The Historie of the Councel of Trent (Paolo Sarpi (Nathaniel Brent, trans.), 1619)
==========================================================
Sarpi's Istoria del Concilio Tridentino (1619) - Venice vs. Rome; the great anti-papal history of the Council of Trent, smuggled out of Venice. Brent's English translation (1629 printing).

ſent tode Councell of Trent, Publiſhedin French. An. 1608.

6 Andr. hudichius, Biſhop of Quinqueccleſizin Hungary,

bu in of the Councell of Trent,in bu Epiſtle to Maxi-

mil1an 2. Fmperour.

7 eAn EpiſiUe\{ Biſhop lewell vnto Seignior Scipio, a Senatour,
of Venice,tuching the cauſes mouing the ((burch of Engtand
to refuſe (,onmmunion with the Councell of Trent: now firſt

publiſhed accoring to the Originall annexed.

8 Fr a8 the foreſid Epifile of Dudithius,priteen by himſelfein

 Latine.
|

. \ » .
Union Theolog::11 Seminary
& NEW YCEKOITY

| TY: 1 0 BY
Bravery \) 6 Teoory
apr 429 "
- EIT RDER

\

\ mans CF THE

AL Epiſtle of Gregory the Firſt , Biſhop of Rome to

-
" ” _ a h
[4 kg of * LV 2 J r -
F : x

_ INI D «
SEE SEAS

RENE EEE 5

WA liar SIN, 4 DANCES CN "y
= Sue AD = Les END) =

{ TO HIS MOST
1, +143): ha E D
MAIESTIE. '

A SEE Offer toyour Ma1EtSTIE Ss view
LE: 49. 23 che trucſt and moſt iudicious Eccle-

/ Þ. tafticall Hittorie , that either mo-

bj derncnmes, orany antiquitic hath

| afforded to the world; impaired ( [

ll conteſle ) in beautie, as being tranſ-

all ported our of the naturall luſtre
ff both of ſtile and phraſe, by arade

and vnſkilfall Tranſlator, but no-
ching altered in the trueth and ſincerity of che matter, which
it handleth.

W The Author, a ſtranger to theſe parts, conuerſant onely
where the Goſpell cannot be truely preached, was moued to
| write it, as for thecommon good ofall Chriſtendome;, ſo par-

ticular ly 1n contemplation of your Maieſttes ſerutce, For as

you hold the higheſt place amongſt all Kings and Princes,

and are Gods greateſt Lieutenant "vnder the whole cope of

heauen, ſo youradmirable perte&ions,of Wildome, Lear-
; ning, luſtice, and Religion (with which your royall breaſt | |þ

f ? 15 1nriched beyond all compariſon to bee made with any 0-
thers ) caſt foorth their bright ſhining rayes intoall Coun:
treis andquarters of the world, and rouſevpthe endeavors |
E of the worthieſt, cuen 1n places the fartheſt remote, to la-
\4 bour 1a the building vp,or repaiing of Gods Chutth, To
| 03 farre

_—_{—
. _— p

EEE as — ww

——_—_—

THE EPISTLE

farre as the tyranny of Antichriſt, vnder which they live,
andthe fafetie of their lines, which nature bindes them to
preſerve, doch give themeaue. | Inwhich number, is the
Avthor of this preſent Treatiſe. Theend and ſcope whereof
being theglory ofGod,by diſcouery ofthoſeprattiſes,which,
for many yceres, haue beene concealed by-rhe enemies of
Cur1sT, theaduancement of true pietie and Religion, I
know notto whom it may be addreſſed more 1uſtly , then
to the greateſt Mateſty vpon the whole ſurface of the carth,
and the chiefeſt Defender of the true taith amongſt vs,

And ſurely ifeuerany booke ( except onely the Booke
of God) did deſerue theprotection of fo excellent a Patron,
it is this Hiſtoric ofthe Councel)l of Trent. For, of all the
things in the world, Religion 1s of the greateſt conſequence,
and,in Religion, Ecumenicall Councels ( nextatter the holy
VVrit) haue euer caried the greateſt ſway;which being rue,
and guided by the holy Ghoſt, haue beene caules of infinite
bleſs1ngs, bur being pretended onely, and gouerned by hu-
mane policies and Arte, haue brought foorth as many miſ-
chiefes and afflictions to the Church of God.

Now 1n this of Tren: it is plainely diſcouered, that the
Biſhops of Rome ( of whom eighthued and died, during the

time of the Synode and treatie thereof ) in ſtead of being

Cur1srs holy Vicars, as they pretend, haue beene the

greateſt, and moſt pernicious quackeſaluing inglers that euer

the earth did beare.

Ic would be infinite torelate the Stratagems they vied to

Juertir, before it began ; their poſtings to and fro, to hinder

the propoſing of thoſe things which they thought would di-
miniſh their profit, or pull downe their pride ; their policies,
to enthrall the Prelates and Diuines, by hopes and feares;
their diligence 1n ſending their adherents to Trent, and fo,
by procuring amator part of voices, to make themſelues the

abſolute Lords of all the determinations that paſſed, By

which deutces that which was deſired by godly men, as the

onely remedy againſt ail the errors in manners and doctrine,
both in Church and Common-wealth, and eſpecially a-
gainit the greateſt enormitiesof the Popes themſelues, hath

beene

XUM

% _—
——...

DEDICATORIE.
beene wreſted toa quite contrary vic, to weaken the lawfull
rights of Kings and Princes , to peruertthe doctrine and
Hierarchie ofthe Church of G o Þ, and co lift vp the Papacy
co an vnſufferable heighe of pride. This is that holy and
great Synod, of which the Romanilts doe boaſt themſelues
ſo much.

And indeedeuery one of any meane capacitie may eaſli-
ly know, that many controuerted points betweene them and
the true Prot:flors, neceflary ( as they maintaine) for the
ſauing of mens ſoules, had neuer any colourable eſtabliſh.
ment but chis; which inſenſibly creeping 1n by che ſuperſtici-
on of the vulgar, or ſecretly ſet on foote by thoſe that were
ambitious and couetous, or ( at the beſt ) blindly zealons,
haue alwates beene oppoſed by the Orthodox, euen pub-
likely, vncill che malicious induſtry of the greater pare, pur

coſilence( though nqger quite overcame ) the paucitie of the
| better. So thattheir vanting ofthe Antiquitie oftheir Re-
ligion, and ofthe infancie of ours, is vaineand idle.

Andifthey will glory ( as viually they doe ) of the vni-
| uerſalitic of their doctrine, becauſe it was eſtabliſhed ( for-
3 ſooth) by the holy Ecumenical (ouncell of Trent, as they terme
FS 1t,nonecan better tudge then your M a 1t s T y how factious
| and how vnlawfull thataſſembly was, and, by this Hiſtorie,
3 the whole world may vnderſtand the weakneſle of thar
foundation.
7 The Almightie blefſe your Ma1zs T1 with length of
daics, ſtrength of bodte, loyaltic of your people, and with all
E-&

| imaginable happineſle in your moſt Royall Progenie, and
| in ſwaying the Scepter of your Dominions,

) Your Sacred Maieſties

moſt humble , and moft faithfully
deuoted Subied,

NATHANAEL BRENT:

>

Ourteous Reader, thou ſha ſee in this Booke greater va-
rietie of remarkeable accidents, then, before the reading of
it, thou couldeſt haue poſſibly imagined. The ſtate of re-
ligion quite altered,in divers Kingdomes and Countreys of
Chriſtendome ; the Grandes ſometimes diuided and armed
one againſt another, ſometimes toyned in confederations
and leagues ; the Eccle/iaſtikes oppreſied; the Proteſtants per-
ſecuted ; the B'ſh:ps of Rome, as it were, acting their parts,
\ and moſt lively deciphered in their natuzall colours. If
learning will content thee, marke the diſputations of the
Theologues, and the deepe diſcourſes of the Author him—
| ſelfe. 1f policic will pleaſe thee, thou ſhalt findeitin the
conſultarions and treaties of Princes, managed, with admirable dexterity, by their Am-
$aſſadorsand Miniſters ; and generally no delight will bee wanting to thee , which thy
curioſitie can deſire , or any other Hiſtorie affoord. Bur conſider , aboue all, in what a
ſtrange manner the Conclliarie Acts of this aſſembly in Trext were caricd. By reading
of thoſe few words of thy Countrey-man Edmond Campian, below in this page , thou
maiſt perceiue in what repute the Papalins doe hold it; and after , when thou haſt read
the Booke,thou wilt know how much iris ouer-valued, Compare thy iudicious cenſure
with his thatis partiall, and thou ſhalt finde them to agree as white with blackeneſle,

darkcneſſe with light. Farewell.

Verba Edmundi Campiani, ratione quarra , reddita
Academicis.

Ridentina Synoduas quo magts inurteraſcet , eomagis indies evque perennius effloreſ-
Tz cet. Bone Deus,que gentium wvarietas , qui delecius Epiſcoporum totius orbis , qui
SE regum 07 rerumpublicarum ſplendor, que medulla Thedogorum , que ſanttitas, que
Ef lachryme, que ieiunia, qui flores Academici, que lingue, quanta ſubtilites, quantus
labor, quam infinita leftio, quante virturum OG [tudiorum diuitis auguſftum illud Sacrarium im-
plenerunt f |

The words of Edmond Campian in h# fourth reaſon giuen
to the Vniuerlitics. |

He Synod of Trent the older it waxeth, the moreit will flouriſh, Good God,
what varictic of Nations, what choice of Biſhops of the whole world, what
ſplendor of Kings and Common-wealths, whac marrow of Theologues,

what ſanRitic, what weepings, what faſts, what Academicall flowres, what languages;

whar (ubtilties, what labour, what infinite reading, what riches of yertues an ſtudies

did fill vp that Matcſticall ſacred place ?

Ya
" "Ca ””
ba bn. 2 os

» ” 2 . bl = ©?
, - ad * _—_
: ? » A k- J —
- - C Cy 4
na Sces* "et o. ”;” a
Ea «x 4 ODE TOR %
FO" "As vr F -
, / . _
.
h .

Wa P!
—\-
_ | ,
i a>
. —_
_ "

FL = 4h

TO'T END

L AR. GOOD..LORD, THE LORD
Archbiſhop of Canterburie, his Grace, Primate
of all ENGLAND, and Mectropolitane, and oneof His
MaAaliEsTiEtsS moſt Honourable

Priuie Councell,

== @>1O/} Reverend in Chriſt, It may ſeeme.
Bo | finonge (and | ain ſure it u without ex-
ample) that of one Councell onely ſo
| /argean Hiſtorie ſhould be yritten,and
Jo full of all varietie of matter, For in
thoſe of former ages iuwbich the Holy
Ghoſt did really and effeFually aft1s
the Fathers , howſoener more Prelates
1 cl and Diuines were aſſembled from pla-
ces more remote_ , and the ations guided by the greateſt Princes of
all thoſe-tumes , yet nothing was attempted to encreaſe or maintaine
the Herefies and abuſes that raigned then , nor was any thing te -
markeable, but the very Podrines and Decrees themſelyes. But
after that th: Biſhops oRome;, ſcorning to be \dimflers and Ser.
uants, made themſelues Maſters and. M onarkes of the Church of

| ow , the prafliſes and inuentions of worldly men chaſed away the

eauenly inſpirations of the bleſſed Spirit,and greater confufions and
troubles did ariſe in handling Diuine Myeries , then d1d happen

at any other time in negotiating the affaires of Kingdomes and of
Common -wealths. Thu bath mmiſtred a whole Oceanof occarren -

ces, and afforded a moſt copious Subied toths preſent Treatiſe.

And ſoirrefitable u the force of Truth, and the Diuine Prout-
dence ſo great , that howſocuer the Romanifts hae vſed all poffuble
dilig tnte t6 binder the finding out of their vnlawfull proceedings =
EDS

E —-

bir & 6 es tudgem
andintegritie ſcarcely to be matched )
who, out of the Diaries, Memoraals,

Fon that any

 Jnpubliſhing heereof, if my Pen hath not merited ſuch praiſe as
others might, yet my defire to Tang 29m Church hath not beene
wanting, and my zeale to ferue your Grace, in whatſoeuer | am a-
ble, ſhallneuer yeeld to any. Ynto whom I'wiſh C for the publike
benefit of Church and Common-wealth,and for your owne particular
contentment) a perfe& accompliſhment of all your pious and honora-

ble defignes.

Your Grace's

moſt obliged to doe
you ſcruice,

NATHANABL BRENT.

}
d
* x
'T
|
'
;

JOG =)

oo

=-

FIRST BOOKE OF

THE HISTORY OF THE

COVNCELL OF
TRENTKE

0 rians of our age haue made mention in their
T4 writings of ſome particular accidents thar
LA happened therein, and Jobr. Sleidam, a molt di-
=] ligentauthor, hath related, with exquiſite in-
Þ. duſtry, thecauſcs that went before, notwith-
y]

F

7 ; —_—_— : « -

"
" RI
£ C [
It

ſtanding all theſe things put togerher would
Sy B={ not ſ{ufhce foranentire narration,

rn

1500

Pope Altx-
ANDER 6;
E mperour
MaxiMi-
LIAN, I.

Hexry 7.
King of
England,
Levvis 12.
Frenc > king,
am

S—_——yg

7A Y purpoſe is to write the Hiſtory of the Cenn- The puryot
4 cellof Trene. For though many famous Hiſto. **<Auber

o Formy lelfe, ſo ſoone as I had vnderſtan- The hemes

e vicd for

ding of the atfaires of the world, I became excceding curious ro know the cellcttionpf

whole proccedings therof:and after I had diligently read whatſocuerl found A

written,and the publique inſtruCtions, waether printed or diuulged by pen,

Ibcrooke my ſelte , withour ſparing cicher paines or care, roſearchin the re-

mainder of the writings of the Prelates,and orhers who were preſcntin the
Councel.the Records which they left behinde them, and the Suffrages or 0-
pinions deliuered in publique, preſerued by the Authors themſelues,or by 0-
thers, and theletters of aduice written from that Citric; whereby I haue had
the fauour to [ce eucn a whole regiſter of Notes and Letters of thoſeperſons,
who had agreat part inthoſe negotiations. Hauing therefore collected {o
many things as may miniſter vnto me ſufficient matter for a narrationof the
progreſle, I am reſolucd to ſet it downe in order.

I wil relate thecauſes and managings of an Eccleſiaſtical] Conuocation,by
ſome,for diucrsends,and by diuers meanes procured and haſtencd,by ſome
hindered and deferred for the; pace of 2.2. yecres : and for 18. yeeres more,
ſometimes aſſembled, ſometitnes diſſolucd , alwayes celebrated with diucrs
Incentions, and which hath gotten a forme and concl uſion contrary alroge-
ther to the deſcigne of them that procured it, andto the feare of thoſe, that
with all diligence diſturbed it; |

ro God,and not totruſt in the wiſedome of man. n

. a cleerc inſtruction for ys to referre our ſelues
a SPE TAWPOS:o,

A | For ._

5 PS Ret rs.

4

I

* The Hiſtorie of 'L1B. 1.

1500 For this Councell defired and procured by. godly men ,. to reunite the
——> Church which beganto bee divided , bath fo eftablithed the Schiſme ;' and

ALEXAND, 6.

Maxmucs.z, madethe partics ſo obſtinate, that the diſcords arehecome irreconcilable :

——O—  w—OO—

Hexky 7. k ,43 SIT EO
Levis 12 hath cauſed thegreatelt deformation that euer was fince Chriſtianity did be-

Thecoacu- gin : and hoped for by the Biſhops to regaine the Epiſcopall authority, vfur-

> dokqull pcd for the molt partby the Pope, harh madethemTooſcir alrogerher,bring-

es | ing chem into greater {eruitude : on the contraty, feared and auoided by the

ofallmen. Sea of Rome, asa potent meanes, to moderate the exorbitant power, moun-
red from {mall beginnings by diuers degrees vnto an-ynlimited exceſle, ir
hath ſo eſtabliſhed and confirmed the ſame, oucr that pare which remiaineth
ſubicct vnto ir,that it was neuer fo greatnor fo ſoundly rooted.

[twill not be inconuenient therefore ro call it the Hiade of our age ; in the
explanation whereof I will exactly follow the truth, nor being poſſeſſed with
any paſſion that may makeme crre. And hee thar ſhall oblerue rhatI lpeake
more copioully of ſome times, and more {paringly of others,!et [tim remen:-
ber thar all fields are nor equally fruitfull, nor all graines delerue ro be kepr :
and thar, of choſe whichthe Reaper would preſerue, ſome carecicapeth the
hand,or the edge of the fickle; thar being the condition of cucry haryeſt, that
ſome partremaineth ro be glcancd after,

= TW But firſt [muſt call to minde, that it hath beene a moſt ancicntcuſtorne in
The oricinall ' * Af . SE
cul & yro- the Church of Chriſt to compolc the difterences of Religion,and ro reforme
ys - thccorrupted diſcipline, by the conuocation of Synods. So. the firlt which be-
ga2 in thelifetimeof many of the holy Apoſtles, whether the conuerted
Gentiles were bound to obſceruc Moſes Jaw , was compoled by a mceting in
Hicrufalem of foure Apoſtles, andof all the fairhfull which were in that Ci-
tic: by which example 1n the occurrences which incidently ſprung vp in c-
ucry prouince forthe ſpace of 200. yeeres and more afterwards, the Biſhops
and chicfeſt of the Churches aſſembled rhemlelues rogethicr ro qualitic and
end them; that being the onely remedy to reunite diviſions, and to accord
contrary opinions.

Bur after that it pleaſed God to giue peace vnto his Church , by exciting
(onſtantine to fauour religion, asit was more caſte for many Churches to
communicateand treate together, ſoalſothediuifions became more com-
mon. And whereas before,the difterences went notout ofa city, or, at the
moſt,out of a Prouince, now by reaſon of the liberty of meeting together,
they extended themlclucs ouer the whole Empire. Whereforcalfo irwas ne-
ceſlary thatthe Councels(which were the vſual remedic)hould be aſſembled
fromplacesmorediſtant. Whereupon a Councell of the whole Empire, being
congregated in thoſe times by thar Prince, ir had the name of the holy and
great Synod;and alitlc after was calledthe general & Oecumenical Councel,
though notaſſemblecd from all parts of the Church,a great part whercof cx-
rended it ſelfe beyond the bounds ofthe Romane Empire ; but becautle the:
vic of that age was to call the Emperour Lord of the whole habitable earth,
howbeit the tenth part thereof was not ſubictt vnto him. By which cxam-
ple thelike Councels were called by (onſtantine his ſucceſſors in other occur-

ring differences of Religion. Andthough the Empirc was diuided into

the

Xs

and being managed by Princes for reformation of Eecleſtalticalfdiſcipline, £

-
I” en i ——_—_—_
*

{
'
'F
d

——

-
III nn

- inthattra&twherethe New are ioyned wich the Pyrences, there were ſome

, cesandCardinals,h

L1s. t the Councell of Frens. 3
che Eaſterne and Welterne, notwithſtanding the affaires thereaf being mang. DA
ged vnder a common name, the Conuocation of Synods throughout the rv: es »
wh ole continued Rill. | - MAZ1iMIL, £
7 Burafcer that the Eaſt was ſodiuided from the Weſt, that thereremai- Fra? 7
ned no more communionin the Soucraignty,and after that the Eaſt was for LW
the moſt part poſſeſſed by the Sararens, and the Welt parted amongſt many Men oes.
Princes, thename of an Vniuerſall and axcumenicall Councell was no more ==: ofgme
deriued from the Roman Empire, bue amongſt the Grecians, fromrhe afſem.
bly of che fiue Patriarkes,and in theſe countreys of ours,from the vnitieand
communion of thoſe Kingdomes andStates which obeyed the Popeincau-
ſes Ecclefiaſticall. And the aflembling of theſe hath beenecontinued,norto
appcaſc the diſſentions about Religion principally, as before , bur cither ro
make warc'in the Holy-land, or to compoſe Schilmes and diuiſions of the
Church of Reme, reli for controucrlics berweene the Biſhops and Chri-
ſtian Princes. ;
$ Inche beginning of the16. centurie of yeeres after the natiuitic of our 1506
Sauiour Chriſt, there appearcdno vrgent cauſe to celebrate a Councell , nei.
ther was there any likely to happen fora long ſpace. For thecomplaints of
many Churches againſtthe greatneſle of the ſeemed abſolutely to be
appeaſed, and all thecountreys ofthe Weſterne Chriſtians werein the com-
munion and obedience of che Church of Rome. Oncly in a ſmall parttharis

remainders of the olde Waldenſes or Albigenſes. In whom notwithſtanding u« pa.

there was ſo great ſimplicitic and ignorance in learning , that they were

not fitto communicatethcirdodtrine vntoothers, beſides their neighbours

conceiued ſo ſiniſter an opinion of their impictie and obſcenicie , that there
was no danger that the contagion could ſpread any further,

9 InſomeCantons alſo of Bobhemiathere were ſome few who maintai- Fre =
ned the ſamedottrine,cuenremnants of thoſe whom the Bobernians call **==
Picards, whoſe increaſe could not befeared for the ſame reaſon.

10 In the ſameKingdome of Bebemiathere were ſome followers of John  _
Hu, which were called Ca/iſlini, or Subutraque, who, except that particular, gin.
that intheholy Communion they miniſtred the wu vnto the people, in 0-
ther things differed not much from the doftrine of the Church of Rome. Bux
theſe alſo were not eſteemed conſiderable, aſwell for their [mall number as
becauſe they wanted learning , neicher did it appeare that they deſired to
communicatetheir doctrine,northat others vere curious to vnderſtand it. =

n There was yet ſome danger of Schilme. For Julius the ſecond, hauing Pop: ihe
addidted himlelfe more to the Arts of warre, thento the Prieſtly miniſtery, wa more «|
and gouernedthe Popedome with exceſſue imperiouſnes towards the Prin- Teern®®

k conſtrained ſome of chemo ſeparate therglſelucs fron ==
him, and tocall a Councell. And che French King Lewis the rwelfth,cxcom- niche ra.
municated by the ſame Pope,had withdrawen hisobedience from him,and &.v
was ioyned with theſcparatedCardinals,which beginning didſeemiemight

- produce ſome imporcantccluſion.But Iulws opportunely dying, andLeo be-

Ing creared in hisſtead,wwith his dexterity he reconciled,in a very ſhort ſpace,
the Cardinals and the Kingdome of France both at once: ſo thata fire was
| A 2 quenched

—_——— OE

a a Pod een hour ae ”% noon
eG... - ful b

_

"Ivht The Hitorie of + - Lin

—

RA quenched with admirablecelerity andeaſe, which inlikelihood might haue

Max » burned the Church. | | 45

azr7q 12 Leothetenth, as one whoſe birth and education was noble/adorned

ZAR) the Papacie with many goodparts which hebroughr intoit,amongſt which

The deſerp- WWETE HiS ſingular learning in humanitie, goodnefle;and amarneilous ſweere

Ls. ** mannerintreating of affayres, together witha pleaſing behauiour,morethen
humane, ioyned with incomparable liberalicie,and a great inclination to fa-
uour thoſerhart were learned, andendowed with any extraordinaryqualiry.
Which vertues were not found in that Seaof along time before, neither c-
quall,nor neere vnto his. And he would haue been a Pope ablolutely com-
plcate, if with theſe he had ioyned ſome knowledge in things that concemne
Religion, and ſome more propen(ion vnto pietie, of both which he ſeemed

careleſſe. Ana as he was molt liberall and-well feenein the Arte of giving,ſo

in that other of gaining he was notableenough of himlelfe,bur vied the af- -

ſiſtance of Lorenzo Puccr, Cardinall of Santi £uatro, a man exceeding ſufficient
in thatbehaltfe. |
Leo therefore finding himlelfe inthisſtate;quier,the Schiſine extingui-
ſhed abſolutely, wichour an aduerfary, as one may ſay, ( becauſe thoſe Row
Waldenſes and Caliſtint were not any way contiderable) liberall in [pending
andrewardingaſwell his kindred,as Courtiers, and profeſſors of learning, o-
ther fountaines, rom whencerhe Court of Rome was wont to draw riches
vnto it ſelfe out of other nations, being dried vp,he thought fit to ſerne him-
ſelfe of thatof Indulgences. .
Whenthe An 14 This manner of gaining money was put in praCtiſe after the yeere
btn. 100. For Pope Vrbane the ſecond hauing granted aplenary Iridulgence andre-
dulznces b- miffion of allſinsto whoſocuermade watre in the Holy land, to regaine and
i ſet at liberty the Sepulchre of Chriſt,outof the hands of the Mahumetans,vwas
imitated by his Sueceflors for many hundreds of yeeres; ſome of which ( as
alwaies new inuentions are enlarged) granted itto thoſe that maintained a
ſouldiern caſerhey couldnot,or would not goeto warrethemlelues inper-
fon. And afterin progreſle of time, the fame Indulgences and pardons were
giuen forthe taking of armes againſt tholethar obeyed not che Church of
Ronie, alchough they were Chriſtians:and for the moſtpartinhinite exa&ions
vere made vnderthole pretences;all which,or the greaterpart,vvere applied
to other vles.
tcaneda 15 Leobeing counlelled, by the Cardinall of Santi £uatro,to follow thele
plenaryIndul- examples,lent an Indulgence and pardon for{innes throughout all Chriften-
1 dome,grantingit to 'whoſoeuer would giue money ,andextending of ir even
vnto the dead, for whom when thedisburſementwas made, his will was
that they ſhould be freed from the paines of Purgatory;giving allopowerto
eat egges and whitmears on faſting daies,tochooſethemlelues a Confeflor,
and other ſuch like abilities. And although the execution of thisenterpriſe
of Leo had ſome particular in it that was neither pious nor honeſt, as hereat-
ter ſhall appeare (which did giue fcandall, andcauſed innouation)notwith-
ſtanding many of the grants ' made by thepreceding Popes, had cau-
ſes more vniult, and were exerciſed with'more auarice and extortion. But oc-
caſtons ariſe many times which are able to produce notableeffe&ts, and yer
came

3
DE ee es CO ado O—_

—

Lis. t * the Councell of Trent. 5

come to nothing, for wantof thoſe that know-how to viethem. And,which 1517
is more, it isnecelfary, forthe cfefting of anything ,thar the time come in FA 1
which it may pleaſe Godto cone the erroursof men. All rhele things mer axis, «
rogether inthe time of Leo,of whom we ſpeake. | Hanar 8,
16 Forbauing publiſhed an vniuerſall grantof Indulgence, in the yeere ("A -
1517.he diſtributed partof the harueſt, before ir was reapedor well ſowed,gi- 1519
uing vnto diuers perſons the reuenues of diuers Prouinces,andreferuing ſore
alſo for his ovwne Exchequer. Inparticularthe Indulgences of Saxonie , and
of that arme of Germanic , which reacheth fromthence to the ſea, hee gaue Tie Popes
ro his liſter Magdalene, wife vnto Franceſchetto Cibo , baſtard ſonne of Innecen- geupart of
tive the eighth : By reaſon of which marriage,this Leo was createdCardinall Mbmenet
at the age of fourteene yeeres, which was thefirſt beginning of Eccleſtaſti- ow cre-
call grearneſlein the houſe of the Medici. And Leo vied this liberality;norſo 4 =
—_ through brotherly loue as forrecompenleof the charges which the fa. **<*
milic of Cibo were at, when he retired himfelfe to Genuanot daring to abide
inRomeſo long as Alexander the 6. had linked himlſelfe with the Florencines,
who being enemicsto the houſe of the Medici, had chaſed itour of Florence.
The ſifter(that the Pope his gift might beprofitable varo her)commirtedthe
care of preaching thelndulgences,6 exaCting'the money vntoBiſhop Arem- mio
boldue,yvhointhe alſumption of the Epiſcopaldi 4 ns not himſclfe vw t<agm
of any of thequalities of aperfe&t GemaMerchant:Thisman gauepowerto fit. * ,
publiſh the Indulgences ro whoſocuerpromiſed toraiſemoltprofitby them,
without any regard of thequalitie of the perſons, euen ſoſordidly , that no
man of any tolerablecondition could contra&t with him; bur he found Mi-
niſterslike vnto himlſelfe, who aimed at nothing but the gaine of money.
17 It wasa cuſtomein Saxowe,that whenſocuer Indulgences were ſent by 7;. ycrenic
Popes, the Friars of the order of the Heremites were imployed to publi —_

chem. The Pardon-mongers, Miniſters of Arembo/dus would not goe tO indulzence
in Saxoe by

theſe, becauſe, being accuſtomedto manage the like merchandizes , they cam.

might vie ſome deuice todraw ſomeſecrer profit to themaſelues, and from
whomlikewife,as practiſed in this office,chey expeCted notany extraordina-

ry thing, which-mightbring them more then viuall aduanra The Doming

Fez bur _
went rotheDominicanFriars. Theſe men,in publiſhing the Indulgences, deſt- cans were im-

| loyed by the
ring to amplifie the valueofrhem, more then others had done before, ſpake Feaſt: of

m-ny ſtrangethings; which gaue cauſeof ſcandall. Whereunto was added ©:
the badlife of the Pardoners,vvho,in Tauernes, and elſewhere,in games,and
other thingsnot fit to bee named, ſpent that which the people ſpared from
theirneceſlary expences, to purchaſethe Indulgences. |

18 By theſe meanes Matin Luther, an Herenute Friar being ſtirred vp, began "ew _E
20 lpeake againſt the Pardoners, firſt reprehending theſe nevv exceſſme abules exinſt the Ins
onely.afterbeing prouoked by them, heeſer himlelfero ſtudy this marcer, __
being defirousto FM the foundations and the rootes of the doctrine of In-
dulgences. Which when he hadexamined, paſſing from the new tothe old 57 Cord

abuſes, and from the builaing ro the foundations, hepubliſhed 95. Conclu-

Toba Thecel a

ſions inthis matter, which were propoſed to bee diſpured on in Wittenberg, Dominican
Where they being ſcene and read,they were not oppoſed inany vocall confe- 7Fromind

rence, becauſe no man appeared againſt him: bur Tobn Thecel , a Dominican way th
P g PP , of Leber,

A} | Friar,

—— CCS ooo EEE ES I ern eo Oo 9

The Hiftorie of Bc: | L143. 4,

— 1517. Fiar, propoſed others contrary vnto chele,in Frankfort of Brandeburg. |
AZ 19 Theletwofhilesof Concluſions were, asone may ſay,a ioyning of iſſue.
ro wir, x: Wherefore Martin Lather went on to write indefericeof his, and Jobn Ecchins
———7” tooppole them;and theſe Concluſions,togerher with other writings , being
Fxanc's gone TO Rome,Silueſter Prierius, aDomunican Friar,vrote againlt Luther. Which
BY Tn Ecchis Conteſtation enforced both the one and the otherpartie ro{warue from this
oppoſed 1+ matter, andpaſictoother things of greater importance. For the doctrine
os. — of Indulgences hauing nor beene well examined in former ages, which
itucſter Prie- |. | | wy RT
Sa" didneverconſider how they might bee defended and maintained, or how
punt Lube”: mpugned , the ellence and caules of them were nor well vnderſtood.
of Indulzen= Some thought they werenothing but anabſolutionor freeing , made by au-
| well mder- thority of the Prelare, from penance which the Church in the moſt aun-
food mall cient times impoſed , by way of dilcipline , vpon thepenitent , (which im-
poſition was allumed in lucceceding ages by the Biſhop onely , after delega-
redto the penetentiary Prieſt, and inconclulion left wholly ro the will of the
Confeſlor) and thar they delivered vs not trom paying the debt due to the
Iuſtice of God. Others thinking that this brought more hurt vnto Chriſti-
ans then benefit , who being deliuered from Canonicall puniſhments, be-
camenegligent to ſarisfhe the divine luſtice with voluntary penance, be-
gan to bee of opinion , that they ſer vs freefrom boththe one and the o-
ther: bur theſe werediuided. Some thought that they ſer vs free, though
nothing were giuenin recompence forthem. Others, abhorring that opini-
on, ſaid, that, by reaſon of the muruall participation in charitie of the
members of holy Church, the penance of one might bee communicared
vnto another, and freehim by this compenſation. Bur becauſe it ſeemed
that this was more properto menot an holy and aufterelife, then to the au-
thority of Prelates, there aroſcathird opinion , which made them in part
an abſolution, becauſe authority was neceſlary forthem, and in part acom-
penſation. Bur inregard the Prelates Jiued nor in ſuch ſort, as that they
could ſpare much of their merits forothers,there was made atreaſury in the
Church full of the merits of all thoſe who had more of them then would
ſcrue their owne turnes; the dilpen{ation whereof is commitred to the
Pope, who, when he giueth Indulgences, recompenſeth thedebr of the fin-
f gre qup aſhoning ſo much in value our of the treaſirie. Neither was there

| of the Church ] , : . , . I
J an end of the dithculries : for ir was oppoled that the merits of Saints being

finite and limited, this treaſure might be diminiſhed. Wherefore defiring to
make it indeficient, they added the merits of Chriſt, which are infinite:
Whencearoſe adoubr whatneedthere might be of the little drops of the me-
rits of others, when there was an infinite Ocean of the merits of Chriſt:
which gaue cauſe roſometo make the treaſure to bee onely of the merits of

OUr SAUIOUr.
20 Theſe things, lo vncertaineatthat time,and which.hadno other foun-
dationthentheBull of Cement 6.made for thelubilic of the yeere 1350, ſeemed
The aduerfs- NOT lufficient to oppugne the do&trine of Mart Luther, to reſolue his reaſons,
ics of 17her and to conuince him. Wherefore Thecel, Ecchius, and Prierius, ſeeing them -

| proouc the

Goftineel ſeluesnot ſtrong enough inpoints proper for this matter, betooke them-
by common ſclucs to Commonplaces, and4ayd for their ground workethePopes autho-

{1 reaſons only, [iti ec,

Liz 1 the (onncel of Trent.

7

ritic, and conſent of the Schoolemen; concluding thar the Pope, not beeing

ablero crrein matters of faith, and hauing approoued the doctrine of the (Nan ©
Schoolemen, and himlelfc publiſhing the Indulgences to all the fairhfull, ic $52.95. .,

wasneccſlary to belecue themas an article of tanrch. This gaue occaſion to

Martin topaſle from Indulgencesto the authoritieof the Pope; which being **2x<: »

predicated by others to be the higheſtin che Church, was by him made infe-
riour toa Generall Councelllawtully called, whereofheſaid there was need

in that inſtant and vrgent neceſſitie: and the heat of diſputation continuing, Popes auto-
rity,and other

themore the Papal| authority was aduanced by others, the more it was by
himabaſed. Nocwithſtanding, he contened himlelfe within the bounds of
ſpcaking modeſtly of che perſon of Leo, ſometimes referring himſelfe to his
wudgement. And, for the lame reaſon, the doctrineof remiſſion of ſinnes, of
Penance, ana of Purgatorie wasfſert on foote , the Romaniſts ſeruing them-
ſclues of all theſe common places forproofeof Indulgences.

21 Friar James Hogoſtrat, a Dominican Inquiſitor, wrote againſt Martin Lu-
ther more to the purpoſe then them all; who, ſetting theſe reaſons aſide, ex-
horted the Pope toconuince Martin with chaines, fire, and flames.

22 Neuertheles, the controuerlie grew ſtill morebitrer, and Martin alwaies
went forwards to ſome new propolition,as occaſion was offered. Wherefore
Pope Leo cauſed him to be cited ro Rome by Hierom Biſhop of Aſcoli Auditor of
the Chamber, in Augult 1518, and vvrote a Briefe to Fredericks Duke of Saxo-
nie, exhorting him notto protect him. He wrotealſo to Thomas de Vio,Car-
dinall Caictan, his Legat in thedietof Yurburg, that he ſhould vſeall diligence
tocommit him topriſon, and to ſend him to Rome. Diuers meanes were v-
ſedto the Pope, that he would becontenred to order that hiscaulemight be
examinedin Germany; who yeelded to referreitto his Legat, vato whom the
iudicature thereof was cominirted, with initruction, that if he could diſco-
uerany hope of repentancein Martin, he ſhould receiue him into fauour, pro-
miling him pardon of all his errours paſt , together with honours and re-
wards, referring the whole to his wiledome, but incaſe he found him in-
corrigible, he ſhould deſire Maximilian the Emperour, and the other Princes
of Germany, that he might be puniſhed. |

23 Martin went tothe Legatto Aurburg,yvnder theſafe-conductt of Maximi-
lian-where,aftera conuenient conference vpon the controuerſed dottrine,the
Cardinall hauing diſcouered that by tearmes of Schoole-divinity,in thepro-
feffion whereof himſelfe was moſt excellent, Martin could not be conuinced,
that he alwaies ſerued himſelfe of the holy Scripture , which is vſed but a
little by the Schoolemen, he declared that he would diſpute no more with
him, but exhorted himrto aretractation, or, at leaſt, ro ſubmir his Bookes
and doctrineto the iudgement of the Pope,ſhewing him the danger he was
in,if heperſifted, andpromiſing him fauours and benefits from his Holines.
Martinnot anſwering to the contrary, he thought itnor fit to vvring from
himanegariue, by preſſing him too much, but rather to giueſpace, that rhe
threats and promiſes might make impreſhon, and thereforegauehim leaue

1518

Haxav s.

Latber bogin-

net}. to ſpeake

againſt the

doctrines of
the Romane
wch.

Tames Hogo-
ftrat his P<r-
ſwaſion to the
Pope.

1518

Meanes vicd
by the Pope
eo ring Lis
ther to Roms,

Lywthers cauſe
refcrrred wo
Card. Caietan.

the Popes Le- \

gals

Lither come
meth to the
egat with
the Emperors
ſafe-conduR,

Lither had

leaue rg de

ro depart for that time. He cauſed al{o Friar Iobn Stopiccius, Vicar generall of par.

the orderof the Herenutes to treat with him in conformity hereof.
24 Martin becing returned once more , the Cardinall had much confe-
| A 4 rence

a—__—

Is The Hiflorie of Lis. 1.

— —

1518 rence with him concerning the heads of his doctrine , rather hearing what
FT he ſaid, then _— ro gaine himſelfe credir by the propoſition of ac-
MaCtiL, & commodating the buſines. Whereunto when he deſcended, exhorting him
H-xzr 8, Nottoletſlip ſo ſecure an occaſion, and fo profitable, Luther anſwered him,
—— with his accuſtomed vehemencie, thatno compolitioncould be made tothe
Arhis reume prejudice of the truth; that he had offended no man, nor had necde of the fa-
he was more . :
” vehemen UOur of any; that hefecared no threats, and chat, if any thing were vnduly at-
ten before: rempred againſthim,he would appcale ro a Councel|. The Cardinall (who
had heard that Martin was ſecured by ſome Grandies, that they might hold a
bridleinthePopes mouth) luſpeCting that he was perl\waded to ſpeake in
that ſort, diſdained at it, and deſcended to bicter reprehenſions, and baſe
tearmes, and concluded that Princes haue long hands, and ſo bid him bee
gone. Martin, becing parted from the Legats preſence, remembring Ibn
Hu his caſe, wentfrom Auburg without laying any more. From whence
when he was a good way >" 4-"4FOE, Images of his ovrnecale,he wrote
Lube: ener. a Jetter tothe Cardinall, confeſſing he had been too ſharpe, laying the blame
ypon the imporcunity of the Pardoners and of thoſe that wrote againſt him,
romiling more modeſtic hereafter, roſarishe the RR not toſpeakeany
more of Indulgences,with condition that his aduerſaries ſhould doe thelike.
Yet neither they nor he could be kepthilent, but one prouoked the other,
whereby the controuerſic grevy more{harpe.
The Cudinall 25 Wherefore the Court in ome ſpakediſgracefully of the Cardinall, at-
mx wing Eributing all the milcheife rothelſeueritie and bale rermes vied againſt Luther,
Laher wth they blamed him for not hauing promiſed him grear riches, a Biſhopricke,
" andcuenthered hatofa Cardinall. And Leo, fearing ſome great innouarion
in Germante, not ſo much againſt Indulgences,as againſt his owne authoririe,
made a Bull vnder the date of the 9.of November 1518, wherein he ſer forth
The Bull o& the validitie of Indulgences , and that himlelteas ſucceſſor of Peter, and Vi-
eo for = carof CHRIST had power to grant them, both for theliuing & forthe dead,
dulencs.. and that this was thedorine of the Church of Rome, which is mother and
miſtris of all Chriſtians,,vhich ought to bereceiued of whoſocuer would be
in the communion of the Church. He ſent this Bull co Cardinall Caictan,
who, being at Linz in vpper Auſtria, publiſhed it, and cauſed many authenti-
call copies to be made thereof . ſending them toall theBiſhops of Germany,
with commandement topubliſh them, and ſeuerely, andvnder great penal-
ties toenioyne all mennot to haucany otherfaith.
26 By this Bull Martinſawy cleercly, that from Rome, and from the Pope, he
could lookefor nothing but condemnation; and as before he had for the
 moſtpartſpoken reſeruedly of the perſon and iudgement of the Pope, ſo af-
The Popes terthe publication of this Bull hereſolued torcieCtir. Wherefore he ſer forth
Ne ee, an Appeale; wherein hauing firſt ſaid, that hee wouldnot oppoſe himlelfero
aCouxcel, theauthontic of the Pope when he taught the truth, he added, that he was
not exempt from the common conditions of being ſubieCt toerre & toſinne;
alleadging the example of S. Peter, ſharpely reprehended by S. Paul. But hee
{aid,it was an caliething forthe Pope, hauing ſo great riches and retinue, to
_— Whoſocuer wasnot of his opinion, without reſpect of any; vnto
whom none other helpe remained, bur to flic ynto a Councell by the _
©

Lis. t. | the (onncel of Trent.

*»

of appcale; becauſe all reaſon perſwadech, that a Councell ought to bepre- 1519

ferred before him. This Appeale went throughout all Germany, and was
read by many , and eſteemed realonable. Wherefore Leo his Bull extingui-
{hed not che fire that was kindled in thoſeparts.

27 Bur it hauing giuen courage to the Court in Rome, as if the lame had
been quenched, Friar Samſon of Milan, of the order of S. Francis, was ſent ro
preach rhe ſame Indulgences amongſt the Swiſſes, who hauing publiſhed
chem in many places,and colle&ted the ſumme of 120000. crow nes,came fi.
nally to Zuric, where V[ricus Zuinghus a Canon in that Church, was profeſlor,
who oppoling himſelfc tothe doEtrine of this Friar thePardoner;there grew
great dilputation between them, paſſing alſo from one marrer to another,
asit happenedin Germanie. Whereby it cametopaſlſe that Zuingliue was hear-
kened vnco by many, and gained credit, and was imboldned to ſpeake, nor
onely againſt the abule of Indulgences, bur againſt che Indulgences them-
{elues, and euen againſt che authoritie of thePope, who granted them.

26 Marun Luther percciuing that his doQtrine was eſteemed , and that it
paſſed allo into othercountreys, became more couragious, and (er himſelfe
roexamine otherarticles, and, in the matter of Confeſſion, and of rhe Com-
munion, he forſooke the opinion of the Schoolemen, and of the Church of
Form, 95. ratherthe Communion of the Cup vied in Bohemia, and
ſecting downefor the principall part of repentance nor che diligent confeſ:
ſion made to thePrieſt, burratherthe purpoſe of amendment of life for the
time to come. Hepaſled alſo vnto Vowes, and touched the abules of che
Monaſticall Order,and thele his writings, going on their iourney, arrived ini
Louaine and Collen, where, being ſeene and examined by the Diuinesof thoſe
Vniuerlities, they were condemned by them.Neither did this trouble Martin
one iote, but rather cauſed him to goc on, and to declare and fortifie his do-
Etrinethe more it was oppoled.

29 With theſe contentionsratherthenrelofure diſcuſhonspaſlled theyeere
1519, when many aduertiſementscomming to Rome, ofthe ſtirres in Germany
and Suiſſer/and. augmented with many amplifications and additions, as the
manner of fame is,c{pccially whenmartters are related from places fatre di-
ſtant Leo was noted for negligence,that inſ{o greatdangers hadnotvſed pow-
erfull remedies. The Friars particularly blamed him;thar being addicted to
magnificence, to hunting, to delicioulneſie,and ro mulicke, (with which he
was delighted beyond meaſure)he paſled ouerthings of the greateſt impor-
rance. They aid, that in point v Faith the leaſt thing oughtnot ro be neg-
tected, nor the prouiſton againſt it one 1oteto bee deferred, which, asiris
moſt eaſe before the miſchiefe rakeroote,ſoitcommetrh too latewherrit is
waxedold. That Arius was but a ſmall ſparke, which might cahily have
been pur out, and yet it ſet the whole world on fire. That Ioþn Hur and Hie-
rome of Praghe would then haue done as much, if in the beginning they had
not been ſuppreſſed by the Councell of Conſtance. Onthe contrary {ide, Leo
repented himſelfeof wharſoeuer he had done in theſeoccurrences and mo
of all of the Briefcof Indulgences ſent intoGermany,thinking it would have
been better to let theFriars diſpute amongſtrhemlehues, and to keepe him-

telfe neutrall, and reuerenced byborh parties;then by declaring himlelfe for

one

”
”

FAS

Ln0o 10,
MAX1MIL. |

— — ———

Henar 8,
Faaners 7,

The occation
why Zumglius
b<gan to op-

polc the Pope.

LES

—_— —

AC

L1:ther paſ-
ſ{ech (CF) other

POINTS,

His Bookes
were condem=
ned in Loxairne
and Colle.

1519

The Pope
was bluned.

Leo, though

reprehended
for neyl1genc®

thoughrhee

had done to
much.

The Hiflorie of Lis. z.

1520
FAS

Lao 1%

Caanllly

Hemwar T2.
FuxAaWwcts 1

WYVYN)

A diſpute be-
tween the Di-
uincs and Ca-
none,

oneto conſtraine the other to alicnate themſelues from him that this con-
tention \wasnot(o great, as thatit was neceſlane ro hold it in any repurati-
on, and that, ſolong asit was lightly eſtcemed of, fewy would thinkeof it,
and if the Popes name hadnotbeen vicdin it vnrtill then, would haue ended
his courſe, and ſo vanifhed.

30 Notwithſtanding for the many inſtances of the Prelates of Germanic,
of the Yniuecrlitics, who, being incerelled by che {entenceof condemnation,
berooke themleluesto the Popes authoritic for theirprotection, and cſpeci-
ally for the continuall importunitics of theFriars of Rome, herelolued to

celd to thecommonopinion. And he made an alſembly of Cardinals, Pre-

ates, Divines, and Canonilts, vnto which he wholly remitted the bufines.
By this itwas moſt eaſily concluded, that the Pope ſhould denounce hire and
ſword againſt ſo great an impieric: Bur yer the Canonills differed from the
Diuines, theſe becing of opinion thathe oughr preſently rodefcend to this
denunciation, and thoſe ſaying that a ciration ought to go before. The Di-
uines alleadged that the doctrine was cuidently leento - impious,thatthe

books weredivulged,and the ſermonsof Lurhernotorious. The others (aid,

that Notoriouſnes did not take away the defence,yvhich isallowed by the

Jaw of God and nature,alleadging the viuall places : Adam where art thou ?

Whereis thy brother Abel? and in theaccident of the hue Cities, ] will podown and

ce. They added that thecitationof the Auditor the yeere before, by vertue

whereof the iudicature was referred to Caietan in —_ and remained vn-
l

perfe&t,if nothing els were ſheweditto beneceſlary. A

ermany diſputes,in
which theDiuinesactributed thedeciſionvntothemſclues alone becauſerhe
queſtion was inpointof faith,& the Lawyers appropriated vntothemlelues
as mich as concerned the forme of iudgement, a compoſition berweene
them was propoſcd,diſtinguiſhingthe bulineſle into three parts, the do-
Etrine, the 5! ig and the perſon. For the doctrine, the Canoniſts yeelded
that it ſhould be condemned without citation: fortheperſon they perliſted
tro maintaine thatthe citation was neceſſaric. Yet not becing aþle to ouer-
come others whoinliſted vpon their owneopinions with greater acrimony,
& couercd themſclues with the buckler of religion, they found a middle
way,thata preceptſhould be ſentro Martin with a convenientterme,that ſo
it ſhould bereſolued into a citation. Concerning the bookes there was more
todoe. TheDiuines did thinke they ought to be condemned ab{olutely co-
ether with thedoctrine, and the Canonilts that they ſhould be ioyned
with the perſon, and comprehended vnder the terme. It not being poſſible
to makean accord herein, they did both the one and the other. For fit they
were condemned for the time preſent, and afterwards a terme alotted to
burne them. And with thisreſolutiona Bul was framed vnderthe datc ofthe
15. of lune 1520; Which being, as it were, a beginning and foundation of the
Counncell of Trent, whereof wee arc to ſpeake, it is neceſlary to fer downe
here a briefe Epitomie thereof.
1 In which chePope,dircCting the beginning of his words to Chrſs,vvho
hath left Peter and his Succeſſours for Vicars of his Church, exciteth him to
aſſiſt it in theſe necefſities. From Chriſt he turneth roS.Peter and prateth him,

by thecharge which herecciued of our Sauiour,co be carefull of the m_
_ o

__=_

L 1B. 1.

of the Church of Rome,conſecrated with his blood. 'And'/paſſingtoS. Paul; 1520
deſireth the likeaffiftancefrom him; adding, that, although he hath deemed © —
hereſies to bec neceffaric for'rriail of thegood , yer itis conuenient to extin- 7 >; Ag
guiſh them in the beginning. | Finally ;rurning himſclfero all the'Saints of E777.
hceauen , andrto the Church vaiuerfall, teeprayerh chem ro intercede with 0929" W
God , thatthe Church may be purged from ſo great contagion.” Then hee |
proceedeth to (hew howir came ro his knowledge, and how hee harh ſeenc

with his eyes,that many errors were renewed, which were condemned long
bcfore,of Grecians,” Bobemians,and orhers,falſe;{candalous,apt ro offend god-

ly cares, and ro deceiue {imple mindes, ſowed in Germanie, alwayes beloued

both by him,and by his predeceſſors, who, after the tranſlation of the Greeke

Empire, haue cuer taken their protectors fromthat'nation, andthar many |

pious decrees againlt hererikes ——_- beene made by thoſe Princes; which the

Popes allo haueconfirmed. Therefore that hee, not willing to tolerate rhe

like errorsany longer, bur rather to make proutfion againit them, would re-

cite ſome of them: and here he repeateth 42. Articles,whichareinthepoints i Pore |
of originall fin, Penance and remiſſion of fins, of the communion, of Indul-, xz. anicls
gences, of Excommunication, of the power of the Pope, of the authoricie of $4...
Councels,of good works,of Free-will,of Purgatory, & of pouerty,all which

he ſaith arc reſpectiucly peſtiferous, pernicious, ſcandalous,offenfiue to pious

eares , contrary to charity , contrary to the reuerence which isdue to the

Church of Rome , contrary to obedience, which is the ſinew of Eccleftalti-

call diſcipline : whercfore being willing to proccede to ſentence, he,with the
Cardinals,generals of the regular orders; with other Diuines and Doctours,

both of the oneand cheorher law, hath madediligent examination of them.
Therefore hee condemnexh and reiefteth them, reſpectiuely , as heretical,
ſcandalous,falſe,offenftue ro pious cares, deceitfull ro godly minds, and con-.

crary to the Catholike tructh: Hee prohibirerh vpon paine of excommunica-

tion, aud intinite puniſhments, that no man ſhould dareto keepe them, de-

tend them, preach them, or fauour them. And becauſerhe ſame aſſertions =
arcfound in the bookes of Martin,therefore he condemnerh them, comman- zarier
ding vnder the ſamepaines,that none may reade or keepe them, bur that they a |
ought to be buracd,, as well thglc which doe containe the forc{aid propoſt- ve
tions, asall the reſt. Concerning the perſon of Martin himſelfe, he faith, he The rope v3-
hath many times admoniſhed,cited,andcalled him, with promiſeoffafe con- Minananns”
duct, and prouifion for hisiourney ;that, if heehad come, hee would not 7; 54h
hauc tound ſo many crrours in the Courr as hee faide , and that himſelfe the
Pope would haue taught him, thar the Popes his predeceſſors hauencuct cr-

red in their conſtitutions. But becauſe he hath endured the cenſures for the

[pace of a whole yecre, and hath dared to appeale vato a future Councell, a

thing prohibited by Pizs , and Julius the ſecond, vnderthe puniſhments due

to heretikes , hee could procced to condemnation without any more adoe;
notwithſtanding forgetting theſe iniurics, heeadmoniſheth the ſaid Martin,

and his-protectors,to changetheiropinions,ceaſe to preach, and in the terme

of 60. daycs,vpon the ſame paines,to reuoke al the foreſaid errors;andburne |, —-
the bookes;z whichincaſethey doe not, hee declareth them notorious and” ©

obſtinate hereriques. After he commanderth all vnder the ſame paines;thar
they |

the Councell of Trent. i

———_

_—

, a i - wr
Re ee eee ee ets —T IE

'

I2 The Hiſtorie of "1 L1s. 1.

1520 they keepe not any bookeof the ſame Martin, though it conteine not the like
{>>> errours. Then ordaineth that all men ought ro ſhunne as well him as his fa-
Cnaxzes 5. YOUTETS; Yea, COmmanderh cuery one to apprehend them , and bring them
Heer 8. pcrſonally before nim, or ar leaſtchaſe them ourof their Lands and Coun-

KEE? 3* treys : hee interdicterhall places whither they ſhall goe : commandeth thar
they bee cucry where made knowen , and that his Bull ought to beereadiin
cuery place,cxcommunicating whoſocuer ſhall hinderthepublication there-
of: he determineth that rhe exemplifications ought to be belceued, and or-
dereth rbat his Bull be publiſhed in Rome, Brandeburg, Miſna,and Manſperg.

The Popes Martin Luther recciuing newes of the condemnation of his doctrineand
- E7-9992 bookes, ſet foorth a writing, repeating the Appeale madeto the Councell,

cauſeth La-

therro make and making replication thereof forthe ſame cauſes. Furthermore, for that
Appeal. the Pope had proceeded againſt a man not called, nor conuinced , nor the
controucr{ic ofthe doctrine heard, preferring his owne opinions to the word
of God, and cauing noplace for the Councell,heofftereth to demonſtrate all
theſe things,praying the Emperourand all Magiltrates to accept this his Ap-
cale,for defence of the authority of the Councell, thinking that this decree
of the Pope binderh not any.till the cauſebe lawfully diſcuſſed ina Synod,
ans  Butmecn of vnderſtanding ſeeing the Bull of Leo, maruciled at it for ma-
Lee calured: ny cauſes. Firſt, concerning the forme, that the Pope ſhould Pn roa
declaration with clauſes of the palace in a matter which ought to be han-
dled with the words of the holy Scripture ; and eſpecially viing periods fo
intricate, and ſolong and prolixc, that it was ſcarccly poſſible ro draw an
ſenſe from them, as if he had been to giue ſentence in a feodatary cauſe. And ir
was particularly noted thatone clauſe which ſaith, Inhibentes omnibus ne prefa-
tos erroresaſſerere prſumant, is ſo drawen our in lengrh,with ſo many inlarge-
mentsand reſtri&tions, that betweene Inhibentes and Preſumant , there arc
laced morethen foure hundred words.

Others, paſſing on alirtle further, conſidered that, to haue propoſed and
condemncd as hcreticall,ſcandalous,falſe,oftenſtucro pious cares,and deceit-
full co ſimple minds, 42. propoſitions, without declaring which of them
were hereticall, which ſcandalous, which falſe, but onely with a word (ref-
pectiucly ) artriburing to euery one of them $2 vncerraine qualitie, cauſed a
oreater doubt then was before; which was hot ro define the cauſe bur to
makcit morecontrouerled, and ro ſhew moreplaincly , thatanother autho-
rity and wiſedomeyvas neceſſary to determine it.

Somecallo were filled with admiration, for that it was ſaid,that among ft
the 41. propoſitions there were errours of the Grecians condemned long a-

oe. Others thought ita ſtrange thing, that ſo many propoſitions in diuers
points of faith; ſhould be decided in Rome. by the aduice of the Courtiers
onely without participating them to other Biſhops, Academies,and learned
perlons of Europe.
Butthe Vniuerſitics of Louain and Collen,being pleaſed that there was a co-
lour giuen to their ſentence by the Popes Edi@, publikely burned the bookes
The Popes of Luther. Which gaue cauſcthat heallo in Wittenberg, (all that Schoole be-
| . ull and the _ ir, "as :
| Decrerals ing aſſembled) iudicially and publiquely made ro beburned , not onely the
paratore, Bull of Leo,but togerher alſo the Popes Decrerals; and aftcrgaue an account

| Wittenberg.
| to

"om

L1s8.4. "th Comncellof Trent.

n

to the world of that ation in a long manifeſt, publiſhed in' writing, noting; 521.

the Papacic in tyrannic ofthe Church, peruerſcneſſe of Chriſtian doQrine, >"

and yſurpation of the power of lawfull magiſtrates.
But aſwcll for Latbers appeale,as fortheſe and other conſiderations, cu

ſed, writings being {cr forth: continually,both by the one part,and the other.
For Martinfailed not to confirme his doctrine by diuers writings, and, accor-
dingly as he ſtudicd, hee diſcouered morelight, cucr paſsing ſome ſtepfur-
ther torward, and finding articles , of hich in the beginning hee had nor
thought : Which hee fayd he did for the zcale of the Houſe of God. But hee
was conltrained allo by necelsitic. For the Romaniſts hauing laboured cf
f<ctually in Collen with the Elefor of Saxonie , by the mediation of Hierom
Aleander , that he would deliuer Martin priſoner to the Pope, or by ſome
other meancs to procure his death , he ſav that he was obliged ro ſhew vnto
that Prince, and to the people of Saxonie, and cuery oneelle,that he had rea-
ſonon his ſide, thar neither hee norany other porenrate, might yeclderothe
carneſt intreaties of the Romaniſts,madeagainit his life. 34/1

The yecre 1520,bcing thus paſſed, thedictof Wormes, of the yeere 1 52 1 521,
was cclebratedin Germanic, to which Luther was called ro render an account {519m mae

of his doQtrine, and had giuen ynto him a ſafe condu& by rhe Emperour
Charles, clefted ewo yeeres before. He was: counlelled nor to goethither,

ſccing that the ſentence of his condemnation made by 7 HIER

ckeno-

beforc, and hanged yp;whercby he mightaſſure himſcltc yo bring

thing but a confirmation of his doome, if peraduenture no: worſe thing hap- -

pencd vnto him. Notwithſtanding himſelferhought the:concrary, againſt
the opinion of al his friends,and ſaid,that though he were ſure to haue to doe
againſt as many deuils as there were files in theroofes of the houſes of thar

citic,he would goe thither.
Andin that place, the ſeuenteenth of Aprill, hee was demaunded by the 7 ,14e inter:
Emperourand the whole aſſembly of the Princes,if hee were Authour of the 1989dinthe

Bookecs which wentabroad vnder his name,the Titles whereof were recited,
andthe copies, placedin the midit of theroomewhere they ſate,were ſhewed
vato him, and whether he woulddefend wharſocuer was contained inthem,
or tctract-ſomerhing; His anſwer was that,concerning the books, heacknow-
ledged he to be his; but to reſolue whether ro maintaine the thingscorained
in them,or not,wasa matter of great moment, & therfore required ſometime
ofdcliberation.Therc was granted him time that day,to giue his anſwerethe

next:Which being come, Martin, brought into theaſſembly, made a long ora- Anſnereth,

tion.Firlt,he excuſcd his ſimplicitie,if,bred after a _ & ſumple maner, he
had not vſcdtcarmes according tothe digniticof thar place, and giuento cuc-
ry-one conucnient ticles;then he confirmed that heacknowledged the books
for his owne. A nd concerning thedefence of them, heefaid they werenor all
of onc{ort, bur ſome containeddodtrine of Fairh and Pictie,others reprehen -
dedche Doctrine of the Romanilts, and a third kinde was of choſe which
ts | "= Were

LY

Cranrss g,
ery Hanay 8. ©
one became of opinion, that a lawfull Councell was neceſfarie, by which,nor U*<v *: |
onely the. controucr lies might bee decided, bat the abules allo, long {ince A CE
brought into the Church, might bee redrefled ; and alwayes the necelsitic tobe nec,
' hercof appearcd the more, by how much the more the contentions increa- 3g,

©.

al. dt

-_ The Hiſtoric of Lis 1

_ TW

1521 wcre written contentioully, againſt the defenders of the contraric doctrine.
——> For the firſt, he ſaid he were no Chriſtian or honeſt man if he ſhould retract
Cuantasre them the rather, becauſe though all were condemned, yet all were not iud-
fn 3. ped naught by the ſame Bull of Leo. Forthe ſecond, that it was too manifeſt,
Fzaxcrt 't- that all the Countryes of Chriſtendome were oppreſſed and groancd vnder
- © . thebondage. And thereforeto retract the things alreadieſpoken would bee
nothing elſe but to confirme that tyrannie. In the bookes of the third kinds,
he confeſſed hee was more bitter and vehement then hee ought, excuſing
himſelfe that hee made not profeſſion of SanRtitic, nor would maintaine his
owne manners, bur his doQrine onely , whereof hee was readic to giue an
account to any man whatſocuer, promiſing not to be obſtinate , but to caſt
his books into the fire himſelfe,in caſe any crrour were ſhewed him with the
Scripturein hand, Hee turned himſelfe ro the Emperour, and the Princes,
ſaying, it wasa bleſſing of God when the true doctrine came to be made ma-

nifeſt,as to reieCt ir, was to draw vpon vs a cauſe of extreame calamities.

His Oration being ended, he was by order required by che Emperour to
nope; giucaplainc and {imple anſwere, whether or no he would maintaine his wri-
eh.ng: ; tings. Whereunto he anſwered thathee could nor reuokeany thing that hee

had written or taught, if he werenot conuinced by the words of the Scrip-
eure, or by cuident reaſons.

The Emperour hearing theſethings, reſolued, following the ſteps of his

redeceſiours, to maintaine the Church of Rome , and ro vic all mcanes to
quench that fire. Howbcit hee would not violate the faith giuen, bur pro-
\ cur. .ccs. Claimea baniſhmenr againſt Martinafter bee was ſafely returned ro his houſe.
lunon otthe {SOME of the afſembly approouing that which was done at (onftance, ſaid
Pa ®® that thefaich'ought.nortd be kept. But Lewis Count Eletor Palatine op-
poſed himſelfezas voto a thing which would brand the German name with
= 2 markc of perpetual ignominie, expreſſing with diſdaine, thar it was intole-
table, that "i the {cruice of Pricſts,Germanie ſhould draw vpon it ſelfethe in-
famic of not keeping the publique faith. Some there were alſo that ſaid thar
there was no necdeto procecde fo faſt to condemnation , becauſe it was a
marter of great moment, and which might produce gredt conſequences.
> Thedayes following there was a treaticin preſence of fome of the Prin-
ces, and inparticular, of the Archbiſhop of Triers, and of Ioachimus Ele&orof
Brandenburg, &many things wereſpokeby Martinin defence of thardoGtrine
and by others againſt it, being deſirous to induce him to referre euery thing
tothe iudgement of the Emperor,and of theaſſembly,& of theDier, withour
any condition wharſocuer. But he anſwering that the Propherforbade toput
our-confidence in men, yeacuen in Princes, to whoſc'1udgment; nothing

ought lefſc ro bee committed then the word of God, it was at laſt propoſed

che fe” that hee would ſubmitall co the iudgment of thefurure Councell, whereunts
--<— ppg he —__ with condition,thar firſtthe articles, which he intended to referre;
'  mightbedrawcn out of his bookes: and that ſentence. might nor be given of

them bur according to the Scriptures. Laſt of all, being demanded what reme-

dics he thoughtimight be vcd in this cauſe? he anſwered, thoſe onely which

were propoſed to the Iewes by Gamaltel;thatis,that if the enterprize-were of

man it would vaniſh,bur ifir came fro God,it was impoltible'to hinder it, and

chat

-—a
A _- -

© 4 _
II I
ET

L18, 1, the Conncell of Trent I5

uw

that it might giue farisfaQionto rhePope, becauſcall men oughero. reſt ſe- 152.1
cure(as himſclfe did )thatif hisdefeignecame nor from God;ir wouldperiſh os wm
inaſhorrtime. From which thi cbeing impo flible.co remone him;and - nor Cd
ſtanding firmeit his refolurion , notto acceptany iudgement biir ynder hit fours >. .
rule of the ſcripture, he had [eaue giuen him to depart,andarerme of 21.daies FUSESZ
aſſigned himto returneto his home, with conditionthar hee ſhould neither - |
preach nor writeany thing in his iourney. For which, after hee bad giuen
_ thankes,hedepartedthe 26. of April. 5 5 "oo
43 Aftcrwards ('harles che Empetout publiſhed an Edict in the fame Diet Tic nupe.
at Wormes,the 8.of April. InWhich,bauing firſt declared, that it belonged ro Ls Lech |
the duty of the Emperourto aduanice Refipion , andtocxtinguilh hereſics; |
which began to ſpring vp,he procceded on to ſhewrhiax Friar Martine Lather
endeattoured to. ſtaine Germanic with that contagion , ſothat,it he were nor
hindered,all chat nacion would fall into'/an horribleruinc; char Pope Leohad
fatherly admoniſhed him,and after chat, the alſembly of Cardinals,and other
excc}lentmen, had condemmnedhis writings, and declared him an Hererique,
if within a certainerermehereuoked nor A crrours; and had ſenc by Jerom
Aleander his Nuncio,acopie of that Bullof condemnationtobimthe Empe-
rour,as proteour ofthe Chutth,deliring him it thightbee 2a in execution
inthe Empire, his Kingdomes,Dominions and Prouinces;that notwithſtan-
ding this, Martin amended not hiniſelfe, yea mpltiplicd his Bookes daily, full,
nor onely of ney herelies, bur ctten of holewhiich haucbecn long fincecon-
demned by holy Councels;andnotonly in theLarine tongue, buririche Ger-
manalſo,naming in particular many of his crrours; he concluded thatthere
was no writing of his where there was not to bee found ſomecontagion or
deadly ſting,ſorthatit i= at faid,that cucry word was a poyſon;thatthele
things being conſidered by him'/the Emperour, and his Counſcllours of all
nations ſubie&t vnto him, treading in the ſteps of the Romance. Emperours
hispredeceſſours,bauing conferred,in that Dict of Wormes,withthe EleCtors;
and metiof orher States of rhe Empire,by their counſcll and aſſent, (though ir
was nor firto heare a man condemned by the Pope,obſtinate in his perucrſc-
nes and a notorious Heretique/notwithſtanding, totake away all occaſion
of cauil},many laying ir was neceſſaryro hearethe man beforethe Popes de-
cree was executed) hereſolued to ſend to fetch him by one of his Heraulds,
notre know and iudge the things thatconcernefaith, which belongeth to
chePopealone, burcobring him to the right way with good perſwaſions, $
Then heeſhewed how Martin was brought into x & publique afſembly,and ;
whereof he was interrogated, arid what be anſwered, as it hath beene decla+
red before,and how hehad leaue giuen him,and departed.

44 Afterwards hegocth on,concluding thatthercforefor che honeur of
God,and reuetetice of the Pope, and for the duty of the Imperialldignity,
bychecounſell and affenc of HePtitices: Fleftors, and States, cxccutingthe
ſcnteticeandcondemnation of the Pope, he declated thathee holdeth Map.
tm Luther for anotorions Hereti que, and determiinerh tharhee ought tobe
fo held of nic; probibiclng cucry one to teceiue ordefend himinany

forr,commanding both P rinces and States;vtiderall thepenalcies, to b;
hend andtake him aftcrtherermef ryyetity dayes,and alſoco pgs
! eats BS 1 wy

CC OI
Li

——

16 | T he Hiſtoric of = | L1B. Is

TE

1521 hiscomplices, adherents, and fauourers, ſpoyling them of all their goods
. ; -mooucable and immooucable.* Hee commandeth alſothatno man ſhould
Lzo.1%  'rgadcorkerpe his books, notwithſtanding chatſome thingbegood intherr]

CHARLES

emmmaaans 4{017 1,24 order as wellto Princes, as others that adminiſtcr Iuſtice, | thar they,
Hsnxar 8, b.; $4 +} 5 I :
Fzaxcis ry burncand deſtroy rhem. Aid becauſe books extracted out of his workesare

FN compoled andprinted in ſome places, and pictures and images ſpread abroad
- tothe dilyrace of many, yea,cucn of the Pope himſclfe, he commandeth that
none ſhould prinr,paint,or keep any of chem,bur that they beraken and bus
ned by the Magiſtrates;and the Printers, buyers and ſellers punifhed, adding
a generall law, thatno writing may be printed where any point of faithis
handled,chough the leaſt ofall, without conſent of che Ordinary.

45 In this ſelfe ſamerime alſo the Vaiuerlity of Pary,drawing diuerscon-
fry of Pau Cluſionsfrom the bookes of Luther, condemned them, partly as renewed our
— ofthcdodrinc of Wigleffeand Huſſe,and partlyas newly deliuered by him a-
* wr. oainſt the Catholique DoCtrine, Bur all theſe oppolitions effeed nothing

clſc;but that Luther anſwering,bookes were multiplycd both of the one {ide
- andrheother, andrhecontentions waxed morcſharpe, and the curioſity of
many was ſtirred vp, who, willing to informerhemſclucs of the ſtate of the
controuerſic, came to notethe crrours reprehended, and ſo withdrew their
deuotion from the Pope. |
46 Amongſtthemoſtfamous contraditors, which thedoCtrine of Luther
Heny the 8, | : :
ingot eg- found, was Henry 8.King of England, who notbcing borne the Kings eldeſt
{write  fonne, had beenedeſtinared by hisfarherrobe Archbiſhop of Canterbury,and
wgainſt Luther 2 | p
therefore in his youth was madeto ſtudy ; But theeldeſt being dead, and af-
cer himthefathcralſo, hee ſucceeded inthe Kingdome ;and cſteeming ita
great honour to imploy himſelfein ſo famous a controuerlic of learning,he
. wrot a booke of the ſeucn Sacraments, defending alſo the Popedome, and
' oppugning the Doctrine of Luther ;athing ſo gratctull ro the re that ha-
aing recciged the Kings booke, he honourcd him with the yſuall title of
Gaines > Defender of the Faith. But Martin ſuffcred not himſelfe ro beſcarcd with thar
gerofthefaih. moſt illuſtrious glittering name of a King, bur anſwered his Maiefty with
aſmuch acrimony, vehemencie, and as ſmall reſpe&, as he had anſwered
the petty Do@tors. This Kingly tittle being entred into thecontroucrſics
de men morecurious, and, as it happeneth incombats, thathe lookets
on arc alwayes ready to fauour the weaker, andrto cxtoll hisactions,though
they bec but meanes, ſo {o hecrceit ſtirred vpa generall inclination towards
Luther.
TheBof copy. 47 So ſoenc as the Emperours decree of baniſhment was publiſhed tho-
four wer roughout,the ſame month Hugo Biſhop of Conſtance,in whole Dioccſle is the
cinch Citty of Zuric , wrottothe Colledge of the Canons of that place, ofwhich
number Zuinglius was one,and another letter tothe Senate of the {ame Gity.

In thoſc letters he putthem in mind of the dammage which the Churches,

and Common-wealths alſo endured by innovation of doftrine, with much
detrimentto ſpirituall well-fare, and confuſion of publiquequict and tran.
qty Hee exhorteth them to beware of new Dodctours , ſhewing that
they aremooucdonely by their owne ambition,and inſtigation of the deuil.
Heſcnt therewithall the Decree of Leo,and the banifhmenc publiſhed by the

BY ts potwrmnofuce} cot {gavtagee amiuwan ro Bane ra Emperour,

| : = -_ _ _—_— new a 0. 1
ata gr nes 4m - en 9m AE IRE» - |. I . — _
—— AO

XUM

wy

L183, 1, the Councell of Trents ns

Emperour , cxhorting them to recciucand obey both the oneand theother, 1521
and particularly noted the perſon and doQtrineot Zuijng/ius and his adherents; AN
JW - which conſtrained him to giucan account of whatſocucr he had taught his © uns 55.
7: Colleguesand to fatisfic the Senate. Hee wrotalloro the Bilhop, infilting FFT
p:incipally vpon this, that concubinarie Prieſts were not any, more to bee fx ax <is 14
: rolcrared, from whom ſprang infamy to the Clergy, and bad cxampleto ay
the people, and generally corruption of manners in all; a thing which could
wy. taken away, but by bringing in of marriage, according ro the Apolttles
doctrine. Heewrot allo to allthe Cantons of the Suifſes in his owne defence,
making particular mention of an Edi&t madeby the Magjltrates their prede-
ceſſors, that cuery Pricſt ſhould bee bound to hauc his proper concubinegthar
hee might not en{narethe chaſtity of honeſt women ; adding that though ir
ſeemed a ridiculous decree, yet it was neceſſarily ro be made, . norcould bee
changed, vnleſſe that as much as was conltiruted in fauour of keeping Concu- '
bines, wereart chat preſent conucrred vnto lawfull matrimony.
48 Theſtirring of the Biſhop induced the Dominicansto preach againl(t TheDoi %
the docrine of Zuingliw,and him to defend himſelfe. Wherefore he wroteand againt 2um
ubliſhed 67.conclufions,whichcontained his doftrine,and touched theabu- {*#ned7.
{cs of the Clergy,and of the Prelats. Whereupon much confuſtoa and difſenti. ve mere. /,
on ariſing, the Senate of Zuric beganco conſule how to appeaſe the tumules,
and called together all the Preachers 1nd Doctors of their turiſdiction. The
inuitcd alſo the Biſhop of Conſtance to ſend ſomemanof wiſedomeand lear-
ning, to aſſiſt at that conference, rothe end they might pacifie thetroubles,
and order ſomething which mighthce forthe glory of God. - The Biſhop
ſent his Vicar, Tames Faber,who afterward was Biſhop of Vienus ;and the day , ho traby
” appointed forthe mectin I being cone, anda great mulcitude aſſembled to- the Bithop of
octhcr,Zuingliu reproduced his concluſions, v#ered todefend them, and to afiftincom-
anſwereto whoſocuer would contradict them. After.many things were{(poke 2998.28...
by diuers Dominican Friars, and other Doctors againſt Zuinglius,and by him =
anſwered, Faber ſaid, that that timeand place were not fit totreateof ſucha
matter,& that the diſcuſſing of ſuch propoſitions belonged co the Councell,
which would becalled very ſoon:for he ſaid, the Pope had ſoagrecd with the
Princes, and greater Magiſtrates,and Prelates of Chriſtendome. Which gaue
{ubicct to Zuingliwto fortifie himlclfe, ſaying, thattheſe promiſes were made
to feedethe people with vaine hopes, and 1n the meane ſpace to lull them
allcepe in ignorance; thatthe things which were ccrtaine and cleerein the
holy Scripture,andin the yſe of the Primitiue Church, might very well bee
handled atrhat time, though they expected a moreexactdeclaration fromthe
Ceuncell, of the points that were doubtfull ; and alwayes vrging him tolay
what he could, againſt his concluſions, Faber told him that hee would not adv gs
treat with him jn words, but would an{were his concluſions in writing, Fis Worth

nally, thealkembly ended witha Decree of the Senare, thar the Goſpell ſhould -
bee preached according tothe dodtrine of theold and new Teſtament, not ofthe Seay ;
accordingtoany humane Decree or Conſtitution. AWE.
49 It being;thereforeperceiued, thatthe labours of the DoCtours and Pre-
latesof the Church of Romeandthe Popes decree, who proceeded ro an ab-
lolute condemnation,” and the Emperours'Bando,ſoſcucre, not onely could
of : B 3 ns: IRE | NOT

a» — —

XUM

Wh —— I 2

The Hiftorie of Lis le

1521 notcxtinguiſh the new do&trine, but that notwithſtanding it made cucry day
SA agreaterprogreſle, eucry one beganne:to thinke char theſe medicines were
Canes. 35. NOt properforſuch a malady,and that in concluſionit was neceſſary to come
FTI ro ſuchakinde of remedy, which, being vicdin times palt in the like occali-
Eagyer: + Dos, ſcemed had appealed all troubles, which was the celebration of a Coun-
a general cell, Wherefore this was deſired by all forts of men,asa wholclomeand the

was

thought to bee ONCly remedy.
i 50 Itcameto beconfidered, that theſe nouelties had nor had any otherbe-
ginning butfrom the abuſes which time broughrc in, and from the negi-
ence of the Paſtors; and therefore that it was impoſſible ro remedy the con-
TING ſprung vp, bur by remedying the abuſes which cauſcd chem ; and
that there was no other way to proutde againſt them, with concord and v-
niformity, but by an vniucrſall Congregation. And this was the diſcourſe
of godly and well diſpoled men. Notwithſtanding there wanted not diuers
Mivees fares oe {Ores of perſons , who thought the Councell would be profitable for their
perſons dere ends, and deſired it ſhould be regulated wirh ſuch conditions, that it could
ehe Caunc : MTs :
fordiucueads, NOT be but in their fauour, and not contrary to their intereſts, Firſt, thoſe
: that had'embraced Luthersopinions deſared the Councell, with condirion that
therein all might be decidedand gouernedby the Scriprure, all the Pope his
conſtitutions and ſchoolc.lcarning being excjudcd : Foro they aſſured thems-
{clues, noronely to defend their owne doctrine, burallo that onely theirs
fhouldbe approoucd.But a Councell that ſhould proceed as the vic was 800.
ccres before, they would not, and would be vndcrſtood thar they referred
not themſclues to thatcenſure. And Martin was vicd to fay, Thatin Worms
hee was too faint hearted, and that he was ſo well affured of his dodtrine, thar
it being divine, he would nor ſubmir irſo much asto the judgement of An-
gels ; yea,;that with it he was to indge all, both mcnand Angels. The Princes
and other goucrnors of the Countreys regarded not much what the Coun-
cell might determine concerning doftricns, bur defired it might bee ſuch a
oneas might reduce the Prieſts and Friarsto their beginning, hoping thar, by
that meanestheregalities, and temporall juriſdictions would returne vnto
chem;which, inſuch abundanceand plenty , were paſſed intothe Ecclefiaſti-
call order. And therefore they ſaid , that it was in vaineto call a Councell,
where the Biſhops and other Prelates oncly ſhould haue a deliberative voyce,
becaulerhey ought to bee reformed , and it was neceſlary that others ſhould
haue the charge thereof, whocould nor be deceiued by their proper intereſts,
norconltrained ro reſolucagainſt the common good of Chriſtendome. The
meaner ſort, though they had not much knowledge of the affaires of the
world, deſired that che Eccleftaſticallauthoriry might be moderated , and
the rome peoplenot burchened with ſo many cxaQtions, vnder pretence of
Tithes,Almes, and [ndulgences,nor oppreſſed by the Biſhops Officials,vnder
colour of corrections, and ſentences. The Court of Rome, S moſt principa)]
part,deliredche Councell,thatit mighe reſtorcobedience to the Pope, which
was taken from him,& approued ſucha one as might be goucrnedaccording
to theformes vied inthe laſt ages. Bur that it ſhould haue power toreforme
the Papacy,and to takeaway thok introductions, from which the Court re
cciucd{o manyemoluments, and by whichagreat part of the gold of Chri-
| TS = £ ſtendome

ou

—_

— _

CG. DPI War _—_

L18, 1, the Countell of Trent. 19

ſicadome was glucd together in Rowe,this naw chem not. Leothe Popebe-
ing,as it were, inaftrairberweeneboththe partics, knew not whatrode. 1522
ſire, He ſaw thac cuery day his obedience was diminiſhed, and that whole 43x25?

- CHArLLS -

countreys ſeparated themſelues from him, and defired a Councell for remedy; nt

 Hunny 8.

' But when hee conſidered thatic would bee worſe then the malady, CACYING Fraxcys 1.

with it in conſequencea reformation, he abhorred ir. Hee conſidered with DAYS
himſelfe howtocall a Councellin Romz,or ſome other place of the Churches knonerh noe
dominion ; as his Predecefſor and himſclfe had celebrated with {1ngular won rpg
fruit, the Councell of Lateran afew yecres before, hauing by that meanes cores
appcaſcd the ſchiſme, reduced the kingdome of France; which was lepara- 2
ted, and, which was of no leſle importance, aboliſhedrhe Prgarnaticall San- brougix co
Ction, doubly contrary to the monarchy of Rome ; as well in regard it was an Ma
exampleto takefrom him the collation of benefices,a greac foundation of the
Pontificall greatneſle, asalſo becauſe it was a preſeruation of the memory of
the Councell of Baſil, and by conſequence of the ſubieQtion of the Pope toa

enerall Synode. Bur afterwards hee ſaw not how a Councell of that ſort
could giue remedy to the diſeaſe, which was nor inthe Princes and great Pre-
lates, with whom familiarity and intereſt preuailed, but in che people, with
whom it was neceſſaryro vicreality, and to makeatrue muration. The caſe 51, 4...
ſanding thus, in the end of the yeere 1521. Pope Leo departed this life, — Pope Lev.

51 And inthe beginning of the nexc yeerethe ninth of Ianuary Adrian was 4diatis ciea.
created. Which aſſumption cothe Popedome being made of a man who was much texted.
neuer ſcenein Rome, vnknownetothe Cardinals and the Court, and remai- 3522
ned in Spaine (beſides che world holding an opinion that heewould not ap- |
prouc the manners of the Romans,northe free lifeof the Courtiers) all mens
thoughts wereturned to conſider of it ;{o that Luthers innouations were no
morcthoughr of, Some doubted that hee was too much inclined to a refor-
mation, others that hee would callthe Cardinals ynto him, and ſo cranſpore
the Papacy out of Jtaly, as had happenedat other times. But they were
ſoone deliucred from this great feare. For the new Pope, thenetr day after
he had recciued aduice of his election (which was the 224 of theſamemonerh
in the city of Yiforia in Biſcay) not expecting the Legars ſent vnto him from
the Colledge of Cardinals,to fignificit vato him, andto hauc his conſent, af.
ſembled thoſe few Prelates which he could ger, conſented to the Election,
andhauing taken the habitand armes, declared himſelfe Pope, and went pre
ſently to ©Barcellona ; where he wrotero the Colledgeof Cardinals the cauſe
why he had taken vpon him the nameand-charge of the Pope, without ex-
pectingrhe Legates,commitcingallovnto chem the publication of irthrough-
outall Italy. He was inferced to tarry at Barcellona a conuenienttime, ro
paſſe the gulfe of Lions , which was very dangerous ; yet he deferred no lon-
+ needs mult ro imbarke for Italy ; andarriued thereintheend of Au-
gult 1522. | | |
52 Adrian found all Italy incommotion, by reaſon of thewarrebetweene

the Emperourand the French King, and the Apoſtolicall Seavuer head and —_
cares in a particular warre with the Dukes of Ferraraand Yrbin, Arimint,new- " rd ngg
ly taken by the Malateſti, the Cardinals divided, and not truſting oneano- ©
ther, the fle of Rhodesaſficged by che Turkes, the lands of the Church

Ss EE.

— - on ets. et
S — — — ——————_— —_—

420} | The Hiſtone of

1522 exhauſted and in extreameconfuſion, during theanarchy of eight moneths.
an Notwithſtanding; hee applicd himſclfe principallyro compole the diſcords
Apxian %& —1jojion in nd bcing nounthed and brought vp from/hischild.

in religion in Germany, An g ghr vp is

CHARLES Ts

——7z. hoodinthe ſtudics of Schoo-Diuinity,heheldthoſe opinions ro beſoelcare
Francis 7: and cuident,that he was perſwaded that no reaſonable man could thinke the | |
Aarne ve contrary. Wherefore he gaue no othertitleto the doctrine of Luther, bur va-
"Coar arien {auoury, fooliſh,and varcaſonable, andthought that none, buſt ſome fewe -
my. cies {OO1cS,COU!d DCIccucit, and thatthoſcthat followed Martin were men, who,
hegos te jn their conſcience, vndoubtedly maintained the opinions of the Churchof
detn®'®" Romezand fainedrhe contrary, becing prouoked by the burthens layd ypon

them. His opinion therefore was, that it muſt needes beean eaftethingto
extinguiſh that doctrine, which had none other foundation then matter of
44: rome Profite, and thoughtrhat, by giuing ſome ſmall ſatisfaction, the body would
jn Fees, Calily bee healed, which rather made ſhew to bee {icke,then thatir was ſo in-
deed. And becauſe hewas borne in Prreft, a city of low Germanie,hee hoped
thatall chat nation would willingly hearken to his propoſes, and ingage
chemieluces ro maintaine his authority, as being an Almas, and ſo ſincere in
all hiscreaties, that he vſcd neither Arts norfſecret ends. And being perſwa-
ded that itimported much to vic celcrity,hereſolued ro make hs firſt propos

Hereanet'® frion in the Dict, which was prepared ar Noremberg : which to the ende it .
mation before 11; hg begratefully heard, 2nd h1s promilecſteemed reall, -hethought it ne-

he maketh his : . R
frlt propof ceſſary to giueataſte, by beginnivgareformarion, before hee treated with
c

- ay them, remoouing the abulcs which cauſed thedifſention. To thisende hee
called to Rome, Toby Peter Caraffa, Archbiſhop of Chicti,and Aarcellss Cagele of
Gacta, men eſteemed for their honeſty and vertues, and very skilfull in
 whatſocuer belonged to Ecclefiaflicali duſcipline, chat by the counſcll of
them; and of the Cardinals which he truſted, hee might findeſome remedy
againit+he corruprions which were of greateſt moment. In this number
the prodigality vicd in giuing Indulgences firſt preſented it ſelfe ynto him,
becaulc it gaue way to the reputation which the new Preachers in Germany,
had gained.
53 The Pope, being a Diuine who had written in this matter long before
Luthc thoughtto handle it, meant tocſtablifh by an Apoſtolicall Decree, and
as Pope,thar doctrine which, being a priuate man,he had taughtand written? |
Thats, that an Indulgence being granted ro one that ſhalldoe ſucha godly
worke,the worke may be performed by ſome in ſuch perfefion, that he may
obtainethe Indulgence ; ny if it wantſomething of thatexaQneſle, the wor
ker vbtaineth notall che Indulgence,bur onely ſo much as anſwereth in pro-
portiontothe imperfc& worke.The Pope thought that by this meanes hee
{nould not onely prouide againft ſcandall hereafter, but remedy alfo thoſe -.
that were palt , becauſc ic being poſſible ro qualifie with ſo good circumſtan- |
ces cuery little worke, that 1t may deſcrue any greatreward, Luthers obiction
was anſivered , how by the offcring of a penny ſo greatatreaſure could bee
gained ; and ſecing thatby the defect of the worke, hethar gaineth no all, !
obtaincth notwithſtandioga proportionable part, the faithfull drewe nor
\ themlſclucs backefromy ſceking Indulgences,
, $4-Put Friar Thomas of Gaeta,Cardinall of $. S?u , -a perfet Diuine, dif- |
$7: EET  -_ Ee: fwadcd

m—_—_ A. th
—_—_—_ —_ MC
a ſ
.
c

\

TL 1B, Is

—_—

wo s
I ms Stn -

XUM

L18, 1, the Councell of Trent. # 21

—

{waded it, telling him, chatthis was to puniſhchartruth, which; for theſafe- TR

tie of ſouls, it was better ro keepeſectet amongſt learned ment, and'tlititic ro
was rathcr diſputable then decided. 'Therefore;rhavhimſclicalfo, who fteds exmns”
faltly belceucd itin his conſcience, notwithſtanding had fo catried it'in his m3 ©

. writings;thatnohe burtthe moſt Icarned men coulddtaw irfroth his words: Fxorecs r.

which -dodrinc being divulged andauthorized,there would bedanger har Card carren
euen learned. men would conclade,  tharthe Popes grant profited potHMing, Popefrom ma,
but chat alloughttro beactriburedcothe quality of the work which hit >. bros
abſolucely:diminiſh mens hore deſires to purchaſe Indulgences, ant? ther. Piugences:
ſeeme of the Popes| authority. The Cardinall addei thac, after hee had ex-

atly ſtudied this ſubic&, by the comtand of Leo; at therime whenthels
contentions began in Germamie, and written afull craft rhicreof, being Legat

in Awburg,the next yeare he had occaſionte examineand treatof irmote dis

ligetdly, ſpeakivg with many, and diſcuſſing chedifticulriesand motiues

which troubled thoſe Countryes: and intwo cotiferences which hee had

with Luth:-r in that City, he diſputed that marter at large, which having well . ,-.. +
digeſted, hedoubted nor bur that he might ſay with afſeucrarion & withour © *
danger of:errour;that there was no ocher way to giue remedy tothe ſcandals - >
aſt,preſent, and to come, then by bringing backe thoſe thingsto their fieft = +1
boning Tila it is aclcarecalc, that, howſocucrthe Pope may freethe

fahfullfromany puniſhment, by the meancs of Indulgences, yerto him
that readeth the Decterals it plainely appearcth, that an Indulgence is arrab-
ſolution from penance itnpoſedinconfeſſion onely. Whereforecauſingthe
diſulcd penitentiary Canons to beobſcrucd again,and impoſingconuenient
penance, cuery one wauld cuidently ſee the neceſſity and vrility of Indal-

ences, and would carneltly ſceke them, to free themſclues from that great
CE of penance;and thegolden age of the Primiriue Church would re-

- turne againe,in which the P relates had abſolute command ouer the fairhful,

onely becauſc they were held in continuall exerciſe with penance; whereas
now, being become wanton, they would ſhake off from them the yoke of
obcdicnce. The people of Germanie, who buricd in idlenes, giuecare to Mar-
zin for preaching Chriltianliberty,if rhey were curbed with penances, would
thinke no more of this innouation , and the Apoſtolical Sea might fauour
therein whoſocucr would bethankefullco itin that behalfe. _

55 This opinionpleaſed the Pope, as grounded vponauthority,and where-
unto he {:vy nut whar oppotition could be made. Hecauſcd itto be propo- wi wa: wa.
ſedin the Penitentiarie Courr, to findea mcanes and forme how tojpurit in {n8= imbrace
praCtiſe firſt in Rome, andthenin all Chriſtendome. For this cauſe diuers af. *
ſcmblics. were made by the deputies forthe reformation, together with the
P cnitentiarics, totreat of the manner how to vſcit. But ſo many difficulrics
didcrofleit,that in concluſion Lorenzo PuccioaFlorentine,Cardinall of Santi
2uatrowho was Dataric to Pope Leo,and(as hath beenfſaid) a diligent mini- purwa«dinen:
ſter ro find our money,and was nowchicfe Penitentiary,telated ro the Pope, 39! **
withagencrallaſſent,thatthe propoſition was thought impoſlible, and rhar,
when proofethercof ſhould be made, in ſtcad of curing the preſent diſcaſes,

farre gearer would be ſtirred vp. That the Canonicall puniſhments were 1
grown into difuſc,becauſethey could no longer beſupported for want of the
7 ; = —_
/

- by —_ — _— -— ——_— | —OO—M—

22 The Fhſiorte of © L1B, Is
1522 ancientzcale, Whercforefor him-that would bring chem backe, it was nc-
[SAA he ſhould makethe ſame zcaleand Charity inthe Church toreturne
Chant" 4« againe. Thatthis preſentage was not like vnto thoſethatwere paſtzin which
#2Tallthe Confſtirutionsof the Church wererecciued, withoutthinking any
Fzaxcis t- more of them;whereas now euety One will beaiudge, and cxaminetherea-
"XV (ons: Which; if it happen inthingsthat bring with them no burdenar all;
'* or very lite, how much morc multir be expected in aching tharwould bee
moſkheauy.  Itwas true, that theremedic was fitted for rhe diſcale,butrhat
it wastoo ſtrong for the body that was ficke, and inltced of curivg would
kill ic, and rchatin place of regaining Germany; Italy would ficlt bee loft, and
rhatcſtranged much more. The Cardinall added, meethinkes1 bearcone-
fay,as S. Peter did, Why dothey tempt God laying vpon the Diſciples ſhoul-
ders that, which neither we nor our fathers hauc beenable to beare: That his
Holynes ſhould remember thatfamous place ofthe Glofle,alleadged by him
in hisfourch booke vponthe Sentences,thar,concerningthe value of nduk
Fovre very BEDceS, the complaint is both old and doubtfull ; Thathice ſhouldconfider
diffcreax op the foure Opinions all Catholique, and yer ſo diffcrent as thar Glofle dorh
Indulgences, Fecite, Whereby it is manifelt, tharthis matter intheletimesrequizerh ſilence
be IC4B*- rather then any further diſcuſſion. |
| $6 Theſercaſons ſankedeepeinto Adrians mind.and made him-niot know
whatto doc,and hee was perplexed ſo much.che more, becauſche found no
leſſadifficulty in orher things,which,in his ſecrerpurpoſe, hee meanedto re--
forme, In the matter of diſpenſations for marriage,theraking away of many
prohibitions againſt contracting matrimony berweenecertaine perſons,
which ſeemed ſupcrfiuous, and hard to bee obſerued (whereunto hee was
much inclined, and it would hauc beene a - caſctorhepeople) was bla-
med by many, asa thing that weakened the {inewes of diſcipline, and the
continuing of them made the Lutherans fay , that they were onely toger
money. Toreſtrainc the diſpenſations tocerraine qualities of perſons, was
ro giue new matter to the pretendants to alleadge that in ſpirituallthings,
andin whatſocucr belonged tothe miniſtery of CyrIsT , there was no dif.
ference of perſons. To rake away pecuniary expencesfor theſe things, that
could not be, but by rebuying the Offices which Leoſold,the buyers where-
of were gaincrs by this. Which alſo hindered theaboliſhing of Regreſſes ,Ac-
« by And (Coadittories, and otherdeuices vicd iv thecollation of Benefices,
Which had the appearance (1f not rather theeſſence ) of Simony. To rebuy
the Offices was 1mpoſhible, in regard of the great charges which mult bee
made, and alwayes continued. And that which moſt troubled his mind was,
that when he was rcſolucd to take away anyabuſe, there wanted not ſome,
who tooke vpon him to maintaine with colourable ſhew,that the thing was
pood or neceſſary. With theſe doubts the Pope way gricued vntill Nouem-
er,de{irous to makefome notable prouiſion,to giug the world ataſte of his
minde, who was reſolutcto remedy all the abuſes, before hee begantotreat
In Germany.
The _ 57 Atlength Franciſcus Soderinu Cardinal of Preneſte,called Cardinal of Yol-
Sederinwa, © Ferrajin whom he pur moſt confidence(though afterward he wasſo farin his
disfauour that he caſt himintopriſon) made him cometo reſolution. This

_— — —

&, ,

- —_—

L1s.. the Gauncellaf Frens. _

Cardinal], moſt converſant in matiagitg ciuill affaires, and imployed in the 1522.
Papacics of Alexander, Inlins, and Lev, which were full of divers andimpor. {> —
rant accidents,in al his diſcourſes with che Popecaſt out words which might Cuaxcas 5.
inſtrut him. Hee commended his goodneſle, hisingenuity and bis minde Haar #, ©
inclincd to che reformation of the Church, and the rooting out of herefies:; Went:
adding, notwithſtanding, that hee tould nor haue praile by his ous intenti-

on onely , notable to doe good þy.it ſelfe, ynleſſe hee ioyned thereunto an

exact choyce of fit meanes, and ancxecution managed with the greareſt cir-
cumſpettion. But when hce ſaw himconſtrained by the ſtraitnefle of time

to relolue, heetold him therewas-no hope to confound and roote outthe
Lutherans by correcting the manners of x Courr, buc rather thatic would

beea meanes to augment their credit much more.. For the people, whoal-

waycs iudge by the cucnts , whenthey ſhall bee aſſured, by Lua Cog a
mcndmenr,that the Popes goucrnment was iultly reprehonded,wil perſwade
chemſclues likewiſe,that the other innouations propoſed haue good founda-

tion, and thearch-herctiques, ſeeing they haucoucrcome inone part, will

not ccaſeto reprehend thereſt. T hat inall humane affairesir fallerk out, that
torecciue ſatisfaction.in ſome requeſts, giucth pretence to prepare more, and

to thinkethey are due. That reading the ſtories paſt of the times, when he-

reſics have beeneraifed againſt che'authority of oh Church of Rome; it will

appeare , that all rooke pretence from the corrupted manners of the Courr.
Neuercheleſſe, ncucrany Pope thought fir toreforme them; butaftcr ad-
monitions and inſtructions vicd, to induce the Princes to protect the
Church. That, whatſocucr hath. ſucceeded well hererofore,ought alwayes

to bce obſerucdand kept,, That nothing did more ruine a goucrnemenr,

then tochangethe manner of ruling it. | Thatto open new wayes not vicd

was to cxpoſe him(clfe to great|dangers,andtharir was moſt ſecure to tread

in the ſteps ofthe holy Popes, whoalwayes hauebroughetheir enterpriſes ro

a proſperous end. That no man hath cucr extinguiſhed herefics by refor-
mations,but by Cruſadoes,and by exciting Princes and peopleto roote them

out. That hc ſhould temember that I#nocentivs the third, did by ſuch mcanes

happily oppreſle the Albigenſes of Languedoc,atd the next Popes extinguiſhed

in other placcs,and by ao other, means, the Waldenſes, Picards, poore' people

of Lions, Arnaldiſts, Speroniſts, and, Patazines, ſothar' now there remainerth no

motc of them bur che name. oncly. That there would not want Princes in
Germanie, who, in calc the Popg would giuethem leauetoſfcaze rhemſclues

of the States of Luthers fauqurers, would greedily embracethecondition ;

and chat Neem caule many peapleto follow them,»by granring Indul-

C

pene's and Pardonstq whoſqgucy, would afhiſt theme The Cardinall pur
imalſoin minde, thathe ought not to thinkeof the Germane ſtirres in Re-
ligiov.asjf there were ng more imminent danger ro the Apoſtolicall Sca; be-
cauſcthe-warre af Italy, athingiof greares peril, hanged-oucr theirheads,
whereunto he ought principally, co-applyhis mind immanagingwhereof,if
he wanted money, hich is che ſfiacw.of warre, hee might recciue ſome no«
torious affront; andrhar ao rcformation-could! bee made, that would nor
porably diminiſh therencs of the Church; mach bang ow fountains,
She one temporall, the rentsof che Eccleſiaſtical Rate, the other three [Þi-

ritual),

—_.

24 The Hiſtori of Ls. 1. |

1522. ricuall, nas, atid collations of Benefices, none of them
free, could bc ſtopped, burthat onequarterof the reuenues would be cur off..
Cranes | The Poperclating theſe difcourſes to William Enconre, whom afterward he
FRET. created Cardinall, and Theodoyic Hezivs, hisfatniliar and truſtic friends, ſayd
Faaxcr-: rhe condition of Popes was milerable, ſecing it was plaine that they could

44:+7bemni- not doe good, though they defired'and indeauourcd to doe it,and concluded
ion ofthe that, before the iourncy which hee was to make into 'Germanie, ic was not
FP poſiblerocfiett any one point of teformarion,and rhar it was neceſlaricth
po y one pointofreformarion,a hey
ſhould be contented to belecuc his promiſes, which he was reſolued to main»
tainc,thoughit werero deuelt himſelfe ofall temporall dominion, and to be
reduced to the life of the Apoſtles. Neuertheleſle hee gaue ftrair commil-
ſion ro both, of which one was Datarie, and the-other Secrctarie, that they
ſhould be ſparing to grant Indulgences, diſpenſarions, regreſſes,and coadiu-
rotics,vntill meanes werefound to giuea rule for them by a Law and perpe-
ruall Conſtitution. Theſe things,hauing read them largely related ina Dia-
ricof the:Biſhop of Fabriato,wherc he noted all the remarkeable things which
hee had ſeenc and heard, I was willing briefely to repcate here, becauſe they
may {crue much to the vndetſtanding of rhoſerhings which ſhall be ſpoken
of hereafter, | |
In the firſt Conſiſtoricof Nouember, by conſenr of the Cardinalls, hee
appointed Franceſco (biericaro,vhom he knew in Spaine,Biſhop of Fabriano
The Bitop (yhom Lnamecd alittic before) for his Nuncio to the Dict of Norembere,

of Fabrianc 18

ſcar Nuncio Which was aſſembled in abſenceof the Emperour, who, ſome few moncths

——— ag ' before, was inforced to = into Spaine, to appeaſe the tumults and ſedirions

begunne in thoſe kingdomes. The Nuncio arriued at Noremberg atthe cnd
enerrorke Of the yeere, and preſented the Popes Letters to the Electors, Princes, and
Dicragaint Orators of Cities, written generally to themall,ynderthe datc of the fiue and

The Popes

Luther,

twentieth of Nouember; in which hee firſt complained that Martin Luther,
hauing becne condemned by the ſcntence of Leo, and the ſentence executed
in Wormes by the Emperours Decree, publiſhed thoughour all Germany, hee
erſcucred notwithſtanding| in'the fame crrours,” continually publiſhing
hodkes full of hereſtes, and thathe was fauoured,nor" onely by the meaner
ſort, bur cuen by che Nobles alſo. Adding that, though the Apoſtle forctold
that hercefics were neceſlaric for exerciſe of the godly, yer that neceſlitic was
tolcrablc in times conuenient, not in thole;,itwhic Chriſtianitic being op-
preſſed by rhe*Turkith armes,all induſtrie ſhould be vicd to purgerhe diſeaſe
within, that the dammage and danger, which it bringeth by it ſelfe alorie,
hindcreth his endeauoursagainſt ſo greatan enemic. Then hee exhorteth
thePrinces andpeoplenot to make ſhew of giving any conſentro ſogreatan
abomination; by tolcrating iraty longer. 'Hee ſhewed them that ir was a
moſt ſhamcfull thing to tuff chemſelues to beled out.of the way of their an-
ccſtors,by a ſample Friar , as if ney y Luther were bf Vnderſtanding , and

wiſc. He aducrtifeththem that, if |

followers hue denied obedience
to the EccleſiaſticallLawes, much/more wilt rhey eftecmebaſely ofthe ecu-
lar; andif they hauewſarped the goods of the*Church] rbuch lefſe will they
ab(tainefrom thoſeof the Laitie; and hauing dared to lay their hatds vpon
thePricſts of God, theywilbnot ſpare the Foues, wiucs', and _ of
RITY: chem,

Ss” _

%

4 ot
0,
; LEY

* __ | —— — ———C—. _——_ — "
CO—— —_ —_ _ —O————
My - - LY
_ _eo .

L181, the Cotneall of Trent. >} 25

ther-Heexhortcrhthein,if they cannorreduce Marthiiind his followers iniro 1522"

theriglitway by fairs memes, toprocecd ro ſhatpeand ery remedies; ro cat PRI

the dead members fromthe body,as anciently was done viito Dathay, atd 2. Cdaktay' 4

biram,to Ananiay and Saphira, to Toninian and Vieilamiu; and finally asthitit mot 4

predeceſfors didagainſt John Huſſe, and Hierome of Pravhe, in the ( ouncel! £15 i

of Conſtance, | Whoſccrample, in caſe they cannor otherwiſe doe, they etght

' ro imitate. Iconcluſion he referred himfelfe as wellin this particular , as'if

other affaires';\to the relation of Franceſeo (*hiericato his Nuncio. He wrot

letters alſo almoſt toallthe Princes , with the very ſame conceits ; and to rh&

| Eletor of Savoiy he wrotin particular, tharhe fhould confider what ble wihe nth:
miſh ir would beto his poſtcrity, to hauc fauoured a franticke man, whoput = _

confuſton iato the world with impious atid fooliſh intentions; turning vp.

ſide downerhedoftrineeſtabliſhedby ctheblood of rhe Martyrs, labours of

the holy Doctors,and armesof the molt valiant Princes;rhat tic ſhould walks

intheparhes of- his anceſtours , "nor faffering his eyes ro bee'dazled by thie

fary of a petty companion, to follow crrous condemned by ſo many

Councels. | | | is
60 The Nuncto preſented tothe Dict,not pnch the Popes Briefe, bur his The Nuncio

waderth rhe

owne inftructionsalſo, by which hewas inioyned co exhortthePrinces with binradeth he
ſeauenreaſons,to oppoferhemſelncs againſt at peſtilent doctrine of Luther! = reiſons vs
Thefirlt, becauſe the worthip of God), andcharitytowardsrheir neighbout **, _—
mootitdrhem thereunco. Secondly, the infamy of rheirnarion,” Third! 0
theirowne honour, thewing themſclaes notto degenerare from their prede:
cefſonrs, who whereprefent arthie condemridtion'of Tobis Hſe it Copftaiite;
and of the other hereriques; lcadingfome of them to chie fire, cut With their
ownehands ;* andrhar they wouldnt faile of their ownepromiſemmdcon-
ſtancy, the greater part of them hauing approoucd the Emperours Edi&#
mir Lehr,” Fourthly thactheintury ſhotild'moouerhem,, which Lugber . _
ath d6nc-ro-thetr Propetiſeors ARA abother faith then thar which
they beleeucd,and conduting by conſequence rhatrhiey arealfirrhell. wn
they ought ib bemooucd, By rhe marke which the Lucherans dime ar, whi
to :wakrn the fecalat power, afterchey hautannibilated the Eccleſrafticaty,
—_— ence'tharit is vfurpedagainſtthe Goſpelf, Alchouglithey crafei-
ly mikethew beſet the fecalit;onely terdeceinethem! Sixrly; thar they
xouldtbrifider the difſentiorizahd confulicns raiſed monies ra
Andially hi - chim to'obfere chat Tutherrieaderhinthe fame wi
chit MabowZ: #i©10ag ay oc, petntitting catiialfinclitiationiro be farigttt,
chotiihcleefictosdocit 4 on ſty , © that he' may rheifor pow
erfallp deee; iyth th: mined in i6-
feneetha w A

Fo

and Sn
Hott Sons Harh
npetaoul this confation

|

—___

——— tm... At
u1—_ O ——_— — > —_— — —— —— w- =y —

TS

—
| Hivar 8.

the Dict.

| 1523. a ;
AA ſes inſpirituall chings ;. many .rtanſgrefſions of che commandements.,, and

RIAN ©.

CuanLss 5.

The anſwere of

h

5 Co
Fa.
F'Y | p.
 £

ſomcahowigations haue beene commiteed(uenio.that holy Sea, many,abu.
laſtly,allchings turned ro theyorlt, fo rhat it maybe ſaid, thattheipfirmicy
ispaſſcd from the head to the members,from the  Popestorthe inferigus.Pre-

= VNY lates, in ſo muchgtharthere hath beene none that hach done good, nonetone,
| Fortheamendmentof which cuil, him(cltcis relolued roimploy allliigavits,

and vicall diligence thatthe Court of Rome, from whenceperaducntureall
this miſchicfe procceded, ſhould be reformed firit of all. Which bewillcthe
rather doe, becauſe he {ecth thatallrheworld doth earneſtly defareit; - Not-
withſtanding that no man oughe ro maruaile, if he {hall ſce chat a{lche abu-
ſes benot ſoſuddendy amended... For the diſeafe being inuctctared and mul-
tiplicd,it is neceſlary to proceed flow!y in the cure, and to begin from things
of greateſt weight, roauoyd the confounding of all, by defiringro doe all to-
gcther:He gauc him commiſſion aiſo ro promile in his namerhe obleruation
of the Concordates, that he would informe himſclfc of the cauſes called into
the Rota, to remaund them to the parties according vnto juſtice. And laſtly,
that he ſhould ſollicite the Princes and States in his name, to anſwere the let-
ters, and to informe him of the meancs , by which he might mpſtcommodi-
oully refilt the Lutherans, Beſdes, the preſentation of the Popes Briefe , and.
theinformation,the Nuncio propoſed that it was obſerued that aimolt.cucry
wherein Germany , religious men forſooke the Cloiſters, ang returned tothe
world.,and thatthe Pricits married themſclues, to the great contemptiand dil-
gracc of religion ; and rhe greater partof them commurred many exceſſes and,
cnormitics. Wherefore 1. was, neceflary.that ſome order' were taken that
thele Sagrilegious marriages mighr bee difſolued, the Authors ſeyeral-
ly puniſhed, and the Apoltares reduced vnder the power of their Superi”
QUT. . |

k ſ

...61 The Djcranſwered the Nuhcio inwriting, that with reyerencethey bad

they gaucthankes to God, farhis . Holyneſle aſſumption to the Popedome,
iſhing bim all happyncſlc from abouc., And (when they had ſpoken whaz

 warrcagainlt the Turkgs) concerning thedemand bo CLErUS the

ucn agaiult Luther, and the Edict of Wormes, they anſwcr

F

gens caulcs ..1n, regard char the greater. part of the. peopke wasaperiwa-
COS ypon Germany; lochatit.any Ing had beene done fo prion. of the
by is mardona

nll d maineaine th Shaſre 20d imopicry and, popular .cumul

tumalrs.
F hoy: fayd,

A in

—_

imſcif

the,
99 Sr

Fo 24> =e ; oy
w $44 -*& 3 w?

ww Aa4aS

"+ WW hh

LB. I, the Conncell of Trent. "ud ah 27

— ut

. tweenethe Ecclefialtiques and Seculars, and to extirpate the preſent tumulcs. 1523 |

And becauſe Germany had conſented to the paiment of Annates, vpon con- oa
dition they ſhould beſpentin the warre againſt the Turkes, they being payd Crus 5.
ſo many yeares,and ncucr conuerted to that vie, they deſired the Pope, that Fur 8.
from hencefoorth the Courrof Rome might not be troubled to exact them, LSAY
bur chas they might be lefrro the Exchequer of the Empire for the expences

of that warre. And whereas his Holineſle demanded counſell of the meanes,

by the which he might oppoſe himſelfero ſo great inconucnience , they an-

ſwcered, that,if the treaty were not of Luther onely, but of rooting out alroge-
ther many crrours,and vices which by long cultome, and fur divers reſpects, The'Councel
haue taken deepe roote, by ſome ignorantly, by. others malicioully defended, ;, J_
they deemed no remedy more commodious, effe&tuall,and opperiune, then Pbcbelin
it his Holines, by the Empervurs conſent, would call a gudly, free, and Chri- Gomony
ſtian-Councel], ſo ſvoneasit were poſſible, in ſome conucnicnt place in Gey-

mavie; that is, in Argentine, in Menta,(|ollen, or Metz, not deterring the con+
vocation thercof abouca yeere; granting power to euery one, aswell Eccle-

ſialtical as Secular,to ſpeake and giuecounſell for theglory of God, and ſal

nation of ſoulcs, any oath erobligation to the contrary notwithſtanding
Which,they chinking thar his Holtncſle ought ſpeedily ro execute, and being

deſirous to make, for the interim, the belt prouifion they were able, they

were relolued totreat with the Eletor of Saxonie, that the Lutherans ſhould

neicher write not print any more, & that che preachers throughout all Germa-

wic ſhould be filentin thoſerhings that mighecauſe popular tumulc,& ſhould

preach the holy Goſpel ſincerely and purely,according tothe doctrine appro-

ucd by the Church, not mouing diſpucations, | but reſeruing all controuerſies

rothe determination ofrhe Councell. Tharthe Biſhops ſhould depute godly

and learned men to be ſuperintendents ouerthe owns to informe & cor-

rect them ; yet ſ6,as that no ſuſpition might be giuen thatit was done to hin-

der the truth of the Goſpel;that hereafter no newthing ſhould be printed be.

forcit were ſeen & alilowed,by honeſt & learned men, Hoping bythis means

to prouide againſt the rumults,if his Holines will cake order againſt the grie-
uarces,and ordaine a free and Chriſtian Councell ; not doubting bur that the

cumults will ſo be quicted, and the greater part reduced ro tranquillity, For
vndoubrtedly all honeſt men would expect the determination of the Coun-

cell, when they ſaw that it wasto bee celebrated quickly. Concerning mar-
ried Priclts, and religious men, who returned tothe world, they choughric
ſufficient if che Ordinarics did impoſe vpon them Canonicall puniſhmenrs,

becauſe the Ciuill Lawes had made no prouiſion againſt them * But incaſe

they commitany wickedneſlc,tharthe Prince, or Magiſtrate, in whole Ter.

ritory they ſhall offend ,0ughtrto giuethem their duechaſtiſement. |

62 The Nuncio was not faciſtied with this an{were, andrefolucd to reply... _ "_—

And firlt for the cauſe why the Popes ſentence, andthe Emperours EdiCt a. &« Nuncio
gainit Luther were not cxccuted, he ſayd, that the reaſon allcadged did not fa- ke Diet,
tisfic , which was, that they refrained rodoeir, to auoyd ſcandals. For it was

not conuenient totoleratean cuill, that good may come thereby , andthar

they vughtto cltceme morethefaluation of ſoules,then worldly tranquilli-

ty. He added that Lutbers followers ought notto be excuſed by che ſcandals

OO OS Oo mn oo

Cz and

_ Ao.

_— cm.

—_

The Hiſtorie of L1Be Is

ee

and grievances of the Court of Rome, For in caſc they were true, yet ought
they not to forſakethe Catholique vnitie,but rather ſupport whatſocuer was

avuan 6. atniſſewith all paticnce. Whereupon he cntreated rhem to- exccute the ſen-
**>5- tence and Edid before the Diet caded. And if Germany were any way bur-

WW it. Andifthere were any differences

thened by the Court of Rome, the _—_— Sea would bee ready to caſc

etweene the Ecelcftaftiques,and ſecu-
lar Princes, the P ope was willing to compoſe and cxringuiſhchem,Concer-
ning the Annates, then he ſaid nothing, for that his Holineſſe would anſwere
chem in time conueniecnt. But to thcir demand of a Gouncell, he replied, thar
his hope was, that it would not diſpleaſe his Holincſic, ifchey had demanded
It in more fitting termes, and therefore beſought them ro takeaway allthoſe
words that Lk, giue him any vwbrage. As thoſe; that the Counicell might
be called by the Emperours conſent ; and thoſe orher,that the Councell mighe
be Celebrated rather in one Citic then another. For if they were notraken a-
way,it ſcemed they would binde his Holineſſe hands, athing which could
not produce any good cffe. For the Preachers , he intreated them thar the
Popes decree might be obſerued,that thence forward none might preach be-
forc his doctrine were examined by the Biſhop. For the Printers and diuul-
gers of Books,he replied that the anſwer no way pleaſed him;that they oughr
rocxccutethe ſentence of the Pope and Emperour , roburne the bookes,
and puniſh the diuulgers, earneſtly aduerrifing them that allconfiſted in
this. Andconcerning bookesto be printed hereafter, that the late Lateran
Councell oughtto be obſcrued. Bur, forthe marricd Prieſts, the anſwere
would not haue diſpleaſed him, had itnor had a ſting inthetaile, while it was
fayd, thartif they fhall docany wicked thing , they ſhall bepuniſhed by the
Princes or Magiſtrates. For this would be againſt the liberty of the Church
and the ſickle would be pur intoanorher mans field, and thoſe men would
becenſured by the world, who arcreſerued vato CHKtsT.For Princes ſhould
not preſume to belecue thatthey were deuolucd totheir juriſdiction by their
apoltaſic, norchat they could be puniſhed by them for their other offences,in
regard, thecharacter remainingin them, andthe order, they are cuer vnder
the power of che Church , neither can Princes doe more then delate them to
their Biſhops and ſupcriours, that may chaſtize them, Inthe end he deſired
chem to conſider more maturely vpon the forefaid things and to giueaberter
anſwer,more plaine,more ſound,and better conſulted of.

63 The reply of the Nuncio was not well taken inthe Diet, andir was
commonly ſpoken amongit thoſe Princes,that he had a mcaſure of good and
cuill,only by relation vnto the profit of the Court,and notto the neceſſities of
Germany ; and that the conſeruation of the Catholikeamity , ought rather
ro incite to doe the good thatiscaſic to be executed, thento ſupport rhe c-
will which is hard to be indured. And yet the Nuncio deſired, that Ger-
many would ſupport , with all patience, the oppreſſtons layd vpon it by the

Court of Rome, which was notWilling to bend itſclfe, though neuerſo
lirtle to doe good, orratherto defiſt from cuill,but with promiſe onely. They
fayd, his Holincfſchad too quickea ſence, if he would be offcnded by ſo
modelt and ſo neceſſary ademand of a Councell. Andaftcrlong liſcuſtion
it wasreſolucd by commonconſent, not togiue any other anſwere bur

—_

 Movughcroclectany thing, ro lull tho

the Councell of Trent. 29
ern) whae.che Pope would xefolue ypon har which they had giuen al- 1523
| = Afterwards the ſecular Princes madea long complaint apare, of char veel
which they prercndedagainſt the Court of Rome, and the wholcEccleſiaſth trzwyg 7
call order ; reducing itroan hundred heads, which therefore they called Con- FAME
rum grauamins.; T hee they ſentynto the Pope (becauſe rhe Nuncio, varo Titus }
whom they were imparted, went away beforethey were cnlarged ) with tb<Princes of
proteſtation that they neither would nor could-endurethemany longer, and e
thar they wereconſtrained by neceſſity , andrhe iniquity of them , to ſeeks
withall induſtry to free themſclnes from them, and by the molt commygdi-
ous waycs they could. :
65 Itwould be long to cxpreſſe the whole contents. Butin ſumme, they
complained ofthe payment for diſpenſations,andabſolutions; of the money
which was drawen = them by indulgences; of the ſuirsin Law which |
were drawne to Rome; of the reſcruation-of Benefices,, and the abuſcs of :
Commendacs,and Annates; of the exemption of the Ecclcfiaſtiques inbffene © ©
cos; of Excommunicationsand vnlawiullinterdicts ; of Lay cauſes drawen f
before: rhe Eccleſiaſticall Judge by divers pretences , of the greatexpences in 2
confecrating Churches and Chutch-yards, of pecuniaric penance ; of expen« |

Lis.-1;-

cesto haue the Sacraments and the buriall, All which were reduced to
lc, torobthem ofchcir moncy, and to

lltrare,

rincjpall heads; tocnchrall thepeop | |
oppiopritedaino themicluestheuriſdiction of the ſeeular
'56The ſar of March the

The p
crab of

brought in;ortheniſaſues:cohwinced of incorrigibility. Andrhoſe that excu- geraics ©
the cheifcſt

ound of tha
oarificall; |

> ho
7 « _ "2 P
k i ub & 8
Y _
many ">
Is w# # WAS * ft .
4 (1 ho
, ”"

# 7
: "37
ol « St . - A ' -
« © a E Ci of > , |
-
S

ecil};;;andto

c thatare notWary , tocnioy
C 3 . the

zo The Hiftore of © Ltw

Op E__——

Is L -thebenefir of rime, and, in the meanc {paceby treating with Princes,to iu-
min itificthemſclues, in ſuch ſort, thatthey may rhe berrer make the PP ſub-
Crs .7\ lect vnto chem, and take from chem all power to oppole themleſues againſt

| =—7— their wills, and to ſpeake of their defedts. And becauſe the Pope ſayd, thar
Faaxcrs 1. - in giuing the remedy , it was neceflary not toſtriue to prouideagainſt all ar
WYYW once, for feare of cauſing great miſchicfte, but ro doe things ſtep by ſtep,they
laughedar it ; addiny that it was well fayd, ſtep by ſtep, bur ſo that there were
a Whole age berweene oneand another. Bur, in regard of Adrians good life
before his aſſumprionro the Papacic,as well after hee was Biſhop and Cardi-
nall,as before, and the good intention which was ſhewed inall his aCtions,
holy men expounded allin good fcnfe, thinking verily thathee confeſſed
the crrours with ingenuity ,and that he would redrefſe them ſooner then hee
romiſcd;neither did the cuent make them judge the contrary. For the Courr
bins not worthy of fuch a Pope, it pleaſed God to call him, almoſtas foone
as hehadreceiucd therelation of his Nuncio from Noremberg. For the 13. of

Pope Abias ; SEPiem ber he ended the courlcof his yeeres.
wh. _ 68 Burwhenthe decree of the Receſſe of Noremberg was publiſhed in Gere
the Recelle of many, with the precepts concerning Sermons and Prints, the greater part C+
Normb'; 3 fteemed not thereof, but thoſe that were intereſted, aſwell followers of the

expounded 11 . R .
concrary ſences CHnrch of Rome, as Lutherans, expounded all in their owne fauour. For it

nas Aut being ſayd that the things which night Rirre vp popular tumules, ſhould
ine.  notbeſpokenof, the Catholiques vnderſtood ir,tharthe things broughe in
by Luthersdodtrine, and thereproofe of theabulcs of the Ecclefiaſticaliors

der ſhould notbeſpoken of ; and the Lutherans fayd, that the meaning of the
Dier was ," that the abuſes , which ſtirred yp the people againſt the Prea-

chers, whenthey heardas well bad things as good repreſented vnto them,

ſthoild nor bedefended. And thatpartof the Decree, which commanded

To preach'the Goſpellaccordingto the doQtine of writers approoucd by

the Church, rhe Catholiques vnderſtood, according to the doctrine of

the Schoo!le-men, andthe laſt poſtillersof the Seriprures. But the Lu-
zhzransſay,it was to be vnderſtood of the holy Fathers, Hilary, Ambroſe, Au-

ſtim, Jerom,and thelike;expoundingalſo, thatby vertuc ofthe Edit of the Re-

ee9e,it was lewtullfor them tocontinue inteaching their doctrine vntill the

DP * Cyuncell:atdtheCatholiques vnderſtood thatrhemeaning of the Dietwas,
thatthey ſhould continue inthe doctrine ofthe Church of Rome, Whereby it
"+ appearedhattheEdie;in Read ofquenchingrhe fire of Concroucrfics,cnfla-
ae! met it the more; andinthe mindes of godly men there remained a deſire

| of #frce Couicell, vnto which it feemed , char both the partics would ſub-
mitthem(ſclucs ; hoping that by thisthey ſhould beedeliuercd from ſogrear
mifchicfe.” 117 | p, , "2 11 " CEIC

6 Aﬀerthe death of Adrian, Julio de Medicy, coufinto Pope Leo,was crea?

ode Medic red futrefſor and Gallcd Clement the ſcaucnth.;who ſuddenly applied himſclfe
che rench, was tothe afiiresof Crmanie. And;beingCkilfull in the knowledge of negoria-
ealee2s. tions, hofaw clearcly that Pope Adrian, contrary totheſtile of ils Dees
noucke ae way $00 ficil; 48 inconfelling the defects ofthe Court, ſoinpromiſingthe
«1524. Tefortmation ;afid tooabie@ inasking countoll of the Germans how proui-
1 Honthightbemiade againſtrhecomentions of chat kingdome. (5A

Wu 013 BY?
i
.

—

oo I ——_—_

Liz: I, the Councell of Trent or TT —

hee drew vpon his backe thedemaund ofa Counccll, which was of great” 1524.
importance, eſpecially wich condition rocelebratcit iti Germanie, and had gj- has 67
uen too much courageto thr Princes ,that they darcd not onely to ſend, but Camm n55-,

5S: x 1-4 Ms J-i I's " p—_— _—_—_—_
to print alſo the hundred gricuances ;a writing ignom inious tothe Eccleſia-Hsn xr a,”

ſtiquesof Gerwavie, but more to the Courtof Rome. Hauing confideredall vu;
things welkhe reſolued thar it was neceſlarie ro giue ſome latisfaftiontothe ©

Dutch men, yerſo, that his authority might not bee indangered, norcthe a

commodirics of the Court, taken away.” He conſidered tharhowſocucr ſome
of the 100. greiuances concerned the Court, yetthe greater partrouched the
Biſhops, Officials, Curates andother Prieſts of Germanie, Therefore he hoped
if that the forcfaid perſons were reformed, the Getmans would cafily bein.
duced tobe filent for che prefent;in tharwhich concerned Rome,and tharwith
chattcformation he ſhouſd haue diucrced the treaty of the Councell Theres.
fore hce- thought it conucnient ſaddevly to diſpatch a Legare, a man of
wifedome and authotitie, rothe Diet, which was to be' celcbtated theres
moncths after in Noremberg, with inſtruction, t walke iache ſame way
and aboue all, ro difſcmble the knowledge of Adrians propoticions, and
of the anſwers giuen vnto him,” that\hee might” not receiue any preiu-
dice in his Tretaic , and might proceede, as if the matter were to.
begin: m" | |
”oT he Legat was Lorenzo Campeggio,Cardinall of 8. Anaſtafia, who being ._. paige

, . . - *, . a — W Q* J FOE | s ” - p
lar men, to ſet his negotiation inorder, he ſpakealfo in publique, where he he Din

+44 4*47 8 *F

' 91: Hee wasanſwered by the Princes (for the Emperout Was 1n Spains, "AS The anſieece of

yccre before,” they had ſhewed Yiro the Nuricio of Pope Adriay

ued that Adrian bad receiued, becauſe the Nuncio Tomifedro Thor af - tia

alſotheythoughcrhatthe"gricuanices, which Germany receitied from'tho
. Clergy, vereknowneviiro all,” being publiffied in Print, 40d hat they cx-
pefted, eyervnnllthatinfitint!,” that their' tuft defires ſhould heard, and
coninugdexpecting {till Whicrefore, ifhetadany orderot inſtruction _
ff110 efruUl, 0291 a 579 C'4 fs. EE. Fr FF

, pips t (91401

w——

-

"I

JOE Load 2, ASAT;
__ WW. " as, 2 +,

oY

Ls

—

OR COoRo———. —

| *<fthe Pope,they Yrayed himro dcclarcit,. that they might confulrofche whole
 1524-:40gether with him. dag
Ear 3 92, To this the Legat replyed,according to hiscommilſien,thac he knew not
Cranens 5-. thatany inſtrufQtion had bin brought to the Pope or Cardinals, concerning
poer &" "the meancs & way of compoſin the differences in religion. But he well afly-
©» ny red them of the Popes very good meaning, from whom he had molt abſo-
ceply, lutc power,to doc whatſocuer might {cri for that end but that it-concerned
chem to ſhew the way, who knewthe condition of the perſons, and thecu-
| ftomes of the country. Thartit was very well knowne that Ceſar in rhe Dier
of Wormes , had publiſhed , by their conſent,an Edit againſt the Lutherads,

whereunto ſome had Poon obcdicnce, and ſomenor; of which diverſity and

maunds, cherewere man po
| ; Goel of herefic ;rhatof/ choſe hecould notcreate,, bur offered to bernfor-
LON medand to ſpcakeof chole which were notagainſt che Pope,and/had ground

Toge
right prop
t find

00

che Clergy of Germany ;butfor theabuſe

his refor® 2% 1 $44! lh
| ng 74, The:
———

J DILSLION i iis 3 5:.3Þh- 2, | 1 > IP 9.
rdina made a reformation of Germanie,the which (touchin
feriour C FE andPea udged that itwould notonely.cheviſh
png ill, as bghc rem dies alvyaies.doc, but that would ſeructo.inlatgethe
lominion of the Courr., 299! greater Prelates.te the prejudice oftemporall
auhoriticand would make an cgrrancero greater extorſions of money) was
not

w- — -

— —_ —

.-— Ws "The Hliftorie of "__ Lin Þ

—

Lrs. I, the Councell of Trent; 133
not recciued, it being eſteemed bura maske rodelude Germany,and to reduce 1524.
it ynder greater tyranny , though the Legate viced all effeftualldiligencerhac wo
it might beaccepted. Wherefore he would not conſentto any of the propy. Eyre 4.
fitions, made by the deputies of the Diet. By thisir being plainc, that it was fin s.?

impoſſible to conclude apy thing with him, tacy publiſhed the receſle the SEES x

cightcenth of Aprill, witha Decree, that by che Pope, with conſeac of the -- + --

Emperour, a free Councell,in ſome conuenient place in Germany , ſhould be The Decree
intimated, ſo ſoone as was poſtible ;and that the States of the Empirc ſhould *** P>*
aſſemblechemſclues ar Spirathe cightcenth of Noucmber,to dererminewhat
courſcfhould be taken yntiliche Councell were begun. That cuery Prince

fhould call rogether, 1n his owne State,men, godly and learncd,to colle&the

things thar oughtro be diſpured on inthe Councell. That the Magiſtrares .
ſhould hauccarethat the Goſpel ſhould be preachedaccording to the dodtrine + - + s
of the approouecd writers of the Church; andall pictures and contumclious 5-298

bookes againſt the Courrof Rome ſhould be prohibited.

75 TheLegat hauing anſwered ro cucry poirk of the Decree, and ſhewed Widk which
ib -

. : . | -$759 þ was
chat it was not the officeof Seculars, 'to deliberate of any thing concerning norgleatey. |

faith and doQtrine, or preaching thereof, he promiſed thathe would giue the

Pope anaccountconcerning the Councell unely- |
76 The Princes being gonefromthe Dier,the Legat endeauoured to brin

rion{whichthe Dict would not receiuc)to be publiſhed ; and there did meete {aan ®
him in Ratizbon, Ferdinand che Emperours brother, the Cardinall Archbiſhop
of Salzburg, two Dukes of Bauaria,two Biſhops, of Trent and Ratwbon,and

the Agents of nine _ Where firſtrhey madea Decree vnder thedatcof
- the ſtxr of Tuly ; That it having beene ordered in theafſembly ar Noremberg,
that the Edit of }WWormes againſt Luther ſhould be pur in oxecution, as farre as

was poſlible,therefore they,at the inſtance of the Legar, Cardinall (Campeggio,
did command that it ſhould be obſcrued in all their Dominions and Stares.
Thar the innouacors ſhould be punifhed, according ro the forme of the E-
dit. Thatnothiog ſhould be changed in tlic Celebration of the Maſle and
Sacraments. That the Apoſtates, Monkes and Nunnes,and married Pricſts,
and tho{ethat reccjued he Euchariſt without confeſſion, or did cate forbid-
den mcates,ſhould be puniſhed, And that all rheir ſubiets that were in the
Vniuctſitic of Wittenberg ſhould depart from thenceywithin three monceths,
and returne home, or goe to ſomeother place. The dayſfollowing, beeing
the ſcaucnth,the Cardinall publiſhed his Conſtitutions of the reformation, 414 fcc
which were approoucd by all the forenamcd Princes,and it was commanded *
tharthey (hould bee publiſhed, recciued,and obſcruced, throughoutall their
States and Dominions. | |
77 Inthe proheme of the Conſtitutions the Cardinall ſaid, that rorcforme
the life & manners of the Clergie being a thing of great moment forthe ro0«
ting outof rhe Lutheran hereſte, he had ordained theſe decrees'by thecouns« 4
{ell ofthe Princes,and Prelats aſſembled with him, which he commanded to
be obſerucd throughout all Germany, by the Archbiſhops,Biſhops,and other Ti reforms:
Prelates, Pricſts, and Regulars, and publiſhed in all the Cities and Churches. zr-bexs _ -
They conrained feauen andrhirty TEE Ss the apparel aud —_
" on

— —-—- -—

| hc affairec of Hclabourerh |
together thoſe that molt fauourcd the affaires of Rome, to cauſe the reforma- to caue his

- —_— due” BAL «S
4" 4.0 tha Uh! + EET a + ew, I
- | bs N

— ——

The Hiftori of L1Be-I,

— —

34
1524. ation of the Cleargie, adminiſtring grats the Sacraments,and other Ecclefia-

ar, ficall fanRions, Banquets, Fabriques of the Churches ; thoſe that were to

Curnr 7- take orders, celebration of holy-dayes, faſtings: againſt Pricſts that were mar-

Cen Hed, againſt thoſe that confeſſed not, nor commanicared , againſt blaſphe-

Hsnxr 8 mers, ſorcerers, ſoothſayers, and other things like theſe. Inconcluſion,the
WWW celebration of Diocclan Councels cucry yeare was commanded for the obſer-
-- uation of theſe Statutes, giuing the Biſhops power to inuocate the ſecular
armeagainſt che cranſgreſſors.

73 The Edi@ of the reformation being diuulged, the Princes and Biſhops,
whoin the Diet had not conſented to the Cardinals demand, vycre offended,
-———onghns well with him, as wich al! thoſe that aſſemblcd in Ratisboy, itſeemivg vn-
were offended to them, that they were wronged by the Legat,, for making a generall order
——_— for all G:rmany, ina mecting of ſome fewe onely ; and ſo much the rather,
reformation. Heeanſe ir was doneafter it was demonſtrated vnto him, that no good could
comethercby. They thought themſclues iniured alſo by thoſe fewe Princes
and Biſhops, who alone had taken vpon them to oblige all Germany, con-
traty ro the opinion of the reſt. It was oppoſed allo againſt that reformati.
on, thar, leauing the things of importance,as if chere had beene no diſorder in
: them, they made prouiſton in things of the ſmalleſt weight. For Germany
ſuffered bur little inconuenicnce by the abuſes of the inferiour Cleargy , bur
greatby che vſurpation of the Biſhops and Prelates, and greateſt of all by
thoſe of che Court of Rome. And yet there was no mention made of them,
as ifthey were now in berter orderthen in the Primitiue Church, Then
conterning the inferiour Clergy,the principall abuſes were not treated of, but
choſe rharwere of leait conſequence, which was, as it wereto approoue
them ;atidthoſe alſo that were reprehended , were left without their true re.
medics, being onely noted without applying the medicine, neceſlary to cure
the malady.
79 Butthe Legar, and the forenamed Princes that met him, carcd bur little
for what was ſaidin G-rmany\, and lcfſc for what would follow the publica-
"ticnofthe Edict- For theirend was oncly toſatisfie the Pope, and the Popes
end was onely to fhew,, that he had made prouiſion that there ſhould be no
need of a Councell. For ( lement,a man skiltull in Statc affaircs,cucn in Adrians
vs ag (IMG alwaycs maintained thar it was pernicious counlcell, inthe occurrences
euer chinkez Of thoſe times, to viſe che meanes of Councels; and was wont toſay , that a
_ T4 Councell was alwaycs good when any thing elſe was treated of burtthe
cate - Popcs authority, bur, that Leing called into queſtion , that nothing was
queſtion, =more dangerous. Foras 10 former times, the Popcs ſtrength conſiſted in ha-
uing recourſeto Councels, ſo now the ſecurity of the Popedomeconfiſteth
indccliningand auoydingthem ;and the rather,becauſe Leo hauing condem-
ned rhe doctrine of Luther , the ſame matter could not bee handled or cxa-
mined ina Councell, without doubting of the authority ofthe Apoſtolicall

Sea. Fr.
The Emparour 80 TheEmperour hauing recciued the Decree of Noremberg, was much
«3; ditalled moouedAt it; thinking that to treat and giue ſo reſolute ananſ{wereto a ſtran-
of Nerenberz,r, ger Prince, without his knowledge, in ſo importanta matter, was bur ſmall
repuration to his imperiall Maiclty, Neither did the rigourof the Decree

_ _—— _—_— =

| plealc

—_—

* .
2 —_

A181 1, the Conneell of Trent. | © 235

4 ——

; pleaſe ir; forcſeeing the Popes diſpleaſure, whom he defired ro keepe lditing 1525
and well aftcted rowards him, in regard of thewarre which his Capraines SAR
then made with the French-men, © Wherefore he wrotebacke to the Princes Cuuurnr 7.
in Germany complaining that, himſelfe hauing condemned all the bookes of EEG
Luther che Dictreſtrained chemſelues onely ro thoſe that were conurncli, BE eg)
But he reprchended them morefeucrely, thatthey had decreed thecelebrati-
.on of a CouncellinGermayy, anddefircd the Legate to treare thereof with cergha ava 4
t1e Pope, asif this did nor more belong ro the Pope and him, then vntb
them , who, if they thought chat a Councell would be ſo commodious for
Germany, they ought to hauc recourſe vnto him, to obtaine itof the Pope;
howſocuer,he knowing alfo that this would be profitable for that Coun-
rcy', wasreloluteitſhould-becelcbfated, yetintimeand place, when and

where himſelfe could be perſonally preſent. Burtouching anew aſſembly

at Spira, which they had ordained, to'order their matters of Rehigion vatill

the timeof the Councell; : he ſaid tharby no mean ; hewould yeeld voto

ic: yea,, he commanded they thould becarefull ro obey the Edit of Wormes, 2% gonna
and tharthey handled no poinc of Religion, vatilla Councell were called <9» & che
by the Popes orderaud his.The Emperors letters, mereImperious then Gey- worms
many was vicd to racciue from his predeceſſoursfmooued very dangerous hu-
morsincheminds obmany Princes, whichfloting vp and downe, mightea-

fily hauecome toatroubleſomeconclufion, 7 © ** |

\1 $4 Burche moouing wasſoane ſtopped, and the yeare fo] lowing r525. had 1525
no negotiation inthis matter. For the Bores in Germany tebelled againlt the
Frinces, and Magilirates , andcuery one was bufied with'the watte of the
Anabaptiſts,and in Jtalyin thebrginning of the yerre ſucceeded thebarrell of rrovicte |
*Payiaandche impriſonment of Francy che French King.'- Whichſo lifted vp Springs, i
the Empgfqurs minde, that. hethoughche had allche world in his power : poo
Bur aftcxwardsthe [leagues of | many Princes againſt him, which-were crea:

ted of, and che negotiation ofthe Kings liberry,gauchim buſineſſe envugh!

Thc Papealſa, becauſc /tdly was withour defence; in the power of the Em- Theropetu.
perours Miniſters, thought of his owne caſe, 'and how he mightbe joyned Pimencee
with others, who.were able ro defend-him agaialt the-Emperour, from che Emperec
whom his. mind was! alienated ,/ ſccing hewas-becomelo potcat, tharthe
Popcdomeremainedat higdiſcretion:” "1.50 | 2p

- * Intheycarz.1 526,they returned tothe ſame.rreaty in Germany and 7taly.
In G-rmany,all cheStazesofthe Empitc being afſembledatthe Dict iti Spird
2n.the cudg of Iung,ir was gpnfulred of; byfpeciall order from the Emperour,
ws Chriſtian Religion, amdicheancieorcuſtomes uf che Church mighrbe |,
RIS andthe rranſgraſiers putnthed. The — fo various, $i,
F23L6 wazimpoſtble is coucled any thing, 'thoferhat'repteſented the Em-

| grours pcrigns ,; caulcd:rhe)lmperiallicerers ro-beread : where Charles faid,

| HH OHH luedio palleinto [taly,and co Rome; forche Crowne, and to

Txcat with the Popefar che callingat 'aCouncelh it) Wherefore he comman-
Nod thagporbing ſhoyſd beordaijned in the Diet domrary to the lawes, Cer. TheEnycror
JIQNEES; . andaungieyg cuſtomas of che: thurchburrchatcheformeiof the E+ procure =
di of Wormes ſhould be obſerued, and that they.ſhoald pati ntlybeate __
{anall delay, ;xptillbes bad aogetared wen the Pape the. celebration of a

| * 29W69) Councell,

1536

——

Wh IF I —_—

OO OI an AG te A —

3526 Councell, which ould ſhorty be. Forby wrating of matersof Religion

- aA. 1naDiet, rather hurtariſcgh then good, oy = 1 |
Cimuwmr7. 83 TheCitics,for the molt partan{wered,thattheir de{we was ro gratific
nr and obcy the Emperour , burchat they faw notthe meancs howrowoethar

Hznzr & which he. commanded in his letters , becauſethe.controucrfies were increas.

FRANCIS I

RR led, and did increaſe ſtill, particularly cencerning the ceremonics , and rites:
of Worms and if forthe time paſt the Edit of Worwes .could not bee obſcrucd, for feare
ed © of Scdition,the difticulty was then greater, as was declared tothe Popes Le-
ore Andifthe Emperour were preſent, and informed of the ſtare of chebu-
ſineſle , hee would becof the ſame opinion. Concerningthe promiſe of his
Maieſty, for the celebration ofa Councell ; cuery one fard, hee might hate
eftced it when he wrot the letters, becauſe he was cher in amiry with the
Pope ; but afterwards there being diltaſtes berweene them, and the Pope ha-
uing taken armes againſt him, it _= not how, things ſtanding thas;
Councel|could becalled. For theſe reſpects ſome propoſed thatrhe Empe-
a National rour ſhould be intreated to granta nationall Councell1n Geymaniego giuch re-

' Councel) in

Germany is - Medic to the dangers that were imminent. Which it ir pleaſed him nor, at lcalt

Eived. (thebatcrto withſtand the moſt greiuous (editions) thathe wouldbecoun.
rentcd to deferrethe execution of ia Edict of Wormes vntilla generall Coun.
ccll, But the Biſhops, who had no other ayme bur the preſcruation of their
owneauthority,faid that no treatievught to be made in the cauſe of Relig
on, during the diſcords berweence the Emperour andthe Popeur-thar all
ſhould be deferred ynrilla better rime. [2

84 The opinions wereſodiucrſc, and ſuch diſcord, beryeene the Eccleſi. |

The Princes aſtiquesAnd thoſe chat were inclined to Labers dodtrine,was ſtirred yp, that
in the Dicc. of tACTC appeared fnaniteſt danger of Ciuill warre, and many of the Princes par
Vide rhemſe]ues in order ro depart. ButiFgrdinand and the other miniſters of the
Emperour,ſecing clearcly whac dangadynagald ariſe ,, ifthe Diet were diffol-
ued with ſuch diſfcation of mindes,” a rinces departed withour any
Decree ( becauſethey wouldhauc proceeded y, with danger" to hauc

diuided Germany;without hope of reconciliation) they endeuouredto pacifie
the chicfeſt both of che onc;and the other fide ;and incheend, they came to
arcloJution, ro make a Dectce :which though ic concluded notinfubſtanet
according to the Emperours minde, yetit ſhewed ſomeappearance of agree-
The decrze of MENT berweenethe States, : and obedience cowards his Maieſty.” 'The con-

he Diet of ., : ; ;p [ye MT ery ri
_ rents of jt was ; that it being neceſlary, for giuing of orderand fotthe to the

aflaires of Religion, and forthe maintaining of liberry,zo celebrate a lawful
Councell in Gerwauy,oran vniucrlallot all Chriftcndome,whichmay begin
' withinchecompaſſc ofa yeare, Ambaſſadours thould bee ſcnttotheEmpe-
rour, to pray him, thathe would caſt his cyc vpon the miſerable andrunmE
ruops arg of the Empire, and to returneinco Germany ſo ſoone as might be,

to prouidefor it. Thatinthe mcabefpace, while theoneor the other Coun
ccll, neceſfaryforthe bulineſſe of Religionand of the Edidt of Wormes beobs.

-” Hingd, allchePrinccs. and Statesoughtto potterne-themſelues intheir Pro;
uinges and Lurifdictions, thar they'may giuo# good account of their ations
r0'Gadatd the Emperour.. jp 35009 Dig , LOW: 7210 QIEOLDI
& Bunn Jab, Clooe hauitgpaſſed the yeetebeforsin grief: of mid ad

feares,

b— ———

»£ on
- -
-

—_——

"2 "te att. Oo nS
L1s. t. the Gncell of Trent "# 77

_—

| Fearcs,chinking thas ſometimes hee ſavy Chorer armed in Rome, to polleſe 153 6

himſclfe of mg ET 2 _ —_ regaine - - of the Ro. RAN
man Empire, vſurp ce Artesof his predecelſours; ſometimes ſerin a conn 7
ms Nth __ __ ” -= _ , Withour wma l —
hee well ſaw it wasimpoſſhble co diminiſhthe Temporal, and,aboue all,ha- Fama.

ing concciued a bad prelage, that all che miniſters ſent into France, to _ WWW
wirhthe Quecne mother and the State, vere periſhed inthe journey , atlaſt, 06.6% *
iachecnd of March this yecre, hcerooke breath a little, ynderſtanding thar mi fare of
zlic King was ſer ar liberty , and recumned inco France: Hee ſent preſently :ndofte |
cocongratulare with him,andto make aconfederation againſtthe Emperour, ****:
The which beingratified in Cugnuc the rwo and twentieth of May between te mates:
him , that King, and che Princes of [alie, vnder the name of themoſt holy <niotemen
League, and hauing abſolued the King from the Oath taken in Spaine, for the F.cnch Kg
oblcruation of the things agreed vpon , now deliuered from feare,, a paſſion ©
which had much power ouer him, thinking he was in libertie, and being

much prouokedthat, nor onely in Rome and Naples, Ordinances were publi-

ſhed torhepreiudice of the Court of Reme, but,, which more greined him,

alicans in Ceſarsnamerodeſiſt from litigaring in thar

and command two

_ thatintholedayes ial Norary dared to appeate publikely in the Fora,

Court, hee reſolued to declare his minnde, charhee might incouragethe con-

-

» hg wrote vico Charles avety Wrizti ate
long Briefe, in mannerof an inuctiue; f hauing tepeated the benefics Fic
which hee had done him, as well bei dinall,as zfecrhis aſſumprion to |
the Popedome, andthe ; ary which hee had-refiſed from orher Prin-
ccs,toſtand firme in his freind(hip,ſeeing hee was ill _ and tharthere
was no correſpondence ,neithertn good will, nor obſcruation of promiſes,
buren the conrary, much matrer of tuſpicion was giuen him , and many of-
fences committed by exciting new warres in {talie,and elſewhere (all which
hee repeated in particular) laying the blameof all che miſcheifes vpon the
Emperour, ſhewing that the Papalldignicy was offended inall; an3 paffing
to another kinde of offencesdone vnto tum , by publiſhing lawes in Spaine,
and Pragmatiquesin Ah $4 the liberty of the Church, and che dig-
nity of Pe Apoſtolicall a, hee concludedinthe end , nor according ro the
vicof the Popes, by denouncing ſpirituallpuniſhmenrs , but proteſting vnro
him; thar ifhee will nor leaueto doc wrong ceafingropolleile Iralie, and ro
troubleother parrsof Chriſtendome , hee will nor be warring ro the luſtice
and liberty of his Countrey , whercin Rtandeth the proteftion of that
holy Sca, bur will mooue his iuſt and holy armes againſt him, not ro
_—_ him, bur to defend the publique ſafety , and his owne proper

wgnny, | | |
_ +86 This diſpatch being ſent into Spanne,the nextday hewrotand diſparch- , þ.
ed another Briefero the Emperour, withour making micntion of che firſt; wau anode
Where heſaid inſubſtance, ky —_—

federarcs, and the three andewenticrh;

ar, for the miainitaining of rhe liberty of Tralie, mormore-

. andrheprouiding againſt the dangers of the Seaof Rome, he had beene con- fome:
ſtr-incd ro comerotheſedeliberations,vvhich couldnotbe omitted with our
failing roperforme the duty of agood Pope, and a juſt Prince. Whercin if
his Maicſty will afford the remedy, which is caſie, profitable, and glorious
£1 5] D 1 JE

for

A

——_———

38

The Hiflorie of Lis.-1;
_—_

m_—
«

> "74496

FRAL?)
CLEMENT- 7.
CHARLES 5.

Henry 8.
Francis I.

-pu
End inturious deſires of his miniſters , that orhers-may reſt ſecure of their

for himtodoc, bee ſhall thereby deliuer Chriſtendome fromiaprear feare.
whercof his Nuncio reſiding with him, ſhall giue him an accountmore at
large. He prayed him, for Godsſake, ro hearc him, and to prouidefor-the

Bl ke 0%.) F and to containe within the termes of tuſticezthe vnbridled,

LAY goods andlines. Vaderthelclalt wordsthePopecomprehended principally

The Popeſen-
derth a Mont»
more _—

Card.Cologna,

And hauing
chanved his
mund,maketh
a long dif-
courle in

Conſiſtorie,

The Popes
dif-oule was
thouphr not wp

be lunccre,

*Pompeius, Cardinall Colonna, Veſpafianus, and 4 canius, With others of that
family , who followed the jall part, and were me byrhe Vicexoy
of Naples : from whom hee daily recciueddivers oppolitions to his ende-

uours. And, which madegreater imprefhon in his mind, he feared alſorhat

they might bring the Papacie into ſtraights. For the forenamed Cardinall,
a man bould andproud, contented not himlſelfe toſpeake of him publikely,
as of os the Papacie by vnlawfull meanes , magnifying what
the houle of Colonna had done againſt other Popes , intruders (as Lon named
them) and vnlawtully choſen, but headded thatir wasfatall cothar family
to hatethetyrannicall Popes,and to themto beereprehended by the vertue
of it: and threatned him with a Councell,and treated with all the Emperors
miniſters , to perlwade the Emperour'to call it. Whereby the Pope being
rouoked to anger , the bertesto preuent him, publiſhed a ſeuere Monitory
againſt that Cardinall, citing him to Rome, vnder the greateſtpenalties and
cenſures;,inwhich alſo hee rouched manifeſtly rhe Vice-roy of Naples and
obliquely the Emperour. But the warre was not proſperouſly begunne in
Lombardie, thearmy ofthe French King, not appearingas yet, and the Chri-
ſian army wasdiſcomfited at the ſametimein Hunganie ,King Lewis dead, the
number of thoſe who followed Luthersdoctrinedid ſtill increaſe;andall men
required a Councell, which mightmakean vniucrlall peace amongſt Chri-
Rians,andgiuean end roſo great diſorders. W771
87 The Popeforthele cauſes, having fiſt compoſed the differences wirh
thoſcof thehoule of Colonna, and aboliſhed the Monitory ſent our againſt
the Cardinall,called a Conliſtory thethirteenth of Seprember, inwhich hee
comilerated,in along diſcourſe,thecalamitiesof Chriſtendome,bewayled the
death of the King of Hungarie, and attributedall misfortunetorhe anger of
God, ſtirred vp by {inne , confcthng that all began from the d&formarion of
the Clergy. Hee ſhewved how it was neceſſary , forthe appealing of it , to
begin ( for ſoheeſaid) from the houſe of God , wherein hee would giueex-
ample in his owneperſon. Heexcuſed the rayling of armes, and the Proceſſe
againſt thoſe of the houſe of Colonna, exhorted the Cardinalls roamendtheir
manners, ſaid hee would goc in perſon to all the Princes, tonegoriate an vni-
ucrſall Peace, reſoluteratherto die, then to leaue this enterpriſe, yntill he had
brought itto effect, yetaſſuredly truſting in God to ſeethe concluſion there-
of. The which being obtained, hee reſolued tocall a generall Councell , to
extinguiſh the diviſion in the Church, and to take away the hereſies.” Hee
cxhorted the Cardinalls, cuery one to thinke of, andpropoſe vnto him all

thoſe meanes, which they thought might ſerue for theſe rwwo endes , that

15, to plant peacc, and roote out hereſte. © The Popes diſcourſe
was publiſhed throughour Reme and Italic, and Copies thereof were
ſent abroad by many; and though it was much helped by the.com-

mendation

i v1

Fr,

>. ERS
"I : -
53 REIT S ra

ivy

_—

W”—— 2 - A 4 OE CIC:
- 0 a= 4
tt,

” ET I. ” - "
b—
" Lo
e
, I B ſo
OI

- 0 OK: ..
88 Bur in Spaine the two letters bei by the Popes Nwntiv, to VA?

che Emperour, theoneaday afcerthe othet, there wasnwoh ſurmiſing ral. Chun,”
ſed in the Counlell of that Prihve. Sore of them beleened that — 3m in
pencing hirſelfe of rhe birtetnelle of che firſt, had \wror the ſecond for 4 rem.

medicine; wherefote they aduiſetdchat nonotice ſhould bee takth thereof, LYN
And this opinion was increaſed by areportgiuen out by the Nuneio, that 5uan
by che ſecond hee had receiued order , that if the firſt were not deljuered, ir <=9g 4:
ſhould not beedelinered ar all , butſent backe 7 carry the ſecond _ of the Pope.

t te

conſigned. The wiſer fore ſaw wellenough , thatifthePope had tepen

hee might hauepreuentedrthe firſt Corrier, by cauſing the (econd to ttiake |
morehaſt:moteouerghat it wasnot likely that ſo wiſesPrince as hee would
rcſolue ro write ſo bitretly without preat conſultation. Therefore they
thought it wasa kind ofcunningto make aproteſtation; ahd not tohaue an
an{wer. And it was tefolued that the Emperonrſhould imitare him anfwe- The Empe-
ring tothe firſt with termes fitting ſeuetity, and aday after to theſecond ; ac- Mu mt
cording tothe forme thereof. |

89 Andſoit was detie,and anapologericall lecter way written by the Ern-
perour the ſcuenreench of September , whieh inthe original} comeines 22. ,,,o_-
Thy of royall paper, which Mercuriue Gattinara pretented open to the cined x:
Nuncio , and readittohim, and ſealedic in his preſence, and conſigned it, apa.”
that hee tnight cauſe it to be deliuered to the Pope. In the beginning of
the lecter che Empcrourſhewed har theforme whicts che Pope held was
diſproportionable ro the duty of a true Paſtor , and no. correſpondent to
the filtall obedience wehich hee Had performed rowards the Apoſtolicall
Sea, and his Holineſſe, who ſo prayled his owne attions,, and ſo condemned
his, with titles of ambition and auarice, thathe was conſtrained to declare
bis innocency.- And begianing the narration/ from whar happened is the
time of Leo,afrerwardsincherime of 4dr:a and finally-in his Papacie, he
ſhewed thathe hada intention in all his adtions,andwasimtorced to
doe as lice haddone, $aying: the fauke vpows. the Pope, Hee repeated many
benefits which hee had done him , and onthe comrary fide many creaties
which thePope had madeagainithitmn ar chcltarioteciines and in conchu-
fron heſaid, thathe defired nothing more chen-the publique quier ,an vni-
nerfalipeace, and che mm" —_ chings if chey _—_
redby his Holinells,- cola tris weapons, putting Perers
Corendincerdic Buanchi | Forthis foundation being laid;zv vwascaſie ro build
peace thereupon, ando apply rhemnſtines to corre& che errours of the Lu-
therans, andother hereciques;whereinhceſhould haue found him an obe-
diencſonne. / Bur if his Holifiefſe:didothervvile ; heepro before God
and men, that heecontdinor beeblamed for none of cheſe ſiniſter ohances
which ſhould happen toChriſtianRehigion;promiſingrhar if hee will: ad-
mithis iuſtificarionsasrrueandtlawfull; hee will notremennber any miuries
recciued. But'if heeſhatt continucro bearc armes againfthim, becauſe this
will not beerhe office of afather, burof a party, nor of aPaſtor , bur of an af-
fayler,ir willnot be connententthathee bee iudge in'choſe canſes, and rhere
being none other vto whomrecourſe may he had againſt him, For his own

D 2 " juſtification

- — -——oo end

L1 B, lo

_ The Hiftorie of
2526 iuſtification,hee will referre all to the knowledge _—

hd

udgement of a gene-
AHN rall Counccllof all Chriftendome ; exhorting his Holinelſe inthe Lord to in-
Cwan? 7: timate itina ſecurcandhir place , limiting vacoit aconuenicnt rerrae, For ſec:

ing the ſtarcof the Church and of Religion to be altogether troubled , ropro-
_ ulefor his owne and the Common-wealths ſafety, heeflicth torhar ſacred
WY and vniuerſall Counccll, and appealerh vnto it againſt allcherhreatspaſt, and

gricuances to Come.

TheEmpe 90 Theanſwertotheſecond was madethecightcenth;andin thatheſaid,

rou-lwe thar hee was glad to {ce his Holinelle treat more Jouingly,and to defire peace

Brief. =—morecarncily in his ſecond letters ; which if it were as much in his power
rocſtabliſh,as itisin the power of others co make warre, he ſhould ſee whar
his mind was. Alchough hethinkerh that his Holincs ſpeakethasrhruſt for-
ward by others , not of his voluntary mind,and hopeth in God that hee will
rarherprocurethe publique good,thcn follow the affections of other men.
Wherefore he prayeth him to behold the calamities of Chriſtendome.For hg
calleth God to witneſle, that he will bealwaics ready tolet cuery one know,
thathe hath none other cnd thenthe-glory of God, andthe ſafety of his peo-
ple;as he hath written morearlarge intheother lercers, |

TheEops: I TheEmperour, theſ1xr of October, wrot alſo to the Collcdge of Car-

zor wrixeh dinalls, that he was exceedingly grieued, tharthePope forgerting the Papall

los i dignity, went abour rodiſturbe the publique quict, and when: he thought

vnab, hee had giuen ta the whole world, by making the accord with the
French King, that lerters came to him from bis Holineſſe, ſuch as hee never

thought would haue come from a common Father, and Yicarof Cxr15T: |

which he belecued alſo were nor reſolued on withouttheircounſell, becauſe

he was perſwaded thatthe Popetreared nor of thingsof lo great a moment,”

withourcommunicating allvnto them. Therefore hee was troubled very
much,toſce thatfrom a Pope,and ſo religious fathers ſhould proceed warres,
threats , and pernicious counſells againſt an Emperour , prorectour of rhe:
Church, and ſowell deſeruing, tharto.-pleaſe them hee itopped his cares
in Wormes againſtthe prayers of all Germ,aue, made-vnto him againſt rhe op-

reſſhonsand grieuanes, which ir received from the Court of Rome, mas
70 ame of thc honeſt demands char a Councell might bee called;
to withſtand the forclaidopprefhons, which would be as much as ro wirhs!
ſtand the Lutheran hereſie. Thatto ſerue the Sea of Rome, hee had prohi-:
bired che meceingar Spira, which Germanic had intimated, foreſceing thatir:
would haue bina beginning to ſeparate it fro the obedience of Rome , & hath
diucrted the thoughts of thoſe Princes by-promiling them a Councel.Where--
of hauing wricten, and giuenan account tothe Pope, his Holineſle thanked:
him for hauing forbid & allembly of Spira, but prayed him to deferre to;
ſpeake of a Councell vntill a more convenient time. And hee, to pleaſe,
made morcaccount to giue him ſatisfaction, then of the prayers of Germa--
nie, which were ſoneceſlarie. And yet for all this thePope novy wrot lerters:
vnto him, full of complaints and imputarions ,dema ing things of him,
which hee could neither wuſtly, dy grant.. Of which lerters he ſen--
deththem acopy, being deſtrous toſignihe the wholevntorhem, that they
might yphold Chriſtianity , now ready to fall, and imploy themſelues

to

,_—"_—__
ows

_—

. _ , «
Won anmcdhn ens hb Lge nur ee $xwtband, 3 REN _

- "wn"
ow & ©

the Conncell of Trent, 41
todiuert the Popefrom ſo pernicious adeliberation;in which if heſhall re: 15 2 6
maine vamoueable, they may exhorr him to call a Councell, whereimto in 1
caſe he will not condeſcend according to order of lavy ; hee beleecheth their crunit?;7
moſt reuerendPaterniries , and chefacred Colledge, that, the Pope denying ———
or deferring the conuocarion, they would call ic themſclues, obleruing the Fam;
due order. Wherefore if they ſhall refuſe togrant him this iuſt i. or WW
ſhall deferre longer chen isconuenient, he wil makeprouiſion forit himſelfe 939
by the Imperiall bay the meanesthar are iult and ficting.This ler- 1s Coun-

Lis. t

rer was deliuered in the Conliſtory therwelfth of December, and together OO

alſo with it a duplicate of theletter, which was conligned to the Nuncio in
Granada, was prelenred tothePope. |

92 All thelelerters were mſtancly printed in diuers places of Germanic,
Spaine , and Italie, and many copies went vp and downetrom hand co hand.
Thoſe perſons, who though they obſeruerheaccidentsofthe world,yer haue
not much capacity,and vſcto liueand gouernethemlelues by the examples of

others,andelpecially of the Grandics,and who by che demoaltrarions which

Charles made againſtthe Lutherans, as'well in Wormer, as in other places, in ——
contemplation of the Papacie, belecucd that he fauoured rhe Popes ſide for rince.
religion and conſcience ſake, ſeeing his change, were much ſcandalized, eſpe- "*7
cially for thar he ſaid, that he ſtopped his cares torhe honeſt prayers of Ger-
manic , to doc the Pope apleaſure. Andthoſeof the wiler ſort were of opi-
nion, that his Maieſty vas not well aduiſed rodiuulge ſo great a ſecret, and
ro giue the world occaſion to belceue,thatthe reucrenceſhewed towards the
Pope, was an Artof | gm couered with the cloake of religion. And
further they expected , that for theſe letters the Pope wouldſhew fome de-
ſireof revenge, the Emperour hauing touched rwo great ſecrers ofthe Pope-
dome: theonein appealing from thePoperoa furure Councell, contrary ro
the Conſtitutions of Piusand Iuliurthe ſeconds, the other, in hauinginuired
the Cardinalls to call a Councell, incaſe of anegatiue gen, or a dilarion in-
terpoſed by the Pope. And it was neceſlary that this beginning ſhould draw
great poor emcoke. with it. | "xp = |

03 Butas ſeedes, though moſt fertile,calt intothe ground out of ſeaſon, fru-

Eihenor,; ſothele great —_— happening in time not conuenient, became The famdy of
ht

vaine. And ſomuch happenedinthis occaſion. For while the Pope ſought 1,1

reuenge with his armes, and with the armesof ſo many Princes, that hee <<.
might vſeſpiriruall remedies, afrer he had madeſome temporall foundation,

thoſe of the familic of Colonna, either not truſting the Popes promiles, or

for ſome other caule, arming their Subiedts, and others who followed that

faction, approched Rome, vponthe ſide of the Suburbs, therwentierh of
September : which amazed very much the Popes family. And the Pope
himlſelfe, ſurprized vponthe ſudden , and wholly confuſed, knowing not
whartreſolutionto takecalled for the ſolemne Pontifical habirs.ſaying, that

ſo apparelled tothe imitation of Boniface the 8.ſitting inthe Pontificall chaire,

= _— m_ to ſee if they dare _ thefirlt, SUI oo »

the Apoltolicall dignity, in theperſon'of the Pope himſelfe. But hecealily .p.,.c..
veeld'd tothe conrla * his rene aue bimſfcin che Caltle by the gal- cots
lery,and not giueoccaſion to be noted of folly. 0be

— | The

S.

-_ -———

—__

42 _ "The Hiſtorie of L1s, 1;

AN Church. They ſpread themlelues alſocuen vnto I houſes of the
Cwe*T"7- Borough. Buttheinhabitants making reſiſtance , and the Oxjou, acontrary

CHARLES $5. . .
ained to retire

| Thepalce Pope; and thearmy waxing bigger cucry day with ſuccours, that arriued
Churchare from Naples, the Pope fearing [ome greaterincounter, ouercome by neceſh-
ſacked.

Acue the Colonneſs and Neapolitans ſhould retire themſelues from Rome, and the

Pal rank camunications againſtthe Colonneſcfdeclaring them hereri
Bull rganſt lo
Sn. dered out excommunications againſt the Co/onneſs,declaring them hereriques,

The Cardinal
appealcth ro | _
dic Cound njnfticeandnullity of rhe monitories,cenſuresand ſentences; bur alſo the ne-

che Councell, which the Empcrour wouldaſlemble in Spira.
95 Of this Appeale,or Citation, or Manfeſt , there werecopies hanged by
night,by thoſe of the faftion of the houſe of Colonna, vpon the doores of the
- principall Churches in' Rome, and in diuers other places, and ſpread ouer
lralie. This put Clement ina greatpaſhon , who mightilyabhorredthe very
name of all . notſo much fearing the moderating of the Popes au-
thoriry , andof the profit of the Court, as for his owne proper reſpects.
Mie pope i. ForthoughLeo his kinſman, when he made him Cardinall, caufedproofeto

feareth a coil-

cdlinreed be made, thatthere waspromilcof marriagebetyeene his morher and his
maion, nd father Iulianus , yet the vntruth of the proofes was notorious : and though
moni  therebcenolaw whichprohibiterh baſtards to aſcend ro the Papacie , yer
the vulgaropinion is, that the Papalldignity isnot compatible with ſuch a

ualiry. Hee doubted exceedingly, that vnto ſucha prerence, though vaine,

"pam might be giuen by hisenemics , being vpheld by the power of the
Emperour. But hce was more afrayd , becaule, being conſcious by what

Noſu:z. artes he mounted to the Popedome,and hovy Cardinall Colonna had away to
Ten =* prouc ir, conſidering the ſeuereBull of [uu the 2. which maketha nvllity in

can make

good a Simo- a SirnOniacall eleftion,and forbiddeth that irſhould be made good by any

onofths ſubſequent conſent, hee greatly doubtedthar ic would happen vnto him as

_ it did ynto Baltaſſar Coſſa, called Toþn the 23, But I haue not been abletolearne
what was the negotiationof the Counſel of Spira, hauing nor found an
mentionthercof,burt in the foreſaid Manifeſt, and in Paulus Ioutus inthe life of
the forenamed Cardinal. In the _ of theſe tumultstheycere ended, wirh

publiqueexpeRation,and feare where the tempeſt would tall.

96 For

L

I ee LE i x

FEY
PR —_— "I

| 'the (omcel of Trent.

_—

96 For the nextycere 1527. thenegoriations of a Councell were buried in

filence, according to the vic of humane affaires, that in che time- of warre,

ſion for lawes hath no place. Yer there ſucceeded notable accidencs,

neceſlarieto beerelated, for the vnderſtanding of thoſethings which hapned

afterwards, in the matter which we handle. For the Viceroy of Naples, pre-

rending that the Pope , by proceeding againſt the Co/omeſs, had broken the

rruce, incited by the Cardinal, andothersof that family, pur his Souldiers

into theiriourney towards Rome: And on theother fide allo, Charles of Bor-

bone, generall of the Emperours armicin Lombardie, not hauing wherewith to

pay his Souldiers, fearing they wouſd mutin, oratleaſt, runne away, beeing

delirous by all meanes to keepe them together, ſent them rowards the Eccle-

ſiaſticall State; whereuntoallo he was mightily incited, by George Franſperg,

a German captaine, who hauing conducted into [talie berweene thirteene

and foureteenc thouſand Souldiers of Germame,almoſt all Lutherans, with no

other pay, butof one crowme a peice of his own goods, and _—_ to lead

them toRoma, hee ſhewed the great opportunitic they had ro gerſpoyles,

and to makerhemlſcluesrich, ina citic where allthegold of Europe may bee

L. found. |

4 97 Inthe end of Tanuarie, Borbonpaſled che Po with all his troupes, and

directed his iourney towards Romania: which march troubled Clement excee-

dingly , conſidering the _ of the men, and the continuall threats of

Franſperg, who cauſed a halter to be caried neere his Colours, ſaying, that

with thathe would hang the Pope; the better toencourage his men to ſtand

({ ' vnited, and to _ the iourney though they were not paid: All which

| things induced the Pope to giue care tOCeſar — a Neapolitan, who

| camenewly fromSpane; and brought a long letter from Ceſar, full of offers.

And affuring his Holines,thart his Maicſty diſliked che inuaſion of Rome, made

by the Colonnefs, and that he wasdefirous ofpeace,heinduced him to kearken

tothe truce,whichſhould be negotiated between him,& the Viceroy of Na-

ples. And alchough in March,Captaine George Franſperg was takenwith a fir

of an Apoplexie,which cauſcd his death,yer becaule the army was entred in-

| ro theEccleſiaſticall State, and ſtill marched forward, the Pope in the end of
the monerh, reſolued to come to an accord, though he ſaw it would bee to

his great indignity, and would giueſufpition to his confederates, and per-

baps aliene chem from defending him. Therefore the ſuſpenſion of armes for

cight moneths was cſtabliſhed,the Pope paying 60000. crownes, ——__
thoſe of the houſe of Colonna fromthe cenſures, and reſtoring to the Cardina
his dignity;whereunto he condeſcended exceeding hardly. Bur howſoeuer
the truce was concluded withthe Viceroy of Naples, the money disburled,

1527

Cramant 7.

Henry 8;

Francrs 1,
WWN
The Vi |
of Naples mar-
cherh towards
rr cron
-
breach of the
truce,
Charles of Boy -
bon marcherh
towards Rome.
George Fran»
ſees is Gene-
rall of t36-0,
Almans.

He cafieth
with him ari
halter ro
the Pope.

Fr
a

An accord is
made,

andthe Colonneſ;reſtored, yet this was not accepted by the Duke of Borbon, -

* who following on his journey, the 5. of May lodged neere Rome and aſlayled
: it the nextday onrhe Vaticanſ ce. Where, though the Popes Souldiers, and
the youth of Rome, eſpecially of the Guelhiſh fattion, a chemſclues

| valiantly inthe beginning, and Bourbon were flaincby a Musker-ſhot , not-

with ſome of the Car

C 4 es

withſtandingthearmy entred and thoſethatdefended the Townefled into fr mkenby
che Suburbes. ThePope as in ſudden accidents, full of feare.ſaued himſelfe, z6or afecr
diralls, inthe Caſtle : andalchoughhee was counſelled pot nn

44 - The Hiftorie of L1s. 1,

1527 not totary, but to paſlc immediatcly into Kome, and fromthence , to goe to
A? ſome ſecure place, yer, refuſing this good counſel], heereſolued to remaine
Cumnzs 5. there. The Citie, novy without a head, was full of confuſion, ſo that none
Z—— yſecd theremedic which then was fit, that is, to breake downe the Bridges,
Faxcr 1, which gocouer the riuer Tiber, from the Suburbes to the Cirie, and todefend
WY Hemfclucs,vihich if it had been done, the Romans would haue had time,

at the leaſt, ro retire all men of account, and goods of value, into aſecure
place. Bur this not becing done, the Souldicrs palled intothe Citie, ſpoyled

not onely the houſes, but the Churches allo ot all cheir ornaments, Cling

on theground,; and treading vnder feet thereliques, and other ſacred things

which werenot of value, putting the Cardinals and other Prelatesinpriſon,

TheCardinals making a mocke of their perſons, by ſetting them on vilebeaſts in the Pon-
_ impin2 tificall habir.. Itiscertaine, thatrhe Cardinals of Siena , Minerua, and Ponceta
_—— yer well beaten, and carried molt baſely in proceſhon, and that the Spaniſh

' _ andGerman Cardinals, though they were confadent, becaule the armic was
compoſed of their nations, were not better vied then the reſt. The Pope, re-

nevove FiredintotheCaſtle of Saint Angels, was belicged, and conſtrained romake 21
yeeldedh the ACCord, ar the ſametimeyeelding the Caſtle rothe Emperours Captaines,and
= conſ1gning his perſon priſoner therein: where hee was kept verie cloſe. And
beeing in excecding great affliction for che things paſt, there was: added one

more, in his opinion, much greater, that the Cardinall of Cortona, who go-

Flrerce be- uerncd Florence in his name, hauing heard the newes, retired himlelfe from
— the Citi, andlcft it free. The which having ſuddenly chaſed out the Medici,
andregained their liberrie, reformed rheir gouernemenr, and the greater parr

of the Citizens ſhevved (uch hatred rowards the Pope, and his family , that

; they defaced their armes, euen in their priuare places, and diſgraced,with ma-

The images ©

Leothe 10. & ny blowes, the images of Leo and Clement, which were inthe Church of the
of Clement the y 9 :

7.arc defaced. .Nunciatd.
The Emperor $8 But the Emperourbauing receiued aduice of the ſacking of Rome, and
micetha the of the impriſonment of the Pope, gauc many ſignes of infinite griefe , and

— wand madedemonftration thereof by cauſing the ſolemnefeaſts ro ceale , which
uu  weremadcin/alidelid, forthe birth of hisſonne, the one and twentieth of

the ſamemoneth. By which appearances he would haue giuenreſtimony to -

the world, of his pictic andreligion,if hee had commanded6at theſametime
that che perſonof the Pope ſhould beeſer ar libertie. But the world, thatſaw
the Pope was priſoner ſixe moneths more, perceiued what difference there

was —_— truth and a _ - : : : |
They began immediately totreat of the Popes deliuery.TheEmperour
tel | non al _ * him lar into Spaine, lr (as = true 1%, Hr
browfhrino that it would haue beene a great reputation to him, if intwo yecres there
Par.  hadbecnebroughtour of Italic into Spaine, two {o great priſoners, a French
King, and a Pope of Rome. But becauſc all Spaine, and eſpecially the Pre:
lates dereſted to behold fo great an ignominie of Chriſtianitie,that he ſhadld
be brought priſoner thither, whorepreſented the perſon of Cy r15T She
changedthat opinion,conſ1dering allo ir was not good toſtirre vp too much
enuie againſt himſc]fe,nor to prouokethe King of England, whom he feared
much, in caſe heſhould haue 1oyned himſclte moreneerely with the French
King,

\\

J

Eo re 7. ons
J |

King, then he was bythe peace publiſhed in Auguſt;'who had alreadie ſerit '1 527
apotentarmy into [tale, and atchicued diuers victories in Lombardie. Where. (7?
forcinthe cndeof theyecre, the Emperour graunted thar thePope ſhould be Exunzs 5.
ſer free with chis condition, thathee oakley be againſt himin theaffaires T—
of Milan and Naples, and, forſecuritie thereof, ſhould giue into his hands, O- France *.
ſoia, Ciuita vecchua, Ciuita Caſtellana, and the Cittadell of Furli, and forhoſtages,
his rwo Nephews, Hippolitur and Alexander, that he ſhould grant hima Cruſa- ſera tbeny
doinSpaine,and a tenth ofthe Church reuenues in all his kingdomes. The de- Pogmmd -
liveric being concluded, and hauing receiued power to depart our of the Ca-
{tle che ninth of December, he durſt notexpect ſo long , bur went our the
night before, with a ſmall conuoy, in the habit of a Merchant, and retired
himſelfe immediately to Monte Fiaſcone, andafter he had taricd there a little,
from thence he paſſed to Orwero.

100 While the Princes were all buſted in war, theaffaires of religion alre-
red in diuers places; in ſome, by publike Decree of the —_— n others,
by popular ſedition.For Berne,making a ſolemne afſembly,both of their own The ſtace of
Do&tors, and of Strangers, and hearing adiſputation many dayes, recciued 7 = uy
the doctrine conformable to Zuricandin Baſdall the images were ruined and I ouſt =
burnt, by apopular ſedition, and the Magiſtrate depriued, and others pur in |
his place, and the new religion eſtabliſhed. And onthe orher fide, eight Can-
tons aſſembled themlſcluestogerher, and ratified within their territories the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, and wrote a long exhortration to thoſe of
Berne, perſwading them not to change their Religion, which belonged nor
to one people, or one Countrey, but onely to a Councel of the whole world.
Bur forall that, the example of Berne was followedatGeneua, Conſtance , and
other places thereabour ; and in Argentina, after a publike diſputation, the
Maſle was prohibited by a publike Decree, vntill the defenders cf it could
ſhew that it was a worſhip acceptable to God, notwirkſtanding that the
Chamber of Spira had madca great anda long remonſtrance, that ic was not
lawfull, notonely for one Citic, but not for Ki the States of the Empire , to
make innouation of rites and doctrine, it belonging onely roa generall orna-
tionall Councell. * DEMS.

101 In talieheſerwoyeares there being neither Pope nor Court of Reme, | 1628
and it ſceming, that rheſe calamities were an execution of Gods wdge- x. Fon
ment againſt : od grm——_— , many men beganne to reforme, and in gjonir

Et

priuate houſes indiuers Ciries, eſpecially in Faenza, a Towne belonging to A
the Pope, there was preaching againſt the Church of Rome, and rhe number
- thole, whom others called Lutherans, and themſclues Goſpellers, increa-
edeuery day, | :
102 - "v5 AGE following 1528, the French atmy was farte aduanced with- The Fetch:
inthe King men beeing

dome of Naples, and had polſciled italmoſt all ; which conftrai- caredin
ned rhe Emperours Capraines to condutt the army out of Rome, much 74 =
diminiſhed , partly by reaſon of thoſe , who, laden with ſpoyles, meant cauſe the 5p;

co put theminaſecureplace;andpartly becauſeof theplague , which cauſed forte tan
great mortalitic among chetn. The confederates inf tly defired the |

Pope, that Rome becing ſer ar liberty by neceſſity, nor by thedefire of rhe

Emperour, hauing no more necde ro temporize with him, hee ks”
| #2 that

, Pope,

46 | The Hiflorie of Lte. 1.

152 roccaliondeclarc himlclfe ro be royned with them, andprocerde againſt
CA on with ſpicicuall armes, and depriue himof the Kingdome of Naples, and
Gos'7 of the Empire. Butthe Pope, as well for that hee was wearicd with rrou-
Z———— bles,, as allo, becauſe in caſe the confederates had gained the berter, they
Faancrs :. would have maintained the liberty of Florence, the gouerament whereof he
WY more defircd to recouer, then to bee _—_ of the injuries recciued from
oh Poper® Charles, hee made a firme rcſolutionnot to bee contrary , yea, to ioyne him-
yi he n+ ſelfe with him vpon the firſt occaſion, to regaine Florence : the which hee
ce mor: ealie Was alſured that, if the French King and theVenctians trad becne conquerours
Ebru in babie, they would hauc maintained inlibertie. Yet keeping this within
his breaſtfor thepreſent, he excuſed himſelte thar, by realon of hispouertie,

and want of power, it would rather be a burchen then an caſe to the confe-

dcrats and that the depriuation of the Emperour would cauſe Germany to be
ſuſpicious, that he would prerend to haue authoritie rocreatetheEmperour.

And thinking that his yn 7 mk percciued what he aymed at,as he was cx-

Men?" cellentin coucring hisdelignes, he made all demonſtration chart hee had laid
have kid 26d aſide all rhoughtof Temporall things. He lettheFlorentinesvnderſtand ma-
porallchings, ny moneths together,that he wasmolt vnwilling ro meddlein theirgouern-
- ment, onely defiring that rhey would acknowledge him as Pope, and not
morethen other Chriſtian Princes did : that they would not perſecute his fa-

mily in their priuate affaires;thatthey would be contented thar their armes

ſhould ſtand withinthe buildingsot his predecelfors. Hee ſpakeof nothing

but of reforming the Church, andreducing the Lutherans. "That he was reſ, ol-

ued topalleinto Germanie inperion,& to giue fuch ancxamplerhatallſhould -

beconuerted. And theſe were the ſpeaches he viedall this yeere: ſothat ma-
ny belecucd for certaine,thatthoſc aftlitions which God had laid ypon him
for his amendment, had procured their duc fruit. Burthat which followed
inthe yecresafter, made the godly belecue, thatthey wereas ſeed ſowen vp-
onarocke,or by the way ſide; andthe wile, that they were abaite to bring
the tay 6 alleepe. : BE :

103 Thenextycarc 1529, a peace being negotiated betweentheEmperour,
_ "2 and r& French King, —_— ** Boi abated, the treatiesof —_—
drape cell beganne againe, For Francis Guignones, Cardinall of Santa Croce, hauing
gaine, brought out of Sparne, from the Emperour to the Pope, the releaſe of Oſtza,
Thecauriona- Ciuitta Vecchia, and other Townes ies tothe Church, conſigned to
DST whe _—_— miniſters for {ecuritie of the Popes promiſes, rogether with

large offers, Clement, confidcring the treatie of peace, which was negotiated
with theFrench King, and hovy much his ovvne intereſts required, that hee
ſhould be firmely ioyned with Charles, hee ſent vnto him, vato Barcellons,
Ferolame Biſhop of Vaſone, maſterof his houſe, to rreare the anicles of accord
bervvcene then : which were calily concluded , for thar the Pope pro-
Apeaceis c5- miſed the inueſtiture of Naples, forthe tribute of a white horſe onely , che
cluded bo- : « Mis
ewecnech& Patronage of the 24. Churches,paſlage for his men,andthe Imperial Crovvne.
Eo Onthe other, the Emperour promiſed ro reftore imo Floreace the Popes
wihduerſ: Nephew, rhe ſonne of Lorenzo, and togiuc him to wife Margarite bis baſtard

daughter, and ro affiſthim inthe recoucrie of Cerma, Ravenna, Modena, and

Rheg pro, taken from him by the Venctians , and theDNuke of Ferrara. _

agree

XUM

BI ; LTH "EN wo & p | Y
” F T— rm i EI
- EY Oe rh gt > 0B — ot
%- {4,1 ra RR”

” ; ITT ©
4 : na. 6, rome oi EIS
APIS 2 OOO

and the aduantagewhich their aduerſaries would haucgained. After long *

A
—

L1s. tl, : the (ouncell of Trent. 47

agrecdallo to receiue one another at the Coronation, with the accuſtomed 152
ceremonies. Onely one point was long dilpured : For the Popes Miniſters V7?
propoſed, that Charles and Ferdinand ſhould be bound to conftraine the Lu. Mm er
therans , by force of armes, to returne to the obedience of the Church of G
Rome, and thoſe that were for the Emperour required, that to reduce them orig
the betrer, the Popeſhould call a generall Councell. After long diſcuſſion of WW
this point , not to cutoff ſomany otherimportane delignes, on which they A poinemuch
were agrecd, it was reſolued to ſtand in this article in generall rearmes, Wrest=
and concluded, that, to reduce'the Lutherans to the vnion ofthe Church, the Fep< <nd be
Popeſhould vie ſpirituall meanes, and Charles and Ferdinand temporall, who 5
asf ſhould make warre againſtthem if they remained obſtinate: and in that

calethe Pope ſhould prouidethat the other Chriſtian Princes ſhould afhiſt

' them.

104 lathis ſorttheconfederation wasconcluded, wich much ioy of Cle- camertfu
ment,and maruell of the world, how, hauing loſt all his ſtate and reputation, 37 x:
he ſhouldreturneto theſamegreatnes inſo 5 Jon atime. In Iralie, which ſavy geameile.
an accident ſo full of varicrie, or rather contrarietie, it was eſteemed a diuine

miracle, and by thoſe that loued the Courr, it was aſcribed to ademonſtrati-

onof the fauour of God towards the Church, |

105 But in Germamiea Diet being intimated in Spira,vv hich beganthe15. of y-£cndates
March, the Pope ſentthicher JobnThomas of Mirandula,to exhort them tothe 9-2=®
warre againſt 8 Turks, promiſing tocontribute himſelfe alſo as much as
his forces,exhauſted by thecalamiries of theycares paſt,would allow him to
doe, and to giueafſurancethat hewould vie all induftric ro accord the diffe-
rences betwveene the Emperour andtheFrench King, tharall chings being pa-
cified, and all impediments taken away,he mighrapply himſelfe, as ſoone as
it was pofhible,ro the calling and celebratinh of a Councell, to reeſtabliſh
Religion in Germanie. ;

106 In the Diet they firſt treated of Religion: And the Catholiquesthought ,,..._.
ro putdiſſention betyeentheir aduerſaries, diuided into two opinions, forme #e of 4uſin
following the doctrine of Luther, and ſome of Zuingliue, if the —_ the diuiheh,
of Haſſia, aman wiſe andprouident, had not withſtood the danger, ſheyy- Wir ace
ingchatthe difference wasnot great , and giuing hope that it might eaſily 14qu=,woud |

haue made 2a»

be accorded, and declaring thedammage that would ariſe by the diuiſion, mongſt he
diſputation in the Diet, to finde our a forme of compoſition, in the ende

a Decree was made, that, the Decree of rhe former Diet of Spira, becing

wrelted by thebad interpretationsto defend all abſurditie of opinions , and qurintt®
therefore heing now conſtrained to expound it, they ordained, That whoſo- 57.

eucr had obſerued the Emperours Edictof Wormes, ſhould obſerue ir till,
—_— alſo the people thereunto vntill the time of the Councel, which
theEmperour gaue aſſured hope ſhould be calledſhortly: and hee that had

changed doQtrine, and could not bce reduced without danger of (edition,

{ſhould abide there, and innouate nothing more vntill the Councell began: _

that the Maſſe ſhould not bee raken away, nor hindred in any place where

the new do&tine was receiued, that Anabaptiſme ſhould be puniſhed capi-

tally according to the Edict publiſhed by cheEmperour,which they ils

The Hittorie of Lis. x

1529 and that conceming theScrmons and Prints,theDecrees madein the two laſt
A”) Dictsof Noremberg {hould be obſerued; thatis, thatthe Preachers beecircum-
Cuantes 5, ſpect, take heede of giuing offenſue words, and giuenor occaſion to thepeo.-
T——— pletoriſc againſt the Magiſtrate, that they propole nonew opinions which
Francrt 1, 999 no foundation mthe holy Scripture, bur preach the Golpell according
WYV t the interpretation approoued by che Church, withour touching other

things that bediſputable,cxpeCting the determinarionofthe Councel,where
all (hall belawfully decided. , |

x07 The Eleor of Saxonie,and fuc Princes more, oppoſed themſelues to
chis Decree, ſaying, that they ought not co forſake the Decree made in the
former Diet, by which cuery one might exerciſe his ownereligion vneill the
Councell . which Decree being made by the common conſentof all, could
not without the ſame conſent, bee changed. That the originall cauſe of the
diſſentions was very clearely perceiued inthe Diet of Noremberg,and theſame

e, vnto whom the demands were {ent , and the hundred gricuances ex-
ounded, confeſſed it; yer forall this, no amendment was ſeene. That, in
all the conſultations ir waseuer concluded, that there wasno way more con-
uenicnt to remooue the controuerſes then by a Counce!l. In the meane
ſpace, while this is expeCtcd, to receiue their Decrec, were to denic the pure
and yndefiled word of God; and toalloyy the Maſle, were to renew the diſ.
orders. They ſaidchey commendedthat part, that is, to preach the Goſpell
according to the interpretations approoucd by the Church, but that there
2105 8: adoubt which was the true Church. That tocitabliſh a Decree ſo
obſcure, was to lay opena way to many tumulrs and controucrhtes, & there=
fore would notby any mcanes giueconſent vntc it. That they would give
accounttoall men, and cucn vato Ceſar himſelfe, of this their opinion. And
that vntill the beginning of the Councell,; either generall of all Chriſten-
dome, or nationall of Germanie, they will docnothing that may iſtly bere-
roouecd.

108 To this declaration foureteene principall cities of Germanie adhered,
and from hence came the nameof Proteſtants, by which they are called who
follow rhe doctrinerenewed by Luther. For thelePrinces and Ciries gaue out,
their proteſtation and appeale, from thar Decree vnto Ceſar, and to a fu-
rure Ecnerall Councell, or Nationall of German, and to all iudges not

ſuſpeRed.

09 And becauſe mention is made of the differencein opinion between Lu-
ther and Zuingls, in mater of the Sacrament, it is fit to ſhevy heere, how the
renouation of doctrine being begun in rwo places, by rwo perſons indepen-
dentthe one of the other, thar is, by Luther in Saxome, and Luinglas in Zuric,
chey conſented in all the heads of do&trine, vntill the yeere1525. and then in
the explication of rhe myſterie of the moſt holy Sacrament of rhe Euchariſt,
though they both agreed, in ſaying that the bodic and blood of our Lord
Icſus Chriſt are in the Sacrament onely in vie, receiued with the heart and
faith, yer Luther taught that the words of our Lord (This is my body) ought to
be receiued in a naked and plaine ſence,and,on the contraty, Zuinghuraught
that the words were figuratiuely, ſpiritually , and Sacramenrally, and nor

carnally to be vnderſtood, And the contention alwayes increaſed, and _be-
came

.
a A — A
NN CER
—

Z The Councell of Trent. - 49 ;

zee goes Das Þ -

tt. tie ee. tres. Maths _ _—

L1s. 1.

came euery day more bitter, eſpecially on Martins ide, who treated after a 1524
ſharpe manner againſttheaduerle partie. Andthis gaue marrer to the Catho- N
likes in this yeeres Diet of Spira,to beable (as hath beene ſaid Yto purdiſtruſt rrifg
and diſtaſt betweene the parties. Burthe Landgraneof HaſSia, who, hauing FF
diſcoucred the cunning ot theaduerſarics, kept his {ide in peace, with hope Franc +

to reconcile the contrary opinions, as Well ro maintaine his promiſe, as ro "VY
withſtand fururc dangers, procured a conference, follicited the $uiffesto ſend The conte

——

rence of +

their men, and afligned Marpwy for the place ofthe'diſputation , andallthe 3mpure.
moneth of October of the ſameycete 1 52.9. Therecame our of Sqxonie, Luther 1529
and his two ſchollers,andour of Siſſerland, Zuinglins and Ecolampadins. Only

Luther and Zuinglins diſputedand the diſputation continued many dayes; yer £iber nd
forall thisit was npodtble forchem to agree ; whether it wete, becauſe'the uf mn
controuerſic being paſſed on fo farre, it ſeemed that the honour'of the Aus ****
thors was in queſtion,or becaule, as it happenethin verball contentions, the
ſmalneſlc of the difference, nouriſheth the obſtinacic of the partics : or be-

cauſe, as a little afrer Martin wrote to a friend ,-{ceing much tumulr rayfed,

he would not by Zuinglins his forme of words, whichithe Romaniftsſomuch
abhorred,make his Princes more odious, andexpoſethem'to greater danger.

But bee the cauſe what itwill;one more vaiuerſall is very true, rhatit plealed

the Maieſty of Godro vie this difference of opinions, for diuers effects, which
followed after. It was neceſlarie to end the colloquie without concluſion,

but chat,by the meanes of the Landgrauethey agreed inthis, that being of ac.

cord inall other points, they ought heercafter roabltaine from birterneſſein

this particular, praying God to ſhew ſomelightof agreement; Which con-
clufion, though refolued on with wiſedome, -and, as they faid,'with charitic,

being nor followed by their ſucceſſours , hindered yery much the ptogreſſe

of the reformed Doctrine. Forincauſc of religion, cuery ſub-diuiſion is a

ftxong weapon in rhehand of the contrary part. 5,394 03 os 51725

- - Burthelcague berweene the Pope and Emperour being concluded; as
hath beene ſaid, andthe order ſer downe for the Coronation, the Citic of ThePopeand *

-., Empcrour

Bolonia was appointed for the place. For it ſcemed not conueniett tothe Pope mera2oges
| about the co«

that this folemnitic ſhould bee performed in Rome, in the preſence of thoſe ponent

who had ſacked it buttwo yceres before. This was acceptableallo to Charles, '7e2:<d of ds

becauſeir made theceremonies more ſhort: which hedefired,that he might mann,
afſe into Germanic fo-ſooneas might bee. Therefore the Pope,z#sthe greater

pcrſon, arriued firſt in Bolonia, and afterwards che Emperour thefifth of No-

ucmber;; where heetaried foure moneths, and remained'in the famepallace

wich the Pope. Many things were treated of by theſetwo Princes, partly

for theyniverſall quier.of Chrittendome, and partly for thepritare incereſt

of the one and the other. The principall were , the generall peace of 7talie,

and cheextirparion of the Proteſtants in Germanie.” Tofncake of the Brſt,be-

longethinorto the ſubie@ that is handled +butconcerning the Proteſtants, it

was propdfedby oneof the Emperours Counſellors , that, conſtdering the

narurc'of Germans, -vwho are tehacious of libertie , it were better by faire

mcanes and tweet repreſentations;/8 by difſetnbling the knowledge of many

things, rocauſerhe Princes to returnetothe obedience of the a . For this

protection being taken from the new Doors, the reſidue eaſily bee
E ">. + - Semedieds

—

50 The Hiſtorie of | L1s. 1,

_
= — 4

i 9 remedicd. And to doe this,a Councell wasthe true and proper remedie: as
AN wellbecaulc it was defired by them, as becauſe eucry one would bowarthat

 CLemenT 7.

'Cuaxzes 5. maieſticall and vencrable name. |
TT But the Pope, whofearcd nothing more thena Councell, eſpecially if ir
CA wereto bee celebrated beyond che mountaines; free, and: in the preſence of
: choſe, who alreadie had openly ſhaken off the yoke of obedience, ſaw very
well whatan caſte thing it was for theſe ro perſvwade the others alſo.” Hee
conſidered further, that although the cauſe was common to him with all
other Biſhops, whom the new opinions ſought to depriuc of the wealth
they poſleſled, yet there remained ſome marter of diſtalt, berweene' them
I and the Court of Reme, For they pretended that collation of Benefices,
with the reſcruations and preuentions, was viurped from them, and a great
art of their authoritic raken away,and drawen to Rome, by calling of cauſes
' Thither, by reſeruations of diſpenſations, & abſolutions,and ſuch hkefaculries,
= which formerly being common all Bilhops,the Popes of Rome had appro-
 priated to themſelues. Whereupon it was repreſented vnto him, that "4 CC«
lebration of a Councell would beatotall diminution of the Popes authoritie.
And che Pope Therefore he rurncd all his thoughts ro perlwade the Emperor,that a Coun-
cars Cell YVAs NOT good, to pacifiethe ſtirres of Germanie, bur pernicious for the
Emperonrg IIMPCTiAll authboritie in thoſe Prouinces, Hepurhim in mind of twoſorts of
a Councell. * yerſons, the multitude, and the Princes and Grandies : that it vyas probable
that the multitude vyas deceiucd, but rogiue it ſatisfaction inthedemand of
a Councell, vyas not to giue itmore [ighr, but to bring in popular licence, If .
ir yvercgranted ynto them to make queſtion, or ſcckegreater perl picuiticin
religion, they yvould immedaately prerendallo rogiue lavyes for gouernc-
ment, and to reſtraine the authoritic of Princes by Decrees : and _ they
hauc obrainedto cxamine and diſcuſle cheEcclefiaſticallauthority,they yvill
learne allo totrouble the remporall. He ſhevved him thar ir vvas more cafie
ro oppoſe the firſt demaunds ofa multitude , then after they had brene grati-
-- fied in part, to preſcribe them a meaſure, For the Princesand Grandics, hee
. might afſure himſelfe, that their cnd was not pictic,, butthe making them-
ſelues Lords of the Ecclefialticallgoods, and being become abſolute, to ac-
knowledge the Emperour nothing art all, or very little 5 and that many of
them keprihemſclues ynſporred with that contagion, becauſe they haue nor,
as yet, diſcoucred rhe ſecret, which being made manifeſt, they will all addrefſe
themſelues tothe ſame ſcope. That there was no doubt but that the Papa»
cie/would lole much-in the loſſe of Germanie: but the lofle of the Emperour,
and of the houſc of Auſtria would bee farre greater. | Againſt which, if hee
would makeprouifion, he had no other meanes, then {cuerely ro:imploy his
authoritic. and power, while che greater part obeycd him : whercincxpedi-
tion was.neccfſaric, beforc the number increaſed, andthe profit were diſco-
uered by all, which is reaped by following choſc opinions. That ynto expe-
dition,{o neceſſaric, nothing is more contraric, then'to treate of aCouncell.,
For chougheuery oneinclinchimſelfe co it; and no impediment becinter-
poſed,yerircannot beeaſſembled burin length of yeeres, northecaules han-
died withour prolixitie: which thing onely he would conſider. For it were
infinite to: ſpcake of impediments which would bec rayſed for diucrs inte-
| EE 5 relts

——.
"——_

Q—

©

_—

"a G "= 7 74 none Te warns > mn” yen — —
” , .
.

ſpirit 'to goe

Ty 645-4 The Councellof T ren.

the lcalt putihg jv.idelayes/;7 that ir- niay. come. to. nothing, . That there rebel

yond their degree.» The:Popeconcluded;tharin hisminde
hee was ſo aſſured of the iſſue, thar hee-could ſpeakethereof as a Prophet; © -
and affirme, that, by calling a Councel, greater diſorders would enſucin Ger-
many. For thoſethat deſire ir, pretend to:continue vntillchenin what they |
haue begun, when thcir opinionsſhall bee condemned, and nothingelſecan
{uccecde, they will rake anorher cloake to derrat from the Coancell: and
in concluſion the Emperoursauthoritie in Germany will come to nothing,
and in other places will be ſhaken; the _ power will bee diminiſhed in
that Countrey , and in all the refxdue of: the world,-will bee increaſed the
morc. And therefore the Emperour ſhould belceuc his opition,therather
<cauſc hee was not mooued by his proper intereſt, bur with adefire to ſee

Germany reunited ro the Church , / and ibimſclfe. obeyed. - ' Thar norhing The Pope
wouldrake goodeffe, if heewent nor preſently into Germany, and imme- Ne Bm

diatcly vſcd his authoritie, mtimating hat the ſentence of Leo,, and rhe E- Rorecres®®
dict of Wormes ſhould bec exccured withour any replie, not gining care to Zpandte
any thing the Proteſtants could ſay; cirher:demanding a Councell, or mote wn.

inttrution, or alleaging their appecalo or proteſtation;/or any other excuſe,
becauſerhey areall bur pretences of impictie. That hee ſhould vic force 4-
gainſt the firſt incounter of diſobedience; which would bee cafiefor him to
doc againſt a few, hauing all-the Ectlefialticall Princes, and-the greater”
part of the Seculars-, who, to rhisend, would rake armes wich him. Thar}.
this and no other thing is cotigruous tothe: office of the Emperour, Adugo- |
cate of the Chureh of Rome;ap@rothe'oath taken in Aquiſgran / and which -
hee ought to rake in recciuing>the Crowne'from his hand. Laftly, tharic --
was a cleere caſe, that the holditig' of aCowncell, or any other treatie'or negs-
tiation in thisoccaſion, would fiecgflarity end-wich warre: Therefore " was
| E 3 ter

52 The Hiltory of - '. \ Ls. 1,7
153d barter toimake trial ofgompelingdhiclediforders,by cheftrengtof autho-
£255. rite, andiwichabſolurevommaund; which! would cafily rake:goodeeffetty
Gninte#4. anGincaſcithhouldnor,ratherito procecde to force'of atmes, then krehe
Hoare 9:5 Taines Joofe| ta popular licenee; ro the ambition of cheGrandies 31and:per-
| -—— mericenetiey the arc} hercriques. 4197 5, UMIS T0106 cit Der! No et] (;1
Whoconde- -1/Theſerealons vaſcemely 1n vlie mourhof-Eriar-Inlkisde Medici, .Capalitr
Lender of Matta, (forto the Popewas called beforohw-was created Cardinati) much

moreot Pope Clement the 7. did-norwirhftanding preuaile with Charles, 'bo-
ing {cconded by the-perfwaſions of Mercurius de Gattinara, the Emperours
Chancellourand Cardinall,(yntrowhom the Pope made #9, 1/8/19 and
.particularlychatin che firlt promotion of Cardinals, which herhem: prepa-
rcd to make, he' would hauc regard to his kinred and dependants) arid:by
-the Emperours' proper inclination to hauc more abſolute. authoritie in Gere
-enanie, theivwas granted to his grandfather;or his fathers grandfather. _

1530 --i" In Boloxiaall che folemneattsand ceremonies of the coronation were
The Emperor. performed, which was finiſhed the 14. of Februatv, aud Ceſar being rclolued
Zelonis, Logo petfonally into Germanie, togiuean cad iothole diforders, be intimia-

cd an 1mperiall Dict for the 8.of April,and in March hebegan his journey.
Andrefolucch+- The Emperour parted from Boloyiawith this firmerclolution, tolabour

ro en-10y 15:12 the Dict, with authoritic and command, :that the Princes ſeparated one

aut201itie mn

mac-otre- from another, ſhould. returne to the obcdicnce of the :Church-of Rome,
Comverio he 20d £0 protubite Sermons and: bavkes of therceformed dodrine., And the
Lczac yon Pope gaue him for company the Cardinall Campeggro, as Legate, who ſhould
And Pere -Follow-him to the Dict. He lentallo Peter Paul Vergerins, Nuncio to.King
ME 4,Ferdindind;with/inftruttion to Jabour with him, that there ſhould beenodil-
_ pucation itn the Dicr, nor-conſulcation concerning Religion, nor any re-
Jolutionaaken to calla Counccll in Germanie to that purpole; and togaine the
.fauourotchar Prince, (who, being the Emperours {ns res. hauingſpenrt
many yeecres in Germanie , hee thought was:able ro doc much) hee thould
-grant him. power to take a contribution of the Clergie of Germanie, for the
-warre againſt the, Turkes, and to make vicof the gold and filuer appoyntgd
-for ornament of the Churches. | | |
1: Almoſt all the Princes arriued at the Dict before Ceſar, who came thi-
The Dier of, -ther the: thirtcently of. June , the euc of Corpus Chriſti day, and went in
7,2. proccllion the day following; but- was not able to obtaine thar the Prote-
nar refule: ants would content themſclues robe there. Which the Legate percciuing,,
cclizs. . . With infinite diſpleaſure, for the-preiudice done rothe Popeby this contu-
macie, as hee tcarmed it, to goe aſicpfurther,and rocaulc the Proteſtants
to .a{liſt ar the Ceremonies 'of che Church of Rome, was 'a meanes that the
;Egxperour cight dayesaftcr,, being to begin the aſſembly,, gaueorderto the
The Duke of, E lector. of, $axonte to carrie the ſword before him, as he went thither, accor-
ch he word 10g tO. his. office , and to ſtand.ar-rhe Maſſe, c The Eletor thought that by
gene tons - yeelding; bee ſhould contradict his profeſſion, and by refuſing ſhould looſe

diſput2tion is pita y ; k | :

wherherhee | his digmrje, hauing found our,that.in caſcof his deniall,che Emperour would

210 x: che 7PJUE the!henour roanother. Bur hee was counſclled by his Diuines Luthers
*  AHchollers,that he might docitwithouroffence to his conſcience , alliſting

Sat a ciutthnoras ara religious Ceremony: by the example of the Prophet E-

353}2C lizens,

. fellwasno

_ the letters of hisLegation, andin theaſſcmbly, inthe preſence

L121 a "YE EH - rm

DS

Hr Pony te —_ SI
nn hens This aan, Cele Þ
SE ETD
ent, NH |
wont fox no-man-chuld wants _

which inducechercunto.- a5 HO
tags rpoſe of the Electoryconcluded, that if
t

lizghs, who choughtiz. 09 patinconurnient thas.

$yria, conuctted co-the.true Religion , ſhould
of-the a when omg wa who

ing cha 59
or oan at -xroip

his reaſon, and would yſc ithetcafter agate encoptned in
many occaſions to diuers inconveniences ,, hee d be lawhullio&
uery one by that cxample, for preſeruation ob bia dignitic, ox hivrerricorie, of
the fauour - his Lord, or other cmioent a earns 9 tociulc to-giue af.

ftanceto any a&ion whatſocuer, at which,tbough oth ers ocloytbyace |
religious acte;heaſliſted, asat aciuill;thinges\ wuh. (ig nn boon epvy I oe oor
In that Maſle; iceneg Pimpine '0 e Popes Num: 7 The Sas
cio, made an Oration:in Lacine beforerhe Offertatie;I.ip which he 4
a word of any ſpiricuall or religious matter ,; but. vpbraided-Germaniefor has tor
uing ſuffered ſo many wrongs by the Turkeawi revenge; andexhore
ved them by many cxamplcs of ancieneCapraidies: of the Rowbrge: Com-
tnon-wealth, to make: warre-againli thew« {Hee ſaid, chedila
Germanie was that the Turke obeyed one Privuth ancly , whereas in-Germe-
nie many obcycd nor at all:: chat the\'Tarkes liuelin one religion, -abd-the
Germans cuery day inucar new, andmocketbegld., 2s if it were, become
mouldic. . Hee caxed themithat beingdelironstochangerhefaith, they had
not found ouronemore holy at the leaſt and mote wiſe, |Einally. hee ——_

ted them, that imitating Scipio Naſica, Cato, the people of- ; and'their
ahceſtors, they houlds obſeructhe Catholique Rabgion, thofenouir

rics,and applic themſcluesto the warre. q Um

- Th the firſt Seſſion of the Dier, the Legar,Cardinall

m7 11
cargo rl

perour, madean Oration in Latine; the ſubltance- whereof: was,that thecaulc naked
of ſo many Sects, whichthen reigned , was wantof chariticand loue; ithar
che change ofdodtrincand rites, bad-not onelyrentthe Churchi inpicces,
bur brought all policic toamiſcrable dcfolation.. For remedying of which
miſchicfe, the former Popes hauing ſent Legats to:the Diets, 7 no fruir
comming thereby, (lement had ſent him to cxlioft;to counſeland troimploy
all his indeuours to reſtore the true doQrine. And haujng eqmmended the
Empcrour, hee exhorted all ro obey whatſocuer hee ſhall ordaine ang re-
ſolue vpon'concerning Religion, and Articles of belicte; Hee perſwadcd
them-to make: warre againſt the Turkes, promiſing thatthe Pope would
Tow no colt to/afliſt them. |Heeprayed them.for theloue'of Cunrvr Hor

cir Countreys, andthcir ownefaferie , _ alide all errors; they
would a pplic them(clues.to ſer Germanic , and iſteni{ome ar libertie,
Thatin lo Coin the Po bo rs of S. Peter,gaue them his bcoediQtion,
- TheArch-bi Mentz anſwered the Legatsoration,/byorder of the Ar{s ues
Efnperour and the Dier; oe (oſer, as ſupreme Aduocare of the Church, Arcviubay

| will vle all:meanes to compole the —_— will imploy all-his forces in ©**"®

ww RR -7

—_ - the

nes: -——— ——  — al — rt Pann. wo

wregodin De Twrtes) ind rhaviatiibe Priviceowilt i6yfie Taye)
\ NE; Mr raleywng wind Weir det ronipthall prooar#by Godand
oro Hoon nanparmbilliges bei j'the Elector of $lare- q
thetÞrificesandprocelter Ciricoio yh with binypreſenced
UN ek ns otthiedfaith\ written in Laldaghtnd Durch,
Th: Lube. IAA FQoliyi fead; "Buk-che'E vr refuſing! ro hauvir
ans oept- RA I PUbliq ue} it warpitethunilbchehcext dagtwhencheLegare would
ſoft HOP Ad fofFaarecs eilitg font pretadice:?:But the Princes bring
Aad ſo do the & beforothe'Bm r. inan-Hall, capablero recciue about 1400,
——— — — — ————— — And theCiries, which followed the
+ —_ ; prelenved aparvihoconteſtivn of their fakiyhoe _ |
| rigs f6mth or Cena oint of the Bncharift! »
F | B3F, FTheconfolhon ob the Pxinces,' 'afterwatdsfrom this place, who
The name of jt was read, Was called Auguitans; cortvincd wo, þarts :- inrbe firlt-ywyore
CURR þ '3 fetgirCrecdeb ofthe yniticotthe Godshead;of ofigi-
' ilfiagoofthelticarnarion; of iuftitication,oftht miniſtery.ofrhe Goſpel,
=> ofcheCOhurch,oÞaldainiltring che Sacraments,of Bafirimrgpifiche Eucharsit,
ofCornfelon;ofPermticezof rhe vicofrhe Sacramenrs;and the Eeclchialticall
ord82,of the vitevof che ©harch, of che'ciuill Commonwealth; of che laſk
Indgemieny; of fxee wilt; of the caule offi ianc, offaich; of good workes;and |
worthipping of Saints. In theſecondwete exponnded the dbarines which þ
wk. weredMefencfront the Churchof Rome; & the abuſes whichthe-Conteſlio= '
=» $08 Tel Ard theſ@wetedeclarciar largeinfeuen anticles; of theholy
nfots,radriage of Prietts, of theMialſe -of-Confeflion; of the diftin-
QAicldFiricates; of M Monaſticall vowes, and Eccleftafticalluriſdiction.:Ia.
eonelili6n they\'s ;i9 caſe ir wereneedtfull;"a more full-information.
But4ithe prohime'thercofthey delivered, charibicy had pur cheir confels
 _ fionin writing to obey the Propoſc:of bits Maicttic, thatal} men ought 10
ways « preſcirtheit aptiſons : anditheretore if the other Princes will pigc-vp thicirs
das'c 87919) res writing, they ##fe readiero conferre peaceably with them, thatthey may: |.
' 25» COfXS Ay agteenienc; whereuntoin'caſe they could hot come, his Maie- :
ſtiethaving Finenithom'ronderitand in all the former Dicts;z#hathecould = :
not determines? eonclodeiany matter of Religion: for diucxsreſpeAsthets
allcaved;buttharhe would perlwade the Pope rocaltagencrall Councell,and
finallythaving caſed irro'beeſaid inthe Dict of Spiria;, that 'the differences
» | betweene hisMaicſtie and the Pope being readicto bee compoſed, there
P could bee no'dowhr bur tharhee would giue confenr vntoit; they offcred to
| | appetite, and togiuca rcaſony and wakea detenteof their cauſeinſuch a ge- '
nerall;free,and Chriſtian aſſeobly,of which it hathalwayes bin treated, inall :
the Dicts ;edebracedduringrhe:nme ofibis Empire; : Vato which Councell, |
i ant cohis'Majeſtie, they hauc formerly in duc forme, and vpon good cauſe 1
1. rag onto which appealc they doe yet adhere, not intending to aban-
' tieirher by this treatie,, nor by-any other, if che diffcrence bee not
| charindblyreduiced firſt roaChriſtiah concord.
= [1 his vas the oncly Act of the firtt day. Bue the Empetolr, before *
=7 made any reſolution, would baue the Legatesaduige, Who, having gead ©
cenſure ——_—_ quafiopgogahts with the-Divines which hebrought + |!

Coalcllion,
out

Prey
Ge

FR 2

a MERE OI: x. I an Re. OR

gi

—_— —_

PEI |

- RT Y

VI Tz * _ tz C
a<#.--3 gn ts: «. 2. w- Lu. ——_—_

 ſhouſdreformicall; was norts' bee endiifad; Aid ornietiig

 therewere [dihethingsfit&becamerded,
 prouiſfion ſhould pn SERIE

licall Sea ſhould -
not el han eek
rour; dat forc'pyt _ peers
on Vfchedodfic; Butirowonſide Teh
co Ml vaquicrand: fabrile wis' 'Wtib'womld Ynnderny- ty ans
noitiee ro propele; with. hos elſe ptoBab Bees Rh wddlQ Baue:

heard with greedines,beexaſeof the itch

thewortd;and'thitby CRASHED f i yce

weahieRoics woatdbe raiſedi then thoſe whith vie fs es wo
hi opinion wastharche de@trine SFehULAt Erin

prefdiceaconfatation Moen Irkevwil, SHS: BbFniog *
\ abliſtied in copies;for feare of opening Fa gg of ra
(houktbe ved; thar the hore tans” Mt Sbi fl of ould be
by pro ns favours warn tonahy £ p Cop'c gjuens)
divers Fects Are mindesof the Car | t
che Proceſiants rite wieked/then they
informed of thcirparticular opinions: orhers on nk 40Þ'1 of
of the bad corkceicthey had againſtthe | Gabs
ſurd as before they did, yes, Kin great fs feof ai A, th d
were taſtly reprehenided/Tephiores beo ACA AMS jet,
Archbiſhop of Salzburg;'told cutty one! har the i reform men oF the Maffe T4. ab
was ho” thelibertic To ilar con rand che dethat q taftto beif- ſhop of $«le
burthenedof fo many” commatidemettts of 1 men, 'but* that's” re Mol not A ——_

YEH Eft med oy +
perours Secretarie, aide; that if the Proteſtant Pratherghad* money,
would cafily bay of the 'Tralians what Religion? pleaſcd't belt,
withoutoolde,ir wasimpellibleromake theirs ſhitiedn the world,” ©1219
The Emperour,accotdingto the Legates advice A Poa by' His
awnc Cookie deſirous focompoſe allbyan TY itt bolt to
ſeparate the/Ambaſſadors ofthe cirics from ioynitgg Wi
proje&t-nor ſucceeding, he cauſed a confettarionto ene we the Pe:
eeftaras pur ypin/writing, uhd/ anotherof tharivh ah
Cities. Andhaying called thewholeDiet togethe?, hee
thathehad conſidered ofth&egnfelfion preſented ries ht
dcrroſome pidasarid learned. ttien; ro deliver t SE Yn
heere Hemade theeotifatation'of itt0 he read:it yh
nions being raxed;jrwas confeſſed inthe end

thetiſelues Orgy oa
<eitjuſt dematidsbur _—_
diinſello proce@oranddefcnex 6f

gi/n coi! (yy 219 1926 > $300 ©: MARCO Ht

—_—  —  —— — — — —

rm "= "TOI 4 th.

| Fri = pie Thaoruecopld beedane
h wo the holy, Scripture, any errourin;cheir
inc wecge thew! o.carredtir, orio make a rcher deglarationjiu caſe
cre neccfſaric. An Lbecaulc ſomeof th operPropeleathy them,were
grantcdin 5s Sev ſome.reiedt fed if if acopic of theconfurations
> nin hens em,they {þ ould becaperaded moreclecrely, | F

between the =. \fecr, many treatics,l: kes,and {cuen Proteltants were Choſen,
Cotolies, tatonferre hergto fi es of compolicion:-who, nor being

= ieoande ey reſtrained rothr

Qo
»
- * ® a__— — _ — —_—_—_—_ —_————__———_— —— —

ro . And though-ſome
wy ſn: Bi ho ocrine,andorher petty rhings; belonging to ſome rites, |
wereagreed on,yer Dn comeloon.. yas percciued,thatthaconferenge could +1
pr oncord at all, becauſe. neirher partie was willing co-granc tothe I
other any  ching of importance. . Many dayes being ſpent io'this treatieghe
ation of che Cities confeſſion was rcad: whereunto their Ambaſſadors
| that many Articles of thei writing were repeated otherwiſe then
1 Pakiee3 ne by chem,8& many other chingsptopoled by chem, drawne
Lg -to A, ad ſencc,tomakethem odiqus;vng, allwhich: obicctians they would =
" - haucanſwered, if a copic of the'Tonfuration bad beene given them inthe mn
"meane time; they prayed ther nor to ;þclecue any calumnie, but -20 ex- 3
pct their defence. They denyed to giue\them.a copic, and fayde thar the
En crour would not ſuffer, > the: points of Religion ſhould bee put in-
: ro diſpuration.
wh. Emperour aſſayed by way of canuaſe to perſivade the Princes, tel-
ling chem, tharthey were but few, their doctrine new,thatir had been ſufi-
cicntly confined in this Dict, that their boldnefſe was greatto condemneof
crrour,hetelic,and falſe religion, the, Imperiall Maicſtic, and fo many Prin-
ces and States of Germany, with whom, et wes becing compared, made
nota number; and which is worle, to clicemc alſo for heretikes, their owne
fachers and anceſtours, and to demanda Councell, and yet togoe,on ſtill in
. thecerrours. Thelc perfwaſi 10nsauayling nothing, becauſe they denicd theirs
to be new, and the rites of the Rowane Church olde, the Emperout. im-
ployingoth cr remedies, vnto which he was aduiſcd by the Legat Campeggio,
cauſcdcuery oneto be treated with apart, p propatn vnto them ſomefaril- |
faction in their proper intercſts, andlaying beforethem diuers oppoſitions
and cxcſlcs, which he would haue railcd againſt thcir proceedings, incaſe
they perſiſted in their rcſolution, not to reunite themſclues to theChurch.
| Bur hubla tholc Hongit to bring, about their owne defi _ by pertc-
ucring , or preferred the preſcruation of their Religion, before all. 0-
ther interel}, the pethyaions, though very poten, produced noneeftect. |
Mehr car 9 FP ourobraine of them, ro.grang the exerciſe of the
igion wit

The anſwer of
the Pr oteſtant :

A ar ela

in-their tcrrizoxies , votill the time of the Councell,
hots promiſed ſhould bee intimated within ſixemoneths, becauſe the
Projeſaes had. Fs s 6 his was the iougntion of the Popes Legarc,
who.notbcingablc ak inc his purpoſe for the preſenc, thought ic lufti-
cicent,if kin the Romanedodtrin A place, he pur confu-
\O aſc WC wcrcealicnared A creby a way o_
beopeed tO US accidents which might giue occaſion to rootc out the |
NEW. [-

Ce a ee tre eee GO I ES Ee Ie IT I rr mn ————rmrtmmnmnmnmng nmr ——
L1 6:1. The Councellof T eiit;

I 6.1, @ COUNCELLOF 1£ YOND, 47
p——_ - | : —

Lwuhin fixe 3 $30

ijuſtificz thatthe Sacraments, Ceremonichy For Qblcquies of the dead,

"

ſhould bee giuen tofir perſons, .and that the marryed Priclts ſhould forſake
their wiucs, or be. baniſhed, all ſales of Church goods, and other vſurpa-
tions madevoyd, that in preaching and teaching, no man ſhould paſſe thele
rearmes, but the people ſhould be exhorrted to heare Maſe, toinuocate the
Virgin May, and the other Saints, ro oblerue the fealts and faltings, thar
the Manalteries, and other ſacred Edifices, which haue becne 'deltroyed,
ſhould be rebuilt, and che Pope ſhould berequeſted ro intimate a Councell
within fixe moneths, in a conuenient place, and afcer to beginne itwithin
a yeere at the. molt, thar all things remaine, firme apd conſtant, and
.noappecale. or exception ro the contrary, zake place, and that cuery one
;ought ro itnploy all his forces, poſlcſſions, life, and blood, to preſerue this
Decree, and thatthe Imperiall Chamber proceed againſt wholocuer (hall
oppole it, ? 2 2dein oc,
The Pope hauing receiued aduice from his Legar, of what was done i

theDier, was touched with an inwatd gricfe of minde, diſcoucring that, The Pove wig
though (barles had receiued his counlell,by vſing his authoricy,and chrear- A
ning violeoce,yet he had not procecdedas aduocate of the:Church of Rome, forms in

on  & - » ken]
vnto whomirbelongeth nor to.take knowledge of the cauſe, but ro bee a Epecaliy fo
mecre exccutor of the Popes Decrees : whereunto was quitecontrary to Crn_
haue receiucd checonfeſlions, and cauſed them to bee read, and to haue in-
Kirated aconferenceto accord the differences. Hee complayned beyond

meaſure, that ſome points were agreed vnto,and pecinlly chat he had con-

ſented rotheabolition of ſome rites;thinking that the Popes authoritic was

violated, when things of ſo great moment were treated of, withourhis pri-
uity : atthe leaſt if his Legates authoritic had beene interpoled, it had becne
tollerable. After heconſidered that it was a great preiudiceto him,that the
Prelarcs had conſented to it. Bur the promiſing ofa Councell,, which hce
{o much abhorred, preſſed him aboue all: in which, though honourable
mention were made of his authoritic, yet ro ſubſcnbe ſixe moneths , ro
call ir, andaycecreto;beginne it, was to meddle with chat which was proper
to the Pope, and tomake the Emperor the principall,andche Pope his mini-
ſer. By the obſeruation of theſe beginnings, he concluded that there was

-

licle hopeiptheatfayres of Germany,and that hee was to thinke of a._defen-
five,that the diſcalemight not paſleto other parts. pf the body of the Church,
ch was palt,could nor be yadons, hee thoughr jt nat

Wen wiſcdome

And becauſcrhat whis

_ Vo — - ” ou— - Po ESD - ——S—— —_ - as

58S = The Higaryoof - * +

oO 0 oeS—o—— — — — << _

—
"En"

Li 8.1.7
1531 Wiledotne ro ſhew it was doiiCagainit his will, but ro make hitnlelfe che aus
GX thor ofir, that hemight receiue aleſſe blowirhis reputation. '* -
*Caartzs 5 Thereforc he gaue an account of the things palt to all Kings and Prin-
Hexay 8:7 'cesdiſparching hisTertersthe firlt of December,all ofthe ſamerenorut, thar
axer 5 hehoped the Lutheran hereſtemighr be extinguiſhedbythe preſenec of the
_— ;Etperour,and thatprincipally for that caule hee went'ro Bolonmato intreat
he would c:ll | hin for it;though he knewthat of himſelf he was very wdaffeQedthat way,
a Counccll, . : , R : GEN ,
h>4b: a- BUE Bauing recciued aduice fromrheEmperourzand fron his Legat(, ampeg-
ur meantit- 970, that the Proteftants arc become moreobſtinare, hee hath communica
ted thewholeto the Cardinals, and together with them, ſceth eleefely, char
there remainerh no other remiedie, bur that which hath'beene ved by his
Predecellors,thatisa generall Councell. Therefore hee cxhorterhithemts
afhilt in the Councell that ſhall be called, cither in perſon, or by their Am-
baſſadours; a thing ſo holy, that hee 1s reſolucd to'pur it in execution; fo
{o:neas it isposftble, intimating a generall and free Councell, inſome'ficte
place in Tealie. The Popes letrers were knowen to the whole world, becaulc
his minifters cndeuourcd in euery place to giue notice of them-vnto all: nor
becauſe the Pope or the Courrdefired to apply their mindsto aCouncell,
from which they were molt auerſe, burrocntertaine the world; that by cx-
pecation of the remedic of theabuſes and inconueniences, they might re-
maine conſtant in obedience. Yer few were deceiucd; ferit was nothard ro
Andtisco! diſcouer,thar to deſire Princes toſend Ambaſladours roa Councell;whereof
covredbly Neither time, norplacc,nor manner was refolued on, was roo much affected
_ preuention, OD EA
Sr Burthe Proteſtants alſo rooke occaſion by theſe letters ro write like-
- n..... Wile tothe Kings and Princes : and the next yeere in February they fra-
inss/'oe medaletter to cucry one yndera common nameof all, of this tenour. Thar
BI"E theold complaint of pious men againlt the vices of the Clergic, noted by
Tobn Gerſon, Nicolas Clemang#s,and others in France,and of Iohn Colier in England
and of others el{where,was knowen vato their Maicſties, which alſo happe-
Kh ned in Germami in theſc lalt yeers,by occaſion of the deteſtable & infamous
ainc which ſome Friars made by publiſhing Indulgences. And paſlling
Gown this to relate whatſocuer happened vntill the laſt Dicr, they ſaid thar
their aduerſarics endeuoured to incitethe Emperor and other Kings againſt
them, viing diuers calumnies; which as they haue withſtood in Germante,
ſo they will more cafily confure in a generall Councel of the whole world;
wherunto they will refcrrethemſclues, ſo thatit may beſucha one, in which
preiudices and paſhon may take no place. That amongſt the Calumnies
laid vpon them, this isthe principall, that they condemne all Magiſtrates,
and vilifie thedignitic of Lawes : which is not onely not truc, but, as they
haue ſhewed inthe Dict of Auguſta, theirdoQtrine honoureth Magiſtrates,
and defendeth the ſtrength of Lawes, morc'then cucrharh been done in o-
ther ages, teaching Magiltrates that thcir ſtare and kinde of life is moſt ac-
ceptable ro God, and preaching to the people that they arc bound, by Gods
commandement ro giue honourand obcdicnce to themgand that he wil nor
leauevnpuniſhed the diſobedicnr, becauſe the Magiſtrate hath his goucrne-
ment bydiuine ordination. Thar they hauc defired tor ſignific theſe things
[0

-.

|
|
|

i
|

Lk I, TheC ouncellof Trent. 59

to them, Kings,and Princes,for clecring ofthemlclues before chemprayin 'v5 =

them notrto belecuethe calumnies, and ro ſuſpend their judgements; yncill' > |
CipMENT 7s

thoſe thatare accuſed hauc place to acquite themſclues publiquely. ' And Euaxtts x. -

therefore they will deſire the Emperour that hee. would call a-godly and 5577.”
free Councell in Germante, as ſoone as might bee, and notto vie forceyatill Faakcu 1.
thematter be diſputed, and lawfully defined. —>,

TheFrench King anſwered with very courteous letters, inſubſtance, giz Theres,

uing them thankes for communicating vnto him a bufineſle of to'grear King o he |

Prottitafitse

weight : he ſhewed them thac he was glad to ynderſtand of their.imnnocen+
cic, and did approoue the inſtance they made, rhat the vices-might bee a+ -
mended, wherein they ſhall finde his Will ro concurre with theirs: [that |.
their requiring of a Councell was iuſt and holy, yea, neceſſary; nor oncly
for the atfayres of Germany, but of the whole Church 7 that ir was not ho«
neſt tro-vſe Armes, where the controucrlics may' bee ended with: treaties
Thelerters of the King of England were of the fame Tenour, but that hee car raed
declared in particular, that himſcl|fealſo deſired a Councell, abd that hee s»gine ©
would mediate with Charles, to find out a meanes of compolitions |

The Empcrours Decree being knowen throughout all Germanie ,they!:
began immediatly ro accuſethe profeſſors ofthe new Religion,inthecham- gu...
ber of Spira, ſome for zcale, others for reuenge, and ſome allo to poſſeſſe;7=<mcein

the goods of their aduerlarics, Many ſentences weremade, many declara® — "rpg
tions, and many confiſcations againſt Princes, Cities,and-priuate men , and ual
none tooke place, but ſome againſt priuate men, whoſe goods were within 1g nt
the territories of Catholiques. - By others the ſentences were-contemned,

with greatdiminution of the honour, nor oncly-of the Chamber, but of

the Emperour alſo; who ſoone percciucd thar the remedie was vor fitted to |

the maladie, which increaſeddayly, For the: Proteſtanc Prifices and Cis .
tics (beſides that they eſteemed little the iudgementsof the Chamber)come =
bincd themſclues together, prepared for their defenee,and fortified theme
{clues with forraine intelligences: ſo that jr appeared,'rhat in.cale_ things _
went on, a Warre would ariſe, dangerous for both partics, and whatfocuer -
the iſſuc was, pernitious for Germany. Wherefore he was willing that ſome
Princes ſhould interpoſe,and find out a way of agreement. Tothis end ma»
ny heads and conditions of compolition were negoriated all this yere 1531.
and to giue them ſome concluſion, a Dict at Rativban was: appointed for
the next ycere.._. wor 11it36n
In the meane ſpace, all things remained full of ſuſpitioris, and the 2.;ugyw
diffidences berweehie the one'partandthe other, ratherincreaſcd. And this;$97.mmet
yeere alſo, there happeneda norable cucat among the'Suiſſes, which com-! |
pou the diſputes between them. For thoughthe comrouer(ie in-religion,;
cene Zuric,” Berne,and Bafil on the one {1de,and the Popith Captons ow
the other, was often compoled; by the mediation of diners , yet at that time
the hatred was ſo great berween them;and neweauſes of diſtaſts ariſing dai-
ly,thr contentions were often renewed,” And this yeere chey were grearelk -
of all, thoſe of Zuric and Berngartempring to hinder the vitualling of fue
Cantans,which cauſed both parties to arme. With choſc of Zuric, Zumgline
tookearmes, though his friendes perſyaded him to remaincat Hogond
I A Aa

* |
——

PRI as

60 ©. The Hiſtorie of .

"I

F<. CP __—_ HIER TC YE OO ITS” ICI oo

1533 teaucthatchargeroothers. Whrreunto- he would by no meanes yeeld, that
CA he might.not {eeme to incouragethe peoplein the Church onely, and for-
Cx4k345,5, fake thamin timeofdanger. The:cleucnth of October they cameto a ſer
Rzxar.8.,; batrcll,inwhich,tholc of Zaric had the worſt, and Zuinghus was (laine; for
CPS, iwhichtheCarholikes more reioyced,then for the victory. They did diuers
Wis% death diſgraces ro thecorps, and the death of thatman was the chicfeſt cauſe of
AT anewedtopoſition-betweenerhem, borh the parties rotaining their owne

litiof be, :
fenedi® religion. *Þ he fiue Catholike Cantons affured themſclues, that hee bein

Ciltouar., remoucd,who,by his Scrmons changed religion in theCountrey, all would
Andmaketh TeturneTtothe old; In which hope, they were confirmed the more, becaule
bien ne. Ecalampadius, a Miniſter in Bf, of the ſame opinion with Zuinglius, dyed
withina:few: daicsafter withgriefc,tor thelofſe of hisfriend, the Catholikes
attriburing the death both ot the one and the other, to the prouidence of
God, whozcompaſlionating theHeluerians, had puniſhed and taken away
-+—-»'T the Authors of their diſcord. Surely it is a pions and religious thought, roat-
.--.. tnbutethediſpolition of cuery cuenr,tothe prouidence of God t but to de-
rermineTto whatend thofe cuents are directed, by that high Wiſcdom,is not
farretrom prelumprion. Men are 1o ſtraightly and religiouſly wedded to
.,>their ownec opinions,that th ey are perſwaded:that God loueth and fawoureth
= them; as muchas themſelues. Bur: the chings that happened afterwards,
-»ſhewecd thar-rhe Cantons called Goſpellers, made greater progreſle in the
doctrine receiued,atrer the death oftheſc rwo : a manifeſt Argument,thar ir
camefrom ahigher cauſe then the labours of Zuingims.
T53z _', Anagreemenr berweene the Proteſtants and the others , was negotiated
agement inGermanie, by the Electors of Ments and the Palatine, and many writings

Proreſt-iues Were made and _—_ becauſc they gaue nottull ſatisfaction to either of
ole ns The partics; This madethe Emperour rctolue;thata Councell was exceeding

3-

tholikes was

negorincd neceſſary; and having imparted his opinion tothe French King,hefenr one

be ciiecied. rg Rome by poſt, to trear thereof wich the Pope and Colledge of Cardinalls.

The Eeperor The Emperour made none account of the place preſcribed,norof any other

doh (crioully f5eeial condition,in cale Germany were {0 (atisfied that the Proteſtangswould

Councdl. bepreſent, and ſubmit chemſelues,which fatisfaQtion theKing alſorthoughr

| ro be iuſt,and offered ro ioyne with him. The Ambaſſage was deliuered to

the Pope in theſe tearmes,thar the Emperor hauing vſed all megnstoreunite

the Proteſtants rothe Church, by imploying authority, thregts, treaties, and

iuſticealſo, nothing now remaining, bur cither warre,or Rr 1n re-

.zgard he could nor rakearimes, by reaton of rhe Furkes preparations againſt

him, he was conſtrainedco rakethe other reſolution; and therefore did be-

ſeechhis Holineſle,that;imitating his Predeceſſours, hee would bee content

t6&raunt a Councell; whereunto the Proteſtants wouldJabmit thomſelues

withoutdifficultic, hauing offered:dwers: times ro ſtandro the determinari-

_ oniof one thar is free, in which the:Iadges might beemenwichourparria-

litie. The Pope, whoby tv meancswould haue-aCouncell, hearingthe re-

---— ox. fi ; 7G not being able to giueaplaine negariue 3 made a grant, bur ſo as

the Councell gat hee knewitiwould not beeaccepted. Forthe place hee- propoſed one
ypon ſucha oy Fvy - | "IO"

condition a ofthe Citicsof the Churches State, naming Boloma, Parma, "Piacengs , Cl-

would not bee EIE$ Capable to recciue'andfced a multitude, healthfull, with a large rexritory

—_— —— PEE  - - . round

B 1vi cs

Te ad

XUM

d Oe | Rot n > k "PC y
04/3; ca GRE AS Rt a +4

L1s.1. The Councellof Trent: 264

round about : whitherrhe Proteſtants ought hot tomakedifficultiers-goe; v55%
becauſe they ſhould becheard : ynto whom hee would giveafullt aridample AS.
tafe-conduct, and himſclte would bethereinperlon, rhateuery thing might wif Ky
bee handled with Chrittian peace, and no; —— ed.” Thatheocould Foo
by no meanes conſent to celebrate-it in Germanic, -becaule Ttalie weyld not Blakey n,
indure to be neglected, and Spaine and France, who inEecleliafticalltnarters YY
yecld vnio tale, for the prerogatiue of the Papacie, which is proper viro ir,

would not give place viito Geymanie, and the-authoritic of that 'Councell

4

Newt bee licele clteemed , where onelyDuch-men were preſent, and forne .J...

_— i. 4. Mt

ew of another nation. For yndoubredlytheltalrans, French-men; 4nd Spa-
niards would not bee induced co goethither,” The medicine is'notin the
power of the-ſicke, bur of the -Phylitian. "Thereforp Germanic corrupted
with the mulciplicitie and vatierie of opinions; could not'give tight iudge-
Ment in this ſubieCt, as I4alie, France, and Spaine, which are vncorrupted as
yet, and wholly perſeuereinſubleQion to the Apoſtolicall Sea, which is mo-
ther and miſtris of all Chriſtians. / For che mannerof defining things in the
Councell, the Pope laid there needed no words; becaule no difficulz could
ariſethercin, except they would make a new'fortne of a Councell, neucr vſcd
in the Church. Thar it was manifeſt, thar rivfichad voiceina Couricell,by
rightof thc Canon, bur Biſhops, and Abbats by cuſtome, and fome others
by the Popes priuiledge: the oihersthar defireto bee heard;oughrro ſubmit
© themlſelues to the determination of thele ; cuery Decree being madein the
name of the Synod, if the Pope bee not preſent in'perfon : bur when hee is
' there, euery Decree pafſerh vnder his name, onely with theipprobation of
che Fathers of the Synod. The Cardinals likewiſe ſpake in the ſame key, T\-<Cadi-
butalwayes interpoſed ſumereaſon,roſhewtbara Councell was notneceſia- dehewo ther
ric, ſo long as the determination of Zes ſtood in force; which being execu. alloy
ted, all would be remedied, and hee that will not referrehimſelfe to thede- =
rermination of the Pope, eſpecially accompanied with the counſell of the
Cardinals, will much more deſpiſeall Conciliaric Decrees. Thatirt was ma-
niteſt that the Proteſtants call nor a Councell , but onelyto gaine time, and
ro hinder the execution of the Edict of Wormes. For they well know thar
the Councell cannot cH0oſe but approoue thar which Les hath determined,
except they would bee a conuenticle, or ynlawfull aſſembly, as all choſe
bee , who haue ſeparated themſelues from the doctrine and obedience of
the Pope. a |
| The Emperours Ambafſadour, rofindeout a meane, had many audien- Thc Empe- -
ces with the Pope,and with two Cardinals, deputed by him ouer this mar- Jour labou-
ter. He put him in minde, that neither hee, nor France, nor Spaine, had necede Fruwihe”
of a Councell,nor did defireit; and thar therefore it Was ro no purpoſe ro/P4pe32 chute
haucreſpect'vnto them : that it was ſoughtfor, tocurethediſcaſcs of Germa- meme for the
nie , vnto which, becauſe irought ro beeproportionated, ir was fittochufea cannovob , =
place, where all cthatNation mightbce preſent. That, forother Countreys, **'*
the principall ſubie&s were ſufficient, becauſe nothing was to bee handled
concerning them; that the Cities propoſed; werein all reſpects exceeding fir,
bur only thar they were farre diſtant from Germaiie;and y page) thefafe con-
duct of his Holineſfe onghr ro {ccure cucryone,' yer the Proteſtants were
FE ſuſpicious

was Ce ES a. + p, 5
SE or Pts :
\. Deng” . -

;62 The Hiiitory of «+ Lint.

Re eee Ct —— — _ - _ —

1532 {utpiciousfer divers reatonsboth old, and new, amongitwhich,theyeſtce..

SED med;qot che lealty-rhtat Leorhe renth, hiscoulin, bad condemned them al-

Crartrey, readie , and declared them herezikes., Andalchough all their reaſons arc re-

fiexsx 3... folucd-with this ow; tnateuery one Qught to relic. vpon theFaith of the
13 le,

Faagci

2ccommadate himfelfe ro that, whichhough in rigour is w4 due, yet in
Whe ouzhe Equifie is conucnient, ., And concerning thedeliberatiue yoyceFof the Coun-

to hauc voices :

rtohevoices e}1,;hee diſcourled, that they being broughtin, partly by cultome,and part»

C.c ir Germa-

w. luly 23 there ſhould bee common and publike peace berweene the Emperours Ma- :
trim, ieilie, and allthe States of the Empire of Germanie, as well Eccleſialticall
as {ccuiar, vorill a generall, free, and Chriſtian Councell, and in the mcane
ſpace, that none ſhould make warre againit another for cauſe of rchgion,
nor take {poile,or befiege him, bur that there ſhould bee true amitic , and
Chriltian vnitic amongit all. "Thar the Emperour ſhould procure the inti=
_ mation of the Councell, within ſixe moneths, andthe beginning within a
yeere; Which if ir bee not poſlible, all che States of the Empire thould bee
called rogerher,to reſolue of what 1s tit to bee done, as well for the Councell
as for other neceſlaric things. Thar the E, mperour ſhould ſuſpend all the
iudiciall proceſles, in cauſe of religion, made by his Fiſcall, or others; againſt
the ElcQorof Saxonte, and his adherents, ynull the future Councell, or the
forevamecd reſolution of the States.
| On the other {ide, the Elettor of Saxonie, and the other Princes and Ci-
ns po tics, ſhould promilc faithfully ro obſeruc this publique peace, ro giue due 0-
calmzot» bedicnce to the Emperour, and conuenient ayde againit the Turke. This
_ in6.monetbs, peace the Emperourratificd , and confirmed by his letters, darad the ſecond
of Auguſt, and ſuſpended allo all procefles , promiſing to doc his ende-
-uour for the calling of a Councell within ſixc moneths, and for the begin«
ning of it within a yeere. Hee gaue allo an account to the Catholike Prin-
ccs,of rhe ambaſlage ſent to Rome, for that cnd, adding that ſomedifficulties |
of weight could not as yer bee accorded, concerning the manner and place.
But he would continue his cudeupursthat they ſhould bee reſolueg, and thar
the Pope ſhould grant the couuccation; hoping that hee would not be wane

ting

.
0 . "Cp ” -i yy 6: Pi os wa - + > a :
| ES 4 Ly

= EY | —_ _—_ - ; wr Ds -
057 x RALS RY NI. OECD — XUM

- »s%, , a. * "—
. P = >, « 3 n 1 " Pry 4-6
. AER y Ws I at... "oy , Po
" WP... a .-

aa... Ate th. Oo. AA ets At
—

TheC ouncellof Trent. G3

a_ a = i. lh.

lt. : FL

L1s. 1,
ting to the neceſlitie of the Common-wealth, and his owneduetie: but in 1532

calc this ſucceeded nor, hee would intimate another Dier to finde.a reme» CAD
LBMENT Fs

dic herein. | CHARLES F.
- This was the firltlibertie of Religion , which thoſe that adhered to Lu-7; CO
thersconfellion, called the Augultan, obreined by publique decree: whercof Frances i.
che world talked diuerſly. Ar Romethe Emperor was reprehended, for pur- 4, no 4
ting his ſickle (as they ſayd) into another mans harueſt, cuery Prince being ncofthe
obliged, by the [trifteſt bonds of cenſures, rothe extirpation of thoſe that conteliion
are condemned by the Pope : wherein they ought to ſpend their goods,
ſtate, and life : and the Empetrours much more, becauſe they doc fo ſolemn-
ly ſweare vato it. This nor being performed by (Charles, an example nor
heard of,there was cauſe to fearea ſudden reuenge trom heaucn. Bur others
eommended the pictic and wifedome of the Emperour, who laboured more
to preucnt the danger, imminent ro Chriſtendom, by thearmes of the Turke, -
adirc& oppolcr of Religion ; againſt whom hee could nor haue made rcl1-

Rance without ſecuring the Proteſtants, who are. Chriſtians roo, though
diſſenting from others, in ſome parricularrices , which is a tolerable difte.
rence. That che Maxime,ſo renowned in Rome,thatirismore mecteto perſe-
curcherctikes, then infidels,was wel firred rothe Popes dominivn,butnorto
the bencfir of Chriltendome.- Some alſo , -not regarding che Turkes, ſaid

thar Kingdomes and Principalities , ought notto bee gouerned by the lawes

and intereſtsof Priclts ,who are more partiall, for theirowne greatneſle and
Yrofits, then any other, bur'according; ro the exigenceof the publike good,

hich requireth now and'then, the'rolerating of ſome defe&t, Thar it was

the ductic of cuery Chriſtian Prince, roindeuour equally , that his Subiects

maintaine the true faith, as-alſo thatthey obſerue all the Commandements

of God,-and not this, more thea'that. - But when a vice cannot bee rooted

our, without the ruine of the State, itis acceprable ro'the Maieſtie of God

to permit it : neither is the obligation greaterto puniſh-hercrikes,then forni-

cators; who if they be tolerated, for publike quiet, it is nogreaterinconye- -

fience,if thoſe bee permitted, who defend norall our opinions. Andthough

it bee aotcaſie to alleadge examples of Prinees, which haue done this with+

ih theſe $00. yeeres, yet hee that will confider'the times before, will {cc

ir:done by all, and laudably coo, when neceſlitie hath required. If Charles ha-

uing attempted to compole by all meanes the differences in religion, harh
nt becne able to bring any thing to paſſe, who can feprehend him, if, ro
fry what can be done by a Councell, hee hath eſtabliſhed peace inthe meane
time in Germanie, that he may not ſee her ruine? None knoweth how to go.
verne a territorie, but the Prince himſelfe, whoalone knoweth all the nece(-
fities of it. Hee will oucrthrow his State, whoſocnerwill gouerne with re-
ſpect vnto the intereſts of others ; and ir would bee to as much purpole'ro
goucrne Germanie, as the Romancs deſire, as'to goucrne Romeas the Durch-
fnen plcale. —_—_

No man that ſhall reade this occurrence; ought to maritcile, if theſe and The Rome:

niſts wou

many more diſcourſes didrunne in the mindsof men,it being-athing which pac cucry

did inwardly touch them. For the caſe was, whether eucry Chriſtian Coun- rm 2ctoe.

trey ought to: bee gouerned , according to its owne neceſliticand profic, Ss 3+ dogg

F 2 - was

4
—

ht. -- dA»

64. The Hijtorie of Lis. I,

1533 Wasa flaue of one onely Citic, to maintaine the commodities whereot , all
——> others ſhould ſpend themlclues,and becomedcelolare, Thetimes following
Cranzes 5: have taught, and will teach perpetually , that the Emperours reſolution was

CHARLES F-

-T-—7 conformable corhelawes of Godand man. The Pope, who was moretrou-
Fzaxcrs 1 bled hereinthen all others, as one who was moſt intelligent in State affaires,
| faw very well that he had no realon to complaine; bur hee concluded here-
ThePopeis withall,that his intercſtscould not concurre with thoſe of the Emperour,and
from the Em- therefore his minde was wholly aliened from him,
_— The Turkebeing chaſed our of 4uftria,the Emperor paſſed into Tealy, & had
conference with the Popein Bolonia, where they treated of ail the common
The lexzueis afaires: and though the league was renewed berweene them, yet the Pope
racwedbe was not fully ſatisfied, both tortheliberty of Religion granted in Germanie,as
bor Gone hath been ſaid, and becauſe they agreed not concernivg the Councell. The
Popes minde. Emperor perſcuered in demanding ſucha Councell, as might cure the mala-
dies of Germany, (in conformity to his Ambaſſadors propoluion the yeere be-
fore) which was impoſlible if the Proteſtants had no partthercin, The Pope
continued in his reſolution, not to admit of a Counccll by any meancs, burin
calc of neceſlitic,and which ſhould not be celebrated out of Jraly,and wherein
none ſhould haue a deliberariue voice bur thoſe vnto whom the Popes lawes
did allow it. The Emperor would haue condcelcended rothe Popes will, if
there had been meanes togiue the Proreltants contentment; wherein thathe
The Popeand Might giue his Holineſle cerraine information, hepropoſed vnto him that he
-mpion = ſhould tcnd a Nuncio into Germany, & himſelfean Ambaſlador,to find outa

o.ucto {end a

8 "co! forme & temper for theſe difficulties, promifing'that his Ambaſſador ſhould
dorant > Ger- GOUETIC himſclf as the Nu ncio would. The Popcaccepted the match,though
=_. he werefully ſatisfied ofthe Emperor, aſſuring himſclfe, char in caſe the ne+
folacth i» SgOriation of both thoſe miniſters had taken none cflect, Charles would haue

make an :Ii- 70ne about to hauc giuen Germanic fauisfattion ; and from that time Clement

ance with

Fhancego be Te olucd to make a {traight alliance with France, tobeable,by that mcanes, ro
find heEm- hinder whatſocuer che Emperout ſhould propoſe. | ;
ror The Pope after Ealter 1533.ſent Hugo Rangone, Biſhop of Rhregio, ro
33 exccutethe propoſition accepted by him: who comming with the Emperors
Ambaſladorto John Frederic, Eleftor of S4x0ny,(who had ſucceeded his decea-
{ed father a few monerhs beforc)aschicte of theProteitanrs,declared his com-
miſſion; that C/ement from the beginning of his Papacic, had alwayesan extra-
ordinary defirero compoſe the differences in Religion, ſprung vp.in Germany,
and for that end had ſentthither many learned perfons; and though their
paines tooke not effect, the Pope norwithitanding had hope, chatat the Em-
perours going thicher after his coronation,all would bebrought to perfeRti-
on. Bur hauing not obreined the cnd he defired, the Emperor returnedinto
lealy, and ſhewed him that there was vo fitter mcanes then a generall Coun-
cell, which the Princes of Germany delired alſo. With which the Popebcing
well pleaſed, as well for the publique good as to giue the Emperonr con-
_ tentment, had ſent him, ro agree with them, concerning the manner of the
future Councell, and of the time and place. And for the forme and order
thereof, the Pope propoſed ſome neceſſary conditions.
The firlt, char ic ſhoul@bee free and generall, as the Fathers were woont
[oO

Dx EN re EBRD - a.

SPITS.

SY” ac too tg =

SPITS.

a —_— hm M—_ _ —_ ©. A " 0 F4 w
i - = Ce ——2*

nth att ttt. At

L1s.1

T be Councell of Trent. "65

to celebrate it in formetcimes. Then, that thoſe that demand a Councell, 2.
ſhould promile and giue aſluranceto receiue the decrees that thall be made. A
For otherwiſe it would bee labour in vaine, it being to no purpoſe to make Cnrartss 5.
lawes, which would not beoblerued, Thirdly,char heihat could not be pre- maxay 8. *
ſcar ſhould ſend Ambaſſadors tomakepromile, & put in caution, Aﬀcer this, 32251
that it was neceſſary, that in the meane while, all chings remained asthey ate, feta roo
and that no innouation were made beforethe Councel, 1 he Nuncioadded, Councelbres
that for the place the Pope had not long, frequent, and great confiderati- |
on. For it was neceflary to prouide one that ſhould bee ftercill ro afforde

victuals to ſo famousa concourle, and of an healthfull ayre roo,tharthepro-.

grelſe may nor bee hindered by {ickenefle. And in concluſion Placenta, riaes ivr the
"Bolonia, or Mantua ſeemed vnto him very commodious, leaving ir ro the hw xm mag
choice of Germanieto elect which of theſe places thiey wouiſd. Bur he added Nunao, =
that if any Prince would not come, or not ſend Ambaſſadours, it would

bee iult for all the others to defend the Church. Inthe end heeconcluded,

that if Germanie would giue a fir an{were to thepropolitions,the Pope would
immediately trearte with other Kings, and would intmare the Councell

within {ixe moneths, to begin ayeereafter, thar pfouiſion of yiEtuals mighc

be made, and thatall, eſpecially thefarthelt diſtant, mighr prepare themſelues

for the voyage.

The Nuncio gaue vp his: propoſition it writing, and the Emperours The f#pe:

Ambaſſadour madethe ſame negotiation with the Eletor ; whoghaving re- yy nga
quired time to anſwere, the Nuncio was infinitely plealed. For hee detired ityuuann.*
nothing bur delay,and cooke the anſwere for a prelage of the happy ſucceſle
of the buſineſſe: and hee could not refraine ro commend him , tor not be-

ing too haſtic in a deliberation which deſerued time, Yet the EleQor an-

ſwered within few dayes, that hee was very glad that the Emperonr and

the Pope were relolued to call a Councell, where, according to promile, of-
tentimes made vnto Germanie,the controucrlies mightlawfully bee bandled,

| by the rule of the word of God. That himſelfetor his ownepart, would

willingly make preſent an{were to the things propoled; but becauſe there
are many Princes, which haue receiucd the ſame confeſſion in the Diet of
Ausbug, it was not fit, nor profitable for the caule, ro anſwerealone : but an
aſſembly being intimated againſt the 2.4. of ſuns, hee defired hee would bee
contented to grantthisſhorr delay, that he mightrecciue a more common,
and reſolute concluſion. - The ioy.and hope of the Nuncio was much in- The Nunas

| ;s pleaſed
creaſed, who defired the delay had been rather of yceres then monerhs. Bur os = waveng

the Proteltants, aſſembled at the aforeſaid time in Smalcalde, anſwered, than. Tree.
king the Emperor, that, for theglory of God, and faferie of the common- &f the Pro
wealth , hee had taken paines to cauſe a Councell to bee celebrated; which bled in 64
would beein vaine, if conditions were notoblerued , neceſſary'for the cv ***
ring of thediſeaſes of Germanie: which defircrhi chat her controverſies may
be defined with due order : and hopeth to. obraine it, for that the Emperour |
hath in many imperiall Diers promiſed ſucha one, which, by che: mature -
deliberation of the Princes and Stares, hath been refolucd ſhould be celebra-
ted in Germaniz; in regard that many errors being reucaled; by occafion of .
the [adulgences, publiſhedin Sermons, Pope Leocondemnedthe _—_

F 3 an

The HiStory of La3.1,

oy _ - m—_— - -_

_ 1533
[> >—I\—N
CLEMENT 7-
"CHARLES F-

————

Henay 8. .
FRANCIS LI.

And their ex»
CEeptions a»
gainlt rhe
Ppropolitions
of ho Pope.

andthe Doctors, who difcoucred the abutes. Bur that ſentence was oppo-

ſed by the teſtimonies: of the Prophets and Apoltles. Whence did arite the
controuerfie, which cannot be decided butin a Councell, where the Popes
ſentence,or thepower of wholocuer, may not preiudicetlic cauſe, and where
judgement may be giuen, not according tothe Popes lawes, or opinions of

the Schooles, but according to the holy Scripture. If this be not performed,

this ſo greata labour would bee taken in vaineas may appeare by the exam-

ples of tome other Councels, celebrated before.

 * Now thepropolitions of the Pope were contrary to this cnd, to the pe-
ritions of the Dict, andpromilcs of the Emperour. Forthough hee propoſe
afrec Councellin words, yet in effe&t hee would haue ir tied, fo that vices

anderrors may not be reprehended, and himſclfe may maintaine his power.

Thar that was not a reaſonable demand that any man ſhould bind himſclfe
to obſcruc the decrees, before he know by whar order,maner, or forme they
arc made,whether the Pope defarero haue the ſupreme authoriticin him,and
his; whether hee will hauc the controucrſics diſcuſſed according to holy
writ,oraccording to humanc lawes and traditions. Thar that claulcalfſo ſcc-
med caprious, that the Councell ſhould bee made according to the old cu-
ſtome. For it being vnderſtood of that old, when all was determined by
the holy Scriptures, they would notrefuſe it. But the Councels of thenexr

- precedingage were much different from the other that were more ancicnt,

where too much was attributed to the Decrces of Popes, and other men.

| Thar the propoſc was glorious, bur irtooke abſolutely away the libertic

which was demanded, and was neceſſary for the cauſe. Thatthey deſired

- the Emperour tobee a meanes that all might paſſe lawfully. Thar all men

were in attention, and ſtood inn hope of a Councell, and demanded it with
vowes and prayers, which would bee turncd into great ſorrow and yexation
of minde, it this expectation ſhould bee deluded, by giuing a Councell, bur
not ſuch aone as is deſired and promiſed. - That thereis no doubr but thac
all the States of the Empire, and other Kings and Princes alſo will bee of the
ſame opinion,to auoidchoſe{narcs and bonds, with which the Pope think-
cthtobindethemin a new Counccll: ro whole will if the managing of the
aftaires ſhall be permitted , they will referrethe whole to God, and thinke

of what they hauc to doe. Yer for all this if they ſhall bee cited , with good.

and lawfull aſſurance; in caſe. they ſcc themle]ues able to doe ſome thing for

the {eruice of God, they will not refuſe roappeare ; but with condition, not

The Pope re-

cn\ierh Hugo

Rangone B. 0

R beggro, his

.no9a/ ng
cth Vere

[Lam in tus

4£C

ro conſenttothe Popes demands, nor toa Councell which is not confor-
mable to the Decrees of the imperiall Dicts. In the end they prayed the
Emperour not to taketheir reſolution in ill-part, and to chdeuour that the
power of thoſe be nor confirmed, who lopg/fince haue waxed cruell againſt
the innocent... _ Y

The Proteſtants reſolucd, not onely toſend theanſwereto the Pope, and
the Emperour, but to print it alſo, together with the Nuncio his propoſiti-
on, which by theſame Pope was iudged-indi{creete, and too open. There-
fore vnder colour that heewas old and vnablc to bearc that charge, herecal-
led him, and wroteto Pergerius, Nuncio with King Ferdinand, that he ſhould
take ypon himthat place, withthe ſamcinſiructions,admoniſhing him to re-

| 7 | member

F
—_

_ _— OC IT.

rad W—_—Y ht

. Aa th. Py «AD — as A. ——

L1s.1. The Councell of T rent. 67 |

member not to ſwarue by any meanes from his will, orto giue eare to atly 1534
moderation,thoughthe Kingdefirc it, that vnaduiſedly he calt him not in- > >

ro ſome {trait,and conltraine him ro calla Councell, which was nor profira- Cuonana he
ble for che Church,or forthe Apoſtolicall Sea. Be wermw=agy

While theſerthings werein handling ,che Pope who forc-ſaw the anſwere 225 5
which would come out of Germany, & before 1n Bolonia had conceiued bur :
ſmall confidenceinthe Emperour, wholly alicncd himſelfe from his friend-
ſhip. For in the-cauſc of Modenaand Rheggio, berweene his Holineſle and
the Duke of Ferrara, referred to him by the parties: hee pronounced for the

Duke. For all which-cauſes,the Pope negotiated a confederation with the
Freach King, the which was concluded, and cſtabliſhedalſo by the mariage ene:
of Henry the Kings ſecond ſonne, with ( atherine de Medici, the Popes grear ence cha

| : | . ope and the
grand-child. And'to giuea complcat perfection tothe whole buſineſſe, hee French King,

went to Marſeilles in perſon, to ſpcake with the King. But vnderſtanding = pomrennn
thar this iourney was reprehended by all, as notaddrefſed to any publike re-

ſpect, but onely ro make his houſc great, hee iultiftied himlelfe, by ſaying

hee vndercooke it, to perſwade him ro fauour the Councell, and to aboliſh

the Lutheran heref1e. Andrtis true that there, beſide other treaties, heeper-

ſwadcd his moſt Chriſtian Maicltie, rodeale with the Proteltants, eſpecially

with the Landgrauc of Haſsia, who was ro come to him into France,to caule
them rodefiſt from demaunding a Couacel, propofing vnto them, that they

would ſecke outany other way to accommodare the differences , and pro-

miſing his owne faithfull andeftcQtuall helpe, when time ſhould (eruce. |

The King did thus ncgoriate, bur could obtaine nothing. For the Land- The French

graucallcadged,thatthere was no other meanes to hinder thedefolation of Fore
Germany, and that not toſpeake of a Councell, was willingly torunne intoa >>. ogy
ciuill warre. Inthe ſecond place, the King treated with them, that they Poyes requet
would be contented witha Councell in Italze, Burt neither did the Ger» paar pe
mans agree vnto this; for they ſayd,chat this march'was worle then the firſt: |
becauſe that conſtrained them onely to make warre, but this calt them into

a {cruitude both of body and ſoule:whereunto refxtance could nor be made,
but by a Counccll,in a tree place: yet condeſcending forhis Maieltics ſake; to
wharlocuer they wereable,they would ceale ro demand to haue it celebrated
in Germany, ſo that another free place were appointed autof Tralie,though it
were necrevnto it.

In the beginning of theyeere 1 534 the King gaue the Pope an account - 1534'

of what hee had done, and offered to bring to paſſe, that the Proteſtants |

ſhould bee contented with Geneua. The Pope haulng receiued the aduiſe; The Popeis
diſpleaſed

was vncertaine, whether the: King, though his confederate and kin{man, with the Pro

would be glad roſec him introubles, or if, in this particular, hee wanted nj tn
that diſcretion which he ſhewed in other affaires : But heecontluded, that plice of the...
it was not goodto vichim in this marrer.. And. writing vnto him, thanked |
him for his paines, withoutanſwcring to rhe: particular of Geneua; and hee
incouraged many of the Courtiers, whole mindes were troubled, aſſuring
chem, that by no meanes he would conſent toſuchafolly. ' 1
Burchis yeerethe Pope, in ſtcad of regaitting Germanie, loſt. the obedience Heloowh .-
of England, by proceeding rather with choler and paksion,, then mide Wiles of zagink *
ome

Pb — CG

= The Hiitory of Lis. 1,

1534 dome neceſlaric in{o great negoriations. I he accident was of great jmpor-
CH tance,and greater conſcquence,which to declare diſtinctly, t 2s neceſjary tO
Cuaxres 5. begin from the firlt caules, whence it had its originall.
Hears, Catherine Infanta of Spaine,liltcr to the mother of (, barl's the Em perour,
Exaxcts © - was matricd to Henry the cight, Amg of England,.and was betore,the wite of
Arthure, Prince of Walles, Henryes cldelt brother; afrer whole death, their fa-
ther gauc her in marriage to Henry, who remained ſucceſſor, by the diſpen-
ſation of Pope Inlio the lecond. This Queene was withchild often, and al-

waycs cither miſcaricd, or brought footth a creature of a ſhorr lite, except

_—

The cauce.

onconly daughter, King Henry,cither for diſplealure againit the Emperor,or

for deſire of iſſue male,or for ſome other cauſe,conceiuedaſcrupleinhis mind
chart the mariage was not good; and taking counſell of his Bithops, ſeparated
himſclfc from her company. The Biſhops created with the Queene, that ſhee
would be contented with a diuorce,faying that the Popes diſpenſation was
ncither good nortruc. The Queene would not giue careto them, but had
recourſero the Pope: to whom, the King allo ſent ro craucadiuorce. The
Pope, who was {till retired in Oruero, and hoped for good conditions in his
affaires, if the fauours of France and England, which ſtill they performed,
were continued, by moleſting the Empcrour in the kingdome of Naples,
ſent into England the Cardinal Campeg giodelegating the cauſe vnto him,and
The Cari. the Cardinallof lorke. From theſe , and from Rome, the Kivg had hope gt-
nals C-22%- yen him, thatin the end, theſentence ſhould bee on his {ide : Yea, to facili-

| es ade raterhe reſolution,thatthe ſolemnities of the iudgement , mighr not draw
Foechene the cauſcinlengrh, a bricfe was framed, in which, hee was declared free
Ne meeai. from that marriage, with the moſt ample clauſes, that cuer were put into any
_ Popes Bull, and a Cardinall ſent into Exgland, with order to prefentit, after
Therope ſome few proofes werepalt, which he was ſure would cafily be made. And
_ euſthis. this happencdin the yeere152.4.But Clement, iudging it fitter for compaſsing
bead made Hig def1gnes vpon Florente, as hath beene declared in its proper place, to

- + -ontorM ioync himſclte with the Emperour, then to continue in the triend{hip of
> burnd France and England, inthe yecre 152.9. hee ſent Francis ( ampana vnto Campe-
gio, with order to burne the Bricte,and to proceed ſlowly in the cauſe, Can-
peggiobegan firlt ro draw the cauſe in length, and after, ro make difficultic
of performing the ——_ made to the King. Whereby bccing aſſured
that the Iudge and his aduerſarics did collude, hee ſent to the Vniuerſicies
A confulcati- of talie, France , and Germanie, for a conſultation in his cauſe ; where. a-
cauſe ofdi> mongſt the Diuines, ſome were contrary, and ſome fauourable to his
Py retenſion. The greater part of the Parifians were on his fide, and
ſome belccued that the Kings gifres more perſwaded them, 'then
rcalon,
TEPopers © But the Pope,citherrogratific the Emperour, or for feare, that in Eng-
= * {4nd by meancs of the Cardinall of. Jorke, ſomething might happen, not ac-
callec>Ca» COrding to his minde, as alſo to giue occaſion ro Campeg gio to part from
PA thence,called thecauſerohimſtlfe. The King impatient of delay,cither, be.
cauſc he knew their cunning, or for ſome other cauſe, pubbſhed the diuorce
The King with his wife, and married 4rne Ballen in the yere 1533. yer [till che caule de-
famed Pendcd beforethe Pope; in which; he was relvlucd ro proceeds lowly, to

{arisfie

*
E

: -
« Z gf Ps
; AD ©

XUM

” Ib. de 5b:

—_ ——— TO SETS” ONE OOOOOL|FOM: CT TIT IST _— i —— "
_— * -_ 2c LE EIS EZ. , An. . T5 =
—_ BY

The Councell of Trent. *

am—_—

FE” - HR.
{atiſftic the Emperoar and not offend che King. Therefore ſome by-points 15 4
rather were handled, then the merits of the caule. And thedif puration grew >...

vpon the Article of the Artentars, in which the Pope gaue ſentence againſt Cranuss y.

—

the King; declaring,that it was not lawfull for him,by his owne authoritie, fur 8,
without the Ecclctialticall Iudge, to ſeparate himfelte from his wife, For C235 &
which cauſe, the King in the beginning of this yeere 1534 denied the Pope
obcdience, commanding all his ſubie&ts, nor ro carry any money to Rome, The King
nor to pay the ordinary Peter-pence. This infinitely troubled the Court of Peicr-pence
Rome, and dayly they conſulred of a remedie. They thought to proceede "4 gg
acainltthe King with ccnlures, and to interdict all Chriltian Nations all
commerce with England. But the moderate Counlſell pleaſed belt, ro tempo-
rize with him, and co mediate acompoſition by the French King. King
Francis accepted thecharge,and fentthe Biſhop of Paris ro Rome,tonegon-
ate a pacification with the Pope;where they {till proceeded in the cauſe, but
gently,and with reſolution, not to come tocenſures, if the Emperourdid nor
roceede firſt,or at the ſame time, with his forces. They had diuided the
cauſc intothree and.ewenty Articles,and then they handled, whether Prince
Arthure had had .carnall coniunction with Queene (atherme; in this they
fpcar time vntill mid-lenc was pait, when, the nineteenth of March, newes
came, thata Libell was publiſhed in England, againlt rhe Pope, and the
whole Courtof Rome, and that beſides, a Comedie had beenemade in pre-
ſence of the King and Courr,tothe great diſgrace and thameof the Pope,and
of cucry Cardinal in particular.| For which cauſcall being inflamed with
cholcr, they ran head-long rogue ſentence; which was pronounced in the
Conllſtoric,thetourcand twentieth of the ſame monerh, that the mariage
| berweene Henry and Queene Catherine was good, that he was bound to
take her for his wife, and thar, in caſc he did it not, he ſhould beexcommus» ©
. nicated. HE >
The Pope was ſoone diſpleaſed with this precipitation. For ſixe dayes
after, the French King his letters came, that the King of England was con-
rented to acceptthe ſentence concerning the Atrentates, and to render obedi-
ence, with condirion, that the Cardinals whom heemiſtruſted ſhould nor
meddle in the buſineſſe, and thar perſons not ſuſpected, ſhould bee ſent to
({ambray to take, information. *And the King had ſent his Proctors before,
toalliſtinthecauſc at Rome. Wherefore the Pope went about to deviſe
ſome pretence, toluſpend theprecipitared ſentence and againerto ſerthecaule
on itsfeere. h
But Henry ſo ſooneas he had ſcene it, ſayd it was no matter. For the Pope
ſhould be Biſhop of Rome, and. himlclfe' ſole Lord of his kingdome: and
that he would docaccording to the ancient faſhion of the Eattern Church,
| not lcauing to bea good Chriſtian,nor ſuffering the Lutheran hereſie,orany
> otherto be brought into his kingdome. And ſo he did. Hee publiſhed an
zu Edict, wherein hee declared himſclfe head of the Church of England, and
puniſhed capirally,whoſocuer ſaid that the Pope of Rome bad anyaurthoritic
| there : he chaſed out the Colleor of the Peter-pence, aud cauſed the Par-
liament to approoue all theſe rhings : where it was determined , thar all
3s Biſhoprickes of Z1gland, ſhould bee conferred by the Archbiſhop of rok
| bury,

%

70

- The Hijlonte of : Liana)

u—__

SA
_-

I53+
FS
CLieMENT 7-
CHARLES $5»

Henixr 8.
FRANCIS I;
\

How the adti-
onof K Henry
Was expo. .n-

dd

The Popes
have 221ned
much by ma-
trimomall d.(-
Pe.ulations,

burie, without ſending to Rome, and that the Clergie (ſhould pay ro dhe King
one hundredand fifty thouſand pounds tterling yeereiy, for the defence of
the Kivgdome againlt wholocuer.

- This ation of the King was variouſly expounded. Some chovght him
wiſc, forfrecinghimſlelfe trom the lubicction of Reme, without any innova»
tion in Religion, and withour putting his ſubie&s in danger of ſcdirion,
and without referripg himſclte roa Councell, athing which they ſaw hard
to be effected and dangerous allo for him, it being impoſſible that a Coun-
ccl], compoled of Eccleftaſticall perſons, ſhould nor maineraine the Popes
power, which is the maine pillarof their order : becauſe by the 45.9907 tis
aboue all kings.and the Empcrour, bur without it is ſubieC&t to rhem, there
being no Ecelefialticall perſon that hath ſuper1oritic bur the Pope, | But the
Court of Rome maintained thatit could nor be ſaid,that there was no change
in Religion,the firit and principal Artiele being chavged, which is the ſupre-
macie of the Pope, and thar {editions would arilc as well for this onely,as for
all thereſt. Which the eucnt ſhewed to be rrue. For the King was faine to
proccede ſeucrely againlt ſome of his ſubiects, whom heloucd andelicemed,
[rt cannot becxpreſled what gricte was conceiucd in Rome, .and by all the
Clergie, forthealienarion of lo great a Kingdome from the Popes ſubic&i-
on:aad it diſcoucred the imbcecillitie of humane affaires, wherein, for the
molt part, great damages proceed irom thoſe: things, from which thoigrea-
teſt benctits were formerly recciued . For by matrimonial difpenſatians, and

by lentences of diuorce,as well grantechas denyed, the Papacic hath gained

much in former times, ſheltering the Princes with the name of the Vicar of
Chrilt, whom it concerned with ſome inceſtuous mariage, or bydifſoluing
one tocontract another, to yaite ſome other territory to their owne;,- or to
drownethe title of diuers pretendants, making, for this cauſe, ſtraight allis
ancewiththem, and interclting their power ro defend rhatauthoritie, with-
out which their ations would be condemned and hindred-: yea, intercſt-
ing. not thoſe Princes onely, bur all chcir poſteririe, ro maintaine their legiti-
mation. Butthe miſfortune whichthen aroſe, might be aſcribed to the pre-
cipitation of (lemenr, who, in this cale, knew not how to manage his aythos
ritic: andif it had plcaled God to haue giucn him in this fa the vic of
bis vſuall wiſdome, he might haue gained thuch, wherenow his loſie was
Great, £0 |

- Butthe Emperour at his returne into Germany, being informed of the
negotiation of the Nuncio Rangone, concerning the Councell ; wrote to
Rome, comp'aining that himſclte hauing promitcd a Councell to Germany,
and treated with the Pope in Bolonia, in what ſort the Princes ſhould be
dealt within this matter, yer the Nuncij of his Holinefſe had nor procce-
dedinthat manner that was agrecd of, but had ſo treated, that rhe Pro-
teltants thought themſclues deluded: praying him 'in the ende, to: finde
ſome way to giue Germany ſatisfaction. The eighth of Iunc the Emperours

letters were readin the Confiſtorie ; and becaule there came aduice, a little

beforethat the Landgrauc of Haſsia had takenthe Dukedome of Wittenberg

from King Ferdinand, by force of armes, and reitored itto the Duke Plrick,

thelawfull Lord of it, and that Ferdinand allo was inforced ro make peace

OM With

XUM

L1s.1. T be Councell of Trent, 1
with them, many of the Cardinals ſayd, that the Lutherans hauing atchie+ 1534
ucd ſo great a yidtorie, It Was neceſarie to giue them ſome fatisfaion, "Sax.
aud not co proccede any more by Art, but to make ſome demonſtration of Cranugs"
cies, becaule the Emperourhauing promiſed a Councell,it was necella- tema 8, -.
ric hee ſhoyld nor. be deluded, and fayd, that ifrhe Pope could not finde a re
way, there was danger, Thathis Maieltie would be conltrained to. yeelde :
to ſome.otherthing, of greater preiudice' and loſe ro the Church. Butthe
Pope aud maior- part of the Cardinals, ſecing ic was impoſſible to make
the Lutherans accept ſuch a Counſell, as might bee ſcruiceable to the
Court of Rome, and being refolure nor ſo much asrto hearken ro any (peach
of making itotherwiſe, they, reſolued to anſwere.the Emperour, that they
knew yery well the importance of the times, and what great need there was
of a generall Councell: which they were moſt rcadicto intimate, in caſe
it might be ſo celebrated ,that it might produce good cies, as necd re-

uireth : but ſecing new dilcords ariſeberweene him and France, diucrs 0-

en diſſentions berwceene other Chriſtian Princes, ir was neccſſarie they,
{ſhould ceaſe, and mindes thould bee reconciled, before the Councel were
called. For, during the diſcords ic could not produce any. good cffect,
and now lealt of all, the Lutherans being in armes ,and made proud by
the victory of Wittenberg. _ | |

But itwas neceſſary to leaue diſcourſing wich the Pope of a Councell:
For heefell into along and morrall infirmitic, whereof he.dyedin theend «4, ws,
of September, with no ſmall ioy of the Court. For though they admi- fi
red his vertucs, which werea naturall grauitic, exemplary parſmony, and
diſſimulation, yerthey hated more his auarice,rigiditie, and crucltic, encrea-
{cd,or morc manifelted, attcr he was oppreſſed by his infirmitie.
In the vacancies of the Sca, the Cardinals vic ro compoſe certaine Cpitul-dions

alwayes coma

_ capitulations, torcformethe Papall gouernement, which all (weare ro per- potty 4
forme, if they ſhall beaſſumed to the Popedome, though it appeare by all yenucotiie

precedentexamples,that cuery one ſwearerh with a mind not to keepethem,

in caſe he ſhalbe Pope.For ſo loone as he is cleAed,he faith, he cou'd notbind

himſelfe,8 that heis at liberty by gaining the Papacic. After the death of Cle-

ment,the capitulations were fer downe, according to cuſtom,amonglt which

one was, that the future PopeſMuld bee es call a Councel within a

yere.But the capitularionscould nor beeſtabliſhed & ſworn, becauſerhe fame 1a, rae

day,the 12.0f Oftob in which the Conclaue was locked vp,Cardinal Farneſe porens 1

was ſuddenly created Pope, firlt called Honorius 5.inthe creation, and after {420mg

inthe coronation Paulus 3. A Prelate indowed with good qualities, & among rooaicn na-

all his vertues,made more eſteeme of none then of diſſimulacion. He being a - 51k

Cardinall practiſed in ſixe Popedomes, Deane of the Colledge,and much, Frm ws |

conuerſant in negotiations,ſhewed that he did not feare the Councel, as Cle-
ment did, but thought it profitable forthe Papacic,to make ſhew by al means
of deſiring it,being aſſured that hee could not beecnforced to call itin ſuch
maner, and in ſuch aplace where hee could haue no aduantage,' and when
chere was cauſcto hinder ir, the contradiction whichthe Court and Clergie
would make, was ſufficient. He chought allo that thismightſerue to main,

rtaine peaccin Italic, which he eſteemed yery neceflary , that hee might go-

-ucrne
4p

= [- 4

4
SIT. 4
Me) *:
Q > b
% a > al we
» i \. 4.4.00 *

a ” % 6; Ry

E.. b : Y F - 2 at]

" C . : | <8
TY fo ee IG woos Wet 2" 9, 1. _ gs OORY h & . hy yy a \ ow,
o pr A I, ” ” = Z L —_
T ©. wars 1" ”; "Walks 2; - p #4 {4 3, SUD > . ®rligs 1: v7

"WIS 2 at PR Fe. bt
a” — ing Pu y

\ ©
i 4
.

' "_— th. hs —_ tht

72 - : The Hittory-of

_

L414
2534 ucrnein quier. Hee faw very well that this colour of a Councell might
£7 ſeruero couer many matters, and ro excuſe him in not doing thoſe things
Cuaxies 5: Which were contrary to his will. 'T herefarc'ſoone after his Creation he ler

Hey 8. , them knowe,that though the capitmarions were not {worne, yet hee was
'ZX; reſolued ro obſerue thac ofthe conuocation of a Councell, kngwing it to
| be neceflaricfor the glory of God, and benefire of the Church :andthe 16.

of the ſame moneth'he- made aſgenerall congregation of the Cardinals,
Hemiketn Which is not called a Confiſtory, the Pope nor being crowned as yer, where

tewchuthe Heepropoſed this matter. Hee ſhewed, by potent arguments, that the inti-

detireth a

Co.ncel. nation could not bee deferred, it being otherwiſe impoſſible to make true

amitie betweene Chriſtian Princes,and to extirpate the herefies : and that
therefore all rhe Cardinals ought maturely ro conſider how it ſhould bee

] celebrated. Hee depured alſo three Cardinals to aduice of the time, and

lace, and other particulars, with order to deliuertheir opinion in the firſt
Conliltory after the coronation. And to make contradictions ariſe, which
might ſeruc him in occaſions, heeadded,that as he would reforme the Cler-
= gein the Councell, {o ir was not conuenient there ſhould be need [0 re-
tac Carcinals FOYMe the Cardinals, bur that it was neceſlaric they ſhould then begin to -re-
to come formerhemſelucs, becauſe he was reſolued rodraw fruit from the Councell,
the precepts whereof would bee of {mall force, if the effes appeared nor
firſt inthe Cardinals.
The cuſtom is,that in the firſt daies the Cardinals,efpecially thegreatones,
Andrefufeth obtaine fauours cafily of thenew Pope. Therefore the Cardinal of Lorraine,
to 2rant the : , | .
nommution of and other French,in the name of the King,defired him ro grantro the Duke
a opzant Of Lorrainethe nomination of the'Biſhoprickes, and Abbacics of his domi-

Abdats to any

Punce., nion: Which demandalſoit was thought the Venerians would make for

theirs, The Popes anſwere was, that in the Councell, which ſhould be cal-
led ſhortly, it was neceſlaric to take away the facultic of nomination from
thoſe Princes that already had it; which was fome blemiſh to the Popes
his Predecefſors, who had granted them. Therefore it was not reaſonable
ro augment the heape of crrours, andto grantthat now which ſhortly
ſhould bce revoked with ſmall reputation. |
In the firſt Conſiſtory, which was the twelfth of Noucmber, hee dif-
courled againeof the Councell, and ſayd, thar firſt it was neceſſary to ob-
The "%* | raine an vnion of Chriſtian Princes, or aſſurance of ſuſpenſion of armes,

maketh ihew
todelirean while the Councell ſhould endure. Therefore that hee would ſend Nuncy

> ot þ e- to all Princes to negotiate this point, and other particulars, of which the
ny Cardinals puthimin mindc. Hee called alſo Yergerins out of Germany, to
yergcrimis bewell informed of the Stateof thoſe Provinces, and deputed three Car-
es. dinals, one of cuery order to conſult of the things to bee reformed, Theſe
were the Cardinall of Szena, of S. Senerino, and (efis. Neither was there cuer

any Conſiſtory where hecntred nor, and ſpake much of this matter, and

often ſaid, it wasncceſlarie forthis end, that the Court, and eſpecially the
Cardinals ſhould firſt be reformed. This was expounded by ſome, to bee

fpoken with good zeale, anddefire of eftc&,by others, that the Courr and
Cardivals,might findemeanesto hinder the Councell, that there might nor

bee any reformation. And the ground of this their opinion was, that ha-

uing

The Councellof Trent. _ 7

w—_ — - ———_—u —_— "_

L1s. I,

uing deputed three Cardinals, hee elected neither che molt zealous, nor the: 1535
moſt practicall, burthe ſlowelt and moſt quiet of all the Colledge:: But the Sir ay
next rnoneth of December, hee gaue more-ample-marter of diſcourſe. For. Cxanrss 5.
hee created Cardinals, (Alexander Farneſe: his ownegrandchild, by Peter A+ aac 8. ©
loifius his'baſtard,and Gnido Aſcanins gat ms child by his daughter Con-1 2252? &
flanza , the former of fouretcene yeeres of age, and the other of ſixtcenc, To ofthe

opes ne-"

To thofe thattold himof their youth, hee anſwered; that his owne decre> phewesare- +

ire olde age did ſupply ir. The hope of reforming the Cardinals;;-and the nm bots
Fare of ſome of them vanithed immcdiately, becaufe it did not appeare-'*2%*%* |
how itcould begin, bur from the age, and lawfull birth of thoſe whictiwere '... .'.._ ©
ro be created. The Popealſo gaucouer toiſpeake thercofany mote, hauing/
dons that, which would not ſuffer him to maske any longer. Yer the:/pro-

olition of calling a Councell was curranc ſtill. diicta

And inthe Conliſtoricof the ſixteenth of Tanuatie 15 35. heemadealong 153 5

and vehement Oration, exciting rhe Cardinals to reſolue in that matter. For.
by proeceding ſo ſlowly, the world did rhinke that the Councell was nor
truely intended, and that they had nothing but words, and Court baly wa-
ter. Andhedeliucred his minde with ſuch graue ſentences, that the; whole The Pope
auditoric was mooued. In that conſiltorie it was reſolucd ro diſpatch elite ih Dvin
Nuncij co the Emperour, to the French King, and other Chriſtian Princes, Jak hen
with commiſſion to declare, that the Pope and Colledge had determined ©2ncvmins,
abſolutcly, for the benefic of Chriſtendome; to celebrate a Councell, exhor-
ring them to fauour it, and to procure peace and tranquillitie, while it ſhall
Jhſt, butto tell them, that for the time and place, his Holineſſe was not re.
ſolucd as yet. And the molt ſecrer inſtruftion was , that they ſhould cun-
nivgly fide out, what the Princes thoughr concerning the place, to the
end, that all their intereſts and purpoſes being knowen, hee mighr hinder
them, by oppoſing one againſt another, and fo worke his owne will. Hee
charged alſo the Nuncij ro complaine of the ations of the King of Eng-
land: and, when they ſaw opportunirie, ro incite them againlt him, and ro
offer them alſo that Kingdome for a prey. Among thele Nuncij Fergerius Yeeerim is

ſem backe in»

was one; ſcntbackeinto Germanie with more ſpeciall Commiſſions, to pence t Germane
crate the minde of rhe Proteſtants, concerning the forme of proceeding in ——_
the Councell, that hee might draw from thence ſuch concluſions as were
neceſſaric, He gaue him alſo particular chargeto treat with Luther, andthe
other principall Preachers of the reformeddoGtrine, viing all kindes ofpro-
miſesand offers, to reducethem to ſome compoſition. T he Pope reprehen-
ded inall occafions the rigidneſle of Cardinall (aietan, who in the Dict of
Ausburg 1 518. refuſed Luthers offer, that ſilence being impoſed to his aduer-
ſarics, hee would alfo bee contented ro hold his peace: and hee condemned
the acerbitie of that Cardinall, who,by vrgingobſtinately a recantation,caſt
that man headlong intodeſpaite,which hadcoſt,and would coſt the Church
of Rome, as much as the halfe of her authoritie is worth. That hee would
nor imitate Leo, in beleeuing that the Friars are good inſtruments to ſup-
reſſe the Preachersof Germanie. For reafon, and expcrience haue declared
the vanirie of thar cogitation.” That there were but two meanes, force and
treaties; both which he would vſe, being readie to agree to any _—
| o)

">

74 i The Hiſtorie of | La ».1.

1535: fortarthe Popes auchoritic might remaine incite. For: which nd bet aid

LY hee had necde of able .men , tir for negotiation, arid:theretfore the one
PavL.

ef and twenticth of May , hee created {txe Cardinals, and-tbe ſeventh, a few
-—7:dayes aftcr all which, were men'much elicemed in rhe Courr.', Amon

Hrenay 8,

Fraxczs3: 'theſc was Jobn Fiſber Biſhop of Rocheſter, then priſoner in England, for retu- |

Ti p53; ſing roobey the Kings Decree,which tooke away the Popes authorivie. The

creaethſewa, Pope 11: making choice of hum, con{idered:chat hee honoured this promo-
-..tion,byutring-inthat numbera learned may, and well deleruing x for the
nomber vis perſecution which hee endured : and that havipg increaſed his dignitie, hee

Cardip:s.
In wah 5

John Fiſher B, ; f : , ' [
© recizfer, would /haue more relpe& with the King, and more credit with zhe, people.

Bur thar, Cardivals Cap proficed thar Prelate in nothing, bur ro haſten his

dearh\'which was giuen him 43. dayes after, by cutting off his-head in

publike. | Ce:

' Bur howſocuer the Pope made open demonſtrations to deſire ſuch a

Councell;as might gue fatisfattion,and reduce Germante, yer all the Courr,
The Covre and the'Popes ncercelt friends, who treated molt ſecretly with him of theſe

wa of ori things, faid that it could notany where bee celebrated bur in 1ralie, becauſe.

on that Ma4rn- h
e-<wastbe * jn no other placeit could bee tree,and that in Tralie, no place could be choſen

+ oat but Mantua. |
nay Tergerins,athis returne into Germanie, deliuered the Popes Ambaſlage,
\. firſt ro Ferdinand, and then to thoſe Protcitanrs thar came ro that King a-
bout the preſent occurrences, and at lalt hee made a journey to treate with
the others alſo. He had no other anſwere from any of them, but that the

The nevzotia-
non of25 which ſhould bee called in the ende of the yeere, The propoſition of the
weave. Nuncio contained, that that was the time for the Councels, ſo much de-
fircd , the Pope hauing treated with the Emperour, and all the Kings to
call it ſeriouſly , nor as formerly, in appearance onely ; and that irmay nor
bee deferred any more, hee determined to chu'e Mantua for the place, ac-
cording to. the reſolution taken with the Emperour,' two yceres ſince:
Which being a Citie of rhe Emperours vaſſall, placed ncere hisconfines, and
the Yenetians, they might holde it for {ccure: belides that rhe Popeand the
Emperour would giuc any greater caurion whatfocuer. Thar it was not
neceſſaric to relolue or ſpeake of the manner and forme of treating in the
Councell, becauſe this would better bee done in the Councell it ſelfe, when
it ſhall bee called. That it could not bee celebrated in Germanie , which
abounded with Anabaprilts,Sacramentaries,and other ſets, for the moſt
parr, both fooliſh and furious. Therefore that it would not bec ſecurefor
othcr nations,to goe where that multitude is potent, and co condemane their
doctrine. Thattothe Popecir isall one rocall it in any other Country what-
| focuer; but hee would nor ſeemeto bee inforced, and to haucthatauthoritic
taken from him which he hath inioyed ſo many ages, to preſcribe the place
of generall Councels. -
He ereaterh In this 1ourney Yergerius found Luther at Wittenberg, and treated with
ven £47%%* him very courteoully, vpon theſetearmes , inlarging, and amplifying chem
yery much. And firlt, hee aſſured him, thatthe Pope, and Colledge. of Car-
dinals, cilcemed him cxcecdingly, who were infinitely. gricucd for the loſle
5] |

, | of

&

(4

would conſulr together, and refolue by common conſent in their aſſembly, .

Pam v4 ” — — —

Wm £4 CC

L - 6-1, £ | ' The Cenncellof Tent,

ofone, who, if he hadbeen employed in lin feruicy of God, and thi Apox |
ſolicall Sea {which'are ioyned togerher) might haue'brotighr foonth in]

elt1mablefrair; and thar they would doe whatſoever theytould to tegaine

him, Hee told tharthe Pope blamed the rigiditie of Careray, and that the fare, xc;
Cardinals dino lefle; chat hee might expett all fauout from tharholy ——— ,

Sca, and that the rigor of Leo, which hee v(ed by the inttigarion of-ochers,
not of his-owne dilpolition, diſpleaſed all fnen. Heciadded alſo that hee
would not diſpute with him of the conrrouerftes, becaulehee profeſſed not
Diuinitie, buttchat by common reaſon hee could thew him that it was good
e6'reunite himſelfe with rhe head of the Church. For conf:dering that his
doarine, comming tolight, and being publiſhed withia theſe eightdens
yeeres had rayſed innumerable ſets, of which the one dereſterh theorher,
and fo many popular ſedicions, with the deatrhand baniſhmentof ſo'grear
multitudes, it could not bee concluded that it came'from God. But one
might well aſſure himſelfe, that ir was pernitious to the world , becaute fo
much miſchicfe procceded from ir. 7Jergerius ſaid , that ir was roo great a
felfc-loue,-and too great a conceipr of ones owne worth, when a-man
would trouble the whole world to'ſowe his owne opinions. If you haue
innouated in the faith ,"(faid Uergerins) in which you were borne, ad bred
vp 35. yeeres, for your conſcience and ſaluations lake; it was ſufficient to
keepe it within your ſelfe. If the Joue of your neighbour mooued you,
why did youtrouble che whole world vancceffarily, {ecing har, withour ic
men didliue, and God was ſerued in tranquiihty? Hee added that the con-
fuſion was gone on ſo farre, that the remediecould nor be deferred. The
Pope is reſolute to applie it by calling a Councell , whereall the learned men
of Europe meeting together , the trueth ſhall bee cleered, to the confu-
fion of vnquier ſpirits, and for the place, hath deſtinated the Cirie of Mantua.
Andalthoughthe chictelt hope confilterh in the goodneſle of God, yet put-
ting tothar account cheendeuours of men, it was in Lathers power, to make
the remedic eafte, if hee will bee preſent, treat with charitie, and oblige to
himſelfealſothe Pope, a munificent Prince, who taketh fpeciall norice of

perſons of merit. Hee pur him in minde of the example of Encas Siluius, And proj.

E . "_ . ct hurt *©
who following his owne opinions with much ſlauery and labour, could ger the example
of Aencas 8148

no further preferment, then to be Canon of Trent, bur, becing changed 2,
ro the better, became Biſhop, Cardinall, andfinally Pope Pins the ſecond.

Hee called to his memorie ©Beſſarion of Nice, who of a poote Caloier of 4n4of2:/%-

Trapizonda, became a great renowmed Cardinal, and wanted not much of hor
being Pope.

Luthers anſwers were ,-according to his nature, vehement and fictce, zniher un

lyyere,

ſaying, that hee made no account of the eſteeme which hee had with the
Court of Rome, whole hatred hce feared nor, nor regarded their good will,
that heeapplied himſelfe to the ſernice of God, as cok as hee could, though
vvhen hehad doneall,he yyas but an vnprofitableſeruant; that hee ſavy not
hovv the ſeruices of God yyere joyned vvith thoſe of thePapacy,butasdark-
nefle vvith light; that nothing in all his lifeyvas more rofirablero him;chen
therigor of Leo,& the rigidiy of Caietan,vvhich he couldnt aſcribeto'them,
but to the prouidence of God. For notbeing ax yet inthoſetimes illuminated
G 3 WE Jn

ww — hr 4, PRR_— a Mt. th PR ET —E——m—_ = «4 -

76 The Hilory. of - | .\ \ L1B.1, |
£354 inalk the tructh'ofChrittian fairh, but bauing onely dilcoucred the abuſes of
4>-+R/ Indiilgcotcs, heeawas ready ro-hauc kept {ilence; incalc his aduerfaties had
gaz donethclike. Bur the writings of the malter of tha-hioly palace; "the inſul-,
 Hinnr+825 Urigiok Caictan, and the rigor: of Leo conlitained him to itudie, and to de;;
es {ricmany other lefle tolerable abules, anderrors of rhe-Papacig, which he:
: coult nor difſen.ble, nor refraine ro-decelare them vnro the; world with-a
good adn{ticnce...' I bar the Nuncio had ingenuouſ]y-confcſſed thar hee va-
dcrlitaod not Dwinitic ; which appeared clecrcly bythe reaſons which hee
propoledy becauſe: none could call his doctrine new , but hee-that belce-
uedthir Cyxist,the Apoltles, and the holy Fathers liued; as now the Pope,
Cardinals, and Biſhops doe. Neirhercan any argument be drawen again(t.
the doctrine, from the {editions happened in Germanie, but by [him that,
bath-not read the Scriptures, and knoweth nor that this is proper to the
word:of God, andthe Gofpel, thar it ſtirreth vp troubles am 3 tumults,
eucn.ro:the ſeparation of the father from theſonne, wherelocuer it is prea-
ched: - That this was the verweof it, to giue life rochem that hearken to it,
and-r0 bring, greater damnation to wholocuer rciecteth it. Hee added , thas
it was agreat fault of the Romaoilts,to eſtabliſh che Church with gouerne-
ments taken from humane reaſons , as if it were a temporal State. That
this 4s that kind of wiſedome, which S. Paul ſaith, is accounted foolithneſle
with God, as note9elteeme-thole polictiquereatons, by which Rome doth
coucrne, but to truſt in Gods promiſes, and to referre ro his Maicſtic the
managing of the Church aftaires,is that humancfolly, which is wifſcdome
with' God. That to make the Councell take good cftect, and to bee proti-
table forthe Church, was nor in the power of Martin, butof him that can
make. it trec, thatthe Spiricot God may rule there, and guideir, and the ho»
ly Scripture may bee the rule of the retolutions, nor bringing thither inte-
relts,v{urpations, and artificesof men: which incaſe it ſhould happen, yet
himſelfe would there vſcall ſfinceritic, and Chriſtian charitie, not to binde
the Pope or any other vato him, buttor the leruice of Chrilt, and peaceand
hbercic of the Church. Butthar hee could nor hope to [ce lo great a good
{o.long as irappeared not that the wrath of God was appealed, by a lerious
_conuzr{ion from' hypocrite. Thar no ſound argument could bee raken
from the aſſembling of learned men, ſeeing that ſo long as theanger of God
 tskindled,, there is-no crrorfoabfurd and varcaſunable, which Saran can-
- not per{wade, eſpecially to thole great wife men, who thinke they know
much, whom the Maicttic of God will confound, That nothing can be re-
cciued from Rome compatible with the miniltery of rhe Goſpell. That the
examples of Eyeas Silwins, and Beſſarion movued him nor. For hee cſteemerh
nor thoſe cloudy glirterings, and, in caſe hee would exalt himſelfe, he might

ny

truely. reply chav-which facctely was lpoken by Eraſmus, that Lather becing

poorcand baſc,makerh rich,and aduancerh many. Thatir was well knowen
ro the Nuncio-himſelte, ( not-to goe farce ) char the lalt May himſelfe had a
o-cat partin the creation of the Biſhop of Rocheſter, and was therorall cauſe
of rhe-.creation! of Sromberg, Thar if the life of the firlt was fo ſoonera-
Fereerias ken away, this was to bce aſcrib:'d to the prouidence of 'God. ergerites

\

COU: 30

moucL»ber, COUId nor perſwade Luther, to remit any thing of his conſtancie, who ſo

ſtedfalily

—— a

L1s. 1, T he Councell of Trent, | 77
ſtedfaltly mainraincd his doEtrine, as it ic had beencapparaut 10+the eyes," 1535:
and ſaid that the Nuncio, yeaand che Pope himlcife, ſhould-loaaper.embrace oO
his faith, then. he-would abandon ir. 6 220862908 © dcive © 3+

. Uergerius aſfaicdalſoto perlwade ſome other Paedchers inWittenberg,and tires 5.”
elſewhere in che journey , according to the Popes'commiſlion; bur tound ©2nen 5
no inclination, as hee thought hee ſhould, burrigiditicin allthar were of ac- wn.
count; and thoſe: thatrendred themſelues were of fmall worth; and PIeteg-"therans/ ex-
ded much,fo that they werenotfor hispurpole. ©, 9g £117; oPneony:
But the Proteſtants, vnderltanding Yergerivs his propoſttion,therebeeing Toner, = -

CHARLES s.

*. #

fifteenc Princes,and thirtie' Cities aſſembled in Smalcatda, anſwered thatthey
had declared their re{olution concerning the Councell.in many: Diers; and
laſt of all ro the Nuncioof Pope Clement, and the Emperours'Ambaſladours,
ewo yeeres ſince, and that (till chey deſired a lawfult Councell, asthey were

of 15:Princes *
and zo.Citcs'»
atiembledin
Smalcalda. -
DMATHA 15 TC .
tuicd by the
Germans,

furethar all godly men did, and that they would goe to it; 'as many times
hath beenederermined inthe Imperiall Diets. Bur for the Councell which
the Pope hath appointed to bee in Manrua, they hoped that:the Emperour
would not breake the decrees of the Dier, nor his ownepromiiles, 1o'ofren
made ynto them, that the Councell ſhould beecelebrated in-Germany;: and
that they ſaw not how there could bee any danger there, fecing tharallithe
Princes and Cities obey the Emperour, and are: fo-well gouerned, thar all
ſtrangers are receiued and entertained with all humaniry. Bur that the Pope
ſhouid-prouidefor the ſecuritic of tholethar wentto theCouncel they could
not ſee how, eſpeciall conſidering what things haue happened in the pre-
cedent age. Thar the Chriltian Commonwealth hath neede of a godly
and-free Councell, and that toſuch a onerhey hane appealed. And wherc-
as the Nuncio fayd, that they ought not to treat'of the manger and forme
firlt, ir ſignified nothing but tha there (ſhould beeno libertie, and char all
ſhould bee referred to the Popes power, whoalready hauing ſo often con-
demned their religion, the Councellcannorbee tree,if hee. {hall bee Iudge.
That the Councell is not the tribunall of the Popeand Prielts 'onely , but of
all the orders of the Church, not excluding the Seculars. Thar to preferre
the Popes power before the authoritie of the whole Charch, is an vniuſt
and tyrannicall opinion. That the Popedefending the opinion of his owne
men, yea with cruell edicts, making himlelte a parry to the caule, it is jult
thar the manner and forme of the proceſlc ſhould bee derermincd by the
Princes. | | Sil 1

The Kings of Englandand France, ſent Ambaſſadours rothe aſſembly of The King of
Smalcalda: the French King ( who had a difleigne ro make” warre in -ltaly, rg wry ;
Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, becing now dead) defired ther nor ro accepc "n= ra
of any place for the Councel, withour the aduife of him, and of the King of ** —_
England, and that they would accept of none without them; 'The King'of «« a,
England aduiſed them to beaware that they callednor ſuch'a Councel,where,
in ſtcad of moderating the abule, they ſhould morecſtabliſh'the Popes au-
thority, and defired them to'approoue his diuorce. On the other ſide they

dealr with him to receiuethe Auguſtan confeſſion: Which things, being

treated of in diuers aſſemblies, had no concluſion ar all. |
But /ergerins, in the beginning of theyeere 1536, returned co the Pope, to. 1536
3 relate

i PCIe

' 78

T he. Hiſtorte of L1s.1,

1536

CYAN
PavL. 3.

CHARLES F.

Hexar- $8.
FAANC1S I.

CAA SRD

Ver gerapts rc-
turacth and
deliuecera ro
the Pope the
eX:& of his
Negotiatio!,
He i5 rervar-

ded.3nd (cor

relaye the effett of his Ambaſlage. Heedeliuered in ſumme;; that the Pro-
teltants would»nbt-recciutany Coyatell, except it were free, and 1g a fine
place, within che contincs of rhe Empire, grounding themfclues vponthc
Emperours promiſe,andrhicof Luther and his:complicesthete was nohope
aral,nor any other way robe thought of, bur to oppreſle them with-warre.
Vrrgerins for histeward had cheBilhoprickeof (apo d'Itria, his owne Coun-
trey;-and was fens by the Popeto Naples, to make the ſame'rclation to the
Empcrour,who having bcen e victar:ous in Africa, waspaſſed into the king-
dome;to ſettle cheaffarres rhercot.. The Emperourheariogthenarration of
the Nuncio, went ro Rowe. Hee had priuare conference with the Pope,

ro rhe, Empe- CONCEFNING theaffaires of Italy, and che pacification of Germanic, The Pope,

1 2u7,

The Empe-

rour gocta to

R 2-487 £0 con-
ferre wich the TC

Pope.

The Pope and
E:npcror hue
contrary ends
and diflemBolc
one vith ano-

ther.

according to <ergerins counſel , faid there was no meanesto bee yſed but
warre;” But the Emperor, ſeeing the timenot ripeas yet,to reape from rhence
hatgood fruitasorhers were per{waded he might, aud himfclfeallo intang-
led in aly , without poſhbility of being tree, but by yeclding Milan, which,
herclolued, by-all meancs ro make his owne, whither all his actions did prin-
cipally tend, allcagedforarcalonto deferrerhatwarre, rhar-it was more ne-
ccflary to defend Milan from the French men; On the other {ide the Pope,
whoſethoughrs were wholly bent tro make an Italian Lord of that Stare, and
therefore propoſed the warre of Germante , not fo much to ſupprefiethe Lu-
therans (as hee faid openly} as to diuert Cſar from poſſelling Milan, which
was his principall cnd, though ſecrer, replyed that GAG ad the Venett-
ans, what by armes,aud whar by treatics, would more cafily make ihe King
delilt,in calc his Imperiall Maicttic did not medale. |

The Emperour hauing diſcouered. the inward thoughts of the-Pope,
with as much diſfimulation, made {ſhew hee was perlwaded,and inclined ro
the warre of Germante ; yet hee (aid, that it was firto iuſtifie the cauſe well,
that the whole world might nor be againit him, and to ſhew, by intimating,
a Councell, that hee had firſt vied all other meatics, | The Pope was not fory
that, beipg neceſſarily ro intimare a Synode,it ſhould bedoneina.time, when,
in regard the French King had inuaded Saxoy anc. Piemont, all Italy would bee
ſet on fire with warre; whereby an apparent pretcnce wasgiuen him to en-

The Emperor Uiron the Councell with armes, vnder colourof cuſtody and proteRion, He

15 pufted vp

with the Afrt-

£474 YICLOTits

ſhtwed him(clfe to bee contented, fo that ſuch conditions were ſet downe
which might not derogatefrom the authority and repuration of the Apolto-
lique Sca. The Emperour,who,by realon of the victory atchicucd in Africa,
was lifred 'vp in minde, and [wollen with valt thoughts, beleeucd hes ſhould
make an end of the warre in Lombaray within two yeeres at the molt, and
thathauing immuredthe King of France beyond the mounraines, hee might
apply himlelfe'to the affaires of Germany , without any impediment, His
mcaning was the Councell ſhould fcrue him for rwo things... Firlt to bridle
thePope,in caſe, during the warreof Italy, hee ſhould according to the cu-
{tome of other Popes, put himſelfe on the French; {ide when that ſhould
bee the weaker, to counterpoile him that was victorious. Secondly to rc.
duce Germany to his obedience, which was the marke he ſhot ar. But for the
Popes obedience } hee clteemed ir bur an accidentall thing. For the place,
Mantua picalcd him; and for the relt hee cared not what condition the Pop

might

%

—— OT  .. a

—

%;

*

*
ee es Bs ee ene ed
Ly

—_

—— ts nes GY it. 2. a PIE th ——

L1s.1,. The Councell of Trent. Ig

a_—_—— i —— ttt as ll
Sa
—— ——

might adde, conſidering that when the Couticell were aſſembled;he ſhould 536
be able ro change whatfocuer pleaſed him not: Therefore he conctuded that CEE
hewas contented withi'any condition, forhatthe Councell mightbeeeele- Curns 7,
brarcd,alledgingrharhe hoped ro perſ[wade almolt all German ro conſent tian 8.
vnto it. Wherefore the reſolution was ettaþliſhed by the Pope,and the whole f*4*<i5 *
colledge of Cardinals. | | Arciolanon
Therefore the Eniperour,entering intothe publikeConfillorie the 28. of ————_
ril, chanked che Popcand Colledge, for hauing readily and without delay oe
reſolued ro call a generall Counccll, and then defired them that the Bull TheEnyeror
mightbe diſpatched before hee-parted from Rome , that himlelfe mighr eee” rag
giuc order for the reſt. The Bull could nor beframed lo ſoone, becaulc it was <vilore,
neceſſaric to conſider of tir words rob: pur into ir, ſuch as might giue
as much hope of hbertie as was poſhble, andyer nor preiudice the Papall
ower. Sixt Cardinals, and three Biſhops were depured for this buſineſſe ; The Bull for
and finally the Bull was finiſhed the twelfth of lune, publiſhed in the Con- EE
ſiſtory, and ſubſcribed by all the Cardinals. Therenor wasas followerh. | ©. mace:
; Thatfrom the beginning of his Papacie hee had defired nothing more
then tocleanſe rhe Church, recommended by God ro his care, from herefics
and crrorsand to reſtore the diſcipline to irs former ltate: for which tindin
no way more commodious then that which alwayes hath bene vſcd in hke
occurrences, that is,a generall Councell, he had often written concerning it
to the Emperour and other Kings, with hope not onely co obtaine this end,
bur alſo , that all diſcords-being appealed berweene Princes of Chriſten-
dome warre might bee made againſt the Inftidels, to free the Chriſtians
from that miſerable {lauerie ; and alſo to reduce the Intidels themfclues ro
the faith. Therefore by the fulneſſe of authoritic which he hath from Ged,
by the conſenc of his brethren the Cardinals, hee dorh»+intimare a generall
Councell of all Chriſtendome, againſt the z7.of May the next yeare 1 5 3 7. The Corncett
in Mantua a rich place,and commodious for the celebration of the Councel, #,overn in
Therefore he commandeth the Biſhops and other Prelars, of what place ſo- 715374
eucr, by vertue of their oath, and ynderthe paines ſet downe by rhe holy
canons and decrees,thar they tender their preſencethereat theday pretixed. *
Hepraycththe Emperour, French Kung, and all other Kings and Princes to
be there in perſon, orincaſe they cannor, to ſend honourable and ample
ambaſſages, as the Emperour, French King, and other Chriſtian Princes
hauc often promiſed both to Clement, and ro him :and to cauſerheprelars of
their Kingdomes to goe thither, and there remaine vnrill the end, to deter-
minethar which ſhall be firtoreforme the Church , extirpare heres, and
to make warre againſt the Infidels. |

The Pope publiſhed another Bull allo, to correct (as he ſayd)all thevices A Bull for th

| anddefe&ts of the Citie of Rome, the head of all Chriltendome, miltris of of zme.&

learning,manners and diſcipline; that his owne houſe being firlt purged, he
might more eaſily cleanſe therelt. But not being able fullyro performe this
buſineſſe by himſelf, he deputed the Cardinals Oftienſe, Saint Seuerino, Ge-
nutio, and Simoneta, commanding all men ynder the molt gricuous paines,
to yeeld them abſolureobedience. Theſe Cardinals, together with orher Pre-

lars,deputedallo by the Pope, applycd themſelues immediatly to refarme rhe
penitentiarie

80 T he Hiſtorie of | La B. y

O—————_—

1537 penitcntiarie and Dataric Courts,and ihe manners of the Courtiers: yet BO-
C——> thing tooke cc. But the 1ntimarion of che Councell ſeemed very. vnfir:

Pavr. 2.

CuaxLzs 5. tO CUCry Man ofany meane capacitie, ina tyme whenwarres were on foote

—

| Him 8. in Picardte,Pronence,and Piemont, berweene the Emperour and'the Frenchi

FrRAaxC1sS LI, Ki |
| INT, /
RA PSS v5 1 q 8 * « * : S

The Prote- The Proteſtants when they had (cenc the bull, wrote tothe Emperour,

com cer ty thatit appeared not what ſhould bethe forme and maner of the Councell.

—_— Facy defired it ſhould be pious, free, and in Germanie,and ſuch a'one was c«
ucr promiſed vnto them, and ſaid they hoped that his Maicſtic would pro-
uide that their demaunds ſhould bee fatisticd, and his promiſe fulfilled:

7637 But in the beginning of thenextycere 1537. the Emperorſent to the Pro-

The Ewreror Ieſtants Matthias Eldo his Vice-Chancellor, to exhort them to receiue the

exhoneth 8 Councel,for the calling whereof he had raken lo great paines, and where he

LL,
T > accc PC LC

Cauacell meancd to affoord his perſonall prelence,it ſome great warre conſtrained

him not to be elſewhere, Hepur them in mind that they had appealed toa
Councell, and therefore thar it was nor conucnicnt that now they ſhould

change theirpurpole,and refule ro mcereall other Nations, who hauc fixed

therein all char hope for reformationof the Church. Concerning the Pope,

the Emperor ſayd there was no doubt but that hee would gouerne himſelfe

as was fit forthe principall head of the Church, and that in caſerhey had a-

ny complaint againſt him, they might modeſtly proſecute it in the Councel.

For the manner and forme, that it was not conucnitnt rhey ſhould preſcribe

it toall Nations, bur ſhould rather thinke that nor their divines onely were

inſpired from God, and vnderſtood holy myſteries, but chat men may
e'{cwhere be found, who wantneither [carning, norſanctitic of life. For the
place,though they hauedemanded it in Germanie, yet they ſhould conſider
 whatwasfit for other Nations. Mantua is ncere ro Germany, rich, health-

full, and the Duke thereof vaſſall of the Empire, ſo that the Pope hath no

power there;and if they defired any further caution, himfelfe was ready to
ciucitthem. Hee ſpakealſo apart with the EleQor of Saxonie, cxhorting

him to ſend his Ambaſladours co the Councell, without vting exceptions or

And theyan- excules, which would hatch nothing butinconucnicnces. Concernivg the
_ Councel!, the Proteſtants anſwered, that hauing read the Popes letters, they
{aw well,thatheeand the Emperour were not of one mind; and, hauing, rc-
peated what was treated of with Adrian, { lcyent, and Paul, they concluded
that they bad all the ſame end. They went ontoalledgetheir reaſons, why
the Pope ſhould not be iudge in the Councell,nor yet thoſe, who were by
oath tycd vnto him. And forthe place appointed, befide that it was againlt
the Decrees of the Imperiall Diers, no ſafe conduct could free them from
danger,it they went thither. For the Pope hauing adherents throughout all
Traly,who bitterly hate the Proteſtants doctrine, there was great danger of
treachery andlecret plots. Belides,in regard that many Doftors and Mini-
{ters ought ro gocin perſon, becauſe it is not fitto handlea matter of thac
1mportance by deputies, their Churches would be left deſolate. And how
can they conſent to the jud zemenrof the Pope, who: hath no other ayme
but to roore our their dorine, which hee calleth hereſic, and cannot re-
trainc from ſaying ſomuch in all his Buls, yca,in that, by which hee inti-
EE | bs. matcih

—_— _

t j
.

—_—_. PIR a 7. ETC CO... ia.

L l 6.1, The Councell of Trent.

8

———_—

marcth he Counccll: and in.the Bull, which, diſſemblivgly;hee made for 1535
reformation of the.Court of Rome, hes hajh ofteq repeared, zhat hee harh, > a@)}
called a Councell ro extirpate the Lurheray hercfic, and maketh demonſira;, craniss 3:

tion thereof by efects, exerciſing bloudic torments and. puniſhments , a+ Hint 3, ©

gal | Jar: | > Faixcis t
gainlt poore innocent people, who adhere to. thatreligion, for conſcience Bott »

fake. And how ſhall they be able to accuſcrhe Pope and his followers, when -
himſclfe will be judge? And to appoue his Briefe, is.noching clic bur ro con« © |
{ene to their owne condemnatian., And therefore that they. have alwayes
demanded a free and Chriſtian, Councel,nar onely that cucry man may free-
ly ſpeake, the Turkes and. infidels being.cxcluded; bur thar thoſe char arg.
linked gogerher by.oathes, and other Coucnaurs, may|not bee Tudges , and
that the word of God may gouerne, and define all. rhe conrroverlics. I har
they well kaow, tharthercare learned and godly men in other Nanons : bug
withall they aſſure rhemſelues, that if the, yalimired payer of the;Pope hall,
be moderated, not their Diuines onely , but many orhers, who now by.
reaſon of oppreſſion hide themiſclues,, will labour tori reformation of che,
Church. That they will not diſpute of che {iruationand ticnelle of Mantua,
bur thicy may well (ay,tharſo long as there is warre in 1ralie, they cannor:
want matter of ſuſpicion. Thar it is ſufhicient to ſay of the Duke of that Ci-
tic, that behath a brother a Cardinall, ane ofchs prime ment the Courr,
That in Germany, there are many Cities,as commodious as"Manrua, where
Lultice and e<quitic doe flouriſh : and in.Germanie thole ſecret wiles ro take
away mens liucs, arc neither yſed yor knowne, .as they are in other places.,
That in theancicnt Councels, the ſecurcnefle of the PUREE hath, euer been
firſt ſought for,which would nor beſufficientthere, chough hee the Empe-
rour were perſonally preſent ip the Couacell. For,,it is knowne that the
Pope grant him ,place in conlultations, bur for power of determinipg, they
releruc it to themſclues onely. That ir was knowne, what happencd to the.
Emperour $7gi/mond, in the Councell of Conſtance, whole ſafe-conduct was
violated by the Synod: and himfelfe conlirained to. put vp ſo great an af-
front. Therefore they prayed his Maicltie co coalader the importance of
thele reaſons. "= LEY rial |
There appearedin this fame Diet the Biſhop of ix, ſcut by the Pope to
inuitethem to the Councell. But hee did no good, and fome of the Princes Someof the

Troteſtaine

would not ſo much as heare him. And ro make their reaſons knowne to Princes wont
' "hotſo much *

the worldthey printed and publiſhed a writing , where chey laboured prin- 1719: 46
cipally toanſ{were that obiction, that they would not ſubmitthemſelucs to 7-res Nuncio
any Ludge, that rhey deſpiſed other nations; that they refuſed. che ſupreame Th*y inftife
tribunall of che Church, that chey had renewed herefics formerly condemy- 2» theworld
ned, that they were glad of ciuill dilcords,thatthe faults which __ found ©!
in themauners of the Court of Rome, were {mall., ang tolcrable, They al-.
leadged the cauſes why it was not fir, that the Popealonc, nor yer.togerher,,

with his adherents ſhould be judge: chey broughe che examples of. many
Councels refuſed by diuers of the Fathers, andin tine, implored the ayde of.

all Princes, offcring that whenſocuer a lawfull Councell ſhall bee callcd,

they will therein detend chear cauſe, and render an account of all their aCti-

o0as, Tacy ſac ai{o. an cxpreſſe Ambaſſadour to the French King ,to pu
im

wn 9-4 en de Dn — - —  —— +. is. = 4 - ds IEEE ASE — —— PRE oo lt ro et. er a 4 .
- _— tn,

$82 Thethitoyuf >

—

LL IBZLE, _

> >

—_ —C

1537 him aparticufar.account of the ſameehings '!who anſwered ;thar'for” the
C—S—>. Councell he'wasof theit opuionznot to approove ;exceptir wete lawfull,

—_—- 2 | Cf A . by NF ae" :
Guantes 5/ ahd ina ſccnreplace,aſftiringtherfithat his ſonne-in-law thc King of Scor/and

— = ---

| —

Hints, © was of theſaremund.- © ICT - my rage

Francs 3, -- The Dukeof Mantua to grarifhe the Pope, granted his Ciriefor the'Coun-

The Duke of &&{]; withour confiderinig what he did;thmkins.asothers, that it could Hot

Mantua mak- , _ S. 4% SON ©, WM * © . \ ;

«haguam of beeffeted, there being warres berwe-netheEmperour and FrenchKin't,

- mural Germany oppoling n,for whole {ak<ir wasGallcd, Bur when hee faw the

called. jntimation;hebegan to rhinke h&weo ſecure the place; and ſenea propofiti

onto the Pope, thar; ifregard of rhe grear-nutnber"of thoſe rhar' would

come to the Councel;there was need of agreatgarrifon,whith he woald not

hauedepend yponany but himſelfe;and tharhee was not-able ro maintaine

it. Thereforc incaſe his Holincfle would celebrate the Councell in thar Ci-

tic; he muſt allow himmoney forſouldiers pay: The Pope anſwered- thar

the multirade would nar conſiſt of men of armes, nor profeſſed for the

war, bur of Eccleſiaſticall and learned-per{ons, whichone magiſtrate,vhom

hce would depure torender juſtice, with a ſmall core and gard, was ableto

Keepein order; that a garriſon of fouldiers wonld breed a generall ſuſpicion,

and became nor the place'of the Councell,where all ſhould appeare ahid bee

truely peaccable, andrhar in cafe #rarriſoh were neceſſary, ir were not rea-

ſonable ro putt into the hands of any burof the Councel it ſelf, that 18;0fthe

1p Pope, whois head thereof. The Duke,confidering that juriſdiction draw-

mbiroad er with it abl lure ſoueraigntie, by A thar by no meanes hee would

ſec where haue wufticeadminiſtredin his Citic,bur by his owne officers. The Pope,

mill ><ce- 2 Very Wiſeman, who ſeldome receiued any an{were which hee did not fore-

Kern, ſee, was much amazed.and antwered'the Dukes man, that hee would neuer

haue belecned rhar by his Lord, a Prince of Ialy, whoſe family hath bcene

ſomuch aduanced by the Apoltolicall Sca, who hada brother a Cardinal!,

that would bee denied him of which neuer any made doubr before, which

the Law of God and man doth give him, whick the very Lutherans cannor

denic, that is, to be ſupreame iudge of the Clergie; athing which the Duke

denicth not to his owne Biſhops, to iudge the cauſes of Priclts' in Manrnua.

Thatin the Councel nonethould be prelent bur the Eccleftaſtiques,who are

Prieſts concu- exempred from the ſecufar power, both themſelues and their families. Which
brnes are © | >" 1 d .

Ecclefaſticall 1s ſo cleere, that the Doors of Diuinitie aftirme char the very concubines of

wil" Prieſts are of Eccleſiaſticall wuriſdition; and yet he would denie him a Ma-

giltratero render juſticetothoſe men,during the time of the Councell. The

Duke, for all this, was conſtant, aſwell in refuſing the Popes Magiſtrates, as

alſo in demaundivg pay forſouldiers. Theſe conditions ſeeming hardro the

The Pope re- Pope, Contrary (as helayd) to the atncient cultome, and againlt rhedignity

oluecth not to 4 ; . ;

cllhe Coun- Of the Seca and Eccleliaſticall hberric he would nor yecld vnto them, and

<<a45** relolued notto call the Councell at Mantua. Heremembred very well whar

happened to Tohn 2.3. for calling a Councec]] where another was ftrovger

then hee. His purpoſe therefore was to prolong rhe time, and excuſed him-

ſelfe :na publique Bull, faying in ſubſtance, that though with griefe hee

was conltra * ro depure an other place for the Synod, yethee endured

it with paticncc, becauſe another was in fault and not himfelte: and becauſe

he

« ny F Fs. £ 4
bf 6. - nt Kt ans, wn
A FRA no * >
PY - LIFE X n
” %

"ow. frat __

>
PFyy

L1B.1 The Countell of Trent.

——_ - —_— — -— — —_— - __— A 2-——— — _ ——— — -- — ————

%
"OI IC PII
EO"
i
———

hee could norreſolue ſt ſaddenlyvpona totftienient Ciriehee deſerted the 1 $37
celebrationtherepfvatilithefirtt of Nouember the ſame yeere. AA
; Ar thartitvethe King of OY thanifeſt1f his owne pane, Cuan tis 5,
and of i#\n6bilitic, againſt the Popes Conuoeation; as-by a' perſon that nay 3.
had ho powetyin atirie when 7talie was fer a fire withwarre,and in a place Fane *:
not lectits; aiding that lee muchidefired'a Chriſtian Corncell, but that ro TheKing f
the Popebhe would neither goe nor ſand Aimbaſſadours,hau ing nothing to moth the?
doe with'the Biſhop-of Rome,or his Edits, aiore'then' wich the edits of xr ang,
atly other Biſhop.  Thatthe auncicht Councels were called by the aith; ori.) aifcit.

tic of Kings, whiclyeuſtome:aught: now tlie rather to. be renewed, be-

cauſe the-defect; of the Court of Rome arecalled into queſtion. Thar

was not vſuall with Popes to breake their faith, which himlelfe had more

cauſe toconfider then orhers, becing molt bitterly hated by him, for hauing

denycd him authoritiein his Kingdome, andthe reuenew which was payd

him. That to blameche Prince of Mantua, beeaule hee will not recciue ſo

many peopleinto his Citie 'withour a garriſon,” is ro mocke the world; as

alſo to proroguerhe Councel ynro Nouember;'tior ſaying in what place ic

ſhall be celebrated.” And if the Popechoofe the place, withour doubr ir

will bein his owne Stacc, or of ſome Princethar isobliged to him. There-

forc,it being impoſſible that any man of iuvgementſhould hope for a true

Councel, the beſt way was for cuery Princeto refortne Religion at home:

concluding inthe end tha if any man could giue him better dire&ions, hee

would notrefuſe ro follow them.” | |

-- In Italyalfotherewas a generall diſpoſition to interpret the Popes aQti- _

ons iathe worler ſenſe : and itwas ſpoken freely, that ovgh the Duke of Cowen

commuted to

Mantua were blamed, yet he was nor the cauſe why the Councell was not Cardinals,

called, whereof cherewasa manifeſt argument, becauſe che Pope had pub- Ca

liſhed a Bull for reformation'of the Court;and commirred the care thereof tm

ro foure Cardinals artheſametime; which notwithitanding was buricd in ve

ſilence, though neither the Duke, nor any bodie elſe hinderedir from beeing 2

in his power: and having propoſcd itimmediately after it was aſſumed ro

the Papacie, it was not ſo much as ſpoken of for three yeeres after. The The reforme-

Pope ro withſtand theſe dcefamations, refolued to ferche '® {ineſſe on foote f2* isfr on

againe, firſt reforming himlclfe, the Cardinals, and the Court, that none ,

might obie&t againſt him, nor make bad conſtruction of his ations; and

heeleted foure Cardinals,and five other Prelates, whom he ſo much eſtce-

med that the yeere following hee made foure of them Cardinals, giuing

chargeto thoſe ninctocolle&rhe abuſes, which deſerued amendment, and

withall to adde the remedies, by-which they might quickly,and cafily bere-

mooued, and ro reduce all roa good reformation. *The- Prelates made the

collc&tion,asthe Pope; commanded, and committed it'to writing. Rn
Inthe beginning they: propoſedfor the fountaine and ſource of all the of hexvnies

abuſes, the Popes readine({e ingiuing eareto fatterers,and his facility in diſ- *** ©

penſing with Lawes, with n - ot theCommandementof Chrilt, notto

receiue gaine tor ſpirituall rhings. And deſcending to particulars,they no-

ted twenty foure abules im-the adminiſtration of Eccleſiaſticall matters, and

fourc inthe ſpeciall goucrament of Rome';tliey-couched-rhe ordination of Theparicul

520 : Cleargie*®

” — - —-— -- - -

LL1sB. 14

- _— - —— I

$4. T: | The Hiſtoric of Y

1538 | Clcargie men , Collation of Beackecs, Penſions, Pefmutations, Regreſlcs,
* gh Reſeruations,Pluralitic of Beaefices, Commendaes, Exetptiohs,, deforma-
Caaxczs 5- tion of the regular order, ignorance of Preachers;and Confeſlors;hbertic of
- Hrnax 8.. Printing pernicious Bookes,the reading of them, tolcration of ApoRates,
raxcrs 7» Pardoncrs.And,Paſling to diſpenſations, firft they touched that, for mariage
-.* of thoſethararcinorders, for marriages in degrees forbidden; diſpenſati-
ons granted to Symoniacall perſons, facilitic of graunting Confeſlionals
and Indulgences, diſpenſation. pf. vowes, licence to'bequeath- by; will the
Church-goods, commutation of wils and teſtaments, tolcration of-harlors,
negligence of the gouernementof hoſpitals; and ſuch other tHings, which
they exactly handled,cxpounding the nature of the abuſes; the cauſes and
|  originall ofthem, the conſequences of the euils which they carry with
Theſerhings them, the means to redrefſe them,and ro keepe hence forward the body of
arſerdowie the Court in Chriſtian life : a worke worthy to be read, and whichdeſcrucd
a:Bookeof tg beſet downe word by word, if it had nor beene too long,
ThePope hauing receiucd{the relation of -theſe Prelats, cauſed many
Cardinals to conſider of it,and after, that he atight reſolue what to doc, pro-
os polcd it in the Confiſtory. Fryar Nicholas Scomberg,a Dominican Cardinall
of 5. 5;/w Of S. Siſtius,alias of Capya,thewed in along diſcourle,that that time compor-
would haue | . __ . .
no formar- Ted NOT any reformation atall. Firſt, hee pur them in mind of the malice of
ona: almade. -714n, which being ſtoppedin one courſe, findeth aworle, and that itis bets
ter to rolcrate a knowen cuill, which, becaulc iris in vic,is not ſo much mar-
ueylcdar, then by redreſſing rhar, ro fall into another, which, being new,
will appcaregreater, and be more reprehended. Hee added that it would
giuc occaſion to the Lutherans, ro bragge thar they had igforced the Pope
ro make that reformation ; and aboue all he conſidered that ir would bee
a beginning to take away not onely rhe abuſes, bur the good vſes allo,
and to endanger the whole ſtate of religion. For by the reformation it
would be confeſſed that the things prouided againſt weredeſeruedly repre-
Cxinil c«- hended by the Lutherans, which would be a great abctting to their whole
rf<ccluctd Joftrine On the other l1de, Job Peter Caraffa, Cardinal Theatino, ſhewed
t10n, chat the reformantion was neceſlarie, and that it was a great offence to
God toleauc it, and anſwered that it was a rule in Chriſtian actions, thar as
| euill isnotto be done that good may follow, ſo nogood of obligation is to
ThePope ©- he omitted, for feare that cuill may cnſue. The opinions deliuered were di-

mandeth the

remonſtrnce yers and the finall concluſion was not to ſpeake any more of it vntill ano-
Or ene .

© be concea- ther rime; and the Pope commanded that the remonſtrance of the Pre-
fr ns lats ſhould beconcealed. Burt Cardinall Scomberg {ene a copic thereof into

to Germ) 8 Germanie,which ſome —_ was done by the Popes conſent, that it might

w

by Cardinall a q
Scomtere. if APPEArC thcrewas ſome deſigne in Rome, and ſomepaines taken. alſo for re-
Deamarie be- Formation. The coppy was ſuddenly printed, and publiſhed, throughour all

commeth a '

Froceltaae. Germany, and many wrore againſt ir, both in Dutch and Latine. And the
number of the Proteſtants increaſed dayly in that Countrey,the king of Den-
marke,and ſome princes of the houſe of Brandeburg being cntred into their

The Counce'l league.

isincimaced az Nouember drawing neere, the Pope ſent out a Bull for conuocation of
Ficenzsand n

thee Legs the Councell at Ficenza,andalledging the neceflitic to prorogue the time,
——_ becaule

ICS "ot the do « "_ ,

1 ey i —

Is

oi eos...

T he Councellof me i 8&5

La oO

renzp Compeggioiegatebctore for Clement the ſeuenth
moneta, and lerom alcander created Cardinals by himl

hauing before declarcd to. the-world, the manifold caules;why-broahad refu- vi5nyinnd,
ſed the. Councell,, which rhe-Biſhop of Ronmetained bee would celebratoin
Mantua, prorogucd afterwards, withourathgamion gf:any certameplace; fic

ſeemed not conuenient to proteſt, as often as hee did excogitate.wew way,

atid to refuſe-thar Councell, which the Popemadeacolowablethewthache

would celcbrate., Hee {aid that that declaration:detended bis, atuddbis King»

domes caule,againſt all che atrem prs,thateitherPaul,orany orhepPapecauid

take, which he, was willingto confirme iwith this.Epitite, tq excuſe lim-
{clic for -nor'going:te; Ticenaa, moretheorhee would haue done ro Mantua, **
though' no man deſired a publike alſembly of Chriftians. morc!then hin>

ſelfe, ſo that the Councell bee generall,; free,andpious, fuchas.heebarhdes

ſcribed in his proteliation againſt the Councell of Mantaa. » Andavnoching
is more holy i 2% a generall Conuocation of Chriſtians, ſo nothingismore
prekidiciall and permcious to toligion, .thena:Cauncellabufcd for gaineand
profie, or confirmation of crrours. That itiscalled ageneralt Cowncel!; be.
cauſcall Chriltians may.ſpeake their opittions ; and chacitcannarbee called
generall, whereonely they- are heard, whoarerciolucdropurthehifelues on
the 'Popes fide, in.all marrers, and wherethe ſame men are plaintifes,defens
dants, aduocares, and iudges. Thar all may beeſayd of. Vicenzawhich ,in
his declaration,bath becn {aid of Mantua, And briefly repeatingaihort cons
tents thereof, hecdayd , if Frederick Duke of Mantua hath-nonyeetded ſq
much to the Popes authoritie,! as to grant him his Cide in that:zmanner thar
he would, why ſhould we ſo much eltcemeir, as ro. goe whither-hee ples
ſth? If the Pope:hath power from God to-call Princes whither thee will,
why can hee notchooſe what place hee lifterh,and make himlelte obeyed?
Ifthe Duke of Mantua can, with realon,deiie the place whichthe Pope harh
choſen, why carinor orher Kings and Princes refuſero:goethither? And if
all Princes ſhould denic him their Cities, where would be his power > what
a thing would it haue beene, if all men had parthemlclues intothe journey;
and being arriuedrhere, ſhould hauc beene ſhur ont of doores by the Duke
of Mantua? That which happencd tor Mantua, may happens likewile for
Vicenza. | | | Ip 9;
The. Legars went to Vicenzaar the time appointed,and the Pope to Nizzs, Oo _—_
in Prouence at the ſametime, toſpeake perionally with the Emperour, and c»u..
French King, which hee gaue our was onely ro'make peace berweene thoſe A conference

ewogreat Princes, though his principall ende was todraw the Pukedome rn, af
of Milan into his houſe. 1 here the Pope,amonglt ocher things, deſired them je tiene
both to ſend their: Ambaſſadours to the Councell, and ro'cauſe the Prelates of 91m
which were-in their traines to. goc alſo, and ro/giue order that thoſe har

were.at home intheir Kingdomes ſhould begintheir voyage thicher. For
giuing

PIE SOIT "IO I a _—— ” EET OOOOE EUTOITT WORE” ET”

86

Lim!

The Hiſtory of. > T

1538

FN/ASN'
PavL 3,.”

CHARLES F.,

Hexxy ».XS
FRANCIS 1;

3s deterred 1.
vnull Eattcre

gluing the order they both excuted, and laid, rhar firltit was fitroinforme

themiclues by chePreltates, of the neceſſities of their Churches ; andfor/fen-
ding tholcrharwere preſent pthac irwouldbechard ro perſwadetheimta;got
before they had confalted with others.” - The Pope was fo caltly{aristied
wich theantwere, thatiie'was doubred;' whether hee more deſired the affir-

I Ae  Matiuezor the negartiue?! Therefore this T reatie being vn profitable; as were
ounce 5 V

all his other in/tharmecting , hee vent his way, 'ahd, being at Genwa, in
His recutne;] received ktrers from his Legares , who were at Uicenga, yet

 alonewithour any Prelate; whercfore hee-recalled them, and by his Bull,

The Pope
tliumnicicth 2-
g-init the K.
of England.

darcd'theeight of Lulic, prolonged'the rerme of the Councell ynril the next
Eaſter day.>3£- > ©! | |

vi. This-yeete, the Pope brake' the wiſe patience, or rather diſmula-
tion, which:, for fourc yeeres: together, hee had: vied rowards England,
and ſcnt-againl(t the King a terrible chundering Buli, fuch as neger- was

vicd by his predeceſſours; nor-imitated by his fucceſſours, Which ful- *
mination, hauing its .originall from the Manifelts , publiſhed againlt the ..

Councel of Mantua, and: Uicenza; my purpole requireth, I ſhould make tmen-
rion' thereof. Beſides, for the vnderitanding of many accidenrs which ſhall
bee related heercafrerz it is neceſlary ro repeare this cuent, with the parti-
culars of it. £10;

' The King of England hauing denicd his obedience ro Rome, and decla-
red himfelfc head ot the Engliſh Church, theyecre 1534. as hath beene ſaid
in its place, Pope Par, immediarely after his afſumpuon, was continually
mitigatcd byithe Emperour for his owneintereſts, and by the Court, which
thoughr by tharmeanes,cither ro regainc England, or ſerit on fire, tofulmi»
naicagainitthat King : which hece,asa man wellexperienced in the world,
iudged would bce to little purpole ; conſidering, that if che rhundets of his
predecefſors ncuer had'good fuccefſe, when they were belecucd and fea-
cd by all, there was lefſc hope they could effect any thing, afrer a do«
Grine was publiihed, and recciued by many , which did contemnethem.
Heethoughtir wiſedome to holda weapon withiv che ſcabberd, which had

nb other edge; but what was giuen by the opinion of thoſe againſt whom .

it was vicd. [Burtthe beheading of the Cardinall of Rochefter happening in
theycerec 1535, the other Cardinals werecarnelt inremonttrating voto him
whata ſhame, and how great a danger it was to the Oxder , which ever was
elteemed molt facted and inuiolablc, if ſuch an example fhould bee ſuffc-
red to paſſe. For the Cardinals defend the Popedome boldly with all Prin-
ces, becaule they areaſſurcd of their hucs : which aſſurance, when ir thail be
taken away, and madeknowen to the Seculars, thar the Cardinals may bee
zuiticed, they ſhould doe their buſznefſe with roo much feare: Notwithſtane

ding,the Pope forſooke not his reſolution, but found a temper, neuer vſed by

any of his predeceſſors,to lift vp thethunderbolr with his hand,and co threa»
ren to thoore, yet to hold it without flinging it abroad , and fo to fatisfierhe
Cardinals, the Court, and others, and nor co put the Papal authoririe in ba-
zard. Therefore heframed a Procefle avd molt ſeuere ſentence againſt char
King,.chethirticth of Auguſt 1535. and withall ſuſpended the publication,
during his pleaſure. Yet (ſecretly he letthe copic gocinto the hands of fome

that

2
Xe 8 \

OWE IR wy 7, no a ——_— ERROR - . - - -
— —_—

Sac -—- bas Org — "=; —

Pm i ——— _
T_ Io <EEooomeRns

_ ys"

IEP IJ”, 4

|
\
Y,
|
!

— MEG 5

Py

—_—_—
— TI_ — —

Lis.1, The Councellof Trent.

that hee knew would caule it to beedeliuered:ro the King, diſperſingthe 1538
rumor of the Bullcharwas framed, and the ſuſpenſion; with fame, that ve-
ry ſuddenly hee would remooue:theſuſpenlign, and come to: publication; Crunzcs 4.
,erwith deſeigne neuerto proccede fo farrect? + 1 ul 1 020i FT”.
' And though hee wanted nor hope, that the Kiogjcither for feare of the Frmncas 3. -
excommunicarion framed, or by theinclination of his people; orby: the fas |
tietic of puniſhments, vicd againſt thole chat difobeyed bes! Dieeree; would
mduce himſelfe,' or by the mediation of the Emperoury or FrendyKing,
(when by reaſon of the occurrences of theworld.; hee ſhould bee canſtrai- J- ......
ned to vaite himſclfe with cicher of them ) would bee induced to'ycald,uygt
he was principally mooued by theforenamed cauſe, .chathemightnor ſhew |
the weakeneſle of his weapons, and more confirme the King inhis ſepa»
ration. - But in the end of three yeeres hee changed his purpole, by xeafon of
the prouocation which the King ſeemed to vie againtthim, by ſending our
manifeſts againlt all his callings of the Councell, and by oppoſing his ati-
ons, though withour patticular offence of his perſon, aud lattly, by hauing
proſecutcd,cited, 8 condemned S. Thomas of Canterbury, ifor a traitour to the The King of

1 | | bo . England \en-
kingdome, with-confilcation of goods, whom” Alexander thethird:canoni- tence s.

zed inthe yecre 1171. for being [laincin defence of the Eccleſiaſtical) power yum
and liberty, whoſe ſolemnefealt che Church of Rome dothannually abſeruc:

which ſentence was executed by taking the bones out of the gr:uey\which

were publikely burned by rhe hangman, and the aſhes {prinkled inthe

river, putting his hands into the treaſures, ornaments and:rreuenues of the
Churches dedicated co him , which was to touchia ſecrerot the Popedome;

of farre greater importance then the matter of the Councel. Whereuntoioy-

ning ſome hope which hee conceiued from the conference with the Freach

King, which was, that he would afliſt the maleconrenrs of England, ſo ſoone

as hee was free from the warres with the Emperour, the 17. of December,
hebrandiſhed the thunder-bolt of excommunication, made three yeeres be-

fore, and opencd his hand to caſt it forth, which all this while was readie to

doeir. Thecauſcsallcadged were inſubſtancetheſe. Thediuorce, obedience The cis of

the excom-

taken away, the death of the Cardivall of Rocheſter, and the proceeding a- municuion, |
oainlt S. Thomas. The puniſhments to the King were, deprivation of his 00,9
Kingdome, and to his adherents , of whatſocuer they poſſeſſed, comman- |
ding his Subiects ro denie him obcdience, and ſtrangers to haue any com.
merce in that kingdome, andall crotake armesagainlt, and roperſecureborh
himſclfeand his followers, granting them their ſtates and goods for their
prey,and theirperſons for their (laues. |

But how much the Popes Bricfe was eſteemed, and hiscommandements The excom-

munication.

obſerued, the leagues, confederations,peaces, treaties, which by the Empc- was generally
rour, French King , and other Catholique Princes, were- made wich that *=*==<
King, doe cuidently declare. |

[n the beginning of the yeere 1539, new controuerſies being raiſed in 1539
Germanic aboutreligion,and perhaps by men of bad intentions, who vſedir
bur for a pretence , there was an afſcmbly held in Francfurt, whither the An afembl
Emperour ſent a commiſſioner; and after long diſputationthere, it was by Francfore 2-

his conſent concluded, the 19. of April, that there ſhould bee a conference bour rcligion,
H 2 | - in

— — — > 4

We" _— RN "> TS.

5-5

Ct ae ok | Wen: 4
" X -- _ A

A ICS

:
4
:
:
|

:
'
|
;
:

COTE REES

OI”—— -  - — won Ge —

83 IT þe. Haftorte: of, © - L183 1

, OC. FE IP ERTIES — S.. de —_— et ah.

SEL in Norembejig.chefirlt ot Auguit; rotreate quictly andJouingly of-Rieligiony,
Vs - 2 whorcouthe onefdeand che other, bekqesthe Dadors, orher pexſons, gf;
Cammar-5- vwifedamne: were 20!be preſcnt,ſenrbytheEmporans; King: Ferdaighd, fd) 0
Hee 2.::thcr Princcs,to ſuperintend at thecoffequic; and deale bcrweene the parties.z
Farners's* and WIatwas Yerennined by commoncenſenr, fhould be ſigniticdroallihe
_ © © © erdersofthe Fithpire,andratitiedbycheEmperor inthe nexc Diets TheCo.
tholikeswould kageche Pape increared x9 / fend allo-lome perion. to the conn
tzreutebburthe PRooreltantsthought iccomrary i their proteltation.; and
where the threwdfure ivavatiunor done.-; iÞhis news. of the> aflembly. being arriucd at
Po we. Reyne rhgRopewas oftunted, as wellbecaulerhere ſhould be a treazicabaug
dce. Religion ini Geymnabie, as becauſe it derogated from; the.credic;okihs Coun;
ecl}iritmaredy though hee cared very'Jutde ro have celebrated g,and mare
particularly becauſe rhere.was a' diſpute-to admit ot one.to bee ſg by him,

' avd jnhe/end his authoritic wholly reiected. ; Therefore hee lyddenly. dit

patched into Spaine the Bilhop.of Marte Puſciavo, whole principall meſſage
wastoiperſwade the Emperour not to,cophrme;;yoa, rather to annibilare

'> 23 >! rhe Decrees of that Dict. | b:- .
Heſendetba + ':1/D he{Nuncio had a:greatand long inſtruction, firlt, ro complaine ories

+10 ma voutly of. che demeanor of lohn UVeſſaliys, Archbiſhop of London, his Commil-

the Emperor)
farywhoforgening his oath made ro chat Sea, and infvite Benefits recemed
fromwhePope, and che inſtruction given him by the Emperour, had can-
ſcented tothedanands of the Lutherans, with prejudice of the Apoſlolique
Sea jand diſhonourotf his imperiall Maieitie, "Thar London was corrupted
with: gifts and'promiles, the Citic of Ausburg hauing giuen him 250. thou-
ſandHorins of gold, aud the King of Denmarke promued him.4. thouſand
\ cw; Blorivd yeerely, out of thetruirs of bis Archbiſhoprique of London, which
Dermiris, wasthkenfrombim. That he thoughtrotake a wite,and forſake the Church,
and had ucuer cntred into holy orders. "I'he Nuncio had commandement

to thew-ro-the Empcrour,, that if the things which London had graunted,

were confirmed by him , they, would ſhew that hee was not a ſonne of the
 Apoſtolique Sea; and thatall the Catholique Princes of Germanic com plat-

ned thereof, and were- of opinion that.his Maicitic would nor contirme

\..,, ther. Hee gaueorderallo ra propole vato him his ioterefls concerning the
Dutchic of Ghelderland, and che election of the King ofche Romans,tomoue

him the more; putting him alioin mindethat hee could nor haue Germanie

at his diſpoſition, by rolerating the Lutheran heref1es, as London and others
did-perſwade. For it is athing long ſince knowen , that principalitics can-

not in likelihood be preferucd where Religion is lolt,or where two religions

- are {uficred. Thar this happened rothe Emperors of rhe Ealt, who hauing 4-
bandoned the obedience due tothe vniuerlſall Biſhop of Rome, lolt their for-

ces & Kingdoms. Thatthecunning ot the Luthcrans was manifelt, who hauc
procceded maliciouſly with his Maicltie, and that, vnder the colour of clta-
bliſhing their Religion. they doe cuer procure ſomething elle. That an exam»

le thereof was the Dict of Spira in the yeere 1526, of Norembe-g 1532,

and of Calano 1534. when the Duke of i irrenberg regained the Durchie,
which ſhewed that thoſe commorions of the Landgraue and the Lutherans

were not for religion , but ro take thar ſtare trom the King of the Romazes.
| That

-

OOO 40:0 AOL EO Ee ee or ee OO RRPrnmzRa

"= rw bay gs
2,
0 ak} "8
a

_

4—

— —

FS 4a * vai gs

F
by
F

"WE.
So a

I—_ i. Atl —

HT —_— Mu.

Link: The Councell of Trent, 89

That hee ſhould pur himin mindethat, when hee made an accord with the 1 539

Lutherans , the Catholique Princes would not endureſuch a diſorder, that

his Maicſtie ſhould haue more power ouer them then ouer the Prorcitants, Cuaxtss x;
and would thinke ypon new remedies. That thereare many other lawfull Haar 8. ©
and honeſt wayes to veduce Germante,the Pope being refolued toaffoord him raed}
all poſſible ayde , according to the proportion of his forces. And when his :

Maieſtie ſhall haue well thought thereon , he will findechat thee capitulaci-
ons cannot bce approoued, without making all Germany Lutheran; which
were wholly to depriue himſclfe of authoriry. Forthar Sc& cxcluderh all
ſupcriority,extolling libercy, or rather licence aboueall. That he ſhould pur
into the Emperours head to augment the Catholique League, and to rake
from the Lutherans their adherents, as muchas hee could, and to ſend as
much money as was poſlible into Germame, to promile, and really to giue ir
to thoſe that follow the Catholique league. That it were good alſo, ynder
colour of Turkiſh affaires, to ſend a competent number of Spaniards or Ira.
lians into thoſe parts, lodging them within theterritorics of the King of che
Romans. That the Pope was relolued to {end ſome perſon to the Catho-
lique Princes, with money,to gratific thoſe that ſhall be fir for his purpole.
That he ſhould cxhort Ceſar, ro make ſuch an EdiCt, as the King ot England
made in his Kingdome, cau fing arumour to bee {pread cunvingly, that his
Maicſtic negotiated with the ſayd King , to reduce him to the obedience of
Rome. The Pope gaue commillion alfo to the ſayd Montepulciano to com»
plaine tothe Emperour, that his filter; Queene Mary, Goucrneſſeof the low

Countrics, ſecr=tly fauoured the Luthcrane part, that {hee purpolely ſent ye Nonci
complaineth

men vnto them, that, whenthe Catholiqueleague was to be eſtabliſhed, ſhee er yon
wrote tothe Ele&or of Triers, that hee ſhould nor enter into it, and ſothat Emperors

ood worke was croſſed, that ſhee hindered the Lord of Laxaur,the French d
Ambaſſadour, from going into Germante, to-conſult with the King of the ,
Romanecs,and the Legate of his Holineſſe about religion : which hee did bes
leeuc proceeded notfrom her owne will, but from the counſellof her bad

miniſters.

But becauſe mention is made of the Edit ofthe King of Englandin mat- The Edit of

ecr of Religion, it will not bee amiſle to recount heere, how Henrythe eight ay
inthe time of the Diet of Francfort, cither becauſe he thoughtto doe God ler. ** *:

uice by not permitting innouation of religion within his Kingdome, or ro
ſhew conſtancie in what hee had wrote againſt L urher, or to giuethe Pope
thelic, who laid an imputation ypon him in his Bull, that hee had þubli-
thed hereticall do&rine in his Kingdome, madea publique Edit, whereby
hee commanded that the reall preſence of the truc and naturall body and
blood of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, vnder the kindes of bread and wine, there
remainihg no ſubſtance of thoſe elements, was to bee beleeued rhroughour
all England, as alſo that Chriſt was wholly contained vnderthe one and the
other kinde; that the'communion of the Cup was not neceſſary; that it
was not lawfull for Prieſts to marry ; that religious men, after heir profeſ.
f10n and vowes of chaſtiry, were bound alwayes to keepe them, and to liue
in Monaſtcries ; that ſecret and Auricular confeſſion was not onely profita-
ble bur alſo neccllary ; that thecelcbration of Maſſe guen private, m_
| H 3 NO,

ow Couns

ad may

b —_—A—

90 The Hiitory of Eo; Lis. 1,
: 5 39 -holy thing, which hee commanded ſhould bee obfcrucd in his Kingdome.

——? :Heprohibitedallrodoc orteach any thing contrary tothelearcicles, ypon
ParL 3. , : : : : |
Cnaxizs F.  Paineto be punithed as hereriques., It is to bee maruciled at, how the Pope,
177g, whoalitde before thundered againlt chat King, was conſtraincd to prayle
Fzaxerst! hisactions,and to propoſc him to the Emperour for an cnſample to be imi-
raced.: ' So, a mans proper intereſt makes him commend and blame the
ſame; perlon. . | \ 415
Burthe Pope, after hee had diſpatched Montepulciano , ſecing thatby cal.
ling the Counccll,andafter deferring ir, though hee entertayned the world, : |
yer hee loſt reputation, thought it neceſſary to leaue that ambiguous pro- |
A confulrati- Eecding, Which howlſocucr it had giucn men ſatisfaction heerctofore, ycr in |
= >rh_g progreſſc:of. time it might produce ſome {inilter ctte&. And hee made a j
{ecrer reſolution, : to declare himſclte, and to forſake ambiguities ; and-in
the conliftory, hawing related what had happened, and propolcd that i
was nccellary to make a conſtant and firmercſolution, hee pur the matter I]
inconſulcation. Somcof the Cardinals ,-ro deliuer rhemſclues from feare, 4
which cucry other day amazed them , did-not approovethe ſuſpenſion , but
defircdan cxpreſle declaration that there ſhould bee no Councell atall, be-
cauſlc itappeared not how the difficulties could bec ouercome, before there j
was a reconciliation betweene Princes, a neceſſary meanes, without which '
there was no hope it could bee celebrated. Bur the wiſcr ſort. were balan-
ced betweene this and another fearc, that there might bee Nationall Coun-
cels, or other remedies vied, more offcnſtue ro them then a generall Synode;
and therefore themaior part gaue conſent forthe ſuſpenſionduring pleaſure:
thinking that when it ſhould ſecme not fit to bring it to effect, it might bee
- continucd, by pretending the diſcord berweene Princes,or ſomeother thing ;
aud thar if there happened any danger of a Nationail Councell, or of Col-
loquics, or ought elle, it might bee remooued by promoting the Generall
Councell, and afligning vntoit place and time; and afterwards it might. bee ®
ke Councel Called, orletalone, as time ſhould aduiſe. Thematch was made, and a Bull
kd iu. was framed the thirteenth of Iune, by which the Councell intimated was
rwgpletue: ſyfpendedduring pleaſurcef the Pope and the Apoſtolicall Sea.
Bur Montepulciano the Nuncio , who went into Spaine, exccuted his come
 miſhons with the Emperour, who, cither for thecauſe alledged by the Nun-
= cio, orfor ſome reſpects of his owne, declared not himſclte whether hee dil-
ſented or aſlented to the Colloquic,appointed to be held at Noremberg in Au-
guſt, Afterwards, by reaſon of his wiues death, and the rebellion of Gant,
with part ofthe low Countries, hee had occaſion, by pretending affaires of
greater _—_ to leaue'the marter in ſuſpence, and ſo the whole yecre
T5 3.9. Paitcd. |
7 When! ſer my ſelfe ro write this Story, conſidering thenumber of Collo-
quies, ſome onely-intimated, and ſome held, ro compole the differences in
religion, I doubted whether it was fit to make mentjon of all, hauing con- |
cluding realonsforthe one parrand the other. Intheend,confidering thar |
I haue propoſcd tomy ſcltc to relateall the cauſes of the Councell of Trent,
and obſcruing thatnone hath beene intimated or held, bur to hinder, or di-

vert, or delay, or to haſten and acceleratethe Councell, I reſolued ro make =
mention |

p v
Y TL
*s . _— Mt "D+ wy Pa pa > _ KALL -
— TOS _ TT TINTED

\ :
>
—_ A PP on cou Se

WH TY
is a
4 Deas wv.

—_——
* is. SO ro, He

|;
x
:
|

- - —_— ..-.
CS CL LS NE OO IINS

Lis... The Councell of Trent, [OY

mefition of s cry one, eſpecially for the fruit which may be gathered from . 1540
the knowledge of the notable particulars which happened in them ; " >-uoh

as in that which was appointed the yeere following, which had his begin-/ Cuaxczs 5.

—

ning thus. m—_—
; Il FRANCIS &
| The Emperour wentto the low Countries by the way of France, to ac ney

commodare thoſe {cditions, and Ferdinand mert him therewhere one of the 1 5.40 ©
molt principall bufineſſes,conferred of berweene them both, was to finde a
way of compoſition for matters of religion in Germane, which being cxact-
ly handled by the body ofthe Emperouss Councell, all did incline to inſti-

| ture a Colloquie herein.
This comming to the caresof Farnſe, who was Legate there,and bad ac- cucin: ra
; companied the Empcrour in the voyage (which Cardinall,though a youth, 774 Heres
vnder the ageof rwenrie yeers, yet had in his company many perſons fit for &tb:be Col-
buſincſſe, and amonglt others, Marcellus ( ervinus, Biſhop of Nicaftro, who P'
after was Pope,and called Marcellus the ſecond) hee oppoled this reſolution,
and creating with the Emperour, Ferdinand,and with al thoſe of the Councel
he purtchem in mind,chat the Proteſtants had beene often dealt withall, for
peace, beginning ten yeeres fance in the Diet of Ausbarg, bur [till withour ct-
} fect: And in caleany concluſion had beene wade, it would haue beene vaine
| and fruitleſſe. For they dayly changetheir opinion, not followitig any cer-
| tainedocrine,and hauc oppoſed cucntheir owne Augyſtan conftelsion. That
| they are lipperieas Eecls. Firit they were deſirous that theabulcs and vices
| ſhould be remooucd, now they will nothaue the Papacie amended bur ex-
tinguiſhed, and the Apoſtolicall Sea,rooted our; andall Eccleftalticall iuril-
dictionaboliſhed. And if cuer they were petulant,they would bethen much
more, when the peace was not well confirmed with France, and the Tyrke
threatned Hungarie. That there wasno hopeto perlwade them, becauſcthe
controucrſics werevpon innumerable doctrines. And becauſe there arc ma-
M ny Sects among them, it is impoſſible ro accord withall; beſides, that the
orcater part o' them hath no other end, but ro poſleſſe the goodsof others,
and bercaue the Emperour of his authoritic. It was true that the inſtanc
\ Turkiſh warre per{waded an agreement in Religion; bur this wasnot to be:
done in particular or Nationall Diets; butin a generall-Councell, which
might immediately be intimated. For where Religion is in queſtion, no mu-
cation can bemade without common conſent. That Germany is not onely
to bee reſpected, but France, Spaine, Italie, and other people, without whole
counſell if Germany ſhall makea change,there will ariſe adangerousdiuilion
of that Prouince "6 the rett. That it was a moſt ancient cuſtome; cuen
from thetigne of the Apoltles, to. compoſe controuerſies with a Councell
onely,and that now all Kings, Princes,and godly mendefired ir. 'T hatpeace
may now caſily be concluded betweene the Emperor andthe King of France,
& immecdiatly afrer a counccl called, and in the meaneſpace indeauours may
be vicd to increaſe the number and power of the Catholique league of Ger-
many, which, by intimidating the Proteſtants, will cauſe'them to ſubmic
themſclues to the Councell, or at the leaſt they will þec enforced by the Ca-
choliques; and when it ſhall beneceſlary to refilt the Tyrke, the Carholique
[4 league, being ſtrong,may conſtraine the Proteſtantsro contribute: which 1n

cale

92 The Hiftory of

L int?
1546 calc they will not doe, it was neceflaric of two cuils tro chuſe thelefſer;itbe-
-\ vg a greater faultro offend God by abandoning the cauſe of Religion, then

PavL 2.

Cnaxizs 5- to wantthe aſſiſtance of one part ofa Prouince, And the rather, becauſe ir

| ——

—==—— isnotcaſicto iudge who arc more contrary to Chriſt, the Proteſtants of the

Fxaxc15 7- Tyrkes, For thele deſire to inthralc our bodies, but thoſe,both bodyes and

*Y” foules rogether. All the diſcourſes and parlies of theCardinal had for their

concluſion,that it was fir to call a Councell,and to begin it that ſame yeere,

and notto treate of Religion in the Diets of Germanie, but to labour or

augment the Catholique league,andto make peace with the King of France.

ThcEmperour after much deliberation,concluded that he would labour

for a concord,and gaucorder for a Diet to be held in Germany, where Fer-

y dinand thought good, inuiting the Proteſtant Princesto be there in perſon,

TheLegaze and promiſing publike ſecuritic vneo all. Cardinall Ferneſe, hearing of this

dp concluſion, made without his knowledge, wentimmediately away, and paſ-

ſing by Parts, obtained of the King a ſcuere edict againſt the heretiques ,and

Lutherans, which bcing publiſhed, was cxecutcd in that citie, and after
throughour all France with much rigour.

The Diezof In Germaniethe Dict was called by Ferdinand in Aganoa,where the Catho-

$£799-29® ligue Doctors,and many Proteſtant Preachers and Miniſters met together ;

; and the Elecor of Triers, the Palatine, Duke Lews of Bauaria, and Willam,

Biſhop of Argentina, weredeputed for mediators betweene the parties. The

Proteſtants being required to preſent the heads of the do@trine in controucr-

fic,anſwered that they had giuen vptheir cofcſſonin 4usbarg,ten yeers ſince,

and an Apologie indefenceof it ; that they perſeucred in that doctrine, and

were ready to giuean account thereof vnto all men: and not knowing what

theaduerfarics reprehended, they had no more ro ſay, butexpeRedto vnder-

ſtand from them what it was they eſteemed contrary to trueth, for ſo the

matter will cometo a conference,and themſclues wil notfaileto ſet peace be-

fore their cies. The Catholiques rooke them ſuddenly ar their word, & affen-

F ting to what the others propoſed, inferred that it was fitto eſteem for appro-

ued all things paſſed in that Dier,and to account the Decree firme and table

which was > abliſhed in the Receſle,and to lay before then the forme of re-

conciliation begun in that Dict. The Proteſtants, knowing their difaduan-

rage, in caſe they followed that forme, and the preiudice which that decree

would hauc inferred, vrged for a new forme, and to haue all the preiudices

taken away. On the other {ide the Catholiques demaunded, thar in regard

all preiudice was to be remoued, thoſe things that the Proteſtants had done

ſhould be reRiified, and the Church goods, raken by them reſtored. The

Proteſtants replycd, that the goods werenot taken away, bur, by renouati-

on of thetruedoCctrine, werereapplyed to thoſe lawfull and honelt vſes,vnto

which they were deſtinated in their firlt inſtitution, from which the Clcr-

gic had degenerated, and thereforethat it was neceſſarie ro decide the points

of the dodtrinebefore they ralked of the goods. And the contentions in-

creaſing, Ferdinand eScluded thar a new forme, nor preiudicial ro any, ſhould

beinſticuted, that the Doctors thartreated on both ſides ſhould be equall in

number,andthatir ſhould be lawfull for the Popeto ſend his Nuncij thither,

& that the place/of the Colloquie ſhould be changed, which ſhould begin in

Wormes

* , © ehrmIm—

* , 0 emI—m—

dt. — —__ —., = Hh

Ls. 1, T he Qoancellof Trent. 93:

Wormes, the eight and cwentietvof Ottebernexrib na 1549 ;

goods: The Prorettanrs2ecepred-rht. Decreedeclaring, th vrhey!retujed [>> _

not the preſence ofthe Nuncy, but intended nor to arttibut@ choreby -any /Cxaxcis 5,

pfithacie ro'rthePopgnor ulthoriticroxhem, + rel 1 nog 110 Haar 8...
The Emperour contirined/theDecrea;andgaue order for;the afſembly; pntwgus t

andipppvinged GrameltorhisCommillionerthere:; whangoing  wirhesl,

withphis fonne, che Bilhop of Arrazy ho atrer was 'Cardinalland threc Spas CO

nifh;Diuines, began cheCollpquie, and made a very godly difedurſe, and fic ihon tet

hatch few dayesatcer; there arriaed Thomas 'Campeggio, Biſhop:

of Feltre, Nunciore the-Pope. Forhis; Holineffe, chough he law chat cuery_To which the

treatic of religion inGermamiewas pernicious ro his! attaires , and-rherefore ; prone

hadvſedalldiligenceto bteake off: that Conference, yer hee thought ir lefle

hurtrogileconſearvaro mrhen ſuffcr-irrobeedane. againſt his will. The

Nuncio,according toithe Popesinitruttion, at bisentric, made:a diſcourſe;

chatrthequierot Germany was alwayes procured by the-Popes, and. eſpeci-

4ly by Paulus 3.who tor that caufe,had-inrimared ayencrall Councell in

icenga,howlocuer he wagcanſtrained-rodeferte it, vnrill another time,

becauſeino man went thirher,and. nowwagsrelglueditaintimaceit againe; jn

a moreconucnicar place:irwhich,tharthe marrerof: religion might be han-

dted with fruic, hee had graunted ctorke Emperour, chat a Colloquie mighe

bee held in Germanic, which might beeancntrance; ro diſpoſe them to the

reſolution ofthe Councell, and had fer tum to; bee preſent there, and-to

affift. Therefore hee prayed them all ro:aime. ar:concord, promiſing that -

the Pope would doe whacſocuer with ptctic hee could. "There arriucd allo The Pope

endeattangs

' theforcnamed Biſhop of (apo d Btrig, who,though ſent by the Pope, as one ther Nunca

who:well vnderſtood the-humors of Germany;yer came as ſent from France, as
thathe might doe the Popebertterſeruice vnder another name; Hee'cauled 2s
an Oration to be printed, thefubiect whereof was, the vniticand peace in
the Church, bur the ſcope ro th-w thara: Nationall Councell, was not the
mcanes to attainethereunto, And this hee diftribured amongſt as many
men as-hee could, tointerrupt the Colloquie, whichhad areſcmblance of
it. Much time was ſpent, in giuing formerothe conference, as well for ſe+
crecic, as for the number of the Do&ors which were to ſpcake. And there
were ſome who 1tudiouſly protracted the time, as well for the diligent in-
dcuours of the Nuncio Campeg gio,as the {ecret negotiations of Vegerius, Fi-
nally it was ordered that Tohn Ecchivs ſhould ſpeakefor the Catholikes, and
Philip Melanfthon for the Proteſtants,and char ctheſubic&t ſhould bee original
{ſinne. While theſe things went on in Wormes, the Popes Nuncio, ret:din
with the Emperour,ceaſed not to perſwade his Maieltic, that the Colloquic
would bring foorth ſome great {chiſme,and make all GermanieLutheran,and
not onely take obedience from the Pope, bur weaken his owne allo. Hee
repearedthe ſame conceits which Monre-Pulicano, vied to hinder the Collo-
quicappointed in the Dictof Franckfort, and thoſe that werevled by Cardi-
nall Farneſe to hinder that of Aganoa. In concluſion, the Emperour, confi-
dering thele reaſons, and the aduices giuen him by Granuel, of the difficulties
which heincountcred,thinking to doethe workebertter 1n his owne perſon,

hee reſolued the Colloquie ſhould not proceed. Wherefore Ecchius and Mes
lanflbon

> Fg iN
S. * "508

G- Oo

=

The Hiftoriewf + Lit:

dad
PavrL. x. ©
Cranres F-

- -- -
—

Henay 8: -
' Fxaxcrs t* *

KA US

T4541. oy
learned and ditcrecre, wich moſtamplcauthoririe, that there might bee{no:

'needetoſendto Rome foray thing, butall migit/be there immediately de-

The Duct of
Rat 1551:

. ” -

1541. laxfthon.hauing ſpoken three: dayes, 1he' conference was titerrupred, For
leterscame from the-Empetour,whichirctalled Granuel,and referred thexelt,

rorhe Dievin Ratisbon., 07 :01: |

| : 33 29: ' 2 | . 1433; Sobgt $200
Thar began in March 1 5 41.77] he>: Empetour was: potſonally prefenc,,
with/great hopeto:cod all diſcords;andto: vnite: Germany in-one Rehigipn.

For which purpole hee.alfo had dolired the Pope:toilend 2 Legate  44)att

rermined, which by the Dictand the Legate{hould bee rhought conuent-
ent; laying, that for this end hee had yeclded .to the-greatcimportunitie of:

' the Nuncioreſiding with him, to breake off the Colloquic of Wormes.. ::-+:

Ta/er Cont 4-
rim the Popes
Le2atin R4-
£44620,

His inftruRi-
On.

The firſt ne-
gotiition with
ehc Empe: our.

.. The Popelent tor his Legatc laſper Cardinall{ ontarini;a,manmuch, e-
ſteemed, for his ſingular honelty-and learning;aud pur-alſo: into his-com+
pany men inſtructed in all the intereits of the Court; with Notaries::to
make [nltraments. of whatſocuer ſhould bee handled or ſpoken: hee gaue

him Commiſſion, thar if he forcſaw that they went abour ro.docany: thing

which mighttend to the diminutionof the Papall authoritie, hee ſhould
intcrrupt it, by propounding a gencrall Councell, the onely and truc re-
medic; and in caſethe Emperour were forced to yeeld to the Proteſtants in
any preiudiciall marter, he ought.co forbid it, by the Poſtolique 'authori-
ric, and,if ir were done, to condemneit,and to declare it voyde,andyo leaue
the Dict, but not the Eimperours company.

: Being arriued at Ratzsbon, the firſt thing hee had ro doe with the Em-

perour, was to excuſe the Pope, that hee had nor giucnthatampleautho-
. ritic, andabſoſute power which his Maicſtie deſired. Firſt, becaule it is ſo

annexed tothe very bones of the Papacie, that ir cannot begranted- ro-any
other; ſecondly,becauſe neither words nor clauſesare found; by which the

the Pope, the Priuiledge of not bcing able to crre being giuen' to his =

authoriticof derermining controuerſicsof Faith can bee communicated by

ſononcly; in thole words, 1 haue prayed for thee, Peter : Bur that the Pope had
giucn himall manner of power to agree with the Proteſtants, ſo that they
depy nor the Principles, whicharc, the Primacie of the Apoſtolique Sea,
in{ticurcd by CHr1sT, the Sacraments,as theyarc taughtin the Church of
Rome,and whart llc is determincd in the Bull of Leo,offteriag in other things
ro giue Germany fati{faction. And hee defired his Maicſticnottogiuceare to
the propoleof any thing nor fitto be granted, withour the priuitic of other
Nations, to auoyd all dangerous diuiſton in Chriſtendome. Ir is neceſſa-
ric to make particular mention of the things that paſſed in that Diet, be-
caulc that was the principall cauſe, which induced he Pope not onely to
conſent, as before, ns to vie all endeuours that the Councell might be celc«
brared; and which aflured the Proteltants, that neicher in Councell, nor in
any orher place, where any Miniſter of the Pope was preſent, they could
hope toobraincany thing. :

The firit action began the fifth of April;and it was deliueredin the Em-
perours name, that his Maicſtic,ſecing the Turke centred into the. bowels
of Germany (the cauſe whereof was the diuiſton of the Statesof the Empire
for the difterence in religion) hadalwayes ſoughra meancs of pacification;

and

-” ME Oats as

EP CET
CRETE

PR
we ©

wo” v4 OR. Or.

a

_ -
4 wa AC —_ gr"

"y —
+ i by
-

ablcro bring it ro: ett, he returned, and went in perſon ro Roms) ro make Crates $1

L i 6.4.- The Colnceltsf T renc. 65

-— A comp Sz EE Bn CO nn” I NT I" a_ M6
4 = - I I— _
— ad p< ES... "_———

and that of the Councel ſerming'varo him moſt commodious, hewent pur- 15 4x
polcly into [taly to;rreat'chereot with Pope ({lement : and (after, "not being =
the ſame neotiation with Pope Paul, in whom he found much readineſle: tmay s, ©
Buc not being able ro effeRany thing, by reaſon of diversimpediments of nes *-
warre, heehad finally cafted'that'Dier, and beſough the Popero ſend a Le- The fri a6i,
gatthicher.. Now he defircd nothing burthar ſome compolition nMdhe be in Refvbom,
made, and' thatſome (inall number of godly and learaed men might bee
choſen obvcither {ide,to conferre vponche controuerftes;in friendly maner,
wirhourpreiudice of cither of the/partics,aud propolerothe Dictelic means
of concord, that all being conſulted with the Legate, the wiſhed conclu-
fioa might be attained.” Suddenly there arofea controucrhie betweene the
Catholiques and Proteſtants, about the manner of chooſing thoſe that
ſhould treat. Whereforethe Emperour becing deſirous that ſonie: good
ſhould bee done; demanded, and obtayned of either parriezpower tonomi-
nate the perfons, deſiring them to/beleeue he would do norhing bne for the |
commongaod. For theCatholiques he elected 'Jobn Ecchius, Iulins Flugins, TFhotaned-of
and John Groperns,and for the Proteſtants , Philip Melanfthon, Martin Bucer, rs
and lobn Piſtoria: whom he calledico him;arid gravely admoniſhedrhem to
abandon all paſſion,andco ayme onely ar the glory of God. He made Frede-
rique,the Prince Palatine , and Granuel Prefidents of the Colloquie, adding
vnto them ſome others, that allmight paſſe with the greater dignity.When
the aſſembly was made, Granuelpubliſhed a booke, and faid it was giuent® A boot-gi. |
the Emperor; by ſome godly andlearncd men, a5adircttion for the future prone
concord, andthart his will wasthey ſhould read and examinzir, chat itmight © «<=
ſcrue for an argument and ſubje&'of whar they ought to' treat, thar that concud.,
which pleaſed all, mightbe confirmed, that which difpleaſed all, mighr bec
corrected, and inthat wherein they afſenredaor, meanes mighe be vcd to
reduce them to an agreement. The booke contained 22 Articles, The cre-
ation of man, the integrity ofnarure, free will, the caule of originall finne,
Lultification, the Church, her {tgnes,the {ignes of the word of God, penance
after{inne,theauthoritie ofthe Church,che interpretation of the Scripture, |
the Sacraments, Order, Baptiſme, Confirmation , the Euchariſt, Penance,
Matrimony,cxtreame VnEtion, charitie, the Eccleiialticall Hierarchie, the
articles determined by. the Church, the vie, adminiltration, and ceremonies
ofthe Sacraments, Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline, aid diſcipline of the people.
It was rcad and examined ,and ſomethings were approoucd, ſome things a-
mended by common conſent, and in others they couldnot agree. And
theſe were, the ninth, ofche power of the Church,the fourcteenih,of the Sa-
crament of Penance, the eightcenth of the Hierarchie, the 19. ofthe ars
ticles determined by the Church, thez 1. of ſingle life. In thele they differed,
and cither partic wrotc his opinion.
This being donein the aſſembly of all the Princes,the Emperour required
the opinions of chem all concerning therhings agreed on, and the diftcrens
opinions of the Collocutors, and wirhall propoſed theamendement of the
ſtire of the Common-wealth, as well ciuill as Eccleſiaſticall. T he Biſhops re-
ictcd abſolutely rhe Booke of the concord, and whatlocuer was donein the
Colloquy ;

}
s

OA > I — = ——__ I —_
96 4belt{ NLOLy: fig) v0

nc — Lend _L ELEATS Ca ” : _—

L1s: I. 1

—_—_— —

he Deo 2

1544 Colloquic;ynto whomrho9tber Elefiarsand CarholikePrinces jlcfironisat
>> peace,agxccehnor baod it was gongluded, 4bat the: Emperouy, as aduogarc of
Pavs 37. ; _ Tg" "#- ; St
Cuanuss;5- che Churehgogerher with ohe Apoltolikedzcgar, [hovldexamincthe chings
T3 abreed on,avd any thing veargab/curgthould caule ito becerpounded;
—__ and ſhogldercat withithe Pratetiants,that-boncetning the things 10 CONTIO-
- + - - verlie; they: ſhould conſents (owe Cluiltiari forms of condarit 2 gfarime
-1-1...: partedall ro the Legat, and yrged um tha:theEcclebalticall Srare.ough1to
be reformed. Thebegar, after behad comiidercd: of altthe;buſineſle, anr
The Le2 ate ka "I -, = . . S
pete lice {yvered 1 WENtingnormore perſpicucuily:then theangicnt: Oracles;in this
£- Oat. manner./Tbat hauling ſcenc:thcBooke preſentedrotheEmperour;and what
was written by the depuries ofthe Colloquie, as welltht explications of, ci>
therpartie,asthe cxcoptions of theProteſtahts;it ſeemedthar theProreſtanrs,
differing in-certaine articles-from- the common conſent of cheEhurch(in
which.not withſtanding hedeſpaired net; thar,with the helpe of God, the
migbt: be induced zo.agree) nothing ſhould be ordere&'concernipgrhe refts
duc;bu txeferred to. the Pope; and tbe ApoltolicallSca,whoz ctther in the
-:-:* gcnera}{ Councell, or.fome other way , it there ſballbceeauſc,, will detine
* © themaccording; to the. Catholique tructh, with: regard -ynro-+the times;,
and: what-ſhall bee. cxpedient: tor the Ghriltian Common-wealth , and for
ermanie. $22C R013 3G3 14 Y.9iG 5 OI DEE Q 1:6 f:
a a0 - Burfor reformation of the Cleargie;hee promiſed all readineſſe, and, ro
_ _ - that end,called into his houſc-all the Bilhaps, and made them:along exhor-
he Prckus./ TATION. Firlt for their manner: of liuing,, that they ſhould abſtainetrom-all
© * - ſcandal, andappcarance of luxuric,auaricand.ambition, Forthcirfamilic,
that they hould, ynderſtand that from it the people made-coniecture of the
"mannersofthe Bithop, thar, thebcrter ro-keepe ther flocke, they ſhould re-
mainc in themoſt inhabited places of the Dioceſle, & haue diligent watch-
mecnel{e-where, that they ſhould vilice the Dioceſſes,giue the Benetices to
honeft and fir men, ſpend their reuenties. ypon the-necefſitic af the poore,
flying not onely luzuric, bur all ſuperfluous pompe, make proviſion of
godly; lcarned, diſcreet, and not contentious Preachers, . procure that the
yonger ſort be well brought yp, becauſe &y this meancs the Proteſtants draw
all the Nobiliticynro them, Hee commurted this Oraticn to wri..ng , and
-gauc it tothe Emperour,to the Biſbops, and the Princes t which gauc occa-
{10n tothe Proteſtants to raxe the an{were made to ( eſar,together with the
cxhortation made to the Prelats, alledgivg tor rheir motine , thar the wri-
ting being publiſhed, they ſhould ſecme to approoue it, if they diſſembled
the knowledgeofit. His anſwere made to the Emperour pleaſed not the
| Catholiques, becaulſc it appeared tharhedid approuc the things agrecd on
in the Conference,
The Empe- = Butthe Emperour related in publique Dict whatſocucr was done vnrill

rours opiumeon

concerns. LMATtMe, and communicated vntothem the writing of the Legar , and con-

bo
-

)

Rehyyonto cluded;that hauing vicd all poſliblediligence, hee ſaw not what more could

which the La- :
g:doa- be done,butonly to deliberate, whether (lauing the receſle of the Dict of

£70t. Ausburg) the articlesagreedon inthis conference, ought to bee recciucd, as
| being Chriſtian;nbrany morctobe diſputed of, at tlie leaſt vnill a generall
Counccll, which ſhallbe held very ſhortly, (of which opinionthe Legar lec-

med

- "T "EW SEED f
ES

972
it ro bee) of;in caſe therewere no Councell -vnrill » Dier, where allithe 1541

controuerfics of: Eligibainy beeexaQtly handled, - ol 1h 14 SAY
: n Phe-El-Gtors approoucdfor good,and vndoubtedly profirable, charthe Cuauys 5
Arricles agreed oin/in theconftrence;ſhould by all berccemued, vmillche time iixaar 5,7]
of che Couocally:in which they may'beecxamined againe; or, in caſethat te +
faile, ina Nationall Councelhor Dict,i becauſe it would ſeruero makea per- Ns Qanfoner
fett reconciliation inthe: Articles, notaccorded as yer. Bur yerthey prayed _
his Maiclticcogoc on iftherewereany hopero make any furcher agreement

L1>.2. © The CouncellafTrent.

4

_ OY '

 inthar Diet: andifopporttinity ſcrued not, chey thoughrir good,char,by his

fagour; agencrall or Nationall:Councell, might bee called ''in 'Gertaanie, 'as
fooncas might bec, that the-ynion might wholly be eſtabliſhed. ThePry- The ancere
teltanrsmadethe ſame anſwere, onelydeclaring themſclucs, thatas they de+ Yan”
{ired a free and Chriſtian Councell in Germanie, fo they could not confent
ro any; where the Popeand his Miniſters, had power to heare and iudge che
cauſes of religion. * Bur the Biſhops and ſome'few other Catholike Princes, The an6vcre
anſwered after another manner; firſt, confelling thatin Germanie, and other 9% ent
Natiohs;there were many abuſes, ſecs, and hereſies,, which could nor bee "Prints
extirpared without a generallCouncell; adding, that they could-noraſfenr
to any cbangein religion, ceremonics,andrites, {ceing har the Popes Legate
offereth a Councell within a ſhort time, and that his Maieſtic will create
with his Holincſſerhereof./' But in caſe the generall Councell could nortbee
celebrated , they deſired that the ys and Emperour would ordaine a Na-
tionall Councell in Germanie; which if they would nor doe, another Dier
ſhould bee aſſembled, ro rootc out theerrours; and that they were reſolued
to adhere tothe old rcligian, as it is contained in the Scriprure,, Councels,
doctrine of the Fathers, and alſo in the Imperiall Receſſes, c pecially intharot
Ausbiurg. That they will neuer conſent to receiyethe Articles accorded in
the Colloquic, becauſeſome of them are ſuperfluous, as are rhe 4. firſt, and
becauſe there are words in them, not conformable to the cuſtome of the
Church; beſides ſome poſitions, which azepartly damnable, and partly ro be
tempered; and becauſcrhe Articles accorded,are of lefſe moment,and thoſe of
_ remaine in controuerſic: and becauſerthe Carholikes of theCol-
loquic had grantcd coo much tothe Prote!tants, whereby the reputation of
the Pope,& the Catholike ſtates was wounded. They concluded itwas better
theatts ofthe Colloquie wereleft to their place,and whatſocucrbelongedto
religion, deferred to/a generall Councell,or Nationall,ora Diet. Not the opi-
nion only of the Catholikes, that the Emperors propoſition was too aduan-
tagious for the Proteſtants,cauſed them to makethisanſwere,buralſo becauſe
therhree Catholike Doors of the Co!loquicdiſſentedamongſtrhemlſclucs.

Bur the Legate vnderſtanding that the Emperour had natned him, as
conſenting tothe eſtabliſhment of the things accorded, as welb-for feate, as
at che inſtance of the Eccleſiaſtikes of the Dict, he went to the Emperour
and complained; that his anfwere was ill interpreted, and that hee was bla- The Legzre
med for hauing given conſent, that the things accorded, ſhould be tolerated Prey pg
-vntill che Councell ; that his minde was, that nothing ſhould berefolued oh, frerem=
burall ſenrro the Pope, whopromiſed by thefairh of a good Paſtour, and
Vniucrſall Biſhop, that all ſhould beedetermined by a generall Councell, -

J | Y

' _ egrcarics about.

98\ Q The\Ptorie'sf-> IY | '# L B,?{ " :

Al —— w Ct ——_

" <4: byſbme odler way, cquiuatent; finceieiyg ambwathour pattion, nor haſtily;
HS but maturely , alwayes aymingat yit-fermed gfrivodi;'!Fhie his Holinefle
Canety ;/ hacro thefameend,in the beginning,ot bis Papjacic, fentderzers arid; WNancy

"©7577 10thePrinces, toicetebrateirhe CoundeHa -did intimate it; and tear

Met." hi Legats to the place; iandat hee-batdendureciſo manyureaties of xcligion
WON! in-Germanie, with ſmall reuerence of! his authoxitie, ro whomncly ivapper:
© taincthro makerthiem, Je was vpon his Maicliiespurpole;; and promile chat

\ all ſhould beetforthe beltz:thar ic why unreaſonable, tharGermane ſhould afs

fame that ro her ſclfe} witH iniuriccothe Apoſtolik Sea, which belongerh to

all nations of Chriſtcndome.' Wherefore the Popes clemencie was notons

ger to bc abuſed, by concluding rthaxin aDier, which belongerh ro:him;and

the Church: vniucrſall, bur ſayd ,>thar the booke, and altthe- ates of the
Colloquic, together with, the opinions of both partics, was:ro bee ſent to

Rome andthe determination of his /Holineſſero beeexpefted. And nor fa»

risfied with'this; hee publithed a third writing, in which hee fayd,, that his

wiiting givemzothc Emperour, concerning rhexreatie of the Colloquic be-

ing diucrlly interpreted, ſome expounding it, as if hee had conſented rothe

Articles accorded of, vatill the generall CouncelL, and others'vnderſtanding

that hee had referred both theſe,andall other things to the Pope, tothe end
there may remaine no doubr heerejn, he declarcth thatin thewritinghe had
no intcntion to decide, any thing in this buſincfſe, nor that any Article
ſhould bee recciucd ortoleratcd vntill the furure Councell , and lealt of all
did'then decideor define them , bur had referred the wholetreatic, and all
the Articlesrhereof yntothe Pope as hee did referrethem4till. Which ha.
uing declared to the Emperour by word, hce.would allo declare and con-

firme it to the whole world in writing. |
And hee was not contented with this, but,, conſidering that all the Cas
tholike Princes, eucn-theEcclefialtikes, did agree in demanding a Nationall
Councel, and that,in his inſtruction, he had {traight charge fromthe Popeto
oppoſchimſelfc when that ſhould bee vrged, though they would docirwith
his authoritie,and with the preſence of the Apoltolicall Legats,co ſhow what
dangerit would be to mens foules, and iniuriero the Popesauthoritic, from
whom would betaken thepower which God hath giuen himand granted to
one Nation toputthe Emperor in mind how himlelfc;being in Boſonta,dete-
itcd a Nationall Councel, knowing, it to be pernicious rothe Imperiallautho-
ritie , becauſe che Subic&ts, incouraged by ſeeing power giuen them to inno=
uate in matter of religion, would thinke to doe the like in thetemporall ſtare,
and thar his Maicltie, after the yeere 1532. would ncucr bave an Imperiall
Diet celebrated in his preſence, leſt he fhou]dgiue occaſion of demanding a
Nationall Counccl: he treated moſt {crioully with the Emperouriand with
cuery one'of the Princes, and-befides publiſhed a writing addreſſed ro the
,  Catholikes.” Hee ſaid therein that hee had diligently conſidered what a pre-
The Lezzee judice it would bee, if the controucrſics of doctrine ſhould bee referred to
pts [the Councell'ofa Nation, and thought it his ductieto admonilhthem , that
diwate all they ſhould by all meanes remooue that clauſe, for that ic was moſt mani-
rdicninz | feſt char queſtions of faith could: not bee determincd in a Nationall Coun-
Councell. Cell, becaulc ir concerned the Vniucrlall ſtate of the Church ; and if any
x | I thing

%
© OOOETES _

v1

TR” EE ENT I mod —O—O Dr _.
a 0 hw
——_—_——

_—_—  __ =

L 69K, The Councell of Trencs <9

£8 —_—

= ho ooo oat; ne men ne
%

—

thing wkcraderetmingd thetcin, it would hee veyde and ptino force. And, i444
8s .in-ngrcelebraring. fuch a Councell (as hee! was perſwadedthey: would: OI
abr} they ſhowld docathing moſt acceprablers his/Holiniclle, whois head; Crus 5:
of rticChurch; andof all Councels, ſo thecelcbratiqh of it would bee'moſtiiicvar 8-44
offen{nerbihim! - Thar it was aclecre caſe; that by this meanesgreatoriſor. conan
ditions would ariſe in marter of' Religion ,7as well in- other; Nations; as ini
thac moſt noble Prouince.. Thar hee would nor omit this duetie; both to!
obey the inſtruction ofthis Holineſle, and not to bee yyanting ts thecharge
of Legationlayd vporrhim. | $113; fi apgit>1 bam om
The Princes anſwered. this writing of the Legate, that it was-dn bis The anfivers
owcrro temedicallthe inconuenicnces which mightarile, by perfwading Ras
his Holines; thata generall Councel might be intimated andcelebrared with-1*9%+ .. . . +
outany more procraſtination. - iT hat by this meanes all.occafion of a Nart: pe
onall Councell ( which all the Scates of che Empire defxred and prayedtor):

* -

would bee remooued. Bur if the generall Councell, {o' ofich \promiled;

and laſt of all by himſelfe , were not broughrro effe&t;.the manifelt neceſli*
ticof Germaniz required , that the controuerlics ſhould/bee'derermiined ina)
pationall Synod, orin an imperiall Diet, with the afliltance' of the Popes: .
Legate. "The Proteſtant Dwuines anſwered 'alfo in along writing ; (and ſaid, Themſerr:
thar neither greater ſeditions, norany ar all could ariſe , when the contro-7itmi Divine
uerlics of Religion ſhall bee compoled according to the word of God, and
manifeſt vices corrected accotding to'the. dodtrine of the Scriptyre, and
the vadoubred Canons of the Church: - That to derermine of faith hath ne-.
ucr been formerly denied ro Nationall Councels, becauſe Carist hath pro-
miſed his aſſiſtance, where two'or three:1ſhall bee 'afſembled in his Name.
That the number was great, not onely of Nationall Councels, burcueg of a
very few Biſhops , which haue derermined'the comreuetſtes, and ordeted!'
the manners of the Church inSyria, Greece, Afrique, Ttalie., , France. , and
Spaine againlt the exrours of. Samoſatens, Arrius, the Donatiſts,Pelagins, and.-
other heretiques; whole dererminationscannor bee called voyde,vtno force;
and' vaine, without impicne. . Thar it hath beene granted co the Sea'of
Rome to bee the firlt, and to the Pope to haue the chiefelt authoritic a=!
monglt the Patriarkes ; but thar it is nor' found in any: Father, that hee
hath beenecalled head of the Church, or of the Councels, C1 $T onely:
is head; Paul, Apollos, and Cepbas are bar Miniſters ofthe Chareh, Thats -
what may bee expetted from Rome the diſcipline chere' obſerued 10 many
ages, andrhetergiuerfation ro celebrate a lawfull Cooncel doedeclare. - --
Bur the Emperor, after long diſcuſhon, the 28-6f Iuly made rhe Re-
ceſle of the Diet vemitring the whole aQion of the Coloquie vnto' the
generall Councell;"or National: Synod-of Germanis; 6r a Diet of the Enj-
pirc, Hepromilſed to goc into Ttwlie, and torreatewithithe Pope for'a Cotin«/
cell; which-ithee could not qbtaine either generall or Nationall;heewould'
intimatea Dict of theEmpite within cighteene monerls,'ts ſettle the mat:
ters of Religion, ahd bee'a'rneanes tharthe Pope ſhould ſendthither'a Le-
gate. Hee commanded 'the-Proteltants' r& receines n6/heww! opMions , but
thoſe thar:were agreed'on; ard the Biſhop toreformetheifChutches.” Hee
commanded that the Monaltefies ſhould not bee deſtroyed; —— ee”
| £ w; _—-

100 The Hitlory of L uB4,

a i. % ——

Lo
»
_—

ns

1542 ut tiie Church viurped, nor any man follicired to change religigmizknd,, to
CNA. giue che Proteſtants greater ſatisfaction, hee.added, that, concermingthedes

Cnaxizs' 5- Ctrincs not as, yer accorded, he preicribed chem nothing; bur thattheylought
Hexsy 8..-nNot to dcliroy the Cloylters of the. Monkes, but reduce themits. a-holy
et and:Chrittian amendment, tharthe Ecclcftatticall goods ſhould:;nor beey-
ſurped , bur; left roche: miniſters, without regard of diuerfitie of religion!
that'no. man thouid bee mooued to change his religion, butthofe reccmued

who change it willingly. Heefuſpended allo.the Recefie of Auibarg, for as

much as concerned religion, and the things depending, thereon, yauull the

-

= O . .
controucrlics were determined tha Counccll or Die. 17
A conference. Aftetthe Dict was ended, Cafar paſſed into Tralie, and diſcouricd with

berwcenc the _

PopeantEm- The POPC in Lucca, concerning the Councell, and the Turkifh1warre; and
peeour in concluded that the Pope ſhould ſend a Nuncio into Germanie, totake reſo-
luton buth in the one matter and the other, in the Dict which ſhould bee

held in Spi-a'in the beginning of the next yeere, and that the Councecll

ſhould bee held in Uicenza,as was before appointed. The Pope ltgnificd

the concluſion tothe Sevate of Venice, who thought not fit, for. diucrs re-

ſpeCts, that fo great a multirude ſhould meere inthe Cirie, and ſhould'treate

of the Turkiſh warre, as certainely they would hauec done, citber with a

TheVencri- purpole to cffcEt it, or at thelealt ro make a faire ſhew. Whereupon they
fri the - an{wered , that, the caſe being altered by reaſon of an accord which they
Councelt:®. lately had made with the Turke, they could not continue in the ſame opi-
cerak, nion, becauſc Soliman would ſuſpect that they mogued the Chriſtian Prin-
ces to conſpire againſt lym. Hecreupon the Pope was conſtrained to al

ter his deſeigne. But the Cardinall Contarmi was much calumniated ip the

TheT.ezze Cours of Rome , where an opinion arolc, that hee was ſomewhat affeed to
eter  Lutheranilme; and thoſe thar ſpake lealt hurr of him, fayd, that hee OpPO=
Lu:xcrauſne ſeq not as Much as hee ought , and that hee had put the Popes authoritie in
hazard. The Pope alſo diſtaiicd his feruice, though hee were mightily
defended by the Cardinall Fregofſo. Burat his returne to his Holinefſe,whom

hee found in Lucca expecting theEmperour, hee rendred an account of his

Legation, and gaue abſolute {atisfaCtion. |

"17542 The yeere 1541. ended thus : and inthe next the Pope ſent Toby Morone,
11bn 00x: Biſhop of Modena, to Spira, where the Diet was held in preſence of Fer-
win ND 4and: Who, according to his commiſſion, declared, that the Popes minde
«01594. concerning the Councell, was the ſame as before ; that is, that itſhould one
day bee celebrated; that hee had ſuſpended it by Czfars conſent , to make

way firlt ro lome concord in Germanie : bur ſecing this 10 bee in vaine, hec

returned to his former opinſon,not to deferre the celebration of it, But that

| heecould norconſent ro make itin Germanie , becauſe hee meantto bee there

in perſon, and that his age, and length of the way, and fo great achange of

the ayre hindered his going into that countrey. And that it ſeemed nor

more commodious fot-other Nations. Beſide , that there was a great pro-

babilitic to feare, that the differences could notbe handled without commo-

tons, Thercforc,that Ferrara, Bolonia,or Piacenza (all greatand moſt oppor-

rune cities) ſeemed rohim more fir. Burtin calcthcy liked them not, hee?

was coutentcd to call itin Trext, a Citic at the Confines of Germanie, That
| 3 Þ

=O

-» Wto Fa... ws

RT rr o_

_— ——— PT Rs a

3 —_—__ O44 - ”. .

0 The Countellaf Trent. .- 3.

3, HAI III... - > are,

L 1B, A, \
his will, was to begin it at Whicdoncide, but for tbe iſtraigheneſſeatitbetimag 1544
hee had prorogued it ro the thirteenth of Auguſt. Hee prayed thetnall rg - Ira
bce preſent chere, and, laying aftdeall hatred, to hapdle the cate: of God Guarzas 5;
with fanccritie- Ferdinand, and:the Catholike Prineeathankedthe-Bope, and far 3.
ſaydgbat;norbeingable re my 169 in Germonie, as Ratibon or Cole (nhttt =
len,chop were contetited with Trent. Bur:the Proteſtavrs wouktnbeagreets ol 6"
| ther that the Councell ſhould be intimated by che Pope; or thatTrene ſhould mee
be cheplace, which was the ceule yhby boghing was determined initbat Diet Councch tot
| concermng tht Goyncellc inn db f2rtD) WW $1145 99054 fat muld.
+> Bawlvcuer,; the Pope-ſtint out a Bull of the incimation;44be-two and ones:
| twentieth of Mayizhis yecte;; wherein having declared/his'dofire ro pro- The Pope |
[ uide agaialt theeujls of Cheiſtcodome, bee layd, tire bad abyayes thought Bull of «
| ypon the remedies: and finding nonemore fit 5hen-a Countell, hee was ©
conktantiy reſaluad. ro call it : and, making mention of the Conuacarion at
Manna, thengfthe ſuſpenſion, after of the ConuoegtionatFicenzg, and of
theorhet ſuſpenſion made in!Genue, and: fAvally of tha other during plea«
(ure, hee went: on: co ſhew the reaſons rthar induced: him roconmtinue the
fame ſuſpenſion;vntill then;; Theſe were ; Ferdinanss warre vxHengary, the

OE ee Or IO II” II" yon td "_

= Witte Taq e.

| rebellion of Flanders; againftthe Emperour, and the rhings,that happened
; ih the Dice of Ret#bon, expeRting a timcappointed by God for this works;
Butconſideringiathe end,/chat every timicis acecptable to his diuine Maics

; ſtie, when holy things are handled, heereſolued ro expect ng otbert conſent
of the Princes, and becauſe hec could nac haue Vicenza, beeingmilling 10
giue ſatisfaction to Germanie coneerningthe place, and vnderflaniding they +
delired Trent, though a Citie more within Italy ſeemed ro him-more coma |
modious, yet his father]y charity incliaed his will royeeld rothairdemandss—
and hee choſe Trent to celebrate therean-Qccumenicall Councel-thefirſt of «+ |
( Nouember next; and thathe interpoſed that time, thathis Decree mightbe .
publiſhed, andthe Prelates haue time to arriueat theplace..; Thetefore, by
| the authoritic of the Father, the Sonne, and the HalyiGhoſtzand the Apos
Ales Peter and Panl,which himſclfs exerciſerh on earth; bythecounſell and
* conſent of the Cardinals , all fuſpenſions being remevoucd, hee ivtimareth
an holy, Qecumenicall, and generall Countell in that Citic,afirphce; free,
and opportunefor all Nations, to bce begun the fic of that:moneth, pro» |
ak and ended : calling all Patriarches, Arcb-biſhops, Biſhops, -7y au
and thoſe who þy law or priuiledge, hauc voyce in general] Councels, and
commanding them by yertueof the Oath madeto himand the Apoſtolique
Sca,and by holy obedience, and ynder:che puniſhments, by law ot cuſtome
to bee inflicted ypon the diſobedient, to bee there in perſon, or, incaſe they
ſhall bee bindered; to make fairh of the hinderance, ot ſend proctots: pray«
ing the Emperour, the moſt Chriſtian King , and all other Kings, Dukes,
and Princes; to bee perſonally preſent, 'or; in caſe they cannor, to ſend Am-.
baſſadours, men of grauiticapd:aurhoritie; and to cauſe the-Biſhops and
Prelates of their Kingdomes and Proninces to goe thither: deſiring further
of the Prelates and Princes of Germany , for whoſe ſake the Councell is inti-
mated in the place.they wiſhed , that the things may bee handled which bes
long tothe trueth of Chtiſtian.religion, tothe correction of manners, to the
I 3 | _

af

—_— lt a—_—

102; The \Hifloriwafe <3 \ [, 3,81
154: peacediitb<dbcordofOlmltian Prihges' anc p6oþIe, 'ati{opptctiioniGFthe'
| TIn2 2(11 1

PST Barbariads and infidets.. HuvuAlo d. 297TI02 20) | 03 21 LIYEC101g ber -
Cn4a154-4/ 5 F he Bikwas preſently ſcm from Romieco ajtReincts; butwwent nbefþerts
Hoang Kal in a fic tincoclFor#Fratitiexhe Freacly King;bawng luſy ddnounceÞwatte;
Poms; axbremikagyitmer; agxinſt choEjaparourided publjued itby.s bobks!
The Fiench_ which heotebfoorts; hebwade iruuthe arc inftant in Brabane; Prtehnbory}
orafi aghinſt” Rencigltone; Wienwnt, andHriofſe; j $5380! 11 50 bluod) tianyoD 217 1603 19117

Frridooee 121 TheEmporour,-hauing receiaed the Bulbof the Councell, anfwetedilie

5 rt Pope, that he was not fatished with ir. For hauing nenevrefuſed apypaitice;

an# cotghge Zangzr, vedolizthatriie'Councel inight bee talledgaid congarily theBidnch
Eccach King. Kang having alwaycsendoauoured tonhindet ite ſta ſtrange vat ir
- | thaxthey weredomparedand niadecquallinehsBull; atid;reheatts e
© miurics whichheptotcnded to haverecciucd frottithe King;added 4s that;
in the laſt-Dier ar S$piajhe:had laboured by his Ambaſſadours-o cherith the

Giſcords.ofrcfigion + 390579 + Ag !and} fauour'to cicher parry,

thcondlyxway3rocall the Councell.eltabliſhrefigion;and tegaine peace!
The French YT he Kangtzprefaging, what impurations would beelayd ypon him for
none making'amvarrettothe hure ofreligian;and hinderance of theferuiceof God,

cruell a:2inkt

ve Po: yhich mighrbeeexpeRed from! the Councet;prevenitedit by publiſhing are

ſtaars,to free

himſelfe from Edit ayaiufbcheLucherancs,commanding the Parliaments x6 excerſteir/if1.
on: 11d rp0n Uiblably; with ſencrs charge tharall (houldbee appeached, whe bad bookes
1 by  qiffering from the Church of Rome,that madeſeeret conueiiticles,chat tranf-

Emperour,

I aqzT_z_ TT
>

hindered orforcflowed, becauſc hee gained nothing byity/ahd that this was
farre fromtbecxamplesof his anceſtors, by whoſe imicarion heeviedall'en-
deauours to preſcrucreligion,, as the 'cdi&s and cxecutions made iti! France

did very welldemonftrate.. Therefore hee prayed his Holinefſe, not'to be.

8409 h . lecue

IT

XUM

; & .
——— . — SF. — TW - —w_—  — - —<2 wo es - "a  _- _—— —— _— — J_— —_— > ——
— © ——

— — I —————— — :
keuerheealumnics, audanaliurobiimidte that hee ſbould tfhnde. buttiheadgi/ 15641
i afbit ini 30; all pacwſob, eihar-of. his, amrac,or f dve Glatt of...)

Fn

Rowe. 2251219 2010 25607 mody Lain baly 1d aid 32d mo zopbul acl rare

1-\ThePope hate preividliceshr ofhce.of acojumon Fachsty.whendfbis fomns.,:;

predeceſſoursdidcucrtpakaoRienuion; ian Legarsollgth the Privcbt,to tf

z0cdiate 2 pactticasigny GardinallGIratiniig chig-mperour, end Sedoldwa to, Ticfiricer

the: Erench King,to pray-thetn eq ddrger private 3nwwries, forthe pubicjue ron

eauc;androbeareconated;tharthrit difcords may hot bvoder the peace. of ns

edigion..,Fo Cardinglldetterini,yiba.immediatly.dyrd, be {ubliiruced Cars, commt23g*

divall Viſewts whercatthe Court, ateyled.becaule hoe: was nor: gracious

with the Emperour, to _ he was ſent. And £0ug, the -warre Waxcd':

Hate: (0: thaty places;y the Papotchinking chathe wropged bisreputiti- +4: 4 7 v7

od if BAIL wulkche Corngrl, ahe 26.0t AB, 20a = TR
this Legats to Trentate the Sypodeiyhichlioad itmarcd; Peter Panle * PR. 2

2rijins, lon Moronegndh Regivald Bade; the finit as2 leamned,and practiſed. hy

Eanoniltzthe ſecond, aA man tigfannegoriation, the third;ceo ſhtw thay

hawſocucr the King of England was alichated fromthe (ubiecbion of Rewe,

perthekingdamehadagreatpatunzheCouncel.:l'otheſchedilparchedhe

maudat of che Logation, cammanidingatheruitagoe: thirhat,and to enter-

taincrhe PrelatesandAtybaſladgurs yphacangymo chem,wichout making

any publike act before chey-had recoigedininuctions, which hee meatne 20

fend them in time congenicnt. 11 21: wo9d 5$13,U2011D> 4119 . | 716 Hd ..

- The Emperour allo vadcrltandingthe depuration) of the Legats}thoug The Emperor

as the caſe did hen ſtand, he hoped tar.po goods gerthar thi Pope mighbdo $"< «51nd

nothing to his preiudice;he ſent thuher for his Ambaſiidours,DonDiegoghis Tremr,ands

relident in Venice, and Nicholas Gramnelyrogetber with bis Sorine Anchony Bi- bu the Car

ſhop of 4rras,and lometew Bilhops/ofehekingdome of Naples. The Pope; fue

be {ides hisLegats,ſentthither (ome-Rulbops, wham he eiteemed molt fairhs

fall, with order not ro make too, mith-baftin their iourney. As wellthe 7

Popes-men as the Emperours, arrived atthe thme-appointed:/ Theſepreſens

tedto the Legars the Emparours mandat;anddebred sbatthe Councelſhould

þe openedand the buſuneſſe begun. >The Legazs rake delay;and ſaid;thar: it

would bea diſhonour;to-the Chuncell, to beginiewich foſmall anumber,

eſpecially where Articles of lo great. importange were to beharidled,as were

thoſe which the Lutherans did queſtion. [The [mperialilts replicd,ehar the

matter ob reformation-might wellbee handled, which was:more- neceffaric,

and not{ubicct co ſo many difficukics. The othcts all haritmuibbee

applycd: tothe vie of divers Nations, fo that the alliftanct of -4ll -was:more

neceſlatie therein;ln fine they pond coprotefiations, towhichtherLegates

nor anſweting, but refertingthe ;anſwere rorhe Pope, 'nogoncluftonarall

wasmadoc: 2 3: ani 4 ol gods Jo cane. {inet To vaibns}

Theendotrhat yeereapproching,theEmperergaueorderto Granuellto g0 Co

tdthe Diet, which ks HE ——_ begianing/of: - ant pf ge

and ro Don Diegoto romaine: Trent, and to labour rharrheCouncel ſhould Pint ©

hegin, orzat the leaſt, tharthoſerhatwere allrmbledfhould not depart, chat 779% ©

inche Dict be might makeyſcofrharthadow ofthe Counctll, Io Noremberg

Granuelpropolcd the watte againiſt the Tarkes, and that cheEmperormight -

35 | bes

:
.

104 Vibe Fotorie fe oo \ _ 77
nm memnngs = yen

PPE—_— EI=ISS GE ee eee ee ee er em
1543: breaflitied againithe FrencbKing/Phe Proteſtant replied; demanding that
7 >7-the differeates of Rdligion might becompolcd, andthe oppreſſion which
Cary the ludges ofthe Chamber vſed agaialt chem yader other prerences, rhough
imine "indcedtor chaceauls might beraken away. Granmulanſwered; that irneither
Fakes: * ouldznor oug hets/bedoueiiy tharphteand time; becauſe !Councell way
ThePue-" | afſombledin Teuttorhatend.”? Bur theetcuſe was /in vaine, becauſe the Pro-
ro g0toTre# toltants approned not th&Counicell,andfayd plainely, that they would not
—_—__ be there, The Dier chded without concluſion; ahd Don Diegoreturacd rotis
Yes. - AmbaſſagearTenice,though:the Legatsincreatetithat; ro.giue reputation ro
= ""thebuſineſle, he wouldenterraine hinafelfe cheregyntiltcheyrecciued aniwer
from rhePope. 7 © 100). DO þ I 2600 57. 0'00W 07 07GAT 11701108
TheLezws . . - TheEmperours Ambaſſadour being gone; the Biſbops of rtheEmpirctol-
bacwaerce lowed; andall the orhers, hauing leauetodepart ynder diuerseolours; atthe
als laſt; theLegats; after they had beene there ſeaueni monerhs, without doing
© anything, wererecalled bythe Pope. '#td this-was the cd of that Congre«
gation:*The Emperor, being parted from-Spaine by feato go into-Germany by
the way of 'Jraly, the Pope Telolued roſpeake with him ſome whiere; and de-
fired ir ſhould be in Bolonia. Ando this cad he ſerit'Peter Aloifitus his fonners
Genua, to inuitc him-Bur becauſe his Maicſtie would torgoe aut of his way;
nor-{coſe time in- his voyagephe ſent the Cardinal! Farneſe to meet him, and
pray him to goe by the way of Parma, where the"Pope might expe him;
But after there being drfficultic how the Emperour might enter -inco that
, Ciriethe twenty one of June 1543.they metin Buſſeto: a Caſtle belonging
The Pops and £O the Palanicmi;{cituate vpon the riuer Tarus, berweene *Parma and Pia-
ee Buf: CORRG: T NCEdS of them both ſuffered nor that the bulineſſe of the. Coun
ſw. _. _ ccll,and of Religion ſhould bethe principall treatie berweene them. Bur
| the Emperour being wholly bent againſt the French King laboured ro incire
the Popeagainſt him, and rochaue money from him for 'the warre. The
keto ten” Pope,ſeruing himſelfe vpon this occaſion, was wholy ſer ypon the gaining
Ain, of MilanforbisNephewes ; wherein hee was afliſted by Margarize, baſtard
daughterto the Emperour, married to OFauine Farneſe, the Popes Nephew,
andin that reſpe@,made Dutcheſle of Camerino. The Pope promiſed the
Empcrour to combine with him againſt the French: King, to make ma-
ny Cardinals of his nomination, to pay him for ſome yeeres'15 0000.
crownes, lcauing alſo in his hands the'Caſtles of Milan and Cremona. Bur
þecauſerhe Imperialiſts required a million of ducars for the preſent, and an+
other million vpon ſhort dayes of payrnent, nothing could PROT arvarr :
and in regard the Emperourcould nor longer tarrie; it was agreed to contis
nuerthe treatic; by meanes of the Popes Miniſters, who ſhould follow rhe
 Emperour. Cſarſhewed he was fatiftied with the Councell; that by rhe
\«.  {endingof Legats,and afliſtance of thoſe few Prelats, the Catholiques of
Hemifruites Germany atthelcalt had knowen' his ready mind : and, becauſe the impedi-
che Enpese” Ments might be impuredtorhe French King, he concluded that the remedie
cothe French Was NOFTO bethought vpon, vntill it did appeare howthe'warre proceeded.
” -» They parted with'great demonſtrations of mutuall ſatiſfaQtion; yer the
Pope multruſted the Emperour,and fromthat cimerurned his mind toward

the French King,” '- 3 1

But

XUM

© be Councell

-
A —_—

L F B. I, S

”
,
\7

made with-whom ſeeucr wasvGid;apainlt whom alſoall Chriſtians, Princes tmp ou and
were bound by-bis commanderment co cakearmes, and, which mott'impor- = Site :
red; that {till remaining more contumacious, and openly deipifing}his au® mwpope- ©
thoritic, this cuidenely- thewed to chewortdthat 'the Emperour bareno re-. p54 mb of
ſpe& vata him, neitherſpirituallnortemparall,and gauecxamplets all, ro' league.
makeao-account of his authoritic. And the affront feemed ro him' rhe
greater, becauſe ( lement, who! mightea(ily-haue remporized in that cauſe,
co pleaſeche Emperour,-and fot his interetts, had\proceeded-againit that
King, who otherwile was well atteed,anddeſerued well of the Apoltolike
Sea. Toweigh downerthele offences, the Pop= purin the other:ballance,
that che French King had made fo many--lawes and edicts beforc|named,
to preſerue religion and his authoritie. V aro which was added tharthe Pas
rif}an Diuines the firſt-of Augutt, aſſembling the people bythe found of a
Trumpet, publiſhed five and ewentie heads of Chrilhan doctrine, propo- +
fing-che bare concluſions and{dgrerminations., withour adding -rcafons,
perſwaſtons, or grounds, bur: onely ew as :itwere by authort:ie,
what they would haue belecued; which werepriated and ſent through all
France,confirmedby the Kings letters, vuder moſt. grievous puriſhmnents;
againlt whoſocuecr ſpake or caught other wile, wirhanorher new Decree
to make inquifition againſt the-Lutherans: Theſe things the rather plea-
ſed the Pope, becauſe he knew the King did them,nor{o-muchfortherea-
fon related before, that is, to iuſtific himſtlfe' ro the world that hee made
not warre with the Emperourto fauour the Lucherans doQtrine, nor\to hin«
der their. extirpation, bur principally topleaſehim,and top reverence of rhe
Apoiltolicall Sea. 7 3 oh HUN O70

Bur the Emperour knowing the- Popes complaints, anſwered, that the: 71, x...
French King hauing made a League wirh/the "Turke ro the preiudice of- for: anwnere
Chriſtians (as the ſiege of Nizz4in Prouence;made by the/ Ocroman Armie, complanis,
guided by Polinus che-Kings Abaſſadour, andthe {poiles-raken inthe rivers:
of the Kihgdome;-well ſhewed ) iowas lawfull-for hiny.co vie, for-his de-
fence,thchel peof che King of England, a Chriſtian, though he acknowledge
not the Pope; as alſo;by the ſame Popes [caue, himſcite and Ferdinand vicd:
the alliltance of the Proteſtants, more auerle, from the! Apoſtolike Sea then
that King;that the Pope, vnderſtanding the'League «of the. French King

marique,depriucd of :his Kingdotne and: dominions;. whoſe confederation & lags: be

with the-Turke, ſhould hauc proceeded-! again{t hiny.>Burchee» ſaw wel

whartdiffetetice was made. For-the Turkifharmic;which had ſo exuth:dam-
nified all the Chriſtians whereſoeuecrir went; paſſed friendly : by the: Popes — ROE
riuers,yea going toOftia ro takein thefreſhwareron S.Peters. day arnight;for — 22039! 7-8

which all Rome, was th confuſioh;rhe Cardinall of Corps, who'comimanded:

in the Popesname that 'was abfenr,purthenvom of feare, being ſecureÞy rhe:

intclligence which he had wth the Turkes, 5 5 #7 2% 4 2 229199 04 2412
The

pp og r—_ — www -- —_ pg _—_—_— CE EEEE——

$06 + 2 The Hiftowcofc,) 30 \ . L 1s & 1

——_ CMS — — —

15441  brEbg:ovayre andþ theioveampiainss pirikg) Lilenice this axxeaties/about the
Li "Roacdd cgungehfor thivydorewhich;the perry prareturhed intocke field, &bpoaty
Cporrrenso inthe reobSpragyberethe Emperourrtbratiang sheapaines which be tors
LIE merly.iookro:rncdyithc dicorasen religions 8 dwally;thecare $i duigence
2222243] VedanRearobonheptitihem wn briud bow jrnot being the polliblete comm-
2544p A palothoeomronenies all was fiza)ly referred toageneiplorNatienal Coun
Then ehoraNiet,andtbatefitrwardes thePaprarhisuipgncebad intumated che
clit... Coungelivelacrs himtc/fceloluedrabs npertorits would baue pexturmed i6
Diucghpure Hube waroh France hadnotbundergd himBurnow;in regard the Ciſtord inter
to 4-5 ligjqn;tompinatbahefamc;& is/accompained with chejameinconueniences;
2-4-1106 flor me rodeferre Yieremedy any Jougets for which be ganeorger they:
hould:;confder,and propole ro himoybatyay they thoughero bebeft. The
bultnefic of xel1gton was much:conjidered on4urbeeault the affayres of the
warreprefled ther wore, itwas referred to tht Dietz which was to bee ce«
kbraredinDecember; and in the meane_pace, 2Decree was made, that the
Empciour;thould giue:charge:ro ſome hovtt} and learned men to write a
forme of-reformation, and that all the Pripecs ſhould doe the ſame; thax
all being;covferred together ,.cbas might: bee. determined} in'the: Diet by
cotmmouconlent, which was to.be oblerued:vnn]l the futuregenerall Coun-
cdl, ro beheld in Germany, or vatilla;Nationall. lo rhe meane ſpacethar all
ſhould remaine in-peace, without raifingany. tumuls fot Religion; andthe
Chnrchcs of. che oneand the orher ſhould epiay/ their goods. "This [Receſle
did-morgenerally pleaſc the Catholikes ;.bur fome of them, becauſe they in-
gincdbihbs Protelbanys opinion, approoucg this middle way. Thoſe that

veere notcontented;eing/their nyumberto be ſmall, relole ro endurceit,
-:- Rut the, warre wenton (till, and the. Popes diidaine conceiued-tor the
Tre Popes Teague'with ' England; did waxe greater, for that tho Emperour had, never
dn Rſfcntcd3o any of thole maine and ample matches offered him by.che Car-
—_ is dinalb:Farneſe, whoohe ſent Legatewich himjntoGermany,concerningthe
eranofthe Dutchiciof Milanta-the Familic, ohthe Farneſt; and,,:that be-
|  1ngroaſliſt in the Dier of Spira, he would nor luffer the Cardinalli Legate
..-:,;-to follow him thitherfor teare of oftending; the Protetiants: And; finally,
© -canftdering the Decree made in'the Dier, fo preiudiciall-ro him agd- the A-
PR © 92s pin he was more offended, becaute hee faw-his hopes loſt; an&
wauthoriticand reputation much diminithed, and tudgedir neceflarie ro
 ſheaw'hewas ſenkibleof ir:  Andithoughon the other, 1de hee,cantidered
that his partic iniGermany was weakened,'\and was caunlelled; by; his molt'
ibwartfricndsro-diſfemble, yer: nally, beeing aſured, that by; declaring

= *

himlſclt&opchly omg wn hee did more, (trauly . binde the French
+ 9 po hee reſvlucd ro beyin- fromiayordes: to:
ceds;,as theconiundtures ſhould comport.- - : | -- -:

King 'romaintainic hi
thke ocoaliontbpaſſeto |
-:Abdthetfitthiof Auguithewrotcagrear long letter roche Empetor; the

The Pope | farbpttalee whergdfavas; | That having vaderſtond what decrees-were made:

writerh 2 long

_ ancrylercer | M'Sptira;chis duty andfarheriyoharitic did inforce him 4o tell himbis: opiai-
ow  dnjthathemigttmmorfollowtiheexample of Ely the Prieſt, whora God (e-
uctchcquinuhed: tor his-too much-indulgenee- rowards! his ſonnes,,” That

the Decrecs of Spira were dangerous for the Empergurs f@ule, and extreams. ,

S1T | ly,

—

JE" IE

XUM

—_ WI —— - - —-—- -  - wwe 4 -
—

L R ». t "The Councell of Trent. 187

ly croubled che Church; that hee ſhould nor violace the rules obſerued by 1 vey
Chriſtians, which command that, inthe cauſe of religion, all ſhould bee re- ,C> > >
ferred roche Church of Rome: and yet hee, nor clteeming the Pope, who Cuantnb $;

=—_—

———

onely, by the law of God and man,hath power to call Councels. And to de- jms 5.
cree in ſpiricuall matters, was willing to thinke of aſſembling a Genetall of F*4*<% i:
Nationall Councel!, and hath ſuffered Idiors and Hereriques to iudge ofre: * -
ligion : hath made decrees concetning ſacred goods, reltored ro honout
the rebels of the Chutch, whom he had condemned by his owne. Edicts
thac he is willingto belecuerthat hee hach nor done thele things by his owne
inclination, bur by the pernicious counſell of choſe that beare ill will to che
Church of Rome,and that he complaineth of chis,thar he hath yeelded vaio
them; thatthe Scriptureis full of examples of the wrath of God, againſt the
vſurpers of the office of che High Priett, of YV2za, Dathan, 4biron, and Core,
of King 0z4as, and others. Thar iris nota ſufticienc excule rolay, the De-
crees are but temporary, vntill the Councel onely. For though the thing
done be holy, yet in regard of theperſon that did 1t,it not belonging to him,
- itis wicked. That God hathalwayes exalted thole Princes, that have becne

deuoted to the ſea of Rome, Head of all Churches, (/onStantine,the Theodoſy,
and (barles the Great : andcontrarily hach puniſhed th:olc that have not gj-
uen ducreſpect vntoit. Examples hereof are Anaſtafins, Mauritins, ConStane
the 2. Pilip, Leo,and others; and Henry the 4. was tr this caule chaſtiled by
his owne ſonne; as alſo Frederickethe 2. by his. And nor Princes onely, but
whole Nations haue beene puniſhed for it; the ewes tor putting to death
Chriſt the Sonne of God; the Grecians for hauing many wayes contemned
his Vicar : which things he oughtrhe moreto feare, becauſe he is deſcended +
from thoſe Emperours, who haue recciued more honour from the Church
of Rome, then they hauegiuen ir. That he commenderh him for deſiting the =
amendment of the Church, bur withall doth aduiſe him to leaucthe charge
thereofto him,to whom God hath giuen ic. "That the Emperour is a Mini-
ſter, but not a Gouernour, noran Head. He added, that hee deſired the te-
| formation, and hath declared it often by intimating the Councel, whenſoe-
ucr any ſparke of hopehath appearcdthatir might be afſembled,and chough
in vainc yntill then, yethee had not beene wanting to his duery, deſiring,
much a Councel, whichis the only remedy againlt all miſchicfes, as well
forthegenerall good of Chriſtendome, asthe particular of Germany, which
bath more necde thereof. Thar it hath beene jntimatcd already, though de-
ferred vntill a more commodious time,by reaſon of the wartes. Thar it be-
longeth to the Emperour himſelfe, ro giue way that it may bee celebrated, by
making peace,or deferring the warre , while matters of religion arc handled
inthe Councel. That hee ſhould obey theſefatherly commandes, exclude
from the Imperiall Diets all diſpures how religion, andreferre themto che

Pope, ordaine nothing concerning Eccleſiaſticall goods, reuoke the
grantes made to the rebels againſt the Sea of Rome; orher-
wiſe toperforme his owne duety, thathe ſhaii bo
forced to yſe greater ſcuerity againſt him
then hee would.

THE

4 ,
—_—E——————R————— NEO hs —

4
2.
A

0 os
/ 5 FOES f 4 KR
« p 4% £ I St 4 # "
+$5% * 4 : j * S467 4 'F J
Y " ; O75 ili w} 4 u
_—
- "n-4 d i & : ” ji . 4 , 2 Ee. * C
þ | | > pp %# x N *Z3 * » = . 7 33 B . * aa » .
: Y ' :
LF) 4 2 : _ ; 4 , ,
* & : [ : Fs +» F$ . 4 "

- _— p 1
.

c ———_—

——— -— ——— ——_— =—Y

SITE ICT. TT.IAT F'/
Txz. SgconD'Books..

— 4 - __—_—
—

He Warre betweene the 'Emperour and the French
King laſted nor long. For the Emperor ſaw plainely,
that while he was buſiedinthat, and his brother in rhe
other againſt the Turke, German ſo much increaſed
inlibertic, thatthe Tmperiall name would notbe e-
ſteemed within a ſhorttime; and rhat ſo long as hee
-made Watrre in Frarce,heimitated E/opsdogge, who
following the ſhadow, loſt both it and the bodie-
Whereupon he hearkened tothe propoſitions of peace made by the French
men,with deſigne not onely to befreed from thatimpediment, bur, by the
Kings meanes, to accommodatethe Turkiſh affaires, and applic himſclfc

1544_

PAvLr 3
CHARtes Fo

FRANCIS. I,

The Emperor
is wholly incli-
ned to peace,
which was c6-
cluded the 24.
of Septemaber.

vnto Germanic. The fourc and twenticth of September the peacewascon-

cluded berweene them;and amongſt other thingsthey both capitulated to
defend the old Religion,andto labour tor the vnion ofthe Church, and re-
formation of the Court of Rome, from whence all the difſenſions are deri-
ued,and har, for this purpoſe, the Pope ſhould ioyntly be requeſted to call
the Councell, and the French King ſhould ſend ro the Diet of Germanre, to
perſwadethe Proteſtants to acceprtit, T he Pope wasnot afraide of the ca-
pitulation for the Councell, and reformation of the Court, being aſſured
tharwhenſocuer rhey began that enterpriſe, by reaſon of their divers ends
andintereſts, they would not long agree: neitherdid he doubt, but that the
deſigne being to be executed by a Councell, he would fo actommodare
cucry treatic, that his authoritie ſhould be amplified: Buthe thought rhat
in caſc he ſhould call the Councell at their requeſt,the world would imagine
he was conſtrained, which would bring much diſhonour to his repurarion,
and incouragement to him that deſigned the moderation of the Papall

ower, Therefore not expeting to be prevented by any of them,and dil- Tic Poſe dic
+ (embleth his

ſcmbling the ſuſpicions conceiued againſt the Emperour, euenthoſe that {7;.:...
were moſt important (which the peace made without his knowledge, with -

points preiudiciall ro his authoririe put into his head) he ſer forth'a Bull, in
which he inuited the whole Church to retoyce for the peace, by which the
onely impediment ofthe Couiicellwas remooued, which he cftabliſhed a-
paine in Trenr,giuing orderit ſhould beginthe15. of March.

He

mt _

No The Hiftorie of ER!

1344 Helſawtheterme was ſtraight, and nor ſufficient ro giue notice through-
Pt. out, much leſle ro giue the Prelares ſpace to put themſclues in order; and
Crantes 5. makethe iourney : Yethe thought it aduantage, that, in caſc it wereto bec
Hen 8, celebratcd, it ſhould beginne with few, and thoſcitalians, Courtiers, 'and
Faaxcis 1. his dependants, whom hee had ſolicited ro beetherc firſt, becauſe the man-
KS ner of proceeding in the Councell ſhould bee handled in the beginning
Hoon (Which is the principall, yea the onely thing to preſerue the Pontificall au-
ofthe Coun- thoritic) vato Whoſe determination they who daily arriued would be con-
ſtrained ro ſtand. That it was no maruaile that a generall Councell ſhould
begin with a few : for ſoirwas inthat of P:/a and ConFfrance,which neuerthe-
lefle had an happie progreſle. And hauing penetrated the rue cauſc of ma-
king the peacc,he wrote to the Emperour, that he had vied preuention and
celeritic to intimate the Councell,ro doc him ſeruice. For knowing that his
Maicſtie was conſirained,by reaſon of the French warre,to permit, andpro-
miſe many things to the Proteſtants, by intimating the Councell he had
now giuen him a mcanesto excuſe himſelfe in the Diet, which wasrto be in
September, if, the Councell approaching, hee performed notwhat hee had
promiſed to grant yntill the Councell.

But the Popes haſtineſle pleaſed not the Emperour, nor the reaſon gaue
TheEmperor him ſatisfaQtion. Hedefared, for his repuration, ro betheprincipall cauſe,
with the ſud. ro make Germame acceptthe Councell more cafily, and for many other re-
| pr ſpcats. And therefore beipg able ro doe nothing elſe, hee vicd all thoſe
mn termes,which might ſhew himſelfe ro bethe Author, and the Pope the ad-
| herent. He ſent Ambaſſadors to all Princes to ignific the intimation, and
to pray them to ſend Ambaſſadors io honour the meeting, and to confirme
the Decrees which ſhould there be made. And he ſcrhimſelfe ro make ſeri-
ous preparations, as if the enterpriſe had been his owne. He gauediuers
orders to the Prelates of Spaine and the Low Countries, aud commanded,a-
mongſt other things,that the Diuines of Louarze ſhould aflemble themſclues
33. Pointof tOgether,to conſider of the dofrines which were to be propoſed; which
bye they reduced to threeand thirtic heads, without confirming them by auy
Diunes2t 1 place of Scripturc,bur explicating magiſterially the concluſion only. Theſe
Heads were after confirmed by the Emperors EdiQ,& publiſhed,with com-
TheEmpert mand,that they ſhould be detended and followed by all. And the Emperor
«iſtaſt againſt CONCCaled not his diſtaſte againſt the Pope, in his ſpeeches tothe Nauncio, as
me Pope- well yponthatoccaſion,as in other audicnces: yea,the Pope having created
thirtecne Cardinals in December,amongſt which were three Spaniards, he

forbad them ro accept the armes,or vſethe name or habit.
 TheFrench King alſo aſſembled at Melun the Pariſian Diuines, to con-
ſulr of the neceſlarie poſitions of the Chriſtian Faith, to be propoſed inthe
Councell ; where there was much contention. For ſome deſiredto propoſe
the confirmation of whatſocuer was conſtituted in Confance and Baſil, and
the reeſtabliſhment of the pragmaticall Law ; and others,doubring that the
King would be offended by deſtroying the Concordate, made between him
and Leo, which would neceſlarily follow, gaue counſell nor to ſet that dif
puration on foote. And afterwards, becauſe there were diuers opinions in
thatSchoole concerning the Sacraments, ynto which ſome giue cfieQiue
; , | miniſterial!

"4 WES L 4

S *n,/ _ TH ODD -

|
f
e

he. 4

—

L1s. 26 the Councellof Trent, 11k

miniſteriall vertue, and others not, cuery-one deſiring that his opinion - 154.4
ſhould beean Article of Faith, nothing could be concluded, but thatthey lt
ſhould keepe themſclues within compaſle ofthe fiueand twenty Heads pub- Cnemnnns x.
liſhed two yecres before. | | KN? NHunzy 8.
But the Pope,fignifying tothe French King how little good will the Em Faaxcrs 1.
eror bare him,defired him,forthe maintenance of the Apoftolike Sea, ro :
ſend Ambaſſadors to the Councell as ſoone as might be, and charged his
N «nc refiding with the Emperor, that, attending all occaſfionswhenthe
Proteſtants gaue him any diſtaſte,he ſhould offer all aſſiſtance from him, to
recouer the Imperiall authoritic, with Spirituall and Temporall aydes.
Whereof the Nunc:o hauing had too many occaſions, he ſo wrought, that The emperor |
the Emperor,finding he might haue need of the Pope both the one and the = =
other way,remitted his rigiditie. And he gauean argument thereof, by gran-
ting the new Cardinals leaue to aſſume the name and armes, andby giuing
the Xuncro more gratefull audiences,and by conferring with him ofthe at-
faires of Germame more then he was wont to doe. |
The Pope made great haſte, nor onely to call the Councell, but to dif- The Fore dif
patch the Legates,whom he charged, that, for maintenance of theirdigni- Legacswo
tie, they ſhould nor firſt ſend ſome ſubſtitute to receiue the firſt Prelates, as -
ſome aduiſed, that afterwards they might make their entrie with mectings
and ceremonies, but would haue themſelues to be the firſt, and to be there
before the time. He deputed tor his Legates, John Maria de Monre,a Biſhop,
Cardioall of Palefrina, Marcellus Cerumns, Prieſt of the Holy Crofle, and
Reginald Poole, Deacon of S, Mary in Coſmedin. Inthis man he choſe Nobil-
tic of blood,and opinion of pictic, which commonly was had of him, and
the rather for that he was an Engliſh man, to ſhewthar all Eng/anddid nor
rebell: in Marcellus conſtancie, and immonecable and yndaunted perſcue-
rance,together with exquiſite knowledge: in Monte,zeallitie,and openneſſe
of minde,ioyned with ſuch fidelitie to his patrons, thathe could not prefer
their intereſts before the ſafetic ofhis own conſcience. T hele hediſpatched
witha Briefe ot Legation,withour giuing them, as the cuſtome' is, aBull of
Facultic, or any inſtru&ion in writing, being vncertaine, as yet,what com- ZH giucth

them no in-

miſſion to giue them, meaning to gouerne himſelte,as the ſucceſſes, and the *rudions.
Emperors proceeding ſhould counſell him, So hemade them depart with
the Briefe onely, ;

Bur beſides thecare the Pope had for the affaires of Trext, anather of no
lefle moment troubled his minde, concerning the Diet to be celebrated in |
Wormes,where he thoughtthe Emperour would not be preſent; and doubt- Cardinallter-

neſe is ſent to

ing that, being prouoked by the letter written vato him, he would ynder- thepic of
hand cauſe ſome Decree to be made, more preiudiciallto his affaires then png
the former, or at the leaſt giue way vnto it; he thought irneceſlarie to haue

in that place a miniſter ofauthoritie and reputation, withtitle of Legate.But

he teared an affront that way, in caſe the Diet ſhould not receiue him with
duc honour. He found out a temper, toſend to the Emperor the Cardinall B
Farneſe his nephew,and make him paſſe by Y/ormes,and thereto giue inftru-
ions to the Catholikes, and, after he had made the treaties that were con-" -
uenient, to goe forward toward the Emperour, and inthe meane ſpaceto

K 2 ; fend

—_

LE —

112 T he Hiſtoric of L rs. 2,

| b_b4 fend ' Fabies Mignanellus of Siena- , Biſhop of Groſſeto , for his Natichs
;>—"\ to reſide with the King of the Romances, with order to follow him to the

Pavr.- x

CuarLes 5. [)1jer. |
Afterwards applying his minde to Trent , hee cauſed a conſultation ro

Hewxy 8,
 FRaxEBt be begun concerning the faculties ro be giuen ro the Legats. T his bad ſome

A IM difficultic, becauſe they had no examples to follow. For in the Lateran Coun-
on 2»ourtbe e{[ next preceding,the Pope was perſonally preſent; before in the Florentine

taculties to

excntorxe Fuygentics'the fourth was preſent, and that of Conſtance, where the Schilme
$245 wastakenaway, began with the preſence of Jobn the 2.3. one of the three
depoſed Popes and ended with the preſence of Martin the fifth. Before that,
the Councell of Piſa was called by the Cardinals, and concluded by 4lex-
ander the fifrh. And in more ancient times , Clement the fifth was preſent in
the Councell of Vienna; in the two Councels of Lions , Innocence the fourth,
and Gregoriethetenth ; and before theſe in the £ ateran, Innocence 3, Onely
the Councell of Bafil,ar that time when it obeyed Engenius the fourth, was cc-
Icbrated by Legats. Butto imitareany thing that was there obſerued was too
TheCon- badaprelage. Hee refolued to frame the Bull , with this claule, thathefenr
Te themas Angels of peaceto the Councell, which before hee had intimated in
Trent: and gauethem full and treeauthoritic, that, for want of thar, the
celebration and continuation might not bee hindred , with facultieto pre-
{ide there, and to ordaine any Decrees or Statutes whatſocuer, and to pub-
lith them inthe Seftions accoiding ro cultome : to propoſe, conclude, and
exccute whatſocuer was neccſlary, to condernne errours and roote them
Out of all Prouinces and Kingdomes: to take knowledge, heare,decide, and
determine the cauſes of herelie, and;whatſocuerelfe concerneth the Cathos
like faith: ro reforme the State of the holy Church inall her members,aſwel
Eccleliaſticallas Secular: ro make peace amongit Chriſtian Princes, and to
determineany thingelfe which may bee for the honour of God the increaſe
of Chriſtian faith: with auchori:icto bridle, with cenſures and Ecclefiaſti-
cal] puriſhments, all contradicting and rebcllious perſons, of what (tate or
preeminence ſocuecr, though graced with Pontificall or Regall dignity ; and
ro doc any thing elſe neceſlary and fit for the extirpation of herefies ander-
rours , and the reducing of thoſe peoplethat are altened from the obedience
of the Apoſtolique Sea , preſeruation , and reſtaurarion of Eccleſialticall li-
be:rie; yet with condition, that in all things they proccede with conſent of

the Councell.
Butthe Pope, conſidering not onely how to ſet the Councel] forward,

TheBullfor but of the meanes to difſolue it when it was begun, in caſe his ſeruice did

EK © requireir, to prouide for himſelfein goodrime, he followed the exam pleof
Councell = Martin the fifth , whofor feare of thoſe encounters which happened to Iobn
the 23. in ConStance, when hee ſent Nancy to the Councell of Pania_, gave

them a particular Briefe, with authoritieto prolong, difſclue, or traaſlare itto

whart place they would; A ſecret ro crofle all deliberation which was con-

trary to the intereſts of Rome. A few dayesafter hee made another Bull,

giving the Legates power to transferre the Councell, This bare Gaterhe 22.

of Fevruary , the ſameyeere, of which being to ſpeake hercafter, when the

tranlia-

?

=

w—_—_ ye

——_
_—— MO PE

L192 FN the Councellof Trent. WW &: "7

| Thethirtcemth of Marcha$45.the Catdinals of Monte and Sante Croce 1545
arriuedin Trenr,and were receiued by the Cardinallof that place. That day; >>?
they madetheirpublikeentric,and granted three yeetes,and ſolmanyrimes: Cannes 5. -
forty dayes of Indulgence;tothoſe that were preſent. They hadinorthisau- 7,5 57
thoritic from the Pope, but hoped he would ratifiethe fat. They found no Fraxcrs 1.
Prelate there, thoughthe Pope had cauſed fome-to part from Rome, thar Dy
they mightbe preſent art theprefixedtime; nn noun ug fo Een pour

Thefirſt thingthe Legates did, was roconfider of the-contents of the ic.
Bull of Faculties giuen them, and reſolued to keepe ir ſecret, and ſent aduice
to Rome, that the condition,toproccedewith conſentofithe Councell, tied
themroo much, and made themequall roeuery pettiePrelate, and would
breedgrear difficulties in thegouernment; in caſe irwere neceſſarieto com-
municatecuery particular ynto all; and aid irwasrogiue too much liberrie:
or rather licence to the multitude.” Itwas perceiuedin'xomethat the reaſons
were good.and the Bull was corrected according totlftaduice,andabſolute- T'-Bul'vns
authority was giuen them.But the Legates;while they expeRed an anſwere,
appoynted ourtthe place forthe Seſſion,;capable of 400. perſons, within the
Cathedrall Church. 2.4 2:12 25301 93N WS 1 TIP

Don Diego de Mendoza, the Einperors Ambaſſador wich the Republique: 2-Pixre-
of Venice,arriued/in Trent teri dayes afterthie Legares, to affiſt at the Coun-! 7rwe.
cell, with large commiſſionigiuen him from-Bruxels the twentieth of Fe-'
bruarie, and was receiued by the Legares,afviſted with the Cardinall Ma-
druccio,and three Biſhops, who onely were then arriued ; whoſe names ate
not to be omirred, becauſe they were the firſt: Andthey were, Thomas Cam-
pegio Biſhop of Felere, the Cardinals nephew, Themaz of S. Felicius, Biſhop
of { aua, Friar Cornelius Muſſas, a Franciſcan, Biſhop of Bitonto, the moſt e-
loquent Preacher of thoſetimes. Foure dayes after, Don Diego made his pro-
poſition in writing ;which ſhewed the —_— good diſpolition concer-
ning the cclebration ofthe Councell, and that orderwas giuento the Pre-'
lates of Spaineto bethere, whohe thought were already in their journey ;
heexcuſed himſclfe by reaſon of his in TR for not being there be-
fore, deſired thatthe aQions of the Councell;and rhe reformation of man-
ners might begin, as was propoſed two yeeres before inthe ſame place, by
the Lord Granuel and himſelfe.” The Legates —— 7 in writing, com-
mending the Emperour, receiuing his perſonall excufe; and ſhewing their
deſire of the Prelates comming thither, 'And the propoſition andanſwere
were receiued by the parties ytto whomir belonged, inthe poinesnorpre-"
iudiciall to the rights of their Princes reſpeQiuely. A caution which giuerh
a manifeſt argument, with what charitie they treared iti the propoſitionand
avſwere, where there were onely words of pure complement, except the
mentor reformation. oO On |

The Legates norknowing which way to treate, triade demonſtration ro The Legaes
proceedioyntly withthe Armbaſt adors and Prelates,and to conimunicate to rwoſornoflet
them their moſt inward thaughts; whereupon when letters came from Rome -
or Germanic, they afferableT all ro reade them. Bur perceiuing that Don
Diego equalized himielfe $6 them,and the Biſhops preſumed morethen they
were wont to doe at *Reme, and fearing ſome inconuenience would arilc

_ E BL K3 when

14 Fr | T be: Hiſtorie of |. we: ><

1545 when their numberdidenerealc;rhey fenr aduile ro Rome: that alwaick one ©
>> lencrſhouldbe writtento bee fhewed, and the ſecret things apare; betauſcof
Euancas x. theletters which thephadreceiued vntill then; they had madenowie.but by:

Hzway 8.

FRANCIS 1,

their wit! ©. They demandedalio acipher,.co.communicate the-mariers of

arcater Moment. | All which patcicularitics, with many more thariſball-bee

8 -

V

D. Diego
would haue
preceded the
Cxrdinall of

Trent.

The Amba(-
fadoursof the
K.of the R5-
manes 1c re-
Ceruco incon-
grepation.

Thepropoſi-
tion of Ferds-
and 1n the

Diet,

ſpoken of , hauing raken -ourof the Regilter of the lerters-of rhe Gardinall
of Monte, I haue not beenc willing:to conceale them, becauſe they ſerue 19
penetrate the depth ofthe treatics: - Vit 1 TE ET

The monerh of March beciogpaſt, andthe time , prefixed inthePopes
Bul/,to beginnethe:Counce! expited manydayes,, the Legatcs con{uled a-
monegſt themaſelues concerning the opening of it, and reſolued ro expect ad-
uiſc Sm Fabins Magnanellus, Nuncio with Ferdinatid of what was havdlcd in
Wormes, and order from Rome , after the oe had heard of the arrjuall and
propoſition of Den Diego; and the rather ,.by caule they. were aſhamed to
make ſogreata beginning with three Bilhops onely. "The Ambaſſadours
of the King of the Romaaes arried-the cight of April, and a ſolemne con-
oregation-was madc toreceiuc them. . In thati Don Diggo would haye prece-
ded the Cardinall of Trent, and fate next the Legates,ſaying that in regard he
repreſented cheEmperour, he oughtro {itin the ſame place where his Maic-

ſic ſhould. But not to hinder thebulincſle, they found out a way to place

them 1o, thatir could not appeare who had FRE precorlenee, .

The Kings Ambaſfadours preſented onely.their Prince his letter, and de-
claredby word of mouth, his gbſeruancerowards the Apoltolique Sea and
the Pppe, his readineſſe ro fauaurche,Councell, and large offers; and they
added that hee would {end a commillion in forme, and perſons berter in-
{kruCted.- -- - 1 OD
After this, the wiſhed for aduiſe camero Romeand Trent,of the propoli-
tion made, in the Diet the 2.4. of March by King Ferdinand, who was Preſi-
dent there inthe Emperours name, and of the negotiation which followed
thereupon. _ The Kings propoſition was, thatthe Emperor had made peace
with the French King,that he might apply himſclfc ro copoſe the differences
of religion, and proſccure the watre againlt the Turkes; ftrom whom bc had

romuſc of aſliſtance, and an approbation of the Councel, with a reſolution
ro be there in perſon, or by bis Ambaſſadors. That for this end,it being be-
fore prorogued, hee had dealt with the Popeto intimate it againe,and (olici-

ted him to giue ayde againſt the Turkes» T hat he had obtained the intimati-

on of his Holineſſe, and chat Ambaſſadors ſent from the Emperor and him-

 ſelfe were already in Trent. '- Thatall the world knew whar paines Ceſar had

taken to cauſe the Councel to bee;celebrated; firſt with (lement in ©Bolonia,
then with Par in Rome, Genua, Nizas, Lucca, and Buſſetoe. Thar according
ro the Decree of Spirs, he had giuen order to men of Icarving and good con-
ſcience, tocompole a forme - - ar ; which was accordingly perfor-
med. But it beivg a thing of great deliberation, and the time ſhore, andthe
Turkiſh warrethreatning them , the Emperour was refolucd nor to ſpecake
of this any more, bur to.cxpect how the Councel would proceed, and what
might bee hoped from ir, becauſc'it was ſuddenly ro beginne; and in caſeno
fruit appeared, hee might before the end of that Dice, intimate another bo
| = T OO handle

* IAC oe in EATEN IPO

E 18.12. tbe.Gomeetlof Trent. ng
handle'all/ har buſineſſe,"apply®} hiinfcife tow roehit which isvF more _ 1545
importance, that is the /Furkiſh'wirre.e5 COu191077904 SHTSUOR ONJOR If 21: ſ A,
This propoſtriofhitde thePtoreſianiSvery fulpitivis.' For the pthc of Cinnrs? +.
religion being to laſtvntillthe Councell they wereindoubt thatwhen they acpay »,
were exhauſted, byeontributiotsagainſt he Turkes;they ſhould beaſſailed, Fvco's:
Wl SS. 7 png, ger IVY oY HG OY FRE EAR : YE. EW , a I
ypon prerenee that the' peace-was ended by opetitnig the Councdl in Trent. The ſuſpirien
Yer mandedrhar che rreirie begun ſhould beeevntitiued; Alleadging fans. ©
chaccherime was long enough t& him that'feared'God; or ar leafivthata
new pexcefhould be eftabliſhed vatill'afawfull Counicel; To oftenpromied,
ſuch asthar of Tier was nor;forthe reaſonsiſo coves 107g be-
fore! 'Ant they declared that they could nor contribine;-if they haditwor
aflurancevFpcace; yor tied tothe Popes Councell; whiththiey tad refaled
whenſoener it wasſpokenof i: Aridrfoughthe/Bcclofialtiquesdideonfenr
abſolutely; rhar the'caufe ofreligioh ſhould be whollyremitred ro theCoun-
_ yerirwas reſolued ro: expette the Emperours ahfwere'before the'coli-
ClUl1ON? 01:5 {\ oli 1603 * 115 1YGD 203 to fonmd-ls:s vt on of 2. C

Three particulatsiin-this ation diſpleaſed the Pope'and Legates which +. voge and

were ar Trent, One,charthe Enperontarrogated rochindelfe, tobaueindu- te Lexzres |
ced che Pope to celebrarethe:Councell; whiclrargued (mall care of Religion {4 with three
in his Holineſſe. Theſecond;:that he had inducedithe-French King 10 con- Fepropore
ſent yntolit, which-was-no:hbmourto' bis fanQtitic, rowhomthisbeloriged, **

The third: that hee would'ſtill keepetbe birin hismourch'by afurace/Dicr,
that, inGaſothe Councel wentnotdarward'phee ſhould alwayes'feare, that

things cancerning Religion {Hould berreated of inthe Dier. -*The Pope was

* -

©
S653

i 3d. 1

-perpetuallyrroubled;' nor ſo-miuch for the iniuriesrecciued from the Prore-

{tants, as for rhe Empcrours actions, which, as heewas wont tofay, though
they ſeemed fauourable,yer were more parnictaus coreligion, andhis autho- ©
ritic, hich could not be ſeparated Behides,irſeemed be was abwayes:in dan-
ger,that che Emperotir would makeſomeaceord withithe Dutch-men,to- his
preiudice. Andthinking howto prouido atamedic; hee could findenone,
Kano on foote a watt far Religion, becauſe the Protcltaties would bee
curbed; and the Emperour hkewiſc-iritanglecin a dangerous enterpriſe, and
all ſpeech-of reformiationand the Councclliwould bee buried in filence; He
had great hope it would ſaccecde, by that which bis Nunco wrote 'vato him,
chat hee found in the Emperour greatdiſdaine againitithe Progeſtancs, and

-that he hearkened to his FRENOy to ſuþduc them by force; | Forthis rc-

ſoak beſide that which was before related, and ro hinder that no prejudiciall | +

[8

7a#n%

Soi *# ww £%

ſent Cardinall-Farneſe into Gerwawe,with. inſtruQions neceſſary... "as £ "—_—

cr,

Y

: "nd a a A. = —_——— ae. Bit. =
—_ tens a 4 a ys a a ABA at An OL A Ate eee

6 1:19 \Tibe Heftortewf LB. 2.

1545 bcr,incaſethey vaderfioadibatthey world weate pf Religion ingheDiers
pay x7 but if nor,to gouerne themſelues as otherreſperts ſhayld aduileg,;Fbey ſaw
Cuanuas 5. thatthe propotingotthe Digxdid notbigdethem;bur,onthe other fidezthat
Heaxr 8. the (mall oumber ofPxclares (who then,werenot marethenfoure) perſwa-
Fraxcts 2: dedaprorogation. Notwithſtanding, they were indoubt thatthedanger
1% reaar? ofche; Turkiſh armeswouldconſtraine Ferdmand ro tuake the; gue, and,
nine 99's according to promile,-tointimate.another Diet, in which Religiopſhould
queabou betreated of :caſtingrheblawe-yponthan,by ſaying that noticewasgiuen
on Coun- them of. the propoſition, that, knowing what was promiſed with ga0d mr

© tentiongthey might haye hindered the execution.of irby;openingtheCount
cell, Fox chis cauſerhey ſcntindiligence ro the Popejtratceciucarder from
him what ro doe! inthis doubatull-coululration, ſeeing themſc]yes on the
one fide conſtrained by aporent reſpectro makebaſte,and-on theotheren-
farcedto defiſt,becauſe they were almaſt alone in Tree, They deelared £©
thePopethattbey had manyeoniecturesand fignes, thitthe Emperour re+
garded not the celebration of the Councell; that Don Drego, after his firſt
.. .-. .cotmpaition; had-nevitr ſpoken iſo much axone ward, and did thew, as ir
.--* werezinhis countenahtce;thathewas pleaſed with thatleaſure and pending
.. ofrimc; Forhis.appearance 'onely was ſufficient roexcuſe aud Suſtifichis
Maſter,that having, by himſelfe and his Arabafſadars; continuallydeſired
and ſollicired the Councell,and brought thebufinefierotharpaſic, and nor
ſeeing a aonuenicnt progreſfle, hee-might and ought to' intimate another
; Diet, todererminethe cauſe of Religion;:as by reaſon deuoluedvatohim
risrefoued by his owne diligetice,and negligence ofthe Pope. Theyreſoluedtorake a
<«ll ſhould be - Middle courſe: thatis;to fing a Maſſe ofthe holy Ghoſtbefore the Emperor
ue rr ©"  arriued inthe Diet; which might ſtand for a beginning ofthe Councecll,and
Maſſcofthe - preuent Whatſoeuer the Emperour coulddoe in the Receſſe,and,onthe other
| "fide, remoue all occaſion of ſaying, thatrhe mattersof the Councell were
begunto be handled with foure perſons; remaininginlibertie to enioy the
benefitof time, and to beabletogoc on, ordeſiſt, ortransferre, or ſhut vp.
the Councell,as the occurrencesthould aduiſe.' They withed him ro conſi- -
' der,thatif the Councell were opened, after that Cardinall Farnmeſe had ſpo-
ken with the Emperor,one might thinke that Cardinal{wasſentro entreate
- thatitmighr notbe opened, atid could not obtaine it.” Beſides, the fame of
the Turkiſh Armicincreaſing,itwould be ſaid ir was opened when neceſlitie
compelled to thinke of other matcers, and whenirt was knowne it couldnor
The devreof , Hedone, The Cardinall Santa Croce deſired much thatfignes of deuotion
Sacre, © ſhouſd be ſhewed,andrhe people made to runne together with the vſuall ce-
remoniesof the Church; andthereforeperſwaded thatall ſhould write ro
 thePope,to demaund a Briefe, with authoritie to giue Indulgences, dated
from therime of their parting,/that the Indulgence which they granted at
| theirenitrie,might be made good: That Cardinall was ferupulous, that the
..., Pecoplewhich werepreſent atrhatentrie,” ſhould not bedefraudedofthoſc
three yeeres and thrice fortie daits which'they granted, and would ſupplic
it by this;notconſfidering that a difficultie didariſe, whether herhat hath au-
-ſ{thoritic to prant Indulgences, can make good thoſe which another hath
Tpranted without authoritie, T ba _
c

—

——
——

[L1s.2. the Councell of Trent. IE

The Cardinall, Biſhop and Lord of Trent, conlidering thar that Cirie,lit- 15.4 Ks
tleinir ſelfe, and nor much inhabited j would remaine at the diſcretion of ies?
Stranggrs, and in danger of ſedirions , incalerhe Councell proceeded, gaue Cuanirs 5:
the Popg.covnderitand, that there was need of a garriſon. of, at the lealt, an tirxsy 8.
hundred and fiftic foormen, eſpecially ifthe Lutherans came, which expence WAxer *+
himſclfe was not able to beare, being exhautted by paying his Predecefſors Tt« drm
debrs, The Popcanlwered, thar, if he pur agarrilon imto,the towne, the Lu: rech a ganiſun,
therans would hauca pretenceto publiſh thar the Councell was nor free,
that it was in vaine to make doubr,ſolong as none bur Jtalians were in Trext ; :
and thathehad no lefle care of the quiet of the Citi, then che Cardinall him-
ſelke, becauſe the ſgcuritic of the Councell more imported the Pope, then the
Biſhop of the place; therefore that hee ſhould leaue the care thereof ynto him,
and aſſure himſelte,that he will be vigilant to prouide againſt dangers, for his
owne intereſt, and will not burthen him with any expence. Having well
con{idered all rhe rea'ons which perſwaded and diflwaded to begin the
Counccll, for di\ſwafton hee ſaw no weightic reaſon bur this , that when the
Councell ſhould be opened, hee would be intreated to leauc it fo, varill the
impediments of the Turkiſh warre, and others,did ceaſe : which was to pur
a bridle in his mouth , which would turne him whither he pleaſed that held
the raines : aching dangerous to his affaires. This made him reſolue firmely
in himſclfe , by no meanesto ler the Councell ſtand idly open, and nor to de -
part from this difzunCtiue , either to celebrate the Councell if he could, or, if
he could nor, to ſhur ic vp, or ſulpend-ir, yntill he had publithed another day

4 ThePope gi-
ro reaſſume ir. Hauing eltabliſhed this point, he wrotero the Legats, to open wo —
irvpon Holiroodeday , which order they publiſhed to the Emperours Am- CO
baſſador and the reſt, wichour naming the particular time. A little after 92 09ost
Cardinall Farreſe , in his tourney towards. Wormes , atriucd in Treat, ge Cal Hong
broughtche ſame commuſlion;and all being conſulted of betweene him and T1.
the Legats, they refolued tro continue , notifying viito all, the Commillion
roopen the Connicell in generall, without deſcending to the particular day,
more then this, thatit ſhould bce when hee had ſpoken with the Emperour .
in TPormzs. Andthey conceiuedgood hope; becauſe they ynderſtood that
his Maieſtic, knowing the diſpatch of the Legation, was much fatisfied with
' the Pope, and declared that hee would ioyntly proccede with him ; and
therefore they would not go on to any newadtion, without his knowledge,
for feare of diſturbing him; and the rather becauſe Dor Diego, and the Car-
dinall of Trent aduiſed the ſame, |

Don Diego renewed his pretence , ro precede all but the Legares, allcadg- ,,, Dllegore:
ing, that if, when the Pope and Empcrour met , no man could fir berwcene RE
them, the ſame oughero bee obſcrucd in thoſe that repreſented the one and precedence.
the other; and ſaid hee hadthe aduice of learned men heereiv. TheLegares
anſwered in generalltermes onely, that they were ready to give cucfy man
hisplace,expeCting orders from/Rome ; which pleaſed Don Diego, hoping thar
deciſions and examples thereof would bee found in the publike Records ;
(hewing hee was readic ourof the Councell , to giue place to cuery pertic
Prieſt, but adding that, in the Councell, none after the Pope, had moteati-
thoriti: then his Prince. Some thatreade this relation may thinker amd

ULOus

—

p_—

18

{be Hithrie of L1s. 2.

I —

1545
FLAP
PavL 3.
CHARLES 5»

HEenRY B.,

FRANCIS IT.
is os. ©,

The Vice-
roy of Naples
would fend
but foure Ki-
Mops to the
Councell,and
thoſe of his
DOWNe N10111-
nation.and is
inuch oppolcd.

The Pope ma-
keth a fencie
Bull, that none
ſhould appeare
1n Counce!] by
Proctor,

The Legates
require money
tr the expen-
Ces of the
Councc!!.

” Tkefirſt con-

| grevatio ſpent

11) Ceremon'es.

fluous, becauſeit containeth matter of ſmall weight: but, contrarily, the
writer of the Storie hath thought neceſſaric to make knowne, from how
ſmall rivers ſo greata lake,which poſſeſſethall Europe, hath been rajfed, and
he thar ſhall ſee how many letters/went to and fro before the opetiing was
concluded, would wonder atthe cſteeme was made of it,and at the furmiſes
thatdid flie abroad.

In 7ralie, becauſe they ſaw the Councell went on, and hoped that now
it would be celebrated, the Biſhops thought of their iourney. The Vice-
roy of Naples tooke care that all his ſhould not goe. His will was to ſend
foure of his owne nomination, with commiſhon tromthe reſt of the Kin g-
dome, which are aboue an hundred. Therefore the greet Chaplaine of the
kingdome aſſembled the Prelates in his houſe,and intimated vnto them,thar
they ſhould make a proxic. Many oppoſed,and ſaid they would goc in per-
ſon, becauſe they were fo bound by oath: butin caſe they could nor, it was
reaſonable thatcuery one ſhould name a Profor, according to his owne
conſcience, and nor oneforall. The Vice-roy wasavgrie, and gaue order
againe tothe great Chaplaine to call them, and command them to make
the proxie, and ſentthe like orderto all the goucrnours of the Kingdome.
This troubled the Pope and Legates very much, becauſe they knew not
whetherir came fromthe Vice- roy his owne fantaſie,to ſhew himſelfe a ſuf-
ficient man,or from want of wit, or whether ſome other had made him doe
it, and proceeded from adecper roote. Todiſcouer from whence this mo-
tiue came,the Pope made a ſeuere Bull,that none,without exception,ſhould
appeare by ProGor. T his the Legates concealed, as being too ſeuere, be-
caulc it contained all the Prelates of Chriſtendome, cuenthe moſt remote,
and thoſe that had lawfull impediment,who could not poſsibly obſerue it:
and alſo becauſe it was too rigid, conſtituting that they incurred ip/o fafto,
the puniſhment of ſuſpenſion from their Minifterie. And they feared it
would cauſe many irregularities,nullities ofaQes,and vndue receiuings of
fruits, and that by this meanes ſome diſcontented Nation might be ſtirred
vp to appeale andconteſt for juriſdition, Wherefore they wrote, thatthey
ought not to publiſh it withoutnew commilsion, thinking the rumor thar
the Bull was made would ſuffice,though it were not ſhewed. What end this
Bull had, ſhall be declared in its fir place.

Another buſineſſe remained, though of ſmaller moment, yet noleſle
troubleſome. The Legats,vnrill then, had receiued but ſmall ſtore ofmoney
for their expences,and were too poore to ſupplie our of their owne, as was
fit for themto docin ſome particular; in ſo much, chat if they ſo continued,
they ſhould not be able to maintaine themliclues.Whereupon they did com-
municate itto Farneſe, and wroterto the Pope, that it was not for his repu-
tation to hold a Councell withour neceſlaric and accuſtomed ornaments,
with that luſtre that ſo great an aflembly required ; for which it was neceſſa-
rieto ſend ſome perſon,to vndergoethis charge only:and therefore it would
be good to appoynt a Depoſttarie,with a ſumme of money,to diſcharge the
occurring expences, to afsiſt ſome ncedie Prelate, and to cheriſh ſome man
of account: athing neceſlarie to procure a good end of the Councell.

The third of May,ten Biſhops being then arriued,they made a congre-

gation

Ls. 2» the Councell of Trent. -

gationco cſtabliſhthe things rhar ſhould goe beforg; ia which they publike- 1545

lie intimatedthe Poyescommiſſion toopen the Councell, adding,that they SYAL]
would notdetermine of theday,vntillthey had imparteditrothe Emperor, Canes, 5.
' This Congregation, forthe moſt part, was ſpent io matters of ceremonie; j3r555 5.
thatthe Legatcs, though of divers Orders, one being a Biſhop, another a Faaxcrs x.

Prieſt, and the third a Deacon, ſhould notwithſtanding haue the ſame orna-
ments,weariog Rochers all three alike, as their office and authoritic was e-
quallin one Legation and one Preſidencie; thar'the place for the Seſſions
ſhould be beaurified with hangings of Arras, that it might not ſeeme an AL
ſembly of mechanicall men. They propoſed whether it were fit to make ſeats
forthe Pope and Emperor, which ſhould be adorned and remaine emptic:
they treated whether itwerefit to giue Don Diego amore honorable place
thenthe other Ambaſſadours. It was conſidered that the Biſhops of Ger-
manie,who are Princes of the Empire, doe pretend right of preceding all o-
ther Prelates,cuen Archbithops,alleaging that itis nor qnely ſo obſerued in
theDiets, but alſo that the Biſhops which are not Princes ſtand bare before
them. It was remembred, that the yeere before,there was a difference inthe
ſame Citic,where the Biſhop of HercF#ar, and the Archbiſhops of Corfu and
Ortranto met togetherata Maſle. Somealfo alleaged,thatin the Popes chap-
pell, the Biſhops that are Ambaſſadours for Dukes, and other Princes, doe
precede the Archbiſhops, and theretore that the Princes themſelues ſhould
docit much more. And they concludedto reſolue nothing herein vnrill the
Councell were more frequent, that they might ſee how the French men and
Spaniards did vnderſtand it. 1 hey thought fit to renewthe Decree of Baſil,
and of Iuliusthe ſecond,in the Laterane Councell,that it ſhould preiudice no
manto fit out of his place. The reſolution to expe the aduice of Farne/e,to
determine the day of opening the Councell, gaue much ſatisfation to Dor
Dzego;and thoſe tew Biſhops ſhewed much deuotion and obedicnce tothe
Pope,as didalſo the Biſhop of UVercelh, who arriued the ſame day after the
Congregationended.,together with Cardinal Poolerhe third Legate.
While they merin Trex: to conuince hereftes by a Councell,in Frazce they
did the ſame by force of armes, againſt a ſmall remainder of the Waldenſes,
inhabitants of the e4/pes of Provence,who (as hath been ſaid before) maintai-
neda ſeparation fromthe Sea of Rome, with a diuerſe dorine and rites, ve-
ry impertc@ and rude. Theſe men, after the reformations of Zumglus,en-
| largedtheir dodrine by his,and reduced their rites vato ſome forme,atthe
ſametime when Geneuacmbraced the reformariou. Sentence was pronoun-
ced againft theſe many yeeres before, by the Parliament of eArx,which had
neuer beenexecuted. The King now commandedto exccutethe ſentence.
The Preſident muſtered together as many Souldiers as he couldin the pla-

ces bordering vpon them,andin the Popes State of eAwignion, and went with amicrabic

an armic againſt thoſe poore creatures , who neither had weapons, nor rf.

thought, otherwiſethen by flight, to defend themſclues, thoſe that could. mc by

French men,

They went not about toteach them, or by threarsro make them leaue their
opinions andrites: butfirſt of all, filling all the Counttey with rapes, flew
asmany as ſtoodto their mercie, becauſe they could not flie, withour ſpa-
zing old or yong, of what age orcondition focuer. T hey deſtroyed, or oe

thex

> _

120 RL. .$ The Hiſtorie of L 18 i 24

2545 ther razed the Countries of Cabriers in Pronexce, and of Hery;dolo-in the
ah, County of Vimvy/in, belonging tothe Pope, and all other places in thoſe
Cnaruas 5. precin&s.[tis certaine that more than 4000. perſons wereflaine, who, with- =
Hz 8, outmakingdefence,defired mercy. F2:390
Francis 1 Butin Germany,the Emperour arriued in Y/ormes the1s. of May, and
Sz. Cardinall Farneſethe day following, who treated with him, and with the
i 2, King of the Romansapart. Hedeliuered his commiſſions particularly ton-
the Evperur cerning the Councell,declaring that the Pope had giuenthe Legats power
to open it: which they meantto doe when rhey ſhould voderſtand from

him, what was done in the Diet, Heetold the Emperour, that it was not
neceflary to regard the oppoſitions of the Proteſtants, ſeeing that the im-
pediment,alleaged by them, was not new,but was foreſeene from the day the
Councellwas fitſtſp: ken of: that he might aſſure himſelfe, that they, ha-

uing caſt oftthe yoke of obedience, the priucipall foundation of Religion,

and proceeded to {o impious & wicked innouatios,agatuſtthe rices,obſerued

many hundreds of yeres,by the approbation of ſo many famous Countels,

_ they would, withthe ſame boldneſle, ſpurne againſt the Councell, which

was to begin, though lawfull, generall, and Chriſtian, aſſuring themſelues

to be condemned by it. Therefore that nothing remained, but that his Ma-

ieſty ſhould induce them to obedience by authority,or conſtraine them by

force. Which,in caſe ir were not done, and they ſo much regarded, as not

to bee condemned, or, after condemnation,not conſtrained to lay aſide

their errours;all the world would know thar the hereriques command, and

the Pope and Emperour obey, Thathis Holinefle as he thought fitto vie
mildnefſe atthe firſt, ſohe thought it neceſſary to ſhew really, that after ir

would follow force of Armes. Thar he offered him a grant of part ofthe Ec-
cleſiaſtical reuenues of Spaine,and power to ſell the plate ofthoſe Churches,

roa(liſt him with his owne money,andto ſend him ovr of Traly 120co. foot,

and 500. horſe paide, andto endeuour that he might likewiſe be aſliſted by

other Princes of 7rat, and to proceed,during the time of the warres, with

ſpirituall and temporall Armes,againſt whoſocuer ſhould moleſt his terri-

He complain- COTICS.Farneſe declaredalſoto the Emperour the attemprofthe Vice-roy of
EC oF Naptes,who would haue ſent foure Proctors inthe name of all the Biſhops
_ of the Kingdome,ſhewing it was neither reaſonable nor lawfull, andtharic
was a diſhonour to the Councell: For if Biſhops, dwelling ſo neere, and be-

ing ſo many, might be excuſed by ſending foure, France and Sparne might

doe1t much rather, and fo a Generall Councell ſhould be held with twenty

Piſhops. And he prayed the Emperour not to toleratea thing ſo contrary

tothe authority ofthe Pope,anddignity of the Councell, whereof himſelfe

is ProteQor, deſiring him to giuc ſome remedy heerein. The Cardinal! al-
ſotreated with him concerning the promiſe made in his Maieſtics name, in

the propoſition ſent to the Diet; that is, that to determine the controuerſics

of Religion, in caſethe Councell did not proceed, another Diet ſhould be

held ; anddefired him to conſider,that if neither his Holinefle, nor his Le-

gats and Miniſters,nor the Court of Rome, were in faultthat the Councell

were not celebrated, nor proceeded, he could not by any meanes intimate

inthe zecefe another Diet, viider this colour, And he inculcated this poynt
excecdingly

p I- tx. th.
P_ OO PIT IRE, _ *

Liv, &TheCouncellof Trem,

mc PI

I2I

Gn.

exccedingly, becauſe hee had ſtrait commiſſion therein from Rome; and
becaufe the Cardinalt of Monte, 'a man very free, nor onely ſpake-bur alfo
wrote yato hiasthereof , in his owne-name and his colleagues, after thar
hce parted from Trent ſaying in plaine termes, that this was the moſt im por-

1545
CNS

Pavt 3.
CHanris 9.

x Boot

Hewry $,

cant pointat which he ſhould cucr ayme, without forgetting it in his whole P4*<: 1.

negotiation, taking care not to-admir any excuſe, becaulc this onely would
produce any other good agreement. And for his owne part, hee would
t his Holineſſe in minde rather to abandon the Sea, and reſtore the
keyes to Saint Peter , then ſuffer the Secular power to arrogate authoritie
to determine cauſes of Religion, vnder prerence and colour that the Eccle-
ſtaſticall hath failed.in celebrating a Counccll or othervvile.
Concerning the attempr of £ Viceroy , the Emperor ſaid itprocreded
from his owne proper motion, from which, in caſc hee had not great reaſon
to the contrary, hee would bee remooued. For opening the Councell hee
 gaue no reſolute anſwere, bur ſpake diverlly,, ſometimes chat it would bee
good to begin it in amore fir place, ſometimes that it was neceſſary to make
{ſundry prouiſfions firlt. Whereby the Cardinall ſaw-plainely that his ayme
was onely to hold the marterin ſuſpence, and to gouerne himſclfe as occa-.
ſion ſerued , either openingor difloluing it. For not intimating another
Diet to treare of religion, hegaue agenerall and vnconcluding an{were, that
hee would alwayes make as much eſtceme as was poflible of the Popes au-
thoritic.' But to the propoſition of making warre againſt the 1 ering
he anſwered that the Popes counſel] was the beſt, and that the onely way
was propoſed by him, which he was tefolued ro imbrace; yer that hee would
proceede with due caution, and firſt conclude a truce with the Turke,
which hee- then did 'mediare diligently,- and molt ſecretly, by the Ertnch
King , and that hee knew well, that the number and power of the Prote-
Rants was great, and inſuperable, and thatin caſe they were nor diuided or
ſurpriſed art vnawares , the warre would prooue doubrfull and dangerous.

Thar his deſigne was to concecale his purpoſe vntill opportunitieſerued, and

The Empe-
rors an{wete
ro MEL cat,

then torreate with the Pope. In- the meane while hee accepred the offers |

made vynto him.” | men |
. Beſide: theſe publike buſineſſes, the) Cardinall had one priuate for his

The Legats
private nego-

owne houſe. -ThePopethinking ir toolirtlero giueto his familic the Duke: tiaion cor
domeof Camerino,and Nei, ns giu&them allo Parmaand Piacerga; mms,

which becauſethey werealittlo before in thepoſleſſion'of the Dukes of Mi-
lan, he defired the Emperours conſent , to eſtabliſh his gifr the better. The
Cardinall treated with the-Emperour hereof, ſhewing it' were berter for
his Maicftic that thofe Cities, ſ&'ncere to rhe Dutchicof Milan were in the
poſleflionofafamilic;ſo:deuoredand allied vnto him; thenin thepower of
the Church;:in which ifan illaffetedPope ſhould ſacceede, divers inconue-

niences Might ariſe; that this would not bee ant alienation of rhe/patrimorie

of the Church}, becauſe they firſt came intro the hands of Inlivs 2.” either

. was the poſſeſſion-of themwellconfirmed bitynder Leo; thatitwould bee

more'proficable forthe Charch; becauſe the Pope'world giue it Cviermo in

cxchange?andirhat” derraftingithe chargeof maintaining the garriſons of

_ twoCitigs,andaiding cightthonſandcrtorwnes, which the new Duke
2 j R

would

tt. tt tA Ae tt 4 Mie 4. 4a TY WEE FRA rH EE.
”

112

The Hiitory. of LE B32...

Sad

1545
GFSANSTY\

Pays Þ-,;
CHARLES F-

Hraxy 8.
FRANCIS 4;
i oh SS

The Empec-
rors anſ{\iwcre.

The Prote-
ſtants ſuſpcR
that warre
would bce
made 2:;a1aſt
ties,

The Legate.
dotb (ecretly
and ſuddcaly
Xemurne unto
ttale,

I EI—_

would pay, the Church would receiue more rent by ( amerio,then by theme
To theſccxpoſitions the Cardinallioyned hisdaughrers letters, who cftectu-
ally praycd the Emperour for her owne interelt ; vnto whom the manter was
not diſpleaſing,, as wcll for the atfeRion hee bare ro his' daughter and ne=
hewcs, as becauſc1t would bee more cafic ro recoucr them from a Duke,
then from-rhe Church, ' Yet hee neither denicd nor granted, bur laid encly
hee would not oppole. | |
The Legare treated with the Catholikes, and the Ecclefialtikes eſpecially,
incouraging them to defend thetrue Religion, & promiſing chemall fauour
from the Pope. The Proteſtants ſuſpected thenegoriation of the warre,
though handled ſecretly, becauſea Franciſcan Friar, preaching before Charles,
Ferdinand,and the Legar, aftera great inucctiuc againl(t che Lurherans, turned
to the Emperour,and [aid it was his office todeftend the Church with armes;
rhar vntil chen he bad norperformed that which was neceſſary to beeftefted,
that ſo many benctits which God had beſtowed vpo him,deſcerued he ſhould
make acknowledgement of them by ſerting himſclfe againlt char contagion
of men, whooughtnor to liuc any longer; and that he ought not ro make a-
ny further delay, becauſe many ſoules did dayly periſh by this means, for
whom God will aske an accountof him, if he gaue notſome ſudden remedic.
This Scrmon not onely begat (uſpition, but rayſcd diſcourſes allo that it had
been commanded by the Legar, and by the publike exhorrations,they conclu-
ded what the priuate were. To remedy which rumor, the Cardinal parted [c>
cretly by nighr,& returned quickly inco Italy. Yet the ſuſpicion of the Prote-
ſtants increaſed, by the aduifcs ſent from Rome, that the Pope,when he diſmiſ>
ſed ſome Capraines,gauethem bope he would imploy them the next yeere.
Bur the B.of Sidonwmarriucd in Trent the 18. of May,with a Eriar,a/Diuine,
anda ſecular Doctor,as Proctors of the Elefor Cardinall & Arch-biſhop of
Metz, TheB.madca ſhort oration of the Eleorsobedicncertothe Pope,and
Apoitolike Sea, much commending the celebration gf the Councell, as the
onely neceſſary remedy to thoſe wauerings of faith, and Catholike religion.
Thc Legares, inchciranſwere, commended the pietic and deuotion of thar
Prince; and foradmitting his commiſſion, they ſaid, it was neceſlary to fee it
frit, becauſe his Holincfſe had made a neiv prouiſion, that none could giue

voice by proxic,and thatthey were in doubt, whetherircom Prong a Cars

- dipall,and a Prince; that they well knew the prerogative w

Thc Profors
of the Arch-
b1op of
M-ntg arc 2
Lourt to leaue

the Councecll.

| ich hiscxcellen-
ciedeſcrued,whereuntothey were molt ready to giue all honourand teſpet.
Thele three men perceiving the difficultie,, were ina confuſion, 8ndrhought
to depart. The Legats repentedrbem ofthean{were, knowing of whatimpot-
tance it would be if the prime Prince and Prelate of Germagite, for digniticand
riches ſhould beealiened from the Councel: And they, wrought by way of
mediation; dexrcroully made by the Cardinall of Trent, by the Ambaſſadours
and others,that they would remaine, ſaying the Bull {pake only of lxalian Bi-
ſhops,and that the Legats were deceived :, which-impuration they; were conn-

tented to beare,that they might yithſtand ſo great adiſerder.| "(+1 -

Whcrfore they wrotero Rome giuing an account oftheſucotile;&deman-. |

ding whether they, ſhould receiue them while the Bull yas infforce; adding;
thar'it ſeemed hardro repeliche Protorsof fo greatapetionage, who ſhew-:;
| y | cd

- DE ere ro = —_ ——

> —— -

a ts.

Linz; ©" "Thcmmteton

ed himſelfe zealous and fauourable to the Catholike partic , who by this 1545
meanes might grow luke-warme: they were inltant to haue an antwere,
3*

| gh
becauſe the determination hereof would ſerue. for a prefideng, for that the Cunt: 5.

other great Biſhops of Germanie might ſend Proftors likewiſe, whonrit were Fu nn
berter they Wcnt not ro Trent in pcerion., becaule being accultomed to-ride Fnocenep L.
with great traines, the Ciric would not beeable toreceiuerthem all: and they The tegnes
wrote that, abouc all things, it was not fitto ſcorne che Dutchmen, who 525 enefly
arc naturally ſuſpicious , and ca{ily refoluethemſclucs; and eſpecially chole or maneotoogrin
that arc louing and well-deſeruing, as Coclews, who 1s already in his IQUrney, Frodurs.
as Prottor for the Biſhop of Heicſtat; who hath wrigen jo much againſt
the Heretiques, that one would beeaſhamed:to {ay thatheecould nor have
avoyccin be Councell. The Pope thoughtit not ticto write preciſely here- The Pope
of, conſidering the difticulties of Naples. For the Viceroy conriniuing'in _
his reſolution, a commiltion' was 'made to foure.to bee prelenr-there, in e'*
che name of all. Thelc bcing prepated for their journey, paſſed by Rome,
conccaling they were elefted tor the reſt, daying they went for themlelucs;
and that the others would follow. 'Bur hee. wrote to the Legares ta enter-
raine, the Proftors with good words ,. vntill.hee gauc another reſolution.
The Neapolitans ſpak=allo in the ſametenor ar their arriuall in Trent, and as
well the Pope as the Legates, diſlembled rheſame, deferring to ſpeake of it
yarill they were refolucd of the time ro openithe Councell.

| Inthe cnd of May 20. Biſhops, fiue Generals, and one Auditor of the

ota were come to Trent, allmuch wearied with expectation. Theſe com-
mended thereſt, who, not caring to bo haltic, expected to ee a more realo-
-nable occaſion to part from cheirhome, and were by them.called,, to their
great diſtaſte, headlong fooles ; for being lo cafily perfwaded. Therefore The Pectates

123.

OS F I 3 I

dchre co de-

they asked the Legates leaue.rogoe for fifrcene or twenty dayes tofUenice, onion
Milm, orclſewhcre, roauoiderhe incommodities.of Trent, pretending want 77
either of hcalch, or apparell, orotherreſgects, ., Bur the Legaces, khgwing run to
how much-it concerned the;reputazion of the.Councell, entertained them,
partly by ſaying they had not power co giue|gauc;and partly by giaing hopc

that the Councell ſhould begin within few dayes,; Ca/ars Ambaſſadoyr re-

ruracd to his Ambaſlage at Venice, vpon. precence of ind{polition,leaing

the Legates dqubttull, whether it were by che Emperours [gommitlion vp-

on ſome tricke, or for being weary bee idle/and incorhmedared, Hee
promiſed a ſpeedic returns, addingzhatinthemeane whilethe Ambaſſa-

ours of the King of the Romanesjremained thereto aſhiſt-che ſeruice of

God; and yer thee defired rhe. Coumcell ſhould, nor bee-gpencd ynull bis

xcturne.. . a at ax Hi 2677 12ga1 3.2165

;, | Butinthecnd of che nextmonerh the greatgxpart ofthe Biſhops, moued,

Jome by pouertic, and ſome by incommoditie, made! griekous cortplaines,
Andrailed as it wereafedition amatgahemlclues,threatning thatchey would
depart, and 4 eto Fran aſtel-4ktg; gavernous of Trent; whom
[Ferdinand had appointed co hold his plageytogetber with Anvbonie Ginets,T his

man came before the Legats, anddefired them itizhe named ethisKing,ithar |
-now at lalt they would begin, ic being plainechove ncheoplorenttnk uc -
by che:celeþration, and howmuch. cuill by:temporizing thus: LhoLagace
—- | L 2 | c

| =
w_

»

fn ns

124. | The Hiſtorie of LIE 1

— -* —-— —”—
- — 6

” « X
LO IT

1545 held thernfclues offended herewith, becauſerhey thoughtir was to thew they
"Damp world that which was contrary to thetructh, and to attribute ts them the
Cuaurrs 5: delay , which proceeded from the Emperour. And though they among,
Hm 8. themſelucs refolued rodifſemble; andtoanſwere in generall termes , yer the
Fraxers t Cardinall Monte could rot bridle his libcrtie, but in making anſwere, con-
|  cluded'inthe end with perlwafion ro expe Don Diego, who had more par-
ricular commiſſions then hee! Ir was hard-ro entertaine and comfort the
Prelates, who ill endured thatidledclay, and efpecially the poore ones, who
wanted money, and not wordes. Wherefore they refolued to giuc at the
Moneyis 8 Popes chatge, fortic Ducats a yeeretothe Biſhops of Nobili, Bertmoro, aud
"i Chioza, who com plained more then the reſt; and fearing chat the munifi»
cence might giue pretence hereafcer, they deciarcd rhemſclues that ir was
for alubſ1dic, and nor for prouifton. They gauethe Pope ap account by
letter of what they had done, ſhcewinghim the necethtie to affilt them with
ſome greater ayde: bur telling him withall , chat irwvas not good to give
it asa firme prouiſton , thar the Fathers mightnor ſeemethe ſtipendarics of
his Holinefſe : which would cheriſh the Protcliants excuſe, not ro tubmit
themſelues tothe Counce], becauſe it wascompoſed only of thoſe that depen-
ded on,and were obliged to the Pope.
The A:c>vi-  - Atthe ſame timetheEmperor, in Wormes, cited the Archbiſhop of Collen
wopot ©'*2 to appeare before him within thirtie dayes, or to ſend a Proctor, to an{were
E-2perourin tothe acculations and imputations layd vpon him , commanding him inthe
Wen mecanc ipace not to make any innouation m Religion and Rites, but to re-
duce the things innouated totheir former ſtate. Fermannus Biſhop of (ot-
ln , deſiring to reforme his Church, intheyeers 1536. called a Councell of
the Biſhops his Suffragans, where many Decrees were made, and a booke
printed , compoſed by Joby Groperrs , a Canoniſt , who, tor ſcrnice done
ro the Church of. R-me,was after created Cardinalt by Pope Par! the fourth.
Bur whether the Archbiſhop, and Groperns himſelfe were nor fatisfied with
the reformation, or whether heechanged his opinion , hee aſſembled che
Clergje and Nobility, and chiefemen'of his ſtare in the yeere 1543. and coſta»
bliſhed anctherreformation:” This , though it were approoucd by many,
pleaſed nor thewholeClergie, yea, the maior part oppoledit, and madeGro-
peru their head , who before had giuencounſel{tor it, and promoted it.
They entreated the Archbiſhop to defift, andexpett a generall Councell, or
at'thelealt,an Imperiall Diet; which-hot being able ro obrainc, inthe yecre
1545 they appealed rothe Pope, androthe Emperour, as ſupreme 'aduo>
cate and proteQtour of the Church--The Archbiſhop publiſhed by a wri-
ting,that The upenle was frivolous, and that hce could not defiit from that
whichibelonged 10-the' glgtyof God), and amendment of the Church; that
hee had notro?doc cirher' with che Lutherans or orhers, bur that hee obſer-
ued the dodtrineagreeablero the nog periprare The Archbiſhop.going
on in bis rcforniation, and the Clergie'of |
the Emperourreeeived the Clergieifits his proteQion,and Cited the
- biſhop; ashath beene ſaid;! 1 02500 te G2 + |
+. | This newes commingt© Trent ,gaue matterto' paſſethetitheatrheleaft
' withidiſcourſes., The Legates were much mooued; and amongftthe Pre =
—_ | WHhiCc

-
i

079G "(3JL3E

—_ cm — ey — va ee edn

Ayman po ay, Mono |

XUM

—

— O_o SS oe __—_ CC no nn. omg.
m— — ——

rent,

125

>

— -o— Jo pa -—_ — PIT Io I I. mt.

L1s.2. The Contell of T

which were preſent choſe thar weteof any ynderſtandingblamed the Em pe- i564

crep arne
tour, for making-himſclfe ludge of faich and rcformarion ; themoſt gentle IN
word theyihdts was; that che Emperours proceeding wasivery ſcandalous. Galaeas 5
They begaryto'know-they were nor eltcemed, 'and-thatio ber'iglegwas'th Fins z..
beeorned by the' world, "Therefore they id&difcourte thar they warecon- F2ae#.k
ſtiaynedrodeclarectheraſelues tobea Councet lawfully called, andro bebe 71, £..hy

is blam

plane theworke of God, procecding firſt againlt che foreſayd Archbiſhop,
the Eledtorof Saxony, the Landgtiue of pgafbia;and likewiſe againſt the King

whoa few daycs before thought themſclues confined in priſon. The Minj-

ters of the Archbiſhopef Mentz abated this heat, OT. gas in minde of

the greatheſſeof thoſe Princesandtheiradherents, and the' danger ro make

_ them vnite themſclues with the King'of England, and ſo"to'makea greater

fire in Germanie: andthe Cafdicialtof Trenr ſpake in the fame forme." The
Tralian Biſhops,thinking it a great matter to meddlein ſuch eminenriubiects,
faid it was ttue thar atthe world would be artentiucar ſucha proceſſe,yerrhat
all che. importance waſtobegin iid ground'/itwell : They incited one'ano-

_ *her, ſaying it was-neeellary to redeeme the lowneſle paſt withcelerity heres

after. "That they ſhould demand of thePope; ſome man'6b wortlyto' peto-
Tate again{t the acculed;as did Melebior Baldaſ$ino , againtt the Pragtarique;

tn the LaterangCouncely beeing perſwaded that to depriue Princes-of theit

States had no otherdifficultic, then to vic weltrhe formies of Proceſſes; Bur
ithe Legates, as well for this as fororher occurrences,knew'it to be neceſlarie
Tohaucſnth a Dodorand wrote ro Rome eg beprouidediof one: i  \

> The Pope vndetitariding the Emperorsadtion, was aſtoniſhed;afid doub- The Pope

ted whether rocomplaiteorbeſilene; Tototnplainezwhen no effea would

«his mooucd him exceedingly: But on the other ſ1de,confidering well how
much itimported him nor tofpaſſcoucr a marter of that thomene, hee reſoi-
'ued not to giuewords,as they did in Trent,- but roprocced ro facts, atid an-

| ſwerethe Emperour afterwards; if hee ſhould ſpeake of it. © Thetefofe hee The Arts
'made another citarion againſt the Archbilhop, the cighteetith of Tuly, thar

within ſixtie dayes he ſhould appeare beforehim, Hee cited alſotheDeanc
'of Colle; and fiue of the principall Canons ; leauing'the world to Gipuſy
how the Archbiſhop bard 1 |

tauſe, in diners places, ar the ſame time, and how' diſpute of the' com-
_ of the place of iudicature belonged ro the hotiour of Chrift. But
how this ſucceeded, and what cnde the cauſe had, ſhall bee faid in its

Ce. C1415”,
'Toreturne totharwhich more neerely coticerneth rhe Councel; che Ems

crour aſſayed in the Diet diuers wayes , to make the Proteſtants grant him The Eupt6t

affiſtance a-
g1ihſt che |
Turkes of the
oreſtahits,
ogine2
nditionall

aſſiſtance againſt the Turkes, not mentioning Religion. Whereunts they

Fill anſwered » thatthey could nor refolue wir outthey were fecured, thar
the peace ſhould be kept, and that, by the conuocation in Trent Ynder the *:
name of a Couticell, ir was not vndetſtood that the 'timeof the peace was ts

appr before two whicheired him for the ſame

» fot
the Citativiiy
by the Faihtt$

of England.” They grew into ſo great ſpirits'rhat they-ſeemed nor the faine; * 7

J

&

was wonder-

fully diitafted

accerd he thought frivolous; and ademoniifarion of his{mall power.” And rhe ©

ſhop is cited
by che Pope.

IE

ended , according to the Decree of the forther Dit, bur declared that the __

| þeacecatnot beimerrupted ; rior themſelues enforced by aty Detrees made

L __ itiTrew;

-. _

——_ * G - »
- x © WS OG SC" —————

126 Tbe Hilfory of. _

_—_
—— nm ”

hs in Trans; becauſe tbey cannot ſubmit tbemlelues rothat Councel, where the
. % bs) 43 2 . - 6 _- .

PALS, Pope, who hath condemned them alrcafly chathifree, power. iba Em PIE
Cainti27, {ayd, hee could:pot giue:them; peace which might:;cxempr them from the

—— —

Hire,” Comngel, to whoſeaithorityallare fubicet;that hehad no way 3@.cxcule hin
Fakxcrs3i ſplferoocher Kings and Prifces, if it were granted to:Germanie alone. norte
2... obgy the Councdl; aſſembled eſpeciallyFor herſake, Bur if /,as+hey az,
:? ---4: ehey:pretended a cauſe why they would not ſubmir, let them goe to the
-..2;- -Cogndcl, andalledge theirrcalons whythey {uſpe& ir; that they ſhould bg
+ heard andif it. appeared tbey, had wrong, they might then retule ; that ar
| - was not pertinent eo preuent, and _—_——_ that which jd brug not, Pie-
+reridtnggrieuance of things x0 come, and iudging of that which is/nor ſeene
as yet.; They replycd, they ſpakenor of things to.come bur paſt, theirRelj-
gion being condemned already ,'and perſecuted by the -Popeand ail his ad-
herenzs,” Therefore they were not ro expeR any future iudgement, becaule
it was-paltalready. That it was iuſt thac the Pope,and his adherents of Ger-
many,and of all other places,ſhquld make one pare mn the Councell and chen+-
{clucsthe other and for the difficulcy abous che manner and order of proces-
dingahe Emperour,Kings,and Princes ſhould bee Iudges, bur for the meris

of the cauſe, the Word ot God onely. | A SIE
.. They could not be remooued from this refolution, though che Ambaſla-
dour ot France, there preſent, did very much, and with mcnacing termes, en-
rreat;hera to conſcut tothe Councel; which threatsthe Minilters of that K.
the Popes fauourers, did ditateto the Ambaſladour, when hee parted from
France, TheImperialiſts propoſed the. cranſlation of the Councel into Ger-
. many,yndcr the Emperors promiſe to labour eftcQually,thar the Pope ſhould
_ 'condefcend ; whichtheothcrsaccepred,vpon condition the peace were clta-

bliſhed-yauill the Councel were aſſembled there. But Charles,being furcthat

the Pope would never agree,law that this was to giuethem a perpetual peace,
aidzherefore he thaughtir bercento leaue things in ſulpence, granting it on-

ly vorill another Diet, ſeeing hee was conſtrayncd, hauing nor concluded

.'- truce with/the Turkes as yet, and clteeming more that warre; thinking

© thatby occaſion of a Colloquic, orher reaſonable meanes would bee offered
herecafterz@,makethem con{entanew to the Councel of Trent , or, in caſc of
retuſall,co hold them contumaciopus,and ro make warreagainſt them. There-

Another Diet Fore the fourth of Augult hee ended the Diet, and ordained another in Ra-
i orpnen* tigbonfor Tanuary next, whereat the Princes ſhould be perſonally preſent,and

Ratwsbon tor

Lay, Jnftituted a Colloquie in matter of Religion, of foure Doctors, and two

Judges fora ſide. This was to begin at December, that the matter niight

be digeltedbefore the Diet. Heeconfirmed and renewed the former Edits

of peace, and{etdownea manner topay the contributions for the war., How

.» the Colloquiedid proccede, ſhall be ſaid in its place. | =

The Prore- , The Proteſtants, being departed from: Wormes, ſet forth a booke, where
e224; they faid.in ſumme, thar they cſteemed notthe Tridentine for a Councell,
oa bcing nor. aſſembled in Germante , as Aarian and the Emperour promiſed;
whercunto romake ſhew'of giuing ſatisfaction by making choice of Trent,

was tomocke rhe world, becauſe Trent cannot bee {aid ro bec in Germante,

bur onely bccaulc the Biſhop is a Prince of the Empire : but for lecuritie,thar

It Was

7
_— k . _ - a om po
0p —_— > IAA at" CLAD En one erence

a

i —_—

T be CouncellofiLrews
it wabaowdll indtolicandatmwuchiache Popes poweras Romeitſelfe. And ; 1545
thorather they efttemed iro lawkull, becauſe Pops; Paul y le beeprefi- 6 22's
dcbtirvit,and propoſe by bis Leyars;chatrhe ludgeswereryed wag himby \Cudnzns
oath;)that che pla Lcingagainlt the Pope, Akincoah.am 40be Iudgt; Hinuas br
charit wasneceffaric rotreat firſk-ottheffoarme of the Councell;, and. of ghe f**515 2
authoritics, whercWpon roground; Bur'the: Bmperopss. relolution dilplea- Th Enjerer
ſcd alike in Zrengand at Romdgas:yeell becauſe ſecular Prince medled in Re- for meding |
ligion;as becaule,itſecwedihe. Gouncell was caſſerzed; in regard, thac aps © **#**
proaching, order was giua1$0rhandle eile-where tho comrougrfics of dg-
etrcine., The Prelars inTrene blamed theDecrec, as igwere with. one voyce,
ſayingit was warlc then that of Spire; andmaruclliagthat the Pope, who
ſhewed himſelfe: fo quicke ggainlt thagghad and dig rolarate this, after char
che Councell was intumated, and already aſſembled. ; From this they drewa
manifeſt Argument, that their remaining in Trent wasVaineand: diſhonou-
rable.. The Legars (rycd their wits to conlolare, and perſwadethem, that all ,,,.. .
had been permitted by his Holineſſe fora good end. But they teplyed , that in 7renr are

iſcontenteds

whartſgeuer the end -was, and whar thing {ocuer doch follow, the blemilh; 2d mor of
notonely of the Pope and Apoltolique.Sea, bur of the Councell and the —
whole Church will neyes be taken away.- Neither could che Legats refalt
their complaints, whichended in demanding leaue to depart, lome 2lled-

ging neceſlary and important affaires of theirown,agd fometo retire them»

L ts; Zi

ſclues into ſome of the next cities for infirmitic or indiſpgfition, And though

the Legats gaue leaue t0 none, yerfome of them day ly ropke it, (> that before
the end ofthe moneth; there remained very. few. But)in Rome, though th is
ſucceſle was foreſeene by the negotiation of Cardinali Farneſe, yer-after ic

happeried they begam-to thihtke more exalyof it. They conſidered that the

Emperors ends were much different from.the Popes ;.tpr he, holding chings

_ inſuſpence,diſpatched his buſineſſe wellin Germary,'giuing the Proteſtants The Emperes

chretheo ;

hope,thar if they pleaſed him, he would nor ſuffer the Councell to bee opes boldthe
ned, and putting themin feare, thatin cale they did nor, ir ſhould begin pomectin
and proceed again{tthem. , Thereforche cuer cauſed ſome new emergents

to ariſe, which mighthold chings:in ſuſpence, paſſing the cime. pleaſancly

vnder divers colours, and ſometimes alſo propoſing that it were better ro
transferre it to another place, giying hope hee could bee contented ir wers
tranſlated into Tralie,euen vato Rome,thatthe ops and the Prelates 'of thar

eompar might morecaſily hearken tothe propotuiion, and draw the Coun- =

ccll in length, | | 7:

The Pope was in great ſtraits. Sometimes hee had the ancient ' deſire 2
of his predeceſſors that the Councell ſhould not be celebrated, and condem- wi cours
ned him(el{Efor hauingproceeded fo farre, yer, hee ſaw that ir was fcandas © **
lous and dangerous _- tro ſhew openly that hee would not haue it, by
diſſoluing chat ſmall congregationwhich remained in Treat. He ſawclecre-

ly that it was not a good remedic to extinguiſh herefics, For concerning

that which bclonged to Tralie, it was better ro prouidc againſt it by foree,
and by the office of the Inquiſition, whereas the cxpeQation of the Couns
cell hinderech that which is the onely remedie. For Germany, it appeared
Plainely that che Councell did rather maake difficulc ;then facilicate =_

EO : thugs,

128

-

—_— £22.22) Aha. a _ A —. >. a1 4 4 "1 " ® -
ne EET. Lf

L &nu2, |

| wil — * —_ eto wer gn ws > __—_ cc =

———renennn— —_— as 2 |
1545 Wings: BefidS; in eaſeitwere celebfared; heedoubred whiceher hee: ſhould

2A grantheEmperont the-halfe fruits-and vaſſalapes of the>Moneſtdries-in

| Pavx.y

*Chantts” 5

Hinkr*d.
Fxanxcry 5.
Us;

S oth gf '
” _ 3.4 -
- .
=_ . - -

a -
> i - =yY -+

""Spaine: Fer if hee didtiot; bisMaieftie would bee angry,; andif beeididit,

.heedoabred thartheSpanith Prelatis would difcouer in- che-Connccll, that

Xhey wetealienared fromrhim andtheApoſtolike Sea, for:giuing; thac to o-
thers whith belonged torher. Heſawlikewife rhat the Prelates of the king-

© dome were#Hatiſhied whowouldthivk ir incolerablero Pay the tenrhs;.aud

be at charges iithe Oouneel. H eethoughtharthoſe of France would joyne
with them;ahd incourage thetn,norforcharitie;but rohinderthe Emperors
profit. Therefore he beganto incline to the-rranflation, fothar it werenoe
caticd further into Germany,as was treated of in Wormes, whercunrohe ſayd

he would neuer conſent; though hee had an 100. hoſtages, and asmany -

pawnes: andthe rather becauſe by tran{ferring itmore into-Jrah,jnroa plate

. morefertil,commodious and ſ{ccure, he thought he auoyded the intotraeni.
.-: enceof continuing in thar Rare,and letring the Councel} lie at anchor, and
| bedrawenin lengrh from ſeaſon to feafon; the wortt refolution that could

' be made,tor infiniteand perpetuall preiudices which might infue. Beſides,

The Bull of
wanſation

There is
much mur* _.
murinyg at the
donation of
Parms and
Pracenza oa
baſtard.

The Pope
fendeth a
Nunc1o to

the Emperor.

by the time which the tranſlation required, the preſent milchiefe was cured,

which was to haue Councell , and a Colloquie, and Dierinſtitured for re-

ligion concurre together,not knowingwharend the one or the other mighr
haue; a thing diſhohourable, and dangerous, and of bad. example; and the
Prelats would be ſatiffied byparting from Trent. Beeing thus refolued, thar
he might be prouided to pur it firlyin execution, heſent-to the Legares the
Bull of faculryto tranſlate ir,dated February 22, of which it hath beene ſpo-
ken before. 35 1"! CETDIIS |

Theſethonghts did hot poſſefſecither the whole,orthe principall part of

the Popes mind,buthe' thought much more of infeoffing his fon in Parma

| and Piacenza,which he had im parted to («/ar,& dideffectitin the cadof Au-

guſt, not reſpeCting the _—_ murmuring, that, while the Clergie was to
bce reformed,the head of it ſhould beftow principalities vpona ſonne of a
damncdconiunftion. This the whole Coſledge rooke ill, thouy,* onely
Tohn Dominicus de (7up#is,Cardinaltof Trani,with ſomefew more, oppolcd it;
Tobn Uega,che Emperours Atnbaflador, refuſed ro bee preſent , and Marga-
rite of Anftria,his ncphewes wife, ſhewed herlelte diſcontentcd, becauſe ſhee
dclired the inueſtiturein the perfon of her husband, for that fhee loſt the
title ofthe Dutchefſe of Camerino, and got-nothing, Afterwards, beeing
wholly imployecd in freeing himſelfe from the! difficulties and dangers
which the Councell bode with it ſtanding thus,” neither opened nor
ſhur; barſo as ir might ſeruerhe Emperours turneagainſt him, hee reſolued
10 ſcndthe Biſhop of Caſertatotreatewith his Maieſtic, propofing either ro
haue ir opened andbegunne, or ſuſpcndedfor atime;and in caſe thar plea-
ſed not, he was to propoſe the tranſlation of it into' 7taly, to giuc conueni-
ent time to what ſhould be handled in the Colloquie and Diet, or ſome 0-
ther march,which were not ſodiſhonourableand dangerous for che Church,
7 haue the Councell remaining ſtill on foote, aud the Legares and Prelars
zdle. ph, | ;

_Thisnegoriation had many rubs. For the Emperour was reſolute,not to

conſcnt

—_

—__
kg

XUM

_—_—  —_— 9 - -
- -—— _— —_— — c_ — - - —— ___ II MW Dn —_ at - -
_ —— —— a ED "Ie >< ere

LtButs *  TheCountellsf Trent. t25

conſent cither co ſuſpenſion ortranſlation; not holding it good for his ends i 44
EN | EDN 545
tobegin it, he did not abſolutely denieany ofthe things propoſed; and ha- SM
uving no other courſe to rake,he knew not what to do, bur to incerpole gith- Chinzes F:
culticsto the three propoſitions. Finally, in che middeft of October, hre npmys ©
found out a temper, that the Councell thould becopencd, and the reforma- pomp w
tion treated of, forbearing ro ſpeake of herefies and poinrs of doQtine, left |
they ſhould prouoke the Proreſtants. The Pope aduiſcd heereof by the The Fepe is

Nuncio his letters, was touched atthe yery heart. For hee ſaw plaincly that «cd with ihe

this wasro gjue the vitoric into the bands of the Lutherans, and ro robbe J72een

himſfelfe of all auchuritic, making him depend of Colloquics and Imperiall

Diets, ordaining inthem treattes of religion, andforbidding the Councell

tomeddle with them, and foro weaken him by alienating his dependants;

andto {trengthon the Lutherans, by ſupporting, or nor condemning their

hereftes. And beeing aſſured rhat his and the Empetours intere(ts were fo

contatic, as thatthey could nor be vnited, he relolucd to conceale his owne

ends,and to proceede as belt befirred his affaires. Therefore, withour ſhew-

ing any diſtaſtc of the anſwere, he preſently replyedro Ca/erta, char, for his

Maicſties ſake, hee refolued- to open the Councelt immediately } comman-

ding that the acts thereof ſhould begin, and all thould proceed: with full

hbertie, and in fic manncrandorder. This che Pope fayd in ſuch general

termes, becaulc he would nor expreſſe himſelte, what lhould bee tarſt; 'or

whatlaft, or whartreared of; or W hat wholHy left out. For heewas reſolute

ro handle che marterof religion and potnts 6f doctrine principally, without -

allcadging other reaſon ,incale he ſhould bee-conſtrained ro alleadge any;

but that to treat of reformation onely; was 4 #1 og vied before; con-

rrary cothe reputation bord of himſelfeand oF che Councell. Therefore, the

laſtof October , hauipg imparted all/ro-the Cardinals, by their counſel

and aduife, he ordained, andwroteallot& Trent, thitthe- Synode ſhould be ©

opened the next Sunday,calledGaudete'in Aduent, which was*tobce' the t4, Fein ot.

of December. gr IDO IQ 20000177 CNT 411118 the Councell
The Prelats ſhewed greatioy for the ewes, fecitig” themſelves deliuts cnby, ©

red from the imminent danger, toremaine Jong in TWrr arid dot norhirs; in

Bur alittle after the ambiguiries'were on footagainie./ For letters eame from +, .

the French King to his relarts, Whicly were three) thar they Honld depart. Prads are re:

This fermed tothe Legares #thing of thi greateſt ithporaaiees being a5 it 5rd.

were a declaration” that Priieeatd the” King /approoucd” asf the” Conm Prirecdts

cell.” They vicdall meanests hindet' their) departure, tellirfp* the Prelates, :

thatthc King gaue chat ordervwhen the caſe WHY GHierwi Tad that they

oughit to expect attother, becauſe his'Mxieſtic waFtiow informed ofthe pte- -

ſent tare, putting chem in tinide” of eieſerndall tMirwouldenfuc, if caſe

they did otherwiſe, and of the off (@awhich: ether Narions would take.

The Cardinall of Trent, an#tlic Spatſidh Rd THYfh Brelats ptoreſted again *

 theirdepartare. Thereforcin canchifi6h they rookea thiddiecourſegwhich

the King comttiended when hekdtwi Unite Lbrd of Ries hould got
of adaptors gen vs eno'temane, oO,
The la [tf N6trembet;the tiimePlaſixed forthe opetiiifiefthe Countel

approaching;the LegatedWrote aan gies oma mms; +
Pe | | ne

| vgs . = _— —_ as — uy, — ” —— - <
1320 :. 1 be Hiftorie of L 1. :2.
1545 the Apoſtolique Sca, it were fit, 13 opening of it, to read and regilter a Bull,
>> which might command it to bec done; and they madea diſparchin all dili-

Pavr ;z.- X

Caaxtrs ,5+ Fence that it might come in.time. The anſwerc, together, with the Bull,
Hex 8, atriucd theelcucnth of December. Therefore the Legates commanded a
eaxert faſt and Proceſſion the next day, and made a Congregation of all the Pre.
4 latcs, where firlt the bull was read, and thcnalltreared of, which was'to bee

done the next day,in the Sellion.” The Biſhop of Eftorgapropoled aftera plca-

{ing manner,that it was neceflary to read in the Congregation the Briete of
© Bt the Legation and Prefidencie, thatallmight make protcſlion of their obe-
would nor diencc, and ſubicttionto the Apoltolique Sea, The requelt was approo-
ſuffer the Bull ed by almoſt all che Congregation, and accompanied with the particular
wonrobes jn{tance of cucry one, Bur the Legate SantFa Croce, confidering bil fare
F thedemand..miglitreach, and that to publiſh the authoritie of the Prefi-
dencie, might breede dangerto hauc itlimited, minking it better by ECepiNg
it{ecret;to vic itas occaſion ſerued, an{weied readily, that in the Councell
all were but one bodice, and that it vyas equally necetlaric to reade the Buls
of .cuery Biſhop, to ſhew. hee ws ſucha one,inſtitured by the Apoltolique
Sea; which would be tedious,and, by realon of thoſe who dayly will come,
would ſpend thetime of all ch Congregations, and ſo hee ſtopped the re-
quelt,and retained rhe digyftic of rhe Legarion, which conſilted in beeing
vniimired. + ;, I |

ubile yl! fore hee exborted cucry, one to. affaſt the Fathers aſſembled therein, with

(hed 1a Rome

SS # ac 4<+<

©-- - thatitwasheix charge curing thewhole courle.ofthe coyncel.co adronilh
The admoni- the;Prelatsinqecurreacesan
ti5n © ard, 1, * ; | gs :

vw.  Shapdingthathisadmonitien & all the reſt, wereas wel made to them{clues

7 Y oY

Sd

L

— —— ao oa ll OR AYE. DC EEE —_—_ _——— _
- . — — k__

Lis. TheCouncellofTrnm 141

FI"

which was the war,forrainc ofthe Tarkes and ciuill of the Chriſtians. Thar m_
Without chis inward and true acknowledgement, their enterance into the > — \

Pavt: 3.

Councell, and calling vpon the holy Gholt were invaine. Thacthe iudge- Cuances' 5
ment of God was iuit to punith them fo deepely , chough uc wete lefſe fumar 8. *
then they deſcrued. Therefore they exhorted cuery one ro know his Paav*'s 3
owne faults, to mitigate the wrath of God, replying tat che holy Ghoſt,
which they had inuocated, would nat come , if they-refuſcd to heare of their
owne finnes,and like E/dras, Nehemiah and Daniel, confeſle them. He added
thatic wasa great bleſſing of God,chat rhere was ſuch an occafion giuen to
beginne a Councel, for reformation on all hands. And though concradis
ors will not bee wanting, yer it was their ductie conltantly ro goe on,and,
as Iludges, ro auoyde ate, and aime onely at theglory of God, in regard
they arcto performe this ducty before him, the Angels, and the whole
Church, In fine, they admonilthedthe Biſhops ſentby:the Prinees, ro doe
their Maſters ſcraice with faich and diligence; yer peakiering che honour of
God beforc all. Afterwards the Bull of che intimation of the Councel in the
yeere 1542. was read, anda Briefe of the ſumple depuration of the Legartes,
rogether with a Bull of the opening of the Councel, and immediately 41-
fonſo Zarilla,Secretarie to Don Diego, ſtepped forward, and reproduced the
Emperours Commillion preſented before tothe Legates, and ſhewed a lets
tcr of Don Diego, in which he exculcd his abſence, by reaſon of his iadifpo-
ſition. For his excuſe the Legates ſayd it was worthy tobee admitted. For the
Commiſſion,though they might inſiſt yponthe anſwere giuen before, yer
they were pleaſed for greater reuerenceto recciue it againe, andexatnine ir,
and make an{wereafrerwards. ;

Thele things being done, according to the rite of the Roman Cetemo-
niall, all knceled downeto pray ſoftly, as the vic was in all che Selhons,and
then they ſayd aloud, Ad/umus Domine, &c. Sante Spiritus, &e. Which the
Prelident ſpake with an high voice, in the name'of all. The Leranie being
ſung, the Goſpel was read by the Deacon, Si peccauerit in te frater tins, fc.
And laltly the hymne, Vent Creator ſpiritus, beeing ſung,and allfare downe
in thcirplaces, the Cardinall of Monte pronunced the Decree; with inter-
rogatgtic words ; reading, whether irplealcd the Farhers, forthe praiſcof
God, cxtirpation of hereſies, reformation of Church and people, depreſſion
of the enemics of Chrilt,to determine anddeclare rhar the holy 'Tridetitine
and Generall Cquncel ſhould begio, and be b:gun; whereunto altanſwered,
firſt the Legates, then the Biſhops, and other Fathers by che word: Placer,
He thcnadded, whether in regard of the- Feaſts of theold and newycere, it Thedctree

for opetng

pleaſed them thavthenexrSeſhon ſhould be the ſeuenthiof Ianuaryand they' te Count,
anſwered likewiſerhar itpleaſedrhem. This being done, Hercules Seuerallo, ind bolecn
Speaker ofthe Caouncel, deſired the Notarics:to makean in{trametic of all. fea

The himne, Te Deumlandamus, was ſungy and: che Pathets purting off their
Poncihcall habirs,aod purting on cher common, accompanicdſrhe Legatesy

the Ceaſſe going before. Thele' ceremonies being yſcd in rhe Selſtons tol-
lowing;ſhall be repcared-no more. 2.1 2; 10 2b16 FO

- Germwy and Italy were vety curious to kniurthc firſt 4&tions of this af-
ſembly, Which. was begun withfo many difficulrics;: 6.che-Projacs _—y

Ty $i
&

.
-

132

The Hittory of __ 74

DD ——

i > LN
PavL, Z» i
CHARLES |.F,

Henry 8B. 4
FKAXCIS 17
N—N" "VF
The contcuts
ot the orati-
on,mue by
thc Bithop of
Biionto,

Theceaſure
of tlic oration.

AMES. Ln "0 I

I5 45 | andtholcoftheir tamily,werc charged by ther friends 1to aduiſethem of it;

Therefore immediatly after the Scthon,a copie of the Legats admonirion;
and of the oration of Bitonto was {cnt into euery place; whichwere quickly
ptinted. Whereof that Lmay the better tell whar was commonly ſpoken, it
is neceſlarie to relate briefely che contents of the Oration. It began with
{hewing the neceſſitic of the Counccl!, becauſe itis an hundred yreres ſince
that of Floyence,and becauſethipgs of ditfticultie belonging tothe Church,
cannot weli be handled but in it. For in themthe Crecds haue beene made;
hercefics condemned, manners amended, Chriſtian Nations vnited, armies
ſentro conquer the holy land, Kings and Empcrours depoſed,and ſchiſmes
rooted our. And thatfor this cauſe the Pocts introduce the Councell of the
Gods. And Mojſes writeth thatthey were concliliaric voyces ,theDecree to
make man;and to confound the tongues of the Grants. Thar Religion hath
three heads, Doftrine, the Sacraments, and Chariric; andthar all cheſethree
call for a Councell. Hee declared the corruptions centred into them, for re-
fttauration of which, the Pope, by the fauour of rhe Emperour, Kings of
France, of the Romanes, and of Portugal, and of Chritftian Princes, hath
aſſembled the Synod, and ſent his Legats. He made along digreſſion in com-
mendation of the Pope, andanother, not much ſhorterin praiſe of the Em-
perout;thenhe prailcd the three Legats,dernung their commendation from
the name .and ſurname of cach of them; anu added 'thar the Councel
being aſſembled, all oughtro mect inir, as in the Troian horſe. Hee inuited
the woods of Trent, ro {ound foorth through the world, that all ſhould fub-
mitchemſclues tothar Councel;whichit they doe nor,it will be juſtly fayd,
that the Popes light is come into the world, and men hauc loued darknefle
better then thelight, Helamenred that the Emperour wasnor preſent, or,
at the lcaſt Don Dicgo,who repreſented him. He congratulated the Cardinall
Madruccio,thatthe Pope bad aflembled in tus City the ditperſed and wande-
ring fathers. Hee turned to the Prelars, and layd, thattoopen the gates of
the Councel,was to open the gates of Paradiſe trom whence would deſcend
lining waterto fillthe carth with the knowledge of the Lord. Hee exhor-
ted the fathers roamendment, and to open their hearrs, as dry ground, to re-

cciucit; adding, that if they docit nor, yer the holy Ghoſt will-open' their.

mouths,though theirmindes bee poſicelied with an euill ſpirit, as hee did the
mouths of (;aiphas and Balaam,lcit, if the Councel ſhould erre, the Church
ſhould crrealſo. Heeexhorted them. to lay aſide all paſſion, that they may
rrucly ſay, It feemed good tothe holy Ghoſt and to vs. Hee inuited Greece,
France ,$paine, Italy, and all Chriſtian Nations to the Marriage. Im:fine, hee

turned himſclfe ro Chriſt, praying bingby the interceſfionrof Saint Vigilive,
(che turelaricSainrofthe valley of Tor eniaa-Gag |
The Legats admonition was: accountcd pious, Chriftian, modeſt, and

worthy of Cardinals; but the Serman of the Biſhop was1udged farre'other-

wilc. His vanitieandoſtenration of Eloquence was noted by. all. \Bur men ,
of vnder{tanding compared, as anholy-{cntence ito a wicked, thoſe ingeni-*

ous and moſt truc words of the Legats, that withour a-good inward ac--

knowledgement,thcholy Ghoſt would in vainebccalled on; with thefaying
of che Bithopquirecontrary,thar, without that, their mouth: ſhould bee ©-
pened

es

m— = _— —
.

XUM

— —__—_——Y — ——_ po p__— SS... - —

Link! the Councell of Trent. | 133

pencd bythe holy Gbolt , chough heir heart remained repleniſhed witha 15 45 -,

wicked ſpirit. It was thought arrogancy1to: athrme,, that, ig calc thoſe > — 1

few Prelates erred all the Church would: crrez as it other, Councels of ſeucn Cures 5.

hundred Biſhops had not erred;and the Church refuſed their doftrine. O-Hixar 8. *

thers added that this was not-conformable to thedoarineof the Romans nets &

its, whograntnotinfallibilitie but rothe Pope, and tothe Councell by ver- |

rucofche Popes confirmation. Bur to compare the/Councellrothe. T ro:

ian horſe, an inſidious inucntion, was noted bf tolly and reprehended for:

irceucrence. - To haue retorted the words of the Scriprure, that, Chriſt and:

his. doctrine, the light of the Father is come imto the world, and men haue

preferred darkeneſle before the light, 'making the Councell and doctrine

thereof, ro bee the Popes light; appeared ta tlic world ,-which if ir were not

recciucd, it ſhould be faid, men hauc loucd datkenefle more then light; was

eltcemed a blaſphemic; anditwas: wiſhed char at the leaſt hee had notcaken,

the formall words of the holy Scripturc , that hee might nor haueſhewed fo

openly to haue dilefteemedir. £1390] 1 g |
Bur in Trent, the beginning being made, neicher the Prelares, not Legars The Legazes

themſelues knew what ſhould bee handlcd,nor whiat order obſerued.” Ther- bow ro pro-

fore the Legates wrote to-Rome a {ctter,, worthje to bee NEE. © 7 ——_—_—

_ giue anaccountof what was done before. Firlt they ſaid they bee appointed

thenext ſeſhon the day after the Epiplianic z as a terme;which conld:not bee

raxcd ncicher of too long delay., nor too. much breuitic,/\thas inthe meane

time they might boaduiſed how to gouerne themſclues.inthe other falkons,

wherein they defirerohauc light ; and becauſe they might cucry heare bein,

rerrogated of diuers things, for which they could nor haue ſpace rq-aduiſe

' andexpectan an{were; they delaredthar as parcicular atinitruction,-as was

poſſible, {hould be ſentrhem. Abouc all chey-deltred aduertiſamenoconcer-

ning the manncraud farme to progeede, to,propole, ag rclolue,” 4nd- whiat

matter ſhould be handled. They:demanded, efpecially if: the, Gaule-of here-

fies ſhould be the frity or. ſhould)be treated otin generally-or in-particular,

condemning the falſe doctrine, or the perlons of the prizicipall henerakes,or

the oneand the ochertogetbert if-the:Prclates: propolean Articleof. refots

marion; whercat all-kteme to'ayme , whictheriic thqiuld beg handled zogerhes

with the, Article of :Raligion, .orlbcforeot afteh::ifthe Ggpnceiloughtio in

tinate its beginning taall poopleandmatioris;rinuiting the ProlgysandPriny

ces, and exborting)the faithifull:to:pray; God fartir zi ati his Holinefſe will

doc it himſtlfe ; whenthere ſhall booced(i61/ro write ſorakdenter,,wifliue or

reſponſe: what farmeis to he xſed:. and-whas:Seale}likewilowhatiforme

isto bce vcd. inche cxtentian of: dactdeoreea3if they (hould:rake narige at 3he

Colloquicand Diet which wile, bold in Germany ; or dillemble it g)tebcy

{ball procerde flowlybr fwittly\aswelli wrig:the ſeflons 32843

propoling:themartds;|; They|infaarncd. forte: Prabres howg bd fir ro

proccedetiy:nazions; which, cheyhald ro beſatlnious; thaticwould make the

Preldtesof aueryonetoanytin;addgbacthe tathrnunjbasrof ltahass wha

are molt kaithtullr6 FW RI FRB ATTY (7a 1 3 e ſuffrage

of thcmaltogerber wouldbrofaqudilyalucwtih the fly ronch

men;op Spaniards,or Durchmen: Fhcy ſamaduile: iexins papneines

TS | M . OT [0

.The Hiſtorie of L1n.'2.

- 1545
RANA

PayL he

CHARLES 5.

Hexmy 8, -
FrAxC1S' 1,

ALS

thac ſome hada deſigne ro dilputeof the authority of the Councell, and

Pope; a thing dangerous to raiſe aſchilme amonglt the Catholikes them-
ſclues ; andthariin the congregation of the 12. all the Prelats joyntly and car-
neſtly defired to ſee rhe commithon of theit tacultic, which they were con-
ſtrained artificially to auoide, not knowing as yet how their preſidencie
oughr to be vnderftood and how farrehis Holinefſe would baue it extended.
They demanded alſo that order might be taken for the rodes, that cucry day
and houre they mightſendand receiue aduile, as occaſion ſcrued ; they deft-
red ſomeorderabout the precedencieof Ambaſſadors of the Princes, and
prouiſion of money, in regard thoſe 2000. crownes, ſent them a little be-
forc were ſpent vpon ſome poore Biſhops,

: ThePrelates were carnelt that the worke might beginne ; wherefore the
Legates to give them ſomeſatisfa&tion, and to ſhew they were not idle, cal-
leda congregationthe 18. day,withoutpropoling any thing but the manner
of living, and conucrfing,and gauerning rheir families. Much was faide a-
3 the vic broughtin, eſpecially in Rowe, to weare the habit of a Pre-

"lateinthe ccremonic onely+, and ar orher times of a fecular. Sumptuous

apparrell, as allo baſe and ſordide , were equally reprehended : and much

. was laideof the ave of their ſeraants, bur all was referred to bee relolued

The Popes

uiſvvci Cc.

inanother congregation, which was held therwo and ewentieth, and was
wholly ſpentin diſcourſing vpon ſuch ceremonies, concluding'that a good
reformation of the minde was-principally neceſſary : wherefore ayming
at the-ſectnelineſſe: which belongeth to their degree, and edificarion of the
poopee ; edcry one will ſee whar hee hath ro redrefſe in himlclfe, and his
nilic, MI 20 | | | |

Thi Pope, vnderftanding the Councell was begun, depureda congrega-
tion of Cardinals and” Courticrs to {uperintend , and aduiſe concerning the
affaircsof Trent, Conſulting with thefe, hee reſolued that things were not
as yet ripeienough to ſceclcerely whar matters wereto beehandled, and in
whatorder. Hee'tauſed an an{wereto bee ſent tothe Legares thar ir befce-
medmnorthe Synodeto inuite cither Princes or Prelates, and leaſt of all ro
defire any oneto aſhft cher with praycrs;' becauſe this hee had ſufficiently
donehimelfe by the Bull of che Tubile, and thar by rhe Lerters for the con-
nvcarioniof theiConncell::rhatzrhey ought nor to ir{finke-thar-the Synod
ſhould write to any; the Legars hauingſpowerto ſtpplythar, by their owne
letters writtch itral their nates.» Concernin g the:extenſionof the Decrees,

. theritleoughtrobe, The molt holy Occumenicall andgenerall'Synode of

Trentche-Apoſtolicall-Legats bemg Prefidents.) Bur for the formeof giuing
voycesy that their reaſons weteverygoudnor'rodocir by-nations ; the rather
becauſe it washewer ved imrancient times bur was introduced by the Coun-

celof (fonftance, and followedbyrharof-Bafll; whichare nor robe imirarcd.
Burthe forme viedinthetaft LarraxCouncclbeing the beſt and moſt decent,

they ſhould followthar, by'whith lacciexatnplo, which. fucceeded well, they
might ſt6pthemauth-ofwhoſocucrpropbled any rothercomrary. Andcon-
cerning the coridetmnation ofthe hereviees;8 matters to be handled;8 other
things deetbyithem3orderthould begiuenin'time convenient: in the
meanſpatethey ſhould fpendecherime inpreabulary:tliings accordingrothe

caltome

4

, - Zo

:
1
&
i
of
| 4%

 XUM

_ . - » » *  - a. fat + i, rarer

L 1s. 2. the'Councell of Trent. 135
cuſtome of other Councels: 'Tharthey ſhould maintaine their preſidencie 1545
with that comlipeſſethar beſcemeth the Legats of the Apoltolike Sea, yerſo 7
as that they may giue fatisfaQtionvnroall; but,aboucall,hould vic diligence Crantan Þ
chat the Prelats ſhould not exceed the bounds of honeſt liberty , and reue- Haage,”
rencetowards the Apoſtolike Sea. It was a marter of greater importance to ONES
aſſiſt che Prelates that they might bee able ro maimuaine themſeclues. There-
fore hee ſenta Briefe, by which hee exempted all the Prelates of the Councell
from payment of Tenchs, and granted them the participation of all fruits,as
wellin abſence as preſence: he ſenralſo rwothouſfand crownes to helpe the
needic Bithops, giuing order they ſhould not careto hauc it publiſhed ; be-
cauſe, in caſe ir were knowen, it could not bee expounded burfor a louing
courtclicof thehead of the Councell. P: 3-66Hh

This place requireth, by reaſon of that which hath been, and will be ſpo- The manace
ken in diuers occaſions, about themannerof ſpeaking their opinions in the cesinwhe |
Councel called, Giuing of voyces, that it ſhould be declared, what the cuſtome —_ wy
was of old, & how this, whichis vſcd in theſe times,came firſt vp.The aſſem-
bling of a whole Church, to handlc in the Name of God the occurrences of
do&rine anddiſcipline, is a thing molt profitable, vſed by theholy Apoſtles
inthe choyccof Matthias, and the ſcuen Deacons : and the Dioceſan Coun-
cels are much like to this. Bur of the meeting of Chriſtians from many re-
mote places to conſult rogerher, there is a famous examplein the Acts of the
Apoſtles, when Paul and Barnabas, with others of Syria;mer the Apoſtles and
other diſciples in Jeruſalem, who were aſſembled abour the queſtion of kee-
ping theLaw. And though it may bee ſaid that it was a recourſe ofthe new
Churches of the Gentiles, vnto the old mother Church,fro whence their faich
was deriucd,a cuſtom much vſcd in thole firſt ages, & often rehearſed by Ire-
nic and Tertullian, 8 though theletter were written by the Apoſtles, Elders, 8
brethren of Teruſalemonly,yetin regard that not they only, bur Panl 8& ©Barna-
bas alſo did ſpeake,it may well be called a Councel ; by example whereof the
ſucceeding Biſhops thoughtall Chriſtian Churches to bee bur one, and like-
wiſe all Biſhoprickes to be butonely one,ſo framed, thateuery Biſhop held a *
partthereof,-not as his owne, bur ſo, asthatall ought to gouerne the whole,
and cuery one to employ himſclfe moſt in that which was particularly re-
commended to him; as S.Cyprian, in his little golden booke of the ynity of
the Church,doth piouſly demonſtrate. In caſc of neceſlity of any parcicular
Charch,though the perlecutions ſometimes waxed warme,a$ many as could
aſſembled themſelues, to make prouiſion in common. In whichaſſemblics
CHK15T andtheholy Gholt being preſident, and chariry chafing away all
humane paſlion, they aduifcd andreſolucd of what was fir, without ceremo-
nics or formes preſcribed. Butaftera certainetime, paſſions of menand cha-
ritic beeing mingled together, and there becinga neceſhiry to gouerne them
with ſomeorder , the chicfeſt man amongſt thoſe rhar were aſſembled in
Councell, cither for learning,orfor greatneſſeof the Citic or Church where: _
of he was,or for ſome other reſpe&t of cminencie, tooke ypon himthe charge
to propoſe andguide theation,andcolle&t the voyces. But after tharir plea-
ſed God to giae peaceto the Chriſtians, and thartheRomane Emperours re-
cciucd the holy faith, there happening moredifficultics in do&trineand diſci-

M 2 pline

136

The Hiftorieof | Lrs.2.

1545

Favs 2.

pline, which, by reaſon of the ambirionor'ather bad affections of thole that
had followers and credite,troublcd the publike quier,another fort of Epiſco-

Enanres' 5. pal aſſemblies had beginning, congregated by Princes or their Lieurenants,

ene, eee eeeeney

Hexxr 8. To rcmedicthetroubles. In theſe the action was guided by thoſe Princes or

F:. "AaC1s 1.

AR / M

agiltrates which did call them rogether, whoalfo were perſonally preſenr,
propoſing and goucrning the treatie, and decrecing interlocutorily, the oc-
curring differences, bur leauing the deciſion of rhe-principall point, for
which the Councell was congregated,to the common opinion of the aſſem-
blic. This forme appeareth in the Councels, whoſe ates docremaine. The
Colloquie of Carholikes and Donatiltes before Marcelinus and many others
may {crue for example. Butto ſpeake onely of generall Councels, this was
donein the firlt Councel of Epheſus before the Earle Candidianus, ſent Prefi-
dent by the Emperour; and moreclecrcly in that of ( alcedon before Martia-
ms and theludges by him appointed, in that of Conſtantinople in Trullo before
Conſtantine {urnamed Poganatus, where the Prince or Magiſtrate that was
Pref{1denrt, commanded what ſhould bee handled, what order obſerued, who
ſhould ſpeake, and who be filcnr,and diddecide and accommodate thediftc-
renccs in theſe things. And inthe other generall Councell,theates whereof
arc not extant, as of the firſt of Nice, and the ſecond of ( onſtantineple, the
hiſtorians of that Age doc witneſle, that (; onſtantine and Theodofius did the
like. Yet inthoſctimes, when the Biſhops themſelues did aſſemble of their
owneaccord and others medled nor, the aftion was goucrned as hath been
{aid,by onc of them,and the reſolution taken according tothe common con-
ſent. Sometimes the marter was ſo eaſe, that it was diſpatched in one mee-
ting. Sometimes, by rcaſon of the difficulty or mulciplicitic thereof , it was
neceſlarieto reiterate the buſineſſe, whence proceeded the many Seflions in
theſame Councel. Not one of them was about ceremony,or only to publiſh
whar was digeſted cl[ewhere, but ro vndcerſtand rhe opinion of euery one,
and the colloquies,diſcuſſions,diſputes,and whatſocuer was done or ſpoken,
were called theaCtes of the Councel. Itis a new opinion,and ſeldome practi-
ſed, though eſtabliſhed in Trent,that the Decrees onely are called Adctes of the
Councel, and ought onely to bee publiſhed but inthe ancient Councels all
wasgiuen ynto all, Notarics were preſent to colle&the voyces, who,when a
Biſhop ſpake and was not contradicted, wrote not his proper name, butthus,
The Holy Sinode ſaith. And when many faidthe ſame thing, it was written,
TheBiſhops acclaymed,or affirmed,and the things ſo ſpoken were taken for
deciſions ; if they 1 pake in a contrary ſenſe, the contrary opinions were no-

ted, and the names of the authours, and the Tudges or Preſidents did pro-

Councels go-
uerned by -
| Princes.

nounce. Sometimes ſome impertincncic did vndoubtedly happen by reaſon
of ſome mans imperfection ; but charitic, which excuſeth the defects of ones
brother, did coucrit. A greater number of the Prouince, where the Coun-
cell was held, and of the borders was prelcnt; but without cmularion, cuc-
iy one rather deſiring to obey, then to giuc a law vnto others. After the

alterncand Weſterne Empires were ſeparated, there remained {till inthe
Welt ſome marke of the ancient Councels, and many were celebrated in
France,and Germany, vnderthe poſterity of Charles the Great,and nor a few in

Spaine,ynder the Kings of the Gothes. Aclaſt, Princes being abſolutely debar-
red

L1 8:2. the Councell of Trent. _ 7

— —

red rointermeddle in Eccleſiaſtical matters, that kind of Councelgrewin diſ- 15 46
uſc,& tharalone remained which was called by che Eccleſiaſtikesthemſclues, ; ——'
che conuocation of which Prouinciall Councels was almoſt wholly afſu- Cuanres 4:
medby the Pope, by ſending his Legatesto bee Preſidents, whereſocuer hee timar s. ©
heard there wasatreatic tohold a Councell. And after a certaine time hee rr
rooke that power to himlſelfe which the Romane Emperours vſed, to con-
uocate a Councell of the whole Empire, and to be Preſident himlelfe, ifhee
were preſent, or, in his abſence, to ſend Legates to be Preſidents; and to gO-
uernethe ation. Butthe Prelats, aſſembled in the Synod, being deliuered
from the feare of a Secular Prince, which keptthem in awe, as worldly re-
ſpeRs, the caulcs of all milchicfes, did exceedingly increaſe, which cauſed
alſo the multiplying of many indecencies, they beganne to digeſt and order
the matters in private, that they might obſerue a decencic in the publike
meeting. Afterwards this was obſerued fora forme, and in the Councels,
bel1des the Seſhons , they beganne to make Congregations of ſome Depu-
ties, to ſer in order the matters to bee treated of, which in the beginning, it
they were many, were diuided, and a proper Congregation aſſigned to cuc-

ry one. And this becing not ſufficient toremooueall che indecencies, be-
cauſc thoſerhat were nor preſent, hauing different intereſts, made difficul-
tics in publique, beſides the particular Congregation, they madea gencrall
before the Seſſion, whereall were preſent ; which according to the ancient
rite, is rhe ConciliarieaCtion, becaule the Scſlion, eucry thing being done be-
fore, remayneth bur a pure ceremonie, But a little more then one Age
being palt,priuatc intereſts cauſed a contention to ariſe amongſt the Biſhops
of diucrs Nations. Whereupon thoſerthar were remote beeing few, and not
willing to bee oucrcome by the borderers, who were motein number, ro *
makethe ballance equall, it was neceſſary that eucry Nation ſhould aſſemble
by it ſelfe, and reſolue according to the number of yoices, andthart the ge-
nerall deciſion ſhould be eſtabliſhed , not by the ſuffrages of particular men,
but by the plurality of the yoyces of the Nations. Soit was obſerued in the
Councels of Conſtance , and *Baſil: which vſe as it was good where the go-
ucrnment wasfree, as it was when the world had no Pope, ſoit ill betitred Why theRo-
Trent , where they defired a Councell ſubie& varo him. And this was the fogrears

rcalon, whythe Legates at Trent, and the Court of Rome, made fo greata forme of yro-

matter of the formeof proceeding , andof the quality and authority of the <*4ins
Prefidencie. |

[

But theanſwere being come from Rome,they called the Congregation the ©
fifch of Ianuary 1 546. where the Carditfall of Monte hauing falutcd and bleſ> x ; 46
{cd themall inthe Popes name, cauſed the aid Bricfe of cxetmption from pay* -
meantof renthestoberead. The three Legates made as it were three enco-
mialticall Orations, oneafter another, declaring the Popes good afteRtion
towards the Fathers. But ſome Spaniards ſaidethatrhis fauour of the'Pope
brought greater dammagethen benefit, becauſethe accepting of it implied a
confeſſion that the Pope mightlay burthens ypon ether Churches, and that
the Councell had nor authority to hinder him}, norto exemptthoſe who by
right were not to be included. The Legates werenotonly diſpleafed arthis,
but returncd alſo ſome biring termes. Some of the Prelates demanded D

: M 3 ; ;

ſ

138 The Hiſtorie of -— Ks ©.

P 546 rhegrace might bee extended to thoſe of their families allo,and tOAs Many as
{> were preſentin the Councel. The Generals of the religious Orders deman-
Cuanirs 5. ded likewiſe the ſame exemption, alledging the cbarge of the Monaſlcries
Har s for the Friars which they brought to the Councel. C atalanus Triulrius, Biſhop
anert t; of Piacenzs, whoarriucd two dayes before, related publikely that heewas

rifled as he paſſed necreto Mirandula, and defired an order ſhould be made in

the Councel againlt thoſe that hindered or moleſted the Prelates, or others

that went tothe Councel. The Legatcs, ioyning this propoſe with the fore-

faid prerence of exemption, conſidering of what importance it might bee, if

the Councel ſhould meddlcin ſuch a bulineſle,making Edicts for their owne
cxalcation, and that this wasto touch the ſecrets of the Eccleſiaſtical Hie-
rarchic, putit a{ide with much dexteritic, alledging it would ſeeme ſtrange
totheworld, and too great a defire of reuenge, offering ro labour with
the Pope, that hee would prouidefor the ſecurity of their perſons, and hauc

con{ideration of the families of the Prelates, andof the Friars. And ſothey

appeaſed all.

And going on tothe Conciliary actions, the Cardinall of Monte related
what forme was obſerucl in the lalt Laterane Councel, where himſ{clfe was
preſent, as Archbithop of Siponto. Hee aid, that treating then of the French
Pragmatique, of the ſchiſme againſt Talius 2. and of the warre betweene
Chriſtian Princes, three deputarions of Prelates were madefor thoſe mar-
ters, that cach Congregation becing employed in one onely, it mightberter
digeſt it ;3that the Decreces being tramed,a generall Congregation was called,
where cuery one ſpake his opinion, and that by thole the reſolutions were
better reformed, ſo that all things paſſed in the Seſſion with greatconcord
and comlineſle; that the buſineſle tro bee handled by them was more various,

Cs 10 Lutheranes haying moucd cuery ſtone, to oucrthrow the building of
erderfor i- faith ; therefore thatit will bee neceſlary to divide the matters, and for cuc
Rns Cor ONTO Ordaine A particular Congregation to diſputeir, to cauſethe Depuries
_ to frame the Decrees which arc to bee propoſed in thegenerall Congregati-
on, wherecuery one (hall de[tucr his opinion: which that it mighr bec abſo-
lutcly free, chem(clues the Legares did reſolue to be propolers oncly, and not
to giue their ſuffrage bur in the Seſſion. Thar all ſhould bethinke themſclues
what was neceſſa:yrto be handled,that ſome beginning might be made in the
Seſſion which approached.
a greardiffe-- They propoſed then, whether they were pleaſed that a Decree already
therile of the framed, concerning Chriſtian conuerſation whileche Councel laſted inTrenr
Concel. ſhould bee publiſhed in the Seſſion. Which beeing read with the title , The
mo$t holy, as the commandement from Rome was, the French men defired
this addition, Repreſenting the ( hurch Yniuerſall: which opinion many Bi-
ſhops did follow with a ioynt conſcnt. But the Legares confidering that that
title was v{cd onely inthe Councel of Conſtance and Bafil, and that to imitate
them, wasto renew their memorie, and to giuvethem ſome authority, and to
open a gapto the difficulties which then troubled the Church of Rome ; and
which imported more, confidcring that aftcr they had ſaid ( Repreſenting the
Church Yninerſall) ſoracalſo might Pinke ro adde the words following, that
is, which hath power immediatly from CH x 1s T whereunto cucry one,

Ll

%
NOS. ——_— w—_———_—_———_——

chough

: 4 ,
-

-* Sa —_

— Re ee
LY he ———
%
%

— CI

- urn EEE nee ie

a —

L1s. 2. the Councell of Trent. uo

chough of Papall dignirie, is bound to obey, they oppoſed ſtrong]y,and (as t546
they wrote to Rome. in a termes ) they whetred themſclues againſt it, F
withour declaring to the fathers the true cauſes , but onely ſaying they were Cuaxizs x.
froathy and inuidious words, and that the heretikes would haue madea bad ttruiy 3.
ivtcrpretation of chem. And they all ſo laboured,withourdiſcoucring the ſe- CO h
cret, firlt by art, then by ſaying plaincly they would nor permit ir, bh they
appcaſed the generall commotion, though the French men and ſome few
more remained firme intheir propoſition,

And Iobn de Salazzar, Bilhop of Lanciano, a Spaniard by Nation, aſliſted
the Legars very much, who hauing commended in ample termes the firlt
Councels of the Church, for antiquity and fanRiric of thoſe thar afliſted, he
deſired they ſhould bee imitatedin the title vied by them ,' which was very
plaine, without expreſling reprelcntation, or what, or howgreat authoritic
the Councell had. But heeplealcd them not, when he aid ; that, by their
example the name of Preſidents oughrtto be laid afide, becauſe it was neuer
vicd by any ancient Councell, hack un onely by that of Conſtance, which The nmeof
by reaſon of ſchiſme, changed Preſidents often : adding , that if that ex- mace
ample were to be followed, it would alſo be neceſſary ro nominatethe Em- fin Cour
perours Ambaſſadour, For then the King of the Romans was named,and the Councellof
Princes with him. But this pride was farre remote from Chriſtian humility: "OT
and he repeated the diſcourleof the Cardinall Santa (roce , which hee made
the ewelfth of December, by which alſo hee concluded, that they ſhould de-
fiitromake mention of Pref1dencie. This propoſttiontroubled the Legats
more then the former ; yer the Cardinall Monte ſuddenly an{wered, that
Councels haue ſpoken diuerſly , according to the occurrences of the times :
that formerly the Pope hath alwayes beene acknowledged, for head of the
Church, nor cucr any Councell hath becne demaunded, with condition it
ſhould not depend on the Pope,as the Duch-men now doc with great bold-
neſſe ; vnto which hereticall temeritic it was fit to reſilt in cucry ation,
ſhewing they were ioyned with the head, whichisthe Pope, by making
mentions of his Legats. Hecſpake much in this matter, and knowing hee
could better maintaincit by diucrſion, then perlwaſtons, hee was a meanes
they ſhould paſſeto another thing. The contents of the Decree was appro-
ucd by all; but there being one parricle in ir, in which cuery one was 2 £8
ted topray to God for the Pope, Emperour, and Kings, the French Prelats
delared there ſhould ſpeciall mention bee made of the French King. This the
Cardinall Santa Crece commended, but added, that the like ſpecification
 wouldbeexpettcd by all in their place, which would proucalong bulineſle,
and full of danger,by reaſon of precedencie, The French men replicd , that
inthe Bull of he conuocation , the Pope had made mention onely of the
Empcrourand French King;and thercforeby that example they ſhould name
them both,or ncither. The Legats rooke timeto thinke of ir, being deſirous
to giue cuery one farisfaction,

Theſcucnthof [anuary all the Prelats,clad in their ordinary habit, aſſem- Ti «fon
bled themſelues in the houſe of the prime Legar, from whence they went to BE
the Cathcdrall Church with thecroſſebefore them. Our of the Countrey

of Trent were colle&tcd into the Citie three hundred foote, armed partly ng
pikes,

W "1

——

E The Hiſtorie of Y + Lis: 2.

FR? a FY _—__—

-vq 46 pikes,and partly with harquebuſhes,and ſome horlc. Theſepur themſclues

in fileon cither ſidethe way , from the houſe of the Church ; wherethe Le-

Caanrrs 5. Fats and Prelats being entred, the Souldiers returned to the market place,
Hz & and diſchargedtheir harquebuſhes,and remained there to guard the Seſſion.
1 zany Beſides the Legars and Cardinal] of Trent,there were preſent foure Arch-bi-

ſhops, twenty eight Biſhops, three Abbars of the congregation of ( aſsina,
and foure generals,who farin the place of the Seſſion. Thele forty three per-
ſons madethegenerall Councel. Of the Archbiſhops,two were titular only,
neuer ſceenc in the Churches, from which they had their name, which the
Pope gauethem,only to dothem honor; the one was Olaws Magnus, Archbi-
{hop of Ypſala in Gothland, the other Robert Yenante , a Scottiſh-man, Arch-
biſhop of Armaghin Ireland; who, though hewere porc-blinde, was com-
mended for hisyertue, ro ride poſt the beſt in the world. Theſe two men,
having beene relecucd certaine yeeres in Rome, by the Popes almes , were
ſent to Trent to increaſe the number, and rodepend on the Legats. Abour
the number of twenty Diuines ſtood on their feete; the Ambaſlador of the
King of the Romans, and the Proctor of the Cardinall of Ausburg were pre-
ſent, and ate ypon the Ambaſſadours bench, and necre vnto them, vpon the
ſame bench, fare ten Gentlemen, choſenout of the bordering places by the
Cardinall of Trent. ' Tobn Fonſeca, Biſhop of (,aftelamare ſaid Maſle, and (o-
riolanus Martiranus,Bilhop of S. Marke,madethe Sermon,

When the Maſle was ended, the Prelats put on their Pontificall habits,
and then the Letanic and Prayers were (aid,as in thefirlt Seſſion. After this
all fate downe, and the Biſhop that ſaid Maſſe, mounting into the Pulpir,
read the forenamed Bull, againſt admitting to giue voyce the Proctors of
thoſe that were abſent, withour mentioning the other , where thoſe of Ger-
manie were excepred. Then he read the Decree, in which the Synod exhor-
tedall thefairhfull aſſembled in Tren , ro liuc in the fearc of God , and dayly
to pray for the peace of Princes, and ynitic of the Church , and thoſe of the
Councell to ſay Maſle, atthe leaſt on Sundaies , and to pray for the Pope,
Emperour, Kings, and Princes, and all to faſt, giucalmes, to be ſober, and
co inſtruct their families. Itexhorted alſoall men, eſpecially thelearned, to
bethinke themſclues exatly how to reſiſt hereftes, and intheaflemblies ro
vic modeltic in ſpeaking. And it ordained beſide, that if any fat notin their
place, orgaue not voice, or was not preſent in their congregations, he ſhould
not receiue any preiudice, or gaine any new right. The fathers being inter-
rogated, afterthis was read, they an[wered, it pleaſed chem. But the French
men added, that they approued not ſo barcatitle, andrequired an addition
of Repreſenting the coninerſall Charch. In fine, the next ſeſſion was appointed
the fourth of February, and the fathers had lcaue to depart ; who putting off
rheir Pontificall habits, did, inthcir ordinaric apparell , accompanicthe Le-
gats homein the ſame order they came to Church; which was obſcrued in
all che ſeſſions afterward.

After the [cfſion there was no congregation held vntill the thirteenth of
Tanuary, becauſe Perer Pacceco, Biſhop of Jahen, lately created Cardinall, who
expectedthe har from Rome , without which the ceremoniec gauc him not

leaue to gocabroad , had adeſireto bethere, becauſe order was tobee raken
therein,

,-

L 1B. 24 the Councell of Trent. TY

therein, that no.inconucniences ſhould happeniinthefcſhon. The congre- x 546
gation being allembled, the Legars complained of thoſe, whointhe ſcion PN
had oppolcd the title; they fhewed it was nor {zemely ro cauſe diverlitic of Cade
opinions to appeafe in that publike place ; that the congregations were nyuae 2.
made thar cuery one might deliucr his mind more prinatly , and all agree in puns»
that which was to bee publiſhed ; that nothing weuld moredaunc the here-
tiques, and encourage the Catholiques, then the fame of ynion. They de-
{cendedto the matter of the title, and ſaid, that none was more fit chen that
which the Pope hadgiuen in the Conuocation, and in-{o many other Bulls,
where it was called, Occumenicall and yniuerſall; vato which ic was {uper-
fluous to adde (repreſentation) in regard whole bookes declare whata Coun-
ccll lawfully called, and begun, is, and dothreprefent ; that by doing other-
wiſethey ſhould ſecme to make doubr of the authority thereot,and reſemble
irto ſome other Councell, vnto which they gauc that title, being willing ro
ſupplic with words the lawfull authority which they knew it wanted, glan-
cingatthat of Bafil and Conſtance, but ro makea tirme reſolution they would
haue.cuery one deliucr his opinion.

The Cardinall Pacceco beganto ſay, the Councell was adorned with very
many titles, which if chey were vſed in all occaſions, the expreſhonof chem
would bce greater then the body of the Decree. Butas agrear Emperour A fue +-
poſſcſſour of many kingdomes and ſtares , vieth in his Edicts the title onely Gu cue
trom whence they haue force, and often putteth his owne name to chem
withoutany titleatall, ſorhis Cohuncell, according to the Subictts char (hall
be handled , ought ro vie many citles to expreſic its authoriric; bur now thar
they are in the preparatories, therc is no necel{itieto ylc any of them ar all,
The Biſhop of Feltre put them in minde,thatthe Proteſtants defired a Coun-
cell where themſelues might haue a decifme yoice; fo that if this titlebe giuen
cothe Councell, that it repreſenterhthe Church vniuerfall,they will draw an
argument from hence, that ſomeof cuery orderof the yniucrſall Church
oughtto be preſent. - Thele being two, the Clergieand rae Laitie, ir cannor
be incircly repreſented, if the Laitic be excluded. But for therelt, choſcallo
of the Councell who aflengcd to the ſimple title, wereof opinion tha ir
oughr to bee ſupplied. The Biſhop of Saint Marke laid that the Laikes are
molt improperly called the Church. Forthe Canons derermine that they
have no authority cocommand , butneceſlitic to obey, and tharrhis isone
of the things which the Councell ought to decree, thatthe Seculars ought
humbly to recciue thardoctrine of faith which is giuen them by che Church,
without diſputing or thinking further on it ; avd-therefore that it is yery
meere to vic thetitle, that the Synode repreſenteth the Church-yniuerſall,
tomake rhem ynderſtand that they arenor the Church , bur oughrro hear-
kento, andobeythe Church. Many things, were ſpoken and they went on
withoutany firme concluſion, but onely that the {impletitle ſhould bee vied
in the next (eſſiqn,as itwasin thelalt.

When this was cnded, becauſe certaine Prelates deſired, that at the laſt
they might come to marrers ſubſtantiall , the Legats, to giue them fatisfacti-
on, propolcd that they ſhould conſider of So heads contained inthe

Popes Bulls; thar is, the extirpation of hereſics, reformatien of diſcipline,
and

_—

FE The Hiſtorie of Lis. 2.

1546

Payzt 3.

and eltabliſhing of peace; how they ſhould beginne theſe treaties, whar
courſe they ſhould holde, and how proceede; that they ſhould pray Ged

Cuantss. 5. TO illuminarethem all, and cucry one ſhould ſpeake his opinion in the firſt
Hexxr 8, Congregation. In the ende ſome commilſhons from abſcnt Biſhops were

FaanCis 1.

ARS

The Legates
defire ro make
their partic

i{trong,

The Imperia-
liſts defare to
beginne with
rctormation,

preſcnted ; and the Arch-biſhop of 4ix, the Biſhops of Felere and Aſtor-
24a were depured to confider of their excuſe, and relate in the Congre-
ation. |

: Thenext day the Legates wrote to Rome, that it appeared that theampli-
fication of the title, with addition of Repreſenting the ( hurch Yninerſall, was
a thing ſo popular and fo plealcdall, that it might cafily be ſpoken of againe:
and therefore they deſired to know his Holineſle pleafure if they ſhould
perſiſt in denying it, or yecld ynto them, eſpecially ypon occaſion of ma-
king ſome Decree of importance,as to condemne herefies,orthe like. "They
gaucaduice alſo, thatthey had made the propoſition for the next Congrega-
tion ſogenerall, thatthey might yeclde tothe defire of the Prelates , which
was to cnter into the ſubſtanriall points, and yer cnterpoſe time thar the
might recciucin{truion from his Holineſſe, "They added thar the Cardi-
nall Pacceco had aduice, thatthe Emperor had giuen order romany Spaniſh
Biſhops,men of exemplary liucs,and learning, to goctothe Councel. Vhere-
fore they thought it neceſſary , that his Holineſle ſhould ſend ten or tweluc
Prelates, whom hee might truſt, men fitto appearefor theirother qualities,
thatthe numberof the Oltramontans increafing , eſpecially men rare, of ex-
cmplaritic and learning , they might in ſome part bee incountred. For a-
mongltthoſethatynrtill then were in Trent, thoſe that had good mindes had
lictle learning , and leſſe diſcretion ;and thoſe that had ynderſtanding, were
diſcoucred to hauc deſeignes,and hard to be gouerned.

In the next Congregation, aſſembled the cighteenth , roynderſtand the
mindesof all , concerning the Propoſitions made in the laſt, the opinions
were foure. TheImperialiſts ſaid, that the points of dofrine could not bee
couched , with hope of any fruit, becauſe it was firſt neceſſary tro remoouc
the tranſgreſhons, from whence the hereſies aroſe, by a good reformation,
calarging themſelues very much in this field, and concluding that ſo long as
the ſcandall which the World recciueth , by the deformation of the Clergic,
ccaſcth not, nothing that they can ſay or preach will euer bce belecued, all
becing perſwaded that deedes ought to bee regarded, and not words. And
that they ought not to rake example by the ancient Councels, becauſe in
them cither there was not corruption of maners, or that was not cauſe of
herelte;andin fine, thatto deferre the treatic of reformation , was to ſhew
themſelues incorrigible. # |

Some few others thought firto beginne with doctrine, andthen to paſſe
to reformation, alledging thar faith is the ground and foundation of Chriſti-
an life; that no man begins to build from the roofe, bur from the founda-
tions, that itisa greater ſinnero errein faith then inother humane aCtions ;
and that the pointof rooting our herefies was put firſt in the Popes Buls,
A thirdopinionwas, that the points of reformation and faith mightill bee
ſeparated, becauſe there was no doEtrine without abuſe, nor abuſe which
drawed not after it the bad interpretation and bad ſenſeot ſome _

Therc-

-

CO Cn ee Ea outs

m— {TL

the Councellof Trent. - | 143 2

L 1s. 2.

Theretorc ir was neceſlaric to handle them ar the ſame time, for thatthe 15 46
world hauing their cyes fixed vpon this Councell, and expeCting aremedie yn —
as well inmarters of faith as maners, ir would be fatisficd berter by handling Czaxcss 5:
them both rogether , chen one afcer another: eſpecially if according to the Henry 8. |
propoſition of the Cardinall of Monte, divers depurations were made , and ones
one handlcd his marter, and the other char, which ſhould be done quickcly,
conſidering that che timeprefent, when Chriſtendome had peace,was preci-
ous, andnotto bee lolt, notknowing what impediments the time to come
might bring. And he rather, becauſe they ſhould ſtudy ro makerhe Coun-
cell as ſhorr as they could , that the Churches the lefle while might remaine
depriucd of thcir Paſtours, and for many other reſpeRs, intimating chat
which might ariſe inlepgrth of time, to the diltalt of the;-Pope and Court of
Rome_.. | I $200k

Some others, among whom were the French men, demanded, rhar that
of the peace might be the firſt : that they ſhould write varo the Emperour,
the moſt Chriſtian King, and other Princes , giuing them thankes for the
conuocation of the Councel, for continuance whereof thar they would eſta-
bliſh peace, and helpe the worke forward, by ſending their Ambaſſadours
and Prelates; and likewiſe ſhould write friendly tothe Lutheranes, inviting
them charicably rocome to the Counceli,and ioyne themfelues with the relt
of Chriſtendome. "The Legates, vnderſ(tanding the opinions of them all,
and commending their Mrs av ſaid, that becauſcit was late, and rhe con-
ſulcation of nos. 2 , and the opinions various, they would thinke of what
euery one had ſaid ,and, in the firit Congregation, propole the points ro bee
determined. 7? | |

Order was taken that there ſhould bee two Congregations every weeke, j99.00T:

gre2ations C.

on Munday and Friday , without warning : andin the end the Archbiſhop ') we, |

of 4ix, hauing receiucd letters from the molt Chriſtian King, ſaluted the Sy- timaties.

node1n his Name, and promiſed thar his Maicſtie would ſuddenly feud an

Ambaſladour, and many Prelates of hisKingdome and fo the Congregati-
on cnded. |

The Legates ſcntaduice of all ro Rome, and. wrote that they had drawen
in length che reſolution of the things that weve handled, vnder the pretences
before related, bur iu ":urh rogaine moretime, that they might receiue in-

{tructionsand orders how to goucrne themſelues ; befceching his Holinefle

againeto make his will knowne , and to conſider aboue all,thatto-prolong

the Councell, and hold ic open,when he mighrmake it ſhore, was not good
for the Apoſtolique Sca: adding that they were conſtrained to hold two
Congregations cucry weeke, to keepethe Prelates in exerciſe, and to take ot-

_ cafion from them to make them by chemſelues. But they ſaid chat this would
draw onthe bulinefle very faſt, and therefore thatit: was neecflary to-4akt
fome.courlcto refolue their propoſes quickely, and not to deferrotoanſwere

them as hicherto hark beerfedone, bit ro aduiſethem|yharthey oughttode
preſencly, and rotbreſee, as nuich asmight/beg what coulit happen.And lee .

ing they.had written ofrentimes,, tharrhany-poore»Bilhoppes came t9:the
| Councell, forthchopeandgood promiſes which his holineſſeand Cardinall

Farwſe had giacntkem;rhey then repeatediit,addivgyitivas an errorto od

ro Vis

14-4. | The Hiſtorie of LIvi2:;
1546 to vierhem ashomely in Trent, asin Rome, where, hauing no authority, they
"og humbleand in ſubieCtion; bur when they are in the Councell, they thinke
Cuanurs 5. they ſhould be cſteemed and maintained, which if ir benot done,it were ber-
Hey 8, Ternottohaucthem inthatplace, then ro haue them thereill ſatisfied, and
xe 7 diltafted;concluding that thatenterpriſe could nor ſucceed Well , withour
diligence and coſt. | | Tt |
It maygenerally ſceme ſtrange,thatthePope,a wiſe man,and skilfull in the
affaircs of the world, ſhould nor giuc an{were vato two particulars, of ſuch
importanceand necelsitie,inſolong atime, after ſo many inſtances of his
| miniſters. Bur his holineſlſe grounded nor his hopes vpon the Councell; all
ThePopeis his cogitations were turned toward the warre, which the Cardinall Farneſe
vponthe war treated with the Emperour theycere beforc,and could not forbeare to make
agunſt the : ;
Portancs, demonſtration thercof: neither did the Emperour defirethe Councell ſhould
0 procced;it being ſufficient for his ends thar it was openedonely.
Bur the Prelates, who defired to begin with reformarion,and leauethe do-

Aconzroucr- Ctrine behind, aſsiſted by the Emperours Miniſters , afſayed ro draw theo-

te how t9 bc-

gin, whecher thers to them : which thing being very cafie, becauſe the reformation was
\ t r = .
tion or do... Fenerally defired,andnort much belccued, their number grew ſo great, that

tion or doc-

moor with the Legacs were confounded. Therefore by themſelues and their friends
* they oftendealtpriuatly with diucrs, andlaitly , inthecongregation of the
22. day, all three one afteranother ſet chemſclues ro ruine the foundations
which werelaid in fauour of the reformation. One reaſon, drawen from
| the Emperours propoſition in the Dict of Wormes the lalt May , made a
great impreſsion , 'when he ſaid they oughtto expect what the Councell
would doc inthedcfinitions of dadtrine,and in the reformation; and , thar
if nothing weredonc, he would intimate another Diet,ro accommodate the
differences of rcligion,and correct the abufes: arguing from hence, thar if
they haridled northe points of do&trine , the determinations of the future
Colloquie and Dictwould bee canonized, neither could they with reaſon
hinder chem ro treatof religion in Gerwanie, which themſclues refuſed ro doe
inthe Councel]. , bob? t
There was a great rich Prelate in the congrezation, who, with a premedi-
rared ſpeech, wentabout to ſhew, thatthey ought oncly. ro aymear therefor-
mation,aggrauating much thecommon deformation of rhe whole Clergie,
andinculcating, thatſolong as our veſlcls were nor cleanled, rhe holy Ghoſt
would not dwell inthem,and by conſequence, that no right iudgment could
be expected in matters of faith, : Mil 140:
BurtheCardinall Sana (,yoce taking from henceoccafion to ſpeake, ſaid,
thartthere was no reaſon to deferte the reformation of rhemſclues;yho were
to manape the Councell; bur that was cafic and ready, and might ſuddenly
be execyred,withour delaying chepoints of doFtrine, which were:intricate
of themſelaes;andof{ong digeſtion. Hemuch commended —_— for
making mentionofathing ſo holy,and of ſo good cxainple: for beginning
from themfelues,they mightealily reforme allrhe reſt of the world ; and hee
earneſtly exhorredall to comerorthe'practiferthereof.'1y/This opinion was
much commended byall,butnor followed ; for many ſaid; the reformation
oughtro beegeneral{;yirhbur looſing tinrc in thatparticular. ' | _—_—
_ tncy

Wo" », + > —_—_— 7 9

Bull pr |
imageof:the holyghoſt inthe forme of a Doue , andchenameofihe Synod
-on the other, and ſome defired other formes , altwhich were glorious.

Ls. 2. "5 the Councell of Trent.

——
—

145

they all concluded,cxcept ewo,chatthe Articles of Religion and reformation
ſhould be handled together, as they arcalike deſired, and deemed neceflarie

1546
SPSULN:

Pays 3.

by the whole world, and ioyntly as 0 in the Popes Bulls. The Legats Cuancer x.

were content with this. reſolution, though they rather defared rocreateof fra; a,

faich, and leaue the reformation. But ſo great was their feare chat they
ſhould be conltrained to bandle reformation alone, that,they chought ir

Faancis 5.

made to han-

a great yiEtorie to ioyne them together. - And they thought alſo that their die doarine

opinion to leaue the reformation was dangerous, becaule they ſhould re-
{ilt all che Prelates and States of Chriltendome, who defired it, which
they could not doe without much ſcandall , and infamic. If this courſe
which they tooke, being conſtrained thereunto by meere neceſſtic, ſhould
not pleaſe thoſe ar Rome, they could not complaine of any but them-
ſclues, who Were ſo often ſolicited to anſwere the letters, and ſend neceſlary
ialtructions. |

Afterwards it was reſolued to write to the Pope to thanke him for cal-
ling and opening the Councell, and to deſire himto maintaine and fauour
it, and to beca meanes ynto Chriſtian Princes to continue peace among
themſclues , and cxcice them to ſend Ambaſſadors to the Councell. "They
relolucd alſo ro write ro the Emperour, the French King, Kings of the
Romans, of Portugal, andother Catholike Princes, to preleruepeace, to
ſend Ambaſſadours, ſecure the wayes, to mooue their Prelates to ap-
peare perſonally in the Councell. The care of writing theſeletrers was com-
mitted tothe Bilhop of Saint Marke,and were to be read and ſcaledin the next
congregation. S |

The Legatcs publiſhed -ewo points to bee conſidered of by-the! Fathers,
whereof they were to giue their voices.  Thefirſt, whetkerin chenexr {el
ſion the heads of faith,and thoſe of reformation which were correſpondent,
ſhould bee handled together. The ſecond how to proceedin making chojee
of the two heads,and in bandling and examining them. The Legars chovghr
they had by thele propoſitions diſburthened themelncs of the-imporcunate
queſt made by ſome, to cſtabliſh ſome ſubltanciall (point in- every: cot-
3c , and withall co hauc ſhewed that they held the 'Prelaces/ in
cltceme. _ ole :

The hexrcoHt tion was {ſpent in reading many letters , andgiſpurii
what Scaleto _ _— pm. they thould bedllealed inleadc, ow,
rtothe Synode, inwhich ſome would hauconthe oneiderhe

But the Legats,, who had anocher order from Rome, ſuffering the fathers 40
diſpute heercon, diverted the propoſition by ſaying it ſauored of pride, 'atid
protracted therime', becauſe they muſt ſend to nice to makethe forme
of it, in-rcgard no Artifan-in” Fre was able-ro (doe it ; additig ahat'ir
might bee: berter:thought of afterwards; 2nd that ir was neceſlariers dil-

parchtheletters now, 'which night bee done by themanic and'ſealeof che
Prime Legat. That which-remaincd was-puroff vatill the next'Congre-
gation. > IHE: 1901351116250 3 Ct 240} 16X9 2:21.36 201 VOr a
 Inthe which, rhe wo points-befote pee ens Hong

ccraing

and reforma-

tion together,

gation,

146 The Hiſtorieof : L1 Be 2.

er Is —— oe

- 1546 ccrning the firlt,there were rwo opinions. Onethat the Decree ſhould bee
{5D frained and publiſhed : the other that it was nor good to tie themſelues'with
:Craxus 5, a Decrec, but to keepe their libertie, and reſolue as occaſion ſhould ſerve.
ikxzr8.. . They rooke a- middle courle ; to make mention onely that the Synade
24x45 t- yas principally aſlembled for thele two cauſes, withour going any further.
- Burfortheſecond point the maior part were of opinion, that they being aſ-
{emblcd ro condemnerhe Lutheran hereſie, they ſhould follow the order of
their confeſſion ; which others contradicted, becaufeiit was an imitation of
the Colloquies in Germanie, which woulddebale the digniticof the Councel,
-And the rwo firſt headsof the Auguſtan confeſſion being of the Trinitie,
and incarnation, in which there was no ſubſtantiall difference; though they
were expreſſed aftera new maner,and vnuſuall in the Schooles,if they-ſhould
beeapprooued, reputation would bee giuen them, and they couldnorſo
— well condemne the reſt ;and in caſethey would neither approoue nor con-
demne them; and ſpcake of them not with the termes of thar confeſſion , bur
-of the Schooles orothers, there was danger to raiſe new, dif] putes/and new
ſchiſmes. . The Legares, who aimed at nothing bur ro driveour the time,
were glad to heare the difficulties, and did carctully cheriſh them, fomerimes
incouraging one; and fometimes another. | |
The Lezates © '—T hertime pretixcd for the ſcf[1on approaching , the Legats, having recei-
wePapie acd no inſtructionfrom Reme,were much perplexed.For to paſlethaticſlion,

of inftruti- as the former,in ceremonies only, was to looſeall reputation; and to handle
.any mattetwas dangerous, becauſe they had nottherr marke pretixed where-

at roaime. That which ſcemed to haue leaſt peril], was ro frameadecreevpon

the reſolutiontaken in the congregation, to handle the points of. faith and
reformation together: whereunts oppoſition was made, that it was to bind
themſclues,and ro determine that in the congregation, which was vndecided

by the Pope. In this ambiguitieit was propoſed that they ſhould makeadela-

rory decree,ynderptetencethat many Prelats were intheiriourny,and would

ſhortly come thither. Cardinal 'Podle rold them, that in regarda contefhon of

faith hath been made in all the ancient Cauncels, the ſame ſhould bedonein

;that {eſhon,publiſhing thargf the Church of Rome. Ar the laſt it wasrelolucd

ro make the Decree with a ſmplc title, andto make mention therein that

» , they ought to treat of religion;and reformation ; bur inſfuch generallxennes,
-  thatthe Creed mightbe recited, and:paſſed ouer, making anotherDecreeto

_dcfertethe 1789 57 we vntillanocherſeſſion,allcadging for areafon that

:lome Prelates wereteady to ſerforward ,.and ſome intheir iourneyalready::

andto prolong the terine of the-ncxt feflion as long as they.could ;; for feare

.of being brought inco the like firaits: yer ſo as norttoput iroff vanlbatrer
Eaſtet,;:r | pt 37 46 G£1012:109070 1. nogw9t 23ugub
2 When:this was frained,; they imparted it tothe Prelates thoy-rruſteg
-moſt, ambbglt whom theBilhop of Bitonro pur rorhcir conſideration: har

to makgafcilion to cſtabliſha-Creed,made 1200. yecres befareandoouriau-

. ally belecued,andnowablolutelyaccepted by al,might belaughedarbythott
-Shat were enuiougnd ill cxpounded by athers.| Thar chiey canmorifay:th&

follow the Fathers example in this: becauſethey haue cither made avonfel-

as Þ 5m Loni againſt the hercfics they ;did condemne z'or -repcated' he 'former

made

%.

Dnne.-

"I

XUM

"FI". ——_

Ls. 2. the Councell of Trent. 14.7
madc againlt che herefics already condemned, ro giue'them'greaterautho. 1 5.46

ricie, adding ſome thing fordeclaration, orto reduceit into memorie, orro >
ſecure it againſt oblivion. But now neither a new confeſlion was compo- Cuantzs 5:
ſed, nor a declaration adioyned. Togiue them more authoritic belonged Haar 8, ©
not co them , nor to that age. To recall it into memorie, in regard it was Cuz 7;
repearcd cuery weeke inall Churches, and was inthefreſh memoric of cuc-
ry one, was athing ſuperfluous, and affeted. Thatrhe heretikes ought to
bee conuinced by the confeſſion, was true of thoſe who erred againſt ir;
bur it was not ſo of the Lutherans, who belecued it as the Catholikes,
If when this preparation ſhall bee made, the confeſſion bee neuer vſcd to
this purpoſe, it will bee thought to bee doneto no other end then toenter-
cainethe time, and to ſprinkle Court-holy-warter, not daring to touch rhe
poynts of doctrine, nor being willing to meddle with the reformation. He
thought it better ro interpoſe delay , 1n regard of the expeCtation of the Pre-
latcs,and ſo to end the Seſlion.

The Buhop of Chioza added, that the reaſons allezdged might ſeruc the
hererikes turnes, by ſaying, that if the confeſſion can ſerue to conuertinfi-
dels, oucrcome the heretikes, and confirmethefaithfull, they could nor cn-
force them to bcleeucany thing beſides. The Legat iudged nor theſereafons
ro be ſo ſtrong as the contrary,that not tomakea Decree was loſleof repura-
tion. Therefore they reſolued on that fide, and firted ſome words better,
according to the aduertiſements of the Prelares, and propoſed the Decree in
the Congregation of the firlt of February. Of this many things were ſayd ;
and though it was approucd by the maior parr, yet in the cnd of the congre-
gation itgauedilta(te, and ſome of rhe Prelates ſaid, reaſoning among them-
{clues,it will be ſaid, that by a worke of twenty yecres time, ic hath beene con-
cluded,that we ſhould be brought to heare the Creed repcated.

The fourth day , deſtinared for the Seſſion, they went ro Church with The Scvios
the ſame ceremonies and company ; in which Peter Tragliania , Archbiſhop
of Palermo, ſang Maſle, Ambroſe My atarin of Siena,a Dominican Friar, Archbi-
ſhop of Torre, read the Decree: the ſubſtance whereof was, that the Synod, Thc Decree
conſidering the importanceof the two points to be treated of, that is, the ***
cxtirpation of hereſies, and reformation of manners; exhorterh all coruſt in
God, and arme themſclues with ſpirituall weapons , atid thattheir diligerice
may hauc both beginning and progreſſe from the grace of God, it determi-
neth to begin from the confeſlion of faith, imitating the examples of the
Fathers, who in the principall Councels, inthe beginning of the ations,
hauc oppolcd that buckleragainſtthe hereſies, and ſometimes haue conuer-
red the infidels, & ouerxome the heretikes with thatalone; inwhichall chat --
profeſſe Chriſtianitie doe agree. And heterhe whole was repeated word :
word, without adding any other concluſion. And the Archbilhop asked the -
Fathers,whether the Decree pleaſed ther. All anſwered affitmariuely, b1*:
ſome with conditions and Sn of nogreat moment, yer {uch'as diſplea- ; reals
ſed the Cardinall of Monte; who liked'nor they ſhould deftctd/toparticu- 4 Cer:
larsin the Seſſions, fearing that when fome 'marcer of weight! was tobee The cight of
treatedof,, ſome inconuenience might ariſe, Afﬀetwards the other Decree nt y x
was read, intimating the Seſſion forthe cighth of Aprilt, alleadging for : Mg

; N 2 CAaUulc

:

14.8: | \The Hiſtorie of LA Be: 24

_ J

1546 cauſcot rhe delay, that inany Prelates were in a readineflero come,and ſome
>> werc inthe igurncy, and for thatthe deliberations of the Synod will bentorc
Cnamies 5. eſteemed When they ſhall bee ſtrengthened by the countell and preſence of
Haar 8, of more Fathers; yet ſoas that they would not deferrerhediſcufſion and cxa-.
—_— mination of what {ecmed fit ro be handled preſently,

Thc Courtof Rome, who ſtood all amazcdar the yery name of reformarti..
on, was well plcaſed ro-heare that the Councell entertained it ſelfe In pream-
bles, hoping \ ba time would bring foorth ſome remedic. And the Courrti-
crs that had intemperare congues, exerciled their gibing, publiſhing ders

Vaſuins | bitter Paſquins,as then the cultome was inall accidents, ſome commending
the Seſſion, the Prelates aſſembled in Trent, for making a moſt noble decree, worthy of a
encrall Counccl,and ſome cxhorting them to vnderſtand their owne worth

and knowledge. |
The Lezaxs The Legatcs in giuing the Pope an account of the Seſſion held, ſent alſo
giverne Pope aduilc,that it would be hard to oppoſe, and oucrcomethole whodeſiredto fi-
the Schon. njſh the title, with the repreſentation of the Church vniuerſall ; yer they
would cndeauour to remooue the difficulties. But that it was impoſſible
ro cntertaine the Prelates any more without comming to , and doing ſome
cſſentiall matter; and therefore that they expected the order and inſtruttion
which they ſo often had demanded. That for their parts they thought ir
fir to handle thoſe points of the holy Scripture , which were in controuetrie
berweenethem and the Lutherans, and the abuſe brought into the Church
in that matter ; which chings would much farisfie the world , and offend no
man: andthey would expect an an[were for this, there becing ſpace enough
ro examine thoſe matters, and many occaſions to driue out the time yatill

the beginning of Lent. - Fg

Tran... Bur thoughthe Councell was then opened, and [lill celebrated, the af-

of Germawe faires of Germanie continucd the ſame. In the beginning of the yeere the E-

conn” lector Palatine brought in the vſc of the Chilice, the populartongucin pub-

che Patern* lique prayers, the marriageof Prieſts, and other things which were refor-

- ——___ med before inother places. And thoſe that were appointed by rhe Empe-

rour to bee preſcntin the meeting , ro.tivde out a way to-compole thediffc-
xences of Religion, met rogether ata Colloquic in Ratisbon. The Emperor
deputecd for Preſidents the Biſhop of Eicitar, and the (onte of Furftemberg :
but no good fruit grew thereof, by reaſon of the ſuſpicions which one part
conceiued againſt the other, and becauſe the Catholikes omitted no occaf1-
ons tO giue. greater icalouſics to the other ſide, and to faine them of their
owne,which finally made rhe Colloquie to diflolue.

Martini». * The fifteemth of February Martin Luther dicd allo. Theſe newes being

Merci fſebtto Trentand Rome, there was notlo much gricfe for the change of Re-

The Romz- JigiOn-inthe Palatinate,as ioy that the Colloquie ſucceeded nor well, but ten»

at ded to diſſolution, and that Lurher was dead. The Colloquic ſeemed ano-

andar the i= zher Councell, and gaue greaticaloulic; becauſe, if any thing had beene ac-

ſolution of

= mor corded,, they faw not how. the Councell could after reie&t it, and, if it had
.. ::4..  - Deencaccepted, it would ſcemethat the. Councell recciucd lawes from ano-
| therplace: And by all meancsthe Colloquiec being on foote, and the Em-

perours miniſters there preſent, it brought ſmall reputation tothe Councell
* and

4 -3

1 do a

L 18,24 the Councell of Trent. 449

andrhePopc.. The Fachets in Trent, andche Courtint Rome coriceiuedgredt 1,46
hope, ſecing rhat ſo g_ inſtrument, tocomradict the:dorinearid CAN
rites of che Church of Rome, was dead;'weho was the principall; andalmoſt cud, 1,
thetorallicauſeoff the diuiftons and. innouarions introduced, and hicld ic for FqT=
a prelage of che, goad ſucceſſe of the:-Councell; and the rather becauſe char Fruncu 3.
| deach was diuulged throughout Fel, wich many ptodigious and fabulous Ya
circumſtances, which were aſcribed romiracle, and the vengeance of God,
though there were but the vſyall accidents), which doe ordinatily-happeniin
thedeathsof menof fixtic three yeeres off age: for inthatage Martin Luther r:ttes rated
died. Butthoſechings that happened afterwards cuen voull our age, baue 722547
*declared that Martin was onely one of the-mcancs, and thatthe cauſes were
more potent and lecrer, | Ny | |
The Emperour becing arrived in Rartbor , complained grieuouſly that The zmpe-
the Colloquic was diſſolued, and wrote letters thereof throughour all Ger- _—_
many ; which werelaughcd ar, becauſe it was too much knowne that the fe- **< Collowy
paration was wrought by the Spaniards and Friars,and by the Biſhop of Eic- =. |
flat, whom hec had ſear. And when the workemenarc knowne, itis nor
hard to iudge whence the beginning of the motion doch proceed. But the
wiſc Emperour was willing to vſethe ſame thing to fatisfic the Pope andthe
Councel, and to finde an occaſtonagainſt the Proteſtants ; which the cuecnt
ſhewed to bee true. For the ſame complaints beceing renewed in the: Der,
Þ and mcancs of agreement beeing ſought by thoſe that were aſſembled ; the
| Miniſters of Ments and Triers ſeparating them(clucs fromthe other Electors,
and adhering to the other Biſhops, g—_—_ the Councell, ard:defired thz
Emperourto prote&it, and to cauſe the Proteſtants to be there, and ſubmit
chemſclues to it. Bur they did reſiſt and remonſtrate that that Councell had
not thoſe qualitics and conditions ſo often promiſed, and deſired thar the
peace might bee kept , and the differences inreligion accordedinalawfull
Counccl in Geymante., or inan Impctiall Dict. Butinthecnd themaskes x;,,..,,q.
were remooued, and the prouiſions for war could no longer be hid; where ney Socpms
of mcation ſhall bee made in its prop:r place. The Pope conſidered very
much of the letter written from Trent , weighing the inconueniences that
would follow, if hee kept the Councecll at anchor, with the ill fatisfa&ion of
ehc Biſhops that were there, and the miſchicfe that might ariſcif the refor-
( mation ſhould begin. In fine, percciuing thatit was neceſlary to put ſorne-
thing to the hazard, and that it was wiſdometo auoid the greater cuill,here-
ſolucd ro write backe to Trent, , to begin the ationas they had aduiſed;; ad-
moniſhing them not to broach any new diffcultics in marterof faith ,'nor
ro determine any of the things controucrſed amonglt rhe Catholiques, and
| to proceed {lowly in the reformation. The Legates, who vnrill then had ih
q
|

the Congregations entertained themſclues in generall matters, hauingre-
ceaued power togoc on, propoſed in the: Congregation of the 22. of Febru-
ary, that the firſt foundation of faith becing eſtabliſhed , they oughrtin'the
next placeto handleanother more ample which istheboly Scriprurezwhiere-
inarepoints >elonging tothe dotrines controuerted with the: Lurheraqes,
| and others, for reformation of thoſe abuſes which are —
neceſſary to be amended ; and ſomany,, thar perhaps the timevnti _

| N 3 Seltion

XUM

1150 [ The H iſtorie of L rs, 2.

-— _

We. E the conttotcrfics withthe Lutherans in thisſabie&, and of the abuſes; 'and  M
Co 5. es. euch wasſpoken hereof by diuers Prelares. ', -* —_ 036.2001)
———-/> The Diuincs,who were thirty innumber,andalmoſtall Friars had vin
Fzaxcis : then fſcrucd inthe Councell onely tomiake Sermons on Holy-dayes;3n exaþ
—Y>- tationof the Councelland the Pope, and tormake light skirmifheswith the
 _  Lutheranes; butnow thatcontrouerted doctrines wereto bee decided), and
pac Pains the abuſcsoflearned men ratherthen of othersro bee reformed, rheirworch

- [4
z

begin ro be t |
tem. - begannetoappeare. And order was taken that in the pojtits of dodtrine to
> bedecided; articles ſhould be extrated out of the bookes of rhe Lutheranes

contrary to theorthodox faith, to bee ſtudiedand cenſured by the 'Diuines,
chat cuery one ſpeaking his opinion of them , the matter might beeprepared
to framethe Decrees, which being propoſed inthe CSngregation, and cx-
 amined bythe Fathers, when cuery mans voyce was knowen, that might bee
cltabliſhed which was to bee publiſhed in the Seſhon. And for the abuſes,
cucry one ſhould call comind what hee thought worthy of amendmenr, to-
gcther with the remedy fit for ir. |
The articles for matter of do&trine, drawen out of the Lutheranes
bookes, were, - |
1.. Thar the neceſſary doctrineof Chriſtian faith , is wholy conteyncd in
the holy Scripture,and that it is an humane inuention,to adde ynto them vn-
written Traditions, as left ynto the holy Church by Chriſt and his Apoſtles,
deriued vnto ys by meanes of the conrinuall fucceflion of Biſhops,and rharir -
is acrilegeto defend that they arc of equall authority with the old andnew
Teſtament. 0.
2. Thatamongſtthe bookes of the old Teſtament, none ſhould bee rece
koned but thoſe that haue beene recceiued by the Tewes, and in the New the
{xe Epiſtles, thatis, that ynder the name of S. Pawlto the Hebrews, that of
S. Iames, the 2. of S. Peter, the 2. and' 3. of S. John, one of 'S. Tude,and the
Apocalyps. m_—_
3- Thartovnderſtand the Scripture well, or to alledge the proper words,
it is neceſſary to haue recourſe to thertexts of the originall rongue'in which
itis written,apd to reprooue the Latine tranſlation; as full of errors. g's
4+ That the divine Scripture is molt caſte and perſpicuous, andthatto
ynderſtand it, neither gloſſe nor comment is neceſlary, bur onely ro have the
ſpiritof aſhcepe of Chriſts paſture. QI] $015713
5. _ Whether Canons, mh Anathemariſmes adioyned, ſhould be framed a-
gainſt all theſe Articles. ETC OT. *
Vpon thetwo firſt, the Diuines.diſcourſcd in foure Congregations; and |
inthe firſt all agreed, that the Chriſtian faith is contaynedpartly in theSerip-
ture, and partly in Traditions ; and tnuch time was ſpentinalledging for
this placcs of Tertulian, who often fpeakes of them ; and many were num- |
bred out of Irenie, Cyprian, Bafil, 4uſtm, and others; yea ſome ſaid more;that- I
Tradition was the onely foundation of the CatholiquedoQttine.” For the"
Scripturc it ſelfe.is notbelecued bur by tradition. But therewas fomediffe--
rence how this matter mighefitly be handled, © 7 1 190 1.1L
- Ficenzy Lunello, a Franciſcan Friar,'was of opinion , thar, in gs _
_w

I ne ee. tl.
'

Linz — cena /tremm. _. :mnt©

holy Serprureapdsradivanrmnereco beaſtablihedfor groundoffaich, they 1546
ought firit co treapof the Ghirch , -which is a more/princi ward fe-el
For the Scriptureretciucthayrhoruy fromir,/ actording tathelfatnous fgy- Cruz,

- CRARLSS 7.
ing of Sgipt Aaguſtine: I Would nor bale bclecucd che Golpalliftheaurhari- mar ©
fic'of zh Church had not:ehmpealled me; and-noxſeican beinadebt rraditi- httt 7;
ons , but by grounding them ypon the ſame authority. Forifacontrouer- Picouſe +
fic ariſc, abouratraditionyit willbee neceſſary to decideireicherbythereſti- thoriic of

 mony, 0 by the determination of the Church... But.this foundationbeing hea
laid!, that cucry Chriſtian ishoundto belceucethe Chatch; one may 'fecutely
build thereon. He added, thatithey ſhould rake example fromallthoſerhar
hauc {ubllancially wriccen/againſt the Lutherans, as Fryar Silveiter, and'Be- ©
chius, who haue more w—_— authoritic of the Church, thavany other

argument; ncither is it pollible ro convince the Lutherans otherwiſe, Thar © +?

—_— ——— — —_

it 1s contrary to the end propoſed, (that isto lay all the foundations of Chri-
ſtian doctrine) to leaue our the principall, and perhaps the onelyground, bur
certainely that without the which,the refiduecannorſubliſt, This opinion
had no followers. Some oppoſcd againſtir, thatirwas ſubic& torhelame
difficulcies which it'made to. others, For the Synagogues of the hereriques
alſo would arrogate to bee the truc Church ,. ynro whom this authoritie
was giuen, Others holding ito beathing moſt -knowen and vndoubred,
that by.che nameof the Church the Cleargic ought xo bee vnderſtood, and
more-properly the Councell andthe Popeas head , ſaidthey oughtro main-
- raine, thatthe authority of the.Church is already decided, and rhar to treat
of it now,were to {hew there was difhcultic, or ar the leaſt, tharir was a thing
newly clecred, and not moſt ancient, cucr beleeued fince.*Chriſtianirie
beoatt.  - vw CE 3-87
Tu Antbonius Marinarus, a Carmelice Fryar, thought fit to refraine ſpea-
| king of traditions, and ſaid, that for deciſion of the firſt Article in this mat-
ter, it was mecte firſt to determine whether the queſtion were fa&i, or iuris:
that is,if-the Chriſtian do&trine haue two parts, one which was'wtitten by
o the will of God, andthe other which was forbidden ro beewrit; bur onely
caught by word of mouth; or if inthe whole body of doGrineit hath acci-
dentally happened, that all hauing becne taught, ſomepart hathnot beene
committed to writing. Heeadded, that itwasa clecrecale thatthe Maicſtic
of God ordaining the lawof the Old Teſtament, appointed it ſhould be ne-
ceſlary to hauc ir in writing zand therefore wrote the Decalopue in ſtone
with his owac finger, commaunding it ſhould be laid vp inthe Cabinet, cal-
- ledthe Arkeof the Coucnant. That heoften commaunded Moyſesto write
| the precepts ina booke, and thatonecopieſhould bee keprin the Arke, and
| the King haucanothertorcade ir — 56.8 {2084 C3012 30.8
| This fell nor out in the Goſpell, which the Sonne of God wrote in the
| hearts, for which ncither tables, nor cheſt, norbookeisnecelary : yea, the
| Church was molt perfetbefore anyof the Apoſtles wrote; andthough they |.
"#» had writ nothing ,:the Church would have wanted nothing ofits perfecti-
on. Butas Chrilt fouridedthe doetrine of the New Teſtamentinthe hearts;
ſo hee forbad itnotto bee written, asin ſomefalſe Religions, where the wy
lteries were kept ſecrer, nor waslawfull to write them , but onely co _

|

XUM

1252 *"Fþe \Hiftorievf | E 1's.:2.
1546 whembymwotdof mouth, - Andtherefore thatit isan vndoubted truth char
> >D. wharlocueri the -Apolites hauc written , and whatſocuct-they baite taught
ve 5..by word of-mouth; is of cquall authority, becaule they wrote and ſpake
Hanax, 8, by cheinltin& of the holy'Ghoit, -which notwithltanding, as , by aſiiting
enen 3; them; irhath-direted chem to write and preactthe trueth ; ſo it carniot be
:4.-.: Midithath forbidden them ro write any thing; to theetid to hold it in my-
'> .Þ.: ſtere; whicrefore the Articles of faith cannor bee diſtinguiſhed into wo
© * kinds; fomepubliſhed by writing , ochers commaundedto bee communica-
tedonely by. voyce. Hee ſaid, that whoſocuerthought otherwiſe, thuſt fight
again(trwogrear difficulties; theone, rotell wherein the difference is, the
other, how che Apoſtles ſucceſſors haue beencable ro write that which was
forbidden-by :God: addiog ,-thar it was as hard to maintaine therthird;'that
is, how it hath accidemally happened, that ſome particulars hauc not beene
written, bccauſeit would derogatefrom the prouidence of God in direding
The Fathers the holy Apoſtles ro compole the Scriptures gf the New Teſtament. Therc-
caarions of fore hee concluded, that ro cnter'into this ireatie, was to ſaile berweene Scilla
bis Bad (aribdis , and thatir was betterto imitate the fathers, who ſerued them-
"12  felucs of this place, oncly in caſe of neceſlitie, never thinking to make of it
an Article of competitionagainlt che holy Scripture. Heeadded, that it was
not neceſſary to proceede now to any new determination, becauſe the Lu>
thcrans, tzough they ſaid they would be conuinced by the Scripture onely,
- hauenot madcacontroucrfic in this arricle,and that it is good to keep them-
{clucs oncly rothe controucrfics which they. haue promored , without ſct-
tivg new on foote, expoſing themiſclues to the danger of making a great di-
uithon in Chriltendome.

Theopinin The Fryars opinion pleaſed but few; yea, Cardinall Poole reprehended it,
+ mg and ſaid, it bettcr beſeemed a Colloquie in Germanie, then a Councell of the
«taittals yninerſall-Church: that in this they ſhould ayme at the (ancere veritie it [elfe,
not as there , where nothing is handled but the according of the parties,
though to the preiudice of the truth ; that to preſeruc the Church, it was ne-
ceſſarie thatthe Lutherans ſhould receiue all the Romane doctrine , or that as
many of ihcir crrors as was poſſible might be diſcoucred, the more to make
manifeſt ro the world, that there was no agreement 1o'be made with them.
Therefore if4hey haue framed no controuerhie concerning traditions, it was
neceſlary to frame it now,and to condemne their opinions, and roſhew,that
that doCtrinenot onely differcth from the true, in ho whercinirdocth pur-
polcly contradiCtir,bur in allother parts: that they ſhould endeaupurto con-
demneas many abſurdities as can be drawen out of their writings, and that
the feate was yainero daſh againſt Scilla or (aribdis for thar captious reaſon;
wacreunto wholocuer gaue cargy would conclude there was no tradition

at all. | Plots $491 4101 4
Concerning "In the (ceond Article they all agreed inthis , rhara Catalogue ſhould bee
he comon<2 Made, (a8 1t was in former times of the Canonicall bookes, in which all
Scaprure: ſhould beregiltred which arc read in the Romane Church, cuen thoſe of the
OJd Teltament, which were ncucr recciued by the Hebrewes. And for proofe
of this, they all alledged the Councell of Laodicea, Pope Innecemcethe firſt,
the third Councell of (arthage,and Pope Geloſtus. Bur there were foure opi-

nions.

6 -
MY as og. Dr —_— PPE

XUM

—_ re =O
1 4 £4

LwnsT the Councell of Trent. 152

F
y 4

w —

nions. Some would haue two rankes made; in the firlt oncely thoſe ſhould : 546
þe put, which wichout contradiction hauc beene receiucd by all: inthe other oo

thoſe, which ſamerime haue beene reicaed, or haue had doubt madeof Cnanirs x. -
them ; and it was ſaid , though formerly this was neuer.done by any Coun- Htmar 3.
ccll or Pope, yeralwayes itwasſovnderſtood. For Auſtin maketh fuch a di- C301 *;
fincion , and his authority hath beene canonizedin the Chapter In ( ano-
nics. And Saint Gregorie, who was after Gelafius, writing vpon bb, tayeth
of the Maccabees, that they arc written for edification, thoughthey bee nor
Canonicall,
Aloiſtus of Catanea,a Domican Fryar,ſaid thatrhis diſtinftion was made by
Saint Hierom: , who was recciued by the Church, asaruleand direion, to
-Appoint the Canon of the Scriptures; and he alleadged Cardinal Caieran who
haddiltinguithed chem, following Saint Hierom , as an infallible rule, giuen
vs by che Church; and ſo hee wrote toPope Clement che ſcuenth, when hee
ſent him his expolition vpon the Hiltoricall bookes of the Old Teſtament.
Some thought fit to eſtabliſh three rankes. The firlt of thoſe whichalwayes
hauec becne held for Diuine;rthe ſecond, of thoſe whereof ſometimes doubr
| hath bezne made, but by vſc haue obtained Canonicall authority ; in which
| _numberare the ſ1xc —_— and the Apocalyps of the New Teltamenc,
and ſome (mall parts of the Euangeliſts. Therthird, ofrhoſe whereof there
bath ncuer becneany aſſurance; as arethe ſeauenof the Old Teſtament, and
ſome Chapters of Danieland Heſter. Some thoughtir better to make no di-
ſtintionaral|, but ro imitatethe Councell of (arthage and others, making
, the Catalogue, and ſaying nomore. Another opinion was that all of them
ſhould bee declarcd to bee inall parte3, as they are in the Latine Bible, of di-
| uincand equallauthoritic. The Booke of Barxc troubled chem moſt, which
is not put in the number, neither by rhe Laodiceans,nor by thoſe of Carthage,
nor by the Pope,and therefore ſhould be lefrout, as well for this reaſon , as
becauſe rhe beginning of it cannot be found, Eur becauſe it was read in the
Church,the Congregation ( cſtceming this a potent reaſon) reſolued, that
it was by the Ancients accounted a part of Jeremie, and compriſed
with him.

In the Congregation on Friday the fifth of March, aduiſe being come TheBit.op
that the Penſ1onaries of the Biſhop of *Birents had demanded in Rowe to iningin =
be paide, and forthis cauſc had cited him beforc the Auditor, requiring C—_
hee ſhould bee compelled by excommunications and other cenſures, ac- <x<ommuni

cation 1n

cording to the ſtile of the Court, ro make payment , hee lamented hiscaſlc, Rome for not
INgZ 11S

p

and ſaid that his Penſioners were in the right, and yet himſelfe was not in PonGonaries
| | | the wrong. For ſo long as hee was inthe Councell hee could nor fpend lelle

;

then ſixe hundred crownes by. the yeere, ,and that his penſions being des

. tracted, hee had left but foure hundred : wherefore it was neceſfarie that hee
ſhould bee disburthened or afliſted with the other rwo hundred. The
poore Prelates Jaboured herein, as in a commoncaule, and ſome of them

1 BY paſſed to high wordes, and ſaid it was an infamic to the Councell, that an
p officer of the Court of Reme ſhould bee ſuffered tovie cenſures againſt a Bi-
ſhop aſliting in the Councell ; that it was a thing monſtrous, and would
make the world ſay thatthe Councell was nor free ;that the honour of that
aſſembly

XUM

The Hiftorie of ' Lt. 12.

_—

1546. allembly required char the Auditor thould be cited to Trent, or fome-reuenge
ep ma raken againithim,thar thedigniry of che Synod-mightbe preſerued.Some al-
Cuaxurs 5. ſoprocceded fo farreasrocondemane the impoſition of penſions, laying,thar
Hexax 8. it was iuft and anciently obſcrued, thattherich Churches ſhould aflift the
12:0 patyp poore, not by conſtraint, but by charity, withour taking things neceſlary

from themſclues,and thar S. Paul taught fo. Bur tharpoore Prelates ſhould be
conſtrained to giue torhe rich, ſome of that which is neceſſary for their owne
ſuſtenance, was atking intolerable ; and that this was one of the points of re-
formation to be handled in the Councel, reducing it ro theancieur,and truely
Chriſtian yſe.Burthe Legars,cof1dering how iult che coplaints were,and whi-
ther they might tend,appealed all, & promiſed they would write to Rome,and
caule the judiciall proceſle ro-{urceale,and to endeuor thar the Biſhop ſhould
in ſome ſort be prouided for,thathe might maintain himſclte inthe Councel.
| abcre  Allthe Diuines hauing made an end of ſpeaking the cighth day, a Con-
| diy of Carm-- 9Fegation was intimated for the next, though it was no ordinary day, notſo
qrmar 1 much roeltabliſh quickly a Decree ypon the diſputed Articles, as for a grace

d:tions arc of

cquallauho= of che Cour:ccll,that in that day, dedicated to a profane feaft of the ( arnoual,
>nptores. the Fathers ſhould buſie themlclues in the affaires of the Councell. And
then it was approucd by all , thatthe Traditions ſhould beerecciued as of c-
quall authority with the Scriptures. Bur they agreed notin the mannerof
making the Catalogue of the Diuine bookes; and there were three opini-
ons : One, not to deſcend to particujar bookes ; another, to diſtinguiſh the
Caralogue.into three parts ; a third , ro make onely one, and to make all
the bookes of equall authoritie. And not becing all well rclolued , three
draughts were made, and order giuen that they ſhould exactly conſider
which of them ſhould be receiued in the next Congregation , which was not
ve» Fr held the twelfth day, by realon of thearriuall of Don Francis of Toledo, ſent
924% Ambaſladour by the Emperour, to aſliſt in the Councell , as Colleagueto

ucth in Trent,

tees Don Diego: who was met on the way by the maior partof the Biſhops , and
;Our. familics of the Cardinals,

| Fergerin:fi- At this time T/ergerius , who often hath beene named before, cameto
| Councellfo Trent, not ſo much with defireto afliſt in the Councel], as to flicthe rage of
Inquiſitor, Frikr Hanmbal,a Griſon. For he knew not whereto remaine with

more dignity Sqor to haue greater commoditieto iuſtitic himſclfe againſt

the imputations/of the Friar , who publiſhed him for a Lutheran, not onely

in 1ſtria , bur beforethe Nuncioof Yenice, and the Pope. Whereof the Le-

gates of the Councell beeing aduerriſed , ſuffered him nor to bee prelentat

che publique Actes, as a Prelatc, if firſt hee werenot iuſtiticd before the
| Pope , to whom they cffcEtually exhorted him to goe ; and if they had not
bi fearcd to raiſe ralke-againſt the libertic of the Councell, they would haue
| gone beyond exhorration, This Biſhop, ſccing hee was more diſgraced in
Trent, departed a little after , with purpoſe to returneto his Biſhopricke, ho-

ping the popular ſedition was appealed. Bur when hecame to Fenice, he was
forbidden by the Nuncio, to goethither, who had order from Rome to make

/::4-,, Nis proceſſe , for diſdainc whereof, or for fearc, or for ſome other cauſe, hee
forlakets quitred Ttalie within afeywy moneths after.

Ttalie.

The

ends none, DIS people raiſed-againit him, as cauſc of the barrenneſlc of the land; by the

-* —

Lis. 2; the Councell of Trent. | 155

The fifteenth day, the three draughrs beeing propaſed, though every one 15.46
was maintayned by ſome, yer the third was approoucd by the maior part. {>>
Inthe Congregations after, the Diuinesdiſcouried ypon the other Articles, Czances 5.
and in the third there was much difference ;about the | Latipe tranſlation of Hixzy 8,
the Scripture, berweene ſome few who had good knowledge of the Latine, 2015-7
and ſomeralte of the Grecke,and others who were ignorant in the Tongues. _

Friar Aloifius of ( atanea,ſaid thar, for reſolution of this article, nothing could IS
be brought more to the purpoſe, or more fit for the preſent times and occagg ten
ſions, rhen the indgement of Cardinall (. azerane, a man very wellread in Di- |
uinitic, bauing ſtudied it cuen from a childe; who forthe happineſſe of his
wit, and for his laborious diligence, became the prime Diuine of thatand
many more ages, vnto whom there was no, Prelate or perſon in the Councel
who would not ycelde in learning, or chought himſelfe too good to lcarne
of him. This Cardioall, going Legate into Germanie, inthe yeere 1523. ſtu-
dying exactly how thoſe that erred might be reduced tothe Church, and the
Arch-hereriques conuinced, found our the true remedy, which was the lic-
tcrall mcaning of the text of the Scripture inthe originall conguein whichir
is written, and all the re{idueof his life, which was t1. yecres,hee gaue him-
ſc|feonely ro the ſtudy of the. Scripture, , expoynding not the Latinctranſla-
tion, butthe Hebrew rootes of ai old, and the Grecke of the. new Telta-
ment. In which tongues, hauing no knowledge himſelfe, he imployed men
of vnderſtanding , who made conſtruction of the, text ynto him. word by
word, as his workes ypon the holy bookes doe ſhew. That good Cardinall
was wont tolay, thatto ynderltand the Latine text, was, not to ynderſtand

_ theinfallible word of God, but the word of the tran{latour, ſubic&tand ob-

. Noxious vnto errors. That Hierome fpake well, thatizo propholicand write
holy bookes proceeded from the holy Ghoſt, but to txan{late rhem'into ano-
ther tongue, wasa workeof humane skill. And hee complayned and faid;
Would to God the Doctors of the former age had done (o, and thenche Ly;
theranc herefic would neuer haue found place. Hee added that no tranſlati-
oncould becapproucd without reiecting the Canon, Yt vererum, d.g. which
commandeth to haye rhe Hebrew text ro'examine the realitic of the bookes
of the old Teſtament, and the Greeke fora direction inthofle ofthe newy,To
apprpece a tran(lation as authenticall , was tocondemnes. Hierome, and all
t

| ole who haue tranſlated. If any be authenticall,to-what cndfcruethe reſt
which arc not 2 it would bce a. great vanitie to produce -yncertaine copies,

; when there are ſome infallible. That they ſhould bee of the.opinion of S.
| Hierome and ( aietane, that cuery Interpreter may crre,though he hauevſcd all
artc not to vary. from the originall. Bur ſure it is, thatif theholy Councell
Jthould cxamine, orcorcetaniinterprecation according to thegzue text, the
holy Ghoſt, which afhiſterh-Synods in-matters of faith, would keepe chem
fromerting,; and ſuch a tranſlation, ſo;cxamincd and.approoued, fvight bee
called ayrhenricall. Bur that any.could beapprooucd gn ſuch an cxami-
natign,. with aſſurance of Le haneper rhe holy.Ghoſt, hee durſtnor ſay,
except.the Synode diddetermine-it, ſecing that in che, Councel of the holy
Apoltlesa great inquiſition, was, made, before, Burthis becing a worke of
tenne.yecres,and impoſlibleto be yndertaken, it ſeemed berter t@leauerbings

as they

A

The Hiftorie of L1s. 2.

1545 asthey had remained 1500. yeeres, that the Latinetran{lations ſhould be ye-

>> rified by the originall Texts. |
Cuaxczs 5, Onthe contrary, the maior part of the Diuines ſaid, that it was neceſſary

ro account that tranſlation , which formerly hath becne read in the Chur-
'- ches, and vicdin the ſchooles, to bediuine and authenricall ; otherwiſe they
ſhould yceld the cauſero the Lutherans, and open a gatero innumerable he-
reſies hercafter,and continually troublethe peace of Chriſtendome. That the
edoarincof the Church of Rome, mother and milſtreſle of all the reſt, is, in a
great part, founded by the Popes,and by ſchoole Diuines,vpon ſome paſſage
of the Scripture , which if cucry onehad liberty to examine whether it were
well tranſlated, running to other tranflations, or ſecking how it was in the
Greekcor Hebrew, thele new Grammarians would confound all, and would
be made Iudges and arbiters of faith : and in (ſteadof Diuinesand Canonilts,
Pedantics ſhould be preferred to be Biſhops and Cardinals. The Inquiſitors
will not be ableto proceede againſt the Lutherans, in caſe they know nor
Hebrew and Greeke , becauſe they will ſuddenly anſwere , the textis norfo,
and that thetranſlarion is falſe : and cucry nouity,or toy;that ſhall come into
the head of any Grammarian , either for malice, or want of knowledge in
Diuinity,ſo that he may but finde ſomegrammaticall tricke inthoſe rongues
ro confirme it, will be ſufficient to ground himſelfe thereon, and he will ne-
uermake anend. That it doth appeare, fince Lather began rotranſlatethe
Scripture , how many diuers and contrary tranſlationFhaue ſecne the lighr,
which deſerue to bee buried in perpetuall darkeneſſe, and how often Marti
himſclfe hath changed his owne tranſlation ; that neuer any hath becne re-
rinted without ſome notablechange, not of oneortwo paſſages, butof an
Lndeed ina breath: that if this libertic bce giuen to all, Chriſtianitie will
ſoone be brought to that paſſe that no man will know whar to belecue.

To theſe reaſons , which the maior part applauded, others added allo,
that if the prouidence of God hath giucn an anthencicall Scripture to the
Synagogue, and an auchenticall New Teſtament to the Grectans , ir cannor
be ſaid, without derogation, that the Church of Rome , morebeloucd then
the reſt , hath wanted this great benetit, and therefore that the ſameholy
Ghoſt , who did diftatethe holy bookes, hath dicatedalfo that rranflation
which oughtto be accepted by the Churchof Rome. Some'thought ithard
to make a Propher or Apolile onely totranſlare a booke therefore they mo-
deratcd theafſertion, and ſaid, that he had not a Prophericall or Apoſtolicall
Spirir, but one very neere. And if any ſhould make dainty to giue the ſpirit
of God to the Interpreter, yer he cannot deny irto the Councell ; and when
the vulgaredition ſhallbceapproucd, and an anathema'thundered againft
whoſocuer willnot receiue it : this will be withoureerror, notby the fpirjr of
him that wrote tt, bur ofthe Synodethat hath receined ir for ſuch. A

D. Ifidorns Clarus, a Breſcian , anda Benediftine Abbar, a maniwell ſcene
inthis itudije;- wentabout to remoouec this opinion by an liiftoricall narTati-
on; and-ſaid inſubſtance, that in the Primitive Church there were many
Greeke tranſjationsof the Old Teſtament , which Origen gathered intoone
volume, confronting thetn in ſixe columnes; the chiete of thele is called of
. the Sepmagine; from whence diuers in Latine were taken and many __-
raken

w..

*,

a"

-— >

I CABEASS i td Gt TIPS LOI OT IEC RR TIO Oo ISS ASC. X25
> 7 *—O—— OC

Tr CH TIO

—

157 ,

_ —_—

taken from the Greeke text of the new Teſtament, one of which, moſtfok
lowed aud read in the Church, and eſteemed the belt by Saint Auflin\, is
called Itala; yet lo as thar the Greekerext ought yndoubredly to; bee prefer. fa
red. Bur Saint Hierom , a man (.as all doe know skilfullin'theknowledgt Hedvy gift

1546_

Favt

+ Fancy is

of tongues, ſecing that of the,olde Teltamenr to ſwarue from the Hebrew \;

truerh ; by the fault partly of the Greekeinrerpreter, ahd partly of che Latin,

madc one immediately out of the Hebrew, and amended that of the new
Teſtament according to the trueth ofthe Grecke text, Hieroms creditmade
his tranſlation to bee receiued by many ; but was reiected by ſome, either be-

cauſe they loued more the errours of antiquitie,then new trueths,or, as him- |

ſelfe complaineth, by reaſon of emulation. Bur a few yeeres after,when envie
was laid aſide, that of S. Hierom was recciucd by all the Latins;& fo they were
both in vie, one being called the olde,and the other the new. Saint Gregor's,
writing to Leander vpon bob, teltificth that the Apoſltolike Sea victh them
both, and that himſelfe , in the expoſition of that booke madechoice to fol-
low thenew, as conformable to the Hebrew text: yet in the allegations he
would vſc ſometimes one, ſometimes another, as it beft befitred his purpole.

The times following,by the vſc ofthem borh,compoſed one ; raking part of

the new, and part of theolde , according .as the accidents required, and to
this the name of the vulgar Edition was giuen. The Plalmes were all of the
olde; becaule, being dayly (ung in the Churches, they could nor be changed.
The leſſer Prophetsarcall ofthe new, & the greater mixt of both.” This is ve-
ry true thatall hath happened by the ordinance of God}, without which no-
x (99 can ſucccede. Bur yer it cannot bee faid rhar chere Was in it greater
knowledge then humane. Saint Hierome faith plainely chat no interpreter
hath ſpoken by the holy Gholt, _ The Edition which wee haueis his for
the moſt part: it would bee [trange to attribute the afliſtace of God to him
that knowerh and affirmeth hee hath irnor. Wherefore no tranflation can
bee compared to the text in the originall rongue. Therefore his opinion
was that the vulgar cdition ſhould beepreferred beforeall, and allowed, yer
ſo as that ir ſhould bee corrected by the originall, aiid all men forbid to
makeany other : only that ſhould be amended, and the others extinguilhed:

andſoall inconuenicnces cauſed by new interpretations, which hauc indicj-

ouſly been noted, and reprehended in che Congregations, would ceafe.
Andrew de Vega, a Franciſcan Friar, going as a Mediator betweene
theſe two opinions, approoucd that of Saint Hierom, thatrhe qualities of an
interpreterare not any Propheticall, or other ſpeciall divine ſpirig, which gi-
ucth chem infallibilitie , and the opinion of the ſame Saint, and of Sainr
Auſtin, to corre the tranſlations by the rexts. of the originall rogue. Bur
added that ig was not contrary to this to fay withall, that the Latin Church
holdeth the vulgar edition for authenticall , becauſe itis thus to bee vnder-
ſtood, that concerning faith and manners there is no crrourin it, though in
ſome ſmall marter, or Þ Komay of wordes there may be a miltaking,*ir

being,imp6{lible that all the words of one language ſhould bee cranſplanted

into another, burthat there will bee ſomereltriction or inlargementof ig:

nifications or mctaphore, or other figure,, Thar the vulgar edition hat
beene.cxamined hceretofore by the whole Chrirch during the ſpace of 1990.
Oo | Yecres,

S. lerom (1:
that no 1n:cr-

RY

preter hath

(poken by hg
holy Gao,

_ *«.

EEE... {44 SORE OE LO AER HAN ih) ee

-
"Y prey

158.

The Hiſtoric of 7 YL

"Y

\ 1545 yeceres,and knownethat there is vo errour1n it,in matter of faith or manners;

CAN

Pavi 3.
CHARLES F;

= —

Henay $.
FRANCIS I,

WWWWm>S

Diſcourſes a-
bout the ex-
polinon of
the >criptures

and in this account it hath beene held and vied by rhe ancient Counicels, and
ſo ought ſtillro bec held and approoucd,and declared as authenticall, char is,
thatirmay beercad without davger , not hindcrivg thoſe that are mere dili-
gent to haue recourle vnto the Hebrew and Greeke originals,but torbiddivg
{ogreata numberot whole cran(lations, which "_ confuſion.

About the Article of the ſenſe of the holy Scripture, the doAtine of
Cardinall Caieran gauc occafton to ſpcake diuerily; who raught, and practi-
ſed the ſame himlelfe, that new conceits, when they agree to the text, and
arc not alicne from other places of the Scripture, and doctrine of faith , are
notto be reicCted, though the ſtreame of the Doors runne another way,
in regard the Maicſtic of God hath not ucd the ſenle of the Scripture rs
the old Doctors: otherwile there would remaine no more power to thoſe
chat liuc now, nor to poſtcritie, then to tran{cribethe ſame things againe
which ſome ofthe Diuines and Fathers approoued,and ſome oppoled.

To the firſt it ſeemed a fpirituall ryrannic to forbid the faithfull ro make
vie of their proper ingenie, according to the grace which God hath giuen
them: and that this was iuſt a prohibition ro exerciſe the ralent giuen ys by
God. That men ought to bee inticed, with all allurements, to the reading
of the holy writ, from which when that pleaſure, which nouiticbringeth,

ſha!l bee remooued, all men will eucr abhorre it, and ſuch ſtriftneſſe will.

wake men apply themſclucs to other {tudics, and abandon this, and by
conſequence all ſtudic and care of pictic. 'T hat this varictic of {pirituall

gifts bclongeth to theperfetion of che Church , and 1s found amongſt the

Fathers, in whole writings there is great diverſtie, and oftentimes contrari-
ctic, yct ioyned with aſſurcd charitic. Why ſhould not that hibertie bee
graunted to this age which others hauc imoyed wh pirituall frun> The
Schoole-men though, in chedoctrincof Theologie, they haue no diſputes
about the mcaning of the Scripture, yerthey hauc as many differences in
points of religion, and no lefſe dangerous. 'T har it js better to imitate an-
tiquitic, which hath not reſtrained the expoſition of the Scripture, bur
We it free, |

Thoſe of the contrarie opinion ſayd, that popularlicence being worſe

then tyrannie, it was then fit to curbe the vnbrideled wits, otherwayes they
could not hope to ſce an end of the preſent contentions. T hat anciently ir
was allowed to write vpon the holy Bookes, becauſe there was needs, in re-

gard there were but few expoſitions. And the men of thoſe times were of

an holy life, and {ctled minde, from whom no confuſions could bee feared,
as now. And thereforethe Schoole-men, fſecing there was no more ncede
of other expoſitions in the Church,and thar the Scripture was not onely ſuf-
ficiently, but aboundantly declared, they rooke another courſe ro treate of

holy mylteries;and (ecing tharmen were inclined rodiſputings they.rhoughr

| O
good to buſic them rather in examining of thereaſons & ſayings of Ariſtorle

to keepe the holy Scripture in reverence; from which'much is derogated,
when'it is handled after a common faſhion, and is the ſubic& of che Studies

,and excrciſes of curious men. Andthis opinion went ono farre,that Richard
CFE . ; -
of Mans, a Franciſcan Friar, fayd that the dorines of fauh were now fo

clecred

Kee”

" -
» *2%36 CE OY & ne TY

ee le bi, 4

oF.

a GEN

L t 8.2: T be Comtell of Treiit, 159
cleercd, that wee ought no more to learne them our of Scripture: which; i54s
| it is true, was read heretofore in the Church for inltructionof the people, CN
whereas now it is read in the Church onely to pray, and ought to ſerue eur: Cuanztd þ;
ry one for this end onely, and not to ſtudie. And this ſhould be thereuercnce Hanay 8: -
and worthip due from euery oneto the word of God. ' But, ar the leaſt, the CAVE
ſtudying of ir ſhould bee prohibited to cuery one that is not firſt confirmed |
in ſchoole Diuinitie; neither doe the Lutherans gaine vpon any bur thoſe
that ſtudic the SCripture: Which Opinion wantcd-not fe neutirs,
Berweene theſe opinions there went two others in the niiddle : One,
that it- was not good to reltrainerhe vnderltanding of the Scripture, to the
Fathers oncly, in regard their cxpoſitions are allegoricall for the molt part,
and ſeldome literall ,and thole that follow the letter, fir themſelues to their
owne time, ſo thar, the expoſition agreeth not to our age. That Cardinall The opitied
uſanus, a man excellently learned and honeſt, faidiudicially, that the vn- thartherzpss
derſtanding of the Scripture mult bee fitted to the time, and expounded ac- rags
cording to the current Rites : and that it is not to bee maruciled at, if the —
Church in one time expoundeth in one faſhion, aranotherin another. And |
this was the meaning of the Lateray Councell, when it decreed that the
Scripture ſhould bee expounded according to the Doctors of the Chutch,
-þ or as long vic hath apptooued, that new expoſitions ſhould not bee forbid-
| den, bur when they varie from the common ſenſe. - | |
| But Dominicus Soto, a Dominican Friar, diſtinguiſhed the matter of faich
and manners from the others,ſaying, it was meete in that onely to keepe eyes ——
ry wit within limits,but in others ic was not inconucnient to let cuery one,
ſo that pictie and charitiebee preſerued, to abound in his owne ſence. That
' the Fathers deſired nor to bee followed of neceſlitie, but onely in things nc-

ceſlary to belecuc and to doe.. Neitherdid the Popes; when in their De-

_

"————y hy

CY,

X cretals they expounded ſome paſſage ofthe — one ſenſe, meate ts
1 canonizethat, ſo thar ir ſhould not bee lawfull to ynderſtand it otherwiſe,
b- though with rcaſon. And S. Paul ment ſo,when heeſaid,that ptophecying,

thar is, interpretation of the Seriprure, ſhould bee yicd according to the ana-
logicof Faich, chat is, with refercncets the Articles thereof, And if this di-
| ſtinCtion were riot made, they muſt needes fall into notable inconueniences;
by reaſon of the contraricties which are found ih chediuers expolitions of
the ancient Fathers,which doc oppugne one another. |

The difficulties were not ſogreat, but that the vulgar edition was appro- ley
ucd, almoſt by a generall conſent, the diſcoyrſe having made' deepe impref- provucd, |
| f10n in their xr wn that Grammarians would take vpon them to teach Bi-

ſhops and Diuincs. Some few thoughtit fir, inregard of the reaſons broughe
by the Diuines, to leauc the point for that time; but ſeeing 'the reſolution
was otherwiſe, they deſired them toconfider,that hauing m_—_ ic, rhey
ſhould commanditto be printed and cattedted, atid inchat caſe, charir was
neceflary to frame a copic by which to make the impreſſion.  Whereupott
{1xe were deputed by corhmon corſent, and coitimanded tobe dili chr if
making: that corre&tion, that it might bee publiſhed befote the chd of che
Councell,releraing power ro themſelſues to augtnetir! the riumber;if amotigſt
thoſe that were to come,any were firfor the works, Om TE

XUM

The Hiftory of Cams

Pg

1546

Pavi 3.
CHARLES 5.

—— ————
Henxxy 8.
FRANCIS I,

The abuſcs

ac l{poken ot,

Bur in giuing voyces vpon the fourth Article , after Cardinall Pacceco
had faid,thar the Scripture was cxpounded by ſo many and fo excellent, men
in goodneſſc and lcarning, that there was no hope to adde any guod thing
more, and that all the new herefics ſprang from the new expoſttions of the
Scripture, and therefore that ir was neceſlary to bridle the ſaucineſſe of mo-
dcrne wits,and tomake them content to be gouerned by the ancients, and by
the Church,and thar ifany had ſome {1ngular ſpirit, he ſhould be enforced to
concealc it,and not to confound the world by publiſhing ic, almoſt all runne

into the ſame opin!on..

The. Congregation of the 2.9. was all ſpentin the fift Article. For the

Diuincs hauing ſpoken irreſolutely, and with refcrence to the Synod, to
which it bclongeth ro make Staruces , the Fathers were dovbtfull alſo. To
leaue out the Anathema wholly , was ro make nodecree of faith, andin the
very beginning to breake the orderſcr downe, to handle the two heads to-
gether, To condemne euery one for an heretike who would not acceptthe
vulgar Edition .in ſome particular place, perhaps of none importance, or
ſhould publiſh ſome inucncion of his owne vpon the Scripture, through va-
nitic of minde, {cemed roo rigorous. After. long diſcu{hon they found a
temper, which was to frame the firlt Decree, and comprehend in it that
onely which concerneth the Catalogue of the holy Bookes, and the Tradi-
rions,and to conclude that with an anathema.. Then in the {econd, which bes

ther cauſes ofthe barrcncfle of the Jand, requiring that all, theſe obſeruati-

Parficun Te FOncradictio! -  FOF.IOME. deigl
ding devout ly ak or, atthelcaſt, permitted, and nor damnable,
ed (peakingipf.che Word of God þ
nz ſeller CORE of bed
R_ Y

when they opene thebo

$A fa

# How ww ©

other

- WW
r OT moos an

_—

—=— —_ -—
ak.

—— — -

. Y

I6y
—_— —

44 IST” OY, TOES YN 4. FI" _ I SCETTEz - & - 2

The Councell of Trent.

_O% DS.

L1s. 2.

other derractions, was generally condemned, and much was fayd of the ' 1546
meanes how ro remooue the *Paſquins of Rome; wherein the Cardinall 'of >" ;
Monte ſhewed great paſſion in deſiring aremedic, becauſe he was ofrenmade Canzns $4
a ſubicct of the ſaucineſle of the Courtiers tongues, by reaſon of his naiturall airy n, "
liberty and pleaſancneſle of wit, All agreed,chat the Word of God could ne- Faeiy" ty:
uct bee reuercnced enough, and that to vie it ro mens commentations, |
though Princes and Prelares, is not ſeemely, and generally that all vaine vie
of it isa finne. Bur yet the Councelloughtnorto buſicir ſelfe in this, in te-

ard they were-not aſſembled to prouide againltall faults ; neither was'it tg
- forbid abſolutely, to drawthe words of the Scripture ro humane matrers,
becauſe S. Antoninrs, in his ſtorie, condemned not the Sicilian Ambaſſadors,
who, asking pardon of Martin the fourth, delivered their Ambaſſage in no h
other termes, but ſaying three times , Agnus Dei qui tollu peccata munai, miſerere
nobis. Nor the Popes anſwere who likewile ſaid thrite, Ane Rex Indeorum,
Er dabant illi alapas. Therefore that ic was the malice of the Lutheransto re-

rchend the Biſhop of Bitonto, who in his ſermon made in the publike Sefſ1-
on, ſaid thatto him that refuſed the Councel, it might bee replied , "Pape lux
rvenit in mundum , & dilexerunt bomines magis tenebras quam lucem, So many
Congregations were ſpent heerein, and the number fo increaſed, and the
weakeneſle of the remedies propoſed did ſo muc h appeare,thatthe common
opinion inclined to make no particular mentiou of any of them, nor to del
cend to the proper remedies, or particular puniſhments; but onely co forbid
them ynder generall heads, and leaue the penalties to the diſcretion of the
Biſhops. Of the abuſes of the Prints there was not much to be ſpoken; for
all agreed that the Printers ſhould beebrideled, and prohibited ro Print any
facred thing before it was allowed but forthis che Decree ofthe lalt Later

Councel was ſufficient, | |
Bur about readings and preachings there were terrible controuecrſies. A gat cen-

tention be=

The Regulars becing already in poſſetlion of chem, as well by the Popes tween: the
priuiledges, as by the praQtiſc of z00.yeercs, Jaboured ro preſerue them with J4r5ane,
all cheir might: and the Prelates alledging that they belonged to them, and rings and
were viurped,pretended reſtitution. And becaule the contention was heere, Mas...
not of opinions, bur of profit, they vcd on both fades not ogely reaſons, bur

deedes allo. Which JC a were ſer on foote that at thetime of the Sefli-

on nothing might be decided. Therefore the Legates reſolued , to deferre

theſe rwo points yntill another Sellion, Two Decrees were framed, as for-

merly was reſolued,and were read in the lalt Congregation, and approoued;

yet with ſome exceptions in the point of the vulgar Edition. In the cnde

heercof the Cardinall of Monte, after hee had commended the learning and
wilcdome of them all, admoniſhed them of the feemely behaviour which

was fitto vie in che publique Seſſion, ſhewing one hearr,and one minde, in

regard the points were ſufficiently examined in the Congregations : and the
Congregation becing ended, the Cardinall Santa Crote aſſembled choſe chat

- hadoppoſcd thevulgarEdition, and ſhewed they could nor complaine, be-

cauſc it was not prohibited bur left free ro corre&t ir, and ro haue recourſeto yy... of
the originall ; but that onely it was forbid to fay there were in it errors of ra :

2

faith, for which it ought tobe reiefted,”
O 3 | The

mmm — oe Vo ——— -- -———— —
_ — - —

163 { be f1ſtorie of L442;
1546 -.\; Thecightof Ap:il, appoynred {orche Seton, being come, the Maffe of
$00 che holy Ghott was faid by Salator Alepus, Archbiſhop oft Torre in Sardinia,
Cuantes 5. atidthe Sermon was madeþby Friar 4:tm of Arerium , Generall 'of the Serut,
Acxax 8. :; the. Pontificall habiliments puton,theaccultomed Jetanicsand prayers made,
2 7; andthe Decrers read by rhe Archbiſhop that ſaid Maſſe. Thefirit conteined
TooDerces 1 {ubltanee; thar che Synode, ayming to preſerue the purity of the Goſpel,
— o—_ promiſcd by the Prophicrs, publiſhed by Chrilt, and preached bythe Apo-
{tles,as the fountgine of all rructh,and difcipline of maners (which trueth and
The contents 7. i | b S S
eftheformar. di{ciplinc arecontained in the bookes,and vnwritten traditions, receiued by
the Apoliles, from the mouth of Chrilt, and dictated to them by the holy
Gkolt, and paſled from one to another) doeth according to the example of
the Fathers, recetue with'cauall reueretice, all the bookes of the old and new
Teſtament, and the traditions belonging to faith and manners, as procce-
ding fromthe mouth of Chriſt,or dictared by the holy Ghoit,and preſcrued
inthe Catholique Church. And letting downe the Caralogue of the bookes,
concludcth, that iFany will not receiue themall, as Sacredand Canonicall, in
all parts, as they are read inthe Carholike Church, and contained in the vul-
gar Edition, or (hall wictingly and purpoſely deſpife the rraditions,let himbe
Anathema; that cuery one may know what ground the Synode will vſe1n

O

confirming the points of doctrine, and reformingof maners in the Church.

Thefubtnce The ſubltance of rhe ſecond Decree was; that the vulgar Edition ſhould be

52929 beld for authenticall in publike Le£tures, Diſpurations, Sermons, and exPO-

fitions, and that none ſhould dare to refuſe ir. Thar the holy Scriprure can-

not. bee expounded againſt the ſenſe held by the holy Mother the Church,

nor againſt the common conſent of the Farhers, though with purpoſe co

conccale thoſe expofitions, and thar the offenders ſhould be punithed by the

Ordinarics: that the vulgar Edition [hould be molt exaQtly printed. That no

bookes of religion bee printed, ſold,or kept, withoutthe authors name, and

that che approbation appeare in the frontiſpice of the booke, vpon paincof

excommunication, and pecuniary puniſhment, conſtituted by thelalt Lare-

764 Councecll. That none ſhould dare to vie the words of the holy Scripture

1n-icurrility, fables, vanity, tlacreries,detractions, ſuperltirions,inchantments,

_ ... diuinations,caltings of lots, libels,and that the tranſgreſſors ſhould bee puni-

-n neet>® ſhcedar the diſcretion of the Biſhops, And ic was determined to hold thenext
heme 17-. Sc{hion the 17. of Tune. t |

The Con. -- Afterwards the Commiſſion of Don Dizgo de Mendoza, and Francis de

_ Toledo, the Emperours Ambaſſadors, was read by the Secretarice of the Coun»

Ambaiſadors cel. Don Diego was abſent; and the other, having, in the-Emperours name,

"=  falutedrthe Fathers in few words,faid in ſubſtance; Thar all the world knew

that the Emperour crhought nothing to befir him more,then not onely ro-de-

fend the flocke of Cyr1sT from enemics, bur to free it from tumultsand

{cdirions; therefore thathe reioyced to {ce the day when the Councell, pub-

liſhed by the Pope, wasopened,andcharbcing willing to fauvurthar occaſion

with his power and aurheritie, he had ſent thither Mendoza, vnto whom , in

regard of his indiſpoſition, himſelfe was ioyned. Su thatnothing remained

bur to pray God vniformely,that he would fauour theeaterpriſc ofthe Coun.

cell, and which is the Principall, would preſeruc peace betweene the Pope

- and

bo
|
b
,
4

ate va _ , p 4 CAE. ron I OO I -- OS" ROS Meta Et

Lis. 2, T he Councell of Trent. 167.

and Emperour,fot the citabliſhing of the tructh of the Golpel, reltoring the 1546
Church to her puritic,& weeding the cockleour of the Lords field Anfwere {> —
was made by the Councell, charhis Lordſhips comming was molt accepra- Culnzss if
ble both forthe dutic they did owe the Emperour, and*'for the fauour hee Har 8. |
romiſed chem, hauingallo much hopein the realtic & religion of his Lords 3252 7:
thip. That they imbraced him with all theithearr, and did admit, as farre
as rhiey could with reaſon, the mandates of (ſar. Thar they were ſorry tor
the indilpoſition of his Colleague, and thanked God forthe peace betweene
the Pope and the Emperour, praying him to fauour the defires of them
both, forthe increaſe of Chriſtian rel1gion,and peace of the Church. Thele
chings being done, with the vſuall ceremonies;the Seflion ended;rhe Deciees
whereof were ſeat ro Rom? by the Legares,and alittle after printed.
| Butafter they were ſeenc, eſpecially in Germany , they minittred great AfewPreas

and not Icar-

marter of diſcourſe. Some thovghr it {trange that fine Cardinals, and 48. ncs,do decade
biſhops,ſhould ſo caſily detine the molt principall andimportane points of 3
Religion, neuer decided before, giuing Canonicall authoritic ro Bookes bg05-
held tor vncertainc and apocryphal}, making aurhenticall a rranſlation diffe-

ring from the original, preſcribing and reſtraining the manner to vndertitand

the word of God; neither was there among{t theſe Prelates any one remark-

able for lcarning, ſome of them were Lawyers, perhaps learned in that pro-

fel; 0, but of little vnderſtanding in Religion ; few Diuines, bur of lefſe
 thenotdinary ſufficiencie; the greater number Gentlemen or Courciers; and

for their dignities ſome wereonely ticular, and the maior part Biſhops of ſo

ſmall Cities, that ſuppoſing cuery onto repreſent his people, it could not

be ſaid that one of a thouſand in Chriltendome was repreſented. Bur par-
ticularly of Germany there was not ſo muchas one biſhop or Diuine, Was ic

poſlible that amongſt ſo many no man ſhould be ſent ! Why did not the Em-

perour cauſe ſome of them to goe, who aſſiſted in the Colloquie, and were
informed in thediffercncies? Amongitrhe Prelats of Germany onely the Car.

dinall of Auſburg had ſent a Proctor, and him a Sauoyard. Forthe Proctor F
of the Cardinall and Ele&or of Ments, vaderitanding their malters death,

went away two moneths before,

Others laid, chat che things decided were not of ſogrearmomentas they 1;,,1ine
ſcemed.For the point of traditions, which ſeemed moſt imporrant,was of no «indy de-.
conlequence.Firlt becauſe ic was nothing ro ordain they ſhould bereceiued, ningnatur
if it werenotdeclared which they were, & how they ſhould beknowen:the ©
becauſe there was nocommandement ro receiuethem, bur'onely a/prohubiri-
on to.contemne them wittingly and deliberately. So that he that reiected
them with reucrend termes, contradidcd not; and che rather, becauſerhere
is an example of rhe adherents of the Church of Rome, who recciue nor
theordination of Deaconeſles, graunt not tothe people the eletion- of the
Miniſter, which certaincly was an Apoſtolical inſtitution, continued more
then eight hundred yeeres,and which more importeth, obſerue nor che
communion of the Chalice, inſticuted by Chriſt, przached by the Apoſtles,
obſcrucd by the whole Church, yntill within ewo hundred yecres, and now ©
alſo by all Chriſtian Nations burche Larine; tharifthis be not atradirion, it
isimpollidleto (h:w whatotheris,' And forthe yulgar cdition __— a

chentica

164. The Hiſlorie of

es as _Y

TL 1. 2

1546 rhcnticall, nothingartall was done, becauſc among to many copies, it can-

Re. not be knowen whichis the true. Butthis Jaſt oppoſition was made, be-

Caries 5- cauſcrhe depuration to make a corrected copie of the vulgar cdition , was

Hexar 8. not knowen, The which, for what cauſcit was not effected, ſhall-be ſaid in
25 ioplace
Nor concer=.  Butthe Decrecs of the Selſion being ſeene in Rome, and the importance
gr eduon. of the things treated of conſidered, the Pope began tothinke he ought more
rorcgard the buſineſſe of the Councell,thcnynrill chat time hee had done;
aud heenlargedthe congregation of Cardinals and Prelats , who were to
conſider of the occurrences of the Synode, and to relate them. By the ad-
uiceof theſe, after their firlt aſſembling, he admoniſhed the Legars of three
"A things. Onenot to publiſh hercafter in Seſſion any decree, before they had
monitherh-che COMMUNicated itat Rome,and to auoyd too much {lowneſſe in proceeding,
ewes. DUTto beware much more of two much celctitie, which might make them
rclolue of ſome indigeſted matter, and want time to receiue orders from
him , what they ſhould propoſe, deliberate,and conclude. The ſecond; nor
to ſpend time in matters not controuerled, as they had done: in thole thar
were handledfor the lalt ſeſſion; whercinall agree, that they are vndoubted
principles. The third, co take hecde, that by no meanesthe Popes authoritic
be diſputed on.
Towbomite Whercunto they readily anſwered that they would obey his Holineſle
regues mi commandement ; but that ir ſeemed to them, thar in the things defined,
hivete, - there is ſmall difference berweene Catholiques and Herctiques, and that
ſome ofthe Scriptures of the Old and New Teltamenr, recciued by the third
Councell of Carthage by Innocentius the firlt, by Gelatins, by the {ixt Synod
of Truſlys,andthe Florentine Councell are called into queſtion by the He«
retikes, and which is worſe , by ſome Catholikes and Cardinals, and alfo
thatthe vowrirten Traditions are impugned by the Lutherans, whointend
nothing more then to anaihilaterthem, declaring that all things neceſſary to
ſaluation, are written. And therefore though theſe two heads bee princi-
ples, yet they are the moſt controuerſed concluſions which areto bee deci-

dedin the Councell,and of the greateſt importance. They added that vnrill

then there wasno occaſion to {peake of the Popes authoritie, or of the
Councell,butin treading of the title, when theaddition of Repreſentation of

the roniverſall Church was required. That many defire it ſtill, but thatthey
will auoyditas much as poſhbly they can. And in calc they ſhall be broughe
o it by force, they will defire(thinking it will nor bee denyed them) to ex-
pound the manner how it-doth repreſent, that is,by meanes of the head, and
- not otherwiſe; whereby there will bee'rather gaine then loſle, For thereſt
becauſethey think the maior part will alwayes bearcal reuerenceto his Ho-
Mreom_y vnited,as Head, with the bodic of the Councell, (which will be
ſo long,as they ſhall agree in the reformation) hee may ſer his hearr at rel$

that his authoritic ſhall notbe queſtioned.
The Pore Afterthis the Pope ſent Jeronimo Franco Nuncio to the Swifſes, giuing him
N»x#:0 the Jerters to the Biſhops of Sion and Coira, to the Abbar of $. Gallo, and other
99% Abbatsof thoſeNations; to whom hee wrote, that, hauing called all che
Prelares of Chriſtendome to the Generall Councell of Tren, it was fir that

they,

hn <a. *

Foals

L I B, 2s

they, who repreſent the Heluetian Church, ſhould aflilt allo, inregard hee 1546
much loued that nation,as elpeciall ſonnes of the Apoltolike Sea,and main- ——y
tainers of che Eccleſialticall ibercie. - That Prelates out 05 Ttaiie, France,and Codnantd
Spaine were arriued alrcadic, and che number increaſed dayly. 'I hat it was Hr; g
nor {cemely that they, being bordercrs, ſhould bee preuenced by thoſe thar F*o><rs x:
dwelt further off That their Countrey was infected with herefies; and © © ©
therefore had morc' need of a Councell. In tine hee commanded them,

vpon their allegiance and oath, and'paines preſcribed by the lawes.,/ to-goe
thicheras ſoone as was pollible ; referring the relt ro bee rolde them; by his |

Nunc. b545 To 5 20000157157
And at the many inſtances of the Clergie and Vniucrlicie of (/ollengaflifted And giveth

ſenrence a«

by the Biſhops of Liege, and Utred, and Vniuerſttie. of Lojaine;he Pronoutt gunithe
ccd ſcntenceagain(t the Arch-bithop aud Ele&or of Collen, declaringihim OY
excommunicated, depriuing him of all benetices and priutledges Ecelefia- Tf?
ſicall, abſoluing his ſubie&s from their oath of fidelitie, and commanding
them not to obey him, becauſe he had incurred the cenfures of the \Bull of

Leo the tenth, publiſhed againſt Luther and his adherents, as bauing held, de» ©
fcadcd and publiſhed thar doctrineagainlt the Ecclefialticall rulcs; badith
ons of the Apoltles,and yſuall rites of Chriſtian religion.] And the'lennce ©" a 4 pong
was after printedin Rome. He made alfo another Bull, giuing order that. f- R_ 4
dolphus Count of Scauemburg a{fumed before by the Arch-bilhop for his, Co-
adiutor,ſhould be obeyed. | o ONt 1 blood!
 Andheecarneltly deſired the Emperour, that che ſentence-might be exe- Tre emperor
cuted ; who, thoughe nor thus nouitic fir for his purpoſe, becauſe is, would the Popes
makethe Arch-biſhop, who vartill then had abſolutely obeyed himgg yalte 'cnrence.
himſelfe with choſe chat were combined againſt him. And ,chereforc he held

hin (till for an Arch-biſhopand created wichhim, and wratero himj with»

out regard of the popes ſentence. This vexed che Popeatthe heart, þurſee- (702;
ing there was no retnedie, hee rhought it folliero'complaine invaine,,, [Jhay fro? inthe

{cntcnceproduced another bad cftect, becauſe the.Proteſtants cookeocedtion GR

ro confirmetheir opinion that the Councell was intimated only co. ififaare

them. For thecontroyerſed dottrine of fairki pught ro bee examined 25n

the Councell;, how couldthe Pope;beforethedefinition therept; proccedeto

ſentence , and condemactheArch-biſhop of hereſze2 Therefare itappeaterh

that in vaine they ſhoyldgoe:to that Councelly where, the:-Pope dominee»

rcth, who cannot diflemble, though hee wayld;.that hee)efeemerb them

as mencondemned, "That is was manifeſt allazhacthe Pape; made po, ac-

count of thaxFouncell,;Hecaufe, afcer it: was xguny bee progtededidetini-

Uucly inchatwhich belongerh tothe Councel, wichout impartinganydling

vntoit, The,Duke of Saxenie fignificd thistq the-Empeioun. by) bib Aprr

baſſadours, aydafior {ayds, var himy that the:cPopes, mide; being; Bow.

made, manifgits/it would þce high tne: t9,gronide for Grmman'/ oy ine

Natjonall Councell, orhy,handligg {eioraſly,the-points gt Religiohian a |

Diet, -: 4 n9cr od 0190152 3:6 idfrbales? 2510506 22d 01 219it/
-Buxro rerutheto the bytzneſle of the Countethgbete.cemsined.(as- hack:

beene layde).as remnants of the thinks: babdlgd befortiiaghe lalt; Selviony

the rwo points, to prouide for the LeRutes of the holy Scripture, _ _
—_e_ : chit

- - ,
> BE”

—
wy J

Lis.2.

1545 chingofthe word of God. For this was handled in the firlt Congregation;
> and (to begin the matter of faith ) it was propoled to trear likewile of origi-
Cuartss' 5 Nall fin, Wherunto the Spanilh Prelars oppolcd, and iayd,that to provide a-
Hmzr 8. gainſt the abuſes of preaching & reading,was matter cnough for oneleſſion.
_— Which opinion allo was followed by the Italian Prelates who were on the
: Emperors ſide, And the Legars thought they had diſcoucred that this was

lotred by Ceſars miniſters, who at the very inſtant had ſcriouſly treated with

thoſe Prelats. Therfor they ſent aduicerhereof to the Pope, from whom they

had anſwere,that they ſhouid take heed ro go on warily,vntil he wereable to

iuethem a reſolution. Therefore they vicd artificiall diligence, entertai-

ping themlſelues with partof the Abuſes, without comming to the conclu-

ſion of them and without making demonſtration whether they would pro-

_ _ ccedeinthe matterof originall finne. And thus rhe caſe ſtoode vntil Eaſter.

Pe» Franc = Which being paſt, the Pape wrotethey ſhould proceede, and propoſe
kexdcrhtar that matter. This being deliuered the ſecond of May, cameto theknow

_ ledge of Don Francis; who going to vilitethe Legats yſed much arte,ſome-

166 The Fiitory of

-—t_.

_——

mation ſhould

—_— crimes making ſhewro giue them counſell, ſomerimes propoſing his opinion
iz forthe proſccutivg of thereformation onely,to know their mindes, and to
perſwade them obliquely ro embrace his deſeigne. Bur ſeeing that did no
good, hee began to ſpeake as plainely as was needfull, rhathee had letters
from the Empcrour, by which hee was charged to be a meanes that the
ſhould not enter into the points of doctrine, bur ſhould handletheretorma-
tion only. The Legats brought many reaſons to the contrary; & amonglt 0-
thersthey ſaid,they could nor doe ir without contradicting the Popes Buls,
which propoſed thele two things rogether; and that which was eſtabliſhed
inthe Councell , that they ſhould goc forward cheeke by iowle; adding,
that they had written to bis Holineile, chat they would begin eight days
after Eaſter, Diucrs diſcourſes and replyes were made on both ſides, andin
concluſion the Legats ſaid they were commanded by the Pope, and could
not be wanting to their duetie. Don Francs ſayd, it was the dutic of good
miniſters to maintaine amitic betweene Princes, and ſometimesto cxpet
the ſecond Commillion. This was not denyed by the Legates; but they
anſwered that more was nor to be expected trom them then they were able
ro doe with their honour. They gaue the Pope an-account of all this, ad-
ding, that the Cardinall of Trent told them, rhatifthe Article of originall
ſing were propoſed, theEmperor would be dilcontented; and therefore on
the one ſide being deſirous ro make peace and concord, and'on the other to
obey his Holinefſe commandements, they thoughrtgood to ſend away this
aduifcin diligence, beſceching him not to lct thetn erre; adding thar if no 0+
ther aduiſe came,they would follow his laſt commandement,and would la-
bour to perſwade Don Francis and the Cardinall of Trent, tharthis Article of
originall ſinnewas no more queſtioned in Germany, but accorded , as was
manifelt by the laſt Colloquic of Ratizbon, where. his Maieſticfor rhe firſt
Atticleto bee accorded, cauſed that of tuſtification to be taken. But to give
as much more timeasis poſſible, they will entertaine themſelues; as many
dayes as they honeſtly cat , in diſpatching thar which remaineth of the
hſt Scſlion. YiOrbs:.: f $21 L23C0Ec Wy bot
mr A Cone

TW "Te OO ONT Pg

b-. -

"LD I ONO

© ti nas vt. ptr I

be. F,-

Zoo gt WR In >

Lis. ;  TheCountellof Trent.
"© ACongregation was made for this onely, to give abetrer bom hov as

they ſhould more orderly procccede then they formerly bad done, as well {, >

in handling the do&trine of faith, as the matter of reformation. And they Cnaatas $1

m7 ” N

diltinguiſhed wwo forts of Congregations; one for Diuines,to diſcourſe on Haar 4,

the matter of faich which ſhould be propoled, whoſe opinions ſhould bee 326% 5
written by one of the Notaries of the Councel, ro whom ſhould bce added een
Canonilts, when refortnation was ſpoken of: (which Congregations were to preceedin
bee held in the preſence of the Legates, inwhich any of the Fathers that ur apy
would tnight be preſent.) Another torrof Congregations ſhould confiſt of
Prelates to frame the heads of Doctrine and reformation, which, beeing
examined,and (ct in order, according to the moſt common opinion, ſhould.
be propolcd in the generall Congregation, to vnderſtand cuery ones voyce
thatby the determunation of the maior part, the decrees might be cſtabli-
ſhed, which areto be publiſhed in the Setſion:. | |

According to this order, they treared of LeEtures and Sermons, framing .,,. ,,«...y
and reforming diuers draughts of Decrees ; neither was ir poſſible to finde beryern the

\& | | bo iclates and
a way to plealcal,becauſc the Prelars that were much intercfſcd ro deſire that rcguiars,a-

all might depend _ the Epilcopall power, without cxcmprion of atty. 9" "na
Bur on the other ſideythe Legates defired ro.maintaine the priutledges given dothreweuts
by the Pope, cſpecrally ro the Mendicants and Vniuerſities. And after ma-
ny diſputes, when the matter was ſufficiently debated, they thought thar , in
thc Congregation of the tenth of May, all would agree. But ir prooued to
the contrary, for though i laſted cill iighe, yet in ſome points, they could
come to no conclufion, forthe diuerſitie of opinions amonglt the Prelats
theml(clues, and in others, becaulc the Legates would not yeeldeto the ge+
nerall opinion, to remooue, or at the lealt,. ro moderate the priuiledges.
They alledged againſt the Bilhops,that they were more moucd by their pro«
per intereſt,then by reaſon; thatrhey made none account to preiudice the rex
TT they were too bold tn correCting the former Councels,& inmed-

ing with the priuiledges granted by the Pope. And they could nor agree,
nor onely forthe vafletic of Opinions and intereſts of the Biſhops, bur alſs
beca::ſe the Imperiaiilts did endeauvur to make a difference, to hinder the

propoſing ofthe. points of Dodrine. Neither was this temporizing bngrate-

full 6 the Legates, who were reſolute, if they werenotforbid in the an{wer,
which they expected from Rome, to propole the doctrines, and, as thrir ins
ward friends ſaydc, to clecre them{cluesafterwards of whatſocuer ſhould
enſue. | 2 -,
But to'make ſome end of the things handled, they cauſed abricfe of the
opinions ofthe Duines and Cinonults , deliuered in ders preceding Con-
gregations, to be read;ſaying, that in fegard the voyces were long, rhey had
collected theſunime of them,that they may cxaminerhem and {peake their
opinions thereon. But Bracius Martens, Biſhop of Fieſole, hearing theex- _
tract read, oppoledir ina continued ſpeech, and ſaidic was neceflary rhat the {wrong

ehiefall Congregation ſhould: know thevoyces and tedſons of all, wichour ———
reading collc&ions and ſummes; and inlarged himſclfc by amplifying the
authoritic of rhe Conticel, & theneeellity ro informeit wel, & the ſmal con-
ucnicncic,that ſome few ſhould be Iudges of the determinations, or arr"

HI ere re to | - ns

"SF L, veaithcs * 0-2 1:2: "—- - wh
- TIA am pF - Noon ths

[OA ACTS

&7 Cs

= ce!l dependingon the Pope, in Teauing of things begun, and beginning

L 1:2.
T7545 rclolutions thould comefrom any other place : wherear the Legates were
/ -. much offended, and reprehended the Biſhop with afte&ted modelty, burby=

©

168+ \ T be Hiftorie a

—

—_

Cantrs 4, tingly enough. And ſo the Congregatien brakevp,

Hans.  Thenextdaythe Legatsfentto theB. ro demand acopic of his diſcourſe,
Fraxcrs 3 andſcnrit to Rome, taxing itas irrcuerent and feditions , adding, thar they
Whocon- had modellly and feucrely repretiended him, and would bauc gone further

lane to rhe |
Pope botv'f | (becaulc he deferued no lefle) butthat they feared ro mooue fome vnſcalo-

my oph'y "< nable dil pure, which might make a rent; Burthathe ought not to eſcape yn-
ns Wy puniſhed, lcalt he ſhould be emboldencd to do the like in cucry CONgregatie
on, or worſe: repreſenting to his Holineſſe,that by all meaneshe ſhould bee
chaſed our of Trent,and order taken that the Biſhop of ( hioza, (nor much
valike vnto hi n,though inanother courſe) ſhould never returne, This Bi-
ſhop parted immediatly after the {efſ100, ypon prerence of indiſpoſition, bur
in tructh by reaſon of wordes which paſſed berwcene him and Cardinall
Poole ia Congregation,1n the matter of traditions. For hauipg ſpoken in de-
fence of Fryar Antonius Marinarus, and thereupon conteſted with the Car-
dinall, and ſo having complained that the Councell was not free, he ſaw, he
was notin the Legars fauour,and obnoxious todanger. The Legats nor con-
tent with what they had done, to mortifie the Biſhop of Fieſole, and to keep
_ rhe matter intire vnrill there came aduile from Rowe,thar they might goc on
with it, or diſſemble, as they ſhould de commanded, inthe next Congrega-
tion. Monzegaue hima nip by the way, andconcluded thar he left him then
ro con{ider of his owne affaires,becaule himſclfe was robe imployed in mar-

ters of greater importance. |
The Pope anſivered concerning the two Biſhops, thathe would giue a
ThePores Temedie iN time CONueDIeENT. But for the matters tobe handled, he layd,that
anerero i if they regarded the defires of Princes ,they would makethe Councel more
: tumulryous, and the reſolutions more long and hard, becauſe euery one
' forght ro crofſe what liked him-nor and by putting difficultic in onething,
to promote another. Thereforethat without any morg to doe, they ſhould
begin with originall ſfinne, aduifing them ro omir the excuſe which they
purpoſed to vie ro D.Francis, that is that the article of originall finne is nor
queitionedin Germany; but ſhould rather vic generall rermes, and all reue-

_rence io theEmperour. , | :

TheCouncell Fe fyrthetr 'commanded them, that concerning the corretion- of the

andy coo tyulrar edition,they ſhould proceed no further, vntillthe Depuries ouer the
i... Councellin Rome, had determined what courlc ſhould be held. The Legats
_relolting, for execution of thoſe orders, to propoſe originall ſinne, madea
congregation two daycsrogether,todetermine of the two heads of reading

'and preaching, before they publiſhed their -purpoſe to handle matters

of fairh, Jealt thoſe two points, being vndecided, might cauſe the Imperia-

- Its ro diaertfromthis; Andthiey cauſed rhe Depuries forthe vulgar ediri-

on, to bring to thery al]'they had done, charging them ro proceed np fur-

ther vnulithey had teceiacd new order. Such was the libertic of the Coun-

v
EW. : .
" {6 treating of the LeQures and Sermons, there was a generall complaint
HE STO 2 > :

0

= _ F.., = RE, _— —_——_hlw_— a——_

= <0 —_— - td

E 1:6. 24 the Corncellof Tredt. 469

of che Biſhops, eſpecially Spaniſh;char,Cryu1sT hawng commanded thathis *1546
doctrine (hould be taught, which igexercifedin theChtirch bypreachitis;atd NSD
reading co the more capacious, that they may be fit;to reach the people;the Cranits'F;
care toſuperintend; oucr allthar exerciierhele tunAibns;, oupht to bee Pr6*- Hiver 8,7
perto-the Biſhop. I:hat the A poltles hanc {o inſtituted;and the holy Fathers Co
to praftiſed. That now this ofhiceis ablolutely taken from the Fiſhopsby Acovplane
priuiledges, {o that no ior thereof remainerh.” "That this isthe cane why ali gilar orders,
is outot order, becauſe the order inltiruced by CH R448T is changed. The
Vniverſitics are withdrawen with exemprions;that che Biſhop cannorknow
whatthey teach; the Sermons areby priuiledgegitien to the Friars, who'by

no meanes acknowledge the Biſhop, nor futter him ro med&l6: ſo rhar the

office of a Paltour is quite taken from the Biſhops: And on the contrary;

thoſe wi anciencly were appointed ro weepe for (innes, and expreſlely and *
{cuercly forbid to preach and teach, haucaflumedrhis power vnto them, off _
atthelealt, it is giuen them for their proper funQion: And ſothe flocke'
remaineth without cither ſhepheard or hireliog, becauſe theſe ambulatoric
Preachers, who to day arc in one Citie,to morrow iti anocher, know neither

the need,nor the capacitic of che pcople,and\lcalt of allthe occafions to reach

and cdific them , as doth the proper Pattour ; who kucth alwayes with the

flocke and knoweth the neceſhries and infitmities of it. Beltdes the endeof

Luther was one of thelc ; whoif hee-had remained. weeping in his Cell, the
Church of Cy R15sT had nor ſtood in theſe termes. 'T hat theabuſeof the
Pardoners was more manifelt, who goe about preaching Indulgences,
whole ſcandals, formerly giuen, cannor bee'related withour teafes. 'T har ir
is aclcere caſe, that they exhorr the people to nothing but ro git® money.
The onely remedie for theſe diforders, is to take away all the prifttledges;
and to reſtore to the Biſhops , the charge to teach and preach, anto elc&
tholc for their fellow labourers whom they ſhall know worthy of thar mi-
niſtery,and diſpoſed to exerciſeit with charity. =
. On the contrary fide; the Generals of the Regulars, and others faide; An Apclogh
thatthe Biſhops and: Curates hauing wholly abandonedthe office of a Pa- owns. *
{tour , ſo that for many hundreds of yecres the people remained without
Sermons inthe Church; and without the do&rine of Dtuinitie in Schooſes;
God had raiſed the'begging orders to (upplie theſe neceflary miniſteties ;
into which notwithſtanding rhey intruded not themlelues , but centred by
the grauntof the Supreame Paſtour ; vnts' whom it principally appertais
ning to feedeall theflockeof Cruxisr, it cannor bee faide that met depu-
ted by him; ro ſupplie-rhe defeQts of him that had rhe care of chefYocke aid
did abandon it, Linn vſurped the office of attother. But it may bee ſayde;
that jf they had not vſed that charitic, there had now femained ho ligne of
Chriſtianitie. Now that they haueapplycd thernſclues morerhen three hun-
dred ycercstothat holy lads ; with ſuch frait asappearcth, they __ bo

P . ELIDE

©

Y

©: 0:

S.2

:

o

">. ;

of +

: i
by
|
.
P
4
»”

%- Ro 4623; T_ _ ? , Wha;

———

170 i The Hiſtorieof =

1546 Acribed thoſe funRions, and made them their owne, by a lawfull rirle, gi-
Par; 5 en by thechicte Paſtour, the Biſhop of Rome; and thar the Biſhopshaue no
Cuaxuss 5. Jayyfull rightynto them, nor can alleadge the vic of antiquity to regaine thar
Hazy 8. Office, which'ſo many hundred yeeres fince they hauc forſaken. "Thar they
22x415 3- hauc a deſire of gayning for themlelues or their Monalteries is a meere
calumnic, becaule che almes are gathered onely for their neceſſary foode,

and apparell, and the reſidue being ſpent for the worſhip of God, in
maſles, buildings, and ornaments of Churches, turnethto the benefir and
edification of the people, and nor to their owne profit zthat the ſeruices
dane by their orders to the holy Church , and doctrine of Diuinitic (which
is nowhere to bee found but in their Cloiſters ) deſcrue the continuance of
that charge which others are nor able to exetciſc.
The Legats | The Legates, imporruned by both parties, by the Councell of their moſt

reheat. ward friends reſolucd to relate to Rome, and expeQ an anſwere. The Pope

ference to j

C

Kemcantet- referred 1T to the Congregation ; where preſently it was ſeenc whither the
free. pretence of the Biſhops rended ; that is , ro make themſeJucs ſo many Popes
1n their Dioccſles. For when the Popes priuiledge and exemption ſhould
bee remooucd,and cucry one {hould depend on them, and none onthe Pope,
The Depuries all cauſe of going to Rome would ceaſe. They confidered that the Popes
ribs have anciently had for a principall ſecret to preſcruc the Primacie giuen

aencicants them by CHRIST , to exempt the Biſhops from the Arch-biſhop, the Ab-

Policie. bats fromthe Biſhops, and ſo to oblige men to defend him. Thar it is a

cleerecaſc, that after the fixe hundredth yecre, the Primacic of the Apolto-

like Sca hath beene vpheld by the Benedictine Monkes excmpred , and after

by the Congregations of Clunie, and Ciſtercium, and other monaſlticall

aſſemblies, vol God raiſed the Mendicant orders, by which it bath becne

maintained vntillnow. Whereforeto takeaway their priuiledges, were di-

re&ly ro oppugnethe Papacic, and not thoſc orders; to remooue the exemp-

tions, werea manifelt depreſſion of the Court of Rome, becaulc they ſhould

want mcanes to keepe a Biſhop within compaſle , that hee exalt nor Limſclfe

too high. Therefore that the Pope and Court were compelled by neceſlitie

to maintaine the Friars cauſe. But to doe theſe things ſmoothely, they con-

ſidered alſo thatit was neceſſary to conceale this reaſon ; and they relolued

The Popes to an{werethe Legates, that by all mcancs they ſhould preſeruc the ſtate of

— hc Regulars, and cauſe the Bulhops to ſurceale, ſetting before rhem the ex-

ccſliuc number of the friars, and the credit which they haue with the people,

andaduiſethem to rakea moderate courſe, and not makea Schilme, by deſt-

ring too much. Thar it was iuſt they ſhould receive ſome latisfation,

bur they ſhould alſo bee content to giue it ; and when they came to the

point, they ſhould grantany thing concerning the Pardoners, bur ſhould

docnothing concerning the Friars, without communicating it cothe Gene-

ralls, and ſhould giucthe Biſhops ſome ſatisfation which might-not take

away the priuiledges. That they ſhould doe the like for the Vniuerſities;

becauſcit was neceſſary thatboth thelc and thoſe ſhoulddepend onthe Pope,
andnoton the Biſhops.

After theſe letters came to Trent, thoſe of the Councell had three diucrs

ends... For the other particulars propoſcd in theſe two matters, by thoſe
who

E £8, 2.

L 16.2 the Councellof Trent. 171
who were not intercltcd cichercofauour or disfauour the exemptions, were 1546 -
but little conliderced of; For the Lectures, lome: propoſed the reſtitution of >>>
the ancient yſc when Monaſterics and Canons cloiſters were bat Colledges Cuintes 5:
and Schooles. Whereof ſome remainderappearcth in many Cathedral Chur- Har 8.
ches, where thereis the dignitieof a Schooleman, Head of the readers, with CE 7
a Prebend. Thele mcn now doe nor performe the duetie, and indeedeare

vnable. All choughr it honeſt and profitable to reſtore the Diuinitie Le-

cturein Cathedral Churches,and Monalteries. For the formerthey thought

it caſe to makeprouiſion, by commirting the care of the execution thereof

ro the Biſhops; bur for the latter very dithcult. The Legates oppoſed che
Supcrintendencicof Biſhops,cucn inthisallo, though ir were oper Monkes

onely, not Mcndicants, for fcareof leauing a gate open tothem, to meddle

with priuiledges granced by rhe Pope. - But Sebaſtianus Pighius, Auditor of Theinuent-
the Rota, found a temper for this,that the ſuperintendencie ſhould be giuen duor of the
to the Bilhops, as Delegates of the Apoltolique Sea. The inuention plea- Po

ſed, becau'c it was in fauour of the Biſhops, without derogation of the pri-

uile-ige , for the Bilhop was roſuperintend , nor as Biſhop, bur as the Popes
Delegate. Aud this gaue a paterne ro accommodate other difficulties; one

in giuing authoritic to the Metropolitans, ouer Pariſhes vnited tro Mona-

ſeries, not ſubie&t ro any Dioceſle; another,in giuing power to Biſhops oucr
exempted Preachers, who faile ; and feruedallo very muchin the Decreesof

the Sellions that were after. ;

The Canoniſts propoſed that the Schoole ſubtiltie was not fit in theſe [91ers

ſons to vp+

times, and that it beſcemed rather naturall things, and'Philolophic, that _—_
theſe new Lectures ſhould bee introduced ro handle the Sacraments, and the thor.
authority of the Church, as Turecremata, Auguſtinus Triumphus, & after them
S. Antoninus,and others haue done with great fruit. -But the Fryars contradi-
ing,and oppoling that this doctrine was as neceſfary asthat ; they found a
remper,and ordered that the Lecture ſhould bee for expoſition of the Sctip-
rurc,and that the matter ſhould be fitted tothe exigence of the rext read, and
the capacitie of theauditors. |
After many Diſcourſes in many Congregations , they came roeſtabliſh
. the Decrees forthe Sermons, and to ouercome the difficulties,they cauſed
the Prelates , who were their aſſured friends , to negotiate with the lralian
Biſhops, wiſhing them to conſider how much they were bound, for the
honour of .cheir nation, to vphold the dignitic of the Papatcie, whoſe au-
thoricie was created of by medling with' the priviledges, and” what they
might hope for from the Pope and Legares, applying themſelues ro that
which is iuſt, and notdepriving:the Friars of that they haueenjoyedfo long,
Thar it was dangerous to delpile ſo manylcarned men, now when hercſies
doe trouble the Church. Thar the authoritie of Biſhops ſhould beenlarged,
by. granting them power to allow or diſallow the Preachers when they
emer out of the Churches of their Ordet ; and when they preachin them,
y making themacknowledge the Prelate, firſt asking his benediction. That
the Biſhops might puniſhche/Preachers for heteſie, &forbid thein to preach,
to auoyd ſcandall. Thar they ſhould bec contented with this arid thar other
things ſhould bee added, as occaſion ſerted. By this meanes they gaitied ſo

: P 2, | ; many

—_
—_

- 2 TT o "4s "I COVE el 24 * 9r-92e 2h
4
» — dy » ah jo W192, th 716+ rar ho th - A
© _— FT

L 1s. 2.

The Hiſtone of

=_

1546 many, that they were ſecure to eltabliſh the Decree with thoſe conditions.
>? But there remained anotherdifficulty ; becauſe the Friars and Generals were

Pavi 3.

Cuaxurs 5. not (atisficd,and to diltaſte them was not ſecure, and exprelly forbid by the

= —

Haxzr 8, Popc. They endeauored to ſhew them, that thegrant made to the Biſhops,
Jaxers 1- was iuſt and neceſſary, whereof themlelues were cauſe, by extending their

LESS

The points
of originall
finne to bre
diſcuſled.

priuiledges too much, and by paſſing the bounds of honelty. In finc,by ad-
moniſhing the Biſhops to proceed fo, tharthe Friars might not hauc caule to
complaine,the Generals alſo were pacificd.

When chey made knowne their reſolution ro condemne inthe ſame Sefli-
on theLuchcran opinions of original! ſ1nne, they alleadged,thar,ro keepethe
ordcrof putting both the matters together, it was neceſſary ro handlc ſome
poynt of faith , and that they could not begin from any other poynt. And
they propoſcd the Articles extrated our of the Vroteltants doctrine in
that martcr, to bee examined and diſcuſſed by the Diuines in the Con-
gregations , whether they ought ro bee condemned for herericall. "The
Cardinall Pacceco {aid , that the Councell was to handle Articles of faith,
onely to reduce Germanie,, the which hee that would doe our of ſcaſon,
ſhoa!d not onely faile of his ende, but make watters worſe. When there is
or portunitie to doe it, it cannot bee knowen to thoſe in Trent, bur onely
to him that fitteth ar the ſterne of that Countrey , who, fecing all parti-
culars , knowcth when to applic the medicine. Therefore hce aduifed
that rhey ſhould craue by letters the opinion of the principall Prelates of the
Nation, before they weutany further,or that the Popes Nuncio ſhould ſpcake

thereof with che Emperour. -To which opinion the Emperours Prelartes,

induced by the Ambaſſadour, did adhere. Bur theLegares, commending
their judgement), and promiſing to write ro the Nuncio, added, thar, not-
withſtanding this, the Articles night bee diſputed by the Diuines , to gaine
time; whereunto the Cardinall alſo, and the others , adhered, hoping thar
many difficultics might come acroſle,to caulc a delay, and the Ambaſſadour
Toledo was contented, ſo that the Summer might bee paſt before the defini-
tion were made.

The Articles propoſed, were. |
r. That Adam,by tranſgreſſing theprecept, hath loſt iuſtice,and incurred the
wrath of God, and mortalitic; and though hee bee impaired both in ſoule
and bodte, . yet no finne is transferred from him to polteritic, but onely core
porall puniſhments. ;
2-., Thar Adams ſinne is called originall, becauſe icis deriued from him to po-
ſteritic,not by rranſmiſlion;bur by imitation. |
3+ That originall ſinne is 1gnorance, or contempt of God, or want of
feare, without confidencein his Maieſtie, without diuine loue, and with con-
cupiſcence,and bad deſires; and generally acorruption of the whole man in
his will, foule, and body... Lo
4. Tharin children there is an inclination to cuill, proceeding from the
corrupted nature, fo thatafter the yſe of reaſon, it bringeth forth aloathing
of diuinethings,and an jmmerſion in martersof the world ; and that this is
originall ſinne. | ;
5+ Thatchildren, at thelcaſt borne of faithfull parents, ough Buy a)

apuzec

"WES!

L 18.2 the Councell of Trent. 173

—_—

aptized into the remiſſion of ſinnes , yer they hauc no finne by deſcending 1 546
from Adam, We NAN
6... That _ finne is nor cancelled in Baptiſme, but not injputed,or ſo Caantes $6
razed, that itbeginrcth to diminfh in this life, and i holly tobted OutiN Hazy 8,
tharto come. WTO I ad _e © - 791 _T 40 *FRANC1S I,
7 Thar-the {inne remayning in the baptized, hindefcth his efitrance into /-- -,.
IcAuecn. | ” y; | elite j395f7 fx *
$.. Thatconcupilcence which cheriſherh ſinne, and remaynetHafter bap-
rilme;is truely {1n.-; , | > 1131385 20 ,

9. Tharcheprincipall puniſhmentdue to originall ſiane, is hell fire, befides
_—m_ death, and other imperfe&tions, vato which man is {ubicEt in this
II C. bs 1:44 35
The Diuines inthe Congregation agreed, that to diſcuſſe thoſe Aﬀeicles,
it was neceſlary not to proceedin that order, but ro examine all the matter
methodically,and ſec what was finne in Adam, and whar, derjued from him
to polterity, is fan inall men, called originall, how it is tranſmitted, and how
remitted. |
[nche firſt point allo they agreed, that Adam being depriued of righte- Tia

ouſncſle, his aftections rebelled againſt reaſon ; which the Scriptureyſeth to nllinac.
expreſle, ſaying, the fleſh rebelleth again(t the ſpirir, and by one onely
name, callerh his defect Concupiſcence, That hee incurred che wrath of
God, and corporall mortalitic,threatned by God, together with the ſpiritual
death of the ſoule; and yetthart none of theſedefetts caybecalled fine, but
puniſhmenes that follow. Forf1nne is formally thetranſgreſſion of a divine
precept. And heremany enlarged themſclues, to finde our rhe kinde of this
faulc. Some aid it waspride, ſome gluttony,ſome infidelity,and ſome more
ſoundly, chaticmightbeedrawneto all theſe, and more. But hee that will
take S, Pauls words for his ground , can puritin noother kinde, bur of pure
diſobedience. Bur ſeeking ro know what thing deriued from Adamis fa in
vs, the opinions were more diuers. For S. Auſtine,who firlt ſought into the
eſlence thereof, following S. Paul ſaid itis concupiſcence. And S. Anſelm,
many hundred yeeres after, holding that fin is cancelled in thebaprized, con-
cupilcence {till remayning, maintayned that-it is thepriuation of originall
righteouſneſle, whichin Bapriſmeis renewed, by a thing cquiualenr, which
is gface. ' But S. Thomas , and S. Bonauenture, defiring to reconcile theſerwo
opinions , conſidered thatin our corrupted nature there are tworebellions;
one of the ſoule againſt God, the other of the ſences againſt the ſoule; and
that this is concupiſcence,and that vnrightcouſneſſe, and therefore both ro-
gether are the fin. And S. Bonaventure gaue the firſt place to concupiſcence,
ſaying that this is poſttine, andthe othernegatiue. And S. Thomas contrari-
ly made concupiſcence.the materiall part, and the priuation of righteoul-
neſle the formal. Whereupon he ſaid,thatthis {innein vs is concupiſcence,
deſtitute of originall righteouſneſſe. The Maſtgr of the Sentences, and the
old Schoolemen followed S. Auſtins opinion . "which was mainrained'in the
Councell by two Hermite Friars. But becauſe Tobn Scorc's defended the opi-
nion of his countrey-man Avſelmus, the Franſciſcans mainrained it/in the
Councecl,and the greater part of the Dominicatis that of S.Thomas. So'it was

; | | P 3 . declared

© En aero oP. —
Ly OR 10” owe ogtip nents won 4 _—_—_—

—_—

Mi The Hiſtoric of Lis. 2.

1546 declared what was the {1nne of Adam, and what originall ſinne in orher
PavL 3. ..; mcn. Ea : in
Cuaxzes, 5. . But they were moretroubled: ro diſcourſe: how it was tranſmitted from
Haar 3. him to polterity,and ſucceſſiucly from fatherto ſonne. For Sairit Auſtin, who
425-0) opened the way vnto others , preſſed with the obietion of Iubanwsthe Po
How orion; JAgian 4 Who askgd him of the manner of tranſmicring originall-ſ1nne when
vane is tranl- man is CONCeiucd,ſccing that Matrimony and the vſe thereof is holy,neither
mitted to po- , R |
tii. God thefirſtauthour finning,northe parents, nor he'thar js borne, by what

chinke ſinne centred, anſwered onely , that chinkes were nor to bee ſought

-
”

where a gate ſtood wide open,the Apoltle ſaying,that by Adam ſinne entred

into the world. And in many places where he was to ſpeake hereof, he ſhew-
cd himſelfe doubrfull, and was irrcfolute whether as the body of the childe
is dermed from the body of the father, ſo the ſoule fromthe foule. For the
fountainc being infecteFrhe river mult needs bee defiled. The modeſtic of
this Saint, was not imitaredby theSchoolemen ; who, being relolued that
cucry ſoule is created immediately by God, ſaid, that the infe&tion was prin-
cipally in the fleſh, contracted by our fore-fathers in the carthly Paradile,
either from the poyloned qualitic of the fruit,or the venimous breath of the
Serpent. Which contamination is deriued into the fleſh. of the children,
which is a part of their parents fleſh, and is contracted by the ſoule in the
infuſion , as a liquor contracteth the ill qualitic of an infeed yeſlell ; and
the infection is cauſed in the flc{h, by the lult of the parents in the genera-
tion. Bur the varicty of - wy made no difference in the cenſure of the
Articles: For cucry one cleauing to his owne, ſhewed that it was decided
by it, that the firſt arcicle was herericall, which vndoubredly was condem-
ned for ſuch in the Councell of PaleRtina, and in many of Africa againſt Pe-
lagius. And it was reexamined in Trent, notas it was found in the writings
of Luther, or his followers, but as it was aucrred by Zumglius: who, not-
withſtanding ſeemed to ſome of the Diuines , who diſcuſſed his words well,
to thinke rather that in the polteritie of Adam it was no fſ1nne of ation, bur
a corruption and transformation of nature, which hce called a {inne in the
kinde of ſubſtance.

The ſecond Article was eſteemed hercticall by all, and was by the ſame
Pelagius long ſince inuented; who, becauſe hee was not condemned in the
Councell of Paleſtina, for ſaying that Adam had not hurt his poſteritic, hee
recanted, and confeſſed the contrary, and after, together with his followers,
declared himſclfe that Adam had damnitficd his polterity , not by tranſmiſh-
on of {innc,but by giuing them a bad example, which hurteth thoſe thar doe
imitate it. And Eraſmus was notcd to hauc renewed the ſameaflertion, in-
terpreting theplace of Saint Paul, That by Aden ſinnecntred into the world,
and paſſed into all, in regard all hauc imitated, and doc imitate his tranf-

reſſjon.
, Thethird Article for the firſt part, was cenſured in Trent, asalfo in man
Colloquies in Germany , by ſaying that thoſe ations could notbee ner
{1nnc, ſeeing they are notin children,nor alwayes in thoſe of ripe age: ſothart
to ſay there was no ſinnebutthar, was wholly to deny it, and nottofarisfic

theexculcof thoſe in Germany , who ynder the name of aCtions, vnderſtand
| = oe oy anaturall

, - #

—,

—

ct —_—_— —_——— NE —

—}_ ——_— HC _—

L x B.[2. che Councell of T1 "i 175

—_—

- T

anaturall inclinarion toill, and an inabiliry:ro good; For, if they ynderſtood *r 5/46
itſo,it was fit coſayit,and noe roſpeakevill;burto as thatothersmay vnder: LEON
ſtand them well; And though Sainr 4uftinſpakertniswhen hee. faid,that o- Ciimres'4.
riginall rightcoufneſſewas roobey Godz and totxothaue concupilcence, hee nur ls
wouldalcer his peechif he had;beeneiritheſe times;.becaulcir is yery: law. nets E
fullro namecheicauſe forthe offeet; and/the effedt for the cauſd;when they |
arc proper and adequare. Bur it is not ſo inithis caſe; forotiginaliſnneis not
thecaulc of thoſe bad actions;cxcept a badwill, as ptincipall,beadded. Bur

for the4econd part of the Article, they aid, char if'the Proteſtants vnder-

ſtood a priuatiue corruption, the opinion may be tolerated; but they vndet-

ſtand acorrupred fubſtanceasif the proper nature of man were changed in-

co another forme; then thatin which iewas creared; and reprehend the'Ca-
ctholiques , when they call the/finnea/privation of Fuſtice, as a'fountaine

without water ; but they call ira fountaine from whence corrupted waters

doe iſſue, which are the acts of increduliry,diftruſt, hatred, contumacie,an in-

ordinate louc of ones ſelfe, and worldly things : and therefore har jt was fir

abſolutely ro condemnethe Article. Andrthe fourth alſo was cenſured by the
ſame reaſon, ſaying that inclination to beethe puniſhment offinne, ang nor
finne formally; and withour alleadgingoughrclſe,it was abſolutely denied
to b:e a {inne. S900 12: 7. OAT > 12 OPO0s $5.5 |
Ir muſt nor bee omitted that in this poynt, the Franciſcans could not 011+ +, 5.cnas
teine themſelues from exempring the Virgine , the mother of Gop , from <= exempt

this law by a ſpeciall priuikedge, cndeauoring toenlarge themſelues in the yr
: f FE ek _., finneanare

queltion,and to —_ it ; and the Dominicans labourcd to comprehend” hef oppoted by

by name, ynder the common law,though the Cardinall of Monze omitredno © 20mm

occalion to make chem leauetharcontrouerlie, faying, they were aſſembled

to condemne the hercſics; not the opinions of the Catholiques.

No maa reſiſted the condemnation of the articles. Bur Fryar Ambroſurs The opinion
Catarinus noted the reaſons for ynſufficient, in that they declared nor'the *<*m*
cruc nature of this ſinne; and ſhewed itina long diſcourſe. The ſubſtance
whereof was; thar it is neceſſary to diſtinguith the finne from the punifh-
ment ; that concupiſcence and priuation of righteouſneſle, is'the punith-
ment of {inne; therefore thar ir is neceſſary the ſinne ſhould bee another
thing. He added,that which was not a finin 4dam,it is impoſlible it ſhauld
be a finne in ys: but neither of theſe two were ſinnein 4dam, becauſe neither H_-
priuation of rightcouſneſſe, nor concupiſcence werehis a&tions; therefore
neither are they in vs ; and if they wereeffeets of {1nne inhim, of neceſhric
they mult be foin others alſo. 'By which reaſon, itcannor be ſaid that ſnine
is theenmitie of Go v againſt the ſinner, nor the ſinners enmitie again(}

GoD , fecing they are things that follow finne, andcome afterir. Hee op-
pugned alſo thetran{miffion of ſinne,by meanes of the ſeed and generation,
ſaying, That as, if Adam had nor ſinned, rightcouſneſſe would haue beene
transfuſed, not by vertue of the generation, bur onely by the will of God;
ſoiris fit rofinde another meancs to transfuſe ſintie. And hee explaned his
opinion in this forme; thatas God made a Couenant with Abraham and
all his poſteritic, when he made him father of the faichfull,fo when he gaue

; priginall rightcouſncfſcro Adem andall mankindehee made him ſcalean ob-

ligation

_ + The Hyſtarie of \ L1s: 2.

— OO

g—
-

41546 ligationinthe nameofall, to keeper. for hinulelte and them, obfcruing the
pur 5 commandements; which becaulc herranfgrefied, be loſt ur. as well for others
Cuazues 5. as himſclte,& incurred thepunithtments allo for them;zthe whichasahey are
Hxzx 8. deriucd into cucry, one, {othe very tranſgreſſion of Adambclonged tocucry
112535 35 onc;.t0 himasthe cauſe, to others by.vertuc;of rhe Coucnanc ;forhbrihe
* __acionof Adamisactuallfinnein him, and imputed; roorhers, as original;
beeaule when hee {inned, all mankind did finnewith him: Catarinuqgroun-
dcd himſelfc principally, forthatatrueand pus inns mult necds'bee a
voluntary a&, and noother thing can bee yoluncary but rherranſgreffion of
Adam imputed vnto all. And Paul faying thar all haue-ſinncd in Adam, ir
mult bee vaderſtood that they haue all committed rhe ſame1inne with him.
He alleadged for example, that S*. Pay ro the Hebrewes athrmeth ; thar Lew
paid tithe to Melchizedek,when hee paid it in his great Grandfather Abraham;
by which reaſon it mult bee ſaid, thar the poſteritic violated the commande-
mentof Gop, when 4dam did it , and that they were finners in him, as in
him they receiued righteouſnes. And lo there is no need torun to Juſt which
infecteth the fleſh , whence the ſoule recciucthiinfection. - For it cannot bee
vnderſtood, how a ſpirit can recciue a corporall paſſion; andif ſinne were a
ſpiritualiblemiſh in che ſoule,it could not fitlt bein the fleth, and if 1tbe cor-
porallin the fleſh,it can work nonecftic&t in the ſpiric. That the ſoule;by ioy-
ning it ſclfe with an infeed body, doth receive ſpiricuall infection, isan vn-
concciueablecranſcendencie. He-prooucd the couerant of God with Zdam,
by a place of the Prophet O/ea,by another of EccltfiaZticus, and by many pla-
ces of Saint Auſtin. Thatthe ſinncof cuery oneis the-actonely of the tran
greſſion of Adam, hee proucd by Saint Paul , when hee faith, That by the dif-
obcdicnce of one man,many aremade ſinners; and becauſethe Church hath
cucr vnderſtood that finne is nathing clſe bur a voluntary action againſt
# | the law , of which kind there was none but that of Adam zand becauſe Sainr
ſ ; Paul faith, T hat death entred by originall finne, which entred onely by actu-
1 all rranſgreſhon. And hee brought for the principall proofe, that though
Eue did cate the apple before Adam, yet ſhe knew not (he was naked, nor thar
f thee had incurred the puniſhment, bur onely after Adamhad ſinned. There-
force Adams lanne, as it was not hisalone, but of Exeroo, ſo was itallo of all
his polteritic |
Donininu © But Fryar Dominicus Soto,to defend the opinion of Saint Thomas, and of the
%.rocrollerh, Qther Diuines.from the obicftions of (atarinys, brought a new expoſition,
oiCarxrmus, And {aid, that Adam ſinned aQtuallyin cating of the forbidden fruir, bur after
j heremained a {inner by an habituall — by the action, as by cuc-
th ry badaction ſuch adiſpoſition is bred in the minde of the ator, by which,
Nis though the a&t be palt, heremaineth, and is called a ſinner; that Adams aci-
on was tranſitory, nor hadexiſtence,but while hee wrought; that the habiru-

92-09 47 5% 4 0A. At + gy
———— frtber IP» arm, £4 > atom
£ £ . y

as proper vnto euery one; that Adams action is not originall ſin,burthat con-
ſequent habir which the Theologuescall priuation of rightcouſneſle, which
may be wel expounded, colidering that man is called a finner,not only when
hee tranſgreſſeth actually,but after alſo, vntill the finne bee cancelledgnot in

regard of the puniſhments, or other conſequencesof funnc, but in regardot
the

all qualicic remaining in him, ' paſſed into the polteritie, and is transfuſed =

—o—_—_ —_— -
—

>> >.

> FE:

—

andere un — A ———
L 1s. 2. the Councell of Trent.

177

the preceding tranſgreſtion it (elfe; as that which maketh a man moked,

1546

ynrill hee bee [traighrned againe; who is ſaid co be ſo, not by an aQtuall aRti- CAN
on, but by that cikeet which remaineth after the a&tionis palt. Heecom- Cuazizs 5;
parcd originall ſinne to crookednefle, as it is indeedea fpirituall obliquitie; uy 3.
for the whole nature of man being in Adam, when hee made himlelte croo- ps

ked by tranſgreſſing-the Precept, rhe whole natureof man, and by conſe-
quent , euery par.icular perſon remained crooked ; not by the curuitie of
Adam, burtby his owne,, by which hee is truely crooked and aſtnner, vn-
till hee bee {traightened by the graceof God. Thele two opinions were
hy diſputed,and cuery one pretended that his owne ſhould be recciued

by the Synode.

all, that it is cancelled by bapriſme, and the ſoulercitored pure into the itare
of innocencic, though the puniſhments which follow finne beenor remoo-
ucd, that they may bee an cxercile for the juſt. Andthisallot them expoun-
ded by ſaying , that the perfe&tion of Adam conliited inan infuled qualirie,
which adorned the ſoule,madcit perfect and acceptable to God, and exemp-
redthe bodice from mortalitic. And God, for the merirof CHk15T, gi-
ucth vato thoſe that are regenerated by baptiſme another quality called 14-
Rifying grace, which wiping out cuery blemiſh in the foule, maketh ir pure,
as was that of Adam; yea in lome it worketh greater eftects then originall
righteouſneſle, but onely that it worketh no cffe<t in the bodie , whereby
morrahitic, and other naturall defe&ts are not remooued. - Many places of
Saint Paal and theother Ay were alleadged, where they lay, that bap-
|

tiſme waſherh, cleanſerh, ilſuminateth and purifiech the ſoulc, ſo that no con-

Butin the conſideration how originall {i1nne was remitted , they agreed How original

Gn 1s renu:tcd

demnation, ſporor wrinkle remainerh. Ir was exactly diſcouricd, how , if

the baptiſed haue no {1nne,, ſinnecan paſle into their children? Whereunto
Auguſtinus anſwered, with exampies onely : as of a circumciſed father the
fonne is borne ynciccumciſed , and of a blinde man one that can ſee, and of
a puregraine, oneclad in ſtraw. (atarmus anſwered, that the Coucnang
was made with Adam onely, andrthatcuery one hath {inne by impuration
of that of Adam; ſo that the intermedifte Parents haue nothing todoethercs
in: and if the forbidden fruit had beene caten , not by Adam, butby one of
his ſonnes,his poſterity had nor fianed ; and if Adam had{innedafrer hee had
begorſonnes, his ſinnc had beene impured to chem though borne, before.
Soro diſputed againlt ir, that if Adam had: finned after Lis {onnes were
borne, thoſe would not haue becne obnoxious vartoir ,\ bur their polteriry
ſhould. _ yet 1 | | FEE

The common yoyce was, that-theſixt Article was hereticall, for ſaying
there remaincth in che baprized ſomething worthy of death; and "4 nan
for leauing remainders of {1nnc inthe baptized: and the eight moſt cleerely,
for makingconcupiſcence a ſinte inthe begs Only Antoninus Marinarga,

- aCarmeliceFriar, affirming, asthe others, that ſinne is cancelledby baprilme,

and that concupilcence is before {inne, yet, for condemning the contrary of.
herelic, hee conſidered that Saint Auſtin being olde, writing hee1eof ro Bonis
facius, ſaydplainely that concupiſcence was not a ſinne but a caule and an ct-

fect of f1nne : and writing againlt Inlianws hee ſaid in as plaine termes, that it
was

—_—_— —.

178 7 he Hiſtorie of L1v. 2:
1546 was finne, and the caulc, and effect thercot : and yer in his retraRtations hee
fa neuer made mention of either of theſe rwo contrary propoſitions, becauſe
Cuanies 5. heethought hee might ſpeake both wayes of it, in regard it was not a matter
Hmm 8s, Of faith, thediffcrence being rather verball then otherwiſe. For it is one
2axcrs 1: thing to aske if a thing bee a {1nne, or if it bee a finne to a perſon ex-
"YY” cuſed. As hee that gocth foorth ro hunt for things neccſlary for his ſu-
ſtenance , if hee thinke ro killa wilde bealt, and , by inuincible ignorance,

flaye a man, the Lawyers fay that the action is murder, and a finne :

bur the hunter is excuſed , ſo that vnro him it is not, by reaſon of his
jonorance. So concupilcence , becing the ſame beforeand after bapriſme,

is finne in it ſelfe; and Saint Paul ſayth, thar ir rcfilterh che Law of God,

eucn in the regenerate, and whatlocuer doth thar is finne. But heeth at

is baptized is excuſed ; becauſe hee is cladde with CHR15ST : fo that the

Article is true one way , and falſe another; and it is not juſt tocondemne

a propoſition, which is true in one ſence, withour diſtinguithing it firlt.

«
—

This opinion was reiected by all, and it was ſaid thar Saint Auſtin made two
ſortes of concupiſcence; one before baptilme, which is a repugnancic of

the will to the Law of God, which hee fayd was ſinne, and aboliſhed in
Bapriſme ; another , which is the repugnancie of the ſence to reaſon, which
remaineth after baptiſme, which S. Auftin called the cauſe and ce, bur ne-
ucr finne: and when hee ſeemeth to ſay otherwiſe, it mult bee defended thar
his minde is; that concupiſcenceis a ſinne, which by baprilmelcaueth ro bee
ſo , and becommethan exerciſe of vertue and good workes. 'T'o this opini-
on of Soto they ioyned what hee had ſaid in his ſermons, made in the Maſſe
on the fourth Sunday of the laſt Aduent,and in that of the Lent, exhorting
torepoleall confidence in God , condemning all cruſt in workes, and afhr-
ming that the heroicall Aces of the ancients, ſo renowned by men, were
trucly {inne ; that hee ſpake of thedifferenceof the Law and the Goſpel , nor
as of two times, bur as if the Goſpel had beene cuer, and the Law ought ro
be ener, and alſo of the certaintie of Grace, though with ambiguous and
doubtfull clauſes, for feare they might ſo reprehend him, that he could nor
vreis fulpe: beedefended. This madethe Friar ſulpe&ted by ſome, that he was not whol-
nt Ty aucrſefromrhe Proteſtants dodtrine.

When they camerothe Article of the puniſhment, though Saint Auitin,
grounding himſelfe vpon Saint Paul, held expreſly , that the paines of hell
fire belonged yntoit, euen in little children, whereunto noneof the holy
Fathers contradicted, yet the maſter of the ſentences, with the Schoolemen,

who follow moſt of all Philoſophicall reaſons, diſtinguiſhed two kindes of

cterall puniſhments ; one the priuation onely of celeſtiall bleſſedneſle,
the other , a chaſtiſement : and they aſſigned the firit onely to originall
ſinne. Onely Gregorie of Arimini forſooke the generall opinion of the
Schoolemen , who by that meanes gayned thename of Tormenter of children,
Bur neither henor Saint Anti were defended by the T heologues in the con-
A difference gregations.. Yet there was another diuiſion amongſt them. For the Domi-
—+> ng xicans {ayd that children dead, without bapriſmie beforethe vic of reaſon, re-

and D-wi- Maine after the reſurreQion in a Limbo and darkeneſſe ynder the earth , bur

£415 about

Zimie, Without fire: the Frantiſcans ſayd they are to remaine vpon the earth, and in

lighc

—————

% I _—_
_”_— Bo

—m—_— SPE.
4 oo.

_ ” * SS +» =—
_ -- ” o ; > -. .*
T

the Gorncellof Trent, | 2

* #

th. Aa ——

L I By 2,7 |
light. Some affirmed alſo,chat they ſhould bee Philoſophets, buſyingcbem- 53 ”

{clues'in. the knowledge of naturalithings, nut without that greatipleafure >
which happencth when curioſttieis ſatisfied by invention. Catarims laid fur- Crumnaps'A
ther, that they (hall hee viſited and comforted by the holy Angelsand Saints. Haar 3. ©
- Andin this ſo many vanitics were delivered, that they might giue great mat- xe? #
ter of entertainement,, Bur for reucrence of- 4uſtine , and not to condemne
Gregory of 4rimini,the Auguſtinians made great meanes,that the Article,though
falle, as they thought, might nor bee condemned for herericall; though (+
tarinus imployed all his force to the contrary, to repreſle(as he laid rhe bold-
neſſeand ignorance of ſome Preachers,who,to the great{candall of the peo-

le, publith that doctrine, afhrming that Saint Auſtine.had ſaid ſo onely in
(wm. of diſputation againſt the Pelagians, and not becauſe hee was cleare
in that opinion. Whereupon, ſince the truth is declared ;orhe contrary by
common conſent of the Schooles, and that the Lutheranes haue raiſed the
ſame errours,and the Catholiques them(elues fall into it , the d:claration of
the Synodcis neceſſary, _

The cenſure of the Diuines being ended,and rhe points treated of by the FheDelies
Fathers, to relolue vpon the forme of the Decree, the Biſhoppes ( among|(t vnderttand
whom yery few had knowledge in Theologie, bur were an Lawyers,or or phgoy as
lcarned men of the Court)were confounded with this ſcholaſticall and crab-
þcd manner of handling the Articles;and among[t {o-many opinions, knew
not what to thinke of the eſſence of originall {inne. Thar of {/atarinus was
belt ynderſtood, becauſcit was expreſſed by apoliticall conccir of abargaine
made by one for his poſteritic , which being tranſgreſſed, they are all vn-
doubtedly bound ; and many of the Fathers did fauour thar. Bur percciuing
the contradiction of the other Diuines , they durlt not receiue it. For re-
miſſion of the fin, this onely they held to bee cleare, that cuery one hath ori-

inall {tn before bapriſme, and is perfectly purgedof it by baptiſme. There-
ne they concluded that this ſhould bee eltabliſhed forfaith, and the conira-
ry condemned for herefie, together with all choſe opinions which deny ori-
ginall {in,in what ſortſocuer: but whar that {1a is,there bcing ſo many diffe-
rences amonelt the Diuines, they ſaid ir was not pollible to fer downe ſo cir-
cumſpectly,thar ic might fatisfic all, and not condemne ſome opinion, which
might cauſe a ſchiſme. |

Mareus Viguerius , Biſhop of Sinigagha, Fryar Terom Generall of S. Auſtin, fri = 7*c

a Franciſcan,

and Andreas Vega, a Franciſcan Diuine, were oppolite to this generall incli- oppoſeri ute

common in-

nation, This laſt ſhewed more then the others, char it. was notconucnienr, clinavion 0
condemne the

nor euer v{ed by any Councel, rocondemne an opinion for hereticall , with- cunion of
out declaring firſt which is Catholique ; that no true negariue hath in'ir ſelfe *<uibe-

ranes withour

the caulc of its truth , bur is ſo by the cruth of an affirmatiue; nor ever any <aing the
propoſition was falſe, but becayſcanother.is true: neither can the falfity of Cubolques
the one be knowne;, but by him whoknowerth the truth of the other. There-
forc the opinion of the Lutherans cannot- bee condemned of herclie, vncill
the opinionof the Qburchbeſer downe. Hethat ſhall obſerue the maner of
proceeding inall Councels ,' which have handled marter of faich, will ſee,
that they haue laid firſt an Orchodoxe foundation, and by that condemned

the herefics; and ſo it is neceſſary ro docnow, For when it ſhall be read thac
the

ttt a es Se. rY -” & * <>

Li1-8. 2,

[185 On The\kftoriesf
1546 theCouncelof. Tremhach condemned the Lutheranes for! ſaying originall
{ _ ſ1nnexs}ignorance, contempr, dilirult; an hare of heaucnly things,and acor-
=. - Cnaxizs- 5. ryprion of the whole man in the will, foule and'body, who is there thar will
Honnx 8: notdemand,what is-it then? and will notlay in himlelte, if this opinion bee
AA heretical, which is Cathohke? And when he hal ſeethe opinion of Zunglins
| condemned,thar children the {onnes of thefairhfull,arc baptized into remiſ-
4 {ion of {innes , though nothing bee tranfmiered from Adem bur the puniſh-
ments,and the corruprtior. of nature, will not{uddenly aske,whar elle is then
tran{mirtred? In ſumme,he concluded, that the Councel was aſlembled prin-
cipally rotell the Catholique rrueth, not onely ro condemne hereſies. The
_— Biſhopſaid , Thar chcſc Articles hauing been fo ofren diſputed in the Diets
& Err frm of Germanie., cucry one would expect from the Councell a per{picuous do-
te 440»; Exrine, Clearcd from all dificultes. The Generall alſo, who was ſomewhat
0 7 | +—qptabarÞ] ſuſpected to bee fuborned by che Ambaſſador Toledo,added, that the true Ca-
*  tholique doctrine of originall finne is conrained inthe writings of S_ Auſtin;
that Egidius Romanus had wrote a booke thereof , that whenſoeuer the Fa-
thers would take but alittle paines , they might bee able to vnderltand the
truch,and judge of ir; that they ſhould nottutter a fame to bee ſpread,thar in
Trent chat was relolued in foure dayes,which-in Germanie hath beene {o long
diſcuſſed without concluf1on. |
Theſe aduertiſements were not hearkened vnto, becauſe the Prelates had
no hope to bee able by itudie to 'bee well informed in the crabbed {choole-
poynts,neither durlt chey goe abour to maketriall of ir; and becauſe the Le-
gars had receiued abſolute command from Rome ro define this marter inthe
next ſeſſion, they were conſtrained toauvid the difficulries, cſpecially beeqnte
the Cardinall of Monte was refolued to make this great wunpe by all means.
And therefore calling vnro him the Generals of rhe Orders,and theDivines,
( atarinus and Yega,who [pake more then chereft,he charged themts paſſe by
the difficulties,and helpe forward the diſpatch: 1s B20 2.3 09 rt?
The Prelates depured to frame the decree, with the afliitance:of the Dj-
uinzs,deuided the matter into ftiue Anath:mariſmes, T he tirlt; of the-perfonall
{in of Adam: the lecond,of the transfuſion into poſterny : the chird;6f rheires
f medy by baptiſme: the fourth, of the baptiſme of children : the ffth;of con-
is cupiſcence remaining. After this,the opinions of the Zuinghans were eddems-
if ned in the foure firſt,and of Luther in the fifth. They conferred on'theſe Ar-
\, ticlesalmolt all, adding and taking-away what they rhoughr fit with much
[ The Fr4ncj= Concord , bur onely that the Franciſcan Biſhops and Fryars approoued not;
rhe Vir, That it ſhould be generally ſayd, that the ſinne of Adam paſſed ins all mans
pine #4) kinde, becauſe the bleſſed irgine, the mother of our LoRD , was compre-
exceped. = hended,if ſhee werenot particularly excepred ;and rhey:defired the'exeepti-
by on. The Deminicans fad on the contrary , that the propotition- ſo gene-
rall, and without cxceprion was Saint Pauls, and all the holy Doors, and
thereforethar it was not fir ro alter it with ati exception: 4nd chatcontradi-
tion waxing warme, they fell into the queltioriwhich the Legates had'ofter
diuertcd. They faid ,'thar though the Church had-iolefaredrhe opinion of
the conception, yet hee that would examinerhematte? well, might find thar
ſhce was not exempted from the common infection. And the others ay
| ted,

- ———

PX -

- -— I <> ea - > ee er > oy RIA De CO —— I es Vue APES wes GFA eas

 B I Bb, 2»

6. EE

T be Councell of Þ renr.

i.

ſed,that irwould bee as much as to condemnecthe Church, who celebraterh;
the conception as immaculate, and a kinge of ingratirude, derogating from
the honour duc vymoher, by whom all the graces'of Cyn1sT-paſle vnro. vs;
The diſputations rurned intocontention, fo farre, tharthe Emperours Am-

| baſſadourhad hopero obraine his deſigne, thar che matter might nor be pto-

poſed in thenexr Seſſion. - 70.5 |
Many things were propoſed vpon thar occafion, which cauſed them to
roceede to the-Decrec, 'which ſhall bee rehearſed ; which becaule ir affor-
ded matter of diſcourſe,fot the entire vaderltatiding of all; it is neceffary ro
tclate from the beginning the originall of this controuerfie. After thar the
impictic of Neſterius had divided CyrisT, making two ſonnes, and denying;
him to be God who was borne of the bleſſed TUirgin, the Church; to incul-
cace the Catholike'tructhinthe mindes of thefairhfull, made often mention
of het in the Churches as wel! of che Falt as of the Welt, with this ſhort
forme of wordes in Greeke, Maria 9=, in Latin, Maria mater Dek This
beeing inſtiruted onely for the honour of CyrisT, was by little and lictle
communicated alſo to the mother, and finally applycd to her alone ; and
therefore when images began to uiultiplie, CHR1sT was paintcd as a babe
in hismothers armes, to put vs it} minde of the worthipdue vnto him, cuen
in thatage. Bur in progrefle of time, ir was turned into the worſhip of the
mother without the ſonne , hee remayning 4s an appendex in the piQure;
The writers and Preachers, eſpecially reole that were eonremplatiue, caried
with the torrent of the vulgar,which is able rodoemuch in theſe matrets,lca-
uing to mention CAKts$T, inuetited with one accordinew prayles, Epithites,
and religious ſeruices; in ſo much thacabour'the yeere to55. a dayly Offices
was inſtituted tothebleſſed Virgin,diſtinguiſhed by ſeuen Canonical houres,
in a forme which anciently was euer vſed tothic honout of the Diuine Ma-
ieſtic,and in the next hundred yeeres, th&wotſhip ſo increaſed, thar it came
to the-height, even to attribute that vnto her, which the Scriptures ſpeake of
the Diuine wiſedome. And amoneglt theſe inuented noumes this was one,
hertorall exemption from originall ſinne. Yer this remayned onely in the
brealts of ſome few priuate men, hauing no place in Ecclefiaſticall ceremo-
nics, or amonglt the learned; About the yeere 1136. the Canohs of I ions
dared to bring it inte the Ecclefiaſticall Offices. Saint Bernard, who lined in
thole times,eſteemed the molt learned and pious of that age, who was molt
frequent inthe prayſes of the bleſſed Yr;gin, lo farreas to call herrhe necke of
the Church, by which cuery grace aud influence paſſerh from the head, ins
ucighed ſcuercly againlt the Canons, and wrote ynto them , reprehending
them for introducing a dangerous nouitic without reaſon, ot example of an-
_ tiquitie; that there want not places to praiſe the Uirgay, who cannot be plea-
ſed with a preſumptuous nouitic, mother of raſhneſle, fiſter of ſuperſtition,
daughter of lightnefſe. The'nexr age had Schoole-Docors, of both the or-
ders Franciſcan and Dominican, who in their writings refuted this opini-
on, vntill about the yeere 1300. when John Scor, a Franciſcan , putting the
matter into diſputation, and examining the reaſons, did flie to the omniIps-
tencie, ſaying : 2 God had power to free het from finne, or to cauſe inns
toremainein her onely for an inſtant, or for acertaine time: that God onely

Q knowerlh

t546
(YN

AVI 3;
Cranrks $;
D—— —
Hgawy 8:
Fxaxcrs t;
—Y—qnS

A diſcourſe of
thc Author ro
thew how the
ble lleaV5rgih |
cawe to be

wortkipped;

=—_

— a ——

'Y + W | The Hitory of

L 1p. 3.
1546: knowcth which of rhele.three is erue, yer it 1s probable ro attribute the firlt
CAA 'ro:Marie—, io calc it bee:not repugnant to the authoritie of the Church,
Caaxtrs.5- apd of the Scripture. | The doctrine of this famous Diuine was followed
Ty a.” bythe Franciſcan order; But in the particular of the conception, ſecing
eraxcns. 5: rhe Way. layd: gpen they affirmed abſolutely for true , that which hee had
©. propoledaspollible and probable, vnder this doubtfull condition, if it bee
2: .. not repugnant: to the Orchodoxe Faith. "The Dominicans did conſtantly rc-
$.Themsis {iſt;, and followed Saint Thomas, one of their order, famous for his lear-

—_ 5 ning, and forthe approbation of Pope Toby the two and twentieth, who,

_w—_— ts. At _— M——

he

2240:il3race. x depreſſe the Franciſcans, who did for the molt part adhere ro the Em-
cans. perour Lewis of Bauaria, excommunicated by him, did canonize that

Doctour and his doctrine. The ſhew: of pietic and deuotion made the
Franciſcan opinion generally more accepted, and more tenaciouſlly recciucd
by the Vnuverlitic of Paris, which was in credite for cminent learning ;
and after long ventilation and diſcuſſion , was afterwards approoued by
the Councell of Baſil, which forbade ro preach and teach the con:ra-
ric. This tooke place in thoſe Countreys which receiued the Councel],
Finally Pope Sixtus the fourth , a Franciſcan , made two Bulles in this
matter ; one in the yeere one thouſand foure hundred ſeuentie f{ixe, ap-
proouing a new Office, compoled by Leonard Nogarola *Protonotarie, with
Indulgences to him thar did celebrate ir, or aflilt : the other in the yeerc
ohe thouſand foure hundicd cightic three , condemning the aſlcrtion, as
falſe and erronious, that it is heref1e to hold the conception, or a {inne
to celebrate it, excommunicating the Preachers and ochers who noted

ded by the Church of Rome. and the Apoſtolike Sea, Bur this did nor
appeaſe the contentions, which betweene the rwo orders of Friars ſtill
| waxcd ſharper, and were renewed cuery yeere in December; fo thar
Pope Leo the tenth thinking to giue a remedic by deferring the contro-
| uerſte, made letters bee written varo divers. Bur afterwards he had more
= | | important cogitations, by rcaſon of the nouities of Germanie.., which in
| thele contentions wrought that which happeneth in States, that the Citie

being belcaguered , the faCtions doe cealc, and all ioyne againſt the com-

ture, the doctrine of the Fathers, and the molt ancient Schoole-men,
where not one iot was found in fauour of the others ; bur they alleadged
for themſclues miracles, and contentment of the people. Tobn of Paine,
a Dominican Friar, ſayd, cither you will that Saint Paxl and the Fathers
hauec belceued this excmption of the Uirgine from the common condi-
tion, or not. If they haue belecued ir, and yer haue ſpoken generally
without cucr making mention of this exception, imicate them alſo now.
Bur if chey haue belccued the contrarie, your opinion is anouitic. Trro-
lamus Lombardellus, a Franciſcan Friar, fayd , that the authoritic of the
preſent Church, was no lefſe then that of the Primitiue; if the conſent
of that in thoſe times made men {peake without cxception, the conſent of
this, which appearcth in celebrating the Feaſt throughout, oughe to induce
ys not to omn it,

that opinion of hercfic, or the contrarie, becauſe it was not as yet deci»

mon enemie. The Dominicang, grounded themſclues vpon the Scrip- ,

pa REES FT I I———Y —— —— — aa. * - H— _ is... CEC. Ales ct.

L1s. 2. be Councellof Trent,

—___—_— PI a a. A _—
- —_— —— —}} Cd.

—

" The Legate wrote to Rome of che'inarueilous agreemenc of all againſt - 1546.
the Lutheran doQriney-and the re{Slutiowtaken to. condemneir;and fenr ORp="H |
a copic of the Anarhematiſmes framed, giuingaduile withall of the contention Crtanths #4

raiſed about the conception. Wheteuncoirwasanlwered from Rome, that

by no meancsthey ſhould meddle with a matter, which may.caulc a ſchilme F***
berwcene Catholikes;' but ſhould ſtrive to- reconcile the parties , and giue The Pope

them both ſatisfaction ,-and aboueall co preſerue in. ſtrength the bricte of {aww
Siſlus 4. The Legates hauing recviucd the order, did by themlelucs, and by ibn abut
the wiſer ſort of Prelates perſwade both. patties ro lay aſide the contenti- on fiaule by

ons, andapplyrhemſclues ioynely againſtthe Lutherans. They wereon both

{des contented to be filent,fo that their opinion were not preiudiced: yer the 5% «Ghilin®

Franciſcans ſaid thatthe Canon was againſt them if the Yorgin were nor excep-
ted and the- Dominica that they wage condemned if ſhee were: It was ne»
ceſlary to finde a way how it might bee declared that ſhee was neicher com-
prchended, nor affir: Was, yn which was by ſaying, they had no.

| intention either ro comprehend of except her. Afterwards at the great in-

ſtance of the Franciſe:ms, the others were cotitenc it ſhould bee ſayd onely
they had no meaning to comprehend her. And to obey the Pope it was ad-
ded, that the conſtitutions of Siſfus 4. ſhould be obſcrucd. FE-c

- Whiletheſerhings are handled'in Trexs, the Dict being afſembled in Ra. 7
eibon,the Emperour ſlacwed grear diſpleaſure that the Colloquie was difſol- **
ued withour fruit, and required that every one ſhould propole whar hee
thought fr to appeale Germanie. ' The Proteſtants deſired thatthe difference
of Religion might bee compoſed,according to the. Receſſe of Spira, by a na«
tionall Councell, ſaying ir was more fit then a generall , becauſe by reaſon of
che great difference in opinions berwtene Germaniz and other Nations, it is
impoſſible to auoyde the raiſing of a greater contention: and whoſocuer will
caforce Germanie to change opirrion, mult tirſt ſlay many thouſa ids of men;
which would be a dammage to the Emperour, anda ioy rotheTurkes. Fhe
Emperors miniſters anſwered , that his Maicſtic was not the cauſe why the
Decree of Spira was not executed; and thatit was knowenynto all, thar, to
make ſo neccſlaric a peace with the French King, hee was conſtrained to
yeeld to the Pope in matters of Religion; that the Decree was fitted to the
neceſſities of that time, which being changed, it was alſonecefſarieto change
opinion; that in National Councels ſomtumesmanersare amended,bur Fairh
and Religion neuer handled, that in Colloquies one hath to doe with Theo»
logues, who, forthe moſt part are vntractable & obſtinate; ſothat with them
onecannot come tapſuch moderate counſels as is neceſſary; that noneloued
Religion more then rhe Emperor, who would not {warue one iote from that
which is iuſt and honeſt,to pleaſe the Pope: but he knew wel,thatin a Ntio-
nall Councel he ſhould neither be able toreconcile theparties, not find whom
to makeiudge, The Ambaſſadourof Mentz and Triers diuided chemſelues
from the other foure, and being vnitcd with all the Catholikes, approoued:
the Tridentine Councell, and Peſo hr Caſar to prote@ it, and co perſwade
the Proteſtants to goe thither and ſubmit themſelues vato ir. T hey anſwe-
red that the Councell in Trent was nor free, as was demanded and promiſed
in the Imperiall Diets: they delired againethar che Emperour wouldobſerue

Qs ; the

184 The Fiftoreofs \ \. Lis a.:.4
1546 * thi prage/and-ordainetbgt Redigion might be attaÞlypedon-a lawiyll Coun-
AY Rch of hamaie; or awlozperall ict]ors Dollogujs:gttuarned rien. on;
Cunms.s bathtidesGo 211 16 lady» 2liubs $0153 Loasrt rotamdiank 20130 21003 £
ITT 1:1n pais Toagtim cbe/Expazaec had-nitie ſoerer-prowfiod; foravaiins
Fxacer9:* Ivl;chiutar being ableforiger.torcancedbes- shbias kidweht iptheNigreſtantyy

NRA

T% odor able Dig, pod: beckule, peace mas conchidebmirbdhgretcb 55goandd
onFfor wire + rupee ante dhe! Tus amr rng did! cabbzpcteciuahe-caulgt epetially,
rh6tfortbat.a fauicwas'fproad;s batshs Pape alloand Fodinand did afic, where?
or pt by all wevin:contuhon.! AndijneEmperogbuntccs hoe was dilcauared;,ghei:
ale 2" "Hinjotbwedeorthe Gardinalhof'77eve. Poll: ro Ramts) re.dentang infcrÞs:;
'= Pope the Luccours: hroptomiled g and:{ens {cap wines \wish mrangjante ale:
andFlanders tolcuieSWdldicrs,and{pllicited thoBrincass nd ProxtaprGernt
man Captaings, nas.corhibined with thojcobthe leaguaniyindalds; tofol-.
low kjscolours, atbrming;; bad promifinghee wauld now make.varce for,
Religiod z þix ſuppeeſſe/chorebelion bt:lpme, ywbos.ynder that, prezencs;
would not ackpowledgethe Lawea ner the MaieltiergizhoPrifge, By: rs,
prom dhe quicred.riiany-ob the Gaiies , who before and ueeediuedzhergngy)
uation in he Rites/ot tHe Church , probilthgall benquolenceptheghtodiy
cnt,and ſecuritic fortheirReligianuworn) 4 wh 14 2007 10091199 213 361) bob
1-1 7>!? » Bur inthe-Councell there beipgno moredifiarence amgrightsheFathers
1218 "concerning the thivgs diſcufſedz; andthe decrees of:tith and; refdrmbacigns
being; framed-5;the Emperours Ambaſladohr; brivgings able anydongento;
reliththe Legats reſolution z7the feucrteetTh of. June being; come;:tht day;
appoynetd forthe,S Elon Alexander Fichghbamini, Biſhop; df *F.ignas » larg>
Matic; Marcs:Lawra:s; a Domuncan Friar, preached.;; aud whentheryſual,
: ceremonies vere ended; the dectice of faith; with: fiue,4u4 OPURLIFMeS 5 W982
« Decree IEA. - 1.05 Againſifaim that conteſlerb notyghar Adayibyrranigealling hack;
thn loft-landitic and iuftice,iucurtedthe wrath of God: drathiangdulualdome.
me ro-the Delill and is infe&ed-in ſoule and/body.: ,z. Hgainlthingher augts,
reth thas Sdam by finninghath bur himlglfe onsly,qrhath defiuegdioto his;
polteritic the death onely ofthe body, and notf{inne, he death.gf the doule:
3-- Againſt him that affirmeth that ſinne, whichis apein.the beginging, and,
proper to.cucry one, jranſmitced by generation , notimiration;cambecaboy,
liſhed by any.other renedic then the death of Q&x1$T,;ar denigeh gharthe;
merit of CaR1ST-is applicd as well to-chidren, as! zothole that hecof ri
yecres,by tho Sacrament of Baptifme ,miniired 1n thetorme,and | of «i
Gburchs.-4:Againſitdaim chardenieth tharchildren whien are wo borne
01ught te be baprizedjzthough rhe-fonnes of Chrillians, pg laichaheyarc bape,
tized fartemillion of fzunes,but nor becaulethey baugigqnrratedany origis
nalkonefrem Hdams,;5. Againtbim.thatdenyerk thar' by zhe,;gracc <,
Baptilatcrheguilt ofgriginalllaageis-remirietl,or fait chatall is nar zemoo-
ued'which hath ghearg&and proper nature of fnng, burghat it is52Z0d and,
not imputed , concupifrente{til| remaining, in the baptized foran cxctcilc
which cannot burt bat him thar, 9-s roit: the, which, bceing called,
ſinpe bythe Apoſtle,the Synod declarech thatir isno true aud praper {anne
but is ſo termed becauſcir ariſcth from ſinne, and:inclingh to1t.,,/That, the
Synod mcancth not to comprehendin thedecree the blelled Hrrging but, thar

the

11»
C$ ;SIC 1d
11tac Scion,

5
©
t

a t

» X
* No” 4 +
-

SES Cz DCEeo_u=n@<<rE..o.cocacr ic. edn ico
— —_—_— CC F4 ” —_ —_ _ a4

FY

* —_"Y _— ye

S—

A

L't B. 2. 7 be Councell of T rens,

the con!litutions of Siftus 4. oughtto be obſerued, which ir doth repew, 1546
The Decrce of the reformation containeth two parts, one 1n matter of DAN
the Lectures, the other of the Sermons. For the Lectures it was ordered, Grants 5.
chat in the Churches where there is a ſtipend allotted for reading Divinitie, Hazy s ©
the Biſhop ſhould prouide that the holy Scripture ſhould bee read by the Sti- FE22en t«
pendary,it be be tic,and not being fic, the Bithop ſhould depute a ſubliirure, +1, ©....,
to periorme the charge: bur for hereafter that the benctice ſhould not bee *! ret6wmas
conferred but vpon alufficient perſon. Thar inthe Cathedrall Churches
of populous Cities, and collegiate Churches of great Caſtles, where no ſuch
ſtipend is afſigned,the firlt Prebend thar falleth yoid, ſhould bee applycd to
that vſe,or ſome {imple benefice,or a contribution of all bepeticed men, to +
inſtirute the Lecture. That in poore Churches, there ſhould beeat the icalt
a Malterto teach Grammer, whohall cnioy thefruits of ſome {unple bene-
-fice, or haue a ſtipend trom the Capicular or Epilcopa!l table, or the Biſhop
{hall finde ſome other way to effect it. Thar in the Cloyiters of Monkes
there ſhould be a Diuinitie Lecture, if ir may bee, whereinif the Abbars (hall
bee negligent,they (hall bee con{trained todoeir, by the Biſhop as the Popes
Delegate. That in the Conventygot the Regulars, there ſhould bee depured
Malters of ſufficiencie to perfoffne this charge. Thar in publique ſtudies,
wherea Diuinitie LeQure is nor inſtituted, it ſhall bee in{iirured by the cha-
riticand pictic of Princes, and Republiques ; and where ir hath becne inſti.
tuted and neglected, it ſhall bee reltored. Thatnone ſhall bee madea Leu-
: rer, cither publike or private before hee bee approoued by the Biſhop, as tir
for his life, manners, and knowledge, except choſe that readeinthe Cloy flers
k

—

— —  —

of Monkes. That the priviledges granted by law , to Publique Readers in
- Diuinitie, and ſchollers, forthe cn1oying ofthe fruits of their benefices, in
| their abſence ſhall be prelerued.
'F Concerning Sermons the Decree containeth, that the Biſhops and Pre-
lates bee bound,it they bee not hindered, co preach the Goſpel in perſon,and
if they bee, to ſublticure men of ſufficiencie. That the inferiour Curates
oughtto teach things neceflary to faluarion, either by themſclues, or others;
at theleaſt on Sundayes and lolemne Fealts ; whereunto they (hall bee con-
ſtrained by the Biſhops, ary exemption notwithitanding. And the Curates
of the Pariſhes ſubie&t ro Monaſteries, which arein no dioceſle, {hall be con-
ſtrained tothe ſame by the Metropolitanes, as Delegates of the Pope, in caſc
_ the Regular Prelate ſhall be negligent. That che Regulars (hall nor preach,
except they be approoued, for theirlife, maiers.and knowledge, by their {u-
criours: and in the Churches of their Order, they (hall demand the bene-
diction of the Biſhop before the Sermon begin : but in other Churches they
ſhall not preah without the Biſhops licence. which {hall bee giuen them gra-
tis, It che Preacher ſow errours or ſcandals, the Biſhop (hal prohibire hum
if hereſtes, he ſhall proccedeagainlt him according to law and cultome: and
if the Preacher bee a priuiledged perſon , hee ſhall doe it as delegare;-yer ra-
king care that the Preachers bee not molelted by falſe impurarions , and ca-
lumnies, and hauc in cauſe ro complaine of them. That they permit not
that either Regulars who liue our of Cloyſters, or ſecular Prielts, exccpr

they beknowen andallowed by them, doe preach yntill aa accountbegiuen
Qz thercof

XUM

1386 | The Hittory of ,

i. ett. MO. Mn

LiKkS.

1545 thereoftothe Pope. That the Pardoners (hall nor preach, nor caulcany to
x7 reach, and in caferhey doc, they ſhall be compelled to obey by the Biſhop,
Dares 4. notwithſtanding the priuiledges. In tine, the 29. of lulic, was aligned tor
T3 the next Sellion. |
tzaxcisr: The Dectces becing pronounced by the Biſhop that ſayd Maſle, rhe Se-
| cretary of the Councel rcad the letters of the French King, in which hee de-
—_ puted for his Ambatladourin the Councel * Peter Danefins; who madca long
pouredior And eloquent Oration tothe Fathers, ſaying in ſubſtance ; T hat the King-
cnt. .doine of France {incethe firſt moſt Chrithan King Clodones, hath alwayes

'\on,

Peter Dar: TL2 nT ” 4r < j ir
perer dere. preſerued Chriſtian religion mot funcere. 'T hat S. Gregory the firlt gauc the

tidor tor the tirle of Catholique to Childebert,in token of his incorrupt religion, Thar rhe

French Kiag,

and makech  K1Ngs haneneucr ſuffered any (et in any part of France, nor avy bur Catho-
++ =xmqjng liques ; yea, haue procured the conuerhon of Strangers, Idolaters, and He-
rctiques, and hauc conſtrained them with pious armes to profeſle the true
and {ound religion, Hee ſhewed how Childebert compelled the Viltgothes,
who were Arrians, to ioync themieluts with the Catholique Chuxch : and
how (/barles the Great made warre thirty yeeres with the Saxons, to reduce
them to Chriſtian religion. Then he declared the fauors done to the Church
of Rome. Herecountcd the enterpriſes of Pip and ( harles the Grearagainft
the Lumbards; and how, ina Synode of Bilhops,ir was granted by 4drian to
Charles, tocreate the Pope, and to approoucthe Bilhops of his Dominion,
and inuclt chem after they had receiued che oarh of fidelity. He added, thar
though his ſonnc Ludouicus Pixs,furrendred that authority to createthe Pope,
yet he reſerucd that Legats ſhould be ſentymto him,to preſerue amitie, which
hath beene cuer maintayned withrmuruall ofices. For which confidence,
the Popes, in times of difficultie, either chalcd out of their Sea, or fearing ſe-
dition, haue retired themſelues into that Kingdome. T hat it cannot beerold
how many dangers the French men hauc runnc, and how much money and
\ blood they have ſpenr,tocnlargetheliits of the Chrittian Empire, or to reco-+
' _ uer thar which hath bene v{urped by the Barbarians, or to reltorethe Popes,
or todeliuer them from danger. Hee added, thatKing Francis deſcending
from thele, in the beginning of his reigne,after the victory archicued in Lum-
bardy, did, with the ſame picty, goe to © Bolonta, ro mcere Leothe tenth, to con-
ftirmea peace with him ; which hath continued with Adrian, Clement , and
"Paul: and intheſe 26. yeeres the points of faith being brought into great
ambiguities in diuers regions, hee hath taken molt exact care, that nothing
ſhould be innouated in the common Eccleſtaſticall vie, bur all referued ro the
publique cenſures of the Church. - And though hee bee of a quiet, plealing,
and nor bloody diſpoſition, yet hee hath vied ſeueritie, and made grieuous
Edi&ts; and hath broughr ro paſlc, by che diligence and vigilancie of his
Judges, thatin ſo great a tempeſt, which hath ſubuerted many Cirics, and
whole Nations that moſt noble Kingdome ſhould not bee ſhaken, in which
the ancient doctrine, rites, ccremonics, and manners, docremaine: ſo that
the Councel might ordaine what they thought ro bee true and firre forthe
Chriittan Common-wealth. He faid further, thar the Ki::g knew how pro-
firable it was ro Chriſtendome to haue the Pope for Head, and thar, beeing
tempted and inuited, with moſt gaincful profers, to follow the exam 5 of
| : another,

2 "ET" ” —
op AGE, wo SS AIG

_
ts. --.. : OS *
« LE - rs Rt

Gs © . hd,
(4

T be Councell of Trens. 18

mY TY F'Y FE CUT —_ —_—
_ —_ —_ ACM. Lt ”

L ia2.

=

another,would not forſake his opinion, and thereby hath lolt his neighbors I as.
loue, with ſome diſaduantage, Thar vnderſtanding the Conuocation of the £ SO
Councell, he preſently ſent ſome of his Biſhops, and whea hee ſaw ic went Cuanzrs $6

—

on incatneſt,and thar the authoricie thereof was eſtabliſhed by many Sefli- ticme, 8;
ons,he'hath ſent him for his Ambaſſadour,to affiltthem,and co pro: ure,thar COONEY
at the lalt, rhey would conſtitute and propoſe the doctrine which ought c- Dy
ucry where tobe profeſſed by all Chriſtians, and reCtifie che Ecclefialticall
diſcipline, by the {quare of che Canons; promiſing thacthe' molt Chriltian
King will cauſeall ro be obſerued in his kingdome, and protect the decrees
ofthe Councell. Then he added,thar,themerirs of the French King being fo
great, his priuiledges, grantcd by theancient Facthersand Popes,oughr to be

reſerued, which Ludouicus Pins,8 all the Kings of France {ince hauepoſle(-
ſed: and the rights, priuiledges,and-immunities confirmed to the Churches
of France, of which hee is detender, Which if che Councell will doe; the

French-men will be thankfull, and the Fathers will not repent them of their

deede. Ard -« anfive,
Hercules Senerollo, Proftour of the Councell briefely anſwered, in the 74% +
name of the Synod,thanking the King; ſhewing that the Ambaſladors pre-
ſence wasmolt acceptable, promiſing all diligence in the eltabliſhing of
faich and reformation of manners, oftering all tauourrothe Kingdome and
Church of France. |
Bur the Decrecs of the Seſſion being printed,arid gone into Germanie, af- ,,,.. .._...
foorded matter of diſcourſe. Ic was fayd that the Pelagian unpictic was ſu. tbe dece 5 n
erfluouſly handled, being by ſo many Councels, and che common conſzne ©
ofthe Church, more then a thouſand yeeres fince,condemned, thar ic had
becne tolerablc if che ancient doctrine had beene confirmed; that in con-
formiticvnto it,they had well propoſed a true yniuerfall propoſition, by (ay-
ing that che ſ{inne of Adam did Na into all his poſteritic,but after had de-
ſtroyed it, by ancxceprion; thatir helped the not, that the exception was not
aſſertiue,butambiguous: for as one particular maketh falſe the contradicto-
ric yniucrfall,ſo onc ambiguons particular,maketh thevaiuerſall vncerraine.
And who ſecth not that io longas this exception remaineth, though with
ambiguiry,cuery onemay conclude,thar it is not certaine that {inne is paſſed
into all che poſterity, becaule it is not certaine whether it be paſſed into the .
irgin: and the rather, becauſe thereaſon which perſwadeth that excepti- .
on,may perſ[wade many more. That Bernard concluded well, that the ſame
rcaſon which induced tocelebrate the ( onceprion of the Virgin, will conclude |
the like for her father and mother, Grand-fathers, and great Grand-fathers,
and all her Genealogic fince Adam. Bur when they came to Abraham they
ſhould goeno further; becauſe there is great reaſon co exempr from origt-
nall\innenone but him. For vnto him the promile of the Redeemer was
made; CHRIST is euer called the ſeed of Abraham, and Abraham che Fa-
therof CHr1sT,andof allthat belecue, a paterne of the faithfull. Theſe
begreater digniries then ro beareC a 1 $T inthebelly; according to rhat
diuine anſwere,thar the Virgin was more bleſſed in hauing heard the word of
Go v, thenin hauing borne Cur 1 $'T, andgiuen himfucke. And he that

will not for preheminencicexcepr Abrabam,but one!y eſteeme for ſound the
gs ; ancient

138 Tbe tititory of L 14
1545 ancicnt reaſon, that CH R 1 s T 15 without finne,becautc he was borne of the
© holy Gholt, without the ſeed of man, will fay it1s berter tofollow the coune
Craxzrs 5. C21] ofthe wiſe man, and containe ones ſ[cife within the bounds fer .downe
Hex 8, by the Fathers. They added, that the world was much bound to the Coun-
axers 7 ccll, for being contented ro fay thar it confeſſcth, and thinketh that concu-
piſcenceremaincth in the 1 49" ellemen would be compelicd to de-
ny to fecle that which they do. Inte decree of reformation,it was expected
that order ſhould hauc been taken with the ſchoole-men and Canonilts,
with thele for giuing dwine propricties to the Pope, even to call him God,
attributing vnto him infallibilitie.and makirg the ſame tribunall of both,ſay-
 iogallo, that he is more mercitullthenCarIsT: with the Schoole men,
who leauing the Scriprure, ormaking itall doubrtull, haue mad e Aritoſtles
Philolophy the foundation of Theologie,cuen making aqueltion wherher
there bea God, and diſputing of it on both {ides. Iticemed ſtrange that ic
was vaknowen vatill then,that to preach was the ofhce of Biſhops: that the
abule of preachivg vanities, or any thing but CHR1s T was notremooued;
thar prouifion was madcagainlt che open merchandizing of Preachers vn-
TheDc: ces der the name of almes. Newes beeing come of thete decrees to the Empe-
th. nos OUTS Courr, it was taken inill part chatlight marrers, not required by Ger-

The Catcinall

of Trenr con-
clu cth 3
Icayne the 26,
ot Tune, be-
evecne the
Pope and the
Emperour,a-
inlt the
Yotcitants,

The cules
and capitula-
£ions of thus
lcague.

P»

mny,werc handled, andthat in matter of faith the diſputes were anaked
by the decree. For the controuerfie of originall finne, being almoſt agreed
in the Colloquics, from the Councell, from whencecompotition was exPe-
&ed,a decree did proceed againit the things accorded: and it was written in
the Emperoursname,to his Miniſters 1n Trent,that they ſhould promotethe
rcformation,and endeauour that the controuerſic of tauh ſhould bedeferred
ynrill the Proteſtants came, whom the Emperour was perſwaded heecould
brivg thither; or, atleaſt, vnrill the Prelates of Germany did arriue, who
would put them(clues into the journey, ſo foone as the Dict was ended Bur
they ralked bura little while of theſe attaires of rhe Councell becaule other
accidents happened, which drew ali mens eyes and mindes yato them.

Forin Romethe 26. of Iune, the Cardinall of Trent concluded a ague
berwcenethe Pope and Emperor, againlt the Proteltants of Germanze, the
rreary whereof was begun the yeere before in WFermes by Cardivall Farneſe,
as hath beenſaid, and afterwards continucd by other Miniffers, "The cau-
ſes alleadged, and the conditions were; becaule Ge1many bad a long time
perſeucredin herefte, for remedic whereof the Cuuncell was aflembled in
Trent,and already begun, whereuntg the Proteſtants retuſing roſubmit,the
Pope and Etnperour, for the glory of G o Þ, andfafctic of Germanie, doe a-
gree,that the Empcrour ſhall rakearmes againſt choſethat refule it, and re-
ducethem ro the obedience of the holy Sea: and for ihis,the Pope ſhall lay
in YVenicean hundred thouſand crownes in truit, beſide the hundred thou
ſand laid thercaſl ready, to ſpend in this v{c onely, and ſhall ſend rothe war
ar his owne charges, twelue thouſand [ralian foore, and five hundred light
horſe, for ſixe moneths, ſhall giue the Emperour for this yecrc, balte the

rents of the Churchesof Spaine,and power to alicnate, of the reuenewes of

the Monaſteries of thole kingdomes, to the valew of fiue hundred thouland

crownes: that during the {xe moneths,the Emperour ſhall not make an ac-
cord

Pp

8x

Lina: T be Geungoell oben. 89;

- FO

= --- TE ——_—_—

—==_

cantons the Popes myo aps wh lllntTaas grmine ag
pordeypt whasdpeuctisgeined by theayagy ant

antliltzhgaoyes continue OnStar 3. q
49 ;

«+

ng. 18apiculations,yhich alideane He r0.both parugs, fhall cbearcaredron, cr fhf

and place (ball blair fororbaro. euichnintbabe league bearing;part ofithe tis 5 7

4
!

Faaxcis i

charges and reocuipgpartetibe protigs,.Nhcrs yas opecapuryation apart;
vyhjcl was:kept {ntret copcerningtht Erench, Kg RA pn ofart =
a5ipg 5c: wartcs.did.; meourtiatiney agaitlh the Enprroyr >the.

lope

are daycs afier the Bape wrote:tgdhe-Spillesdinuiding htm toſalſlt worms the
him; firſt ſhewing in ample termes his beneuolence rowards the and the
griats be teietorthat ſome of then baglalirangedthem{elyts-ftom; bis: ohe-"
dicpeF} fd thaykipg{God.fer thole;wha perleuetedwaidecomhinending

aa all,for aa in cbisdttes Sace.of religion;they-keep i midiyes in-pcaceg
wherga649 ether; phces hvaregumulre dance tof chedawotaike;headded,
rhatte provide,againlt thenghice hadrgrggingd che Gountell of Trene, ho-
ping chagno man would refyle ro {ybryitlyaaſelts:apd heewas afſured thas ©
thplegrzonglt them, who wall rhejLpotigucicd-ituabe Apolkolicall obcdi-
cg, illobey ihe Counce}l;and "eaten Terenaed :Heeinuited,
thefngllato.gomerhither, ;:gomplaynicgcaet mdpy ip, Germanic, who are

- (ld Brinees, did prougly dildameapdadlpilethed Gouncell whoſe autho-
- Hiig-lisrahes Divine hen humane, This:hagh campelled bim to thinke of,

torgs nad, Armes.,uAnd- hogaule. it hachhappentd,qbatathe Emperour hath.
maticczhe fame ggfolution, hee hath baege:5onftrajngdto ioyne With him;
apd,afiG.thim, with his owae. and the;,Ghurches Power, to! reltore reli-
githb}warre,, That. hee was-willing,zo ſiguifitis-purpoſe and minds,

CAUIC, 1&1 0 29) 3 > 3110 , of B21 Gi ff ENT e Cl] TIVES O! 7 $I 144
mperqur made ſhew he yodertbokerhewarte, not for er I
aue it

"thoughe that

{traggecs/againithim, and rgtuſed to obey:theLawes, viurped the poſlefh, hi tr i

made for reli<

PRITER of-theinjuric, Bur many'gfchePraceſtancs kepr themlclues gn,

is 0bey<

cantiguedin gouerment, and was obe ted. by his, pcople,r followed, the. For" his peo

and; yrote.ynto him, that, none of his: ſubicQs,might, beare armes @; tmpcro,
gain{{fhims yhergin the; Arch-biſhop | iraplayed:þys. bdevayrs fnoerelye

bee[houng to pcuecure pitmniayarh ofpirigaliznd nomporall, © |

fos $9 1:70 vis 74! ec waH3y3; = 123 to dum of bawmetintggo 1 SUorka Bope”

:

L I Þ: 2
1545 FheEledtor of Saxonie, and the Landgraxe leeing chis; they publiſhed a'Ma
>>> nifeſt the cleuenth of [uly, declaring: that the warre was vnderraken forRe-
Crantts 5-ligion;and that the Emperour covered hismeaning witha cloake oftab og
Hmm s,  Teucnge againlt ſome fewfor rebellion ,codifioyne the contederates, ane* op-
Fxancis 6. prefle them by degrees. They alleadged that Ferdinandand Gramel, and 0-
The Eletor ther miniſtersof his Maieltie, had ſaid, that the cauſt of this Warre- waytlie
ems contempt of the Councell; they called to minde the Popes -ſentenee againſt”
_— th the'Elector of Collen; they added that ihe Spatilh Prelates would nor
2zainſtthe haye contribured ſo muchof their proper reuenewes for any other cavfe;'
—_—— they ſhewed that in orher things the Emperour could pretend nothing a-
 oainſtchem. | ; 4 ALTA [4
Bur while thePopeand Emperour m_—_ avainſt the Lutherans ſome
- thing beſide” Anatbemariſmes,the day after the Seflron,the eighteenth of Tune,

nn, |< Congregation was made, whereatrerthe accuſtomed prayers and inuo-
led,nche ext Cation of the holy Ghoſt, the Secretary read, in the Legates name, a writing,
488 _ framcd by the principal Theologues,in which it was propoſed, thathauing,
© by divineinſpiration, condemned the hereftes concerning originall ſinne,
the order fk thingsro bee handled did require, that the dectrine of the
modernes, in the point of dininegrace, which is*the medicine of ſinne,
ſhould be cxamined; and that the rather it was fit-ro follow-the order, be-
cauſcit was obſerued by the Aug»ſlane Confeſſion ; all which the Counccll
meancth rocondemne. And the Fathers and D juines were intreated to haue +
recourſe by praycryntothe diuineaſhiſtance,and to beaſliduous,and exaR in
their ſtudies, becauſe all the errours of Martin were refolued into that
point. For hauing vndertaken from the beginning to oppugnethe Indul=
gences , he ſaw heecouldnor obrainc his purpoſe, except heedeſtroyed the
workes of repentance,in defect whereof Indulgences doc ſucecede.  Andiu>
ſtification by faith onely,athing neuer heard of before, {cemed rohim agood
meanes tocffe& this z from whence he hath colle&ed nor onely that good
workes are not neceſſary,buralſo that a diſſolute liberty in obſeruingtche Law
of God , andofthe Church will ſcrue the turne: hath denyed efficiencie
in the Sacraments,authority of Pricſts, Purgatorie, ſacrifice of the Maſſe,
andall other remedies for remiſhon of finnes. Therefore by a contrary
; way,hethat will eſtabiiſh thebody of the Catholike doctrine, muſt ouer-
throw this hereſie of iuſtice by faith onely,andcondemnethe blaſphemiiesof
that enemic of good workes.
| "When the writing was read, the Emperours Prelates ſaid, that themore
principall and important the point propoſed was, itſhould beethe more
marurcly, and opportunely handled, that the ſending of the Cardinall Ma-
druccio tothe Pope ſhewed,, that ſome bulincſle was on foote, the which ir
was notfir todiſturbe, butin the meanc ſpace ro handle ſome thing of the
. reformation. The Papalins did, on theother ſide, inculcate, thatit was no
honourrto interruptthe order begun, to handle together, incucry Seſſion,
doctrine and reformation, and that after originall ſinne no other matter
could be handled. The Legates having heard all their opinions,concluded
that to dilcufſethe points,and prepare x rye not to define them, but that
they could not bee derermincd withour preparationbefore, (Which yo.

190 T be” Hiftorie of

©  O

—

Se” ttt. ds. AA F OI ITT I I + te ad. Edt WITS" I FIDE PEI”"Y RM Py m -_ —_ -

The Councellof T, rent, 191

— — M.. A ———  E.7%
C4 Py

L 1 b. 2.
ſaid onely-ro gaine time, andafter to put themſclues in order, to execure 1546
what ſhould bce refolued at Rome,berweenethe Pope and the Cardinall.in PA;

AVI, 3.

che Emperours name. Tharto digeſt that matter, was not to hinder the cu, Py

,
A —

——

reformation, becauſe inthat the Diuines would bee imployed, and in this. 355577

the Fachers and Canoniſts. With this reſolution it was concluded, that the F*-v<1+ 1.

Articles tobee diſcuſſed and. cenſured, ſhould bee colle&ed out of the Ws

bookes of 'Lather, out - of the Colloquics, Apologies, and our of the wri-

tings of the Lutheransand Fathers. And three Fathers,and as many Diuines:

were deputcd. ro fer downc what ſhould bee difcuſſed, and to frame the
Articles. -  «

| : The next Congregation was held to order the marter of Reformation; T'<4icoutte

whererhe Cardinal of Monte layd, that the world hath complayned long Monte concers

ſince of theabſence of Prelats and Paltoures, dayly demanding reſidence; ie ©

chat the abſence of the Prelats and other Curats from their Churches,is the

cauſc of all the miſchicfes of the Church. For the Church may-bee compa-

red toa ſhip,the ſinking whereof is alcribed rotheabſent Pilor, that ſhould

goucrne it,ifhe were preſear. He ſhewedro them, chat herefies, ignorance,

and diſſolution doe reigne in the people; and bad manners and vicesin the

Clergic, becauſe the Paſtours being abſent from the flocke, no man hath

care to inſtruC thoſe,or corre&t theſe. By the: Prelates abſence it 18 come to

paſſe,that ignorant and vnlearned Miniſters have beene promored, and per-

ſonsaſſumed to bilhoprickes, that were more firfor any other charge; for in

regard they neede not execure their duety in perſon, no ficneſle is neceſſary.

So he concluded,that roeſtabliſh the point of refidencie,wasa generall re-

medy for all the maladies of the Church; which alſo hath ſometimes becne

vied by Councels and Popes; bur cither for tharrherranſgreſlions were then =

buc few orfor ſome other cauſe, ir wasnot applyed with ſuch ſtrong and

ſtrairbonds, as is neceſſaric now that the diſeaſe is come to the height : that

is witha morcſcuere commandement, with more greiuous and fea: efull pu-

niſhments,and by meanes more caſte to be executed.

This was approuedby rhe firſt yoyces of the Prelates. Bur when 1acomo The Biſhop

Cortefi,a Florentin, Biſhop of Veſone, was to [peake, commending what had tec introns,
beeneſayd by others, he added,that as hee belecucd chat the preſence of the | mw ad
Prelatsand Curats in times paſt, was the cauſe of mainrayning purity of faith _

in the people, and diſciplinc in the Clergie, fo hee could clecrely ſhew, that

q heiedionn in theſe latter times, bath not beene the cauſe of the contrary

ſubuerſion, and that thecuſtomeof nor refiding hath beene brought in, be-

cauſe reſidence hath beene wholy vnproficable. For the Bilhops could nor

then preſerue ſound dodrine amongſt the people, when the Friars and Par-

doners hadauthoritic to preach againſt cheir wills. ' It is well knowen that

the innouation in Germany, {prang from the Sermons of Fryar John Techel,

and of Friar Martin Luther ;among the Suifſes from the Sermons of Friar

Samſon of Milan. And the reſiding Biſhop was able to doe nothing,bur fighe

with diſaduantage,againſt theſe, who were armed with priuiledges. The

Biſhop is notable to make the Clergic liue honeſtly, forchat,befides the ge+

nerall exemptionofall the Regulars, euery Chapter hath one, and there bee

few particular Prieſtsthat wantit. The Biſhopcannot prouide that fir _

DCE

XUM

ky a 4 Fans TL SES. LS ©. OO.

Fey"

| TheHiitory of

Wn — —_ CO OT HY A

1545
1... 5 Sk
CHARLES F

Henzy 8. *
FRAaxCi1S T.
5+

The D-putics
for collecting
the Aimicles
Cillent about
the manner of
Procceung.

25. Articlcs
concerning)
zwſtifhcarzon

% . i»
« F
wy

bee promoted to that charge, tor the [icences ra promote, and thefacultics
. which the titular Biſhops eniop, whotuffer him notrovic fo much as the
» miniſtery'of the/ Porrificals. And irmeay:befſaid.in one word,that the Biſhops
: doenot reſide; becauſe they hauenothing to dae, .or rather that they may
' not make greater inconnenicnces ro arite, which would happen by their
concurrence, and comemion with priuiledged men. Hee concluded, rhae
as he thought ir fitro rcltore reſidency, lo they ought roxreac how to reſtore:
the Epiſcopall auchoritie. The Biſhops that{pake afterthis Prelate followed
his opinion, that it was neceſſaryro commaund refidency, and ro-retooue
theexemprions which do hinderit. And the Legats were enforced tocolenr,
that both ſhould be confidered of, and thateuery one ſpeake his opinion of
them, and that ſome Fathers ſhould be depured co frame the Decree, thar it
mightbe examined. | | bs ; 6.

T he deputies for colle&ting the Articles of iuſtificarion ; hauing recciued
the extracts of the propolitionis noted by cuery one to be cenſured, werenor
all of one opinion. Onepart deſired that foure or {ixe fundamental Articles
of the new Joatrinemight bee choſen, and! condemned; as was done in the
matter of originall fine; alleadging thatirwas fit to follow thedtile begun,
andthe exampleof the ancient Councels, which, haning declared the prin.
cipall Article, condemned the! herefte, neuer. deſcending ro. particuiar
propoſitions, but condemning the bookesof the hereriques, in thar vniuer-
lall they comprehended allrhepernitious doctrine; and ſo- the honour of
the Councel] required. But the other parc, aymed ropur vnder cenſure all
the propoſitions, which might receiue a bad conſtruction, that choſe might
be condemned, which in reaſon did deſerueit : ſaying;thar it was the office
of a Paltorto diſcerne intirely the wholeſomegraſle from the hurtfull, and
notto ſuffer the flocke to taſte of rhis. And if the exampleof ancient Coun-

ccls ought to be imitated, they ſhould imitate that of Epheſus, which made

ſo many, and ſo famous Anathematiſmes againſt the dotrine of Neftorixs,
that they did containe whatſocuerthe hererique had faide, and the Coun:
cels of Africa, which deſcend ro the condemnarion of all the propoſicions
of the leCtes.

T he firſt opinion did vndoubtedly propoſe a morecafte way, and would

naue pleaſed whoſocuer detired a ſpecedie ende of the Councell, and lefe a -

chinke open for agreement, which furure times might produce. Yet the ſe»
cond was embracgd, which ſaid it was good to examine all the propoſitions
of the Lutheran dodtrine,to cenſure and condemnethat,which;after mature
deliberation, ſhould ſeeme neceſlaric and convenient. And: 24. Articles
. were framed. 1. Faith without workes, is ſufficient to faluation, and a-
lone doth iuſtifie, 2. Iuſtifying faith is a ſurecruſt, by which one belce-
ucth thathis {innes areremitted for Cyr tsT; and thoſe that are juſtified arc
bound to belecue certainely that their ſ{innes are remitted. 3+ By faich
onely wee areable ro appeare before God, who neither regardeth, nor hach
necd of -our workes : faith onely making vs pure, and worthy to recciue the
Euchariſt, bekecuing that in ir wee ſhall recciue grace. 4. Thoſe that doe
tonelt things, withoutthe holy Ghoſt,do ſinne, forthat they do them wich
awicked heart, andit isfinne to keepe the Commandemenrs of God withs
Out

L1p 8; .!

>
Es 2
44

Pas ?

L. — $ ods Fas of Trent.

out faith. 5. - Thebelt repenranceisa new life, and the repentance ofche |; 546

life paſt is nornecellary, neicher dorh the repentance of aRuall{-nes diſpoſe

vsto receiue grace. -16.: No diſpolicionis neceſlary to iuſtification; neither Crazrre 5.

doth faithjultitic becauſeir difpoſerh ys, bur becaule it isameanes or inſttu-

ment, bywhichthe promiſeand grace of God is laid hold on , and recei- F12n<is +.

ued. -7-: Thefcarcof hell helperhnor in gaining of juſtice; yea, hurteth;
_ andis fanne , atidmakerh the {anners worſe, 8; Conttition which ariſeth
from che diſcuſhon, calling'rominde, anddercſtation of ſinnes, weighing
gay nvalcitude, and filthineſſe of them, | or: theloſle of crer-
- nall _ ,and gaincof perperuall damnation, maketha man.an hypo-
criteahda greater ſinner. ' 9, Phe feares by which ſinners arererrified ci-
ther internallyby God ,or externally by Preachers, are ſinnes, vntill they are.
ouctcome by faith. -- 10.  Thedodtrineofthe diſpoſitions deſtroyeth thar.
of faith, and takerh conſolation from the conſciences. 21, Onely faith is
neceſſary, andother things are neicher commanded nor forbid, neither
is fannc any thing bur intreduliry, 22. Hee that hath faith is fice from
the precepts of-the Law, and hath no neede of workes to bee ſaucd ; for
faith giucth all abundantly, and alone fulfillethall the Commandements,
and no-wotke of afaithfull man is ſo bad asmay accuſe or condemne him,
13. A manþbaprtized cannotloſe ſaluation by reaſon ofany ſinne whatſo-
cucr, excepthes will notbelecue, and nofinne, but infidelity, ſeparateth vs
from the. grace of God. 14 Faith and works are. contrary, and workes
cannot beraught without ſhipwracke of fgith. 15, Externall workes of
the ſecond Tablearc hy —_ 16. Thciuſtifiedare ſer free, from guilt,
and puniſhment, and ſatisfaction ncither in thislifeaor after death is nccel-
ſary ; and therefore thereis no Purgatory, or ſatisfaftion , which ispart of
Penance. 17. The juſtified, though they haue the grace of God, cannor
fulfill the Law, or auoidec ſinnes , though morrall.' 18. Obcdicnce vnto
the law in the juſtified is weake,and vnpurcin it ſelfe,not acceptable to God,
buracceptcd for the faith of the perſon reconciled, who belecucth rhat the
remainders of ſ{inne areforgiuen him. 19. The uſt fanneth in eucry good
workc,and nv- worke maketh the ſinne veniall. 20. All rhe works co
yca,of the molt ſantified,are {inne : the workes of the iuſt are veniali by the
mercicofGod,bur in the rigor of his iudgemenr are morrall. 21. Though
the inſt ought to doubt that his workes bee ſinnes, yet hee ought withall
ro be aſſured chatthey arenotimputed. 22. Graceandiulticearenothing
bur the will of God , neither haue the iuſtified any inherentiuſticein them,
and their finnesare nor aboliſhed, bur onely remitted, and not impured. 23.
Our iuſticeis nothing bur the impuration of the juſtice of CyrrsT, and
the juſt haue ncede of a continuall iuſtification, and impuration of the iu-
ſticcof CHR1sT. 24. All the iuſtificd are receiued into ou grace
and glory, andall Chriſtians are <qually great withthe-mothcrof God, and
as much Saintsas ſhee. 2.5, The workes ofthe juſtified deſerue nor bleſ= +
gra Pe can any confidence be pur inthem, but onely in the mercic
of God. I
Whcnthe Articles were publiſhed, it was nor ſo cafie to ſet downie
courſc to handle them in the Congregations , as when originall ſinne was

c<{puted =

-

i __ FJ ar =. —_— ——a

—

Lais.i2,

The Hiſtorie of

"©

Hrxmay B; «
FraANCis 1

Von

[1

.

194
P 546 dif Purcd on. For in thatwarter they found the Articles alteady handled by 3
>>+. the Schoole:men.;but the opinien of Larber concerning uiſtifying taith);rþab!

Cuanirs 5. it is confidence and*certaine periwaſion of the pronuſc of>Gady-with the?
- +, conſequences thar follow, of the diſtin&tionberween the Law &'!the Goſpel}:

"and of the quality ofworkes Hepending optxheonc; andthe orhergevas nes
uerthoughrof by any. Schoole writcr., .anddercforeneuertonfutecor dif!
cuſſed: fotharthe Biuines had worke enough! firft to: vndetftandahe nicg:r
ning of the Luthcranpropoſutions), rand tlardiffercnce from c{:0f6 tharars?
dererminedin-chcgchooles:, apdithen|the toatans..hyivel icliioo! diftingnith?
them. . [ris certainetbar in thebeginningſame of chan, and.ctheFathers for:
the molt;parr;d:d beletuc that tht Proteſtants FR Breewvill; heldiopizo
nion;;thatman,inexrernall actions, is likeaftone; andwhenirfiecantibutd:
infhice rofaithonely;withour tab conctrtaice-of workes , thought:hinviuſt:
who bclcetet only: ahc StoryofrheGolpalahough, in'ocherreſpedtiheinere)
neuer ſo wicked; another fechabfurdities >the whichyby bow muclizhe:
more rhey arcalicne from:common. fanſe, foiniuck: the:-barderthey. aro voi
confurc:-asicetuall in all opiniohsconrraty tomaniteRtbppearance;and;hd?
generally received patſwatonitly) ny bro  liobrios Its droviy di

The maior partof'theDiuines j whoithen-were aſcended! ro themumber:
of fine andfourry, wasvery tenacious otthe gpinions generallyzocctued in:
the Schoolesjimpatientof contradiction,where the Schooke: menagreed, bur
where tiey agreed not, 'they did-very much {tand:in defenceof - ovne?
opinion; and the Dominicans; more then cherelt,werewont ro vaunt; that;
for the ſpace of threeſhundred yeeres, the Church-ouercame herclics by their
paines.” Yer there wanted not ſome wile-men , who fuſpended their iudge-
ment , yntill thercaſons were weighed. Intchis number was Ambroſeus Cata-

rinus of Siena,a Dominican Friar afrcr created Biſhop of Minort , Andrews d*'
Vega a Spaniard andFraucttcave and Antonius Marmarus ,a Carmelite. Thej
Heremires, becauſe they were of the order which Martin Luther guitted,did;
affe& ro ſhew themiclues more contrary ro him then all others, and eſpecial-
ly Terolamus Seripandm the Generall. | y |

Incxaminivg the Articles , the; Theoloques that began ( to facilitate the
vaderſtanding of theatrrce firit)labourcd to fer downe what that faith which
iuſtficth is, and wharworkes it excludeth , diſtinguiſhing them into three
forts; preceding grace; whereof the ſeuen following Articles vntill,ten dat
ſpeake , concurrent in. the very moment with the infuſion of it,, arid ſuble-

wrafter gracerecciued; of whicht he otherclcuen doc ſpeake, /'Ehar taithy
wltiftcth muſtbe preſuppoſed as vadoubted, for that it is-ſaydand repeated

Þy Saipr Paxl. To refolue what that faithis,, and howit maketh a man iuft}

thc opinions weredifferent in the very beginning. For the Scriptbte attri-

buting many vertues-to faith, which ſome knew not. how to apply to one
onely,they thoughtthe word wasequiuocall., and did diſtinguiſh ivinto mas

i
+4

TheGgnifics- BY {1gnifications, ſaying that ſometimes it israken for ai obligation rokeepe
tions offuith- Hromiſes : in which ſenſe Saint Par fayd, thatthe incredulicy of the Tewes

made not yaine the promiſe of God: ſometimesfor the vertue to doe mira-
cles,as when itis faidjif T ſhall hauc ſo muchfaith as to remoouc mountaines;
ſomrimes for the conſcience,in whichſenſe itis ſaid,that,that worke,whichis
not

op
*
s
>
'
v

— y

Lisz3 | the(omnettio/Iont. gs
nos conformable.pe fuch;afiact 3ametimes for: 2 truſt and: confidence 15.45
in God,j chat, his Maicitigivebktepe his promiſesy fo Saing;James willech ca
Vs ms faigh

+ Without doabtings-Laltly,y fora perfwaſiqn and firgic Cuazzxs s.
allen; ( rhpugh.ngs guident) tothe Lioge reuealodiby God, ; Others added fag a,
orher haniifatieies/omb race numberot.nine, ſome: ra the-number of faoners's,
fITTECAE:! 21105-3001 2EW yiluoiftit 501 20 IG [G0 Dm 2300 amen ond |
Bax EciarDomincus, Seco 4 oppoſingthimlelfe agfinſt all;;ſaid, that/this mine
 isarmnp3ot farh nd 2ginitg of vidoryto theLathprauey 3nd tharthere lr opinion
were, buqcwo lignifications; bae, chetrucrh-and aeality of him char afit-
meth or-promilerh, che orher, che aſſenr: in- him char; heareth 3, thar the firſt
is in God, the ſegqad;is onely invs:;andof this laſt all placesiof, the Serip-
cure, vwhjch-ſpcaks of our: faith ,'arc; ynderſtood.:-bur to take faich for-a
rrult and contidence, is ngt.onely.animproperkinde of ſpeaking, but abu-
Huc, peuarreceiued by. Saint Pal: thattruſt differerti lictle or-norhiog from
hope; and therefgrechoopinionof Lwhetought ta bee held foran vadoub-
ted errqus,, orracher herefie; that iuſtifying faith is atruſt and cercainty. in
the minds. of a Chriſtian, rhathis {inngs for Curzon, arcitemitted. Soto
added, and.was'tallowed byrhe-maior pare, that that truſt could not iuſti-
fie,; becaule-ic waggtmeride, anda (ianc; for thatino man, withour pre-
ſumption, 'could aſſure himſclfe that: hee was. in grace, but ought alwaics |
ro doubx. .. For, the other part; (Fatarinus:held!, and, had many followers, The opinions
' chat juſtification proceeded nat from! char truſt, yer chat.che juſt might 345m?
and oughrto belceue by. faith, that hee-is- in (grace. - Andres. Vega 1cta */45.. .
third opinion on fore, that it-was neither remerity,, nor cerraine faith, yet ©
thatone might hayeaconiefturall perſwaſion without ſinne. And this con-
troucrſi: could no: be quitted;,: becauſe in it conſiſted the point-of the cen
{uringthe ſecond Article. Thereforc it was firſtlightly diſcuſſed; :then (the
parties bezing warmed) it divided , and held long in diſputeall che Coun-
cell, for rae realons and caules-which ſhall: bee declared; But all agrecd, ;
thatiultifying faichis an aſſent to wharſocuer is reucaled by God, or derer-
I mincd by the C'1arch ro be belecucd ; which, ſomerimes being ioyned with
p charity , fometimss remaining withour it, they did diſtinguiſh into two
% ſortes; oac which is found in;{inners, which the Schooles call ynformed,;
: ſolicary, idle, or dead ; the other,vvhich is oncly in the good, working by cha.
y ricy, audrherefore called Formed, cfficacious, and lively. And heere ano:
: therconroucrlicaroſe. For ſome thought that faith,ynto whichthe Scrip-
raresaſ(cribe ſaluation,iuſtice; and fanRification , was onely the ligcly faith,
(asallo the Catholiques of Germany held inthe Colloquics )and included the
knowledge of the «oak reutaled, the preparation of the will, and charity,
in which che fulfilling of the whole Law 1s-contained. And in this ſenſe
it cannot be ſaid, - thar oncly faith iuſtificth , becauſe it isnot alone, but
formed with charity. Among theſe, Marmarrs liked not it ſhould bee ſay,

5
:
\

7 char fairh is formed with charity , becatiſe. that kind of ſpcach is nor vſcd by
I Saint Paul, but onely that faith worketh by charity.
: Others vnderſtood, that inſtifying fairh was faith in generall, nor ſay-

ing ie was cither linely or dead, becauſe they doe both iuftifie after diuers
manners ; | cither compleatly; asthe liucly,orasa beginning or foundation,
R'2 ; as

XUM

-— — —
-- ms —

wie Hftonesſ Ed 4.

—> iufticevnte \cJ/tio otharwile then as Philo!
Cuaturs 5. ber; that is;/as ina baſis; which-is as it"'w

2546 | avthe hiſtorical Eiith 5 and of this Saint Paul ſpeaketli when hie atttiburerh
phie'is coltaiticdivthed] _
» norhing, "the principall rc-

Hers | 'maiving ; thar isro ſerthieftarue vpon it.” This ſecond opinioh'was ivinr-
—_— ly maintained by the Daninitans and PFrancifcans,che other by Mariners and

his adherents. Burthe principall point of the difficulty was notrouch&7rhat
 o{s,whetheb#inan is inſt; and thewdoth iultfy , bt; bydoitig iuffly; becom-

meth juſt] Theyaltoptced in onvopinion;rhat ro fay'orftly faith derth iu!
1iific, was a'propoſition bf manyifenſes, and all:abſard.” For God'and the
Sacraments doc iuſtificascaufes' intheir ſegerall kindes {fo that theprops:
ſition harh4hat and mahy other-exceprions, \. The preparation alfo-of the
ſouleto receine grace'jisa cauſe invirs kinde g[6that faich cannior excliide thar
ſort of workes. ' But theArticles concerning; workes that oe before grate,
all which Luther condettineth for:ſinne, the Diuincs cehtſured for hereti-.
call, rather by way of imac&tiue then otherwiſe, © condetnning likewiſc of
hereſic the opinionraken in genera[l;'thar humane workes, without faith,
arcſicnc* thinkiog its clearecale jthatmanyaQions ofmien are indifferent,
neicher good nor euilf; and that” others there are , which though they bee
not acceptable'to God ;'yetare morally good., as the honeſt actions of Infi-
dels,and Chriſtians which are finners, which to call honeſt and ſinnes im-
plicth a contradiction; and the rather, becauſe'in this ranke are included the
beroicall ations, ſo much commended by antiquity.

Carmiimbis © But (,afarinus maintained tharman , without the ſpecial] heJpe of God,

can doe no worke , which may truely bee-good; though morally, bur ſin-
neth ſtill. Therefore rheworkes of the Intidels, who are not excited by
God to beleeuc;and of the faithtull who areſinners before God ſtirreth them
vpto conuer{ivn, though they ſeetie honeſt ro men; even heroicall, yer
are trucly'{innes, and hee that commenderh rhem , doth conſider them in
generall andiaccording to cxternall appearance}; but hee that ſhall examine
the circumſtances of eacry one, ſhall finde they are peruerſe: and that for
this Lather was not to bee condemned ; notwith(tanding hee fayd that the
Articles ought ro bee cenſured, asthey ſpeake of workes that follow pre-
venting race, which: arc a preparation to wuſtification ,as an abomination
ofſinne;teate of hell;and other terrours of conſcience. For confirmation of
his opinion , ftiecbrought the doQtrine of Saint Thomas , that to:doca good
worke ,;the concurrence'of all circumſtances is neceflary , but the want of
oneonelyis ſufficiont for an ill. Sorhat howſocucr among the workes con-
{ideredin generall, ſome are indifferent, yetiin the ſingylar there is no medt-
umberweenehauing all the circumſtances., and wanting ſome.” "Therefore
eucry particularaction is good orcuill, neither is there to bee found any one
indifferent. And. becauſe amongſt the: circumſtances the end is'one, all
works referred to a bad end+are infected ; fo that the Infidels referring all
ro abadend ; theiractions areſinsrhough they ſeeme-heroicall;ro him that
knomerth not their intention. . Neither doth it make any difference whether
the relationto abadecnd be atuall or habituall, becauſe theiuſt doth merir,
"though hee referrcrh not the worke aQually roGod:,:bur habirually oncly:
He faidturther,alleaging Saint 4uſtine, thatitis ſmne- not onely tg refer the
action

: OR a oa Me.
.. " '3

=> *
a> © bod
_ RE ner rGera G

_—_——_ - IS,
— JA. .© —_—_— — + — ” -

Lizz.i the Councellof Trent. = .

-

260d z and-begaule heede- 15.45

mm Hl... At et I ns
.

ation.to a bad cad, but aklanotto reterroitroa

Qs
2.
2
SN
I
Wn
Z
-
4
b
o
©
g,
(®)
=
a
by
E
-
©
b]
NN
Z
f
D)

— <— ; | B66” 51 Ml rodlay-
[his opinion was very ſharpely impugned by Soto, proclaiming it hercti> mew we op
r1on of Ca;4-
rin#7 to bee .

maintained a man might, bythat (trengthof nature, oblerue cuery ptecept
of che Law, in regardot the fubſtance of the worke, though hot in regard
of the end ; which was cnough to auoid ſinne. Hee faid there were three
ſorts of humane aCtions ,, one, the tranſgrellion ofthe Law, which is ſinne ;
another, rhe oblcruxton thereof, hauing charity for the end, which is meri-
rorious.and acceptableto God ; the third mixt , when the Law is obeyed for
tas ſubllance of cc Precepr, which worke is morally good and; perfect an
irs kinde, becauſe it ac:omplitheth the Law , making euery worke'good ac-
cording to morality,auoiding;by that meanes, all fin. Buthe moderated this
great perfection of our nature, by adding, that it was one thing to rake heede
of any one particular finne;, and another ro bewareof all rogether ; and fayd
thata man might auoidany one, bur notall; by the example of him that
| had a veſlei} with three holes , who could not ſtoppe them with two hands.
o bur could fiop which two of them he would, one remaining open of riecel-
; {iry. This doctrine did norfatiſfie ſome of the Fathers. For thought clear-
ly ſhewed chat all workes arenot ſinnes, yet it did not wholly ſajue Free-will,
becaulcir will neceſſarily follow,that it isnot free inauoiding all finne. Bur
Soto giuing the title of good workes vnto theſe, knew not howto deretmine
whether they were preparatory toiultification. It ſeemed to him they were,
inregard of thegoodneſſt: of them: and it ſeemed they were not, conlide-
ring the doctrine of Saint Auſtize, approoucd by Saint Thomas, and other |
good 'Diuines,thar the firlt beginning'of ſaluation protcedes from the yoca- 4
tion of God. 'He auoyded theſe (traits by a diſtinCtion,that they wereprepa- = |
ratory a farre off, but nor neerely, as though giuing a remote preparationto ,,,..
the force of nature , the firſt beginning was not taken away from the grace Gon inden:

of God. C | S cd by Coro,

The Franciſcans thoughrrhar nor onely this kinde of wotkes were 'F00d
"'K-£ and

* : R \ XL
" ava.” -- > + > a 4
es 254687, 94 18 -/q + 44 - 0%

4

XUM

198” £ The Hiftorie of L1s. 2,

' 1546 and did truely and properly prepareTto jultification , "bur allo thar they were
CA rtvely meritorious inthedightof God. Therefore Scorus, the authour of

PavL 2

Crartes $:"their doctrine; intiented akindeiof merit, which hee artribured to workes
Henzr 8 doncby the force of nature onely/,--faying char in congruitic they deſeruc
W295 7 grace by a certaine law,and intallibly , and that a man,by naturall power on-
The dodtrine 193 3y fecle a forrowforſinne, which isa dil} poſition, and merit of (ongru-
Fen: 293 as aboliſh it: approouing common ſaying of hys rimes , that God ne-
cerning meri- Uerfaileth him that doth as much as hee is able. And'ſome of that Order,
——_ paſſing thoſe bounds; did adde, that if God giucth nor/grace to him har
doth what hecanghee would be voiult, vnrighteous, partiall, and an accep-
ter of perſons; They clamourcd with much ftomacke and indignarion, thar
it would beca'great abfardiry, if God made no'difference betweeneone that
is naturally honeſt,and another drowned in all vices, and there would be no
reafon why-hee ſhould rather giue grace ro onethen another. "They allo al-
ledged , thar Saint Thomas was of this opinion, and thatotherwiſe a man is
put intodeſperation, and made negligent rodoe well , and wicked men may
excule their bad workes , and attribute them to the want of the aſliftance
of God. | tht
Iscontradi- But the Dominicans did confeſſe that Saint Thomas was of this opinion,
Dome » when hee was yong,and after did retract it, when he was old. They did re-
prehend it,becauſe1n che Councel] of Orange , it is determined that no kinde
of merit 2oeth before grace, and thar the beginning ſhould bee attribured ro
God; ſaying, that the Lutherans hauing made {ſuch exclamations for this
congruous merit, irought wholly to be aboliſhed, as indeede it was neuer
heard ofin the Church in ancicnc times,in ſo many controverſies with the
Pclagians. Thar the holy Scriprure doth attribute our conucrſion to God,
and thar iris not fic to Icauc the forme of ſpeach which it vieth.

For the preparations there was no difference in the ſubſtanceof the do-
Arine, All held thar afrer God doth {tirre vs vp, fearc and other confiderati-
ons ofthe malignity which is in finne doe arife. They ſaid that the opinion,
that theſe thingsare bad, was hereticall , becauſe God exhorteth the ſinner,
yea, moouerh him to theſe conſiderations, and it mult not be fayd that God

 mooueth toſinne ; and which is more,it is the office of a preacher to terrific
aſinner by cheſe meanes : and becaule by the ſame meanes, all paſſe from the
Rate of ſinne to thatof grace , it {cemed very ſtrange that onecuuld no tpaſlc
from {inneto inſtice, without the meanes of another {1nne. Bur for all this,
they could not free themſclucs from the difficultic on the contrary part ; be-
cauſe all good workes way ſtand with grace, but that feare andother prepa-
rations cannot and thereforcare {1nnes. Friar Antonius Marinarus thought
the difference was verball,and faid,thatas paſſing from a great coldto a hear,
one mult paſſe by alcle degree of cold , which is neither a heat nora new
cold, but the ſame diminiſhed, ſo one gocth from f1nnc to iuſtice by ter-
rors and attritions, which are ncither good workes , nornew f{innes, bur old
{innes extenuated. Bur he was compelled to retract, becauſcall were againſt
him Of the workes done in grace there was no difficulty amonglt them.
For they all ſayd they were perfect, and meritcd faluation ; and that Luthers

opinton,tharthey arcall finnes,is wicked and facrilegious : and holding ir to

bec

who will not hauc the verbe 1u/{ificare to be e

PO OOTY Sd

18.2. the Councell of Trent. | 1 99

be blaſphemie ro lay , chat che bletſed Virgine hatch commirred che leaſt ye- 1 5.46
niall 1112 ;ch2y could nor endure to. heare'thariſhee linned in'cuery action,
and (aid,:harche carch and hell would oper-chemlelues againſt fo greatblaſe Cres 5.
phemics, | HI ON: of Jun: Jkt | >{::1 Benner 6,”
 Forcenſure of the 22, and 23. Anticles, inthe pointof the efſepecgf Di- Cen 5:
uinc grace , ic wasacominon con{ideration,thar che word Grace, inthe firſt ,1,.....
{1znitication,was vaderitood for a bencuolence or good will, which; when condemne
itisin him that hath/power,neeeſlarily bringing foortch a:good effect; thar is; craing =
2 gift or benefit, which isalſo called Grace. 'Thatthe Proteltants thoughrto an __
meanly of che Maicity of G o 0; that 'it:could doe no: more then make vs
partakers of his good will : bur is omnipotencic required that we ſhould
hauc the benefit thereof in effe&t. » And becauſe fome man might fay , that
thediuine will onely,which is G o'D himſclfe, can-haucno greaterthing to
eltow , and that to haue giuen vs his Sonne was thegreatcit benefir, - and
thar Saint Jobs, to ſhew the great louc of Go> towards the world, allead-
ged nothing elſe burthar he had giuen vshis Sonne,they ſaid tharthefe bene-
firs are common to all, and that it was fit he ſhould beltow a particular pre-
{car ro cucry one. Therefore the Diuines haue added an habitual grace, gj-
uen to cucry' iult man in particular, which is aſpiricuall qualiic — 4
Go D,infuſed into the ſoule , whereby itis made gratcfull and acceptable ro
the diuine Maiclty, wherot chough the Fathers ſpeake not in exprefſerermes,
nor the Scriprure, yet it is clecrely deduced fromthe word Inſtifie; which be-
ing cftcctiue,doth neceſſarily f1gnitic ro make iult, by the impreſſion of reall
Tuitice : which rcalicy, becauſe it is no ſubſtance, can bee nothing elſe but a
qualitic and habire, »
And vpon this occaſion there was much ”=_ againſt the Lutherans,
eiuc,bur iudiciall and decla-
ratiue , grounding themſeluesvpon the Hebrew word wwe Tjadak, and the
Grecke aug2y, which {1gnific to bee pronouncediulſt; and ypon many places
of the New and Old Teltament, and that it is vſcd in that fignification in
the Latine tranſlacion ,allcadging forir places tothe number of fifreene. Bur
Soro excluded all thoſe of Saint Part, which ſpake of our juſtification, which
he laid mult needes be vnderitood 1n an cftectiue fenſe : whereupon aroſe a
grear'dilpute hetweene him and Marinarus,wholſaid,one ſhould nor ground
himſelie vypon fo lighta matter. Bur he ſaid the Article of habituall Grace
could not be doubted of; as being decided inthe Councell of Vienna, and by
the common opinion of all Thcologues : that this was to make ſure foun-
dations, which cannot be deſtroyed, and not to fay rhat Saint Paul ro the
Romanes , when he ſaith that Go D iuſtificth, doth not meane declararorily:
for it is manifeſtly againltthe T'ext , which maketh a iudiciall proceſle, and
faith, thatnonecan accuſe or condemne G 0Þ sEle&, becauſe Go Dp: doth
juſtiterhem: where the iudiciall words, to accuſe and condemue, doc {hew
that the word Iuſtifie, is indiciall allo. |
Bur the Francilcans approued habitual grace, becaule charity it ſelfe isan
habit. Andhere was a ſharpediſpucation berweene them and the Domint-
cans , whether the habir of Grace be the ſame with the babir of Charity, as

Scorus would,or diſtinit,as Saint Thomas , and ncither party ycelding, , they
debated

——— — — ——— ———

__— * . =_ - RO
GE Ee Ee COTE I TR PETIT "ogy 7 Tn

_ $09

The Hiſtorie of Ls. 21

546 debined whether, 'belides. this'Grace or inherent Juſtice, the Juſtice of

>—

Pa VL 2, L

CiHaRtlets &,

Hexry! 824!
Fraxers 1,

—_

vor »

SR6*Y f

CHkt $Talſobeeimpured'ro'the juſtified, as if it were his owne which
they did in regard+of the opinion of Hiberrus Pighius,, who confelling the
inhercnt,added, that we mult not cruſt in that, but in the imputed iuſticeof
Ca RrrsTas ifitwereours. '! None doubted that Cyr 15T had merited for
vs; but!ſomeblamed rhe wordto Tmpute, and would bauc itaboliſhed, be-

> cauſe irwas notito bee founebin Fathers : who contented them(ielucs with

thewords, Communication; participation,;diffufionderiuation ,'applicati-
on ,'compuration, and coniunCtion.. Others faid,,thar + 8rocing vpon the

 thing;thev'ought nor rodiffer ypon theword , becauteir fignifier preciſely

Contentions
in the Coun-
cell are cheri-
ſhed by diucrs
for diucrs
ends.

A Tubily is
publiſhed in
Rome, In
which rcligi-
on is declared
to be rhecauſe
of the war'e
againſt rhe
Prowfants:

the ſamerharthclorhersdoe, which rhough not byalliand often; yer ſome-
rimes was vſed. -Forthis the 109. Epiltle of Saint Barnard was brought , and
Tegadefcnded ,thar,:rhough the word be nor. found in the Scriptures, yer
1s a moſt proper Latine word ro ſay: that the juſtice of CyrrsTis impu-
ted to mankind for fatisfa&tionand merit, and that irs continually imputed
to all that bee iuſtified;, 'and doc'{atisfic for their owne finnes : but hee
wopld'nort haye itiayd;irwasimpuredas if ic were Ours. Whereumnto it be-
ing oppoſed that Saint Thomas vicrh to ſay ,thatthepaſſhon of CHR1sT is
comrunicaredtorhe baprizetl for remiſhon, as if himletfe had ſuliained ir
andidied; therewas a long and great contention vpor his words. The He-
remit? Generallheld an opthion/, that, inthe Sacrament of Baprilme, the Tu-
ſticeof CyR18T isimputed, becaule it is communicated wholly and in-
tirely; bur nor in penance, when our ſatisfaCtions are alſo required. Bur
Sorolayd, the word Imprucation, was molt popular and plauſible, becaule ir
ſignified, at the firlt fight,that all ſhould bee acknowledged from Carts;
but yer tharhe did cuer {u{peCt it, inregard ofthe bad conſequences which
the Lutherancs draw from thence. Ehatis,thatthisonely is ſufficient, with-
out inherent rizhreouſnes : thatthe Sacraments doe nor conferregrace : that
the-puniſhment'is aboliſhed rogerher with the guilt: char there remainerh
noplace for fatsfaction:; that all are equall in grace, 1uſtice, and glorie :
whencerthey deduce alſo tharabominable blaſphemie, that cuery iult man is
cquall rothebleſſed Yirgin. "This admonition begat ſuch a ſuſpicion in the
hearers, that there appcared a manifeſt inclinationtocondemne the word
for hercticall, chough reaſons were efteftually replyed to the. contrary. The
contentions berweene the Tneologues, did certainly ariſe from the immo-
derats aftetion they bare to their owne fect, and were cheriſhed by diuers,
for diuers cnds. By the Imperialiſts, to conſtraine them ro abandon iuſtifi-
cation. By the Courtiers , to find a way to ſeparate the Councell, and ſo to
auoid the imminent reformation. And by others, ro free themſclues trom
incommodities, which they|tcared would be greater, by reaſon of the dearth,
and of the warre-which approached : and the rather becaule they had little
hope ro doe good. |

But while they thus diſputen Trent, the Pope publithed a Tubile in Rome,
thefifreenth of Tuly : by - "47 "HE Princes of Germany of the paines
ro find out,or perſwade others, the true cauſe of the warre, For hauing large-
ly declared, in that Bull, his paltorall affection and care for the faluation of
men, relating the perdition of foules by the increaſe of hereſtes, and that to
rootc

Lind rhe Concellnf Trent. = ”
* rootethemgur, che Councell was alreadie begun, hee bewailed, abouc mea- t $46

, 4 ;,

ſure, the obſtinacie of the heretikes, who eonrenine gudirefuſe ro'obcy-1r,and a,
to lubmirchemlctues $0 the determination thereof. For remedie whercof he Cxaxirs 4:
had.madga[.cague with the Emperour, toreducethem;tothe obedicnce of Hanar "=
the Church by forceaf Armes,-: Hee therefore wiſhed thein all co-haute re- WEE 5.
courle ynto G2 D by prayers, pits gn andcommunibis, that
G 0 D/of. his Diuine,Maieltic, - would giuea,good iflueto this warre;, yn»
dertaken for 'his glory,, exaltation of-the-Ghurch; and cxtirpation of he+
relies. {1 (111, ener rt 720} chain Pods 655 odvvo 3. wvn
The.Emperour, in confortaicy.to his purpoſe of concealing the catiſe of T1. ze.
Religion, the ewentieth of Tyr dun Ky ubliſhed a Bandy againſt the cor $25
Saxon. and, Landgrauc, laying tocheir charge that they had alwayes hindered $:x20nd
his deſignes, had neuer obeyed him, made conſpiracies againſt him, mooucd
warre againlt other Princes of the Empire, {led vpon Biſhoprickes, and
other goucraments, diſpoſleſſed many of their goods, and coucredall theſe
things wich che glorious and ſweet name of Religion;peace,and1iberty, but
hauing indeede rather any other end, - Therefore hee doerh preſcribe them,
as pertidious, rebels , ſedirious, guilty of high treaſon, and enemies of the
publike peace: and commanderhthar none doe aſliſt them,or be linked with
than, ablolucth the nobility. and people of their dominions from their
Oach of tidelitic, including all choſe in the Bando whoperſeuere ro obey
them. |
The cauſe of che warrcalleadged by the Emperour grieued the Pope, and ja"
that of the Pope gricued the Emperor,becauſe both their ends were hindred, * o#ended
For though the Pope pretended that he had publiſhed this Manifeſt, that all othertoral-
the people of Chriltteudome might implorethe aydeof God, rofauour the ot
Emperours Armes, yet both he and cuery man of iudgement knew vety well,**m==*
thatit was .to giue notice to Germany , and the whole world, - that the warre
was for Religion: whichrthe ſimpler ſortalſodid know alittle after. For his
letter to the Suiſſes before mentioned , and a copic of the Capitulations made
with Madruccio,were publiſhed. The Popecroſled (4/er in this, becauſchee
defircd the ſuppreſſion of the Proteſtants, withoutrheexaltation of the Em-
perour, and therefore to ballance rhem well, hee meant ro conſtraineall the
profeſſors of the new Religion to ynite againſt him. And it is certainethat
the Popes action hindered the Emperours deſtgnes. -Fordeſiringrthe Suiſſes
ro continue theirleague with the houſe of Auſirie and Burgundy , and nor af-
laſt the rebels, the Euangelikes anſwered tHfarchey would firlt beſarethar the
warre was notfor Religion. So it hapencd, thar,the-warre being butncwly
oo__ , diſcords werealrcady ſowed berweene the Princes, lacy confede-
rated.
The Potentares of balie were amazed, and ſaw the Popes yſuall wildome Ti-Triaces

. : : of 1r«lie doe
was wanting to keepe warre farre from Italie, and the Princes beyond the ceofere the

mountaines in an <quall ballance of ſtrength ; who in the fame inſtant had kya

fayle4in boch. For if the Emperour had ſubducd Germanie , Lalie had re- ©

mained ar his diſcretion, and Fraxce not ben ableto reliſt. If theEmperor |

had been overcome, the Dutchmen would haucpaſſedinto Iralie. And per-

haps theſe reaſons running inthe Popes minde , perſwaded him when ne
| d

__ WEE. Ons we oy cs
MH & - by ON. %* ES ip 1395; WAS, g
Kr 2 men oorens © gn : M
OT 9 a AS

Rome

mc
Xaſtorie of YI) E511 gl

—o—_ _____

gre EEE ————_—_ —
—_—

dos "Fbs
1525 tad conchidedihelengue, tolecurc hiniſefe againſt the Empetour with the
> countcypile of Germany.” "1193 ONVY. 2941307" (330 9:36,013 . 2 M645 ;1Þ1]
Quanies 5: "| | Bub {*fa#, betidexhis diſtaſte forthe Tubelie, ' ſuſpected alſd*that the
1!raxr 8: Pope ,hawingobrained his ctid'of making iwarre' againſt the Proteſtants;
20245; wonld.difſdlue the!Gouncell;-ynder prerence to deferte it viitill the warte
was cndedigporfor cate of the 'aritics. whiehthe Proreſtants prepated in Sne-

< mia; Hreknew chiewasrhe nie of alt the Court; negotiated with: him
 morethen fiye:and twenty yeeres; andthatthe Bilkops aſſembled in Trent,

cuen his owne, had the ſame minde, forthe incommodities which they ſuf:

. --.: Feted:there? Hee ferred the Lutherans would Tay , if the Countcell were ſe-
- * -*": parated,, thatir was aſſembled onely ro findea prerenee of makitig warre a+
* gainſt them ;andrhattheCatholiques of Germarie, would thitke; rhar,the
 mnrerelts of religioniagadreformation being layd a{ide ;hee would endevour

onely ro\ſubduethem:; Hee doubtedallo jrbat going on to handlethe Con:
rrouerled points, as*already they had originall finne, and mcafitt6;bandle

( as hewasaduertiſed'):iuſtitication, hee might bee hindered in fſorne com-
poſition, which otherwiſe hee might haut made, giuing hope to the Cities

that their reaſons ſhonld be heard, to ſeparate them from the Princes of rhe

league. Helaw clearely it was neceſſary the Councell ſhould remaineopen,

and yer me.:dlc only with reformation : but that ir was impoſſible to obrainc

it withourthe Popeconfonted with him.- -T herefore hee {ent ro certific him

TheEmperor in diligence, that hee would imploy all his ſpiritand forces ro make Trent
omar {ccurc, thoigh there went a fame of the Proteſtant armics in Szeuia, Thar

ly 1ntreat the.

Popetht®3- iq yas neceflary-ro-maintaine the Councell, that they might anſwerethe

ly reformati-

onmaybee backebitingsand calumnies, which would bceſpred againſt themborh, if ic

the Councell, were diſſolved! Hee carneltly prayed him to keepe the Councell opcn and

ez Norto handlerhe controuerſies becauſc his purpoſe was to compell the Pro-

affolued: reſtants, his adherents, by authoritie, and his enemies by force of armes, to be

preſent , arid fubmirtchemſclues. Butin the meanerime he deſired him not

ro-hinder his-excetlent deſeigne , ſhutting the doore vponthem , with con-

trary decrees, made in-their abſence. 'T hat this could not continue long;and

thar hee hoped to {-e the end of this ſummer. Therefore, that hee ſhould

bee contented-:thar now reformation onely ſhould bee treated of , or, if rc-

ligion were , they ſhould touch matters of, ſmall weight oncly , thar, when

they were defined, they might not offend the Proteſtants. Hee ordained

alſo,thathis Ambaſſadour in Trent ſhould make the ſame inſtancero the Le-

res. And'being informed that Yanta Croce. was inclined to any kindc of

= WH diffolution of the Cou ncell, hee charged his Ambaſladour ro giue ſi a nip,

nethche Le- and tell Him, that if, in this, hce did croſſe his Maieſtie, hee would cauſe him

are *42/* to be throwen into theriuer Adice. This was knowen to all, and written
by the Hiſtorians ofthis time. Senn |

The Pope, though hee would faine haue beene free from the Councell,

The Pope Which the Court delired alſo, yet heethought it neceſſary to gratifie the Em-

+ er IN peronr,inkeeping it open, and not bandling controuerſies. But to treat one-

mation ondly ly of Reformation neither pleaſed him nor the Courtiers. Therefore hea

handed. =wrotetotheLegares that they ſhould nor ſuffer the afſembly ro difſolue, nor

make a Sellion vnrtill himſelfe had giuen order, but ſhould cnterrainethe

Prelates

mn 6. So ad wn tt 00 oa es ns
TS: N Ty.5 yy 50S RT TT hs Eg I, * 's TT FS. -
OS OR IG

mw,
ce eaten 2x —

Lam. l the Councell of Trent. 203

Peclaresjioudt i boo}ogucsmgrhCongregations,and fuch buſinefles andexer- 1 5 46
ciſcs,as ſeemed ro them beſt. The 2 5. day the [ubclic was folemanely publ 2
{bc xiadyerr ;| ini pretcrioubb ric Legates;/and all the-Councell;oAndithar Cumirs 5.
they maghrapply ci&h(g/nds do taſtings, and other workes'af Betiance;adcore Himns 3.
dmgzadicprotcegzofiche Bul theStflibawardeferred wat infhould  IGIAS;
incimmnddd6d chyfongregationsinemapitcd toring2dayeso yid- 5! - +1 %orrhe tubely is
pahgeoriphdlertncquaticdutottttaly;rache Emperazrs ictuſce,and Chiuſet © 7
waviakewrdy. Hahn Sukrcefifiudii For whithoeule the Gounccy: was all, gieProte

* MAntarm

Cannce;wontaipivionto;Hhrugand fortificd that Gitie; 16: #21 the poly 7: rene air.
ſeliowofi chelp ndppiladted hinttelfe:ſeurn miles: aboys it. .- This) - -1
redomen gayfberbaacthabGonpucyaild bcahoſcetotthowwarand that |
thy Coundcabritbud wholly be difturbeny +Þhe: Prelates], wholdeſired a pre-
trcodqpacriney lnpliticd the dangers:and-incommodities; whercunco the.
Logateynogappaſaticyio che beginhing, cauſcd a ſuſpition,rhatithe-Pope had
rio migdgdonomuethe Comgell, Sdmc,ofthe rjiaſt timerau Prelars,yvhe:!

if

had no defire to remained Trent, departed; andilo would moreihabe dong; '
ifcbe:(dbdimibob Lreane j:latoly returnedfrom Roweg had notiaſluredihem,
chat thePope/waildhatobreti much dilpleated therewichandgbe timerous

had notdeenconifantcd byr him / and the; Empexauss Ambaſladour 4 ſecus;

ring.chem'that cheegreat:number;which' cameout of 1talywouldcompelthe,
Procoſtants to be gone : and alloit-the Popes lettersto- the Legates,) which
cameinthe midz{cit of rhele ſtirres, had not ioyned the Pepes authority and
thcirs,rotheinreaviesof ochers. _ --- . «2008 ant tend ern b cy þ
.. Burthough theProtcftancs enterpriſe did nor ſacceed , and. Tirol remay-:The tetiun |
ned ſecure, ſo thatuhere was -no OE 40s that fade, yet there was,confuſign,*92ess palle

by Trent, vn

in Trent, by reaſon of the great numberof ſouldiers,' which continually paſ., dr checom-,
{cd out of [ta!y into Germante, who , according to the capitulazions of- the! wad Farneſe.
league, were imall to'the number of rwclue thouſand foore,and fine hundred
horle,beliderwo hundred trom the Duke of Tuſcany, and one hugdred fromy
the Dukeof Ferrarg:iThe-moſt tamous Capraines of Italy came with thqud
vader the condu$t of che General Ofauis Farneſe,and his brother Alewandet-
Farn:ſe,Cardinal;and Legacegbechgraadchildren to the Pope;by: his ſonne;:
and {1xe thauland Spaniards:;the Empcrours owne ſouldiers, taken our of
Naplesand. Eumbardy, : Andifolong as the fouldicrs paſſed, whtichiwas vacill
themiddlc of Angit; though the publike ations of the Counjcell were nor
wholly omitted, yorthe meetings werenot ſo many; nor (o frequented. - Bur
char the Bilhops and Diuines might hauccntcrtainment, the:Cardinall Sar-
ta (roce held anafſembly of-learncd men in his houſe; where they treated of
the ſamethings,bur familiarly;and withourceremony. + Is |

The Protcltanescombined with the Emipetour, did then publiſh a wriz The Prore- -
ting, addrefſedrotheir ſubjects, full of raylings againſt the Pope, calling neawiche-
him Antichriſt, inſtrument of Satar, imputing, vato him. thar;, before , hee we cy
had ſent to kindle a fire in divers places of Saxonie, and now: was authour ** 7r*
and mooucr ofthe warre, andhad ſentiinto Germany. to poylon the-wells,
and; (tanding watcts , aduiſing all to bec diligent. in raking; and puniſhing

"” "Whos

PS APIS; Wh WEL Ao ox y__ the *

- » VE SCRAGEY 206 WA es. een

— ———

204. T he Hiſtorie of ;

= f p thoſe poyloners. This very few did thinke to be probable, and was cltcemed

—\-\ acalumnie. -- |

Chanres 5. 30:1 The Popes men bring come into the armic,which was in Landiſueh, the

mrs 15 of Auguſt, the Emperour gaue the collar of the golden Fleece, ynto his
Faaxcrs 1 Gonnein law Oftanius which hee had beſtowed on him in the celebration

AJ PN.00S

The Emperor of the aſſembly of that Order,held vpon Saint Angrewes day, and heſawethe

coll of he - lifter of the Popes men, wich much approbarion and contenr,to hauc the

cone Fi flower of thetalian'Souldicrs. Yerrhe ends of che Pope and Emperourbe: |

to his ſonne

inl-o.02-: ingdivers,they produced occaſions of diſtaſtes. The Cardinall Farveſedeſss/
NE, red to cary the croſle, as Legate, before chearmie, and hadorder from:the
TheEwperor Pape ſo to.dve,publiſhing Indulgences, as formerly was vicdioro be donein
Card. Faraſe (yaſadoes, declaring it was the war of the Catholique Church. But hecould'

cxptherrolſe obtaine neircherot theſe-from rhe Emperour, whoſe end was quite contrary,

beforethe ro entertaine the Lutherane Princes who were with him, and that the Cities :
| perceluing hee
couldnottary'ih the field inany other qualiry , with the Popes dignity, and-

armie,

might not waxe obſtinate againſt him for it. The Cardivall

his owne, his remained in Ratisbon,and faininghimſclfero be licke, expected
his Grandfath=r>anſvere,vhom hehad advertiſed of alL;;: : . .* >! *

They now being in arcadineſſe on both {ides,, though cither hada preat |
armic , and forced one-another , preſenting alſorhe barraile when they ſaw
ad many ue occaſions ro ar-.

their aduantage; and though cachof them
| chieuc ſome notable victory , yet they were not embraced: by the Prote-
_ ſtants, becauſe the EleQor and the Landgraze had: cquall authority ouer.

the 5x0» n>rhem : a goucrnment which cuer ſucceedeth ill in armes :'and becauſe the

2 Landgraue

bringethgrea Empecrour knowing this, that he might be Conquerour without blood, and
to ſay. not gluc the enzmics occaſion to ſer their affaires1n berter order,cxpeeted that
time ſhould pur'into his' handa cerrainc victory, in ftcad of one that was
doubrfull,expoſing himſelfe to the hazard of a bartell , whereby nothing of
moment or conſequence was done.
TheLegatsin Trent, now freed from the Souldiers, fid regalate the Con-
regarions,according to the firlt ſtile, reducing them to ordinary dayes, and'
beehinkiri them(ſclues how to driue the time, according to the purpoſ= of
the Pope. They found no athcr mcanes,butro ſhew that the importance of

the matrer requiredan cxaCt diſcullion , andto prolong the diſputations of

the Divines, giuing an entrance to new matters; Whereof there could nor

want occaſion, in regard 'that by reaſon of connexion, or intemperancicof

wit, Doors do cuer caſily paſſe from one ſubicct ro another. They reſolued

alſo to cheriſh the differences and yaricticof opinions ; a thing eaſe to bee

done, aſwell for the naturall inclination of mantooucrcome in diſputations,

as becauſe in the Schooles, eſpecially of the Fryars, roo much obſtinaciein o-

cad.»exe pinion of their owne ſeCt,, is very viuall. Monte, who was of an ingenuous

—_— if poſition , thoughrit wquld be hard,and could not promiſe to be conſtant

ſemble ſo wel

2 cheoeer, info longadiſhmulation , as he law was neceefary. Burt Sante Croce, a man

crxe. ofamelancholy andcloſcnature, offered totake vpon himthecharge of go-.

Fathers»xe Ucrning the buſincſſe.

che _ Inthe Congregation of the twenticth of Auguſt, it ſeeming thar as muck

ms © had beenſpoken ypon thetwenty fine Articles , as was ſufficient to frame

the

L1s: 2;

4

IN TRLASELIISSIS OC OOO. TEST. ”— OO O—_—_S OO ——

The Councellof Trent, 205

_ —

SLA "=

Li B, 2,

the Anathematiſmes,it was propoſed ro depute Fathers to.compole them. And 1546
there were: named three Biſhops, and three Generals, and Sonta Croce firlt of CAS
all. Who hauing madea modell of the Canons, and propoſed itro be diſcufe- <xaxz33, $
{ed in the Congregations following, the fame diſputations did returne,vf the Hizar 8, -
certainricofGrace,of rhe morall workes of Infidelsand {inners;ofthe merit ©2555
of congruirie, of imputation, of che diltmction of Grace and charitie; and
choſerhar were intereſted inthe opinions ſpake tnore earnelily, becaule rhe
Cardinallgaue them-an edge , by ſhewing char the matrers were of impor- $ats &nes =
tance; and oughtto'bee dilcuſſed well, -and- that withour the refolution of inonnttt
them, irwas 1mpoſſiblero make'a good derermination. The controuerlie on. gy
of the cettaintic.of Grace onely, held chediſputants in exercile many dayes,
and madeobſtinare; and diuidedintorwo-parts, nor onely the Divrines, bur
the Prelares alſo. .Yet.che queſtion was not cleered by the diſputation, but
more obſcured. _ 5; 04D
- In theboginning Tas hath-beene delivered) one part faid thar eertaintie A tifereice

of Grace was preſumption ; the other, thar one might-haue it meritotioully. bout certains
Thegroundofilic firſt was, thae Saint Thomas, Saint Bonaventure, andgene. 7 © IG
rally the Schoolemen thoughtlo; for which cauſerhe maior part of the D&d=

Mminicaris were of che fame opinion. Beſides the aurhotirie of DoCtors, they

Alleadged for reafons,that God would 't6rthat man (ſhould becertaine, thar

hee mighix not beelifred vpinpride, arideſtecme of himlelte, that hee might

Nor-preferre himfelfe before others, as heethat knowerh himſelfe to bee ft

«would doe;beforemanifelt {1nners : and aChriſtian would ſo'betome drovys

fic;careleſſe,and negligent to doe good, Therefore they ſaid tharincertaine-

fic was profirable,and metitorious befides,becauftic is a paſſion of the mind,

which dorhafflictir;and/being ſupportedjisrurned to therir. Theyalleadged

-many places pony alſo; of Solomon, that's man knoweth not wherhey

Bee bee worthic of hate or loue +: of Wiſedome , which eommandeth hot to beg

wichourfeare of the finne pardoned, of Saint Peter;to worke out-our ſaluation

With feare und trembling ; of Saint Paul, who (aid of himlclfe, thoughmy conſci-

ence accuſe mee not; yet -am I not thereby 1mſtified. Theſe reaſons and reſtirhe- The 5jivioa

nies-cogether withmany places of the Fathers, were broughrandatuplified, 74:, «mm

clpeci | ly by Seripandus, Vega, and Soto. Sh11'%;

-

' -1BatCatarinus, and Marinarus, had other places of the ſame Fathers, to the The opinlott
a . . . ; S of Cararimiut

contrary; which ſhewed they had {poken accidentally in this particular, as & aurmerzh

theoceaſions made moſtfor rheir purpoſe, ſometimes to comfort the ſcrni-

Ppulous, ſometimes to repreſfe&the audacious. Yet they kept them cloſeto the

authoritic of theSeripture. They ſaid that to as many as it is readin the Gol:

pel that CH R15sT hath forgigen finnes ; ro-all them hee ſays; Belreur that

your. finmes- are forgiven. And it would bee an abfurditic that On rrsv

ſhould giuean occaſion of temieritic and pride; or Af the contrary were profi-

table, or a merit}, that hee wonld depriiic all men' of it.” Thar the Scripture

bindeth vs to giue God thankes for our ialtifieation;which eahoorbe ginen

except wee know wee haue-obrained it; for to giuethem when wee are vii-

ccrtaine, wouldbec moſt foeliſh and-impertincrie/' That Saint Paul doeth

”
.

'plainely confirme the cerraintic, when hee puttcth'the Corinthians inmind -

to know that CHR15T iinthem, except they bee reprobates. *Atrd when Hee
= p

ſich

206

"mT

The Hiſtoric of » } Linizt

1546
CES
PavL 3:
CHARLES 5.

Hrnxy 8.
FRANCIS I.

ſaith, we haue recciued from God the Spirit ro know what is giuen vs by his
Diune Maicſtic; and more clcercly , that the boly Spirit doeth beare witneſſe to
our ſpirit; that wee are the ſonnes of God : and it is much co accuſe them of raſh»
neſle, whobelceue the-holy Ghott that ſpeaketh with them. For Saint Am-+
broſe {aith that the holy Gholt doeth neuer ſpeake vnto vs , bur doth make ys
know thariris he that [pzaketh. After this hee added the words of Cai st
in Saint John, that the world cannot recciuethe holy Ghoſt, becauſe ir ſeeth
him not, nor knoweth him, burthatthe Diſciples ſhall know him, becauſe he
ſhall dwcllin them. - Catarinus did fortific himſelfe ſtrongly, by ſaying , that
it was the opinion ofa man inadreame, to defend that grace is yoluntarily
recciued, when wee know not whether wee haue it or nor; as if, ro receiue
a thing willingly, it bee nor neceſſary thatthe willing receiucr ſhould know
itis giucn him, that he docth really recciue it, and that, afterir is recciued, he
docth poſlcſlc ir. |

The force of theſe reaſons made them firſtierirea little, who cenſured the
opinion of temeritic , and yeeld that there might bee a conieure, though
not an ordinary certaiuetic. Yer they acknowledged a certainne in the

Martyrs, in the newly __—_ , and in ſome by ſpeciall revelation; and

from coniccture they were brought to call ic moralli fairth+ and Vega, who,
in the beginning, admitted probabilicy onely, oucrcome by thele reafons,
and beginning to fauour the cercaintic, for feare of conforming himlcite
to the Lutheran opi -ion, ſayd, that there was ſo much certamtie as did ex-
cludeall doubt, and could not bedeceiucd, yer that it was not Chriltian faith,
but humane and experimencall. And as heethat is hote, is fure hee is{o,and
ſhould wanr ſcnleif hee, doubted, ſo hee that hath grace-in him, docth pers
ceiue it,and cannot doubt; yet itis by theſcnce of the minde, not by Divine
revelation. Burttheether defenders of certaintic , conſtrained by the ad-
uerfaries to ſpcake plainely , whether they thought a man might hauc it, or
whether hee were bound vnto it, or whether it were a Duwine or humane
faith,thcy came to ſay, that it being a faith giuen ro the Teſtimonic of the
holy Ghoſt, it could nor bee ſayd to bee in our liberty, cucry one being
bound to belecue Diuine reuclations, and that it muſt needes beecalled D-
uine faith. | ; ; mn |
And they being preſſed with the obicEtion,, that if that faichybee ner
equall ro the Catholike faith, ir docth not excludeall doubt, if it bee equal],
then the juſt ought as much to belceuc he is 1uſtified, as the Articles of taith,
( atarinus did an{were,thatthar faith was diuine, of cquallcentaintie, exclu-
ding all doubt,as well as the Catholike; but thar it was not the Cathslike it

Aſclfe. Hee afhrmed that the Faith which one giueth ro Diuine reuclations,

made vnto ones lelfe, in-particular, was diuine, and excluded all doubt, but
when 1t is receiued by the Church,then it is made Vniucrſall, that is, Catho-
like,and that this onely concerneth the Articles of faith; which notwithſtans
ding, in regard of gertainty andexcluſion of doubt, is not ſuperiour to pris
uarcefaich, bur exceederh ir onely in vaiuerſaliry. So allthe Prophers had firſt
private faith of che things reucaled ro them by God, of which, aftcr they
were receiued by che Church, they had aCatholike faith. This opinton ſecs
med hard at the firlt hearing, and the adherents of Catarinms, who wereall the
Ep Carmcliter,

Ph; DN

——_——— RE = eee, <A -

207 -

ts. on. the th. tht. hi... th dt. te, aA... > ”
a I = wad. th... At =
FS ?
=

— a

. Las, the Councell of Tren:.

Carmelites, becauſe. Toby Bacon, their Do@our, was of that opinion, and 1546
the Biſhops of Sinigaglia, Worceſter, and Salpi, did willingly goetofarre; bur PREY,
Fans 2 the reaton beeing weighed and diſcuſſed , it was {tratge how it Crianino' f
was receiued by a pfincipall part of the Prelates , Soro-crying-our that it Wis nmny 8. 7
roo much in fauour of the Lutherans, & others defending that-Luther ought LIND 4
nut to becenſured tf he had ſaid that,after iuſtification,that kind of faith doch Wn 3
follow, but becauſe he faich thar is the faith which iultiGeth. . *- ©: ©. 1 {
They anſwered the reaſons of theother part, that the Schoolemen ought
not to bee regarded, who ground themſclues vpoa Philoſophicall reafons;
| that one cannot iudge of diuine motions; that ©: authority of Salomon was
not to the purpole; for ſaying none knoweth whether hee bee worthy of
loc or hatred, applying it hecre, it would conclude, chat the molt wicked
ſinner,who perſcuereth, cannot know thar hee js in diſgrace with God: that
the ſaying of Wiſedome cannot bee applicd to this, and the tranſlation doeth
deceiue, becauſe the Greeke word «9 doth not {ignific linne pardoned,as
the tranſlation is, bur expiation or pardon, and the words of the wiſe man
arean admonition to the ſinner not to lay finne ypon f{inne by roo much
confidence of pardon to come, or palt : that ir was not fit to ground an Ar-
ticle of faithvponancrrorofan —— Thus did the ſame men, who
then had madethe vulgar edition authenticall, ſpcake of ir; which cucry one
mayal(o obſerue out of the bookes printed by them, who aſlilied at the de-
cree of the approbation. T hey ſaid;tharro worke with feare & erembling was
an Hebrew Neale, which fſignifieth notambiguitie, bur reucrence, becauſe
feare & trembling are vied by ſeruants to their maſters, euen when they are
commended by them, and know theyarc in fauour; thatthe placect S. Paul
did fauourthem, when he ſpake of iultification. For ſaying I am nor conlci-
ous of any want, yet thereby am I not juſtified, he would inferre, but I am iu-
ſtificd by ſomething elſe, and ſo would prooue the cercaintie. But the true
ſcnſcis, that Paul ſpeaketh ofdefedt in the office of preaching, and ſaith, my
conſciencedoth nor accule me of defe&t in any thing,yer | dare nor ſay I hauc
wholly ſatisfied, but I reſeruc all ro the iudgement of God.
Heethathad not ſeene the memorials of thoſe who had part in theſe dil:
F pag cy how farre different that was which they printed , would nor
clecue how much was ſpoken vpon this article, and with how much heare,
| not onely by the Diuincs, bur the Biſhops alſo, all ſeeming to vnderltand
; heruah , and to: haucit on their {ide : {o that Santa (roce ſaw there was
| more neede of a bridle, then ſpurres , who defired ro make an end of it by
intreating them to paſſe ro ſomething elſe, and to diuert the controuerl1s,
It was twice vropoladin congregati onof the Prelatesto leauethis queſtion,
as ambiguous, long, and troubleſome; yet they returnedto it, being drawen
by their affeftions. Aclaſt the Cardinall,ſhewing they had ſaid enough,and
that they ſhould conſider againe of the things ſpoken, to reſolue on chem
more maturely, obtained of them to ſpeake of preparatiue workes, and ob-
ſeruation of the Law: vpon which occaſion the marter of Free will was
broughtin by many,and notneglected by the Cardinall, & hepropoſed whe-
ther they would haue that particular alſo handled together with the reſt, be-
cauſcirdid ſocohere with the,that it could nor be handled ſcucrally.Therfare
SA Prelates

—_— _—d— "Ig —

+ le EY OT” O . w. as A »
a: OK. 08 16. 8 es 1 " OI, 4 -
4 On % -Þ-Y EP oy a” 2 *
_ -- 9s bo TE +
- ' E. -
wt -

Mt.

208

> - _—

* ... The Hillery of L 18.2,

1546

Pavi 3.
CHARLES, 5.
—— —
sxRY 8.--
FRANCIS 1,

cerning Fice
will.

The difcui6

of the articles,

Pol "os | A great

Prelares and Diuines, were deputed to colicet Ariicles ,:Qur of the workes of
the Lutherans,that they might beccpſured; "3.

;; } The Articles were, 1. Godisthe rorall cauſe of our workes,good and
cuil}; and the adultery.of Dauid , the cruelty of Manlins, and the treaſon of

Indas, are workes of God; as well as the yocation of San/. 2: No man

Artides con- Math; power to thinke-well or ill, but all commcth-from ablolure neceſſi-

tic, and in vs is no free will, and roathrme.1t; is a meere fiction, 3, Free
willyſince the ſinncof 4dam,is loſt, and a thing onely ticular , and when one
docth what is in his power, hee f1nneth mortally ; yea ,-it is a thing faincd
anda title withour realitic. 4. Free will isonely in doing ill, and hath no
power tordoe good.) 5. Free will mooued by God, doeth by no meanes

icooperate, and followeth as an inſtrument withour life, or as an vnrealo- |

nable' creature, 6. That God conuerteth thoſe onely whom hee will,
though they will not,and ſpurne againſt ir.
Vpon the ewo firlt Articles they rather ſpake in a tragicall manner, then

Theologicall, that the Lutheran doctrine was a frantique wiſedome, that

mans will as they makeit, is prodigious; that thoſe wordes, a thing of title
onely, a title without realitie, are monl(trous ; that the opinion is impious
and blaſphcmous againſt God ; thar the Church hath condemited ir againlt
the Manichees, Priſcillianiſts, and laſtly, againſt 4balardus, and Wighffe, and
that it was a follie, againſt common lence, cucry one proouing in himſelte
his owne libertie; thar it deſeructh not confuration, bur, as Ari/otle ſaith,
chaltiſemenr, or cxperimentall proofe. That Luthers Schollers percciued the
folly,and to moderate the ablurdirie, ſayd after , that man had liberrie in ex-
tcrnall, politicall, and cecumenicall actions, and in matters of ciuill iu-
ſtice, that which cucry one but a foole knoweth to proceede from coun-
{ell and cletion, but denied libertie in matters of diuine iuſtice onely. :

Marinarus ſayd , that as it is fooliſh to ſay, no humaneattion isin our
power, ſoit is no lefſe abſurd to lay that cuery one is, cuery one finding by
experience that hee hath not his affections 1n his power, that this is the
ſcnce of the Schooles, which ſay, that weearenot frec in the tirlt motions ;
which freedome becauſe the Sainrs have, it is certaine, that ſome freedome
is1nthem, which is notin vs. Catarimus, according to his owne opinion,
that without Gods {peciall aſti{tance, a man cannot doc a moral| good,
{aid thicre was no hberty in this, and thereforethar the fourth Article was
not ſo cafily ro bee condemned. Uega, after hee had ſpoken with ſuch am-

biguine, that hee vaderltood not himiclfe, concluded, that berweene the Di-
O , > % . Geng
_uines and the Proteſtants there was no difference of opinion. For theſe

concluding now thar there is liberty in Philoſophicall iuſtice, and not in
ſupernaturall, in extcrnall workes of the Law, nor in internall and ſpiritual,
itis to fay preciſcly with che Church, that one cannot doe ſpirituall workes,
belonging co religion, withour the aſſiſtance of God. Andthough hee ſaid
thatall indeuour was to be vicd for compoſition, yet hee was not gratefully
heard, it ſeeming in ſome ſort a preiudice, that any of the differences mighe
bee reconciled ; and they were wont to ſay, that this is a point of the Col-
loquies, a word abhorred, as if, by chat, the Laitic had yſurped that authority
which is proper ro Councels. | A

rt © Rd

_
%

R 2. -
%

—— Dp  -  — — -
_ —_y

- —_— -_ ——_

 TheCouncell of Trent, 289

 — -

——

Rd

\ Li B. Zs

A great diſpucation aroſe amongft them, whether itbeein manspowerto 1
belecucor nor belecue. "The Francilcansfollowing Scorus, did demiciit; fay- 42 |
ing; thatias knowledgedoth neceſſarily tollow demonltrations, ſo faith doth <uanzs $i
arile neceſſarily fram perſuaſions, and thatitis in the vnderſtanding, which iyrax 3:7
is a naturall agent, andis naturally mooued by the obiect. They alledgetd C2551 #
experience; that noman carr belecue whar hee will, bur whar ſeemeth trucz
adding that no man would feele any —— hee could beleeue hee had /

-
—_—_ 4

it not. ::T-be Dominicans ſaid, that nothing is mote in the power of the will
then to. belecue, aud, by the determinationand reſolution of the will onely;
ane may belecue thenumber of the ſtarresis euen.- ..-* D022

.. Vpon thethird Article, whether free-will bee loſtby ſinne,very many aus
thorities. of Saint Auſtine being alledged , which expreſlely fay. ir, Soto did
inucnt; becauſe hee knew.no other meanesro auoydrhiem, thartrueliberty is

þ equiuocall; for cither it is deriued from the Noune, Libertas, freedome, of
F. from the Verbe: Liberare, to ſet free : that in the farlt ſence it isoppoled to
| necelliry, inthe ſecond to ſeruitudey and that when Saint Auſtine fayd , that

free-will was loſt, hee-would inferre nothing elle, but that it is made flauero
finne and Satan. This difference could notbee ynderitood, becaule aſeruant
s is.nor free, for that hee cannot doe bisowne will, bur is compelled to follow
' his Maſtcts; and by this opinion Euthercould not bee blamed foriniitling a
booke,of ſeruile will. - Feioy hobo lob g0ty-mg
Many thought-the fourth Article abſurd; ſaying ; that liberty is vns
der{tood tobe apowet to both the contrarigs: therefore that it could not bee
ſaid tobee a liberty to cuill, it it were notalfo to good. Butthey were made
\; to acknowledgethcir error, when they weretold that che' Saints, and bleſſed
A Angels inheauen, are freero. doe good,andthereforcyhat it was no inconucs'
by nicncetharſomethould bee free onely ro doeeuill; |»: 23VE
-. Incxamining:thetifth ayd {axr Articles,of the conſent which free-will Oi
ucth radiuine inſpiration , or preuenting grace, theFranciſcavs and Domi.
x nicans were »f diucrs opinions. + The Franciſcanscontcnded' that the will
E beeing able to prepare it ſelfe, ithath liberry much morero accepror refuſe
\' the divine preucntion , when God ginerh aſſiſtance, before it yſeth the
x {trength.of nature.-:The Dominicans denied charttheworkes preceding the
4 yocation arc trucly preparatory, and cucr:gaue the firltplace to God. Not-
4 withſtanding there was a contention berweenethe Dominicans themleiues;
For Soto.defended,, 'that alchough a manicannor obtainegrace, withour che
ſpeciall preucnting:aſſiſtance/of:God, yer the- will may-cuer ſome way reſiſt
4 and refulc-ir, anq:when it doth'recciucit, it'is becauſcir giuethaſſenc, and
Y doth wjllſo : andif our afſentwere nor required , there would bee no cauſe
; why all ſhould nor be conuerted; 'For,-according t&rhe Apocalyps,'G oD
I ſtanderh alwayes ar the gateand knocketh': and itisa(ſaying oftheFathers, p
Fi now made common, that.Godigiucth grace to euery ane Th will haucir,
4 and the Scripture docth alwayes require this conſentin vs; and'tofay orher-
wile were to take away the [ibertis of the will , and co fay that God vſerh
violence.. : e183 ion arltic 5: IT "73 Of 3d : | 4
Friar Aloiſius ({ataneafaid ro the: contrary, that God workethitws forts of
preuentivg grace in the. minde, according-ro thedoQrine of Saint —_— |
$24 S 3 8rh

*+# *%

oe T. .
*:

XUM

210 _ - The Hiſlorieof © L 1s. 2,
1545 theoneſufficien;theother cticGuall; rothe firlt che will may conſentor re-
c ' fiſt; butnortothe ſccond,becaulc'irimplicth corradidtion thar cfhcacity can
AVE 3.4 | ;
Cuartes 5. bercliited. For proofc hcealledged places of Saint Tobn, Saint Fanl; and ve-
Har 8, - ry clecre cxpolitions of Saint, Auſtine... Hee anſwered, that it ariſeth hence
Fzaxcrs't# that all are not conucrted, becauſcall arc nor effetually preuented,”T hat the
— * feare of ouerthrowing free-will is Temooued by Saint Thomas, that things
areviolcntly mooucd by a contrary cauſc, but neucr by their owne : and God
being the cauſcof the will, to ſayit is mooued by God, is to ſay itismooued
by.it ſelfe.” And hee condemacd, yea mocked the Lutherans manner of
ſpeech, thatthe will followerh, asa dead or vnreaſonable creature; for bees
ing reaſonable by nature, mooucd by its ownecaule, which is God, it is
mooucd as reaſonable; and:followeth as reaſonable. And likewifethat God
conuerteth, though men will nor, and {purne at him. For it is acontradj&i-
on that thecf{c& ſhou}d ſpurne againlt the cauſe. That ir may happen fhar
God may cftcfually conuert one, that before hath ſpurned againſt ſufficient
preucntion ; burafterwardscannot, becaule a gentlenefe inthe will moucd,
mult ncedes follow the efficacie of the diuine motion, |
Soto ſaid, that cucry diuine —_ was onely ſufficient, and that thar
 whereunto free-will hath afſented,obtaincth cfticiency by thar conſent, with-
out which: it is vacfecuall, nor bythe defect of it ſelfe, bur of the man.
This opinion hee defended very fearctully, becauſe it was oppoſed, that the
diftinction of thereprobate from the elect, would proceede from man, con-
rrary to the perpetuall Catholique ſence ; that the veſſels of mercy are di-
ſtinguiſhed by grace, 'from the yeſlcls of wrath. Thar Gods cletion would
| befor workes foreſecncand not for his good pleaſure. Thar the doctrine of
the Fathers, and of the African and French Councels againſt the Pelagians,
| hathalwayes publiſhed, that God maketh vs to will, which is to ſay, that
hee maketh vs conſent. Therefore gining conſent tovs, it Us. 0 to bre at-
tributed to thediuine power; or elſc he thatis ſaucd would nomore be obli-
gcd to'Ged,then he thar is damned,if God ſhould vie themborh alike.
- Butenotwithſtanding all theſc reaſons, the contrary opinion had the ge-
nerall applauſe, though many confeſſed, thatthereaſons of Caranea were not
relolucd, and weredifplealed that Soto did norſpeake freely, bur faid thar the
will conſcatcrh in a cerraine maner, ſo that it may ina certaine maner reſltt :
as though rherc were a certaine manerof'meane berwcenethis affirmation
and negation. The free ſpeech of: Catanea, and the other Dominicans, did
trouble them alſo, who knew nothow:o diſtinguiſh that opinion, which
attributeth iuſtification to conſent, from the Pelagian: and therefore they
wiſhcd them to-take heede of leaping beyond the marke, by a too great de-
fire ro condemne Luther , that obicction beeing eltcemed aboue all, that,
by this meanes, the diuinecleRion or predeſtination, would bee for workes
foreſecne ; which no Diuine did admit. This drew theaxto ſpeake alſo of
Predeſtination. * |
Anicles con- Thercforeit was determined, by reaſon of the connexion, todraw Arti-
&iinmon, Cles,in this ſubicct;alſo from the doQtrine of the Proteſtants. Inthebookes of
+ marry Luther, jn the Auguſtan confellion, and in the Apolagres, and( olloquies, there
0,,:c242- was iTthing found thardelerucd cenſure ; bur much inthe writings of the
ab + 2 Zuinzlians

-
” J-_—_— >

Li: By Zo T he Councell of Trent.

-
——_—

———_—_—_—

— — - _ w_ _— — — — c——_— —_

Zuinglians; whencerheſcfollowing Articles were drawen. 1, For Prede« 546

ſtination and reprobation, that:man doth nothidg, bur all is inthe will of LV
G © D. 2. The Predeſtinated cannor be condemned, tior the Reprobate ſas Exiarus
uced. 3.' Thecle&and predeltinated onely are truly iultified; 4: The its jm n: *

Rificd ate bound by faith to belecuce theyare in the nutmber of the Predeſtt; Te2h*®? p

nated. 4. The idiltified cannor fall from grace. 6, Thoſerhat ate called, -

and arc not inthe number of che Predeſtnated, doe never recciue grace,
7. Thciultificd is bound tobeleeue, by faith, that hee ought to pericucre
in juſtice vntill theend. 8. The juſtified is bound to belecue for cerraine,
that incaſchefall from gracc, heſhallreeviucit againe.

*. DD

on of the At-

; In examining the firſt of theſe Articles, the _—_ wete diuets; 'The Thedifclf-

moſt citeemed Dinincs amonglit thera thought it to be Cacholique, and
the contrary herericallz becauſe the good Schoole Writers, Saint Thomas

S:otus, and the reſt; do fo thinks; that is, chatGo Þ, before the creation, out

of the maſſe of mankind, hath elected by his onely and mcere mercy, lome
forglory,for whom he hath preparcd, etfectually, the meanes to obtaine it z
which is called to predeſtinate, That their/number is certaineand detertni-
ned, ncither can s gs be any added, The others not predeſtinated cantiot
complaine, for that Go D hath prepared for them ſufficient aſſiſtance for
this, though indced gone bur the cle ſhall be ſaued. For the molt pritici-
pall reaſon, they alleadged, that Saint Paul rothe Romans, bauing made 7a:
coba paterne of the predeſtinated,and &ſau of the Reprobare, he producerh
the rea of G 0D, pronounced befoge rhey were borne, tiot for their
workes, but for his owne good pleaſure, To this they joyned the example
of the ſame Apoltle; that asche Porter oftheſame lumpe of clay; maketh

one veſſel] to honour, anotherro diſhonour; ſo GoD of the ſame maſſe 6f

mcn,chuſcthand leaueth whom he liſterh.Forproofe whereof $. Pdwl britig-
eth.the place, where G 0D ſaith ro Moſes yg] will fhew mercy on Þhom 1 will
ſhew mercy, and 1 will ſhe pity, on whom Iwillſbew pitie, And the ſame Apolile
concludeth, that it is not of him, that willeth, or of him that runneth, but of Qod
who ſheweth mercy: adding after, that God ſbeweth mercy on whom hee will, and

bardeneth whom be wil. They ſayd farther, thar for thiscauſe the coun(ell of -

the diuine predeſtination, and reprobarion is called, by the ſame Apoſtlez
the hejght and depth of wiſedome, voſcarchable, and incomprehenſible,
They added places of the other Epiſtles, where he ſaith ; Wee hawe nothing bus
what wee haue receiued from God, that wee are not able of onr ſclues, ſo much as to
thinke well, aud where, in giuing the cauſe why ſome haue teuolred from the
faith, and ſome ſtand firme, he ſaid, it was becauſe the foundation of God flats

deth ſure,and bachthis Seale ; the Lord knoweth who are bis. They added dis .

uers paſſages of rhe Golpel of Saint Tobn, and infinite authorities of Saint
pe > becauſerhat Saint wrote nothing in his old age,burin fauoar of this
octrine. to rok atom 7 TC Haw}
But ſomeorhers, chough of leſſe eſtecms, oppoſed-this opinion, calling
it hard, crucll, inhumahe, horrible, impious, ad che it ſhewedpartialitie in
Go D,if, without any motiue cauſe, he cletcd one; ard reietedanother; and
vniuſt, if hedamned men for hisowne will, and not fortheir faults,and had
created ſo greata multitude to-coridemaeit.. They layditdeſtroyed mn

-

— -

es , .
——— Py ___ ” - ICE Me.

L 18.2,

—

212 \ The Hiſlorie of

| 1 546 becauſcthecle&t cannot Gnally: doc-cuill, nor the reprobate good ; that it
Vary. >" calterh men-into a gulte of. delperation, doubting thatthey bee reprobarcs;
Cuantys, 5 thatitgiutth occaſion tothe wicked of badthoughts,|. nor caring for pe-

Hzxsx3,.-: DANCE, but thinking that if they bee elected, they thallnotperiſh, if repro=
gat] bates, iti in-yaine ro.doe well, becauſe it will nor; helpe them. They con«
" feſſed;thatnoronely workes are notgbe caulcof Gods cleRion, becauſethat
itis before them, & eccrnall, but thatneither works foreſeen'can moue Gob
to predeltinate, who is-willing, for his infinite mercicthat all ſhould bee {a-
ucd; and rothis end preparcthſufficient aſliſtance forall, which cucry man,
hawing free-will,recciueth or refuſeth,, as pleaſcth him :and Go p,in his c-
' rernitic, foxeſceth thoſe who will receiuc his helpe, and vicit ro good, and
_.. tholewho will refuſe; and reieQerh thele,cleterhrand predeſtinareth thole.
T hey added; thatotherwile there was no cauſe why. G o D in theScripture
| ſhould complaineof {anners, nor why hee ſhould cxhorr all to repentance
and conuer{1on, if they hauc not fufhicent meanesro getthem: thar the ſuf.
ficicntaſliſtance, inuented by the others,ts vn{ufficienc,becauſcinthcir opi-
nicn,it neuer had or ſhall haue any effect.

Thefirſt opinionasitis mylticall and hidden, kcepingrhe mind humble
and relying on GoD, without anycontidencein itfelte, knowing the de-
formitic of finne, and'theexccllencic of diuine grace, fo this ſecond was
playiibleand popular,cheriſhing humane preſumprion,and making a great
ſhew; and it pleaſed morethe preaching Fryars, thenthe vnderſtanding Dis
uines. And the Courtiers thought icprobable,as conſonant to politique rea«
ſons. It was maintained by the Biſhop of Bironto, andthe Biſhop of Salpi
ſhewed himlelfe very partiall. The defenders of this,yling humanercaſons,
preuailed againſt the others, bur comming-ro the teftimonics of the Scrip-
rures,they were manifcltly oucrcome, +

Catarinus holding theſame opinion to reſolue the places of Scripture,
which troubled themall, inucnted a middle way: that Go b of his good-
neſle, hathele&ted ſome few, whom he will ſaucabſolutely, for whom hee
hath prepared molt potent, cffefuall,and infallible meanes; the reſt he defi-
reth for his part they ſhould be faucd,and to thatend hath prouided ſuffici-
ent meanes- forall, leauing it to their choice to accept them, and bee ſaucd,
or refuſe them and be damned. Amongſtthele there areſome who receive

. them &arefaucd,though they be not of the number of the cle&; of which
kind there are very many.Others refuſing to'cooperate with God, who wiſh»
eth their {aluation,are damned. The cauſe why the firſt arc predeſtinared,
is oncly the will of G'o D; why theothers arc laucd,is the acceptation, good
vie, and cooperation with the dinine aſhiſtance,foreſeene by Go D; why the
laſt arereprobared,is the foreſceing of their peruerſe will, in refuting, or a-
buſiog it.  T hat Saint Joby, Saint Paul,and all theplaces of Scriptureallead-
ged by the other part, where all iggiuento GoD, and which doc-ſhew in-
fallibiltic, are vnderſtood onely-'of the firſt, who are particularly priuiled-
ged; andinorhers, for wbom' the common way is left, the admonirions,
exhorcations, and generall afſiſtances arc verified, ynto which bee that will
piuc carcand follow them;is{aued;and hethat wil nor, periſheth by his own

Aaulr.- Of choſe fewe who are priuiledged aboue the commen rg
FN... | .

—_ at.

- -n— — OOO 9

_
— 4% 4 * -_
—_——_—} nts, 4

L 16.2, the Countellof Trent,

the namber is dererminate,and certaine with God, but not of thoſe who are
laucd by the common Way depending on humane hberrie, but onely it re-
rd of the forcknowledge of the workesof cucry one, Catarmis [aid hee

wondred at the {tupidity of rnole, who lay the number is cerraineand deter- ii; 5,
mincd, and yet they adde that others may bee ſaued; which is- as much as rg F*2*<53 5

ſay that the number is certaine, and yetir may bec inlarged; and likewiſe of
thoſe who ſay, that the reprobates haue ſufficient alfitance for (aluationz
though itbe neceſſary for him thar is ſaucd ro-hauca grat er,which is to lay,
a ſufficient vnſufficienr, |
Hee added that Saint Aufins opinion was not heard of before his time,
and himſclfc confeſſerh, it cannot be found'in the works of any, who wrote
bcfore him,ncither did himſelfe alwayes thinke it trucbut aſcribed the caule
of Gods wil to merits,ſaying,God rakerh compaſſion on,& hardeneth whom
he lifterh. But that will of G 0 Þ cannot bee vniylt, becaule it 1s cauſcd
by molt ſecret merits; and char there is diverſitic of ſinners, fore, who
though they be jultificd, yer deferue juſtification. Bur after che heate of diſ-
puration againſt the Pelagians tranſported him rorhinke,and ſpeakethe con-
trary. Yet when his opinion was heard, all the Cathoiikes were {candalized,
as S, Proſþer wrote to him. And Genadius of Marſcilles 5 0.yecresatter, in his
judgement which he maketh of che famous writers,ſaid thar it happencd tg
him according tothe words of Salomon, thatin much ſpeaking one cannot
auoyd finne,andthar by bis fault, exaggerared by the enemiesthe queſtion
was not then riſen, which might afrerwards bring forch hereſic;whereby the
good Father did intimate hiaKaragh that which now appcareth,that is,thas,
by chat opinion, ſome Se&,anddiuiſion might ariſe, . | |
The ccnſure ofthe {cond Article was diuers, according tothe three fe-
lared opimions. Catarinw thought thefirſtpart true, inregard of the efficacie
ofthe Diuine will,coward thoſe whoare parcicularly fauourcd, but the (es
cond falſe, concerning the ſuffiencie of Gods afliftanceynro all, and tans
libertie in cooperating Others aſcribing the cauſeof Predeftinarion in all rg
humane conſent, condemned the whole Article,in both parts.But thoſe that
adhered ro S. AuStin,and che common opinion of che Theologues,did diſtin-
ouiſh it, and ſaidit waxgrue ina compounded lence, but damnable ia adiuj-
dcd : a.fubtiltie which confounded the mindes of the Prelares;and his owne,
though hee did exemplificir,by ſaying; hee that moouerh cannot {land itill,
itistrueinacompound ſence becauſe it is vnderſtood, while hee moucths
butin adiuided (enceit is falſe, that iris in another time. Yet is was not well
ynderſtood,becaule applying it to his purpoſe, it cannot bee ſaid, that a matt
predeſtinated can beedamned, iv a time when heis not predeſtinated, ſeeing
hee is alwayes ſo: and generally thediuided ſence hath no place whererhe ac
cident is inſeparable from theſubic. Therefore others thought to declare it
berter, ſaying that God gouerneth and mooueth cuery thing, according to
irs proper nature, which in contingent thiogs is free, and ſuch, as that the
Act may conlilt rogether with the power to the oppoſite; ſorhar with the
act of predeſtination, the power to reprobation and damnation doeth fatid.
But this was worſe vnder{tood then the firſt.

The other Articles were, cenſured wich admirable concord, Concet=
ning

wy

TO paey\ Oy REI TRY ow a -——O—_—
% o I +4". © wo -

—— "OY OO 1E-2o 7th fete 41 1 P
m__—_—_ agrees > 9: 27 eg «4

L k8n.2.

The Hiftory of

—_— — 4

bh —

I;45
+50

PavL. 3.

ning the third and fixr, they layd it hath alwayes beenc an opinion in the
Church,that many receive dwine grace, arid keepe it for a time, who after-

Crarces 5. Wardsdocloſcit, and in fine are damned. -There was alleadged the exams

Hrnxy 8.

FRANC1S 1.

ki

plc of Sanl, Solomon, & Indas,one of the wwelue; a caſe morecuident then all,
by the words of Cy 1 sT to the F a TH E R;Thaue kept m thy Name althat chou
haſt gwen mee, of which not one hath periſhed but the ſonne of perdition. To theſe
they added Nicholas,one of the ſeuen Deacons,and others firit commended
in the Scripturcs, and then blamed; and for a'conclufion of all, the fall of
Luther. Againſt the fixr they particularly conſidered, that vocation would
be an impious derifion, when thoſe that are called, and nothing'is wanting
on their {1de, arc not admitted : that the Sacraments would not bee effetu»
all for them, all which things are abſurd. Bur for cenſure of the firſt, the
authoritie of the Prophet was brought, dire&ly contrary in termes, where
God faith, thar, if the ir/t ſhall abandon iuflice , and commit iniquitie, 1 will not re-

ember bis good workes. T he examplc of Danid was added, who committed
murther and adultery; of Magdalene and Saint Perer,whodeniedCnRris T.
T hey derided the follies of the Zuinglians, for ſaying the iuſt cannot fall
from grace, and yetfinneth in every worke. "The two laſt were vniformely
condemned of timeritie, with exception of thoſe vito whom God hath gi-
uen a ſpeciall reuclarion, as to Moyſes and the Diſciples, to whom it was Ic-
vealed thatthey were written in the booke of heauen.

The cxamivation of the Diuines,concerning Free-will and Predeſtinati-
on, beeing ended , and the' Anathematiſmes in thoſe matters framed, the
were ioyned to thole of iuſtification, according to their fir phaces.. Where-
unto cppoſition was made by ſome in one part, by ſomein another, where
there appeared any word which might preiudicate their opinion. Bur Ia:
cobus ( occus, Arch: biſhop of Corfu, conſidered, thar, by the Theologues,the
Articles were cenſured, with many limitations and amplifications, which
ought to be inſertcd in the Anathematiſmes, that the propoſition might nor
abtolutely be condemned, which might recciue a good confiruQtion; and
the rather, becauſe it is humanirie,to make the moſt fauourable interprera-
tion,and charitic,not to thinke cuill. Diuers did conrradiR; firlt m regard
of the practiſe of the ancient Councels, which haue condemned hereticall
pppotmige without limitation, naked, as they have been deliuercd by the

erctikes; eſpecially becauſcir is ſufficient in matter of faith, for condemnin
an atticle,that it hath one falſe ſence which may cauſe the vnaduiſed to erre.
Both the opinions ſeemed reaſonable,.rhe firlt, becauſe it was fit to knowe
which ſence was condemned, the ſecond, becauſe it was not for the honour
of the Councel,to limit the propoſitions of heretikes. Hereunto was added,
that a:l!he Canons were thus compoled, reciting the opinion which was
to be condemned,and alleadging, for cauſe thereof the places of Scripture,
and doQtrine of the Church, vnto which it was oppoſite. The Canons
were made, according tothe forme of the Councell of Orange, liketo thoſe of
or1ginall finne,in the preceeding Sefſion. Bur the reading of them proouing
log and tedious, and the mixture of tructhand falſhood, of things reproo-
ued and approoved not very inte[ligible; the Biſhop of Sinigaghia put them
ficly in minde of aremedic for both inconuenicnces; that it was berterto
| ſeparate

a

- TheGouncellof Frent. 215

—_ oo 4-. _ _—_— —_ —— Co 4 + OE M4
= TE 0 I

hm ww —_— —— —
B * V
A 5 AL

{eparare the Cathojike dactrine from the contrary aud make two Decrees; 4546
inonc to make acontinuareddeclaration;and confirmation of the dodring GEENA
of the Church, ip the. other] ro condemne,; and: anathemarize the contrary, Gnangss.$
The aduiſe pleaſed all, and fo it was rdolucd; and. firlt the! avarhowratefmet tions ©.
ivcte framed aparss and therrpaines:taken tromake the other Decree, And FRaet%00 "
thisthepcalledthe Decree of the dorine;, and that the Canons; whith TR
ſile was after fallawed. in; tbe ſecond and third Conuocation: of the Kt the C++
Coundell: ring nf wk 2.5 8d: 5+7Behaibarainiciod 335 259 wn
_ Seutta(,76e ropke-ineredible painesro makethe Decrecs, auoydingyas  __
muchas was poſlible, to inſertany thing controucried among; the Schooles Hye tf
anen; and {o handling thoſe which could not beomicted, as that euety one axes ay
mighrbecontented; in cucry Congregation he obſerued whar: was; diſliked Ny
by any,and tooks:it away , or gotrectcdir;as hee wagaduileds and bee lpake peas |
-notonely in the Congregations, but with eycry ontiti particular, was intor- |
medof all the doubts,and required cheir opinions kedwerſified the marcer
with diuers orders,changed tomerimes.ong:part, ſometimes gnptfier, voull
hee had reduced them tothe order in which|they rigware 3 which generally
plealed and was approucd by all. Itis certaine,that i9:dererminethele things,
Congregations were held conſiſting partly of Theglaques, -partly of 11
Prelates; to the number of ong-hundred, and that, Ffom-zhe beginning of
September vari theendot Nquember, there ppſled not a day,in which the
Cardivall did not meddle with-that which: was,doat before, ahd charge
ſomething, The memorialloftheſe mutations remainerhi Whereof L will
rchearſerwo, as a taft ofmany , whichitwould bee: tedigdus 18 recount; In -
the firſt pointofdoctrine,itwasfarlt written, by. common confehs, that nej-
cher the Gentiles, þy.verrue of Nature, northe Iewes;by the lavy of Moſer
could free them(elues from {innegand beeauſe' many. did hold that circum»
ciſfiondid remie ſinnes,they ſuſpected tharthele worgs might prejudice theig | :
.opinion,though S,Paul hath , it —_— texmes, faid the fame;.in more then RY
oneplace, "The Cardinal, to ſatisfie rhele men, in,the.place where. it was
fayd (Per ipſam etiamlegem Moyſil) changed,avd laid (Periplan tian litteram
tegis Moyſj:)8 cuery ordinary Diuine might _ wdgehow wellthewword
literamdid betit that place. Inthe: begingingot the-cighr oinr,/thoſe thas
— manetained certainety of grace, were not-contented-1k (houldbe ſayde, A
mans finnes are not emitted by the certainetie of remillion, and becauſe ons
is confidentin it. And the Cardinall gauc! them ſatisfaQtion, by excluditig
the reallcertainety,and putting in the roome,boaſting,& contidencein that
ovely. And inthe concluſionof thac point, euery ene might plaincly cc, -
that the cauſc ought ro haue beene giuen, for that no' man can certaincly
know that he hathobrained grage. Burtofacisfie one parc, hee added, cer. -
rainety of faith; and the Dominicans, thinking this was nor enongh, vrged
him to adde Catholique. Bur beegaule theadherents of. Catarinus werenor
contenred,in ſtead of thoſe words,Catholiquefaith, iti was laid, Faith which
cannot be {ubie& rofalſhood. This contented borh ſides. For one parry»
anferred,then,that cenainty of faith which can be had/hercin, may bee falſe,
and chereforcis vncertaine, the other inferred,chat thisceriaincty could haue
no doubtof falſchood while it remaincd, bug by changing from the ſtate of
grace

-

- .

w_— _— A y—- " —_—_ —— —
wy ts Wear t0 ow 5 1] 5, i LB + os ' CET
>
= pv RN rr ID eds Fo n
a _

TITTIES TT 377 —._ Do... | = ja

The Fhiſlorie-sf * + + L 18.2;
1545 ofgricctouhe Starcobſinne, ir may breome talle;-as3ibvontingent: cruthes,
Lat byakeration ofcheir fubicts.atemade kilſe.: Burxhc 'Cachwlike faich is nor
Cuda4rs- Onely cefraine, but vnchangeable, becauſechetabiectotiit aiethings) necet-
Hmzrs.-:; fary,orpath which cannorbealtetods: +44 23 of bas ighotn in? þ ol
— >/Andtruly,concetning rheſepartieulars;itisporkit to robbe che Cardinall
=! efhisducpraile, whoktewhow-tofatitfietndn,:cuen obſtinare in qorirrary
-.:-- dpiniensAndihole chat would be becrerinformedehewvinwnay vnderftand;
ro princp [tet that, immediatly afcer the Scfſion, Friar Dow.inicus Soro, principall of the Do«

cans,a0d nr micyetingp WIOEC thr &@ bookes,and'did imitle-chera' jiof>Naru re andi Grace,
«rea V2, forcommencry-of this Doctrine; 4ndin bigexpolicions;hll bise pinionsare

Vcancianr,? Foun awhen this worke was publiſhed, Friar vintorn Vega, the mbit:citces

» comments ed of rheFranciſcans;ferfoortfifteche proat bookes For Commentaries
CR Vpon the hivteene poinsof rhar:derree, andwid-cxpoundir all: according ro

eacto2-- his. owncopittion. Theeewo opinionsdo noronly: differ, almott imaitthe
_ Hriiclesbutinmanyst chem, ar expreſly :coprrarys Both which: workes

were priffied iti theyecre s 548:a7t heethatfhall reade them, obferwing thor

they doe givevery ofcen;intetchimigeable ad doubtful fences ro the words

ofthe Couticell, wil ttarnaile hownheſerwo perions, thethnete for learning,

and eſttmaripr,who kad greaex part therein thenorbers;did norknow the

vnely ſence2and true{copect the Synoder of which-alfo;fome feworhers,

of: thoſe which were intereſted} Having wricter diuerilyal couldneuer tinde,

whether thanifitmibly did agroein-one ſericeorwhether there was wnitie of

0 nn Iwordsonely.*Bur to retutneroch&Cardindll; when theDectce-yyas a ppro-

and wproucd med by allan Trent;hoftnht it ro the Pope;andchePope pave itro'theFryars,

© andicarnedthenof Rimeto Inns,
$ecan{carty enctmight vaderſtanditinhis ownetence. .- |

-/Þ haneireficarded nkogether what was one'in marter of faith; that T

Reformmion Yai by not digjdethings thatare eommexed:Butin the metine timeſome dayes

hm wet fmrabour the reformition;and # thoſe congregarions'itwas pro-

fſedrofet Yownerhe: qualities; requiſite in-the protrouon! of cheigrearer

Peclats, Hd Miniſters of rhe Chureh- And very graueſayings wers dcliuc-

ted withgreat S{kentaionburtherewas no way found How tholethings,

whereofehey ſppke mightbe oþſcried. Forwwhere the Kingshduethe pre-
fentati6n;they fav Botwirh vwhar bonds to He them i/ Where eletion: hath

Plice;the thaprer doth eonfiltof grear ah@raighty perſons for thereſidue,

The point All digniticxare confetted by the Pope,and more then two thirds of the be-

the quires HEACeSArereſertiedtorhe Apoftchke Sea;Vato which itisnotfitwpreſcribe
oi we Bet; av, Whetcupon, ter many arid long'diſeourfes, it wasconcluided,that ic

was better t6 leaue the buſineſſe,” * © -* 0) HIRED HUED If; 3, 0

Thevzine of -* The difconrſes ih point ofreſidency, * wete neither fewer nor ſhorter;
hls, =Wwhicl-ended hot in therefolvtion which was neceſſary; &defſiredbymany,
ind made ſ6we confiiliconthen;%dnd prepared marcer for otbertimes. For

the viderftandinZWhereof,it#neceffary rorclume thibmatrertidtathe be-
ginning.” Jo7 29001 07 210 0-073 1. | | & | 30" Fine"
TheEcdleſiaftiaſl* Degrees were nor originally inſtirured asdignities,

A cicoure of preheninencics, rewards, or honours,as now they are, and hauebeene,many

cenccnins hundred yceres, bittas minilterics, and charges, otherwile called by Saine
| "Pant,

CST D013 35:

_ and other Curates, though they mightexcrciſerhe charge by lubſtirutes, yer

—_—

W B. 2. the Councell of T1 Tony 60 217

Pat,works,and thole that exerciſethem,arecalled by Car 1isTour Lokpd 1 546
jathe Goſpel, Worke-men ; and rherefore no mancould then enter into co- FIAN
oitationro abſcar himfelfe from rhe execution thercof in his owne perſon: Cunt s;
and if any one ( which {cldome happened ) retired from the worke , it was iu; #
not chought reaſonable , he (ſhould hauc either titleor profit. Andthough ys i;
the miniiteries were of two ſorts , ſome anciently called , as now they are, :
with chreofſoules : others of temporal things,for the ſuſtenance and ſeruice
of rhe poore and {tcke, as were the Deaconries, and other inferiour workes,
all held chemſclues equally bound to thar ſeruice, in perſo;neitherdid any
thinke'of a ſubſtitute, burfor a ſhort time, and forgreatimpedimears, —_
[:fſe torake another charge, which might hinder that. The Church being in-
creaſed, where there were many Chriſtians,and free from perſecutions , ano-
ther {ort of Miniſters was inſtiruted, to feruc in the Ecclef1alticallaſſemblies,
alwcll in reading the diuine Scriptures, as in other functions, to ſtirre vp de-
uotion. There were inlticuted alſo Colledges of Miniſters, which mighc
in common apply themſclues to ſome charge, andothers as Seminaries, from:
whence to take Miniſters inſtracted already. Theſe of the Colledges, nor
hauing any pcrionall charge,ſecing the Congregation did adminiſter,as well
with one more, as with one leſſe, ſometimes , by reaſon of ſtudic, orgreater
inltruction; or for ſome other cauſe, were abſcat from the Church , one for
a ſhortrime, another for along , without hauing ritle,charge,or profit. So
Saint Terom , a Prielt of Antioch, but without any particular Cure, and Ruff
nt, in the ſame manner, of Aquileia , and Saint Panlmus, ordained Pricit of
Barcellona, did ref1de but little. But when the number of them increaſed,
they did degenerate,and were called vagabond Clerkes, becauſe that manner:
of liuing madechem odious, who are often | poken of inthe Lawes and no»
uell conltirurions of Tu/tinian. Bur neuer any thoughtto holde rhe tice of
an office,or inioy the protir, without doing ſeruice , buconely,after the yeere
ſenen hundred,in che Welt Church, when the Eeclefraſtical miniſteries were
changed,and male dignities, and honours , and rewards for feruices done,
And as before a perſon was choſen fit for the neceſfitie ofthe Church, fo
afterward adegree , dignitie, or emolument was fitted to the qualitic of the
erſon ; from whence aroſe the exerciſing of the miniſtery by a ſubſtitute.
"This abuſe hath drawen in another by conſequence; that is, to thinke ones
ſelfe dilobliged;not onely ro miniſter, but ro bee preſent, and aſliſt him rhar
laboureth in his place. And indeed where the induſtry of the perſon is nor
cholen forthe worke,buta place and degree is prouided for theperlon, there
is no reaſon hee ſhould bee bound to labour for himſelfe, or affiſt him that
docth.. The diſorder proceeded lo. farre, that ir would haue ouerthrowen
the Clergic, ifthe Popes had not in part reſiſted , commanding char Prelares

fhould betied toaffiltance in the place, which they called refidence. Where-
unto alſo they bound the Canons, wichour conſtraining other beneficed
Clerkes vto it, not ſo much as ſpeaking of them, bur leauing them to the
cuſtome, orrather abuſe brought in: by which filenceircame to paſſe, thar
they thought themſelues obliged.. Neither did this voluntarie deceipr

diſpleaſe the Pope , who ſaw very well that it wouldend inthe grearneſſe -
| T the

>, wo”

The Hiſtorieof OE 4

1546 the Court. And hence aroſe the pernicious, and neuer ſufficiently detelted
; >>*- diltin@tion, of Benefices of refidence, and nor reſidence; which followed as
Craxiss 5. well in deedas in dodtrinc, without any blufh of abſurditie , which it did
Hazy 3, Cuidently bring with it : that is,to giue a titlcand falaric without Obligation. -
1mtga7 And topalliatc it, orrather ro make it more ſhamefull, whereas the Canonilts
hauc a maxime conuincing this ablurditic, thatis, that cucry Bencfice is gi-
ucn foran office, they hauc expounded it, vnderſtanding by officechehoures
or prayecrsof the Breuiarie : ſo that a reuenue of a thouſand or tenne thou-
ſand, or more crownes is giuen for this onely , to take a Breuiaric in hand,
and read asfaſt as one can, ina low voicc,not marking any thing bur to pro-
nouncethe words. Butthe diſtinction of the Doctours, and the prouiſion
of the Popes augmented the abuſe in the ſhort time: For withour thoſe
ſomcof «2 bencficed men might perhaps haue made conſcienceofit, bur
with them, they thinke theabulc is uſtified, as a thing lawfull. And forthe
Curates, the Popes diſpenſation was neuer denyed to any, that ſought ir by
that way by which euecry thing is obtained at Rome. So thar the poorc
oncly docrefide, and thoſe that gaine by it: and theabuſe, firſt a little re-
medied by the Popes lawes did, by the diſpenſations, ner onely Jeape to the
height, bur ſpread it ſelfe abroad, and infefted the carth. After the itirres of
Germanie for Religion , which gauc occaſion to ſpeake of and defire refor-
mation, cuery oneaſcribing the miſchicfe ro the negligence, and ſmall carc of
WF the Prelates, deſiring to ſee them at the goucrnement of their Churches,de-
teſting the diſpenlations , which cauſcd them to be abſent, diſcourſes were
made of their Obligation; and ſome Pious men, amongſt whom was Friar
Thomas Caietan, Cardinall, afhrmed that the Obligation of reſidence was by
the Law of Gop.. Andir happened,as it doeth, in all things, that the pre-
ceding pallion perſwaded the more rigid opinion, and more ſtrict Obliga-
tion, and made the diſobligation more hard. This cauſed them to adde vn-
to it, the vigor of the Law of Go D. The Prelates, ſecing the milchicfe,
and deſiring it ſhould beexcuſeable, and a ſmall fault, would ncedes belccue,
rex contre. Fat they were not bound by Go Þ, but by the Ss whole diſpepſation, or
- w—__— pg filence, did ſaucthem. With thele preuious diſpoſitions of do@rine,the mat-
bourrelidence Fer Was propoledin theCouncell, asbath beene ſaid : which becauſc it pro-
duceda [mall controucrſic inthe beginning , a greater inthe progreſle, and
in the end (which was in the yeeres 1562. and 1563.) greateſt of all, it will
notbeynſcaſonable tro make ſomerecapitulation, and to recount ſome parti-
' cularoccurrences. -
Therefore though the Articles firſt propoſed , were but to addegreater
A controuct bonds,and puniſhments, tothe precepts, to remooue the impediments , and
redidence be facilitate the execution, and all agrecd, alleadging perſwaſions out of the
 ZwreDr oldandnew Teſtament, Canons of the Councels, dodtrine of the Fathers,
 - and out of the inconucnicnces which ſprang from the non-reſidencic , yet
the maior part of the Diuines, eſpecially the Dominicans, did determinethat.
the obligation was by the Law of God. Friar Bartholomew (aranzs, and
Friar DominicusSoro, Spaniards, werethe molt principall authors. The molt
grounded reaſons they brought were , -that Biſhoprickes arc founded b
CHR 1 $ T,asminiſteries and workcs,and ſorcquire a rerſonallaQion,which

aman

Cel nes: IT hem— —_— POSING " *
Ce eee WeroamebWiny 42 OM

—_— o
_—_

v 0 prog” p wor _ Y + if ——__. uf la
- ”_-) hep £ l bi 5 M6. - - hy W :
P py R R oe eatck cog Wes + ta Rt k
l I edema .
ret ay a i _ 6 IT
a —_ R —_

. F.. "4it-
iv :
4 G _
$
:
-

EY nh F
Ave < - L

\ og FLIES Pe EF & 4 D I

A <* vl e .
WO At wt :
” a 426 LIES
S73I
.

kde.
os OOPS OOO OO - Ss + on

La 8.2. 1 the ouncellof

.
— ” - had
SS. mo—_ _—_ — - - _ _—_— >
a

Trevs 219

a
mn.

a-manabſcntcannor performe, that\C tk rs T, deleribingthe'qualitic of a... 1546
| good ſhephcard , ſaithy;xhat heegiucrh his like for the flocke, knoweth the SV
ſhcepeby-rherrnames;and walketh before: theta... The,Canooilts; and Ita- Cuanins 5.
| lian Prelates did diſpute), that the obligation; was by zhe Becleligſticall lay, Hine i.
| | allcadging that anciently :ncucr any notrreſfident Was: roprehended as ay,
cranſpreſlotir of the Lawof God, bus of theaiCanons onely..Thas Tamochse, . |
chough Biſhop of Epheſws, was longin his iolurney,by orderotS.Panl. That
1, was faydio'Saint Peter, Feede the L amber; which is ea yl and ;
yet hee cannot bee cucry where: preſent :- ſo theBiſhop-may fulfill che; come.
mmandement, of feeding, without refadenice,! They anſwered the contrary.
reaſons, that the conditions of a Paſtor, propoſed by Cz x14.6 T,docagreero
none butCrRr1sT himſelfe. 7 als m1 3805 dreamt mar +
Friar Ambrofius (,atarinus , though a Dominican, was contrary-to. the .
reſt. He fayd,the Biſhopricke inſtitured by Cx x 18 T is one oncly.; which
che Pope bath : the inſticution of the others is by the Pope; who, as hee,
dwideth rhe quantity and number of the ſheepe to bee fed), ſo hee preſcri-.
berh alſo the manner and qualitie. Therefore it belongerh to the Pope, to-
appoint cuery Biſhop,toartcnd the flocke, by himſelfe, or his ſubſticute; and,
. may allot ynto him cither much or little, anddepriue him alſo ofthe power
of feeding. Fhomas ( ampeg gius,Bilhop of Felere,anſvered another way,thar.
the Biſhop ,as Saint Jerom relſtificth, is the inſticution of CyzIsT, burthe,
dinifion of Biſhoprickes was afterinſtiruted by the Church: that Currsr:
gauc the charge of feeding ro all the diſciples, bur tied them not. toa place,
as the ations of the Apoltles , and of their Diſciples dor ſhew ; the aſlig-
ning of this portion of the flocke to one, and thatto another , wasan.Ec-
cleſfaſtical inſtirurion, to gouerne better. 0 bs
Thee things were handled by the Biſhops with much paſhon. The "AY
Spaniards did not onely adhere to, but cheri
iurediuino, hauing a lecret , which they communicated oncly amongſt them. *"*
ſelues, to make great the Epiſcopall authority. For if it were once deci-
dedthat they had the charge from Ca x1 sT to gouerne their Church , ir
would bce decided allo, that they hauc from him authoricy neceſlaric
for it, which the Pope could not reltraine, Theſe defignes were {melled
out, by thoſe that [cancd to the Court, therefore in regard of theimportance
of the matter, they alſo incouraged the maintainers of the contrary opini-
on. The Legats thought it bertet to withſtand the anger, bydiſſembling
their knowledge of it : ang, aiming at this marke, ſaid for thepreſent, thar
the matter was hard, and had necd of greater examination ; that where the
controucrhte is betweenethe Catholikes , they ought not ro condemne one
part, for feare of making a {chilme, and ſowing contentions, that they may
ioyntly indcauour to confute the Lutherans. Therefore, that it were berter
ro deferre the declaration, by what right it is due, vntil another Seſſion. Some
rhought it ſufficient to renew the old Canons and Decrerals in this marter,
and fayd, they were ſeucre enough , becauſe they inflicted deprivation fora
uniſhment, and reaſonable cnough, becauſe they admitted lawfull excuſes,
hercremained to find a way chat diſpenſations mighe not be granted, and
that was ſufficient. Others thought ir neceſlaryroadde new puniſhments,
T 5 and

Lt. ee. HE

of : Spanich
the opinion , that it was de fecrer in this

— ——

2.98 | The EMforieppsd L.rs 2.!

— — — qpm—_—— _ 7 IRPY

© -  - ———

, [5
41Y

| S—

S Ti wulrich wasoft rhe: | elt importance, bas

154d" akidyceiigerinagpidimes 7 which wa | |
A atoltteobdalatoarve wyelidencie would follow; and that'irwas no?
En Aol ot> wltwet obſittitiow came;-ſo'ir were cxecured;2and: char! |
6:2 oY

Hex _

Fu MJkgss

Uodeelk ilirity would be better diſeuſſed- Tr pleaſed the maior!
parti aridwtheotherfhouldbe done: wwhercunto the) Legares.
oefewalcar;! #00 0470 DEPT difpenſationsfhould nor bo&fpoken

254} Mtotmatolioyagribedefired;charthe impedimencsThould bee!
l ef ethane y exertipiony herein chore was as mach ſpoken,
arf8vvirNitod! oft, thoſeyvhichyheldeucry exemprion for

aKBHſe2 2d thef®Whortiought rhem/neceflary in che Church,'and repro-
ed onightheartalRey 2 (2 bio, 1c 1oNg&9 « 16 2gori! Bok

 Adiſcourſeof S, Jerom witneſſcth, that in the firſt beginnivgs of Chriſtianity, the Chur-

the Authour
concermns
EXEMmptions,

ches wirf8buernedbyd'kindeet Ariſtocracy , by the commoncounſel] of
cthePrecbytery ? but ro withſtand the diuiſfions which! were brought in,
ch&inbriafehically terngment: was infticurcd,  giuing all the Juperintens;
dine} the Bilhoþ 7whomall the orders of the Church did obey , nci-
thts dfÞdgconc thinkers withdraw himſclfe from vader the authority. The:
rhl56u% Biſhops 1avhole Churches , becauſe they were vnder:onc Pro-
vihe@badtommerty did gouerne chemſelues alſo.1n common by Synods;
aiidto Hike the'oodtrnement'more caſie, attributing much to the Biſhop
of tie Principatt Thy prhey made him as it were Head of that body : and
by a mbretiple ebttiniunion, which all the Prouinces of one perfeEture or
great g8trertjement/held rogerher , che Biſhop of the City where the Ruler
did tefide ; wineda2 eertaine fuperiority, by cultome. Theſe prefectures
vere; thefinfenall Ciry of Rome, with the Cities adioyning z the prefecture
of Al-xandria, which gouerned Feypt, Lioya, and Pentafolis: of Anrich, for

{ Syria,arddther Prbifirices of the Eat: and inthe otherleſler prefectures,cal-
1 Red mn Creeks; mis. thelame was oblcrued. This gouernement, brought in,
and approdvcdby euttorne onely , which found it commodious, was cſta-

bliſhedbytheft!t Councell of Nice vader Conſtantine, and ordained by a Ca-
rion that ithould continue: and euyery one was1o farre from putting him-
ſelfe out 6f this order that the Bithop of Ieruſalem hauing many honourable
pfeliciniihentes', perhaps becauſe ir was the place where our Sauiour
Chrilt-converſed in'the fleſh ,- and was the fountaine of Religion , the
Councell&f Nicedidordaine that thoſe honours ſhould ſtil] remaine. but ſo
that nothitig was derrafted from the Metropolitan, then Biſhop of Ce/area:
This g0ternemerit;vhich hath bin cur held in all the Churches of the Eaſt;
was alteredin the Latine, becauſe many great Monaſteries being built, go-
verned by Abbatesofigrear fame and worth , who by their conſpicuous vir-
tites,madethe Biſhops afraid, there aroſe fome emulation betweene theſe and
thoſe: and the Abbates, ro free themſclues from theſe inconueniences, whe
ther reall;; or fained , and ro couer theirambition, to withdraw themſclues
from the ſubie&tion which they owed , dig obtainc of Popes to bee receiued
vader theproteRtion of Saint Peter, and immediately vnder the ſubicion
of the Pope. This being profitable for the Court of Rome , becauſe hethar
obtainerh priuiledges ; is bound ro maintaine the authority of him thar

granteth them , ſuddenly allthe Monaſteries were exempted. The Chap-

tcrs

tt A. wed

Lin. ©  theCouncellof Trem. 221
tersalſoof Cathedfall Chutches T conſiſting for che moſt patrof Regulars, ex $46 |

byche lame prorences; didabraine exemption.” Finally , the Chatiacenſian fame 1)
2ad Ciiterſtan-Congregations were all wm ay 714" inlarpe- Cimzs 5
tnetw-ofche Popes aurboriry., which:camero haue ſubieQs in all'places; 42 Huar 2.”
_ fended: and; protected by:the Papacic;\and interchangeably defenders and C02 /;

ptorefors. 1 The inucatiatrwas.norcommended by Saint Bawnard, who li- |
ued in tharrime; and was of the Ciſterfiam Congregation: yea;hee admibtii-
fheidPapeExgmizs'z.toconliderthercof,, that allwete: buſes/;"thar ir ouplic
notes he well rakeniftan Abbardidrefuſer coobeyrheBilbop,and the Biſhop
the;Metropolizadc.:thar the inilicanrcChurch fhoaldtakeexamiple by the tri-

plan, wherend Angel cucy daidgt willnotbe ynder the Archangel. Bur

Bernard would hauc ſaid morc;jif heehadfined inthe times following, when
the Mendicant Orders , 0btaincd, not onely a geherall exemprionn;, from the
Epiſcopall authority, bur pon alſo co build Chutches , in atiy place 'what- _
ſocucr,andto admiziſtcr che Sacraments ig'themi -Butin theſelaſt ages the
' abuſc yychron (o farre,that cucry petty Prieſt did obtaine;withaſmal charge,
ancxamption from the ſuperioriry of his Biſhop, not onely in'cauſes of cor-
re&ion; butallo co be ordainedby whomrhe liftcth, and in ſumme; nor to ac-
knowledge the Biſhop ar all;-+* 1 ofvibOn 4 297 FT
- , , Thivbceing the [tate of thecauſe;; and the Biſhops requiring” remedie;,
ſomethat weremore vehement , returned to the things ſpoken iti the Con-
gregations, that.were beforerhe other Seſſion, againſt the exeraprioh ofFric
ars.; Bur che wiſcr. ſort thinking it impoſſible to obtaineany'thing ;ſolong
as the number and grearneſſe of the Regular Orders continued, and fauour
of the Court; chey were contented ro remooue onely the exemprions of the
Chapters,-and particular perſons, and demande 4 reuocation of them all.
Bur the Legares, treating with them in particular, and putting then in mind
that all the reformarion could not bee made by that Seſſion, thar'it was fir ro
begin, and leaue ſomething for future times, madethem reſt contented, thar
the exemption of particular Priefts, Friars, not inhabiting inthe CloyRters, 4 ſmil refor-
and of Chapters, only in criminall cauſes, ſhould be remiooued (from whence mare: of e-
the greater diſorders doe arile, ) as allo faculties togiue Clericall Orders to yuh. © *
him char refiderh norin his owne diocefſe : promiſing to prouide againſt
the other abuſes inanother Seffion. | '--- CLTTRINSSL =:

Whilc theſe things were handled in Trent , the Pope hauing receiued ad- Cad Form
uicc fromthe Cardinall Farneſe; conſidering with how ſimallreputation an gue mitts
 ApoltoliqueLegare did retnainein Ratioboy , when his ſouldiers werein the Fayeons®
field, he recalied him: and;wichhim;a greatnumber of Italian Gentlemen,
which wercof the/Popes troupes; did deparr. In the'rniddeſt of Otober,
the twoarmics were fo.riecre;atSancbem, that there was bur 4 little riucr be- ie |
twcene them. And ſtanding'fo 3 ORauus Far neſe . fenr by the Empetour «ns
with the Italians;andſoimneDutchmen;tooke Danenert in the' fighr of thi 1235ber,and
cncmic, whohauing donenorting while he was in Sweuia but hindered the 13ken by 0-/
Emperour , was conſtrained in:Noucmber to abandon the Counttey, by -4#. ©
rcalonofagreattiuerſion,,made by hs Bobemians , and othersof the Impe- ,,,, -.....
riall faction, again{tSaxonie and Haſie, places belonging ro the two Prote- 57 1« is,
ſtants Heads ; - whorevire$todefend their owne Countreys, lexying High icrerion.

- Germanie./

222 1 TheHiftoricof \: L-ts. 2.

-1546  Germanie.; at,the Emperours diſcretion; and this was the cauſe why many
| PIN -Princcs and Cities combined,,-did incline ro compoſition with him, hauing

£443 5- honeſt caugighro hold;rheirreligion. Bur he would nor make mention ther- |
lcxzx 8. Of in writihg, lclt the warre ſhould {ceme to bee made for that cauſe; -which |

(I < :would.offend thoſe rbat followed:-him., make others morevnwilling xo ren-
: _dereherlelyes, and giue ſufpicion:to the Ecclclialtiques of Germanie.,”who
.hepcd.coferibe RomaneRares) reftored inceucry place. i Yer hisMmiſters
-promiled hepa all, thatthey ſhould not beemoleſted in the exerciſeptreligi-
0n;cxcuſipg their Maſtery if, for many relpedts, he could nor ſatisfie them,to
make a capitulation/thetcof: and-hee (ocaried himſelfe;, rhar his reſoturioa
appeared ig gjue them/content,byiconniucncic.> By theſe dedicioustheEm-
perour gaindd mucharzilery , drew niuch money from the Cities yrothic va-
lyc of matty-bundied thouſrnds, and, which was of greatcft importance, was

or 1C

_

| | abſolute. Lozdot all High Germanie. G4 290 -7IIC Jil
ne popes .,*; This happineſſe made the Popcicalous, and chinke rorprouide far him-

vey lclfe before all Germany:were ſubdued. His ſouldiers vnderthe conduR of bis
forces. = grapc-child Ofawivs , were much diminiſhed innumber; by reaſon of thoſe
who parted with the Cardinall Farneſe,and of others who did runne away by

whole rankes, for the incommoditics they ſuffered. Therelidue, in the mid-

delt of December, the Emyperours Armic being lodged neere the Village of

Setben, departed;by order frum the Pope, from whom Oftauius had comman-

dement to returne into-Jtaly,and to tell his Yncle,that rhe ſixe moneths bee-

ing ended, the Popecquld no longer beare fo great a charge: that the time

of the obligation was cnded,and thar cfleted for which the league was made,

Whereof the that 18, Germany brought into obedience. The Emperour complayned, that
complanzth. he was abandoned when he had moſt necd of helpe. For nothing wasdonc,
fo long as th: Heads were nor oppreſſed , who could not bcefaid ro beſub-

ducd, but. retired onely , re defend their owne Territories; and being deliuc-

:  redfrom feare, it was to beedoubted they would returne with greater forces,
Batre and b:rter order then before. Bur the Pope iuſtified his nor continuing inthe
=o. {caguc,andthe departurcof his men,by ſaying,that hee was not made paria-
kerofthe compoſition with the Cities and Princes, which could notbecſta-
bliſhcd without him and. eſpecially, becauſe it was made with much preiu-
dice of the Catholique faith, rolerating herefie, which might hauc beenroo-
redout. Thataccording to capitulation , hee had not been partaker of the
profirs of the warre, nor of the money the Gountreys paid which did com-
ound ; that the Emperour complained, when himlſelfe was offended and
diſeltcemed, enen with dammage of religion. --Nor content with this, hee
forbade the Emperour to receivemoney of the Churches of Spaine, longer
then cheſ1xemonceths : and though the Emperours Miniſters made many c-
fcEtuall treaties with him, ſhewing that the cauſe continuing, for which they
weregranted, it required that the grant alſo ſhonldcontinue, and thar all

The Fzejchs : | EB

_—_— would bein vaine, and without fruit , if the watre were not ended, yer they

r3 : . > . . 4
the D9r/1m Could notremooue him from his reſolution. bo 1 1 2 |

Ges In Genuagthe family of the Fieſchi,making adangerouseonſpiracy(which

which the

Pope bl= had almoſt taken cffct ) againlt that ofthe Dory, whicktfallowed the Empe-

med by the » : 4
Emperour- Fors 1idegthe Emperor was aſlured that chePopesſon;, the Dukeiaf Piacenzs
| was

 NORAIESE wer gt guhtt '

XUM

WT

- E -

I "IT AY a ae. 34 Wea. x tl on _ —_

6 — ES; "= = _
L1s. 2. the'Councellof Trent. 223

© oo_—OnG—

was author ofic, and belceucd char ir camefrom the Pope,and refrained rior _ 547
to adde this complainrto rheothers. The-Pope belceued' the' Emperour >
would be buſicd in G-rmaniz a long time, and norbeableto offend him with Cuinits 5;
remporall forces:but fcarcd he mightrrouble him by thiaking the Proteſtabits nur +.”
gocto the Councell. Tolcparare the Councell ſeemed tooyiolentand fearis WT ©:
dalous a remedy ,;clpecially hauing continued ſeucn' monethsin a rreatie, |
whereof nothing was publiſhed. | He was of opinion to'publiſh the things

already digelted,fecing charby thardeclaration;cither the Proteſtanes'would Thc Popes

refuſe togoe thither ,.or, if they went; would be' conftrained'toacteptit; concern

whercin the principall point of all the concrouerſies conſiſting , theyictory teproceed-
would bes owne. And ifthere-were no-other reaſoh'to doe ir;''rhis'wa3 cell.
ſufficient ro proouc it was good for hit, becauſe theEmperour would not
haue any controuerſies decided; For thecounſels of thoſe thathaie contra
ry cads, ought ro becontrary..: Hee faw weli;that the Emperour would not
rake it foran affronr.. Bur the diltaltes berweene them were already 6 great,
that licclecould beadded to them zand thePope; whew hee was prefled with
reaſons, which did-pet{wadeand diſlwade, was wont to vie the Florentine
laying , A thing donehath-an head; and'fo ro execute that which' was nc:
ccflary.. Therefore he wrotero the Legares in-Chiriſtmas, thar they ſhould
hold a Seſſion , andpublith rhe decrees already framed: This commande-
ment beingreccined , they called a Congregation therhird of Tanuary , "in |, $47
which having determined, by the vniforme conſent of all, toiniirate a Sele.
ſton forthe thirteenth, in regard it was tediousto all, ro remaine there ſo
long,and rcfolucof nothing ; the Legates did propoſethe publication of the
Decrees framed. For thole of faith , the Emperours Prelares oppoſed; and
faid , that there was no opportuairy as yer, andthatit ſufficed to publilhthe
reformation. Bur the Papalins vrged the contrary zalledgirig it was knowen
to all the world, that che point of grace and iuftitication had beendiſcuſſed
ſeuen moneths together, and thar the-Decree was eſtabliſhed ; and thar it
would bea derogationtorthe faith,if the Councell ſhould ſeeme ro feare the
publiſhing of the trueth, which was decided: And becauſe theſe were more:
10 number, their opinion, aſliſted by the Legates, prenailed.\ The two next.
Congregations were ſpent,in tcadingagaine the Decrees,as well of faith 45$' The Sefon.
reformation: the which , ſvme ſmall marrers becing corre@ted; by the Att Erna,
uice of thoſe who were not preſene arthe firſt, pleaſed chem all; TheLe- 2nd te De,
gates , accompanied withrhe Prelates, went tothe Church with the yſuall and reformaa-
ccremonies, on Thurſday thethixtecnch. of Tanuary,, and heldche Seffion ; liked. ©
where Andreas ( 'ornarws, Archbiſhop of Spalato,ſang Maſle, Thomas Stella;
Biſhop of Salpi, did preach 3 and! the Decrees of faich and reformation
were read. | 1 Heat acts 16,noOHO)C. RR
The firlt conteined fixteene beads, with their prohemes,and thirty three'
anathematiſm:s. Aftcrit had forbid ro belecue; preach; orteach , otherwile
then was conltiruted and expreſſed in:thar Decree; wrideclaredinfabliance!” -
t.. Thatneither Gzntiles,by natura}l-mcancs,norlewes;by the letter of Moy?
ſes, hach becnablc to free themſclues-from finne. 1; > Whereupon' G #1
ſenthis Sonne,to redeemethedne dndtheorher, 4171 Who,though he died”
for all, yertchole onely cnioy thebenefic; varo whom bis merit is commu
; nicatcd

i

The Hiftorieof "x4

{TN
Pavi 3.
CHARLES 5,

Hexry 8,

— NR

15+7

-- ©

buc ſhould pur his hope in the aſſiſtance of God , who will continue, if man
' failenor. 14.' That thoſerhar arcfallen into finne may againic receive grace,

nicated. 4. Thatthe iuſtification cf the wickcd, is r.othing bur a tranſla-
tion, from the ſtate of the ſonne of Adam, into the ſiate of the adopred ſonne
of God, byIzsv CHR15sT, which, after the publication of the Goſpel, is
not done. without Baptiſme, orthe vow thereof. 5. Thar the beginning
of iuſtification,in meh of age, proceedeth frem preventing grace , which in-
uitcth to diſpoſe. themſclucs , conſenting ;and cooperatirg with it freely:

which-cheyidoe willingly and might refuſe. '.6. "The mannerof the pre-

- paration, js firſt to belceuc, nliagy 2 thediuinereuclations ,and promiſes,
and knowing onesfelfe ro beeafinner, ro cutne frem. the feare of Gods Ju-

ſtice to- his mercie, zo-hope for: pardon from him, and therefore to begin

© tolouc him,and bate-ſinne : and finally, purpoſing to'bee baptized, to begin

ancw life, and keepethe commandementsof 'God.. - 5: -' Thar juſtification
followerhthis preparation, which is not oncly a remiſſionof ſinnes, bur ſan-
Rification allo;;and hath 5. cauſes :-the firiall, the glory of God, and cternall
life : che efficicar, God: the merirtory , Cur 1.5T : the inſtrumental, the Sa-
craments:.and theformall, juſtice, giuenby: God, receiued according to the
good pleature of the holy Ghoſt, and according to the oh ng oftkere-
cciucr, recciuing, together with remiſſion of finnes, faith , hope, and chari-
tic. 8. Thaewhea Saint Paul ſaith, thatmwan is iuſtified by faith, and grats,
it ought to be ynderſtood,becauſefaith is the beginning, and the things thac
precede iuſtification are nor meritorious of grace. 9g.. That ſinnesarenor
pardoned to him thar vaunteth , and repoſcth himſclfe onely in the confi-
dence,andcertainty of the remiſſion. Neither ought it to be ſaid; that onc-
ly faith dorh.juſtifie, but euery one as heeſhould nor doubr of the mercicof
God, the merits of CyRr1sT, and cfhicacic of the Sacraments, ſo, in regard of
his ownc indiſpoſition he may doubt , becauſe he cannot know by certainty
of infallible faich,chat he hath obrained grace- 10. Thar theijult aremore_
juſtified by obſcruing the Commandementrs of God and the Church. 17.
That it cannot be ſaid; chat the Commandements of God are impoſſible to
theiuſt, who,though he fall into veniall ſinnes, yer ccafeth not robe ſo; thar
no man ought torelic on faith onely , nor ſay, that the iuſt ſinneth in cuery

ood a&tion,or commirteth ſanne, if he doany thing for reward. 12. Thar

no man ſhould preſume hee is predeſtinared, belecuing that the juſtified can
: {innc no more, or ſinning,can promiſc himſclfe repentance. 13. That no

man canpromiſero himlclfc abſolute certaintie to perſeuere vntill the end,

becing ſtirred vp from aboue to: recouer ir-by repentance , which differeth
from baptiſme,becauſcit containcthnort only contrition, but ſacramental con-
feſl10n,Pricſtly abſolurion,ar the leaſt in vow, and farisfation beſides for the
remporall puniſhment, which is nor alwayes remitted altogether , as in bap-
tilme, 15, ;/Thartthegracc of.Godis loſt , not onely by infidelity, butby
any morrall ſinne, though fairl-beenor loſt by it. 6. Trpropoſcthrothe
iult the exerciſe of good workes, by which 'erernall life is gained, as grace
promiſcdby.the mercieof God, and a reward due to good workes by the
diuinc promiſe. And 1t concludcth that this doEtrine doth not eſtabliſh any
juſtice of our owne;, efuling the iuſtice of God, but the ſameis ſaid robee
ours,

, - | mm

_—_—

UE ER. Do oo
,

af  — 28.

L a va2..: the Cound

ours; becaulc 11151nvs, and of (G0 2; þgipginfuled þy/him forche merit of 15 47,
CuRis7t. ſo'tine)romakeeuery gyt ynderſtand,nor only thedodtrine to - IE
be fqllowed, burthat-ailo which.isto be guojded, j.addeth, Canpns, again({ Craxzzs ''Þ
himecharlaith. 1, Tharatwanmay bec:jultified wichour grace,, by the Hixar 8. ,,
{trengrh of humane nature, and doctrine of the Law.,,; 2+; ,,Þhat grac is. Nr raurs”
oiventoliuc wolb with greater facilitic,; and:to.mErit.erernallilife 5 as. 16,free The Canons
willcatrdocir,burwirh difficukic.| 3,:/Thara thanmay belecue, lgue,hopers 4 wi.
orirepent; ashe ought, withourthepreuention,, or affiljance gfche holy.Spie..
rit/42:"Fhat freewill, excited:by'G o D.dacth nat cooperate, rodilpoſe ysr 5";
rograce, nor cairdifſentchough it would.-: 5. Thag after the: {znne, of: Adam; +=
free will is lolt.- '6- Thar it-is.notin the power of-maa to docill,buras well,
bad as good workes, arc dong,' not onely.by Gods: permiſhion, . bur by. his:
owne proper working. 7 'Thatall workes, TER iuftification , ar$
{1nnes, and chat a man ſinneth the more, by how mach che more hee labou-
rethtadilpoſe himſclfeynto grace. ; 8:,, That the fearc of hell , which ma-
keth:ysabltaine from fin, and to flicto the mercy of Go D,is fin. g. Thar,
che wicked is iultified by faith onely, withour preparation, proceeding from
che motion of his will, 10: That man is iultitied withour the wltice by
which Cx «15 T did merit for ys, or is formally iuſt by that. 11. Thac he
is iuſtified onely.by che imputation of the iultice of Ca R158 T , or onely.by
remiſſion of finnes withour. inherent grace and charitic ; or that the grace
of iuſtificarion is oucly the fauour of Go D. 12.4; har iullifying faith is
nothing bur confidence in the! mercy of GoD , who remitteth finnes for
CHRIST. 13. That, for remiſlion of {innes,it,is neceſſary robelecuc
they.are remitred,nor doubting of ones own indiſpolition. 14. That man
is abſolucd and iuttihed becauſe hedoeth firmely belecuc it. 15. Thathe
is bound by fa:th ro belecue rhar hee is in the numberof che predeſtinared,
16. That one may be certaine he hath thegift of perſcuerance, without ſpe-
cial revelation. | 17. ,That onely that the predeſtinated obtaine grace,
18. Tharche Commandements of God are impoſſible rotheiuſt, 19. Thar
there is no other Evangelicall preceprbutof faith. 20. Thar the juſt and
erfc&.man is not bound to obſerue the Commandements of God and the
Church, orthar the Goſpel is a promiſe without condition of obſlcruing the
Commandements: 21. ThatCHKRIsT isgiuen for arcdeemer, nor for
a law-maker, 22. That the iuſtified may perſcucre withour he ſpeciall/af-
liltance of Go 0,or canngtwith it... 23. Thar che iuſt cannorlinne, orcan
auoydeall veniall ſinnes, withour a ſpeciall priuiledge,as the Church holdeth
of the Virgin. 24. Thar juſtice is not preſerued and increaled by good

Y workes, but that they are Fruics on:ly or ſignes. 25. Thar the/iult fanneth
4 mortally, or yenally,in cucry worke. 26. Thatthe iult ought nor to expect
5 a reward for his good workes. 27 That there isno morrall {une bur infi-

2 dceliry. 28 That grace being lolt, faith is lot alſo; or that the faith re-
1 mayning is not truce norof a Chriſtian. 29 That man inning after bap-
tiſme,cannot be lifted vp by the grace of God, or may recouer it by faith
onely , without the Sacrament of penanace. 39. That cuery faulrand pu-
 niſhimentts waolly remicred co eucry penitent man, there remaning no tem-
porall puniſhinent, co bee induced in this life, or in Purgatocie. 33. That

the

#'C

226 The Hiſtorie of y I. rm n.

—_—

_— —

1547 cheiult ſinneth, if hee doe good, onely in hope of an crernall reward.
© 32. Tharthe good workes of the jult, are the gifts of God, and are nor
Cans 5- withall the merits of the juſtified. 33: That this doctrine is derogatory to
Har s, thegloryof God,and merits of CHR15ST, or that their glory is nor made -

oxen 2 moreilluſtrious by ir. ' - ;

Thcantors "When I had madethis ſhortnarration of the Decree, I began to thinke ir
rabnwly ſaperfluous,ſceing all thedecrees of that Councel are printed in onevolume,
the decrees andin cucry 'mans hands, and that in the compoſition of the Actes thar fol-
bepnedn lov ;1 might Teferretny ſelfe to thar booke : and Lwasabaurt torcare this
volume; 16afe. Bur conſidering thatſome might defirero readethe whole continua-
tion.in one booke only, and thatifany thought it better ro ſee the originall,
heemighr omit this mine abbreuiation , I rclolucd norte change, bur ro ob-
ſcrue © ſame ſtile in the matters following : and the rather, becauſe I am
oricucd, when, in Zenopbon and Tacitus , I {ce the narration of things, molt
knowen to their times , omitted , which remaineth vaknowen to rmce, be-
cauſe there is no meanes to know it againe: and I hold it for a maxime,thar
one ought ncuer to referre himſelfe ro another. Therefore I come to the
| {ſumme of the Decree of reformation.
TheDecce Which did containcin ſubltance; 1. That the Synod being willing to
tion, amend the depraued manners of the Clergicand people, thought fir to be-
gin with the goucrnours of the greater Churches. Therefore truſting in
God,and his Vicar on carth, that, thatcharge ſhall be giuento worthy men,
exerciſed from their youth in Ecclefialticall diſcipline, it doth admoniſh
chem ro periorme their ducty , which cannot bee execured without reſiding
in the place, where it is to bee done: Yet many, leauing the flocke, and care
of the lambes , wander in Courts , and apply themſclues to ſecular buſineſle.
Therefore the Synod doth reuucali the ancieur Canons againſt non-reft.
dents, and dorh conſlitute beſides, that cucry goucrnour of a Cathedrall
Church , of whar title or preeminencie ſocucr, who ſhall remaineſixe mo-
nerhs rogerhcrour of his Dioceſſe,, without a juſtand reaſonable caule, ſhall
loſethe fourth part of the reuenues, and if he perſeuerc fixe moneths more,
. ſhall loſe anothertfourth part, and the contumacic increaſing, the Metropo-
liranc,vpon a of not entring into the Church for three moneths, ſhall de-
late him to the Pope, who, by his ſupreame authoritic, may inflict greater
arm pms” moe the Church of a more profitable Paſtor. And if the
Metropolitan ſhall likewiſe offend, the moſt ancient Suffragan fhall beo
bound to denounce him.
2. Burtothers, inferiours to Biſhops , rycd to reſidence either by law or cu-
ſtome, ſhall becompelled thereunto by the Biſhops, abrogating cuery pri-
uiledge which giuctha perpetuall exemption from reſiding. Bur diſpenſa-
rionsgrantedfor a time, for a rcaſonable cauſc, true, and prooucd before the
Ordinary , ſhall remainein force, and the Biſhop , as Delegate of the Apo-
* ſtolike Sea,ſhall rake care thata ſufficient Vicar bee prouided for the charge
of ſoules,with a conuenient portion of the reuenucs , notwithſtanding any
+ priuiſedgeor exemption. — :
Beſide that no Clerke, by perſonall priviledge, or regular dwelling
out of the Monaſtcric, by priuiledye of his order, ſhall bee exempt from

being

L1s. 2. the Councell of Trent. 2 227 |

becing punithed , if hee offend, or viſited, or corrected by his Ordinary. 1545
EO 2 | ary. 21547
4. Likewiſc that Chapters of Cathedrall and other Collegiate Churches, ——Y
ſhall nor , by vertue of exemption , cuſtomes, oathes, and agreements, bee Cuaxins x.
freed from the viſitation of their Biſhops, and greater Prelates , when there 5557 50
ſhall be necede. G Francis r.
5. Infine, ir didordaine that no Biſhop might exerciſe Pontiticall ates in

the dioceſſe of another, by pretence of priuiledge, without his leaue, and Th* next Sef.

onely ouer his ſubic&ts. Andtheday of the next Seſſion was appointed the held herbir

third of March. i of March.
In Rome, the Decrce of faith miniſtred no matter of diſcourſe, in re-

gard it was not new,as well becauſe it had beene ſeenc, and examined pub-

likely ( as hath bcene ſayd ) as becauſeall men knew that the Germane opi-

nions were to bee condemned, But the Court Biſhops , who had beenea-

fraid a long time of the Article of reſidencie, which was handled, did reſt

content, aſſuring themſclues that the Decree of the Councell, could worke

no greater effect, then the Popes Decretals had done before. Butthe inferj- The inferiour

Courtiers are

our Courtiers were diſcontcntcd , ſeeing the Biſhop hadpower ro com pell diſconrented
them. They lamentedrtheir owne miſery, who were to ſeruc all their life to —nlonlag
gaine their liuing, andafter ſo much paines taken,for a reward,mult be con-
fincdin a village, or, by a bale Canonry , ſubiccted to a greater ſlavery, in
obcying rhe Biſhops , who will nor onely keepe them, as it were, tied to a
ſtake, bur with vititations, and pretence of corrections, will bring them
to a miſerable ſubietion, or hold them i perpetuall yexations , and
charge. \
Bar elſewhcreand eſpecially in Germanie, when the Decrees were ſecne, TheDecees
that of faith was more ſpoken of: which mult bee read ouer and againc, in Gormany
with much attention and ſpeculation , becauſc it could not bee ynderſtood
without a perfe&t knowledge of the inward motion of the mind, and with-
out knowing in whom it is a&tiuc,in whom paſſue,things moſt ſubtile, and,
for the diucrs appcarancethey make, cuer accounteddiſpurable ; all the do-
&rineof the Councel turning vpon this hinge, wherher the firſt obie&t of the
will worke vpon the will ; orthe will vpon the obiect, or whether they bee
borh aCtiue and paſſiuc. Some pleaſant wits (aid, that if the Aſtrologers, nor
knowing the true cauſes of the celeſtiall motions , to falue the appearances,
haue inuented Eccentriques , and Epicicles, it was no wonder if the Councell,
deſiring to ſalue the appearances of the {uper-celeſtiall motions, did fall into
excentricitic of opinions. The Grammarians did notceaſe to admireand [coffe
theartifice of thar propoſition, whichis ip the fifth Chapter ; Neque bomo ie
mihil omnino agat ; which they ſayd was not intelligible ; and wichour cxam-
ple. Forit the Synode would {ignifie: Eriamhombo ipſe aliquid agar ; it might
ſay ſo plainely, as is fit ro doe inmatter of faich, where rhe more {imple ex-
preſſion is the better; and if they would vic an elegancie, they might ſay,
Etiam bom 'ipſe nibil agat. But the word ( amnino) beeing interpoled , rhar
ſpcech is incongruous and without ſence , as all are which haue two nega-
riues that cannot be refolued inroan affirmatiue. For to reſolue that, one
mult ſay, Eriam hom ipſe aliquid omnino agat , which is incongruous, and nor

to bee vnderitood, what aliguid omnino may fignific heere. For it would ſay
| that

Of —_———

228 1 be Hiſtorie of L1s. 2.

1547. that a man hath an action in a cerraine kinde, which in another kinde is no
ng Wy action. | ;
Cuaxtes 5 The Fathers were defended), by ſaying , that ro examine the forme of
Hwexy 3, | Specch fo ſeverely, was nothing bur ro cauill. - Whereunto they replycd,
: _— thata gentle interpretation was duc vnto viuall formes of {peach , but thar
| it.is a publique yrility to diſconer the artifice of him, thar, leauing the cleere
and y{uall phrafes , inucnterh thoſe that arcincongrueus, and containe in
them contradiction,to cauill,and to play on both ſides.
Thoſethar ynderſtood Theologic faid,that the doctrine,thata man may
| alwaycs refuſe diuine inſpirations, was contrary tothepublike, and ancicnt
praycr of the Church. Et ad te no$tras etiam rebelles compelle propitius roolunta-
tes: Which is not fir wee ſhould fay is a vainedefire , but that it is made b
| fairh,as S.Iames faith, and granted by God to his ele&ted. They added that
L one could no more ſay with S. Paul , that it commeth notfrom man which
doth ſeparate the veſlell of wrath from thoſe of Gods mercie, that which
{eparaterh being that humane, Non nihil omnino. Many did conſider that
place of the ſeuenth Chapter, where it is ſayd,Luſtice is giuen by meaſure, ac-
cording to the good plcature of God , and the diſpoſition of the recciucr ;
both which things cannot bee true. For if it pleaſed God to giuemore to
him that were leſſe diſpoſed, it would not bee by meaſure of the diſpoſiti-
on; and if itbee by the meaſure of that , there is alwayes the moriue by
which God worketh , and doerh not yſc his good pleaſure. "They maruci-
: | led that thoſe werecondemned ,, who ſayd that the Precepts of God were
impollible ro bee kepr; ſeeing that the fame Councell, in the Decree of the
ſecond Scflion , exhorteth the fairhtull aſſembled in Trent , that, repenting,
confefling, and communicating, they ſhould obſerue the Commaunde-
ments of God, Quantum qui{quts poterig. Which modification would bee im-
pious,ifthe in{tihed could keepe rhem abſolutely; and they noted that rhe
ſame word, Pracepta, was there, to take away all cauill.
Thoſe that were rcad inthe Ecclcſiaſticall Story , ſayd, that in all the
Councels, held in the Church,from the Apoſtles time yatill now, there were
neuer ſo many Articles decided , as in this Seſſion onely ; in which Ari$to-
tle, had a great part , by hauirg cxaQly diſtinguiſhed all the kindes
of cauſes, which if hce had not done, wee had wanted many Articles of
Faith. |
The Polititians alſo, though they ought not to examinematrers of Reli-
Jion,but {1mply follow them , yer found matter of diſcourſc in this Decrce.
For ſ{ccinginthetenth Chapter, the Obligation of obeying the Commande-
ments of Go Þ and the Church, and the ſame pied inthe twentieth Ca-
non, they were ſcandalized , becauſe there was no mention of Obligation to
the commandements of Princes and Magiſtrates, They faid thar Moonee
vnto theſc is more plaincly ſer downe 1n the Scripture; that the old Law is
fullof it; thar the doctrine is cleere in the hew Teſtament , expreſſed; and
handled ar large by CHr1s1 himlelfe , by Saint Peter, and Saint Pau. That
there is foundan cxprefle Obligation to heare the Church, bur none cxpreſle
ro obey it- Hee 15 obeyed who commandeth of his owne power, and hee
is heard who docth promulgate that which belongerh to another man. _
cher

- — ——-

——

Lands - | the Councell of Ti rent. _

ther were thele mean ſatisfied with the excuſe, that the commandemenrs of © 1 545
Princes are. included in thoſe of God , and that obedience is due ymo them, jonny
becauſe God hath commanded chey (hould bee obeyed. Bur they replyed Cnanine 5:
that,by this reaſon, the Church-rather ought-ro bee omitted ; and: ſaid that irmay 3.
the Church was expreſſed , and che Princes paſled oucr in filence, to breede Vonent *:
(according to the ancient ſcope of the Ecclefiaſtiques) that pernicious opi-

nion, that men are bound to, obey them for conſcience fake, and Princes

and Magiſtrates onely for fcarce of temporall puniſhments, and cthatother-

wiſe their commandements may. b= crarkereſſed without reſpec and fo to

cauſe cuery goucrnment to be hated, accounted tyrannicall, and ſubuerred,

and, by deſcribihg the ſubieionvnto Priclts to be the only principall way

to gaine heauen,todraw all iurifdiction to themſelues, and,by --- "$4

all authority. We”

 TheDecrecofreformation was ſaid to bee a meerc illuſion. Foro truſt

in God andthe Pope that prouilion ſhould;:beemade of perſons worthy to

goucrne the Churches, belongeth rather. co.him that prayeth, then: to hitn

that reformerh. 'T'o rene the ancient Canons with one word onely , and

oneſo gencrall, was morc to confirme the:diluſe of them : but if rhey would

reſtorechem in carnelt , they. ſheuld remooue the cauſes which haue buricd

them in filence,giue them ſtrength by penalties, and depuration of thoſethat

ſhould put them in exccution, and fould vie other meancs which doc re-

uiuc, andpreſcrue.Lawes. In fine it was ſaid to haue done nothing bur e-

ftabliſh that one might bee abſent all the. yecre, by loofing halfe the reue-

newes,, or rather one was taught how hee might nor reſide cleuen monerhs

and more, without any puniſhmenr, by intcrpoling thoſe thirty daycs of

fewer, inthe mid(t of the other time of the yecre ; andthatrhe Decree was

wholly deſtroyed, with the exception of iult and teaſonable cauſes, which

no man is (o {impleas nor to find,bcing to hauc Iudgesfor whom it will be
rofitable not to hauerefſidencic practiled, :

This place requireth that, mention ſhould bee made of a particular acci-

dent, which, then begun , though it cnded nor vnrillaftcr fouremonerhs,

belongeth wholly ro che preſent Seſſion, & maketh knowen what the Coun-

cell was,and in what eltimatiqn;it was had, by thoſe thataſliftcd itit. For che

vnderltanding whercof, I will repeat that Friar Dominic Soto, whohad ( as

hath 'boen ſayd) agreat part ia-the Synod, in framing the Decrees oforigi-

nall fangc,and juſtification, hauing norcdall the opinions andreafons vicd in 5.1, mes

thole diſcuſſions ,..thought to communicate them ynto the world, 'ahd to [77pu pub

drawabewords of the Decreo to bis owne meaning, printed a booke con; 2=<a6uns |

raining the whole togerher ; anddid intitleit; Dengturt Gy gratid;:..and did Cs...

dedicatceit, with anEpilile, toche Councell, to bee: (as hee layd.inehe dedy hr eghnuy,

cation). a Commentary of thetwo foreſajd;Decrees.,, Comming to the Ar- #4 th F+-

ticle ofthe certaincty of grace, hee laid ina longdiſcourle; rbar the Synode mich emided:

had declared, thataman cannot know bee hath grace by fo great certainrie,

25 isthatof faich,oxcluding all doubt. (@arizus ; newly made Biſhop of Mi

wort, hauing defehded. the comuary,, and; Rill-perſeucring, did ptwr 2 Iucle

booke, with an Epiltlc Dedicatory to the ſame Synode; the ſcope whereof

was, to maintaine-that the Councels.ocaning was: not to condemn the
| ; V opinion

- —  - >

The\thiſtorieof \\ L4-8.! 2k

__ 0
414- Gatth

Pavs 3.
CHARLES F.

Hexxr 8$3--
FrkAaXxCiS 1,

hd nd

= Counccis doe

deliberate of
tf uth,not by.
diuinc infpira-
ri6n,but by
humane di(-
quilition.

opimon ot him thar faith a iult' man may know heehath# race; _——
as hee knoweth the Articles of Faith to beetrue: yea, that the Councell hark

decided that hee is bound to beletne ir;becauſe;in the fixeabdtwentiech Oat
non, ichath condemned him?rhiHaich'thartheiuſt man oughtnot to hope
for,and expeCta reward; it being neceſſary ,that hee thatoughtrohope'as 'A
juſt manſhould know hee is ſo: In this! eontrariety- of opinions, Both wri-
tiogafhrmaciuely ro the Couneell;, cirher ef cthemdidnoronely (ay; rhathis
opinion was the opinion of the Synbde, bur aftetwards wrote alſo andprin-
red Apologies;and/Antipslogies; making conplaitnste rhe Synode-cheone
ofcheorher , of attributing tharto ir}, which {Eneutrfeid ; bringitg divers
reltimonirs of the Fathers ro prout their 6Wwne opinion” who bare witneſle;
{omefor'one, ſome toranother; ſo thartheFatherswere all diuidet{ ints
two parts, exceptſome good Prelares, who as neutrals, ſaid, that they vnder-
ſtood norrhe diffterenct;; bur gaue conſent"ts the Deerec, in theforme as it
was publiſhed, bechule both the/Parties-were'agreed.''TheLegate'Sante Crore
did reltifiefor Catarinys. -Monrefaid\ hee wasfa third party, Fhisſcemed
topurallmen ou of hopeto wiierſtandthemeaningofithe Couneeliſeeing
theprincipall men that were preſent init, "did notagfee! And it dothraiſen
difficulty jbybattharSynode way thar determined the Article, viiro' which]
8oto-and: Cararinus did write at" appeal&gieach thinking it wds'on his
fide ; ſo that it was neceflary , chirierther 616 ofithem, 'or: both! ſhojild bee
deceeiuedici' And wharthalbonethinke of the others, whan ir ſo happened to
chele> Ir mihetbeeſigt, - irvvadthe agiteparcof all togerher, vile Which
theholy:Gholtg? vil afhillance, maderr roltererminenive Prucaths, tiongh
hot vnderſtood bipHiny thatdie derermiriedty!! 1s1Calaphardid prophetic ,be-
caſe hee was high Nri6it pnor vader[tandiny thoprophelie;iavichs Bithop
of Bitoxedllaid 11 hiastraton.- | But this affwere Kaditwa oppolitions-; the
one, thar'Go \maderhe reprobate and mfidels/ptophefic, wirhoat'vhder-
ftanding,but the fairhfull,by illuminating theiriminde;xhoother,chatthe Di;
uines doe vmiformoely!{ag;thar Corncelsdoenordeliberate of fairtybyMuine
inſpiration þarby hamane dif quibxeion which theSpirir:doth aſh{,to kepe
them fromerrors;forhat chey-cannor determine; withour vnderftaiiding the
marrer. Pcthaps/hedhould hit vporchertuerh; that ſhould fay,thatzdebaring
the contraryopinionsitiframing'the Decree, every party did refals Wordes
cbntraty ro his opinion;andall reltedinthoſtwhich hethoughemiphtbeie
ted cy his owne meanint fo thar theovpreſlisffof rheamattor becarideapea-

__ blcof diudrstcrpreaſtions. ' Butthigwontd vor ſerue'to refolusthi bt

All agreed thy
condemhihd '
che Lutheran?
opimions? ©

% as

An nduevtife- ©

mcnt 21ven by
CAA ts.

ropoſedgand co find wharrhe'Coutiel'was 2 beeauletbideo giuenayhity of

brds;and<ontrarieveticanings Burthatwhith hathobecnretate;m his
panicular;und perhdpsd mo_ inemany'matersoccurtednor inicordonÞ
ningtheLgtheranopiniontotiobrattdidatieevirharequitice onſet)
| Oncatueriſemenoelt ele fardeiCatarimg concerhhingatis) mand? Jovtie:
cents ri 2 m3 = 05} robeeDmtanaliatie Auchoroferl
vinonomdbe defrarxieebotliiotmamnionHoedn fdetedztmcinwis weepur
nancie,tofayithar efrmidbdyrithiemracevolanarilabdetal Hoijards cen
Hinche hack igbeemfethe iieaecerinewehiagwolinmarily, whichdree
kijowerhinotto bo giuatyhitn;andovchourboinglurehohinh recemedyt;s
AWCOITTIG V But

XUM

——_Wl_—

Lis. 2, the Councell of Trens. | 221

But torcturne to the Councel|, theday after the Seffion a generall Con- 1547
gregation was aſſembled, to deliberate of, and put in order themarrer to be CAN
digeſted in the next Seſſion, and, for matter of faith, it being alrcady derer- Clendindt
mined to follow the confeſſion of 4u5burg, the firſt point was of Ecclcſias Hm ».
ſticall miniſtery , which the Lutherans ſay is authoriticro preach the Gof. 22D * +
pcl, and to adminiſter rhe Sacraments; and-ſome reſting ypor the firit
parr,did propoſe thar the Eccleſiaſticall authoritic ſhould bee handled,decla-
ring allchoſc funQions,ſpiricuahand temporall,which God hath giuen them
ouer the faithfull,” and are denied by rhe Lutherans. And this did generally
pleaſe the Prelates, becauſcir was a matter of an eaſe vnderſtanding , with-
out any crabbedneſle of the Schoole, and where themſclues might haue a

art. Butit was notgratefull tro the Diuines, becauſe thoſe things were nor
handled in the Schooles; ſo that they ſhould haue nothing ro diſpute, and
mult referre chemſelues for che molt part rothe Canoniſts. They faid thac
the Auguſtanes doc not handle all Eccleſiaſticall authoritic , but char onely
of preaching ; whereof there was as much decreed in the laſt Seſſion as was
{ ifficient, but in the ſecond part there was matter thar did cohere with iu- +1c @w;cs
ſtification, that is, the Sacraments,which are the meanes ro beiuſtified, and gf <nex: |
ſaid it was more fit romake theſe the ſubic& of the next Seſſion. The Legats, Scramencs.
and their dependants adbered hereunto, in ſhew for theſame reaſons , bur A—— |
indeede for another more potent, becaule, inthe other conſideration, they inn lnnte
might hauc handled theauchoritic of Councels,and of the Pope, and propo- h=riicgtibe
ſed many hard marrers, nor fit to bee mooucd. Pope,

Hauing reſolued to handle the matter of the Sacraments, itwas confide-
red that it was various and ample, not poſſible to bee comprehended in a
Seffion, nor cafic to bee determined intro how many parts it ought to bce
divided. The Auguſtans made itſhort by taking away Kon Sacraments, of
which they oughtto treate more exadtly,to reeſtabliſhrhem : thereforerhar
it was good to begin rodiſcuſſerhe Sacraments in generall, & charge was gi-
uen toput inorder the Articles drawen outof the Lutheran doEtrine, deſcen-
ding alſo to the Sacraments in particular, of asmany as ſeemed ealie ro dit-
cull : and that the reformation mightfollow the detinition of faith and do-

Arine, theabulcs, occurring in the miniſter of the Sacraments, ſhould be put
rogether , ordaining a Congregation of Prelares and Canonilts to diſcourle
ofthe remedies, and to fr Decrees , with order,thatiftchey both hap-
ned on the ſame day , Santa (roce ſhould bee Preſident of the 'Theologues,
and Monte of the Canoniſts, and both together in the generall Congregaci-
on. Burt beſidethis, in regard of the promiſe to continue the marter of re(i-
dencic, ſome of the molt principall Articles thereof were ro bee handled.
In this it was not ſo eaſe to agree, becauſe the Lepates and their adhercors
had contrary ends to the/other Biſhops. | |
Theſe began to hope,and to ayme,almoſt all,but eſpecially the Spaniards, The Spanith
to regaine theEpiſcopall authoritie, which anciently tuery one didexercilc in © _—_—_
his owne Dioceſſe, when the reſeruations of Benefices, of Calcs, or of Ab- Fl
ſolutions , Diſpenſations, and the like were vnknowen, which they were
wont to fay in priuate diſcourle, when few.were preſent, that ambitionand
auarice had made proper to the Courr of Rome, vnder a fained colour to
V 2 mannago

}

—

The Hiſtorie of Lis.2.

1547 mannage.thembcttcr ,.and more to the publike ſeruice of God, and the
A + # Church, throughourall Chriſtendome, then the Biſhops could doe in their
Cuaes-4. owne Citics, in regard of their imperfeftion and ignorapce. Bur ir was not
Hexev 8. {o, becaufe diſſolution and ignorance did not enterinto the Epiſcopal order,
Faxc1-t+ yatilchey were compelled to goe as ſeruants to Rome. Bur it bad gouernc-
Cad 216-74 ment vverethenicenc in the Bilhops, which cauſed their authority ra bee ra-
Iy divert the cen away, NOW it may bee (eene to bee worlt of all in the Court of Rome; 1o
econ that, bythe fame reaſon, that mannagement ought to bee raken away which

15 not proper to ir, bur much abuſed by it.
- . Thedccree,that ref1dencic was required by the Law of God,was eſteemed
by theſe Prelats the belt remedie for the dilcaſe paſt, and preleruariue againſt
hereafter. For if God hath commanded Biſhops roref1de perpetually with the
flocke,itfolloweth neceſlarily that hee hath alſo preſcribed them the charge,
and giuen chem power to exercilc it well. Therefore the Pope cannor cal]
rhem,or buſie them in oughtelſe,nor diſpence with them, nor reſtraine their
authoritic, giuen them by God, "Therefore they deſired to procecde to the
determination, ſaying, it was neceflary to refolucthe Article, becauſe it was
ſufficiently diſcuſſed. The Cardinall of Monte hauing premeditated before,
let them ſpeake who were molt earne{t, that part of the heate might cx-
hale; then he oppoled himſelte dexteroully, and ſaid , it was ncceflary to doe
it, becauſe the world did expect it, but that they oughtro doe it ina fir times
that the difficultic was handled with roo much heate,and that in ſome it had
: ſtirred more paſſion then reaſon ; ſo that it was neceſſary to let che feruor bee
coolcd,and ro interpole a little rime, that, the contentions being forgotten,
and charitie reuiucd, place may bee giuen to the holy chefnttnng which
the trueth cannor be decided. That the Popes Holinefſe, who hath vnder-
ſtood, to his gricte, che former contentions , defireth the ſame, that himſelfe
alſo may diſcufle the matter in Rome, and afliſt the Synod with his counſel].
He concluded, with more refoluterermes fhen ſo modeſt a beginning oughe
_ to inferre ; that no more ſpeach ſhould bee had of it before the Seſſhon, =
cauſc the Popes will was refolutely ſo , but that they ſhould attend to re-
forme the inconueniences which hauc cauſed theabulſe of not reftding. This
mixture of remonſtrances and power made fome of the Fathers, who af-
terwards did print treatics concerning this matter, ſay, ard pur in print,
that the Legates did forbid to ſpeake of this queſtion ; and others denied it,
with an inueCtiue againſt the farlt, ſaying, they derogated from the libertie
of the Councell. In the end of the Congregation it was reſolued to refume
the things that remained to bee diſcuſſed in the laſt Seſſion, andtorreate of
remoouing the impediments, which are the cauſes of uot refiding. A-
mongſt which the moſt principall becing pluralitic of Bencfices, in re-
card it was impoſlible to reſide in many places , it was reſolucd to treate
of that.
But ro auoid confuſion, I will relate withall that which belongeth to tho
--: Sacraments, where the conſideration, for the moſt parr, was ſpeculatiue and
doctrinall,oorto interrupr the order of the matter of Benefices, wherein ſome
things hapned which did open a way to important anddangerous actions.
Articles were-framcd by the depurics in matter of the Sacraments, and gh,
manner

—

LJ 1 B42. — Conncellof T YOnk;\ 09 235

mangez of ſpeaking of them was prelcribgd tathe-Dijuines , communicated 1547 ©
ro Alia = Ag pars order thatghey ſhould fay, whether a i hoes Dd,
all hereticall or erroncous,and ought to hecondemard by the Synode; aug Cranes: A
if any deſerued not that ſentence, they. ſhould. alleadge their tealons and au; rendr v.—
thoruy ; andafier ſhould declare what yas the opinion, of Coungels, and of CGE #
the holy Fathers, in'all thoſe, and which.of rhe, Articles baue berne rept9g ©
ucd alrcady, and which remaine to beecondemaed-; andifin this matterany
onc ſhould findeour ſome other Article: worghy oficenſure, hee ſhould give ©" © |
noticethereot, andauoyde impertinent.queſtions igall; whereig,one mght
diſpute. on both fades, withgur, preiudics of faith, andall other tuperfiuicy
andtediouſieſle of words. 1, ad od dhe 4h
Of che Sacraments in generall there were fourcreene Amicles/ 3. That Fourreeiie
the Sacraments of che Church, axe. not ſeuen bur feyves,, which,may bee cal- the 5:< _

> at _-

xcraments. 14, Thatthe Sacraments hauc beeneinſticured onely.roche-

CEA .

iſh faich.,- 21h 03015 116162 &  QQigle ww off3 bo! Cao Van ain yy
. Of Baptiſmethere were ſcucnteene Articles. | 1... That in che Romance ary ge
Catholique Church, there.is no true Baptifme.,. 2. That Baptiſm is free, Bapeiſins.
and nor. neceſlary to (aluation.j. 3. That.ig| is. not true-Baprifine.which is

giuen by Heretiques.,. /4. TharBaprilme,is. repentance, . 5. That Baptiſme

is an cxtcrnall ligne, as the red marke inthe, Lambes, and hath no partia 1u-
-tification,” 6., TharBaprilme ought robexenucd; ,, 74..T bat trug/Paprilme

is faith, which belecueth that finnesareremireed to the, penicents;,B, That

in Bapriſme {anne is,ngs rooted gut,! but onely nor impareds, .p-jThat.che
Baptiſmg of Caxisr.and Jobn, baye the fame veriue,.,,10., Thaxthe.Bap-

ilme of. CxxxusT harh nor made yoyd har of Jobn, bur bach adgdad ghepro-

miſe vatoiri 13.. That in Baprilme che; immerſion prsly.js os Ard
all ocherrhings being free, may. bee omirted wizhourlype., 1a: Tha
berter ro ogur the bapgiſme ofchildren,,, then, baptize; dhe. whileaghey

?

-notbeleryse.... 13; . That children ought.npturo bes bepti;
haue not proper faith, ., 14. ;That thoſe chasarobaptiaed;ins

comming to the age ofdulcretion,gught PAS
3

ng

oo rr uu. - I
—— — - _- - —}A

44 21017 el... , Hiſtorie of | Lew's.!

1545 _ norbelecued.”- 15. Thatthoſe that haue beene baprized'in their infancic,
Ly, when they cometo peg tobe interrogated, whether they will ratific
—_— thr Baptiſte, and, 1 they deny,vighr cobe {cft in liberty.” 16. Thatfinnes
——— &mmittcd&aftcr Baptiſmearcremirted, onely by the memory and Faith that
Feanczs L) Wits hath" Beene-baptized; © 15: Thar the yow of Baptiſme hath no other
—Y> @&tidivonbirof faith, yea,nullificth all other conditions. ho
WG. OT Confithiation there werefourcArticles- 11. That Confirmation is
cles of Con- Wit a ment. ''2/;* That it ifinftieured by the Fathers', and hath no pro-
45 Wilt of thef?ace of God! 3. Thatrnowitis an idle ceremunie, and former-

1 wits Oatchilme; when children, comming to age, gaue an account of

their faith , before the Church. 4. Thar the Miniſter of Confirmation is
_ 537 hortheBilfopohdyburany Prieſt wharſocucr. a” |
_— 1k Fnthes Congregations , all the Diuinesagreed, in affirming the number
Altaeree thier OE ſeen (Std condetnning the contrary opinion as herericall, in regard of
thereare (evenit he, generanconfeht of the Schooles, beginning from the Maſter ofthe Sen-
bu: nor that Ythees, (WHO WPake deftriiriucly thereof) vnri{[thisrime. © 'To this they ioy-
more. =Redthid Detree of theFlorentine Councell for the Armenians, which/detcr-
= wy bw Manerh thatnumber, and; for greater confirmation , thevſe of the Romance

runder of Church was added3whencethey concluded, that it oughtto be held for an

{cuen. -

>" For the other part it was ſaid; that ir wis neceſſary to eſtabliſh for an Ars

*tricle, thartheproper Sacraments, arencithermorcncrleſſe, to tepreſſethe

-boldnefſc as well of the Lutheranes, who make rhem ſomerimes'two, fome-

times thite, [ometimesfoure,asallo of thoſe who cxceedeſench; and if ſome

"times 4gfearer namber,andfotnerimes aleffe;be found in theFathers, it was

' becauſe theii; *beforerhe determinarion ofthe Churth ; ir was lawfull to vie

the word in) a morefatge;or more ſtrict fi priification. And heretocltablifh

-theſuſiciencic of this number of ſcucn; as the Schosle-men ieake, that is,

{tharthey-ate neithit*moretior lefſe , they were tedious jh'recounting the

| reafors deduced from ſenen naturallthings; by which life is gained and pre.

eraedy fromuhe eiryerthes; from the ſciicn eapitail'vices ; from the Te-
$1 BR. |

500 uen

:
:
=_
X 4
- *z3£
n 3
= vy
is
7 ,
Fn
q
:
4

k# -
*
1850
ay!
i F ©
i s

Meg *
[ 3
'S.

.
L- &
34
LF <

7

rh oo"
X ,

OM. WANs cor ere mm ws 4 e..--
% Lys na |
D Sr cit

26 5. GY AA IO IT, ROS as

m—_—

"Liza, 'the Comncell of Trent. | 235

vendefe@s, which came from originall ſin; froavrhwefixe dayes of the creas: x $47
ion of the, world, and ſcuenth of relt ; fromthe ſcucn' regions 'of Egype 5 5
from the ſeuen Planets; from the famouſneſſe of the number of ſfeuen, and ria.
ether congruities,vſed by theprincipall Schoole:mengfor proofe of the cor itaay, 7
cluſion; and many reaſons why the conſecration of Churches, of the veſſels Co_
of Biſhops, Abbats, Abbeſles, and Monkes, are nor Sacraments, nor holy

warer, nor the waſhing of feet,as Saint Bernard fayd, nor Martyrdome, nor
thecreation of Cardinals, northe Coronation of thePope. © |

dittin&tions, and that they would cuer haue referred themſelues to the
Chirch; but the Lucheratie boldneſſe ought not to paſſe withoat condeni-
riation, who hauc brought in choſefalficies, wirhcontempt of the Church;
2ndrhar'was notto be tolerated inthe rath Lutherans, which might bee'ins
dured in the holy Fathers. | F 5 90S
In theſecond Article, of the neceſſitie of the Sacrameiits!, ſome would Theneet

not haue the condemnation to be abſolute, þut adiſtintion made;in regard meas.
it is cercaine, thar all are nor ablolutely-neceſlarie. There waganorhet opini-

on alfo tobe condemned,which laid, That the Sacraments'wete tior: nietel-
facieinche Church, becauſcir is cerraine, they are not neceflatyro euery one,

yea, that fomeare incompatible, as Order, and Marrimonic. Yer :theniore
common opinion was, that the Article ſhould bee condenined ab(olutely,

for two reaſons : one, becauſe the neceeſFirie of one is; ſufficient to. make ithe
Articlefalſe, as it licth;the ocher,becaule they are all neceſſary in ſome ſort
ſomeabſolurely, fome by ſuppoſition, fome by conueniencic, and {one for
greater vtilitic; Bur many maruailed, that Articles. of Faith ſhould bee efta+ *-
blithed, inſuch maltiplicicy of cquiuocation. For whole Ins

FA

XUM

- ay —_—— my

=

99.4. 4

. Av Wn rai es rent as

Seem, wy Aw ay, MO hd

n  "þ a og
:
—_— —

ws.

COT
Lden.s Amp

$M ati a
HRS WB - As - + O

I +. as Bens

2»

_—_ _— _ Gm —_—_

vIS E\ Thetditory of 'B I B, M |

—o—_ ——— >

w—_ the Canons, werecontpalrd; there was added, condemning bhim-thar held

Z—-—> the Sacraments not to-he necellaria, but. {uperfluous ;inlarging by this laſt
Gar 4 termetheHgortication of the freſh.) 05:1) = 2136648 15:19] ads (6
ix; -- Many were of opition:that the:other, part of the Article ought;40 bee

Faangts.4% gmitred, becaule it was defined inthe laſt Seffion, that-farcthonely: yas not

= =

-
FE
, TY

Concerning
thedignity of
the Sacra-
ments.

The fourth
Article is ve-
ncrally con-
dceinned.

and the T hicfe ,vpon the Croſſe, then onely illuminated by the vertue of
£rk15sT, knew not the Sacraments, nor could make any vew of them; And
cany-holy. Martyrs,connerted inthe heate of perſecution, by ſeeingthe con-
ttaicic of others,and preſencly taken and putrta death, one cannot ſay,but by
eiunatwn;mtharthey knew che Sacraments and could make a vow. There-
fore it was bettcrto [cauethardiltintionto the Schooles,, and to putit in
rhe:Articles of faith. The: common opinion was to the contrarie, ſaying,
thatalchoughthewords ofthe diſtinction were new and {cholaſticall, yer
bne.mult beltcuetharrherhing {ignificd was raught by CHRI sT, and is
an Apoltolicalltradition' rand tor the examples of (,ornelivs, the Thieke, and
Martyrs, itisto bee vnderſtood, that there arc two forts of yowes-of the
Sacrament; the one explicite, the other implicite; and, atthe leaſt, this ſe-
cond is neceſlarie; thatis, that they had not the vow aCtually, but, would
hanc had it, if they.had been informed. Thefe things theothers granted to
be rrue, butnor obligatoric, as Articles of faith: The difficulties,in which
thzy could not agree, whete referred to the Synod, that is tothe generall
Congregation. 708 | |

-'Asit hapncd alſoin the third Article; which, though cuery one thought
to: be falſe, yetall did agrec;thar, in regard of the neceſhitic and vrilitic, Bap-
tilme doth proceede; in regard of the f1gnitication, Matrimony, inregard. of
the dignitic ofthe Miniſter, Confirmation ; inregrad of diuine worſhip, the
Euchariſt : byrbecauſc onecannortſay, without a diſtin&tion, which is more
worthy, itis better to omit the Article, which cannot bee vnderſtood with»

ont fubciltic. Another opinion was,thatall the reſpects of dignitic ought to

becexpreſled. And another, that the clauſe ſhould bee added to the Article;
that is; according to the diuers reſpets. This opinion was moſt followed,
bur :did -much- difpleaſe thoſe, who could not endure that the Synode
ſhould abafeic ſelfero theſe {cholalticall foojcries, (for ſo rhey called them)
wo wang tharCH KR 1's T-would hauc theſe weake opinionsbrought into
Us tatnh YL EY: > 4120 | l
*Alchough rhatthe fourth Article ought to: bee condemned ; yea, that
iEvas neceſlary ro amplificit,condemping the doctrine of Ziunglivs in par-
ticulargwho will haue the Sacraments to bee but fignes, by which: the faith-
> ..2 full

XUM

Se 00 WR C0” "I HI,
EY ” "RO
<< ed A 4 *
-

XUM

—— - > a —

L1 Bs 2. the Councell of Trent. 237
full are diſcerned from infidels; or Actes, and exerciſes of the profeiiion of 1547
Chriſtian faith, hauing no other relation; to grace, but as ſignes that one > —
hathreceiucd ir, Afccr chey treated of condemning choſe who denyerhar Sas Cuarcss 5:
craments doc conferre grace,to him thaepptterh.notabarre, or docnor con- Huany, n.
felle, thar grace is conrained inthe Sacraments and conferred; norby verrue 2202s t
of faith, but Ex opere operato. But comming to expound how they arecon- HR
tained, and their cauſalitie, euery one did agree, = grace-1s gained by all amr bg A
choſe aftions that excite deuotion, which proceedeth not from the force of <2nicr gre
che worke it{elfc, bur from the vercue of deuotion, which isinthe worker, re *
and theſeare ſaidin the Schooles, ro cauſe grace, Ex opere operantis. There
are other actions which cauſe grace, not by the deuotion of him thar wor-
keth, orof him that recciueth the worke , but by vertue of the work ir
ſelte. Such are the Chriſtian Sacraments, by which, grace is received., fo
that there be no barre of morrall {inne, rocxcludse it, . aw” there bee nor
any deuation. So by the worke of Baptiſme, grace is giuen to the infant,
whole minde is not mooued coward it, andio- one borne a foole, becauſe
there is no impediment of ſinne. The Sacrament of Chriſme docth the
like, and that of extreame vntion, thoughrhe ſicke man hath loſt his me.
moric. Bur hee that hath morrall ſinne, anddoth perſcuere aQtually, or ha
birually, cannot receiue grace, by reaſon of the contrarictic, nor becauſe
the Sacrament hath not vertue to produce it Ex opere operato , but
becauſe the receiuer is not capeable, being poſſeſſed with a contrarie
qualitie. : |

Though they all agreed in this, yer they differed, becauſe rhe Dominicans
didaffirme,thathow beir graceis a ſpirituall qualitic,created immediately by
Gop, yct ir is an inltrumentall and cticftive vertue in the Sacraments,
which cauſcth a diſpoſition in the ſoule rorecciucit. Andrhereforeir is ſaid
that they containe grace; not that ir is inthem as ina veſlcl}, bur as the cf=
fe&t in the cauſe, alleadging a ſubtill example, as the chezill is aCtiue, nor
oncly in ſcablingrhe ſtone, bur in giuing forme tothe Statue, "The Fran- The F-»-4
ciſcans ſaid that it could not be coneciued, how God, being a ſpirituall cauſe, -ic>, con-

nor agree 2-

can vſca corporallin{trument;for aſpiricuall effe&, as is grace; they did ab- voucthe

manner hoy)

ſolutely deny all cffctiue or diſpoſitiuevertuc jn theSacraments; ſaying they nun
haue no vertue, butby the promiſe of God, that ſooften as they ſhal be gd- mens oe
miniſtred, he willgiue his grace to them, Therefore icis ſayd they doe con- ge
rainc it,as inan cffetuall ſigne,nortby any vertue of their owne, but by a Di-

uinc promiſe,of infallible afſiſtance ro the minilterie. T hereforeit is a cauſc,

for that the effe& docth follow, not by any verrue of its owne, but by the
promilc of God, to giue grace ar that time zas the merite is cauſe of the
reward without any aCtiuitie. This they proouednot onely by the autho-

ritic of Scots, and Saint Bonaneriture, their Diuines, but by Saint ©Bernar

alſo who ſaiththat grace is recciued by the Sacraments, asa Canon is inueſt-

cd by the booke, and a biſhop by thering. Thercaſonswere expounded on

both ſides, with great prolixitie and ſharpeneſſe. And they cenſured one ans

other. The Dominicans ſaid, that the other opinion was neere to Luthe-
raniſme,and the others, that theirs, being impoſſible, gaue occafion-ro the
heretikes racalumniate the Chur ch, Some good Peclares defired ng
HEE tvithouf

_ -

1, P — ——PrtIE -
{lt et een een. Dated ad... ati. recmnert
"LR -— - TY
.

PS ah

228 The Hiſtorie of L#B;'2,
1547 - withour effec) to makepeace, ſaying, that in regard they agreed in the con-
{> > clufion, that the Sacraments.conteineandare cauſe of grace, it did lixtle im-
Cnarres 5. port in What manner,and thar'irwas better, not deſcending ro particulars, .
Hear. 8. to ſand inthe generall. But the Fryars replied rhat they ſpake not of words,
anert ©: burof eſtabliſhing, or annihilacing che Sacraments. There would ncuer
haue beenan end, if the Legate Sana Croce had not giuen order that the
ſhould paſſe to that which remained,and that afterwards they ſhould returne
. tocxamine whether ir were neceſſary to decidethe / grow ro leaue it,
The Legates - The Legates called ynto them the generals of the orders, and prayed
reprele the them to cauſcthe Fryarsto treat with modeſtie and charitic, without patr-
kbercie of he TiAlitic to thetr owne {cR, ſhewing they were calledro ſpeake againſt here-
Fryars.  fhes, andnot to make new ariſe by diſputes. And they wrote thereof to
Rome, ſhewing how dangerous the libertic was which the Friars did aſſume,
and ro what it might come. And they told: the Pope that a moderation
was neceſſary. For there being a fame ſpred of thoſe diſſenſions, and cenſures
which one partic pronounced againſt the other, it muſt needs raile ſcandal,
a1d ſmall reputation of the Councell.

It was thought fitro omir the fifth Article, as decided inthe former Sel-
ſion. But Friar Bartholmew Miranda called tro minde that Lather,by th at pa-
radox of his, thar the Sacraments doe nor conterre grace, but by exciting
faith,drew alſoa conclufton, that thoſe of the old, and of the Evangelical
law, arcof cquall vertue; which opinion was to bee condemned , as con-
trary tothe doatrineof the Fathers, and rhe Church;all hauing ſaid,thar the
olde Sacraments wereonely {1gnes of grace, but rhe new gonteine it and
cauſeit. No man did contradict the concluſion, bur the Franciſcans pro-
poſed : that it ſhould not bee fayd ofthe old Law, but of Moſes Law, in re-
gard that Circumciſion it ſelfe did cauſe grace: but it was not a Mofaicall
Sacrament;for Cn xk 1 5 Talſoſaid, it was not of Moſes, but of the Fathers ;
and alſo becauſe other ſacrifices, before Abraham, did conferre, and cauſe
grace. The Dominicans replycd that Saint Paul fayd plainely, that Abra-
ham had recciued the Circumciſion onely for a figne; that hee being the firſt
vnto whom it was giuen, it is as much as to ſay it was inſtituted onely for a
ſigne. Andthe queſtions of the manner of conteining, and cauſing grace, re-
rurnediinto the field. Friar Gregorie , of Padua, ſaid hereupon, that it was a
cleere caſe in Logique, that things in the ſame kinde haue idencitic and diffc-
rence among themſelues. If the old Sacraments and ours had onely dit-
ference, they would not all bee Sacraments, bur equiuocally, if onely iden-
titie,they would bee abſolutely the ſame thing. Therefore they mult be-
ware to put difficultic in plaine matters for ſome diucrſitie of wordes; and
that Saint Auguſtine had ſayd, that theſe and tholſc,arc diuers inthe figne, bur
equall in the thing ſignified. And in another place, that they were diucrs
inthe vifible ſpecies, ry ſame inthe intelligible fignification; and that
clſc where he puts a difference; that thoſe were promisfiue, and theſe demon-
Aratine: which another doth expreſſe in another rerme, that thoſe were pre-
nunciatiue,and thelc conteRtatine. Whence it plaincly appearerh,that they agree
and diffcrin many things; which no ſcnſible man candeny : and therefore

it was wiſcdome,notto put'that Articlein the beginning, neither was irto
any
Y

». 7
—— ——

EL 1s. 21 the Conncetlof Ti rent. 249

any purpoſe to rovelx iriiv'theprefent Dectee, Anotheropitioncameforth, 3 345
that che'opinion'of the Latherans ,and Zuinglians, was robee condemned, | JO
withour deſcendins-to the'patriculars, ''For they {#y," there iFno diffe. Cuincnt 3.
rence; betwcenethe ld and newSacrametits, burinthe Rites. 'Batit hath Hpuzr v. ©
beene (hewed, thirirhereare other differetices; "and thetefore; they ate to be EERD
condemned forthis-onely, withour deſeetiding to ſhewiyhat't ofc differen
tes are”: ered] IC; | | | 1 2002 DIO ge 1 Of!

Burrhe ſize way cenſured bythe Dominicans; who faid itwas properts
the Euangelicall Sxeraments to'gine grace; and that'the vid did tot bitie'fr, *
bur onely by chevertae of deuvtion: and thar this wasthic opiritoh of Sattir
Thomas.. They alleadged, for principall ground ;the derermmatibH&Pths
Florentine Councell, that the Sacraments of the old Lawdid nor cauſe$rice;
burdid figure,thavitrizult bee giuen by the paſſi6ri of 'Citx1 57.” Bip Becauſe
S; Bonaneture,andiSemis did mainaine; that the Cirtaraciſion'difl Ehfttre-
grace Bx 6þery operats, Sedrus adding, chat, inimediarly afrerthe finncoF Adam;
2 Sacrament was inifticuted,in'which a grace was giuento babes by vettue of
It , that is, Ex opere operato , the Francilcans ſaid the Adtitle Was" trite 4nd
could notbe cenftretl;andrhabif;; as Sattie Thomas THi8%; chilthreniBcore
Ca R 15T,were faued by the farhersfaith; the ſtate of 'Chiiftians Was Worle.
For nowiche'farhets faith doth riot helpe the children; withort Biptitme ;
and Saim Huftinz ſaith”, that the childethat is caried bythe fither fobebip2
ized , if herdic ir the way, is damned.  S6 that if fart onely Gi eheh ff
fice, thocondiviorwof the {ones af-Chriftians is now worſe,” tn thefe diff-
eultics jrarany-did propoſe , "that the Atcicle;; as probable, #iGutt ee 455
murced. (mn Fhard 50: yet + 15% CHIOTIED) C721 DABET 0 1) 102uOD wor?
/\Toleauc outthe ſfeurnth arcvhth; there Was 2 Sreatfgricm ent "But iy Concernitig
the. ninthyob the Chalabter, Friar Dominicns So/o;etrdeatioured to delarkArtfat opined by
it hath foundarionifi theholy Serfprure;atidhat'i cudt bipheld'ylrh BER ent”
foran; Apottolictll Tradition YN though thenamecharNitorbeen q'by
the Farliery'i yer cherhirio ſiorified is moftancicht VENALYS dil ROMSEY
him fo greata ſcope , becauſe it did not appeatt /thar Oni: ,"6t tREMAfter -
ob the Sumences, had'mate any nitttidn ta 2 Vet; lob Sedt6 AHG (that roions-

1 wasnot necefiry ; by the word+6*the Stfiptire'or of thes Adrts _————
firmeitgbyr dnely by/the nurhot#P bf the(CHireh; d tHidS hugh WRAYASEY heat wn ot
Doctor ,o dente things with a KhYtoFEbuftcdie” Ti wah w

Wikedrg'! 1
10g whatthing they meant it (hoald'be; an@ Whore Fitgfit 6H TEM Pt rar

plicity of: Schoolc-opinions J ſomemakitiy if quality and” Hoo thofe

vere fourc opiniohs, accorditigt5 the | | 0 the Qialites TO
fpiricuall{power; ſome ati habitedr Hf &R7 others tpirtibl ioure?
andthe opmion chav'it iwasn (crfible meaphoticall quakty® Unto
abctcors. ..Somewouldbateir real alatiorn lies fabHiiic of e;
ie

tht

whowereio dethrehbav Arre Pn OT Ie: ng. Phe

of opinionsjcoricetaitipehe Gros Fe rs bo erp b
etieadcofcheſoute; forneti the volterftndiff) fort infiewity 29d Mere io womb 1
veantcdtr, whognie phate iy heads by 2UIBLhe2} wort out!
$d9,;aDominican Friaf} we, pages > ork = <ug | Ricbalt gn 1.
qualioy-; befbre:cho eb ofloface; ahat # WS of tWoldfr2'on; wi
bit; which

The Hiſtorie of Lis a

1547 Which can neuer Bcceaboliſhed, the other which may bee loſt,and regained;
"— the former whereof is called a Character , and the later a certaine ornament,

PayL 3.

| Caarins 5. The Sacraments which giue the firlt ,cannot bee reiterated , becauſetheir cf-

— | —_ —

Her 8. fectcuerremaineth ; the others may , when their effect is loſt, This caried
x2 afairc thew, but was notapprooucd by many , becauſe there was no other
author to be found of that ornament , but Saint Thomas; who allo ,though
he begart it, yer did nor thinke it worthy of education, But howſocuer , all
14... agreed inthis generall , that three Sacraments haue the Character ; yer ſome
mens havea did ſay modeltly, that itwasto bee approoucd as more probable, notas ne-
_—_ ccſlary : others on thecontrary, that it wasan, Article of Faith, becauſe In-
nocentius the third, made mention of it, and was ſo defiiedby the Councell of

Florence, 7. Heoamn 200507
The Arricle, that the honeſty of the Miniſter was not neceſſary,was ſo
diſcuſſed by Saint Auftine, in ſo many bookes, againſt the Donatifts;thatthe
Diuincsdidall agree : and belides it was allcadged, for a principall ground,
that the Article wascondemned, by the Councell of (,onflance, amongſt the

errors of John Wicklufe. * DISA T_T TY
They, all condemned cheeleuenth Article, as contrary to the Scripture,
Tradition,and vic of the vaiuerlall Church. . r
The twelfth, of the formes of the Sacraments , was diſtinguiſhed , as re-
_ ceiuingitwoſences 7 vnderitanding by forme, cither the eſſenriall words, as
itis ſayd,thatcucry, Sacrament hath , for matter, the ſenſible clement, and,
for forme, the word, or vaderltanding,, by forme, all the formeand rite of
che MiniRery,which includeth many thingsnot neceſſary, bur decent. And
they chought fit ro make rwo Canons thereof; by the firſt, condemning him
- of herclie,, that, layrh,, thac che forme may be changed, being, inſtituced by
” CH R.1.s'T .Bur,for the ſecond {enſe,though accidentall things may receiue
mutation, yet whenany rite is brought in by publike guthority,; or recei-

— © uedand confirmed by common vic , it ſhould nor bein eucry mans power

it is conucnicnt for. ſomenew relpect. 5;

to changeit, butonely inthe Popes, as Head of the Church vniucrlall,wheis

Concernine _- 11 rb chireeenttl., of the intention of the Miniſter, they could nor diſſene
che neennion , fx0.11 the,Councell of Florence , which holds it neceſſary : butwhat intention
tier 1m he3d- Was required ,, Was hard to cxpreſie,, in regard of the yaricty of opinions a-
Rk See. bout the efficacic apd vertue, of che Sacraments : becauſe there cannor bee
neat. the ſameintention of, two. who haucdiyers opinions. The common an-
{wer was, that the intention ra docas the. Church did, was ſufficient. Not-
withſtanding this cxpolitioh.,the- difficulties remained , for that mens opi-
nions wha = Church is, beeipg divers y their intention in adminiſtring the
Sacrament, would; proouc various alſo. It ſeemed they mighelay , it was
notdifferent, . whenall bad chefame aime to doc that which hath been in«
kiuredby Cari sT., andgblerued byzhe Church , though a-falſe Church
berakentor atruedp charthe cice of the one and rheother be the ſame. ©

adicoure of +7 Im ghis particular, the Biſhop of Minori propoſedathing worthyto bete=
ers rom: Peared heercandattcemed by all co deſerue greatconfiderations Hoe ſayd,
che ineenu0n char tothe Lugherans, who giucnogther vertuc tothe Sacraments, then-oq,
&&. — cxcitcfaiyh, which notwithſtanding may bee ſtirred yp fome other way , it
28 | did

L 8.2, | the Councell of Trent, 241

did little import to recciuc the true Sacrament. Whereupon they lay it is 1547
not neceſlary, and thinkeit not conucnient, thatthe malice of a wicked Mi- Ov

AVL. 3

nifter, who hach no intention to conferre the'true Sacrament, ſhould bee Cu.ns; 5;
ablcto hurt, becauſe weeareto regard wharthe faithfull receiuerh,, and not F030.
what is giuens. But among it che Catholikes , who doe truely artributeto I
the Sacrametitpower to giue grace co him thar.doeth not refilt ir, {ccing it
happeneth very ſeldome, thar grace is obtained by any orher mecanes, ſure-

ly lictle children, and many who hauc burſmall vnderſtanding, are faued

no other way. . And ordinary men have ſo weake a diſpoſition, thatit

- would not ſufficeewithour the Sacrament.. And thoſe few, who,as © benixes,

hauc a perfedt diſpoſition, yet doe receiue-greater grace by the Sacrament,
Therefore it much. concernetly a Chriſtian ro: bee aſſured, that hee receis

ucrh chat which is truc and effcttuall.:.. If a Pricit, hauing charge of fours

or five thouſand ſoules,were an infidell;; bur a formall hypocrite, and in abs

ſoluing the penirent, baprizing of children, and conſccrating the Euchariſt,

had an intentionnotto/doewhattheQharch doeth,ir muſt beefayd that the

children aredamned, the penitentnor abſolued,and that alfretnaine without

the fruit of the Communion. | Neitktr-is itenougtito ſay, thar faich {i upply-

eth; becauſc irdoth not helpe childrenar all, accordingzortheCatholikedo-

Etrine, nor orhers, fo much as the Sacrament: 'and ro attribute fo'great ver-

ruc to faith, were to take all yerruefromthe Sacranients;ahd'co fallinto the

}

Lutheran opinion, , - 131 7 ond! 2: C
Hee conſidered how atender-Farher would be afflicted: when his fonne

was about to die, if hee doubted of rhe imen(ion of che baprizing Prictt. So
hee that feeleth himſelfe of-a weakediſpotiionzand is tobce baptized, whar
anxietic will he haue, that perhaps thePriclt is a Counterfeit Chriſtiat1, and
mocketh him, not meaning to baptize him , but onely ro waſh him in jeſt.
And the ſame may bee feared in confethon, and receiujng theEuchariſt.. He
added, if any ſayd theſe caſes were rare, would toGod .irwerefo; and thar, in
this corruptage, wee had not cauſeto doubt they were mavy. But ſuppoſe
they are very few, or but oneonely. Let there bee'a knaue Prielt, who tay-
neth , and hath not an intention to adminiſter thetrue Bapriſmeto a childez
whoafter, being a man growen,is created Biſhop of a great Citie, and liuerh
many yeeres inthat charge, ſo that hee hath ordained a great part of the
Prieſts; irmult bee aid, that hce, being nor baptized, is not ordained , nor
they ordained, who arc promoted by him. So, in that great Citie, there will
bee neither Euchariſt, nor Confeſſion, becauſe they cannot'bee without the
Sacrament of order,nor order without atruc Biſhop, neither can hee receiuc
order who is not baptized. Behold millions of nullities of Sacraments, by
the malicc of one Miniſter, in one 'Acte onely. And hee that thinkerh that
God ſupplyeth by his omanipotency,and prouideth againſt theſe daylyoccur-
rences by extraordinary remedies; will ſooner make one belecue that God,
by. his prouidence, hath prouided-that ſuch accidents ſhould not happen,
Therefore the Biſhop ſaid to cucry inconuenierice; God hath made proui-
{ion heerein , by ordaining that robee a Sacrament which is adminiſtred,ac-
cording to the rite inſtiruted by hinſelfe; though the Miniſterhaue another

inward intention. And hee added thar this doeth not crofle the common
X docrine

$

I'Þ
Sv
,
p.
4
50:
'}
':
»

-—_

> Iia4 2 x p GR...” (4 . h =
—_ 4, =

24-2 The Hitory of L1s. 2,

1547 dodrine of the Divincs, or the determivarion of the Florenune Councell,
which requireth-intention, becauſe the inward intenrion 1s noreo beevndet+

PavL 3.

| Cuaxrss 5. ſtood, but that which is manifeited bythe externall worke,though inwardly

Hexry 8.

-— wy are innumerable. Hce brought many reaſons for proofe, and at laſt the
example written by Sogomene, That the children of Alexandria, being ar
play by the Sea (ide, did imitate, inicft, the ations viced inthe Church, and

harry Arbanafius,created Biſhop of the play,did baprize other children nor baprizcd

bemzacbild before; whercof Alexander, of tamzous' memorie; Biſhop of Alexandria, being
ce aducrtized,he was troubled at it,and calcd the children,andasked what their

-_ Biſhop had done;and {aid ynto them 2 and vnderttandiog that all the Ecclefi-
alticall rice was ob{crued, by che Counlell of other Prieſts, did approoue the
bapciſie; which could not bee maintained, if fuch an intention, as others
{pake of, were required, bur might well beein tharmanner that himſclfe did
cxpreſlc it, | =

The opinion The Divines did not approoue'this doctrine;, yet-were troubled, and

542... knew not bow to relolue the reaſon}: Bur they thil defended thar the true

of 3M::292r1 Was

»o::eceind. inreqtion of the Minilter was neceſſary, cicher actuall, or virtual, and thar
ur he pub withour it the Sacrament was not of force, notwithſtanding any cxtcruall
Lo: dMdemonſtration. I mult notrefrainero ſhew ailo (though it bee an antici-
gow ene. Pation of the fir time }-thar howſoeuer che Synade did after determine ab»
hs mud. fojarely that the intention of the Miniſter is neceſſary , yer this Prelate re-
mained firme,and, in alittle Booke that hee wrote of this Subiect a yeercat-
ter, did lay that the Synode of Trent wasof his opihion, and that the deter»
mination ought to-bce vnderſtood in hisfence. There was no difficultie
in-condcmning the laſt Article, by reaſon of that which hath becne ſaid by

others. : |. | |
The matter of Baptiſme,in thethird Article, gaue them greater trouble,
what that Bapriſme is, which is giuen by the beretikes. Allgroundedthem-
{clues ypon the Schoole-doftrine, receiued bythe Florentine Councel, that a
Sacramentrequireth matter, forme,and intention, and that water is the mat-
ter,the expreflion of the Actin the name of the Father , the-Sonne, and the
holy Ghoſt, the forme, and to doc whar the Church doerh, the ivtention.
Whereupon they eſtabliſhed an yndoubred covcluſton, that thoſe heretikes
hauetrue baptiſme,and agree with vs in theſe three things; which they ſayd
was recciued by an Apoſtolicall tradition, eſtabliſhed long before by Pope
Stephanus the firlt, in the beginning of the third age, and approoucd by all
the Church following. Bur thoſethat vnderltand antiquitie doc know,thar
this was not the opinion of Stephan, in whole time, matter, forme, and in-
tention were not heard of. For that Pope did thinke abſolutely that thole
who were conuerted from any hereſte whatſocucr, ought not to bee rebap-
tized; though, in thole times, the heretikes, except ſome few Montaniſts, were
Gnoſtiques, who vicd extrauagant bapriſmes, by reaſon of the exorbitant opi-
nions which they held, of the divinitic, and perſon of CHR1sT. And it
s certaine that thoſe Baptiſmes had nor the forme which is vied now, and
yet the Church of Rome did the receive to repentance, cuery ſort of here-

tikes indifferently , without rebaptizing them. The-Biſhops of Africa and
( appadocia,

Ke: it bee contrary. And lo all inconueniences are remooued, which otherwile

L1B..«: . | the Comcellof Toes. | 24.3

Capadara reredineal oppoſiteyſaying,chutaltſiaaerike were aTebar tis 154 _-
zcd.i Inth< Councdof Negamiddle courſewarhdldgdiade roi yu yl 4 _—_

—

*/ - ſhould not beerebbptizedy burtho RandinitacndiMiaren/isſhoyllo: The, cer? ;.

Cotnccll of: Conflidntinople did mumnermany bexecikes which wereoto!bedte- Fat
baptized ;:atid orhers-to. bee: recorurtÞco meWirohew; job whom. it Foxcrr; |
would-b<chardo'\ſhew that tho ſame formpuias viad-o Bur: ywhithris of YO
rtiore imporrance) Sala Bernard dorth wimeſey thatthe Newatiens Encra-
riques, Saccofors were not rebaprized in Rome, \vhonrnowithitanding hee!
did; tchaprizey 'ncither.did-thar-Saintthinke/this diuedfiriclwoibcodblutd : --
anely hor faid, ir would'bee good roaflemblemanyBilops roxrefoladay. fe
anan vniforme procceding.”: Bur giuing no:morcheede votlielethiogs then
rofables;ahcy held che currem:do@trine; chat anhererike doth micly bap-
cxzc, if he vicch che wordsandtrach theinronrionot theCharchs 113 (i [yh 7
3. The foprch/ Article; rhac Baptiſme was/Repentance;'ia regardiof rhe =
forceiof the ſpcectr, was:held by-many novro-beeifallezialleddging the E-
uangtliſt, who ſaith, that lobn-preachodirbe Baptime of Repentance; and thar
"Paul, inthe ſixt ro:the Hebrewes,calleth-Baprifme by the hame of Repentance.
And:ſomany Fathers'haue faydithe: fame; that the Article!coulbamor bee
_ candenyhed, exceptit did lay: tharBaptiſme:was the Sacrament of Peyance,
Bur becauſc ir ſeemedin this ſence ro bee the ſame with thedaatertichy Arti»
cle, manyicBought fictoleaue it: b dove: 26059 219111 alan tial »ds nogq)/ |
::.The g.and 19. belonging toithe Bapriſme:ob Jobn.z niany wert of opi- .
monthatithey ougheto bee ome? - Forinvtſpeakingiotthole of the old *—+-
law, it waslefſe fit zo{peake of thar'which wasin the middle, invregard their
ſcope wasTo handlc the Sacraments of the new law: | Butothers faid;tbarthe
heretikes mindewwas, not to cxaltthe Bapriſmo of lobmandro makewequall wietherths
with thatiof CHR 1'sT; but ro abaſcthacof CyrisT; andtomake irequali iow rpg
with lobns bapriſme; inferring, thar, asthis did notgiuegrace;burwava/pure * <3
ſignification,fo was outsallo, which is a molt formall berefie;/'w7 108 #1 +:
i. In the eleventh of the Rites, ſome would haucthy,lubltaminls diſtin-

uiſhed from others; and ſaid, thar thoſc.onely cannos be'ominred wirhour
; rows ' Others would exclude the caſe of neceſ{itic onoly 3 and:rhatiother-
wiſe it was not-lawfull ro omit any whatſoeuer; forinzegard the'Church;
goucrned by the holy Ghoſt , hath ordainedthem, thrpareneceſſarybyrhe
. precepr, though not by the {ubltance of. che 'Sacramone. ''Theyatleadged
many Chapters of the'Popes,and Councels, 'all which,would prooucyaine,
if euery oncmight changeas heliſterh. That = which(pcakerhofimmer-
ſton, though it bec a more cxprefle figure of the death, þurialt, and vcfurre-
&tion of CatusT, yetit was condemned by all; and: rnany'plates ofithe Pro-
phers were alledged , where afperſion, or effuſion of : water is tpoken of,
all which,they ſayd,ought literally ro bevnderſtood of bapritme,! (12551 2

All fer chemſclues againit thoſe three which ſpeake of che baprifiia of

children, alleadgirw; the docrineof the ancient Fathers and Schoolemen;
and many inucCtiuves wete made againft Erafmnus;' armibuting voro-him tht £-4wme is
_ Invention of the fifteenth, ſaying, it was impiousand pernicious; ard would _

open a way to aboliſh all Chriſtian Religion: adding, chat if the children of
the yncircumciſed lewes, comming to age wete bounds keepeallthe law,

X a and

LEI
S +

:
'$

BE
244 The Hiftoric.of vi Fe.

1547 and were punithed far Tiras more Bacompelithetbunes:
5 ofthe fairhfull ro abledugthe Chrittizn law; thattag)\ tobkeriniedbPurd had:
Cuaniss, 5 deſeructly condemnadithe Article avd ogiuymt btSxngdtodod 10n biuor »
Amar 8,  Thdyconcluded;thatthe {ixcecmb wesgentcindqurabe former Aaticles,)

C2851 + becauſcindid rakedwway. Penang; onc ofabiefeyuor Sacraments.) Bar hibdaid,!
: that thedaſkwas.conttary totheproper muitttry of baptiſm, inthe cry. bes:
ginning whereof the catechized vadnioniBied, that;at bite willhaueereroatt:

: life, it 13;heceſſary.ro.obferuc all thecommaindonens.co: I 9139 $40100% © 14 11
Of coofrme- Im tbe Articles abaut cornfirrhariony abere| was,no difterence:c;and all;
7:2.  forchcirground, did allcadgethe QoupcbbobFortneticAnd that which is)
ſaidin the third Artcke,thar yang men: did formerly giuean account of thai
faith inthe preſcnceot the Church, was generally. deerdefd; char, nor-becitg:

vled in theſe times, one ought to/beleeue thvas newer ved: betore ; for the:

Chutclt would ncuer bauc-inermitred that ceremonies \Many: places of
Councels avid aticicat wricetswereallcadgeds bigkingmention of: Chrifmes

and: Vnctjien, whych rannorafree to infiruction prifgzamination, {Thores:

fore they Eoncluded;;thar ir wasa molt vatouatgrorabea,tochapgeſoprinci-

pall a Sacrament, apainit the common meatjing ofalirbe Church, inroarite
perhapsbſrd in fomeparticular place, butgeucr.yniuerlally, asche:YnRion

of thalfknſnts ft di 2375} oido atboruee} 31g a

Whetberone- Vpon the laſt article there was much difhculcie, in: regard>Saint Grego-
rd # Pope, didgraunt the miniltery ra fimple Prieſts! "The, Francilcans,

be winiftcr of Te, t -
_ Corjamerin* pecording t0-the dadrine of Saint'* Bonauenrure , toilowed by. ohm Scorus,

andtheirorder , which doeth-attriburethe mivittery rarhe Bithop oncly,as
Pope 4driar the {uxtidid allo maintaine, anfwered, char:it was apermiſtiion
- bnely forthartime;and again{tthe Popes will;to auaide the feandall of thoſe
- 5, People! ofclle tharthe Voction, permitted by Gregoriez was notthe Sacra-
--* mentaf.confirmarion.: Which aniwere nor pleaſing Saint Thomas; becauſe
it did nor wholly free the Pope from having erred, hee-found.a temper,
and ſaid,thatthough'the Biſhop beeche miniiter of Centirmatiop, yer, with
the Pope$-permiſhon,it may beeadminiltredby cheBricit.- Orhers oppoſed;
and faid;thar the doctrine of the Romane Church was ablolute, thar the
miniſters of Sacraments are-inliituted by CH x 15 T,'whom:though the
Pope can/command to the exerciſe of the, miniſterie; yer hee canhor make
the Sacramentto be of force that is admipilixed by others, por nullific that
which is conferred. by the miniſter, inſticured by CarisT, though againit
hiscommandement.-:And therefore if CHRIST hath inſtituted the Buſhop
for. miniſter, the Pope canror make that grant to the Prieſi; if CHr1s7
hath granted thatthe Prieli may doc ic, the Pope cannot hinder him. For it
wouldferme a [trange thing, that in the other Sacraments, being all of grea-
tcr neceſſitie, CHRisT (hould preſcribe the miniſter, withour' leauing
any ltbertie yato mev, and in this, which may arany.time bee deferred, vie
a {ingularitie, whereof,for {ixe hundred yeeres, vatill the time of Gregorie,no
.. man had made any mention, buildingan Article of faith vpon foure words,
' ſpoken by occaſion: andit the epiltle had been loſt,no man would euer haue
inuented that diftinQion;.,vnuſuall in ſuch a marter, nor to bee applicd ro
any thing bur to this place of Gregorie.

In

Fs "*,

Da MRS ns be >:
wet M4 1 P
Eo. 2 *” -

XUM

- — ——_
_ — — an

Ly B.Z. * the Councell of Trent. | 245

_———

Others, being not ſatisfied with chereſolurion of either party, did pro- 1547
polc, that the words of the Florentine Councell ſhould beeraken. Some S446,
thought fir, onely ro condemne him that would ſay, that the Prieſt, and nor Cranes 5.
the Biſhop onely, is the ordivary Miniſter, giuing by the word ( ardinary ) far 8.
power to inferre, therefore there is another extraordinary, or to ſay , that MEM52 »-
there can bee no other, becauſe rhe Sacraments haue no Miniſter, but Or-

dinaric.

While the forenamed Articles, weredilcuſſed by the Diuines, in the Con- A Decree of
gregation of the Canonilts , aſſembled ro colle&, and remedie the abules, atocemeony
concerning the Sacraments in general, and, in particular, of Baptiſme, and 5 b-*
Confirmation, a Decree was made contcyning {ixe heads : which faid thus
in ſubltance. That the Synode, defring to remooue the abuſes, brought in
by men or time, and to.tcach the Miniſters of Churches, and all the faich-
full, how to gouerne themſelues in obſeruing, miniltring, and receiuing the
Sacraments, doeth ordaine. 1. Thatthe Eccleftaſticall Sacraments, ſhall
bee freely conferred , without raking or demanding any thing for them,
vader any pretence whatſocuer, and no cheſt, veſ{c}], cloath, or any ſuch
thing (hall bee ſhewed, by which a demand may bee intimated; nor the Sa-
cramentſhall bee denied, or deferred, vpon pretence of any long and ancient
cultome, not to conferre them before ſome certaine ſtipend bee paid, or ſa-
tisfaction of ſomedebtr, conſidering that neither cuſtome, or length of time,
doeth diminiſh the {inne, but rather increaſetb it: and the offenders ſhall bee
puniſhed according to the lawes, madeagainltſymoniacall perſons. 2. The
Sacramear of Bapriſme, ſhall not bee conferred in prophane places, but in
Churches onely, except in caſcof necefſitic,and when the children of Kings,
and Princes are to be baprized, according to the conſtitution of Clement rhe
fifth , which ſhall not take place in all chat have dominion, bur oncly in
great Princes. Neither ſhall the Biſhop giue the Chriſme, bur in ſeemely
ornaments, and in the Churches, ſacred places, or Epiſcopall houſes.
3- - The Sacrament of Bapriſme ſhall bee adminiltred by able Prieſts;in the
mother Churches onely, except, by reaſon of great difficulty ro goe to them,
the Biſhop thinke fat to grant itto other Churches, or that ir _ been gran-
red timeout of minde: in which Churches, holy water; taken from the mo-
ther Church, ſhall bee kept in a cleancand decent veſſell, 4. In Baptiſme
and/Chriſme, there ſhall bee allowed but one God-father, who ſhall neither
bee infamous, mor excommunicated, nor interdicted, nor vnder age, nor a
Monke,nor any that cannot performe what he promiſerh. And in Chrilme,
hee ſhall not bee recciued for a god-father , who hath nor recciued Chriſme
himlſelfe. 5. To take away the abule, practiſed in many places, to carry
about the water of Baptiſme, or chriſtened children, with their forchead
bound, to makemany god-farhers, by waſhing of the hands, or looſing
the forchead, the Prieſts, in regard no.compaternity 1s contracted by thele
mcanes , ſhall nor permit the warer of Bapriſme to bee carried out of the
Church, bur ſhall caule it to bee caſt into the'Sacrary, and the Font to bee
ſhur vp. And che Biſhops, when they giue the Chriſine, ſhall make ewo
clerkes ſtand at the Church doore, to yntic and waſhrtheforeheads , of thoſc
that hauc recciued the Chriſme,, not ſuffering any that is tied to gocout -

þ - 3 rac

_
ts EE es ow... 7 whom «
-

* _ - ow Aw.
me ga On; EIT Ogg —_—_——— RR". Pet
- oy” LW
—_—

he % p
cy
" — = as q

rn —_
£41" ba, a
, _— .

wa

———-— 4 . > _ pro morn FP Pg. ,  AK.apr © ha
G ” . * = 7 e As a, _
yr A reg . « TIF"
OE EIIIIN PR mn] =. all;us
o EY d © 19 rn

_ -

hd Xe ue SIE

x * 8 5 24 oy a
a / "1 fo;
PaſgDs>- cs REI ae hd IP
a

py —_ _ - 5
i. Led

3240 0 44K F- DEE

246

| The Hiſtory of* Lis 2.

1547
(> \—N
PAYt..23-
CHARLES F,

| — _——

Hremxar 8,
FaAaXCi1S' 1.
-— -7* a

Dircuiries
reterrcd ro the
geneall Cons

greg ito,

In which thcy
could not bc

dccaded,

the Church. 6. The Biſhops (hall beediligencly carctall,;nurro confirme
any who is excommunicated, interdicted, orin mortal-finne.

And though the Canonilts did more ealily agree 1n theſe Decrees, then.
the Theologues in their diſcuſſions, yer ſome difterences were amonglt
then, for-rclolution whereof, becaulc afrerlong diſputation, they could
nor agree, they put them informe, and referredthe deciſion to th-generall
Congregation. The firſt doubr was, whether vnro theſe wordes, that
is, tharnothing ſhall be required ordemanded, it ſhould bee added, or recei-
ucd. The ſecond, whether they ſhould addethefe words ; vader pretence
of any cuſtome whartſocuer. The third , whether they ſhould vic fome
words, to {ignific, that the Synodedocth nor prohubire valuncary oblations,
or doth prohibite them onely, when they are giuen in regard of the Sacra-
ment, and notfor other reſpects of pietie, or whether the Decree ſhould bee
left in its vniucrſaliry.

Bur there was the ſame difficulty, in the generall Congregation, impoſl1-
ble to bce reconciled. Thoſe that required theadditions, notto receme, or
pretend cuſtome;, alleadged the Goſpel ; Freely you hae receined,, freely giue_;
and many Canons, anathematizimg him that giueth or receiueth a temporall
thing, for a ſpirituall. T hat cuſtome, againit the law of God and narure, is
corruption,and cannot take place, Thar in the title of ftimonie,the cuſtome
of giuing , or recciuing,, for poſlcſhon of benefices , benedictions of marr-
ages, for burials, bencdiCtion of the Chrifmme, for oyle, or for the ground
of the buriall, is reprehended and condemned. Which the rather ought to
be applyed to the Sacraments, in regard,it tharbee nor protybited, noching

is done, becaule the corruption is vicd1n all places, and cuery one will cx-

cuſc himſelfe witch it. That as the cuttome of receiuinganything before, ts

condemned in the Decrec, lo the cultometo receiue after, ought ro bee. con- *

demned, by the ſame reaſon; or elle, by condemning that, this is approoued.
And for voluntary oblations, they would hauc it generally forbid, ro giue
or receiue any thing alittle before, or a lictle after, tor any reſpe&t whatſoc-
uer ; becaule, in reſpect of the time, one may preſume thatiris giuen for the
Sacrament. And heere the glofſe was alledged, which faith, that howſocuer
It is a worke of pictic, to put money into the boxe, yet to doe it in-time of
receiuing the Sacrament, breedeth ſuſpition of ſimonie:.and therefore that
the time is to bee reſpected , which may make a thing ſeeme euill, which o-
therwiſe may bee accounted good. That Ged doeth command, 70 take away
all occaſion of ſcandal, and to abſtcine from all appearance of emill, Andtherefore
that the Sacraments may bee purely adminiltred, they would haue yoluntary

-oblations ablolutely forbid, in time of adminittring the Sacraments, exhot-

ting the faithfull,tovſerhem,in other times and occaſions, «i

On the other {ide was alleadged , that the tourth Councell of (arthag?
granteth the receiving of whar 1s offered for baptizing of Children; andthat
the Diuines, hauing determined that noremporall thing {hall be receiued for
the Sacrament, doc confent withall, that one may reccine for the paines in
ad rim{tring them, and much rather when it is Tiucn Or receiued, not in re-
ſpe of the Sacrament, but by way of almes, or cl{e the Lairy would hauc
no occa(ions to exerciſe workes of charity, and the poore Curates wouldnort

be

L1d.8. the Councell of Trent. Cs - > 6

beableto liue. They all-adged theauthoritic of Saint Paid, Thatit i not 1537

lawfull ro muzzel the Oxe that treadeth the corne,and that he that ſerueth at "Maa
thealtar thouald liue by it. That it ſhould neuer be confeſſed that any cufſtonie Cranes 5-

- ——

is introduced to giue or receiue any thing, for the miniſtring of the Sacta- nia s.

Francis ti;

ments; becauſc it being generally v{cd, ir would bee as much as to fay,thit 4
pernicious abule hath bene tolerated, yea approued inthe Church vmuers
ſall. Therefore that they ought not to ſpeake of breaking a cuſtorne that
was neucr in vie; lcalt thinking to remedy that which is not cuill, but lo c:
ſteemed by the tendernelle of ſome mens conſciences, the Church ſhould
recetue a mortall wound. "Their principall reaſon was that Innocentits
the third,in che generall Councell, in the Chapter, 4d ApoRtolicam, docth not
onely declare the cultome of making oblations,in the adminiitration of Sa-
craments,to be lawfull,and ordaine it (hould bee obſerued, but that the Bi-
ſhop ſhould be puniſhed, in caſe he ſhould go abour to change it. Therefore
 trodetermine the contrary now, would be to condemne, very {candaloully, 4
Pope 8a general Councel, as approuers anddefenders of a pernicious crror.
It was replyed by the other {1de, that the Statute of the Councell of Car-
thage doth condemne,lcuercly,the exa&tion,and doth tolerate the voluntary
oblation: bur thatir was amended by the Councell of Heliberum, which for-
biddeth the yſc,ob{crued in thoſe times,thatthe baptized ſhould pur ſome
money into the font. That the inuentio of the Divines,diſtinguiſhed the mi-
niſtery of the Sacrament from che paines in adminiltring it, and the diſtin-
&ion to recciuein reſpect of the Sacrament, or of ſome hing elle, and that
of the firſt and ſecond intention, are metaphyſicall, and chimericall, conſt
dering the words of the Goſpell, are deliuered in abſolute rermes, not ſub-
ic ro cauill,or glolles, which doe marrethe Text: That God by Moy/es and
Saint Paal, prohibiting the muzzcll, doch meane that food ſhould nor bee
denycdtothe hungry beaſt, yer that he ſhould nor be filled with ſuperfluity.
That the pouertieot the Cleargie could not be pretended, hauing notonely
competent, but.abundant reuenues, That the abulc is that rhe armor:
of Churches reſide nor in theirbenefices, and yet will recciueallthe fruites,
hiring the inccrtaintic to poore leely Prieſts, who ate forced ts {ell all ro
keepe themlelues aliue. That they ſhould r:ther make provniſion that all
ſhould reſide , by which meanes they would haue morethen enough for
their maintenance,and ſhoulFnornecd to ſell the Sacraments. And by this
occalion they began .againeto dilate of reſidencie, and of che good thar
would follow declaring itro bee, De inre dinino, That if any benefice with
curc of loules bee ſmall, prowſion ſhould bee made, by vniting other ſimple
benefices andin caſethere were no other way,by cauſing the peopie tocon-
tribute fortheir maintenance. That it is better,and pleafſerh God more co
confeſſetheerror palt, and to redreſſcit, then ro defend ic, and peticuere.
And theCardinall of Monte, who otherwiſe did not ſeeme iticlined to refot-
mation, was. percmptory in this, anſwering thole that alleadged the au-
choritic of Iynocentizs the third, and the generall Councel,that they did great
wrong tothart Pope and thoſe Fathers, to ſay they defended lo. great an a-
bule,and tharthey ſhewed their ignorance. For if they reade the z chapter of

the lame Councell, which is the third before that which they haue alledged,
2: my

SV

Nd

24.8 | The Hittory of b _

1547 they might hauclecne the meaning very plaincly, and how thoſe Fathers
"pe did forbid all cxaCtioiis, condetining allo the cultome tothecontrary. And,
Czaxres 5- 1n that Chapter,the cultomes to giueany thing for admimiltring the Sacra-
Hazy 8, Ments arc notallowcd, but others;being lawfull, honeſt, and in fauour of
faaxers 7: the Church, are permitrtcd, as tenthes, firlt fruntes, obJarions vſually made
© rothealtars,canonicall portions,and ſuch other laudable v{ances alleadging

that-the Chapter was ſo vnderitood by Bartolus and Remanus.
:hens: TheFathers depurcd to make the decrees in matter of faith conſidering
pra". theopinions of the Diuvines,and the concluſions in which they agreed, lea-
uing and diſtinguiſhing rhe Articles according to their direction, and ran.
ging them in a better order, framed 24. Anathematiſmes, concerning the
Sacraments in generall, ten of Baptiſme, and three of (| br;ſme: which were
: expreſſcdin ſuch a forme, asthat no Catholique opinion was condemned ,
1: wachard to andall partiesfatiſſied. Butin compoſing the Heads to cxprefle thedottrine,
—_— as was done in juſtificagion, it was not poſſible to vic the tearmes of one opi-
weupae nion,but thatanother ſeemed to be difallowed ; which neither pleaſed the
Doctors fortheaffeQion they bare to their owne ſe&t, nor the Legates and
Neurrals,for fearc of ſowing new diuiſions: But nor beeing abſt to expreſſe
thedoctrine ſo nicely, but that more then one of the partics would bee loſt,
they referred it to the generall congregation, ro deftinehowthe Sacraments

doe containcand caulec grace.

The Congregation was no leſſe perplexed then the Deputies. Oneparr
' inclined ro omit wholy the marter of doctrine, and to paſſe with the 4na-
thematiſmes onely, as they did inoriginall finne. Another part would haue
the doQtrine by all meanes, allcagding the reaſons vied, when they treated
of juſtification; that it was neceſſary to follow the example then begun:
and that all diligence thould be vicd to ſatisfic all parties. Bur ar the jait they
ſaydit muſt bedone, and that there was no danger of diuifton.For the Di-
uines,preſent in Councel, though they ſharply d:fend their owne opinions,
yctthey doe referre themſcluzsro the Synode, which the abſent will aſſured-
ly doe alſo. Therefore they ſhould not refraine rodoethebulſineſſe exaQtly,
that the heretiques may be conuinced. T his opinion had preuailed,but that
Tohn ©Baptiita ( gala, biſhop of Albenga, and Axditor ot the (hamber, did
ronply oppoſe: whoſaid, it was neucr fourg] in any Story , thateuer any
man was willing ro hauc his opinion condemned, and though all rhe Ca-
tholiques referre themſclues to the iudgement ofthe Church of Rome, yer,
if their opinion werercic&ted, they would nor referre ir, but defend it more
 obſtinarely,fortifying theſclucs the more by reaſon of oppoſition; by which
' meanes, of [eCtes, hereſies doe ſpring. Therefore that the beſt way was to
colerateall che opinions, and ro take carerhat none condemne another, bur
thatall may liucin peace. Neither is there ſuch contrarietic betweene chem,
tharvſing this moderation,any inconuenience can ariſe ; whereas, withour
it,cuery verball diffcrence or little trifle is able ro deuide the whole world.
Thatmany opinions of the moderne innovators might haue beentollerated,
if they had becne modeſtly maintained, without condemning the Ghurch
of Reme, and the dottrine of the Schooles. This conſtrained Leo ro retere
againſt Luther thoſe arrowes,which he had firſt ſhot. againſt the Apoltolike

Sea,

 XUM

_— IIS » = 5 -

the Council} T rent. 2£9
Sea.In tum, chewite)Prelace ſaid; tharchgviuallproteftations of the Doors: 4 5 47
roxreferre rhemiclucs wo the Churehy wero vermes of good manersand reue-' > =D.

Pavr Z-

tt. _—

L1is. 2:

rence, whichthould be anſwered withas mach, roſpedt,by kceping thEfclucs Crantrs 5.

SS roo e—o—

neutrall berween the contraricties. Thar it is fir,that he that would bee” re- Hay s,

OE gittc reſpect againe: and our ought neuer7s belecue that lice 155"?
t{aichhcedorh referrehunſclfeand' fubimn;haca-parpole/ts doc eg? [21 ponies

occaſion were offered. Of:this Luther isamnanitettzexamplaywho, while he eorstar hey

had codaconely withithe Fryers; who:were Pardon-mongersin Gennany, inns tbe

mattcrof ſndulgences;asaliowirh the.datturs of Rome, did alwayes fay hetitbae

referredbitmſcite ro:the PopenAnd whenr:Leo rooke the-promile tor real}, £994 mancrs,

which was made ohklyin ſhew,Martindid not oncly keepity but inucighed:

moreagainlt his Halinefle, thea/hce hadidoge againit rhe Pardoners in

Ohmanay 2 15d 0 yaibrozat dvider noel; 3! 7 NARS:
TheLegates ſent'a copieto Rome of all chings tharwere deliberated, and cad w ame

ofthe difficulties remaining,as/well in matter of Faith, as-in reformation of

theabuſcs;deitringrobauc order whanthey>thould refhuc, recxamining in

the mcane{(pace the lamme marers; bur molt derioufly the marcer of che plu-!

raliticof :Benchiccs, propoſed long before; as hath beeneſayde, and thandled:

inparcatthe ſamctim:, allcheſubttance 'whereof 1 wilt continuately relare:

..-[n the> Congregationof rhe fifrecath of Ianuarie, when the Articles of

the Sactamencs were giucu out, the matter, begun the' day before, continus

ing{till,in regard many doc not ref1de becauſe they arenot fir ro exerciſerhe

charge;with chepluralitic of Benefices they handledche qualiticsand condi-

rions requited in Bithops. Thy began with chat which Saine Pam requi- |

reth in biſhopsand Deacons,talifting much vpon the! words,irreprebenſeble, The ili

Tiucno ro hoſpicalitie,nor couctous, not new.in Religion, and clteemed by a 2-3 eng

{trangers. Afterwards other condrioos,required by many Canons, were ©

allcadged,wherinthere was no difticulrie, all vniformely declaiming againſt

the vices and defects:of the Prelates and Clergie. This difpleaſed nor the

Legates, being contcar ro ſce the Prelates cntertaine chemſclues with this

ſhadow of libertie;. Bur in the heare of (peaking, Jobn Salazar biſhop of

Lanciano,attriburcd the beginning, of all to the Court of /'Rome, which, in dis

ſtriburing'biſhoprickes, regardednot the ſutficiencieof the perſons} but ſer=

vices performed. Whercunto the biſhop o* Bironto, who ſpakea little aftcr,
replyed with much fceling,and (ayd, that the faulrof others was vniultly at-
tributed tothe Court. For in Germanie bilhoprickes aregiuen by cleion, in
France,Spaine,and Hungarie, by the Kings'nominartion; and in Jraliemany
doc belong to particular Patrons; and to thoſe that arefree, theprinces doo
recommend,and willnotbe denycd,taking all libertic from the Pope, Bur |
he that will not bce-tranſported by opinion, but iudge fincerely, will ſee
that thoſe who are made freely at Rome are; the beſt of all Europe. Pluralitic
of benzfices, vnknowento the firlt ages, hath not beene broughtinby the
Court of Rome, but by biſhops and Princes, beforethe Popes tooke ypon
them to regulare the matter of benetices throughout all Chriſtendome and,
but for cheprouiſions which are to bee, found in'the bodice of the Canon

Law, the diſorder would hauc becne alreadic mounted co chehcighs,
| Some

aary——— cli oo oe rn emer ne rants 2 enrengy  pgy on, 08 mace, ener ater” ctr PE ee ner ear ew cnn + co ,
\

EN _

— A T —_— — es. Mt.

250 - The Hiſlariecaf | vN\ L18..2

A

1547 Some were! plcaled, and fone: Jiſplealed: at wtingdorticrtion.;:according
RT ro their affections.” But eucryoverdilcaixared that che amartercould]) non

_ Cuanczs.5. lee handied. without dayger, asthe treaties.ob the next Congregarions:d1d1

— — —— M____—_—_

Henxxy $., thew, 5 z4 13 9c 35.4 th ,£S1DIi]T6TIICG)? ©? 29350 [ew e”

Fraxcrs t-. Bur becauſe this; particular deſeructh tobce-mell viiderf! ond; winblifbee

\- ON ©_—

A diſcourſe of tit ro ſhe#y how the abuſe began; 8 came to'thas growth Yer. Lwalinoidpuak
conceraing-.-Of thoſe happie times when the. name of cheChurtbwigcemmon roallthe
—1--—aakggh congregation of the faichfull,viitowhich didbelong|rirtrvte & proptiety.of
-the goods which arecalled Eccleſiaſtical}, yyhewthcpoore;& ther muniſters

had their foode and: apparel from ohe corurmon Maſſe,; and ehoſce> were
moreprincipally prouided for then theſc... Neither will/mentionithetime

when they did fall one degree, and: of one Mafle madeg4-parrs, putting that

of the poorc inthe lowelt place, which, according to the former vic;ought

to becin che firſt. Buc I will begin fromthe ime; whemtbe: Kare of rhe
Church wasappropriated tothe Clergic anely, all other Chriſtians 'beeing

excluded ;when that was applycg:to few; which belonged na allantiee the

rich, that which firſt ſcrued for the! poore.' I ſay in- the beginningrof thoſe
times;the Clergic hauing diuided amongſt themſclues:all & reucrvewes of

the Chutch, the charges, which before were called miniſeries 8nd. offices

of ſpirituall care, the temporalitic beeing now molt eſteemed , were named
benefices. And yet fo long as. the old Canons remained, that \one man

ſhould notbce ordained yorotwo: titles, none could haue more then one

Bencfice: -But the reucnucs being by warres or inundations diqmniſhed, and

become nardufficient for theirmaintenance,one man might hold two, yer

{o:as that'hiee ſhould arrend them both. This was begun in fauour: nor

of the man beneficed, but of the Church, which:, becauſcir could not haue

a,propcr miniſter, might haue ar the leaſt ſome other ſeruice. Vponpre-

_* tence of theinſufficiencic of the Benefices, and that none could: be found to

ſerue in them, they began to grant more of them vmo one, though no ne-

ccffitic appeared,for the ſeruice of the Churches; and the maske beingraken

away by little and little, they were not aſhamed to Coe ic in faucurof the

Horthe®- theſe and with themſclues. Yerthe gloſle of the Canobiſts alwayes decla-

Bene TE4( tO Makea ſhew of honeſtie) that many benefices ſhould nor bee given

compatible

& incomp3- IO ONE, but when one is not ſufficient for maintenance. Bur they cur this

more then enough fora King. The cuſtcmebeing begun, and neither the
world,nor cquitic being ablc to reſiſt itthe Popes reſetucd to then:ſc]ues
Power

cs IE EEE ec IS out run an "Enema =

- = -

”
T——ou» 2% IO A. =
C Son — =_ _ - — —_——

W__ —— _ f
OI ens A CA

—_

LJ 1 6.2, ' the Comncell of rene. = 'F

—_ OO *

zower to diſpenſe with the incempatible,and ro haue morethen two ofthe 11.
others. But ro finde a colourble way to pur thism practiſe, they layd hold ,”— -
on Commendaes, a thing inſticnuced ac chefirlt ro 500d purpoſe, but atret vſed Chant;
rothisend onely. For when, by reaſon of warres, peltilence, and othet ſuch raw 5
cauſes, the cle&tion of prouition- could tot be made fo ſovne; the ſuperiour ****<'* *
did recommend the vacant Church,to ſome honeſtand worthy man; to gg. How ts
uerne it, beſides the care of his owne, vouli a Refor were prouided; who —
then had nothivg to doe with the reuerines, bur to gouerne them, and con-

figne them to anorhet. 'In-progrefle of time the Commendataries, by divers
prerences of honeſty andneceſlitie,made vie of the fruits, and, co enioy then

the longet, fought meanesro hinder the prouwſiom, ' For remedy whereof;

order was taken, that the {ommendd (hould not laſt longer then {1x months;

But the Popes, by the plenirude of their povver, did paſſe theſe limits, and
commended fora longer time, and atthelalt, forthe life of the (ommendas

tarie, giuing him power to vſcthefruirs, beſides the neceſſary charges. T his

good inuention, ſo degenerated, was ved in the corrupted: times, for a

cloake of pluralitic : obſetuing thewords ofthe law, to gine' bur one bene-

ficero one man, contrary tothe ſence ;'in tegard that a Cormentatarie for

life, is the ſame in reality with cheritulan?” Great exyrbitances were com-
mitted, in thayumber of the benefiees commended; fo thar; afrer:the-Ly <

therane ſtirs began,andall men detnanded reformation, lement the ſeuenth ,

in the yecre 1 5 34.was not aſhamed ro/ commend vnto his Nephew Hippoli-

tus, Cardinall de Medicts, all the benefices of che world, ſecular, and regular, Y
nitics, and parſonages, ſtmple,and with cure, being vacanr, for fixe mos 4 tie: ci:

mend: gn

dig
neths, to beginnefrom the firlt day of his poſſeſſion , with power to dif- 7... 154:,
ofe of, and conuert to his vſeall che fruits. This exorbitancie was the licighr rorary i
of all, which in former times the Court durlt not vſe, though ic gaucinCom- 7 7,
menda a very great number vnco one. Ines: |
Therefore the Pnion, formerly vicd for a good end, was invented to pal- of #im of
liare Plaralitis, This was praftized whena Church was deſtroyed, or the 7"
reuenues vlurped, that litrle whichremained together with the Charge, bees
ing transferred fo the nexr, and all made one benefice. The induſtry of the
Courtier Found our, that beſ1des theſe reſpets, benefices might bee vnited, ſo
that by collation thereof, Plnralitie was wholly coucred, though in fauour
of ſome Cardinall or great perſonage, thirty, or fortie in divers places of
Chrittendome were vnited. But an inconuenience did atife, becauſe the
number of benefices did decreaſe, and the fauour done to one,was done aft-
terwards to many, without merit or demand, tothe great dammage of the
Court and Chancery. And this was remedied, wich a ſubtile and witrie inuens
tion, ro ynite as many benefices as pleaſed the Pope, onely during the lifo
of him vpon whom they were conferred, by whole death the vnion was vits
derftood to bee diſſolued, ip/o fato, and the benefices returned ro their firit
ſtare. So they ſhewed the world cheir excellent inuentions, conferting a
| benefice, which was bur one in ſhew, but many in deed; as one confetſed
hee had ſtollena bridle, concealing it was vpon a horſe head, which hee
ſtole wirh ir.

To remedy pluralitic,it was neceſſary to remooue the abuſeof theſe three
pt etchices,

252 The Hilory of+- i L133. 1

_-

i.
Re —_—

1547 Ppretences. Thisthe walerfort of Prelates vagcrltanding, aprecd yniformcly
> atthe firſtpropoſe,to inhibite all, of what condition locuer, to, hauc more
Cuaxizs 5. then three benefices. And fome added, when twoamount nat to. the yal-
HE" lewof fourchundredducars ofgold:; audtharit one were worth fo much,
FRASCES 1. no man Whatlocuer (hould haue any more, nor morc then three, though
A diſpute a they were not worth lo much. Of this there was much diſputation, and
medyof > Much more when. Aluife Lipomano,. Bilbop, of Verona, propoſed. that this
744% decree mighttouch them alſo, who were now poſleſſors of more; who,

without EXCePLLON of any, thould bee conſtrained ro renounce, thoſe that
were ſ\upernumeraty,; within fixemoneths if they.werein.Iraly, and within,
ninc if 18 -other places which if. chey did: nor-they ſhould bec depri-
ucd, without any further: declaration,jnotwithitanding the benefices were
ronicd, or commended, or polleticed by. any othercitle.. 'T'o. this opinion the
Biſhop of Feltre did adhere; bur did moderate it, by diſtinguiſhing Diſpenſa-
tions, Commendaes,and V; nions:{aying,thatlome-were madetor the good of the
Churches; and.ſome in fauour. of the poſlefſar ;, deliring that. the former
ſhould remainein forceyzandthe otherthould be.regulated. "The Biſhop of
Lancianodid nor admir this diltinction: ſaying, that hee that would make a
laſting. law, muſtnot pur exceprions imo the body of it, in regard the ma-
licciof manis:aptro inuent them, and tofreethemſclues fromuhe rule. The
_— Byſhop of Aibenga madealong oration to {hew, that good lawes doc regu-

to lovke tor-

wardondy, Jatethefururconcly, and that hee, who, not containing himſclfe within che

ward, bounds of reaſon, willamend rhat which is palt, doth cuer raiſe tumules,
andin ſtead of reforming,make agreater deformation ; thar it were ſtrange
ro depriuemen of their poſſeſſions, and perlwade them to be content, Hee
added, that he forcſaw, that if luch a-Decree were made, either ic would not
be recciucd, orifit were, would caule colourableand fimoniacall ref1gna-
tions, and greater miſchictes then pluralicy could. For hereafter, the pro-
uifion ſeemed voto him ſuperfluous: for no manbeeing to hauemore bene-
fices butby the Popes diſpenſation , it ſufliced that he was reſolucd notto
difpence,

In that Congregation, amonglt many tragicall exclamations, made by
diucrs men,*Bernardrys Dias,Byſhop of ( alabora,faid that the Church of U;-
cenza was ſo diſordered, as all men knew, that it required ratheran Apoltle
thena Biſhop; taxing the Cardinall Ridolf, who poſiclled thar Biſhopricke,
beſides many other benefices, not gouerning it , nor hauing the Epiſcopall
order,neuer{ceing it, nor knowing any thing but thercnts. Andeuery one

ke againſtthe inconuenicnce,tharfamous Churches ſhould neuerfcetheir
Biſhops, becauſethey were imployed in other Biſhoprickes, or more beneti-
ciall dignities..Some faid, that the Pope onely might prouide againſt this,
and wereof the opinion of Albenga;that he alone might make the reforma«
tion. + This pleaſed the Legates,as well for the Popes dignity,as to free them-
{clues from raking paines1n this matter, which, in regardof the varictic of o-
pinionsand intereſts,they thought would bee of an hard digeſtion: boping
that when they. had gone (po farre as.to [cauethis reformation to the Pope,
they ſhould eaſily leaue alſovnto him the point of refidencie, which was as
hardto be concocted, for bat it was popular,and drew with it the regaining

of

» VEE 2

w—_

5 doi OT :
#/ :

_— OY

—
— = DM

L1B#z,-' the Conncellof Trent. . 257

of the Epiſcopallauthoritie and iuriſdiction. - ThereforetheLegates, being + 45
in hope that ic might bee obtained, eſpecially if it were propoledias a thing SA
done, not to bee done, they preſeatly ſent. the:Pope word of it, who was Craxus 5.
glad of the newes, becauſe both the Courtand himſelte were doubrfull where Henay, 8.
the artemprs and defignes of the Prelates might end. And thinking fir to 325% ©»
ſtrike the yron while it was hote, hee made a greater ſtridethen che Legates
would hauc had him, and diſpatched a Bull, by which hee recalled vmto him»
ſelfe the whole buſineſſe of the Reformation. But in Trent whilit an antwere
was expected from Rome, they proceeded in the treatic begun, and made a
draught of the Decree, that no man ſhould haue morethen one Bilhoprike,
and hee that had more(hould quit thereſt; that heereafter whoſocuer (hall
odraine many inferiour incompatible Benefices, ſhall bee depriucd without
furcher declaration ; and hee that formerly hath poſſeſſed more then one,
ſhall ſhew his diſpenſations ro the Ordinarie, who ſhall proceede according
to che Decretallof Innocentius 4. Ordinary. In giuing their voyces vpon theſe |
points,many defired co haue diſpenſations forbid. The ſhewing of the diſ- OfdiferGit-
Ppenſarions, and the procecding according tothe Decree of Innocentius, plea- raiuc.
fed but few; becauſe it was a kinde of approbation of them all, and an in-
crealing of the milchicfe.. For hmocentivs ſaith, thar if the diſpenſations bee
found good", they {hall bee admicred, if there bee any doubr, recourle (hall
bee had to' Rome, in which caſe no man doubted, but thar any of them
might bee doubred of, and receiue adeclaration at Rome, conformable to
the grant. Many feared that when they were examinedandapproucd, there
4 remayning no doubt, the abuſe would bee confirmed; and therefore
would haue had them prohibited abſolutely. Others fayd they haue al-
wayes beenc inthe Church, and were neceſlary, and that all was in vſing
them well. -
Marcus Uigerius, Biſhop of Sinigaglia, was of an opinion, which,if it had
beene recciucd and beleeued , would cafily haue reformed the whole Cler-
gie, Hee ſayd the Synode might remooue all inconueniences, by decla-
ring, that a lawfull cauſe was neceſſary for adiſpenfation , and that whoſo- .
eucr doeth otherwiſe grant it, do-th ſnne, and cannot bee abſolued, bur by
reuoking it; and that hee who obtaineth ir, is not ſecure in his conſcience,
notwithſtanding the diſpenſation, and continueth in finne yntill hee quit-
teth the Benefices ſo gotten. This opinion wanred not centradictors. For
ſome ſtood vp and (aid, that hee who granteth licence of 7 luralitie, with-
out a lawtill cauſe, dorh ſinne, yer the diſpenſation is good , and the difpen-
ſed is ſecute ih his conſcience, though hee knew the enlawfulneſſe.of che
" cauſe. And: rhe'difftergnce continued many dayes; theſe {aying j/thatit - 1. |
- was to take all/authoritie from the Pope,and thole, that thePopes authoritic * -
ſrerched'norlo farre, as'to make that eviil ſhould not bee euill.” From'this
they went to another doubr, whether Fluralitie was forbid by the'Law of A deubr mo-
God, or of tnan. Thotewho maintained re{idenctetobe by'theLaw' of God, ow bf rakey
fayd that Pluralitie was forbid by the ſame Law, and theteforethat the Pope $9
could not diſpen.e: orhers {aid-ie was forbid by the Cans encly. The Le
, Lat-sdid hatdly appcaſerhe comradiftion, and helditdangerous, as well for *
{crring on foote the point of refidencie, as becauſe ir touthed rhe Popesau-
ip.” Y | thoritie,

:

254

 , ———

L [ B, 70 ;
\.

1547
SUN

2 $
PavL 3,

CHanits 'sy.

Hexry- 8;

Faancrs 1.

LR RS

thoritic, though hee was nat namcd : and the rather, becaule,that ſubull
diſcuſlion' of the:force of them did putthem: all in&azard. ;, There-bcing
much confuſion, -Dicgodi Alano, Biſhop of dſiorga;lajdgab at in regard they
could nor agree about Diſpenſations, they ſhould prolubite (, ommendaes, and
Unions, which are pretcnces to palliate the abuſe; and bee ſpake much a-
gainlt rhe one andthe other. .. Hee ſayde that *Upions and (ommendaes for
terimoof life werefull of abſurditics, becauſe by, them ic was confeſled , thac
regard was not had of the good of che Church ,- but of the perlon, that chey

were molt ſcandalous to the world, inuented a little betore,to ſatiate auarice

The Pope
ſendeth a Bull

to the Legars
which diiplea-

ſerh them.

TheSpaniards
doe delire that

the maner of

and ambition, and that it was a great indignitie to maintaine an abuſe fo
pernicious, and notorious. Bur the Iralian Biſhops, who were for the moſt
part intereſted in one ot cheſe, did not willingly heare ſuch abſolute propoſi
tions,thinking fit ſome prouiſton ſhould be madeayainlt them, bur notſuch
as ſhould rake them quircaway. |

In the beginning of February , the Topes anſwere and Bull came from
Rome ; which the Legates thought was too ample. Bur yct to make vle of it,
they propdſed the matter againe, cauſing the lame derermination to bee re-
pcated by heir adherents, that, in regard of the difficulties and varictic of
opinions, it were good to free themſeues, and referre all to the Pope. The
Imperialifls, cuen thoſe who formerly ſeemed not auerſe, did now ſtrongly
reply, and faid it was not honourable for the Councell, To which opinion
the mator part inclined, returning to that which was ſaid before, and ray-
{inga greater confuſion: in ſo much that the Legares ſaw that rhey could
notmake ve of the Bull, ard wrote backe, that they were our of hopeto rc-
mit the wholereformarion to his Holinefſe, nor more then that which is pro-
per vnto him, that is, the moderation of the Diſpenſations and Priniledges, and
Reformation of the Cardinals : which if hee were relolued ro make, it were
good to vie prevention, and topubliſh a Bull in Rome, vnder the name of
the Reformation: of the Court. For no man could ſay that the Pope was not
to reforme his owne Court, and that which bclongerh to himlelfe. Neither
was it neceſſary to publiſh this Bull in the Councell, which, if ic did handle
all other matters , would bee fully ſatisfied. And they aduertized his Ho-
lineſſe; that the Synode would neuer bee quiet, vnuull prouiſion weremade,
not onely againlt the future, but alſo againſt the prefent grants which are
{candalous. -_—_ |

When the Congregation was ended, the Spaniſh Prelates,, with their tol-
lowers, to the number of rwentic, the Cardinall *7 acceco becing the chiete,

proceeding is did ynitormely conclude, that, as the Congregailons werecaricd, no firme

Councell ,
fhould bee ;
changed,

The Spaniſh

Cen/wre.

reſolution could bee made., For all the good thatSzas ſpoken, was cither diſ-
ſembled by bim, who gouerncd the actions, or-pblcured by contentions.
T hereforethat it was ncceſlary to change the manner, and ro,giuc their de-
mands in writing, that ſo they may cotne to a. concluſion, And. they made
a Cenfare yponithe points propoled, and pur it in writing;preſcating it to che
Legares in the Congregation held the third of February, _ |
The Cenſure conteined elcuen Articles. 1. That betweene the quality
of' Biſhops and Pariſh-Prieſts, all thoſe conditions thould beepur, which are

. fer-downeinthe laſt; Lateran Councell, it ſeeming that roolargea gate.is 0-

pened

+.

A _—__

Lis.ae. the Councellef Frem, > ©

pear am ihee/atape, which. are neceſſarily to bee. pw quiteremooucd,} 1.
y, making a more [trick Reformation, in regard of the, hegelics which they —*
cauſe, and che ſcandals which, they giue tothe world, 2. Thar it bee ©\.a

> plaincly ſpecificd, that Cardinals are bound ro, Fs

lixemoneths in the yeereat theleaſt, as formerlyhath been commanded to f*ou©*
other Bilhops.; 3- [That the hs Ty ly aclt deelared robes,
rare diving... 4: That.che Pluralitie of Carbedrall Churches becdeclarcd to bee

a great abuſe, andeyery one admonilhed, ( ſpecifying che Cardinals allo)

to beecontent wit.one onely., and to quit the reſt, wichin ſome ſhore time,

and before the Councel cnde., | 54. Tharthe. Pluraltze of the leflerChurches

bee takenaway, prohibiting it noronely for thefururg,, bur fortherimepalh, —
alſo, rcuoking all Di$-n/ations granted, noticxcepting Cardinals.gr others, ++ «1
bur for iuſt and rcaſonablecaulcs to be praduced and proued beforethe Or-, *
dinarie. _6. That/ ions for life, cucn thoſerhar ek madelong {znce,. .,”
bee all rcyoked, becauſe they induce Flaralitie. 7. That cuery one who,
harh a Benefice-wich cure,or other Bencfices which require Reftdenciry bee
depriucd if heerefide not, withour any Diſpenſation to bee granted, but.in ca-

ſes permitted by the Law. 8., .That whalocucr hath a *Benefice with Cure,
may bee examined by.the Biſhop, and being found rg bee illiterate; vicious,

or otherwiſe vafit, may, beedepriucd,, andthe, Benetice giuen to ane that is
worthy., by a rigorgus examination , nor. ar the, will. of the; Qrdinarics,

WD BP DFI: 3 109% 233 0 TI; 2 10! "L408
The .cgates were.troubled, not oncly.tor, chat. many, Articles were (ex Tie Texars

m ls
of the thin

ud to keeperhem in'ors
amonglt. , elelucs., They

pro :
all Refmton i Fnc,and public ſore he Slim, TheyGmealie

Cenſure of cthe.S 1a 7. nt
atienpf, aid Which iceig _
bee © bold, withour they were, ypheld, and p ome gre —
Prince. And they delucdto zecciue coma haha oald der

ES : ay10gs

-

XUM

256

L 547 _ laying, theiropinioh'wasro perſift , and fiot'to yeeld one ore, aſwell for:
AAS the importahcc of the ratrer, 'as'Hot ro open this paffate, that rhe Prelates
MP may obtaine, by feditton and*force; that'which is nor willingly ranted*

_—_

ILL - - , : _ — Þ i 9
re T = chem; "Por thar wohlbcerotependon crit favour; and incurte the dan.
Fraxcis't. Ser of forme"{ſiniftrous accident: '" Thar, for marcer of diſpeaſarign, hey
—> would tiotſuffer thamfelues ro bee ouetcome ? bur in the&pd; if t © opp ſ<>
oye, which'arenot weighed), bilt®

him wo ſend _agitne, 'WIthour replie. For thewholec importance of the Reformation yy

vato them

And deGre OWwne Churches, birrewith intention'ts commit tio: more, thar they fidealy
Woo”
wore ot bis contift ih the next-Sefſont, and'as the Mutiners ſhall thenſſucceede , tiey will

dgpendants, . TX {I FFTYC | | Wy » 4 |oifs
Is | cage relvlue-cicher ro oppoſe In other otcaltons, Or to TP quict an obe-,
oue.come by oY UMM 92ÞLiT SUB INQ , 342 3a £91

number. dicnt. * " &Þ.

; bbea Mm vas NOrce ct they ſpak&more
rcleruedly, ig regard the number ofthe Ttaſians, who adhered to the T!Wites,
did'inercaſe, and becauſe they expeQted an anſWwere concerning their Propo-

oftlie Spanyh Cenfure, and the Shake , which vas of 5fcater impdktance,
tecther With'orherthirgs) where8Fhewas ad uerrized Before, he refertied to
173 TIV*RUYSNLIAON 73%. 0) DIIOC'TY: 7

his ovine d&ttemination; © 220 bluc

; | I. Ref ' IRA Qt
The dctermi- IP he Depbtics, hr ocheifinefſe, did conſider tharth preſſion
nonna mage by thEDegares, as moreEobourable' and morcpHSRirable, HE 1PHA
cemuzihe Kaecerde/BatiPnory Hibte pertiieions > tharirwas notwiledpmietgFatjdeſo |
fre. great hazards) in'matrerfof ſogttar moment? and that Uchie Hh" to:
| She all; Wavequally Rdtigerous:"Fheir conchifiont #3, thr iÞrhit Le
CH: »—

Til: & garcs

L 18.2. _ wa” |
gares were nor morethen cerraine to ouercotne, they might gra

Dh. —_— 4.4. ""F- * 2 ket 3 Le

15 nOtConur |
make proviſion, asis faid inchelerrers... Tothe third, ro conſt

[che letters... ] rd, icute that re-
{lidencie is required by the word of God, firſt the Decree beeing applied to
particular Churches, would perhaps not berrue : then for the e&t, it can-
not choolc but make greater confuſion, there becing a contradidtion , thar
the Decree ſhould be made, andthe contrary permitted, arthe leaſt racirely, .
for haltc of the ycere. To thefourth, to declarethe plurality'of the Cache
drall Churches cobecan abuſe, the ſameanlwere may bee made. as vato the
third, and for the Cardinals, his Holincfſe will provide, as hath beeneſayd
before. To the lifth, of the plurality of the leſſer Churches, the prouiſion
propaſcd by the-Legates , ſcemcth to bee ſufficient, and yer, if for thetime
 paltic beethoughe fir, ro make jc more ſeucre, his Holineſle is contented :
who docth aduerrize,them, thatroo much ſcucritiein this yares may worke
a contrary.clic&t, by the reſiſtance which is like tobee by thoſe who

/ F$TIT? w#- }

arc in polleſſion': and doth conſider withall, that ſimply co leauethe indica-
ture of the diſpenſations to the Ordinarics, may caulc abuſe, and bring forth
no other cftect , then the increaſe of theiraurhonty.. To the ſixth,toreuoke
the Fuions for life, howſocucr his Holinciſe thought to makea fic rouiſion
therein, yer ifit be deſired rotakethem all away,itmay bee —— that 2
conuenicnt time bee giuen tothe polleſſors , rogdilpoleof the encfices, 'To
theſcuenth, thatnon-reſidencie in Benefices with Cure, ſhould p1 ilely ca-
ricwith it Deprination, without any Diſpenſation to bee granre
permitted by the law , is too rigorous, and wouldbeeobſcrys |
incaſe it ſhould bedetermined. To the cight, that hee that hath a Benefice
with Cure, if it bee found heeis valcarncd,, or vicious, may rived |

de-

the Ordinary, itbcing vaderſtood of ſuch inbability, as by che lavy docth

ſcrue it, it may be granted; orherwiſe the demangis not haneſt , becauſe all
wouldbe left.to the conſcience of the Ordinaries,,,Totheninth, that Benefices
with-Cure, be not giucn before diligent cxamination, in regarditisncceſſaty
to leauc the maner and qualicy thereof, to. the conleience;of himwho is cg
conferre the Benefices, itſcemeth that to makeany orher Decreehercin, is
{uperfluous exynprofirable. Totherenth, romake che Proceſſein paribu,
concerning thoſe who atc promoted to Cathedrall Churches  ghets appea-
rcch no fruicofthis diligence, it beeing a5calis tolindea falſe witnelle in par-

tibus, asat Rome: wheze, becauſe cuery thing maybe (ufficienely cx
ic is ſupcrfluoustolecke furcher, Torheelcuenb,,thar none bee: 01

bur by his owne Biſhop, ir ſecmerth.cthar the Bull may. ſuffices, becauſe it |
prouide many wayes,agaiaſt the inconuenienges,precendeginthis point.., / =
_ The Pope,did prolentlydiſpatchehe anſwers xo Trewleduingirbothedif 1 4a:

eration of the Legates ——— |
vl | b | |

"3X

_—  —— —_

Me The Hiftory of _ | Li444;4

—

1; TT een ar ep pay WAL, 1o hit they!
ie Iaifts ler dowiieby theDFpiſtic |

teh orrodevieMyhocale FountificfHiichucs abit to Tos Xt Headuiſedthem
ig a oltifiaie ro YE OrAEZ, andihat they ſhotifs bokthieSeſ:
Fontas 7 a6 ue ny Poe who! yommring the dotrine of the: 'Sacratneits;” and
— HE Prath97\fines oncly ; Sn which they ate Hlagreetd, becauſe
RS Ennorbe ex Sm J6SWichot dibger. That the) ouſt teaue*
wislhy't the Detce of obs cs of the Sacritnents; of Bap live atid'Con-
firnation, it! Jeng inpofbte io touch j that Nting, withoutofferidiigthe
whele order of ePriclts and Fritts) and Afr ng the Herenkes too treat
a "torque! by eonfellinig they had fetrverly ap tooucd: ſoch norgblcablur-
dirfes: Hee Sg they ſhould labour ro rhaRe thi SrſSion a as Quiet

- : _ -

The Pope is inf-rilakds the PEpe; ' eon{ideting with Wars and _ his NAY
1-0 friends, che2dvilſes' Tent Vhio/Hirm 426i) Trent, and fronti/his Nymcio'n oy

the aduil-s

| fear fromthe gygga@ 1, walfigll of ſuſpicion," thatthe Councell wouldpreduce ſore £
f:6 us Nun rronter, 6 the fretuticcof himſelf; *and the Papacie. Feeconh 1croKi
mg. falions aiobgit the Diuines, clpetally oth! and Franciſcans'; 3 Aft»
cieritienetes, and cotitrary in doEtrine, and feared thar, raking courage 1m
the-OvunedP?"they woyld'goc beyond the bounds: of thoſe contentions,
whit Haitbeence hardly 'compoled by the wiſer fort: whoſe differences
betins nd lefſe:rhet thofe with the Lutherans, "and themſclues very bold in
raxins one atidther ©Ex&tp? faines were alwayes taken to make them agree,
theft would bee dangerof ſome great iconyenicnce. Hee was much trou-
bled with thedifpitatiohef Refdencie, whether ir bee required ture diving,
and with thebbldneſſeof Friar Bartholomew Caranza, who, becing cricoura-
g6d by many ; dared x4 rhe contrary opinion, the dodrine of devils.
Het ſaw how eefily kch ariGther miſchicte as thar of Luther might arife; and
thar; iFan article of faith were-made of reſidencie, the Papaty was reidticed
© nothing: "Hee! conſidered; tharall the eLfortfidiions aymed ro reſtraine
th&"Popcs/anhotiry, and ro enlarge thepower of the Biſhops; and how lit-
the hivfelfow4s tRecriied Zin that, the Councel hauing gwen hope to refetre
the'Reformation'ts him: hereof hee had framed a Bull, and recalled the
whole tmatect t& Rome, "they had after treated thereof moreſharpely , wirh-
out atly reſpect&fhis aiitHority. Heehad great ſuſpicion of the ſpirir'atd
couranc'of” cheSpaniards; 'tonſtdering the quilitics of that wiſe-Nation ;
; that t dortiiotworke by'echance; that'irmakerh greater ſhew of reverence
| theii'it beareth;tharir Ranferh'vnired Ih'1t felfe, 8: {tepperh notone foorefor-
wrard;wirhourlookin 5a preatwayt before them. Itſecemedt6 him a greatmat-
ref, \tharthey met rogether;and had thade a common cenſure: and chuught
irprobabletharthis webbewas feeredy{pun by the Empervur; in regard his
Arabffadour diddayly rreate with diem. Hee 'fulpected the Emperouralfo
for his preſent peritic, which efditanily doeth make men not abletoſcr
bouttdesto'theirdefignes. Hee'confidered his cotminencie#t religion;and
thouphit it 'was t&'gaine the Lutherans fauour. Hee remeribred the com-
| . ., plaint3 ved nor'ohdy by rhe Empervur, bur. by. his Miniſters allo, when
he _— Souldiers __ ed, that _—_ abandoned intirnecf' neede; and

hce

U 4 =- , ee, res — _ +
we ————_—_— I ———_ Sane. nat, _ »* — m—— ” Y —— — —
- " t—_—_ ett.

L 1 b.2, ? $3 6) -
hce knew thar he accribured che fedition of: Geyna to his fone; the Duke of 15,47
*Pracenz4, Bur hee weighed'abouc all, hiywordes vied to the'Nuncio, thac —-N;
hez-had:no greacer 'enemie thenthe Pope::Hee'feared tharwhen he had & Chaitrs 4.
{tablithed an abſolutcauthoriticis Germanity heewould' chinker6 doe therupury 3,
lkein babe, makingvic of theCouncell corMupprefſe the Papaciey He {aw ay
that all wagin his power, \in'regard of rhenncurable' indifpofiten of the 4X,
French Kinggand his approchingdearh. Otrhe Dolphin, being young, arid)
not experienced, hee knew not what to promiſe himfeife : and was. ature
tharche Prelaces, who'did vatilbchen,adhere co theCourtot Rojwgwhicntoc-
werche Enipcrorſhould vamatke him(ſclfogwrould profefſe ro begnthis fi2e;
tichcr for fearc of greater power, or foretijalanion arthe Popes! grearnefſes
trhich chey would diſcoucr, whenthey-ſhoutd ſroa ſecure way laid open tos
modcrateir, 02 3321 bad od 2melaet W 3; orivel ctokibolt
2: Thelerbſpects made him tefolue rofecure' himſclfeiin foe: fort of the anaarce
_ Councell,| To cnd ir, didnorſeeme-{eafonable; in regatd there did remaine <onw -non
ſo many things ro be handled. The Suſpmſiondid requireſome greac' cauje; rran(lce cb;
and would be to little purpoſe; in regardhte'ſhouldbee pretently delired' to Bolan,
take it away. To tranllace ittoa place:where himlelfe' had abſolureauthorn-
vie; {ecracd the belt counſell. Ani lecinghis was to'/bedone, heewould fo
do it,as tharall danger ſhould be preueared:whichcouldnorbe, if the coun-
cel;were not celebraced within his owne territories. He did notthinke Rome
was fir becauſe it would raiſe roomuch diſtbutle'in| Germanie. ;Bolonia lee:
med thebelt place; becauſe ic was necre the Mountaines, fertile,and of great
reccipt.. For the'manner, he relolucd ro conceale his owne perion, and to
cauſc:irto-bedoneby the Legares;by the aurhozitic giuen them'irthe'Bull,
datcdihe zz. of February, arid ſencyntothem in Augult, 1545. ' For doing
ſo,if the'Tranſlation were oppoled,the Logars would be bldned; and htmſclt,
as notinterefled, mighthe morecalily vpholdihems: andif, by actidenr, hee
ſhould:change hisopimon; he mighr doc irwithouc diſhonour. Being thus
rclolued;hetent aprivate Gentleman of the family of the: Cardinallof Monte
with lettersof credic,codoerthusambaſſage rohochthe Legates: conmaun*
ding him,nor to ariue there beforethe Se/conp and thenrogiue then aurhos ___
ritic cotranflareche Councellco Bolonia, makinglomeapparantcanſetoarile; + -
or making: vic of foine cauſc alrcady in beciog; purring/1it inexecurion lo
quickcly, thar,afrerthe enterpriſe begun, they ſhould conclude betore any
impedimentcould beinterpoſed. 2 222W ; 273219 216,
:: Butin Germanic, a great part of. thole Cities about the Rhine having made Thc rmgczs;
compoſition with theEmperour, andthe Elector */alatme cauled/ht. mini; ow rue ©
ſters codefatiche Emperour ſeeing bunſeltenowableraexcludeche Arch-bi: wb the
zop of (oln, {cnt two Commitlarics, to afſenible all; che! orders: of his orcaics,
Sate,and ro,cauſc ther to-abandon him, ahd-1ocreceinetor theiri/Arch bis |
ſhop, Prince: ddoipbus, his coaiucour;yrobding obedience; and {wearing tides
ltievnco him: The Cleargie was readic ro doear; for theeaules i befote reci-
ted: bur the Nob:lit'e and Ambaſſadours of chg; Cities, retufing,laving they
could norabandon a Prince vaco whom chey:-had tworhe: The: Nuke of
Clensbordering vpon him; ſent rothe Arch-biſhop, and:canſcdihi&l ofeof
theNobilicero 5 chicher allo,ro pray himionfhd4 + ay +

_R_—_——WNRIMT "TL:

---<- - - ——

: State might; not bee diſlolued, with the great dammage-ef the ;neighbour
PSNA Sawant Ge Arch:hiſhop mooucd with:compaſhon, to free the Stare
Cuantes. g. from. warre, andthat the innocehrt people 'might nor {ufter,:did gencroully:
Eovrano, 6:Fgnounce the Stare, arid abſoluc his{ubictts. from che oath; and fo: Wdelphus,
Fran£45 i=: was recciucd for bis ſuccefior, whom he hadalwaics loued as his brother,and
who 46 communicated to him whatſocuer hee haddone for reformation of the
rencunce bis Church; who was now of another opinion, cither becauſe heewas truely
_ changed, orfor ſome omherreſpe., © 24 21:2 95 2
Thanks given . In February, NewWes came to: Trent of the: deat of the: King of England,
ax ioym Which bappencd the moncth before. The Farhers gaucthankesro'G o D, and
Tenor wentalmoltallcothe Biſhop of Worcefter, congratulating that himſelfe and
K.of England the kingdome were (as they ſayd) deliuercd:from the.ryrannic ofa crucll

perſccuror, ſaying, it wasa miraclethat he had lefra ſonne of bur. nine yeeres

of age,thathe mightnot be ablerotread in his Fathers ſteps. And-it is. true
thar hee did not tread in them all. For Henry, though he had wholy taken a-
way the Popes authoritie,and puniſhed hisadherents capirally, yet hee did c-.
uer conſtantly retaineall the re{iducof the doArine of the Church of Rome.
But Edward(tor lo his ſonnes name was) goucrned by his. Vncle on the mo-
thers ſide, the Duke of Somerſet, who was inclined to the doctrine of the
Proteſtants, changed religion, as ſhall be faidin its place. |
ThePopes letters being come, the Cardinall Sanfa( roce was of opinion,
that it was good tro moliiticthe Prelates combined, by granting ſome of the
petitions, which wategranted from Rome, thinking, they wouldcafily bee
pacified with that determination, The Cardinallof Monte layd, that to con»
deſcend roan inferior (c{peciaily to a multitude) was to make them pretend a
orcater ſatisfaction ; that firſt he would try his friends, & when he found he
was fortified with the greater number, hee would not retire an inch; bur if
he found ir otherwiſe, heewould vic art. After many diſcourles, as it hap-
neth berweene Colleagues, SanFta Croce yeclded ro Monte, who was morepaſl:
- {ionate. They recciued aduilc, thatthe abſcne Prelates would bee returned
before the end of February, whoſe minds were ſounded, and many of them
4 :cecon. Weretound to adhere to the Pope. Theſe being confirmed with hope, and
rang :5- Others cnſnarcd with the ſame aire, that the Pope would take notice of cuc-
potedinCon- Ty ONES Mcrit,they cauſed the decree ro be made, with fifteen heads, andpro-
£2103 polcdit in Congregation. 1993 |
By this,greater difficulties were raiſed. In the Proheme, by this exception;
| Sauingalwaicsthe Apoſtolicall authoritic, inall things. Eucry foole fawar
what itaymed, andthart itinferred/a pertinacious obſtinacie, in the
' which they ought to remedic, bypreſeruing their cauſes. Yernone durſt-op-
Andis there poſe, but x Biſhop of Badacoz, who ſaid, it had rced of declaration,becauſe
 *pd. the Conncelloughtnor, norcouldimpeach the authoriticof any, much lcſſc
ofthe Apoſtolike Sca,acknowledged for Headot all the Catholiques. Butic
ſcemed that the words there placed did 1ignific, that in Rome the-procee-
ding ſhould beinthoſcthings as before, and that the moderationſhould nor
haue poweroucrdiſpenſations, and orher inuentions, by: which the autho-
riticobthe old Canons hath beenealwaycs weakened. Indefence of theex-
ccption it was ſaid,thatche Lawes'of Councels arcnor as the Lawes _—
| where

—_— e426 £4 ng i OT TIT IO I ES * pa - — "'N
_ "CITES th Q
ror.

Lis. 2. -' the Connccllof Trent. 265:

where quitic and rigourareghe ſame thing, chatthey:arc{ubioroithe com-|, 1 $47
mon defcdt of all Lawes, which by reaſon of their-vnjucrlalitiegoughrtobe; =>
moderatcd by cquitic incaſcs.yor foroſcenc, when itwasld bar yniuſtro pur; Ceances, 5...
them in execution; : But becauſcrhere is: not -alwayesa Councelt;co-wbich:eogggG..-
recourſenay be bad, nor ir being potſible tocarrendehis; whicachere is one, F*2nc +;
the Popes aurhoricio is neveſlarie. Ie wasreplycd, that;thougballiLawcs haugs: | -
the deft of vniuctſaliric,yetallwere oukliſked wishaurtexecptions;tharde >
theyſhould now door otherwile.it wereas muchasrofay, that ardinanys.;
and not onely in rarecaſes,and nor forefcene, the Pope mighediſpence wirh!,
the-contrary.. 7-03-4571 2s 21 09960 2G Gott: blood)

- This opinion vas not openly- approoued by all; who in cheir.conlcienes ve. oc
thoughrit truez whereupon the Legat Monte raking courage: layd{ic, was; at
ſubrilrie, not to attribute as muchtothe Apoſtolike Scazazthey were bound, |
and ſo he made ther all left; The Bilhop of Badacoz demdunded,, ichac
mention ſhould bee made in.thag Proheme, . that rhe {Article gf xelidencie;
was Not quite left off, bur 'deferred onely. The Legates-anſwered,:thas:
this: was a diſtruſt of their promiſes , and/a  vaine Qbligation x0, doe that.
which-was alwayes in, their; power ::Yer,, ro fatiſfig:lo great-a-defirey hee:
fayd.it ſhould bec added inthe: Proheme,; that all: was deereced. in profes,
cuting the point of reſtdeneie; which they had begylp; whereby. ic. would;
apprargychas it.was notcndedin the other Soſlion;andihatpare gid: zemajne;
to Ft 4 4 ' : . \ :

landibd i: 1) hn lonibt od ants, both ound ellivnornn”) 5
., Concerning the Heads of the qualities of Biſhops and other Guratta., tho Picouſe x
Archbiſhop Toryeſaide, that chey: did no oncly :remedic the gokrupgions five: of 11-
brought -in, bur did-weaken the ancient xemedics. --For with: ſuch: genetallCurars:
termes of age, manners, knowledge, abilitic and worrb,::eutty:one might:
bee canonized for an able.man ;-and to:alkcadge -the gccrees; oh Alexander;i |
was to nullificall orher:Canonsþ which: preſctibe gthet condicions, For!
yhen one is alwaycs.named.dnid thearthers purpoſtly;concealed, i ſeemerh,
thar thete is ſomederogation:ro-thae; tharir was aecellarie 16 day plainely:
yehatchis grauitic of manners, and knowledgebfloters is :whighit ic Were;
done,cuery Courticr: wouldbec.exc]udetdofor cuets Thatithe: amanncrs ro*;
quiſite are well repeatedby Saint Pagh, and ycr-not trgarded-; Lheleaming.
and Dodorſhip, :whbich-Paw requirerhy 1s the knbipledge, of, Ghriſtjan|
Docrine,and ofthe holy Writzthar Hovonins the thirds nottg beimitatey;,
whodepriued a Biſhop. of che: lower Saxoutr, becauſe hee had nor Jearneg,
Grammar,nor cucrread Donatus:Fortheglalle,faithhe,could nog wrachtbe,
people grammer; avz6Serrhons. were) be!made by Grammer rales.and got
accarding:torhe Gafpel. The Bilbop of Heefaaddath calbar neither the rept
fercncero,.nor the allegation afhe, Dererals or confliturions , Yid pl
bin. Fat cis donepoiher $&giue!gtcatonguthoritig) gp hems onharces!
i from ebah, or ta make ondgggtoghreg? thelt, ahdeheSyaoderoi greats
force;andihat all chote wayts amoyns volito becay ps wats 95 205 k

wastoo long to-benrep whenitgid eapeaind ys tþ
therewanriocauſehor ityin-rogardbic iy [a ypgererml "able
ions, by-diſpuring whither tholggonſliguiens wurde; of

L Om——

cad 13% \ The Hittorywof = L 18..2,:.]

1547 pint 017 3 472A RE linzirations and ampliations b&the Doctursy
A & wad thediaets interpretations; which is ro confound the world. Thatrhey::
Curr 5 have needeof Detrowwhich may:cauſe peace, charitie, anda erious:rofor-
ovens 6, Mation'intheQhurch aorwhichmay gue occaſion of Rtrifes, and new in-.
Fravers'7* confnicnciesr To what-purpole were ir nowto inflict-vpon the Ordina:

| riesjheptunithimontsofiche Chapter;Grazi nin, the execution whereof is
cotrittedeorcho Prouidciall Councels, whictrare diſuſed; if order: bee nor
trakbaxo/bringrheatiavieagaine ?Fhen the Benefices conferred bythe Or-

Nary boar of diupgrs celeruations, beingtevyerthena tenth parr, why

ſhould prouiſton be made in this, and the abuſe ſuffered ro run-in the nine.

| .xeaths; whidkzxhe Courrdoth'conferre? Likewifezn marter' of Plaralitie, to

E _appfoncithetonftiention,De mulra;is ro cltablifh it the more;becauſedif pen-

{ations aroperifiired jtretat, "1 2 SIR 4s STHIGATIIR Of FOR SITY C1,

1th Articherwieremuch diſpnred' on. - The Spaniards did require, thar

 Adipme che 'Cardinals ſhould bee ſpecitied; bur -anſwere was made, thatit was nor
Cardinals = cg erienty Ihregarg of tho greatneſſe of the Order, beingche chiefeſtin

o'10h be | _. AV , . e
peatedin rHEIChurch, and repttnithed with men of ſingular merir,ro-ſhew ſo plainely
-— chereiwerecortuptions init, worthy of amendment; "and that: chey

didviot arneridthemfelites. Bur ir was ſufficient to doeitin generalitermes,
whichthouſdinendethemallo; asro command cuery one, of what digni-
ri6j®degres} *6r preeminence {ocuer. Others ſayd to the contrary'; that
the Canoniſts hauedeclarzd,thatthe Cardinals arc not conteined vader any
- "ceneralliermes, if thep bee'nor expreſſed by name, andtlercforethatthere
was ng'otrr way ro-pWbuide-apainſt the bad example which the world ra-
» -Keth; but roreforme then it particalar. T hat there is ſtall need to reformed
 theiiiftriourClexrgie;:whole corruprions areburſ{mall ;and chemſclues, as
irwere; xompeltedro ftfitcace the grearerPrelates, -T hatin curing -aſicke
bety, oneouphr to begin with the greater diſeaſes, andthe more principall
parts,” which being healed, theochers willheale of :themſclues; 'or will
ritede Burhbht medicines. For the abuſe'of perpetual Tnions, they ſayd
i6-was fuffieiently; provided, by xeterring ro the Biſhopsthe examination of
thoſe whicfare already made , and by prefurning-themrobeelurrepririous,
which/atcribtgtounded vpon reaſonablecauſes. - 'Burailwas overthrowen
by the mddificationfollowing ;tbatis, i the Apottolique'Sea ſhouldnot
thinke'gthexwile: forrhis was reeſtabliſh:them, and'roipurthe Biſhop co
re9uble ard chatge/:/Itwas deſired againe;) rhar Tytons for life ſhquld bee
prohibiredatidthoſenullificd which arcalreadymade.” War.)

7 Bur the tMdior parttid approue the Decreesa5-they were propoſed , ſomg

forthe good affeion they barns Re 2 and ſome-berguſc they had'becne
vaded , Yd ſombyood meals, whowere promiſed; thatche Pope,
y his Balbo would eake:awayiboth theſtiand manyiother diſorders ; buc
thi fortepuraricn efirhe_Holy Sea; tie ought rodocichimlelfe/and noe
Kent ts BEE pellet/rs/recente lawes from the Synod; apainſthis will,
ARY eheſepacrogalttweredhroguanettef the wholbnumberof the Sy-
nÞd/7Phetime oftheiSeſiig my  Hnarhematine; becing
red 6veraglih&foineKquitedtharthedorineſhouldbeadded; and ſome
dernanded Why the Berecottheabuſes wabnor reloluedon. Tao thete itwas
Pg | | | layd,

at

_ —_— = _ C—_

- oy ” ——oG_ Gd AR

— CC ——— CE” —

L 16.2. | the Councellof Trene.\ \ 26;

faid, chat the marter was not well diſcuſſed , andthat it was mgrefit ro han-- 1 547
dle them after all. the Sacraments , giuing remedie-wirhall co the abuſesoc- SY
curringiin the minittery of cucry one, andtothe generall abuſcs of them all. Cranzas 'Y
In giuing a reafon why the doEtrine was:qmitted,'rhe,molt concluding ar-! torvany 6:
gumeat was, that ſo it was done in the Scffion concerning original finne;) 223505 3
and that a doctrinall declarations neceffary, when rheanatbemariſmes cannot

bee vader{tood without it ; therefore that it was neceſſary in the Decrecof
juſtification ; bur in this of the Sacraments, the ayathematiſmes be ſo plaine of
themſclues, thatthey may ſcrucalſo for doctrine. The approaching of the

time, and the conſent of the maiorpart, made them reſoluc for this opinion,

and compelled chem to be {ilentyvho demanded chedodtrine, and the refor-

mation ofthe forcnamed abules.

The Decrees being made, though, with theſe difficulties, and the third TG
of March being come,and thePrelares,according totheir viuall order,afſem- 7
bledin the Church, to cclcbrate the Seſsion, James Coceus , Archbiſhop of
Corfu, ſaid Maſe, ( orio/anus Martiranus, Biſhop of Saint Marke, was to make.
the Sermon, who for the diſtaſtes recciued in the Congregation, thinking he
could not well bee preſent, and nor perfiitinthe ſame opinion, in regard ic
was not (ſecure to contradict in publike Seſſion, he made choife to faine ſome
indiſpoſition, and ſo ro beeabſent : by which meanes rhere was no Sermon
that morning : asif amonglt faxtic Biſhops, thirtie Friars, exerciſed in prea-
ching, notone wasableto ſpeake foure words with premeditarion of toure
houres. And it was noted in the Aes;thar there was no Sermon, becauſe A ictting a&
the Biſhop of Saint Marke, depuredito,makeir,was hoarſe, and fo it was Prin- (4. pitos of
ted. Which as it ought to bee attriburcd onely to the plealant yaine of the **=&
Secretary,who wrote it,fo itis aſure argument, that they did not then thinke
therime would come, when all.the ations of that Aſſembly, thould be cſtee:
med cquall crorholſe of the Apoltles , when they mettogerher, cxpeCting the
comming of the holy Ghoſt. |

When the Maſle, and other ceremonies were ended, the two Decrecs
were read. CIs e |

The firſt concerning Faith, contained in ſubſtance. That for comple- The pecrees
mentofthe doctrine, definedin the former Seſſion. it was meeteto handle the 5
Sacraments ; and, the better ro extirpate the hereſits, the Sympde did for the
prelent;conltitute the Canons following, meaning ro adde othersafrerward,
whentime ſhould ſcrue. +» bg |

The Canons, or the Anathematiſmes of che Sacraments in generall ,, were thir- The Catons
reene., 1. Againſt him tharfaich,, that the Sacramentsof the new Law, hauc og in.
not beene all inſtizuced by Cars, or thatthey are more orleſſechen ſeucn, ll.
orthat any of them is nor truely , and properly a Sacrament, .-2, And thax
they dificr not from-thoſe af che old Law, bur in the ceremonies and rites.

3. And that none of them is ; in no reſpe&, more, worthy then anothef, ©
4. Thar they aregar neceflary to faluation, and tharthe grace of God, may
bee gaincd by faith alone, wirhourchem;; orwithour, any purple co receiug
them.,.. 5., That they are ordained, ongly.to nouriſh faith. .6;; Thar they
doenotcontcige iq them thegrace ſignified , or doe nor giue is to himrhae
doth nat ce{ilt, b:ariare excernall (iznes of jultice, and CharaFers of a Chriltis
| nes

ne T he Hiſtone of L t&;2; -
1547 anprofeſlion , to diſcerne rhe fauhfullfrom 1nfidels. 7. Thatgraccisror
wg alwayes giuen by'rhe Sacraments, nor vnto all, foras much as belongeth to
Cuaxres 5-'(zod, though they bee lawfully receiued: 8. That by Sacraments Grace is
Evwann 6. NOT giuen , it vertue of the adminiltration of them ; called , Opus operatum :
thancrs - burcbar it ſufficerh onely to beleeue the promiſe. 9. Thar in Bapriſme,
( onfirmation, and Order , no indelcbleC baraferis imprintedin the ſoulc , for
which caulerhey can bee'receiued butonce. 19. Thar all Chriſtians haue
power to adminiſter the Word ard all the Sacraments. '11. Thatin mini-
{tring the Sacraments, the miniſters intention , at the [caſt ro doc what the
Church doth, 1s not neceſlarie. ' 12. That the miniſter, whois in morcall
ſinne,giuerh not rhe true Sacrament, though he obſcrue all things neceſſary.
13. Thatthevſuall rites, approued by the © hurch, may be deſpilcd, or omut-
ted, or changed for others, by cucry Paitour.
——— Of Bapriſme there were fourtcene Anathematiſmes. 1. Againſt him
' that fairhthe baptiſme of Tohn had the ſame vertuc with that of Chriſt. 2.
Thar truc and naturall warer 15 not necefſaric ro baptiſme. 3. Thatin the
Church of Rome, which 1s the Morher and Miftris of allrhe Churches , there
is notro bee found the true doctrine of baptiſme. 4. That Bapriſme, giucn
by hc reriques, in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy GhoFR, with incention to
doe what the Church doeth, is not true baptiſme. 5. "Thar the baptiſme is
free, that is, not neceſſary 'to ſaluation. 6. That the baptized cannot looſe
Grace, though he ſinne, ſo chat he leauc not to belecue. 7. Tharthe bapri-
zed are bound only to belecrie, and notto obſerue theLawof Cy r1sT.
8. That they arenor bound ro obſerue the Lawes of the Church. g. That
| by the memory of bapriſme , all vowes made afterwards arc of no force, but
derogare from faith. and bapriſmall proteflion 10, Thar finncs commit.
redatrer bapriſme, by fairh and mitmory thereof, arc remitted, or made ve-
niall. 11. That baptiſme is to be renewed in him, who hath denicd the faith.
12. Thar none ſhould bee baprizcd bur intheagcof Cyr18sT, oratthe
time of death. 13 Againlt him who putterh ror children baptizediin the
number of the faichfull, or faith they mult be rebaprized at the yecres of dif- -
cretion , orthat it is better ro omit their baptiſme vnull then. 14. "That
children baptized, vw hen they come to age, ought to be required to fatifie the
promiſe madein their name , and to bee left rotheir will if they refuſe, not
compelling them to Chriſtian lite, but by denying them other Sacraments.
The Canons >f Confirmation there were three { anons. 1. Againſt him thar ſaithit is an
9 Conn» idle ceremony, not a Sacrament properly, orthatit was formerly v{cd , thar
children might giuea publike account of theirfairh. 2. Thar ro giue verruc
tothe { briſme, is to wrong the holy Spirit. 3. T har euery fimple Þrieſt is the
ordinary miniſter of (onfirmation,and not the Biſhop onely. | Soge
The decreeof *” Aﬀcer this, the decree of reformation was read , which, in the Actes bare
 thisricle. 'A'Canon concerning refidencice. And it contained in ſubſtance;
1: Thar noBifhop becreatcd but of lawfull matrimome-ofnpe yeeres, lear-
ned, and of good behauiour. 2. That none'may haucor keepe more Bi-
ſhoprickes then one, in Title, ( ommenda. or ay other way, abd whoſocuer
hath now more then one, ſhall chooſe one, and quit the Teſt within f1xe
moncths, if they be of che Popes freecollation, 6relſe within a yeere : _—_
as wiſe

—_—

L182. the Councell of, Trent.

wiſc alt{halbc accounced void burthe latt. 3, That other benetices,elpecially 1547
with Cure,be giuentoworthy perſbas, ablc.co take charge of (oules: other- =>
wile the ordinary Patron isto bepuniſhed.'4:That hereafter whoſoeucr ſhal Cuixcrs 5.
recciue many incompatible' Benefices, by way of rien for life, perperuall row.nw 6.
Commn442, or otherwile; or ſhall keepe.thoſe char he hath recciued againſt Wes =
the Canons, ſhall bee depriucd of all.:- 5-* Thar the diſpenfations ofchole who

haue many Benefices with/Curey or incompatible; ſhall bee ſhewed to the
Ordinaries , making prouſtonafretwards forahic curcof foules, andother gb- _ |
ligations- | 6. That perperualtPaions, made within forey yecres, (hall bere-

viewcd by the Ordinaries,as delegates, and thoſe that arc vaiuli (hall be nulli-

fied, and choſcrhat haue nor becace in poſlcſiton, or ſhall be made hereafter,

ſhall be preſumed ro beſurrepritious, ifchey beinor madetor reaſouablecau-

ſes, and with citationof all chatbe interclted;-and:nothing tothe contra}

of rhis, ſhall be declared by the ApoſtoliqueSea: / | 5., Thar Benefices __

cure, vaiced, (hall bee yilued/by the Ordjnaries eucry'yecre,, and ſhall hauc
Vicars.a:bgacd,perpctuall or't all , with ſuch aportion. of the fruits
astothem thall ſcememecte , a— of Appcales or Exemptions.

8. Thacchc Ocdinaries (hall euery yeere by rhe Apoltpblique authority, viſic

rhe Churches exempred, prouiding for thecarcoffoules, and other ductics,
wichoutreſpeX-of Appeale, AIG Cultomes/prelcribed. g. Thar

Biſhops ſhall bc conſecrated withinthe time fer downe: by the Law , and ll.
prolongations for more then fxxe; moneths ſhall bee voyd. 10; Tharche

( bapters of Churches, in vacancie of the Bithopricke, ſhall nor grant Dimiſo-

ries for Orders, but to him; that is obliged to rake them, becauſe of a Bene

fice. 117. Tharlicenccs to bee promoted by any Biſhop ſhall beevoyd,if a

lawful! cauſe be nor-cxpreſſed; for which-they may not bee promoted. by

their owe Bilhop ,and, in_thatcale, they (hall bee promored by-a-Biſhop

that re{iderh in his Dioceſe, 31 2. That Faculties not to recciue. duc Orders

{hall not ſerue for longer time:then a yeere, but incales/cxpreſſed inthe law;

13, That mcn preſented to Benefices, by any Eccleſiaſticall petſon wharſo-

 euer, ſhall got be inltitured before:cxattination; made by. the Ordinarics, ex-

cept thoſe who are preſented byrY nivierſities, Colledges,and general Studies.
14. That in the cauſcs of the.exempred accrtaipeforme (hall be obſcru:d,
and where: the queſtion1s of:ravard, or conecrning thoſe who ſuc is forma,
pauperis,the Exempted alſo,who:-haue a ludgedepured,tha[l beconucneed be-
fore the Ordinaricibut thoſe who-haue no ludgedeputed, hal beeconuented

 inall cauſes, r 5. ThartheBiſhaps ſhallrakecareofthe Hoſpirals; rhar they be

__ goucracd by thaadmiriſtrdrars, though Excmpredobleruing a certaine
Orme, ! ing! (1 bojignwt dg vitehs P2521 15010-bos 2161: forete {20

The Prelarts who oppoſed irithe Cangregarions;:did: the ſame in the Scf> A modet op-
ſion,butwith greater. modelty; deſiring thar.thedegrees ofthe perfons com- rage, wrnot + |
prehended-might begxpreſſed,and that beſtdts che proviſions againſt future $27.5.
cuils,remedics! mightbeadded for the preſent, whickfatemore hurfull; arid |
dangerous. Bur the Legats, hearkening vato'thoſe wards as viitodle talke,
concludcd:the Seltianandappoineed thenext for cheancof April,hci) + + The credence

Tht ſameday:thte/Papes meffenger , concealed yaitubchen ,cuen-from the 27n0;.
Legats,Hidappeare, and declaredrochembis credende; rin vu wen ton ddl

: | 7

from

266 The Hiſtorie ©
1547 from-Trent to 1ſþn& The Card.Sarta Crocewas confounded; but Monte being
17 SD withonrfeare ſaid;that he cuer knew the Pope to be a wile Prinegjand that he
Cxiatss 9. 'thenſawin bit the heighrof iudgement,thar it wasneceflary ro'doſo,if they
tonnes; would preſcruc theauthority ofthe Sca. Apoſtolike: and therforetharir was
- monpnae> fit ro ſcrue his Holines with fidelity, fecrecy,and diligence.And it bapned fir-
ly thar many in thefamilics of the Prelats were f1cke, cither by the diforders

-of the Carnoual,or becauſe theaire had: beep moilt many daics before.” Monte

The prerence ſyþortied forne to-aske»the Phyſicians. whether thoſe infirmities were nor
_? contagious. The Phyſicians; who-in their Prognoſtiques , always ſay the
worll they can,beoaule if theyproue true,they-ſeemelcarned,in having fore-

ſeen themyif nor, they ſceme morclearned in Temedying orpreuenting them,

ſpake (omeambiguous word, which was [tudioully Iproad abroad,and belce.

ed by fomeof the meaner-fort,Some othersalſo wete credulous of it; efj peci-

ally tholewho were willing crodepart,and: therefore withed it weretrue, And
afcerche Sellion, a Biſhop dying opporrunely, interredwith the obfequics of

:he wholsCouncel;made thematrer moreconſpicuous. Wherupon all Trene

was full; char rhedifcaſe was compagious;; rand. che farewas ſpreadin all the
bordering places. The Legars,ro fhew chey had no finger in difperling this

IS 2 -*

fame ; held a generall congrogation the next day afterthe Seſſion ,"todigelt

'what ſhouldbediſcuffed concerning the Eucharift,and,the weeke following,
the Congregations of the Diuines did begin. Bur the: fame being increaſed,
Monte gaue order to' Hercules Sznerolo,Proftor of the Councel, romake a Pro»

cesconcrrning the pelitlent infirmity. The Phyſicians were cxamined;and le- |
ronjmus\Fracaſtoriusamonglt others, who had the ricle of the Phyſician of the

Councel;and other perſons beſides. It was reportedtharthe neighbor places
would have nu more commerce withythe City : which made many Prelats
askeleaue to deparr,'cither for feare, or for defireto.goe from thence by all

meanes.' Monte gaueleaue to ſome, thar their departure mightbe allcadged as

one of the caules, others, with whom he was more familiar, he perſwaded to
rarry,indeed,notrowant adherentswhen hefhould propoſe the Tranſlation

-of the Councel,but,in ſhew, that the Qouncel might not diſſoluc; and there-
forc he wiſhed them. torequire in the Congregations, thatſome order might

be raken, The Proces was proſcaured vnrill the $.day:-when newes came, ct-

ther true orfained,zhat Peronadvould traffiqueno more with them: -which

rroubledrhemalljbdeauſerheythould be as ic were all impriſon. 517

' - Thercforethohidaya genctall Congregation was held concerning this: in
"which the Proces wis read; and apropolition-made, what remedy might be
Found tharthey mightnor be confined; wittra diſcaſeinttheir houles,and de-
riucd ofyictualsand other neceſſaries. Many proteſted they would deparr,

- and coulÞnorbehdd;and; when much had bin ſpoken, Monte propoſed the
cran{}anom-gfcheCoeuncel, ſaying be had Apoſtolikeauthority rodovit from .

The Bull of 'The beginning;andcavfed the Popes Bull to be read, digeAted tothe 3/Legars,

che 1201- \Monte;SantaCroce;andÞoole.In which, hauing declaredtharhe had eſtabliſhed

-the Cauncelliin Trens;8 fent themchirher;as his Legats, and Angels of peace

; totheend.thar ſogodbyaworke-might nor bee hindered by rhe incommodi-
tie of cheplace, hegiuerhpowertoany rwootthem,in abfence of therhird, ro

- 1rran{laceivimo-fome prthercitie,nocc commodious;opportune;andiccarc;

wot. Q ; and

-
—

Ls. 2, the Councell of Trent. - 267

ll. *

and to command the Prelats, vponcenſures and puniſhments, hot to proceed 154
any further 19 Trens, but ro continue it ins the Ciry,vnro whichthey (hal tranſ- av
ferre it, & ro call chither che Prelars, & other perſonsofthe Councel of Trent, Czantzs 7,

—. —————_ et

vpon paine of periury, & other cenſurts,fet down in the letters of the conuo- rowny 6;
cation, &rhar he will rarthe whaclocuerthey ſhalldoe, any thing to the con- Cong
rrary notwichitanding, The Emperors Prelars anſwered immediatly,tharthe |
diſcale & the dangers were not ſo great, thar the rimorous might haue leave

ro go, varill the opinion were palt, which, by the help of God, would vaniſh
quickly,and if the Scil1on were deferred, it was nomatter: that many depar-

ted the-yeere before, for the ſuſpicionsof'warre, and the Seſſion was deferred 7;. Benpe-

more then 6,moneths, and that they _ doe ſo now, if there were occafj- 215 minitters

.

doe diſcoucr

on. And other ſuch reaſons they brought. The diſputation concerning this «eplor.
was long, When the Congregation was ended, the Imperialiſts, conferring a-
mong themlcucs , and ſecking curiouſly that which before they cared norto
know,they [melt out that ir was not a generall diſeaſe, but a pretence.  *
The next day a Congregation was called to conſult vpon the ſame mat-
ter, It was found, that 1 1.Prelats were already parted, & they began to ſpeake
ofthe place whither ro goe. Thar it ſhould bein Germany all did abhorre.lt
could not bein the State ofany Prince, becauſe they had treated with none.
There remainedonely the State of the Church. The Legatrs propoſed Bolonia ;
which plealcd all chole that approucd che Tranſlation. T heImperialilts did
contradict,and ſome did almolt proteſt: but the maior part conſented. Some
duubted rhe Pope would take the Tranſlation ill, becauſe it was made with-
out his knowledge. But Monte. ſaid , that ſudden chances, and perils of life
aie free from theſc reſpects, and thathee would vndertake the Pope ſhould
bee contented. Conlideration was had of the Emperour, and other Princes,
and it was concluded,thatif they made mention of them in the Decree, they
gaue ſatisfaction to the reucrence which they did owe them : and to fatisfic,
in ſome ſort, thoſe, who approucd not the tran{lation,they made ſome men-
tion of returning, The Decree was propoſed by way of deliberation. Doth
it pleale youro declare that this diſeaſe 15 manifeſt, in regard of the predictis
ons , and other things alleadged ſo notoriouſly , that the Prelates cannor rc-
maine in this Citie, without danger of their life , nor can be kept here againtt
their will;and b:cauſe of the departure of many,andproteſtations of orhers,
by whoſedeparture the Councell would bee diffolued ; and for other cauſes
allcadged by the Fathers,notoriouſly true and lawfull ;Dotheir pleaſe you ro
decelare,thar,for the ſecurity of the Prelars liues,and proſecution of the Coun-
cell,it ought to be transferred to Belonia, and is now transferred, and that the
Seſſion intimated,for the z 1. of April, ſhall be celebrated, and all things pro-
ſecured there, vntill che Pope and Councell ſhall thinke fit to reduce it into
this or ſome other place,by the aduiſeof the Emperour,the French Kivg,and
other Chriltian Kingsana Princes ? ©
The next day the Seflion being held, and che Decreercad,35.Biſhops,and AScon is.
three Generals did aſſent. Bur the Cardinall Pacceto,and 17.0ther Biſhops op- the Deace of
poled. Among thoſe that conſented, there was nor one of theEmperors cus grips. 997
i-&ts,but Michael Saracenus,a Napolitan, Archb.of Matera. But amonglt thoſe
that conſented nor, there was Claudins della Guiſche , Bilhop of Mirpots, and
Z 5 | Manrtelli,

WW

H

_—_

4 BE ®

The Hiſtorie of ©

1547 Martelli,Biſhop of F iefole, and Marcus Viguerins,Biſhop of Sintgaglia, whom the
> Cardinallof Monze did vpbraid, that his vncle becing drawen from a baſe &-
Cnaxurs 5. ſtare to the height ofthe Cardinality, from whence the greatneſle of his houſe
tomany 6,. and his owne Biſhoprickedid proceed, he did il] requitethe Apoſtolike Sea.
en * Foranſwere he vied thewords of S, Paul, God is not mocked. The Legates de-
parted, with the Croſſe caried befotethem,accompanicd with the Biſhops of
cheir faction, with ceremonies and praycrs. |
The Imperialiſls were commanded by the Emperours Ambaſſadour not to de-
part vntill his Maieſtic were informed, and gaue themorder. In Rome the
Court was glad they were deliuered from danger. For there was already great
ronfuſion and ſale made by the poſſeſſors of many Benefices , who ngke ro
vnburchen themſclues , but ſo as that they would loſeno commoditic. The
Popecſaid,that hauing giuen his Legates power to tranſlate the Councell,and
_ promiſcdto ratihie what they ſhould determine, and cauſe itto beexecured,
_— by the and they hauing iudged theinfeRion of the ayrero bee a lawfull cauſe, hee
bore . could nor chuſfe but approoue it, and the rather, becauſe the maior part of

the Prelates did conſent.

Fut none was ſo fimple, as not to belecue that all was done by his com-
mand:ment,it bcing certaine that nothing, how little ſocuer, was handled in
the Councel, without order firlt had from Rome. For which purpole letters
comming onceeuery weeke,and ſome weeks twice,it was notcredible,thar a
marter of that importance, was hatched in the Legats braines. Beſides,onely
ro bring ſo many perſons into a Citic,ſo icalous as Bolenia, without conſentof

Thzaare of the Prince thereof, ſeemed to be a thing which the Legats would neuer hauc
nk attempted. Many did belceue thac the Bull had not a true date, but was new-
oy ly made, though che date were old,and withthe name of Cardinall Poole,to
giue greater reputation: otherwiſe that clauſe, in which authoricicis giuen
vntoriwo of them, rhe other being abſent, to tranſlate the Councell, would
ſcemea kinde of Prophccic, that Poole ſhould deparra yecreafter ; andthe li-
þcriic totrav{terreitro what Citic they liſted, ſcemed roo large, and improba-
ble,con{idering the ſuſpicion alwayes fixed in the minde of the Popes , that
the Councell (hould bee celebrated inan vnfaithfull Citie,ſhewed more then
cucr by Pope Pawl, when hee did call ic. So that it was incredible that hee
would,vnncceſlarily,cxpoſc himlelfc to the diſcretion of another, in a matter
of {o great weight. Yet, following the notes which I haue ſcene,as 1 haue ſaid
| before, I aſſure my ſelfe,that it was made two yeeres,and ſent 1 8.moneths be.
Ie ppearerh FOre this time. Bur that which could not be conccaled,and which did ſcanda-
by the B44 lize cuery one, was,thar, by that Bull,it appeared that the Councel was in ſer-
zl wasnor uitude. Foritthetwo Legars could command all the Prelats, at once,to part
: AW 7 from Trent,and compellthem by puniſhments,and cenſures, let any man ſay
rouris often- that can,what liberty they had? The Emperor, hearing the newes,was much
RN dipleaſed,becaule,it ſeemed, hee was deſpiſed, and becauſc hee ſawa weapon
74.5.0. Taken out of his hand, by managing whereof, according to opportunity, hee

King dich. —Thoughtro ſet Religion ar peace in Germanie.., and {o to put itvnderhis

obedicnce. The newes camenortto the French King, who
the 21, ofthe ſame moncth, changed this
life for a berter.

: THE

DE” a REN 3
Si RANT im. 4 "JE Re
I Ota +.

THIRD BOOKE OF
THE HISTORY OF' THE
...COY.NCELL OF
| 2:'F. RE N:T}

Am nor ignorant of the lawes of Hiſtories , and

The ccenſvre

how they differ from Annals, and Diarics. I ofthe Autbcr

CONcernins

DEER knowe likewiſe, that the narration of vniforme {moms

accidents , breedeth ſatiety in the Writer, and te-
diouſncſlſe in the Reader : and that to recount
# ſmall matters roo particularly, deſerueth the name
2 of a fooliſh knowledge: . Yet-L oblerue frequent
J Re rcplics, and little narrations, in Homer , and chat,

F Eat RZRZERRREs in the cxpedition of Cyrus the yonger , X:nophon
y doth more rauiſh and inſtru& the minde, by reciting the {crious and merry
| diſcourſes of the ſouldiers , . then. by. relating the a&ions and counſels of
Princes. Iam of opinion, that cuery matter hath his proper forme, and E
thatthis of mine, cantior bee compoſed with ordinary rules. - I afſure my
ſelfe, that this worke will bee read by few, and is of a ſhort lite ; not fo
much for want of forme, as for the nature of the Subie&t, AndI1 amo per-
{waded , by thatwhich I ſec happen in thelikethings. Bur not regarding
perpetuity,or continuance of time, it thall ſuffice me that it will pleate ſome
one, to whomel will ſhew it, becauſe I know hee will make vie of ir ; and
Iamaſſured that, for hercafter,thar will happen to it which the conjunCtures

ſhall comporr. | | =
The Prelates remaining in Trent , were in great ſuſpence , yntill letters HO
came from the Emperour,commending them fos contradicting the Tranſla- Timane®
tion, and abiding'in Trent, with expreſſe order not to part from the Citie.
They conſulted among themfelucs, whether they ſhould docany Concilia- Jrnns roll
ric at: and it was vniformely reſolued, thatit would make a {chilme, and Prevs _
therefore was nor to be atrempred: bur that they ought to ſtudy the points, 2-6
and to expett whatopportuniry would bring. There paſſed ſome writings
berwcene the Diuinos of Trent, and of Bolonia. Theſe did, with affetation
call it the Synode of Bolonia'; and thoſe; the boly Synode, bee it whercſocuer it
will. And ſome of them remaine {ti]l in Print. in Boſonia. The Legates, and -—
© 3 other jos

XUM

270 | "The Hiltorie of Lis.35

—— —_—

1547 other Cardinalsof Rome; made diuers requeſts ig priuate, vatoſomeof thole
"4 ch who remainedin Trent, to cauſe them to goc to * Polonia, or, at thelcaſt, to
Cuarces 5. makethem depart from thence. Bur they gained none, but Galeatins Flori-

Eparr 6. Mante, Bilhop of Aquilas. They labourcd to brivg to the Seſvon, all their

_—

EDwardr 6.

+, frendsrhat parted trom Tyent, and that more ſhould come allo : which was
cafic todoe, by reaſon of the commodious paſſage from Rome.. thither. Di-
uers Congregations were made, in'whichndrhing was handled; but how
they mighrdctend che Tranſlationtogbee layefull, and to ſhew thartthoſe of
Tjenr, were bound to 10yne withehern, @

The 21. of April beihg cotne chiegday appainted forthe Scihog, wich
m_—_—_ great concourſe of all the pcopleok Belonia,qnd much ſolgmniticgtoLec ats,
- accompanied with thirty foure Biſhops, wentto the Couricel-houſe; «2h

nothing was done, but a Decree fead\, which layd, thi, it being relolucd

in Tren; co tran(late the Synode to Bolonia,and iq celebrate the Seſſion thar day,
publiſhing Canons in'matter of theSacrameiſts, andof reformation, yer «

conſidering , that many Prelares'of rhe Councel , were imployed in their

Churches,by realon of the holydayes of Eaffer, hoping they will returne ere

long, that all may be done with honour and grauity , the Synode hath defer-

red the celebration of rhat Seſſion; vntillthe ſecond of Iune, reſcruing pows-

erto themſ{elues to abrcuiate the terme. It was decreed allo, to write letters

in the name of the bcly general Synode , to the Fathers remaining in Trent,

exhorting them ro-goc to *Balonia , and to ynite themſclues with the Body,

| from whichbeingſcparated, they cannot bee called an Ecclefiaſticall Con-

aregation;, but dde"giuc much {candall ro Chriſtendome. Theſe leners,

beeing receiued in Trens, werethought nortto be diſcreet, anddid rather cx-

alverare then moil:tierheir mindes. Therefore they reſolued not to anſwere,

 __ forfeare of makinga contention, and loto letthe attempt fall ; which was

aſcribed to the Cardinall of Monte his roo much liberty, nortto the moderati-

on of thar Aſſembly.

the Eletor The Emperour,who was in Saxonie with a puiſſant Army,inthe very face

nken p;rcace Of thar EleRor, wholly buſicd in martiall affaires, had laid aſide all thoughts

in bc, and ofthe Councell. And the 24 ofthe [ame moneth, hauing pur his Armie in

£2, Order , vponthe river Elb, called by the Latines Albi, came toa ſer bartell ,

The 3:40, i Where the DukeEle&tor was wounded and raken priſoner,and his Armic de-

convened fearrd. The Proteſtant forces being weakened hereby, the Landgrauc was

b:15 en Cnforced to yeclde, and ſome few dayes after, by the mediation of hisſonne

vor. in law Manritivs , and the Elecor of Brandeburg, did wilingly make hisper-

ſonall appearance. The Duke was firſt condemned to die as atraytor, and

then his life was giuen him , vpondiuecrs hard conditions; all which bee ac-

cepred,, bur his ſubmiſſion ro theCouncell , in matter of religion. ' And Ce-

far was content, that the others becing obſerucd , this ſhould be omirred.

Other conditions were propoled allo ro the Landgraye z:amongſlt. which

one was to obey the Decrees of the Councell of Trent z whereunto, he con-

{ſented nor, bur ſubſcribed to referre himſclte ro a godly-anid-freeCouncell,

where the Head and the members might be reformed , whichalſorhe Duke

Maurice ,and the Eleor of ©Brandeburg would doe, They were both jmpri-

ſoncd, the Saxon for cuer, andthe Landgraucduring the Emperours plea-
ſure

mm
— CC ECO
*

L 1 s. 3. - the Conncell of Trent. >.

ſure. Caſar beeing made Lord of Germanyby this vi&tory , became Malter of x 5 as
a great deale of Artery, and drew much moneytrom the Cities and Princes; =

' . » PavL Z.
and to giuea peaceable torme to what he had atchicucd by warre, he orday- Cranes g.
ned a Diet in Ansburg. ene
HENRY 2.

 Thelerhings did much affliit the Pope, who conſidered that Traly wasw nut ,
without helpe, aridremainedat the Emperors diſcretion. Yet he was comfor- ThePoreis
red, tharbauing gotten the conquelt by force, hee would bee compelled 'to mind with

maintaineit by the ſame mzanes,andcould not remoue his army from thence v4 wg

very ſoon. In the mean ſpace he had time to treat & agree with thenewPFrenth |

King,and the Iralians,and ro ſecure himſelfe. Inall rheſe troubles lie was con-

ſolarcd,being deliuered from feareof the Councell, Hee commended abouc

meaſure, the reſolution of the Cardinall Mozte, to whom hee attributed this

benefit. Hee reſolued to ſendinto France, Teronymus Boccaferrins,a Romane, wikew 1

Cardinall of Saint George, in ſhew to condole with the King, for the death <nictevrion

of his father,and togiuc him ioy of che beginning of his kingdome, but with Freoch Kuig

Commiſſion to make intelligence, and confederation with him. The Pope

gauc the Legate molt ample power to grant the King all his demaunds, in

matter of Benetices, without regarding the Decrees of the Tridentine Coun- Ant enduh

cel. And,to-be teady ro embrace all occaſions , which might ariſe in Ger- G:r9-y,

mnie, to trouble the Emperour, and that no reſolution might betaken inthe

Diertohis preiudice,he ſent Francis, Cardinall Sfondrato, for Legate, with in-

ſruetiqn to treat with the Clergie, and to keepethem in deuorion to make

diuers propoſitions to the Emperour , to eſtabliſh rhe Councell in Bolonia z

whichaf it were notin a place of his owne ſubieRion, hee feared more then

the Emperours Armes in Italy, |
Arrhis time therewasa great ſedition in Naples, becauſe the Viceroy, D. a gra, con-

MOtOoNn 14s rats

*PedrodiTol:do , delired ro bring the Inquiſition into the kingdome, according noun lar

rothe cuſtorne of Spaine. The Napolitanstefilted,and made a (editious crie by bungng ii
chroughour Naples, God ſave the Emperour, and confound{ the Inquiſition » theti, rn. ,
being aſſembled, they chole a Magiltrate ro defend them ſaying, That when
they yeeldedrhicir obedience tothe CatholiqueKing , they madean cxpreſle
eapirulation;rhat cautes of hereſ16 ſhould bee cenſured by ordinary Ecclefra-,
fticall Iudges, and that the parcicular ofice-of the Inquiſition ſhould nor bee
brought'in- 'For this cauſe the Spaniards and Napolitansdid feditiouſly'take'
Armes, and many were ſlaine; and there was danger of reb-Ilion. When all
rhinzs wereſer in order, fifty thouſand men beeing puttin Armes/afſembled
by the ſound of Bels, the Spaniards bcing retired into the Caſtles, andthe
people fortitied with Artillery;in conuenient places, there was, as it were, a
formallwarre,betweene the Citie and the Caltles. The tumulc laſted from
the end'of May , varill che midſt of Iuly, and more then three hundred pers
ſons were l|aine on both ſides: In which iirerim the Citic ſent Ambaſſadorsi7yy now
roche Emperour andche Pope,offering to yeeld, if they mighrbee-receiued. "+
Ic wasenough for the Pope to naurith theſedition; which hedid with much
dexterity,hauing not forces to maintainethe enterpriſe; But the?Cardinall
Theatinus, Arch-biſhop of char Citie, promiſing them the adherence'of alÞ
his kinred, who were many, andporent, afidhis owftepaines alſs';who , ro"
that purpole, would goe in perſon, did cffe&tually cxhiore chem nortolerllip

aft

a * Sf 2M A. H
VB oY - > IM

5 _ . i”

272 The Hiſtorie of | L1s. 4.
1547 anoccation , {o profitable for the ſeruicc of the Church » gaining ynto it ſo
Fg >" great a kingdome.The Spaniards,calling luccours from diuers parts, became
Cnarirs 5. MOTC POTENT, and letters came fiom the Emperour, that he was content there
romany 6, ſhould be no Inquiſition, and pardoned the Crie, except ninetecne,all which
——_ he named bur one, whom he would diſcouer when timeſerucd : yer the Ciry
Bu: appealed paid fora fine an hundred thouland crownes. Thele conditions were of ne-
by che Empe- Cefſity recciued,and thoſe few of thenincrtecne whocould be found, were pur

= to death; and fo the tumulc was appealcd.

The Councl In ©Bolonza the Legats did not well know as yer what to doc ;and the Pope
procesdeh had commanded them not to procecd to any action, which might be oppo-
r9.8 ſed, ormakeadiuiſion, burro gocon ſlowly , deterring the Seflions, and.
making ſome Congregations , to ſhew they were nor idle. But ir was noc
calie ro makethem in a good forme, to dilcuſſe the point of the Euchariſt,
Therforms in regard the principall Diuines, accuſtomed to handle marters of faith in
\fons oly Trent, were wanting. Yet lome Congregations were held, and diucrs Di-
F uines did ſpeake, burno Decree was framed. There is no cauſe to ſpeake any
more of the Reformation, becauſe it was then buried in deepe filence, |

The ſecond = The ſecond of Luly being come, the Seſſion was celebrated with the ſame
| + 0: Hg ceremonies ; where they did nothing but prorogueit, with a decree like to
done, that of the forme , ſhewing that the Synode had deferred ir yntill that days:
becauſe the Fathers were ablent and expected : whereupon , beeing defiraus
to deale louingly with them, they added another Prorogation, vntillghgft-

recath of September, not. ccafing in the meane ſpace ro examine the fiGints

of doctriccand Reformation , reſcruing to themſclues power to ablageuiate

or prolong that terme, though ina private Congreyation,

 Afrorgili Tn France it was not hard for the Legatc to obtaincof the King whatſoc-

— uer the Pope delired. For hee allo was no lefle icalous of rhe Emperours for-

French King. CUNC,and there was good intelligence betweenethem, and very lecret propo-

{itions did paſſe. Amongſt the publique, one was, that the King ſhould ſend

t9 the Councell of Boloma, as ſoone as might be , as many Prelats as was pol-

{ible. Marriage was contracted betweene Horatins Farneſe , the Popes Ne-

phew,and Diana the Kings baſtard daughter , of the age of nine yeeres, The

King ſent nine French Cardinals, to remaine in the Court, to gue the Pope

Two Cardi- TEpUrAtION and to nouriſh friendſhip berwcene them. The Pope created

dar che Cardinals the ſixe and-twenticth of luly , ar the Kings inſtance , Charles

= 46 _ Archbiſhop of Reins, and (harles of andoſme_, of the blood
royall. |

i : " the cndof Auguft , Ceſar went to Ausburg, to celebrate the Dict there,

picun4y/* hauingabout the Citie, the whole Armieof Spaniardsand lralians, and ſome

wa companies of toote within the Citic. It began the firſtof September,where

_ theEmperordeliring principally to pacific Germany, did impart what he had

formerly doneindiuers Dicts , to reconcile it, and how, for this end, he had

cauſed the Counſell ro bee called, and tobegin in Trent: but thathis paines

auailing nothing, bee wasconſtrained to paſſe ro another remedic. And be-

cauſe ir pleaſed God togiuea happy iflue ro his reſolution, reducing Germany

rotholctermes thathewas aſſured to reforme it, hee had aſſembled rhe Prin-

ces for that end. Burforthat thedificrence ot religion was caulc of all thoſe

| troubles

g+"& —_— .
ect —— Mt ” _ * —al——_

Lrs. 3 | the Councellof Trent. | 273

croubles, it was neceſſary to begin rhere, 'The opinions of the Princes in 13 47
chac Dierwere diuers; foramonglt the Eleftors the Eccleſtaſtiques deſired, >
and yrzed, that che Councellof Trent ſhould beheld, and demanded 'no con- Crancss 5;
dicion. The Scculars, adhering to the Lurherans,werecontent,with theſe con- zxniig 57
ditions,that it fhould be free, pious, thatthe Pope ſhould nor preſide, neither TSA /

in perſon,nor by his Miniſters,fhould releaſe the oath by which rhe Biſhops Inwhich the
arc bound ynto hin),chatthe Proteſtant divines thould haue a deciding voice, incpiaioa
and that the'Decrees alteady made ſhould be reexamined. The other Carho-
likes demanded that the Councell ſhould be continued , and the Proteſtants
hauclafecondutt crogo thither, and ſpeake freely, and be inforced to obey the
Decreecs. | ho Bk
Whilc the Pope was in cxpeRation of the ſucceſſe of the Diet im Germanie, The Popes
the 19. of September, his ſonne,Petres Aloifinus,Duke of Piacenzs, was flainc in wet mmm”
his owne palace , by con(piracic, and his body ignominiouſly expoſed; and, 977.6
ſome few houres after, ſouldicrs camefrom Milan,ſent by the Vice-Duke, Fer- 7:ero4xyot
nudus Gonzaga, who made them(elues Lords of che Citie. This afflicted the yourrnow of
Pope aboue meaſure, not ſo much for the death of his fonne, and the igno- —_
minie, as for the loſfe of the Citie, and becauſc hee ſaw plainely thar all was
done with the Emperours knowledge.
:Burthe Legats in *Boloniathought,thar inthis affliftionand buſineſſe of
the. Pope , it was not fir to write two letters cuery weeke , of what did paſſe
in the Councell,as they were wont, and therefore that it was conuenient to
prorogſec the Seſſion for along time, and to intermit all Actes of the Coun-
ccll ; which would bee done with honour enough, ifthe Seſſion, intimated
forthe fifteenth , werecelebratcd, and the next deferred. Yer the publique”
griefc for the Dukes death , requiring that no ſolemnity ſhould bec made,
they decmed it was better ro anticipate, and deferre it in a Congregation.
Therefore the fourtecnth,the Prelatcs beihg all called into the houſe , where
the Cardinall of Monte was lodged, heeſpake vnto them , thus in ſubſtance, ©. 2c ms-
That the mortow was appointed for the Seſſion; but cucry one fawin what Rs - gen
ſtrairs the Synode was; that nor many Prelatcs are arriued, who are in j 52"
their iourncy, eſpecially the French-men, and thoſe who arclatcly come, are proroganan,
not well informed, yea, cuenthoſe who hauebeen preſent the whole Sum.
mer,at the diſputation of the lefler Diuines, arc not well in order ; where-
unto was to bee added the cruell mutder of the Duke, which held cuery
onc in ſulpence, and themſclucs buſied in prouiding for the ſecurity of che
Cities belonging co the Church : that hee was glad hee had teſerued power
to prorogue the Scſſhon, that they may be freed trom the paines of going to -
the Church to celebrate it : that his aduice was , yea, that it was neceſſary ro
make vicofthatreſeruation, prolonging the Seſſion now, and nor cclebra-
ring it to morrow. The prorogation pleaſed all the Fathers. the Cardinall
added, thar, hauing conſidered much of ir, they were norable to {ct downe a
certaine day whereon to reſt: that when they were in Trent , thinking to di-
ſpatchthe Decree of Tuſtification in tifteene dayes, they were faint to [weate
in the buſineſſe ſeuen monerhs rogether, oftentimes making two Congrega-
rionseuery day : that where the queſtion is of fairh,, and confounding the

heretikes,onc oughtro goe withleaden feere, and often roemploy much time

274 | | The Hiftorie of - L1s.

1547 indiſcuſlinga little word; thatone cannot know whether it will be necel-
>>" {ary to celebrate the. Seflion within few dayes, or not within many mo-
Caaxrrs 5. neths; therefore that his opinion was to prorogue it during pleaſure of the
z>nmps; Counccll;and that this reſolution was vndoubredly the. belt, And if an
teeny 2: ſay, that,theprefixed time becing knowen,, onemight better diſpoſe of his,

-- buſineſſe ,thele may aſſure themiclues, that it will appeare within few dayes,
what courſe and progreſle the Synode is like ro haue: . All were, content ig
a , ſhould be prorogucd , during the Councels pleaſure, and lo they had leaue to
1 depart. | Rf [1g5n A
| The Prelates | "The Prelats of Germany , aſſembled in the Diet the very ſameday , wrote
— the Pope, foro the Emperours pleaſure was , demanding tharthe, Coun-
och; Pope Cell ſhould be brought backe to-Trext. In the leticr was mixture of prayers
Smodero - and threats. . It cxpounded thebad eſtate and danger of Germanie.., againſt
©. which proviſion might haue been made, if the remedy of the Councell had
.. been applycd 1n time, and heldin Germany, as was defired. For having am-

plc 1urildictions, they.could not long remaincin remote places, for which

caule none went tro Mantude , or Vicenza ,and but few to Trent,a Citie which

| # belongeth alſo rather to Italy, eſpecially in time of warre. Now, all things
2 beeing in peace , they concciued great hope, thatthe ſhippe was ſafe in the
hauen, when, bcyond all expeQation,-they vnderſt uncell; in
whichall cheir hope conſiſted , was tranſlated to another place,or rather di

uided. Therctore becing depriucd of this remedy , there did nothing re-

- maine, but to haue recourſe to the Apoſtolique Church, praying higHoly-

neſle, for the ſafctic of Germany, to reſtore the Councell ro Trent; which if he

did,there was no ſeruice which hee might not promiſe himſclfe from them;

* and that otherwiſethey knew nor whither to flceforayde, againſt the mil-

_ chicfes and dangers that were imminent; that therefore hee would vouch-

ſafe ro conſider of their demaund, and ihinke that if hee made nor prouiſi-

on , it was very poſſible they ſhould thinke of other courſes, to put an end

to thele difficulties: Praying his Holineſle to take their Letter in good part,

being compelled to write thus, by their owneduety , and by the condition

of the times. | FP
The Bape Moreouer, the Emperour vicd all diligence that all ſhould ſubmit to rhe
rorobance Councecll, vrging, $46 > / any defiring them to relic ypon his credit. His

ot thc Princes

and Granvel Hrayers tothe Eleftor Palatine werea kindeof threats, in regard of his for-

| condinonall mer offence, lately pardoned. Maurice, Duke of Saxome , was neceſſarily to
«randy yeeld, becauleof fo great benefits , newly recciued from his Maicſtie, and be-
cauſc heedefired the enlargement of the Landgraue,his wiucs father. There-
fore theEmpcror,hauing promiſed they ſhould haue due fatisfa&tion,and de-
{iring them rorrult.vnro him,they finally conſented, 8& were followed by the
Ambaſſadors of the EleQor of Brandeburg,and by all the Princes. The Cities
retufed (becaule they thought it very dangerous) to ſubmitthemſclues indif-
fcrently to all the Decrces of the Councell. Granueldid ncgoriate very mugh,
and very long, withtheir Ambaſſadors, holding them obltinare, in refuſing
what the Princes had approued,adding ſome threats, to condemnethem in a
grearer fumme then they had already payd. Therefore they were compel-
led, in fine, to condeſcend to «fſars will, yet with caution of obſcruing the
promiles,

[ he Councell of Trent. 39

promiſes. Being called betorerhe Empercur; and demanded if they would
conformethemielues to the reſolution of the Prirjees} they anfivered , they ' 1547.
{hould be roo bold} ifthey-wenrabout to corredt rhicitr anſwere, and, with on |
all, gaue-vp a writitig', Which conreinet the cotidititis, with which tcp Chenzas. 9c)
would'recciue the Councell.- "This was raken; burnor read, and they were Enwony 6.
commended, in the Etperoursriame;by His'ChanceHfout , for'thar they hid WEE
referred all to { 4far,as others had done,” and relied vporihim : and the Et
perourbimſclfe madefhew to bee well pleaſed with it: ſo theontand the gs

Wy willing tobe deceived. 7

Lrs3

he Cardinall Sfondraro fayted not of hisduety'; iti propofits tmiby gd) The negori--
uancages tothe Emperour, in ave would my Oy Connbellia Bo Sfendrare, |
lonia; he ſhewed him in what confuſions 'Erglend was! beeing veiders Kint& jou, =
who was achilde , whoſe goucrnours were at variance , and people in dif
ſtruſt one of another, becauſc of religioti } he'diſcoutred vnto him'the'invel-
ligence which the Pope held in thar-Kingdomne;all which ſhould bee ro his) --.
fauour,andthar hec would affiſt him iti cHatetiterpriſe with' ren /arid ſhips;
and would giue him lcaue to. make yſe of the Eccleſiftical retits/of all is"
States. "The Emperour knewthe Popes aime was wineangle him it's riew
enterpriſe, and ſoro trouble him inthat which hee hadalready broughero x
concluſioni' Therefore hee anſwered, that hee would bee viſited! with the
Popein religion, bur,in point of warre, was relohitcto proceede lone , at
not to be his Captaine, who'would abandon himin the beſt rite sFrvice;
as he haddonc in the warre of German, Atid;on'theether ſideepropoled
divers aduantagesro rhe Pope, inixalc hee would confentto the'tetiirne of
the,Councell ro Trent. * The rhe anſwered, hehad no'commiltior?
herein; the Emperour ſent; ndiligence, the Catdinall'6f Trent ro the Pope,
ro negoriate rhe reſtitution of the Councell; and otherparticats; which
ſhall bee related. The Pope, havirſg heard him often/atid nor beeing ble r&
ditcouerhis intention; did finally an{wete Hitn, thathee ſhould fpeakrhefeof
in the Confiib, ey.t0 07 0 2617 Ft J01G BH Hadw, ns) Et 10:28
The Cardinall hauing , theninth of December, if preſence bFtheWhele andore:s |
Colledge; declared wharpainiesaid dangers ; he Ethipei ur had vndergone! CHI
onely ro maintairie the dignity'of the Contied!; and how firially” By1Hifs a1 the Pope.
genceandauthority;/Iiev had (ifthwerd all thaPHncesad& States BEGHminic, =
ro adhere;, and (ubtmirithemſtfuts'vnto it! hee pta 6 hits-Holinelſe;, i the
nameof (ſar, Ferdinand; arid cheiwboleBinore, dize for the Ide bfCd!
he would cauſe the Biſhops who wereat Bolan, to ttthttletb ThvffiofAnift
the neceſſary workebepatnne;atid would re ple:Rir&ſtnd oneortyve Le!
gates into Germany, wich full Pontificallptuwer, notkbopiny frontthem any
Feculey chat the taanadtf liulgg } vritit/> "BE OH a; Rt betet _
; downeby-theitallgice; andrheTleroictefbrhied;, thif bewoultHawe of ym...
- Gderatior, and deierimine;. if ihe Sthowire vacant; ing'the Hteofehe 1.7
Councell hnchan ail Faduny aha ef 360cOhN RA ett rhe *
Pope; that, incaſeicſhould haþpth ;rionevsRirrss/1hFlCare® RR UAE The boret:
| point wasadded, to-pitt the: Poplinmiindeof Wield US80,-2rid appteachin} Pie old age;
death, au (oro make him condeſeend morechſily;; fithis ETA
not inherits thediſpleaturo whichithe Einpctbutrooke at his

The Hiftarie of "Mp E 1. 3.

=

1547 Pope,inanlwere of chele propolitions,commendedthe Emperors good will,
>> and his paines, for publique {crujce of the Church , concluding hve would

Pavz 3.

Cuanres 5. haue ſuch conlideration of thele propolitions; as they deſerued, andrelolue,

Eowary 6. 2s GOD Would inſpirchim. The Cardinall , hauing indiuers private audi-

inn > : cnces ,aflayed in vaing to haue ſome good relolution from the Pope,leauing
The Ci;d of che inttruction.ro Don Dicgodi Mendoza, whom the Emperour had cauſcd to

Trencretur- 0e for that purpole to Rome from Siena, where he was to acconniiodate the

cth,leauny

Do» Diegs in Gifferences of that Republique, hee departed,and returned to' Authurs: Dox

Sn. [VO STS

Th | _
\--  a=pall opganlwered, thas ewould:ficſt ynderltand the opinion , and the reaſons

rrp __ in thenameof the-Ercneh King , and {pakethus in ſubſtance, ' That King
1 thc cunue - : | "po . , |

"av Francis had neuer ſpared any colt or danger,to maintaine the liberty of other

| Princes... ln conformity whereof, Henry, nor degencrating from thevertuc

of his anceltors. ,ſo foone as he [ett to mourneforhis Fathers death, was wil-

lingo declare his olz(eruance towards the Sca of Rome, That the tmcrirs of

che Kings of. Francecowards the Pope, were famous, and exceeded all thoſe

of other Nations: bur this was aboue all which the King now doth, protni-

{ing all his forces to preſerue the, Papall dignity , now when it is ſocontem-

ned.; He praycdthePope to rectiue the King for his: fonne, and ro promile

to.him(clfc all alliltancc from hia', and rogtake care rhat rhe Church ſhould

weceiue nodammage or fhame, inregard , thar from ſmall beginnings, great

factions haue riſcn,which haue brought the Popes into great calamities. He

., exemplified in many,Popes, afflicted , who weredefended, and raifed-by the

- Kings of France,congludiog that che preſent King willnor yecld-to his ances

; The dicouſe The Cardinall of Guiſe made apublique diſcourſcein theſame Conſiſtory,

.

. - . ſors, inpreſeruing)thegdignuty ofche Apoſtolique Sea... nn 03 11110)
Mana (rm dm $i Pape'made Gaiſſpeake ſojtoencouragetheCar-

dinals higdependants,and to daant the lofty, ſpirits ofthe Imperialiſts,and ro
make-them.fſcerbepcguld norentorce himi; And\to execute what the had

ſaid ro Don Diegoghe,yyrote to Bolinia, roche Cardinallof Moree, the propo-

{tion made vnto him, and his owne'dctermination, giving him order, thar

ſo ſoonga4 might be,imuocaring,theholy Ghoſt, hee (hould deliuerall tothe

Fathers and. when brhad yaderlinod their opinion, hauld: write backe whar

L menu 1h Copnieall chought, The Legare, the Fachers beingaſſembled, declarcd
\# dd woke in rhe Cormmullions.,jand gauchis owe voice firſt, which all the otherstollows
:K cd. For yhc ſpiricwhich was wont to mooue the Legates to thinke as rhe
1 ::7 Pope dit aud he;Biſhops robclccuc as the-Legatesflid worke as formerly

1 & haddone. The veicesbei Tolleed, the Cardinall., by theconſent and

E i#:bc namavf all. anſwered trhaxthe Synode,, when the lawfull decree was
madc,tp-wrauſſare ic from) Treve to Eolenia y bauing ar vx - pur
akad | t themſclucs

© cf J's

P 4 a

-
> _

L1s:3. the Councellof Trent."

themſclues into the ioutney; and, afterthatthey werearriuediin Bolonia, vii- 4 545 |

derſtanding that ſome remained in Trens, having againc touingly exhorred
them! to part from thence ,-andioynewith choblody

-

of rhe Councell, they Craniis F

made none account thereof, continuing ftillinthariCicie, with'conrempt row4ans T.

of the Councell,arid {candallof many yas if they prerendedrobeea lawfull 972

Councdl, or werenot bonnd:to obey: this; and thereforethar the Fathers Thcanbrert

"a LEA. of ſent from 36-
did not know how thercturne to Trent could bee treated of wich the honour 4 Concer:
Ning tne re-
turne of the

and reputation of the Synode,ifrhoſe who remainetheredoenotfirſtgoc ts

*Bolonis,to vaite with thereſt, arid acknowledgotheipower ofthe Councelt, ©:

When this is done,thercturne,in contemplaridn'of Germanie, may bee hand-
led, if that Nation will giue ſafticient fecuritie to obey the Decrees;as well to
be made, as madealrcady. Headdedthar there wasafame{pread;that when
the Councell returned to Trent the proceeding ſhould bes popular, and liceris
tious. Therefore the Fathers thoughr:irneceſlary ro have goodiecutirie, that
the order, continucd in the celebration of Councels from the Apoſtles time;
vntillchis age, thould be obſerued; deſiring alſo caution, toſtandſteure, and
to be able to depart, andtranflate alſo rhe Councell j when' it ſhalt ſeeme fit
to: the maior parc, andtocnd ir whenchey: ſhall iudge that they Haucartat-

ned the-end for which it was called; c— Holinefſ& not to icoms -

pell them to thar which would bee againſt the ohour of God, and libertie
of the Church. | | O21" BIG

| The Pope hauing recceiuedtheſe letters, when the” Maſſe was' ended on
Saint John the Euangeliſts day, beeing returned to the Chamber of therobes,
with the Cardinals; did communicate the Councels anſwere ynrto them :

Germanies ſake : that the Emperqur was a good witneſle hereof ; that he was
fare that the demand, which he the Ambaſſador hadimade, in the name of
Caſar Ferdinandand the Empire had a condition annexed;that is,if irmay bee
with the peace andproficot other Nations,and liberty of the Church: which
being aſſembled in a-generall Councell, ſeeing it hath iudged otherwiſe, and
that the Colledge of Cardinals was of the ſame opinion, he could not chooſe
but repute iriuridicall,avd reaſonable, and/approoucit,as hee allodid. Thar,
for his fatherly affection, towards the Emperour, and the King , hee wiſhed
hee: could giue a more acceptable an{were ; but from-a Pope ,-Head of the
Church, nothing could be expetted;bur wharthe well gouernitig ofthe pub-
like did compell him to reſolue : thar hee knew the Emperours wiſedome,
and his filiall loue, and was confident he would teceiue this for good, which
was thought neceſſary by ſo many Fathers, and would comntrianid the Spa-

nich Prelates in Trent, ro goe preſencly-co Bolonia, and labour ro make Germa-

nic receiue the: conditions propoſed by the Councell; and ſendy as foone as

might bee, the Duch-Prelares , and giverheSynode eaurionrhatthe condi-

tions propoſed-{hould bee obſerued: Mendoza; vnderſtanding the Popesre-

Which the
Pope doeih
communic: te
to the Cardi-
nals in Confi-
ſKory;& ro rhe

which bceing approoued by the — ;he cauſed Mendozg to bee called, £%erows
and rejatcd. voto him the opinion of the Synode, -approoued alſo by the Amvaticet.
Cardinals, adding that there was nothing that he was notwilling to doe for

-£ Who would

ſolutionby his anſwere, would iinſtancly haue proceſted, chat rHe#fſembly 'have proteſt:
Bolonia was not alawfull Councell; andithat his Holiticffe, if he brought pn yep

noc backe to Trent,would bes cauls of all the miſchitices thatiſhiould fiappen ded by the
es ;

Aa "=

£ > 5 Code nn RS
" 35%8 . <2 YN
ps RO /
mY :

——

278

——— ———  R -_

The Hiſtorie of L 1s. 3.

1548

SYN
PavL 3.

CHARLES F-

Epvvarr 6.

ENRY Z. -

WS

ro Chriſtendom, & thar,he fayling, the Em peror,as Protector ofthe Church,

would make prouiſion- Butthe Cardinall of Trani, Deane of the Colledge,
and ſomcorher Cardinals;interpoſing, hee was content to relatethe an{were
to Ce{ar,and expe orderfrom him.” . 2 7 20457

The Pope, conſidering, theaftion of Mendoza, thought thar this bufineſſe
might make ſomediftegence berweene him &rhe Emperor, in which caſehe
choughtir nor fit to haue rh#Prelates of Germante ill aftefted co him. 'Arthe
reccjuingof their letter, yhercof mention was made before, he was offended

- with the lat particle, that they woutd'thinke of other courles, holding itro

bþca plaine threat, andreſoluedro.giuethem no anſwcre andcontinuedthree
moneths jn.that opinion: but gow, berteraduiſed, hee doubred, char; it they

| held themlelues robeecontemned, they wouldrake ſome raſh refolurion, to

The Pope
writeth to
the Prelatcs
oft Germanie
im anſ{verec of
rhcac letter,

which-che Emperor would giue way,that hee might bec intangled in'grearer
difficulties, . Therefore beeing refolucd to prevent the danger,by honouring
thei with an an{were, he made ir'very modelt and artificial, yer not with-
out a conuenient ſence; of his owne honour... *The letter began with com-
mendation of their pictic, which appcarcd in their care toremedictheherc-
lies, and feditions ,' and: that himfelfe was no lefle. follicitous, in regard of
bis paltorall oftice , fo that hee hath not fuffered , nor doeth ſufferany ime
to-paſle without thinking of ſome remedic,, and had, from the beginning
of his Popedome, recourle vnto that which hath beene mentioned by
tem, that is, vnto the Councecll.- - And herre relating what happened in
the conuocation of it, and the impediments , why it camenor preſently to
cxecution, he added that, it being aſſembled , many Decrees haue beene
made as well ro codemne a great number of theherelies,as to reformea great
art of the Church; cthar-the Councell parted from that Citie withour his
knowledge, but rhe Synode hauing power to doc ir, hee preſuppoſerh the
cauſe was lawfull,vntill the contrary.docth appcare : and that akhoughſome
few hauc diſſented, yet it cannot bee ſaid charthe Councell is diuided. Hee
addcd that it is not tranſlated into a Citric farre remote, and nor ſafe, and that
the being of it ſubicro the Church,doth makeit ſecure for Germanie, which
hath recciued Chriſtian religion, and many other benefirs from it. That
hee carcd not whether the Councell were celebrated there or elſewhere, and
would not hinder the Fathers to chuſcanotherplace,fo they were norforced.
Bur what did hold them from returning ro Trent, they might ſee by the let-
ters of Bolonia, whereof hee ſent thema copic. Thar hee. hath deferred to
anl{were their letters, becauſe the Cardinall of Trext comming vnto him in
Caſars name, and afterwards Don Diego di Mendoza, hee was willing to an-
{were the Emperour firſt, That,by theJerters of the Fathers of Boloma, they
will ſee what is fit to doe beforc the returne bee reſolued on. Therefore hee
prayed them. ro come or {end Proftors to Bolonia, and to aſſiſt in the Coun-
cell. His conc[uſ1on was, that hee was not troubled with that point of their
letters, where they intimare that new courſes ſhall bee raken, beceing con

| ſcious to himſclfe not to haue omitted any part of his duetic, and to haue

imbraced Germanie with all charicic. Thathce promiſed himſelfe from them
and Ceſar, that they would doenothing without maruritic; bur if courſes

ſhall bee attempred agaigt the authoritie of the Sca of Rome, hee cannor
7” 2 hinder

XUM

2.

L 16.3, the Councell of Tren:.

OOO +

279

—_——

hinder.it, CHR15T hauing forcrold as much, when he founded ir, yer hee
feared notrthar their atrempts would ſucceede, becauſe it was grounded y
on a molt ſure rocke. ' That others had often-times endeuoured the like,
bur their;plots Wwcre. cucr ouerthrowen : and that GoD. gaue cxample in
thoſe, what others, who wouid tread inthe fame ſteps,mighr hope for. And
if the miſcriespait,, will.nor mooue thole;rhat are preſent ro defilt, yet hee
is ſure they will remayne conſtant in their. ancient pictic and faith, and
in their Congregations will not 'giue place to counſels contrary to the dig-
nitic of the Church. |

The Emperour, :becing aduiſed by his Ambaſſadour of the conditions
propoſed by thoſe of Balonia, and the Popes reſolute anſwere, though hee
law plainely that his Holineſſe couered himſelfe with the name of the Coun.
cell, and Fathers of Bolonia, who did notorioully depend on him in all mar-
ters, and.recciue all motion from him, to let the world know that he omit-
ted no meanes to ſer the Councell on foote againe, hee ſent Francis "Car-

246, and Martino Telaſco to Bolonia, Thele comming into the aflembly,the

{1xrecnth.of Ianuary, where there were no more Fathers with the Lepates,
the Cardinals of Monte and Santa Croce, then. in the laſt. Seſſion, they preſen-
ted the Emperors letters, which were thus addreſled:  ( onnentui'* Patrum
"Bolonis. Which becing read, and 7/argas beginning to ſpeake, Monre inter-
rupted-him, and ſaid, That though the holy Synod was not bound to heare
bim, in regard the letters were nor addrefledtoit, becauſe it was,got a Con-

1548
Pavt 3;
CHaRrilss 4;

—

CC
EpDvvanr 0;
Hzmay Z4

The Empes
rour perce1z
ueth y Popes
cunning,and
ſendeth Am-
baſladors ro
Bolonia,V ar«

£45, and Ve-

C0,

Vargey P
fwICe imters

uent, bura Councell, yet they refuſed not to giue himaudience, with *Prote- 7421e4mn 44

lation that it ſhould not preiudicethem , or giue aduantage to others, and
that ir ſhould remaine free to the Fathers, to continue the-Councell, and ro
goc on, and procecd againſt the obſtinate"and rebellious, by infliC.iog the
puniſhments of the Lawes. Yargas required, that an inſtrument (ould bee
made of the Proteſtation, before the *Propoſatiom was vngeriiood; then hee

cach;

prayed the Fathers , in the name of all Chriltendome, $0 proccede with c-

quite, becaule, perſiſting in their opinion, not wiſely and: maturely imbra-
ccd , itmult ncedes end with ſumegreat publike calamitie; bur yeclding to
the Emperour, all would ſucceede well. Hee went about to ſhew how-dan-
gerous an crrour it wouldbee, not to change their determiination,and how
well Ceſar was aftccted to theſeruiceof God,and the Church. In thele words
he was againe interrupted by Monte, who ſaid , Iam heere Preſident of this
moſt holy Councell, and Legare of Paul the third, ſucceſior of Peter, and Vis-
car of CHR1sT oncarth, together with chele moſt holy Fathers, to proſe-
cute , for the glory of Gop, the Councell, lawfully transferred from Trent,
and wce pray Cſar to change opinion,and toaſlilt ys herein, and ro curbe

the perturbers of the Councel, in regard his Maicftie knoweth that he who

hindereth holy Councels, bee he of what degree faeucr, incurreth-moſt gric»
ous quo 7 of the Lawes ; and we are reſolued, that, whatſocucrhap»
peneth, we will not care for any threats, nor willbee wanting tothe hanour
andlibertic of the Church,of the Councell,and-our owne; +. | | |

Then Palaſco read the Proteſtation, which hee had writterrin hithand; The Empe:
the ſumme whercof' was, Thar Religion being ſhaken, mdnners.corrupted, tion wnng
Jo Aa 2 ard jor Comme

' The Hiſtoric "EIS L us. 2.

1549 and Gemanie_ ſeparated from the Church, rhe Emperourbad demaiinded a
7: AL ; Councelof Leo, Adrian, Clement, andar lalt of Partithe third, and ſhewing the.
Czaxies's/ ynpediments and difficulties incalling it}, he touched the things hafdked in- |
| Enmany 6, it, and added, thatwhile his Mafeltic made warre, prit&ipally foriReligion, |
ar and put Germanie in quiet with his vercti&havihg greatrhope ro make chem
octo the Councell, who yntillthen had*ted; they ,molt reticrend Le-
cares, 2gainit the expeCtationof all; withoutthe Popes knowledge; making
a livhr fained cavle ro ariſe,” propoſed toZheFarhers the tranſlation of the
_ Councell, without giuivgthem time to thinke on it; whereuntofomegod-
-— * © ly Biſhops oppoſing; proteſting they would remaine in Trent, they , with
' the confent of a few Italians, decreed'the'faid Tranflation, and parted the
 ».. | next day, and went to Belonias: That the Emperour being victorious, ſol-

— ©... licited the Pope mary wayes, praying him tomaketh&m ro returnero Trent,
ſhewing the ſcandals and imminent dangers, if the Synode did not end in
that Citie /-and, in the-meane ſpace, endeauoured, in the Diet of Awburg,
romakeall the Durchmen ſubmirthomlchies vnroir.-Finally,that heſent the
Cardinall of Trezt to his Holineſſe , to {1gnifie this vnto him, and to pray
him romake the Councel returrie ro Trent. That he cauled alſo Mendega to
Sc rv Rome. to)negoriate the ſame thing: and that the Pope hath taken

_ time to treate with them in their aſſembly; who have giuen a vaine an-
| ſwcre; captious, full of deceipr, worthy.to bee condemned by the Pope,
| _* who norwithſtanding hath approoucd tt , calling rhe vnlawfull Congrega-
| —_ * © *- tion of Bolonia by the name's} a generall Councell, giuing them ſo great
" authoritie, rhar hee knoweth, ndt how to arrogate ſo much-to himſclfe:

Thar it was Certaine ,' that the Covncell could not bee tranſlated, but b
| yroent neceſſitie ; 4:lig&nrdifeufiion, and conſent of all; thar, for all this,
| they , who call 'themſclues Legares , and others, did raſhly runne our of
| Trent , fayning cerraine Feuers , and infections of the ayre, and teſtimo-
| nics of Dotours which the event hath ſhewed to bee cauſes-nor ſo much
| as of avy vaine feare. That incaleof any ſuch neceflitie, it was fit to treate
| firſt with the Pope, and the Emperour, who is Gardian of Councels. Bur
| their haſte was fo'great thatthey did nor{ſo muchas conſul with themlelues.
Thar it was mecte to heare and examine the contradictions and opinions
of thoſe Fathers who did ſpcake for conſcience ſake; who, though nor fo
| manyin number, ought to bl preferred, as more wiſe, Thar,in caſe it were
= fit to depart,they ought not to quitthe Countrey, but, according to the De-
| crees'of the holy Councels to chooſe another place in Germanie. That the
| choyle-of Bolonia, fubie&t ro the Church, could no way bee defended, be-
| cauſe it was certatnethat the Germanes would not go thither; and that cuery
| one might refuſe it, for: many reaſons : which was to diſſolue the Councell,
without warning. Therefore theEmperor,to whom it belongeth to defend
the Church, and protec generall Councels, ro compole the. difſentions of
Germany, and alfo'to reduce Spame, and his other Kinigdonics ghd States, to
a true Chriſtian life , ſeeing thar the voreaſonable' departure from Trent
12 dothdiſturbehiswhole purpoſe, hee defireth them, whocall themſches Le-
--.., gats,withthe other Biſhops , iro rerurtie rs Trent, from whence they _
f. $ £1 T nat

_ 280

PR_

<<»

Lt B. 3- the Councell of Trens, \

l

——

That theycannotrefuſe this, paranny] om docit whenthe ſi ſþi2 +

cions of thepcſtilencedid ceaſe {which i

ritic of them, pretended Leyats; andofthe Biſhops there-preſenc; is nor ſuf
cient to giuea lawtoall Chriſtendom,in matter of Religion , arid reforma:
tion of manners, eſpecially cothoſe Prouinces whole manners and'lawes arg
not knowenvntothem. Likewiſethey proteſt thattheanſivere of his Holi:
neſſe is not good , bur vnlawfull, full of dectipr, illoforie, andthar all the
dammages, rumults , ruincs, waſtings of Countries which haue happeneg,
doe,or may happen, ought norto be impured to Ce{@'; bur ro'thar Congre-
garion which callerh chemſclues a Councell,ir being able moſt calily and cas
nonically.co giueremedie thereto. Proteſting allo bs the Emperour, in the
defett, fault,or negligence of chem;andthePope, will make proviſion with
all his forces, nor leauing theproteRion andcare of the Church, which be-
longeth vato him as Emperour, and King, according to the lawes; conſent
of the holy Fathers, and of the whole world. In fine, they demanded apub-
lique inſtrument of wharſocuer was handled by them, and co haue the Em-
perours mandate, andthcir proteſtation inſertedin the acts of the pretended

Congregation.

<-*

- Oalaſco, after the proteſtation, preſented the ſameyvriting which hee had wg
inhis hand, and required againe thatthe inſtance ſhould bee regiſtred.- The my

ſolarans

Cardinall of Monte with conſent of the Synode,, did molt grauely- proteſt;
that they would rather dic, then ſufferſuch an example co bee broughcinto
the Church, that the Secular power ſhould call a Councell. That Ce/ar is

ſonne of the Church,not Lord,or Maſter. Thar hinifelfe,and his Colleague, |
are Legatesof the holy Apoltolique Sca, and refuſe nottorender/an' account - -
to God and the Pope, of their Legation, andtharthey would an(were, with- |

in few daycs,the Proteſtation read vnto them.

-  Mendog4 in Rome, having receiued the Emperors an{were,thathe ſhould The
goc or, and proteſt to the Pope, in preſenceof the Cardinals 7atidiAmbaſſas £47; nn
dours of Princes, and vnderitanding what was done in Bolonia, by Vargas, froeteth

and Velaſco, appearcdin Confiſtory, and kneeling before thePope, read the
Proteflation, which he held written in his hand. Heebegan wichthe Empe.
zors vigilancie and diligence, to reunite C hriſtendome, diuided into'diucrs
opinions of religion, . Hee ſhewed what requeſts he had madeto'Advian;Cle>
ment, and Paul himſclfe, ro perſwadethemnto call the Councel ; 'ynro which
the rebels of Germany refalin ro ſubmit, hec had compelled them'toobs
dience, by force of armes; x. 6509 chough the Pope ( ro ſhew he would
not bce wanting to the publique cauſe) didicontributeſome ſtralt aſfiſtancs
of men, yet it may beſaid , thar the warre is finiſhed onely by the Emperouts
forces. In which; while heewasbufied ; behold rhe'gpod worke beguri-iri

Trent , was incerrupred by a pernicious attemptof rransferringiheCounctl, -

pon prerences,neither true nor probable;rorhyg purpoſeondly, that pablike
_ might be hindered, norwithſtandingehe morepodly nd found part of

e Fathcrs did oppole, and remaine in theplace- That rhe name-of the

| Aa 3 Couticel

P 8
1 if they will doe',cit will bee moſt ac- PA .
ceptableto all Chrilterdome. ':Burifnor, they, the/Emperours Profors, by Cundss 4.
ſpecial mandare,docproceſt har the Trauflation orrexefſeis vnlayfoll; and ——E_
void, rogether wich all che things thardoe,or will follow;and charthoauthd- * OT

Ama.

© {The Hiſfgfs Lang

ttm

44  Gouncehovld becgwriiorthalgy novrochole, whadtercriredro/Bolouj;
C=>X hangiuredby hisHolmefſ& wighthe nameot hisadherems;;wwhott will. he
* 48 che preferretb btfaremhe prayers obgbg:Emperaiir,and[Anidinand; and Princes
——— ot ;Ewpire; nodsegarding.ttſt goodot Germayrqorthe'conperfion-of
Hear rawzH thofe ehafiaact, Hoteduteyhemg Jceingthsy arc coritent ro ſubyur-to) the
—= Councell>ok Bent; wbdroreoiayneth.corhung bur td-reduce:ic rochat Cutie;

For whidlbbcipg segicfted,ivahe forclaidnames,by limrbe Ambafſadar,bo
bach gadrian an{yerefu)bdtcunning; butryoyde pf realtor, Wherefore fees
iigtharthe Euavgelicdllrequiirions; made by hit, che Emperours Ambal:
faddir;zoiþis oboe, the 14:apd 27.0f Decemberzand,the 16.-of lapuas
ric, by ther Ptoitars of his Maieltic in/Bolonia, have beene;neglected: inn
both places;j;haedid jhen proteft,; that rbedeparturefrom-Trent;and Tran-
{lation aftihe Counsthto Bolenid, were voydeand volawftull, will bring cony
rentioninethe Church; and pucthe Cathalique faith and religion in dans
ger,.and&doe for the preſentgiue feandaltrothe-Church, and deforme the
{tateithereok;';T hat all che runes, ſcandals;anddiflentions, which will ariſt;
ovghtto beimputcdta his Hobnefſe, who, though hee is bound to prouidg
againſt rhe , Cd thelofſp'of hisblaod;.yerdocth fauourandehberiſh

the autheurs'of them -. That the Emperour;in deftefrand fault of his Halil
hefle , willimploy albhisforceuro makeprouition herein, accordingto.thg
formeſcr downeby the holy Fathers, and obſerucd by conſent ofthe wholg

...> world.: 7] hen turnivgso the Cardinals hee faid;thar, the Pope, refulzne to
4,” rake carefor the peactiof rdigiong vniting of Germany, aud reformation-of

2%! ryvanners 4 if they allo, willbeanegligent,, be made the'fameproteſtation vnto

them;;! and ieauing;gyiewriting, which be had 'in bis hand;hedeparted?-  :;

-: {The Pope confidering the Fretetarton of Mendoza; and aduifing of the

The Pops aufinefle with the Candjinals,fay lie was ina (trait, and that tobe taken fot

0 ke himſelie 8; party,andeg hauc thecoutention, turned againlt hin was much againſt

men hisrepuration: neither was there any remedy, butby-tnding a way:tomake
ca:26. himſelfe Neutral, and Iudge betweene them who approvue,;and whoo

+-- 27 pugne the Trandlation; +] o doe this, it was-neceflary radecline the fProve-

\ ſtatiap;ahabit might ſeeme norto bee made againlt him;bur ,'before himyar

' -- > aain{tthaſe of Bolania 310 which-not becing able.ro-diflemblc fhiifficiently;

hee relolyed roJlay tothe Ambaſſadours cbarge, the rranſgrefhing of his Mae

ters, Manda; chinkinþtbar the Emperour ; feeing his dexterity inblaming

his: Miniſter, that hee: might not breake-with his Maicſtie,, would-imitate =

himz;andproccede 45af bee had protceſtedagainſtthaſe of Boltomia 3 acknows
Isdging the Pope for Tudge.' Therefore ,-on Wedneſday, the firſt of Febru»
aryocallihg Mendoza into the Cenfiftory, hee made a very long an{were, and
fayd indubſtance. | That to proteſt, was-a thing of bathexample, vſed by
thole:who'baue ſhaken off obedience; or are nor conftantin it: That bims
ſelfcand the Colledge of Cardinals, arc fotry forcharvntzpeted action, in
regard of the fathcrly:louc hee hath alwayecs borne the Emperour,' and bc}
The anfnere cauſe it was done when it was lea{tlooked for, hauing made warre;andgai-
elle ro the Dd the vidtory againlt his gwneand the Churches encmics , and-beeneaſs
 Procctuirn- Liſted by-the Popes.mep's maiptayned with his immente; charge: which
faccours.lygre great; jand came-in fit time,, and deſerued not fuck areward

22G 00 c: * & A after

XUM

—_—

——_— ﬀ > ww—— Wt ” _
”— — %. _ - « ann I L We , ”
_ - *

| i

ater *i995y; tes is, .harghgend of dheypearre, Thould bee the, beginning.af 153.8"
jpatcbwgagaet nim. Bunye did atiigate bisgriefe, becauſe the Arabs. _SN
Fl

Jdoutibad exceeded. che bavatsof theEmperours Commilliqn,in which bee Cuntrs

haflbpmpandedbis3 iodgrs ar Bolpng, to protelt rotheLegares ; and. to rows 6.
* big, iþ. prac agni/tibs Epuncel of Aolone, .Inprelence af rhe Pope and 39 4.4
Cafgizaly.hurngipainG.the.Pops, Thatihe Emperour baſs

bis of avaſt gince, knowing 1 26-NgPs ro Ks zhe onely, lawfull lace wo
&

and jcquringan vadue preiudjge;againſt, the Councell, ſorhar, the 7 7
aQotehc Progeſtatuen falling, of it;lelte, there was no. need of jan anſwere DL
Lot egg]<cre al} mgns miggs,,, hee would 1nake one. And firlt, for thar hee ap

hi, 30d./ometiqnesthe Emperour himſelfe, withndiuers wars. Hee added,

aha (9.iudge wherherithecauſesof the Tranſlation bee lawfullpr no, was rc-
{erucdsptumlglfe,./Thag io praiſe choſe of Treat, was ro praiſe thoſe whg
wert:lgpatared;frgm the Church. Thatherctuled yar, por ever did,tharthey
Jboylg.recurne te Trex fo thar ir mightbee done lawtully, and withour of:
feacgbiarher Nations. Thattgthigke qacly Trent fig tocelebrarerhe Coyn-
+5 ;yy550 wrongthe holy, Gholt,, which is:worſhipped, and preſencin all
place Niche ought regardig be;bad char, Germany, bath necd of a medi:
cine, farybythatreaſon, there ſhould be a general Councel held in Eng/and,
ans: Qlſe, where-s That a. commodiqus; place, is uot ſoughptar thole., for
whomhe lawesareake, butforthole who make chem, which.are the Bi;
ſhops.s/Thaoficy'umes-Councels bays beene made, out of the Prouinges
wharqhe here{is5;haue rajgaed,. That becknowerh why he was difplealed
with thbanfwery giuey himgthatis, thatthe Decrees made, andro be made,
arcrecglucd, aud . ors manger, ykd cacr fince:che, Apoſtles time, is ob;
ferusd-T bac he willauoid {all oegligence ip providing for the, Church, and

if («ſas vill bediligent, lerhiga.keeps himſglte within.che limits, preſcribed

ro h!Þby the Javees and Facbers, The fynionsofihem both. beivg diſtin,
will hefroftablerocheClutygh. Andgoncerninggbe Trorfluion; whether _
is. wcrelawhullonno, he called ehgcaule zohim, and depured 4, Cardinals,
*Barits Buogos,Rodke and Creſcemors, tokears i,pommanding cucry e069
eaſhirves endsdj shey' ſhould astempy ag /novitie, giuing, the terme of 2
maths the Fachers of Belgvia and. Treut 5p produce gheir reaſons; And be
exiſedihis d<creeg4 be \Vijren by rhe — che Coniſtory, in the ac;
crllpingd wdicralbforme ofzhe Gours,inkubiting rhe Prelarsof Belonia and
Tyrazopnrouarcany thing, while thecauledepended., 1 | |... 1,
+I lelipparialults did lapgh excreamelyguibe Popes diſtinction, pf. prove:
mod | | 109

dijcpys(rd: of 3ll his actions, Jonero:this end., and hoyyorhers did<rofl

-

- —
—
-
*
2 f : :
F
— W——— _- - <> ew -- — c_—_—_—  R_ _ — MO _ -

L 1 BJ.

1548 | ifimz azainſtrhe Pope, andbeſorc hit: But Dizgomadea new Proteſtation,
AN fa ing hee had a ſpeciall mandate from the Emperour, to proteſt as he had

Pri, 3- fo
CAAFLES F-

Envrany, 6.

H--x+ x, "oy

- goÞ

Don Diego

mak thanew

prot ſtation.

The Pope
witetn rothe
Farhers 1n
Trent by way
of cx12at10n.

dong. The Popes inhibition beeing reecived in Bolonia, and no more aſlem-

blics of Biſhops, or Congregations of Diuines being made, all departed by
litrle and little;exceperhePopes ſtipendaries, who could not docit with their
honour,” T hoſes Tr iniooued not, according to the Emperours wil, that
chey mighr keeperhere forme ys ofthe Couticell,and hold the Catholikes
of Germanyin' hope, and” thie Proteſtants in their dutie and that their pro-
mife:ro obey the Councelof Trent, mightnot be yoyd,there being none atal.
"The Pope caufed his atifwere giuen tro Mendoza, to come to the know.
ldgr of the Fathers of Trent,and cxpeRted fifteenc dayes that ſome overture
would bemade by himorthem, that he ſhould be Iudge,as hce had deflcig-
fed. But ſceing nothing fucceeded, he wrote a Bricfc to the Cardinall Pac-
ceco, andto the Arch-biſhops and Biſhops of Trent, in manner of a citation :
in which haping delivered the cauſes, which! mooued him to intimate the
Counccll,;and the impediments and delayes, which happened in calling ir,
andthe ioy he hadto fecit begun, which was increaſed by the happie pro-
eccding,hopingehat in aſhort time prouifion would bee made againſt the
enils of the Church, heeaddcd, that he reccined-as much ſorrow from the
contrary encounters; ſo that vnderſtanding the-departureof his Legates,
and maior partof the Biſhops from Trent, ſome remayning ſtill there, hee
was fob fie that it might hinder he progreſſe of the Councell, and giue
feandall to the Church. This being as well knowen tothemasto him, hee
maruciled why, if the Tranſlation of the Councell ſecmediiuſt ynto them,
they went not in company with the others ; if vniuſt, why they made nor
their complaint ro him. Thar it was a clecre caſe, whereof they could not
bec ignorant, that they were bound to doe the one or the other; cither of
which, 1fit had beenc embraced, would hauc taken away all occaſion of
ſcandal. That he could not chooſe but write to the with gricfe;that they were
defectuous in the,one or the other,and that hee was ſooner aduifed by the
Emperour of their complaints, then by any of them, ſo much as by letter, or
meſſenger : and thar,forthis negligence, hz had more cauſe tro complaine of
the Cardinall,who was more obliged, by reaſon of his Cardinalitie. But be-
cattſe that which they ſhould haue done, was preucnted by (4/ar , who hath
complained by his Ambaſſadour,thatthe Tran(lation is void and vnlawfull,
he doth readily offcr vnto them, thar which ſhould not haue beene denied,if
they had made the caſckowen, that is, to heare their complaints , and rake
knowledgeofthe cauſe, And though he ouglit ropreſuppoſe that the Tran-
flarion is tawfull, yer ro doetheparr ofa iult judge, hee willogl y offereth to
hearc them and cheir reafons, which they ſhall bring rothe contrary; that
herein hee wopld hold and efteeme-of the Spaniſh Nartiori, and of theirper:
fons, nor ſuffering rhe great preſumrions to prevaile, which ought to
hadagainftthem. Thercfore having by aduiſcof the Cardinals, called the
cauſe of the Tranſlation of the Councell vnto him, and giuen commiſſion
to ſome of themrorelate jtin Confiſtory, all that pretend intereſt being cis
td, and the Prelates of Boloma and Trem: inhibiced to attempr any thing,
while the cauſe dependeth;as wascontainedin the writing, ne he ſcene

_

WR $i +: 5.
fn

a tt hn
—_— dil.

Lys. .. #be Countellof Trent. \ 235
thema topy,deſiringro conclude the eauſcias fooneay maybe, hedomman- 1548 _
deth'them, thatprerendivgabe Franſlation to be 0f no force;theylend three, + N
arrbecatt; welliaſtructcd,! roaffiſt in iudgement, and to alleadge: their pterCxucie 4.
renſions,and 'to-redder their preſence,as ſoone as may bee; concliding , thatzomaas 5. .
the pref cntation ofthe Briefe tothe Cardinall, or toxrwg or three of thematsÞ2=* >, -
tixed ar the Church doore of Trent,(ſhall bind rhemall; as if u had heene per- Who anne

_—_——

{onaliy intimated ro cucry one7Fhe Popeſentalſoco thoſe of Bolonia to 1nti="
matetheſame Decree, who-ſentimmediatly to Rome. 17 1 $16.0
But: the Cardinall Pacceco, and the other Spayjards in-Trent, who,
were:m number thirreene ,- having firlt; ſent to! know the Emperoyrs,
mindo, anſwered! the Popes letter the: three and-rwentiech; of March,.
caus infubſtance. .'Thatchey truſtediin his benignitie and wiledome, which
willzaſtly know. that, in contracting| the Tranſlation, in being filenc, - in,
remadymang in that Citie, they thought of nothing lefle, then} of offeriding.
his Holincfle; yca,chat che principall cauſe, why they diſſented; was, becauſe
amaiftrof ſo great weight was handled, without his knowledge : whercin
alſothey:deiired,char ſo ſmallaccount ſhould norbe madeof the Emperour.
Fhatirleemed cleere to theny;, that the Tranſlation-would notbee well ex-.
ponaded, nor caftly approoued by his Holineſſe, whom they prayed not N
ro.belceuc thac the;/Emperour had preuented their complaint, exacted: by
his Beatitudc, becauſe they had complained firſt ro him, ne that hee did is
of hisowne: motion, who thoughtthe proteCtion of rhe Churchbelonged
rohim': that. they ſhould never haue thought that his Holineſſe would
haue deſired to. haue beene aſhſted by them, ro whom they belceucd
an abſolute account was giuen by his Legates ,in regard what they ſpake
was ir publike, and written: by Notaries ; that ;it ſeemed enough for
tiem to-deliucr their opinion , and'then to bee {ilenr., Therefore they
didinot- belctue :rheir preſence was neceſfarie in ought. elſe. Thar.
there 'bee any defect, yer their plaine meaning iscleare, That they thought
ir-cnongh co diſſent from che Tranſlation, and for modeſtic and! humiluic,-
nat to trouble his Holineſle, -whom they fuppolſed would notbee (wanting;
ro perfotnic whathce thought fir, for the good of the Church. Thar. they,
faw tiotwhy they thould departwith the Legates,who promiſed, in the ges
nerall Congregation, and in the publike Sefhon,ro returne to Trex, ſoſgone
as the ſufpirionof the {ickneſle did ceaſe, eſpecially if Germany; would, ſub-
mittothe- Councell. Thart-they remained there, beleeying rhey would rc+
- rurne; eſpecially when they vtderſtoad, thar, by the grace of 'Ggd, and,,yers
cuc of the Emperour, Germanie did ſubmjt. it (elfe.,.'And that ſame haye. re-
cciued ſcandallby their abiding in Trevt, as his holineſle ſaith, it.isſfufhicicot
for them that,zhey haue norgiuen ir; andon the other {ide,thedeparrure of
othors| bath troubled many, Thar the ſucceſſor of Sajut Peterharh eucrbeen
very yenerabletotheirnation wherein themſclueshaue not;beene detectus
ous.>Ehey pray:his Holinefſe, that they may riot bee blamed. fqr.vyhar they.
hanetioneto a.good cnd.; and doc humbly befeech him.qocroconkentthey,
ſhould bee pur-into a uite, inregard he caulc is. not,cheirs, but,Gods; laying,
tharif it were chcirs, they would be content roindure any wropg but being

Gods,and CHRESTSs, 4s It is, it belongerh.more 40,ngpsthen.to his _
Sa " fiat.

| .
-£2115 |

286 The Hiftory of L 13.3,
154 YPicar.In fine,;they prayed bis holineſſe ro ſetthomcerrupred Conncel on its

"a _ feete againe; and cauſethe Legars and Fathers vo rerurne tro the ſame. place,
aVLi., 2. |

Caarrzs 5. and ro doe this by a-Briefe ; without rreating:of Trunſlation. They: pray-
Eoryarp 6: ed h1m to rake their words in good part, not tpoken roifignific what- the
Hnr. 2. quticof his Holincſſewas, but what they hoped:from him.

Thereply of | - The Spaniards anſwere being recciued bythe Pope,:it was ſent to the

th: Protors

of the Fathers Cardinals\, to whom the cauſe was:commirted;by whom it was communi-.

of Bolonma

the Fpancards Cated tO the Profors of thoſe of Bolonia, that they might proceede, Thelc
ane. anſwered, thatthey wereglad thatthe Spaniards do acknowledge the iudge-
ment andthcTudge, and that they will not bee a partic. Yet it was neceſſa-

ryto retort ſome things deliuered intheir anſwere, to makethe Trueth ap-

peare. In that they ſay his Holineſle ſhonld firſt hauc been aduiſed with, it

was ſuperfluous, in regard a peciall Bull was then read. 'That the Ermpe-

' Tour had been'neglected, it cannot be fayd, becauſe ſo great cſteeme hath

been held of his Maieltie, as of che Pope, the caulc it telfe not compor-

ting any delay, ſeeing it was neceſſary to diflolue, or tranſlate the Coun-

cell, in regardotthe progreſſe which the peltilent {ickeneſſe madeinthe

| Cirie, and borders, of the aCtuall and eminent departure of many-Fathers,
0 of the Docots oath, eſpecially of Fracaitorius,who had a publike ſtipend,and
of thefeare that the commerce of the neighbour Citics would bee taken a-

way. Allwhich appcarcth in rhe actes tranſported to Rome, by his Holincſle

 commandement. Thatthe Legates, after the Decrec,cxhorted them ro goe
to Bolonia and being arriued there, did admonith them by letters, ſo Te
they cannot ſay they ought nor to follow the Legats, becauſe they canfſen-
red notto theTranſlation, for the ſuftrages of all in the Councell being free,
they might diſſent with a ſafe conſcience: bur the maior part hauing made a
Decree, it was meetethe leſſer part ſhould yeelde, orelſe; never any thing
would be determined. Thartthe returne hath beene promiſed is true; bur
it may bee ſcene in the Decree, in wharforme the promiſe was made. . If
they taryed, belecuing that the others would returne, why did they not an-
ſwere the Legats letters, who admonifhed them ro gocro©Bolonia. But when
they ſay the ſuſpicion of the Peſtilence was pretended, itis probable they
ſpakeir by chance; otherwiſe having nothing to ſay againſt the Tranſlarion,
* andnotſcnding, according tothe Popes Decree, they ſhould incurre the
(_enſures.Neither is that dwiſio ought worth, if the cauſe betheirs, or of God.
For asit belongeth to them, no man will doe them wrong, as vato CurisT,
fecing the queſtion isof the fact, it is neceſlarie ro cleerethart which is nor
manifeſt inthefa&t. Whereupon the Emperour hauing calling the Legats
rerended, and the Fathers of Bolonia not a Councecll, but a priuate afſem-
ly, andvttered many opprobrioustermes againſt the Tranſlation,it was rea-
ſonablethe Pope thould aſſume the cauſe,nor to cheriſh,bur to appeaſe con-
centions. Whetherſcandals haue riſen by the Tranſlation, or by their remai-
ning in Trent, may beſceneby this onely, that their remaining is the cauſe
why the returne cannot be. And when they pray his Holinefle ro cauſe the
interrupted Councel| to recurne, ifthey vnderſtand it of the viuall Congre«
gations, they haue neuer beene intermitted ; if of rhe pnblication ww; the
Decrces, this hath becne referred for their fake : and ſo many things are
alrca-

XUM

S® - 9

a —— a. oo 2 I” Org" - -

EE” 0

_—_— — _—_—— _

already diſcuſſed in Bolonia, as well of faith as reformarion, thar a long IF 1548
on may bec made- thereof. Thetefore they pray his Holineſle; togiue ſens >"
rence, confidering:that-no Councell, but in time of {chiſme; bach laſted ſo © ns F,
long asthis, ſo thaccheBiſliops are deſired by their Churches, 'vntos' which tnaxs 6.
itis ficthey ſhould bee teſtored. This wiititig was preſented in the'ende of $22*>
, fterwhich there 'was no further proceeding iti theeauſe, for that the
depured Cardinals knew nor how'to conclude. To pronounce the 'Tranſle +1; co...
cion lawfull,in the abſence of the eontradiors, was to make aſchiſme,hauing mi depwed
no meanes to cnforce them to-receiuc- the ſentence ;' and they faw leſle nom
tncanes ro:force them roaſliſt in the cauſe, The Pope was much troubled; 927”
ſceing no way to compolethe difficultic, withourformeof iudgement; © .
- While thefe things were iti: queſtion, after the death of the Duike his
ſonngthePopedidcontinually'demand the reſtitution of Piacenza, and of
other places, vſurpediinthe Deftrift of Parma, making vic of the intereſts of
the Emperours daughter, wife to Duke Oftauius ; ſonne of himi that was
dead. Buethe Emperour, putpoling ro ioyne that Citie to the Dukedome
of Milan;and to recompence his fonnein Law in fomerhing elſc,delayed the
rime with diners anſweresand offers, hoping that the Pope, beeing eighty
yeeres of age; and gricucd for his ſonnes death, and hating many other di-
{taſts, would end allthe conttouerfies by his death. But the Pope ſeeing he pieces
was deluded withdelayes, moalcltcd with requeſts for the' rerurne of the prremeche
Councell ro Trent, an dottended by the'temaining of the Spaniatds in the perour,about
Cirie,comakeadiuerſionarrhelcalt, hee let the Emperotir know; thar the of 21acenes.
vſurpersof Piacenza,a Towne belonging to the Church; had incurred che
Cenfutes; rothedeclaration of which hee would: PROT fulminating alſo
miorcof them, if within a certaine time prefixed, ic were not reſtored to
him. The Empcrour wrote backea ſharpe letrer, adviſing the Pope norto
chcriſh the fugitiues of Naples;{hewing that all the pragjis were knowen
ynto him, and that heedid vnderſtand the calumnies raiſed againſt him,
thatheprocurcd aſchiſme, when he demanded a Councclin Trent, to vnire
Chriſtendome; and for Piacenxa, that itwas a member of the Datrehie of
Milan,many yeeres vniultly vſurped by the Popes : andifthey haue ticlero
it, letitbce ſhewed, and hee will not failexo doc juſtice. The Pope feeing
his ſpirituall weapons would doenogood, without thetemporall;changed
his opinion, and ſoughrto make a ſtrong League againſt the Emperour ;
whcrcin he found mauy difficultics, nor being ableto perſwade the Veneti-
ansto ctiter into it, andthe Frenchmen requiring the conſent of the Conli-
ſtory, in regard of the-Popes decrepire age; anda pawrtie of honey; which
the Pope was not willing tolay downe, in regard of the great charge hewas',. .
ar,fearing ir would begreater, for which cauſe, he had layd asgreatburthens 5s Holinefle
on his ſubicCts as they/were ableto beare, and ſold and pawnedas much as to wakes _
he could, and giuenorder for granting of allſotrs'of diſpenſarions, and fa- gi - "x6
uours, to whomſocuer would giue money, to ſupply the wancsof the Apo» gafenitn””
- ſtolique Sca. Forthe Counccl,he was molt reſolute norto eric bee out of patics in ©,
his owne Territorics, and beſides other yrgenc reaſons; that of his owne mas 19 der.
and the Popedomes reputation was added, that the ——_——_-}
compeu

Toon Las:

27" If PINES ———_—————_——_— EC CY
154$ compell him. But he knew not. how to induce him.and: Germany, to glue
A confeiit.; To et; itvaniſh, ſomctimes ſeemed: good vio himpand ſomes
Tart 3--": times not, and he often'difcourſed thereot with the Cardinals, borkin Con-
_— (iltory,aud-priuately, Bur:fipally, hee reſolued roputro:hazard the: deter:
H x'3.25- mination, (for which hee knew be was inſufficient, wotopcly! foritbe rea-
— ſons before alleaged, bur for other weightic reſpects, which paſſed in Gere
many: For ( «ſar; gbthereturngof the Cardinall of Trent to Aubnrg,vader-

_ __ anding the Popesmande, anditht,an{were:beegauerte Mendoke, at the enfl
7 of December, (yhich cauſed him; ro giueover! for theÞProreliation, as hath
>"! Leene fayd)andihinking tharthePope, by:requiring thexeltiturion of Tia;
2: 2" conge-lought to divertall ſpeech ofthe Councell, was afluted; har, fo long

_ "as he liued;either the rerurne would not þg;ortbe reſolution would -bee pro-
tracted; and therctorethoughth tbctorebegifarmed to ſet Germaig at peace,

| TheEmperor M: rmatrors of-religion. \Hereof a propofuionwas:madein.theDics;|and or-
rioluaieo fercakenythat choyle ſhould be made of perſons, fir-for-rhis: good worke,

of icl;gjon in hoſewerecholen who were efteemed the: bet; who nor agrecing all was
me referredito Ceſar... Hee elected: three, Jultres ;Elugius; Michael Sidanius, and
Tobannes Itebius. Theleafterlong confulration, compoicd atorme of Relis

oion, wich was often examined, reuiewed;apd changed/firſt by themſclues,

Thereforea © . | ; .
forme :scom- and then by diuers perſons, vnto,whom the Emperor cautcd it ro be thewed;

poco 204 ſome of the, principall Miniſters of the) Prateſtants. were alfo called;
that they, myghtapprooucit,” Butir had ſo.tnany alterations, additions, and
-diminutions, that x appearcedto þe the'worke-of many men, wha had con-
_.trary-ends. Finally ,itwas tcducediinto rchatformeinwhich ic now:is;8 the
Legate{cnt.a copic- thereof ynto Rome, - by'the Emperours conſent, who
was willing to'vaderſiand the Popes opitiion, and by the counſel]of the
maior part.of the: Prelates , who ſeeing, the contraucrſics berweene the
Popeand the Emperour,fcaredshat the Emperour would obcyhim' no lon-
ger; a thing much abhorred by them, tor the inbred, and inucterate-opini-

on of the Dutchmen,'to maintainethe digniic of the Pope, which is theon-
ly counterpoiſe of the, Emperoursauthoritie, whom without his aſhſtance,

they were notable-to refilt ; if, according to; the vic of ancient Chriſtian
Princes,they would keepe them within their bounds,ard remooue the abu-

ſes of che renowned libertic of the Clergic. x bog bv; oft 256 f

whichcon. The Bookecontayned twentie fiue heads, - Of the ſtate of manin inno«
meth 25.) conGie. Of che ſtate-of man after {inne, Of theredemption by CarisT.
"8 Of luſtification, Of the fruits-thereof;. Of the: manner: how /'it is re
cciued> Of charitie and good; workes:- Of: belicte of the remiſſion of =

ſinnes. Of the Church, Of the. fignes: of the true Church,! - Of the/au+

thoritie thereof... Of the Miniſters of the Church; "Of che Pope: and Bi-
.-i: ſhops. Of. the Sacraments,| QF Baprtilme.. Of Conhrmarion. - Of Pe-

- nance, Of the Euchariſt. Of; cxtreame- Vaction.: QF. Order.- Of Mar-

riage. Of-rhe: Sacrifice of the! Maſſe. Of the merhory, inteteefion, and

_ -», Inuocationof Saints, Of the Communien. ; Of che Geremonies,cand: vic

j* 74 Dos of the +1 3» qr theſubſtance _ would —_—
Dieth 95 tedious andvnproficable, becauſetheconſequences which began from char
ont © booke, laſted not long; Ir had the —_— tho Interwv, preferibing veliac

: wa

Liz:3.' rtheCounctllof Trem. 28S

to, beleeue, vnrillallwas. eltabliſhed bya gencrall Conncel[ +: 1548
- When the.copie cameto Rome, cucry.one wasamazed ; firſt in'generall, *——
chara temporall Prince, inaſccular aſſembly, ſhould meddle with religion; Cumin 5,
and nor in;one Article onely,' burtinall- Phe leatned called to minde the hrs:
rus Of Zeno , theta of Fi:raclius, and the wm of Conftances;,:'tand whar area
diuiſions theſe Imperjall conſtitutions ju matter of religion'imade in Chri- And i coptts
ſtendome, and ſaid, rhar, vncill then, there wererhree names, vnluckiero the ©
Church, bringing into 1t many diuiſtons, ynder pretenceof vaitic: ro which
mightbeadded chisfourth, the Interim of Charlesthe fifth: Theydoubred-
that this beginning of the Emperour would cnd:; where Henrythe: cighr,
King of England did arrjue , to declare himfclfe Head of the Church : which
would haucſo much more compaſs, as —_ Italy, Germany, and other ad-
iaccnt Countreys were greater then one |U}and, which ,in appearance , did
make ſhew ro containc one Catholike dottrine, bur was very farre from it.
Deſcending to. particulars , they reprehended that , inthe points of originall
{inne, juſtification, che'Sacraments, Baptiſme;and confirmation, the doctrine
derermincd by the: Councell was not ſer downe ; and thar colle&tion being
madeto becobſcrucd yarill cthe-Councell,in-regard the Councel,concerning
thole puints, was madealrcady, what clſc could bee ſaid, bur that it was pre-
ciſcly ro be obſerued? Bur to haue publiſhed another doctrine; was wi an-
nihilate che Counſell, and char the Emperours cunning was moteto be ſu-
ſpeed then cucr, ſecing that hee made fo carneft a requeſt, that the
Councell ſhould returne to Trent ,and did at the ſame time, take away all
authoricy from wharſocuer was conſtituted by it. They condemned che
whole body of thar doctrine, for that it contained: ambiguous ſpeeches,
which (uperficially con{1dered, did teceinea good ſence,but,inwardly, were
full of poyſon,thar,in'ſome parts, irdid purpolcly ſtand'onely vpon the gene-
rall,chac the Lutherans mightexpound it forthemſelues: bur inthe Article .
of concupilcence, it ſpakeiult asrhe Lutherans did; as allo of iuſtification, -
placing it in the bclicfe of che promiles, and attributing roo much, yea, all,
rofaith, Inche Article of good workes,, nothing' was faid of the merit ©
condignitic , which is che principall point in that matter, In the Article of
rhe Church thar ic hath-not deriued vnity. from the vifible Head , which is
eſſcnriall ; and, which is worte, hath: madea Church inuifible bycharitie,and
then madethe fame viſible. . Thatit is aſecrer Arrifice todeſtroy the Hierar-
chie, andeſtabliſh the Lutheran opinion.-"Fhar.co have made nores'of the
Church, ſoundneſſe of dodtrine;and the. layfull vic of the Sacraments, hath
giucn a way'to all ſc&s-ro hold, obſtinarely, themſcluesro bee theChurch ;
conccaling che true marke, which is the obedicacetorhe Pope of Rome. That
che ſaying,that the Pope wasappointcd for remedie of Schiſme,and Biſhops
by the Law of God,was not ro beendured.. That the Sacramentof Penance
was made molt Lutheran-like,, in-that it wasfayd}, tharbelecuingtoreceiue
with this Sacrament: that which Cu x 15T hath promiſed, 'ir happevett
to eucry one as hee beleeucch. That che principall point of Sacritice,iscor-
ccaled , thar it 1s cxpiatorie; and propitiatory for the liuiag and the dead;
Thar hauing granted wiues to Prielts,and the Cupin theCommunion of the
Laitic, cucry one might (ec, thatwith thoſerwo es che whole Catholike

Bb faith

290 1 "The Fhiftorieof oy : L Be 2.

2543 faith was oucrthrowen. - Allthe Courc taid with one voice, that rhe princi-
_—_ pall- point was in queſtion; rbar the foundations of the Church-were ſha-
Cranrxs 5. ken; that it was neceſſarproimployall their forces, to excite all Pritices, to
FR9RTE. {end to the Biſhops oftalinations, and; by allmeancs, to reſiſt this begin-

Hzszr-z- ning, from whence would yndoubtcdly follow, notthe ruineof the Church
#n > © of Rome(forthat was impoſlible) bur agreaterdeformarion,and diſhonour,

then cuer. dndroraworntds cd i | mob,
Where te '- But the old Pope; ibeeing moſt fenfible-, who, with the acutcneſſe of
on his iudgement , ſaw-more theh them all , did! immediatly penetrate-t6 the
coma betrome, and iudg=dtharthe enterpriſe would bee goodfor him ,and perni-
ciousfor the Empcrour: | He maruclled much arthe wiſcdomeandcounfell
ofſo great a Prince; that , by one victory, hee ſhould thinke hee was made
iudge of allmankinde; and preſuppoſe hee was able'to conteſt with borh par-
ties. Thara Prince;adhering ro'onemight oppreſle another, but ro contend
with both; was too'imuch: beldneſſe of vaniry. Heeforeſaw that the do-
&rine would gencrally moredifpleale the Catholikes, then the Courr and the
Protcſtants.molt of all, and that irwonuld be impugned by-all,and defended
by none: wherein there was no/ncede of his-paines , becauſe his encmics
would workefor him ; more then himſclfe could doe ; and thatir was better
to permitthe publication ofir;, then to hinder it zand rather being in this ſtare
in which it is;, then when it is reformed,thar it may more cafily fall. Onely
there was neede of threerhings. Phat theEmperour ſhould not know this,
That he ſhould be pur vpon thebu{ineſſeas ſoone as might be. And that the
frit blow ſhould be againſt the Proteſtants. - To cfte the firſt, it was fir to
makealight oppoinion, inſome things : for the ſecond, ro ſer on foote the
incerelts of the Germane Prelares : and forthe third ro makeit cunning]y ap-
peare, that chis dorine was collected , notto vryute both parties, but onely
ro curbe che Proteſtants ; by which meanes a great point was gayned,that is,
thara (ſecular.Prince did not make Articles of faith for the faithfull , bur for

thoſe that erred.

His inftru&i- herefore hee ſcnt in{truftions to Cardinall Sfendrato, tro make ſome
— rang oppolition, and , whenthedo&trinc ſhould bee publiſhed ( that hee might
- *®). not beprcſenr.)to take lcauc andbee gone. The Cardinall,according to his
Commilſion,deelated, in the Popes name, that the permiſſion to continue
the receiuing of the Cup in the holy Communion, though he that recejuerh
it isnotto beereprehended,, (the cuſtome of receiving the Sacrament vnder
both kinges being abrogated long ſince) was athing reſerucd ro the Pope; as
alſo the granting of marriageto Pricſts: and the rather, becauſe, ic harh neuer
:” been viedinthe Church : and the Greekes and Eaſterne people, who doe
not binde them to aſingle life, doc graunt that married men may recciue
Orders , and keeping their wiues , may exerciſe the mimiſtery , bur doc nor,
nor cuer did,:; permit them to marry, who were in Orders before. He ad
ded, that, without.doubr, if his Maicſtie would graunt theſe things to bee
lawfull,heſhouldgricuouſly offend the Maieſty of God : but holding them
vnlawfull j bee might permit them to the heretikes , as aleſſercuill, It is to-
lerable ,,and 1-96-27 2 the wiſedome of a Prince, when all euils,can-
not bee remooucd,, to ſuffer the lcaſt,, that rhegreater may bee rooted our.
Thar

291

rily, and with his Princely power, - + | | =
Thiscenſurc was impartedby Car to the Ecclefiaſticall. Electors , who Ti-Ecdes-

did approoucit; bur, particularly, tor the point of reſtitution of Eccleſiaſtis tors approve
call goods, thcy affirmed it was neceſſary, without which the worſhip of [ms th
God could not beereſtored , nor Religion preſerued, -nor peace well aſſu..imvcc

ally concer-

red. Andthat becauſe the ſpoile was manifeſt, iuftice did require a {hort "2 notice:
proceeding. All the Biſhops were of the: ſame opinion. The Secular Prin- viiped by he
ces were {tlentfor feare of offending the Emperour; and, by their example, "mn
the Ambaſſadors of the Citics ſpake bur lirtle,andoof thar little, little account _
wagmade. In regard of the Legates remoÞſirance, the Emperour cauſed a te emperor
Proheme to bee madce'to the-booke,, to:this purpoſe... T har, ayming ar the tem: uo
peacc of Germanie,hee found it was impoſlible to make ir, yntillthe differen» '**i®:
ces of Religion were compoled, from whenceall thedifſentions and heart-
burnings hauc riſen; and perceiuing thar agenerall Councellin Germany,was

the onely remedy herein, hee had cauſed it ro-beginin Trent, and perſ[waded

all che States of the Empire to, adhere ; and-ſubmit ynto it: but thioking

not to lcauethings in ſuſpence , and confulibn; vatill-the Councellbe cele-

brated , a forme was cceſriee ro him by ſome great, 4nd zealous: perſons
which,ſomelcarned hauing examined, by his appoihtment {they haut found

it not abhorring| front: the:Catholike Religion, it betingiynderſigod:in'a

good ſence, except rwo Articles, the Communion of he Cupgand matri-

age of Pricſts, Thereforchee requireth the States, who vatill.then-hauc ob-
ſcrucd the Lawes of the vniucrfall Church , to perſeucte ini them; and, as

they haut'promiſey,, notro changeavy thing ; and thoſe- that haue innova-

ted , cirher ro returne to antiquity , or toconforme-themſtlues ro.thar con-

fc{lion ,if ,in any thing, they hauc.cxcecded it;, and robee contented with ie,

nor teaching; writing, of printing to the: contrary, burexpecting dnely the **
declaration of the Qouncell. And becauſe, inthe laftpoint, leaue is giuen co /-

take away {upcritirious Ceremonies, hce reſerueth tho deelaratioh there  ..... _..
of tohimſclfe , andofall orherdifficulrics that riould-ariſe.| The fifteenth of ye vroee04s
May the Booke was real in the publike aſſembly;  The-voyces were norta- emmys
ken according to the yſc ; bur onely the Eletor did riſe , and thanked the <7: its

Bb 2 Emperour

CO ee DEE LIES ed CO ————_—y

”
.
_ Dm _—_— _ tw at —

oo - —
— "ET CO I Em 4 _—

| Lis. 3.

292 £ The Hiltorie of

1548 Emperourinthe'name ofthemal}; whotooke the thatkesfor a generall ap-
Fs > Probationand aſſent." No man {pake then a word : but the Princes, who
Czaxuns 5. did long ſince follow the confeſhon of 4usburg , when they wereby them-
Enwaxy 6. ſelucs,did fay they could nor accepr it: and ſome of the Cities ſpake words
mr +, which {igniticd the fame, though not openly , for fearc of the Emperour.
| The booke was printed in Latineand Puhfy order from Ceſar,and after-

wards tranſlated, and printed in Italian and French.

"The Emperor Beſidesthis,the Emperour publiſhed, the fourtcenth of Iune,areformari-

ng —_—
—
.
.

ponioa ON of the Clergic , which had been maturely digeſted and collected by lear-

refarmation

> wary ned and religious men. It conteined2 3. points. Of ordination andecletion
| heads. of Miniſters. Ofthe office of the Ecclcſiaſticall Orders; -Of the office of
Deans and Canons. Of canonicall houres. Of Monaſteries. -Of Schooles
and Vniuerſitics. Of Hoſpitals. Of the office of a Preacher. Of theadmi-
nitration of the Sacraments. Of the adminiſtration of Baptiſme. Of the
adminiſtration of Confirmation. Of Ceremonics. Of the Maſle..” Of rhe
adminiſtration of Penance. Of the admitiiftration of Extreame Vnction.
Of the adminiſtration of Matrimonie, Of Ecclefiaſticall Ceremonies. Of
the diſcipline ofthe Clergic and people. Of plurality of Benefices. Of the
diicipline ot the people. Of Viſnations. of Councels. Of Excommuni-
cation. In theſe poinrs were contcined about an hundred and thirtie pre-
cepts, ſo iult, and full of equity , that if one ſhould fay , neucr any reformari-
on before was made more exact, andlefle partiall , without cauilsand traps
ro cnſnare the vnaduiled , hee could not cafily bee reprooued , and if it had
been madeby the Prelates only,it would nor hauc dilpleaſed at Rome, except
1n wo points, Where it giuerh authority to the Councell of Bafil, and in ſome
other places, where it medlerh with diſpenſations,and cxemprions,and other
things reſcrucd tothe Pope. Bur beceing made by the Emperours authorttie,
which being it ſeemed:more vnſupportable then the Interim. For itis a fundamentall
+ + hw maximeof rhe Court of Rome , that the Seculars, of what degree or honeſtie
is udgedin (geucr,cannotgiuea Lawto theClergie, though to agood cnd. Bur,becauſe

Rome More

wnlupporable chey could not chooſe, they ſupported the tyranny (for ſo they fayd) which
rrim, they werenotthenabletoreſiſt,

The Emperor ” A little after thoEmperourgaue order,that the Dioccſan Synods ſhould

oa be heldat Saint Martins day, and the Prouinciall before Lent. . And becauſe

Synod. the prelates deſired thatthe Pope ſhould conſent, at thelcaſt ro thoſe points,

which ſccmed not todiminith hisauthority, theEmperour offcrcd them, by

his hand-writing,, dated thecighrecnth of Tuly, to vie all diligence to per-

{wade his Holineſſe not to bee wanting in his ducty. ' This reformation

was printed in many Catholique places of Germany, and alſo inMilan, the

Conciudeth {ame yeere,, by Innocentius (.iconiaria. The Diet of Aubwrg cnded the laſt

I of [une , and the Receſſe was publiſhed; in which the Emperour. promiſed

Arcrromi- that the Councell ſhould be continued in Trent, and that heewouldtake or-

ſimprionof der thar it ſhould bee reafſumed quickly; in which cale hee commanded all

in7rez. the Ecclefiaſtiques robe preſcnr;and thoſc of che Auguſtanconfelſionto gae

thither with his ſafe-condu&, where all ſhould bee handled according; to

the word of God ; and doctrine of-rhe Fathers , and them(clucs ſhould bee

. heard, '- SHLD eto p41; | 4

WOISQ(LiA | The

XUM

"294 _ The Hiſtorie of = L1s; J

EE ER SER =oanrana kt nl. i a.  ———.. — =

1548 the Church doth noretrein denying ittothe Lairrgio pramievito chem tor
9TS life, or for ſo longstheyſhallthinke fir, ſorhat it he'donencither itithe
Crancre 5. fametimenot with that which is doveby deoteeuf the-Churth. "Hee
Eomas 6, granted them power alſo.,o, vnite Excl
Hanar 2, . Schooles,or ;andtoabſoluc the vſurpers of cclefiafticall mo6yd.

able goods, after thegefticution of rhe mAh ap ; compoundii ng alfo/
for (vale nam 0907 7 mae confuncd, trick avthoritero comms
nicatctheſe toother perfons of noce; gw
Whcbicea: . This Bull paſſedinaliplaces, ra} war venitzlis oolatibe whit
my, ſhallbcerclarcd,, andaffootdedrmarrer of iſeourſe, pore theprotieme;'
wherethe Pope ſand , that; imthe troubles of the Chorcly, heawiseumforred:
abner pena
"7: on "bpm remedy:of Councell; arifche badbofoun-
 -- dation burypon him zand y perſons: of Toes: [Then they- 0's;
Pn roireſtore and Princes ro howours , fate; and dig-
There was allo obſerucd a comradidtion, to abfoluc frotynlawtull)
cans wei nced no abſolution;and from me oahtono man cu ablolue.
And ic wasthought another contradiftion,to'grane the Chalice onely to bim,'
| Who bclecucth theChurch dothnorerre, in forbidditiperoche Laitie. For
how is it poſſible to belecue ſo, and ro defire not ro becomprehended i inthe
prohibirion?- Bur mn 5 err not forbears laughing, }when'rhey tead the
condition, to abloluethe Friars who forſooke'
habire conidlabaas ifrhe kingdome of &o D didconſ{iftir} a colowr|orvelt-
ment , which bcing noxwornein thew,, yer-it was neceſfary ro haut ir\ iv ſes
cet. Burchough che Nwncy were foone deputed , yerrhiew/ diſpatcluwas de-'
| ferred vniillrhenext yrere, becauſe che Emprrour was norpleaſed with the
whythedi. manner of Ir, in whichno mention'was madeto affiſt , orauchorizethe
gw uifionsmadeby him ;neicher would the Pope eucr bes jperiiraded that my
wasdeferred. 1: niſter of his ſhould be _—_ | l OA1mgt mahe
The Empe- The Emperour ccin Aubig) vied hob ence, [har[rhe
ors mee Interim mightbce received, by che Proreſtant Cities ; bue ant, reliſtance
_ pobans comme wha, becauſe they did 'dereſt ic more then theCatho-
norche Ca liques. They faydir waa. torall eftabliſkmene of the Pipacie. ' al;
mouqeet: they found le evich rlannkdGicitgs of Tuſtification;and thicthe conimenion
ofthe Cup;and martiageef Prieſts: was - © Tobie Frederick Dule
of Saxony, diough priſoner; faid freely, Go D and bisconſbience oats:
which heewas bound aboucall,did nor permit hitt!eo recetncir.” Whete- it
was admitted; diucrsacridents, varietics,and cotfulionsdidfuceeed (fo that
ir was broughtiaco ſomeplaces dinerſly, wickſo mariy —_ Joes
ditions, that one-may (ay, ir was railgereieeted b althenacce wy.
Neitherdid cheCarholiques carerohelpe forwatdehe bufidele &.
dicnorapproburirehcmfelues. Tharwhich dedhinr ch Emporio,
was the modeſt liberryofaliccleweake Citie, whichdeſircthimythar,beihg'
Lord of their hee woald ſuffer that theirconſeieaice might be
longto GopztharifthedoQtrine propoſed to them, weroreceiued:bytlin.

ol _ ſhould haucagrear _—_— to fol low.) Bur if his Maieſtie would

compell

[Beneficeptb Studies, |

cloyſters;-to6weare the |

XUM

a, -

I EE

Ears the Copneellof Trent.

compel rheavcy iccoprotand baſins ths
O kneir arg bio ireohieh

waedhis'T'ro
7 and to giue

nios andpaines;zheo makea'ſtrong,
in-Frendi yioes aft iralſor.andiiga' rene!
wholeſquadcon Wri inſtic,
ly afrhe Hanſetowancs, Ar x
0 oinithatwillreconcilecotmmry opinions, chi
reetoimpugantbis, ai pnemoreobſtir
Them mel ntangullt dinidion:aron
who had in patt yodddctl i Gdfar
remomes.excuſtdthemſclues;and by
indiffcrerit,andbyto } that did nor
prouc or receiuethem ,andthavie was layfull,
feruitude; when nolim ptccy wisnoyped with ic; \ard
the Emporour way co-bcobeyed>: Octicts , |
pellediſaid ip yaserueichat indifferene things
mcancsot chem,pernicious thin
med a general]

»

Jurr

66% airy i

F

e Ow ne | 4
1 -For-thofe

WSU phOvay vga
things One DY/ tHerd wete
Ic | 4 k f |

; 7's * : .
*. I. = 4
» £0 / * + at IS « =
- ” - |
4 : "

| that the Bl .-

)Adiulfens:
the

On,

k. wi

5 ] BE Ea

$549
The Duocc-
{in Councc i, 8

are hcld,and
the Empcrors
rien gat CA

e11ll Co
of Colleen

== podgraſtirotioncf rom rr
AipſyandiyedX tary

brongdnadrmith ortafplotdpropatibie POLES 5% Tauren. *prrcw
con Wpoidigwrodddcd, fer alone Eolnticar
ain" g Enna — _ Rt pan." 09a -
mpg rhe, Nees c [2 t>Gryner ravp © ero0Dtakingnoritet
bs Re apr yi darlin wir fixanyo A nfo tar he
ft EEE ir

The Decrec

{The Pronin-
*ciall Counc:ll
of Ment.

points are res
mar —_—

or haue D

Fx ſhew pert much the opinions of

If lamwlafeaidt anonatemeds
theGovenrl of FagpeailDquaary con, lwking

hey econ doggie bbBebgion.,
iva"g

LE rocrafter

cxamp(? cls Thi nvett
DE

drinBrymaricsp
that

nionaicd:b hcfpoken fol

5 - _— 4 —_ _s " A ;
—

Lev-j the CouncellofTrem. 297

char Religion catinot'be handledina Nationall Councel; And though one +1545.
may ground himſclfe more'vpon divers Prouinciall Councels of Jfrice,,E- >>
2Y2:, of Syria,and ocher parrs of the Eaſt,yerthis,being moderne;chough nor Crazzn 5.
of {uch coalequente ,” will perhaps more prouoke rhe Reader to miarke ir. zona 6,
Th: Ele@>rot Tyiers did celebrate allo his" Synode't'and other” Mcrropoli. (97 |
rancs, nordeparting from the Communion of the Pope, did all publiſh the |
Imperiall Edicts of Ausburg, as well-forthe Interimof Religion, as for thi non eo
Ecclefiafticallreformation. 7 1 7 | * celvarebetd.

| The Nuncy, deltinated by the Pope the yeere before, arid deferred; forthe Tic 3.5
cauſes aforeſaid, begantheir journey for Germany; who,in cuery placewhere ©: raped: yu
they paſſed, were ——_— by the Catholikes chemſclucs : fo*odious was 4chud in al
che Popes name, andthe very habirof his Minifters,in regard of his differen. ****
ces with che Emperour,, and of the courſes'hee rooke. And finally , in the
cad of May, they went to (ſar into the Low Countreys,whete, after long
diſcu. on how to execute the' Popes commandements, there being difhcul-
ticincucry propolirion for one partor other, in fine the Emperor refolued,
thac, hauiog faculry from che Rope to ſubſtitute), rhey ſhould ſubſtitute the
Bithops; eucry one'ip his owne Dioceſle, referring all ro their cotiſciences,
This matcly was got rcadily-made by the' Nuncy ; yer condeſcending ar the
laſt, a ſubſtitution wasprinted ;in the nameof the three Nancy, leauing a

lace for rhe name'obÞthe Prelate,' vato whom it was to bee direfted; and
inſerting firſt the renorot the Popes Bull, and alleadging for cauſe of the
ſubltirucion, cheirnor becing able ro bee in euery place, they did communi-
catc their authority , with aduice not to grant the Communion of the Cup,
and yſ[cof cating fleſh, bur wich great maruritic and evidencprofic, prohibi-
ting that oughrſhould be payd for thoſe Graces. '(,4/ar vndertooke to ſend
| them ro whom, and where itwas fit,and to what place ſoeuer hee addreſſed
chctn,heegaue them ro vnderltand, thatthe procceding ſhould be with gen- PEERS
| tleneſſe, and dexterity. There was very little yſe of: theſe faculties ; forrhoſe har ry
chat continued inthe Popes obedience, had no need'of them,and thoſe who '** 5*<
wcerealizned,did noronely not cate for them , but refuſed them alſo, A few
daycsaficr, Ferentinodeparred, Fano, and erona retnained with Ceſar , vn-
till che Archbiſhop of Sipontowas ſent by Iulivs the third, as ſhall be fayd in
its place. | | ETICS 234 £

; the ſame time the French King, making hisfirſt entry into Paris , the The French,

fourth of Iuly, cauſed a ſolemne proceſſion ro bee made; and publiſhed an butt cnuy
Eli&,rendring a realon thereof, rhar hee didir ro ſignifievetodll; that hee putlivet in
recciued the proteCtion of the Catholike religion, and of the Apoſtolike Sea, 2922
and the carcof the Ecclefiaſticall order : and that hee abhorredthe novitic of Romances
rcligion,andreſtifiedro all his will ro perſevere in thedoQtineofche Church **
of Rome, and to baniſh the new hererikesour of all bis dominions; and hee
caulcd this Edi&robe printed inFrench;and ſent ir incoall partsofhis'kings
dome. Hee gaucleauc alſoro his Prelatesro mem mer 4770s 25

«

reforme the Churches ; which being knowen at Rewe-was _— beea
bad cxamplc, andmighrbeca beginningrto make cheFrench Church inde- Arne...
pendant ofthe Church of Rowe. Hee cauſed: alſomany Lucherans to bee 2zuot he
puttodeathin Paris, himſclfe|becing preſent at che ſpectacle: andin thebe= ©

DN CDORT : ginmnng ,

E

- "bh ThHferieaſ) Didcþ
1549 -ginning of the next yeere hettenewed. the Edict againſtthem, laying orie-
7 nous xp megy vpotithe Iudges,, who werenot diligent in dereQtingand
CHARLES 5: puni ing them. a = V7 S= FP | | $4 30 , ;
T7" ,; . Butthe, Councellin, Bolonia hayipg {lepttwo yecres , the ſeucnth of No-

Haxar2-: ember, tho-Pope, ſecing a letter of. Duke Offanius , his nephew zrhar hce
 \, - -wyould-make anagrecment with Ferrandys Gonzaga , tocnter into *Parme.,

The dupe | Which Citie.the Pope cauſed ro-beeheld inthe name of the ——— Sea,
Grth yu hee was ſo aſſaultzd with perturbation of minde and-anger, that hicefwoo-

© ___. ed, and; after ſomofewe'houres,'comming to himſclfc, he fell into a Fea-
ThecleSion er, whereof be dyed Within three dayes.. This made Monte part from "Bo-
Poe. -., Jonia.to be Atthe Elefion of the newPope,and all the ther Prelats to rerire
"* rotheit houſes. Thecuſtomeis, that the Cardinals doe folemnizethe Obſe-
quies of the, defun& Popenine daycs, andenter into the Conclauetherenth,
Then,by reaſonof the abſence oftmany, they entred nor yncill the 28. of the
monerh.-. The Cardinall. Patceco left not Trent vntill the Emperour, vnder-
{tanding of the Popes death , gaue him order ro goe ro Rome, where hee ar-
riucd many dayes after the Conc)aue was ſhut yp. The Cardinals bcing af-
{embled'ro,create the Pope, and making capitulations, according to-the cu-
| {tome,which cuery one{wearethto obſcrue, in calc hee ſhall bee elected, the
frlt was to proſccutethe Councel, Euery once thought the new Pope would
hauc been c{cfted before Cbriſimas, - For the holy gate, for the Inbile of the
next yecre 1.550. beeingto be opened on the Eucof the Feaſt, ar which the
Popes preſcnec was neceſſary, and there becing that yeerea great concourſe
of people to thatdcuggion , cucry one belecued that this would mooue the
Cardinals toprocecd quickly to the cleCtion. Theſe were diuided into three
factions; Laperialiſts, French,and depcndants on the dead Pope,and by con-
—_—— {cquence,on his nephewes. The Imperialiſts would hauec created Cardi-
to be Pope nall Poolezandrhe French, Salwiati: But ncither of theſe parties was ableto
makethe cle&tion of it-elfe., norto agree, in regard of the contrary ends of
their Princes. The Dependants of the Farneſi were able to conclude the
election, tb which part-ſocuer they adhered : and they were contented to
choole Cardinall Poole,tar the goodncſleof his diſpoſition, and his conti-
BY nuall obſeruance of the/Pope andrheCardinall;F arneſe. Bur Cardinall Thea-
acdor vipi- ting oppoſing him, and ſaying hee was blemiſhed with Lutheraniſme, made
weanime, Many Iatire. Farveſe dif} ptadbere te Saluiari,8 was relolued notroconſent,
+ but ypon ſomecreauye- oft his vnele. The intereſts of the factious were ſo
'* great, thatthe relpetof theholy yecre ,and thecxpettarion of ſoinuch peo-
 plezwho wereaſſetblct.allcharday vncillnighe,could notpreuaile., -
Cud.Mozz ©» :Atthclalt, the partic of ,Farneſe, aſſiſted by the French-men , did oucr-
 cccited *- come. and Jobn Maria & Monze,Legare of the Councell ur Trent and ©Bolonia.,
; was created, ypon whom Farneſedid concurre;thinkinghima faithfull ſer-
uantto himgand bis grandfather,,and the Freach-mencthinking hee would
fauourtheir/King,and croflc theEmperour, inregard of the:Tranſſation of the
Councellto Boloniey.,;Newther-were the Imperialiſts againſt him, becauſe
Coſmo, Dulkevf Florancd; made them. beleeuc that hee fauoured the French
no:more:thee his thankefulneſſe ro the Pope-had conſtrained him , whoſe
" intereſts he thought hevyas bound to maintaine; ſo that this caule beeing
| | remooued

_— "_ ——_

L1s.3 the Coun

NN OET eta» o——<dr

dt. 4a.
-
*
—

Curr eee EEE en a os Axon >= ces 2p 7
gay +

Ky DOE EOS
cello Trent. ig
tighely.'- Maniy did loacin him his © x $56
hy diffmulation, and open ro'all. Im: KA
mediatly afterths eleHionjincoriformiriets that which was capitulited, hee Eiaxuss 5;
did {ware to proſecute the Councel. Hee was eleedthe cighrof February, EanianE
3 6% TAL 3 Hi#xzy 2. .

and crowned che 23.and thezy; he'spented the holy pare:

_ —_

remoousd;/ hes wyoaldicatry hitiſelfe v
naturalllibzriie, free feomr hypoerificand

The Emperour, perceiuing-that che affaires of religion ir Germanie, did > - 7
notgocashewould hate chent, hoping te rethooue theidifhculty by his pre. .. 1559 |
| ſence, did intimate a'Diet for that yeere in Ausburg, aid ſent Lewit © Abila The Emperoy
' rocongrarulare with che Pope'for his afſumprion , and to defire him to ſer ſendet an |
the Councell on foote againe: The Pope anfwering with as much courtefie, 2the Pope
made grcar offers of his good will, For the Countcl;hisanſwere was in gen@ latcandeo
rall tcarmes onely';'becing notas yet reſolucd/in himiclfe : and ſpake hereof cron of the
with the ſame irreſolution ro che CatdinaFof Guife, who was toreturne int ©
France ; but affirmed that hee would nor docir; before hce had cotrrimunica-

red cuerything co-the French King. And to 'Cardinall Pacreeo, atid other
Imperialiſts, who often ſpake thereof with him, hee ſayd, he would eafily ac-'

cord with the Emperour in this particular, ſo that the proceeding were f1n-

ccre, toconfound'heretiques to faudur'the _— deſſeignes, and nor. -

ro disfauour the Apoltolique Sea: whereof hee had many, conſiderations,

which in fittime, 5M would make knowento his Maieſtic. Hee preſently
gaucataſte whar his gouctnment would bee, ſpending whole dayes in gar-

dens, plotting our delicious buildings, and ſhewing himſelfe more inclined:

ro pleaſure then buſineſle; eſpecially when any difficultic was atinexed. The _.. _
Emperours Ambaſſadour,Don Diego, hauing curiouſly obſerucd theſe things, 7orcwkore
wrote to the Empcrour, thatall the negotiations of his Maicſtic with the from.
Pope, wouldcafily lucceede ; for that, being catticd away with delights, one bulincil.
might make him doe what he would , by making him atraid. And the opi-

nion was more confirmed,that he would be more addiCted ro his ptiuate af-

fection, then to the publique good, by the promotion of a Catdinall, which

he madethe laſt of May , ro whom hee gaue the Cap, according to the cu-

{tome. k bay | i Eten

John Mariadi Monte; when he was Biſhop of Sjponto , becing gouernout of T;cene®
Bolonia,recciucd into his houſe a boy of Piacenzs, of vnknowen parents, and'<zn=ll
loucd himas if hee had been his owne ſonne. Ir is recorded, thar , beeing”

ſicke in Trent,of agreat and long fickenefle, whereof the Phyſiciatis thought”

hee would die, hee fent him, bytheir counſell, co Yerog, rochange the Aire;'

where hauing recouered his hiedlth;and returning ro-Trent , the'day of his at-

riuall, the Legate-went out of the Citie for recreation, accorripaniied with

many Prelats , and mette him necre the' gate, ſhewing manyſignes of ioy.

_ This gaue marrer of diſcourſe; whether it were by chance, or wherher the

_ Cardinall, going forth vnder another colour, had a ſecret purpoſe'to meere'

him. Hee was wont to ay , that hee loued and favoured him,asauthour of

his owne fortune , becauſe the Aſtrologers had foretold, hee ſhould hauc*

great dignity andriches, which hee could not haue yifhe did noralcendyo'

the Papacie. :Soſuoneashe was created Pope, his vill was, that Innocent#s.
(for ſorhe yong man was called )ſhould be adopted the ſonne of Boldwin di
_ Monte,his brother, by which/adoption, hee was called Innocenti»* d: mw
| | auing

—_—_—

ti
"_— _ <— _—_— - _—

OO. ewe 0 Bo »— - —_ =

HE The Hiſtorie of , + L1s. 3

1550 Hauing, riven him many benefices, on the day aforeſaid, bee created him
= 4-2 Cardinall, giving ſubicct of diſcourle, and Palquins, to the Courtiers, who

Iviivs 3

Cuanres 5 did ſtriue.ro ſhew the true cauſe of ſuch an yauſuall ation, by coniectures
Fowany 6, Of diucrsaccidents palt.

Haxar 2. © Charles,beforc he parted out of the Low Countreys, eltabliſhed theInqui-

The emperor ifion there : whereat the Dutch and Engliſh Merchants, of whom there
ctablerty  WCTG INANY 1 thoſe parts, becing.much mooucd , had recourſe to Queene
on inthe low Mary,and the Magiſtrates, deliring amitigation of the: Edit, or, otherwiſe,
Cours) protelting they would depart-. Thoſe who, wereto execute the Edict, and
inſticuceche Inquiſition , found difticulty euery where; ſo thatthe Queene

- wascnforced to goc to Ceſar, who was in Awburg , to.celebrate the Diet, to
erſwade him that the populous Countrey might not bemadedeſolate, and

ſome notable (edition arile. (faryeclded very hardly; yet, inthe cnd , hee

m- _ was content totake away the name of Inquiſxion,and corcuoke whatſocucr
concerns” inthe Edi&tdid concerne ſtrangers, all itanding firme which belonged to
the Naturals ofthe place. The Emperour dealt with the Pope by his letters

is and Ambaſſadour, to rcaſſumerhe Councell of Trent, del1ring a preciſean-

- requirech tro

the Pope ſyycre,notſuch as hee gaue to D' Awila,nor withſuch ambiguity as he vied ro

preciſe anlwer

concerning » LTCAT With Cardinal Pacceco , but that hee would let him know the Capitula-
"ome tions which hee required , that hee might reſolue whether that medicine
would cure the maladies of Germanie, or ſhould thinke of other remedies , ir
being impoſlible rocontinue longerin that State.
Andebe Pope  T Be Pope, con ſidering with his inward fricnds,that this was the moſt im-
doth (criouily POITant dcliberation which could happen in all his Papacie, did ballance
whaanſver The reaſons which might perſwade or diſſwade it. Firlt he conſidered,thar,
tomate  remitting the Councell.to Trent, hce condemned the Tranſlation to Bolonia,
which was principally his deede, and ſo ſhould plainly confeſle hee had done
amiſle,cither willing]y,orat the inſtance of another. And if there had beene
nothing bur the Tranſlation, it had not beenea matter of fo great weight.
But hauing made himſelfe a party rodefend ir, and fo carneſtly,heecould nor
excuſe himſcltc of malice,if hee did ſo cafily retra&tit. And,which imported
moſt,he ſhould put himſelfe into all choſe dangers, from which Paula moſt
wiſe Prince,thoughtfirto [ecurchimſelfe, 8 perſeucred inthat opinion vnril
his death : and that it was a manifeſt crror to reenter into them. And though
many were not ill affe&ted to him, being a new Pope, yctit is certainethar the
maior partdoenot pretendro bec greuedat the Pope, but at the Popedome:
and, for this particular, no mancan bcc ſure, that ſomething may nor hap-
en in the progreſſe,, which may raiſe him greater hatred , tho ugh withour
os faulr. Beſides , allmen are not mooued with hatred, but thoſe that hurr
molt, defire to aduantage themſclues by depreſſing others, Therefore it
may be concluded that the ſame reaſons, which mooued ©Paxl, would con-
ſtrainc Iulisallo to the ſamercſolution. He conſidered the great troubles that
Paul ſuitained 2.6. moneths , for this cauſe, and the indignities which hee did
neceſlatily ſuffer, and the diminurion of the Papall authority, not onely in
| Geqvany, butin 1calyalſo.. And ifthis did derogate from Paul, confirmed
ſo many yeeres inthe Papacie,and cſtecmed by all, it would doe it from him
much moxe, bcing a new. Popc, not hauingas yct made intclligences , and

adhe-

XU

L1s.3- the Conncell of Trent. 2

adherences, neceſſary for theenterpriſe of conteſting, and if a proteliation 1; 50
ſhould bee layde on his -backe, ora Decree, as the Interim, his authoricie CAN
would bee{corned by all. Hee was not to reckon of the paines in tranſlating Cuancss þ.
che Councell, and his conſtancic in defending it, becauſe with thechangeof rp5uuns Þ
forrune, whatſocuer dependeth on it is changed, and the aCtions of John Ma. Us? 2.
ria di Monte , doe not apperraine to Pope Iulins, and thoſe things which gaue
reputation ynto that man, doc not giue it vnto this. Then ic was firto doe
as hedid, to ſhew himſelte a faichfullſeruant of his Lord; but now , becing
Lord himſelfe, the reſpectof conltancicin ſeruing well doeth quiteceaſe,and
another docth ſucceede, which requireth wiſedome, in applying himſelfe ro
the times. Hee conſidered how popular the Emperours requelt was, in re-
oard the reducing of Germanie was in queſtion, and how fcaudalous it would
bee notto hearkenvato ir. The cauſes which mooued to makethe Councell
were plaine and manifeſt coall; thoſe which diſſwaded were ſecret, & know-
ento few. Finally the Oath made, and itcrated,ought to beregarded; which
though it did binde to proſecute the Councell, without preſcribing rhe place,
yet it was certaine,that, without che Emperours conſent, being king of Spaine,
and Naples, Prince of the low Countries, and hauing other adherences in
Ttdlie, it was impoſlible to make a generall Councell ; ſo that, ro refuſe to
bring it backe to Trent,and nor to proſecute it, was all one. He inclined to this
part molt, as molt agreeableto his diſpolition, deſirous rather to flye preſent
incommoditics, then auoyd furure dangers. For chooſing to celebrate the
Councell, hee was deliuered from the trouble which the Emperour would
ive him; and for the dangers which it brought, hee began to elteemethem
Icfſe. Hee thought the Emperours fortune was not then the ſame as it was
two yeeres before. For atthat time the expeRation of the victorie, which
heeafrer obtained, gaue him regutation ; which now ſeemeth rather to bee
burdenſome to him , then any cale. Hee holdeth ewo Princes priſoners,
| as wolues by the cares. The Citics of Germanie,, doe openly inchne to
rebeilion, The Eccleſiaſtikes hane a fatictie of that domination. There
are alſo domelticall croſſes, in regard of his ſonne, brother, and nephew,
who aſpire to the Empire; a bufinefle, which perhaps may giue him trouble,
beyond his forces. In fine, he concluded, according to his diſpoſition, Ler
vs get out of the preſent difficultic, with hope that our good fortune will
not abandon vs.

And concealing his reſolution, hee deputed a Congregation of Cardi- He c6cealeth
) C his reſolution

nals , and other Prelats, for the moſt part Imperiahilts, chat they might fall rotilic bee |
vpon the reſolution which hee had taken, mingling ſome few of his cruſtic pore
friends arnong(t them, ro gouerne the buſineſle according to his purpoſe. 279 Gre
To theſe he propoſed the Emperours requelt; giuing order that withourall lars.
reſpect, eucry one ſhould ſpeake what he thought conuenient for the ſeruice
of Go D,and the Apoſtolike Sea. And in caſethey thought firtocondeſcend,
they (hould chinke how to doeit with honour, (ccuritie, and fruit. TheCon-
oregation, hauing often conſulted, related to the Pope,thatthey wete of opi-
nion the Councel ſhould bee proſecuted, becauſe ſuch an Oath was taken iti
the Conclaue, and by his Holineſle, after his aſſumption, and to take away
, {candall from the world, which without doubt would be vety great,incale if
Cc | Wets

x; .

302 The Hiſtorie a L1s. 3.

T1550 Wcerenot done. And it might bc proſccured two waycs;ofte by continuing it
—_— in Bolonid, another by remirring ir to Trent,” Tt could nor-deecontinuedin
Caanrrs 5. Bolonia, becauſe Paul had called rohim the catife of the Tratiſlation;'and in-
990TH hibited ro proceedeanyfurther. Tf his/Holineſle did net'firſt giveſentehce
Hex"x 2- that the Tranſlation was good,it was not lawftill togoe on'in thar City: and

if hee did, he would give alawfull prerence to bee ſuſpected, it being'knowen
thar the Tranſlation was madeby him, as being the primeLegate, arid Preft-
dent. Therefore onely-the ocher way: remayned ; ro remir it ro Trent, and
all occa{iogwas fo taken away-from Germanies to ſpurne again{t it, and the
Emperour was ſatisfied, which was a very effentiall poyot. This aduice,

being, brovghtto the Pepe, was approued by him: and fo they paſſed tothar

——_—

which remained. |
The 0ifcul- &- And firſt it was concluded , that the conſent and aſliſRtance of the French
nt Cons King was neceſſary, and the preſence of the Prelares of his Kingdonie, other-
<9 7x2 wiſe the reputation of the Councell would bee very weake , and they ſhould
— beeindangerto looſe France, onely toindeuour to tegaine Germanie, which is
loſt: which were,according to thefable,tolet the body fall,to get the ſhadow.
It ſcemed hard to per{wade thar King, and to take from him all ſuſpirion, if
the Councel were celebrared inaplacefubict vnto theEmperour,and neere
vnro his armic. But examining what thoſe ſuſpitions might bee, they could
finde none, bur that the Councel might determine {omethivg, in preiudice of
the gouernmentof that Kingdom,or againlt the priuiledges of that Crowne,
or againit the Iibcrtic of the French Church : in which, it hee were ſecure, ir
could nat bee doubred butrhar, for the hereditaric obligation ro protect and
fauour che Apoſtolike Sea,he would afliſt,and ſend his Prelates. "The ſecond
ditficulcie was, that the Italian Prelates, beeing poore , could not bearc the
charge of that place, and rhe Apoltolike Chamber, being exhauſted, could
ilt fupply as much as was needctull,be{ides thecharge of maifitaining the Le-
gats,and Ofticers of the Councel,and other cxtraordivarics. Whereof thin-
King often, they could finde no way to hold the Councell withoutexpence,
and that it was neceſſary to dtinke of this Cup : bur ſuperfluitics might well
bee cut off, by diſpatching the Councell quickely, and not tarying there
longer then was neceflary. The third difticultie was, that the Proteſtants
would call into queſtion the things determined ; wherein all the Congre-
cation reſolued readily, that they ſhould make their meaning plaine, thar
they oughtto be eſteemed as ipfallible,and not ſuffer them to be diſpured on:
and to declare this before the Councel, not deterring to make themſclues vn-
der{tood vnrill then.
Ofvtichthe © Thefourth and moſt important difticultic of all, was theauthoritie of the
5 44. Apoltolike Sca, as well in the Councell,asout of it, and oucr ic; which not
- z0> the Proteſtants onely doe impugne, but many Princes alſo would reſtraine,
and many Biſhops did thinke ro moderate. This was the chiefe cauſe why
the former Popes would not bec perſwaded ro call a Councell ; and Paul
who was brought ro it, did percetue it in the end, and prouided again{t
it, by che Tranllation. This danger was ſeene by all ; bur none could fer
downea way to c{capcit, but by ſaying, that God who had founded the Ro-
manc-Church , and placed it abouc others, would diſſipate all counſell,

: raken

— ——

A A. cm

_—_ » SE + - - "I m _— ” - "4 ho -
5 | i q pn , | .3 . Lo 1
4 ” * f pF - kt "
La B, = 'S * |
" n n bo
_———

caken' againſt ir. This, ſome belecuing for ſimplicitic; ſome for their 1536
inccreſt,, ſome becauſe they knew not what elſe ro fay, ſectned not ſuſ- PAS
cient. , fi a5 bis ,aN61-991 io 109293619 26v9 EI; } Cuninrss 5.
- But Cardinall (reſcentios; groundingrhimwſelfe nweh-ypon this confic gxmag T
dence, fayd, that-there was.no humane adtion/ in! which there was hot B92
ſome danger ; that che warre did thew asrfiuchzwhictris the chicfelt; which
is nener eriterpriſed,, though with eicuer ſomuch aſſurance of viſtotie ; but ..
there is davger of-lofle and toralbdeftruction; neirheris there any buſineſſe The free _.
vndereaken, with: ſo:much certamety of a- good iſfſte; which may not ſud- dival Creſcew
denly fall into great inconuenicaices, for vakriowen, or lightly eſteemed, "=
cauſes. ; But hee char is forced; for auoydingother eujls, to yeelde'to ſome
reſolution, muſt natcare for ir. Things are in ſuch a ſtate, rhar, if the
Councell bee not held ,:there is more.danger thar the world , andthe Prin+
ces , þceing ſcandalizcd, will alicne rhemſclues from the Pope; and dot
more. defato, then; inthe Councell, by diſputationsand Decrees; Danget
is to bee, incurred cither way, and it is beſt to rake the moſt honoura-
ble, and {calt dangerousparr. Bur many prouiſionsmay bee madero divett
it; as to kcepe the Fathers of the Councell buſted , as much as may bee,
it other. matters, and fo to hold them in exerciſe, that they may nor haue
time to thinke of chis; ro keepe many ' in-amitic, eſpecially the Italians,
with perſvaſions and hopes, andby other meanes vied hercrofore; to hold
the Princes counterpoyled, nourithing fome differences of intereſts be-
twectric them , thar 'they may nor. ioyntly vndertake ſuch an enterpriſe;
and ,/ if one doc it:alonc, the -orhers will oppoſe it : and a wiſe man
will findc-othcr remcdics in.the very fat , by which hee will bee able
eq catris.matters along ,, and 'make them vaniſh.. This opinion. was ap*

rooued ,.and- a reſolution raken, that no demonſtration of feare ſhould _

Yee made, bur oncly that ir ſhould bee intimated to the Emperour, that
this'is forcſcence, but thatno man carcth for'it, becauſe there is a remedie
prepared;; | 29 | -
This conſulcation beeing marurcly made;'and a reſolution taken to rc- The Pops |
ſtore the Councell in Trent, the Pope gaue an account thereof ro the Car- ir parton
dinall of Ferrara, and the French-Ambaſladour, and diſpatched ah expreſſc ppg
cytrier to the French King , to fagnitie his: purpoſe 'vnto him , {ing to $308 30 06
hee-would-ſend a Nancio vnro him) co relate more particularly rhe reaſons r:wluias,
which moued him. And, inthe end of Tune, hee diſpatched two! Nuncy
at. Once, Sebaſtianus Pighinus , Archbiſhop of Siponto, tothe Emperour, and
Triuleins, Biliop of ,Tolane , to the French King. T's the firſt hee gaue
inkructions ,- ro ſpcake in conformitic of the reſolutions taken jn the
Caohgregation. Hee gaue order to:Tiulcins ro-goe by polte, thar hee might Tre jad
aduiſe whas the Kings: minde was; which hee deſired ro know before hee pionroiiee
proceeded any: further. Hee gaue him inſtraQionto give a particular ac: 9
count of the:cauſcs why hee reſslued ro bring; backe the Connell to Trent;
becauſe Germanie. did ſubmic coir becauletheEmperoutdiddefire'ir; be-
cauſe it could not continuc-in Bolenias, for the'caul before related; and
that the Proteſtant affaires mighenor beo accommodatetd/in ſome preiudi-
» Ciall manner, laying the blame on the! Pope; *\Bur chatHhis firſt —_—

TRE Cc 3 Cl

-« ww %

_ _—_— I Fo
_ -

304 1-7 The Hiftone af) v3 : Ly = 3.

1550 ” cipall, ground! was the: afliſtance:ob his molt Chriſtian Maieſtie arid che
RA preſence of the Prelares of his Kingdome? which hee hoped ro6btaihe ,*be-
Cranes, 5. Caule his Maicſtic was proteRor of the faith, and an imitator of his-ance-
5-—— ſtours, who: neuter: deparred'[frgm''the opinion! ands counſels'of Popes.
Kane 2-; Thar ja che. Councelt they would applic themſclues ro the declafariotand
= purifying| of. che paynts.of tuetrinc, and rctormarion -of manyets:- nei-
| 4her ſhould any thipgEonterning the States, Dominious, and:particulat
- © Priviledgesofthe Crewineof France. bec handlcd. \ Thats ro che Emperouts
-.. ..-> Xequelt , ca vnderſtand), whether the: Pope would profecute the@otincel
© 30 Trewb, or nor, the Pope -hadan{wered he would, with the conditions'dif
cuſſed in the Congregarcion, all which bce gauc order co his Nynclo to:cbtm:
municateto the King; - whole. minde hee. delited ro:knowe,/ avifoone as
might bee, hoping to finde-it- conformable to the. pietic of tris Maieſtic;
\ 20 the loue which hee bearcth xo him-the Pope, and-to'the 'ronfiderite
which hee hath in bim. Heeialſo charged che Nuncio:to communicate
all his inſtructions to the Cardinall of Gwſe, and, 'with him; of other-
wiſc, as bee thought beſt, to declare it to'the King; and ro whomelſe hee
thought hi. 16,7 nely 9qP2A «

he afire- Hee gaue the like inſtruction co che other Nancwo, in particular', rotell
noi tbe. the, Enzperour, that the Pope.did really ſhew the obſcruation of wharſoe:

waſentro yer hee had promiled ro Don <Fedro di Toledo, thatis, ro proccede with his
" *P Maicllic ſim ply, plainely, and withour arrifice , and to repreſent vnto him
his willing, minde to: proſecute the Councell, for the:glory of God, dif-
charge of his qwneconfcience, and for the good which thereby' might re-

dound to his Maicſtie and che Empire, And, to anfwere the-Emperours

motion , to make knowen the eapituſations: which heerequired; hee ſhould

tcl, him-that hee never dreatmed ro make any bargaines or capitulations;

for proſecuting the Councell, but onely ſome neceſſary conſiderations,

which -hee charged his Nuncis to expound to his Maicſtic:” And they

were foure. The firſt, that the aſſiſtance of the moſt Chriſtian King, and

- the interuention of the Prelates of his Kingdome, was.neceſlary; without

which the Councell would haue bur ſmall reputation, 'and irmiphe bee fea-

fourecon- 'Ted that a Nationall Counccl wouldarile;or France be loft. Tharthey-oughye
4 not to deceiue themſclues. For as 'Trent was —— for Bis Impe-
perothe- rjall Maicſtic, ſo it was too vnſecure for the moſiChriſtiary King *"atd

" therefore that it was fic to findea way to ſecure him:;: That heothould cor
municateto the Emperor the way which he had found our: which if. ivwert:

not ſufficient, ic would be neceſſary thathis Maicſticſhouldadd&&forethins

elle. Theſccond conſideration was,theexpences whichthe Apolt6hkeChali

| ber,cxhauſted,and charged with debts, was to make; for the Legats;and ather
cxtraordiparics, which the Councdl-bringethwitk it; and likewiſe for the
expences Which the poore Italian Prelates cannot bearcantharplade; Thete4

forc that it will bee fat ro caleulatethetime well, afivell for cheprocreding,as

the beginning,thatan hourcmay not bee ſpentin yaihe; orherwiſe the 'Aper

ſolike Sca will got beeable to bearcchecharge,nor ro keepe the IralianPre-

' Tarcs from becingimpacient, asformercxpericnce hath caughr./Befides;; it

is not honourable fat;the/Apaſtolike Seato keepe the Legates idle, andar -

anchor,

E

L1 6.3. the Councell of Trent:

anchor, without doing any good. That it was neceflary, thar, before they 1550

(SES
Ivirvs 3.
CHARLES F.

cometo the ate,his Maicſtic ſhould bec ſecure of the intention and obedi-
cnce, as well of the Catholiques in Germany , as of the Proteſtants, cſtabli-

(hing things againe inthe Dier, caufingauthenticall mandates of the Coun- trois £

ries and Princes to bediſparched, his Maieltieand che whole Diet together,
binding themſelues to execute the Decrees of the Councell, that the paines
and colt proouc not vaine and ridiculous, and hereby to rake all hope froni
whomſocucr did thinke to diſturberthe Synode. Thar, in thethird place;
his Maicſtic ſhould confider,that it was neceſlary to declare, thatthe Decrces
already made in Trent , in marter of faith, and thoſe of other former Coun-
cels, may nor, by any meanes, bee queſtioned , nor that the Proteſtants may
demand to bee heard concerning them. Laſtly, that hee ſhould rell the Em-
perour,that the Pope did belecuc, that his Maicltics good will cowards him,
was reciprocall, and that, as hee did readily cgndeſcend to fauour the affaires

of his Maieſtic, and of the Empire, by holding the Councell inaplace fo fic

for his purpole, ſo hee defirerh thar his fincerity and realitie,may not bring a
burthen vpon him. That hee hoperh,ifany one ſhall attempr ought agaiult
it, by cauillations or calumnies, that his Maieltie will not tnaruaile, if hcevſc
the remedies which ſhall occurre,for defence of the authority giuen immedi-
atly by. God to him,and the — Sea,as well in Councel as our.

The Pope thought it profitable for his affaires, that his reſolution ſhould =

bee fully knowen in 1taly and Germanie; and bade Iulins Cananus his Secretary,
making (hew to fauour ſome Courticrs , his friends, ro communicate the
forelayd inſtructions vnto them , with obligation of {ecrecic : by which
meanes they were ſpread cuery where. The Pope had aſpecdy anſwere from
his new Nuncioin France. For that King, vnderltanding the cauſes, why the

Pope could haue bur lictle confidence in the Emperour, it regard of ſome 1.

things -palt, thinking hee was much inclined ro France, made great demon
ſration to bee well pleaſed with the Nuncio, and his meſlage , offered to the
Pope whatlocuer he was able to doe for him, promiſed to aflift the Councel,
and to ſend the Prelates of his Kingdome, andall fauour and proteCtion, for
maintenance of the Papall authority.

| The Empcrour, hearing the propoſition of the Arch-biſhop of Siponto
and conſulting marturely of
the Pope, that, knowing the publiqueneceſlity , of holding the Gouncell in
Trent, had found a conuenient way to remit it , without further proceeding
in the cauſe of che Tranſlation; a thing diſtaſttull , of much difficulty, and
of no profit. Heeadded, that the foureconſiderations were all important,
and reaſonably propoſed by his Holinefſe. Thar, for France, hee did not on<-
ly commend what he had conſulted, bur offered to joyne with him, to giue
all poſſible ſecurity ro that King. Thatic was reaſonable to cut off ſuper-
fHuous charges, and not to ſuffer the Councel ro bee open, and idle. Thar a
Decree was madcin Augburg, a ycere {incc, that all Germanie , cuen the Pro-
teltants alſo,ſhould ſubmic themſclues, a copie whereof hee would giue ro
the Nuncio, and cauſe it to be confirmedinthepreſerit Dict. That he thoughr

it nor a fit time now to treate, that the things already decided in Trent,ſhould |

not bee queltioned, becauſe it would bee donemore opportunely in that Ci-
Ce3 tie,

\EVYSS

The Frenct
rge offers to

The Empe-
I rors anſrerd

it, did commend the ingenuity and wiſedome of tothe Pope.

306 The Hiſtorie of L1s. 3.

its.

_

1550 tie, when the Councell was aſſembled. And for the authoritie of his Hol-
AA nefſe and the Apoſtolique Sea, as hee hath formerly beeneaproreRourof it,
Cnmies 5. ſo hee will bee hereafter, defending it with all his forces, and even with his
TE ownelife, if there were occaſion. Thar hee could not promiſc his Holineſſe
azar 2, tharno vnquict ſpirit ſhould ſpeake or treate in the Councel, but he gave his
word, thar,in caſc it did happen, hee would fo oppoſe, that he ſhould com-

Es mend him for his paines. ts is
He propoſe * -T he Ermaperour, as hath becne fayd, was in Aubarg, to hold rhe Diet;

I

the poſer which, thobgh it wasnot ſo corpaſled with armes as the former, yer it was

on of «|
Councelin alwayes armed. Heepropoſed the proſecution of the Councel of Trent, the
4«4-r:and ob{cruation of the Interim, madein the laſt Dier, andthe finding a way for
_— reſtoring of Ecclefialticall goods, and the renewing of iuriſdiQtion. Ir plea-
Contrions ſed the Catholique Princes, that the Councel ſhould bee proſecuted; but the
requires 2? Ambaſiadours of ſome Proteſtant Princes did not conſent, bur with theſe

the Prior. -

©2592 conditions. That the things already determined in Trent ſhould bee re-
Coun. examined; that the Diuines of the Augultane confeſſion, ſhould not onely
bee heard, but haue adeciding voyce; that the Pope fhould not preſide, bur
ſhould ſubmit himſelfealſoro the Councel, and releaſe the Biſhopsof their
oath, that they may ſpeake freely. The Emperour complayned ofthe Pro-
reitants, that his Decree of the Interim, was notobeyed by them; and ofthe
Catholikes,that the reformation of the Clergy was not executed. Theſe excu-
' ſed themſelues,ſome by ſaying, that they were to proceede {lowly.auoyding
*_ diſſenſions; others, that the exempt, pretending priuiledges, would notobey.
The Proteſtants layd the cauſe vpon the people , who, in regard the martrer
concerned their conſcience, did murin, and could not bee forced. The Em-
perour, gauean account to the Nuncio of all theſe particulars, ſhewing not
onely the conſent of the Catholiques, and of the greater number of rhe
Protcſtants, but thelimitation alſo propoſed by the others, leſt , if hee had
heard of it by ſome other meanes, it might haue produced ſome bad effet.
' But hee added, that hee would not haue this limitation putinto the a&ts, be-

cauſe thoſe Princes had giuen him their word, that they would doe nothin
againſt his will; and therefore hee might afhrme to the Pope, that all Germa-
, ne was contented with the Councel. Afterwards, he treated moreſtrialy
with the principall Eccleſtaltiques, propoſing that the beginning ſhould be
before Eaſter, and that they would goethither in perſon. ' Which being pro-
miſed by the Eleftors , hee ſolicited the Pope ro make the conuocation for
The Emperor Eaſter , or immediatly after, becauſe hee was aſlured of the conſent of all
bullets the Germany. Which the better to confirme, he praycd his Holivefſe, tharwhen

CONUdOcation

et the C2» the Bull was made,hee would ſend him the draught, before it was publiſhed,

ccl,and d {t-

rcth roicerhe chat ( ſhewing ittoall in the Dict) hee might, by that occaſion, make aDe-

Bull ctorc it

be publiſhed, Crec,and caule it to bee recciued by all.,
The Pope thought that nothing was concluded of what was propoſed

<<

O
bee receiued. Hee would nor, that, inthe very beginning of the Councel,

this ſhould bee diſpured of , becauſe the iſſue was plaine, that is, that much
time would be = and nothing done, and in fine, all would bee diſfoſued
without concluſ1on. It was plaineto bc {eene, that the generall diſpute, whe-

ther

os

by him, fo long as it was nor decided , that the Decrees already made ſhould

LB: \the Conncell of Trent. ES
therchey ought robe receiued, did drawakier it a particular of cuery once, and 1556
chat himfelte ſhould norbe ableto interpaſe, becauleit would-bre allcadged CEN
that hewas tobe ſuſpected, as hauing beene preſident, andthe principall au-, Cuucs; 4;
thour!To infilt more with che Emperour that this point might bee decided; tans a.
would give him morediſtalt, & calFall into-ioſuperable dificukies. He was Re El
counfelied; rhat, without ſaying any mote,he ſhould rake thepoint for deci Th. Popes
ded, 8&prefippole inthis Bulchat the Decreesalread y-magde ſhould be accep. orion
red byal[:- For the Ball going tothe Dict with. this.tenor,cicher the Dutch» the Decrees
men will be-contented:with i; and ſo he {hall obtaing his purpoſe, . or will PO TE:
AOrapocpt ic,and ſo the diſpute will begin /in.che Dier,/jand heme will bee
free from'icareof it, The:Gouncel ſeemed vato hit good, ur:conformitis
whereot he maderthe Bull, Andto facisfieche Empezour in part; hee ſent jr
to himznorin adtaugbt, beckuſe herhought.it was again{dhis. honour, bur
framed; dated, and ſcaled, yer norpubliſhed:. Theadaje. was the fifteenth of the renencs-
Nonember.. - | DI3IVY rh rdenAc AT bois rd
- Jn.char Bull he aid. That for che raking away ofall differences of Religion November
in. Germanyzitbeing expedientand fir(which the Emperour had alfo fignifi-
ird:vnto him) to reducethepenerall Councel into Trent, called, by Paul the
third;begun, ordered;and proſecuted by himclte, then Cardioall , and Pre-
fident,and:mady decrees' of faith , and diſcipline, heeing . conſticured and
-publiſhed cherein; hee vnro! whom ir belongerh. to, call and dirc& gene- *
tall Coanccls, for thcencreaſe ofzhe orthodoxe reli gioh; and ro reltore peace
to: Germany, which formerly hath not ycalded toany Province in obedicnce
ahd reucrence of the Popes, the Vicars of-C 4 &t-s Ty hopivgalfo that the
Kings and Princes will fanour and alliſt it , exhorteth and admoniſheth The Cad
the: Patriarques,: Arch biſhops, Biſhops, Abbars/andpthers, who, by Law, is to bepkia
cuſtom; or priuiledge, ought wo athiſt in Councels;'tobee in Trent, cS Gtlt iy; ©
of Mayyih which day he hath ordained, by his Apoſtolique authoritie, and
:conſent of the Cardinals, that the Councell (hall be reaſſumed inthe ſtate in
which irwas, and proſecuted; whether he will ſend his Legats;by whom he
willpreſide in the'Synode , in. calc he cannot beperſonally preſeng, norwith-
ftandingany tranſlation, ſuſpenſion, or anything elle,elpccially thoſe things
which Paulthe third+in his Bullof the ( onuocation, and others, belon ing.to
the Councell, did ordaine thatthey ſhould not binder; which Bulb. his will
istharthey ſhall remaine in force, with all their clauſes, and dectecs, confir-
ming and renewing them,as much as is needtull. fe _— =

The Emperours Miniſters, and other zcalous Catholiques, ro whom the
Emperour did imparr it, thought it would. exaſpetarethe Proteſtants, ad
giue them occaſion not toaccept of the Councell, in which the, Pope de-
clared that he would notonely preſide, bur direct allo.'  Belades, to talke of

rcaſſuming and proſecuting it, was to put-too many nacratig ur
F

heads; and to ſpeake ſomagniticently of his authoritie was nothing; bur to

prouokethem. Theycouncelled the Emperourto enduout'that he Pope
ſhould moderate the Balland reduceit into ſuch a forme as might tor, more

alcinate the Proteſtants. The Emperour treated thereof with che Nuncio, twizzusy
deſiteth an

and wrote to his Ambaſſadour to doe the like with. the. Pope, Praying his [frm ,

Holineſſc affectionately,and cticually, and for Chriſtian charitie, ro mat the Zu,
_ idle

ee ns. ths
bo Th nt 8
bg

—_ - — - - Sh

ms, "ies.

1550

J7Lirvs. 3-

H «xt i Z. p

The Popes
anſycre-

Caaritss F+
Enyy So
RN <=,
+; Tis Aivg aid hearing then; malt bebroughrto:che:Councell, where being ar-
' riucd, tt- wilt bee'a fir time to ſhew-ehermthercuth.: That ro condempethem

a -

thoſe words thore milde, which "might diucrc Germanytrom. accepting\the
Counccll. TheAmbaſſadourin®Rome treated with a Spaniſhdexreritic and
{4i8, Thar'as wilde bealts, takeri maſnarc, muſt be drawen.gently,makivg
ſhew ro yeeld vntothern; nor muſt bee fhewed the fire,orarmes, torifeare of
ſrouoking them; and putting theryindeſpaire, wbichwill encreaſetheir for-
ce&&!{orheProxeſtants muſt beevied; who with Gentlenefſe , andby- inſti

before they were heafd/was Le exaſperatsaand-:prouoke chem more.” The
Pope an{wered;accordiig to his'vſualhbertie;rhathe would norberaughtto
fieht with 2Cit ſhut4p;but would have ic arhiberrie, that it mighe fly;thatto
bring theProteſtantswith faire words to the Counce},:where the derdes

- -- woulditdt beattf\verable; was ro-put them indeſpaire,and make: them rake
' - ſome raſhvcfolution; and therefore what was to f

-- themplaincly, The Ambaſſadour anſwered, thatit was true inthings B&>
© teflary, orfirtobeſpoken: but he ſaw-not how it was then fir ro: ſay;”that ic

cc done, was to bee told

belongeth rohim ro dire&t Councels, That theloithings are moſt rruc; bur
trierh-hath/nor rhisptiuiledge ro be ſpoken at al times, andimall places; and
that itis good rocontealeit, when the vtrering of irdoth:produce; a bad &-
feet, That he ſhould Femermber, that,by the hor ſpeeches of Leo! the tenth,

and his Legare, Cardindl (Caieran,-che fire was' kitndled chat -now-burneth,

which, witha gentle word , might hauc' beene put our- Thar the Popes fol-
lowing,cſpecially Ci:ment and Paul, wile Princes did often complaineof. it. If
Germany may-now Begained withdextrous viage;why thould ic bemore ſe

—- Sarated-with bitterneſſe? 1% |

- The P6pe;as it were diſdaining,fayd, Thatir was to. be preached openly,

\. and inculcated, which C x & 1 sT-hath ratghe,thathis diuine Maicſtic bath

made his Vicar Headof the Church and the principal light of the world:
'thar rhis'1s one of the truthes that mult be ſpoken in all times, & places, and
{as Stinr Paid faith) in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, that to. doc otherwiſe would bee
againſt thecommandemenr of Cyr1sT, Hiding the (andle conder.a buſþell,
which ſhould beſet ona ( /andleſticke. Thatir was not honourable forthe Apo-
Rtolike Scato vie artifice, and diflimulation; bur that hee oughr- to ſpeake
plainely.  - To kh FSNLu 1
E The Ambaſſader, by way of a pleafant diſcourſe,fayd ; That ro hide the
rod, and to make ſhew of benignitie, and to yecld vntoall, ſeemed vnato him
the true Apoſtolike office, thathe had heardiir readin S. Paxl,thar being free,
bee made himſelfe ſeruant of all, to gaine all; with the Iewes,a Tew, withthe Gen-
tiles, a Gentile; with the weake, weake ; to winne them alſo: and that this was the
way to plant the Goſpel. In finethe Pope, notto enter into diſpute, ſayde,
that the Bull was mgdeaccording to the tile of the Chancery, which could
not bealtered; thathe was aduerſc from nouities, and mult follow the ſteps
of his Predeceſſors; that obſerving the vſuall forme, wharſocucr ſhould hap-
en could not beattributed ro him, bur if he had inuented a new, all the mil.

- Chiefe would be laid to his Charge. The Ambaſladour, ro giuehimrime to

berthinke himſelfe better, concluderh that he would not rake the anſ{were for
a Negatiue, but hoping that his Holincſſe would take compaſſion on Ger-
2 | many,

4 of —_—
and nptb2!
Jobus
tells of this Ty:

dere news 1". rae
ode Polates, Ailtncancs Freya yore

moto tbhordatwiuhthoPope or > oltntly:diipdiheg FI
ptclle& yrrier,, tod1gnificatirg y bo Wry any a
Jardpasa nd eras. ome þ armor obe-Bull>wyberyreladriy, ory)

like afſtmbly;whichiprodgccdagtbtholabectic& which ace forelaw,-thag 3m”
i8;tharthe P roceitants would recall theit word1d1abmit wy
> refuſe rd goc. the) Canneell Icplealadithe Carhohkes:by ire
Jon ofcheharſliand jnceadtablo tile theap quocterch fart calſeygforfach

wetc, chavidbelodgerhuorhePgle;horoms x&call|cibur-al{o-co
dire;;andgaumnpbe: -Corincels ;thar choe!: Was eo vomihitie'and

pralcavte therkings begiudgwhicls takeaway 2 he emuminy of ru
out occaſion

was alfcady handled; that vnſcaſonably , and wir
- boo day bodeckeoplctiniche Bop Pope for: Vicard of © nid x; * _
ehaddeclarcdhimlelic: © he Gouberlard adeplldbrlobs +

ba. hr merry. aſked wards bail confirmed the: Bull "aho
of .the:Conugration of Paw. They'fayd rtavubd Councdlla owith=cbbi -
grounds; wouldpein vaine,:whcreunto toſubmitanci'felfe; was rorfihnd
2ga4Ult -G 0 B5:and his conſcience; [Lht Gatholikew apt; chagibthero vero
 yetadeg the pomp rn he labour .anditbarge would 1bedidbe,
—_— _ tigate- atemperitoþoth ro an. yigg, thartbeCouncalhwas
rall Ghfiftian Natiops;al ingirbd {Gerniany}
ec had framed the Conuocation asit va agree vnto rat mars boon he
xe, ehiry ſhouldeancallcoibie-care;wboknowbdwaatiandle chebyfaridle; Emperonr
hath ſhould ſuffer otherNations$amcetite;:and imfte would $oc
a= cloh,af notthirber, yet ro-larhe; pecre/ = wouldrake order; bor 7
th. rv TR thatcall rogs rerrs (hap: than
Neo not regard what be Popclay tuwiyhesdiltſolſe xidipromih,
vponlthewordof:gp Empetdur andaKing)-Sobbae pakifiedtheirtnindes;
andabe of os KeeftWprſoy! wanhade,ndarNecees publiſhedyehi/
Lenoun-whe reok, yas: - 204 2 196{\gorſt 20540 $1077 No X9b10d 2013

hatin jn; che formetDicrzrhberherss -ob -meanes} to!
Lanza þ blog people (uDlahnbenly t _
| anal Gouncelalldbe $6 «ofthe Empirchaumcontirmeg d
and.reſoluedeaporrp roucthe fgrneSynody:& Fubmirchtmiclud
it gwhich baniag not nr an ren
nn hath bdtmadezin

NI AA of it

319 | " an9$ 3 \Tbeieftorginf L1s3,
x Lrentzehe finftoof May: 3:tbe-vear rene ry 3 andrhis Hogan 4 it
FA andrhd co becne:road, and: propoſcdiniche!Dier;/2ivis fic
a2nsF conminue bythe | lame:refp]ution-tocupedtthe Cotncal,. _

it£yvhich allGhriſtian Princes will dflift, an

Rr cyru theholy:Church,arid defer _
theohis charge;jashe hatch promifedo Who

thackis wills tha cuetyone whoigocth
iatauthoriticand power;to goc,

Than tonour Auer thedhall thinke in hiscotſcience to
bemccetldnf Andiheoctorc thorhe will lodge inthe Confines of the:Em-
+ :iarficcacrrefi: place bee! can} And: hee\ admoniſketh the) EleQtors
6 reg atdactsotake ho Empirc;clpecially the Ecolefiaſts 1.5.4, 2g thoſewho
Merry nn ©. rs an Religion; $99 they ney up youu to.\bee there, well in-
ik 5 prank dce ifticxca Ife:raking:care thar all ſhall
"mY / 2a cal ada ind tnddatertyitiogbes handled piouſly and
Chtiltianly\-kccorciungrotheholy Scripture, and doftrine of Ts Fathers.
And for:tliderimſyreſiba.of the Decrecs of cho Inter-relginn, and: R
cioe, bribg afſured/thatjeweas impoſſible to! ouercomethe difficulties, and
that tis anellafourcdtrhemore;o rhirigs grew worle, to: rhe-cnd that
confuſtonma padeadticheeralioh xaen himebo cogaicionofcherrarigeeE
ſrons pli;yreniopnngaic? Princaand orders of the Ni be $5 OO
hereafter, Oi } 115900
Which ſem- - 1 The word feeing chid Decree -choughr ou aSit was, a: jufd counrerp
counterouſe of the Popet Bullzamaltparcs: Theone wilÞ direct Councels, rg
Full” Willtake Caratharall bet, dane i order, andiuridically;the'one will wy
fide;andthegther will haueche deciſion according to theScripture/an
Fathers: thoone willwomiauatc;and the other. wall haue 24-5
ucry: one-t6ipropoſe;according-to his conſcience. In ſurime j the Court
could nor'digett rhisaffrom, and: complained chat ic was another (one?
cationiof theCodncell Bur the P opt according to bisvſuall plealanchefle,
_ fayd;cheEmparovit hahbeencacas with menoeite publication of nt
ke pabahen being behun, cheÞ himſdlfe'ro the Oo
: _ yeere t551.being begun, thePope, imfclfe to the Coun-
[| qd | intimated, had rwo arg ppg iperſons to preſide,
The Preb- and ro bee ataas little: c-as i way-ipoffible,: To guoyde”© hee
Councellace thought t0 fenctbut oneLegare; bur thac was 'too- greata-butthen tor' one;
une becauſerticte would:-beei none! who\ had; chedfamie. interoſts; on whom.
hee'might fafchyitelic, and-bccauſ&het ſhould boeeſteented the onely au-
thoybof whazfocuct was lone. For which reſpects it was hecellary tolay
che burden on more wens ſhoulders. The Pope found a'middlei way,
to ſend one Legato, and:\two' Nancy ,, wich 'cquall aurhoritic, thinking
Cn uld bee, betzer-ſerued,- becauſe hope maketh men more
= his &yc-ow all the: Cardinalls;hec found none 'mote
and:i)reickiall <a worthy. ; then” Marcella (rejeantivs , Cardi-
\ natl1of SiMarcellus ptoWhon Hecrioqned for Nuncy, *Sebattianus 'Pig-
- bizns, Archbiſhop of :Sipokto, and i!Biſhop of ' Th
'rox#7:of rhe: former heoemade —_ for dr great confidence hce-had-
in

XUM

CCCCCCCCFTOy —_— _—

a _—
_

— OE In CCI "IT _—_

L143. the Councell of Trert.

in him before his Papacy ; of cheorher, for thefome of his greatpietic,gcwod- 15514 |

" I.

neſle, and loyalty. Hauing had many ſecrer parlies wich theſe three, and o- |" — ©
pened vero them theſinceriticof his hearr, andinſtructed them fully, hee Gabanes: 4

EY notem.om — a

eau? them.an ample Mandate, to be prelenitin the Councell, in his name; the Ewins 6,

Hs8rxry. 2.

*4

4

tenor whereof was; . Ivar. 2.
Ic belongeth corhe farther of -a family, ro ſubſtiruce others, to doc rhar 714... t

which hee cannot commodioully doe himfelte, Therefore, hauingreduced *** Mui
to-Trent the Generall Touncel,inrimared by Paul, hoping that the Kings and
Princes; would: aftoord their fauour and afliftance, hee cited the Prelates,
who vſually haue voyce therein, to bee there the firlt of May, to reſume the
Counccl in the ſtate ir-was. Bur not becing able ro- bee perſonally preſent,
according to his defare, in re{pe&tof-his old age,and other impediments,that
his abſcace night not beean hinderance, he appointeth Marcellus, a zealous,
wiſe, and lcarncd Cardinall, for Legate, and the Biſhops of Siponro, and Ve-
rona, famous for knowledge and experience, as Nuncy, with ſpeciall Man-
date, and fir clauies, Sending them as Angels of peace, giuing them autho-
ritic to reſume, direct and proſecute the Councell, and to doe all things
mecteand neceſſary, according to the tenoref his,and his predecefſours ler-

ecrs of the Conuocation. The Emperour, whom the Councel did mote 7. r,g.4

concerne, holding it to bethe onely meanes, ro make himſelſe abſolute Ma- gue bA3GS
C [£9]

ſter of Germanie, (end aſafe condu&tin an ampleforme, to all the Proteſtant the Prox-
ef al
Orders of that. Empire, for themſclues, their Ambaſſadours , and Di. ©

u1ines.

But while theſe foundations, were layd in Rome and Ausbarg; to build the
Councellof Trent vponchem, webs were ſpunne in other places, which ob 7*<Por r-
{cured thedigniric and authoritic of that Synode, and Engines were framed mw 0044:

4 £:TR*Cs :

which did ſhake and diſfolucir. The Pope immediacely after his aſlump- es
tion, tO preforme whathe had promiſed in the Conclaue, reſtored Par-

. ma to QfRauins Farneſes, which the Pope had taken into his hands, in the

name of the Church, and aſſigned ro him two thouſand crownes a mo-
neth, to defend it. OFauins in regard of the enimitic of Ferrante ( ongaga,
Vice-Duke of Milan, and of many arguments which he had, thac the Empc-
rour meant to be Lord of that Citie, rhe Pope allo hauing taken from him
the prouilton of rwo thouſand crownes, doubting that hee was not able to
dcfend it with his owne forces, treated with the Pope, by his brother the
Cardinall,cither to aſſiſt him, or giue him leaue to prouide for himſelfe, by
the proteCtion of ſome other Prince,able to maintaine him againſt the Em-
crour. The Pope, without thinking more of ir, anſwered, that hee ſhould
doe for himſelfe rhe belt he could. wherefore Ofauins by meancs of Hare- ER
. . . . yn 310 rec21-»
tins, his brother, ſonnc'in law to the French King, put bimſelfe vnder the verba trench
G , Di» . EE ./* Garifon ine
protection of France,and receiucd a French Garifon intothe Cirie. This dil- te Cute.
Pos the Empcrour his yncle,who perlwaded the Popethat it wasagain(t
is honour, who was ſupreame Lord of that Citie and Duke. Therefore
ghe Pope publiſhed a ſeuerc edict againithim, citing him ro Reme;and de-
claring himtraytor, if he did nor appeare, and demanding the Emperours Which occa-
alliſtance againlt him; who declared that heedid approouc the Popes cauſe, verneene the
Emperour &

and would defend it with his armes. This was a beginning of a manifeſt te breach £-
warre,

—_

T_ The Hiftory of 'L 13.3,

1551 Wwarre batweenerhe Emperour and theFrench Kivg, and of great diltaſts
-: =o of this King againit the Pope. Andin Saxone, vpon the River Albi, diſcour-
C«a«r2s 5. ſes beganne, berweene the Saxons and thoſe of Brandeburg, to makea league
Envy 6, againlt the Emperour,that he mightnot wholly ſubdue Germany, as ſhall be
How > faidin its place. Notwithlianding theſe ſeedes of warre, which in Ttalie, in
A confeiers- the beginning of April, begap to ſpring, the Pope would haue the Legare
in Gerry and Nunc goe to Trent, and gauethem commiſſion to open the Coungel, on
Evers. Ec firlt of May, theday appointed, with thoſe who werethere, yea

though there were none at all; by thecxample of the Nuncy
of Martinus the fifth, who opened the Councell of
Pania alone, without the preſence of

any Prelate,

rHanmm1T 56 T

Toe ArV&2z3 (144

| £12 ©
1102 wh ak > OJ mic gniyetq "7108 a”, «len, |

; Wy =: > 4 4 Y os

Prion, 16d, coin mh 0! "THT

Si liam [12:9 100 bluot! 9 i, GO has, 2:wrordio hn
FOVRT BOO E

9:1 Ft - 433060) iii \n91 fv R: Uo It , T9011

{1] 20Y ;
29316 | Obs S004
OI xd WISION 2il ' Ko "R 0 It \O it
19 , Iiguu!5: 5 | LY F. 371191 22:17 oetl
m_ v6? 2:10 BATA »d1 not A E-NiTy>: 90 Rg odfotb ima >; -
10 22ib9 1191 © »tod2 5}; 03 b>21ot 250 bluow 51/1216 2irl Cs

LAH AP I Inns 0 rm nam Ac Th Prefiders

C wich ſomiePvelars), whofollower 5 ah Ea
| -— Rowe} andifolre orticr berg; arri Prelats frriv
5 rubs, > -—_
; they affebb

Mp ply enioritedc Smoate

4?
Yr mg Sk

bros ps voepny rev per ro org ry mow cn
Decree meattogatoritys "Pleaſootilie che Pachers; chat,atdorging ro che,Po

lementalirChondllof Ten (ould betcſurtred,and oſbevred? Andall + IO
vinggienabdevayeedy hoeiſdydtughine Pleaſe iryowyrhar thonen'Se Jets

fion be held the firſt of Seprembet tiext? Wheteunroall agreed: Andithe X poi
Cirdingl ;Feims Prdlident,ccohotpded}byidgroomens icvthe name © catober, =

all the Synode , chavther(Conncell, is ni/Land ſhalhbetiprofecitod: i4Vol. © _ -
Ce Le eercing xho0 glxthe Prelacyviketoofien, mat.
ye. Ferns Legacs hould|otbecauſs the Con ON shad\noformy, oi
there beigg'ho Diuides>(Oniely thevfinodiſpored m— —_
make thodefiberarion'afivhat iriclred bs bes Lcdoronerate
cially immaceer oFrefdimation which wateſtreniades bedofirhobreacelt |
AGomene winch 36d þ citrbay rid oJum 11: DAS to 110142930 we »<1-
1 Ini4hs: ene of:he: PET" the Po 1 ferid-74 ByBatds itorchic ThePope fin
Saifſes; who before bad boots the Nunioof PoperPadl touhar Habivupriti (6s tz,
cipally-to'7 idefacthe Pretibly : King-wli gi; ndvehus'Souldiery
theta paid ev obraine>ef thekt/# Jeulo; the aftuires of (Parnds, And; "vp-
on that occaſion; hde wroteviis them'the fduetrandewtnrietyof Wdy;rhar
as het hat taken thaviams of Tullue'the ſevoreh j;2 (oratfeltionate torhem,/ bo
ligo woldddollow his example ns. Gon andyfiive 5 thotewſkincs:
- whic

LR 4s

F, * 3
"=
'

a
#4 A

» YL, .
Ts oo %® F - f
f - :
k G © 4
= . "Er -
"T'ermes, his Am
: wo ' CY

F %
" »
by . Þ,,41 nnd <
af ; v > 7 4
”
Fl”, S %
» Wu « ”—_

.

im thedeericedf

mo
a +

2 & Al LW} 5 "£4 v4 f
V TREE” (TT
WeY _£ i» d,* ( vw
The French A ab © © -& 4 ; Kg
cha&vpon

Kingexcuſcth a
uion r
ll ougye

to che P
1 ,
Aqd $a | |
goc thither, it could not with reaſon

r
Pope © tþ dac nFFhÞ 9 whith ine thquld de aftcr
= LE Swing o_ nee e0 "4 't Ring BOT v no
meanes retire , aty4ncals his Holt wauldink ncurrall , bur
makehimſclferhe Emperours diiniltcr,, by hom the King was certainethar
hee was guided , his Maicſtic would bee forced to yſe thote remedics of rea-
- - -.. fon andfa, which hisanceſtorshauc:vitd againſt partiall Popes;thePope |
His Holanelſe grevy angry'or fainod'to beſb,/afhd anſwered that if the King cooke Parma,
9%" .: from him, bee would take. France fromthe King ; andif the King did take
"© fromihitnhis vbedienca,hce would rakefrom the King the commerce of all
Chriſteridome; and ifbc{pdkelaf force,let: him docrthe worſt hecould; if of
_ Edits, andprohibitions, andiych things, heelet him know, thathis pen,
papcr, andinke- were. poxdnferiour. Bur _— the Pope Tpake {@ bighz
yet hee: was afraid ;1and thercfore,, ro.cxcite the Emperour, hee (ignified
vato him';dy his Arncio ,#heBiſhop of-Imola , whome bee had lent in
place of the Archbiſhop of-Sipewro, all cheſe diſcourſes with the'Frenchs
and afreryiards tolderbin,:[ chat. jn Rewe. there was doubt. of anothcr
ſacke', in regard-of Jo, many rumours: of the Turkes.;- and French-men,
and feare /of Nationall; Councels.' Therefore there' was neede of Armes,
* to preuens/thele! agteopts;- and. to defend themſclues, when neede rc-

«+» giutjed\ {25:6 Ne ono £2 nod R bf:
The French ; } The King ſecing, tavas impoſſible to porſwade the Pope, wrote a publike
King mane letter roall-the Biſbdpk:.of this Kingdome ,!as well in-France.P., ax chiewhete,

for 2 Nu9- commanding; theth $81bd atthcir Churches within-ſixe moncths,! and 26
from which: put themſtlues, in-arder thets fora Natiovall Councell; and the letter was
*orcaion of Preſented totholegils who werein Remel ; | neither durit the Pope binder
Moos, themyfor fear of dbitig them , and bis owne reputation moretutre.” But he
the Pope. {ent Aſcanus dels Corpa, bis nephew,into France.,to diſfwade the King from
che protection of Parma: to make him vnderſtand that Oftanius Farneſe, be-

: 4g his Vaſſall ,heefheuld-by. no- meanes endure to; hecontemned by bim,

_ -in regard.i6 would becan ecernallinfamy ; and ancxampleto- others noteo
acknowledge him-for Pope. That his inclinationto. Fnance-and bis Maicity

was great,and his mindeauerſc from thoſe who were emulous of him ;and

that thisisknowento-the whole world. Yer theforclaid reſpeFtislo poreny

thanit his M* would not | giucaremcdy,,. it wereenough co make him caſt

—_-

himſelfeinco thearmes of him chat he would nor. His inſtruftionalſo was;
| F.C thar

XUM

—_—_. a
" = nr I. IO tre. At. tt PO W_E

L 13. 4. the Councillof Trent, 3i5

thatif theKing would not beper{waded cothis,he ſhould pray himtoconſi- |» 552
der well how great inconueniences 4 Nationall Councell would: draw aftet DER
it,and chat it wouldbe a beginning co giue his SubieRs licence, whereof hee Cures 5
would repent him,and would preſently cauſe this bad effe& to hinder thege- rbwurs o,
ncrall Councell,which would be thegreateſt offence could bedotieto God, phe
and the greacelt damage rofaich,and the Church. Heprayed bim'toſendan | ©
Ambaſſadvur to Trent;afſuringhim he ſhould receiue bf honour andreſpe& -
from thePreſidents,and all thePrelats who were his Holineſle friends,Wher.
unto if hee did not condeſcend,, bur perſeuerc in maintaining the Edit; hee
ſhould,for raking away all ſcandall,propoſc-to him a temper,to declare, that
his meaning was notco hinder:the generall Councell by that EdiQg > |

The King, hearingthe Ambaſlage, ſhewed alſo that his honour did con- Bur be conti

ſraine him co continue the proteftion of the Duke', and to maintaine the hisrefolation.

—_—

Edi, but with ſuch words , as made it plaine hee was diſpleaſed with the

diſtaſtesgiuen him, and that hee had a deſire to right himſelfe. And to an:

{wcrethe Pope, hee ſent the Lord of Monluc, the Elef of Bonrdeaux,to hin,

not without ſome hope to pacifiethe Popes minde. Bur doc hee what hee ---:
could ,hee pI 0s in the ſamerigidneſſe concerning the affaires of Par-
me, and ſent the fame Monlxc backe, with commiſſion ro complaine of the
King, that hee had ſcat the Edie of the Nationall Councell, and letters,

to the Prelates who were ſubic&ts to his Holineſle, cuth in remporalitics
(vadctſtanding the Biſhop of Auignion) as fatreas ro Rome, Which all the
world did interpret to be done onely to hinder the rooms Councell. And,

in concluſton , hee praycd the King, that ſeeing they were both reſolute,

himſelfe to correct Ofarivs, and his Maieltie to protect him , at the leaſt
chcir differences might bee contained within Parma, though his Maieſtie
had aircady proceeded further, by taking the Cardinals and Prelates from
Rome ; whoſe departure hee would not hinder, hoping that his Maictie, ha-
uing exhaled hisanger, ſhould bee illuminated by God, to change his ma-
ner of proceeding. Neither theſe mutuall offices, tior the reſpe&t of the
Councell,could make either of theſe Pririces remit any thitig of thelt tigor:
The gencrall conſent was fauourable to the King. For the Emperour ha- -
uing ſcized on Piacenae-, to leaue Þarmato him alſo , was to giuec all Tlie.
into his hands; and itſcemed anindignity , that the poltetiry of Paul, who
had fo labourcd for the liberty of Teal , ould bee abandoned by all: andiif
the Pope did not complaine that Piacenge- was vſurped, nor made any in-
ſtance for the reſtitution, why ſhould hee complaine that the Duke ſhould
ſecure himſclfe of Parma. And this reaſen preuailed ſo much with ſome,
that they aſſured chemſclucs it was well vnderſtoodby Tulins; but that, to
make ſome thing ariſe which might hinder the Councell, which not procee-
ding from him, might bec aſcribed to another, hee defited a watre betweene
the King and the Emperour, Ir is certaine that hee labouted more with the
Empcrour to mooueatmes againſt Parma, or Mirendula, then with the King
tro accommodate the buſineſſe. The King hauing tricd all meanes to paci- | |
fie the Popes minde, paſſed ro the extreame, which was to proteſt by his ret ag
Ambaſſadour Termes, and particularly againſt the'Councell which was af- $< <ounce!

ſembled , hoping that reſpe& would remooue the Pope? the contents of bled in7rone/
Dd - which

—OOO Wn

—_A_ —_—_ —_—

I” IS
att ts... Ah ——
ds. Ah

316 The Hiftaricof\ Lu 8&4.

i. BAS. 4. SORES nd

1551 which proteſtationbecauſcir was) reitcratedin-Trent, ſhall be related ypon
© get, thar occaſion. 9 Hong, ito: - 0751210 Xp” 9s |. , [2 L
Cnancess- «But i Germany there was imbre ſpeach:of the-Councell- then wer. For
Emazn 6 ManriceDukcot Saxony, ſccingthe Emperours refolution;togiuethimaſure
ROT Me fi argument:that he would obey him » n ſcndibgitoTrewt,, commanded *Phj-
TheProre- {ip MelanBhqnand lod orhersot his Diuings,ro put rogether rhe:points of
reſolucroſend doftripegto. bee: propoſed inthe Gouncell ,-and to-afſcmble in Lipfiaall the
077% Doctorpand Miniſters of his Statero-cxamine:them. And ( briftopher, Duke
of Wittenberg; who; alitule befere, fucceededd his fathergeanted another com-
politiog tobemade-byhis people,” whichiwarithe ſamerhing in ſubſtance ; |

and the one'part did approouethiat of the othet; yerdid chooſe norto pro-

:-£ ceed ioyntly,,. that the Emperour mightinot ſuſpect,: Afterwards-Duke
" Maurice wrote to the-Emperour; giuing him-an account of his being in or-
der with his Diuincs,, .and of the writing which heehad preparedzbut ad-
ded, rhat his Safe (onduttcemed not ſufhiciens,! For in che-Counce)]:of Con-.

[tance izwoas determined , thar they might proccedeagainſt thoſethat came
Andrequice a £©he Councell, though they had Safe Condu# from the. Emperour;-and the:
Se Condo Decrce:was approued by thedcath of Toby Huſſe, who went to the Councell.
Councel, ynder,the publike faith of Sigiſmond. That therefore hee could not ſenda-
ny to Trent, if rhoſc-ofthe Councell did not giue Sefe Condu&?, as was done

in that of Baſil, whither the Bohemians, for the example of Conftance,

would got. goc; but ynder thegublique faith of the whole Councell. There-

fore hee prayed the-Emperous.to procure for them a Safe Condu# from the

| Whichthe Ecclefiaſliques of Trent , in that forme as thoſe of Baſil did grant it tothe
ears Bohemians , berauſe they werciult in the ſame condition now, as the Bohe-
procure. q1jans were thien, (er promiled ro doe it, and gaue order to his Ambaſſa-

dours,whow he then diſpatched to the Councell, ro procure it.

The Ambaſſageconlifted of three perſons, to honour the Councell , and

to have many miniſters to treate; and this colour was for the number, that

——_— was for the Empire,another for Spaine,and cherhird for his other States,
ſadoursrocke 2nd ycrall in ſolidumfor all. The Mandate was ſigned the fixt of Iuly : and,
conteined that Pope Iulins , to appeale the controuerſies of Religion in Ger-

The contents 114142 , hauing recalled to Trent, the firſt of May paſt,the Councell called by
——_ began, and intermirted, himſclfe, by reaſon of his indiſpoſition, not
becing .ablero beethere in perſon , hee hath ſent ( not to faile of his ductic )
his Prodtors thicher, Therefore truſting vpon the faith , honeſtic, experi-

© ence, and zeale of Hugh, Count of Mountfort, Don Pedro di Toledo, and William,
Archdeacon of Campagnia hee maketh them his Orators , and Mandataries for

his Imperiall dignitic, Kingdomes, and hereditaric States , giuingthem,and-

cach ofthem faculty, to appeare inthe Councell, ro hold his place; con(ule;;

rreate, giue counlell and voyce, ro decree in his name, and doe cucrie thing,

elſe which himſelfe could doc if hee were prefent: putting themin place of;

his. perſon , and promiſing to-ratifie whailocucr ſhall bee done by them:

three ,-or by any/gne of them. The,Popec, though hee much deſired the
Councel{hould bee opened, yer after it egan , hee tooke nothought thar

- the Prelatcs ſhould goethither ; eicher becauſe he was intenrvpon the warre,,

which was on firc at Mirandula, or becauſc heecared but little forit. All the'

paines

Lis. 4. the Councellof Trent. 217

paines was taken by che Emperour, who'rhrult forward, firſt, the Eleours 1 551
or Mentzs, and Triers, a1d afterwards of Cullen, rogether with fiue other prin. 5 pry,
cipall Bithops,and the Proctors of many who were hindered. He cauſed alſo Cuxuas x.
ſome Prelates r2 come our of Spaine,, beſides thoſe who had entertained 25g 5;
them(clues in Trent, and ltaly, vniill then , and out of his States in-[taty ; be- eons, Su,
{1des which there were bur few : 1o that, for eight moneths that che Councel The Sd
laitzd, che Preſtdencs and Princes beeing reckoned, the number did not ex. ci! Eleciors
cecd (txty foure. | : | Tar
T he firlt of September, the day appointed forthe Seſſion, beeing come, OI
they went to the Church with che vſuall ceremonies. The order of prece- «
dence was thus. Firſt che Cardinall Legare,then the Cardinall Madrwceio,che {4h
rwo Nuncy, the two Ele&ours, ( that of Collen beeing not come) two of the bid.
Emperours Ambaſſadours (the Arch-deacon being not yet arrued)the Am- 1,tich te
baſſadour of the King of the Romances, andthen the Arch-biſhops. The E5make
Maſle beeing ſung , and the Ecclefialticall ceremonies ended, the Secretary arionro the
read an exhoctation , to the Fathers of che Councel, in the name of the Pre.
{idenrs ; to this purpolc. Thar, by the preſence of rhe ewoEleftours, being
encred into hope, that many Bithops, of tharand other Nations , will aſſiſt in
the Councel,they thought tir, inthe meane time, in regard of the place they
bare, togiuealiccle admonition to themſclues, and them, (though they ſaw
all were ready to doethe office of good Paltours) becauſe the matrers to bee
handled were of great moment; that is, to extirpate hereſies, to refortneEc-
cleſialticall diſcipline, from the corruption whereof hereſics haue riſen, and
fiaally, ro pacific the dilcords of Princes. That the beginning of the ex-
horration , oughtro be taken from the knowledge of their owne inſufficien-
cie, flying to the alliltanceof Go D, who will nor faile them: whereof they
ſce many arguments already, but eſpecially rhe comming of the two Princes.
Thar the auchoriry of Generall Councels, was alwayes very great, the holy ©
Gholt preſiding in them, and their Decrees eſteemed not humane, bur di-
uine. Thar an example hereot hath beenelefi by the Apoſtles, and the Fa-
rhers following, ſeeing that,by Councels,all hereriques haue beene condem-
ned , thelife and manners of Prieſts and peoplereformed, and the diſcords
of the Church appeaſed. Therefore being now afſembled ro doeasmuch,
chey muſt awaken thethſclues, thar they may regaine the ſheepe that lept
_ out of the Lords fold, and keepe thoſe which haue norgone altray as yer.
Wherein the faluation of thoſe only is not in queſtion , but their owne too, .
in regard they mult giue'an accotntto G o D, - by whom, if they performe
their duery, they ſhall be rewarded,and all poiteriry will arcribute greatprailſc
ro thar Councel; bur they ſhould not aimeartrhar, but onely at their owne
ducty , and charuy towards the Church, which beeing afflicted, wounded,
and depriued of ſo many dearechi[dren,, lifrerh'vp her haridsro GoÞ, and
them , to reſtore cthetmto-her. Thatthercfore they would handle the mat-
rers of the Councel withall gentleneſſe, and without contention , asbecom-
merh (vo grearan afſembly,vſing perfit charity,and conſenrof minds, know-
ing thar Go Þ docrh bchold and judge them.
' The exhortation beeingended ,-the Decree was read by the Biſhop that The Decree
ſaid Maſſe; the ſubltance whereof.was; That the holy Synode , which, E = many
| Dd 3 the

&.

%
z

Loa 4

218 | The Hiftorie of EX,

"IR

1551 the Seflion paſt, did determine toproceed-in this, hauing deferred ro docir
117.7 vatill now, by rzalon of theabſence of the Germane Nation, and the ſmall
Cz4xzz5 5. number of the Farhers, reioycing for the arriuall of the two Prince Electors,
warn 6. hopingthat many more of that and other Nations, will, by their example,
- Ce  batken cheir comming,doth deferre the Seſſion for fourty dayes, that is, vnrill
. . theeleuenth of October, and proſecuting the Councell in the ſtate in which
EP - it is, having treated alrcadie of the ſeaucn Sacraments,of Bapriſtne, and Con-

firmartion, dothordaine to treat of the Eucharilt; and, for reformation, ro

| handlethole things which doe facilitate refidencic. Then the Emperours

*  Proxicbecing read, the Earle of Mountfort laid, that the Empcrour, after hee

had obrayned the redudtion of the Councel to Trent, neuer ceaſed to labour

thatthe Prelates of his Rares ſhould goc thither , which theprelence of the

Elce&ours, and the frequencic of the Fathers, doth demonſtrate. And to te-

{tific his mind the- more, he hath ſent Don Pegro of the Kingdome of Spaine,

another of his patrimoniall States , and himlſclfe of Germanie. , though vn-

worthy, Praying to be receiued for ſuch. Jobn ©Baptiſta C aftello, the _—_

an{wered , in the nameof the Councell, that they were glad to heare the Em-.

pcrours Mandate, hauing by it, avd the quality of the Proctours, concciucd

how much they tnay promiſe themſclues ; therefore thar it hopeth for aſſi-

tance from them , and doth, as much as ircan, admit the Emperours Man-

date. Likewiſe the Proxicof the King of the Rowanes, inthe perſon of Pau-

lus Gregorianus, Biſhop of Zagabria, and of Fredericke Nauſea, Biſhop of V1-

ena, was read, and this fecond did ſpcake, and was anſwered as thoſe of the
Emperour. :- art F + f7 I"

After this Iacobns Amiorus, Abbat of Belloſana, appearcd inthe name of the

ras French King, with kerters of his Maicſty, waich hepreſented ro the Legate,

_ Jy o they-might be read, and his credency heard. TheLegate receiuing

Ercnch Kings

Rs them, gauethemto che Secretary, to be read. The ſuperſcription was, San-

of giucth di» FFiſ$112188 in ChriSt0 Patribus ( onuentus Tridentini. "The Biſhop of Orange, aiid
Kaſt to the 8 ; = |

Synode, after him, the other Spaniards ſaid aloud, chat thoſe letters werenot ſent vnto

them, who were agenerall Counce], and. nota Conuent; and therefore that

 theyought neither to bee read, nor opencd 1n publike Seſſion, bur , if the

Meſlenger had: ought to ſay, hee. ſhould goc home. Much was ſpoken

concerning the {ignificationof the word , Conuentus, the Spaniards perſ1-

ſting that it was imurious. Sothat the "__ of Mentz, was forced to ſay,

that if they would nor recciuca letter from the King of France, who called

them Sanfifsimus (onentus , how would they hearken to the Proteſtants,

who called them Connentus Malignantinm? Bur the Spaniſh Prelats continu-

ing {tillto be more rumulcuous then the reſt, the Legate,with the Nuncy,and

the Emperours Ambaſſadours, retired into the veltry, and had along diſpu-

tation-hercof, Arthe laſt, rerurning to their place, they madcirt beerold to

rhe Speaker , thatthe Synodedoth reſolucto readethelctters withour preiu-

dicc, thinking that the word Conuentrs, is not meantin anill ſence ; and, if ir

be, dath proteſt of che Nulitie..'Then the Kings letter was opened, and read,

which was datcd the 13. of Auguſt, andſaid in ſubſtance, That.itſcemed a-

grecablerotheobſeruance which his anceſtors haue alwaics vicd towards the

Church,to ſignificto themthe cauſes why he hath bin forced noxgto ſend any

Biſhop

* : v 0 © » -
—_ G x a —<___ TIT

L 1-8. 4 the Councellof Drens. _ ::

B. rothe conucne,called by luliss by rhepame ofapublike Councel, being af 155+

ſured chac hey the farhers wil not condetnneany mans fact beforethey know >>>
it,and that when they (hal vnderitand what hehath done,they wil commend Cuanzky 5;
it. Thache was compelled, tor preſcruation of his honour, ro.continue in his £5wcs g,”
reſolution roprotetthe Duke of Parmaztfrom which hee would not refuſe TRE, |
ro depart, if Iulticeand Equity did permit. That heewritcthto them as r0 DRE
Honourable Iudges, praying them to recciue the letters, nor as from an adver- {rromen
ſary,ora perſon ynknowen, buras fromthe Prince and principall ſonnzs of
che Church by inhericance of his Anceſtors, whonuhee promiſeth alwayes
ro imitate, and, while he defendeth himſelfe from wrongs , nor to lay alide
his charity rowards the Church, butcuecr to recciue whatſocuer ſhall be con-
ſtirured by her,{a that due order be obſcrued in making the Decrees. Theler-'71, 11,17
ters being recited,the Abbar read a Protcſtation;containing a narration of a 'e%tba_.
Proceltation, made by Termes,in Rome, ſaying, ThattheKing, after heehad *
caken ypon him the defence of Parma, ſecing that thoſe laudable things.
which hee had done were reprehended, vicd greatcare that Paul Termes;kis
Ambaſlador,ſhould giucan account of all tothe Pope, & Colledge of Cardi-
nals, totake from them all {niſter opinion , ſhewing tharthe taking of the
Dukeinto his protection, was the cfict of a pious , humane,and kingly
minde; wherein there was no cunning or private gaine, burreſpe& onely of
the Churchzas appeared by the propoſitions of accord , whichaymcdat no-
thing but that the Church mighr nor be robbed, and 1zay preſerucd in peace
andliber.ic. Andifthe Popethoughtthis a cauſe to putall Exrope into warre;
he was ſorry ; but it could nor be imputed co him, hauing nor onely accep-
ted, but offered allo all honeſt and fit conditions. Neither could the diſfolu-
rionof the Councell aſſemblzd bee preſcribedro him, praying the Pope to
conſider what milchictes would accompany the war , and topreucat them
with peace. Which it his Holincſle will nor regard , but defirerather to ſer
Europe on fire, and hindet the Counccll, giuing ſuſpicion that it was called
not for the good of the Church bur for priuare interelts ; excludirtg from ir
a molt Chriitian King , hee.could not choole bur to proteſt to him and tho
Colledge,that he could not ſend his Biſhops to Trent, where the accefle is nor
freeand ſecure, and that hecould nor elteeme that a generall Councell , bur
priuatefrom which he was excluded; ncither could the peopleor Prelates of
France be obliged to the decrees of ir. Afterwards he proteſted that he would
cometo the remedies vicd by his anceſtors in like occurrences ; nor to rake
away his duc obſcruance from the Apoſtolique Sea, bur to reſerue ir for ber-
ict times, whenarmes ſhall bee laid downe, which arediſhonelily raken vp;
again{t him , deſiring of his Holineſle, thatthis Proteftarion might bee regi-
{tred, and giuing him a copicof itro peruſe, Theſe things hauing beene al-
rcady protelted in Rome,he deſired ſhould be likewiſe proteſted in Trent, withi
rhe ſame inſtange; that they might be regiltred in the ates of that aſſembly,
and4I8 there beinga publike inſtrument made of it phe mighe vie it intime
and place. "Tek RO |

Whenzhe Proreltation was read, the Speaker, hauing talked witli the Pre-

{ident, anſwered in ſubltance; That the Kings modeſty in his ferters was'
gratefulkeorhe Synode; that irdoth-notatceprtchepetfon ofthe Abbar jobs
REFS Q

v +4 =

429

[TER wa =_—_

1554
Iviivs. 3.
CHARLES Fo
Enyvanrn,6,
Henry 2.

R— NARS

-

The cenſure
ot this Prote-
ft i101.

23s itis lawfull; chat wargcth hiato. bee in the ſame place the eleventh of
October yto receiue the an{were which (hall bee made cothe Kings letters;

and forbiddeth the Nancy to make an inſtrument of the preſent ation, bur

ioyatly with the Secrerary of the Counce)]. And nothing elle beeiny to bee

dane,theSellion was chded. Then the Abbart demaunded an inſtrument of
the action; but couldnotobraine ir. |

When Termcs bad proteited in Rome , though many did not know of the

aQ,yct it was belecucd that rhe Pope would deterrerbe Councell, becauſe ir
mult needes bring forth new diuiltons,if {uch a principall Nation did reſiſt.
Butthe decciued the world , not for any defire hee had to celebrate it, bur for
that he would nor ſeeme to be cauſcot the diſſolution;beivg reſolued, that if
it were ſcpararcd without him , hee would anſwere, with an open mouth, to

whoſocuer ſhould deſire it again,th ar he had done his part,and woulddo no

more. Burt rhe Proreſtation made in Trent, aplaceſo con! picuous, was pre-
{ently publiſhed cuery where, and gaue matter of diſcourſe. The Imperialits
eltecmedita vainity,laying, That the act of the maiorpartof the vniuerſali-
ty, iscucreltcemed lawfull,when the [cſſcr,being called, either cannot or wil

not be preſent: rhar all are called to the Councell, andthe Frenchmen alſo

might hauc come without paſhng by the Popes territories, but in caſe they

could not, yetthcir abſence doth nor derogate from the Councel}, becauſe

they are not neglected, bur invited. It was faidto the contrary, thatto cd]

in words, and to exclude in deeds,was not to inuite, and, forthe Popes ter-

ritories, one might goctrom France'to Trent without paſling by them , bur

' not without paihng by thoſe ofthe Emperour, and the maiorart hath full

The Decree;
oft Councels
do not binde
the Churches
abſent.

authoritic,-when the leſſer cannor appearc, and is ſilent, becaule it is pre-
ſuppoſed coconlenr, and when it will not appeare, becauſe ir is accounted
conrumacious, but when it doth protett, it bath its place, and ſpecially , if
the impediment proceed from him that calleth the action,in abſcnce,cannor
be of force.

And the Counlcllors of the Parliament of Pars, ſaid ſome thing wore;
That it is true, that the authoritic of the wholevniuerſalitic is transferred in-
tothe maior pa:t, whenthecaule is common toall, and nothing belongeth
ro particular men : bur when the whole belongeth to all, and euery one hath
his part, theafſenr of cuery one is neceſſary, Er prohibentis conditio potior ; and
the abſcor, not giuing their voyces, are not bound. Of this fort are Ecclefi-
alticall aſſemblics, and bee the Councell as populous as itwill, theabſenc
Churches are not bound if they thinke fit not to receiue it. This hath alwayes
beene vie in ancientrimes, that rhe Councels becing ended; theDecrees
ſhould be ſen, to be confirmed, ro the Churches that were abſent, inwhich
otherwiſe tbcy had noforce; which cuery one that readeth Hilarins, Arhana-
furs, Theodorerus, and ViAorinus, who handle this particular, may ſee plaine:
ly. Andichappenediomerimes, that ſome part of the Canons were'fecei -
ucd by ſome Church, and lomeletr our, as cuery one thought fir, fot theirine-
cc{lities, manners and vles. And $.Gregorie himſeclfe doth witneſſe,” tharthe
Church ot Rome did nor receiue the Canons of the ſecond Countellof (Con-
ſtantinojile, nor of rhe firlt of Epheſus. TR :

/ Wiſemen, nor con{1derivgrthe lubrilrics , ſaid, that the Kivg hadginen thar
Councell

F

L 18. 4. the Cauncellof T rent. | Z21

Councelban'vncurable wound,” Por ir:havitig nv; otherground ea'Chri- 't5;0

ſian chacicy,and the afliftanceofthe holyGhoſt/;it youl@neitetbee belee-' >

ucd that.cheſe werapteſent inanaſſembly;, agataſt HhickamoltChriftian Cirkital',

King,perſecutorof all Sc&ts, withthe adheretice of aktwpdomie/horblemi- Evwany &

ſhed in-Religion;; 1 did: proteſt inthat forniey' And ey brought arttzperi- WS +

Cncc fat proofe. : Forrhey ſaid ;xtar che/Prefidencs retyring ro cltile _—__

the Emparours Atnabaſſadours -did ſhewiwho gvidedthe Coliiteedl And

which-was of more importance,when theſ&fiuehad conſulted, 'and impar- - |

ted nothing ro any body elſc,the Speakerfayd/T he help Synod doth receiue

the letters;: And whitwas that holy Synode? And likewiſethe Abbarsex+ T1cpies.

polition becing read ,theanſwere, relolucd on by theProfidentsonely , was ins wk:

given inthe ſame name. Neither can chedifficulty be&remooned;? by fay- the auboric

ing, thatthe matter was of tiogreatimportangee; firſt;becauſe'ir will be hard cu,

to.maityaine, thatit:is not a moſtimportanttmarter;where the dabger of di-

uifionin;the- Church. is in queſtion: then;/be-itasirwill;-no' man” can arro-

gatc{o himſclfc power,to dedare whar is of. importance, and whatnot :and

this 4$:2:demoniization that things arc carried iuftas the Pope fayrh in the

Bull; avdthe Prefidents in the. Sermon read; thatthey weretg direct the

Counccll; forthey did fo indeed: TheaduiferhatitheKing hadUiſmiſſed the:

Popcs Nunciozand:publiſhed a'Manifet., did reitgrate the fame difcourles; The French

which Manifeſt wastlicn printed ard diuulgedthroughour, Wherc he ſhew-/u the royes

eth ar large the cauſes: why he cookevpon him the protetion of *Parma,bla- uti.

meth the Pope for the warre begun; ſayirig that hee vied this Arrifice, thar Mantcit.

the Councell might.not be held; Concluding intheend, that itis not meete

that he ſhould hauc-money ourof his kingdome,to make warreagainlt him,

whence 4grear ſummeis ordinarily caken for vacancies, Bulls; Graces, Dil-

penſations, and Expeditions : and therefore, by thee@unſellof his Princes,

he did forbid ro difparch Curriers to Rome, and to am{were money, or gold

or {iluex: not. coyned, by way of banke , for Beniefices'or other Graces and

Diſpenſations,v pon paine of. Contiſcation; as well for Eccleſialtiques as (e-

culars,and thelex0 bee punithed corporally beſides, giuing the Promooters”

athird of the contttation, Fhis: Manifeftwras itirolled in Parliament, with'

a propoſition of che Atcourney generaltvÞrheKingzin which he faid;thar ir

was no new'thing; butvicd by Charles theo tixe, LewiftHecleuciith;and Lewis

the twelfth , an&wasconformable.ro checotmion Liv,thar moncy (hould

not bee carried torhe cnemie:, and thatit would bde#hard eaſe; if with the*

money of Frande;\'warrc ſhould bee made again{the King, atid'tharir was:

berter forthe lubiets; of the kingdomerakeepe theirimoney!, and not care”

for diſpen{ations;; which weronorableroſgcurechoconſeicnts and arenbs?

thing buta ſhadowcaſt before the cycs of men, which cannothide'therrieth”

from 6G 0D. > Y : (] | 30 $ 3b VIIGH vv S192 fy £5, Fa 1 2011 31 fi ; AE
Itcauld not b=endu red,n either arRomenorin Tyentahar the King fhotld-wwche A-

ſolemnely protel;and make warre agamift:the Pope; and [till lay , thachees:. -

bare the ſame reuerenceroward the Apdſtolique Sea, whichiSnothivg Brie”

the Pope. Whereanto the French-menanweted;thatanriquiityHidice this:

opinion ; yea., Viftor the third, . whowwasone of the wn thar aſſumed”

much, ſayd that cho Apoitolique Sea was his miſtrelſe. ' The ini wasfayt;,
eit{e3

before

—_

py TT

— — —
T5
-

322 : 5 The Hiſtorie of : L 1s. 4+

15 51 _bcforchimby Srephen the fourth and by 7 Mtalianrs ;and ( onftantinus, who
15> weremoreancient,it aincly appeareth, that by che Apoſtolike Sex is vader-

Czaxuss 5. ſtood the Church of Rome; for ifthe Pope were the ſame thing, his crrours
Emap  anddefccts,wouldbe of the Apoſtolike Sea. 2020 T0054 7
Haxxr 2. TheFrench King, fearing that, by his diſſcntion with the Pope, thoſe
The French chat defired change of religion, would make ſome innovation, which might
more ſeuere Prooucſcditious ,. or that himſelfe might come into the bad opinion of his
_—_ pcople as if his minde were averſe from the Catholike faith, and' perhaps
' toopen away for reconciliation with Rome , hee made a molt ſcuere Ediat
againſt che Lutherans,confirming all che others which hee had publiſhed be-
fore, adding greater puniſhments, morc wayes to diſcoucr the guilry, and
greater rewardsto the Promooters. : Lt QAO G01,
The Emperour, conſidering that the French King, in regard of the num-
ber of the French Cardinals , and other dependants of that:Crowneyhad no
lcſſe power inthe Colledgethen himſclfc,and being combined withitheFar-
nel1, did farre excecdehim,though he had the Pope of his ſide, ſent to Reme
Don lobn Manriques, to pcrſ[wade his Holinefle to create new Cardinalls, ro
excced,orequalizeche number of the French... The Popewas cnclined here-
unto ; on ſaw what difficulty there was , his Papacie being new,and ex-
hauſtcd,and in time of ftirres , when it is hard to haue the conſent of all the
Cardinalls ;and to create them without conſent was dangerous, - Hee was
doubtfull whether romake many ar once, or by little and line. He thought
hee ſhould ſooner obtaine conſent forthis ſecond courſe, and that his truſty
friends would remaine in hope,and thar the Cardinalls would more 'oppolc
a numerous promotion, and choſe that were excluded would deſpaire. He
doubted whether it were firte to create any of the Prelats of the Conucell ;
| becauſe therewere many chat deſerued well, and the three Eletors were
Notto bee paſſed ouer, eſpecially the Eleor of Mentz who thought of ic.
Oa theother fide, ro ſend red Cappes to the Councell, hee thoughe would
mooue cnuic. Heerelolucd not toexpeRt Chriſtmas , when all come foorth
with their pretenſions, and the places of common meetings are full of wa-
gers , buttocxccute this buſineſſe ſome day before vpon hefadden ; though:
afterwards he found no fittime ro create > Gon bur Chriſtmas. * |
Bur co returne to Treas, the ſecond of September, the day following the
Seſſion, a generall Congregation was made, and, in it, Fathers depured to
frame the Articles of the Eachari#F, co bee giuen to the Diuines, and to col-
Ic& the abuſcy in chat marter. - Afterwards they diſcourſed' of the 'Refor-'
mation; which becauſe it was to-rake away the cauſe why Biſhops doe
not reſide , many were repeated, ' {ome propoſed before in Trent and Bolo-
nia ,and ſome then firlt ſpoken of, Finally, he inſiſted ypon iuriſdiftion ;
laying chatche Biſhops were wholly depriued of it, partly by auocarion of
cauſcs,and partly by appcales, bur cſpecially by exemptions: yea, thatmore
often, iuriſdiction was exerciſed ouer and againſt them by their SubieRs, ci-
ther by ſpeciall:commiſſion from Rome-, or by vertue of (onſernatories,
then by them ouer their ſubie&ts. And Fathers were cletedrotrame the Ar-
ticles concerning this marter. The Prefidents,, conſidering the Popes in-
ſtruftion to auoid dangerous contentions among the Diuines, & their vnin-

telligible

$elligible diſputcb4 yay ure ran alſo3bcir-confulion j in 2554
ſpcaking! F Our theArtcles frained ,whi they; ye i {& 2h.
handle:0n T petdayafter dinper;and theve addedibe manaer.andordss 10 Gnantns $
| bte hed intho;Gongregations, much limiced yr ws 215 or Jonara 6
Ipirbbars y.2iTheAniclas ware tonne; drawer front DE >
vinglianeondlobdhentnes;; wy 3 [That un; the Rugbariſt the Body, er Lam
and cPjuipitic: of Cath car, is not: rawely, toc 28-i0-a-4igage c24 Tas Hocunis,

Crnier ivaotgiuenitabrecarcs Sacramentally; bur ſpigitually, and by <rropocs |
4 ern SN oo

of the Bread and Wine, ſo tha Land bo
es” ht rm thohomanitie:, and; '3 \the
IT Wine; ſo chazis maybeezrucly ſaydthis Btcad.is
i veineigahc Bloadof Ca n 1's t; .4;That
of-fgncs.  $<2:Thar CAALSS, ought
Fares water rv pr haciſt, gor honouted i in feaſts nor as
inprocelliog , nor to the licke, and tharthe worſhippers are.arus —_
6. Thassbe Buchariſtoughs, not to bee ſaved, bys ſpenc, and popes Y
immatlialy,nutchat ho chitdodhnorloglorh abuſe chis Sacramencandabas
iti os ws rank to-giue che Communion. to.himlclfe..| 7... That in
articles; whichremaine after. che Connnunion,, the Body ofourl.o xd
c_—_ remdine; but onely-whilc it-is receiued,, and neither before poraf-
Jo >:$> 1; Thatiscis de ture divine, to giuc both kinds to thepcoplaand chil:
dren, 4nd thatthey.ſinne who force han ro vie ane onely.,..g...] That lo
much hot.containcd vaderenc, as vnder both}; neither dortheececriuelo
mugh, who! communicaterh with one; as hee char doecth communicate with
bothi,>xb. -Tharonely fackis a ſufficient preparation'to receiuerhe Eucha-
riſoeichcr.is confeſſion nece(fary, butfree, clpecially torthalcarticd, neither;
are, men. bount-i0-Commugicate at Eaſter. - | -; -

;2:ifrer.5bele pgs was added, in this forme... That che Dj. Whoaey:
vines aug toceank ions withrhe holy Scripture ,\T raditjons _—_
ofrho-kpolilos laced and an po rooued Councels,and by he conſtirytions
and authorities. of, the holy: tsj:chagthey\ ought to. vſe breuitie,, and.
auoyd. luperflugiy and-vhpteficable quaſtionss apd petuerſe commons.

Thar this hall hee che-qrder of ſpeakit — firlt, choſetbarare

faithly 295: wh ch vr gion went

- by the arts ? the Emperourjaud,

Scaular axe oe og ng order of, och
ROPE A r OI
__ es þ Regie, ee'G ares omg wg gran

ifacalcy and jautbority.co the Diuiges ;wb9,ars; to LA's
a hae doe be EEO rs

ca eopinigNs: is order did nptplcalet Which dork
dir. was8 novitie, anda. condetnning;of Schoole;dis fic

liap Diuines; w ra Di-
vinitic, which,iaNldeficulties, vietheeaſon, becaaſqirwas 005ta
to Freare a5 Saint. Thawes;Sajng' Bonauentwye, and orher farngus

atherdoatine which is called, politiue,andconfilerh. in.coll-Ring.he
ings ofthe. Scripruresand Fachers,, was onely a faculty of the memory wn

paines in veitiogaond war olds burknowen: tQ, rae

__-”

PS TRY
AL 7%
- *

——————_ I ao
Fr iflbrieof } 2M Þ rl 4.

| — Dead dtatre hidden
5332 tb&bythefoDoavls who; for rheferhres imdredandGifey'y

In defegded He Church | Jade Havent wapro hold the por wg
Cathcerr BL BURIOEGVREANTE pdidboltiall Rag rvaticeyof vexdirigy ambmicmes
Baie & PROT WTR GuereOWic, irropd knw thanywngues;abreade

— #de Avdtionbs)!whenduns bb drill bee pood Diuſne-can norapp
25:47 Binder wb Mbltcnerciſe his wit and make wr rerirk S's
a3 a#idhor to narþecrriens. :fPhe plomplajhed, age Cares 4
55-4915: {hbeBofGreeHeiDatch (7 beeingubeaſtomed roccomentwith
®=4.4 1) tKe run ur oper ery phe © which is norvicdn
my Mas, Fihsy) wetetolfpeakeatrofting? berin o
 plirtetiey knviWacthing!? TI wn
erred cine tor the corner, ens eolaplainedhet
yefiTpreuaile@ but cle} beamſe geundly't Fadices deſited halt
ke wFith mrelks eb{dtcatnes; 08a qa ir» thErartor ofitalbiieds
eadorhof alt idy Maled) "Aden ane; thutqhiForder diafact
edition. 219g qidlizow od 16? : bcis, 221, 3:13 0) TO. VOt 192039 el
dnkers-Chnare 24ff6hs <Hects: hen wetecomfortable.” ForehEfirſk
_— Mr 16/k6uldbocefdenined thefvricall;/as ichidibeanc!
aucles, =IAWrbfet onfchabeahreGpinidnsZolafit was to bee othitted, for
tak olaien i45abidenterheSicramentallConimunion,”” Others hell
i699 ar ſafpecteds 2nd me would haucdthvered it iniclearet teftiIEs
Thb&himowapition wasthartheediird wMreticall ;bucthatic Was ror
fie'r8%ohderinezoripedle of i6;15604iH(e it wianriny opinion ihuented by!Ro-
L2)0u:TuzienſisDetorethen fours hahdred yeererfince, an@nruce followed
| by ty, theref&fete ſpeckoefic would (contrary ro the” preceprofthe vile
._= dk koi? vulll.;ovvhich; beein quier; tired: not? * They added!thar
| | the Councelt was dfembled"aga inftithe-modernc herelics; and tare
.._ , tharthey werenot rorake paines ayverrp \Comeerningrhe fourrhAfticle,
Gard: thetowere Gucr?6piniofs.” : Somefaid, thar-theqyvord; onely, beeitty taken
\. © awvay/the bpinigthivas Catholiq Us; toſeytha the Euchariſt is for theremil-
*— offs Abt Lhaawged {Roe pat any: of the hereriques; an
cthetekor# they bought thifArriclewight be onhitisd.” Some faydir wis'hes
reticill'} thou? ghtie artoucy ervmood \'betauſe the Feetonbe of
the Eccharif® & nor ina rebermilion obfinnes.”-In the fife} 411 2-
greed;and Hany arr efiges 6the-worſhip Aid ma-
ny teWw wayes propoſedtovhlaryele,as thedaidthen of cr eucry once felurſd
our. 1p ibvſe wii tnp web in hacks, « cxetpE19 chelait part; tharis/tHi#
iis iÞtlavfillts Cbrattivkon to himſetfe, Some faid { Har A)
109 HUGHSSd SPthOBiques Ins Cacholique\ ard-thereforeie:rhbft
bePeaprdlſedy that ivis tec condertned Gin his ward df chcPricfisir 91
'F 7 hrs (of $aKataiichet  vitepard of theſeit wa ed beegudhume fopMlns
= - _ - riball;bretalbigthe lix>Gduhcelf,, thehuhdrefandenceliiprer; tak wo!
| OH aEkineRs "Othtrs would; charforithe Laiguly effe), | heicale 6F heveffity
ik ould Goexeladed! ta-the fevern®i\val powred darnfſes cur RASH!
Ethics gain He nbdetheProreſiimes; a5 inventors of a WICked OpiHIGHS,
hover beard sf Before ith Church, Vpon the eighealitnade long diſtout- -
(S, though all to the ſarrie purpoſe; 'Their principal eealghs: to eondeftine
It

CC) inions 1re

%.

d ere”

*

caule is,the faith of him who receiueth it.

onely to confirme; that the ancient Councels had nor. done lo, which

ia.
i406 tai

tC

it were, becauſe our Saujour inthe fourcand twenticth of Saint Luke, did 1551
bleſſe che bread onely torherwo Diſciples : and becauſe,in the Lords Prayer, AA,
weeaske our dayly bread; and becaule, inthe Aces of the Apoſtles, in the Cranks *C
ſccond, and twentieth Chapters, Bread onely is ſpoken of, aad Saint Parl rowing 7
in the ſhip, in the ſcucn and twentiech \ bleſſed nothing butthe Bread, Au- wag to)
thorities of.the ancient Doors , and ſome cxamples of the Fathers were © © :
brought, bur they.grounded themlelues principal y vpon the Councell of
onflance_, and the cuſtome of the Church, as alſo ypon diuers figures of

the Olde Teſtament, and drew many prophecies alſo to this fence. And,
concerning thechikdren, all agreedrhatperhaps it might formerly:bee done

by ſome particular man, but was, by all others, knowen to bee an errour.

In the ninth Article, the firſt part, that as much is not contained vnder one

Species as vader both , was chought to bee hereticall, by the Dutch Diuines ;

bur the [calians fayd ic mult bee diſtinguiſhed, before 1t could bee condem-

ned. Forif it were vnderſtood in reſpect of the vertue of the conſecration,

it is clcare that vnder rhe bread there is the body onely, and vnder the wine,

the blood onely ; but by conſequence, which the Diuines call Concomitancie,

vnder the bread there is theblood, ſoule, and diuinitie , and vnder the wine;

there is the body,and che other things ; and therefore it is not ro be condem-

ned in ſo generall termes. Burt for the ſecond , thatas much is receiued by

one as by both,there was a difference for many did thinke, that alchough

no more of the Sacrament, yet moregrace was receiued; ſo that they did de-

fire a declaration herein. In thetenth- ſome would haue the firſt part ex-

pounded of dead faith, becauſe there is nodoubt bur that a liuely faith is ſuf-

ficient. For the neceſlitic of Confeſſhon, the Dominicans conſidered, that

many learncd and holy Catholiques held that opinion , ſo that ro condemne

that would bce ro condemne them. Others propoſed , for a remper, that

it ſhould not bee condemned as herericall, but as pernicious. Some would

hauc this conditionadded, if rhere were commodity for a Confeſſor. The

laſt part, for communicating atEaſter, ir not becing commanded by the Law

of Go DÞ, butby the Church onely, thecommon opinion was, that it ought

not to bee condemned for hereticall, it being a thing nor heard of, that one

ſhould bec condemned of herelic , for nor approouivg a particular humane

preceprt. Many Diuines did propoſe another Article allo, raken out of the

writings of Luther , which was neceſſary to condemne. And it was this:

thar although there was a neceſlitic to recite the words of CHR15T, yer

they arcnotthe caule of the preſence of Cx ts T inthe Sacrament, butthe

Aitcrall the Diuines had ſpoken, the deputed Fathers did collect ſeucn ou ofwhica
Anathematiſmes, out of their » ja , which bcing propoſed in the generall 7, rom...
Congregation, it was firit of all conſidered, rhat it was not fit to paſle ouer <o=poid.

the matter with Anathemati/mes onely ; that this, yas, not to teach, bur

alwaycs had expounded the Catholike opinion, and. then condemned the
contrary ; thar the ſame ſucceeded, well to this Councell, in the marrer of
[uſtification ; and although ir was forced, - in the Scflion of the Sacra- ———
ments , to change this courſe , for yrgene Fer yet.chat Was rar _—:
'E cc

326

The Hiftorie of L1s. 4.

I55t
SEN
Ivizvs 3+
CHARILLS F

\——_— =
EpvyarnD 6.

Henry 2.
— Yn

Figlre heads
of doctrine
are propoſed
ro bee duicul-
TW

bee imitated which was then done by reaſon,then that which was after chan-
ged by necelfitie. This opinion was cheriſhed by the ralian Diuines,who
[aw there was but one way to regaine their reputation loſt. For asthe Dutch
and Flemiſh Diuines were of abilicic to prooue the concluſions by authori-
tics,ſoro expound them, and finde their cauſes, there was neede of Schoole
Diuinitte, im whichthemſelues were well ſeene. This opinion did preualle;
and order was giuecn, that the Hcads of doCrine ſhould bee framed, and
Fathers depurcd to fee it done. The Heads were reduced to the number
of cighr., Of the Reall preſence. Of the Inſticution.” Of the cxcellencie.
Of Tranſubſtanriarion, Of worſhip. Of preparation to receiue the Sa-
cramenr. Of the vicof the Cup, in the Communion of the Laitie. OF
the Communion of Children. Ir was propoſed alſo ro make a collection
of the abuſes which did occurre, and to adde the remedies. Then, in thar
Congregation, and ſome of thoſe tharfollowed, the Fathers began to ſpeake
their opinion concerning the ſeucn Anathematiſmes: wherein nothing re--
markcable was fayde, bur that, in condemning thoſe who confeſſed nor
che recall preſence of the Lords body,many delired thar the Canon ſhould bee
more farand pregnant ( for ſo their wordes were) that, in the Euchariſt,
there is the bodyof IEsv s CHrisrT, the ſame which was borne of the
T)irein, did ſuffer on the Croſle, was buricd, rayſed, and alccndad into hea-
ven, firreth on the right hand of Go Þ, and ſhall come ro judgement. And
ſomeofthem called ro minde, thar there wanted one very important point,
thatis, to declare , that the Minilter of this Sacrament is the Prieſt, lawfully
ordained. Which they did, becaule Luther and his followers doe often lay,
rhar cucry Chriſtian may doe it,cuen a woman,

Bur the Earle of Monrforr, percciuing that they treated of a matter much

 controuerſed, eſpecially of the Communion of the Cup, which was the

The Ambaſ-
ſadors of the
Emperor and
Ferdinand
d<1flwadethe
di(cuſtion of
the Commu-
110n vnder
onc kinde,

molt palpable, popular, and belt vnderſtood by all, hee thought that , if
that were determined, the Proteſtants would neuer bee induced ro come to
the Councell, andall the Jabour would bec in vaine. And hauing imparted
chis to his Colleagues, and the Ambaſſadors of Ferdinand, they went all to-.
gether to the Prefid-nts, tro whom, when they had ſhewed what paines
(«ſar had taken , both in wafre , and in the negotiation to make the Prote-
ſtanrs ſubmit to the Councell, which they would neuer doc if they went not
thither, they ſhewed that they ought ro apply chemſelues principally ro this;
and, torhat end, the Emperour had giuenthem a Safe condudt, But they
were not contented with it, alleadging that it was decrecd in the Councel of
Conſtance , and really executed, that che Councell is not bound by the Safe
conductofany, whatſocuer hee bee ; and therefore they required one from
the Synode, which was promiſed ro them by Ceſar , who gaue charge to
them his Ambaſſadours to obtaine it of the Councell. Whereunto the Le-
gate making a very complementall anſwete, and referring himlelfe ro the
Sell1on which ſhould bee held, to gaine time, that hee might giue an ac-
count thereof ro Rome. the carle added, that for the ſame cauſe, he thought
it not fit, thar, before their comming, the controucrſcd points of the Eu-
chariſt ſhould bee handled; that there wanted nor matters of reformation
ro be ticated'on, or others, in which there was no difference. The Legate
-- an{wc-

Lift the Counzellof{ Trent.

- _— — = ——

anſwered, that ir. was refolued long agoe.ts, handle the Enchariſt;'neicher 1557
could itbealtered, becauſe it was concluded before char che Decrees of faith ;c I
and reformation ſhould goc hand in-hand, and,that.the,macter of the Each. hacker
riſt did follow that of rctormation, which was handled laſt , before they toeans £
went to Bolonid.. Bur hee fayd, that chis was moreconrouerled with the 02922:
Zinglian Suiſles, then with the Proteſtants, whoare not Sactamentiries; as
thoie, The Count ſpakeof the Communion-of the Cup, and ſaid, chat if thac
point weredecidedagainit chem, which is vader{toodby all the people, and
a thing whereon they {tand molt, it was impoſlible ro reduce them. Thar,
Ca{arallo in the Decree of rhe. Inter-religion,, was forced to yeeld in this, and
therefore deſired that they would bepleaſcdto deferre ityncill the comming
of the Proteltants. The Legate did not refule, but pafled ir over with ge-
ncrall and vaconcluding wordes, that hee might fir{t vaderttand the Popes
mindc, varo whom hee gauean acount of whatſocuer was handled by the
Diuines, and of the .Anatvemarifmes framed , and of that which was diſcout- .;;. Legabh
ſed in matter of reformation, { whereof wee will ſpeake hereafter) and then givth he
hce gaue aduiſe of the two requelis of the Emperours Ambaſladours  defi- count o# all
ring an anſ{were. |
The Pope pur theſe things in conſultation; and, for the ſafe conduct,

found varietic of opinions. Some would not haue it giuen, allcadging that iyy, aut
it was ncuer done bur by the Councell of "Baſil, which was not to bee imita- *<cnflracien
tcd in any thing ; and that it was a-great preiudice to binde themſclues to
rebels, rhough any thing might bee endured if there were hope to gaine
them; bur there was noneatall ; yearather, in {teadof that,there was reaſon
to feare that ſome would bee peruerted , as -Yergerius was,though not whol-
| ly, yer in ſomepart; from which contagion the molt principall Prelates,and
the molt obliged to the holy Sea, haue nor beene exempted. On the orher
{ide it was ſayd, that, not out of hope to conuert, but ro leaue them with-
qut excuſe, it was fit togiucthem all ſatisfaction; buttherather, becauſe the
Emperour for his owne intereſts, kad made grearer-iaſtance, whom it was
neceſſary to pleaſe now , becauſe, France being aliened; they were wholly ro
dependon him : and it was better to preuent, 4nd doe that willingly, which
of neceſſiric was to bee done. And, concerning the prejudices, ir mighr bee
madeinſuch a forme, that it ſhould not bindeatall, or very little. - Firlt;
by not deſcending to namethe- Proteſtants, butin generall, the Eccleſiaſtikes
and Scculars of che German Nation, of euery condition. For ſo, vader the

cnerall wprdes, it may bce ſaid they are comprehended, or,chat it is vnder-

tood of the Cacholikes onely, and notof themyalleadging thar, for them; a
ſpcciall and. expreſſe mention was-neceſlary..1;ThenthbelSynod may granc
a ſafe Condudt for it{elte, andthe Popes authoritiewill bee referued, Then
Judges , concerning faults committed, may 'bee depured;-and the eleRion Ard aitye:
left to them, ro auoyd ſuſpicion. .Sothar vigorofditcipline, andauthoritic
of pugiſhing would bee rercained,, and no {ſhew-madeof yeelding or remit-
ting any thing. This opinion preuailed with: the Pope, who, according to
that forme; made a draught of the ſafe Condutt; and anfwered the Legare;
commenting, his wiſedome in the anſwers hee: had-giuen, reloluing thar the
fats Conductſhould beegraued in thicfarmeheefenchim;'dnd that the mito

E E 2 rer

228

 —_

1551

Ivirvs 3.

CHARLES $,

ForvvarnD 6,

Henay 2,

WAY ung

A content=
On arilct2 be-
tivcene the
Erancitcans
and Domun-
CAi1S CONCET.
ning the real
prc1crice

ter of the Cup ſhould bee defetfed; andthe Proreſtanrs expected, Bur nOt a-
boue three monethis; or little more, nor becing idice in the meanewhile, but
making a Sellion'/berweene,to treare of Penance, which hee would nor hauc
deferred aboue fourtie dayes;or little more. Hee aduerriſed them alſo, thar
the Canons, in matter of the Eucharift, were too full, and that itwcreberter
ro divide them. | Wer ld
While they conſulted in Rome, in Trent they went on to handlethe points
of doctrine; whercin they proceeded as'cafily, as before, in diſcuſling the
Articles. But when they came to expreſſe'the manner of exiſtence, how
CHK1ST js in the Sacrament, and the Tranſub/tantiation , how the Body
of CHRIST is madeof the Bread,and the Blood of the Wine, it could not be
trear4d on withour contention betweene the two Schooles, Dominican, and
Franciſcan; which did much trouble the Fathers, by the ſubriltic and ſmall
fruit thercof,them{clues not knowing how rocxplicate their owne meaning.
[v fumme,the Dominicans would not haue ir faid that Chriſt wasin the Eu-
chariſt, becauſe he went thither from another place where he was before, but,
becauſe the ſubſtance of the Bread is turned'into his Body, theBody being in
the place 'vherethe bread was,withour going thither;and becauſe all the 1ub-
{tance of thebread is turned into all the tubitance of theBody,rthar is,the mar-
ter of the Bread into the marter of the Body, and theforme into the forme, it
is properly called Tranſubſtantiation. And therefore there are twoſorts of the
exiſtenceof Cur1sT our Lord, both of them reall,rruc,and ſubſtanriall; one,
as he is in heauen,whitherhe alcended,when he parted from the carth, where
hee firſt conuerled; theother, as hee is in the Sacrament, in which he is, be-
caule hee is where the ſubſtances ofthe bread and wine, conuerted into him,
were firlt. The firſt exiſtence is called naturall, becauſe1t agreeth to all bo-
dics; the ſecond, as it is{1ngular, lo it cannot bee expreſſed with any name
agrecing to others, nor can bee called Sacramenrall , which were as much
as to lay, that it was notthere really, but as ina figne, the Sacrament being
nothing but an holy {rgne, except by Sacramentall one would vnderſtanda
rcall manner, proper tothis Sacrament onely. "The Franciſcans would haue
it ſaid, that one body may,'by Gods omnipotencie, bee trucly and ſubſtan-
tially in many places, and when irdoeth get a new place, it is in it; becauſe it
gocth thither, not by a ſucceſſiue mutarion, as when uleaucththe firſt place
to getthe ſecond, butin an inſtant, in which it gaineth che{econd, without
loſing the firſt ; and that God hath (o ordained , that where the body of
CHR1 $1 is, there ſhould remaine no other ſubſtance, not by annihilation,
becaule the ſubſtance of Cx xi sT ſucceedeth in place of it, ad therefore
ie is truely called Tranſubſtantiation, not becauſe the one{ſubitanceis made of
the other, as the Dominicans ſay, bur for that the one doeth ſucceederthe
other.  'Themannerof Caxri1sTs being in heaucn andin the'Sacrament dif-
tererh nor in ſubſtance, bur in quantitie onely : becauſe inheauenthemag-_
nitude of the body poſlefleth asmuch {pace as is proportionablere'ir, and
it is ſubſtantially in-the Sacrament without poſſeſſing any place.” Thert-
fore both (orts aretrue, recall, and{ubſtanriall, and' in regard-of the ſub-
Itance, narurall al{o:: in reſpect of the quantitie the exiſtence iri heduen is
naturall, and in the Sacrament miraculous; differing, m this onely; rhar in
[03 heaucn

Line the Coltcellof Tre. - 19
hequerthe quantity is truely aquantity and inthe Sacrament, hith the con- 7557
dicior of a Fwy  Eicher partie was [6'weddedtVtheit owne opinion, &o 4
charchey afficmediveo be plaitie/cl&&2}and inceltigible roll, and pppoled Gunu?';
infinice abſurdicievagaioftcheother. 'The Eletorof (Cullen, who,with Io" ETGI7
hannes Groperas, was afliduousarthe difptrations, ro viiderftandthis matter; Pronr »-
in char which one patty 6ppoſedagainſt the other, he gaue aredJon torhem
borh; in'chat which either of thernafirmed, hee faid, be deſired fome probas-
bilicy, andrhatthey ſhould ſpeake as vnderftanding the matter, nor, as they
ſcemed rv doe, by eultome ahd-habite of the Schooles. Diners draughts
were made by bath ſides, to expreſſe theſe mylterics, and ſome wete compo-
ſcdby raking ſome thing from either partic. Bur none gaue farisfaQion, ef:
pecially to the Nwicio Verona, who wis the orinicipall Superivrendent in
this matter; It was determitied inthe gencrall Congregation, to vie as few
wordsas was pollible, and t6'make an expreſſion fo viiucriall,as mightbee
accommodated tothe meaning of both: pattics: and the care hecreof was
commicted to ſome Fachers and Theologues, with the ſuperintendencie of
the forclaid Nuncio. a ne DP
In the end of chisCongregation, it waspropoſed that a colleftion ſhoulg The 1buſcs
be made,of the abuſes occurring in this marrer , with remedies againſt them, therein w6
and,in the Congregations following, many wererecounted, Thar in lome ****
articular Churches; the Sacrament is not kept, andin others, is kept very
vndecemly, That; when it is carrycd inthe {treeze,many doe not kneeketo
ir,and fome [carcevouchſafe to put off their caps. That, in ſome Churches,
itis kept ſolong,, thatit becommerh putrificd. That, in adminiſtring the
holy Communion,great indecencicis ved, by ſome pariſh Pricits, Who hat
not ſo much as acloarh, for him that communicareth, ro hold in his hand.”
Thar , ( which is of moſt importance) the communicants doc not know
what they receiue, nor arc inſtructed of the dignity, and fruit of this Sacra-
ment. That Concubinaties, Concubines, atid other enormous ſinners, and
many who know not the Pater roſter, atid 4iie, Maria, arc admitted to the
Communion, That money is demanded at the Communion in the name
ofalmes, and, which is worſe, there is an vſc in Rome,thathe who is rocom-
municare, docth hold a burning-candle inhis hand, with money ſticking in
it, which., together with the candle , after the Communion, remaynethto
the Pricſt, and he that bearcth nora candle, is not admitred r5 the Commu- 75008
nion. To remedie part of theſe, and othet abuſes, five Canons were made, And five Ca
which had a faire proheme. In which it wasconſticured , that the Sacra- reuret tbe.
ment becing lifted vp on the Altar, or carryed by the way, euery one ſhould
kneele, and vncouer his head.” That the Sacrament ſhould beekepr in cucry
Pariſh Church,and renewed every fiftcene dayes, arid hauca lampe burning:
before it nightandday. That it bee carryed to the {icke, by the Pricft, in ati
honourable habitc,and alwayes withlight. Thaithe Gurates reach the peo-
ple, whargraceis receiucd in this Sacrament, and cxecute againt chem, the,
enalties of the Chapt. Omnis otrinſque ſexus. That the Ordivaries ſhould
tow cate of the execution, chaſtiſtng the tranſgreſſvurs with arbirrary pus
niſhments , beſides thoſe which are ſet downe by Inncentive chethird, in the
Chapr. Sratuimus, and by Honorins the third,in the Chapt. Sane. in;
; Ee 7 The

—c «AW

330

i

L551

-

Ks | he reformation was handled,,atthe lamegime, when:thers wasdi{pu-

ration in warter of faith,bur by,qches, Congregatibns, in which the) Gano.

Iv11vs 2g.
CHARLES $.

_— —— —— —

Epyvarer 6,

HtwnRY 2.
NS

_
The Refor-
mation 15
handled at the
ſame time
with the Do-
Qtrinc,but in
diucrs Con-
gregations.

A diſcourſe of

che Authour
CONCcerRIng
En opall Iu-

riidiction,

niſts did aſſiſt ; which diſcullions,norro intexxuputhe maittr, Lhabe þrdvghe
all rogether to this place, And becauſe choppypole wesgoreformenbetpils
copall juriſdiction, thisÞlace requireth {torghe vnderfiapdipg.of wharwaill
be ſayd vpon this, and many other occalionshereafter;) that theiorigitalh
ſhould bee declared, and how, becing mounted to {ſo great powerjithecame
ſuſpected to. Princes ,'and terrible! ro.the people.' Ci HIST haujog CcOm-
manded his, Apoſtles to preach-rhe Golpcl,;and adminifterthe Sacraments,
hee left alloto them, in perſon of all the taithfull, this principal precept, To
louc oneanother, charging them r@,make peace, berwetnethoſethardifſen-
ted, and, for the laſt remedie, giving the cate thercof ro\the body:of the
Church, promiſing it ſhould bee bound and Joolcd in heauen;, whatlocuer
they did binde and looſe on carth, and what{ocuer rwodid aske witha com-
mon conſent, ſhould bee granted by,the Fathee,., In this charitable office ro

iucfſatisfationtorhc offended, and pardon to the offender, the Primiriuc
Church was alwayes exerciſed. And, in conformity of this, Saint Paul or-
dayned, that brothers, hauing ciuul ſuites one againſt another, ſhould nor
goctothe Tribunals of the Intidels, bur that wiſc men ſhowild beappoynted
to iudgerhe differences, and this was a kind of ciuill Iudgement, as the 0-
ther had a f1militude of a criminall ; but were both ſo different from rhe
iudgements of rhe world, thar as theſcare executed by power of the Judge,
who coforceth ſubmiſſion, ſothole onely by the willof the guilty, ro receiue
them, who refuſing them, the Eccleſialticall lyudge remainerh withour cxc-
cu:ion,and hath no power, bur to foreſhew the iudgementof Go Dd, which,
according to his omnipotent good pleaſure, will follow, in this life, or the
next,

And indeed, the Eccleſiaſtical iudgement did deſerue the name of cha-
ritic,in regard that it only did induce the guilty ro ſubmit,and the Church ro
iudge with ſuch fincerity , that ncicher in the one any bad effec could haue
place, nor juſt complaint in the other ; and the exceſle of charitie in corre-
Ring, did make the corrcctor to feele greater paine then the correted; fo
that, in the Church, no puniſhment was impoſed, without great lamentati-
on of the multitade, and greater of the better ſort. And this was the cauſe
why to correct, was called to lament. So Saint Paul, rebuking the Corin-
thians, for not chaſtiſing the inceltuous, ſaid, ou haue not lamented to ſeparate
ſuch a tranſgreſſour from you. And in another Epiltle, Ifcarethat when I come
vnto you, I ſhall not finde you ſuch as 1 defire, but in contentions and tu-
mules, and that at my comming , 1 ſhall lament many of thoſe who hauc
ſinned before. The iudgement of the Church ( as is' neceſlary in cuery
multitude) was fitthat it thould be conducted by one, who (hould preſide
and guide the action, propoſe the marters, and colle&t the points to beecoun-
ſulted on. This care, due to the moſt principall, and worthy perſon, was al-
wayecs committed to the Biſhop. And where the Churches were wany, the
propoſitioris and deliberations were made by the Biſhop, firlt in the Col-
ledge of the Prieſts and Deacons, which they called the Presbyteric, and
there were ripened, to recceiucaftcrwards the laſt reſolution in the general]
Congrega-

GE —E— EE—a——o——y

Co le. _

Congregation ofthe Church; This fornie/ was ſtill 0 foore' in the yeere 1 ; zt

two hundred and-fiftic, and is: plainely. ſecheby-the: Epiltles of (IPprian, FEA

who.in the matter, cancerning thoſe who/didiearts;.of meates! offered to $n4niss 5

Idols, and ſubſcribe! co the; Religion! of; the! Geatles;: writeth to: the Romaph fs

Presbytcry , that hee doeth not thinke to. doe any>Uliing withour their rips”

counſcll, and confent of theipeople:;\and writeth tothe p ople, that, at

his returne, hee will examinethe caules; 20d. merits thereof  in-cheir prex

ſence, and,ynder their iudgethent , and -hee wrote to thoſe! Prieſts; who, of

their owne braine, had reconciled ſome, thatithey ſhould giucan account td

the people. mY 112412: bas .;:; | |
Thegoodneſlc andcharitie of the Biſhops, made their opinion for the

molt part ro betollowed,and by lteleand little, was caule chat; zhe Church;

charitie waxing 'colde, nor regarding the charge-layd vpon them by

CHKIST, did leaue, the cate x0 the Bithop;and ambition, a witty paſſion,

which doth infinuateit ſclfe ia the ſhew of vertue, did caulc it to be readily

embraced, Bur the principallcauſe of the change was the ccaling of perle-

cutions. 'For then the Biſhops did e eEtas it were a tribunall, which was

much frequented; becaulc as temporall commodities, ſo{uires did; encteaſe.

The iudgement, though it were not as the former, jn regard of the/forme; to

determineall by the opinion of the Church, yetit was: of the ſame ſincerity.

Whercupon (|onſtantine, ſecing how profitable itwas to determine caules,

and that, by the authoricic of Religion , .captious: actions were diſcouered;

which che ludges could not penetrate, made a Law that there fhould lye ns

appcalc from the ſentences of Biſhops,which thould bee executed by « le-

cular [udges : andif in a cauſe depending beforea ſecular tribunall; in any

{tate thereof, either of the parties, though the other contradi&, ſhall de-

mand the Epiſcopall judgement, the caule ſhall be immediately remitted yn-

to him. | | 3

 Herethe tribunall of the Biſhop, began ro be a common pleading place,

hauing execution by the Miniſteric of the Magiltrate;and to gaine the name

of Epiſcopall juriſdiction, Epilcopall audience, and ſuch like. The Emperot

Talence did enlarge it, who,in tie yeere 365. gaue the Biſhops thecare ouer

allche prizes of vendible things. This iudiciall negotiation plealed notthe

good Biſhops. Poſsidonius, doth recount that Anſtm, being imployed herein,

{omctimes vatill dinner time, ſometimes longer, was wont. to. ſay, thar it

was a trouble, & did diucrt him from the things proper vnro him; and- him-

ſclfe wricerh,thar i was tolcaue things profitable, and to atrend things cu-

mulcuous and perplexed. And Saint Paul did not rake it to himſelfe, as bc-

ing not fitfora Preacher, bur would hauc ir giuen ro others. Afterwards

ſome Biſhops, beginningcoabuſe theauthoritic giuen chem by the law of

Conftantine, that law was [cuentie yecres after, revoked by Arcadius and Hono:

rius, andan ordination made that they ſhould iudge cauſes of religion, and

not ciuill,cxccpt both parrics did confent,and declared chat chey ſhould nor

be thought to haue a Court. Which law being notmuch oblerued in Rome;

in regard of chegreat power of the Biſhop, Yalentmian being in the Citie;

in that ycare 452.did renew it,and made. it to be pytin execution, Bur a little

after, ſome part of che power taken away was rcltored by the Princpy ghar
ollow:

332

. The Hiftory of Lis 4.

IS F I
PRINLY
Fvirvs. 3.
CHArLES F+
E'wvvand 6,
H NtY, 2.
SY”

followed; ſorhat Inftinian did eſtabliſh vato chem a Court, and audience,
and aſſigned ro chem the cauſes of Religion,the Ecclefiaſticall faults of the
Clergic,8&diuersyolunrary iurifdictions alſo oucr rhe Laitic.By theſe degrees
the charitable corre&ion;zinſtitured by C x R 15 T, did degenerate intro do-
mination, ahd made Chriſtians looſe their ancient reucrence and obcdicnce.
It is denycd in words;chat Eccleſtalticall iuriſdiftion is dominion , as is the
ſecylar,yet one knoweth not howto pur adifference betweene them, Bur S.
Pd did put it, when he wrote' to Timetbie, and repeated it to Titus, that a
Bithop hould not begrecdy of gaine,nor a ſtriker. Now on the contrary,
they make men pay for proceſſes, and impriſon the parries, as is done in the

fecular Court.

But the Weſterne Countrics being ſeparated,and an Empire-made of Jre-
ly, France, and Germany, and a kingdom of Spaine, in theſe foure Prouinces
che Bilhops,for the molt part, were made Counſellors of the Prince, which,
by the mixcute of ſpiricuall and remporall charges, cauſed their juriſdiction
to encreaſc exceedingly. Before 200. yecres were paſt, they pretended ab-
ſolutely all iadicature, criminall and ciuill, ouer the Cleargie,arid, in ſome
things,ouct the Laiticalſo, pretending that the cauſe was Ecclcliaſticall. Bc-
ſides this kinde of Iudicature, they inuented another, which they called

_ mixt, in which the Magiſtrate or the Biſhop might proceed againſt the ſecu-

lar, which of them tookethe cauſe in hand firſt; whereby in regard of their
exquiſite diligence, neuer leauing place co the ſecular, they appropriated all
vnto themſelues; and thoſe which remained out of {o great a number, were
comprehended in the end bya generall rule,eſtabliſhed by them,as a ground
of taith, that cuery cauſc is deuolued to the Ecclefralticall Court, if the Ma-
oiſtrate will nor, or neglect ro doc juſtice. Bur if tle prerenſions of the
Cleargic werecontained within theſe bounds, the ſtate of Chriſtian Com-
mon wealthes were tolcrable. The people and Princes, when they ſaw it
mount to thele vnſupportable termes, might with Lawes and ſtatutes hane
broughtthe iudgements to a ſufferatle forme, as formerly vpon occaſion
hath beene done. Bur that which put Chriſtendome vnder the yoke, rooke
from it, in the end all meanes to ſhake it from the necke. For after the yecre
1050.all thecauſcs of the Cleargy being appropriated to the Biſhops, and
very many ofthe Laitie, vnder title of ſpiritualitic,and almoſt all the reſt yg-
dcrthe nameof a mixt judicature,and placing themlſelues aboue ſecular Ma-
giſtrates, vpon pretence of iuſticedenied, rhey cameto ſay, that the Biſhop
had chat power to judge,not bythe grant or conniucncy of Princes,or by the
will of the People, or by cultome,but chat ir was eſſcntiall to the Epilcopall
dignitic,and given roitby CHR1 5ST.

And chough the Lawes of the Emperours remaine in the {'odes of Thes-

 dofuus and Tuſtinian, in the ("apitularsof Charles the great, and Lewis the Debo-

neere, and others of later Princes of the Ealt and Weſt, which doe all ſhew
plainely, how, when and by whom this power hath beene graunted, and all
Stories, as well Ecclefiaſticall as prophane, doe agrecin declaring the ſame
grants and cultomes,adding the reaſonsand cauſes, yet ſo notoriousatructh
hath not had ſuch power, butthat a contrary affirmation onely , without a-
ny proofe, hath been able ro ouercome it; which che Canoniſts hauecſo farre

maintained,

L1s: 4. the Councell of Trent.

_maintaincd asto publiſh choſeforhererikes who doe nor ſuffer themſelnes | ” 'Y;

to bes hoodwinckt. And not ſtaying heere they adde, that neither the

Magiltrats, nor the Prince himſelf,can meddlc in any of thoſe cauſes which Ciiazces 5:

WH

the Clergic hath appropriated, becauſe they are ſpirituall, and of ipiricuall Exyuay a

things the Laiques are vncapeable. Yer the light of tructh wasnor fo pur
out burthar Icarned andgodly men,in thoſe firſt rimes, did oppoſe that do-
ctrin,ſhewing that both the Premiſles of that diſcourſe were tale, & thar the
Maior,that is,chac the Laiques are vncapeable of ſpiritual things,was abſurd,
and impious. For they are adopted by the hcaucnly Father, called the ſonnes
of God, brothers of Ca 1s T, pattakets of the Kingdome of heaucn,made
worthy of Diuinegrace. Of Baptiſme, and of the Communion of the fleſh
of CHRIST. What other ſpirituall thiogs arcthere beſidetheſe? And if
there were, how can hec, who is partaker of theſe which are the chicteſt,
be layde abſolutely in generall rermes to be vncapeable of ſpirituall things ?
Bur they ſayd thatthe Minor was falſe allo, that cauſes appropriated ro the
Epilcopall iudicature are ſpiriruall. For all either delicts or contracts :
which, confidering the qualities, giuen by the holy Scripture to fpirituall
things,arc asfarre from bcing ſuch, as carih is from heauen. Butrhe oppo-
{tion of che b=rterpart could noroucrcome the greater, and fo; vpon the
ſpirituall power, giuenby CHRK1sT to the Church, to binde and looſe,
and yponthe inſtitution of Saint Paul, to compole contentions betweene
Chriſtians, without going to the tribunall of [nfidels, in much time, and by
many degrees, a temporall tribunal hath beene builr, more remarkeablethen
eucr was any inthe world, and in che midit of cuery Ciuill gouernement
another inlticurcd, nor depending on the Publike, which is fuch akinde of
Common-wealch, as nor one of as many as have written of gouernments
would hauc imagined could ſubſiſt. I will omit to ſpeake how thepaines of
ſo many,bc{ides the obtaining of the wiſhed end. 'T'o make themlclues-in-
dependent of the publike, hauc, before they were aware, ray{cd an Empire,
there being a moreditficult opinion ſprung vp,taking root with: admirable
progreſle, which giuerh to the Pope of Rome, as much ar once, 'as hath,
11 1300. yceres, beene gained by ſo many Biſhops, by ſuch extraordinarie |
mcancs, not making the power to bindeand loole the foundation of iurif-
diction, but the power of feeding,and ſo aftirining, that all wriſdiction was
giucnthePopeby Cu r1 s T, inthe perion of Peter, when he ſaydto him,
Feede my ſh:epe. For lo ic will be ſaid inthe third reduction of the Councell,
when great tumults were raiſed by this opinion, which ſhallthen berecoun-
| ted, Butby that which hath been now declared,cuery one may of himſcltc,
concciue whar remedics were necefſarie,to giuca tolerable forme roa matter,
broken our into ſo great corruptions, and compare: them with.cheſc thar
were propoled. IIS £30: f- Jo Ee þ+d
In Trent there were two defects conſidered; tharis, that thecharitic of
the ſuperiours was turned into domination, and theobedienceof the inferi-
ours ifito'complaints;ſubrerfuges, and lamentations;andrhey firſt chought
of prouiding,in ſomelorr, againſt them borki. Butin-proſecuringrthe firſt;
which is che fountaine from whence the ſecond is dertued; they vied onely

an exhortatoric remedicto the Prelates torake away domination, _ re-
ore

or _—_—_—— ——

_o 51 {torecharitic. And for the inferiours, many {ubterfuges, beeing mentio-
— > nedro delude iultice, three heads onely were taxen, Appeales, abſolutoric
SS 4 graces, and complaints again{t the Iucges. Johannes Groperus , who aſh-
7 ttcdin that Councellasa Diuine anda Lawyer, ſpake honourably of 4p-
H-»x. 2 peales,and fayd, that while the hcar of faith remained in the brelts' of Chri-

| {tians, Appeales were not heard of. Bur charitic in the Indges waxing

—

A crſcourſe of

7harxs Colde, and place bring giuen to paſlion, they entred into the Church, for
Cee theſame reaſons which brought them into the fecular Courts, thar is, for

_—_ thecale ofthe oppreſſed. And as the firlt 1udicatures belonged nor'to the
Biſhop onely,burto him with the councell of his Prieſts, fo the Appeale. was
not dcuolued vnto one man, but vnto another Congregation. Bur the Bi-
ſhops, raking away the Synods , did 1n{ticute Courts and officers, Jike the
{eculars. Neither did the milchiefe ſtoppe there, but paſſed to greater abu-
{es rhcn in the Secular court. For there the firit Appeate is onely to bee im-
mediate fupcriour, neither 1s itlawfull to leape to the higheſt, nor permit-
ted, in the articles of the cauſe to appeale from the Decrees of the Iudge
which chey call interlocutories, bur 1t 1s neceſſarte to expcE the end. Bur
in the Eccleftaſticall Courts one may appeale from every ate, which ma-
keth the cauſes infinite, and immediately to the highelt Judge, which carry-
eth them out of the Countreys, with great charges, and other intolerable
miſchizfes. This hee ſaid hee did declare, ro conclude, that if they would
reform this matter, which is wholly corrupted, and docth not onely hinder

* re{idencie,as inthe Congregations of ſo many worthy DoC&tours and Fa-
thers was contidered , but corrupteth the whole diſcipline, and is a gric-
-uance, charge, and fcandallro the people, irwas fit ro reduce it to its be-
ginning,orasnecre to it as might bee, ſetting a perfe&t Idea before their
eyes, and ayming at that, to come as nigh ro it, asthe corruption of the
marter doth comporrt. That the well in{tituted monaſlticall religions haue
forbidden all appeale; that this is thetrue remedie. Hee that hath not beene
able rogoclo high, hath moderared them, granting them within their or-
der, and forbidding them without, which ſucceeding Well, as appeareth ,to
keepe thoſe goucrnments inorder, it would worke the ſame cleft in the
publike gouernments of the Church ,if the Appeales were centined wirh-
in theſame Prouince.And toeftetthis, and to bridle the malice of the liti-
gants, itis ſufticientio reducethem to the forme of the Commonlawes, for-
biddivg the Leap,thatis,to go to the higheſt without paſling by the imterme-
datcfuperiours;and by forbidding Appeales fromthe Articles,or the interlo-
cutory Decrees:with which prouiftons, the cauſes willnotgoe farre, will gor
be'drawne-in length, will not cauſe excefliue charges ;, and. other .innume-
rablc grieuances, and; thattheſentences may paſle with:{inceritie, ro reſtore
the Synodals,which are not ſubicct to ſo great corruptions, remouing thoſe
officers by whom the world is ſo much ſcandalized,becaule itis not-poſlible
that Germany ſhould endure them. 14325 Tema

Thisopinion was not willingly heard, exceptby the Spaniards & Durch-
men.BurtheCardinall & the Nuntio of Siponto,were difpicaſed thathee wenr
ſo farre:For this was to take away, tor onely the profit-ofthe Court, bur the
honour allo;no cauſe would gocto Reme, and by degrees, cucry one would
forget

XUM

Lis. 4. the Countellof Trent, 45

forget the ſuperioritic of rhe Pope, ir beeing an ordinary thing with men; t65t

not to eltcemerhar Supcriour,wholcaurhoriticis nor feared, or cannor be ,> --
vied. Therefore they cauſed Jobn Baptiita Calt:llus, of ©Bolonia, to ſpeake in Chanrhs F:

the next Congregation, inthe ſame marter, 19 ſuch ſoft; as that without coh- x5 6
tradicting Groperus,che appearance, whichthe reaſons alleadged by him did cm hes
rhake ſhould beedatkened. Hee beganne with the prayles of the ancicht », oromics
Church, yer dexteroully touching, that inthoſe ſame times, there wete im. v=o,

. hannes Bapris

crfections, in ſome part greater, then in the preſent. He thanked G o b #- <:/cs

maketh anc-

that che Church was nor oppreflcd, as when the Arians did ſcarce ſuffer it ther aſcoute

to appeare: and (aid, that anciquitic ought riot ſoro be commended, as that print

ſomething in the latter age, may not bee reputed berter. Thoſe who praiſe 4

the Synodall iudicature, hauc not ſecne theirdefets, the infinite length in

che diſparches,the impediments in'the diligent examination, thedifficulty to

informe ſo many, the (editions made by thefatious : it is to bee belecucd

that they hauebecne intermirted; becauſerhty did norſucteed well, and that

the Courts and Officers haue bectte broughtin, ro remedy thoſe diſorders.

It cannot be denicd, that thele haueſome that deſerue to be prouided againſt;

which is firro doe, without reſtoring that which was aboliſhed, becaule ir

was intollerable. In Appeales, the cultome wasto paſle by the intermediate

Superiours,andnor,ar the firlt,ro leap to the highelt; which was taken away,

becauſerhe Governours of Prouinces and Countries, were become Tyrants

ouer the Church,and fora remedic, all buſinefles w:re carricd ro Rome. This

hath irs inconucnicncies, the great diſtance of place, and charge; bur they

are more tollcrable then oppreſſion, Hethar would reduce the tirlt cultome,

ſhould findthar in ſtead of redrefling one cuill hee ſhould cauſe many and

cucry one greater. Butaboue all ir mult be conſidered, rhat the ſame publike

thing multnotalwayes bee ordered in one manner, bur as time hath mutati-

ons,ſo itis fit to changethe gouernment. The ancient manner of gouer

ning wiltnor be profitable, except the ancient ſtate of rhe Church doe re:

eurne. Hee that, ſeeing how childrenare gouerned, and how the libertic of

eating and drinking avy thing, at anytime, is cauſe of health and firength,

ſhould chinke an old man might doe ſo, would find himlelfe much deceiucd.

The Churches were little, compaſſed with Pagans, vnited amongſt them-

felucs, as becivg necrethe enemy ; now they are great, withour any opp0o-

ficto keepethem in their ductic; whereupon the common things ate neg-

lected, and it isneceſſaricrhey ſhould becared for by one. If thecaules did

continue ineuery Prouince, within a few yecresthere would bee ſuch diger-

fttic,that onewould bec contrary to another, and they would not ſeeme to

be of the ſamefairh and religion. The Popes of Rome tooke not vponthern

inancient times many pzrts of goucrnment, when they faw it was good,

burreſerucd it to themſelues when it was abuſed by others. Many fſuccced-

ing Popes were of holy life, and good inten{ioti, who would haue reſtored ir,”

bur that they ſaw,that, in a corrupt matterzit could nor be well vied: His con-'

cluſion was,that to preſeruethe vniry of the Church,it was neccffary rolezue'

things as they are. TH —
Neither did this pleaſe the Iralian Prelars, who'would hauerhic Popes

thorittc preſcrucd,yer withall,Jome thing tcſtoted'ro chemſelues , ery

| in

336 The Hiſtory of | ” Sec]

1551 being to refide; therefore they came to modcrate the bufarcſlc, 19 rellore

AA Synodall iudicatures was reietedby almoſt all, becauſe it did dimjnjſh the

Jeans. 3, Epiſcopall and was too popular. To appcalc by degrees, though, ir was

7 maintained by many; yet it was cxcluded by pluraline of voyces.” [To ap-

3 * | peajc from the definitiuesalone,was accommodated with a hmitaticn, thax

= itſhouldbeonely in criminall cauſes, others beeing left in the ſame ſtate,

though perhaps they had more ncede to be reformed, For proceeding a-

gainlt the perions of the Biſhops, no man deftring to facilitate the iudicature

againlt himlſelfe , the. reſtoring of it to Parochuall Synods, voto which ir

did formerly bclong, was not ſpoken of, but they defired' to prouide thar, ir

remaining inthe Popes hands,it ſhould paſſe with greater dignitic of that or

| der, moderating the commiſſions which came from Rome , by which they

\ were forced to appeare, and ſubmit themſclues wo perſons of an inferior

| ranke. Andthis was ſo carneltly deſired by all, that it was neceſſary for

the Legar to yecld ynto it, though he was not pleaſed with any exaltati-

on ofthe Biſhops, becauſe all was taken from the Pope which was iuen
tothem. | |

TheDutch Prelates did propoſe,thar the lawes of the Degradations might

11m be moderatcd,as being intolerable, and giuing much occaſion of complaint

Prelaescom- in Germany. For it being a pure ceremonie which hindereth Tuſtice, and

-onefrIro they hauing deſired a moderation, cuer fincethe ycere 1522.inthe one and
$744 thirticth ofthe hundred gricuances, to ſee that theabule is continucd, giuerh
matter of ſcandall co ſome, and of detraction to others, "The ancient vic of

hou IDC Church was, that if any Eccleſialticall perſon would returne to the ſecu-
about Degrs- larſtare,to cheend 1t might not appcarc that thoſe who were deputed to the
; minilterieof the Church,ſhould feruerhe world, the Biſhops did vſe to take
from him the Eccleſiaſticall degreezas in warre, to hold themſelues in more
reputation,it was Not grauntcd to a Souldicr to returne to ciuill funCions,
and be ſubie&ro the cull Iudge, if he were not firlt bercaued of his milita-
ric degree, which therefore was called Degradation, raking from him his gir-
dlc, and armes, as with thoſc he was created a Souldier. T herefore when any
Cleargic man,cither willingly, or by the lawes was to returne to ſecular fun-
cions,or,for ſome faults, was made ſubicct to that Court, the Biſhops did
| take from him the degree, with the fame ceremonies with the which he was

| inueltcd, ſpoilng him of the habits, and raking our of his hand the inſtru-
ments, by the allignationof which he was depurcd tothe miniſtcrie. Being
apparelled iultas if heewereto miniſter in his charge, hee wasto be [lripped
firit of that, which was laſt in the ordination, and with contrary words to
thoſe that werevſcd in the promotion. And this was very vſuall in thoſe firlt

_ rtimesafter ( onftantine, for three hundred yeeres. Bur abour the yeere- ſixc
hundred, a cuſtome was brought in,not to permit Cleargie-men of holy Or-
der to returne tothe world, and to others it was granted to doe it at their
pleaſure; whereupon, by little and lirtle,the Degradation of the lefler was who-
ly diſuſed,and that of the greater was reſtrained onely to this caſe, when they
wereto be madeſubie&tro the ſecular Court. And Tuftinian, regulating the
wdicatureof the Cleargie, aftcr - he had ordained that, in Eccleiialticall de-
licts, they ſhould be chaſtized by the Biſhops, and inſecu)ar del:&s, which

he

- whar

= & -
— —_— Dr — ht WC Py .
Ce nA <UL — -_

Lad " the Councellof Thene, 337

— PoPry PIIY 4

hcecalled Ciuill; byrhe 9600 ludge, added thatthe'pu avſhould 15 5a
nocheexxccatedbetorethepariic guilric , weredeſpoyled ofhisPrielthoed: OWSY

by the:Buhop Aud after'that criminall iudicature'ouer the Clergie Way Caius 4; |
granccdto rhe Bifhops, the Degradation 'remaited onely whenehepuritfhs roms s,l
ment-was deach;>which, in regard ofthe digniry-of 'their otderythe Ectieſs is = -
altiquezxwould nothauc inflicted pon'aClergietvah, But;:inbaſes ofexar” , /
biranrwickednelle; ic ſecmed tharir could not be denied; without ſcandatly -
therefore they found a way rodoetharindiretly owhichdiveRly they evule 3 ods far al
not; ſaying; it was juſt thatthe offences of the Clergie' ns rot 3h

oh,

with deſerueddearh, bur che: Degradation was firſt neceſſary /w
madefodifficult; by circumſtances of ſolemniric;thar'very ſoldotne ir could)
bee: done: | And this procured a-greater reuercnce of the Clericall Order,
with whole blood iutice had nothingtodoc, if ſo-niuch ſoletmiiticdid got!
precede: It was-inftly' ordered that the Biſhops ſtiould nor doe burin'
publique,apparclled with the holy veltments;;and ,; which moreit ported;
with che allittanceoftwelue Biſhops, inthe Degradation of a Biſhop, of ſie;
in the Degradation of a Pricſt, of three, inthe Degradation of Deacon,
who were toi bce preſcnt in their Ponriticall ornatnents”” Atid'ir ſeeming
ſtrange; thara Biſhop , who mighr giue a degree withour conipaitie, could
not take it away alohic, PopeInnocentis the third 'rethooued-the matutile;
with a maxime,, © which hath not much probability , ſaying , thattemporall
buildings are hardly ereCtcd, and calily pulled downe, but ſpitiraallconera-
rily, arecaſily built, and hardly deſtroyed. The yulgar held theDegrada-
rion for a neceſſary thing , and, when it happened, ranneto it, withvnipeake»
able frequencic. - Bur learned men doe know the horrome of it. For hauing
determined, that,in the collation of the Order , a ſigne is imprinted inthe
ſoule, calleda Character, which is impoſſible to blor our , or remooue by
Degradation, this remaineth apure Ceremony, performed for reputation
oncly. In Germanie_, there becing bur few Biſhops , it could nor bee'done
w.chout immenle charge, to bring lo- many into one 'place. '*And thoſe
Dutch Prclates, who were in'the Councell, for the moſt/part Princes}
did know more then orhers, how neceſſary'it is, for examples fake,” 'to
puniſh, with deach, che wickedneſſe of Prielts : whetefore"they deſire
chat prouiſion ſhould be made therein. ' This particalat was much diſcuf©
ſed, and, in the cnd , it wasrefolucd tior ro change the Ceremony by atry
meanes;bur to finde a temper; that the difficulty and-tlic coft might be ro
| dcrated.. | | y } 3:9 50113979 03
The Legat, though cucty'weeke he had giuen an accountrothePope of
- all occurrences, yer he-was wilkig to eſtabliſh in Congregation the draughts
of theDecrees, that he mighr ſend a copic of them and receiueary ariſwert
before the Scion... : Wherctore, the generall Congregation beingaſſembled;
not making mention of what was writtett to him from Rome. heemade'#
relatiofiof that which che Earte of Monntfore had repreſented, 'addivg that
'the requelt for a Safe Conduct ſeemed reaſonable, andalfo thedeferring of
Codes could bce deferred- with. honour, For hauing appointed al-
ready roſpeake of rhe Euchariſt, the firlt day of September, they could not
chooſe bur dor it; bur to: omit ſome point moreimporrant, and more<6n-
1 Ff rrouerſed:

©

*

-

FY —
-

Fx Dbhd Hiftorie of +
951 wield, yadiarbing whithmight be granted; And thewvoyecs becing col-
1-37 kd, allyerc;of: opinion » that the;Safe Conduct ſhould bee ginen; bur
Cyaauas 5.>CONCEIDIDG the matter $0: bee bandled,, ſome thought that je wasinor. for
Ems & this, honour:todeferre itt the Protefiants did not giue ſecuritictbat they
Fear would cometghandlejt;and ſubmistbemlſelues to the determinationofithe
Noo Ceunce)l.\Qthers ſaid bat their bangur was ſaucd , if it were doneartheir
afdgArinc requeolt; angiihis wasthe more common.opinion. Then the Legateadded.:
Me be ke THAT, they, might reſcrue the matter of minirivg the Cup to the Laitio;iand,
commin? of ts ſhew thatthiey did not.come for one Afticle onely , 'they:might ioyae allo
ants. with irche/Conmunion of Childsen; And order was taken to compoſe
the Decreeinthis particular, Which, beeing read , ſome thought it was too
lixtleroreſerue two Articles, and therefore that: irwas bercerto. divide. the
firſt; intochree.and fo-reſerue foure,, and ro addethe Sacrifice of the Maſle;
the controuerlics wherpof are great; -For ſo :it will appeare, that-many
things are relerucd, and the molt principall;, and in this opinion all did a-
Sree! | Andyvhonit was fayd that the Proteltants defire-to bee heard con- |
cerning theſe, a Prelate of Germanie., [toode yp;andasked, by whom , and
ro whom this. requeſt was: made; becauſe it did much imporr that this
ſhould appeare ; - otherwiſe when they ſhould ſay it was not true, :the:ho-
ngur of thc} Gouncell, would bee. much blemiſhed. Bur there beceing no-
thing but; what Count Mauntfort had ſayd as of himſelfe, and tharallo nor
reltrained xo thole fourc heads , nor to the matter of the Euchariſt, bur in
gcncrall of all the Controuerlics, they were much troubled how to re-
ſoluc. To ſhew «that this reſcruation -was made by theirowne motion, be-
ſides tharzit was an indignitie, it did draw an obicction ypon them, thar
they ought;20, referue all. This way was found to bee leaſt ill, nor to
ſay tharthe Pretcltants make requeſt , but that they dcefire to bec heard ;
whereoftheze.can bee na doubr made, becaufe they hauefayd it vpon di-
uers occaſions; and though rhey meant concerning all the controuerſies,
yctitisnoffalſaie to {peake that ofa part, which is ſpoken of the: whole
number, not;excludingthereſt. Some thought that this was to hidethem-
| {clues behinde a thread; but yer it did paſſe, becauſe they knew not how
to, doe better... For this caulc, rhe matters reſerucd beeing to bee taken
outof the Heads of deftrine, aud the Anathematiſmes , thele which remai-
ned were, for more perſpicuitic, diuided , and reduced to cleuen, | When
they were to make the Decrcees againſt the abuſes, they knew not where
ro put them. Amongſt thoſe of faich they werenotto bee placed , becing
of Ceremonics and yies. With thaſe of Reformation they did nor agree,
in regard of; the diverſity of the matter, To.ranke them by themſclucs
wasa nouitic, and did alter the order ſer downe, After a long diſpute ic
was concluded to omit them now., and aftcr ro place'them with the De-
crces of the Maſſe. The points: of the Reformation were accepted with-
out difficulge , hauing|beene already eſtabliſhed by themſclues. Thbre re-
mained rhe forme of the Safe Conduet, which was referred to the Preſi- *
dents ro cotnpole, by the helpe of choſe who had experience in ſuchthings;
which alliſted the Legate to make'that forme paſſe which was ſeathimfrom

Rome-.

PR -

Ls. 4-«

The

L 1s. my the'Councell of Trent. | 339

-. Theicleucarh EE Ss asthcy [1551
were wont.: [The Biſhop of Matorics fang Maſle,:and:the Arthbithop of ;, 7
 Torremaderho Sermon, which wasall-mhepraiſeof the Sacrantent ofthe Cranzas gi
Eucharft, » And ochet viuall Ccremonics being perfermed,thoDecrce ofthe t>nine 57
dodtring was odaddbyhe Biſhops ithat did:celebratbthe Maſſes! /The: fub- nt”
ſtancc weluptcof was2([Thatche'Spriod affcrnbled ro deckretheancicotfairh, A 5£0n is
and rowetncdy thcidoohucrixeaces cauſedby the Seetcs, diddoſuafrom he _, i
beginainggro rddcedbtchecotkle;fowediiitheticld ofabe Eichantd: Thert- ofdodrine
fore, tcachjog che Cltholike.dbetrine, cuenbeldcutdiby:theChurch;cirdbth noms.
prohibircalithefairhfull hereafier ta belecugreach or preach;dthicrwiſe then
isdcelateds/Firt, it cogcherh ichar in cho[Excharift; after the;Confecration, +
CHR1ST:i5 /containcd ; trucly;; goally, 'and/fubſtanciglly; vader the appea- ©
ranccsofrhefenfible things, hotwithſtandingihe i257 hcaucnby a naturall
exiltence;becauſc he\igprelenvia his ſubſtance in-mary other places,} Sacra-
. tacncally, inamaner ofcaiftence; which isbelceuedbyfaith, ahdeanhardly
be cxpreſſed by words.: Foralltheancicatshauciprofefſed, rhat Cnr: did
inſtiruce this SacramentinchclaſtSuppor; when , after the benedition-of
the, Breadarid Wine; hea fayd;in dleare and manifeftwords , that, he gauchiis
-Body and'Blood, which having a moſt plainc ſignification, it is grear: wid-
kedneſſe to wrelt chemito imaginary figures, denying the tructibab the Fleſh
2ad Blood:of Curisr:!: Afrerwardsir tcacherh,tharCnr:stThath inftity-
ted this Sacrament:in memory.of himſelfe; :ordayning;it ſhouldHbo recetuced
252 Spiritnall foode of the ſoule; asa medicine for our dayly faults, a preſer-
uatiue from morrall finne, a pledge of crernall glory; anda {ighne of the. Bo-
dy whereof himſclfe isthe Head. And though it bee common bb this Sacra-
ment with others, to bee a {igneof afacredrhing , yer it hath thisproper to
it ſelfe,charother hauing vercuero ſanctificin thevteg this dotkconmteine the
authour of. Sanctity. bctore the vie. For the Apoltlcshad nor reeciied the.
Eucbariſt from the hind of our Lord , when hefayd thar.it was hisBody : and
the Church-hath alwayes. belecued, rhatths Body of CarisrT-is vnderthe
bread, and che Blood vader the wine, by.verruc ofthe Conſcerarion; but, by
concomirancic,as much isvnder;cither ofthe kindesand eucryparrofrhem,
as vnder both ; declaring that by the Confecrationiof the Bread and:Wias,
there.is made a — of 'rhcir whole ſubſtance: into theifubſtance
ofthe. Body and Blood of C mixcx $ T7; which! conuerfion the Catholique
Church hathcalled Tranſubſtantiation, by a firand properterme.'! There
the fairhfull doe giuc the honour of Laria,ordivineworſhip;duevnto God,
co this Sacrament,and it hath been religiouſly inſtituted ro make a partiewlar
fcaſt forit cucry yeere,and tocarry irinproceſſion,inpubiqueplaces Like- ,....:
wiſc the cultomeco keep it inzanholy place-isauncient,andhath beech obſer- oY
ucd fromthetimeofthe NicesCouncalkand rocarrpirtothelicketsanold
cuſtome becing reaſonable befides,, * and'commanded-in many-Councels.
And if it benor fit char any holyrhing ſhould bohandled wichour ſanfticy,
much morenone-gughtrocometo this Satramentwithour gregtrcucterice,
and proofe.made-of himſelfe; which proofe mpſt bes} rhatnonehauing
morrlly ſinned ,thougl hee bee contricgmay recciucit; withourfarramen-
tall Confeſsion,, which the Pricſt-alſo\, who — '0ughrro _
Y Ff 2 ©)

CO ——_y s

3 >,

240 hf The Hiftorie I _ L1». 4

1551 Yo'thathcecan findea Confefſdur;:and1ifrhee cannorheemultconfeſſe im-
-—) mediacelyafterward.:; ir docrh'teach alfo that therebee Three kindes of recei-
G2: uitg the Bucharit. :\QoeSacramenrally oncly., as {mners doe; another ſpi-
mans tially jas thoſodoc;who reociuc it witha bucly faickand defire ;thethird
Haar'z” onteinethsboth kindes;as theft dec:receiticat,: who: having prooucd

GSO chernſclues; as aforeſaid; doe goats tho Table: And there is dn-Apaſtolicall
'*_ Sraditiony aid ſo iodught io btbabſcrucd,tharrkebaitie ſhoaldireceiue
.>-» the Communion frota the Priclts;and:rhic/ Pricftes thoald: Communicate

” fFkemſdues;! In theeride:the SynodeprayectialliChaiſtians ro agtec in.this
doitrine:-WhehtheDectce wasendcd, cheelcucn! rabrmatiſmesawere road,
The Anerbe- x31) Againithim tharſhalldeniethat, in the Enchargs; is contained trucly,
nayn  rcally,and fubftancigllythe'Bodyiand Blood, withrhe Soule and Diuinitic of
Cx x1 $ vythatis; yrholc Cx ris Tt; andihall fay that be is contained onely
a3 ina {igoe{ vr figure; ar virtually: | 2... Thar in the Euchariſt there docth
remaiberhb'ſubſtaricobf che 'brcad and-vyine:with the Body.and Blood of
Cur 18$T,orfhall dchiecharadnirable contcrfion ofall rhe lubBianceofthe
bread inio the bodyz:2nd ofthe yaing ivrottic blood; chore remaining oncly
the forme; which-conuerfionthe:Cburdh :moſt appoſitely callcth Trauſub:
fantiation, - ;.. 'Thaejin the Sactament of the: Eucharift,vnder euery kinde;
and vndercucry: pait ering {oparated/;:all: Cn 15 T' is nor contayned!
4 Thargthe Conſfcoration beating made; chetsnor there; but intheyle,and
| neither before: nor after and thar bee is notan the particles, which remains
after rhe Commuinion-” :5. That, the pripcipall fruit of the Euchariſt is the
- remiſſion of {mnes, or chavi Harh no other Gt 6. That Cnn1sTin
the Euchareſt ought not1o bee worſhipped with the honourof. Latria-, vor
honoured with a particular: feafty; nor. carried: in proccſſion,, nor: pur ina
publique:place, ro begworlhipped:, or that the worſhippers are Idolaters,
2.  Thavitisnot lawfullto keepeit in anholy place, bur that it ſhopld bee
diftribured'roche Randers by, . or that it. is not lawfullto carrie t:honous-
rably'torke ficke.' '8:.. That CHR315ST in the Excharitt is cateri onely {pi-
ritually,and pot Sactamentally, and really. - 9. Thar the faithful being of
age, are notbound tocommunicate cuery yeere at Eafter, / 20:1 Thar it is
not-lawfull-ro' the Pricſt;, who cclebrateth , tro communicate! himſelfe.
11: Thatfaich oncly:is a ſuthcent preparation to recciue it: Declaring
in;the ende ;thar thepreparationought to bee by the meanes of Sacramen-
rall-Confcſhon;;--holding him: to bee cxcommunicate who; ſhall! reach,
preach, affirine pertinacioully , or defend inpublique diſputation;the con-
xt __ A ; | - wes BS '

The Decres >: The: Decree of the:Reformation: conraincth firſt along admonition ro
ef Reforma rhe Biſhops to vic their, juriſdiction moderately , andtharuably; then; de-
terminerh;that in cauſes of viſitation, corrc@ion , and'mability ,andin 'the
crimivall,,none may appealc tratthe Biſhop or his:Yicar generally; before

the definitiue, or from-an irreparable griaiance; and whenrhertfhall bee

: Placeof Hpperale,, anda Commulion ſhall bee granted impartibus, by Apoſto-
likeauthoriy;, it ſhall net-bee granted to any:bur che: Mettopolitan ;7 of his

Vicar; 0f,:incaſc heebceſuſpeed,orfarre difiane,onthe Appeals bee from

him , jt ſhall'notbee but roa Biſhop dwelling nterg,, araBiſhops

O!

Vicar. »

s

— wy |

L 1.8. 4. | the Couneell of Trent, ©

341

Vicar: That tho defendant appealing ſhall beebotind roprodutein'thels-

coadinitance theactes of the tirit, which ſhall beegiaen him" wichiorhir-

tiedayes, withouc /payingfor/them. | That the Biſtiop,or his Vicar general
may proceede agaiolt any, ro condemnation, ' andyerball depoſition; hid
may allo degradefolemnely/, with the affiſtance of ſo'many Abbars of Mitet
and poſtbrals, if hcecanhaue them , orof fo many other Ecclefiafticall-dig-
nities, as there arc Biſhops required by the Canons." That the Biſhopasde

legare,amay ſummarily cake'knowledgeof the abſolution of every one of

whom inquiſition-is made, and of the remiſſion of the puniſhment of cucry
one that is condemned by him; and ifir ſhall appeare vnto him;cthar ſentence
barh'bcen obcained , by relling that which'is falſe;-or concealing the truerhj
hee may cauſc it nyc ro be execared; TharaBifhop may nor bee cited ro ap-
peare perfonally;, but for ſuch a cauſe for which ho may be depoſed ordepriz
ucd,by whatforme'of iudgement ſocuerthe proceeding bee. That teſtimo-
nics, ina criminal| cauſe, againſt a Biſhop, may not bee receiued by informas
tion, bur by witneffes, and thoſe of good fame, chaſtizing them grieuouſly
if they ſhall depoſe ypan Paſhon : and thecriminall cauſes of the Bithops may
notbe determined bur bythe Pope. Tre |
' After:this another: Decree was publithed; in which the Synode ſayd,
Thar, defiring roexricpare all errours, it had handled foute Articles exatly.
1. Whether it were neceſſary and commanded by Go DÞ , thar all the faith-
full ſhould recciuerhe Sacrament vnder both kindes. 2. Whether hee thar
recciuerh bur one,recciucrh lefſe rhen he that receiueth both. 3. Whether
the holy Church hath erred in communicating the Laiques with the bread
oncly,and the Prieſts who doe nor celebrate. 4. Whether children ought
to bee communicated. Burt becauſe the Proteſtants of Germany,doe defireto
bee heard concerning; thele Articles, before the definition, and therefore
hauc demanded a Safe Condu& to come , remaine, ſpeake freely, propoſe
and depart,the Synode, hoping to reducethem into the concord of one faith,
hope,and charity, by yeclding to chem, hath giuen them publiquefaith, thar
is, Safe Condudtt as farreas itcan, according to the tenor vnder-written, and
hath deferred to define theſe Articles , vntill the twenty fiuc of Ianuary the
next ycere; ordaining withall , that the Sacrifice of the Maſſe be handled in
that Sellion, as a thing annexed, and that in the next, the Sacraments of Pe-
nance,and extreame Vn&ion, be diſcuſlcd. |
The tenour of the Safe Conduct was ; That the holy Synode docth , as
much asir can,grant
all neceſſary and fir clauſes , though they requirea ſpeciall expreſſon , to all
Eccleſialticall and Secular perſons of Germany, of whar degree, ftare,or qua-
liry ſocuer , who will come to this gencrall Councell , that they may with all
Itberry,conferre,propoſe, treare, come,remaine, preſent Articles , by writing
or by word, conferre with the Fathers deputed by the Synode, anddiſpute
without iniury and ill words, and depart when they pleaſe. And the Sy-
node is further pleaſed tograne,chatif, for their greater liberty and fecuriry,

they ſhall deſire, that Iudges bee depured for the offences which they haue

I 5 FI
{NY We"
Ivigvs $i)
CHARLES 4
Edwaryd,

Hsanxay 357
WR SS

*.0

The Decree

concerning
matters to be
defeircd vnrill
the comming
of the Prome-
ſtants.

The tenor of
the Safe Con-

ublike faith , full ſecurity , that is, Safe ConduR, with 4ut

The Ambtal-

committed, or ſhall commit, thongh they be enormous, and ſauour of here ;,..;.4.

ſic, they may name thoſe that they ſhall cfteeme fayourable. Afﬀrer this,the
'FfF og Mandate

Eleor of
E randeburg.

342 g The (drtorte of 8 L1s. 4.

h—

1551 AManitate of:hachim,ElcQoriot Brariteburg , was read ,in — of 'Chri-
1. Wapher Straſſe , a Lawyers, and Jobn'0ſman, his Ambaſſadours, ſeraco rhe
ces 5. Counccll.: [Theformer madeca lobg Oration ,ſhewingithe good affe&tion
Enwane 6. And teucrence of his Prince; rowarde the Fathers , without: declaring whar
fxar > | his opioion Was in point of Religion, The Synodeanfwered, (tharis ;rhe

Speaker-in its vame;) thatir; heard with great content, the Ambaſſadours dil.

courle,eſpecially in chat part, where thar. Prince doth ſubmit himſelfe corhe
Counccll,andpromileth'\ra-obfcruethe Deecrces , hoping;that his deedes will
beanſwcrable-to-hiswordes:: 'But-the Propoſition of thoſe of Brand,
was-noted by many ,  becauſerhe Ele&ounwas of the AuguRtane conteſhon,
and it was opeply knowen , that;his intereſts. did mooue bim ro make'fuch
a faire ſhew, that his-ſonne Frederick? , cleEted Archbiſhop:of Magaehury by
the-Canons, a Beniehice, , voto which a very grearand rich principallitic is
annexcd ; might not be hindered at/Rome. , and by the'Catholiques in-Ger-
Mmanie_. | G3 441.7

Anarifice  Theaniwere which the Councelgauc, was much matueilcd ar, in regard
vicd by the | |

Councel,of- Of the faire. and aduantagious manver of contracting , pretending/ten rhou- -M

br Church [and by vertuc of the promiſe , when the bargaine was bur of ten.- Forthere:f

of #9.  j$ no more proportion berweenethele two numbers, then was betweene the'Wp

reucrence promiſed by the El:Etour ; and the obedience recciued by rhe Sy-= WF"
node. Ir was replied fordctence , - that the Councel| did not regard what +:

was, but what ſhould haue been ſayd/, and thar this is an v{uall and pious al-
lurement of thc holy Church ef: Rome. , which yeelding tothe infirmiticof

| herchildren, maketh (hew ro belecue, that they haue performed their ductic.

So the Fathers of the Conncell of { arthage, writing to Innocenzius' the firſt,to

giuchim an account, thatthey had condemned CeleStinus and ©7 elagivs , defi-

ring him to contorme himlelfe co their declaration ; hee commended them

in his an{were,that,remembring the old Tradition, and Ecclefialticall diſci-

pline , they had referred all ro his judgement ; whence all ought ro learn,

whom toabſoluc, and whom to condemne. And indeed, this isafairc gen-

tle meanes,to make men {peake that in fil-nce, which they will not in words.
Afterwards, according tothe intimation, made to the Abbat of "Belloſanaw,

to giuehim then an anſwere to the Letcers , and *T roteſtation of his Maſter,

they made the Apparitors demaund , by proclamation ; at the Church doore,

wherher any were there for the moſt Chriftian King.. Bur no man appca-

ring, becauſc it was ſo concluded by the Kings Countel, nor to enter into the
contcſtation of the cauſe, eſpecially for that chey could expect no an{were,

but made at Rome. , by tlic Pope and the: Spaniards; the ſpeaker did deftre,
thatthean{were decreed, might be read publikely ; and lo it was, by conſent

Trcancecce Of the Preſidents. The {ubltance of it was; That the Fathers conceiuing
ofche Coun- oreat. HOPE of the fauours of the King, were exceedingly grieuedfor the.
the Abb of wordsof his Miniſter , which did much abate it;;-yetthey had nor quite,
pely=n% loſtir, in regard they were nor conſcious of hauing-giucn himany cauſe of
oftence: and, forthat hee ſaid, the Councel| was atleybled for rheproftic of

ſome tewe, and for priuate ends, ithad noplace inthem, who were afſem-!

bled,nor by the preſencPope onely , burby ©Paulus chethird, to extirpatche-

relics , and rcforme diſcipline, thea which cauſes none can beemore come.

mon

Ly; B. 4. the Councellof Trent. = 24.3

"0 2 —_

-mion.and pious ; praying him colccthis Bithops goecoalhſt this holy worke, | J ; 5t

wherethey {hall haucall liberty. And if his Miniſter, apriuateperſon, who ——

Ivitivs z..

/brought.vnco them things diltaltfull, was heard, with patience and atrenti- Cuartss 5:

on , how much morc welcomeſhall perſons be of ſo great dignitie.” Adding zbw.ns 8.
withall,chat though they comenor; the Councell willnot wanerepuration Eat =
or authoritie, having; becn lawfully called ;1and, for iult cauſes; reftored. |
And, fortbat his Maicttic did-proteſt,co victhewonted remedies of his An4
celtors,'the Synode had good hope, thathee would nor reſtore! the things
long-ſinecabrogatcd;to the greatbenefic of chat Crowne, but looking backe

ypon his|Anceſtors,on che nameof the moſt'Chriſtian King , and ott his fa

ther Francis, who did honour that Synode; following that example; hee'will
not bee:varhankefull to: GoDz ahd the Church his morker , bur will rathet
pardoh priuatc offences,for publike cauſes. a 3,194) 4
TheDecrces of the Sc{lion were immediatly printed z which, being curi- 7** Decree:
oully read in G:rmany , and cl{e-wherc , raiſed:much fpecch in many chings is Germ«y.
concerning the Euchariſt, Firſt , becauſe treating of the mannerf the ex-
tſtence, it ſaid, that it could hardly be expreſſed in wordes', and yet affirmeth
afrer, chat it is properly called Tranſubantiation; and, in another place, thar it
is a moſtfit rerme-: which beeing ſo, one cannordoubt- but that it may bee
properly expreſſed. It was further noted, that hauing declared that CxkisT,
aftcr thebencdictionof Bread and Wine, ſaid, that rhat which hee gaue, was
his Body and Blood, it came toderermine, againſt the opinion of all the Di-
uines, and 'of the whole Church of Rome.., that the wordes of conſecration
were not thoſe; that:is, this ismy body , becaule ir dorh afhrine that they
were [pok=n after the conſecration. 'Bur to prooue that the body of our
LoRDisinthecEucharilt betore the vie, becauſe CH x1 s T, ingiuing of it,
ſaid , before it was received by his Diſciples, it was his Body , did ſhew that
they did preſuppole; that the giuing of itdid nor belong tothe vie; rhe con-
trary whereof was apparantly true. The manner of ſpeach vicd inthe fifth
point of doctrine, ſaying that diuine worſhip was dueto the Sacrametir,vas
noted alſo for improper, ſ{ccing it is cerraine, that the thing ſignified of con-
tcined,is not meant bythe Sacrament , bur therthing ſ{ignifyingand contai-
ning: and therefore it was well corretedinthe {ixt Canon, which ſaid, that
the Sonne of Go-D ought to bee worſhippetin the Sacrament.'' Thatalſo ir
the third Anethemariſme was noted , tharalt Cu x 1 $'T was in cuety part,aftet:
the ſeparation, becaule it ſeemerh one. may neceſſarily infertefrom henee;;
that ir was notincuery partbcforethediuifion. © ''+ 1207 nc
The Prieſts complainedofthe reformation,and fayd,that the Biſhops au-\cuuinets
thority was made too great, and theClergie broughtintoſeruitude. Bugthe tbe ctormas
Proteſtants ſccing the point where.it was aid , that they defjredto bee heard-
in fourc Articles onely, did much wonder who ſhould make that requiethin
theirname,ſccing they had ſaid,and repeated ſooften,in publique Diets, and
by publique wricings, that they deſired adiſcuſſionofall the controverſies}... _
nor would recciue any of.thoſe things which were'already derermined{ inf tn: cikke
Trent, but would haue all tobe recxamined. ' They thought alſo that th&cnci; puns
forme of the Safe ConduCt was very captious', becauſe aswell inthe Decree!7 7m hmmm
$0 grant it,as inthe tcnour therof,there was this clauſe of reſervarion,as tatre/of te Site
as

— — —

344 % The Hiſtorieof il L1s. 4

1551 as belogneth to the Synode : for no man demaundeth of another, bur that
"> which belongeth co-him to graunt. Bur this afte&ed diligence ro expreſſe

Iviivs 3+

Cuaries 5. and repeat it, wasa f1gne thatthcy bad inuented a meanes ro goeagainſt'ir,

Enwane 6, and tocxcule themſclues vpon others. And they. doubted nor butthat the

Hear 2- aymcofthe Syncde was to leaucs gatc open for the Pope, that he mightdoe
-- x with his SG and the Councels + ths what hee brake Gonteaide for
them both. Beſides, the treating to depure [udges forthings hereticall com-
micted, or to be committed, ſeemed to thema kinde of ner,to catch thoſethar
were vawary; and even the very Pedants did laugh arit, that the principall
yerbe was more then an hundred and fifry wordes diſtant from-the begir-
hiog. The Proteſtants did vniformely agree not to bee contene with ic, or
erult vpon it, but to deſire anocher ; iult hke rhat which was given by the
Councecll of Baſill, ro the ©Bohemians ; which if it were:granced , they did ob-+
raine one great point, that is, that the controucrſtes ſhould be decided by the
holy Scriprurc,and if ic were not granted,they might excuſe themſclues with
the Emperour. _ 3 2 Te

Theday following the Sefsion,there was a generall Congregation, to ſet
downc howto treate of Penanceand cxtreame Vntion, and to continue the
reformation. It was conſidered, that the manner of diſcuſsion preſcribed,
was excceded by the Diuines, whence contentions did ariſe, for which they
could not be ynited againſtthe Lutherans: and therefore it was thought ne-
ccffary to rencw the decree, & not fufferany to victhe reaſons of theſchools,
but to cauſe them to ſpeake polttiuely , and allo to obſerue the order, which
they thought fic to citablith againc , as well becauſc the nor obſcruing of ir
had bred confuſton, as becaule the Flemmgs did complaine that none ac-
count was made of them, as did alſo the Dwuines which came with the Pre-
lates of Germanie. T'o handlc Penance, and extrcame VnEtion, was decided
already, and ſomething was laid in matter of reformation , and Prelars were
deputed, who, with the Nuncio of Verona, were to make the Articles in mat-
cer of faich, and , with the Nuncio of Siporito, in matter of reformation. In
matter of faich-twwelue Articles were framed vpon the Sacrament of Penance,
drawen Yerbatimuut of the booke of Martin,and of his Schollers, robe diſpu-
red by the Diuines , whether they were to bee held for hereticall , and con-
demned for ſuch; which, in framing the Anarhcmati/mes , after the Diuines
had giuen their voyces , were ſo changed, that-no ior of them remaining,itis
ſuperfluous torecite them. To theſe Articles were added 4.more of extreame
Thee Pt Vnction,anſwereable,inall poinrs,to the ſoure Anathematiſmes cſtabliſhed.In

.Crees are

—_— the ſame page where the Articles were ſet downe,three Decrecs were added.
nec ofprocee- That the Diuines oughtto giue'theiropinionsour ofthe holy Scriprare,Tra-
pn ditions of the Apoltles, holy Councels, Conſtitutions, and authorities of
Popes,and holy Fathers , and our of the conſent of the Catholique Church:

Thatthc order of {peaking ſhould be thus : that firſt they ſhould ſpeake who

were {cnt bythe Pope: ſecondly, thoſe who were ſent by the Emperour :

thirdly, thoſe of Lonaine , {cnt by the Queene : fourhly, thoſe Divines who

came withrthe EleQors : fiftly, the Secular Clergie men, according to their

. promotions: fixtly, che Regulars', according ro their orders, Thar there

ſhould bet wo congregations cucry day , onc.in the morning from the foure:

tcenth

—

w 4 |

3 02
. oy: >
6 CS "Ss

Ling eamdſrn.

ht — ets.

Cs oF*®

_ twencieth bourevpcill cbathree aud ewemiicth:: [The Arcicles of Reformimi>
.0n were ininumberfificene}Ubwhich aofveredthepoints which-wer
eſtabliſhed, excoptthe laſt aim yhichiapropoleyvas 0% canſticure;thar
Benobnc (bould nor begitictin (evtthends;,but ——_ theſam&age,
which che law{required zacahaſe whomight haus

ticle, when ic was ipoken:.of, was .calaly buried-inribence, becquice ithindered
many \Prelates to rcnouncathbirBanehigey tothe Nephewesy i! | {F227
Y "The Pape whale bathbewo ſaid) mona lenemiebtheCarbaliqua Suiſles;
inuiingthom 'rathe Councell.did Gilbmakethhfame inftaricevnrothem,
by bis Nunc TO allitedby cbeEmpe-

teench houre.,-yncll theleuear x::another;initheaficrn ohne fried

TOUE.; Th-French
{iſtedby Vergerws;who, knowing cha {caretsand.ends of theRomancs,told
him how hee ſhould perſivadt; that nawion.;-and:weote alfoaBookein this
ſubiect;. ſo.chat in the Diatofi, Badits, which then was heldez; not onely the
Evangelicall, but the Catholique Suilles allowereperſwaded 'NROT to {end
any,;'-and 'the,Griſons; cntring;/into-ſuſpicion ypon the: aduerriſements of
Trrgerius ,, that! the: Pope, did: plotte;' ſomething; to their-preiudice.,.".did
recall Thomas Plata bibop.of Coira-, who was alrcadyin the Coutts
cell; "fe \. T | D531 E »} 07 FO F< Ef; '3 5 Py 3 © 219 » Wo

In Trent the Congregations of the Diuines-were diligebtly-haſtenced:
wao, though they {pake according to the order af the twelbe Articles j yet
all che-matter of Penance was -handlcd,nor as the:Seboole-inenqnly,but alſo
as the Cauonilts doc handle.it,, following Far maketh a queſtion
choreof, divided, forthe lengrh of it, into ſixe diſtinions :and themanncr
prefcribed by the Preſidenits,to deduceand proouc theconclufians from:the
tiuc places aforclaid, cauſed not prolixity., luperfluity, and-vnproficable and

in-eitle2 which At.

ing didappoſe;by;his Ambaſſadour; Marks Mufeual-

5gr
$s

Cyan:

HznKojau!
Py

_

Vergeria dil
coucreih the.
ſecrer ends of
the Romas
niſts roche
Swfles and
Griſons.=.,-

The manner

of diſcu :
the —_—\

doctrine is

vaine queltions to bee augided:, bur gaue occaſion of greater-abuſes:-For cenfurd.

when'they ſpake Scholaſtically , they kept themſclues wichin the: marter.at
the leaſt,and thediſcoutſewas all ſerious and feuere. But inthis new maver;
which. they call pofitiue (an [ralian word , drawnefrom plaine apparel]; with-
out ſuperfluous gornaments).they rannc.into fooleries. For, alkeadgingthe
Diuine Scripture ;-uhcy brought all che;places ofthe Prophets, and Plabacy,
eſpecially where the word; Confiteor , and its.verball ; Confeſſia;ate fouid;

which doth {igoifiein the Hebrew ,prayſe, or ratber, rcligzabs-profeſbodz

and haled them:to the Sactament of Covfeflion': and, whicliwas leſſe to.the
purpolc, figures were drawenifrom the Olde Teſtament; roiſtiew thavitwas
prefigured,.. withoutany regard whether ir might-bec applied to.irwithdb
milicude ; and hee-was heldtholt kach&dwhobtonght-adih af chemo Al
the rixes ſignifying humility , griefe, and repentance,  vied-bythale who

confcſled , were-boldy called Apoſtplealt:Fraditions: Innumerable mi:
 racles wererelated,.-ancient and moderne; : concerning things which!ſuc:
ceeded, well to thaſe who: were deuored:to: Confelfion, andill,'ro-tholt
who were negligent., anddeſpiſers of: its-:All the authoritics alleadgetl-by
Gratian,were often. recited, but yaripus and divers fances: ginenthemy accorr

ding. ro che matter; and others, allo wee:addads; And: hee:chart ſhould

haue heard chols Doftours. ſpeake ,- cotld: not! but: conclude,: tharthe

Apoliles

-
__— ——

 =- 346 465 1 The Hiftorteof | + \ | Ls. 4

"$i ads

>= orſieroconfeſſeothers.” Id ſummeythar, ro which all did come, and which
+ | Cuaar-5. wasmoſtrothepurpole, wasthe Councell of Florence. Among the memeri-
Fonaess,: als,theredort kin appeare wonhy of particular mention, except thar
fave +, whichistobe ſpokenof when the ſubſtance of thedoQtrine-mult berecited,
Bur thus much was neceſſary to bedeliucred:'''Our of thefeſheaves of diners
forts of corne;; caricdintorhe'barne 7 iwis nomarucl{if a mingled griſt were
chreſhed. The poincsof doQrinebyreafon-ofchs mixture;didabfolutly pleaſe
batfew;neicherwvas irobſerued inttits ſubict;avitrothers;norro condemne
any opinionofetic Cacholikes,burzwhererhe opinions ofthediuines were va-
rious,tomakerhe cxpreffionwithſucha cetriperxhar al parties might befari{-
fiedWhicheaiſcrh meaiorto obſcryemy formerorder, but firſt rocxpound
' the ſubſtancevfche Decree, as it wareſtabliſhed:ro be read it1 the'Seffionyand
I then roadde'that whichthe ſamo perſons of ctheCouncell did norapproue.
TiwDecre - The Decreewas this; 'That although ; in handling! Iw/tifieation 5-much
coxcenins was ſpoken of the Sacrament of Penance, yet, toroote outdiuers herefies of
thisage, it was fitre to lluftrace theCatholiketructh ; which the holy Sy-
nodc doth propoſe to bre-perperually obſcrued , by all Chriſtians; adding
chat Penance was alwayesncceſſaryz-incuery age of theworld , and ; after
CHR1ST,totholcallo who were to be baptized; which Penance is not 4
Sacrament. Therc is anotheriinſtirured by Cf sT, when, breathing: vpon
his Diſciples ;-he gaue ther the holy Gholt , ro remitte and retaine {innes,
chat is,to reconcile the fairhfull , fallen into {inne after Baptiline, For ſo the
Church bath alwaycs vaderſtood it; and the holy'Synode doeth 'appreoue
this ſenſe of: the wordes of our ord,” condemning thofe who vndertiand
them of che power to! preach the Goſpell.: And his Sacrament differcth
from'Baprifme,not onely inthe matter and forme, burallo becauſe the mi-
niſtcrof Baptiſm: is nor iudge, whereas after Baptiſme , the ſinner doth pre-
ſent him(cltebefore the rribunall of the Priclt ;asguilty,to bee {cr at libercie,
by his Sentence. And,by ©Bafriſme a full remiſſionof ſinnes is receiued, which
is not receiued by Penance, without {ighes and paines. And this Sacrametit
isas neceſſary for {inncrs after Bapriſme,as Bapriſme it ſelfeis ro him thathath
aor receiuedir./* Bur the forme thereof conſiſteth in theſe words of the mi-
nilter ; 1doe 4bſoluc thee : vnto which other prayers are laudably added,
chough they bee not neceflary. And*(ontrition , Confeſsion-, and Sati:fation,
| areas it were, the matter of the Sacrament, which arc therefore called'parts
wy | of fPenance. The thing fignificd , and the effe&t of the Sacrament, is , re-
I conciliation with God,whence peaceand cleatcneſſeof conſcience do ſome-
timcsariſe. And therforethe Synod doth condemne thofewho make horror
of conſcicnceand faith ro-be parts of Penance. (ontrition is griete of minde
- for{innccommiteed, with:purpoſeto finne no more, and was cuer tieceflary
op inall times ;bur in ſinners, afrer Bapriſme, ir is a preparation'to temiſſion of
| finnes, being ioyned with aputpolſe' to doe whatſocucr elſe is required, for
the'lawfull recciuing of this Sacrament. Andi is notonely a ceaſing from |
{1anc, ora purpoſingatid a beginning ofa new life, but alſo an batc'of the
life paſt. Andrthough Conrrition be foructimies ioyned with chartty /-and re-
concilcth amantoGop, beforerhe rccciuing of the Sacrament , yetthis vers
2221107 | ruc,

}

L1B 4 the Councellof Trent.

wo

347

ruc cannot ;bec afcribed co it; withourps

of P:nante.' 'Buctheaction whickvariferh

pocriſic ,burthe gitrot Go D, by-whnechtficpenitencbering aſſiſted , doerti

da :iq tccciuc laſtice, » which although camor bring! vs 20 iultifi-
cation without \che'Sacrameritq;yor-ir: 4geth diſpoſe: ys: ro: obtaine"grace
from GeD., in. the;Sacramenr-of Penanceiu. By this), the Chutch hath
 eucryndertiond that-Cu x1 ST bath inflicured- the-encire-confeflion of
fiancs' axncceefharyy by. the Law, bf G oD,'ro thoſe tharfall after Baptiſme;
For hauing inſtiruted che Prieſts, his Vicars, for Indges of all mortall ſinties;
iris ceftaine that thry;cannor-exercife this judgement, withourkhowlkedge
of the cauſt;;norolſoruc cquitioin impoſing puniſhment, if theſinnes bes
nor particularly madekaowenvntothem,and'not in generall onely;.There-
fore theipebirenrought in (/onfe/520n, ro declare all his mortall finnes, cuen
the molt ſecrer, buvelreveniall ; chough chey may be confeſſed, yerthey may
bee concealed alſo withour offence. * And hence. itcommeth, that, in (onfeſ-
fon j ir is neceſſary toexplicare thecircumitances, which alterthe nature of

ryolro receiub thifaid Sactametit | is5 'P
;cirher by. reaſon of the filrhinefſe |
pf linncey/ or of the tear of piiniſhmeno,uwichhepeatpardon yis'not hy:

LY
Livs 3- '%
HARLES f.
EDwaRp 6,”
Hzxmy 2, ©

SARS

theſinne, becaufcotherwile, one cannotindgeof the weight of theexceſles; .

and impoſe a condigne punifhmenr. . So thar it is wickedeſle to fay , that
this kinde of Confeſsioz is impollible, of thar'it is the murdering of the con-
{cicnce,becauſc norhing isrequired bur that thefinner , hauing diligently cx-
amined himſelfe ; ſhould confefle what hee remembreth, and the ” for-
gorren arc ſyppoſed to bee included in the ſame (onfeſsion. And though
CH Rt sT hath norforbid publique onfeſsion, yet he hathnot commanded
it; neither would ir bee good ro commaund that ſinnes, eſpecially ſecrer,
ſhould bee confeſſe4in publique.” Wherefore rhe Fathers, hauing cucr pray-
fed the Sacramental fecret Confeſsion, the calumny of thoſe is vaine, who call
it aa humanc invention, excogirated by the Laterane Councell; which did
not ordaine Confe/,ion,but onely that ir ſhould be made at the leaſt oncecue-
ry yeere.” Concerning, the Miniſter, the Synod doth declare thoſe doEtrines
to beefalſe, whichextend to all the faithfull, cheminiſtery of the keyes,and
the aurhority giueaby Ca R18sTro bindeand looſe, remit and teraine pub-
lique {innes by correetion, and ſecret by voluntary Confeſsion, and ink

charthe Prielts,, chough ſinners, haue authority ro remit ſinnes; which is

not a naked miniltery,, to declare that ſinnes areremirred, bur a tudiciall at.

Therefore. let no' man ground himſclfe vpon fauth, chioking that, withour

contrition ,anda Prieſt, who is willing to abſolue himzhee can haueremifl-
on. But becaule there is a nullity in the ſentence , pronounced againſt him
who is noc{ubiect,thetc is alſo a nulliry in rhe dblolncioh of the Pricl{t,who
hath nocaurhority , delegate, orordinary, oucr the penitentt and the grea+
ter Prielts doe, with reaſon, reſcrue tothemſelues ſome faults more grieuous,
and (o:doth the Pope very iultly;andthere is no doubr,burt that euery _
may doc itiwhis Dioceſle. © And this reſcruation is nor onely for external}
policic,burisalſoof force before G o 0. Therefore it was alwayesobſctued
inthe Church, char; inthe hoare of death,any Prieſt may abloluc any peni-
rent, from any finne. Of fatisfation the Synod doth declare, that the
{rnac beciag remitred, the puniſhment is nor pardonedjir becing not conue-
" nicat,
"I

I OY

——_— — , »«

34. The\Hiſtorie of L 1s, 4+
1551 nient, thathee ſhould b:eſo wy recciuedinto Grace, who hath fanned be-
ure7,), tore Baptifmicandafeer, and becictt withoura bridle, which may draw him
C44434.5 from other finncs; yea itris:conucnicnt, hee ſhould bee like ro Cu'ri'sT;,
Evaro 6. Who luffering puniſhtncors did-farisfic for vs, from whom our fatisfaCtiong
A alſo receiue force, as offered by;him to the!Father, and recciucd, by his cer.
_ _  egllion, Thercforc the Prieſts pughrtto impoſe conucnicnr fatisfations, nor
onely cokeepethe penitent from new ſinves; bur alſoto.chaſtiſchim for the
old; declaring likewile that Satisfaction is made, not onely by puniſhmenes;
; willingly Tecciucd, orimpoled yo Pricſt, but by induring alfo,with pari-
| cnce, the {courges ſent from God. | | 33 6e; wh
i. Avethe- -, Iniconfarmitic of this doQtrinc, ffrecnc Anathemariſmes were-made. 71:
me Againſthimthac ſhall fay, thar-Penance is nottruclyantd properly a Sacra-
menc,in[tirured by Cur 1 $T,toreconcilc {inners after Bapriſme. 2. That
Baptiſme-1s Penance, ,, or that is:not che fecong table-or bord after ſhip-
wracke: : 3, Tharthc words of CH r15T, Quorum remiſeritis peccata, arc
not vnderſtood of the. Sacrament of Penance, bur of the autheriry co preach
the Goſpel. | 4. That Contricios, Confeſſion,and SatizfaFion, arc nor required
for, as it were, the matter, and as parts of "Penance, or (hall ſaythar the errors
of conſcience and faithareparts. 5. That Contrition is notproficable;
burcauſcch hypocriſic, and isa forced, and nota freeſorrow.. 6. Thar
Sacramentall ( onfeſſion is notintirured, and neceſſary by the law of Gop,
or chat the manner of confelſling to the Prieſts in ſecrer, is an humancinucn-
tion. 7. Tharictsnot neceſſary ro confeſſe all mortall ftnnes, cuen thoſe
thatare hidden, and the circumftances which doe charge the nature of
chem. 8. Thatthis is impoſlible,or that all ate nor bound to confeſle once
a yeere, according to the precepr of the Laterane Councell. - 9. | That the
Sacramentall ablolution is nor a judiciall act, but a minittery, ro declarerhe
remiſſionof ſinncs to the belceucr , or thatan abſolution giacn in ieſt doch
helpe,or that the confe(ſion of the penitent is not requilue. 10. Thar Pricits
in morrcall {inne, hauc notpower to bindeand looſe, ortharall che fairhfull
haucic. 11, Thar Biſhops hauc nor authority to relerue calcs, bur for ex-
ecrnall policy. 12. Thatall puniſhmentis remitted rogerher with the faulc,
and that noother ſatisfaction is required but faith, that Cn x1 s T hath ſa-
tified. 134 That Satifaftion is not made by ſuffering afflictions ſens by
Go0D, by puhiſhmcnts impoſcd by the Pricſt, and willingly raken, and that
the belt "Penance is oncly a new life. 14. That SatisfeRionsare nor divine
worſhip, but humane rraditions, 15. That thekeyes of the Church are
onely to looſe,and nor robinde.
Same of The Diuines of Louaine oppoſed the reſervation of caſcs, ſaying it was not
is fo clecre, becaulc ircannot bee found that any Father did cuer ſpeake ofic;
Dawnere and that Durand, who wasa Penitentiarie, and Gerſonand Catctan doc all af-
Callen. firme, that not finncs, bur cenſures arcreſcrucd tothe Pope : and therefore
that it was t00 rigid, to cliceme him an herctique whothought otherwile.
The Divines of Colle ioyncd with them, and faid plaincly,that it could nor
bee found that any Ancient did ſpcake of any reſeruations, but of publique
finnes, andrhat it was not fit to condemne the Chancellour of Faris, ſo pi-
ous and Catholique an Authour , who wrotcagainſt them. That the here-
| riques

— -

y Un ——_—_—_—

349.

L184. the Councellof T rent. :

tiques were wont to ſay, that theſe releruations were inuentedfor gaine; as 1551
allo Card. Campeggio ſaid, in his reformation, and thatir gauc him occaſion ro CAA
write againſt it; vato which theDiuines would not hauc an{wered, nor been <#4xuss 5.

able to anſwere. |
And thereforeas well the doGtrine as the Canon, ought to bee moderated,

that.it may not giuc ſcandall,nor offend any Catholike. Theſame men of Col-
len ſaid, tharthe mcaning of the words, Quorum ligaueritis, condemned inthe
ecnth Canon, is cxprelly, and formally ſo vnderitood by Theophila&, and thac
to condemne it were to make the enemies rejoyce. And that which was aid
io chclaſt, chat the power to bind, is vnderſtood to impole Penance, they ob-
ſcrued that the ancicnt Fathers did not ſo vnderſtand it, bur thar to binde
was to make oneabſtaine from receiving the Sacraments, vatill a compleace
fatisfaction., They demanded allothatmention ſhould bee made of publike
Pcnance , ſo x commended by the Fathers , eſpecially by Cyprian, and
Saint Gregorie the Pope; who, in many Epiltles, ſhewerh it ro bee neceſſary
by the Law of God ; which if it bee-nor brought againe into vieconcerning
heretikes and pablike {inners, Germanie. will neucr beefree: and yertthe De-
cree, as well.in the doQrine, as the Canons , doerh not onely nor ſpeake
in fauour.of it, but rather doerh weaken it, and derra@ fromir. They de-
fred allo chavſome certaine externall {1gne ſhould be declared for the marcer
of the Sacrament; for otherwiſe the obieEtion of che aducriaries will neuer
hee an{wercd, >.

-., Two things did exceedingly dilpleaſe the Franciſcan Dinines: the one
for hauing declared Contrition, Contellion, and Satisfaction to beerhe mat-
tec of the;Sacrament, holding them to-be neceſſary requiſites, but not efſen-

—O—-—_ TFwoooows s

And orhers
by the Frate
calcans and
by Fr ar Ame
brofos i ela

tiall parts of Penance., They layd ic was plaine, that the matter ſhould bee

athing applied to chereceiuer, by che Minilter; and not an operation of the
recciuer Feunſelfe That chis appeareth in all Sacraments; and therefore
that it.is agreat inconucnicnce to put the actesof the Penitent for part of the
Sacrament... T hat jt-is certaine'thar Contrition is no lefſe required to Bap-
tiſme, thenjifis to Penance; and yer itis not put for parr'of Bapriſme, That
the ancients did require confeſlion of ſinnes betore Bapriſme, as allo Saing
Ton di ofaboſn wiliem he baptized, and they made choſe that were Cate-
chiſed roRand in Penance; and yerneucrany ſaid, that theſe wrre parts or
matters of Bapriſmec; Therefore. to:condemne this opinion, held. bythe an-
cient Diuines of the Franciſcan religion, and now by the whole Schoole of
Paris, Wisto pallctheir limits.::They complained allothat it was made he-
relie today, tharfacramenrall Abfolution isdeclaratiue, becaule:Saint [erom,
the Maſter of the Sentences , S.*Bonauenture, and almoitall che Schoole Di-
uincs baue cleerely.fayd;rhat rheAbfolutionin the Sacramenrot Penance, is
2 declarationthart oncis ablolued.- To this Jalt,an{were was made;that hee

wasnot abfolutely; carndemnedfor an heretike,, who faidthat Ablolation is -

a declaration thatſ{innesare remitted but rhar ſinnes are temitted to hinuehat
docth: certaincly bclecue thatthey arc remitted ro him:2:therefore 6ne]y rhe
opinion'of Lather was: comprchended. Butthey were nor lo ſatisfied, fay-
img , that;in handling of hereſie, one ſhould ſpeake plainely,and tharao nan

would make ſuchancxpolition of it ::and they demanded; that,as wellio rhe
Gg pong

CET nr gion ” _ ee

q——

350

The Hiflorie of L 1s. 4.

A—

ISS1
> SSN
Ivizvs 3.

CHARLES F.

EnvyaryD 6.

Hexay 2.
— a * aa 4

The Dodtrine
con.c ning
FXIrez ac
Vaction,

point of doarine, as in the Anathemar!ſme, this particular ſhould bee well
declared. Bur Friar Ambroſaus © elargus, a Diuimcofthe Elefor of Triers,
cou{idercd, that the words of our Lord, Quorum remiſeritis, were'perhaps
nor expounded by any Father, for an inſticution of the Sacrathent of Pe-
nance, and that by ſome they were vnaerttood of Baptiſme,by others,of any
otherthing, by which pardon of {innes is received. Therefore to reſtraite
them onely tothe Sacramentof Penance, and to declare them heretikes who
vnderitand them otherwiſe, would giuea great aduantage ro-the aduerſa-
ries, and cauſe them to fay, that the ancient doctrine of the Church was:
condemned in the Councell. Therefore hee exhorted them, before the

made ſuch agreat ſtride, to ſooke vpon the expoſitions of the Fathers, and,
when thoſe were examined, to determine what ſhould be ſayd:Many of the

' Fathers thought the remonltrances to be: yery confiderable, & defired that

cheDeputics would conſulragaine, as they had done before, vpon other 6c-
cafiors, ro remooue whatſocuer gaue offence to any,andſo to framethe De-
crec; as that euery ope mighrapprooueir. -- | | SIO FIG $103 0

Bur Cardinall Creſcentivs oppoſed with a continuate ſpeach, ſhewirg that

©? torake the ſinewes and ſoule trom the Decrces,to ſatisfic the humiors of Pate

ticular men, was not honourable for the Synode. That they were-marure-
ly cſtabliſhed , and therefore it was fir ro ob{erue them.” Yer, if his opinion
did not pleaſe all, hee was content, that, before any thingelle were done, this
gencrall ſhould bee handicd in a Congregation, whether it were good to
make a change or not,and then to de{cend to theparticulars. Byirin this hee
did not fully diſcoucr what his aime was, which afterwards heedid manifeſt-
to his Colleagues, and trultie friends : that they ſhould nor ſuffet the vie of
contending and [peaking [o freely ; which would beedangerougwhen the'
Protceitants came, becauſe they would doc as muchyin fauour oftheir owne
opirions. T hat, for the honeſt and reafqnable libertie of the Cotncell , ir
futticerh thar one may deliver his opinion, while the matteris difpated; but
afrer, when all men haue beene heard, theDecrees framed by theDeputics;
allovied by the Preſidents, ſcene, examined, and approoucd at Remy to-calÞ
them into queſtion, and to require an alteration, for particular intereſts,'
was roo much licence. "The Cardinal! ouercame, atthelaſt, themaior pare-
of the Fathers, being per{waded that the doctrine eſtabliſhed was according?
ro the opinion of the molt intelligent Diuines, and moſt oppoſite t6rthe Iu”
theran.nouities. tors 7 { 3015!
But bccauſe almoſt allis ſpoken that concerneth taarrer of faitly; in-rhat
Sellion, it will not bee amiſle to adde thar little whichtermainahy tonching;
the Sacrament of extreame YnRion. Of which the Dininos ſpake- with ths
tamerprofixitic, but without a difterenceamong lt thiemfctues. And out
of their:apinions three points + dottrine.-and foure4nathemariſmes were
framed. [The dottrine contained in ſubltatce:' Thavrhe Vadtioncofrhe
licke, is trucly and properly a*Sacramenr, in{inuaredg: by C xi sTous
Lord,in S. Marke, and publiſhed by the Apoltle S. James:-from windo words
the Church did icarne, by an Apoſtolical[ tradition, thartheoylk}bleffed by
the Biſhop, isthe marrer, and thewordes vicd by the Maniſtergis rhieformeof
the Sacrament ; but the thing contained and the cfie6b;:i5 the grace of che
holy

ih * PITS | .
£22334)! ' 8nt-

bl

_

_ Tz

holy Ghoſt, whichpurificchchereliques of finne, andrayſeth vp the minds #5 t
of the ſicke, and ſometimes, when ir is profitable for theſoule, giueth health FINE
of body:\The miniſtersof the/Sacramentatethe Prieſts of the'Chiurch, the Cuts,
worden: being not vnderſtood for ancients , but'for Prieſts,” And this z5,7575 ©
T/ition ought principally co begiuentorthoſe who ate at thepointof death, a eto
who; being rocoucred; and returned to the tate of fickeneſſe, may'tecciue ir
againe.' And thereforc an Anathema is pronounced.” 2. Againlt him that
(hallfay that extreame UntFion'is not truely and properly a Sacrament, in-
{ticured|byCxrz5T.; 2. That ir doeth nor giue grace, nor remit-ſinnes,
nor. caſethe {icke;'bur is ccafed, as that which did formerly belong to the
grace of healch. 3... That the rite vied by the Church' of Rome, iscontrary
ro theſayiny of Saint James,and may bee neglefted without ſinne, - '4,, That
the Pricit oncly is not the minilter, and that Saint Tames did vnderſtand the
ancicnts for age,and nor the Pricſts,ordained by the Biſhop.

But. if any maruaile why it is ſaid in the firſt head of the doctrine, that i4.Anidetof
this Sacrament is in{inuated by CHR1sT our Lord in Saint Marke, and pub- —_—_
liſhcd in Saint James, whereas theantecedence, and conſequence of the words in vÞicb the,

X : k : | . X | Preſidents
did require, that it ſhould not bee fayd, inſinuared, bur inſtitured, hee may the Synod &

know thar it was firſt ſo written, but a Divine hauing obſcrucd, that the buedivees
Apoſtles, who anoynred the ſicke,ofwhom Saint Markeſpeaketh, were rior ***
Pricſts,becauſe the Church of Rome holdeth, that Prieſthood was conferred
vpon them onely inthe laſt Supper, it ſeemed a contradiction,to affirme, that

the Tnttion which they gaue , was a Sacramecnr,and that Prieſts oncly are
miniſters of ir. Whercunto ſome, who held it ro bee a Sacrament, and ar
that time inſticruted by CHRIST, did an{were,.that CHk1sT command-
ing them to miniſter the Un&on, made them Prieſts concerning that acte
onely. Asif the Pope ſhould command a ſimple Prieſt to giue the Sacrament

of Chriſme,he made him a Biſhop for that ate, Yerit was thought roo dan-
gerous to afhrme it abſolutely. Therefore, in ſtead'of the word Inflitutum,
they put Infinuatum. Which word what it may {ignifiein ſuch a matter, cuc-

ry one may iudge who vnderſtanderh what Infinnare 1s, and docth apply ir

ro that which the Apoſtles then did, and to that which was od

by Saint Tames,and tothe determination made by this Councel],

But in matter of reformation, as hath beene ſaid, fourteenc Articles were
propoſed, all belonging to Epilcopall iuriſdiftion : whereof when they had
vaderitood the opinion of the Canonilts in the particular Congregations,
and read all in the generall,they came to frame the Decree. Herein the ayme
of the B B. was to increaſe their authority, & rorecouer that which the Pope
had vſurped from them,and of the Preſidents, togrant as little as they could,
Bur both partics did proceede cunningly,and A ſhew to regard onely the
ſcruicc of God, and the reſtitution of the ancient Ecclefiaſticall diſcipline.
The Biſhops thoughtthey were hinderedin executing their office. For when
they did ſuſpend any from exerciſe of their orders, or Ecclefialticall de-
grees, and —_—_ , for cauſes knowen to them(clues, or did refule to lee
them paſle to higher degrees, all was retra&ted, by a Licence or Diſpenlation -
gotten at Rom? : which cauſed a diſteputation of the Biſhops, damnation of
foules, and a totall ruine of diſcipline. Concerning this, the firſt head was
Gg 2a made,

TRIO

1554 made, that ſuch Licences and Reſticutions hauld novbreotforce. | Bur the
AA ' Prefideruforthe honourof the Apoltolique Sca,; would:nothaverhe Pope

Caarrrs 555 named; nonthe chictePenitentiarre, nor aly miniſters! of rhe Court, rom
Forraeo & Whom fuch Licences were wont-to bee obtaibed. The pitular Biſhops did
Mort 1t alſo hinderchem;z who beeing depriucd, byaDecreepubliſhed in the-fixe
- = © Selhon, ot powet toexercile the pontifical office in the Dioceſles withour
leauc-of the-proper Biſhop, did retire themſclucs, intoaplace exempt from all
Bilhgpriques.; admitting thoſe ro holy. ordersewho were'before reieted, as
vafir.;\by.jheir owne Bilhops; which they dit by yertue of a priuiledge ro
ordaineany that offered himſelfe vnto them... This wasprohibiredinithec-
cond head, but withthis moderation , that; forreuerence of the Apoſtolike
Sea,mcytion ſhould nor bee made, who grantcd the priuiledge. :And.conſe-
quently'ip.the third head, power was giuen to the Biſhops co ſuſpend, for
what time they pleaſed, any one ordained without their examination , or
with licence, by facultie giuen by whomſocuer, Theſe things the wiſer ſort
: of Bilbops.knew to bee of {t mall weight, becauſethe Canonilts doe hold that
- Licences, Priuiledges, and Faculties granted by the Pope, arencuer compre-
* kended ingenerall words, withour ſpeciall mention bee made of them. Bur
_- notbecing able to obraine more, they were content with this, hoping that
time might open thema way to proceede further.

It was alſo decreed in the ſame {1xth Selſhon, that noſecular Clerke , by
vertuc of perſonall Priuiledge, nor Regular, dwelling out of the Monaſtc-
ric, by vigor of the Priuiledge of his order, ſhould bee exempt from the cor-
rection of the Bilhoppe, as Delegate of the Apoſtolike Sea, Which ſome
thiaking notto containe the Canons of Cathedrall Churches, and other Col-

legiate dignities, who, nor by priuiledge, bur by ancienr.cuſtome, or by ſen-
rences purin execution, or by Concordates with the Biſhops eſtabliſhed and
ſworne, were in poſſeſſion of not beeing ſubiect ro Biſhops, and orhers al-
ſo reſtraining it onely to viſitation, it was ordained in the fourth head, thar,
concerning ſecular Clerkes, it ſhould bee extended ro all times, and all ſorts
of exceſſes, and declared that none of the things aforefayd (trauld with-
ſtand. ”

Another diſorder as great did ariſe , becauſe the Popedid grant a Iudge,
at the eleCtion of the ſupplicant, ro wholocuer did ſeeke ir by the ordinary
meanes vcd in Courr, with authoritie to defend , protect, and maintaine
him in poſſeſſion of his rights, and to remooue the molettation giuen him,
extending alſo this fayour to all his domeltiques. And this ſort of Indges

_ were called Conſeruators ; who did l[tretch their authoririe, io place of defen-
ding the ſupplicant from moleſtations, ro withdraw him from iuſt corre&i-
ons, and allo, attheir inſtance, to molelt and trouble cheBiſhops, andother
ordinary Eccleftaſticall ſuperiours , with cenſures, The fifch point made
prouiſion againſt this diſorder, ordaining that Conſeruatorie graces ſhould not
helpe any bedy, nor free him from inquiſition, accuſation , and conuenti-
on, before the Ordinary, in criminall and mixt caules, and in ciuill alſo, in

- which hecis plaintife: and, in othercauſlcs , if the Conſeruator bee ſuſpected,
or difficulcicariſc berweene him and the Ordinary, who iscompetent Judge,
that arbitrators ſhall bee choſen, according to the forme of the Law; and

that

1-344

L 18.4: the Conncellof Trent.

that Conſeruatory letters which comprehenddomeſtiques ; ſhall bee'exren 1 5hi

dcd but vnto two, who docliue at the charge of the Malter of thefam:ilie,

IvL

and that theſe and the like graces (hall not continue abouc fiue yeeres, and'c»
that the Con/eruazors (hall nor haue Tribunals. Bur the Synod did notmmeane +,,,,07 6
ro containe in this Decree Vniucrlities, Colledges of Do&tours, and Schol- Jn" +

lers, places of Regulars, and Hoſpitals. Concerning which exception,
when this point was handled, there was very greatcontention, it ſeeming ro.
the Biſhops, that, againlt all right, the exception was larger then the rule,
becauſe the number of DoCtors, Schollers, Regulars, and Hoſpitalaries, is
greater then of all others, who can haue (onſeruatorie.. letters, and that the
_ prouifion againſt any particular man was ca{te, but thedilorders of Vniuer-
ſitics and Colledges, were of the greateſt importance. The Legare gaue an
account hcercot ro Rome: where it becing decided, by that which was con-
ſulred vader Paulthethird, that it was neceſſary, for maintenance of the A-
poltolique Sea , that the Friars, and Vniuerſttics, ſhould torally depend on
Rome_, there was no necde of a new determination : and immediatly an-
{were was made, that the Conſeruatories of thele, ſhould, by no meanes, bee
couched, Whereupon the Fathers of the Synode, who were adherents of
Rome_, bccing centred into this opinion, the others, who were fewer ,.were
forced to be content withthe exception, and there was ſome hope, and ſome
meanes v{cd to pacifte them. |

The ſixth point was concerning the Prieſts apparell: whercin it was ca-
ſily concluded to ordaine, that all che Ecclcf1aſtiques of holy Order, or Be-
neficed men,ſhould bee bound to weare an habire fit for theirdegree, accor-
ding to the appointment of the Biſhop, giuing him power to fuſpend the
tranſgreſſours, if,after admonition, chey ſhall nor obey, and ro depriue them
of rheir Benefices, if, after correQion, they ſhall not amend; renewing here«
inthe conſtitution af the Councel of YViemna; which notwithſtanding was

not much fitted to thoſe times, prohibiting vpper garmentslaced, andofdi- |

ucrs colours, and frockes (horterthen the veltment,and red and greene btee-
ches chequered, things diſuſed, which haue no neede of prohibition.

The vic of all Chriltian Nations was molt ancient, thar, to imitate the
mildeneſſe of CyHrisT-our LokD, all the Miniſters of the Church
thould bee neatand cleanefrom mans blood, neuerreceiuing to any Ecclefi-
alticall order, any perſon dctiled with homicide, whether. voluntary or ca-
ſuall: and, if any Clerke committed any luch excefle, either willingly or by
chance, ail Eccleftaſticall fun&ion was immediatly raken from him. This
hath beene, and is now, inuiolably obſcrued by other Chriſtian Nations,
vnto- whom diſpenſations againſt the Canons are vaknowen ; bur in the

Latine, where rich men may caſtly make vſe of them , it is oblerued onely |

by the poorer ſort. It being propoſed in the fourthand fifth Article ro mos
derate the abuſe, it was ordained in the ſeuenth head, that a voluntaty ho-
micide ſhould for cuer remaine depriucd of all Order, Behefice, and Eccle-
{iaſticall office; and when there ſhall bee cauſe to diſpence with the caſuall
homicide, the commiſſion of the diſpenſation, ſhall bee direfted to the Bi-
ſhop onely , or, if there bee cauſeto the contrary , to the Metropolitan, or
next Biſhop. They ſaw that this Decree, did nor ſerue to moderate the
Gg 3 abules

\—\
VS 3.
ARLES F,

254: The Hiſtorie of © L1s. 4.
G 551 abuſcs,but ro make the diſpenſations dcarer. For the Popes hands, were not
>> ried concerning voluntary homicide; and fot cafuall, the decree was 'obler-

Ivitvs 3.

Cuaxtes 5. ucd , 11.00tCOmmiItring the cauſe to any but rhe Biſhop, but ro diſpence di-
Epvrazp 6. TECLy, without committing it to another, was not taken away, firſt making
' W227; theprootes in Rome., or diſpatching the diſpenſations vider the name of
Mot proprio, or with other-clauſes, with whichthe Chancery doth abound,

when it hath cauſe to vic them. © " |
A.ccrtaine fort of Prelates ſeemed: to hinder much the authority of Bi-
ſhops, who,forthcir repuration,in the place where they dwelr,obteined pows-
cr of the Pope, to punith the fauits of the Eccleſtaſtiques of thar place; and
{ome Bithops allo, pretending that their Prieſts receiued ſcandall and bad ex-
ample from thoſe of the next Diocefles, obrained authority to chaſtile them.
Some dctiring that this diforder ſhould bee remedied, by reuoking wholly
ſuch authorines, and percciuingrhar it would diltaſtemany Cardinals, and
creat Prelates, who abuſed them, they found a moderation, that they ſhould
viethem, yer without prejudice of the Biſhop, ordayning in the eighth
poynt, that they mighcnor procecde butin preſence of the Bithop, or his dce-
pizie. "There was anorher way to ſubie& the Churches and people-of one
:2ioccfle, to the Biſhop of another, by vuiring the Churches of one ,-to the
Churches or Benefices of the other: which though it were prohibited in
ocnerall rermes, inthe ſcuenth Se{hon, yetit beeing not fo plainely doneas
{ome defired, an expreſle declaration was demanded. Whereupon it was re-
ſolucd in the ninth point, that all perpetuall onions of the Churches of ore
Docelle, tothe Churches of another,thould be prohibired, vader what pre-

rence? locuer. EL
The Regulars made great inſtance ro keepe their Benefices, and to re-
gaine thoſe wiichthey had already lolt, by the inuention of perpetuall Com-
mendazs; and many Buthops,for ſundry reſpects, were willing to aſhiſt them.
They were deftrous to propole, that theſe perperuall Commendaes ſhould bee
quite taken away; bur, fearing to bee contradicted, rhey were content onely
to defire they ſhould bee moderated. The Preſidents, onthe other fide; ſce-
ing the hazard, that this matter, dangerous for the Court, ſhould bee ſer on
foote, themſelues propoſcd a light remedie, ro hinder all treatie of a better.
And this was, that Regular Benetices, viually giuen intitle to religious men,
when they (hall bee vacant hercafter, ſhall nor bee conferred but vpon men
rofcſled of that Order , or to ſome perſon who is to recciuethe habite,and
take vpon him the profeſſion. This was the tenth poynt, which did nor
much import the Court of Rome. iv regard as many Commendacs were alrea-
die made as could bee; and the Prelates had no grear defire to obtaine more,
though it would hauc becnc an honour for the Churches, if theregular Ab-
bars had refided. Bur, in regard of the fauour extended ro the Monkes, nor
totake morefrom them then was taken already ,.a counterpoize was aaded
in the next point, ordaining that they couid not haue fecular Benefices,
though with cure. Which howſocuer it ſpeakerh onely'of thoſe who arc
rranilared from one order to another, ordaining'that noneſhould bee recei-
ued, but with condition to, remaine in the Cloyſter, yerby parity of the rea-
{on, or by anargument of greater realon, itharh: beene vnderltood general! y
0

XUM

- — — - -
FE Aha a.

Lis. $ the C ance of Trent.

of all. And becauſcthe patronage of Churches, wasgraunted in Courr by: 35573
race, and ro make the grace thegreater, powet giuen to depute an Eccleſin >=
{tical! perſon, with faculty to initicute him that is preſented; this diſorder) Cnanres 5.
was remedied in the ewelfth head , ordaining: that none ſhould haue right towns 5. -
of Patronage, but the founded of the Church, or heeghat hath comperenly- Cu

indowed, with his patrimoniall goods, one already founded. And for re
imedie of the ſecond dilorder, it was forbid in the 13. head, that the Parrone, ,
though he had a priuiledge ro doe it, ſhould not make the preſentation to a-'
ny bur the Biſhop. | |

While theſe things were handled , Johannes Theodoricus Pleniagortes, and +, , '_..
Tohames Eclinus, Ambaſſadours,ſent by the Duke of Wittenberg to the Coun- ors of the
cell, arriued in Trent, with order to preſent publiquely the confeſſion of their wer ganue
doctrine, whereot mention hath beene made, and to ſay withall, that Di- &mamn,”
uines would Comerto cx pound it more at large, and defend it, if fecurnie and ans 9 ply
fafe conduct wete giuen them,according to theforme of the Councell of By. tir ah,
fil. They went to the Count Momrfort,the Emperours Ambaſſadour, ſhew-
ed him their Mandate , and tolde him they had commilsion to propoſe ſome
things inthe Councell, This being related by the Countro the Legate, hee
anſwered,that as orhers Ambaſſadors did firit-prefent themſclues to the Pre-
ſidents in thename of che Pope, and did f{ignific trothem the ſummeoof their
Ambaſſlage, ſo thoſe of Wittenberg ought to doc : hee rherefore wilhed they

thould come, and promiſed to receiue them with all humanity. The Counc Leer ener

related the an{were; wherewith the Ambaſſadours werenorcontented, fay- pum.”

ing, Thatit was one of the points required in Germany,that the Pope ſhould

nor preſide; which not becing willing to contradict, without order from

thcir Prince, they would write, and expe&tan anſwere. The Count did cun-

ningly aſſay to lcarne the whole ſecrer of their inltructions, to aduertiſe the

Legate of it. But they ſtood vpon generall termes, and would not ſpecific

any particular. The Legatefent immediately aduiſe hereof ro Rome,deliring

tro know what hee ſhould doe, and the rather, becauſe he vnderitood that 0-

thers would come allo. | | | TX |
In the beginning of Noucffiber,the Emperour, to bee neerethe Councel, boar

and the warre of Parma, went ro 1/pruc, diſtant but three dayes ioutney from 77«c.viſtane

trom the

Trent,the way being ſo commodious, that if there were occation, hee might Councel biz
heare from his Ambaſſadoursin one day.  Fhe: Pope had newes at once of ers.
the atriuall ofthe Emperour, and of thoſe of Wittenberg. Andalthough hes *'
truſted vpon the Emperours promiſes;madero him before the conuocation

of tlie Councell, and ofcen reitcrated, and ſaw the eftes, becauſe his Ams
baſſadours curbed the Spaniards, when they were too bold in —_—

the Epiſcopall authoritic, and was perſwaded he would; perſcuere;/in regar |
of their common intereſts againlt the French King yet hauing hear of -Whichma- :
fome things handled in Germany, hee was alittle icalous, that, cicher-tor ne- fomwhar pa
ceſsitic,or for ſome great opporrunitic, which occurrences might bring, hee!
would change his opinion. Yerhe rooke courage; conſidering, thar-it there

were warre in Germamy,no account would be held of the Councel}, and du-:

ring peace, all the German Eccleſiaſtiques would beeon. his fide, avallo rhe

Lalian Prelates; whoicnumber hee could caftly encreale by ſending thicher

— — —> ©
ERS OCLC OOTY

'
& 4
bc Þ
F-
,
! es
'

256 | The Hitory of | WEE 4 4;

=y 5 1 | all thoſcof the Court : thatthe Legat being reſolute, and hoping ro be Pope,
—\A would labour as for himſelfe,and that the Nuncio of Siponto was molt atte-

TvLiys. 3. | ; :
Caarrzs 5. Ctionateto his perſon : that hemightatany time be reconciled with France,

Err re, becauſe it was defired by that King, by meancs of whom, and with the Pre-
Hz, 2 Jaces of his kingdome, hee might withitand all attempts made againſt his
—V'> authoritic. |  $

1..m.  Heanlwered the Legate, that heecould giue him bur little inſtrudtion
of bis Holi- qOrethat be was not onely acquainted with, but principall Author of rhe

bel Treaties made in framing the Bull of the Conuocation, that hee ſheuld re-
member that the things decreed vnder Paul , were {tudiouily approoucd
therein;that it was ſayd that 1t did belong ro the Pope, not onely to call,but
al'o to dirc& Councels,and to prefide by his minilters, and that hee ſhould
not leauc open ſo muchas alittle chinke, in preiudice of any of theſe. Fer
the reſt he thould gouerne himſelfe according to occations, putting him in
mindto fly,as the Plague,all middle counſels, and modcrations, when any
of theſe were handled, but ſo ſoone as the difficultic did ariſe,to breake it off
fuddenly, that the aduerfaries might not haue time to looke farre into it.
That he would not lay on his ſhoulders the Trayſlation, or diſſolution of the
Councell, but onely that he ſhould ſpeedily aduertiſe when hee faw cauſe.
Furthermore, that he ſhould ſer on foor as much matter of doctrine as he
could, which would workc many good cficcts. For it would make the Lu-
therans deſpaire of concord wichour their torall ſubmiſhon , would intereſt
the Prelates more againlt them,wou!ld norgiue time to theſe to thinke on the
point of rcformation, and makea ſudden diſpatch ofthe Councel, a matter
of thegrearcelt importance, becaule there is danger of ſome inconvenience
ſo long as itlalteth. And when hefaw himſelfe forced to giue them ſome
' ſarisfaction,in amplifyingrhe Epiſcopall authoritic, hee ſhould condefcend,
and yet hold backeas much as might bee. For in caſe ſome thing ſhould bee
granted preudiciall to the Court, as formerly hath beenedone, yer ſolong as
the Popes authoritic remaineth intire, there will bee mcanes to reduce them
eaſily ro their firlt {tare,
> anger Things ſtanding thus, the 25.0f Nouember, the day appointed for the
November. Sefton, came. The Fathcrs mer, and went to Church in the vſuall order :
where the ceremonies being finiſhed, the dectrine of faith, the Anathema-
riſmes, & decree of the Reformation were read by the Bifbop that ſaid Maſſe,
Thetenour whereof being already recited, there refiaineth nothing elle to
be ſpoken. And finally, the lalt decree was read, to giueorder for the future
Seſſion; in whichit was ſayd, that ir being already appointed for. the z 5. of
lanuary, the Sacrament of Order oughtthen to bee handled, together with
the Sacrifice of the Maſſe. So the Legate would haue it pronounced, that, ac-
cording rothe Popes opinion, they might hauc matter of doftrine enough
whereon to treat. "The Scſhon being, ended, the Legate vſcd all diligence
 Thedecr'es. that the Decrees might nor be printed. And his order was obſzrucd at Ripa,

are ſorbid to

be publihed, wherethe Preſſe was, and wherc the other Decrees were printed. EFut no

«din Ger= Man could hinder the ſending-of many copics out of Trent, whereupon

_—_ they were printed in Germany, and the &fficultic and delay ro let them ſee
light, made the Cririques curious, and diligentro examine them wore ex-

actly,to tinde the caulc of this ſecrecy. That

—_—_—
+

L1B. 4; + vba Cpunralidf Trent.

a. — OC 4. a.
An. ML at i 0.

:'Thatwhich was decidedinthe firſt-poinr of do&trin, arid the (ixr Canon;

cautrd much ſpeech +rhat is, rhat'Cagrsr, when hee breathed 6n his Dilci. free *

ples; and gaue themtheholy Gholk, laying, Whoſe finnes youremit they ave're«
mirted,'andwhoſe Jinnes you retaine, they areverained did infticurerhe; Sacrament

of: henarte< (hr was confidered char Baptiſme was firſbvſed by the Teives, for _—

legalicleaulineſle, afterwards applyedbySaint.Jobn for a preparations goc
rothe:Nteffmy which wasiro come,'and finallyby Caxtsr;in expreſſeand
plainc words, inRirureda Sacrament; tor remiſfivirat finnes;atid an chrrance
into the: Qhurchvordaining, ir ſhould bee miniftred in the:name of the Fa
ther, Sorincy..and holy, Gholt: Likewiſe in rhe captiuitic of Babylon a Poſtre-
naon wax inlticaccd bythe [ewes, with bread and wine; for athankes giuing
anda memorial of cheir-going'our of Egypt, while: being our of the land
of promiſe, they could not'cat the Paſchal Lambe: in imitation of which rite
C H K1 $T:influrutedche Euchariſt, rd ginethankes ro Go Dy forthegenerall
deliucranceof mankind, and in memoris of himſclte, who was the Author
thereof, by the ſprinkling of his blood. And howlocuer like rites haue beene
formerly v{cd,though for orherends, as hath beene ſaid, yer the'Scriprure
doth cxpreſſcall che frngulacitiesof them. Now that. C a x1 8 T would ins
troducea rite roconfeflcour finnes in particular {otexatly, as that nv vie
was cucrthelike,it ſcemed ftrangerhat hee would beeynderſtood by words;
from which ic mult bee drawne-by a very vnioynred conſequence, yea by
many conſequences, very farre fercht;as was done by the Councell; And rhey
wondred, why the inſticutio being made by che-word remitto, the forme was
nor, Trent thy finnes,rarher then Tabſolue thee, Others added,thar if, by thoſe
words,a Sacrament of abſojution is inſtituted, with this forme; Ab/eluo te;
by which one isablolued, one muſtlay, by.an varcfiltable neceſliie ; chat
another, or the ſame; is inſtirured, in which, this forme ſhould likewiſe bez
Ligo te: bzcay(c ic cannot be vaderſtood how the ſame authoritie to looſe ad
binde, Ganadal vponthe words of Cn & 1s 'T abſolutely alike, doth requite
inabſolution the pronouncing of the wordes, Abſoluote, and that other - bf
biadingdorh nor require che pronouncing of the words, Ligare:. Nor by
what rcafon, tp executethar which C x 1 $T hath ſaid, Quorum retinneritis;
Ec. C quacunqne ligaueritis &c. itis not neceſlary rofay, Ligo 78,' but to
execute Onorumremiſeritis , & quacungue ſoltieritis, it is necellary to fay, Ab-
oluo te. .. | S406” ,
n Likewilc thedodtrine, inferred in the fifreeneth point, was cenfured by
critiques? where it is ſaide, that CAR 1 $T by the ſame words; did 'con-
Ricurethe Prieſts;iudges of finnes, and therefore that ir. is heceſfarie rocon-
felſe them all abſolutely; and-in particular; together with the cirumſtances
which alter the kinds, ſecing that irdoeth appcare by the words of our Lord,
that he hath notdiſtinguiſhed two fotrs of ſinnes, oneto bee remitted; and
the other to be retained, whereby it would bee neceſſarie to knowof which
the delinquent is guilticz bur one onely which doerh corprehend all; and |
therefore the word Pecratain generall is onely vicd. Burheeharh diſtingui-
thed two ſortes of ſinners, faying,, Quorum, &> Quorum : nc of che Penicen;
varo whom remiſſion is granted; another of theobſtinate; vato whom it is
denyed. Therefore they ate rather ro know the (tare: of the 5

—_—

358 ' The Hiltory of L1sB.4,

then the nature and number of the {innes.. Bur concerningthecircum- <
AA ſtances which alter the kinde;irwas ſaid, that cuery honeltman may f{weare,
_ 5- With-a goodconſcience,thatthe holy Apoſtles, and their:d:{ciples, niolt skil-
= full inthingsccleſtiall, not. regarding humane {ubrilcies, did neucr:knowe
H «x. 22 what wercthecircutnſtances which alter the kinde, and perhaps 4$;4ritotle
had not made this ſpeculatiob, the worlde would not haue knowen it. vn+
till now,and yet there is made. of it anArticie of Faith,neccfſary ro faluation,
But as it was approoucd, that Abſolno, was iudiciall word, and-reputed a
good conſcquence.that if the Pricits:doc abloluc,theyare Iudges,fo ir appea+
red'to be an (ncanſtancie,ro condemnethalc who ay, it is. a naked miniſtes
rictopronounce; it þcing plaine,that the ofticcof aludge is norhing bur co
pronounce him innocent who is {o,and the tranſgreſlor guiltic,and that this
metaphorcofthe ludge doth not bare, that the Prieſt can make a'iuſt man
ofa delinquent,as is aſcribed ro him. The Prince may'/pardon offenders,and
reſtore them to their good name;ro whom, hee that maketh a wicked man
ſt, is more like, then to. a Iudge, who doeth cuer tranſgreſle his of-
fice, when heepronounceth anything bur that which hee firſt findeth co be
true, But they were amazed moſt of all, when they read the poynt
wheretheſpeciticall and {1ngular confeſſion of {innes, with thecircumſian-
ccs, is prooucd; becauſethe iudicature cannot bee executed without know-
ledge of thecaulc, norcquitie obſerucd in impoſing puniſhment,it the faults
be knowen onecly in general,and afterwards that CHk1sT hath commanded
this confeſlion,tharthcy may impoſethe codigne puniſhment. They ſaid char
this was plainely ro mock the world,and think all men fooles, & to perſwade
chemſglucs that all theirabſurdities ſhould be beleeucd, withour more ro doc. +
For whoknowcth nor, and ſccth nor dayly; that the Confesſors enioyne Pe-
nance, not onely without weighing the merit of the faults, but withour ha-
uing the laſt conſiderationot them. It would ſeeme conſidering the words
of the Councell, that the (onfeſſors ſhould haue a balance, to make difference
of cucry grainc; and yet oftentimes to recite fiue Patcy nofters, ſhall bee a
Penance, for many murders,adulteries,and thefts: and the molt learned (/on-
feſſorsand generally all in giuing Penance, doe lay to euery man, that they
docimpoſconely part of the Penance. Theretore it is not neceſfarie to im-+
7 that exact Penance which the faults doe deſerue, nor to haue a particus
ar enumeration made of the ſinnes and circumſtances. Bur what neede one
goc ſo farrc,when the ſame Councell,in the ninth point of the doeine, and
the thirteemth Anathematriſme,doth ordaine,tharſatisfaftionis made by volun-
tary Ponance, and ſuffering of aduer{ities. Therefore itis-not necdctull, yea
not iuſt,toimpolc in Confeſſion the puniſhment that is corre pondent, and,
by conſequence, notromakea ſpeciticall enumeration, which is ſayd co bee
ordainedfor thisende. And they added, thar, notconſideringany thing ſpo-
ken before the {onfeſfor, though molt learned, attentiue, and wiſe, hauing
heard the Confesfron of an ordinary man, for one yeere, much more ofa greac
{nncr,for many yecres,itis impoſſible hee ſhould iudgeatighe, rhough hee
had Canons of the puniſhmentducro any ſinne whatlocuer, without danger
to erre-morethen halfc, to ſpeake the lealt. For a Confeſſor {ccing all in
writing, and confidcring many daycs of it, could not make a balance to

decide

%

CE EE TIES

|
l 4
Hi
[|
F;

—__—

Ls. 4. the Councellof Trent.

—

©: {i

decide iultly, much leſſe hearing, andxefoluing preſently; as the cuſtome- ix,
They faid it was-nor firthey ſhould beſdicontemned;8& held ſo.inferrible; as

- tobeleruc ſuch abſurdirics. Of rhe yeſeruation of (( jaſes enough was ſaid by
the Diuines of Lowine, and'Collen;; which was artribured to! a: defire vþ:do-
minionand toauarice!” 215! 7 15 nw? | 931613553 binge F
The next day:there was @ general Congregation, to giue!o
diſca/hon of the- Sacrifice of rhe Maſſe,and the Communion: of the'Cup ;-and of
Children.. Andakhougtthg Dccrees were already made; for the Sclſion of

the eleuenth of October, and deferred, yet.they, diſcourſed againe,. as if no-.
thinghad beenefayd, and didehooſe Fathers ro colle&t the! Articles: to. bee

diſputed on, and others ro makethe Decree. And becauſe they. made haſt;

155k

I' Lys. g,. v7

Chpariks, 5;

© ——_ ns —
Epwakp 6, 2
Higay, 2. ;

The Sactiflee
of the Malls,

the Comin»
nion of the; -

Cupandot /:
clilorth ab |
handled; --

ſcucn Articles were ſuddenly'framed, whereon they diſputed ; twiſe cucry: -

day ,in which number was che Ambaſſadour of Ferdmand , and Tulivs Plur
gizs,, Bilbop of Namburg,, and: for greater reputation, theEle&our of ( ollen;
tharall.chat dorine might ſecme to-come from! Germany; 'and- toc frott
Rome: hey madeallorthirccent Anatbematiſmzs,condemning tholt for here-
ciques, who doc.not hald the Maſle, for 4-xrucand. proper Sacrament, or dod
lay itdoth nothelpeche Liuingaudthe dead, or doe. not reccue the Canon
of the-Maſſc, ordgecondenine priuate Maſſes, orthe ceremonies which the
Church of Rome victh. Andithen.foure Heads: of doctrine » were, made;
Thatww che Maſle;. is! offered a true and*proper: Sacrifice," inftitaced by
CHER LST:; oftthencceſſitic ofthe Sacrifice of theMaſle, and how itagreesti
with.that of the: Qraſle; of tlic fruits of chat Sacaitice, and: rhe. application
thereof; of the rites and ceremonies of 'the Maſſe.; AY: whichwiere ro -bee
hoodledogain® Chuiltas, andarc/nor relarcd heert ;perticularly,, becauſe
they-wore tiot pubhſhed intlicutxt Scihan:. | 7,2916”- £2 21991 brit: af
- Whilethe Fathers doccnterraine thewſclues in thelpuſageſic of the;Count
ccl, the Ambaſſadors of Wutenberg , did receiue letters from thexr:Princegta
procced, apd to preſent their dottrine, inthe belt maiiex they couldic There,
forcein theabſchceot che [Earkeot Mongfdre; they autregred thic Cardinall of
Trent, ta bec ameanes, thatthe Preſidents would recejvetheitilertens; afftrin,
 blecheiFathers; and ginerhdarairdicnce, The Cardinall praturſed all gant
offtcebtr ſaydit was neceſſary corell cheTiegare whats hoy!Woulgd:52car on!
it being ſaconſizurcd by-che- Fathers; inodued, theneuhia by the-propoſirii
on madeby-che Abbat of: Brlldſana. 'T herefore: rheyimpareed 40:hiim their
inſftra&tion,ſayingabcy werei{entitoobtainica fake Condudttforithoir;: Theo!
logueias.it wat giueh-inBaflro the Bobamians; and ta; propoſtthicie do.
arine;thar, ir being. examibeddyjthe Fathers; they mighicbeiteadys; cou
terrewith choir Djuagcs; MPO nes he Legats,redewiugithis rele:
tion fromthe Cardinal; impirited:to-bir owHat heoBape had: werftecn; and!
told im. chati was .rtar.tgbedhiffered; this citber they grany other Proves;
ſtaars, ſhould preſent cheir DoArine,much leſſe beadmitted ro defendir, ith
regardchere would bee: no-radtgfcontentibme:thavir wastheoffide of the
Fachers, which wasbbſcrutd-yntillelien; and pbughtzabecontinind, 12o(exa-!
mine theirdocrine;azken our.of their Bookes, aridicondewint thattwhicl
did deſctue ir. "If che Proreſtadts badiaaythiſiculeiearid didprovoteit bum-
bly,and ſhew Gs i. rccantdaſtrucion; it ſhoulfl-bec given
20 | /

-

=

+

The A mbaſ-
ſadours of
Wittenberg ;
reccive letrers
from their _...
Princes, yrith
ocder to xroe
ceed in their
Regotiation.

of th- Legare
cotheir pro+
politions,

G4 -7

— The Hittory of hine:

1551: by:aduiccoftheCou ncel, Fherefore hee denied abſolutely ro aflemble the

- — SN Fathers,to teceiue their do@rine,andfaid, he could nor:changethis opinion,
oat ;-Though it ſhould colt him hislife. Foraltcring rhe lafe condudt;he ſaid it was
== -antxorbicantindignity tothe Councel;that they ſhould miltruſt that which
1 +x.>- was grantcd,and thattorreat thereof wasan vnlupportable-.iniury, and de+

—Y>” ſerued chartthe faithfullſhould ſpend their lives in oppoling ir.

12 jy The Cardinall of Trent would nor giuethean{werefo ſharpe ro the Am-
relawed: ro the zaffedors, but faid; Thar che Legare was angfy,thar they would begin wich
RE Cork the preſentation of their dodtrine; in regard they were to recciue fromtheir
nl ot: Sapcriors, with reucrence and obedience, the rule of Faith, and nor preſcribe
itto others, with ſuch. an-vnſeemelineſle, and abſurditic. Therefore he adui-
ſed rhemrolet that day paſſe, rhat rhewrath ofthe Legat might be remitted,
andthento beginne with:fome other point, thar afrerwards they might fall
vpon thoſerwo:: thatis, ropreſentrheir doctrine, and deſire alate condutt.

They followed this counlſell,and a:fewdaycs after, the Cardinall being par-

red from Trent, they defired the: Emperours Ambaſladour ro perlwade. the
Eegaretorecciuethcirmandare, and heare their propoſition, that vnderſtan#

E: ding his minde they mighrreſolue; as they fhould haue: inſtruction from
cheir Prince: . The Ambaſſadour treated: withthe Legare,and had chelame

anfwere which was giuert to the Cardinal of Trent; which did not proceed

from diſdaine,but from a relolucdwill. The Ambafſadour vnderſtanding the

Lepars mind;was of opinionthar the buſtneſle could inor then take place,

and knowing that'to relate theanſwere was difhonourablefor the Empe-

rour, whohad fo largely. promiſcd;that euery one ſhould>be heard, propoſe
freely;and conterrce,in ſtead of giuing a direct an{weretorthoft of Witreiberg,
he found diuers excuſcs,to gain time,whichhedid norſoartificially,though
 he'werea Spanard,butthar they were diſcoueredto be prerences norxo giue

" aplaineNegatiue.” | 7 611, RAR 33 27004 þ 2113

. - Ar thistime Ambaſſadours wentto Trent, from Argeming; and fiueCities

_ +.» more; 'withinſtructionro preſenerhoir doctrine. They imployed Guliehnus
; Pitanius,theEmperours third Ambaſſador; who-not tofall ypon the ſame
Uiffculcies)which his:collcague did, rooke their'Mandat and petſwaded

them to:expett a fewidayes, vntill he had ſentro Cafar and receiued 'an an-

ſwerc : betauſe jnſodoing, they ſhould proceed vpon a good ground.'This

made quierthoſe of Wittenberg alſo, The Ambaſſadour: wrote to Ceſar, tel-

ling him of the Ambaſſadours refolucion,ſhowing what anindignitic ic was

rohis Maicſtie,that no account.fhould bee made of ſo:honeft,” and-loiuſt a

promiſe made by hirh.. /TheEmperour,to:prouide againſtthis diſgrace, and
___couninglyro makeyſcofthe Councell, cxpeRing the Ambaſladours' of the

_ > EleRorofi'$axontewroterharthevrhers ſhould bee! entertained vntilÞ their
./_/arrivall;affaring them hey ſhoatdthea beheard; and with al-charitiezcon-

ON ferred with. SELL $50 379 o3 3 30 PIRIEnm > Rot] wir 119t9' | CLE

Atmy 2 Thethifrecnth of December; Maximilianyrche Sonneof [Ferdinand paſſed
Irene by Trent with his wife and children, and was mcrby rheLegar,andrhctrali-
anandSpanith Prelats;and ſomeGermans alſo.” Fhe Prince:Elefors did nor

mcere him, but viſited himin his:ladging. The Proteſtant Ambaſſadours
complainedto him, thag,norwinhflanding fomany-promiles made by Ogley
| chey

of - —— .

che Councell of Trent.

chey could nothauc audicnce,andpraycd himto hauc pitic'on Germanie, x 5 51.
becauſethole Priclts, being ſtrangers,” did notcare, forſome ſmall reſpedts SO
ofcheir owne, to (ec it an fare, yea, by precipitating che determinations, .and Cuanzns 5.
Anathematiſmes, did make the controucrſies cueryday more hard. Maximi- Eomans. 6,
kan perlwaded rhem'to bee patient, and promiled to rreate with his yaele, 20> ,
_ _ 46 TEN the Councell might paſſeas he had promiſed, inthe Dice, Andprone
tNey-tnoutd, | 7 : | CASTING B34 5ft
| Ar Chriſtmas the Pope creatcd fourtecne Italian Cardinals, and imime- tear wits
diately publiſhed thirtcene of then, reſeruing one to bee publiſhed when jrperouuh
heechought fit. 'And to honour fo great a creation in the beginning of his bilie-
Papacie , c{pecially there being eight and fourtieCardinalles in the Colledge, The Pope

which was then thoughr-a great number, hee pretended occaſion to dae it Cartaisjs
forthe enmitic with the French King. Of whom hee complained as well Eaves.”
forche warre hee madeagainſt the Apoſtolike Sea, as forthe Ediftcs publi-
ſhcd, adding a report which chen came from Lions, and Genus, that he threat-
ncd to makea Patriarke in France , which if it weretruc , heeſaid it would be
neceſlaric to proceed judicially againſt him; Whercin he ſhould mcer with
many difficulties, in regard of rhe great number of the French Cardinals, ro
whom it was ncedefullto make a counterpoile, by creating few, men of
worth, of whom the Apoſtolike Sea might make vie, in occaſtonsof impor- =
rance, The Colledge was contentcd, and rhenew Cardinals were recciued. ——_—
After this hee diſpatched to Trent the Biſhop of Monte-Fiaſcone, with -letrers ©oycommeth
of credicto Cardinall { reſcentins and thethree EleQors, whoſe comming hee <lwible:-
did congratulite, and thanked them for their zeale and reuerencerowards ©
* the Apoltolike Sca, exhorting them ro perſcuere, Hee gaue him orderto
tell them chat hee had created Cardinals , that hee might haue Miniſters de-
pending on himſelfe, in regard all the olde did depend ypon fome other
Prince, ro cxcuſc him forthe warre of Parma, ſaying that hee did not make
it but charit was madcagainſt him, and-was forced to defend himlelfe. 'T'o
Cardinall (7eſcentius hee gaue an accountof the Cardinals made, promiſing
tro make themall vnderltand his mind, how they ſhould demeane- them=
ſclucstowards his friend, vnto whom hee was fo much obliged: And
hee made the Nuncio of Siponto bee tolderthat hee had diſpoled of him. as
the friendſhip berweene them did require, and that hee ſhould'not care to
_— wherein, burthould continue to performe his dutie, as formerly hee

ad done: a9 itt 2511 |

Chriſtmas ing ended,a generall Congregation was made, ro giueforme Agcncal

L I B. 4+ 361

—

1+, reftant Am+

to the handlingafche Sacrament of Order. They. difcourſed of the abuſes is ieatoler
which, in this, wereentred intothe-Church , and the. Nuncio of Uerons ſaid, forthe dicur

that cherewasin all ſome abule, worthy of amendment, butinthisan ocean norte

of them: '||And,'after many>tragicall- exclamations were made, they re- Orr.
ſolued, accordinglyto their cuftome;, firſtro propoſerhe Articles drawneout
of the Latheran doQrine, and then difſeuſſewhich ſhould bee condemned
for hercricall; and frameche Anarhematiſmes and Heads of doctrineandinthe
end, ſpeake of theabuſes. Twelue Articles were given tothe Diuines,where-
on they dilcourſed, morning and eucning. Outofthe opinions of theDi-
 uines, the Depurie Pacheco fila firſt _ —— |
H © creticall

——— ts
-— $1 "IES GE RES ” _—_—
x 4 a Xs \ -
% w_— o >

r= _ _—_—

762 "Pl The Hiftorteuf L1s.4.

—

———_
—— 4
*
”

1552 hereticall roſay; that Order'is nor arruc- and proper Sacrament; or that it is
>——> oneoriely, which rendeth to! Prieſthood , by many mcanes ; to.denie the
Cure 5. Fflerarcbitz ro (ay that theconſent of the people is neceſſary ;to ſay tharthere
Pomnnn 6. is notone ViliblePriclthood; that VnEtion is nor neceſſary ; that che'holy
try 2.  -Ghoft is not giuen-in ir; tharBiſhops are nor Demre Diumo, and ſupcriour

to Prieſts. Vponthele, fourc points of Doctrine were made; of the neceſ-
ſitic and inſtitution of che Sacrament of Order; of the viſible and external
Prieſthood of the Church; ofthe Eccleftaſticall Hizrarchie; of the difference
ofa Prieſt froma Biſhop: This doarine and Canons, becing - £2 by
the general Congregation, were all pur:;nto one-Decree, vtiderthe ſame con-
why nomen- text 2 with tharof the Sacrifice, to'be publiſhed in a Seſſion. -Yerit was nor
con emc doneforthercaſons which ſhall bedeclared. Therefore there is noparticu-
Cans Jar mention made of whar did paſle in.the Congregations of Berber and
_— Lb | pq"; becauſe the ſame things were dilcuſſedagaine'ynder *Pins:4:in the
lawarx. Third reduction of the Councell ; vato which when we ſhallcome, the diffe-
rences ſhall bee ſhewed berweene the Decrecs framed now, and thoſe which

wereaft:reſtabliſhed ynder Pur. |
The Eledtors,,,  Bytnewes comming to. Trentthat there were leuies made of Softtdicrs,

crave lcauc io

depare. throughout all Germany , and that there was feare of warre, the three E-
Icors ſeeing their States were in danger ,craued lcaue of the Emperour, by

Leners and Melſcngers;toreturne, thatthey might preſeruerhem. Cafar,de-

faring the.Councell ſhould continue, anſwered them,in the beginning of the
I552. yecre 1552. that the rroubles were nor fo greatas the fame ; that he had fent
E ro know therrueth, and that a few men onely were in Arme$bur thatthe ci-
tics continued in their obedience, and Maurice, of whom the report was,thar
he had raiſed ſome ſtirres, would ſhortly come vnto him,and had ſent Ambal-
ſadours, who were already in Iſþruc,and would ſhortly be in Trent;that thoſe
few Souldiers,lodged in Thurimgia, who made ſome excurſions vpon.the ter-
ritorieot cheBiſhop of Menrz , did mutin for want of pay onely ; that he bad
ſent oneexpprelly to pay them, and giuethem their paſport; that heeknew
whatſocuer was ſpoken and fcared,and did not negtectany thinggtharhehad
ſomc in cuery place to aducrtiſe him., anddidſpare nocolt ; therefore hec
exhorted them not troabandon [the Councell;, which would: bee m dan-
ger to beediffolucd with their departure, | which would giuc a greatblowe
ro Religion': - and..if their States want anyiprouiſion;' letthem-catmmaund
their Miniſters, and giue him notice, and hce will giue thenr all afli-

i —- BA  REATOIA Ao9 | D319. Ao Ofad 2mm:
JocAmbata*,.,' Wolfacs Colerus, and.Leonardus Badehornw Ambaſladorglyr

=.
o b F

dors of Saxo- Mari e;Ele-
2zcome9 Ctor of $Sdx07y,arriucd.in Trent the7.of Janiary; whichgave great ioy to the
© ElectorsandGermanPrelates, beingafſurcd hereby, that 'Menrice did nor at-
cempt any thing. \ They firſt treated 'with:the Emperars:Atnbaſſadors, fay-

ing, tharthcar Prince,defirous ofedheord , determined tolfend rothe Coun-

T1. Ccll{ome godly Diuines,' nien loving peace',; which the other:Proteſtant
tazon. Princes would docalfo; butthat aſafe Conduct was firlt' neceſſary; in the
forme of char of Bafilland that, inthe meanewhile, alltreatic'in the-Coun-
cellſhouldceaſe, and that, after. their arrivall ; rhe things alrcadyhandled

ſhould: bee reexamined; "it notbering a generall Councell withous;the pre-

pI pls | ſence

FW

—— - — >» _ w _ «

Ls BY ee. the Councellof Tredr. 363

ſcncc ofall Nations; that the. Pope ſhould: haue- na power to preſide, but. 1552
ſhould ſabmic himfeife ro the Councell , and releaſe tri rhe Biſhops>>— |
that their voyces may befree. They added,rhat,in the-Copgregation , they Cranes, 5.)
would expound-alt more ar large; which: they defired ſhould bee afſembled'romane s.
quickly. becauſe their Diuines were withinche diſtapceof fourry miles, and _exrgdes |
didexpedt onely to beecalledi The Emperours Ambaſladours gaue goud
wordes., becauſe the Emperour to entcrtaine Maurice, - commaunded they.
ſhould bee well vied: ' Theſe Ambaſſadours treated inthe ſame manner with:
the Prince Electors, and Cardinall of Trent, but refuſed: ro treate with Car-
dinall Creſcentius,and his Colleagues, that they mightnotſeeme to acknoW-.
ledge them for Preſidents. They deſired to bee admitted in publique, ro
preſenttheir Mandate , and to bee recciued as thoſe of the EleFtorof Bran:
deburg had been ; whereof the EmperoursAmbaſſadours gaue them hope, _
and.promile , thatthey might enterraine them. But.,'on the other fide, the _
Legate and Nuncy did plainely refuſe to alter the forme of the Sate Conduct, noms
ſaying, it was too much diſhgnourable for the Synode , which reprelenteriag*
rhe Catholike Church, that foure SeCtaries ſhould make difficulty ro beleceue
it; ncicher would they ſtoppe the courſe of the Decrees, already putin order
with maturitie. And what hope can there bee of the conuerſion.of Germa-
nie, when they come with theſe demaunds. And, forhearing them1n
publike, ir wasiult, becauſe it was promiſed ; but beeing ſent to the Coun-
ccll, of which chey ſee and know that the Legateand Nuncy are Preſidents,
chey mult acknowledge them for ſuch , wt clfe they cannot bee admitted ;
for ſo they had ipeciall Commiſſion from the Pope, when thoſe of Wittenberg
came ; tharto reical{c oathes , and ſuch like impieties , they would rather dic,
then cauſero be done: and thatthey would ſooner depart, diſſoluc the Coun-
ccll,and command che Prelares not to aſliſt atany ate. The Emperour, en- Ofen?cthhe
formed hereof, who tooke the buſineſſe to the heart, was offended with the a
obltinacie of che Papalins, who,vpon a nice point of honour,would diſturbe
a buſinefle of thar confequence,and raile a warre,which,in the end, might be
their owneruine. And he ſentbacke order to his Ambaſſadours, and the
Cardinall Madruccio,to vicall meanes,and his owne authoritie allo, to pacific
che Legate, firlt with intreatics, then with high words, ifthey could norfind
a temper, which might farisfie both parties, and to force the Preſidents,in a
ciuill manner,to yeeld to that which was iuft.
The Emperours Ambaſſadours, and Madruccio, aduiſing together, reſol-
ued not todemand of the Preſidents all at once, Gur firſt, onely to receive the:
Ambaſſadours ; Whercin they vſcd long perſwaſtons, which did all tend to
ſhew, that when they were brought into the aſlembly, where themſclues ate
Preſidents,it might be ſaid, that their Prefidencie was acknowledged though
before no particular complement had becne vied with chem. To. the per-
ſwaſions , they added intreatics in the Emperours name;;mixed-with ſome
words, ſignifying that it was not fit to abuſe his clemencic, nortoforce him:
ro vſe other remedies; that neceſſity was apotent incitation , to him that had
power in his hand. [lirthe end Creſcentins ſuffered himſelfe:ro be perfwaded 19
recciue them , notin Seſhon, bur ina publique generall Congregation in his
houſe,thinking that thereby he ſhould! be acknowledged as Head. | His edge
| Hh z being

oy
£4.

_- * - — — © ——_—

wb —

364

| The Hiſtorie of © - L1 a To

a.

v5 52

—  — —— — —

beeing thus abated ,they came toſpeake of ceafing/to treate of the!points of

id _—_ .doQrine. Toledo (aid;rhat he had heard it often preached, that theſaving of

Ivirivs 2;

CHARLES F;-

EDdwany 6,
Hunky 3.

KN Rs

At F inſtance
ot whoſe Mi-
mite. s ehcy
change their

: OP111 ON,

A conſul:ati-
on abour che
maner of ce-
cciuing the

Proteftants

in Councell.

'ohe ſoule:was ſo deareto CHR1.ST, that hee would deſcend againe, and

ſafferon the Croſleto gaineit; and pow thar they refuſed to ſauc ail Germany,
where was the imitation of C#r1$sT? The Legatc excuſed himſclfe vp-
on the abſolute commands of the Pope , which hee muſt needes obey. Bur
che Ambaſſadour replying, thar;ro a Miniſter inſtruction is giuen, in wri-
ting,and matters of dilcretion are-referred ro iudgementr, the Legate aid, that
hee.ſaw well, that this was adegrec- to demand a retraCtation of the: things
already decided. The Ambaſladour gave his word that hee would neuer
ſpeake of that, yea , would deale cfteCtually with the Saxons, tomake them
deſiſt fromtharrequelt. ' In theend,the Legate, perſwaded by the Nuncis. of
Terona , who ſuffered himſclfeto bee oucrcome firſt, not to lay ( heefayd)
on the Popes backe, and the Councels, ſo great a burtheu, that ſo1mportanr.
a buſineſle ſhould beeprecipirated ,and {o {mall a delay denied, condeſcen-
ded co (ay, that hee was content, ſo that the Prelates, in the general Congre-:
gation, did approouc it; to whom allo he referred himſclfe forthe Safe Con-:
duct, which they required. / 3-51

The Congregation was called , roconſultypontheſe particulars zand the
delay was catily granted , vpon the perſwaſtons of the Imperialiſts. :For the:
Safe condutt , the conſultation was more hard, not oncly forthe reaſon al-
lcadgedby the Legate, but becauſe the name of the Councell of Baſil, and
the referring themſchues to it, was abhorred ; and, which did more im-
port, they thought thae ſome things might fit thoſe times, and nor thele,
b=cauſe the doctrine of the Bohemians was not fo contrary ro the Church
of Rom:. Notwithſtanding all theſe oppofitions , the authoritie of the three.
Eleftors, andoof the Cardinall Madruccio , and the negotiation of the Empc-
rours Ambaſladours preuailed.

Bur *7 etrus Tagliauia, Arc hbiſhop of Talermo, ſayd, that onevcry princi-
all point was omitted , whether it ſhould bee allowed , that they ſhould fir

inthe Councell or nor, and what termes of honour ſhould bee giuen them,
and their Prince. For, to vic them mcanly would breakeoff the bulineſle,
and to honour manifeſt heretiques, would beea greatpreiuaice. T heſame,
and greater conſideration multbee had, how to Dehiani themſclues rowards
the Diuines whichare to come, who pretend to hauca yoyce, and will bec a
partic in difputations-and Conſultations,nor will be eſteemed, as the Church

mult elteeme them, that is, WOES and condemned,

with whom itisnotlawfullto treat, but oncly to inſtru them, if they hum-
bly crauc it, and pardon them by fauour. 'Concerning this propoſition,
much was ſaid of the varictic of times, vnto which all lawes muſt be accom-
modarcd ; that the ſame Popes which did conſtitute thoſe Decretals, would
not oblerue themiin theſe occaſions ; that nothing; is'more eaſily broken,
chen charwhich is moſt hard. - Which reaſons, though they perſwaded the
maior part,yet they knew not whatto rcſolue. - It ſecmed, that rodetermine
what rigot ofthe law was to bec retained , and whatto bee mitigated, was a
mattcr of much and long conſulration, not to bee reſolued on without the

Pope and Colledge of Cardinals, which the Rraicncfſc of time could nor
Da i ſuffcr

en AH =” "x LABELLED —

Ling! "the Gunceltaf Trans.

alfirs 'C -W henall-weredoulstull, che Biſhop ſhopof Nanbsrg.c 2rrunel Gayd, © Ke 0
charneccſliry didiexcuſveucry tranſgrefiion,andihering gm ,
ers of Germary ,/1lelexhings:weanmat on, and,

Buri; for moreaſſurance.; it was-goad nay tongs i = Tl a Fg

was done for-charitie ;and piety; whigha liam, a
thoſe that wandet zand thazitisivoderſits pare 5 19yt prexyd dicsj

rough CA,

with choſeclabſcswhich the Lawycrs know. howgo-find. This opinion {a = th
readily cmbraced;firſt by the Durch,thenbyche Spagith Prelares,and'ac laſt, ® fe 2m oh

ſorhewhatcoldly.by the [ralians, the Legatoxomaigin immgoucable, an
ſhewing|plaincly _ hee ſtood quiet, being forced by peel ts: » 1 heſe g-
folutrons being ſothed/; it was reſplued that; the 24.9f-rhemancyh er
fhould bcc a 7. a 5; hey 4, ,to recoiutand heare the Saxon. Ang bat:
ſadours;,that the 25.1day the: Sefton ſhould bee: held}, wherciathe dilation,
made vntill the comming of the:Proceſtant Diuines,hould be publiſhed, and
Farhcts elected , who'; ——__ with the: Nyncio of Spouto,, thould make the
Decree, .the Proteſtarion, and,Safe, Condut. The Empcrours. Ambaſla-
dours delircd to haue the draught of the Safe Condy&t, before, igwas publi;
ſhed, toſhewirt cheProteſtants , thatif it did nor give them ſatisfaction , it
might beſo amended, that they might not haue occaſion to refuſe it ag they
did the other; {+

'The dayes following were ſpent in the things aforclaid; which becing | An exhorts-

finiſhed, the Emperours Ambaſladourscalled the Proteſtants to-chem; and.
the Ambaſſadour "PiFtauins, hauing made an cloquenr encomialkique orati

on, of the goodneſſcand chantels of the Fathers , and cxhorted.rhem to p gue 2: the Prove-

ſome little part of farisfa&tionto'the Councell , as they receiued much

it, told them rhat ic was concluded eo recciue thcir Maxdats and perigys and
ro heare-their propoſitions ,'and:-todeferrethe concluſion. of the pgines, of
do@rine,thoughalready diſcuſſed and digeſted, ro expe the Diyines, and
hearethem firſt. - That they ſhould hauc a veryample Safe Condut, as they
deſired, whereof Tre ran: was made, - And hes was copious in ſhewing
that theſe were memorable faudurs and graces , ſaying, it was neecllary'to
yeeld ſomething rothe time yand not. to deſire all ar once; that when they
ſhall bee cntred into the bulineſſe , occalionwill make them qbraine many
things,which beforc ſeemed hard; that the Fathers doedelire ghecomming
ofthe Diuines ; thatthemſclues;, the Emperogrs Atabaſladours , hayc. mat-
ters to propoſe of great. moment, and doe ſtand angly,cxpeting that the
Proteſtants ſhould beginne , that afterwards they may comefoorth rhem-
ſeluesalfo: For this cauſe he prayed them to proceed ſlowly, in their demand,
that the Pope ſhould ſubmit himſclfe ro the Councell;, For the Fachers dge
know, that there is forme thing to bee amended in the Papal} grearnefſe, bur
wirhall, that they mult goc on cunningly; that themſelues baye dayly expe-
rience ,whardexterityand Art muſt bee vled; in treating with the Pipes Mi-
nifters;: "Likewiſe: the reexamination of the things already concluded, Vas
nottobepropoſed in the very beginning , becauleir would bee roo great an
infamy ard diſhonour tothe Councell. Therefore ler their Diving come,
who ſhould haue aconuenient audiencein all things ,'and when-they (hall
| ſoc rhemſelues wronged, it (hall cyer be _ for chem t6 fopeet The: A
H 3 ante

: 5 "__ ——m—__ _ , — -_ — - —_ yl

-366 | Jet The Hflori'opo0\ L1s 44

———— Oo we - - —

_r552 thanrs;retyritig themfelbesandcpntidering.thoakaughrofrhe fafe Gondutt,
ZD1 Fe not ediatent;\becaidſe fe 'was nor likev yharot'Baſlih which fourc
Gunktss 5. rhings ore Were granted tothe Bohemians v1; Thailrbiey ſhonkd$zuc a
EDviaxy'6;. Fi troyoyce/ 2, Fhatthe holy Scriprurczthe practilofancientr@hurch
WYE, HeCountaly; atid [tikcrpreters}iconformable3s the Soriprure, ſhould bee
Whoarenos FaQges: 3; ThatthoyWiight cxereiſe theirreligion in their houlcs, 14; Thar
- — wha not! ing-ſhould be donchvcontttapr and Yiſdaine of:rtheir doctrine. c1Of
theSate Con- theſe foytes; the ſecond *pasdiffgencirom tkdowhichi was grannted jt this
; draught,and he three orherswererorally'kefrour:! They dulpeRted:alfoybe-
cauſcthe Coiuncell d i&nor promiſe them ſecurity inthename _—_—
and Colledie&6f Cardinals as didchiat of Baſil." Yer they-reſolyed nar

trtention of this bat tB'demand rhe-inf erring of rhe other (4;clauſcs :ahdrol4
theEmpetouts Ambaſfadours' plainly , tharthey couldnorreceitcirinahis

forme becauſe they had this cxprefſe comniiſhon 1n their.inſtructions:/Tiledo

ſhewed {dine diſeaine, that they ſhould norconrent thetnfclues , wvith-thar

which he,andhis Colleagues ,had obtained; with ſo muchpaines!, rhat the

chicfe itmportance wabitythe ſecurity of comming and departing;andthar thb

rel1due appertained to the maner of their negoriarion, which might more eas

ſly be conchaded by the preſence of the Dinines - thatiriwas roomuch ob«

Forwhia [tinacicroyeeld in nothing,and to defireto giue lawes alone ro the whole
| age Church.Bur it norbeing impoſſible 'ts remoue them withtheſc reaſons;from
Audelivore -YHOr reſolurion,they ſaid, intheend;thar theywould referreir roche Fathers,
. 1 towhomthey reſtored the draiisarof the-lafe ConduR, with theadditions
Which wererequired. wo -97711 | | SY
 FheLegare and preſidents, vnderfianding.the requeſt and reſolution of
the Proteſtants, ſhewed chefmperours Ambaſladours how vniuſt and vn» '
 mecttheir demands were. Foriinthe tormeotthar of Baſil they neuerfound
thatit was granted to haue a'deciſiue. voyce tinithe Councell; bur, that the
Scriptute, practiſe of rhe Church, Councels, and Nactours , who ground
themſelues on it,, ſhould bee' Iudges, is fayd , becauſe the pradtile of the
Church is called by che name of Apoſtolicall Tradirion:: and when it is ſaid,
the holy Fathers, it is vnderſtood:that they ground thetnſclues onthe Serip.
rure, becauſe rhey haue no orher gounds.' - The third,ro exerciſc their Re-
ligion in'their owne houſes, is-vndcrltood, with condition that-ir-bce not
knowen, anddone withour ſcandajl. The prohibition, that nothing ſhall
bee done in comtempr of them ,/is expreſſe when itis promiſed, that , by
"no meanes, they ſhall bee offended. Therctore that it did appearethauthey
complayned without cauſe, onely ro cauill, and1n regard there is no hopeitb
content them, there doeth remaine nothing bur ro giue them the'Safe Con-
duct, as itis made,andto leaue them to their liberty, to make vſcofir or not,
The Earle of Mountfort replied, that nothing could bec more feruiceableuo

© the publique cauſc,'then to take from them all pretences and cauils;and to
* make them vnexculableto the world: therefore, in regard there was p06 xe-
all differeice betweene the Safe Conduct of Baflandthis, roftoppe:their
- mouthes , that mighrbee copied out Verbatim , changing oncly thenamesgf
 theperſons, places, andtimes.' 'The Preſidents mooued with thar ſubtilc
and {tri&t anlwere, looked one vporranorher , and the Legar, raking the mat-
i

a.

4 !
_ » Y o —

©. Councellof FTren.

L 1B, 44

£

vnaduiledly., and comerazy.ro Chriſtian doctrine, and bound themſclues ro

nient. : |
Aftcrwards the Saxon Ambaſſadours were broughtin ; wherebeeing cn-
tred,and hauing madethcir obcilance tothe aſſembly, *Badehornus ſpake , v-
{ing thele cles De reuciend , and molt worthy Fathers and Lords. The
ſubſtance of his ſpeach was this. That Maurice;Ele&our of Saxony, wiſhing
them the aſliſtance of the holy Spirit, anda happy iſſue of the action, did let
them know, that hee had long ſince reſplucd , thar if cucr agenerall, free,
and Chriſtian Coyncel were celebrated, where thecontrouerlics of Religion
might be decided according to the holy Scripture, andall might ſpcake le-
curely, anda Reformation bce made inthe. Head and the members; co Fad
is

The Proce.
ſtation of the
Councel con+
cerning the

Budehornus
onc of the
Saxon Ame
baſladours
makethan
oration in the
genecrall con-
grezation,

_—y FIres ——_—

268

Lrs,

1562

his Diuigesthirher. That now/chinkingthey arc affembled'rorthisend hee

HA
Iviivs 2. — TY ; | . % 40 Harnakd ps abs.
Cuanzzs 5: tO Carty theit (*onfeſſion to thar Synod; which was notyetdone; infegard of

-? hath called his Theologucs rogerher, cottittianding them ro chooſe ſome,

Enward 6,
Hanxy 2;

ENS

acertaitie conſtitution of the Councell of ("oftance, thar faith or ſate Con-
dnt; giunby the Empcrout, Kings, or others, to hereriques, or perſons
ſulpe&rd, dughtnot tobec obſcrued; and of the exattple of the Bb s,
who would'nort gocto Baſil, withortt ſecuritictrom the Counccll.Therefore
that the EleFor delitred chat ſacha (: afe Condut ſhould bee giuen ro his Dx-
uincs,Counſellors,andtheir families; thattior long ſince/#certaineforme of
ſafe Conduct was picſented ro him, much differentfrom'tharof Bafl\;Yfo that
the Diuines thought it-dangerous ro come hither with it, becauſe, by ſome
Decrecs made in Trent ,'and already printed, ir didappeare,tharthey are ac-
counted heretiquesand {chilmariques, though they neuer hauc beenecither
called or heard. Therefore the Prince demaimdeth , {he ſayd) char his men
may be excuſcd,and a ſafe Conduct granted,ihthe forme of that of Befil,and

_ thac,vnder(tanding that they would proccede tothe concluſionof thecon-

rroucrled Articles , ir ſcemed ynto himAa thing preiudiciall ,-and contrary rs

_ all law of Gob and Man, jnregard hismen were lawfully hindercd , for
wantofafafeCondudt. Who therefore prayeth them thar all may be defer-
red vntill his Diuines be heard,vwho be bur fixty Dutch miles diſtance, ' That

afterwards it being related ro him,that the Proteſtants nay nor be heard con-
ccrningthe controuerled Articles, defined the yeeres paſt; the greater part of
which containe gricuouserrours , the Prince defireth thar they may be reex-
amined,and his Diuines ſuffered to ſpeake, and that determined which (hall
bee conformable ro theword of Go Þ , and belceeued by all Nations of the
Chriſtian world. Fot the things determined haue beene handled by very
fey of thoſe who oughtroaſlilt in the generall Councell, as docth appeare
by theprinted Caralogue; 1t becing efſentiall roa generall Councel,thar all
Nations ſhould bec admitted,and freely heard. Thar the Prince alſo docth
remember, that many controuerſed Articles doe concerne the Pope; and the
Councelsof ConStance and Bafthauing determined, that the Pope, inpoints
of faith,and which concerne himſelfe, is ſubie& ro the Counce]l, itis fit the
ſame ſhould be done inthis place, as alſo, which was conſtituted inthe third
Seſlion of the Councell of *Bafil, that all perſons of theCouncell ſhould bee
abſolued from the oarhes of Obligation ro the Pope, as farre as concer-
neth the cauſes of the Councell. Yea, thar the Prince isof opinion, thar,
without any further declaration, by vertucof the conſtitutions of thoſe
-Councels, all arefree from thoſe bonds. Therefore praycth the aſſembly,
chat they would firſt repeate, approouc, and ratific the Article of the ſuperi-
ority of the Councellabouc the Pope, eſpecially in regard the Cleargic hath
need of reformation, which hath bene hindercd by the Popes. For the a-
buſes cannor becamended, if rhe perſons of the Councell depend on the
Popes nod, and beebound, by yertuc of oath), ropreſeruc his honour, ſtare,
and power : andif it might bee obtaincd of the Popeto remit the oarh wil- |
 lingly, it would bepraiſc-worthy , and gaincgreat finoth:eretlir and aurho-
rity to the Counccll, becauſcthe Decrees would bee made by free-men,who
might lawfully rear, andiudge according to theword of Cn x1 5sT. That
| . _

L1s 4: the Conncellof Trend. E

imcoachalio a the Prigce defircrh thathis propoſitions may be takeh ingood 55%

part, being moucd tozcnderthem, for rhezeale of his/owne faluativn,chari-

ticto wards his Countrey, and'peaceof all-Chriſtendome. © Hauing rhis dif Cuans 5./
courſe in writing,le preſented it,and-it wasreceiued byttieSccrctary,and the zomuny 5:
Speaker ſaid in the:common name, that the:Synod wouldcontader of ir, and hon th

make an{were in due rime. :1; 7 7+

After thele;thoſeof Wutenberg were heardywho preſented chis Mandate mp rx.
their Ambaſſlage. Which beiog read;they briefly ſaid;rthat they wereto ren} 19f the Duke |

of Witten-

der the Confetlion of their do&rine; andthat Diuines would.come to. de£rg.

fend ir,and:handle the ſame things moreart large,ſo that iudges might be in-:
differently choſen by both {tJes,torake knowledge of thecontronerfics:For:
their doRrine being repugnanttorhat ofthe Pope and the Biſhops his adhes:
rents,it was vniuſt char cither the Plaintifo,orthe defendant ſhould be iudget-
deltring therefore,thar what was done in the Councel the yeeres paſt, might
nat haucthe ſtrength of a law, bur that the diſcuſſion of cuery thing alrcady-
handled ſhould begin again,ic being not iuſt,char when ewo contend in law,)
whar is done by one, the other beeing lawfully abſcne,, - ſhould becof forces:
and cheracher, becauſc ir may be clcercly demonltrared,thar aſwellin the laſt;
atiocs,as in thoſc of theyeetes before, Decrees haue been publiſhed concra-/
ry-to the word of GoD. And they preſented their doEtrine,and diſcourſc irs
writing : all which was recciued by the Secretary, bur the doctrine was not
read. I he Speaker anſwered in the name ot the Fathers; that an{were ſhould/
be giuen in rime convenient. 3-713 | .

When this was done, the Eleours and Ambaſſadours depatted, the The Futer:
Prelares remaining with the Preſ1dents , to giue order for the Selsion, Firlt, viter the Saf

the Decree was eltabliſhed, and then the Safe Conduct propoſed, adding;

the cauſes why che Protellants were not content. Andconſulting,wherher

thac which they deſired ſhould bee added to the forme, they did cafily agree

all in one opinion, thar nothing ſhould be added, to auoide incxtricable dil-
utes,andancuirable preiudices.

The nextday,the 2 5.of Tanuaty, deputcd for the Sclſian , they went tothe Tics:mon

Churth with the vſuall Ceremonies, but with more Souldiers , called by the
Preſidenrs,to make oltentarion of the greatnes of the Councel,and with ma-
ny firangers, who came thither, thinking the Proteſtants ſhould be receiued.
publikely,and with ſingular ceremonies. The B.of (,atanee fang Maſle, and
Tohn Baptiſta Campeg gio, B.of Maiorica,preached,and,the vſuall Ri.es being ob-
ſerued,the Decree was read by the Maſle Biſhop; the ſubſtance whereot was:

Thar the Synod ,to performe the things already decreed; hauing exactly han- Ti Decree,

dled whatſocucr belongeth rothe Sacrifice of the Maſle, & Sacrament of Or-
der, ropudliſh ia the Seſſion che Decrees concerningthem, andrche4. Articles
of the Sacrament of the Euchariſt deferred,thinking that the Protattants, vato
whom they had giuen ſafe Conduct, would haue beenarriued by this rime;zin
regard they are not come, but haue made ſi upplicationrthat all ſhould bedefer-
red vatilanother Se ion, giuing,hope tharthey wilcome long before thecele-
bracion therot, hauing receiuedaſafe Condut in a more ample forme,the Sy-
nod delirous of quier & peace, belecuing that they wilkcome, not to contra-
dictche Catholik: faith, bur to ynderſtad the truth, & that they wil be ſatis =
with

——
——_— — —_—_—

p_—_— a ———
tt u

_ 370

—_— —_—

The Hiftorie of L1s. 4.

rr

Ig

\—YN
Ivitvs 3..::
CHARLES /$.

———_—_——  —
EDwarD 6,
HzmxkyY zo ;

— << a>

The Safe
Condud, .

— — | _ a Ser
with the Decrces of the holy mother the Church, hath put oft tke next Scfſ1-

on, yntill che nincteenth of Maich;to giv ebght ro,and publiſh the things a-

forclaid, granting them((ro remoue all cauſc of greater delay )a ſafe Congdudt,
ofthe tcnour as thall be recited , determining to handle, inthe meanewhile,
the Sacrament of Matrimony, and to proſecute the reformation, that they
may publiſh thedefinitions of this,together with the definitions of thethings
aforeſayd: The ſubſtance of the fafe Conduct was; T hat the Synod,adhering
rothe ſafe Condutt alrcady giuen, and amplifying it, doeth make faith to all
Prielts, Princes, Nobles,and perſons,of what condition focucr,of the German
nation , which ſhall, or arc already come to the Councell , Safe Conduct
ro come, remaine,propole, and{peake inthe Synode, to handle andexamine
what they thinke fir,giucarticles, and confirmethem,anſwerethe obicEtions
ofthe Councell , and diſpute with thoſe'whom it doth elect, declaring thac
the controuerſics in this Councell ſhall bee handled according tothe hol

Scripture, Traditions of the Apoſtles , appreoued Councels, conſent of the
Catholike Church, andauthoritic of the holy Fathers, adding, that they (ball
not be puniſhed vpon pretence of Religion,or oftences commirred,or which
will bee committed, (o that there necde not bee any ceſſation from Divine
Seruice, by reaſon of their prelence, cither in the journey, or in the Citic of
Trenz, orinanyplaccelle , and ſhallrerurne when it ſhall ſeemegood vnto
them,withour let, with fafcty of their robe, honour,and perſons, but with the
knowledge of the deputies of theSynode, thatprouiſion may bee made for
their ſecurity : granting that, in this ſafe Conduct, all thoſe clauſes bec held

tobce included, which are neccary for reall and full aſſurance: adding,thar

ifany ofthem, cicherin comming, or in Trent, or in returving, ſhall commir
any enormity , which ſhall nullitie the benefit of this publike fanh, hee ſhall
be puniſhed by their own Iudges,fo that the Synod may be latisficd : and, on
the other ſide,if any other in comming hither, remaining here, or returning
ſhall commir anything which may violate this Safe Condutt, hee ſhall bee
puniſhed by the Synode, with the approbation of the Germans themiſelues,
who ſhall be preſent 1n Trent, the forme of the aſſicuration remaining til!
in force, giuing leaucro their Ambaſſadours ro goc out of Trent, torakethe
ayre, and returne, to ſendand receiue aduiſes , and meſſengers ,as often as
they thall chinke fir, yer accompanied with the Depuries, for their ſcecurity:
which Safe Condutſhall remaine in force , ſo long as they be vnder the care

of the Synode,in comming to Trent,in theirabiding there , andtwenty dayes

after they ſhall aske leaue ro depart, or after it ſhall bee granted tothem, thar
they may bee rendred in a ſecure place, ar their cletion: which things it
romiſcthyfaithfully,in the name of all faithfull Chriſtians,of all the Princes,
Ecclefiaſticalland Secular, and likewiſe of all other perſons Ecclefiaſticall
and Secular, of all conditions : faithfully promiſing withall, that the Synod
ſhall nor ſecke occaſion, publikely or ſecretly,that any thing bee attempted
in preiudice of this Safe Conduct, nor.to violate the ſame,will yſc,or ſuffer a-
ny to vic any authority, power, right, ſtatute,or priuiledge of Lawes, Canons,
or Councels, eſpecially thatof { onance,and of Siena: which things in this be-
halfe,and for this time, it doth diſallow. And if the Synod, or any perſon in
it, or anythartbelong to them ſhall violate the forme of this Safe Conduttin
any

iL18. 4..
any point orclaule. whacſocuer,” and puniſhmenr bee nor inflitedto their 1 552
approbation , letthemxhinke*rhar the Synode hathincurred all che puniſh- oF
ments wiich the violaters of ſuch SafeCondudts may incurre by the law of Gunn: 4.
-GoD. or man, or cultome, withour admitting excuſe, of contradiction. romine 6;
[/Ehelc thinys beitg read, theySeffion was ended. It is cerraine thar the Pre- nay
fidcnes, doubrfull what might enſue, were willing ro bee prepared, if che :
witde were proſperous, to decide the matter of the Sacraments, all in one
Seſſhoh't -and rherefore hauing.ina readineſle all that belonged ro the Com-
munion, che Mafſe,,and Sacrament of Order, they were Sefirocs ro digeſt
alſo andputin orderall that concerned Matrimonie , thatchey might pur all
41nto obehuddls; and rohandle fuccin&ly, in atothet Seſhon, Purgatorie,
Indulgences, Imagos, Reliques, and fuch ſmall matters, (for ſothey called -
them) and chen ro end the Councell. And if any thing' were oppoſed to
this delcigne, they might (hew that the fault was notin them.
_ *. Many, who readitheſe occurrences, will marucll that the Pope, from
whom all conſultations of farreleſſemoment were wontto ptoceed, is not
named... Whichthey will:ccaſero doc, when they (ſhall know, that hee was
aduiſed from: point to point, of all the accidents and dceleignes , and thar,
when thaſcof Wattenberg werearriued , and newes catne that more were ex-
pedted; hee anſwered his Legate, and Nancy, that the Proteltants ſhould bee
catcrtained with as much courrefic as was poſſible, knowitg it was ne-
ceſlary/in ſuch caſes, ro ſuffer ſome indignity ; willing them to viediſcre-
tion, becauſe paticice-winneth honout in the end. That chey ſhould ab-
Rainefrom all _ Colloquie in matter of rcligion , either by writing,
orby word of mouth: That they ſhould endeauour, by perſwaſions and
hopes, to gaine ſome of the Proteltant Dofours, and ſhould ſpare no colt.
The Pope was aduifed of cuery thing that was done,'yet nothing hapned
that mightmake him alcer his purpoſe. But when hee vnderſtood that the
Emperoutrs Ambaſſadours had giuenthe Proteſtants hope to moderare the
Papall authoritie and faid chat they expected to ſeea gare laide oper by their
negotiation, that afcerwardsrhey mightſecondit; and bring inthoſerhings =
which they had defeigned,' and that the Fathers did hold irneceſfary to re- wiythe Pope
ſtraincichauingorher intclligence tharallthe Spaniards were of that minde, £29...
and that che Empcrourdid deſcigne ro/aduance himſelfe by debafing the Pa- r-o=-
cie, and did cheriſh che Protettants.; ts ſhow thatirdid notproceed from
Im, hismind was aliened from him ,.andrutnedro the FrenehiKing, ' Hee
theteforchearkenedtorhetreary of the-Cardinall Torn, in the Kings natne,
which being cxccuted, the Jbtorion of the Councell would follow, with
out his paihes, orwichour ſhewing tharhe did deſireir; © 549790 , 21)
The Sellion becing made, the Proteſtants, though they perceiued' cliar
the SafeConductwas norcnlarged) asthey:defired;>difſemblingtheknow- *
| ledgeot it, didderhand ic} andian authomicall copic was cot gnedby the
Eimperours:-Ambaſſdours, r6ithe Amballadqursof each Prinee? Who has
uing readit , did complaine-thar proinifts were not'kepr, and required/the
Syriods anfrwercts ihceivexpblirians;andorteirirequelts, madeconcerning,”
_ the manner of procecdingrim:the Councelt:! branes
them-cogacon with dexecrity; ſaying, as before, chat with timgth RO
”

obtainc

the Councell of Trent. "on 471

372 - The Hiſtorie of : L1s. 4.
L552  obtaine all,but ſccking things diſtaſtfull, and before there was opportunity,

> -— euery thing would be more hard. Thar it was not neceſlary ro cxpreſſe in
Cuaxcns 5. the Safe Condutt, that they might cxerciſc their religionin their houſes, in
Eowaxo 6, regard it was vndcerltood to be granted, becauſe it was not forbid. That no-
x7 +, ching ſhould beedoneto their diſgrace was plainely expreſſed, inthat good
and recall vſage was promiſed and, befides thar, publique prohibitions will be
made to all, which will be of greater force, For the reaſons to be alleadged
in Councell, the ſame was ſaid in ſubſtance, that the Scripture ſhall bee the
ground, but when there is controucrfic of the nicaning of it, it will beene-
ceflary that the Councell ſhould be iudge. Forirt isdumbe ofit ſelfe, with-
out ſoulc,and,as ciuill Lawes, hath necde of a Iudgetogiueir life; which;in
marter of religionis the Councell, as hath been obſerucd cuerfſincerthe Apo-
The Prore. Ailes time. The Proteltants receiued the Safe Condutbut with Proceſtation,
Rincs receive thar they did it. onely to ſend it to their Princes.
duR with The Prefidents,co cxaminethe Sacrament of Matrimony,as was decreed,
TY Amide. making a generall Congregation, and chooſing Deputics, gaue foorth 33.
ns Articles, in that marter,to be diſcuſſed by the Diuines, They ordained allo,
+ < zrucnt® that the Depurics ſhould makethe Canons, as the particulars were cxami-
ned, Some Congregations wete beld,and ſixe Canons framed. Whereupon
the Proteltants complained tothe Emperours Ambaſſadours, that thehope
that with time they ſhould obtainea reuiew of the things decided, was quite
Whereof che Taken away » becaule they proceeded to new deciſions, while their Diuines
Proccttine were expected, The Emperours Ambaſladours could not obtaine of the
d>complaine Preſidents ro [top their proceeding , which they haſtened with all diligence,
The 74p«l;ns NAT Cither the Protcftants mightnot comero Trent, or , if they came, mighr
ory g findeall decided. For the reexamination, the Pope, the Court, and all the
faſter, Prelates, were relolucd to denie it conſiantly. And they thoughe that th
mighe with better grounddenie the reviſion of many things, then of a few.
But the Emperour, whom it did much concerne,to bring the Proteftantsro
| Trent, but nothing atall to hauc the matters reexamined, aduiled by his Am-
«dn baſſadours, of whar the Proteſtants complained, and how they were hinde-
Emperow. redo goetothe Councell, ſent a man to Trent, with commiſſion to goe to
Rome allo to negotiate, 'thar all ation might. be deferred for ſome few dayes,
ſhewing that that haſte did precipitate the bultneſſe, gaue ſuſpicion ro the
Protcſtants;and made them more yowilling togocto the Councell, He gauc
order allo, thathis men ſhould beecommanded not to proceede , and ſhould
Pratelt againſt the Fapalins,if perſwaſions would nor ſerue, This refoluri:
oh of the Emperour,ſignificd in Trent, caulcd a penerall Congregation to be
called , where it was reſolued , to deſiſt fromall Conciliary a&t, during plea-
fure of che Synode.. 1. /|_, 01% 262, LEN Bo 00ICLE |
Wherewidh Bt the:Pape was dilpleaſed with that which-was done, anddiſdaining
the Pope is 3 : | 34" —_
dileacd, atithe Empergur for other caules allo, : wrote ro Treritycrbat fuſpending the
As allo with actions as few:dayes as'was poſbblc,, they ſhould, \folt:reputariowofrhe
meanenp'e Councell;reſume them wirhourreſpect.» Another cauſe, which, belidesrhis;

Ferdinand, *-
aint the B- had proupked the Pope and Cardinals, was,that-Ferdinanid defiring eo pofleſſt
alma. Tranfluazia,which wasaſſaulted by che Tutkes on the other ſide; vponpre:
tence! to keepe it for the young lonne of Tobp:ainode;,: George Martinaceio;
witg:do n Biſhop

XUM

&
-

”"

Biſhop ol Yeradino, a man of exeellent wiſedome and-: rear-replirarion in _ I552 |
chat.Countrey , was willing t6 keepe'it' in Iiberry*; a1 1,rco ayoyd greater Cor
danger, not being able roconrelt with, the Furkes'andthe houfe of Auftria Catint's

at once,made choycero ioynehimſclfe with rheſe, by whom col rieerpoyſi 9 Epmanns.

&
O—_— I ——

the Turkes, he heldiall inaweyen balance! *Thole of 'Anflriaukfowing IR

by gaining of this Prelar;rhey ſhould whollyobrinetheir purpole,Ferdinand,
belides other things which heedid to oblige him mor&vntorthem, promiſed
him apcnſion of cighty thouſand Crownes,' and the! Etnpironi"Whiyncd
of the Pope with greatinltance, ro create him Cardinall, and ( which was
ſcldome vſcd) to ſend the Cap, and ro'giue him leatie to wearerhe ſcarlet
habir , which was norlawfull', becauſe hee was a Monke of Saint Bafl: all
which wasdoncin the middeft of October." But this vaine ſhewof honour
becing not elteemed by the Biſhop , was not willing ro peferre the inter-
elts of the houſe of Auſtria, before his Countrey , he was traiterouſly , and
cruelly {laine,by Ferdiands miniſters, the cighteenth of December, 'vpon
pretcnce that he held intelligence with the Turkes. This accident did cxcce-
dingly moouethe Cardinals, who thought chemſelucs molt ſacred and in
uiolable. They conſidered of what importance the example was , that a
Cardinall ſhould bee ſlaine vpon fained cakumnies, or for ſuſpicion. And
they incited the Pope , who was forward of himſelfe, ſhewing him thatthe
Cardioall was poſlc{ſour of a great treaſure, to the value ofa million , which
belonged ro the Chamber , being the goods of a Cardinall, dead without a
Will. For allcheſe reſpe&s the Pope depured Cardinals to rake knowledge of
the crime, and Ferdinand,and all his Miniſters of Tranfiluania , were thought _
rohaue incurred the cenſures. Commiſſioners were ſent to Yienna co make ay em
inquifition. And , not to returne to ſpeake of this againe, I will ſay heere, by MNyecnoughr
way of anticipation,that the heat being abated,as the cuſtomeis, becauſe that 5:9tecen-
which was done could not bevndone, not to raiſe any greater ſtirres, the
proceeding was with much conniuencie; andchough rhe proceſſe was made
as Ferdinand would, yet nothing was prooucd againſt the dead man, and the
purpulerodraw the inheritance to the Chamber died, becauſe little was found,
in compariſon of that which was thought, Martinaccio,a man bountifull , ha- |
uinz ſpent all in the puþlikeſeruice,and that which was found being diuided _
amonglt the Souldiers. The Pope declared Ferdinand, and all thoſe who {97
werenot preſent at his death, to beabſolued, with thisaddition, if therhings <ondiioually,
deduced in the Procefſe were true. Whereof the Emperours miniſters con1- ſeluch.
playning , as if the integrity of Ferdinand were queſtioned, the Pope made
che ſentence abſolute , and thoſe onely, who were Authours of the murder,
went to Rome tg beeabſolued , bur fo,as if hey had done a good worke. And
in Hungarieand Rome it was held, that it was done by command from him
who had interelt,, according ro the viuall ſaying , that of cuery ſecret coun-
ſell hee is Aurhour , who recciueth profir by ir. Yer this did Ferdinand no
good, who ſhortly after for this andother cauſes,was chaſed out of Tranfilua-
nia. Bur becaulero ſpeake thereof, belongerh nor tomy purpole, Ireturne ro
the marrer which Hefc. | 1

The ſcyenth day of Februarie , the. next Sunday before Seprua may, -
the Goſpel ofthe Cockle being read, Ambroſe Cigogna, or Srorke (for ſohis -

| Ti Dutch

Hl tm Ln

#

_ .—_—_
Kc —— S> > OE

1552 , Dutch.name Pelargo, is cxpounded )a DomwicanDiuinc:of the Arch-biſhop
EE 73 \o Triers obfoacheg, who, applying the vawe of Cockle to the heretiques,
Cuaresy. {aid it WA He to. tolerate then , when, without danger of greater miſchicte,
Evwanps. they could pot be nopted our... This was told to the Proteſtants, asif hee
T2: had ſay, that,it was lawfull nor to obſcruethe faith given : which raiſed a
' great tumulr. , Hee defended himlelte thar, bee ſpake of herctiques in genc-

Lzall a208 ape no maxethen; what.the Goſpel-it ſelfe docethpropoſe:--bur if
;he had fayd thar it; was fixco cxtirpate them with fire, bonds, and halters, or
any other way , hee ſhquld hauc done that which the Councellin thie ſecond
_Sellion didcommand:.thathe had ſpoken modeſt]y,nor could a Sermon bee

an_—

-

-inadc vponthar Golpel without ſaying as much. The Cardinallof Trent,
andthe Emperours Ambaſſadours did pacitie the commotion, bur with diffi-
cultic, though ic was, manifc{t that the Friar ſpake not of keeping faith, nor
.of the Proteſtants particularly, bur of heretiques in generall. TheEleQor
"made thishis prerence;to depart, which hee was reſolued to doe before, by
rcaſon of ſome ſecret intelligence, which he held with the French King, as
The Ele&>r Allo to recoucr his. health ; and ſo he departed in the midit of February, lea-
craft 'uingan opinion, that it was with the good liking ofthe Emperour,and with
Tree. 'promiſeto returnequickly. Yeghe paſled not by TFpruc, norſpake with the
Emperour. "41 8
The firſtday gf Lent the Stations were,by aftixion, publiſhed in Trens, in
the ſame manner as in Rome, by the Popes graunt, to himthar viſttedthe
Churches ; which gauc cntertaincment tothe Fathers and Diuines, who, in
rezard of the intermiſhiarof the Congregations, wanted buſineſle. And be-
forc, beeing almoſt idle, they.caterrained themſclues in priuate mectings,dif-
courling variouily, ſometimes of diſfoluing , ſometimes of continuing the
Councecll, according to tac newes which was brought. In the beginning of
March, letters came. from the ElcCtour of Saxonte , to his Ambaſladours,gi-
uing them co-amillion ro proſecute their inſtances in the Councell, and ad-
uiſing thar hee was ready ro goe ro the Emperour in perſon ; which-put all
men our of feare. .Bur nor long after,a generall rumor was ſpread, thatthe
French King was confederate with the Proteſtant Pringes , ro make warre
The Fictors ayaiaſt the Emperour. The Electours of Mentz, , and ( ollen departed
Meptz, depart the eleventh of March, and palling by Ifprac, had very ſecret conference
from 7renr. ; +BY : : ,
with {e[ar; and the Ambaſſadours of Mawrice., fearing ſome danger,
went ſecretly out of Trevt, and returned home by divers wayes. Not-
_ withſtanding all this, fourc Diuines of Wittenberg , and two of Argenti-
on inedee, Haw CAMETO Trent afterwards , who, with the Ambaſſadours of that Duke
& 4:gem'wns did immicdiately defire the Emperours Ambaſſadours, that the Synode
Synod. might an{werethe propoſition alrcadic made,and begin the conference. The
Legare anſwered, tharthe nineteenth of March, a day appointed for the
Seſlion, approaching, ir was neceſſary to giuc order fort, and to han-
ale many other things » of which one ſhould bee, to- finde a ſorme how to
[reate. |
TheAmbaſa- Therefore that day a Congregation was made in the Legats houſe , and a

; bg relolution raken to prolong the Seſlion yntill che firſt of May. In this

"HIM EL | -
ncorgreg Congregation the Ambaſſador of Portugal was recciued , who preſented his
__ Manaat,

v
-y
k 7

þ

XUM

Lis: 4 4 the Councellof Tron, | .. Fs

FEES "ELLIS. IS

us CCC AO IS

Mandar,andicvadea fpcagh,and wizariſweredwithe vſuall. forme ak ork _

EE M

and thankescorhe:King 5 and wdtds of Compldmenrrs the! ArBufſadourn, >>,

Burthoſdlof Warenbergyſccing nocan{ivore 9 made wefivirpiopoſitions) Canalcy

-
%

ad .thas cherl;cigare ns WTI Ar av deb pov hie his FAG
ing-broupht/m

ny.deſtrecrdfauc, apdkcould nbtbau

any prionddcopyrrtipttientts!

{tribured chem-yntadiuers; which raifed nuchmnoile; andifoniclakvhiQ tb piciin gs

{er ted puniſhment.” For he;vnrowhome SafeiCond 1 i8@ranced Iv bor diſade 2h
ro giue adne;offcnice\vato hinthargraunterhics '- And 'thipwaseRtttifedd prod y F"

of their C335

publiqueoffence.- Yey inchocnd-all was quiered: '-115b oriw ooapiorg inning gl
> The Procceſtants;/ together with tho Empcrours'Ambaſſadours Zoefired:
often; tharthe afttion-fhould begin; which nocwirh{tand inogawas deferred,
ſomctimesivnder prerence, thartheLegate yoa nor veel ifhealthyſGhnetiches?
vndcr -diuers; others.::'The Empcrours Ambafſſadours: yſed all nieithesits:
miakerham begin, and'perſwaded the Proreftants'notip defire anmifivers
ro thedemaunds/preſenred by them, and;afrerwards notto defite"thatithe!
doctrine exhibircd by them ſhould bee examined. Bur as one difficulty way”
remooked by. the Proteſtants, ſo:another was til raifed by the'Prelidenrs,
ſometimes about the manner of creating, ſomerimes about the/ matrewwith
which tobegin. 'But-in the end, theProteftancs, perſwaded'by Piftanirs;” .
were canttent to begin-where theothers would, Yet; for all chisy/nothins |
was done..: For the-Legate, though very licke of great paſſions of mifideywas . .

bl
ic;

. : ; C 7 c = . fo ul wil
thoughero faine,that hee might tinde a pretence notro/begin;-'T heNuney' dn}

were irrefolure, and the Biſhops did not agree among theniſclues; *Forthes ©

- adherentsof Ceſar, Spaniards andothers, mooued by'theEmperouts Atmbaſi

{adours,defired*to proccede : burthe Papalins,ſulpedting'thar thetnd of the!
Imperialiſts was to come to the reformation ofthe Court of Romiejehibrace?

all occaſions of delay. And becauſethe Dutch Biſhops-were already 6p"

ted, by:reaſon of the rumours of warre, they expected the like oceafionialfs,
eſpecially becauſe rhe aduices of the Armesof the French King, audtotifede-

rates of Germanie again(t the Emperour,did continue;Protefts, atid/Manifelts

beeing publiſhed, which alleadged, for acauſe, thedefehecof Religion, ad!
libertic:of Germany. ' The firſt of April , the EleQor bf SaxoniebeſteBed'Unf©
burg,which did render it ſelfe the third day ,/and the fixtnewes theteoFeare?

to: Trent, and:thar all-Tirol did-arme, and meant to goe to 1Þruc'; thetebecif or ihe Coun:

ccl1,2nd the

”"—=_ ; s | nth. een amand4 437" ="
anopinion, thatthe armic of theconfederates did purpole ro poſſtſferhem pings

ſclucs:of the paſſages of the Alpes,to: hinder frangers/from comming into' dr from,
Germany. . Therefore' in many of the Italian Biſhopsembarqued'/#hd wWetitlion of the
downethe Riuer:Adice, to goc to Uerona;and the Ptoreftants detertvinedts wine.
depart. Jn | vor codes el noting

[There remaining bur few Prelates, and the Legate'often dotitigt; by reds Ti= Leyare
ſon of his great infirmitie, nor being able conſtantly to'refoltic ;'the Nune he Neeeg
fearing they ſhould be alone in Trent if they expected the firſt of May, accorv 719 ©”
ding tothe order, wrote to Rome, deſiring to knowe whar they ſhould do it vb4+ 10 dee.
theſe great ftrairs. The Pope, who altcady had coneladed with France, nor
clteemcd any more whatthe Emperour could doe; hating ouercomethe dif-
ficulcies by which he was compaſſed, aſſembled the Cardinals'; anU'propo'
fed tothem theaduice of the Nancy, the maior parrofwhom'didconeurre;'

It z withour

'

0,

M 90m" 15 HO 1 age So bee whe dee ent A Ce - AI att... Aarne
, Dieiw

27G: The Hoftorteof + L1s. 4.
1552 Wiheut difficulty; /thattbc Gouncell ſhould bce {ulpenged:! The Bull was
>> rad, andiſent to'7] rent, and letters addreſted tothe Nwicy,' giuingthem au-:
YIIYS 2$+ 17 | -pog . ' 4 : :
Ce«i424.5, >tharitytaxcthekulþanſion;r Therefore, when they layyvrgent tccelbtie,they
Emaar Ware torhmeandcd iglyecld ynco jBy) Bot purting the dignity of-ctheCouncell-
HS»: ndanger; Which4hould be reſtored aranother, motepeaccablerimei;nor!
From wheges SHTOIMING I ablohae)y-, tharichey might kcepe it in their power,/and vie
he FEE. IE PORIGCASIONS DU fuſþcndingar, forſomeyeeres.: The Nuncyiconcealed
pnd che. this-anfiaſRee, and conſulted withthe Emperours Ambaſladors, andthe prin-'
Cd ' cipal prelates, who deſired thatorder ſhould be expeRed from Caſar;abd cx-!
_ * renuagtd the featn:as: muchas: they. could: Notwirkſtanding thePrelates,
thaughibomaior part were Spaniards, fearing their owne perſons; and ha-”

ting the-Proteſtants, and not hoping , thar in ſo grearſtraits,, theEmperour
could-haye time toy thinke:of the/Councell, gaue conſent to: aſulpenſion,”
Therefors che Nancy did intimaatetbe publique Sefton for the 28. of Aprilz:
ſo.greatiwascheir feare:that theycould not expect two daycs,the timeappoins!

reg torr, 7! +1 Poftierots 050 lt 1 boricidirg 9P4:i20
-Thoſe few that remained didafſemblezavd, afterthe Ecclefrafticall cere-"
mgnjes-werecndcd:;(forthepompes: were: omitted for that time }the'Nun-

Which i5©3** cio. of Siponto Cauſed the, Decreeto bee read; by the Secreraty. Theſubſtance
03 he 2.0f whereof was: That the Synode'( the two Nuncy preſiding in their owne:
Fn name, anghinthe name of Cardinall Creſcevtins the Legare, gricuouſly ficke)
-+ pearl is. aſſured, that all Chriſtians dag knowe, that the Councell of Trent was firlt
for wmoyerts. affembled by -7/aulud; 2nd after retiored by Iulins , at therequelt of Charles
the Emperour,.to Teltore Religion, eſpecially. in Germanie., and toicorredt
manners,and that many Fathers af 'diuers Countreys did mecte withour ſpa-
ringany.paines , or fearing any, dangers, - avd.thar the proceedingwas pro-
ſperous;,;,vwich hope that the innovatorsof Germanies would come to the
Conncaliind yeeldrotac realons.of the Church: butthar, by theſubrilty of

the enemig, tumults ar: ſuddenly railcd, which hauc intetruptcd the courle,

taken awayall hopegf proceeding , and giuen caule of feare, that the Synode

would xatherirricate the mindes of many,then pacific them. Therefore per-
ceining.thateuery place, Germanie elpecially,ison fire with difcords, and thar

the Dutch Biſhops, eſpecially the Electors, were departed to make prouiſion

for theiz.Chyrches;ithath determined not to contend Withneceſhtic; but ro

- be falenr;yngll better times. And: therefore they doc ſuſpend the Progreſle

- for two yeeres,with condition,that fall be quiet before that time beecnded,

_* the Councell ſhall bee vnderitood ro'bee reltored ; burif the impediments

ſhall notceaſe atthecndof two yeeres , it ſhall bee vnderſtood that the ſuſ-

penſion is taken away ſo ſoone as the impediments are remooued, without a

new Conugcation of the Councell;:bis Holincſle, and the holy Apoſtolique

Sca, hautyg giucn conſent and authoritic to this Decrec- : And,mm themeane

_ time, the: Synode dath exhort all Chriſtian Princes and Peclatcs , as:farre as

- concerneth Tyery one,tocauſcall the Decrees of the Councell , madevnull

then, ro beoblerucd in their Dominions, and Churches, This Decree bee-

ing read, was approued by the Italians. TheSpaniards, who were twelue,

5 ane—hy ſayd,thatthe dangers were not ſo great as they were made. : That fiucyeeres

Prelaces. _ finceChiuſa Was takenbythe Proteſtants, when no commander, but Caftel-
| alto,

XUM

4 Shoe "Cr Fas 2
vhs :
that a -

L s, =
P

bd

rinde.d © heConpellfionie 7G

4
— ” OG

oNow -

Ut SCORER
rac's ſpec

Paplighs. pe tithliinangs neVeide of-Sipemta; guting his beqedidt
ras. Farhens gayetbguroue a boginthcirioumcyliFlic Newpabdbiie) wy
lign Pxelatds beeingdepareed yin the cad; the Spaniard: deparredalia,endſo> © /\.
d&g che Emperours Ambaſſadaurs, abd the Cardinal (orgfcentive wasearriedr telco
rof{erona; wherebes dings 91123 MATTY Jo v1) © AS 21 500369 off, tug ere:
;;Fprhelalt part.ohthe Decree:gelhe>Nuncy; were, mic ti blamedrin/Rome, The Nunc 4
that ithe;Syngde had deratmiucdgbeobicriyationofthe Coniticuriog8fWirh-2: blowed
ogt a5king;farl} che confirmation aftbeApoliedique Sea,alledgiog)that rhis,yar of ti
haping þetp exquiſucly oþlcrued hy<all forader Councels) was aigrear viur-| 5
payangnd operate Papalauthorite, | Some-allo madea fcruple ... +
cha;.all charaiſiRed-in char Seſlion ;-had-incurred thecenſure of the Canonyg ©
Omnes,dist.2.2, hauing doneapreiudice to a priviledge ofahe Popes althori-
Ly preiending:; thanthe'Dccrets of che-Coupecll , were of ferceibefare rhe
confirmatian.- I bcy-fayd' for themſclues , tharthey had.nort 'commanded

2

F And their de-:.

but-perfrnaded ihe obſeryauion, ) But'the anfrwere did not fatisfic, becauſe to fence sno:

eſteemed

oblerue as4law., doth preſuppolſe an obligation; and in theDeoree, the ex- food.
bortationis, referred-onely to Princes and Prelates, who btocxhorted 46 cauſe  '
the Decroesre becablerued. And for the oblcruers, a former obligation is
preſuppoled;and format of. faith, they faid the anſwere could: haue: no

place. . They:might have excuſed themſclucs, and ſayd, that cueryithing was

approoucd, by the Pope;, before it- was publiſhed intherScſhons.- Neither
would this haue ſatisfied, becauſe, thoughit was true, yet.it did nobappeare.
'This gaue occaſion to wonder, rhatthere ſhould; bee fuch-a-contention, be-
rweene the Synode anththe iProteſtants', concerning) the things.deerecd,
which the. Proteſtants yould hauercexamined, and the Synode would hauc
ro: bee held ay.congluded.:, For. if they were; not, perfectly eſtabliſhed; rhey
Might bee regxamined;..cAndrhey:difcourſed,tharthe Pope,who was tocorti-
firme themy|; was to dot it, cicher with taking knowledge of the-caulſe jor
without; if without che confitmation was a vanitic,, and according rothe
prouerbe, that none ſhould rake apotion,andanother beepurged zifwith ir,
rhen the Pope ought to.examine hers ,andſo mightcucry one, and rcferre

himſelfero his HolineſſecIn ſurmezif the force of the Decrees of che Coun-

celldgpendeth-on:the Papes:Confirmarion, before rhargthcy arein luſpence g
and may bequeſtioncd, ahd:diſcuſſed better, which waslalwayes denied to
the Proteſtants, | Somedid conclude, that the Decree was adeclaration that
the confirmation was gat inecdfull. . The Proreſtants thought not of thelc
reaſons , which the fttobger they are in the'Doftrine, of the Sea of\Rome.,
ſo much thejmore the-yſc of chem would eadammage thcir pretenfions.
But becauſe: chere was tmore ſpeech. of the validirie of this'Decrec: in rhe
yeeret 564:w cnt: Councel ended, chat which remainethiſhall bedeferred
#93 | Chg + mon} 21Bn-:1oTnotf) 5:3
THE Thought .

ER LS

— — —_-

- — OIOI a” wy -

378"! The Hiſtorie of ©

L IB. 4 .
1552  ThougtitheProvdltancs hadeHc better jm marinaging the warte} yet Man”*
> rice treated Friendly wil Fepdinatid, yea, wetirro bim ildto bis owneFerrites)?
Cunrys ries; defirinie riothitpe6t hin, bur che f eedome of the Landgrare;, His Father?
ane in law; the hbinyor Gemanepangipeaee of Religion." The*Pivtcſtans
Haar 's""Armmds didiltil demi eheEmperour; thoughtiec weretibe ready is |
+1 make & thinking hechad Germany vnder hisyoke hee Would rior:
- angJeane ary part ofthedominationwhich tread aſſumed : and Pelinand; #7
The Emperor ter tide ha@ rented With! Mauric?;>WenrroVfþruc, ro perfwade hit.” Butthe '
we. enemies Mtniieapproaching that Citte; the timperout was force#to flie by |
"night; withall hisCourt, andafter he had-wandered in the Moutitaines @f
Trent, he came to flaco a City of (arinthia,atthe confines of the Venetians;”

þ .. whers hewas mach afraid ;becauſe'theScnate, ro ſecure the fromiers, ſen
F lon 1mm min? 5Y ,thovglvthe Venetian Ambaſſadour did aflurc him
| --- that they were arhhis feruice, itthere were occaſion to' employ them, ''Before"
Andrreech hedeparred' from [pruc;he {er John Fredericke, Duke of Saxony, at libertic, to
D-ke of-5:x- rakethe glory of hisdeliueryfrom Maurice: (which pleaſed that Prince ye-
m9ul>X9- ry nuch , whom it' concerned more to bee fauouredby anenemic his Supe-'
riour, then by an cazmic hisequall,and emulous,” 0 00
"201 M4 A few houres after the deparrure from }ſpruc , Maurice atriyed there the'
kb pvc. {ame night; where notrouchingiapy thingrhar belonged ro Feridhnand,or the:
Citizens ; he made himſelfc Lord ot the Emperours baggage, and of the bay -

_ gageof his Courr. ' The Proteſtants fceing their aduantage by this flichr ,

nt qt publiſhed another Manife$, fignifying in ſubſtance ;rhat hauing reaket arires
forth a 31s- for Religion, andthe liberry of Germany, as the encmicsof rhe trueth had no
— other ayme, but that the holy Doctors being tirlt oppreſſed, the Popith er-
rours,might be rettored,and rhe youth brought yp in'them, hauing 1mpriſe-

ned ſome, and madeorhers{weare to depart, and not returne againe, which
oath doth not binde,becauſeir is wicked, they did recall them all, and com:

maund them to reſume their office of teaching, according to the Auguſto

(C onfeſſion', and, to remooue all calumnies, did abſolue them from the oath

Abc | rakem} The'rreatic cf peace {till contiouing, ic was at laſt concluded -in
Paſſaa, in the beginning 'of Augult, concerning all differences; and, for
Religion, it was thus ordered: that, within f1xe moneths , aDiet ſhould bee
called, ro conſulrhow the diſcords in Religion might molt caſily , and com-
modioully be compoſed, cicher by a gencrall or Nationall Counicell , or by a
Colloquiec, oryniucrfall. Dict of the Empire. That in that Diet, an equall
number of godly, humblc and wiſc menof cither Religion ſhould bee taken,
charging them ro confider of and propoſe the moſt conuenient meanes :

and, thatin themcaneſpace,neither —

J! our, norany other magforce
any in matter of Religion , againit his conſcience, or will, neither De fats,
nor by forme of reaſon , nor docany thing in contempt, or togrieuc any for
that cauſc, but to let cucry man liue in quiet , and inpeace : and likewiſe thax
the Princes of the Auguſtan ('onfeſſion may not moteſt the Ecclefiaſtiques or
ſcculars of the old Religion , but let them enioy their goods, Lord(hips, Su-
pcrioritics, iuriſdiftions, and ceremonies; that in the Chamber iuſtice bs ad-
miniſtred to eucry one, without regard of what Religion he is,nor excluding
the Confeſlioniſts from the places they are to haue amongſtthe affefſors,and

that

\
9 ; %
£ "= J
, p YJ

©

———

BG —— -
L 18.4. the Councell of [rent.. 379

—_—_

that it be tree tor che aſſeflors, and for the litigants to ſweare by God and the x $52
" Saincs,or by God and the Gaſpel. And though there be nomeanesof com- Rt.
policion in Religion,yerthis peace ſhall remainein force for euet. And ſo the Cuuans? 5;
Interim was abrogated , which had been really executed but in few places. EST
The Landeraueot Haſsia was dcliuered by vertue of this agreement , ſo thar Hv>y >.
all difficulties with the Emperour did ccaſc; yer the warte continued a whole ire,
yeare, in many parts, berweene diucrs Princes and Cities of the Empire. Bur The Lond.”
the Cities recalled their Preachets, and Dottors of the Auguſien ( onfeſsion; "news
and reſtored che Churches, Schooles, and exerciſe of Religionzandthough, the Proteſtant
in regard of the baniſhmcnes and perſecutions againſt the Doours ahd realled.

Preachers, there remained but few ofthem, andrthoſe concealed vnder J13.2#

the proteQion of the Princes , yer, as if they had riſcn againe, there
wantcd not to furniſh all places. ' The warrchindred the aſſem-
bling of the Diet diſlcigned, and deferred it from one
yeere to another , vnrill February 1555.

whercof wee will [pcake in

the fir place.

Yor 3 ly. NIDIPE.
f : BJ bn A.
; - ” "ww /
ZE] (>. IND. EW ==
Aon * po j »£ W *

JN

_—_ þ x i
\ wa ys po Fe -

k W/ ; 6 LA A

k { o WE - —< L Pp |

1 'V » "{*.” * j* - a4

KY T3 \L j

1 \ \s ws * LY

$ e os AD. A's JS IL, d
A —_— *

On TERA , OSD Ez" T7
- _ > « " d y << ﬀ

1 F

9 |

”

® y_— _—— a
2 SSIS heb)
bt 4c »-/

# mn

Xn

—— a _— -- —

no 17

44»; iG 2 90> ! $- .

5110 ith 11 byn5s1>t: i Dit e bony 9b 191

277!

NOS” 20 2c —— > = wo —on—__——- oo Wo

ob T9Þf1v 21659005 3lods bn:
912(13 4» 74 no\ bed yo02 1 ve G05 %

— OW—

wi Aug)

L «4, \©rs+ 1 _—_ * , ' , : s

*ee, 43 bas booyd 31 1 O07 @IIk M13 Go  TOHNOESH3 TOTSIIMIT 2 OT TE GH

Fa F ys F- 61 4.9 4 y= IU: TY, + £ q| ? >. 7 ©

eveayi 710 py e once | 2h pbge d 9 «fl ſt: IJ ERTY” i Or nll FC: / 'G (O,?317!%
2 283A4nD of ol 50 \ 292 1G? wa 3G EMILUE $20 elf1132%- lo! 114 notion
© G24. : agly VV 705) ni 3g69 64149%S yi! 19599 Div , hn gyoids aww wit

«rant ie on , 312 G29TES 2H ___ 73 D915 2125 2697 i443 Jounwbend off
enac>:/7 yodvw s baynino? 211cw S003 194 .5t6og bib twotzomna 1 diiw Vs ih
ts #1 , c :

az dT 14 <1amd $1110 25 = ') za 5 Eq el2Ut(i2 2012SV9T29 ; 2JT&Q-V Ci. ro bf 2h \
2095) 22 nar » . "N.cC : ; i.
gy —_ c\Nvo\ \upAugut:. 5 Ts, 1 to CTY0OUI bere - 2T2CI2&697 5 3151 Ho! £5353 22 2111.) c;

N Gn Bow FH —_ _ ” — [|
— Agvod: bat; noi) Yor z bas ,covi>>d20 , I oci2 bo16HD)1 br:
27 - 3 HM . - A hd SA 4

: bag 22v0R0Q 507 Jlaigys +I bas  OrendLINGy 2013 10 PTB, (14

Ci
view
md 5 ,

f 1r133r VV”! }111cl bam try
. * .ut9 # bh
Cad v4 T 5113

22286) 1 is

919013 , 27909!
10 NOLKOS:
(1107121 G2 300 br:
2013 to 7 QI11QC
viBu1d>1 [ſioy - 203005 01 5759y
nt 225% q1 liv 0 loop vw
»2alq

—_—
4

bmdongy: iT os

30 24

þ — x. —
"3 (C Py p- Enwarn 6,
.. Haxay 2,

F,
g
.

, . LF) k Fa *f1 3VY of s ils £ : ; . iT
. - Fs 4 O " ac .
\ p N 4 * . FS” ; , « \ ' . E, FI l —_
# % " 4 | Jy , : # . L435 : : « IS * b .
* o p ob 4 "FY : ;
- «+4 diol . 5 : , ' : ESL
i F) # «. s * 4 » u % > # - ,
- " + ©* rt” * % . = —_ _ " -- © r 4
-  Þ ; f 4 : .
4 + # . F k ; F * ai #43 A S$5% + ſy
ev 4 >
. +
* ” % , ” + S %
” X bk d vo | : * * 4 k \ £ ”
TY 1 3+” 4 V3 . , "_ 144
4
, - 1
a - .
.

'OF THE HISTORY OF _

:...THE COVMCEEL OF 361...
wn] nn) 'T'REN.T: | 03 .

= HePope, now freed from many cares; by the .
|:diſſolution of the Councell, thought tit ro
preuent all occaſions of relapſe , and propo-
| {ed in Conſiftory the neceflity to reforme the ThePope ma-
Church,” He ſaid he had reduced the Councel wiew thit hee
| to Trent forthis end, which hauing not fuccee- Jeon
ded according to his deſire;in regard of diuers
accidents of warre, firftin Faly; then in Ger-
many, it.was mectcto docthat-iniRome, which
t in Trent could not be done. Hee appointed
therefore, a great congregation: of-Cardinals-and Prelares, ro conſider of
the buſineſſe. Hee: fayd,, hee clefted many , that relolutions. might
bee more. mature, and hauc .greater reputation ; though his.ende was
thought to bee, that, by reaſon of the multitude, mareimpedimentsmight
ariſe, and fo allmight come ro nothing. And the cucnt was iudge- ': For
the Reformation was handled in the beginning wich-great heate;-after-
wards it went on,, for the ſpace of many moneths, very: coldly;' and, ar
the laſt , was buricd in {ilence;! : And the ſuſpenſion of the Councelt; in [panes
Itcad of rwo yceres , did continue-tenne; verifying the maxime of the Phi- odor |
lolophers; - that the cauſes ccaling,, the cffeRs doc ceaſe allo. The'cauſes fin.
of the Councell were firſt the great-inſtances-of Germanie, and the hope,
concciued /by the world,:that ir: would cure all the diſeaſes of Chrilter- Pe
dome. Burtthe effc&s that wereſcene vnder Paul thertbird did cxringuith vio.
the hope, and ſhew.;to:Germanie. that ir was impoſſible ro haue fuch a potations of
Councell as they deſire, Of the ſecond reduRtion:of the Synodethers ©
was another caulc ; which was the great deſire of ({barles the Emperour
to pur Germazie vndet his yoke, by meanes of Religion, and co make che
Empire heredicarie, by cauſing his ſonne to fucceede him , and/{o t6-e-
ret a Monarchic , greater then any fince the Roma, euen then-rhar of

Cbarles

Pd

a

— —— _—_— - _ =

- I I ——_—

I i Sas = = —__— a

_— —_Þ_Oll

: 2825 EL Po The Hiſtorie of — E  Lis.5.

—  —__—

_—— _—— -

1553* Charles the great, For this, the victorics hee had obraincd was not ſufhcient,
(7.re 7. peigher did beg thinks, kee-could ſupply whay was wanting by-new-forces
Cuxxrxs-5.0ncly,; botfupetting, the people yuro him by Religion cand rhePritices by
Ewan. &treaties y/ hee had: conceiucd a-vaſt hope to mymort: lize his name; :This
texar ="2*y25s the Caule why heewislo carneſt with Judh-s for the: ſecond Conuoca-
Clarlersieth tion'of the Concell,/and of his tffectuall petfwaſions (otro call charmwn-
mike cheEm- olehrJe@.the three Bed Progodier anda jhe Fronyuer with ee:
prebered® ee hadporher ,10 febdther Pale Burwhilethe Concell was eelebra-

ted, Charles , hauing put all — #1 icaloufic, found the firſt en-
eratha

counters in his owne houſe, For- though hee ſecmed formerly

ro haucgonlemed ro the rien ram chem bpth (as it was ro

Marcus and L ugins, h cguall au ority,an exam c folldiwed b Dioclefian,

%

.  andmany others afterwards ) and then to labour that Philip ſhould bee cho-
enact: | King of the Romahe Fofluecectd them , (Fvherbin Charkes =_ employed
his filter,che Queene of Hungary,to periwadehimts ir,for the aduancemene
of their houſe ) yer”, bertcr aduiled by his fonne Maximilias , hee began to
; change his opinzon. To cfteCt this bufaneſle, already fer on foote, Philip was
called by his father,that hee might bee knowen to theEleors,in the Dict of
Ausburg in theyere 1 5 5 1.which made Ferdmand retire himſelfe, & the forclaid:
(Quecneto gocthirher;,:.comake praco betweene the brothers, But Maximi-
lian, tearingthar hisfather out, of his good vature, would yeeld, Icauing the.
coucrnment: of thEKingdomes of Spaine , which the Em perour had given,
. him, in4he-hands of his-awife, che Emperours daughter, returned ſuddenly:
into Germanie, bby, whibile perſwations Ferdinand remained conſtant in his pur-,
pole,and {,barles had:nothing from che Ele@ors but: good words. | By this:
oppoſition. the Erhparouts.edge.was abated, who ſent his ſonnebacke imo
Spaine , without. hope eucr to obraine the conſent of Maximilian. "And after-:
wards being compelled, by cheforcſaid warre,to make'anagreement, deſpai-"
ring of his ſonnes tucceſſion, he layd aſide all thought of re{toring the anci-
cntReligion in Germany,and, by conſequence all care of the Councel;though '
Which au. De continued many yecres after in the Empire. And the Court did care for ic
_—_—_ lietle , becauſe none did: defire it. But divers accidents then happencd,
- <eot Kchzi- which though they teemed ro make the ſuſpenſion perpetuall, yer, inthe ſe-
Councel. Cret Providence of: God,did miniſter cauſes for the thirdConuocation, which
thecantinyation ofthe ſtory requireth ſhould nor bee paſled'ouer in ſilence,
inregardthe knowledge of the cauſes docth helpe much to penctrare the ef-"
- feds, which happenedafter that the Councell was reſumed,
res '  ThePope,iceing that the people of his obedience did not fomuch'eſteetn
him;by reaſon of che; alichation of Germany ; did imitate Eugenins the fourth,
How5-ope who maintained the' reputation which the Councell of Bafill tooke from
his repuracion I1Myby a ſhevy of Grecians, anda ſhadow of Armenians ; and thelare exam» -
ple of his predeceſſour Paulus 3. who, when the contentions were hote', be-
rwcenehimand the Emperour, forthertranflation of the Councell ro Bolo-
nia, for which the people allo did diſtaſte-him , receiued, with many ceremo-
nies, op Steven, by the name of Patriarke of Armenia the greater, with one
Archbiſhop,and z. Biſhops,who came to acknowledge him for the Vicar of
CH RI sT,andgenerallcommanderof the Church;:and to renderhim obe--
dicnce,

”

—_—

F 'B LB. $. all Councell of Trent. | | 28; -

[dience::: According tothele examples, Inlius did receiue with much pub- ' 5553
- like ſolemaitic one Simon Sultakam , cle Patriarke of all the Co wkich TN
are berweehe Enphratesand India, ſent from thoſe Churches ro be confirmed Cunr:s 5.
by the Pope, ſuccefſour of Peter , and Vicar of CHRI1sT. Hee ordained fanny s,
Sim Biſhop, and gaue him the Parriarchall Robe with his owne hands, in {goat |
.the Confiftory ; and fent him backe to his home, that thie Churches might .... a
-not ſufferin his abſcnce, accompanied with ſome religious men, whovnger-
Hood theSyriaque tongue, All the diſcourſe was , not onely in Rowe, bur
throughout all kake, of the immenſe number of the Chriſtians in thoſe
-parts ;.and how muchtheliſts ofthe Apoſtolique Sea were enlarged. And
particularly they ſpake of the great numberof Churches ih the Ciric Muzal,
which, they ſayd, was the old Aſſar, vpon the river Tigris, from which Ni-
niaz, renowmed for the preaching of Jonas, wasnot farre diſtant, ſituated be-
yondthe riuer. Vander this juriſdiction they put Babylon, Tauris, and Arbela, ws
famous for the batraile berweene Darius and Alexander , with many Coun-
treys of Aſhriaand Perſia. They found alſo the ancient Cities named inthe
Scripture, and Ecbatan, which the ſtorics doe call Seleucia and Njfbi, They
fayd thar this man, eleed by all the Biſhops, was ſent to the Pope forcon-
firmation, accompanied with ſcuenty perſons, as farre as Teruſalem, and from
thence by three, of whom one dicd;, and another remained ficke in the iout-
ney, andthe third, called {/alfi, came with him to Rome. All theſe things
were printed ,and yery curioully read. The Pope receiued another alſo , na-
med Marderins, a Jacobite of Aſſyria, ſent. by the Patriarch of 4nticch , ro ac-
knowledge the Apoſtolique Sea,and giue it obedience, and make profelſion
of the Romane faith. But the world becing fatiated with the former, did
not carefor this ſecond. p:

After thcle ſhadowes of obedience, which the Sea of Rome gained , there
ſucceeded one reall, and of great importance, which did abundantly recom- -;;,. j,. .;
pence whatſocuer was loſtin Germanie. The ſixt of luly 1553, Edward King #etnidicti
of England dicd,of the age of fixteene yeeres. Fifteenedayes before, hemade
a Will, with approbation of his Councell, wherein hauing declared tharit did
bzlong to him ro namethe Succeſſour , according to the lawes of che King-
dome, he excluded his filters , Mary and Elizaberb, becauſe their tegitimation
was doubted of, andall the poltcriry of Margaree, his fathers clder filter , as
ſtrangers, not borne inthe kingdome, and named her Quecnewho followed
in order,that is, Taye of Suffolke, grand-childe to Mary, formerly oo France,
and younger filter ro his farher Henry 8. by her daughter, notwithſtanding
that theſayd Henry had,in his laſt Will, ſubſticured Maryand Elizabeth, which
ſublliturion hee ſayd was pupillary,, and did not binde him now hee was of
age. Jane was proclaimed Queene in London, and Mary retiring herſelfc in- ::- ispro-
to Norfolke, that ſhee might commodioully paſſe into Fraxce , if there were {mn
occaſion, named herſelte Queene alſo, and was finally accepred by all the ©
kingdome, alleadging in her fauour the Teſtament of Henry , and that of a
Matrimony contracted bona fide, though there bee a wullity in it, theifſue is
legitimate, Iave and her adherents were impriſoned, and Mary entred into = 7ry6
London, and was receiued with a generall applauſe, and proclaimed Queene ©:onne.
of England and Fraxce- , and had theticleof Head of the Church, Sheepre-

{curly

;' 4 F
4 = C
: #

XUM

—————

Cn——— ——rm——_———— wo —__—__—_ ——_

2 84 The ] Hiſiorte of L1 Do Fo

1553 ſeutlyſertheprifocers at liberty, which her father had pur intothe Tower,
tvivs 3, | Partly for Religion;and partly for other cauſes. A littſeatter her entry there
Cuaxuss 5. aro{c a (edition in London, by occaſion of one who tooke the-boldnefle to
QMazx, preach Popery, and ofanorher whodid celebrate the Maſſe. Toappeaſethis
+ 20 *- . trouble, which was very con {iderable; the Queene cauſed an Edict to be pu-
A G4ionin bliſhed, that the would liuc in the Religion of her Anceſtors, att.
_—_— would norpermir thatany thing ſhould beepreached to the people, bur thar

which formerly had been. Afterwards , theeleucnth of October (hee was
crowned with the vſuall ceremonics. The Pope aduertized hereof, confi-
dering thar ſhee was brought vp inthe Catholique Religion, interreſted
in the reſpects of her mother , and couſin by blood varo the Emperour, ho-
The Pope ped he might make ſomeentric into the Kingdome , and therefore did make
maketh Car- Cardinal Poole his Legate,thinking, becaulchee was of the blood royall, and
tw Lezarfor Of an exemplary life, he was the onely in{trument to reduce that Kingdome
27/924 to the Churchof Rome. The Cardinall, who had been baniſhed by pub-
lique Decree , and depriucd of his honour, thoughtic not fit to begin the
encerprile, before hefully vnderſtood the [tate of things , becing aſſured that
the mator part was {till deuoted ro the memory of Hemy. Hee therefore
{cnt into England (ecretly, Gionanni Franceſco ( 'omendone,to enforme him,and
wrotea Letter trotheQueene: in which, commendiny her perſeucrance in
Religion in che times of hertroubles, hee ecxhorted her to continue in the
times of her happinefſe, recommended vnto her the ſajuation of the ſoules
of r2ole people,and the re{ttution of the true worthipof Go D. Comendone
hauing obſcrued cuery particular, and found meanes to {pcake with the
Queene though compaſled and garded on cuery {1de,perceiued ſhee had ne-
ver beencauerle from the Romane faith,and had promife from her that ſhee
would labour to reitore it into the whole Kingdome, which the Cardinal
vnderitanding , put himfclfeinro the voyage.
one | [n Englanl, after the Coronation, a Parhament was held, in which the
force of  Giuorce of the Queenes mother, Katherine of Aragon, was declared to be vn-

diuorce of

Heroes. Jawfull ,the marriage good, and the iſſue legitimate, which was obliquely
be lawful. rg reſtorethe Popes lupremacic, in regard it could nor be gocd, without the
validiric of the diſpenſation of Iulivs the ſecond, and by conſequence, not
without the {upremacic of the Seca of Rome. It was ordained alfo,thart all the
Popery is > on(titutions in matter of religion made by Edward ſhould be abrogared,and
that religion obſerued which was in vſc at the death of Henry, In this Parlia-
ment, they treated of mariying the Queene, though ſhee were aboue fourty
Ant the mir- yEcres of age: and three were named: Poole, who had not takerP holy Orders,
ms though he was a Cardivall; and Courtney, both of the blood Royall, and
ac) fr{t Couſins of Henry the cight, in an cquall degree , this of the white Role,
grand child of Edvardche fourth , by his daughter, and that of the red Role,
Nephewto Henry the icucnth by his filter; both acceptable ro the Nobilitic
of England, Poole tor wiſedome, and ſanditic of life, and (ourtney for his lo-
uing bchauiour , and carriage. Pur the Queene pn Philip Prince of
Spaine beforetheſe,alwell for the treaties made by her coulin Charles the Em1- +
perour, (heraffeCtion allo inclining much moreto the morhers {ide then to-
the farhers\ as becauſc ſhee thought ſhee might berter ſecure her owne and

the

—

Lis, "I the Countell of Trem. Y | . 355

the Kingdomes peace with that marriage. The Etmperour, who did much; i 554
dcfirc to effeCtir, fearing that Poole might diſturbeir, by his preſence in-QAAN
England, knowing hee was departed Legate., made meanes by: Cardinall Cxauss 5,
Dandinus , the Popes Miniltcr with himſelfe, that hee ſhould-not part xy.
out of ltalic ſo loop , ping ,; that as yet an Apoltolique Legate could wupbes
not goc into England with honour. But, the Letter of Dandinus'not ta-/ Vari he c6-

king cfic& , and *Foole becing in his journey as farre as the Palatinate, hee rag

ſcat Diego: Mendoza», ro ſtop him by authoritic. | Itſecmed firange to the Tito
Cardinall, and hee complayned that the Popes Legation was hindered with inco Gogland.
the damage of Chriltianitic ,, and of the Kingdome of England; and gee © bo ><
of Germanic. Therefore the Emaperour,: not to giue:ſo- much: matter of
talkc, made him goe-to Bruxels, and cntcrtayned him-in Brabant , vorll
che marriage was cnded, and all.things accommodated as hee would; and,
for colour, imployed him to. treate a peace betweene himſclfe and the.
French King. "7 99 bilig warmit2s # ond

In the beginning of the yeere 15 54. the. Emperour ſent Ambaſſadours , ,.,
into England co make the concluſion : and the Queene proceeding to
fauour tlic olde Religion , did the fourth of March 197m other Lawes,
reſtoring, the Latine tongue into the Churches, forbidding married men: -
to exerciſe: holy FunQtions, and giuing order to the Biſhops not to- make
them ſvweare,, who were to bee. —— into; the Clergie ; as Henrie had ap-
pointcd , that the King was ſupreme Head of the Church: of England; and
that the Pope had no ſuperiortic there, bur was Biſhop: oncly of the Ciric
of Rome,  Shce ordayned alſo that the forme of Prayer, inſticuted by Hen-.
rie, where, amongſt other things, God is prayed to deliticr tharKingdome:
from ſcdition, conſpitacic, and'ryrannic of the Pope} ſhould be razed our
of all the Bookes of Ritcs,and forbid robee printed. /:In-Aprilanother Par-
liament was held, in Ge I was giuchto thecontradt of marriage*:
where the Queene prapoſed the: reltitution | of the: iPopes. fagremacicy:
which ſhee could not obtaine, becauſe the Nobilitiedirefift, who con-
ſidered nar, that they did vainely denic this demaund; which bw - Je ORR
contayned, in their aſſent to the marriage; »*F hilip;'Prince-of Spaine, ar-» Thredevea
rized in England the «eighteenth of Iuly.,.and on-Sainc James day' the mare,
Nhpcal were celebrated, and hee receiued the titleof the King of Naples,
and did conſummate-the Mattimonic. In Noucmber'there 'was bas widy: 5
Parliament, in which-Cardinall Poole was'reftoredtohisHononwand Coun 07"
trey , and-ewo. were ſent to inuite and accompany hink j\with whom'hee =
paſſed into the Iſland, and arviued-ar Lohdon,che:thieelandrwernicth'of C:rdil |
Nouembetr , with a ſilucr Croſſe .carrycd before hign;i;; Avhis firfcentric mew co Loa:
into the Parliamene, : hee- mado'®: difcourſegin | Engliſh>before'1fhe King, ooo
Queene,. and Ordets of the Kingdome;! Hee thanked: chem very mucti: fore him.
that hee-vyas reſtored ito bis Countrey; har we Eveds-an Orationin
_ w_—_— _ to: che!Countrey . _ of Ncauerptwhi
they ,vcredepriued , by. departing from the Cluitchoibtee exhor
to-knowlbdge TW gi _ recciuc>the/ benefitivhich God!
Ticar, had.ſcnt them. -. The gifcourſe:wabrery longand atritic
the concluſion was; that hee liadaghe Keyes

then
| 1 lie?

 _

386 The Hiftorie off} L1B.'5.
1554 which they-had ſhurte, by making Lawes againft the' Apoſtolique Sea:
LL whichiwhth they did renoke, hee would opetithe doores varo them,” The:
Cunt? F: Cardinals perſon was well accepted, and'an'apparant aſſent was gtuen to
= his-Propolition ; though the?Maior part id [cererly abhorre the yualiric
Heer: of a Popes Minilter, and were/gricued to'comevnder; theyoke againe.' Bur
SOVavon! they had ſaffered themſclues ro bee carried (ofarre, thatthey knew riot how
' + tO TE 531 | 4 [af fits 3 Wod 1 t e 799095 |
Thenanace | © | The mext day-the're vniotiwith the Church of Rothe was'deetted in
ofche rent "Parlianment;j" and the manner* was thus fer downe.;'''Thar a-Supplicarion
Church of ſhould bee mad iti the Parliaredts name pwWhereiti ie fhould bee declared
"om that they werevery-lorric for having detiygdbediciide e the Apoſtolique
Sca, and for hauing conſented to'the' Dearees madeapainſt'ir;  rohiſing |
ro cadevour heercafcer:that all-choſe Lawcy/and Dider $'{Hould bet abo-
liſhed ;;and'beſceching the King74nd QueenEto'interecle for them; that
they may beeabſolucd from thecrimes and cenſures, and receiubd;-as peini-
- rentchildren, intorhebofomeofithe Chutels, ro ſeriieGod ; ii 6bedicnce
of the Baprrand:Sex'bf Romei: The laſlbof Nouctnber, Saint: Aniblewes
day; therAMaicfties;theCardinwl; and wholeParliateht becing afſembled, 7
che Claurollour aiked the generalitic wicther they'Wers pleated: rhar par-
don fhoald beedeitianded of the Legate;ahd whetherzhey would recurne*
rothic:yhiticof the Church;andobedienceof the Pope, fipremieHeddthere-/
of; :ari:ſamec ſaying yea, and the others holding their peace, a Supplica-"
rien was preſented rothicir Maichties inthenaimne of the Parliamant; which
beeinig/publiquely: read; they roſeto defircirhe Legate,' who mere them,
and-ſhgwelbimiclfe willing zo 'giue theta fatisfaction;, and'caufing the
auchbritie giticishith þy rhe Poptao bee readi;7 hee diſtourfed how accepra- *
ble: toGbd: che repentance of a' {inner was; and how the Angels did then
rcioyce far che-conuertion of char Kingdome: and all being'on their knees,
implaring;che-mcrcicof God jiheeablolued them ;:whichbeeing done; hee
- wear takhe,Churdhiveith all He multirude, .to giue'thankes to'God;: The”
Ambaſdors Nektrdaypan'Ambaſlage was: deltinared to the Pope : 'to readerhin obe-'
ure ippoiney; dienee;: for whidu Were:named: Anthowy! Browne ;\ Vicount Mountacute,
PoPe....c:1.c.; CODING, y ,;Biſkoppe of 'Ely;|ahd Edward Cerne 33who hid formerly
beens. Ambaſſadbur it -Romes tor: Henrie-chei cight;, und-Wwas-now' ro'bee'
For which Teſaaens there 1againo!an: that charge: »Aduice hderevf! catrie ro Rome
ocees Qnickly;;nforcwbichimany Procefiione were made;:noronedlyim char Cirie,
Rome. —=bytith@rdwolrall alloy uo; giuc:chankes 30! GodÞ)'1 The Popeapprooued”
"-x2 Whdrohekegata: hadrione., ':aad ſanta Iubilythe fabroatidewenticth of
©. | 0:1. DI8GRBIDERS -allcadgingin chof#BLU for acabtey tharyllike cher Farhet of the!
1:0” families Raving r6cdiiered hizipsbdigatHonnby ir was neerethabhicytionld'
26" nogoBAyRewdotbeſiical} inf} bucgencrally invite ab tothbfane Tubis?
0 .lepantl bonprayidandcxwolledthe attionsct the KibgyQercneprand peod?

I (2-1. |

_—— ls:of; >Fheo Parlianiont continuA{ovaril} dhognidt/bfilanuarie:
15-289: the atticer Edited? the Kingeno punith hevericiies;undof®

the! IygildidionafyBilbops! wiromnmwdd;ctherPrimacis ,>and!albprehes?

rhincotes Gf ch&-Ropnethoredsrall conrraty Dtcrearmaderwiithid wen-

6 yrates Ja palin aricy adbp inet yabolhod ho penall
| A

, 5! y Vo Lawes

” *
< a
: 1 Gy <2 as. 4 "3". ex Rr " FE. _ 5 py <ES
En a—— Per” - oor VR WIR 9” 7 OT TER IT mn ———_ —— — -

XUM

- —_—

LI | the Councell of Trent, j37

Lawes again!t hererickes rcuiued, and many were burned, eſpecially Bi- 1554
ſhops, who would perlcuerc in the reformation abolithed. Ir. is cercaine + het nl
that one hundred f{cuentic and f1xe perſons of qualitic were burned that Enanrae-+.
yecre, for Religion, beſides many of rhe:common;ſort, which gaue but ws.
licclecontent ro chat people, who alſo wereditplealed thar Martin Bucer, and 1,20-ritagy
"Paulus Fagins, dead foure yeeres before,, were citedand condemned, as if Monyarebur-
they had beene liuing, and cheir bodies digged vp, and:burned; an action, 1nd for Re-
commended by ſomeas a reucnge of what Henrie. the-cighr had done a- ©
gainlt S. Thomas, by others compared to:tharwhich the Popes ,, Stephauus
the ſixth,and Sergins the third, did againltthe Corps of Pope Formoſus. =

Many alſo were at the fame time burned in France for Religion ; not oy in France
without the indignation of honelt men, who knew that the diligence yſed
againli choſe poore people , was nor for picrie, or Religion , burro fariate Which yas

one t0 fats

the couctouſneſle of Diana Valentina, the Kings Mittris, tro whom he had i thecoue-
giuen all che confiſcations of goods made in the Kingdome for cauſe of —_—
Hereſic. Ir was wondred alſo that thoſe of the new reformation, ſhould **
meddle with blood, for cayſe of Religion. For Michael Seruetus of Tarra-

ona, madc a Diuine of a Phytician, renewing the old opinion of *Paulus
Samoſatenus, and Marcellus Anciranus, that the word of God was notathing
ſub{ilting, and therefore that Chriſt was a pure man ;:Wwaspur to death for #i/%r-

«ttw is bur-

iti) Genena, by Counſcll of the Miniſters of Zuric, ©Berne.,, and Schiaffuſa : nc uu Ge-
and John(aluin, who was blamed for itby many , wrote a Booke, deten-
ding that the Magiſtrate may puniſh Hererickes with lofle of ife 3 which
Doctrine being drawen todiucrs fences, as it is vaderſtood more {trictly
or more largely, or as the name of Heretickeis taken diuerſly, may ſome-
time doe hurcro him, whom another rime it hath helped. x

At that time Ferdinand, King of the Romanes, publiſhed an Edict to all Theingot
the pcopie ſubicct ynro him, that in poinrs of Religion, and Rites, they bublitherh an
ſhould nor innouate, bur follow the ancient cuſtomes , and particularly pos ww
that, .in the holy Communion, they ſhould bee contenrro receiue the Sa. 92n KligÞ
crament of bread onely. Wherein though many perfons of note, the
Nobilitie, and many of che Citics made Supplication ynrto him, thar, at
the lealt.rhe Cup might bee granted them, faying that the 1nlticurion was
of Chriſt, which might nor bee altered by men, andthar ic was the vic of
rhe 0)d Church,as was confeſſed by the Councell of Conſtance, promiſing
all ſ\ubmiſſhon and-obedience in all other things, praying him nor ro
burthen their conſciences, bur to accommodate his commandement rorhs
orders fer downe-by the Apoſtles, and of the Primitine Church, yer Fer-
dinand perſeucred tn his refolution, and anſwered them, that his comman-
dement was not new, bur an ancicnt inſtitution, vſed by his Anceſtors,
Emperours, Kings, and Dukes of Auftria: and that the vle of the Cup was
a nouitic, brought-in by curiofitic , or pride, againſt che Law of the
Church, and conſent of the Prince. Yet hee moderated the rigour of the
anſwcre, {aying , that the queſtion being of a pointrhar concernerh ſalua-
tion, hee wouldchinke of ir mgre diligently , and an{werethem in fit girhe,
bur that, in the mcane while, hee expected from themobedience, and ob-
fcruation of the Edict. Hee publiſhed alſo a Carechifme the fourcecnth of 414a Cav-

Kk 2 Auygult,

/

—O—— OTE OO EE MS OO EEE Reomoo—_

288 7 he Hiſtorie of L1s. 5.

1555 Auguſt, madc, by. his authoritie, by ſome learned and pious Diuines,
FAN commaunding all the Magittrates of thoſe Countries; not ro ſuffer any

AM.

PAVYL 4 | , : : , by

xa 5: Schoolemaſters to readeany burthar, citherin publique or in private, be-

Mar i Cauſe, by:dtacrs Pamphlets which wentabour, Religion was much corrup-
AB er'2- ted inthole Countryes.: This conſtitutiondiſtalted rhe Courr of Rome,

Woich zee” becauſe itwas not{entto the Pope,to bee approoued bythis authoritie,nor
Courof +: Came foorth imtherantcof the Bilhop of the Countrey,, the lecular Prince
ont © aflumibg the office; tocaulets bee compoſed, and ro Authorize Bookes in
matter Religion;eſpecially by name of Carechiſme;ro ſhew that it belon-
ged rothedecular power,todereomine what Religion the people thould fol-

\ Jow,andyybatrefulc. om | |
|}! Theywoyceres of the ſuſpention ofthe Councell being expired; they
..- 4.3// trcareftimthe Confiltoric what was firtoberdone. For althoughthecon-
Bitionlimhe Decree was, thatthe Councei] ſhould beof force againe when
the impediments were remooued ,, which did {till continue, by reaſon af
- thewarzesof Siena; Piemont, and others, betweene the Emperourand
the French King , yer it feemed char any man of an vnquier Spitit might
| fay that choſe impediments were not ſufficient, and that it was vnderſtood
| that theCouncellwas on foote againe; forbar, to free themſelues from
Irsrwfaltl. thoſe dangers, itmight be good to makea new declaration. But wiſer men

in Kkorne wot

0 ipeetvct.., rate counſel ngrro mooue the euill while it was quiet, while the world
hour Was flent, while neither Princenor People demaunded rhe Countell, leſt
£45103 9 byhewing they were afraid, rhey might excite others ro require'it. This
waccndd, aquice prenayled?, and madc the Pope reſolue neuecr to ſpeake' more
of If. | |
ISS 5. In the ycere 155'5- there wasa Dict in Ausburg, which the Empe-
« Fenn tour had garimared , principal! y rocom poſe the controuerſies of religion,
capoiechs, IN regard this was the tounrainc of all the troubles / and calamitics of
Rdizon, Germanic , with thelofle nor oncly of the lines of many thouſands of
.. - men, but of their foules alſo. Ferdinand began the Dierin the Emperours
name, the fifth off Februarie z where hee ſhewed ar large, the lamentablc

Inwhich 7er- fpectacle of Germanie, in which men of the fame Bapriſme, Language,

| ain ant mis _ f 1 : . F
| keth an Ock- and Empire, were diſtracted by ſo various a profeſſion of Faith, there ari-
__ fing new Sects cucry day : which did ſhew ngt onely {mall reucrence to-

wards Gog,.and. great perturbations of mens mindes; bur was cauſcalſo
that the mottifade knew not what ro belecue; and that'many of the prin-
cipall Nobiliticand others were withour all-taith, and-honeſtie, making
' no conſcience of their aftions , which rookeaway all commerce :'ſothar
now it could not bee fayd that the Germanes wete: better then the Turkes,
and other barbarous people; for which cauſes God hath affliftediit with
ſo great calamities. Therefore it was neceſfatic to rake in hand the bu-
lincle ofreligion. Hee ſayd a generall, free, and pious Councell wasfor-
merly thoughtthe onely remedic. For the cauſe of Faith becing, common
to all Chriſtians, irought to bee handled by all : and the Emperour im-
ploying all his forces heerein, did cauſe ir ro bee aſſembled; more then
once... Butthere was no necede to ſay why no fruit came by it, it beeing well.
| knowento all that were preſent. Now if they deſired toprooue the ſame
| remedic

L: BS. _ the Councell of. Trent. 35 9

remedie againc, It was neceſſary 0 remoouethe impediments 3 Which did 1 555 |
' hinder chem from attaining the wiſhed end;, Bur if, by tcafen. ofthe acci- X35,
dents that occurre,,;they. thought fit to deferre this yaull another-time, &4*155 5
they inight treace of viing other meanes: They knew-not howio make vie 3 «= x
of a Nationall Councell,becauſeche maner,forme; andmane of them were
diſyſcd. 1 he Colloquics, whereof they had: ofteri.made proote, did no and prope-
good ,-becaulc both. parrics aymed more at private gaine, then publique <>
pictic and yrilitic. . Yet hee fayd they were not tu be deſpiſed now, if they
would lay aſide. the obſtioacie of their private atteRions ; and. counulcl-
ied chem-to trye them once more, if the: Dict- did-not-propolea-beicer:
Way- | Tf HOCELDE C6310 CMDB LIED IETE
x This propoſition was made by Ferdinand, with others, coneerning the
peace and warre with the Turkes , thatitr might paſſexhrough-Germanie,
and (ſcructo inuite men.ro the Diet, towhich very few.,were come.; Bur ir
was ill cxpounded, in regard of his former Edict, publiſhed in his States,
much contrarieco this propolition, and more, in-regard of the execution
of it, hauing chaled more then two hundred Preachers-our of Bohemia.
And it went to Rome allo; where the Pope, curling,as hee vſually-did, the Which dif-
Colloquics, andinuentors of them, complaynedtharthere was no;end of bije.
theſe difhcalciesand that hee was co haueaCouncell,;aColloquic,ora Diet
alwaycs on his backe.,. Hee, blamed thoſe rimes for. becing fo fulLoftrou-
bles, prayſing formerages whenthe Papes might liue quiesly, not beeing
in feare of their authoricic. Yet hee was comforted by theperfe& fubicti-
on of England to his obedience, by the deerces madein his fauons; by the whoicconto-
| Letters of thankes which hee recciued,and with the promiſe that afolemne ont ne
Ambaſlage would come cre long, to thanke him perſonally for his father- F2g/ud-
ly clemencie and bcnignitic, and to promiſe him obedicnce.., Wherewith
beeing well plealed, heecould nat chooſeburieſt, and (ayd, thatheedWen-
ioy ſome part of happincſle, in that hce was thanked by thoſevato whom
he owed thankes,...., (!, Þf i fo tn 0a 3d olds no oRegt 2:
But though the Pope had litrle hope of Germanic, yer, nortancglett ir;
nor any overture that might bee made, in propoſing meancs20-reduce ro
the Church thole that wandred,.hee ſent Cardinall Moone, for hisLegate; Hee ſender
rothe [mperiall Diet, withinltructions cuer ro lay beforerhem theexample is
of England, and, by that, toicxhart Germanic to know their dileaſe;and re- P**
"cciuethe:ſainc cure; and, aboue all, ro-diuert all-Colloquies;;anditreatics of
religion. The Cardinall was no ſooner arriued.in/Ausburg, but Pope ia:
lius died, whercof hee recciuedaduile cightdayesafter:Hethetcforedepar. Anddich,
tcd thelaſt of March, .cogether with the Cardivall of Ausburg to aflitt at op

i

the cle&tion of the new Pope;' , 1 1 out ods ole, torh4c 10
| Before they. came, Marcellus Cernines, -Cardinall:d Santas Croce, was Mrethe
eleted Popc.in Rome, the ninth of April; a man grane,-dh<di{cuerc by created Pope,
nature, and of a.conſtantmunde; which:bewas willitgto demonttrace/in wm
the firſt ation of his Papacic , by retaining the ſarnemarae}, thtwing:the
world that his dignitic had) not changed:hun ;.cankrarie $0:thdowhicirfd
many. of his predeceſſors had done. Forafectthechaoging ofthenanics

.

began, becauſe Dutch men, were made Papes; towhotc:naies!Romane

Kk 3 carcs

The Hiſtorie of | Lis: 5.

1555 cares were not accuſtgmed; all that followed obſerned the fatne vic, ſig-

nifying thereby that they had changed their private affeRionsinto pub-

Cranes 5: Jiqueand diuine cares. Bur this Pope, to:{hew thitin- bis private cltare

hee had thoughts worthy of\rhicPopedotnic,' would; by retaining the ſame
name, ſhew his immurabilitic.-- Another a@ion of-his alſo*was like ro
this. For the capitulations made in the Conclaue beeing' preſented tg
him, tharhce'miphe ſweareto' them, hee afiſwered ir 'was' the'fame:thing
whichheehad fwornca few dayes before, andthat hewould obferneirby
deedesandinot by promiſes. 'Theholy weeke whith then was celebrated,
and Eaftetholy dayes'apptoching; pur the Pope, by the afliduitic of Eccle-
fialticall ceremonies into an non.  Yethis choughts were {ti]l fixed
on the things hee had diſſeigned with many Cardinals; before his Pope-
dome; ro/which hee did cucr thinke hee ſhould aſcend; and particularly
hee imparted his pays ro the'Cardinall of Mantui ro-compole the dif-
ferences'of Religion by a Councell, which hee ſayd'did not fortnerly ſuc-
ceede well, becauſe aigood courſe was nor taken. © That it-was 'neceſhary
firſt ro make an intire'reforraation, by which the real{ differetices would
- beeaccorded ; which being done, the vetball wouldpatrly'cexe of them-

. felucs,and partly would be compokd with ſome ſmall paines'of the Conn-
cell. Fhar his Predeceſlors for five ſuceeſſions, abhotred the name of re-
formation, not forany bad end, but becauſe'they' were perſwadedthat ir
was (et on foote, to pull downethe Papall/aurhoritic.' But'his opinion
was contrary , and that nothing could'more preſeruc it then that, yea,
chat it would beea meanes toenlarge ir,” | Forobſcruing things paſlt, cuery
' onemightr ſee, thar onely thoſe Popes who'bhaue madercformations, haue
aduanced and inlarged rhcir authoritie. Thattherefotmation did-not al-
ter any-ching but that which was for ſhew-and vanitic , 'not onely of no
montenr; butof charge and burthen; as ryors, pomps, gtcattraines of Pre-
no feperthous ant vnprofitablecharges, which doc not make
the Papacic venerable,but rather contemned; which yanities being cut off,
thetrucpower,reputation;and credit with rheworld willincreaſe, together
- withthercucnuecand other {1newes of gouernement,and aboucall,thepro-
© eetion'of God, whiclcucry one may aflurc himſelfe doth worke in confor-
_.. miticof ones proper duetic. OD SUTIN 70V JOS BEING 7:

Theſe diſhgnes, publiſhed in Court, wereyby his wel-willers , adorned

with thetitles of Pieric, louc of Peace, and Religion; burſorhe; thatiwere
cmulous , :ſayd the' end: was not good; * hab the Pope did ground him-

- ſelfe ypon'Aſtrologicall prediions ( folkewing/his fachers ſteps; who

"+: becamegrear —_ profeſſion which,as ſometinies} either by'chance

or otherwiſe, they ſucceede, fo, for the molt pare, they ate'occalions of
the fallof many.” *Amonglt the Popes particular diflignes.; one'was, to
inſticuce '\>Religion/of aw-hundred perſons 7 like vnto & 'Canalatie*/ of

aS. | | :
«px. which himſclfe would be Head; and make the election; raking rheim out

of anyiothbr Religion, or ſtare of perſons /cucry one of which ſhould
baucyeercly'fiue hundred crownes but of the Chamber (' ſhould rake #very
folemne: and firicb:Oath of fidclitic ro rhePope, ſhouldhdt bee dure
 toiany.otherdegree/morhauegny more rexenue; excepr;HFor theit deletts;

e© £5 e 2a fl they

, —_— CDG. 0  z oo gy COD ——
k

E1s.5; \the Councelldf Trent. 39

_ — 2
— _ — —- ww -DOoa.a_t

"IX i...

chey werocreated Cardinals; ia which xaſe they were 'not=rforlake the 17 55

com punie. Theſe-onely heewould: imptoyfor Nunc ; and*tninilters of I
buſinefſes , Goucrnours of Ciries; Legarecs , and-iit all other .occafſ. Cnannnn 5
ons of the Apoſtolique'Sea”' And imanylearned} tytn;. Inhabirahrs/of Manta;
Rome; whom himfelfe did know, were wamtd;andotherspurthemſelues 7

of manynouirics; which were altbutied in ſifencey becauſe 'Mareeltns, firlk irannouns
weakened by rhepaineshe rookein the longgtear ecretyoniesyas hath bin tving fr bur

2 2.daye35

the next Moneth, John. Peter Caraffa, who 'called: himſclfe Paulus Quar: yy oe

tus, was created, the Imperialiſts refiſtng as muchas they: could: For he 4:5crexcd
P ope.

dome.' 'Whereuntowas added the ſeucritie'of his'manners; which made Pome fe.

the Courr fad, and putir in'geater fearc of reformation, then it formerly Courts
aira

his perſon and familte, he laid aide immediatelyafter his creation” Forbe-

ing demaunded byhis Sreward what diet:hee would” hatie-pronided for

him;hee anſwered fuchas befirrech a Prince ::and would be crowned with

greater pompethen was vſuall,affeRing, in all his aftions, to keepe his de:

pree with magnificehor; and to appeare ſtatelyand fumpruous, To his

Nephoewes and kinſmen hee was as indalpgent as any! of his Predeceſſors:

Heaffc&ed to hide his ſeucritic rowards others, by thewing the greateſt

humanitie; bur within a ſhort time hee rexurned co his owne nacurall 'dif-
oficion2:> 115 bo ai, (11049 20th 150 anus 2a brghen

\-viag rooke ir for a great glory that theithree Engliſh-Armbaſſadours, The £: =

difparched:in the time of Ialius,cntred Rome the fixibalpy of his Papa- are received

cic : and:the-firſt confiſtorie after: the Coronation wis-publiqu&:The Gtor ww

Ambafſadauts, werebroughrincoir, who proſtrarmyahemſelies av the 17c2e

Popes feartdid; inthe riame of rhe Kingdome, acknowledge the faults ''

commicted,tclating;them; all in: particular (for ſo che Pope would haue

it) confolling they hadbeene>yngrarefull for: fo: many: benefirs! receiued

from theChurch,and humbly crayingipardon: for it-»The Pope did pare

L—_—

192 + The Hiltory of Liz's,

t555. douthem, rooke them vpfrom the ground, and imbraced. chem : and, ro
£LA—> honour their Maictties who ſent them, gauc-the title of 'a Kingdome ro
Cnaxrzs. 5/ Ifcland, graunting them this dignitie by the autboritie. which the. Pope
Mazy. - hathfrom God, being placed oucr all Kingdomes, to ſupplanc thofe thar
WAIT, are contutacious + and to build new. -Mcn of indgement, whothen

The Poxeg= knew notthetrue catiſe of that a&tion, thought ir a vanitic, not-ſceing

ucth to Irc-

pits what profit, either of authoritic of hanour, jc might bring roa King, 10

* | haue manyritles inthe-Countrey which hee: poſlceſſerh,, confidering thac

' the molt. Ghriltian King is: more, honoured by the onely tice of King of

France, theo if his State werediuided into as many, /Kingly titles as hee

bath Prouinces. Neither didic then ſeeme a firtetyne to-lay , hee had

ower from God to build vp, and ouctthrow K ingdomes. Bur: tho'e

that knew the truce cauſe, did notthinke it yaine, bura ſecret, viually pra-

Qtiſed a_ long time. | Henrie the: Eight, after his: ſeparation from the

Pope, made [reland a kingdome, and called himſelfe, King of England,

France, and-Ireland ; which title , continued by Edward, was aflumed

by Marie, and her Husband, The Pope ſo ſoone as hee was created, cn-

tred joto a reſolution that the title of:Ircland ſhould nor bee vicd by

whichwas , thoſe Princes, afhrmipg conſtantly thatit belonged onely to him, ro

_— akndiv* giue the pameofa King. Bur it ſecrmed- hard to enduce England to quir
conſcorof that which rwo Kings had vſcd, and theQueene, nor thinking much of
——ang Fape. .. : : ;

\.. -- it, had continued, Therefore hee found a temper; tharis , ro diſſemble

the knowledge of what Henry bad done, and himſelfe to crect the
- Popeshave Ifland into a Kingdome,thar ſo the world mightbelecue tharthe Queene
ofenguen had yicd the Titkeas giuen by the Pope, nor as decreed by her Facher.
heyceuld, And the Popes. hauc often given that which they could nor- cake from
we poſietors. the poſleſlors, and to auoyd contentions, ſome haue receiued their owne
goods as gifts, and ſome hauc diſſcmbled the knowledge of the gift, or

| of the pretence of the giuer. In the priuatc diſcourſes berwerne the
Popeand the Ambaſladours, kce found fault thar the Church goods Were

not whally reſtored, ſaying that by no mcanes it was to bee tolerated,

ard that ir was neceſlaric to render all, cuen-roafarthing; becaulc the

chings that belong to God can neuer beeapplyed to humane vies, and hee

that wichholdeth the lealt part of them, is in continuallſtate of damnari-

The Pope on. -, That if hee had power to grant them, hee would doc it molt readily,

commander:

the reftiruns for his Fatherly affection which hee bearcth tothem,, and for the experi-
——_ - ence hee hath of their filiall obedience, but his authoritic was not fo
England. Jarge,as that hee might prophane the things dedicated io Go D, and {cc
England bee aſſured thatthis would beean Anathema, and an cantagion,
which,by the juſt reucnge of God, would alwayes hold the Kingdome of

England in perpetuall infclicitic. Hecharged the Ambaſladoursto writc

-- thereof immediatly, and was notconteneto ſpeake of it once; bur repeas

++ red itasofrenasthere was. occaſion. Hee ſaid alſo,plaincly, thavihe Petar-
Andther37 perce ought to bepayd, as ſooneas might bee, and: that, according to the
:rpexce. Cultorne hee would ſenda Colletor for that purpole;;': tharhimfclfe had
excrciled that charge three yeeres, hauing |beene:ſem:into England. for

that cnd; wherein _ much editicd,: by ſccing ithe forwardneſle 6

the

IE.

393

nh wot rar og : oth 16 co ail
L1g.ay | the Councell af T rent.
che people 10 contribmate,clpeciallyotrholcot rhe meanet ſoft ;andioldthem 15; 5

oftenthatihey could: por hope! ghat SaintzPerer would open heauen: vato Px
them, tolong as they wiurped his goods vpancearth.” This relation made vn- Gransns 5.

w-the Queene, wichajany othettreatics,cominued [ucceeſhiuely from Rome, » . «+.
cauſed bra implay:albherfpifirs ercin; Þurndotbing»could be done, be- 7 *
cut manrpotthediobilicic, angoHthe:@rardies hadincormporated many of The Que-re
eſe revzenewes inforheir bouſes;/ For ho flfe ſheereltorcd the tenths and canton, xluch
all orherEcclefraltigaliigaods annexediodheo(Mrowne, by her brother, and va no
her Fathers: The AmbaſladaurspartedfromRome, with much praile;and
fauourftom the Pope forthartubmillionzameancs by which his good will

is eafilylgaiticot 07 row hos | ani n, offs 3 2. ©, #7

{ Immediarcly after the. Creatign of the: new. Pape; the Imperialiſts and

French men; did; vie>» who thould gaine/him/] But-che'Cardinall of Loraine;
who:well knew his humour, confirmed his aftection/towardes the French;
tcllihgbiman. Conſiftorie, and+in many private Treaties belides, that rhe

King didknowthatthe Church: of France had neede of reformation , and

was rcady.to aſhit his Holineſle; cither by ſending Prelates tothe Councell, -

if. heethanght fit, or by any other meanes that ſhould ſecme good vnto
him. !! 1 '{12 4 virrtnt, itt | ;

Inthe meane ſpacerhe Dice of Germany was proſecuted , not without - Tang
contentions; which: would haue beene greater if -Cardinall Morone had the Dre: of
remayned'\chere, as well for tha negotiations heo would haue made; asfor ©
the ſuſpicions conceiued by the Proteſtants, that heeiwas {ent gnely to
oppolc theiteommoditics. Andic was alrcadie publiſhed cuery-whete chat
Rome; was full of hope, that Germany, wonld- quickely/ come vader the
yoke, as Englandhad done. + Afrer the. Cardinals departure; thetir(t dif-
ficulcie was z whether the points-of Religion ſhould bee difcufled firlt of
all ;' which though the Ecclelzaltiques did" dontradi@ in. che beginning,
yet it wasfinally re{olued, by common conſent ro beginne there, Wherein
there were two. contrary Propoſttions; 'One to treat-of the meanes to re-
forme it ; the.other to leaue euery one to his libertic :-abotir: which point
there was very, great controuerfie,, But in theende, all-inclincd to the (e-
cond propoſition, not knowing how to roote our the euill which did {ti}
molic, onely hoping+that when the humours were-quict, and the difte-
rences and ſuſpitions .remooued , many eafte and commodious wayes
might beo-found out. :Forthis, irwas-neceffary ,to.cliabliſh a peace, that * *
for cauſe of Religion there might:bee no:more- warre, and that itmight
bee lawfullfor all the Princes and States of che Empire to follow and caule
to bce obſerucd in their Nominions what Religion pleaſed rhem bell.

Which reſolution, when it came to. bee cltabliſhed raiſed greater contro-
nerſics. For thoſe of the Auguiban Confesfion did pretend, thatit was law-
full for all co accept their Do&trine, retainingthe honours, States, and De-
grees which they poſſeſſed. .On'the contrary, the Catholiques would nor
hauc it permitted to the :Ecclefraftiques ro change: their Religion , and
keepe their degree, but thatif'a Biſhop or an Abbot did embrace the other
Religion, he ſhould loole his dignitic, Neither would chey haue it permic-

ied to ths Citics, which ſcucn yeares ſince had receiued the decree of the
| Interim

|

*. i UB. or rhe pes ro, & «

L1s.5,

—

The Hittory of

MARY.
HENRY, 2:

But atthe laſt
a Peace 0: Ree
1izron 15 efta-

Þ1ti icd,

Interim madein Aus bug , toreturne tothe Augnitan (onfeſſion,
Writings paſſed on' both fides'concerning this,” and, arthe laſt, the ri-

. gour of -cither partic was abared. The. Catholiques were content that

the Cities ſhould doeas they pleaſed, andthe Proteſtants gaue ouer their

reteace concerming the Eccleftaltiques. Andithe fine and twenticth of

ptember the Receſſe was made,thata Generall or Nationall Councell(nei-
ther of which could bee aſſembled in regard'of many difficulties )becing
neceſfarie to determine lawfully: the caules of Religion, varill a way mighc
bee opencd vnto a friendly agreement thoughour all Germanie, the 'Em-
perour Ferdinand, the Carholique Princes-and:States,:ſthould nor forcethe
Princes, Orders and States of the Auguitan Confeſsion to forſake their Re-
ligion and Ceremonies alreadiciniticured, orto bec jinſticutced in their Do-
minions, nor ſhould doe any thing in contempt thereof, nor hinder them
in the free vic of that Religion: and thoſe of the Augnſtan (onfeſs2on ought
to behaue themſclucs in the fame fort rowards Cxſar, Ferdinand, and the
other Princes and Statesof theold Religion, as well. Ecclelialticall as Sc-
cular, cuery one hauing powertoceltablithin his owne State what. Reli-
gion hee will, and to torbid rhe other. And if any Ecclcfiaſtique ſhall
aban,Jon the old Religion, it ſhall bee no infamic vnto him bur hee (hall pre-
ſent loole his Benetices, which ſhall bee conferred vpon others by the Pa-
tron; and the Benctices , which the Proteſtants hauc' alrcady annexed to
Schooles and Miniſteries of the: Church ſhall remayne in rhe ſame ſtate.
Thar Eccleftaſticall juriſdiction ſhall bee'exerciſed no more againſt thoſe
of the Augu/tan Confeſsion ; bur, otherwife, ſhall bee exerciſed according
ro theancientcuſtgme. The Receſſe being made, another difficulcic arole
for the remoouing of which, Ferdinand, viing the abſolute Imperiall au-
thoritic of his brother, did declare with conſent of the Eccleftaſticall Order,
that the Titulars, Cities, and Communities, {ubie& ro Eccleſtaſticall Prin«

| ces, who haue adhered many yceres to the Auguſian Confeſsion , and recci-

Of which the
f ope com-

p! 4n.th ro
the Emperors
Arbaſla.o0r »
and Cardinall
of Ausburys

ued long {ince the Rites and Ceremonies thereof, and doe obſeruc them
ſt:]l, may nor bee compelled by their Princes to change them, but ma
contitucin them vntillagenerall concord in Religion, which ſhall be con-
cluded.
Pope Paul vnderſtanding of this Recefſe of Ausbwy , was cxcecding
angry; Heecomplained thereof ro the Emperours Ambaſſadour, and to
the Cardinall of Ausburg, reprehending Ferdinand tor ſuffering a treaty
in matters of Religion, without the knowledge of the Apoſtolique Seca,
and threatning thatin due time hee would make the Empcrour and that
King know to thcir gricfe, how they had offtended+ him ; hee exhorted
them to preuentit, by reuoking and diſſallowing the things grauntcd, that
hec might haue no occaſion to proceed, as hee meantto doe, not oncly,a-
o311it the Lutherans, but cuen againſt them alſo, as Abertors : offcring
ro alliſtrhem, in caſe they ſhould doe it by authoritieand armes, and to
commandall Chriſtian Princes, vpon payncs and cenſures, ro aide them
with all their forces. He was nor ſausfhed with the Ambaſſadours anſwere,
who alleaged the ſtrength of the Proteſtants, the warre againſt Ceſar, in

which hee was liketo bee priſoner in I{pruc;and the Oathes taken, For the
Oathes,

bl Bing we - ND + — WI 4 4
———W_ BY Deg ans

CB... NEST SE

L1s.5.' - the:Counceltof Trent.
Oathes, hee anſwered: that heefreedandabſolucd them" yea, comman-: _

_

395

-_—

& «
*

dcd not to obſcruethem. To'rherelt hee:layd;thar in Gods cauſe, 'one >>

mult not proceed according to humanercipedts. 'Fharthe Emperour CaOChngaeos,

in danger by Gods permillion,becaule hcdwl ngewhat hee could'and'ought bx 7.

to doc; toreduce Germanic tothe obediente of che Apoſtolicall Sea i that | arty |

this 13 but a roken of Gods anger, and:thathec' mutt expect greater pus!

niſhmenr if hee rake not warning by ir: bus carrying -himfelfe"ss 2'Soat

dicr of Chrilt yndaunredly, and withzourworldly rctpects, he ſhall abraine

all manner of victoric , as the examples of che rimes'paſt doe''demon-/

ſtrate. 1 320 307% 1103 101917; ;cl
The fame was that the Pope was mooued to ſay ſ{o;'not onedly -by his!

owne inclination, bur by the perſwaſion of rhe Cardinalt of Ausburg, who i =

was difplcaſed with the libertio granted tothe: onfefsioniſts.. 'It-is certaine-

that Paul,being of an high ſpiritand valt chaughts, didafſurehimſaferhat he

could redrefſe all che diſorders, by his Papaltauthoritic onely, notthad need

of any Prince hercin.; Therefore hee: neger: ſpake with Ambaſladours bur DIRE =

hee rhundred in their cares,'tharhee wasaboue all Princes, *tharhe would einen

not thatany of them ſhould bee roo domelticall with him, that hegcould 4inz3:oa.

change Kingdomes,thathee-was fucceſſor.of him whorharh depofed Kings:

and Emperours, and did ofcen repeace, for: a beginning of aurhoritic ex-"

erciſed by him, that heehad 'madc [reland -a-Kingdome, and, went on:fo'

farre, that, in Conſiſtoric, and at his Table: publiquely;in theprefence' of

many, hee faid, he weull not haueany Prince forts: Companion{bur- alt

ſubiectsvnder his foote (ſo heeſayd, itriking/iragainlt the ground:)-as ir'is}

fir,andas'it is his will who hath buile che Church j|and\hachy plated! cher!

inthisdegree. And ſometimes he would fay;thar, ratherthen wewould:doe'!

7

#} F 4)

any thing balcly, we'iwould die,oucrrhrow all, andiferthe whote-world on!
fire, #1} ; as $i. 4 N —— + i wards 1 16cha

- Pawlthe fourth was naturally. of a loftiezmind -and:courage;'and rruſted-
much in his knowledge and'good fortune, which did»atcompany: him- in
all his ations : whercunto the. power. and fortune'/ob the PEI
added, hee thought euery thing was calae;-Bur two: humoursdid'iflore in'
him. by.curncs; one, which by : cultome toi make wieiof Religionitiall his
attemprts,did indie him ro imploy his Spiritualt;Anthoritic 7:4he orhet”-
was put into him-by Charles ({araffa, his:Nephew, .who being'valiant, and
exerciſed in warre,, made. Cardinall of. a-Souldier, did retaine'nis marciat'
ſpirits,and perſivaded him 16-v(c his romporall poweryſaying;rhqthe on6-
vithoutrhe other is deſpiſed, bur,boeing| ioyned,are inftrumcnsof:gretr-
matters» The circamſpett old-man, kneivavell thrar the! Spitittatlis made?
weaker, whenit ixgmanifeltcdharchereis'neede ofcheFempotluBdt bee:
ing evct. intent3o0-nmiake his name. great; fomerimbs-hoegate carer bis-
ER O_—Y more{cilnthodmddcercomy
claded 10: vie | the, Temiporall:ſecretly, o Spiritual, ariprel
rwlrerat ery are rear rags anr ——
ſed by theteuents.::Therefora retreated moik {doveily Gel ers nee,
wich cheCardinall of Lorairicy.a {cague with cho. FrenolbKi johy "Lage wit
ingalmoſtmade; Lorainafiarted; from Roms) to, rakg;dway hb jog _

. By LY T2 OO

XUM

The Hiftory of Lins,

155 5. the Cardinall Torrmon went thicher, with whom it was concluded, with

the ſame lecrecy. The principall -captiulation whereof was, the payning

' Caa»128 5- of the Kingdome of Naplesfor a yonger ſonne of the King, with grear
" 4737 © enlargement of the bounds of the Eccleſraſticall ſtate; whoſe confines
He xr. > were to be S. Germano, Gerigliano,and, on the further {ide of the Apennine,

the Riuer Peſcara, beyong Benexentum : and lome things beſides were yeel- -

| ded vnto for the Popes benefit. +
The Pope alſo thathe might-hauc a prop to leane on in both courſes,
thought ir neceſſary tro make a. promotion of Cardinals, dependants on
himſclfc, men of courage, who would not bee afrayd to proſecute hisdiſ-
{cignes, and imploy themlelucs in any bard enterpriſe. Hee began to
{pcake of this promotion bur a few daycs before hee madceir; which gric-
ucd the Cardinals, for that hee would contradi&t the Capitulation which
he had ſworne: andthe Imperialiſts, abou all, conſidering the qualitic of
the perſonsto be promoted, purpoled ro oppoſe. The twentieth of De+
cember, the Pope being entredinto the Conliftoric,ſayde, ſo ſoone as hee
fare downe, that he would not giue. audicnce to any that day, becauſe hee
had greater mattets to propoſe. Eucry one vnderſianding by this that his
meaning wasto create new Cardinals, rhe Cardinall of Saint James went
ro his ſeate,to ſpeake with him ; and the Pope refuſing, and the Cardinall
nor defiſing, hee (ct his hand on his breſt, and thruſt himfrom him. All
being ſer, the Pope began to complaine of thoſe who: reported hee could
make burfoure Cardinals, in regard of that which |:ce had ſworne in the
{onclaue, and ſaid, that this was to bir.de the Popes authoritic, which is ab-
ſolure; that it is an Article of Faith that the Pope cannot bee bound, and
much leſſe can bind himſclfe; that to ſay otherwiſe was a manifeſt herefic;
from theguilt whereof he did abſolue thoſe that were faultic, becauſe hee
thought they did nor ſpeake obſtinately: but hercafter if any ſhall ſay the
ſame, or the like, againſt theauthorine giuen him by God, hee will giue
arderthat the Inquifition ſhall proceed. Hee added, that hee would . make
Cardinals,and would not haucany contradiction, becauſe hee wanted per-
| ſons forimployment,which hee could nor put vpon them , becauſe cucry
one had his proper faction : that irwas fir ro. promote menof learning, and
of cxemplaric life, to imploy them for reformation of the Church, eſpe-
cially inthe Councell,whercofit was high cime to treate (criouſly , which
he would propolewith the firlt occaſion. Bur:now hee would name'vanro
them the perſons to.bee promoted to the Cardinalitic (a thing not 'to bee
defcrred;any longer) that they . hauing. a conſultiue voyce; might pur
_ tO his-confideration what was. for the good of the Church, whercin
they ſhould ;bee heard; and thar:they ſhould not belceue they - had: a de
cifiuc voyce,, becauſe that belonged onely ro him. Hee-propoſed?ſeucn
perſons: inwhichnumber onclyone was his kinfman, and-anorhervof che
Theatine Congtegration: the others: were menof much fame, cither for '[car-
ning, or-far che negotiations of the. Cours." agft- theſe: was: vTabannes -
Groperws,-ot Collen, of: whom often mention; hath becne :madey; who
| ” "knowing hee wouldnortiuclong, thinking :zo-honour his mcmorie- much”
_-'*moreby refuſing adigaity,defired cucn by grearPrinces, then by!keeping
__- Ir

ita few dayes, which would giue matter of diſcourte:rothole thatiwereemu-. 1 $5 5 |

——_ ww.

L1 8:5. { the Councell of Trex. x I $ 297

lous of him, hee fenrthe Pope many chankes, rogetber with-his.excuſe, and. >

PAvai 4.

—— - --

_ Cardinals wereicreated the-next Sunday-before the league. was:concluded Miry
with France, which was the 15. of that moneth. 7 ig ade of
Arthis cime Cardinall” Poole, who for many reſpects of ſugecſlion
ro ſhew hee was:not ſo much obliged co the Papacie,, would not;receiue! Eg-jPucl wn?

cleftaſticall Ordeys,rheſc caules being! ceaſed, went out of the-number of the+.»..; »* © _

i; 2.4

refuſing the ornaments, would neither haue the nathe,,-northe tice. Lhe Enaxces ;.

W013 AA MH

4 and \Card Foo; ,
; | ;
LN PLOT orc 41:14

#

Dcacon Cardials, and wasordaincd Prieſt : and, fourc moneths after, gag, 77 » 1

Arch-biſhop of { anterbury being burat , hauing: becne fitſt degraded | wickt
many ceremonies, he was put.imto his place. 1): i road:
The pcople of 4u8tria-, in regard of the Receſſe madeintheDiet , and-of;

Ferdinands declaration in fauour of the Cities ,andNobles ſubic&troEcclefi-
CThej

alticall Princes, centred into hope thar themlelues alſo might retainehberne 7,

of religion. Therefore hauiny called a Diet of his SubicRs, ro hauea con; —_—

criburion againſtrhe Turkes who made warreagainlt him,chey-demaunded 59h

permiſſon and freedome toliue in purity of religion, and to imoy the bene-

tit which was granced vnto the { onfeſSronsts; telling the King that the (cour-

gcs of the Turkes, arc Gods viſuations , to inuitethem to amendment of

life; that Armesare in vaine raken againlt the enemie, it the wrath of God

be not firit appeaſed, who will be honoured according to his ownepreſcripr,

and not according tothe fanſics of men. They beſecched him thatthey might

not be in worſe eltate then other Germans, and that Miniſters of the Church.

might reach and diltribure the Sacraments, according to the Evangclicall

and Apoltolicall do&trine; and that the Schoole&-maſters ſhould nor bee ba-

niſhed varill cheir cauſe were heard, according to juſtice; offering , vpon

thcle conditions, to aduenture their lines and goods, to giue him content-

ment. (i
Ferdinand anſwered, that hee could not grant their demang, not for want To whom

.
>

we.

Ferdinand :.n-

of will to gratificrhem, but. becauſe hee was bound ro obey the Church, (acre thus

and chat himſclte and Ceſar: hadieucr dereſted the dilcords in religion ;. for
remedy whereof they bad inititured many Colloquies,and finally procured the
Councell of Trent ; which if it had not a happy ſucceſſe, it was nor to bee
imputed vnto them, in regard itis knowen with what counſcls-and artifices
ir harh been hindered by others;rhar afterwards an Edit was made in fauout
of the Auguitan Confeſsion,in which themlclues were parrakers, becauſc irwas ,
— faid therein,thateuery Prince,not Eccleſialticall, might chooſe which of the
rwo religions he would, and:the people follow the religion of the Prince,
with which .if any bee norcontent , hee hath liberty to ſell his goods, and ro
gocwhither hee will ; thar therefore their ducty was te continue in the old
Catholique Religion, which himſelfe profeſſerh : butto yeeld ro their defires
as muchas he could;hee was content.to (uſpend char part of che Edict which
concerneth the Communionof the Cup, yer with condition that they ſhould
change nothing intherites and ceremonies of the Church, vntill the Decree
of the {uture diet. ' And they, deſiring nothing elle 5 werecontent ro contri-
bure readily againſt che Enemie. - 3:2 28 if |
The Bauarians alo detired of their Duke, libertic of religion, demaunding,
Ll afree

298 : T be Hiſtorie of Lis. 5.

1556 afrce preaching of the Goſpel, mariage of Prielts, the Communion $ub o-
63S traque, and to cate flcth cucry day, proteſting thar, otherwiſc, they would
Cuaxuzs 5. NOT pay the heauic Subſidies, and conttiburions againſt the Turkes. The
Sfany. Duke, ſceing that Ferdinand ( his wiucs father ) had graunted bis peo-
Ny 2 ple the Communion of the ( uppe; ro obrainc contributions of them, did
The Bauri- likewiſe grantthem that Communion, and leave to care ficth, ifthere were
lib:rry ofre- neceſſity, on faſting dayes; ynrill the cauſes of Religion were compoſed by
Win xr publique authority,che Edits made by him in marter of _ ſtilremai-
| _ cord ningin force; ptotelting,, in many and copious termes , that hee would nor

them in ſome epart from the Church, and religion of his anceſtors,nor change oughtin
EE ! theccremonics , without conſent of the Pope, and the Emperour , promIi-

ſing to procure that his Metropolitan and Biſhops ſhould approoue this
The whole grant,andnor molelt any for theſe things. The whole Palatinate did imbrace
Palatine rhe AuguStan ( onfe(si0n, becauſe, the Eleftor becing dead, his Nephew ſuccee-
te Auguitan ded, who bad declared himlelfeto be of that ( onfcſsion many yecres before ;
Comet for which he had ſuffered many perſecutions. And,now being madePrince,
hee preſently forbade the Maſſes, and Roman ceremonies throughout all his
Principality.

Bur the Pope hauing layd the foundations before rehearſed , applying
himſclfe ro-ſpirituall marcers, thought ir neceſſary to gaine credit with the
world ; which could nor bee done, it ir did not appeare by deedes, not by
words onely, that the Court of Rome. was reformed. Therefore, becing

1556. wholly ben torhis,in the end of Ianuary 15 56. he crefteda Congregation,
ThePopee= jn which were foure and trwenry Cardinals, and fiuc and fourty Piclates and
zrez-rioneo Other perſons, the molt learned ofthe Covrr, to the number of 1 50. and di-
ern Uuide them into three rankes, in each of which were cight Cardinals, fftcene
cernng%- Prelatcs ; and others tothe number of fifry. To theſe hee committed the

diſcuſſion of all the doubts in marter of Simonie: which hee printed, and
ſent copics of them toall Princes, and ſaid hee had publiſhed them,thar they
mightcometorhe knowledge of the ninerfities, of generall Stadies, and of
cucry learned man,thar all might haue occaſion to make knowen their opI-
nions, which he would not openly defire,becauſe it was not honourable for
that Sea, which is miltris of all, to goc about and beg them. Hee ſayd,thar,
for himſelfe he had no necde of the inſtruction of any, becauſe he knew what
CuRIsTdidcommand, butthathe had creed the Congregation, thar,in
-a matter whercin all arc inteeſtcd,; it might not bee ſayd that hee had pro-
ccedcd of his owne head. Hee added thar, hauing purged himſclfc and his
Courr, it could not beeſayd ro him, Phyfician cure thy ſelfe_., and that he
would make Princes know, that there 1s greater Simonie-in their Courts,
which hee would take away , beeing ſuperiour aſwell ro Princes, as Pre-
lates. |
—_— In the firſt Congregation of the firſt ranke, held thez6.of March, be-

meering of

which 3.0pi- fore Cardinall Bellai , Deane of the Colledge, twelue perſons did ſpeake, and
broached, There werethree opinions. Oneofthe Fiſhop of Fare , who defended that
for the vſc of the Spiritual power itis not inconuenient to take money, when
itis not fora price, but for other reſpets : another of the Biſhop of Seſſa,
that this was by no meanes lawfull , and ypon no condition, and that ir was
ablolutcly

— —

XUM

=

md

L 18.5. the Councell of T1 rent. EYE 399

—OL

ablolutely derettable Simonic , as well ro giue as to recciue, nor could bee 1556
excuſed with any pretence: the third ofthe Biſhop of Sinigaglia,in the middle " Dev,
berweenethele rwo,thar it might bee lawfull; butin ſome certainerime one- Cranixs 5.
ly,and with certaine conditions. The voyces of thqt ranke being all _ Tas

ded , bur voluntarily offered , for any fpirituall grace whatſocuer, that hee tis omn.ayt.

would grant to more matrimoniall diſpenſations , and was in a mindetore. 2, ,.

Some told him that it was neceſlary to handle ſuch a thing in a gerierall
Councell; which he hcard with great indignation, and ſaid hec had no necde
ofa Councell, himſelfe becing aboucall. And Cardinall Bellai {aying, thar
a Councell was neceſſary , not toadde authority to the Pope, bur to tinde a
mecanes for execution, which cannor bee yniforme in all places, hee conclu-
ded, that, if a Councell were neceflary , it ſhould becheld in Rome-, arid thar
it was nor ncedfull ro goc elſewhere; that he neuer conſented thatthe Coun- y;,, ,,;.;..
cell hould beheld in Trent , as was knowen to them all, becauſe ic was in iy.
the middelt of the Lutheranes, that the Councell is ro conſiſt of Biſhops ot 77e».
onely ; that other perſons mighr bee admirred for counſel , yet onely Ca-
tholikes, otherwiſe the Turke alſo ought to bee admitted ; thar it was agreat
vanicieto ſend into the mountaines chreeſcore Biſhops,of the leaſt able, and:
fourtic DoCtours of the molt ynſufficient, as was twice done already, and
to belecue that, by thoſe, the world could beberter regulated, then by the
Vicarof CH « 1 $T, with the Colledge of all the Cerdinals , who arethe pil-
lars of all Chriſtendome, elected for the molt excellent of all Chriſtian Narti-
ons,and by the counſlell of the Prelates and DoRors which arc in Rome, who
arethe molt learned perſons in the world, and more in number then,by any
diligence, can bee brought to Trent. |

Bur when newescameto Rome. of the grant of the (uppe, made by the Heris much |
Dukeof Bauaria to his ſubiects, hee entred intoa great rage againſt him : $ yan: made
and hce purthis amongſt other things, for which - deſſeigned ro make {rao
prouiſion at once, beeing full of hope that eucry thing would bee cafic vn- |
ro him, if the Cour: were reformed, and wasnot troubled though hee ſaw
the number of abuſes ro increaſe, For a few dayes after the Ambaſſadour'
of Polonia , comming cxprelly to congratulate his Holineſle for his aſſump-
tion tothe Popedome, madefiuedemands in thename of the King and rhe
Kingdome. To celebrate the Maſle in the Polonian rogue. To victhe as alc with
Communion Sub xraque ſpecie; The mariage of Prieſts. Thar thepaiment mrmnn,.
of 4nnates might bee taken away. And that they might call a National] by*eVoto;”
Councell:ro reforme the proper abules of the Kingdome; and to reconcile'fows.
the variety ofopinions. Hee heard thele demands with vnſpeakable impa-

”

rience, and ſer himſelfe ro deteſt them molt bitterly, ſpeakivg 2gxinlt them,
oneafrer another, with infinitevehemencie. And, for concluſion hee ſayd,”
thata geaerall Councell in Rome would cauſe the herefhies and badopinions

LL S of

4.00 S The Hiſtorie of L1s. 5.
1556 of many tobec knowen, alluding to what was done in Germany, Auſtria, and
EIS Butariae. And becing, for thelc reaſons almoſt reſolute in himlelfe, (orat
Caaxies 5:: the lealt,willing ro ſecme ſo ) that it was neceſſary to call a Councell,heetold
27S all the Ambaſſadours thar they ſhould fignitic rotheir Princes his purpoſe
Hear >, tOmakea Laceran Councell, like vnato that which is ſo famous. And hee
Whack ma. ſent Nuncito the Empcrour and the French King, to exhort them to peace,
ſpeake of hol- though in France hechad a more lecret negotiation. Hee gauc commillion
Ant alſoto treate with them of the Councel] ; and fayd in the Conliftory, ina
long diſcourlc, (as he was very copious )thatir was neceſſary to celebrate ir
uickly , ſccing that beſides Bobemia-, PruſSia, and Germante , which were
11. Much infefted ( for thoſe were his words) Poloniaallo was in danger. That
ceis 1noxy = 6 : er :
wihy French 11 France and Spaine they were well affected in Religion, but the Clergic was
ms badly vied. Thar which hee principally reprchended in France,was the cx-
A444. action of the Tenths , which the King made the Clergic ordinarily. pay. Bur
Emperour hee was more incited again{t Spainze. For Paul the third, and Iulins, haui
—_ oranted the Emperour ( harles che halfe and quarter fruits , fora Subftdic of
the warre of Germany, and hee hauing reuoked the grant,becauſc he wasnor
{atisfied with the Recefſe of 4usbarg, yer they perſcuercd in Spaine, and forced
the Clergic to pay,by ſequelirations and impriſonments.
Hee didnot forbcare to ſay, that the Emperour was an heretike; thatin
the beginnjvg heefauourcd che innouators of Germanze.., to depreſſe that
holy Sea, and to make himiclte Lord of Rome-, ard of all Italie; that hee
held Paul the thirdin perpetual] trouble, and thar he ſhould not doethelike
ro him. Hee added, that alihqough hee might remedic all thele inconueni-
ences by his owne authority, yct not tolay ſo greata burden vpon him-.
{elfe alone, hee would not doext without a Councell ;that hee had called ir
in Romz, and nameditthe Lateran; that hee had giuenCommillion to 1ig-
nifc it ro. the Emperour and Frencn King in courtel1e, but not to haue
their conſent or countell,becaufe his will was they ſhould obey ; that he was
aſſured.it would pleaſe neither of them, becauſe it is notfor their purpoſc, li-
uing as they doe, and that they will ſay many things againft ir, rodiſturbeit,
But hee will call ir whether they will-or no, and make knowen what that
Sea can doc, when it hath a Pope of courage. The 26. of May,theanniuerſa-
Tic of his Coronation, all the Cardinals and Ambaſſadours dining with him,
according to cultome, hec began, after dinner, to diſcourſe ofthe Councel,
and that his reſolution was tocelcbrate it. by all meanes in Rome, and that in
courteſie, heegaue notice thereof rothe Princes, and that the high wayes
may be madeſecure forthe Prelates. Bur if no Prelates would comethither,
yer hee would hold it with thoſe onely who arc in Court, becauſe hee well
knew whatauthoriry he had. | KG:
While the Pope was bufic about the teformation,newes came to-Rome,
Pur moſtof that atruce was concluded the. fifth of February berweene the Emperour
eruceconclu- ADd French King , - by the mediation of 'Caxdinall Poole ;who did intcrpoſe
Seenen® inthe.nameof the Queene of England : | which madethePopcamazed,and
Prics. the Cardinall Cargffs. much more, hauing bcenc treared, and concluded
withour them. The Pope was dilplcaſed;; prjncipally for the loſſe of repu--
cation , and for the danger which it broyght, if thoſerwo Princes were
; ioyned

— —NT

L 18454 theCounceltof-Trent. 481
Joyn:d, acww.oiodijretion bes mult needey ffapd. To the Cardinall, im- 1556
pariear of ccit , tr lzermed char five yerres, m.the decrepir age of his Vacle, Ds
1d quite rake fro n, im all accaltons to chale the Spaniard our of the King. Cuikris” 0.
don: of N,zples, whom he ſomuch hated... Yerthe Pope, nor looſing cou- mir.
rage, made ;hzw of igy oc therruce, bur ſaid hee was nor fully ſatisticd with IRS
it, b:caulc apeace was.neceſlary, in regard of che Councel, which hec pur-

poſcd rg celebrate, which he wasrclolucdtotrear, and, for that end,to (end

Legates, rgithoie Princes, beeing aſſured ro.concludcir, becaulc hee would

imploy his.aarhoricy.: For hee would not bee hindered/in the gouernment

of the Church, committed co him by Car 1sT. To the Emperour hee ſent 1,
Scipio R:b1b4, Cardinall of Piſa, and ro the French King, Cardinall Caraffa, $ngbedit
his nephew. This wear with all ſpeede, and to the other order was giucn paſſion and

T9 goc (lgwly. R-hibz.had inſtruction to exhort the PEO to amend (ues wo hem
Germaay:, which was, noc done yntill chen , becauſe none had proceeded a- urira2e ay
right 19 char enterpriſe. Hee knewthe detects of his predeceſſors, who, to wmenderb no-
ltop the. reformation of the Court , did hinder the good progreſle of the *
Counce]. . But contrarily he was reſolucd to promote theretormarion, and
to celebrate a Councelin his owne prelence, and to begin with this poynr;
aſſuring himfelfe chat when they ſhould ſee the abulcs taken away, for
which rhey hauc ſeparated themfclues from the Church, and remaine con-
tumaciousitill, chey will defire, and runneto receiue the decrees and con-
Rticurions:which the Councell will make ; where (hall be reformed, not ver-
baily , bat really, the Head, members, Clergie, Laitic, Princes, and people.

To doc lo good a worke, a truce of five yeeres is not ſufficient, becauſe
thercare no elſe ſuſpicions in truces then in warre ; and one mult cuer bee
ready ro prouideagainlt the time when they end; that a perpetuall peace is
necelſary;ro remooue all malice and ſuſpicions, that all may bend themleiues
jayacly, without worldly reſpeCtsto that which concerneth the ynion, and
reformation of che Church. Hegaue thelikeinſtruqtionto Caraffa,and was
content it thould ve publiſhed, by gining our ſome copies of ir. |

The Courc did generally thinke that the Pope {pake' lo ofren-and lo car-
neltly okche Councel, that no man elſe might propoſcit ynto hin,,,and did
threaten che Princes, and all the world with it, ro. makethem-abhorre ir.

Bur afterwards it was knowen that he deſgigned to free. himſclteby,anocher
way,fromche troublegiuen to his-predeceſlours. For when therefgrmation
onely of the Pope, of the Court, of the exempted and priuiledgedgerions,
dependants of the Pogpedome, was propoled', cuery Pringe, peopleand pti-
yace mag, in rezard-nothing was $6 bee hangled that concernedghemy was
forward4gfollicite che.Councelly bur hec propolang ghereformarion ofche <2"
Clergie,l,ajrie, and eſpecially of the Princes; with a:molt{eyere-Junguiftions* © >:
waich hg'd;ſeignedto jnſticurc;he made chem all equall;ſo chathimſeite was

not in queſtion onsly but ocher- likewiſe... And this was aſecrenby-which

hee meantio hold all men in feare, and himſelfe in repurationotantegrity,
and worth, And ,, concerning the Councel; hee meangito gouernghimlelte
according.to theconiynCtures, yereuer holdingthis pointconſtandy ro ce
lebrate it 'w Rome. 37.1 lis Hom 30] , 2: 24 : |
Bur, to returae to tae Legates, hee ok hisnephei,s large inſiruction,
L13 tO

-— D*———  —

Fd

The Hiſtorie of | Lis. 5.

1556 totriethe Kings minde, and, if hee ſaw him reſolute to obſerue the rruce, ro
$7 55 thunder into his cares the ſame leſſon of rhe Councel: and to Rebiba he gaue
Cnaxuss 5. order. to goucrne himlelfe as hee ſhould receiue aduice from his nephew.
Maar, © (@affacaricd to the King,the Sword and Hat, which the Pope had bleſſed
haxar - on Chriſtmasday at night, according to the cuſtome. Of the Peace hee .

made no mention, bur repreſented to the King, that howſocuer the league
was not violated by the truceof fiuc yecres, yet it was made of no force, to
the great danger of his Vacle and of his family, and that they had already
ſomeraſte thereof, by that which the Spaniards had done. Hee recommen-
ded to him, in molt cffeCtuall rermes Religion, and rhe Papacie, to which
his predecefſoursgaue ſingularproteCtion , and the Pope himſclfe and his
family, much deuoted to his Maicſtic, The King was not auerſe, but re-
The Erencs Mayned doubtfull, conſidering the Popes age , who might dic when hee
Kingbraketb ſhould haue molt neede of him. Caraffa perceived this, and found a reme- =
che Popes in- die, promiſing that the Pope ſhould create ſo many Cardinals, parriall for
ans France, and enemies to Spaine, that hee ſhould cuer haue a Pope on his ſide.
The Cardinals perſwaſtons, and the promilc of the promotion, and the ab-
ſolution from the oath of the truce, which he gaue inthe Popes name, tOgc-
ther with the negotiation of the Cardinall of Loraine and his brorher, made
* the King reſoluc to mooue warre, though the Princes of the Blood, and all
the Grandies of the Court abhorred the intamic of breaking the truce,and re-
cciuing abſolution from the oath. The concluſion beeing made, ( araffa
recalled the Legare ſent to the Empercur, who was arriucd art Maſtric, and
cauſed him to comecinto France,though he was bur two daycs journey diſtant
from Ceſar: which made the Emperour, and the King his ſonne beleceue, that

in France, lome thing was concluded againſt them. -
The 2ope The Popes diltalts, againſt the Emperor,and his ſonne,did dayly increaſe.
—_ He madea molt fcucre proceſlc againlt 4ſcanins Colonna, and Marcus Antonius
gait the. his ſonne, for many offences, which hec pretended to bee done againſt the
 Apoltolique Sca, fo lovg ſince, as when (lement was beſieged, and aftcr-
wards againſt Paul the third,and Tulins , and by Marcus Antonius againt him-
ſelfe, and the State of the Church: and, relating in Confiſtorie all the in-
iurics done of old, by the Colonneſi, againſt rhe ApoRolique Sea , did ex-
communicate Aſcenins and Marcus Antonius , depriue them of all digniticand
fee, with cenſures againſt thoſethar gaue them aſſiſtance, or fauour, and did
confiſcate all their poſſeſſions within the State of the Church, and gaue
them to the Count Montorizs, his Nephew, with the title of Duke of Pagliand.
Who rerire Marcus Antonius, retiring into the Kingdome, was receiued, and ſometimes
imo the k1ng- ade Cxcurlions vpon his owne lands, with fome few Souldicts, which
peranomate much prouvked the Pope; who thinking his nods were commandements
vpon their ynto All, abletoterrific euery one, hee could not endureto bee {0 little cſtec-
7 med at Naples, his Countrey , where hce would hauc beene thought ro bee
omnipotent. Heethought inthe beginning, by ralking lauiſhly of the Em-
peror,and of the King, ro make them deſiſt from fauouring the Colonnefi,
and therefore ſpake very often diſgracefully of them, in the preſence of all
forts of perſons, but moſt willingly whenany Spaniſh Cardinall was pre-

ſent, and, at laſt, commanded it ſhould be written vmto them. *

402

None

L rs. 5. the Councellof Trent. 403

None of cheſe proofes taking cfte2, hee proceeded further, atid the three 15 56
and twenticth day of Iuly made the Fiſcal;” and Silueiter Aldobrardinus, the j——»
Conſfiitoriall Aduocate, appeare in theTonfiſtory , who declitedthat his Cuinir: 47
Holineſſe hauing excommunicated , and depriued Marcus Antonius Colonng, Maxx, ©
and prohibited vnder. the ſame cenſures,, all ſorts of perſons to affiſtor fa- 5? >
uour him,and ir being notorious thartthe Emperour , and King Philip, his ThePope
ſonne; had furniſhed him with horſe, foore, and money , they were fallen thache wit
into the puniſhments of the ſame ſentence}, and had 1ott rheir Territories, Jug
which they held in Fee, Therefore they deſired that his Holifieſſe would Empeor,mnd
pracced to a declaratory ſentence , and giue order for execution. The Pope :
anſwered that he would aduile of ir , by the counſell of the Cardinals , and
giuingz them leaue to depatr, he propoſed in Confiftory what was fit to bee
done, iri acalc of fo great importance. The French Cardinals ſpake with
much honour of the Emperour,and King Philip , but fo tharthe Pope was
more prouoked. The Imperialiſts vſed words of an ambiguous ſence, fir to
gaine time, The Theatini , the Popes owne Cardinals, ſpake magnificently
of the Papall authoritic, and of rhe worth and wiſcdome of his Holinefle,
who onely knew how to finde a remedy for that maladic, prai{ingall thar he
had done, and referring themſclues vnto-him for all the reſt.” The Confi-
ſtory being diſmiſſed without a reſolution , the Pope knew that Girhtr hee
- mult yeeld, or come to a warre; from which becing not aucrle, in regard of
his nacurall diſpoſicion , full of courageand hopes, aduice came fitly ro him
from his Nephew , of what was concluded in France. So thar the diſcourſes
of reformation and Councels were tarned'into parleys of money, Souldiers,
and intelligences ; of which things, as not pertaining to my purpoſe, I will _
oacly fay as much 2s may ſhew what the Popes minde was, and how much
he was addicted to a truc, or, at leaſt toa colourable reformation of the ,,......c..
Chiutch. ThePopearmed the Citizens, and inhabitants of Rome , for the wane, .
molt parc, artiſans, and ſtrangers, to the number of 5000, diltriburing them
vnder the Heads of the Rio, for ſo they werecalled: hee cauſed many of his ;
Cities to bee forrificd, and put garifons in them; and the French King ſcar Genes,
him,at his inſtance , 3009. Gafcons, by ſea, that hee might fubliſtwhile the
royall Army was preparcd. (207 REG 10k Dt gs

In theſe negotiations, and prepatations for warre;'the Popeirtipriſoited and imprito-
many Cardinals,Barons, and others, vpon ſaſpition*as allo Carfillaſſo die Cydimis &
24, Ambaſſadour of *7 bilip King of England, and Toannes Antoine Taſos, thi ;,gonuhons
Emperours Poſt-malter. And ro the Duke of 4lud, who ſentitd pfoteſtz- 7g 4rer ©
gainſt him, for maintaining in Rome rhe fugiriues of the kingdotiie of N4- dou.
þles,for laying hands on, and keeping in'prifon publique perſons? without
reaſon, for hauing opened the Kings letrers(all which things hee had done) +
adding rhatthe King, forpreſeruarion of his honour and of theright of his -* *
people, could otchoofe; incaſe his Holineſſc did perſcucre infuchoffefi-. - _
fiuc ations, burſecke revenge for theirijurie , he ſent backe an anſwere, thit Ti: Duke of
hee wasa free Prince, and ſuperiour ro'all orhers , norbound to'/gilit 'ahy at 2h
count, bin codemiund ir yoo - thar hee might enterraine any Wong done
perſons, and openadny letters ; which hee thoughrro bee written againſt the da.

Church: that if' Cartillaſſo had done the office of an Ambaffadour,-nothing zprou an-

ſho al 4 ere,

” - % bs +:
Eg

« "Xx.

ap. *

Ne th, —

_—

[| gn Tins

——_—. _—— ——
—_

557 ſhould hayc been dapeagainſihina; bur having made treavies , mopyed (c-
K Parc ©), ditions, plaged againſt the Pringe,towhom, he was ſent,, he had offended as
{© Cnmius 5, @priuaremanandasfuch ſhoulgbee punilhed,thar no danger ſhouldmake

Mar.  ; hun beewraptiog torhe dignity of che Church,, anddefence of that'Sea, re-
Art, terringall.io GoD,,by whom, hee, was made. ſhephcarg. of the flocks of
- CHRIST: And the Pope {till continuing to. make proviſion , theNukeof
' Aiuabcingreſolucd thatir was better ro aſlaulr then to bee aſſautred,iſeqtan-
© other proreltation again{t him , that, the Kipg having endured ſo many in-
 lurics, knowing thar the intentiqn gf his Holieſſe was'to diſpoſleſſe him of
 ghekingdome of Naples ,and becing aſſured, that,to this.end, hee had, made

a league with his cnemies,could not continucin thoſertermes : andrtherefore

inregard his Holineſle/did defige warre, hee did denounce it againit him,

aud would begin it quickly , proteſting thatthe calamitics thereof.could nor
be.impuredto him , and laying the-blame ypon the Pope., Bur if hedefired

peace, hedid offer it likgwile vatohim, —_ all. rcadineſſe, The Pope-ma-

king a ſhewro delire peace, bur anſwering onely in generall termes, togaine

time, the Duke began no:make warre the fourth of September, and in the

ja  yecre 15 56. policlled himiclte of almolt all ('ampania-, holding it in the

caule he mo-

ueth wrare - nameof. the Next Pope, and came {o neere to Reme, that he put all the Citic
gainit hun, Sd ;

in fcare, and made them, ftrengrhen and fortific it. And the Pope, toteach
The Goucrnours of ltrapg places|whar they ought to doc in {uch caſes, com-
pelted all the religious getſans,of yhat ſtate or qualitic ſocucr,to carry carth
veith a aglhds 09 thar lhoglders; ro raiſe.che bulwarkes.. Amonglt pther
places which,had negd of Rampands , oye was gieere the gate of che people,
ſoee «+ jor thz end of the,way called F lamiyja, wherethere is a Church of our Ladie,

pulars, and of Much deuotion ;z.which the Pope purpoling to pull dawne,the Duke ſent

parpoſeth ro. 9.pray him ler it ſFand, giving. his word and oath that he would make no

pull cove a es |

_—_—_ -. vie of che gpportunigie.of that place, Bur the greatneſle of the Citie,and 0-

tion. cher relps&s.and dangers, counlclled him, not aſfayling Rome, to vadertake
ſmaller enerpritcs. , : |

The Emperd ,;, [t.gaug much marter of diſcourle, that , this.yeere , {harles the Emperor
- "_ parted from! Flanderg, and paſled imo Spaine, ta þetake himſclfe to a priuate
life ina ſolitary place; ſo that they made a compariſon berweene 3. Prince,

.» Traincd yp; from higintangie, in the negotiations and affaires of theworld,

2,2, who arti agc of lice. more chep. fifty yeescs.,. had relolucd ro; quit the
"+1 worldandagelytolemeGed, changed: froma mighty Prince, to.a meane
+14 Fehgjous per{an,and one,who had formerlyabandoned the Eifcopal charge,
ne (01%ircmiea Monaſtery, and now, beingatthe age of 80, yeetes,and made
;.Bapg,did wholly wo himlelfe to pomp andpride, and eagdeauoutedioder

(all Ewppelon fire with, watre. | \ 2... A So baroyoo nom ut 0% 107

1557 2j,| In the, þeginning of. the yeere 15 57.the;Nuke. of Fniſpalſed into Traly,
i With bis armic, in fauour of the! Pope, who, ro.oblerpe4l c promilcot his
 inco 7794 DePREWmade to the! French King., made; a p5omotion' of 10, Caxginals ;
, . ..* whichnotbecing according to the meaning, and the endagreed on, neither
{niet ah for the number , nor. qualitic ofthe perſons, his excuſe was, that heewas ſo
Cadinals. , .necrcly conioynced with his Maicſtic , that his dependants would bee as {er-
* .gictable the King as the Frenchmen themlelugs.; and chat hg might aſſure

him-

-

. 4 m »4 __ . - - - ” © —

Ip -

EL 18.5. the Councell of Trent.

—

”J

-” ——

himlelfe thar they were all for him; and that hecould nor then niakea grea-
ter promotion, ſecing the number was ſo greatalready; arriving to 55."which
would quickely bet diminiſhed, by remoouing ſomerebels, and putting ho-
neſt men in their roomes ; which hee meant'6f thoſe who were a tcady in
the Caſtle,and others againſt whom hehad a'deſſeigne;as well for matter oF
State, asof Religion. For hee was not fo intent to the warre, as that he did
abandon the bulſincſle of the Inquiſition, which he ſaid was the principall ſe-
cret and myſtericof the Papacie. He had ſomie information againſt Cardi-
nall Moron, that he held intelligence in Germaniz, and did impriſori him in
the Caltle, deputing foure Cardinals to examine him ſeuerely, and Feidins
Foſcararus,Bilhop of Modena,as confederarte with him.

Hee depriucd alſo Cardinall Poole of his Legation of England, and cited
him to appeare in the Inquiſition ar Rome, hauing alreadic impriſoned his in-
ward friend, as one of his complices, Thomas S. Felice Bilhop of Caua. And

1557
[So :
5 4. Wo
CHaktss g.
Mar YT,
Hexay 2.
\ P
The Toquiſt-
tion1s the /
principal my-"
ſteſfe of the
Pzpacie,
C::d. Morone
and che B of
Mod:cna are *
impriſuncd.
And Card,
Poole depri-
uced of his Lo
gation,

that hee might nor pretend to ſtay in England, ynder colour of his Legation,

and the affaires of thoſe Churches, hce created Cardinall at Whitſuncide
William Peto, Biſhop of Salisbury, and made him Legarte in the place of Poole.
And although theQueene and King, teltifying what ſeruice hee had done
ro the Catholique Faith , made carnelt interceltion for him, yet rhe Pope
would ncuer remit one iote of his rigour. Cardinall Pool? obeyed, laying 4-
{ide the adminiſtration and ornaments of a Legat,ſending Ormaneto to Rome,
ro giue an account of his Legation; bur himſelfe parred not our of England,
alledging the Queenes commandement, becauſe neither ſhee, not the King,
thinking the Pope was paſſionate, would conſentthat hee ſhould goe. In
England many were ſcandalizcd for it, andaliened from the Pope, and ma-
ny in Rome. thought it a calumnie, inuented co teuenge himſelfe for the
truce betrwceene the rwo Kings, treated by him being Cardinall and Legare,
without.imparting it to him. And the oppoſition which hee made againſt
him. inthe:Conclaue, to hinder himi from being Pope, was thought to have
no better ground. The new Legat , a man of great integritic, had the ſame
conceits; whoythough hee trooke vpon him the name of Legar, nor.to anger
the Pope yer in ninemoneths that he liucd, after he had the croſle of the Le-
gation, hee did neuerexercile the Charge, but bare the ſame reſpeR rowards
*Foole, as;before. © ' Core | FF;

The Duke of Glife being comeinto Italy, made warte in Piemont, with
purpoſe co continuc/it'in Lumbardie, and fo to divert thearmes taken vp a-
gainſt che Pope;Bur the Popesatdent deſire to afſaile the Kingdome of Na-
ples, did not permit hit. The Frenchmen knew the difficulties ,' and the
Duke of:Gaiſe; with/{6ine principall Commanders, went to Rome by polt,
to makethe Pope 'vaderſtand;; what the reaſons of warre did perfwade. In
whoſe prefence alÞbeing conſulted on, and the Popes teſolution'norgiuing
place roahyotherdeliberation, ir was neceſſaty ro yeeld vnto him! Yer they
did nothing, but aſſault Ciuitela; a place ſituated at the cntry into the Pro-
uince of Abruzzo; where the armic had the repulle; and: Guiſe complained
much har the Caraffi had not made the prouifions which they had promi-
ſed; and were necoffary. In ſfumme, rhe Popes armes, as well his6wne, as
auxiliarig,verc not tnuch fauoured by God.” Bnt'in tHe midlt of Aligalt the

armie

Wherewitl
many wcre

oftended,

Ti Duke of
Cutfe rectte
ucth 2 repulſe,'
by det:ult of
the Caraffi.

[(-

206 — © The Hiſtrieeſ Lis. 5

1557 army of the Duke of Alua approaching Rome,not afraid of the French,which
Pare , Was entertained in 4bruaae, and the Pope vnderſtanding the ſurprize and
Faxoaxo. ſacke of Signea, the {laughter of many, and the danger fn which. Pagliano
Mag, © was, he relatcd all in Conſiſtoric, with many teares ;adding, that he did vn-
Haar -  Jauntedly cxpett martyrdom,the Cardinals maruciling that he ſhould paine
ge * 7 ow the cauſe ro them, who vnderſtood the tructh,as if it had bin of Cyz1sT,
the appro WHETICAS it Was profane, and procceded from ambition , and ſay it was the

Detzof principall ſincw,and myltery of the Papacic.

4 1.  WhenthePopes affairs were in the greateſt ſtraits , the French Kings
S.Q-n>, Army had ſuch a great, onerthrow necre to S.Quintin, that hee was forced to

recall the Duke of Guife, and his forces, for thelafery of the Kingdome let-

ting the Pope know his incuitable neceſſitie , giuing him leauero rake what
1, counſel ſeemed belt for him, and ſending him backe the hoſtages. The
Fac King Popercfuſcd to let Guiſe recurne , whereupon there beeing a great conteſta»
rea TON berweene them,the Pope notable to keepe him, bid him goe, ſecing hee

tysrorces. had done little ſcruice tothe King, leſſero the Church, and none at all ro

Whom the

P>p-difin- his owne honour, Intheend of that moneth,the Duke of Alua approached
ſerh w.th bid , , X
carnes, Rome , Which he had taken but for want of courage. His retreat was afcri-
| bed to the baleneſſcof his minde,who publikely ſayd, that hee feared, that if
The Duke of . '
4/«: m:hs Rome had been ſacked, the Armig would haue been ſcattered, and the King-
_— nc expoled to danger; without forces or defence. But ſecretly hee ſaid,
dd uot. that becrng in the ſeruiceof a King, who bare great reuerence to thar place,
hce refrained to doe it, becaule he knew not whether the aftion would haue
been approoued. Finally,a compoſition was made the fourteenth of Scp-
—_— rember berweene 4luaand the Carafft , the warre hauing continu:da whole
on ycerc. In the capitulations the Pope would not haue ('olonna, nor any of
his ſubic&s comprehended, nor any word inſerted, to ſhew, that hee had of-
fended [n impriſoning the Emperours Miniſters, but maintained molt con-
ſtancly, that the Duke of Alua ought to come to Rome to aske pardon, and
receiucabſolution ; ſaying plainely, that before hee would looſe one iore of
this due ( for lo hee called it ) he would ſee the whole world ruined : thac the
queſtion was not of hisowne , bur of Chrilts honour, which he could nor
preiudice, nor renounce. With this condition, and withthereſtitution of
the cities taken, the controuerſie was ended. It was clteemed.a/prodipie,
that the very day that the Peace was concluded, there was ſuch a greav in-
undation of the river Tiber,that all the plaine of Rome was drowncd ; and x;
great part of the fortifications of the Caſtle S. Angelo was ouerthrowen,
And goctheo T he Duke of Alua went perſonally ro Romero ſubmit himſelfe rothe Pope,
Kepeio de and recciue abſolution inthe Kings name , and hisowne. So it bappened,
lucon. that the conquerour bare the indignitic , and hee that was oucrcomi trium--
' phed more,then if hee had been victorious. Andit was no ſmall fauour that
the Pope receiued him with humanity , though hee forbare nor his-vſuall:
haughre (tate. | Ws EEC P {5
The warre was no ſooner ended, but new troubles came ypon:the Pope:
For aduice was ſent outof France , that, the fifth of September at night, in
*Parts, about two hundred perſons were aſſembled in. an houſe tocelcbrate!
the Communion ; which becing diſcoucred by the common: people, the.
houle

I an 5, q the Councell of Trent. 407-

houſe was aflaulted,and ſome fled, but the women and weaker fort were ra: i 557
ken, of whom fcuen were burned , andthegreater part of che others reſer- >
ucd for the ſame puniſhmenr,co be inflicted when the complices were found Rowena
out. Thc Suiſſes made intercellion for theſe zand che King, in regard of his Pune = x;
warre with the King of Spaine ( for ſo Philip was called afrerthe reſignation 7%
of his father) hauing nced of their aſſiſtance, gaue orderthat the proceeding gar
againſt them ſhould bee moderare. The Pope was intinirely angry , and "ag
complaincd in Conſiltory ; and ſaid it was no maruell if theaffaires of the angy wit $
King,did not ſucceed well, becauſe he more eſteemed the aſſiſtance of here- | = os
tiques,then the fauourof God. The Pope had forgorren thar j in the time 5ravons-
of his warre,the Cardinals of the Inqaifition complaining thar the Proteſtant Procetans,
Griſons, brought to his pay, forthe defence of Rome.Þ, vied many ſcornes a-
gainſt the Churches and Images , his Holineſſe did reprehend them, faying
they were Angels,ſent by God, for the cuſtodie of the Citie, and of hisper-
ſon, and that hee had a ſtrong hope that God would conuert them. So men
iudgediucr(ly of their owne intereſts, andof the fa&ts of others; The Pope
tooke occaſion hence, to call in minderwo conſtitutions, which the King rom: —_
had made the ſame ycere, which hee ſaid were againſt the liberty of theCler- firmuontin
ic,and therefore was reſolute they ſhould be abrogated. The one was pu- ligion-
_ bliſhedthefirft of March, that Mariages made by ſonnes before the age of
thirty yecres complear , and of daughters beforetwenty fiue, without con- .
ſent of the father , or of him in whoſe power they were, ſhould bee voyde.
Theother the firſt of May, that all Biſhops and Curares ſhould refide, vp-
on painc of Ioſle of che reucnues , with at impoſition of an cxtraordinary
Sublidic , bef1des the ordinarie Tenths, to pay fiuethouſand foote Souldiers.
The Pope thought not of theſe things when the newes came, becauſe hee
wasthen in warre,and had neede of the King. Bur this reafon ceaſing , hee
complaincd that hee had medled cucn with the Sacraments, and vnſupport-
ably burdened the Clergie. Hee fayd it was neceflary to prouide agairiſt
theſe diſorders,by a Councell, which weregreater then could bee obieed
againſt the, Clergie; that it was firto begin the Reformation from: hence;
thatthe French Prelates durſt nor ſpcake ſo long asthey were in France, bur
becing in a Councel in Traly, free from feare of the King , their complaints
would ſoone bc heard. Amongſt theſe diſtaſtes the Pope receiued ſomcioy, ris well
that the Colloquie, begunne in Germany, to compole the differences in reli- we $50 3
gion (which troubled his Holincſle atd the Court, as all Colloquies had oh Ol
done ) was rcſolued into nothing. The beginning, progreſſe, and cnde Germany.
whereof, [thinke neceſlary to recount, forthe ynderſtanding of thechings
that follow, x SEE»

Ferdinand having, in the Dict of Ratisbon, confirmed peace in Religion Areminnor
yntilla concord were concluded , to finde a way to make it, it was reſolued |
in the Dict the thirteenth of March, that a Colloquie ſhould bee held in
Wormes, of twcluc Docours of the old religion , and twelue Proteſtants, in
which the differences ſhould bee diſcuſſed, to bring the parties to an agree-
ment. Ferdinand appointed for. Preſtdent of the Colloquic, the Biſhop of
Namburg, who was ſo famous. Theparties being mer in the place the four-
ecenth of Augulſt,che rwelue Proteſtants were nor abſolutely of one opinion,

| For

408 = The Hiſtorie of * | L 18.4

1558: Forſome of them defiringapertect vnion of the Church, laboured torecon-
,- ">> cile the doctrine of the Heluetians , which was different concerning the Eu-
Fexpmaxo.: Chariſt ; and, for thisend , the. Miniſters of Genenathad made a Confeſsion in
5. this point, which did notdiſplcaſe *Philep Melanfhon , and {1xe more of the

Pmttiy 2, [

Manx Confeſsion of Ausburg , but did nor fatisfie the othertiue. , This beeing percci.
—— ucd by the Biſhop,a man wiſc,and factious, whoſe end was thatthe (*olloquie
ſhould be diſſolued wichoutfruit, hee made the Catholiques propoſe, that
the Colloquie being inſticuted onely berweene them, and the Confeſsionifts; ic

was neceſfary to condemne all the ſects of the Swinglians, and of others ; be-
- cauſcthe errors being vniformely condemned, the rructh would calily ap-
pare... The fiucaforeſaid,did conſent it ſhould be o. MelanAthon, who per-
cciued the cunning,which was to ſow diuiſion berweenethem, and to make

them as yariance withthe Swfſes the Pruſsians , and others, ſaid that it was fir
ro agree vpon the truth firſt,and chen by that rule, ro condemne errors. - The
Biſhop ſhewing to the fiue that they were contemned by the other ſeuen,
perſwaded them to depart from the Colloguie, and wrotethe ſuccefle to Fer-
dinand, concluding that they could nor proccede, in regardof the departure

of theſe,and that thoſe which remained would not firlt condemne the ſects;
Ferdinand an{wcred , that his defire was they ſhould proceede, and that the

; (onfeſsioniſis (ſhould recall thoſe fiue that were departed, and the Catholiques

bcetn the meane ſpace contentto. begin and diſcuflethe controuerſed Arti-

cles. "TheBiſhop ſceing rhar he had loſt this point, perſwaded the Catholike
Collocutors to write to the King, that it was nor juſt ro begin the rreatie, if

all che Proteltants were nor vnuted, becauſe it would be neceſſary to treat

agaice with the abſent, that which was concluded with the preſent, and (o

rotake doublepaines. T hey all retired, withour expeCting any anſwere, and

each partic blaincd the other,cxcuſ1ng it ſelfeypon the reaſons aforeſaid.

1558. The Popeperceiuing chat, by the warre paſt, hee was depriucd of the cre-
eds it with which hee thoughtro daunt the whole world , thought ro regaine
ſeverely jt by an heroicall aftion,and did,the f1xe and ewenticth of Ianvary, in Con-
_ omnetanily, f1{tory depriue Cardinall (araffaof the Legation of Bolenia-, and of all go-
uernement,and confined him to Ciuita Laumia , and rooke from Tohn Caraffa,

the Cardinals brother , the command and charge of the Armie, exiling him

likewiſe to Galeſs}. Hee depriued the other Nephew of thegouernement of
Borgo,and baniſhed him to Monre-bello, commanding that their wiues, fami-

lic,and children ſhould depart from Rome, and themſelues nor depart from

the places to which they were baniſhed ,.vpon paine of rebellion. Hee de-

priucd likewiſe allthofc of thcir offices ; rtowhom hehad giuen them in con-
remplarion of theſe. Heeſpent more then ſixc houres ,in complaining, and
enucighing againſt their offences, with ſuch furic; that hee diſdained at the
Cardinals who [pake any good word to pacific him.''To 'Cardinall'S, Angelo,

who firſt commending iuftice , put him in mindeof afaying of Paul the z.

which he ofcen vſcd, that the Pope ſhould neuer take hope of fauourfrom
any,hecanſwered, that his grand- father 7 aul the 3. ſhould haue done berter

Inflicucecha TO haue proceeded againlt hisfather, and puniſhed:hisyillames:- Hee inſti-
pew govern” ruted a new gouernment in Rome,and in the State of the Church, giuing the
charge of all bufuicfles to Camillzs Orfinns, vnto whom hee ioyned the Car-

| dinals

, q +

dinals of Traniand Spoleto, affectirig a fame of iuſticein theſe ations, and 1 5 "
laying the blame of all thegrieuances, which the people ſuffered, vpon the DAN

Nephewes. Being chusdisburthenedof the goucracmenr, heapplyed him: Ar wi
ſelte wholly to the office of the Inquifition , laying ic wasthe true Ramme to pur is 1,
beae downe heteſic, and defend the Apoltolike Sea. And, notregarding pant .

what did befic che time, hee publiſhed a new Conſtitution, dated the fit. —> ,
tcenth of Februarie, which hee madeall the Cardinals ſubſcribe. In rhis he emeS-Lparwe

renewed cuery cenſure and puniſhment, pronounced by his predeceffors, cone in-
and cuery Statute of Canons, Councels, and Fathers, in whar time focuer, $14"...
publiſhed againit heretikes; ordaining tharchoſe char werediſuſed, ſhould <vnttuurion,
bee broughtin vſeagaine. Hee declared tharall Prelates, and Princes, cuen
Kings and Emperours,failen into hereſie, ſhould be, and thould bee ynder-
ſtood to be depriucd of all their Benefices, Scates, Kingdomes,and Empires,
withour further declaration, and yncapcable to be reſtored to thein, cuen
by the Apoſtolike Sca: and cheir goods, States, Kingdomes, and Empire,
(hall bee vnderitood ro be common,and to belong ro thoſe Catholikes who
can get chem. This did miniſter much talke, andifit had not preſently beeti yyich wit
diſcitcemed by the world, it would hauc kindled a fire ih all Chrilten- bethe mnt
dome.
Another accident made the world know that hehad not moderated the
haughtineſle of his minde The Emperour (harles in the yeere 1 5 56. by his
letters written tothe Eleorsand Princes, did abſolutely gine ro Ferdinand
all che adminiſtration of the Empire, without reſcruing any thing to him-
ſelfe, commanding that he ſhould beobeyced by all. Afterwards he ſent Wil-
liam, Prince of Orange, with two colleagues,to the Diet in Germanie, totran(-
fer the name, title, crowne, and dignitic vpon Ferdinand, as if himſclfc had
beene dead; which, not ſceming fit to the Electors, was defertedyntill the
yeere 1558. in whichthe fourth of February,the day of the Natiuitic,Coro-
nation, and orher felicities of Charles, the Ceremonies of the reſignation be-
ing made by his Ambaſladors,in preſenice of the Eletors, Ferdinand was iti-
ſtalled with the viſual rntes. The Pope heariog rhis,fell intoan exceſſiue rage.
He pretended that as the Popes confirmation doth make the Emperour, lo
the reſignation cannot be pur into the hands of any but himfclfe; in which
caſe it belonged to hum to make whatEmperour hepleaſed, alleadging that
the Eletors haue powergranted them by the Popesfauour,to cleft the Em-
perour inplace othina that is dead, but nor in caſe of reſignation, in which -
it remaincth ſtill in the powerof the Apoſtolike Seazas allo to the diſpoli- The Poperes |
tion thereof are pup all dignities reſigned vntoit.' Thereforethe refig- aa vr or
nation of Charles 18 voyd, and the whole authoriticts chooſe an Emperour =
is deuolued to him, and was refolucd not to acknowledge the King of the
Romanes for Emperour. | 52 Yiu
Ferdinand, though he knew this, ſent Martin Guſman, his Ambaſſador, to
Siuc him an account of his brorhers reſignation, and his owne affumprion,
ro teſtificvaro him the reuerence hee bare him, ro promiſe him obedience,
and co {tznific vnto him that he would ſenda ſolemne Ambaſlage, torreare
of his Coronation. The Pope refuſed ro heare him,and referred the diſcuſ- Andre here
fionof the marcerco'the Cardinals: who relared (forthe Popes wil was they gyour.
M m fhould

mft:lled in
the Empire.

410

The Hiſtorie of © L1s. 5.

558
FSI NLSGN
PAvL 4
FERDINAND.

Prirtee 2.
Manrvr..
Hrx&y 2.

NY RS

ſhould doc fo) thatthe Ambaſſador could not be admirted,before ir did a p-
peare whether the refignation of Charles werelawfull,and the ſucceflion of
Ferdmand tut. For he being elected King of the Romans,and the eleQtion
confirmed by Clemens, to ſucceed afrer the death of the Emperour,it was nc-
c:ſſary the Empire ſhould bee voide by death. Bef1des there was a nullitie in
all the ates of Francfort, as made by heretikes, who have lolt all authoricie
and power. Wherefore it was neceſlary that Ferdinand thould ſend a Proctor,
and renounce whatlocuer was donein that Dier,and beſcech the Pope, thar
hee would graciouſly bee pleaſed ro make good the reſignation of Charles,
and his aſſumption to the Empire, by vertue of his plenaric power, from
whom he might expect all paternall grace and fauour. The Pope refolued
according to this Counſel], and ſo declared himiclfe ro Guyſman, giuing him

' three monethsro put it in execution, beyond which time hee would heare

Whoghauing
made 2 prote-
itarion,depar-
ecth from
Roinc,

no more ſpeech of it, but himſelfe would create a new Emperor. Neither

was 1t oollible ro remouc him, though King ©Philp,to fauour his vncle, ſent
Francis Vargas exprelly,and after him I:hn Figaroa,to intreate him. Ferdinand,
vnderſtanding this, gaue order to Gu/man, that, if within three dayes aficr
the receipt thereof, he were not admitted by the Pope, he ſhould depart, and
proteſt ynto him, that Ferdinand,together with the Eleors, would reſolue
of that which ſhould be for the honour of the Empire : Gu{man deſired au-
dience againe, which the Popegrantedin priuate, notas vnto an Ambaſſa-
dourof the Emperour; and, hearing him relate what he had in his inſtructi-
ons,and that which was wrote vnro him from the Emperor, he anſwered,
that the things conſidered by the Cardinals were very important, and that
hee could not reſolucon them lo ſoone; that he would ſend a Nuncioto the
Imperiall Maicſtie-of Charles the fifth, and, in the meage while,if hee had
commiſſion from his Maſter to depart he might doe ir,and proteſt whar hg
thought fir. Therefore the Ambaſſador, hauing made his proteſtation,de-
arted. Andalthough Charles died the ſame yeerethe 2 1. of September, yer

it was impoſlible to remooue the Pope from this relolurion. |
Thenumber of thoſe who call themſclues Reformed being now increa-
ſed in France, their courage did increaſealloz and there being a cuſtome a-
monglt the peopleof Pars,in the Summers cuenings,togoc out of the Sub-
urbes of S. German ingreat multitudes, to take the freſco, and to folace them-
{clues with diuers kindes of ſportes, thoſc of the new Religion, in ſtead of
doing ſo, began to {ing the Plalmes of Dauid, in French verſes. The multi-
rude firit laughedat the nouitic, then, leauing;the ſports, joyned themſelues
yaco the ſingers. And the number of thoſe who came to that place began
co increaſe morethen vſually. The Popes Nunciotold the King of this noui-
tic,as of a thing perniciousand dangerous, becauſe the miniſtericsof religi-
on,vſually cclebrared inthe Church,in the Latin congue, by religious mem
onely , were put into the mouth'of the common people, inthe vulgartan-
guage, which was an inuention of the Lutherans; telling him rhax, it he did
not refiſt the beginnings, ina ſhort timeall Paris would be Lutheran. The
King gaue order chat the principall authors ſhould bee proceeded againit;
whereinthey went not very far,hauing found Anteny,king of Nauar,and his
wifc,in that number : Bur for hercafter it was forbid vpon painc of "ow
| ; The

Ls. 5. the Conncell of T rent.

The Religion in England was alfo much changed this yecre. 1 heQucene
dicd the ſcucnteenth day of Nonember, and Cardinall ©} oole the lame day;
which ſhred vp many , who were not fatisfied with the former gouerne-
ment,to reſtore the reformation of Zdward, and to ſeparate themſclues whol:
ly from the Spaniards : which they did the rather, becaule King 7 hilip, to
hold a foote in England, had treated to marrie Elizabeth, faſter and ſucceſſor
of Mary, to Charles his ſonne: and when there was little hope of the life of

— —

— _—— ———Y

41

I EI er nn er EE Ee re ns

i558
SN
Pa VL 4+,
Frxbinand

—
Purtie 3.
E1:izABETH,
Hexkry 2.
C -aY Pu.
Mary Quecne

of Eng land

= . $ d h
Mary, hee hadallo caſt foorth divers words , that hee would take her for his an z4e4-
owne wife. But thenew Queene being wiſe, as thee ſhewed her ſelfe ro bee #7 <7

in all her goucrnemenr,did firlt ſecure the Kingdomeby oath,that ſhe would
not marrie a {tranger, and was crowned by the Biſhop of Carlile, an adhe-
rent to the Church of Rome, nor making any open declararion what do-

Etrine ſhee would follow, difleigning, ſo ſoone as thee was ſetled in hergo-

ucrnetnent, to cſtablilh ir,by the counſell of the Parliament, and of learned
and godly men,and to make a con(tant reformation of the ſtare of Religi-
on. Thercfore {hee exhorted the chiefe of the Nobilitie, who deſired a
change, to proceede without rumulr, afſuring them that ſhee would nor en-
forceany. Shce cauſcd preſently an accountro bee giuen to the Pope of her
aſſumption, with letters of credence written to Edward Cerne.,, who was
Ambaſladour to hcr {i{ter,and was not deparzed from Rome. Burthe Pope,
procceding according to his vſuall rigour, anſwered, thar that Kingdume
was held in Fee of the Apoſtolike Sea; that ſhee could not ſucceede beeing
illegitimate; that hee could nor contradict the declarations of Clement the

Ppretem

With whom R
the _ duk
y Cote

ſcuenth,and Pax/the third, that ic wasa great boldneſſero aſſume the name ©:

and gouernement without him; thar, forthis, ſheedcf{erucd notro bee heard
1n any thing; yet becing deſirous to ſhew a fatherly afteCtion, if ſhee will re-
nounce her pretenſtons, and referre her ſclfe wholly ro his free diſpoſition,
hee will doc whatſocuer may bee done with the honour of the Apoltolike
Sca. Many did belecue that as he [pake thus by his own inclination, fo he was
incited by the French King , who fearing a marriage betweene her and the
King of Spaine. might be made by the Popes diſpenſation, thought firto af-
{ure himfclfe by cutting off the practiſes inthe very beginning. But che new
Queene vnderltanding the Popes an{were, and wondring at the mans haſltie
 dilpoſition,thought it nor profitable, either for her, or the Kingdome, to
treate any more with him. Sothar the cauſe ceaſing, ſhee gane the Nobilitie
leaue ro conſult what was fit to bee done for the ſeruice of God,and quict
of the Kingdome. A diſputation was held in Weſtminfter, in preſence of all
the States, betweene learned men, choſen on both fides , which began the
lat of March., and laſtcd vorill the chirtieth of April: and, a Parliament
being afſembled ro this end, all the Edicts of Religion made by Mary were
aboliſhed, thoſe of her brother Edward reſtored, obedience taken away from
the Pope, the title of the Head of the Church of England giuen ro the

ucene, thereuenucsof the Monaſteries confiſcated, and afſhigned fomero
che Nobilitic, and ſome to the Crowne, the Images taken out of the Chur-
- ches by the people, and the Romane Religion baniſhed. Anotheraccident
happencd allo. For in theDier of Ausburg it appearing, by the aCtes of che
Colloquie the yeere before , diſſolued withour frait, that there was no hope
Mm:

to

A diſputation
's bel n
Weſt minfer
in mattcr of
rchgion,

—

my The Hiftorie of L1s. 5.

1558 todocany good by that mcanes, Ferdinand tolde them hee would procure

> the generall Councell to be reſtored, exhorting all to ſubmit themmlelues to

Fzzpizaxp. the Decrces thereof, as beeing the way to remoouedifferences. The pro-

_  - O—

Pnirze x teltants anſwered, that they would conſent to a Councell, called, not by
Hoenmr the Pope, bur by the Emperour, to becheld in Germanie.,in which the Pope

HENRY 2.

—>> ſhould not preſide, bur ſhould {ubmit himſclfe to the indgement thereof; and

promiſebro xeleate the Biſhops and Diuines of their oath; in which allo the Proteſtants
erall Coun- ſhould hauca deciding voyce, and all ſhould bee determined according to
_ the holy Scripture, and whatſocuer was concluded in Trent, ſhould be recxa-.
' mined: which,if it cannot beobrainedof the Pope,yet the peace of Religion

ſhould beconfirmed, according to the agreement of PaſSan, hauing knowen,

by too manifeſt experience, that no good can beedrawen from any Popiſh
Councell. The Emperour knowing the difficultie ro obraine of the Popea

rant of the things propoſed, and that now hee had no meanes to negotiate
h him,in regard of the controucrf1cabour the reſignation of Charles, and

And confir- WIL

weththeac- hjs ſucceſſion,he confirmed the accord of Paſſan, and the Receſſes of the Di-
cord of 2.zſ-

ſa, ets following.

* AYSIEs The Pope hauing cut oft all meanes to treate with the Emperour and
the Fope'*  Germanties, knew not what to lay tothis. Yet hee was more diſpleaſed with
fed, their diſcourſe concerning the Councell, then with the libertic granted by

the Receſſe, becing reſolute not to cail any Councell but in Rome,whatſocucr
Pur moxe ſhould happen. In this reſpect another accident was as gricuous asthe for-
earns; MCT; that is, the peace made at Cambray the thisd of Aprill , betweene the
619 Kings of France and Spame_., which was well confirmed by che marriages of
the daughter of Henry to the King of Spaine, and of his filter tothe Duke of
Sauoy. In which peace, amonglt other capitulations , ic was agreed, that
Þoth the Kings ſhould make a fairhfull promile to labour joynrly that the
Councell ſhould bee celebrated, the Church reformed, and the differences
of rcligion compoſed. "The Pope conſidered how goodly a ſhew thetitle
of reformation, and the name of a Councell did make; that Englandwas loſt,
and all Germany alſo, partly by the Proteſtants, aud partly by his difference
with Ferdinand ; that theſe two vnited Kings were much offended by him,
the Spaniards by deedes and words,the French by words attheleaſt,there re-
mayning noneto whom he might hauc refuge, thatthe Cardinals were vwea-
ric of his goucrnement, and his people not well affected, in regard of the
incommoditics of the warre,and the taxes layd vpon them. Theſecogitati-
Sorhithee ONS did fo afflict the old Pope, that hee was vnhr to rule. Hee could not
beemevnit Holdethe Confiſtories ſo often as hee was woont, and when hee did holde

them hee ſpent the molt part of the time in ſpeaking of the Inquiſition, and

cxhorting the Cardinals to fauour it, as becing the onely way to extinguiſh

hereſies, |

But the two Kings did not agree to procure the Councell for any ill will,

or interelts,whichcither of them had againſt the Pope,or Papacic,burto pro-
BUSY, againſt the new do@trines, which did cxcecedingly increafe, being wil-
ofwhereior- lingly heard and receiued by all mcn of conſcience : and, whichwas of more
oy ago importance, the male-contented, and thoſe who were defirous of innouari-
ea?" ONS, put themſclucs on that ſide, and did dayly , ynder pretence of __
make

XUM

—_

*

0

L1s. 5, + 4.13

| , =7 ; yy or * 2s i o" Wee os 0 _— Mn
make.ſome enterpriſes , as wellin the Low Comntries yas in France, in regard 145-8

—_— toe. AM

che Conneell of Trent.

-
—

OO UT re rn ES —_
_

.
-

_—_—

thoſe people did loue their liberric,and had- commerce with Germanic,as bor- EIT

dcring vpon it. 'In the beginning ofchetrroubles ſome ſeedes were fowen, Frnniainh.

which that they might notrakeroote,'the Emperour Chales the fifth, inthe piciie 37

Low Countries, and the French King, inihis Kingdorhe, made many Edits, 5402* 4

and commanded diuers executions , wheteof wee haue ſpokenin their dre Ag

places. Bur after that the numberof the Proteſtants did increafeiin Germa-

nic, and the Euangeliques did multiply amongſt the Suiſles, and rhe ſcpara-

tion was made in England,by reaſon of the often warres berweenethe Empe-

rour and French King, either partie was forced tocall Auviliariesour of theſe ++

three Nations, who publikeiy profeſiing and preaching the Reformed reli-

gion in their quarters, by their example; and by other meanes, diuers of the

people became of their opinion, Ir is certaine, that this compelted'Charles

the Emperour , toattempr the-bringing in of the Spaniſh Inquifition ,'[ceing

that other remedies did nor preuaile, though hee was partly forced to defilt,

for thecaulcs before related. - And Henrythe French King, gaue the Biſhops

authoritie topuniſh hereriques ; a thing neuer vicd before in that Kingdome.

And although in the Low Countries , from the firlt Edit of Charles, nil!

this time of the peace, there were hanged, beheaded, buried alive, and bur-

ned,to the number of tifty thoufand , and very many pur ro death in France, 1n:b-Low

yet both places werethen in worle caſe then cuer.. This made the Kings ” ng

to thinke joyntly of finding a remedie; by the great perſwaſ1on of the Car. ommnno'

dinall of L oraine for the French , and of Granuel Biſhop of Arras for the Spa- tort mac, |

niards, who being in Cambray, from. October vntill Aprill, with other De- »yw France,

putics of the two Kings, totreatea peace, did conferre particularly among (t

themſclues, how thar doctrine might be rooted out; and wereafterwards the

chicfc inſtruments of whatſocuer did happen in both Stares. The caufe they wricofthe

alledged ro be the zeale of religion,and theſeruice of their Princes : burir was - une

vniuerfally belecued, that ir was ratherambition, and a deleigneto enrich quromenur,

themſclues by the ſpoyles of thoſe who wereto be condemned. | were cauſes,
The peace beeing made, the King of Spaine, to begin to giue ſome order,

not being able robring in the Inquiſition openly, thought to doeir obliquely, The King of

Spaine ere-

by the Biſhops. Burt there beeing but ewo Biſhopricks in the Low Coun- Geth Buhops
rickes in the

tries, Cambray , and tre, and the reſidue of the Clergie ſubte&tto the Bi- Lov Coun.
ſhops of Germane, and France, and thoſc two Biſhoprickes alfoſubicct to for: **<5trbce

might more

raigne Arch-bilhops,to whom appcalcs could not be denied, forhat he conid «ily bringin

the [91h

net worke his will by meancs of them, heethought fitro free all thar Clergic on
from the ſubicCtion of Biſhops, who were not his ſubieCts , and to inſticure

three Arch-biſhoprickes in thoſe Countries, Meclin,Cambray,and Tre, and

ro ereCt into Biſhoprickes , Anwerp, Balduck, Gant, Bridges, Tpre, S. Omar, Na-
mur, Harlem, Middleburgh, Lewarden, Groninghe, Ruremond, and Dawentet ; an-
nexing vnto them, for reuenewes, ſome rich Abbies.' Hee cauſed the 1a
to approoucall this by his Bull, dated the ninth of May thefame yeete. Fhe
pretence for doing of this was, that formerly thoſe: Countries ; beeing nor
much inhabited , did not neede a'greater number of Biſhops, bur now the
mulricude of people', and dignitie of the Cities did require they ſhould bee
honourcd withEccleftaſticall titles. Yer rhe Nobilitieatid Comminaley did

Mm 3 mmagme

_
| "EY

4.14

The Hiftorie of L1s. 5.!

1558

CSS SN
Pavi 4
F8KDINAND

ParrLiP 2.
FiltzaBETH.
Henry 2.

AY SS

Which ma-
keth che No-
bility ro com-
bine and re.
fuſc to pay
tribatc.

The French
King catrech
into the Mcr-
curiall.

imagine it-Wasanartto bring in the T»guifition; in which opinion they'werc
confirmed when they-Jaw:the Popes Bull. For,accordingtothe'vic of: Rome,
ro en/arge theirpower or profitin cucry bargaine, he alledged,for acauſe of
that newinltirution, that that Countrey was'compaſlcd:; and, as it were,
beficged by Schilmariques, who did not obey him, the Head of the Church,
ſothat thetrue faich was in great danger by the fraudes and.-in{idiations of
the Heretiques, if new.and good Gardians were not placed ouer them. This
occurrence made the Nobilitie to adhere together, and to thinke how to
make refiſtancebefore there was meanes to compel| them by force of armes.
They rclolucd therefore not to pay tribute, vncill che Spaniſh Souldiers
were remooued out of the Countrey , and began to incline more ro the
new opinion,and to fauour it: which cauſed the other rroubles which ſhall
bec ſpoken of.
Bur the French King, deſirous to make prouiſion that the Lutheran ſect
ſhould not marecncrea(c inthe Kingdome, vnderſtanding that ſome of the
Counſellors of the Parliament were infected with it;in a Mercuriall ({othey
call the judicature, inſtitured examine and correct the ations of the
Counſellors of Parliament,and Iudges of the King) held in Parr the 15. of
Lune, wherethey were to treate of Religion, after the Congregation was
aſlembled, centred in perſon. Hee faid hee had eltabliſhed peace in the whole

- world,by the marriages of his {alter and daughter, that hee might preuide a-

gainlt the inconucniences bred in his Kingdome abour Religion , which
ought to bee the principall care of Princes. Therefore vnderitanding they
were to treat of this ſubic&, hee cxhorted them ro handle Gods cauſe with
ſinceritic. And hauing commaunded themro proſecute the things begun,
Claude Uiole., one of them, ſpake much againſt the mannersof the Courr of
Rome, and the bad cultomes,growen to bee pernicious crrours , which haue
cauled the new ſets. Therefore it was neceſſary ro mitigatethe ſcuere pu-
nilhments, vntill the differences of religion were remooued, and the Eccleſi-
aſticall diſcipline amended by authority of a Generall Councell, the onely
remedie forrhele cuils, as theCouncels of ( onflance and *Baſil hauc iudged,
commanding that one ſhould bee celebrated cuery ten yeeres. His opinion
was followed by Ledouicus Faber, and ſome others. Anne du Bourg did adde,
that many villanies werecomitted , condemned by the Lawes, for puniſh-
ment whercof,the ropcand fire were not ſufficient, asfrequent blaſphemics
againſt God, periuries, adulterics, not onely ſecret, but euen cheriſhed with
impudent licence; making himlelfe to be plainely vaderftood, rhat hee ſpake
not oncly of the Grandics of the Court, but of the King himlclte alſo; ad-
ding that, while men liucd rhus diſſolutely, divers torments were preparcd
againſt choſe who were guilty of nothing , but of publiſhing ro the world
the vices of the Church of Rome, and dctiring an amendment of them. In
oppoſition of all this, Fgidins Magiſter, the prime Pref1dent ſpake agaivlt the
new ſects, concluding that there was no other remedie, but that which was
formerly vſcd againſt the Albigenſes, of whom © hilippus 4nuguftus pur ro
death ſixe hundred inone day, and againſt the Waldenſes, who were choked
inthe caues, whither they retired ro hide themſelues. When all the voyces
were giuen,the King ſaid, he had now heard with bis owne cares, that which

before

XUM

——oI= oa  ———————— ——_

L1s: $. - the Councell of Trent. 415

_ "—_— as C4 Lt.

before was told him, 'tharthe'conragionof the Kingdoine dorh hence ariſe, 1559

thar thereare in the Parliament who docdeſpiſerhe Popes authoritie;and his; "Bay,

thathe well knowerh they arc bur few, bur'the cauſtof many cuils, There- Frzorx xs,

forc bee exhorted thote who are good ſubje@s tocontinne in doing their Pairs x
ducty, and immediatly gaue order that Faber and du Bewrg ſhould be imprifo: xynortrt
ned, and afterward cauled foure more to bee apprehended in their houſes : Ry dis
which did much daunt thofe who <mbraced the'new religion. For the detfrfome of
Counſellors of Parliament in France, beeing reputed molt ſatred;and invio- cher
lable; who notwithſtanding; were put into priſon for delivering their opint- manad ky
01 in publike Aſſcmvly,they concluded that the King would pardonnone.

Bur cxamples of great feares arealwayes ioyned withothers of equall bold- 15 9
neſſe. For ar the ſamerime, as if there had beene nodanger arall, the mini- I'* Mir.
ſters of the Reformed (for ſo the Proteſtants are called in France.) afſem- 351904 in
bled in Paris in the ſuburbes of Saint German, made a Synode; in which
Franciſcus Morellus, the chicte man amongſt them, was Preſident, ordayning
diucrs conltitutions, of the manner of holding Couricels, of remoouing the
domination in the Church, of the cleEion and office of Miniſters, of cen:
ſurcs, of marriages, of diuorces, of degrees of conſanguinitie, and aftnirie,
that throughout all France rhey might not onely hauc an vaiforme faith,
bur diſcipline alſo. And their courage did increaſe, becauſethe fame of the
ſcucrity vied in France comming into Germanie., the three Elkeftors , and Arevert
other Proteſtant Princes ſent Ambaſſadours to the King , praying him to ** mecrceſſi-

on of the Prge

proccede with pictic and Chriſtian charitie againſt the profeſſors of their reftane itin-
Religion , guiltic of. nothing bur. of accuſing'the corrupted manaers, and ot dg
the diſcipline peruerted by the Church of Roms, which had bene done more
then an hundred yeeres ſince by other godly Doctors of France. For that
Kingdome becing now in quiet, the ditterences of Religion may cally bee
compoſed, by the diſputation of able men, defirous of peace, who may ex-
amine their confeſſion by the rule of holy Scripture, and of the ancient Fa-
thers; ſuſpending in the meane time the ſeueritic of the ſenrences;” which'
they will recciueas athing moltgratefull, and remaine much obliged ro him
for ir, The King gaue a courteous an{were in general] wordes, promi- Which aid
ſing to giuethem latisfation, and to ſend one exprelly to ſignifi ſo much jowu.”?
vnto them. Yethe remitted nothing of the ſeueritie, bur, after the Ambaſ-
{adours were parted, hce deputed foureTudges, of the body of the Parlia-
ment, in the cauſes of thepriſoners, with the Biſhop of Parss, and the In-
quifitor , Antonie de Mocares, commaunding them to proceede with' all ex-
edition.
, The Pope, vnto whom all theſe things were knowen, 45 hee wis much
diſcontented withthe progreffe of the new dodrine inthe States'of both the
Kings, fo hee was pleaſed that thoſe Princes did thinke of it; and mooued
them, by his Nuncy,and by their Ambaſfadours reſiding with him, co doeſo
ſill. Bur hee would not hauc any other meanes then thar of the Inquifition,
which he thought the onely remedic,as he faid vponall occaſions , iudging'
that the Councell would doc as formerly ichad done, that is; reduce all into'
a worſe ſtate. While he was poſleſſed withhelecogitations, and weake of

body, the King of France died the ſecond'of Iuly; by a woundin the cye;'

running |

;
$
/

416

The Hiftory of - Lans;!

_——

————

65.39
AM.

P AY Le
FERDINAND

ELL1ZABETH.
FRANCI1S. 2-

" Hepry the (e-
rk,
the ſecond of

July.

The Pope dy-
eth the 18.0t
Auguit, re-
commendinz
to the Cardi-
nals nuthing
but ihe office
of the Inq -

frrow,

The people
flew their de-
teltation of
him,

Card. Morne
yvas (ct at li-
bertice, who
was ready to
be ſentenced
for an herce
eque,

Capitulatios
fyorne vnto
by the Cardi-
nals in the

C onclaue,

runningat Tile; for which hee ſeemed yeryſorrowfull, and was ſoindecede,
For alchough hee ſuſpeted, and with reaſon, the intelligence betrweene the
rwo Kings, yct hee had itill hope to ſeparatethem. Bur the one being dead,
he ſaw he was at thediſcretionof the otheralone, whom he morefearcd, be-
cauſe he was more offended by him,and was of a more cloſe nature, hard co
be ſounded. Hee feared alſo that in France a gate would beſer wide open to
let in ſeftes, which might bee confirmed before the new King could ger fo
much wiledome and reputation, as was neceffary to oppolc ſo great difficul-
ties. Hee liued ſome few dayes, afflicted with theſe cogitations; but now
laying afideall hopes, which had vatill then kepr him aliuc, hee died the cigh-
reenth of Auguſt, recommending to the Cardinals nothing bur the offica of
the Inquifition,the onely meanes, as he ſaid,ro preſeruethe Church, exhorting
all ro cmploy all their endeauours , to cltabliſh it in Italy, and whereſocuer
cl{c they could, ;

The Pope being newly dead, or rather ſtill breathing, there didariſe, by
reaſon of the great hatred conceiucd by the people againſt him, and his
whole houſe, ſuch rumultsin Rome, that the Cardinals were more troubled
with thele,as being ncereand vrgent, then with thoſe that were common to
all Chriltendome. The Citic was all in {edition the head of the Popes /tarua
was beaten off, and drawen through the ſtreeres ; the priſons broken open,
and more then fourc hundred priſoners ſer ar libertic : and going to Repeta,
where the Inquifition was, they did nor onely take out the impriſoned , but
burnt the place,and all the proceſſes and writings kept therc; and they had
almoſt burned the Conuent of Minerua, where the Fryars, imployed 1n that
office, doedwell. The Colledge of Cardinals had recalled Caraffa in the life
time of the Pope, and, in the firſt congregation which they held after his
death, they deliuered the Cardinall Moyone our of the Caſtle, who was rea-
dic to bee cenſured for an Heretique. A great queltion was made,whether
he could haue a voycc in the election, being oppoſed by thoſe who thought
him their aducrfary. Bur atthe laſt it was rc{olucd on his fide. Tho Cardi-
nals were forced ro conſent , that all the moucable armes and monuments
of the houſe of Caraffas ſhould be torne in pieces, and the immoucable de-
moliſhed. |

Bcing afſembledin the Conclaue the fifr of Seprember, cight dayes after the
juſt time, becauſe they were hindred by thoſe inconucnicnces, they made
capitulations, which, according to cuſtome, were ſworne to by all, thar
they migk giuc ſome order for the gouernement, which was wholly confu-
ſed by the too great ſeucritic of Paul 4. Two of them did belong tothe
matter whereof we treat; one, that the difference with the Emperour,which
might hazard the loſſe of all theref:due of Germanie, ſhould bee compoled,
and hee acknowledged for Emperour; the other, that for the neceſlitic of
France and Flanders, the Councelly as the onely remedie againlt herefies,

ſhould be reſtored. The Papacie was vacantlonger theathe neceſſitic of the

time did comport, not ſo much for the diſcords of che Cardinals, as for the
intereſts of Princes, who did interpoſe morc.then they were wont. While
they were locked vp in the Contlane, King Philip going from the Low Coun-
zries into Spaiye by ſca, with relolution neuer to remooue thence, fell inro a

| {torme,

Lins, > the Councell of Trem. © 417

— —_—

ſtorme,in which almoſt all the flect was wracked,his houſhold Ruffe,of ve- 1 559
ry great valew,loſt,and himſelfchardly eſcaped, Hee {aid he was deliuered, £Y*?
by the ſingular prouidence of Go D, to root out Lutheranifme, which hee * Sapeans
relently bczan to doe. For the 24.0t September, ſo ſoone as he was arri- £:1,aumn
ucd in Seuil,co giuean examplein the beginning of his goucrnment, and to "Si
leaue no hope toany, he cauſed Joharines Pontws Count of Bayleno,together King 7p
with a preacher,and many others of the Colledgeof S. Ijidore, where the nilar ſea,
hew religion was catred to be burned for Lutherans; as alſo ſome Noble 09g

women, to the number of thirteene,and lalt of all the ſtatue of ( onStantinus —
Pontius, Confeſlor to Charlesthe tifth, who ſerucd him in his retyred life, 3zini che
and held him in his armes when hedyed. This man dycd in priſon a few ©
daycs before, where he was put immediatly after the Emperours death,for
imputation of Herefic : whichexecution, though againlt an vnſentible ſfa-
ene, increaſcd thefenre, becauſe euery one concluded that no conniuencic
nor mercic could be hoped for from the King,who bare no reſpec&trto him,
whole infamie did diſhonour the memorie ofthe Emperour deccaſed. Af-
terwards he went to *Ualidolid, where he cauſed rwentie eight of the prime
Nobilitic of the Countrey to be burned in his preſence and kept Fryar Bar-
tholomew Cqranza in priſon, mentioned often in the firlt reduction of the
Councell of Trent,who was Arch-biſhop of Toledo, chicte Prelate of Spaine,
taking from him all the reuenewes. And it cannot be denicd that theſe exe-
cutions,with others which daily ſucceeded, though not ſo exemplarie, kept
thoſe Countreys in quiet, while all other. places werefull of ſedition.For al-
chough the new opinios were ſowed in the minds of many,cſpecially of the
Nobllitie,yet they were concealed within their hearts,in regard of the cloſe
natureofthe Spaniards, who abhorre dangers, neueraduenturing vpon
hard enterpriſes, but ayming toprooceed ſecurely.

The Kings death in France, which they reformeddidaſcribe to miracle in-

creaſed their courage;though they durlt not ſhew chemlelucs openly in Pa- _ _
ri. For his ſonne Francs, the new king, after he was conlecrated at Rhemes, Bader M
rhe twentieth of September, gaue order to proſecute the procefle of the inicacthehe
Counſellors, who were in priſon, and depured the Prefident of S. Andreas, histater,
and the Inquiſitor Antonius de Mocares, to diſcouer the Lutherans, The Iud-
ges,hauing gained ſome of the common ſort, formerly profeſſors of that
religion, had notice of the places where they did ſecretly afſemble.Therfore
many, both men and women, were impriſoned, and many fled, whoſe goods
were confiſcated, aftera citation by three Edidts. And by the example of
Paris,the fame was done in Poyrou, Thalouſe,and Aix of Promenice,by the inſti
g1tion of George Cardinall of Armignac, who, not to abandonthat enter-
priſe, would not goc to Rome tothe election of the pope, viingall diligence
char choſewho were diſcoucred might be apprehended. 'Theprofeſſors of
that religion being ſtirred vp hereby, and imboldened,becaule they knew
they were many,fent about many writings, againſt che King.and Queene,
and tho{c of Loraine (by whom the King was goucrned) authours of the
perſecution, intermixing ſome points of doctrine; which being willingly
read by all,as things compoſed by publique libertie, did imprint the new
rcligionin the minds of many, 4 of

In

XUM

413

The Hiftory of * Luz 5,

I'F59
lt. VF; SN
Prvs. 4:
FERD:iN ND»

EIttAKETH.
FRAMC1S2

Agand Borges
15 burncd.

whoſe con-
Ntancie giuerh
an cacrenſe rg
thic efo1 med

Religion,

Meanes vicd
inFranceto
caicoucr the
Reto,mar:its,

thn Angelo,
Car oi Me
aicryivcrcated
Popc.

He appro0-
ucch the re-
ſfignarion of
Charles. & the
ſa-cefl1i9a of
Ferdinand,

In the cnd of the proceſle againit the Countellers, after along conreltati-
on,all wereabloJued,exceprt dine du Furg, who was burnt the cighteenth
of i}ecember,not lo much by the inclination of the Tudges,as by the refolus
tion of the Queen, prouoked againit him, becauſe theLucherans did diuulge
in many writings, & libels ipread abroad,that the King bad beca wounded
inthe eye by the prouidence of God, for a purithment of his words,vicd a-
oain{t du Bourg,that he would ce him, burnt. But the death and conſtancic
ot a mau ſo conſpicuous,did make many curious to know what religion
that was, for which he had {ocouragioully indured puniſhment, & made the
number increaſe: which augmenting allo cuery day for other caulcs,thoſc
who wereintercſſcd1n their ouerthrow,either for loue of the old Religion,
oras Eccleftaltiques,and authours of the former perſecutions, thought ic
neceflarie to di\couer them, before they were ſo many as that they could
not beſuppreſfied. To this end they caulcd the pictures of the bleſſed Vir-
gin, and of Saints, to be placed in eucry corner throughout all France, and
eſpecially in Paris,burning candles beforethem, making the porters, and 0-
ther vulgar perlons ſing the vſuall prayers of the Church, and appointing
men to {tand there with little boxes, to aske almes for the buying of candles:
and he that did not honcur the 11nages in paſling by,or did nor ſtand with
reuerenceattFoſe corners,or did not giue thealmes that were asked, wree
held ſuſpe&ed, & the lealt cuil that did befall them,was to be abuſed by the
pcople,with boxes and {purnings : But many of them were impriſoncd,
avd putin ſuir. This prouoked the Reformarilts,and cauſed the great con-
{pitracic of Grffery Renaur,of whom wee will ſpeake hereafter. |

In Rome, atter divers contentions and practiſes to create Pope, the Car-
dinals of Mantua, Ferrara,( arpi, and Putea, finally the 2.4. of December ar
night, Iohn Angelo Cardinall of Medicis was created, and named himſclte
Pius 4 who hauing appeaſed the tumulrts of the city,and ſecured theminds
of all by a gencrall pardon of whatſocuer was committed in timeof their
ſedition,applyed himſclfc ſuddenly ro the execution of two capitulations,
which he had ſworne,concerning the maſt common affaires:and the thir.
tieth of tne ſame monethcalling rogether 13. Cardinals, and conſultin
with them abourthe reieftion of the Ambaſlage of Ferdinand, and the de-
terminationof ©7aul not to acknowledge him for Emperour,the common
opinion was,thathe had receiued wrong. But aftcralong conſultation how
ro remedie this inconuenicnce, many things being propoſed and diſcuſled,
bur nomeanes found how to treat without danger of greater incounters,
in caſe the EleFors (hould interpole(as it was impoſſible to forbid them)che
common opinion was,that they were toauoideall negoriation, becaulc ir
wou'd conclude with the diſhonourof the Pope;and tharit was berter nor
tocxpectany requelt ro be made from the Emperour. This was approucd
by the Pope, who thoughtit wiſedom to giue that,which he could neither
keepe nor ſell. Hetherefore preſently called for Franciſcus della Torre, the
Emperours Miniſter in Rome,and tolde him that heapproued the refigna-
tion of Charles, A ſucceſſion of Ferdmand tothe Empire, promiſing to write
vnro him with the vſuall ritles, and bad him ſend aduilc hereof.

After this,he thoughtlſcrioully of the Councell,beivg afſurcd hee ſhould
te

,
.
- ” - s *% -
” OI ————— a

——_—

a
4 RE  e ,

Lis. 5. ' the Councell of Trent, | 419

Po, 8 EO IR_ST

ty. i

be imporruncd for it from diaersparts;Canferring with the Cardiurall Moi 1 555.
,rone, whom hetruſted for his wiſedome- and friendſhip, he mach donbred; —
* a5 himſelſc ſaid, wherher rhe Councell were good forthe A pottolique Sea, hate
ornot; andif not, whetherit were betterro denicirablolucely, and freely Enuwwncry,
oppole whoſoecuer ſhould deſire it,orto make ſhew he was willing, and to Fane >:

_

croſle ir with ſome impediments, beſides thoſe which the bufineſſe ic {clfe And conſul
would bring :and if it were tic to celebrate ir, whether ic were berrer ro ex- mee
e& vntill he were requelted;or ro preuenrand require it himſclfe He cal |
led to minde the cauſes why Paul the 3,did difſoluc ir vnder colour of tranſ-
lation, and rhe hazards which Iulizs did runne, if good fortune had noe af-
ſiſted; that now there was no Emperour Chavles tobefearcd, and that the
weaker the Princesare,the BB.are the more bolde, who werethe more to
be looked ynto, becauſe they cannot aduancethemſelues but ypon theru-
incs of the Papacic. To oppoſe openly the demand of the Counccll was
ſcandalous,in regard of theglorious namethereof, and of rhevaine opint-
on which the world hath, thatit muſt needs beprofitable; as alſo becaule c:
uery one 15 perſwaded, that the Counccl is refuſed'for feare of reformation :
which maketh che refuſall a greater ſcandall, And if neceſlitie ſhal enforce
to grant that which had bene abſolutely:denied, it will bea torall loſſe of
reputation, and incite the world to debaſe him who hath oppoſed. In theſe
ambiguities the Pope was aflured that the Councel could not beprofitable
for the Church, nor for the Kingdomes diuided, and muit neceſſarily en+
danger the Papal authoritie; yer he could nor opetly oppoſe it, becauſe the
world was yncapable of thistrueth. Bur he was vncerraine, whether, in cafe
the Kings or Kingdomes did require itthe coiunCtures of the futureaffaires
might beſuch, as that the ſceret impediments might take cfte&. When hee
had thought of all, he concluded to ſhew himlelte ready,yea, deſirous, a:id
to preucnt the deſires of others, that he might conceale himſelfe the better
in croſling them, and haue morecredit in repreſenting the contrary difticnl-
ties,referring tothe ſuperiour cauſes that dehberation, ro which humane
indoement could not reach. So much he reſotned of, and no more. |
The coronation was made atthe Epiphany;and thetleancnth of the fame
moneth he held a frequent congregation of Cardinals, in which he decla-
red his mindeart large,that hee would reforme the Courr,and call ageneralt
Councell,charging them all ro conſider whatrhipgs delerucd reformation;
and of the place, time & other preparations of the Synod,thar it might not
bring foorth the fame fruit that it had done twice before. Andafterwards
he ſpake ofthis in his priuatedifcourles with the Cardinals and Ambaſſa-
dours, vpon all occaſions;yer did nothing which mighemanitelthis inten
tion more plainely. ' | : 2: 122027: gd
Newes cameto the Emperourat "Vienna of what the Pope had intima'
ted to his Miniſter;who immediatly deputed an Ambaſſadour, and, before” Thc raije.
his departure, wroteto the Pope to'giue him ioy of his affumprion gand+ 7 crib
thankesthathc had wilely, and like a father, ended the difficitriez which: 4 © 4:4
Paulus 4.had,agaimt reaſon and equitie, ſer on foor, gining himvanaccount+
of the Ambaſſadour which he had appointed ro come vnto-hiim. This
was Scipio, Count of Arco, who came to Rome the renthot Wien |
| c

ry

——

The Hittory of DE

1559 fell inoagreatdiffculry in thevery beginning. For the Emperour gaue him

a

{>= 7 commiſſionto render tothe Popercucrence oncly,and the Pope was relo-

Fxznnaxy. [ute hee ſhould render him obcqience, ſhewing that the: Ambaſſadours of
Enarzrs. otherEmpcrors had done fo to his predeceſſors,and laid plainly,that other-
x12 wiſc,he. would noradmit him. The Ambaſſadour of Spaine, and the Car-
4 neon dinal Paccecoaduiled him not corranſgreſle his commitlion, but the Car-
itauous.p:  dinals Morone 6c Trent perlwaded the contrary;whoie opinion he followed,
«ccro:xc becauſe the Empcrour had giuen him charge to conſult with thoſe two
Popwor  Cardinalsin all matters. Aftcr the ceremonic was ended in the Confiſtcry,
ondy. with ſatisfaction ofthe Pope, the Ambaſſadour, begin to pray him in the
frli priuate audience, in (,«ſars vame,tocall the Councel ro compolethe

__ difſeaſtons of Germany,was preuented by him, with the Ambaſſadors great
ry *! contentment; who beleeuing that hee was to treat with the Pope, about an

| Sr voplcaſing buſineſſe, was preparcd to dcliuerit in {ugered rermes, that ic

ek: »i the might beheard more willingly. The Pope told him, that the Cardinals,
Counccll. :

being in the Conclaue,conſulted how.they might ſer the Councell on foote

againe,in which conſultation himſclfe was a very principalpartiez and now

/ being Pope, was more confirmed inthe ſame determination. Yet he would

not proceede blindely, but {o.as that he might auoyd the difficulties, which

happened before, and would bee ſurcof the neceflarie preparatories , that

the defired fruit might ſucceed. Hee ſayd thelike ro the Ambaſſadours of

France and Spaine, and wrote to his Nuncy to impart it to their Kings: hee

ſpake ol italſo with the Ambaſſadours ot the King of Portugal, and of the

The Duke of \t ©. | | |

Saveydeman- Princes Of Italie, which were 1n Rome.

me — Aftcr thisthe Duke of Sanoy ſent one expreſly to deſire the Pope, that
rovolia by hisfauovr,hemight makea collognie of religion, to inſtruct his pcople of

Colloquic.

the YVallies, who were generally alienated from theold religion. Theſe were
apart of the TWaldenjes, who, 400, yeeres fince, forfooke the Church of
Rome,, andin regard of the perſecutions , fied 1nto Polonia, Germany, Pugh,
Provence, and ſome of them into the Vall:ys of Mountſents, Luſerna, Angroua,
Peroſa, end S_ Martin. Theſe hauing alwayes continued intheir ſeparation,
with ccrtaine miniſters of their owne, whom they called Paſtors, when the
doctrineof Zuinglins was planted in Genena,did prelently vnite themſclucs
with thoſc,as agreeing with them in points of doctrine, & principall rites;
and when Piemont was vnder the French-men, though they were forbid
vpon paine of death to excrciſerheir religion, yet by little and lirttle, they
madc ir publique, fa thatwhen Countrey was reſtored to the Duke of
Sauoy,, the exerciſcof ir was almoltfree. The Duke reſolued ro make them
receiue the Catholike reh1gion, ſo that many were burned, and pur ro death
by other meanes, and more condemned tothe Galleys,ar theinſtigation of
the Inquifitor,Thomaſo Iacomello, a Dominican Friar. This made them conlulc
+ whetherit were lawfull ro defend themſclues with Armes; wherein their
miniſters did nor agree. Some layd they might not oppoſe their Prince,
though itwere rodeiend their own [iucs,but might carry away their goods
and retireintothe mountaines. .Others ſaid they mighe vie force, in lode-
ſperate acaſcas this , - eſpecially itheing not ſo muchagainſt the Prince, as

againlt the Pope, who abulcd the autoritieof the Prince. Many of chem
| dd

4 "—

I o—_—
L183. 5. the Councell of Treat.

—Yy

4.21

4

— W_— — -

did follow the tirit opimon,and the othersltood ypontheirguard;fotharth
{ily be gained by inliruction, receiued the counſell which wag giucn him,
ro 1o{tituce a (olloquieto this end. But becauſe hee would nor dilplcaſc the
Pope, by prececding withour his knowledge, hegauchim an account here-
of, aid asked his conſent. "The Pope beeing angry that,in Talyalſo,cuen vn-
der his nofc,his authority ſhould be queſtioned, anſwered that hee would
conſent by no meanes ; bur, if thoſe people bad ncede of inſtrufion , hee
would [enda Legate, with authority to abſoluethem'who would beecon-
ucrted, accompanied with Diuines who might giuerthem inſtruftion, Bur
heeſaydhce had liccle hopeto conuert them , becauſe the hercetikes arc obſti-
nate , and whatſocuer is done to exhott them to acknowledge their faulr,
they-cxpound to bee a want of force ro compell them. Thiar it cannot bee
remembred that any good was cucr done by this moderation, but that ex-
pcrienceistaught, thatthe ſooner julticeisvſcd, and forceof Armes, when
that other is not ſufficient , ſo much the better the ſucceſle is. If hee would
proceed thus, hee would ſend him aſſiſtance; but if he thoughtir nor fir, all
mightbecdefcrred vntill a generall Councell, which he would ſuddenly call.
| The Duk=did nor like the ſending ofa Legat, berauſe ir would haucprouo-
kedthem more, and forced him to proceed according;to the interelis of 0-
thers, thinking it betterto rake Armes, which the Pope commended more,
and promiſed aſſiſtance. Therefore there was warre in theſe alleys all this
yecre,and part of thenext, whereof we will peake in the time when it ended.
There wasa great con{piracicin many parts of France, intro which many
were cntred,and the maior part for cauſe of Religion,di{daining to ſee poore
people drawen euzry day to the ſtake ro bee burned, guilty of nothing bur
of zcale to worihipG 0D, and tofſauc their owne ſoules. T oth:le were ioy-
ned others, who,thinking the Guilards to be the caule of allthe diſorders of
the Kingdome, iudzedit an heroikeaCte to deliuer it from oppreſſion , by
raking the publike adminiſtration out of their hands. There were allo am-
birtous perſons, delirous of change, who could not workerheir will , but in
the middeſt of troubles. Both theſ: coucred themſclues with the cloake of
Religion,togaine more followers : and the betterto confirme their mindes,
cauſed the Principall Lawyers of Germany and France, and the moſt famous
Proteltant Diuines to publiſh in writing,thar, withontviolating the Maieſtic
of the King.and dignity of the lawfull Magiſtrate, they might oppoſe wirh
Armes, the violent domination of the houſc of Guie, who offended true Re-
ligion, and lawfull iuſtice,and kepr the King as it were in priſon. The Con-
{pirators prepared a great multitude, who ſhould appearc befare the King,
without Armes,todemand chat the [euerity of the judgements might be mi-

& 1559
Duke perceiving they had not rebellious thoughts , and thar they mightea-

Prvs 4 |
Fs DixnanD,

Fiitzanrth.
FRANC1is 2,
LARS /
Tomſtru&'
the pecple of
his Valleys,
whom beforz
he had perke-
cred,

But his Holi;
nefle refuſe th
to grant it,

And therefore
the Duke ta-
kerb Armes
a2-in|t them,

A great con-
ſpiracie 1n
France, the
Cazites uf 12,

b

tigated , and liberty of conſcience granted, deſigning they ſhould bee fol-

lowed by Gentlemen, who ſhould make ſupplication againſt the gouerne-
ment of the Guiſards. The confpiracic was diſcoucred , andthe Court reti-
red from ©Blois, an open place fitfor the execution of fuch a purpoſe, vnto
Amyoi/e, altrong fortreſſe. his troubled the Confpiratours ; who , while
they werethinking ofa new courle, ſome ofthem,who tookeArmes, were
>carcn and {laine, and others taken and ſentenced re die; and to appeaſethe

Nn twmult

Thc Conſpi- *
141015 aze die
conerced and
rony ow om”
exccutci! 21 d
the refit pag»

Courts

Þ
i
i
4
i
i
2
F

— cc

4.22 The, Hiſtorie of | Tas s:

1559 rumulr', pardon was granted by the Kings Edict, datcd the cighteenth of
- hgh March,co all, who ſimply moucd with zcalc of Religion, had cntredinrothe
EznpxaxD. CONfPITACIE, [0 thatchey difarmed within 24. houres. Afterwards the King
Exzazera, by bis Edit, pardoned all the rcformartiſts,vorill they returacd to the Church.
txaxcrs 2- Hee forbadeall afſemblics for Religion , and commirted to the Biſhops the

hearing of the cauſes of hereſie. T his diſpleaſed the Chancellor ;zthough hee
conſented, for feare the Spaniſh Inquifition would bee broughtin, asthe Gui-
ſards delared.

\ The humors mooued were not quiered by the puniſhment of the Con-
{pirarors,and the pardons publilhed,nor the hopes laid afide,which they had
concciucd, to hauc liberrie of religion, yea,grearertumults of the people were

The Prote- raiſed in Pronence, Languedoc, and Poitou , whether the Preachers of Geneua.,
Re WereCalled,and came willingly : by whoſe Sermons the number of the Pro-
meaues ot the reſtants did increafc. This generall and ſudden combination made the go-
Genews: yernours of the Kingdomerelolue, that there was needeofan Ecclefiaſticall
remedic , and that very quickly ; and a Nationall Synode was propoſcd by
the whole Councell. TheCardinall of 4rmignac faid,that nothing wasto be
done without the Pope; that healone was able ro make prouiſion; thatthey
ſhould write to Rome, and expect an an{were. To which opinion ſome few
Prelats didadhere. But the Biſhop of Yalerce ſaid, that a ſudden remedy could
not be expected from the Pope, becauſe he was farre diſtant, nora fic one, be-
cauſe hee was not informed of the particular neceſſity of the Kingdome, nor
acharitable onc,becaufe he was buſted in making his Nephewes great that
GoÞ had giuento all kingdomes , all things neceſſary ro gouerne them; rthar
France had Prelats of its owns ro regulate the cauſes of religion, who better
know the wants of the kingdome; thar it would bee a great abſurdirie to ſee
Paris burne, having the rivers ot Some and Marne full of water, and to belceuc
— puny chart water mult be brought from Tiber, ro quench the fire. The reſolution
_ of rhe Councell was, that, there becing neede ofa ſtrong and ſudden remedy,
*  thePrelatesof the Kingdome ſhould afſemble, ro finde a way to hinder the
courſe of theſe great miſchiefes : andthe eleventh of Aprillthe Synod was in-

timarcd, for the tenth of September. |
| Butthatthe Pope might nor take it in ill pare, a Currier was diſpatched to
Rome, togiuchim an accounr of thereſoJution, and ro cnforme him of the
neceſſity of that remedy , and to pray him not to take ir amifſſe, The Am-
baſſador repreſented ro his Holineſle the infection of the kingdome, and the
dangers, and the hope which the King had of ſome good remedy by a gc-
nerall Conuocation of the Prelats, without which he ſaw no mcancs to make
an cficctuall pouiſion. T hercfore hee was forced nor to deferre longer, nor
to expect remedies from places romere , which were vncertaine, and loog in
comming , and to v{e that which was in his owne power: and he added that
no conſtitution of that Synod ſhould bee of force before it were confirmed
by his Holineſſe. TFhe Pope, on the contrary, did gricuouſly complainc,
cnt. that the King had pardoned the crrours commirted againſt religion, cucn of
ns. choſe who did not aske it; wherein none had power bur himſclfe. And
bacukess, * What King is there ( hee ſayd) who thinketh hee is able ro pardon offences
againſt Go D? Thatitis no maruell if , by the juſt wrath of Go Þ, there

bee

—_——

Lins ns — —_— I _—

w# £3 4 *

(non Cay ng bens vhurp<d

Prelars would an; no good, 7s Ros + Sreajer cal nthat he 620
PRapaſe43 SP crAGOuneal Mel Ts ewfonky 5. TT
$w500h a het ee eerd Tm thera min you] liner hlabivy ot"
fn 09, GEISHA ig en ney red DenDna play, Arias
EE? lon 20 hee ; kweShbevih Keen clonal

#6 chat rhis yag,neugr tgleraredby\ che; A Apolt _
ba ate Coyngcls! IE , 2; GOf p

chmultacedes tollow;,, Hog complainadtouch chat
Po then is conlens demnandgd;!

ET ep WT: wth {mallzel) (194 WWE orb

all affayres ar ro beereferred, noma ge him an ag;

nike are done, hu.co.recciue from him auchorizyradaether

count,
that che Rd of ps bliſhed 9p iferrean Apoltalicin that kingdomefrom be
Sea,oh, remedic whegcof hee: would. ago expreſla Nano, to

make his wil ho ro theFing.
nana Biſhopot. Featonh inlieydion; ,to hewhimahata Na marr
tignal up6rl afar Kingdom, wopldoerakinde of i$  Fromghe Sparne 19 di
vaiuerlal{ Church ,giucabed.exampl any ag Gags » and make his. Hao
lates po. co woo ich erp hin 2

f th ;

LL 5.vV 4 ww

be — MA Forthe andy Fnch do pa pe oo hingr cliceme
not == Prelares, lo. that whacocugrah IFy { ould depo beeop Ong
them
that the,true remetic: was romaket hePr — Crone [
keeperheir flockes,oppoſing rhe faringk cd in-iu-
{tice againlt A OETAGS iudged tobee h perry etl of; faith;
and wherci ir carinot b ec done.in. regard! 9 the, multicuda, zo.vlſe ;forsgiof
armcs 9  compelal ro oF RET ormance of ty {Spares IF COA

Z

_— the pore ny 2 ws ore wh DESs

Bur i hornet dragg pal hy Sag { force., tha
Re in no pmpol nn all che ilohies mhich
croublerh. F rmpeaodis SP fe, win ttt Knglne _
neighbour places, commeth from Genegqy, tha cho axtirpation of that roote auto;
would rakeana gr pond men. of checuill char moking,ywarreout of ſa F King
the Kangdoms, hee (hguld: \cuacuate thoſe bad humors, whichgid croubleic; a je; 264intt Ge
Nn 2 __

AL

__ ll Es, 5

* dy >
bo ow fix] Morag hi&{/!1livib 1016512 «. Tk _ "*— Of he!
Mn, YPHePapperthag no hewtr Cs; Th Sn
ENT wi OPS Me"  He@tdert'rs? hit SPECS Find
_ ro M41; withilitth GINA; rc ro Hig Offi
nor: Ra Natto EDivhich World be Tratifoll ts Frlnte and 2B

©" ptefort ane; 2d v6HeHSr the Por Coubfeys TheDiike of $dbbj "YeNT.
| kegedre propolit)otiofclicwatte of” Gert, promiſing to's s / Him:
ſelfe wholly2fit. : to that thoſe” two Kin; eG bbccontenr ol Fit,
and that” Theyoitte were to Btemade by RI fot bit. 'F6I tie Citic
belongio&t to hisDortinion ; it Wasnot mt; th ale it viere woftie?* tha Ci
ny ſhould 6{ſ2ſeit buckiihſelfe? Therefore if his Htniclle wogld'come
tothe HFecBIENES Heteſſiry tomake 2 league” with PRI apitu Cl Frs: hs, wg
folne'greer intbvttucitebice might ike, if either the Net oat
69 himfelle Abattbeeabandbiice after he ltd; vrouiea che cas os
$ 1p" him, who would vndoubtedly defend theCitie;” '3 NIYWOr HV 2ncl 27t.

<a> 68 Gerbils chic K iter Bf m1 ens, $a Fuolbould: norpermir
ws © = tho! biel ey {li Matids"of doyBut Eretidhitben WAR þ 4s 2190 $664
"fox his{ertfiee 36 ropartif theyieiniry of thc”F ranch! ounree. hte
hee” anſwer's chat Reethought thor fir tihie to thake Attempt. OButfor
the" Natiotall Councell of Francs) 56 was perfwaded it Would beeadanges
tSus cxample r& his Stitcs. Therefore hee difparchel avyay AnfbnidUi To
tedo,Prior of Lions ;to fionitic rothe Frendh Ring,thir theeelebration of that

The Kins of COUuNCcell would beeverPBurefulk! \h regard ofthe diviſion which mighr 4-
rare dilor- rife, the kitjpdoine' berg iniected:” Heeptayed him'H6t t6' G6 on heere-
King ome in/andfayd; chat prom niooned Wim to: titles this requelt, bue 6nely bis
ds loge to bind? hid} hiszexle'to thegtery of God. "Hee left his confidera-
tion; beſidestht contentions WhiZNit might hiſe within his kingdothe, the
petnicions exathþple which orher Prouinces WSuld rake; hd chepretidicer =

would bring to rhe General Cotineell; which was to Bae held, and*was the

onely remedy{ifot all thewnksand dif ons of Chriſtendotne; thatir would

ſheiv' there: Hs #6t (0 g6od ihcelli ence betwerne the Emperour and them
a9(hould Bec Aeill thake'the Proceſtanswaxe provd in prefiidice of

che publigge zee? Phe added, tharhce warited nor force to repreſſc the
aifsleiihl oFhiYStbie&t>; and, if hee world make vſc of the Forces him

ctheKiiys bf Spud, Hee would very willingly employ theth'in'this eaſe ard

his ove petf6rralls, ifthere wete'neede;; that his Subic&s tight nor boat

dhe) had brog#fir him: 8/ary indignitic: whet&of he-wa$to eSnf deriyitich
frown inr1A 66fhiisreigne: Hee oa0e commiſſion alſo to hi&'At m-
ballkd6ur? X*h iifhee could roreBtaine his, OWoWAREIS Gros
cher real6ns HeSortatea {ulpe nii6h df ic; Pe T6np# rite asHe* cond, and
thould tr texte With the Gatdinal} of Din Wie Cas H keevtiderſtso ;hada
fear hand iv this Cones], that{asa Prince ofthe 8 Churche 3nd as havine a
 gfeitpart inf thegoucrifernent of 44 Ringdone, hee was bound of confi;
. der thedatimagewhichmight redound roit,andall Chriſtehdome. Be cail:
. ſectatſ cheſame- xequeſt'to' be mader ro'tlic Dukevf Guiſe! the Conſtable; the

Queenc

m_ ww. -

L 18:56t--: the Councell of Trent. A25
Quecene mother, and'ro/the Marſhall Saine Andrew. Hee gauc him com- 559
millionalſo to aduiſe the Ducheſſe of Parma, and Vayes his Ambaſſadour 7 /—
at Rome, of whatſocuer hee did... Likewiſe hee gaue the Pope aduiceof the Fnwnuxo.
carnelt requeſt he had made by onecxpreſly ſent, andofthenecd that King femmes,
had of aſhiltance. "To this he added thie neceflrie in which himſelfe was,the nes >,
Turkes hauing raken-from him the yeere before, ewenty Gallies,twenty fiue ,,uum.
round Ships, and the fortreſſe of Gerbe; which forced himto increaſe his Ar- pnenn_

mic. He therefore requeſted his Holineſſe,cogranthim a large Subfidy of the dievommhe”

Churches,and Bcnefices of his Kingdomes. ( ple TN
| Theptopoſition of aſſaulting Geneke, was not well taken in Frince, bes The French

cauſc it would makethe Hugonots (ſo the Reformatiſts are called) ſuſpicious, fied went the

and vnitechemſotues. Beſides, none' going tro'thart warre bur the Catho- Polen

liques , the. Kingdome would bee lefr open tothe oppolites, Andro Pro. Geneve.

uoke che Sniſſes , protectors of that Citie | ſeemed nor good, in regard of the

ſeruice they mightdoe that Crowne. Therefore they anſwered the Nancio

oncly thus, that, while ſo great contuſion did afflict the Kingdome within

ir was impoſhibleto apply themſelues ro martersabroad, ' Bur, for the Na- Fix French

rionall Councell , theſame anfwere was giuen to Toledo and the Nuncio,thar concerning |

the King was reſolued to keepe himſelfe and the kingdoms in the'Catho- Synod. ©

lique vnion ; that hee would make a Nationall Councel}to ſeparate him-

feite, burtownite ro the Church thoſe that went aſtray;that aGenerallCoun-

cell would more pleaſe, and, in likelyhood, be moreprofitable, if his vrgent

occaſions: would ſuffer him to expect the time, which muſt necdesbe ve

long ; that the Nationall Councell , which hee defarcth, ſhalldepend on the

Apoltolique Sca, andthe Pope , which ſhall ceaſewhenthe Generall ſhall be

afſembled,and ſhall incorporate withit. And that his deedes may anſwereto

his words, hcedefired the Pope to fend aLegate into 'Francey , withipower

ro aſſemble the Biſhops of the Kingdome, and-roſertle rhe affaires'of Re-

ligion. |

ThePopecaſtfoorth'the Propoſition to make warre againſt Genend ; nor
ſo much for the hatred hee bare tothat Cirie, asithe Seminary of the;Zuin-
glian Preachers in France_,or for feare of ſome innouation in-[taly,as topro-
long thetreatie of the Generall Councell. -For if the-warre had beenekin-
dled,

Makerh the
Pope baſten,

wich bin ,: and particu -abautrhe place, which ſeemed ofmoſt impor- the General
tance, becauſe, in-concluſion,the Councelldoth produceffetaccordingo ©
the minde of him thar is ſtrongeſt inthe place where it: iscelebrated.: Hee |
would fainehauc propoſed *Bolania, or ſomeother of hisowneCities, pro- , _
milſtng;ro goe thither an perſoti bur ſaw it would beeilbconftruc by the 7 (= |
world. He was refolued not to accept of any Citic beyond the Mountains,

no'not to hearcany.propolitiotzofir. ' The Cardinal/*Parreto'propofed We
PLOTS | 38 a

Jn I

—

426 " The Hiſtorie of © : Lrs. 5.

_—

1559 lan, and hecondefcended , ſorthat he mighthaue rhe Caſtleinhis bands,du-
"mg ring thetime of the Councell ; which was to referre himlelfetto an im poſli-
Fzzomano.. ble condition. He thought allo ypon ſome of the Venctian Cities, but the
:114rra, Republique cxculcd it (elfe, leſt they ſhould make the Turkes ſuſpicious , of
axert 3 whole forces they were then afraid. When hee had con(ideredaall, he found
Who ,afrer DO fitter placethen Trene, For the Councell hauing been held there twice be
couſultatio, forc,cucry one had experience of what was good, and what badin that place,

T:enr«be6r- and therefore would more caſily conſent togocthither then elſewhere. And

Ret there wasalſo ſome appearance of reaſon for ir,becauſe the Councell,cclebra-
ted by Inlius , was not finiſhed , bur ſuſpended. Hee thoughrro fatisfie the

| French men, by ſcnding Cardinall Tornon into France,nor in qualitic of a Le-

And fenderh gatc , but with power, when he was there and ſaw there neede, to aſſemble
ino France {ome of the Prelars of the Kingdome, ſuch as the King and himſelferhoughr

Naonatts,. He, bur not all, thatthere _ be no appcarance of a Counccll,and to treate
nothing. |

nodthere.. yyith cheſc,burro relolue o |
There werealſo wo other accidents of no lefſe conſideration , which

thruſt-the Pope forward to ſpeake more plainely of a Councell; one farre

oft, but imported the loſſc ot a Kingdome; the other concernedoneperſon

Scerlandre- onely, but was of grear conſequence. The Nobilitic of Scotland, who had a
& Pope. * long time made warre tochaſe the French men our of the Kingdome, and
to take the goucrnment out the handes of the Queene Regent, and had
cucrencountred many difhcultics,in regard of the great ſuccours,ſent her by

her ſonne in law the French King, to nuaintaine the kingdomeforhis wife ;

finally that chey mighc quirefree chemſclues,they reſolucd to ioyne with the

Engliſh, and incite che people againſt the Regent. To this end they gaue

way t@ libcrtie of teligion,to which the people was inclined. By this meancs

_. they broughrthe Frenchmen into great [traits , and the old religion was lit-

tle eſteemed; for which the Pope was blamed, becauſe the world thought,

that, if che Councell had beene begunne, all popular commotrions would

. _ haucbecncſtopped. Theother accident was,that the King of Bobemia had,
eg a longtime, held intelligence with the Proteſtant Eleftors , and Princes of
urea, > Crane, and was formerly ſuſpected forir by Paul the fourth , ſothat hce
a Fcoccitan« could not refrainetoobictt tothe Emperour, in private diſcourſe which hee
had with Martin Gufſman his Ambaſſadour, that Fi ſonne was a fauourcr of

herefie, . The fame ſuſpicion continuing in the Court after the death of
"Paul,the Popecaufed the Count of Arco to tell him,thatif he would not liue

as a Catholique,: hee'would not confirme him King of the Romanes, yea,

would dcepriuchim.of all Dominion. Notwithſtanding this, aduice came
afterwards to Rome. , that hee entertained a Preacher, and heard him often,

who had brought in the vſc of the Cup in divers places , but nor in the Citie ;

and the King himlclfe ſayd, hee could not recciuc it otherwiſe : which al-

chough be put not in practiſe, yer thoſe words gaue the Popegreat ſuſpicion,
which wo Clpecially becauſe, almoſt in all placts of Germanie.,, the Communion of
Poe The Chalice was vſed by all that would , and none hindered the Prieſts romi-

ocallebe njſterirt, Foralltheſe former reſpeRs the Pope was reſolute to make this

even orcatiumPpe. ; {12 "Gb.
Thethird of Iune he called the Ambaſſadours of the Emperour,of Spaine,
| | "Portugal,

-

L1 ».5. the Councellof Trent. 427

©Portug ul, Polonia, Venice, and Florence; who appearingall before his Holineſle; . i559
except the Ambaſſadour of Polonia, that was fieke, hee complaincd firlt, ——
that hce could nor call che, French Ambaſſadour for feare of ſome queſtion Frurnuny
of precedencic , which was a cauſe to hinder tle publique benefit of con- zrirangey
ſulcing on the common aftaires of Chrilftendome * but "bole two Kings bes Jane &
ing couſins, it was neceſlary they ſhould reſolue tg accommodatethe diffes Wherein bee
rence, for the good of the Chriſtian Common-wealth;and eſpecially of theit purpoſe to all
owne Kingdomes. Then hee laid,thar, thecauſe why hee had ealled ther; 5 ,Aune
was the celcbracion of the Councell , which hee was refdlacd to bring to cf. rinhbim-
fet,remaouing all difficulties, which Princes,for their owne ends, mighr ſet.
on foote : that the place ſhould be Trent , which hauing plciſed wwiee, could
- now be denied by none, in regard ic was nota new place, andthe Councell
celebrated there onely ſuſpended. Therefore raking away the. ſuſpenſion,
the Councell is open,as before zand many good Conltitutions having been
made there, it would nor be fir co call them in queſtion, by making thew of
calling a new Councell. Headded that it was neceſſary to doeit quickly, be-
cauſe ihings grew worle eucry day as appeared in France, where hey tfcated
of a Nationall Councell ; which hee neither would nor could cndure,becauſe
Germanie , and every Prouince would docthelike; that hee would giue of-
der co his Nuncy with the Emperour , Kings of France and Spaine.Þ ,to treats
hereof with their Maiclties, and did now intinyatethe ſamero all chem,thar
they might {cnd their Princes word of it. For although he could both rc-
ſoluc and execure of himſcltc, yet hee thought fir ro doc it with their know-
ledge, that they might pur him in mindeot ſome things forthe common be-
nefit, and reformarion of the Church ; and ſend Ambaſſadours tothe Coun-
ccll, and fauour ir by creating with the Proteſtants. Hee added, that hee did
belccuc that ſoine of che Princes of Germanie would goc thitherin perſon,and
chat he was ſure the Marquifſle of Brandeburg would. |

Vargas made a long an{were, relating what had been done'in former
Councels, He dilcourſed of the manner of celebrating Councels,andrhen
delcended totheplace, and ſpake of what was done in Trent, wherehimſclte
was preſent. He Ss Generall Councels from Narionall, much.
condemning that which was intimated in France, The Ambaſſadourof
Portugall commended the Popes purpoſe, and promiſed theobedienceof his
Maſter. The Venetian fayd , that, in timespalt, neucrany berrer remedie
was found then Counccls, and thanked Gop for inſpiring his Holinefſe to
doc ſo pious a worke, which was for the preſeruation of Religionzand bene-
fit of Princes, whocould not hold rhcir States inpeace in —_
on. The Florentine Ambaſſadour ſpake in the ſame manner, offering all alli»
ſtance from the Duke. The Pope wrote to his Nuncis in Germany , France, $..1,e.
and Spaine, in conformity of that which hce fpaketo the Ambaſſadours, Yer _—_
hee ncucr ralked of che Councell; but hee caſt foorth ſome ſeed of&contrary may colt ic.
herbe, which.mighc hinder che birth: of ir, or choke irafterwards; being al
ſurcd,that, when the affaires of the world did ſtand ſo,tharthelifeof irmight
dochim fcruice,heecould reoteout thiat which hee had ſowed vponit. Hee
rold che ſame Ambadladours apart, ſome more plainely, ſome in ieft;rhar, co
call the Councel with profit, itwas neceſſary tothinke more of —_—_

(a)

-
- ME 7 TOY

_— -

= The Hiftorieof—o Lv. 5

3559 ofthe beginning, and of the execution, then of the Conuocation, prole-
>" cution: that the Conuocation belonged ro him alone,theprofecutionto him
kapman». and the Prelats;the execution to the Princes : and therefore that it was meer,
Furr, that, firſt of all, they ſhould binde themſelues ro it, and make alcague, and
o—_— ele& a generall Capraine,to goc againſt thediſobedient, to execute thedeter-

minationsof the Councell, conſidering that, withour this, it would be fruit-
Icfſe;and diſhonourable to rhe Apoſtolike Sea, and to thoſe Princes who bad
ſcat Ambaſſadours, and afforded fauour and aſliſtance.

The French - ' The Pope did not recciuea conformable anſwere from his Nuncy. The
nb 7:25* King of Spaine commended the Councell, approoucd the place of Trent, pro-
x firplace for triiſed to fend his Prelates to it, and to fauour it by all other meanes; bur ad-
' ded, that it was not fir ro doc any thing without the good will of the Empe-
rour,and French King. The anſwere of this King was, that heeapprooucd
the celebration of the Councell , bur not theplace of Trent, allcadging thar
his Prelares could oor goc thither, and propoſing for places more fir, (on
Wor ve the SABLE, THINS » Spire, TPormes, or Aganoa. Heeintimared alfo , that they oughr
doctrines,al- not tO make a continuation of the things begun in Trens, but to abandon
chere, thould Chem quite, and make a whole new Councell.. This anſwere troubled the
| +—r_m Pope, who thought it did not proceede from the Kings ownemotion, bur

amnion from the Hugonces. | | |
But the Emperour ſenta long writing, in which hee ſayd, hee could pro-
miſc nothing for the Princes of Germany, before hee knew their opinion ;
which he could nor doc withour a Dict : which if hce would call, it was nc-
ceſſary not ro name the Councell, becauſe the Princes would not goe thi-
Ofwhoſeo= ther,” butpretending another: cauſe to call it, hee might afterwards ſpcake
poncwic, Of it by occaſion. Hee.added, char , for his parrimoniall States, hec had
no hopeto bring them rothe Synode, without graunting them the Com-
munion of the Cuppe , and marciage of Prieſts , and without a good refor-
mation were made; bur aboue all , that no mention ought to bee tmade of
acontinuation of the things begun 1nTrent. For the Lutherancs would neucr
conſent otherwile, yea,the very name of Trent would makethem refuſe. And
he propoſed ConfFance or Ratizcbon. The Pope ſaw that the propoſition of a
Dictdid require the time of ayeere, and perhaps of two, and was gladof it,
bur was ſory thatthe occurrences of France. required haſte. Hetold eucry
one,roſhew his forwardaefſe, that he carcd not forone place more then an-
other, and wouldtake Spire, Collen, orany other Citic which pleaſed the
Empcrour, ſo that che Biſhops might comcand goecin fafetie, irnot being
. conuehient to ſecurethoſe who hauc no voyce in the Councell , and leaue o-
thers withour ſccuritic who certainely haue. Burir was not fir to ſpeake of
reuoking what was donein Trent, ſaying he would ſpend his blood in main-
taining; itbecing a marteroffaith. Concerning that which is of humane
conſtitution,asthe Communionof the Cup, and matriapeof Pricſtcs, theſe
prohibitions becing madeforaguodend, as heewould not take them away
of himſclfe,which:he had power to doe,ſo hewould refetre all ro the Coun-
cell, howſocucr-hce ſaw they would neuercforfake their opinion whar-
ſocucr was granted them. Hee complained of the Emperours weakeneſſe,
who feared hisowne ſonneinolefle then orhers, and then deſired the Prelares
'; ſhould

XUM

terine&yehivhee-@akcomtmewithiany

L'is.4. : hofoanell of Trent. 429

ſhovltboſchmoGermanitz whereheedeclared he had nor powerto ſecure 1559 |

rthem;,dharhewoul{gocroLouftantinople, ſorhatheemighthaneſecuricie, ——>

whichwould rior beoxpetedfromtheEmperour gihaeche Germuns weredl. ri thuns
mall Horeriques undthd King of the Rowanes mortporehrehendris fachpr; aoounegs
Jharheca3egardatavtancplace more 'ixinanorhet go chat ievere in deal}, Batt z

xphich.ooctys feade forrife-Carholigaes,iuow oiqungss 3 10) mk ould

. 5(11Flikrefore DIY andthc Emperodtgingenerall 7: Pore

cutoplace; faying thay the tecuridje=bcmdok,;
ofrhe Qouncelwhack alwayes'becne efteemed neceſfary;" and! was. nove:as..
muth aveuvr;/withour making partichtzroppoſition-againftrheplacesni2-
med bythemrs- Ruryin.hisanfwereto theCatholiqueKing,; hettommended |
his good mind; nadcontirmed/him in:his purpolez and; fortheſubſidiche
delredihee interpoled diuers difficulties jas well comaintainetheprofirs of
the Church, as not to offend him,and make him-hissppoſite pinthe rimeot
the Councell jc 257 lotf] "Ds, | (tt 81 1230 :
.; Thr.affaires ofithe Catholiques waxed cucry day more difficulr. ' Forthe 71.1...
Hugonors in*Fraxregrew ſtronger, and in Scorland liberty of-Religion was <vmny men
grantedroall þy publique decree, and in Flanders the -humors were prepared toy againſt,
co ſtireg,vpon rhe'firſt occaſion:;zwhich the King did appeaſe by'proceeding PE
flowly:, rraumingthem whatthey would, though rohis ownelofſe andim-
dignitic-Firlt,chey:retuf <drocontributetotthe King beforerhe Spaniſh ſoul.
dicrs were remooued out of the Counrrey; when thele were diſmiffed, they
would:pay to nove'but ro chepeopleof cheir owne Countreyy andonelyfor
the guard of ftrong places,and choſe notro depend-of the Kipgs Miniſters.
The King endured all, knowing chat euerylictle diſtaſte would make chem
ſer on foote the pretenceof Religion, andexpetted ynrill che hear wereexrin-
guithed;; which he did the rather; becauſe it was diſcoucred thatthe feedes of
the new opinionsin Spaine were not dead; bur onely couered for feare, and
thar in Sauoyrhere were more heretiques beſides the old Waldenſes. * "11
Bur the Court of Rome was gricued-molt of all,thatthe Pope haujng;by

his nephew Marcus Altemps , whoafterwards was Cardinall, perſwaded the
King of Bohemia to be a good Catholique, with:many promiſes of honours
and profits, intimating the ſucceſſion ot-rheEmpire, which he would hardly _
obraine in caſe heſhould doe.otherwile, was aniwered by the King, thar hee kd pad
thanked his Holinefſe, bur rhar his ſoules health was more dearetohim, 71 7,"ePe*
then all chechings. ofrhe:wotldp which anſwere they fayd in Rome, was a <nhing his
Luthcraivformeof fpeach; and [ignitiedanalienation from the obedienceof ©
thar'Sea; and they began' to diſcourſe what would happen after the Empe-

rours death. While theſe accidems-troubled the Popes mindey-nevwves was The popes
brought him, chavthe-Hugonors his Subic<ts in the territory, of Auignion carr or
wereaſſembled , and difpated whether rhey: mighrrake- Armes againtt che agnothum.
Popctheirremporall Lord, andreſolucd they miighr becauſe hisfucceſſion

was not lawful,as well becauſerharCoumrey wasnoriuftly raken from Ras- |

1ondus , Count of Tholoaſe, asallofor chatche EcclefhaRtiques cannor;, by: the
commandementot Chriſt;poffefleaty remporalNominion:andreſolaingrs

rebel, by.rhe means of Alexander Guilotimus,alawyer;put tham{clueswnderihe
protection of ( barles de Montbran, who wasin Armesfor Religiooryand - |
muc

—_—
L—_—

I pray 'The Hiftorie of Ln.

1556 - much followed in Dolphinte. Charles, cntring the territory: with theet|thoit-
>" fand foote, made himſclfcLord of the whole Countrey!; withanugh, joy of
Exxpmaxo. the inhabitants. James:Maria, Biſhop of Utuers,Vice-Legat of Auignionimade
Emmars Dppoſttion;and very hardly kepr the Cirie.:\/The Pope, wapmuch alllicicd
tence bcrcvwich nat ſo much for thelofſcofthe Couritrey, as for! thecauſe;whichy,

being takenfor an example, would rouch the very root of che Papacic.\Thiep-
-7"*>* [fore hee (cnt Gardinall Fwingfe, veho was Legat to defendibe Citie::1 Bit the

Buralf nger danger was modcratcd, þrcaiuſo Gardinall Tornon(whole:Neede (harks had
noone" A2rricd-): who was thitbnor farrefriom that place., as hee was gaing) to the
of Cardinal Court.) made him defaBiand geerd:Gevrug ;bypromiſtpyireſtitution of his

'  ig6ods, confiſcated forizepellion;'and ro beereealled ſhonely; wich:liberty of
eonſcienct;ithe would goeout of France. 'Sorhe Popes territory:; depriued

"of tharprate&tion, did remaincin-ſubiction;;but full of ſaſpicions,and:rea-

dy.co cmbracc cucry nouitic, © nd br. 01300 25.1550

The Proteſtants ſtill increaſing in France, and which was of more.impor-

_ +. - tdnce; thedifſentionsand ſuſpicions betweenethe Grandies ,the21..of Au-
1560- guft a560.the King calledavery great aſſembly at Fountainbleds,in which has

Nr , uing bricfly exhorted,tofer downe what was fit for his feruice,thenecelſitics
n allemblyzt ofthe Kingdome were declared by the Chancellour, which heecomparcd to
Secs,  Aamian:lickeofan vaknowen diſcafe. Afterwards Jaſper CGG cKing

ſame pcritions, which he aid were delivered rohim , by amulritude of peo-
ple,yvhenthe was in Normandy , vato whom hee could nor denie this fauour,
ropreſentthear to bis Maicitic. The fumme of them was ; that thefairhfull
Chriltians,diſperſed chroughout che whole Kingdome, did pray his Maicſty
ro-looke on.them with a fauourable eye; that they deſired nothing bur a
moderation of the crucll puniſhments, vntill their caulewere heard ; and thar

Fa which  Ehcy might make publique profeſſion of theirReligion,to auoid ſuſpicion by
opinions were private aſſernblics.. Then John Monluc, Biſhop of Valence , hauing declarcd the
= infirmities ofthe Kingdome, and commended the chaſtifingof the fediti-
ous; ſayd tharthe caulc of thecuill remained, yea ſtill grew worſe, ſo long
asreligion might beetaken for a prerence, againſt which, prouiſionhad nor

becne formerly made, becaulc the Popes hadno other ayme,, but to holde

the Princes in warrez' and the Princes, thinking to ſuppreſſe the cull with
puniſhments, haue nor arrained the wiſhed end,nor the Magiſtrates and Bi-

ſhops iuſtly performedthcir ductic. The principall remedic was to flic ynto

Go D, toaſſemble godly men outofthe whole Kingdome, to finde/a way to

roote outthe vices of the Clergic, to forbid: infamous and immodeſlt ſongs,

andin ſtcad of them to command the f1oging of Plalmes, and holy hymnes,

in che vulgarrongue;and it the common interpretation which gocth abour

be not good,to take away the errours , ſuffering that which is good ro be v-

ſed by all; Another remedie was, the Generall Councell , alwayes vſcd to
compoſe ſuch difterences; that hee could not; ſec howthicPopes conſcience

could be quict one moment, in regard fo many foules did-periſh euery day;

ſaying, thatifa Generall Councc]lcould nor bee obtained ; they: were ro al-
ſemblca Nationall, by che example of Charlesthe Great , and Lews the De-
boneere; that they did gricuouſlycrre who troubled the publique quiet with

armes; yponpretenceof Religion, a thing alwayes abhorred by antiquitie
; that

if Fan!

XUM

= s* +

-

ITY the Councellaf Trent 431

thatrheir ecrour was as great, who: condemned to:death choſe thatadbered: 1560
rothe nzw doGtrine, onely tor the opihian bf picry;;/ Who, dying conltant ny
ly, and concemniagzuhelofle of rheit goods, Kirrevp'themindes of che mul- Sr ERAS
ticude, and makethein defirous to know wiiar-fairhchiar is; for whichthey [gretis: es)
cndure{ogrear puniſhments. 401 Mandi As bo) 1 amndager] ens”

(harles Marillac Bulhop of Vienna, ſpake inthe ſame manner ; commending 2d of
che Geaerall Coyncell,bur adding, that ic might ſooner bee deſired then ho-: -.:): 1
ped for , conſidering the difhculrzes whict doe viually.arife to:ſuch a buſts ©} ©
neſle, wherein (ha#les the 5. hauing taken great paines;-hath-tuer been.des:
ludedby che Popes, Befides, the ſiealeof Franteis ſotharpe'; thar there is,
no time to call 4 Phyfician from farre... Therefort.they:wert to calla-Natio«;
nall Councell, / as had been vied fromi thetinieof Clodoke: vntill Charles the
Great , and afterwards vhrill Charles the [cucnth ; ſometimes of the yohole'
kingdome , and ſometimes of pr : that now;the diſeaſe being vrgevtchey,
were to expect no longer, nor to holde any eltceme of cheunpediments:
which the Pope did interpole ; in the meane whilerhat the Prelateseughcro
reſide, and that che lralians, who haut athird part of the Benetiees; were nor
ro beſuffercd ro cnipy the fruirs intheir abſerice;'to take awayll Sjmhonic,
and ordaine;as was done ih the 4ncrran Councell , that almes ſhould nor bee
giuznin times of adminiltring the Sacraments; that the Cardinals 4tid; Ptc-
jares, deputed by Paul the third, gaue the lame counfelt;chat Paul the fourth.
chought ir neceſlary,though afterwards hee gaue hirh(clte ro luzury and war,
chat it this were not done,there wis danger to ſeethe prophecic of Bernard
verified, That CaRI 5s T woulddeſcend from heauen to whippe the Prieſts our of
the Temple_.,as hee had th: Merchants. Then hee ſpake of the remedies for the
other maladics of the Kingdome. Colign/, when it was: his turc.e to {peake,
faid, that requiring thoſe who gaue him the petitionsroſubſcribe hem, hee
was anſwered, that 5005. men would ſubſcribeiit therewere occaſion, +

Francis of Gui{e,concerning.che point of Religion, ſaid, heereferred him-
ſelfero the iudgement of learhed men,bur protetted thar.no Councell ſhould
hauc ſo great authority wich him.,'4s to make him decline one iote from the:
old belicte. The Cardinall of Lorgine, hauing ſpoken of other patriculars;
deſcending to that of Religion, layd, tharthe petitions preſented were molt
proud , and that to grant che Orators publique exercife,; were to approoue
rheir docrine ; thatit wasacleerecale,, that che greater part vicd: Religion
for a pretence z and therefore his opinion was , they ſhould bee procecded a-
oainlt with more ſcucricic, mitigatipg the puniſhmenrof thoſe who aſſem-
ble withour Armes,onely for Religion,in{tructing and admoniſking them ;
and to this purpole to caulethe Prelates rorefide, hoping that by thele reme-
dics,all will bee provided for , without cither Generall or National! Coun-
cell, The voyces becing nor vniforme, a Decree was made, the 2.7. of cthae
moneth, rhat there ſhould beean aſſembly of the States at Meanx, the tenth
of December, and, if the Gznerall Councel|ihall nor be called fuddenly , as
the Popchath made ſhew,the Biſhops ſhall aſſemblerhe 1 3 of Ianuary to treat Thc pc
of celebrating a Nationall: in themeanc while the puniſhments forcauſeof 1,
Religion were {uſpended,cxcept azainit cholewlio rookeArmes:! | 1

The Pope, cnformed of the refolution of the:affetnbly of Fountambleau,

Wwrotc

fe <
———

— Þ -—_ —
%
#

_ ——
The. Hiſtorie of  - L1B5

_Ol Ge  —_— 4

+ — cw

. 2 4808 DE? conf AI --- ple
1 5601 Wrote to-CatdiballTornono hinder the mc:ting of the Biſhops, and, it hee
Fl ——*;.could noCrevurheto: Rome... ' And chethree and trenucth of September
Fzzpimze,i hee called che Ambaſſadours;:and told them the necethitie of the ſudden cc-
Enzae; Jebracion-of a generall:Councell-; in regard of the derermination of the
Fraxcr2- Frenchmen , to call a Nationall; which though he had giuen orderto Car-
Cauferh che Jinall Foro to hinder; yer hee did not hopeitcould be done. Bur hee ſaw
ope co meke - , .. | | :
ere char bee a nEceftie ro celebrate thei genetall Councell , that ir might nor bec fayd
Tov tharthe Nationals'were called; for wanr of ir. Therctorc that hee mult
cel{uddenly. needes openthe Councell of Trent, taking away the ſuſpenſion ; that the
place was molt tity” becing.berweene Germanie.. and Trale., though others
propoſcSpire, Triers, and other placcs , which' hee would accepr if they
were ſecuic, beeing- readic to goe to ( on8tartinople 1, if hee might with
ſafecic; that one could not rrult rhoſe-who- want faith; that no-Catholike
could bee {ccure ivthole places, no not the Empereur himfelte;, that, if
they refuſe Trent ; they may tinde places inthe Dukedome of Milan, the
Kingdome of Naples ; in the State of Venice , of the Duke of Saroy, or Fle-
rence, \ Conccrning-the revocation of the things already decided, it was
notro bee menrioned;; + that hee would neither revoke nor confirme them,
bur referreall ro the Councel}, which , with the aflittance of the holy SPi-
rit, will determine whatſocuer it ſhall plcaſc God. Heedid much rumi-
nate vponthe Nartionall Councell of France, ſaving that Germanie. would
follow the example , and that lomie [tirres would bee railed in Tlie, it order
werenot taken; that they would {ubmit the Papacic tothe Councell, and
whatfocucr belongethto it; +But his reſojution was this : Pro five EF religtone
-oolumus mori: Dciiringthe Ambaſladours to ſpeake their opinion, the Em-
_ perours Ambaſſadour ſayd , it was berter totake time, 1n regard the Em Pe-
rours aftaires would nor permit him ro conleart, The Pope ſecming to bee
angry , the Ambaſſadour added , that ir was good hritto winne the mindes
Whezen beis of the Princes of Germany. The Popc an{wered more angerly , that there
Ee Was now no time todocit ; and the Ambaſladour replying , that hefeared
An” that by this meanes the hereriques would bec incited apainit Jcaly, the Pope
ſaid aloud,that G o D would not abandon his owne caule, aud that he ſhould
bce afſified by the Catholique Princes , with men and money , for his de-
fence, The Spaniſh Ambailadour commended the Popes purpole,and {aid
that his King would not -faile to fauour him , and that to this end hee had al-
ready {cnt Antonio di Toledo into France. The Ambaſſadours of Por:ugall, Ve-
nice, and others offered the fauour and aſſiſtance of their Princes, and inthe
cnde, the Pope gaue them-order-o {1gaihic his intention , and ſodiſmiſled
them. | |
Afterwards hce recciued anſwere from Cardinall Tornon, that , hauing
tried all meancs, hee was nor ableto remoouethe King, norany of his Coun-
cell , nor could hope for any better ſucceſle hereafter, yea, that hee ſaw all
chings towaxeworle. The King of Spaine, hauing fentrothe Pope the fi-
nall an{were giuen to Toledo, wrote withall , that the French King excuſed
himlelfe, char, withouta Nationall Councell, heecould not remedic the dil-
orders of hiskingdome,and ihat it was no marucil,if,towithlland inconue-
nicnces, Princes doeithat-alone , which they ſhould dee together with the
| Pope

XUM

Li = | he Councell of T1 ane, T 433

OO —

Pope. This letter croubled his Holineſſe thinking hee did inferrc tha at hee I £60
might doe the lame alſo himſeltein Flanders. It was afterwards diſcoucred FSI
thatthe. Popes purpoſe was, if hee could nor abſolucely anoyd the Councell, F: core in
to-deferreit at thelcalt, varill he had ſet in order his domeſticallaffaires. For, rang
being ro hold a Synod, it was neceſſary to giue a good example in the meane wy 2 rs 5
ſpace, and (ſpend exceſſinely in maintaining poore Prelats, and officers, and 76+ Pop+

ſecr et þ upoſe

other things, neceffary forthe Synode , which would conſume all the Feue- wasto avid,
newes ; and the buſineſle ir {elfe allo would take vpall his time, ſothar hee Comal
could not take careof [is houſe. But hee reſolued , though avainſl his will,
not to deferre the Conuocation any longer. Whereupon the twentieth of RR
October heeheld a Congregation of Cardinals, in which hee gaue rhem an jpongsnt
account of the anſwere of theFrench King ro Toledo, of the King of Spaine.
his letter ro him, and of the negotiation of the Cardinal This, . adding a
new crrifiurar ſent him our of France,thatalrhough the general Coun-
ccll were opened , they would nor goe thither, if the Protcitants did nor
conſentto receiueir. Theſe things putthem in a great confuſion , and all
feared, that though rhe oencrall Councall ſhould proceede, yet "he would Andis much
make the Nationall, whenes by conſequence, an alicnationfrom the obedi- ron
encc ofthe Apoltolique Sea would arite,, and an example to the reſidue of © 7745*
Chriltendome to doe the like, either with , or without che conſent of their
Princes.

Somethoughr much of the Pretefition made ro the Cardinall of Treyr,
that heeſhould not bee rooliberall in oftering that Citic, but remember har
the Emperour is Lord of it, without whoſe conſent kee neickercqn , nor
oughtro. diſpoſe of itin ſachs buſinefſe; who haddeclared himf-Ife alrea-
die, that, by all meanes hee would firſt makea Diet. - "They were alſo muclh
troubled with that which D. Antenio diToledo wrote,that all the Grandies yea,
che Biſhops themſelues did favour rhe new opinions, to (ſettle and augment
their owne cftates; Notwithſtanding all this, all the Cardinals , except phe
Cardinall of Ferrara , were of opinion to open the Councell, remoquing THe <-:u.
ſuſpenſion: The Pope {aid the Councell ſhould begin: ar Sainr Martins tide; .... |
and conſidering the immincardangers; ahd the hopes tooucrcome them; he Hi conifor |

15,thae

reſolued' himiclfe;, fd did convfort alſorti> Cardinals and his otherdepen- lofſe will be

dants'with it, chat. che ſofſe would be grearto"Franc#/afid little go him. " Fof French King

rhe Apoſtolike Sea reecjueth yeerly out t of that Kingdom bur tive and rrven- gomenl
tic thouſand crownesgbtir: on the other fide,the Rings aurhority beings great, 52.
oranted by the Popts;rodifpoltof Benefices, heewouldloofeit al; in regard:
thePo operations ebbitio takeh away,the Pragmittike*$v6ld rake place, Faiſd
the Biftiops would beeleded by the Canons;the Abbars by the” Monalterics,
and theKing bereanedofall Ne \ Therefor! hee wis(orry for nbrhing but,
for the lofſe'of ſo aan foules. Burif Go > wouldFeortect them forch&if
faults andiinfidelityHiecould nothelpeit?s 42 55-0900 ne

In tobeginniap6PNWaern better nz Rome Forth Emperor, ri kayn
in which he (aid ,chongh i in generall rcrmes' that, concerning Gil Gouncell, 1oreovind
kee woulddoe, forhis owne p&ſon,; wharſotucr theP pe oTexſed, ; bur'ad- own gor

ded) thatyro/old 4 Councelfour of Germanie.. , or to continncrhar of Trent: Saks compar

by caking” away thefuf penſtor/would docno tood: Burtifc a orcarer barred non 0
Oo in

434 | The Hiſtorie of L 18. 5.

_ —

=j 560 in the Proteſtants , with dangerthat they would endeuour to hinder it with
.— Armes ; in which kinde hee had heardof diucrs treatics : but , makinganew
' Fazomany. Councell,there was hope to perſwade them to goce thither. This caulcd va-
Fuizarsrn, Ticty Of opinions mm the Cardinals, it bcing plaine , that , if there were
C2xes * not a continuation of the Councell of Trent ,all the — already determi-

ned would be vaine and voide, hauing never beene confirmed - 4 any Pope.
Wherein the T his was propoſed in Congregation by his Holincfle, whereofthey contul-

Catio®*3* td and ſpake much, without giving of voyces ; which being demanded in

dunded in 0- | . | I Hp"
pion. = another Congregation,( arpi ſhewedart large , that ir was neceſlary ro conti-

nuethe Councell,rcmoouing the ſuſpenſion onely, and was followed by (e-
fs and Piſano. Burtthe Cardinallof Trent, who was next,faid,that in a marter
wherethey wereto treat de ſummarerum , full of ſo many difficulties, ic was
berter to thinkea little more on it. And this opinion was followed by all

Theprorety. DE other Cardinals. And, ficly, the next cucning a Currier came in haſte,
tionotthe to Rome out of France , with proteltations {rom the King,thar,ifthe generall
peg 52S Councecll were not called, he could no lovger deferre the Nationall : and that
they were not to thinke of Trent,or avy place in Tale, in regard the Councell

hauing been deſired ſo many yecres for the necelsities of Germany, and now

the danger of France becing added, it was mecte to ho[de itin a conuenient

lace for both the nations : otherwiſe it would bee invaine , if the Germanes

and French-men went notthither , adding, that if any place in France were

choſen, it ſhould be molt ſecure. In the end the Pope thought nor fit to

delay it any more, bur the fifrecuth of Noucmber refolued in the Confi-

AProceTion ftory ro make, the next Sunday , a Procelsion , in ſackecloth and aſhes , gi-
and [ubclic ; . , c

forthe decer- UINg A Tubclicgand {1oging the Maſle of the holy Gholt, for the determinarti-

Me Oot-made tocclcbrate the Councell in Trent; concluding thatif, after ut was

Councel. affcmbled,it ſeemed commodious to tranſlate itto another place, hee would

doc ir, andgoe himlelte allo in perſon,lo that it were ſecure. Headded, that

he could tinde Armesto vie, any wentabourto infringe the things determi-

Aprearque- ned,and began to conſider of the tenour of the Bull. Euery day a Congrega-

ſhon in Rome

wherherebe tion Was held, to reſolue wherher they ſhould plainely declare the continua-
fhouldplanly LION, taking away the ſuſpenſion ( as he defired )rhatthe things determined
bedeclared: mightnor be diſputed on agarne,or examined. The. Imperialilts, and French
menlabourcd much with the Popeand the Depurics,that irmighe becalled a
new Councel,that the Dutch and French-nien might gothither, ſaying,they
might reſoluc init, that the things already bandled ww not be handled a-
41nc; otherwiſe it were in vaineto [peake ofa Councel|roreduce the! Prote-
ſtants, giuingthem occaſionart the £0 to refule ir,andtafay they-could not
ſubmit chemſclues to thoſe who hauc condemned ,rhem) (before. they were |
heard. On the contrary,the Spaniards and Duke of Floyence,who was then in
Rome, laboured that the ſuſpenſion only mightbe remgued, anda continua-'
tion declared. The Pope and deputics rookea middle way ;boping both par-
tics would beſatisfied.. A lubclic was publiſhcd andfentinco all places, and
the 24.day.the Pope, with che Colledge of Cardinals, & all the Court, wenton
foore, with aſolcmne Proccſlion, from S.Perers Church ro Minerua; in which:
there was great cofuſ1on. For the Ambaſſadors who were wontiro.go-before.
the Croſſe, percciuing thatthe BB.did follow,and aftexthemthe Dukeof Flo.

rence

TTY b | ;he Councellof Frene.. — 435

—

rence berween'2,minor Cardinals,chey would hace that aceallo) Wherupon 1569
thetearoſea diforder, for copolmg wherof, after {(dmecomeſtarion,thePope ;> —
gavothem place berw. zenc himſclte arid che Cardinalswhio went beforetiim. Pb-wimans
"The 2 9.day the'Conuoeation of the Conncelwaspubliſhed in theCon- frmawerra
fiftory;the Bul wherof was' incirled;ofthe Hrimation of the Councel of Trent, po ”
theLatine word was Inditions Anditwasfo6printedin many placesthough -
afterwards whenthewh6lebody ofthe Councell Was puns! the word; Ce -,

19,1 90; }

bhrations wasvfed. -Fhotmor oftheBultwasg'o, 4 010/03 ans 1d 7
?Thar the Pope; fromthe begjuning ef his aſſiithption; dida opply his nal ad - of
roghe rooting! our of herefies; extinction of diutſjons?; indartondhn (gf on of he

manacTs ;for remedie whereof -- me to eefebrarea geverComed,-

and: lacing al the occutrehices: vnderehaſoPoya acribedtrhe lutcellex io
diuers is Fer b Nitrogen of midtiinde 7atthefealt ; ;'70

To To

viceof 5 Berdinaid, Ern perou? eleftcd, and other Kings: ahi Prlhaus; tet
heehathifornd ready to-helpe forward the celebration, by the iuthoriticof
Go ÞD, audofrhe holy Apoltles *Peterand Paul , heedeth intitnate'agenerall
Councell, in the Citie of Trent, to beginarEaſter; remoouing all filpenſion'
wharſdeucr: exhorting,, and- commanding , vnder” the canonical! puritfh-
ments, all Pattigikis, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Abbais, andorhers;, whohaue
a deciding voyce-by- law, priutedge, or ancient'cuftome, norbecing lawful
] Flihdeted, tobte'there beforethar day ;admoniſhing thoſe alſo ih the- ſane:
manner, who haue, or may baue any incereſt- there; praying” the Eimperovr;
Kings: hd Princes: to ſend their Proctors; if they cannot be perſon: yPre- =
ſent; and xo cauſe their Prelates tO performe their duetic without ex uſe'or- {tes Ws
delay” -and to make the paſſage- freeand ſecure;forthem and theirt fr oy?
as hirnſelfe will doe within his fFerritottes' , bauing no other end'ih © Iu!
ring the Councell, | butthe honour of Gov! the reducing oli
ſheep & and the perpetnall peace'6f Ehriftendome; ; ofdaining-that the Bulk
ſhould bept bi # IR -4rd:tharby vertue theteof after ch& dof two
moneths,ir ſhall bindeall char arc comptehended| avi" ithad beat perſ6naHy
intimated Voro them; 0977 F es wad

--/T he:Poperhoughrhee ba Graf trot; thoſe who wenld dues Tom rg
new Coincell intithated! and thoſe who deſired! a'continuation 6fthe _ nos Fa
Bur as: Riki coliniels She vitally diſpleaſeborh patties, fo the Pope gaute” ”
ſerisf7Eion to nare/as ſhall be declared; Preſently after the publication of
ou *the Pope ſehr Nichetd into Francewith ir; with comthilſion, if th -

rine' Git} not pleaſe; 'tO lay, that chey fhould nor except agaiolt the org |
— Bead itdid nothindertlicii to ſpeake 3 e Fptioe of thethings al-' -..
ready propoſed.” "Het ſentiralfo'ro heEmpetot, King of Spuine. _
Ent

436 The Hiſtorie of
1550 ſentlikewiſc Zacharias Deiphinus , Bilhop of Liefina, to the Princes of high
"Za Germany , and loannes Franciſcus Comendone, Biſhop of Zante, to thoſe of Lowe
Fenomaxy» Germany, with letters ro them all, and with order, firlt to receive inſtruftion
Earn, fromthe Empcrour how to treats with them , and then to execute their am-
axer > baſſage. Helſentalſothe Abbar Martinengoro theQueene of England,to.inuite
 * herandher Biſhops to the Councell, becing perlwaded ſo to doe by the fore-
of -eere, named Edward Cerne , who promiſcd him that his Nuncio ſhould be receiucd
nuredroche Hy one halfe of the Kingdome, by the Queenes conſent. And althoughthe
Pope was purtin minde to, ſend Nuncy into England, and to Princes clſewhere,
who doc profeſſe apen ſeparation from the Sea of Rome,would bea diſtcpu-
ration to him , yet hee anſwered hee would humble himſfelfero hercfie, inre-
gard whatſocucr was done to gaine ſoules to CH R15 T,did belecmetbat Seca.
Forthe ſamereaſon allo he ſent Canobius into Polonia, with deſſcignerto make
him to goe' into Moſcouia, roinuite that Prince and Nation to the Councell,
though they haue neucracknowledged the Pope of Rome.
Afterwards he returned toſpeake of the Councell in Confiftory, deſiring
to be informed of the lcarned men, of good lifeand opinion, of divers, Pro-
uinces, firto diſpute and perl wade the tructh , ſaying he purpoſed rocall ma-
ny of them; promiſing that, after hee had vſea all poſſble diligence:ro make
all Chriſtians come thither,, and to vaite chem in Religion, though ſome, or
many,refuſed tro come, he would not torbeare ro proceede. Yet he was trous
bled, becaulethe Proteſtants of Germanie, vnto whom a great part of France
was vnitcd, would denie ro come,or would demand exorbitant things, which
kee could not gravur them, and doubted they might bee able rodilturbe the
Councell with Armes. Neither did hee hopeto be affiſted by the Emperour
againlt them cn regard of his [mall forces. Hee confeſſed thar the angers
wcregreat,and the remedies ſmall , and was perplexed and troubled in mind.
The Bull of tz Councel going through Germany, fell into Proteſtants hands,
aſſembled at tlic mariage.of the Duke of Salzemburg,who did intimatca Diet
- in Nanbwg,to begin the twentieth of Ianuary. we IN

_— Pergerius\wrote a bookeagainlt this Bull, in which, aftera great inueCtige
booke againſt againſt cthepompe,luxury,and ambition of the Courr, hee ſaid, that the Coun-
cell wascalled by the Pope,not tocltabliſh the dotrineof Cnr 1 8 T,burrhe
ſcruirude and oppreſſion of poore fouls; that none were called , but thoſe
who were bound by oath to the Pope, ſo that nor onely all were excluded
who arcſcparatcd from the Church of Rome, buralſo men of the greateſt
yaderftanding amongſichemlclues , raking away all liberty , in whichonely

there was hope of agrecment. :
The Princeof * At this time newes came to Rome, that the French King had impriſoned
prioned,and the Prince of ('onde,andſcra:guard ypontheKing of Naxare; which plca-
ho K. {edthcPopemuch, asa thing which might wholly diſturbe the Nartionall.
ot X«««rre- Councell; And his hope was the ſtronger that he ſhould. recciue no diſtalte,
becauſc aduice camethar the King was very ſicke, & in danger to dic; which
hindred the aſſembly. of the States in Meaux. And,inthe end,therewas great
altcration. - For Francys, the FrenchKiag , dying the fift of December , and
—_ {Charles che ninth,of the agcof ten yecres, ſucceeding , in regard of his mino-

hen? ritic,thegouernmentfel principally vpon the Kingof Nawerre; as firlt Prir.ce

Lis.'s5.

ſuccecdeth.
of

XUM

XUM

E'teus!

. {not no-bortoleratedy that: evY

afchd Blodd:, FhcQuemna
cheauchoriry which thee-bad
Nano was.contemtop:

Hedidahngdttoppolyiauc
thoigubllof

-_ —_— k

ueneFrance-

began codocir the 13 of December: +

ch
on

ebildech, and kinretk If there be difference of relivientio tHefarvefamility
tht farheragrecthitor with his ſonnes ;nor'the brothers among; thieth(clues]
not the huſband with chewife, - To remejdic theſe diſorders; |

or -

th roi

's heede
of a Counccll, which the Pope hath promiſed : but in che meme while; Tr

7 Gouldthapromtinownoregon nd
bring in new Rires ar his-pleaſurc;andfo rrouble thepabliquepeee!Ifthe

| Counicell faileby the Popes default; the King willinaksprovifionanorhet

way : butir was neceſſary char cuery ore fhould arhend himRlfe /beeduſes
good life is:a vehcment orator to perfwade;"tharthe-taines of Eutherbines,
Hugonots,and Papiſts,no leſle factious'then thoſe of the GrelpharintGhibio . ©
lines, wetc'to be takenaway; and Armies't6beraken apaihft thoſe whe couct '-
their auarice,ambirion , and deſire 6f #tibuation; with tiecteabdiof religh =O
on. John Angtlo,aduocate in the Parliatnefit of Bourdenux, [pake forthe third 26 angete””
Order: hetpake muchagainſt the bad manners,ard difci itic ofthe Clergy p the tha Or-
noting their ignorance; auarice, and latirypiseanfeofalf the euils (hd did!
much diſcoutle ypon them! itsthetnd; het detidndedihiatall thightbeeres =
dreſſed by a ſudden celebration of the Councell. Jawes'7Earle of-Rochfort, + 1 mrg
ſpake forthe Nobilizie; who, amongſtotherthings, faideharall the euill did «pv a TG
ariſe from theiargedonarions , wadeby rheKingand bther Grandies;ro the =»
Churches,: eſpecially: of iuriſdidtions ; a thing much ine&muenient , thirhe
that ought ro.giuc himſelfe wholly toprayer:and preathitig; ſhould exerciſe |
powerouerthe lives and goodof the Kingsſabies;and that irwas neeel-
ſary to remedie theſe incontieniefices. ' And; ir the'end; hee paueapearition, » -
demaunding/in the-hame of the Nobiliry';ts6-hane publique Churches for _ . .
their religion, Jacobits Quindinus a Burguridian, ſpaktfol theCletgic Hefaid, dowarve ar
the States were aſfetmbled co provide for the ticeeſſities'of the Kingdome, forthe Cler-
norco amendche Church, which cannot erfe; whith'is without Blemiſhot ©
wrinkle, and will alwayes remaine withoutcorruprion, though the dilcr
pline, infoine ſmall part, may needereformarion;”' Thetefore thoſeare tor
to bee hearkened vato; who, renewing theSeQs, long finite buricd; detnand'
Churches apart from the Catholiques7 but arers bet puniſhed 25 hereriques,
anddoc nordeferucthiae theKing RR RCA TEneaY EE
jo Is

- am Rs wW- i 64 _ bit. adds. bead
$.* _—_ _ p a i. 44 .»

_ 43k nFhe\Wiftaric of | | Iannis
I DA | his Subicfts.ptobeleme

1 Ghurchgbarshoſe-who baue fortaken the Kage ar _—_
Exxpixaxe; Bebo be luffered-to rerurne; that. are Leſaltialidg
RT— to be pr oc Wet Wat ray tical rene
DT ph [+ > 0s - rr IL ATEH Phe $am. ver"

. .- 1. reltoredto the or6gJtbcin ed;rbax,in c r547
Theapmiz the. Concordate, the nowinariduob:iEedehultical dighiriesvias ginet boths
may King,the hereſ1 cs of Lucher began,wiho wasfdllowed byZavj hos andochibysi
_ - Inche cad ghee demanded tharabinimuniticeacd pritlecyes of cheAlergis
mp ee 2 PR). OPEN reraboned® | 10.7150: 4 103 A824
- The:King| ordaing&that-the Prelaros honld pur themfclues irxundet to
The Ortthas : goc-to; the- Gouncclhyhich wagintimatcd : at Trent; commandedithavallthas
for Religion,hoyle-be ſetariliberry, their Ptoceſſesniftlevoily

OO @—_——OO—_

and liuc-accordingj no. the forre-preſcribtd byrhe
ought

tions of the” &
King  // Werein
1 thei ke omminrodvntill hateiome, pardonediandrbar goodsrdſtpredl
© HaconRiouedacapicallpoiſhwentsfor drafowha rmarcter

- of Religiangishieriommerdsptdecds Hb adworidhed aro follow.thevites
vicdin cheChureh,,:yiithout: -chaking avyriobouation. :6Þhe refidurviusde'
ferred yntill May:oex6 when tha petition Preſented by Rovcbfore, wasto bes
gon{idered, off: mort 112979 7 holimong ©: 2gqot] od did  HoonPoD £30

; ThePope, vnderſtandin « ofshedbubofking-Frow; Jogothes with
the aduice;ptcheGatginall _— that tho-Quednowaviogried with:Nauar,

was troubled imminge, fearing the raines world benibregiuen rothoProce-
ſtancs., [Thergfore hee dent Lorenzo Lentin;Bifhop/of 'Fermo, and caulcd the
King of Spaive.9{nd, 19: Manrignes,tocpodele with1the Queene z#brrhe
The Pope death of hex fonne,, _ ro. pray het- tovce carcfullof the Religion inwobichi
---» pr (hee was horne and,breg ; £o'rememberthe great benefirs receiucd-from the
| mocerand A poltoliqug;Sea Peg meanes of Clement ,-and not ro {uffer ſchiſmcroarite,”
 $w=caname by too m1yeh licence, nor to ferke remedies e]yberefor the cuilspreſent.and
imminent;bur from the'Church of Rome 3 for which-end the Comncell: was

-inrimaced ; that inthemcang {pace{ſhe would take careahat the Kitigdome
ſhould ot ſv rue from trye piety, and _ no preiatiog thould boo! ne to/

"che Councel) intimareds.. 1ctdolgd oy bo nvg pol
_ -  Theycere1560) endedigsy; leauing "has ſceides adm 7 Wer CAE
1561 troubles did fpring; |1Thepext yeere Manriques canieined Frances: and: deli
ucred his Ambaſſage::; Who: hauing receiued from tbe, Queene a,piousand:
fauourable : anſwers cepcerning Religion and the Councell:, and {peaking a+
gainc of theſame tyhicth, as occaſion was. offered ;; did- contitimally-exhorr
her. roprocced with phailhtacnts againſt the Hygonors, adding threatsalfo. -

The negotia-

ionotthe to his exhoTtations, |} Nayart, £pnwary 19 allthe Spaniſh deſieignes) did ap-

biladour, pole, in regard of his po 0 ay tothe Kingdome.of Nanarre:\cManriques
 didcombincwiththehouſeof Gaiſe, and athers who had the famedeſlei gne,,

to make him fauous zhe Catholiques,, the Pope,andthe Cauncell,ro 94.4
vnto himche patronageof rhe GarholiqueReligionin France, Gd thathe
would bee' diuorced from. his wife, Joan of Alibert, Queene of. Nanarre, by.
inheritance, and would retaine right tohe Kingdome by the Popes au-:
thoritie, of which ſhee ſhould bee depriued for herefic by bis Holincſle,,
Joe would take to wifes Mary, Queene of Scors, by whom hee'ſhonld hauc:

the

/

þ 1851 the Oxneedlof Trent.

[in
alohingeGuilardsprowiledhimzebe

> kindaws ot Englerdylaahtabbein depracdbychb TOR an
ma mae 4

part; who (ds Novateryrurou 1&1
"rl heſhthings thiey continudliyirt yvaro Afledt by
big 07 wag bg 2» Be eating 2d 015bem
(remaniehePringes wear 7 ton,
Prem wypdofopunca w>clion
gonfuſaon. for the y ary rar es."
pats m0 A 2 agrees] amrhtben!
vs By Synode:<[Go
thadifieronce was pant ena _
Io g9Ungoeucnin undaziansof RehgiomidF
pn ripe mms 2nd3j they
} POINFAGEGONE would bac of fcaallcii
ure ing diubrs/Copies:of thar Cnfiiing wii diReed tera
PUTS PDEs andsin dives df chem dome ap) —_ ava

any thought aHey ought tp takelthaton ons
. le inhe.yecte 1 erage ITY Pr carer
—_ wi datlarcd, id 'a-Prohememadevntoiiti; UE oa
denier teg-huidhite; 'The Dyke of Saxonie anſwered; theycoul m__
16-C4CS andcares ofche wotld that they. ſhouldnor {ce vx ae —_—
fexcnces y hg: thats af ichey would make ſhew.ofvnion wWhcrenhdrwers av
varAnGBokbsy ;ſhoulhbepconvinced:of vanitie-and lying; andyatermany»
Kh ep yes without agrcemiene.in thatpoins: Fob jhoCuilans orc
hs Joms choughtfit.vo retulo:it ablolutcly; andiotherh were ofopinion}? * - —_ Fog
Ambaſſadours to make offer that the y would goe»to:a frovand Obrio A
ſtian Cquagethand:r9, pr dhe txcadtionnobith; Tan, POT
d,toiſhew? * as Dd

of ig i ora owe at place;aud otherb,oftericines
ticy did.not refoſe, aboa thoricie ofailaw ECouncrl|andthaichciynion of:
the wasniouh eokindered by-cherh | but by theartibition Zourc of:

Bowe3of hich: .make cher Germane Catholiquewtmore fiuourable ro
cm.; Ag: toy $11cuded zo make petition to: the, Emporour in cis
Fr 1 »1t; eee 19D 07, FH 03 57195 0! Hubrnos ie aiffÞogrr:
he two Nutk),arriving ibidufhico ar the Calne. foundteBayes; which
rour.a Fm, who gavethem-counfell ragoborh:ibmcdinlyxcy iNfennbuny, fro xwms
in $4xoxi, wheretheProteliaora were aflembleding 'Dier ;acidtoittcate/ns | my
modcltly wichthem.as was pefſible / raking care tor rixaſperareor offend" nk
chem Eas i ikchey,weat! io each of theminco: cheir ovene!Sraces ;| they would/ ano.
bee paſted Fromoge;ro anotber,and would-ncucrtrauean propre
d.y en Ek had, & bochiperformed this dfficeioymly 1 k mighe divide -
Ad gaaaprt to whom they weerefent: He! mnmind of
che ond ; whhirhich the Protelſant did rl ary co-the
Cn: Coetenaiaeads thereof againoigehey aighe bee prepas.
—_ toreplic, in. chePopesname, what tbey rhoughs fac! ; The Eeperoarſen |
three Ambaſſzdours of hisowne to goewith.chemvo the y;andrhe-
mics "Bobewia. {flid recommend them io the Duke: of81x9nie; rhar r
| might goo lecurely. The Emperours!Ambafſadours: , havinghadaudicnco

at

R : os " Wn
# . a - . 4" - I » _ IF: " . |
poets». ne Cnr 0 OY 949 < POET args, oo AY SOD ns ie EE; +12 AR OT RES” 1500 PROCEED pe 1,

FC at ar che Diet, - 0 wr aſl} i-ivrheCouncell, abd2o-pir
) $0 ma ofGermavie:i thi heoytns Fonſtlis

nd,
= =o wagon mirhercto beaudgegt che'BB, were welaſe oÞcheil bard?
made to the Pope and the Sca of Rome, and if the Proteſtane!
hagedteiiaznFny ors) Bu iingebarthe Pope admittetiv 6B}
Coundelidbut ſuchdisgretwornevmo hith\Cagainft Which
bavcabvdycoprotaſicd, boy cold hardly agrceymoit ;\thartheywerewild
fr tcpseſcorfolmmchrorhe ;Erapetodrgiret Son
hainabiblenllcabrrnge reqmilithoPrinces, thenisþſenc, _—
Amurde te m——y weir broughein} who 7
otpicticadd Religian;:in rcuiyin hs CouriceL,46 ext
—— ace av tvaby Religions. and Gofpels,as ther the
bat ſenoquinuuerthem,co- ha forward fo tnidablodr _
thacali ſhould chanted vyichCbriſtian Claritie; ahdVlutheirvoyecsfh

;wfirrento eichofthem. The

1104: HecfeecbriThey preſenred aliothe Popes Briefzy
Ges text; depalltbs Brifenſeaod av!before;xverelerit backs; dtd the Neiny
led toreagiiican aniwere which was torhis effoft \Thar'they' did'nor ac”
knowledgedny. iurjſdichonofrhe Biſhop'of Reme =thae there wiYHG ealile!
to-reucale tlicir pleafuteconcorming he Conte Fino hed por
cithcr'edraikos hold ie; tharthoyrhad deliueredtheir triinde and deferminatl.

an tothe Ertiporour, their. Lord; tharto the:Nymcy, whis were nobly deſcen:'

Ae Pegeo- ag inaiCommomnwealch vehich they lowed: \theygffired all: good office,”
dm—ane. ant woult dot morzifthey.hacdmorcone from the Pope Thus ey id
her oe" cheallembly ; and did:intimace another, to —__ in  Aprincs fittiſh Heats

to begin in
apa. of yaitivgchemſclucstageiher: - 20A L

Theneeori. + The Niincle Delphitat ; delivered his Ada. et divers Okzev ache fe.
- —2%6 rurnedo; Lhe Senatoof Noremberg/anſwered ; ae wr pe feeforfaks |
the Auguſtan Conſc/sion\, nor accepr of the Comncell: 448" ethiaving'rhc thecon--

dicions required by the!Proteſtancs.. The Scyares of Arpentine, mim At.

Of Comer- burg ,and ima, nn inthe fame manher.! Comendone parting Foin'the
_—_ Dict, wene to.Lubec from whence he ſentto Frederic; King of Daimark#;to:
demand his Safe condu@t tro come to him, to deliuer to him the Pope#fA1 it

- baſlage,antlinuice him:tofauour rhe Conncelt. '' Hee an{Wered, rhat neither
. Chriſtian }kisfacher, northindelfohad ever anything t6:doc with"#dP6p6,

'”"and therefore hee cared moro recoiuc any Awbaſſage from him! Bbth" the
Nunc had afauourable anſwcre from the Prelates; -Princes, and Cities Ca."

n wo ; with promiſe of deuotion'tothe Pope; bur ,conecthing el (ns
cell, theydaydthey weretortreare with che Eniperour ,/it beingneeeffHy to
Of ar conſule together, for feare of the Lucherans.'/ Jerolamus: Martinengo'; icy
the Queence of England for the ſamerauſe, becing in Flandzys; receli6iFegin
mandement from-hcr noe to paſſe rhe Sea; andalthough the Kiny'of Spkine

and Dukeof Hua did makecarneſt ertreaty thar hee mightbee ad ied, * 211d

heard , commending chei cauſe of that Legarion, thats; theynioi) fa the
Chriſtian Churehih agcnerall Counccll, ycrthe Queenedid perſericr&hwher

firſt reſolution, anſwering bar ſhe could nor treat with DE ome,

4

whoſe authority was cxcluded our of England, by conſent sf Partiamenr.
( anobing,

%-

GT ”

_

cdvcarninggheCouncell;, ſaid they os |

XUM

L1s.5. the Councellof Trent: "BE: 441

(, anobins, when hee had:deliuered:his Ambaſſage totheKing of Polonia, , by 561
whom he was well receiued , could not goc imo 'Moſconia ,; by reafonof the 5——'
warre betweenethar Princeandthe King. Bur going/inro*Prufiia, lice was Fizomuss*
anſwered by that Duke, that he wasof t Co zand'could not zrmwiayin.. *
conſcat toa Popiſh Councell. The Suiſſesaſfembled inaDicrar*Badahear] UN% 7
thePopes Nuncio, andj retejuing the Briefe, one of the maſters of Zu- Anlof com:
ric did kiſſe it. The Pope, aduerrifed hereof, could not chooſeburrellireo _ '.
all the Ambaſſadours reſiding with bir, with much ioy!:: Bur, having con- Roo hp
ſulred of the buſineſſe concerningthe Councell, the Catholiques anſwered, ini” |
that they would ſcnd thither,andithe Euangeliques that:chey would not ac- j--7 = "___
Cc tof it., + FT DELTA T6078 o- LEP : Wo

"The negotiation of the' Nuncijin —— publiſhed in Rome..;
there was a whiſpering againſt the-Pope , for fending Miniſters tro the Dicr
of the Proteſtants; wherein hee excuſed himlelfe, 4 it was not by his or-
der, but by the Empcrours, .to whoſe diredtion he did deferreche Nuncyjfor
which hce did norblanic him, in regard hee did not care for nicepoines.of
honour, bur onely for doing of good. The Emperour , hauing conſulted "moe org
with his Diuines concerning the Bull of che Councell , wrote to the Pope; #917.
that as Ferdinand, hee could totally adhere to the will of his Holineſle,. and ©!
bee content with any forme of the Bull, and endeauour that all Germaniey,
ſhould ſubmit chemſelues ro him; bur as Emperour hee could ſay nothing,
vntill he was cnform<d what was done by the Nuncy,and his Ambaſladours;
who went tothe Dict of the Proteſtants in Newwburg. - Hee was almoſt ſe-
cure, that ifthe Pope had not declared, that the conuocation of the Councel
was not a continuation, buta new Indifion, or that thepoints already deci- a
ded might bee reviewed , and handled againe, the Bull would haue been ac-
cepred. The French King wrote to his Ambaſſadour in Romethelaſt of 1- ,,y wn,
nuary, that there were ſome things to bee reformed in the Bull before hee + French.
could receiucit. For alchough the word Indiftio, was vſedin thetitle, yer
in the. body of it there were words which did {ignifie the remooung of the
ſuſpenſions of the Councell already begun, which Germameſuſpe&ting,would
vndoubredly require an interpretation of them : which would draw the
Councell in lengrh , and:nor giuing the Emperour fatisfation, and them,
would cauſc ſo many diviſions in Chriſtendome, and fo many difficulties,
that ic would be a Councell in ſhew onely,withour fruitor profic./ Thar,for |
his part he was pleaſed that Trent ſhould bee the place; nor made' any diffe-
rence whether it were a new-Itdiftion , or a continuation, in regard his Ho-
linefſe was willing, ashee was. told by Nichero, that the determinations al-
rcady made may bediſputed and examined againe : wherein,as the reallper-
formance would giue fatisfa&jon to all, ſoto take away feate,and ſecure cue-
ry On was necellary todeclare ſomuch beforchend taking caretofatisfic

ze Emperour by allmeancs, without whoin no good ſuccefſeofche Conns
ccll could bee hoped for. Hee ſayd, tharifallthis were nor performed;hee
would , as the purpoſc of his brother was., call a Narionall Councell, which
was the onely remecdyforthe neceſlities of his Kirigdome.: Hee gaueorder
to his Ambaſſadoyr allo tocomplaine ta his Holinefſe, thathis brother ha-

} is

uing procured with ſuch carneſt cntreaty , the opening of the Councell, yer

no

> > - —_ .

442 "The Wiftoriof) ang?

56 nd honourable mantion was-particularlyimade:ot him inthe Bull; rherea-
>> ſob wharcateuery oneknew ro bee, becaule hee would notnamethe Frerich
Idle. FALK King)inimediarcly after che;Emper OUT, Notwithſtanding all theſe reſpe&s,

© Enzapzan tae Kingatopromagethe bulueflcof Religion, wroteatche lametimets the

On Prelates of hisKingdomo; toprepare.chomfelues 'rogoeto the Councell; ard

> -* tohcerhere artho rico of the:Conuccation: 'of whitli letter he'ſent a copie

EOS " 4@ Romer ood non Mig loot boils, fr 1 511.7 211 24417 #7 : Ky

| Towhomide, -; The:Napewas adycrtiſed:byhis Nuncit thacitho King ſpake againſt the
ene poll; -by -inſtigation of the, Gardinallo Lonane 4: and) 'afrer' hee heard” the
---- Ambaſſadours propoſition; heanfwered, Thar heomarbciled charthe King,
© Who doth not acknowledge any ſuperiour, would ſubicct himſelfe to'the
diſcretiomot another Prince, 86notrefervahimſelferotthe Victr'ofCar t5T,

to: whom.it belongetl:to/ moderace wharfocuer doth concertie Religion;
ſaying, chat hisBullwasapprooued by all vrhers; and had noneede of refol-
mation,and:thac he was retolued'ir ſhould and acatdide © That for namints

che French King, he had notthoughroft'ic; and that eheCardinals, to whome

the compoſition of it was committed ,thouphcir fuicient to'natftecheErmc

. perourand all Kivgs in general ; otheriaſe » Hiattfing/one in pafricitar 'it
would hauc becne neceflary to- haue donethe likeinallthereſt; thathims

{cle rooke care onely of the \ubſtanceoft the Bull; 'theaving all the reſt to the

Cardinals. This anfwere did not{arisfietbet'renchren;who thought their

preeminence was notto be paſſed oucringerierall terfries,/ in regatg"as well

of theirgreatnefc ,'as of their merits rowardsthe-Apoſtolique Sea!''- Tri the
6nd, the Popegaue themyconcentment, ſaying; hee could not hauc his cyevp-
onall chings;but,would becaretul.nor tocommit any crrout hereafter; Yet
he marie no-gredt account oftharkingdome,ſeeivg that, withoutanyreſpett
2 of his authoririe , they uncermedled in things properly belonging to him: av
The Pope © ©. X . k a : 0” 0g
Jocth not e- IN. pardoning heretiques , and ordering things Eccleftaſticall, though reſer-
FeemFrexc. cd to himlelfe. Forthe States aſſembledin Orleance in Ianuaty, did ordaine
that the Biſhops ſhould be cleed by the Clergic, with'the aſliſtance of the
ludges of the King ,twelue of the Nobiluie,and as mavy of the people; that
no money ſhould be {ent ro Rome for Annats; that all Biſhops and Curates
ſhould rce{1deperfonally, vpon paine of looſing the' fruits of their Benefices ;
that in cucry-CarhedralChurch a Prebend ſhould bee telerued for-a-Reader
in Diuinityz:! andanother for 'a'Schoolemaſter; that all Abbars{Abbeſſes,
Priors,and Priorcſſes ſhould be fubicct to theBiſhops, notwithſtandiris any-
excmption; that.inothing ſhould ber cxaQted'for adminiftring'the”Sacta”
ments, for Burials , or'orher publique functions ; tharPtelates ſhouldhoe vie -
cenfures, but for publique faulrsand ſcandals;;thar wotnenſhould not!tyake
profcilionts be of any religious order , beforetheageoftwernty yecres% not”
men bcforethe age of. fiveand twenty ;vntil}-whichrinnethey mightdifpoſt
of:cheir-goods to: whbav they pleaſed ;(cxcepr ro rho Monaſtery /thathe

Eeeleſtaltiques ſhouldnor recenteEegacies) or any thing Jeft vntothuq or

given thetrbyplaſt willoi7And orher. things alſo were Uridiined',' for Better

reſprmation-of the Chuirghi/and bf the Clerpie'; "which hon Zh ey were
not: then publiſhed, y@che-Nantioſcntthetictothe Popertah8 that
gouctnedFrance , thought itfufficicnt ro gius farisfaQtion tt ſThew 6#ly.'to

| choſe

SOFT OFS

=_

%*

L1ss. | | the Councell of Trent. we 443

ll.

— —

thoſe har required a reformation, nor caring that any thing ſhould be exe- 1561
cuted. TIN

. of -2 : . . =_—
But , on the contrary , the Kings Diuines in Spaine did not approoue the Faxomany,

recciued him inthe Kings Hall, and as Ambaſſadour of the King-of Nauarre, che Kings tal-
thinking ir preiudiciall ro his poſſcſhon of that Kingdome, to which hee had

no title but by the excommunication of Iulizs the ſecond, and becaulc hee

gaue audience ro Monſtenr de Cars, who cameto intreat him in theſame Kings

name, to bea mcanesthat the Kingdome might be reſtored ro him or ſauil-
factiongiuenhim, and had promiſcd his paines hercin. The Pope ſent the

Biſhop of Terracina, expreſlcly , into Spaine, to iuſtific and excuſe what hee For uikich
had done in fauour of the King of Nawre , and to expound , as it were by the Pope ſen-
occaſion, the meaning of the Bull, To thoſe that were afraid , in regard of mp aryw |
the contrary opinions of ſo great Princes , hee anſwered, that as a louing

father, hee had inuiteda!l , burthat hee eſteemed the Proteſtanits as lolt,and

that the Catholiques of Germanie could not adhere to the Councell without

making a ſeparation from the others, and raiſing a warre: and ifany Ca-

tholique Prince would forlake him, hee would proceede by his owne au-

thority , as did Inlivs the third , without che French King. But hee told his

inward friends, that heaccounted all theſe troubles to be indifferent, - in re-

gard, not knowing theiſſueof them , hee mightas well hope fora good ſuc-

ceſſe, as fearc a bad., In the meane ſpace: hee ſaw that hee receiued ſome be-

ncfit by . chis yacertaine Counccll ,- -becaule it ſerued him as a bridle for '_
Prince and Prelate, inattempting any nouitic , and fora colour todenie vn- ty o*$Coun-
plcaſing fuirs, layingthgr the Councell becing opened, hee ought ro proceed 198 298
warily , and with reſpect, and notto be prodigall in beſtowing graces and ſome tice.
fauours: 'and when any great dithculry did ariſe; hee did referte it to the -
Councell. Opey he was afraid that the bad affetionof the Proreſtancs to: . -
wardsrhe Church of Rome, inighe cauſe ſome cxcurſion/ into Tralie , which owns
would bee deriued wholly vpon himlelfe ; and hec ſaw an ouetture- thereof #"< =

tweene the -_

by a difference of. precedence bervyeene the Dukes of Florence and Ferraris; Pukesof 71+
who deſcended xo ynciuill termes. Coſma Duke of Florence, ſaid hee hel Fo-ars. ,
the place of che Florentine republique ,, which was uct preferred before the

D akes of Ferrara. Alfonſo, Duke of Ferrera, pretended that the Dukedome'

had continucd inthe houſe of his progenitors for many ſucceſſions; where-

as Coſmowas the firſt Duke of Florence, whole precedencie could norbe main-"

rained

4.44. The Hiſtorie of | Ls 5s
1561. taincd bythe rightof the Republique, becauſcit wasno more in being, This
> Duke was fauoured by Francis,as couſin to Henry the ſecond: and brother in
Fptaxy. law tothoſe of che houſcof Gwe. The other grounded himfeltevpon a fen-
Fnanran, tznce of ( barles the fifth, in his tauour. , Afonſo made inltance in Germanie_,
9559: chat the Emperour, with the Electors, would beciudgeofit ina Diet, The
Pope thought it dangerous that the Diet of Germany ſhould giue ſentence!
concerning {taly, which did: by conſequence import an execution,and dan-

cer of Armes. For remedic whereof, he wrote to beth the Dukes, that it be:
longedonely to the Apoltolique Sca, and Vicarof Cyr1sT to giue ſentence
in ſuch caules, commanding them both to ſhew himtheir proofes, and ro ex--

peCt his determination. And to be prepared-for-all events, hee tefolued to
fortificthe Calt]c of Rowe , and the Citic Leonina,commonly called *Borgo,
and other places in Js State, as hee thoughtconuenient,and impoſed ataxe,'

of three Iuly, vpon cuery mealure of corne called aRubie., throughour his
whole Terricory. And notto giue caulc of icalouſtc to Princes;heicalled che
Ambaſladours ofthe Empcrour , Spaine, Portugal , and Uenice, to whom hee

imparted his determination, and his reafons, commanding thera to aduer-

riſe cheir Princes of it; and ſ{ayd, that the Subſidie Jayd vpon his Subicets'

would be but {mall, Icfle then thar which was impoſed by Panl 4. when hee
commandedrthe celebration of rhe Chaire of- Saint Peter; becauſeby his im-'
poſition,the poore mn paid burehree Julia yeere,bi.r by the Fealt of Paul 4.

did loſe tiuc,and that dayes worke. |

ThePopeap-, Thetime prehixed to beginthe Councell approaching, the Pope, not to
Ne: failcin any thing that was to bee performed by him, deputed Levate to pre--
Councel.  {1de, Hercules Gonzaga,Gardinall of Maniuzs, aman eminent, in regard ofthe
oreatneſſe of his houic,of his brocher Ferandus,and of his owne vertue.. Hee |

vicd the Emperour to periwade him to accept, and was confident of his

worth and dexterine.. To him hee toyned Jacobs * 7 utes, of Nizza, an cx.

cellent Lawycr, who was excrciſcda longtime, firſt in the Rota, and then in

the Signature; laying that hce purpoled to n:ake three more, ard thar ; If hee

could not finde able men in the Colledge, hee would create new Cardinals, '
Diuines, and-Lawyers, men ot honeſty, torthis imployment. And hee cal-

led a Congregation-of Cardinalsand- Prehates, ro giue order fotll things
neceſlary for the beginning of the Councell in Trent, atthe time appointed :

_ and .lctters, came very fitly from the French King ;-and', in confbriniry of
eth the Bull, then, his Ambaſſadouir,) Meanſicar of Angoleſme; did declare vnto hint, that |
- he wascontent with the Coincch vpon any rearmes, being dcfirousts ſee the”
cect of it ,and that fruit vwhich all Chriſtendomne did require. Atd He {ent |
Mouneeur de:Rawberletcxprefiely 'vnto him, to make the ſame reguel};*arid-
ro repre{cahynto himahe:nceeftnies of France. ,.and totell bim'of the ine:
{tance made;#prohinvhercin, by the States afſembled in Orliens Ar" "s

* 4 " mw — —_+
_ «ip *
K F.
Tor

voto him, shatsif thisremedic were not quickly applyed,becthould htc con
ſtrained to recciue.amedicine.inhisowne Kingdome?byWi- Aﬀertbly of”
his Prelates; in regard-there wds is' meanes-tocompolerhe differences of
Religion, butby a free Generall Coancell; or j/in deft thereeF, bya Natio- *
nall,. 'ThePopeanſwered that nonedid defire the Councel motethenbime'?
(cltc, thedelay whereof proceeded nor from hmm, but from the ditiets 6pi<*
nions

P

L 18.5. "the Councellof Trent.

——

nions of Princes, for whole ſatisfation he had giuch ſuch aformeto the Bully x56 x
as ſeemed molt firto conrentthei alli They changed theiropinion in France, fOory

-

becauſc,, becing in as bada Bare as might bee, thoughtchateuery mutation F
made elſewhere would better their condition. Me TY

Viterbo wrote out of Spainethat theKing did approoue his propofirions, C22%** 2
and that, after ſome conlultation with his Prelates,. was finally reſolucd ,,;;, .,..
to accept the Bull , without makingany dithcultic,and to ſend his Prelatesas + Kngot
ſoonc as the (eaſon was ticfor trauell, and an honourable Ambaſlage, to affilt _

in the, Councell.... Hee ſenraduiceallothat the Przlates of Portugal were al-
rcady parted from their houſes, and that the King would ſend/an Ambaſh-

dour; but that he had perceiued that ſome of thoſe Prelates had a purpote, Thic Pope is
; trouble wich

that the {uperioritic of the Councellaboue the Pope ſhould be defined/i the yew 5rne of
Synode; which pointthey had ſtudied, and cauſed many Diuinesroduethe f*72t4s/

| Duwines,

like. The Pope was troubled with this aduice, and confidered wharthee
. might looke for when the Prelates wereafſembled in theCouncell, and did
rreate altogether , who ad ſuch high choughts before they parted from
home, and fearcd that the King and his Counlell had a finger 1n ic; Yeryas
a wile Prince , hee conſidered , that when the Councell was held:; not that
nouitie onely would bc propoſed, but many moreto the difaduantageof'o-
thers as wellas of himſclfe: ſaying that cuery weight had his counterpoylc;
and thatof thethingsthat are attempted, not one in a thouſand docth take
clicct.
Hee was more attcntiue tothe enterpriſes of the French-men, asbecing
more imminent, and ofper[ons who are not flegmaricallin refoluing,as the
Spaniards are, 7 hereiore hee imparted to rhe Ambaſladour euery aduice
that came vnto him , and tola him in diucrs conferences, thatthey were nor
rothinke of Nationall Councels,afſemblics,or Colloquies, in macrer of Religi-
on, becauſe hee could not but eſteeme them all for {chiſmaricall; that hee
prayed the King not to vic thoſe remedies, which would certainely reduces |
France,notonely intoa worle condition, but inrothe worlt-of all ; chatrhe
difficulcics of Spaine- being remooued, the Councell ſhould-cerrainly be-ce
lebratcd , becauſe thoſe which doc continue in Germarie. are mor confiders
able; that the Catholique Princcs and Biſhops will conſene; andperbaps rhe?
Duke of Saxonie allo ; as hee:hath made ſhew , by ſeparating himſclfe from
the others aſſembled-in Newnburg ; that hee hoped" the Emperour wduld:
alliit perſonally, if; there were neede , as himſelf did 'promiſctoidoe; if hee:
thought ic fit, wherein hee would cor ſubict himſelfc ro the iudgergeritof

&

any but/himſclfe. | repiil v | TSTNL 'tr#hth |
Ealterdrawing ticere, which timewas appointed ro-begin the Councel},

#

| Cardinall f Je1 ” '\nee 1s; $5 ar. er MEE, falleth licks,
and Car Puaters being, yery ſicke,iheeput in-hisroomeFri olamie, alc banks

Cardipal Seripanda a Diuinc of much fame, and cauſed him ro depirr prelenol,; cn i
ly,andzo paſſe by Mantues} taking with him theother Legateyandro beeay rs — *

Trent arthe time appointed,” Notwithſtanding whichicommaridementithey
came notthither vnul the third feaſt ofthe rcſurretion;and foundchere nine |
Biſhops-who were arriued before them. The Pope wab ddigenticomakerthe:
Iralian Biſhops pyt theraſclues in order; and thereforewrote ctheEnallenars!
tothe Vice-roy of Naples,and'to his Nunciorhereandcauled his\bmikltersts:

js - I periwade

446 The Hiſtorie of Lis. 5.

of 561 qperliwaderheBiſhops of the State of Milan, to bee ready for their iourney to

© wh the Councell , as ſoone as might be. Hee defired alſo the State of Fenice to

Faxomanv» ſendthe Biſhops of their Territories in Italy, of Candia, Dalmaria, and Cyprus,

Eimmeeru, With all poſſible expedition,and to create Ambaſſadors, to afliſt in the Coun-

Cnants5 9: cell,inthename of that Republike, The Italian Prelars werenor cafily mo.

The Talan uced, becauſerhey knew he beginning could not be before theconſent of the

nor foaſty Emperour did come: which was ſtill prolonged, becauſethe Spaniards and

Eg as 5 FrenCh-men were expected , before whoſe arrivall in Italy they thought it ſu-

Pope would perfluous to, goeto Trent, And many of them , eſpecially the Courtiers,

could not beleeuc but that the Pope did counterfeit. Burthetructh was thar,

being aſſured he could nor auoide the Councell, hee did defire to ſee it quick-

ly. Hceefſaid he knew whar incouenience the prolongation did caule, but

- knew not what the celebration might doe : and thought that the enemies of

his owne perſon,and of the - wm ry Sea might dochim more hurtin the

rime of the expeQtation,then they could doe inthe Councell it ſelfe. And be-

ing ofa reſolute nature, hee vicd the Proucrbe ; It is better toprooue the cuill
oncc,then alwayes to feare it. |

TheDuke of While theſe dcelayes were vicd, the Duke of Sauoy madea compoſition

om With the Taldenſes of the Valleys of Montſents. For, hauing made more then

r compolinon

pub ens a yeeres tryall to reduce them by puniſhments , and, after they ſtood ypon
Xen; their guard,as hath been ſayd, maintained Souldiers againſt them , for which
the Popedid aflilt him with money , howſocuer they proceeded rather with
skirmiſhes , then any ſer warre, becauſe of the craggedneſlcof the Countrey,
ct,atthclalt, theycameroa formall batraile, in which the Duke had a grear

By reaſonof OUCTthrow, loſt ſcucn thouſand men,and (lew but fourteene of the enemies :
2grearouct* and although hee did often repaire his Army , yet he hadalwayes the worſe.
Fhercforcconfidering hee did nothing but make his Rebels more warlike,
conſume his owne Countrey,and ſpend his money, hce reſoluedrto receiue

them into fauour, and made an agreement with them , the fifth of Tune;

in which hee pardoned all faults paſt , gauc them libertic of conſcience, a(-

{1gned them certaine places, where they might make their Congregations,in

other placesgauethem leaue to comfort the {icke,and doe other ducties of re-
ligion, but norto preach; gaue lcauc to thoſe that were fled toreturneagaine,

and reſtitution of goods to thoſe that were baniſhed. It was agreed al{othar

the Duke might ſend away which of their Paſtors he pleaſed, and that they

might prouidethemſclues of others ; that the Roman Religion might'be ex-

exciſed inall places,butno maninforcedto profeſſe it. The Pope wasmuch

hk giacch diſtaſtcd thar an Italian Prince, afliſted by him, and not ſo potent but that

.

Pope. heemight {till hauc ncede of him, ſhould permit hercrikes to liuc freely in
\ his-ſtatez and theexampledid trouble himaboue all, becauſe it would be al-
leadged tohim,by greater Princes , when they would permit another religi-

4 on.  Heemadea bittercomplaint hercof in the Confittorie, comparing the
miniſtersofthe Catholique King with chat Duke , who having at the fame

+ time, diſconered three thoufand Lutherans, who: went out of {oſenzu'y-and
retired themſclues ro themountaines , to liue according to their dorine,did
hang ſome; burncothers,and putthe reſt into the Galleys ; and heeexhorred
all the Cardinals to thinkeof arcmedic. But there was great difference be-
=; TWeene

YE

þ 184% the Counclll of Tint. 147

eetcpodppretiing a few dilarmed perſons; farre frombelpe ;arid'ouerconts 156 |
migg;a Sreatnumber of armed-men inaplace advamagious for them; with OS
perene-fuccours ar:their ſhoulders. Tho Duke ſetittoiiuſtifictiiscaule / 2nd Findinias:

7
1, ho.
i . — —

4 the Popo,not able tro-anſwcre/hisreaſons was' | ciffed., 2, nouliohcor l Prornny
-- In-Fmnce, chou the Queene and Prelates did defire to fattsfiethe Pope; _ E:

in referting che canfob of religiomrothe QCotncell, yera,congregatioiof the Who ws pa-
Prelates was putin order : 12 which, howfoeuer the Atibaſſadouraſſured the Dow.” 7
Pope, that nothing ſhould beelſpoken of doftrine3416f tiny thing pretudiets game wat
all cohisatchoriryjbut anelya courſe ſer downehow!to pay:che ings debes, no twngs 9
to prouide againit ſome abuſes?) iand to confalt whar was'to bee Handled in Pros in
the generall Councell, yet his Holineſſe was norlarisfied, yea was'ef opinion
rhatchcy thought, that roprouide againſtabuſes}, 'was'to hinder the'profity
of the-Caurr, and charcoconſultof the Councel, was to ioyne with the Spa-
niards.( whereof hoehad ſomerincelligence)/in the poinr of the ſupreatrie
power of ehe Councell, cucn ouer'the Pope.- And, by reaſon of rhe difſenti-
ans betweenethe Grandics of the Courr,fpread alfo ouer all the'Proninces be-
cauſe cucry one ſought to increaſe his faction , there being a greatliberry of
ſpeaking; the profeſſours of the new religion wereplainely diſcovered, and
protected by the greatelt abourthe King, with much indignationof the Ca-
tholiques.': Whereupon there were contentions atid diſcords throughout
the whole Kingdome, calling one another, in ſcorne; *Papiſts, and Higonots,
the Preachers making the people-rumulcuous, and cuery one having divers
cnds. He plainly ſaw, thatif the Carholike partic had nor all the fame ayme,
ſome great inconucnience would ariſc;for preventing whercof,andto croſſe
thoſe defleignes,, he rhought it neceſſary ro hauc-a Miniſter there, a man of
authoritic,and nota French man, who would hauemoreinterelt in che king-
dome, then inthe ſeruice of the Apoſtolique Sea; and refolued ro fend a+
Legaterhither. Andcafting his cycvpon all the Cardinals, heemade choice Imowhich
of Ferrara in whom all neceſſary qualities did concurre; ſingular wiledome, fndetor |
dexreritic in negotiations; nobility of birth, being allied ro the Royall houſe' Ein vs
of France, brother inlaw to the Kings great Aunt,daughter of Leirs the 12, 7oro*
and ſo neere a couſin rothoſe of Guiſe, ( the Dukes wik being the Cardinals
neece) that they could norchufc bur fauour him, in regard of their neer=nefle'
in-blood. He gauc him foure particular Commiſſions; to fauourtheCatho- , |, . .
liques, and oppolc the Proteſtants z ro diuert the National! Synode, and himiouc |
aſſembly of the Prelares; to ſollicite the going of the Prelatesro the Coun-
cell; andtocaule ati abrogation of the conſtitutions, made in matters Ec-
cleftaſticall, -- 11832 12210 2.280 TOI "D-.-
While the-Legate waspreparing to goe, there fell outan accident which
made the Kings neerelt friends fearethe Catholiques, as much as the Prote-. -
ſtants. For the fourtcenth of Iuly, Arthirus Defiderius was apprehended \muppiicuen
necre to Orleans, who was ſent into Spame witha Supplicarion, written in {n* = of
the name of the Clergiz of France, in which they demaunded rhie aff1 '5/--.
ſtance of that King againſt the Proteſtants , becauſe they could not bee
ſuppreſſed by a boy and a woman, with other more ſceretiniirudtions in
cipher, to be imparted to his Maicltie, This mari being impriſoned, and in-
tcrrogated of the confederates, diſcoucred ſome; whomitwas dangerous ro
Pp z make

nt. Mis

£7 — ws. * "St - — ea

—

 — > condemned him tomake honourable (arisfaction , rotearerheſupplication,

Pivs 4,

- of Hiugonvtes and Popiſts, ordaining tharno man, vndetprerenceofidiles-
ENS « UcTing the Congregations for religion, which were forbid thould'cneer with

makerh an or-

dinaionin - rgany or fewginto another mansbpute ; tharthoſe who werein priſon forte-

tauour of the

Prowitanes,? Jigjon ſhould beſet at-hbertie, anditbat thoſe which flcd, fince thetime of

of monegy:4 1 1. cit! 3 dg 15119 |
Bur notwith{landingall theſe oppofirions, the Edi&t was cxecured ; ſo

_ againſt. 3. Thatthey ſhould bee puniſhed by the Eclefiaſticall Courr,for-
bidding their Congregations,cither publike or priuate,and liberry ro preach,
or adminiſterthe Sacraments, but after the Romane faſhion, - In concluſi-
on,they tooke a middle courſe, and made an Edit, whichis called the Edict

The Evi of of Tuly. T hat all ſhould abſtaine from doing iniurics, and liuc in peace;
uly, Hg

that the preachers ſhould not rayſe rumults, vpon paincof death ; thar none

ſhould preach or adminiſter the Sacraments, but according to the Romane

Rite ;thatthe Eccleſ1aftiques ſhould bee iudges of herelic;thar if the perſon

guilty were deliuercd to the Secular power , no greater puniſhment ſhould

Pee inflicted then baniſhment,and this tro continuetil{a Generall or National

— Councelldid determinc otherwiſe ; that allthoſe who hauc mooued any tu-

mult, forthe caule of Religion, ſhould be pardoned, lining hereafter in peace,

A Ceteguie is And like Catholiques, Afterwards treating bow-to accommodate the con-

_ rroucrſies, it was ordained that the:Biſhops ſhould:meere in Poif;, the tenth

of Augult, and that the Proteſtant Minitters ſhould haue a Safe Condutt'ro

come thither, "This was contradifted by many of the Catholiques , who

' 1... Fnought it ſtrange, diſhonourable, and dangerous to purthe Religion of

Cardot Le. Their predeceſſours , recciued yntillthat time, ro compromiſe, and inha-

rein ner Zard, Bur they yecldedat the laſt, becauſe the Cardinall of Loraine promi-

fucemeber ſed largely that hee would confure the hereriques ,and rake the: bu = vpon

| imſcife;

L 15 lid Corneellaf Trent. 449

himſclfe;, whereinj hee was alblied by-rbe Queene;; who, knowing his 156%
delre, tg,make glientgrion ofchis witte, was ivillingito gine/him' farifa- {5
cio, non 5d 1603 INGO} T2143 17 6 9030 9967D 013 40}, 114 Firbinine,
' The Pope had npwet at ionceot thele two-Edidts3:in which hee found +:#/455rs)
ſomething ro;commentt , andfamerthung ro blames blec-commended the KA
Parliamegy,for maintaining thegauſcof religion; and blamed itjberauſe hey
had ordgred incontrary tothe; Decrcrals:; nor roprocerdroany grearereen-
ſurechen-banifhmenteHis conchuſion waszthat whenthe maladiciiigros-
ter chenahgremedic,itought to be:made lightotby-patience.: Bivrheinuni
 ncar danger of the .aſſemblyatthe Prelares;eſpocially rogerher wirhthePro-
teltants, he chought way intolerable, and faid;he woulddocchebetthecould
ro hindep je; wherginitt he ſhould;nor becablezo preuaile, yerheo way wich:
our fault,,, 'Thereforg he treated eftettuallpmich the:Ambafiadouryand:with
the King, by. his Nwxcio; that, ſecingithe Aſlermbly'could nor bee 9mitred;yct
at the lcait the arriuall ofthe Carthnall:of' Ferrara mighrbee:expettct, thac
bceing made.in prdlenge of an;Apdſtolicall legare, with/abſoluteianthori-
* tie, it mightbce lawfull, Hee wrotcalſoro thePreldrs,thartheirpower did
not extend ſo, farreas to make Decrees in-matter of Religion, or Ecclefiaſti-
call diſcipline, and. chat if they went beyond their bounds 5 heewould not
oncly makeall yoyd ,; bus! proceed againtt'chem with/ all ſeucrity: » Neither
the Nara nor the Ambaſſadonr could preuaile; imregard:thataor anely rhe
Popes adverſaries did appofe,bur cuen the Cardinall of Loraine hirafelfe,with
his adherears; and.ic was roldche Nuncioin the Kingstame , 'rHar thePope
might re{tſecure', becauſe nothing ſhould beerefolned on, but.by the opink
onoft thr Cardinals. , wt hd” COLI þ 13 78 epittchs ol>d3 5 IOTV
_., But, foxall chis , cheafhiresofche Church did precipitate : and*ift1' RM The Councel
it was thoyghc to bee agrear. fill, that there! being acontroucrſikigiptece: Katie,
dencicherweene the: Cardinais:and Princes of theBlood ; in the Aſſembly there
of the States continued in 'owoifes, rhe Kings: Counſell.did detefrnine'it —
again{},che:Cardinals', and the:Cardinals: Chaſtilon/and of Artyignae did Cds,
yeelde;rhough Toro, Lorgine, and:Guiſe departed; difdaining Hd evuroiu-
ring attheir Colleagues. And the Deputic of thethird/Order, whoſpake
again{tihe Clergie,,was beard-vvith applanie;;obiecting>ro thetwighGtahce,
and luxury, demanding bat al iutidictidirlhouldbeiraken fromthiem';and
the reucaewes,andaNationall Counccll held ;-wherein'the Kitigor Princes
ol the Blood {houlid ptefide ; andirhat-in themraticeariethoſe, whodocyot
receiue the Romiſkigoremonics, might aſſemble;and ptcxch, inthoprefetice -:o 1...
ofapubhke Minilterofthe King; chatic mighs'/plainly appearcthut'nothins | Reb pas
is done againſt him:} -,, WW WG 9 OLED 2211 36\1) (Cl Niaoy mga
Theygrearedal(o of applyjngto the:pubaliquoapatcof theBetleflaſticall
rcucnewcs and: many, other things againftictharorderand!thoihatiber of
thoſe whodid fauoiwryhe Protditatits;,did Rilkincteaſe, 2>The Cler3itto free
thcm(clues,, were forced to protitileto paythe'King fouyetenthsytercly, fot
{txe yecres yand lo the bumours Jiſier ed agaitt Ft | were quiered.' S And, The pope is
which was the greatelt precipicejthe Queene rate afonglecrert&thie PoÞel ih ales
datcd the fourth of Auguſt}, ſhewingichei tqmrinenotiatgers for che tiffe: (nyymoo bin
rcncesof Religion, andcxhortizig him to vis tome reavedic; ſhiefayd there mother.”
| ; P pÞ 3 were

- + JC 0

4.50 T be Hiſtorie of
1561 wereſo many ſeparated from the Church of Rome. , that it was impoſlible
2" to reduce them , either:by law or force; that many of the Grandies of the
F:zomane. Kingdome did draw others by their example ; that there becing none of

———

E.2azry them who denic the Articles of Faith, nor the ſtxe Councels , many did

- 2 96 2 aduilc to receiuc them into the Communion of the Church ; bur if this

did notplcaſc, andthat it (cemed better ro expe&ta Generall Councell, in the

meanc a , in regardof the vrgent ncceſfitic and danger of delay , ir was

neceſlary ro vieſomeparticular remedy,by making Colloquies of both parties,

by admoniſhing them to abſtaine from iniurics , contentions, and offenſiue

words,by clecring the mindes of thofe who were not alizncd as yet, taking

from theplace of adoration the Images, prohibited by Go D, and condem-

ned by S. Gregory; by remoouing from Baptiſme, {| pittle, and exorciſmes, and

other things, not io{ticuted by the word of Go D, to reſtore the vic of the

(Cupinthe Communion,and prayers in the vulgar rongue; that the firſt Sun-

day in cuery moncth, or moreoften, the Curatcs ſhould call thoſe who will
communicate, and, ſinging Plalmes inthe yulgar, ſhould, intheſfame alſo,

pray for the Prince, and Magiſtrates , for the falubrity ofthe ayre, and fruits

of the carth; then,cxpounding the places of the Euangelifts, and of S.Panl, .

concerning the Enchari$t , they (ſhould come to the Communion; that the

Fealt of Corpus Chridti (hould betakenaway ;becauſcir-is inſtituted only for

pompe z: that if the Latine rongue mult bee vicd in prayers , yetthe vulgar

thauld be added, for rhe benefit of all ; that the Popes authority ſhould nog

be diminiſhed, nortbe doctrine changed,in regard it is not iult totake away

the miniſtery, becauſe the Miniſters haue erred. It was thoughr that ſhee

wrote thelc things art the perſwaſion of John Monluc, Biſhop of Valence;

- wich toomuch French-hberty ;and they troubled the Pope very much,con-

* ſideringthetime, fullof ſuſpitions, when a Nationall Councell was ſpoken

of, and a Colloquie intimated in Poif. Hauing well conſidered all, he reſol-

. ued todiflemble, and not to anſwere, bur onely that, the Councell drawing

neere,whatfocuer was thought neceſſary might bee there propoſed, with at-

ſured hope:that no reſalution ſhould bee made but for the ſeruice of Gop,

and pcaccof the Church,

. Theſe occurrences did confirme the Popein his opinion, that the Coun-

cell was profitable both for himſelfe and the Court , and that it was neceſſa-

ry to celebrate. it for his defence, againſt the PR which wereand

might bemade. And hee ſhewed tokens of ioy , for the letters which came

butiecom- VNTO him, the 2.4-of Auguſt, fromthe Emperour , in which hee fayd that hee

forced byano- did abſolutely conſent ynto the Councell , and that hee did nor declare him-

fromche Em- [e]fe ynrill then , that hee mightmore caſily winnethe Princes of Germanie ;

F butnow, notbeing ablero docany more; heeprayed him to continue hiscn-

deauoursgn haſtcnivg the celebration. Hauing called togerher all the Am-

baſſadoursof Princes, and moſt of the Cardinals, {o that it was almoſt a

Conliſtoric, he ſhewed the letters rothem all, ſaying, it was worthy to bee

written in lettersofgold ; thatthe Counce]l would beemoſt profitable; thar

_  1t was nottobedeferred ; that it would be ſoyniuerſall that the Citic'of Trent

- would not becabletgrecciucit,and that irwould bee neceſſary ro thinke of

_. tranllating itto aplace more large and ferrije. His diſcoutſe wasapprooued

| = by

L 1s. 5.

XUM

—_—
——

_—
nckon . ects

L1 B.5. | the Councell of Trent. 451 ig

by all chat (tood-by , thoughſome thought ir dangerous to nameche tranſla- I ;6t

tion in the beginning;in regard that cuery lirtle ſuſpitian might either hinder ov

or delay the Councell. Othets beleetied rhar rhis would nor diſplcafethe Fraps,

Pope, andthat hecalt foorth that word'ro opeti a gatewhete the difficulty £55750

might enter. BEES 0 0 IIEES011 11 Chotonng,
[c being not onely relolued, burgericrally knowen that note ofthe Dutch x

Prelares would come to Trent, and a doubr madealls, it regard of the (Colle- ©

quicinſtirured,, that the French-men would treat onely amongſtthemſclues,

and thatthe Councell would conſiſt of none bur Ttaliens , except forme few

Spaniards, the Italians were of opinion, that a few of them would ſerue the

rurne,ſo rhat many of them vſed meanes'to the Pope tobeeexcepred ; who

rold chem plaioly , chat he was aſfuredthat all the Fitramontans would come, Th< 16+:

full of hopes to ſabic the Popedome to the Councell, which being the excuſed from

common intereſt of Þalie., whereby it is ptcferred before other Nations, Eondci,tu
they oughtto go all thither forthe publike defence; that hee would nor ex- Gone:
empr any, but rathertakealt hope from them, faying,that they might bee aſe & tbe Pope-
ſurcd thereof, ſecing howdiligent he was inſending the Legats thither. For,

beſides rhe Cardinall of Mantua. and Seripando, hee had [cnt Sraniſlaws Ofires,

Cardinall of UVarmia. The nextday,hauing publiſhed che Emperours letters,

hee called a generall congregation of all the Cardinals, though it were Sun-«

day. Hee treated of many particulars concerning the beginhiiig and pto-
reſſc of the Councell ; and promiſed to afliſt thepoore Prelars with money,
bo vpon condition they ſhould goe thither; and allowed them bur cighr
daics tobegin their iourncy. He ſhewed how neceflary the Councell was,
in regard Religion was baniſhed, or cndangercd in ſome place cucry day;
And he ſpake the truth, Forin Scotland,inan aſſembly of all the Nobilitic of for res
the kingdome,it was conſtitured that there ſhould be no more exctcile of the halen back
Romane Catholique Religion. | wr vom
In Auguſt the Prelats did aſſemble in Poifi, whete they treated of the re-
formation of the Cleargic , without making 'any concluſion. Afterwards;
the Proteſtant Miniſters being come; in number fouretcehte, who were cal-
led,and ſecured byafſafe condut, amongſt whom Peter Martyr, a Florentine,
who came from Zuric, and Theodore *Bexa,, Who came from Geneua-, were
the chiefe, they gaue a petition-to the King which had foure parts. 1. That The coteguie
the Biſhops might not be Iudges in that buſineſſe. 2. Thatthe King with # 7
his Counſcllours would prefide> 5. That the controuerſies mighe be de-
cided by the wordof God. 4. That that which was agreed on, and dc-
creed might be written by Nortatics cleRed by both partics. The Queene
would hauc one of che foure Secretaries of the King towrite, andgratnred
that the King ſhould preſide; bur ſo, thatthis ſhould 'notbee committed ro
writing , alledging that ic was not fir for them, nor profitable fotthe King,
conſidering the preſent times, The Cardinallpf Lordine, deſired the Kings
preſcrice in the oo aſſembly,thar icritight be morefrequent,and ador-
ned, tomake oltcntation of his worth, promifmighitnſelfe a certaine yicto-
ric. Many of the Diuincs perfwaded the Queeno not to ſuffet the King to
bee preſent, that thoſe tender cares might notbe enaetiomed by peſtiferous
dodrine. | Before the parties were'called to the combat , the Prelats made a
proceſſion,

aid See.

_

© © She Bilwioof

f _—__

Li 'Bo 5
105. pe, and did all compmunicate,cxcepr the Cardinal Chaſtillon, and tuc
1,2, Bithops,, bs ouhgry.proteltcd.onete anceher,that they meant not to handle
F-nor.s% pouns gt gating, DRMAtters of Taith'ad 23! flv IT:
Þ:1242572., -. | npigcond ot Sepianberthey began, is preſence of.theKing),:Queene,
reros Princes of the blood, and the Kings Counlcllors , together with:\txeCardi-
- — als, and fpgiicBiſhaps.,lheKing,; as he-was jnfiructed; madean exhorta-
Kee WPB,\thatbcngafſlembled roremedic thetumylts of chekingdame, and to
nel Coprecthgrhingsthatgvere amiſkethe defied they thould nor depart, before
all diicrgnges were a@mpoled: , The Chancellor ſpake/morc at large to the
Tt 2140 the Kings name, and {aig particularly wthatthediſcaſe bes
ing yreens, did require apreſent gure 5: thatthe remediewhich:couldbee cx-
. 1 pected fragiuhe.Ganncel beltdes char. would bee flow ,' would:proceede
.. trop, mcn, who, being izangers, know. nor theneceſbtits of France, and
© arc, bound zafollowrhe Popes wall; thatthe GIS ncaa knowing the
© ..----necds of the kingdonie, and neere.thiblood;are marc firito execute thisgood
91% 4» Yorke ;; tafalhough the: Cou ncch:intimatrcd by: the POPE were held z yet
the like of, this hathibetne donemother ttmes,; and 4s notwithautexamplez
thatyiaghegume of Chatles thegzeat,many Councels wete held at once; and
thar,many twnes,the,crror of agecnerall Counce] hathbincorteed by a Na-

And the
, ji!

Chancellor lame.
# | Þ

at Lirpe.

tional, as Arianiſmecltabliſbed by the.generall.Councel of Arimini, was con-
demncdin France, by aCouncel called by S.HHarie; He exhorted all ro ayme*

attheſamecnd ,andithemorelcarngd not rocomemnerhar infcriors, nor

thiſcero cnuicrthoſeg tg /auoid carigus queſtions; not to bee aucrſe from the

Protchangs, who weretheirbrethreu, regenerate in theſame Baprtme, wor-

ſhippers.af the; dame.Cu Rk 15 T.; Heeexhorterhihe Brlhops to'treat with.

chew ogarteoully , leckivg ro reduce them, but withourteueritic ,tonfides

_ /ring thatrmuch was-atribured to then, ;ih that they were ſuffered tb: be Ind-

gcs 18 rhcir owne cauſe: ſaying, that this did conltraine- ther ra proceede

with finceritic , andthat, ia lo doing, they fhould ſtop the month off. their

aducrlarics,bur, tran{grelling.the office of iult Iudges, all would beiwvaine,

_ an&40,a0 purpoic, The Cardinail Tornon role vp, and, hauing thanked the

King, Queen, and Princes,for thealiiltance they aftoarded rotharaſlems

bly. faid tharthe Ghanceliors propoluo ns.vere of great importance,and nor

to bo: hanged z ar;apfwered: vpon;the lixdden, and rherefore detired they

might bgccommitted ro writing, the berzer:to, deliberate ypon thanx. The
Chancellgr,gid retuſe,avd the Cardinallof Larainedidvrgem. | inuo

The Queene .-, | Lhe Queene,, perceipitg thatthis was required by the rwo Cardinals; ito

TS draw mc-bufineſſeinJehgeh, g4uc order t0/' Bea tO [peake: Who, bamng

z-:0beyn. prayed 0D/his knee, apdrecitedthieprotehendt his faich, complained thar

thoy-wereaccounteditetbuleng g,and Sedirious ,. perrupbert of —_—

pcacc;thaugh they. had no aches $0d then the glory of:GoD, notdefired io

allcmblethgmlelucslaus.co feryehut:, and oÞcy:the Magiſtrarcs ;;appdmtcd

by hin). T hen be declared. ih-what:they dodgroe with che Churchot Rome,

and -in wherelcydifent, he ſpakeot fatth;,good workoes,of the authoritic of!

Councels, 4anues of Egelelialticall dilcipline;obedicncero Magiſtrareb/ and

who lewcth Of, che Sacragaents; and eptring rinto the matter of the Eucharit ;treofpake

>” . wid uchhcatc, thar he gaue buir all Tatisfaction ro thoſe of his owneparrie;

A PE lo

*

Fl

XUM

- _
th. tt. ——

L 18.9) the Councellof Trent. _
forhar hewas commanded ro conclude, And hauing; relented the (dnfeſſion L =_
othis.Qhurches, anddefircd.it might bee examined;;he madeatitznd. The FAN
Cardinalk Eornon, full ofdildaing;roſevpyand faid,tharthe Biſhops; eucn fot- 5

vs
FE8rDiNAND

_ cingtheit:conſcierices ; had Gonſented!ro heare: chiſe'new Exanygeliſts, fore- Ermiangy

ſceing they would ſptake many. iniuriousdiings agaimſt:God,andthiat burfor <#*->-»3 9:

the reſptt they bats: to the Kibg,/they would hauoziſed; and-difturbed the wieSeC

aſſernblyo: Therefore hee prayed his Maicſtic,notie belecue whit they had dihiner,”

ſaid ; beeauſe the Prelates would ilprooucit; ſo'thachee ſhould ſeethe diffe-
rence betweene the tructh anda lye, and demanded aidayes time toanfwere,
' requiring that all ould bec/ remooucd from thence; that they might not
hearethole blaſphemics. ; Wherewith'the Queene thinking her ſelte co bee
couched , anſwered, char'nottiing was done but bytheaduice of the Princes,
of thc Kings Counſel], and Parliament of Paris, novo change or innouate
any ching in Religion, but co compoſe the diftcrences, and ro reduce thoſe
that wandered inco the right way ; which the Biſhops were bound in wiſe-
dometo ptocurc, by allgood meanes.. 1-71 + w |
The aſſembly being difſolued;the Biſhops and Diuines conſulted amongſt
cthemſelues what ro doc. Some of them-wounld haue had a Confeſsion of Faith:
written, ynto which if the Proteſtants would not ſubſcribe;rhey ſhould bee
condemhed for herctiques , without any further diſputation. Which opi-
nion ſeeming too bard, afrer much diſcourſc, they relolucd to an{were two
of the-points propolcd by Beza; thatis,.of the Church, and of the Enchariſt.
The Congregation being afſcmbled 4gaine the ſixteenth of the moneth ,;the The Curd.of
Cardinall of Loraine, inthe preſence oftheKing, Queene,and Princes,madea {ins he”
long Oration, and ſayd ; That the King was a' member, not head of the <***liaes
Church ; thar it belonged to his care to defend ir, andthar, formarcer of do-
&rine, hee was ſubicct ro the Ecclefiaſticall Miniſters; that the Church did
not-containetheclect onely ,any yet could noterre; that when any particus
lax Chyrch is inan crrour, recourſe muſt be had tothe Churchof Rome; De-
crces of the general] Councels, conſent of the ancient Fathers, and, aboue all,
rothe Scriprure expounded inthe ſenſe oftheChurch; that the hereriques,
failing ia this, hauc runne into. incxtricable crrours;as the modernes, for cx-
amplec,in the point of the Euchariſt,in which, by. an incurablcirch of curious
queltions, rhey hauc ſed that which was inſtituted by Chriſt for abond of
ynion,to make an irreconciliable rent.inthe Church. And then he handled
this matter, and concluded , that, if the Proteſtants will not chavge their o- |
pinion herein, there is no. meancs of compolition. 4 |
When he had made an end all the Biſhops ſtood vp , and ſaid they would
live and die in that Faith; they prayed the King roperſcuere in it; additg,
thatifthe Proteſtants will ſubſcribe to this article; they will not refuſe ro dil-
pure the reſt; but if not, they ought nor to hauc any moreaudtence, bur ro
G chaſcd out of the whole kingome... Bez@-asked lcaucroanſwerepreſents To whom
ly ; but it ſceming not fitto equalizeapriuare Miniſter, to ſo great a Prince gin...
Cardinall, theafſembly was diſſolucd.. The Prelats were willing the Colloquie &1erand was
ſhould hauc beene thus ended; but the Biſhop of Nalence told themvit was
diſhogourable. Thercfore the foure and ewenticth day ir was aſſembleda-
gaincin preſence of the Queene,andthe Princes. Bezz tpake of the Chur - ahocber day.
; ; ar

o

__”eV
s |

%

_

4.54. The Hiſtone of 1; 1.5
I ;6t and of the, conditions apd authority thereof; of Councels ,: ſhewipg they!
6, >, may erres and che dighity .of the Scripture. ( lauders Efpenſens ari{wered;)
F:zocuaxe- that hee-hadalwaycs\defared a Colloquienn marter of Religion ,and abhorred'
Emu, the puniſhments which the poore vofortunarepeople endured:burhemuch
apy maruciled by what authority ; and by whom:che Protettants werocalled in-
Andis1n- to the Ecclefiaiticalt miniltery , who had layd hands onthem to makether!
cloud £- | ordinary Mimiters , arid, )ifthey pretended an extraordinary vocation 'whito?
Hen werethe miracles ro demonſtrareir.\ Then hee treated of Tradidions:” Hee'
ſhewed ,thatthere beeing a controuerſic of the ſenſe of the Scripttres, re
courſe muſt.bc had to the Fathers; and thatrmanyhingsare belecued by Tre”
dition oncly , as the Conſubſtantialitir. ofthe 'Sonne, the baptizing of infants;
and the virginity ofthe motherof Chriſt after his birth: Hecadded, that no
generall Councell was eucr corrected by anorhet in ee doQtine.-/Di-
uersteplics ard diſputarions paſſed on both {des , betweene the Ditines;
who were preſent. And, there being a great contention,the Card.of Londine
making a Mm reopated the matter of the Encharit,, aud ſayd;;thatthe'Bi-
ſhops wcrextlolute nor to proceede any further, if that Article were tot a-
reed on; and then demaunded of-the Minilters, if they were prepared to:
lublcribe rhe Auguitan (onfeſcion in that Article, ©Beza asked whether hee
ofed that in the name of all, and wherherhimſelfe, and the other Pre-
lates would ſubſcribe tothe orher points of that Confeſs1ons and receiving no
an{were either of the oneor the other, hee demanded , thatthart which was
propoſed to bee ſublcribed vnto, ſhouid bee pur in writing , that they might

conſult of it ; and ſo the Colloquie was pur off till the next day, |
Feafors, — 10 which" Feza, who began to ſpeake,did much proucke the Biſhops. For
kerhagaine,) hauing iuſtificd his vocation rothe Miniſterie, hediſcourſed of the vocation
kh he Bi-" and ordination of Biſhops, fhewing what Simonie was committed, and de-
"7% manding howit could beaccountcd lawfull. The paſſing to the Article of
the Exchar;ſt, and the point of rhe Auguſtan Confeſdon propoſed vnto him, hee
ſaid it ought to bee firlt ſubſcribed by rhoſe who did propoſe it. "The partics
-—— w_—y not being able to agree , a Spaniſh Teſute., one of the traine of the Cardinal!
tefure. of Ferrara, who was at the Colloguie, hauing reproched the Proteſtants, did
reprchend the Queenefor meddling in matters which belonged not to her,
bur rothe Pope , Cardinals, and Bithops. This arrogancie troubled the
Quecnes Patience; bur, forthe Popes ſake, and the Legates, ſhee diſſembhed.
Ancwcourle Finally, not being able ro conclude any thing by this manner of parlie, it was
ordered,thattwa Biſhops and three Diuincs , of themoſt moderate , ſhould
confcrre with fiuc of the Proteſtants Miniſters, to ſee if they could finde our
Whickdoth A Way to make anagreement,: They afſaycdto frame an Article of rhe* Eu-
wht goo* charift in generall termes, raken out of the Fathers, whichmight giue fariſ-
faction to both partics , which becauſe they could not doe, they concluded
the { oloquie. T his did miniſter much marter of diſcourſe. Some ſayd it
was a bad example to treate of errours once condemned,and that they ought
no lo muchas to heare thoſe who denie the foundations of Religion, which
hath continued ſo long, and beene fo much confirmed , eſpecially in the pre-
ſcnce of ighorant people ; and that , alchough nothing was reſolued againft
thetruc Religion, it hath made the heretiques bolde, and grieued the Ca:
tholiques.

%

Eos TL)

ii... the Councellof Trent. Ss 455

f EET PINA

tholiques. Others ſayd, ir would bee generally good to handle theſe con- 1561
rrouer{ies often , becauſe che parties would by this mieanes becomefamiliar; 5
maliceand other bad affeions would ceaſe, and many wayes of compoſi- Frzomaxs.
rion might be found; and that there was no other courſeto extirpate the c- trrpuntys,
uill char had raken ſuch deepe roote. For the Court being divided vnderpre- Comer
rence #f religion , it was impoſlible they ſhould be reconciled; excepr all ob-
ſtinacie layd aſide , they did tolerate one another, and take that cloake our of
the hands of vnquicrand turbulent people, with which they couertheit bad
actions. ENT
The Pope, vnderltanding that the (olloquie. was diſſolued without doing Wherysb hs
. . . © Pope is wcll
any thing, was very glad, and much commended the Cardinall of Loraine, pleaſed,
and Tornon more. Thezealcof the Icluite pleaſed him, and layd, hee might
be compared tothe ancient Saints , hauing, without reſpe&t of the King and
Princes maintained Gods cauſe, and ypbrayded the Queene to her face,
Oathecontrary, hee reprehended the oration of the Chancellour, faying, +.
it was hereticall in many parts, and threatned rocall him intothe Inguife- cellour of
' tion, TheCourtalſo, whenit was diuulged to them, was diſtaſted with ir, in pn
and conicCtured that all the gouernours of the Kingdome had the fame dif: P2ther nh
poſition coward Rome; and the French Ambaſſadour had much adoe to de- vernmens of
fend himſelfe. - | MT
That which hapned tothe Cardinall of Ferrara is not to bee omitted , as I'* nt

tainment of

being of affinitic rorhe matter whereof I write. That Prelate wasreceiucd ar ue
the firit by the Kiog and Queene, with much honour, and hauing preſented or
the Popes letters of credence', wasacknowledged for Legatcof the A polto-
like Sea, by their Maiclties, by the Princes, and Clergic. But the Parliamenr,
hauingdilcouered thar,amonglt his Commiſſions,one was, to deſire a reuo-
cation,or moderation,at the leaſt;of che things accorded in the States of Orle-
ance,the laſt of Ianuary, concerning the diſtribution of Benefices, and, parti-
cularly,che prohibition of paying Annates ro Rome,and ſending money outof
the Kingdome to obtaine Bencfices there), orotherfauours, did immediatly
ubliſh che Decrees, which had' not been puniſhed 'yncill thartime, vnder
the date of the thirtcenth of Seprember, L'96 the Cardinall might not ob-
rainc his purpoſe; and did relolue notto giuethe Legate leaue to vic the Fa-
culcies giaen him by the Pope. For the cultome of that kingdome is, that a
Legate cannot exerciſe his office,it his Faculties be nor firſt preſented, and'ex-
amincd in Parliament, and regulated and moderated by adecree thereof, and
confirmed in that forme by the Kings Bricfe ; ſo that when the'Bull of the
Faculties of the Legation was preſented, to'bec, as they ſay, approoucd, it was *
refuſed bythe Chancellourand Parliament, allcadging that it wasalready de- 4
termined not to vieany more'diſpenſations againſt the rules of the Fathers,
nor collation of Benefices againſt the Canons. Bur the Cardinallhada gre:
ceraffronr; intharPaſquins were made; and ſpread; both in the-Courrand
Citic:of Paris, concerning 'the loues of Lucretia *Bijgia; his mother, and
Pope Alexandertheſn, his Grand-father by the mothers ſide, with repert-
tion of the vbſcenitics diuulgedthroughonall Icalyin'therime of that Pope-
dome,which made the Cardinallridiculousto thepeople: 12 0TOT
The firſtthing. hee vndertooke was to hinder the preaching of the Re-
formariſts,

4.56 The Hiſtorie of a Be 5s
- 561 formatiſts, who after the(, olloqwie,did practiſe ir more freely then beforc,and
>>". vied perſwaſions ,andmade {ecret promiſes to the Miniſters. And becauſc
Frpinane. hee had nocredit withthem, in regard of his kinred withthe houſe of Guiſe,
Ezra. for which reaſon alſohe was held ſuſpected by all the oppoſues oftharfami-

CHARLES 9. |; . . . ,
—antn* 7: lic,to gaine reputation, he made acquaintance withthe Noblcs of the Hugo-

or em not fa&tion,and weatto their feaſts, and ſometimes was preſent ar their Scr-
Huzonots. MON 1N the habit ofa Gentleman. By all which he gained nothing, becauſe
Diſpleaſeeh Many thought he did iras Legate, by conſent of the Pope, and the Court of
he Cour of Rome was difpleaſed with his ations.

"FINE The Queene of France , vnderltanding that the King of Spaine tooke the
cher ſendech Colloquie inill part, ſent Iaques de Montbrun expreſly to him; who madealarge
12 Ambal- excule, that all was done for neceſſitic, and not in fauourof the Proteſtants,

dour into

Same andchar the King and Queene, withour ſpeaking any moreofa Nationall
lojure. Councell,were refolued ro ſend their Biſhopsto Trent, as fooncas might bec,
The King anſwered him in general] words, and referred him tothe Duke of
Alua; who, haaing heard his Ambaſlage, ſaid, thatthe King was ſory that,
11a kingdome fo ncere,and (o ncercly allied to him in kjored,rcligion ſhould
be ſo ill handled ; that there was neede of that ſcucrity which Hewy vicd , in
a Mercuriall Covgregation,and Francs in Amboy/e,not long fince heeprayed
the Queene to make prouifton, in regard, the danger of France belonging to
him al{o,hee was relolued by theaduice of his Councell,to:1mploy all his for-
14. C,and his lifealſo roextinguiſh the common pellilence; whereunto he was
ads woull follicited by the Grandics and people of France. The wiſe Spaniards thoughe
bucWiY £o Cure the maladics of Fland:rs , by the medicine of France; which were not

malaties of

Heir Ilſe, but onely were leſle apparant, and rumulcuous. The King of Spaine
emeof = could neucr makerhe States allenible, to obrainc a contribution or donative ;
o_ burprivateaſſcmblies in(, anbray,/alentia, and Torney were diſcoucred. The
Magiſtrate hauing forbid chem, and impriſoned ſome of them, they pue
themſclucs into Armes, with greatdanger of rebellion;andat ſeemed that the
Prince of Crange, and Count E-gment were open fauourers of them , cſpecially
The Princeof after that the Prince had-married Anne, daughter of Manrice , Duke of Saxonie
bam deccaſed : which did much diſpleaſethe King, foreſceing whar ifſuc ſuch a
ecrof 5 Duke marriage might haue,contrated by one of his SubieQs,with a Proteſtant of
ſo greatadherence. Yet the Spaniards ſpake as if Flanders bad becne found,
and hat they. feared infeftion in France onely, which they, would haue pur-
oed with warte. ; And the Ambaſladour was anſwered conccraivg the King
of Nauarre;of-whole bulincſlc he had Commiſhon to treate, that hee deler-
ucd nothing, for the ſmall carc hee had of religion, and that if hee would
haue fauour, he ſhould firſt moonewarre againit the Hugonors in France...

i Th= Queene allo excuſcd the ſame Colloguie to his Holineſle by clic Kings:
Ambaſladour in Rome,telling him,that,to putthe Hugonots to ſilence, who!
ſaid they were/perſccuttd before they were heard, and ro appeaſe rheircom-
motions , the King was forced to graunt them publiqueaudien&zinxhe
preſence of the Princes; and officets of the Kingdome,reloluingthathif they
would not be oucrcome with reaſon,he would after he had time to-puthim-
{e!fcin order,ouercomethem by force. She cauſed himalſo/to trearwith the
Cardinall Farneſe,Legatc of Avignion,ro reſigne thatlegation tothe Cardipall

"Bhs | ; of

L IB: 5. T | the. Conncellaf Trent. } A57-
af. Barkon, whereunto Ferneſe wiriz gruen confenr; the; Acbaſſadoc Ipake —_

of itro the Pope inthe nameof; him, andofrhe Kingof Navarrs,ſaying;thar * $6 |
his Holineſſe would be freed fram-chatgeand the Citic ſecured: fromttiefin: Panorrans
gonots,, who woiild got arteimpr oughcagainſtir, bripginthe protetionofa frmwnnry,
Pcince.ok the blaad.: :Natanely gholewho were gkiltull in theaffaires ofthe C2htt*'s:
world; bur cucry oncot ary micacio iutlfcment; kaow:rhatthis:wasidoneao Dy
takewithieaſc,the dominion of that Citie-from: Rome; and vniteir ro:Fadens;
Therefatdche Pope denied iv ablolutely,andirehavedahe propoſition in Con:
liltorie, as:if ſonic grear preindite had beene concealed' vndettir; which did
nor appearcatthg frſtifight. And bemuchcomplained of the\Queene ant
Kingbf Natarre, who hauing'often/firomifed him that norhingthould-bes
dong)im;France again{t his auchoritie; yorthey did fatour'! herefics, 'and wore
authors ofthe Congregations|lof che Prolares, Colloquies, and'of other preiu-
diciall ehings. Heſaid his gentlenefſe wasthbrequired} and gherefore, that hee
would begin the'Councell ſuddebly, &by.tneancs thereof, make known the
renexence which ſecular Princes:owe to the Churchi\Hevied che fame com-
plainrand threarsrorhe Ambaſſadout,who hauingxreplyedrharthedemand
of tha Legarion was r0.a goadcnde, and thatall rhe:aftions of'rhe Queene
were done with maturitic and juftice,added, thar the 'Countell was more
delired iby the: King then by-bis Holineſſe, hoping 'ir would proceede witl:
thc ſame cquitic and reſpect towards all 'Prinecs, normaking difterence of
chem, Heyled theſewords, to mocke the Pope, whohad granted alittle! be-
torc a great Subſidierothe King of Spaine;ro be paid by the Clergie,afrer he
had obtained of him the (imple. Annates. But the Pope, ſuſpeCting the peti-
rion ot 4utgnion;;and conſidering that the Vaſſals of tha Citric were all Pro-
reſtants fearing ir might bevſurped by theKing of Nauarre, didpreſently di-
ſparch thirher-Fabrieins Sorbellone', with two thouſand foore, rolye there in
garriſon,and gauerhe goucrnement thereof to Lorenzo Lenci, Biſhop of Fer-
1919,25/Yacadegare.. i: | >7) |

After)rhc{ /olloguzewas cnded;and the Proteſtants departed, the Prelats re-
mainedytqtreaiof rhe Subſidies ro be given to the King; whichthe Queene
thinkiog,would giue ſulpition roche Pope,in regard of his ofreti complaints
aſſured him that they remaincd onely ro conſult of the Kings debts, and that,
rhecongregation being ended, ſheewould immediatly/giueorderro the Bi-
ſhops topur chemſlelyes ina readinefle roggoeitorthe Councell,Notwirhltah- = |
ding they -treared of-the;Communion ofthe Cup, the Biſhop'of Yalence, x; ,..c
with conſentof che Gardinall of Lorayne, propoſing, thatifit were allowed, 77 about

,_ the Commus

the proſperous courſeof rhe increaſe of the Proteſtants would be interrupted, mon ot the
in regard that: many; Who doc adhere vnto them,aoe: begin ro belceuerhem oP

| from this: point, wlto would nor hearken 'vato them, if this' were granted *.”
fre:ly.by che Churciz. And thoſe who vaderſtood the affaires oftheworld
did'confider, that, by this mcanes, a fation wouldarile betweene the-Re-
formatiſts tKemſclues. Some few of the Biſhops thoughtfirir ſhould be con- ©
ſticuredby the Edi&; and immicdiacely executed; fayingrharthe whole Coiri- '*
munion was not-taken away by decree of the Church), but by cuſtome

only ,and thatthere is no Eccleſiaſtical decreewhich' forbiddeth thEBiſhops

to teturne co the former ye. But the maior part would nor confentic (hould

Qq bee

XUM

458 '{ be Hiftorie of Lrbi-9.

156 i bec done, butby grant,or,ac theleait, by che fauour of the Pope. Some few
__ would not agree to any.innovation, bur were forced to yceld to the greater
1VS 4. : . 'Y . Pg

Fazomax». number; This-was much vrged by Lorarne zwho, co obtaine the Popes con-

emnzzezra; ſcnrchoughtic neceſſary1o gaine the fauour of the Cardinall of Ferrera; and

wnin's, rowinhimtheberter, he pertwaded the Queenerto hearken to his propoſiti-

' ons,and to grant himfomething.:>The Cardinall bad proceeded fo {weetly

and c6urtcoully.withcuery one;cuen of the contrary religion, that hee had

-  gainedthcgood will ofmany who did oppoſe him ar the firft, And his nego-

RF Heb: being examined, it was granted, by. a*Briefe of the King, aduiſed

ienY.* thercunto by the molt intimate of. is Countell, thatthe capitulations of Or-

© cxercie bis [-ance concerning marter of Benefices:ſhou[d be ſuſpended, and that the'Le-

_  gar-might,exerciſc his Faculties; but fo, as that he ſhould firſt promiſe yn-

der hishand wrinng, that he would not vie them, andrhat he would bec a

meancs that the Cope: ſhould prouide againſt all the abuſes and diſorders

| which are committed in the collation of Bencfices, and diſpatches of the

Whichthe Bulls in Rome. Notwithltanding rhe Coancelor refuſerh ro ſubſcribe and

len okas, ſealethe Bri:fe,according to'the (tile of the kingdowe ;and, it being impolli-

ie bleroremooue him from his reſolution, it was tubſcribed by the Queene,the

King of Nawar:e,and by the Principal officers of the Kingdome:wherewith

the Legatewas content, more regarding the preſeruation ot his own honour,

th-ncheleraice of him.that (cnt him. For this fauour, he was content ro

th nke-well of the Catan)union of the Cup, and to writethereofto Rome,

The Aſſembly which he did with fueha temper;that ncitherthe Pope nor Court were di-

En laſted. In the concluſion of the afſemblic of ©7 oifie,the Prelares granted

role ci power totheKingtofell rocooo. crownes of the ycerely rents of the lands
mo of of the Chuch,fo chat the Pope would allow ir. + 31 BY

Cromaes, The Kinz gaue order ro his Ambaſſadour in Romero make requeſtforir,

ſhewing the neceſcity and vulity of the grant; which the Ambaſſador did,

jult rh: day before letters came to the Pope from the Card. of Ferrara, which

gaue him an account of the difficulties ouvercome,and how he had obtained a

ſuſpenſ1on at the capitulations of Orleance againlt the ecclefiaſticall hbertie,

and leaue to vic the Faculties of a Legate ; which things, he ſaid, were more

hardly compaſled, becauſe thc Cardivall of Loraine, trom whom he expeRed

TheLegz. fauour, had oppoled him from the beginning. And hemadea full narration

intormeth the

Pope tha of the {tate of Religion in France, (hewing the danger that it would bee

there are bur . R I 4 . |
ewo wayes © QUItC extinguiſhed, and the remedics to preſerue it; which were onely two.
preteruere®. Onc, tO giue ſatisfaFion ro the King of Nanarre, and-to intereſt hm in
Fraxce. the defence of it. The other to grant the people generally: the Com-
munion Sub vtrague ſpecie ; affirming that Ran ue 1h. 4 meanes, at the
wy Pep lealt rwo hundred thouſand ſoules would be gayned. The Ambaſſadour, in
dereth che CON'ormitie hereof, beſeeched the Pope in the name of theKing, of the

he Conema: Church of France,and of the Prelates,that they might be diſpenſed with 10
mono 52% adminiſter to the people the Sacrament of the Fuchar ſt vnder both kindes,
Fzac-men. as a profitable and neceflarie preparation,to dilpoſc them to receiue the de-
cerminations of the Councel! with readinefle, wihout which it is much ro
bce doubred that this remcdie will find raw kunicurs, which m7) cauſea

greater diicalc.

The

|
q

i
Y

———_—

L':s:5. the Councell of Trent. 459

; .., The Pope, according to his natural diſpoluiony ſuddenly anſwered, 1561
withour any premeditation , thathehad encrthoughthar theCommunion ;—
of bothkinds, and mariageof Prielts' werede iwre pofinind ; in thiedifpolition FavDmang, -
of which things hee had as much authority as the' wholewnigerfall Church : zrrtanurn.
and therefore. was thought tobeea Lucberan inthe laſd(onclaxe;: Thar che ©2hene *
Emperar had madethe {ame'requeſtforhis ſon, »the king of Bobemie, whoſe Wo gioch a
conſcience did induce him to be of this opinion;andhaddemandedthe like anrcre.
for the people of his patrimoniall Terricories, bur:tharthe Cardinals would

never. yeclde vntoir. Notwithſtanding hee ſayd hee would not refolucof

any ching without propoling ir firſtin; rhe Conſiſtory;; and :promiſcd to

ſpeake hereof in the next; which beeing; intimated for the tenth of Decem

ber,the Ambaſſadour, accordingtothecuſtome of rhofe.at whoſeinſtance

any bufineſlc is handled, went in che morning whilethe Cardinals wereaſ:
{embled expecting the Pope, ro mediate with:them;' The moſt: diſcreere
amongſt them anfwered , thatthe demand: did deſernegreart deliberation;

and that they durlſt not rcloluevntill they-had well conſidered of ie others

were paſlionate, as at newes neucr heard of before: The Cardinall'of Cueua

fayd,that he would neucr giuchis voyce in fauour: of ſuch a demand , and

that if it were ſo refolued by authority of. his Holineſlſe, and the conſent of

the Cardinals, hee would goe to the'top of the ſtaires of Saint Peter, and

crie (,miſericordias): with a loud voyce not forbearing to ſay-that the

Prelates of France were infected with herefie. The: Cardinall Saine Angelo
anſwered , that heewould neuer giue a Cap: full of ſuch deadly poyſonto the

| peopleof France, in ficad ofa medicine, and that it was better toletthem die;

then cure them with ſuch remedies. T'o whomthe Ambaſſadour replied;
that the Prelates of France were induced to bee of this opinion with good
grounds, and Theological reafons, which deſerued not ſuch a contempru-
ous cenſure ; and, on the other (ide, that ir was not fic to,giue the name of
poyſon totheBlood of CHR1sT, and to call the holy Apoſtlespoyſoners;
andthe Fathers of the Primitive Church, and of that which followed for -.. .....-
many hundreds of yecres , who, with much fpirituall profir, haue miniſtred _
the Cup of that Blood roall the people. BY

: The Pope, becing entred into the Confiſtory , hauing dilcourſed with Forwhichob
ſome Cardinals, and better thought of the buſineſſe, wiſhed hee had been a- > ni
bleto recall his werd. Notwithſtanding hee propoſed the martet , related
the Ambaſſadours inſtance,cauſed the Legatslerterrobeeread, and demaur-
ded theiropinions. The Cardinals who were dependants ont France , com-'
mended with diuers formes of words the Kings intention, bur, concerning
che requeſt , referred themſelues ro his Holineſſe. The Spaniards did all
oppoſe, and vicd great boldneſle of ſpeach, ſome calling the Prelates of

ance heretiques, ſome ſchiſmariques, and ſomevnlearned, alleadging no
reaſon but thatall Cyr1sTis in both the kinds. The Cardinall Parcecocon(r- -
dered tharall diuerſttics of rites, eſpecially in the molt principall ceremonies
docend with ſchilmcand hatred, For now the Spaniards in France goe to
the French Churches,and the French men in Spaine tothe Spaniſh, bur when
they ſhal communicate ſodiuerſly,one nor recciuing the Communion of the

 other,they will be forced to make Churches apart;andſo behold adiuiſion.

Qq Z Friar

— ——

4.60 \ The Hiſtorie of © | Lins

þ

1561 tha Friar: Mibael \ Cardinall of Alexandria, fayd tharit.could-nopby any
>>, meanes:be granted. yzhe Popete plenitudinepoteitatis;portor wanrofautho-

_ "7 | - : = . 9» 82 * +5 . | * » x ig
Fenvmane! riticin hida:oucriall whichisdteurepoſrivo, ih whichnuntber this isburin re- |

Euzanerns gard of. thirivcapaciticof hitn chat demaundeth the fauour. For the Pope
W232:='9 cannot giuepower toidbecnill but ir is an hercricall cuill ro receiue the cha-
-.:-14 lice; thinkwg iro bee pecelary; therefore the Pope cannor grant ir'1oſuch
"rh periops:.- And it tanhort bee:doubred| but that thoſe who demandit'doe
tudge it aeceliary,becaulc notpanmwakeath any. great matter of indifferent te-
Temonies. :Jdce ſaidthat: theſe! men doc'hald the.Chalice either ro bee necel(-
fary.; ornoq: if norywhy doctbey give! ſcandall) by making them(clnes dif-
ferfrom athers2 if othorwile, then they arc hereriques and yncapable of the
grace. 'The:Cardinall RodelpboProdi Carpi,; who was' one: of he laſt that
ſpake ;-betauſc the iriferiours doc. bogin, concluded in conformitiewith the
others, that nor oncly:the ſainng of: two hungred chouland ſoules , but one
onely was a ſufficient -caulc' to difpence witt.avy polariue-law , with' wiſe-
dotncand maturityi-but in-char-propolſition anc ought to: rake heede; leſt,
thinkivgito gaine two bundred thouſand, hce loſe rwo hundred millions.
'Fhatir- was manifcRt}, that.rhis wauld not bee-the laſt demand of theFrench

tncn inmate ofreljgipa,but a ſftepro propole another , thar afterward the
will demandthe marriage cf Prie{tsy;the vulgar rongue-in' the miniftery of
Theincon. The Sacraments : whick.will hauethe ſame ground, becauſe they are-de wie
uenience Of  pofirtuo, andmult be gtaniod forthe preſcruation of many, -Of the marriage
of Pucſts, of Priefts.this inconuemicnce will-follow, that hauing houſe, wife, arid chil-
dren , they-will nor depend onthe Pope, bur of their Prince, and their love to
their children will rmakethem yecld: ro any preiudice of the Church-i /Fhey
will ſccke alſo to make'the Benehices hereditary; andfo m a ſhorc ſpace; the
authoriticofthe Apoſtolike Sea will be confined within Rome. Before ſingle
life was inſticuted,the Sea of Rome receiued no profit from other nations and
Citics,and,by it, is made'Patron of many Benetices,of which mariagewould
Threineonue- Quickly depriuc her. , Of the vulgar rongue this inconuenience would fol-
necnce of the Jow , that all would thinke themſelues Divines, the auchor:tic of Prelates
* *. wouldbediſcſteemed, and all would become heretiques. If the communi-
on of the Chalice were granted , ſo that faith were preſerued,it would bec of
" "SR mall importance; but ir would opena gate ro demaund an abrogation of all
nience of che poſ1.1ue conftitutions, by which onely the prerogatiue giuen by CH Rr15sTto
efthe Cup. the Church of Rome, is preſcrucd, for by thoſe which are de ture divino no pro-
fir doth ariſe,but that which is ſpirituall. Fortheſe reaſons itis wiſedometo
oppolethe firft demand,not ro bebound togrant the ſecondiand all the reſt. -
Ti: Popere-  T he Pope, principally for theſe cauſes , did refolue negariuely ; and, ro
zrancrbe Cup Make his relolution the leſſe grieuous, hecauſed the Ambaſſadour robe per-
am © ſwadecd todefilt of his owne accord, who not conſenting, hee'caufed him
ro be intreated , that, at theleaſt, heewould proſecute it gently, inrepard it
w.s impoſſible to yeeld vnto him , for teare of alicuing all the Catholiques.
The Ambaſſadour ſtill proceeding, the Pope firſt put him off with delay,and,
inconcluſton,anſwered , that howſocuer he could, yer he onghtnerts yeeld
to his requeſt , becauſethe Councell was ar hand, vnto —_—_ hee had re-
ferred theEmperours petition, ſo heewould doc that of France , and, to gra-

tifie

——— _— -

-
—_— ——cÞQ. 7 —— — - - -
— =y
I...

L in. 4 the Councell of Trent, _ _ 461
tifticche King , would bandle char article firſt ofall;pard lodifparch itinj4s 1 561
licle cime as would berequiſiteto grant the /2mee withymaruritie?- The? Ari. CLINE
baſſadous repeating chis inftance in cuery audicheezrieFopeatded;that hee Finbiiuxs.
was ſurc; all che Prelates.did not make that-requelbzbecauſe thomaior pare rrimeages,
in the Congregation did refolue not ro ſpeake'of iri-taying thatthe name of ry
the Prelates of France was vied , whereas the-motioniproceeded)butfrom a |
few, and choſc incted” by others , meaning the Queene; acainſt'whom hee
| barealecrergrudge,for the letter ſhe wrorevnto bimzhe 2iof Augult 0
At the ſame time-when the Peririon of the French Prelates was publi- The French

relates are

ſhed in Rome, n2wes came our of Germanje; tharthe'/fame men had ſent'ts aeeiedin
the Proteſtanrs theregto perſwade them toperſeuercintheir dodtine, promi- 2,5;
{ing to fauour them in the Councell, - andzodraw.other Prelares todoe the

like. , This was digulged in Trentallo ; and: cauſed the French-men ro haut
burſinall reputation, both there among(t he ltalians; 'and'iin'theCourtr-of
Rome,where they were efteemed tobe men of anvnquier ſpirit, and deſirous

of innouation. And it was faid (as (ufpicionsdocal wayes addefomething}

in regard of the difputes which that Nation hath ever: had withthe Courr-——
ol Rome, in ycry important Articles, and of the preſenit-accidenrs,' that cer-

rainely chey would goeto the Councell , with no other'aime,/but onely ro {Me Nore:
cauſc troubles and innouations. "The Ambaſſador, that the popalar rumor t<;Counce!.
againlt his Nation might not makean impreſſion inthe:Popesminde, was

willing to ſecure him z who perſwaded him*jronically notto trouble hitm-

ſclfe, becaulc itwas not likely:; nor could bee beleeuc;thar ſo ſmallanum-

ber as arc the French-men,could thinke of ſo greatenterpriſes;and;ifthey did,,

that they ſhould finde many Italians who woald oppolc thera; ''Burche ſaid,

15:44

ucrcame, in perſwading: the Princes / who'wereof comrary opinions ac-
cept the Bull; his diligence in-fending preſemly the'Logates, andthole Pre-
lates with whom hee EY Tears nav” withiperſwaſiog#}br com-
maunds; tharall is already prepared'/by him! onely ;[feueri rioneths ſince;
andis fo chargcable|coſhim ,, thar ; amonyſt 'officersahdipoore Pretites;rhe
 Apoltolique Sea doeth ſpend aboue three thouſand crownes a monerh;; atid!
that experience (heweth tHardelaydocch bring' 0n noteeuperite;/thar the
Dutchimendocinuent ſomethingieucryday;o CLmwd opt") pon
neceſſary worke ; thacherefaeg doe! increalgity FranceJand (one Biſhops are
almoſt become rebiellidus,. bymaking abſurd petitions forthe Cup Fwhich?
they doc with (uctr violence, char the greaternuttibet{hoarogpod Carho-
| Qq 3 liques

XUM

 — X =_ — YT —_— —_—__ On ny

4.62 'noThe Hiſtorie of E r.5.

1561 liques, drefgrced toyeclde ; that all Princes hauc appointed Abaſſadours ,
"a that, therr areiſo many(Prelares- in Trent already , thar they are nor onely ſuf-
Eviaxy icicntigbtgipneghicfiynod, butarc more then were in any of thexwo for-
E1142zr4, MCC conuocationsthercof; andrhat nothing remained but ro beginne,with-
<22*** 7- out expeting;avy longer:: The Cardinals hauing conſented hereunto, and
Twoprer- Commended-his refolutions hee ioyncd two Legates more to the three for-
dents more 4 MCT, Lydouicus Simonetaz',agreat Canonilt , who had paſſed through allthe
forthe Coun- offices of the Court, afhd Marcus ds :4lremps, his {liſters ſonne. Hee comman«

'  :» - ded theformer todepartpreſcntly,and nocto tary any where in the journey,
and, ſo looneas heecameto Trentztocauſc the viuall ceremonies tobe made, .
and the Maſſeof theholy:Ghoſtro-beelaid for a beginning of the Councell.
Hee laidafterwards thatthe Synode was tocontinueſtill, not toterminate in
ſuſpenſions, or tranſlations's/as formcrly irdid:, with notorious preiudice
and danpes; bur ro haue. an abſolute cnd. For cfteting, whereof ;there was
no necdeto ſpend many moneths,in regard the moſt important points were
already determined and the refiduc was fo ſet in order, by. diſpurations and
examinatiohsynder Iulius ;that {earce any thing remained bur publication ;
{othatall would bedifparched:in-a ſhort rime. o
+ Simayetaarriued.inJrent theniuth of December, and, at his centric, ſawa
arcat firerile out of thecarth,, .yehichpaſſcd over the Citic, like vnto a fal-
ling tarre , but onely in bignefle; whereof. idle perſons, of which number
there weremany, madediucrs pronbgnoltiques , ſome prefaging good , and
ſome hurt, which would be a yanity'ro-recount. The Cardivall found ler- |
cers weittenaficr hisgeparturetbacthee ſhould expect a new commiſſion to
aryl opcn theGouncell. The Popecompelled ſome Biſhops who were at Courr
mi. atthetimg of his departure, ro. Joewuh bim ; ſothatthe number of all , be-
{ide the Cargdinals,was 92. -; 1»,
The Nuns, rclidenc in Fran , returned ro Rome. in the beginning of
Theo December - Who hauing relacedaþe fare of chat Kingdome,the Pope wrote
bis Legit ro the Legate that he ſhould reprefent ro the Kings Counſel! , thatthe Coun-
cell was tobe celebrated for Frauce onely , becauſe neither Traly , nor Spaine.
had neede ok, it, and Germanie did refule 1t; and te}l themthat therefore it did
conccrnethem to promote it; a thing neglefted by them, but performedby
him in regard of hisfatherly afte&tion ; andthat the Legares beeing in Trene
alrcady,,and manypotrhe lalian and Spaniſh Prelates, and the relt in their
journey ;they ſhouldiamediatly ſend an Ambaſladour, and their Biſhops,
Beſides, he commanded the Legar to yicall.diligenceto hinder the preach-
ing andaſſemblingob the Proteſtancs, androencouragethe Divuines ;giuing
them, Indulgences and-fpiricualli graces, and;promiſing/rthema ceinporall aſſi:
{tance alſs;;but thathimſclfe ſhouldgby nomcancs, bepreſcntatthe ſermons
of the Prozeſtants, apd;auoidall/banquets where any.of them wete in com-
- nanie. i 6 25nd) | — 11 acres hos \ .! | : »ip'lo! 0A
Tent  ArthelametimezhePolonianPridats carheroTreitz who, hauing viſired
comers the Legates,/and. ſhewed the devotion of their Churthto the Seaot:Romes,
related how the Lutherans: attempted to bribg theirdoRrine intothat king
dome, and the. foundations whigh were already layd inrfomerparts; to op-:
poſe whole plots the Bifhops: were alwayes tobe vigilant : thar I all
| . clirous

— — —— =>
. F %

.

277] (13907) £9

i»

*
=_ _ _ —
— di ———

Lis s. | the Councellof Trent. 463

deſirous toalliit in the Councell,and ro promote thecommon cauſe;which j «t

| notbcing able tro dos;for the caule aforeſaid, ſo important-and/neceſſarie; —YN
T1 ; : "CA! © Puvs "4.
they had {car their Pcoctors rogiute voyce, av it the,Prelats were preferit; Frxvnavy
And they demanded to haue as many voyces as they had'commiſſions' from F:jzingrd,
the Biſhops, who, for lawfull cauſes, couldnor part ouvof the kingdome; ©#2*= 9.

The Legats anſwered in generall rermes, meaning torefolue with mature de: Who defiets
vecas many

liberation: and the Pope, whom they had aduiſed hereof} propoſed ir inn woces:s:hcy
Conliſtoriezwhere the Cardinals, withourdifficultie, concutred-in the nega- fauecommy:

fions from the

tiue, becauſcit was determined before that the refolurions ſhould bet tnade Biſhops. =
ir rrque

as formerly they had beene, by pluralitie of voyces;; and not by Nations; isſ{n: to

Rome ; where

Which was therather thoughtto be neceſſary, becauſe there was a fame that i mscieete

the French-men , though Catholiques,came with Sorbonicall and Parliamenta: '* run

rie mindes,fully bent ro acknowledge the Pope no further then they pleaſed. corfequentes

And it was knowen before, that the Spaniards had ſome'humourto fobiect

the Popeto the Councell; and the Legatcs had often ſent adujce fromTrent, Thedclrignes

chat ſome bad ambitious humours,, to enlargethe Epiſcopall authority, were 975m”

diſcouered ; and,in particular,the-Spaniards did propoletbatitwas neceſſary Preares ue

ro reſtraine the authority of the Pope, ar the leaſt ſo farre as that heemighe *

nor derogaxe from the decrees of his Councdll, ſaying, that, otherwiſc, the

labour and colt would beall invaine,if,forſmall cauſes;and ſometimes with-

out any, he mightdiſpence with them, as he dayly doth withall the Canons;

The Cardinals ſaw no ether meanes to oppole theſe attempts , but bylſert- "FIPS:

ding a great number of Italian Prelates,who, being vnited together, will o- efecke Pope

uercome all the Pltranioncans. And this remedie would bee to no purpoſe, {ram

if che voices of the ablent were admitted. For the Spaniards and French-men [in 7

would caulc all their Biſhops ro ſend proxies, and-it would beas much as to 2 makea

giuc voyces, not by heads, bur by Nations. | Is 5 is
Therefore ir was written to Trent , that they ſhould make large promiſes

to the Polonians , bur conclude, that the Councell was a continuation;and the

ſame which was begun vnder Pawns the third, ſo-that the orders then practi-

ſcd,and continuately kepr , with good fruit, ——_— ,muſtbettill ob- --.

ſerued ;amonglt which one was that the abſent ſhould haue no yoyce;; with .-...

which if they did difpence, all other Nartiotis would pretend the like; - with'

much confuſion; that whatſoeuer requeſt Polonia. did make; for any thing 307,7rwn®

that was proper to it ſelfe,and would nor railc any ſtirres in other Countries, *9 Þ frivticd

- with a courte»

ſhouldbe grantcd in'regard of themerits of tharmoſt noble Nation. The ous negarive,
Polonians ſeemed to.bee {atisfied with theanſwere, yer pretending brefinefle at rnumns ©
Tenice,they departed; and recurned nomote.”': £47 UTTO 1015000 m0 |
Aletter. which the King of Spaine wrote with his' owne hand ,-cauſed +
much joy.in Rome. z':ih which hee aducrtized che Pope of the nevotfition of =
Montbrun, {catvoto.him by che Queene of France, and of the ai &rewhicly .
heegaue him, promifing to affiſt his Holinefſe ro purge Chriſtenddine of he- 74» 74-c4--

rel 15 Con-

rel1c, with all the forces of his Kingdomes and States, atid roſend* potetir and [img sy
ſpeedy aydes to any Prince that would cleanſe his Countrey: of that conra- ** Pry

ment of Pars

gion, [But the bad conceit which the Court had of the French-moi Was 'in- Reba
creaſed, by an aduice fent frony Paris , tharrhe Parliament had; with'much that he Pope
ſolemaitic condemned to recant -one Toby Tancheret;\a Bachelor gf Diuihi | Sg

ty,

464 | The Hiftorie of L1ss,
1561 ty, becaulc, with intclligence of fome Diuines , he had propoſed and defen-
"5 ag. ded publique queltions, that the Pope, TVicarof CHR18T, is Monarch of
Ezoman» the Church,and may dcpriuc Kings and Princes, who diſobey his comman-
EET dements, of their Kingdomes, States, and Digmties; who becing accuſed,
£22342 9: cited,and hauing confeſſed the fat, did flic , and the iudges , as ina Comedie,
eauſcd theBeadcll of the Vniuerſitic to repreſent his perſon, and to make a

*  publike ſatisfaction, and recamation, forbidding rhe Diuines to _ ſuch
ueſtiohs hercaftcr, making them goerothe King to aske pardon for hauing

luffercd ſo important a marrerto bee diſputed on, and to promiſe to oppoſe
themlſelucs alwaycs againſt that doctrine. T hey ſpakeof the Frenchmen as

Forwhichche of loſt ſheepe,, who denicd theaurhoritic giuen by Cart sTto S. Perer,
\Enctmen ro feede the whole flocke , and to looſe and binde , which doth conſiſt principally
ſuced in Rene jo, puniſhing the delicts which giue ſcandall, or offence againſt he Church
in common, without difference of Prince or ſubic&. Theexamples of the
Emperours, Henry tbe fourth and fitth , Frederic the firſt and ſecond, and
Lewis of Banaria,of the Kings of France, Philippus duguſtrs,and Pulcher, were

allcadged ;as allo the famous ſayings of the: Canonalts in this poynt: they

{aydthe Pope oughtto cite the whole Parliament to Rome; andthar the
concluſion of chat Diuinc ought tobe ſent ro Rome alſo,tu be examined be-

Bur the Pope FOXE 20 thingelle were done, and approoucd, and the contrary condem-

afemblch ned, ThePope did moderately complaiae hereof, and thought ir berter*-

+ ny todiſkmblc, becauſt, as hee ſayd, thegreat ſore of France did make this in-

ſenliblc. |
The Court was'pcrlwaded, that neither Ambaſſadour nor Biſhop would
be ſeat out. of France: to Trent, and diſcourſed what was fit for the Popero
| doe, toforce theni to accept thedeterminationsof rhe Councell, which the
' Pope wasby all mcancs, refolued ro open,atthe beginning of thenew yecre,
Hee imparted this detetmination to the Cardinals, cxhortivg them tocon(1-
der, thar-icdid not ſtand with the honour of the Apoſtolike Sea, nor of thac
: Colledge, to recciue rules and teformations from others , and tharthe condi-
omen tion of the times, whenallcricout for reformation,not vnderſtanding what
makearelor” iris, AA TRY UiIe, that inregard of the glorious name thereof, ir ſhould nor
—Cour., beercfuſcd; that,inthis contrariety of reaſons,the beſt temper was, to make,
by way of preucntion , a reformation of his owne accord; which would
not ſeryeto that purpoſe onely , but win commendations alſo, by making
himſclfean example co others ; that for this cauſe, hee would reforme the
| Penitentiary,and Datary, principall members of the Court, and afterwards
> MWg conſidcrofimaller matters : and he deputed Cardinals for oneandtheother
che opening ERATgEe. He diſcourled of the cauſes why the opening of che Councell could
1 no longerbedeterted.. For it being diſcoucred thatthe Vitramontans hauc bad
ends and, diſſeignes, to abate-the ablolute power which Go D hath given
. to the Pope of 'Ronegthe more time they hauc to thinkeon it, the morerheir
plots will cncreafe ; and that chere is danger, that, by time, ſome of the lea-'
lians way beegaincdallo ; tharthereforcit isthelafeſt way ro vie expedition;
and that,ifghe greatexpenices, which arc made in maintaining the Prelars ; be.

"*notquickly cnded,the Apoſtolike Sea, will not bee ablerobearethern. Aﬀccr-

' wards begauethecroſleof the Legationto the Card. Alremps , wittv order co:
| pur

XUM

XUM

*

RY...
0s

Li B.5. the Councell of Trent. | 465

————

ut himlel{e in readinefle, and to bee in Trent ar che opening of the Coun. 1x 561
cell, ifit were pollible. The cauſe why hee reuokedthe order, giuen ar the ” oor
departure of Cardinall Simonets, to open the Councell at his arriuall , was eo FINS
the in(tanceof the Emperours Ambaſlador in Rome , thatthe Ambaſſadours #75.55,.
of his Malter might bee preſentat ir. Burafrerward having aduertized his gn,
Holineſle , that they would be in Trent beforerthe midlt of lanuary , hee car-
neſtly eatreared the Marquis of Peſcara, whom the King of Spine. had
ſent Ambaſſadour to the Councell, to bee in Trent , and affilt at the opening
of it. Hee ſolicited the Yenetians allo to ſend their Ambaſſage, becing care-
full char char ceremony ſhould paſſe with reputation. Notwithſtanding, he

wrotcto the Legatsto open the Councell ſo ſoone as the Ambaſſadors
ofthe Emperour,and of the forenamed Princes were atriucd, and
that if they came not by the middeſt of themoneth, they
ſhould deferrceir no longer. Andin this coniun-
ure the yeere 1561didend,

(%)

———}

kN wav «
w7 SIA f "= - j
v 4 ?

Yo She Be

-
by
|
-. p
6 _ .
_ ” * p ? -
4
[} -4 k ; |
4 *
* a : |
- . : 7 | | | |
z ; , © y : —_ | |
.
8 * 1 % Þ |
: , b . -- _ . 1
: _ > | 3 |
y »- : - -- , . 4 os \ : |
| ; , © » -
j : | |
% - ?
| 6
[
| : .
. -
w -
£ | | |
i | |
| | & ww .
| | | | . + +
*
| is 2
| = FA u . A
: :
| ?
| wo
' L ,
: T | |
- : |
: 7 | |
| 4 . f 5 & |
:, Ls >2
- ” MR. = = w « 5 -— —_ {) |
} v -- ( % wn k pn | |
I = : 6 5 _ . " 4 ( = { i
C - . ; - i c ry | | ;
* PY w—_ ” M— . ; |
: ' — p”
- . — | | |
: . , «a + ,
3 ' |
. @ p_ k *+4 |
| EF
$4 a |
- |
3% | : 5 -
4 ! | " n 6 5 © - .
- . cans % a ' |
Py _ "= bs % y -_
—_ b k k » # [y — . Jn IF
# 7 y -4v hs. ' 4 ” mn —_ —— L -
AM La, a $46 od y } | : | 3
A p p_— : F wy _ _ *.
4 Py - © % . 4 - pt * |
q %. |
| %
[ud |
, - |
| + > 4 8-1 | |
” .
-*%% 4 | |
|
- |
: - p
" - £ | | |
" of . _ . e m_ |
| . ' wi . Ix % / / #
C Þ . , _ 8 - : | ;
w m WS os tw, Te” | |
% - { ; oO $ % 14 w |
hy — ” ba "1 ute” | |
| : K «® \
- | A - 4 | |
. | |
- |
: |
. v 2
- | |
| * ” |
@- 4
%
. : | |
{ | |
. # .
| | ; 5 g $1 « on | / 1
4 ue |
0 | % __- F * SD | -
« -—4 % ; ; |
| , #
LN 5 a x
. 4
| :
.
. Ls g 2 |
| 1}
? - | |
.
{
- —_ a.
*
+
| b ;
- s
b

XU

I562
VS
" <a wat
Farbinand.
| ELnazara.
WY CuUHARLES 9.
: *1 v
T2 2 4$
| | A DIS , ANT) [37 [157 | E
bs {- T R E N FT. : -
RA HcLegats, in.confortnitic of that which the 4 gercrail | |
FIZ Popc had lalt commanded, the fiftceith of {71d fic rs.
* Cats
| A of April ;in

44 Ianuary made a generall Congregation, in'%Arm":"
"_ which, the Cardipall of Mods as Prime. gre: contro-
|. Legate,, made adiſcourle, to ſhew how ne-/ariſe.
| ceflary and fir it was to open the Councecl],

{ and cxhorted the Prelatcs to promote ſo la-
Ex cred and pious a worke, with fallings,almes,
Mf and frequent Maſſes. Afterwards the Bull
| dof thc Lcgation was read , dated' the tenth
of March ; which was in generall termes, with the v{uall clauſes: that he
ſent them, as Angels of peace, to preſide in the Councell, which was to
begin ar: Ealter,, After this, three other Bricfes were read; The firlh
dated the fifth of March , and was a facultic to. the Legates to give leaner
the Prelates and Diuincs to rcade, during the.time of the Councell, bookes
prohibired. "Theſecond dated thethree and ewentiath of May , that the Le-
gatcs ſhould hauc faculticto abiolue thoſe who: would ſeerctly abiure- for
cauſe of hereſtes. The third:was dated the laſt of december, 'in whichthe
Pope to take away all controucrlie which might happen berweene the Pre+
lates about precedencie , doth command; thar the Patriarkes ſhould hayethe
firſt place, the Archbiſhop the ſecond , and the Biſhops thethird , regarding
onely the time of the promotion , notrhe digniticof te Sea,or of the Prima®
cic,wherher trucor pretended. N 7 | |

This being read, Friar <Bartholomew d: Martiri, Archbiſhop of Braga in Onc aboge
Portugall,cxclaimed that the Councell ſhould begin with doing injarie toche the vadares
principall Churches of Chriſtendome, ſaying that his Sca; which had the.
Primacic of Spaine , ſhould , by this ſentence, be made inferiour, nor onely ro
three Archbiſhopricks, ſubic& vnro him, bur alſo roche Archbiſhop of Ro-
ſera who hath no Suffragan, and ro the Archbiſhops of Niſ5ia and Antivar

who

- — — -.. mv Ge oo  OrO_ <> O_o
— ——G——

1.6!

= _ — _ ——— -— —

1562 who hauc notany reſidencic, and ſcarce any Chriſtians to gouerne ; that it

ns,

l Bj. not.equitable.to makegnelawpr ones (c)tc, anda b [9-268 and
Fx*DixAnD. FO pretcnd the preſcruation of Pcs. OWN! L , 2NQ, FO"CEPTIUG.OTNETS of
raw. theirs. Heſpake ſocarneltily , that the bled: ane di; ardly
+507 pa *) pacific hior, tho 1ph'they ca aac.  ,thag.uhe Popes

mcihing , atid cheirs'was , that, ja ſmgn)/! r\oſeaog-righs by
chat Dezre ,penbey in procealt ze potion bvBbateyery Prima,
whether cruc%of prerenm® 1 ,*fter rh©Eo mainemtheſamc

ttatcin which hee was before. HR hop beeing with much adoe ap-.

Anotherwhe- peaſed, the other Spaniards madeirequeſt, Bhar the opening of the Councell

ker this Con- ; | . , .

= Oy miglirtze dedcaredr COl1 ti thar ih, op 5m Pal,

the & ouncell i | J1 *OLUN-

me ouncel and pratccuted by Nius le nemgight cauif , that yvas a eweCoun
ar

h
continuation cel], The Biſhop of Zante, who had been in Germany , knew how that

ot the old,or IF, "R 2 : ' _ 8
ancyy Coun- action would be calymiſpt STTT"IT pabyr,ycplicd,

as decided, {oro declare db nhuch- now withbar.nechild, would cut off all
hope from the Emperour and FrerickKing to finde ſuch a conjuncture, as |
that the Proteltants would ſubmit themſclues to the Councell, and affilt in
it;- The Legats, clpecially Mantua and Farmienſe , did ſecond the opinion of
the Biſhop with many diſcourſes ;'and much was ſpoken oli both fides very
"bitterly, aud the Spaniards fayd they would proteſt and rerurne : yer, aftcr
many conſultations, they finally'agreed ro delift from their inſtance,not to
oppoſethe” Emperour;theiFrench King, the Nurchmen, and Frenchmen,
nor to giue'marterbf complainrto the Protctianrs, ſorharno words, were v-
ſed ro ſigmifieit wasamew Councell, or ro preiudicethecontinuation. The
Cardinals promiſed inthe Popes name, that his Holineffe would confirmg
whatlocuerwas done in Trent, in.cherwo precedent Councels, though this
were difſolued without concluſion. The Spaniards were-contents and af?
ren cer long difcourſing , irwas concluded, that a fo:meof words ſhould be vied
councel. to fignitic, that the Countell did begin to be celebrated), allſuſpenfion:being
remoucd ; which though they were.ambiguous , and mighr bee drawen ro
| contrary letices, yet being ſufficient ro compolerhe prefenr difference , they
| were receiued z'and chey concluded to open the Councell the next Sunday,
being the cightcenth 'of the monerh. In the endethe Cardinal] propoled,
- that the Councell being begun , the Prelares ſhould frequent the publique
Chappcls inths rime of-Maſle, and that there ſhould bee many Latme Scr-
mons,which being tobeemadeſomerimes by menthat know not whardoth
+4. 0.6.0., Oeftehe time, place, andatiditorie,ctharir were good to depure a Prelate,who,
xedens153p- as Malter of the holy Palicein Rome , ſhould review that which was-to bee
Pe wi.c. POKEN , and ſo the Sermon-tor bee reprared , according to his cenſure. The
38 eur 1550 n PLOPOLITION pleaſed them all ; and Egidius Feſcararus, Biſhop of Modena; was
f rabliqe.  appointedto peruſecuery Sermon, and whatſocuer cl{c wasito bee delitcred
in publique. / ans 1 Eyfrit "2.

The Congregation bceing diſſolued, the Legates, bythe helpe of their
inward friends , beganne to frame the Decree, and did conceiueit'in the
forme agreed on ; and obſeruing diuers treaties amongſt the Prelates; while
they were idle in Trent to propoſe ſome one prouifion , ſome another;| all

tending

:

ih. ag << a a a Y - 4 FP
7 k R
"7" "i

a _- ys REES rented tn} corre ern þ 19 eng En > + mo ;
Liz 6. the Connell of Frent. 469
tendirip ro enlarge.the aurhoriry of theBifhops) a@dimiriiſh thatbf Rome, 1562 |

———_—_—

they thought to remedie all in the beginning , before the humour be#ants

propoſe uiiy.marter ro Finotiaad.

ſtirre; by decrecing that noneybutrhe Povſies!, th
bee diſcuſſed. They fiwithe propoſition was hard Shdforeſawwetfithad th [ny
on; tlicrefore they cthoughtitneveſfary to vit mud? RY that imightberrs. Tioncn s:

cciucd (weetely;andat ynawares'Thereghttie;thatwdiie fot propeunt Why te Le

ſcemed hardandlharpe,and the affirmative, chat theLegatsHhoill&prope wid pre

which did vircually onely , and not plainely'conatntan exclulibh of orhers; maroone

 didpleaſe berter, covering all with a'preretice/of klepirig order?! 4d gigitig Peary ching

rimeofdehberation-to the 'Synodey The Deetet W; atufiaatly- mathe; bur them- |

thar, cuen at thispreſerit, oric muſt be very tent, hee will difcouer the ©

ſenſe, anditis impoſſible ro'vnderſtandirit the Reft{ which Twill ttharte if

vulgar, inplaine tcarmes; burhee that'will ſec rheArtifice : ler hitifeate ſx it alle tou

Latine. i 07940 {Df 471.99D 0) D910! 924) LILORN 2 (Ot: | e 29" renn
Therefore in conformitic of the reſoluri6ri, when the cighreefith day wit The epi:

come,a proceſſion was made of the whole Clergic of the Citic, ofthis Dilitics Sellion, in

and Prelares , who}, beſides the Cardinals" were ot&Hhilhdred la we ob

that did weare Miter , accompaniedby oC — HEa6y opened.

people armed goins from SaintPerers Chaitth ;torHeOirhedtall; TC

Cardinal of Mantaaang the'Maſſ of thelioly Gholt;atid Gafpatv hel Poſs;

Arch-biſhop of Rheg giv, made the 'Sermon.” "His ſubie&t wasthe Auchort-

ticofthe Church ;\Primacicof 'thePope !/ and rhe power of Cotincels. He

laid that. the Church had as much authoritie'as'the' word of G&d; thar the

Church hath changed the Sabbarh'; ordained by God} into Sunday , and ra-

ken away Circumciſion, formerly commatnided by bis Diuine Maicſtic "ard!

thattheſe Preceprs are changed, norby chepreaching of Cr xt' $7; bur by

the authoritie ofthe Church. Turning himſelfe co'the Fathers', Hee'exhot-

ted themto labour conſtantly againlt the Proteſtants , being afſared that, as

the holy Ghoſt cannot erre, ſo they cannot bee deceiued. And the Vent creas

, for ſpiricus beeing ſung, the Secretary, who was Biſhop of Tilefi , read the

Bull ofrhe Conuocation , befottalleadFed/;"and the forelaid Archbiſhop!
interrogared the Decrce for the opening the Councell;ſaying, Fathers, dorh it
pleaſe yourhar the generall Councell of Trex ſhould be celebrated from'this
day,all ſuſpenſion whatſoeuer beeing remooiied , to haridle, withdue order,
that which ſhall ſeems fit to the Synod, the Legatsand Preſidents propoling,
ro remoouethe controuerfics of Religion,corredtmannets,an eeer &
peaccof the Church > 'They ahſiwered \ Placer: ' Qncly fonte pre ts contra” |
difted that part , *Proponentibus Ligatts : which wordcs'I reprate if Latine, Th-wort:
becauſe they mult bee often mentioned; itr regard of the grear'totirrouer- ww Leys,
fies anddiſputes which followed.” The'contradiftors were Ft? Quertero, clin.
Arch-biſhop of Granate-, Franceſco *Biancs, Biſh of Orenſe.,", Andreas della
Queſta, Biſhop of L-on, Antonio ("olermero,, Biſhop of 'Almerizs.” They faid
they could not conſent, beeaufe rhey wete new wordes, never vied in
any. Councell, and demanded thar their voyces mighrbee regiſtred in rhe
ates of the: Councell. No anfiyerewss giuen then, and the next Scf-
ſion was intimated for the fix&and' twentieth of February.” The Spca-
ker of the Councell required all the'Notaties and Protonotaries ro make

Rr one

_

». oor at 5 ev ren enipgntore bt-< er en DIY a

—
— - 25 Ie. 9 wt -
2 —

49 T uns beckigbarie of G x5.6.

11562 Qac ©Þ more Inſirumancs. of che; things aforelayd ;.: 'and 1o the (Scflion
Frzpraxin., The Legates, aduiled. the Popeof what -happencd in the Congregation,
£:n:ra and Sciliob, who.imparted it to.ghe Conſifiery. In which many were of 0-
rey j pinion ,in regard of thelc firlt difficulties ,-thatthe Councell would nor pro-
*  - ceed well, eipeciallyconfideringthe obſtinate comradiction of the Spaniſh
Biſhops. nox;fir ro,compole the, differences of Religion, Siboughtihe Le-

-*: gates and Bifhg s of Jtalie ſhould: vic Arte, and yaitic in temporizing and

.- : Quercomming't cm,;;-The-Pope,commengcd the wiledome of the Le-
'., Fates,, thatchey had;preuenced, as heofayd, theremeritie of the innouators;

+ and was not diſpleaſed with the.oppolition. of foure, becauſe hee feared a
orcater number ; hegexhorced the Cardinals, ro refornzethemclues , ſeeing
"EIPM 3 hadto doe with vnreſpecttull pex{ons,giuitg arder that the other Hralian
> crRY Biſhops ſhould bce ſolicited ro depart. And hee wrote to Trent that they

ed byall ,;- ſhould maintainethe Decree figmely , and put it in execution, without. relen-

Wcancs.

a 2: tingone lOtc., Fed; 357820 | bes! AS ne; a4TO ene f
Tumilis + In France the 'Queene of Nguarre , Prince of Conde, Admiral ,:and Du-

ketmon,-., Cell of Ferrara, bauing many moneths made requeſt that places ſhould be
allowed: othoſs of the.new Religion, for the Sermons and Ceremonies, and
allchelc,and many Grandics more, cucn in the Court it ſclte, making profel-
{ton thereof, the inferiour Reformacilts , imboldened, hereby , did afſem-
ble chemlelyes apart, whichthe Catholiques.nor being able to ſupport, very
dangerous popular tumults were Failed in many parts of the Kingdome, with
ſlaughteron both fidesz, which: were cheriſhed by the 'Nobilitic of the Ca-
tholiques,, enuying that che Hagonor Princes, gaynivg a popular trayne,
ſhouldexccede thema , Two diuers tumults were rayſed by Sermons ; one
in Dyon,and theothcrin Paris, notorious not onely for the death of many,
bur alſo for the rebeliion againlt the Magiſtrates ; which made the Kings
Counlcllrelolue to ferkea remedy z and, that it mightbce fitted to the whole
Kingdome, the Prelidents ofall the Parliaments were called , and anumber
of Counſcllors clc<tcd todeliberate with maturity what was belt to be done.
Thelcucntecenth of Ianuary , all chele being aſſembled in Saint German , the
Chanccllor declared jn.the Kings name, that they were called tro conſult how
ro remedierhe ſtirres raiſed inthe Kingdome., Hee madearecapitulation of
all cherhings that hapned,, addivg chart the differences of Religion ſhould be
referred to the Prelates,,, but wheo the peace of the Kingdome, and keeping
of thc Subjects in obedjenceroche King is in queltian , that this could nor
belongto the Ecclehaftiques,bur to thoſe whom the King would appointto
*conſulr of it. That he had cuer commended Tylli, who was wont to blame
(,4to, that, liuing in a moſt corrupt.age, was fo ſcucre and rigid in hisdeter-
minatiohs; as if heehad been a Senator in Plzohis Common-wealth,, Thar
lawes were to bee fitted ro thetime.and perſons , as the ſhooe to the foote.
That this particular was then tobe conſulted of, whether it were, good
ſeruice forthe King to permit,or probibite. the Congregations of the Pro-
reſtants; wherein they were nor to dilpute, which Religion was the berter,
becaulc they tooke. not in hand toframe a Religion; - þvur ro-pur in order a
Republique; and that it wasnor abſurd to ſay ,that;many might bee good
| Citizens,

=

a
EF

Ls. 6. the Gouncellof Trene. - 471

Cirizens,and not good Chriltians , and that rhoſe who were of diners religi- 1562

ons mighr ituc in Peace. | EN
ln conſulting hercof the opinions were diuers: but they prevailed who FeeDmaxp,

thought that the Edict of Iuly was to bee remirred in pare, andthe Prote- Errors,

{tancs to have leaue'to preach. Arthe making of che Edict, which eontained ©2355 5

many points, the Cardinals of *Borbox, Tornon, { b.ſtillon were prelent, as allo

the B:\hovs of Orleans , and Palence. That the Proteſtants thould reſtore

the Churches poſleſttons, and other Eccleſiaſticall goods vſurped. Thar

they ſhould forbeare to bearedowne Croſles, Images, and Churches, vpon

painco*dearh. Thar they ſhould nor aſſemble themlclues ro preach, pray,

or adminiſter the Sacraments, in publiqueor in priuate , by day or by night,

within the Citic. That the prohibitions, and puniſhments of the Edict of

Luly., and all others made before ſhould bee ſuſpended. - That they ſhall nor

be molelicd in their Sermons made out of the Citic, orhindred by the Ma-

giltrates, who ought ro protett them from iniurie, chaſtifing the Seditions

on both ſides. Thatnone thall ſcandalize another for Religion, or yſe con.

tumclious words of faction. "That the Magiſtrates and officers may bee pre-

{cent at the Sermons and Congregations: That they ſhall not make Synods,

( o!loquies,or Conliſtories, bur with leauc,, and in preſence of rhe Magiſtrate,

Thac they (hall obſeructhe lawes for feaſts, and degrees prohibited for mar-

riage, That the Miniſters ſhall bee bound to ſweare to the publique Ofh-

cers,not to offend againſt this Edit, nor to preach any doctrine contrary to

the Nicen Councell , and the bookes of che Newand Old Teſtament. "The

Parl:amenrcould hardly be brought ro accept of this Edit. Thercforethe |

King did commaund againe, thatit ſhould bee publiſhed, adding thar it was

to be vaderſtood to bee made by way of prouiſion, vntill the determinations

of the Generall Councell were diuulged, or the King ordaine otherwiſe, nor

mcaning to allow two Religions in his Kingdome , but thatonely of the ho-

ly mother the Church, in which himſclfe and his predeceſſours haue lined.

The Parliament bceing nor agreed for all this, the King commaunded, thar,

laying af1deall delayes and difficulties , the ordination ſhould bee publiſhed.

And lo itvras the f1xth of March,with this clauſe,thar the Parliament did ve- $97 Fre*fs

rite the Kings letters ro obey hum, conſidering the ftare of thetimes, not ro 44: mate,

approouethe new Religion, bur onely by way of prouifion,vnrill itbe other

wilc ordained by the King, | | |

But to returne to Trent in the Congregation held the ſeen and tvwenticth The propos

{tions 1n the

of Ianuary the Legates made three propoſitions. The firlt,to examine the Cyrgregus-
bookes written by diuers authors,fincethe herefſtes began, together with che 97,9 nnd
cenſures of the Catholiques againſt them, ro determine whar the Synode
ſhould decree coricerning them. Theſecond, that all thar are intercſted in
that marcer , ſhould bee cited by Decree of the Synode, leſt they com:
plaine that they haue not beene heard. The third; thar a Safe Conduct
{ſhould be giucn tothoſe who are fallen into heref1e, witha large promule of
great and {ingular clemencie, ſorhat they will repent, andacknowledge the
power of the Catholique Church. And order was giner that the Fathers,
hauing conſidered on the propofitions , ſhould deliver their opinions in the

next Congregation, as well how to examine with caſe the bookes and ce-,
Rr 2 ſures

4

4.72 - Hh: The Hiſtorie of L1s.6.

1562 {urcs, as concerning all therelt. And Prelates were deputed to examine the
——S\-N Mandates and excules of thoſe who pretended they could not come to the

Prvs 4.
Ezzavtxaxp, Counccll.

Ezra  Thisplacedoth requirearclation of the beginnivg of prohibiting baokes,
Caarres 9. and With what progreſle it was come ro that itarcin which it then was, and
© Y” whatneworder wasthen taken, In the Church of Martyrs there was no
Adiſcomſe Ecciclialticall prohibition, though ſome godly men made conſcience of
concerns; Teading bad bookes,forfeare of oftending agaivlt one of chethreepoynts of
onof bookes. che Law of God , to auoyd the contagion of cuill; not to expoſe ones ſelfe to
teinpration, withour necef[1tic or profite ; and not to ſpend ime yaincly.
Thele Lawes, beeing naturall,doc remaine alwayes , and ſhould oblige vs to
bewarc of reading bad bookes, though there were no Eccleſiaſticall law for
it. Bur thelc reſpects ceafing,the example of Dionyſus, Bilhop of Alexandria,

a famous Doctor , did happen, who abour the yeere of our Lord 2.40. bein

reprehcnded by his Prielts tor theſe cauſes, and troubled with theſe relpes,
had a viſion that hee ſhould reade all bookes , becauſe hee was able ro judge
of them. Yer they thought there was greater danger inthe bookes of the
Gentiles, then of the hereriques, the reading whereof was more abhorred
and reprehended, becauſeir was more vied by Chriſtian'DoGors for a va«
nitic of learning eloquence. For this cauſc S. Hierom, cither ina viſion, orin
a lleepe, was beaten by the Deuill ; ſo that about the yecre 400. a Councel in
(arthage did forbid to reade the bookes of the Gentiles, bur allowed them ro
rcade the bookes of the heretiques , the Decree whereof is amongſtthe Ca-

nons collc&cd by Gratian. And this was the firlt prohibition by way of

Canon : bur thereare others, by counſell of the Fathers, tobce regulated ac-

cording to the Law of God, before recited. T he bookes of heretiques, con-
raining doctrine condemned by Councels, were often forbid by = Empe-
rours for good gouerninent. So Conſtantine forbad the bookes of Arrins ;
Arcatius rhoſc o, the Exnomians, and Maniches; Theodofins thoſe of Neſtorius;
Martianus thoſe of the Euticheans ; and in Spaine the King Ricaredyus, thole of
the Arrians. It ſufficed the Councels and Biſhops to ſhew what bookes did
containe damned or apocryphall doftrine. So did Gelafius in the yecre 494.
and went no further, leauing it to the conſcience of eucry one to auoyde
them,or reade them toa good end. After the yeere 800. the Popes of Rome,
as they aſſumeda great part of the politique gouernment, ſo they cauſcd the
. bookes, whoſeauthors they did condemne, to bee burned, and forbad the
reading of them. Notwithſtanding, one ſhall finde but few bookes forbid
inchatſorr, vatill this age. A gencrall prohibition of reading bookes con-
caining doctrine of heretiques, or ſuſpectcd of herefies, ypon paine of ex-
communication, without any furcher ſentence , was not vied. Martinrs 5.
doth ina Bull excommunicatcallthe Sects of heretiques, eſpecially Wiglefijts,
and Huſs:tes , not mentioning thoſe who read their bookes, though many of
them went abour. Leothe tenth condemning Luther , did withall forbid all
his bookes, ypon paincof excommunication. The Popes following, in the
Bull called In ena, hauing condemned and excommunicated all heretiques,
did cxcommunucate thoſc allo who reade their bookes: and, in other Buls
againſt heretiques in generall, did thunder the ſame cenſures, againlt the _
crs

Line "Trl

ders ofchcir bookes. This didracher breed aconfuſion. | Forthehereriques | I ;62
nor. becing condemned by name , one was: to.iudge:of the bookes more by 2

the quality of the doctrine, then by the ndiinit of the authors, wherein diuers Faromaxo:
men becing of diuers opinions , many ſcruples of <conlcicticedid ariſe: The tir,
Inquifitars being moxe diligent, made Catalogues of thale whom tlicy knew, 225;

which; not being conferred, were-not ſufficientroremoous the difficulric: |
Philip, King of Spame, was the firſt that gauea more conuenierit formc;inthe
yeere 15.5.8, making aLawcthat the Catalogucof bookesptobibitedby Inqui» |
fitron ſhould be printed. old tinginoang 21,926900 20102: 10% 3
According to this example Paul 4. allo ordained ;.that an Index ſhould
be compoſed by that office, andprinted'; and ſo it was.if1 the yecre 15 594 in
which they did procecde many. {teps further then formerly tliey had dons;
and layd fqundations ro-maintaineand make greattheamborityoftheCoure
of . Rome, by. depriging men of| tharknowledge ; which is neceſſary toidefend
them, from-vſurpations. -Yarill that time; they .concained themfclues withe
in. the tcarmes of the bookes of the; hereriques, neither was thereahy þooke
forbidden, if the author were notcondemned.. This Judex was dinidedinto
three parts. The firſt conteigerh the names of thoſe, all whoſe:workes,of
what argument RFI 6 ww > forbidden; and inthis'number
arc. placed not onely thoſe who baue profeſſed doEtrine, contrary to that of
Rome, but many allo which lived-and dyedin the profeſſion therof:;- Thee:
cond contcineth the names of -the bookes-which are particularly .condem»
ncd, others of the fame authours not beeing condemned, In-the'rhird;
ſomc bookes are condemned without aname, butonely by agenerall rule;
that all hole arc forbidden which beare notthe names; of T malic Writs
ten afterthe yeere. 1 5.1 9, and many Aurhours and bookes are-condemned
which for 300.',2 00. and x90. yeeres hauc beene commonly: read! by
the learned in the Church of Rome. with the knowledge, and withoutthe
contradiction of the Popes of.thoſe times ;;and , amonglt ctheimadernes;
ſome of. thoſe, which, were printed-in. Italy, eugn' in Rome , wich approba-
tion of the Inquifition;;and allowedalſo byalic Briefes. of the Pope!bimlelfe;
are forbidden.;z 4s-the Annotations of Eraſmus vpon the New Teſtament;

The 2annota-

which Leothe tengh having read,approued hyhis Brigfe,datcd in Rdme, Sep» tions o! £-./-

tember 10. 1518, But itis a thing, conſiderable aboueallithar videxcolout Newer.
of faith and religign, bopkes/argprohibired and condemned , wichrhe' farne menace s
ſcucrity,ia, which theauthorityof Princes aud; Temporal, Magiſtrates is'des £<« 10.are.,

forbidden to

fended from theylurpations of che,Clergie ;-and} of Councels arid Bilhops; vere.

from the vſurpatignsof.the Court of Rome ;; ia which-hypocriſies on'tyran-
nics are manifelted, by which.the, people,,vnder protehce-of Religion, are
decciued.'.. '[alupunea better myſtery. was.neuer: found, thenrovſereligi- ,

on ro, make mcn-inſcoſ{ible, - Thar Jnqui/ition wentilo lacre, thatitmade = |

Catalogue of. 62. Drincers , amd probibired-all.bookes printed byrthem,y of =
what authour, art, or idiome locus; with 20 Addition.ok more weight; that
is and; bogkes printed by ſuck” Printers 4wboſhaue-printed! bookes. of) here-
riques;j{o that. chere ſcarce; remained; a. hogke tgbed acad. And :for tbo
height of rigour,, the prohibitign. of bar loke ome: contained in that
Catalogue, .was)ypon paincof cxcommugigatiaridans fententic, releturdro
_— TY Rr 3 - rhe

ven—”wo-w yy wy +

_— CEC NC x —_
FEY uw Thethftorie of": Lis.6.
3362 the Pope; deprivation and incapaciticiof offices and bericfices, perperuall
>? infamieand other arbitrary puniſhments. Concerning this ſcueritic,remon-
Fapmas {lrance was madetothis Pope Pins, who referred the Index and allthe mar-
Ez i2-z, terto the Councell;a5 hath been faid. |
Cuaxrss 9: * Tonchingthe Articles propoled there were divers opinions. ' Ladouicus
The opnion *Becatelli) Archbiſhop of Ragwf#, and Friar Auguſtin Seluago, Archbiſhop of
of che Arch- | WE a] _S. VOe | | .
biop of z- Genua; thought that ne good cffeCt could proceed from handling the marrer
£:an1% of bookebin Couneell;yca,tharir would rather hinder rhe concluſton of that
ccrninzhe for whichthe Councel is principally aſſembled. For Paul4.by the-connlell of
AS all the Dguifitors, and of many famous then ; whoſenthim aduice from all
parcs; rhade a moſt: complear catalogue} to'Which nothing can bee added,
excepr ſome booke come foorth-within thelerwo yeeres), which deferuerh
horthe labour of a Synod.” But hee that would allow airy that are pfohibi-
ted-in that colletion, would ſhew that they have vpaduiſedly-proceeded in
Rome, and fo would take awayall repuratien from the” Trdex already pybli
thed, andfrom theDevree it {elfe which chey'would make ; tt beeihg a com-
mon maxime, rhat'new lawes- doe remooue'eſtimation more from them-
fclues,then fromtheold; Beſides ({aid © Eecareth) there is no need of bookes,
the world hath too tmany already , elpecially ſince printing was-inucnted :
and ir is better to forbid athouſand bookes withour cauſe ,-then' permit one
rhar deſcructh prohibition. Neither weteitfirthe Synod ſhould be troubled
with rendring the'cauſes of the prohibitions, making cenſures, orapproo-
uving thoſe which ate already made in diuers places by the Catholiques. For ir
would beeto call for contradiction. Ir belongeth-ro a Doctor ro giuea rea-
fonot his ſaying , alaw-maker if he doe it; doth diminiſh his authority , be-
cauſe the ſubie&t doth wreſtle with the reaſon alleadged; and when hee thin-
kerh he hath reſolued it, hee rhinketh alſothar hee hath raken all yertuc from
the precepr. Neither is it good to correct or purge any booke for the ſame
cauſes, for feare of making men.ſay'thar fomerhing'is omitted thardeſerucd,
and fomerhing changed thar did not deſerue correftion. - Moreouer the Sy-
nod would incurre the difplcaſureof all that are afte&ionate to the bookes
rohibited, and would induce'thent not to recciue the other neceſſary De-
crces, which ſhall bee made: ''Hee concluded, that, the Index of Paul being
Fufficienr, he thought ir not fittotake paincs in vaine in doing of that ancvy,
whichis done already”, of vndoing thatwhich is done well. Many other
-_ realonswere alleadgedin confirmation of this'opionion, by many: Biſhops
- creatures of Paul 4, admirers of his wifkedome ifi managing the Eccleſiaſtical
dilcipline;who maintained that ir was neeeffaty to prefetue, yea, roaugment
the rigour inſticured by him,ifthey wouldpteſerue the purity of religion,
The opinion © Job Thomaſo $; Felicio , was'of a.contrary opinion; that the Councell
- "reel thouldrreate againe of -bookes; as if there had been no precedent prohibi-
lion; becayſethat;;beeing madeby th= Inquifition of Rome, is odious, for the
name,to che Uirramontans,and beſides is [o rigid thatit cannot bee obſcrued;
and nocthing.doth-more caſily bring a law into difuſe ;then'the impoſhbilicic
or great difficultyih keeping it yatid the great rigour in puniſhing'the rran(-
gretſours; heſaydrharg indeed; it was necefſaty to preſeruerhe reputation of
thar office; bur thatwwght beedonec conucnichtly cough, by making no-

mentt-

a —_ _
m—— 6

Er. 6. the Councellof Tent.

"FL 4 _ FAY " A ”
*
4 75

—m—_— " .

mention thereof, and by ordayning onelythings neceſſaty ;/'andmoderare j $64 \q

puniſhments. - And therefore his Co— tharall conſiſted in ſerting ;——\
downe the 'manner,and fpakewhar himſelfsehoughtxo bethe belt 3 that is, Frrvmaxy.
chat the bookes notalready cenſured ſhouldbe diuidedarnongft the Fathers 32mm.
and Diuines of the Counſel,and choſe that wereablcntalfe, to'bee examined Rene
ant cenſured, andrhat a great Congregarionſhould bedepured,to iudge be-
ewvcenethe cenſureand'the booke; and thar this alſo ſhould bee obſeruct in

thoſe which are cenfuredalready;'and rhenall ſhould be propoledin the ge-

nerall Congregation,ro decrecthat which was belt forthe publike &66d; For
citing the Authors; hee ſaid there weretwaſorrs of them ; ſome ſeparated
fromthe Ohurch, and ſome incorporated iiez'of the! formet ho/account-is

to be made, ſecing that, by their ſeparation;theyhaue,as Saint Paulſzith, con-

demned themſclues,and their owne workes; fo:that there is'no cauſe to-heare
them;of the others ſomeare dead; and ſome alive; of which the'larter are

to be cited and heard;becauſe their good nameand honour being in queſtion

one cannqr procced againſt t1ew/wworkes , before the hearing of their rea-

ſons. Concerning thedead,Whatfocuer thepublike good doth require may '

be done, withour danger of offending any. ' Another Biſhop addedtv> this
opinion,that the ſame forme ofaſtice, vied towards the Carholiques aliue,

ſhould be yſed alſo rowards thoſe that are dead;becauſe they hauekinred and
ſchollars; 'who doe participate of the fame of infamie-of the dead, and are
thercforc intcreſted,and in caſe there were noneſuch, yetthe onely. memory

of the dead cannot be judged, before it be defended. 'n.; or |

Some alſo did thinke it was notiuſt ro condemne' theworkes'of Prote:

Concerning the third Article/to inviterhehererickesro repentance with Thc Loos 1
promiſeof clemencie,and grant of aſafe condu& , there were diutrs opini- ?ndPreves !
ons,cuettanionglt the Legates thetfclues, **Mantid was for a general} par. roman
don, ſayirg, that many wouldbeegainedrhereby, andthar it wasafemedie ofgantud,
vicd by all Princes; itv{&dirions;'or rebellions';'ro pardon choſe whom a © ug
cannotouercome, beeauſe,by chatmecancs; thoſethat are keaſtfaultieVUgcre- wm
tire, andtheothers remitine more Weake; and although but fer watyained, cc.
or

«
POT I CO POR ITR PUNT "HO" OT 4

-

The Hiftorie of F  E1n:6

476
15 62 Or but oncouely , ye ir-Was to bee done; that though none arallcould bee
Fa: . - gained,yctit would be great gainero ic and (hew clemencie. Stmoneta {aid,

E«z>mane- that this would be dangerous for the ruine of others, becauſemany are-indu-
Enmi>zza. ced totranſgrefle, when they ſect is caſtero ger a pardon, and that rigour,
(PIR b choughit be hard rohimthat fecleth ir,doth-keepe many in their ducty ; that
© jtis {ufficientto ſhew clemencie to; him thardetireth it, but tocarric it after

him thatdocch nor.demaund; erdocth refule it , doth make men more carcs

lefle of themſclues z andherefie will bethoughero bee buta (mall fault, when

men'ſ{ee iis ſocaſily pardoned; -In theſe xwo- opinions the Prelates were di-

uided ;and thoſe whodid not approouetheSkfe Conduct, ſaid, it was not gi-

uen to any in the, firſt Conuocation of this:Councell,, which would hauc

been done if it had berne neceſſary or convenient, becauſe the Pope that
ſatechen was molt wiſe, andthe Legatrs the chicfcltof the Colledge; tharir

was giuenin the ſecond Conugeation , becaule Manrice Duke of Saxonie,and

other Proteltants did deſire it, and the Emperour alfo in their behalfe: bur

now it beeing demaunded by;nove, Germamyiefaying aloud , and proteſting

thatit doth nothold this Councell ro be lawfull, a Safe Conduct would but

giuc them matter,ro. make lome badexpoinion of the Synods meaning, The

Spaniſh Prelats would by no mcancs conſentto agenerall Safe Conduct, be-

cauic it would preiudicethe Jnguiftion of Shaine, in'regard, ſo long as that [a+

{ted , cucry one might profeſle himſclfeto beea Proicltant, and:make him-
ſelfercady forthe voyage, andcould not bearreſted by that office. The Le-
erat gates thought the like might happen tothe Inquiſition of Rome and haly, All
nerall Lon- Hejng contidered, concerning.the tudex ,it [cemed ſufficient for char preſenc,

gregation , .
concerning TO make Deputies , and tolet thoſe that were interelted vaderitand, by fome

ery ep part.of the Decree, that they ſhould be heard, and inuiteallro the Coun»
ccll;and;for the Sake Condutt, to rctcrrethemſelues,'in.regard of the difficul-

tics,to afurther conſideration. ; ta 1

While theſe things were handled , the Popes Nephew , Cardinall. 4ltempy,

the fift Legate, came to Trent,and withall the newes of the EdiCt of France.

| beforerchcarſed : which pur them all intoaconfuſion, that Princes ſhould

permit, by publique Decree, thoſe nouitics which the Councell was then at-

The Empe- ſembled'to.condemne. ,. The next day Antonius Miglkcins,, Archbilbop of
rors Ama” *Pragne , Ambaſſladourfor the Empcrour,was receiued in a generall Congre-
uct m Con- pation, and his Mandate read. The: Archbiſhop made along Oracion, relet-
2p uing the reſidue to Maſter Sjgy/mond Torn, his Maiclties ſecond Ambaſladar,
who. was to come. | The Synode anſwered; that they were very glad toſce

the Emperours Ambaſſadours 3 and that} they did admit his Mardete- The
Ambaſſadour woulg haue precededthe Cardinall Madryccio, alleadging the
rcaſonsand prercnſions of Don Diego, inthe firlt Councell; butby the Legats

an{wcrg, whotold-him how that bufineſle wascnded; he was latisfied; and

F

SODA 3 ont] Gt hon ft 6) ds Joolimod

©. ,, Theninth of this monerh Ferdinandus Martineaz Maſcarevius;.; Ambaſla-
ThePortugal Jour of Portugal}, "weas recciucd, and the Kings letter of credenee;and Man-
is recemachs & dat read. A Dodtor|that came with him.madea logp.graiion;;z intiyhith-be
mw {hewcd the bencfir which the Facet reaperh by Councels, and he necellt:
bur,matet® ry of chispreſcar, the croſſes which it formerly, cnduredy man
ome

”

" the Cuneell of T; an 477

| L 1s. 6.
dome of Pope Pius hath now oucrcome them. Hee. ſaid the authoritie of 1 562
Councels was {o grear,that their Decrces were to bee receiued, as diuine Ora- ——
cles; that che King hoped rhat the differences of Religion ſhould bee deci- FanDmAND,
ded in tha: Councel,. and the manners of the Clergie directed ro Euangeli- Erimmra.
call 1ncericie; that therefore he promiſed all obedience, whereof the Biſhops gs
arriuzd alrcadic, and thoſe who were to come, could giue reſtimonie ; hee
ſhewed the picrie and religion of choſe Kings,and the parnes they haue taken
ro ſubiect ſo many Prouinces ro the gouernment of the Apoltolique Sea of
which heroically pious workes they might expe& an imitation in King Se-
baſtian. Hce ct forch,in few words, theNobilitie,and vertue of the Ambal-.

{adour, and finally praycd the Fathers to hearehim,when hce ſhould ſpeake
in the behalfe of the Churches of that kingdome. The Speaker briefcly an-
ſwered, that the Synod was well pleaſed with the Kings Mandate, and his
Oration, and thatthe picty and Religion of his Maielty and of his Anceſtors

was generally knowen, and their gloric conſpicuous, for maintaining the
Catholike Religion in that kingdome in theſe turbulent times, and ſprea-
ding of ir in places farre remote: for which the Synod did giuc thankes ro
Gob,and recciuethe Kings Mandate with due reſpect. |

In the congregation of theelcucnth, the other Ambaſlador of theEmpe- The Emp:
ror preſcated humlclte: who was recciued without much ceremonie, becaulc Ambaſſador
the Mandate had bin read before, ſotharthere was time to treat of Conciliaric Eun

| matters; whercof ſome thing being ſpoken, libertic was giuen to the Le- #9" |
ears to elect Fathers to conſider of the Index, and others to frame the De-
crec, againlt the next Seſſion. For the bufinefle of the Books,Cenlures,and |

Index, the Legars named the Ambaſſadour of Hungarie, the Patriarke of Ye-

nice,fourc Arch-bilhops, nine Biſhops,one Abbar,and rwo Generals.

The thirteenth the Emperours Embaſladours came to rhe Legats , and The Empe- }

made five requelts ; which they left in writing, thatthey might confider on a

them. "Thar the word ( ontinuation ſhould notbee vicd, becauſc it would fe ea ets ,

make the Proteltants refuſc the Councell. That the next Sc{ſ1on ſhould be ;

dcterred, orart the lealt,matrers of ſmall weight handled. That the Contel-

{ioniſts ſhould nor bee exaſperated in the beginning, by condemning their

bookes. Thar a large ſafe conduct ſhould be giuen to the Proteſtants. Thar }

whatſocuer was handled in checongregations, ſhould bee concealed, which |
hicher:o had beene diuulyed,cuen co thecommon people. And hauing of- ©
fered all fauour and aſhiltance in the Emperours name, they added, that they | | (
nad order from his Maicltic, that if they werecalled by their molt Reuerend | |

Lord({hips,they ſhould gjuc their aduice in matters of the Councell,and cm- |

ploy hisaurhoriticro fauourthem.

TheLegarsanſwered the ſcucntcenth day , that it being neceſlary ro giue To ntom [
ſatisfaction to all,as they would not name the Continuation at their requelt, fo, on
not to prouoke the.Spaniards, it was neceſfaric to abſtaine from the contra-

ry; that they would {pend the next Seſhon in generall and light matters, and

allow a long timefor others ; that they would nor then condemne the Au-

guitan (onfeſSion , that they would not then ſpeake of rhe bookes of the Con- | '*

feſſionits,but would make the Index in the end of the Councell ; that alarge |

ſate-condutt ſhould be giuen ro the Germans, when it was decided -wherher

it ſhould

4
L DIR" ala, Te

4.78 The Hiſlorie of L18.6,

1562 ir ſhould be giuento them apart, or together with other Nations that they
"TD would rake a good courle for {ecrecie , and impart ymo them whatſocucr
Fzzxp many They (hall handle, being aſſured of the Emperors o00d aftc&tion and thar the
Em. Ambaſſadours are correſpondent to the picticand Rehgion of their Malter.
Cranurs 9- George Droſconitins,Bilhop ofthe tive Churches,the Emperours third Am-
- =; ud baſſadour , who came to Trentthe moneth before , preſented his Mandate in
ches, che Em- the generall Congregation, the foure and rwenticth of February, and made
—_—— an Oration, in which heeenlarged himſelfe in the praiſes of the Empcrour,
is recciuedin {vying that God had giuen him to theſe times, to prouideagainſt ſo many

**  mMuleries; hee compared him to Conſtantine in fauouring the Church ; fhewed

vhat paines he had raken for the conuocation of the Councell], and thar ha-
uing obtained ir, he had before all other Princes ſcnor Ambaſſadours, two for
the Empire , kingdome of Behemiaand Auſtria , and himſelfe for the King-
dome of Hungarie. Hee preſented his Mandate , and thanked the Synodefor
giuing him place, firting thequalitic of an Ambaſſadour, before they ſaw
the purpole of his ambaſſage. The Decrec was made 1n generall cearmes,
and read, as well to fatisfic the Imperialilts , as becaule the matter was nor
well digeſted.

Which being done , Mantua gauc a modeſt and grauc admonition to the
Fathers, to keepe ſecret What was handled inthe Congregartions,as well to
auoyd oppoſition , as becauſe thingsare held in greater reputation and re-
ucrence when they are not knowento all. Befides,that it would be diſhono-

. rable forthataſlembly , ifany thing were publiſhed, (as mighthappen often)
without conucniznt circumſpection , ard fir ſcemelinefſe. Hee added that
there was no Colledge or Councell, Secular or Ecclefiaſticall, ſmall orgreat,
which had not its ſecrets, to bee obſcrued by oath, or vpon penalties : bur
that Synode,conſiſting of wiſe men, ought nor to bee tyed butby the bonds
of their owne iudgement ; thaz,in ſaying thus, hee ſpake no more to the Fa-
thers, then to bis colleagues, and ro himlelfe , euery one being obliged to ad-

- moniſh himlſclte in cuery thing thar is feemely. Then hee ſpake of the diffi-
cultic of the Safe condutt and exhorted euery one tothinke exaQly of it, ſay-
ing, that if ic could not bee determined before the Seffion, anaddition ſhould
bee madeto the Decree , that itmight begranted in Congregation. This
was agreed on amonglt the Legats, becauſc hauing difcouered the difficulty,
eſpecially in regard of the I:quifitidn of Romg and Spaine-, they had written
wharlocuer had been ſpoken as well concerning this point, as the Index, and
expectcd an anſwere from Rome.

WhererhePope was in a rage for the Edict of France , and impatient be-
cauſe they did nothing in the Councell. Hee ſaid 1t was nor good thatthe
Biſhops ſhould bec long our of their ref1dencie, cſpecially to handle ſuperti-
cially points already decided in other Councels, hee had formerly ſuſpected
the Spaniſh Prelats, and did it then much more, becauſe he thought their ill
affection was increaſcd, for giuing the King leaue to ſel] foure hundred thou-

a ſand crownes of yecrely rent of the Ecclcftaſticall reuenuesfor tenne yecres,
and thirty thouſand crownes of the reuenues of lands held in vaſſalage of
the Church : which ſcemedto be a great diminution of the greatneſle of the

Church of Spaine,
Lewis

ee Ao - a? = - | —___ ,
a Cs Res cron of $' aw -- — _—_— — a. %*

Ly8.6.i * theComncellofiren: © "gs
... Lewis $.Gelais, Lord of Lanifacy'fent out of Frente expreſſely 6s gfe the 156%

Popean account .ofrheSrare ofrlie Kingdome,came to ,andfayd; that 7-v.
the King fecing the; great care:ofhis Holineffe concerning the Councell, Farbrxaxiy.

had eleded for his A mbaſſadourtbrhac _—_ Monſitur di Candalle;and cau- Enmioty:
{cd foureand twenty. Biſhops ro:gbe:thither , of whontithev gaus hiya liſt, CBT,
Hee related whar bad happenedim France ſince rhe deithof Francis, arid thie An Ambitii-

gdour is fent *

neceſſitice&iproctede with modetaion, as well becauſetheir fore Were not bur of 7:49 *
ſufficient. co vic rigeur|-as alſobrewuſe { ifrhey had beerie?)they ſhould have git.
embrewed them(ctueyin the blood of thegreateſt of che Nobility j vwhich town: ofthe |

ftareof the

woutd haucalicned thewhole Kingdome,and brought all: matters to a Worſe kngowe. ”

eſtate ; and that che King had no hope bur in che Councell,, in whielvall Na-
tions, cuct; the Germansthemſelues,would afliſt. For Religion being cſta-
bliſhed in Germany, be did not doubrto doe the like in France, butthought-ir
impoſſible co-make thoſe who will not be preſentin the Councell,,t0/aceepr:
the Dccrets therofzand that che French Proteſtants catnorbe ſeparated from
the Nutch;- Thercfore hee cntreatcd his Holineſle , that, to giue them (ati(-"
fa&tion,only for the ſecurity of the plac&and forme of proceeding;he would
beplcaled to yceld yntotliem), in regard of the great benefice which would _ _
cnſuc. The Pope anf{wercd , firſt concerning the Cguncell, rhat, from the: WE
beginning of his Papacic, he was reſolucd ro call it ;' that hee hath beene hin-
dered by the Emperour and King of Spaine , both which- notwithſtanding
haue at thjs preſent Ambaſladours and Prelares there; that none remaine bur
the Frenchmen, who haue moſt necde of the Councell; that he hath omitced
nothing to inuitethe Dutch Proteſtants, eucn with the indignitieof that
Sca; that hee will continue, andwill giue them what ſecurity they cen re-
quire; thathee thought it nothoneſt to ſubie& the Councell co their difere-
tion, and rhar, if they refuſed ro come, cfpecially hauing beene inuited , they
oughtro proceed without them. Bur,for the things done in France, he brict-
ly layd hee'could not commend them, and prayed God to patdon the Au-
thours of ſo great inconueniences. TE +> 216G28

And the Pope would hauepaſſed thoſe bounds, if hee had knowne what
was in doing in France at that ſamertime , when Lanſac made relation vnro-
him .ofwhar had beene done. For, the fourteenth of February, the' Queene? -
gauc order in S, German, that the Biſhops of Valence and'of Seeg,/and theDi-+ *
uines, Butigler, Eſpenſeus, and Picorells , ſhould conſent whar mightbe done a weary in
for a beginning ot-concord; who propoſed the points following; Thar it fron port
ſhould bce abſolutely forbidden to makeanjmageof rhe holy Trinity , or of #126».
any perſon not named in the Martyrologies, accepted-by che Charch. That
the images ſhould not haue any crownes orgarmentsput vpon them , of
vowes of oblations madeynto them, nor ſhould becarriedin proceſſion, ex-
ccpt the {igne of the holy Croſſe; wherewith the Proceftanrs ſeemed'to reſt

' . content, howlocuer. concerning the figne of the crofſe'they made ſome re- .

ſiſtance, ſaying that Conſtantine was the firlt which did propoſe it tobe'wor-.
ſhipped, contrary to the vſe of the ancient Church, | Bur Nicholaus' Magliar-
dus, Deane of the Sorbon '3 rogether with other diuines, dit oppoſe; and de-
fend the adoration of images, though hee confeſſed there weremanyabules
init. Iathelamemoncth the King of Nauarrewrote tothe EleQor Palatine,

the

m_—_— — qkqq OO ms " R _

—_— Ao pe »— —_—

WE —_

480- 3, - The Biſtnegſs) | Tas s!
1562. , the Duke of v4 991 4" re of Haſſig;\that howloduer they could not
>>Or agree i rheiColloquit of Pojfi,aor in thisJattabour images, yer hee would
Fr911Jap.. (tijl labour reforme rcligion, nor ſo, agtotroublerhe publikequiet of the
mane Kingdamebur bringiag itinby little andJirtle.. 1 14 123 +
C3222; | Atthedametimethe D ukeof Guiſe and Cardinall of Loraine went to Tia-:
The King #7. yerne; \Caltle belonging to theBiſhop of Seraibarg;and there mer Chriſtophey-
thro the, Duke of Wittemberg, with ſonie Minilters of the {ygrſtane Confeſion, They -
Pnete%t='- "vere togetherthiree dayes; acid thiolc of @ayecxpounded 10 the Duke what:
ami.” fatourmwasdonets the Auguſtan Confeſion in the Colloquic of Poifi, and the
rene he difficulty whichche Reformartiſts of Francedid makeinaccepting it, deſiring:
the Duke of thar Germany would'ioyne with: them 'to, hinder the: doEtrine of Zuinglins :
Wireezs. notthatthe amendment of. feligion (which they much deſired): might bee”
delayed: burthata-peſtiferous poiſon might nortake roote, \notonely in +
France, but in Germapy alſo. This:they did,'that,the warre now approching, *
they tmig he-morecafily haue afliftance,orar the lealſt,rhar it might be denied?
co theirentmics. This Parlic begorgreat ſufpirions in Rome, Trent, and France.”
The Cardinall/and his adherents witified themſclues,.char'ir: was for the
Food of Chriſtendome, ro haue'the fanour of the Proceſtants af Giymany 4+
gainlt-the Hugendts of France. And there wasa fame, that the Cardinall-did'
xracly delatean vnion inrcligian with Germany, and thar, as hee detcſted the
(onfeſsion of Geneua, {o hee inclined ro that of Awsburg, and defired to ſee it

Manted in France. Itiscertainethat;after the Councel of Trent was ended, he
{4id, hee had formerly belceucd that Confe/sion, bur thatafterwards he-was ſa.
cisficd with, the detetrminarion of the Councel, and thoughtthar all good
Chriltians ought rodocthe like, Concerning the Sermons publikely made
in France, though there were {editions in many places, which did hinder the

115orcfor- increaſe of the Reformarilts, yerthere were then 2150. aſſemblies, which

ined Chur-

me Were Called Churches,
The Sefwon | Thelixeand twentieth of February being come, the'Sefſion was held in
February 26. Tent; Antonius Helius, Parriarke of Icruſalem , ſaid Maſſe, and Antonius
ſon be- COceus, Archbithop of ( orfu, made the Oration. When the Maſle was /en-
Ambaſſadors ded, the Mandats of Princcs beitg to be read, there grewa queſtion between
o itz, the Ambaſſadors of Hungary and Portugal, each pretending that hisſhould
aourch<r1e- firſtberead;asof the moreeminencKing ; There was no difficultic in the
rheir Maſters Precedence of the Ambaſladots themſclues, becauſe thar of Porrygal, asa (c-
cular, fareat the right 1de of the Temple, andthe other, as an Eccleſiaſtike,
.*,  attchelcfts; TheLegates, bauing conſulted hereof , faid, that the Mandats
ſhould beread in the order as they were preſented, not according| to the!
 dignitie ofthe Princes, The Popes briefe, referring the matter of che Index
co the Councell, was read alſo.: This 1nde.x had beene made in Rome by Paul
the fourth;as hath been faid, with which if the Councel had medled, it might?
haucſcemed tochalenge ſuperiority aboue the Pope. Therfore they thought *
fic that the Pape ſhould voluntarily giue [caue, to preuenttharpreiudice. The /
The Decrce Maſle Patriarke readthe Decree, the ſubſtance whereof was. That the'Sy-
concerninz nod,meaning toreſtore the Catholike doctrineto its purity,and correct ma:
ners,in regard rhe number of peraicious and ſuſpected bookes was increa-
ſed, becauſc the cenſures made indiucrs Prouinces, and Rome, haue done no +

good,

. hog
A Ha ti - Ca $ tom X E FE. 5% 5 -
. wal as

\

-

L.1p. 6} the Countellef(Trent, 481
good; hath determined to degiuteſome Or amr tags tore- 1562
late tothe Synod, 'in rume:cofinuenient, whar hey chinke fir. ro-have done,
morc,to {cparaterhe eacklefromtbe good corne, toremobueal}ſcruples our! Fanwmano.
of mens migdcs, ,apdio take-away all caufeiof complaims;; ordaming that 'enzaxzre.
this ſhauldbecpgbliſhed with.chat Decree;tharif any hanc imereftimthe bu UHREE 5
lineſſe,ofche bgokes,and cenlurts; or any other ro bee handlediu Counctell,:
hee may know and be'aſſuredthar hee (hall bee courteouſlyheat#;qAnd be-
caule.the, Synod doth heaftiiy. detire the peace-of the Church,tharallmay ac-
knovyled their.comman macher, it.dbthinyiceall who doenor' commu-
nicate;yith her, r@reconciliationand concord;and rocome to Trentyn where

they (hall beimbratedwich all offices of charitie;and further; hath decreed:
thata laf&condutt maybe granted/iin a generall Congregation, andthall bee
_ oftheſameforce andſtrengeh,; as if it had beene granted'in/publike'Sellion;
TheDaereebding reed, the title whereof was: Of che holy: Ecumemicall, general Thetiieo!
Synod, layyfully afſembledin'C x x 1 5 T, the Arch-biſhop' of Granat#/requi-iis queitoned.
red chat theſe words (repreſenting the -oninerſall(hurch):ſhould'bee 'added, as
hath bcencgbſctued inal the latcr Councels. Antonius Peragues; Aroh-biſhop:
of Caglizrf, made the ſame requeſt;;'and theſe rwo were followed by almoit
all che Spaniſh Prelates,defiring that this requeſt mighrbeenotedinthe Ts.
No aalwere,was tnade; but,for concluſion,thenext Seffion wasappointed to
be the 44 of May:.: 4 7 151 | Iv CHOREES153
The Decree was printed, nat ontly becauſe it:was the cuſtome, bur becauſe: The _—
ic was madg of purpole to bee publiſhed roiall; and, ir-was cenſured by all”
ſorts of: perſons, It. was demanded how the Synod did call thofe, who:
1 were interel}ed in thechings which were to-bee handledin the Councell, if
they were, not knowne.;. and- ſaid that formerly all things were handled
beſides expectation,and who could prophefic what the Legates would pro-
pole, becauſe they knew not themſclues, [till expeQting: Commiſſions trom!
Rome. Thoſe who wereintcrefted tnany booke, how could they-know that
any thing.would beſpoken againſt it? The generalitie of the cirativn,andin-!
ccrtaintic of the caufe-mightinduce cuery oneto gocto Trent, beeaule cuery:
one hath intereſt in ſome particular, which mightperhapsbee rrenreti ont.
was concluded generally thartthey were called m ſhew, and excludediredeed?
Notwithltanding,; thele things whichthey could notpraile,'theyedmmen-
ded the ingenuous'confeſsion of rhe'Synod,that cheformer prohibirions had
begot {cruples.in mens minds, and:giuca.caufeof complaints. In Germanie
that part was ſuſpected, wheretheSynod giuerhauthoririe-o ir ſelfgtogiuc a
late-conduct in a generall Congregation.! Forthey:vnderſtood notany dif-
ference, in regard the ſame perſonsmetin borbafſemblies; bur only thar they! -
did weare, Miters in the Seſſions,and Capsinthe Congregations ;'nor why, if
che ate-conduct could-not thentbe granted', , they could not make 2'Se{l100/
exprelly forit. Inſumme, they.thought thar there was ſome great mylterie
cquered.if.it, howſocucr themoſtyngerſtanding mendid belccucthat the
Synod was aſſured thatno Pratoftant woutd:come to: Trent , with any fate-
conduct whatſocuer, 'cxceprit: were by force; as it happeved'in the yeere
L552. becauſe of the reſolutions &harles ; arhing which could no'more bee
putin-pragtiſc. ©3 7 2612.00 OV TE CITY 0307. :
ant Sſ The

XUM

=

482 * The Hiſtorie of + Ers.6.
1562: bb The Pope wrotebacke tothe Legats,rhat the hererikes ſh6uld not be in-
"—\ uitedto repentance with promiſe of pardon ; becauſe, ir having been done

Prvs 4+
Fz3kDINAND.

EL1ZABRETH.
CHARLES 9.
RS
The Popes
anſwer to the
Legats,

by 1ulins, and, another time,by Paul che fourth; no good iſſue came of ir. A-

monelt the hereriques, thoſc who arcin a placcof hberry will nor accepr it.
and hoſe who remaine where the Inquifition hath power, if they feare'to bee
diſcouercd, will recciue the pardon fainedly ro ſecure themſclues'of thar
which is paſt, with purpoſe to doc worſe more warily. For the Safe Con-
duct, bee was content.it ſhould bee giuentoall who arenot ynder the Inqui-
fition ; burſo , as that the'exceprion-ſhould: nowbee expreſſed ; in regard that
when Julius grantcd his pardon, cxcepr onelyto thoſe who were ſubict to
the Inquiſtions of Spaine and *Portugall, much-was'{poken againſt it ; and
it paſſed with ſmall reputation , as it the- Pope. had not the'ſame power oucr
that I:quifition , as oucr others. Burfor rhe manner of cxpreſliig} ir, hee!
did refcrre. it to the. Synode. For the forme, hee commended that which
the Councell gaue to Germante.in the yecre 1552, inregardthar was ſcene al-
ready, and that ſo many Proteſtants came that yeere ro rent, vpon'that ſectt-
ritic, Concerning the Index , hc ordained that the deputies ſhould proccede,
varill an occaſion were offered tomakea publique Decree withour' the op-
ficion of any Prince. [3 Of 36. fc:

Theanſwerebeing come, the. ſecond of March and the'day following
Congregations were held, to reſolue whether the generall pardon oughrro
bee publiſhed ,and a Safe Conduct granted,and what forme was to be giuen
tothe oneand theather, and the fourth day; after long 'difputarions, all was
concluded, the Legates bauing made the determination fall where they ay-
med, wichout intereſting the Popes authority. \To inuite the hercetikes tore-
penance was omitted, for the reaſons alleadged in Rowe. It was much
diſputcd,wherhcr a Safe Conduct was to be giuen by thename of the French,
Engliſh, and Scortith men, and ſomeſ; _ of rhe Greekes , and other Nati-
ons of the. Ealt. Itwasprelentlyſcene that theſe pooremen, afflicted in ſer-
uitude, could not , withoutdanger and affiſtance of money , thinke of Coun-
cels; and ſome ſayd that, there __ a diuifion of the Proteſtants, it was
goodtoletthem alonce,and nor ro name them , alleadging thar it was dange-
rous to mooue ina body ill humours which were arquier. Togiue a Safe
Conductto Engliſh men which neither they , nor any of them doe require,
would bee a great indignitic. They werecontent it ſhould bee giuen to the
Scots, becauſe the Queene: would demand it, bur fo, as that the demaund
ſhould firſt bee made., For France. , there was a doubt made whether the
Kings Counſlell would rake it;wellor not, becauſe it would bee thoughr
to beea declaration that the King bad: rebels. OF Germanie, none could
doubt, becauſe it had beene formerly graunted ro them; and if it were
graunted to that Nation alone, it-would-ſccmethat the others were aban-
doned. Many thought fitte rogrant it abfolutcly-toall Nations; * but the
Spaniards did oppole , and were faugured by the Legates, and others who”
knew the Popes minde, to the great indignation of thoſe , who' thought
that an inference might bee maderhar the Councell was not aboue the Inqui-
fation of Spaine... Inthe cndeall difficulties were reſolued , and the Decree
framed withthreeparts, Inthe firlt a Safe Conduct was giuen tothe Ger!
Mans,

ws W_ _—_ ———_——_— >

=
het

LE 1. & the Conneellof Frent, |
mans., jult word by word Jas1t &ras-madc inthe. yeere'1y; 2 Irche lecond, I $62
it was layd. that the Synod:dverhy giue. SafeConduetin the fate forme and ;;.-- rt

words as It was Such ra:rhe:Darchmen , to cuery one who harh'nor Comme F=ovinass)

munion offaich wich her, of cucry Nation , Province, Citic andplacewhete Ecrvinrrs,

any.qhiag is preached; ranght; orbclcetied), conraryes that whith'is belces T3252 5

nhatis The Decree

ucd in the Churgh of Rome.  : Inithe chird'iv was {ayd;rthatelrhouphvalt hart: *

024 doc{nat eemers becomprehended inthar exrention / which harh beets £ca”
dong fox cerrainerefpects, yer thoſewhorepent,, and verurne tothe boſormd
of the Church,are nor excluded,of what nation ſoeuer they be; which the'Sye
nad deſtretb {bould be publiſhed co all:; Burbecaulc'ir multbe mararely cons
ſulced.gn;, in whacforime'rhe Safe Conduet multbee giuen'them, they haus

thought firro deferrethar point vntill another time, thinkiog ir ſufficient; for

the preſent ro provide for che'ſcturitic of thofe who have publiquely abars
doncd the doctrine of the Chitrchy, - 'FhoDecrece was prefently printed, us
was fit; itbcing\made.onely ro: bee publiſhed. - Yetthe Synodedidnorkeepe
promiſe, toconſult of rhe Gems of ths Site Condutt , ro begitgeii to/thofe of
the'third kinde,and inrprinting; of the body vf the Councell;this thitd part
was left out, leauing i to the ſpeculation-of the world, why they did promiſe
ro prouide for thotcallo, and publiſhicin print; withadefire rohave all men
know it,and afterwards not rodo it, and labour to conceale that,which then
they did defire ro:manifelt.: - OF SEO 240) 299043 394M]

The Emperours Ambaſſadours ſollicited the Legates to friake the refor:
mation ,|and to write to the Proteſtants , exhorting them ro' comero the
Counccll, as was done to the Bohemians, inthe rime ofthe Councell of 'Bafil
The Legars anſwered rhat, for theſc fourty yeeres, all;both Pritieeand peo-
ple,hauc deſired reformation, yer ncuer any part thereof was handled', bi
them(ſclucs did crofle and hinder ir , fo that they haue been conſtraynedro a* _....
bandon the worke ; that pow they will endcauour ro'make agenerall refor«
mation of all Chriſtcndome; bur for one particularly for the Clergic of Gi:
manie, which doch molt needeir, and which the Emperour doeth principally
expect, they ſaw.not how they could make1t, ſeeing tharthe Dutch Prelits
werenot come to the Councell; and for writing tothe Proteſtants, in regard
they haue anſwered the Popes Nuncy with ſuch exorbirane vnlceinelincſle, 's
they could nor but cxpeEthar they would make a worſe anſwere'to the Lets +
ters of the Synad; | LOI -

Theclcucnth of March che Legates propoſed rwelue Articlesin the ge- S—_—
n=rall Congregation, to bee ftudicd and diſcuſſed in the next Congrega- «4:
tions. |
1. What prouifton might bee made, that Biſhops and other Curates may
re{ide intheir Churches, without beeing abſent, bur for cauſes tuſt, honeſt,
neceſſary and profitable for the Catholique Church. ) Ofs (ot
2. Whcthcrir beeexpedient, that none be ordained but ynro a ritleof ſome,
Benefice, in regard many deceits are difcoucrcd which ariſe from ordinatton
ro a title of the Patrimony, 05 Ws 42

Tha: nothing be receiued for Ordination, either by the Ordainers ,- of
their Miniſters, or Notaries. | 45 }
4. Whethcrit oughtto bee granted tothe Prelates, that in the Churches.

Sl 2 where

" =-

-

x 4.84 L I'B, 6.
15562 Wherethercarc no daylydiltriburions , or ſo ſmall as that they arcnot eſtes
£7 med, they may conuertoneof the Prebends tothat yſe. » --
Fzzpmany. 5, Whether greatPariſhes which hauc need of many Prieſts, ougheto hauc
Epmanetu. many ritles allo. '{ © £1 K
Is, 6. Whether {mall Bencfices with Cure, which hauc nor a competetit'rcuc-
| nuc forthe Prieſt, ought to be reformed, makinig one of many. 13
7. What prouilſion is tobe madeconcerning Curates ignorant;and of abad
life,vherher ic be fic ro giue them coadiurors, orable Vicars, aſſigning them
part of the reuznucs of the Benefice. ;-; |
| 8. Whether power oughtto bee giuen to the Ordinaric to incorporate
intorhe mother Churches, ruivated Chappels, which, for pouecrtic cannot
be rcbuilr. ale; of |
g. Whcther ir ought to be granted to the Ordinary that hee may viſite Be-
neficcs held un (; ommenda, though they be regular. t
10. Whether ſecret marriages, which ſhall bee contracted hercafter,oughe
to be made voyd. |
14. Whatconditions ought to bee aſſigned, that a marriage may not bee
eſteemed ſecret, bur contracted inthefaceof the Church,
1z. Whatprouifion ought ro be made concerning thegreat abules, cauſed
by che Pardoners,
One Article Aﬀeer theſe thepoint following was giuento the Diuines to bee ſtudied,

more COncer- M-)

aingclande- and diſcuſſed in a Congregation appointed for that onely.

ſtinc maria»

ves, Whether,as Euariſtus, and the Latcran Councell haue declared , that clan-
deltine,or ſecret marriages arc reputed not good, both before the Iudge, and
in cltimationof che Church,ſo the Councell may declare that they are abſo-

The Prors- lutely voyd., and that (ecrecie ought to bee put amonglit the impediments,

ins of Ger- which doe make a Nwlitie in the marriage, In the meaneſpace, it becing

many (reatea

lea,vc,ard = ifcouered that the Protcltants of Germane did treate a Icague, and make
=. {ome lcuicsof Souldicrs, che Emperour wrote to Trent, and tothe Pope al-
ſo, chatthe Councell might ſurceaſe, vnrill itdid appeare whither the moti-
ondid tend. Forthis cauſe, and becauſe of holy daycs the re{idue of this
moneth was ſpent in ceremon.cs onely. |
The Spanib The ſixteenth day Franciſcus Ferdinandusd *Aualos, Marquis of Peſcara,
Amb .flideur k . .
received, & Ambaſſadour of the Catholique King, was receiued in a generall Congrega-
an orien ion; and, his Mandate being read , an Oration was made on his name; the
narnc, {ubltance whereof was; That the Councell becing the onely remedic for
the cuils of the Church , Piusthe fourth hath , ypon good reaſon, thoughe
it neceſſary in theſe times; in which © bilip, King of Spaine, deſired ro
haue becne perſonally preſent, to giue example ro other Princes: but, be-
cauſc hee cannor , hee hath ſent the Marquis, ro at{ilt and fauour itas much
as poſſibly he can, knowirg that howlocuer the Church is detended by God,
yet ſomerimes.it hath necde of the aſſiſtance of man. That the Ambaſla-
dourdocth notthinkeit needfull ro exhort the Synode, knowing their in-
cred:ble and almolt diuine wiſedome; that hee fecrh good foundation: laid
already, andthe things now treat:d on , managed with arte, which doeth
mitigate, and cxaſperate; ſothar hoping thattheir future a&tions will bee
coircſpondent, hee will onely promilc all good offices, endcauours ar.d fa-

UOours

"The Hhftorie of

+ A

L 1s. d the Councell of 'Firent. - 485
ugursfigm ahe Kings) TheSpraker anfweted,in theCouncelsname;tharthe 1562

comming of ao Am batkadour;from lo great a King had giuen courageand ,—
hopsgf the Syngdichiattheremedics ,[ which itfhalbwetorthe cuils of Chei- Frxomuns,
tkeadome,will be pmeticableptherctore it-doech imbrace his Maieftiewith'all £:5..5375
299d 4fi5tionghankett bimyaftcrethito require his merits,androdoc whar. ©*tttns »
ſotuer- ian for his honour - ang doch ;a51r10ught; recciuc theMandate. In The anſivere
che-Corgzegation atthein $3thdAmbaſladour of (o/mos; Duke of Florence. ter. nel
and Sifrid,; wa xeceiad ;who;after his Mandate was cad} made an'Oration p I we Aubes

in which.bcehhowedat largethabffiniticof his Duke with the Pope, exhor- reneets recei
ted rhg Farhers to purge che Church,and declare thelighrofthe rruth, taught 1c 5 0:
þy che-Ppoliles , offering all poſſible aſſiſtance: from bis Duke, as hee had ***
done þefareto.tcho Pope, for-preſeruation of the Maiettie of the Sea of Reame.
The Spaker thanked: him in theSynodesname, and; bauing made a reuc-
rent-contmemoration of Leothetcnth , and Clement tha feacnth padded rhar
they wereaſſembled-cnely torthis cid, andrhoughr of nothing but) of com-
poſiogalld;fcntion,chating away the darkeneſle of ignorance;atid manife-
ſting the cructh. GLUE $1900175” þ *

 ' Melchior. Lufs, Ambaſſadour of the Catholique Sniffes, and Ioachimns Pro- The Ambaſ:
poſtus,, an Abbat,ia the nairic of the Abbats, and other Eccleſiattiques ofthar roma
Nation!,,wetereceiued inthe Congregation'of the za.fIn whoſename an O- Sera re-
ration was made tathis purpoſe! / Thartlie Conſuls ofthe9. Canons, inre-
gardotheir filiall ducty rowards the Church, haue ſent Ambaſſadours to al-
{ilt in the Councel}, and ro promiſc obedience, and'to make knowento all,
that they doe not yecld to any intheir defire to affilt the Seaof Rome; as for-
merly they haue,jin the times of Tulius z,and Leo rozas allo when they fought
with the neighbour Cantos, for the defence of Religion, ſlaying Zuing/nrs,
themolt wicked enenue the Church had , whole bodierhey ſought amongſt
the dead, and burnt ir.co teltific tharthey ought to hauc irreconciliable warre
with the ather Caxtons,, ſo long as they conrinue to bee out of the Church,in
regard they are {1tuated at rhe confines of Ttaly, asa Caltleto refiſt rhe Nor-
therne euill, rhar iz cannot penctrare within the bowels of that Countrey.
The Synode anſwered by the Speaker, rhar the picty and good deedevof the
Heluetians towards the-Apoltolixque Sca were many andgreat; butno obe-
dicnce or office more opportune then rhe Ambaſlage ſent;and the offer made
ro the Synode; that they were glad of thecomming of che Ambaſladours,and
| had, belide the protectionof the Empcerour; Kings, andPrinces, much con-

fidence in that famous Nation: ':- -. T1300 YOOELAB MO AEAL.-

Inthe Congregation of the {xthy of Aprill, Andreas: Dudicius, Biſhop of Th< Ocaors
Tinia, and lobannes ( oloſarinus, of Canadia, Oratours of the Clergic of Fungs- Kos
_ Fie, were receiued. | The firſt made-an Oration, andfayd;thatthe Archbi- Tun
ſhop of Strigoniam , the Bilhops and Clergic, had receiued great ioy for three -
chings ; for the aſlumprion of 'Pars 4.to the Papacie, for the conuocarion of
the Councell of Trent, and forthedepuration of the Apoſtolicall Legars to
preſide init. Hee ſhewed the:obſeruance of the Prelates towards the Ca-
cholique Church , and called the Cardinali of Varmia- for a witneſle there-
 of,, whodidknowe them,and conucricd with them; hee exrounded the de-,
uotiorrof the Hungarians , and theſeruice they doe to all Chriltendome, in
ol x main-

o—_— =

4.86

" _ . 1. —_— XR, I.” Fw m
—_

The Hiſtorie of

————_<_OIX oo awww

1562
FSIFYLSGN
Pivs 4-
FzrDINAND

— — _

ELIZABBTH,
CHARLES 9 »
.,

maintaining warre againſt the-Turkes, and-the'partitdlat diligence of the
Biſhops, 10 oppoſing cheplors ofthe hereriques.” 'Hee related the/fommon
deſire of them all ro bee! preſentinthe Councell;' if theiFpreſence had nor
beene neceſſary at home, to defchd their caftkes-againfÞthi& Turkes;; ' who
arcattheirconfines ; and to keepe watch againſt the heteriques ſo thatbe-
ing forced roperforme:this duricby them their Orators, they recommended

 themſcluesro the proteRion of the Councell;offerin Toreceiuc andbbſctue

The Article _

ot re{idence '
1s (ct on toot
a71nc,and
caulern a con»
tcAtion.

whatſocucr ſhould bedecrecd byrit. The: Secretary anſwered in the Coun:

cels name, that the Synod was affured ofthe joy which the Hungarians Eoti-
cciued for the celebration of the Generall Councell; rhat they onghr to pray
God forthe happy iſſue of it; thatthey defired to haue ſcene the'Prelates
in perſon, bur {ceing they are hindered by the cauſcs prooued by:the'Cardi-
vall of Varmia-,it doth accept their excuſe, hoping that ChriſtianRiligion
will recciue prohithy their preſence in their owne Churches ;andtherather
becauſe res | won recommended their a&tionsto them-the Oratours; Beeing
honeſtand religious Fathers,andithcreforethat they doeembraceboth them
and their Mandates. OOO 2036640]

In the Congregations dayly held from the frucnth dayvnrilrhev$;the Fa-
thers ſpake of the 4. firlt Articles , but very confuſzdly of the firſt; concer-
ning Reſidence. Of thoſe who aſliltcd in the firſt Councell, "when this
point was handled; which was-done with ſomedifference,or rather contro-
uerlte, there were Þur fiue Biſhops in this,! and yer ;-ar the firſt ptopoling
hereof ,-they preſently diuided cthemſelucs:into parts, asremembring the an-
cient contetition; which happenedin no orher queſtion;neirher at that time,
nor inthe time of Tultus, nor arthis preſent.: Some ſay the cauſc was; for that
the other dilcuſſans,beeing rheologicall, were norwell vnderftbod , and
were handled:{peaulatiucly by the learned , without any paſſion bur of ha-
ered againſt che Proteſtanrs , who did trouble chem , by (crting on foorthoſe
queſtions. But this rouched the Prelates in their owneperſons,' Phe cour-
ticrs were mooued with ambition, orobliged to follow that opinion, which
was moſt commodious for their Patrons; ' Others were caricd away with
cnuic, who not hoping ro raiſe themſclues to that height in which the cour-
tiers were, deſired to pullthem Jower,and foto become <quall. In this Arti-
clecuery.one laboured according to his paſſion, and kept a {trift account of
his owne voyce deliucred in the Congregations, andof all the voyces of o-

_ thers, which were any way remarkeable. Of this number 34. came into my

The Suffrage
of che Patri-
arke of /ers-
ſalem concer-
ning Reli-
dence.

hands , inthar forme as they were deliuered, and of the others I have ynder-
ſtood the concluſiononely: bur here nothing is to berclated but thar which

is of notre. T |
The Patriarke of Jeruſalemfſaid , Thatthis Article had been handled, and
diſcuſſed in the firlt Councell,and concluded, that , ro cauſe ref{idence, there
arc two prouiſtons : One, toconſtitute puniſhments for thoſe who doe not
relide; another, to remooue the impediments which dochinder refidencir,
The fir{t was fully ordered in the fixt Seſſion, neither can any thing bee ad-
ded, in regard the lofle of halfethe reuenues is a very great pecuniary puniſh-
ment,then which a greater cannot be impoſed, without making the Biſhops
beggars, If the contumacic bee excellwe, there can bee no greaterpunſhe
ment,

$6Z

I | | / SK
har Stxrh&:hcearing/5nd derernining: ob the'caufescof Biſhops; that fixt rivofiucus,
Seſlion referied-itewhis: Holinefe ro finde!'wremnedieyeitherby, nieancs of 2 £55155517

_ of the impediments; :elefting a-certaitie mamber'of Fathers, as:chen was - --:--
done ,\10« make colkRion' of them, tharthey:may bee propofedipatid pro- h
uided. for: | + | lou hg) ne 2m £13 TO2DNEMNOS con
;.' The Archbiſhop of Granata added; thara more potent and cffettuall rex The fufinge

rhe Biſhops vnderſtanding theii dugry, wil chinke ofitheirowneconfeicnce; © | ©
chey willmot be repured hirelings;bur Paftors,who knowing that the flocke --...
isgiucatothem by God, ro whom they muſt make atr'aecount, wicthour lays *
ing the fault on orticrs,and beingaſſuredrhat diſpenſations wil neirher-ſaucy

nor hclpetticm., chey willapply themſclues toperforme theirduery. Andhe "DIRE
proceeded ro proue,with many authoritics ofthe Newand Old Teſtament}, x ops
and expoſition of chePathers; that this was the Catholikerruth. This opini-f**

on was 4pprooucd bythe maior part of the Congregation, 'the maintainers

whereof: laboured ro bring aurhoritics and reaſohs. -
' Others did reiect it, and faid it was new; neucr defended, neitherby anti» quo
quity , nor by this-age before Cardinall:Caieran'; who ſer the'qutftion om
foore, and maintained that part, which notwithſtanding hee did abandon'in
bis old age, becanfe heetooke a Biſhopricke;-and did neucr refide 5 thatthie
Church hatheuer held., :char-the Pope might diſpenle; 'rhar Now-refidents
baucalwaycs beene puniſhed , and reprehended as rranfyreſſors of the- Ca-
nons onely , and nor of the Law of God; thar, indeede, itwasdiſpured'itrthe.
firſt Councel|,butthe diſputation was held to beſo dangerous by che Legars,
men of great wiledome, that they did cunningly cauſcitto beebutied in ft-
lence; thatrhiscxample ought to be followed, and that the bookes which
have beene writteri ſince, haue giuen grcat{candall rothe world , and made
knowenthatthe difpurarion proceeded frot partiality. For the' authorities
of rhe Scriptureand Fathers,they arc oncly extJorrations to perfeR ion , het-
ther is thereany ſubſtantiall proofebut ourofche Canons , which are Eccles
ſiaſticall. Jawes. 7 Ih 1708 Tv No
Some held opinionthat there was neither place, nor time, nor:opportu-
nity to/handlethar:queſtion, & that no good could come by the dererminari-
on

A an
———_—_—_— —_—

NR _— CO —C—D——— ———

488 The Aiftorieof © © Lrn:6t

* L.56h on of it; but dangerofmany ABCEnUcNICNCEs 5 that the Councclrwasaflems
' 13 bled, 69-extirpatcrherefies;, novo make: Sebiſme Fr c whoa nes
Eoixane, Which, wyoyld bappetrby condemningan opinion , followe ;.ibavebyrho
Euaenre, greater park , yetby one balfearthe. lealtz 5tbat the: authoursoftbaropinion
| Sj haue rof\inuentediefeer trucths fake, but ithe moretavrge men to-refide;
 * © with fall ground: ef rcaſon 5-:in regard that the Lawes'of: Goprateinor
more-giligently obſcrued than-the: Lawes ob ithe Church; tharthe;precepe

Trcuneor For ketþing of Lentismore (trialyobſrard,,rhenthole of the Decalogue;
he Pope are that-if to:cþnfeſle.and communicate at Eafter were commanded -by. G oD}
rucdrhn MOTre would not doe ittberinow doc; that: ro fay Maſſe with Copesis an Ecz
ce lawesof cIcftafticall lawgand yer nomandoth tranſgrefle ir;heethatdoth notobcythe
pcvall commands of the Canons , will tranſgrefſe much more when hce feb

*-  rethonely theiuſtice,of Go Þ rnexther willany Biſhop be mooued with char
determination , butir will giue acca{1onto plot rebellions againſtrhe Apo-
ſtolique Sca, toreſtrainerhe Poptsauthority, and (as-fome hauebern heard

co whiſper )to deprefſe. the Court of Reme2 ;that that was theornamentof

the Clergie,. which is reſpe&ted inortber- places , onely inrcgard of it; thar if

ir ſhould be depreſſad;the Churdiwyould rucry where be leflecltermed; and
thereforethar'ie wasnotht ro handle ſuch: a buſinefſe;r without imparting

it to bis'Holincſſe and Colledgeiof Cardinals, ro whom it doethprincipally

belot jay ( J F653 wn iP5J! rat rite 't : TIAL \ Sub N 21 01-1151 TR Tf (1

TheSuff ate TR opinion of Pavlis Loris Biihopds Nocerg,is not to be omigred; who
2 drip faidih ſubſtance.:, That cetrainly the Canncel was allembleditonuten great
ofXe74. wound, which is:thegdeformationofthe Church, thecauſe whereof gas all are
_ perſwaded; is rhe ablengeof rhe Prelars fromrheir Churches ; which becing
affirmedby all, is perhaps por-{ufaciently; confideted by.any. | Burit is nor
\:;the partofa wilc Phyſician 10 take-away'the cauſe before hee be well aſſured

Saud

'"*that the remoouing of-ir will-nbht cauſe greater difcaſcs:i: It the:abſence of
Prelars hath beene thecavſe of the corruprtions, there will bee: efſergeforma-
tion in thoſe Churches whete they haue reſided, | The Popes,fortheſe hun-

_ + dred-yettes,;,hauccontipbally ſarein Rowe, and vicd all diligence roinftruct

the people; yet we'doe nor feethar that citie is better gouerned then others.

The grear capital Cirics of Kingdomes arc moſt out of order, where the

Prelats haut alwayes reſided; an the contrary ;lome poorerities, which hauc

not ſcenea Biſhop in 48 hundred yceres,are leſſe corrupted; tharamonglt the

ancient Prelats/hereprefent, who hauc continually reſided in their Churches,
of which-number there'are ſome; nor one can/ſhew that his Dioces:isbercer

then the-next, which hatic continued withouta Biſhop: 'If any fay:they are a

flocke without a ſhephicrd, let him conſider that not Biſhops only, bur Pariſh

Prieſts ali] haue cure of foules, and that there are mountaines' which ha-

uing neuerſecnc Biſhops , may be a patcrne to Epiſcopall Cities, -'Fhar the

zcalc and carcof the Fathers of thefirſt Councellis' ro bee commendedy and
imitated, who, by. penaltics,haue incircd the Prelats roremaine in theit owne
Churches, and bcgunto remoouerthe impediments which did hinder them ;
but they were decciued if they did hope that thisreſidencic would beafufh-
cient reformation; yea,they oughtto feare, thatas refidencic is 'now requi-
red, ſo polteritie,ſecingtheinconuenicnces rhat ariſe from thence, wildetire

their

L186 the Councell of Trent. : 489

FATTY

—_—

their ablence. Thar they ought not romake luch firovg bonds as cannot in r562
time of ncede bee looled , fuch as Is Diuinum would bee, which they now ©——>
begin to allcadge,, 1460 yeeresafrer Cu k 1 $ T Wheterhereisapetnicious Fixomunn,
Biihop, as was that of Cellen, he will defend himſelfeby this doetriney in not zipoamrn
obcying che Pope, when he hall ce him ro giue anaccount of his ations, CR
- or keepe him farre off ,that hemay nor cheriſhthecuill. ' Headded, that hee
ſaw thatthe Prelates who wereof the contrary opinion had a good zeale, but
did belecuealſothar ſomcof them would bee: content romakevicofit, to
withdraw themſclues fromthe Popes obedience, which the {trifter it is, the
morcit dorh hold che Churchvnited. He pur them in mindealto,that what
ſocuer they doe heerein, wiil rurne to the fauourof Pariſh Prieſts allo, to
withdraw themſclues from obedienceto their Biſhops. Forthe Article being
thus expounded, they will make vſe of, and lay, that ihe Biſhop cannot re-
mooue them from their Churches, nor reftraine their authoritie by relerua-
tions,and,being Paſtors immediatly ſent by God , they will prererd that the
flocke doth more belong rothem. then to the Bilhop,and no an{werecan be
madeagainlt it. And as hitherto the goucrnment of the Church hath been
preſerued by mzanes of the Hierarchie , fo this will cauſe a Popularity, and an
Anarchie, which will deltroy it. F

Jobs © Baptiſta* Bernard, Bichop of Aiace,who though hee belecued thar reſt. ThefuFage
dencie was de iure diuino , yet thought it not fitto [pcake of that queſtion, de- 1194 5:rnerd
liuered a ſingular ſpeech, ſaying ;"I hat, notayming to cltabliſh one opinion moms hg
more then another, but onely to toenforce refidencie, as that it may 3a re-
ally cxccured , hee thought it vaine to. declare from whence the obligatiori
came, or whatſocuer clic , and that it was ſufficient onely to remooue the
cauſc of abſence ; which is , that Biſhops doc bufte themlelues in the Courts |
of Princes, and in the affaires of the world, being ludges , Chancellours, Se.
cretaries, Counſcllours, Trealurers; and there are but few offices of State
into which ſome Biſhop hath,nor inſinuatcd himſelfe. . This is forbidden by
S. Paul, whothought it neceſſary that. a ſouldier of the Church ſhould ab-
ſtainc from lecular employments. . Let Gods command bee executed , and
them forbidden to takeany charge, ofhce, or degree, ordinary or extraordi-
naric, in the afiaires of the world; and then there being no cauſe for them ro
remaine at Court, they will goe to their re{1dencie, of their owne accord,
without commaund or penalrie , and will not hauc any occaſion to dcparr
from thence. In concluſion, he deſircd that the Councell would conſtituce,
that it ſhould nor bee larwfull for Biſhops or others, who haue cure of ſoules,
ro exerciſe any ſecular office or charge. | |

Thc Biſhop of tive Churches, the Empcrours Ambaſſadour, oppoſedand Foproedby

! tic Bithoap of
ſayd, that if the words of S. Paul were to bee vnderitood according to the foe Cn

ſence which was giuen them , the whole Chuich was to be condemned, and men

all Princes, fnce the yeere 800, vatill now, for that for which they princi- *****:
ally deſeruc to be commended, theſein giuing , and thoſe in accepting tem-

porall Iuri{d:&tions; which alſo haue becne exerciſed by the Popes, and by

Biſhops placed in the Catalogue of Saints. The beſt Empetours , Kings of

France, Spaine , England, and Hungary haue euer had their Counſels full of

Prelates,all which muit bee coademned, if Gods precept doeforbid them to

excicile

490 'T be. Kiftorie of - - L 18.6;

1562 Ccxcrcile thoſe charges, , Hee that thinketlaT-aul his command doth compre»
> hend Ecclcfialticali perſons onely, is deceived : Forit-is diret:d.roall faih-
Fxo:xas full Chriltians, who arc the Sou:diers of Chriſt, andinferreth, tharas the
Euz 2xra, Worldly (ouldicr docth not buſichimſclfcin the Artes by which life is main«
Ez4Xtz* 9: rained, becaule they are repugnant to his profeſhon,ſorhe Souldier of Chriſt,

that is, euery Chrittian, ought to abſtainc from choſe things which arc re-
pugnantto Chriflian profelſhon; which'are {1nnes onely ; but whatfocuer
may bedone without ſinnegis lawfull for cuery one. Fhe Prelates that ſcrue
in thoſe affaires,catnot be reprebended-,excepr it be ſaid thattheyarc finnes.
Thegrearneſle of the Church, and the eltecme the world maketh thereof,
proceedeth moſt from Ecclcfialticall dignitics , placcd in perſons of Nobili-
tieand of great blood, and from Prelatcs exerciſed in charges of importance
which if they ſhopld bee incompatible ro the Clergie , noperfon nably det-
cended would cater into that order, no Prelate would bee cltecmed, andthe
Church would con{tiit onely of people baſely borne,and living baſcly. Bur,
onthe contrary,the gooddoGtors baue cucr maintained, that thole Starures
arc againſt Eccleſtalticall ibertic , which exclude from publiqueadminiſtra-
tions Ecclefialticall perſons, rowhom they belong by right of birth ; as alſo
the prohibitions that publique charges cannot be giuen ro Prielts. This was.
heard with applaulc of all the Prelatcs, cucn of thoſe who thought that rc-
05mg {dence was d: iure Dixino; ſo potent are the affctions of men, that ſome-
times they luffcr them not to difcerne contradictions. |

Abricfei —Oftheother Articles a light diſcuſhon oncly was wade; yer ſomething
ac otcne Was ſaid worth the noting, + Fas the ſecond, for prohibiting ordinations ro
ceminz ordi- rhe ticle of the Patrimony ,1t is cerrainc, that ſince the Church was conlticu-
we f-be 5. td and citabliſhed, and neceſfaric miniltcries deputed init, no man was or-

"noms dayned,1in thegood times of ic, but varo ſome proper miniſtery. Bur this
good vie was quickly turned into an abuſe. For in regard of the exempri-
ons of diuers, and of othcr worldly reſpects, and becauſe the Biſhops defired
tro hauc a great Clergie, they ordained whoſocuer came vnto them for it.
Thereforethis ſort of ordination was forbidden in the Councell of { balce-
don, which was then called abſolute , or looſe, ( for ſo the Greeke word doeth
properly izgnific)commanding thatnone ſhould be ordained bur vnto a par-
ticular charge,and that the loofe ordinations ſhould becnullified, and made
voyd. This was afterwards confirmed by the Canons, fo that this rule re-
mained as a Maxime, eſtabliſhed in the Church, that no man could bee or-
dained without a title; and inthe ancient and good times, by a title was vn»
deritood a charge, or miniſtery to be exerciſed, But after thar corruptions
were entred, atitle was taken for a reuenue to liue vpon,and that which was
conſtituted tothis end, tharamongſi rhe Clergie no perſon might bee idle,
was thus transformed, that no perſon might want, and bce forced ro worke

Hor his lining. Andthetruc fenſc of the Canons beceing couered by this in-
terpretation , Alexander the third did cſtabliſh it in his Lateran Councel], fay
iog,thatnone ſhould be ordaincd without a title, by which bee may receiuc

prouiſion, neceſſary for his life, with this exception, if he had no inheri-
rance of his owne, or from hisfather ; which would bevery reaſonable if a

title were required onely to maintaine life. For this cauſe many,ſhewing they
had

_—

L1 s/ 6: the Councellof Trent. 491

had a Parriimonie;"by falicproofes , were ordained; others, after they were t564
| ordained to a true/partimony, did alien it; and others, borrowing a ſuffici- Hr
ent patrimony vatill they were ordeincd,, did afterwards reſtore it to him Fizomunp.
thar had lent ir, -fo'thdt ehere were many poore Ptieſts,and many iniconuc- E775my,
nicnces cauſed, which required that prouifroh ſhould Bemade forrhem. ' * C4 b
This Article beitrg propaſed-to the Synode, rhete were divers opinions. In which
Some (ayd,thar it baby eſtabliſhed that reſidencie is de Ture dinito, and cucry Spimonsore
oneexercifing his charge, che Churches will bee perfeAly ſerued', arid there Eu”
will be no neede of Clergic-mennor beneficed ;or of ordinationstothetitle
of pacrimonic orany other, ant all incotitenicnets will bee'remetied;” For
there will beeno idleperſon in the Clergie; from'whom'innutterable tmi[.
chicfcs: and bad exatnples doe'come?, "there will bee nho'begyat, norany
forced to vie balerrages. They 1ayd,rhat rioreformatian wasgood, bur that
which did-reducerhirigs ro-theif beginning; that the primittueChitch did:
continue thany yeeres ih perfection', and that the integrity theredFcould by
this meanes only bereſtored;' There was another opinion;that n6neſhould
| bedenicd io take holy orders, who, for honeſtie or ſufficiencie , did deferne'
them, alchough rhey were ow alleadging thar the poore were not exelu-
ded in the Primitiue Church, which'did nor diſlike that'Clerkes and Priefts
ſhould live by their labour, bythe example of S.Paxlthe # ins > Apollo
the Evangeliſt , who liued by making Pavilions. And afret that Pritices be.
came Chriſtians,( onſtantivs the ſonne of Conſtantine, gane, in his ſixt Conſul-
| ſhip, apriuiledge ro the Clergie; that they ſhould nor pay any Subſidic for
that which they did traftique in ſhops and worke-houles , becauſe they gaue
ſome of their gaincs ro the poore. The inſtruftion of S, Paxt to the faith-
full was oblcrucd,that they fiould labour in honeſt workes', that they might
haue whercof togiue ro the pope. They faid that an idle and wicked life.
was ynſcemely inthe Clergie, betauſe' ir gaue ſcandall; bur'ro line of ones 1a-
bour was honclt, and tended ro edification; and if any were forced to beg. -
becauſe of {ickneſle; irwasnothame , ris more then torhePriars who holde
it fora glory to bee accounted beggars; that it was nota Chriſtian propo1-
| tion, that to labour- to liuc by ones hands, to begge in' cafe of i nporencie,
| was vndecent to the Miniſters of CH t's T, and thatnothing was'vnſceme-
ly but vice. And'f avy thoughethar want was cauſcof theft, or other ſinnes,
| hee ſhall finde,when he thinketh better on'it;thar theſebee fines of rhe rich
rather then of the. poore, andthar auarice is niore imf otent;- and ynra-
| | med, then pouetty,: which ;becing alwaycs bufte,doth rake away occaſi-
ons of doing ill. Att honeſt man and a poore man'are compatible, bur
notan honelt man and'anidle man. The grearbenefit'which'the Chutch
{ militant-1t this wotlde,” and'that which's in Purgatoric docth recciuc by
Maſſes, - celebrated by poore Prieſts ;and'notby rich; is both! written and
preached ; of which number if none were;rhe faithful living, and the ſoules
of the dead would bredepriued of great ſuffrages; that ir were better thar a
ſtrict order ſhould bee 1nade;; chatperfons of honeſty and ſafficiencie ſhould
be ordained withour a title, ſecing tharnbw the cauſe docth ceaſe for which:
Antiquiticforbadeit, which was, for thatthoſe who had ritles, abouring in
theirEceleſiaſticallfunCtions, did edifie; andthe others, becing idle, did mh
: fcandalt,

- -_
— it...
——

A <—_— = ———_ — __—_—_ ———.

4-92 {pe FHiflorieof \ I: 1846;

156 2 ſcandall,whercas now thoſe tharhauc titles doe, forthe malt pariy-difdaine
> theEcclefaſticall minilterie,and liuc in pleaſure,and the poore perigrme the,

Prvs 4.

, | FaxDtxand. funRions,and doc edifc, FE-S, Se 7 OMALEG 36;
# Rc. . This opinion was not followed by many. ., But a,middle. opinign-: had:
W2A5:5, great applaple ; which; was, tharche vic. ſhould bee [tilloblerued, noo or-
-..: daine withouta title to an Ecclefialticall benetice,ora,ſufhcicntparrimonie,
that Pric{ts might nor diſhonour their order by! begging, and-thatir thoulg
- bee conſtirured,co remopu allfraud,that che Biſhop-ſhould prouide-thatthe,
| patrimonie,to Which the Clerke.is ordained, might nor bee alienated... Ga-;
briel de Venexs,Bilhop of YVauiers, contradicted this, . and ſaid, thatthe patri-
moni of. Clerks is a{ecularching,, conecrning whichthe Clergit cannot:
poſlibly makeany law: befides many. occaſions may ariſe, tor whiththe Law;
or the Magiſtrate may lawfully command ir co bee alicnared. Andivis gene-+
rally cruc vhat the, patrimoniall goods of Clerkes, for. preſcriptions, aud; all-
ſorrs of congracts,arc{ubictt ro theciuill laws; and therefore thatthey ought;
ro:conider, well of the bufinefle, betore they. aflumeauthoritic tobreake a ci-:
ul contract. MoS RO 4-5 logodt 320), ode nh to yior, r3 01 boin!, fd
Concuning ., T he occaſionof propaſing thechird Artiglewas, becauſe the precepr of
>monie CHRIST, that all ſpipizuall graces {hould bee freely conferred; as they are
freely receined from him,'was many waycs tranſgrefſed inthe collationiof Or-
| ders : whichabuſe was not new, but greater in former times. For, inthe
beginning of Chriſtianiie, charitis abounding , the people who receiued
=. {pirituall chings, from the Miniſters of Ca x15 T, didnot onely,according
rothe diuineprecept expounded by $. Paal, contribute to them as much as.
{crucd for rheir neccfhtics , bur enoughalforo. maintaine-the poore, neuer:
thinking that che temporall was a price of rhe Spirituall. Bur after thatthe
r:mporall, which was held and inioyed incommon, was diuided, anda re-
ucnue applycdro the titles; called a Benefice, the ordination being nor then
diltin& from the collationot thericle, and by conſequence of the Benchice |
anncxcd co.it,. bur both being giuenand recciued together, it ſeemed to the
ordainers, that, befade the ſpiricuall thing, they gaucalſoa temporall, for
which they might receiue another temporall thing, in recompence, which
hee that wauld obtaine, was forced to accommodate himſelfe ro the will of
him that could giue it,ſo.that open buying and ſelling was cafily brought in,
which,in theorientall Church,could ncuer be corrected, though many 'Ca-
nons and cenſures were made againſt it. Yet, it; was much. diminifhed;.bec-
cauſe Godtooke from thery, by the rod of the'Saraceps, agreat part of their
goods. And, inthe Welt, though ir was much 'reprchended by good mco,
yetit continued, inſomeplacces more, in ſomeleſle, yntill, abguttbs yeere
1 090. the ordination was diuided from the collation' of theBenefice g for
i which cauſe thatdid beginne to paſſefor nothing, and Simony did-ſtillcon-
li tinuc 1n this,and that moxciopenly then Þcfore.), And this abuſe did alwayes
increaſe, though vynder diucrs names of Anzates, {mall ſervices, ' wiring ,
ſcale, and otherpretences', which che, Church: ſtill vſeth,i with ſindll hape
thatthey canicucr beraken away, yntill Ca K+.5)T 'come againe, with" bis
whip, ouerthrow the tables. of the moncy chaygers ; and:chaſe them our of
the Temple. But the ordination, which, being ſeparated from the Boncfice,
| had

"x . . A
- a" » > of £ "
p ly > L , a 6 4
—_s Lad F _ # " L. ”
$1 250 45 $440 wt 4 vv fant N - & +
? * p w « "1<"/1 2g. RT.
4 ; o
SM ”

IJ

Lis: 6. | the Councellof Trent. Tl 493 =

had the fortune to bee conferred freely;,:did/inioy/ir bur a ſmall time. For 1562

the Biſhops eltceming ir vnproficable and: baſe ;' and regarding more the. -

ther which yeelded fruit, lefr off, by little and lirtle; roadminiſter the ordi- Frnvimano;
nations; fo that ricular Biſhops were inftidured,, who performed the Ponti- Ernawry,

ficall Eccleftalticall miniſterics, and che true Biſhops buſted themſclues inthe
tremporall onely. Thoſe, hauing no! revenues; were forced to maintaitic
themſelues by che adminiſtration of thaſefuntions:' 'Whereupon hee thar
recctued Order was compelled to contribuge, firtt by the name of almes or of-
tering, afrerwards, cromake it morchonourable; * the title of donatiue or
preſent, and, proceeding further,that icmightnorbeeomirred as being a dues
tic, it was coucred with the name of reward, notof the Ordayner, bur of his
ſcruants, or of the Notarie, or of fome other who ſerucd himin the ordioari-
on. Therefore in this Article'it was propoſed; thatthe abuſe occurring in
the collation of Benctices ſhould not bee ſpoken of ;'as beeing an/infirmutie;
not curable with any.remedie butdeath.” ' | > don};
Concerning which the: Prelates were. diuided, nor by opinions, or af-
fections, but by qualitic of perfons. Therich Biſhops condemned the recei-
uing of any thing ; either for rhemſelues or their officers, or Notaries, as Siy
monicall, and facrilegtous , bringing the example of Jebefie 'ſeruant of the
Prophet Elizens, and of Simon Magus, and of the ſcuere commaundement
of CarisT,' Giue. freely'as you. baue receined. They allcadged alſo many
exaggerations out of the/Fathersagain(t this {1nne, ſaying, that the names of
a voluntary donatiue, or almes,” are vaine colgurs.repugnant tg trueth,:be-
cauſc the gift is beltowed for the Order, without which it wouid notthaue
beene giuen. | And/ if ir bee an. almes, why is irginen-ypon that occaſion
oncly ? let ir be made ar another time, and Orders conferred without the incer-
uention of any thing. i-Butthe miſchicfe is;thar if ovaſbould tell the Ordainer |
that heegaue him an almes, hee would holdit forao iniurie; nos would re-
cciue it at another.zime. 'Thereforethey oughrnorro belecuc,.that they
could deceiue God and the'world. © They: concluded thatamablſolute Dex
crec oughtto bee made; thatnothing ſhould/beegiuen;thoughy withngly;or
vnder the'name of almes, norrecciucd, notonelyby.theOrdainer, bural
any of his; or by the Notaries; vaderche nameof writing, ſcale,paincs)or any
other Pretence whatſocuer.'11 3 tn hot Rd 1 boon agdt Fling)
| Rurithe/poore Biſhops and che Titular ſayd'to the:contrary, :thatas-20
giuc order for a price was a wicked ſactiledge{o1o takeawayalincs;fomuch
commended by Cx kx 15'T , did\deltroy charitie, and whollydetotine the
Church. Tharthere was the fame rea(on abſolutely for Ordenations;; which
is for Confeſſions, Communions, Maſſes, Durudl and giber Eeg]chratkioall functi-
ons; atidthercforenocauſe why that fſhouldbeitorbuddin Grdaation, which
isallowed inal{rheſe j' ang thieallegarion;ahavitic beciap-Alates, ts i2beegi-
ucn at another time, is of 'as mach 'force:in;all che orherifuniions:' {Tha
Church hath yſed, from che beginning, to redeiucoblaricinsandabnes, ypote
theſe occafions ; which it rhey thallbee rakervaway;rirepoore religious per-
ſons, who liue of chem,; will beeforced rotake ſomegrhercoutte; the rich

F

will not performe the offices a8 doerh, andyforrhe ſpace of fine! hundred
yecres, hath plainely appearcd;' ſo thartheexerciſe.of Religion wikbee pa
| Te | An

494 The Hittory of 22 Lame;

: 562 and he people, remaining without ir,will fall into impietic;, and divers per-

nicious ſupcrſtirions. And if thoufands of crownes arc giuen without repre-

Fnomas, henſion for the yeſtments which the Apoltolike Sea giueth ro the Merropo-
Enzima. litans, how cana ſmall acknowledgement be reprehended, which the Biſho
Cnaners 5: recciucth from the inferiour Orders ? What reaſon 15there that things of the

% = In Me q
A + 4» "TIE" " Kd boy a ad E004 L
[7 V Ws of
Fe i RR he » TE TEN ny 3:66. os...

ſame kinde ſhould be ordered by contrary lawes > That cannot be called an
abuſe which was inſtituted in the beginning. And it remaineth ſtill in the
Pontifical, that waxe candles are-preſented , by thoſe that arc ordayned, ro
the Biſhop ordainiog, at the offering place, in time of the Ordinations, which
be cemporall chings, and,if they bee grear,and well adorned, may colt much.
Ir is not therefore (o bad as it is painted our, neither can the oppoſites garne,
by the infamic of poore Biſhops, the name of reformers, imitating the Phari-
ſecs,in oblcruing moatrhes, and ſtraining at gnats. .

Some ſayd alſo that it could not beeconftitured, as being contrary to the
decree of Innocentins the third, in thegencrall Councell, wherethe vle of gi-
uing and recciuing a temporall thing, in the miniſtery of the Sacraments,
is not onely approoucd, but the Biſhops are commanded to compell the peo-
plc, by cenſures and Eccleftaſticall puniſhments, ro obſeruc the cuſtome , gi-
uing the ticleof laudable ro thoſe things, which now ſome goe aboutro con-
demne as ſacrilegious.

But Dinifins, Biſhop of Milepotamus,made a long digreflion, to ſhew how
the faithfull would bce edified , if the Sacraments were adminiftred by the
Clergie for pure charitie, cxpeting no reward but from God onely. Hee
affirmed char neceſlarics were ro beeallowed them, and greatcr proviſion
alſo; bur that this was ſufficiently and ſupcraboundamtly done, by the aflig-
nation of Tithes, becauſe they,not beipg therenth part of the people, doe re-
cciuc ſogreat a portion, beſides other poſſeſſions which are double as much,
Therefore ir is not juſt ro demand that which is already recciued an hun-
dred folde;-and if the Biſhops bee poore, it is not becauſe-the Church is
poore, but becaule rhe riches arc ill divided. With an cuen diſtribution c-
ucry one might be fitted; and that might be giuen without counter. change,
for which more then the iuſtpricchath beene already receiued. Hee added,
that, if this multitude of abuſes could nor bee taken away altogether, ir
would bec good to beginne with that of Ordinations;:not reſtraining it ro
the onely action of conferring the Sacraments, bur extending, it alſo tothe
precedent.” For itwould be agrear ablurditic that one ſhould pay too deere,
in the Chancerics of Bilhoprickes, for dimiferie |ctters , by which the Clerke
hath leaueto finde out onerhar will ordainc-him,and in Rome to be ordained
out of the times appointed, and {ay the reformation -onely.vpon the Biſhops
chat doc ordaine. This opinion was approoued by many, in reſpeftof +
dimiſories of Bilhops;; bur concerning the Facultie ginen ar Rome, the Cardi-
nall Simoneta fayd,” that the Popewould provide for it, and that it vas nota
thing to be handlcdinCouncell. | - - NES ES ca abs

Concerning the reward of Netaries ſore thing was ſaid. For ſome eſtce-
ming itanofhce wy

re
ped. Others held it

Y ſecular,chought tharthcir pay ought not ta bee liop-
ditforan Eccleſnlticail office. Antonives 4ugnitings,Bilhop
of Lerids, ar: antiquaric;faid; thatin the ancient Church the Miniſters were

; 7 ordained

ds,

——_— c_—
——_

Lts. 6. the C onncell of Trent. 495

ordained in preſence of all thepeople, fo that there was noncede of letters 1562
Parents or teltimoniall, and after they had gained a title they did nor change ;———>
Dioceſle, andif, for any caule , they did make a journey, they had a letter Frxomano:
from the Biſhop, then called Firmata. The vſe of letters reſtimoniall began #:=uamra;
afrer char the people left ro bee preſent at the Ordinations, and the Cierkes be- C32HS 5:
gan to bee vagabonds, and, being introducedin ſupplement of the preſence

of the people, is robce eſteemeda temporal office; bur, becaule it is applied

coa ſpiritual marrer, it 1s to bee vſed with moderation. Therefore his opi-

nion was, that ſome reward ſhould bec allowed for them, but moderated,

and limited.

That which was propoſed in the fourth poynt belongeth onely to the Concerning
Collegiate Churches; which having by cheir inſtitution, this function , a- ge
monglt others, to aſſemble chemſelues in the Church to prayſe God, ar the
houres appointed by the Canons, which therefore are called Canonical,
rents were annexed to them forthe maintenance of the Canons, diitributed
amongſt them in one of theſe foure manners. For cicher they lived at a com-
mon table and charge, as the Regulars,or cuery one had his portion of rents
aſſigned ro him , ( which therefore was called a Prebend) or, the ſeruice be-
ing ended, all was diltribured amongſt them, either in meate, or money:

Thoſe thartiucd in common-continued in that diſcipline buta ſmall time,

but came to diniſton , cither into Prebends, or diſtributions to the Preben-

darics,cxcuſing rhoſe from performing thole diuine offices, who , by teaſon

of infirmicic,orſome ſpirituall buſineſle, could notbee preſent. It was an ea-

 fiethingro find apretence, and begin an vſeof being leldome inthe Church,

| hg ro cnioy the Prebend notwirhſtanding. Bur hee, vnto whom the mea-
ſt

fe was diltributed,after the worke was done,could not bee excuſed; {o that
i{cipline, and frequencic in the Offices remained longer in this ſecond kinde,
then in the firſt. © Forthis cauſe the faichfull,whenthey gaue or bequeathed
any thing to the Churches ,-ordaincd it ſhould bee pur in diltributions : and
experience ſhewed, tha ter the diſtributions were, the betrer the Of-
fices were performed , and thatrhg negligence of thoſe who did nor aſfilt in
the offices might beeredreſſed, by raking part of the Prebends, and making,
diſtributions thereof. - This 'was much commended by many of che Pre-
Htes, thinking the worfhip' of God would bee much inlarged heereby ;
whereof there could no doubt bee'made, becauſe ir did appeare already
by experience. + Andthis was all which was ſpokeh for a ground of this
Sona” < 2145555 EIS TUIIOU ON:
Bit L ucas Biſantius , Biſhop of (ataro, a godly man , burp6ore, ſpake to
the contrary , that rather. the Prebendaries ſhould bee forced; 'by'cenſutes,
and depriuations of part; or of afl'the fruites, abdof rhe Prebends chem-
ſclues, bur that the firlt forme ſhoul®ar bee altered; - Foralmolt all thee
inſtitutions being made by the laſt will ofchefairhifulf; they oughtro beeob-
| ſerucd inuiolably, and withouralteration} riot onelyvpon prerence of berrer,
but nor for that which is tity and cercainely better ;inregard iris nor uſt
ro meddle with that which'belongettrto another;'betuſe hee doeth not vſe
it well. But, which is of: more importance, ro'exerciſe a ſpiritual! fan-
Qichi for reward is yndoubtred Simonie;fo that bydriuing GI
| Fr 2 ener

| 496 | The Hiilory of R$ 1B. 6G,

1562 therwould cnterfarre worle, making negligentmentobecome Simouizcall.
>> The otherparc an{wered,that the Councell had power te change lalt willes;
Frz>maxe. and,for aflilting at divine Offices for gaine,onc mult diſtinguiſh, thatthe gaine
Ezzanmzre. isnotthe principall, but the ſecondary cauſc, and therefore there is no {inne

ans 9 init; for the Canons will goero Church principally to ſerue God, and ſe-

condarily for the diſtributions. T he others replyed , that they ſaw not how
the Councell had greater power ouer the goods of the dead , then of the li-
uing, Which no man isſo impercinent as to pretend ; and bcfides the do-
Arineis not fo ſecure as it is affirmed, that it is lawfull ro ſcruc God for gainc
ſecondarily. And if it were, it is nota ſecondary, bur a principall cauſe,
which firlt mooueth, and without which the worke would not bee done.
This opinion was not pleafing and ray{cd much murmuring in the Congre-
gation. For cucry one beeing conſcious tro himſelfe that hee recciued the
title and charge onely in regard of the rents, did thinke hee was condem-
ned. Thercforethe Article had great applauſe that the Prebends ſhould bee
rurned into diſtributions, to incite men to ſerue God, in the beſt manner
they could. | |

mary Theſe Articles hauing beenethus diſcuſſed, Fathers were deputed ro make

eputed to : ;

frameche De- the Decrees; and it was propoſed that, in the next Congregations, they

= ſhould ſpeake of ſixe more , lcauing that of ſecret mariage for another Sefl1-
on. "The next day the Legates and Deputics mer, to colle& the ſubltance
of the opinions of the Fathers, and, concerning the firlt Article of Reft-

TheLegees dencic, they diſſented amonglt themſclues. Simonera fauourcd the opini-

nionconcer- ON that it was de iure poſitiuo, and layd, that the greater part, cucn thoſe who

ring et held itwas deinredinino, thought firte thatthe queſtion ſhould bec omitted.
Mantua, without manifeſting hisowne opinion, fayd that the greater oum-
ber did demand a declaration of ir. Of the other Legates, Alremps follows-
ed Simoneta,and the other two, though with ſome caution, adhered tro Man-
tua. And this difference did not paſſe without ſome bitterneſle, though mo»
deſtly expreſſed. For this cauſe the Legates held a generall Congregation,
the 20. day ; in which the demand following was read our of a paper : that
is; Becauſe many Fathers hauc fayd that refidence is de ture dinino, fome haue
fayd nothing, and others ſpoken againlt the making ofthe declaration, ro
the end , that thoſe who are depurtcdro make the Decrets, may make them
quickely , cafily, and ſecurely , your Lord(hips may bee pleaſed ro deliver
your opinions, onely with the word placet , whether you approoue or dif-
prooue the declaration, that reſidencic is de inre diuino: becaule, according
to the cuſtome of thisholy Synod, the Decree ſhall bee made as the greater
number ſhall give their yoyces; which becauſe they had beene —_ delt-
ucred in great varicty,they defared thagghey wouldail {peake diltinly;, one
after one, tharthcir ſuffrages mighgþonotcd. TE No

andfetos All hauinggiuen their voyceg3;$8; fayd, 7 lacet abſolutely : 33. Non places

oe Pert: ablolutely. 13, fayd Placer, conſalro prins SanQifimo Domino noſtro : and 17.
anſwered, Nonplacer, niſi prins conſulto Sanifirmo Domino noſtro. The 13.did
diffcr from the 17. becaule(rhey did abſolutely approouc the declaration, yer
were ready to change thcir opinion,if the Pope thought otherwiſe : the 17.
did abſolutely notapproouc,yct were contentto be * che Popes opinion , if

hee

L, 6. 6. | che Councellof Ti rent. | 497.

hee d1d likeit. This was avery ſubtile difference; and ſed onely where eue- 15623
ry one doeth thinke to doc his Maſter the belt ſcruice.' T he Cardivall Ma: (5 >
druccio would nor preciſely anſwere to the interrogation; bur faid,hereferred Fravinuns,
himſelte ro his voyce, delivered in Congregation , which was in fauour of tins,
Hu divinum;” And the Biſhop of Budua ſaid, that hee held the affirmariueas E=**
alrcady concluded, and rhat bi chought fic it ſhould be publiſhed;-\The-voys _,...
ces becing collected and diuided, and it appearing thartheigreater part ; by
one halfe, did approoue the declaration, thara fourth pare onely did diſlike
>Ar;and thar others, though conditionally, were wirh the firlt, they came ts
words of ſome birterheſle, and the reſidue of the Congregation was ſpent
in diſcourſing heereof, not without much confuſion; : Which che Cardinall
of Mantuaperceiuing, made a ilence, and;exhorting the Fathers ro modelty;
gaue them leaue ro deparr. OP BDC | {41
The Legares conſulted what was fit tobcedone; and agrecd to giue the Phoeoithe
Pope an cxadct account of all, and expe his anſwere, and inthe meanc while thc Pope2n
ro proſecute inthe Congregations the Articles remayning. Mantna would _
haue ſent his Secreraric, Camillus Olino, by polt, with letters ofcredtnce, and
Simoneta would hauc all expreſſed inthe letters. They concluded rotemper
theſe two opinions : that is,to writea very large letter,and referrethar which
remained to the Secretary : who the ſame day parted from Trent, 1n the cuc-
ning. This,though ſecretly caried,came to the knowledgeof the Spaniards; Tomegrat
who much complayned that they ſaw abeginning madeofan yoſupportable Jieonrence
gricuanee, thar euery treatic ſhould not onely beelent, but conſuleed of and Sprnitk Pre-
rcſoluedalloat Rome_; that the Councel affembled wile before ipthat Ciry,
was diflolucd without fruit, yea with ſcandall alſo, becauſe nothing was re-
ſolucd by the Fathers, bur all in Rome; lo that a blaſphemous Prouerbe was
generally vſcd, thar, rhe Synod of Trent was guided by t he boly Ghoſt, ſent thicher, A Udo
om tim: to time, ina cloake-bag ge from Rome. And tharthoſe Popes, who ab- was vied+-
folurely refuſed the Councel gaue lefſe ſcandall, thenthole who haucaſſem- | 5
bled ir and hold it in; feruitude. The world was' in hope thar, if once a <*n<
Councel might be obtayned, all inconueniences would be redrefſed; bur ha-
uing obſcrucd how things were caried , vnder two Popes before, and how
they are goucrned now all hope of any good is extinguiſhed ; norany more
to be hoped for from the Councel, if ir muſt ſerue ro beeaminilterof che in-
tereſtsof the Court of Rome,and mooue or Rand fill artheir plealure.
This gaue occaſion , beginning in the next Congregation todiſcufſeche
Articles propoſed, briefly to ſpeake of the point of Refidencie. The Cardi-
nall of Tarmia ſayd, that that'matter was ſufficiently treated 0Q4 char the
Decree thould bee fratned torelolue'it; which beeing'propoled-euery one
might ſay whar he& thought fit: but hee*could not quier'the hamors-thac
were mooued. Therefore the Arch-biſhop of Prague, the Emperours Am-
baſſador, made a continuate ſpeach, to exhorr che Fathers to proceede prace-
ably and with lefſe paſſion, admoniſhing them to conſider whardictbecome
their perſons, and that place*: ' Bur Tulins Superchins;Bifhop'of Carrie, aniwe-
red cholerikely , that nothing doth lefſe beſeeme che Councelithen rolay 2
law. ypon the Prelates,, eſpecially whetrit is done'by otiewho fepreſehterh
a Sccular authority; and vſedſome biting'rermes 1 fo-that the Congregarion
I-42 was

CE _—_ OO EO

4.98 | ies The #HiSory of Las 6.

i
_—

1562 Waslikctobediuidedinto parts, Uarmienſe, who was Preſident in it, fecking
Wb moderatethem, diuerted theſpecch vpon other Articles , appointed for
ezpmaxe. that day, and propoled that ſome meanes ſhoyld bee viedrolcrat liberty the
Erzarrs: Englih Biſhops, who were in priſon in England, that, comming to the
—_— Councel, itrmightbe ſaid , that thatnoble Nation was preſent alſo, and not
\ cones. Wholly aliened fromthe Church, T his plealedall: bur thecommon opinion
ron inche Wag yThatit might ſooner bee delared then hoped for, They concluded that

Councel ro

frac berry the Queene hauing refuſed to: receiue a Nuncio, expreſlely ſen from the
—— "> Pope, it could not be hoped that ſhe would hearken to the Councel. There:
verempris. fore all they could doe was to perſwade Catholique Princes to mediate for
The Venetian them. The 25. beeing S. Mark® day, the Venetian Ambaſſadors wererecei-
Ambilladors 11ed, inthe genefall Congregation, whoſe Mandat being read dated the 11.0t
in Congie- the ſame Moneth,and an Oration made by Nicolas di ©1 onte, one of them, an
Si *” anſwerewas giuen inthe viualltorrre. Ea
- .. In thoſefewdayes,the wileſt amonglt the Prelates,con{idering what a dil-
* reputationit would be to the Councel, aud themlclues, iftholc {tzrs were not
| pacified,endeuoured to pacifiemens minds by ſhewing that if the Conciliar
atios were not proſecuted without tumule, beſides the (candall & the ſhame,
che diſſolurion of che Councell, without doing any good, would neceflarily
foilow. This remoaltrance rooke effec; and cauled chem totreat peaceably
of the ſixe Articles remaining ; of which there was nor much to bee ſpoken.
For the fifch, the prouiſion was thought neceſſary ; but there was a difficul-
tic concerning the manner, becaule = diuiſion of Pariſhes was firſt made
by the people, when a certaine namber of inhabicants , hauing recciucd the
The Gvion £ruc faith, built atemple for cxcrcife of their religion, hired a Priclt, and did
of Panic. conſtitute a Church:, which, by the neighbours, was called a Pariſh ; and
' when the number was encrea(cd ,;if one Church and Priclt were. not ſuffici-
ent, thoſe who were-molt remote did build another, and fir themlclues ber-
ter. In progreſle of time, for good order and concord, a cultomcbegants
hauec the Biſhops conſent alſo. Bucafter that che Court of Rome aſſumed by
 *reſcruations the collation of Benefices , thoſe who were-prouided of them
from Rome, when the diui{ion of great Pariſhes, and, by conſequence, a di-
' -minution: of their gaine was in queſtion, oppoſed rd ks thefauour
of the Pope, ſo that nothing could bee done herein, without going to,Rome-
which wheh it hapned, clpccially beyond the Mountaines, in regard of the
impediments of Appeals, and. other ſuites, ic was a thing of great charge.
To prouide againlt thelc inconueniences in Councell, the Prelates | Hf
thatwhere ove Church was lufficieat for a people, but Borane Rector, the
titles ſhould not bee multiplicd, becauſe where many Carares arc,there muſt
-needes be diuerfitic of opinions$þur that the Biſhop ſhould.compell the Pa-
riſh Prie{tto take other Prieſts co afbit him , as many as were needefull ; bur
where the largeneſle ot che habirations did require, hes ſhould haue power
to crect anew pariſh Church, diuiding the people and reyencemes, and. com-
pelling them'to make aiſufficientreuencw by contyburion,, Only Euſtathins
"Bella, Biſhop of Paris, who came nor long, before, gold chem, char in re-
:gard of the lat part, the Decre&would not be recciucdin Fraxce, where they
-doe not couſent thatithe Laitie may be commanded, in atecmporall watecr,

by

L es: 6. - the Conncell of Trent.

lt.

by Eccleſiaſticall authoritic, and that ic was nor for thereputation of age-
nerall Councell ro make deerces, which would be reiedted 10) any Province.
Fryar Thomas C afellus, Biſhop of Caua, replyed, that the French men doe nor
know that this power is giuen to che Councell by CHR1sT and S. 7 aul,

1562.
Pryvs.
Fzskpoinag xD

—

— —

EtizinerH.

who hauc commanded that maintenance ſhould becallowed by the people, REI >

to thoſe that ſerue them in ſpirituallthings,and char the Freach-men, it they
will be Chriſtians,mult obey. Bellay replyed, thatynrill hee had vnderitood
thatwhichCHK1sTand Saint Paul docgrant tothe: Miniſters of the G@-
ſpel, to bee a power to receiue maintenance from him chat doth voluntarily

iuc ir, and not to conltraine any to giue z and that France would cuer bee
Chriſtian. And he paſled no further. _

The ſixth and cighth Articles would nor haue needed a decree, if the Bi-
ſhops had kept ther authoritie, orif ic had continued in the Pariſh Prickts,
or in the people, ro whom ſuch prouilionsdid formerly belong, as hath been
{aid, and ſhould doe till by allreaſon. Bur che necelsitic of handling theſe
matters proceeded from the reſeruations made ro Rome... The Prelars were
all ofthe ſame opinion, that prouiſions were requiſite, yet ſome would nor
conſcat they ſhould bee made, becauſe chey would not meddle with the
Popes authoritic ; by creating of things reſcrucd to rhar Sea, eſpecially in {o

rcatanumber, Leonard, Biſhop of Lancjano ſpake of itas of a pojn: of iu-
{ticeythar all che offices of the Apoltolike Chancerie being ſold, it was not fit to
diminiſh the diſpatches made there, becauſe it would take away part of the
profic, withoutthe conſent of the buyer ; and therefore that thele prouiſions
ought ro bee made in Rome,wherethe intereſt of all would bee conſidered,
And this Biſhop would haue proceeded further, in regard of the intercits
himſclfc and his friends had inthoſe offices, if che Arch-biſhop of Meſſina, a

Spaniard, who fare next, hadnottold him chatnoching ſhould be refolued

beforeir were contulted of,and conſented roin Rome. They called ro minde -

that which was done inthefir{t Councell, when authoritie wasgiuen to Bi-
ſhops, concerning things reſerued tothe; Pope; that is, roaddc, that the
ſhould doe it as delegates of the Apoſtolike'Sea 3 which counſell was follo-
wed in all decrees, made concerning ſuch matters, | |
In che 7. though eucry ohe thought fit thatthe people ſhould bee: ſerued
by perſons ſufficient forthe miniſtery, and of good behauiour, yer they: ſaid
it was cnough, and yery much,to prouidefor the furure, becaule.ghole lawes
which looke backe and diſpoſcof things paſt are cueraccounted/odipus,and
tranſcendent. Thereforethey thoughc it ſufficients prouide fit perfonstor
hereafter, rolcrating choſe whoare in poſſzthonalready;, The Arch-bulbop
of Granata ſaid, thatthe depuration of anyvakic perton. rothe migiltery of
C HR. $ T, was not ratified by hisdiuine Maicſtic : and therefare was void
the poſleſſor hauing noright : and that they were boundto remouc him that
was yafir, and to putanother ſafficicnt perſon, in his, place., Bugchis opini
on was not followed, as being coo rigid, and impoſhble to be executed, be-
cauſe there was nota wlt meaſure of, neceffaric lufficiencic- Therefore the
middle way was taken, not ro exceed the propolition/ of che Artigle, bur ma-
king adifference berweene the ignorant and {candalous, roproceede againit
the formerwirh leſle rigour, as being lefſe gulpable,; And as it þclongerh to

the

500

—— EI Inn _—

The Hiſtorie of

_—

1562

FM... LN
P tVS., 4
FERDIN4ND

Er1tZABETH.

CHARLES. 9:
ws” E Mas
Hovy Com-

mendacs bc-
g21L

T he abules

the Biſhop by/all-reaſon; ro make prouiſion. when the collations came nor
from the Pope;(o, in this caſc allo,it ſhould bee graunced vnro him;,'as Dele-
gate of the Apoltolike Sea. 2alhe\e, |
Torrcat of the viſitation of Benefices commended, inthe ninth article,
occaſion wasgiuen by -a-good vic, degeneratedino agreat abuſe. In'the in-
curſions which the Barbarians make _m the Welterne Empire,it often hap.

ned, thatthe' Churches were depriucd of their paſtours, when thoſe vnto

whom it did canonically belong to:-make proution of ſaccefiors, could nor
docit,as being hindred by'inuaſions, fieges, or impriſonments : whereup-
on,that the-people might nor continuclong without fpiritnall gouernment,
theprincipall Prelars of the Prouince, or fomeof the neighbours , did re-
commendrhe Church to ſome Cleargie man, conſpicuoustor pictic,and ho-
neſtic, and fir for gouernment,varill, the! impediments being remooucd, a
Paſtor might be canonically elected. The Biſhops and nexc pariſh Prieſts
did the like, when thelike vacancies hapned in. the- Countnees; and alwayes
he that did commend anorher,did {ecke roimploy a man of note,and hethac
was commended;did{abourto atilwere the expeQatior:; ſo that great fruit
did cnſuc,to the ſatisfaction of al:Butas alwaies fome corruption wil in time
creep into good things, lome ofthe Camendataries beganto think nor ovly
of doing the Church good, but rodraw ſome profit ro theinſelues allo,& the
Prelats Iikewifſeto commend Churehes without-neceſſitic. T he abuſe increa-
fing,a Law was made;that the Commenda ſhould nor laſt aboue ſixemoneths,
nor the Commendatarie participate of thefruirsof the Benefice comended.
Howſocuecr,the Popes,pretended robe abuue this law, did nor only commend
fora longertime,and grant an honeſt portion ro the Commen#datarie , but did
commend allo for terme of life, granting all the fruits vntorhe perſon com-
mended,as'vnto the rituler. Yea, they made the forme alſs quite contrary.
For whereas it was formerly ſaid inthe Buls,/We doe recommend” vnto thee
this Church, that itmay be well governed it! the inverim: they began'to lay,
Werecommend vntothee ſuch'a Church, that thou mayeſt mainraine thy
ſtate, with agreater dignitic. And moreouer they ordained, that if the Com-
mendatarie died, the Benctice ſhould remaineart their diſpoſition,ſo that t

could notbe hindred by the Patron. And the {ommendataries beins placed
by the Popts the Biſhops conld-hot meddle'in thoſe-chutches, and! cucry
onein Court was more willing to gerBenefiecs in Commendathen inthe Title
ro cxemptthemſelues from the {ubicQion of the ſuperiourPrelates;'fo that
the Biſhop was deprived of authoricicoucr the greater pare of the Churches
of his Dioceſle, and the {ommendataries , norſubiet to ay Superittenderi-
cic, ſuffering the buildings to fall;and dimitiſhing,or wholly taking away 0-
ther neceflarie expenſes, bauing no other end, then according ro-rhe proeme
of rhe Bull,to maintaine their owne ſtate, ler all goe ro deſolarion;lt ſeemed
an indecehec, that the Biſhop ſhould meddle with that which wav'tecom-
mended by the Popeto another and therefote they tFovghr fitt6 thake a
manerly prbuiſion againſt this dif6rder, granting the Biſhops authoritie ts
viſit and ftiperinrend;but as Delegates of his Holineſſe.”” #7 SH DIP

: ” s "

- ©'The twelfth propofition was made to remedie the abuſes of the Colle-

20d impaeties
of Cailcdors.

Qours, becauſe theancient inftieution as degenerated a}lo. 'F6t Hoſpirals,
g Spittles,

L rs. G6. v

- P

XUM

__ * 6 —_ . TR"

L1s. 6. the Conncell of T ren.

Spirrles,places for cducation of Orphans, and ſuch like, beeing it itutcd in 71 56a.

ders placcs for neceſlitic, without any maintenance bur the armes of the 57>;

faichfull, ſome godly perſons vndertooke the charge to goe about and aske Fi thakg

them at mens houſes,and for their credit, had letters teltimoniall from che Ettanrs

Biſhop. Others, that they mighr not be hindred by the Biſhop, obtained fa: SIS

cultic from the Pope, wich letters of recommendacion ; which were cafily

granted, in regard of the profic which came tothe Court, for the diſpatch of

the buls. This inſticution was immediatly turned into cxceſliucabules,and

the leaſt part of the armes colleed was beſtowed in che right courſe. Thoſe

alſo who had obtaincd power to colleR,did ſubſtirure alſs baſe and infanious

perſons, diuiding the almes with them. The ColleRouts likewiſe,to gain at

much as they could, vſeda thouſand facrilegious and wicked artifices, wea-

ring a certaine forme of habirc, carrying firc, water, belles,and other inſtrus

ments to make a noile, that they niightamaze the vulgar and breed ſuperſti-

tion in them, telling falſe miracles, preaching fallcindulgences, asking almes

with imprecations and chreats of cuill and miſtorruves, againſt thoſc that

would notgiue, and vſing many other impieties like to theſe, ſo that the

world was much ſcandalized; but no prouifion could be made, in regaid of

the Apoltolicall grants. The Prelars enlarged themſelues in this marger, re-

lating the abuſes and impieries aforelaid, and many more, ſhewing that re+

medics had beeneformerly yſed,but without cfteR; and ſo would all others
roouecthart ſhould be attempted : oncly one remained, which was to abo-

iſh wholly che name and v(cof ColleQtors; in which opinion all concur-

red. At this timethe Ambaſſadours of. the Duke of *Banartia came, who rc* The Ambab

fuſed to preſent chemlelues in Congregation, exceptthey might haue prece- pure 57 5

dence of the Ambaſſadours of Venice... Whercunto they denying to yecld, 5% comet

the Legares interpoſed a delay, thatthey might recciucanſwere from Rome, wide An-

The Pope vnderſtanding how the voyces weregiuen inthe Congregatie rene.

ons concerning, refidencic, and that the. Spaniards did all hold rogether,

madea bad Prognoſtique, and thought that ynion epuld not be without the

Kings knowledge. He laid he had along time knowen, by great experience, Trerope and

that the "U/tramontan Prelats doc cnuie the greatneſſe of lake, & ofthe Apo- Mecour me

ſolique Sea,and, for the ſuſpition which he had of the King,was ill atisfieded vabes.

with him,as if he had failed of the promiſe which he made vnto bim to pre- corhemiron

ſcruchis authoritic. The anew 9} of all bis diſcourfes was, -rhat fe Span,

Princes will abandon him, he will hauerceourſe ro-heauen; that hee had a

million ofgolde,and knew where to get anotticr; and beſides, that.God wil

prouide for his Church. The Courtallo did perceiuc,: with greatpaltion, in

what danger they were, and thoughcrhat theſe nouities. did aime to make

many Popes, or none at all, and to hinder all che protiss of che offices ofche

Chancerie... Aduice came to him allo, from his Nuxcioin Spine, that _—

was ill pleaſed with the (Proponentibus L-gatis) conſticured in the firlt Seflys

on : andthe Pope was ſo much che more plealed withir, becauſeby the di-

ſtalte of others, heperceiued they had defſeignes ropropolelfomerhing to his

preiudice. Yet he caulcd itto be excuſed tothe King, thatit was done with-

ouc his priuicie, howſocuer he thought it neceſſary ro'repreſſe the petulancie

of vquiet ſpirics,(aying,thatthe Councel could be likethe rower of Ba :

LEY

« - —-  -
> nes a.
<> OT OOO
ot
5 nt b

- - "_ - —_— .

———_—
A»

_ 7 COPS COL WT T8

—— [—_

got The Hiſtoric of L's. 6.
8 462 oy Pie fea | =
2562 if cuery turbulent perſon might moouc humours as heliſted;thar the Legats
A werediſctect, and did reuerence his Maicltie; and would propole. wharſoe-
Fronts. uer ſhould pleaſe him, and giue farisfactionto all wiſcand godly perſons,
EE But with the Kings Ambaſſadour rcfiding with him, who ſpake thereof hee
Caries. 5. procceded ſomewhat roughly. Firſt, he complained, that he had done bad
— 6ffices herein; then, relating how the Spaniſh Prclats, as it were ſedirioully,
procceded inthe Councell, he ſhewed that the Decree was holy and neceſ:
Aric, and that nopreiudice was done toany, infaying that the Legats ſhall
Bropole: Vargas anſwered, that if ithad beehe layd onely, the Legars ſhall
opoſe; no man would hauc complained, burthat ablatiue (Froponentibrus
THEY depriuc the Biſhops of power to propoſe; and therefore thar ir
was firrochangeitinroanother kinde of ſpeech. Whereuntothe Pope an-
frrered;with ſome dildaine,that he had ſomething elſe ro doe, chen to thinke
Cnius generis , & caiu>eaſus. The Popes {uſpition-cid not want ground, ha-
ang diſcoucred that the Ambaſſadour had ſent many poits into Spaine, and
yrito Trent, exhorting the Spaniſh Prelatsro maintaine theirlibertie, and de-

firingtheKing that the Councel might notbe helde in ſubie&tion,

: Bur, in rhe Court, many- Prelates hauing avtitten to their friends from
Trent diverſly,according to their afte&ions, there wasa great tumult, or ra-
theran aſtoniſhment,cuery once thinking hee 'did: already ſce Rome emprie
bf Prelates, and depriuedof all prerogatine and emineficie. Itdid appeare
plaindy, that the Cardinals re{iding in Rowe, ſhouldibee excluded from ha-
| ting Bſhoprickes ; that pluralitie of benctices was forbid, thar no Biſhop
4-4 or Clrate-might hauc any office in Rome, andthiar the Pope might nor bee
+. - + = abletoUifpence in any ofthe things aforclaid; which ate the molt principall
3-4-2 ofallthar are in his power, fo that his autthoritie would bee much dimint-
© 7 ſhed:* Arid they fertiembred the ſaying of Liuie, thatthe MaieStic of a Prince
wes* Fr hardly browght from the height to the middle, but is eafily cat beadlong from the
middle49 the bottome. They diſcourſed how much the authoritic of Biſhops
would beeinlarged, who would draw vnrto them thecollation of Bertefices,
----'7 denyitifthcPopes authoritie for reſeruations, thatthe Biſhops beyond the
©, Mountaines,and ſome Italians alſo, hauccucrſkewed abad minde rowards
_ = the Court, forenuie; and becauſc they can nor {0 eably hauo-place init; and
| that they'Wereto take leedeof thoſe who rematnem placesrhe moſt temore
_ .»« from Rome, for conſcience ſake, becauſe they would: dozworle then all the
rdſt, in caſetheywwere able ;thartheoſehypoctiticall Puritans hauc a greater
ambitionthen thereſt,chough coucred, and wotild faineadyancerhemfelues
bythe frijnezof others, as Paul thefourthdid very wellſhew by effefts.And
becauſe the Spaniards were vnited inthis, and exhortedby Vargds to perle-
nete,many did whiſper thatthe King was the-firlt mooger, who, ro gaine
SubſidiesfronirheClergie, havingtwo difficulties roouercome, oge' in ha-
uirig che Popes conſent, the other #-taking'away the reſiſtance” made by
"Chapters and — being the prime '6f the Nobiliric, exempred
from Biſhops, & moſt of them hauing recciued Bencfices by the Popes colla-
tion,doe oppoſe themſelues without reſpect, did purpole'to aduance the
Biſhops who doc wholly depend on/him, and recciue ; ws Biſhoprickes by
His preſentation, by-freeing of them from ſdbietion to the Pope; and ſub-

jccting

Lin. 6.7 +: the Comncell of Trent, 5b3
icing the Chapters and Colledges voro them, and fo, by cheir meanes; ro 1564.
gaine ancaſicand ablolutedominion oucr the Clergie. | Re,
The Court did generally complaine of all the Legats for propoſing the Faxpinens
article, or {uffcring it ro be propoſed; ſaying, that it was formerly ordained tym
with great arte, thatthey onely ſhould propoſe; oncly to reliſt the arceimps W"I-w
of thole who were ill affe&ted ro Rome,and thar rs could not bee exriiſed;
becauſe they hadanexampleof a diſorder, which this diſpute cauſed in the
ficlt Conncel. Aboucall, they complained of Mantie and Seripando , and
clpecially of Mantua, becauſe with his reputationand credit, he might cafaly
have withitood all inconucnicnces. They ſayd it was neceſlarie to other
Legats,more inclined ro the common good,not Princes,nor Fryars, but (acti
as had paſſed through the degrees of the Court. Andthe generall voyce did
defeigne Iobn Baptifta Ciyala , Card. of S. Clement, in the firſt place, ae e
he had ſhervcd himſclfea ttour champion for the Popes auihoritic, in the of-
fices of Referendarie and Auditor of the ( hamber; with much commendation
and cncreaſe of the affaires of Rome; who,being ſuperiour to Mantua, ought
ro holdethe firſt place, which would make him retire, 1 ORE
The Popecauſed many congregations to bee held by the Cardinals, de-
putcd to conſult of theaffaires of the Councell: who hauing thought of di-
uers remedies to ſtopthe current of this cuill, hebegan to ſpcake of the buſi-
neſſes much morequierly and corre&tly then before. Heedid nor condemne
theopinion of ry who faid,that reſidencic was de igre dinino, yea hee com-
mended them for ſpeaking according to their conſcience; and ſometimes
he added, that perhaps that opinion was the better. But hee complained of
thoſe who referred chemſclues ynto him, becauſe the Councell was afſem-
bled, that cucry one may deliuer his owne opinion, and not lay the things
of difficulticypon the backe of another, that chemſelucs might auoid ha:
cred and enuie. The differences betweene his Legates did diſpleaſe him;
which they ought not to haue publiſhed, with ſcandall, but, concealing t
them, to haue compoſed them berweene themſclues, or referred them to
him... Aad as hee was plcaſed that cucry one ſhould deliuer his opinion
freely, ſo hee blamed the practiſes which many vſed, to ſubuerr othersg with |
deceipts,and almolt with viulenees. And hee could notchooſe bur bee rrom-
bled wich that which was ſpoken concerning thelibertic ofthe Counceland
chat ro'conſule of the matters thereof at Rome was to violate it; ſaying it was
a ſtrange thing, that hee , who was Hcadofthc Church,and che Cardinals;
who wereprincipall membcrs, and other Prelates in Rome; who hauc voyce
in the Councell, ſhould bee accounted ſtrangers, and may nor bee infor-
medof what is handled,and {pcake their opinion, whereas thoſe who hauc
- nolawfullparr in it, hold it lawfull cocntermeddle; and that in an ilt fort;
chat it is plaine, char the Prelates went co Trent, with!

commiſſton-from their
Princes, according to' which they proccede ; chat:the, Ambaſſadours, by
letters and perſwalions, doecompell them ro! follow che intereſts of their
Maſters, and yet, for all chis,no-man faich; which(fhould be fayd) char the
Councell-is ot free. . This he amplified, in-all his diſcourſes , with much
vehemencie; adding, char cofay the Councell was not free, was-arcoulour v-
ſedby hiar who was not willing co'ſcea goodend thereof, hoping todiflolue

ity

ES

504-

The Popes
anſywcre cat
to Trex.

i562 1t, ortotakefromitall reputation; all which he held to be ſecret fauourers of

ningly and conſtantly in this butineſle, intimaring thatmany had conſpired:
again{t che Apoſtolike Sca; Afterwards hee cauſed the an{were to bee read
which he purpoſed ſhould be ſent ro Trent, which in ſubſtance did containe
two points. That the Counlell was free on his part, and cucr ſhould.

Thar it was fir he ſhould bee acknowledged for head, and receive that re-

Jpect whichis ductothe Apoltolike Sea. He asked the opinion ot! all the

A Confultt-

won in Rome
about tending
other Legars.

The Pope
makceh plors'
£0 maturiine
he grearnceflc
ot the Apo-
R3i:que Sca.

Cardinals : whodid vniformely commend the An{were. Some told him thar
in regard of the differences berweenethe Legats, ir were good ro fend others,
ſome of the molt extraordinary perlons,andothers fayd that the importance
of the buſines did require that his Holineſſeand che whole: Colledge ſhould
goeto Bolonia, that they may be neereto Trent, and togiue'better afſiſfiance,
as occaſion ſhould be oftered. Whereuntorthe Pope anſwered; that hee was
readicto goc,not onelyro Bolonia, bur to Trent alſo, if-there: were neede,
and all the Cardinals offered to follow him. They conſulred of (en-
ding other Legates, and reſolued not to ſpeake ary more of'ir, as yet,
becauſe Mantua would depart, which would bee a great preiudice to
the reputation of the Councell, in regard of the opinion which the
Emperour , King of Spaine, and almoſt all Princes; have of his hone-
ſtie, andof the credite.hee hach with the greater part of the Prelares cf
Tha. +! © | + &

Theſlerters being diſpatched, he dealt with the Ambaſſadours of Uenice
and Florence, that their Princes would recommend the cauſe of 'the Papacic
to their Ambaſſadours in Trent,and command them to cauſethe Prelates of
rheir States,notto be preſent inthe Parlies againſt the Apoſtolique Sea,and
not to beeſo carneſt in thepoint of Reftdencic. Afterwards' hee called all
the mp at Court, and thewed them whar-ſeruice'their' pre-
ſencemight doe in Trent, and the neceſirie thereof; Hee loaded 'rhem with
promiles, gaue money tothoſe who were poore, and diſpatched chem to
the Councel. This hee did to encreafe the mumbery apainlt they ſhould
{peake of Reſidencie,” and becauſe yo. French-men were expected, from
whom he could nor Prognoſticateany good. And not: to haue' France; his
oppoſite, whoſe Ambaſſadourswould be in Tens very ſhortly, he relolued
to giuethe King r00000:crownesand rolend himasmuch intheName of
Marchants, vpon ſufficigntaſfurance for the privcipall and the intereſt , ſo
that he would in carneſt,and without diſhmulation; reuoke the Edi&s:and
make watre forrcligion;thar wittrthat money'Suifſes and Germanes might
be leuied robceynder checonduftiof his Legare; -avd' (the: collyursof the
Church; tharno Fugonoe ſhould beepardonedwyrhout hisconſent; chat the
Chancellor, the Biſhop of #alence, arid others, ro beenamed'by him} ſhould
be impriſoned ; thatin the Councel nothing ſhould be: havBled againft his
authority , and that'his Ambaſſadours ſhould ror make mention of thie Aus
Fs Ef Sa, nats.

L 18. 6. the Councell of Trent.

505

nats. Tet he promiſed to accord with the King in chac maticr,andtoreforme x 56 4

it,cothe ſatisfagion ofthis Maieltie.

* Prvs -4. +

Afterwards che Pope conſulted on the point. of Reſidence, that, when Faxomans.

there was occaſion , hee might ſpeake thereof correly., withour prejudice #rizumrn.
. © : - . + CHakLEs g.
co himſclfe, or {candall roothers. And hauing well diſcuſſed: rhe reaſons; © wen” a

hee {cried 1s opinion roapprooucit, and cauſe1t to be executed vpon whar

He conſulterh
on the point,

law ſocuer ic were grounded, whether Canonicall, or Evangelical, And fo ofRcvdence:

he anſwered the French Ambaſſadour, whoſpaketohim oft; adding, that
he alone is depured to ſee the execution of all the Euangelicall precepts. Fot
CaRk1sT hauing ſayd ro S. Peter, Feede my Lambes, hath ordained thar all the
orders made by his diuinc Maicſtic, ſhall be executed by meanes of him one-
ly, andthat hee would makea Bull thereof, with apenalty of deprivation of
the Biſhoprickes ; which ſhould bc more fcarcd then adeclaration which the
Councell might make, de inre Diuine. And, the Ambaſladour infilting ypon
the liberty of che Councell, hee ſaid, that, if all berty were graunted vnto ir,
they would extend it to reforme not onely the Pope, bur Secular Princes alſo.
And this forme of ſpeech much pleaſed his Holincſſe , who was wont tofay,
that nothing was worſc thento [tand ypon the defence onely ,andthar,it o-
thersdid threaten him with the Councel], hee would play with them at the
ſame weapons.

Art this time, to begin to execute that which hee had requeſted, and pto- And refort.-

miſed,rhat is,to rcforme rhe Court, that the Councell might not meddle with

eth the Court

in petty mat-

it, hc firſt publiſhed a reformationof the Penitentiary, a very principall meme ** 9%:

ber, giuing outareporr, that hee would ſhortly allo reforme the {{ hancerie..,
and the (| bamber. Euery one did cxpe&t that the things belonging to the ſal-
uation of ſoules ſhould hauc beene regulated, which arc managed in that of-
fice; burin the Bullthere was notany the lealt mention made of repentance;

conſcience, or any other ſpirituall thing : onely it rooke away the Faculties |

which the Penitentiary doth exerciſe , in diuers caules beneficiall , belonging
ro the exterior diſcipline of regular Friars ; notexpreſling whetherthar pro-
uifion was made to give thoſe Faculties ro ſome other officers , or whether
hee eſteemed them abuſes vndecent,and would baniſh them from Rome. Bur
\ the cuentdid immediatly rake away the doubr. For the ſamerhings were
obtained from the Datary , and by other waycs, onely with greater charge.
And this was the fruit of the reformation. |

Butto returne to Trent, the Fathers hauing deliuered their opinions, and
the deputies framed nine Decrees ( for the Articles of Matrimonic, as al-
ready decided , and of ref1dencic by conſent of the Legars, andof fomeofrhe
Fathers, perſwaded thereunto , were omitted) they propoled them to bee c-
ſabliſhed in Congregation, and ro. bee read in the Sellionat the rime ap-

pointed./ By reaſon of this omiflion, the demands of thoſe that fauoured relt- Anothercon-

dency were ſtirred vp. Wherunto the Legars anſwering,char thar Article was |

not wel diſcuſled,nor was fit to be propoſed in that Sellion, bur that itthould
bee doneia ime conuenient, they were moreearneſt then before;alleadging
that there would neuer beea greater opportunitic, murmuring thatit wasa
rricke ncuer ro conclude ic. But they were forced ro relent, {ecing the Le-
gates reſolute not to handle it then, and becauſe thoſe ofthe conttary opi-
Vu nion,

C
\

1160 abuur

chdency,

506 .. The Hiſtorie of L 18.6:

__——

2.56% 'nion ,cncouragedfrom Rome , did labour more cfic&tually to the contraric.
= wage: Thercfore {peaking of the other Articles onely , with ſome few alterations,

Ezpmane. the nincheads wereframed. |
Enzazza, +2 The Maquis of Peſcara- made carneltſuite,in the Kings name, that thar
e445 9. Councel might be declarcd to be a Continuation of the Councell begun vn-
AAMAS " | L -
TheSpanit der Paul 3.and proſecuted ynder Inlus. He was albiſted by the Spaniſh Pre-
m ai0 "2. þ+ . . , |
matcth ſis Jares,and others, who followed them,alleadging that it was to be done, for ne-

omuanon Ceſfity Of faith z and that otherwiſe the determinations, already made, would
declared. he queſtioned, which would be a notable impiety. The Emperours Ambaſſa-
(:4 by the dors ved ttrong perſwaſions to thecontrary, ſaying they would preſently de-
a nbatadors, PArt & protelt, For the Emperor hauing giuen his word to Germany,thatthar
Conuocation ſhould be a new Councel, he could not indure ſo greatan affront.
They faid they would not by this mcanes, reexamine thethings decided, bur
that while there was hopero reduce Germany,they would not cur iroff;eſpeci-
ally with ſo much diſgracc of the Emperor. Card.Seripande had no otheraime
bur thatit ſhould be determined to be acontinuation, & formerly, in making
the Bul ofthe Connocation,did labour therein, & did now cffeQtually further
the Spaniards requelt. But Manruadid conſtantly refalt , that ſuch an iniuric
might not be donerothe Emperor, without necelhitic; and he found a temper
ro pacific the Spaniards ; ſaying, that hauing already held 2. Scflions without
making mencion of this propoſition, it will be no preiudice to deferre it alſo
to another. The tclolution of the Emperors Ambaſſadors to depart,and the
pcriwaſion of the Card.cauſed Peſcarato proceed more rimiſly. And letters
camevyery fitly ftrom Lew de Lanjac, chicte of the Ambaſladours ſent to the
Councel fromthe trench King, who,becing in his voyage not farre diſtant,
wrotcto the Legats and Fathers, to pray them that the Scllion might be pro-
rogucd, vatil he & his Colleagues were come. Mantua,making vle ofthis occa-
ſion, propoſed the prorogation of the Seſſion, for which though they would
not conſent,in regard of maintaining the dignity of the Synod,yer they reſo]l-
ued({omefor oncreſpet,fome for another, and ſome becauſe the humors of
 relidence were not wel quicted) to cclebratc.it,withour propoling any thing.
- art The 14- day being come, they metin the publike Seſſion, with the vſuall
Ceremonies : where the Maſſc and the prayers accuſtomed being cnded, rhe
Secretary read the Mandatrs of Princes, according to the order in which the
Ambaſſadors preſented themſelues in Congregation : Ofthe Carholike king,
of the Duke of Florence,ot the SuiſS:s,of the Clergicof Hungary, and of the Ve-
nctians.. And the Speaker did in a fow words thanke all thoſe Princes, for ha-
uing offered their athſtance for the ſecurity and liberty of the Councel. AF-
i= which no- IErwards the Maſſe-Biſhop pronounced the Decree, inthis ſubſtance: That
ung 154935 the Synode, for fone iuſt and honelt cauſcs , hath determined to deferre the
promulgation ofthedecrees appointed for that time, vnnil the fourth of June,
for which day itdoth intimate thenext Scſlion. And nothing elſe was done

The Spanito| I chismeeting, | - | Ti
Ambailzcour So ſoone-as the, Seſſion; was celebrated, the Marquis of *Pefcara- parted

tcth from ; : 4 R
Frene >.dayes From Trent, laying hee muſt returne to his goucrnment-of Milan;becaulc of

before the ar-

call of he LOC NCW [tirres ,rayſed by the Hugonots , in the Delphinate, * Butir being
rrenchAm- knowen that thoſe forces were not ablcto iſſuc our of the Countrey,and that

the

> _. .

> a \.

commillion from his Kingfara dor,who, defirourthar che Cquncellthould ;—
proceed, would hoc haue it.intcrrupeediby the comrouerficiof prectdetice, Fehwivawe
which could not hauc becn audided,, i hisand theFrench Aimbaſſidorsfrad = is (ogy
been.in Trent cogerher. i Lewis $ Gelats, Lord of Lanfac, chiete'of che Freweh THNhtts 2;
Ambaſſage, arriutd two daycvaftcr the departure of the otherpand was wie The Frewh
vpanthe way by abany ofthe Prclars,and parrieularlyby the Spaniards. Phe com: os |
' next day: Atnoldde Ferrieres, Prcfident of Paris,and Guido Fabt#;Yord of Pibtasj *©*
gowhed-men, Colicagucs of che Ambaſlage, didariuealſo,'''w 1517 511) 05,

Atthis time aduice'came!to the;Councell how'the Pope, Cardinals, \and
Court of Rewe.., had cenſured: the Farhers for che point of Reſidence, at'd _
many-rtceiucd letters from the-Cardinals rheir Pacrons; tull of comphlaines] Es
repreheaſions , and exhorrtations , which letters they ſhewed to many.” On S917. os
the other {1de, newes came to Rome. of what hapened in Trent afterwards, 2s 1
The Pope did rehew and augment his diſdaine againſt the Cardinall of
Mgitue, for hauingomirred the occaſion ro declare'the Continuation , be-
ing requeltd to doc it by the Ambaſſadour and Prelates of Spaine. Hee
was {ory co {ce thai'Cardinall ioyned with-the Spaniads in the point of reſt-

dencc,and oppolitero them inthe Continuation; which wastocroſle him in
all things./ For no man, chough ofa dull wit, would haue forborne to haus
made that declaration , becaulc if ir had ſucceeded well, it had becne much
in the fauourof the Catholique Church, if not, the Councell had been dif-
ſolued; athingofno lefle benefire. They began in Rome ro conſult againe
of [ending other Legats, and particularly the Cardinall of Saint (lement,dcf-
{1gniag to lay the principall charge, and theinſtrution vpon him: andnot!
to take rhe firlt place from Mantua, and ſo to giue him occaſion to deparr,
they thought ro ordaine 1m Biſhop, newes being come alittle before of the
death of Francis Tornon, Deanc , by which one of the {ixe Biſhoprickes was
voyde. |

The Emperovr, aducrtifed of the: propoſition to declare the (ontinuation,
was mooued, and-{enrehe Pope word, that whenſocucr it was done, hee:
would recall his Ambaſladours from Trent, whom he commanded, that; if
the relolution were, made , they ſhould preſently depart, not raporting the
publication. Therctore his 'Holincfle was in hope that, by this meanes:
the Coyncel might be ended,and was fo much themoreangry with theCar-
dinall of Mantua for ſuffering] fuch an occaſion to paſſe, and beganne to
thinke how it might bee reumed. The Court, as well to' imitate their.
Prince , as for theiy owwne intereſts, continued” their complaints , and
murmures againſt the Prelaces'of the Councgl, and moſt of all againlt
thar Cardinall,and againſt Seripando and Tarmtenſe ;* and, on the contrary,
the Prelatesin Trent, and elpecially the Spaniards, complayned of the Pope
and the Court, Of him,for holding the Councell in ſeruitude, to which'he
ought to leauefree power, to handlcand detetmine all things, and not'to/ «
meddle himlelte ; and yer, beſides thar , nothing is propoſed but what Th- Prel-gs

' , : . | 43 Of ee Cooun-
. pleaſcth the Legatcs'; whodoe nothing burthat which is commanded from) cio!
Rome,when a propoticion is madein which 70.Biſhops do vnifarmely agree; /7 200%
they arc hindred,cucn co ſpeakerherof,tharthe Councel oughr tobefree,ahd

Vu 2 excmp?

508 | The Hiſtorie of ; L I 6.6.

+ þ

5 562
PxHNSN

Prvs 4+

FERDINAND.

ELtZABESTH.

pn.

exempt from- all preucntion; concurrence, and interceſſion of any other
power ; and yet lawes are giuenthem wharto handle, and limitations, and
corrections made of the things handled and decreed ; which continuing,
they cannot truely bee called a Councell. Thar there were amongſt'them

Kine # more then fourtic ſtipendarics of the pope, ſome receiving thirtie, ſome

A paſſage c0-
c-rrang tac
equilty of
Biihops

The French
Ambaſladors
arc received in
convregation,
and one of
them maketh:
an Oration, -

ſixtic crownes a moneth ; and that others were terrified by the letters of
Cardinals, and other Courticrs. . "They complained of the Court, that, not
induting areformation, they heldir lawfull co calumniate, reprehend, and
cenſure that which was donefor the ſeruice of God. Thar, hauing feene how
they proceeded againſt a neceſſarie and ſmall reformation, they muſt needes
expcct a great commotion, and contradiction, when they ſhall be more
rouched at the quicke; that the Pope ought to bridle the tongues of the paſ-
{ionatc, and make ſhew at theleali, ſecing that hee would nor beetied really,
that the councell may proceed with finceritic and libertie. -

"Paulus Emilius Verains, Biſhop of (apeccio, came to bad termes with the
Biſhop of Paris, in amecting of many Biſhops. For Paris hauing diſliked
the courle of determining by pluralitic of voyce , and the other anſwering
chat all Biſhops were equall, ©7'arisasked him how many ſoules were vnder
his charge; who an{wered that he had fiue hundred : then Paris replied,thar,
in regard of his perſon, he yeclded vnto him, bur in reſpe& of thoſe who
were repreſented by the one and the other, hee that ſpake of fiue hun-
dred, ought not to bee made equall ro him that ſpake of fiue hundred thou-
ſand.

Things ſtanding in theſe termes, there was no Congregation made vntill
the 20. day : in which the French Ambaſſadours (who had imparted their
inſtructions rcothe Imperialilts, and held correſpondence, according to the
command of their Maſter ) preſer.ted themſelues. The Mandat of their
Ambaſſage beeing exhibited and read, Guide Faber made a long Oration, in
which, hauingexpound:d the continual deſire of the King, thatthe Coun-
cell ſhould beaſſembled in a fir place, nor ſuſpetted, and the requeſt hee had
madetothe Pope and all Chriſtian Princes forit, hce rold them what fruite

might bee expected from che opening of ir. Hee added, that as thoſe doe

much erre who would innovate alltherites of the Church fo ro maintaine

all of them obſtinately, not conſidering the ſtate of the preſent times, and
the publike good,deſcructh no lefle reprchenſion. Heedeclarcd very parti-
cularly the remptarions which the Deuill would vſc, ro dinert the Fathers
fromthe right way, ſaying , that if they gaue careto him, they would make
Councels loſeall authoritie; adding, that many Councels hauec been held in
Germanyand Italy, with no fruit, or very little, of which it was ſayd thar they
were neither free nor lawfull, becauſe they were gouerned by the will of an-
other; thatthey oughtto bee caretull co vie well the power and liberty gi-
uen themby God. For if, in priuatecauſes, they deſerue ſeuere puniſhmenr,
who doegrarific any man againſt juſtice, they deſerueit much more, who,
being iudgesin cauſes diuine , doctollowapopular applauſc, or ſuffer them-
{clues ro be made gowned {laues to the Princes , ro who they arc obliged; and
lard thateuery one ſhould examine himſelfe whar paſſion doth poſſeſſe him.
And bccaule the defects of ſome former Synodes haue madea preiudice to |

this

lt —_—_—

Lis: Gi che. Councelto ff ent, _ 509
chis, it is fic to{hew-that choſe chingoatotpiſtzeluiteacry one may'diſpure 1552
withoutbcing buracd, that publikefaiclvisnorbroken, thar'theholy Gholt Pres 40en?
isto be called for from heaucn onely,and char this is not that Councel which Frzpniee.
was begunne-by Paul 3. andprofecurod byJulluoy.3n turbulent times; bod Frroomerns
in the midſt of arnics; which-was diflotuet! withoazdoing'my cling thit TAE 7
was good, but a new, free, peaccable, and {awfull:Councell;called according -iniq? <1
ro the aucicne ciiſtome, rowhichall Kings, Pritices, and Republiques,286e . ....
giueconſent, ro which Germany will runne and brig wyitdyirelic aichors of '

the newdiſpures, ie moltgraucand eloquent menwhich ir harki:”! He e6ry-

cluded, thatthoy the Ambafladours did promiſe, ro:this ertl;"the affiſtanice

of che King. Icſcemed thar fome of tho Fathers, and of theLeyares theme
ſclucs,. did. noerake thoſe words well; ro which'\the Speaker tor knowing Spekerinory-

whatcoanlwerc, hor what complement to make;"the' Congregation! ended ra wn. om
with che Oracion! »» 1129 197d 5 tb 202] 7 | ">; make,

The next day, the ſamcAmbaſſadours went tothe! Legats, 'afſembled' for
that purpole,whcrechey extuſcd che:French Prelares tor 'nor comming; i

: 7

regardof the tumulcs, prorhiſing that when they were ended; as'they hoped TicE-cact
they wauld bc ſhortly, they ſhould come with ſpeed: '' Aﬀetwards they de- And oy
clargdchatthe Hygonats doc ſuſpedt rhe conrinuation of che ©6uncel, and: doc jim 1.
requireAnew; that che Kibghad creaced heereof wich rhe Emperour," who t< Cowl
delired che ſame,at cheinſtance ofthe Confeſionifts;rhiat het? had deminded =
theſame alloofthePope talidantniond that the'difference'was'onely' be-
tweeneithem and the King of Spine, and- thar'it concerried not him;butre-

ferred it tothe Councel.- 1 Fherefore they demanded a-decharation,in plaine

rermes, that the Indifion-is new, and not in thefe words, Indicendo continua-

mus, 7 continuandoindicimus, which is an ambiguity not befitting Chriſtians,

and implictha.conradiction ;and faid, tharthe Decrees already made by the
Councell, are-pot recciued:bythe French Church;norby rhe Pope himſelfe,
and chac Henryz didproceſt againſt it:chatconterning this point, they were
addrefled ro them/chc Lagates, becauferthe Popeharh ofrenfaidtharthe que-
{tioa, of IndiFion; or-continiiation wazs mothis, and thac hee refetred'/it ro the
Councech.. Andihiauing delibered thigpetition: by word; they left ir ld in
writiag, The Legars, afrerthey/had confuked rogerher,anfweted 1 writing | ._..
allo, that chey4dmicred the excuſe ofthe Bilhopsabſent;barrhar they cond! Lewy
not; deferre the diſcuſſion! of thar which was tobec bandledtn the Councer * -
vatillcheir comming,becauſe the Fathers who'were preſent/would'bbe' m-
commodated ov much ,: chatthey!haue nor powerto deelatethit the Tigi-
Aion of the Councel is new.bur toprefide onely, accorditig to therenour of
the Popes Bul;agd thewillof che Synodei! The Freachnen wer? S5hten-
ted ith cheanſiyere forghepreſent; having determined; 't5g&ther Wit the
Impcrialits, noreo. procetd furchcryfs long avitvchs acts'tnenion Wah trot
made of cowipygion,cconfidering rhac che Spaniiirdi9 hauitrfrnade! rap ies;
in;hefirlt Sefbemrhar theconrinzetionifhould be declared, arid roceitodtirititlh
contradiction, therewandanger thartheCounttl/would have beeti:? #751 -
ucd. But theankivercof theLegars publiſhed bythe Breneh ten, that their
authorjry.was to-prefidgqccording rolthe wilt ob the Sygode} madeths'Spi-
niacds ſays char thoſe words did ubiabvrhe Logatesro'the Genncel, wheres ;

+. Vy 3 indce

\

—

5 « LP ah F 5 ; oC 's
we. o. WW: p 4 4 Ne 4
- ? E £* "C
« j > +» 4 .
$- yp: mo _
- E 's * a
<=

—_

[-18.6.

"1562. indeed they made themfelucsI#tds oucr:it. And Granars (aid, that it was

———— Al.

- es
| ”y 7: we
The Hyſtorie of

—z |
"4

 —

510

A—kKQr
+ _-

Pivs 4+
== "hah alſo. a 1

Emz.2arn,  TheLegarspropolumgygothing forthe next Seſſion , the Prelats, who fa-
K23*3* 9; uogred ns 38 or OG 15 diſcourſe againcof it, andiperſwadedthe Am-
TheSpzni- balladoursof the Em perout, Kings of France, Portugal, and allthcothers, ro
ards require? (00uc The pn irmight bedccided inthe next Seflion; alleadging,

hat it hauing beene propoſed and diſpurcd, it would beea great ſcandall to

in the point of Þ

RMIEE  leaucir vndecided, and would ſhow that it was for ſome nous intereſt,

- ld

ſecing that the/principall, Prelars of the Councel, and the greater number

| diddefirethederermination of it. The French-men, together with the Im-
Ee Eencs Perialiſis, made inſtancethar the points of doQtrine might nor bee handled
= + Em- 10 ablcnce of che Proteſtants who doc impugne them, vntillctheirconuma-
We Leeas cie be manifeſt, ig regard the diſputation is ſuperfluous, wherethere is none
of dodrinz LO ContradiQigaPecially there being, matter enobgh beſides, in which the
my be defer- world dothagree, that is, agood reformation: of manners ; that the Englyb
_— Ambaſladour in Frajce had declared, - that his Queene would ſend-ro the
zo. _ © Councell ; whence it would follow that the other Proteſtants woulddo the
like; ſo that agenerall reunion ofthe Church would ſucceed: and that'one
 mightaſlure himſfelfe to ſee this cffcAcd, if a good reformation were made,

'*- Cardinall Shnonet4. anſwered this ſecond propofition, thar the bulineſſe
ſcemcd eafie, but was not ſo, becauſe all-confitted. in the diſpoſirionof Be-
neficcs, in whichthe abules proceed from Kings and Princes, This'trou-

bled all "the Ambaſſadours, becauſe of the nominations, and diſpoſttions

which Princes do cxereile, and cipccially the French King. Bur the propo-

ſition of the Reſidence did-molctt the Legats more; nor were the Fathers

pacified with theexculcs formerly vied, chat che matter was not ſufficiently

digeſtcd, that there was not tume enough before the Scflion to make ir

clecre, and for orher conſiderations; And the heate grew fo great,that ſome

of the Ulrramontans were agreed to pratelt, and depart, And this was the

cauſc of [topping the morion. For the Ambaſſadors, fearing thatthe Coun-

ccll would be intetrupred, and knowing that the Pope woull cheriſh every
occaſion, ceaſed to make any furrher-inſtance, and perſwaded the Bi-

Burtheydoe ſhops to he contented to.cxpect ;and,forthe ſame cauſe, they laboured with
allure the Miniſters of Spaine, that they ſhould nor inſiſt any more to' haue the
Pope would continuation declared : who not onely were pacificd, but proteſted alſo tothe
hereby rodiſ- Legats, that they 'did nor then demqund it; ſaying, thar, if others ſecke co
Councel, Pputthe Councellintothe ftocke, thereisnoreaſon their purpoſe. ſhould be
coucred wirh the cloake of the King of Spame. The proteſtation- pleaſed the

Legats, who were ingaged by their word to the Marquis, and ktiew not how

to acquitethemſelues. Neither was it leſſe grarcfull ro them to deferre the

oint-of Reſidence; and; that none: might change opinion;.they drew a
_ which they read in Cottendies, ria; ras ao rotted,
thatin the nextS$elſ10n they ſhould doc nothing bur deferte theſe matters
vnrill another, andcharfor good reſprts : and they rhoughr they were dif
burthcned of two. great weights. The Scſſion- approching),” imatly who
chought themſeluesmuch pricked with the oration of the French 'Ambii-

fadour

"A an abſolute dominion to make vſc of the quality of aſeruant; and of a Lord -

9

= - _ LOI. 4 ns "c @

511

—

__ IR eee cen a oE
ladour, d:{ircd che Legars comakea ound anſfivere, when the Mandate was 156:
readin the Scfſion ; atsd Cardinall Altemps did perſwade , that by all meanes'; ——»
ic ſhould bee o , ſaying thatthe inſolencie of that Palace-man wasts bee re- FiwBmiacs.
preſſed, who was accuitomed coſpeakero meane people. The chatge here- jirranara.
of was giuen ro Fo, Baptiſta Caftello ; the Speaker , with ofder onely to defend ©59itt »
the dignity of che Synode,without touchingany maris perſon. | £

- ThePopc,after long conſulration,relolued that the Continuation ſhould The Vopens-
be declaredJetthe Emperour doe whar he could; thinking tharirmuſt needs the cones.
ſucceedeoweell: and diſpatched a Currier to Trent with this Commiſſion. 927,09,
This, being arriued the ſecond oof Tune, troubled the Legates very much, in o=c:teer
regard of theconfuſtons which they ſaw would ariſe, and of the diſorder in oyiw
which the Councell was; andall reſoluing vniformely'to' informe the Pope” -
berrer ſignifying varo him therhings res, don been handled, andthe Decree!
already publiſhed, and ſhewing him the impoſibilitiero performe his order,
the Cardinall Altemps, who before had lcaue to goe to Rome for other cauſes,
weat away: by polt the next day, to dceliuerthe meſſage inperſon. Burar nighe
another Cartier came with letters, that his Holineſſe did refer all tothe wiſe
domeand judgement of the Legats. [2 9 047 e963

The fourth of Iune being come, the Seſſion was celebrated;\ with the v-"Ti. $don
ſuall ceremonies, and the Mandates of the Arch-biſhop of Salzburg,” and of <iratce?

France, were read. Which being done the Speaker made” an anſwere , and _—_—
laid, chat there was wa prouiſion would be made againſt all the dilorders finer 0 the
of Chriſtendome, by the remedie, which the Pope Tonighe neceſſary, that 7.4.
is, this Councell, begun by the afliftance of the holy Gholt, and confent of
Princes; amongſt whom the French King hath ſene men of conſeictice and:
religion, to offer not onely-aſhſtance, but obedience alſo ro this Synod,
which doth not [eſſe deferae it then other Councels, againſt which Ul af -
cd perſons hauefallelyoppoſed, that they haue not beet! lawfull;'nor'true,
though men of pictic haue cuer held them ro be Couticels, hauing beene:
called by him'that hath authoritie, howſocuer calumnies haue betrne {ſpread
by others, that they were not free; againſt which, asalſSagaiaſt the'preſenr
Synode, therreacherics of Sathan copiouſlyand acutely*repeared bythem,
the Ambaſſadours, did nor preuaile ; rharche Councell will not make #4 bad:
interpretation of their diligent arid free admonition norto regard popular
applauſc, or follow the will of Princes, bur as it dorhefteeme irnot to bee
neceſlary , orrather tobeefuperflabus, ſo itis willing'to belecue thatir'doth
procced from a good mind, * that it'may not be forced*ts fay' atry thing a-
gainſt irs mild and piouspurpoſe, and vſualkeuſtprnc.  Biitto free rhem the
Ambaſladoursfrom that vaine feate, which they would ſcemie to have,” and
aſſure themof their rrue purpoſe, he doth foretell themthat the effedts will
ſh-w that the Councelt will poſtpoſe the defires, will, and'power'ef who-
ſocucr-to herownedigniticand authoritie ; and*promiſertito King Charks
wharit is abiG&o doc, faving faith and religion, for preſeruation of his dig-
nitic,kingdomeand ſtare; The French-men were ill ſatisfied with this an-
ſwcrc, but knew they had deſerued ir. Aftcrwards the Decree was tedd by ene

| rhe Maſſe-Biſbop. Tharthe Synod, in regardof digersdifficulcies riſet; and Fretcbmen. |

to define the points ofdo@trine, and reformation both rogether; doth aps TheDecree.
was | | poynt

DEER. I; MHC Loo tn
Wn is bb ora
«£460 0 OI ITE ATTS us <> NI
Ls

I

Scllion,

*%. »
4 = YN

CHARLES 9.

..cadcd,

Order giten_
for che matter”
of the next

The {1x5

formera/lembly yadcr Julius, butzhara bricfeand ſound examination mighr
{cruc;;lowhar ey bee dttertmined!ing few daycs, andalltheorhertune
may.bs{pent jn the reformation;; / They ſayd that Articlc of teſidencic had
becne already propoled,, andexamined inpart,and that itwasmecte that it
ithould ggce bc ended. This apijfion wasopenl y followed by chirtic Fathers;
anglirappeared thatk was {cerctly approoucd by. many more, who would

hauc ſhowed themlelues intheconcluſion., (Bur CardinallSimontea, deſiring

to inrerpgſeadelay;s by layingehatir was dor mecterrs; bandle:char mareer

+ + vntill pongmindes were patified,, which:had: becad mooued/by the former |
-. diftercacz; whichwillaocſufferchem, ro difecrnoths eructhy openedagare
. 10 Joby; BaptiſiaCofiagne, Archbiſhop of Reſano,antird, *Pompeiar Zamberea-

r.15

of £ Fs 00M Ws.”
3. þ * tg [ vs wh : _— KW.
bs Fa 5 *o 7 1 AS 32 fa > F
ata 6
WP 6 4+ bee ,

Wes "4 - D s £ YI t v & * », 2 47. -
x l "88 WW 4 "a+ "— ng nd . 6 Þ SA ! ED Ls; - : \ B Y J 4 a a3
z » 47 "ORNP- og © Ag ws tit PE. 1 adit a6- __— MS x : . . on 5 Ri : FS” Nog - AER
' DIY "23 1 WY" Fr Nt ons: f ? [ = * _ . 2 oh 4 -
” IF; + 4 bo b bs”? T 6” ant SOS * 4 a ” 6 ,
& 4 wo 5 : : bu gb - - = :
4 ® ST ” % 7 -
a \.. 4B n .#* > . \
, $* ” > F
l "x ; X had »
*» JW » & + : +2
#5 > A
.

*

* - — +

Trent. "oe

rus Biſhop of Sulmona ; both which ſpeaking hotly and ſharpely ;raiſed ſuch r;62
2a tamule thar rhey feared ſome inconuenicnce. For remedy whereof” the _ NAY
Cardinall of Manae prayed: thoſe of rhe reſidence to be quier, promiſing, Flavinht.
that in another Scfſion, oraghen they handled the Sacrament” of order; this rims;
ſhould bee diſcuſſed. Thertumulr being thus appeaſed,; and itapptaring; eight CYantis 9.

Pa

thereluming of the points handled vnder Inlius,would 1 pend more time,ang' The Card. of

bee moredifficult then to examine them againe,as hapneth roaiudge who is ayLogg
| to frame his ſentence vpon aproceſſe made before another, a reſolution was(hgfonesr.;
taken, that the Divincs ſhould ſpeake of them, andacongregation bee helq > 4tobee.
ewicca day, in which wo of the Legars ſhould aſſiſt (ſo dividing their char:
ges, that they mightmakcan end the ſooner ) and of the Ptelars as many as
-would ; and that they ſhould haue two dayes to ſtudy, and begin the third;
| With this concluſion the Congregation ended. But Simoneta was' offended wherewith
with the promiſe which Mantua made, without confentor participation of $71”
his colleagues, and madcan open quarrell. Mantua was blamedby the Pte- /ofended.
lates who fauourcd the 'Court, and calumniated to beill affected ; but, by
the ſincere, was commended for his wiſedome, who, in a dangerous neceſ]1-
tic, rooke acourſe to withitand the diuifions and proteſtations which were
| prepared, and blamed Simoneca for being offended, becauſe Manta, much
more eminent then he, truſting vpon the confent of Seripandoand' Varmien-
ſe, whoſc opinion he knew,might thinke that arcſolution taken by neceſlity,
ought ro hauc beene ratifiedby him allo. SFr 21:4 ,0
The next day the Emp. Ambaſſadors hauing obtained, as they deſired, thee
propolition of the Chalice, for which vntill then they had proceeded with re--
| ſpect, cameo the Legars, and preſented to them, according tothe infirudti-
| on of their Prince, twenty points of reformation. 1. That the Pope would T4. tmpi--
bee content to make aiult reformation of himſelfe and rhe Court of Rome. w5it Amb

dors propoſe

2. That if the numberof Cardiaals cannot be reduced to twelue, yer that it o:he Leyars
bee brought ar rhe lealt ro the double of ir, with rwo ſupernumerary, ſo that rs Loney
they may not exceede fixe and twenty.. 3. That no ſcandalous difpenſa-
tions may bee granted hereafter. 4, That the executions agairiſt the cont-
mon Lawes may be reuoked,and all the monaſteries ſubicCed to the Biſhops.
5- Thar pluralitte of Benetices bee taken away, and Schooles erefted in Ca.
thed:alland Collegiate Churches,and that Eccleſiaſticall offices may not bee os
bought and ſold. 6 T har Biſhops may bee compelled to refide, and nor
exerciſe their office by Uicars, and if they bee not ſufficient, that thecharge
may not bee committed ro one Vicar, but to many perſons, and rhat the Vilt- —
rations, and Dicecelan Synods, may bee made cuery yeere. + That cuery
Ecclcſiaſticall Miniſterie bee exerciſed freely, and thar rich Benefices, with-
out cure, may bee incorporated to thoſe that haue cute, and ſmall revenues;
0 8. Thatthe Canons againſt Simonie may bee reuiued. 9. That the Fe-
cleſ1aſticall conſtitutions beeabridged, the ſuperfluitie cut off, and nor made
cquall to the obligations of the Law.of Go D. 10 That excommunieati-
on bee not vicd bur for morrall ſinne, ornotorious irregularitie, 11. That
Diuinc Scruice beſo ſaid, as that ir may bee ynderſtood by him char faich ir,
and by | him that heareth. 12 - That the *Breniafies and Miſfalsbee corre-
Qed, and thoſe things taken away whichbee not found in the Scripeure,, as
| als

XUM

fs 9d p EY f «ts a >
TE Ef 32> ad » : 7” _
_—— - 2 i - Do 0 * om a
- -S ? & - 7 IE Looe,.s Por
+ } 7.8]

pri —_——eg—_o—te _ _ _—_ + — —

514. The Hiſftorieof [1 8B.6,
"1562 allo the prolixitic. 134; That in celebrating the diuine offices inLatine,!
Pig, prayers bee/interminglediin the vulgar. 14 'Tharthe Clergic-and :Mona-
Faxpaaxe, ſticall ordex bee reformed, according to the ancient inftitution, and :thar fo
ELzaBaTH.. great riches may not begadminiltred (o ill. : x 5/ titbe conſidered whe-
Cnont* 5. cher itbe expegdienteo remir ſo great obligatiqns of thepoſitiue Law,abating
ſomeof the rigour,in the difference of meats and faſts, and granting marri-
age of Pzielis co lomenations. 16. That, rotake away the dietſttic of o-
pinions, thediuers Pgftds be forbidden ro be read, and one made by publique.
authoricie,, -and likewiſe a new Ritual, which may bee followed by all.
17.  T'bat:a-way bce fqund, nor rochafe away bad Pariſh: Pricſts.; becauſe
that is caſie, bur to ſubltiruce better, 128 That mgreat/prouinces many Bi-
ſhoprickes bee creed, conuerting rich Monaſteries to'this vie. ' 19, Thar,
for Ecclefiaſticall goods vſurped, perhaps it was better at that crimetopaſle
them ouer with dithmulation. Inthe end: to fay ſomething: ro-plcale the
Pope, andto pacific him if hee were angry fortbeſe propoſitions; headded:
20 Thar cheLegars ſhould endeauour,that no ynprofitable queſtions, which
breed ſcandall; as whether Reſidence bee de ture diuino, and: the like, ſhould
bee propoſed ; and rhatrthe Fathers. ſhould ſpeake without choler, and nor
makethemlelues a fable ro the aducriarics. Concerning the 17. they'gaue
ſome partitular'noces, to reduce thoſe who werelc(t obſtinatc amongit the
SeQarics, by. {ending thetn to ſonie Vhiuerlitic where they may bee inſtru.
Red, in a ſhort cine, and giving order to the Biſhops, who hauc no Vaiuerli-
tic, to: make a Colledge in the next, forthe youth of their Dioceſles, ro make
a Catalogue of the Doftours whichare to be read in the Schooles, prohibi-

ting that aay others bercad.
Who anſwere © T be propolitions being vnderſtood, the Legats, retiring firſt, and con-
+ 0 dara ſulting cogerher,returned and madean{were; that it was nor poſlible to pro-
ſelinthenext poſe them the next Seſhon, hauing, at their inſtance, that matter of the Cha-
59% * licevpontheirhands, of great importance and difficultieg thar the things
propoſed arediuecrs, and concerne diucrs ſubicCts, which cannot be all digcs
{ted together; that therefore chey would communicate torhe Prelates as oc-
calions were offered, thoſe which had afhinitic with the other reformations.
The Ambaſſadours knew that they {pake this that they might nor publiſh
their writing in congregation, thar, by gaining time, they might deluderhe
Emperours expectation. But yer, at that time, they ſaid no more. Afrer-
wards, conſulting cogether , they held ir expedient to informe the Empe-
rour wcll,as well of thus particular,as generally of themanner how they pro-
theBitlop ceedcd inthe Councell. And to doe this,the Bilbop of Prague rode polt, that
boots hep might returne before the Sellion. The Legats, percciuing that the Coun-

cth by poſit co

_— cc|l ſtood vpon bad rermes, in many reſpects, bur eſpecially for the diflaſte

heltxeof  andfufpition of the Pope, thought it neceſlary to informe him fully. of all

that was palk, and imminent, For this, Friar Leonardus Marinus ,. Archbiſho

—_ Ro of Lanciano, was choſen , becauſe hee was a man of ſpirit and acceptable ro

c:270m- the Pope, promoted and much fauoured by him, and a friend alſo ro Seri-

- iq ** pando;wholeinſtrutionwas toenformethePopetully, to excuſerhe Legats
and to pacitie his Holinefle, Hee carricd the common Letters ofthe Legars
for F4: credence, to which Strmoreramademuch and long difficultic to (ab-

{cribe,

»
o

*
A | -

| ORE - Ik. $2

—

—_—

L 1 8.6: the Councell of Frent. $15
ſcribe; por would hauc doncit, bur thatthey agreed that cuery one ſhould: 1562
write particular letters of his owne. Simoneta wrote; that hee did thinketo " pg;

| ſendche Archbiſhop of Reſano,for his particular, togiueamorcexatt' infor- Fmomans.
mation, but that, being better aduifcd , hee afterwards reſolued roexpect the terms,
cucnt of Lanciano his iourncy.. | W i3 * '© BLLLf ropargnchy

The mutual diſtaſts;andderra&tions ofthe Romansagainſtthe Trentines, |

and of cheſe agairiſt, thoſe, did. increaſe at the arriuall of euery Currier. It:

Trent, the fauourers of re{idence did bewaylethe miſeties of the Church, the:

ſeruitude of the Councel,and the manifeſt deſperation-ro ſee the Church re-

formedin Rome. 'The oppoſites lamented, thata Schiſme was plotted in the:

Councell, yea, an Apoltacic from the ApoſtoliqueSca.: They fayd that the,

Vltramontans, for malice and cnuicagainlt che iealians, did aime-notſo much

atthe depreſſhon, as ar the abolition of the: Papacie ; which beeing the foun-

dation of the Church, becauſe C 8 & 1.8:T;hath madcirt ſo, rhe totall de-:

ſiruction of the whole building mnlt ncedes cnſue;/ The Pope, receiuing:

new aduices dayly, and alwayes worſe, as cycry day ſome nouity did happen.

in Trent, beſides the accidents occurting in Germanie and France, contrary to

his affayres, was ſtill more diſpleaſed, The opinionof the maior part for re-

{idencic, didnot ſo much trouble him,asthe practiſes which wero made;el(-

pecially by the Ambaſladours , perceiuing thatthe Princes were incereſted in

it againſt his authority. Heſaw'the Emperor was wholly bentito make his

ſonne King of the Romans,and 'ready to-giue all ſatisfaction ro Germany;and

therefore had cauſcd theſe Articles of refarmatian to beipreſented tothe Les

gats,and called to him the Amb. Prague, to find a way how to propole them.

in Councell,and cſtabliſhthem. Hec knew the-French King was exhauſted,

compaſled with infinite difficulties, and imdanger to be forced tro compound:

withthe Hugonots, which if ic happen, the French Prelates may.runne to the

Councell,ioyne with the Spaniards , and make themfclues authors of othet

propoſitions againlt the Papall authoritie, Hee thought ro calme the rem-

pelt, which he ſaw preparcd againſt him, , both with deeds and words, by le-

uying foure thouſand Swiſſes,, and three thouſand Durch horſe-men, hee!,,, ,,

ſcnt to Auignion Nicolas Gambar@- with fiue hundred foote, and at-hundred #encb a

light-horſemen; gaue money to:the Duke of Sayoy, to pet himſclfe inarmes,:leo2ve of all

and oppolc,if the Hugonors would delcendiinto Italy. And ro engage al Prin:; rpm

ces, he relolued to treate a league defenfiuc of all, Catholiques', again{t the $2 the |

plots of the Proteſtants in cuery place, holding it to beat caſterhing to make

them condeſcend, if for no/other cauſc., yet for-this, at: the-leaſt, to free

themſclucs from ſuſpicion; / Jt Ttalieheetbought it not hard roinduce all.

For the Duke of Florence was wholly his; -In Seuoy:hee had intereſt, forthe

ſuccours he ſent him, and forthedanger hee was in;the Venerians deſired ro!”

keepe.the /itramomans our of {talieP; the King of Spaine-had neede of him tor

Naples, and Milau,:;-and France: for: the aftuall neceſſiric in which it was, *

Therefore he madethe propoſition in Rome tothe Emperours Ambaſſador,

and the Vcnerians,and jw the Abbar of Saine Salwoforthisenditito-France,

andthe Lord Odeſcalco intoSpaine;; to whom allo! hee gaue; ipftructiqn;:x0
complaine to the King that the Spabiſh! Biſhops were ynired againlt his au+

thority , andto ſhew him that the propoſitions of the Emperour, were fiees

; | make

* 0

———

—_—C— —_— = _—__

516 be: Hiſtorie of L18.6,
1562: makea Schiſme. Itwas cafic to forelee the iſſucof thar proic&, toany thar
£9, did know, chough bur ſuperficially, rhe ends of the Princes. TheEmperor
tsxpmaxy. would by no mcancs condeſcend to any thing that might giue ſuſpicion ro
E:12a2zr», the Proteſtants; the French King was lo farrefrom hindering the paſſage to
©22525*9: the Hugonots in Italy , that hee would laue becne contentto hauc ſcene his
Purcaonot whole kingdome rid of them; Spaine hauing great poſleſſ10ns in thoſe parts,
' did morefcarcandabhorre an vynion of Italian Princes, then deſire the ru-
inc of the hereriques che Venetiavsand Duke of Florence could not conſent
roany __— might troublethe peace of Fahy. And fo it happened that
; - the propoſition of the league was nor imbraced by any of the Princes, cucry
one alleadging aparcicular cauſc,andall one common, that it would hinder
the progreſle of the Councell; which many belccucd would nothaue diſplea-

ſed his Holineſle : and the rather becaule hee againe propoſed in Conſiſto
the declaration of the Concinuation, and tharhimſclfe would make a decla-
ration concerning Refidencic. Which things he did not performe, in regard
ofthe opinion of Cardinall Carpi, followed by the greaterpart of the other
Cardinals, thatir would not bee good ſeruice for his Holineſle, northe A-
poltolique Scato make himſclfc aurhour of odious things , which might a-
licne the mindes of oneparty , and thar it was better to lcaue them in the li-

+ berty of the Councell for thattime. |

Notwithſtanding he did nor forbcare rocomplaine in Confiftory of all
The Popz the Ambaſladours. Of theFrench heeſayd, that Lanſac ſecmed ro beean
ofthe am- Ambaſſador of the Hugonors,by hispropoſitions , deſiring thatthe Queene
baltzdors. of Englard,the Proreltants of Swiſſerland, Saxonie,and Wittemberg , ſhould bee
expectcd at the Counccll, who are declared enemies and rebels , and hauc no
other cnd then ro corrupr the Councel,and makeit Hugonor; which heſayd
himſelfe would preſerue, and haue forces ro doe it. Thar hee alſo and his
Collcagues defended ſume,who diſputed the authority of the Councell to be
aboue the Pope, which opinion is herericall, and the fauourers of it archere-
tiquzs,threatning to perſccute and cbaſtiſe them. Hee layd they liued like
| onots:that they did no reucrence to the Sacrament ; that Layſac, at his
q | table, inthepreſence of many Prelates inuited , had ſayd, that there would
come ſo many Biſhops out of Fraxce and Germanie, that they would chale
the [dol out of Rome. He complained of one of the Venetian Ambaſſadors,
And ofthree and ſent his Maftcrs word of hun. He faydof the Cardinals , Manta, Sere-
 pando,and Varmienſe,thatthey were vnworthy of the Cap. Ot the Prelates he
{pak as occaſion was offered, and perſwadedthe friends of cach of them to
write vnto them. All this was doneand ſayd by him, not becauſe he belee-
ucd it, or for intemperance of his tongue, but by Arte, to force cucry one,
BY ſome for fcare., ſome for ſhame , ſome for ciuilitic, romake his A =_ bo
mihrforce him , which hedid moſt eaſily receiuc, and readily beleeue. + And irs incre-
| "2 nr dible how his affaires were aduanced by thismeanes. For.hee gained ſome,
gies. and cauſed the othersto proceede'more warily, and remilly. Whereupon
his naturall courage reviving in him, which ſtill was full of hope , hee ſayd,
chat all were ynited againſt him, butthar, inthe end, he would makerhem all
bereunited in his favour, becauſe they hauc allnecede of him, fomedeman.

ding afliſtance,and ſome graces,

Amongſt

——— — — OO

— cv

L1s.6. _ the CouncellafTrens. | £151

- Amongltthe Prelates whichthe.Popeſent laſt rocheCouncelhom Rowe, 1.562
as hath. | laid, there. was: py, ec; nor <Umpimiglia, .,. © $I;
who had bcene Senator of Milan, 4nd imployed inmapyAmbaſſages;aniao, frivricns,
fir for negotiation, and: of ani exat_indgement.; . Havingiloaded. this man, rinwery,

with promiſcs ( which hee performed. ally erogting. him Cardinallio.the Cit 5

firlt promotion after che Councel ) hce defared to haue him in Trays belides, 75vitep of

the Legatcs, as aſecret Miniſter... Hee gave-him,commiſiionio ſpeakethar ny *

to divers which was nor fit to ber 6@mmared el gd \.marks, well che rms
differences berweene the Legats, andthe Naa Fi oblciue «.

cxactly.che humors, opinions, and practiſes, of the:Biſhops; drowrim

co him particularly alimarters of [ſubltance, ;iHee,charged him t6 ablerue +

che Cardinall of Mantua aboue all the Legates,. bur. ts; holde intelligence -..-*

with Simpnera, who knew his-minde,and to.lgbour that therg-ſhould bee no

more any demand made forghedeclarationcencerningzeſtdencie; pr, if-it

could not bee hindercd, that irthould be deferred yarillthe cnd of ce Coun-

cell; and char, if chatallo could-not bee obtained, hee ſhould delay igas.long

as it was:pollible, yſing all gicancs: which hee thoughe expedient for this

cnde. Hee gaue himalſoalift of the names of thoſe who faugured.the.Ro-

man partin chat matcer, with commillion. to thapke. them, ,and:3ocgurage

them to continue,and to promiſe them recompenſe: referring to hjsdilcre-

tion, intreating with the oppoſites 5 ro yſe fame kind of ;threars ,, withour

ſharpencſſe of words, bur (trong in ſubſtance, and to, prgtnile -ra;tholethas

would relent, obliuion ofall that is paſt, and ro-giue partigular adyjce.ig

Cardinall ©Boromeo of whatſocuerdid happen' which bedid.,' And ihe rcgi-

{cr of the letters written by him,with much acutenc{lc;andiudgemens, hath
been ſhewed me, out of which a great parrbfthole things which followhach

beene drawen. «| 5 03 0bnim arts fouls anofevr ti

Bur hauing recciued aduiſe of the promiſe made by Manta, hee faw it

was hard to diuert the handling of that Article, and thought chat rhe diſlens
tion berwecne the Legates would. produce greater cuils, ang clicemed this
ro bee the molt principall point,as well in deede, as for reputation... For how
could he hope to repreſſerheatremprs of the miniſters of other Princes, whon
he could not gouerne his owne? Therefore hee thought itncceſlary-to vic
the ſtrongeſt medicines, for adiſcaſe that had ſeized on the vitall parts; _
reſolued to ſhew openly how ill hee was fatisficd wich, Mantua; which hee
thought would cither make him altcr his courſc,or aske leaueto'depart,or;by
ſome mcanes, toretite from Trent-: and if the diſſolution of the Counccll did Y
inſue,it was ſo much the better. | He gaue order tharthediſpatthes ro Treng, The #prech-

es from Rome

formerly addreſſedto him, asprime Legate, ſhould hcercaticr bee ditc&gd areno more
roSimoneta; he remooucd, fromthe congregation of Cardinals,who were rg - Cxrdinall
conſulr of the affaires of Trent, the Cardinall Gonzaga, and cauled Frederics * nw
"Boromeo to tcll him chat the Cardivall, his Vncle, did thinke to'ruine the
Apoſtolike Sea, but ſhould effect nothing bur the ruine of himlelfe ; and of
his houſe. He related to the Cardinall S; Angelo, who was a great friendzo
Manna,whatſocuer had happened, and ſhewed himſclfc molt cholerique a-
gainſt him ; and as much againſt Camillus Olinus, the Cardinals (ecretary,, as
not hauing performed the promiſe hee made vnto him, when hee was ſentro

| d 3 Rome.

Y v "'*

*

G38 Gb HHHfterg of PTE PAY

—-— -———_— -

CSOSN

P1vs, a
FErDINAN
"EL1zAB] TH.)
CHARLES 9,

=> EL
Whoſe Seere- \
tarie alſo,Cas
anillass Olhue ies |
15 in dif©pacel
with the Pape,

The negoti-

2tion ot the

Arch bitop

of Lanciane
- 41. ©

WIL Y Pope.

1562 Rome. Which coſt o
- the Cardinall wer&t&onciledYraſee
>! che corps of his VAſterHe Was HAPING

{rhepoorenimt __ Forhovwlotucr the Popeand
0 ep eey Manttlaywirhs

tences andtrotbledifong rinieywhorh, afar his Neck eera%d ea, 1
knew myſtIfro be a patforveryglfubngan@tharhe had not delerned fuch
misfortufieh+ £5 ULLOUE!, © ao1ttst 24 ( (3000D 563251). 1101 F.
' Whetithe Pope wigthu&ufcted, Cantianeamets Remez and amongit
other” things; preſen{{@25h Potion cetter ſubſcribed by more'then
thircie BHhops; HARI6ER 6F/AHdgnactrEnwhich they complaynediof his
diltafteagamit theriiproteftin)theydid wat thinkethcir opiniory was con-
trary 16 His auth68Hty, whith chey-would-defond' againit all, and main-
raine it muiclabte if af part&#42FF his tnadeca.miraculous diſpolition un
the Poptstinde to" receive” inddly' thbrlertors! ofthe Legates j"Bfanrue.,
Seripaitito j and Varmijeſe; andre gineenreifoke relacion.of the Arch-
biſiopwhi gave Him apartitalar account'tf all: occurrences; and! made
him'a'gfear deale"lefſe-fiſpietomi Fhencheoe! began ro excuſe-the Cards
> 31 the bepitwing ;/ notbevingrable roforadce that any, inconue-

__

:
—=— ,

and the/Cotrr; For 'ownit.conld not bre fayd; — and all the

dare intheinext Seflion;thart he-was Head of the Church;and had ginen him
commiſfiontodeliuerthe Ambaſſage to him, which,for many reipeCts, they
thoughttiorfitro'committo writing ; and natned (o many of them,rhar hee
made thePope tharucile,and ſay;chat bad tongues, and worſe pens had pain-
ted thoſe Flies in other colours, Thenhec ſhewedhim thevnion, and

reſolution of the mitiiſters of Princes to mainraine the Councell, and the dif

ofition ofthe Prelares ro ſu pporcany rhing, thatir might conriuuec, and no

+" oecafionwariſcro diſſolucit; that thepointoftelidencewas ſo aduanced,and
' the Fathets fo intereſted, in regard of their*confcienceandhonour, and the

+1
ah
FJ.

Ambaſſadors for their reputation, that ir was impoſſible to denic the hand-
ling anddefining of it. He gaue him an account;and atopic of thepropotaci-
ons of the Emperours Ambaſſadors, ſhewing they didall aime to ſubic the
Popeto the Councell, and thatthe Cardinall of Mantuz did dextcrouſly de-
cline the propoſing of them in congregation. Hee concluded, thar,irbeiag
impoſſblero recall that which waspalt, his Holinefſe might artribure mach
vnto chance, pardoning, according to his vluzhbenignitie, thar which for-
metiy

-—— —_— ———

"59

—————— ——

Lts. 6. the Counceltof Trent.

—— -—_—_  —__—— >

merly h14 happencd, nor by malice, but by negligence of fome,and might 1562

make betcer prouifion for heereafrer, becaule all were” reſolucd nor to pal

propbleor handle any thing, before it. was conſuleed and determined by his Fixmans:

Holineſle. DE "ON: Y IE 4 .” Bifranith,
The Pope , weighing the remonſtrance well, fett'preſently backe the 342i »

Arch-biſhop , with letters to the Legats, andro'ſome'of thoſe who had ſub- 71. iravy

ſcribed rhe lecrers to him, in anfwereof the letrers which hee brought, and f0p»or -:

caue him commiſſion to tell chem all in his name, that his will was the yah levers

Councell ſhould bee free;rhar ctiery one ſhould ſpeake, according tohiscon- ons.

ſcience ; that they ſhould make Decrces according to tructh; rthar hee was

tor diſpleaſed becauſe the yoyces were giuenmore afrer one manner then

another ,' but in regard'of the attempts and praiſes to' perſwade and vio-

lenceothers, and of rhe contentions and birternefſe berweene them, which -

things doe not become a' general Councell, Therefore that hee doeth not

oppoſe the determination of refidence, bur aduiſerh thom to lay aſide their

heate,andchar when'their minds ate quiered,and docaime only at the feraice

of God, atid benefic of the Church;chey may'handle it with profit; Hee was

content ir ſhould bee rold Mantuathar hee was glad to vndetſtand of his in-

_ ”

Ertzaptth,

ter to the Legates, that, following,che ſteps of the Councel vnder Tulins,apd
taking tlic points already digeſted by ir, they ſhould tmmediatly determine
thern;dfdid utiake ane” oof en =
Ac that time they were bafied in Trent, in hearing the Diuines ſpeake in
the Congregations, concerningrhe'fixteenc Articles, who began the ninth,
and endedthe three and twentierh 6f the moneth; and howſocuer they were
in number 66. yer nothing worthy obſeryation wasdeliuered by any, in re-
gard cheratrer becing new, nener handled'by the Schivoftemien; definedint
the Councell of (,onſtance ar rhe fitſt onſer; andtmaifitained by rhe Bohemi-
ans by force of arms, ratherthen by Teaſon'and difpuration, they had no-
thing ro ftadje bur what was written in theaſfFourtieyeeres, by ſome few,
excited by the diſputarions of Luther. Therefote they all agreed, that there The come-
was no necefſiieor precept of the Cup ;'atid, for proofe, they alleadged pla- Cup is dif
cs of the new Teſtanehr,; where bread onely is named; as in Saint Tobi, ©
He: thas eateth this bread {hall late for ever. They fayd that; yntill the time of
the Apolttes, bread oncly was in vie; asit isrcad in Sainr Luke, thatthedif-
<iples in Emmais kriew'CH x1'sT in breaking of bread, where there'is no'
meiitioh of wine. 'Atid Saint Phul;teady ro ſuffer ſhipwyrackeatiheSta,dothy
bleſſe the bread}; din ſpeaketh'nor'of wine? Tn'miany' of the 6ldtCavons
mention'is, made of rhe commithibriofthe Laitie; as differing frotm'that of
cheClergie , which difference'tould not confift inatiy thing burin tH&Cup.
To theſe were added the figures 6f the old Teftiment. - Manna} which fig-
Hificth the Eachariſ}, hath no'drinkein it.. * Jonathan, who tafted the honie,
did not drinke; and ſachother congruitics. And it was matrerof gfearps-
ticnce toheare them all repeare the ſamerhings. I ought not to' omhitone
Xx 2 par-

ot che Cup.

—— . —— — . —  ——

= WF}

520 The Hiſtory of

: — ——

i —_—

1562 | parricular,ſcriouſly dcliuered by James Payua,a Portugall,char CHRIST, both
0; by precept and example, bath declared that the bread is dueto all, and the

Eanmite. Cu po the Pricſts onely. For hauing conſecrated the bread, he gaucir ro his

Euzazzrn. dilciples, who then were Laiques, & repreſented the whole people, comman-
c£2n4es 5: ding they (houldall cate of it; afterwards hee ordained chem Priclts, in thele
The opmion words, Doe this in remembrance of mee; and, in the end, hee confecrarcd the
*2« Pow.” Cup ,.and gaucit ro them now conlecrated Prielts. Bur the wiv ſort did
2 lightlypaſſcouerthis kindeof arguments, and confined chemſclues ro two.
Twoprinci- One, that the Church hath power from CHkisT to change the things
+ gg that are accidenrall inthe Sacraments, aid that to the Eucharift both kindes
communion are neceſlary, as it is alacritice, but as it isa Sacramenx, one onely, fo thar
the Church hath power to ordaine the vic of oncalone. Which they con-
firmed, becauſe it did once, in the beginning, charge in Baptilſmethe inuo-
cation of the Trinitic into the inuocation of CarisT onely , and returned
afterwards to thediuine inſtitution. The other reaſon was, thac the Church
cannot erre ; bur thee hath ſuffered the vic of bread onely ro be brought in ;
and. finally hath approucd it, in the Counce!l of Conſtance, and therefore ir
mult bee ſayd that there is no dinine precept or necellitic ro the contrary.
Bur Friar Antonius Mandolphus , a Divine, belonging tothe Biſhop of Trague,
having firſt affirmed that hee was of the opinion of others in this , that there
was no diuine precept, obſerued, that ir was as contrary to the Catholique
doctrine togiue the Cupto the Laiques by diuine precepr, as it was to denie
itco then by diuineprecepr. Thereforeall thoſe reaſons, which did ſo con-
clude,wereto be layd aſide,and thoſe of the diſciples in Emmaus, and of Saint
Par 1n the ſhip , becauſe by them ic would bee concluded that it was not fa-
 criledge ro conſecrate one kinde without the other, which is contrary to all
the Doors, and meaning of the Church, and oucrthroweth the diltini-
on of the Euchariſt as it, js a Sacrifice, and as itisa Sacrament. Thar it was
plaine alſo, that the diltinCtion of the Laicall and Clericall Communion in
the Romane Ordinary was a diucrfatic of places inthe Church, notof the Sa-
crament recciucd, begauſcatherwiſe this reaſon would conclude, that, not
oncly thoſe who ſay Maſſe, bur all che Clergic ſhould hauc the Cup. Ofthe
authority of the Church jn; changing rhe. accidenrall things of the Sacra-
ments, no man candoubt ; but heefayd it was not atime to diſputewhether
the Cup were accidentall, orſubſtantiall, Hee concluded thar thjs Article
might bee omitted, as already decided in the Councel of Conſtance, and that
che fourthand fifth Articles might bee exaQly handled, becaule, granting
the Cup to all Nations that deſire it, all ocher diſpurations areſuperfluous,
yea hurtfull. Jobn Paul;a Diuine ofthe Biſhop of tive Churches, ſpakeallſo
rothe {ame purpoſe,and both of chem did difpleaſe, becauſe it was thought
they ſpake againſt their conſcience,atthceinftance of cheir maſters.
Concerning the ſecond Arricle, the Diyines were allo vaiforme in the
afirmatiuc,and all their reaſons were reduced to three Heads. 1 he congrui-
ries of the old Teltament, when the people did participate of the mieare offe-
ringsin the ſacrifices,bur ncucr of the drinke offerings. To take away from
the vulgar, occaſion to belceuc that one thing is contained vnder the bread,
another ynder the wine. Thethird the danger of irreuerence, And heereche
| rcalons

"Be \

1.18.6. the Conncell of Trent.

—

521

realon» recited by Gerſon were brought; thattheblood tight be ſhed,cither 1562
inthe Church, orin bringing oft, eſpecially over thEMounraines in wits CD
ter, thatir would hang inthe beards of theLaikes, that ir would bee ſower FanpenAn®,
it ir were kept, that there would want veſſelsr& hold 'enougtyfor'ten thou- Eriinrry,

CHartis ©,

land or twenty thouſand perſons ; that,in ſome places;ir wouldbeeroo rear age wy

a charge, inreſpeRofthe price of wine; that the veſſels wouldinot bec kept
cleane; that a Laice'man would bee of equall dignitie with # Prieft.” .Which

reaſons it was neceffary to ſay thar they were iult and good; otherwiſe the.

Prelates and Doors, for ſo many ages, would have t4tghranviitrueh,and

the Church of Rome, and Councell of (onflance erred.” All theſereaſons (ex.
cept thela(t) were thought ridiculous, becauſerhoſe dangers mightbeerare

calily withſtood in thele times, then they could inthole 12: fitlt ages, When |

the Church was in greater pouerty, And'the laſt ſeemed ro'bee*of noforce
to (hew that the change was reaſonably made, bur was good to triaintairicit
after it was made. The rwo Diuines afore named did aduilethar this Article
alſo might bec omitted. Hoo opt
In the third Article, that all Carts is receiued ynder one kinde, the do-
Etrine of concomitancie,delinered by the Diuines , was taken foran'argumendc.
For the body of CaisT being vnderthe bread, by vertue of th&conſecracion;
CaRrsT hauing fayd , by words omnipotent and effectiue, 'Thitvs ty body,

and the body being aliue,it muſt needes haue blood, foule, and diuinirie':fo
that all CyrztsT was vndoubredly receiitied vnder the bread. Bur fome im © = ©
fcrred heereby, thar therefore all gracesare received/in ir, ſeeing that hewho + . +

hathall CuR1sT wanteth nothing , becauſe hee 1s abundantly fufficienr.
Ochers ſayd to the contrary , that the ilJation was neither neceſſary, nor
bable. Foffthoſe whoare baprized, are filled with Carisr, as St; Padl faith;
and yet other Sacraments aregiuen vnto them. And becauſefome auoyded
the force of the reaſon by ſaying , that the other Sacraments are neceſſary
in reſpect of ſinnes commirredafter bapriſme, , it was replyed' that the anci-
ent Church did immediatly communicarethe baptized, ſo thar,as from|be
ing filled with all CaRtsT in baptiſme, ir cannot bee inferred ctharthe Eu-
chariſt doth not conferre other graces, ſo-from hauing receiued all Cxrxrsr
vnder the bread, ir cannot be inferred thar no other grace isto be conferred
by theblood; neither can it be ſayd, withour great abſurdity, thar the Prieſt
in the Maſſe, having recciued the body of our L o kD, and,by conſequence,
all Cyr1sT,doeth not receiue any grace in drinking of the Cup: for orher-
wiſeto'drinke of it, would be a worke indifferent and vaine. Moreoueritis
decided, by the common doEtine of the Schooles,and of the Church , that
by cuery ſacramentall ation, by vertue of the worke it ſelfe, which they
call, Ex opere operato, a degree of grace is conferred. Burt it cannor be denied
thar to drinke the blood of CxrtsrT is a ſacramentalla&tion, therefore ircan
not bee denicd, rhar it hath a ſpeciall grace annexed.” In this controuerſie the
greater part of the Diuines held, that, nor ſpeaking of the quantity of grace,
anſwcrable to the diſpoſition of the receiner, but of that which the Schoole-
men call facramentall,it was <quall in him that receiaed one kinde onely and
in him that receiued both. The other opinion'was defended, chough with
the imaller number, yer more carneſtly. Friar Amante Seruita, a Breſcian, a
Xx 3 Divine

' V'oihn 242m rant os ie $i ee s

The Hiftory of L1s.6,
1562 Divine of the Biſhop of Sebenico A fauourer ok this {ccond opinion , paſſed
FE ary farre, 1 know not with what aimeorendz who, alledgirg the doctrine
Frame: pf Thomas Catctane , that blood 'is nat part of humane. narure, burthe firlt
macs, Aliment; andadding that ircould nor bee ſayd, thatche body doth neceſlarity
Guanies 9: dravy 4 copeomirance its aliment, Gid inferre thatthe thing contained vnder
_ © © beth kindesis notablolutely the-ſame: and hee added, that the blood'of the
Friar £m4** Eucharſ, according to the words of'C a «15 T, was blood ipilt,and,by con-
opinioe wich {cquence, out of the vaines, in which if ic remained, it could not bee drinke,
-- __ fo rhatit:could hot beedrawen in-ceorcomiuancie with the -vaine, and that the
Euchariſt was inſtirured in memory of the death of CarisT,which, was by
ſeparation ad cfiulionoft blood. . Wherear there was a noyleray{ed amonglt
bur preſerdly gheDipines , and a cracking ofthe benches. Therefore, recalling himlclfe,
kerb paracn HeeTerracted, and faid that the heat of dilpuaion had.carycd him to allcdge
the rcaſonsof theaduerfarics, as if they had beene his owne, which notwith-
landing heepurpoſed to relolue inthe cnd; and hee ſpent the refadue of his
diſcourſcin refoluing them ; and, in conclufion,asked pardon of the {candall
giten.; becauſe hee had not ſpoken with ſuch caution , as ro ſhew plainely
that thoſe reaſons were eaptious,and contrary to his owne opinion. And he

madeancnd withourſ peaking of the other 3- Articles,

The x.Artide , But, cancerning the fourth Article, the Spaniſh Dinines,and dependants
marco en; Spaine, Were marucllouſly vnited, in giuing counſcll that, by no meanes,

15 nat to bee

allovcsrothe ghje-yſc of: che Cup ſhould bee permitted ro Germany, or others. The fub-
i 6.1; main- (4nce:of that which they ſaid was; Thar none of the cauſes which former-
Sorni Pre ly-moouedthe Church co rake it from the people beeing cealed , yea becing
mw. now. more yrgent, and others more ſtrong and eflentiall annexed, it was fir
td; perfeucre in the determination of the Councell of { onſtance.Þ, and of the
Church: before and after. And diſcourting of the dangers of irreucrence,
which wasthe firſt kinde of the caules, they faid they were now more to bee
{cared , then; in former times. For then there was none who did norcon-
{tantly belccue the reall and naturall preſence of CH k1sT in the Sacra-
ment, afterthe conſecration,ſo Jong as rhe kindes did laſt, and yet the Cu

was takenaway, becauſe men had rot luch regard to the blood of CyrisT,
as was neceſlary , and therefore 'whar reucrence can bee hoped for now,
when ſome doedenicthe reall preſence, and lome will haue ir onely inthe.
vie? Beſides there is not ſo much deuotion amongſt good Catholiques, di-
ligence in humane affaires, and negligence in diuine becing much increaſed;
ſo that it may bee feared, thata greater negle&t way produce a greater irre-
uerence. To make a diftercnce berweene Priclts and others, is now more
neceſſary then cucr,, becauſe the Proteſtants hauc cxpolcd them to the ha-
tred of the people, and {pread a dodtrine which takerh from them their ex-
cmptions, {ubiccteth them to lay Magiſtrates, detracteth from their power
of abſoluing from finnes, and laith alſo that rhey ſhould bee called ro the
mimtltery bythe people, and bee obnoxious ro bee depoled by them ; which
ſhould force the Church to preſcrue cxaCtly all cholc rites, which may giue
them repucation. The danger that the vulgar may recciue an impreſſion of
falſe belecfe, and bee perlwaded that tome thing 1s in the Cup which is not
vnder the bread, is now more vrgenr, in regard of the new opinions ipread

abroad.

&

EIN a.

a ———

L 18.6; OO the Councell of Trent. $22

abroad. 'Many ſaid, that the Church did prohibite che Chalice, ro oppolc 156z.
the errour of Nz$torius, who did: belcene that all Cy r1 5s T was not vadec, 4
one kinde; which being rhe opinion of lomeof the heretiques now,the pro- Fruotx: 1
hibition.is to bee maintained 1till.YVhat they would inferre by this I cannot 4p
expreſſe berter, hauing neuer read that Neſtarius did ſpeake 19 this {ubicct; ><, |
norchatthe Modernes.doe handleit withthoſe rermes., Bur the-third dan-.: |
ger that theauthoritic of rhe Church would bee debaſed, and aconclufion,
made thatit hath-erredin takingaway the Cup,may beecalled gor-adanger, *
buta thing thac wouldcertainely happen . neither was the requelt made by |
the Proteſtants, but to conclude, that the Synod hauing confeſledthe errour
paſt, hath corre&ed ir,by-this graunt; ſothey will pabliſhche victory , and
demaund a change allo in other conſtitutionsof the Church... They ſaid,
they were deceined, who thought rhe Duteh-men would bee ſatisfied with.
this, and ſubmit chemlſclucs.to the decrees of the Councell; yea; they will.
take away falts, diffterence of meatces, demaund marriageof Prielts; and in”
abolition of Eccleſtalſticall juriſdiction in the exterior Court, which-is tbe
markeat which they all doe ayme; thar it is nor crediblethey arc Catholikes
who delire the Cup, becauſe the Catholikes doeall belceue that the Church:
cannot erre, and thatno deuotion is acceptable ro God if it be not approued
byir, and that obediencetothe Church is the height of Chriſtian perfe&i-
on ; that it is certainly to bee belecucd, that hee that doth demaund the Cup
thinkes ir neceſfaric, and heethatthinketh ſo, cannot beea Catholique; thar
none doth demaund it belccuing that hee may not lawfully vie it: withour
the-graunt of theCouncell,but thar rhey may nor bee hindred by their Prin-
ces, who, if they were alone; would yſurpe it, withoutany allowance ; that
of this cuery one. may bee aſſured, obſeruing,thar, nor the people; bur the
Princes doe entreat, who will not ſuffer a nouitic without a lawfull Decree;
not becauſe the people would nor bring ir in of themſelyes, more willingly;
then ſecke itof the Councell. - _ 43 porn
And this argument was ſo preſſed , that Fryar Francis Forier, a Portugal], Apcrulane

ſaymy ot a

vſed a conceipt,which the auditors thoughtto bee nar, onely bold, bur peru; F:yriga
lantalſo; thac the Princes would make them(clues Lutherans, by petruſiion NN,
of the Councell. The Spaniards exhorted chem to confider,thargt this were 4 b<Cwp-
graunted to Germanie, Italy, and Spaine would demaund the like, ro whom
ircould not bee denied; from whence allo theſe Nations would learne notto
obey,and rodcfire a change of other Ecclclialticall Lawes;and thatro make a
molt Catholijke countrey Lutheran,there was no better meanegthento giue ir
the Cup. Francifcus Della Torre, a l:juite, repeated aſaying, of the Cardinall
Saint Anyelo, the chiefe Penitentiarie, that Sathan, who was woont ro' trans-
forme him(elfeinto an Amgell of heaucn, and his Minilters into Minilters of
light, doth now vnder the couer ofthe Chalice, with the blogd of Ca ris rt,
exhorr to giue the people acup of poylon. 5 mo tet ion Heuer |
Some added,thar the prouidence of God; guiding the Church,; inſpired
the Councell of Conſtance , in the former age, to eſtabliſhche raking away of
the Cup, by adecree, not onely for the reaſons which-were then of force,
but becauſe if ir were now in vie, there would bze no; externall figne, to-di-
ſtinguiſh'the Cathaliques from the Hererigques, andchisdiltinction being/raken
away

PE I" WIE

—

*—_

524

The Hiſtoric of

1562

——
Prvs. 4

FERDIN ND

_ ®

Er1izABBTH »

* CHARLIS9.

away the ProteFtants would bee mingledin the Church with the faithful,
and that would follow which Saint *Pautſaith,thar 4 little leauen goth quickly
make ſower a great lumpe; ſoirhat ro grauntthe Cuppe would bee nothing clſc
bur to giue the heretiques greater opportunitie ro burr the Church... Same.
alſo, who knew nor the petition: had beene preſented rothe Pope,” aid by.
him, (co vaburchen himſelfe, and draw the -marter in length) referredito
the Councell, did expound itil, that the requeſt was then made to the Sy-
nod, and not to the Pope,fuſpeCting it was to this end, that they might en-
large eucry grant withvntit intetprerations, and {o cauſe a necelhitie 'of ano»
ther Councell, ?

But thoſe who thought they might condeſcend to therequeſts of the Em-

 perour,andof ſo many other Princes and people, gaue countell ro proceed

with lefle rigour, and-not to make ſuch bad interpretations of the godly
prayersof the weake brethren, bur to follow the precepr of Saint Part, to

_ rransformethemſclues into the defects of the imperte&t, ro winne ther, and

not to haue worldly aymes of reputation, burro gouecrne themſiclues by the
rules of chatitie, which treading vnder foot all cthers, cucn thoſe of humane
prudence,and wiſedome, hath compaſſion, and yeeldethto cuery one. They
{aid rhey ſaw noconſiderable reaſon adduced by the others, bur onely that
the Lutherans would fay that they hadprooucd that the Church hath erred,
and would make other demands. Bur hee is deceined who belecueth that
a Negatiue will makethem hold their peace. "They haue ſayd already thar
an error hath beene committed, they will ſay hereafcer , that obſtinacie is
addedto it, and where humane ordinations onely arc in queſtion, an altera-
tion willnor ſeeme ſtrange, nor mil belecme the Church. Who knoweth
not that the ſame thing cannotagree to all times, that there are innumerable
Ecclefiaſticall riceseſtabliſhed and aboliſhed; and chat it is nor againſt the
honorof the Councell to hauc belccued thata rite hath beenegood, which
experience hath ſhewed to be vnprofitable. To perſwade ones felfe that this
demand will beget others, argucth roo much fuſpicion,and deſire of aduan-
rage; but S. Paullaith, that fmplicitie and chriftian charitie doth not thinke ewll,
beleeueth euery thing; ſupporteth all, hopeth well. |

Itbclonged to chele onely to (peake of the firſt Article, becauſe thoſe of
the abſolutencgatiuehad nothing to {a ot it. Buactheſe werediuided into
rwo opinions. One which was the morecommon, that it ſhould begraun-
ted, vpon ſuch conditions as *7awithe third did grant ir, of which wee haue
ſpoken in their place. The other of ſome few, that ifrhey would grauntthe
Cup,to make them ſtand faſt in the Church, who now doe ſtumble, it is
mectſo totemperit, as that it may produce the eftc& defired; which thoſe
conditions cannot doe, yea would yndoubredly make them fall headlong
into Lutheranime. It is ccrtaine, that the penitent man ought rather tochooſe
any temporall euillthenro finne; yet Caietan gauecounſcll, not to come to
any (pecificall compariſon,and ſay, that it is better to bee put to death with
pincers, or vpon the wheele, &c. becauſc by thismeanes one ſhould rempt
himſclfe withour neccfhtic, and fall from a good diſpoſiticn, preſenting
horrours to himſelfe'ro'no purpoſe. So, in the preſent occaſion, theſe am-
biguous men, when the Councels fauour ſhall bee brought ynto them, will
reit

L rs. 6. - | he Cantaadi of Treas

reſt ſatified, and thanke G © D,andthe Church, and will thinke no more of is
ictrengthcrung themlſelues by lirtleand little, Ii isthe [axe commande- >-
ment ot S. Paul,co recciuerhe weake in faich, not with di ine

{purations, or pr e- Finn

(cribing them opinions & rules,bur ſimply,cxpeRting oppurtuniric ro giue 5,,7,5777
a morcample un{truction. Hee that ſhould now propoſca condition in CF;

Germanic, to belecuc this, or that, would trouble them much , while their
mindes doc wauer, ſo that,thinking whether they ought ts belecuc itornor;
they will fall in:o ſome errour, on which they world not otherwiſe hauc
thought. To this reaſon they added, that howvocuer ic is maintained, that
the Church hath, for juſt cauſes, taken away the Cup, if afterwards it docth
grantir vponother conditions, withour providing againſt thoſe inconueni-
ences, for which it was firſt remooucd, ir is confeſſed, that it was taken a-
way without cauſe. Thetcfore they concluded,thar it was fit ro conſticure
for conditions.all the remedies to the inconuchiences;which firlt cauſcd the
prohibition; chat is,that the Cup ſhould neuer be carried our of the Church,
and thar the bread onely ſhould be ſufficient for the ſicke,thar ir ſhould noc
bec kept,to take away the danger of ſowerneſle, that they ſhould viclictle
pipes, auoid effuſion, as formerly was done in the Romane Church. T his
cing done,it will appearcthart the proviſion was firſt made vpon good rex
ſon,reucrence will be ſtirred yp,peoptcand Prinees willbelareficd and the
weake will be tempted nomore. A Spaniard faid; that irwas norlo cafily
to be belceeued, that the Catboliques did, with ſuch hear of deuotibn; deſire
the Cup, and therefore that ic were good to ſend into GermanieÞ.to beinfor-
med who they be chat demand it, whartthcir faith is, and what be their mo-
riucs, thatthe Synod, tecciuing the reJation, may hauea foundation to pro-
ceed on, and not groundanſcitc ypon thewords oforher; _

[n the ſixc Article they al cxprefiedthemſclues in few words, becauſe there
was not much to be ſaid. For the Euchariſt not being a Sacrament neceſla-
rily, and Saint Paul commanding that he who is to receiuc ir, ſhould exa-
mine himſelfe whether he bee worthy, it doeth plainely appeare, that it can-
not be adminiſtred to any that hath nor rhevſe ofreaſon; and if the contrary
hath beene practiſed in ancicattimes it. hath beene where and when the
tructh was not ſo well declarcd as now it is. Therefore the Synod ought ro
derermine that 'the preſent vic. ſhould bee maintaincd. Some well obſcr-
ucd that they oughtto ſpeake of Antiquitic with more reucrence, and nor
ſay that they wanted. the knowledge of the Trueth. Defiderius a ( armelice
Friar,of Palermo,hadan opinion by himſclfe,thatthe Article ought ro be o-
mitted; ſaying, that the difficultic being not mooucd by the Proteſtants of
theſe times, it was not good,by handling of it, to'fera nouitic on foot , thar
the matter was probable on,both {ides,and char when ic ſhould be knowen
that it was handled inthe Councel,it would excite the curiofitie of many to
thinke on ir,& giue them occaſionto (tumble. For ſomemighc be perluaded
ro belecue that the Euchariſt is a Sacrament of necellirie,as well as Bapriſme,

becauleche ground of that are the wordsof CHx1sT,Herbat ſhall not be borne
azaine of water and the Spirit, ſhall not enter into the Kingdom of heanen ; and of
this, If ye eate nos my fl:(b and drinke my blaod, yee ſhall not haue life. And the- -
exception of childcen canaor plainely be grounded vpon the precepr of -x p
Pa,

Qu—

526

The Hiſtorie of

L rs.:6

1562
—— WN?
Pivs. 4+

F ERDIN+ND»

F:1taBETH,

CC 4aARtas. 9.

— it a, 4

T he Legats

due unchne to

eraunt the
'$ upto Gere
many,

And are op-
pole by the
Spanuards.

_——— ——

Paul,to examine our {clues, which children cannor doe, becauſe the Scrip-

ture doth likewiſe command, that an inſtruction in the doctrine of Fairh

ought ro 55 vom Baptiſme: which if it beapplycd ro men of age, without cx-
cluding children of bapriſme, who cannor learne, the examination prece-
ding the Eucharift may alſo be applycd romen of diſcretion, withour exclu-

ding children from ir, His concluſion was that hee 'did approoue the vſc

not to giue them the communion,bur would nor haue the Councellto han-

dle that which no man =_ |

' The congregations of the Diuines beingended, the Legars did incline to

otant the Cup to German, with the conditions of *Paxl the third/And ſome

morc;and,conſulting with their inward friends, framed decrees Concerning

che firſt, fonrth,and tifth points, deferring the others vnrill they had berter

conſidered how to auoid the difficulties concerning them , related by the

Diuines. And'callinga congregation of thePrelates, they demaunded whe-

ther the three decrees ſhould be propoſed, that they might ſpeake their opi+

nions of them in thefirſt congregation: Granata, who had found the Le-

gars intention,and was molt oppoſite rothegrant of the Cyp, contradicted,

and faid, thatthe order of the Articles was to be followed which was eſſen-

riall,it being impoſſible to decide the fourth and fifth,vntill the ſecondand

third were decided.” Thomas Stella, Biſhop of Capo di Iſtria, oppoſed, and fayd,

that in the councell chey ought not to vic Logicke, and arrtices, to hinder

good determinations. Granata replyed, thar Irimſeltedefired the ſame; that
15,that propoſitions might be maderothe Synodin order, that they might
nor ſtumble, by walking in confuſion. Granara was aſſiſted by Matthias Cel-

linus, Archbiſhop of Zara,and rheother by Tobn Thomas of S. Felix, Biſhop of
Cana, but viing ridiculous ieſts, rather then any ſcrious diſcourle; which

- gaue ſomediſtaſt ro the Spaniards, and made a great whiſpering among{t

Card.Symone-- .

the Prelats. This cauſed the congregarion to bediſmiſſed; -and the Cardinall
of Mantua exhorted the Archbiſhops tg read and conſider of the draughrs
made;that theorder of proceeding might bee refolued on' in the next Con-
regation. | Rs Cr
This place requireth, that, becauſe rhe Congregations were often ended
by reaſon of ſome diltaits given to ſome grear Prelare, the ordinary cauſe
thereof ſhould be related. It hath been ſhewed before thar there were ma-
ny Biſhops in the Councel, Penfioners of the Pope, who'did all depend on
Simoneta, becauſe he was molt intereſted for his Holinefſe, and had themoſt

ſecret inſtructions, Hee beceing aman of an acute" judgement, made vic of

them, according tothe capacitic ofcuery one. PR_ theſe; hehadſome
that were bold and 'wittic- , whom he cmploycd in the Congregations, to
croſle thoſe who cntred into matters contraty ro hisendes,” Theſe were ex-
crciſed inthe Art of icſting {oberly, to prouokeothers, and makethern ridi-
culous,themſelues retaining their grauicie, and not being! moued at all. The
ſcruice they did to the Pope, and the Cardinal, doch deferve particuſar men-
tion. Theſe were the forenamed Biſhops, Caya, and ("apo di Iſtria, Pompeins

r= che Lezat, Zambertarus of Bolonia,Bilhop of Sulmona,and Bartholomens Sirigus,of (|andia,

maketh vie ©
4-icſting Bi-
ſhops :n the

- Councell.

f

Biſhop of Caftellanetra ; each of which, to the common qualities of their

Countrcy, had ioynedrhe perfections which are gainedin the court of Rome
: Thelc.

L rB8; 8: ++ the Councell of Trent, \. $2;

Theſe did/exafperatealſorche'diltaſts berweene Mantia and Simoncta; betore! ; 1 5662.
mentioned, by ſpeaking ill, and detrafting from Mantra, afwell in Trent by >; . FA
words! agby letters to'/Rome; which was attributed ro Simoneta,bbcauſe cuc- Farpina xp
ry onefaw hee made muchelteeme of chem. Whereofpurgirig himlclfe to £::24 __
the Setretarie of Mantua,and tothe Biſhop:ot Nola;helaid;thar for the ſmall CES
reſpe& they bare toſuch a Cardinal, he would-nor haue bad any more friend-.

ſhip with them,but-that he had need of them in'rhe Congregation, to op--

poſe the impertinences ofthe Prelates. '-- + - 9851 1 fe Sf ie
AuguNtinus *Paingarner, Arabaſſadour of *Bauaria, having beene in Trent 40 ot 3-

two moneths, as a- priuare man, by reaſon of his prerention toprecede the v3 Con- |
Venertians, had finally commiſhon from-his Prince, co appearc in: Publique, Fakes m_
and was receiued inthe Congregation ofthe 27 of Tune, ſarc after the Ve- jinens:
netian Ambaſſadours, and tirſtrmade aproteſtarion;faying, that astheright 4».
of his Prince was molt ſtrong, ſo hee was readyrodefend it. in-any other
lace, butrthar in the Councell , where Religion is handled,' hee would nor
{tand vpon thoſepoints of honour: and therefore was contented to yeelde,
bur ſo.as that itmightbeno preiudiceto.his Maſter, or ocher German Prin-;—
cesof 'the Ele&orall-blood of rhe Empire. The Venetian Ambaſſadors Re harman
ſweredthe Protettarion,that their Republique had right of Precedence,and-b#vours
that as the Dake of Bauariadid then yeeld, ſo hee ought ro doe inall places.
The Ambaſſadoutmadea very free and long/ oration;/in which-hee ſhewed
the ſtare of religion ih Ba#aria,faying ir wascompaſſed withheretiques, who
wereallo entredinto it; that there were whole Pariſhes of Lutherans, Zuin- mazthalong
glians, Flatians, Auabaptifts, and ot other Sects which cockle the Prelats hauc ———_—_—
not been able ro weede out, becauſethe contagion is not onely imthe vulgar;
bur in the Nobiliciealfo,. The cauſe hereof hath beene the bad life of che
Clergie, whoſe great wickednefle hee could not relate, without offending,
the chalte cares of the auditorie.- Bur ir-ſ{ufficeth that his Prince doth tell:
them,thattheamendment of DoEtrine would bee in vaine and vnprofita-
ble, if firſt an amendment were nor madeof manners. Heeadded, thar the
Clergieis infamous for luſt; that the policique Magiſtrate doth:nor fufter a
Concubinary Citizen : which fault is ſo common inthe Clergie, that there
arc not aboue three or foure in an hundred, who are not concubinarics; or
ſecretly married,or openly,thatrhe Catholikes alſo in Germany, doe preferre
a chaſte mariage beforean vnchalte ſingleife;cthar many haucabadoned the
Church for the prohibition of the Cup, ſaying,thar the word of God, & pra»
ctile of the Primitine Church doth force them to vſe irzwhich vatilthispres
ſent is ob{eruedin the Oriental Churches, and formerly! hath beene vſed in
the Churcn of Rom?. That Paul 3.did grant it ro:Germany, and the Bauari-:
ans doecomplaine of their Prince,that he docth enuieitto hisſubiects, pro-
teſting that if the Synod doe nor make prouiſion, his Highneſſe willnor be
able to gouerne his people, and will be forced to giue:them that which hee
cannot withhold, For a rem2dic of the ſcandals of rhe Clergic, heepropoſed
a goodreformation, and that in euery Biſhopricke Schooles and Academies
ſhould bz cre&ted,to bring vp good Miniſters; he demanded the mariage of
Prielts, without which it wasimpoſſible;inthar agero tcforme the EClergie;
alledzingrthat ftnzlelife was not commanided by Gap; Hee demanded _
che

The Hiftorie of _ L 1s. 6.

_

FREY
P | 4 V $. 4:
FERDIN - ND.”

—

EL1ZABETA.
CHARLES. 9.

*_F ,
_

1562 + the Communion vnderboth kindes, ſaying, thar if ic had beene- permitted,

many prouinces of Germanie had remained in the obedience of the Apolio-
like Sea,” whereas tholt who hauc.continucdin. it vatill now,, doerynne

away fronvit,like a torrent, together with orher nations; thatthe Dukedoth
not deſire the three remedies mentioned, hoping to reduce to the-Church

the ſe&taries,”/ and thole thatare ſtrayed, bur oncly to retaine thoſe who are
not diuided'asyet. Heeſaid it was neceſlary ro begin with reformation, or

. cl{e all che paines raken in the Councell would bein vaine; that, the Clergie

"The anſvere
co its

being reformed, his Prince, it his opinion beasked in point of dodtrine,will
beeablero ſay ſomething worthy of conſideration; which isnorfit to be ſpo-
ken now, becauſe it is not convenient to treat omaking-warre againlt the
enemie, before one hath multered his owne forces at home. In thecourlc of
his Oration hee ofteninterpoſed, that his Prince ſpake this, not to giuea
Law to the Counccll, but ro intimare it with regerence; and with this con-.
ceiptalſo he madean cnd. The Synod anſwered, by the Speaker,that hauing
long expected ſome Prince or ambaſlage of Germanie, but abouc all the

Duke of *Bauaria, a Baracadoe of the Apoltolike Seain that Countrey, they

were glad to {ce his Ambaſſadour, whom they doerecciue, and willlabour.
as they haue done, roconlticute whatſocuer ſhall bee for the{eruice of God,
and ſoules health of the fairhfull. T heFrench-men, hearing this. oration,
were well pleaſed, becauſe they were notthe only men that did freely admo-
niſh the Prelats of that which was fitio be told them ; but hearing the an-

. ſwere,they grew icalous, becauſe this was courteous, and theirs ({barpe. The

The Empe-

rors Ambal-

difference was, becaule, howſocuer the ©Banarian did acutely bitetheClergie

ingenerall, yer heſpake of the Fathers with much reverence, whercas the
French oration was eſpecially dirc&cd to reprehend thoſethat heard them ;
beſides che an{were made to them was premeditated,and that ro the Banarian
ex tempore_. Burt they were both vſcd alike, being heard with the eares

onely.
The Emperours Ambaſſadours, conſidering, that, in the laſt Congrega-

498d pre- tions of the Diuines, the Spaniards, and molt of the Italians had ſpoken a-

ſent a writing

in Conzre-

gainſt thegraunt ofthe Cup, and that many of them hadcalled them here-

gon, con- riques who docdemaund it, roanſwere to this and other obicctions, to pro-
grant of the
Cup,

motethe propoſition of the Bauarian, and to preucnt the Prelats that they
fall not into the impertinencies vicd by the Diuines, compoſed a wri-
ting, which they preſented in the ſame congregation, after the Ambaſſador
had ended his Oration, Theſubltance whereof was. Thar, in regard of
the place they hold, they haue thought ficro admoniſh the Fathers of ſome
things before they deliuertherr ſuffrages. Thar the Diuines haue theſe laſt
dayes ſpoken well, asfarreas concerneth their owne Countrics, butnort for
other Prouinces and Kingdomes. 'T bcy prayedthe Fathers fo ro frame their
opinions, that they might giue a medicine not ro the-ſound parts , which
haue no neede of it, but tro the members ill affefted ; which they will firly
doe, when they (hall know which bee the weake parts, and what helpe they
defire. And beginning with the Kingdome of Bohemia, they faid there
was no needetogocfarre, norro mention the things handled in Conſtance,

bur onely to adde,that,aftcrthat Councell, no practile, force, or warre, hath
bcene

ht — oy -

D—_

-.v

Orr rn

Like the ConmeltofTrent. | | |

beencable ro take the Cup out:of tharKingdomie.,;/Thar the Church did 156,

louingly grant ic vnro'them;;vpon cerraijigconditions,, which *F6u 4, dil 57;
reuoke;beaulc they were norobſerued..1; But Parband:Ivlins thethird ; xg Frvoiyeny!
. Ieyainechurkingdomyſenc Niagh, roperanit ic vatooirm; thouglithe bllk: Exmzarary,

he(ſ;byrcafon of fome. impodiments,was.not to perfeRion.. Now Wh.

the Emperor; hauingar his charge;ioſticuted the Atcbitbilhoprickept Progue
aindoblabed in. che: Parliamenvof Bobeinis; tharthe Ealiftine Prieſts ſhou]

not bee ordained butby the Arch-bihopzaind hand .acknowledgohim tors

lawful Brelace, did beleech thePopethardughangcahion, tgregdinietheds;

thigh worbe loſt; which his Holincfle bquingaclazedtocheiudgementof -

the Gouncsll, icwill remaineim the payyerahereafing; ptclerue:thac Kinig- -
domgiby granting the Cup vmro them! Thavthoſe ptople differ bue like

from the Ohurch of Rome z that chey neuerwotild- admir of matied Prielts;

nor 6rdained by-arly Biſhop oacof rhe'contminionofthe Apgltelique Sea;

that/;tin theirprapers-rhey make mention of thePpe;; Cardinals; and Bi-
ſhops; that, it chey haue anyſmall difference indd@rine, irmaycaſily be re-
Athed A6tharthe Cup bee granted to/themy thavit is:no maruaile ifan ig0-
rant Mtlticudehaue'conceiuedthar opinion; ſecipgthiat menicarned, godly,
and Cathotike doe defend rhar inoregractews:conferted in.che Communion
of both kindes,thenioefoneayely.. They:exharred the Fachers tatake heede;
that thatoo- great (ſcucritiedoenormake them defperate,'and: calt them-
ſcliesihts the armes of rhe Proteſtants.-: They added , that tiers were:Ca-
tholikesin Hungarie, Auſtria; Morania,Silefia, Carintbia; Carniola,Stiria,Bauarja,
Sueuia,and other parts of Germanie.,, who deſire the Cup with great zeale;
which'being'made-knowen ro Paulthethird , A —_— Biſhops leaue ro
communicate ther with it, which, formany.impedimenes, was nor effected.
Of theſe there is danger that, ifrhe Cupbe'itakenifromthem;they will turne
to the Lutherans. '' The Diuines haue, incheir publikedilputations, made a
doubt; that thoſe whodeſtre-the Cup areheretikes;:bur his Maieltic doeth
demiahd it for Catholikes onely,”: T hatthere is hopetareduce,by this gragir,
many'Proteltants alſo, as ſ{omeof them haucalready proteſted they would

returneand beeconuerted; being fatiared with nouines; otherwiſe the! con- +

trary is'to' bee feared. Androanſwererohim that askeda few dayes finee,
who' hee is that doethdemaund it;hee may knowthar the Emperour docth
deſire; that the Arch-biſhop of Prague. may ordaine Caliiiie Pricſts; aud
the 'Ambaſſadours for the Glergie of. *Bohemia.s:defire the ſamie, for. thac
kingdome; arid if there were no hopero obraineit, therewould not belefe
ſo much as afy'lirtle:remainder of Catholikes.”'hn:Hungaritshey: force the
Prieſts ro.gtue chem the Cup; by raking away theirgoads, and tbrearnivg ro
kill chem; and the Arch-biſhop of Strigonium hauingpuniſhediſome Prielts
for doing it, the people remayneth without Catholike Curateg,; hath no
Baptifme, andiis abfolutely ignorant of Chriltianidodtrine, readyito fall in-

to Payatifme. T6 conclufien; they prayed the Fathers.co haue corhpallion,
and ro fide 2 ieaties to preſerue thoſe people inthe faith, and-call backer” |
thofe thar are ſtrs) ed. (1,230 139153 1121104103510 747:079D OT 015077 -11917

Hite end' of che congregation the Legates gauethodraughts compoſed,
concerningrherhrecfirit Articles, for fra

Yy | mer

oftcheoppoſition madain thefor- - - |

%
,

to —y, ——_— 4 -  . ——

"Tho Hibtory of _ Lins;

— —_ — - OO OS

” 62z mer congregation. T he. dayes following che:Fathers handled them and on
CA. the z;they diſeourſed very amply;(peaking of the ſacramental grace, whether

Pry , . = | W | |
Frzpma. MOIc bee Toeciucd in borh kindes then in one: and fome defended: one parc

Emmys and ſomo another. Cardinall Seripandoſaidyehat the fame dificultic baying
gets becne diſcuſſed inthe Oomncellvader {alius, it was reloluctithat irfhould not
bee diſcuſſed -againe. Yer ſome Prelaces defared a declaration of ity but were
hot hearkeried vnto, ityregard ofrhe contraricic of opinions, and: becauſe
the greater/parrdid hold thar borkgpinions were probable! - But tro. auoyde
alt difficulrie, it was concluded, thacall Cnzrs mT the fountaine of all gra-
Some of the Tos,is receiued; Some ofche Biſhops prepared for their departure from Trens,
bourrodepare WHO , hatling ſpokerewith much paſſion and hcare concerning reſidence,
hm es fav -chey were hated, and fcarcd ſome gricuous incouner , in caſe they

lad fpoken  (h@uld perſeuere. Amongſt theſe was the Biſhop of Modena before miencio-

cerning reli- Hed , a manvery learned;'and of a ſincere conſcience, Tulius Paveſs Arch-

"4 biſhop of 'Sarrento, theBiſhop of Uiniers, Peter Haul Coſtazzarus ; Bilho
of Aqui, and others,” who had obtained lcaue from the Legates: whic
Mantua gaue them,that( in regard they were his friends )|he might ſet them

at hberae; and che others, to rakeaway occaſion of diliaſtes. Bur the Am-

baſſadour of' Portugal did remonitrate ro theLegates that this would bee a

dilrepuration to- the Councell, the;cauſe being knowen why they ſuffercd.

and thatie would bee ſayd there was no libertie, which would alſo bediſho'

Nos ac cop-, nouUrable rothe Pope. Thercupon they reſolued to ſtop-them,, and the ra-

T ther, becauſerhey'vaderltood, that ſo ſooncas they were departed, others
would aske leauc alſo. |

The Legares deferring ro propole the other Articles, in regard of the

difficulties , which they torcſaw, the third of Iuly the Emperours Ambalſ-

ſadoursarnd the Bauarian deſired that chey would deliuer their opinions con-

cerning them; and a Congregation bceing called the' next day to this ef-

The \nba- fe&t, the French Ambaſſadours preſented a writing , exhorung the Fathers
| ſadours of . f þ . hi Hh . ha .

F-axce nd tO graunt the Communion of the Cup , making thistheir ground, that in

Baueris PI matters of Politiuc Law , as this was, they ought to 'ycelde, and not to

ſent a wriung

- —_ bee ſo obſtinare, bur ro conſider the necefiitie:! of the time, and -not giue

che Cup. ſcandall to the world, . by ſhewing themlclues'ſo conſiant in obſeruing
mens preceptes , and neglecting G Oo D $,, by reieting reformations.
And in the ende they required, that. what determination ſoeucr they
would make, it might not preiudice the vic of the Kings of France_,
who receive the Cup .in their Conſecration, nor the: cultome of ſome
Monaſterics of the Kingdome which doe, 'at certdige times , adtniniſter
it. Yer- nothing clſe was done in that Congregation , bur onely {uxtecne
47 ms of-dodrine giuen foorth ,'to bee diſcuſſed in the Congregations

ollowing.” 7 Tow | CT

he Layates ** The Legates wereaftoniſhed at the propofitionof;the Frenchmen, vn-

we croubled derſtanding they were ioyned with the [mperialiſts; for which caule them-

iuntion of ſelucs were to walke more warily., And weighing well he motiues of the

the French» - b | .

menand Im Frenchmen to derogatefro the poltiue precepts,they obſerucd that che granz

perialitesin of rhe Cup, beſides the difficulties propoled,did draw-yith, it many more, in

the Chalice. diuers Matters. They remembred:the requeſt for marriage of Priclts, made

FF by

OS ONS WPI” EY” AR 1 > "_

0 HS SONG PPP OI OL Ho En Ae 1s Ft

6. 1 ASA ORE, oth

wy ——— —— . = 5h —_ — IO UP—C 4 RN -2o.4O> + Dc, 9 — — ——— --- ; — —— RS... -———

L1s: 6 ths Contheell of Trent. 531
by the Bauar:an and that Linſacyin 4 feaſt two dayt# before "iti the preſet +46.
of many Prelates4doited / eHhorcing ther to'gtatifis the Emperour*'m!the {"—\52
2 L DID + A; 4:2. Ts go os >» h 905: 4: 4a; ne 2 w_ TVS S--. 475
peritiorfor the Cup, ſayd , chat" Francedid deſire "Prayers; diuine Offices atld Frzotxaty

Maſſesin the vulear rongue;rhir rhe imagesof the'SHints ſhould bee raker'4/
way & mariage'$fantedto Priefts'; andknowihg 'tharcheb« inning is more
ca{ily refiſted chewrhe Progrefle', and'that onemay};” with feffe paines? 456
hindered-from cneritnig; mro'ary Houſe, thay driuenforth;they ref6lucd that'it
was nota'firtine torrcate'of rhe Cupi''' Fhey peffiwaded Pagnand, AGcit
ofthe Marquis of *Feſcara ,zo'defire thar the derermitiarion mrghrnor bee
made;beforc his King was adtiſedthereof.” The Congrega cionyof the =
and ſeuen dayes wereintermitted', rotreate with the Imperialilts)thar they
would bec contented ro'deferre the matter, alleadoits divers #afoiis: the
moſt concluding-whereof was; becauſe the rime wastoo ſhort;ro tmakei the
Fathers ynderſtand , that the grant was neceſſary.! Finally , afterTong par-
ley,they were'contenr,thar al} thar part whith concernech doqrineſhouldbe
deferred; wherwiththe Legats/notbeing fatisficd,arthe laſt the/Arhbaſſadots
conſented; thar chat p6inr oficly ſhould bedeferred;'{o that the Uilation were
mentioned in'rHeDectec;, anda promiſe made to determine itahethertimie.
TheFrench-men remained tobe treated with; whererhey found more faci-
litie, then they expected; whoſaid, they had neither propoſed nor required it;

ELLZAZE 3.1” >
CHarLzs :;
9

And ther
doe cauſe
treaty the:
ot to be cc
ferred.

bur onely afliſted the Emperours Ambaſſidours. © This _ being 6- |
G

uercorne , they begari ro compoſe the Decrees ; whicl to diſpatch quickly,
they ler- the Fathers knowe, tharif any' of them would aduile any thing,
hey —_— commit it to writing , that the'compoſition might not bee fore-
llowed.'': 2004 6 I pas age ”

In the Congregation ofrhe eighth day'/ Daniel Bqrbaro,Parriarke of 4qui-
lia, (aid'; in dcliuering his ſuffrage, rhat newes becing' come of theaccordin'
Frante;,and therefore 4r beeing probable char many Prelates would come, {t
were fitto deferre the points' of doctrine vnrill cherr artinall ;bricthenſtance
beeing ſeconded by none, 'notſo muchas by the French Ambaſſadors thetm-'
ſelues;;aedid fallof it (elfe. ' In the next Congregation AT,
Biſhop'of Leyida , pur them-in tminde , what'it would bee govd romake nil oth
tion of thecuſtdmes of France,according rotheinftance of the Ambatſadots,
by purting in words&which mighr preferne the priviledges of that Kingdome,
adding that, after the dere;:minarion'of the Councell of Conflange;,” the Greet:
ans were Hor! forbid r&conimuticate withthe Cup ; becauſe hel had*#pti-
uiledge,” which hee had ſeehe?biir becing ſeconded by none but Bernards'

dal Bene, a Florentine, Biſhop of 'Nimes, lard +7 bat layd afide allo. |

Afterthe Congregation, the Ambaſſadour Ferrier did ctirionflydemaund'of
Augaſtinus the tetvurAuthour {and tint of that priuifedge * Who having re-
ferred it'fto Pope Damaſus, rhe A mbaſſadout AG becaufit was ccrraine,
chat; an hundred yceres afret' that Pope; to abſtainefrom theCup was ac-
counted ſacriledgt'in'the Chtitch of Rome;'and thar the Roniane Ordmarie”
doth deſeribe theeotmmunion of the Laitie Yways wich he Cup ,andthar'
in the yeere 1200. Tynocentiu# the thirFmaKkech mention thatche women dif
recciuetheblood of Cx 1 s Tin theComnmunidn, oo, I
Thetcnth day Leonard Aller, a Dinchman'; rift Bifhop oa” ;
Yy Zz | who

— _

——

i. -

ms. 4 + = Rd

The Hiſtorie of L 18.6.

—__—

———_

1562

IIA

Pivs 4-

FaxrDIiNAND,

————
EtizABLSTH.
CHARLES 9.

\

Nine points
of rctormati-
onarercad.

The Biſhop
of Yegira ma-
keth a reſ{o-
luce (peach
concerning,
ſome corrup-
tions 1n
Rome.

who came the weeke before,dcliucring his opinion concerning the Decrees,
madeadigrellion in manner of aſer ſpeach ,defiring the Legates and the Sy-
node, that the German Prelates might bee expected, viing diuers reaſons,
bur principally three; which were ill taken by the Congregation : thar is,
T.hatit could not beecalled a generall Councell in whicha wholeprincipall
Nation of Chriſtendome was wanting. That to proccede without expe&t-
ivgthem , would bee accounted a precipitation. That the Pope ought to
writc tothem, and call them particularly. Thegood Father knew. nor that
the Pope had dealt with them two yeercs before by Detphinus and Commen-
done, his Nuncy in Germany , nor what anſwers were madeby the Proteſtants
and Catholiques,cheformer of which ſayd they would noz;and the laterthar
they could not come to the Councell. Some thought he was mooucd by the
Empcrours Ambaſſadours, who, ſceing that thepropolition of the Cup was
deferred, were willing to prolong thereſ1due allo. "RT a0 Bp
Inthe next Congregation, nine points of reformation , formerly eſtabli-
ſhcd,were read, and, to the firlt, that nothing ſhould becpayd for Ordinati-
ons , Albertus Duimius, Biſhop of Yeglia, who came the weeke before, and was
not preſent atthe diſcuſſion of the matter, ſayd; that hee held that poynt to
be very imperfect, if chey did not conſtitute withall, that likewiſe: nothing
ſhould bee exaQted ar Rome... for diſpenſations ro receiue Orders out of due
times , before the iuſt age , withour licence and examination of the Ordina-
rie,and for irregularities , and other Canonicall impediments. For inthoſe
things greatexpences were made, whcras to the poore Biſhops, whohauc not
wherconto liuc,aſmallalmes is giucn ; which hee would byall mcancs haue
raken away , yet ſo , asthat they giue not a ſcandall to the world totithe rue,
and (talc gold and filucr. Vpon this occaſion hee enlarged himſelfe, and
taxed the payments made in Rome for all ſorts of diſpenſations , and added
thar, whenſocucr any dilpenſations hauc beene preſented to him , either for
Ordinations or ought cl{e,, hee hath vicd to aske whether they hauc payd for
them and,vnderltanding that they hauc, hee hath neaer executed nor admit-
red them; which hee ſpake publiquely , becauſe it was the ducty of every Bi-
ſhop ſoro doc. And being anſwered, thatthey had formerly treated of this
i} Congregation , and relolued to referrethe reſolution thereof to the Pope,
who might with more honour, reforme the Offices of Rome, he replied,thar,
thelaſt Lent, hee had ſpoken of it in Rome , but particularly in the houſe of
the Cardinall di Perngia, in preſence of many Cardinals , and Prelates of the
Coyrrt ,and faidthe lame things, who anſwered they weremarters to be pro-
poſed inthe Councell; but now, vnderſtanding the contrary,hee will ſpeake
of it no morc,burlcauc it ro God; ... |
Tothelccond of the Ordinarions to title, rhe Biſhop of Fine Churches ſaid it
was more neceſſary to prouide, according to the ancient.conltitutions, that
none ſhould be ordained withoura title and Office, then without areuenue,
becaulcit isancxceſſiue ſcandall,that many are. ſcene to bee.made Pricfts, nor
to {eruc God and the Church, bur to cnioy their caſe, ioyned with mych lux-
uric, and with a good reucnue,that the Synod ought tothinke ſerioully here-
of,and to finde a meanes thatthere may nor bean Eccleſiaſtical perſon, who

ſhall not bedcdicated to ſome miniltery, becauſc hee hath obſerued,, that, in

Rome

cular Biſhops ; onely tor ambition of dignitie; which'inuention'antiquitic/Fakomixo

— EE eoo—uoeommm en

F | of . "SIEM ES 20 on. . _—_ BT" 5 £5. | a2 9  \AFA-,
that ir was more neceſſary to divide great Biſhopriques go they might bee!

laying, that darkenefſe'could not bee raken from the ſtatres, except it vvere Perapborial.

remooued from the Suinne, hortheſicke body healed,.ſo long as bad diſp0- tion ofche

{itions-didremain&inthe head; which docth'diſpearle them ro'allthe mem

bers. "And for thelalt point, concerning Receivers , heſayd, that iewasnor

honourabicfor the Councell ; norprofitable for the Charch co begin with

the reformation of the ſmalleſt matters ; rhat the matters of importinice are-

firlt ro be handled , rhe {uperiour orders to bee reformed firſt, and the infe-

riouraftetywvards. Which fayingyſeemed'to = mary of the'Spamih Pre-

lates, and ſome of the Iralians'al{6.” Bur partly by ſaying thatthoſ&Decrees'

were already compoſed, andthatthere wetebut threedayesrotheSefhon;

which ſhort time did not comport the digeſtiori'of newinarters}parilyby”

making ſuch oppoſitions againſt the things fpoket as they wereable ; and

by giujng aſſurance; thatthe Pope would makea molt {ttid reformittion in

the Court , the remediesof the bar es wherof could be berter diſcetth&d 4nd

applicd at Rome,where the infirmiry is berter knowerny thei! in the-Cotineel),

; andby ſuch like reafons, 'the proviſions thought on'thele and orherPre”

lates, were deluded” and all wete' made comnitent for that preſent withithe

nine Articles. a7 Þ 2 (0::-27 HUAEO8 4 01455%77 (00 DOLL
Bur,the Congregation being efded\ the Legates aid atlier Papalins ; he: The Lame A

maining in theplacetogether, ro conſidet''6f what chey heard -"cifedhir lins, doecon-

char theboldnefle of thePrelares/iti broichihg new ſedrrigus inatref$;"Wich-may quit

our reſpect,did increaſe diyly , which could'netbe called;liberty 2*Bbe Wo et

much licence; and tharthe Diviries, with retious difcotirſe#; tookey too

much tire ; contending artiorigft el miſclue#abour'tiothj þL and oft: yo

ſingro impertinences ,whicheonrſef ir did cotitintie the Touncaiw

An{hc

neuer be cohcluded:-- Befides there isdiiiget da beta maerny oy | = re arm
and produce ſome {iniſter effe&.”®'Toby Batt fete, e Spetker 3% Ji /eevron re
had exerciſed the ſathe office" ty th& former eget "vgder Tallis 31 the Cardinall
them , tharCardinall (7eſcentins;wvhien they dibfel

poled , without reſpe&t was Wortfto TAFCreube het
file of their diſcourſe; ro4Breviate4Bole whtliver
times to impoſetheriy lence ; w 6h brett” ow
ifaires of the Councell would reel ph, alionFof fraptr
diſcourſes would bee'tiken away.'' T7) armmeh As-t6t pleaſed with?
who ſaid, ther if (reſcentius did SoHcih{&/FIPWER TG ARIA Charts a
| Yy 3 reſtic

: the Cardinall
1} þ r 62 of Verma...
Adobe
fie

53+

pam

—_ —— —— <——R——

_ —_—

=q The Hiftorie of  Þn.6.

1562, ielticot God had nor-giuen a good progreſle to that Councel;that nothing

Me” 4

\—> 1s morcaneceſlary to a Chriſtian Synode then liberty , and that , reading the

Prvs. 4.

F ER INAND: 'Counccls.of the bertertimes,, one hall findecontentions and diſcordsi inthe

—_—_—  —— - =

"n= II " "yt

VN. thoſctimcs, which notwithitanding z did, in the cnd, turne, by the aſſiſtanceof.

ionings of them; cuen in the preſence of the Emperours, molt potent in

the holy Gholt, into a marucllous concord; and that was the miracle which
didpacific! the, world, . Hee ſaid, there were infinite contentions inthe Ni-
cen: Councel, and mol exorbitant i inthe Epbefine, and therefore nowonder

if nowrhgerewere ſampdiucriitie ofopinionsciuilly carricd, which hce that.

would reſiſt by humaneand violent meatics, will lct-the rs know that

.the Councell is nos free; and take from, ir all zepuration;thar it is good tore-

'--ferrethecaulc varg Gad ho, will gouerne Councels), and moderate thoſe

"-yhoarc allembledzn, his name} Lhg-Cardinall of Mantua approoucd the
7 «.opinian,gt Varmiev(e,, and diliked the proceeding of ( reſcentins ; bur ſaid

"jr was:9r.contiary t6;the.libertig pf the Cquneell to: moderate abuſes with

| replpe:14 ard wall AN

Decrees, ,, preſcribmg xle-@xgatiand time; of ſpeaking, and diſtributing,
ro. cucry,.ons; bis, QIvNS Parp 1 his-was, commended by. Yarmienſes,

and they.agrecd: $9 Bus order. for. it ,: hen the Seſh ons ſhould bee:

1E "REEL T4 p95 b

The Lmperialifts Were NOW GL OUS of bo to aka the Chalice, and "ung
inccrelts were ccalgd. - Bur the French-men y with ſome Prelates, Jabourcd'

much. chat noching.might be dancin the Seſli jon of the ſixteenth day, bur all
deferredynuill thenexz., as had beene donetwice before...
auoid thg 4

be publiſhed.; I;helt thereforedid ſecke tg remooue, and thole to incerpole

difhgulcies..'T herexemaingng, but wo dayes rotheSeihon , a Cepgregation,,

was fheld.jn the marpog.ot the! z 4. day ; ig the beginning whereof Granats
deſired ghe Legaies + har; 4a.tregard of the importance of the maiter tobee,
handlcd, they would pro:ogue the Seſſion ; and made,as it were,an Oration,

1-0; ; hehow mTahy Aiffculg;ces were ſilk on. foot; ; neceſſary to bee decided.

The Legates , reſolute tq he contrary, admitted norcaſon, and cauſed the
examination of che, doctring ra. begin :In reading ofthe firſt point, when

they came tothgiphace, wheyg vis ſaid ;; that it cannot bee inferred by the

words,ofigur Lyrd.in.S S: Jobn.. :1fyou ſhall not cat the fleſh of the Sonne, of man, and

drinke ono, & Gravatabegay; and.laid, thatthat paſſage did nor ſpeake
6 Sacrament i hur of f Faith, vader thei Metaphore.of nucriment;;- allcadg-

on ths ex. 2 PR Adppeſalons of. the-Farhetsy and of$. Auſtin par-
dy expaunded zhar place, ag; if hee bad read in £8

HS onc was-atisficd. But, Granata replicd more'

| Chairs and it { C
."=cargeſſ! nes | ag bc ijoynedt0 it ;fay-

ing.chat, by thale word $+ Rawipcucr they were-yaderſtpod, xcearding, [0-
wel [1 Frhe Eachers, the Commynjon of the Cup could not be
ve; d. TR long ontgleaſe ſame of the Fathers, and gathers did not.

oge.,.tharattcr things were concluded , ons:
thou 1. pros vnnece(lar additions, . diltyzbe. ethe'points cſtablir,
ſhed ;and there ere 57, whoſaid Non placer.  Bugy$9.come toan end, the

Legats

The Legates, to,
ame 9d labour with all chcir forceto cſtabliſh the points, that,
thalefaure thax eoneernecammunon, andthe nincofreformatipn , might.

Linfei the ConncellofTrom. =o

Legates were.contenc, that theclaule ſhould be added; {apig indeederie frem- 1562.
—eth cog inlcried by force and, docth begiain the Latine: Vtcungue inxta "4 room.

V arias. 00 Polit tist Joi 071 1603 bus , bag boots on 1d 4, ic {Fanvenans\,
- lathe ſecond poinhot che authoritie ofche Churchiquerche SACFAMCNLS, 4£::ramrn,
whea they came to fhis.place , har they might change the;vſeof;cheGup; Cons 5
by che example otghetorme of Bapriſme., Jacobus Gibersv:, Bilbopotf. Aiife..y : |
ſtood vp, andiſaid.itwas a blaſphemie ;;that the forme ok Baptiinje was wn-..

very much adoc; ſaying ,thata draught ſhould beemade in writing how it |
ſhould,bereformed,and [hewed in the nexs Congregation. .. * "RY

.

In that the Biſhop of the Fine Churches, gaue new occaſion of diſtaſtes.- OWE

SS

——_— a I. ASS _

—

—_ The Hiftorie of L1 3.6.

1562 would irrecoucrably-beloſt;andrherefore that they mult be carefull to doe
;—— ſomething: - Farmienſe was oucrcome;and aniwered that hee had done no-
Fc DiNaxDs thing but toagood end, and that thoſe Divines were addrefled ro him by
Emamra the Emperours Ambaſſadours. Simoneta perceiued that the honeſty of thar
+9; Ye Prelate was abuled, by the ſubtiltic of others, and cold the other Legates,

that he doubted that the Impetialiſts might draw ſome lecrer from him,and-

agreed with them roadmoniſh him of it vpon ſome good occaſion.
— Thelaſt day hadſomecneouinters alſo. For the Biſhop of Nimes, at the
perſwaſion of the French Ambaſſadours, deftred, thar, in the firſt pointof
 reformation,where ſome fee is aHowed to the Notary, forthe Letters patents
1he Legares. OF Orders ;the cuſtome of France might nor be preiudiced, where nothing is
bout to Pat oFiucn, He was f6llowed by ſore Spaniards ; and they were fatisficd, by an
Cogrgnions addition in the Decree, thatrhe cuſtome ſhould bee ſaucd. Other mutarti-
che Bilhop of ONS Were defired and granted , and all was in order for the Seſſion, thenexr
©2% morning. TheLegars rifing vp todepart , Arias Gallego, Biſhop of Girone,
came and ſtopped them,and deſired they would fer downe againe,and hearc
him. They looked oneypon atiorher , bur their deſire to hold the Seſſion
caughr thety patience. "They fate downeagaine, with the diſtaſte of many
Prelates , eſpecially the Courtiers. The Biſhop cauſing the point of the di-
{tributions bee read , ſayd, that it ſcemed'to him a hard thing that power
(hould be giuen to the Biſhop ro rake the third part of the Prebends and con-
uert'cthem 1ato diſtributions ; that formerly all was diſtributions, and thar
Prebends crept in by/abuſe ; that Biſhops had authoritie to infringe bad cu-
ſtomes ; rhatir was not iuſt char theCouncell ; by giuing the Biſhop a third
part of ths authority which hee hath , ſhould rake two thirds from him.
Therefore hee defired it ſhould bee declared thar the Biſhops have ample
ower to conuett into diſttributions as much as they thinke conuement.T he
Archbiſhop of Prague confirmed this opinion with other reaſons, and the
who maketh Spaniards holned by thcir countenance togiue conſent. The Cardinall of

2 ſpcech vnto

conc. Mantua hauing much-commended the pictic of thoſe Biſhops, affirmed, that

ning diſtrbu- ix yas a poIne worthy ro bee conſulted on by the Synod ,and promiſed, in the
; nameof the Legares, whoſe conſent he firſt had , that it ſhould beeſpoken of
1n the neat Slfion. T |
ASeflionis _. © The fixteenthday/beaing come, the Legats, Ambaſſadours, and Prelates
held. 8. of Went othe Church with the viuall ceremonies. 'The Sermon was made b
Tiniene pre:- the Biſhop of Tiiana: who , howſocuer heewas reſolued notto ſpeakerhen
owe of Ofgranting the Chalice, did not forbcare to take thar matter onely for his
wot" ſubictzandrodiſcourſe that the'vſc of the Chalice was common ſo long as
_, the heare of charitie did endure; but, that decreaſing}, and inconuenicnces
Reſidence. (ucceeding, by the negligence of ſome , the vie thereof was nor interdicted,
bur oncly-irwas raught;* that thoſe 'who could hardly auoyd irrcterence,
ſhould lefſc offend, it-they did abſtainefrom#+ whoſe example in progreſſe
oftime, others did follow , char they might nortic themſclues to'dhfigence.
Inthe firlthe commended the meiriorable cxamplc of picrie;andblaftned the
impictieofche moderneinnouators, who to Matte it , hauekindled fo great a.
fire, - He cxhorted thePathers ro charitie, and to extinguiſh the flame; and
nortoſuffcrall the world toburne by their default, to condeſcend to the'im-'
| becilirie

PR_

— = A

Lin.G. the Councellof Trent.

©: a

becillirie of hcirchildren , who demand nothing burthe blood of CHRIST 1562

He admouiſhed them, notto calt away ſo many Prouinces and Kingdomes,

Px

SUS
Vs 4+

co ſpare ſoſmall a matter; that{ceing that bleſſed bloods ſought with ſocar- Fzzvmany,
neſt a defire,thcy would not fearerhe former negligence, for which it was 0- £.,rinmy; ©
mitted, but granc'it;' that CHR1-s T would not haue them ſoobſtinare in C*42*** 5"

their owne opinion ,a50 maintaineſo perniciousa diſcord amongſt Chrifti-
ans,for that blood which himſclfe ſhed ro ynitethem in a molt ſtrict bond of

RY.

charity. Hee paſſed dexterouſly from thar matterto an-exhorration ro reſi-! .

dence; and concluded: with.the diſtaſte of theothers, who deſired to hauc
thoſe.marters buried it falence; : | | |

Whenthe ceremonies were ended , the Maſlg:Biſhop read the dodrine, ThedoGtine

expreſlcd in fours heads; containing 1n ſubſtance. Thatthe Synod,in regard :.ine in four
_ errors which gocabout, concerning the Sacrament of the Euchariſt, bs

hath determined t9;cxpound that which — rothe Communion Sub.
wtraque, and ofcaliten, provieing all che faithfullco beleeue, teach, or

ore, according to the iudgement and cuſtome of-.

rcach otherwiſe. Ther
the Church, it doth declare ,.that the Laickes and Clerkes, who doe nor ſay

Maſle , arc not bound by any diuine precept- ro communicate Subrotraque.,, |
and that it cannot bedoubred, without preiudice of faith,thatrthe Communi«.”

- on vnder one kinde is {ufticient,that howſocucr Cx Ri s T hath infticuced,
and giuen the Sacrament ynder two kindes,it cannot beinferred from hence,
that all arc obliged to receiue it ſo; nor from the ſpeech of our Lo & D,rcla-
ted inthe ſixt Chapter of Saint Jobn, where although there bewords which
name both kinds, yer there be alſo which name that onely of bread. Beſides,
it doth declare, rhat the Church hath euer had power to make a nauration in
the diſpenſation of the Sacraments , fo long as the ſubſtance.remaineth :

Which may b<c drawen in generall from the wordes of Saint Paxl, rhar the.

Miniſters of (hriſt are difþenſers of che Myſteries of God; and particularly in the
Euchariſt , conccrning which power is reſcrucd to it, ro giucerder by word

of mouth. Thar the Church knowing this her authority , howſoeuer the |

_ vieof both kindes was frequentfrom the beginning ,yer the cuſtome _
changed for iult cauſes, hath approued that other , to communicate wir

one onely , which'no man can change withaut the authoritic of the ſame:

Church; itdoeth declare befides, that All Cam 1 s Tisrecciued ynder cither
of the kindes,and the truc Sacrament , andethat hee who-receiueth oneonely

is notdefrauded of any. Grace;neceſlary to faluation, as concerning the fruit:
_ thercof. Finally ir docth teach, that children, before the vie of rcalon, are

not bound to Sacramentall Communiot, becauſe Grace cannot beeloſt in'that

P nat |
neccſlicie of ſaluation,bur for other probable cauſes. In conformitieofrhis

doctrine fourc Anathematiſmes were- read,  1.. | Againſt him that'ſhall {ay,;

age not.condemning antiquity for the contrary cuſtome, obſerucd-in fome-!

ces, becaulcit is robe yndoubredly belceucd that they haue donieit,nor for-

oure 14n4-

bematiſmel

thatall the fairhfull are bound, by diuine precept, or, necellitic of ſaluation, <:<4
to receiue borh the kindesin the Enchariſt. 2: That the Church hath nac
had juſt cauſes to communicates the Laickes andthe Clerkes, who doe not ce-/ -
lebrate the Maſſe, with the kinde of Bread onely, orchatithatherred herein,
3- Agaiaſt him that ſhall denicthat All Cyrgrsr,theFountaine —_—_—

i” EE" BG
1552; atall graces, isrecciuedvnderthe bread onely. "45A gainſt him that ſhall
>, ſepthaccheCommunionot the Exchariſt is neceflary for childrenbefore the
Fxzomaree Vicatroafon.! After thiganocther Decree was Tead allo/{aying ,'rhar the Sy-
Erazzr, node will examine, with the firſt occaſion, and define two other Articles, not
4954548 ducuflcdas: yet : thar is, Whether the reaſons for which the Church hath
& Decree 1s communicated vaderone kindey/arc good:{til, ſo thartheCup ought for to
ng:wo begranted toany ; andin cafcirdoerh appeare that it may be grantedfor ho-
Pio. Delt caules;with whatconditions the grantiiso be rrade. SE QUTY
_ :.. During thetimeot che Male, Mfonſus Salmeron,and Franciſcus dellaT, orre;
leſuites, diſcourſed , the one with Yarmienſe, andthe orher with Madruccio, as
they ſtood behinde cheir ſeags); thar in the firſt point of dotrine; the matter

eds ——
—

5 HOT: The Piftdrie of LEE

— Cr <td
a. —_— _—__ AG Ll

_ « of the inſticurion ofthe Sacrament ynder bothkindes is obſcurely expreſſed,”
--andchar it is\necefſary to {ſpeakeplainly, and ſay, that Car 1s Tdidinſtiture'

irfor his Apoſtles,a ndrhoſcthar fay Maſlc onely,and'norforall the faithful :
that irwas neceffary to infert this clauſe, ro remoouc a}l-doubr from the Ca-
rholiques;and all occaſion of oppofing and calumniating from rhe heretikes;;
thar chey,as Dawes ſenrfrom'the Pope, could'nor forbeare to gittetheirad-
uice:ina marrer of ſo great importance; and were both fo earneſt, efpccially
Salmeron,who talked with Parmierſe;that the reading'ofthe Decrec being en-
ded, Varmienſetfir{t,and then'Madruccio made the propoſition ; which pleaſed
many,bur was reic&ted by the greater-part; not for irs'owne fake, butfor the
manner of propoſing it on the ſudden, without allowingtime to confideron
it. "It didnorpleaſc the other Legats, for the ſame cauleallo; yet in regard of
the honour of the place;they ſaid, withour any adoc,that ir ſhouldbe reſerned*
roithe nexr Seſſion,in the handling of the two next Articles. }
Nine Afterwards the nine points of reformation were read, That for collation
- Reforma: of Orders, Dimiories, Teftimonials, Scale, or anything elſe, neither the Biſhop!
' norany of his Miniſters {hall receiueany thing ; though voluntarily offered.
Thar the Notaries , where there is cultome not ro recciue, and where they
have no ſalurie ,, may receiuerhetenthipart of a crowne. | Thar nbfetnlar
Cterke; thoughtufficient, may be promored to holy Orders, if hee hauenora
Beneficezparrimony ,or pcaſion;able ro maibtaine him;;'and tharthe Bene-
ficemay norbe- renounced; nor thepenſion-extin&t, trot'the pattimony alie-
ned withourlicenceofche'Biſhop.-T hat inthe Cathedralfor collegizre Chur-
ches,in-whithrthereareno diftnibutions ;or very ſmall; the Biſhop ray con-'
uree,co tharvfe;the third, part of theprofitsofthe Prebends;' That in Pariſh,
Churches , where much peopleis; the Biſhops my totnpell thei Reforsro
rakeche aſſiſtance of other Prieſts;,'and theſe that are Targ&in'compaiie ma
beedigidedziand furniſhed with: new Refbors\, if there ſhall be need$;and the
prople map be:compelled rocontribute. Tharthe Biſhops may make aper-!
peruall TnitonotBenctices, with cure, or without; betauſe ofponettic, ot *
- other juridical cauſes: Thar theBiſhops may#ive {oadators to Pariſh Pricfts”
that arcvnlearned , and puniſhthoſt tharare ſcandalous! Thar rhe Biſhops |
may ioyne the Beneficesof old ruinous Chirches t6' others, and cauſc the
Churches ro bee built compelling the people to contribiite to the fabrique: |
Tharthey may viſiteall Benefices held in /ommenda. 'Thatthe name, office” |
and vicof Receiver be taken away in all places.  Intheend , the'Seſfion was
| ordained

ttt.
A.

— ———

Le _y 6. the Conneell of Trens.

339

ordained for the ſcuetncenth of Seprember;and a declaration made; that the 1 TW

Synod might abbrcuiate or protoguc,at pleaſure, as well char Tetme; as auy. 57>;
other,which ſhall belimitcd for che furure Seſſions; - RES WK  FxnSmand
Theactions of this Councell were notun fo great expectation in formet rrnumern,
times,asatthis preſet , in regard all Princes hadagreed indemanding it,and +I=&g
{cat Ambaſſadors, and.thata:grearnumber of Prelats were aſſembled,  foure SD

times ſo-many as before : and-bad/beene begunne now fixe maneths, and

of rhe Cour-

choſe ſpentindaily and continualltreaties anddifcuſſions 5; with diſpatches Ee ®

of many Curricrs and -Prelats from Rometo Trent, and from Thich Ronie...
But when the Seſlioncame ourin print , the viuall Lazine proyerbe, of TH
birth of the Mountaines, was — ;

ing of:two Articles was noted ic ſeeming irange,thar, hauing made foure

y. vied byrhll,'Ahd-parcicularly thedelay-

Articles offtaich,withfoure Anatbemati/mzs, they were notable ro-deelare that. *

of granting the Cup, which is de-iure Ecclefiatico. Some week, opinion;
that ic ought to haue-becne handled firſt, - becauſe if it had beeue granted;all
the diſpurations hadccalcd. Fhe third point-of doftrine was much con-
{ideredon in the concluſion. For it being ſaid char the faithfull, who recei

-—

ucth the body of Cx 1 $ T onely,is nordefrauded ofany neceflaty:Grace,it ritinmate \
ſeemeda confellion that ſorne grace, not neceſlarie;islolt. And berea doube ****s

was made whetherthere beeapy authoriticof man which can kinder che fu-
perabundant, andnorneceffarie grace of God; and if ir can, whethct theſe
impediments bee charicably vicd, Two things wergmuch-ſpoken of as
monglt ehe reſt ;- one, the obligation impoled to beleeue tharantiquitic did
nor hold the Communion! of children :to- bee _neccſſatie; bocaule where
the tructh of a ſtory is in-queſtion, - ir is a-matrer of fact, »and-palt ;.if

which there is no authoritie that can alter the things done, Yet hee that
rcadeth Auftin will know that; inninc places, notin;a word ; but with a dif-

courle, hee docth afirmethe heceſlicie of the Euchariſt fer children, and ewo
of ther doe make ir equall to chenece{htie of, Baprilme; ,yca bee (aich; more

then once; that the Church of Rome hath held and defied it to) bee neceſlas -

ric forthe {aluation of children; - and dbcth glleadge for it Pope[nnocentius,
whole Epiltle doeth' yerremaine, in which hee faith ir plaivelys: And they
ma ruciled why the'Counccll would, without,neceflitie, troubleicſclfe here:
iMn,tono end, when itmighebec ſaid that either ity; or Iiniacentivs had erted,
' The other was the lecond 4nathemati/me, with the declaration;\that he is art

herctike, who faith the Church was not induged vpanjuſt caales:to! commu; -
nicare without che Cup : which-was roground an Articke of faith, ypon 4 | |

fact of. man, Andrhey held-is'a miraculgusthingtharchey would ay, that

one is bound ro obſerue the Decrecancly! jwre bunano.,{butis boundidgre Db - :-

winoto bcleeuc,it is iuſt , andiomake Anigles g faithincbings, which may

bee changed daily. Ochers added alſo; chasif the cauſes wereſainll; they

ſhould {4y whar they.were, and-nat force-mcn: to beleeuc by terrour, but in-
duce chem by per{walton 5 becauſe that was-r1& domineere oner the faith,
which Saint Pauldoth ſomuch detelt, .Concerningnhe pointagf
tion, it was generally ſaid, chat more light poings cold mor behandled,, nor
more lightly, and char they did. imitate! shePhyſician, whoyinan Heficel
Þadic,laboarcd to kill che ircb: , And co pureheir handsinro mdngpurles,to

matinrainE

. $:condly in |
"Sg pvinc ot Re-
tormationm

54.0 The Hiſtoric of *y L ps. 6.
rc62 miaintaineCurats, or repaire Churches, feemedaftrangething;bothforthe
>. matrer,and fot the manner. Forthe marter, becauferrhe Cleatgie was luper-
ber, HE” : : "2 =_T .

Fixvm.y  fluoully rich, and rather indebted rothe Layrie for diucrs euidentretpects;
£25 12:5? forthe manner; becauſcneicher Ck 1'&T, nor his Apoltles, didicuercom-
Cnr * Jell men tomakocomributions, bur onely gatepowetto receiuethole thar
© _ _were yoluntaxic.! Atxtherthatreadcth Saint *Pauttorhe (orinthians;candto
-.. - - the Galathians;j ſhall feerhe maſters crearment of the Oe thar. rreadeth the
© *..,Corne, and thedugieottherarcchiſcd;rowardshimthardathreachpyerto,
as2harthoſet}abourets:haue nd ation ortighe by rigour of Law, 'norany
Obancerie co relicue chenn..} - - as '7 « 20379 CEIPO IEEDNOHC $0 090)
h reconciite - {{FheSrfſion beingthded, rheLegarsbeganto pur inorderttiofe things:
ence Which-wertzo bechandled inthernex, parpolſing toanricipmerherime, if
- Cardinall of Loh re poffible.-1L oft Tarrero' Tent from prog. .ur=m2 4j:toahe Car.

Martuaand
5x14. dinall ty brother,andfrom Cardinult Gonzge4; to his Ynde,iwirhmolt cf-
fetualbexhorcarions; irrthe Popes name, -to:accommodate the differences,
and to hold good imvllipence/rogather:;! for whichoaule:the Sutiday afrer:
che-Sellion, Simonera dined withitieCatdinall of Maiiua; and tnade wperfect
:: 1: E&concllatieiiwithtiim- Mantue began to/difcourſe of fome-Prelates, who
 "eanemurh his: houſe; whonrhee fulpeQedtohaiedoneall offices againlt
hum... Bur Simard did op himmodelily ,; and-faidgooliat hereafter | they
fouldnbtfperaketo; They confulred xarnettly hownhey mightgiuc full
faiitactiontothe Pope, 'andtheCGourt, it marcerof:Refidencey nd what
Prelars werefirro bevemployed troperſwatde others. Fhoſe who had: decla-
red:themſelues rorfaiour the imeretts of th&Pope and Courr, howſocuer
rhcy were otherwifoablo, they thought nortir becauſe they wanted credir.
Thoyamade choice of eyomenof hnceritie , and devtrous:in negotiations,
The Ar<-bi- the Biſhops of: Modena and of: Breſaa. The fame dof che Archbiſhop of
Mop oe £8ciand, having catled rogetherthe Prelars who had'wtitreryto thePopein

ano preſentcth

the Popes cheirowne behalfe, preſented torhem the Papes Briefq, fulkof kindnefle; hu-

-_ ho manirie, and offets:which pleaſed chem allapd did much irigate ctheirheare
wmohm forReſidence:  Anotheraccident allo hapnett the fame'day, much in'the
Popes fatiour. Forth Marquisof *Peſcara {catvnto his! Secretarie'aicopic of
a/lerter;\wtirrento him from'che Kiog ; inwhichheetold him) that, hauing
vnderſtooStharchedeelarationof the Compbularita would difpleaſe the' Em:

THe Kine of PErour, and Frante; dndmight perhaps caufe-aHiflojurion"o che Councell,
Spins ell nes hepatic himomrnatthon rt make no farcher mſtance for it; ſo that no decla-
weerienof the TAO wete thadefortew Tridiftion, andthat the Conncell did proceeds as
-» 00; ehtetybboun, - Aftetwards:heegaue him bfderro lechisPrelacs know,” that
afulence ipo- Nee MA iderſtood theeomtroueriie and dilptiteconcetning Reſidence; and
the inftareethey had'ftade; that it might beodeclared' to bee d# iure dinino,

(aying thdthee commended theirzcale and good intention; yer thought that
thedeclarFion didyot'befir cheprefent 'tirhe;- and thetefore' withed them

40 defilt; 1The'Secrerarie ſhewed the letrerro the Spaniſh Pratats'3 and

1 Gratata, Wading exactly" confidercd of it,” faid, ' rhitatwas well, ſecing
-<+: -.04 Hh chbPobe did'diffike it"; That the "King 'did- not'know the impor-
Trance of 46,'that hee whs counfellolby the Arch: biſhop of Seuil,-who never
tat? reſided, and by the Biſhop of Conca, who remained in Court #that hee

knew

""owy,, IRE IP had. thi IP

now, IT " 3

——_——_——

Lis. 6. the Councell of Trent.

— —

54

Os et <a,

knew very well to what cnd hee did commaund it, that he would obey him 1 552

in not proteltiag, but would neuer forbeare to demaund it, as often as there xe)

es” ns | |
was occaſion, knowing well that hee ſhould nor offend the King hcercin,

T hat point concerning the continuation: was {hewed allo ro the [mpcria- £:rraumry,

CHARLES 9

liſts, and French-mem : who anſwered, there was no neede of that declara-
tion to be made expreſly in words,fecing that it was executed in decdes,

In the next Congregation, held the rwentieth day, the Sacrament of the
Maſle, and the abuſes conſequent , were propoſed ro bee handled. The
Cardinall of Mantua did admoniſh the Prelates ro deltuer their opinions,
quietly and briefly, in the Congregations, and without noyle, and related
the rules which they had made for the Congregations of the Diuincs, to
takeaway contentions,confuſion, and prolixitie; which , being read, were
approoued by the congregation. Afterwards Cardinall Seripando diſcour-
ſed of the manner of examining the points of doctrine, and the Anathema-
ciſmes, in the congregations, and putthem in minde that they had beene ex-
amined and diſcuſſed before in the ſame Councell, and eſtabliſhed allo, al-
though not publiſhed; fo that the Fathers might very muchabreuiace their
meditations, in regard there was ncede of nothingimore then of expediri-
on. Granata. added, thar,the Maſſe hauing becne handled before,and rhere
remayning much time yntill the Sefſon, the marrer of Order might be han-
dled alſo. And the ſame was confirmed by the Biſhop of Fexe (hurches,
whicly ſome ynderſtood to bee ſpoken ironically ,.and others, tothis ende,
that they might handle reſidence, according tothe promiſe of Mantua. In
the ende, the Articles , to bee handledin the congregations of the Diuines,
were giuen forth, Theſubltance of the orders before mentioned was com-

}
1V.S 4.

Firtpixn&dngD;

_--

Prziry 2.
NR

Seuen rules
are ſer cown,

the. orecr of

rehended in ſcuen rules. - That, incuery matter R—_ oncly fourc of concerning

che Diuincs ſent by the Pope, choſen by the Legates, ſhould ſpeake, two le-
culars , and two regulars. Thatby the Ambaſladours of Princes three of
the ſecular Diuines , ſent by them , ſhould bee chofken. That cuery Legate
ſhould chooſe a ſecular Diuine of his owne familic. That of all che other
Secular Diuines of the families of the Prelares , onely foure ſhould bee cho-
ſen to ſpeake, beginning with thoſe who werecreated Dottours hirit. Thar
among(t the Regulars cuery Generall ſhould chooſethreeof his owne order,
Thar none of the Diuines ſhall ſpeake abouc halte an houre, or, if they doe,
ſhall bec interrupted by the Maſter of the Ceremonies, and hee that will bee
morebricfe,ſhall bee more commended. That thoſe Dinines who are nor
to ſpcake, may deliuertheir opinions in writing tothe Deputies, concerning
the things propoſed. By theſe rulesthey made account thar foureand thir-
tic Diuines were to ſpcake , and that they mightall bee heard in renne Con+
gregations at the moſt. [In eſtabliſhing and publiſhing his order, che dif-
ficultie was what inſcription -ro giue ir. Some thought thariro calt ira
meanc to bee obſerued by the Diuines , was to runne-into the inconnenis
ence obie&ted by that Sparrane, to the dthenians, that wiſe men did conſult;
and the ignorant giue ſentence. For auoyding whereof the inſcription was con-
cciued thus; A mean to be obſcrued' heereafter in che-poynes which

examining
the points of
doctrine;

ſhall bee cxamined by che inferiour Diuints, inferring that the'Prelates were *_

ſuperiour Diuines.

The

Zz

_ET SES
by

Ws. 4

wes.

a mm
Das; i

ag ar tf
Fo 'P

Mn vr der or op) = EY

I_ as A
Wt 2:4 00> een
LOS A cv -eeoig. re ASAGA

a= > Ames

_—

2 195" BP WEE
-—,

mm __—

8 os + © $os

we ee

ED

INI

—_—  ———

542

- Fihe Hiftory of "ins:

1562

ES \
Prvs 4

FrRDINAND.

ELTAKET!!.
CHARLES 9.
Pa:tip 2.
"oa.
I. Articles
CONC. ning
the A.:/Je are
rLOPOIC + LO
= cxamincd.

The French
Ambaſlidors
writc tatheir
King tor Pre-
lates ©: Do-
Qors to bee
ſent our of
France.

And coplaine

of the procee=

The Articles were thirtecne, 1, Whether the Maſſe bee onely acom-
memoration of the ſacrifice of the / roſſe,ard notatruclacrifice. 2. Whe-
ther the ſacrifice of the Maſſe derogaterh from that of the Crofſe. 3. Whe-
ther CHR15T did ordaine that the Apoltles ſhould ofter his body and
blood inthe Maſſe,in thoſe words, Doe thu inremembrance of mee. 4. Whe-
cher the ſacrifice of the Maſſe docth oncly helpe hinz who docth recciue ir,
and may not beoffered for others, as well living as dead,norfor their fjunes,
latisfactions zn | other neceſſities. 5. Whether the priuate Maſſes,in which
the Priclt alone docth recciuve the Communion without other Commu-
nicants, bee vnlawfull, and ought ro bee taken away. . 6. Whether the
mingling of water with winein the Maſſe bee contrary to he inſtitution of
our Lord. 7. Whether the Canon of the Maſſe doeth containe crrours,
and ought ro bee abrogated. 8. Whether the cuſtome of the Church of

Rome, tro pronounce ſoftly,and in ſecret,the wordes of che conlecration, bee.

damnable. 9. Whether the Maſſe ought to bce celebrated onely 1n the
valgar rongue, vnderſtood by all. 10. Whether ro attribute certaine
Maſſes tocertaine Saints be an abuſe, _ 11. Whetherthe Ceremonies, veſt-
ments and other cxternall f1gnes which the.Church vieth,oug hr to bee taken
away. 12. Whether toſaythatour Lo RD is myltically facrificed by vs,

bee the fame as to (ay , thar hee is giuen vs to cate 13, Whether the

Maſſe bee a lacrifice of prayſe and thankes-giuing onely,or propitiatoric for

the living and the dead. It was added, | that the Diuines ſhould ſpeake
whether theſe Articles were erroneous, or falſe, or hercticall, and
whether they deſcrued to bee condemned by the . Synode; and. that
they ſhould divide them, fo that the feuentcene firlt,- ſhould ſpeake
of the {cuen firlt Articles, and the others, concerning the-{ixe fol-
lowing. - EF ;

TheFrench Ambaſſadoursthought flill they had ſmall reputation inthe
Councell, in reſpe& of others; and after that the Decree aforclayd came
foorth were more iclous then before, becauſe mentzon was to bee madeof
the Diuines to what King cach did belong (which was not doneconzerning
the Prelates) and none would bee preſent for France. They doubred alſo
that , by this meanes, ſome preiudice might arife to the prerogatiues of the
Kingdome. . Therefore they did preſently , and afterwards, vpon other oc-
cations , ſend aduice into France, that the diſputation would paſſe onely be-
tweenethelralians, Spaniards, and Portugals; that France would haue no
part , if his Maicſtie did nor preſently diſpatch away ſome Prelate, or Do-
our, .c{pecially becauſe matters of great importance, contained in the Ar-
ticles propoſed, were to bee handled; which alſo would bee a meancs to
obraine or hinder other things, according to his Maicltics deſire, and che
contents of their inſtru&ions ; that vntill then they had propoſed none of
the Articles of 'reformarion, becauſe,nor hauing tuffragesto maintainechem,
no account:would haucbecn: made of their remonſtrances,;, that the Coun-
cell will nor hearken to any thing thats pretudiciall to the profit or autho-
riticof the Court ; becauſe the Pope is Lord of the propoſitions, ir hauing
becnce determined in the begivning, and cuer ſince oblerued, that nothing

<1 c%ut- may bee propoſed but by the Legates; as allo of the reſolutions, becaule {a

many

2 AR * vt

0 Re »* -

—-,

L1d.6; -\ the Conncellof Trent. oo To 143

many Prelats arcihis penſtoncrs,and ſtand at hisdeuotions; thiticksrefolucd, | 5 —_
that the Councel ſhall nor-meddlewich reforming the Court;bus felcrue tha Sy
wholebuſineſle co his Holineſle; that the Spaniardswwho wereyery zcalayg Fane wks

_— -—— —

for the reformation, are cooledand purin teare, opayinipechen fondof their Ecurrty,

CHARLks$ 9.

King; rthatrhereis no hope; ſo long as the caſe ſtanderh thus; ro;bbtaine.a- $22t%*
ny taing but whar plealcrixthe/Pope;: becauſe no-inltance made by. all the — v—
Amba{fadours andPrinces which are ia Trane , hattybceniable to perſwade
a good reformation of the Eccleſ1alticall' diſciplias;howlocucr- Articles, |
conformable nor'onely to theyſeof the primitiue Church ; buteuen tothe
Decrees of the Popes themſcluts\hauc been preſented tothe Legates ; that, in
ſead'of thoſe, they propole poines of thepreſent controucrliesof doctrine; *
though they haue been toldit isſuperfluous;/in abſence. of theiProreliantss
and that,if they propoſe any thivg concerning mariners; it is of {mallim pat-
eance,and of no fruit. OP 36h jDUBL Qi wn wwd

] he'Pope, dayiy aduiſcd of the diuers occurrences in Trent, did fears
that no Decree would bee publiſhed in the. Seſlion at'the day: appointed
but vaderſtanding how happhiy it paſſed, was exceeding glad; andthe more,
in regard of the reconciliation of rhe Legates, andof che letter of the King
of Spaine: Hee could not conceale his ioy, bue on it in Canfiltorie
and ſpake of it tothe Ambaſladours, 'and thanked the Catdinall of Arragen,
brotherof Peſcara; to whom hedid attribure this ſeruice. And being whol-
ly benr to conclude the Councell quickly, and finding ;that.nothing could
prolong it,but the points of reſtdence,and of the communion of the Cup,he
wrote to the Legates , that he was wholly incgnc to the reformation ofche
Court; that they ſhould aſſure thereof the Ambaſſadours and Prchates'whp
ſpake of ir; and that themſelues ſhould diſpatch the other matters: which
they mightdocin three Seſſions more. Heecommended them. for having
relerued powerto abbreuiate the time prefixed, exhorting them ta.make v/t
thereof. Hee added, that, knowing it was hard to make agood reſolution
in the Councell, in matter of reſidence, becauſe many Prelateshauing deli-
uered their opinion ro a good end, were intereſted in-their honour, they
ſhould procure that it might bee referred vnto him, andlikewiſcſhould free
themlclues frominſtances made by Princes for the communion of the Cup,
by making the ſame reference. Andif any difficultic, hard to beereſolucd,
ſhall happen,in any of rhe points, which remaine to bec handled, they ſhould
propoſe rhe remitring of irro him alſo; becauſe hee can more ealily decide
any thing in Confiſtorie, calling ſome Dofors,if there be occaſion, then if
Trent, where mens diuers intercits make the reſolutions impoſlibleor yery

lon

The firſt Congregation of the Diuines was held the next day iti the after The (es
noone, in which the order of ſpeaking but halfean houre was ſowell obſer- cerue3 rales
ucd, that Sahneron the Teſuite ſpent the whole cime himelfe, with much ſau-
cincſſc; ſaying he was ſent by the Pope, and rhat being ro ſpeakeof impor-
tant and Rey matters, no time was to bee preſcribed-ynro himzand dil-
courſing on theſcucn Articles , ſpake onely common things, whichdelerue
nor particular mention. The next morning hee was imficared by hisfellow
Torre, who {pcm that whole Congregation alſo , and rather repeated rhe
Z% * things

> IR ” ws , =
. > CET OE 2 - n » #224 yo —
a ooo horns OY ) " = wy _ * =" PI [Ont es" r Os ht "
CY OO SEE IN + + wat: 7 , as: wt Fa ates Wks Ct y .
| oy & +41 x. 44+; Mgt 0; "7% Vera wan ug = ans qa ge # Is —
cats J

444 = ; A The Hiftury of E iB.6,. |

1562 things ſpoken before, thenadded any thing of his owne. But, which was
FAS worlt of all; comming,in the end-,\ro che place ot S. John, If youcate nor, exc.
Fannie: het ſayd, ir muſt needes bee vndetttood of the Sacramentall C ommunion,and
$7735 added, that, in the firit point ofdoetrine, publiſhed in thelalt Seſſion, it ſec-

Cute 9- med that doubt was made of it,and therefore that it was. neceſſary ro declare
\—- mrthenexr,rhat norhing is ſpokca of in that paſſage but the Sacrament; and
that ifany were of another opinion, hce appealed to the Synod. The Le-
wich whom gates were much offended at his ſpeach., as well becauſcitcroſſed the derer-
oe atra, mination of the Councell, as becauſc it ſhewed/a necefſitic of the Communion
of che Cup, bur much more, becaulc tholc'Teſuites, howſoeucr they were the
firſt; would bee excepted both fromthe generall orders + with ſo much pc-
tulancic. They called ro minde the ſtirres rayſed by them in the Seſſion,
and Torre was particularly noted by Simonera, for hauing written againſt Ca-
tharinus in fauour of reſidence, that it is de zure diuino, with inſolent termes, as
the Cardinall fayd. Therefore, the Congregation becing ended, hee told
his Colleagues, rhatit was fir torepreſſe this boldneſſe, and giue example to
others; and theyagreed fo to doe ypon the firſt occaſion. |
The diſcuſi- In the diſcuſſions of the Diuines all were vniforme in condemning the
onoitheAr= Proteſtantopinions of hereſte, inthe Articles propoſed, and did quickly dil-
archthe others. The diſcourſe of eucry one was long,in prouing the Maſſe
co bea ſacrifice , in which Chrilt is offered ynder the ſacramenrall clements.
Their principall reaſons were z That CHrisT #4 Prieſt according tothe order
of Melchiſedec: but Melchiſedec oftercd bread & wine; therefore the Prieſthood
of CaR16T docth requite the facrifice of bread and wine. Morcoucr, the
Paſchall Lambe was a true ſacrifice; and that is a figure of the Enchari, there-
fore the Eucharift alſo mult bee a facritice. Afterwards the prophecic of
Malachie was alleadged , by whoſe mouth God reie&ted the ſacrifice of the
levees , faying his Name was holy, great among(t the Gentiles, and that in
eucry place,apurcoblation is offered ro him ; which cannot bee vnderſtood
of any thing clſe which is offered in cuery place, and by all Nations. Di-
vers other: congruitics, and figures of the old Teſtament were produced,
ſme grounding themſclues vpon one, and ſome vpon another. ln the new
Teltament theplaccof Saint Toby was brought, where CartsT fayth to the
woman of Samaris, that the here is come in which the Father ſhall bee worſhipped
- inSpirit andintructh: and to worſhipin the holy Scripture docthſignific to
ſacrifice, as appcarcth by many places. And the woman of Samaria asked
him of theſacrifice, which could not be offered by the Irwes but in Jeruſalem,
and by the Samaritans was offered in Garizim , where CyR1sT then was.
Thercforec they ſayd the place was neceſlarily to bee vnderſtood of an cxter-
nall,publike,and ſolemne adoration, which could be no other but the Eache-
- rift, It was proucdalſo by the words of Chris, This ts my body which i ginen
for you,wbich is broken for you. This is my blood which is ſhed for you. Therefore
there is a breaking of the body , and an cffulionof blood in the Excharift,
which areaQions of a ſacrifice. Abouc all,they grounded themſcelues vpon
the words of Saint Paul, who putteth the Euchariſt in the ſame kind with the
lacrifices ofthe Jewes, and of the Gentiles, ſaying, that, by it, the body and
blood of Caktsr arcparticipated ; as in the Fbraiſme, he that cateth of the
hoaſlt,

on Mes EA egy Y

Lind: the C ouncellof Trent.

hoait, is parcaker of the alrar; and one cannordrinkethe Cup of theL.ogp, - 1564
and cateof his Table, and drinke of the cup at Deuils,, and bee: partaker of >>

their cable. Burthar.the Apoſtles ware ordayned Prieſts by Caryr, they

prooucd plainely, by.che wordsipokeul ro-them by.GHR1sT our ;h ORD Exoartty,

Doe this in remembrance of me. For better _— many atthorities of the Fa-
thers were adduced, who docall namethe Enchariftalactifice,. or; jn! more
generall rermes, doc reſtific that. Jacrifice is, offered id:rhe Churchi! Some
added afterwards, thatthe Mafſe was a ſacrifice, becaule: CHmsT. offered
himſelfe in che ſupper. And they: brought. thjs:realon'for the moltprinci-
pall, and prooucd the ground thereof, becauſethe Scripture ſaying plainely
that Melchiſedec offered bread and Wwihe; Carts T copld nor haugbeene a -
Prielt after chat ordcr , if hee had nor doneshelike; and-becauſe Crrisrt
ſayd, that his blood;was a confhirmation-of:the. new Teſtament ;,but.the
blood which docth confirme the old , was offered inthis inſtituriop :;: there-
fore it followerh, by-a neceſlary. conſequence, that Caxisr himſ(elte allo
did offer it. * They arguedalla, that Cuz1sThauingſayd, Doe thy inremem-
brance of me, if icc had not offered, we could nor doe. it;'; And they layd che
Lutherans haueno other argumentto prooucthe:Maſſe tobe no lacrifice,bur
becaule Chriſt hath/nor offered; and therefore that opinion! was dange-
rous,as fauouring the hercticall doCtrinc.. Itwas alſo more cftectually proo-
ucd, becauſe the Church fingeth, in the ofhce of the body of our Lo RD,
CHR1ST, 4 Prieſt for euer after the order of Mekhiſedec, bath offered bread and
wine. And in the Canon of the 4mbroſian Miſſal it is ſayd, that inſtituting a
forme of perpetuall facrifice, hee hath firſt offered himſelfcasan hoalt, aud
hath firſt-raught how to offer it. Afterwards mauy-authoritics of the Fa-
thers were produced,to proouc the ſame. cn EE...
On the other parr, it was-ſaid with nolefle aſſeucration, that Cyrisr,

in the ſupper, hath commandcd the oblation-to bee made for euer, in the mech diuded.

Church, after his death ; bur that hee hath nor offered himſelfe, becauſe the
nature of that ſacrifice did not;comportit. - And, for proofeheereof,, they
fayd that the oblation of the (7ofſe would haue beene {ſuperfluous ; becaule
mankinde would haue beene redeemed by that of the ſupper, which wear
before. That the lacrifice of the Altar was inſtituted by Ca R1:3T; fora
memoriall of that which hee offered on the Croſſe; bur there cannot bee any
memoriall, butof athing paſt; rherefore rhe Euchariſt could-nor beafacritice
before the oblation of Cxktst: on the (rafſe.). They alleadgedallſothar nci-
cher the Scripture, nor the Canon of the Maſſe, nor any' Councell euct ſayd
that CaR1sT offered himſelfe in the ſupper, and added, thar theplaces ofthe
Fathers before alledged, ought to be vnderitood of his oblation onthe Croſſe.
They concluded, thar, hauing to define the Maſſe to bee a ſacrifice,as.indeed
it was, it might moſt cffeCtually bee done by proofes out of the Scriptures
and Fathers, without adding ſuch weake reaſons. T his difference was not
betweene many and few, bur dinided aſwell the Diuines as the Fathers, into
almoſt equall parts, and occaſioned ſome contention. Theformerwent ſo'
farre as to ſay thatthe other opinion was an errour, and required thar ir
ſhould bce filenced by an Anathematiſme , condemning of heretic,thoſe that
fay, that CHR1ST hath not offered himfelfe in the ſupper, vnderthe facra-
Zx 4 * mentall

On 6 77 pms _ R
_ 0 OG. Ce Ee IT
- 7%. Re ne l nw +
6% " as

—_—

546 115 * The Hivtoxy bf

—

= %. * 1

1562 menrall elemeties.” The others 1vid'ir Was fora timeroground ones felfe vp-
OSD: &h things vncertariR,atid/ypoipritw opinions, neither, heard not thought of
FrabixAaxb. by ancK ity; butthir one ought ts matt - Ry which 1s plaine, and ccr-
Enza7,, tainebork by the'Setiprute arid bptheFarhers;,-charis,char Cu $7 hack
om fas conminandeditheoblation 010097 15190 10% ng en net hv T
SV —Althe monetvof Iuly'was fpent by the ſecuenteenc who: [pake vpon

chefrit Arriclepg the taterdigy diſpatched in a few-dayes, rather with
1rjous 2 tearm3/ againſt» the Ptorettanes)/ chen with realons, It is
nor fitteto'relare tho patriculave;, bur onely ſome fewe that are moſt no-
table; f 029 4 $1190 | by
Th. Airoute © In rhe-Congrepation ofcrhs w4-of Iuly% in the afrernoone,, Georgins di
00214: aide; a Diaineofthe Ki of Parrugall, fought ro oucrthrow- all:thehrounds
ofiche/acher Diubies ; layd to-prooue the lacritice ofthe Maſe by the holy
Sctipture; and {aid firlt; charieeould not bedoubted har the Afafſe was a [a-
ci4fi6e; becaule allthe Farhershaue ſaid irinplaine words, and replyed it vp-
off eudty occaſion rand heebepan-with the Latins and Greckes of the ancicns
Chure\zand with the Martyrs; and came, from cimetbxiime,vacilebepreſent
age, dfhrming that there is no Chriſtian writer who hathinor calledir a ſa-
erifiee. **Thitefote ir mult-certainely bee concludedithat ithhath beene fo
raivht'by an Apottolicall tradition, the force whertofis morethen ſuffici-
cnt remake Articles of faith, as this Councell hath maintained from the'be-
ona.” Bur this tieand ſolide foundation is weakened , by. thoſe who
would build/in cheayie; ſeeking ro tindejn rhe Scriptaresthat which isnot
there, $iting occaft6ir co theaducrſaries tocalumniatethe rrueth; while they
fee it grounded vpern ſuch an vaſtableſand. And hauing thus ſpoken , hee
| procceded roexainine, one afrer another, the places ofthe oldand new Te-
ftament, atledged by the Dijuines, ſhewing thar no cxpreſſc {ignification of
+ the ſacttficecould be drawen from them. To the fact of Melchifedec, he an-
{wered, har Cyr sT was a Pricſt of that order, as hee was the oncly beget-
ren, eternal, vvirhour predeceſſor, father, mother, or. gencalogie. Andthis is
prooited too plainely by the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,where Saint Pauldiſcour-
fing at large of rhis' place, doeth handle the crerniticzand {ingularity of the
Pricltlvbd,and maketh romention of the bread and'wine: He repeated the
doctrine of Saint Auſtin? , that when there is a fir place forany thing to bee
ſpoken and iris notfpoken, an argument may bee drawenfrom theautho-
xitic negatively. -Ot-the *Paſchall Lambe he (aid, that ircould not be preſup-
poled'for a thing lo euident that it was afacrifice , and:perhapsto him that
= _ Wouldtakevponhimto proouc the contrary, the victory would neceſſarily
bee yeelded; and alfothat it was too bard a metaphor, to make ira Type of the
Eucharift, and notrarher of the Croſſe. - Heg commended thoſe Theologues,
who, hauing brought che place of Malachie, added thar of Saint: Tohn, Ts
worſbipun Spirit and trueth, becauſe indeced,the one and the other did formally
{peakeof theſamething,and were to beecxpoundedalike; thatno difficuluc
mightrbe'made concerning the word, Adorare: which certainely doth {igni-
fie alſo a ſacrifice ; and the woman of Samaria. tooke it 1n the genecrall {1;7-
nification.' But when'Ca R15T added, That God is:a Spirit , and Wil! b-e_
worſhipped in Spirit, no man” that is not willing to expound all tolags
in 21

| » .

L Ps. 'G. |
ihan vnproper fence, will ſay that a Sacrament, which con lilterfrof .a thing; 1 TM
viſible and inuifibleis purcly {piritually bur compoled of this;;aud the Ele >- — 1

| RES , | 3 PA Prv;s. 4:
mentary {1gne: Therefore he.chat willexpound both thoſe placts of; inter Frnomann

nalladoration,canfiot be convinced, and1hall baue probability oo. bis ſide}. Exam

the application being plaine, that this1s pfferedin all places, and by all Nazi- $99t5n* 5:
o0ns,and is purelyſpirituall,asGod'isa pure Spirit. Aud he proceeded, and! —v —
{aid that:the words;' This is my body which # given for you , and the blood Which is

ſh:d for you, hauea more plame meaning,it they be referred tothe body and

blood in their naturall efſence , then in their Sacramentall; as whenir is ſaid,
CHyRt1sT #5 th: true Vine, which bringeth foorth thawine ,.1tisnormeanc that che
ſioniticatiuc vine doth bring foorth Wine, burthe reall.- So;thisis my bload

which is ſhedde, doth nor {ignitie thatthe Sacramentall and:faghiticariue

blood was ſhed, but the blood naturall and{tgnified.” And that which Saine

Paul faith of caking part of the Sacrifice of the Tewzs,and of therable of De-

uils, is vnderſtood of the Rites which Gop did iptitate by Moyes ; and of
thole which the Gentiles did vie in facrificing ; lo that it cannot hence bee
prooucd that the Euchariſt is a ſacrifice; thatit is plains in Moyſes, thar,in the

voriue facrifices , the oblarion was all prefented ro Gown; and apart burnt,

which was called the Sacrifice ; and that which remained belonged partlyto

the Prielt, and partly to himztiar offered 5 which they did cate.with whom

they pleaſed; neither was this called, ro fcrifice, but 10 participate of the

thing ſacrificed, The Gentiles did imitate the ſame; yea, that part which

was notconſumed vpon the Altar , was ſentby ſome to bee fold; and thisis
thetable whichis not the Altar. - Theplaine meaning of Saint Paxlis; that

as the Tewzs, cating the part belonging to him that offterech, which is a re-
mainder of the {acrifice,doe partake of the 4ltar, and the Gentiles likewiſe ; ſo

we , eating the Eachariſt,are partakers of the ſacrificeof the { roffe,' And this

is it which Car'sTlaid; Doe this im remembrance of, mee; and which Saint

*aul laid ; As often as ye ſhall eate- of this bread anddrinke of this Cup , you ſhall

profeſſe that the Lord dyed for you. But whercas it is faid thar the Apoliles were,

by the words of the Lord,ordained Priclts, to offer ſacrifice, wherihee ſaith,

Doe this, without doubr itis ynderitood of that which they had ſecne him ro

doc. "Thereforeitmult be manifeſt firit chat he hath offered; which cannor

be, becauſe the opinions of the Divines are.various/angdeuery one confel(-
| feth ,thar boththe one and the other is Catholique; and thoſe, who denic

that CHRIST hath offered, cannot conclude by thoſe words, thathce hath
commanded the oblation. Then hee braughtthe arguments ofthe Prote-
{tants,by which they prooue,that the Egchariſt is nor in{tizuted fora facrifice

but for a Sacrament ; and concluded that it could:not bee ſaid thar the

Maſſe was a ſacrifice, but by the ground of Traditicrizexhorcing them to reſt

vpon this, andnotto makethe trueth vncertaine;, by defiring toprooue too

much. Then hee came to refolue the Proteltant atguments, and gave his
Auditors ill fatiſfa&tion therein ; for hce recited them with force, and good
appcarance , andan{wered weakely , ſothat hee didrather confirme.chem.

This was aſcribed by ſome tothe ſhorinefſe. of rime-which remained ynill  __
night, and others thought he was notablero cxpreſſe himlelfe. better, and Goh but
the molt intelligent were o! opinion, that thole anſweres did not a2 the Prebes.
himſeltc.

the Councellof Trene: 54.7

—_—

OO Ou

548

—

© The Hiſtorief Lis. 6.

I562'
RNA
Prvs. 4
FanDINAND +

-— — —— --

ErrzABETH .
CHARLES 9.”
ParriP. 2.

> ALE

The Rites of

the Church of

Rome arc Vas»

TOUS»

—

himſclie. TheFachers murmuring hercat, Tatobus Patua, another Portugal
Diuine, repeated, inthenexr Congregation, all;his arguments , and reſolued
them, withſatisfactionof his hearers ; ſaying,- in excuſe: of his Collcaguc,
that he was of the fame'minde; and the teſtimontcs of the Ambaſſadoursand
Prelates of '*Forrugaliof: his-honeltic, and foundneſle of doctrine, caulcd the,
Legates-not tobe offended with him. Notwithſtanding, hee departed a few,
davesafter;neitheris his name inthe Caraloguesof the Diuines, bur-oncly;
in thoſe which were printed at Breſcia,and Rina, before that time.

The 2.8. of July, John Cauillone,a Teſuire, and a Diuinc of the Duke of Band-
ria, ſpake very clecrely concerning the Articles; repreſenting all , as it were
without difficultie, notby way of examination, or diſcuſſion, bur ſtirring vp
their affetionsto pictic.' He ſhewed many miracles, which hapned indiuers
times; affirmed, that from the rime of the Apoſtles vntill Larher, no man
doubted cf ic; allcadged rhe Liturgies of Saint lames, Saint Marke, Saint Bafil,
and Saint Chry/oſtome. Cn noppoonene cf the Proteſtants , hee
faid, they were ufhcicntly refolued;,. without which they ought to belceue
they were bur fallacies, becauſe they comefrom perſonsalienated from the
Church. And, intheend, he exhorted the Legars nottopermir, thatin any
matter whatſoeuer, thearguments of the herctiques ſhould bee propoſed,
without adding a molt cuidene reſolution; which he that cannot doe, muſt
forbearetorelate them ; becaule true pietic requireth, thar the reaſons con-
traric to the doEtrine of the Church thould notbe repeated, before the minds
of the hearers be prepared, by ſhewing theperuerſeneſſe and ignorance of the
inucntors, and that their arguments arenot hearkened vnto but by people
of a weake braine; whichbeing done,they may ſuccinly be rehearſed, with
the incermediateproofes, adding the plaineanlwere well amplified ; and
when itdoth ſcemethatſome thing wanteth, thediſpurarionis ro bee diucr-
red toanother marrer,for feare of breeding {cruple in the mindsof the audi-
tors, eſpecially being Prelats, and Paſtors of the Church.. His diſcourſe did
plealevery muchthegreater part of the Prelats, and was commended for pi-
ous and Carholike, and thar ie did delerue that the Synod.ſhould make a De-
cree, and command that all Preachers, Readers, and Writers ſhould obſcrue
the rules ſer downe thercin. Bur ir gaue ſmall ſatisfation to the Ambaſſa-
dour of his Prince, who, after the Congregation, in preſenceof the [mperia-
lifts, which came incomplement to thanke him for his ſpeech, (aid, that rruc-
ly it diddeſerueto be commended, for hauing taught how to yſe Sophiltry,
inthe ſimplicitie of Chriſtian doctrine.

Antonius of Valtelina, a Dominican Friar,oneof thelaſt which were to ſpeake
of the {ixe laſt articles of the Rites, faid,that it was plaine by all hiſtories, thar
anciently cuery Church had her particular Ritual of the Maſſe, brought in
by vie, and vpon occaſion, rather then by deliberation and decree; and that
the ſmall Churches did follow the Merropalitan, and the greater, which were
necre. The Romanerite hath beene, rogratific the Pope, received in many
Prouinces,though the Rites of many Churches are ſtill moſt different from
ir. Heſpakeof Mozarabo, where there arc horſes and fencings after the ma-
ner of the Moores, which hauc a great myſtery and ſignification ; and this is
ſo different from the Romane, thar, if it were ſecne in Italy, one would noc

thinke

«&\

. #4 —_—

L :s.-6. the Conncellof Trent.” _ 349)
thinkeitto bea Maſſe. Buc that. of Romealſ@hath bad grear alterations { as) 1 $63.
will appeare to him.chatreadeth theancient booke, which remaincth as yer; 7 >
and is called Ordo Romanus) which haue beehe. made ; nor oncly;inancieny Fuvinins
times, but cucn inche-latrer: ages alſo. and the. true Romane rice; oblcrucd, rimming
withinthree hundred yeeres , is nor chat, which, is now! obſcrucd;;by the $9955)»:

Prieſts in thac Citic, bug that which is rergingd by che: Order! of $. Dominicke, CW

For the veltments,veſſels,and other ornaments of the,Miniſters and Altars,ic-

yo—_ not by bookes onely, but by ſtatues; and piftures,that theyare lo.

changed, that if the ancicncs ſhould returae.jarothe world, 'they, fyould not _

know them. Therefore he concluded, thaztobinde. allcoappraueabe Rices,

which the Church of: Rome victh, :mighrbe yeprocnded, as asPagdemnari-.

onof antiquitie,and of the ylts of,other Chuxcitcs, and might receiue worſe

interpretations: He aduiſed rodiſcuſle the efſence of the Maſſe, andnatmake-

mention of theſe other things. Hereturned toſhew the dificrence betweene

the preſent xire of Rome, & that which is deſcribed inthe Ordo Romans ; and,

amonglt other particalars, in{ilted much vyponthis, thar, accordingcothar,

the Laickes did communicate with both kindes ; and fo began 19. perſwade.

the grantofthe Cup at this preſent. His. diſcourle dilpleaſed the Auditorie,

bur the Biſhop of Fiue Churches protected him, and: {aidgthat he had deliuercd

nothing vntruely,nor giuen any ſcandall, becauſe he ſpake nor tothe, com-

mon people, nor to fooles, butin an Aſlembl of learned men; ro whom no

trueth can giue bad cdification,'andthathethar would condemne the Friar,

as ſcandalous or raſh, did firſt condemne.himlclte , as, vacapable of the

trueth, | _—_ LO
The ſame difference which was berweene the Diuines,wasallaberweene Tie Petite?

the Prelates, deputed ro compole the Dodrine and the Arachematiſmes,to be opiniS, bout

propoledin Congregation,For, in thedoftrine, beingto alledge the proofes the doarine.

and explications, ſome approoucd or diſprooued one, and ſome anothet,ac-

cording totheir affections. Martins Perefiucs , Biſhop of Segouia, who had

beene preſentin the Councellatche handling of this matter, in the endofthe

yecre 1551 wasofopinion, that the ſame do&rineand Canons ſhould bee

taken, which were compoſed to bee publiſhed in Ianuarie I 5 5 2: and that

they (hould bercuiewed. But Cardinall Seripando did not approoue it, fay-

ing,that there appearcd inthat an incomparable pictic and Chriſtian zealc,

bur ſubic& to thecalutmnies of the aduerſarics ; and that the end ought nor

ro bee the inſtraction ofthe Catholikes, as the aime of thoſe Fathers ſce-

meth to hauc beene, bur che confuſion of the heretickes. Therefore that

they ought to bemore reſerucd in all parts, and not ro meddle with corre-

Ring the chings ordained then; that ir was berter to begin againe-, and not

co giue occaſion that it may bee ſayd, that they hauercaped that which was

ſowen by others, Granatadiſſented from all, and would not haucir ſaid, that

CHRiST made an oblation in the Supper, or did inticute che'facrifice , by

thoſe words, Doe this mremembrance of me. For the firſt, Seripando laid, hee

didnotthinke it neceſlarie, and that ic might be omicred, it; being ſufhcicor

that CHk1sT hath inſtituted the oblarion; bur yer it was necellarie ro ſay by

what words it was inſtitutcd, and there bee nor any other but thoſe before

' mentioned. Bur lobannes Antonius Pantuſa, Bilhop of Lettere, was very pal-

nate

560 The- Hiſtoric of © »\ L 19-.6, 1
1562" ſionateto/hatiethereaſons of: Melchizedec, Malachi, of the adoration of the -
>=. womn of Samariaehie tablesofSaint Paltheoblation:of Cyrnigrin the”
Fox» Stpper,ahdeucry other reaſoh dlleadged to/be pur ints' the Decteeln'the
Erlzi8676Zend, a'ter the diſputationof many dayes; they agreedto-put all-in, 'thar the.
Can, 4:Prelats'mighr ſpeake their opinions-in the Congregations, and rhat' mighr
A” betaktfitway whichdid nor pleaſe'the maior-part. They madealſoa colle-
corofrheabuſes, which dayly happenyin the celebration of Maſſes, which
werebut few ih rel pc&ofcholewhich were notedin the yeeren 5 514.

The Archbi- "©" Thetliitrecnth of Auguſta cherall Congregation was hclde to receiue
Drier the” riff ofthe Biſhops of Ratisbone- and Bafil, tharthey mighthonour
Palermo this ſecbfAethe ſhane of the Citic of Bafi,, which/Yid contend with him
open. fortheritle, ſaying, hee ſhould'net be calted Biſhop cf Baſil" bur of Bontruto.
| FThed: xibg giving forth;the Archbiſhop of Lanciano was of opinion,
* that thieYhnatbematyſmes onely ſhould be publiſhed, and the points of doctrine
wholly oftiftted. Healledged the example of/other Coanſels, in very few of
which'ithath bin otherwiſe obferued;and that this fame Councel of Trent, in

rhe matter of Original lin;of the Sacramenrs;& of Bapriſme,didleaucit out,
 Hefatdir was for Do&ors to ſhew reaſons for their opinions,burthe Iudges
(fick'asFihops in'Councel arc)were to make their fentences abſolute; thar,
ifarcaſon be added,not onely the Decree, batthar alſo may bee impugned;
without Which cucty one will thinke that che Synod hath been: mooucd by

molt potent arguments, and cuery one wilt belecue that ichath beene indu-
ced by th${c which himſelfe doch moſt clteeme; that it-is not ſecure to vie
rcalons,though molt euident, becauſethe hererickes will oppoſe them, and
| = eſteeme thewy bur little; and the more is ſayd, the more matter of comradi-

__ &ionis mimiltred. He added allo,thatthe coniunctures did require a fudden

' diſpatch ofthe Councell, and didintimare, by words vaderſtood by the Le-
carsandfauourers ofthe Pope, that by this meanes they ſhould giue fariſ-
fiction to his Holineſſe; Oftawianus Preconins, Archbiſhop of Palermo, who
followed him in order,ſpake ro the contrary ; that the vſe of Counſels hath
beenero make a Symboll of their owne, vnto which the doctrine doeth an»
ſwere,andthen to adde the Anathematiſmes. That this hauing beene obſcr-
ucd in this Councel | vnder Julius, and now againe in the laſt Seffion, if it
were not continued, it would be ſayd, it was for want of reaſons. Hee ſayd it

was baſe, to ſhun thedi{puration of Hereriques,yea thar their contradiction
would makethe do@rineof the Councel (hinemore brightly, and thatthey
"were not to rake care'to finiſh the Councell quickely, but to finiſh it well,
Theſe two Prelats were ſo tedious, that the night concluded the Congrega-
tion, and they ſaid it was no wonder if a Daminican of Genua (foro Landiano
was) ſhould be contrary to a Franciſcan of Sicilie.

 Thedaycsfollowing divers practiſes were vied, by ſomero finith,by others
to prolong the Councell,and thoſe who were intereſted ved theſe and the
like reaſons. Bur the miatter being propoſed once againe in Congregation,
The Lees the maior Part thought fir to continue the order begun. This ſet on foote a-
u practices *praine the diſputation about refidence, and the fame men were deſirous of the
«cu.sonof * Concluſion of the Councel,and of the omiſſion of that matter. Which gaue
*2-4-9:% occalion ro Mantua and Seripando to yſc their tdeauours, and to ſhewe the
Pope,

L ts. 6. "the Councell of Thenk

z V 4 _
——_— <W_ > — -——— ——

Pope, by cficC&ts,thar they did accommodate chemſclues to his pleaſure, ac- t5 6s.

cording to the initruction which Lancians had —_— chem by word of

mouth. They employed hercin, to vſe good per{wafions, rhe Arch-biſhop Fieotias
of Otranto, the Biſhops of, Modena, Nola,and Bre/cia,who were nor open 7 a Enzunrts

palins,but newly gained. They did overcome tlie Falians, inducing them

not to Caange their opinions, nor to contradict themlelues, but nor ro vrge —V >

that matter any more. Many did promiſe that if the Spaniards would fur-
ccale,themſc!ues would doe the like; Theſe foure Prelaces madea note of
all chey had per[waded}and found they had gained much; but with the Spa-
niard) it was not poſlible to preuaile a ior, yea this made themi combine the
more. They wrote a common letter tothe King,inanſwere of that which
his Maicſtic bad written to the Marquis of Peſcard; firlt complaining of the
Pope, for not ſuffering the point of Reſidence to bee derided, in which all
the reformation of the Church is ro be grounded, and with a very faire and
reuerend manner of fpcech; they concluded there was nolibertie in the
Councell; that thz Tealiavs did ouercome with pluralitic of voyces, of which cu.
ſome for pen{zons, ſomefor promiles, and thoſe who were lea(t corrupred
for feare, did obey the will of his Holinefſe. They comiplained-of rhe Le-
gars, whoif they had ſuflered, as they ought, the point to bee cotichided,
when the fit time was, itinight haue beene reſolued for the ſeruice of G © Þ,
with great concord, before they could haue written from Rum; T hat wo
thirds ofthe Prelats did delirethe definition that all che Ambaſladours'did
fauour the truth herein ; yet proceeding with modeſtic and cHaritie; they
ncuecr had the courage to protelt ; They belecched his Maicſtie xo conſult
with godly men about this Article, aſſuring chemſclues, that, after mature
deliberation, he would fauour the opiniongas being catholike, pious,and nes
ceſſary for making a good reformation. ', ar angles 8 rt 1;
- This accident afſuredthe Legats, and their adherents, that itiwas impoſ+
AJible to burie this matter in ſilence, ſeeing that the: Shatards were: not pact
-ficd,cither by the Kings leuer, orby the perſwaſions yled rorhem; yea, had
declarcd themſclues againe, by writing into: Spaine, which made them ſeeme
to be inſuperable. The Papalins therefore conſulted together, and refolued
toſcnd to the Cardinail of Ferrara into. France, a Copie of the Catholique
Kings letter to Peſcara, that he might procure.ſuch another from that King
tothe French Ambaſſadours, as well co hinder their practiſes to the contra-
ry, which they dayly made, as thattheFrench Biſhops,' when:-they- came,
might not vnite with the Spaniards , as theſe did hope, and expedt., And, to
diſcredit the Spaniards with their King, they reſolued to, write. .into- Spine,
that Granata and Segouia, their Leaders, who make ſhew of conſtjence, had
promiſed their yoyces tothe Biſhop of Five Churches,farthe Comitnunien of
the Cup, not reſpecting his Maielktie, who deth fo muchabhorreit- . ._ -..
At this time;the Pope,confideringin what imminent danger his \guthoti- Th

tiewas, in regard of the difficulties and confuſions of Trent,;;ſtirres of makeh te-

France, and of the Diet whichwas prepared, in Garmanie,in which the-Em-
perour would be forced for hisowne interelts royceld to the Proteſtants,
thought ficto ſecure himſelfe by all meanes, and had giuen money a month
beforcto tea Capraines, to raile ſouldicrs, which were lodged in __

anc

552 | The Hiſtorie of
1562 and Marcaandgrew very familiar with the Miniſters of the Princes. of . Italy,
-=-—N and With the Cardinals who were their neere triernds. This bred a fu{picion
From in the Spaniards and French-men; and the French, A mbaſſadour exhoned him
razr Þ ld, to defilt from making prouiſions of warre,for fearc of diſturbing theCoun-
Cnant3s 9: cell, The Pope an{wered,that the Eyg/iſh menand Procettants of Germanie,

wy </ having declared themleiues thar they w:ll affilt the Hugonors of France,it-
was nothiefertitin'to beynprouided ;chatthe world was full ot heretiques,

and therefore it wasneceſtarie to -protect the Councell,as well by force,/as
byauthoritie. The Spaniſh Ambaſſadour went not the ſame way, bur con-.

_ irming thatthe- proceedings of the proteſtants werero bee ſulpedted, pro--

| iſe him all ayde and aſhiftance in his Kings name z' which hec did to

hinder che making of a league in” Italie, which would ncuer haue becne

Andisps- pleaſing in Spaine. The Pope accepred the offer; and, vnderlianding ar the
, tegwihlus {ame timethe vnion of his Legats, and how zealous they werero doe him
” ſ&nice, wa#mmuch confolated. And hee ſent them word that they ſhould
| hinderall ſpeach concerning refiaznce,if ir were pollib]c,or,if they could nor,
ſhould make vſeof pluralitic of voyces,; butaboueall, that. they ſhould dil-

patch wanckely , that they. might conclude it before the comming - of rhe

French men,and the aſſembling of the Dictin Germany, thar the Emperour
torthegreat defire hee hath romake his ſonne King of the Romanes, may

notſuffer himfelf8to be perſwaded bythe Proteſtants, to propoſe in Coun-

cell ſomething ffiore preiudiciall, then thoſe things which haue becn pro-

poledalready. / - '> - TO

Therequet 2 The Freneh Ambafſfadours;after they bad often madea modeſt requeſt,
of the french rat their Prelates might be expedted,did,the tenth of Auguſt, preſenc ir in

writing, The tenor whereof was, That the moſt Chriitian King, reſol-

uing to obſerue and reucrence the Decrees of Councels, which repreſent

the vniuerſall Church , doth defare that the Canons of this may be receiued

by the aduerſaries ofthe Church of Rome , of which thoſe who are not (e-

parated haue noncede; and hee thinketh that thoſe which are to bee made,

will be more acceptable, if the Seſſion bee prorogued, thar, vnto'fo- great a

multirudeof[calian and Spaniſh Prelates, the French Biſhops may be added,

of whom,urtheancient Councels of the: Church, greataccount hath becnc

made. The cauſe of their abſence, which they the Legates hauc heard bc-

fore, and iudged neceflaric, wilt ceale quickely, as itis hoped, -and, incaſe

irſhould nog yerthey will arriue before the ende of September , becauſe

they arc ſocommandedby the King. And hereby it will cometo paſfle alſo,

thar'the Proteſtants,for whoſc ſake the Councell was intimated, who fay c-

*yery day tharthey will bec preſent init, will haue lefſe cauſe ro complaine,

- becauſe they cannot require more maturitie in this weightie buſineſſe, nor

accuſe them for roo much precipitation. They demaunded rhat, while

their Biſhops wereexpetted (that none might thinke tha the King did de-

{igne that by this meancs the Councell ſhould be idle or diffolue) they would

treat onely concerning manners,and diſcipline, and the two points remai-

ing,in matter of the Communion of the Cup. They added this laſt clauf

notto difpleaſe the Imperialilts,who had hope to obzaine it in that Sefſſe

The Legats, hauing conſulced,anſwered in writing;that the prelats of Frag

wh

* »|

4

"HIISY

rr rr I—_ _ _—

FL

% .

L1s: 6. the Councell of Trent. $51 Hg
were, before the Councel was opened; expeAedalmolt fixemoneths, arid'aft 1 645 I
rerit was begun, which was pion done in regard of France,the ' de- 4 Fo .
terred ro handle any matter of weight f1xe moneths more, into Whith be- Ferometes!
cauſe they are now catred, itisnot conuentent rodelilt , becaule they could r+:-:—-,
nor ſo doe, withoutdiſhonouring the Councell, and much incommodgating :;.....
ſo many Fathers; buc to prolong the day of the Seflion was not in'thetr SO
powerto grant, wirhout conſentof the Fathers;and therefore that they cen?

> -

<-.
notexpet from them a more determinate anſwere.” | | IC,

The French-men then defired , tharit might be granted tothenivromeo's
their propoſition in the Congregation, Butthe Legares anſwered; that;
forcit had bcen tolde them , and all:the other Ambaſſadours, tharthe\ *.1 uy.
might negotiate with none but the Legares, andthat it was formerly deeteed .
in that ſame Councell that Ambaſſadours might nor publiquely ſpcaK's't apy
Congregation, but onely the day in which they are recciued ,.and their
Mandate'is read. This made the French-men complaine much to'rhe wi;
Biſhops , and eſpecially ro rhe Spaniards , and to fay it was agrearablurdiry gu...
thatthe Ambaſlages ſhould be addreſſed ro the Synod, and the Mandats pre- _.
ſented to it, and yet they might nor treate with it, but with the Legats onely,
as ifthey were Ambaſladoursto them, whoare but Ambaſſadorsthemſchues;
as the Pope who ſendeth them is a Prince ; and as hee is a' Biſhop , and che
» firit Biſhop, they are bur ProQors of one whois abſent, and have beene al-
wayes ſociteemed in ancient Councels. - They alleadged the example of the
Councels of Nice. ; Epheſus , (halcedon , Trullus, of the ſecond of Nice alſo,
and that the breach berweene the Pope and the Councell' of Bajt was, be-
cauſe they pretended to change this ancient and laudablc inſtitucion. Thar
this was a kinde of gricuous {cruitude in che Councell that they could nor
be heard, and an ttiuric ro Princes, who could not treate with thoſe with
whom they were to manage the affaires of their ſtates, thatthe Decree als
lcadged by them , was not ſhewed, and rhat it was fit to ſec it, and to know
from whom it procecded. For if the Legates forthe time being did make
ic, they did extend their authoritie with great cxorbitancic ; if the Synode;te
was necellary to examine how and when, Forit was an intoletable incon?
uenience, which was done inthe beginning of this laſt Conuoeation'of'the
Councell, chat the Legates, wirha few [ralian Prelats , who camiefrom Rome
 onely , thould make a Decree, and praftiſe ic with rigour, thar norhitig
may bee propoſed, but by the Legates; fo that the way is barred, to tl
Princes, and Prelares, ro beeable ro propoſea good reformarion', which
would bee for the {cruice of 'God ; but in ſtcad of that, the do&trine contro-
uerſced with the Proteſtanrs is handled' in their abſence, wichourt any be-
nefir ofthe Catholiques , who doe not doubr of it, and alicning the Pro-
reſtants, by condemning them before they are heard. And their com
playnts were renewed when they were'enformed from Monſieur del Iſle-,
Ambaſladour of their King in Rome. , that , by the Kings order, hee had
made the ſame requeſt ro the Pope, rhavthe French Biſhops might Hee
expected all September, and thar his Holineſſe had referred 'ir ro the
Legates. Lanſac fayd, it was a thing' worrhy of etcrnall memoric; Fhg
Pope referred it to the Legates, the Legares cannot doe it 'withour rhe
| Aaa Synoc

game oe erm IS EI S—_—

55+ The Hiſtorie of = "Hine

— ————_—_—_—_ x ! —
1552 Synode, and that cannot heare them ; and ſo the King and the world are
">", deluded. 4

Fromaxy, = The eleuenth of Auguſt the Bifhopsbeganto giue their yoyces, concer-

Enzazzru, Ning the Decrees in matter of the SaErifice; and almolt all did lightly and y-

Seances 5: niformely paſſe oucr all , bur oncly that ſome did nor approoue the put-

ting inof the oblation of our Lord, in the Supper, and others did main-

rainc it, and, formany dayes, thenumber on both ſides was almoſt equall.

Why the Ge T muſt not omit, as athing worthy of memorie, that the fourteenth of Au-

ivir- 1:20: gult Tomes Lainez,, Generall of the Tefuites did arriue ; about whole place,

lowwof thoſe becauſe rhar ſocietic had ncuer been in Councell,there was much adoce. For

vhoallF0 hee would not content himſclfe with the laſt place of the Generals of the

' Regulars, andthree of the ſame ſocictic laboured ro pur him forward; for

which cauſe hee is not named in the Catalogues of choſe who aſliſtedin the
Counccll.

The Spaniſh Prelats preſented ro the Legatsa requeſt ſubſcribed bychem

all;in which, hauing rehcarſed many inconueniences, cauſed by the exorbi-

The 7ri%- tant graces, and priwedges, granted to thole of the Conclaue, they demanded a

Coxtawfit, TEWOCATION,Or,at thelcatt,amoderation of them. The Cardinals,cntring into

the Conclaue,where they are locked vp for the cleQion of the furure Pope, vie

to haue two ſcruantsapicce,onefor a ( haplaine,another to ſerucin the Cham-

ber; which arccle&cd by them rather for negoriations , then to ſerue their

perſons, and arcordinarily the beſt Courticrs of Rowe. Thele oftentimes

haue no} lefſe part in thoſcaffaires then their Maſters; ſorharirhath becne

an old y{c, thar, when they come our of the Conclave , thenew Pope recciucth

them all into his family,and giucth them Priudeages, fitting the _— of cuc«

ry one,of one kinde ro Priclts;of another to Seculars. Amongſt thoſe which

then were vſually giucn to Priefts, were theſe, that they might religne, to

any. Ecclefiaſticall perſon, the Benefices they held , and cauſethem to bee

conferred vpon whomfocuer they would name;thatthey mighrchangetheir

Bencficces with any beneficed man,themſclues making choyce of the perſons

ro confcrre both the one and the other. By this exorbitant Facultie, an o-

pen merchandizing was cauſed, and the Bithops perceiued that where any

(,onclauiſt was , Canonries, Pariſh Churches , and other Benetices were {can-

daloully changed, ar pleaſure. The Spaniards complained much becauſe

great inconueniences had lately happencd in ( atalonia, by meancs hereof.

Rut the Legarcs fayd, that the moderation of ſuch abuſcs belonged onely

to the Pope, becauſc it concerned perſons of his familie, and that it had

becne often concluded, to leauc the reformation of the Court to him, much

more of his familic; bur they promiſed to write to his Holincſſe, and ro

defirea prouifion: as they did. The Pope confidering that the Conclaniits

of account remayneat Reme, and with the Cardinals, and that the proui-

ſion would touch onely ſomefew, and thoſe of ſmalleſleeme, men retired

ro their houſes, and that it was fir for his affaires, ro giue ſome ſatisfaction

ro the Prelares of the Councell, eſpecially ro the Spaniards, refolued to

yeelde vnto them, and, in the next moneth, made a rcuocation of many

prntegy granted vnto thoſc,which notwithſtanding was not oblcrued by

is Succeſlor.

Faber

" Wy'S PO ee. Ix F 3

L rs. 6. \che Councellof Trent. - "555

: 'Fahzr;che chird Freach Ambaſſadour ; patted'fxotn Trent, to retatneto 1562.
France, which made che PapaliasfulpeCt that he'wentto give an'accotnt of {=
the Councell,and roſolticite rhe comming 6f the French Prelates*#hdrhey Fanomaxe.
choughthee woulddve bad offices, becauſe they ſaw bivinclinaridh' by ſome Erjxanra,
of his letters writren'to the Chancellor, which they had intercepred'for the ill pes »
fatisfationheand his' Colleagues had , beeauſe they conld not'6btaine the —V—
prorogation. | Whichbeing related to Lanſae, by ſome creatures of Simanera,
rodifcouctrherruech\,' hee anſwered that hee was gone for his owne parti-
cular occaſions, and that ir was no maruell; if;the defeats ofthe Connell be-
ing ſo manifcſt,one did thinke they might bertlared. oO - ppt |

Bur conccrbing the Sacrifice of the Maſle , in the Congregation held yn- ORE
ill che cighreenth, allcontended reſolutely abour the oblation of Car sT in *<gpizren
the Supper : and Father Salmeron was the principall man ro perſwade rheaffir- the5»ye:
matiue. Hee went to the houſes of thoſe who were fic othet pinion,
clpccially of choſe who had nor giuen their voyces, perſwading them ro bee
ſilcor, or,at the lcalt toſpeakeremilly, and vſed the name of Cardinall Yar- _
mienſe principally , and ſometime of Seripando, intimating the ochet Legates,
without namingthem:” And this he did with ſuch importunity,that the BB.
of Chiozza, and of Veg/ta , complained of itin the Congregation of ther 8! of
Augult. Andthis ſecond ſpake for the negatine with very forciblercaſons:

Hee told them they ſhould conſider well ot it, becauſe one propitiatory ſacri-
fee being offered , if it bee ſufficient ro expiate,, noother isoffered bat onely
torthankeſgiuving;aud herhat maintaineth.a propitzarorie {acrificein the Supper,

mult nceedes confeſle that, by it , wee areredeemed, andnor by his death ;

which is contrary to the Scripture and Chriſtian dorine , which afcribe
ourredemprtion ro this. Andif any fay it isall one, begunne in the Supper,

and ended in the Crofſz , hee fallerh into another inconuenience as great, be-

cauſe itis a contradiction to ſay that the beginning of a Sacrifice is a Sacrifice,

and if one ſhould cealcafter the beginning, and goe no further, noman

would {ay hee had facrificed: andirt will neuer bee beleeued thar, if Cyr isT

had not been obedient vnto his Father,cuen'vnto the death of the Croſſe, but

had onely made an oblarion in the Supper , wee had been redeemed, fo that

it cannot bee ſayd that ſuch an oblation may bce called a Sacrifice,j becauſe

it is a beginning of it. Hee ſayd hee would not abſolutely defend that thoſe
arguments were inſoluble, but that the Councell ought nottotic the vader.
ſtanding of any,who had conceiued an opinion, vpon fo good reafpns, He

{aid, thar, as hee made no difficultie rocall the Maſſe a propituatorie ſatrifice , lo

he could not by any means be ſatisfied, thatit ſhould befaid tharCnx1srT

did offer, becauſe itis enough to ſay that hee commanded the oblation. For

( laid hee )if the Synod doth affirmethat Crrtst did offer, the ſacrifice was

either propitiatory , and ſo it will fall into the difficulties before mentioned, or

not propitiatory , and o, by that, it cannot bee concluded that the Maſſe is pro-
pitiatorie : yea, on the contrary, it will be ſaid that che oblationof CHR 1s T

in the Supper was not propiciatorie,and therefore thar of the Priclt in the Maſſe |
ought nottobec. Hee concluded, that it was more fecureto fay onely that icwurss caxed
Cu R1sTcommandedthe Apoſtles to offer a propitiatory ſatrificein the Maſſe. = >
Thea hec obliquely rouched Salmeron, ſaying, that , if in points of reformati- 9m of

Aaa 2 on

ade —_ — 9 OY, EE
556 The Hiſtorie of L 18.6.
© -—- - 176 ooliinmay F: x Fa
1562 on, practiſes were led , it were tolerable, becauſe they are humane, but to
62D proceedeby faction, in matter of faith ,is nora goodexample. The Biſhop
Fzymaxy. perſwaded ſo many , that it was almoſt the common opinion, norto make
| Etnanzrn, mention of the prpiee ſacrifice offered by C1 R 1's Tn the Supper.
Cuanir* 9 Thelamedaythe Archbiſhop of *Frague,who came nor long beforefrom
\>- the Emperour,preſented his letters ro the Legates , andlerters came alſo from
che Nuncie Delpbinus , reſident with his Maicltic: both which fignificd,, chat
his deſire was that the ſacrifice of the Maſle fhould not be handled beforerhe
Diet,and that the Article of the communion of the Cup might bediſparched
in the firlt Seſſion. The Archbiſhop preſented alſo, in the Emperours
namec;a forme of reformation. "The Popes command,to finiſhrheCouncell
quickly, was ſo peremptory,that the Emperours firſtdemand could not bee
granted: but hee was partly ſatisfied in the expedition of the matter of the
' communion of the Cup. For the Pope, vnto whom the Empereur had
made theſame requeſts, wrote to Trent that they ſhoulddoe fo. Therefore,
in the next Congregation, Mantua propoſed that , the doctrine of the Sa-
crificebeing concluded, the communion of the Cupſhould be handled. As
the Prelats were giuing their yoyces, it was rerfiembred, that the difficultie,
whether Cn R18T didofter himlelfe in the Supper, was not propoſed to be
diſputcd by the Diuines, howſocuer they haue accidentally ſpoken of it, and
therefore that it would bee good to propole it, rhat it might bee diſputed
on cxpreſly,or omitted. | |
The generall of the Ieſuites was the laſt rhar ſpake in this matter ; who
vas wholly for the oblation of CarisT, and ſpent a Congregation him-
ſelfealone, whereas, in the other, berweene ſeucn or renne Prelates did ſpeake.
Euery one hauing giuen his yoyce, howſocuzr the opinions were almoſt
equally balanced , yet thc Legares arthecarnelt intreaty of ar mienſe, refol-
ucd ro put the oblation into the Decree, but not viing theword Propiriatorie.
In the cnd of the Congregation , the Biſhop of Five Churches ſeconding the

= s - . . O .
TheBibopot-propoſition of the Cardinall of Mantua, made an oration ; in which hauing

Ako firlt repeated the negotiations and paincs, taken by the Emperour for the
no  {cruiccof the Chriſtian Common-wealth , andto reltorethe Catholique pu-
th Commu” rirje, not onely afrer hee was aſſumed ro the Empire , but inthe life time of
Cup. * Charles, hee added, that his Maicſtic had found by experience, that the molt
gricuous contentions and complaints of the m_ did ariſc from the pro-

hibition ofthe Chalice, and had therefore deſired it ſhould bee treated on in
Counccll, Whereupon himlelfe , andthe other Ambaſladours, by commil-

{ton from him did, atthe firft, put the Fathers in mind to confider that Chri-

| ſtian charitic did require, that they ſhould nor ſuffer ſo many ſacriledges, and
ſlaughters in molt noble Prouinces, & hinder the reducing of ſo many loules

intothe boſome of the Catholique Church, by enioying the obſcruation of

a Rite with roo much ſcucrity; that there isan infinice number of thoſe, who

>, hauing not abandoned the Orthodox faith , are notwitſtanding weake of

O . R , :
conſcience, who cannot bee cured but by this permiſſion ; that his Imperi-

all Maieſtie is forced ro make continual] warre with the Turkes , which hee
- cannotdocbutbythe common contribution of Germanie, whereof ſo ſoone

as hee maketh mention, they begin to ſpcake of Religion , and principally |

/ | demand

XUM

£ S wu
——_—CÞ. dt teen. ona oe - Dw =. mo .... TD. AS

—_—

L 12.6... the Counceltof Trent.

= —m—y ©
£%
' Pp
\ 1
-—"Y I, hs.

demand the vicof che Cup, which ifir benotgranred, and © cheegntron =
ficstaken away, it is ro bee: ſuſpected that nor Hd
will bce

ungary onely ; but Germany ,
polleſſed by the Barbarians, with dangerof other bordering Pro: »

1562
gs \—

IVS &, |

ED ixant

uinces; that the Church hatly vſcd alwayes to embrace thoſe rites which are 57274cs,l
contrary to the new hereſies : and therefore it is good to take this reſolutioti COA

which doth ſhowthe faith of che veriticof the mold blelſed Euchariſt agaitift
the Sacramentaries ; that there is noneede; as ſome require;to fend a Proctor
exprelly:in the name of choſe'wwho doc'defire it, 'as was done tn the Comm:
cell of Bafl; for then all the:Kingdomealonedemaunding titre favour ; it
might <aluly bee done: bur now nor one people, or Nation alone; but an in-
finice.number diſperſed in many Regions; docth! make the demand ;that
it is, no-marucile if che Peticion were firlt preſemted-tothe Pope, 'anid- not
— obtained, becauſe his Holinefſe did wiſely referre all ro the Synode, to
ſtopperthe mourhes of the Heretiques ,' who will not receive: fauvurs from
that Sea, and becauſc hee would not ſeemie to derogare from the Councell
of (,onſtance, it-becing conuenient, that the vic of the Cup taken away by
a generall Councell ſhould bee: permitted by the definition'of another, as
alfo-cogiue reputation to the' Synode,' ro whicty it is fir ro remit this de-
ccrmination which may compole che diſcords of the Church; thar hee had
letters from Rome, that 'the: Pope. did rhinke' the dethand honelt, and
neceſfary., and rooke ic in good- part that it way deſired of the Counce!}.

Then he preſented the Article concerning the Cup, as hee defired it ſhould

bee handled. And ir concained, in ſubſtance; that it might bee granted to
the States of the Emperour, as-rhey comprehend all Germany and Hungary.
T his becing rcad:, the Prelares made a'great buſſelling, and gaue manitelt
{1gncs that rhey would contradict. ' But rhey were quiered for char preſent,
becauſe was told themy tharthey might-deliver their opinion , when the
voytes were collected. ot wh |

"The third of Seprember;irhe French Ambaſſadours made a tfews requeſt

tothe Legatos, that; tg giue'more credit tothe Councell), and to make the
Decrecs.thereof. to bee morecafily recciued in their Kingdome; they woitl4
proroguc the:Selhion a nioneth,or tive weekes, handling other marters in th
meane while, to publiſh afterwards ini the next Seſſion aſwell that which
hath becne dilcuffed and derermined alteady, as that which ſhall be handled
and determined in the meane fpace; for fo no timewould beloſt,the Coun-

cel would nor be proloague,and chic King andthe whole K ingdome would

recciuc. great fatisfa&tion;: Beſides, the Prelates of Polonia being'expedted ro
come:hordy, it would-bee arhingof tnuch edification to the vninerſality of
Cbriſtendomec;toifherrrbavclicemets held of ewoifich confiderableKing-
domes; This inttance was tnadetheday before the Legares received letters
fromehc Cardinall of Ferw#s,chat-the Cardinall of- Loraine 'and the Freneth

q \
PU ”— ”
boa \ > %. -
4 =

Peclates would chmebyiallnſcants,and twenty Parifian Doors with them, Ne v'sot che

At other letters were ſhed alſo written ro diuets Prelats by their friends, »

giging che ſame aduice; atingj chat their intention'was'to handle the poinr
of the ſupectiority.of the Pope and Councell. Therefore they thought iro
much the moreneceſlary rodilpatch/ the things already dilcuſted, that they
might not becrofled with new croubles, fearing alſo that,torhe bad humors

Aaa 3 |

TY

0 uming of
he Cardinal
of 1 oraineto
Trent,vvith
m'ny Fel res
and Dunes.

">

"' of

la. tha
—_

—

=} | | © The Hiſtory of  Laiss.

156 2 in Trent worſe becing added, and il. {ſo many diftculties would

AA bee raiſed, that cither the Councell would bee infinite, or ſome preiudiciall
| —»—> 2a thing reſolaed. But the Legares concealing thee reaſons, anſwered the Am-

——— baſladors with honourable tcrmes,inthe maner formerly vicd by them. That

Cnaxrrs 9: rhe Councell was called principally for France ; that their Prelares had beene

Paritip 3.

Aa long ſince called; thar ro-cntertaine {o many Fathers a longer time, in the
{ame expectation, would bee at indignity tothe Councel] , and thar if the
things diſcuſſed were not publiſhed; the world would thinke that/it was ci-
the by reaſon of ſomediſlention amonglt themſe[ucs, or becauſcthe reaſons

74. com Of the Proteſtants had ſome validity... : Bur Lanſac bcing fatisfied withnoan-

plant of = {ſyerc, and {till preſſing the dilation more,complaincd that'the Councell was

7 opened for the French-men, and yet they were not expetted;tharheecould
ncuer obraine any requeſt. of the Legates ; chat his remonlirances were'con-
remncd ; thatia licad of gratifyaoghis King; they vied greaterprecipiration
that hee did nor attribute this tothe Legates, knowing they did/nothing but
what was commanded from Rome;that they were in ancrror for ſuſpecting
the comming of the French-men , that hauing aſſayed fo:often to obraine
that which was iult, and ought to bee granted without demand, it'was now
fir tothinke of other remedies ; and ſpake fo, as that hemade them doubthe
would doc ſomccxtraotdinary matter. This raiſcd a rumour in the Councell,
that it would bee diſſolued. Which pleaſed che greater- patt; ſome; to free
themſelves from the incommodities they. ſuffered ; ſome, becauſe: rhey
choughr chat remaining there they ſhould doe God litcleor no ſeruice; and
the Papalias, for fearc of ſome atiempr. It was publiqucly ſaid, that Loraine,
vpon all occaſions, had thewcd an-inclination to diminiſh the Popes autho-
rity, that hee would open ſome way for France. to aſcend to the Papaci,
which he thought nor fir ſhould be wholly inthe diſpoſition of che Colledge
of Cardinals, conſiſting of Tzalians ; that France hath cucr pretended rolimir
the Popes power,to ſubiect it tothe Canons and Counlels; that this opihion
would bcc fauoured bythe Spaniards, who alrcady , howſoeuer they werr
much rcſcrucd in their {peaches had declared their deſire for-rhe'ſame, and
would be followed by many Italians, who,bccauſe they carinet,or know nor
how to make vic of the preterments of the Court, doc enuir thoſe chardoe,

beſides thoſe who arc defirous of nouity not knowing whiyizot whom there
{cemed to be a conſiderable number. "2 rnoct 90 02 bation bas

Adicours In Trent adiſcourſewas publiſhed, which paſſed through: che hands' of

— pablithedin 21}, and was ſent by the Legates to.Reme ; in which it was ſhewed chart was
impoſliblc to finiſh the Councell in a ſhort time, becauſcall Princeswiere:in-
clived to prolong it. Qt che French-men and>Imperialitts ir couldinvribee
doubred, in regard of; their demand wade for the dilation; - The Kingof
Spaine ſhewed the ſame mingde,: having deſtinated the Count: di Zinuifor
Ambaſladour rothe Synode, {o ſoohe as the Dict of; Francfort ſhould -bet e1-
ded, ro which hee was firſt ſent, The Prelates,by their-tediaus diſcoustes,
woulddraw the matrers in length alſo.; Then was ſhowed theimpoſbility
co continue long'in this {ort, there being no prouiſion of.corne bur for Scp-
tecmber onely: and it becing not knowen-where any may bee gottengin/rc-

gardof the generall dearch, and the delay, made þy the Emperour aud-Duke

: of

2 : — P < , 4
Pr OTE "TS 4 a... Matt < a "© lt. F 4 OO IEEE "IIS I > OS

the Gonncell of Trent, 24

tt... a. EI". "OY 4 = DA. I —_—c

—

E FB, 6.

of. Bauaria, to anfwere the demand made yatothem concerning vi uals, it 2542
did ſceme they could nor' bee relicuced. It: was added thar the Proceftanrs | Sar}
wouldalwayes be laying ſome ſnarcs romakethe Fathers fall-ints fome dif. Firomas.
honourablercſolucion,and raiſing nouitiesro'cauſc Princesropropoſerhings xmnazir®
preiudiciall; chatthe Biſhops ſeemed roalpiretoliberty;, tad would notin panete®
timebc contained within ſuch narrow bounds, andtharthe Synode would bv —
not onely be. made free, bur licentious alſo ; and; by a finemetaphor, ule pro.
greſle ot rhe Councell-was compared to a mans body, which doth get, with

delight, a-{mall, andin the beginning not regarded French infeRtion);; which
afterwards doth cncrcaſc, and poſſeſierhall the blood; andall the powers of
K-. Itexhorted the Popeto conſider well onir, and nottocome to a tranſla-
tion, or ſuſþen/iou, tor fearc of being contradicted by all Princes, butto lcarne
how to victhole remedics which God doth ſend him. IO GOf

| - Amidſt th:ſerroubles the Legates haſtened ro conclude the Decrces for Tire opini-
the Seſſion. That of the ſacrifice ſtood in goodtermes; burthey talked fill notne”
of the grantof the Chalice: and.there were three opinions. - One extreame, Chalice,
and negatiue, that, by no mcanes, it ſhould be gramedy another affirmariue,

that it ſhould bee granted, with the conditions, and cautions, which ſeemed

good tothe Synode, which-was maintained by:fifry of the moſt incelligent

; perſons; and; amongſt theſe, ſome would haue Ambaſladgyrs ſentinro the
Countreys which did deſire it, to rake:information wheth@ chegram were
fir, and with what conditions. -'The.third, that it ſhould be remined to the
Pope; which was diuided into many.branches. Somewould' hauc had'an
abſolute remiſhon,:withour declaring wherher he ſhould grant, ordeby ir;
and others; witha declaration, char he ſhould-grantir, according ro his wif:
dome. Some would hauc reſtrained him to particular Countreys, and others
left him to hjs liberty. The Spainyatds did abſolutely deny ir, becauſerbe'Am-
baſſadour Fargas had writtento them from Rome, thatir would bee'for rHe
good of rcligion and ſcruiceof the King , in regard of the'Low Cotmtreys

andthe State of: Milan, who, when they "ſhould fee their neighbours enjoy
that liberty, would require ittheml{elucs alſo, and whetherit weregraunted
or dcnied;2a.greatgate would be:opencd toherefie, The VenerianPrelates;
perinadathy their Ambafſadours; were of thelamemindeallo forthe ſame
rcaſon, i FC B20 G (LLAI9S 1007 HPO? CHIBS QDBIU RO0(4

| Iyvill recice. the principall Authors onely of theſe opinions, andrherhings
remarkableſpokaen by. them. | The Cardinall Madraccto; who ſpakefirſt, ap- Of _—
proucd the grant, withour exception; The three Patriarchies didablolurely thorswere:
deny it. Filic Arch-biſhops whotollowed, referred themſclucsto the Pope.
Granata, whohad promiſed:therEtmperours Ambaſſadotrs to fauour then,
that they might adhere ao him.ia tho marter of Refidence on which the inſt-
ſicd abouc alk, faid hee-di4neicherafirme not deny; burthariccould notbce
concludedih that Scſhon;;and wis;necefarily robe deferred vnill another,
bur wouldinot; refarrg himſelfe playingic wass'marccr of grear deliberati-
on, becaulcek could nothercgularidby the Soriprure,or Traditions, bur by
wiſcdomoonely-; wherdin irs nocaffary co proceed writte cireumſpeRion,
for fearcof being deceiuctbin cho circumſtances of thefa&;, which carmor
be knowneby ſpeculation; ordilcourſe; tharheemade no difficulty, as 0-

thers

.

#F 7
s &

86s rz The Hiſtorie of \ | Li 8.6.

4
: —_— A

——_— -*

0 $62 thersdid,for thedanger of cffu{ion, lhewing thar the Wine is notfpilt in che
{>>> ablution which is vow made; that, if it would make an vnion inthe Chutch,
Fazporane it ſhould not be abhorred, it being bur a Rite, which may be changed for the
Enz:arn. goodof the faichfull; burycrhee referuced himſelfe, becauſe other extraua-
5nanss 5. gant things might afterwards be demanded) that, roauoid errour, it would
yy be good tirſt to haue recourſe vato God, by Prayers, Proccſſiens , Maſles,

almes, and faltings ; afterwards, norto omit humane diligence, in regard

there arc no Prelares of Germanie-in the Councell, to write ro the Metropolt-

cans toaſſemble chem, andcxamine the marter well, and to infortne the Sy-

nod according totheirconſtience. He concluded, that, itbeing impoſſible

codoc lo many things in a {horrſpace, he choughtfirro defiit now, 'and de.

ferre the determivation vnuull anocher time. lobn Baptiſta Caſtagna .. Arch-

Biſhop of Roſano, diſlwadingthe grantabſolutcly, ſpake againſt"thoſe that

made, andithoſc that fauourcd: the requeſt, raxingrthem nor to begood Ca-
tholiques, becaule, if they were, they would not deſire athing vafic , with
 {candall of others, Aud he ſaid plaincly,thar che requeſt did ayme to bring

in here(ic, and vied ſuch words; that cucry one vnderttood, that hee mceanc

Maximilian King of che ©Fobemuans. | | 1:20

The Arch-Buſhop of Braga, or Braganza, ſaid, heewas informed that (im
Germanic there were fourc {orts of men. _Truc,Catholikes : Obſtinate here-
tickes : Concealed heretickes ; and men weake in faith. That the firlt doe
not demaund che grant, yea oppoleit;;xttieſecond carenor for it; 'thethird
deſareit, that they may coucr their herelie,, becauſe they way counterfeic in
all otherchings, butin this ; » which therefore, was novto bee grafted them,
for chat ir would: folter their errours; but the weake infauh were nor ſuch,
butanely for the bad opinion they hauc of the Ecclclialticall power, and of
the Pope, and doc not demaynd the Cup for deuotion, which is found one-
in-perians of a goodlife , yhereas they arc drowned in vanities and plea-
{ures of the world, and doe vnwillingly confcſleand) communicate once a
 yeere, which doth. not demonſtrate {uch beatc of zeale that they ſhould de-

fire tocommunicate with bath. kindes. Heconcluded, that the diligenceof
the Fathers of Baflought to be 1mirared,that fourc or f1x Prelates-of the body
of che Councel ſhould be cle&ed,who,as their Legats,accompanied with Di:
uines fitro preach, ſhould viſnc the Prouinces named by his [mperiall Maie-
ſtic, or where they found -peiticnr men, cwho defired the Cup fordevori-
on, or becauſe they were actaſtomed torhat Rite, and forall other marcets
would abcy the Church, ſhould reconcile them,andgranc irvixgthern, '-*

- TheTztular of Philadelphia, though-a Datch- wan; {aid, thatto-dehy'ir; be-
ing. demaunded by the Eniperour, was dangerous; :andpernirious to grant
it 1 buitchat he wasrclolued rather to difpleaſe men then ſpeake againttihis
cat{cicace;thatir/was inpeſſible topradtile the yice'of the Chalice, without
dangerofcffufipn,; carrying irabour, raplaces remote, andof bad paſſage;
mavy times by night , intirac of{now; wainc, andice 5: that che'Proteſtants

would boaſt , ;fbdinculcaterathepedþle:,: tharche Papiſt® Joe begin «6
xnow thetructh ; andthat, without daubr, thoſe who makethe requeſt doe
raintaice that theprecepr of-C n x.4's T cannotbefulfilled; bueby*raking

the Euchariſt ynder both-kindes. And he rooke in his hand aC hafechifme writ:

en

”

XUM

- - —— - ——
1 tt. —_— ——_— A. _—_ Pergrcy

--
_—

— a 4
—— —_—

-
-

EL IB, 6. the Councellof Trent.

:

ten in Dutch; which hee read'and expounded in Latint, and declared what 1 562

their opiriion was. He added,thart the ( arbolikes would hauc the worle,and © arty,
ro gaine a few,, would loole very many ; that they would doubt on which Fizvmuxs.
fidetherruc faich'was ſeeing the( atbolikes yeceld to the Fuſtomes of the Pro- Emma

teſtants;chatche gtanc made'ynto Germanie would moouc other Proyinces,
and eſpecially France; that the Heretiques will make proofe by this, to ouct-
ſway x. ftancio which they hauc found in the dodrine of the Catholike
Church: He concluded, that it ought to bee def-rred; at the leaſt, yncill the
cad of the Diet, that the Durch Prelates might ſend ro the Councell, ap-
ane the opinion of Granara-to defer, and the other of Braga; that thoſe
whodeſare the Cup haue all a roote of herefie; and added, that the Empe-
rours Ambaſſadours had made ſuch paſſionate inſtances, and ſuch effecu-
all perſwaſions, that, being intereſted ſo much, it was not firthey ſhould bee
preſent in Congregation, that cucry one might [peake freely. Fryar Thomas
(ſellus Bithop of (ana, hauing recounted that the Biſhop of Fine Churthes
had perſwaded many, ſaying, that if it were not granted, ſo many miſchicfes
would follow, that it had beene better neuer to haue called a Councell, ſhews
ed at large, that ir ought not to bee granted though the lofſeof many ſoules
ſhould enſue,becauſea greater number would periſh, if it were granted.

| The Biſhop of Captemberg, in Stiria, deſired alſo that the Emperours Arn-
baſſadours ſhould renire, and inueighed much againft the words of five Chur-
ches, related by ( ana. Many of the Spaniſh Prelates made the ſame inſtance to
the Legars, that the Imperialiſts might not bee preſenfin the treaties of the
Fathers during this conſultation, it beivg fufficient for them to know, in the
end, the reſolution of the Synod. Bur others contradicted ; ſaying, that ra-
ther they then others ſhould bee preſent, and that tocexclude thoſe who haue
incerelt, hath neuer beene the cuſtome of Synods. The Legats, conſidering
chat they had beene preſent from the beginning, and that they could not bee
excluded without danger of tumult,rc{olued romake no innouation,

The Biſhop of Conimbria was of opinion, that it ſhould bee referred to the
Pope, to grant the Grace, with fiuc conditions. That thoſe that were to make
vic of it ſhould abiurc all hereftes, and, in particular, ſhould ſweare that they
belecue, that as much is contained vnder one kind, as ynder both, and as
much grace recciucd ; that they ſhould baniſh the hererique Preachers ; that
in their places they-{hould not keepe the Chalice, nor carry it to the ficke;
and that his Holineſſe ſhould not commit this to the Ordinartes, but fend Le-
gats, and that the reſolution ſhould not bee made in Councell. For when ic
thould be publithed, ic would make the herctikes proad, and ſcandalize vye-
ry many Catholiques; and therefore, in caſe this diſpenſation were to bee
granted, it ought not to beput inthe cyes of all nations. The Biſhop of Mo-
dena maintained that it could not bee denied, becauſe, after the Councell of
Conſtance, the Church hauing reſerued to it ſelfe power to diſpence, hath al-
waycs ſhewed,that ſomctimes it would be expedient to doe it ;that Paulthe

_ third had formerly ſent Nancy, to relcaſe i econ hee perceiued that the
prohibition had done no good in ſo many yeetes; that the Bohemians would
neuct be reduced without it; that the yſe of che Cup was conformable to the
inſticution of CHR1sT, and anciently obſerued by che Church, |

Friar

562,

Pays 4.

1562 .
A SN Tearned,detecnded the:(

Friar Iaſþ:rof (* 4h Biſhop, of Liris ,amauofan excmpliry-life;, and

Faxpman: der at the divcritic of opinions , becaule thole-who demie-hauethe moderns

ErtizaBrr:
CHARLES 9.
HILIP 2,

—_—Y —
',

' to followzand thoſe who grant doc follow antiquitic, the: Councellot Bafil,

and Par the third ; thatin this varicty, bee adhexed to: the affirmatiuegs be-
cauſe the thing was good in its owne nature, attd profitable, andexpedienc
withthe conditions propoſed, and beeing aqdreſled as a thing neceffary ro
reduce ſoulcs, hee that did deſire the end , muſt nccdes vic the meanes; that
the neceſſiticof the meanes ought not to bedoybred of , becauſe the Empes-
rordid affirmcit, whom he did beleeue that:G 9.D would not {ufferto be de-
cciucd in ſo importanta bulineſle, and the rather, becaule:( hazles was of the
ſame opinion ; and the demand of the Duke of Bauaria and of the French-
men did proouc the fame. Andit any did doubt thar.the Secular Princes
were not well informed in this caulc, being Ecclefialticall,he muſt needes be-
lecuc the Biſhop of Five Churches , and the two other Biſhops of Hangarie.,
who were inthe Councell. And becaulc it had been fayd;, thar the Father
was to bee imitated , who recciued his prodigall ſonne, but notbeforc here.
pcnted, he ſaid they ought racher to imitate the ſhepheard in the Gofpel,who
tought, with great diligence, in defart and mountainous places, the loſt
ſheepe, and laying ir on his necke , brought itto the ſheepefold. The dil-
courle of this Prelate, forthe fame of his honeſtic and excellent learning,
and becaulc hee was a Portugal, whom cucry one thought would hauc been
molt rigorous in maintaining the R:tes vicd, did not onely confirme thoſe
who were of his opinion, but made allo very many.of the oppoſites ro
WAUCcr.

The Bithop of O/emo who ſpake after him, ſayd; I doubt we muſt drinke
this Cup,by allmeancs,avd Go b grant it may be with good ſucceſſe. Iohan-
nes Baptijta Oſius defended, thatthis vie ought not to be granted , becauſe the
Church hath ncucr wont to grantthe Icaltthing according co the poſitions
of rhe herctiques, yea alwaycs to conltiturethe contrary. He ſhewed by thar
which happened amonglt the Bohemians , who had alwayes been the molt
rebcllious , that one ought not to promiſe himſelfe any thing of theconuer-
ſion'of hereriques , but ro make account hee ſhall bee deceiued by them, and
that it was neceſſary to make the Emperour vnderltand , that his demaund
was not profitable for his State. Hedefired the Legats alfo,that they ſhould
not ground theimſclues ypon thoſe who had from the beginning ſpoken of
referring it ro the Pope , becauſe they ſpake confuledly , and that the ſuffrages
ought ro be collected, as vpon other occaſions, by making cucry one anſwer
Yea, or No, and to omit thoſe artificiall wayes which ſome had beene for-
ccd trovle ro giue {atifaftion. Hee was followed by Friar Johannes di Munnas-
tonzs, Biſhop of Sogorne, who ſaid, that firſt hee was of opinion thar the Grace
ought nor ro bedenicd, buthauing heard the Biſhop of Riete,was,by his con-
ſcience, forced rochange, and defend the negatiue ; thatthe Councell, which
was iudgein this cauſe, oughtto haue regard that, yeelding vnaduiſcdly ro
the Emperour,they doe nor preiudice other Princes. Friar Marcus Lanreus,
Biſhop of ( ampania, ſayd , that the Emperour did heartily deſire thisgranr,
but that it would bee ſufficient for his Maicſtic forthe gaining of his people,
(Ca)

—_——————— ——

_—_—
md

Les 6

' the Councell of Trent.

ro makea ſhew onely , and therefore that it would be fitro giue himan ac- 1562

count of the difticulties,chat he might iuſtifie himſelfe with them.

*Perrus Daneſius, Biſhop of Lauanr, did not define whether it were fit to Faxomaune |
grant the Cup or not, burſpake onely againlt the opinion of referring it to Emmunzra,
the Pope. He ſayd in ſumme,that perhaps the Pope would be offended, be- $****>* 5

PaiiiPe 3.

cauſe hauing becne tirlt requeſted himſelfe, and hauing, cither for that hee —v—;

knew not how, or would not reſolue, referred it to the Councell, it isa ma-
nifcſt argument that hee would not beepleaſled, if it were remitted to him a-
game with the ſame ambiguities ; and the Councell which confilteth of ma-
ny, may more cafily beare the burthen of the importunitics of thoſe who
complaine for wantof fatisfaction , and requirea remedie,then the Pope a-
lonc,who, tro maintaine his dignitie,muſt hold ancſteeme of many reſpects.
Beſides , ir will giue occaf1on of calumnies , that the Pope remitrerh ro the
Councell,and che Councell ro the Pope, todeludethe world. Afterwards he
came to Logicall rermes, ſaying , that cither it is referred to the Pope as ſupe-
riour, or as inferiour ; thateither the Councell , not daring ro rednnin re-
gard of the difficulties, doeth remit ito a greater power , or , to frecit lelfe,
doth referre it to an inferiour: bur neither the one nor the other is fit to bee
donc,beforc it be decided which power is ſuperiour ; becauſe cuery one will
hence draw anargumentfor his opinion, and much occaſion will be giuen
for diſputations and diuiſfion. Hee ſayd,with aflcueration, that no wiſe Pre-
late oughtto conſent ro ths reference,if he were not firlt aſſured in which of
the two kindes it ought to bee done; yea, that it was impoſlible it ſhould bee

done, but that the words would ſhew cither the one or the other. The Papa-

lins were impatient to heare this Prelate, -

The Biſhop of Fine Churches ſpake in thoſe Congregations, in his place,
asa Prelate ; and following immediatly after, with other ncw diſcourles, he
made them forgerthe former, and making a long digrefſion, perſwaded the
grantofthe Cup. Ther he anſwered poynt by poynt,to all the -
Hee fayd there was no need roanſwere thoſe who would exclude him from
the Congregations, becauſe their realons were as ſtrong againſt the Empc-
rour himſelte , ifhe had beene preſent; that hee would not anſwere the dan-
gers of cffuſion, becauſeifthey had beene remedileſſe, the Councell of {'on-
ſtance, would nor hauec rclerued power to diſpence; that the diſcourſes of
thoſe who perſwade the negatiue ſeeme ynro him weighty,andeffeRual,and
able ro draw himto that fide , if hee had nor praiſe and experience in thar
buſineſſe, which hath more needeof ſuch knowledge, then of Science and
ſpeculatiue reaſons. To thoſe that ſaid, that the like grant did neuer any
good in times palt,he anſwercd,that it was quite contrary , becauſe, after the
ereatic of Bafil, many Catholiques were preſerued in Bobemia,, who ſtill live in
pou wich the Caliſtini, and haue lately recciued the new Arch-B.of Prague,

y whomrthey caule their Prieſts to bee ordained. To thoſethat feared ro
ut new cogitations into othet Nations, hee anſwered, that thoſe would nor
= moucd by ſuchan example, becauſe hauing in them no mixture of here-
ſic, and bcing deſirous to preſeruethe purity of Religion , they would refuſe
the Cup, though itwereoffered vnto fg - that the Germans the more it is
dcnicd them, the more they deſire ir, bur if ir were granted them, they mighe

”_

7

*®

mth. -
—

prac DO en — —_—_— —

—_ - —,

-— The Hiſtorie of L 18.6.

1562: becdiucrred from thar vie; the feare chat when they had obtayned this, they

DR would paſſeto other demands was too ſuſpicious, and if they ſhould , they

Fzxymax. Might alwaycs bedenicd; thar ir could not be calleda nouitie, becauſcit had

Earn, been granted by the Councell of *Pafill, and by Paulthe third ; whoſe minj-

p2-aie* 9. fters,had they beenmorc couragious, and not retired from thatdiſpenſation

—-— for ſmall terrors, bccauſc ſome impertinent Friars preached againſt them,

would hauc done more good ; that hee was much offended with the reaſon

alleadgedby ſome, that as no man could be received with condition that for-

nication ſhould bee permitted ynro him , no more can theſe people, who

would be reconciled , ſo that they may hauethe vie of the Cup. For the firſt

condition is abſohutcly bad,and this onely as it is prohibited, Heeanſwered

the Biſhop of Sogorne, thatthe Emperour did notcontend with any Prince,

nor ſoaght preiudices againſt others, and deſired rhe Cup for his people by

Grace, andnot by way of Tuftice. But ypon thoſe who fayd the carc hereof

ought not to bee commitred ro the Ordinaries , but that Delegates were to

bee ſent from the Apoſtolique Sca, hee ieſted ſomewhat ſharpely ; af-

king whether hcethar had the charge of their ſoules, andall the Spirituall
goucrnement might not bee truſted with a thing indifferent, cr whether the

thoughr thar thisthing did exceed the Epiſcopall gouernement. ' Heſaid that

to referre it tothe Pope was to giue him new and continua]l moleſtations:

= To Philadelphia lice an{wered , that the Catholiques would not onely not be

| troubled , but conſolated , becauſe they might liue vnited with thoſe, with

whom they arenow much troubled. To them who would haue Proctors

ſent exprelly,he laid,it was no maruell that nonecame to demand this Grace,

becauſe the Emperour had vndertakento demand it for them ; who could

make an infinite number of them to come if the Fathers would. Bur as the

Councell was carcfull not to make the Safe condudt roo large, that ſo many

Proteſtants might nor come as to put them in fear, ſo they ought to hauc the

ſame reſpc& hercin, becauſe more would cometo obtaine this grant. His

concluſion was, thar they would haue compaſlion on their Churches, and

hold an citeeme of the demand of ſogreat a Prince, who, our of his deſire

of the ynion of the Church , doeth neuer ſpeake of this buſinefſſe withour

reares. Intheende, he ſhewed gricte for the paſſion of many Prelats, who,

for a vaine care of ſeeing a change in their owne Countreys, were content |

with the loſſc of others, In particular he complained of the Biſhop of Rzeri,

who held rhe Emperour fora Prince ignorant in gouernement, not know-

ing what was good for his States, which hee fayd his moſt Reverend Lord-

ſhip, accuſtomed to feruc ar the Cardinals tables in Rome, could nor

reach him. Finally, heefayd, that many other things did remaine to bee

| anſwered, which were ſpoken as to challenge him to a Duel; bur hee

chought it berter to beare them, and paſſe them our with patience. Hee

repeared that which hee had ſayd before; that is , that if the Cup were not

I graunted,” it had beene better that the Councell had neuer beene called:

[| which hce expounded thus , thatmuch people remained ini obedience to the

| Pope, hoping that this Grace would in the Councell bee graunted vnto
them, who would wholly aliene themſclues when they faw they were de-

| | fraudcd.

Andreas

L1s. 6. the C onncell of Trent.

Andreas di Cueſta, Biſhop of Lionic Spaine, ſayd, that clic good intention 1 564

of the Emperour avd Duke of *Bawaria could not bed6ubted of, nor diſputed /

whether the Councell might giue ſuch a permiſſion, þur thatic was onely to *+>

bee conſidered what was expedient. His opinion was that the ancient Fa- =
thers, and continuallvfe of the Church,neuer to yeeld to the petitions of the

berctikes, was to bee imitated. It appeared by the praRtiſe ofthe Nicen Coun. —v—

cell, chat, howſocuer the world went toplic turuic, they would never graunc
any thing vato the:n,and the Doctours abſiained from words vied by the be-
retikes, though rhey hada good lence; tharthey would never haue been plea-
ſed with this grant; that the Carholikes would take ir ill; thatfor an vncertaine
hope of reducing a few heretikes , many: Cacholikes would be loſt;rhar becaule
the Biſhops of Germanie did not make the demand, it was a greatargument
thar it proceeded not from dcuotion , comming from a people who giue no
ligne of any {piricualitie; that he could notyngerſtand how they were peni-
rent,and would returne to the Church,belecuing it was gouerned by the holy
Ghoſt, and yet be obttinate not to doeit without this fauour ; that this obſtj-
nacic ſheweth, that they hauc not the: formall reaſon of faith ; that if the
Counccll of Baſil did formerly grant this to the Bohemians, it was becauſe
they did abſolutely referre trhemleluesrorhe Church, which, afterwards, in
kindneſſc,did graunrit; that it ought notts be called a rrue remedie which
is not neceſſaric, by the nature of the thing, but by the malice of men; that
the Synode ought not to nouriſh nor cheriſh them prthat the example of
CHR1ST, in ſecking the wandring ſhcepe , is ſufficiently imitated, when
they are called, inuited, and prayed ; thar if this fauour muſt bee graunted,
it were better to bee done by the Pope, who may reuok<e it if the condiri-
ons bee not performed; that the Councell granting it, if the Pope would
afterwards recall it, they will pretead he cannot docit,and that his authority
is not abouec the Councel, that the heretikes doe cuer proccede with fallhoods
and dcceits. =
Antonius ( 'oronicius , Biſhop of Almeria, faid, that hee was confirmed in
thenegatiueby chereaſon vicd by the defenders of the afhrmartine; thathow-
focuer God giueth many helpes to the impenitent, as preaching , miracles;
and good in{pirations , yet hee giueth the Sacramentsto the penirent onely ;
that if they would bee mooued with charitic, they ſhould bee more carefull
to preſcrue the Catholikes then reduce the heretikes; that the Councell of Con-
{tance ought to bee imitated, which to maintaine the good children of the
Church, prohibited the Communion of the Chalice, taught by Toby Fuſe ;
that now they ought ſo todeale with the Lutherans ; that-chis grant would
open a gate to infinite milchicfes; that they would demaund marriage of
Priclts,abrogation of images, of faſts, and of othergodly conſtitutions, al-
waycs propoling their demandsas the onely and neceſfary remedies to vnite
them to the Church; that euery little change of the Law doeth breede great
dammage,c{pecially if it bee made in faupur of hererikes; that heewould nor
giue counſell chat the Pope ſhonld dot it, though hee might doe it better;
chat the people would bee lefle offended then if the graunt were made by
the Councell, howſocuer it ought to bee confeſſed that the ſupreame autho-
ritic is in the Pope; that in caſe heſhould grauntit, it ought nor cobee.com-,

Bbb mired

566 . The Hiftory of - Lis.6.
1562 mitted ro the Biſhops though knowen to bee worthy for lome time; becauſe
"We they may become bad, & of a peruerle faith,moued by rheir privare' jarerelts.
Expo. Franciſcus di Gado, Biſhop of Lugo in Spaine, made a long exhortation to
Enzzers the Fathers, thar, to auoyde difficultics, or to givc ſatisfaftion ro Prince or
C1nizs 9: negple, they would not derogate from the reputation and dignitic of genc-
Petite 2. P P I Y ju P - $
—— rall Councels, whoſe authoritic hauing cucr been eſteemedin the Church, as
eucry one knoweth,and that thaiiftig maintained the taith,was notto be con-
temned now, for reſpe&ts and intereſts. He alleadged many places of Saint
2nſlin, for authoritic of generall Councels, and much exrolled the authoritic
of them ; and howſocuer hee neuer deſcended to compare it with the Popes,
yet cuery one ynderſtood that hee made it the ſuperiour. And Jerolamus
Guzrini,Biſhop of Imola.., viing the like conceits and words, extolled allo the
autho:itic of Prouinciall Councels, ro confirme his opinion of not graun-
ting the Cup,and ſayd, thattheirauthoritic oughtto be eſteemed obligatory,
vntill che contrary was determined by a generall Councel], alleadging Saint
Auftin for it. Inheatcof [peaking, hee came out with theſe words, that the
gcnerall Councell had no ſuperiour; but perceiuing afterwards that the
*Papalins ( of which number himſclfe was ) were offended,ſought ro mode-
rateir, by repeating the ſame things, and adding an exception of the Popes
authoritic. By which meanes hee ſatisfied neither partie; bur the greater
numberdid excuſe him,and attribute it to inconfideration, becauſe, in the
former congregations, hehad, ypon diuers occaſtons, confuted thoſe whoal.
[cadgedthe Councell of Baſil. Notwithſtanding Cardinall Simonera, how.
{ocuer he.imployed him to make ſuch oppoſttions, did not forbeare ro ex-
pound it in a bad ſence, and rocharge him that hee was transported by af-
fcion, becauſe the Buls of his Biſhoprike were not diſpatched vpon free
colt,as he would haue hadthem.
Thelaſt congregation concerning this point was held the fifr of Septem-
ber: and,among(t others, Richard of Ter/elli, a Þ-reualentian Abbat,and a Re-
ular Canon in Geneua, maintaining the negatiue, ſayd, that this matterguds
diſputed many dayes in the Councell of Baſil, which diſputation remaineth
ſtill, colle&ted by Friar John, of Ragyſe, Proctor of the Dominicans, and, in
conclution, the Cup was abſolutely denied to the Bchemians : fo that no 0-
ther determination can now bee made, without declaring to the world thar
the Church did then erre,ina generall Councell. Hee was reprehended by
the Bilhop of Imola. ( to ſaluc his owne ſore) for giuing authoritie tothat
ſchiſmaticall Counccll, and noted of great boldnefle, that thoſe who fm-
The:utoriry Ply alleadged the Councell of Baſe hauing beene often reprooucd, he ſhould
ofthe Cou"- nor onely cite it, bur giuc it the authoritic of a generall Councell. The Fa-
therreplied that he alwaycsmaruciled, and then more then cucr, how any
onecould ſpeake ſoof that Councell,confidering that the foureteene Articles
decrced inthe matter of the Chalice the laſt Seſſion were wholly taken our
of it, and that hee knew not howa Decree could morebe approucd,then by
_ renewing of it not onely in ſence, bur in words alſo. And waxing warme
herewith, heefayd, that, in regard of the Decree of that Councell, the de-
mand of the Cup ſauourcdof herettc,and morrall fine. Whereupon abuz-
zing was railed among the Prelatcs; and hedefiring to proceed was lilenced

by

"20" "I Sta.” wad IT n Wy”
> 24 - Ct © _ 5 7 : -3 RR
+. + -— ENF Y
- 3 F,

FR.
7
Ws:
%
+

L1s. 6. the Councell of Trent.

567

by the Cardinall of Mantue,ſo that (topping himſclfe hee askedpardon, and | 562.

:

ſpeaking a few words,concluded.

Not co ſpcake any more of this Father , will adde heere , that hee wa

notcd to hauc been atthe French Ambaſſadours houſe, thefixtecnth of Au-
oult , carly in the morning , ro demand whether their Biſhops would come,

Pivs. 4

$ FanDixany
—  — x ——
ELizaBrtR.
CHARLES. gs

Pauitie. 3,

and to exhort that rhey might bee ſollicired to comequickly, And in'the —V—:

Congregations, in which the ſacrifice was handled, hee propoſed the doubr
whether the aurhority of the Pope bee abouc the Councell; adding, thar
when it ſhould bee diſcuſſed, hee would ſpeake freely. Theſe things bees
ing put together, and duely weighed, the Legares did not thinke fir that the

French-men ſhould finde at their comming ſuch a humour in Trent, and
thought to make his Generall recall him, for buſineſſe of the Congregation,

Richard of
Verſell dieth

and ſo to remooue him honeſtly. Bur there was no neede; for the poore
Father fell ſicke a lictle after with griefe of minde, and the twentic ſixth of

Nouember died, In that Congregation Friar John Baptiſta, Generall of the
Serui, maintaining the negatiue alſo,to ouerthrow the ground of the oppo-
ſites, ſpake ar largeconcerning the Councellof (onftance, which firlt de-
creed that matter, and commended the authority thereof; cxalting it abouc
other generall Councels , and ſaying that ic had depoſed three Popes. This
did not pleaſe; bur was paſſed oucr, becauſe they would not thruſt many
matters together. |

Thegiuing of yoyces beeing ended, the Legates were deſirous to giue the
Emperor fatisfaction,burcould ner, becauſe the party of the negatiuc preuai-
led: they reſolucd therefore to labour that it might bee referred to the Pope,
hoping that,by perſwaſions,ſomeof the negative might be drawen into that
middle opinion. And they gaue commiſſion to Jacobus Lomelinus, B.of Maz-
2ara,and to the Biſhop of Ventimiglia, to imploy themſclues herein, with dex-
reritic and circumſpetion. The Legates themſelues ſpake with the three
Patriarches, and perſwaded them; by whoſe meanes all the Prelates and Fa-
thers of the Venetian State were pacified,, which was a conſiderable num-
ber. Having gaynedas many as {zemed ſufficient, they belecued they had
ouercomethedifficulry. They brought the matter to this point, to write a
ſerter tothe Pope inthe ordinary forme, and to ſend a note of all thevoyces.
But the Biſhop of Fine Charches did nor _ it,cxcept a Decree of the Sel-
fion did appearce. For theſetwo Articles hauing beenreſcrucd in thelaſt Sef-
ſion, to be handled in this, and they now beeing handled, and refolued, ic
is neceſſary that the reſolution of the Seſſion ſhould appcare in the Ades.
Tarmienſe ſhewed him hovy hard and dangerous it was to propoſe the De-
cree,and that he ought to bee content with the letter, if heedeſired to ob-
raine. The Biſhop not beerng pacificd herewith, they reſolucd ro make a
Decree, to bee nar | in the Seſſion ; in which hee deſired it ſhould bee ſayd,
Thatthe Synode, knowing itis expedicntto grant the vſcof the Cup, did
referreynto the Pope to grant ir, tro whom , and vpon what conditions hee
pleaſed. The Legates ſhewed him char many who were for the remiſſ-

The Generall

of the Serws
extol'ech che
Counccll of
Conſtance.

The Cup js
denied , by
pluralitic of
VOYCES,

on, did doubt whetherit were expedicnt, and therefore would oppoſe the =

Decree, ſothatit was impoſlibleto cauſe any ſuch declaration to bee made;
andrhat , if hee were firme inthis opinion, ir werebertertolet a weeke paſle,

Bbb z thar

568 The Hiftory of © L1s.6.

1562 that this great heat might bee cooled, The Biſhop of Fine (| burches was
AN content ;and fo, this point becing deferred , they purpoſed tocſtabliſh the
Faoome. Decreeof the Sacrifice, that this becing ioyncd withir, they might make
= AW wg 26 He forthe Communion. Yarmienſe... did oppolc, who beeing

Cuaxuns 5: perſwaded by the Teſuites, Laynea, Salmeron and Torre,did propoſc another

Pr1liP 3.

AA formeof Decreefor the Sacrifice in matter of the oblation of Cy rI sTin
the Supper , and they had much adocto make him defiſt. Finally,becing al-
moſt out of hope to bee ready to hold the Sellion atthe time appointed, the
Decree of the Sacrifice was eſtabliſhed in the Congregation of the ſcucnth
day by conſent of the major part, howſocucr Granara labourcd to interpoſe
impediments and delayes. |

After this,tenne Articles for reformation of the abuſes , occurring, in the

| Maſ,ncre propoled,and cleuen more indiuers other points of reformation;

which were purpolſcly choſen of cafte matters, not ſubic&ro contradiction,

and fauourablec to the authoritic of Biſhops, that their procceding might

not bee hindered by the oppoſition of any ; which was well knowen to the

| Ambaſladoursand Prelates who complained of ic. "Theſe began to behan-
=. - | dled the ninth of September , and the Prelates deliuered their opinions brict-

: ly, fourry in a Congregation. There was no remarkable oppoſition , one-

ly Philadelphia ſayd , that Germany expected that matters of weight and im-
portance ſhould be handled in Councell. Hee named divers, and, amongſt
others, the creation of Cardinals, and pluralitic of Benetices, Toannes
Zuares , Biſhop of { onimbria, ſayd, that {mall matters were not to bee neg-

The Counce! 1e&ted, but thought that the dignuic of the Synode did require that ſome ſpe-

israxed by cjall order ſhould bee followed, that it may appeare why theſe particulars

uers Prelats, : ,
for omitting are propoſed before others; that the reformation ought ro begin from the

oarof Re- Head , and paſſe ro the Cardinals; from the Cardinals rorhe Biſhops; and
Mp formation from them to other degrees; otherwiſe he feared that the Carholikes would
be offended, and theprorteſtants laugh. Paris ſayd, that, for theſe hundred
and fiftic yeeres, the world hath demanded a reformation in che Head,and
the members , and hitherto hath beene decciued ; that now it was time they
ſhould labour in carneſt,and not by diflimulation;that he deſired the French
men ſhould bee heard for theneceſlities of that Kingdome; that in France. a
farre more proficable reformation was made, then that which was p:0po-
ſed in Councell. The Biſhop of Segenia ſayd, they did imitatean vnskiltull
Phyſician , who gaue a lenitiue, or anointed with oyle, in mortall diſcalcs.
The Biſhop of Oreate ſayd , thatthe Pope ought not to grant ſo great faculty
to the Creſado, and the Fabrique of Saint Peter, by vertuc of which, cucry one
in Spaine will haue Maſſes in his houſc, which if ic be not moderated, the pro-
' - viſions of the Councell will bee in vyainc; that it was neceſſary to declare
thattheDecrecs of the generall Councell doe binde the Head allp,, Where-
at buzzing becing raiſed, hee made a ſignethey ſhould bee ſilent, and added,
that hee meant in reſpe&t of the diretion, and not of coattion. He pracee-
ded , and ſayd that it was nccefſary to finde a meancs to take away contcnti-
ons, and ſuits, or, atthelcaſt, ro make them fewer and ſhorter, © 1ncauſes of
Benetices;thatthis cauſed great expences, hindered the worſhip of G o D,and;
ſcandalized the people. The Bilhop of Fine ([burches ſpake concerning-the

point

_ wm Re Ie? * T0801 F : p A aa : os = SY .
__" 2 PORT” - - \ Y 5: Br thc. , F421 4019.6
_=_ own _— won yr ht SFr ” FEY w wigs NIN. We EE ap. * T = Rnd 2

FTy © ns

P '
x
%
; P _" : 2 q : * 4 4
-— $-- x -— —— = | wn W —_— a PI 2 <LI > ARR ap—_ m—— Hh "
= 7 9 # : --
' -

-

ginc of conterring Buboprigutts rpowadingabe wardes hee hadfai

ale. and_yoworthy perlous were

racceded from Princes , who.did importunate 'T
Pope,laying chey would bee bercer beſtowed wpoRahe he
Holine(le. And he complained thar his words A. cal OUDQED. |} .

The Spaniſh Agent complained. inthe Kings name, that inthe eight Ars
tiele roo much authority was giuen to Bilhops quer Hefpital, Monneaines of

-
”

pictic, and. fuch places ; and particularly in Sitka, againlt the priuiledge!

. ## 4;

,
* "

which that, Kingdome auncicntly hath . for ;vyhole Gricfation {4
Legates cauſed' a clanſs, jo, bee added for reſeruation of the places which

that 1562.
ored; 496 declaring thar,che abulg; ©

orle: keepers, of his

TOY
Frannmaie ;

—

ELz4BaTy,

HARLES g.,

llexpounded. { 1; Phitiy 2.:.

g

-

are, immediately vader . che protection. of the: King, Thele things, bees. ...._.
ing cnded,, the Legates,werein!a ſtrajt,, becaulc there were, butthree dayes ' * * »

to.the, Seflign , . andhavy things ynrelolued , ,eſpecially char which wasof

orcatclt importance, in which cucry ane was carried witha ſtrang affeQtion,

that is the communion of the Cup, Bur onc accideptmadethemazo prolong
thetime., . For che Freach Ambaſſadour in Rome..,, hauiog carpcſtly defired

the Pope inthe Kings name, to cauſeadelay. vntill. che comming of his Pre-.

»

lates,his Holinzſſe, though nothing could mote. dilpleafe himrthen, che pro-
longing of the Counccll, alwell in regard of his wane inclination , as of the
Cardinals and Court, wha were in hope, and much deſired xo ſer. ir endedin
December,notwithſtanding,to conceale his fares), didan{vere, thar it was
all oners, him , andthar it did depend on the Prelares , whoif chey did ab-
korre cuery delay, it was no maruell, jn regard of cheir long and incommo-
dious abiding there , ſaying that they, ought co be reſpected, and that henei-
ther couldnor would compell chem, or impolea, lawypon:them, contrary
rothe ancient vic; tharhee would write tothe Legates, cancerning this in-
ſtance, and (hew hee was contented with the dilation; tharthis is all tharcan;
be required of hum ,and enough to fatisfic the King... Thus he wrote,adding,
that they ſhould make yſciot this permiſſion; as,t ſhould ſeeme, moſt reaſo-
nableco.che_Fathers.,, ' This letter, and the backwardacſlcin their bufineſls,
and chat which was writzen by Delphjnus , Nunci6. with the Emperour, and
the inſtance'of the Emperours Ambaſladours, thatthe-Decret of che Maſe,
might not bec publiſhed, made ſome of the Legates incline ;ro.deferre the Sels
ſion, But Simoneta; who ynderftood the Popes minde,ratherasit was in his

, . ww 4.4 #4 s ©

head , then asit was exprelled in the letter, oppoſed fo trongly , tharthe

contrary ma Flog. o nd. heſent Wuice to/Romg how dangerous arhing
it was to changertheablolure, commands formerly giuent, to'come-quickly
to Ks ike Comet ens to _ verbal fatisfaction on
chers, cacouraging.thale who had bag-intentionsto erofſe good reſolutions,
and laying: burthens ypon them 49, make them odious, 10 lole; reputation,'
and to make them yah doe che ſeruice of his Holineſle. , Shmouct4was
fauourcd by the cuens., ;Forghatrcbading no'9ppoſition.of.rmement;theAts
ricle of theabules of the Maſe was eſtabliſhed grogerher with the cleuemh-of
reformation, and the Decree of he Commugion had lefſe difficulrythen
was belceucd, It did aps paſſe at the: firſt proppling, becauſe ir (aids has
the Pope, by conſent and apprabazion of the-Cquacell;Jhowld doe whathe
thought good. | This was jrapogaes. by Fife whoaldshanegeineeend

»

L ” "Shine ee £4
Lots %

ow —

gy_

570 "The Hiflory: of SER 14

—_— —_ - —— —— CG

_ Y

1562 the remiſſiue part ; which madetheLegarsrefoluc toomirthis matter whol-!

>> ly,dnd excuſed theniſelues t6 the Imperidliſts, becauſethe faulr did not'pro-
Fxxpmaxe. ceed cirher fromthe Pope, of from them, The Ambaſſadours defited that it:
Pars. ſhould beepropoſed withour ithe clauſe of conſent andapprobation'; which
54nrns 9: che Legates' thinking wolild cauſe a delay of rhe Seſſion, did refuſe.” The
x Ambaſſadouts proteſted ;thar ſeeing fo ſmall eſtecme was held of the Em-
crour, they would afliMt rio morceutherin Congregation or Seffibn, ynill

bis Maicſtic aduiſed bercof} bad gag thoſcordets that befirted thy Imperi-

alldi nity.” Hercypon the Legates wete content, nor onely to propoſe it
WT he clatilc,but to yeperfwations chemſelues, alſo,and to cm-

The grant of P oy others. . "And the day follow ng; which was the next day befor Cc the
de Copitt® Seftion, the Decree, correQed, did paſſe by the niaior part (thoughcontra-
wm di&ted by all'bF che negatitic)1o the grear ioy of the Legars ad Papalins,
aſwwcll beeaufe the' Seflion wasnot prolonged, which they greatly feared, as
alls-becatſethey thoughtir more honour for the Pope; thar the grace ſhould'

totally depend on his authority: The 'Ambaſſadouts were well fatisficd with

this particular; but percciuing thar the Seflion woul4 beein order, and that
che|publication'sf rthe'{acritice of the Maſſe could nor bee hindered, as they

had defire&in the Empervurs tiame, they ioyned with the French-men, who

were mil-conrenc, becatfe the requelt which theit King had madein Rome.

A geverall was denicd, | Thereforerhe lame day, inthe afternoone, all the Ambaſſa-
of th-Ambal dOUrs mer/in the houſe of the Tmperialiſts, ſaying they would confulr' of a
ous thivgcommon to all Princes. The Venetians and Florentine, becing called,
excuſed rhemſclues, ſaying they could not come, withour exprefſe commill-

oln'from their Matters: ”1nthat Aſſembly, the Biſhop of Fine Churches made

alotig diſcourſe;to {hew,thar hitherto nothing of worth had becne handled

inthe Councel;; that they-hdd'vaincly'dilputed of points of doQrine; which

did'the heretiques ho good, who were reſolued not to change their opinion,

nor the Catholiques, who ate ſufficiently perſwaded already, rhar, for refors

mation; nothing hath beene-propoſcd 'but things of no moment; 'vf Nora-

ries, Receivers, and ſuch like; that it did plaincly appeare, that the Legares

would makethe next Sefſion- according ro'the [ame'iſtile, and afterwards
ſpefid'the timein/diſpures, deciding of Do&trincs, making Canohs,of Order,
Marriage, or forme other fleight marcer, roattoyd, as they haue done the ſub-

ſtahriall points of reformation. "And, by theſe and'6ther reaſons, well am-

plificd, he perſwaded the Ambaſſadours to ioynetbgether,and to goeto the

Legats, and defire that for thatSeflion they would'omit tofpeak'sfthe lacra- -

ments, of doQtrines, or 'Ganons, becauſe'it was now titne to thitike ypon a
good reformation, to rake awyſo great abuſes; ts eorret bad thirttiers, and
ro labour that the Councell may norbee viiftuirfull.” The Spaniſh Secrerary
would notafſenr. For his King, deſiring that the contmmnarion ſhould 'beeide-
clared inthe end of the Councel, teareheefhothfpretudice him{glfe; it the
manner of proceeding, which 'was'to handle chedoErine and reformation
together, ſhould be changed, becauſe thar alreration might bee v{td for an ar:
gumetr that irwasanew'Couricel. | The Ambaſſiddur'of Portiigal; bauing
made along vneoncludingſpecth, ro ſhew-he deſired a reformation; bur vp-
onmore pleaſing termes,'tetired from thecompany.” The SuuſſEſceing the

exam ples

LY XUM

Ss * -———_— —_ a __ WF - —o— =. < wwe pugad®— © 1 _ Ss tt a. a _—— RE Ee I II mn, ——e RC «hs its dou :
[ 0 bo 4 - *% + "Ko —
> c . pL «, % \ Ty
TB. 6 ance 7
. » .
— _ - = __— —— Fc. A ah , _ —

examples of choſtrive andthir che Yencititiwerenor | preferir, featirip'ts' ITY

mt _ FO TEY . . $4 *cy. + aft 7 a 4 v0 Ct So WY 8 ; , —_——
commiran'crrour,faid; itwere good to' confiderfic agzitle , befotc'they re- {>>
ſolucd, * Allthe others were reſoluterogoe,! #3 0) Þ Hs 0 10 142" ElnSteas”

Lakjac(by conſent? ſpake for them all /Fayhg, Thef Were ſetit by their Fran
| pl
oa JED
tiperfluons,itiabſenccof rhoſe who doe L-/a to
impugneir, butby raking agood; holy, and abſolut* refofinatioh'Sfman- Fm ©

Princes:to afliſt and fauourtheCbuncell, andtoprocure thatthe proceeding
ſhould bee perrinerit; nor by pan of do@Qrme'; whereoFnbne of them;
being Catholikes,dot doubr,;ant is (a

ners. Now, becauſe, norwithſtanding all theit remohſtjances, they ſaw

they wottlddetermine woe we poinrsof cotiteducrſed-do&titic, and tongs

thereformation bur ſlightly,he prayed them to/thange their purp6ſe; andts
employ the next Scflion'in reformarion'onely , pre poſing more-impbrratie
an adcalfity Arguments then thoſe whereof hitherto they'had ſpoken,

The Legates anfwered in the vfuall forme ;' Thatthe deſire of the Pope arſe Theinſwert

theirs was to doc the ſeruicc of God), procure theFvod of the'Church, and
fatisficand grarificall Princes; bur yer thar i was not connehientto breaks
the order always obſetuedinthe Councell ro handle doQritieand refottna-
tion together ; rhat rhe thirigs alteady dotic wete bur a beginining ;char they
had a good intention'ro'doe better; that chey'Wwould molt readily' tecejuc
the Articles which the Ambaſſadonrs would propoſe ; thatthey matuclled:
that the Articles determined at Poiſi in France" wete nior lent'to the Pope;
who wouldhaue approued then, "Lanſacreplicd, that the Pope hauing re-
ferred all matters concerning Religion 'to the Councell; the French Prelates;
when they came , would propoſe both thofe and many other'things, -' The
Legats anſwered they ſhould be welcome, and willingly heard; bur chatthoy
ought nor for that cauſe to deferre the Sefltonintegardthat nothing ſhould!
bee handledin itin preiudice of their propoſitions ; tharmoſt of the Fathers
were reſolued the Seflion ſhould bee held; that-it was'dangerous: ro'pine'
chem diltaſte, and rharit they expected in Trent, with gredt $i{tommoditie,”
thoſe who litted artheit cafe, and deferred theirtommitig whichthey promi-
ſed, it was nor firro diſcontent them 'mote by waking theniremaine idle;
This cunning perſwalton being nist fironglyoppoled by che Ammbaſſadbrs>
they held the-Congregation, andfranied the Decrees; which being eftablic
ſhed , when they camero appoint therimne anFthetrarref T6rthe neut' Se.)
on, Granatacounlelfe4 them co prolong the tirhe!That the Ffeiich-tnitn; ahd
Polonians might have ſpice, norondy toons, Bir toinf6tnit thetnichies.
and chat theywwould hotþroccedeto'a preciſe deelatation 6fthiit which was
robe handled; bur ſtandvpon thegenerall; as formerly they had done ;/and
refolue according 'tovccarrences:->FotTo manypetfonsbeetig-rocome;' it
could notbceburthar they would bring ſome"tiew tiiatiers; ' which 'trtght
cauſe new*determinations..” This ofiitiion was followedby the'Spatiatds,
and many others,andiw$like ro Hauc bectic genetallyapprocucd! Bur it Be?
ing noyſed;that the Popes abſolitecommandetitnt wis'come, tharthie
Scfhion ſhould'nor be tefetred abouctivo mioticihs:and thit the Sgcriments

of Order and Marriage Thoald bee hatrdled rogethet}the Papalits wer&9hs ."*
duced toperfivade t at the time-rifighe nor bee lonvedatd tHat oth +

thoſe Sacrattivits mightbediſcuſſe(9"Phe LegivesTewed@ they were forced

hed ro

-

rv
ar 4

\ of the Legats.

=
. —

et.

LA ad th.

WF ——  ————— —— wm—_—_ ———— c—

GO ERR,  rmmeem——_s I HETIITENY Prep fomtom——s on
— <a | T he Haſtorie of. ....... L 18.6;
_ xG) |

1562. tomakethe Deercein conformigic heereof., Bur there were two other true

{<> caulgs of it ; the ons the quicke diſpatch: of, the Councell, becauſe rhey ho-

Fin». ped, by ſo doing , tofinilhall inchar Seſſion alone , the other, thatrhe Spani- .

Euzaper. ards and ochcr.tauqurers of the reformation, might nor hauc time, becitg

Pagite 4 buſted in marters of faith , co handlcany,rhing of importance; and: particu-

—— larly, thai chey.might be hindered ro png ,or infilt ypon Reſidence. AE

---*- " rerthatthis point was cltabliſhed ,all che Decrees becing read together, new

- *.-- -compagictions ywcrerailcd, beſides the yſuall contentions , which the Legats

could. hardly ſipppe with faire/yyords. The Congregation laſted ynrill rwo

hpureswirhin night, with, ſmall (acisfa&tion of the parties, and/ſcandall of

hanglt men..In the cndall was relolucd; but by the greater part only, which
did a6 much exeecd in aumberthole who contradicted. FE

The Sellion, 11 Pac ſeugntecngh of Seprember, thegay appointed for the Seſſion, beeing

----. .-- eamethe Lepars Ambaſſadors;and 1 80:Prelars went to the Church, with the

_**  "wiuallceremonigg; and after prayers made intimeof the Maſse , the Biſhop

of; Ventimiglia preached : who, with an Epiſcopall and Scnatorious grauitic,

viing the comparilpn berweene ciuill badiesand naturall;fhewed how mon-

{trous aSynod would be, if ithad no head; he ſhewed the officepf it, inma-

kingan influenceof-vertues into all che members,and.the thankefulneſſe and

ducty.pfchele, in. hauing more carc of icthen of themſclues, expaſing them-

{clucesallo ro the defence of-ic; heelaid that the chicfe. fault of an hercrique,

according to Saint Pant, was., that hee. doth-not acknowledge anhcad , on -

which-the connexion of the whelce.body.docth depend ; hee added, in few

words, that C.4-R 1,5 T was the inuiſible. Head of the Church, but in many,

TL TT”

332 :411448 CON-
crningev*  Abdifth Patriazen of. Muzale, in 4ſyria,beyond Eupbrates,was come to Rome,
Chiiſtians. WW

Are confuted
by the Port«-

z<l Amballa- 117 of March,vvas readyin which hee ſwore to mainraige the fauh otzhehg;
"by Charchof Rove, promiſipgto approourand harpyhigb is did:

C33

Ls. 6. Conncellof the Trent. "593 =

_—_—w

approue and condemne ,; and to teach the ſame re-rhe Metropolitans and Bi- 1362.
ſhops ſubic& vnro him.” Afterwards his letters, directed tothe Synodegwere > \
read, in which hee excuſed hisnot comming tothe Councel,by reaſon 'of the tuvmans;
length of the journey, and prayed them, that whenit wasended, the Decrees Enamra,
thereof might beſentynto him, which he promiſed he wonld cauſe to be ful. $*43tn? 5:

ly obſcrued; The fame things had been read in the firſt Congregation, bur —-v—,
not regarded. The Portugals proteſtation made men conſider diuers abſur-

ditics inthar narration, and there wasa whiſpering , and the Portugall Pre-

lates begatito ſpeake. But the Speaker, by order of the Legates, told chem,

that this ſhould be ſpoken of in the Congregation.

Andprocccding in the actes of the Councell , the Maſſe-Bilhop read the Thc jorrine
doctrine of the Sacrifice ofthe Maſſe, diuided into nine heads; which contai- **44
nedinſumme: 1. That,for the imperfection of the Leuitical Prieſthood,
another Prieſt, according to the order of Melchiſedec , was neceſſary ; which
was CHR 1s TourLoRD :who, although he offercd himſelfe but once ypon
the Croſſe, to leaue in the Church a viſible Sacrifice, repreſenting that ke |
(roſse,and a plying the vertue thereof, declaring himſelfe ro be a Priclt after
the order of Melchizedec,offercd to G o Þ the Father his body and blood, vn-
derthe Bread and Wine , and gaucthem to his Apoſtles, commanding them
and their ſucceſſors to offer them. And this is that pure offering forerolde
by Malachie , which Saint Paul calleth the Table of the Lord, and was figu-
red by diuers Sacrifices , in the time of Nature, and of the Law. 2. Becauſe
the ſameCn Rr 1s Tis facrificed in the Maſſe without blood , who was facrifi-
ccd onthe Croſſe with blood, this ſacriticc'is propitiatory, and Go D, appea-
{cd with this offering, beſtowerh thegift of repentance, and amen all
linnes,the offering,and (by the Prieſts) the offerer becing the ſame, who for-
merly offcred himlclfevpon the Croſſe, onely ina diuers manner; ſo thar this
of the Maſſe dorl not derogate from that of the Croſſe, Yea, by this,the fruirs
of that arc re;eiued, which is offercd for the finnes, puniſhments, and neceſſt-
tics of che fairhfull,and alſofor the dead , not fullypurged. - 3. Andthough
ſome Maſſes bee celebrated in memory of the Saints, the ſacrifice is nor offe-
red tothem,burto Gop onely. 4. And, to offer him with reverence, the
Church hath, for many ages,inſtituted rhe Canon, free fromall errour , cotm-
polſedourt of the words of the Lox, tradition of the Apoſtles, and conſtitu-
tions of Popes, '\5. And, for thecdificationof the faithfull , che Church
hath inſtitured certaine Rites ro pronounce inthe Maſle, ſome things with a
lowe,and ſome with a loud voice , adding benedidtions, Np and
veltments by Apoſtolicall tradition. ' '6. And theSynodedocth nor con-
demncaspriuateand ynlawfull , bur doeth approouc thoſe Maſſes, in which
the Prieſt doeth communicate alone { which vie is common Yin regard the
prope docth communicare ſpiricually , and that they are celebrated by a
publique Miniſter, and for all the faithfull. 7. And the Church hah
commandedto put water into the wine, becauſe CaRr1$T hath done {o, and
from his fide didifſuc water and blood rogether , by which the vnion of the
people, ſignificd by the water , with CH «1 $T their head is repreſented,
8. : And howlocucr the people doc not receiue much.inſtruction by the

Maſſe, yet the Fathers hauc not thought it fir that ir ſhould beecelcbratcd 's
the

” —

tar"

— —_ ”

_—

————
, EE CET . "INES _
DE CCI Sth nent rot wr > SEO ore a os, 4 P
phe fl - 5 R's w w_ 4 m_ L .
b _- Me" Thos TO. , TY _

ens
_—_
o

_——

4 2 5 a
+0 MM omr= norm ==
%- 19 < + A __ mots os

Fo 4 : d
|
|

_
* —_

Ou OO Tn FEE 1 me Rats i;
EY ESA ET IE
Cor ia SEL
- o -
© 7
h
y 008
»

i.

574 The Hiftorie of L 18.6,

1562 the vulgar. Therefore retaining the vic of the Romane Church,thatthe peo»
>" plemay not bee deceiucd, the Priclts oughtro expound ſomething which is

- "BW &-

Faxenaxp. read init, clpccially ypon Holy dayes. 9. Andto condemne theerrours

Erazzras. Which arc ſpread againſt this doctrinc,it docth adde pine Canons.

panes 9- 1, Anathematizing him that ſhall ſay, that atrue and proper ſacrifice is
—— notoffcredto G o Dinthe Maſſe. 2. Orthar ſhall ſay that Cyzr1sT, b
—_ theſe wordes , Doe this in remembrance of mee , hath not inſtituted'Prieſts , nk
" commanded them to offer. 3. Or ſhallſay, that the Maſſe is a ſacrifice
onely of praylc, or thankefgiuing, or a bare commemoration of the ſacrifice
of the Crdſſe, and not propitiatory, and that ir doeth helpe onely him thar
docthrecciucit, and ought not to bee offered for the Huing and the dead, for
ſinnes,puniſhments , facisfaCtions, and other neceſſities. 4. Orſhall ſay,
that the ſacrifice ofthe Maſſe docth derogate from that of the Croſſe. 5. Or
that it is a deceit to celebrate Maſſes in honour of Saints. 6. Or thaterrors
are contained in the Canon of the Maſſe. 7. Orthat the ceremonies, veſt-
ments, or externall {ignes vied in the Maſe, are rather incitements to vngod-
lineſſe,then offices of pictic. 8. Or thar the Maſſes, in which the Prieſt a-
lonedoeth communicate, are volawfull. 9g. Or ſhall condemne the Rite
of the Church of Rome, to {peake part of the Canon and the words of conſe-
cration with alow voyce ; or that the Maſſeought to be celebrated inthe vul-

gar, or that watcr ought norto bee mingled with the Wine.

Adecreecon- The Farhers aſſented torhe Decree, except onely to that particular , that

cernin? thea-

buſes ot the CHRIST did offer himſelte, which threeand twenty Biſhops did contradict:
my and ſome others {ayd, that, howlocuer they heldirto be truce, yerthey thoughr

not cither the rime orplace fit ro decree it. And there was ſome confuſion
in delivering their voyces , becauſe many ſpakeat once. The Archbiſhop of
Granata. began todiflent, who, hauing contradicted in the Congregations,
that heemightnot haue occaſion to doe the fame in Seſſion, determined ro
be abſent. Bur the Legats ſecing him not ar Maſſe,ſent to call him more then
once, and conſtrained him to come; which did more excite him to contra-
dict. Immediatly after another Decree was read for inſtruction of Biſhops,
concerning abules to be corrected in celebration of the Maſſes: And contai-
ned in ſubltance; That the Biſhops ought to forbid all things brought in by
auarice, irreucrence,or ſuperſtition. Itnamed particularly, for faults ofaua-
rice, bargaines for reward , that which is given for new Maſſes, importunate
exaCtion ofalmes : of irreucrence, the admitting to ſay Maſſe of vagabond
Priclts, vaknowen, and publique and notorious ſunners, Maſſes in priuate
houſes, & cucry where elſe outof the Churches and Oratories,iftheaſhiſtants
be not in an honeſt habit , the vſe of Muſicke in Churches, mixed withlaſci-
uious ſongs,all ſecularaCtions,profaneſpeeches,noiles, and ſcreeches; of ſus
perſtirion,to celcbrate our of due houres, with other ceremonies and prayers
then thoſe which arcallowed by the Church, and recciued by vſe, a derermi-
nate number of ſome Maſſes,and ofcandles. Ir ordained allo,thatthe people
ſhould bee admoniſhed to goe totheir Pariſh Churches, at the leaſt on Sun-
daycs and great = 9) CAMRDEEK thatthethings aforclayd are propoſed
to the Prelars, tharchey may prohibite and correc as Dclegars of the Apo-
ſtolique Sca,not oncly thoſe, butall that arcalikeynto them, |
The

— —_—

——_—

Lis. 6. the Conncellf Trent |

OOO EE

57

The dectce of reformation contained' 1 Heads: 1; That all the bDe- I $62.

-.<  - »

and ſuſtentation of the poore. 9 Thar the adminiſtrators of the Fabrique
ofany Church whatſocuer, Hoſpitall, Confraternity, almes of any Mountaine
of pictie, orany other pious place ; ſhall bee bound to giue'an arcountcuery
yecre tothe Biſhops , and, in caſe they bee obliged ro make an account to 0-
thers , the Biſhop ſhall beeioyned with them , without whom they ſhall nor
haue any diſcharge. 10 Thatthe Biſhops ſhall examine the Notaries, and
forbid them the vic of their office in piricuall matters. 11. Thar wholo-
eucr ſhall vſurpe the goods , rights, or emioluments of Churches , Bene-
fices, Mountaines of piety , or other pious places , whether hee bee Clerke,
or Laique, King or Emperour, ſhall remaine excommunicate,' vntill 4
fall reſticution or abſolution of the Pope; and, if hee bee Parron , hee
ſhall bee depriued of the right of Pattonage, and tlie clerke conſenting ſhall
be ſubie&t ro the ſame puniſhmeur,depriucd of allbenefices ; and vncapablc
of any more; Ra TROL
Aftet-

/
\

.

\

-

576 | The Hiſtone of \ TY L 13.6.

1562 Afﬀtcrwardsthe Decree forthe grant of the Cup was rad; of this —
">>? That che Synod having reſerucd to it [clte-rhe examination and dghnition of

Purvs. 4 . b * oY n
Frpn-xv two Articles , concerning thecommunion of the Cup, in the former Sel.

Emanrn; hon, hath now determined to deferre the whole bulineſle ro the Pope, who,
p22355.9 jnhis {iogular wiſcdome,may'do what he thinketh rofitable forthe Chriſti-
+, 1... an Common wealch,. andfor the good of thoſc who demand it... This De-
concerung CEC, A8.1t vas approoucd inth&.Congregations by the maior part onely,ſo it
©? - happenedinthe Seſſion, where, befade theſe who contradicted, becaule they
rhoughtthe Cup could not beegranted for any caulc; there were ſome who
required chatthe matter ſhould be deferred,and cxamined againe. T'o whom
the Speaker anlwered,in the nameof the Legats, that con{ideratiqn ſhould be
++... f hadof it. And finally the next Sefl1on was intimated forthe rwelfthof No-
the nexz >> yernber,tg determine concerning the Sacraments of Order and Matrimony,
] And the Synod wasdilmiſſcd,, atterthe viuall manner, great diſcourſes be-
tweene the Fathers about the Communion of the .Cup con tinuing ſtill.
Concerning which, ſome perhaps will be curious ro know, for whart cauſe
the Decree,laſt recited, was not put after that of the Maſſe, as the marter {ce-
meth ro require, 'butina place where it hath no connexion or likeneſſe with
A2:2mein the Articles preceding. He may knowrthar there wasa generall maximein
the Coon"! that Councell, that toeſtabliſhadecree of reformation a mater part of voyces
-pats yyas {ufficient,but that a Decree of faith could not be made,if a conſiderable
a:t did contradict, Therctore the Legats knowing that hardly more then
halfe would conſentto this of the Chalice, did reſolueto make itan Article
of reformation, and toplaceitthe laſt amongſt thole, ro thew plainely thar
they held itto be of that ranke. There were alſo many diſcourſes at thar
time, and ſomedaycs after, about the point decided, that Cygisr offered
himlſclfeip the Supper , ſome ſaying thar , in regard of thethteeand twenty
contradictors, it was not lawfully decided , and others anſwering that an
eight part could not bee calleda conſiderable, or notable part. There
were ſome alſo who maintained that the maxime_ had place oncly in the
Anathematiſmes, and in the ſubſtance of the doctrine, and nor in euery
clauſe whichis pur in for berter expreſſion, as this , which is not mentioned
in the Canons. ; h _

The Empcrours Ambaſſadours were very glad for the Decrce of the
Cup, beeing aſſured that his Maicſtic would more'cafily obrainc it of the
Pope, and'vpon more fauourable conditions, then it could haue beene ob-
rained inthe Councell, where, torthevaricty of opinions andintereſts, ic
is hard to make many to bee of one minde, though ina good and neccſ-
ſary matter. The greater part ouercommeth the better, and he thar oppo-
ſcth hath alwaycs the aduantage of him chat promotcch. And their hope
was thegrearter, becauſcthe Pope ſeemed before to haue fauoured their Peti-
tion, Bur cheEmperour had not the ſame opinion, aiming not to obraine

_ thecommunionof the Cup abſolutely, butto pacifiethepeopleof hisowne
States, and of Germanie, who beeing diltaſted with the Popes authoritic for
therhingspalt, could not reliſh any thing well that proceeded from him;
whereas if they had obtained this graft immcdiatly, trom the -Councell, ir
would hauc gwen them good ſatisfaction, and bred an opinion in chem, thar

they

TATE. + i 1 p = a
> . *” ACS As + -
: : 04 Fi - »
- ; - Þ;, ' 4 *,
4 . j 4 K
* " 7 _
F , & pe
[

> % -
02.4. a8 ,

PL

L1B.6, 2 the Countell of Trent, - - ©

chry might bauc obtained other requeſts which rheyeſteemed ; ſorhdrthis © 1565

motion becing [topped,and theinfected Miniſters caſleered, he did hopehe 5,7.
might hauc held them inche Cartholique Communiori, Hee ſaw, by former Finixixs.
expcrience,that the grant of Paul was 11ot well receiued ; and did morc hutt Erizanbre.
thengood; and , for this cauſe, hee did proſecute the inſtance to further $942t#

with che Pope, and declarcd the cauſe of it; Therefote wheti hee reteiued
' newes of the Decrecof the Councell, turnirig roſome Prelates who were
with him , hee ſaid, I have doneall[ canto ſave my people, riow looke you

vntoit, whom it docth more concerne.

But thoſe people which dcfircd and expected the fauour,, or;as they layd, orice
the reſtitution of that which was due yatothiem , were all diſtaſted that their «+*:

juſt requeſt having been treated on fixe moneths, preſented by the interce(-
{ions of ſo many , and fo grear Princes , and after, for better examination;
deferred and diſputed, and diſcuſſcd againe with ſuch contention, ſhould, in.
theend be referred to the Pope , which mighthaue becti as well donear the'
very firſt , withour looſing ſomuch time, ſo many perſwaſions,and fo great
paines. They fayd , the condition of Chriſtians was according to the Pro-
phecic of I/ayas , Fe ſendeth, and countermandeth, expefleth , and reexpeRech.
For the Pope, who was moucd firlt,referred that tothe Councel,which'now
the Councell remitteth ro him; and borh of them due mocke both Prints
and prople Some diſcourſed morc ſubſtantially; that the Sytiod had reſer-
ucd the definition of rwo Articles. Whether the cauſes which did furmerly
moueto takeaway the Cop , arc ſuch as that they oughtro make them perſc
vere in the ameprohibition ;and if nor, with what conditions it oughtto be
granted. Theformerbeing vndoubredly a marter not oP fact , bur of faith,
the Councell did confefle, by a neceſſary confequence,that it knew the cauſes
ro bee vnſufficicnt ; and would nor,for worldly reſpeds,make the declarari-
on. For ifthey had thoughc them ſufficient, they muſt needes perſeucrs in
the prohibition, ifany doubr had remained they ſhould haue proceededin
the cxamination, and oughr not to remit it,. but for the inſufficiencie of the
cauſes, Bur if they had madethe declaration negatiue ,thatis, that the cau-
ſes were not ſuch as that they ought to perſcuere, and referred tothe Popero'
doc ypon information,wh remained to bedone defaS», they _—_— auc
beenc excuſed. Neither canir bee fayd thatthis is preſuppoſed by the refe-
reace. For in the Decreeof this Seſſion, hauing repeated the two Articles;
they reſolued to referre the whole buſmeſſe to the Pope; and therefore nojx
preſuppoling any thing, 939 $4.2 © OS) =
Idocnot tinde, in the memorials which 1 hauefcene , that the Decree of
the ſacrifice did rayfe any martcrof diſcourſe. And'the cauſe perhaps was,
for tharthe words doe not'o cafily declaye the ſenſe, as contayning many
ſtrained Metaphors, which draw the mindes'of the Readers vnto divers con-
fiderations, who, when they arecome totheend, knownor what they haue
read. Onely concerning theprohibirion of the vulgar ronguc in' theMaſle,”
the Proteſtants ſayd ſomerhing. For it feetnedacontradiction,to fay, thar
the Maſſe docth containe much iinſtruQtion for the faithfull pope, and to,
approoucthat part ſhould bevetered with alowe voice, and wholly to forbid'
the yulgar tongue, onely commanding the Paltors rodeelare foinerhing a,
Ccc the

478 at -The Hiftory of * L1 B. 6;

1562 the pcople. Whereuntsſdmg anſwered well,thar, inthe Maſſe were fomeſe-
LN. crets hich oughtto be concealed from the people, which areyneapable; for
S 44 {2 . . 4

Fizpinazp. Which caulc they are ſpoken ſoftly,and in the Latine tongue; bur other things
Enzanzs. Which be of goodedification are commanded to be taughr. But this was op-
©a4r+.9 poſed two wayes ; one;that therefore this ſecond fort ought to bes frithe vul-
WAS gar;theother,becauſethey did nordiſtinguiſh the two forts. Forth Paſtors
being commanded todeclare,often,ſomething ofthat which is read,and con-

ccale the reſt, theſe rwo kindes being not diltinguithed , ſome of them may

miſtake for want of knowledge, and ſo abuſc the people. The Antiquaries

-did laugh azcheſediſcourles; becaule it is certaine that eucry tongue which

is nowbroughr into Arte, was formerly vulgar, in its owne Countrey ; and

that the Latin, vicd inthe Church, was many hundred yeeres; both'itn 1ralie,

and in-diucrs Colonies of the Romans,in diucrs Prouinces, the common lan-

| guage. And in the Romane Pontiticall there remainerh yet a forme of the
ordination of Readers in the Church,in which iris ſaid, that they muſt ſtudy

to reade diſtinctly and plainely,that the people may vaderſtand. But hethar
would know whar language is to be vied inthe Church, needeth only (with-;

out anymore difcourſc) reade the 14. Chapter of Saint Paul, in the firſt to the
Corinthjans, which will ſufficiemily informe him , though his minde be ne-

ucr ſo; much prepoſſeſſed with a contrary opinion. And hee that would

know what the mcaning of the Church was, and when and why the Court
madethis altcration , may obſerue, that Pope Jobnthecighth , having ſeucre-

ly reprehended the Morauians, for celebrating of the Maſle in the Slawonian
rongucand commanded them to doe fo no more, yet becing betterinformed
afterwazds, wrote 9 the yecre cight hundred cighty eight , ro Sſento-Pulero,

their King or Counte, alctrer, in which, not by way of grant, burof decla-

ration; he afirmeth thar it is not contrary ro faith and ſound dodtrine to ſay

Maſe, and other prayers in the Slauonian tongue , becauſc he that hath made

the. Hebrew language, Grecke, and Latine, and hath madeothers allo for his
glory,allcadging divers paſſages of the Scripture,and,in particular,the admo-

nitionof S.Paul ro the Corinthians. Onely he commanded that, for a grea-

ter decor in the Church,the Goſpel ſhould firlt be read in Latine,and after-

wards in.the Slauonian tongue ,as the vic already was in ſome places: Not-
withitanding hee gaue Jcauc tothe Count, and his Iudges, ro heare the Latin

Maſle if it pleaſed them better. To theſe things wee mult adde that which

Gregory the ſeuenth wrote to Yratiſlaus,of Babemia,iult rwo hundred yecres
aftcr,thathe could not permit the celebration of diuine Offices inthe Slauoni-

an tongue,and that it was nota good excule, to allcadge, that it was not for-

mcrly prolubired. For the Primitiye Churchhath difſembled many things,

which afterwards, Chriſtianitic heeing cſtablifhed , vpon exact examination,

haue beencorreated. And he commanded that Prince to oppoſe thepeople

a herein wirh all his forces. Which'things he that ſhall obſerue plainely, ſhall

ſce which were the ancient incorryptinſtitutions, and how corruptions be-

gan for worldly reſpects and intereſts. For when men beganto place hea-

ucn belowthe carth,good inſtitutions were publiſhed ro be corruprions,one-

p tolerated by antiquitic,and abulcs, broughtin afterwards, werecanonized
or perfect correions. |

by
Mz
1
I
4
:
:
: M4
tiH
F*
+".
7
$4
”*
£ $
F+ 1
13-26
's
&
o
»+
A
1178
- :
Th
3 *Ki
i-F
q:
Ts
4 :
'S
o
>.
bs
«gz
f
8
=
1H
a5

But

— _ — — — — ——— <II—=—

heComeell, of Tre: 4

— — * — Wy

_ _—'T © retutnetothe Deerees ofthe Councelll; 1 ie e6f the vOrmaticn
Fi (pleaſed many;; eanſideringitharmrirhes-paſttheBedleGalteult
lpoged co che whole: Church char is; Toll the ClrtthianvgPgnt Conprel f
gation; theadminiftrationwhercof wasdortimiuedes h& DER ORs, re baÞf ©

| ro.diltrihute them for the nafarenaneebf Miniſters, dew: HI IL
therpoore perſnoo, fatcduemionot children ; jor 8fpit cnc
priſpgges,and-atber workesofpibry; 1Notwichſthydmgithe
yotuhteyerreltrablys anroded! re eSepatateq ahFrokBory
andre wet as:they ploaſod:'>Pur afrerroard rhe abaſes Kota oe
Far.che people wasjnhiollyerciaded from wes be inhcgoodiVgnd
clſaltives beirightiradminittrarors: before; decli whos oy)
ofchem,, converting char:rogheir owhe ve; which was-dcRic
Poors; forholpitahtic , {chooles; and other Workss oP pierie: Od wore
world-hayinga longtime complained , and detvnded a"rehittiein es
ſome Laiques hauc, in ſameplaces \piouſly creQut other" Apia en q
Schoolds;&c. andappoinced Adminiſtrators * theEAity: _ Newh ewb
in this agg, demanding a remedy morccarneſtly, that Hg TEN :
Xcvllgpedby Prizſts, may berzfloredy/the Cone, H ' Read OF gr aintth
adcrandſbivii;and rettoring M gi ld Colledges;:Sehobh&? 4rd Sihk
places, of piety; as/ xwas' cxpeG&ted:yi barks _ 2 ti 75H meu SHA SR
nifhch Ars talero:wicipiectts alſo whichin havebcen' ieured GA ADs bY-
daigingtheſupcrmiendebciegfiBiſhops; which no/tmincan Uoitbeberth le
asirhach bin ameanesformerlyco tan '$d0ds delfifiited for e6oll'Wyetkes?
and toappropriate|chenrro>vtesinbr pious;'fo it will {in a very (Nort" tit el
produceche lame: (ens cones 'The Parliaments of Pinde( Sa
_ this _—_— and faid plainely ; the Synode had cyertded'thatt 2h rftoritfe:
medlingywyrih:the goods " Sechlare, it beeing cleerexthai _ df a pidij
wir (ine Na, row Prieft;; thari euery! Chiiſtier yy The bo
 to\ybaiigghd workblit pleaſerky without! 7 ing the Clerg ni |
lawes taertin x , othirwiſerheLairpwoul bee' merranlunah; iPrb :
mighe dac-io goodbarwhar. pleaſed the Prieſts,” þ /1
Ie A r ticles} by:which powcr 1oBliqoe/piveiſts ha Cv
ments,bypreſcribinghow dodwhenthey fnily bee &
that Tettarhenrebayrcheid! from-the' Civill |#
they; may box.changecd' ) Andif dry/fay that a WR,
of riazure;rhoduthariry bb Pricſts will Beexthaded{hemore!: EE
tbajJavy Sdifpenlable nbriecyn'difperiſe bit Bet IRE RGHHe? hight!

placc inrhoCompianawcatrliyorhicariantas, Bir —__ v7 Ojrat'; |
muſt renicrtibercharSaint Pagtoeth ao den06IP ph = ;
of the Miniſters of Godi: Yarif'arly ©bifitibh wet ah
tine ,tothoir, Reclaevrany riuriddiftiort eonfeniing WIR. Kit Hifi
arfpicitudil kudgtsbur romporgi}//aridoughe «tet
ow Gonbotq butfroin ror i rg nite A os
and dVagonnt > ar yronate milifters of CHAP S922 ir ob of
the ComMmat-wealcty;ab chepare ealled by Ubiersrinits2% td era
he ea \Burchefifth Artick 2ifnrffdecet'sÞ was

Ccc z

TTY

(be. ; SA

'Ea pan ,

EL1ZA8L

PH x10.

ARLE

conrane ocher dalpeaſers, wthrhe ſuperincendengofelle ByBajs 5 PHH8TF Gn.

iTZz LIETEE »

$570
je*

"03 11991.

arty N1

my
Q

- "vom ' The Hittory of

m_ p. 6)

'1562 noleſſe noted. Foritis plainc,that,in ancient rimes, cucry diſpenſation was
AAA adminiſtred by the Paſtors in their ſcucrall Churches,and thatafrerwardsin
Pivs 4 : EF | . | .
Fzxomivo ſuccelle the. Popes reſcrucd to themſclues the molt principall things; which
Emma. o0c might.ſay was done, that the moſt importantmatters might nor bee
| Cranuns 9, ed by vaſufficientperſons, howſocuer the reaſon formerly allexdged
Pritiy 3. manag Y P k M j

SL tothe contrary by the Biſhop of Five Churches ſecmerh very ſtrong. But
now. the Councell decreeing that diſpcnſations ſhall bee commitrred to the
Ordinaries ,to whom they ſhould op aetion did ccaſe, one may
demaund. to what cnd power is taken from any perſon, to bee giuen co the
lamcagaive2- Iris plainerbat,by reſcruing diſpenlationg,nothing was meant

i} Rome, bur onely thattheir Bulls might bce-vrrered;/becauſe this becing

.thcy chinke it better the worke ſhould be executed by him char ſhould
done it, if hec had not been forbid, then by any other. Divers other
oppolitions were made, by thoſe who more willingly cenſure the aQtionsof

others, when they procecedefrom eminent perfons; which becauſe they bee

of nogreat moment , arenot worthy of an hiſtory, - . - Bly |

+.\. The Pope bceing aduiſed of.the holding of the Scſfion , and of that

which happened in ir, was very glad , as dcliuercd fromthe feare hee appre-

hengded ,rthar., in the contention about the Cup, his authoritywould bee

drawen into diſputation gand becauſe this way of compoling differences, by

referring, them vnto him , was opencd , hee hoped the like might bee done

in the Article offre{idence, or inany other that ſhould be controuerſed : by

which mcancsthe Councell would be ended quickly. Brft hee foreſaw rwo
cauſes which might croſle his deſſeigne ; one, the comming of the Card, of

= Lorraine with the French Biſhops, which did muct»trouble him, eſpecially in
rloeero' Tegard of the vaſt thoughts of that Prelat,muchcontrary totheaffaires of the
martome  Papacie, ſo incorporated in hinj,thar he was nor able to conceale them; for
Councell. yyhich hee ſaw no remedie , but by making the Italians fo farre cxcecde the
Pltramontans , that in, their yoyces they ſhould not paſle fora conſiderable
number., Thercforc he continually lollicited all the Biſhops, whether riru-

lar, or others who had renounced, to goc to Trent, offering tobearetheir
charges, . and loading them with promiſes.: Hee thought alfo'to ſend a

number of Abbats, as had becnedane infome Councds.'' Bur becing adui-

{cd berrcr, he chought ir fic not to ſhew ſomuch affcttion, nor toproucke

ethers to doc the like; 'Heefearcd another: erofle in regard of the purpoſes
which hc had diſcouercd in all Princes to hold che Councell open with do:

ing of nothing;inthe Emperour,to gratifie the Durchmen and to gainethcir
fauourinthecletion of his ſonne r& be King ,of the Romans, intheFrench

King, to worke his will with the ſame men,and with the Hugonors;He con-

{idered much of the Congregation of the Ambaſſadoins, whichſeemed to

be a Councell of Seculars inthe middelt of that of the Biſhops; thinking thae

the Congregations of the Prelates would bee dangerous, withourthepre-

HALL on 2 GAG of the Legates to keepe them 1n order; and therefore;

thatthe Ambaſſadours much morc, might handle things preiudiciall ; and

that there was danger.f they conginucd, that they mighebribginfame' Pre:

late, in regard there were Eccleſialtiques amongſt them;) and fowielreence,
yadcr the nameofliberry. In this perplexicy hee conctiued hopebecaule he

b. 5 6h . "Suſ | {aw

SS «@

L 1s. 6. | the Councell of Trent. y 531.

ſawrthe greater part of the Ambaſſadours oppolc the propoſitions, and that + x 56L

the French King,who hauing no Prelats colild preuaile bur little. Notwith- Fzxvman'

itanding he thoughrfic ro ſollicite the concluſion of the Councell, andto £5,557

none were combined bur onely the Ambaſſadoursot the Emperour, and of LAN

CHARLES. 9.

cheriſhchediuiſfion which heeſawamongſt the Ambaſſadours. Therefore env s

he wrot immediatly thatchey ſhould hold Congregations often, and digeſt; —.

and put in order the matters quickly. And becauſe to giue one thankes,doth
oblige him to perſeuere,he commanded that rhe Ambaſſadors of Porragall, &
of the Suiſſes,and che Secretary of the Marquiſle of Feſcara, ſhould be com-
mended, and heartily thanked , on his part, forrefuſing to conſcar with o-

| thers to an impertinent propoſition. Hee cauſed rhankes to begiuen to the

Venctians , and Florentine, forthe good incentionthey ſhewed in denying
ro cometo the Congregation , praying them not to refuſe to ceme hereafter
if they were called, becauſe he knew their prokunuy would cucr be ſeruiceable
ro the Apoſtolique Sca,, and hinder the bad deſleignes of others. Neither
was his Holineſlc deceiued in his opinion. Forit madethem all fay , that
they had done fo, becauſe in thoſetimes,the ſeruice of God did require
that the Popes authoritie ſhould bee defended, reſoluing to per-
ſcucre in that relolution. And they profeſſed they were
more obliged by the courteous thankes of his
Holincſle for doing chat,to whichtheir

ducty did bind them.
(3

Sk DO b -
1 ING \ , 1 4 > ok
a4 4 #; A _ _ 4 ». F *
j of CIOS MN 1-2 +
. Pp * " by /
Aqp, | T1V/ A&A
WE, oV. .V AY, .
*K\\f! , &>: 0 J\ / C3 = w_ - "WS,
\ WW) LEY */ PUNE i a
- E217 1] PENN DS; .
P ary 4
w_ p _ , fa CY 2 ” 4
<> JOE :
/N / Id
" \ A W \
W | lf

RAR”

: FI
»

py, +

-
. OS DAE op pt or. © bn
C
><
oa,
A
*
4 , » :
ww way - *% %
= -
*
"
:
" = * -y .
_, =
-
; ,
. =_ " . k
» I
_-
-
”
-
.
-
®
-
|
| :
*
- "1 4
6 -
4 —— k / ,
#
;
= hs . -
- %
,
bl + #
”
x ”
[0 =
% .
* $
”
* .
-
F " =
. -
»
=
; / "_ - d . _ - %
Fe . * * [1 _ '®> A k i
Y way - - k.
» ' 4 = _ a} - pu « * n y
"7 , - _ \ hh
% , E . - - = '
- . ol © an *
» - \ * _— .
; . %
73
bo ,
oF -
by p
= -
+ 4 + |
x
v4 « _ 0
-
$2. .
% - . , ,
7 = .
” %
% - - >
7 os
k
_ 4 - _ % 4 . m——_— . "
ob . a } " X
5 a . & e hy
: k hoe noe. ng 7 ; gh |
. . s 6. —_— » L- ” as
” © 4 %
8 - * —_
þ 2 \
3 > -
by 5 | a
' * ” - . -
* -
I L *
.
»4 k
- # |
w . þ -m— a

© * % —
- £ wa w od,
_
”
' . O F
: i P ; F a ; —
ay
——_ *
. 4 j
-
- . Y G } »
%
- .
n
. 6s
2
'
- =
bo -
. | . : |
” . "2% ,
-. 4 = - - * 4 it
- = ; a
+ +». PR Us % , 6 1& *.
# -
. " * 4
oF 4 4 —__ A

oo

AY -

bench ti gets. I er er Oe

F, Ge 4
4 Y - a. G 4 — =
. <4 RIPE 4 ©, Te $A OE Pn
p 4 0 SI TOO
0 OS OS . pt 49 - "ao bs b .

a, Fa un N 4

$# SS343-

#3 os $1 tl ; 4 , ,
' $5
. ;f s ©» :
4 . : . JUL [ | ? h 1 -
£
« 3z 1.” : Pl ! - > *., 2% * :, 4 3 4 « 4 ry :
- > 4 -
Lay : :$: 8 ' p , if % :
- ” ” 4 c , - -

; 4A 4
, *Yh TOATY. vs 5. £
Ss : - SS * % -W 77S
»
: .
*% ,
A
* F -
; :

_ OF THE-HISTORY OF

THE COVNCELL OF
. TRENT:

—— ———  --

- -
PT; 4 .
-

wy "IS

—_. - - -— <w_—

n—p_—_ lc cutomcot thoſe who write Hiſtorics is,
bY ; bl He

co propolc,in the beginning, a modell of what

2 they meane to handle... Which I haue thoughe

J=——7q fic ro deferre vntill this place, making it an ab-

— T

- — =
Sa ILY”
[ %  -
T _—

| defſeigne of that which is to follow; Hauing
| -—>}| rclolucd crogiuerothememorials,which | had.
{X=<| collectcd , fome forme, which might not cx-

Ng B49 E WS M1; cecd my power, and yet beſt befit the marter,

which hauc hapned amongſt Chriſtians in this world, ot perhaps will hap-
pen hercafter, this is the molt principall, and chat moſtmen arc defirousro
know whatſocuer doth belong to that which they doe elteeme,cuen thelcaſt
things ofall. ThercforeI chought firſt thatthe forme. of a Diaric would
belt agree to this ſubic&t. But two oppoſitions did croſfe niinc opinion :
One, that that forme could not'befit the occurrences of twenty nine yeeres,
ſpent in makicg preparation for the birth of this Councetl ,norof thefourc-
recae yeeres which paſſed while it ſlept, it not Þeeing knowen whether it
wercaliuc or dead. Another,that all the, caatter which a continuate Diaric
doth require,could nor voſlibl y be found. Thercforc,fitting the forme to the.
matter,as naturedorh,northe matter ro the forme, as the-Schooles;l.choughe.
it notablurd to write the preparatory and interconciliary times by way of
Annals, and in thoſe of che celebration to makea Diarie of the occurrences.
of tholedaycs, the knowledgewhercof I was able coattaine ; hoping that
whoſocuer (hall reade this Treatiſe , will excuſe the omiſſion ofchole which
could notbeknowen, , For ifof things, the intire memorie of which choſe
who hauciatcreſt doc labour by,all meanes, to preſerue, often times a great
part is quickly loſt, how much more will ic happen in. this, which'many

rat of the which is related already, and a.

I conſidered , that , of all che negotiations.

ARIES 2.

* PutLzPi 2.

The forme of
this Hiſtoty.

The Hiſtorie of :
"1968 men of oreat place, and exaCt.iudgement , haue vicdall diligence, amd {pa-

cd no-paines whollyzo conceale. Ir is aucrbat matters of great. yeight
ben

Pirvs aq.

| Hmomac.:oughr rebeeheld ina myſtetyzwhen it is forthe commphgogd;
EcrranarmiIf Lek damoific one, and HE w mage is rio maruaile if men who hauc

Canna 9. comtary ends, docpro HORS Thecommonaindfa

Aye. ſayin ofthe Lawyery J þ his cauſe ora ie or Le.
bour&lyto auoydiabt as-Who ſeckoth, Faine. /For thele cauſes this
Treatift of tnine' lifeguzittfe of Natrarion ; antHowbeir

I might ſay , thatas much might bce found in ſome famous Writer, yet this
ſhall not bee my defence , bur this, +tharifc others haue auoyded it, they
hauc not written the Hiſtory of the Gta P 11 ary of ther like

ns. a
The petition " : FAS) C-A.1 © = £ i FAR D Met

of the French
inlia e. cfcrring of

Auballdors. [otters from their King cha ould
it. Wherefore thought aphopf s pall, carhe th the! watt ahd rold

them they had a new Fommitliop-trom theFapg to make, requelt, thatthey
would labour in the reformation, and, for} points of f x,20-M , Expect the
comming of his Prelares ; ; adding that, if the marter of Order and Muatrimonie
were diſputed by the Diuines, and handled by the Prelates , no more points
of do&rine would remaine; Far the conmniing of the EI: Se” would bee
ro noPurpole. Wherefore their requeſtwas; thatthcy would be pleaſed to
dcferrethem voull the'end of Of6ber, imploying themſelucs, in themeane
ſpace, inthe matier of reformation, orone day inthat, and another ,in mar-
terof dorive, not defetririg 4s they had done, all the matter ofreformati-
on vntll che latt dayes inmcdiztli ly before the cell on, (othat thereſ{carce re-
© 7 WHOM mainedrime ſo much avtofcerheArricles; much eſe to conſult ypon them,
Lezaresan- The Legares anf wered:that their propoſiti tons did delire to be weighed well,
PT att they would becaretull ro giue them all poſhbleſatisfation;demans«
ding acopic of their inſtructions, that they might refolue the ben The
Ambaſſ:dours Jaue them a writing,of this tenour: Tharthe King having
ſeene the Decrees of thetixteench ot July,concerning the Communibii Sub p
traque ;and'deferringawo Articles in the ſame matter, and thoſe propoſed
in the Congregations cohcerning the ſacrifice of rhe Maſſe, howlocuecr hee
commendcth that which ts done;yet he catthor conceale that which is ger.c-
rally poker, chatis, thatthe marrer of diſcipline and' manners is entiet' quite
omitred, of Nendetl yhandled, and the controuerled points in Religion, in
which all the Fathers doc mY haſtily determined. - Which although hee!
thinketh to bee falſe ;yet thee deb reth chat the propof: itions of His Atibaſla |
dours may bee ex pounded}; as neceſfary,to prouide forthe goodof Chriſten-/
dome, and the calamiticsof his Kingdome. And hauing found; by expert-'
ence; that neither ſcucrity nor: ticdetation hath beene able to reduce thoſe
who! arc {c parated' from the Church , hee cough firto have recourſe co the
Generall Councell ; which hee hath obraintd MG, the Pope; that tice was fory?
that thetumults of France did hinder the cothitning © of his'Prelates ;thar hee
faw well that the conſtancieand rigour, in continuing the formebegatne by
the Legars and Biſhops , was nor fir fo recotbile peace, and makean vnity in
theChurch ; thathisdefire was, rhat nothing might beedoneroaliene the.
minds

Fr Sees 5 o_

—_—— © —_ —_ ——_

Lis. 7. the Conncell of Trens. *
mindes of the aduerfaries,now inthe begining of the Councell, bur thac 4 566

they may bee inuited, and,in caſe they comegereiuedaschildren withallhu- {7
- manitic, hoping that byrhis mcancs, they will ſufferthemſeluesrobertaught, Faromand:

and brought backo ro the boſome of the Church: And becauſe'/all tharare 8:maneys,
in Trent doe profcfſcthe ſame Religion,and neithetcannor will make Joubr Fans:
of any partthercof;bee thinkerh the diſputarion'and ce
ligion co bee noronely ſuperfluous, bur imperrinentforthe. iques,and
a cauſe ro ſeparate the aducrſaries the more. For heethatchinkerh chey will
recciuetheDecrees of the Councell in which they hauc not aſliſted, doeh
not know them well ; neither will any thing bee donebythiis meanes, bur ar-
guments miniſtred of writing more Bookes. Thereforethe King thinkerh
it berrerto omit thematterof Religion, 'yntill the otherof Reformarion'bet
well ſctin order : | and that. this is the: ſcope at which citery one thult ayme,
that the Councell, which now is great, and will bee greater by che comming
of rhe Frenchmen ;-may.produce fruit. - Afterwards:the King 'demanderh, +
thatinregard'of theabſcnce of his Biſhops, the next Seſſhon may bee pur off -
yntillthe cad of Oober, orthe publication of the Decrces deferred, or a
nev ofder cxpedted from tho Pope, to whom hee hath writcenylabouring'in
the meane while in rhe marter of Reformation. And becauſe he ynderſtars

gdeth char the ancicarlibernie of Councels is notobſerued , char Kings and

Princes,or their Ambaſſadours may declare theneceſlities of their States, his
Maicſtie demandeth that their authoritic may bee preſcrued, and all reuoked
which hath beendoncto the contraty. |

The fame daythe Emperours Ambafladours cametotheLegats;, FEQUI- The peririon
ring tharthe Articles ſencby his Maicitic, and preſented by them, might bee 99 acute”
propoſed, and wefe vety catneſt thar the points of dodrine might bre defers *4=-
red vntill che comiming of the Frenchmen; and, that the reformation way
bee ſeruiceable noronely forthe whole Church, burforthe Church of cuery
particular Kingdame, theirdefirewas that two-of euery Nation might bee
depurcd , to purthem in mindeof cliat which did'deferue to bee propofed,
and iſcalſed in Counccll. The Legati#hade a common: anfwereto them
both, that they could naralter,withourgtear preiudice, theorderfer downe;
which wasto handle DoQrineand Reforination borhtogethet, andyif they
ſhould, that other Princes would oppoſe ; but, to:content them, they would
ordaine that the.Diuines and) Prelates ſhould examine: che: matter of Order
encly,and aftcrwards handle ſome poynes of Reformation gobſeruing ſtill

_ the r vſe, tharcueryone;of w tionſocucr maypurcherithe

Legats, in minde\ of whatrhey thinke neceſſary, profitablejor connenient;

which isa greater liberty then ro haue wo depured for eucty nation1and af:

tcrwards they would trearof! Matrimonie, The Ambaſſadours being nor one

jote contented,the Legars ſentall their demandsronbe Pope (uni 101 1502
The-Frenchineh complained to all fic of thisauſtericie;avdfortharithe  '-

Pope had larchydammainded orherPrelits rogoerothe Couneelt;;charkes -
mmirha vicendin muckbir onificlrehe Papylit cheraſelues did dockilie ibyld
becdone ſd openly, and-inftriviienthenewes w of the commingof

the Erench-meng\defiringeobeſecured by a meior parr, yer ſoyas riorrohaue
it kaovene for what cauſe irwasdone: 'BurchePopedid of 0
521191Þ ccede

—— of re. Vl.

4

GTITT: flare of io Hare!

' #362. xcc&e(b openly; tharthe Cardinal] of Loraine _— know that his: attempts
(7x* 5 -vbuld/beimvaike, andforefolue not to corn, or thatthe Frenchinen might
Faxmmand. rake fombcoecalion. toamake the-Councell: diffoluc. Neither: wasizhe Po
Ereeazari. acl; ofclrivo pioidn;/buralb das Court, fearing ſomegreatptciudice by :
Ganann4- Qacdindls Wfrignenarhath howſocuer they: might nor{ucceeds (a King
> ww chcoooudfarcohopchary:;yer his comming:'ondy would; hinder,

prolong, autd:di{tuirboriefCoungell: i Ferran ro]di Lorain? , his: kinſemari,
ihuredis tourney volt bec of nomonientzand; of{mallrepurationto-hin-
delfe'y ii regard) hoowabld arriucatrerall was:detcrinince; and/Bizncheto,/a
familiar triend of cheGardinall of Armignicy who allo! had .creqie with: Lo-
flame, vwore as/muctorocticnyborh ; andrtho(Becrerdobot Seripande,; who
hal: tamitiacitioiad do Preſzdenr. Ferries toldehinrche Gn alt which
wasrhough ponenion from thePopeyior to naked: , AC
theleaſtso 2112 yd 193ihng 246 Ines bos 16917 74 viou fot dw 1.50100 20 34
The Arcidlcs ,c1>\Burthbircard ofalZagions of the Councclwas.oor annrs: wat for all
ot Wa$:'4 Fod cheArribles j-concerming the Sacrament of :Qrier werg proſcutly
my gtcn footch 2t9 be difptred by the Niuines rhe diſpuratits tledked and di-
ater ber toure radkes; cach of them being ii ap—o-Merckey
wetceighe.- i! 3:.:WhHether Order be:tracly bnd:properdy a Sacrament;/inſit-
tured by! Ent $T; oranhumaneinucthtibnzor Ritcgtonle Miniſtersef
the word obGow, auttebcbe Sacratnents 2c: 2241 Whether Order becrone Sa-
6rament.'ohcly }andiall; othersbee means 1and degrees ynto ÞPricfibood?
3- Whctherthere be an Hizrarchie iy theEarholiqueCbbrch;tonfilting of
- {Biſhops Pricfks;; ancbmber Orderi; of whertherall:Chriftians berPrivili, OT
” whether theivocatiby xavwtonſonr of che-pr6pidar fecularMaagilirarmbec ne-
. - oolſaty, orwherthcra Prit/Fnay. bxcomea Laitka?-- 427 Whether there bea
vidablc and-exicrnall Beid@bhedinabe now Teftament;anda: power'to conſlc-
crateand offerhe body and bload/of Currertiand roramir{nnes; orondy |
thebare Minutery ta preaengbeGoſpel, forhatthole whoptcachnatare mcg
Priefts?:.; 50) Wherhevhhb: holy Gholt is giubniand recetacd in ordination,
anda Character mprintd? i 66:Wherhct Zain, and dther cercihbrites,
benece{ary:ib conferring Order zor ſupcrfluoys;/orperpigious?! : 9:0 Whos
ther:Bilhops bee CneribuctaGriefin; |afid;haugipeculiarpower to:conhrme
aad.ordains , rand nar ear ang ng arcbtoughtinby!anyorhetgbtaocs
then Cinapicaliondination,ore tracMinilkers dfahe Wordand Sacraments?
B:/) WihawbrtaheBiſhapytalicdapdordained bythe Pope,bolawfulk6; whos
thiexthole bee wu Bilbeps wha conc inbyavgorber way then Canonical
indtaciond :Thc 23iotqhe moneb 5þe Congregations oftheiNiuipes pet
ubandetmnbeldavintioday ;andendedihe froond of) oben, Dwill;des
6954ing 1oiminn vc, beldte tholcopmianrontomnc remarkable
ther for lingularayot edncratietyaniongthamſolues;: 1 2, 115153009 *
arcdipurcd 2c{:[m che rfeGangrogatian! foune: Dillines bEale/ Þ. ops dpakiyalicedid all

inthe Con-
D@nder was a:kkcrametne, rpc tapas

gregitions, _—=—_ it atboning dba]
allyby clidoof: © 29 7 WP FUE

Yhemadition of: rar Faehtts; ;viwborrexpoſancaiDu!

pincs;,andaboge all; bycheCouncell'of Florexreagdingdothisreaton;ithat

the Ghurchyeould bebacontuliontit there wew=noh gouehwnohtrandolc:

1923 dicnce.

h— FY OY

Lrs. ”. the Councellof Treme

7

dicnce. Burt Friar Perer Sorowas copious , in ſhewing thar-thete were ſeuen 1562

.Orders,and cach properly a Sacrament, andall inſtitured by Cxzisr, ſaying,

> LE)
Pivs. 4.

it was neceſſary ro make a declaration herein , becauſe ſome Canoniſts ; pal- Frpmund
ſivg the limits of their profeflion,, haueadded rwomore, the firſt Tonſure, zones.

and the Biſhopricke ; which opinion may caule many orheretrorg of grea-

Cuantns; 9g.
Pa1tÞ, 2.

ter importance. Helikewiſcſhewed ar large;that Ca 1 s Thad whemhee —v—

was on carth , cxcrcifed all theſe Orders , oneafttranother; all whole life as
it was addreſſed tothe laſt-of theſe Sacraments, ' fo it is plaine,, «tharall che

others ſcrue oncly as a-ladder, to climbe vp to the higheſt z which is the
Prieſthood. f 1 | tb) aoaerlell
But Jerolamus *Brauus, a Dominican Friar, hauing proteſted thathce con-
ſtantly held that there wereſcucn Orders, and cachotthema Sacrament, and
thatthe vicof the Ehurch ought to be obſcrued, to proceed from the infe-
riour to the {upcriour, and ſo.to che Prieſthood, he added , that hee was norof
opinionthat (o particular a declaratio oughtro be made, in regard of the dit-
ference -betweent the Diuines, amonglt which one can hardly fiad woof
the ſame minde. For which cauſc (/ateran,in hisold age, wrote, that hethar
colle&crh the things taught bythe DoCtours, and in the auncientand ma-
derne Pontificals,, will fee agreat confuſion in all other Orders but Prieſthood.
The Maſjer of the Sentences maintayned , that Sub-deaconſhip and inferiour
Ord:rs, were inſtituted by the Church,, and the Scripture ſeemed to haue in-
ſtirured the Deaconſhip, as aminiltery of Tables , and not as one of the Altar.
The difference concerning inferiour Orders in the old Pontificals, where that
which is in oneis not in another, docth ſhew theyareSacramentall, and nor
Sacraments. Andrcafon doth lead vs hereunto. For the ations which one
ordaincd doth , may be done by one not ordained, and arcoftheſame yali-
ditic, cffe&,and perte&tion. Saint Bonanentare allo, though hee thinketh that
all ſeucnare Sacraments, yet he holdeth two other opinions to be probable .

one,thas onely Prieſthood is a Sacrament, and the inferiours, being imployed

about corporall things, asto open doores;reade Leſſons, light Tapers,/and
the like,dae not leemeto cxpreſle any celeſtiall marter,andare therefore one-'
ly diſpotitionsto *F-rieſtboed, The ſecond, that therthree holy Orders are $a-
craments,and,concerning the eomtmon ſaying, thar the inferiour are degrees!
rothe ſuperiour,Saint Thomas athrmeth , that inthe Primitiue Church many
were ordained Prieſtsimmediatly., withour paſſing; by the-inferiour Orders, |
and thatthe Churchdidordainethatrhis:paſfage Loold bemadefor humi-
liation Qnely. +-Itappearerh plaincly,inthe Aces of the Apolites; tharSainr
Matthias was immediaily ordayned! an Apoſtle}, and the ſeuen Deacons did
not paſle,by the Subrdrgronſhyb;; and the inferiour Orders. Paulinus ſaith of-
himſclfe , that, hauing'a purpoſe-ro applyhimlclfe rothe ſeruiceofG © Þ in;
the Clergie,he would,torhumijkation, paſſeby all Eccleſiaſticall degrees, be-
ginaing from the OFzarie ; butwhite hee was thinking to begin; becing yer a.
Laicke,the multitude rooke himby force'ia Barcelona on Chrittmas day;cas!
ricd him before the Biſhop , and cauſed him to be ordained Prieſt at the firſt ;-
which would not 'hauc beenedone if it had:notbeenc the vic in thoſe times.
Thereforethis Brauws concluded , thatthe Synod otwghr not topaſſs beyond:
thake things whichare agreed onby the Catholiques/pamb tharir was betcer=

to

|
/
f

[
">
"4

, 588

The Hiftorie of Li _

Cr Cr Wes

1562

>

Pers 4-

FanpINAanye

| ——

Elitienth,

to begin with the Order of Priefthosd, which would make a connexion be-
eweene this Seſſion and the'laſt , which handled the Sacrifices, and to paſſe:
from Prieſthood to Order in gencrall, nor delecnding to any particularitie, '

The Congregation being ended,and molt of che Prelates departed, Fine

Enann 9 "arches, with his Hurgariaus,and ſome Polonians,and Spaniards,raricdbe-
\— hinde; to whom he made a {peach , and ſayd,that the Empcrour, being freed
TheBibopof fraqmall ſuſpicion of warre; by the truce concluded with the Turke, tooke

Fowe Charche

s

ſpeech con»
cerning re-
formation,

Andis fecom-
dcd by che
Spang ids.

nothing ſo much to the heart as the reformation of the Church , which
would lurcly be effected, if fomeot the Prelates in the Councell would afliſt,
Thereforc he cxhorted and prayed them, for Gods ſake, and for the charicic
which cucry Chriſtian oweth to the Church , rhat they would notabandon
fo honeſt, iuſt , and profitable a caufc, rhar cucry one would pur downe in
writing what hee thought might be conſtituted forthe ſeruice of God, with-
outany reſpe&t ofman, norreforming one part, bur the whole body of the
Church, both in the head and in the members. Granate did ſecond hum,
(hewing the neceſſity and opportunity thercof, chanking the Biſhop of Fine
Churches for hisadmonition , and ſaid, they would confult amongſt them-
ſclues. Forthis cauſethe Spaniards, beiogaſſembled rogether, diſcourſed of
the neceeffitie of reformation , and the hope thereof, in regard of the Empe-
rours inclination, from which thcir King alſo , who was w:'oft pioully addi-
cd would not diſſcart,and the French Prelatcs, who would ſhortly betherc,
would vndoubredly promote and aſlilt che worke,in earneſt. They repearcd
diversabufcs , and ſhewed that the fountaine of chem all was the Court of
Rome, which is not oncly corrupt init (elfe, but the cauſe of deformation in
all Churches ;and particularly the viurpa'ionof the Epiſcopall authoritic,By
reſcruations, which if it-were not reſtored, and the Court depriucd of thac
which they haue taken from Biſhops, it would bec impoſſible the abuſes
ſhoul4 bce redrefſed. Granata confidered, that, ic becing neceſlary to lay a
good foundation for ſo noble a Fabrique , a way was open for them now
thatthey were to ſpeake of the Sacrament of Order, if it bee determined rhac
the authority of Bilkops is infticuced by Cn x 15T ; becauſc ic will follow
by conſequence, that it cannot bce diminiſhed ; by which meancs thar will
becreftorcd to: theBiſhops, which having been giuen them by Cu k15T,
hath by the ambition of athers , and their owne negligence, been ng way
from x ov «24 added, that it was fo much the more nccellary, be-
caule the Epiſcopall. authority. was brought co-nothing,, and the Order ere-

» Red ſuperiour to Biſhops, vnknowen tothe Church in former ages , thar is,

the Cardinals , who arthe firſt, wereeſtcemed in the number of Pricits, and
Deacans, and, aftcr the eenth age gs to exalt themfclucs abouctheir'de-
gree. Noewichſtanding they were {till accounted inferiour to Biſhops vn--
till the yeere: 12.00 {ance which rimethey haue ſo farreadvanced thericlues,
chatchey hold: Biſhops as ſcruants-in their houſes , and it will bee impol--
ſible to reforme the Church, vneill both of them bee reduced:/torheirdue
aCCsS. ” 4. TS ay | ; ; boy bs
P Theſe propoſtionsanddiſcourſes were heard withapplauſe; ſothatthey
relojued tocleet faxc of them , to pur in writing the things neceſlaryand fie,
as well forthe reformation in generall, as: particularly for this point of the

inſticu-

CATE FO ET

. I
_ inſticuciopof Bilhops, whence chey patpoſedto begin; Grattars, Tdſper ('or- ries *
nante, Archbilbop of Meſſina, the Bilthop of Stgowe, and Martin di Cardous, 4 47>

Bithop of | Tortoſa VVcre named ;'the laſt of which was exaſtwwhytheProicct AK ND

L187. the Councellof Frent.

——————  — —

_—
--

-— -
x
> 5

———

didnotprocced. For, bhauing fecret —_———— ; he EXCUF Etiribury,
{ed himlalfe , allcadging bis owne inſufhciencic; and rhe ynfirniffe of the $29ties.s
time; adding that Fiue £burches was not mooued withpittic, and ha tho of ——
ther cad then ra make vicof them, to conltraine the Pope; by meaties'ofthe -.
reformation; to-grant the vic of the Cup, wherein they had becne auecrſe.

And (eging they were diſpoſed to heare him', hee prevailed fo'much' with

them thatthey paſled no further for the preſent, butinterpoſed a delay. Not-
withltanding ic was not long deferred. For Grarata,”Braganga, MeſSma, and

S:gonia, hauing obtained audience of the Legates, deftred;thar they might

haandlc the Articles propoſed heretofore by Cardinall ( reſtentius inthis ſame
Councell, and concluded , though nor publiſhed, thatis., that the Biſhops

are inltitured by CHR1$sT,' and are ſuperiour to Prieftes ture dinind.

The Legares, aftcr they had conferred rogether, anſwered , thatthe Luthe-

rans hauiag afhrmcd thara Biſhop and a Priclt is the ſamething, it was firto

declare thata Biſhop is ſuperiour, but that it was nor neceſſary to ſay quoiure,

nor by whom a Bilhop is inſtituted, becauſe there is no controuerfie of it.
Granatareply:d thatthere was a comrouerſie, andthar if che Diuines did dil-

purcir, the neceſlity of deciding this point would be knowne. "The Legates

would not conſcnt by any meanes; and, after ſome few ſharpe words on

both {1des, the Spaniards departed withourhauingobrained any thing ; yer

rcfolucd till ro perſwade lome of the Diuines to bring this particular inro TheLegaes

wil not ſutter

tncdilcuſlions, and ro make mention of ir when they were to giuc voiccs in theink ruin
congregation. Bur the Papalins, vnderſtanding hereof, did cauſe it ro be pf mths
voyccd among|t the Diuines, rhat the Legates did forbid all ſpcach of thar
queſtion. | |

Bur ro.returne to the congregation, when the ſecond ranke ſpake , confi.
ſting of Diuincs and Canonilts, Thomas PaſSues, a Canon of Yalentta, ſaid,
thatall doubt made of the Ecclefiaſticall Hierarchie,did proceede from grofle
iznorance of antiquity, it being a thing moſt knowne thatin the Church the
people hath alwayes beenegouerned by the Clergie, and, inthe Clergie, the
iofcriours by the ſuperiours, vnnill all be reduced ynto one vniucrſall Refor,
which is the Pope of Rome. And hauing declared the propoſition atlarge,
he added that there was.no need to doe any thing hercin , bar to make hi
eructh appearc,by r&noouing the contrary crrours, which hauc bin broug he
in by the Schoolemen, whoſomcrimes, by roo much ſubriltic, doc make
plaine wy obſcure, _— the Canoniſts, who place the firſt ronſure,
and the Biſhopricke in the uumberof Orders. Ofthe latter he faid,ir ſeemed
ſtrange co him, how they could confeſle, that confirmation, ordination, and
ſo many other conſecrations doefo peculiarly belong vntoir , chat they can-
not poſſibly bee done by any cle, and yer deny irto bee an Order , -when as
they giue that nameto the keeping of the doore,, which may as well be done
by a Lay-man. For the firſt conſure, he hath cuer heard the Diuines ſay , that
a Sacrament isancxternall figne which ſignificth a ſpirituall grace, and that
the conſureis the f1gne,and the thing ſignified is the depuration to the _

| D dd ©

®

' 590 The Hiftory of & np 7

L—_—

— — << _—_ -

1562 of God; and therefore hee wondered why they would not baucirtobea Sa-
A crament, and the rather , becauſe one cntreth into the Clergie by it, and doth

Pivs 4

FERDINAND. participate of Eccleſiaſtical exewprions ; ſo that, if it were not inſtituted by
Eran CHRST,it could notbeſaid,that cicher Clergiſhip,or the exemption thereof
Cnanies 9+ yyercde inre Dinins; that it was plaine that the Flerarchie conliſterh in the Ec-
1 cleſiaſticall Orders, which is nothing bur an holy order of ſuperiors and infe-
cb org riors, which can neuer bee well ctabliſhed without making, as the Canonilts
rarcive, =doethe Tonſure the lowelt,and the Biſbepricke the higheſt; which being done
the Hierarchie is all cſtabliſhed, becauſe the firſt and laſt being giuen, thoſe of

the middle will neceſlarily follow, which cannot ſubſiſt withoutthe former.

Concerning theother partof the Article , they ſaid, it was very plaine by
the Canons, thar in the choyce of Biſhops and depuration of Prieſts, and
Dcacons,the oy of al ſorts was preſent, & gauc voice or approbation,but
this was bythe Popes tacit or expreſſe conſent ; becaule no Laicke can haue
authority in matters Eccleftaſticall, but by priuiledge from him. And this was
granted in thole times, becauſe the common people, and Grandiesalſo,were
deuout,and did,by this meancs, entertaine themſclues in ſpiritual things, and
ſhewcd more obcdicnce and reucrence to the Clergic, becing more ready to
irrich it with oblations and donations, which hath made the holy Church to
be 1n that (tare 1n which it now is. But ſince deuotion did ceaſe,the (eculars
haue aimed only at the v{urpation of the Church goods, & to placetheir ad-
herents1n the Clergic. And now the new Heretikes have made a deuiliſh in-
ucntio,ſaying, that was duceto the people which was granted by fauor which
3s one of the molt peltifcrous heref1es which hath cucrbin ſet on foor,becauſe
it dochdcltroy the Church, without which faith cannot ſtand. Heallcadged
many reaſons and congruities,to ſhew that the ordination ought tobe in the
powcronly of the Ordainer, which he confirmed by the Popes Decretals and
concluded in the end,that not only the Aiticle was to be condemned as here-
ticall,bur thar,the voice and confentof the people in ordinations being taken
away,foriult ana neceſlary reaſons,the Pontifical allo oughtro be corre&ted,
and thole places remoued which make mention thereof ; becauſe,ſolong as
they continue there,the heretikes wil make vſc of them, toproue that the aſ-

{iſtanccof the people is neceflary. He laid the places were many bur to recite
one,in the ordination of Pricts, the Biſhop ordaining faith, thar it hath been
conitiruted by the Fathers , not without cauſe, that the people ſhould have
voiccin theordination of the Rectors of thealtar, that they may be obedient
ro him whom they haue ordaincd , in regard of their cohſenting to his ordi-
nation. If this, andother Ritcs ſhall remaine, the heretikes will alwayes de-
tract from the Catholike Church, ſaying the ordinations now are bur ſha-
dowcs and {hewes,as Luther did wickedly lay.

Francis Forrier, a Dor.inican of Portugal, ſaid the Hierarchie of the Ca-
tholike Church,could not be doubted of, it being proucd by the Apoſtolicall
tradition, by teltimony of allantiquity, and by the continuall vie of che
Church. And howſbeucr the word bee not vicd by all, yerthe thing ſlig-
nificd hath cuerbecn in praftiſe. Dionyſus Arcopagita., hath madea proper

treatiſe of it, and the Nicen Councell hath approoucd it, and called it an an-
cicntcuſtome: andthart which hath been called ancicnt inthe begining of

the

Li B. 7» the:Councell of Trent. | | $91

the fourth age, mult noedes heirs originallfrutthe time'of the Apoltles. 1562
Oanely he chqughr.n nor fir to handle this payatioyacty-withrhe Sacrament £7.
of Order , howlocuer many of the Schoole-men doe: hahdleir jn' that: place, Fewmang.
pucting the Hierarchig-ig che ſuperiour and-inferiqur; Qrders ; a thing which ern,
cannot (} ub ieDctog.eerraioe that the Popes therkigheſt Hicrarch, 'and In:
that che Cardinals dofollow, & chen the Patriarchs;Primars, Arch-Biſhops, —V—
Bilhoos,Arch-Priclts, Arch-Deacons, and otherinfcriourdegrees vaderthe
Popc,as kicad. | And io omit the diſputation:-wherher theBilhopricke be an
0:der,icis gexrainethar the Arch-biſhoprike;Parriatk(kip,and Papacicarenor
Orders and doe lignific only ſuperiority and iuriſdiation ouerBiſhops.There-
forcche Hizrarchie conſifterh in iunfdicbion;atid the Councel of Niceplacerh
it.in that; when. it ſpeakech of che Biſhop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch,
Therctoreche handling of Hierardhie mult not be ioynad with that of Order,
for feare gf, giuing way to calumnie. 251 2 |
There was much yarictic inthe diſcuſſion of theſe Articles , thoſe of the
ſecond ranke returning to the former, and ſomediſputing that the degree of
a Biſhop was an Order, and others, that aboue Prieſthood , there was no-
thing bur Luriſdiction; ſome alleadging Saint Thomas, and ſome Saint Bo-
nauenture , and ſome becing of a middle opinion, that is, that itisan eminent
dignitie, or ofhce in the Order. The famous ſaying of 'Saint Hierom, andthe
authority of Saint Awtin were alleadged,who ſay x an che degreeof a Biſhop
hath b-cne molt ancient ; but yertan Ecclefiafticall Conſtiturion. Michael of
Mediza did'oppole, and fay, that the Catholique Church , as Saint Epiphaniws
{aith,, did con:lemne'4erws of herefie;, for ſaying that the Degree of a Bi-
ſhop is no greater thetyrhat of a Pree: into which herefte it 1s no wonder
if Hierom, Auitin , and {ome other of the Fathers did fall , becauſe the matter
was not cleerc in all poynts. This boldnefle, to ſay that Hierom and Auitin
did fauour of herefic, gaue great (candall ; but hee inſiſted the more vpon ic,
and maintained bis poſition. And the Do&tors were cqually diuided into:
ewo opinions in this poynt. Wrote wp
Others placed this Hierarchie in Orders onely, alleadging Dyonifuws, whoin
naming the Hicrarchs,maketh mentionof none but of Deacons, Priclts, and
Biſhops. . Some followed Forrier,that itdid confilt in Iuriſdifiion. At thelaſt
a third opinion came foopth,thar ic was a mixture of both, which afterwards:
was more generally approoucd,;,For placihg it in Order, it did notappcare:
how Arch-biſhops, Patriarches,and, which is of-morc imporrance;the Pope
. bimſclfe could enter, all beeing of accord that theſe Degteesare:yorOraers!
abouc the Degrecof a Biſhop. Yet ſome did alleadge the common faying;
ro the contrary,that the Epiſcopall Order is diuided into foure parts;Biſhops,
Archbiſhops, Patriarches,and the Pope: and placing it inurifdidtion, none
of the, haly Orders did enter. | 1374 J7Js SILOCELR! OG, < 1 QQOHbE 7
| There.was'a great, diſputation amongſt them abour-the forme of the!7ic fore of
Heerarchie,;, lome ſaying it was Charitic , ſomeFaith informed, andorhers, - | 4
according,to Cardinall Turrecremats, Vnitic.  Tothis laſt, was oppoſed thar
ynitie is a genericall qualitic in all that is one, and is ancffefof the forme
which doth produce.it.c, Thoſe who were:for charide-brought very many =
places of the Farhers, which doc attribute the; vnitic'ofxheChurchynro ic, Is
| | Ddd 2” Bur

 —

592

The Hiftory of L1 B. 7

1562
P1vs 4+ z by
FERDINAND.

EL1ZABGTH,)
CHARLES: 9.
Puitrp. S. ©

Vo 4

Bur orhers ſaid that it was the hercſic of Wiglef. For, if it were [o,'a Prelate,
looſing-charity.,'would bee:our of the Hierarchie,and loſe authoritic. Not-
withſtanding they did nor auoyd the difficultic, by making faith informed
ro bee the forme ; becauſe a Prelaremight externally counterfeit, and bee ſe»
cretly vnfairbfull,who'norbeing of che Hirrarchie che Chriſtian peopleconuld
not know whomto obcy, becauſe they might doubt of all, and ſometimes
had cauſe rodocir.  Andas.the Diuines, eſpecially the Friars are freein ex-
cmplitications, they alleadged the Pope, ſaying, that, in caſc he-fhould bee
increculous ,zthe whole Hierarchie, would periſh by his defaulr, whether one
did make faith or charitic to'bec the forme. And therefore they fayd, Bap-
tiſme was. Butthe fame difficulties did ariſc in regard of the'yncertaintic

thercof,, becauſe the intention of the Minilter, according to thedetermina-

rion ofthe Councell; isefſentially required; which is more ſecretthen the o-
ther two: for which caulc it cannoc beecertainly affirmed of any thathee is
baptized. . | 4 |

The Articles, whether there bee a viſible Prieſthood or whether all
Chriſtians bee Prieſts 2 or whether a Priclt may become a Layman? or whe-
ther his office bee preaching + were nor handled with any diſcuſſion,” bur

* withdeclamations againlt che Lutherans , who depriue the Ghurch of com-

Of thc holy
Ghoit ciucn
12 Ocdination

merce with GoD , and ofthe meanes ro appeaſe him , making it a confuſion
without gouernement;and bereauing her of all her beaury and comclineſſe.
Friar. Adamantins , of Florence , a Diuine of this ranke, belonging to Cardi+
nall Madruccio, ſaid, thatchc'grearelt part of thoſe who had ſpoken , had al-
lcadgcd onely probable reafons; and conueniencies , which when Articles of
faith are diſcuſſed, doe mor oncly not force the aduerſarics , bur confirme
them more 1n their opinions: and, for proofc hereof hee brought a direct
placeof Saint Auſtin, Hee added 'thar diſcuſſions in Councell ſhould differ
from dilpurations in Schooles: For in thoſe how much the more things are
minced, and curiouſly handled , the better ic is; burtirdoth not become
a Councell to examine any thing , burthar which may bce clecred and made
plaine. Notwithſtanding many queſtions were diſputed , the knowledge
whereof cannotin this lite { in which G o D doth nor ſuffer all ro bee diſco-
ucred ) poſlibly bee attained. For this Article, it is abundantly ſufficictie
thar the Church hath an Hierarchie ; that the Ferarchie conſiſterh of Prelates
and Miniſters, tharrheſe are ordained by Bifhops, that Order is a Sacrament,
and that: Seculars haucno patr: herein. Petrus Ramirixs, a Franciſcanc Friar,
following thedo&rine of John cet , ſaid, that Order ought not to bee called a
Sacrament, bccaulc ir is inuifible and permanent, whereas all the Sacra-
ments are neceſſarily viſible , and (except the Encharift) conſiſt in ation.
Thereforc to auoydeall difficulties, one mult not ſay that Order, but'that Or-
dination is a Sacrament. But hee was much oppoſed, becauſe all the Di-
uines,and (whichis'of no |cfſc importance ) the Councell of Florence alſo doc
call Order a Sacrament. "And it would beca great boldnefleto taxe all rhe
Ro ,agecnerall Councell , and the whole Church for ſpeaking impro-
erly. | |
In the third ranke;rhere was noleflc yarictic of opinions concerning the
fifr Article. For howſocucrall agreed that the holy Ghoſt is giuen and re-:
cciued

am wg che Councellof Tre, 591

PEE> CET

cciued in Ordination, yet ſome ſaid, hee was given in his proper perſon, and 1 $62,
others , inthe gift of gracconely, They diſputed much on borh ſides, but > —
thoſe clpecially who, affirmed grace. Another queſtion was, whether grace Fuvmuns,
of Iultitication bee conferred , oronely a gift ro cxerciſethe office. For the Ermanury,
former was allcadged,that all the Sacraments giuegrace of Luſtification ; for p3**** 5
the later, that a man cannot without repentancerecciuegrace, and yet may SOAP
recciue. Ord:r, For the {/haratter, as they all agreed that it is imprinted ig, 1-4
Priefthood,, {o they diſſented in allthe reſt. For ſome ſaid it was imprinted in
the holy Orders oncly, and others in all the ſcucn; both which opinions Saint
"Bonaxentare docth thinke to bee probable. Some were berterpleaſed with
che diltin&tion of Durandus , that vnderſtanding, by (|harafter, a power to
worke a Spirituall cfte&, the Prieſiboodonely hath it , which onely can con-
ſecrare , and remit ſ1nnes; and the others haucitnot, ih regard their actions
arecorporall, which a Lay-man, without any the leaſt veniall finne, may
doc as well as they. Butit by Charafter be vnderſtood a depuration to aſpe-
ciall office, ſoall the Orders haue a propet Chamfter. Others oppoled - ak
it was a Luthcranc opinion, contained in the firlt Article , and faid, thar
therefore it was neceſſary ro afhrme a proper and indelcble Charadler in all.
And ſome faid it was in the firit Tonſure allo , becauſe it was not reiterated
in thoſc who arc degraded , as would be neceſlary if a (| baraer were not im-
printed; and becaulc,by ir,one is inueſted inthe Clergie , and made partaker
of Eclcſtaſtical exemprions,and immunities. Neither would it bee poſſible
to maintainethar Clerke(hip,and the immunities thereof were de iure Diuino,
but by {aying, that che firlt Toxſupe is a Diuine inſticucion. Concerning the
degree of Bilhops the controue: fte was greater, and the queſtion was reui-
ued whether ir bee one of the Orders. For hauingtwo properactions lo fa-
mous, tocontirme, and orqaive, a Spirituall power isneceſlary to it , which
isa CharaFer, without which ordination and confirmation would beeto no

urpole. The auditors were weary with hearing ſo many difficulties, and
did willingly giuccareto thoſe who faidthey ought to omit them,and ſpeake
onely in generall termes. But theFriars grumbled , and wereangrie toſce
in them a diſpoſition to define Articles, and pronounce Anathemae®, nor
vnderſtanding the poynts, and abhorring thoſe who would informe
them. 5

In the fixt Article they all condemned the Lutherans, for detratting from

vnaions, and ceremonies vicd in conferring Orders. Some deſired that
thoſe which arc neceſlarie,and belong ro the ſubltance of rhe Sacrament ( as
was done in the Councell of Florence) might bee diſtinguiſhed from the
reſt, and him declarcd to beean hererique, who ſhould ſay that Order mighr
bee giuen or recciued withoutthem; and for the others, that hee ſhould bee
condemned ingenerall termes, who did call chem pernicious. Hereupon a
great contention arole which were neceſſary, and which were added tor
ornament, ordeuotion. Melchior ( 'ornelins, a Portugal, ſecmed to fpeake wi ere-
much tothe purpoſe ; who ſayd, the Apoſtles did yndoubred]y vie impoſiti, ham nene”
on of hands in Ordination, ſo that none is mentionedin the holy Scripture ferin: 074.
without that ceremony ; which, in ſucceeding ages; was thought tobe {@
eſſcariall,that Ordination was called by thatname, Notwithltandivg, Gre-
Ddd 3 gorie

:
-

<4 RX” i ca x hl

\

| —

594- : The Hiftory of

Mc
mt

Lis. T.

I562

Pivs 4.
FaroDINAND

ErrziniTH.
CHARLES 9,
PHrHiliP 3.

\

The Leeates
are much tro-
bled with the
ſperches that
paſled CONCer-
ning Retor-
£IAtion,

And ſcndtos
the Pope.

gorie the ninth (aich, it was arite brought in,and many Diuines doc not hold

it to benecefſary, howſocucr others be of the contraric opinion. Itappea-
reth allo by the Decrerall of Innocentiws the third in this point , that yn&tion
was not vſed inall Churches. And the famous Canonilts, Hoſtienfis, lobannes
Andreas, Abbas, and others docaffirme, that the Pope may ordaine a Prieſt
with theſe words onely,Be thou a Prieſt;and (which is of more importance)
Innocentius, Father of all the Canonilts, ſayth ; that if the formes had not been
inuentcd, it had becne ſufficient it the Ordainer had vſcd theſe words onecly,
Be thou a Pricſt, orothers cquiualent, becauſe they were inſtituted by the
Church afterwards to be ob{crued. For theſe reaſons (ornelius gaue counſel
notto ſpcake of neceſſary Ceremonies , but onely ro condemne thoſe who
hold them to be ſuperfluous, or pernicious.

- Alchough the Congregations of the Diuines did take vp almoſt all the
time, yetthe Prelates did morc intend, and diſcourſe amongſt themſclues of
reformation , ſome promoting , and ſome declining ir, rhenof the points of
doArine diſcuſſed by the Theologues ; lothar the frequent and publique
ſpeeches which were heard throughour all Trent, cheriſhed by the Ambaſ-
{adours of the Emperour,and French King, induced the Legates to thinke ir
neceſſary to make ſhew they were notauerle from it ; eſpecially becauſe they
ha1 promiſed to propoſe ir ſo foone as rhe matter of Order was diſcuſſed, and
vnderſ{tood , thata diſcourle of the Ambaſſadour Laxfac was received with
great applauſe made in an aſſembly of many Ambaſladours and Prelates,
in which hee concluded that if the reformation, propoſed and demanded by
che Emperour,waso feared and abhorred, yer, ar the leaſt , a way oughtro
bee found out without making new conltitutions, to cauſe thole things
wliich hauc beeneeltabliſhed in ancient Councels ro bee obſerued , by re-
moouing the impediments which doe nouriſh eht abuſes. The Legars cau-
ſed chepropoſitions of the Imperialilts, and all the inſtances made ynto them
in matter of reformation vatill that day, and their owne an{weres to bee pur
rogether , and an abſtract ro bee madeof the Conſtitutions of the Aſſembly
in France,and of the demands of the Spaniſh Prelats : all which they ſentto
the PFpe, and rold him ir was impoſſible to entertaine them any more with
words,and chatirt was neceſſary to ſhew the worid by ſome cftc, that they
hauca purpolc to handlc this matter, and to giue fatisfaCtion in ſome ſort to
the Ambaſſadours of Princes, eſpecially in that which they deſire for the
intcreſt of cheir Countreys ; yet with ſuch circumſpection as thar they
may not preiudice the Papall authoritie , or prerogatiues of the Church
of Rome.

The Popelccing the inſtruction of the French King, which did im port
the prolonging of the Councell, was much diſpleaſed. For he had conceiued
hope,tharall which did remainero be diſcuſſed, might be defined inthe next
Sethion of the 12. of Nouember, or if not, yct that the Councell would bce +
concluded, ſuſpended or diſſolued in the end of the yeere , atthelareſt. He
therefore anſwered the French Ambaſſadour reſiding with him ( who deft-
red the points of doCtrine might bee deferred varill the comming of their
Prelats,and the matter of reformation handled in the meane time) that hee
was informed thatthe Cardinall of Loraine mcanr to tarric yntill che ſurpriſe

of

Era. 7. the Councell of Trent.

of *Burges,& to attend the Kivg to Orlience,ſo that his departure out of France 1562

would be very late, and perhaps acuer, andihatit was not iult cocotertaine

x : , . vV$
fo many Prelates in Trens,, vponidifſeignes ſoremote, that chedemaunds for Fixzomazs.

delay were not made, becauſe the Erench-men deſired ro goe ro the Coun x
cell, burcopur bimſelfc. and the. Prelats ro more charges, proteſting, thar,if

his money:wete conſumed by this meanes, he ſhould not be able to continue —v—.

io aſliiting.the King. He made it agreatermarter,that their Prelars had been
expected crghieenemanerhs, and himlſelte lead along with divers friuolous
excuſes;-'He complaincd of his condition,that if the Councell vſeth any re-
ſpe rowards him, which ic doth but ſeldome,the Ambaſſadours, there pre-
{enc, ſay it isnot free; and yet them(clucs to:defirehim to ordaine a dilation,
which isa thing more vniult, and morcabhorred by the Fathers then any
ocher. His concluſion was, that when hee:had aſſurance or likelyhood of
their comming,he would cndcuour that they ſhould be expetcd, ſaying, hee
had giucn order to bee aduertiſed , by an —_— Currier, of the Cardinals
departure, that hee might preſenely employ himſelfe in the buſinefle, and, in
the mcane while, heethought it not iult that the Fathers ſhould be idle. He

{ayd che marter of reformation was more fit to bee deferred then this of do-

Erin whichdoth norconcerne him, as being a good Carholique, who will

vadoubredly not diſſent from others. But in macrer of reformation it is fit

to hearc him, becauſe it doth concerne him, as becing a ſecond Pope, bauing

many Benefices , and a reucnue of three hundred thouſand Crownes of
Church liuings, whereas himſclfe hath but one Benetice,, wherewith hee is

coatent, that notwichitanding hee had reformed himſelte, and all parts of
the Court, tothe hinderance and lofſc of many of his officers,and would do

more, but chat he ſaw plainely, that, by diminiſhing his reucnues, and by

weakening the forces and the finewes of his State; hee encourageth the ad-

ucrlaries, and expolcth all Catholiques, who are vnder his prore@tion,ro the

inturies of his cacmies. And, for the Countreys which are nor ſubie& ro

him in temporall matters, he ſaid the ouerthrow of diſcipline did ariſe from

themſelues, andfrom the Kings and Princes , who , with vatit and importu-

nate requelts, doe force him co make extraordinary,prouifions, and graunr

vaulualldiſpenſarions ; that his condition was miſcrate ; who if hee did de-

nic vatic requelts made vnto him , cuery one complained of the iniury, if he

ganced them, all che inconvenience enſuing was aſcribed vnto him, and

men began to {peake of reformation , as the Kings Ambaſſadours had done

in Trent, in ſuch generall termes, that it cannot bee vnderſtood what they

meanc. Hee faig,let them come to particulars, and ſay what they would

hauc reformed in che Kingdome, and they (hall haue fatisfaftion in foure

dayes; that the Prelars in Pojfs, haue made many conſtitutions, which he wil

confirme when he (hall be requeſted : burto {tand ypon vniuerſalitics only, -
and co find fault with all that is done, without propoſing any thing, ſhewerh
they bearcno good affeCtion.

Theſuperio-

Thefourth ranke of Theologucs remained, who were to handle the lupe ;;1, ot 14
riority of Biſhops aboue Prieſts. Thoſe who. ſpake firlt tollowed the do- p22

Erincof Saint Thomas and Bonaventure , who ſay a Frieſt hath wwo powers,
oneto conſecrate the Body and Blood of Cyr +5 T, andtheother ro-remir
ti ſins;

Eo ED ESTES +» -4- hg . =—_ L - . a
4 = GA rat. oy. ow. 1, IIA
”

i

596

—_— —

—_— cw memo DE ———_—_—_—_—_—_—S

Hh —

The Hiſtorie of L1B.7

PIE

Prvs 4

1562 fins;in the former wherof a Prieſt iscqual,in regard a Biſhop hath'nor greater

authority then a ſimple Prie$3,bur inferior 1n thelater, becauſe notthepower

Frx»mxan». onely of Order, but of iuriſdiction alſo is required Others added tharjt was
Erzauern, More excellent ation to giucauthoritic ro-conſecrate, then to conſecrate;

CHARLES
Paitie 2.

* and therefore that the Biſhop was ſuperior in thisalſo, who cannoronly.doe

—— it himſclfe, but ordaine Prieſts, and giue them authoriry. - -Butthis beeing

diſputed ſufficiently,they returned ro handle the Articles of the Hierarchie, as
being the ſame with thispoinr of ſuperiority; andthe queſtion becing whe?
ther it doth conſiſt in Order, iuriſdition;orin both, Antonius of Mont-Alcino,
a Franciſcan, ſaid, it ought not ro bevnderltood ofan imaginary ſuperiority;
conſiſting in preeminence , orpcrfe&tionof ation, bur in lupcrioritic of

. Foucrnement,ſo that it may make lawes ,giue commands, and judge caules,

as well in the Court of Conlcience, as inthe externall; which ſuperiority is
ro bee diſcuſſed, becaule ic is denied by the Lutherans. He ſaid theremult be
an authority inthe Church to gouerne it,the vnitic whereof could notother-
wile be preſerued. Hee prooued itby the example of Bees,and Cranes, ſay-
ing, that in enery particular Church a ſpeciall authority was neceſlary to go-
uerne it, which was in the Biſhops, who hauepart of thecharge, the rorality
whercof is in the Popeas Head of the Church ; which containing authority
to iudge, and ro make Proceſſes and Lawes, it mult needes beea power of iu-
ridiction. Concerning Order , hee ſaid a Biſhop was of an higher degree
then a 7'rie$t, hauing all the power of him,and two powers more; yet not-
withſtanding cannor bee called his ſuperiour ; as a Subdeacon is foure degrees
higher thena doore-keeper, yer not {lupcriourvnto him. Hee prooucd this
his opinion by the generall vic of the whole Church , andall Chriſtian Nati-
ons, and allcadged diuers authorities our of the Fathers. Finally, hee came
rothe holy Scripture, citing many places of the Prophets, ro hew thar this
authority is called the authority of a Paftor , ſaying , that the vniuerlalitic of
it was giucn to S. Petcr, whenCHRI $T ſaid , Feede my Lambes, and ſome of
itimparted by Peter to the Biſhops, when he bad them , Feede the flocke which
they baue in their cuſtodie. And this opinion had great applaulc.

» But before thoſe of this fourth ranke made an cnd of ſpeaking , the Spa-
niſh Prelates reſoluing the point ſhould bee handled whether Biſhops are in-
ſtirured by CH &1 sT, afterthey had conſulted togerher , did conclude that
it was better the fir{t motion ſhould begin in the Congregations of the Di-
uines, thatthemſelues might with more ſhew of reaſon, reſuming the things

ſpoken before, diſcourſe ypon them, and compell others to doe the like.

Therefore,in the Congregation of the firſt of October , Michael OroncuFpe, a
Divine of the Biſhopot *Pampelona,faid to the ſeuenth, that being to qualific
or condemne a propoſition which hath many fignifications , it wasneceſſa-
ry to diſtinguiſh them, and afterwards to examine them one by one ®and hee
thought the propoſition whether Biſhops bee ſuperiorto Prieſts ro be ſuch:
For one muſt diltinguiſh whether they be ſuperiours defaFo,or de ture. That
they are ſuperiours de fait cannot bedoubred, becaule preſent experience,
and the Hiſtories of many ages doc ſhew,that Biſhops haucexercilcd ſuperi-
ority.and Prieſts obedience. Therefore this Article being withour queſtion,
the other , de iure, remaincth to bee diſcuſſed. Wherein there is another am»

biguitie

597
bigaitic alſo , wherher Iure Pontificio, or Diuins. In the firſt ſenſe the caſe is x b62
clecre, rhar chey ars (uperiours, there becing ſo many Decrctals which fayir >>
expreſſely : which howlocucr it bee cre and certaine {yerthe Lutherans arc Frzxoman
notin'this regard ro be condetmned-f6t hereriques, keczuſe that cabnot bee Emiiairy.
a1.article of faith which isgrounded 6nly vpon chic law of man; id Ydttar $1ontss
robe condemned for denying the ſuperiority of Biſhops), ohely iti calſtit bYe —X—
d: inre'Diuin).” He added that he thought rhis poine- very clecre;/and tharkt
could cuidently/proouc'it , and reſolue anything alleadged tothe cotitrarie,
ſayiag heemult not procced further, beeing prohibitedrofpeake of it; And
here he ſhewedthariche Miniſtery of Confirmation! and Ocdinatfon is pr6-
per ro'Bifhops- And hauing ſpoken ypon the cighth Attiele , in conformitit
of theochers,he ended hisdiſcourſs; 7 257 005 2753 $2 2048

Johannes Fonſecs ,a Diuineof the Archbiſhop of Grandta, followed* who Thcintiis!.
centred braucly vpon the marter,faying,it neither was,norcould beforbidden 23: amme*
ro ſpcake of ir. Forthe Article being propoſed to be diſcuſſed, whether ifbe
hcrecicallor no, it is tieccſfary ro vnderſtand whether it beea inſt fayth, 4-
gain!t which ic cannor be, ifir doc nor tepugne tothe Law of Gop. He fayd
hee knew not whence the repott catnie , that bne might not ſpeake of ir, 'be-
cauſc by the very propoſition of the Article , ir was comimanded to be dif-
cuſſed. . And here hee proceeded ro handle, not the ſuperiority alone, byt =
the inſtitution alfo,affirming that Biſhops are inſtirured by Crur1sT, and by
his divine ordination, ſuperiours to Prieſts. He ſaid, thatif the Pope be in:
ftirured by Cyr 1s T, becauſe hee hach ſaid ro Perer, I will gine thee che keyes
of th: Kingdome , and, Feede my Lambes;Biſhops are likewiſe initirtred by him;
becauſe he hath faid roall the Apoltles, That which you bind on carth ſhall
be bound in heaucn,and whoſe {innes you remirthey are remitred, ſaying to
them afterwards, Goc into the whole world , and preach rhe Goſpel. And
(which is more) he ſaid vnto them, As'my father hath ſentme, fo Iced you,
Andifthe Pope be fucceffour of S. Peter, the Biſhops areſucceffors ofthe A.
poltles; alleadging many authoriies our of the Fathers,thar rhe Biſhops are
fucceſſours of the Apoltles. And,in patticular, he feciteda Jong diſcourſe of
S. "Bernard in this poitit to Eugenius the Pope ; anda plice of the Actes of the
Apoltles, where S. Paw (airh rorhe Epheſians that they were made "Biſhops by
the holy Ghoſt to gouerne the ChurchofG O D. Heeaddedzthatro bee confirmed
orcrcared by the Pope, did not conclude that they were not infifruted by
CakisT,or hadnort authority from him. « Forthe Popchimfeſteis created
by the Cardinals, and yet hath his auchoritiefromCirr 1 $T : andPricſtes
are created by the Biſhop, who'docrh ordaine them ; bur receine their ainho-
ritic from G o D: | Sothe Biſhops reeeitie the Dioctfle from the Pope,and au-
rhoritic from CHKIST. Their faperiorityoucr Priefts he vroberd be 7ure
digino , by authoriticof maiy- Fathers;:who ſay that Biſhops dotfiiceecd the
Apoltles, and Pricſtes the ſcanty twodifeiples. Concermng orher particles
of this point, he ſaid th: ſamerhings which'others ha# ſpoken before, Car:
dinall Smonera was impatient, and curned'6fren to his Colleagles,/and was a \hicver- |
bourto.interrupt the diſcourſe: but being; entred/ints vpon T&*good IE Som ancre.
ſon, and heard by th2 Prelaros with ſuch artention, hee knew ior how ro
rclolue. EIT OA B1l24ts

Lt B. >. the Conncell of Trent.

Bas -
=

— ——— —_ — --

.
4 4a 43S

# >

After

"CRTS nk

* TE Re Swi It wig es Wo A inks 4 0 ns
RLDROT Tet PR pretty ger eo

. 4 . we Io > —— >» wo ow
,

£

The Hiſtorie of L1 8.7

——

1562

SPSHIYN

Pivs 4.

EtizaBBTH,

CHARLES 9.

. After him. followed Antonius Groſſetus , a Dominican Friar, who, baving

briefly palledouer the other articlesjniifted ypon this. Heeltood much vp-
> oN the wordes of Saint Pawblpoken. xo the Epbefians in Miletym , exhorting

FexDiNAND

them to. haueacare of the flockez guer which the holy 'Ghoſt had: made

them puctleers; vpon which place hee made many obſeruarions. He'layd ir

"TAL" ac, ©

we

"was; frſt ncceſlary to declarethar Bilhops havenor commilhonfor their of-
fice from mey, for [o.they would be hirclingsco whom theLambes Yocnor
belon becauſe the man,who had commirted the care vatorhem, becing 1a-
CebeFrhey had no more.tothinke on.'Bur Saint, Paul ſheweth that the com-
miſſion to goucrne ghe people of:G 0 D is diuine,, giuen by the-boly Ghoſt,
to.concludethatthey cquld nor be excuſed by any diſpen{agrion.of man. He
alleadged the famous paſſage of Sainr Cypriar , thatguery Bilhop is-bound to
FIC aN AGFOUNt of Cyg1sr onely.' [Then he added that the Bilhapsof Ephe-

. [ua were novof thoſewho wercinltituted by CH R 1 s T our. Log, white hee

of 14 2864148
Grofſetms EL
cuſerh fum-
ſelfe.

-- wasin the fleſh, bur by Saint aw or ſomeother Apoltle;or diſciple; yer no

mention is made of the ardainer, butall is attributed tothe holy Gholt , who
hath not giuen authoricy to,goucrne, but dinided apart of the flocke, and
conſigncditro be fed, And here, hee made an inuedtiue againlt thoſe, who
a few dayes before, layd., that the Pope docth diſturbe the flocke, inculca-
ting that it was not well ſpoken , and that it-would bring againe into vic
rhac which Saint Pauldid deiclt ; 1 am of Paul, and I am of apollo. He layd the
Pope was.the minilteriall Hcad of the Church, by whom CurisT, the
principall {Head doeth worke, vnto whom alſo the worke ought to beeaſcri-
bed,laying according to Saint Paxl, that the holy Ghoſt doth giue the flocke
to be gouerncd. . For che works is neucr aſcribed to the inſtrument or mi-
niltcr,bur to. the principall Agent ; that this forme of ſpea:h hath alwayes
beene vicd. by the. Ancients, that Go D and CHyRr1sT doe prouide the
Church of goucrnours; that Saint Paul wrote to the Epheſiens , thar Cur1sT,
aſcending to hcaucn,,, hath furniſhed the Church with Apoſtles, Eunngel:fs,
Paſtours , and Maſters, {hewing plainely that he did prouide Paſtcurs after he
was aſcended into heauen , and that the inſtitution of Paſtours and Maſters,
in which numberBiſhops arc,oughr as much to be aſcribed vatoCuris r,
as ynto the. {poſiles and  Euaxgeliſts therſelues, The Theologue perceiued
that he diſplcalced the Lxgates, and ſome more beſides ; and fearing ſome bad

incounter;; as had happencd ypon other occaſtons, hee added thathee had
ſpoken withour, premedication, . becing caried along by conſequence of

; wordes; and heat of difcoutle, notremembring that thar-point was forbid-

den to be ſpoken of. Aud cntring ,againe to cxaminc the proper offices of

Biſhops, andcontradiQing the Lutherans, who holde them for ſuperfluous,

ſhewing they haue been yery ancient in the Church, and come from Apo-
ſtolicall cradition, heconcluded. The Legats did perceiuc that this was the
arte of Granata,and theother Spaniaris,, to giuethe Prelats a field to cnlarge
themſclucsin this matter, Therefote they cooke order that the contrary o-
pinion ſhould be defended by ſome of the fourg Prelates,, who oncly remay-

ha ned ro ſpcake the NEXT day; and the Popes Prelats,vſ{cd rothis arte, were Pro

parcd tocontradift the Spaniſh Biſhops ; if they had begunto ſpeake of this

2”

matter inthe Congregations.
The

L1s. 7. - the Conncellof Trent. 599.
The next day,the ſecond of October,two Diuines went aboutto prooue, 1562.

chat as the ſuperioritic of Biſhops was cerrainc,ſo ir was hard to beedecided gry

quo inre, and in calc it were, would beof no fruit ; and therefore was to bee Bnomano.

omitted. Two others maintained,that it was de inre Pontificio. And Friar Eumy

Simon, a Florcntine,and a Diuine of Seripando, dilcourſed, according co the $*m***

Opinion of Caietanus and (atharinus,inthis forme; that Biſhops are inſtiruted —v—.

by CyxtsT, to goucrne the Church, that his Maielty didcreateBiſhops +»:

all the Apoitles, when he ſaid, ſend you, as I haue beenc ſent bychoFather,

that this inſticution was perſonall , and cnded withthem ; chat oneof them ©

was conſtituted , to remaineperperuallyin the Church, which, was Peter, > + -

when he ſaid, not ro him alone, bur toall his ſucceſſion, Feede my latwbes, that ©

Saint Auſtindid mcane {o when he ſaid, that Peter did repreſent the-wholg

Church, which was ncuer ſpoken of any of the other Apoſiles 5 64s, Bains }

(.yprian ſaid that Saint Peter is not oncly a Type and figure of the yniryzbug

thatthe vnity docth begin from him. In this power, giucn onelygo Pezes

and his ſucceſſors, the carcof gouerning the Church is contained;and of ors

daining other Refors and Paftors , not as Delegates, butas Ordinarjes,, diui-

ding ni Prouinces, Cities, and Churches. Therefore when it is des

manded, whether any Bilhop bee de ture dinino,onc multanſwere affirmacriue-

ly, One oncly, the ſucceſſour of Peter, Befides,the degree of a Biſhop is de iure

diuino,ſo that the Pope cannot take order that there may be no Biſhops in the

Church,burt cuery particular Biſhop is De ture Ponzificio. Whence it com-

meth that be may createand tranſlarethem,, diminiſhor enlarge their Dio-

ces, giuethem moreor lefle authority, ſuſpend them alſo and depriue them

which he cannot doc in that which is de ire diuino. For from a Prizf, he can;

not takeaway authority to conſecrate,, becaulche hath itfrom Curisr,

bur may take juriſdiction from a Biſhop , becauſe he hath ic from himſclfe.

And thus the famous laying of Cyprian muſt bee expounded ; there is bue

one Biſhopricke, and cucry Biſhop holdeth a part thereof in-ſolidum ,

otherwiſe, 1t cannot bee defended that the gouernement of;che Church,

is the molt perfect of all, that is Monarchicall, and mult neceſlari-

ly fall into an Holgarchie, which is the molt imperfe&t, and condem-

ncd by all thoſe who write of gouernment. Hee concluded, that quo

inre, Biſhops arc inſticured, by the ſame they arc ſuperiour;to Prielts,

and that, when this matter is to bee diſcuſſed, the declaration is to bee

made thus. Hee alleadged Saint Thomas,who faith, inmany places,that cuc-

ry ſpiricuall power dependeth on char of the Pope, ant thar cuery Biſhop

ought to ſay,I hauc receiued part of that fulncſſe. Helaid thatthe oldſchoole-

men were ot to be regarded, becauſe none of them had handled this. .mat-

tcr ; butthe Modcrnes, hauing after that the herefic of the 'Waldenſes arolc,

ſtudicd the Scripture and the Fathers, hauc cſtabliſhed this trucch. The lalt

Diuine Jabourcd rocontradi<t him, in that he ſaid the Apoſtles were ordained

Biſhops, ſaying, when he ſentchem, as himſelfe was ſent bythe Father ,” that

heſent them to preach, and tro baptize-, which belongeth norco a Biſhop,

but toa Prieſt, and that onely Peter was ordained a Biſhop by CarrsT, who ,

after the aſcenſion,ordained the other Apoſtles Bilkops. Concerning theo, © on

ther parts of this Article, and the next, they all agree4ro.comdemae them: h>vcE
An "__

600 - The Fiflorieof L 185.7.
1562 And {othe Congregations of the Theologues were concluded. 2
RASAN ide which the Legates, becing obliged ro propoſe the reformation,

|

P q > a Þ
Faxpmano. Conf] ring with themſclucs whar particulars might be propoſed notipreiu-

mmm diciall{ and yet might giue ſatisfaction , were much troubled. For thar
Cuare 5: which would begrarcfullrothe Ambaſſadours, would damnific the Courr, -
A and diltaſte the Biſhops, neither conld they meddle with any thing thac
The Legates ayold pleaſe the Bilhops, which would nor bee preiudiciall to Rome, or the

demandot the

Pope byler- Priti6es; Their reſolution was to diſpatcha Currier tothe Pope , and expect

 rers har tbey anWwefe; and inthe mean time, to draw thebuſinefſein length, by ma-

ſhall doc con-

—_—_— kingchePrelates ſpeakeinthe matter of Order. In particular, they gaue his
| Holineſſe an account of the contention which they did foreſee, concerning
the /Artickeof the ſuperioritic of Biſhops, in regardof the perition made by
thePpaniſh Prelates, andthe entrance made by their Diuines. And how-
focutt they knew not their ende, yer, obſcruing how carneſt their re-
queſt'was ; and knowing how the Spaniards doe viually ayme atthings
firrcoff;they could notchooſe but fulpe&t. They put him in minde that
this was-the time in which they promiſed to ſpeakeof reſidence; whereof

forge motion was made alrcady. Forthe Archbiſhop of Mefina demanded of

thoſe of Cyprus, and Zara, what their opinion would bee, in caſc it were pro-

polcd, and, many practiſes were diſcouered, though they were not ablcto
penetrate the ground of them. Thar they gaue order to Orranto and Yents-

mivlia, tolearne cunningly of what opinion the Prelates would bee in caſc

they propoſed toreferre it ro his Holinefſe; who, hauing ſcunded them ex-

a@ly, foind thar 60. would bee rigidly oppotite, of whom there was but

{mall hope that they could pofitbly bee perlwaded. For howſocuer the Se-

cretaty of the Marquiſle had, at their inſtance, dealt efteually with the
Spaniards,yerhe brought from them no more then this, that they would noc»

oppole wit birternefle bur deliver their opinions quietly, and withour cla-

mour. That they kiiew the mator part were of the contrary opinion, be-
cauſerhey depend on Rome ; but they ought to diſburden their conſcience.

Fhar they were aſſured that this was nor contrary to his Holincſle,of whoſe
religiousand godly diſpoſition they could not doubr, bur vnto the Biſhops

"onely who areabouthim. They added , that the Spaniards, hauing diſco-

ured thatthere wasa purpoſeto remit the buſinefle ro his Holineſle, fayd
theſame was done inthematter of the Chalice, and that it was in vainc to

hold a Councell ro handle that which was of no importance, and rorcterre

chat which deſerueth proviſion. They aduiled him of the promiſe made to

che mbaſſadours,to propoſe the reformarion,and of the impoſh)bility tode-
ferreirany longer, and being aduertiſed of the comming of Lomine, and the

French- men;and vnderſtanding that they were full of conceits, and defignes

of nouitic, they concluded thar they would vndoubredly ioyne with che mal-

contents of Trent. |. Therefore not knowing, -in theſe ambiguities , what

courſe to rake, they told him they had relolued ro expect the comminde-

; ments of his Holineſle.' | : |

Ni entes © The Pope being adviſed , artthe ſamertime, from otherplaces of che pro-
andothers "it jects of Lomine,and particularly , that hee would reforme he cleEtion of. the
—_— Popedome, that the Titramontans might alſo beepartakers of it - it —_
ha cepcly

” Cn: 7 : y ”

Lis. = | the Councellof Tre. 601 s

deepclyinco his minde. Thereforercſoluing notco.cxpet the blow, but to 1563
preucnt, hee informedall thefralian Princes heercof,, ſhewing them what £>5—*"
a diſhonourit would beetothe Nation it it ane” age wp. hceſpake Frzomuns
not for himſclfe, whom itdid not concerne, bur for publique reſpe&ts, and 8rzanre
for chz loue of his Countrey. And knowing that a Spaniſh Pope could $5955 5
not becacceptaþlero che King of Spaine.Þ,, in regard of the naturallpropenſi WV.
on that Clergic hath , to free themſelues fromsthe exaCtions of the King,
and that a Frenchman would haue pleaſed him lefſe becauſe of thecnmiry
berweenc the Nagions , and that the greateſt parrof his truſtie friends were «
in Italy, hee wrote-vnto his Nuncio, ro communicateynto himthe deſigne
of the French men, to make a Pope of their Nation, that, by his meancs,
they may pollefſe Neples aud Milan, to which they pretend right. - And,not
to bee wanting on his part, that hee might remoue ſome of the foundations,
on which the Cardinal might build, which were the abuſes of the times paſt,
lately reuiucd , he made a Bull in chis matter; which howſocucr ircontainied
 onlycheprouiſtons formerly made by divers Popes, which were antiquated;

ct iurmight bee ſayd there was no neede of more reformation in that bes
balfe, becauſe the Bull did remedic allthe inconueniences which happened,
or, at the lcalt, tooke all ſtrength from them, ſothatircould not bee preten-
ded rhey were in force. And co him that would prognoſticate thatit would
not be obſcrued, as others made before, it might beeanſwered, that hee who
doth cuildoth thinkcill,andthatir istheducry of Chriſtian charity ro cxpe&t
good from cucry on. The Bull was datcd the ninth of October 1562. Aﬀcr-
wards newes came, that many Congregations were held in Spaine, to make a
gencrall reformation, and ro giue commiſſion to the Ambaſſador, who was
ro goe to Trent, to make the Spaniſh Prelats ioyne, andaimeallatone marks.
The newes that the King would ſend another Ambaſſadour did pleaſe nai-
ther the Pope nor the Legats. For the Marquis of Peſcaradid much conforme
himſclfe ro the Popes will,and the Miniſters he vied were of Milan,much ad-
dicted corhe perſon of his Holincs and his kinred, and to Card. Simoneta,who
ag + them inthe Popes ſcruicevponall occaſions. Butthe Count of Ly-
na, who was deſigned to be ſent, had remained with theEmperor, and with
che King ofthe Romans and was very dcarc ynto them, and had their proics
imprintcd in him. And they feared him themore becauſe there was a fame
(aad it was indecd (o refolued, though nor effected ) that he ſhould bearethe
name of the Emperors Ambaſſador, to auoid the difference of precedencie
with France,bur really ſkould be Ambaſſadqrofthe K. And the Popedid ſuſ-
pet for many cauſes,the coniunttion of choſe Princes; eſpecially inregardof
the K.of Bohemia, who, indiucrsthings, had ſhewed he was aucrſe from him. -
And the nomination of the Count of Luna was more diſpleaſang to him, be-
cauſe hz could not comebeforethe Dier of Francfort was ended, which being
likely cola(t varil che end of the yeere, he conicttured the King hada purpoſe
to prolong the Councel. Buthauing receiued the laſtaduice fromthe Legats,
he was perplexed molt of all ſeeing the Prelars, cuen his ownealſo, werecon-
ſpired to make it longer, by meanes of vnſcaſonable perſwaſions, howſocuer
thcir interelts did requirea quicke diſpatch. He cauſed the letters to bercad in
Congregation ofthe Cardinals, and gauz order thatevery one ſhould ke,

Ece (

2409 og. -———*"— S >

m—_—_

GO2 vn The Hiftory of 3 Li8.'9.

Prvs 4.

The anſwere
mad: ro the

Legarcs,

q>> to takeaway rhepreſcnt

ETIZABETH.

IeUance, 1n regardithe Councellthelongee icon,

r
F=zvmany. tijucd theharder lhe managed.- Neither'eould any order bee given

—O— -  — =

of compoſition with the Hugonots ; aud Spaine , to keepe thELow-Conntreys
iihopeo berepearedall the difficulties whietVaroſefrom the divers '#nter-
ofts of theiPrelaccsin Councell, theaimes, whichwereiſtovered inthe'Spa-
miacts,'andvehat was taſpeted of the defignes of theFretich-:menn,whole
comming wascxpected. (Eg £56 2603 7469 aff NOETNELW 230 C1

'- Arthas rhmne;che French King ſerirthe Abbar of Manre;expreſly,

-
-

to'Rome,

Ecclefrailicall perſon intheworld , not much inferiourtoaPope. Heefaid
che Bilhops had diſcreerely haydled the poinrs of reformation, in theafſſem-
bly of Poiſs,cttering to cauſc the greater part ofrhem to beconftirmed by the.
Councell. Heeadded , that hee. was forced 4o haſten the ende of the Sy-
nodcin regard of his great charge, which if itdid'continuelong , heecould
not bceablero continue in aſſiſting the King in his warre; ſo that hee ho-

ed hee would ioyne with him to conclude ir. The concluſion of his
diſcourlc was , thathee had no authoritic in Councel], but to approoue, or
reic thedeterminationsof ir, without which they would be of no force,
and that his purpoſe was to goc to*Bolenia when the Counce] was ended, and
troaſſemble all the Fathers there, that he might know them,and thanke them,

and make the approbation. This French meſſenger gaue the Pope allo the

letters ofthe Cardinall of Loraine,of the ſametenour,with an addition of pro-
fers, to preſerue by all mcancs , theauthority of the holy Sea, The Pope aſ-

ked him in particular what the Cardinal:meant to propoſe; but receiuing one-
ly a generall an{were, that is, neceſſary remediesfor the Kingdome of France,
heeanſwered, to make the Cardinall bethinke himſclfe what ro doe, that all
ſhould bee marurely aduiſcd os, cucry thing bcivg decided in Councell by
pluralitic of voyces.

It was reſolued, in the Congregation of the Cardinals,to anſwere the Le-
gates that they ſhould-labour ro conclude the Article of re{1dence, before the
commingof the French-men , ard ro referreittothe Pope; withoutany De-
crce, if it were poſſible; bur if not, yer, at the leaſt, witha Decree. It ot
| ther

—_—.
hf

E 18: 7:
ther cquld bee obrained, then to.make the declaration with tYewards and 1562
puniſhments, nor touching the poynt, whether it were dehure Dinh, That YI
the Article of the inſtitution of Biſhops ſeemed difficult), arid of vtear con: Firoinaxy;
ſequence, and therefore that hey ſhould -procure thae thoald'5e femitted frimaners,
likewiſe ; which in caſc they could not doe; yet they ſhbuld invislably ob: prints
ſcrue not toluffer a determination to paſle, that it was deiure Diuino: «Cons —V—
cerning reformation , that his Holineſſe was reſolute that none ſhould med-
dlewiththe Papacic, and Courc, who already had made'ſo-tnaiy teforma-
tions, ( which all the world did knowe ) as that cuery diſorder' was tedref;
ſed ; and,if any thing remained, was willing to adde it; char}or ll other
matters, they ſhould tell all men plainely thatthePopedid retnitrhe refot-
mation freely to the Councell ; and of choſe things which were roppic by
the Imperialiſts,and decreed by the Freneh-menanPojf, they ſhould propos
in Councell what they thought expedient, but not reſolue; before they {ent
aduiſc againe. GR 003 LOR 99G
The propoſition, to finiſh the Councell, was eſteemed by rhe congrega-
tion to bce of greater moment; not becauſe the neceſſitic ro docit was not
manifeſt, but becaule they ſavy riot the meanes, in regard ſo many thints
did remaine ro bee handled, and that the Prelates could nor bee induced'r5
youu briefly , nor to agree in-theirdiſcourſes ; which things were neceſſary
or a ſudden diſpatch, and , withoutthem, it was impoflible ro*qbnelude,
bur in a long time. To luſpend it wirhoutconſent of the Princes, fecmed
dangerous and ſcandalous, in regard of theaduice, ſent by the Legates,that
the Ambaſſadours de Ferriers and Five Churches had ſaid , thar iftheCouncel!
were ſulpended they would notdepart from Trent, nor ſuffer thEPrelates,
their adherents, to' goe, before they had commiſſion from rhelt Princes. «-.
To haueco:nmilhon trom chem did requiremuch tire,becauſtthey would
vndoubtedly know one anothers minde, before they would anſwere, There?
forc they knew not what ro reſolue in this matter, butto ſolicitethe Legates;
ro diſpatch the points , which remained to bee-handled.” The coniming of
Loraine did trouble them more, being aduifed, from/diners places;that', b&
ſides the buſineſle of the cle&ion of the Pope, hee meant to propoſe niany-
nouities, abour the collation of Biſhoprickes, pluralitic of Benefices y and,
which was of no lefle importance, the.Communion of the Cup , Marta
of Prieſts,and Maſſe in the vulgar tongue. And, preſuppoſing hee would
not begin his journey before he& had anſwere from the Abbatk Mante”,
ſear by the King and himfelfe , they gaue counſelltorecall the CAfdiniblf &f

od The Cardinal

*

Ferrara,and to offer the legation of thar Kingdome' to. Eoraine , Which they o £5:1me

F -

didrhinke might ſtoppe him;becaule he'ſo'much defiredto conifiadnd that pen

the Councell of Trent. +603 —- 4

Clergie, thathee had formerly plotted ro make himſdlfe Parriatth'iti Frare#! i trone
bur if he came, that more Prelarcs ought tobeſentto the Councel;and lome
Cardinals alſo,to counterpoile him. And che Carditiald of Bordyfter 2, ai
Nauagero were natncd, Bur this teſolution "was notthen takenn,be& uf they
feared that Loraine, would diſdatne , and*take occaſion to dovwgreran
becaule it was not fo well knowen whether theſe were abletormake fo'grexr
an oppolition,as allo becauſe they were willing to'knogw the opinith firitof
tholc rho were in Trent, for feare of giuing thern ditait, Theylebtifideret?

Ece 2 the

"604. The Hiſtory of —_ Liv. 9,

1562 thechatge which would increaſe , which was not fit to bec indured,, withe
Fo") our great vrilitic. Therefore they reſolued to write tothe Legates, not to
Fzpman». ſufferany the leaſt diſcourſe concerning the eſcQion of the Pope; which if
Euzazzra. they could nor reſiſt, yer they ſhould not giue any permiſſion , but rather
Praker 9 rerurne to Rome, leſt they ſhould preiudicethe Colledge of Cardinals, and
Ao Ttalie.: |

But, in Trent, the Deputies for compoſing the Anathematiſmes and do-
Erine, hauing. conſidered the opinions of the Diuines , made adraught; and
pur intoit, that Biſhopsarc ſupcriours inre Dixino. For the Arch-biſhop of
Zara, andthe Biſhop of (onimbria, chicte of the Deputics, were of that opi-
nion, Bur the Legates did nor permit it, ſaying, that nothing ought to bee
pur into it which was not contained in the Articles ; notwithſtanding that
it ſhould bee thought on, if the Fathers did deſire it in the Congregations.
The Spaniards therefore did immediatly reſoluc to defire it ; and the Le-
gates, vndcritanding ſo much, gauc order to their Prelates, who werc
wont to contradi&, that, if this matter were propoſed, they ſhould bee
{ilent, and not diſpute, that rhey might nor giue the Spaniards occaſion
to replic, by which meanes the Congregations might be drawen in length,
and inconueniences ariſe , which happened. in the matter of reſidence, bur
if the inſtance were proſecured by Granata, or others, the Cardinall
Tarmienſe. ſhould interrupt them , anſwcring thar ir was not a poynt to
bec handicd in Councell, becauſc it was not controuerſed with the Pro-
teltants.
The Arch-b, The thirrecnth of October r 5 62. when the firſt Congregation of the
Tours Prelates was held,the Patriarchs, and ſome Arch- biſhops, hauing approoucd,

c

- urnrran. We | few words,the Anachematiſmes, as they were compoſed, the Arch-biſhop of
of Biſhops. Granat4,did ſolikewile concerning the fix firlt Canons; inthe ſeuenth hee
deſired itſhould be layd,that Biſhops, inſtituted ire Dium?, arc ſuperiours ro
Priclts; ſaying, that hee might with reaſon defire it, becaule irwas propoſed
inthis formein the Councell, by Cardinall Creſcentins , vnder Tulivs the third,
and approoucd by the Synode. For witnefles hee brought the Biſhop of Se-

ouia, who aſliſted,as a Prelar,in that Councel,and Friar Ofauianus Þreconins,

Hcadded allo the Epiltle of Cyprian to Rogatianus, where hee often repeareth
that the Dcaconsare. made by the Bifhops,and the Biſhops by G o D: and
that famous place ofthe ſame Saint, chat there is but one Biſhopricke, and
cucry Biſhopholdctha part of it. Hee ſayd the Pope was a Biſhop, others

are

” tt.

 theCountell of Trent. —_—_

wy Y

L I B. 7+

arc, becauſe rhey arc.all brorſicts ſonnes of ane father, which is Go D, and i 564.
of one, mother,,.yyhich, is £f Church. Therefore the Pope doth allo call SSN

bras - 2 p þ Lk i de eb erat ant MAE. Wy 4.. >
them brethren ; {gchar if the Pope beeinſticured by Ciqrasr, f6-are the Bi- Fnomaxs,
ſhops allo. Neichereanir begſaid.thar the Pope callech them beochren ig. ci 1c wern,

4% 4 4

uilitie,or humility ancly,becauſc'the Biſhops allo,in the incorruptages;haug £54ntts. 5

called himbrothes., Thereare.extant Epiltics of Ofriag dbianiss, (Gofucl- '—N—.
us, Lucius, and Stephanus, Popes, where be giueth chem checicle, of brothers; =»
andof 4uſline, wrigten in hisowne name, apd of the other Bilhops gf, Africa,

in which the Popes, Innocentias, and Bovifacins, arc likewile callsd.hrochers.

Bur, which is moitplaine, not anely in rhe Epiſtles of chole-two'Saints, bur

of many others alſo, the Pope is called; Colleague. And iris againſtithe na-

turc.ofa Colledgeroconfiſt of perſons of divers kindes, +, and it thefe. were

ſuch difference,that cthe;Pope ſhould bee iyltinated by CxrIsT, and Biſhops

by che Pope, they cyuld nor be in.one Colledge, Ina Colledge there may bee

an Head ; as in this Colledge of Bilhops the-Pape is Head, but for edificari-

on onsly,and, as tis ſaid in Larine , in beneficientem cauſam. ' St. Gregory faich,

in his Epiltle co Johannes Syracuſanus., char when Aa Biſhop is in afaulr, hee is
ſubic&rothe Apoliglique Sca,; but otherwile,,. allare equall, by reaſon of
humilicy.; which Chriſtian-humilicy is neucr {cparated from thecructh, He

| allcadged St. Jerome to Enagrins, that whereſocuer a Biſhop (hall bee, whcther

in Ree, or in, Augubjwum, or in (, onflantinople,or in Rheggio,all arc of thefame

merit, and of the fame Prieſthood, and all ſucgeſlors of the, Apoſtles. Hee
inucighcd againſt thoſe Theologues, whafaid,. that St, Peter-had ordained

the other Apoliles Biſhops. Hee admoniſhedihem co ſtudy che Scriprures,

and t0.0þſcruc, thatpotvcr to teach ithroughoutall the world, ro,adminiſter

the Sacraments, tofgmit finnes , tobinde and looſe ,/ and ro goucrne. the =
Church, is cqually giuento all: and finally, they are ſenc inzothe world, as

the Faher harh/lenrrheSopne, > And therefore as the! Apoltles had autho-

ritic, not from Peter , but from Cx x 1 s 7,;ſauþe; ſfuccelſours. of the Apo-

ſtles hauc not power-fram the fil urof Pgttrgburfrom;CmmRi is y; him-

{c)fea; biee broughtrochis purpgleghe exampleatiherree,in which there arc
mayybranches,butong body ofely-1Thep hee jeſted arthoſe Diuincs, who

had ſaid,chacall che Apoſtles, wera infticued by. CHrIsT, and made. equall

in autharivie,: but thatarivas-pletdewall in chem,/and ought, not. ro paſſe to
thtir{iceeflputs,exccpt that af eer,;askingehem, as/if they, had -becnc
preſcats hugh wha CO MMI I, 0s ers ym make
ſuch +bold afhirmanonjcnuentabnurbin theſafifiy yocrovamely, ioxproſicly
cantraryzothe'Scripnite; in.which Chrilkiſaid co —_ Apoliles ,; Fwil. bee
-withyau, vutil the end of their pebich wpadsbecaule they cannot beo'ex-

poundath oficheix particular: perſeatmencly muſtbanceniacily vnderfiond of
the ſaccefliph of all; aud/fo thoydrantbee or ood by. allthe Fathers

and Schodlemendtghnehorn this newopiniontsdireatlyconrrary, Hee,ar-
gucd,thar,iftheiSqrsanates boinkidurdd by: Chriſt, by conſequence the Mi-
wiſters of tberaartinſtuutoddi{piandbcecharwyillfay-chatthe Hicrarchie is
Wetrediune, and the chiafn Hierarchd idſticutedby his Maicltie, mult lay that
theotticrHlirerdcrdalidirait the func wftichrign; Fhar ic.is a perperuall do-
tingob che;CatboliquaCliurch, char Orders arg giucn by che band of Mi-

Ecc 3 niſters;

—— ——

© 'The Hiſtory of

CSF things beitig truce andcerraine ; and denied by the heretiques , in many pla-
Fezomiaxo CCS, Which the Biſhop of Segonia- had colledted, 'ir was neceſlarythey

' Cardinall/armienfe tookc occaſion hence to interrupt him, ſaying,as they
had agreed ;that there was no controucrſje of this, yea,that the Confeſſoniits

did maititainc the ſame. Therefore that it was ſuperfluous ,and ynprofita- |

ble toptr'ir in queſtion, and thar the Fathets oughr not to diſpurc of any
ching 1a which che Catholiques and hereriques doe agree.  Granars, riſing
vp, replied, thatthie Auguſiane (,onfeſSiondid not confirmerhis, but contradi-
&ed ir, purring no difference berweene a Biſhop and a Prieſt, bur by hamane
conltirurion, and afhrming , that the ſuperioritic of Biſhops was firſtby cu-
Nome, and afterwards by Ecdlefiaſticall conſtitution. And hee demanded
againe,thatthis definition tnightbe madein che Councdll;or the realonsand
authority, alleadged by him; anſwered. The Cardinall replied, that the he-
reriques did not denic theſe things , but onely.did multiply iniurics, maledi-
ctions,and inuectiues , againſt rhepreſentvies. And fone other replies paſ-
ſing betweene them, Granata- , full of diſdaine and heate, ſaid, hee referred
himſelfe ro'the Nations. | 36 93D
After rhis,there being ſome timult raiſed and appeaſed ,they ſpake ofthe
other points , receining the things as they were propoſed, ſome groundin
themſclues vpont the (ayitig of Parmienſe , ard lome holding rhat the Pope
 onely is inſtitured inre dinino;verillir came to the Archibiſhop'of Zara; who
ſaid , ir was neceffary to 2dde the words ( de ture Diuiho)) rocondemne that
which the hereriques ſay to thicontrarie , in the Auguſtaric Confeſion. ar-
mienſe aid again ,/that in that Confeſſion the hererikes did/nor diſſent in this;
and Zaraalleadging the place,and the words,thecontentioa'wasfo'long,that
the Congregation did end with it. " "13 42S 1 ors 204110

In the Congregations t6ll6wing, theopiniotis were diuers alfo, In parti-
cular, the Archbiſhop of Braga demaunded the fame adiune , ſaying, ic
could not be'@mitted- Heprooucd at large the inſtirution-of Bſhops* Ne iure
Diiino,, britiging reaſons and argument$like ro thoſe of Granata, and laid,
that the PopeeoHlnot rake from Biſhoperhcauthoririe giventhetnin:cheir
conſccration”, 'which'dorth:containe in'ittcpowernor onely of Order, bur

of iuriſdictionals; becauſe; inic, the peo te is affigned to him'tobekedand =

gourrned , without whith cheOrdiuadionis.nor of force; whereofithisis a
manifcſt-argumienc;\that ro rigilar and pontariue Biſhops a'Citicis'atoned,
which would not be neceflabyaf tho wunſedpult Order couldfublift withour
juriſdiction.” Belides, inghing, rhe Paſtoratly chis forme is viedy; tharicis a
{1gne of the power which is giuen himcocorredbyices, | Andy ivhich is of
more importance, when the Ring'is 1 1 auger is faidytbat withir he doth

the bdbkcoof the Goſpell ;/by.whichthe

In che

marry the Church; and , ingiuing

Eprſcopall CharaQteris imprintcd,, irisfaidy/thavhee mult goorortieprople, \.
committed rohim: andin theend of theeonſecrarion ;:that praywigtayd, _

Deus omnium fidelium' Paſtor @*Refor 11hich fincefBlch beeneiuatieo Mig.
ſals appropriated tothe Pope, by turning bimiclfe)to'Glo D;, andiaying; rhar

his

Am

—

L197

= 9 "6-< COOPEE _—_— Pa - {I - = nn —_ * A. a. _©*
' _- __—— diy» tech ce _—

Ls. 7. mm. Councellofrbe Frenps: 697

*

concluſions arid reaſons of Grangtanfade a long —_— of the places of the

Rome. Hee added, that the Pariarches, when they were created, {ent a circu-
larEviltle cothe others, to giue them an account of their Ordination , and
faith; which was as much performed by the Popes to others as by athers to
then, chacif che powerof the Biſhops be weakened,thart of the Pope is weak-
ned allo; thatthe powet of Order , and juriſdiction, is giuen to the Biſhops by
Go D, and that thediuiſion of Dioceſles, and the application of them to the
pcrion procecd:th from the Pope. He alleadged anauthoritic of Anacletus,
thac Epiſcopall authoritic is giuen in the Ordination , with the vn&tion of the
holy Chriſme; chat the degree of a*Biſhop is as well an-Order inſtirured by
CHrisT, as the Priett-hood ; thatalE Popes, varill.Suefler , hauc cither

rofcſſcdly, orincidently fayd it is an Order ,,which commeth immediatly
from God , that the words ſpoken to the Apoltles ;-Whatſoeuer yee ſhall binde

in the poine

herenques,for ſaying would.

not hauedone it Bi | | Woithim |

' Fifty nine Fathers vortof chis opinion , and perhapsthe number bad. begy Zoot rn
.ofr £-++= of inftirution

greater if atiany had a illarciſe archatcime,otad
which chen-did genera[lyraigne, and ſome others had got tained the lants of du.ope
impediment ; that they. might bee out ofthe cxawde, and RAN, in 2

V,

iD 2

/

—_ 2: The Hiftorieof

+56: apolticy fromthe Apofiiolike$ea;.to the great ſhame and damage of ralys
> Which hath no'other honour aboue the Nations beyond the Mountaines
rapmac. but thatwhich it receiucth fromthe Papacy. «Fine burches ſaid, it was fic
Enzazern, thatirſhould bee declared qaoiure all che Orders and degrees of the Church
pears 5: arcinſtitured,”andfrom whom they recciuc authoritie. Someothers adhe-
VV redto hitm;and,in particular, Pomp:ius Picholhomini, Biſhop of Tropeia ; who,
making thefatncinſtance, added, that when allthe degrees of the Church
were handled, from the'greateſt- co. the leaſt , and declared quo iure they
were, hewoulddeliucrhis opinion alfo concerning the degree of Biſhops,
if the Legats would give leaue. In this nun\ber-ſome bricfely adhered to
the opition of others who had ſpoken in this marter, and-ſomeampliticd
theſame reaſons, and turned them 1nto divers formes, fothir ir would be
roo long to make a narration of all the ſuffrages which are come-into;. niy
hands. | | | 1ri1 or
| That of George Sincout, a Franciſcan Friar, Biſhop of Segna;; doth well
deſerue to be repeated, who,adhering to Granara, faid, that hee-would never
haue belceued'that any could hauc:doubred whether Biſhops arc inſtirutcd,
and hauc authority from Chrilt. For if they haucit nor from his diuine Ma-
ieltic,neither can the Counccll have any from him, which confaſterh of BB.
that itis necefſaric that a Congregation, though very populous, haue their
authoritic from whom the parricular perſons haue it, tharif Biſhops are not
inſtirured by OH 1'sT, burby men, the authoritie of them altogether is
humane, and hee who heareth it ſpoken, that Biſhops are notinſtiruted by
CHR1sT, mult reeds thinkethat this $ynod is a Congregation of profanc
men, in which CH = r&T dorhnotpreſide, buta power receiucd precarily
from mecn;and ſo manyFathers woutd in vaine refidein Trent, to their great
charge and trouble, becaute hee who hath giuen the power to Biſhops , and
the Councell,may, with more authoritic , handlethe ſame:things; and ir
would beea' greatilhyfron generally of a]l Chriſteadome topropolcir, i nor
onely asthe beſt, burasrhe onely and+nceeffaric meanes, to decide the pre-
ſent controuetfies. Headded,that hethad beene fiue moneths in Trent, with
this perfwaſian, that ncucrany. would hauc doubted: whether the Counccll
hath authoriticfromG/owp; and wherher .it may ſay as the firſt Counceil of
Jeruſalem did{ 'It ſcented to uhg holy Ghoſt and torws; that hee would neucr bauc
come ro'thlc CouncellizFheehad belqcued thayCurisT had not becne in the
- midſt of it. Neither catvanyornefay,thar,ybereCnxk1 s Tafliſtcth,theau-
-. thoritic commeth-nor from/him ; ithar if any: Biſhop ſhould/belecuc and
= thinke his /autboricie ro bee humane; ithad beene :greatboldnefſe in him to

——— em

my
.

"La B.7

_

e453, 4 -

”

L 1s, 7. . the Conneell of Tr: ww

owne authoricic. He concluded,rhar the Farhers ſhould take heed what chey | 562
didrclolue, in a point, which beeing reſolucd truely, doeth eſtabliſh all the xy
actions of the Councell,and if otherwiſe, ouerthroweth all. FanommNe
The ninetecnth of October, all the Fathers madeanende of ſpeaking in arr

this matter , except Father Laynez, Generall of the Ieſuites , who, beeing ro C*4*=%s. s-
ſpcakelaſt , did purpoſely abſcnr himſelfe that day, that hee might haue a CA
whole Congregation for himſelfe alone. Andto makethe cauſe hereof vn- ach: whole
derlitood , we mult returnea little backe , and remember, tharwhen the que- jinin*"
Kion was ſer on foote in the beginning , the Legates thoughr that the aime Theimpet+
was onely ro make great the authoritic of Biſhops, and to giue them more poinc of he
reputation. Burt beforethe ſecond Congregation was caded,they perceiued, —_—
very late, by the voyces giuen,and reaſons yſed,of what importance and con...
ſequence ir was. For it did inferre, that the keyes were not giuen to Perer
onely ; that the Councell wasaboue the Pope, and che Biſhops cquall vnto
him, who had nothing left but a preeminence aboue others. They ſaw that
the dignitic of Ca:dinals, ſ{upcriour to Biſhops, was quite taken away, and
that they remained mcere Prieſts , or Deacons ; that , by that determination,
ref1deace was inferred by a neceſſary conſequence, and the Court brought
co noching ; that the preuentions and reſeruations were remooucd ,and the
collacion of Benchees was drawen to the Bilhops. It was notcd that the Bi-
ſhop of Segouidy had, a few dayes before, refuſed ro admit onetoa Bencfice
in his Dioccſſe,co whom it was giuen in Rome. And theſe things did (till ap-

earc more plaincly , as new y —_ were dayly giuen , and nevy reaſons al-

cadged. For thele cauſes the Legates did vie the (ollicitations aforclaid, for
feare that more Italians might ioyne with the;Spaniards. Yer they were not
ablc to preuaile ſo much,but that almoſt the halfe wereofthar opinion, And
the other Papalins reprehended the Legates, becauſe they forclaw not whar
might happen, but ſuffered ſuch great pr_—_ ro come vpon them, ſay-
ing, they proceeded by chance, and admitted not counſels and aduertilc-
ments of wile men ;that,ſo ſoone as Granatadcliuercd his ſuffrage,they were
pur in mindeto vc cffectuall follicitarions ; which afterwards they were for-
ced to vie, when it was too late ; that bycheir want of care (it nor malice in
ſome) matters haue beene Randled of the greateſt importance thar can poſit-
bly happen in Councell. They added,that the Ambaſſadour Lasfac had, by
many lollicitations , vicdto diuersof the Prelates, diſcoucred himſelfe robe
-notonely a fauourer, but a;-promoter of that opinion; and conſidered what
an addition would be made yato it, when the French-men came, who were
expected. And they ſpake ſo openly , thatſome words came to the cares of
the Legatzs themlelues ; who , feing now the danger not foreſcene, thought
(in.regard the matrerhad procceded fo farrc,and ſo many had pur themſclues
on thar ſide )that it was not firro thinke of diuerting the queſtion, burof tin-
ding a temper, togiue the Spaniards ſome ſatisfaction. And, afterlong con-
ſulration, they determined rocompoſe the Canon, with theſe words; That
Biſkops hauethe power of Order from G 0D, and, inthar, arc ſuperiour ro
Prielts; not naming iuriſdiction, for feare of making them ſuſpect. For, by
ſuchaformeof wordes, itmight be inferred, that the iuriſdictionremained

wholly inthe Pope, withour laying ir,

They

—_ — a

i—

—_ tt -

4610

The Hiſtorie of | L 1.7.

1562,
Prxs 4 |
FSADINAND
ELl1zieBTH,
CHARLES 9.
PHILIP Þ« ;

EARS

-2:/They ſent Father Soto, ro treat with the Spaniſh Prelars, concerning this

forme, norſo much with hope to remooue any of them, as to penetrate to
whar they might be brought.  Granata gaue hitn audience , but no anfwere.
HJ: laboured with others alſo,and gained the reputation of a good 'Courtier
of Rome, in ſtead of the other, of a good Friar,as he was before. And; to win
ſome that waucred, and ſome who vnaduiſedly fell into that opinion, beeing
otherwiſe deuoted ro the Pope, they reſolued to vic ſolicitations vnto them,
thar, vnderſtanding the difhculty , they might bee content to referre it to his
Holineſſe, or, atthe lealt,to ſpeake more ſparingly. Toperformerhis, with
the two aforenamed,they ioyned the Archbiſhop af Roſano,and the Biſhop of
Pentimgha. And,that thoſe who would acknowledge their error might haue
colour to retire,they gaucorder thar Laynez ſhould make an exa&t ful Lecture
onthis matter ; and ,that it might be heard atrentiuely,and make an impxeſ-
{ion,they would not hauc him, as hath becne ſayd , ſpcake after the others, in

the cnde of the Congregation, bur allowed him one wholly for himfelfe,

The foure Icl'iits contulted rogerher concerning the opinion , and Caueglione,
labourcd more then the relt. And, not to omit any good meanes of duwer-

ion, they buſted the Prelates in another marrer. For, toreturneto the 0c-

The diſcourſe

currences of that Congregation, after that the Generall of the Serai ( who
was the lalt ) had giuen his voice1n conformitie of the Spaniards, the Cardi-
vall of Mantaa a.\monithed the Fathers deputed for the Index, and ſhewed
how important a buſanellerhey had 1n hand,in regard all ſubuerfions doc a-
riſe,andall hereftes arctpread by meanes of bookes, he exhorted them to bee
diljigent,andzo-lvtche Synod [zethe end of the work quickly,he ſaid he knew
it required much paines and time, but confidered withal that all the Fathers
wouid contribute their labours co the afſiltance of the depurics , laying, that
the Congregations were ſpent in handling queſtions of no profite, and a
worke fo neceſſary deferred. Hee exhorted in the end, that this particular 6f
the Index might be concluded inthe next Seflion. E3.::
The morning being come, Laynez (pake more then two boures,very fitly,
with great vehemence, and maſter-like. The argument of his diſcourleh ad
ewo parts; the fir{t hefpent in proouing, that the power of juriſdiction was
ginen wholly to the Bithop of Rome-, and that none in the Church beſides
hath any ſparke of it, burtrom him-zand the ſecond , in reloluing all the con-
wary arguments, vied inthe former Congregations. The ſubſtance was,thar
there is great difference, yea,contratiety betweene the Church oC 1s 7
and ciuill ſocieties. - For theſe hauec firſt their bezing, and then they frame
their gouernement,and therefore are free, andall juriſdiction is originally in
themwhichthey doe communicateto Magiſtrates, without depriuitg them-
(clues ofic. Butthe Church did nor make ir ſelfe, nor its goucrnmevr, bur
CHRisT ,who is Prince and Monarch, did-firſt conſtiture Lawes, by which
it ſhould be gouerned , and then did afſemblc'it, and ,as the Scripture faith,
did build it; ſorhatitis was borne aſeruant, withour any-kinde'of liberty,
power, or iuriſdiction,and abſolutely ſubieCt; For proofe hereof; he allead-
ged pla:cs of rhe Scripture, in which the Congregation of 'theChutch is
comparedtoa ſowing, to the draughtof a net, and toa building :- and where
it is ſaid that CHR1sT camcinto the world to aſſemble his fairhfull people,
ro

——
—_———__—KW.—_

__

Ls. 7.

the Cotcell of Trend. G11

_

OI O-O— ————

togarher rogerher his (hocps; rozaltryR chemg by,do@rine, ayd example. 1562,
[Teo beadded chat tha firſt andpriggipaligroung, ypon-which CH xzsT > —
buileche Charch,was Pererand j1s-fuecelion, according tothe words which Fuomaxs.

r

bee ſpaks.zo him; Thou-art Pacery.and: yponthis:rocke,Lwill build my
Church; , Which rocks howlocuer ſane of the Fathers haue yaderltood. ro >

be Cart s T himſclte, and othersthefaith of Pater, .or the confellion of his ——

faich , ycrthe more Carholique, cxpaſidionas,, that, Peter himlclfe is vnder-
Rood, whoyinche Hebrew and Syriacke, is cajleda ſtone... Aad:, continu-
ing-his diſcourle, heeſayd,that while CyrisT lined inthe moxrall ficlh,hee

gouerned che Church. with anabſolureMonarchicall government, and, be-
iagto depary out of this world, left the ſame forme, appointing , for his Hi-
carSaint "Peter and his Succeſlors, co. adminiſter jras hee had done, giuing
him full and.totall powerand iurifdiction, and ſubicting the Chuich to

him,as.ic was to bimſclfe. This he-praucd of Peter,becaule the keyes ofthe
Kingdomeof heaucn were giuen to him onely, and, by conſequence, power
to bring in, and (ſhut our, which. is juriſdiction, And to him alone it was

layd ; Feede, that is , gouerne my ſheepe , animals, which hauc no parc or iudge-

meat in goucrning themſelucs. Thele things, thatis, to beea Key-keeper,
and a Paſtour,becing perperuall offices, muſt bee conferred ypona perpetuall

per{on,thatis,nor vpo the firlt only, bur vpon all his ſucceſſion. Sothe Biſhop

of Rome, from S.Perer to the cnd of the world, is trucand ablolurs Monarch,
with full and torall power and iuriſdiction, and the Church is ſubic&vnro
him, asir wastoCHR1ST. Andas when hisdiuine Maicſtic did goucrne
it, it could ndt bce fayd, thatany of the fairhfull had any the leaſt power or
juriſdiction, but meere, pure,and torall ſubicCtion, ſo it mult bee ſaid, in all
perperuitic of time, and {o ynderſtood,thar the Church isa ſheepefold , and
a,kingdome; and that which Sainr( yprian laith, thattherc is but one Biſhop-
ricke, and a part of it held by eucry Biſhop, is ro bee expounded, thatthe
whole power is placed in one Paſtor, without diuifion, who docth imparr
and communicate ir to his, fellow miniſters, as cauſe doth require. And in
this ſcale Saint ( yprias maketh the Apoſtolique Sea like vnto a roote, an
head,a fountaine, and che Sunne ; ſhewing, by theſe compariſons , thar juriſ-
diction is efſenriall in that alone, and in others by deriuation or participa-

tion. And this is the meaning of the words , ſo much yled by antiquitie, that
Peter and the Pope hauc fulneſſe of power, and the others are of their
charge. And chat he isrhe onely Paltor, is plainely prooucd bythe words of
CHRIST, when hce fayd, he hath other ſheepe which heewill gather roge-
ther,and ſo one ſheepefold (ſhould be made, and one Shepheard. The Shep-
hcard, meantin that place, cannot beeCHr1sT, becauſe hee wouldinor
ſpcake in the fucure, that there ſhall beone Shepheard, himſelfe then beeing
a Shepheard, andtherefore ic mult bee vnderſtood of another Shepheard,
which was tobe conſtituted after him, which can beno other but Peter,and
his Succeſſors. And herc hee noted. thatthe precepr, Feede the flocke, is found
bur twice in the Scripture: once giuenby CHR18sT to Peter onely, Feed?
my ſheepe : againe by Peter to others, Feed the flacke allattedro you. Aud if the
Biſhops had recciued any iuriſdiction from CygrsT , it would beeequallin
all,and no difference betweene Parriarches, Arch-biſhops, and Biſhops ; oF
; tncr

— _—_—_ Al.

AC _—_

G12

.DAA tht ——_—
—_—

—_—

—_——

© The Hiſtorie of «La _

1562

FPwSYN

Pivs 4.
FzxDINAND

ther could the Pope meddlewith that authoritic, rodiminiſh of take it all a+
way,as hee cannot in the _ of Order,which is from G 0D; Thereforc he
. aduiſcd them to beware, leſt, by making the inſtitution of Biſhops, de inre

Eire Dinumo , they doc not take away the Hierarchic, and bring in an Oligarchie, or

CuanLtss 9g
Parte, 2.

ATW

rather an Anarchie, Hee added alſo,that,to the cnd Perer might goucrnethe
Church well,ſothatthe gates of hell might nor preuaile againſt it, Cxzisr,
being necrevnto his death, prayedeffecually tharhis faith mighrnor faile,
and gauc him order ro confirme the brethren , that is , he gaue'him a priui-
ledge of infallibilitic in iudgercarof faith , manners and religion, binding
all the Church ro hcarchim , and to ſtand firmely in char which ſhould be
determined by him. Heeconcluded, thatthis was che ground of Chriſtian
dodrine, and the rockeypon which the Church was buile. Then hee cen-
ſured thoſe who held there is any power in Biſhops recciued from Cyrtsr,
becauſe it would rake away thepriuiledge of rhe Roman Church, that the
Popeisthe Head of the Church and Vicarof Cyr 15sT. Andit is very wel
knowen what is conſtituted by the olde Canon , Onmes fiue *Parriarche,
&c. that is, that hee who taketh away the rights of other Churches com-
mitrerh iniukice, and heethat rakcth away the priuiſedges of rhe Church of
Rome isan heretike, Hee [aid it was a mecre contradictionto ſay the Pope
is Hcad of the Church and the goucrnement Monarchicall, and then ſay
that there is a power or juriſdiction not deriued from him,butrecciued from
others. ene,

In reſoluing the contrary arguments, hee diſcourlſed that, according to
the order inſtituted by CHR15T, the Apoſtles were ordained Biſhops,
not by CH R1 s T, but by Saint Peter, receiuing iunſdiftion from him oncly;
and many Catholike Doours doc hold that this was obſerued : which 0»
pinion is very probable. Butthe others who ſay the Apoltles were orday-
ned Biſhops by CakrsT, doc adde, that his Diuine Maicttic in ſo doing, did
preuent the office of Peter, by doing, for that one rime, that which belonged
to him,giuing to the Apoſtles that power which they ought to receiuefrom
Peter, euen as God tooke ſome of the ſpirit of Moyſes,and diuided ir amongſt
the {cuenty Iudges. Sothatit is as much asif they had beene ordained by,
and recciued authoritic from Peter; who therefore did remaine ſubicct vnto -_
him,in reſpe&t of the places where,and the manner how to exerciſe the ſame.
And howſocuer it is not read that Peter did corre them , yer this was not
for want of power, but becauſc they did cxcrciſe their charge aright. And
hee that ſhall rcade the renowned and famous Canon, Ita Dominus, will aſſure
himſclfe,that cucry good Catholique ought to defend, that the Biſhops, ſuc-
ceſlors of the Apoltles doc recciuc all from Peter. Hee obſerued alſo, that
the Biſhops arc not ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles , but onely becauſe they arc in
their place, as one Biſhop ſucceedeth another, not becauſe they haue beer
ordayncd by them. To thoſe who inferred, thattherefore the Pope mighr
refuſe to make Biſhops,and ſo himſelfe remaine the onely man, he anſwered,
irwas Gods ordination there ſhould bee many Biſhopsin the Church, roaſ
fiſthim, and therefore that hee was bound to preſerue them : but there is a
great difference, to fay a thing is de inre Diuino, or that it is ordained by God.
Thoſe & inre Dininoare perpetuall, and depend on God alone, both in gene-

rall,

L187 chaCommeettofFrent. 613
rall , andim-particulat'arall itaes” So-Baptiltze,, apdallthe Szcratnents are 1562.
de inre Dinino, 1n everyone of which Go Þ liath his patticulat wotke, and ſo , ——>.
che Pope is from G 0-5; For when one Popedoethidie;, the keyesd6cnor re- Freomaxo,
maineto the Chutchbeeanletheyarenorgitien ro#buts new Popebceing pure,
created , Go Ddoxthammediatly givethemwwntolhitn'! Nowitisnorfo it pots? *
things ofdiuiae ofdidarian; irs, which the yenerall onely proceedeth from ——
GoD, and the pettitalars are-exocuted by men.'-: $0 Sainr PadP faith; thae
Princtsand} rempertYipoyers art ordained by Gd ; that/is,”"tharthe generallpre2 =
cepr, tharthere (houldbe Prineegcomtnetifencly from bim;butyce the pars
ticulargaremadedy rhe ciudlLawes:!-Aﬀiqthe lathe tiianier, Biſhops ate by
divine ordination;}afd Sainr Pun! (ich they areplaced by the holy'Ghoſt ; to
gouernethe Churtch;but nota# ture Diuiis; | Therefote the Pope exyniottake
away che generall-brderof taking Bilhopsiithe Charchbecaifoit is frond
God, buteucry pargicular Biko, beitig # MreCanonicd ; thay beeterfiooned
by che Popes autheritie. ' Torheoppolitioithartheathe Biſhops Would be
Del-eati,and not Ordinary, heeanſwered:; that therewas one inrifdection fun-
damentall, and another derined; aridthe:deriued is cirtierdelegare;/ or ordi?
nary. In ciuill Conmen-wealths the fandamentall4s/in the'Prince,” and
the deriued'in all the- Magiſtrates :-ncithet are the Ordinartes'diffetent from
the Delegates becaulethey teceme authortryfrom diners petſons; yea, all doc
equally derive from the Souereignty ,' burthedifference ſtanderh; becauſe
the Ordinarics are by a parpetuall law , 46d ſuccefhon, and rheothers haue
a particular auchority , either in regafd of the perſon, or thecaſe. Therefore
the Biſhops are Ordinaries, becauſe theyare made by the Popes lawa dignity
of perpetuall {uccefhion in rhe Church. Hee added, that thoſe places where
authoritic ſeemerh ro bee giuen tothe Church by Cyr 15 T (as rheſe,thar
it i5 4 pillar and foundation of traeth , that hze who will not heare_ it, ſhall bee eſtee-
med an Heathen and a-*Publicane ) ate all ynderſtoode in regardof' ies Head,
which is the Pope, and therefore the Church cannot erre, becauſe hee can-
not , and ſo hee that is ſeparated from him whois Head of the Church, is
ſeparated allo from the Church. "To thoſe who ſayd rhe Councell could
not haue authoritie, if none of the Biſhops had ir, he anſwered, that this was
not inconuenient, bur a very plaine and neceſſary conſequence, yea if euery
particular Biſhop in Councell may erre, it cannot beedenicd thar they may
erre altogether ; and if che authoritie'of the Councell proceeded from the
authoritic of Biſhops , it couldneuer bee called generall, becauſe the num-
ber of the aſhiſtants is alwayes incomparably leſſe then that of the abſent. He ERS
rolde them, that inthis Councell, vader "Paul the third, principall Articles 6500;
were defined, concetningthe-Canonicall Bookes, interpferations, paritic of
Traditions with the Scriptures, by a nutmber of flue, or a leſſe; all which
would fall ro thegroundif the multitude gaue authoritic. Bur asanumber
of Prelates, aſſembled by the Popeto make a generall'Councell, bee ic how
ſmall ſocuer, hath the name'and efficatie'ro beer generall from the Pope
onely, fo allo it hath irs authoritic; fo that if ir foech make Precepts or
Anathematiſmes, ncicher of them are of force bur by vertue of the Popes fu-
rure confirmation. , And when the Syhode fayth,chat it is affembled in
the holy Ghoſt ,- it meancth thar the Fathers are congregared,” according

Fff eo

CCC” —

64 | ant TheeHiftory of v L1s. 7,

1562 t0 the Popes intimation, to handJethat, whigh » beeingapprooucd by him,
AN willbee decreed by.zheholy'Gholt: Orherwiſe bow.could it: be ſaid that a
F=xomany; Decree was madeby thehvly.Gholt, and could be madero be of no force by
Euianzrne. the: Popesauthoritic, or had necde of greater 'contirmation.. And therefore

CHARLES gs 2a the Counccls, be they.ncuer lo, fxcquont, if the Popebee preſent, hee onely

I aL docth dearge,ncuher docth the-Goyncell anything butepproouc that is re-
ccinetlieQecrecs ;;and;ehercioge ichach alwaies beerigſaydy Sacro approbante
conciljo,,. y&a,cucn in'xclolutigns afdhegreatelt weight (as\Wwas the diſpoſition
of the Empctour Fredaustbeleeandlnghs general Councell of Lyons) Inno-
centis the tourth,a mall wile Pope)/rctulre glxci apprabayion of the Synode,
chat nope. might chinke.ic, rQ;bes nebellary Land tioughtitoufhcient to fay,
S.zcro prefenteconcilio!; Ad tor al this.rhe Councell caulporbeedayd ro beſu-
pertiuous, beeaule ig 1s aſlempledifor berrer,inguiſition »140t-more cafe per-.
twaſlion, and. to. giue larusfation if mens! Agd mbcn:je;giuerh ſentence, ic
doth ic by.veriue ofthe Popes aurhgritic, deriued ftrom{aed; und for thelo
rcalons ,;theigood Dogours haueſubiccted; the Councelt authority: ro the
Pepcs,as wholly;depending o0-49,withort which it hathnot the afſifiance of,
the holy Ghoſt,nor ina{libilicic, nos power to binde.the Church , bur as it is
ozantcd by hin aloagto whom4 ha 1s T bathfaid, Feeae my ſheepe.

Thecenſi.e T berg was notany dilcourte,ip;tchis Counceh more prayled and diſpray-
coark. — fed, according to the alfeRions; pf the; hearess. The Papalins ſayd-it was
molt learncd,rclolute, apditublianiall, others did condemine it of Batiery,and

{ome of hercſtc: and many made zt-knowcnthey were ottended by his ſharpe

ccalure,, ant charthgy purpoicd in the Congregations following,, to con-

fure him vpon all occafzons, and-to note him, of ignorance, and temeri-

tic... The Buhop of Barts, wiiwas ficke ar home when hee ſhould haue

giuen his yoice, told cucry one that,when a Congregation was held, he would

dcliuer his opinion againlt chat doctrine, withqut reſpect, which nor be-

ing heard in former ages, was, within theſe fatty yeeres, inuented by ( atetan,

to gaine a Cap; that-1n tholg times it was cenſured by the Sorbone, that , in

ficadof a cclcitial! Kipgdome ( for{o the Church is called ) it makethic nor

a Kingdome,, ' but a temporall tyranny ; thatit caketh from rhe Church the

title ofthe Sponſe of CH R 1 5 T, and maketh it aſcruant, proltitured io a man.

He will haug but one Biſhop inſticuted by CHK1sT ,and the others notro

haucany authority but dependant. from him, which is as much as to ſay, that

there is but onc Biſhop, andjche others are his.Vicars, to bee remcoucd art his

leaſure. ce aid this ſhould excite all the Councell , to thinke how the E-

piſcopall authoritic, ſo much debaſecd , might beekept aliue, and that it may

not come to nothing ; becauſc cnery-new Cogregationof Regulars which

doth ariſe, doth giueit agrear ſhake. The Bilkops hauc held their auchorj-

ricintire vnrill the yeere 1050. when it receiued agreat blow by the Cluniq-

cenfian and Ciſtercienfian Congregations , andorhers which arolc in that age,

| becauſe maby functions , proper.,and efſentiall-ro Bilkops, were, by their

"1 meanes reduced to Rome., Bur when the Mendicants beganne after the yeere

| | onc thouland two hundred, almaſt all che excrgiſe of Epilcopall authoriuc
\ | was quite taken away, and giucnto them, by, priuiledge. Now this new
Congregation, borne bur the other day, which is neither ſecular horregular
(as

—

Lv. 7.

— - a

( asthe Vniucrſicic of Parw#did wall-obſeruetight +
Churches peace, EOrA
redece urs; doth. FzsxDina nD

labour to rake away all iuriſdiQion of 'Biſho OY ing ca 5 ucn them * Hhgtiohs-

by Go D, and that they ought toatknow edge'thac r

Sacro preſente Concilio; which becing in all the Canonicall Textes, ſeemed
new vatothemall , becauſe they had not markediir.”. And fome approoucd
thelcſuires interpretation, and ſome, on the contrary, ſayd'that x64 Coun-
cell had refuſed ro approoue that ſentenee. ' Some proceeding ahtother way,
ſayd, that the queſtion beeing of a temporall matter , and wordly conten-
tions, the buſineſſe mighe paſſe eirher one way orother ; burthatno conſe-
quence could bee drawen from hence, that theſame might be done in mat-
cer of faith, or Eccleſtaſticall Rites, eſpecially it becing obſerucd , that , in
the Councell of the Apoſtles,which onghr to bee a ruleand paterne, the De-
crec was nut made by Peter, in preſence of the Councell, nor by him with
approbarion, but the Epiſtle was intitled with the names of the three degrees,
alliſting in chat Congregation, Apoſtles, Elders, and Brothers,and Feter was
iacluded inthe firſt, without prerogariue, An example, which in regard of
antiquitie, and divine authoririe, is of more credit then all thoſe of the times
following, yea thenaltogerher. And, for that day , inreſpe&t of thefe other
points,the diſcourſe of rhe Iefuiregauemarter of ralke rhroughour all Trent,

and nothing elſe was ſpoken of.
T hc Legates were not pleaſed that this remedie, applicd for a medicine,

8 11d worke contrary effect, perceiuing that, in the Congregations , the voy-

ces would beelonger in giuing ; neither did they know how to hinder ir.
For that Father hauing ſpoken more then two houres , it did not appcare
how hee that would contradict him could be interrupted , eſpecially ir bee-
ing in his owne defence. And vnderſtanding that Laynegenlarged his dil-
courle , with purpoſe to publilh ir, they forbade him toimpartic coany ,thar
others might not take occaſion to write againſt it , obſeruing what miſchicte
ſucceeded, becaule Catbarinus publiſhed his opinion concerning Reſidence,
whence all the cuill did ſpring , which ſtill continueth ſtronger then cuer.
Burt hee could not forbeareto giue copies to ſome, as well to honour him-
ſelfe , and oblige the Papalins co his ſocictic, then rifing, asalloro mode-
rate in writing ſome particulars, deliucred withroo much perulancie. Ma-
ny did make preparation to write againſt him; and this motion continued.
vneillche French-men came, who cauſed this differenceto be forgotten, by .,_ Fe?
bringing in others more conſiderable, and important, Yerthe Papalins of thetreach
continued their counſels againſtthe Spaniards , and chcir praftiſes with the der mean- |
Prelates, whom they thought they might winne. And a Spaniſh Do&our, 4
called Zanel, did fitly offer himſclfero the Legares, and propoſed meanes,to

autthe Prelates of that nation ypon their defence, andgiue chem ſomething:
elſerothinke on. And hce propoſed'to them thirtecne points of reformari-
on which didtouch them at the quicke. - But they could nor hence gather

Fff 2 the

—
——_

ES

616 | ' The Hiflory of L 1s 7,

1562 rhcfruit they expected, becaulc thoſe reformations required athers alſo be-
—"Jonging to the Court, which mage them defaft; left, according ro the pro-
hh , bytaking one cye from their aduerſaries, they might looſe both rheir

Prvs 4. |
 FerDINAnD. ucr
Exrzanzrn. OWN, , The practiſes were lo, manifeſt, that, in-a' banquet of manyepre-
PaahtB”9: lates in the houſe of the. French, Ambaſiadours ; diſcourſing of the cu-
SV — ſtome of ancicnt Councels, nor obſcrucd in this, that the preſidents of the
oe Leearee. Synod , andthe Ambaſladours of Princes delivered their yoyces, Lanſac ſaid
| | ox. aloud, thattheLegates gaue auricularyoyces; and was well ynderſtood by all
| that hee meant their practiſes. jms dinidws EH

| ' When theſe Congregations were held, Fing ( butrches preſented the Empe-
The Emperor | \11rs letters tothe Legatcs ; who wrote vnto them, Badeing {atished

defircth thar

the doctrine rhemſelucsin publiſhing the Canons of the ſacrifice of the Maſfe, they would

rd, and oncy forbcare to procecd in the Sacraments of Order , and Matrimonie ,and handlc
tion handled. The matter of reformation in the meane while, referring to their wiſdometo
handle whar part pleaſed them beſt, of thoſe things which werepropolcd.ro
them,in his name. Fiue C burches ſpake in conformitic of the letter, and made
the ſame requelt, that , themarter of Order being lo farre proceeded in, they
would ; at the lealt, forbearc to handle that of Marriage , that, in che meane
ſpace, the Emperour might induce the Germanes in the Dietto goc and ſub-
mit themſclues ro che Councell. For ſolong as the Dutch and French-men
continue in their reſolution, not to gocto it,nor acknowledge it, the Fathers
doc in vaine abide therp, to their great colt and incommoditic ; and when
his Maicſtic ſhall ſee they cannot be perſwaded, he will procurea [ſpeniton
ofthe Councel, thinking it will bee a greater ſcruice ro God, and benefit to
theChurch , to leauc matters vndecided , and in the ſtatethey are, expecting
a more fit time for the conuer{1on of thole who are ſeparated, then by pre-

cipitating , (as hath beene done vnrill that time ) the deciſion of contiouer- ,

fics, in abſence of thoſe who haue pur them in diſputation, to make the Pro-
teltants irreconciliable, without any benefir of the Cacholiques ; ſaying,that,
in the meanc while, they might treat of the Reformation, that the Eccle-
ſialticall goods may bee diſtributed ro perſons of deſert, and all haue parr of
them, andthe reuenues may be well diſpenſed , and the part belonging to the
poorenot v{urped by any ; and fuch other things. In the cnd, hee demaun-
ded of them , whether , the Count of Lana comming with the title of the
Emperours Ambaſladour , the difference betweene Spaine- and France. for

precedence will ceaſe. The Legates anſwered to this laſt, thatthey did nor |

ſce what pretencethe French-men could haue ro contend ; and, forthe reſt,
they ſayd they couldnot forbearc to handle the points of dotrine, bur chat,
withthem, they would handle the Reformation efteRually, according to
theorder ſer downeby the Synode. They commended the Emperours in-
tention to deſire rhe Proteſtants to ſubmit, but added that, for this hope,
the Councell ought not to bee prolonged. Forthe Emperour Charles, in the
Papacie of Iulius the 3. made meanes for the ſame,and obtained it alſo; bur
the Dutch-men procecded with diſſimulation,to the damage of the Church,
and of the Emperour himſclfe. Therefore jt was not fitthe Councell ſhould
change its pace, before the Emperour was aſſured of the intentions of ilie-
Princes and people,aſwell Catholique as Protcſtang , and what kinde of qbe.,
| CicNCe

TC —_—— — ——_—

FF62

 eetrenn: LI
aathemticirtt Adandursotfibe Provincerand Prineeszzanduol} 'Fixonums

chenbfor;the excearion of the!Decreess thartheir \oth2anl (may AS Enpwrwnn.
beinvainr{adid{aughed ar. (Arid Pat's,”
Emprrodv 4d 4 2 1h, : CARS
' 2A Congregation: was held rho25. of ORbber {!3Grevelue Talerriuus! By- The Ambaſ-
 burus,Bilop of \Prewiſa, Ambaſſadour &F Polonia, 'viiio/ghadeaſhibrrfpecetiiucirrecc.

on, chenecallity)ot agoodreformarion;che yſme |
ding tothedeſtresotrhe people; in- nated whichrate de inte CiThe'
Speaker au{wered: inthe Synods hate phabkingteKingand the Ambaſle-
dour;and offering to giucaſhitanceitialt thelvccaſions of that Kingilone:
FheLegars didingr: permit thati any 'thingelle ſhou}dbee handled "in' that:
Congregarion;for the cauſe which hall betelated. 2 1! Dt badg)et 03.49
:/'The Courr in Rome, and'the Popes' Miniſters 4h Trent, "were ti6'lefſe/ ;
troubled with-the'Spaniards;atd their adheremsiti Conncell;thenwirh the:
expeRation'of the comming/'of Loraine!], *and: of the: french-aien ; with!
which they were not ſo much mooued, ſo long as there was hope that ſGme +...
rubbe might ſtoppe:them, as after that certaine:newescame that they would ottbe French
keepethe day of 4ll:Saints with the: Duke of Savoy.” The Cardinal, gicher much route
vainly or of purpoſe, made irknowneat thefronch Court, before he parted, ge,
and in many places in the-journey, that he would' handle'diuers things in
diminution ofthe popes authority. and commodities of the Coure,' which
beeing reported diucrs waies , both in Rome and Trent, made an impteiton
in both places, tharthe generall intention ofthe French-men' was , ro pio-
longihe Councel, and, accofding to occaſtons,to diſcoucr, and put in pra-
Qile cheir particular deſſeignes: and they had coniectures ro makethembe+
lecuz, that it was not withouFthe knowledgeof theEmperour, and of other
Princcs and Lords of Germany, * And howfocuer they were aſſured; that the”
Catholique King held nor full intelligence with them, yet they had ſtrong
arguments to make them bcleeue, that his defſeigne/ was to prolong the
Councel, or, at thelcalt,norto ſaffer it toend; .To crofle this purpole;they tiowte ce
determined to propole the abuſes ofthe Kingdome of France, and to letithe j37nainn ©
Ambaſladours vnderſtand that they would make promtfion for them; be: 8
caule all Princes ; who deſire a reformationanthe Church, would nor wil-
lingly endure any art all of cthcin{clues, ſo that they thought, thar if any war-
tcr 'of importance were handledtotheir preindice, they would forbcare, and
maketheir Prelats forbearealſo t6 ſpeake of things preiudiciall tro the Apo:
itol:que Sca. Therefore after ſome packets had paſſed berweene Rome and
Trent, it becing iudged a good courle the abuſes were colle&ted ;which were'
ſaid to be principally in France; and partly in other Dominions. Andhence
chereformation of Princes began, which, in the relation of the rhingsthax
follow; will affoord'vs much matter. | | |
Beſides, in Romeit was thoughtrobeea good remedie, that the Legates:
ſhould bridle the tranſcendentboldneſſcof the Prelates, viing rheifrauthority
and ſuperiority, more then they had done: And,inTrent, it was C__ to
Fff 3 '- bea

" 1 $7 $9] $4 : I

618 +: The Hillary of i Lamg!

1562 bca good courſe, ro keepe the Prelates, their adherents, vnicedy well cditied,
{=> ahd latisficd, For howſecucr the'vayces of thocontrary part mighrenercalc,
FERDINAND. yet they ſhould cucr exceedc in number 5 and bee or ds:0&-che reſolutians:
Euzanzra. And they thought fitteallo procedd to finiſh the) Councel,-or lufpend;, or
CHARL® 9- rranflate 4; They 'wrot allo, ant; made many of the, papiſl. Prelates to
ASL write to their friends and Patrons in Rome, that there could bee noberter 16

ſolarion orprouiſion;then'to giuc occaſion, (which might>cafily beedohe)
that ſome Pfince might delire the ſuſpenſion, or lu png to {lippe : and;
far this end, | they demanded diuers *Briefes, ro beſentfrom Rome , in-mat-
ter of tranſlation, ſuſpenſion, &c. thatthey might make-yſc:ofchem, as occa-
ſion was offercd.. Fheycounſelled the Popealſoro goeto Bolonia in perſon.
For bclides the recciuizig of morefrequent and freſh aduices, andthe ſudden
making of jncident, and. neceſſary prouilions, hee might haue a colourable
reaſon to. tranſlate the Councel to-that Citie , ypon cucry ſmall occaſion,
or co ſuſpend it; defiring him that, as they had imparted nothing to the
Cardinall Madruccio, ſo nothing might come tq the cares of the Catdi-
nall of Trens, his vacle , who, for many reſpects, and particular intereſts
would certaincly vie all mcancs that it might: not bee transferred from
Trent, » | | | | "oP
To quench the boyling heat in the controuerſic about the inſtitution of
Biſhops, that it might nor increaſe , by meancsof ſo many who were prepa-
 rcd to contraditt Laynez,, they would not hold any Congregation for many
daics. Butrthis lcaſure did ſtrengthen their opinions , and they ſpake of no
matter bur of this, in cuery corner, and almolt eucry day three or foure of
them 10yned together, and went to ſome of the Legates, to renew the in-
ſtance. And, one day , the Biſhop of Gadici with fourc more, hauing , after
the propoſition made ,added, that as they confeſled thatthe juriſdiction be-
longed to the Pope, fo they were content it ſhould bee expreſſed in the
Canon. The Legatcs belecucd that the Spantards, acknowlcdging their er-
ror, would confecfſethatall iuriſdiftion was in the Pope, and deriued from
him ; bur, defiring afurther declaration, that Biſhop ſaid, rhac as a Prince
doth inſtitute in a Citica Iudge of the firſt inſtance, and a Iudge of appealc,
who though he be ſuperior, yer cahnot takeauthority from the other ; nor
vlurpe the cauſes belonging to him, ſo CHRIST, in the Church, hath jn-
ſticutedall Biſhops, and the Pope ſuperiour, in whom the ſupreme Eccleſi-
aſticall iuriſdiftion was , yer ſo, that others had theirs , depending on
CHKRI STalone. Fiue Churches complained to cuery one, that ſo much time

was loſt without holding any Congregation, which might bee profitably

ſpent, but tharthe Legates did, according to their vic, purpolcly ſuffer it to
bee ſpent in vaine, that they might giueforth the Articles of reformation
the laſt day, thatthere might not be time tro conſider, much lefſe ro [peake
of chem, ButtheLegares were not idle, ftill thinking how they might finde
aforme for this Canon, which might bee recciued, and changed it more
then once a day :which formes going about , arid ſhewing the heſitation of
the Legares, the Spaniards werenot onely encouraged in their opinion, bur
ſpake allo with moreliberty ; ſo that, ina mecting of many Prelates ,'S+goui
was not afraid to ſay, that one word would bee caule of the ruine of the
Church. Scuen

——
I==

— At... lh. ti. _ _ D PE. a. _  — — A
_ —

I Pa 2.7

Ers9. Councellofthe\Trent. = __ - 619

Seutn dayes being paſt wichoutany Congregation, the thirticcthof to. 1 $62
borzche Legates being in conſultation, as inthedayes before, all che Spaniards, {>——
wich ſome others; required audience, andmadea ncw inſtance, that the in- Frzwmuxs
Ricurion and ſuperiority of Biſhops De iareDiuino, might bee defincd,laying, frnraaern
that ifir were nordone;; they ſhould faile rodocthar which is iuſt and nece(> $*mtn*: 9
faryin rheſerimes; for clearing of che Carholique rrueth,and proteſting they ——
would affiſtnomore.in-Congregation or Sefhion, This being ditulged,ma-
ny. Italian-Prelates agreed rogerher in the houfe of Cardinal Simonera, in the
Chamber of 1aliusSimonsta>;)Bilhop of Pefearas, and came to the Legates
the next morningyzhree Parriarches, ſixc Arch biſhops , andelcucn Biſhops
wich a requeſt, that ic might not beeput imorthe Canon, thar the ſuperioruy
is Deere Diumo,, in regard it ſauouredof ambition, and-was' volecmely that
chemſclues ſhould giue fentence in'their ownecauſe,and becauſe the greater
part would not hauc it putin, theoccaſion.might notbeegiucutoſpeake of
the Popes authority ,which they.-would ;-and. ought ro confirme. When
this was knowen in Trent, many did belecue that this inſtance was procured
by the Legats themſclucs; whereupon after Euenſong, a greater numberal-
ſcmbled chemfelues inthe veſtry ,in fauoubof the Spaniſh opinion, & others
in the houſe of the B.of Modena, for the ſameend:; and there were fourc other ._-
aflemblicsinthe houſes ofthe Arch-biſhops of Otranto, Taranto, Roſano, and of
the Biſhop of *Parma. The. rumulr proceeded (o farre, that the Legats were |
afraid of ſome ſcandall, and thoughtrhey could by no meancs hold the Sefſ1-
onatthe rime appointed;, .and thar there was a necellitie to diſcufle ſome
points of doctrine,and propoſefome martterof reformation, befote they came
tothe reſolution of the Article which was the caulc of ſo greatea motion.

And Simonets complained vften that he had little afliftance from Man:ua
and Seripando, who howlocuerthey did ſome thing , yet could not hide their
thoughts, which did incline'to/the aduerfaries. x

Letters of credencecame from the Marquis of Peſcara, to the principal! porting
Spaniſh Prelats, wich commiſſion to his Secretaric, to vſe the ſtrongeſt per- «1:4
{ſwaſtons with thom, and ro aduiſe them not ro touch any thing in preiu-
dice of the holy Sea, aſſuring them thatrhe King would be Aifpleaſed ,and
that great inconucnicnces in his kingdomes would cnlue;aying,it could nor
be expected from their wiſedome that they would refoluc inany particular,
before they vnderſtood his Maieſtics plealute. And he gaue him order to
aduile whether any of the Prelates madefmall accountof this admonition,
or were refraCtary in obeyibg , becauſe it was the Kings pleaſure that they
| ſhould ſtand vnired in thedeuotion of his Holineſſe, and thould diſpatch The angvers

expreſſe Curriers: if there wete occaſion. ' Granataanſwered , thathe never ginnar®
meant to ſay anything againſt the Pope, and thought that whatſocucr was 974+
ſpoken for the authority of Biſhops , was-for the bencfit of his Holincfle,
being aſſured, thatifcheir authoriry were diminiſhed, the obedicnce ro the
holy Sea would decrealſcalſo,though by:rcafon of his old age, he knew that
it would not happen in his time; that his opitiion-was' Catholike, for which
he would becontehe radie;; that, ſeeing ſuch contratietic, he was not wil-
ling to remaine in Trent, becauſe hee expeed but ſmall fruic, and therefore
had demanded lcaue codepartotihis Holineſſe acid his Maicity , _ de-
| ring

—

*

JP —_ — X

rr ————_ _ —_— hs 29d lk. &. = o————— _ __ oo - = =o —_

WR ——_

620 The Hiſtorieof iow W | L IaBy 74
1562 {iringroreturne;:rhar at bis ture ourof;8pajve, heixerciued aan

> mandement fronythe King.and.this Miniſtetsjcþut10; aynica the ſernce
Fzrzonaxy. of Godyand the quiet &-retosmarion ofthe-<hureh, wbichhe-hadrrulyper-

they retired all rogerher, andftneroithe KingarNoaorziof the family otiSe+
gouta, wirh inſtruction.,,.toinforme hisMaictid rharqeitber rhey;torany'o-
ther Prelats could bee reptchended} ifrhry; knew: norhow. ro promote:the:
proiects:of Rome; becanle they ITY ching;, but onelywtch-
uer their opinion-concerniugpchat twhriehywas proptitdiby:theLegates ak
his Maieſtic did well know 3: thovitoubbulqbechard:taintorrogaterhan;;
and binde them to an{were-agiinſtitheir:conſtrcnce;. tharchey:yere affi<
red they-ſhould gtfend Go Dd! aodrhis:Maicftiby” ifrheyſhould doc obher-
wile; thatthey could wat bee blamed for ſpeaking! out. of:ſcafon;'brcante
they didnor propote, burat{werey that wheh rhey-did commitany crrour, -
they vwerercady rocorrectit, actording tothe; commandement of His Ma-
1eſtte; that they hadtpoken according:;to:the Catholiquedoetrine, in fuch
plaine rearmes, that they were ture hrewould appraucall., belecching hinuro!
vouchlafe trothearethem,, beforchee. did conderye anyhnitter opinion. of
them. 7 4 | ; FJ 219131 > 4 # (33s 16 er; |
The Teancs  TholePrelars werenat decciuedin belconing it did proceed: rather from
curve the Spy che Minilters, thenthe King. ' 8imonetavicd perſwations;atthe fametime,
\ ©. to another Spaniſh Secretaric.o61the Count of Lamas, thatthe Count bee-
Ingo 2flilt arthe Councell, it. was-Heceflary. hee ſhould come prepared , ro
keepe thoſe Prelates within their bounds gothetwiſe there would cnlue not
onelypreiudicero the Church of;G o.D, buttd the dominions of his Maicf}
allo, becauſetheir principall intent was to afſume allauthority tothemlelues,
and to haue free adminittrationintheir Churches, And heeperſwaded the
Secretary of Peſcara to mecte Lnnaon the way;arid to informe hum of thediſ-
{1gnes, and boldneſlc ofthoicPrelatcs , and ry perſwade that it woukÞbre
good [cruice for the King to reprefſe them, :It conformiric whereof'/ar-
mienſe wrotea log letter ro Perras Canifarro the Emperours Court, tharhce
would v{cthe ſamepcrſwafion'to the Count. © + | ban! bro
Thedoctrine colle&edour of the voyces, deliuered in the former iCon-:
 gregations, being giuen foorth jrhey-began againe to ſpeake their opinions:
concerning it the third of Nouerhber: , -BurCardinall Senoncta forewarned
his adherents toſpeakereſeruedlyi, andnot rotunnc out into:words'of pro-
uocation, becauſerhatrime did requirethat mens minds ſhould'rather be/pa-
cificd, Hauing ſpoken hereof three -dayes, and retutningoften tothe'con-
rrouerfie, by rcaſonof che connaxibn/ of themarter}, the Legares thought ir
neceſlary to propole ſome marterof-reformarion;;ceſpecially becauſe, the
French-men approaching;che Biſhop of Paris faid publikely , tharirwastime
ro

ts begin togiuefaricfattivn'to cheF

=—y Om —
ik. Golf Tr. Gu

*
7
" ,
-

b *

,and other Natiobs,deputing ſome 1562,
Pieſiter of cicH” oo. confrdb?Uf the VeculRled BPUhGRe Colitis, Backs 7 ry
chettalians; nEicher in Trangoor in Rome,could Know them ctharvnrill then _—
noreformarion' had beenithade, becauſe har which was decrecd was to no 577i
putpols. But the Legars beitigto propoſe fome thing otreformatenchought Praney >
it niceefſary , rhatthey might nor giue occaſion of many incotiueniences, to I.

in withrefidence, © Eu 6-6 whe 7 10ank

It hath beeni related already whar the Pope wrote in this bufineſle, Af.
terwards,cheLegates andtheir adherents were in coritinuall cogitation how
co'compoſea Decree, thar might ſatisfje his Holineffe, without preiudice of
the promiſe which Manriia madeto thit Prelaces. ” Forto propole ar the firſt,
tho reference of it to the Pope, ſeemed ret thatpromile; and there
was great difficultic what Dectee to propoſe, which not beeing accepted,
might giuethern occaſion to returne to rhe buſineſſe of reference. They
made a calculation of thoſe who mighrbeedrawen to their ſide, 4nd of thole
who were torally oppoſite, and found that the Councell was diuided into
threepares,almoſt cquall ;- rhar is,into theſe two, andathird ; who deſired a
definition to bee made in Councell , without offence of his Holineſſe: of
which there was hope to gainethe maior part, and fo ro overcome the aduer-
faries. Therefore they diuided themſclues, and perſwaded fo effetually, mnnmomns
thar, beſides others they gained ſeuen Spaniards,among(t whom were 4ſtor- Þ7 7G:
ga,Salamanca, Tortoſa,*Patti,and Elma, the Biſhop of Maceralabouting ſtrong-
ly hercin, At | Bi:

Foure courles were propoſed r&ome to the execution;one, to make a Forcourſs |

Decree, onely with rewards and uniſhments; another, rhar many Prclates coming Revi-
ſhould defire the Legates , that te bufineſſe might be remirred co the Pope, © ©
which requeſt ſhould bee read in Congregarion , hoping that, by.perſwalſt-
ons, ſo many would come vnto them , thar their number woul&exceed the
other, by onchalfe; the third that the Legates (hould propoſe the remiſſion
in Company ; thefourth, that the Pope ſhould preſently ſhake an &ffe-
ctuall prouitioH, which ſhould be printed imrhediatly , and publiſhed cucry
where beforethe Seſſion , that the oppoſites , beeing preuented, might bee <a
forced to yecld. To thetirlt was obiected, that all thoſe wliodemaunded them.
the declaration de tare Dinino, would bee contrary, and thinke rhat rewatds
and puniſhments cannot bee ſocffetuall as the Jdhrwion , eſpecially rhete,
being already Decrees of Councels and Popes, which hauc ncucrbten cftce-'
med: and there would bee difference alſo concerning the teward&and pu-
niſhments. That the Prelares will make impertinent demands; that, at the
lcaſt they will defire the collation of Benefices with Core. That they
will demaund the abolition of rhe: Priuiledges of the Regulars, and o-
ther exorbitant things; and that they ſhall cucr bec'in danger of mutation
after the propoſition made, yntill it bee paſſed in Seflion , eſpecially when
the French-men come, ' who may demaund a retraftation. It was oppo-
ſed to the ſecond, thar the Prelates could not' Bee brought ro make re-
queſt, without'clamour; that thoſe who'werg norcalled , would dildairig
and goe tothe aduerſcpart; that the aduterſarics alſy would make vnions, |
and clamours, and complaine of the'praftifes. To ths third was _

of” raed,

tvs
ESDINAND,

ki

622

ſterieof” 0 OOO apr

I562
PXxNSN

Pivs 4.

FERDINAND.

but for fearc of ſceming xo diſtru

EL1itABETH.
CHARLES 9-
Paiitrty 2.

RS

ie&ted that the oppoſites; would fay , that the copſent eas nor voluntary,
his Holincſſe, and, becaule, thera. was
nor liberty to ſpcake, and if it were refuſed it, were as. much as..$p.call
the Popes authority intoqueſtion: beſides it, would bec layd that this-refe-
rence was defired,by his Holineſſe. Againſt the fourth was ſayd, thatche
Popes Bull becing not read in Councel, occaſion was giuen rg the Fathers to
demaund the definition ,and ifir were, it might bee fearedthar ſome would
demaunda greater prouiſion, and ſq all would ſucceede with {mall repura-
tion. Sccing ſo "_ difficulties they prolonged: the buſindſle;, which did
not giue ſatisfaction , becauſe it had beene publiſhed, thar.the Fathers ſhould
ſpcake of it. Finally, beeing forced to refolue, the ſixth of Nouember,em-
bracing chat courſe to propole a Decree with rewards and puniſhments, af-
rer that ſome of the Fathers had, ſpoken concerning the buſincſle of thar
Congregation, the Cardinall of Mantra propolcd it in good tearmes, ſaying
in ſubſtance; thar.it wasa thing neceſlary, deſired by all. Princes, andthar

| the Emperour had often made requeſt for it, and complayned thart- this

point was not immediatly diſpatched ; and that , by troubling themlclues
with vaine queſtions , which bee of no importance, theprincipall conclu-
ſion hath been deferred ; that this is nota mater which needeth diſputation,
but a meanes onely remaineth co be found , roexecute that which cuery one
thinketh ro bee neceſſary; that the Catholiqueand moſt Chriſtian Kings
had made inſtance for the ſame, and that all Chriltendome did deſire to ce
the prouiſion ; that this matter was ſpoken of in the timeof Paultherhird,
and paſſed oucr by ſome , very impertijnently , with [uperfluous queſtions,
which chen were wilely buricd in filence; that ir appeareth , by che ſame
reaſons,thar there is no neede to handle any thing now bur that which was
propolcd in the Pecree. And, amonglt other things, hee fayd , that they
were confirmed by the {peach of the Ambaſſadour Layſac, who had often
ſhewed by good reaſons, that nothing was to bee required, but that ref1-
dence ſhould beexccuted, and that it was to nopurpole to ſhew whence the
obligation came. Amonglt other particles, there was in the Decree , thar
the Biſhops reſtding ſhould not be bound to pay Tenths , Subſidies, or any '
other Taxc, impoſed by what authoritie ſocucr , though atthe inſtanceof
Kings and Princes. "This mooved all the Ambaſladours yery much ; bur
Lavſac, diſſembling , complained that the Cardinall of Mantua. had named
him, withour telling him of itbcfore, granting hec had ſpoken {o miich vn-
ro him, buras a particular fricnd,not as an Ambaſſadour. .And ro make his
complaintthe more gricuous, hee found fault allo , that the Catholike King
was named before the molt Chriſtian, Of the Tenths hce fayd nothing,

hoping that, by that which he had ſaid, and by ſome oppoſition, which

the fauourers of iu4divinum would make, thatforme of Decree would bee
hindered. Pine Churches {ayd.onely,that hee did not belecue that the Empe-
rours minde was as the Cardinall had propoſed. - But the Secretary ofthe
"ex ex of Peſcara dewandcd openly, that the words might beamended, ſo
that they might not preiudice the grace granted by the Popetohis Catholike

Maicſtic,for the Subſidie ofthe Galljes. The Legates did belecuc-they had
by chis meanes gained the Prelates; burafter chey ynderitood the exceprion
; for

— —

for Spaine ,chey:began to ſayamongſtthemlelues, tharchey; wert fduoured: 15852
ighat which could-or bee granted,  Foraw.Spaineand- France yand.vnder. >";
cucry other Prince they: ſhouldibes forted ro-pay; and: imthe' ſtate: of the: Fravmano
Church alſo , with.a:Nor ab$tantibus , the grace would bee' made of no Emmy

CHARLES g.

force.  Iei245 *Y 18 BISTN | o{IC i CIs D(K21] PTY IN 2 paws
The next day, they paſſed from refidenceto Epiſcapall Order... AndSegd- CLAS
wareplicd , that he inſtitution bf Bilhops de iure Diaino,/vas handled Land: Gif: |

rclolued;.inthe fame Councellynder lalius thechird Jwith-a gencrattconſent Cardinal of
and«hat hinſelfe bad deliucred hisopiniontherein;and ſpecified tbe ayand = bilopef .
houre when it was. | Thc Cardinal} of Mantud- cauſed theaRQes of thattime *4**
robeſcarched, and liat co be: read by the Secretary which was thandefined
tobe publithed , expoundiog them {oz as thag;hee congluded'tharit was imei
ther decided, nor examined , nor propoſed in that manner;as it was faydby
Scgonia, "The Biſhop an{wering, though reueremtly, inapfcarance, there þal-
fed ſo many replies , that-rhey were forced to breake-Vp:che Congregation.
An4 beeaule' lome will perhaps delire roknowe which; otchem fpake! with
molt'rcaſon, it will bee fit ro recite heere.that:-ywhich was then decided inthe
Copgregations,though not pubhthed it-St{hon, by realoa of the fudden 4i(-.
ſolution of that Councell, before related. | -Ehree heads: of do@teine. were
then compoled,thethird whereof was inſcribed ,ofthe Fbierarchie,and of the
difference of Biſhops and Prieſts: and bauing {poken-much of the Eiterarchie,
ir laith thus aftzrwards , as it isrran(lated verbatimour of theLatine. -Befides,
the holy $ynod doth teach,that thoſe are not to bc baarktned onto, wbo ſay that Biſhops
are not inſlituted Iare diuino, it appearing manifeſtly , by che words of the Goſpel, chat:
CHR1$T our Lord harbbimſelfe called the Apoſiles , and promoted them to the degree
of th? {poflle/hip , into whoſe place the ©Biſbops are ſubrogated ; neither ought mee to
thinke that this, (0. eminent and neceſſary a degree, hath beene brought into the . burch
by human inst:tution ; for ſo wee ſhould detratt from , and diſeſtzeme the dinine proni-
dence ; fa; failing in the moſt noble things. Theſe were the. wordcs vicd in that
oint of doctrine. There were norcd alſo eight Canons; the: laſt whereof:
laid chas : Hee thatſhall fay char Biſhops are notinſlitured inre Diniue,or are,
not ſuperivur to Pricits,or haue not auth oritieto ordaine, or that this docth
belong to Prieſts, let him be anathema. Eucry one being, prepoſleſied with
an opinion, doth tinde it 1nallchisthat is read; and ig,is'no wonder, if cach
of thoſe two Prelates did tinde his owne in the ſame words, which the Papa-
lins did interprete onely of the power of Order, and the Spaniards. of all,
which containeta arder and iurildiftion. Yet ſome of che Popilh, Prelates
did belecug that Mitua, ſtudigally taining to thinke as they did; canſcd the FE
old determjpation tg, bee-read,” nar toconfirme his owne opinion, 'burthe _
Spaniſh, which ſecretly heedefended. |, . F |
The Cardiagll of Lomimebceing cnttcd. into Tralie,the/Pope could not de-
niethe Ecench-mep,,to.caulſethathe ſhould. be expected, And heewrore 10
Trent,that they (ſhould prolong che Sellion,yetnot fo as to pafſe Nouember. -
TheLegates receiving aduice,that the Cardinall was vpon.the Laga gt Garda,
in the Congregation of the.ninth of Nouember, Maxtuapropofed the de-
ferring of che Seſion yntill the 26. of the ſame mogerhy, , which Lomine not,
knowing, ſcnt{arlode Graffi , Biſhop of Mante Fiaſcour', and EF ereers
| alſo

— -——

622.

The Hiſtorie of »_ ” any

2 562 - alfotothe Legates, that, if irwould plcaſerhem to rary for him, he would be
AS. in Trent within-atciwdayes,, And they refolued ro make no more Congre-

Prvs 4
FERDINAND.

— ——— -—_—_

—

ELt1zZABETH.
CHARLES 9.
Parti 3.

ASL

arions-yatil} higcomming,togiuc him the more ſatisfatiom* The Bithop
relared, that the Cardinall did (kevy a good\matention/inall his diſcourſes, and
that hee would fend his opinions to his Holincſle, that hee might ſee them
that chePrelates'in hisgompany came fortheſcruice of God,and with a good

" mind toward be-Apoltolique Sea,and did hope thar their comming would

-makearoncord inthe Countelil; andcaulerhemrto bee diligent in'making a

frairfull refdrmarion; without anyreſpect of their owne intcreſt ;and many

"fuck things hee ſaid? which thoughthey weteccltified by Graf, and confir-

1heentric of
the Cardinall
of Loraine m-
to Tren.

He viatectn
tie Card. of
Mantua had
audience the
next day, 1nd
maketh a

ſperch,

med: by-the Ambaſlador de Ferrieres,yerchePopath Prelates did belceue them
oncly1n complement, and porpoled to'y/ eall:the remedies, deſſcigned both
im Trent and Rome. nn nh 1 10W | few
+ Loraint entred Tront:; and was meta mileon the way by Card. Madyaccio
and manyPrelars;/andby alt rhe Legates avthe gateof the Citie;from which
ace he was accompanicd rothe houſe wherehe was lodged: Hee rode be-
rweenethe Cardinals Mantuaand: Sermpands, which honour they thought ne-
ceflary to doc vmtohim;becaule the ſame was done vnto him by Monte, and
Santa ( rote; Legaresin-Bolonia, when the Councel] was helde in that Cirie, ar
the crime whenthe went to Rome for the (ap. inthe cuening he wentto vilic
the Cardinall of Mautau;, and had audience the next day before the Legates,
with the Ambaſladours, Lazfacand de Ferrieres, He preſented the Kings let-
rers dirc&ed rouhe Qouncell, nd-then made'ia long dilcourle, ro ſhew his
inclination to ſeruethe Apoltolique Sea, promiſing ro communicate all his
deſignes to the Pope, ahd to them the Legates, and not to delire any thing,
but to the good ſatisfattion of his Holinefſe. Hee (aid, hee would nor bee
curious 1h ynprofitable queſtions, adding, that the two controuerſtes,of the
m{irution of Biſhops,and of reſtdcnce, which were ſpoken of cuery where,
had diminiſhed rhe authority of the Councell, and taken away the good opi-
nion the world Held of ir. For his owne part he profeſſed hee was more in.
clincd tothe opinion which doeth afhrme them de tare diuino, yet though
it were ccrtainely trije, hee faw no nececſſitic, or opportunitie to proceede
ro the declaratioli thereof; that the end of the Councell ought to bee to re-
unite thoſe ro the Church who were ſeparated; that himſelfe had becne ac a
parley with the Proteſtams, and had not found them fo different, bur rhar
they may bee reduced, if the abules were taken away , and that no time is
more fit to win them then this, becaulc it is certaine they were neuer fo yni-
ted to the Emperour, as now; that many of them, and'1n particular, the
Duke of Wittemberg,was willing to aſſt in'Councell but it was tieeeffary to
giuc him fatisfaction, by a beginning of refortnation, in which thEſeruiceof
Go D did tequire that their Exeefencies ſhould imploy their labour ; hee
ſhewed the defire of the King, that fit remedies mighr'bee applied tothe
neceſſities of his people, ſeeing that, as he had warrenow with the Hugo:
notes, lo if the abuſes were nor provided againſt, hee ſhould haue morg)to
doe with the Catholiques, whoſe obedicnce will bee quite loſt; rhat theſc
were the cauſes why-his Maieſtie had ſent him'to the Couneell. Hee:com-
plained that, of all the money which the Pope promiſed to lend the King, he

could

'F

a.

L157. ' theCouncell of Trent. 625

could recciue but tiuc and rwentie thouſand crownes,,di{ourſed by the Car- 1562.
dinall of Ferram,in regardof thelimitations, pur inthe Mandars, becauſethey - SY
could not be exacted bur vponcertaineconditions;, 'rorake away! the Prag- Fa meu
marike- of all che Parliaments of che kingdome, a thing of {o:great difficul- Eroummn”
ric, that there was no hope cuer to receive one pennie. Intheend hee ſaid C*ontn5 5
hee had brought new inſtructions to the Ambaſladcurs ; and therefore ——S—
when hee had ſpoken tothe Synode, in the Kings name, in the firlt con-
gregation, he would afcerwards only deliver his fuffrageas an Arch-Biſhop,
not medling with the affaires of the kingdome , butleauing the care thereof
ro them. |

TheLegatsanſwered, without conſultation, as cucryone thought good, Fine
commending his pictic and deuotion towards the Apoltolike Sea, and offe- KEE
ring to imparr all cheir affaires vato him.” They ſhewed whar patience they
vicdin ſuffering thelibertie, orrather the licence of Prelats, in their [peeches,
who went vp and downe , and mooucd new queſtions : but now, his excel-
lencie being 1oyned with them, they doubted nor but by his aduice and af
{iſtance they might be able to repreſſerhis great boldenefle, andcompole the
diff:rences riſen , and proceede- heercaftcr'inſo comely a manner, that the
world might recciue edification; which before had conceiued a bad opinion,
rhat the cuill will of the Proteſtants was too much knowne,who when they
ſhewthemſelues not auecrſe from concord, then itisto bee dovbred that they
invent new occaſions of greater difference; that it is cerraine that they hauec
demanded a ©oun:zell, becauſe-they thought it would beedenied them, and
at the ſametime when they required it, they indeauoured by all meanesto
hinderit, as now thoſe , who areaſſembled in Francfort, laboure that it may
ot proccede , and vic meanes rothe Emperour tro interpoſe fome impedt-
ment; thar they hare the very name of the Councell, as much as of the
Pope, neither haverhey formerly made ay other vfeof it , then to coucr
and excu{e their apoitacie fromthe Apoltolike Sea, that there was no hope
of their conuecr{10n, and therefore meanes only was to bee vied to prelerue
the good © atholikes in che trtifaith.'They commended the pu aud good
intention of rhe king, and ſheived the defite of the' Pope for reformarion
and what hee had doneto refortrie the courth not regarding the diminuri-
on of his owne reucnuzs, afidithathee hadalwaics written to the Councell;
thatthey would labourinthef{&mebufſineſſe, whereunto themſeluesthe Le-
oates were much'iinclinedanddiſpofeds; but were hindred by the contenti-
ons of the Prelates, which-eonlumedialmoſt allcherimie; that if in France.
there bee danger to/lovofe the obedience. of the Cathohkes, ir is a/matrer ro
bee treated of with his Hoftieffe, - Concerning: the loanc of money, they
faidethe paternall charitie of thePopexowardstheKing and Kingdome' was
ſo great, tharthey'mightbeeſſitedrhacrrhe eondicions were pur infor pure
neceſſitic. And ifter digers thtwlenientsg they! coticluded!rchar on Mun-

-

day heeſhould bee Keetd ire" Secrhbl eotigrevation; to! declare ro the
Fathersthe occali6l of biy&omimij ables Trade vnto them"thie Kings
letters;® ay 1 79" FJ ADITSHMDIORTIZ® AL. 13:50 TT Tt :

þ TheLegates were ttoublet with theſe-wordes of the Cardinall, rhathee
would'not mcddte witlYthe affaites of the Kingdome,butleauethem rg che
Ggg Ambaſla-

616 | The Hittory of L1s. 7,

1562 Ambaſladours, which were not conformeablc to thoſe which Lanſac and de
-» 29nd > Ferrieres had viteredalirtle before, ſaying , they were glad of the Cardinals
Expmaxy. COMMINg, becauſcthcy ſhould be calcd ofall paines, all being (as they ſaid)
£3797, todepend vpon his Honourable Lordfhip. They concluded thatthey were
CnarLrs 9 ro rake heede of thoſe difhimulations, and the rather , becauſe Cardinall Si-
; A moneta had recciued certaine- aduice from Milan, that the French Abbots,
Todged in Saint Ambroſe, ſaid they would ioyne with the Spaniards, Dutch-
men, and VIcramontanes, and treat of matters which would nor plcaſethe
Court. Beſides,the French-men were heard to ſay in all their dilcourles, that
time was not to beeloſt in queltions , but the gy Say to bee ſpoken of;
that they ought to begin with taking away pluralitie of Benefices , and that
the Cardinall would bee the firlt to leaue them, to giue example that diſpen-
fations areto bee giuen gratis; that the Anrates , preventions and [mall dares
ought to be remooucd, and onely one prouifion madefor aBenctice: ampli-
tying allo the matter, that the Pope had a moſt excellent occaſion to gaine
immortal glory, by making the forefaid prouiſion , to fatishe Chriſtian peo-
plc, and to vnite, and appcatc them by prouiding againſt rheſc abuſes and in-
conuznicnces ; and that in recompenſe they woyid pay vntohis Holinefle an
haltc Tenth ; that chey were come thither, relolute nor todepart, before they
had attempted to make all theſe proutſions, how long focuer they taryed
—* there; thatin caſe they ſaw they could not preuaile, they would make no
clamour, bur returne quictly into France, and make the ſame prouiſions at
home. The Legats allohad notice, that the Cardinall held great intc]]1gence
with the Emperour, and ( which was of ore importance ) with the King of
Bohemia, viho were manitelily inclined to give [atisfaCtion tothe Princes of
Germaniz , who did vndoubredly hate the Councell, and would bee glad ic
might not proceede , but diflolue in ſome aduantagious, mannerfor them,
and diſhonourable for the Apoltoltke Sea and the Synode. They ſuſpeted
allo the Catholike King in regard of an aduice which came to the Secretarie
of the Count of Luna, that the inſtruction beivg alreadie made in Spaine for
thai Count, it was refolued to ſend MartinGazgellone , who had beene Secre-
raric tf harles the fift, to bring him.inſtrution by word of mouth, which
they would not commit to writing, by reaſon of diucrs aduices which larely
had come vnto them.. - And confronting this with another aduice recciued
out of France, that the Cardinall of Loraine had, before he departed, commus-
nicatcd ro his Catholique Maieſtie the petitions; hee purpoled ro handie in
Councell, and knowing afluredly chathe had beene ſolicited by Germanie, to
make initance for thereformation, they doubged that 'the comming of that
Cardinall might hatch ſomegreatnouitic, and,were not plcaſed one tor with
his ſpeach in the audience, corigerningthe (comming of the Dutch-men to
the Councel|,confideringthe conferctice hehad with the Dukeof Wittenberg.
In ſumme, preſuppoting that a pexfon of {o-greate authoritjc and wiledome
would not haue come, withouta ſureground te build his delignes ypon, they
rclojued tofend preſently gll theſe conſideruions tg the Pope.  Andha-
uing obſcry-d char whenſocuer any cxtraordinarics cameto Trent, or depar-
_ ted, the Prelats tooke occaſion toralke, to ſecke our: the caulc, to: whilper,
to maxe a aoilc, and tolay plots allo, which, now that rhe Cardivall. was
come,

— _

— __——————

'F [B.'7. 3 : the Gancell of Trent. ru

come, might produce more dangerous effects, they difparched ſecretly; and 1 56
wrrore'that order might bee'giuen to che Curriers"to Jeaverheir guide and ><
baggage at the thext Poſt ro' Trent, and enret ſlowly intoche Citic , with the Fexpnigs
dilparc  onely2”” 1 317; LOSES FHRSEY 11 9911 TRUT BUR 4 2 HOQTG O01 190 rot

The Gardinallwent not into thecongregation at the day appointed by CuIRLRL
reaf#h of a(niall feuer , which hal ſeſeFon himy and therefore heedelited >
the) woufdprictdeflo wy , tharhe mighrbe preſet before the reſolutisn! deveedthe os:
The figgates-feſhucd ro giue him ſatisfattion;, and therefore they begart?cmouevee
the Congregari6n later then they were wonr, Inwhich the French'Biſhop! ww
and Abbars becjng preſent, ageneral muſter was made. (thentimber file inco Trewts.
Prelates becing fohnd ro beerwo hundtedand eighreene) and a place allig?
hed to tnery one. TD he nexr day, there beeing ſome difficulty about prece;
dence; *they made'anew aflignarion' of places, making all the Prelares to
encer into rhe Congregation oneby one, and conduRting euery one to his
ſeare. [n thoſe'Tongregations none ofthe Frenchmen ſpake, cither becauſe
rhey expeaedthe Cardinallto beginne,' or becauſe they were willing roſee
the manner firſt, The nineteenth of Nouember the Arch-biſkop of0-
tranto appointed a banquet at night for many Prelates, and hee that had A fagiou:
thecharge ro inuite them , ſaying, thar they ought notto faile, in regard _
of the ſeruicethey might doe the Apoſtolique Sea, by comming thither , ic
was immediately publiſhedin Trent, thar : wn Popiſh prelares, were aflem-
bled, ro makeacombination againſt the Frenchmen, This diſtaitedthem
much , andthe more, becauſeatrer the banquer, they wereaſſured thar ſuch
diſcourſes had been vſed at the rable, and obſcruing that fince their corg-
ming ; ſome new Prelatedid arriue cuery day , they thought they were milſ-
truſted, and held to bee oppoſites. Therefore the Legates, ro make ſhew
of all confidence, and refpe&t of honour tothe Cardinall, in the Viſtcarions
whichcach of them made while hee was ſicke , they perſwaded him to rake
ſo good an occaſion to compoſe the controuerſics which thequeltions hauc
made; a thing which would bee cafic for him, and of great reputation, be-
caule no man hath beenable to effe& ir. The Cardinall feemed to bee wil-
ling, and offered his endeauours.

The Pope, who in thoſe dayes had been in ſome danger, by reaſon of fax rg
a greate ynexpeRt:d accident, hauing recoucred his health, receiued advices tity n"*
from the Legates, and from diuers other places, by whichthe Frenchmen 6
had paſſed, all vniformely full of theirdeſſeignes. Beſides; when hce was
ſicke, Monfieur del Iſl: vſed praQtiles, and layd plotces, that, ifheehad dicd,
the Pope might bee created in Trent by Nations, and the Sea held vacant
vntill the reformation were made. For ſo the Councell would bee free , and
the new Pope would accept the reformation , which was cltabliſhed before
his creation. This mooucd him moſt of all, as well becauſe cuery man, ......_...
and Princes eſpecially , are diſpleaſed when any thing is defſeigned ro bee Holmete.
done after theirdeath, asalſo becauſe hee was by this molt aſſured, thar the
Frenchmen were reſolucd ro reforme the Court, and the Popedome, Theſe
things, andthe differences in Trent abour the inſtirution of Biſhops and ref1-
dence, cauſed hifn to hold a Congregation cuery day, and hee could not for-
beare to tell cucry one, that hee had no bufineſſe mote important, and dan-
| Ggg 2 gerous

Etiz4Btrh.

628 The Hittory of L1s.7,

1562 gerous to him chen the Conncell. And relating in Conliſlorie the, diffe-
'{ rencesin Tremtabour the inſtitution}, and the new: propoſuionof refidence,
Pivs 4 ; 6 on UT ETSY Y .
F:xpmany. hee breake Out intothis exclamation, that all the Biſhops henebiced by him
Etizazera, WCIC his oppolnes, and that hee maintained an armic of enemies. in Trent.
$aarres 9+ There was an opinion that hee (ecretly wiſhed ome good. lucgs fc nqthe
A” Hugonots in France, and ſomeaduanrage ito the. Proteltants, hs Dicr of
And makcyh : Sb. wed A a LIL
hun exclaime, Germanie, that the Councell mighr be difſolucd,and not by.hismeance, Bur,
er fed $ceing wholly bear to prouide remegies, he gaue order tothe Biſhops who
© Trexr,,nd WEIEDOL parted from Rome as yet, rodepartimamiediatly; and cauſcd Marcus
— vrtnolders = Atttonins © Boba, Bilhop of 4ſt, Ambaſſadour tar the Duke of, Saxoy, red! ing
with him, togoc thither alſo. Onchc other, ide, bee farbadethe Archbir
ſhop of Twrris , and the Biſhop of Ceſena to gox thirber;;;3the former, þccaule
hee had defended reſidence to bee de ture auungywith more conftancig.then
much, by rcafon of the laughter of his two vneles , and of the;cxecutzons

| f.Panl ; che. other becaule hes
was a familiar friend of the Cardinall of Naph
made againit his perſon: and hee feared, becauſe. it was ſaid, that the Count

the timesdid comporrt,, jn the Councell yndef the, other becauſe he:
s, of whom hec doubted

rearingtobe of Montebello, farher of the Cardinall, had, in his cultodic, an obligation yn- +

accuſed of S1-

ow. dc his hand, by which,:bccipg Cardinall in the Conclaye , hee promuſed a
ſumme of money to the Cardinall of Naples for his voycero bee Pope, Bur
howſocuer his greatelt difidence was in theFrenchmen , yet heethought fir
to difſemble it. Hee ſent into France fourtic thouſand Crownes, the relzdue
of the hundred thouſand which hee promilezd, And hee cauſed Sebaſtianus
Gualterus , Biſhop of Yiterbo and Ludouicus Antinori to goe.to Trent , who,
hauing bin in France, had ſome acquaintance with ſome of thoſe Prelats, and

had made themſelues knowne to the Cardinall, ynder colour to honourhim.
And hee wrote to this Cardinall and to Lan/ac Jerters tull of complemenr,
and contidence. Yet they thought that theſe men yyere {ent todiſcouer the
Cardinals intcation, and to obſeruc his procecdings ; and the rather becauſc
they had receiued aduicefrom Rome, that the Biſhop had cxhorted the Pope
not to be {o much afraid, in regard the Cardinall alſo would finde difficulties
and impediments, more then hebelecued hce ſhould, and ſaid that himſcitc
would make morcto ariſc. | |
The 22. of Nouember, the Cardinall reſolued to cnter into the Congre-
gation the day following ; and it was agreed that the Kings letters ſhould be
read , and himſelfe make a ſpcach. But Loraine, propoled allo , thatche Am-
baſladour de Ferrieres ſhould make another. Tothis the Legares did not con-
ſent, becaulcit this had beene once permitted, both hee and all other Am-
baſſadours , would [till becdefirous ro ſpeake , and propoſe, with dapger of
making greater confuſion ; bur, concealing this caule, they ſaid, that neither
in this Counccll,nor ynder Pagl or Inlizs, it was cuer permitted ro Ambaſſa-
dours to ſpeake in Congregation , but onely when they were fir!t recciued ;
and chat without the Popes conſent they could not yeclde to ſuch anouitie.
But Loraiean({wered,thatthe Kings letter, and the inſtruction beeing new,
it might bee called anew Ambaſlage, and thar, the firlt entrance. After
many an{weres and replics, Lorame. hauing giuen his word, that they
ſhould nor deſire to ſpeake any more, the Legates, to giue him fatisfation,
and

TY _—_—

L 18.7 :heComcell of Trent. 629

and thar hee miyhr not have caule- of open diltalt vere contented, 1562
Therefore the nexr day, the Congregation beeing aſſembled, the Kings CES
letrer was read, with this inſcription. 'I'o rhemolſt holy ah molt reuerend Frzomaxy:

— ——— 7 — cn

Fathers, aſſemblediin Trent to celebrate the ſacred Councell;: Inwhich hee ELrzavurs,
ſaid, char, ir hauing pleaſed God to call him to the Kingdome; it hath pleaſed p,19%5tss:
him alfo to. afflit him with many warres; but hath{o opened his cies; that, — —
howlocucr-hee be yorg , hee knowerh thatrhe principall cauſe of the euilsis [KFrenb
the diuerſitie of religion. By meanes of which diuine-illumination inthe
begint)ing of his Kingdome, hee made inftance tor rhe celebration, oÞrhe
Councel,in'which they were then afſembled;khowing that in chem theanci.

ent Farhers have found the molt proper remedies to the dike infirmities,and;

thar he-was grieued,that being the firlt to procure ſogood a worke, hethad

nor beencable ro ſend his Prelates with the firlt; the cauſes whereof becing
notorious;heerhought hee was ſufficiently excuſed ; and the rather , becauſe

the Cardinall of Loraine was now artiued; accompanied with other Prelars.

Thar rwo'principall cauſes hath mooued him to [end that Cardinall- ; the

firſt, his 0whe greatand frequent inſtance;to haue leaue ro fatisfie his duty,

in regardofthe place he holdeth in the Church j the ſecond ; becaule, being

of his Priuie Councell ,and exerciſedfrom his yourh,, in the tnolt importance

affaires of the Kingdome, he knoweth the neceſſity thereof, better then any

other, and whence the occaſions doe ariſe : ſo that hewill be able ro make a

relation vnto them conformable to the charge which is giuen him, and de-

mand in his name the remedics which arg 'expreted from their wildome,

and fatherly affeCtion, a+ well for the tranquillity of theKingdome, as for.

the generall 500d of all: Chriftendome; Hee beſeeched them ro proceede _
herein with their wonred fincerity,” that they tay come to an holy: refor-

mation, and that che ancient luſtre of rhe Carholique Church may appeare,

in the vnion of all Chriltendome in one' religion ; which will bee a worke

worthy: of them, deſired by the whole world , recompenced by God, and
commended by all Princes. I-conelufion, fottheparticulars; hee referred
himſelfeto the Cardinall,, prayingthem to-bcleeue-hiny in whatfocuet heo

%

ſhould ſay vato them on his partzv+/ *- "ol 45-OE I on « 1H ES” Thebes

; X "VI LG Cy x . 1E Jpec
After this the Cardinall (pake: "In the begining, hee ſhevved the mile- ofuece -
dinull ot 1 c-

ries of theKingdome ,deplored the warres;/\the demolitions of Churches; ©...
 eccif1ons of religious/petlons, 'conculcation of the Sacrament, burmng- of
the libraries ,-images and reliques ob'Saimrs,' oucrthrowing of the monu-
ments of Kings, Princes, and Biſhops; and-expulſion oÞthorue Paltours.
And, paſling to ciuill marters, bee ſhewed the contempr-ofthe Kings Maie-
ſtie, vlurparion of lis rents; violatlon of the-lawes , and'ſeditions raifcd a-
mong(tthepeople:' Heattribured the cauſe of all this ro the! corruprion of
manners; roh+ rvineofFeclefiaſtic4t dilcipline, and negligence in'repret-
{ing herefte,avtd invimgremedies in{ticuted by'GodT urfiung tothe Ambaſ].
of Princes, heroId then that thartwhith 'they Yee now'bebold at lealurein
France, they thall tind #hothie';lvhzet 1t aftvoagei acotoxcpent, if France,
tumbling downe with\irs ws reergtir | thallfal}:vpon places NEETE VITO' IT,
He ſpakeof the verriie and $604 dilpoftrion of he King;rhecounfkels ofche
Quecne /and King of N-mirye, ani of the othet Princes, but aid, theprinci-
hang Ggg 3 pall

I —_—_

The Hiitory of Lt _

1562

Prvs | 4. ©

FERDINAND.

ELIZABETH.
CHARLES 9.
Puitity 2.

KA RS

[|

The anſ{were.

pall marter was expected from the Synode, whencethe peace of God, which
paſſeth allvnderſtanding,ought ro come. That the molt Chriſtian King be-
ing aſſured hereof,in regard of his obſeruance rowards that Synod,and of his
ſorrow for the diftcrences of religion,did demand wo things of them. Thc
firſt, chat they would auoyd new diſcords , new and yoprofitable queſtions
and cauſea ſuſpenſion of Armes among(! all Princes and States , that ſcan-
dall may nor bee giuen to the Proteſtants, and occaſion to belecue, that the
Synode doth more Jabour to incite Princesto watte, and to make confede-
rations ard leagues,then to keepe the vnity of peace. That King Henry hath
firſt eſtabliſhed it, and then Francis continucd it, and that the preſent King,
ynderage,and his mother, haue alwayes deſiredit; which howlocuer it hath
vnhappily ſucceeded, yer they might feare that the accidents of the warre
would bez more ynfortunate, For all the ſtates of the Kingdome beeing in
dangerof ſhipwracke, onecannot helpeanother. Hee therefore defireth
that ſome account may bee held of thoſe who arc gone aſtray from the
Church, pardoning them as much as may be done withour offending God,
and holding them for friends, as much as ispoſlible , cuen as farre as vnto
the Altars. The ſecond requelt , commen to the King with the Emperour
and other Kingsand Princes , was, that a rcformarion of mancrs, and of
Eccleftaticall diſcipline, ſhould bec handled ſcrioully; wherein the King
did admoniſh andconiurcthemby Cr Rr15sT our LoRD, who willcome
to iud ;ement,that , iftrhey meant to reſtore the autheritic of the Church,and
retaine the Kingdome of France, they would nor balance the incommodities
of the French-men with their owne. He ſaid hee was glad,thart Italy was all
in peace,and that Spaine did gouerne the Helme ; but that France was fallen,
and ſcarce held ic with one tinger. Hee addcd, that, it they will demand,
who hath cauſed this tempelt and fortune, hee can lay nothirig but this, that
this fortune is come by our owne meanes, call vs into the Sea. | T hercforc
thatthere was need of boldnefle,and courage,tolooke vnto theruſclues, and
the whole locke. Intheend, heſaid, hee had ended his Legation, and,that
the Ambaſſadours would fay the reſt ; but himſelfe and the Prelates who
came with him , did proteſt that, after God, they would bee ſubic&t ro the
moſt bleſſed Pope *7 ws, acknowledging his Primacic on carth , aboue all
Churches, whoſe commands/they will never refuſe; that they doe reverence
the Decrees of the Catholike Church,andof the generall Synod,that they did
honour the Legates, oftcr concord andynionto the Biſhops, and wers glad
chatche Ambaſſadours were witneſſes of what they fayd,all forthe honour of
the diuine Maicſtic, vat |

Hauing madean end of {peaking,the Cardinall of Mantua, in few words,
commending him for the pains he had taken for theſcruice.of God; ſaid, that
all the Synode was glad of his comming, made honourable mention of his
brothers, who ia their profeſſion ſhewed no leſſe readineſſe intheſervice of
God and the kingdome, and referred himſclfte to. the anſwere which the
Arch biſhop of Zara, deputed hereunto, ſhould make, inthe name ofthe
Councell. Who ſaid that the Synod was (ory to heare of the {editions and dif-
ferences of religion in France, whole quiet and tranquilitic was alwayes deare
vnto them , andthe morethen, becauſc by the narration of his Excellencir,

they

—

L 1m 7. Councell ofthe Trent. P*j

they were ſo liucly {et beforetheir eyes, buthoped char ſhortly rhe King,imi- 1562

rating the yertue of his predeceſſors, would beable to Fepreſ ben, thatche {>——

Synode will labour, by all means, to make the true worſhip of God knowne, Fzxvixants

ro reforme maners , and reſtore tranquillitictorhe Church, which end they ruranra:

might more caſily artaine, if they were aſliſted by bis Excellencie, and the $*0ntn*.
Prelates whocame with him. Hee ſpake largely in commendation of the —v—:
Cardinall , and concluded that che Synode thanked God for his comming,

and gauc him ioy of it, and offered rogiue care to whatſocuer ſhould be deli-

uered by the Ambaſladors, in firtime and place, not doubting, but thar ic

would bee for the gloric of God, benefit of the Church, and great dignitic of

the Apoſtolique Sea. |

Afterwardsthe Ambaſſador de Ferrieres ſpake. He began with the com: Ea arooobng

mendation of the Kings diſpoſition, inclined to Religion , which appeared i-Fencb _
more by the comming and diſcourſe of the Cardinall; by whom it might be
knowne, how great care France did take of the good of the Catholique
Church, becauſc cucry one might ſce that moſt porent reaſons had induced
the King to ſend him, in regard he had cuer imployed him in his counſcll, in
the greatelt affaires of the Kingdome, that the King could appeaſe all the ſc-
ditions in three daycs, and kcepe all his SubieQts in their naturall obedience,
ifheaimedonely athis owne good, and did not defireto maintaine the Ca-
ctholique Church, and retaine the dignitic and authoritie of rhe Pope in
France ; for which hce expoſcth todanger the Kingdome, hislife, and the
goods ofall the Grandees and Nobles. And, deſcending to therequeſts, he
added,that they would not betroubleſome , nor obſtinate in them, thar the
did demand nothing but that which all the Chriſtian world demanderh;thac
che molt Chriſtian King doth requeſt chat which (onſfaxtine thegrear reque-
ſted of the Fathers in the Councell of Nice, that all his demaundsarecontai-
ned inthe holy Scripture, in the old Councels of the Catholique Church,
and inthe ancientConſitutions, Decrees, and Canonsof thePopes.and Fa-
thers; that the molt Chriſtian King doth demand rhe reſticution of the Ca-
tholique Church ro its integritie, by meancsof them the Fathers, conſticurcd
by CHRt1sT as thechicfe tudges, not by a Decree with agenerall claufe, bur
according to the forme of the exprefſewords of that perpetuall and dwinc E-
dict,again(t which, neither v(t urpation nor Preſcriptioncantake placezforthac
thoſe good orders which thedeuill bath taken away by force; and concealed
a long time, may bee reltorcd, as, ityyere , out of captivitic to the boly ciry of
God, and to the ſight of men, . ble excmplitied in Darins, whacompoledehe
cumules of Iudea, not by armes, burbyexecuring the ancientEdi& >: ons
— Tofias , who reformed Religion, by cauſing. thebooke of the Lawro bee read
and obſcrued , which had becn concealed by the maliccof men. Thenihee
[pake acyrely , and ſayd, if they ſhalldemand why France;is;notin peace, hec
could an{were nothing, but thatwhich lehu-ſaydao loam, Howm.can there
be peace, there remaining 2 andoucealed thewords following, buradded;
you knowthetext. | Fhen he ſaid, tharif chey.doe nar {crioully. labour, jin -
the reformgrion, the aſhlance of che;King of Spine; of the Papeaud of other
Princes, will þe in vaige, and theblood of thole who periſh , though tultly,
for thcirowne finnes, will bee'xcquired ar thei hands of: ghemztbe Fachers.
- Hee

Taw A

632

” -=y

'L 18.7,

= — a

The' Hiſtor eof

1562

Pivs 4.

Ezxpixauy TO handle,

EritatgTtH
CHARLES 9.

Partie 2.

Yo

Hee concluded, rhat, before rhey would deſcend to the particulars which
ey meant to'demand , they defired that the things which they had begun
k might bee difparched quickly, that they-might, as ſoone as was
' pollible, apply themſelucs ro orhermarters of more weight, and of greater
necefliry in thattime.. The biting hberty of this Ambaſſadour didno lefle
difpleale, thenthar of his Colleague Pibrac, ar their firſt comming to Trent ;
bur the feare they had of the French-men made them forget all.

The next day the Congregations were continued, and the firſt was all
ſpent by Friar 11#þar of Caſal,Biſhop of Liria: who; informe the Cardinalt
of Loraine of all the reaſons of the Spaniards, did recapitulate, with grear clo-
quence, what{ocuer they had ſaid inthis matter. He added beſides, that no-
thing was more in fauour of the Lutherans, then to fay thar Biſhops are inſti-

| tited bythe Law of man; that by this'mcanes, their nouitic is approucd, in

The Papi ins
arc dift Ned
with the
Erench Con-
gre2 TIONS,

making Preachers , or Predicants, or Miniſters ro goucrne the Church, in
ſtead of Biſhops inſtirured by Cx 1 s T. Heſaid that ro him that readeth the
Epiſtles of Saiht Gregorte, to obs of Conflantinople, and toothers againſt him,
for calling hitnitlfe Vnicrſall Biſhop, ir doth plainely appeare, thatit cannor
Se fard; rhat'the inftirnor of the Pope is from Chrilt,if it be nor ſaid thatthe
in{tirution ofBrſhops is from him allo.
Z The Cardinall of Lorainemade a congregation of Prelats and French Di-
tHnesi2 his'owne hovle, ro vnderſtand their opinion concerning the Turif-
digit of Biſhops; in which it vas viiformely refolued among|t them, that
they did reecite it from Go Dp, and thatitdid belong vnto them tare diuins.
And this fie ularicie of congregation was vicd afterwards by the Cardinall
in all oceurrfnces;ro the grcir dr{taſt of the-Papalins, who ſaid hee helde a
CouncelP dpare Zand feared that the Spaniards wonld iimirare the example,
whichmiohr intimemake- amanifelt-{chilme,as ic happencth in the firſt

 Comitlell of Fins by the-Congregations'which Egyptians and Syrians

Jacobs Hu-
$0148 xtra y-
eth y F rench
P:relares.

cifedth&Biltflo p Bf Pentlmig

held apart” Bat the Papatins had, among(t the Spaniards © Barthom:us Seba-
ftianiis Biſhop'&f''Patri, who'# Spaniard by ination, becauſe hee haJ a Biſho-
pricke 111 Sicelie, had great mref{igencein» Rome, and had di{couered all the
Spaniſhipractſesandcou ifels,” &monelſt the Frenchmen, about the time
when the Cardiriall of Lorame pur him (elfe'it orderfor the iourney,the Nun-
cid France diebiine Jacobus Huponius ,aFranciſcah Friar , a Divine of the
Sor 6976" Hedted bythe Carditfallfortiisconpany ; with whom hee had ſome
eaHe of athhifftancebecantelic wartorfliturcd Protour forthe Counce],
by Tobdithis Pefalev), Billvop of Thjeaier whereof heſontnewes ro Rome, and
4dafafled hiifo e6trefporitencein Trent; wih his letters to LaFtantive Rv-
ner2MaBifhbPs 6f 2aols. - Bute Sihmonerd WA? Hor willing toipur ſuch confidence
1 Ht Bilhsp,hoe would fufcrhim/eokhowthe imeefligence whichwas ts
behel#Withthae Ditine Therefore whey Z wane was hcere viito Trent hee
ſel th&BilYop 5 to! end Wether Brigt of S. Franeis ; called
Parizol3 ito niet Bhighniuo peo td bbimfeont him ; thathe wasinformed/by
the Nyncioof Frante ;ofalevect whithhte, bro:whto the Lord of af?
coli\who had whkteti atlovme hinehar bee houl8 fprake with bjrabetore
bedid deljuerit, Paghtedid ehisbuſineſecinitiingly;to that the lDiumeprol

mifedto doef67 td aceordinely'went'to-Vermetn a' few dayes after hes

1

Came

Eval. Councell of the Trent.

Mit. terre

3 "= tt f TON EEE
:

MORN = 633
came to Trent ;and afzerxhat they: knew one-another , and the tokens that - ; $62.
eley(wcre totreat/rogerhier; rhe) Friar made him arelation of the ſtarcof all ——>'

Prvs 4.

thinks, ariddai; charoheruineotthe kingdomedid clpecially proceeds from Fxopimaxo,
cheT rerwe; who fauoured; thehorctiques, as himfelfe ſaw plainely,in the dil- ESg,o0H
puratibriswhich>hee ofroty/hackwich:theta;a;hþer. preſence. Concerning Cnanius 3.
che ArnladſadoutsinTrent;he fayd they were corrupted alſo.. The Cardinall —

hecheldtro bea good Catholique; bus anclincd to wportinent reformarions

of Ecclefraltidall Rircy;of tho vieufthe Gup,of takingaway images,of bring-
ing inthe valgar rongue.,; and:ſnch other $hings; whexgunto heg-ywas per-.

fovadedbyrhe Duke of guiſe hivbtorher, aud others of his kinred, and that

the Quoene at his departure;; hatbdiecually perſyaded him co it, and giucn
him Twenty thouſand crowncs-(iHae-{aid, that amongſt the Biſhops there
wete three of the ſama: tattion;drity/aboucal] ; that the Biſhop: of Tube.
helde intelligence with- the -Queeriew and , was/{enit andre her , as the
prime: man'to whormthe Cardinall was to. beare reſpect.  Inthecnd, they
{cr dowhiean orderhow ro mcete;and:treate gagerher,, Veutimighagauc him
fifry crownes in gold; as the uegatos had appointed, whichac che firlt hee
refuſed ro-accept ; butVentinyglia:y perſlwaded him with good rermes to bee
content. Notwithftahding/himfelfedid nottrake them, bur called his ſeruant,
who was with him! -andigaue: hin oder ro keepe them in the name of his
Religion. (5 ff , Doirmott |» wind whoriond® [int "rag, 4

[ hancoftcn rehearſtd, andearginue fill, many particulars, whichT am
ſuremany will chinkenot worrhy-of mention , as1 haue thought my {clfe;
but finding:thenpreſetued and:nored in thememorials of thoſe who were
preſcntinrhe ations; Lperlwademy lelfe , that for ſome reſpect, vaknowen
ro me, they haue deemed. "them warchy of commemoration; and therefore,
accordinf'to their judgement rather then mine owne , I haue thoughc fir to
rclate them. - Perhaps ſome ſharpe witte may diſcouer jnthem ſore thing
which is not penetrated by mee ;and thoſe who doe nor eſtecme them will *

loſebura little labour inreading them, |

The fixe and twentieth of Nonember,deſtinated for the. Sellion,Cardinall
Seripando propoſed in Congregation, that it might bedeterred, in regard the
Decrees which they were to publiſh were pot eltabliſhed. And he admoni-
ſhed the Prelates of their long diſcourſes, by meancs whereof they could nor
determineany certaine day Br che Seſſion, which therefore was necellarily
to beedeferred during pleaſure. | Hee tolde them that many of them ſpake
of abuſes, not remembring that co ſpend ſo much time, an vaine diſpurari-
ons withoutany fruit, was the greateſt abuſe of all, which was neceſſarily
to be taken away, if they deſired to fee theend of the Cquncell, with edifica-
tion. Lorgine confirmed. the ſame; and; exhorted the Fathers to leaue thoſe
queſtions, which werenothing tohepurpoſein.thar me, and to bee bricfc
and diligentin diſpatching thethings alrcady-ptopoſed,that they may come
ro things of more importance ang neceſſitie. - Many ofthe Prelates did nor
conſent that the Seſſion ſhould, þeedefcrred during, pleaſure, and required a
determinate time. 'Fo whom itbeing replicd , that,is'was not poſhible, be-
cauſe they knew not when they, ſhouldend'/rhe matter. now-in hand, which

was ſo much controuerfed amongſt them, ir was conzluded that the deter-
minate

Parte 32.

RASAAL

634 T be Fiftorie of ; 1 I Be7s
1562 minatctime ſhould beeſer downe withineight dayes.- : 61 wal ot 25:60

——>\ ++ Theſame day the SenatorMolines arriued; {cnt bythe Marquis of Peſearp,
IVS 4. ;

rrxpmay. t) renew and giue ſtrengrh» co the perlwations, vcd tozhe Spaniſh;Prelates,
Emanzz. in fauour- of the Pope, which hauing beenc madeby:che:- Secretary reſidenr,
CuranLes 9. had done no good. Hee brought new:letrers of credence trothemallfrom

the Marquis, and laboured with great'dihgence. Which,wroughtacon-
rrary cffe&. ' For the Prelatcs didinterprerc it to. bee apractile ofithe'Car;
dinall of Armgon, brother of the Marquis; without any.cxpreſſecommiltion
from rhe King. Itappearing now,rharthe furcher rhey procceded aboutthis
point ofrheinſtirurion, themore difficultiedid ariſe the Ambaſſadours of
France vſcd meanes,that atemper might befound);; chacthey mightrid chem-
ſcluesof thoſe ſuperfiuitics and cometothe buſinefle of the Reformation,
that they might know whar they mighthope for from:the Conncell,» -And
the Biſhop of Niſmes toldtheny, 'when hegauc his voyce , that if the Fathers
weredelighred ro decidea curiofitic, which inconclution will bee nothing
bur words , yet they ought norts entertaineothers with ir, -burdeferring ir
voill another time, to handle' that now which is more neceflary. - DiegoCo-
varruuias, Bilhop of {'itra di Rodrige , who ſpake after Him , excufing rhe Fa-
thers for ſpending time in that queſtion ; fayd, that ir having been propoſed

_ by the Lords the Legates, the Prelatesconkd nor chooſe but deliver. their o-

pinions. .W herewith Cardinall Simoneta becing mooued , did denie thar the

ropolition was made by them; and Seripandodid ſecond him.more flerce-
Hep fayd, thar chemſclues aſſuming roo much licence, did not thinke ir
ſufficient ro difcourle of the ſuperioritieot Biſhops which was propoſcd , bur
had ſeron foote allo the other of the inſtitution, and added 1s diumum vnto
them both;and nor contented with thepatience vlcd in ſuffering them to ſay
whart they will,they beganalfo ro lay the blame vponthe Legars. He ſharply
reprehended their roo much liberty in entring into theſe queſtions, and their
boldneſle in treating ofthe Popes power , vainly ard ſuperfluoully repeating
the fame rhings, more then tenne times , ſomeallo viing friuolous reaſons,
and fooliſh, vnworthy of thatafſembly. And,in the progreſſcof his ſpeach,
perceiuing he had beentoo bitter, he beganto ſer them downe a forme how
cucry Prelate ſhould giue his voyce in Councell. Speaking of the queſtions
propoſed , hee ſhewed that both the oppoſite opinions were probable , and
that in caſc that de iure Diuino had more probabilitic,yer ir was nota thing to
be decided in Councell, Hee could nor by this meancs pacific themindes of
many that wer: moued neither did hc abſolutely pleaſethe Cardinall of Lo-
maine, who made all poſhble demonſtration to gaine a good opinion. For
he made meancs to know the men, and to informe himſelfe what was poſli-
blerobedone, that he might not vadertake the buſineſſe before he knew ir
would ſuccced ; and he afteQed alſoto be the man who ſhould compoſe the
differcnces,and be judge of the queſtion. For diſpatch of the matter, a pro-
poſition was made to depute fome Prelates of cuery nation, as it were to
compromiſe thercſolution by them. Bur it could not bee done , becauſerhe
French ard Spaniards deſired an cucn number of euery nation, andthelrali-
ans , as they were more in number then the others ,ſo they would hauc a
greater numberin this deputation. Simoneta- was the firſt ro oppole this
propoſition,

EM

L1 s. 7. DR 2 Councellofthe Trent. 635

propoſition, for teare of reujuing the cuſtome of the Counccll of Baſil. 1562
Ar this timea new matter of contention was prepared. For the Count "=o

of Luna gaue the Legates to vnderſtand, that hee was to come to Trent Ain- Fazpmaxs

es Ceeemeewenes

baſſadour of the King of Spaine.., and not of the Emperour , but would firſt Erizanaty,
knowe what place would bee allowed him. The Legates called the French dg 9.
Ambaſſhadours , and told them of it, deſiring them ro finde ſome meancs ro CAL
compole the difference for precedence, They anſwered that they were nor A queſtions.
ſent ro compole differences, but to hold theplace due, and alwayes grauntcd dence be-
rothcir King ; that they meany not ro prejudice the King of Spaine_. in aty ny game. *
thing belonging to him, but ro dochim all hanour and leruice, as becing a

conn andafriendrco theit King, and thar'they had charge, if their place was

not giuen ynto them, toimake prorcltationof the nullity of cheaftes of the
Councel,and to depart with allthe'French Prelates. The Cardinal of Mantua
propoſed this courſe, romake the Spaniſh Ambaſladour fer apart from the

others oucr againſt the Legates, or vnder the Eccleftaſticall Ambaſladours,
or vnder the Secular Ambaſſadours.. But the Frenchmen were contented
wich noneof theſc courſes, ſaying that by all mcanes he ſhould hauc his place

after them, and no where cle. | 7%
In the Congregation of the firſt of December Melzhior Anoſmediano, Bi The Bitop

of Guaadice

ſhop of Guadice, (pcaking of that part of the laſt Canon,where it was deter- 2c
"mined that Biſhops, called by the Pope, are trucand lawfull, faid, that the | mami o
manner of peut ng ir did not pleaſe Lim , becaule there were allo Bilhops

not called by the Pope, nor confirmed by him, who notwithſtanding were

true and lawtull. For example he brought foure ſufftragans , clceed and or-

daincd by the Arch-biſhip of Salzburg , who rake no contixmation from the

Pope. Cardinall Simoneta did not {uffer him to procecd, ſaying, that what-

ſocuer the Biſhop of Salzburg,or other Primats did, wasall by the Popes au-

thority. Friar Thomas Caſtello, Biſhop of Cane, and the, Patriarch of Venice.

ſtood vp both ar once, and ſaid that he ought to be pytout of the Councell,

as a Schiſmarike. And Egidius Falceta.Þ, Biſhop of Caurle, cryedatoud, Our

with the Schilmatike. And there followed a greatnoyle amongſt the Pre.

lats, as well of whiſpering , as of fecte\, paitly in.offenceof che Prelate that

gaue his voyce, andpartly in defence: which.gaue bur ſmall fatisfa&tion ro =

the Prelates beyond rhe mountaines; /! TheCardinall of Lomine was diplea- The card.of
ſed, but made no demonſtration .of it; and the ;Legatsdid hardly appeaſe the £7rgnefuih
ſirre, by making others proceed who were to ſpeake inthat Congregatian ; wasnerhice.
which being md the Cardinall of Lorainelaid, in preſence of many of the =
Popiſh Prelates, that the inſolcncie hadbetnc great, that the Biſhop of Gua-

dice had not ſpoken ill, andthac,. if hee had beenea Frenchman , hee would

hauc appealed toanother Councell more free; and that incaſe prouiſion were

not made that allmight {peake freely , the Frenchinen/ would recurne, to

make a Nationall Councell-in\ France. Andindeede'ig was found that the Bi-

ſhop had not! pokenill, and the Canon was corrected; for whereas it {ayd,

The Biſhops called by the Pope of Rome, it-was altered thus The Biſhops al-

ſumed by authority of the Pope of Rome.

Thenext day, in which they were to determine the iuſt time for the

Seſſion, the Cardinall of Mantuapropoled, thar ic might bee prorogued woe.
| Ns ce

636

—— kk _—— o—

The Hiftorie of L1 B77,

1562

Pivs &4
FERDINAND.

ELr1tABETH.
CHARLES 9».
Parittp 2.

ASS

The ſuffrage
of the Bilhop
of Al:ffe con-
cernin? the
in{tirution
of Bithops.

the ſeventeenth ; and if , in the mcanewhule, the Decrees of reformation, be-
logingrto the matter which was handled, could not beput in order,it ſhould
be deferred vntill thenext Seſſion. The Cardinall of Loraine conſented for
that day , bur with condition, that the whole matter might be handled, and
nothing deferred ynnill the next Seſſ1on,in which it was neceſlary to beginne
the generall reformation. The Arch biſhop of Prague, Five Churches, and
the Orator of Polonia,agreed in the ſame opinion. And, afrer much conten-
tion , betweene thoſe, who (as\the Biſhop of Niſmes had ſaid ) would haue
thole queltions deferred yntill-aworher time , and others , who-wonuld hauc
them decided , it was relolued ro appoint:the Seſſion for the day aforclayd,
with'ordct,thar, to diſpatchall the matter,they{hould hold xwo Congrega-
tions cucry day , andit they would not decideall,)yerthey ſhould publiſh
thoſe Decrees which could bee madeby thar time, deterring the vndecided
oinrs ynrill another, handling the reformation inthe next Seſſion, before
they centred into matter of doEtrine. Mantua did allo reprehend the noyle
made with feete, 4hd'wordes , the day before, concluding thar, if hercafter
they would not fpcake with that reſpeC&t and reverence which might bc-
ſceme their ownedignitic, the preſence of them the Legares, who reprefent
his Holineſſe, and of the Cardinals and Ambaſſadours , who repreſent the
Princes, they would zoe out of the Congregation , that they might not cn-
dure ſo great diforders. The Cardinall of Loraine commended the admo-
nition, and ſayd,that as rac Legates ought not to goe out of the Congrega-
tion for avy occaſion wharlocuer, ſoir was moſt juſt that the perturbers of
it ſhould be puniſhed. The Biſhop of (/aua:would neither excuſe himſcite
for that which hee had (aid;nor receiue the admonition with fi]cnce, though
ie was in gcnerall , butlard , tharthe cauſes ought to bee remooued that the
eftc&s w1ghr ceale; thatifthe words of the Bifhop of Guadice had ofteaded
his owne perſon; he would:haue endured it, for Chriitian charirie, which as
it requireth paticnce/in wrongs committed againlt onesſclle, fo it maketh
men l{cnfible of the inturies done'vmto-CH K15T, whole digine Maicſtic is
offended , when the atthortric'of his Yicar is rouched, that hee had ſpoken
well,yea,as well as might be,and confirmed theſame with other-words of the
ſame ſence, which wetEzenerally:condemned of perulancic.
lacobits Gilbetis", of Nopweras.;Bilhop of Aliffe;, in deliucring, his voyce,
faid, that; concerning the jn{tirution of Biſhops, one could not [peake with

 betterground, then confidering well and'vnderſtandingthe words of Saint

Paul to the Epheſians; For as it1smoſt cructhar:CnRisT did rule the Church
with anabſolute government ;while ice liued in mortall flcth, as others had
iudicionſlyſaid, (oit was agreat vntruvh which was added,chat is,thar, beg
in heauen, he hathabandonedtheſame goucrnmcut, yea, hee docth cxercile
it rathef\more'then before. Andthis isir which he ſpake ro his Ap6ſiles , ar
his departure; I amwirb you <oncill che end of the world; adding allo the alli-
ſtance of the holy Gholt ; fo that nowallonoronely the inward influenceof
graces commethfrom'Caris, as from the Head, bur an external] alliſtance
alſo ,though inuifible tovs, which doeth miniſter occaſions of {aluation to
the faithfull-and drivech away the remprations of the world. - Norwithſtan-
dny, beltdesatitheſe things, hee hath inſtiturad'allo ſome members of the
'T i» Church

> I —_— r— — - —_
=

L1s. = : ;baCormieePofThent.

Om + EIS ALES ory EO

—— _—

Churgbtur A poltles, Pattours; 6c. , todefcodiberfa
rodireithem ra/themniticolitanh, avd knowledge-gf GO p./; Andypor
thele he bath bettoweda gift; noceflary darzchextixodung of chis holy ofhige}

ahfull from/curoursam ing62.

which is the power.of inciſdidtion,, whithdsaorcgqualkiaall,burfo muchas tua

cucry.obe hath,is giuen himunmediathiby-Cai wbsni: Nothing is cord

contrary:r0 Saint:Pawbzthenio lay , chaciovyas:giitan ro one onely;to impart WAL

it to whom. he liſted: c! Itlis'rrue that itis-oby cqualirimel;,; bueaccording to
chediuinediſtriburion., which, as Saint Cyfirjanclaithy that rhe vnitic ofthe
Churehtnightbecipreſerned;did ordaine;ahartheſupreame ſhould be in Pe-
ter and his ſucceſſors ; not thar it ſhould bcgablolute;1and , acconding tothe
Proucrbc,that the will may bee alaw, butz ts Sainc Pallaith, for cdibcatiat
of the Church onely., not for deltruftion:{o that,iscannor bee extended to
abrogate \lawes ,:and-Canons, ade by che Church, for a foundation of
goucrnement.... And heere lice began-to allcadge the Canons cited by Gua-
zian, i whichtheancicnt Popes doc confeſle them(clues to be ſubic rothe
Decrecs of the Fathers, and tothe conſtitutions of their predecefiors;  - |»
 TheCardinal#armienſes interrupted-him,, and layd , thatrhe fubic&ro
{pcake on was thefuperioritieof Biſhops;lo that chis diſcourſe was beſide the
matter, '| The Biſhop anſwered, that cheauthority of Biſhops being handled,
it was neceſſary to ſpeake of that of the Pope. And Granate- ftood.vp/, and
laid,chat others had {poken of it {uperfluouſly , norto lay pernicioully , mea.
ning Layneg,/ and therefore that Aliffe might ſpeake of it likewiſe: The Bi-
ſhop of Caua:ſioodyp,' and layd:, that thts had ſpoken of it, bur novirti
chat manner; and whiſperings beginning to ariſe amongſt the Prelates, Simo!
neta made a ſigners Cava tohold his peace; and admonithing Alizco ſpcako
to the paint, he:quicted rhe noyſe.: Burt, he continuing to atleadgerhe Ca-
nons ,.as hee had begun, Varmienſe interrupted him\againe,notdpeaking ns
co him, but making a formalldiſcourtcro the Fathers , concerniug rhat mas+ .
er, He laid the heresikes pretend2o prone;thar Biſhops,cleted-bythePopy;
are.nor true and lawful, and thar-this is the opinion which oughttobecont
demned, bur-wherher rrue Biſhops are inſtiruted ture Diwimo,ornot,there isnv
difterence betwecue the'herrukes and the! Catholikes, and therefore the que
{tion\darh not belong/roche'Synod, which js congregated only.roicondenae
the hereftes, Headuiſed the Fathers to abſtaine from ſpeaking things whiah
might gmuc occaſionot-{caddalli;and cxhort chem.ro feaue thelequeltions,
Aliffedctircd to replic; but:Simanetal with rhe affiſtance:of ſource other Pres
laces,didl pacific hicmythough widhſome difficulty. {And after bim[pake Au
tonius Maria Saliatd, Biſhop :of Faint Papuls'; who fayd, thar albwere ak
ſcmbled for the ſeruice ofiGroD ,- and proceeded with a good-imtention;
thoughiſome oneway.; and {Omeatorher;>:And, hating layd many things
which 4erued WMH IE Kh LIP Ks Th bur'principally ro-reconcile
their mjndes, .was acauſerhds che Congregation dieþquierly eade p and thin
words of hamaniaeand reutroace didpaſicbctweene: the Cardunall andthe

Biſhop. 1.25, 00003113; v0 bloid too bib corghn note of bags 1nd

-: The fourth dtiDiecember; bhe)Cardiialt of Lorainedeluered higopinion Tic fag
concerning che fame-matrer;and ſpake'at large;ſaying, char jurfdiction wal of £21 4ne.

giuenby.God inumcdiatly to the Churthy Hee atleadged theplaceof Saint
H hh tduſlin,

\

Og on oo 7"

1562 Auſtin,tharthe keyes are given r6*Feter , not vnco one perſon, bur vnro the
CA vnitic, and, that Peter, when CH'k is T promiſed him-the keyes , did repre-
Frome ſcnr all che Church , who if hee had Hot been! Sacrament; that is, repreſen-
team, ting che Church , CH R1:sTwouldnor havegiuenthem-ymto him. ' And
Cnanint'9. heeſheweda great memory in reciting cho placos word by word. Then he
CT faid, that thar part of jurifdition-which is 10yned with Epiſcopall order, the
Biſhops doe recciue-immediatly from God ; and declaring/in'whar it doeth
conlilt, amonglt other'chings, hee ſpecified, tharpower of cxcommunicati-
on is contained in it,inlarging himſelfe much iy the expoſition of that place
of Saint Matthew , in which Ca &T5 T docth preſcribe the 'manner of bro-
rherly correction, and judiciall of the Church, with authority to lepararerhe
diſobedient from the body thereof.. Then hee diſpured againſt that opini-
on, allcadging diuers reafons taken out of the wordes of CHRisT , poken'to
Saiat Peter,and from the expoſition which'S. Leo the Pope docth ginevoro
them in any places. Hee exemplified in. many Biſhops who had acknow-
ledged alltheir wriſdi<tion ro comefrom the Apoltolike Sea,and fpake with
{o much eloquence , and in ſuch ſort , tharit could norclearely beediſcoue-
red, what his opinion was. Afcerwards hee fayd , thar Councelshadaurho-
ritic immediatly from God; allcadging'the:words of CHR i s T,Where two
orthree (hall be aſſembled in my natne, 1 will be in the middelt of them, and
the Councell of the Apoitles, which aſcribeth the relolution tothe ho!
Gholt ;andrhe {tile of all Councels, in ſaying they are congregated inthe ho-
ly. Gholt :and,in particular of that of ConStance, which fayth plaincly , that it
hath authority immediatly from Ca k15T: :Buthceadded, that ſpeaking
of Councels, his mcaning was that the head ſhould bee ioyned with it, and
that nothing was of more ſeruice for the vnion of the Church, then to con-
firme well che Popes authoritic; that himſelfe would never conſent ro deter-
mine any rhing in diminurion thereof, andthart all the Prelares and Clergiec
of France were of the-ſame opinion. And'rreturaing ro the inltitution of
Biſhops, and ſpeaking [bill with\cthe fame ambiguiric;, thee concluded in
the ende, that rhe queſtion was boundlefle. Afterwards exhorted the
Fathers to lcauc ir, and himſelfegaue a formetothe Canon, in which the
wordes, ire diuino, were omitted ; and,inſtcadot rhemyir- was fayd, Inftitutcd
CHRIST. +: : links: 019121
\\ TheFrench Prelaces,, who ſpake then after: Loraine,and rhe dayes follows-
ing, vied notthe ſame ambiguity; riorthe lame reſpect rowards tho Apalto-
hike Sea, bur maintained openly,that the authoriticof Biſhops was , te ture di-
amo , alleadging the reaſons, deliucred:by the Cardinall, and expounding
them ; who howlocuer , while rhey ſpake, teanct his head ypon his hand, as
if hee had/been difpleaſed, yertheymorcd him for ambuiien;as if head pur.
polely procured a Comment to bee maderypen his opumon. But the Spani-
ards were not ſatisfied with the-French-men; though they did openly defend
their opinion,as well becauſe the Cardinall had ipoken ambiguoully ; as for
that heeand the other Prelates did not hold the inſtirurion and {upetiotitic
_ of Biſhops deiuredinino to be neceſlaty robederermined inCounctli;bbr ra-
ther thatit ought to bo omitted... | And they were moredifpicaſed wichithe
formcofthe Canon ,' propoſedby: the Cardivall, in whichthe wortsdviues

arums,

the Councell of Trent. : 63 ”

dinino, were lett our , howſocuer, more for their fatisfaQtion, then for a- 1562
ny other refpect , theſe words were put in, Thatthey are inſtituted by "trons
CHRIST. F38&DINAND

L1s. 7.

—  — — %

The Frenchmen and Spaniards had the fame end , to prouide againſt the prrzaners
ambition and auarice of the Court, which did domineere ar their pleaſure, panmmt**
with precepts , vnprotitable , and of no fruit, and drew a great quantitie of —v—
money from Chriſtian nations, by collation of Benefices, and diſpenſations.

But the Spaniards judged, in regard of thedeuotion which the people of their
Countrey beare to the Pope, and of the inclination of the King , and of his
counſell, abhorring nouities, if this had been done dire&ly, andopenly,ir -
would hauec raiſed'a ſcandall , and could not haue been effected, and thatthe
Pope would cafily haue interpoſed ſo many difficulties with the Princes,
that they. ſhould ncuer haue been able ro come to the declaration thereof;
but that according to the cuſtome of that nation, they ought to take their
aime afarre off, and, by declaring thar iuriſdiftion and reſidence are from
CHRIST , and de inre dinino, to put that order in reputation with the peo-
le, towithltand che violent courſes which the Court of Rome might take
againſt heir perſons , that ſo inprogreſſe of time, they meght haue meanes
to reforme the Churches , for the ſcruice of Go ÞD , and tranquillity of the
people; reltoring thelibertie vſurped by the Romans.
But the Frenchmen , who by nature doe proceede openly, and with pal-
{ion, efteeme rhele arres vaine. They ſaid , there would not want mcancs ar
Rom: ro make them vnprofitable, and thatthey required ſo much time be-
ſorethey could be broughtro effect, that no good hope could bee concei-
ucd of them; that the true meanes was , withour art, direaly and plainely
co ruſh downe the abuſes, which are roo cleare and manilelſt , and thatthere
was no greater difficultic to obtaine this which wasthe principall end, then
there was ro obtainerhe prerence,, which, beeing obtained, would bee-as
much as nothing.” Ana their councels were. no ſefſedifterent inanother par- |
ticular allo, They all agreed ; in iudging it neceſſary tharthe execution of
the Decrees of the Councel ſhould beeſo firme and table, that ir might nor
bce altered.. Bur there was ſome difference betweene the Frenchmen and =
Spaniards, about the manner how toorderthat the Decrees of that Councel
might neither bee derogated from , nor altered by the Pope, by diſpenſations,
non obſtanties, and ſuch other clauſes of Rome. And heteſber theFrenchmen
diſſcigned that the ſuperiority of the Councel] aboue rhe Pope thould bee
decided, or a conſtitution made, that the Decrees thereof could nither bee
dcrogated from , nor diſpenſed with , which would bee an abſolate remedie.
The Spaniards thought it ahard point, and therefore nor to bee attempred,
becauſerhe Pope would alwayes bee fauoured by Princes, when hee ſhould
complaine that his authoritiy was diminiſhed, and would becaflifted byrhe
greater patt of the Italian Prelats , in regard ofthe dignity of their Countrey, :
and for many priuate intereſts, And, for themſclues,they thought irfuffic
ent that the Councell ſhould make the Decrces, putpoſing afterward roob-
raine a pragmatique from the King vpon them, by which meancs they would _
ſo bce cltabliſhed, that the Popes dilpenſarions to thecontrary could nor ce
ter into Spaine: | | |
Hhh 2 | The

Dn aan we OY TPP

Po

—_— —_—__—

640 The Hiitory of L1s.7,

1562 The Legates diſpatched an expreſlc Currier, with a copic of the propo-
| aſd ſition of the Cardinall of Loraine, and of the animaducriwn of ſome Cano-
zoo niſts madc VPON it; ſhewing that the Papall authority was in queſtion, de-
Ezra, Manding that order ſhould bee ſent them, what to doe. Whereof the Cardis
Sant 9: nall, when heknew it, was very ſcnfible, and complained that having. gi-
—— ucn the copic before hee ſpake inthe Congregation, and the Legates ſcem-
Toe he 5s. INS TO bee pleaſed, they had afterwards ſhewed {o much diſtruſt of him. He
poſironothe aid hee thought it ſtrange , that fearc was apprehended by cuery. thing
rancroRome That cither himſelfe,or any of the French Prelates ſaid, or did. Hee complaj-
Wherewich ke Bed that his Nation was wronged by the Irtahans, afirming, that, with his
is leaſed. gynecares, hee had hard fome Italian Prelates ſcornefully vſe that fcurrile

roucrbe, which was alrcady made common throughout all Trent; that is;

Thar from the Spaniſh ſcabbe, we are falien into the French poxe: of which the 0-

\ acne ther Frenchmen did complaine-ypon cuery occaſion, andthe Spaniards al-

prouib:in {o,, Whole complaints, as the cultomeis did more 1ncite the curious; and

_ the ſuſpicions and diffidences brweene the Nations did, with yery great

danger, encrealc: neither were the Legarcs and wiſer fort of Prelates ablc to

ſtop the motion, though they oppoſed both with authoritic and with per-
{waſtons.

The, Frenchmen , being proucoked, did reſolue to make proofe of their
libertie, and agreed that, 11 the Congregation of the {cuenth day, the Cardi-
pall of Loraine ſhould not bee preſent , and that their Prelates who were to

' ſpeakeſhould vic freedome , andthar, if they were reprechended, their Am-
baſladours ſhould protcft; and Lanſac, that they might knowe it and be-
ware, in preſence of many of. them , ſaid to Antonius Lecins, Biſhop of
Orange, one of the ſpeakers , that hee oughtto [peake freely, and without
feare, and that the Kings protection was ſufhcient ro maintaine him. T his
becing reported to theLegates , wasa cauſe thatthey were heard with much

ER paticnce, though rhey ſaid that the inſticution and iuriſdiction of Biſhops
mag. rip was de iuredinino , as well as that of the Pope, and that there was no difle-
ritic. rence, bur.in degree of ſuperioritic, and that the Popes authority is confi-
ned withinthe limits-of the Canons, relating, and commending the [tile of
the Parliaments of France; thar, when any Popes Bull is preſented which con-
_ raincth any thing contrary to the Canons receiued in France, they pro-
 nounce it to bee abuſive, and forbid the execution. This hibertie mage the
Papalins vie more reſpc& in their ſpeaches , though the proucrbe plea-
ſed them fo well, that fommetimes ſome of the merrie Prelates could not for-

' beareto vic ir.
 -Thepretence for cheabſcnce of the Cardinall of Loyaine, was the aduice
The death of Of the death of the King of Nakarre, which came to Trent that day. This
Re mes i Prince, Wounded with a bullet at the icgeof Roan, in September, was neuer

Nauar made

agrearchange well cured, and at the laſt, died. Neecrevnto his death , hee recejucd the
mFaxc Communion after the Catholique manner, at the perſwafion of his Phyſ1ti-
ah Viſentius Laurus, and afterwards waucred: towards tlic doctrine of the
Proteltants, and ſo dicd the tenth of Nouember. This accident made a
great mutation in the Councell; and Loraine did {uddenly changea!l his det-
ſeignes. For that King had a principallhand in the Commiſſions given to

the

the Councell of Trent.

E'ts. 7:

cheCardinallat his departure, fothathee was vncerraine whether, after his 2562

dearh,/the Queene;andothers, would continue in the ſame heat.” 'Befides;he

[av x manifelt changein thewhole goucrhement'/and therefore defired tb Prnprnan,
bee in| France, char himſelfe mighr beare part of it alſo. For the Prince'df rms,

(ondetbetingin open diſſention',diſtruſting the Qgecne and rhofe whohad

power with her,;-the Cardinal of Bourbot'vncapable, Montpenfier in' {rrall CAL,

credit, theConftableold , of whom'manyallſo were:emulous, heehada grear
conceirthar'his brother might bee the Chiefe for Armes , and thimlelte tot +
counſel. And hee ruminated theſe things in his minde, thinking but little * .
of theCouncell,andof Trent,where hee was« | The other French-menſayd /
openly, they ought to rhanke God for the death of the King , becauſe he bo-
gan to Waucr, and to ioyne his owne intereſts with'thoſe of his brorher, and
of the other Hugonots. 179 <1 be

The next day, being theeighth of December, wasall pentin ceremonies,
forthe cle&tion of Maximilian King of the Romanes. The Arch-biſhop of
Prague lang the Maſſe of the holy Ghoſt, with the aſfiſtance of the = ors
Councel|: che Biſhop of Tininia- madea fermon; in commendation ofthe
Prince,and the Cardinals and Ambaſſadours were inuited by Pragne.

So looneas the Diet was aſſembled in Frarcfort , the Prince of {onde (ent,
not onely ro demaund aſliſtance from the Proteſtant Princes ,'bur. alſo to
treat an ynion of the Hugenors , with thoſeof the Confeſſion of Ausburg ; and
in particular, to make a toyntdemand fora free new Councel, in which the
tclolutions of Trent might bce examined, the French-men oftheold Catho-
like Religiongiuing hope alſo that they would agreevnto it, becauſe ir had
been promiſed to the Ambaſſadour of France , (who afterwards was created
Cardinal della Bordiſfiera)that it ſhould be done. Butthe Dutch Proteſtants
were molt auerle fromthe Councell , ſo long as Germany might bee in peace
without it. And therefore a booke was printed in Francfort , full of ex-
cuſes, and reaſons, why they neither would , nor could come to Trent,
with proteltation of the nullitic of all chat was, and would bedone inthac

lace. |

Thc corona»

The King was firſt anointed , and crowned King of Bohemia, in Prague, tion ot the

in prelence of his farher,the Emperour,by that Arch-biſhop who went from b
Trent into Bohemia, to performe that ceremonie, that the King might hauea
voyceinthe [mperiall Diet, Beeing come to Francforr, they wereforced ro
expect vntill the Canons of (olcn had elected their Arch-biſhop, becauſe
that Sea wasthen void; ſo that the Princes had much time to handlemany
matcers, expecting ſtill in that place,that the number of ſcuen might bee full,
by the Coronation in ©Bohemia., and the elction in Colen. They were trou-
bledin Rome. with theſe thimgs, and afraid, thatrhe Dict would ſend ro
Trent , toprotelt , and that ſome new forme would bee vicd in the corona»
tion, and the old aboliſhed, which would ſkew an inclination to depart
from the ancient Rites; or that ſome promiſe would bee made; by the new
King, preiudiciall ro the Popes authoritic. Bur the Emperour, and the Kin?
vſed much arte to diuert the handling of points of Religion beforerhe Ele-

The « letiog.

&ion, which was made the 2.4 of Nouember, and the coronation the laſt ,;;..s
of that moncth. In waichche Eleors,and other Prote(tant Princes ſtood <i>

Mmancs.

Hhh 3 at

——_ loud

"642 1.» "The Hiftory of © L 1s. 7,

| 1562

Pivs 4+
FERDINAND.

ELIZABETH.
CuHanrLlses 9.
PritIy 2+ :

LARS

Conditions

' required by
the Protcltats

of Germany,

beto: e they

would att

the,Councel.

atthe Maſſe vntill the Goſpell was read, andrhen they went foorth, This
oncly was new. Burt the Popes Nanciotooke place aboue the EleQtours and
Ambaſſadours. Thecoronation being paſt, the Emperour beganneto pra-
@iſc with ſome of the Proteſtants , that they would adhere to the Councell
of Trent; who, not to bee preuented, aſſembling themſelucs together, pre-
ſented ro the Emperour 'the anſwete, promiſed 20. moneths before to his
Ambaſladours, inthe aſſembly at Namburg , which was deferred yarill then.
la which having declared the cauſes why they had, inmany Imperiall Diets,
appealed and did appeale againe ynto afree Councell, they added the condi-
tions, which they held to bee neceflary , with which they offercdto aſliſtin
a furure generall Councel. 3. That it ſhould bee celebrated in! Germanie.
2. Thatic ſhouldnot bee intimatcd by the Pope. 3. That hee ſhould nor

refide, but bee part of the Councel , ſubic&t ro the determinations theteof.
4- Thar the Biſhops and other Prelates ſhould bee freed fromtheir oath gi-
ucn to the Pope, that they may freely, and 'withour impediment , deliuer
their opinions. 5. That the holy Scripture might bee iudge in the Coun»
cel, and all humaine authority excluded. 6. Thatthe Diuincs of the States
of the Auguſtan ( onfeſSion , ſent to the Councel, might not onely haue a con-
ſulting, bur deciding voice allo, and might haue a Safe-conduR, both for
their perſones, and forthe cxercile of their religion. 7. Thatthe deciſions
in Councel, ſhouid not be made. as in Secular matters, by pluralitic of voices,
burtthe more found opinions preferred , that is, thoſe which were regulated
by che wordof God, 8. Thar theacts of the Councel of Trent ſhould
bee made void, becauleir is partiall, celebrated by one part onely, and not go-
ucried according to promite. 9, Thatifa concord in religion cannot be
concluded in the Councel, the conditions of Paſſaumay remaine inviolable,

 asalſo the peace of religion, made in 4usburg , in the yeere 1555. may con-

tinue in ſtrength and force, and cuery one bound tooblerue it. 10. Thar,
concerning the forefaid condittons,a fitand ſufhcient caution be giuen. The
Emperour,hauing recciued the writing, promiſed to labour for concord,and
to vie meanes that the Councell may be celebrated, where they cannot refuſe,
with reaſon, to aſliſt, ſo that on their part they would lay aſide hatred and
paſtion, which arc contrary to Chriſtian peace. And, tothis end, hee offered
rogoe in perſon to Trent,and reſo]ued to paſſeto Trac, ſo ſoone as the Diet
was cnded, where becing diſtant from Trent but foure {mall dayes iourncy,
he mightin a ſhort time cffe&t whatſocuer was neceſlary,

But in Councel] the Prelats hauing madean end of giuing voyces concect-
ningethe Inſtitution, fo much diſcuſſed: no reſoſution was made, becaule the
Legartes did expect it from Reme : But they gaue foorth the Canon of Refi-
dence,hauing hrlt impartedit to the Cardinall of Lonaine, which was, as was
ſayd before, without the declaration wherher it was de inre diuino, or no, but
with rewards and penalties. And Lomine giuing his voyce firſt , ſaid it was
neceſſary ro grant power to the Biſhops to abſoluc from caſes reſcrued In
cena Domini: which he proteſted hee ſpake, not to diminiſh the authoritic of

Tis Holinefſe, but becauſe, hauing ſeenein Francethar no tranſgretſour there-
of did catreto gocor ſend to Rome forablolution, he thought 1c worle , both
for the ſoules of the people, and forthe dignitic ofthe ApoltoliqueSca, to

lcaue

L1s, 7. the Councell of Trent. | T 643_

lcauerthem in thoſecenſures. Heeaddedalſothatheethoughrir nor firſoro 1x 562
tyc Bithops io refidence, that they mightnorbecablent for iuſt cauſes, which > —Y'
: wereto be referred to the iudgment of his Holynefſe;, Hee ſaid: morcouer, Fa>munc
that thepublike emploiments1n theaffaires of Kingdomes , and republikes, num
were to bce accepted, becaule they ſeeme nor to bealiene from the Epiſcopal - <mmaggs
charge, eſpecially in Kingdomes, wherethe Eccleftaſticall order is a mem- \—v
ber of the Statc, as in France, and theKingdomes, of Spaine allo. The Cardi-
nall was very prolixe; and howſocuer he reperted often that Reſidence was
neceſſary, and that it was fit ro make hs forit, yerhec interpolcd ſo
many exceptions, and excules, that, inthe end, no man could iudge whether
he would hauc any conſtitution to be made for it orno.
The Legatcs imparted the Articles of reformation for the future Seſſion
ro the Ambaſſadors alſo,according to promile, before they were propoſed n
Congregation ; which wcre all for remedies of the abuſes in the Sacrament
-of Order . And therefore the French Ambaſladours and Biſhops mer in the
houſe of Lorame, tocon{ider of them, and depured foure Biſhops to examine
whether any thing was. contained in them pretudiciall to the priuiledges of
' the French Church, or whether any thing mightbee added for the ſeruice of
their Countrey, and withall —_—_— order to the Ambaſladour de Ferrieres,
to collect, in Congregation of the ſame —_ all|che rcformations , for.
merly propoſed in Trent, vnder Paulus , and Inlias , and in the preſent Coun-
cell alſo, and in the Congregation of Poiſi, to makean abſtract of them,and,
adding vnto them choſe which were contained inthe Kings inſtructions,and
wharlocuer ſeemed good vnto them beſides, ſhould compoſe Articles for all
Chriſtendome, and France eſpecially.
But the Imperialilts, ſecing that none of the Reformarions mentioned by
them were propoſed, called together all the Ambaſſadors. Prague ſpake vn-
to them, and told them, that much time was conſumed in Councell with
doing of nothing ; that the Legates had often promiſed to handle Reforma-
tion, and yet they were entertained with ſpeculations, or with prouiſions a
gain(t ſmall abuſes; that it was time to make an effectuall inſtance that the
would begin. to handle important and yrgent matters, andthatif all would
ioyncinrequelting the execution of ſo many promiſes, made by the Pope
and the Legates , there might be hope to obtaine. All conſented ;burwhen
they came ro particulars , they were ſo different, that they could not agree
bur in the generall, onely to demand a Reformation. Whereupon it was re-
ſolued, thar Prague, in dcliucring his voyce, ſhould defireir, in the name of
all ; and ſo hedid.
And , in the matter of reſidence, he ſaid in few words, that the entertain-
ments being taken from the Prelates, which they cnioy in the Courts of
Rome and other Princes , any Decree would ſuffice. "The opinion of the
Arch-Biſhop of Otranto was, that the Decree of the ſaid Councell vnder Paul
the third was ſufficient, adding onely the Popes Bull, dated the fourth of
Sept. 1560. Others demanded that the cauſes of abſence , which the Synode
dcemeth to be lawfull , ſhould be expreſſed, becaule the greateſt difficuttieis
like roariſe ypon this point. The Bull, named by Otranto, did containe a

command of perſonall re{3Jence, vader the penalcics, declared by the ow
ce] 2

644 1 be Hiſtorie of L187.
156z cell, and foure gracesto thoſe which reſide. I hat is, that they may not be
© $75 ctedrothe Court, bur with Commiſſion {1gned by the Pope. Thar they ſhall
Ezpmaxy. be free fromall impoſitions, ordinary and extraordinary, though impoſed ar
brrzazzre. The petition of Princes,” | Thar they may exerciſe iurildiction againſt cuery
£uantes 9+ Secular Clerke , or Regular, dwelling out of his Cloytter. That no appealc
—— may lyc from their ſentences, but onely [rom the definitiue. Others were con-
cent with the Decree; as it was porpoled by the Legares, but with ſome alte-
ratian, all fir forcheir owac relpects, which were as many as there were per-
ſons. Some required chatthe declaration de inye dinino, might be made, And
there was a fourth opinion, that alchough ir be de iure aiuino, yet it wasnor fic

to make declaration thereof. |
The Catdinall of' Loraine aſſembled the French Prelates ro diſpute vpon
this poynt; who concluded vniformely, thatit was de iure divino. The Bilhop
of 4ngiu, was the firlt that gauc his opinion ſo, and all the reſt did follow
him. Eutin the gencrall Congregation of the Synode, the Prelates were yn«
ſpeakeably tedious ; whercot the Cardinall of Lorave complained to the Le-
gares, defring to haue thole matters difparched,thar they might come tothe
rctormation , repeating the words fo often yſcd, tharit ſatisfaction benor gi-

uen themin Trent they will rake it at home.
The (uazz = Frier Albertus Duimius Biſhop of Veglie, alledging thatthe point of Reſ%-
01... dence was diſcuſſed in the Councell vader Pant the third, and the deciſion
mz deferred null anothertime, ſaid , that thercfore it was neceſſary to ſee the
: rcalons then alledged by the Prelates; that now they had giuen their yoyces
withoutalledging realons, which himſclfe would nor doe, cſtceming rea-
{ons more thcn auchoritie and multitudeof opinions. And then he began
corcciteallthe reaſons tor proofe that it is dezuredinino, and to reſolue the
contrary. He inſiſterh much vpon the ſaying of Cyr 15T, 4 good ſhepheardgo-
eth before the flocks, c.allerh euery [heepe by name , runneth through the deſert to [ecke
that #hich ts lojb, and layeth downe bis life for them. He (ſhewcth that this was vn-
deritood of all choſe whom Cu x1 s T hath inſtiruted Pa$ors; which are all
choſe who haue cure of foules , eſpecially the Biſhops, as Saint *Parl, ſaid and
wrote ro the Epheſians; that whoſocuer did hold himlelte nor ro be bound by
the Decree of CHK1sT to performe thele'ofhices, or was more fit for
the affaires of Kingdomes,or Common-wealths,oughr to leaue the charge of
a Taſter, and apply himſelte to thoſe matters onely ; that it is very much to
performeone charge well, butto performe two, which be contrary, is im-
poſſible. His prolixitie did not pleaſe the Cardinals, becauſe he was the firtt
thardiſputedthat matter with reaſon. Hee ſpake with great vehemencic, v-
{ing many phraſcs and words, taken out of Saint Hierome. Simoneta would
willingly hauc interrupted him , bur forbare, in regard of the occurrence of
the Biſhop of Guadice, Burt hce called him, inthe preſence of many Prelars,
and reprchended him ſharpely for-ſpeaking againſt the Pope. The Biſhop
| defended himlelfe humbly,and with reafons: and a few dayes after, alleadg-
— 26h xg ing indiſpoſition, asked leaue to depart, and had it, and departed the one

Trent ior

nc. and twenticth of the monerh,
_—_—_ After this time the controucriicabout reſidence changed ſtate, and thoſe

webs Ports who did abhorre it , did labour no moreto demonſtrate by reaſons or autho
| ritic

L1s. 7. the Councell of Trent.

ritic, as yarill then they had done, thatitwas of che law of man, but began to

terfific thoſe of the contrary opinion,by ſaying,that ro maintaine that it was ; ——\
de inre dinine, was to: diminiſh chaPopes authority ; becaulc it would folloyy Fwvmaxs.
thathce could not enlarge or dimwilh, diuide or vnite.; change or rransferre 5,000005”
Epiſcopall Seas,nor lealie chern vacatt,: or gaue chem. an adminiſtration , or — ne 9.

comm-nda ; that hee.could not re{tzxaine,myeh lefle take away the authorcieto

ablolue, that, by this determination; all diſpenſarions granted by Popes,

were condemned argnce , and powertaken-away to grant them hercatcer,

The other part, who ſaw the neca{hitic of: thoſe conſequences, which they

chouglit-were not valis, but that'it wasthgerueth, and che lawiull vie of the

ancicat Church , and chat the deelaration»was ptopoled for no other ende

then to remoouec thoſe inconuenicnices, themlclues allo omitting to vie rea»
ſonsand authority ,to, proouc it te. bee de aredinino, began to ſhewgthar reſt-

dence becing reltored by that declaration, it; would turne to the inlargetnerit

of the Popes power,, and encreaſe the reuerence rowards the Clergie, and

cfpecially rowards the Pope, who/hath loft authority in ſo many Prouinces,

becaulc Biſhops, nor refiding,, but gouerning by vnable Vicars, haue lctt a

way open forthe ſowingot newdoctrines; which, with ſo much detriment

of the Popes authoririe;haue taken roote. If Biſhops doe refide, his authori-
tic will be preached every where, and confirmed whereit is acknowledged
as yer, and reſtored, where it hath bcen ſhaken. Neither of the parties could
ſpecake with ſuch rermes, but chat their diſhmulation was perceiued on both
{ides,and their inward tthoughes , which they would hauc concealed, were
bur too manifelt. "They were all masked,and yet all knowen. Being afſcm-
bled againe the ſtxtecath of December, one halfe of the Prelates hauing noc
as yet giuen their yoyces , Cardinall Seripando propoſed the prorogation of
the Seſlioc; and beeing not able then ro foreſee when they could diſpatch,
they reſolued ro prefxe'a certaine time,within fifreenedayes. ' And the Car-
dinal admonithe the Prelats of their great prolixitic, in giuing theirvoyces,
which did ayme only at oſtentation,tooke away the reputation of the Coun-
ccll,and did prolong ir,to the great incommoditie of them all,

The Pope was much afflicted witly the death of Fredericke Boromeo his ne-
phew, which happenedin the end of the laſt moneth ; vpon whom thinking
ro conferre all che greatneſſe of his houſe, hee had married him to adaugh-
ter of the Duke of Yrbin, made him generall gouernour ofthe Church, and
purpoled allo to giue him the Dukedome of Camerino , and becaule hce was
old, and oppreſſed with griefe, hee fell into a dangerous fickneſle ; our of -
which beeing recoucred, heeapplyed his minde tothe affaires of the Coun-
cell. Hee held diuers Congregations , ro findea temper concerning the two
Canons,of the Inſtiturion,and of Reſidence, which were thought by ali che
Court to bee yery dangerous for the Popes authoritie; asalſo ro makeſome
prouifion againſt the prolixitie of the Prelats,in delivering their opinions, be-
cauſe it did prolong the Councell, and lefra gatcopen for all thole to enter,
who would attempr any thing againlt his dignicie, Aboue all , that which
was deflcigned by the Frenchmen did trouble him, eſpecially,becauſe heedid
neuerrecceiue Letters from Trent; in which it was not {ayd, that either the
Cardinall of Lorain?, or ſome of the Ambaſſadours did make requelt for rex

| * formation,

CC © I———— + woes ——  R— em_———CRG———o——ne_—

=

The Hiſtorie of L1 —_—_

646
1562
CxS NSN

Pivs 4.

FriDIiXAND.

FLitizABETH.
CHARLES 9g
Pauiite 2.

CLANS

formation , with this addition, tharif chey could nor obtaine thoſe prouif1-
ons they demanded,they would make thetn'ar home, making mention oftcn
of providing againlt rhe arnats, preventions, and other things properly be-
loyging to the Pope of Rome, He relolued todealcplainely with the French-
men ; and to thoſe which werein Rome heſayd, that, hauing (o often offered
to treat with the King concerning his owne rights, ahd tocome toa friend-
ly compoſition , and ſeeing thar his miniſters in the Councell doc alwayes
make ſhevy that chey will ſpeakerof chemin the Synode,, hee was reſolute to

| ſee whether hee would breake our imo an open. difſention with him. Hee

The Duke of
Baxaria (on -
deth Ambal-
ſidours to
Rome.

gauc order, by anexpreſlc currier, tohis Nuncio' in France toſpeake hereof;
and wrote to the Cardinall of Loraine, thatthoſc marrers could not be pro-
poſed in Councell, without breach of the Kings promiles , expreſſely made
ynto him, by Monſieur d Auxerres. Hee complained in Confiſtory of
the impertinencie of the Biſhops in Trent, in making euery thing long, ro
no purpole. Hee exhorted the Cardinals to write to their friends, and him-
ſclfe wrote to the Legats, to vie threats andauthoritie, ſeeing that perlwaſi-
ons did no good. Concerning the Articles of the Inſtitution he wrote, that
ro make the inſtitution of Biſhops abſolutely de iure dinino, was a falſe opini-
on, and erroneous ; becauſe the power of Order wasfrom Carts, but of
iuri(diftion from the Pope, which, in this reſpe&t , may bee ſaid ro be from
CHR1sT.bccaule the Papail authoritie commeth from his Diuine Maie-
ie, to chat wharſoeuecr the Pope docth,CHR1sT docth by him. And, for a
refolution, hee wrote, that ceithcr rhe words de jure dium, ſhould bee quite 0-
mitted,or they (houl4be vied in that forme which hee {ent , in which it was

fayd char Ctr15T did inſtitute Bithops to be created by the Pope , who may

diltribure to chem what and how much authority it pleaſed him to giue

them,for the benefit of che Church, hauing abſolute power to reſtraine and

amplitic that which is giuen , asſeemcth good vnrohim. Then hee wrote,
that, in the particularof Reſidence, it being a cleere caſe that the Popehath

power to diſpenſe, they ſhould, by all good caution of words, relcruc his

authoritic 1h the Decree, in which the words de iuxe Diuino , could by no

meanes bee pur ; as Catharinus had well prooued, from whole opinion, becing

Catholique, they ought not to depart. For holding the Seſſion, hee wrote

confuſedly, thatit ſhould not beedeferred aboue fifteene dayes,norcelebra-

ted beforethe matter were in order, that the enuious might not rake occaſion

ro calumnaate.

Alſolcmne Ambaſlage from the Duke of "Baxaria paſſed by Trent to goe
ro Rome, to obtaine of the Pope the communion of the Cup. They had
audicnce with the Legate , and ſecref conference with the Cardinall of Lo-
7aine. This wakenedthecontrouecrſic inthat matter, which was ailcepe ;
and the Spaniards, and many Italians , (howlocuer the matter was referred
to the Pope by the maiorpart) fayd it would beea prejudice ro the Coun-
cell, if, while char laltcd, thatyſe ſhould bee permitted. And all the Fathers
were ina hurly burly , becauſe letters came from Rome to diners Prelates,
thatche Counceli ſhould be ſuſpended , which report was confirmed by Don

' Tobn Manriques who paſſed by Trent,from Germany to Reme. But the Lecats,

having receiuzd the Popes lerters,thought ir impoſſble to execute the orders

C4

—_——

L r8.-5.

647

the Councellof Trent...
he had lent, and that It wasineceſlary ro-giuc him a more particular account 1562.

of the occurrences; thenicouldbedoneby writing,and make him vnderſiand
thar che Councell<annor-bee-goucrnedas ar Rome they thinke it can, :thar
they might recciue's more:;plaine inftraftion from:his Holineſſe what they
ſhould doe. Andwir/beingneetlary ro fend a man of: tndgement,wellinfor-

YAN
Pivs. 4. T

FaexpDinanD;

—__  __Þ4-
EL1ZABETH,/
CHARLES 9.

Puitie 2

med, and of cteditewirt the Pope; they found nonederter then. the Biſhop —v—

of Uentimigliazrehom they-relolucd to diſpatch withſpeed, The Holy-daies
of Chrittmaſſc approaching! gaue themy fir occaſion fir{tro proceed flowly;
and afterwards rovimermieehe congregations ando te hauc lcafureto make
thardiſparch; which'was' donethe ſixcand.rwentieth of December. |

Theeighrand rwentieth, neowescamero Trent, ofthe bartcll in France,
which hapncd che ſcuenteentbofthe monerh , inwhich the Prince of Condd
was taker priſoner... Thar Kingdome was very turbulent allthat yecre, for
the differences of religion, which gauca beginning firſt varoa gentle, and
afterwards varoafurious warre. . For the Hugonots encreafing in Paris, to the
greatdiſcontenrot the Catholiques , whoare many in the Citic, and adhe-
ring to the Prince: of:( onde rhe (onftable , with his ſonnes , and thehouſe oF
Guiſe., with ſome others, rohinder the greatneſſe vato which: that Prince

The Legates
ſend the B.ot

Vent img ly.
to the Pope.

The battell &

othe: rrou bles

in Frence.

did a(pirc, made league, and deflceigned to makethemſelues leaders of the

peopleof'fParis; andtochale;by.cheir meanes, from that Citicand the Court,
the Prince and his followers”. Each of them departing from his houſe, to goe
towards Paris,and in theiourney (laying and difperfipg the Hugonots, whom
they found aſſembled in daucrsplaces , theycntred imzo Paris ; and, hauing
drawcnthe King of 'Nauarretothcir {ide,and cauſed theciry to arme in their
tauour, the Queene was conſtrained to ioyne with them. - Heereupon the
Prince going out of Faris, and retiring, with his adherents, to Orlience, ma-
nifefts and writings paſſed on both fades., each proteſting they did nothing
bur for the libertic and: fcruice of the King. But the ConStable and Guiſe
waxing cucry day firooger, in Aprill the: Prince wrote to all-che-xctormed
Churches of France;demanding ſouldiers, and money, and dedaring warte
again{trhe defenders of the Catholike parrie, calling them perturbers of the

publike quier, andwiolaters ofche Kings Edit , publiſhed in fauour of the _ _
Reformatilts. TheBtinces letters were accompanied withothers;of the mi- » +»

nilters of Orleans , :arid/'of fome other cities, whichcauled thoſe of that. R&-
ligion'to.arme. Andthere fell our an accident which did incitethem more;
For ar the ſamotimeche-EdifÞ of Ianuary ( whereof wee hauc already made
mention ) was publiſhed againo'in- Paris, with an addition, that neirthct
in cheſuburbs.of the-Cirie,nogwirhin the ſpace of a league any aſſembly of
Religionſhould breheld:, ov:Sagramentsadminilired but after the old Rite:
And ia the end of\May. rhe King:of Nanar mad; all the Reformatilts gee
out of Paris; but pragecdediwithsſuch moderation; tharnone of them wege
offended: ::n ilo216h 5s Shad fo 4s gt op hh Ave both
; Warrebrake fordhin\4l cho: Brouinces/of France; berweene thele parties,
and thar ſummer therewere atrhe:leaſt ;kourtcene:formall Armics;#ll acong
rimc, in divers patts:of the; Kingdome.> The ſonnes fought agaitſt rtheir
fathers; brothers agailalt brochkrs $1and cocn; wotncn rooke Armgs on-both
ſides, for defenceqttheirreligion;s Therewvas almoſtro part in;Dolphinie,,
| L anguedoc,

1562: Langnedoc, and Gafcoigne, waich way pot vexed attcatimes; the Catholiques,
{>>> temainivg/ conquerouts.in ſome places, and, rhe Reforwatilts: in. others,

tema. with ſuch variety of accidents,thatzt would beeredious ro repeat them, and

| Eiraxera.; befides our purpoſe, whichrequireth thac nothing ſhould bee related by ys

car 9- bur: concerning Trent, exceprthale which haueaconnexionwith the Coun-

L— ch,as the. things following: haue; | Wherethe'Hagonors oucreame, the ima-

_ * © gegwere beaten downe;, thealtars; deſtroyed; rhe Churchesſpoiled and the

ofmaments of gold and:f1lucr melted romake moncy;for ſouldicrs pay

where the Catholiques were conquerors, they burned: the Bibles an the yul-

ger tongue; reþaptized children, and remarired tboſc; whb,thad beene: maricd

according to the new ceremonies. And.be condition; of the'Clergie on

both ſides was moit miſerable, who; whenlochcrthey:weretaken, werectu-

elly murthered, withourall humanity. In Iulic zhe Parlament of Paris made

4 Decrec, that it ſhould hee lawfull roflay all the Fgonors,) which:-;by pub-

likeorder, was rcad cncry Sunday in cucry Pariſh, - Aiterwards they. added

| another, declaring them rebels, publike enemies, themiclucs infambus, and

Re + Allrheir polterity, and che goods of thoſe who:rooke Artes inOrliens confil-

cree mide Þy |

me Paz cared ,,cxcept/ onde, vpon pretencethar they Hhicld himby force. And how-

Parts. focuer there. were many treaties betweene the parties ,,anda verballconfe-
rence alioberwcene the Queene: Mother ,:antthe[Princes yer{tich-was the

a@birion-of the Grandies , that it was.impoſlible ro fiiid:out any meancs of

compoſition, x 0110119 mt bo.

11ctoy BurtheKing of Nagar being dead , who-perhaps would. not haue ſuffc-
Counrics red chemo proceed ro an open warre, the Queenercſoluing co regaine, obe-
Frans dicnce withratmcs, demarided aide of all the Princes.” And becauttthe pco-
ple of the how Countreys did learne;, by this example, tobce more. comu-

fnacious, atid obltinate, the Kings authority diminiſhed eyary day,and could

not be repaited by the Gouernours.. . And the King refulcd ro goethitherto

oppoſe his perſon againſt the ill diſpolttion'ofthe people, and the defbgnes

of the Grandics, as Granuel, thechicte in that Gouernment , had giuen him

counſcll -Forthar wife Kino knew how dangerous it was to beconemned

TheOurene £0 bis face, and doubted thar, in Read of gainihg- Flanders hee ſhould make it
ee Sa OTC comwumacious;ahd, inthe meanc while, toole:Spaine. But he thought
nu acmic. that by ſubdaing the Frenchmen, who rebelledagainititheir King\Heemight
make'anablolute prouifion againſt-che comvimacicivhhis owne: Subictts.

And thereforc he offered the Queene great afliftandcofmenaudanoncy, fuf}

fejent roſubic&rhe'whole Kingdome' vntonher: | Bdb dtheQuecne- refuſed

the men And/demanded the manty; knowing: thartbſhebad receiued a Spas

wiſh arnvie; ſhe ſhould have bezne tarcedrogeterne: France, notaccording ts

ber owhiefirrrctts, bur ct che: KinguoF Spaingi: | Yetrakibgia middts courlh,

ſhe receiued fixerhouſand men, wxalrwhichg andiwitihhaorowne forfes;con-

ducted by the ( 61/table, and the Duke of Guiſe, the bartell was madetheies
uenteemtiday aforeſaid,” in-whichebreethdufabd Huganrs; andfiuecthou-

ſand Catholiques'werrflainc, andche Geneiuls on borh 1ides fſoadaaridithe

Conſtable :raken priſoners: Nethervf rhearivics wasdiſcomfiredtbyi venue

of the Lieurenanrs on both-frdos,GaifestprrheCatholiques; and Colionie for

the Hygondrs. * The Queenc didmake Guifeahe Generallprrichdiibngrdet

rerre

—W
—_—_

the Councell of Trent. : 649
tetreCollipme from mainraining his armit, preſcruing'ithe places he polleſled, L562
ard making {pmeprogreſſealtſoe - ou oe GD
Forhis victorie ( for ſo.it was called, though ir deſeryed'nor the name ) Fane
thatikes were/giuen to God in Trent, byall che Fathers aſſembled, rogether numexrs,
making a proccſlion & ſtnging a Maſſe,Franciſcus *Belcarras Bilhop of Metz, pt 7
madcan Orationallo , in which, relating all the ſtorie of-the confuſivns of —v—
France,lince the deathof Francis the ſecdnd,and theſuccelle of the laſt warte, **emvicies

arevicdin __

hee gaue thopraiſe of all that was well done ro the Duke of Guiſe only, Hee 7rc»-forths
laid Martin Luther was cauſe of all thoſerroubles , who, chough bura little 5...
ſparke, had raiſcd a great fire, firlt in Gerwanie, and afterwards. inall thePro-
uincesof Chriſtendome, cxcept 1talizand Spaine; Hee gxhorted theFathers
to aſliſt the Chriſtian common-wealth, becaule they ohely wereableto cx- |
tioguiſh that flame., Hee told them that-this was the Gn and twentieth
yeere {ance Pay! the third began to healerhis-diſeaſe;; by intimating the
Councell there ; which was farſt deferred, then diflembjed,, and fipally cele-
brarcd. with diuers factions, yntill it was crafisferred to Bologia, where there
were many dilations, and greater contentions,and more bitter fact ions then
before, Afterwardsit was recalled to Trent, Ind; by-reaſon- of che warres
diflolued. Now that chey were come to the laſt, there was ng mare place
for difſimulation', becauſe che Councell would cither reconcilethe whole
world, or caſt it headlong, into an infallible ruine; Therefore it was fit that
the Fathers ſhould not regard their priuatc intereſts, nor haue particular de-
{1gnes , nor{peake in fauour of others, in regard the cauſeof religion was in

ueſtion, which will beytterly ouerthrowne, if they caſt their eye vpon any
thing beſides. This libertic of ſpeach hee-zempered with: flatteric, firſt ro-
wards the Pope , then towards the Emperour, kings of the Romanes, and
of Polonia. He paſted -to the commendationsof the Queene Mother of France,
and ofthe King of Portugal ,and;, inthe end, cxhorted them to reforme. the
Ecclef1aſticall diſcypline., - ;:1. 18; | - hnllo

The Cardinall of Loyaine, hauing reccined newes of the impriſonmentof

the Prince; was very glad, particularly for che honour of his brother, ad de- £7
{ired the more to returne quickly! into France ; to aſſiſt him in the Court and
inthe Kings Councell, andtoraiſehimiclte alſo one degree higher, in regard +. .
Naxar.and the Conſtable, towhom hes was necceſlarily to yecld,were both ©
raken away. 7 12, 2tilofion* of f {1 armies: To
5:1 The; AS was full of ſuſpicion fortheiourney ro prac , which che Em- conicl ole
perour had pabliſhed,, rhinking hee-would not goe thither withour grear tehmeaem
deſtgnes,, and without aſſurancecocftec them. Heg belecucd hee had fe- 17r---
.cret intefligence,with:Francdabd:Speme, bur knew hot io what ende, but
onclyingenerall;, thatirwAaplotagainithim, : Thereforc hee reſolucd to
gacin perſon fo "Paonia;\tofend cighvor tenne Cardinals to Trent, to make
Pg withtheltatian/Printes,and:to confirmethe Prelates hisad-

ctents in Councelb)vnetbeecoild firide ſome occafion to diflolye or fuſ-
r_ Andy6 hinder atl-irreatios iv-Trent of tcforming the Court, bee
-laboyrcg mth findelfointhat buſindfſe:' Hee teformed the Rora , publi-

ſhibg4'Briefe;datedthe ſeucnand tweantierhof eegrhber , in which he or-

ME ol hou proo wot, howſeruetecale
- Iii might

Ls By 7.

650 ..- The Hiſtory of L1izy,

1563 might be plaine,beforche made thepropolition tothe whole Colledge,with-

g out conſent of the partics ; that the ſentences propounded in writing; ſhould
1V3 4 "PE ,

Fzx]mxaxv. be produced within fiftcene dayes; thar the cauſes of the 2uditorsthem(thuts,

Eurzanzrn, Or of their kinsfolke vnto the ſecond degree; or'of any of their tatnilic, ſhall

pare 9 norbechcardin the Rora, that the parties ſhall nor bee forced to receue an

> Aduocate ; that no deciſion ſhall bce made againſt thoſe which bee printed,

excepttwo thirds of thevoyces doe conſent : tha they ſhall bee bound ro re-

miteuery cauſe which ſcemerh to bee criminall! ' In the fame Bull hee'made

alſo a taxe for moderation of fees. Hee reformed likewiſe by other Bulls, pub-

liſhed the firſt of rhe next Ianuarie,the ſignature of juſtice, the tribunals of

Rome, the office of the Friſcall Aduocare, ordaining what fees they ſhould

haue. Burthe vſuall cxtorfions were ſo farre from beitig tcdreſſed by thoſe

prouiſions, that by rrahſgreſſing/the new otders, they lcartied to violaterhe
olde which were in ſome vie." > 7 3 Sf13 \ QL: +
The Courtiers in Roe thinking the Catholikes in France had 'gotren an
 abſoluce viEtoric,, and that theHugonors wete reduced tonothing ,' wore! ex-
cceding glad. For belecuing that France had obtainedthar by Armeswhich
t expettedfrom'the Synode, ahd there being no further regard ro beehadof
Germanie,which proteſted againſt ir, they thought thar all cauſes of holding
the Counteliwere ceaſed,ſo that it might be ſuſpended or deferred,and them
ſcluesdeliuered front feare, which had increaſed cuery weeke, by reaſon of
the nounties which happened-in: Trene. Bur the Pope made no' great mat-
ecr of it. *, For being informedrhar the Carholike forces were nav augmen-
: ted, nor:the Hugonors diminiſhed, and thar thisbartell would giyeGccation ro
[ | rreate a peace ,i which could not bee without his prejudice, nor with-
| out giuing'marter of *mote, novitics in Trent, hee was more afraide and
croubled then before.” And the-ytere I 56:2. ended thus ; a congregation in
Trent having beene helde the. thirticth of the moneth , in which ir was
- emnnes co prolong the Scfh19n , and appoint a day for it within fiftcene
ayes. x TT by
3Þ The yeete 1 5 63. began in Councell with-the preſentation of the articles,
! & 1563 of reformation made by the French Ambaſſadours, which ſecmed very. hard
The Aries. tO the Lefates and all the Papalins ;eſpecially-in thoſe-particulars in which
= 6, Format they would hauc the'Rires of the Roman Church altered and in which the
4 |... emoluments and profits, which the Apoſtolike Sea received: from'other
| Churches, were touched:” The Ambaſſadors added the viuall-4pperatie, nor
. tocall ira proteſtation , rharzif their propoſitions worenot.imbraced:;;crhey
> would prouide for their neceffities in-France. '* The Logares wereſureithe
Pope would bee vexed heerewirh , in.s&gardofthepromiſemagelmo bim,
that they would nor treat in:Cooncell:of tbe Amars |; ahdionheripetunt-
_  arieRiter\bur friendly compoſe the marter-with hint”: * oThetefquei they
Shemethop of thoughr ic ncceflarie'ro ſend them. ro himt]by.@ Prefarey, 1 and;tdcinformc
othe Pope: | his Holineſſe..  Andthey cletdithet Biſhop>dfiFirerhd!;-as being andctlin-
k -ſtruRed/in>the affaitesof France; where horchiid btand A{atona'manyyeecres-
Y and in the deſignes:vf the Cardina-ahd/Frepah;Piglatts! of che Goun-
} cell , with whom hee -had:conuerſed lance: theisr(arciyall,” iÞhe, C:
— dinall' of -Loraine., .,:' informed hboroot , © peslfyaded tbem to, WT

3
and

the Councell of Trent.
and himſclfe gaue him ivltruftions, ro-ſpeake with the Pope. The'Bi- 1563
ſhop was fo numble,, that howſocuer 'rhe Cardinall held thar hee was ,7>o —
{cat vnro him for a ſpie,and anobleruer, yer hee catried himſclfe fo well,thar Fuomuna,
he gained the confidence of him and che' Ambaſſadours , withour loſing runuurs,
thac which the Pope and Legates had in him. ' The: Prelate went with in-/p20netts:
{traction to repreſent to the'Popeall che difficulties which the Legars found, '—v—:
and to. bring backe a reſolution how they ſhould goucrne themſclues in c-

ucry particular: '''Hee had in{truQtions from Loyaine to defire his Holinefſe

ro rake in good part'thart which was deſired by the King for the neceſlitic

of his Kingdome, and by them to cxecurethe commands of his Maiettic,

and ro offer his cndeuours to accommodate the differences of the inltirutis:

on of Biſhops, and of ref1dence, which held the Councell employed in (mall
marrers. al 3 5 $0901
 ThcEmperours miniſters, ſecing the\Reformarion of the Frenchmen;

and con{idering tne Proheme, thought they were noted to have bur ſmall:
authoritic. They complained to the Legares that the Articles of reforma-

rion, mentioned by the Emperour and'by them, had not been propoled,

though they had ginen copies of them, ſent them ro Rome, and tron thent
chroughour Trent; deſiring they may bee put together with thoſe of the
Frenchmen. The Legats cxcuſedthemlſelucs, in regard of the libertic which

the Emperour by letters, and themlelues by word of mouth had giaen them,

co propole and omit what ſeemed them good, adding, that they did expect

a fit time, and char 'indeede the Frenchmen had nor found a good conic-
&urc,whilerhe differences of the two Canons doth continue, which giuerh

much trouble to his Holinefſe: The Amdaſſadours were not fo ſatisfied,

ſaying , there was agreat difterence berweene omirting all, anda part; and
berwcene dcterring , whiles inthe meane ſpace things are concealed with

due relpe&t, anddfaulging rhem , and putting rhem'inderifion. And Smo-

neta replycd , thar it was hard'to diſcerne which were fit to bee propoſed,

but cafie to know which were to bec omitted, intheend they were content

ro expect what the Pope would fay ro theFrench propoſitions, ſo thatafter-

wards theirs mightbee propoſed. The French Prelates had conſented, in ge-

nerall termes , to the Articles belonging to Rizes, and to the grieuances of Bi-

(ſhops, which in their ſecrer"thughts rhey did not approoue ; becauſe they
belccued thar, in the diſtiifion of them, rhey ſhould haue the Spaniards, arid

many of the Iraliatts their oppoſites; but ſeeing they were ſent'to Rome,

they were afraid thar the Pope oppoſing thoſe which touched hisreucnues;

would yccldto the others, and by compoſition be content ro giue way to

thoſe which were preiudiciallto them, ro auoyde others which concerned

his owne iurcreſt. 'For thiscitiſe they made ſecret practiſes with the other”
Prelats, perlwadinga modcratiqn;) which being done after the French fa:

ſhion, withourmuch caution; was knowne to the Ambaſladours. 'There-

fore Lanſac aſſembled them all';and reprehended them ſharpely , for daring

ro oppoſe the will ofthe King, Queene , of the whole councell, aid of the
Kingdome. Hecexhorted them , not'onely nor to labour agatalt , but

ro promotethe Kings determitrazioh; And the admonition was very ri:

gOrous. | HIES

L'ts. +;

Tii a Bur

—_— A rn CE On
—

+ The AiSory of L 1B. 7,

1563.

Piys. 4.

FERDINAND:

EriZa8BTH.

CHARLES 9.
Pnttie 24

ASSL

The French
proplitions .

Bur before wee relate the negotiation in Rome, it will not bee amiſle to
declarc theſubſtance of the French propoſttion , which preſently was prin-
red:in Ripaand. Padua , and contcined: Thar the. Ambaſladours had dc-
rexmined long fince,inperformance of the Kingscommand , ro propoſe to
thaCouncell che things contcined ;in.that writag ;;byt.che Emperour ha«
uing propoled almoſt the ſame thihzs, not-toimportune the Fathers, they

PF".

ction ſhould bee reſtored ro Deacans, and other holy, Orders, that they way
not {ecmero bee bare names, and forceremaniepply.. 5... ÞhatihePrielts and
other Eccleftaſticall Minilters ſhould artend ro their vpgar' on, notmcdling
id any office, butin chediuineminiltery. 6+. ThataBihop thquld vor be
made butof a lawfall age, manners, and doctrine; that hee may teach, and
give cxample tothe people. 7. ThatnoDParilh Prieſt ſhould bee made
bur ot approued honeltie, able roin{truct the people, celeb:ate the facritice,
adminilter the Sacrament, and reach the vic and clte&tgighem ta the recei-
ucrs. 8. Tharno Abbat or Conuentual Prior ſhould beecreared, who hail
not ſtudied divinity in ſome famous Vnjuerſty, and obtained the degree of
Maſter, orſome other. 9. Thatche Biſhop, þy himſelfe, or by athcr prea-
chers, as many as arc ſufficient, according tothe propartion of the Dioceſle,
{hould preach cuery Sunday and Holyday,& in Lent, on faſting, dayes,and 1n
Aduenr,and as often as.it ſhall bee fir. 10, , TharthepariſhPrielt ſhould doc
the ſame asoften as hee hath auditors. 11,, Thatthe Abbar and Conucn-
ruall Priog {hall reade the holy Scripture, and inſtiture an Hoſpirall ; lo that
rhe ancient, Schooles and hoſpitality may, bee reltored to the Monallerigs,
12: ThatBiſhops,Pariſh Pricſts, Abbats, and other Eeclefialtiques, vnable
ro-performetheir charge, ſhall recciuc, (oaginrors, gr leaue cher. Bencfices,
13. ' That concerning the Carcchilme, and ſummaric in{truciondt Chriſtie
an doctrine, that ſhould be ordayncd which the Emperour hath propoſcd to
the Councell. 14. That no man ſhould baue mare-chen one kenelice, ta-
king away the differences of the, quality of parſons, and of Bencfices compa-
tibleand incompatible, a new diviſion nat heard of inthe ancient Decrees,
and a cauſe of many troubles in the Catholique Churc h; and that the regu-
+1 lar

L'1B.7. the Councell of T rent. 633
lar Benefiecs (hould bee gruerpronegulars)andlſeculareoſeculars! 'ipgiitThar 1353

he who new bath owo or moreyſhall rerdibe clas only which tne thed{ hoe * Sat,
within 4 thorr-eimog(/or thall»incarre th&-penatty of ahtativient' Cayons. FIRSke
16. Thas to rake away all notcrof:agaricolromithe Clegloathabe beo tai Einar
ken, vpon any precence:wharſocterifor rheadminiftreboget holy things, £205ttts:
but char prouiſton hemade char theCyratesprligherwo Clakes —_— LAAY,

by

. haue whereoo. troltueAnd! mainctaine hoſpitality ;'whielvmaybeeidohe)
the Biſhops (by vniring| benefices or afliyrningrirenhs enewithiern 68, where

"thatcannotbee done;rhe Princemay promeforthemby\ſhbuparonger
collections,jimpoſed vpgn the Pariſhes. | 15/Þhatin pariſh MaſſorjtheeGoft
pel be-expotinded <leerely, according tothe capacwy the peopleg lard that
the prayers which the Pariſh-Prieſt-makethrogether withtheipeopltibrelig
the vulgar eotigue, and thar, the ſacrifice beingveaided Lariepubhapry
ers bee rhade inthe vulgar rengueikewile; ati that at thefanie rimeeor ifl
other houres, ſpiriruall hymnes or Pſalmes of 'Dauid, approoyed by the Bi:
ſhop ,'may bee lung in the ſamelanguage. 18.” Thart cancientDeereof
Leo and Gelafius , forthe Communion vnder borh kinds, bee refiewed.: 145,
Thatbefore the adminiſtration of euery Sacrament; an expofitionbee?taude
inthe vulgar, ſo that the ignorant' may vnderſtand theit yſs and effitfitie.
20. Thataccording totheancient Canons, benefices may not bee eohfetted
by the Vicars , but by the Biſhops themlelues, within the xetme of fixe mio
neths, otherwiſe that thecollation may bee deuolued rothe'niext Superiour,
and, by degrees to the Pope. 21. Thartthe Mandars of prouifion ;"expe+
Aatines, regreſſes,rcſ1gnations int contidence, and commendaes bee reuoked); and
baniſhed: out of the Church, as contrary to the Decrees. 22. That the re-
{tonarions in fauour be wholly extermipated from che Court of Rome, it be-
ing as it werean cleCtion of ones ſelfe, or a demanding of* a ſucceſlour, a
thing prohibited by the Canons, - 23. Tharfimple Priories, from which
the cure of foules israken away , contraty ro the foundation;/andafligned ro
a perpetuall- Vicar, with aſmall portionof tithes, or of other renenue,' bee
re{tored to their former tare atthe firſt 'vacancie.' 24. Thar benefices, vn-
to which no office of preaching, adminiſtring the Sacraments; norany other
Ecclefiaſticall charge isannexed, may haue ſome ſpirituall cure impoſed vp-
on them, by the Biſhop , withthe councell ofthe chapter}, 'or bee vnited to
rhe next pariſhes , becauſe/no' Benefice ought'or can bee without an office,
25- Thar petſt0ns beenot impoſed'vpon benefices, and thoſe aboliſhed
which arcimpoſed already, that che Eccleſia(ticallreuenues-may bee {ſpent in
maintaining the Paſtors;and poore, and in other workes of pietic.26. Thar
Eccleſtalticalliuriſdi&tion throughout the whole Dioceſſebe reſtored tothe

| Biſhops, all exemptions being raken' away , but ofthe-chicte goucrnors of

the Ordersand Monalteries ſubieCt vato then, and thoſe who make general!
Chapters, ro whom exemptions are granted by alawfull rifle, but yer with
prouifiowthat they bee not exempred from corre&tion, 27. ThartheBi-
ſhop may nor vſciuriſdiction , and 'handl: matters of great weight concer-
ning the Dioceſſe, wirhoutthe'coinvſell of the Chapter, and that the Canons
may reſide continually in the Churches, bee of go5d connerfation , learned,
and at thelealt 2. yecrcsof age, inregard the lawes, not giving them =

112-3 | ree

; 634 1 py The Hiftory of L1s:7

1363 free diſpalition oftheir goods'before that time, they ought nor ro bee made
> counk|lours to Biſhops. |. 28!) That the degrees of afhniry,conſanguinity,
FanomnD: andſpitirual} kindred be obſerned, or reformed, and thatit may'nor beelaw-
mare full rodiſpence therein, burwich Kings and Princes, for thepubliquegood:
Cuantns: 9: 2.6. LNAt inregard-many arbubles haue riſen by meanes of images, the Sy--
\A— node would makeptouiſion!, that the people may be raught wharrhey ought

to\bclecue concerning themzand that theabuſes and fuperitirions; if any be
vicdin the worſhip-of them;may be taken away: and thatthe ſame be done
concerning mdulgences, pilgrimages. reliques ob Saints, and-of companies or con-
fraternities.. | 30.;--T hatthe publikc and ancient penance inthe Carholike
Church forgrieuous & publikc offences; bereſtored and broughtiuto vicas
alſo faſtings and other cxereiſes.of ſorraw!, and publique prayers to appeaſe
thewrathof God. 31. Thazexcommunication be nor decreed for cucry ſort
of offeace, orcontumacie, bhuronely for the greateſt, and in which the of-
fender doth perſeuerc after dmonition., 32. T har, to abbreutate or quire
rake-away ſuits of law for benetices , by which the whole Clergie is blemi-
ſhed, the diſtinRtion of petitorie and poſſeſſorie..., 'newly inucnted in thoſe
cauſes, may, bee taken away , nominations of Vniucrfities aboliſhed , and a
commandernent giuen to Biſhops, to give benefices not ro thoſe that ſecke
them, bur tothoſc that auoid them ,and are worthy of them : and their me-
rit will be knowen, if, aftcr their degree receiued inthe Vniuerfatic, they ſhall
haue.ſpent ſome time in preaching, with the conſent of the Biſhop , and ap-
probation of the people. 33. That there beeing a ſuit for a benefice,, an
Economique may bee created, and arbitrators elected by the litigants; which
incaſc they retuſe ro doe, thatthe Biſhop may nominate, and that theſe may
determine the controuerſic within {1x moneths, and that no a ppcalc may lic
from them. 34, Thar the Epiſcopall Synods may bee held once a yceere
at the lealt and the Prouincia!l once in euery three yeeres, and the General,
ifth crebec none impediment, cuery revth yeere. |
Thenegori= "The firſt of Ianuarie Vintimiglia arriued in Reme, hauing made the jour-
—_ ney in fcucndaies. Hee preſented the letters to the Pope, and declared his
PFeeaig/'4 credence, relating the cogitations and diucrs ends and humours which were
in the Councell, and in what fort the Legates and other good ({eruants of his
Holincſlechought the difficulties ought to bee managed. The Pope held a
congregation the thirdday , and gaue account of the relation of Yintimiglia,
ſhewed he was ſatisfied with the diligence and wiſdome of the Legares, and
commended the good will of Loraine , and gauec order that they ſhould con-
ſulrvpon the point of the inſtitution of Bilkops , which did then cſpecially
preſſe them. The fſuxth day becing the anniver/arie of his coronation, hee
held another Congregation, in whch hee publiſhed Cardinals Ferdinandode
Medici, and Frederico Gonzaga; the former to conſolatec his father forche mi-
ſcrable deathof another ſonne, who was Cardinallalſo, and the other to gra-
tificthe Legate Mantaz-, and others of the family ncercly allied iohim by a
marriage ofthe Legates nephew ro a iſter of Cardinall Borromeo. Yctthe
Popedid not omit to aſliſt at the Conſultation concerning the afaires of the
Councell, and reſoſued to writeto the Legates , that the Canon of the inſti

cution of Biſhops ſhould be thus compoled : T har the Biſhops dec holdthe

Princi-

L 18.9. the Couneell of 'Trens. \
incipaliplice in the Chureh,depehding ofthe Pope of Rate andcharthey rows

*h by bi aflumed,/ in parrens Jolicitudinic)'t Adbdiadhic Canon cating 2 |

the Popes pdwer, thavir/ſhouldbeſaid; rhivhohakiauihbriepco foeddnntl Farms,

goucrne:rhe Vniver{a}'Church,inplace of Chriſt, from!whomdlauthori- £:owmms,

tic hath beene comrhranicated to himzas Generall Vican:-burintheDecree of $*n:®*'s-

docrinorhey ſhould enlarge thewords ofthe; Councc]h of Flerence; which ——

are,char the holy Apoſtolike Sea,nand Pope of Rome hath thePrimacic in all Th: Popes

the world;and is Succeſſor of dine Peter Prince of the Apoſtics,therrye Vi- Liu,

carof CyRrist; the Head of all CharchesFarher. and Malterof all Chriſti-

ans, to whotn, inSainr Peter, by Cy x1 sTour Load hath beenegiuen

full power to feede,rule,and gouernerhe Vniuctſall Church: ''addivg,, thar

by nomeanes they ſhould depare from charforme, - which hee was certairie

would bee.recciued,” Forthe [ubſtance of itbecing takenout of a gencerall

Couricell;hce tharſhould oppoſe; would ſhow! him(clfe ro beea Schitmatike,

andfall into the cenſures, which, by the pronideniceof, God, hauing always

beene inflicted vpon che contumacious, ' withithe greater cxalcation of che

 Apoſtolique Sca, hee was confident that thecaulc of the; Church would

not bee abandoned by the Diuine:Maicſtic , »nor by the good Catholiques

and he hoped thar-in the meane ſpace Yintimiglia would be returned, whom

he meant to diſpareb- ſhortly, with more ampleinfiruttions.. Heerelolued

to g0c to'Bolonia, rhat he mightbeerneere;and lo theberter imbraceall occa-

ſions'of xniſhing or tranſlating rhe Councell; which, beforcthey could bee

aduiſet}'to Rome, did vaniſh. Hee cauſed'a Bull ro bemade, and incaſe hee

ſhould Jiebefore his returne;, the Election ſhould bee made in Rome by the

Colledocof Cardinals. wes b |
The Currier was not ſo ſoone diſpatched for Trent with theſe Letters, Th. noon

bur Yrerbo/arriued with the French Reformation, and reuiued his trouble. rower

The Pope,when hee heard it firftread,, was extreamely impaticnt,and brake 7%.

out intotheſe words, that the end of it was totake away the Datarie, the Ro-

ta, rheiSienatures, and finally all the Apoſtolique authoritic. Burt afterwards

he was much pactfied/'# the Biſhop, whotold that his Holineſſe mightbee

able ro diuert ſome things, and modcrate others, granting ſome few of them.

He delinered to him the inſtruction of Lorawme; which was, that Princes de-

mand many things ,to obtainerhoſc of which they haue molt ncede; which

do normuch cocerne the Apoſtolike Scazasthe vieof the Cup, vie of the vul-

var rongue;and mariage of Prieſts, in which, if his Holineſſe would giue ſa-

tisfation , it would be caſic for him to receiue honour from the Councell,

and to obtaine his wiſhed end. Hee fhewed that many of thoſe Articles did

not pleaſethe French Biſhops themſelues , who endeyourcd to croſle them.

The Pope'vnderſtanding hb things , gaue order that the Articles ſhould

beediſcuſſed in Congregation , and that Viterboand Yintimigliaſhould bee
reſent;to informerhe occurrences at large; in which ir was reſolued, that

the Diuines and Canoniſts ſhould writeconcerning thole propoſitions, and

cuery one deliuzrhis opinion in paper z And. to make ſome diverſion in

France,/hiegauz order to Ferrara to releaſe thoſe Fourty'thouſand Crownes to

the King,wichouc any condition, andto tell him that che Propoſttion of-his

Ambaſſadours in Trent , were fit inmany parts for the Reformation of che
1 Church,

Sn

66

>_>
Prvsigs'
FaxDInand:

ELCCABETH.
CHARLES 9s
Phrtiy' 3:

-— ax

The Pope
writcth again
to the Þre-
latcs.

r563

Church,vwbiclacadeſired botioucly cchape Decreed oburso beephrinexce
curionallogycofo, as tlianhe du notappraug them all, becauſe ſors, were to

 thediminutioaoftheKmgwainhbriney) whbiwill bec depriuedef.hecolla;

tiog of Abbies;glwhiohis agndidhclpeto hs, Maiclticito,reward bibgeod (er-
uvants; that theanokentKiugs, having then Biſlbopstgopetent,, mMgcgard of
cheit-grearautBoriry,, andoantmimaciousagatylit tht:Regal power, did de;
fire rbe Popes ito modetareif bue now-the Ambaſſadours by their:propol;-
tions,wouldreſtore'har bocoar;zwiuch the Predecefiouss, of his Maieltze did
wilcly procurets becurbcd-!:Qoncermmgrlic Popes;atthority,thar it could
norbcraken away becauſe; iowa giuaibyC pk T;bywhom Saint Peter
ant hisfucceſſors wereriatiosRu#ord ofabe vnijerfal Church, and Admini-
ſtracors of alt ficttitaſticalbgaods; thar;byt taking away the penliapshe (ball
nothagepowevre gincalmesy which 3s) duc-ot rhemaſt principal charges
whiclrthe Pope had throughout) al the world ; that faculty-t6, 'conferre
{ome Beneficesbach beeneby-fanour grauned to: Bunops,, a4 Qrdibaries,
which is not fitto/bec-.exrenidediro the preindice of the: Vauerlat Ordinarie;
which is the Pope; thar as/Tithtes ard duc. tothe Church de jwre'diyvingi,,fo the
renth of the Tirhos of all Churches is duto'ro the. Pope; thax;, For niorecom-
modutic , this hath been changed into. Amnuats ; that tn caſe they were incom-
modiousforthe.Kingdome of|4mnce, hee did nat refuleto finde atemper, {0
that the righrof che ApoltoliqueSca wereinfome convenient, manner, pre-
ſerued; butthar;as he had ofccpgiucn hinrtovndertiand; this towld:nor bee
handled in Councel)nor by aby but himſclfe, In the erid ae gatit the Cardie
nall charge, that hauing pur all'theic, things/\ro.the Kings confidefatian , hee
thould exhort him to giue new Connmitſſions to his Arabaſladonrs, . i. |
- The Pope ſcar allo co Trent the cen{ures concerning thoſe Articles, made
by diucrs Cardinals,Prelates, Diuines, and Canonilts of: Rome, with 'ordet
that they ſhould deferre to {peake of themas Jong as was polhble; that che
Article of Reſidence, and the abuſcs concerning the ,Sacrament'ot Order,
might entertaine them many dayes; that when there vas necet]iie-ro pro-
pole them, rhey ſhould begin with thoſe which v ere leaſt preiudiciall, as
thol& which apperrainero manners, and doctrine, deferring to treat of thole
which concernc Rites, and Benetices ; that, incaſerthey wete forced to pro-
poſethem, imparting their obicQions tothe Prelates;their adherents; they
ſhould pur them indiſcuſſion and:controuerfſzre;and tharyin the meane while,
hee would giue order for that which he had refolued beſides, And'this hee
wrotetothe Legates. 4-4 Thien 2; ono,
 Ta'the end of the moncth, he deliuered in Confiſtory , that thegreateſt
Princes of Chriſtendome did demand reformation, which could vgt bede-
niedrhem; neither by true reaſons, nor by pretences :'and therefore that hee
was reloliied to giueagood exatyple , and, not to faile of his'quetis;:to begin
with hitmſclfe, prouiding againftthe abuſes of the Datary, rakingaway the.
coadinzoriss; Fegreſſes, refignations m fanvur , and chat rhe;Gajdinals-ought nor
onelyroconlent vatoir, but ropublithitro all. The good inteition of his
Holineſle was generally commended. But ſome confidercd that-thoſe vles
were brought in to take away greater abuſcs of manifeſt: Simonie, and vn-
lawfull bargaines, and that they were to take care, that, remoouuig thoſe
tolcrable

—

L1s. 7. the Councell of Trent. | 657
rolerable inconuenjences, which indeedeare but againſt the law of man, a 1 563.
gatebec not opened, for the recurnc of thoſe which are againlt the Law of LISLE
GoD. . TheCardinallof Trenz ſaid , that it would bee agreatpreiudice to Frovmuxs,
take away the Coadintories.in Germany , becauſe thoſe Bilhoprickes being an- Eran;
nexcd to principalities, if Coadiwories could not bee had tor both rogether, C****5 5
they mult be had for che principalitic alone, and (othe temporall would bee —V—
diuided from the ſpirituall , . which would bee the vrter ouzrthrow of the

Church. . The Cardinall Nagag giero oppoſed the making of Germanie diffe-

rent, ſaying thatthe Dutchmen being the firſtcthar. demanded reformation,

they oughtto bee comprehended at the lalt,; Afterwards the Pope related .

how many caterpriſes were vied in Councecll againſt the priuiledges of the
Rojnane Chyrch, and ſpake of Annats, Reſeruations, and prenentions. Helaid

they were neceſ[aric Subſidies, to maintaine the Pope, and Colledge of Car-
dinals, whereof as them(clucs were partakers, ſo it. was fit they ſhould la:

bour to defend them , and thathee would ſend a number ofthem to Trent,

for.thjs ſeruice. oh — ws
In which place, the next day after the arriuall of the currier, who brought, The Canons

from Re the canons of the inſticution, which was the fiftecath of [ſanua- £nefen
ric,a dayappointed to reſolue.on the certaine time of celebrating the Seſſion,

a Congregation was helde, anda relolution.madetodeferre thedetermina-

tion vatillthe fourteemh of February. And a copy was giuen of the decrees

of the Inſtiturion, with order.that the Congregations ſhould begin, in which,

they thould bee diſcuſſed. And the care of retorfning the decree of Reſi-

dence was.commirred ro Loraine, and Madruccio, together with thoſe Fathers

whom they plcaicd to takevatothem, Inthe congregwiongfoll, wing,the:

formes which camp from Rome were, with facilitic, approoucd by the Pa-
friarchs, and che moſt ancicyt, Archbiſhops, but many difficulties were,al-

leadged, again{t them. by the Spaniards, and moreby the Frenchmen. This
paſſage That Biſhypg do helde the principall place depending of the Papy ) was qug- Dornot able
{tioned becauſcrhs forme of ſprech wasarmbiguous,, which ought to haue the Backers |

0:5 124 |

658 The Hiſlorie of L 1 8B.7.
1563 rhis word, Church Voiucrlall, was vicd in the Councell of Florence,it was re-
E - wht plyed,that the Councell of Conſtance, and Martin the fifth, in condemning the
Fz=pmax». Articles of John Wiglef, doth condemne the Article againſt the ſupremacy of
Eau; the Apoſtolique Sea, onely for ſaying , thatir is nor fer ouer all particular
Cuanrts 9 Churches. And hereadiſputarion began berweene the Frenchmen and the
—— Irahans,theſe ſaying that the Councell of Florence was generall, that of ( 'on-
A difference ſtance partly approouecd, and partly nor,and tharother of ©Bafilſchiſmaricall ;

beryecen : the

Laliansand and the others maintaining that thole of Conſtance. and Baſil were generall

me tiene Conncels , and that this name could nor agree to thar of Florence, celcbrated

men abour

- ——_ onely by ſome few Italians,and foure Grecians. Neither did they gran thar
5:ſuaud F- the Pope had all the authoritic from Ck 15 T, no not with the reſtritions
4 and limitations,as he was a man,and in the time of his morralitie; but they
were content it ſhouldbec ſaid that hee had authoritie cquall to thar cf Saint
Peter. This manner of fpccch was ſuſpected by the Papalins, who ſaw they
would make the life and ations of Saint Petera parerne for the Pope,which
would, zsthey ſaid , reduceche Apoſtolique Sea ro nothing ; which they de-
fended ro haucan vnlimited power, ro be ableto giue arule for: all'cmer-
gents.as the times doe require, though contrary to the actions of alÞ his pre-
deceſſours, and of Saint " wh himſelfe. And the contentions wefe like ro
proceed further. But the Legats, togiue ſome intermiſſon, to haue'time ro
ſend the Pope the corrections of the M{rramontans, and receine his command
hoiv co governe themſelyes in the buſinefſe,-rhat they might fer another
matter on fqot which might make rhisro be forgorten, returned to the poinc
of Reſidence; concerning which, Loraine and Madtuctio: had compoled a
forme, and preſented it ſome dayes before ro the Legars; who; without con-
ſidering of ir, did approouc it, vpon the firſt fight. Afterward, hating con-
ſulted with the Canonilts, they dilliked one parte, in which it wasfaid;; thar
Bilhops arc bound by the commandement of God, to attend and watth ouer
The ears. Fheflocke, perſonally ; and doubting that rhoſe words would not pleale in
nals of 2o- Rome, they changed them, and fo propoſed the forme in congregation.” Lo-
ind Fdineand Madruccio were much offended with rhis mutation, and choughr
wih the Le- they werediſparaged : and Loraine ſaid, that hereafter he would rake no-more
af care in thoſe things, nor treat with the Prelats, but onely giuc his voice with

modeltic, and {crue the Legats our of his loue; in any honeft worke; asfarre

as he wasable. And Madruccio did not forbeareto lay ; that there was a fe:

a
-

A Counccll

withnche CIet Councell within the Councell, which®did arrogate more auchoritie:
Councet = The Legates perceiving that every thing rarh<d 'apainit them, cauſed the
Padics's Congregations to be omitted, Nether was this ſufficient.” For the'Prelats
on made private congregations atnebngft thereleftics , andthe Legars contiimuall

Counccll.

conſultations. The Arch-biffibS of Otratand'orhers\, who aftidtierhe
Cardinalitic, of which they thought themfclucs aſſure#if tlic Cothcdf were
ſeparated, agreed together to oppoſe cuery thing ro rhake fome turnithe arite;
and went paſſionately about , cuen'in the night alfo , making prattiſes; 4nd

_ cauſing men to ſet their hand to: papers. Whith,, thoughin et PRAC
the Legats, yet, for the manner, ir diſpleaſed rhe moſt of thera , abÞt&ho 6
bad cxample, which mighc give ſcavdall. And , 6n the contrary T8Ethere
wanted not thoſe who Icffzed a diſſolution.” Pur cach partit cx} ad tn
occaſion

XUM

E rs! 7. the Councellof Trent, © 659
oceaſiorrtharthecauſe of it mighr beattribured te the 6her ;{o.chat the (uf; 1563
icons did'encrealcon both fades. 11! on Ge Hor 1 1h LINA
The Cardinalt of Lontine complained to all;tharplots-were laid to diſſolue Finonygus)
the Synod , and eſpecially ro the Ambaſladours of Prigges; deſiring them to Ertanata,
wrice to their Maſters, to perſwadethe Pope that the Cpuncell may, bee tone pihhttfs:
tinued , that the praCtifes might bee_ moderated , and4he Farhers lete rg their ——
libertic; ſaying,that ocherwileacompalition would bee made in France; that Of wbich the
euery one mighvliuc as hee would yarilla free Councell., as this was not, in Heine com:
which nothing could bercſolucd bur as picaſed the Legares; nor by the Le. ©. »
gares, but as rhe Pope liſted; that he would be patient ynill che next Sellion, Apdofpne..
and chen,if'he ſawe not things goc berter, heewwould make his'proteltations, rien Coun
ang, togerher wich rhe Ambaſladours ah Prelates , returne inco France, ro ©
make National} Councel, in which pethaps Germanie would concurre with
chemgathing which would be diſplealingrvnto himſelfe,in regerd of the dan-
ger that the Apoſtolique Sea would not- bee acknowledged any more. ,ly _ A
thoſe dayes many Curriers paſſed betweene Rome. and Trent. . For the Le- the French-
gates aduifed the trequent contradidtians, and the Pope lollicited the propos. "2 '* #4
{ing of the Canons whichheſent, Andihe French-men in Rome made the
ſame complainr ro.cthe Pope , which'Leraine had done in Trent , and vicd the - __
ſame threats of a Nationall Councell, and the afliſtance of Germanie. Bur wot 6+
the Pope, whohad been vled to theſerhings , ſaid hee was not daynted with my.
words, was notafraidof Nationall Synods , did knowe that the French Bi-
ſhops were Cacholiques, and that Germanie would notfibieetit fclfe to their
Councels. Helaid that the:Councell was not onely free, bur might be cal-
lcd licentious that the practiſes of the Italians in Trent were nor with his
knowledge, bur did arite becauſe the Vitramontans would tread the Popes au-
thoritic vader their fecte; thatheeharh bad threegood occalions todiflolue -
the'Counce}}, burwas willing. ſhould continue, hoping that;G,.a b, would
not abandon bis Church, and har cucryatiempt againſt iz would come.yp-
onthe headof the Innovators. » Fins Chmches departed, :and went:to,rhe Em-
'perours Courtyinthe time of theſe confufions, ro giue bis, Maicſtic an aq-
<ount of the (tate, of the Councel,and of thecombinaripn of theJralian-Pro-
laces; and itveasdilcoucred that Granazayand bis adhargnts , had delired him
toiperſwade the Emperont to writere the;Catholique, King concerni the
-Refortmationand! Reſidence! that bothin thoſaandin cad
miptic{peake freely ,according'totheir cotſcience ; all whichtheLegares did
-beleeueto pracrealefromtLorane., Andtherefore,hor.acounterpoiſe, them-
{clucs alſo, afew dayes after , pe Wer is 19 64 PG
' vpon prererice rocexclite/andl regdet the rguſes whytheagdemangs. gf his Maice + -
-ſty<ould nor as yerbe propofed; Aniithey/gave himqmuniſlion goexborrehe
-Eraperaur to/brgonrcnvnoreo demapd of;beCouncel.barotihs Pape him- ©. |
\telfe; thoſopditadofibiafirtcion whichig@gxcrachisauboriic;asallo orhar - |

\
-

inſtructions fuck asfecmicditjiem gaod2rn-1t 5. 15h) eff f pg C3 ii:

3: bir Martha Grvietiy: Bithop, of Yerwisce\mbaſladops ofchaKing of
"<Polaniato1thg Exmpcrout.beiog cojngs Trem , pop pretencegovilitthe  .  ..
> Chrdinall66 Farmis ;his'aricient andiriward.fricgds there waya great (uſpici-
\onthathcwaiſentbyht Empetor,co beatyyc:yieges of the progredings in

213 Counccll,

_— ;

Ae Counccll was aſſembled ro remedic abuſes, ſo ſome were willing to make yle

French Am- of it to encreaſethem; that before: any thing elſe were done, it was fitto

Sccended by rable tearmes. "They ſayd that onecaulc of diſcord was, becauſe the Secre-

the Impert-
aliits.

was conclud:d by the common'opinion ; and therefore that it was fit. to
ioyncanother with him. The Imperialiſts ſaid almoſt the ſamethings;and
were more carneſt for another Secretary. Theother Ambaſſadors ſtood
vpongenerall rearmes, deftring'a continuation of the Councell,and an-yni-
on of mindcs. Vi 20 |
TheBofFeo- Things ſtanding thus; Ventimiglia, rediſpatched by the Pope, returned

h ». \ . " , , ; . . b
wah TO Trent thenine and twenticth of Tanuary , who made a relation of his cre-
SW dencero the Legates , and by their aduice, ſoughttoremooue two opinions

ſpreadin the Councell : one;thatthe Pope could not liueJong; the other,that
hee deſired a diſſolution of theCouncell. Hee teftified the defire of his Ho-
linefle; thatlaying alide all contentions, they would labourtor the ſcruice:of
God,and ro'end the Councell quickly. Hee ſpake of Bulls, of othces;and Be-
nefices, conferred vponilome of the kinſmen of ſome Prelars, and a Referai-
dariſhip to the Sccretarie of the Porrugal Ambaſſadour, anda very greatpent1-
onto the ſonne of the Spauiſh Secrerary,andduerspromiſes ro others;accor-
ding ro theirprerehfions. But to the Cardinallof Lorame hemadegreatcom

plements, in the Popes name, ſhewing that hee bad confidence»in bimovely,

for aſudden and a $888'thd of the:Councell; . 1 151i, vhs , ON; ao0jsl
Tretegres *-  Thecomtning of the Biſhop of 4fti, the: Ambaſſadour -of the Puke of

_ vie perſwatti-

ons r0the-" "Saupy , GAue 2 Airoccaſiofiro reaſfme' ie Congregations: in whith theLe-
Cardof Le= ._ 4 2 wa Ea im AY , 7 OE ' |
rancby the pats deſigning), after they hadTecciued him, to renew thepropolition oktfic

25s, © Canons, thiey ſenr the Biſhop” of Sinizaglia tothe Garditabof Larkindsofindy

him to findeameancs that the french-men mighrbecfatisfird. -iThieBiſhap
ſhewed him'; rhat thofe words ( to yorerne the Church Vniucy falb) were hdd in
Whoanve- many Councels; thaethe orher (tharthey wereaſſumed md pdrcofuhelore)
2 were vied by S:Berriard, a writer thuth com mended by his extdidpaiciFhe
Cardinal anſwered ; thitthe' whole world was 4 ſpectator ofthe: detionsof

cac

i

T

——__——_—___ - w_—_ 4 —_— - >” -
Eo...

Ls. 7.1 | rPeGouncdliof Trent, ad

” — ———

a

—

the Counccll:;, thay ctheopinions :and voiec of cuery one were: kagyyile; 1564;
that one oughttg bewaro wharhe:faich ;rhav wricings badbeene lentiof,, =
France, again{tthe:opinions' maintained in' Trent in thagneſtions that yore ts Be drb
handled zrhat.many complained bf himchar hee-procceded with zder mrughrtihumnmmrn,
relpc&; elpecially.inicharmattar;,andnchatopher of relidencexharheebah EISO
notbcene fo carneſtakbe ought for the declaration tharthieyiareder hung giuhet —o >=
20; chasby. a word.vletl by an Authorone cauor. prelamlyconcludbiwhat:
his mcaningwas, becauſe the ancecedtnts antbeqnlequancs mult +breregnfi-
dered, which may-inferre acontrarie ſence; alderhewardesdocinogtrouble
him, burthefence, which they would canonizo;tHiar te ay slinPdpehath au-
thoriticts goucrne:the, Church yniucrſall, auld not:bdeagmitted by the
French:men by any mcanes;  thatit-1© were-propoſed agaidci,.the Ambaſſa-
dours wouldiproreft-in-the' nate of the Kmmg aid of cheiryentic French
Prelates; fromuwhom they: ſhould alwayeshaue-authotitic to doeſieyg; that
this would bceapreiudiceto the opinion whichuts generally helde im Frawee,
char the Councell. isabouethe: Pape. ' 'Sinigagha relating, theſe things r9/ the! opinion is ,.*
Legates:;,. in- preſence, of -many-Iralian Piclares;; afſembledro:contuleyp- EASE :
on this: mattcr , made them: teare chat it was: impothble.co, reduce the <2 %*,
French-mea: : _ 154535 1113 07811 1 iolgt 2594 oil ww 206 =103i;m byfanot, OE

Thecomming of Martin Gueellan of whom; wee fpakerbctore.,,yyhich 777 fot
| happenedat the ſametime, gauc great courageto the -Spaniards - who, ha ene yg
uiog {ecoerhepaſſages of one day,/aid bee vnderſtood plainlythar theCoun- roctice.
cell was not free, i He. prauted(Granata, and faid the:King bad very'goog: 9-
pinion of him and cbataf che Bithoptike af Toledo werevoide!, bee would be:
{tow it ypon him..:[[hings being thus managed; ſunday y,nhelalt of lanyary
came, when che g-nerall congregation was intimated;corectetue tle Amba-
ſadour of Sawoy , who made a thorr ſpeach , ro ſhew the dangers:in which 7/* 2m
the {tare of his Prince was byrthe vicinitie of the herctikes; apd whaveharge «215 recoucd
hee was put vnto;. hc'exortedthemito finiſh the Coutcell:quieklys, knto tim, ®
thinkeaf ſome mcanesto make thecontumaciogs receiue:thai[ecrees; theres =
of, and'aff:red all the forces of his.maſter;1 -Inthe anfweremade y be Pictic
and wiſedome of that, Duke was.commenided., and-ioy+£luer the: Ambaila:
dourof his comming. ' Asthe.congregatians continuet; fo thedillentions
increafed, andiwany demanded thar the Detrer of refidentdy:compeſo: by
the two Cardivals,' thouldibce propoled. [But the-Legars;loeing ſuthwaricry
of opinians, atrer}ong gonſultation amongſt memichaenyatid with the Pre-
latesrheirfricnds-refolued ir was nota timeto make anydecifron;,,/hut nccel-
ſaricro interpoſeſo greata-delayyrhatthe humors mightaoole of themlelucs,
orſome meanes mightbee found ro:compoſethr differences, by prolotiging ©
the rimeofthe Sell10n. .-And,to inake Lotainnagree roipy they. wear'all' ro
his houſ&coimparctheippurpateynto himigand ro:demand his connſtlbant
aſhiſtance. - He complained of thetonucnticleyganditharvbeyloughs by you
lawfull meanes,to giuerhe Poperbatwhichbatongethmar.\nro himigabg re
take fro Biſhops that which is giuen them by Cari sT: he ſaid he:dinot hke
the deferring of che Seſhon ſo long chouglse was corn royceld vnrothety ;
but prayed them; thatin regatd thiswas doneth:modomemens mitids;they;
wouldihdcauor eftCtually tocurbe thoſe whoiwere vugquuctand achbicipus.

) K kk In

Li1s. 7

” The. Hiſtory of

Pp IV$ "Y
FsRBIWAND.

———

Cuantss 9g.
Philip S.--

AY

Noreal diffe-
rence between
a Scſhon and
2 general CON-
or egation,

The Articles

In'the congregation of the third of Febrnaric Mantua propoſed, that, in
regard Lent was necre, and that the holy daycsand feaſts of Eaſter would fol-
low quickly, they would deferrethe Seſſion, vntill after that time, and, inthe
meane while, inthe congregations, handlethe reformation belonging to ho-
ly Ordzr:, and the marter of the Sacrament of mariage. . Bur the propoſition
had'much contradiftion. The French and Spaniards,almoſt all, wereearncſt
thata ſhort prorogation ſhould bee determined, and the matter of Order , to-

gether with irs reformation, defined , before they rreared of Matrimonie; to

which opinion alfo ſome Italians did adhere. Othersdefired thatthe Sef-
ſionſhould bee helde with the things decidedalreadic,and.in particular, that
theiNecree of recidence, compoſed by the Cardinals, ſhould bee eſtabliſhed:
and ſome addedrhatir was agreat indignitie to the Councell; to haue the
Seffion ſooften deferred, ſhewing therewas adefareto violence the Fathers by
wearineſle , ro conſent to thoſe opinions, - which they did not belecue in
their conſcience; and therefore'thar ir ought ro bee held; and matters to bee
relolued by the maiorpart. Some did nor forbeare to fay,that the diſtin&ti-
on of Sefſion-and generall congregation wasnot reall , and that ,/ in regard
che perſons, and the ſame number were in both, that ought ro bee helde for
decided inthe one which was determined in the other, After greatconten-
tion, the dilation vnrill the rwo.and twentierhof Aprill was concluded by the
maior part, the others ſtill contradicting. TheCardinall of Lorame, howſo-
cucr heeſcemedito conſcntonly rocontent the Legares, yerhee was willing,in
regard of his owne intereſt ; and that for:foure cauſes, Toknow whether
the Pope would reconcr his health. * To have commodirie to treat with the
Emperour. To vnderſtand the: .Catholike: Kipgs. mind. Ando ſce the
ſucceſlcof the affairesof :France, that hee might reſolue what to doe, vpon
berter ground... © 112 ty Wes |
Thenext day the'French Ambaſſadours made a great and long inſtance
tothe Legats, ro-handlethe reformation, and to propole their petitions , be-
fore they begatineto treate of Matrimonie. ” They anſwered , that the Sy-
node was, not to recciuc Jawes from others ; that if things conuenicnt
bee propoſed by. Princes, confideration-is to bee had'bf them, at ſuch
times as the Prefitienr ſhall thinke fir ; that if, in their petitions , any
thing bee found belonging to Order , they will propoſe it rogether , and
afterwards the other things in their time. - This anſwere not conten-
ting the Ambaſſadours , they deſired that if they would not make the
propolition, they. would bee content thar themſclues might dociit;, or cl{c
giuethema plaine negatiue ;adding,/as it were in forme of a proteſtation,
thar.if.chey continued: to gine theſe. ambiguous anſweres , they - would
hold them to bee cquiualent-roa fcornefull negariue. | The Legarestooke
three dayes time to giue a moreRrecifc anſwere; and, inithe meanewhile, de-
{ired Lorainero/pacihe them, and:ro maketheni contented to expect vntill
they had receiued anan{were from Rome concerningthe Articles which they
had ſent thither. . : 1  tolgt; et ffotgiee 26017 206k, ON » -
The next day the Articles of Matrimonie were ginen' foorth, to becdiſeuſſed

-opty va by the Divines, theweeke following ; inwhich a diſpute preſenthyaroic be-

rweene the French and; Spaniards, abour precedence , which couldajot bee |
compoled

XUM

— — AP .- -- >> <—_—_.. i — "RR m_— -

Lt. 7.  theCouncellof Trent. 6G

compoled to thc; [atisfaction of both parties ,, but by changing the order; 1564,

obſcrucd vnrill then, and by giuing precedence according ro promotion —-
vacothe doctorſhip. The Popes Diuines, oppoled ſaying, that, the difficul- Fzzomaxo; |
tic beeing berweene the French and Spamards,the prouiſion ſhould bee made r:iranmry. |
for them alone, and heir place not altered;which was yndoubredly the fixit. p,59n5ns *
The Lecgates, ſaying they had reaſon,concluded thatthe firlt ranke;io which —-—

the Papalins were ,: ſhould [peake as formerly chey had done, andthe other 4 wieftion of

precedence

three according to the order of promotion : wherewith che Frenchmen bearene he
were nor content y except oneof rhem were pur int the firlt ranke. The amr a
Spaniſh Secretary deſired that a publique inſtrument might bee made of the
decree, that ir might appcare , that if any Frenchmanſpeake before the Spa-
niards, it was not by reaſon of precedence of the Kingdome. In concluſion,
co giue (atisfation to all,an inſtrument was made, anda grant ro the French-
men, that, after Salmeron, the firſt of che Popiſh Diuines, the Deane of Paris
would ſpeake, and cheothers of rhe firſt, ranke ſhould proceede according
to promotion. |
The. Articles were cight, ypon which they were to diſpute whether
rhey were hereticall, and ought to beecondemned, 1. That Matrimony
is not a Sacrament inſtituted by God, bur an humane introduction in the
Church, and that it hatch. no promile'of grace., - 2. Thatthe Parents
may make voide ſecret marriages, and that thoſe which are:ſo contra-
Cted are not true marriages, yea, that it is expedient that nercafter they ſhould
bee made voide inthe Church. 3. Thar itis lawfull, in cafethe witc bee
diuorced for cauſe of fornication, to marrie another, in the life time of the
former, and that itis-an errorto make adiuorce for any caule but fornica-
tion. 4. Thatitis Jawfull for Chriſtians to haue many wiues, and that -
the prohibition for marriage in certaine times of the yeere, 15a tyrannic,
which proceeded from the {uperttition of the Gentiles. | 5. -, That Marri-
monic ought to bee preferred before chaſtitie;,..and that God giuerth more
grace tothole thar are married hen co others... 6, That the! Prieſts of che
Weſt may lawfully contract Matrimonie, norwithſtanding:cthtyow of Ec-
clefralticall law, andchat ro fay the contrary is to condemne. Matrimonic;
and char all choſe who haue not the gitt of chaſtirie, may marrie. 7 9. : Thay
the degrees of conſanguinitic,- and affinitie , mentioned, in the eighteenth
of Leuiticus, ouzhr ro bee kept,and ncither more nor lefle, _ $-..T hatinabi:
litic tocarnall copulation, and ignorancein the comractof matriage are ohely
cauſes to difloluc Matrimonie contrated;;and that the cauſes of Matrimony
doc bclong to Secular Princes, Of which Articles that they-mighr briefly
ſpeake, they werediuided into foure parts , according to the foure rankes of
Diuines, andtwo appointcd for each. Wong i ER
The Biſhop of Renes, Ambaſſadour of France. ro tec Emperour, arri-

©. 1Tho Fitory of

1563." liansin Councell; adding, thar if rhey fo continued ; hee would pray God
ETA that hee might doe ſome thing for his holy ſeruice. They hadralked of this
Frzomaz> JOUFNCY a MONET before, and thetefore when it was publiſhed, the ſuf] pici-
Erzarzra, ONS werenot fo great as if it had not been foreſeen, Allmen aſſured 'them-
PLARteS 9 {elues, that it was to make a combination concerning the Councell7; and,
> particularly, to bring in the vſe of the Cup ; andthe rather, becaufe the Car-
Diſcourſes Jinall had faid to many Prelates , vpon diuers occaſions, that the Emperour,
dinall of 2 Kings of the Romanes , and of France, would ncuer lcaue to make petitions

IT. for Reformation, vntill they had obtained the vſe of the Chalice ; though
they wereto remaine rwo yeercs in Councell ;- bur that fauour beeing gran-
ted, they would caſily bee quicted,, and that to giue farisfaQtion to thoſe
Princes , was the beſt meanes to retaine thoſe Kingdomes in obedience; thar

: it was impoſſible to obraincit of the Pope, - in'regard of the oppotition of
the Cardinals , who abhorrcd the grant; that it was not hitherto' obtained
in Councell, becauſe the buſineſſe was nor well manraged, and that there

was hope, that v{ing good meanes, itmight bee gained, Bur thoſe who
did morcattentiuely marke the Cardinals protcedings , oblcrued agreat va-

rictic in his {peaches , For ſometimes hee ſaid, that, 1n cafe matters were not

relolued , hee ſhouldbee forced to depart at Eaſter or ar Whitſuntide ; ſome-

times, that heewould rewaine in Trent two yeeres ; ſometimes propoſing

meanes to diſpatch the Councell, and ſometimes taking courſes ro: make
 Itcucrlaſting, manifeſt arguments, that as yet hee knew not his owne inten-

; tion. And they luſpeed his cautelous proceeding, which did arguea dc-

fireto iullific his reaſons by Art, and make his cauſc honeſt. And confide-
ring that in 15þzuc would bee the King of the Romanes, the Duke of Baua-
ria, the Arch-Biſhop of Salzburg andthe Arch- duke Ferdinai:d,it was thought
that this conference mult necdes produce ſome nouities ; eſpecially in re-
 gard of the {mall fatisfaftion which the Councell had hicherto giuen the

i Emperour,. and of the vnion-in all matters berweene France and him. And

ir might bee thought alſo that rhe King of Spain, fo ncere vnto him in
blood”, would adhere ro that partic ; and the rather, becaulc it was diuulged,

that, by his'Jetrers of thet cighr of lune, hee had giuen commillon to the
Count of Luna to hold intelligence with the Emperour, and the King of

France, in matters of reformat.on and libertic of the Councel. In theſe dayes

Friar Felicianus Ninguarda, Proftor of the Archbiſhop of Salzburg, preſtntcd

theletters of that Prince, and made inſtance, thar the ProQors of the Biſhops

of Germaniz might giue voice in Congregations; affirming, that, if it were

granted, other Biſhops of Germanie would ſend Prodtors, if orherwiſe, both

himſclfe and others would depart, becauſe they would nor bee idle. It was
anſwered, that conſideration ſhquld bee had of it, and a reſolution taken ac-

cording to right. And they gaue 4h" acount hereof ro Rome, and would

not reſolue ſo much as this {mall particular without aduice from thence. Bur

in regard of greater bufneſſes in both places, there was no more ſpeachof it;

The ninth of February the firſt Congregation of Diuines was held; ro

diſpurc of Matrimonie. + Salmeron ſpake 1n a very lofty ſhlez and' concer-

ning the firſt Article, delivered the viuall ſayings of che Schoolemen. - For
the{econd, heealleadged the determination of the'Councell of Florence; that
| Matrinonie

L _ 7

———=- pr _— Y ITY LE ——_—
a —— _ - ————_—— - — —_—_ he, WE neuen
/ _—— _— IA ded... = In - oo

Ls mz 9. beCeunceliofFrent. | 665

Marripigny.coreueth perfection ly bcbg roplenngt ihe cons BH 05h. 155
ther hath Fac] athgr] porfena Ahh colmnoſberon | 246+
they @ught!ro bzecandenngh ar hererigygs CTR HON
fathers make ic vaig; char:theaugharitigat heQ ueGh 92s) I GT RE Tenge -
cernimg) the marteriof Sacrampangs; that. itn Aligr 3b Aol fs ans, 5
the ellegcegthax che cooduion of TW wel qT, EK
Church had power.thercit, ,)Hee thc PE MTS OETOE
mariages,; and innumerable A lt low,;:amd angjadss a, ear ns
was ;gkpedient to: vic,a xemediggby makingghemyoidet. HAY jak == 2
vpon-this.inextricahle.calc; if, after martimonyrgorarared.ans * :
ry in ſecret, one doth contraQtin publique xyirh anochcry _ FB Þe-,
ing defarous to depart, and return tot Girl}. awful wite: is prqdby
ccnlures rp, remaige jig the, pybligur, contra; the PO9rs, macs iafraled, |
on both-j{ides ,-cicher\in- perpetual adulcory : 95 in Fonkyres ; with lcandall ,
of h11s neighbour. D-; ;\ -1143 £11 2797 [167
/ -., Thenexr day the. Deane of Tab follongd, 0. ſpake capintly ,qur.of
ſchoale doariue ,,of the. inſtirytion. of marriage , of the grace wa 4 ps
ceiued in it, and of candemning him chart dorhafhrine ix, Lt bee an-humape
inucotion. - But vpou:the article of clandeſtine matrimgnic hauing.dilps-
red, that they were true matiages and lacraments ,he puta doubt wher crihe
Church hath powerto makethem void. He contradicted the, qpinion, that
there is:authority inthe Church guer the marterof Sacraments ; het diſcour-
ſed chatthe Church cannot make any Sacrameng which is\pow lawtull,;rp
be of no force for hereafter., hee exemplified inthe conſecration of the] Eu-
charilt, and went through all the. Sacraments. . Hee ſaidthe Eeclefialticall
power was not ſuch, as to bceablero hindcrall ſinnes,, 4hpr the Qbriſlian
Chu:ch hath becne 1 500. yecres.ſubieS ro thargwhich is pow delaxjbed.eq
bee incolerable, and, ( whichis of.no lefle imporrapee) ſecret moriageave
beene accounte ed o00d eucn from the beginning, of the! world, and warman
hath cucr thought ro make a nullicy.inchem, howſocuer. a publique contra
hath ofcen followedthem ; that it ſeemethto þec inſolyble,qhough;1r, harh
inconueniences onbork ſides; thatrhe mariage« of Adany,and Ene, A PAItcrne
for all otlier,was without witneſſes, The opinion of cheDoctor, was.nar
diſeſteemed; but the Jralian Prelats were well-plealed y that having qnge!1 na-
med the Pape; bes gaue himthys Epichite, with thecxpofirion: following,
Gourrnow 4nd maderator of the Roman Church , that is,, of the-Vninerſall,.. And
this did minilter much dilcourle, Forthe Papaling conetadels that irrmight
likewiſe be ſaidin the Canon of the 1afticution, tharthe Pope hath power 29
gouerne rhe Vaiuerlall Church... But ths Freach'men anſwered, thar, there
was great difference berweene Gying abſolure]y-the Church, Vaiucrlall by
which is yaderſtood the Vaiuerlalicy of che fairbfull, apdlayingihcRoman
Church', that is che, Vniverfall,, where the ward Ramandeorh declare the
word Vaiucrſall, inferring thathee is; Head, of zhe;Vniuerlall , and [chat all
places, i in waich auchoriry is gaucn-to the Pope guerallthe Church, AArcvn-
derſtood diliunRiuely , not conjuniuely y thaxis, » Way FASTY: part of ch
Church, not ouer all togerherT | i BL

The cleyenth ol Fcoruary, the French- -men areſeared) i in \ Congregation. a
| Kkk 3 letter

_—_ -J_—

_—

666

The-Hiftoryof\\ La m__ |

- -
S& %
* ©

1563

Piv s:' 4.

FaxDins 8D”

ErizaBurH.
CuAanras.'sg.
PruLte. 2.

ARS

Letters from
the French K,
are preſented
an Congre-

gation.

And de Fer-
rieres maketh

a (peach,

[etret fromrheirKitig, oftheighteenth of Fanuary ; in which heefaid; that
howlocter hce was affured that the Cardinal of Loraite had impatted ro the
Synode, the happy victory agaibſt' the 'enemies of telipion;; whoſe bold-
nefſe hee Hath and doth day[ireppoſe withour reſpe&@ of difficulty; oridaty!
get , Eucnexpofitig His owneIie;' as becomiinieth the eldeft and moſt Chri-
itian«{bnne of the Chittch, yer hifnfclfe was willing'totnake thei partakers
of the ſine ioy alſo; knowingthat the wholeſorheretricdies, forthe cuills
whic doe affi& Chriſtian'Proninces-;: haue alwaies beene expected from
Cotlficels,” ' He defired of thehi-inthe fame of Curt Tan emendation =
andY&orthation;,” anſwerableto'the expcarion the world hath'<oticeiued
of thei; andtharashimſclfe;atid ſo matiy befides have conſecrated life and
bleo#t5'God in'thoſt wartcs'} fo they ; in reſpect of their' charge, ' would,
with firiceritic of cohſcicnce , be carcfull of the buſtnefle for which they are
aſſembled: The lerrers being read, rhe Ambaſladour de Ferrieres ſpake tothe
Fathers in this ſubltancc. That they hauing vnderſtood by the Kings let-
ers, and before by rhe bratious- of the Catdinall of Lorame,and Biſhop of
Mentz the delolation of Fraxte, and ſome vViRtories of the King , hewould
notrelatethem-againe, but'onely fay , thar thelaſt, in-regard of rheforces of
cheiencinie, was miraculous ;' whereof this is an argument, that being] ouer-
corne, yet hee doth line ; and-committerh fpoiles, rutining'through the very
bowels of 'Frantz.'' But hee ſaid, hee would turne his ſpeech ro them onely,
who are theonely refuge of the miſcries without whomFrance will notbec
able ro prelertie the rables of ſhipwracke. Hee exemplified in the armie of
Iſrael; which had notbecne ableto oucrcome A4malec, if the hands of Moyſes,
lifted 'vp to God, vnderpropped by Aaron and Yr, had nor afliſted the combar.
rants; rhat the'Kivg' of France doth not want forces, a valiant Caprainethe
Duke of Guiſe, the Queene Mother, to mannagethe aftaires of warre and
$275, that there is* no other 4aren and Yy but themſclues, to hold vp the
ands of che moſt Chriſtian-King, with Decrees of the Synode , without
which thecnemic will neuet bee reconciled, nor the Catholiques preſerued

- in thefaith ; that the humour of Chriſtians now , is not the ſame as it was

fifric yeeres ſince ; that all Catholiques are now like to the Samaritanes , who
did not belecue theiwomans relation of Cx R 1 s T,vntillthey had inquircd,
and informed rhemiclues ; thar a great part of Chriſtendome doth ſtudy the
Scriptures, and that the mo\t'Chriſtian King , had giuen no inſtruftions to
his Ambaſſadours, but conformable to them; which they have preſented, ro
the Legate , who preſently will propoſe them, as they haue' promiſed , to
rhem the Fathers , ro whom. the moſt Chriſtian King doth principally ſend
them , expecting their judgement vpon them ; that France doth not demand
any fingular thing, bur common to alltheCatholique Church ; that if vy
maruel] rhat the moſt neeeſlary things arcomitted in the propoſitions, hee
may aſſure himfelfe that they beginne with the ſmallermatrers ; that they
may propoſe the other of more weight ,-iv their firtime, asalſorp giuean
calic executiontothoſe; which ifthey the Fathers 'will not beginne before
they depart from Trent, the Catholiques will cry out ,- the aducrſaries will
laugh, and will both ſay, that thefathers of Trent doe not want knowledge,
bur a will co doe good, andthar they haue conitituted good lawes, withour

touching

—— ——

667
couching them ſo much as with one oftheir fingers, bur leaning tlic obſer-" 1 563 !
uation of them to their poſteriry.- And if, in;the demands.exhibired , any >)
doethinke that ſome thing is contained conformablero the'bookes of the Faxomany:

Ls "7 the Councellof Trens. |

ce nn —_

aduerfaries, he holdethithem vaworthyof anfwere:tothoſewho hold them £:rrammrs, |
immodcrate, hee willſxy norhing burthat of Cicero, thar iris an abſurdity to p22mtnt 5 of
deſire temperance of mediocrity in the beſt chings, which are ſo much the —-—. © /
better ; by how much the bigger they de... Heſaid/the holy Ghoſt did ſay ro
likewarmemoderators; that hee would caſt them out ofthe body; chatthey
fhbutld totifider the ſmall good the Church had, by the moderate reformari-.
on of the *Couticel of Conſtance, and of the next, which he would riot nomi-
nate; for feare of offending the cares of ſome , and likewile of the Coulncels
of Ferrara, Florence, the'Laterane, and the firſt of Trent, and how many ſorts
of men, how many Prouinces, Kingdomes, and Nations, haue ſince depar-
cred fromthe Church.. ' Hee turned his ſpecchito the Iralian and Spaniſh Fa-
thers, that aſcrious emendarion' of Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline was .more for
the good'of them , then of the Biſhop of Rome. , the chiefe Vicar of
CHR1sT,and ſucceſſour of Peter, who hath the higheſt authority in
* the Church of God, thattheirlife and honour was intquettion, and there-
forcthat he would ſay no more. |

In the anſwere to the letters and the Ambaſſadours Oration, the Kin
was commended for his pious &-noble actes, pnd exhorted, as if he had been
preſent, to imitate his predeceſſors, turning all his cogitations tothe defence
of the Apoltolike Sea, and preſeruation of the ancient faith and to giue'eare
to thoſe who preach vnto him the Kingdomeof God, and not to thoſe who
preacha preſent vrility , and an imaginary tranquillity , which will neucrbe
a true peace; adding, thatrhe King would (urely doefo by the help of Gop,
andin regard of the goodneſle of his diſpoſition, of the Counlell of the
Queene Mother , and of the Nobility of France; that the Synod will labotir
ro define things neceſſary for the'reformation of the Church vniuerſall, and
for the good and intercſts of the particular of the Kingdome of France. . In
the end of the Congregation,the Cardinall of Mantua propoled;that,to make
amore quicke diſpatch, the Congregations of the Diuines might becheld
rwicea day , and Prelates deputed to propoſe the correction of the abules; in
the matter of Order ;and fo ir was decreed.

The biting ſpeach of the Ambaſſador did pierce the mindes of the Papas
lins; and particularly, when hee ſayd, that the Articles were addreſſed prin-
cipally tothe Synode : Which words they thought were contrarieto theDe-+
cree , that the Legares onely ſhould propoſe, a principall ſecret to preſerue
the Popes authoritic./ Bur they were mooucd more, that he ſaid that he had
deferred the propoſition of more important matters, vnrill anothertime
whence they drew great conſequences , eſpecially hauing; alwayes fearcd,
that they had notas yer 'diſcouered their deſſcignes, and tharthey didplor
greater matters. Asalloto'ſpeake'ynto the Italian and Spaniſh Fathers, as if
they had other intereſts then the Pope , ſeemed a ſedirious manner of trea-
ting. The Ambaſſadourgaue a copie of his Oration ;and bythoſe words
which hee ſpake of the Pope, Thar hee hath fupreame anthoritie inthe (| burch"bf

God, ſome Popiſh Prelates noted , that, in reciting chem,” hee had fayd,
Who

The anſwere,

a

+ PR ——_ as
” DD c-— me w_ \
- .

6635 Tbatiſtarie of) 1  b18475
c $63 Who hath fall-power in teGhurch vigerlail; d raving chem to! the fauour
© of their opinibn,aud dilputthgahar irwas as muchfobavetullgawer zuthe
Ep. Chutch-yniudrfalb, as sÞgauerne the Church: varyerall, whichitheFrechs
Ear. Mcnididſo much abhorre,; ja the Detect abe;jultigurion,! . Bur. himlelfe.

Mete*t * ndrbe" other Frenchmen afbxmcd., thathee had prongyncedzhem. as they,

IP 3. 1

SAS etc Wines 5.4 ,vaids flog gil other; 3UETIUMGND1oD
The Cart.of 2 Ihe next day; Lorainewereea 1fgc, to viiiche!EmperourandKing of
Zerit theRomang,accompanied with nine}Þrelets, and toure Diuinges of the mgſt
ett0 //pr oc, | . | | e A Sag bat fg

lcarned amonvgftithem. ' He bad arft a/promule fromthe Legats; thatzwhi
© hre wasabſcars the Article of rhe martiaye of _ ſhould got bcehandled,
which hc didin(tantly defare;, that nothing might bqAerermingdygr-precaty;
ceived contrary tothe, commiſſion which;he had tram the: Kings, j9.abraine

Alifpehfacis of the Councell adipenſarion for theCardinall of "Baurbongomarry. ,. Cars

yy toc dinall Alremps atio went ta:Rome, recalled by thePppe ,tobo Grngrall of the
Bourbon. ſouldicrs, which he purpoledtto raiſe for his ownÞlecuritie. ' Fog yaderſtan-
+: qVrÞ#.A ding that leuies were naadedyGermany; by the Dukes of Saxony anfdHiten:

Popes army+

that all was done.to atbit the Hugondts of; France , yer confiderivg that the
Count of Lima bad written, that the Durchmen bad a great defure-10. inuade
Rome, and didrememberihagackeſixeand thirtieyeercs ſince, heethought
it was wiſedoinc notto beavnprouided, and, forge {are caule,, reuiued thc
vreatic of making a combination with all the Italian Princes ,terthe defencs
of Religion, .; UT any ag | 7%
.Inthecongregations,the/ljuines of the fir{t rankedid ynitormiy agree ja
condemainy the hirlt artjele, & cuery; pare thereof,as hexeticall; as allo,the {c;
cond ſaying that fecret marriages were true mariages,Bur there was the difie+
rence before mcetionetd berweene Salmeron andthe Deane of Paris, whether
the Church hath power to make them void. T hoſe who held the negarine,
ſtood vpon that ground, that the marter,farme,miniſttr, & recciuer are cfle1»
tial in cucry Sacrament,in which,as being inſticured by Gad,no Ecclefialtigal
power hath any thing ro doe. They laid chat the Councell of Florence hauipg
declared,that the conlcntof the parties oncly is neceſfary ro Matrimonic , j:c
that would inferre the word, Publique, for a neceſſary condition, docth in-
ferre, that the conſent only is not ſu * © ans nd thar'the Councell of Florence
hath failed ina neceflary declaration. That CH ks layd in gencrall of
Matrimonic,, ;that man cannot ſeparatethat which G.o D hath ioyned, mca-
ning both thepublique and:the ſecret coniunion:,, That inthe Sacramenss
nothing ought to be affirmed without authoriticgtthe Scriptures, ar tradi;
tion, neither of which doe allow this authoritic ro.the Church; yea., by tra-
dition wee finde the contrary , bccauſe all Churches in all nations through-
out the world arc vnifornic ; in nor pretending} any power herein, . Onthe
contrary;,"it was ſaid ty bea cleere cale, that the Church bach power ro make
any man vncapablc of marriage, becauſe many degrees of conlavguinitic
and afiniticarc made hinderances by the Ecclcfiaſticall lawonely ; and Jike-
wile the impedimentof a folemne vow was:made by the Popes law ;'and
therefore {ecrecic may bee likewiſe madcan impediment ; by rheſameautho-

ritie. Theother part anſwered, that the probibition by reaſon ot kinred, is
| _ &

E rs: 7. the Councellof Trent. - 669
dure dino , as Sant Gregory thi Pope ;/abd many of tis fiiceellors havede-" 1564.
cerm incd; that fmartimoniccannotbe' contracted berweene ews;varill it bee YN
knowen in whatdegree df kinredtheyate ioyned;' and ifotlitr Popes hate Fu>maxs,
reſtraincd chis vinvicrfalitietorhe ſcucnth degree, & afterwards 6 the fourth, Erna”

—— - CS En.

thiswas a'generall difpenation, as Dittorce was to the Tewes;and that a {0+ roger of.
lemne vor doctly hinder deturediuino , nor by the Popes authoritie. WEARS,

 Bur("amilus Campey yius , Dominican Friar, agteeing with the others,
chat no humanepower is exrefided tothe Sacraments; added;-that' whoſoe-
ucrcan deſtroyrth&cſence off the mjatter ,* can allo! rnake ir yncapable of -the
Sacrament; thartid/tnan can make water not to be'the matter of *Bapriſmie;:
or ſome bread of wheat nor to bee thenatter of the Enchariſti” bur hee that
ſhall 'deftroy rhe'witer, curning/ir inco ayre, of ſhall burne the bread, tur-
ning it ttito aſhes, ſhall makethoſe matters not ro beecapable of the forme
of rhe Sacraments !-Soin Matrimony,the ciuillnuptiall coneraQis the mar-
rer of the marrimohiall Sactatnent, by Diuine inſtitution ; which becing de-
ſtroyed;and made of no force, can no mote bee thematrer of ir. *' Therefore
it cannotbecfaid tharthe Church can make-anullity'ih the ſecrer marriage,
for 'fo- it would: haue auchority' ouer the Sacraments , bur it js true thar the
Churetrcan'nullifica ſecret nupeiall contract, which, as becing voyd, cannor
receiue the forme of a'Sacratient. This'doctrine did much pleaſethe gene-
- raliry of th=' Fathets , 'becaule'it' was plaine, caſic, and refoluedall the difhi-
cultes:' 'Blit Antonius Solifius, who ſpake after him, did, contradit, ſaying,
theſpectitation was true, bur could nor bee applied ro this purpole. For the
reaſon ;a it is meantot Baptiſmeand the Euchariſt, -that whoſocuer docth
deſtroy the warer 2td the bread, 'doerh make them yncapable-of the formes
of thoſe Sacraments; docth nor argue an Eccleſiaſtieall power, buta natu-
rall, ſo that whoſocher hath vertue to deltroy che waretymay, by this meancs,
hinder the Sacramenr; whereby'it would follow, that hee that can nullific #
civil nupriall contract, may hinder Matrimonic, burthe annullationof ſuch
contratts b:longeth ro the ciuill Lawes; and to ſecular Magiſtrates ; there-
fore rhey' ruſt rak& heede, left-while they would give authoritie ro the
Chureht6/makev6yd fecret marriages -Tbee not rather giuen to the ſecu-
hrpower, 2.5, 29th. 101 v1» EC hh i 17

Amongſt thoſe who attributed'this power to the Church, ic was diſputed
whether it were fir that the Church ſhould 'vſe ir. And there weterwo opi-
nions. One, to make voydalt the ſecret yin regard-of the inconuenicnces
which cnflic.” The vther, thatthe publique; made without conſent of paz
rents, ic whoſe powe? they are ſhould be! made voydalto.: And theſcallcad:

| ewo reaſons; otic/; thar asgreatiriconueniencesdid'follow by theſe, in
reſpeX ofthe ruines'whith happen'ts familits;by mariagesvnaduiſedly;con-
rt4&ted byyoug menn';the erties t

LS

| that tho Law of Go D; commanding obc-
dience to'Þatenrs doch includethis caſs's principal, Tharthe'Lawof
Go p dvcth'$iuerhiv parriculatauthoritie t6'rhe Father, to give hisdaughrer
jinmarriaye }'a5 tr plainely appeareth in Saint' Paul andBxodns. Thitthere
are examples of the/Pattiarchesinthe olde Teftament (all marriedby their

fachers.”' [That the humane ciuiſtLawes hauceftcemed tlie marrizgeevoide,
which liius becnceonirratt:d withour the father; '' Thin oe
1117010 oed

670

© The-Hhſtorit of _" |

_- 477. 4

——t————

1563;
/>- 7?
Piv $. 4+
FERDINAND:
* ELiZABETH.
CHARLES. 9-
PartiP. 2.

NS

The Legates
dare not pro-
poſc the Artt-
cleof the 1n-
{\hrunon of
Bi.hopss

gcd expedient to-oullific(egret marriages , lo now,{ccing that the Popes pro-
hibition is nebſufficicar,, | which bath forbidden them without addition of
nullicic, there is'morercaſon, in regard the malice of man will nor obey the
Law of GoD , which forbiddcrth tro marry without conſcnr of parents, thac
the Synodeſhpuld addeynro it anullity alſo ; nor becayſerhe Fathers haue
authoritic to make voyde the marriages of children, which is hereficto af-
firme, bur becauſe the Church harh authoritie to nullificboth theſe and o-
ther contracts, prohibited by diuineor humane Lawes. This opinion,as ho-
neſt, pious ,and 25: well grounded as the other, pleaſed many of the Farhers.,
And ſo was the Decree framed , howloc ver the publication was omitted,
for cauſes which (hall be related hereafter. - |; ++ + 5h +

+ ButthePrelates did hot forbeare to difcuſſe the commoucrites about the
Popes authoritie;andialtjtucion of Biſhops. . And the Frenchmendid perlc-
uere in their reſolution, not to admitthe words, C burch-Frerſall, leſt they
ſhould preiudice the opinion held .in Fratce.,, of the ſupcrioritic of theCoun-
cell; andif'iir had beene propolcd/ ,. would hauc made proteltation af the nul-
litic,and departed. '; The Pope wrote it ſhould bee propoſed, whatſocuer did
follow. ; But the Legts fearing that cuery little ſtirre would be much: out of
{calon now the Emperour was ſo necre, wrote backe , that it was, better. to
deferreit vntill che; Axticle of Matrimony was finifhed, -,, ., ;.-.

Thelſeventeenth of February Father Seco was the firſt that {pake' in the ſe-
cond ranke; who, yppn the Article of Diuorce, didfr{tdiltinguith the ma»
trimoniall conjunction into three parts: the bond, the cobabiration , and
the carnall copujatign; inferring that there were as many ſeparations alſo.
He ſhewed ar latge that the Ecclefialticall: Prelate had authoricie to ſeparate
the marricd,or to givethem a divorce,in reſpect of cohabitation,and carnall
copulation, forall caules which they (hall tudge expedient and reaſonable,
the matrimoniall bond {till (tanding lure , fo thatneither can marrie againe;
ſaying, thatthis was it which was-bound by G o D, and could notbcelooſed
by atly. -Hewas-much troubled with the words of Saint Paul, who granterh
to'the faithfull-husband , if the vabelceuing wife will notdwell with him, to
remain&ſeparated;-Hee was not contented with the common cxpo{ition,
that the Matrimonic of the vnbelecuers is not inſoluble, alleadging, that the
in{olubilicje-is by the law of Nature, as allo che words of. Adam , cxpounded
by our Say.10vR, andthe vic of che Church, that twarried vabelecuers, af.
ter they-haue beene Baptized, are not married againe ;/ avd that their matrix
monie js. not diftercne from that gf the faithfull. And he xefolued ro-approue
the expolicion of (aietap,that the eparatiany mentioned by Saint Pa, of the
faichfullfrom the vnbelecuer , is norynderſtood of the matrimoniall bond,
and thatir wasa thing worthy ig be Gonſidered by the holy Synod; For For-
nicationthefayd,thaticoughtaottobe acaulc of ſeparation fromthe bond,
but fromcopulatioti,and cohabirationonely,. 'But he found himſclfe much”
intangled, becauſe hee had ſaid firſt thatdiuorce might beegranted in many
reſpects;and for many cauſcs, whereas the Goſpel doth admit bur one, which
1s Fornjcation, which muſt ncedes be vnderſtoodin reſpect of the band,, be-
cauſe Diuorce inthe other two reſpects may have many caulcs,' 3 Hee- gaue
many expoſicions of that place of the Goſpel, without approcuing or-dif;
Go | proouing

eee —_——_—_. Eo.

= — 5 -—— 7
—

E r8.-7.  ube Conneellof Trent

_— —
—_—

ncd, becauſeche contrary is made anArticleof fajth,by

proouihg any of them z and copgluded thatthe Article ouphttobe-condem- | 1563
olical{rradi- NN

—_— —_—

tion, howbcitthe words of the Golpelare.not {a plaine asthat they are ſuffi, Fronruns,

cient to.conuince the Latberans.1 al 1-7
.* Concerning the foutth Article of Poly
lawof Nature, nur could bec permitted iſo-much as to infidels, who are:ſub- .—
ie to Chriſtians, Hee ſaid the ancicnt, Fathers bad many wines by diſpety-
fation,and rhe others, who were.not diſpenſed with by G'o'D, didlucippet-
cruall {inge. For the-prohibition of marriages atcerraine times, be.briefly
alleadged rheauthoritie of the Church, and che diſconucnience, of rharriage
with lome times : and rooke this occaſton to ſay, that no-man'had realon to
begricucd, bccauſerhe Biſhop might,diſpence. Hee returned to the caules
of Diuorce, and concluded that the world would not complaine ofany.gf
theſe things,if the Prelares did vſertheir authoritic with wiledome and chd-
rity. Buttliccauſc ofall the cuils is, becauſe they doe not reſide, but giuethe
gauernementtoa Vicar, and oftentimes, withour conuenicnt maintenance,
ſo thar Iuſticeisi}ladminiſtred,, and graces not well beltowed. And here lies
ſpake atlarge of Reſidence, ſaying, that if ir were not declared to beedeiure
Eno was impoſhible rorcmoouethoſc and other abules,andyo {toppe the
mouthes of herctiques; who notobſcruing that the cuill commeth fromche
bad execution, lay the blame. vpon the Popes conſtitutions ; and therefore
the Popes authoritie will neuer be defended well, but by Refidence well eſtas ©
bliſhed ; nor that well executed without the declaration , de iuredinino;;and
that they did notorioully.crre, who'thoughtinpreludiciall ro the authority
ofthe Pope , whereas it is the oncly faundatian to yphold and preſerve ir.
Hee concluded, that the Councell was bound ro determine therrueth,,'and
ſpake with ſuch efficacie, that he was willingly heard by the Pieramonrans, bur
did dilpleaſe the Papalins , who thought thetime impertigent torouchithat
matter. And it.gaue occaſion to both parties to renew their praCtiles,!;;.2!;þ
In the Congregationof the twenricth of February, Tobu Ramirez, #Erans
cilcan Friar, after hee had ſpokenvpon the ſame Articles , according 49/|ihe
common opinion of Dizines,, of che jnlolubilitic of mariage, ſayd, that; ths
ſame reaſons which are-berweene man and wife, are alſo betweene:the Bj
ſhop and the Church; and that as the mari ought nor 'to-depart; from his
wife, ſo ought not the Bilhop ro Hepart from his Church ,andtharhis 9pir
rituall bond. was of no leſſe forcethenthe other, which was corporall, : Hep
allcadged Innocencethe third, who decrced that a-Biſhop could,not beg rap
ferred but by the diuine autboritic;hecduſe thematrimonial] bond, whish4þ
leſſe (ſaydhe.Pope) cannon be diſſalued by anypowerof may,; And he was
copious in {hewing thar.cthe. Popes authoricie:was rather increaled then di-
miniſhed horeby ;whoyasa gencrall Vicar , mighe make vie af. Biſhops.inan
other place, where'there;was moirg.nerde : asthe Prince may employ maxied
men for publique occaſions, ſcadingrhemro: other-places,; wichourdifiol-
uingthe marrimoniallibond.  , And hee. laboured to; tcſaluerbe comrary.rea-
{ons with much protiaity.'; : | 10 Jo!llimbre) od;

*
HOO TO 2£97 2

j T3418 2615 TW) ;
. In the Gongregatinnofthatafterrioone, Noor Caniſius ſaidiclat, both
cheſe Aricles gthe third and. fourth, were borcaigall;, md
_ nei

'- * EL42aBBTR;

ie hee ſayd it was againſt the C449

C PuzLIP as...

u———_ — —_— _ _ _—— -  ———
Cn

£95 3 detained bymany Pecretals ot es|atdiotulredihe authoriry ofthe A poſto:
CS, hqaeSta i many words/,afaving;; claruitdncieor Councels ,ivthedetermis
wn niticer of fairk;; did perperadliyifollowthe aurhoriry-and wittof rhe-Pope:
Eine-oara: Hee exemplitied in the Councell of Conſtantmople in Drallus, whichvfollowed
centr'y: the inftraction ſent by Pop&Hy4tbore; rhe Councell of Chalcedon; which did
SV wot only follow, bur worthiprhe ſentence of Sr. Leorke Pope; exlling him
alfs;Erumenicall and Paſtourof the Vamerlalk Church: And: afrerhee had
altegdved mabyautboritievandreafonsroſhew rhar the wordsof Cre x87;
Gokeſ to Saithy Peter (Feede my fheepe) doe fi nifie a& muchas if hee: hadſayd;
rule tnid gouernethe Church-Vnuerlw; tc amplifiedvery'much the Popes
vadtricicindiſpenſations,and other things alfo.” Hee broughttheauthoriz

F*

anda'Martyr, of whom no man can ſay that he didreſpect anything! burthe
Mocth, i! | 230 OE FUDGE TTY 6 219DH2 '; 30 S163: 11

i: Atthistiune{, ommendone returned from-the Erperour', whoſe negorix-

tioh had northat ſuccefſe asthe Legars defired. For che Emperburzhcarivg

"8 his propoſitions, anſwered, that hee muſt haue rime'ro thinkeonthem be-
of C02 Haute of their imporrance; and that hee'would confiderofrhemandanſwere

cnc rcurns the-Councell by his Arbbaſſydoby. Hee preſently paue an account heereof

perour. by letters, adding , that hve fobng-the Empecrour wasgrieued and had: an
ill eoFceit of the actionvofithe-Conncell.” Becing now returned;>hee ſfayd
further; that; by th ewordsbf hisMaieftie,and by tharwhichhe had vnder-
ſtsodbyhiscountcllers;” and obſcrued by their proceedings, ' hee thought
Heetknew thar hee was fo firme inthat' bad opinion*;'that hee feared ſome
diſorder Would cnſue. 1 hat;as farre as hee could comprehenyg;the cogitati-
ois'of his: Maieltie werewholly bent ro-obraine'a'great reformation, with
faelypfouſioasas that itamight bee obferned; and rhat hee could cerraine]
afiriie; thathe would norbeecontent:thatihe Ceouncell ſhootdbeifiniſhed:

tafoerodounxixctpprey knew! theirKings minds.) : Hee! ſatdal(e L that whe
omuch k-

TART”

© un
caliagia. affaircs; ang, car, howſdoyer hirhfelid and the Nimeio Delphinaribeid 1363
wied-anuchdiigence,y «they were: not able to-[carnecheparticulated21t) Oo ” 9d

ivs -+ FLAC 1

-But within alhor rnethey came totlight. Forthelcturre Cangiinton tort Freinaw,
r9! the Generall, Lawwaryithatthe Emperour was Ul-aftetted) crowatds:the Brizkvsew
Coungell, and maticmapy points bceconſultcedon; that heemighrreſylae ragr ot
how gp proceeds, rift 5alothe Popedid prefeuere in retuling ro-propofe the Notts
| reformation or It giyingords: contary co: Hig deeds. Oneipoint wagwhad r<don in the
the Empepgurs auiherjtie-might/bojy'Councelli and!chaoFrederieus :Staphi: cont,
lus, Conteffor toiheQueenc ob Babemnia, wastherelyeto naninthe conſulta+

tion, Canifavs delared that.onedt cheSocietieomightbeſerrynto-himgwhiom

he mightbring imo the conſulcation, and byhim diſconer all. -Where

Laynex; hauing ,coateried with Cardinall Sononeta;] they refolued; ro{end

Father Nataljs , by, whom all-was diſcouered: ::\And/the'Artiohes ivohs 7; 7
lulted og were ſeuenteenc.. bi | Whether: a- general» Comntell lawfully tnounbersy
alle mbledby che faudurot- Princes,.may'change che,order determined by ++:
the Pops 5@ be obloryed inhandling'themarters, and-bring;inanew''min-
ner. 42+; Whetheris be proficable for rhe Eharchtbarthe Councethoutd
handiematters,anddeterminethem as itisdirefted by:che PopeorCourt of
Rome, loghatic mily-notidocotberwiſe, 13.1: Whorheryfif the Pope die in
time .gf the councell, the Fachers thereof gugtir 10: choofe another, 44 -
What the Emperours poweriis, the Sea of Romebeingvoyds, and: the Coln-
cell aps2} 2115+ 1 Whether, when marcers/archandled>concerning the peace
and rranquillitie af che Chrittianzcommaondvecalth; rhe Ambaſſadours'of
Princes ooght to haue #deciding voice; howſocurrrthephinue itnioriconcers
ning. matters of faigh... 6 WherhenPtintogmaytecalbeheir Oracots 2nd
Prelates from che councell, withotirimpartipgirrorhedeoans;!! 512 1) Whie: =
therthe Pope may difloluc or GafentalieiGoenfelavidkhs the participation
ob Princes, a0d efpecially: of the: .Emperafir.e* 971: Whether it be Hethar
Pringes;Jhguld interpole,, to: cauſe moreneaflanc arid 'exycdiotir niareers
tobe; handlegin Count -.g.. VIV hecher theQratorsofiPrinces May exi
pqundcg;the Fatheis inperion, thoſethingswhichthoPriyces commit!vneo
them, be expounded 1 10./0Wherherameanismay/be Totind;\thatithe
Fathersy lenyby the Papeand Princes, imayrbee free:i11/pming: rheir Youees
in Concell!.j. 4c Wea courdemay berakcti; tharthoPope #HdCtitr oF
Rowe may-notiinterpbſemn orddyningtharwhictriswo behandledſiff cum.
cell, tharghe libsroaghficheFarhers may noobeehinderadiib;s. Whethera
means. pay-be foundtharnotraudeg viotence):or exortioqr bes! (fri
delivering s/ie-apinidae of the'bachers! 01 143) Wheroraiy this! Hey
bec handled, bee 1ophine-of doctrine; or xeformation>tPthe

POT IT nn DT

Chareh! b4:
torr ig her dilcufledbyirhe Jeannellcrth 4. avhiar remediti ay re $3ttid!
if the italian; Prelaecsdoncontiouentbcir obflinidicir gore fiufter] |
hc lalhgd'1 yd; Whatromidiemapbe vedto'Hinddgthe <ohbilifiny
ofthe lalian Preldtza;hben tlie Poberacchotiri iS irreqiaf{isn 3085) ole
the practiſes may bee remoued which hinder the determination of iy
of re{igengi 5:! 77, 1 Wherheras ber fcomelythittrhc Bififtrour (hs

er- "iſhed iQ
lpnallyatidt i CayncolE:; ::; 10} 11 9007 oil m3 93821qub no 200 bil. _
Bdtalavg oidctarious.contulrazionwarheld ir Robn whether (Phe Ges A cities

Ll] | ,

Y102520105 citions

:=674 v TheHifloryof”'-  I1s.y
263 titions of rheFrench-men oughrrobe propoſed? and they confideredred tot
{>> ſo muchthericight oftherhings chemſetues, as the conſequences thereof.
Fane, For obſeruing what de Ferrieres had ſaidiin his Oration,thatthe petitions ex-
nar hibiced were of thelightcr ſort, and thar others remained of more weight,
$22n4n* * they conicecturcd that the French-men, having not made thoſe demands be-
\ cauſethey deſired ro obtainerhem, they aimed ro make entranceby that way,
| to propole others which chey had in their minde, and thar, by theſe which
they call light, thegate being opened, paſlage might not bee denied them

Whar attemprſocuer they would make beſides. Fortheſc and other reſpects

it was rcſolucd towrite to the Legarcs, that, abſolutely, they ſhould nor bce
propoſed, nor a negatiue giuen, bur onely a delay interpoſed ; and the

meancs they were to vic, were writtenalfo. © Ar the fame rime; a writing

Awicing of an vacertaine Aurhour came from Rome, in an{wereof chole petitions,
nar a which immediately wasſpreadin Trent, and in theEmperors Courr. And ir
tio was belecucd in-Rome, that, by theſe meanes, they had giuen a good coun-
iſeto theinſtances of the French-men. But the Pope was more rroubled

with the nouiticat the Emperours Court to conlult of matters ſo preiudiciall

ro him, knowing well thar the Papall digniticis preſerued by the reucrence,

and certaine perlwaſionof Chriſtiansthar itcannor beecalled into queſtion,

that when the world docth begin to examine matters, apparantreaſons will

notbe wanting to diſturbe the beſt things. Heobſerued that his predece(-

{ors had vſcd potentremedies in like occaſions, and that when the Lada:

on of faith is queſtioncd, . thar.prezepr, to reilt the beginnings, raketh

place. For as, inthe breaches of rwers; ifrheſmalleſt ruptures be not ſtop-

ped, the chanel cannot be kepr full, fo when there is bur a ſmall oucrture

againſt the ſupreameauthoritie, and norftopped, it is eaſily caried to an ab-
ſolurcdownetall. Hee was counſel!led ro write a Briefe ro the Emperour,
concerning this his diſtaſte, as *Paul the third did ro the Emperour Charles,

abour the Colloguies of Spira, and reprehend hum for queſtioning thoſe Ar-

ticles, asthings that arc moſt. clearc, and inanother Brieferoreprouc the

_ Counſellers, for perfwading him to it, and coadmonith the Djuines who

- haucaffiſtedinthebuſlineſle, ro ſeckeavablolution from rhe cenfures.” But
haning thought well on ir, hee conſidered that theftare of thitigs was not

then as it was vader Pal. Firſt; becauſethardifſpuration was publike; whereas

this was priuate,and concealed of purpoſe that it might nor beeknowne;{o

that hee might diſſemble all notice of ir, whereasif irſhould continue after
his/puþlike reprchenſ1on ofir, hee ſhould purhimſelfe into greater danger;

that it weas coucnicar for Charles to ſtand ynired withthe Pope thathe wiyhty

.

not ſybiect himſelfe ro the Dutch Princes, whereatichſsEntperour'is' / as
it were, Jubic&ynto them altcadic ; finally chat chixhwidhe ighr' bee
defarred., becauſeir would  alwaycs: bee:in ſeaſomytbur'by difſembling #
while; hce might obliquely make triall-ro:hinder the relofution) of th

4+ wen which were made, by ſending tlie Cardinal of Mypitas to his

aiellie. I TECIUIT 445)  c =o ; rMOSrmaIYT 920 VAL kB 2011

Diglates --- Thewricing, which wemabour againſt the peririons ofthe French-men,
teFrench= did not one diſpleaſe them, who tookeitfor an afffom;but the Etmperour
bps: . allp yary much. And the Legatcs bauing; received commiſſion from-Rome
av:3K 7.10 76s { T ARE: | concerning |

(i ? (IC '

Lan j the Cumerltof rene, irs

concerning them, werebur ill{atisfied; and chought tharchis wasnor to giue 1563

commiſlion to Preſidents of Councell, butadyercilinents rather co minilters TD
ro make vic of inticaties by way of negotiation, They: wrote backe:onely *3xomno,
rodemand what they ſhould doe, in caſethe Iwperialiſts ſhould make in- Remonare:

ſtanceto haue their petitions propoſed. : and they cauſed Gabriel *Paleorto, purapnt®

PXr1laP2,

Auditor of the Rota, to write a full information of the difficulties, which —v—.-
they ſent. Burthe Cardinall of Mantua, in regard the Emperour had tolde
Commendone, that hee would giue an{weie to the Councell by his Ambaſ-

ſadour, thought ir. not conucnient ro goe vuro him before they recei-

ucd that reſolution: beſides, rheCardinall of Loraine being at che Emperors

Court, and the clietof hisnegotiation not knowne, hee ſhould be doubtfull

in what manner to proceede. Vpon theſe reaſons hee excuſed himſelfe ro TheCxrd. of
the Pope, and befides wrote to him with hisowne hand, thathee had not Trp,
a face to appeare any more in Congregation, to giue wordes onely, as 'b*?or<
hee had done two yceres rogether; that all che Miniſters of Princes doe

ſay, that howlpcuer his Holincſle doth promiſe much for reformation,

yer {ecing nothing to bee 2xecuted, they doe not thinke hee hath any in-
clination ro it ; who if hee had performed his promiles, the Legates could

not hauc beene Wanting to giue fatisfa&tion to the inſtances of ſo: man

- Princes. Neither ought any to maruaile that this Cardinall, a Prince con-

ucrſant ſo many long yceres in many great affaires, and ofa moſt com-
pleate conuerſation , ſhould vie this paſſage with his Holineſle, it bee-
10g a thing naturall ro men that are neere their grauc, for ſome intrin-
{icall cauſe, ynknowen euen ynto themſclues, to bee diſtaſted with hu-
mane matters, and to negle&t pure ceremonies; to which gaole hee was
then very necre, there remayning bur {xc dayes of his life from the date
hereof. | |

But in the Congregation, the laſt rhar ſpake in the fecond ranke was
Adrian, a Dowinican Friar; who, touching bur lightlythe marterin queltj-
on, dilſcourſcd arlarge of difpcnſations, and, with Theologicall tearniesand
formes defended the things mentioned by Doctour Cornifeus, and ſpeake of
them, not withour ſ{candall. Hee fayd chat authoritic to difpence in hu-
mane lawes, was ab(olute, and valimitedin the Pope, becauſe hee was ſu-
periourto them all and'therefore when hee did diſpence, rhough withour
any cauſe, the diſpenſation was notwithſtanding to bee held for good :
chat in diuine lawes he had power to diſpence, bur nor without a'taule.
Hecalleadged Saint Paul, who faith, that the Miniſters of CH R1 s T are the
difpencers of the myſteries of God'; and that ro him the Apoſtle, diſpenſa-
zion of che Gofpel had beene committed, Hee added, that howſocuer the Popes
diſpenſation concerning the Diuine Law bee nor of force, yet euery one
ought to captivate his'vaderſtanding, andbelccue that: hee hath granred it
for alawfull cauſc, and thar ir is temeritic ro call it into queſtion.” "Then
hee dilcourled of the cauſes of diſpenſations ; which hee reduced to pub-
liquevrilitic, and charitie towards'priuate;mcn. | This diſcourſe gaue 06 --:
can toe Ereach men toſpeake of the marrer, withthe ill ſarisfaRion of
_ ay el ke having made dn and of ſpeaking, forobſeruatianof the
xd; | L11z promi-

«

”

"  ETPTOILY _ —_

676 The Hiſtory"

 Lisiy!
11563 promilemadeto Loraine, not to handlethemariage of Pricſts in his abſence,
SS oy changed the order, and made the fourth ranke ſpcake next. lobn Uer-

1'S #- : | wg .
-xomany. din, handling the ſcuenth Article of thedegrees of aftnitic and conſangui-
er2abers © Ditie, paſſed immediatly fromit, and came 10 the matter of diſpenſations,
Cuanrts9: "and ſeemed to have none other aime, rhen to contradict Frier Adrian, labou-
—- ring to weaken the Popes power. Firſt hee expounded the places of Saint
Paul, "That the Miniſters of CfR1sT are the difþenſers of the myſteries of
God, and of the Gofpel, and laid the gloſſe was contrary to the text. For the
place dathnor prooue a diſpenſation, thar is, a diſobligation from the Law,
3s a publiſhing and declaring the diuine myſteries, and the word of God,
which is perperuall, and remaincth inuiolable for euer. Hee granted,that in
humane lawcs a diſpenſation might lie,in regard of the law-makers im per-
fection, who could not foreſce all cafes, and, making generall lawes, muſt
necdes relcrue powerto him that gouerneth the Cemmon-wealth, becauſe.
of Sundric occurrences, which may bring acceptions in particular matters.
But where God is the Law-giuer, from whom nothing is conccaled, and by
whom no accidevt is nor foreſeene, the law can haue no exception. Thero-
forethelaw of God and Nature ought notto be called a written Law, which
in ſome caſcs ought to bee expounded, and made moregentle, but allthar
Law is cucn cquiticitſclfe. In humane lawes, in which ſome caſlcs by rea-
{on of particular accidents, if they had been foreſcene, would not hauc been
comprehcnded, a diſpenſation may well bee-granted. But the diſpencer
cannot, inany cafe, free him that is bound, and if hee denica diſpenſation
to him thatdeſeructh ir, thepartic refuſed ſhall notwithſtanding remaine
withoutall obligation. That che world hath concejueda wrong opinion,
that ro diſpence, isto beſtow a fauour, and that the diſpenſation is requiſite
to be giuen, as any other part of diltriburiue juſtice to bee exerciſed ; that the
Prelate doth offend if hee giuc itnotto whom it is due. And, in ſumme,he
{aid,that when adiſpenſation is defired,eitherthe caſe is ſuch,as,ifit had been
foreſcene, it would hauc been excepred, and here there is an obligation to
diſpence, or would haue been comprehended, though ir had been thoughe
on by the Law-maker, and to this the power of diſpenſing is nor extended.
Hee added char flatteric, ambition, andauarice haue perſwaded,thar ro dif-
penceis to beſtowe a fauour, asthe maſter would doeto his ſeruants,or one
that giuerh of hisowne. The Pope is not Lord, and the Churcha ſeruant,
but heceis ſcruantof him who is ſpouſe of the Church, and by him ſer ouer
the Chriſtian familic, to giue, as the Goſpel ſaith, to cuery one his owne mca-
ſure, thatis, that which isdue vntohim.-- And, in concluſion, hee ſaid, that
a diſpenſation was nothing buta declaration or interpretation'of the Lawy,
and thatthe Pope could not, by diſpencing, vabindeaty that was bound, -

bur declare onely to him that is not bound, that hee is exempted from
the Law. | HEIE 1]
The laſt day but one of February, the Cardinall- of Loraine returned ro

The Card. of | x Se —_y
Leraivere- Trent, hauing remained hue dayes in Tpruc, which hee ſent in continual
tures Negotiation With the Emperour, King of the Romans,and their Miniſters.
Arhisreturnche found the Popes letters ro him; in which hee ſaid,thar hee
.d1d defarea reformation ſhould bee made-and nor deferred anylonger, 'and
48 that

7a _ _—

otra es toes theawords ob phe! F51
—_ be Caidinall ti "pee
WRITE Howe kng _— Fx n0ucal

———
ligeace EL124n8TH!

=
r
c Legatcs muon Ir

Er=hs Wes Bag: - Price
q Har fþ pap gt

ro. L

relaged (thatrhe Gardihall: was; cuery

HT vr fon rh a om EWiahoures,! with dhe Emperouranid
fie JN DAMEN yer gre roYntadiand nothing
of the Articfes, and Fae RIS 'with

a poor mn am ws ke which

h Iv fir mo xdcngn, and Canis when hee: went-ro' ſee the
- ROSES tcNiuites betinge {pokontothe Emperour,
Di wn ere 11

$4 egy Gn. rmungiheprant.of rhe

'up.rhe bat. Ro) b, qe hom far(} Front rr

RY: Farm Peng by Ewan teningto.chd King of theRo«
—_— is vcrl x Hondo Fmt we" mar my F exduredvhis

er: _ W012 F281 $0 OVER re rt v7 hen ® |
Wh aa CIyi ng i be LSB laid ng \butchar the Empero |
yas very, rlind lyallcgtcd; &,conarde th Counkecledring irmighr
eg "u vs Au [chatif if aca ligg wertheivould afbiitin perſon;and

ale v,, Fa pray. thePapgro havgfotupallicn bf Chriftcndonie,
Wal hh ies Pos m t oodiminiſh his men

o Nan pms _ hus Maleſtic rm co. goo —
6, nal FRG ins Keſlaigne tarecenterhectornevfthe
Dp1 otherchin a1irm botor
lp Is Ro Ws, wo 3he. Cardinall he &-) therhlfairescob, m The
wins Rrperoyt of the diforders, anqdulineredbrivio: on chi
For hat cennpmigr beg cd, to oppoletbe:Coutr pf: Rome, andaVe ——
raliah Prelates of Trent, to obtaingih Convetirhecommunioh: bf che Qup; Emperour,

i & 4 %

ki mariage of Prieſts, the vie of, cheyulgar «dogic inholyi inacters, che rc

of,ocher, pteceprs of, politiue laws a:rcfdriarign/in:the Held
mbcrs, andamucancs:orifake the-Dectees'bf choiCouncel/indif
pela 5 TM ham Sal they werenotablaro dbraitie;they: might haeca
Falgumbl on 9208Hicedinn. of cbtaallhes; chey:thould

tics-of their. ptople,:by makiriga Narionhll
— a@10Ks eGormans avid rhe Eredchmen; iv mhaw
Dh Tchgi9% ; Buy. this waggothis ncgotiation.oncly!:Bdrhe tremiaka

MALIage Alles. hetwnene rhe Quoene of <0 and tho\rch a
vols 3

_ ' : 4 i _———_— ——_ —————R — © "wa —_ a_—— —_—_— _
4 - FA ,
x 4 'Y 3 , ""

678 The Viyſtarye/, © ___ Lis: of

of — —_— —
4
Ly

a
m——_—

«63 mand, the Emperours onthe; ah inorher berweait z diiiphter of HSM aic
3 lie and theSuke of Bernd nd can Lake ke ffs
Enoutees: recicesof precedence berwectie Fraie#abih Spaine, hith things; 'ss' dine

IEG ſicall, doe touch Princes theft neerelythtrthepubgye:- © 055 ES 211

$£nan1359-' . Aﬀter thexeturne of Lordine the Congeepaions dntinning,” Tants Alan,

> aFrench Diuine, encred likewilcitito the tnatrer of Uilpenſationie, and fay
thatauihorityzo dilj ence Was ifitfediarely giuen'rs the Churct

g
Th thre Le» = ' ' . __ "F . +. jet;
zz5:emay. ſuperiour, togoucrnethe Councel, or renibouchinh': Þur incaſe, hee would
'he Pope,  Ieauc him prime Legare, he told him le would proceedas God ſhould inſpire

ope 0

pando, who remained romrn, pavers the common letter”

neſſeſhould lie vpon his ſhoulders; hoping to guide it with fatisfaCtion of
the Pope and his owne honour, conſidering that Seripando was ſatiated with
it,and notinclincd ro goucrne it,and that Yarmien/e 'was a ſimplemah, fir to
beled, he wrot to the Pope, thar, the affaircs of the Councel being not in
a good ſtatc,cucry nouity would ſhake it much,and therefore did thinks ficto
continue without ſending other Legates, and promiſed a good ifſue,
In thoſe dayes aduice came from Rome, thar a cauſe of the Biſhop of Sego-
wie, which was to be propoſcd inthe Rora, was refuſed, and that one of the
Auditors told his Proctor, thatthe Biſhop was ſuſpe&ed of herefie, This
made a great ſtir, not onely amongſt the Spatiiards, but all the Oltramontanes
alſo, complaining rhar, in Rome, calumnies and infamies were raifed apainſt
thoſe who did notabſolutelyadhereto their wils. oo
'Thefourth-of March the third ratike beganne to ſpeake : and, for the
fift gr 101 thatit was hereticall, and ro be conderrined 3 and fo
they did of theft: ' Yetthere was adifference, becauſe ſome ſaid, that how-
ſocucr the Orientall Church and the: Occidentall did Hiffet, in'regard this
did admit to Prieftibeod and holy.Orders continent perfons vnely,and'thar did
admit waricd men, yer no Church did cuergrant that Priefts might marie
and chatrhis is ſo by Apoſtolicall tradition, not by reaſon of yow, orof any
Eecleſiaſticallconſtiturjon; and therefore thar, ablokurtly, chey were ro bee
condemidd for heretiques, who'fay itis lawfull for Prieſts co matic, _—_
oa © <q cy

. "T
i

L187. the be Coenreol of Tone,

—O—  — 9.

CC — —_— ____

heyenſivtas & chamſelues: ni hl, carer eotEY 7
{And:others no olfbeegramaditel,
Prieſts 6d marry fotanyicauſc:
forbid ds r9-trro ſome?
gatd of\holy Orders by EcdleBiltcalllinr; ars, cf

*dpgrd: of Mei ©

ſolemge yow, ::That thi: cob; manu b rebottnags ffi he» VV
Church, omy beetokad wy ii: os Him he infforce:
ſtill., the Pope may. di ,it;-F cy aliendpy d emits rien copy ar
who hauebenc and hencofunquie th is hor itea;

martyghentariage Wa ymrmpennes was
which hab c ——_ yrormarySarery 10 nſw wturaroyn ay 4
who, brit of all thePopes, prdaintdabar therethoald bee armllicy inelhena
Kage. oo w frm $675 o_—_ —— by flkmae w_ this
ccing de jure. divingy whcyfaid:t no &d
PN the third; who affirmat regen eg Fe + yo"
abdication of the pro of. godds:, :dothu fo! cleauo' ts: the b bones of
Munkcs, thatche Pope cannor dilpenſethercin,,! "Then they added che'opi- ,
nion of Saing Thos, find of other: DoRors, whoaffintic; thatthe rode ef

vow is.aconlſgerationafihemangd Bodgand char;becauſe 10tmah caritnake ” | :

athing conſcerattdio rerurar to-hinmnaneyfes; ; no man likewile cari make a
Munke to returnoto thepower of * marrying., 'and that alllCatholique Wri-
ters doe conderane' Lucber,, and his-fedtaries)of: herefie',"for' faying thac
Munkſhip is an humane intention ; anddoe affirmethar it is by Apoſtolicall
tradition. whercunt9 _ Opinions chat the Popp =p _—_— , &direaty
contrary. /.:,

Others did maintaine chat the Pope mi ighrdiſpinſt, cutn with theſeallo,
and maruciled at thoſe, who, granting the diſpenſationof ſimplevowes,
did deny thatof ſolemne, as if itwerenot moſtcleare; by the determination
of Boniface the cigth,thar cucry ſolemnity is de iurepofitive, making vſcalſo of

the examples of things<onfecrated ro proouctheiropinion. For as athing

conſecrated, remaininf {o, cannot bee imployed in humane vices, but yet ths
conſecration maybeoremooued , andthe thing made prophane, whereby ie
may lawfully returneto a promiſcuons vic, ſoaman conſecrated to Mubk-
ſhip, remaining ſo, cannot marry, but;zhe Mankſhip and conſecration, ari-
ling fromthe ſolemnicy of the vow, which is deiure pofitino, being remoued;
hee may, without aoy hinderance, liue as others doe. ''They beonghtp Ia
cesof Saint 4win,, by which it doth manifeſtly appeare ,'thar in his »! ta
ſome Munkes did Ro And howſocuer it'was ought they offended in
ic, yet the mariage was lawfull, and Seine Ces 1c. _ cars
ter 31 36 £18, 110115590 ?
They ſaid morcouer it was necellary ro diſperiſ wich Phickts, 7 why
away the precept of continencic.” And the Duke of Baueria havitg ent: ro
Rome, todemaundof his Holineſſethe Communion of che Cup, r6quelted
alſo that married men might haue lcauc ro pa owns tame all
the Ecclefiaſticall miniſtery was yndczlioos z1exerciſe by:Patiſh-Pricſts, in

thecure of ſoules. Many reaſons were alleadged 20 fvads «Sr gb
whlch.wtes reſolucd. into. lon morale patina

want

Sas oo Peake Te
1ToleutirClerkes/ Wi ve FEES

———— —

is

arg) 1 © Lam

&

aun — ——————

1563

p 4 — _—_—— —_—

wart of conicantpaiops,cindo ciorcitoribe miniftcric}: And uhetirayw

SS f of. Fops Pits thaſorondyymasin thelmourtt of avay /jthatPwelQ were
», [xopger realop.qt0roftort mtiagects n*q Thole of che1cGritiary)
id,sbatir is nbrcbeparrot alwwile) kaifha(ibye
Hoodia naraemaprte Bicenel, |
alleatiged.,,hedidootpotmilcicy bdcaufetiey:
9 farhefphudsdio cpipiritanditias
eharoucorhrngd

Theprincipal
reaſon why
Preeſts are
forbid to

marry.

ment>,nd, ilrche
| a8d)for do:

who bad madethis requeſt inthemameof the Duke of "Bavaria: and of
the Emperor allo, & ro make the Imperialiſts not to be ſo earneſt inthe mat-
rer\ of; reformation, which'was of more importance; ithey* wete forced to
yceldi0-rhisdiſpyration;;. 51: d BCE! R910; F9: HUE! CE
©JheFrench:men,-percetuing it was the morecommorn opinion that the
matizge of Privits mighe beedilpenſed:with ; confulredrogerher whether
were, tir to demaund adiſpetation.tor the Cardinall:of *Borbon; as' Lopdins
andibc Ambaſladours had comriifhon.-! Lorame was of opinion; chat it was
nathr ; laying, char, withour doubt,the Councelt would hardly beperſwa-
dediharihis cauſe wasrealonable ,aud vrgent, in regard irwas nothicceſſary
hethould bauepolterity;the King being young, rhere being ewo Brothers,
and other Pringes.ofchrblood,Catbolikes: and for goucrmng ;\during rhe
migoritie of the'Kingyfice mightdocit, remaining inthe Cleargie, that, in
regard of- the dificrences betweeane the French baid Tealians, about reforma-
tiohgandtheauthoriticof the Pope and Bithops, their oppoſttes would dili-
gettdy'oppoſethis demaund ;zihatiravas beret ro go tothe Pope} or expe
abetter occaſion, andrhar it was ſufficientfor thartime, to providethat to
doarinedhouldbe cltabliſhed in prejudice of it. Sonis thoiighrthat Loraine
did noclikeycit: bis priuatcopinion, thir Borboy ſhonld marry; in regard'it
eighe gs ordimigutionof his houſe 3but'6thers' did tit
thigkcit probeble:Firlt;/becauſe: bychismeancs alt hope 'vits taken Frotii
Gr, whodthemiſttaſted much more; yea that Hee'did much deſire this
Honhor (hojldiaceurne to thefecular ftate , char hirofelſs might be the priate
Bredazot France, andthatzifaParciathe were made; as hee much deſired; ee

4 bi might

L

Durch aft

Lan7. the Councell. of Trent. = 8
might vadvubtedly be the man, which could nor bec , if Borbon did Rill TU £3
maine jn che Cleargie. | | bn

Do»

The Pope hauing recetued aduice of. the death.of Mantua, and conſulted Fzxortiuno
with his inward friends, thought I neceſſary tolcng other Legats, whobe ana
ing new, not intangled with promiſes and treaties, might follow his inſtru- <*4**5* 9

Puitie 2,

tions with more cale. And therefore the feucarh of March, the ſecond =
Sunday in Lent , not intimating.a Congregation, as hee was wont,, butthe * Aa
Cardinalsbeing aflembled in the Chamber where they put on their robes to __—_
goc to the Chappell , according to the vic, hceſtayed, and, excluding the
Courticrs, cauſed the doores to bee ſhut, andcreated Legars, the Cardinals,
Iohn Morone, and Bernardus Nauaggerns, that, by the perlwaftons of Princes
or Cardinals, hemight not bee forced to name others thar pleaſed him not.
The Popethoughrro docitlecretly ; butit came to the cares of the French-
men,and che Cardinalloft *Bardiſfera ſpake to the Pope beforc hee went our
of the Chamber, and cold him many reaſons, that, incaſehee would create
new Legats, hee could not commit the charge roa more worthy perſon then
the Cardinall of Loraine, But the Pope being reſolute, and dilpleaſed that
the matter was not fo lecretly carried, anſwered freely, thatthe Cardinall of
Loraine came to the Councell as Head of one of the pretendent parties, and
thac he would depute thoſe who were Neutrals, and withour intereſts. The
Cardivall being about to reply, the Pope made haſte away, and went downe
out of the Chamber lo falt , that there was not time to make anſwwere. The
Congregation being ended, the Fops let the Cardinals goe to the Chappell,
and himſcltc returned to the Chamber, becauſe hee would not bee in cere-
monie,when he was ſo much vexed with the words of that Cardinall.

The ninth of March newes came to Trent, that the Duke of Guiſe, bro- The Deke of

Guiſe is {12ing

therto the Cardinal of Loraine, as he returned from the trenches vnder Or- ©9750:

ac + +

ſpend che refidue of his life jn preaching. che word of G o 9, inltructingthe
people, bringing vp his brothers children inChriſtian pictic, and neucrto
ccalepectormng of.thelc offices, but whea the Kingrlome, for ſome publike
affaires, had need of his paines. The Letter was no. ſooner] parted from.
Trent; but the Citie was full of copies of ix;, rather; id 14
his friends, theaxequelted ; ſo hard ig.is for the atfetion of (ſalts, lougra hee

quiet, though in the occalion of greateſh ſorrow... Atrerthis -SheCardingl,
l thinking:

— _- —

684 The Hiſtory of Lina

1<63 | thinking of the change of things by this variation, altered all his deſſeignes.”
v3 © © |
>> And this cauſed achange allo tn the aftaires of the Councell. For hee being
*zxorxaxD- The man which the Emperour and Queene of France had, vnrill then, whol-
Enirn. ly employed, they wereforced, for want of ſo fira miniſter, ro bee more re-
Sar maſcin their purpoſes, and to proceed more {low]y. But it bappeneth in

-— humane affaires, as it doeth in fortuncs at Sea , where, the windes being cea-
ſed, the waues doe tumultuate, for ſome houres after. So the great weight

O

of the affaires of the Councell could not eaſily be appeaſed, in regard of their
The tex of former impetucus motion. Bur it is certaine, that the dearh of thar Duke
_ \ m_e - was agreat beginning of the quiet which ſuccceded ſome moneths after,
cawn1* efpccially after the death of the other brother, great Prior of France, and the
cace made with the Hugonots , and the inſtances of the Queene to the Car-
dinall ro make his peace with the Pope, and returne into France: of which
things wee will ſpeak in due place. Hereby the Cardinall ſaw, thatthe af-
faires as they ſtood, would nor bee profitable , neither for himſelfe, nor his

friends.

The death of Guiſe was lamented both in Trent and Rome , becauſe cucry
one thought hee was the onely maintainer of the Catholique partic in the
kingdome of France ; ncither didirt appearc what other perſon could ſuc-
ccced, in ſupporting that weight; the rather, becauſe cuery one was daunted
by theexampleof his death. The French Prelats in the Councell weretrou-
bled in 'minde, becauſe they vnderſtood that an accord was treated with the
Hugonors , who pretended, amongſt other things, that the third part of the
Eccleſiaſticall reucnucs ſhould bee employed tor maintenance of the refor-
med Miniſters, |

In this varictic of buſineſſes, and perplexitie of mindes, Fine- Charches

returned to Trent , and, with the other Ambaſladours of the Emperour, had

it audience with theLegats,andpreſented to them theEmperoursletter which

che Leyars hee brought, and the copy of another written by his Maicſtic to the Pope.
and the Pope. = .

They all made requeſt for the reformation, but in generall rermes onely,and

very remiſſely. The Emperoursletter to the Legars,did {ignific his defireto

ſee ſome fruirfull proceeding of the Councell, for which ir was neceſlary to

remooue ſome impediments, whereof hauing written tothePope, he prayed

them to labour in Councell,and to vic perſwaſtons to his Holineſle, that the

future progreſle might be tor the ſeruice of G 0 D,and benefite of Chriſten

dome. [In his letter tothe Pope hee ſaid, that, hauing diſpatched great buſi-

neſſes with the Blefors, and other Princes and States of Germanie , nothing

was morepreciousvnto him, being Advocate of the Church,then to promote

the affaires of the Councell ; that hee was come to Iſþruc for that cauſs,

where, to his griefe, he ynderſtood that matters did not proceed as he hoped,

and as thepublike tranquillitic did require that hee feared, if better order

wer not taken ; the Councell would end with ſcandall of the world, and

laughter of thoſe who had forſaken the obedience of the Church of Rowe,

who would bee incired to retaine their opinions with greater obltinacie,

there had beene no Seſſion held of a long time; that while Princes did la-

bour to yniterhe aduerſaries diffcring in opinions , the Fathers came r6 con-+

rentions, vaworthy of them; that there was a fame that his Holinefſe meant

bb. ro

wo. -
len i. tt
i ————

Em,

Es.7.' the Countell oft Then? 632.
zodidolucor luſpend rhe Councell, perhaps mooutd thereumtoby cthepre- 156
ſeneſtarethereof : bur tharhis opinion was to thegemrary. For ithad ns WA
better it had;neucr beene begun, then lefr vnperfect with thie ſcandall of the Faromans
world, contempt of his-Holincſle, and of thewhgle Cletgic ;, prejudice of E:narn.
this and other furure generall Councels, loſlc of. thas fmalliremainder of Ga p32nttt®
tholiques, and opinion of the world, that the cnd of thediſſolution orfiiſ, ww—
enſ{ion was inely ro hinderthe reformation; thatyin the-intimation of ir,
is Holineſſe did deſire his conſent, and of orfher Kings and(Princes, which
hedid,in imitation of his predeceſſors, whoalwayes hauc thought itneceſ(-
fary,for many reſpc&ts; that the famercaſon:dotheonclude;thatitcannot be
diſfolucd or{uſpended withoue the (ameconſens;Andiic exborted him, noe
to hearken to thole whowould have him to diffolucir,a thing ſhamefulland
vnprofiable,which vndoubtedly would bea cauſe of NationallCounccls,ſo
much abhorred by his Hol. as contrary tothe vniry of the Church, which as
they hauc been hindred by Princes to preferue ghe Popes authoritic, ſo they
cannot be denyed,or deferred any more, Hee per{waded him'ro maintaine
the hibertic of the Councell, which was impeached principally by threecaw-
ſes. One|becaule cucry thing was firit confulced of at Rome, another, becauſe
the Legats had aſſumed to themſclues onely the libertic of propoſing, which
ought to be common toall ; thethird , becauſe of the practiſes which ſome
Prelats, interclied in chegreatneſle ofthe'Courrof Rome, did make. He ſaid,
thata reformation of che Church being!neceſlary;and rhe common opinion
being , that the abuſcs haue their bepoging and growth.in Romie, it-was fit;
for common ſatisfaction, thatthe reformation ſhould bee made in Councell,
and notin that Cirtie. And therefore defared his Holineſſe robecontenttbar
the demands exhibited by his Ambaſſadours,and by other Princes, mightbe
propoſed. Inthe concluſion, he rold him, hee ae” mag toaſliſt in Councell
per{onally,and exhorted his Holinefſero doethelike.. bo thre
This letter was diſpatched the thirdof: March;-and it gaue much offence js.
to the Pope. For hee thought thatthe Empcrour did embrace much more i» ofended.
then his authoritic did reach vnco,and-paſled thetermes of hisPredeceſloxs,
men moreporentthen{himſclfc.: Bur he' was diſplcaſed more-when hee.was
aduiſcd bychis:Nuncio, that hee bad ſent copies: of. che ſameLetcer to other.
Princes, and to tc Cardinall of Larainealſo; which tould:bee done romo.
other cnd, but to incicerhem againſt bim , aud ro tultific hi owne ations;
Beſides, Doctor Scheld,great Chantellor roche Emperour ,-perlwadehhDib
phinus, the Popes Nuvcio in.chat Court; that he would-be arheavestharirhg i» | +

: #
:
o

words, *Uniuerſalem Ecclefam, might begraken away) which ditl-inferte te
ſupcriorizicofthe PopeabouerheCouncell; ayinghatrbeletiones did mon
commporr they vicd, andtbarthe Emptrourand'himlalfcallo-did

know, that, Charles the fift,, of happy memory,,didbold shd —
niowin this afticle, andchar they ſhould take baeikof ginipgogaalioncoliiss =
Maicſtic andaather Princes«o declaroyvhat; they sbwake A
a—_— Sa one ine it waz Botralnime td
dithcultic of the words, *Univerſelem Ecchfion,&:6xandihtaduice which:
came from:Trewe,chatrhe ES
Prelars couktenduce then) , that they might nox-danonize 1ngpinion; con-
191 | | cry

${OSLILL

e302 l 7 ,

" — = = _ L

you z

v Pol FP <—
FE.
_

—_— ———_—

> Tedd Lam

1964 retro atfifeece which; when gencantotofpeakeplainly in chedifeufion
Heap ofithis point, would lngemprefauoretsrbenwas be eeucd, 8erhutaheylwert
fa9rems: deccucdivhet thought theicontrathy! which ſhowed tiearely, bad hewhad
rave reared herepfarrhd Empervurs Court:: TheſethingsconſuteredyrheRope
Cadtrrey.! rhotight frtomakeagood anſwerc, and toſendabouralloy toiitiffiebini

; SAYS (8fe; © ; viuuloNib 2113 10 bas 5113 151 a: CY 5113TO CT! 00 DU; #4 UT. !oct3
ie Ii hereforeihvewrom tothe Emperonr:, thatihee had caliedcheCouncel]
the let: With che paveicipation/ of him; and of ocher Kingsand Pricts, inor becaule
24Þ= theApoltolikeSea-had needy in goterning cheChurch , roexpett che con!
farof amypankrricywhatbalcr;beeaute heo hadiplenicude ofpower kroni

Cx x 15m; facrall hoentient Counetts haze berncaſſembled by:authori-

ty of theBiſhopef Remeznoraby Princoecriinreypoſtd, butas amcercexe-

ettor of hisewill;pheeTiadimace hadawy\purpofe wither rodiflolucor co tubs

pert} theCbuncel; bur harhalwayespirpeledadgtite 4compleat end, for
cthelerdiceof Go D; tharpby conſult ta Rove? thefamiectmarters which

overs dilpuretiinTrenthethhertis ofthe Cormnee) WH9iOr only nothindred;
korprothored'rather;' har no Corneelt was'cuoredebratedinablenceat
chePope;; burthar hee hath fon infiedtions, 'whie I the Fathers hauc' alfd
tollowecd';\ thacthe inftruRions doe itiremaing, which Pope —> ER
chePphofne Couticell , Pope! Leovo that of-Chalcedon', Pope Hgatbo ro that
of:Trulls;Popo Adrian thetirft'ro thefocond ofN#eu, Pope: Auriay ihe 16s
condrorhe cighth generall Councellot'nſtantmopie;ithar;forpropoling in

the Councelt, it hatch alwayesbclorgedro-che Popewhenſocucr he harh bin

prefent; yea; healone hatkerdl6lnedgamndtheCouncai done norhing; buc ap+
bue;that-ih abſence of the Popsthe Legats haife cucr propoſed, or o
chers,depured by them; 1 conformiritochercotirhe Eouncelt of Trenthach
determined, ' that the Liegatcs ſhoutdptopote; thatthis is necellary for rhe

_ keeping of order, in tidaroboriths acreacconfulion j-ifche Prolars,
£2 amulcuouſipand one azainſtatorhet; might [cronfoote marrersſeditious,
nb-+*-4 apedinconttnicnt ; chatthe Legz«cshhauennegcrrefuledco.propotepriy thing
tixis profitable; charchepractiſes;rhade by didervagaintbrhoamboriticof
che/ApoſtolikeSeq; hathynigbh diſpledſed:him ;thatdliche bookesof the Fas
cheovand:Coubeelsarctully char che Pope, ſucetifour,of *#Hergrand Vita

nm oryhs Rufiorof thewmiucrialbChurch: itharmany:comnticles:and
pmattifos:hate beene made by Trans abaintt chis/rraaty jp howſocucoahe

QMHareh hathwhvayoovſadibibiformiofipeetts;!as, his MaieſtieGhightilos|

4 paperfull of glthaplaterorhic hb (env funacited Inapaperiucioted/c:awlll rhe prefer
" * onilghauerifh (becanſghitviLogatopuiing connidehitcy: rabid congare
+ EST WTO IPA cho libentgjofthbQoancetl;td

| cligkanlioriciccobrecontenmidy; i{o thin chdConticellmighrber

Oo 9h hdacfieedobrfrendiberries;aHiat;tarigefenation, tic dghrevh
rhontdBerpigandabldlmne, ahd babdbnrinaadty{felliciiedhiieiogaroeo
re{ofte.ySonitprhar;conderpineriaCourt, the worktkhewhobymariypebl
aificed hrothaiaiade pwoch with che diminution of iv 'rehrs7? kndchargid
doit rehadfdeb flee Aontd nommipie >thar thirwould norberdobens

.

Tewiirroged MoRrotizes|beingriabinfBrmedsntt)iniieadoRnetortningy
would:deforadh © 2-299 Re wile ae
1ST? | ormation

XUM

| i

——

”_ O. TY SEE 1 = ISRINS
L187. the Councellof T rent. 685
formarioa in other Courts alſo, which haqno lefſe'needeof ir; inthe affaires © x 563
of che Church onely;and char perhaps fromthe abuſes therein thecuill doth " ——_
principally arife; thaty concerning the petitions propoled by his Maicſties Faxomans.
Ambaſſladours,and others, he hath alwayes writren they ſhouldbe examined Eun
and diſcufſed,cach of chemi irs fir time, and rhat an oder being inſticured, £*2***5 5.
and continued, to handle in Councell matters of faith; and reformation of —-v—
theabuſes concerning them,both together, it could norbe alcered, wirhour
confuſion and indignitic;that his Maieftiehauing rouched diuers diforders
of the Councell, had omitredtheprincipall; and fountaine of the others,
which is, that thoſe who onght ro receiae law from ({ouncels, would piuc
it ynto them; that if che pierie of '(onſtantine, and the Two Theodofiy. were
imirated, and their examples followed), the (ouncell would haue had no
diuiſion berweene the Fathers, and been in greatreputation with the world;
that he deſired to aſſilt perſonally in (ouncell, ro remedie rhe- diſorders
thereo*, but in regard of his age; and of his important affaires, it was inpoſ-
{iblefor him to goeto Trent,and would nor ſpeak of tranſlating itto a place
whicher he might goe for fearcof giuing ſuſpicion. |
The Pope thought thar the intercſts ofthe Emperorand of France could
not be vnired with his, and therefore could promiſe himfelfe bur lutle, and
hopeleſſe of them, For they did not thinke ofthe Synode bur for'the inte-
relts of their eltates, & therefore did defirenothing from it bur what might
giue fatisfaCtion and contentment to their people, and incaſe they cannor
obraine it, to hinder the ending of the Councell, and: fo ro-keepetheir ſub-
ics ſtill in hope. But theſe intereſts could not moouerhe King of Sparne,
whoſe people arc Catholikes, andthereforehe mighe coriformehimſelfe to
his wil, without prejudice to his ſtates, yea that ir was goodforihiny toſtand
vnited with him,that he mightobraine graces; atid thersforeHic thought it
neceſſaric to ſolicite him, with continuall perſwaſtonsAhd ro give him hope
of all ſatisfation. And Lewis d' Anoladid opportunelyarriue inRome, ſent
cxpreſly by his Catholike Maieſtie. T he Pope honoutedhim abouemeaſure, , .
lodged himin the palace, in the roomes formerly inhabited by Count Fre- Ambatider
deric Boremeo, his nephew, and vſed him with All effectuall courreſie:; The 7...
cauſcs of his comming were, to obraine ofthe Pope a protogationfor fine
yecres more of the Sublidic ofthe Cleargie/graunted vnto him, and power
co ſell iuc and twentie thouſand erownes ofthe Fees of the' Churches,” Hee
had commithonallo to procure'a diſpenfation 'of marriage berweene-the
Princeſle, Siſter of the King and his Sonne*Uharles, which;it Spainie 5 was
thought caſic, becauſe many, cuen private mie, were diſpenſedWithro/miars
riethe daughter oftheir brother'6t ſiſter, which-is as auch as'ro'rakethe
ſilter of the farher, Beſides, Moyſes nd Aaron were bortie bf 'fach w- matri-
monic. For the mariage, the Pope faid he would doe'astmichs hivaurho®
 ritie would ſtretch vnto;'and would cauſe'the mitic? to''be'tonfulted on.
Butthe Teatie did not proceeds, in regard of the infirtdric of the Princefle
which ſucceeded, and madehervatic "i marriage. "Concerning! the Sub-
ſidic, andalienarion; thePope ſhewed awillingminde;" bur made difficulty
rodocit while the Prelates wereat charges inthe Councell, 'promiſing to
gravific the King if hee would affiſt him to finiſhit, and'to free him from ir.
| M mm For

_— .
Wo $ RY, © ;
ins, - : ” RI 7 1 —*D
Fe =: o Q 4 ,
OS 5 Ui F. -— a A -
4 Me -

686

The Hytinie of ons

Inn

> ———

1563

Prvs. 4+
FERDIN4ND
ErrZAEETH ,
CHARLES 9.
Purliy. 2,
YN" /

For matters of the Councell,-Den Leys did not proceed farrein the firſt au-
diences;oncly he offered to procure the preſcruation-of the Popes authorj-
tic, andexhorred his Folinefſenot to treat a league betweene the Catholikes,
lcalt the heretickes {bould doethe like, and France runne headlong to any ac-
cord with the Hugonots.

In the meane while divers aſſemblics were held in Trent ; the Emperours
Ambaſſadours called rogether the Spaniſh Prelares,in the boule of the Arch-
biſhop of Granata,to perlvwade themco conſent that the vic of the Cup might

be granted in Coancell,purpoſihg ta propale it againe: butchey found them

ſo auerle, that they were forced 'to bury 18 {tlence.” The Ca:dinall of Lo-
raine held many congregations with his Prelats and Diuinesto examine the
places, ſent by the Pope roche Etmperour,in the paper before mentioned, and
by the Empcrour to: him, concerning the words, Pnuerſalem Ecclefiam, to lee
whether they were juſtly cited, and whether the true fence was giuen them,
that they. might,as they did, make another writing,in confutarion of ir. The
Emperour gaue order that theſe places might bee imparted to the Spaniſh
Prelates, that he might know their opinion ; which Fiue (| hurches having
done, when they were all aſſembled to this ende, Grarata an{wered that his
Maicſtie needed not eo haue taken ſuch paines with them who doe recciue

the Councellof Florence, but ſhould aske the French-men, whorecciue that

of Bafil. Vpon this occaſion ſome of them , when Five Chu ches was
gone from them, 'did perſwade , that a letter ſhould bee wricten to the
Pope, to take from him the bad opinion hee had conceiued of them. Bur
Granata refuſed , and: ſaid, 'it was ſufficient that hee knew by their voyces
thatthey; were wor oppoſite; heercin; yer ſo, as it was not fit they ſhould
imitate the flatrerie of. the 7talians. And hee vicd theſe very words. Let

| him veſlote rpnto vs our ' «Wne., , that Wee may leave Wnto him more then
# his ; and it #5 104. inſt,, that of Biſhops wee ſhould bee made his Vicars.

Anotherdaythe Ambaſladours of the'Emperour and French King met to-
ether, to {ct downe an order thar the Decree of refidence, compoſed by
the Cardinallof Loraine, might bee propoſed : which: neither they , nor
Loraine could obtaine of the Cardinal of Yarmia,and Simoneta,Seripando being
{icke, and abſcnt.., - mn uict
... Inthecongregation of the- ſcuentcenth of March,onc of the Diuines, fin-
ding opportunitze to digrefſe from the continencic of-Pricftes to reſidence,
{pent his whole large diſcourlethercin. Hee brought authoritie and exam-
ples to perlwade thatit was-de inre diumo,and,to an{were that obicQtion, thac
many Canons and Decrees doc command ;it, which necded nor, if it were
commanded by God... Hee ved this congeit, that Jus dininums is the foun-
dation,or pillar of re{idence, and Jus Canonicum the Editice or roofe, andthac
asthe building is oucrthrowne when the foundation is remooued, and asthe
roofe fallethwhenthe pillar iszaken away, ſoit is impoſlible to preſerue re«
lidence with Ts Caronicum onely jand thoſe who aſcribe. it onely voto that,
haue no. other aymethen to deltroy it. Hee broughe thei examples of an-
cienttimes, noting thatreſidence was exquiſncly obſerued by all, before any
Canons or humane Decrces were Sy A on onc held thathee was

bound by God? But, fince/that ſome hauc perſwaded .therſeltes, ahac
4 there

Ly Be7...4 M
thiere wasno obligation;bur chat which. is; deriund:from -livmancLawes, - 1 p 3
bowlocuer theld haugoften bheene renewed, andfortitied wich.peoglies; yer Ao <

lt harh Rill grower wotleayd worſe: : (12, x 11D Sonlw > 45 noir (MIO! Fanpinarp;
:...1; T he. anc day: Cardihall:Seripondadyed, tothe greargiidhe af all the Pre 5.90777

Jates, and ofiall Trent #' bauing in the morning reerurd Sags edtche In 96
;Encharift, whnchhee ropke dur of his bed vpon bis knees: * tha tapey wee

ryracd;inio.bisbed ,'and.inthe preſence of fiue'Prelates; and of che SeSM0-"The team ot

taties:of Teniceand Florence, and of all his fainilie;.hee maties long Orari- #17<n."
on in Latin, varill his ſpirits did faile him ; heetonfefſed-bis fab wholly |
£onformabletothc Coleliqueotthe Romans Chiveh,ſþake of che|workes
of a Chriſtian; of che Refurreition of thadeads aftheaftaires of tbe. Coun-

cell;. recommending the progreile of ixaathe Legaresi and tbe Gardjnall-of
Loraine; butifivingito ſer downerthe metncs;hisfpirindidfaile him; andhe
fayd, chat:G:Q'Þ. bad forbid himite-proccede furiher,] but thar his Divine
Maigltie vould ſpcake bifnſdlfgin timerand place: 'and ſa palled, withour
ſajing apyamars:....- 2 >;-inw 01366 09 012407 2dybonodesc;

1: The Count.of Luna wrotefromehe Empergur@qurityts. Metin Gude

lun, the. Scerctary, and ſenta copy af alter, wriczento-him fnamiehe King,

in which his Maiclty didaduiſe, thattbe Pope hadicamplainedito.him ofuhe

Spani(h Prclates ; and tipwſoencr heebelceucd that his Halinefſplmes nbc «1 7
well informed, thipkibg that rhe Prelates would -{hcw. deworion- (yards
the Apoltalique Sca, yet heegave brderto the Count, charpathiseomm)

to Trent, hee-ſhowld caſo them favour che Pape 3195 farreasrhoixconſer-

ence could. permit, arid ſoto earry:themiclucs;irhatihis Holineſſe mighc

not hauecauſeto complaiheof him: And:to chispurpoſethe:Coum wrote
allo to Gronea Segouiaand Leon: ! 283 vo nn aac OA! 3 woo

8s FP
Cf

111 Thecightcoth of March , inwhigchoo Copgregationwas held; by rea-

ſog.of NE 2. re 9 the;Erench Aimbaſladouts red fa-

latpely before therwokegates;andromplainedthas;thele clones moherhs,

hoc the. firſt tay of chet:arrivalicin Trent 4 vail chen;; they: had mate

knewen tho.deſolatiousofiFirence tabUnbe:dangers of Chtilte dome ;belr

the: differences: of Religiqny: and declared thatorh6rmolſkm ao

a oy ears gaod ES mane erage
rationgtpolitucLawes;:and> josmrenbibe cho!

gracious mn zibur ewe hae CANES #0

mazien is auoyded,as much/as is poibblle; chatchegreaterparrofabeFathers - .. -

and, T heglogaos.arc now mbre hard andfeucretbepruce; : avidariyaclding |

to the —_— _ the time; they prayed chem ro — .

good mcndyed ; - before -mercrablend dodahy:gob efvt the

publique, fefuice:; —_— hb -Candiwals db Ae |

v6: :defiringirhech. ac? denilGitoeinh ot tkeidihirgoif

thei conſciencd, whilethey had cimec: -\Tihd Logares bofdinkobat: they -

——————————————

Ma94and Setipandowerdrgalcy dritcbon ſthogaldnearenmrablend bed

grate weight ET Ma rn

Cw naar Ay ATT ATT 1 pamdih *

221 —\ M

mm 2" =—

688 | Thr Pifararna) 61 L.rzs 9.
DS ——

OO COON - — x2» —— ———_—

expecingehe mgoriavor bfabd Emperourswdnbatladours Rome: who,

r563 $:
AA wg : ertice vid ies! nite; niade2equetizthePope 3 thara peneraly re-
by NS, ola of the whole Church in the Les doantierrhwenag ich 3: tight

Long tg es
-b&T cadet IRawe barns Comeeltyuntaile chartheDecree | that

ff482 tf.
EEE hoteurrontyan mighrpopofenrCodncelhithould berevoktd as conrra-

wan xyWweboliburipof de ubellthas and Prelac aro ptopatindiig wok
on of her they rhou cg theſ&for their. Churches, andchototdrahivir Srates,
certe E

Any Thisinſt roperovirchooglittcdhould etl madecotiic "yy and
rour & King xe wards tothe Conbuelo*: 1 ; mid alis} bib 231740 P24) 2 «Ni 8 00
zene. 2 Norwithltandlng;zhele Princes inoten afionoidht) For
howſoever Daz BÞwaimidethe tare Gemands upary;) vc. "LET heode
tired:the Poperdiperimvade the:Eniperour ys0! toiſecke'theeommunion
of ths 'marriage'of Priefisg'faying;'vhac the Kingihtd prurw om)
miſſion r6/bis Anibafadoirto goego Trent | and periivaderrBattii ſhould
norbee (pokenol, or,if nwere, tharthe: Spaniſh Prolarey ſhould oppole it,
Tas —_— the oy eto endcuour to winnethe heretiquesbppentlctiofle;
-not {ending vimgche meanes'of che/ Emperbury and of other
fort Dr Wd wh acceptihedtemands of cheFrenchmen,andro ledue
theCouncellfree; tharallmaypropoſeandnoprattiſes bee vied in making
The Popes Ithe reſolutions; ' "T he Popes anfwercrothe Amibaſſadours was,thatthede-
—__ «roe; Proponemibus Legutie, ſhould bee:{drxpounded;:; thaticuery' /one! might
propole wharhewould,and tharrorthe Lagaagdbiepo rted ately, hee had
endiberciero reſohucalltchings; which might a ity Oouncelt; wits
atwriting azall; thacichereformation was defarddby bim;aridehat he had
:ofren madeMnfanto for ir, :and;char\, if the. world would Have had ir _

one, it ſhould hauc beene done by this timezaid-pur inexecuvionallo big
Ktitf®: 's they would: baucir from Frentjibie were noveffeted;; rhe cauſe ought
40 bes aleptbed onohj rothe difficulties: which were amonght'the Fathers!
thartheei defired co: frei) ond of;che Councell; and did protuteand 61til.
viceir pportad cucranyithoughres ſaipendir;; thas;, ih-coeformiric hereof,
tec would write ohetigpanr; anddid wrize,thar the!Decrec;; propontiti-
bus Legdtioowas made torrake away wontulign gy burthat bis will was; that
moar bfiche Prolares thouldbee hindered iro propolewharties thought fits
ang crzochepthoald diſparch-crhentaricts, accordmpzo the yoyoes of the Fax
ers, withour cxpettingiany orderfrom Rome! Burthis letrop was vo piug
daictactionicand norzo vorke any ciiedt. ForMornes, rho prime Legure]
ml{rutbions apatrg _—_—_ the ordervallo whichyhould cottie
132; 05 O1 [115 ' : 211043 $1 1 10 903111921 2712 03
»>ThePupe infovered:Don Lembdin particular, thavdiee tadbopenciah
yak 11k promiiſc of his tabtialthc Sethi hcewould prorehit and pre:
Demerryey erenyrat gaeApoits|apir Sen; buctinobe nd ble wasderet:
wed an bead revgudd mirc inmounters froinHlis Prekaes; alien frod
ati chereti; who; rogaberwithallclgCl Shavies ita Wade bhenw
fokuct dis (chemiesforntbhigradt! obchofubbtdicgtbarheddoybiedadtefthe
goed wilinþ li} Maieltiozbutsllcbecoildidatilg becauſe hbghtad-oot fear
ecaldit Ambaffadours nticieerd RinqormwtheCouncel;ah wir ons Helv
212 1 5 8 lice af defarcicrbods Eg

yl « (ni M

Secret inſtru-
Gions » 21uen
to Cirdinall

AMcrone.

« is . © "9 " is EN * > of 8 ws Fn : - - AP
FF) 4 *: © .
4a” % -—
E. .
%
*

a. Oo —— | i g—s ret ec — en SL AY
Lv s: 7-4 the Conneell of T teut. | 89

= OY —_— —
— th. Mt,

he was notpleaſed it ſhould hauelicenſe, norbein (enuntadeto thoſe Princes, 1564
who preach liberty, and are deſirous to commandizthar eacry-one made tes > —>
.quelt ro/himfor hs libercic of the Councell; buckeedid-nor know whicthet Finomuxt,
: they, had all well conſidered of whatitmportanceirwouldber, if the Pre- Eggtk
lates hadtheraines laid'on the neeke, thar' howſoruct there were amongſt $29mt*: |
them,{ome meh exvetlentforintegrity and wiledomc,yerihere were ofthoſe >
alſo, who wanted cither-one of cher or-both;; all which would bee dabge-
rous if they were not kept in order , that perhaps it did laſt of all concerne
him corhinkeof ir,/becaule, his authority being grounded vpon the promi-
fes of God; heedid cruſt in thoſe ;)tharPrinceshadmote riendls1 to beware, in
rcgardofthepreiudices Which mayenfae, and char;: if che Prelates bad ſuch
ſupcrfluoas liberty,perhaps his Catholique Maicttie would have cauſe to bee
ſorie for it; that, for refortnation; theimpedicments did nor proceede from
him ; that he would :continue'to deforrethedemands-of Princes concerning
rhe communion ef the Cup, andnatiapt of Priefts,deſiring his Maieltic ro
conſider , that as hee-difſented from othersin theſe ipatticulars, ſo 'in cuery
thing elſe thereare ſornd who make requeſtsfot ir, and ochers. who oppole.
Hee concluded, that ic was inthepower of his Maiclticto ſceafruitfull, and
a {uddemehdot the Councell, from whichfo fooneas hee:was free, lice miybr
promiſe himlelfc all fayour from hin - 3 04 1115] eaifiecc;
'Therwentieth of March;the Diuites madeanend of the Atticlesof Ma-
crimony; and the Legatesconſulred privately; whether it were good topro-
polc thedodtrine, and canons thereof intho-congregations of the Farhers.
Bur, conſidering thartheFrencliamenand Spaniards would oppoſe,and thac
greaterconrouerſieomight be raiſed rheneper were, and that ifthey'ſhould
propoſt — they ſhould giue the:Emperoursand French Am-
baſſadoars fir occaliorvto cnter:againe intpxbic martetiof reformation, they
were much perplexedwhatcodoe; |7Jarmizaſertiought godd ro-maketriall,
to accommodate:{pme'of the difficulties: bur | Simotrra., Feared that {ome
* groar' preiadice-might/enſuc;-in>regard of the inftabiliry of his colleague ;
and attributing the blame of all che difotdecsy;iwhich hauchiapned ui Conn-
cell, ro the rwo Legates dead, who: procteging in themattet of refidencera-
ther accotding:' ro their owne'opiniong then rhenecel{uics of the Chutch,
hauc;byroo much incegrityy caxſed all themiſchiche; andifiyd it was tor fir
ropurchemſclucs indangerobraifmp;greater.; acid ES did notconſ{cnt
tharanyofchern (howld bee fpokenot.: [Fmally,>they concluded to intermir
albdiſeuflions,, vnrill the commitigof'the new:Legares. . inthe: meanatimac, The Curdical
Loraine reſolucd to ggeto Venice, rorecredrohismind;zpoſleded with griefs, foluch co goe
forrhedeath of hisboothier,) clix great Prior; which allohadgduiutdihisfor- * Fe
mer forrow;for chedearbofchetukghis orher brothenT 3c 4.09 3: 1
» 1 THe Uifficaltios whiety were ſpdkeri of, were fixt,)1:feconceaning the 174.5 487
Decregnade long before tharhe iLcgares onblyſhua! . >pofo.r. oa; Who one -
ther refidence wetgals inhe dinium'-11 gp Wherher Biſhojrato infliemedby ©
_ CaHrrat.- 4. iConcctning daaurbotirptafthe Popeu!215:9:/Tododreafte
che numberofrheSecterarits;andes holdaneafiaccouma'the'Suffriges,

6.. (Which wasof moſt imporranes ig che gfcnerall reformation?
which-l was er ra wes mes a. vwhetein the
2 1291841 M mm 3 Councel

———_—

; _—_ The Hiftorie of Lys 9.
1563 .Counccl hath beenetroubled vncill this time, anda ptohebofiche xoubles

—> -which ſhallberclared hereafter. -_ - - bug yn=dil dog?
zomaxo:-, The newes was now Ralcin Trent, of the inſtance madein Reme to the

FERDINAND.!
Erna, Pope. For the Emperours Ambaſladours and che Preach, bad publiſhed ic
Exanies 9. ſhould be done, and thatafrerwards they would make! the lame requeſts to
\— the Councel.. The Cardiballof Loraive, whowas:whnt to ſpeake varioully,
faid;thar if thoſe Princes did reeciue fatisfattion ; by propoting their petits-
-ons of reforination,and the reformation made, without diminution” of the
Popes authority, thoſe inſtances would immediatly cea(ce; And: hee added
afterwards, that the Pope might hauca good proceedipg intheacformation,
and aquickediſpatchotthe Counccl , it. hee would deddarehimlelfe plainely |
what points hee would not haue to bee diſcuſled; that they muight labour in
diſcuſbog the others; by which meancs the: contentions would be: raken a-
way,which bauccauſcdall the dcelayes. For ſame, whodtiirotoſhew theirate
fection-to his Holineſſe, ſuppoſing that a pare of thols petitions may be pre-
judiciall cothe Apoſtolique Sca, doc oppolt them/al:: avid others, denyiog
that-any-of them doe preiudice,) doe cauſe the. bulineſſe to)/beedrawen in
length: Bur if his. Holineſſe would declare himſc)te, the difficulties would
ccale. » The Emperours Ambaſſadoutsgauea copietomaby in-Trent, of his
Maicſties letter to the Pope; which made the Legazesrefolue roiprtad allo
the copic of the letter which themſclueshadiwrutehitranſwere to thei Em-
rour, when hce fent them that which hee bad written cothe Pope; which
LN becing compoſed according to;the initructions dent from Remie , did
containethe (anic concepts asthetetrers:of bis Halibefſedid: 1-1} 1
The Pope, comparing the propoſitions of all the-Ambafiadours: wich
the ſpeech of Loraine., wheredf aduico was ſent him wasdp much the more
reſolute, not toconſent to theropoſitians of refarmbtion ; made by the
French-met, And irideed, notonely a perſonot a greatfpirit; aud experien-
cd inthe world ,.as the Pope was, but cucry meanereapacitic might diſco-
uer thecunningvſed, rodraw' him into the. neryin caſe he had nbtbecnowa-
ric. . He conſidered, that ro ſay he ſhould declare which ofthe petitions did
notplcaſc him,didfignific oothitle but chat,by ſufferingahe Þthers zo be dif
cuſſed, lice ſhould lcauc a way wide opentqÞring inithe ohers afeerwards,
which were tohispreiudice; And wiio cevld-doybr:that,ro obraihe abe
firſt would not beeaa cnd,but adegreetarpaie ro thararwhich theyiaymed;
and thatto relcaſe the Ecelchaſticall precepts, belongiwgiorheintesy ras thi
communion of the Cup, matriage of Priel5;vic of «He Lativ congut,whiich
ſeems, ar the-firſt view ,.nocto derogate from.the Popes autharieie; would
_ notwith(tanding.cauſc immediatly a total deſtructioncatithe auadations
of the Church of Rome... Some things.njakea fairedbew; aiid-feeme thas
they, may ber: admirted without loſſe;/but arwile min muſh darifeder the
contluſwn of things,'cathcr then their, Beginning; 1 Boing thetcfore-1cfol 4
ucdro itopthelefirtbpaſlages , and coplidening, whatiothercemedias there
mightbecj hecxrerusqed tobis firſt cogitations;, rharth@Kigyg of Spaine bad
neitherantereſt;noranyaffetiania roſrime the inktairesmade;'thatehe
Emperor and, men:didmuctugbourin then) bopinghy thismeancs
ro farisfic their;pcaphey antlyo;appraſeshogifcords; natknowingthay the
-524y0D 7

herctikes

-

& GB &i M

\

ts M—_ _ PINE OE <0 — .
* a. ——

L187. the CouncellofT rent. = - 691

——_—_— ww. A...
————  __——

— . \ -

heretikesdoe inculcate the reformarion thar they! may Hauc a prer nce. for £963
their ſeparation from'the- Church, and wovld-nor bee-redvced though it i

ſhould be made. Hee thought therefore; rharif' the Princes! were! maue to)Fwpulenk -

- vnderſtandrhis,they would abandonrtheit inſtance; and ſuffer the Goyncell: t:12.2a7s,

CH RLES 9-

to end quietly. Whercforche wholely bent his endenours overcome the p414555. 5
difficulties, by this meanes, And con(idering wellall refpe&s, hethaught.it — —
more caſic ro perſwade:the Emperor,who couldidetermine of him felfc,and

was of amore gentleandſweete diſpoſition, farre-trom ariy cunning, and

not intangled with warre, whereas in'FranctheKing being a child; many

chat were partakers inthe gouetoment, viung many arrifices, and-haung

diucrs intcrelts, it would be very hard ro doeany good. Where-vpon he re-

{olucd that Cardinall Morone before he cntred into'theaffayres of che: Coun |
cell, ſhould goe ro the Emperourfor this cnd;: (Amd/remembring whar Lo- T'- Popere-
raine (aid in Trent, that the Emperour would goe to Bolenia to retcive! the fend Car
Crowne, hereſolued torry whetherhe couldintuce char: Cardinall to: bee a tothe 1me
mediarouthercin, and ſo to rranf]aterhe Councellto tharCitie: He gaue or- '*'*"
der to the Biſhop 'of Vintimiglia'to infinuace-wirh him; :and ro-perſwade Andtah a |
him toir; and, rogiuehima meatiesof enrance;he cauſed Boromes to-gita patarpry
him'commuſſion, to condole withhim, for the deach of his brother the great ©"
Prior, . s SLY 1 (1 43316 11R'9 7 DID (11051

- Bur before'this order came, the Cardinallwasgone for Padua, The Bis

ſhop rhereforeconferring with: Shhopera;concladed thatthe importance of

the mattergid not admirany loſle of time, tor could bee negatiared: bur in
preſence. Wherefore hetefolued ro follow him, pretending to ſee 4Nephew

of his, who'was very ſickein Padua. Being come thither, hee viſited tho
Cardinall,prefented theletrers of Boramo, and condoled with him making

no ſhewofahyorherbuſineſle. - Falkingrogerther, tho/Cardinall demaun-

ded what newes therewas in Trent;fance his departure; and/whiathier-Candii

nall Moronewould goeto'the Emperour, as: was.zeported;; After many idiſ>
courſcs0n both fides; che Biſhopbegan ropughimin mindechac. his:Excel>

l-ncie had formerly old bim'in Trensy char, incaſe the Pope wonkdg0-10.Be>

lonia, the'Emperour would'goc chichet'alfo,ah+woauld-makeir amoctafion
roreceiue the Crowne, 'which would ryrac>wo thogtraraduantage. off bis

Holineſſe ro maintainerhe poſſeſſion of coronation;whichionianiedidcfy |

pugne. ' The Cardinall affirming chis againc;cheB, added;thinhodtiad thai

ſent aduiſe therof ro Rome,and nowhall receiuedanan{wetdhywbichhdded =
conclude that a veryfaire occaſfionwisproſenred rohis/Bxciltencie of: daing
much goodts the Churth bf G oi, by lybouring:iq bririg fa] profitableal
diſſcignetoeffeR.Forintalt he touldperſyvadghis Maicftictogora Bolonit;
calling alſothe Councellthirher; he nighra(fure himſclfd char his bidbdefto
would reſolue tobethere likewiſe;andabatybychelaſfiſtariceofthembork;

che affairesoF the Synod would-haue4quicke diſparebiaotta bappy ectſie, |

"The Cardinal defircd ro ſee wharwiowrine aubim, and ey cue
kitig detnonſtrarion''to proceedefrcely with biry;:(hewedhigaahe! ferrers
of Cardinall "Boromev,, - andawriting of: Privemeis;Galiwjthi: Popes Se
efetarig,!! 10! 415 Yigg) o gd a god ory nfo Lib oof} oct:
' The Zardinall haging read all; —————

| ou

————— —_— O—— =  __— ww a

692) : = a . The Hiſtorie of I-1847!

156 | |
2 > had ſeneto his Maicltic, whereby hee might: reſolus (better, and would, nor
Fe kus faile ro beſtow his paines, if therewere occaſioh. The Biſhop replying , thax

ſcrh many things, yer nothing is ckccuted in. Caunctll, bis Maieftie, gud other
hn

- ſhewed a purpoſeto go toſBoltnis, was:cooſed antheludden,and that when
his Maicſticrold him of of his deſire toafſſtſt pron Councel,his Holi-
neſfe/laboured much ro diſwade him, viing his-worntc varicticot ſpeeches.

| Heſaid allo that theEmpcerour would not refolucto gocinto Bolonca, left he
' ſhould diſpleaſe thePrinces, who might doubt; that when he was there his
Holincſſe would goucrne all after his owne manner, & conclude the Synode
as he liſted, withour making any refortoation, He {atd;he had rocgiued aduile
bf rhe: inſtance, made by »>Dar Lewis dduila. inthe. name of the Catholique
King;/ahd was glad to heare it. And ſpeaking; at Jarge of the particulars,
hecadded,.that jir-was: neceflaricic-thould beepertortned! ,. even from 41-
2 to:Omega,and chatir was fit..to remooue from: the: Councelbfifnc Bi-
ſhops ar the leaſt;who dor alwayes oppoſe all-gogd tclojutions,, ''Hee layd
tharformerly he:thoughtthere were amore abules in: Fravcethep elle where,
bur riow: liekmewthart there were.cnough:iin\ltaly: ao. For: the Churches
areiinthe:hands of Cardinals, who aymungatprofitenely, doewholly aban-
don them ,: and !leaue rhe: ichre-to: a: poore: Prielt /; by which-meancs. the
Churchcsiarorumed;and Simonics, andaniinfiniticigf other diſorders con
micted-) For remiedie-whbercof; the Princes and their miniſters did-proceed
moderately, hoping rhat,at thelalt, the defired reformation would be made.
That bimlaltealls had procecded with repeat; þet-nowleeing-thar- it was
rims to labourid carhelt forthe fervicoaof G:0:D1bee. would. hyrthen his
toufcichcenombore; bur; inthe -firft-yoyce: hee ſhouſil gine, .yva3; reſolued
ofpeake heredk Thathis fawilic had tuffered; as every, png; knowenh, the
lofcef.twan brothers grhavhimiclfe would ſpend his blood is the ſame cauſe,
though norimArmes; as they Hid; thatthie:Holinefe qughe, tos. to: heathen
roithofe:rwho would idiucri hiok fromifo pious an intention;þurroreſfoluc xo
obrainea-rewardur the. habds)gof GoiD bythe mherit-oh retmouing the abuſes
of the-Chyrehl Hoe yd alſo, thar, wben the 'new Legates cares, who-no
doubrwouldbe wel informed of the: Popes minde; js:yould: bee:knowne
wharhis purpolewasconcerning the reformation; cinrregarde: hey could
hateno cauſe: rodefayuigifthey meant! ro make it at:alls And: howlocuer
the Biſhop did often aſlay ro bring him backe to ſpeake of the iourney to Be-
lonia, yerhce alwayes turnedche difcoutle another way. Y/intiniighe fetit ad-

Fa ;  —WiCE

lag YNeOzlnbbllafTrens. ">.

ome urged bibertifare] chit howſecuer th Cardanaliad
boy Klad eargorlttdvis ad dpate 9,
agdofcht©our

n; FaxpienD?

———_ ———  —
tO Kegnanury;;
8 ..

mr Alle
heererof _ ade amdicnofthisiourney,

irony ir owe ems ic
and c wu herd ks had foundhis - Tad promifcd-
hbourtatas i bo hight have proloyyed IthebuſineNeandeauſedduarsps
uno, 91110 211 03N! b911nD 1 avobttgam#. ww _

Adtifepaner: Rome thus; the French-King hadunk hs Newesonn
Hdigonory, the patticular conditions being rr drootor ad green era tens
chinkinabproceededfrom ins Pridits whogthough hopdag | 2ds:openly
declrathenſducstoibe Proteins, yerdidfollow rhadpartyy; heoneſolucd
todifedaettheryndwaswaws fy,ithav hewaviwWiohged mate by: the
masked berericugs,ehen by: thebkic-Hheods mvfiereup Dae lARUPM ch,

hauing cauſed firſt the Emperours letter revttnenbhinogtberiutergils _—
owne tnfwere, he paſſed tromgimebuſigeſſt and relpted.che: confulans of -— +»
Frawvee, adding, that the Cardmald Chyftilion pedibisnimeofBi- -...,..
hop of Balch; Je Hp nar ce oyncedhimftlfede. -
$950 ofthe Cardinals btae; acribuningallthe err him, tothe Arche

iſhop of 4ix,the Biſhop of: Unlmwe-ancſbrce othersbWhich thitgs; how
oedertlicy.were Horotiouspand needed mol funherproofe toicoinero} the
declararian WIGAN ava bln me gourtned che
Inquifirion;,{hoaldproc -againltcheny:Tho Candinalbob*?y/pan{wecing,

chat cherowas need-of propefiand} Ilauchoririezthe» Popo brdaihed,
chacanew-Bull ſhould be made; whiclowng dared.checſeuanph at Aprilz)ahd
conrained in: lybttance; TharhdPopeab Rant Vicarab Corgas 7,
rowhom he latch! recommended che i Me -ro-reducegtholſe

that wander) cobridlewith rem penalviesclroforhextannoohbe gained
by adabnitions;heehach nor; hem of pafſimpti ule} « 09A
redtotxeeute rhis charge. «Nowbithil pm yer nnfomkedlifhoprancingeoncly
fallerintoherericutl, —_ bur dve! hep na 14g
thefaith. Forptouiſion whertin, been
of |Rotex6.whowrhe bath formerly rorntobdedvhaka
ajbedarbppaehecheprind Saba ih
goes" ſe&i Ro Una RE TG wi +

contvacs eb, coupprareparfonaliyargitthdpw

toprtzxceed to ſpitgmoe; whichthee wi) Ny pronobncc lin Priiate:
ThoCardnalenzonormawot ts Poetconmbal. che, by Ld
appcare perſonally in Rome, to purgethemſclues from impunitions: ofchera- "-
1h Ind being adrian why Bike ("li aak hmalt to Dhmfifo,
ut kde Inman, 2Bifkoþ of :Fekinarglobanurs -
 atonla Cecelia Bilboy of Troj | foi Bargid fon Boe 07 Apache

Bland:ob 07 boy bus, ka 217 toNloqd: 2113 2b18wo1 25
1208 DuniroaahabxpetoBanfibe

aceab}[-oruber [goto
ortabwot: Fg Tm ARE BT the fatrieyafiÞrodetdio3;in meds
i ts yand; che ens On ied OC
prof bala-n

ed, and — laceatnight, Fe made as js entry pO
_—_

The entry of
Card. Mo-one
into Trex,

ynder

__ i "Fbb\ Slflafteojh Ln _

I "2063 ' wile 4 cariopy;; wan adetby, tba Legats,4d bafladours,ondFatbites oof che
{IT Coupbellanc Clargicof the Citit, and copdudtedrogheCatbedrallChyrch,
Pans @hy

ax»; yherodhtcremovics wed!'in 8decining Legarss Were | performed, ,T he, tnar-
Es Cop, Lunacainarp Trentallathis day; and was mer bythe Prolaces, and
WL Ambaſladours. Hecntred i _ the Cos RR ; the
a0 03n yand of, Freie, vvitii many: demonſtrationgeffrigndi{Þip.higwas
Ord by the, ##evch, whocolde. hims abey.badcommullion fron:
Kingand/Quetneth commy -allthejrafſeiresvatobim, andoflered th
joyoc with bin inalbthe ſeruiees.of the Gatholique King) Jub-Makker: Lum
avſiycrad;that he hadthefame order, to; ES with chemgyd chat
| he would holde: goed eorrehondepcie..Heewil ted eL.ogpys wing, _—_

louing words,and geaerall offers, y,
Card. Merove *  Thetbirrecnth of Aprill there'was, a rongragations) 40 recciue: Cardinall

1s recciue ld 1a

congregation Morone; where;aftcr the Briefe of his: Legation.wyas read; heb made a i{pech, :

firforthcactaſfion .andfaid\that the warrc&fedirions;and other calawitict,
preſenr,andimm inca;forous ſirines; would:ccale, if a-meancs were found
ro appeafer(3 0 Dy and40 teltorerheancientpuritic, fatiwhich codthe, Pope
had, withgreat iudggmeiit, aſſembled the Copneell, in which .are-rwo,Car-
- dinals; Princes, famous fornobibtiaand! — ot the. pon
ur; and of fomanyigreatKings, Princes Gitzcs|and Nations, a
Prelars of excellcntlcarning and!ineegretie, an oo 8kilfull Divines, Bur,
Mantuaand'Seipado:being dedd;the Pope hadlubſtituted bim; and ioyned
Nauaggero within yhich hebad cotuled; koowing theweightof ahe bur
then, andche weakenelle of ys. Brevgeh LButche vocelliic' of! abedience
Hah pucrcome fearr;;that hewis commandedts gooto tht Emperourand
wouldwtupncſhoridy}co treatwich she bathers;: ih,company: of the. (orher
Legatcs,chapwhioh doth congatieghe ſaluatian. of tho people, t
ofchefbyrch, and theglory.of CatkisT; that hee brought): with-hir-we
chingzvd15agood tcaning. of cthoPope to ſecure the docitine of, fairhs t0
corrodtbad miannersjto rivtide fochen neecflitirs of Prowinecs,and:to:elta-
bliſhpdaccand, _ with thadducrlarics,as much as;pietic 1nd: thc
dignititob:the ique Sajcam permir; the uber; his wine readines, 0
doc wharhi Holi eek commanded bime fie-prayed bhe Fachars,thac
contentiabs anddifgord;andenprotitablequeions being laydafidewhich
doc grceullyolendChiliendawgbey wouldhandle icraqully thethings
chatiato neceſlariecri mo1} 221l5).cist lt /inua 03 91 llsnohaqair32Qc
5th Count  *THe\Count of Lava abi deckbafion ng 2 the "Dandew: veſſels of. his
of". King;Spamiards or frafiatis, on bveficed\in.higk arc{}exhoninguthem.cin
thenamveſhisMaickit,co fiandivniced inte Graded, olifaods 20d: rec
rence towards the Apoſtolique Sea, and not to doct > yldy-
ing he ad tormmilliod ro aduitc! partieulitly alckc\phoeed] [cry
one, atd that his Maieſtia wilt keepe/a pk puininogs —— will
Crt nterpokin to bis deſcrezyold thiacke os hail'thein
ny-ehi nſdcheioconſcienoe, And belgakebb ener alterna
7 pne__ ea 1; 4A. ; ant abe-orbantt.Ce-
pi ane / Winoule,99 (3:15 vid abern, 22H 3104in fo] ysb/ or ofls bayntk bag ,}.-
190Df1Y | Morone

the \

—_

595
Morone was willing to ſce Loraine, before he went to the Emperour, who | r5 63
becaule hee would nor ſpeake with him, deferred his returne. For having >
ſpoken in Uenice with Nauaggero, and ynderltood a good part of the Popes Fanpinant.

— — ————

in{tructions, hee was willing roauoyd occaſion, that Morone, comminica- ELjzaÞsrM,
ting vato him all,or part of chat which hee was ro rreare with the Emperour, puts ®
ſhould pur him into ſome obligation. Whereupon Morone., parted the ſix- — >
ecenth of Aprill. Heeſayd, he was ſent onely to wuſtific the Popes good in- Ys = 524
rention, tharthe Councell might proceede, and an abſolute retormation of por 6m
the Church bee made withour any exceprion, Notwithlianding his other ey?
commillions were knowen, which were co diſlwadehis Maieſtiefrom com-

ming to Trent, becauſe many impediments of the reformation would be cau-

ſed thereby; co excuſerhe Pope, thathe could not perſonally alliſt in Coun-

cell, and to pray him to haſten the cad of 1t, propoſing the tranſlation ro
"Polonia, where his Maieltic and the Pope might meete, which would bee a

good meancs for him to receiue the Crowne of the Empire in ſo famous

an aſſembly; a fauour which ncucr.had becne done ro other Emperours. He

had charge alſo to pray him to maintaine the authoritie of the Apoltolike

Se4, againlt all che plors, made todiminiſh ir, or ratherto bring it tonoching;

and thar the reformation of the Coure of Rome might nor be made in Trens,

but by the Pope himſelfe; rhar no mention might bee made of renewing the

things determined vnder Paul and Tulius, inthe fame Councell, thathis Ma-

icltic would bee content, thatthe Decrees ſhould bee made in Councell , by

the propoſition of the Legatesonely, firſt imparting them, and hauing the
conſent of the Ambaſſadours of his Maicſtic and of other Princes. He had
commiſſion alſo to giue the Emperour hope of a particular grant of wharſo-

eucr hee would demand,for his people;and co diſſwade himfrom holding in-
relligence with the French King,inthis matter of the Counceli, ſhewing him

that as the State of France and Germaniz was not the ſame, ſo the ends of his
Maicſtieand of that King mult needes be diucrs, and their counſels different,

The Legates, remayning in'Trent, did willingly giuethe Prelates leaueto de-

part, andeſpecially thoſe who held. che inſticution of Biſhops and relidence

to bee de iure diuino. |

The-20, of Aprill Leraine_ returned, and was: met by the Ambaſla-

dours ofthe Emperour, of Polonia,and of Savoy; and the ſame day newes

came of the peace concluded by the-French King with che Hugonots, which

was more for the aduantage ot the Catholique party. For after.tae batrel]
before mentioned , the factions were equally balanced, vnrillithe death of
Guiſe. Afterwards Colignie tooke,by aflault,theforrof ( adowe,withlo much
reputationto himlclfe , avd diminution of the Catholiques:y thai-it was re-
ſolued in the Kings Councell:to conclude the treaty of peace', which was
continually managed cuer' ſince the batrell;- Tothiscnd, the ſeuenth of

March an afſcmbly:was made,to whichthe priſoners, Conde and the Conſta-
ble,vere brought; Andzafter fone ſpecch, they being releaſed vpon promiſe,

ro conclude rherpaslconditions; the Hygonote Miniiters allembled, and refol-

ucd notto conlenc to ay agreement, oxceptihe Edit of Ianuary might bee
obſerucd, without any exception; or condition; adding allo, that hereafter
chcir religion thowe cor þic-galled new g thar- children baptized oo

7 | | | [0]

Lis. 7. the Councell of Trent.

Fe OI ES ——

OOO

696 7 be Hiſtorie of EL 1 v7.

p— S "
1563 thould not beercbaprized; thattheir marriages ſhould bceeltcemed lawtull,
-- andrthcir children legitimate. From which conditions becauſe they would

Prvs 4.

Fxxpm4ax». by no meanes depart,Conde and the Nobility, weary of warre, without cal-

Enzazera. hog che Miniſters any more, did make the agreement, And the capitulari-

Cuartys 9- ons, CONCerning religion, were theſe, That wherethe Noblemen of the Ha- |

Party 2. EONS , "8
 — gonots haue high iultice, they may live in their houſes , in hberty of confci-
hf ence, and exerciſe of the reformed religion, with their families, and lubics.
cordin #7444: Thar other Gentlemen, who hold in fee, nor dwelling vader other Catho-
lique Lords of high iuſtice, but immediatly vnder the King, may exerciſe
the fame in their houſes, for themlelues, and their families onely. Thar, in
cuery Bayliwecke, an houſe ſhall bee appointed, inthe Suburbs, in which
the reformed religion may be exerciled,by all of that iuriſdidticn. Thar eve-
ry one may liiuc in his owne houſe withour being enquired into, or molcited
for his conſcience. That in all Citics, where that religion hath beene exer-
ciſed vinill the ſeuenth of March, it ſhall bee continued in oncor two places
of that citie,ſo that the Catholike Churches be not taken for that vic, which
alſo ſhall bereſtorcd ro the Eccleſtaſtiques, in cafe they haue beene {urpriſed
by them , yet ſo as that they {hall nor pretend any thing for demolitions
made. That, in the Citic and Precin&ts of Pars, there ſhall bee no exerciſe
of that religion, but thole who haue houſesor reuenues there, may returne
and cnioy them, without being moleſted for matters cither pait or tocopme,
concerning their conſciences. Thar all ſhall repoſſeſſe their goods, honors,
and offices, notwithſtanding the ſentences to the contrary, and executions
of them, fance the death of Henrie. theſecond yntill now.” Thatthe Prince
of Conde, and all his followers ſhall be ſaid co haue agoodend and intention,
for the ſeruice of the King. Thar all priſoners of warre,oriultice,for mat-
ter of religion, fhall freely be ſet athbertic. That an obliuion of rhings paſt
ſhall be publiſhed, and jniuring and prouoking one another , as alſo diſpu-
tivg and contending abour religion ſhall beforbid , and that they ſhall live
as brothers, friends, and fellow Citizens. | This accord was eſtabliſhed
the twelfth of March,tothe diſcontentment of (olignie, who {ayd, their af-
faires were not in ſtate to make ſuch aduantagious conditions. T har it was
propoſed ynto him in the beginning of the-warre, to make peace with the
Edict of Ianuary, and how that they might require:more aduantage, the
conditions were worſe. Tofay that in cucry Bayliweekerthere fhall be one
aa for the exerciſcof religion, is totake away ali trom:Go D, and to giue

im a portion. Butthe common inclination of all the Nobility did force

PERIEIPITY

him to be contenr. Concerning theſe conditions the K ings letters were dif-

patched, the nineteenth of the ſarae monethit. if whichirwasſayd; T har ir
hauing pleaſed God ro permit, for ſome yeeres, thekingdometo be aficted
with feditions and tumults, raiſed for matter of religion; for which cauſc
armes were taken, with infiniteſlaughters; ſacking; of cirjes, Tuincs of Chur-
ches,and now, by continuance of thecuill , kduing:expericnce that warreis
not the proper remedie for this maladie, the King'harhrhought fitro.reurgce
his Subiectsin good peace, rrultjypthartime, andthe frairof anholy; free,
gencrall, or Nationall Councell witleftablſſhthefame.” : And heerethe Ar-
ricles,concerning religion,were added beftdes rhe othersintnarcersof Srate:

which

Ls. 7. the Comicellof Trent.

whichlezters wicrepubliſhed;and regilired-iCourr of Parliament, and pubs? x 564.

likely;proclaimead io Paris, theſcuen and twentieth ofthe ſame monerh.” 5+ g;/S00R
"ITE

JIln$was blamed by the greater partofthe Fatheriin-Councell;wha faid Frevinuns.
it was'to preferrei the things of the world:zbetore:thethings of &o D;ycatotirars.
ruine both the one:and theorher., '- For the foundationof aſtare;rwhich lis /$2555* 5

PaILIP' 3.

religion , bcing-remoucd , it is neceſſarie that theremporall ſhoutd:come:rd) —xr—.

defolation ; whereof the Edi&t made before was anoxample, whichidid not;
caule peaceand tranquillicie, as was hoped, but a' greater warrethen before
And'lome of the Prelats did dare to ſay ,'tharthe Kingand the wholeCoun:
{cl had incurred theexcommunications ofmany Decrezals,and:Bulls, forha-!
uing giuen peacctathe heretikes ; and thar there was} no-hoperthatche:af+]
faircs of that Kingdome wouldproſper , where there is a manifeſt diſobedir:
ence Vntothe Apoltolike Sea,yntill 5 King andthe'Gouncel digheauſerhems!
{clues robe abſolued from the cenſures,and did perſecute the herevikes with?
alltheirforces...: In defence whereof the Freneh-memnſaide, tharrhe rribus
lations, continually. ſupported by all France, and thomanifelt danger of che!
ruine otrhe-Kingdome did ſuffgicntly rintiifiethis'aftion aganiſtthe oppbs)
{ttioniof thoſe, who, regarding'onely theirowne' intereſts, doc nortcontidert
the nect6ucin which the King was , which is moreipotent then any awy! |
allcadyigg chacof Romulus ; that thegood. of hoping the-moſtprincipy

law of F But thele reaſons were not eltremed, anditheKing was blamed!
aboucall; becauſc hee ſaid in che proheme;rhartherime, ang the fruice of an
holy , frec,gcnerall.or Nationall Councellwonldicanferhe eſtablifhmencot
tranquillicic ; » which -rhey ſayde wasaninjurie-torhe- generall' Councell;
ro beo:pur in alternation with a Nationall,- and: thavthe Cardinals of
' Borbon/, and of Guiſe, ſhould: bee named amongtt the: Authours. of che
CounccH.to make peace, ſaying it was/ a great iniariero che. Apoltolique
FSG k of Fo | St:

The Synode beganne alſo to bee troubled: amongft 'themfehics:, for's +4. 1..... oe
ſmall cauſe, which did giue much matter of :diſcourle:!: ' Friar Perrgr Sora a: $1210 the

bout this time, and chreedayes before his death , did:diQare andfubcribea
[ecrertobre ſent ro the Pope, in which, by. way of confeſſion, hedeelared bis
opinion-concerning the points controuerred:tm Councell; and did particu
|ary exhort his Holncſle to conſent, rhar reſidence; \and the fſtirurion of
Biſhops might bee declared 10 bee deinrediuino. Theletter waxFent rotho
Popec,and Friar Ludouicus Sorus, his companion, keptacopie of itz whothin:
kFig to honour the memorie of his friend; begannto ſpread ir./ if This cauled
much ſpeach. Some weremooued with the ation ofa 'doftourofanho+
nelt life, and at the time of his death. OrhersFaidehedid it not|by his owne
motion, but at rhe inſtigationof the Arch-Biſhop of-* Brazganzz;! Simoneta la-
bourcd co get ia all the copies; which didincreaſe euriofantie;andmadehern
publiſhed the more, ſorhart chey wereinthe hands of all;+Andiir is certaine
thatthe maintainers of thefe opinions 'were-incoutaged by: rhis actidene,
The Spaniards didoften mecrein the! houſe of tho Count! of Lime) where
Granatainformed-him of the preſent and-palt occurroncesof tha'Councelb;
and, the Biſhops of Leria, and Parti beingideparted he faidey theſearg'for<

lornemen, who, like to animals,ſuffer the burrhen ts betaid vponthem;avd
Non rhemſclues

- Pope.

oy +
a ta

Ls. 7

————_—__—_—

Le

. The Hiſtory of

156 3:

Prvs 4+ - +

FERDINAND»

> —
ELIZABETH.
CHARLES 9»

Pr1LlIP 3...

WL ARS

themlclues to bee goucrned by the will and opinion of-another , who are
good for nothing bur to make anumber : adding, thar if in their reſoJurions

they proceeded by number of voyces, as hitherto they had done, little good

could bee hopedfor ; and that it wasneceſlary that matters ſhould bee hand-
led by. way-of Nations. | The Count laid, ir was neceflary to prouide for

,
o

that and niany other things , 'beginning from the renecation of the Decree:

thatthe Legates onclymay propole, and from eſtabliſhing the liberty of the:
Councell; for which things hee had ſpeciall commiſſion from the King ;
which being well ſcrled, the reſidue would beeprouided for with caſes. The
Legats and other Papalins were difpleaſed roce that the Spaniards, theiriop-
polirs; didincuer go. from the Count: and as it happeneth when oneentreth
new-in a place where arc contrarie factions, cuery one: hopeth-to-gaine
him , che Logats alſo.did ftriue to put him on the fide ofthe Prelars rhe Kings
Sabiets, who they called their well-willers ;becaufc they had intelligence
with them; that they might docagood office, and, as they iaide, vndecciue
him , and-makc him croknow the truth. They.imployed alſo hereinthe Am-
baſladour'of *Portugal,, who, hating much opportunitieroſpeake often withs
him , becauſe thoſe Kings had almoſt the ſame interelt it reſpe&t efrmar-
rers Eccleſtaſticall ;did-cunvingly ( becauſe hee was much obligedro'the
Pope) laybeforc hinv $he things which the Popes miniſters had ſuggeſted to

him, for the ſeruice ofthe Court of Rome.

- -Theaz. of Aprill,appoimed forthe Scſlion, drawipg neerc, a congrega-
tion. was held the day-before, to conſult about the prorogation of it: * . T he
Legates did propole the deferring'of itvorill the third of lune. Burt Loraine
{aid it was agreat ſcandall to all Chriſtendome ro prorognethe Scfliomſo of-
red, and neuer to hold it? which would be increalcd alſo if it were pur oft to
another day;and afterwards deferred againce?thereforc, ſeeing that note af the

things propoſed and handled concerning Reſidence, and the Sacraments of

+; Order and Matrimony were relolued,it was betternot to prefixe a centaine day,

- bur to —_— vncill cherwenticth of May, and then to reſolue ypon the time,
| <p

becauſethe-progrefic of all things would then more plaincly appeare ; and,
in themeanewhilc;\nor co looſe time, voyces may bee giucn concerning the
Articles of the abules of the Sacrament of Order , before the ende whereof
Cardinall. Morone would be returned from the Emperour, with ample reſolu-
tion, wherby the matters in controuerſic may bee compoſed, anddiligence v-
ſed to finiſh the Councell within two or three moneths. Cardinall Maaruc-
cioand ſomany of the Fathers followed that opinion , tharit preuailed, afid
it-was decreed that the day to celebrate thenextScfſion ſhouldbee pretixed
the twentieth of May. p ;

The Congregation being cnided 'Antonizs (hierehia, Biſhop of Budua,who,
in deliucring his voyce, was wont to cntertaine.the Fathers with ſome witty
conceit, and ofrentimes to addeſome merric Prophecies, which were ſpread
abroadin diucrs-parts, did then alſo deliuer one concernin g thecitic of Trent,
Hee ſaid in'{ubſtance; that Trent had been fauourcd , and elected for the
citic; in which the.gencrall concord of Chriſtendome was to bee eltabli-
ſhed, but becing made vnworthy of that honeur , by reaſon of the inho-
ſpitali.;e thereof, would ſhortly incurre a general] hatred, as the f«mira-

q bet | ric

—

Emperour , diſparched a Gentleman to-him, -with- the opinion of the

the Councell of Trent. ——— - -o

——— cre Be ——
--

ric, ot, greacer di(cords, The {eacewas couered with diucts:enigmars 3, ina 1563 :

Poccicall Prophericall forme, yer nor fo bur: that ir-was: caſi)yivaderftood,
Lorain: having obraincd the generall coalcar,, with ſo-much'repuration, F6xDaAND.

the Papalins grey jcalous ; who, conf1dering the honony/which was done i£rmamzrn

ro him the day before by thoſe who mer. hum, and pow by the;receiuing, pHonets ©:

of his opinion , thought irnot onely an indigniticto the Legates, buranen-, ——

trance alſo ro breaxke the Decree, that onely the Legates thould propoſe. |

And they ſpeaks Publiquely, that the Pope faid well, that the Cardinall was'

Head of a partic,; and that hee prolonged rhe quicke diſpatch of the:

Councell, and hindercd the journey ro-<Belonias ..'Bur Loraines, not ca-

ring what was ſaid in Trent, and intending his} negotiation with the

L1B.7,

Lorame (en-

Dotours, concerning the Articles pur into conſultation by his'Maicſtic ab agen 1

whom hee cauſed ro tell him, that, for the good procceding of the Councel, - moomcengg

it was neceſſary hee ſhould ſpeake carneltly.co Morone , and ſhew' his grear

deſire to {ee good refolurions,for theglory of God; as allo of the' delire of

all the g,»0d Fathers that hee would not remooue further from the Coun-

ccll, in regard of the fruit which they hoped for; by meanes of his vi-

Cinitic, which will kcepe eucry onein his dutic , and hinder the atremptrs

of thoſe who would tranſlate.it into another place, as/hee was aduiled that

ſome did lay plots ro doc, and thar before he parted from Iſþrace, his Maic-

ſtic would bceaflurcd that the libertie ofthe Councell, whereof hee is pro-

retour, migunt bee preſcrued. Hee ſent him a copic of the Edidt of Pacift-

cation in France , and of alcticr of. the Queene of Seorlanth, im which ſhe gaue

account of her deliaery from a great confpiracic ,.and of her reſolution

roliueand dicin the CatholiqueReligion. © Inthe end; the-Cardinall pray-

ed his Maieltic ro vic ſome meanes that there might beeno diſpute in Coun-

cell tor the precedence , berweene France and Spaine,'thatthe good procees

ding thereof mightnor bee hindered, 3 tu 153 e:4902c11o
ThetwoLegats,, thav chey-might.nor doe nothing/in.the' abſence of-

Moron? , did, the 2.4. of April, impart to the Ambaſladours the Decrees coma:

poſed conceining theabuſes of Order, thatthey mightconfider an them : and

the 29. day they gauethemtothetPrelats.:Thefirſt, of theeletionofBithops,

in which w:re expreſſed cheir qualitics contarmable-tothe ancienv Canons;

the Ambaſſadours didnor approtici, becauſe ir-{eemed to reſtraineroomuch _

the auchoritic of their. Princes:iothie/prefentation'vr:ngmination; bf thera +. ,

And they all labourtd-very.much, a{pecially che Conat of Lamazthatiz might 7;

beeamended , or rather quite 'omitred ;'arhing which! didilikewiſemuch

pleaſe the Legares. - And: theEmperours:minilters made:difficuley al{6;;in

regard ofcheir defſcigne to make an occa(iow-arilc of handlingithe ele&ion

of Cardinals, and by. conſeqtence,df the Pope * | 7 7! fit ring
Theſameday at night Cardinall Nauagzoro( having men ont;'roauoid =

Nauappers
mectings andceremonies;tharhdowould entertthe nexc y) arriued in Trens, comme »
who laid , that, atchcir departure from Rome, the Pope trad told them, that
they ſhould mgkoaigeod-andia'rizrorous ircformation;] preſeruing the au-
rhoricy, obthe Apodtoli ue Siegindich isab{vlucely neceſſary; ro keeperht
Church iri-200d formearid-grdere? CUNNTOD 0121VY 199157): mods 4m 207

no Nnnz2z | Buy

700 The Hiſtorie of L187.
1563, Butnotwith ſtanding allthis, hisHolineſſc in his [peaches to the Ambaſ-
#5 ſadours refiding with him, defired them to tcl] him what reformation their
Fzzpmany. Princes Would hauc. And his cnd was, that, their demands beeing giuen to
Einar him, they mightforbcare to preſent them to the Councel,and ſo haue means,
| + = nate by ſhewing the inuincible Fcultic in cucry particular, to pacifiethe ra-
—>- ging humourof reformation. And hee faid often ro the Ambaſſadors, thar
The Popes their Princes were decciucd if they _ a reformation would reduce the

diſcou:ic to ©

he Amb heretiques , who firſt of all made themſclues Apoſtares, and then alleadged

"_ theabules and deformations, for a pretence; thar the true cauſes which haue
moouecd the herctikes to follow their falſe teachers are not the abulcs of the
Clergie, bur of ciuill goucrnements; thar if all defc&s of the Ecclefiaſtiques
were wholy corretcd, yet they would not returne, but would inuent other
colours, to perſcucre in their obſtinacie; thar theſe abules were not in the
primiriue Church, nor in the time of the Apoſtles, and yer as many here-
riques , in proportion of the fairhfull, werethen as now ; char himfclfe did
delire, in {incerity of conſcience, that the Church might bee amended, and
the abuſcsremooued, bur ſaw plainely thatthoſe, who doe procure it, doc
not aimeatthis good marke, bur atthcir particular protit, which in cafe
they ſhould obraine, greater abuſes would ariſe, and the preſent not bee ra-
kcenaway , that the reformation is not hindered by him , but by the Princes,
and by the Prelates in Councell ; that himſelfe would make one, and thar
ycry rigorous alſo , but in cafe hee ſhould come to the concluſion , the con-
rentions betweene Princes, ſome defiring it after one manner , ſome after
another, and thoſe of the Prelates, who are no lefle oppolite , would hinder
all; that hee knoweth very well that it is ynſeemely ro attempt that which
would onely diſcoucr the common defedts and wants , and that thoſc who
deſire reformation , mooued with zeale, doe, as Saint Paullaith , vic it with-
out Chriſtian wiſedome, and nothing would beceffcted, bur as now itis
knowen that the Church hath defc&s , ſo it would appearc that they arc in-
curable, and which is worſe, men would begin ro defend and to iuſtifie them,
as lawfull vſc.

Heedidexpett, with impatience, the cnd of the negotiation of Morone;
from whom hee had aduice thatthe Emperour rooke time roanſwere, and
ſill continued in conſulcing ypon the Articles. Heethought thar all the
orders and relolutions which came out of France to Rome, and to the Coun-

plercogaine Cell , did proceede from the opinion and counſell of Loraine; and therefore,
the Gartin®" NOTTO Omitte any meancs of gaining him, the Cardinall of Ferrarabecing to
rcturneinto Italy yery thortly, with whom Loraine was to ſpcake, for many
cauſes concerning their common nephewes , hee wrote vnto him to vſc per-
ſwaſions that hee would becontent with the tranſlation of the Councell to
Bolonia ;and , that hee might bee.well informed of the affaires of Trere, hee
gauc order that Yantimiglia ſhould micete Ferrara, before his parley with Lo-
raine, and caric with him the inſtruCtions of the Legats ,: beſides that which
himſelfedid know, ; |

The moneth of May did begin with new diſcourſes of che peace of France,
For the Kings letters came to Lyraine and the French Ambaſſadaurs, to in-

forme themthercof, with commiſſion ro impart all to the Fathers of the
DAE: ---5 Coun-

———_

+ ——_ IM ns x

—

Gap cell nigher. /8geM

ters were ated rhe:

hatahy chEBSH6A bs t
A liſhncagt3 DREW, rhgonn ack kg piggy" Drtoth ey = "R—

3/08 ang diffeultic he might eporiomot iy avoths Sh
bed fa. laging dajwygc by vt gy hy romp ape

rom Buxhe added, that apiausand ſacious wr Warn Ji
[I hea agevera [Land-free Counelly yould fl: confaowon (ls
lndFde

Ze SPY 06 (oliciratipaok which, hegaverr
woe Pa COD mcaneWwhiuſc,
dy in;chac Gig to Jes; debareoonay vp.
gi: wig nf was ſenflibledill of che ir =
ER ef opinionovnrclgipe-heps caufedin mens. tbe
BRAARLI GFA, andgreaterdangerobheSmre _ er.then hee would
rerurae;to, thayextreathy.j, hee wavrchplucd a: inkcafctthe Sema Coudtfl

wauld Aggpaarmeir duty , and tharwhich|isexpetcd fromit, byfa holy
'necellazyazctprmation, to call aNationall,havi given ſacisfactt»
ano, PBANfmeR by: cominyall perſyvalions|vikd troxheFathers ad tho
Pogerto ohwuc gf chem a!remedy!agaivittheedmmonenilly char, to:offe&
this withgreater caſe, he had diſpatched che: Lord d Oyfelio:the: Catholique
Kings and tha Lord. d Allegraaro the, Pope, ant coujtranded' Biragae, that af-
tex:he had-performed his chargewinh the Fathers of the Coriveel), he hauld
paſſera tho EoapArOurxAALIY. if, by Neanes of cheſe{Princes; biec wighegaive
lggreata peachr, | i Agait in) 367 bogotrotib ton bed tw
-11z.is 661raine. that chg Pope Was, . mush diftalted with chopoace, As- wel
fog the prewdigs ob: bis aphoric,uAs hegaulc5 was cqncluded fvicbour his
knowledgss bauing made {ogreas courtiburighssa the'ware-oi Burthe King
of, Spaing pra+dilplealed anare., .. Forbecing, by, hisfouldicgs 1/3 party in 8h
warge}, 4dheviftory.cand having ſpear lo much, bee mays allwaslolk,
and has ie 7669p gene lurlga pence wichaurkimn preiudiceof
xeligion,yubich bee vaderinoketagetend and maingdine; :oſpetially: having
{9 Broan Ms thes ws be thy damagabeedidrectiueTn cheght
nernmentofghehaw Copneridit iobaingplainey:;that 50-4 08 16.
en onvty a rent ow gs:bapcplea Flanders, 2nd firengy-
F Shgmunagsin D515 SODSEPRS Ge bh theſe-rtafensL ahe: Cathabgue

nba a Fr 130996 grtae complaines:rhyhichiviexalieprincipall

hy 57 ry AritiaGageDvdre Seve :trarRens;j: a inp
a7 vakbarahe Kingaeg hieGoupae)were qounducats
Tr on ok domas will zþkaÞþp macs vecefiieyt and farefeate
Omni 49r Ou5ebGormthybadke Hlugaore,whith, as
actpoonts ay hs mee ans "aganroel
de pe ethind. Po 83 botne, gn
Rent brh<mbves.cich.
qr rl tron would; vp-
- Oh. En odather Cho uf
pre rio bla[vlichtobegamermetc
PRFarly aha be el ny noon rw ee
pollefle

>upilduq

—_

EE I — RR TCCCT_— TC
Foz The Aifloneaf"*- 'L 18.54
"$5463 polſheiled Hawede Grace." Bur; befides this principal} end of both'the Am:
PX [ines 'd Oyjel vas afterwards to 'make a propoſition fortran{latitg the
Frevatued. CHangelfromTreit'to ('opftatice, Wormes); dniburg , or ſomearker placejn
mT OmmttiyanttoteprolentiotheKitig,thar,'in regardit ought tobetcdebin:
Ce 7 ol for the Dutch; Engliſh; Feorriſh, and part of the French-rrien; and other
<A S& Nations who were'reſolure'tior'to-adhicre to ; nor'cuertafacceprihat' of
Thi; it was iryaine to contititre in chat place. - (onde wasaurhot of this de»
oatiadion who hoped bythis meaties, if ir did fuccecd , to Rtrengrhen his
party4by: vniting tro theſnrefeſts of fo many Kingdomes nb be 0
td weaken the Oatholiques 7 by"protioting difficulries'again{tthe Cour
of Tren;.1 Bur ivdid nor tHe effet.”) Fot the King of Spaine Winibg heatl]
chepropoſitionitwhichT ay by way of abficipition' that I may trot returns +
td this maner?) did perevine what the aimewas; atid madea fulfanſwere that
the Councellwasafſembled iriTrent'with all the ſokempitics rich eonfehroF
allK ings, Princes, andatthe in ſtance of Francis theFrench Kingthar the
Emperour had ſuperiority inthar City/as tn the others that were named;a6d
might-giuetuil ſecurity toall in caſethe former Safecondu@tiwere nor {off
cient; that hve could not chooſe but ator iriti theplace' whiere if was, atid
acceprthedererminations thereof. And hee aduiſcd'the Popeof all, aſuting
him sr would never. changethar reſokation, © + ET
- TheFrench men ih Trene thoughe irfupetfluous to make inſtance tothe
Fathers, as theKing had torymanded,, before rhe returne of Marone, it being
generally refolucdthataliConciliarya@ions thauld bee deferred vntillthen!
But the Emperour had not diſparched that Cardinall , and infortned Lorate
av che fametitnerhar,for divers accidetits; and becauſe the propolitions were
of the weighEahd/tfpartaners as that thoy/did deferne 'marure deliberation
and-confuleation; head notBeenc ableas yet, 16Sitre refoltte anſwvere, But
hee hoped ix ſhould bee futh, 45 romakeall menknow, that his ations were
an{werable to bis defire, to ſee the affaites:of the Counicell ſet frdiphe,for the
common berths? Therefore ;' notwithſtanding the occaſions atid'vrgent
neceſſities ofhiz other Provinces , hee refolucd'to continue his reſideneetn
Iþrac, ro favour thelibetey.6f rhe Councell, by his preſence, Varill heethad
bopero ſeo fome-good fruit: '' This delay did not pleaſe MarwnelOnibethat the
Emperour ſhould referre; 4s hee did; the negotiarionistorhe Dilitacs; and
Counſcllots:'and bork hee and thePope did doubt that theanſfwere would
bedeferredynnlt he had/heard Biragae , who astlity Were inf6ttied; 'wns'ro
propoſe thezranflation ofthe Counceb-itiro (Fermaiy! ro give FatisfaCtion'ts
atieHugonors; whereunorthe Popes reſolute hot to confent /'2s' wel
»his 'owhe inclination; aziwiregatd of the inſtafic©iniale vie him by the
- Colledgr,of Cardinals and alt rhe Contt!® ! An Medatthic hilmorct
-thoFretichanen; who demandedivefsrifiancn 2d thatflition at the Eirfic
cine; anddeſired to haye-2 Tuppty Fm" the'Cleagie; (for! ayMithr of the
Kings debes;alidyer woolditnake? thewib beadbaters of the Church)!”
©: Bur cherrathwianthivchePrenithuoricn; b red they Etild obtaroc
1nothibg ficfortheir formed ,{b Tong the Titanic id miketh<miior pitt,
-begannero'deſpaite} aridtoholdnieficinn ofthe Comet while if tchiy-
ned in 'Trew;'/Thorefort they ro6ktfibrh the Dinines Rerby the King ict

x An, | publique

\

E2 rurnez/to# ume-thoaRions oftheCouticel? "boche meant afrikeacopytes

L18.57% FF Gated Trene, rent.

—

li avillowanct, anal erhoi alllcaue:exhet to depan coil
ms; phat anl, ndggorina ature pi ce a. Dn
ines: reriined vntilbcheende ;who were araincained bytheſt Sur ira em [EE

as alſo Hugoniue,/wlnduchePapalins Fro mmrny ag
Monatiergandg aveiliin ffe ITO Tot. —_ -
Ld bminy emails :

rour'; add ret ypon

Lobo ho pen md & rHbp

| eB Ws er r,coreaderhelencrsofteQueentof Sax. es ll
} byicheCardioallof -in which ſhedeblared;,tharthee: ©
aig 4 frail herſclfet6che Councell; nigh nate of her ſilccefſobroothe! = -,e tua
Kin dome of England, promifing char in ce it did: happeiy ;4he' wouldſub-
 ic&borkthole Kingdomestorhtobedipnce of. the ApoftoliqueSta :.iT
krrers bocing read the: Cardinallmadeane ne Otarior vicaſsths: |
Queeteoocoding acicher Prefarechor Ainbaſladoutswthe-Countth, be.
caulcthey were all herctiques Wdndpromiabeid [be would never vary from:
thc nds Align -For antwere;'thankes wrregiuen, in rtiovatncobtheSy.
nodes - Soine {laughtd becauſe rhedegotiarionwas asif itbadibeenof apri-
uaceperſon,norota Ptince,andmajucl|<dthat ſhehad notſormuch asoncCa-
cholique ſubictt to ſeritk Burthewiſer ſorr did belerue this was begged;and
extorced from her; becauſe ſhee wasableto:doclike 4 Prince y- inrcgardſhee
had cucr. many Catboliquesaboucher,' 1 (bl ot, or, ) 1c
' Fhe Secrecaric of: Loyaine'wasrecurned who he ſen zo Romeztoclere
him ofthe impuratioffthar he wab/a Head of a fation;mhomahe eire-
cciucd with demonſtrationoftouc ;\and ſtcrned. to belttue his
atid wroreto' rhe Cardinall chithe wvascomtentthat ers

ſhould be'omitced,;rhedodteinesobOrctcrand Refidencenve-ſpoktn ofgbur
thereformarion onely reared on! Lordvie, imp arring this] tas
that order mightde tobrpi T— EE PTY er

wherewithihec was diſtafted.ravithe bddeen indciedly ePaper fed
ioynig this withthoaduice whizhocame/yncd hin pritaryMHererier, dj decking
with theEmperobr ofthclibdrois ofclie Gounchll;{ayd thir bimdeifeardebs
French Ambaſſaioar tid hinderivozoredicen ortiers he complainedivporr
cuerpoceation rwaltwrich whony bochabenhuthe Ceuncellhadnohbgvricy
and that not onely choralolurignefeurdplin aednelinadens Gem

i

but chav/the Fathers, cd xſþociiiycthoGatthiial dſahwols;nath& himſelf
were! not; 28know.vhapway commaynded by wheePope/ pra
as © ght:rdhformeozharfeluorobbewvill of this-Hi _ es

a ocmaay-Cudvie ſtiond bee diparhic fm

alic Legyts for crenpllaiboecatrciide,: oo
fo chi Gaoutalngg ud eicconkitnulnbe —
teen colth hom 'thericer The Npalinoblaitidd) herear

hehe amen

Mn nA orer orp all rſarivfactiom;bcvirig catied chemeevdayic

12119 conſultation,

4
ee ee. — —— — —— A

—RIR—”O£  .mkkblng —=—« Ia
15635 conſalratioo, joreds of bajjioniog) che Congegarians , hncaulo (Merge had;
[Nee wetiecanths cit Thea within ghodayenylitebVparcic ltdoda good)?

Pty $44 4471  y 4 ; : . , r |
_ Fianwmenylieatubolt ſÞcikirig-one:waerd, Sralroarfvardscnuibgino amplements;.
——! patred:cipb from aagkbtrcuchotunalkingofthebubeſſoarnuyl] «1, |;
Crean The ProctorgditheFrengh Prelats, whazomatnediinohe Kipgdetne;be-!

| Puri 43

vorodingarriiod in They 7 ET IIA . ot
Lenfaihpes'!Tnitracbily Od dd ;bich Sinpratordfuling, Lavfecrcplicdy thatthey:
nn hag dethanded Nd cczapt:btreautorbry..digabknowledge this Lo
= gabforlidges,ond- vr tehe Jifhculty thouldbepropo:-
{ecitb[WorincolH: 1Elis,made atzet thejrip@poleto, cxpeftMprone,:
aodappmenicda Cangrogarion c fourteeorhofMayhohandlethe abu-,
The Cardi ſcxotQoin Wire Eirenegiting tis yodopaducerningube fri poin(which
nile to®, afeafiartss ues chltraivdy; for the eautex\ybibh: ſhall bed relabodbereafees),
hisſultraze: oaakocar dere ofthe dbulesconcurririg in clavmartersi1 And; that heeonight
mdrtftochyimijghagainfithe difordors bf: Rumebioftegain with Fraxce; nok
ſpdrſn2 theKing;b&tcaddeonintd chafbrcardete far abarcheidififibirion of:

t

Adnoficeroboie:Kingdoqewhich onglicootbelongirg the Chaprots; was
dijdbd beewernd Pape /uwn;,) arid King twaris:carccly forhbcaring) today, as
chepteyas diovict[amonglt Hidcers;:C1hlb:difliked charthe King and:Prin-
cosdathtbenominirion of Prctarwres, land{ehanGerdinalsdid poſici Biſbop-
rigosjandblamtd alfo-chovaccord latelymade bythe King wirththe Hlygo-
1a;$ Bair; ldauing France, heb fayd thiib/ſReme'way the founcaine whenge all
difpcBorggid ifinc;. thatnd: Cardinal was withour a.Biſbopricke,yea,with-
outibiazy;thovy focuct thoſe! cbargeswereuneotnpatible; chat the thuention
of C:mmendae:, Vnions for life, adminiſtrations; by whithjagainſtali lawy mar
oyBtnehcamograch id ancperiboaloncrmally;;wihappearance tht hee
had odpnoy,wasanotkingofthoMarticof Goin:. Heoooftcn al
leadydtbrhac pliceotSainc Baut:;Thkeheedy oferrours:, far God 5s not mockeid; and
onofaltreape iond/yrbatmibicb herhatb ford: 2: (hich ſpakemwuch againftdilpen-
fihis obyayhiouhe flirengt botalliawerisrakonaway: t+allo agginſt.ma-
nxy.xvao enahddyich fachelaquoncs, thes hee. (pent+he whole Congre-
gation. dis:difcouto was nbraett] takemby bc Paphline 1: Shmorctodid 0
pbnly creagoTeidh lbori Becdars 2d appodcihiny, bod Aidbheſpakeiihonbe Lu
thaidns; nd Gotfgrahi, chad boo rececnat aff ebeiriopinidnd whertavich Lo:
rainbravthbch bill dediatidronplaiied rowbd:Popen 146-the:Qonpriger
nao fbilonimgoporhioghm ordinary ,vowlartby.df meviatic; was ſpoken;
cxoeptonenyotltirolaectbeflanierics, dbbquelykicd;; bytholenihohbedivn>
deertentbinſtiberityſancqutepreheodiddy Laine: yon on ef bf -
0.11 2 nikki cation Gatditiallilornc had hindliparch, inwricing fromk 5hd
(peaks ſike 2 [8 zid vob gencratbrermeny[chavbeckuoukddetendthagiuhatigiect
Cutcran rhdHopraanicradikcciboeddoword;thattroweuld omaineato put;

andpalſc ofbtrirtr; qhic the tebmilitioviehbc@onnalbeo;Bolewewasnot
tbo rithouedondſont obthekingdbidines and Sport sharfanbf
cofoonion:;hevonldont reloluertidfiogo baked propatedritinDinty]

bcingidone/onzherfilddinJunibutdIgntT machmiaticeof sifcourbrirfers

mani;h tint bot: wo ldbtcd Jaucviedy) In TT, 2 ary oh
belatnorenttiowcghedoermicet lo:931{ Dela onyary's pes

CoN81Wnod cuery

Ls. = E the Councell of Trent. | 705

tl

eucry one might propoſe: defiring they would preſently | begin to handlethe 1563. |
Articles exhibircd by him and Frantz. Concerning chis negotiation of the j5——
Cardinall, and of che anſwere made; I haue related whar I-haue found regi- FaxDmMuaSD

mom —

ſtredin publike monuments; burl oughrnot ro vmir thefame, then diuul- z:mwnrs,
ed in Trent, and belecued by men of the greatelt vnderſtanding, that the Dang rhe
Cardinall had treated with rhe Emperour, and with his ſonne, King of the -w—'
omans, more ſecret marters, and ſhewed them, thar in reſpett of the divers Thefecre nes

Otiation Oo

crids of Princesand Prelars, and of thcir diuers and important intereſts, the ——
which were contrary, it was impoſſible the Councell ſhould hauc ſuch an the Emperor.
end as ſome of them did deſire. Hee told them, thar, in the matter of the
Chalice, marriage of Pricſts, andof the vulgar tongue, thipgs deſired by his
Maicſtic and the French King, neither the King of Spaine, nor any
Princcot Italie would cucr conſent; that, in matter of reformation, cuery
forr of perſons would remaine in their preſent ſtate, and reforme others;
whenceit commeth that cucry onedemanderh reformation, and yet, when
any Arciclethercof is propoſed, more doe oppole then fauourir ; that cuc-
ry one thinketh of himſclfc onely, and doth not conſider the reſpetts of an-
other , that cucry one would haucthe Pope a miniſter of his deſignes, nor
thinking whether others will remainc offended for it ; for whom iris neither
honeſt, nor profitable, to fauourone with the diſſeruice of another; thar c-
uery one would haue the glory, to procure the reformation ; and yet per-
ſcucre intheabules, laying the burthen vpon the Pope onely. The Cardi-
nall diſcoutſedallo, thar, Fr the reformation of the Pope himſcltz,he would
not{ay what the minde of his holineſſe was ;but for that which neither doth
nor cantouch him, how canany one perſwade himſelfe that hee would nor
condeſcend , bur that hee knoweth that which is vynknowne to others , be-
caulc the reſpeCts of all are referred vnto him algne. Hee ſaide moreoucr,
that the experience of thele fifreene moneths ſince the openipg ofthe Coun-
cell, hath ſhewed, that the prerenſions are multiplied, and thediucrſitic of
opinions increaſed, and doe ſtil] proccede forward to the height; that, in
_ caſe ir ſhould continue long , ſome notable {candall muſt neceffarily hap-

pen, ; Hee told him of the icalouſte which did poſleſſe the Princes of Ger-
manie,and the Hugonors of France,and concluded = ſceing ir was plaine thar
the Councell could doe no good,it was expedient re finilh irin the beſt man.
ner it was poſſible, It was ſayd that thoſe Princes wereperſwaded that they
could neuer obraine any thing that was good by mcancs of-the Councell,
and cherefore thought it better co bury it with honour , and thar they gauc
their word to that Cardinall ro-vſe conniuencic heereafter , and notrto take
itil] :frhe Councell were ended. And heethat ſhall obſeruc what cndethe Fhognen
Councecllhad, andrthat thoſe Princes had no fatisfation in any of their de- couniuc kere-
mands , will caſily belecuc that the fame was true; bur confidefng , on An
the other (ide, that theinſtances of the Emperours miniſters did not ceaſe
after this negotiation, hce will chinke it a vaine rumour. Bur to a-
uoyde both theabſurdiries, one may belecue that thoſe Princes did then
lay hope aſide, and rcfoluc nor to oppoſe the ending of the Councell ;

yet ſo, as that they helde ir not honourable to make a ſudden _
ur

-

Fan”

Lin.7"

= OC —

- 706 The Hiptorie of

1563  butto remit their inſtances by degrees, that they might not publiſh their
{>> wantct iudgement, for concciuing hope of good by.that meanes,, and for
Ezzomane--not belecuipg the, obſeruation of Saint Gregory Nagyaneen, who teſtifieth;
Euraezre. that contentions hauc alwayes been increafed by the Epiſcopall afſemblics;
pAAnkn%9- - The tructh of this particular] put inthe numberotf thoſe things, the
AAAS ' knowledge whereof I cannot attaine vnto. But it 1s certaine

| that the cataſtrophe, of the Councell , which it was
thought could nor-poſhiblic hauc a quiet con- -
cluſton, had beginning in +
this time.

(*)

—— ; I — —
* CS DP IR”
| ilS
r
4 : THE
ÞF -
1
a _ "ET 242 © ei 4 kv  W—_ —_ —
CY T——"—_— —_ tart id F'vy
Sf
!
; ( i FF
l 1
) IP FP
# \ S376 "
# I
. [1 "IN
3,131 wy Ci '
s i ; bu] ” 1 n 7 Sf } j
. - # Y }
BITE ' 4 ea ot --
4 3.3! 4 »& - f l
'# 1 ,
b 7 _—

XUM

I;563
ff a
> + Pivs 4. |
MA EptbDinanD,
EL1zZAB2TH.
CHARLES 9,
PaziiP 2.

ANSL,

+4
-

Z
bi

i 1 4 ' " wy” —_— ff, "Cf yY | F
| adit $5 18 33 ,DIN:1 EIT PUTGUE 2114
p 1 fx |
, | ; ho 133 4 IT ,;
1 11D 0 11. 941 GI DILQH! -- | a
.: & | E | |
Wo | 5 ; | "\(M] F# 0:13 ev
; | ; - n 4 | [ X ”
© ""'TRE.COYNCGELL QF.
161 3 2 2.500 Ih. ld | | $0 $47
d.5.

| 17, 1:7 BrRiE N Tail

\
>

I Heſcucntcenth of May , Cardinall Morgye re-

*ZEN Juurncd to Trent: from: his Legation in Jſpruc ;
7, and the Legates preſently beganne to-rreat a-

x mongſt chemſelttes about the certaine day of

>= => the: Selſton, becauſe the rwentieth was necre

*%,—"—( when it was tq bee determined: And, becauſe

3-7 they knew notwhe.n the matters would bee in

ERC order; in the Congregationof the nineteenth

IX 2M] day , a prorogation was made-vntill che tenth

= of [ync , todeterminethen the prefixed time.

In that Congregation twonotavlethingsdid happen. Onewas the conten-  _

tion ; whether irdid belong tothe Legates,ortothe Councell, co determine abou Sos.

whether the Proctors of the Biſhops ought to beadmitted in Congregation, 1272.0

begunne (as we have faid:) by Lanſac. "The French Prelates did maintaine,

that the Legates had noother prerogatiuebur to berhe firſt , and had no au-

thority , asthey were ſeparated from the Fathers of the Councell;allcadg-

ing the Councellof Baſil, and other monuments of antiquity, Onthe o-

ther ſide, it was ſaid, thatthe Couhcell could nor bee lawfull, excepr it were

called by the Pope, | and that it belongeth to. him onely roderermine who

may aſſiſt and hauc voyceinit; and thattogiuethis power tothe Councell,

would beto giuc it authority ro generate it{clte. Aftcrſome contention, the

matterdid remaine vndecided. Jngiuing of voyces concerning rheabules of
Order another queſtionſucceeded. For the Biſhop of Philodelphia made\a great
and a long exclamation, that Cardinals haue Biſhopriques without maintai-
ning ſo much asa Suffragan, which was much derided by many, as if the
Biſhop, being bucricular, had ſpoken for the intereſt of himſelfe,andof ſuch

as he was. | The Conde
of Luna is re-

In the Congregation of the 21.of May the Count of Luna was recciued, poten yy

forty daycs after his arciuall, inregard of che difficulties for precedence with Congregati
| | the

PR I" TO IO _

708 The Fiiftorte of '* L 1n.76-
$63: theFrench Ambaſſadougs. Iatchemeanc while, , many conſuleations were

><" held ro compoſerthem;, bur the French would by no meanesyecld that hee
VS 4+

txzomaro ſhould hauc any place but below, and after them.  Whereupon he thought
j79\5zra, to ſtand on his feet inthe midlt of the place anongſt the Emperors Ambal-

-)

En41#5 9: {:Jours ( who hadorder fromtheit Mi aſterro ac ny þim) andrto fi nd
—— by them-vntill hee had Eniſhedhis oration, 20d theti to recurne preſcntlyto
his houfe.- Fur thisſcertelfdifiefourabforthe ing. - Thereforchec h-

bourcd to perſwade the French nor to enter in Congregation that day ;

whereunto they not conſcnting, be hops ro force them toit, by making
ſome Spanith Prelat demaund, that Secular Ambaſſadours mightnot aſhſtin

the Congregationsgbegaulgth 1epir — inthe antjent Coun-
cels3 ws, 2 0 red onld offgngall Princes, ke Purpoled to vic
meanes that ſome Prelats ſhould prope ÞY we Ye ſome things, at
which icgyduld nothe Sha! that the French Afmnba Joſs ſhould bee

preſent; as might be,the prejudices, whielymightcome to. Chriſtendome by
the capitulations made withthi Fiugonots ; orlomeſuch thing. Thus, com-
ming to the cares of the Cardin! of Loraine,, put another courſe in his head;
and, conſulting with the other 'French-men,they reſolued not toconteſt any
more, if'a place weregiven hirg'a part out of the order of the Ambaſſadours.
Therefore the Count, cnrriniyiinro the Congregation the day before menti-
lis p:orcta- Oned,and comming tothe p:laceaſsighed for him, which wasin the midi(t of
"ee theaſſembly ouer againſt rneLegares,, hepreſented the Mandat of his King;
whichbeing read by the Secreraric, heeimmediatly proteſted, that, howſoc-
uer, in that and alt other places; he ought ro be nexrafter che Emperors Am-
baſſadours, / yer becauſe rharphace ;* theicaule which was handled , and the
timedid nor comporc thatthe courſe ofdiuine matters, and of the publique
welfare ſhould behindred by hamane contentions, - he did recciue the place
giuen him, butproreſting that-his modeſty, and the reſpect hee had norts
hinder the progrefie of rhe Councell ought norto be prejudicial rothedig-
nity and rightof HhisPrince,/Phitp , rhe Catholike King, norof hispoſteri-
ty , burtbatthey remaineintire,ſo that they may alwayes make yſe of them,
as if his due place had now beene giuen vnto him ; requiring that his pro-
reſtation might bewrirten inthe Attes, and that theymay notbe publiſhed
without it, and a copy thereof giuen vnto him. After this the Freach Am-
baſladors didproxelt alſo,thatifthey ſhould ſer in any other place: then next
to the Ambaſſadors'otthe Emperour, and beforethe Ambaſſadors of other
Kings,which their Predeceſſorshaue alwaycs held,and namely inthe Cgun-
cell of (onſtente;and the Lateran, they ſhould bee wronged, and if the new
place in which the Ambaſladorof his Catholike Maicttic did ſet, ſhould
bring any preiudiceto them , or to the Orators, the Fathers of the Counccll,
repreſenting the Church yniverſall , ſhould reduce them to the ancient or-
der, orgiue themtheEuangelicalladmonition. Bur the Fathers holding their
peace,and the Emperors Ambaſſadours ſaying nothing , whoſe intereſt is
common with thoſe of France, becauſethey ſir next vnto them, and fo pre-
ſcructheancient poſlelsion of their King, the French Ambaſſadours in re-
gardof the amity and alliance berweenethe Catholike and moſt Chriſtian
Kings, demanded nothing bur chat the: Fathers of the Councell would de-
| clarc

Lis.8, the ('ouncell of Trent. 709

clare that the Count his fat could not preiudice the ancient prerogatiue and 1563

perpetuall poſſeſſion of his melt Chriſtian Maieſtie, and regilter this in the Oey

Actcs. ; Aa
The Oration was made, in the name of the Count, by Petrus Fontidonixe, $:oumg

a Diuine; who ſaid in ſubltance. Thar, the cnd of the Councell drawin N_Y

ncere, his Catholike Maieſtic had ſenrthar Ambaſſadour, to ſhew himſclfe —w—

readie todoe for it that which Martianw the Emperour did in the Councell >

of Chalcedon, thar is, to maintaineand defend the trucrh, declared by the -/

node, to pacifie thetumulrs, and ro conduct toan happic endethar Councel

which his Father, Charles the fifth, Emperourhath proteedin its birth and

growth, for cthecauſc whereof hec hath made molt difficult and dangerous -

warres, and which his Vacle, the Emperour Ferdinand docth maintaine, that

his King hath omitted no office of a Catholike Prince, tharitmightbe called

and celebrated; thathe hath ſent the Prelats of Spaine, and moſt Icarned Do-

Qors beſides ; that hee hath preſcrued religion in Spaine; that he hath hin-

dered the entranceof herelic at allthe allen of the Pirenies, nor ſuffered

itto paſſe tothe bidies, whither ithath labourcd to penctrate, to infe&t the

rootes of Chriſtianitie, ſpringing in that new world ; that, by meanes of

chat King, faichand puritic otdorinedocth flouriſh in that kingdome, ſo

that the holy mother che Church, when ſheeſecth other Prouinces infected

with crrours,taketh great conſolation, that Spaineis the holy anchor for re-

fuge of all her calamities. Hee added, would roGoDÞ that other Catholike

Princes and Chriſtian common-wealthes would imitatethe ſeueritie of thac

King, in bridlingthe Heretikes, that the Church mighrbee dceliucred from

ſo many milcries, and the Fathers of Trent from the care of celebrating rhe

Counceall ; thathis King maried with Mary, Queene of England,for no other

endethentoreduce that Iſland to thetrue religion. Hee repeated the late

aſſiſtanceſent to the King of France, adding, that, by the yertue of his Soul-

diers, though but ftew,ſcnt for defenceof religion, rhe viRoric inclined to the

Catholikepartic. Hee aide the King defired theeltabliſhment ofthe do-

Arine of religion and the reformation of manners. Hee commended the

Fathers,becauſe in the handling of theſe rwo,they would nor ſeparate the one =

from the other, howſocuergreat inſtance was madeyntothem tocauſethem

to omir the doCtrine,and proceed in the reformation only. He ſaid the Kings

defire was they ſhould examine wellche petition, more pious then circum-

ſpc&, of thoſe, whoſay that ſome thing ought to bee grauntedts the prote-

ſtants, that, being overcome with kindacfle, they mayrerurnetotheboſome

of the Church ; laying, tharthey haue to doe with perſons, whocannotbee

bowed neither with benefits nor with pittic. Heeethorred che Fathers, ig

the Kings name, to proccede it ſuch fort, asto ſhew the) hauca greater care

of che Maieftic of the Church, then of the defires ofrhoſerhat wander, and

chatche Church hath alwayeS'vſcd this grauitic and conſtancicinrep eſling

the boldriefſe of her. encmics, notrogrant them fo*tiuch' as thar which it

honeſtly might. He faid; the King defired thar ſuperfludus queſtions might

be omitted ;and concluded, Hat heFarhersbein | We ' rodoe ſo FOOC

a wotke, asto cut&thedifcaſeswhitch ice Chrifien ome, if this were not

4a

_—

feed, poſteritiewould blamehonebur'them, and WOddls, RELAY
By O G0 le,

gr_—_—

710

' The Hiſtory of | L1s.'8,

1563

ble, they 1 would notalſo bec willing ro apply the remedic. Hee praiſed the

>> yertucs of the Ambaſfadour, and thegloric of his houſe ; and ſo ended. An-

Pivs 4-

Frzomane. ſyycreyas made,inthename of the Synode, thar, in theirgricfe for the com-

ELIZABETH

CHARLES. 9.

PaiLIP 2.

The anſwere

The French-
men 1n Rome
complame of
the Cardiaall
of Lorarme.

The ſtate of
religionin
Premont.

0:0

pP* <4 \ rc WP EICEISEIENE ET OE. -S ny
France, that co doe [o, would turncto the ſeruice of theChurch,, |

mon miſerics, they recciucd conſolation, hearing the pictic of the Catholike

K. related, and,aboucall,that his promiſeto defend rhe Decrees ofthe Coun-

cell was moſt acceptable;which the Emperor,and other Chriſtian Kings and
Princes being willing to docallo, the Synod was ſtirred vp to take care that

heractions may beanſwerabletotheirdefares,as it hath donealready,both by

cheir own inclinationand by the exhorration of the Pope,alwaics imploying

chemlſelues in the emendation of maners,and intheexplication of the Catho-

like doctrine;thatit gauethe King many thanks,as for his ſingular affection

cowards religion,and good will towards the Synod, ſofor ſending ſuchan 0-

rato, from whom they did hopefor honour and aſliſtance. i
* TheOrationdiſpleaſed all the Ambaſſadours, becauſe it was a manifeſt

reprehenſion of all Princes, for not imitating the Catholike King ; and they

complained thercof to the Count, who anſwered, that thoſe wordes did as

much diſpleaſc him, yea that he gaueorder to the Doctortoleaue them our,

and not to ſpcake them by any meanes, and that he would be ſenfible of his

diſobedience. The French-men in Rome blamed much thoſe in Trex, for

conſenting to the place giuen tothe Spaniſh Ambaſſador, They ſaide thar

Loraine, for his owne intereſts, and togratific the Catholike K ing had done
this great preiudice tothe Crowne of France, as alſo becauſe hee had counſcl-

Icd the Pope not tograntthe King rhealicnation of 1900090. crownes of
Ecclefiaſticallgoods,as he demanded. They addcd that in all things he ay-
med only at his owncintereſts, and therefore becaulc neither he, nor his bro-
ther, did manage the money, he did nor care though the King ſhould receiue
none artall, Bur che difference for precedence was notas yet well ended.For
howlocuer there was a place found for che Spaniſh Ambaſſadour in the
congregations, the ſame could nor bee giuen him in the Seſſions. Where-
Yoon the Legates wrote tothe Pope, rohauc order how to goucrne them+

clues.

Juke, was forced to belccuc that which hee was vicd to lay of the affaires of

* o This

< i
=
-
P

us

DO.

_— —”

3548. ] the Caoncilnf Trent. Ti

»hTbiz Cartlinallreceiacdanfithdtion:inabe-ſame-placoy from the Biſhop 156;

of: #/ratiwiglia, who vectio exprefly roinformehiny(as hath beene {aid<before) IAN

ef thcatfaircs ofthe Councell; andhow ro treats withLoaine, '| Borki/the Faxontans,

Carditials mer in Mtithefourcand owturictirof May.” Ferrarabauingtela- Ermmmy

tgd: theftate of Francegand afthcirifamilicp!1ncerhe dearh'o6f the. Duke of $*2*tn*s-

Guiſe,and ofthe; Prionpdxhontd |hinyroaSuddar revurne, ſhowing what CA

necefliticrhefamily hadkoPhis prefoncy. 1) Heetold him, tharyfincethepeace Ei ur; wa

was made with the Haggwts;therefvrmationiwould norproducerhoſegood onto

effects in Frabceas wabelecued, Burhe found (which hee could not haue 2*

belccticdbefore)ithaviheehad/a-grear impreſſion; , char his honour did re-

quite thavhefhould:abandon the negotiation; -'- Lorainecowplained that

Moree; tutncd fromghe Emperoury had-athuaigted hinv with no-part of

his buſmefe; laying rhat hee had beeneadaited ofall:by his Maieſtic. Hee

Aid chat the CatholiqueKing was wellynired wichrho Emperoar, and that

there was good intelligence betweene the Count of Luna,, and him. In the

mattce of xefidence, heefaid it wasneceſſary.irfhould bee declared, andthar |

thiswasthcapiniogof'the Emperour;and of almoſt all the'prelates,” ex-

cept ſorncforTraliang, and: char the declaration-was Sentimada; thar 'the

Popemigatnacdipence; ſo thatthelabourotthe Cardinallof Ferrara! ditl

py the-Cardinall.of Zoraine returning to: Trent; did diuulge,
Cardinallof Ferrarahadperſwaded hitm;/ in the name'of the-Pope =

and:Legards} tHarrtietefidence might bee determined withapenall.Decrce,

without dablatinþ;tharivisde inre-arainop whcrounto hee ſaichhee would ne-

uerafſend, io Iiw 2007 11 orgy 01/9905 190 Whounog 20336 271933671; 0

- Bur Qardinal:Motone;'to pacific Loraine-beforaheeenmred ſoriouſlyints ,qgcir wv.

the affaires oftho Gdilncell, knowing itwas ntceſliry to: cyake thew! bf re- fron mos,

ferring all niicters und chim, went to viſirerhinr; poheifically, with the **"*.!

Grofſc before; accompanied wichithany Prelates'jand Atter-tompletneins ©,

roldhimrhachisdelitewyhcſfiolild.gme countellp and 'commaundy pd -

proecedr,cas2ifheeiieorn'one of tht Legaresy that the! Popediddefirea'ro-

frmarignjamdhadiſerage; (Avciclesvery feacrey) and:riwers;tliari thiol

hich wc meprid Erppetours and French Ambaſſadois;(lieuld

bapodpaſtddlſo;itquingthole which belong rotheCourob Rome; which

his Holink(ſbwilltcodmehimiclfegfor rhe vpholding of cheauthoriegjof the

* — I —-_— OT end ts ——.—_

Apoſtaliaq Sex/ — fting chacMorone bab# purpoſe thay

ſotnebs evponifim, eSpamaridsmifltidt him, artſiwe-
bed, A eegng alrparewactoohednic for his ftreagth/ who was
nothblbmiddmordtherl w give hisyoyoeatan.Archbiſkop,; that hewwn-
meidttdwiicalobftiis Holiacſotoriforme other Chutthes, 'and/3efired

| rÞ£6fpeds bupth
kf d5P bin
1:.2boo:.
welte nA bag 3

2:7 1otdbive
9162] 2101

ded hae pre bs +: dear ryan wr
teedindidt zftoinT od0to lum 387g 6 bolicr aid 309cachs$ al TO 9M"3
wad ©» ws Ooo py There

_—_ a Fbe Hiitoryaf) > L128

1563 -Thtrefcllour anaccidenr which wasfafficicnbro'ronfound: and dilide
{> the Popilh Prelatcs amongſt chemſclues-: For adaice came to Trent that
Fzoman»y. Cardinals ſhould bc createdthe nextEmberweeke;:anda liſt of thoſe -who
Enazre Were in Rome was ſent. The pretendants;'who: were manie; were'ill' fariſc
Cuan1359- fied, and, as paſſionate men yicto doc;:did not conraine cthemfelues with-
A inſuch bounds, bur that their words did fhew thcir: affections, and that

they were very ſenſible of-ir. In particular, Marcus Antonius Column,
Archbiſhop of Taranto, and Alexander Sforza Bilkop of Parma, (who, in te-
gard ofthegrear owcroftheirfamilics: in Court, had more hope then 0-
thers.) werenotcd to hauc ſaid, that they would bold: intelligence with Lo-
raine; which Simonets belecuing, did aduilc.it.to. Rome : wherewith they
wereboth much offended, and ſpake yery-feclingly'of it:! .. The diſtaftes
did continuecertaine daycs: but no promotion of' Cardinals beeing made,
and ſatisfaction becing giuen to theſcbiſhops, all: things were finally well
accommodated. - 1000. 2:11 2119990709 Sofioiti>7n! 20 ES

_  Aﬀeer thistjime Loyaive began to remit-his* rigor. For France, becing
:-41c dob NOW, by obſcruation of things paſt, affurcd; that nothing fir for the ſeruice
romrn- ofthat kingdome couldpoſlibly bec obtaincd in Trent, and ſeeing allo thar

the peace wasaccommodarcd with great facilitie, ſo that there was hope ro
reltorcabſolute obedience ro:the King, without medling with :Religion,
and perhaps becing informed by the Emperout of the treatic with Morone,
as alſo in regardof the perſwaſions which the Pope vied to the Queenemo-
cher by his Nancio, did rcſolucnot tolabouranymore, with fuch: affection,
in matcers of the Councell, butrather to gaine the good will of his Holi-
neſle,; and ifany gaod»came: from:TJrenr, to receiuetie; and :onely to. rake
The Queene CArethat nothing ſhould be done to their preiudice. Therefore the: Queene
morher wti= (wrote to Rome, aid offered the-Pope to:ioyne with bimvto finiſh the Counz

x teth ro the - Ape : ORR
n . rope andthe cell quickly, to curbe; Loyains;/arid rhe French Pridkazrgs, that they may. not
4 Loraie, impugne}his authoritic, and to cauſe! allahe-Fiygoner: Souldicrs| ro:depart
| from Anignion, and thetcrritorie thereof;.; Shee;wwrate likewiſe to. the Car-
dinall of Loraine, that the affaites of Frarice:did progeede: extcedingly well,
I and that to giue them perfeion, nothing wantcafbur: bis:preſence, where
L J | beeing able ro doemoregoad theniin Trent, in-which::place; he had found
by experience that no proficablerhingeag beedgne;hboethould'vicimeancs
coquitte himſelfe of thoſe affaires, and returneafloanc 4s was poflible,ſeck-
ing to giuc the Pope all ſatisfatition, and4oi make: Him:his friend and;:for
matters of che councell,not tothinkcanshem;mote thenthis conſcience and
honour did compell him. :::Sbec added yi;thar; hee!{bould-bauc:thic ſame
authgritic in tha kingdome as beg had befafp,s i and ihereforeſhoild haſten
his reggrae. 2. nn oct Dinod) 2qofliff od: 1nd3 093635908 bluow 26
_ © The Qyeeneslexters cameroRomaant Trent initheehd of May!; which,
as thoywere very: gratefull tro-thePope} abd made hignhdlecuc he (bould ee
a good end ofgheqGCouncel, ſoap otheatecaidontdidaruch difpletſchimn For,

rceleiatical in,France, conſulmrion becing bad bow#e payithe debrs obthe e,4be
int axce OFFISSor alicningahc yalew-afopebundtodr cranes nt Eedefir
ns imma goods; wabcontizmed by tbhecKings'Edic; aod ſeri

rence of the Parlament. This raiſeda great tumult ofthe ejptis Sanlath

2720 T £ 000

—

"4H
-
« wi  ;

—— i at

Iav.s.! the ouncell of Trent. | 71

theik priutledges and immunities, were violated; and rhat ſacred things could 7 $63
pdtbcealienod for any cauſe whatfoeuer , withour he author} 'E acc Fs LY
ofthe Pope, To pacific which noiſe, the Amballadourdeſired his HolineſſeFrnoinans, | £2
te giuc his\conſenr, allcadging, that the King'was exhauſted by the aft Elma:
wartes, deleigning to puchis atfaires in order; that hee may beginne; as his $52 /
purpolecucy as {incethe making of the peace; to reunireall the Kingdome —v—
m'the Catholique religion; and, charhce might'be able ro force whoſoe-
uer (hould appole, he meant toimpolea {i ubſilie, and to cauſe the Clergiero
coatributetheir partallo; whereunto theChurch was ſo! much more bound
then others, by how' much her intereſts were: more in queſtion; that, all
beeing conlidered, nothing was found robee morecaſiethen to ſupply that
neceſlity, with the alichation of ſome' fery Ecclefiaſticall reuctines ; in
hedelired the confenrof his HolinefTe: |

\ The Popeanſwered;thatthe demand was painted foorth witha faire pre» Whichma-
rence of defending che Church, bur was the onely way to tuine it, for the iy.”
auoiding whercof, his ſccurelt courſe was not to conſent toit. And howſo-
cucr. ſonic might chinkechac che French would procecd to execution-with-
guthim; yet he was of opinionthatleaue wouldnort haue beene demanded,
incaſc they.could hauc found buycrs without it, thinking that none' would
daroto aducnture their money, tearing (as the affaires of the world arc vn-
cettaine) atiume might come in which the Eccle liaſtiques would reſume
their repts, and not reſtore the price. Therefore, hauing propoſed the bu-

rr > con

oO —_—

"_ERSS | baſſadows: |
rhetopet thi -
For there {6 "2!

\

PAT 5 HOES NE IELIR
-
AY IS. oo ron -

CRT TT" Lis:8!

1563 found,har they ſhould begihen to all owtherighridejeucn rthe AnbaC
EN. ſadour of Florence allo, whoyasthe lali; and thento thoſeon the lofec- Fhe
rzzoÞ8a8D. French, was NOT content With this; and ſaid, charthe Pope had promiſed him
Eros. place, and that the Spaniardcither ſhouldnor come, orſhould ſtandyns
CASES, der him; and would depart from Rome, ih this were:nor perfarmed, Atid ir
\—V> plealed the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour as little :: whereupon the Pope ſerw+Hirm

word that he was reſoluteto giuethe Feencli Ambatiadonr his place.) The
Spaniardanlwered,that,if the Pope werexclolutero.doe hin) thar-gyieuance,
hce.would read-a writing to him. The Cardiuals, whorreqted with hin HP
the Popes name, {hewed him-it was not good to doelo,betore his Holineſſe
had ſecne it, leſt, nor being knowen before ſome jnconuenicnce'might ariſe,
The Ambaſſadourwas vawilling to give it, |but,. imrhe'end; was/ content.

The Proteſis- \hich the Pope hauing read, was veryiangry at thefo1me of words; which'
Spit am-: he ſaid were impertinent, - Binally;he was froughtintorhe Popes Chamber
whe "with. fqure witneſſes, whetchorcad his proteſtation, on his knees;'which:

_ didconraine. Thatzhe Kipg of Spaine ongbt to predade che» Breach King;

_ 1n;regard of theantiquity,powerand greatnctlc of Spaine, and: of the mul-

titude of; his other Kingdomes, by. which he is che:greareſt and oſt potent?

King of the world; becauſe the Catholike faith, and Chutchof >Rome;haue

cucr becne defended, and prefered inhisſtates; chat; if his Holineſle' wild

declare, or hath declared; in wards or writing; in fauout of France, thegtie-

Uancc and inultice was norarious. Thentore he; in the name of hisKin o;

docth contradi& alldeclaration *of-precedeiice, or (eyualicy,: iwfaubur of

France, as frulkrare and Y id,.agaiuſihonprorious. right of his /Cath6lique
Maieltie; and, if. it hach,.beenemade, there 56/a nuliicy init;being doneviths
ourknowledge of the cuſs; 4ud cirationof theparty, and thavhisHeolineſe

doing this, will. becauſe of gyeat ncanucniences.indl}:Chriftendome: The

Pope gn{wered admitting the Proteſtationy Sand inguantum, wxculkig lim

{clts forthe citation omitted)becaulc heegauc wothingromtiaFreaithme;

bur prelerucdithe place in 'lyhieþ hehadgyerfcenethemmevorkeEniperors
Coden offered notwithſtanding to:commiiomhecauletothe Col:
l:dgrof Cardinals,or toithe whole Rotaadditig;thathtloued icheKing and
woulddoc hina]lchegoodofbsrs hacould.: (TheAmbaſtador replied] that
his Halincſſe bad gdepriutd himfelfe of dozpg.ahoKing-any-godd oftice;'by

giuing him ſo great agricuance. The Pope —_ againe}Vhorfor
ok... caule, but yous oWperattd for: chbbabefars won by'ys 236 the King,
mam: 2: thede words werg.uot worthyeo bee piytdhto rhayproceftdcion! _ =_

274900 Sor 350 01 G01 ing bind) [fv 1893619 2b id cid 2112 03 1wobeP:t
one" mA AAP ISlens Firague arained ini Tee ache tan'd time; whom fAbavelſaig
= beborg}gho.Frengh King bud@us tothe auncdl Ind. nhe Emperor, whe

"was SPSRARoNE gatign the! ſ{ecangtatclinic;viheceino:Ambillidors
rretelts IE fRch -v/proſonthurccbihatoyagihc daqaddpog/b6,
"*  Faughphadngithezideof Ambafladaivinthokimpideres BIS brojem:
1695þglcriers gtelnr Kipgedated 4heififisduelrof April! abioh faidadube

Rab iT hat thy feublesandifietineatres; faiſcdaugchb ke ex for

eſegtidigobowersvctywelknowensilfolbidlabodryedeg with'chq

axycandalilonergh Bripeprand Aareotatcotudfrindds, ys

Dagot £ 000 by

.

— — —— - _- $4 OO

CC OO OO EE eee ee. ES

1 On >

_—
eaarb=.

[E188 the Copeell of Frent. "5
byarmes;ithar ir pleaſed God/ m'hivinconypretienſible'Fidgements, tiorto 1565
{afferthoteremediesofarmes vo prodaceatiyithigs bur ernelties, laughrers, {7D
fackings of cities, runiosof Churches; lofſvoF 'PrheesLords Knights, ahid Froomino;
other cakamitics-andideſolarions.\,' forhar ir{is eafie'ts knigw thar they wete Eirrkawrnt,
nor fic 40 heale the! infirmitze ofiSpirirs j\which-ateiuerconiconcly by rea- CO
{on, ahd'perſwafion;thatthis hach eauſed/hittitornakea Pacificarion/acap —V=
ding ro the contents of his letters diſpatched _ thatroccafion ;' nor to:
permittheeltabliſhing of anew faickinthe kigdome, but that, armesbeing
layd afide, he might, with lefſe commadidtion;' inake an vnion of all hiySuþ-
jects inthe fame holy:and'Catholikereligiony abenefic which he did ea
from the mercy of Gadzand froniagoodatidferious reformation; which Ye
didpromifc himlelte fromthe Synod; And becauſe hee had|many things to
repreſcincolrhemgand rodeſircof then, he refolued to ſend Motificar Ree
«Birague,) who would informe them) of all by word of mourh, prayit 6 thein
roreceiuedad hears him with'icourcefie,”! 7 0 9G
-:.'Thieletrers being read, the Preſident ſpake,-relating vety'patticularly the And makech
diſcords, warrcs, andealamiries obFrance,theStateand necelliic into which a
che King and kingdome were redueod|; che ithpriſonnientofthe Conſtable,
and death ofthe Duke of Guiſe , which madethemro beeas/it were withour
armes. Hee iuſtifie&rheaccord arlarge, as beingitnade for;pure and'mecte
necellitic, and with more aduantageto the Catholike partie} then tothe cons
rrary..\ Thar che intention of the King and Qountelt was'notro ſuffer ad in-
troductiony or anctabliſbment of anew religion; but}-onthe'contraty; 7?
armes and:diſobcdicncebeing remoucd, roredyce;with lefſecontraditibh] © 0+
and bytheiwaycs obſeracd by his anceſtors, tothe obedience of the Clad” cine
thofe rharwere our of cher way, ahd to retire a} inary holy Cacholhhe
ofclon,/:knowing very well. thar the exerciſciof two reliviotis t4hnor
fubſatt and concinuc-inonekingdomes 'Thihe [ajd elize the Kirldrd
hope roxcunirequicklyallhis people in oneopititowbythe {frrigaHlary ac&bf
Giot., :ahdby mcanes of, che Councell, a remedy ved aliyayes by rhe #nei.
ens againſt fuch|cuils/ as/thoſe were,” which|did: therſ'2i& Brin»
dome.v Heprayod theFarhers to further che Kings g60d THrertRr1, by24'(6-
rious teforthacion; by reducing manners tothFhiteptitic#trdPiritic oF the
ancient Church, and by compoſing the diffcrence8\\mi tlio (ot AVTR
char'che King /wouldalivayes bee Carkolike' ad Yeact@?ty Chuitfof greg
Rene) ikcoording rdirfe xxample of his atcefforrs,o HEATH ORIG 6 acces
on; thatthoKing did erlrd inthe goodnefſe il wilt dowloÞ the Packevs, 2s
chat rthey1woulkt corpailtionate the miſeties off ) PHOKE LA Mor to/4A!
cheas.1!Þhefretidenthadcommillion to detidih7WHAPHe Core night
| lee

3vrchaked; zontide

to \ QHAETHE HD

Atoind ker ſhould.

716

wad m—_—_—_——

\ The Hiſornof -' © L188

| 4563 ker ſhould anſver Brra in the name of che Synod , condoling the misfor-
—7 tunes and calamitics of the kingdome of France, and exhorriog the King,

Prvs 4

Fzzoixax0 that hauing beene forced to make peace, and to grant fomerhing to the Flu-
Earar, 20nots, corcltore religion intirely, he would, forthe ſeruice of GoD, when

CHARLES 9.
Paige 2.

the kingdome was in peace, labour without any delay, that rhis good cnd

\A/— mightbcobraincd. And they ſhewed this anſwer to Lorame afcer the Maſſe,

A tumult in
Bauaris tor
che Cup,and
mariage of

Prieſts,

before they cntred into the Congregation. Who aid, hee did nor like they
{hould approuc the Kings fact, whereof they ſhould rather complaine, as
prejudiciall to.the fairh; and therefore chat it was better to take time ro an-
{were, as the vſc is in matters of importance, Whercupon they gaue order
that”Birague (ſhould bean{wered thus inſubſtance. That in regard the things
rclated and propoſed by him were of great weight, and had need of much
confideration,theSynod would take a fit timeto anſwere him. The French
Ambaſladours were much diſplealcd with this fact of Loraine,thinking that,
if the Legarcs had not beene diſpoſed to: commend the KingsaCtions, hee
ought ro hauc incited them, yea toforce them as muchas hee could, whereas
onthecontrary, they iudging a commendation of. the fac to bee iuſt and
rcalonable,as indeed it was, he had diſſwadedthem. Bur conſultingamongſt
themſclues,they reſolucd nor to write thereof into France, for many reſpets;
and Lanſac,being to returne ſhortly, might makethar relation which ſhould
be thought neceſlary. |

The moneth before there hapned a great tumult and popularcommoti- |
on.in*Bararia, becauſe the Cup was not allowed, nor marricd men ſuffered
ro preacl1; which dilorder procceded fo farre , that, to appeaſe them , the
Duke promiſed in the Dier, thar, if in-all Inne arcſolution were normade in
Trent, or by the Pope, to giuethem ſatisfaction, himſcife would grantborh
the oneand the other. "This newes comming to the Councel, made theLe-
gats diſpatch in diligence Nicolaus Ormonetys, to perlwade that Prince not to

make ſuch agrant , promiſing that the Councell would not bee wanting to

his.neceſlines, To whom the Duke anſwered, that, to ſhew his obedi-
enceand deuotion to the Apoſtolike Sea, hee would vie all meanes to enters
raine his people aslong as hecould, cxpectingand hoping that the Councell
would rcſoluethat whichthey ſaw to bee neceſſary, norwithſtanding the de>

= - »

termination made before, - |

 TheBiſbopof 4, But rhe Congregations proceeding in handling the:Conciljariematters,

Nimes (pea-

keth agunſt

Annateri.

igone of themthe Biſhop of Names, (peaking of the abuſes of Order, diſcout+
ſedof Arnates..Helaid;tharhowlocuerir could not bee denied thatall Chur-
ches.qught tocontribute.to the Popefor maintenance of his Courr, yethee
could notcommendrhat payment, as well for the maner, asthe.quantitic;
becauſe ir would þe enough if the rwentierh part werepayd,, whereasthis is:
xrhaps;maremnen the teh ;and forthe manner, thatno manoughtro bee
oxced ropaythem:buratter the yecro:was cnded. And ſecing:that rhe Corr
of Reme myf{honmaintained by che cenmburions ofidlEChurches; it is infb
thatiathey ſhopldeergiueſomeprofic thence, whiezeas)many, andd4lmoſt all
cheabulcs ef Chriltendamerdoc ariſe; by mcanes of the Offcets thecbof ;10f
which the Synod oughtto advertiſe his Holineſſe; thaw be ighyan & pro
uiGonthereit. Hoodeletraled coſptako m particulabati che grama _—_

t MCT 3A

OS is

Lil the Gounabllaf Tien.
Prief bonds as Rome; 4 faying, ,tharthe Cahons anddecrersarenot allied I FN
in;

ks —_ nor ſufficient, rhe Biſho pe foombtande

or ONE recourſc.hinder theidetermidiation Sib Prelate: = =
char {| fg in tharCongregation, was the Biſhop of Ofmo; who ſaid;rhar —V—
abuſes of Order are.cotlected, {o-it werzgoodto handle penances,:and: -apety ;
hi allo ,. becauſe all choſe three marsers are of. _ ; arid goe |
and,in hand.
* in anorher Congregation the Biſhop of Guadie ſonke very long; ) ind; a- |
monglt other things, madc,as it wete ,. an inuedtiuc gal theordination TheBitor of

of citular Biſhops , & iy occaſion of ſpeaking on the fourth Article'of the 6994.

abuſes; in which.he aid, thatto redreſle the, great ſcandals: which doe ariſe © Ty Bi-
by mcancs of ſuch Biſhox s, there ſhould be no. mote created withour vrgens
neceſſi ric and i inthat caſc,before tp yeere ordained; the Pope ſhould make
prouiſian chat they mighrliue according to the dignitie of a Biſhop: Heſaid,
thatroche digaitic of a Biſhop is annexed the hauing of a place and a Dio-

celle, andthe PE and Church arc Rn as-man andwite, of: which:

S. mY Mica Cv | 5113109 22

F Negri, Bri of was ehrring into ok ow matrer;;ifaz 4 Who are de-
that in a Biſhop arc.to bee conſidered Order; andiluritdidtionyin relpedtof ——oow. hp
derhe hach —_ bar that h&iis mibiſtetofche Sacraments of Oyderand 5-4-2:

(, onfirmation, and, by Eccleſiafticall conſticatian;; hath aurhoritic of gnany

conſccrations 1:07 Sy: mhigh ate vim ane: \Bupin
reſpetof wriſdi anche Churchr,
whereas tic fir Bi

and chexefor

ds,it aPPes

= - Es
16/ nine Fa Z
> I rhercfor on

EE

bomsino

——
— —

090d acme or oe" REES —Laz&
6 ” Trill r f
718 iThe Hiſtory of ke L 8%
JF £1 =
» pt OS? | 9 - - tS- — -_

"1564 \» TheBiſhop of Lagediſcourſed of Diſpenſations; ſaythg,; thitthere were
A many noon FA DA which if the Synod mentdre ee rs decla-
Sos ei ripgthem to be indiſpenſable;ir would beeagrear ſernicetbGbdP 4h ch
——— fie ro the Church: Which hee'did nor ſay , becauſe theSynod right pines
Caaxne+ 9. Lavy rohis Holincſle, bur becauſe they arc things iti which difpcntationsof
<-— Popc$.cannotbeadmirred;'andif in-a rare caſe, in whible age; ##ta{dHtable
Of Vipen® cauſe to diſpenſe, might happen once, yer the diſpentation wouldtorbe luſt
o* inthatcaſcncither. ' For iris convenient thara priuateperſon ſhoul&fuppore

x ſome gricuance, when there is a great publike bencfir, as alſo, where many

| cales;deleruing diſpenſations'may occurre, to take away occaſions'df obrai-
«|: 13.00 7s FFI pplications, and graces, it is better ro-bee auaritious then

9%" herd fo 24-7 v5 o NOﬀY; TORE |

4 One of the difficultiesof the Councelt ; which wasabour Bikho

| Abo! Trlefins,
the Secretary,in regardof whom frequenr inftancewas' made, thatthEAttes
ofthe Councellmighc be wyitten by two, did caſe ofitielfe., Forhe!noras
ble to-fupport ihe paine of the ſtone anylonger, refolied to bee elit.) Aﬀter |
| hewas retired; that charge was'ginen t&the Biſhop of Campaniz, whole firſt
Theanfrecre ation wasinrhe Congregation of theoſeutnith of tyne,, to reade'the anſwer
01974% whichtheLegats had made; to giue rothe Preſident Birague, which,Being
longandpropoled'ontheſadden , nor affiſted in yoiceby any of the Legats,
ahdvcry arabiguous.,.with words which might be drawen to the commen-
— dation orthedilpraiſe of theaecord madebyrhe King , was nor vnderſtood
by all in rhe lame ſence ; whereupon there were diners opinions amongſt
the:Prelars. - /The:Cardinall'of Loraine firſt fpake ar large of it, and was not
ynder{tood whether hee did approoucir or nor.” The Cardinall of armit,
vrgedto it by Moyore, defired him afterhee had-madean end; todeclate;,
plaincly what heichought; and he anſwered that ir did nor pleaſe him : ro the
greatdiſtaſtc of Morone, who had ſhewed'it'to hirii before , and hefeemedro
be content. Madruccio, who followed, referred himſelfe ro the Fathers; of
rheorhers ſome-did approue jt,and ſomenor: TheFrench Prelars Edtiplai-
- ned, ghar, againfitbeordersobſcrucd inthe'Synodin ke octafions, the an-
[wer wasdeferredand diſputed The Biſhep;Ambaſſidour'of the Duke of
Sanoy, whenie was histurge rofpeake; ({aiÞ;'thar the{matrer dtibht'tobee
refanted abſahiteyzocheLegars,and the two Cardinals. When aff the voices
weredcliucrad, ahe Archbiſhop of Lavoe ftood vp,ard faid;tharhowlpe-
uegheebadoanchidedotherovite in hirfufftdpeyerhatring hedrd the Arc
baſbdpbr, bcvtasof his opinion, atidtheſainewss approud Athoftby che
Vargo df alltorediad. -- J P JX9 , ?23T1T SOIC F4 KDE! 4 i: O05 ION ZE ry | 19
2!:/Thedumntbof: June confulraridh'wisheldBy theLefh
andyvechtic Baeldrs, torfindb aTmcancs to eftablifh tHedo
unonotBillgpsLerking, indeliverivy tit minde! thuct
app mare" men yeh rs >: -y—
vas {6 defined zouncd oof (Cl Farid DaMs Fc
beedid notudolaxerdirontiend C
Ropottophi vm v1 rm wages es 2 |
bankibe pugaiqhs Decades Fukiol Yers be66hlp
iudice tepid o8 hi rcbBap {FOO

?

2901

—_—

the Conncell of Trent. | Tg

Lis.$. |

— ———

enlarged himfeltc with many words to conuincethar Cardinall, reſuming © 1563
and refuting wharſocuer hee had (aid in fauour of the {uperioritie of the ,>>—*>—N
Counccll. Hee added, that ſome held opinion of the {uperioritic of the Panendn
Councell to beas true as Verbum caro faftum eft , ſaying hee knew not how #2
they could ſecure themſelues in their conſcience; wherein he meant Loraine, wag,
who was {aid ro haue vied this compariſon. And,deſcending afterwards ro ——
diſcourſe of the Inſtitution of Biſhops , hee ſaid there had beene no contro- Aconettati
ucrſtein this matter , if the forme propoſed by the Cardinall of Loraine had > as 147
not giuen occa(ion. The Cardinall anſwered, that,at his comming to Trent, 22% ©
he found the difhculties already mooucd; that he had compoſed that forme, **Crvmil
being requeſted, with intention ro make peaceand concord, and to remedy TS
the differences ; that this not ſucceeding, hee would bee glad that che Arch-
biſhop mighcobraine that honour which himſclfe could not doe - thanking

him beſides, that,as his maſter,he had put him in minde of that whercin hee

had failed. And, for the queſtion of the ſuperioritie of the Councell, hee

faid, that being borne in France , wherethis opinion is common, neither hee

nor thcother Frenchmen could leauc it, and did nor belecue, thar, for hol-

ding ir,they ſhould bee forced ro make a Canonicallabiuration. The Arch-

biſhop replyed, thar he diſliked the forme, becauſe it was imperfect, whence

the dithculrics didariſc; bur, forthe reſt, ic was not aplaceto an{were him,

and thar he did little eſteeme the injuries hedid him. Bur he complained of

{ome who did profeſſeto accule the aCtions of the Legats, whercin they did

not ſhew a good minde. The Cardinall was {ilent, and made no ſhew hce
was offended, The Count of Luna, whether of his owne accord, or at the

infance of the Frenchmen, reprchended the Archbiſhop, faying , thart if ir

came to the cares of his Catholique Maicſty, it would certainly diſpleaſe

him. And a French Prelate, either by order from Loraine, or of himlelfe,

did aduertiſe Morone, that the Archbiſhop did much paſſe his bounds; thar

hee vicd bad ſpeeches, in handling the matter of Reſidence ; and that-the
Cardinall was aduiſed, that hee was continually abuſed in his-houſe, and char

the moſt honourable title he gaue him, was, 4 man full of poiſon; lo that, in re:

gard of theſe chings, andof this laſt accidentalſo, it would notbee good

ro call them both rogether to conſultation, becauſethe Cardinall would nor

reſt ſatisfhed. Morene anſwered preciſely, that hee had order from Rome,

ro call that Archbithop to all conſultations, and that it was-conuenicat to

hold eſtceme of him , Wai - hee hadar the leaſtfourtie voices which did 5,05 0
follow him. This,being related ro Loraine , did make hutn cxcceding avgry dnavobud od
againlt Cardinall Moroxe; and the rather, becauſe a few dayes befarethe Le- command,
oats and Cardinals conſulting rogether abqurtheanſwer robee giien to Bl-

rague , referred ro them by the Congregation, Morone,i,did vpbraid him,

that hee was content with the anſwer. tirft made, phrtrwards ſaid the coqs

trary in che generall Congregation. And Loraine conſidered verymuch with
himſclfe, in what manner hee might (heyy bimfelfe ſenſible of tHe ſmallac+

count was madc of him , cfpccially being; aduiſcd fran Roms, that the Pope

did accaſc him for amanſcandalous, and deſirqusro, yaitethe Catholiques
and Proteſtants. Bur weighing his owncintereſts,; which: hlgporn bia
nor co ſeparate himlclfc from Rome, bur rather to ſceke:meahestoboe ar

AEPALULE IUTAGTY 38 Vs , PUT! | _

72.0 | T The Hiſtory of 3 Liz.8

—

| — CCC oor

1563 ted, his profit ouercame his paſſion, and ſo hee reſoſued ro.continue in pro-

,.. >" moringrthe concluſion of the Councell,and giuing the Pope latisfaCtion.
IVS 4.

Fixviuay =But the Preſident *Biragne , hauing expected an anſwere as long as hee

Er thought his honour would permit, the thirteenth day parted from Trent,to

CHARLES 9. - IS. IONS Wi -
Hanat 9 gocts Iſþruc, to negotiate the other part of his in{trucions with the Em

> rour ; which was to giuc him ioy of the cleCion of the King of the Romans,

ret om andan account for what cauſes the Peace was concluded with the Hugonors,

Trew wn” androanſwere him concerning the reſtiturion of Merz, and of other Impe-

prone. riall Cities. Hec had inſtruction alſo, thar, ioyntly wich the King of Sparne,

Hisnegotint- they ſhould vic perſwaſtons for the tranſlation of the Councel into Germany.

Emperour. This particular being imparted to Loraine,to receiuc aduicefrom him in whac
maner to procecd in it, or whether hee (ſhould omitir, as hee had done
in Tyent, the Cardinall reſolued for the ſame reafons, that hee ſhould
make mention of it , as of athing rather to bee deſired , then hoped for, or
arrempred.

TheSpini, The Countof Luna had cxpreſle order in his inſtructions, rodemaund a

Ambatlou” retraction ofthe Decrec, Proponentibus Legatrs; and after his arriualVin Trenr,

ſtance char he He recciued a letter from the King, which rold him , that hee was deſired by

Decree, Pro- ,
>=» ic- the French Queene, thatthe Councell might be tranſlated into Germany, that

xs. i " irmightbe in a free place,and that heehad anſwered, that hee did not thinke
it neceſſary , in regard there was meanes to procure the liberty of it in the
lace where it was; therefore hee gaue him commiſhon to labour, thar ir
might haue full liberty, beginning from the retiocation of that Decree; be-
cauſc,thar continuing,the Councecll could by no meancs becalled free. The
Ambaſladour, thinking hee could nor deferre any longer , imparted this
commiſſhon to the Legates, and, in conformity thereof , made off-tuall in-
ſtance in the Kings name, that the Decree might bee abrogated, or expoun-
ded, ſaying, it was conuenient fo to doe, becauſe the Germanes did forbeare
ro cometo the Councel for this cauſe amonglt others, and becauſe the Em-
perour did thinke it neceſſary, that hee might beeableto induce them to re-
cciuethe Councel. They anſwered, that . Decrce was made by common
conſent of all che Fathers , notwithſtanding, they would conſideron it, and
reſolue that which ſhould ſceme juſt , after hee had preſented the inſtance in
writing. The Ambaſſadour gaue it, and the Legates ſentit ro the Pope:
howloeucr Morone ſaid, it was ſuperfluous, and that nothing was to be done
but to delaytheanſwere, without troubling his Holineſſe. In the negotia-
tion of Princes , eſpecially thoſe which«doc nor touch the ſubſtance of their
Srate,it happeneth,thar howſocuer they do change opinion by thechangeof
occurrences,yct by the perſwaſions made before the change, things contrary
ro their new will dofall our. And fo it was that the perſwaſions madeby the
Queene mother to the King of Spaine, before ſhe reſolued to giue torall ſatiſ-
tactiontothe Pope concerning the Councell, did produce the effect of char
Letter ofthe King. Therefore Morone,who did penetrate the botrome, did

not hold thatcſteemeof icas ſome thought. SOREN |
- Thetifteenth of ſune Morone propoſedin Congregation, tharthe fiftcenth
of Iuly mightbee appointed for the determinate day of the Seſſion. Segouia,
and ſomefew others ſaid,they ſaw nor how thiedifficultics which were vpon
thcir

cicdlartyp die Brench: trien ; aridtRerelwert

-- had - ® £4 . *<+* - «©
_— _——— tr
-—»

L #e,'$; 4 the Comcellof Trans) ; #7.
cheir hands could be relolued in fo ſhor-atimey of Hemwehie, of Order ofthe 5.
inſtitution of Biſhops;'of chepreheminetve-of wa and of Relidenice; LI

_— ne pO —_ —  — —

2d chat it was berrentadtcidethe difficulties firt;andiafterwards ro appoiht TOR .
a (hort :erme for che day of the Seſſion; then ts'appoyntit now;und atrer: Fiftab#ir,
wards to.prolong ir with-indignitie/! Bucche-concradidtors being but few; _— : My
the propoſicion was cltabliſhed;, av it were withourdiffitykie, -Themnexe >SVS
day. Layne, Generall of the Teſwires, mm givitig lis fuffrans;bene aldhisfÞrees 74. ſuffrage
toanſwere whatlocucr had beeneſaid by orhers;;noc conformiable ro this dg2 of iynrts
Qurinc ofthe Coure , with -- great affection, 'ag if his ſaluatish hadibetiie iti

geſtion... Inthe marter of dil faciensHhewas exceeding dingcopions; ſayin;
K was {poken without reaſon Tlatkete is-no othef nr ty ew
igtcrprecariueand declaraciue;-fotfo'the autkoritieofivpod Doftorwould
bec greater then of a grear-Prelate y/ and thiat rt [ay OD _ |
penſation,diſobligehim who is obliged before:God, is tiothing; butts/reexcH =
men to preferre theirowneconſcience beforechentrhority*of the Chineh;
which conſcience, becauſe it may beaetronious,'as itisferthe mot pare; to
referre: men to thar, is Hoching/bur ro cal cttety Chriltiarineg #bortothlefle -
pit ofdangers ; thatasit cannor heflenied/zharfCnk 19T Md power rodifl
pence in cycry taw:, 'northarthePopeis his Vicar, northarchereidthe ſatiÞ
tribunall andconſittoryofrh@Priticipall#che Vieeoorent, folrhfuſt bee
confciſedthar chePope hath the fame avrhority; that this4s the pridiledge of
the Church of Rome; and thateucry one'oughtto take beede, in tte it
hercſicco take away the priuiledges of the Church; becauſe it is tidthiog but”
to deniethe authority which CH #t s Tt hatygiuenit.'” Then hee fpake of
reformingthe Court; and ſaid;, that it is ſiperiout t6-ull/patticuſrChiits
ches, yea ro many ioyned rogetHer; and if if'doeth brloapto the Conte of
Rome to reforme cach-Church', which doe appertaitier6 every Bilisp itt
Councel,ahd none of them caniteforttiethe Ronan; betulife $hefthd188 #'not
abouc his malter,northe ſeruantabduchnsLotd} Tt fofloWwerh,” by neetffir |
confequente, thattheCouncdl{hath hone authority't6 Hicddlein'thitbaſt.
neſſ<;zhar many didcallchofe thingsabuſes,whicls,;f they were exaniitit42ind
ſounded rothe botrrome,woutd befannd robo eichernellfy or profieatste;
that ſome would make the Se40f Rom:jas right che fire oP tie pole;
and ofthe Primicine Church, withourdiſtiv#uſhiiathncetle? (HOP KH6WIHN
what dorkibelong to thofe, and whatto chefſeahatit i5'# Plitic'ealstPult

che PRI G05; the ChireW#Madc rich 26d" chit

nothing is more itmpertinent tHe to Fay thn God back biech Fiche Eno
che vſe,;.-For Anuates hee ſayd}) thatit is de tur dun Bhat Tyohed rid Brit
Ftuires ſhould ibee payd.ro the'Cletroie;; 45 the TS YiP ts the Lvulfer?
and-as:rhe Leuites payd the Tenthes 0 thotgh Peſt fs ouoht the Ectlei

ſraſticallorder _—_— e/ therents Jr

Adnatesthe Tyrhod ofthe Tythes. "This iy exed any hd pies

which city meatietdanſwere Piftertaiont Thiel her thelt ere wisto
akecriibic) 11 ut £01116 tun\s] -d1Yordous 9:00! FIG AMI

-| hd SpaniardrandBrenehmne hone HegnHeſt BA ethbs;' by Foun dens

ordery\6d dy conſenvof\i&Legite%allexdfing\ 25686 ASH Yhemany en

(1311 74 :

P PP | fauours

——_ - —_ — CIT —_— > W-_— RY

L rs. 8;

— I Ro

Rf) a0

-— — a. X}/©-- — -

PETS
* X

Ti ime

—— renee

$363 favours which weredors viza him;vpdnalloteabions, atdeſpecially, be-

SSOGN

cauſe; whotcas arherGenerals werorwontteltiandon theirfeere, and intheir

r 's or 4 . = , C7 . F . I .
- Ep. placewhen theygaue.cheir voyce vil ane was called into:the middle, and

— —_

5,

His tet ©

Giuet difan Churdh. 1, This: becing related, to the Cardinall, in. a Cong

eo the French-

MER,

ElrranITR, made to:fir downe;, and many tmes acongfegation was made for hin; one] Y,
Pe #2. to-gigc him commaditie:ra (peake what hee-would ;1and howſocuer none

wayeuerhalfe ſdprolixeathec, yerhe wasprayſcd, and tholc againſt whom!
hee:lpakdcould-neuer bee {@; briefs; bur they werereprehended for being
teh longs: . But Laynex; knowing what-offtence the iFrench-men:did' pre»
tend; t9haut reccived ,: {ent his: companions z. Torre. and C auilone_, to
make an exculero; Lorame.., laying s that his redargutions Were not meane
of his. Excellencje,or any of the French Prelates, bur of the Diuines of the
$arboxe ,, whole opinions aro not conformeadle ro the Doctrine of the!
regation of
Freach-men,, beld.in his houſe, | the excuſe did much::diltaſt the Pretares,
ſomglaying'i was petulant, and-othersfcornefull , and tho'e fer D1aines
which, ;tRmaingd were ſenſible. of it; ſb.that Hegonias himſclte; whom
they had-bought., did. thinke. ir, vnlufferabley,, Verdun; thought hee was:
rouchcd in-particular, and obliged co reply; and prayed the Cardinalt ro
giue; him leaue, and, occalzan. -; Hee promited to{peake mode{ily;and ro
thewmihatthe doctrine of the; Swbone was orcthodoxe, and that of the [rſuire
new4jand, neuer hearfl of m the Church before; that js;thatthekey of aurho-:
ritis isgiuen by C11 $T, withoutthe key of knowledge; that the holy:
-Ghplt,, given forthe gouernement 'of che Church , #5 calcd , by che holy!
$crzpgure the {pin of cructh,and the operation rhercofin the gouernours of
the Church,andMiniltcrs of GHR1ST, i540 leaderhem ine all tructh;thar;:
forthis cauſe, Cari sT; hath made his Miniltcrs partakers of his authority,

. becaute; hee hath righall imparted ro them thelightof doctrine; thar: Saine

 todiſtzib

<1'aul 9 [Timathse, writing, that, hee is conſtitruzed an Apotile;docth expound
ir-thus,.; that it, a DÞAor of the Gentiles +) yvho, in'twwo: places, prelcnbing;
the, capdjtiqnsofaBilbop, aich,he mult bera, DoRour; that, obſcruing che
vic otihe primizine Church;ir will appeare, that the faichfull did goc to/Bin
ſhopsfordilpenfariopsand declarations, beeaule thole: oncly were aflumed
two.thatghargemwbe.were molt ofall infirifted in Chriſtian Hacirine;abar, ro
omit, apatiquitic haole:menandegreajer part ofrhe;Canonils haut cons
fantlyifaig, tharrhe diſpenlations.of Prelates arc goods Clave nonerfonte, and
not, Ohervyile. . 'Hagonins alfgdid offer ,to proouc that aſſertion] that there
is the apetribunall of CHR1 552d of tbe Fope'; to bee: ippiousand fcanda«
lous,;making moriabitie.cquallzgimmonaſtie, and carrupijbleigdgement
of.zzan,., to chqincorruprible judgementof-Gop , and that itdid proccede
from ignorance; 4bat the Popeis/thar ſervany, whichis ſerovarthit falnilie of
CH R4.S-T}DOF t9p5rfanucihe office oftbe Maſter ofthe faoniliezbut. onely

diltzibure tg cueryo08, ngrarbicrarily, butthat whichis ardained bythe.
Maſter ; thatihg wyasgnazcd thar Ghrijltian cares could ehdurerg boate thas
the wholc,pomerat Ga R-S/F- iS 1njParedito Any;) 1 Dhey allfpake ſome
ccnſ{uring one, ſome anotherof the Teſuites aſſertion. But the Cardioalltald
them, chat igwould be ngſmall matrerif they could abtainethargigabe pub-
Decrees of.the Councall, way migh

C1J 1:1

like

Lp@t bee ginen.to that d6&6vIpe ; at

which |

41s qd Q

=.

XUM

"4

L1sB. 8; the Councellof T rent. 724
which-it was conucnicnt thatall thould ayme'; co which end they ſhould 15654
more caſily come, if the marrer'were paſled(oucrin ſilence, and lutferedo >>.»
dycin obliuion, which; bycontradiction, -might doeſ{omepreiudieetothe Fannin goige
rracth. They were paciticd ; yernor fo, butthat, incheir private mectings; Ezonprh.
they ſpakeof it very much. 111, -/ Momcinapar bus wet but fs ph
Bur the Legates did ſo accommodate the: two Articles of the Inſti-\;.. 5-.-
cution of Biſhops, and-of Reſidence, with» generall tcarmes, that they! of the 'nttucu-
oaue ſatisfa$tion ro borh parties,-' and to Loraine allo.” Bur hauing;con- nine.
{ulted on them wich the Popiſh Duuinesz. and: ſome: Canonilts, Prelarcs,
theſe ſayd, thar they did admirre an interpretation, : preiudiciall to,the au-
thority of the Apoſtolique Seq , and:the vices of the Courts»; The Biſhop of
Nicaſtro,, who had often contended- in this matter. infauour.of Rome, 1ayd
plainely , chat , by that forme of ſpeach,, - it: was inferred that all 1uriſdi-
ction of Biſhops did nor proccede from) the Pope, bur a part of ic im-
mediatly from CHx1tsT; which was by. no mcancs'to--bce endured,
Other Papalins maintaincd the ſame, and made a bad interpretation of all,
if it were not plaincly fayd, that Biſhopshaucall juriſdiction from the Pope.
Therefore the Legates ſent the Articles thus reformed rothe Pope, not lo
much that they mightbeecxamined in- Rome... , as becauſe, ina matter of ſo
great importance, they would: propole nothing without the Popes know-
ledge. -- The Cardinals depurcd for theſe aftaireshauing ſcene and examined
them , did judge thatthe'forme was fufhcient tp-make all Biſhops in their.
Dioceſles cquall to the Popes. ' And the Popeceprehended the Legates for
ſending them}; becauſe: hee knew. that rhe maion part in the Councell were
o00d Catholikes, and deuored to the Church oft:Rome;and in-confidence
hereof ,,was contcntthat the propoſitions and reſolutions ſhould bee detcr-
mined in ;Zrent without his knowledge. Notwithitandjng hee thought he
ought nat'to;[con{cne ro. any preiudiciall ching,for feare of giuing bad ex-
ample to.them,, and beeing a cauſe chart they allo ſhould aflent vato ic agamntt
their conſcience. - 20 Ao t6-96:11129);, | 1

At this time they bad another very hard negotiatiovallo, For the King 24f-rlrie

whether the

ofthe Romanes beingitro ſend Ambailadotrs;xo gine him-an account of his King of tae

cle&tion;would not docas other Empetoursand Kings had done, whoha- oug:: ro p:o-

ing; no:caufe.to make difficulric, d1d/promiſcand>{weare whatlocuer the Mie ont.”
2opcs would.haue them. ; But hce: having reſpettinpritooftend the Princes Pore _

and Proteljancs of Germanie,, would: firſt kribw-whart words mult bee vicd.

The conlultation hereof being-commirted tertheCardinals;; they relolued,

that hee muſt demaund confirmation of the clc&tion, andebweare:obedi-

ence, according rotheiexampleofatll other Borpcrours.': Whercunto het an-

{wered that they werg>deediued ; 4nd rhat hee would cohfcar ro nothing

yhich-migbppreiddiec\his ſucceſſors, as theadtiunsof higpbedececiiors: were

allcadged agdin/tihimiclio,andchat irwas toconfiffcherwas UVaſſell. And he

propoledy that his Ambgiſadour thould viethele wordes ; thatthis Maicſtic

will perfarmeallredcretice,deuotionand duty:rohis Holinefſe and the Apo-

{tolique;See, with pramifehnot one] yrorpreſerucoburt ro:cnlargeas muchas

hee cantheholy Cathohquefairh.>:.T, 1 ation.continued this wholc

yeere withour'agreeinenr;/and; finally, ny chey-thoughr jou

{1119 Ppp 2 oun

i

724:

"The Hiſtotie of \ PTY

$63

| Pivs 4.
FERDINAND
ETt1zZABETH.
CHARLES 9.
Partip 2.

=D ae

4n theexecution: ©: + 1 1h 21h bh

found a remper for ir, - propoſing that hee [hould {weare obedience nor as
Emperour , but as King of Aungarie and'*Bobemia, becauſcit couſdnoc bee
denyed;they1ayd, that King Stexen did giue: the kingdome to the' Apolto-
liqueSexzin the yecre ofour LORD 3 000, acknowledging-to receiucitfrom
the ſayd Sea, and making himſelfc vaſſall; and that "Tadiflans, Duke of Bo:
hemia, didrecciue from Alexander the {ccond power toweare'a miter,binding
himfclfe to pay an handred markes of {ilucreuery yeere, . Thele things be-
ingconſidered ofin Germanie, becaulethere was no proofe of them burthe
bare affirmation of Gregorierhe ſ[cucnth,werederidedzand an{were wagmade,
char they deliredimore freſh cxamples,and more certaine,' and more lawful
ticles.” Meſſengers wentto and fro, with diuers propofitions,anſweres, and
replyes;of which wewillnow relate the iſſue,thar weermay returne no more .
to them: Which was ; thar; twenty moneths after, Count Elfeſtain, Ambaſl-
fadour of that King; arriucd in Rome, wich whom the lame treaties were re-
newed; rodemannd confirmation, and {weare obedience. Hee atiſwered
thar the Oration; which he was to recite punctually, wasin writing; and that
hce had commiſſion nor to alter one iote,, The Pope: therefore: propofed!
the bulineſſe to the Cardinals, in a generall Congregation ; who afeer png
conſultation, concluded, that, howlocuer the contirmation/were not de-!
maunded , nor obedience promiſed, yer,'in the anfwere ro' the Ambaſta-
dour, it thould bee ſayd, that his Holineſſe did confirme the cleCtion ,'fup-
plying all detects thercof de fatto &+ dt ture, and did recciuc theKings ube-i
dience, without ſaying it was-demanded , or not. demanded, promiſed or
nor promiſed. Thisceremonygauebur fmall contentts the Pope, and lefſe
rorhe Colledge of Cardinals.» ». + bf6 5 AMoGdrs
But to returne tothe time whereof I write, the Pope was to anfivere the
frequentinitances, made vnto him by the Ambaſſadours, reſideatin Rome,
and by the Count of Lang in Trent, for abrogation of the;Decrec of
Proponentibus Legatis. And,' becing latiated with this trouble; hee wrote
to the Legates , thar the ſuſpenſton of it ſhould bee propoſedin'Congre-
gation. Burt Morone anſwered the Ambaſſadours ; ' who' vrged the Popes
order; that rather thewhee would: condeſcend vato it; thee deſired that his
Holineſſe-would remoouc him; This anſwere being giuenwithour parti-
cipation of the other Legates;iand:many other things refoluedbyhim alone,
putthem in a icalouſie, thavhee rooke too. much .vpon him!;H{aying,-chat
howfocuer hee might haucinſtructions aparc, yer hecoughtmotico:execute
them without aduifing them favit,and communicating all vnrothem,ar lcaft
In the Congregation of the one and rwenticrh of fume, che af{were to bee
made-cothe Preſident Birague, competed by the Legares and'@atdinall of
Eoraine,wasrtadgmhich paſſtiwithourtdifficultic:: (And becanſe hewwas'nor
preleut , rhar'it might not bee giuen-him by word of mouth ;ehey lent iraf-

cr hinvinwriting, ; And Adanus Fumnaus was depurcd Secretary: ioyned

with Tilefius, who:continuadiv bis indifpoſttion.:2Burthe:differences abour
te Articles of the-in{tirutionof: Biſhops, and of theaauthoricievf the Pope
remayning (lll, or ratherincrea(fing ,/anditbecingplaine; that'to fpeake of
cheman Congregation, would augmenrtchem maze; the Prelares;/avir were,

10] with

L 12. 8. | the Councell of Trent,

with a common conſent, began to handle them particularly, and xopropole 1563
courſes to finde a temper for them. Some,,defurous19 burie thele concro- at.

ucrſies, and to proceede,ſecingino meanes of. concord, gauccounclito omit Frnomans.
both the matters abſolutely : which opinion, howlocucr in concluſion, it Erntarcrn,

,

was recciued , in the beginning had much contradition. The Spaniards
did oppoſe ; who, by al
proceedefromCHRIs T;andtheCardinallof Loraine. went. further, and;
would haue it defined, that their vocation and place were immediatly from
God. Andthe French-men did delare, that che Popes authority might be o
declared as that it might neither contradict, ' nor diſpenſe with the Decrees
ofthe Generall Counccl. Others layd that this — {erucd onely to defer,
without aſſurance that the delay would doe any good. For when they came
to theconcluſton ofthe Councelzit would bee.neceflary ro define all matters
which hauc beene examined; lo that the difficulty would rcturne; and, in
caſe theFrench-men ſhould deparr farlt, as they refolued ro doc, there would
bee danger of ſchilme, ifafrerwardsany contrquerled point ſhould bee hand-
led. Beſides, in regard of the intelligence of Loraine with the Emperour,
thoſe who knew not their newthoughts,, (did'belceue, that che French-men
being gone, his Maicſtic would recall his Ambaſſadoursallo : in, which caſe
it would bee ſmall reputation ro.continue theCounce]l, and, to determine
any thing, would bce thought ip bec a thing done withour authority.
Anorher difficultic as great as this was inthe election of Biſhops. For
many of che Fathers would hauc ig ſayd , that there is an obligation to clect
the moſt worthy, and, for confirmation, alleadged many Canons,and holy
Doctors. The Papalins ſaid,on the concrary, x 46 this was to binde the au-
thority of the Pope, that hee could not gratifie any, and'that the vſc ofthe
Court,timc out of minde, hath beene, to thinke itſ{ufficientifa man worthy
wereclefted, The French: and Spaniſh. Ambaſſadours al{qdid notagree,
becauſeirdid roo much reſtrainerhe powerof Kings in nominations, it they
were bound to gog about and {eckethe not Many Prelates wene
vp and doyne, viing perſwalions, that the Article might not bee recciucd,
though it were without the addition of clefting the molt worthy, and cl-
pecially the Biſhop of Bertinarp, gd the Generall Loyneay diltribuing ſome
annotations,and aduertiſcments, made by them, ſhewiyg that grear mconuc-
niences would cnſ{uc by that Decree, For in.itwascomaynad, thara Cache-
drall bcing vacant, the Metropolitane ſhauld-write vnto,ghe Chapter , the
name of hum who was to be promated; who ſhould atterwards be publiſhed
in pulpit in all the Pariſh Churches of rhe Citie 0n Sunday, and hanged on
the doore of the Church,and af;exyyatds theMerropolicane ſhould goerothe
Citie vacant , and examine witneſſes;concetning the qualities of che perſe) ;
and all his letters parents andrefdifigations bttjng read iqcebe Chapger, cucry
one ſhould be heard who would egpoſeany thing agsioft bis perſps ; ofall
which an inſtrument ſhould bee made, anib{ent rorhe-Popes tobes read in
Confiltory. Thisconſticucion they ſaid would bee a caule ofcalarggies a0d
 {editions,, and that heereby ſome, auchority-was given to:thepeople, with
\which they would yſurpe.the (leQtion of Biſhops, /which formerly they
,ucre want'to haue:. Others beeing ſtirred yp;herewith;madethe lame op»
1411” 4 Ppp 5 poſitions

mcanes, would haucthe Epiſcopall iuriſdition to —v > -

- The Hiſtorie of © © L1&, 8 1

CC

726

1563 poſitionsagainſt che Article, concerning thbfe whoareto' bee promoted £6”
C72. thegrearerorders, inhich it was fayd, that their names oughero bee publi-
F-xorxaxd. ſhed rorhepeoplethree Sundiyes; and aftixed'to thedoores of the Church,
E'12anze3y and that their letters teſtimonialtought ro bee ſubſcribed by foure Prielts,
624x165 9: and foure Laiquesof rhe Pariſh; alleadging, that no airhoritic otighe ro'bee
—— giuentotheLatiticin theſe affaires; which are purely Ecclefialticall. In theſe

perplexities the Legates Knhew'not whar ro doe , bur to enioy the bencfir of
rime,and to expect fomeoucttiite, ro comers the end of the Counce!], to
which they ſaw nor how they ſhould beableto arriue. |

Another trouble beganneabour the reformation of Cardinals. And the
Therdo> Popeynderltanding thar this was ſpoke of in all Courts, and that in Trent,
exon the Ambaſſadours of France, Spaine, and Portugal, werecombined to de:
mand'it of the Councel, hee'wrote to the Lepates for aduice,to know whe-
ther it were berter ro handle it at Rome, or in Trent. He propoſed rhe ſame
in Confiſtoric, ordayning alſo a Congregation roconſultonu, and, particu-
-larly, tro finde amecancs that Princes might not intermeddle in the Conclane,
in the cle&ion of the Pope. And, to. procecde with all circumſpection in a
bufinefſe of fo great weight, hee ſent many Atricles of reformation to Trey,
 drawen ourof theCouncels, with order thattheLegates ſhould impartthem
ro the principall Prelars,and Ggnifie rheir opinions: '' The Cardinals of Lo-
raine, and Madrucetio, anſwered, they would nor delinertheir owne opimons,
before they vnderſtood the Popes minde,and afterwards it would bee neccl-
{ary to thinke very much on it, And Loraine ſaid, thar there are many things
which are thought worthy. of corre&tion', which himſelfe didthinke could
not iultly be reprehended, and others which might in part, bur notablolute-
lie, Heedeſcended to the particular of hauing Biſhopriques, ſayivg, there
was no iticonuenience that a'Cardinall Ptiefſt ſhould haue a B:ſhoprique,buc
did not like that a Cardinall Deacon ſhould bee a Biſhop, and thar, for this
cauſc,hee hadcounſelled his brother;theCatdinall,to leauethe Arch-biſhop-
Dis quickly T1que of Sans.” But this marter of reforttion of the Cardinals was _—_
vaniſh. Jy purto filence. For thoſe who were ia Trene, inclining rather to hauc ir
handledby the Pope and Colledge, arid thoſe who pretended' for the red
Cap,doubring their defires might be croffed they didwith greatfacility,leaue
to ſpcake of it. '-ThePopet##{orhought to makes conftirutian, thar tio Bi-
ſhops ſhould haue any rempofall offices, 'eitherin'Rome, or in'theEcclefia-
ſticall Dominion. - Bur he was aduertiſed by Simoneta; and other Prelats,that
it would bec a grear preiudicerorhe Eceleftaſtiques of F ance; Polonia,and o-
ther Kingdomes, where they are Counſelletsot Kings, and have the princi-
pall offices ; of which they thight'ealily beedepriued, if Pririces ſhould rake
cxatnple by his Holineſſe,andtheScecular!Nobiliry theite them to ir;for their
owncititereſts,' | Therefore if heewonkdlexecutethis his detertivination; hec
ſhould doe it in'effeRs;and nor iriwhitigg,keſtheſhowld damnifierhe Clergy

| 1n othetKingdomes very much; 2>2DENT 22 PIO 1015: 43; vs
© TheEmperonrfound by/experienct; eicheratthis time, or ryormoneths
before, when Moreno was with him;thachisvicinityeo the Councel did not
onely 'no good , ashee' thought it would > bur the! contrary 'rather. For |
the popiſhPrelates,ſuſpeRing his deſrigtieswere 5painſt the-authority ofthe

Court,

-
I. dn: 4 - a ® -
An add Ali. -
”

E:;»8. | the Councellof Trent, AT.

Court, werc afraid of cuery- thingy ſo that the difficulties and ſuſpitions' dic u563
curnc into bicterneſſe;and increale in number, Therefore having other: bis FR
ſincſſe wherein to employ himſelfe with more profit, he departed;;and wroc From.
to the Cardinall of Loraine, that the impoſlibliy-of doing good inthe Emamry;
Councel being palpable, he thought ir was the dutie of a Chriſtian and wife py9ht2s *:
Prince, rather to ſupportthe prelent cuill with patience, theoby curing ir, —» —
rocauſea'greater. And to the Count of Lune, who went vnto him by: Poſt, +,......
three daycs beforc, he gaue order to write to the Catholike King;concerning ror peat
the Decree Froponentibus Legatis exhorting his Maieſtie in bis-name robee ©
content not to deſire the reuocation,'or declaration, and if hee-did chinke

that the not declaring of ie might prciudice other Councels, the declaration

might, if need were, be madeinthe endof this. And+notice' becing giuen,

that they conſulted at Rome and/in Trent, to proceed againſt the 'Queene of "4 dbor-

reth the

England, he wrote to the Pope and the Legares, that if the Councell would Councell fra
nor yeeld that fruit,as was deſired,that they might.ſee an vnionofall Carho- yiins che 2,
liques to reformethe Church, at cheleaſt they ſhould nor giue occaſion-ro ****"
the heretickes to vnite themfelues more, which they would doe,incaſe they |
procceded again(t theQueene of England, For vadoubredly they would by
tharmeanesmake a genecrall league againſt the Catholikes; which would

bring forth great inconuenicnces. And fiis admonition-wasſo effeQuall, that

the Pope defiſted in Rome,andreuoked the Commiſſion giuen:to the Legats

in Trext, After thatthe Pope had giuen diftaſt ro rhe Spaniards, innor gi:

uing place to the Ambaſſadours,to appealſerhem' againe; he gaucearcto the

inſtance of Uarges, who had troubled:him many: dayes together, deſiring

thatas meancs was found that the Count of Luna , thezeAmbaſſadour of his

King, might comeinto congregations,ſo,the time of celebrating the Sefſi-

on drawing necre, his Holines would find away thathe oſs bethere alſo,
Whercofhauing conſidered well, and conſulted with-the Cardinals, bee rc+

ſolued finally thara place, ſeparared from the other Artibaſſadourgſhould be
giventhe Countin the Scflton allo, and tp remedy the comperency which

would bein giuing the Incenſe & the pax,hegaue ordetthat z.(,enſers ſhould

be vſed,and Incenſegiuen to the French-men;and the Spaniard borh atonee ;

as alſo two Paxes to be kiſſcdartheſameinitane, Andhee wroteto the Le-

carsro doe ſo, commanding that they ſhould concealea}{ vari} cherimeof

the execution, for feare ſome inconucniences might-heeprepated? if it were

knowen. | 0H 1111801, yitabon bigt bogrwmds

Morone, according to the' Popes:command, concealed the order, neither f 4ifoence;

did the French-men know of itat all.” On Saint Pareys day; rhoageof Tone, tence. |
the Cardinals, Ambaſſadours,and Farhersbeing aſſembled in che Chappell

of thic Cathedrall Church,and rhe Maſſebeing began which cheBiſhop-of

Alti,che Duke of Saugy his Ambaſſadour,did celebrate;on the faddera mur>

rey veluet chaire came out ofthe Veltry, and was placed: berweeie rhe-laft
Cardinall;and the firſt Parriarke': and by and by theCount of Laia, the's

niſh Ambaſſadour;camein,andfar ypon igwherearthe Prelatskepr a-gread
murmuring,' Loramecomplained to theLegats of thisfuddenaR,concealed
from him. "TheFrench Ambaſſadors ſentche Maſterof the-Ceremonics wh |
make the ſame complainr,celling the of them ccremonittof the Incenſe _
33 | | the

En

2414 The Hiſlarieaf | 18,6

15635 thePax... The Legats anſwered there wouldbe, two. Cenſers.and rwo Paxes;

" gh ety)? wherewith cheFrench were not {atisfiedand.laid plaincly,chat they .weuld
1s 4- | Y 48 . ;

Frepmane. be maintained, NOT _ iN paritic , bur in precedence, and would proceliagain(t

Emre: cucryinnauation, and depart from che Counccll... Theſe goings. and.com;

- worapy © mings continued yarill the end of the Goſpel, ſo that the Epiltle and Golpel

AV vere not heatd, by reaſon of the great whiſperings, ;I he T heologuce beirg

gone into the Pulpir to-preach, the Legars, with che,Cardinals, Ambaſſadors

of theEmperour,and. de Ferrieres, 0vg ofthe French, retired intothe Veliry,

- where thismatter was bandled, andihe Sermon: was caded berpreany thing

was concluded;In the midſt of the (;rede a {alence was made, and Madruccio,

with Fine{hburches , and the Ambaſſadour, of: *Polonia, came. our to ſpeake

with the Count of Luya,and to pray him in the name ofthe Legats, har,

forthat time, hee would bee content, thar: neither Incenſe, nor the Paxe_

ſhould be giucn to any, to hinder this ſudden rymulr, which .might cauſc

ſomegreatcuill,promiling;thar, at any other time whea hee requetted, they

would execute the order of his holineſſe, of two Cenfors, ang two Paxes ar

once, which being conſidercd on before hand, both hee and they, and all

might beable ro rcſolue how to gouerne themſelues wuh wiſedome, After

long diſcourſe, they returned with this reſolution that the Count was. con-

tent. So they all camequt of the, Veſtry, and went totheir places, andthe

Maſſe procecded without Incenſe or Paxe. And as {cone as theſe words were

laid; Ite,niſſaeſt,che Count of Luna, who, in the Congregations, was wont

rogoc outlaſt, did goc then beforethe Crofle, followed with a great parc

of the Spaniſh Prclats , and Italians, ſubic to his King. Afterwards the

Legar, Ambaſſadours;and reſidue of the Prelars departed allo, after the vſu-

all manner. PRE nn
. TheLegats, to;bee freed from the imputation layd ypon them for this
ſecret,andalmoſt fraudulent procceding,n a matter of ſo great, weight,were
faine topubliſh theexpreſſe orders, receiued, from Rowe, to, doe {o in that
timeyin thatmaner, and without participation of any, De Ferrieres laid pub-
liquely, that but fot the-reſpeRt he bare to the worſhip of God, hee would
* haue prottfted,as he.hadin commiſſion from bis King, which he would doe
hetcaftcr;in caſe thevſyall ceremonies of: Inceuſe and paxe were notreltored,
and giucnithem in their due place. The Cardinall of Loraine alſo wrote a
ſharpeletrer:torhe Pope; declaring the wrong thatſhould bauc beene done
them,and ſaid modeſily,that his Holinefſe had made hiin bee told that hee
' xrrifted ſomuch in hitn, that hee would that all; the aftaires'of the Counce!!
-- ſhouldbc,cammunicated vnto him ; whereof, though heſaw no effect, yer
hedid narchmplaine; bur he was troubledthat he had commanded -the Le-
gatrs,nortb-impart vnto bim their owne proper affaires, and eſpecially, thar,
in which he mighthauc done morc:good rhen another, adding, chat/more
 miſchicfehadinſucd, but for his mediation. Hee layde morcouer, that the
blameof all was impatced to his Holineſſe,and prayed him thathe would nor
be the authourand caiife of lo great ancuill- Hee ſent Muſottus wnto bim al-
ſo,by poli, ro informe him more parcicwularly of the reſolution of the French
Ambaſſadours, and of the immincnt danger, 'The Count of Luna complai-
ned of the ſtiffcncfle ofthe French Ambaſſadours, and magnified' his owne
great

FER

—_

L ».8. | _ theCouncellof Trent. 74g:

ofcat patience, and modeltie, and defited the Logates, thatthenexrSunday. x $63:
he mightbeadmicted'ro cquall place, 6 ceremonies, according torhePopes >
order.Somethought it was a ſtraragem of the Popeto diflolue the Coun- Faxomanp
cell; and che Papalins, called Amorenoti, {aid, that, ifthey muſt'come t02'dif- Enmmmnm,
ſolurion;they defircd ir ſhould rarher happenfor the comtogerſie abour the-$ tn ».
* words of the Councell of Florence, That the "Pope is Refor of 'the Church vni- '—wv —
werſall; thinking it would be more eafte tof inſtifice his Holineſle inthar; and
to lay all theblame vpon the French-men. G4; ;
The nextmorning,thelaſt of lunc, the Count hauing aſſembled the Spa«
niſh Prelats, and many lralians,rold them, that the day beforchee went into
che Chappell,not co giue occaſion of any diſturbance, but ro keepthe right:
of his King,and make vſc of the Popes order; thar{ince he had vnderſtood,
that, in caſc he ſhould returne to the Chappelagaine; the French-men would
protelt : which ifthey ſhould doe, hee mult nor faile to anfwere them, in the -
ſame miner and termes that thoy ſhould vſe; as in'regard of his Holinefle;
ſoalſo in the behalfe of the Maicltieof his on The Prelats anſwered, thar
if it came tothis, they would bercadie rodoe his Holinefle feruice, and nor
faile to hold eltecme of his Catholique Maicſticas farrgasdid concernethem.
The Count praycd them _ to conſider well of albwhich might bappen
in ſuch a cale; ſaying, that himſclfe would comeprepared allo.; And: know-
ing that rhe French-men could rake bur three courſes, cirheragainſt the. Le-
gars,or againſt the King,or againſt him the: Ambaſſadour, hee meant to'be
rouidedfor an an{werefor all. All che Ambaſſadours of other Princes per-
{waded the Legats to finda temper; thatſogreardiforder might nor happen:
who an{wering; tharthey mult needs execute the Popes'command, which
was preciſe, and withourany referuation, ard the rather' becauſe. they had
promiſed rhe Count to doc it whenſocuer he would _—_ it,,the Cardinal
of Loraine proteſted to them, thar, in caſe they did fo, hee would: goc into
the pulpit,aud ſhewof what imporrancethematter was, and what aruincit
would bring toall Chriſtendome,and with cheicrucifixe in band, would cry,
Miſericordia., perſwadidg the Fathers and people ro goe ourof the;Churchb,:
thar they might norſee1o fearcfull aſchiſmey and crying, Hee that, defires "the
welfare of Chriſtendome', let bam follow-mit, would depart qur of the Church ho-
ping hehould be followed byouery one. - The Legats mooued heatewith,
perſivaded the Court ro be) content that no Chappell ſhould be liclderthe
nxt Sunday; norar) fauna made, accordibgto>theiv{ty and {ent the.
Pope aduifeofall;! badwny't* 1ine 167 qu adiouo dei loanua) aduoge
Continuall congregations werehicld inthe: houſeoftbeErench and Spar
niſh 'Arttbaſſadours: TheSpaniard fonctimies gaue» hopche! Would bagconr:
cent, and ſometimes made:inſtandeito goc Wo mormenn-s o |
orderfor'therTrrenſez and:Pdx-! Aud the Frendh-Amibafladonirs wars tetolr
aedtoprotelt, and deparr,and ſaitgpenly;thdeubey wouldoriobiptetoliiaz
gainltrheLegares, bemg,burmecto oxecypors;hofagainilt the Kingof!

J=k , =}
4S 53 L £3» 131+ # %

orchoCgunt his/Ainbafladour,intczardiÞey did profedutorbeircauſe, hor;

againſt the Apo'tohike woull alwayeshbnourfollovtingahe
{tcp&ofrheir predeveſſours; buragaitifiithe perfor ofah# Pape, fromivhom!
the reiediceandirinbuaioheamgerivalling himſtlhopebaicy end gioing

| Caule

3 *Xx
$ + FLiS3

b

—C

V

* H—

TY.
1563

Pivs 4»
F@&RDINAND. -

ELIZABETH,
CHARLES 9,

Prilip z.

\ AAS
The P:ench-
men make a
queſtion
wriiether the
Pope were
lawt.lly c-
lectcd,

L1s.$.

m—_——

A—_

The Hiſtorie of

cauſe of (chilme,and for another cauſe alſo,appealing vnto the future Pope,
lawfully ele&ed, and to atruc and lawfull counce]l, threatning io depart,
and-ro celebrate a Nationall. The Prelats,and other Frenchmen apart , did
commonly ſay to cucry one, that the Ambaſſadors had proteſtations/againſt
cheperſon of che Biſhop, who caryed himſclte for Pope, being not |awtull
becauſe there was a nullitie in the ele&tion for Simonre., intimating particu-
larly che obligation which Cardinall (araffa had from the Duke of Hlorence,
with promilc of a certaine ſumme of money, which that Cardinal] ſent after-
wards to the Catholike King, pretending it could not þe made, but by con-
ſentof the Pope before his aſſumprion, as alſo another obligation made by
the Popes owne hand, then Cardinallin the Conclave, to the Cardinall of
Naples,wherof mention hath bin made before. And the Preſident de Ferrieres
prepared a very ſharpeOration-in Latine, and a proteſtation: which howſoc-
uer-itwas not made, yetitwas printed, and was ſhewed by the Frenchmen, .
and is ſtill robe ſcene in-print,as if it bad beene recited-;; ro relate the ſub-

ſtance whereof, is not beſides our preſent purpole, thar.it may be ſcene, not

The protefta -
tion,

whart the French faid only,bur what opinion they brought-rothe Councel.
Heſaid in ſubtance;Thar thar Councel] hauing bin called by means of Fran-
cis and Charles, brothers, French Kiogs,they,the French Kings Ambaſſadors,
were ory they (hould be forced rodepart, or conſent to the diminution of
the Kings digmitic, that the prerogatiue of the French King was knoven to
whoſoeuecr hath' reade the Popes Law , and the Hiſtories of the Romane
Church;as alſothoſe who haue read the volumes of the Councels muit
needs; know whartiplace themſclues ought ro holde, thatthe Ambaſſadours
ofthe Carholique King, in former general! Councels, haue followed the
Ambaſladours ofthe molt Chriſtian, thar now the mutation was made, not
by the Fathers, who, if they had becne in libertic, would nor haue depriucd
any Pance ofthis poſſeſſion, norby the Catholique King,fo neerelyallicd in

amiticandkinred with their King, bur by the Fatherof all Chriſtians, who,

in ſtead of bread, hath giuenhis eldeſt ſonne a ſtone, and for fiſh, alcrpent,

to wound, ich.one ſting, the Kingand the French Church together, that
Pius; doahiow {ceds of diſcord, to difturbe-the peace; of Kings who are
in amitie/ changing by force and injuſtice,the order.of{aring,alwayes vicd
by rhe:Ambaſſadours, and lakily.in che Councels .of{/onflance and' Lateran,
rothow thathe'isabouc Councels; that hecan-veither diſturbe theamiry.of
ch&Kinps, nor alter-the: dotrine:of the Councels:of; ({,/onflance and Baſil;
that the Councel is ab oue the Pope; that Saint Feter had earned taabſtaine
from wordly matters} whereasxhis: his-faccefſor; and noimnaror;: did pre-
retd4xogiueand to tako honours from Kirigs; that;bythe:diuine, Nationall,

_ andeiloll Law;acconnt was held oftho 1Eldeſtſaniic;cboth-in the. life; time

andafreorhedeabhiofthe:fatherz bur PiwAdathtcfulc co\preferre the'eidelt
Kirig befqreoholowvho wereborne longiaficr him; that: GoD/;-in reſpect
of Dajidwould ner diminiſh che dignitic of Solomon; and Pius the: fourth,
I ofvhe'\merircs of Pipme, (harles, Lewis, ahd bf other Kings of

Fraierdoeth precend: 'wirhhis Hecree, rorakeaway the prerogatines of the

ſuccefforsof choſe King's ;rhar;; againſt theÞaves of 'GoD and: man, With.
out any knowledyrof thecauſe; heebathrcondamnedthe King; taken bis
233)

moſt

———_
_—

E:us.8 theGdlneclofTrew, , mt.

moſt ancicnrpotſdſhonfiom him, andpronouncedagainit thecaulc ofa put 1563.
Land widow; that choancienc Popes, whenagenerall Synod was celebras >
ced;hauc heacrdone any-thing , withour :4þprobation thereof, and! Ping Farorncns
hath, wichouccharCouncell, which repreſemerh the Church yniucrfall; ras £124
ken away the poſſc(lionof the Orazorsota/King a pupull; not ciced, ſence rior Dy wy in
co:/him, butrorhe Synod; charcorthecad prouilion/mighti nor bee made a — —
gainft ic,he hath vicd\diligence roconceale his decree, commancing' the Lc:
gats, vpoh paine of cxcommunicarion; ro-keepeic ſecret; -thar the Fathers
thould 'eon{ider wherher theſe betbe facts of. Ferer, and/other Popes, 'and
whether they the Ambaſſadours ftc-not- forced ro: depart, from-the place
where Pizs harh lefc no place forkawes, nor:ſomuch as any priar of libertic
ofthe Councell,in _ nothing is propoſed cothe Fathers, or publilhcd;
if ic be nor firſt feng from Rome; thar. they didprotelt oncly-againlt that Pins
che fourth; adoring the-ApoltolikerSes) and the: Pope; and: the Church of
Rome, refuſing onely ro obey this man, and to cltceme him the Vicar of -
CH R1$7; (that they will always: tiauc in grear'vencranow the Fathets ;
bur, ſecingrhad wharſdeuer is done,is nordonein' Trent, but in: Rome, ' and
thattheDctrees publiſhed, are racherof Pius the fourth, then! of che Count
cell of Trens, rhey will aovreceiue them:forche Decrces'of a generall Synod;
Inconclufion, hecommanded the Prelatesand Diuines,in the Kings name,
to depart, and to'returne when'G o.D-thould reſtorerheduc forme andliber-
ticto generull Councels,and the King recciue his dac place. © - Wo,
- Butthere was no occafion roprotelt; Forthe' Count conſidered: finally,
that, howſocuer the Spaniſh party was greater,ininumber of Prelats,then the
French,yer, becaule the:dependanrs of the'Pope, who! ar! the firit wererom
this {ide, when they vnderttoodthe: willof his Hoſines, would now,khow-
ing thar a'diſpatch was made ro Romefor this caute;thinke:tiebe ſhould de
{itt vntillcheanſwereandrhe new order icame;vatid: therefore! royne with
the Freneh; his {ide would prooucto bee the” witdker,. Therefore inclining
co'a compoſition; andall.chcorher-Ambaſladours; [andthe Cardinall Mas
druccio imterpoling, afrerinany diftreulcies, theydgreed tharmtnher dochriſe/)
nor the Pax (hould be giucniothe publique ccremonics; vntill.che an{iwere
of the King of Spaine did »come-:This accord difplcafed the:Papes deperid
dants, who would haue becae:pladiof that occaſion; ro rarrrype-the pier
greſſc ofthe Councell,av-alloi thoſe; who beeing weary of Freve,and:nov
ſceing how the Counccll: could cither proceed pr. be/endc, deſired: the\in-
rerruption,/asrheleſſer cuill;rharthe:diſcords might'nor increaſe. It; iv;oerr
caine that the Pope himfelfe, receiuingaduice of this compoſition; did rake
irill, jnregard ofthe fanve-feare, xliar the diſcards may-one bee made: grea-
ter, andfome euillen[dagAdd the! Spaniſh miniſters:in- {ra did all blame =
che Count , for letting (lippe ſo-fdnburable an ectafiourifor the keryicerot =
theKingp>: 9 157A 503 to 3}: > 1y0ds 2b gait 21s) ods 2g not TD FN TROY
''This controucrſie beingicompated, the: Legars, ineens the celcbtay £017 ect
tion ofthe Seflion;bacalite the 0 deharodi: Satledderfdetenightchie games tor hip"
doneto reinoduerhediffizences../Loravt propaled the omitlionottheatwes! on we re-
arciclo;xhadig;ofcthefaltantionotBilbops,abdofihe authority ofche;Bops, "***
as rllingare/icroin che-partics:wendgan palſidnargand;concerning Bilbapsys |

2MT16Ww | fay

7
.
wal

wy OO The Hototienſ  Emg

DES _ 205 SOAR

1563 fay norhing, bur whar concerneththepower: at: Order, 'ToJame oftbelBan
>", palinsthis ecined a good -rcmedie; but, tq others nort;. who ſaid, #hae; chis
Fizonane: would: bec attributed to the Pope, asifehe forme, laſt compoled -didijior
EXE pleaſehim, and the: Princes would; wonder; why:his Holines ſhould; noe

SHantes 9. reſt Content, hauing the ſame power given bin, which Saint Peter bad;
AV whichwould haue o1cn matter of diſcourſe roche eectiques; Befades, the
Spaniards would take occaſion to.haus. link hope hetebfter ro /agfee isqgerber

in any thing ; whence 2G: 2 PPT ITY -othari matters als.
Morcouer there might bee a doubowhether it. <6<uld/ be: 'efieied,(becaule:i

was probablethat many of the:Fathers-Would behuite;, that thoſe Agticles
ſhonld bee declared. The Cardinall of Zarame oftcred:tbat the Exctichnbn
ſhould not require it,and{o roJabourwiththe Spaniards that they allo ſhovld.
becontcnt; adding, that, in. "caſe the Legary would doec:thellikeawith the
Ealidns, whodociwith too much paſkon-oppole the: dthers; all wouldi bee
compoſed. ory [7 MM. A2EN01 21 UO 93 Y!21 S$ Vti11121 2499 5

- And yery ficly order camefrom tho Emperour to-his Ambaſladours ; rv

' vſeall meancs that the. authoritic of the;Pope ſhould nor; bed dilcuſled, ir
Councell; which his Maicſtic did, becauſe heefaw,thewaurpere was incli+
pedro calarge it, and feared that ſomething might beedetermined;; which
might make/his concord with che Proteſtants more ditficule! The Amba(;
ſadours, hauing treated withthe| Legatscin conformiue heotcof,.as allo with
Loraine, and otherprincipall Prelatcs, did cauſe th is. Article ro bee, omireed,
a3 alfo that other of the laſtirurion of Biſhops, .c Burfirſt-rhey: made many =
confatrationsabourir, admitting 'vnto them: the | Prejares which. were: of
greateft-noteand hadmolſt followers, ſometimes mote, ſometimes fewer,

that they might ſodifpoſe of matrers;asthat all mightrelt contented, andyhe
Dectecsof the protiſibns madeagaitlithe abuſes were given {orih.Concer,

. ning/the firſtpoint, whichwas of the cleQion of Bilbopsgthe Ambaſſadors

of Spaize and *Portugaltdid ſharply oppolc this particular, that che-Mctrops-
liahs' ſhould examinetheperſons promoted to: Biſhoprikes (whereof aweh
harhbetne ſaid before)-fayingytharrhis wasitoſubiedt the Kings to the Pre-
lats heir ſubicds;becauſe ein was indireatly. given them, torgiedt rhe
Kingsnomitiations. The French Ambaſſadorsbeting demanded. what their
opinion was, made ſhewchey did not carowhether is. were decreed or not,
Wheteupon the Popiſh Prelars, who thought ic d:dirvlinution ro the Poprs
authorine, fayd, thacal[rhazpoint might bee omdtited::;: eſpecially, becaute,
19thefft Scfſiony ſufficient: prouifion: was imide: in [that marreroiBuco)
chersloppoting hotely, a concluſion was: made by corrmoniconlcmey -chas
trthould bce deforred varillche next Seſſion, that:they! mighs; have rims
fo ro:diſpoſcit,asthar it might pleaſe al, leaſt theEpoblication oth chiogs
doreedon ſhould becrofſed, aregardoftbis. 1141) 06! 20 , anwa ocls
| There was the famedifficultic about the laſt of the Articles pr |;
_. whicha formegf confeſſion of faith was preferiadad bee |

' , ©  who'weredeftynci{co Biſhoprickes, Abbics, aridothee Benefice? vir
1» beforetheexamination; which-did ſo'cohere wirkiichariofnbeoulettiong; ab
© thartheycouldnotbe ſeparated, Ir wds #dohud an feferre cbis Andiclelallo:.
Butþecaulc irwas'deforred;and then reſolnod novrobridicareend;vrandeatters |

wards,

# = at

one Biſhop of Rome; Vicar of Chr 1sT , holding bogtancy the faith and do»

. all, rbatinzhe'Sactamentof the Alzar chere:tsþe triie:body-and blood of

Cx R1$Ti,..rcally and (ubſtantially, vader the Bread and Wine; bythe ver-
rue and power of theword of God , 'vttered hyithe Prieſt; the onely miniſter
ordained'to this purpoſe, by the, inſtitution of: Cx Rr 1sT; conteflingallo
thathec js offered inthe Maſſeto:God),'. fortholwipg and rhe dead; for the
remiſlipn of, finnes, - Aod finally. to: receiug add: 'retaine moſt firmely-all
tings which haye þeene vntillchis time piouſly and religiouſly obſcrued: by
their anceltours , nor to ice remooued tram themby any meancs; | burroa-
ugide all nouity. of doarine, as amoſt pernicionspoylan, flying all fchifme,
dcreſting all hereſic,and promiſing to afliſt cheChuirch/ readily and faickfyl:
ly,againlt all heretikeg.) +. | bommobnoo od ot lun Rail omni) ot!
- Irbcing(avbath beene laydlrefalicd edprinictbisrnacer,theylabiiuined
to rectifig $he.maricr of Relidepttyo:bxatkingariay whatfoeucrmight dit
plcaſe thoſe who held it to bee, de iure Diuino, or thole whothopghe ird-beey
ge iure Pajatinos | Lordlneyvicd all efiedtbell diligebento makerhepartiosigrecy
reſolaing,that , by all meaves, theSellion{bowld beheldat'chexinag appbim
ted. For having receingdlaccelyyary; loving letters fromitic Pope; commire
bim,co.comt o/Rowe; and-ro-iprakeiyihibim|ygad dereun\iningtogiut his
HaliceſſtallſatizaFipnhitreſbluriganwwns to giut hiding at an carnalb,
that is, ah dileddegad coingaeig deco ermatn he rs
larss;.9 thingmushdetiveiby kign.: Forlitigaiogto Rowe; hieſpaknam-
biguoully,, ojcaning taxxpectan@nſiverefodm: Fr {7 Aborhermacrer,

chough afnagreatitnparcance,didþralobg thaprogtciiagebaois zcbe hand-
ling ofche fandbotiofiiders,obvehich-aigrear, hong Atcicdd was propoled,
whacitall,erveapouniieh Goindhenditeakh Dovconnekbb offes of a
41T Qqq Orc-

1

y Gholt; it cannot! crre(

"IP. 4.4 3 a
-

f
s

tr tt

734 The Hiſtorie of © | -Ers.8;

563 doote-keeper. | This was compoſed inthe beginning by the Depuries,when

>= >, the Deerecs weremade/,as neceſſaric ro oppoſe againſt cheProtetarits, who

Fxxemen»- fay thoſe Orders 'Wwere not inflitured by Cy'x1 $7; but by 'Ecelefiaſticall

rams incroduRion; becauſe thereisyſe of them, as being officesof ooed-and 'or-

 —uantss- 9: erty gourrnetnent; bur not Sacraments. "This Article bf the-Deetcewas

\-— takerotrof the-Poirtificall , which would be roo lohgand hiperfluens' ro

Thefundions repeat!, in regardiitmay be read inthe booke'it felfe-\ Abd the Dectee did

oar Orders, declate beſides: thatthoſe funRions catinot be excetciſed bur by him; who;

being promored bythe Biſhop Hath reecined grace from God,” ad 2 (ba:

rafter imprinted; ro make hum ablero doe it” Burwhen it cainEto” bee e-

ftabliſhed , they-were! troubled to refolire an oide'common- obicttion;

vvhat necde there could bees of a CharaSder j"and' fpirituall grace ;' to cxets

ciſe corporall Aces, as'toireade, light eandles,”rin' bels, which may bee

asiveltor better done by thoſe who arc avr /ordiined ; eſpecially Tince 1c

harch beenedifulcd , that mert ordained ſhould exerciſethofe' functions. ''Te -

was conſidered, [that the Charch was condemned Fereby for omitting this

vic; ſo many yeeres; And'there was's difficaltte how'to'reſtsre che pra-

Aiſle of them. © Forthey muſt ordainie , not cn{dres; burmen'ofage rothur

the Church doores,*to rivg the bells, ro diſpoſſeſie rhe poſſeſſed with devils:

which if chey did; they did eroffe another Dectee, tharthe inferivur orders

ſhould be a neceffariedegreeto the greater: ',” Neither did theyſee how they:

could reſtore the rhree officegto'the Deaconſhip, 1& mitiiſter ar the Altar;

co Baptize , and co preachizhorhow the office of the Exorcilts eouldbeeoxe +

erciſed, in regard of chevſebrouphrin, thatthe Prieſts ottely didYiſpolſe

the'poſſeſſed. + {ntonins 'Auguſtinus,, Bilhop of Lerida'; "would biuchadihar

whoſe marter omirred, laying that, Howſoeuer it/wascerttlinethatthele were

Orders, and Sacrainents j'!yevitiwould bechard td perlwadetharthey were”

broughr in inthe PrumiriveCharch/;' when there were but few-Chriſlians ;

chatitwasnorforrhe Sy nodydignitie,to'deſcend to f6 thany particulars; thar

ir.wastufhcientrolay,there arcfourcinferiour Orders,withour defeending to

any further ſpecialige- of dp@rne;'or making any infiogarion it the Practiſe:

Oppoſationwasmade, that fo the do&rine vf the Proteſtaiitspwho wall cheth

idle Ceremonies, would not be condemned. Bur Lomaine was'(Auctiour of a

middle courte rharrhe Arcicleſhould: beomirredziamd infevy werdsthe CXC-

cution referred roche Biſhop pwho:ſhould(cauls thim to bee obferued);, as

A much as waspoſhble 51003 10 06h owns 2G 035i Þ19ct tw 2ocl, /\olq

.251 Theſe thingsbeingderled; they:reſdlath ro readcallm\thewenfiltation

of thpſe principall Prelates | thar allzliingsmighr paſle/tyche Seneral} Cont

A atiouwith abſolute quiers! ; Borh/parcicy word agreed), biit'6iitly;in-the

Hnathemariſme,rhainsgthatahe' Hrarevhyec is intticured Divite ord

nation; ''i'TheArchbilnop of Qrrancey urid belier|Nopilh Pee pected,
tht, by ſuckgenetall words, fignifyingrehur

<diffcrepce arebyorflinagiongfCnrt 5:7;

all holyi0atlegwithourniakin
mithrBeirderredythat bid!
-areequaltoch& PapecnuBurahePopiſhD < avtiſtedid pertwatt
-therri nor 10: aki difficyghit ;/bevauſe 8, was manifeſt 4 bpHlie Cahont
precedent , andfobfſequent,) tharnochingwiacpblenofbadoeyin which
the Bope dothnor cxcced chbBiſhopsanderd jarhooaqradesf iledd; lt of.
251000 pp £) The

—_ —_— —

L1 8s. 8% the Countellof Trens.” 735
Theſame meo.fuſpe&tedallo the Profieme of the Articleof reſidence zwhete: 1563
it was {aid;; that thoſe,yho. baue.cure-of ſoulesare bound ;-byi Gods com- AA
maund , 10.Knowertheir{hecpe,&c; ioferring 4 that it was, ift (ome ſort; de-;Fropmens.
clared chat Reſidence was by the commandement-of God.:Bu the greater, Exmanry,
pats of the Papalines were af the.coptrayy opinion; laying;thatallihole parogtenents
ticulars, which arc {aidtrobeccommantdedby God yto him who) bath charge; -—:
of {oules, ay beobſeruedinablence;yhoughtarfo wellias inprefence; and.
that the worges following.doe projude againlt all preludiqhea/hintBonieds,
They ſaid maxcouer, that-it hauing bin compoſed'by-the Carditialot Maneua;
and ofzen;conf{ulted on, this doubt was never made, and/that at Romeliker:
wile theyadid nor thinke irpretudiciall., Bur Otrantoand hisfollowers could
nor poflibly bee rerouedfromtheir opinion! (11), 2 2G) 07 abs hh v2

- -Some.ofthe- Spaniards 'were very carticlt for thedeclarationytharehe: In:
{ticurion of Biſhops, and Reſidence are deywrediuns.bur were forced to: de-!
{aſt., becaule the matey part of cheir Colleagues were dilwddtd by! Loname;
who vicdtcarmes of conſcience; ſaying it was not good ;:nor-accoptable:10
G 0D , when the good delired could nothce cfteRed , to caulercuill by a
ſuperfluous and. vaine-inftance; that it was ſufhcient ro!hinderithe preiir-
dice which-ſome thought co haue donei the truth,, by citabliſhing,toprrary:
opinions, and that ifall-could- not bee now: obrained| which. was |defared;
ſome thing might bec hoped for hereafter , by theaſbljanceot G o)D , Bur
GranutaSegonia , and ſome others could-not beeremooued by any. meaacs;,
 andontheother fide, 'ir was not poſhble roimake quier the Patrtarkei of. Ze-!
ruſalem , or the Archbiſhop of Otranto, and their adherents, who refolucd to;
croflcall that was propoſed , as not ſeruing; to temoue the differences), but

onely to couer them ; beciug afſured, that, in-the progrefle, they would rc-

rurne with greater force , and thinking it better ,- incaſe they mult necedes
breake, to doc it before the Seſſion then after. ' Neither were the Legares a-i

ble to perſ[wadethem. $ Lt | [35 24!

Notwithſtanding theſe two contradictions, matters were eſtabliſhed

with the other principall Prelates ; and the ninth of [uly thegenerall Congre-
gations began; in which all thar belopgerh to the dodtrine and Canonos:of

Order being firlt read,” the Cardinall of Loraine gaucan cxamplcof ſpeaking}

briefly ,-and making no difhiculcic: and; was imirared by orhers, vnrilkae,, .
came to Grayat4- to ipeake; who ſaid, it was an indignitic, that the Fathers Prelas arc
ſhould bee thus detided; handling the foundation of the Inftiturion'of Biz tir opaon
ſhops ſo long, and now omitting it; requiring the declaration, de ture Wind: 51mm the
no, and wondring why a point ſo true and infallible, ſhould notbce (deela+ Piers:
red, He added that all bookes which ſay the contrary onghitro beecondems

nedas hereticall, Segonia adherodto'bim , and ſaid irwasan;exprelle tracthj

which could-not bee denied, and char ic ought ro beedeclaredrocondemne

the beretiques who defend thecontrary..  Guadite, Aliffe, Motte-Maraiogud
ſomeorher Spaniſh Prelates followed : fomeof which faidy-thartheiropini-

on was as trite as the precepts of the deealgzue, The Bilhzp:of (onimbries
did complaine publiquely , that the erucch waidiromwmuentcd by crate.) that

is by ordaining ticular Biſhops.' - Fortbis did thevy chariuriſaiction wasmhot
cſſenciall ro a Biſhopricke , nor receined iramcdiarlyi troorGmRLsT And

ii Qqq z CR hee

w_ " The Hiftorie of L1is.8,

1563 heercquired a o__—_ ro the contrarie, repeating the conceipt'often v-
> ſed, that aChurch and faithfull ſubics were as'&enriall to a Biſhop , as
Frevmany. a wifero an huſband. TheDecrec of Reſidence beirig propoſed afterwards,

: Eunzazzrn. Lorgine did approouc it-with the ſame breuitic; onely hee aduifed, thar
 paanrns 9 wherethe caules of abſenceare' expreſſed, amongſt which is vtility of the!
\—— Church, vrility of the Common-wealth ſhould bee added alſo, ro remooue'
all impediment which that Decree might bring to the admiſhon of Pre-
lates to offices and publique Councels ; wherein he had agenerall applauſe,:
Madruccio ,who followed ,ſpake inthe famemanner; "The Patriarke of Je-
ruſalem; andthe Archbifthops Feralle , and Otramto refuled to deliver thar:
opinions concerning that Decree : whereof the Archbiſhop *Brags , when
his rurne was to ſpeake, complained , and turning to the Legates, told them,
aftcra reprehending manner, that they ought ro vſetheir authoritie, and to
forcethe Prelares to ſpeake theiropinions , and that it was abad example in
Counccll, asif they were compelled to bee ilent, or had anambitionnorto
ſpcake but when they had followers. Whereupon others , who rcfolucd to
imitatc them, changed their purpoſe, and conſented ro the Decree, The
other Decrees were approoucd as they were read , but onely that Granata
made inſtancethat Reſidence might bee declared to beede ture dininoinplaine
words , becauſe (heefaid ) the ambiguous words of the Proheme were vn-
worthy of the Councell , which was aſſembled to take away , and not to in-
creale the difficulties; thatbookes maintaining the contrary ſhould bee pro-
hibitcd and chat Cardinals thould expreſly and namely bee comprehended
in the Decree. This laſt concerning Cardinals, did {cemeto pleaſe many.
Whereupon Moronean{wered, that conſideration ſhovid bechad of it, and
that it ſhould be ſpoken'of another time. © They proceeded inthe reſidue,
and, in the end, the Patriarch and the ewo Archbiſhops conſented alſoro the
Decree; which was the firſt thing ro make them hope that the Seſſion could
be celebrated at the time appointed, athing thought impoſſible, bur cffe-

&cd, by the dexterity of rhe Cardinall of Loraine,
The dayes foitowing the Fathers gauc their voyces concerning the other
Articles of reformation. In which there was no difterence of momenr,
bur onely, that, ar the great inſtance of Powpeins Zambeccari , Biſhop of Sul-
mona , one particle was remooued out of the Articles of the firſt Tonſure; in
which it was faid , that , if the promoted ſhall commirre any deh1&@ within
{ixe moneths after the ordination , the ordination ſhall beepreſumed ro
bee fraudulent, and the ordained ſhall not enioy the priuiledge ofthe Court;
and whereas itis decreed that none ſhould bee ordained before hee was
appropriated to ſome Church, the innovation of the Decrees madeby the
Lateran Councell was added, that thoſealſo who were ordained to rhecile
of the Parrimonie ſhould bec applicd to the ſervice of ſome Church;in which
they ſhould aftually exerciſe themlclues, or otherwiſe ſhould nor bee parra»
kers of the priuiledges. This laſt was taken away allo : and for thereſidue,”
with a ſmall variation of words, and thoſc nor belonging to the ſubſtance,
_ fatisfation was gjuen toall rhe Fathers. Feftoras Sf rio 1
The Spaniards; who could nor obrainc in Congregation thedeclaration
forthcinlticuuonof Biſhops as they deſired, did therhirceenthday atnighr,
aſlcmble

L1 B, S. = the Councell'of Trex. _ 7
aſſemble in the houſe of rhe Countof Lunas; where Granata and his adhe- t563
rears, perſwaged him to protelt to the Legates, incaſethe determinationof ©—>
char point ſhould bee omitted; bur others diſlwaded it; as a rhing which Ennis:
might raiſc'agreat commotion, The whole Congregation was ſpent indif- £77; na
putes, and ended in contention, deterring the reſojution ynrill thenexe mot- SAARLAL Þ
ning. Whenthe Count, hearing againe the diuerfiric of opinions, and ST —
conſidering thar it would much diſpleaſethe Pope, all the Iralian Biſhops,
and all the Frenchmen , who had reformed their opinions, prayed Grane-
7a to thinke as others did, in regard it was not a matrer of conſcience, becauſe
the queſtion was not in what manner it ſhould beerefined, bur whether it
ſhould be refined , oromitted. Grandranot changing, burſaying that hee
choughr in his conſciencethe determination was neceflary , hee deſired him
that hee would {peake his opinion quictly, and freely, and content himſelfe
if it were not embraced by others, and abſtaine from contentions ; which
borh hee and the others promiſed to doe. | '

Thenext day, which was the next before the Seflion, a general congre-

ation was held , in which Morone did propoſe ; whether the Fathers were

leaſed that in the Articles of Refidence, and of theageof thoſe who are
to bee ordained, racntion ſhould bee made of Cardinals; and particularly of
the age. Few did conſent, and moſt of them did diſcourſe that there is no
cauſero make any Cardinals vader age, except Princes , in whom age is not
conſiderable, becauſe they doe honour the Clergy, of what ageſocuer they
bee; andrthar it was to no purpoſe to make'a Decree where there was no a-
buſe. But in che particular ofthe re{idence, the gteater parc was of opinion |
they ſhould bee named. Burſome contradicted, becaulc it would bee an ap-
probation that Cardinals might hauc Biſhopriques, and, by conſequence,
(ommendaes ; which was not fit to doe , bur to'leauethiem to their conſei-
ence, which mult ncedes tel] them char they are nor-exempr from the gene-

——_——

rall precept, rather then by naming them, ro approoue two abules at once,

plurality of Bencfices., and C ommendaes. Afterwards ſome other particulars
of ſmall weight becing handledand concluded, afl which was robee publi-
ſhed in Seſſion was read againe, the Prelates giuing rheiropinions onely with
the word, placet. Some Spanjards and Iralians , in number rwenty cight,
anſwered negariuely, and the others, being 192. did'confent ;and in the en
Moyons concluded, that the Seflion ſhouldbeheld. Hethankedrhe Fathers
foraccepring the Decrees, and exhortedthe others ro ioine withthem, and
prayed the Count of Lanato per{wade his Prelats, thar, ſeeingthe vninerſall
concourfeofall theCouncell in one opinion, they would nor difſent. Where-
of ſpeaking with him more particularly after the congregation, hepromiled,
that, whenſocuer the Popes authority ſhould bee declared, according to the
forme of the Councecll of Florence, bi infticution of Biſhops ſhould bee de-
clarcd alſo to bee de inredinino. The Spanith Prelatesbecing aſſembled har
day at night, in the houſe ofrhe Count, after many diſcourſes, grounding
themſclucs ypon the Cardinals promiſe, were content to' accept all
things. | 2 | |
The fifccenth of Tuly beeing come, they went all roChurch early in the 7+ Sctiign.
mornivg with the viuall order; waere the accuſtomed ceremonies were V-

Qqq 3 led.”

=

<<

| L1 p.8,

738  T by Hiſtorie of
1563 fed. The Biſhopof Paris ang Maſle, and the Biſhop of Al;fe preached,and
#'E did offendthe French-men,by vaming the King of Spaine befqge their King;
F:zpxanD. as alſo the Polonians,by naming Portagall before T'olonia; and the Yenetians,
Euzavern. by Mcntioningthe Duke of Sauoy before their Republique. , He ſeemed to lay
Paantes. 9: allo,tharthe celebration of the Councell,was a continuation with the prece-
—— dentof Taxl and Tulws.; wherein the Imperialiſts and French-men hadill
{atisfa&tion. He ſpake alſo of the faith and manners of the heretikes and ca-
cholikes ; and (aid, thatasthefaith of the Catholiques was better, ſo the he-
Theprexcher reriques did excecde them in good life; which did giue much diſtaſte, cſpects
ny Ambata- ally ro thoſe who remembred the ſaying of our Sauiour, and of Saint James,
fot thatfaithis nor ſhewed butby workes. Ar that inſtant nothing was {ayd,
for fcarc of troubling che ccremonics. But the next day, the French Ambal-
ſadours;the Polonianandtae Vencrians, defired the Legars that the Sermon
might nocbe printed, nor putamengli the acts of the Councell. The Maſle,
and the other prayers being cnded, the Brietes of the Legation of the Cardi-
nals Myorone and Nauaggero wercexcad , as alſo the Mandats ofthe King of Po-
lonia, of the Duke of Sawoy, the leuer of the Queene of Scotland , and the
Mandate of the Catholique King. . Afterwards the Decrces of the doctrine
of faith were read ; in which there was no;contradiction, but onely that
the maior parcof the Spaniards ſayd;, they did conſent vpon condition, that
the Lords the Legates, (hould performe the promiſe. made to the Ambaſſa-

dour of thcir King. | ;
The Decree Te Decree of faith did containe in ſubſtance. 1. The Sacrifice and
of fark. the Priclthood , are vaited in each law; therefore there beeing a viſuble ſacrie
tice inthe New Tcitamear, that is the Euchariſz, it myſt be confeſled neceſſa-
rily,that thereisa vitiole ang externall Prieſihood, in which power is giuen,
by dwine in(tirution,tocontecrate, offer , and muniſter the Euchary?, and to
rcmitand reraine ſinnes.. 2. Which Pricſthood becing diuine,mult hauc
many Orders of Minilters to ſcrue init, which muſl aſcend from lower to
higher minilteries, becaulc the Scripture makerh mention of the name of
Deacons, and from the beginning of the Church the miniſteries of Subdea-
cons, Accolyrhites,Exorciſts, Readers, 8: Oftiaries were vicd, placing the ſubdca-
conſhip amopg{tthegreater Crders. 3. And becauſegrace is conferred in
the holy ordination, Order is truly and properly one of the ſeauen Sacraments
ofthe Church. 4 In which a (harader becing imprinted , which can-
not be þlottcdout, the. Synode doth condemne thoſe who fay that Prieſts
hauc ſacerdoral power for atime, ſo that they may returne to the world,and
not exerciſe the miniſtery of the word of God. And.doth condemne thofe
who lay all Chriltians arc Priclts, or have cquall ſpirituall power. ; which is
nothing bur to confaund the Ecclefiaſticall Hierarchie , which is in an _or-
der, as an armie of ſouldicrs. . To which Hierarchical 0:der doe belong el-
pecially Bifhops, who are ſuperiour io Prieſts, to whom it appertazneth to
adminiſter the Sacrament of Confirmation, to ordaine Miniſters ,and to per-
formeother funftions. The Synodedoth reach allo,thar, in the ordination
of Biſhops, Prieſts, and other degrees, the conſent, vocation, or authority of
the Magiſtrate, orof any other (ccular power1s not neceſſary; and thatthole,
who, called one]y, or inſtituted by the people , ſecular power or Magiſtrate,
| J | or

XUM

*

————

the Councell of Trent, _

Lazk

or by their ownertemeritic ,docaſcend to/Eccleſiaſticall Miniſteries., are nor I 563 |
Miniſters,but thecues. | PAN

> Pivs. 4.

This doctrine was attended with cight Anathematifines. - 1; Againſt, F=zpmaxy..

him that (hall ſay , that chereis,no. viſtble: Prieſthoodin the new. Tcltament, E::mazry,,

norany power toconſecrateand offer,and remir ſinwes,, but onely an Office, p22ntt®-

or naked Miniſtery ro preach the Golpel, and tharthoſe who doe not preach, —vV |

arc not Prieſts, 2. '; Or that, beſides Prieſthood, thercarenor greater Orders; "4 ogg

and eſſe, which aredegrees tg alcend ro.Pricithood.. 3. Orthar holy ordi- |

nation is nota Sacrament, butan humane inuention,or onelya certaine Rite,

to cle& Miniſters of the word of God, and of the Sacraments; © 4..+ Or thar

the holy Ghoſt is nor giues by the holy Ordinartion ,,norany (,harafer im+.

printed, or thata Prielt may returne to bee/aLaique.., 5. Orchat the holy. *

Vnction, or other Ceremonies which the Church yſeth , arc. nor! requilite;

bur may be omitted, or are pernicious. | 6..,'Or thatthere is not an Hierar--

chic inſtiruccd in che Catholique Churchy, by Auiric Ordination, conſiſting

of Biſhops, Pricits; and Minilters. | 7. . Or that Biſhops are nor Superior,

ro Pricits,or haue norpower co confirme and ordaine,, orthat Pricſts alſo

hauc the ſame power, or that Orders conferred wirhout.theconſeht or voca»

tion of the people, or Secular power, arc voyd;or that they tnay be lawfull

Miniſters of che word of God and Sacraments, who are not lawfallyorday-

ned by rhe Ecclefialticall power.: 8. Orthat Biſhops aſſumed by authori- Dy

tic of the Pope ,arenvr lawfulland truc,but char it is an humane invention.
Afterwards the decree of reformation was read , which contained cigh- Fe pets

eccne heads. The, firlt concerning the matter of Refidence, ſomuch /'7 tion.

ted on, in which ir was ſayd,that:cuery otre that hath cure of foules, is bound,

by che Commandement of God,, to know his ſheepe, ro offer Sacrificesfor

them, to fecdethem with preaching, Sacraments,and good cxamples,and to

attend other Paltorall charges; whichthings becauleithey cannor be per-

| formedby him who docth nora(liſt and warch.ouertheflocke, the Synode

docth admoniſh them to feede; and gouerne, with, iudgementand tructh.
Bur that none by a badde interpretation of the Conſtitutions, made vader
Paul the third in this marter.,. may. thinke the abſence of fiue. Monerhs
lawfull;,, it docth. declare , that: whofqcuer, hath Biſhoprickes,, in whar
ticleſocucr, though Cardinals ,. are bound;to reſide perſonally, nor may
beeablent , bur when Chriſtian charitie, yrgenr necellitie, due obedjenes
or vtility of Church or Commgu-wealth doch require z, asallo that luch cas
ſes of ence mult; bec approoucd for, lawful, by che. Pope, ar-Merra-
politanc, exccptthey bee nocoriousar ſudden, inwhich.caleche Prouin;
Tiall Councels mult rake Knowledge, and: iudge of ithe licenges graunted,
har there may beeno abul; rhercin, _ the Peelates prouidingrhar;rhe people
a Lig be damnified/in their abſence. And becauſea ſhorrablence delers
ueth notthis name, though, withoutanyhecaules atoreſayd, it docth der
clarc that this TT not exceede the ſpace.ofewo moneths,, ,or three ar th
molt, whether ir b&*conginuare orat diyers times, ſorharthore be equiry of
reaſon jn it, and withourthe dammage of theflocke;, which muſt be refer;
red to the conſcicnces of the Prelars,admoniſhing every one.nopro beabſent
on Sundayesin Aduent,Lent, Feaſt of the Naintie, Refurreftion \ Pentecoſt, or
| or pus

740 : DES The Hiſtory of L1s. 8:

ee

p $63 C orpus C brifti. Which Decrce, he thar (hall violate, beſides the penalties im-
> —> poſed ypon Non-refidents vnder Paul the third, audmortall finne,may nor,

Piv $s. 4. 4 : p 4 A -
Pm. wath's good conſcience, cnioy the Fruits for that proportion of time, de-

Enzazzrn Crecing the ſame concetning allthoſe that hauc charge of ſoules , who, be-
Caartrs. 9: ng ablcnt with leauc of the Biſhop , mult ſubſtitute a ſufficient Vicar, ap-
— prooucd by che _ ;'allowing aconucnient ſtipend ; and docth ordaine
that this Dececc, together with the other vnder Paul the third, ſhall beepub-
liſhed in the'Prouinciall aud Dioceſan Councels. |
The ſecond Articleof the Decree concerning Order, was; That whoſo-
cuer docth hold a Biſhopricke, in what title ſocucr, though'a Cardinall, nor
receiuing conſecration- within three moneths , ſhall lofe the Fruits, and de-
ferring three moneths more, ſhall loſe the Benefice, and thatthe confecra-
tion , if ic bee not in the Court of Rome-, ſhall bee cclebtated inthe proper
Church, orin theProuince argheleaſt, iftherebe opportunitic. Thethird,
That Biſhops ſhall celebrate te ordinations in their owneperſon, and, in
caſe they be ſicke, ſhall not ſend their ſubicEts to bee ordained by other Bi-
ſhops, before they bee examinedand approoued by themiclues. Thefourth,
Thar the firſt Tonſure ſhall nor bee giueb but to him that”is confirmed, and
hath learned the principles of Faith ,to rcade-and write, and.hath choſen a
Clcricall life to ſerue Go D,not ro auoyd the Seculariudgement. The fifr,
He thatis to be promored to the inferiour Orders ſhall haue reſtimonie from
the Pariſh Prieſt, and'Schoolemaſter , and charge ſhall beegiuen by the Bi-
ſhop, that his name may bee propoſed publikely in Church, andinquifition
made of his birth,age, manners and life. The fixth , That none ſhall haue
an Ecclefiaſticall Benefice before the age of fourteene yeeres, nor cnioy the
exemption of the tribunall, if he haue nor an EcclefialticallBencfice, or wea-
ring the habit and Tonſ#re, docth not ſeruc inſome Church, by commiſſion
from the Biſhop, or dwell in a Seminary , or Schoole, or Vniuerſitie, with
licence of the Bifhop. And,for married Clerkes,the confticurion of Boniface
thecighth ſhal be obſerucd;with condition hikewiſe that they (hal ſerue jn the
Church,ifi habir and To#ſwre,by depuration of the Biſhop. The ſcuenth, That
whico an ordination'is tobe' made, all (hal becalledto the Cirie,the Wedneſ:
day bcforc, atiddiligent inquiſttion ahd cxamination of them made bythe
Biſhop, wich theaſliftance of whs he pleaſerh. The cighth; Ordinations ſhall
not be celebrated btit-intimes appointed by the law,in the cathedral Church;
inpreſcnce of the Can6Hs'; afdiF occaſion bee to make it in an other place
of the Dioceſſe, it ſhall bee in themoſt worthy Church , inpreſence of the
Clergic. Euery oneſhall be ordained by his'owne Biſhop, or, if any becor-
dained by anorher,he ſhall haue letters teſtimoniall ofhis owne: Theninrh]
A Biſhop ſhall not ordainconeof his family thiat isnot his fubie&} ifhe have
not dwelt with him three yeeres, and ,inthatcaſe; ſhalf Yreſently conferre
a Benefice vpon him.” 'Therenth, No Abbar; or other Prefate, ſhall conferre
the firſt Tonſure ,or the minor Orders, but vnto Regulats, their fu bie&s; tor
cheſc orother Prelats',Colledges, or Chaprers, ſha herant dimiſforie letters
to Sccular Clerkes ro recciuc Orders,” The eleventh}, That themitior Orgers
ſhall be conferred ypon him that ynderſtandeth the Larine tongue, 4rid wich
interpoſition of time berweene one Orderand another'/and theſe beitg de-
Orecs

PR

_

Y RR

— a? EE_ IT hs Zh

Lin 8.1 So che Coungell of Trent. -——

748

mes vngp.Qckers, aonglhall: be pings
es worthy ofholy ordess;! 1d fromche laſt ofrheminos, Orders varill the

Subdaaconſhip , there ſhal!

_ tudgeo racrwile far 1 g90d gfche Church, Ii The ewclfch Fs None ſhall LIE \B3T4,

KARL. fe,
Pruritie *s ...

be.ordained Subdeacon, befar the age af cwo and zwenty-ycercs,, Deacon be-

be chedguerpolitianof ayecte, ifthe Bilbop ſhall Fuo

if chere be not hopethat he may 1563.
ON

1NAND.

'
- -

 farethreeand rwentyaPriefhbeforefaxe and ryenty., Neither ſhalltheRg, —v—-

cous (hall. bee fuclt praued in,chemingrOraers ſhall hauc hopes liuc conti-
ney, (hall ſcruethe. Church, to which they areaſcribed,ang (hall thinkeir
yery conuecnient to recciue the Communion on Sundayecs , and folemne
Fealts, when they ſeruc/arche Altar, ., Subdeacgns ſhall not paſle xo a higher
degree » vnuull they bee exerciſed one yeere in-theirownc ; bur:ewo holy de-
grecs ſhall not be giueninone day , by vertucgf any. priuiledge whatlocuer.
The fourteenth, None ſhall be ordained a Prieſt bur a Deacon , which hath
becn exciſed. in that muniſtery , a whole yeercar the leaſt, and found ſuffi-
cient to teach the people, ,and adminiſter the Sacraments: | and the Biſho

ſhall cake care tharchey celebrate the Maſſe cuety Sunday,and hol y dayznag,
incaſcrthey hayc cure of ſoules , they {hall farisfie theircharge z and if any be
ordained to the ſuperior Orders, before the inferior,the Biſhop may diſpenſe,
ifthere bea lawfall cauſe, ' The fifteenth, Howſocuer Pricſts receiue power,
in their ordivationto abſolucfrom ſinnes,, yet none ſhall heare confeſſions,
who hauenota/Parochiall Benefice, or is nor approucd by the Biſhop. The
ſxtcenth, None ſhall beordained before hee bee aſcribed to ſome particular
Church , or pious place, to cxcrciſe the miniſteryof that Order z and, if hee
abandon the place without conſent of the Biſhop, che miniſtery (hall be pro-
hibiredvoto.him ; andno ſtrange Clerke (hall bec admitted to.the exerciſe of
the Miniſtery without theletters of his Ordinary. The ſcucnteenth, To
bring againc into vicrhetuntions of the Orders from a Deacon toan Oſtia-
ric, which, bcing, vicd from the time' of the Apoſtles, haue been intermirred

in many places., that they may notbe derided by the hercetikes., as idle, theſo.

Miniſterics (hall nor bc. exercilcd , bur by thoſe who hauerecciued the Orders
appertaining , and the Prelates (hall reſtore chole funRions , and in caſe they
hauc not continent Clerkesfor cxcrcile of the minor Orders, they may take
married men, {o that they hauc not been twice married, and be in other ro-
ſpects apr forchat exerciſe. ,,.. ... . | |

Thelaſtarticle was for the inſtitution of Seminaries, in whichit was con;

ſtiruted , thatcucry Epiſcopall Church ſhould haue a ccrtaine number. of
boycs', brought vp inaColledge, necrethe Church, or in angther conueni-
ent place, the boyes (hall bee rwelue yecres oldeat the leaſt ,Jegirimare,, and
diſtributed into formes, by rhe Biſhop according,racheir number, age, and
rogreſſcin Ecclcfiaſtigalldilcipline, They ſballweare the habir,and con/ur

carne Grammer, Mulicke, Eccheſiaſgicall compuration , the holy Scripture,
roreade the Homilics of che Fathers, know:the Rites and Ceremonies ofthe.
Sacrament,and eſpecially rhat which belongerh to hearing confeſſions, And

trodefray the. charge thereof, whererhere is any reucnuedepured for edyca-

tion of children, ir {hall beeapplied ro.this Seminarie- , and, to-fupply that.
which remaincth, the Biſhop, with fqure of the Clergic, ſhall derract a por-,

tion
NJ

gulars aloe room tFhe thirtecarh, Subdeacons , and Dea.

156, tiofh from {all the Beriefices afar Dictel@5 26d * and appR/fmp plepenn: alſo2
A ro this vie, and eompelſthoſe' who haueSthool& hots? dr ot erthirg;

Fatwrhhn reade or eachtiy the'SehovIR of the) Semlfnarier? Ment u$; 6f by "ny -
Ertantrn: 1enr iſublitirutes! = ad __ ſte ples Ma gebes gibtn hercafter, ot

Cum 9: prvtito Doctor or Maſters WD we "6fin tHe ave bagd if in
A—any Progitice; ele Churehes be is p64 bat a Ootrhiary arti tBeecreacd |

in them; one, oftriote, Real Gbapp wed inthePt6giHte; and itt the Char.”
chevofthe grear Dibceflſe the'Bnkop MM" ere/6\b;8r moreif hee thinks
fit, befides tha of he Citie,#hiehtiorithRarding Mall deptnd'6n har of"
Oli, IF, , 25 1yuc 00 MON HIDMTIINOLS MIT DDDNYH 07 SMIIOAUICS YEW
121g theehd';the Delis /\Fitievating the riext Scflidti for MeGivent of!
Septrinber/v# Had, expteiag hat thet? the' Sacratiretit of Matritti6ny wits
ro bec hand prid other spetttiiiing torhedoarine of” Faith, as alls:
chic proniſions of Biſhoptickes, "Dignit&es; "na Vis Bendfiees'; 26d: divers,
other areicles' of reformation ® The -Seſlfor cotminied front 'hige'voril fix”
ccehe a clocke'; with great contentof the Legiits andPopiſh Pretares,chat-
martcrs did paſſe fo quietly , Wd with fuch 2genetalicobſent}” And-they"
commendedthe Chrdinil of Loritine about all : eonfelling That te bad oeehe'
rhe fnolt prinefialt caufe0fvhis benefit. *- REN 0
os NO actofthis Councell #3 ſcene with' more defire'then this of this Sf «
hisScllion. {10H enery onebeing; cutioiis to know whiat that' was which held in con:
cenftion ſo many Prclars iti Tyiit ,and all the Courrs'of Chriſtian Pritices in
bufineſſerenmoneths rogerher. Bur ir prooucd tobe accordivg to thepro-
uerbe , The trauatleof mounraines , and rhe natinity of a monſe.. No man could”
fnde how'it could deferve not: onely ſo great atd long paines of {6 many
great per{ons, but even the leaft: employment at all. \ Andrhioſe who vnder-
{tood Theologie,, diddefife thavirſhould be once declared, wharthe Coun-'
| cell did viderttand by the power of reraining ſins which wasmade ono part
of the Sacerdorall power; becauſe they had dedated the ſence of the'orhier
which vas ro remit finnes'' {And others wonderedar the declatation', that
che inferiour Orders are onely' degrees. vntothe ſuperiour, and all vnto Prieſt-
hood , in regard « ir doth appeare; itf the ancictit'Ecclefi alticall Srorie , that
thoſe who wetc ordained roarny miniltery or charge, were, for the molt parr,
perpetually 'nterfaincd/ti-the lame, wid the aſcending to art higher degree
happened very [eldome, and was vied onely in caſcof necelitic, or greatyti.
litie;- 'Nonecofrhe ſcucn Deacons inſtirured by the Apoltles, iſcended any
higher; and ih'theancient Church of Rome it ſelf< it doth not appeare ,'that
theDeicohs , whoſe office was to hears thie confellionsof Martyrs,did paſſe
rotheritle of Priclthoed: | The ordination of Saint Ambroſero bee a Biſhop,
of Saint Hitrome, [Saint Auſtin, and Saifit Paulinus tobee Prieſts, and of Saint
Gregorie chieGrear ro be Deacon isdeſcribed , withour mention'sf any paſ-
ſage by other degrees. hh! did notblamie the vie began'in ater tines, Via
they maruetted'that they di alleadge.ir; as a thing alwayes vid, whereas the
cottrary was #ranifeſt, |
The Decree; tharthe miniſteries of the Orders froth a Deals roan Ofiary
ſhould nor bre- btercifed; *'bur by perfons promo edro thoke'proper Orders,
made a faire ſhew ; but irfeetned "chit hard t6'bee obfertied; that; in h16&'
Church

%
$ .
- -- = ——

wÞ 5; a_—— . — be
'LISs. $:+ be Ctiateel! df Tren:. 743
Chutchinone might ting the belso1Gperatibſhurthe dootes;barthevr-? 1464.
dinaric Offial {s,nor light! the larips/, and <andiesy\burthe'27colites ;,- who ——
wereto eterciſethol& nabuall farxRions; 'tharthop nightaltehd co Pricſt- Fruomano: |
kvod. And iti (cermedforite contradidtion; to'/haudderertrinedablolmely; Eiunry
charchoſGraingfteries ſhbuld nor becexerciſed Burby-perfonsarddined; and $*25mh? 5: :
afterVvvatd commanded che Prelars ro'vettore chem;a tuchiasconveniently —Vo.
clicy could; -iFor obſetuing the abſolure Decree; ir is'very neceſſary ; thar;
where perfous ordaiticteannorbeladfor excrcileof thoſe fonQions'; they
ca(thotbevtercifed ardll# and ibrheymaybecexcreiſed without Orders in
places: where perſons ordayned eanger bee found /theablolbte detionion
might haue bercer been omitred. Inthe Decree of the ordination of Prielts;
it-vwas thougliryery conueniciittopreſeribe tharconditiong that thſhould
beable to teach the people burrhisdidnor ſeamievery coherentiwictythaco:
ther do@rine and vic, thatcure of foulesis nor! effentialþr6Priefthood, to
that to'bct&able roreach the people #5 not neeeffayy ro thofe/Prieftepwho):
rfieanc neuer t6 take thar cute'vponthem. ' AndtombketoI necefſarycons:
ditiohv aithe thinor orders, ro ynderftand the Latine ronpas} waves thew"
chatchis was nota Getictall Couneell of all Chniltian Nations; itvregatd this -
Decrec.caul not bevaiuerſall;andbinde rhe Nariohs of Africa,4fia; andofs :
gfecar patrof Burope,wherethe Latihe rongueneuet bad places) 512 Haicdw yo
- | Theixrch Anurbematiſnie was'much nored im Camany; inwhichauad/tci-
cle of faith was made-of Hierarthiey: which word and ſipnificationithetcof>
is alicne, nor ro ſay contrary to the holy Scriptares; und chough'irwas fome- .,
what anciently inuented;yet cheauthourisnorknowne; and incals hewere;!
yet he is an Hyperbolicall'wricer, nor mitareditrehie vice of char word; horof
erhers'of-his muchtion, by'anyof che ancients: "and following theiltile of
Car'(ytoutrD,,andottheholy Apoſtles; and Primitive Church , it
ought tobenatriednot Filerarchiebur Hierodiaconia, of Hierpdoalia.. And Pe.
ter Pail Vergevins in Valtela did makethis andarher obieRions againtbrhic rereerinms
doctrine dfth& Countcell|the ſubix&@ofhisSermens; relaving;the coneptioprs gh”
ons betweere cheBilhopsy an ddewa&ing as much xs hee 'coutd; riotiopely: #he Councel.
by words; but by lctterszalfo'ro'the ocher Procefiuncand Evangelical Ming:
ters, whiehzhey read itcheir Churches rothepeophe,!: */ &
Biſhop of (210; by bryor from the Pope; andthe CardinalbAtrions; viel btt: D
theanes, ani#114'verp eittaorditideptnannet dlforoicauſybinto depare our:
6f that Countrey; yerthcy-werenotable rot ig to on 70m S16mPINOY
 Coribetaing theDervee of Relidehwe) of which cucry onedifcouriidoatid:
expc&cdſomegoodedahirion, becauferhere wando murty (poked aridwomn:.
ren of4t; thimochimpltancd to buemotoiwmygicerhenchar, mnen pliryeiled
chat in-rho epde thabwwuprbmounced for-agloaifior-ubrtiodon ron tle/
which'wab plineyo cuery ons Alarits,; hat robregefidetrariofings 3
there weteudaiefbll catte' as if aetecnoboniaitnoba hohawlotdvs
rute; rhavwholbendryd raleifo from kicchurey'isf vrhackinalls
ſoeneritbervicthouryhwfalloanſt; locrhdanaenylnbs! o 216lu7ingogds gn
1 Thefideefe ofthis Selli ce amaythorimeliigenbeghdbberitjthokerii 76: Spout
Bervvdone Lomine ard hESpaniandaic For rhefecomplaindd, that thiepilytee pliinc of th
abandoned in the matter of the Inſticurion of -BiſhopgandiGRefiiemrozaa cs, ®

af T7 which

af

ET SBSSR T7 Lin.8,

'# 1563 which hcchad very oftentoldthemthar hee was of their opinion, and pro-
#5" miſedto labour cftcftually tg'caulc that dorineto bec decreed yirhoutma-
Fa>maxzo--king any condition. They added thacthere was no hope he would bee con-
Em Rantinanyother promiſc , and that the-Pope by making him belecuc hee
paris 9: ſhould bee Legate of France, had wonne him. Andother thipgs they ſaid,
A— which werc little for his honour. Onthe other ſide: hee juſtified himſelfe,
ſaying , that the offer was made ynro him co make|his friends miſtruſt bim, |

and that his anſwere was , tharhec would nor hearken vatoiit , -before'a re-
formation werc'made- in Councell; Notwithſtanding it was not. belecucd
that hee would pet{cuerc in-che ſame opinjon,; a6-not fo much as in this
macrer, : * P)- 0 557357 fs 331A 9c] 0 uy

The Legates,defirous to finjſh the: Councell,did,, o ſooncas the Seſſion

was done, vie meancs tofacilicareche! reſidue; which, for marter of faith,

was ences, 'inuocatiothof:Saints,and Purgatorie., And to this end they.

cleded renne Diuines, two.Generals of Friars , and two for' eucry [Prince,
that-is fof the:Pope, Franed ,(/of which there were but a few ;Temaining),

Spaine and Portugal; charging them to conſider how the Protcſignts opin-

on-ia this matter might bricfly bee confured, And-themſelucs; becing re-,

ſolved, meant ro'propoſe ther owne opinions in-generall Congregation,

by which the Canans mightbe:compoled, at the ſame time whenMatrimo-
nic{hou}dbe handled, tharthey mlghe'quickly diſpatch choſematters, with-
outhearivg the diſputes of. the Diuines,as formerly rhey had done, ;;

Thercfomy IN marter.of reformation they treated with the Cardinall of Loraine, the
_ of Vine, Emperours.and Spanith Ambaſadours, to bee content that the reformaci-.
on of Princes might bee prapoled alſo :-who ſaying it was fit that abuſes
ſhould;bercmooued , wherelocuer they were, the Articles were collected,

and hope concaiued thatal rhatremained night bee decided in one Seſſion

onely.; BurtheSpaniſh Ambaſſadour, for many re{pe<&s of his King,did nor

| likerchathaſte; and therefare. did crofle it, with many difficulties. Firſt hee

8 Shame 197-0 neeeſlary;beiortibe Councell cnded, ro vic meancs to

ivgsheProceſtants thither ;allcadging ehar it would be labour in vaine, if
the Dedtces were:not acceprtd by therh, and that: there was no! hope they
wouldaccepethbemyif they werenort preſtnc in Councell. The Legats anſwe-
red that the Pape had done for this parrwhatſocucr wasfir,yvrote letters, and
ſent expreſſe Nwvry:to thaw all, fo chat nothing could beegdone to make their,
conrumacic more manifelk; {The Coupranſwered;thar hee did nor deſire,
 itſhould:bedone tn thenarhe of: his Halineſle, becauſerhat would net oncly
noteablcrhemura come; burmakechommore 2ucrſe, buginthenante of the,
Councell;; with conuenicne,;pramiſes;;a0d interceſſion of the Etapprour,
WhercuntocbeLegars replyuig;that thoy, wauld confader'on ivyuhdygaye an;
account thereof to.che Pope;thar he'mightriſe meavrsip Spaireto dere lucl
diſconnſes;and rofitrſmadethiieading.ofebe Counchll,) TheGonpixebrred,
alfortiarche Diyines might fpcake 11 accordihgito thevſeyeomcern-;
ing the particulars of Indalgewces ; and of thic: cher matters, perlwadingahe!
© Prdatsthatchdordermighe natbechanged,nor thetrepurationotiheCoun-
- .,cetldiminiſhed ,byomittivg 4hc cxamination of chaſe things, whichhad!
morenceidc oficthen any othe.1c G1811 0] 307 Go 13g of mIROD £4S
didn | The

ara Ht. tb Sd... A - + —

Er 68] the (cowncell of Tent. 745
The Pbpowas mbchtroabledwith theſeaduiles, and the rather; becauſe 1563
Don Lamis d Avila, andVarges, the Ambaſſadotteſidentwith him, had $men {0D

Pevs 4.

theirwords, thartheKing would be comentthattheOcurreell ſhould” end. Frxpmanc,

And calling chem vnto him, he made agreitcomplaintofthe' Counts'pro- Ecmierrs,
pokcion.cs; Forche Proteſtants, the: fad rharnbne did moredeſire to tedice $9ghts
them'ta the Churchehen hee; thartheaCtions of his ptedeteſſors fhrfourtie — V—
yeeres; ani his owde; by ſending Nuncy expreſly to chein all, not regarding

the indignitie co which-heedidſubiect himfelfeand the ApoRtolike Sea; was

a manjfelt argument thereof ; that he had yfed the Eniperors mediarion,and
the perſwaſion of all Catholike Princes; that he is aſſured rhar the hardneſſe
of cheinhearris vohuntarie,reſolure,and obſtinate; and therefore that the re-
ducing at chem was no more toberhought of, it becing impoſſible, burthe
preſeruation of the obedienr; that fo long as there was any hope to regaine
them, the ceime did require tharall meanes ſhould be yſed'to pleaſerhem, but
that beeing| loſt, it was neceſlarieco keepe the good, to make the diviſion
ſtrong, and the parties irreconciliable, that the affaires of their King did
requirethe ſame, as hewould percejue too fate, incaſe he ſhould temporize
in Flanders, and vſetcrmes of mediocririe, tharthe King ſhould remember
whar good cffects his feuercexccutions, athis entrance into Spaine, had pro-
duced, whercas if hee had proceeded remi(ly; and defiredrogaine thefauour
of the Proteſtants, hee would haue felr thoſevacciderits which are ſectie in
France. Hecomplained allo that the Count would' preſeribea manner of
handling matrersof Theologie, and dereretuhiewhen they ſhould be well di-
gelted, And laſt ofall hee roldethem ofthtirpromile, 'that the King was

4

coiltent that the Councell ſhouldend, whichthe Cornt did labour ts hin-

| der. The Ambaſhdors hauing cxcaſedtheCotint, and confelled what they

had faid concerning the Kings pleaſure fot tRe end of the Councell,thePope
was fatisfied, ſothar they would becontent he ſhould fayſo much,where he
thought it. neceflaric.. Whereunto they 'conſenting,: hee gaue order to
his Nawciom Spaineto complaineto the King, and totell him, that he could
not penetrate the caufe, whythe Ambaſſadours of his Maicſtie in Rome and
Trent ſhould ſpcake diuerſly,and;which imported more, himſcifedoing what
he could to gratific him, for whar cauſe he ſhould be crofſedby his Miniſters,
in regard,the Councel contirming,he was hindered from doing his Maicſtic
many fauors andgraces, that: if for his affaires in Fiziders, or for'the-inte-
reſts of rhe Emperourin Germanic, he did defirc any thing of the Counteel,he
might know. by experience how hard itwas'to effe&'ir "in Trent; that they
nitghtpromiſcrhemſcluesany thing fromhim, and chat hee wasrefolitee, 4o
ſoonc:as1he Councel wasended/eo fend into all Provinces to prouideforthe
particular \neceſhitic 'of .cuery' one, whereas itt” Treft 'generall' protrifions
onaly c4nbeemade; which hauoiofinite difficulties,” ta bee: fiered to cuefy

ack tor. lum Pun G0 1, 1 90 fH YE) I20ISWI DEL
1. Burcheperſwaſions of choCount in Trens made #diififionofthe Prelates,
formaodefiring thaxthoſe marcetsimight bee exaQtly diſputed ; andthefather,
becauſolvery licde ornothing Was ſpokeir of them bythe Schooſtitien, and . -
wharcds for other things handle&'in/ ei Synode there were detifions c-—: -
phcrotorhet Councdls,or of Popes,or arrvni ormet6tifeht'of DeatStsahedt”””

MIL4GDG . Rrr were

et

| 946 | | The Hiſtoryof + : L#si's

| T 63 were wholly ob{cute,and, inicalechcy were nor clecred Gt would'bee fayd
> > tharthe Councel hadailed.in che moli-neecflance things: :Others\faid,that

* ae

Pavs .4- :1W | _ : Sr IF+ 'n”. :
£64p34a39; if chere; were {o-many, difhculrics, and: comentions:in'che chaig decided ,

ware: alrcady, how mach pore might they befcarcd;tharunthietewhichatctull of
Sg obſcuricic, where there is no-lufficient lightſhewed by the'DoQours they
\Af— might goc in infinitum,becaule they had alargoheld, inregard of manyabules
which were crept into them formarrcr of: gaine;and of rhe difficultie which
wouldariſc aboutrheinterpretationof the:Bulls, cfpocially of thewords vied

in ſome, of pcraltie,and guilt;as allo of themancrottaking Indulgences for

the dead.” Therctore inthele,and the adoration of Saidtsthe viconly might

be handled, and the reſidue omitted, and; for *7Fwrgeaterie;the opinion of the
heretikes condemnedonly;otherwiſe there would bonoznd otrheCouncel,

norany reſolution of this difficultie. While thefe opinions wenrabour,con-
ccrning theſe matters relerued for rhe laſt; the Legars:pefolued 110 :diſparch

chat of Matrimonic, and to aþbreuiate the:time of the Seſſion, and to lolds

The Cad. of it the 19.0f Auguſt at the lateſt. This pleale&d:theCard. of 'Loramevery.much:
-7o7 6 aw ag who hauing receiued an{were out of France, that hee thould give the Pope
o £995 fatisfaction'in goingto'Reme,did reſolue foro do in theend of that raſhes.
ſo that the Selsion werecelebrated; And he wasforced: to ioyne with the
Popeand his adherents; not gnely in regard of the order receiucd our-of
France, but becauſc.theImperialilisand Spaniards did miſtruſt him for the

ſucccſle of the laſt Seſlian, ...; ;r; 2 Ts lnmodS![1 av

The 22.0f luly, the'4narbematifyts were giuen forth, nor much differing

from che manner, in whichthey were cltabliſhed afterwards. The greatc(t

varictic was, that vnxill cheathbey had norſufficiently conſidered of the fift,
condemping dwyorces,allowedinthe Codeof Tuſtiniarn: which Anathematiſme
was aded atthe inſtance ofthe Cardinal of. Loraine, to oppoſe the opinion of

the Caluiniits. And it was callly receiued, becauſeitwas conformeable to the

Schoole doctrine; , and the Popes Decrecs. [Bur in thar of diuorce for
adulterie, the compoſers of the Canons didforbcarc to wc-the word Ana-

thema, fearing ro condemnethaart opinion which was, of. Saint Ambroſe, 'and

of many Fathers ofthe Greeke Church, Natwichltanding the orhers think-

ing; thax,ic was an Article of faith, and almoſt all the: [Fathers conſenting
thercunto, the Canon wasreformed,and the anathema added, condemning

thoſe bat ſay, that thehoud is diflolucd by:adukerig;and thar.cirher of! the

parties may contract another Matrimonic,winleſtthe:othor linerh; which

Canan receiued afterwards another miutation;asſhall be; faide in due place,

In the Congregations following,the rhings propoſed werecalily.diſpatch»

cd., butialmolt allche Prelarcs lefy,chole, and-ipake ofthandeftina\mariages,
choyghagcither the tinge, nor theplacedid:comport.ic-and:the-difteronce* of
opinionstherein-began to be diſcougred;:Inthe Congregation of the foure

and twentieth day inthe morning,the Biſhop of {ortona, Ambaſſador ofthe

Duke of Hlerence, was recciucd z whomadea ſhort ſpeechbfrrheodenorion of

his Prineerowardsthe Apoſtolike Seeand:fauour rothdSynbd:andrhankes
" TheAm- F Fre Rn GUD, nche agregation chatnight,the French Ambaſſadors caus
ng « arcquelt ro bg readjin the nameigfgheir King, thatchildren whichare'in
ccued ncon- che-PORggr of their Parrrogmight nog, withgueicheirconleng;cither marry or

» oC]

gregation, »
#,

berroth

ſ

Liz.8. | the Councell of Trent. 747.

berroth them(clues, or, ifrhey did, thatit ſhould be inthe power of the pa- 1563
rents to make void; or ratificthecontract,as they pleaſed. And thetame —_C"Y
the Fathers were admonilhed: to. put vp in; writing to the depurics the F 8xDINAND;
abuſes obſcrued by thein, in the marter of Matrimomie.. + b 36 51 | 7: Banana
The. yoyces bceing all giuen concerning the Anathematifmes,, rwo Ar- pannett®
ticles were propoſed;the promotion of married perſons to holy Orders, and \ ud ion
the making voyde of clandeſtine marriages. Forthe former, the Fathers Arides con-
did yniformely, and without difficulcic, agrec onthe negatiug;andthe Arch ried Prics
biſhop of Prague, and the Biſhop of Fiue Churches, who perlwaded them to CO
thinke better on ir, were ſcarcely heard. Bur the other of clandeſtine mar-
riage; did not paſſe ſo, For one hundred thirty and {ixe did approue the
making it yoyd,fiftic ſeuen did contradict, and ten would nor declare them-
ſclues. The Decree was compoſed according to the opinion of the Maior
part, that howſocuer clandeſtine mariages were good,ſo long as the Church
didnot make them yoyde (and therefore the Synod doth anathematiſe him
that thinkerh the contrarie) yer che Church hath alwayes dereſted them.
And now, ſecing the inconuenicnces, the Synod doth determine, thar all
crſons which hercafcer ſhall cither marrieor betroth themſclues, withour
the preſence of three wirneſſesat rhe lealt, ſhall becynable co contra, and
wharlocuer they doc therein (hall be voide. And another Decree followed,
commanding the Banes, but concluding, that if there were aneceſſitic to 0-
mirthem, themariage might be made, {o that it were in preſence of the Pa
riſh Prielt, andof five witneſſes at the leaſt, publiſhing the Banes afterwards,
vpon paincof excommunication, to him thar ſhould contract otherwile.Bur
that great number which would make yoid the ſecret mariages, was diuided
into two parts, ſome following the opinion. of thoſe Diuines who grant
powerto the Church to make the perſons vncapable, and ſome, thoſe who
ſay it may makethe contract voide. And theLegatestrhemſclues diddifter.
Morone was content withany reſolution, fo that they might diſpatch. Vay-
mienſe thoughtrchat che Church had no power herein, and that all-mariages,
celebrated ia what manner ſocuer, wich conſent of theperſons contracting,
arc good, Simoneta ſaid, that the diſtinction of the contraft of Marrimonic
from matrimonic ir ſelfe, and che giuing of power to the Church ouer the
one,and not ouer the other, ſcemed to him ſophiſticall,and chimericall, and
was much inclined not tomake any innouation. 200.
Concerning the abules of Matrimonic, many Prelares confidered that
the cauſes to hinder mariages, and to make them voyde though they were
contracted, wereſo many, and happencd lo often, that there were-but few
not ſubic& to ſome of thoſe defets;and(which was more) perſons did con-
tract ignorantly; cicher not knowing the prohibition, or theta, or by for-
ctfulneſſe, in whom, after chey knew the rructh, many percurbations and
| Kor did ariſc, as alloſuits and contentions abourthe legirimation ofche
iſſue, and the dowries. The impediment of kinred, concradted in bap- |
tiſme, was particularly alleadged for a very great abuſe, becauſe in ſome
places twenty or-thirty men were inuitcd for God:fathers, and as many
women for God-morthers, berweeneall which, byEccleſrafticall conſticu-
tion; aſpiritual-kinred dothariſe, who oftencimes;4not knowifigione ano-
Rrra ther,

169x # . Go. "78, es td . _—\ ———_— - R
- ” EE TEN 293; pE< 1 ah 6 - _ 623 4 Rs - \ ” n
PO 0" py 9-1 * hs, 4-0 IS; _ _ NE Or ION 2 ,
C Ein nate * Fe CARAT . » b - I —_=X' _—_— »— oP nana #9, # A,
.

J

et.

—

Lis: 8,

* The\Hiftory of

_—_—

_748

1563
[ NFYN
Pavs. h. ©. if
FERDINAND»
Ei1zABATHK
CHARLES B.,
Pattie: 2».

a and |

ther,do ioyncin marriage, Many thought ficto take away this impediment;
nor becaule it was not well inſtituted at the firſt, but for that, the'canſe of
the inſtirution beeing ceaſed, the offe&t oughr-rocealſeallo. They confide-
red that the goſſips were then ſurcties to the Church, for-the faith of the
children baptized, atid therefore -were bound to inſtru& and chatechize
them,according to their capacitic, by which meanes they conuctfed' often,
and familiarly with them and their parents as alſo the goſſipsamongſt them-
ſclues,by whichmeanesa certaine relation did ariſe betweene them, which
was acauſetobe reyerenced and ſufhcient toprohibite marriage,as all other
cauſcs ro which reuerence oughtto bee borne, Bur afterwards, when vſc
had aboliſhed whatſocuer was reall herein, and the God-father did ſeldome
ſee his God: childe and had no care at all of his education, the cauſe of reuc-
renceccafing, the relation ought nor to haue place.

Likewiſe the impedimentot Aftinitic by fornication, nullifying marri-
ages vntill. che fourth degree, it beeing a matter of ſecrecie, did enſnare
many, who, vnderſtanding the tructh atter the mariage, were filled with
perturbations. For kinred of Conſanguinity,and Afthnity,it was ſaid, that
the ſame account becing now-not made of ir, as formerly was, and, a-
movglt grearperſonages, ſcarcei\memorie kept of the fourth degree, thar
might bee omitted alſo. | Wherein there was much diſputation.. Some
chought, that as ſcuer» degrees-of kinred did hinder marriage for many
hundred yceres , and Innocentizs the: third rooke away three of them ar
once, reſtrayning the impediment vnio the fourth, allcadging very com-
mon reaſons, thattherearefourc Elements, foure humours of mans body,
ſo, it appearing now that foure cannot bec oblſcrucd without many incon-
ucniences, the impediments may bee more jultly reftrayncd to the third.
Others contradicted, and ſayd, that fo they might hereafter proceede fur-
ther,and atthela{t cometo that of Leuiticus,which would cheriſh the opin-
ion of the Lutherans ; and therefore did conc)ude that it was dangerous
toinnonate. Which opinion, after much examination,did preuaile. Some
choughtthar the impediment of fornication, becing ſecrer,ought wholly ro
beetaken away : Bur they preuailed nor, becauſe there appearcd anincon-
ucnicnice, in regard that many things which firlt are ſecret are publiſhed af-
terwards.

Many were of opinion that no nouitic ſhould bee made intheſe pro-
hibitions, but power granted co Biſhops to diſpence, and maintained that
itwas better to giucitto them then tothecourt, becauſe they knowing, bet-
terthe merits of the fact, and the caules, may cxergiſe diltributiue 1uſtice
more exa&tlyherein. They ſayd, the court of Rome doth often giue diſt
penſations toperſons not knowen, who obraine them by deceipt, and that
diligencecannot be vled in regard of the diſtance of the Countreys. belides
the world becing {candalized, thinking they are nor giuen but for money,
that imfamie.ought to be taken away. 'T he Spaniards, and French-menlabou-

—

red cffeEtually herein ; but the Italians ſaid rhey did it ro make themſclues
| all Popes, and not toacknowledge the Apoltolique Seq, and that the difh-
cultic of knding ro Rome, and negotiating the expedition with paines and
colt was profitable, becauſcby tharmcancs, few 'marriages were contracted

Ld (onal Tr

— — — ——————w—w_————_—__——_—— ea to
is-tegscesprohivited;, whereas, if by granting powecrro Bilbbpsthere, wore 1563
alagibry hecreww, the, protubicions would, inadbott rimey. comet nothing, > de
anth athe Luchcrates would gaine therr;opitionceJerxcupodrracommonint Frzomans,

clinksionfeaw;icharnoncibould beedilpcaſcd withg-in ole: prbhibicions, Ecnaru_
burfor a very vrgent caule ; Into which opinion thole who could nor'ipre- mem
uailetforghc Bibhopedidenter allo; rhinkirig it wasinore for-rheir: credit, if —VS
chat which was forbid torhem,: were (not. granted>t0:0thers;5r [After many
. di{courfesin thoCongregarions,cwasrcolucd roreſtraineſpirigualbkinred;
and affihity by matiage and fornicacion;and to confine the dufpentationsallo
withiathelimics'which ſhall beſpoken of mreciringthe Decrces|: ! 11
-Fhetewas lome:contention allo abourche ninthpoynr; in which. Supe+ wiet:r ons
riouts/:are-forbidderoforcerherr ſubietts/ro marrygwith threats and puniſh- = howrnongy
mentsgnamihg theEmperour, and Kings. Gulielmw Caſſodores, 'Bulhop of =="
Bacelons, oppaled,and aide; that it could-nor bee preluppoted, char grear
Princes would meddlein mariages but for great cautes, and: 'for- the pub-
que good ; tharthreats and puniſhmentsare then bad, whenthey- arc 'yſed
contrary-to: order of law, bur penallpreceprts,conformablerothe law, arc
iult, and can notbecreprehended. It there be- any cafe (her faid) 'in' which
che Superiour may iultly.commanda mariage, he may force rhe' celebrations
of it, by penall commands, alleadging allo chatir. is athing decided by the
Diuines, that iuſt fearc doth not cauſe an inuoluntary aftion. Hee deſired
char lawfull caules-might be excepted, and thoſe Superiours only compre-
hendedin the Decree, vehodoecompell againlt iuſtice,and order of the Jaw;
laying, tharmany caſes may occurre, in which thenecefficy of rhe publique
gooddorh requirethe celebration of a mariage, which-hee' that wouldliy,
. that a princecould not command, and cauſe, by compulſion; to bee celebra-
red, ſhould offend againſ{trhelawof God,cand man. 'To this reaſon he ad-
dedan example, thar, in the yeere 1 5 56. theſecond of Tanuary; Paul the 4:
{enta monitoric rofame Toanof Arragonwite of Aſcanius Columna, thatthe +
ſhould not marry any of her daughters without his leaue, 'or, if ſhe did; the
matrimony,though conſummared,ſhould be void; which thatmotfbwiſe'a#d
finccre. Pope would nor hauc done, if Princes had notpower to marry their
ſubics,in caſe of thepublique good. | 2079 251910)
Inthe point of nor mentioning Princes he was followed by-many; and
the nameot the Emperour, Kings, and Princes,' was taken' away. But for
the reſidue hee waymuch jms with this reaſon onely; thac Matrimon
is an holy ching; in whichche Secular powerhath no authority, and if there
be any lawfall cauſero'compell any ro marry, it muſt be Jorieby the Eccleſt-
aſticallpowcronely;” Thetelation of the monitory of "Paul, raifed a great
wiſperivg in the Congregarion, atid aftetwards gaue marrer'of diuers dif-
courſes. > Somefayd hedid ir,notas Prince, bur as Pope,and thathe had rea
fon to doe ir, in regard Aſcanivs Columna being a traytor vnto him, he would
not hauc him get new adherences, by mariage of his daughters; by which
hecmighrbce confirmed in his contuniicie/! Othersfaid, that the Pope, as
Vicar ofi@4 1s T,hath nortraitors ifnftemporall marrers,andthat the opini-
on: of thafewho rhinke that'mariages may be madevoid by Apoſtoliqueau-
thoricy| is nor well:orounded,exceprit bee by'courle of law, or generall ca-
£401! )ETeHI6 Rrr 23 nons

ID < p .
, "_=B 7 w" "F
n k, ”
ma
- 42 .
, _ perth

- ”
Mos

50

1563
PmtANSN

Pavs' 4
FERDINAND.

ELIZABETH
CnanrLlgs g.
Pwrlip 2.

_— 7

nons, bur notfor particular perſons, and char, tor-chis, neither reaſor-can be

brought, nor example /found, + Some denied, rhat 'one . might ground

himſclfc ypon ſuch aftions of po es., which ſhew rather how farre che

abuſe of thcjr power can'ſ{tretc
extended. . > 3 NOKCO ! C: nat p7co:

And there 'was no leſſe difficulty,: becauſe. the Decree, did compreliend
fathers;mothers,and other domeſticall Superiours, whomight compel{ their
children, eſpecially daughters, ro marry: andit was conſidered, thartscome
to excommunication; in caſcsof this kind, was very hard.” Yer thoſe who
before had defended, that children were bound to obey their Fathers m this
particular, did-maintaine it. A temper was propoſed; thathaning firſt com-
manded politique Supcriours vponpaine of cxcommunication, domeſticall

then how fartethe lawfull yſe thereof is

 Superiours ſhould bee admoniſhed not ro compel their childrenagaint

A difticulty a-
bout cenſu-
ring the
Archbiſhop
af T olede.

their will. Burthe ſame men ſtill oppoſcd, and ſaid, it was not iuſt ro take

from fachersthatrpower which God hath giuenthem. And, inthe end,it was
re{o]ucd to takethis part quite away. But the biſhop of Barcelona, and ſome
few beſides; were not of the ſameopinion, as toſay,thar as the authority of
fathers and other domeſticall Supecriours ouer mariages was manifeſt, or,
at the leaſt, not:to bee doubred, and therefore not to bee ſpoken of, fo the
ſame conſideration ought to bee had of the authoritic of Politique Supe-
riours. OH, |

The Congregations, aſſembled to diſcuſſe this point, becing ended, the
laſt whereof was thelalt of Lulic, they beganneto ſpcake priuarcly of ſecret
mariage. And both parties continuing in their orwne opinions, ſome ſaid that
thedifficulty doth preſuppolea dottrine of faith, and therefore cannor bee
determined, beeing contradicted by a notable number. This troubled them
much who deſired they ſhould bee made voide, and thought that they were
wholly barred from all poſlibility to obraine ir. ;
- Ar this time a difficulty aroſe, though priuate, yet very contentious.
For the Deputics concerning the Index, hauing giuen the worke of Bartho-
lomens (,aranza, Arch-biſhop of Toledo, to ſome Diuines, to bee peruſed, and
they hauing related that nothing worthy of cenſure was found in it, the
Congregation did approoucir, and made publiquefaiththereof art the peti-
tion of his Agent. But becauſethe booke, and the authour were ynder the
cenſure of the Inquiſition of Spaine, the Secretary Caffeliunne complained to
the Count of Luna, aud the Count to the Fathers of that Congregation, de-
firing a tretratation. The fathers not inclining to reuoke the Decree, becauſc
they choughrit juſt, thebiſhop of Lerida, oo 4s mooued by. the Count, or
for ſome other caulc, begannetoſpeake againſt it, and/fo raxe it, alleadging,
places of the booke, which, by a bad interpretation, did feeme to deſerue
cenſure, and, which was more, touched the iudgement and conſcience of
thoſe Biſhops. The Arch biſhop of Prague, the chickeof that Congregati-
on, in defence of himſclſe and his colleagues, complained ro the Legates,dc-
firing they would ſhew themſclues inthe buſineſle, and proteſtingnortoaſf-
faſt in any publique a&, vntillthe Congregation had due fatisfattion.. The
Cardinall Morene intcrpoſed,and made peace,with theſe conditions, that no
other copic of the faith made ſhouldbce giuen,and that Lerida ſhould giuc:

21.7 latisfattion

v

Las. i the Gauncellaf, Trent.

—_—

ſatisfaction of words toche Coo: Pens and $0/Pragye- in jiarticular; and 15,63 |

that all (hould bee forgorten.on. ot lides,” And the'Count of Lana, with
yareliGable cncreaties, got the tcſtimonie pur of the hands of the Agent of
Toledo : and ſothis: ſkirre was appraled.,,., . . ap |

\t) abfis;

The Jeegates gaue.the Articles of refarmation to the Ambaſſadours \ ig Eenzars |
number thirty.cight 4.that they might conuiend totheir;conſideration what, —V—:
pleaſed hea), before chey were giuen tothe Fathers £0 bee diſcuſſed; which 3%; Artices

Articles wyerc diuided, and one halfc allotted for the next Seflion, and the 0. tion.
ther for the Sellton following , for the reaſons which ſhall bee related here-
after.. The Count ot Luna perſwaded theorher Ambaſſadours,todemaund,
that deputies might be cle&ed for cucty Nation , to.coi {ider what was fitto
berefqrmed, becauſe themodell giuen/by the Legates, madeforthe intereſts
of Rome,could'not be fitted ws countreys. Butthe Cardinall of Loyaine,
and the French and Portugal, Ambaſladours contradicted, alleadging that©
ucry one might ſpeake his opinion concerning the Articles propoſed , and
ropolc others, if there werecaule, ſo that there was no need to giue this di-
ſtalt roche Pope, 'and the Legates , whacould notendureto heare {peach of:
Nations in Councell. And tc e]mperialiſts comming'to this opinion alſo,
the Count retired, bur ſaid that diuers confiderations ought to beo had cone
cerning thoſe which were propoſed, oY oo #4
The Cardinall of Loraine counlclled the.Legats ra facilitate the buſineſle,;
and to take away tho{ec points which might ſeeme-to cauſe contradiction,
adding, that the ferver matters were handled , the, better it would be; where-

at Varmicnſe ſeeming to wonder, Lorameasked him, whether hee maruciled The Card of

becauſe hce ſaw not in him that heate and defire of reformation, as hee had

madedemouſtration of at orher times :.and headded, that his delire wag the ©*5p*ofhn

ſame,and had the ſame diſpoltion of minde to imploy all his force therein, -
bur that experience hach taught him, that gor onely nothing perfect or ordi-
naric:can = done in Councecll, bur that cucry enterpriſe inchat buſineſle
rurncth co the worlt. He perſyaded alſo the Count of Luyanortolceketg
hinder.che reformation corally, bur if there were any thing-which did nor
fully fatisfic him,hee ſhould wake the partcular knowen, and hee wouldlg-
bour chatcontentmear'ſhould be giuen him. | 6G,
TheEmperours Ambaſſadours firſt of all gaue their anſwere in writing,
the one and thirtierh'of {uly ; in which they laid, that, deliring agenerall re-
formation in the head and members,and hauing read the Argiclesexhibited,
rhey had added ſome things, and noted others, defiring they might be corre-
edaccordingly; and diſcuſſed by the Fathers. And becauſe the Emperour,
withthe Ambaſſadours of many Princes, did hold a Diet in ierna, to hap-
dle many things concerning the Councell , they hoped they would take it in
ood part,if,hauing recciued anew commandement from his Maieſtic, they
zould preſentother caniiderarions alſo; and that, for thepreſenc, the IT

ded cight Articles to thoſe propoſed. by, them. 1, 1 That a ferious, and The Imperid

# ,

durable reformation of the Conclave might beemade.in Councell,, 2. ,,That Aricles |

alicnation of Ecclcfiaſticall goods, without the free and firme conſent of the ®**
Chaptcr,might be prohibited,and eſpecially inthe Roman Church. 3, That
Commendoes, and Cqadiutorics, with fyrurc ſucceſſion; might bee aka:

* | 4- Thar

752 \The Kiijtoryof Q \ LE3 &

15563 4-'Thar Schooles andVniuerſiricsthighc bereformed: :5- TharthiePro-'
A, uinciall Countels may bevinioyned! to correFrhe'Srarmes'of all the Chap.
Paivd 4." 3 #4. ; "s F ONE” HI | ES -
Feevinans. T6fs ; as ao that authoririe may bee giuen to reforme Miſſals , "Brenidries,
zrezevren, Agends, and Grazuals , not in Rome oncly, bur in all Churthes.” -6+ : Thas
CHantis 9. Trayermietr may not bee cited tro Rome in the firlt inftange. - 7% *'Thar
A cauſes may-not bee-refniooued from the Secular Core ra-the Eceleliaſti-
call; ypothpretence 6fjuſtice denyed , before the trycth of theſupplica-
ie bee knowen. 8; T hat (onferuators mity nor bee-giuen in prophane
mamerboiblat 2:4, 7 oor of 0, go «01G 1762 wel
_.And;cbneerning the Articles exhibited by cheLegates; they noted many-
things: patewhereof ;as being bur of {malt weight, it will not beamiſlero
omir. Thoſe of imp6trance were. That Cardialsmightbee choſen our of
allNarions,,thar the Vniuerſa]l Biſhop might bee created by Ele&torsof all
Countreys.' Thar thepronifions againſt Peyſions, Reſernarions and Regreſſes,
ſhould bee extended, nor onely r6 the fature, but to thoſeallo that are paſt.
Thar thekiſling dup; w9.ox ſhould not betaken from the Emperourand
Kings;vhoought ro defend it. That ir may be declared what ſecular affaires
ateprohibired to Ecclefiaſtiques,' thar that which is determined in the de-
cree of Reſidence may not becrofſed. Thar,in the Article of not laying taxes
vpon the Ecclcfaltiques, the cauſe of Subſ1dic againſt the Tarkes and other
Infidels may beexcepted; Thepropoſition ; though it were of hatd dige-
ſtion, did notſo much trouble the Legars, asthedoubr mooued , thatſume
extraordinary demaund for change of Rires, receiued by the Church of
Rome, and relaxation of Preceprs Laws *Poſitito,might come from the Diet
in Vienna. |
'The third of Auguſt the Frenchmen gaue their obſervations, the eſſenriall
The arti-les whereof were, That the number of Cardinals might nor exceed fourc and
exhibitcd by { : . ;
the French EWENTIC, and thatno moremight be created, vntill chey were reduced to that

mctil

»——- * 4

XUM

"— ha _ OS COW.” 7 - —

Eb. the Comncell of Then. 753

dajs gxpeRatines, and;other valaytull wayesro obrainethem;may beremos® x $63 :
ued. ./Tharthe prohybition,thas the Clergie maynormeddlcinteculay wars FSA
ters, may be expounded, ſothat they may abſtainefromall fun&iens,'which Fiesriuxs
arc ng; holy, Eccleſiaſtical, and proper cohtir ordet-.Thhat the Parfons, al: IG
readjc.unpoled, may be taken away and abrogated; /Tharj incaufegofÞLarros Chutrys g.”
nage, the ancient ipſticution.iD France mayrnor bechanged,togiue fenterics I
inthe poſſeforie, for-him who is in the laſt-paſſeſlion; and in rhe-prrivorie;;for
him whg hath a lawfull title, or a long polleſlion. 7] hat the lawev'of France
COnccraing Eccleſtaſticall caules-may not bee preiudiced, that the-poſſeſſoris

may beiudged bythe Kings Iudges, and the petitorie by rhe Ecclelattiques;

but not our of the Kingdome. , That none may beaſſkumed tobeeCanon in

- a Cathedtall Church,before he be fiuc and hirtic yeetes old. Thar, for the

Article containing therctormation of Princes , the Clergie may bee firſt ins
tirely refotm-d in this Selſion, and that which belongeth to the dignity and
authoritig of Kings and Princes, may bee deferred vatillthe next; and-thar
nothing may be decreed therein, beforethey the Ambaſſadours beg heard;
who haucgiuen account to the King of thoſcand other things, whichthey
had to propole. Bur howſocuer they propoſed thele difficult marters , yer
they ſaid indifferentlyo all, and withaffeRacion, that ir might bepubliſhed,
that they would not be earneſt inany thing, but that which concernerh the
rightsand Secular affaires of cheir. Kingdome. The Venetian Ambaſſadours
propoſed, that the Article of Patronage might be ſo accommodated ,; thar ic
might notgiue occalion of nouitie, concerning thoſe who belong totheir
Republigne, and Prince, The Ambaſſadoursallo of Sanoyand Tuſcane made

the ſame inſtances, - . ' ' | -
| Arthistime the Imperialiſts receiued commiſſion from their Prince, to
mediate, as they did, with the Legats, thar,in the reuiewof the Index of the
bookes, mention might not beemade of the Receſſes, of the.Dicts ih Germas
nie, ftormcrly prohibited by Paul 4: and the Emperors order was fomewhar
ſharpe , thar, in ſtead of handling of Ecclefialticall matters, they would 1ct
giue a forme ro. the policicof Germanie, and occaſion to the people who are
goucrned by ſuch Lawes , to aliene themſclues from theChurch of Romea.
ainſtcheir wills., Anſwere was made, that the Biſhop.of Prague one of
_ who was: Chiefe of the Congregation , might know whether any
ſpeech were made of it, and if there was not, his Maicſtic might truſt ro
his Ambaſſadour,, who, in all cauſes concerning him, ſhould bee tauourcd
borh by.chcm,and by.che Pope. 4 To 255 pi net. 211,
.. The fcuenth day che Spaniſh Ambaſſadour preſented! his writing; in
which hee ſaid he was well fatisfied with all the Articles, and wouldinor de-
mand any thing , burgnely the change of ſome words,:which ſeemed vnro
him ro be ſuperfluous, or that ghey may be expounded berter. And heerou-
ched alqoltall things which did enlarge the authoriticof Biſhops, ſo.tmode!.
ratipg the words, that the alteration did not ſeeme to beſubRanriall; biurhar
indeed hedid rather reſtrainechen augment it. Hee made requeſt alfachar
they wauld.crear of. .the (, onclane, {a ing, that the King did: much defare-ir;
as alſo.charthe-part ncening ſul Princes might bedefcrred vncill ano-
fed he had exhibitcd his wrizing ;'hee delared che-Logares,

_ thar,

ther Scihon,. A
+;

754

»

The Hiftoryof Laz.8.

_ ——

of

-

Pivs 4

FERDINAND-#

ELIZABETH.
CHARLES 9, ;
PHILIP, 2»,

RS

1563 that, ſo ſooncas voices were giuen concertiing the things propoſed; they
>4—7 woulddepurc Fathers of cucry Nation, to tolle&t what re,

| ſhould thinke
neceſſary for reformation of their Countreys, thatall might bee determined
with a gencrall ſatisfaction. Morone anſwered in the name of all, that they
could nor-conſcnt to proceede otherwiſe then they had done hitherto in o-
ther matters. Wherein many things being ſaid by both parties, by the Count

tointimatethe Councell was in feruirude, and by the Cardinall to ſhew rhe

libertie, Morone added, that no man could complaine that hee was hindered
in his libertic of ſpeaking. Theother replyed,that he could not belecue thar
any thing of worch had bcene done by them, and did nor forbeare to tell
him , that there was a great murmuring in the Councell for the particular
congregations aſſembled a few dayes ſince, and that it was ſuppoſed that
they were made ro get voices. The Legares faid, it was their duety, inthe di-
ucrlitic of opinions, to ynderltand the trueth,and to accommodate the diffe-
rences, that matters may bee determined with vnion. The Count replycd,
that it was wellif it were ſo, burthar [talians onely were called, except two
or three Spaniards, and as many Frenchmen, who differed from others of
their Nations. The Legars defended cthemſclues,that they were nor called in
proportion, becauſethere were an hundred and hitic Iralians in Countell,
and not abouc threeſcore of all other Nations. The Count ſecmed.to be ſa-
risficd, and, being parred, ſaidto his Prelars, that the Legats hauing beguna
diſcourle to ſhew that eſteeme ought not to bee held of Nations, had con.
cluded ir,ſhewing thatthey had cucrheld cſteeme of them, |
The nextday, the Legats and two Cardinals conſulted about the aduer-
tiſments of the Ambaſſadours , and how to amend the Articles of reforma-
tion, to be giuen to the Fathers and of the manerto bec held in ſpeaking on
them. , In which Loraine hauing receiued new letters from France,and order,
that both himlelfe, and all the ocherFrench Prelars ſhould fauour the Popes
affaircs, wholly bent to fatisfie the Legats, perſwaded them nor to ſuffer ſo
many points to be handled at once, but to divide them into parts, according

| totheſubieRts, and when one part was ended, to propoſeanother, and to

halten the Scſlion , omirting all the things which had any difficultie, and
concluding thoſe onely, in which all, or the greateſt pare would agree, and
particularly nor to propole, in the beginning, thoſe in which the Ambaſſa-

doursdid not conſent, |
The cleuenth day the Congregations began to be celebrated, to eſtabliſh
the Anathematiſmes, and decrees of Marrimonie. ' The propoſition of the
French-men was handled, to make mariages voide, contracted by thildren,
withoutconlenr of parents, in wholſe'pewer they are. And the firſt that |
gaue voice,did differ in opinion. The Cardinall of Loramedid approuc ir, al-
leadging places of the Scripture whichiue to the Fathers power'to marry
their children, examples of matjages u, the Parriarkes T/aac and Tacob, ad-
ding the]mperiall lawes of the Inflitutions and the Code, madeby Chriſtian
Princes of famous 'memorie; as alſo the Canon vnder the name of Euariſtus,
and another of the Councell of Carthage, produced by Gratian. And hee re-
lared the inconueniences ariſing herein. The Arcbiſhop of Otranto was of
the contrary opinion; ſaying,that this wastogiue authority rs Lay/tnen _
| the

te

Bis.8.! the Connell of TFont.

particularly.co inuite the Duke of Mauſcowia: and howſocuer hekneyw notiwel
that hee had inuited other of the Greeke Church jn ſpecial, yerirought rg
bee preſuppoled that the whole nation! was called',,cucn by 4peciallinutiras
tion-;- beſ1Jes-,,the;generall intimation was ſufficient, 'as:theArchbifhop
had ſaid. 'Whercupon the Legates, gaue- order th; the/Secretarie,. to:rake
chat particularourof the petition of thoſe Ambaſſadours, that is," thattche
Grecjans haue not becne called. /, Bug as well 'inxegard of: their propoſition;
as of the.epinion of. Saint Ambroſe, they would nar vie the word Hnithiiva,
buctounda temper; that. js, notto condemne thoſe tharfay that Matrimony
taay bee-diffolued: tor. adylterie , and-anorher; contraged;, 45Sauit dmbroje
and ſome Grecke Fathers did lay, and as che Eafterye Church docib practiſe,
bue to anachetnatize tho{e who lay, the Church may exrc;;' teaching tharrhe

Marrimoniall bond is nqzþgoken by adulrery, apgethat it i3 pat lawfullo?

contract anocher,as the Lutherans doemaintaines; Tl lysforme was generally:
approucd, many dig prailejic, and fay;thar the Councel wasafſcrubledonly:
tocondomne the opinions gf theProgeliants, and-hottholt of other Nati:

CHARLES g.)
Pre, 3 5

oY RL

ons,. Yet, ſome doubted ;how-one could beeicandemited! forfaying' the: |

Ghatch did efrc in teachjnganartiale,;the contrary whereof wasnorcoh-:
Conner Bycſceing that ip vas fauoutetl by ſo many; ep chnachendahones
WHIS+ 7 n

4

—

f 756 1» The Hiftory of Lis:%

1563 And becauſethe propoſition about the mariagevf children id bring in
> agenerall queſtion, wherher the Church could make'mariages void, all bc-
Fuomaxo garine toſpeakcof ir, howſocucr it had beene ſpoken of before ,'the voices
man; colleftcd andthe Decree compoſedaccordingly, as hath beet! ſaid: Cardinal]
5344135 9- Madruccio maintained the nepatiuc,, and alleadged many reaſons and argu-
A/— ments, ſaying,that he would oppoſe in Scſſion alſo. And Varmienſe., and

Simoneta , ſpake as much. But Laynex,, Gencrall of the Teſuites ; having dif-
perfed a writing againſt the irritation; 'made a greater confuſton , and gaue
accalion to many to be more conſtant and courageous in the other opinioit.

Andin the Congregations they beganne to an{were-one anothers reaſons, |

with ſuch prolixity,that che Legats were almolt of opinion ro omit that mat-
tct;forteare ir would hinderthe Scflion, and the rather, becauſe the Biſhop
of Swimona did:firit make'a queſtion in publique Congregation, whether
that matter of irciration did belong to dorine, or reformation. The Bi-
ſhop of Segouia, who ſpake after him , made along diſcourſe, ro (hew, thae
it could not bereduced to doftrine. and therefore the maior part hauing ap-
prooucd theirritation , the Decree was as good as eftabliſhed. T he Biſhop
of Modenafollowed the ſame opinion, adding, thar to handle that matter by
way of doctrine , would take away all meancs of making any reformation
wharſocuer. For in all Articles the ſame difficultie might be moued , whe-
ther the Church hath authoritie in that particular which is handled: which
would beeas muchas to put Armes into the hands of heretikes, and to take
all authoritic from che Church, becauſe it would not bee fit to meddle with
thar,to which ir might be doubred whether their authoritiedid extend. He

complianed, that that queſtion was moucd by him, who oughrto hold it,

as cleareand decided. This opinion pleaſed many, whoſayd thattit neuer
ought to beediiputed whether the Church can doc any thing or not, bur ro
take it for granted,that as all power in heauen and carth is gruento CHR15ST,
ſoche Biſhop of Rome, his Vicar, hath as much, which being communicated
by him co the generall Councel, ir muſt bedefended that it wanterh no power
rodoc whatſocuer isprofitable, without diſputing whether it concerne do-
Arine or not. It pleaſed thoſealſo who deſired the diſpatch of the Councel,
percciuing thatthedifficultiepromoted might hinder the ending thereof,and
cauſe aſcandall. And the Legatcs and principall Italians vied perſwaſtons
that it might not bee ſpoken of, in regard there was no cauſe totrear of it
with the French-men or the Spaniards, who didall agree in opinion, that ſe-
cret mariages ought to bee made voide. And'many aſſemblies of Prelates
were made bothamongſt themſclaes,and with the Legarcs,tothis end: and

it was reſolucd that the decree ſhould nor onely not bee placed with the do-

_ Arine,thatirmightnot ſ6eme to beapart of it, buralſo that ir ſhould not bes
ſo much as ina Chapterapart, leſt it might bee doubted whether ic was held
robeſuch, or nor, butthar it ſhould bet inferred amongſt the articles of Re-
formarion. And toremooucall dificultic the more, it wasreſolued alſo ſo
tocompole thedecree, thar they might not ſeeme to handle thafmarrer pur-
polely, butro mingle it with the firſt article of rhe abuſes, which was apro-
viſion to reſtorethe Banes, ordained by Imnorentins the third, which had bee
incermirred, and in detreeing as well this, as all the other pgs.
bat - priated

" 2

Li. the Councellof Treo © 57

priated for the publike torme.of Matrimonie, it ſhould bee added, intwo 1563
wordes onely, as it were incidently, that ail contracts made otherwiſe were ——_
void,and ſo pallcir oucr,and ſay no more. And the Dectet was compoſed ac- Enamel
cording to this ſence,and reformed often,alwayesyety intricately, and thela- 8m,
ter had cucr moredifficulcy then the forget. Andamangſt other alterations, $******.
this point,cſtabliſhed before,as harh been ſaid, was ehanged,chat thepreſence —v—
of three witneſſes was ſufticient forabſolute yalidity,and;in ſtead of one wit-
neſle, it was ſubltitured, that cucry Matrimonic (houldbe yoid;contraced
withoutthe preſence of the Prieſt; a thing which did much exalc che Clergic,
ſccing that ſo principall an ation, in Politicalland Economicali adminittra-
tion, which vntill chen had beene onely inthe hands of thoſe ro whom it be-
longed,came to be in the power of the Ecclefiaſticallorder,there remayving :
no meanes to contract Matrimonie, if ewo: Prieſts , thatis the Pariſh Priclt,
and the Biſhop interelted for ome reſpects, ſhall refuſe to afford their pre- :
ſence. . I haue not found in the memorials who was Author of this great ad-
uantage; as many other gr——_ of importance ate bid from mce allo,
whereof [ would willingly make mention. I oughenotto defraud Francis
Beaupere, Biſhop of Metz, of his duc honour, who, thinking it impoſſible to
reduce this Decree into ſuch a formeas might giue ſatisfaction to various
opinions,and to repreſent them with reſeruations and nice diſtinctions,gaue
this forme to it,in which it nowis; which as itis ſubicftto diuers interpre-
rations, ſo it may bee fitted ro diuers opinions: and being propoſed in Cons
gregation,it had once hundredthirty and chree voycesin fauour of it, and nine
and fifty did exprelly contradict. 1196 $955!
The Legates informed the Pope of all, and demanded order what they
(ſhould doe,and whether the contradiction of ſuchanumber, ic becing im-
poſlible to perſ[wade them, ſhould hinder the Decree, or not. There was a A vane feite
report, which cauſed ſome feareamongſt the Fathers, that the plague was in <p> gy
Tſþruc,and many would haue been gonc,if the Cardinal Morone, whothought
that matters were in good terme to finiſhrhe Councel, had not vſcd meanes
roknow the certaintic; which was,that in Sborrt,a place twentie miles diſtant
from Tſþruc , many of thoſe poore men wholaboured in the mines, died of a
contagious ſicknefle, by an infection taken vnder the ground,and that thoſe
of Tfpruc had prouided ſo well, as thatthere was nodanger the diſcaſe would
come thither, which alſo did decreaſe in Sborr7. |
A great ſtirre happened likewiſe amongſt the Icalian Prelates, eſpecially
thoſe of the kingdome of Naples,and Dukedome of Milan. Forthe'Catho- «> pace” oy
like King moued the Pope, the monerh before, to place the Inquificion in the «» in Molam,
{tare of Milan, as it is in Spaine, and to make a Spaniſh Prelate the Head of it,
alleadging, that in regard of the vicinity of places infe&ed , it was neceſſary >
to vic exquiſite diligence for the ſeruice of God,and defenceof religion : and
notice camethar the Pope had propoſed itinconliſtory,& did (hew(howlo-
cuer it was contradicted by ſome Cardinals) ſomeinclination to ir,attheper-
{wation okCardinall Carpi,who told him, that it was good for the keeping of
the citicot Milan in deuotion towards the ApoſtolikeSea, which cific flee
periormed, fora fecret hope, cherithed by the Spaniſh Ambaſſador, that, by
this meanes; hee ſhould gainethe fauourgf the King of Spaine co make him

$(> Pope,

758

_

The Hiſtorie of L 1.8.

1563 Pope. Thecitics of that ſtatc ſent Sforza Morone., to his Holineſle , and Ce-
"——\ [ate Tauerna,and*Printiſuale© Biſoſio to the Catholike King , and Sforza Briuio

Pivs 4+

F:zvxaxv. tG the Countell, This laſt to pray the Prelates, and Cardinals of rhar ſtate,

EL1zABETH.
CHARLES 9s
Praiitie pa

VT /

to hauc compaſſion on their Countrey, which being _ into miſcry,
by excclhue impoſttions, would beewholly diſlolucd by this, which gocth

beyond all, many citizens preparing themlelues to abandon the Countrey,

knowing well chat that office had acucr proceeded in Spaine to heale the con-
ſcicnce;;but yery often/ro empriethepurſe, . and for many other mundane
reſpects alſo.  Andif the Inquifitory, vnder the Kings owne cyes-dor domi.
necre {o rigidly ouct:their owne-Countrey-men, bow much more will chey
doc it in Milan, whereremedy will hardlybee found againſt them, towards
perſons whom they care-leſle for. - *Brinio declared how the Citics were
generally perplexed with this ill newes , defiring the'fauour of the Pelates.
Kingdome did doubr, thar,the yoke being pur vpon theltare of Milan, them-
{clues ſhould not becablero keepe it from their owne neckes, as. they had
done before. The Prelates of Lombardie. did aſſemble, and retolue to
write letters tothe Pope; and to Cardinall Borromeo , ſublcribed by. them all.
They toldethe Cardinall it would bee a preiudiceto hum, 'to whom it be-
longed, as Arch-bifhop,to bee the chiefe in that office. .:Andthey ſaid to the
Pope,that there werenoeſuch cauſcs and reſpects as are in Spaine,to pur ſori

gorousan Inquifttionamongſt chem ; Which, beſides rheenident ruine which
it will bring vothar ſtare, will bea great preiudice tothe holy Sea. For hecould
not refule to place it in Naples allo ; which would giue occaſion to other
Princes of Iralietodelirethe like. And that Inquificion hauing authority.o-
uer the Prelates,the holy Sea would haue bur little obedience from them, be-
caule they would be forced to ſeckethe fauor of ſecular Princes,tro whom by
this mcancs they would be ſubic&; ſo that, in occaſion of a new Councel, he

ſhould haue bur few Prelates whom hee might truſt, and commaund freely.

Neither ought hee to belecue that which the Spaniards might ſay, that the In-
quifition of Milan ſhould bee ſubic& ro that of Rome; as docth appeare by
their proceeding in the cauſe of che Arch-biſhop of Toledo, eucr refuſing to
ſend the Proceſſes which hauc beene demanded from Rome : as alſo doe the
Trnguifitors of the Kingdome of Stcilie, who depend on Spaine. The Prelates,
not content with 'this and other reaſons alleadged vnto the Cardinals,
and others of Rome, by cucry one to thoſe with whom hee had any power,

* did perſwade alſo that fome word might bee inſerted inthe Decrees of the
- Counccl,intauour of the Biſhops,to cxempr orſecure them,and ihatthe man-

nerof making proceſſes in tharmatcer might bedecreed, which if ir could not

bedone1n the firſt Sefſion,it might in the next, Morone gauethem hope of fa-
tisfaction.' And this accident did trouble the Councell very much,becaule
many were intercſted init. But newes came;,a few dayes after,that the Duke
of Sefſe had found the generall diſtaſte itgaue, and, for ſome reports which
came vnto him, doubcing that the Dutchic of Milan would follogy the cxam-
ple of the Flemings, who becameGueux (for ſo the reformiſts are called in
tholce Countreys) by theattempr of putting the Inquifition vpon them, know-
ing it was not a fit time to handle thatbuſineſſe, ſtopped their Ambaſſadors,

promiſing

This did niorediſpleaſe the Prelates , then the Seculars, and thole of the.

"

v4

—_— FRY = —_— -
2” 2

Li n-8. the Counvetlof Tre). "2s

D —

promiſing to vic meznestharhe Scare ſhould hauctaritattign)! ' And, bur 1563
for this,ſome minerofgrearmoment hadenſucd.''c 199) oy | 420

| ThePopec (reing the anfwicresof the Ambaſſadors, madetorhe Articles Fandenaah:
propoſed by: the ILcgares; wasmoreconfinnedin'opinion ; thatiic was nes £r2ufoy
ceſlary to: finiſh»rhe. Councell pothervrilehco)choughrforexgrear ſeandall $*oncts »:
would follow : andthe ihcommeniencesforcleenohertficened but light, and ed
feared ſomegrearer horthobghron. Burſering chedifticulry romake an cond) tout co |
witliour: wing the chings. for whichthe Contcel was called, if the envi
Princes werenovconcenc, edrorreat withiall of them herein. There: |

—

| fore her- wrote concerningthisco his in Germanie, France; and Spaine,

andi{pake of it to-all the Almbafſadours refiding-withhim , and'tothe Mi-
niſters ofthe Prinecsof 7talie; alſo, viingthis conceipr, chat ro-bimt that «fſifted
co finiſh" the (ouncell; hee ſhould bee more obliged, thenif hee had afSiſted bim with
armes ,.in ſome great neceſstie// To the Legates hee anſwered tharthey ſhould
principally aymecar the concluſion-of the Contice!l, and ſhould grant whac-
ſocuct: was: nxceſlary/ to obraine'ir, admirtitg as few: preiudiciall things as
was pollible: all which hee did referre-co their wiſedome who werein the
buſineſſe,ſortharthe'Councell might end:with ſpeede-..

Bur-the: Legates;'hauing/togerher with ſome of the Prelates, confide-
red the propoſitions of the Ambaſſadours concerning tbe reformation, and, And & 1d
at their inſtance, omitred ſixe of the Articles propoſed, and reducedrhem *
tro the number of rwo' and thirtie, the one and twentieth of Augult gaue
them tothe Prelates' to bee diſcuſſed, Loraine made particular:congregari-
ons of the French-men to examine chem : which did pleaſe the Legares, not
onely becauſe they wereaſfured hee had the ſame intention as they had, but
becauſe they were deſirous roaccommodaterhem to che common farisfacti-

on, before they were ſpoken of in generall Congregation. And they gaue

order to'the Archbiſhop of Orranto, and Taranto, and tothe Biſhop of Parma,
ro aſſemble their adherents in their priuate houſes, to examine-them, and
ſearch what would giue agenerall concentment. This continuing lame
daycs, the Spaniards, and ſome Ttalians, who were not called, murmured very
much,reſoluing to make amurinie;and ro oppoſe. |
The Archbiſhop of Orranto went to the Catholique Ambaſſadour z who Th. 55:nic

admoniſhed him , and fayd, heewas not willing co write tothe King thoſe pm. co!

things thar would nor pleaſc him ; and told him char thoſe particular c0n- wih te pri
gregations were ſo well ynderſtood by all Prelates, tharhe could notchoole zarions.”
bur giuc his Maieſtic an accountof it. Heeexcuſed himſclte, andr{ayd all

was fora good cnd, to facilitatethe marrer , and topronide againitthe dit-
ficultics before the generall Congregation. And the Biſhop of {{chia com-

ming iuſt then toſpeake with the Count, from the Cardinall Morone., hee

rold him the ſame, %har thoſe priuate Congregations diddifpleatehim, and

that his opinion was they could not bee for any otherend then to cauic difh-

culcies, and roomit parr of the Articles,that the Seſlion might ſooner bee cc-
Icbrated».. Notwithſtanding theLegates, ayming more to ſatisficthe Pre-
lates, then the Ambaſſadour, hauing conſidered on-therthingsoblerucd in

thoſe particular congregations, held themufor good-aduerrtiſements, and

did alterand compoſe the Decrees,according tothem. #7

> | SH = But

+

760 The Hiftorie.of . \\ L tn 8.

tg64 2:6 Bur as they wereabour ro giuethem footth,:fo corredted , the Arkbi:
AA ſhop of Prague, vpon an inſtruction newly brought vnto bim bya CQurricr
Pivs 4+ PA —_

rxzxomaxy from che Emperour, didinltandly deſire the Legars, notropropolerht Re-
_ formation of Secular Princes , vatill chey had-anſwere from his Imperiall

E:ttABETH,

Cuanres 9: Miaicltic,and afterwards was ſeconded by the Countof Luna. TheLegates
—— wcremuch perplexed herewith ,con{idering that France firſt, and now che
Emperour ;-and King of Spaine werenorſatisfied. And ;on the other fide;
the common deſire of = the or — the _ 0 — nee
x... made allrogether. Wrhicreupon Deing int ulc © gero,
oy , Who was | pen v + un whether all the reformationſhouldbepuroff,
foe Arccies QT Onely that part which concerneth Princes.]: Loraine was of opinion that
| — ame onely this ſhould be: deferred, and the reſidue propoled;:which would bauc
acdc nlcaſed, bur thar they doubted they-ſhauld make the Prelates afraid;tharthe
ſecular reformation ſhoulg bee wholly omitted, whereby they might rake oc-
caſion to exclaime both priuatcly, and-in'the publique Congregations.
Whcreupom they reſolucd ro fatisfic the Ambaſladours, deferring the re-
tormation.of Princes; and, that the Prelares might nor rake it ill, to deferre
halte at cheleaſt of che other Articles, and choſe the moſt imporranc, giuing
foorth therelt, as they had correted chem, thartthe voyces mighebee given,
and che Seflion celebrated , though che difficultic about the Decrecof clan-=
deſtine marriages did make them) doubr. The fixt of September one and.
ewenty Articles of reformation were giuen foorth, with order to beginne
the congregations on the morrow.  Inthe compoſition of theſe, Cardinall
Simoneta,and his adherents, vied all cheir Arte and ingenie, ro proceede with
ſuch a temper, that the Court of Rome might not bee preiudictd, and the
world which defired reformation, and the Ambaſſadours who did folicite
ic, ſatisfied, and, which vas of molt importance, the Biſhops concented.
For beeing deſirous to finiſh the Councell, ic was neceſlary that they thould
willingly concurre.
The BB. hadall one ayme,tohauc the goucrnment more free: which they
thought they ſhould obtaine,if three prouifions were made. One,thar Parith
Priclts ſhould depend on them; which would happen,if thecollation of Be-
nefices with cure were giucn vito them, which point, beſides other difh-
cultics , did rouch: Reſernations, and the rules of te Chancerie, which was to
difcoucra great part of the ſecrets of the Court of Rome. Forit did plaincly
appcare, thara gate would bec opencd to' take all collations from them,
which wasas muchas to take from them all power, and life it ſelfe. There-

_ fore they came co a temper , to hold the Reſeruations firme, but romakethe
Biſhops.Parrons co giue the Cure to whomthey pleale, ypon pretence of cx-
amination:' And, to this cve the 48. Article was framed, with cxquiſite
artifice, as cuery onemay {ec , which, with a faire ſhew, giucth power to the
Biſhopto beltow the Benetice on whom heplcaſerh,, and yet raketh nopro-
fire (rom. the Court. - Another point was of cxemprions, whercin they had
formerly recciued many facisfactions, and now the 1 1. Article was added
for a totallcomplemenct. T heexemprionsof the regular Orders remained;
and che Biſhops were in hope,cicher co take them quiteaway, or, atthe leaſt,
ſo to moderate them, that they ſhould be ſubiet vatothem,in a great part.

Eucr

L 18.8. | the Councell of 74 A 736i s

Euer f1ace the beginning of the yeere, there was a congregation eredted 1563
abour the reformarion of the regulars, which, by the afsiſtance of the Gene- "$448,
rals,and aduice of other religious perſons in Councell, had made a great pro- Fixomias.
grelle, and eſtabliſhed good decrees, withour comradiQion; for outwards tc. s,
ly, and in ſhew the Regulars did notonely nor abhorre, but defirethern; bur $992": *
| fecretly they made accountto interpret and practiſe them as they liſted : yea —> -
they thought it good to hauca ſtrict reformation in writjng ; as indeede all Gs,
their rules are onething as they are written, and another as they are obſer- Regulars.
ucd, But when they beganne to ſpeake of moderating their exemptions,
and ſubicRting them, at leait in part, tothe Biſhops, the Generals; and tlic
Diuines of the Orders did muciny all rogerher; and treating with the Am-
baſſadours of Princes, they ſhewed them what ſeruice they didto people, Ci-
tics, and publique Gouernements , offcring,, that if any abuſe whatlocuet
were amoneglt them, it{hould be amended; thatthey would bee contented;
with any retormation, and returning to their gouernetnents, would execute
it with more ſcucrity then it was ordayned, bur ro ſubic che Monaſteries
to the Ordinaries, was abſolutely to pur them our of order. For they, not
| vnderſtanding a regular life, nor the ſeuerity of diſcipline wherewith it is
maintained , would diſorder cucry thing. The Biſhops fayd , that a priui-
ledge is euer with detriment andderogation of che Law, and the revocation
fauourablc, reducing things to their owne nature; and therefore to take
them away was notto innouate, but to reſtorerhings to their ancient (late.
Onthe other ſide it was anſwered, that theexemp'ion of the Regulars was
ſo well preſcribed by antiquity, that itcould no more bee called a priviledge,
but common-law ; thar —_ the Monalteries were ſubic& ro Biſhops, the
Ecclcfialticall diſcipline both in them and cheir Canons, was ſo well gouer-
ned, and ſo ſeucre, that it mericed to ſuperintend ouer all; thar if they will
reſtore antiquity, they muſt doe ir.in all parts, that if Biſhops would returne
to bee as they were in thoſe times, Monaſteries might bee ſubieted ro them
now, as then they were, butit was not juſt that they ſhould demand the [u-
perintendency ouer Monaſteries, before they made themſclues to be ſuch as
was neceſſary the Retors of a regular life ſhould bee. The Regulars were
fauoured by che Ambaſſadours, and by the Legates, forthcintereſts ofthe
Courr, which would hauelolt agreat inſtrumenr,if they had not -- "0%
wholly on ic. And they wanted not the fauour of ſome Prelates, who con-
feſled their reaſons were good. This contention continued certainedayes,
| bur didabateby little and lirtle, becauſe the Biſhops whohad mooucd ir, did
diſcouer cuery day more difficulty in it. X |

 Thethird Article was concerning the impediments which Biſhops re-
ceiuc from ſecular Magiſtrates , who, to preſcrucche temporall power , doe
nor ſuffer them toexerciſe that abſolute dominion which they would , not
only ouer the Cleargy, but ouer the people. To this effe&t,the reformation
of Princes was made, whereof ime 9 ſpoken already, and will hereafter,
moreat large. This part, and others which cohere with it, were deferred
vntill another Seſſion, becauſe ir was thoughrta difficult matter, and that ir
would haue much prolonged the buſineſſe. Bur the Biſhops did expound
chis delay as if they Fad meant to haue done nothing init. Andthey com-
Si s plained,

»

1 \', The Hiſaieof > L t2..8.

1563 plained; that, purpaſing to reforme the w hole Church, theCleargiconcly
>», thouldbe reformed, | The Legates vicdallmeanes to appealethem;thc wingg
Fnomiasn. that notthizonly was deferred; bur other, marcers fo, which were miceſiary

Enos go behandled, promiſing tharthe delay was orly 10 ptececd withimore ma::
cuantes 5 euritie,and that they ſhould cerrainely beedifcaſled zthat tr was-necellary rol
——- facilirate the diſpatch of that Sefion,, whichhoujd be apreparatarie for rhe
* '. other, ifiwhich allchat remainerþ(hould be.handled,; | The Logars were all
bent to hold the Seſsionat the gime.appointcd,,: thinking it ncceffary for the
quicke diſpatch of the Counctt : for whieh:the Pope, by cvery ordinary
Currier,and ſometimes by anextraordinary,;did lollicirethem;tharhe might
be ſet ar liberty from-it, in the Congregation of the ſeucnthof:Seprember
Friar: Martins Roias, Ambaſſadortor the Hoſpunlaries of.S..lobn of leru{alcm,
Tic 4m. now called Knights of Malta , was receiued; which was deferred by reaſon
dow otthe of the great oppoſitionof ſome principal! Biſhops, that heemighr not haue
21+ 5re- place abouerthem, ſaying it was not wlt that a religion of Friars thould pre
n cede the whole body of ſo many Prelats. ,. Bur, finaily,the matter was accor-
ded,and/publiſhed in Congregation, that place was giuen him.amonglt the:
Ambaſladours, without preiudiceof the Prelates , who prerendprecedence.7
His Orion, The Ambaſſador made an Oration,and excuſed their grand Maſttr, who did:
not ſendto Trent ſooner, by reaton of therumers of the Turkiſh Armada, and
of theincommodities they receiued by Dragut, thePyrate, Herzhorted the
Fathers to remedic the preſent cuils, which allo did nor alittle touch theFri-
ars of cheir religion, whoare not idle members of-xhe Chriſtian Common»
weaith. _ He perſwaded the extirpation of hcreftes, offering that their grand
Maſter, and Socictic, would take ypon them the patronage and defence of rhe
cauſe, ſpending not their goods onely,but their liteand blood, Hee related
the beginaing of their religion, which was fourtie yeeres before Godfrey did
goc to the conquell of the holy land ; the heroicall workes done by theiran-
celters, the like whereof they could not performe now , becaulc they were
ſpoiledof a great part of their Jands,and poſlelſ1ons; that they are a Batracado
of Sicilie and Tralie aginlt the Barbarians. "Theretorchee prayed the Fathers
to take notice of the antiquitic, nobilitic, merits, and dangers of that Soctetie,
andco caulctheir poſſc{lions, and Commendaes, viurped from them, to bee re-
ſtorced,and that it might be decreed by the Councel,thar they ſhould be con-
ferred vporvnone bur of their order, ratifying the immunities and priuiled-
ges thereof. T he Speaker recciued the excuſe inthename of the Synod, and
romifed that they would hauc that con{ideration, as his demand , for the
prefcruation ofthe (ommendaes and priuiledges of that religion, did deſcrue.
Bur howſocuer hee made the {ame inſtanceafterwards tothe Legates , and
the relation to the Pope , his Holincfſe would neueranſwereanything, bur
that it belonged to him onely ro make prouiſion herein,and that hee would
doc it,in time conucnient. Es |
In that Congregation and thoſethatfollowed, voyces were giuen con-
cerning the 21 Articles of reformation, propoſed; .in which though there
was nothing:of great moment, yct for the order of-che toric, and declarati-
on of many things which happencd afterwards, .jt is not amiſle to make
mention of the principall. ln the firlt, which was of che @leCtion of Bi-

ſhops,

F =

L188. | the Connoellof Trent. 762.

ſhops;it being faid that there was anobligation toproaide rhe moſt worthy, x 55
the difticulcic formerly mooued did rerirne, that it would binde very ira "> +
ly the hands;as of the Pope iti'collarions,{o'sf kingsand Princes \in-cthenos au ety
minations, if chey were ryed to nominareone perfor onely, And the ICH» Eurzanary
ec pate'was of 'oÞMion to rediooue the! eomparariue, and tofay onely, that (9%
they-were ry gs yo, petſoy.” Buron the ocher ſide, lome , , _
conſidered thar the Father#hfiue alwayes'vied this maner of ſpeechy that Glow

. themoſt worthy (hould be preferred, andalleadgedthe reaſon, thar hee can\ rages
not bee without blame whopreferreth the-lealt worthy, rhough fir, before ors ow
ah other of more deſert, There was much'diſputarion/herein, bur, a meanes »<< :
was found to compote all, leaning, inſhew, theword; wore worthy, and ſpea-
king firft in poſitive cermes;-and- paſſing afrerwatds20 comparariues, that
the prouifion might bee vndetftood ro be free; and fo that forme was vicd
which is nowiti Prift : thats, thatthereis an obligation to prouide good

and fit Paſtours, and that hedoth mortally finne who doth nor preferre the
more worthy, and: more rofirable ro the-Charch; leaving a naturall expo-
{ition to thele words,that many are more worthy and more profitable, in re-
ſpc&tof others, whoare leſſe; 'in which compaſſerhe will of him thac is to
prouide hatha large field.

Inthethird Article there was ſome difficulty abour the viſttation of Arch-
biſhops . Theſealleadged the Canons,and ancient cuſtomes , that the Suf-
fragans did{weare obedienceto the Metropolitans, and were wholly {ubicct
ro their viſitation, correction, and gouernement, and would nor confent
that rheirauchoritie ſhould be'preiudiced, and, amongſt theſe, the Patriarke
of Venice, was exceeding warme. On the contrary, the Biſhops, eſpecially
choſe of the Kinzdome of Naples, labourcd to mainetaine the cuſtome, by
which they differ-not in authoricy, but in name onely. Bur the number of
che Biſhops being great, and of the Arch-biſhops ſmall, and che Legates and
Papalins fauouring thoſe, rhat theſe might not, by granting authorinicand re-

uration by their ſubieQion; exempr-themſclues more from ſubieEtion to
the Court, they would obtaine norhing,' but one word oncly of farisfaCtion,

_ tharis, that they were not forbid to viſit, when there was cauſe, approoued
by the Prouinciall Councell.Whercof the Arch-biſhops did complaine, and
fay,it was iuſt nothing. Forthere beeing one Arch-bithop in the Prouinciall
Councel, and manyBiſhops, it is certaunc that the cauſe would neuer bec
approoued. if |

The fixt Article was concerningrthe exemption of Chaprers of Cathe:
drals,from Epiſcopal authoritic;in whichthe Spaniſh Biſhops, and, incon-
templation of them, the Count of Luna hauing greatintereſt,many reſtricti-
ons & ampliarions were made,but not fuchas did content the Prelars how:
ſocner they were often changed, and'in the end deferred vntil} another $cl+
ſion, as hall beſaid, ' | 3} 6 ©; : |

The thirteenth Arrict;concerning/ Penſions, ſpake generally char no Be-
nefice ſhould be burthened with greater Peyfionsrhen ofthe third part of tho
fraits,or of their value, conformeablerto chat which was vied when the Pen-

fiow began. This ſcemattiaerconuenicnt co the Cardinallot Loraine, becauſe

there are ſome very richtbarnefices which couldnot be ſaid tobe _
| : it they

—  —  —

O—r—_—_
1563

Fo , LN
Pivs 4+
FERDINAND.

_ -  —

FiizaBETH.
CHARLES 9.
Purtiy 2.

> 4

——_— ﬀ Jy _ I .—_—————— —

764

L1sB.$

The Hiftorieof

if they ſhould pay wo thuds, and others {o poorc, that they. cannor bcarc
any penſion at all. And thereforche {aid,;that this was not a iuſt diſtribution,
and that it was better to-prohibite,that Biſhopriques of thouſand crownes
and bencfices of an hundred, ſhould be burthened,and concerning theothers,
ro ſay nothing. This opinion preuailed tothe great content of the Legares,
and Papalins, for the abſolute power which was Icft to.the, Pope in good
Benefices, Thoſe who demaundcd a moderation of the perfions of reſerua-
tions of fruits formerly impoſed of acceſſes and regreſſes, made many and
long diſcourſes. But he difficultie compelled cuery one to buryall infilence,
for the confuſion and diſorders which were foreſcene would-enſue For all
would haucexcuſcd them(ſclnes that they would nor refigne their Benc-
fices without thoſe conditions, and thoſeeſpecially who had payd compo.
{irion roche Chamber for the obtaining of ſuch graces, would hauc complai-
ned that thegraces ſhould bee taken from them, and the money nor. relto-
red; the reſtitution wereof was a thing impoſlible. ; Finally cuery one
thought it enough to prouidefor the future, without thinking of that which
is palt.

The fourteenth Article, which did deteſt and forbid all payment of part
of the fruits forthe collation, prouiſton or poſſeſſion, did much pleaſe the
French men. They ſaide the payment of Annats was taken away by thoſe
words. And indeed he that doth confider,and examine. them, cannor giue
them any other ſence, howlocuer the cuent hath ſhewed, that they haucnoc
been fo vaderſtood in Rome. In the ſeucnteenth, inwhich pluralitie of Be-
nefices is forbid,and gualtie granted when onc is not [ufficieur, ſomedeſired
an addition, that they ſhould not be diſtant abouc a dayes iourney, that the
incumbent mighr make part of his refidence in cach of them. Buc the
could notobtaine it,ncitherdid they much labour, foreſecing that that addi-
tion,as alſo the whole Article, would notbee executed bur againſt thoſe of
the poorer fort onely, The eighteenth, howſocuer it did pleaſe in that ir
did reſtorein cficct the prouiſion of Benefices with cure to Biſhops ; yer the
Frenchmen did oppoſe againſt rhe forme of the examination, becaulc it did
ſcemeto binde the Bi\hops hands to ſtrait, Their reaſon was , that, by
that concourſe, too open and to publikea way was giuen to ambition; that
antiquitic made profeſſion to giue benefices to him that refuſed them, where-
as,by this new manner they would not only procurethem burprofeſſe them.
{clues robe worthy of them.

[n the nineteenth, the Biſhop of Conimbria ſpake at large againſithe Expe-
Ratiues or Aduowſons, becauſe they did make the incumbents death ro bee de-
{ired,and ſometimes procurcd. And for mental Reſeruations, hee fayd they
were fraades, and necre thefts, and that ic was better to leauc to the Po
the whole collation of all Benefices, then to vic ſuch vnworthy Artifaxcs,
as was to giue verrue to a ſecret thought, not publiſhed, and to; leaue a ſu-
ſpicion thatitwas nor a reſcruation in the minde, but an inuention after
the fact. But Simoneta croſſed his diſcourle, laying, that it was good
to reprchend abuſes for which no proviſion was determined, that it mighe
beprocured, butſecing acommon diſpoſition take remedie, and the De-
cree compoled alreadie, it was ſufficient to cſtabliſh dr, by conſenting, with-

| OUtC

-*"

a. — - ———  — ———_— — —  ———— ho

FO I nn

the Councellof Trem.

L1s.8. 705.
' our multiplying words of reprehenſion, ambitiouſly, when there was no 1563
neede! - © | 4 wa IN

The cleacnch of Sepretnber; the French Ambaſſadours receiued letters Fzxpix aND
fromthe King,of che eight and rwcentieth of A in which;hee fignificd; £m,
that hee had receiuedthe Articles, imparted to theimby the Legares, and did $5
fee char matters were farrefromthe hope hee conceiued, becauletoeltabliſh |
theſe was to pare the Kings nayles, and to makethoſe of the Eccleſiaſtiques King much

to Tren! con-

noer. Which becauſe hee would not endure;hce commanded to repreſent cerning the |
ro the Fathers with wiſedome, dextcririe,and courage;thatas cuery Prince,ſo *formouen
long asthe Councel| dothproceed arighr,is bound ro fauour it withall heate
of zeale, ſo to conertheſore, which cauſerh the preſent cuils; and ro make a
greater, with che om of Kings, is farre from that which was expccted.
Thar he ſaw how lightly they paſſed oucrthereformation of the Clergy,who
onely hauegiucn the fcandals ro thoſerthar haue ſeparated them(ſclucs from
the Romilh Church, and how they aſſume authoticie to take away therights
and prerogatiues of Kings, to breake their Conltitutionsand Cuſtomes, prc-
ſcribed by timeout of minde, ro anathematize and cxcommunicate Kings
and Princecs,all cendingco ſowe difobedience, edition, and rebellion of ſub-
ic&s againlt rhcir Soucraignes ; whereas it is manifeſt tothe whole world,
that the power of the Fathers, and of the Councel, extenderh-onely to the
reformation of the Clergie, without rouching matters of State, or of Secular
powerandiuriſdiction, which is wholly diſtin&from the Eccleſiaſticall,and
rhat alwayes, when the Fathers and Councels haue preſumed ro handle ſuch
things, Kings and Princes haue made refaſtance ; whence many editions
and warres, to the great damage of Chriſtendome, hauc proceeded. Thar
they ſhould cxhortthem co bee carefull in that which b:longed to their
charge, and was neceſlarie for cheprefent oecalions, and to leauethole at-
rempts, which, hauing neuer done good heretofore, would produce a worle
effc&t in thoſe times. The King added, that, if the Fathers would not retire
ypoatheſc perſwaſions, they,the Ambaſſadours,thould make a ſtrong oppo-
{xion; which being done, withourexpeCting their indgement, or referring
chemſcluecsto their difcretion,they ſhould deparr,and goe to Uenice, letting
che Erench Prelats know thar they ought to continue in Councel, and inde-
uour to docGodleruice, being aſſured, char, in caſe any thing ſhall be trea'e4
againſttherighcs , prerogatiues and priuiledges of the King and French
Church,they willnor faile ro abſent themſclues, as his Maicſtie would bhaue
chem doe. He wrotealſo ro the Cardinal of Loramein the ſame manner, as he
gauc order ſhould be told rhe other Prelates; that is, that hee ſhould nor ap-
proue any thing with his preſence, chat ſhould be handled in Councelagainſt
che Kings rights, bur ſhould abſent himſclfe,if he ſhall ſce that thefFathers do
fally withoutthe limits of their charge, referring him, for the reſiduc, to the
inftructions ſentrothe Ambaſſadours. %

The Ambaſſadours hauing receiued theſe letters, and conſulted of all
with the Cardinall of Loraine, by his aduice, did impart them ro the Legats,
and caufeda voycethereofto paſſe inthe Councel, that che Biſhops, hearing
of ic, mighr dealt from demanding the reformation of Princes, and them-

{dues might not hauc occaſion to oppoſe, and proteſt. Bur this brought
KC: forth

c .

== -6WH mmm | — —

1563 foorch a contrarie cftc&. For the Biſhops who. were quiet , in regard ofthe
©, expectation thar, when the Seſſion was ended, the reformation of Peinces
F:avixaz». ſhould be propoſed, vndcrſtanding this newes;and pefcciuing thatthe ayme
En was to paſſeirbucrin ſilencc,bcgan to treat among themſelues, no4/to. pro-
Cnnnr3 9: ceed any Further in the aces of thecouncell, if that alſo, which. equcerpeth
\ \/ Princes were notgiuenforth;and putin conſulcation,together-withghg other
A combinu- , |
onofm hun articles. And they procecded {o farre hercin;,-:that a hundred of, them.gaue
can; their wordoneto: another to bee-gonſiant.an this reloJution! ; dud bauing

the Reforma Jrawen a Writing to this purpoſe, which-watdubſcribed by all, they;,went to

&s. the Legars,requiring thatthearticles of the Reformationgt Princes:mightbe

propoledand giuen rotheFathers, declaring, as it were byway of proteſtati-

on that they would not proceed, nor concludeanything in the others;bur to-

perhcr with theſe. The Legates gaue good words,purpoling, and hpping to |

divert che humor. Andin this crouble, the Count of Lung appeared againe,

and demanded,as he had'donebcfore,a reuocation of the Decree, proponents-

Eu; Leg is, that eucry Prelate might propoſe-what he thought worthy of re-

formzrion : and'demanded alſo thar the {xt Article might bee amended, ro

pleale the Spaniſh Prelates, raking quite away the exemptions of the Chapters

of the Canonsof Cachedrall Churche:, and ſubiccting them to the Bilhop.

And there being in Trenta Proctar of thoſe (, hapttrs, who Jaboured, to the
con:rary,he commanded him ro fpeake no more ty it. a

Things ſtanding in thele termes, the Legates thought ro hold -the Sell

on with thematterof matrimony onely.- But it was oppoſed , that-rhedif-

ficultics of Clandeftine marriage werenotwell digeſted as yet, and;thar the

Ambaſladours would fuſpe&,that if the Seſhon-were held, and che reforma-

tion aot ſpoken of, all hope was loſt that it would cucr bee handled. And it

being cuident that no part of the reformationcould bee in order, at the time

determined for the Seflion, they propoſed, in the generall-Congregation of

the'fifteenth of the moneth, to prolong it vatillche cleuenth of Nouember,

and ſo it was reſolued. The cauſe of this long delay was, that the Pope, ſee-

ing the difficulties to finiſh the Councell, arifing parcly by rhe controuerſics

ofthe Prelates, and partly by the oppoſitions of the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour,

ved all hope of oucrcomming them in the Cardinall of Loraine. Whereupon

oxdyinthe hee Wrote tothe Legates, that, in caſe the Selſion could not bee held at the

SY inns appointed,ir ſhould bedeferredfor two monahs. Andthis hee did that

the Cardinall might hauc time ro come vnto him, thathee might treat with

him, of that which was impoſſible ro.docby letters or meſſengers, and thar,

by this meanes, cuery preuious diſpoſition for the concluſion: of the Coun-

 cellmightbeeprepared, Vntill that timethe Pope had no- other determina»

i 04 tionthen to finith the Synode, bur hee firmely refolued then, that , if that

reſolu-d by al
_ a >x could not be done, there being ancceſlitic to rid himſclte of it; hee would by
Councel, all meanes diffolue it. Heeſent the Legares facultie ro make a ſulpeniton, or
a tranſlation, as theythought beſt, by aduice of the Fathers, and wrote vneo
chem that hee would, by all mcanes;be freed fromie,byancnd of it,if ic were
poſſible, which hee did much deſire; bur, if ir could nor be, they ſhould ve
oneoftholerwo remedies: and therefore thar they ſhould cndeuourta make
ſome occalionariſc, that rbey mighrbee requeſted ro docit, that hee might
noe

XUM

L138. the onxcell of T rent.

767.
nor ſecme to bee the author as alſorhat they ſhould/ſollicirethe iourney of 1563
Loraine, who parted the next day after the reſolution was made'to prolong Sins LN

| VS. 4.
the Seſlion. FarDiN. ND

All the diſtaſtes of Francefor matter ofthe Councel were ceaſed in the HD

CHARLES 9.

Popexthough he recciued conrinuall troubles from, that kingdotne. He was pn

much vexed with the daylyinftance,made vnro him; that he woald notcons —> --
fear to the alienation of ioco00; crownes of rag s/o goods,and by the The Carci-
continuall detration which he vaderſtood the ugonots vicd-againſt him, pena
and che Apoſtolique Sea, And particularly, hee was grieued at the Cardinal ****”*
(,baſtillion, who, as hath beenefayd, layd afide che clericalthabite, and called
himſelfe Count of Beauvois;and,vndceritanding that the Pope in Confiltory
had depriucd him of the Cap; the laſt of May, hee reſumed the habite of a {x Cardin!
Cardinal, and was marricd ir: andina by ſolemnitic in Roan, the thir- mocketh the
tecnthof Auguſt, when the King was declared in Parliament to bec of age, E,
he appeared in the ſolemnitie ,'in the famehabite,,' in preſence of all the
French Nobilitic; which was generally: thought to bee agreatcottemprof =
the Papal dignitic, Wherewirh the Pope becing mooucd, hee made his de- nad bebe
priuation to beeprinted at this time, and many copies to bee diſperſed in
France. | ” |
The Popes Nuncio reſident in France;came to Rome,” a few dayes before
the arriuall of the Cardinall of Loraine; who was diſparched bythe Queene,
to propoſe to the Pope a conference betweene his 'Holineſle, the Empe-
rour,and the King of Spain?; and the King/her ſonne,/.in whole eraine bs
ſelfe would be. The propoſition did not difpleaſe che Pope, becauſe ir might
ſcruc him to finiſh the Councell,but hee rhoughe the execution was impolli-
ble. And he promiſed to fead Nuncy ro the Emperour and King of Spaine,
to this cnd ; and appointed the Biſhop'of YVintimiglia for Spaine, whom
hee therefore recalled from .Trent, and the Bulhop of I{chis for the Em-
crour. |
To the Cardinall of Loyaine he made exceſſiue demonſirations of honor,
How the car<

lodged him in the palace, (a thing vnuſuall) went publiquely to viſuce or gr og
him in his lodging. Their diſcourſes were. partly about the/Conference, rome was *

*

treaced in

though the Cardinall did not thinke it feaſable. They treatedabout the fale x.
of a 100000. crownes which whether the Cardinalldid promote or draw
backe, was not diſcoucred. But the Pope hauing,vpov a newinltance made
by the French Ambaſſadour, anſwered, that hedid: referre it rothe Couns
cell, many rhought ic to bean excuſe inuented by Loraine. Bur the prin-
cipall buſcneſſe was about finiſhing the Synode, which the Popethought to
be of greateſt imporrance, and knew to bee molt difficult, Wherein there
was great confidence berweene them. For the Cardinall diſcouered ro him
that his intereſts were turned the ſame way, and that, {ince the death of his
brothers, he ſaw plainely, that there was no meanes ro maintaine Religion
in France,and his houſe, but his conjunction with the Apoſtolique Sea: The
Popcpromiled ro make Cardinals at his inſtance,and gaue him ſuch words
as ſhewed an intention to make him his Succeſſour inthe Popedome: and
that they might haue more credite, he made ſhew , that the greatneſſe of

that Cardivall was profitable for the endes hee had, inayming at ſome mat-
rer

-

— —

—

I563
FSA
Pivs 4-
FERDINAND

— . - — ———

ELIZAPETH
CHARLES 9g,
Puriip 2,

SS

L1s.8

: The Fhiſtorie of

ter of great moment. And the concluſion of his diſcourſes to ,cuery one
was; We muſt ſhut. vþ the Councell, proutde money, aud afterwards that will happen
Which ſhallpleaſe G o D.

The Poperold the Cardinal, that as often as he heard of the diſcords,and
delaies, which fome did plor, he thoughtto ſuſpend the Councell; but chan-
gcd his opinion, for feare of the {candall whichthe world would take, wi:ich
knew northerructh : and'that fometimes he thought this the greateſt cuj!l
that could occurre, and ſomctimes iudged it Iefſe then the davger in which
his anthoritie was, which was the marke atwhich the Princes, Biſhops, and
all ſorts of perſons didthoot: bur: tinally , thatic was neceſlary to layaſideall
reſpects, and cometo rhis reſolution, The-Cardinall diſſwaded bim, (hew-
ing that this was nora medicine. to! cure the{cuill, bur to deferre, it qnely,
with greater danger; becauſc hee would, inafſhorttime, hauc newdemands
to reſtore it, and plots would be[41d by thoſe who were port fatisfied with
him ; and that ro ſuſpend was as: difticult as to finiſh ir, For there was no
necd roalleadge caules for this,it being ſufticicatto bring thingsto the con-
clu{ton,and fo to cnde, whereas the ſuſpenſion did require an allegation of
the cauſe, whereof euery one would {peake his opinioh; that! it was more
honourable to finiſh, thento ſuſpend it; and hee vied other reaſons, which
made the Pope know that his counſell was good'/and faithfull, And after-
wards he aduiſed him ro dealcplainely with the King of Spaine.

Therefore calling the Ambaſſadours of that King, hee complained, in
grieuous termes,faying,that he had called the Councell,vpon hope and pro-
miſe,rhar the affairesof the Papacy would haue beene fauoured by his Ma-
icſtic,to whomhe had giucn all imaginable ſatisfaction, and would giuc him
more,according to his demands,if the impediments,cauſed by the Councel,
were taken away; that he had not demanded any fauour of his Maicſticand
his $4inilters, but the ending of the Councell, for the [eruice of G9 Þ, and
rhe publike good, and therein was ill vied, though itwas rathera lofle to the
King,then a benefir. Therefore hee was forced to hold eſtceme of him by
whom he was eltecmed. and to caſt himſelfe into the armes of thoſe that

-- would asfi{thim. And he diſpatched allo a Currier tothe King, with a let-

ter of his owne hand, complaining of the offices, done by his Ambaſſadour
and Prelats in Trent,contarie to his Miniſters in Rome,cach party laying, hee
doth the commiſhon of his Maieltie. Hee ſhewed that it was conuenient
for the {eruice of G o Þ, ofthe Apoltolike Sea,and of his Maicſtic, that the
Councell ſhould end; and in concluſton, hedefircd him to declare him(elfc
plaincly whether he would afliſt bim heerein, or nor. The Cardinall did
counſel him alſo not to be auerſe from granting rothe Emperour the Cup,
and marriage of Prieſts,by which meanes he ſhould gaine both him and the
king of the Romans, not to conſent onely to the ending of the Councell, bur
to be fauourable, and ro promoter. Herold him likewiſe, that it was ne-
ceſlary ro omit the reformation of Princes, becauſe ir would prolong the
buſineſſe more then any thing beſides. | | |
Afterthedeparcure of Loraiae, niac French Biſhops parted from Trent,
and returned home, fo thar there remained but eight, beſides fixe who wene
with the Cardinallto Rome, This departure cauſed an opinion, thar they
were

XUM

not truly and'properly a murder, an

ponIEG a0 Ie ge PO II A — I ——_—_ my —OT—O OO a > —— SS ——— —_— = tage

L:s: & _ the Conntolhoy Tres," 769

LY

enemas. a4

_ ne

—— - ———— - -

ware ive ed; and rhatchere wav piirpoſe7acthe perfivatiow of the Tuge- FP T1

nts to tecall 'the othors/y:thar, the end ofiits! Councell approactiing3"n0*—A

French-then might beepreſent whetiehey ſhbald bee anathemarized. -"The-riwcuss
Lxgmes,to facilitate chedifhculrics of ſecret martage, cauſed the Dininies Who Ein
were maintainers and'oppoſers of i tomakeapublike diſputation. 7' This Ct s-
was neuer done befotcinany: occurterice ; andthendid ſoHirfle good ferhat I
cuery one was moreconfirmedin hifowneopinidn,/! Afedvedis/0> realfiitne
che Congecgations; ard r&' handle-thereformatidn, they gatofoonk the res;
{duc of the'Articles; the aft of whietwas crhoretttitirion of PHntes, being:
forced tHitteunto by che muripicofehd Prefars, 5200197 2910955 716 apr

: Of which matter concerning Pijites badiag often made: mentiony abd*
now bcili9 $omcro. oplate, in which # ifhiecefiaticto recite it;forthoynder-
ſandiipotthe things th&follow'; itmilt beekiwoiyne chatitdidconcalhed
proheme ; with thirteencArticles ind a' very pregnant Epilogue';;the (itlss-
ſtance whereof was. -./Thar the Synode, befidesthethings conſtituted con-
cernitig/ Eccleſiaſtical perſons, hath'thought'fitro cofrect theabuſes bfthe
Scealars, brought inagainſt the'ithmilticie of theChurely, hoping chat the
Princes will be content, 4d eauſe dug'\bbedience'rs berefidredto the Clergic-
And therefoteir doth admoniſh then to cauſc rheir magiſtrates, officers, and
remp6rallLords; ro yeeldrhat obedienite tothe Poptandeonfliturions bf the
Councell, which rh+mfelues areboutidroperfotme.-' And\forfaciliration'
heereot, irdoth renew ſome thifigs decreed bythe holy Candhs and Timpetial of the Refor-
lawes , in fanour of Eccleſiaſtical immunirie;; which oughto bee obfertcd pion ®
vpon paine of Anathem4.. 1. ThatEcelefrafticall perſons rhay tior bee”
iudged inafecular Courr, howſocuer there may beedoubr of the tne of the
Clerkeſhip, or themſelues conſent; or Haue renounced thethings obrained;or

forany catiſe whatſoeucr, though vadet pretence of publike vrilitie,orferuice

of the King, nor (hall be proccededapainſt there; incauſe of murder, ifit bee

d notoriou ly knowne; norin othercaſes

permitted by the law, without the'declaration of the Iavv going before.

2. | Thatincauſesſpiricuall, of nrartimonic, herefic, patronage, betieficidy,

ciuill, ctimiriall,add'mixt;belonging;in whatmanner ſoeuer; ro the Ectleſic
alticall Coutr, as welt-Sucr per{oris;asouer goodes, tithes, fourths, atiderher
portions apperraining tothe Chatehi'6rautr benefitiall Parrimonics, Ectle-
fraſticall Fees, temporall iurisditivtrof Chuarches,'the temporall Iudgesſhall
not nicddle;, ncithef inthe Peritoris or in the Poſſeſſorie ; taking away All aps

peale vpon' pretenice of iuſticedefiied”;! ofas fo anabule; or becarfethe

4

chings obtained are terivunced *and thoſe whis ſhall haue recomnſe'to the Se
cular magiltrate, inthecauſtstforeſaid; (hall beeexconmmuttvicared, atid depri

 uedof theirrights, belonging'vieo them itithefe thingd*"And'thisſhalfbe -

obſctuedalfo in cauſes depetidingn whitinftance loegers''”' 4;  'THatthe
Seculars ſhall notappoint Indgesin cauſes Eeclefialtieall, thouglfthey bane
Apoſtolikeauthoritie, or acultotift rimic our of:tHind* and che ClerfteFwhe
ſhall receive ſuch\offices fromthe Laikes, though by vertueofaby palbieyst
wharſocuer,ſhallbee ſi fpended from their orders depriued of their Beyefices,
arid offices, and the vncapeable of thera” 2:4 ThattheSeculatfhallhor
comimnand che Eecleftiftical Indge; norirs excomiitunicate without Heence,
POO! Trtt OE

A tt

Ee eee

- "D. Poa

OY — —

_ L188,

1563

PiTr3 4,

ot 19-revoke or fbſpendihe Excommupication: deygunctd;, nott0tÞþid bim
r9;Examine .Gite apd condernne; or ro beueiScrgeants,, or Minilters forexe,

Fsxaglanncution. ,{5411;,LAtngither the Emporous, Kings, nprany Prince. whacſo-

Enarm cucys hall 'makg;Edias or Contitutons,in what manner locyer,concerping:

CHARLES, 9+

Pirie, 2.

Ecelfſiallicalleauſes £97 perſons, vormcddle with theirperſons.,, cauſes , iu-:

A> rildiftipes, g5;#1hunals,ipe:nos in the Tnquifitipn,,. but ſhall bee, bound.

. Ee
w_—_ n
-

to affdprdthe ſacular Armegn: EccleGGalticall ludges, + 6. - That the, cems,
porallijurildiftion. of the:Egeleſialtikes /,. though. with mecxe ,and. mixt,
powet , ſhallnor, heediltutbed, , nor their fſubics drawne ror the Secular)
eribunals, in cauſes temporall., ;;7,. |Thatno prinec of wagilirate ſhall pro-!
miſc by. ©Briefe ,. or other writing, or-ginchope30:any.to hauea Benetice
withinthair dommions, nar procure is from.che Prelates ,or Ghaprers of Re-
gulars,.;and lice; that (hall obtains ic by, that meancs, , (hall bee: deprived;
ani, yacapeable.: , 7 8..; Thar they (hall. gor meddlewith the truites of Bener,
fices, Vacant. vnder. procenctot cultodicor patronage , or proxeion, of!
of 'yizh{tangigg dilcords, nor.ſhall place therecither Baylietes ,, or Vicars:.
and rhe, Seculans who, tha!l, accept luck pffices, and cultadics,; ſhall bee

in thc lands and poſlc(lions of cthe-Church.. - 11, Tharthe lerrers, ſenten-
ces andicitationsof ludges Ecclgfiallicall,, eſpecially of the Court of Rome,
ſoſpgne as they -bee.cxhibiced ,, ſhall bee jntimared , without, exceprion,
publiſhed, aydexecutcd ,. neighier (thall, ir bee neceflaric ro' require con-
ſcnt.or licence; which is called Exequarur , or Placet ,, or, by, any; other
namccither for this ;/.or for taking peſleſſon of Benehicgs, , rhough.vpon
pretence of withltanding falſhoods, and viglences!, except in _fortrefles
and thoſe Bencfices in which Princes arc: acknowledged by reaſon of the
temporalitie; and,in calc there (hall bee doube of falſuie, or of. ſome great
{candall or tumulr , the Biſhop, , as the Popes delegate (hall conktiryte whar
hee rhinketh necdefull, . 12. That Princes and Magiſtrates {hall nogJodge
rheir officers, ſcruancs , ſouldiers, horſes or dogs, in the houſes or Monalitc-
ries of the Eccleſialtikes, nor take anything, from them for their fogde or pal-
lage; ..,13:.. Andifany Kingdome, Prouince , or placeſhallprexend not co
bebound toany of thethings aforcſaid , by vertue of priuiledpes fromthe A-
poltolike Sea-which are in aQuall vic , the priuiledges fthall-bee exhibited ro
the Pope, within a yeereafter the end of che Councell, which ſhall bzeGon7
f wk by him, according torhemerites of the Kingdonies or Provingegand,
in calethey benotexhibiredbefore.theendof theyeere;; they:ſhall be ynder-
| - DT {tood

3; Bl 2 | the wo Tren, v mM x

| —_ , Ho acai —_— abdnde amr pr rd oro SD
thersy renewing all-the:conttianions-of hohfiCinohsy it fi =: BLerkir
youroþ&ccltti alticall in\munitic\»commbddi 7nder AAADERK] Patt 4 wt
that ncichet dirc&tly:nor :indireatly.p'vnder. amy MhiaGedery arty! VS
thingbecconſtiurcd;-or ——_ ainft cheperdenl

08ds of thc Cler-

gie, ovagainſt cheir {iberrie , _—__ dg ya though ifath4es
UL noawithflanding, | tn 0 ic 22 ad bas 38692 50 wild )

_And rhisis ir which was Geſtim vartoddotlisAn baffadou ,and/by cid
of chemzfear roghicir Princes, whe! 0h park waar ancnayy- oatctRe bids
to his Amibafladors before mentio AndrheErhperor having [cenethen Are ail
wrot tothe Cardinall Morone, char Hee could norpothbly aſent,cithers Em: full robe
peror,orasiArch:Duke;that they ſhould ſpeake id Councell6f reforming't _
iuriſdichion: of Princes /, nor 'to'take from'rhera authority 'ro receiiie afli-
ſtanceand:contmburions from the: Clergie; purring him tninde | ehatl
rhe former euils did arife- from the oppreſſions atrempted'by the Eccleſi; -
Rikes-againſt people and Princes. Thar they ſhould bewarenor to providke
chem.more, and caufe greaterinconueniencesto ariſe; 990!

After Loraine was departed , the French Ambaſſadours pur thet proteftas-
tion in.order, ro makeyſeof irif need were, Inthe Congregation ot ters
and twentieth of Sepretmber once of the Farhers made'a Tong ſp {peach to fhew.
that che cauſe of all deformation'proceeded from Princes ; Tat they ' had
more neede of reformation; that the Articles wetealready in order;and was
nqw timeto propoſe them, chat they might not vaniſh tonothing by delaics.
After hez had ſpoken, the Ambatſudour de Ferrieresmadea 16ng queruſous The peach of
Oration ,; or, as the Frenchmen: lay , a complaint, ' The contents where. * =
of, in the principal points, were. ' Tharthey might ſay t#tlic Fathers asthe
Ambaſladovrs of the lewes did to the Priclts. . Ought wee alſo ro continue
faiting & lamenting: T hat chere are morethen 1 5o:yerespalt ſince the moſt
Chriſtian Kings haue demanded of the Popes a av rmation of rhe Ectleff-
alticall diſcipline;rharfor this end only they have ſent Ambaſſadors tothe Sy:
nods, of (Conſtance, Bail, and cheLateran , eo thefirlt of Trent, & finally rothis
ſecond; Whartheirdemands were;Iobn Ger/or;Atmbaſſadourin thar bf Con:
ſtance , the Orations of Perrus Danefias, Ambaſſadour inthe firſt of Trent; of
Guido Faber , and of the Cardinall of Lovaine ipthis ſecond'"doe' reſtifict in
which nothing was demandcdbut the reforthation of the manners of the
miniſters of che Church; and norwithſtanding this they mitiit Ntil[faft and
lament, norleucntic yeeres, but rwo hundred/and Go b graht they benot
three hundred, and inany more. © Andif ary ſhould bay ; that farisfation
bath bcene gigehthem , by Decrecs'and Anathematiſmes ,' they did notthinfe
tharthis was:coſatisfie, ro giue onething in paymentfor another, Tfir hal
bee ſaid thar they ought to bee ſatisfied with agrcat bundle of refortations
propoſedrhe moneth before, they' had ſpoken their opinign concetfitith
char, and ſcntir ro the King, who had an{wered , that he ſaw few things if
it befitting the ancient AN -bur many'things contrary. "Fhac that is
northe plaſtc :r of Iſaias, to heale thewound , butof Exrki:l}, to tnakeitri,

Tet 3 though

f

is ee er
———_— —

772 $624 | The Hiſtorieof JIE L 18:8”

156 3 though hcalcd before, - Tharthdeatddicions of cxcommunicating and ana-
6 rhemacizing Princegywas withoutexamplcin the anciene Church ,''and did
Fz2p many. makeawWay totdþclion; andall thc Anicles concerning the reformation
Euzazzru. of Kings and Princes, haucno-ayme- butto: take away:ithe libertic of thc
52348155 9- Exgnch Church, and offend rhe; Maicſticofthe molt Chriſtian Kings, who,
> by. checxample of Conſtantine ;. Inflinian, and other ;jEmperours haue-made

many Ecclcfiaſticall, lawes.,; » which | bauc..nor one]y nor. dilplealed the
Popes, , butthcy hauc inſerted ſome of chema.in their Decrces, and iudged
barles the Great, and Lewis the ninth, principall authors of them,: worthy.
of chematne. of Saints. | Headded, that the Biſbops-had; with them goucr-
nedgheChurch of France,not only ſincerhetimes of the*Pragmagigae;or Con-
cordate, but fourc hundred yceres! and morcbcfore the booke. of the'Decre-
tals; and.that thele. lawes have beenc defended and! tenewed byrithe later
Kings, ſince that the Decretals, fubltitured in place ;ofithem,, Baucideroga-
icd from them-in the rimes following: . Thatthe Kjng,becing,.now of age,
would; reduce. thoſe lawes; and- the libertic of the- French Chiirch- into
obſcruation, becauſe there is nothing in'them contratic.to the dorine
of the Catholique Church.,/ ro the ancient Decrees:of Popes,:nor to the
Councels of the Church vaiuerſall. :Hee ſaid morcouer that thoſe lawes
docnor prohibitc Biſhops to refideall rhe yeere, and to- preach euery day ,
notonely ninc moncths, and inrhefcalts,as was decreed in the laſt Seſſion ;
nor forbid them tg live in ſobrictic and pictie, and having the vic oncly, and
not the benetir of the reuenvues, to diltr;bute them, or rather ro render them
tothe. poore, whoare owners of thetn, ' And heeproceeded in naming 0+
cher things of the Councel., with the like ;ironicall manner, that hee ſce-
med to. iclt at them. Hee added, that the power.giuen by Gop to the
King, the lawes of France, and the libertic of the French Church, haue al-
waycs forbid Penſions, Reſiguations in fauour or with-Regreſſe , pluralitie of
Bencficcs, nnats, Preuentions and to litigate for the Poſſeſſorie before any bur
the Kings Judges, or forthe propriety, or other caulc, ciwill or criminall, our
of France, and toibid allo the hindering of, appeales, as from abule, orto hin-
der that the King, Founder and Patron of almoſt all the Churches of France ,
may not make vicof the goods and revenues , though Ecclefiaſticall , of
his Subicts , for inſtant 'and vrgent necefſitic of the Common-wealth,
Hee ſaid afterwards,that the King maruciledat twothings. One, that they,
the Fathers, adorncd with ſo great Eccleſiaſticall power in the miniſterie of
Go D,afſemblcd oncly to rcftore Eccleſiaſtical dilcipline,not regarding this,
ihould biade themſclues ro reforme- theſe; whom! they ought. ro: obey ,
though they were ſtiffenccked. Another,that they ſhould think they can and
ought, withoutany admonition , excommunicate and anathemiariſe Kings
and Princes, which arc giuen by Go D to men, which ought nar to beg
doneto any ordinary man, though perſeucring in-a molt gricuous offence;
He ſaid, that Michael, the Archangel, durſt not curſe the Deuill, or Micheas, or
Daniel, rhe moit wicked Kings, and yet they, the Fathers, were wholly con-
ucrſanc in. malediCtions againſt Kings and. Princes; and againſt the molt
Chriſtian, if hee will defend the lawes of his anceſtors, andthe liberty of the
Gallicane Church. His concluſion was,that the King did deſire them not to
| | | decree

—.

XUM

| his A:mbaſſadorsrooþpads tie-Detirecs/ks d:oppole

s
—_—_—

Bun . ' the Coutgellaf\ThenkV __— 773

TOW" $0” "WrBiteatnanendete OY SG ere

&erer any ile apainltrhoſclabi;or/if xevHh

jullpto chat yhich al che world Fieomuns:

mirc A TPUy ay DE n n Kea |
expectert; rotould bet /inatb utepaible rerhoning, nb tid evramand 5cotedgy
_ ,rheAmbiſationry rol (irtherthad es!) blickdreo-hee fpaſeerin panes;
cheKings name? 'Aftormwirdohoedhdinuoeatdicheaben} cart; and the —V—.
Bachers; totobfidet whether che:Kibgs demapdinnd jalt ; whoaber writeve

honeſt farabenn:romakedorders, for i” chrouphowe he” whole

world} whithecthiswertaciqe rs wkecomipaſſion,not "ord the 'Clyech;

nob yporriFyandd byrvpduschomſelwa;rhe Farhers) vheie dignity , repurni-
0n,,and rouculies;;which caynor deprclerucd but byche 'Averby whic
vecregaidicd inthe beginningytlinig 1 confulionstheyrauſt beewg:
ry; and nocicry when Chretiocommenh'; fonk#; imorhebeard of fwins +
chat 1f chey waald reltovre!the Churchitorheantienc repuratian; com
aduerfaries trorepentance;And reforme-Princesgithey follow the'ex-
ample of Ezckis, who didnat imitate his fatherynorthis firſt; ſecond third,
and fourghigrand-father; who'were vaperfedt; bur went highet to theitiii-
earion of hispcrteCt anceſtors; ſoitwas not fir-ar thartinzg'ts reſpe&t the
next'predece{ors;[uhoupts very learned, but re alcend as farte-as Ambroſe,
Augaſtine, and (/bryſoftomes, who'ouetcame the hereriques ;\not by atmiing
Priacesro the warre , 'therſelues-inthe mcane While pickitg;their nailes at
homecybur with: PR EIN ares 7 * "For they, having

framed themfelues firlt like: &mbroſe,” Anſtine, and '(hryſoftomeL, will makethe
Princes alſo ro:become Fheodoſts > Honory , Arcady, Valentiniant , and Grati-
ani ; which he (aid they hoped for, arid praicd God it might bee {v5 and here
beeended. The Oration , when it was pronoutced, did atiger very much,
not onely the Papalins, burthe other Prelates more, and Fre nch-menalſo ? r.; confen
and, when it was caded,, there wazfucha whiſpering , chair was neceffary
ro finiſh che Congregation. & Some did taxe it of herelle; andothers fatd}/it
was much to hee ſuſpected, ar theileaft ; and others, thatit was offenſiueto
godly cares. They faid, hee hadtaken occafion todoe it, inabſence ofthe
Cardinall of  oraine, who would never hauc'enduted choſerermes , and thar
his cnd was to diſſolue the Councdlt; thar hee did attribure ro Kings more |
then belongethr ro them} thar hee inferred that the Popes aathoriry is not
neceſſary forthe viingof'Church goods; thar hee made the Fretid King
like ro the Queene of England. ..Burmorhing did ſo muchieffend , asthathce
faid chat the authority of theFrench Kings ouer perſons and goods Ecelefi-
alticall, was not founded vpon the Pragmatique, ( oncordates ; aid priviledges
giucn by Popes, but vponthe law of Nature, holy Seripture, ancient Coun-
cels, and lawes ofthe Chriſtian Emperours. -- © > SA
The French Ambaſſadours were reprehendedalſo, becauſethey did not
follow the (teps of the Emperours and Spaniſh Ambaſſadors, who; though
they had the lame intereſts, made notfuch acommotrion , becauſe they knew
there was no reaſon for ir. De Ferriererdefended himelfe, & ſaid, thar the I.c-
gates had promiſed the Cardinatl of Lorame, tharthismatter ſhould notbec
ſpoken of, but with fuch moderation, as char ir ſhouldinor totich the affaires
of France, which was not performed; thatthe Kings inftrution had beene,
Tri. | imparted

774 Thefiſterieofino) 5 LE z=3 &

1563 imparted red tO theCardindil,awhogibhehadbecnopreſent ,: would nar onely;
ROT hauc&anſenited 0, burconalitiada Prorefiation!z tharithole wete rear 1910:
Farmmanr' renters, whodheudy (cenevothingÞirthaDegetalyLaweroffourc hundred
Emre yeares; did wliinkecharthironvere: fiafticall lawes botore thin ;that
Cnoni459 if any. moulitroforme theKingbysbedduoritals; be would. refoarde-thema,

\—V— hi Decreed,and leadrhemalle-romoidancicnt. tunes, not-emaly of Saint
Avftine , butokabs al6;:theb bedidnormaketbe French Kin a
Queonc of England, but diappoſertheot  wboheuebegunnelong ſince to
cHlarge zheir ewvge authocicy:bydimdipithing cxeK3ugs ; that; aftho( Arti+
 dasdidfo, machdamwtinttie Empeant, and Cabolique King;as they dog
France; they $Quld-acuct have bee pgepoledgandithdreforche was not to
rake $x4mple by dbole, who haue noe rquall ingereſts. i PheArchr biſhop of
Sangand chaAbbatot (; leigual werodiliaficd molt of all, wbowentvpand
doyync, layiag-ithatebe Anthaſadourrhadondilkee proteſt; andthat their
cnd was inakea confuſton,and:gineoecation: tor:arNationall Councel in
Exarce | thatthey were menmor:well affeRted, croguurcsoftheKing of Ne-
warre,, (cnt by bim co che Gouncel , torbis ownedelcignes, hadiproteficd
withoutthe Kings.commidion, & thatitwvas firzo make ther ſhew their in-
ſtracions 6 te. frame an[yqwſetion again(t rhem,asnat havingagood opini-
on in macecr of faich. Whereiy great &therences didariſe beriveen.the-Ambal-
{adoursand them.i The oexc day the Ambaſſadors gaue the King an account
of the cauſes why they bad deterred the. proteſtation -vnrill: they, ; and how
they, were forced,at that time, ta come vnto-it, adding, that theywould de-
ferre.thercgiltring of it ifche acts of. the CouneQl; yniill his Maiclty had

{cen jc, and cormmandedithem whatthey ſhoulddpe. .. fd - bne1
The Legats not hauingacopic of the:OQration: made. a colleRtion of it by
the memory of thoſe who had becene molt atrentiut ro ſend itrothe Pope,
of which de Ferrieres. haying gottena.copic, complained, that many things
were expreſſed againſt his incention, andin particular, whereheenamed Ec-
cleſtaſticall lawes,, it was repeated , ſpirituall lawes', and thatKings might
take Church goods attheir pleaſure, whereas hee hadfayd onely for necefla-
ry cauſe. By this he was forecedo giue foorth his Oration, and lent a copic
of it ro Rome,, to the Cardinall of Loyaine , cxcuſing himlclfe for not having
vicd words of luchacrimony as he was commandcd in the laſt inſtructions,
and inthe firſt, whichare rcconfirmedinthoſc; adding alſo that he thought
it neceſſary to obey the King, and was nor willing tovndergoethe reprehen-
{1ons of the Counſellors of Parliament, who would haue taxed him, if in a
Generall Councell, marters of ſo. great importance had beenc determined
againſt that which hath beet by them ſocxaRtly maintained; beſides, the
Kingsauthority , which hee defended , having beenc vpheld foure hundred
yceres by the Kingdome of Fraxce, againſt the war, in oppoſition of ir, made
by the Court of Rome, it was not juſt thar the Fathers of the Councell., the
greater part of whom are Courtiers, ſhould be ludges ofthe ancient differen-
ces, which the kingdomehath with that Court. He gauc a copie of the ora-
ctionto the Ambaſſadors allo, andto.asmany as did defire ir, and ſomelaide,
that he had pronounced it;otherwiſe then it was written. ., Whercunto hee
replyed, that that could not bee (aid by any that had any meane ynderſtan-
ding

XUM

XUM

L1im8.! theCountellof Trent. ' - 975
dingottheLarme!, and:rhat,, howlocuex ic was. the farhe;-pragounced, and 1563
written, yerif theychought gtberwiſe,,ghey muſt remembertharche ſtile of >
the Synod was ficuer to iudgeof chingsas they were delivered inyoyce, bur FRnDINAND;
as they, were cxhibiged in wrizing, and therefore they ſhould mouc no cons furs
rroyerſie herein, ot x if they would, himſclfe was to bee belecucd beforeany putt? *- .
other: i 1.15) n 55 \ hacoretdns —_ NT rt CE
The orationbeing publilted,, it was anſwered inthe name of the Synod, '-"—_—

by a namcleſſe; man- Hee ſaid ,that the French Ambaſſadours had reaſonto-
compare themlclursto the Ambaſſadours of the Ierwes, becaule, they had,

both made an. yaiult complaint againſt Go.D ; and that the ſame.anſiere

might bz giuen them,which che Propher gap ro that people, inthe name of,

Go Dthar if chey had faſted and lamented ſo many yeeres,or ateanddrunke,

all was for cheir owne intereſts; that the Kings of France were cauſe of all the

abules of that Kingdome, by naming to Biſhoprickes volcarned perſons,
ignorantin Ecclelialticall diſcipline, and more inclined oa laſciuious then

ro a religious life;.that the French-mcn would not hauc a reſolution, in the
controucrſies of faith, that Chriſtian do@rine mightallwayes be vncertaine;

and place might be giuen to new maſters, who might rub che itching cares

of that vnquict Nation, that they ſparcd notroſay in thoſe turbulent times,

chatir bclongcd to the King , though very yongas yet, todiſpole of all the

—_—

F

. goverment ofthe Church; that chey had ſayd, with aſſcucration, that be-.

neficed men had onely the vie of the reuenucs, whereas in France time out
of mindthcy havecarried themſclucs for Yſu fruftuaries,making Teſtaments,
and recciuing inheritances from their kinsfolke , who dic inteſtate that to
{ay the poote are ownersof the reuenues, was much contrary ro another
ſaying inthe ſame oration,thatche King is Patron of all Eccleſiaſtical goods,
and might diſpoſe of them ar his pleaſure; that it was agreat abſurdity, to
ſay, that the King .mighe nor bee reprehended by agenerall Councell, ſeeing
that Dauid was reprehended by the Prophet Nathan, and rooke it in good
part; thatit didalictleſauour of herefie ro raxe Biſhops of webs latertimes,
asif they were not true Biſhops. In the end, heeſpake arlarge againſt the
faying of the Ambaſlador,that Kings are giuen. by Go D,contuting it as he-
reticall , corfdemned by the extravagant of Boniface the cight, Ynamſanflam,if
hee did not diſtinguiſh, that they arc from G 0D, but by mediation of his
Picar.
The Ambaſſadour publiſhed an Apologic inanſwerof this writing, as if Fit
it had bcene madeto the Synod, ſaying , that the Fathers could not an(were make a» 4-
chem as the Prophet did the Jewes; for they demaunded a reformation of” * ©,
the Cleargic, principally ia France, knowing the defeRts of it,andnot as the
Tewes,co whom the caulc of their faſting and lamentarion was imputed be-
cauſc they were ignorant of their owne defects ; that the Fathers, aſcribin
the cauſc of the Eccleſiaſticall deformatien to their Kings, ſhould take heede
they did not like Adam, wholayd the blame vpon the woman which God
had giuen him for company ; ſaying , itrwas agreat faultin the Kingsto pre-
ſent ynworthy Biſhops , buta greater in the Popes toadmitthem that they
haddceſircd the reformation before the dotrine, not to leaucit yncertaine,
bur bccaulc, all Catholiques conſenting therein , they thought ir neceſſary to

cgin |

— a « -
—_—

776 1 TheBiftory of Lins.

1563 begin With eortupred manners, the fountaineand fourceof all herefics; thar
">+<© hewas norfotry hee had faid, that;it:the Articles propoled, thete ate many
From. things repugnant to the ancient dectces, yea, he would adde.that they dif de-
Errz48tth. rbgarc alſo from the conſtitutions of the Popes of later times; tharheehad
Cai 9: aid that Charles the great,and L:wi the ninth, had conſtitured Ecclefiafticall
\V— Lawcs, by which France had beene gouerned, not that the preſent King did

meaneto triake new, and if hc had, he had ſpoken conformably to the holy
Sctipture ;the ciuill lawes of the Romans , and t6 that whichthe Ecelefiaſt;-
call arithors, Greekeand Latine , doc write, beforc the booke of the Decrees ;
for ſaying thar bencficed men had onely the vie'of the revienues , hee asked
patdon, becauſe he ſhauld have ſayd that they were only Adminiſtrators,
and that choſe who take his ſaying in ill part , muſt complaine of Terom, 4u-
in, andthe other Farhers, who did not fay oncly , that the Ecclefiaſticall
goods did belong ro the poore, but rharClergy-men, like ſeruants, didgaine
all forthe Church ; that he neuer {aid tharthe King had free power ouer Ec-
clefiaſticall goods, but tharall did belong ro the Prince , in time of inſtance
and vrgent publike neceſſ1tie,and he that knew the force of thoſe words, did
vnderltand well, rhar,in ſuch a time , ncither requeſt, nor authoritic of the
Pope could take place, rhat he had teprehended the Anathema againſt Kings
inthat manner as it was ſet downein the Arricles , and did grant rhat Prin-
ces and Magiſtrates might bee reptchended in that fort as Nathan did, bur
that they ſhould not bee pronoked with injuries and maledictions; that ha-
uiog incited thei, by rhe example of Ezekias, tro make a reformation, accor-
ding to the paterne of che ancicnr times, it could not bec inferred that he did
northinkethe Biſhops of chelaſt times ro belawfull, knowing very well that
the Phariſes and Popes fit in Moyſes chaire: that in ſaying the power of Kings
commeth from God he hath ſaid abſolutely and ſimply, as the Prophet Da-
niel, and *Paulthe Apoitle have written, not remembriog the diſtinion of
mediate & immediate,nor the Conftirution of Boniface,of which if hee ( being
a French-man )hadthought, he would haue repeated what the Stories ſay of
| thecauſcand beginning of that extrauagant.
The gouer-- This Apologic did not diminiſh the bad opinion concciucd againſt the
ew Ambaſſadours, bur increaſed it rather, it being ( as they ſayd) nor an cxcule
the Exbers. of the error committed, but a pertinacic in maintaining it. And many dil-
courſcd not ſo much againſt the Ambaſladours, as againſt the Kingdome.

They ſayd, it did plainly appcare of what mind they werewho managed the
affaires of France. They noted the Queene Mother, that ſhee gaue credit to

the C haſtilons , eſpecially ro him thar had quirred the Cardinals Cap; that the

Chancellor, and the Biſhop of Yalence had roo much power with her , at
whole inſtance thar vnluckie checke had beene giuen ro rhe Parliament of
Paris, with the detriment of Religion ;that ſhe had inward familiaritic with
Curſor, and with his wife, whom, in reſpe&t of their Religion, ſhee ſhould not
hauc endured to looke vpon ; That the Kings Court was full of Hugonots,
exceedingly fauoured ; that ſollicitation was (till v{cd to ſell Eccheftalticall

| uu , to the great preiudice of the Church ; and otherthings they ſayd of
this nature.

But while the Councell was in this motion , by mcanes of theſe differen.
ces
»

: . . .
+ > -- _— EE —— _ _ — —
—_—

he Camel of Trens, 777

I m _

- CS

Lis 8.1

ces, the Coync of Luna, accordingts his vic, 7toaddedifficalties'rothofe': 1563;
which wereprapolcd by others , made inſtance forthe abrogaei of Prog t>—"N
ponentibus  Legatis. * Arhing which did much croublerhensolbecaufethey Frxomune
knew nor haw-to content him,withour preiudiceofthe formed Seflions. For Emunare,
natoncly the .reuocation, bur cuery mogification or faſpenſiongdidſecmeto/puttnttts-
bee a declaration, thatthey:had nor lawfully proceeded imrberbings paſt. 150+
Burthe/Ambaſlidour,(ccing norhing done concerning his detiahd; lo often:tion of prope-
madc, {aidgrhas hutherrohe had negotiared modeſtly; bur ſhoakd: bee forced [irrpwo..
roalter hiscourſe; and ſpake morc boldly, becdufetherPope; ' vpon his for- "5s"
mer inltances; had wricten chat they ſhould doerharwhich wasconuenicnr,
and did wholly rcferte himſelfe voto. them... The Legazes, robe quirof his
importunutie, anſwered, chat they would leaucitin' cheliberry ofthe Coun-:
ccll ro:makerhedeclaration; it hechought good; and forthe name of libertie
of the Councel did ſcrue to cover that, which did proceed from others. For -
the Legatesdid-at the ſame: time-viciſtrong pertwaſions with the Prelaces
their triends, that a delay mighcbecrinterpolcd,) roreferre this particulars 4
the end of the Councel,and:to cnioy.the benefirofrime,, thari ſome ouerture
might bee made ro ſome courlelefle pretudiciall, Bur the Count;hauingdif-
couered the praCtiles, prepared a proteſtation, -deliring the Emperours;
French,and Portugal Ambaſſadours to ſubſcribe it; who perſwaded himnor
co bee lo earneſt; ar thar time. For Morone, hauing promiſed the Emperour;'
that prouifion ſhould bee made hercin before the end of the Conncel, varill
it were vnderltood whether that would be performed or notgthey knewnor'
how hee could proteſt concerningtheother. And Cardinall Morone, to pa-
citic the Count;fent Faleatto oftcri to negotiate with him,in what mancrhis|
rcquelt might be granted: which-himlſelfedid not well vnderſtand ; becauſe
his mcamng, was not to preiudice the decrees palt, and, with this condition,;
it was hard to tinde a temper. In concluſion, the Legates-gaue:cthe Count
cheirword that the declatation ſhould be madein the next 'Sclhon, fo that a
meanes werefound to ſatisficthe Fathers.  ;/ 7 0:580
Newes being come to: Rome of the French proteſtation, the Pope, and
the whole Court were wonderfully moucd, rhunking itwas purpofely dorie
rodifſolucthe Councel, and imputed it vnto them, Bur the Pape complained
aboucall, chat while the King did demaunda fauour , and agrantof a huns
dred thouſand crowns of the revenues of the Clergie of France, his Ambaf-
fadours ſhould ſay, in rhe face of che: whole Councell ; thathee might rake
them without him. Andethe Catdinall of Loraine was troubled more:,:be-
cauſc he rhoughtit would bea great crofle to his negotiation with his Holi-
nelle. Helaboured to makeit appcarc, that this did happen againſt his-will;
and that he would haucdiuerted tif he had becn in Trent, that char inſtrudti-
on was a remnant of the Councels taken in the life time cf the King: of Ns-
war, and the exccution procured by the dependaats of that fation;ofwhich
d: Ferrieres was one; that that fattion,thoughit profeſſed the Catholique reli
gion outwardly, did hold frict intclligeuce with the Hugonors, wha dehired
adiſſolutien of che Councell without a quiet cnd, thatthey tight not bean#
thematiled. _ Bur he ſaid, that thoſe who goucrne the affaires in Trent, were
n without blame, in regard, that-before his departure fromirhat 05 0
things

—

——

L TH4

1564 | things.concerningtharmatter flood in-good rearmes4\the Legates having
> > profiled evworbings, with which the Ambaſſadours were contented; One,
Exoman»=that they would. not {pedke of Kings, [and Soucraigne Princesgbatoncly of
Eurazzrs. Certainclitle Lords, whograbt co Biſhops no cxcrcile of Ecclctiafticall iuriſ-.
pannrns's: diction-z\theother,.thatall rhings depending on'graces. done'byithe-Pope;.
> ſhould bceckcepted, as indalgences, priniledges, avd graunts ofrhcholy Sea,8:-

notwith{tahding, fince his departure, they had giucn cothe Farhers the firſt/
forme, witltcheſamethingsinir, which they hid promiſed coctake-awvay.:
' But be aſſured his Holincfle; that, notwirhſtanding this, the Councel ſhould
hauc a quietcnd; and promiſed co write to the Kingyand complaine of thar:
which was done; and to yſe mcancs thar: che Ambaſſadours: ſhould: returne:
ro/Treat ; which:he hapedeo: obcaine.. © - ci3 Cf 16 e9090L3GQCTIL
-\;7Accordiagtothis p_ hewrotcinto France, ':andtoghe Ambaſlk-
dours. Theſc,he told tharcheiraQion had this excuſe, thar it was done, bur
charhercafcer they ſhould continue in doing their: duty,withobt making any:
more innouations | He wroteto the King, that the oppotirion made by the:
Ambaſladours'ſeemed vnto:him very ftrange; andtherarher, becauſe they
haddone it without his privitie, and that there was neither reafon, nor occa-
{10n toric; that his abſence from Trent was the caule why the Ambaſſadours
had applicd, ourof ſcaſon,'a ſharpe plaſtcr., ro a (mall fore; that, ar his 1e-
rurne; he would makeprovitfion therein with great caſe. But becauſe things
done alreadic could not bevudone he praicd his Maicltie towiite tothe Am-
baſſadours , ro cuntinue in doing their durtic, and ro abſtaine from violent
_ conttes. -Headded, tharhefoundthe Pope well inclined, anddiſpoled roan
holy:and {crious reformation ofrhe'Church; that Chriltendome was happy
in bauing ſo worthy aPaſtor, that heeſent him backe to Trent, ſo wellin-
ſtructed of all his holy inccnrions , for rhe cnding and concluſion of the
Councel,thar he:might hope tor an happy ſuccefſe. And becaule, in theend
of the Councel,che:decrees mult bee ſubkeribed by the Fathers, and: Ambaſ-
| fadours, who haue allifted in the nameof their Princes, he defired the King
rocauſc his Ambaſladours:o returne, that they may bee preſent,and accom-
pliſhrchar which is the complement of the prote&tion, and of all the fauours
_ tothe Councel by his Maicſtic, by his Brother, Father, and Grand-
father. 1
- TheCardinall had much adoe to defend himſelfe , not onely with the
Pope, but with the Colledge of Cardinals alloin Conliltory ; who faid,thar
Princes deſired rheliberry ofthe Councell, yer not in the leaſt and iuſte(t
thing that concerne them, bur onely for the deſtruction of the Ecclefia-
ſtiques: The Pope gaue order that better conſideration ſhould be had of
thar which was to bee writren ro Trent abopt that reformation , ſaying, hee
didit,nor tomeddlc in the affaires of the Councel, becauſe hee meant to ler
the Farhersalone, butonely roinſtrutt the Legares, by way of counſell. Bur,
1n the meane while, hee wroteto the Legates, that if the French-men would
deparc, they ſhould doeir, but that they ſhould not giue them occaſion, bur
thould bee very carcfull to hold the Setlion ar thetime appointed, when Lo-
rameſhould be returned, andto finiſh the Counſel wich one Seflfion more,
holding it within two or three weekes at the moſt;- and that they ſhould
conccalc

778 OO -1:1 The Hilbory of

XUM

Lt s; 8-4 iheComerllofTreng. 7:89
conceal this order; pnpurriogiit cormonc bur:toLoraine>r And if the Eine: 15653
rours:Anivialladourw'thould moouschern, theydibuld anfwere; thitbatihe "Oh ALA
arriualtof that Cardindlkthey would gcfolue whdetodadoi Abd heocataura- * rake
ged cham fayidgyahbthee hadbirdighrCrmmyind: Fraxrewo his purpoſes Ecmancs, ;
and chat nothing remained bur Spaine. , whickanſweral} tharir was nor $2 *
godd wtinilhc<hd Obuncell; berault many things; andthe moſtprintipall =
did remaiodro behandied::Norwithitandinghe had hope,hcfaid;toreduge) il
i,and codancuderthe!iSynode, wichagencrallfatisfattions And indredboe: . er
was ſaomedb France-mud:Germanie. Fas belideshis treatiewith Lorame;who- |
didabupdaritly ſecure himotf Fraucey heeteceiutd atthelametimeia refolue:
civn'froniche/Empetogeythat he wascoment with the.cnd; and would fires
mote-it;: And howloeuer his Nantio aduiſed chat his Maicſtic was doubrfult-
in rcſoluing}and thatchere:was danger he would chavgeyor;vnderftanding;
charche King of che Rgmanes was! aurhourofthereſoluton ſaying; thatie!
was goodra finiſhit;becaule ir dit nb good, norganeahy boperthatit would: :...; Þ
doc, hewayafluredcharthat King,moaucd by lnmfeltr; and by good realogy
would prttcnctt in hispurpoſe, and;by: conſequence;keepehisfather io4bae;
OMMoON.U IC 2717 Wir VI: 7 & 10!£31 | F "7 219B 01] 51550
-:; BarchcFrench Ambaſſadours., 'afterthe Oxatioti,, didino more + 459%
publiquely m'Trens. i: hey lerthole-few Prolats: remaining.know ,'thatrhe.
Kings p tealurc-was that they (hould-oppolcthedifr Articleand the ſecond;
becauſe the perſons, and cauſes of France mighs. by ycrtue of thoſe two bee
drawentolnigareour ofthe Kingdome; andtheninteenth, becauſeby !iry
the preventiony'were canonized, and cheParlaments depriued of theirprexp-'
catiues, 18 matter of benefices.”! 15 2 3 FEIEDH
© The Legates,, fo looneas the Fathers had made anendof ſpeakingiof the:
zr. Article propoſed -ynto them the others alſo'; wherein all the Ambaſſa-,
doursoppoled , in regardof the mateer concerning Princes. © The Fathtts
complained; that, beingtoretormaas alwaies hath = ſaid, all the Churcb;;
inthe Head and in che members tothe end, the Princes would haue-no re:

— —

So W YR | J
"" TEE EET , .

,

formation but tortheElergiconely zwhich could not bee reformed neither,

if the Prelares were hindered in performing theircharges , andthe Ecelefiat:
ſticall liberry: notprelcrued. / Notwithftandiog, the Princes; whoſcemedts,
defire reformation ;: did oppoſe that-decroe: which did: reſtore: vato- thei:
their liberty aod turifJicion , neceſfarie for it>:1 The Legares exculed theme
ſetues ;and faid, they muft nceds gine ſome fatisfactioniorhe. Prelares:; than
the Ambafladours had hadrtimeto:alleadye their gfituances:;-and-to handle!
the cauſe with reaſon; and thar it was 200 much! yiolence:to: oppole Qnely
de fafto, and ro ſhew thatthe Councelt is oncly for reformation of the Cler-
gic, andnor of the while Charch(51+1i 7 1.11 nol nl lint)

%

-Newescamearthieſamerime,thatthe Emperour: was verylicko and big The Empe-.

rors (icknefie

Ambaſſadours ſaid, that, in caſe hee-ſbould dic;the;Gouncellinould not belſer: rroublerh tie

« Fathers,

cure; becanterhe fiedact would beeiended; >The, Legatcs' ſei proſemly to

the Pope, for arder what to'dde,; rand. the Prelates beganto thinke more; of;

cing fron Trem, then reforming Princes; : Therefore a Congregation was
helde rhe feuemh'of :ORober;.to.reſolugwhatſbould/bee-done with thie-o+:
cher Articles :of &cformation, beſides the onc-agd twentic ,. and eſpecially'

with

_

 o80 The Hillory of .:  Lymbe

1563 withthacwhichconcernetiPrinces. Invehich afrerdong.diſcuſlkonjicwas

" 3gaangþh \concladed thatthe Seflion fhiduidibe celebrated withtheraancr ob Marrimo-.:
Frpmand. Hig;and che 2 t:Afticles of roformation,abd tbar of the Princes ſhawlttbeede-::
on: ferred?! Theo arxrdayithe Frenehy. Ambaſladbrs parecth diiom Trent co#enice,.
Cuanrss' according tO'thi Klogrorder3> ifs . onnge 570 i OIMudttal 1 OD I5 1 Fri
——- i; ThePpperhoigh:weltiatiified of Leane, andofc$i6 Brenth-men; bis
The Freach depehdants yer propoked againſt thackaQion from which hee thboughtthe
Antaror motivenfthoptoreſtation; wadcin Coutxell,; came;hetreſunnedbisgerers:
__ miidintion madeartherime'ofrhe Edidtof paciticativmwiththe Hlugonots,.

—t edcin Trent againſt theQueene obNakarer iwhiokbechadpuroff,
foratthing rharthe! Emperors mbaſtadors wouldoppoſe;astheyxtid when;
niefitibowas madcofiprocteding againſtrhe Queenwot Bnglaw;i$ reſolucd?

bge Beboys | ſedadenencetobe publithedagaioft the facFrenciuBiſhops formed] y cited;;
of Quinn abhath been fayd:; 4 nd 2Cirarion: ro bee afhxcd ro thegatos of SainPerers:
4444 Church j and in'drherpubliqueplacogagainlt Zohals Quocne off Numerre,the-
widow of Axtonierhat , within! chereriiciof fixemoncrhs;j ſhee-ſhould ap--

peare to defend her {elfe, and to ſhew reaſons why ſhe thould notbeeidepri-.
ved of all her Dignirics, States; and Dominions,, aiid-the'marriageHerweenc
Antonie of, Tandome, andber, made voyd,andthefit illegitimate and:thar;

ſhe had nor-ihcurred other-penaltics , declared by the:Canons;agatati here

riqtcs.” The Cardinall of Lorajne, beforethe Pope. came ro thote-ftntences, |

and proceflc,vicd periwaſtons'to hum;and pur-him in minde;thatthomaximes.
held wn Frantes:did:much difter from chofcof Rome. i. For ir-would bee ul

taken inthat kingdome, that the cauſes of BB. mtheficſtinſtance thauld bee
iudgediin Romp,and that the Cirationagainlt the Queen, as well tor the ſame

cauſe, as in regard it was with temporall puniſhnicnts; would giue matter of
ralke,and bad [atisfaction romany: 'Burchoſe perſwaſtons being vnderſiood

by the Pope, asthey weremade,broughr forth nootherfruit, burthatwhich,

che Cardinall did ſecretly. defare, ''For-rhe conference}, which. the Queene:

Mother ſo much «defired; | by:cucry'Cyrricr that came from her pnew: in+
ſtarietwas made to. the:Pope, Purnewes came from the Emperours Courr,,

that hee would nor hearkeryyneo it; 'and out of Spiaxer,though compleinca-

tall words of che Kings defire-to- haucir effected! yer a refolurionthar the

times ahd conianctures did nor comport it. - 'The:Catdinall of t vrawte was;

of opinion; rharhowſoeuer there was no hope, yetthe Pope.ſhould nor tors

beare to ſend expreſſe Nuncyfor this purpole;/as:beeing anoffice.whercon,

many othernegoriations; forthe feruice-ofthe Apoſtolique Sea, might: de

pend, and ,itparcicular, 'to remooue|impedimentsof the concluſion af the

Councell,in caſe any ſhould ariſe. Whereupon F/ſconte was diſpatched into:

Spaine;and SantaCroce into Germanic, ity ſhew, to treat of this conterenee,/bur

indeede, with ocher particularinſtru@tions/! 6 ns be nh ge
-* In Trent, the Legates', being nor willing to gincoccaſon ofany difficul-
ticwhile the Scfſion was expectcd ; did propolc Indedgences, Purgatory, wor-;

frripping of Saints and iniages, not to publiſh the Dearccs inthe next Seſſion;
þor in the other following, adding the'mannerhow(the Diuines ovght to!

handle choſe matcers, that is; togiuethcir opinion in writing, only cocetning;

| ' the

/ '?

i
>
[5%
4} »
Y a

Ld

— wv pu IE —_—_—— J ——— —__. Ma

Eiv8.) the Councella/ Time. | 7br

the vſc of them; and not to peakeofrhoother dtticles;andgiuing:orterito :rg6;
the farhers ro deluuer thigir yoyccs.inthort termes, proceſtiqgtharwhoſocuer >
would dclate beſides thepoine; fhouldbeinterrupredi-tN otwithſtandingthe Faantnans,
Diyines made long writings,and ſoidincrs, chat che Farhers:knevvnoowhar ELrzanuric.
to reſolueinthat darine: i oh od iu ulwod 3, oil toro if attttt OP

| For thereformarion, howſocuct twemtic Anicles weretoncluded and the —V—
oncand.twentieth'treated on with the Countof £uva, the Spanifh Prelates
complainedthat the Article of the:cxcmption'of:Chapters; and the laſt, of

che firit inſtances, and appealcs, wortaltered fidm that which was nowed by

_ thePrelats,,, Wheteatthe Legars, and Doputiesfor makingthe Decrces, dil-
dainingan{wered, chat, either they ſhould iultifiewhar they daide, or holde

thcir peace. | Andilame words of diltafi paſsingy the Count of 'Luna appea-

red in their. fquour;demandingthatithe oppoſitions: made by his Prelates a-

gainlt chaſe rwo Articles mightbce-confideredon:; + Afterwards,hedefired

that inthe; firfe Article, .in whichthecricinallcauſes of Biſhops werereſer-

ucd to the Pope, a declaration ſhoultbe made; that no preiudice ſhould bee

doneto the inquiſuzon of Spaine ; which requeſt the Ambaſſador of Portagal

had firlt made forhis. kingdome- : And thelLegates anſwering, that thoſe

matters were already decided, the Connt roplyed,char if :chey:thould bepro-

poſcd ſo,he would notgo.intotheSetho,norſufferany of hisPrelats toencer;
Whereupon-Cardinal Morone {aid, that i chey would norgointothe Seſſion,

it ſhould bedonewithour them Tithe Couriraſeribiog;this rigiditicofrhe

Legats ro-the Protorot the Chaptrrsof Spame; he:commanded him to:de+

part immediatly from Tree ; which difpleaſedaheLegats:- Buithatnorhing

might hinder the Scſlion, the time whereof lid draw nigh, toplealerhe Ams

Page thatic werenoc toalbs cheway priferi ahe-Popel>'Buy The Card of
Nom ni fructionand adneluſion of allihings,andbaving! is

ome yy ue ſtrucquamand adneiuſiond ings,2 7 Venite Ronan
in. his\yaycoperiipatic the Ambadfadours coteiarde befote the endrof.ahe Comcd ©

ings 1 rt rs RT Or nm 1
an erid,wich fatistactionofaliand irvyas madorhe RE."
ow Vuu

—

—_— __ —_  - - — - —  —
—_—w_SoAl..Dwo>. A

782 x Theiftmya} he Lis T

x563 -ofreformarion/propoſetin the Congregation of the ninth of Noucmber
1; ©), beldforchis urpoſe, and approoucd with ſmal{refiltatice. Aﬀecr this, the
F4apnany. fgeond Article "was taken away ; which-being (done, all-the- Articles were
Ernzazarz. Tad oucragaine, andthe {uffrages briefly' delivered. "In which ;Loraine,to
paz. faluehis honour, faid,that howſocucr he deſired a greater refortnation, er,
> kndwing thatimche beginning one could nor come rothe laſt remedies, hee
aſſchnted to the Decrecs; nor mdging:ithem ſufhcient, but hoping that the
Pope, cither by bringing the old Canons.into vie, or by celebrating other
gencrall Counccls, would adde a perfection. - + © P
Hemikethan *- IT 18- worthy of memorierhar; in this Congregation, hee madealong di-
© won; Fgrethion,in formeofanencoriaſticallOrarion,of the Popes good will, of his
op defireto ſee the Church reformed;rheEpilcopalldegreereſtorcd to its anci-
cntdignitic,ahd the Councellended;with the fruitof all Chriſtendome. The
Arch-Biſhopof Granata, whenirt was hisrurne to fpeake,brake out into the
Popes commendation al{o,attnbutingasmuch vntohim as the other, bur ad-
ded;that either the Pope did iudge:tharhecould not doe as he would,or had
not-auithority to make his miniſters anddependants toexecute his will. Here
[9 muſt make agreat mutation-of tile. For whereas in the former narration
+ -«_ouncelis I-haue vicd tharwhichis proper todeſcribeyarietic of minds, and opinions,
ments. one croſsing the defignes ofanvrher, and.delayes of reſolutions interpoſed,
framing my {clfe;to declare the:counfels of divers, ſometimes contrary a-
mongſt themdelucs,hereafeer mult makerelation of oneaime only,and yni-
farme opcrarions;-whichſeemeratherroflic thenruntoone only end, where-
ob 1 can-giue bit onecauſc;notrto repeare'irinall plates;thatis;the ioynt reſo-
lation topreciputateche Countcell, - +-ci'v) wrt TCTEE
» Thecrcfotcto ſpeake ſimply, I mult fay,rhat Letters came from the Pope,
with rcſolution thatthe Councell ſhould beecnded;though with diſtaſt of
tho King of Spaine, becauſehechad meanesro:make an agtcement with him
that they ſhouldeſtabaliſh the Decree of ſecrer marriage, withas much'vnion
as 'was poſsiblc;:bur yer'to doe it, "though the fame oppoſition ſhould
continue; that; for the reformation of: Princes, and reftitution' of Eccle-
fiaſticall iuriſdieion and hibertie; they -thould nor deſcend to: any particu-
lat; butrenew: the:ancicnt Canons, :and without -Anathemaes; that if an
difficultic did atiſe, concerning the other Articles, they thould'reſerue it
forbim, who iwould make: provifionthercin ; referring them;.for the re-
{iJuc, ro the Cardinall of i Zoraine, who was: fully informed of his" whole
will; /\whomrhey oughr to beleeue.” Afterwards, hee ſent/a form e'in what
{orc hey; ſhonld finiſh the Councall;;whithy did containe; that all'things
dobevhder Pauland Huline ſhould beconfirmed,anddeclared thatrhey were
alldoneinthisoneCouncell;and charjirvallrhings, theauthoritie ofthe A-
. > 7 pdſtolikeSrefhoyld be preſerncc;thar ofthediings decreed'the Popes:con-
©” firmation ſhoulkdbedemandedghar allrhe Fathers ſhouldfbferibe;arid, after
- ** theryaccordingtothe cxamplcofthcantiemEmperoury, thereſhovldbe 2
_.......0 ſribftriprionof the Ambaſſadors, that thePrinces migtebeboundtorhe ob-
{eruanceef theDecrees; anilto perſecute with Armesthoſeof rhe. contrary
rebgion ;leauing itin the poweerof'tha,che Legats, togother 'wwiel Loraine
1h:adde; diminuh, oralecr;/actording:to ppporrunite!!- All which things

JU V were

Aightwengrthar; 15;64:
(Ti 52d 3c im 2101 38clagſ: + : x?

fx0-d gl

op jismindefredy, though d

hes dhbyld heedereedso Tay, fas ieris hardhalSy\
ondopliinkaubet oeitcins mh mah; Dares, ade itaſiggs
lughpahcy wes gen willing io gue, ofa REAR made) albkarmong
in which hexdmonilkcd che.Faches ab Hei5inpk hel)icfiyyod beitiol

ANgoN og | you!
bacnedntragailaabels tryarpycercs, andbaeryonebogingin arpedbridn” of
whas is NiBrhedl eh doi 25,8982 # Hbbuld produces
radigagd childei becauſe thaworlde. doth gtpedigdbundand. (620d)
Ins tecinghacok, it was (anucniont mamitatcrho Applilath(arryre,ar
Pritvwing Chureh, makingahem apattcrne whengetoaake- the zliiieapacies
oflshednfantnyhich istg comeiinta me: worlds: ;bhielerwcte/{hed: fhigh)dod
Gring.eeligianapddilcipling, all whichghecing degenerated int theforimbss |
ny þcorpigradio.theiaueicatimegritice Angie this dstic athich bath,
been expected iolong,and lsexpecigd Gillis I be ccremonien bdngendedy
thellcuers;of Madainy Regenaok Riders, congetaingithe ſending abrce |
IR rhe glbcware ready 45 alle the Mandaies: of the Dukliof

orence,axd.ptchegrand Maſtcr of Malear; Abtsrytards ho do@rinciand
the enatbewati/mesot matrimanie. war iead by ihe; Maſſe: Balhbp, cro.ihidb
allconſchied. -}Fbd\&rcicles of reforaation of Matrimony beaidg wallyta
the fit, of mdannullationok the clandeſtine; Gaidzall Moy ayelard, diatiiy Varietie of 0+
plealett him,af irpleaſedthePope.. Simbivea/aid.Gitidid nog ipledſe $oz; fant filhics”
reftarcdhim{eſferothePope.: Otttotbess flngarid fifty didabfalutegades morn
nie, ndalshexcltdid-approoue IBloftib vr boitge 316 ofdw v16t!3 0900
- Afterwards the Necrees of refarmaarian wetorcad. Andbecing, comtetd T1. Decree
che ff, of che ;criminall cauſes: of Bilhaps,/pareciuing:ahe: Kingdotons, * form
whereslie inqu{zion:is,; were exceptcd; a; great icopmotion was, railedia>
_ thang che Fachers, the Lombards And. Neipolitns ſaying confiefodiy,
that that exception wasneuct propoled:in Congregation); :2nd:thatinopghs
td þce rcmoucd,; which they. were:farged pr ta.dqo > Afterwards;
the Cardinall.of: Loraine-fayd, coheeriiing the (arhepdyat;)char: cer did apt
prooue the Decrecyyponicondition that it didnaspreiydibebny! of the pris
ag rights, and conſiieutionsof tho:Kings obFam;leohed boencicanty
clided in thaCongregationtheday bafpce, dadkaniogebarthey: did\ ea; |þrt
iudice;tlicauthociticof any, Prinea.: Ando chegnd off de
madea proteſtation, 1 higownenimt. and: af 3c other; French (Proliteb,
wholly conformable, @.dike-dihdr/ wade rwoi-dayra bifash, in'tho Gon»

gatian HO_ | newegg". |

reformarion,but asa-proparation toondantive; hoping s wn per
lbpplic the defefts in a andoiicafoo;by btthginiOIn: vic;rhe old Mit-
aons;or by odcbratingiothics :geritall !Corinchls;/orgiles: perfectioncls

CT v1Tth: Vuuz the

"a > So = th LS. Ry. _
a>
2 ; SE -
.
4

4 The fo Lid
13331 rcheckingebopingi Ailhes idfhred/in the nano Wal tieFiee Bite
FD this 0rd inlericd in the Actes of the Counicell/\altagub ad
recrmnrHgfrumencetde of, "Duets ocher things wetFdded by dthaiginnliime

E St£ABarM1 opþolitions,'ef vom prays rg ny ner #l
canus 2: fort terrier ifing,/ itwa34ald, rhey fhouldbeatream mandated

=" genera C8nptepation;bleauſcir wasthen lare's bouts withia-tights 2;

xrtheconichifion ofthe'Selfion;theDeerecoftiie Hfmatiablrhenct $6

die nin efDecalberwartead; withpower t6- atiticipdtty/deehiring thee

cheſixth Aﬀtictotiow'idefcered, arorher Articles'6f eeforhiai6n exhibited!

ard other rhiess belonging thergints; ſhonld then bee handled;addingaher

arcaſcirlaltſebnic fr,add the ii compote;forgedoftrines' tay be Tide!

died; ad hey Gall becincheirmnnoFpropoled inthe Congregirions! © {vv vi

10 Thed6arine of the S&trameantot Marrimanic did conmmine./ That!)

Jamidid pronounce thy bondof Matrimonie tobe perperuall; 4nbichat dfh6-

lp:operſors may beetopned thetoin; a thing mote: plaiticly-declarediby:

H & 18/2} ho alfo/bybispaſſion; hath inerired grace ro-confixme-it, atid!

rofandtifierhoſcwhoateioyned. ' Which is intiniated by Saint Pak when!

heelayd)rhat this was'the'great Sacrament 'inCHx'15T and'the Chureho

Whereupoh Marrimony .in the Euangelicall Law, ' excceding- the aricieht

mariages;'by addition of grace, it'is'yiftly numbred amonglt the Sacre

ments-ofithe riew' law.: > Fhercfore the. Synode;/'condemnmng-the here”

fiesin thismarter,dorhconftieutethe Aiarbematiſmby /* x Againſthim ebat

ſhall fay, tharMarrimbnic is not one of the ſcuch Sacraments, inſtituted! by

Cxx1srT,- anddothnotconferregedce. - 2; - Orthat its lawfull for-

Chriſtians rohaue many: wilcs at hes; and that"this is not forbidden by

any Law of \God. '' -5;'!/'Or that onelythe degrees of affinitic, arid conſan-

- guinity,cxpreſſcd in) Lewticus may nullifierhe mariage;-and thar cheChurcls

*._..* may noraddeothers, or:diſpencewithfome of them, - 4. Tharthe Church

-. '- cannorcbnſticure impedimenrs,or hathrerred in conſticuring thethi/ 5. That

oneot thoſe who arc maricd may diſfſolue the Marrimony,torherele er ous

1 |. bleſomecornuerſation, or yoluntazy abſence of rhe other. - 6. © "Or thar

"2 lawfullmatrimonic, not conſummated, isnordiflolucd by a folemne religi!

ous yow. 7.''” Or that theChurch hath erred 4h ceaching,that tHemarric

moniallbondis nor diffokuetiby adultery 8. - Or that the Chutch'deth

erre, in ſeparating thoſs-yhoare married fora dererminate or indeterminare

time, in reſpe>t of carnaſtconiunttion; or cohabirarion.  g.'-''Or tharthe

Ecclcliattiquesof holy Order, or profelſed Regularsmay marry;/av allo all

thoſe who tindethey haue-nor the gift of chaſtitie;/in regard char 'Go'D

docth/nor denic the gift to him'thar doerh demaund it.' | .r6. 1 Or that

tha[l preferreche ſtarcof matiage crovirginitie, and thaftirie;/ /11.”'' Or thar

the prohibicionof mariage, in certaint times of the ytere, is ſuperſtition; or

ſhall cohdemnethec benedi@tions and otherceremonies.'' 12 | Or-that-ma-
crimoniall cauſes docnorbclong to Eccleſiafticallludges. i 1! 07 11 7

:-TheDecreesofthercformation of Matrimony dielcantaine, 1. ' That

Howſocyctiirbe truc;rharclandeſtino mariages have: becne: crue and law-

full,' ſo long/as che:Church hach nordifallowed chem ygand tha the Synode

doth auarbematizg him whodothnothold chemfor ſack; as atſo agg” who

013 & 534 | me,

*

"'Y
,

XUM

L118, } 7 ————

aKeme, chat mariages,tQthiradted, Withour corilepr of ;in.votloſe
power the marie, partigsarey is voyde, and chat thie Fathers may: eithes ap!

And becauſe: 2 rms doc.nogobgdgtheSyn
matrimony |

facepfthe Church, where the Patiſh:Priclt hauing! interrogated the man
and.chgwemay, and beard their conſear, ſhall fay,'l ioyne- you in matrimony
inthe name of ohe Farher;; Sonne; and hol Gbeft; and. thall vie ocher words; ac-
cuſtomed ini she-Prowifce. :.| Notwithſtanding the Synod dorh referreirts
the will ofzbe;Bilhop, roomir the Bdxzs,; but doth declare thoſe to bee vn-
capable of jpariage, hoamemperacontractirwhbou the preſence of the-
* Pariſh, Prieli} gr another Prieſt EY horicy,and of two or three wit-
nels, , making voidandmullifying uch contraQs,-and puviſhing; the trafhſ-i
urs Aftcrwards, it doth cxhortthepartiesmaried; notto dwell toge-
ther, before thebenedition;and command theParifh/Prieſt t6haues booke;
in which marjages, fo OY wricten: 1tidotly exhorerhic par-
ries chat aroto be inaried; -co.confeſle, and communicate before the contratt,'
or conitamnation of the! mariagtzre cth the cattomes: and: ceremonies
of cucry Pxgyince; andwill hauc this —— becofforce-wvithin thirtis
daicsafger;jpſhall be publiſhedin cucty Pariſh: 2 TO DART UBA? HITG?
' Secondly; gonectning:/tbeimpediments ade the 8yhode doth af
fixme,thar; therdulticude of probibirions didcauſe great ſins and:[candals/
Therefore is dath reftraine tharofſpirituakco na ariog;totharwhich thebapo
tized and heir parcitts baiic with the-god-fathers and god-mdthers;atid the
numbergk theſc;:co:aneman oy ON Ordciing thefameabour
the kiarediwhich dothiarife by chofacranicnr Obafiemaians! 4 ATedot
reſtraine the impediment-of honeſtie; which: :hackoms' brginoing- fron ©6015
tra&b, io the firltdegretonely,! 4; Tharotaffivicyby'fornicarion;'ts the
fixitpnd (ecand, -5.-:Irdoth cakealway all; bops'ob difpenſarions- for! tia”
trunony,wittingly colraged indefirevs prohibited; and cochofe who oO
igaozartilygprracted, without . rear inicaft of :probableiign
rance, di[penſation may;begiuenigratiso) Bur to>coniraQin Ta _
hibixed, adiſpenſacion,; fhall: i, 3 >granted, br: letdomeordly; fora juſt

hes eaſing inthe ſcton I Prinkes, excopr forty

pu bliquecallq; . "G5. | Matrimony: "not bee boncattalnith rgiat
ſtallen avyay.folong as (heeis inthe powerobhim-char didifteatcjher'; and
doth declarethole Repair, and thoſcrhai doe aliſtelieny wicvodunſellp gif
or fauour, excommunicated, infanious}i vacaphble&ofalld glipnricy ; - aivdlel
hangy re - wh chomedalicraiy Hallaiben __ ach rim
dowry, athe picaſure 1 7410:Tr' thativa
Grail nos marry. vvichout hg as wiriop tinft made, and liceticeof the
Qulinagenloniogcbabrele bing puniſhrhetaſouerely?541Þ To
th ortlaiveagainit Concdbjanci, har being udabonihed thrice by £Or-
dinary, jiacafc they ſeperate nor chomiſelues; roy thall be NAT nmr nt
ahi petfauering one yeeteafter the tenfulte, [rho Didinarie-thbll)p1

werely a themanduhe ann errant |

oil; Vvv 3

Prvs *4

ordiſprooucit;yerthe Church hath: Cycr bopbidjanddetelied -chems) Frnoitine,

oderdorhroommand{thatthe rms”
all bedenquncedin the Ehurch theed Feſtwall dayes, beforcit CntS

Pattie 2.

beecontractcd, andliq impediment being found,ſhallbceedlobrated imche VT.

_ .. , POT ”
CC IMBS <>. wang _— "- -.

=” a y mn he TRI \ _— - wor p. ' *
ys * cif - rote re tr ren co pet > 02 ev” - 20> 09> Ab >

ns — 6s —_— 4. All _ ——_ - ts

a.

736 L1s'8
1363 oiſhed,and,ifche Biſhop hall chinke fir, chaſedalſoour of the'Textitvric
V0, by: afliſiance; of the ſecular power. 9; It commandeth' eupty' teraporall
Fzzpluxe; [ord-and Magiltrate, vpon painc of excommunication ; —
Euzapzzar their ſubieks, or any others, tomarry, diredtly-or-indireatly. ' 10. © Tt doth
M4239 reftrainetheancicnt prohibitions of nupriall ſolemnitics, froth Aducnt, t6
> rhe Epiphany; and from 4/b-wedne/day, tothe Oftaues of Eafter; tilt 1
TheDecrees *- The Decrees of reformation, not as they were' read in-Sellion , but as
of Reforma” rhey werecorreted thenext day in Congregation- (which was'appoynted
 tahedon)dideconraine: i... That publike prayers ſhall be tnade} though
the;Church be vacant , chat whoſocucrhaucright in che'promotion, ſhall be
admoniſhed tharit is a morrall finne,ifthey ſhallnorvſeall diligence topro-

mote themoſt worthy, arid profitable for-the Church, borne of lawfull ma- ;

trimony,worthy in ragard of their life,ago, doCtrine, and of other: qualitics
raquired by thicholy Canons, & Decrees of this Conncel. That in euety pro-
uinciall $ygodaforme of examination thall be preſcribed, by -approbation.
of che Popo;fit for cucty place,& rheexaminatio madeaccording to tharpre-
{cript ſhall beſcat.iorhe Popeto bediſcuſſed by rhe' Cardinals, '8& propolct'
inCoalitoric;andall other things required by che'Synod forage, life, do-
Qrine, & other;qualities inthepromonon of BB.ſhal be required in the Erea-!
tion.of Cardinals,though burDcacons,which the Pope, if -he' can content”
ently, ſhall take out of all Nations, arid choſetharare fit. | And it was added-;z
that theSyhod bring gricucdtoſee ſuchgreat incommditics of che Church,
caunetchoofe but call ro mind, how neceflary it is, thar the Pope,/in regard'
of his dury; ſhould endeauour to aſſume Cardinals of excellettt worth, and
ro piguideslieChurch of fir Paſtourg;becauſc if theflocks thould periſh by
thei :negligehce;, Crs T wilt:demand an acount of his: Holineſſe,
2{-.| Thar:the-prouincialtCounccl ſhall becalted by the Metropolitane, of,
thernolkancicnar Suffraganc, withinone yrorevat chetmoſt” aftef the'cnd:of
this Synode;cand afterwards 'cucry:rwo yecres-ar the leaſt. ' That Biſhops
thall nog bee forced hieereafrerto goc rothe Merropolitanc Chutch. ' - That!
thals who hautnot an Arch-biſhop thalkele&toneitirhe prouinciallSyri6d;
inwhich hecoughr ro aſhi{t, and receiuerhe conſtitutions thereof/ their ox
cmptions and priuiledges othorwileremajning firme.''' And 'the Dioceſan
Symods hall. bee celebrated cucry yeorein which! the- exerypted; except
thoſe whoarchubictt ro general Chaptors,thall ofſift. Which -gtmerall-Chap-
ters, hauing ſecular Churchescannexed;(in-regardiotithem, ſhall affiſt allo.
3: Biſhops ſhall bee. baund to viſue the Dioceſſe euery yeere, either in per-
ſon, or'by yidats, andall of! it, if cheycan; or, ificbelarge, intwo yeeres at
the leaſt.  Mercdpolicansſhhllnor viſucrheDioceſle of ithe Sufffagans, bur
forataulc, din theprouincialCouncel: The Arch:deacons; and
other inferiouts, ſhall viſits znpcrſon;andfhall rakea Notary; by conferirof
the Biſkops>TheY ifitor ſhall goc withaimodeſt-craine of :nign,/'and hor
ls, eanechonad may bee; and1hall nor recciue arly
thing bur frugall and 'medetare dice, which may begiuen cicherit/kind*e
piopey; yet o,astharifthere)bcca ciaſkome in any place/not-ro Fecciue' fo
vipchastheltiifſballbe obſceucd alſo: ThatP atrons thall not tieddlewith
that hich concerncth theadminiſtrationof.. Sacraments, or the ha Ir
, ebotÞin £ VV" | or the

XUM

XUM

— - _ —_—_—
OE... 4 LOS . _ . 53> EY IS —

Ers.8.4 the Ouniedlof Trent. _ ..

ofthoornatirenci.of chd Churtli; immoucable, goods, or rencs of houferget. 1564

eepritdo belong vntoithem by :righr:oftthe foundation: 14; :1iFhar Biſhops 7
ſhall be baatid ro peciach in; perſonpor; having 1alawtulempedimenc;byo- Fanoncmws,
thers; - Aridigcale the Pariſh Pricſtbe hindred chat hee canoe preath in his E:nrannen

CHantss g,

OOO _—

,owne Chutchs, hee ſhallarhis charge,maintaineaniothorcordociit, depiited p22htn!
"bythe Biſhops: And hcſhall preacticucry Sundayandſolemne feaſt and'in v—.

Aduant and: Lent, cuery day,ot thrice a.weeke atrhelealt. + That the Biſhop
thalladmomith cucry anc re go tohis owne Parith,ro hearetheſermon, Thar
none ſhall preach againiſtche — will, whoſc cure ſhall be, that Chrifti-
andottrigebc ara hc - 5: + Thabcriminall cauſes againſt Bi
thops tharbcof greattreeight, ſhall beciudged by the Pope; andifthere ſhall
be occalioirto:commirthem to any out ofthe Courr; they (hall be commit-
re$onely, tbrhe Mettopolitan;or to-Bilhops defted by the Pope, andro rake
mtormatioh onely;: rcheruing the definitiac ;to'the Pope: bur ſmall warters

ll bee 1udged inthe ProvincialliCouncell; orby Iudges depured by them.
6: Tharche Biſhops (ball diſpenſe in.che Court of Conſcience, with all their
ſubics, inallcheir itregularities, andſuſpenſtons for ſecret offences, except

 voluntary[murthcr,,-and-abſoluc from all caſes- reſerucd ro che Apoſtolike

Sea, either by himſelfc or his Vicar; as alſo-frbm the exceſſe of herefio , by
hiaſelfe,but not by a Vicar. , 7-: That che Biſhop ſhall hauc'care'that the
force acidvuſ{cbfi the Sacraments ſhall be expounded to the people in the vul
gar ton;jucibrfotethcy, bee adminiiſtred,, according to cherforme of a Care»
cechiſmieþwhichtheSynod:willcompolc, | whichthe Biſhop ſhall cauſero
be fairhfully-rranſlared:into the vulgar,avd robeietpoundededrihe people by
thc [Parith; Pricſts. 8... That-t publikc offenders publike Penance ſhall
be giuen;burthe Billiop ſhall baue power co.clangeit intoaſecrer.. Intucry
Cathedrall:Church a'Penitentiarie, Maſter, Dodtos, or Licentiate'inTheglo-
gic,or Canon,of cheage of tourtie yecrcs, ſhall bec.appointed by the Biſhop,
913. Fhac rhe-Decrecs. of the Cpuncell.,, vader: Pailclic third; and Piathe
fourth, cdpccrning vitiation ofbaefices cxcmpted,ſhallbeobſerucd inthe
Churches which arcnorof any Dioceſe, which {hall beeyiſned by thenext
Biſhop, asNelegatc of the Apoltolike Sea ' Jo. That where viſuation. or
correctionobmanersisinqucltion, no'cxempignor appeale; thoughtorhe
Apoftolike'Sue; {hill hinder, or ſuſpend rhe exccurioniof rhat which' is de-
trecdoradindged, 1 1::Thatfortitlesof honour which aregiuen to Proto-
notaties, Count Palatinay, Kings Chaplains, or ſcruants inwar,Monalterics,
Hofpials, thoſc'perlons ſhall not be,exemprefrom theautborizicof Bilhdps,
except theythall relideih'the houſes pr endts their obedience,'and Kings
Chaplaines;accordingto theconlintions of bendcentivs the: 3» And exempris
ens:grantalgodtic ſcruansof Cardinals, ſhall not bo gxtcnded to'that which
concerneth bencfices. 13. ' That, ao perſan.vnder the age of twenty flue
yeor6s, halbbepromottdto dignigies with cure ad thie Archedeacpns if ir
may be,thall be Maſtersin Theologis or DoRots; or Licentiatein the:Ca»
nan bavy.ci And none; vader the aggof; ewoand aweonty yeeres;thallbep

motced 'adaydignitic ywinout ee jTbolcthatare promoted ra Bcnefices
with Cure; thall bec/bound! :92 taake; profelſion of theis fairh:; within tive.
rhoneths:lant] Canaus ſhall doethaſamec; Andingaythall be ay=——-4
3} UDO ignirie,

- Lis

b.— —_—_ 4 > _—

8 The Hiftornof: >: L1 B86
4; ignicic, Canonry,or portiop,except he thall haut thar order, which it doth
RUG == andthatage which is dockifiry forthe recciuing of it..'Fhat in Ca-
From. thedrali Churches,allthe Canons and Portionarics fhall-be Pricfts,Deatbns,
Earn, Or Subdeacons;and the Biſhop, with the (;bapter, flialidifiribure bow many
c#aii3 9.” thall bec of.cucry order, bur ſo, as that, one balfe ar the {caftſhall bee Prieſts,
—— The Synod doth exhorr alſo, tharall rhedignitics,, andhalferhe Canonrics
inthe Cathedrall and famous Collegiar Churches may:bee contarred:ypan
Doors in Diuinitic, or-inthe Canon Law,, and that none may bee abſent
more then three moneths inthe yeere. ©:Fhat the! daily diſtributions may
aot be giuen vponany prerence whatlocuer,to any-rhatharh notbeenepre-
ſent'in the offices; and thar cucry one ſhall performe/his office in-his owne
perſon, nor byſubſticures. 13. There being many poore Cathedrall Chur-
ches ; a remedyſhall bee conſulted on/inche Prouncall Councell,. and the
Pope defired ro make prouifioun according ro his wiledome.:- The Biſhop
alſo {halll hauecare ro prouide for poorcPariſh Churches, cicher by vnion
of ſome Benefice nor regular z: or by alhgnariqnof firit fruits; 'or riches, or
by contributions and colle&ions of: the Pariſhioners. Pariſh-Churches ſhall
not be vnited co Monaſteries, Canonries, ſimple beheFices,and religious or-
ders of Souldiers:, and thoſerhatare vnired ſhall bee reviewed by the Ordma-
ries; and the Carhedrall Churches , nor exceeding athoufand:crownes, and
the.Pariſh Churches, not cxcecding an hundred crownes, ſhall-notbe heres
after burthened with penſ16ns, orreſeruations of fruits.” Wherethe Pariſhes
haueno cerraine ws + wa ; but the Sacraments arc adminiſtred indiffercatly -
ro thoſe that doedemaundthem,the Biſhop ſhall confinethem,and they ſball
hauerheir proper Parifh Pwicft. And in Cities which hauc no Parithes;they.
ſhall bee crefted as falt agmay bee. 34; The Synoddoth dereft, and for:
bid all inſticucions or cultomes of paying any thing for the obtaibing of ti-
les, or poſlefſions, except ir be conuerred into pions ykes , declaring them to
be {tmoniacall who ſhallyſurpe herein. 25. 1n Carhedralland Collegiate
Churches wherethe Prebendsand diftriburions are tooſmal,the Biſhop ſhal
hauc power to'vnite ſimple Benefices,orts teducerhemroafmallernumber:
26. \ The Epiſcopall Sea being voyd, rhe-{'haprer thall elc& one or twa
A Economickes, ora Vicar, within eight dayes, or, norgthis authoririethall bo
_ deuolued 6the Metropolicane. And the Biſhop'when he'ſhall-becarcatcd,
ſhallrake of thern an account of the adminiltrationz and puſh theta "if
they haue offanded. 3»7.' | Thar no Eccleſialticall perfon; though a Cardi-
najl;: {hall hauemorethen one Benefice, which norbeig able ro maimaine
hirs honeſtly, another ſumpleBencfiec mirycbeeadded,.lorharthey dog nor
bodvrequirepcrſonall reſidence; which ſhall be vnderſtood ofaltBenefices)
as well fecular as tegular; of what cicteor qualitie (ocuer,, crhouphreommen-
ded! And heechar hath ks reogmeeg Ve ther one hall bee bound:to
leaue all burone; within fixe monerhs,or ifnor,chey thall be allvoyd., Nor-
withſtanding, the Synod docth deſire that lomoprouifion ſhould bee made
forrhoferhar reſignc, in fone conucniert manner, as fhall-foeme befteo the
Pope.”'' 18.7 Incaſeof vacaneicot any Churchin ary manner wharcſocucr,
all thall be written downethar arc propoſed or doe propote themſclues, and
ſhall bcc all examined by the Biſhop withnhree examiners, at thelcaft _
os hank among

© the Counodthaf Trent

EW
27 31
non. p|
"ah. A CORY
Fo Eyronarne.-
Sis 9.”
(py UA...

Mary ant

S :
ſhall cor;hinder Bilbops in th:ix cauſes, nor proceed again Ecclelialticall
ctſons;/butin calcof the Biſhops negligenge,-» Thattche Appellanc (hallbe

be propoſed in Congregation. MEISE ROW
There was notfuch expeQtation of rheiſſue, of chis Seſſion, as of rhe laſt,

Rowe...;did commend it, as true, and neceſlarie, Bur the Paper adhergvrs
choughr ic asabprhinable,as the Proceſtations formerly made þy, Lythers..; v,

- Inthe fizr. 4yathematiſme of Matrimonic, many did wonder, fennel q Thectakiay
folation of mariagenorconlummared, foraſolemne vow, ſhould bee made ces. ©
an Article of faith, becauſe the matrimoniall conjunRion, though not con

ſummated bycarnall copulation, is abondinſticured by the Laws gps
| | P

1TH Nifong) v1 Land

162 Bethe Seriprure JGtÞ aifirriic.z ita ther d/lel dud makiadbitgranc
3 kabags _ eh rfrewatr of nd, 4 ah na poſude,
By rhth tath deetgcd;;ir f6 tange:norkydlamBeNet;
rata bondfhould dilolicsdiaihe;25 tire fhoultbortondenone dias,
cAAtire3 o107 hetetitke, who will dorbelvencychatarnificentionioſghber boroodhlingt *
—© huddred yeetes ſmeethe 4potnqhould piivibite wiintth wlividenkſitiriie
of, madoat the firftereation of the world) !!:.c) qoffig > did lo bouy?e

[Thi the(ehnch ewasthought eo bee a taptiburipan zrocbndeneinc.

an hereticke hirn' that ſhall fay thatth6Charchhoekpertotc in reaching}ulmr;
Marwianbific is not difllued by'adulterieo tbvilf onoheuld (ay abplucely,

char Mittitmony ughtto bediſloked fordidiebule] whiiburfiyngod chin

king thatdne harherred,or notetyediin racking rtH&aonraty jiuſbenticthabar

this fiahſhonld'notbee comprehinded'+ iid {Et ir gouthnbtappeatihhiba |

one tif thinke [except he holthe eemriry to brediverronry irwasiud-

564) thatthey ſhould hate fp6ken plaindly 256d ſaid abfolmetyyrhariwinnot
ffoliied by adulterie, or chat both opinivtidareprolktlojmndniae make
ati'Artiele' bf faith eoncerning' alword! 6HElF, 7 But theſe men whidld or
hatemnade the'dificulcie, ifrhi6y bad kn&wen theeaerbefore montioned,

j

why they did ſprakeit thatmanex:?': > baniod ood on ied >: 292d or Þ>4

o 7

- 'Thealihtli Canon'did affBbrd mirter oP (peechall,bi chat affirrhariuc,
that Goddoth nor deny the Fife -dfchafttiets him'that doth demanndiir4-
righe, becauſe irdid ſeeme ro betohrary'ts the Coſpe, which affictuerh that
it 15n6rgiuen to all; and to Saitit'Par; who doth not exhort co detwaund ir;
which wasmoreesfictheritonfttry; 5156501 10 41605 nd og bot bt

'The Polititiatts'knew'ndtwhee BYdhinke-of the twelfth dnathomatifme;
thar'it ſtiould bee hereſic to hold that marrironiall caufesdocine: belong
toEccleftaſticallFudges,it being ctrraine;thatrheLawes of mariagewerc all
made by the Emperours!, and the iudicature of them adminiſtredbyrhe ſ[c.
cular Magiſtrares,ſolong as the Roman Lawes wereinforce;'which the rea-
ding onely of rhe Theodofian and Iuftinian Codes; and:of the Nonels;>8och-bui-
dently-demoriftrate. And'in theformes of {/aſſiedoroyuzhtrois mentiomof
tetines vſed by the'Gorbiſh Kings-in the difpentations of degrees prohibited,
which then were thought'to belong to ciuill government, :and:morrobee
mattets6freligion;and to him thathathan yskill in-{torygit ismoſtknowen;
that the Eccleſ1aſtiques began to iudge cauſcs'of: thisngare patrhbycom:;

miſſion,andpattly by negligence of Princepatid Magitlrates:': vs 0140,
-Buritithe'beginning of the Decree of teformanom of Marrimotly,-ma-
ny wopdred; how itcould bee defined us arvdrrikicioffamiy;itbacchandes
ſte tnatiages are true Sacraments , atid that the Church hathalwdycs de-
reſted thetn,; becauſe ir detth/ irhplic 2 cotittadiAion x6detct Sacraments,
And'ts cottirtind that the Pariſh Prieft ſhould matkrocacechoſerthac are
ioyntd,and Yaderftanding their conſetit; ſhould{ayy hivayme you bn! Matrows:
ny in the N nit of the Father, Sonne, and boly Guſt, akteridedby the viiticks;
"114,108 inns, that either they arcioyned ons words; 6t-not; if.nor; theuthat
. + = ot tktre which che Couticell of Florence hath detertnined; ctharmarimoiy
r&iutchi perfeRtion fromconſent: if f6,whar contutiction is thac whichiche
PteftinaktthbF perſons ioyned beforc: And if thewory, Lioyhez? nals
c

"OT

COLLIE ETTS imum Oo o—_

468 the Gonneelt of Trent. "79 "

becxpounded,l declare them ioyncd;away would belaydopento conclude, 1 363
that the words of the abſolution arc declaratory.alſo; Bur howſoeuer it was, > VN
they ſaid the decree was niade to tio other cnd;but that within a ſhort time it Fanpmnca %Þ
mighc beo made an Article of faith, that choſe words pronounced by the Pa- Emnure,
Tiſh Prieft were the forme of the Sacrament. - 2: _ | ma
- For making void clandeſtine mariages , they ſpakeas much as was ſpo: ——
kenof irin'the Councell 1t-ſelfe, ; For fome did extoll the decree to the hea-
ucns; and others ſaid, that if thoſe matrimonics were Sacraments, and con-
ſequently inſtirured by Cy K 1 $T; atid che Church hath alwayes deteſted
rhem, and-finally made chem voyd, itdid not appeare how thoſe who had
nor made prouition for itin the beginning,could be excuſed from theblame
of ignorance, or negligence, And when the diftin&ion , on which they
founded the decree, was publiſhed,thar the contra& was nullified , which is
the matter 'of the Sacrament, it was hard to ynderltand a long time, becauſe
the matrimoniall contract hath nodiſtintion fromthe matrimony,nor the
matrimony from the Sacrament : and the rather , becauſe the matrimony
was indifloluble before it was a Sacrament, in regard Cy R1sT docth nor
pronounce it inſoluble, as inſtituted by him, but as by Gob, inthe carthly
Paradiſe. But, it being admitted, that the Marrimoniall contract is an hu-
mancand ciull ching, ſeparatefrom the. Sacrament, which is nullified, ſome
{aid this annullation would not belong to theEccleſraſticallludge, bur
rothe Secular, ro whom the diſcuſlion, and cognition of all ciuill contracts
docth appertaine, | ; 15!

: The cauſe aljcadged ro moderate theitnpediments of matiage, was much
commendgd, # reoratl but irwasobſerucd withall, thatir did neceſſa-

We Many more relirictions then thoſe that weredecreed,inregard

Ic{ſe inconuenicnces byrhe impediments confirmed, then by

a boliſhed.:The endof the Article of matrimonial diſpenſa-
2 vaine: quoſtion inthe: curious, whether the-Pope, by re-

DP J—_—

rily- conc}
ere are
tholttha
rions

ſ{crui Fhimiclfcalone, did more good or hurtto his authoritie. For
thegol os Mcadged the great quantitic of gold which did flow intothe
Court WMougk this chancll, and che obligations of ſo many Princes , gai-
ned by Macancs, as to be {atisfied-intheir appetites; or intereſts, ſo 10 os» =

fentrhie? apMlauthoricic,on whichonely che legitimarionof cheirchildren
was groutided) For the hurt, the loſſcof the revenues of England, andof
the obedience of that :crowne was produced, which did weigh:downe all
painc otfriend(hip,whichthe dipenſations.might COCUre. |: 21.9) 1101360
;: The Frenchmen did norlike thedeoree'y tharthterhar ſtealetha woman,
ſhall bec bound to cndow her, at theplcafurc of-rho idge;, ſaying ;thatthe
Law concerning dowries; cannot be made by Ecclefiattwallauthoritic,and
that'it'was pv to: rake the judicarureof thaodelict from che _
iſtrare.> For if thoEtclefiaftiquediay'makeirhelaw, heeqmayindgei
= ' Andhowtocuertheydaid x che:pttaſurcioftheitudge; yor
there is rio doubr, bur thatin the deelaration;theywoultfayrboyimeant the:
Ecclefiafticalloncly.And hey choughtgtan vſurparionoftemporallauthes. =
ricio, to punith Sctulars witinfataibyantbacapaciricofdiganies: Neither:
did they approouc the conſtitution againſt conduleneries;,penſcnering aJecre:
2A | in

SEN Ig _

_ 1. The Hiſtory of - \ Lang

13563 intexcommunication,that rhey ſhould be puniſhed by the Ecclefiaftique,be-
-— —\\ cauſe excommunication is the extreme, Jatt and greacelt of Ecelchiafticall pu-
rwmae Niſhments,according to thedoGtrine of all the Fathers; forhar to paſle that,

Ei was cocntcr ypon the Temporal] power, and the rather, becaulc they giue
Cnarin? 9. themſelues power to courſe concubines our of their countreys, deriding the
PA ſecular Magiſtrates, by imploring their arme,if there thall bee need; which
is as much as to affirme, that, ordinarily, the execution of this. baniſhment
may be made by the Ecclefiaftique himlelfe. | |
"The Decree of reformarion in the firſt Article was noted either of de-
fe&t, or of preſumption. For if the Synode had authoritic ro giue Law
ro. the Pope, cſpecially in things ſoiuſt , ic was not fit ro doe it by way of
narration, or by obloquitie of words. Bur if it ought to receiue Law from
the Pope, it cannot bee excuſed for hauing paſled its bounds, becaulc it
doeth ſharpcly reprchend the former. actions of.. this and other Popes,
though it doeth it obliquely: "Thoſe that were feene in the Eccleftaſti-
call (tories, ſaid, that to draw all thecauſes of Biſhops to Rome, was a new
policie ro makethe Courr great, whereas alltheexamples of antiquitie, and
Canons of the Counſels of thoſe times doe ſhew , that the cauſes of Biſhops,
though of depoſitions, werehandled inthe countries of each of them. T hoſe
who cxpedteda prouifion againſt the abuſe of penſions, ſecing what was de-
creedin the 13.Article,did iudge thatthe matter would paſſe toa greater cor-
ruption as the cucnt alſo hath ſhewed.. The fourteenth Article was com-
- mended by cuery ones, becauſe it did ſeeme to take away the 4nnates, and
paying for "Bulls, diſpatched ar Rome, for collation of Bencfices. Burt in
progreſle of time,it appearing thatthoſe remained ſtill, and that there was
not ſo muchas any cogirationeither to remoouc or moderate them, they re>
membred, that, onely the ſmall abuſes of other Churches being prouided
againſt, the ſaying was verified, that onely moates were taken-out of the
eyes, and beames neuer. Eucry wiſe man thought that this age was nor
worthy of that Decrce for the vaitie, or, at the moſt, dualticot Benchices,
and thatic would not be obſcrucd bur in the poorer forronely. - Likewiſefor
the examination in concurrence, in the collation of Benefices, euery one
did prognofticarc that.ir-would bee deluded by ſome {iniſter interpretation.
And che prophecic was quickly verifed. For in:Roms, within a ſhorttime,
they began to declare, that.concurrerice was notto. bee. obſctued in caſe of
reſignation , but thathee onely was-zo bee examined, ro whom the refig+
nation was made ; which wasas muchas:co abolifrthe Dectee for the maſk
part; becauſe the better ſort. wero excluded byrefignation; and bec, oncly
preferred who pleaſed the relignant: and: Bencfices arc natiyacant for any
ochcrcaule bur caſually.:'/The Detrec of: the cognition of caufes:inthe firlt
inftancewasquitc deſtroyed , by rhe-exceprion added, thatis;, except thoſe
which thePopewill comic, and cathco-himſcife, For cauſes were neuer ta
ken from thelawfullcribynals butbycoemmiſſions,andauocationsof Popes
and nowthecauſe of thedifcale waspreferued, and the ſymptom. encly cured;
And howfocuertheadiundt {for vrgenr and reaſonable cauſes) did ſeemeto
moderate themarterwol;yermenofwnderſtanding knew that it wasas much
arto fay,foranyarbitrary.cauſe..) 1's iting rr moor ob
1:

Bur

XUM

Lis. $. the Councell of Trent. \

193

——_—

Bur in the lalt poynr, which was in expectation ſo many moneths, rou- 1 364.

ching the eſlenciall I1berty of the Councell, ſccing ir was declared, that the V1.

meaning of the Synod was, not to changethe manner of proceeding, nor Faxvmas,

ro make any addition, or diminution of the old conſtitutions, wile men laid, tr;

that concerning this Councell it was a declaration contrary to thefact, and

a medicine applyed ro a dead body. And {omemocked,and (aid, that ir was
as muchas.the conſolation of an honelt man, whoſe wife had brought him
children by other men, and ſaid (he did it not ro doc him wrong. Bur, by
an cxample giuen to polteritic, ir did teach how all violence, and cxorbi-
rancie might bee vſed in Councell , from the beginning to the end , and all
inconucnicnce done excuſed by ſucha declaration,yea wultified, and mainrai-
ncd for lawfull.

At this time, beſides the aduice of the Seflion heldse, thiree other ſorts of
diſtaltfull newes came into France. The firlt was the Popes an{were abour
the hundred thouland crownes. The ſecond,the proteltation made in Coun-
cell, and the di{pleaſuretaken atit, in Trent, and Rome. Thelalt, was the
ſcatcnce againſt the French Biſhops, and thecitation of che Queene of Na-
warre: The French-men, hauing much conſidered on thele things, refulucd

ZABETH.
CHARLES ge.
Purilie 2.

publiſhed when ir did no good : neither was there any more vie of it,then of —v—

The Alienati-
on of Eccle(:-

not to treate any more with the Pope for his fauour in thealienation, bur to aſtcall ceue-

exccute the Kings Edict, approucd in Parliament, withoutany conſent ot his
Holineſſe. This being (uddenly performed, few buyers could bee found, as
well becauſe men doe nor cafily refolueto lay downe their moncy,as becaule
rhey were diſlwaded by the Ecclefiaſtiques, who told them, that the ſale, wan-
ting the Popes confirmation, would not hereafter be eſteemed to bee good.
This wasa hinderance to the King, and no fauour to the Clergie. Forthe
ſale was made, but it was doneata low rate; ncither was there ray{ed more
chen two millions and haife of Francks,{mall,in regard of the things alicaed,
ſeeing that it was made at twelue foran hundred, whereas it had beene a
ſmall price if they had giuen an hundred for fourc. And it is worthy to
bee repeated heere, that, amongſt che things ſolde, one was, the iurifdiction
which the Arch-biſhop of Ligns had held vartill that time, ouer that cirie,
which was ſold at the outcry for rhirty thouſand Francks. Bur the Biſhop
complained ſo much rhar,in ſupplement of the price, he had giuen ynto him
400. crownes yeerely.

nuecs 1n
France.

Concerning the proteſtation madcin Councell, the King wrote to his

Ambaſſadors the ninth of Nouember, that, hauing ſeene what the Cardinal!
of Loraine had written againlt their proteltation,and heard the relation made
by the Biſhop of Orleence of all things done in Trent, he was pleaſed with it,as
alſo with their retire to Tenice, and commanded, thatde Ferrieres/hould nor
depart thence vntill he had neworder , which ſhould bee when hee was ad-
uiled that the Articles wereſo reformed that the rights ofthe King, and of
the Gallican Church werenot put in queſtion. And he wrotetothe Cardi-
nall of Loraine,that himſelfe and his Counſel knew that bis Ambaſſadors had
protelted vpon great and iuſt occaſion. For as hee would cominucin the
vnion and obedience of the Church, ſo hee would preſerue inuiolable the
rights of his crowne, wichour ſuffering them to be queltioned, or diſpured,or
6 X x X himſeclfe

—_

794

L1s. 8.

- ———

The Hiſtorte of ©

© —_——_——_  ———————

1563
= SNL>N
Pivs 4+
FERDINAND.
EL1iZABBTH.
CUARLES 9.
Pailie 2,

> Ya 4

The French
King takerh
part with the
(uecne Gt
I\NAawdrre.

himſelfe forced to ſhew them. T hat they ſhould not thinke to ſatisfic him,
with ſaying inthe code , Saving and reſeruing the rights, &c. becauſe, vnecr
this colour , they would binde him to (hew a reaſon 1n euery oppoſition.
Thar if hee had ſcene the Articles as they were propoſed, hee wou!d haue
iudged, that the Ambaſladour could not haue done otherwiſe then make
che oppoſition: which his defire was they {hould firſt haue ſhewed to him,
bur ſaid they werero bee exculed, in regard of the occaſton ſuddenly ariſing,
and of the circumlitances which did produce it, and of the ſuſpitions, which
made them doubt of ſome Arrifice to- precipitate the deciftion. And if the
Pope had no intention, as hee,the Cardioall, giueth him ro ynderſtand,thar
the rights of the Emperour,and Kings ſhould bee touched,and difpurcd, his
Holincſle mult turne his anger ypon the Legats, who propoled the Articles,
and named Kings, Emperour & Republikes,and not vponthe Ambaſſadors.
That heethinkerh the proteltation may be juſtified beforeall Chriltendome,

when the Articles (hal be ſeene. Thar,the Legats hauing propoſed thoſe Arti-

clesagainlt che intention of his Holinefle, he ought nor co referre himſelfeto

their diſcretion hereafter, nor to cauſe his Ambaſſadors to returne, ynrill he
had ful aſſurance that thoſe Articles ſhouldnotbe ſpokenof any more, which
being done, he will command them ro goe againe to the Councell.
Concerning the citation and ſentence, the King gaue order ro Henry Clu-
tin, Lord 4 Oyſel, to tell the Pope, that his Maicltic had vnderſtood , to his
grcatdifpleaſure,that which he d:d not belecueby the fame which was ſpread,
yncill he had ſecnc a copie of the monutories afhxed in Rome, that the Queene
was fo proceeded againtt, as that hee was bound to detend her. | Firlt in re-
gard the cauſc and danger was comnton to all Kings , who therefore were
oblized ro protect her; and the rather, becauſe ſhe was a widow, and his ob-
ligazon was the greater, in re[pect of the necrekinred hee hath with her, by
boch lines, and by agnation with her huſband , who died bur alittle before
ia the warre againſt the Proteſtants, leauing his ſonnes Pupils. There-
forc hce could not abandon her caule, following rhe examples of his ance-
ſers;and the rather , becauſe hee ought not to 1ndure that any thould make
warrc againlt his neighbours vnder colour of religon; adding, that it was
not pious, to put the Kingdomes of Spamme and France, lately ioyned in friend-
ſhip,in danger of a bloody warre,for this cauſe. He ſaid moreouer, that the
Queene, hauing many Fees in France, theecould nor, by therights and priui-
ledges of that Kingdom, be compelled roappeare,cither in perſon,or by Pro-
tor, adding many examples of Princes and Popes, who haue procceded
with duc and lawfull moderation. Hee touched the forme of the citation
by Edi&t, a thing not heard of in former times , inuented by Boniface.
the cighth, and, as too hard and vniuſt, moderated by Clement the fitth, in
the Councell of Tienna-. He ſaid that ſuch citations could, by no meanes,
take place, bur againſt the inhabjtants ro whom the acceſle is nor ſecure,
and that, the Queene remayning in France, a great iniurie was done'to him
and the Kingdome,, by viing that fornie; as al'o was done by expo-
{ing ro prey, andgranting to the Vſurpers, the Fees ſhe holdethin France.Þ,
the right whereof belongeth ro him. And cuery one marucilcd ( hee faid )

thathis Holinefle whodid fauour ſo affectionately the cauſe of King ms
| whilc

oF

F414
«IL 4

A@AzTTy
CCil

L i@.$; 1 | the Conncellof Trent y*_

White he livcd,in. being hismediator with the King afSpame, wouldtriowoph 1563
preſſe his children,and widow. Burhe.complaihedinolt of all;chat ſo many— -
Kings, Princes,abd cirics/hauing departed from the Church of Ramey withunFuanixs0;
fourric yccres, hee hadnor'ſo proceeded with any otber:) which ſhewed well:s,55,, 75
that he did it norfor the goodof her foule, buc tor orher ends. 1 Heewilhed) $2oucts 5
his Hol. to confider, that power was giuento Popesforſaluatiab of ſoules, ——
not to depriue-Princes of 1heir States, mor to arder: any thingan:earchly=
polle{lions, whichhauing berne formicrly attenipred by them inGermanie_,
did much troublethe publike: quiet. +1 Hee intreatedithe Pope ro rcuoke\
all his Actes again{t rhe Queene, protclting;thar, incaſe hee would nor, hee
would proceede to thoſe remedics which his predecefours haucivied. Hee |
complainedalloof thecauſe of che Biſhops ;'and commanded his Ambaſſa--and wither
dor,thar,declaring vnto him the ancient examples, the: liberties and immuni- ot
tics of the French Church,-and the authoritic of the Kings in cauſes Eccleſt-.
alticall, he ſhouldpray the Pope notto make any innouation. Monfienr d' Ot-
ſel performed this office with great vehemencic, and, after many- treaties:
with the Pope, obtaincd of him to ſpeake no more either of che Queene, or
of the Biſhops,
Bur in Trent, the Seſlion being ended, and matters well agreed on bc-
trweene the Legates and Loyaine, and the buſineſle imparted ro the princi-:
pall Papalins, Otranto, Taranto, and *Parma, as alſoro the Emperours Am-/The Card. of
baſſadours, Loraine began to publiſh their deſeigne, that the Councel might 1,1 5 4c
bee finiſhed with one Seffiom more. Hee ſayd heecould not beein Trent ative 2.0,
Chriſtmas ; that himſelte, and all the French Biſhops mult depart' before <
that time ; that hee deſired to {ce the Councel ended,and was loath to lcaue
{ſo honourable an aſſembly; bur that hee could nor otherwiſe doe, beeing,
commanded by the King. The Inperialiſts alſo did publiſh in the Coun-
cell,thatthe Emperour did defire the diſpatch, and that the King of the Ro-
manes did write, that hisdefire was it (hould bee finiſhed by Saint Anarewes
day, or, at the longeſt, in the beginning of the next moneth by allmeanes.
Andindeecde that King, not to pleaſe the Pope, but becauſeit was his opini-
on , did follicite the concluſion. For becing to hold a Dier, hee was not
willing his Father ſhould haue Ambaſſadours in the Councell; and 1aid,thar-
if that were ſhut vp, the affaires of Religion in Germanie would bee infarre
better caſe. dp UF
The greater part: of the Fathers were glad to heare this; and Morone,
making a Congregation in his houſe, the fifreenth of Nouember, of the Le-
gates, two Cardinals, and fiueand rwenty Biſhops, rhe principall of cucry
Nation, hee propoſed, that the Councell, hauing beene afſembledfor the nes
ceſlitics of Germanieand France, ..and now the Emperour, King of the Ro-
manes, Cardinall of Loraine,-and all Princes defiring that it ſhould bee fivi- |
ſhed, they would ſpeake their opinion concerning theconcluding of it, and
the manner. + Lorameſayd,, it was neceffary to finiſhir, nor ro hold Chri-
{tendom inſuſpence any longer, to ſhew the Catholikes whatthey ought to
| belecue, and to take away the Interim of Germanie, which could not be done
by any other meancs, becaule it was ro continue yntilltheend ofthe Coun- |
cell; and to continue it longer, could nor bee without great dammage of
AXxX'f the

796: | The Hiftorie of | | L1s. 8.

r563 the'Catholique Church: . And that it was ncedcfull ro. finiſh the generall
— ;Councel| im Trent, 10 hinder a Nationall in France. For the manner. hce
Frzomans'ſayd it might. bee cnded with one Scffjon , handling in irthe refidue of the
© reformation, and diſpatching the .Catechiſme, and the Index of the bookes
ares? -: prohibired/,! Which wete in-order already , referring other-matrers to the
I Rope, nor diſputing the Articles of Indulgences and Images, nor anathemati-
zing particular hercriques, but proceeding with generall termes only, They
all agreed;y.in {ome fort, to finihh the Councell, except the Archbiſhop of
Granata, who referred himſelfe to the Ambafſadout of his King. Some
{aid ic could nor abſolutely bee ended, becauſe ſomany macters did remaine
to bee handled : burthat it might bee done by intiwatiog another ten yeeres
after, which alſo would ſcruc to hinder the calling of Nationall Councels,
and to deferre the determination of the things remayning,. and the: Ana-
thematiſmes.. "The Biſhop of Breſcia propoled a middle courſe betweene
an ablolure-cnde and a tuſpenſion 3 becauſe the former would make the
hereriques deſperate, aud the latter no fatisfic the IT Bur theſe
opinions had no followers, all the others adhering to that which the Cardi-
nall had (ayd. | |

For themanner, Otranto thought it neceſſary ro anathematize the Here-
tiques, becauſeit hath been vied inall Councels, and is the principall thing
which is required of Synods. For many are not capable ro vaderſtand
the tructh or falſhood of opinions, by their owne iudgment, but doe fol-
low or abhorre them according to the credit or diſcredite of the authours.
He fayd that the Councel of { bakedon, full of learned men\,:to clcere them-
ſclucs whether Theodorer, Bithop 'of Ciros, were a Catholique or nor,
would not heare an 'account of his faith , which hee defired to render,
bur onely withed him to denounce a plaine anathema againſt Neſtorins ;
that if Luther and Zuinglius , dead, and their followers aliuc, were nor a-
nathemartized, it might bee layd , that the Councell had laboured in vaine.
The Cardinall replycd, that divers times did require diuers counſels ; that
the differences in Religion were chen betweene the Biſhops and the Prieſts;
that the people were but as an acccflory; that the Grandees either did not
meddle, orifthey did adhere to any hercfie, they did not make themſelues
Heads, and leaders. But now all was quite contrary; becauſe the here-
rique Miniſters, and Preachers, could not bee ſayd to. bee heads of the
Sectes, bur the Princes rather, ro whole intereſts their Miniſters and Prea-
chers doe accomodate themſclues. Hee that would name the true Heads
of hereriques, mult name the Queene of England, the Queene qigNawarre,the
Prince of Conde, the Elefor Palatine of the Rhene, the &leFor of Saxonie.and
many other Dukes and Princes of Germanie. Hee fayd, that chis would
make them vnite, and ſhewthey were ſenlible of it; and;that the'condem-
nation of Lather and Zuinglius oncly would fo prouoke' them, that;ſome
great confuſion woukd certainely ariſe. Therefore tadee,, not what they
would, but what they could, hee thought that the morevniuerſall reſoluti-

on was the better. | | |
' Morone {cnt to call the Ecclcizalticall Ambaſſadours : ro whom hauing

| imparted the propoſitionandopinion of thataſſembly, they conſented to
the

—_—

CT ———— -

Lin.&.. the Concellof ren 797

thecnd and themanner, according torheopiniou ot Lprame.., Which refolus 1563
tion beingallo communicated tothe ſecular Ambaſſadors,they didall aſſent, ;57, —
except the Spaniard, who layd., hee knew notthe'gxpreſſe willof his King, Freomixs,
and defgred cime that he might-vaderſtand ir, ., Nogwithlianding this; the £unr.nru, |
Legartes, reſolute to-execure this determination, gauethe matrer concerning purns*s * |
Princes, omitting the Anarbemaci/mes,andall the particular Articles, onely rs
gewing the old Canons of the'Ecclelialticallhberty and iuriſdiftion, tpcas
king of Princes with-much reuerence , onely cxhorting them tocaule theit -
minilters not to violate them, "The ſame day at hight a Congregation was
made, to beginneroſpeake of the reformation, and an order was {cr downe, =
that there ſhould bee rwo Congregations aday ,'vatill all che yoyces were Rb
Which were deliuercd with. great ſhortneſle & relolution except by ſome 4 diffuly

few Spaniards , who deſired $0 hinder,whercas all the others did cndeauour Ging the

ro. promote the expedition, with breuity.',/Thegreatelt difficultic was co 5,5 whe
cerningeheſtxth Article, of the ſubietionof Chajeers to Biſhops, in regard "0?
of the great uncereſt, which not oncly the Biſhops, bu the King allo had in
diminiſhing the Capitular authoritic, thar they might not oppole the ſubl1-

dies which arc often impoſed in Spaine, and,on theother 1ide;forthe fauours

the Legates did che Chapters, by whole meancs,and for the reaſonzalicadged,

many [talians, who ficit ſeemed ro fayoutithe Biſhops, turned onthe (,hap-

fers {1de, The Count of Lung ſent a Cugrierto Rome,,indiligence,by whole
aduice 'Vargee , the Ambaſſadour, emtreated the Lope for his fayour tothe
Biſhops. Who, according to his cultome, referring himſclfc, ca:rhe Coune

cell, che Ambaſladour complained that the Italian Prelates had becne per-
{wadcd to changetheur opinion-ib that matter. Whereunto.theiPope rea-

dily anſwered,thatthey changed, becauſechey were free, but rcharthe'depar-

ture of the Agenefor-the Chopters fromthe Councell was not fece, hauing
becne driven from thence, and, vpon that occalion,complained,, that the

* Count of Luna, in Trent, did difſwadethe finiſhing of the Cauncel. -Nort-
withſtanding he wrote, accotdihg tothe Ambaſſadours requeſt, bur in ſuch.
termes, as: did not disfauour thepretenſions of the Chapters. And finally the
Decree was made, with ſome-co/argement of the Epiſcopall authoritie in
Spaine,but not ſo much as they defired;; | M ati!

The Venetian Ambaſladours oade inſtance, that, .in the Article of Pa-
—_— thoſe of the Emperour and Kings being, excepted., thoſeof their
Republiquemighe bce cxcepied alſo, The Legates were willing to pleale
them but could: hardly tcll how. For ————— 09
much,and to namethem particularly would breed niaceer of i lic. They
faunda temper, tocomprehend chat in TS ns a. that
amonglt choſe arecontincd the poſlciſors of Kingdomey ghough rbey haue
not thenames-!: 16 biogr oj on uor o3 20h hot etd 16) 37 1on8 38 7: |
- In che Congregation of the eyyentierh. day ,1a-propolicion was My ages
demand the Popes confirmation of all the Decrees of che Colungell;;/as well is vemanaca.
vader Payl and Inlive, as vnder his Holinefſe..',,FheArchrbifhep of Gra-
natd 0 ; lajing,, that/-in, ne {ixrecath; and. laſt Seflonwnder Julues,
when the Councel was ſulpended,it was ardainedetiat allah Diearaes mr04e :

| Xxx 3 -

F: T l
4100 The Popes

|
j
&

E-- wc , The Hiftorie of © L #8...
1563 bythe Synode vntil{ then ſhould be obſerucd, withourſayitigthatthere was
{>> ay neede of confirmation; {o thar to demaund irnowavould bettocon-
"ALES, FE] detnne thoſe Father S, who then chought that the Decrecs' might bee execu-
ENT ted, withourany confirmation atall.' Hce-profefſed heedid nor ſayyhis be-
CRARLES 9: gauſc he diſliked the demand of a confirmation , but tharmeanes'might bee
A found to vſc words not preiudiciall.  Otrants anfwered;thart the Dectee; na
med by Granata, did not onely not fauour the oppolitioh-which hee drew
from ir, bur did reſolue itrather,ſhewing plaitely, thatthe Councell did'noe
thinke the/ordinarions obligatory , becauſe ir did not command, but ſimply
ethort that they ſhould bee receiued andoblerued, whereof no other cauſe
could beeallcadged,* but the want of confirmation. Gratata was:quict,and
reſolued ro demand the confirmation , as it was propoſed by the common
conſent. But in the manner there was ſome difference. - Some were of opi-
nion that the Councel ſhould demand confirmation , and difſolue' without
expecting anſ{were; ſaying it couldnot.otherwiſe bee doyp with dignity, ci-
ther of the Apoſtolique'Sea, orofthe Councel, and thatit would feeme to
bee an accord made betweene them ;' and if any thing ſhould not beeconfir2
med, the prouifion muſt bee made by the ſame Councel,- i To ſatisfie theſe,
who were many, Morone was willingzthat, in the Seſsion of theninth, which,
in regard of the multiplicity of the matters, was thouglit would continue
three dayes,the firſt day a Currier ſhould bee diſpatched todemandthe con-
firmation, at "whoſe rcturne another Sefsion ſhould bee held without any
a&tion,burt to diſſolue the Synod. Bur this opinion had much contradition.
For if the Pope would contirme the Decrees without examining them, the
fame difficulty did returne; if with examination, the rimeof fome monerhs
was neceſſary.” Finally, the Cardinall of Loraine told the Fathers; that theſe
difficulties were to prolong the Councel; thathimlelfeand the other French
men muſt needes depart, being ſo'commanded by fhe King , and that after
their departurethe Councel copld not bee called Generall, there wanting a
| Nation , whereby thedignitic and honour of it would bee diminiſhed, and
£ Nationall Synods and'other difficulties might bee raiſcd.'\ This halfeprote-
_ | Ration, withthe perſwaſions of the Imperialiſts for the /expedirion, was
- cauſe (afrermany conſultations) ofa reſolution, to demand the confirmari-

on, and diſſolue the Synod in the ſame Seffion, 120M o! 20N 1UC,%
© \'The Cardinal of Lorainie wrore prefently to de Ferrieres/who was at Venice,
tharthe-marter concerning Pritices becing accommodated pnans = a
De Ferrieres Une tO Trent. | Who ah{wered hee could not} without parciculagubmmiſ
ene Hion'otit of France, becanſcthe King in hisferrers of theninth/ haddwwricren
Trex. to him; agallo tohimthe'Cardinalt; thatwwhien the Decrec was made; und
himſclfeaduiſcdrhercof;hce would ſend bitwbacke; ſorhacjrwasnedeſſary
to expect the order of his Maicſtie//| Bur/het wrote 'toxhe-Kingy tharhee

thought it not fit for his ſcruice'to returne, in regard that the rightsof the

{ Crowne; and the'lberyof cheGaftican Church were vivlatedi orbverDe-
Crees alſo,publiſhed intharScſſion;!. Et 10 CDOETINGAGB 23108 >d3 bar Þ
The'reformationſtanding'in goodrermes}'the care\of 'compoling the
Decrce of *Purgatory; nivocarion; worſhip, neliques,andiitnd Saints

they

.

. Was committcdto theCardinallof Varmia, andexghc Prelates;rvbochoughr

L1o.& | the Councellof Trent. HE 99

CO IS.

they all reſolucd nor to mooueany difficulties, yet they did riotagtee. | Some :1563
vere willing co make' mention of theplaceof *F urgatory,, {ofthe fire, as dt :
was donein the Councell of Florence.” Others {aid , thas this being hatd t6 Tanaan oh 4
doe, and impoſſible to find words to cxpreſleit, which might giue {atisfaRi> 8.14pm, W
on to all,jjr was better to ſay onely tharthe good workes of che faichfull did $4» 4
helpe the dead for thefemillion of theirflmnes. The Arch biſhopof Layciand '—v —
ſaid, that, in handling the Maſfſe, mention 'was made; |;that'thar ſacrifices Tirana
offered for thoſe that-arc deceaſed in Cn R15T,not:intirely- purged ;by xdkongy
which words the. do@rine of Purgatorie, was ſufficiently defined :{o that ****7 *
nothing remained to bee done, but ro enioyne the Biſhops to cauſcir to bee

preached, and totake way theabulſes, raking care alſo thar thage bee. no wane

of dueprayers forthedead; And fotheDecrce was made. | if, |! 1}

In matter of the Sainrs chey-cafily agreed -to condemne, particularly .,,all Crinion = |
the opinions, contraty tothe yſcs of the Roman Church. '"Onely about Iima- rico of
ges there was ſome difterence/” >The Archebiſhop ſaid; :no honour was duc ***
yato them, bur by.relacion-zo the thing fignified.. But Laineg,' the Gene-
rall , who alſo was one of the compoſers; added, that, whenthey were dedi-
cared,and pur in place of adoration,a worſkip did belong vnto them, beſides
theadoration duc ynro the Sainrworſhippedin them j calling this adoration
Relatine,and the other Obiefive.. He progued his opinion, becauſe the veſlels
and yeſtments conſecrated: deſctue a-:reuerence' belonging vnto! them ,,by
vertuc of the conſecration \,i though they doe not! repreſent any Saint; and

ſoan adoration is due ynto thelmagededicated by veriite of the dedication,
beſides the reaſon of the repreſentation.::/The Cardinall)of Marmia- , fot
'fatisfaCtion of both; concluded\ that the opinion ofthe Archbiſhop ought
to be expreſled, asmore facile; and plaine; but withont)words which wighs
preiudice che other. TS/+i+ 2118 03612115 Jolth gtovw 5-131 yi -337)9

- Depurics were appoirſted-alſo to xcview the refortnation)of Friars and
Nunnes, beſides thoſe Prelateg who had compoſedlit,andtheGanetals of the
Orders were added. ymo tcheni/-: Theſe changedinothing; btithatithbei
generally granted, inthe third Article y1 roall Manaſteries bb Mend
cants topoſſeſſe immooucablegoods, rhowgh ir beaantrary to theitjufiitye
tion, Friar Francis Zamotras ,'Generall ofthe: Monar:Obferuans, defircd:that
his Order mightbe'excepred3faying; heemeattoliueaccordingrothetule
of Saint Francis, from whichit was tor fig tocxerpr hoſe whaidid norge-
maundit, And fatisfationwas giuen him by cxcopring his Qrdee : as alſo
the (apacbins ; atzhic inſtarice'of Friar Thamaſedi'Ci lo; thei{iherall, : Ge
nerall Lainea delited alſo theqaception of the compiatyÞtrTyw; ſaying, that,
howſocucr the Colledges depured to cnterfaineſchiatiass,vhi weromotyer
religious, mightepiop:moourable ; yet tho-houſeh: profeſſed, injwhich
the ſocietic doth eſfentiallyconſitt,mighs)norchuebbotbybeggingowichour
runrns. x perm aus thing Jy re This was cafily granted, _

c ret rac:next ;;rde fan x0eptior 1 might bee geuidowad;d
ſaid, rhathis ſocirrieirouldaliviiyctprenenthtni@lnezia piivetnendkint the his
inthchoaſcs bucdidnorcarc:to haur this kipous withthe world, protedc ro
chinkingehcirdcſerrin the-ſightiof Gag 2obee ſufticient;/whichwauld bac ginytu i
 thegreater, if, bcirig able torinakeyſeafthopawer givedthenbyihe Cul Neve b0o0

cell,

© The Hiſtorieaf Ers.8

—_—

ns ok they 1d forbcarerodoce iti; Thus reſolution was made byteotiſcnt of

7
*& \>,, all che foure &fuitesin the Councell, propoſed by Father Tarres,who faid;they
Sd fhould; by this meancs, hauc libertic ro vic'or- not to vic the grantof the
En: Councell, according toopportunitte. ... 23 abi) a | |
Cur 9s | Tn thetificenth Article it was conſtituted, that nonefhould profeſle, be-
SV fore theage of cightcene compleate, and that cuery one ſhauld beea Nonice.”
" ewo yeeresarthe lcalt; ar what ageſocuerhe.cnircd. The Generalgoppoled;
ſaying , ic was notiutt-co hinder any fromcntring into Religion , who was
capable to know what the Regular vowes didimport; which capacitic was
- iudged bythe Churchtobccat the ageotf {txteene yecres ; ina timewhen the
world was'nat ſo well awake,and thereforetbatiic was fit-ratherto make the
age lefle then greater: which reaſon they vicd alſoagainſt the twaryeeres of
the Noniceſbip. In the end, becauſerhcy were willing to pleaſe allythey reſol-
' tied co atisfic the Generals allo, and ro make no innouation herein.  ..

Beſides the rwentie two Articles, there was another, in which power
was giucn to'the *Provincials, Generals, and Hcads of the Orders to expell the
incortigible our ofthe Order; and to depriuc them. of the habitc. | Which
Iohannes Antonius Fachinnettus , Biſhop of Nicafiro,, oppoſed ſharpely;taying,
that the profeſſion and Act of admiſhion tor arca mutuall concract , and, as
it were, 4 marriage, by which che. profefled is bound'rothe Monaſtery , and
the Monaſtery to him andas the one could \nordepart;, fo the other could

"not put him away, andthat;, by meancs of this Decree, all Cities would bee
filled with expclicdÞriars, to the-grear ſcandall of the world. The Arch»
bilhop of Roſanoſaid tothe contrary, that the Telation wasnort as hetweene
man and wife;; huc as berwvecne father and ſonne., and char the ſonne:could
neuer lawfully-refaſerhe facher, but the father'mighr emancipatehivſonne,
cſpccially if hee were diſobedient,, and that it wasa lcfſecuill ro fee expelled
Friars intheCirics, then incorrigibleinthe Mandſicrics. The Generals were
nerall of one opinion. 'The perperuall did-approoucthe/cxpulſion,; but the
temporary did not.' The majorpart inclined; :-(accordibgtothecultomeof
amultirude,” whewitconfulteth) ro lJeauethings intheltaterthey were, and
notto'decreccitherforche one fideortheother. Bur, iinchis conſuleation,
itwas ofcen and by many, that the-pcople did xceciue great ſcandal
tofce ſomewearca rcligious habirmany yeercs, andatterwards betotne fe-
culars. This/broughrrhe fecrer profefiion inro queſtion, andmadeacon-
ſultarionto begin, whether they otightro declare ittobre of force; asir bad
becne vmitlthar tireor charnoprofeſſion doth bind, but that which is cx-
prefle; But this had difficulrics alſo ; for remper' whereof, this ralolucion
was taker; chacthe- religious Prolar, _ probation being. caded,

ſrould'bebound cicherco giue the Novice dopart;;-or admithim to
_ theprofofionz” And this was inſerredin thefirtcemb Article, as'ima place
conueriently vie vc SONS B11 2 EIA

" Generdil Laynez commendedrhe: Decree: very. much ,asncceſlary;; bar de-

. dired tharthis(ocietiemighrbec excepred ;aliradging,char thecondicion of it
was different from that of other Ordets;thatin choſe racite profel-

- on hathplace; by:ancican cn, nd approbation of the Apgſtolique
| "84a, which itrtheir fociaryivprohibiced ;rhkerhe cauſe of fſcanda]i hichthe
49.) peop] c

Pg

. h -
L188.
peoplerecciucthin ſeeing ſome ina ſecularhabire, whohauc long wornethe 1563
religious, doth ccaſe in them, in regatd the habic of che 1c/uifs dork not differ 2
from the ſecular; rhat their fociery hath alſo a confirmation from the'Apv- Src"
ſtolique Sea,that the Superiour may admirro the profeſſion after long tifith1egurare.
which hath neuer becne maderoany Regular. All inc'ined to fauour hin vaete'S
withchis cxccption; for extention whereof hee contended, thatthe Rulesof| vv —
fpeaking Latine did require that the expreſſion thould bee inthe plurall, ſay+
ing,thart by theſe things the Synod dorh' nor intend to alter the ifſtitution of
the ſeluirs, &c. And it was not conſidered thatthis manner of ſpeech inight
bee referred both tothe admitting or diſmiſſing of Nouices itithe end of the; t<jnee ma-

| ' . kech vie of the
yeere of Probation , and ro the whole Contents of the tixteenth, Atgicle; as nevlicence of

alſo thar it might be referred to all therhings contained in the fixteen heads, jifx,he
Butthe Father knew how tomake vſe of the negligence of others , laying a
foundation ; on which the ſucceeding Teſuires might build char ſingularitie
which now appearcth in their Socictic. \ "

The Congregation of the two and twenticthtreated of Indulgences; the
dif:icultic and length of which matrer made che major part to bee of opinion
ro ſpcake of ic nomore, in regard all were reſolued ls ro auoide impedi-
ments. ' But ſome deſired ro handlethem, ſaying, that otherwiſe the Here-
tickes would ſay, that they were omitted, becauſe there was no ground to
maintaine them. Others thought it ſufticienc to {peake of their vie onely,
and co take away the abuſes which the corrupnon of times hath brought in,
The Ambaſladour of Portugal ſaid, hee was ſorry that prouiſion was not
made forthe Craſadoes, bur would beefalcar, lelt occafion might bee raken ro
prolong the Councell. The Emperours Ambaſladours, though they did
zoyarly ſollicitethe Exped.tion, by coinmiſlion from their Maſter, wetenar
of accord in this. Prague would not haue them ſpeake of the poitits of do-
&rine. Fine-(bursbes{aid, that if they were omitred, and the abules of re-
Jiques , Images , and Purgatorie not taken away, the Synode was quito
ſhamed. | |

The Biſhop of Modena tolde the Fathers, that, in caſe they would handle
Indulgences, as they had done [ultification,, con(tdering all the cauſes ; and
reſoluing all the queſtions, they would tinde it difficult, and to requirca
long time, it being impoſſible ro make char matter plainc, but by degermi-
ning firſt whether they bee abſolutions, or compenſations onely, and ſuffra-

es; or whether they doe remu the penalties impoſed by the Confeſſor one- The Connect

ly, or all chat are duc: likewife whether the Treaſure, whichis purfor their junne he
foundation, docth onely confilt of the merits of CH R18T, or whether pine o'®
choſe of Saints bee required alſo, whether they may be giuen,thoughthe re- <=.
ceiuer performe nothing, whether chey extend ro the dead allo ; and other
things of no lefle difficultie. Bur to derermine that the Church may graunt
them, and haih done ſo in all times, and thar they arc profitable for the -
faithfull, who doe worthily receive them,needeth no great diſputation. The
authoritic to graunt them is prooucd by the Scripeure; their continualkvſe
by Apoſtolicall cradition , and authoritic of Councels , and the perſpicuitio
of the whole matter by the vniforme doctrine of the Schookemen. Vpon

chis a Dccrec may be compoled without difficultie. The opinion had many
followers ;

Pe” IS

a —

the Councellof Trem, 861

th

802

_

The Hiſtorie of Lins

SO

1563

followers . and hee, with oth & Friar Bilhops,; was depured romakea Decrce

F ;

> —N in this ſenſe; addinga prouifion againſt abuſes, ,

Pivs 4.
FEiDiNanD.

ELrzaBErH. ©
CHARLES 9g. _

Parte 2,

\ AAPL
The Index,
Catechiſme,
&c,

' 4athe Congregations following they handled the Index of bockes,(7a-
rechiſme, *Breuaarie , Miſſals, and Agends. Andall things, determined inihe
articular congregations of the Prelates , depured for thele matcers {ince the

O_—_ Synod, were read. Wherein:they did not allagree. Some
thought that certaine Authours and Bookes were cenſured withour reaſon;
and tome, rhart others were omutted which did more deſerue cenſure. And
there wasno lefle difficultic about the Catechiſme, ſome thinking that that

- which was made, was not fit to be madethe common for the whole Church,

in which rhe greater part are {implc, and ſome defiring that more'marter
might be pur into it. And they differed as much abour the Rituall bookes,
ſome deſiring an vniformitic in the whole Church, and ſome maintaining
cheir owne. - But it appearing that theſe matters could not bee decided in a

| whole yeere, the Legates propolcd that all ſhould bee referred to the Pope.

Whercunto ſome few Prelatcs did not confent, and namely the Biſhop of Le-
rida madcalong oration toſhew, that if any thing were proper to the Conn=
cell it was the Catechiſme, it being a booke, which,after the Symbol,ought to
hold the firſt place in the Church ; that the Retuall bookes ought to hold the

ſecond, in correRing of which there was need ofan exquiſite knowledge of

antiquitic, and of thecuſtomes of all countreys, which will not bee found in

the Courtof Rome; where,though there be men of excellent wit,and of grear
learning, yet they want skill in this kind which is neceſſary to doc any thing
commendably hercin , and that this is more proper to the Councell. But
therciolution to finiſh, and the defire ro depart from Trent, cauſed himto
haue bur {mall audience.

The fiue and twenticth of this mon-th, the Count of Lana came to the
Legats, with an inltancein writing. Hee complained that the molt princi-
pall matters for which the Councell was afſembled were omitted, and the
others precipitated ; that they wevt about to finiſh the Synod without the
priuitic of his King ; concluding, that they oughr to heare the opinions of
the Diuines concerning rhe points of doctrine, and expect an anſwere out of
Spaine for the end of the Councell. The Legats anſwered } thac things were
in ſuch forwardneſle, that there was no time to expect, nor was pollible to
withholde ſo many Biſhops, who were already in order to depart. - The
Count replyed, that if the Councell were ended without th: knowledge-of
his King, beſides the inſtance, he would doe ſomething elle, as hee thought
conuenicnt, Hereupon the Legats ſent preſi ently to the Pope, ard the Count
tothe Ambaſſadour Yargas, to treat with his Holines. But Vargas thought

it ſuperfluousto [peakeany more herein, both becauſe, ar the comming of

The Popes
lackneſic,

the currier, the Popetell extreame {icke, and becauſe hauing made the ſame -
inſtance a few dayes before, the Popes tivall anſwere was, thar hereferred it
ro the Councell, the libertie whereof, ſo much defired by his King allo, hee
would notimpeach. And the Ambaſſadour faying,that the Cauncel oughr

to bee held open, becauſe all the world did defire ir, the Pope demanded

what that world was which would hauc it open ; the Ambaſſadour anſwe-

red, Spainewould ; the Popereplicd , Writc into Spaine, that if they buy and
itudic

Lis.8. the Councellof Tremw. ox.

ſtudic Ptolomic,they (ha!l finde that Spaineis northe whole world, TheLe- 156 ;z
gats vied many perlwaſ1ons to the Count of Luna; and io did Loraine allo, ,- —
and the Emperours Ambaſſadours. Bur, not being able to preuaile, they [a- Froon.no
boured againſthim, the Ambaſladours in the name of che Emperour, King t:zamnn,
of the Romans, and of all Germanie, and Loraine inthe name of his King,and ppg,
ofthe Kingdome of France. The Legats, reſoluing ro-tinth the Conncell, —v —
according to the Popes order, howlocuer the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour might
oppoſe, were diligent in diſpatch of the marters.
ilerhclerhings were in doing, the firlt of December, a curricr cane
nol ome late at night, with aduile,that the Pope was ſuddenly fallen into
a dangerous infirmitic. He brought letters from Cardinal Borromeo tothe Le: cnn
gars,and Cardivall of Loraine,that they ſhould haſten the Councell as much © ofthe |
asmight be, and finiſh ir without reſpectof any, tro withiland the inconue- bc baltencd,
nicnces which might occurre about the election of the Pope, in cale the =
Councell ſhould be oper in time of vacancie. Ih theletters there were ſome
few words writtea with the Popes owne hand, who did commit the {ame
abſolutcly, and coldeLoraine he thould remember his promiſe. It is certaine
(to ſpeake this particular here,though our of place) that the Pope was reſol-
ued,in caſe he didnor recouer quickly, ro create eight Cardinals, and ro
take orderthat no confuſion might ariſe ia the cleCtion ofhis ſucceſſor. The
Legats and Loraine purpoled to anticipate the time of the Seſſion, and cither
with the propoſitions, or without to finith the Councell within two dayes,
that the newes of the Popes death might not ftr{tkcome. Therefore they lent
to communicate the aduice recciued, & their reſolution,to the Ambaſſadors,
and did negotiate with the principall Prelates. They all agreed cxcept the
Spaniſh Ambaſladour, who fayd hee had order from lis King,thar if the
Se&were vacant, heſhould nor ſuffer the Pope to bee elefted in Cquncel,
butthacthe election (ſhould be by Cardinals , io that:there was no neede to
precipitate... Bur Morone anlwered, hee knew for certaine, that the-Ams«
baſſadour of France, who was as yet in Yenice, had order from his King, to
protat thatthe Kingdome/would not obey any Pope, but him'thart ſhould x...
bee eleed in Councell; {o that it was neceſſarie by all meanes ro finiſh 417 the vp-
it, for auoyding of danger. The Count off Luna made a Congregation of bs the Coun
Spaniſh Prelares in his houſe, and fpread a fame, that hee was refolued to Fes
proteſtand oppole. |
Notwithitanding, the Legates hel4 a Congregation: the next mor-
ning, in which the Decrees of *Purgatorie and of the Saints: were read,as
they were compoſed by the Cardinall of Uarmia, and the other deputs
tics. Afterwardthe reformation of Friars was read,and all appooucd with
yery great breuirie, andalittle contradiction, "Then the Articles of refor-
mation wereread. [nrthetirit of the manuers of Biſhops, ar the paſſege,
_ where it is (aid, that they (hall not inrich their kinred and; fariilie by: ahe
reuenues of rhe Churef, it was faid of the reuenucs of the Church, of which
they are faithfull diſpeacers tor the Pope. ' The Biſhop of Saliydns did ap-
pole this point, ſaying; char the portions of the; poore beingeivided by
ancient Canon ,as allo of the fabrique and of the Epiſcopallitable; it ganinor
becſatd that biſhops, and other beneficed perſons are difpencers, bur _"_
__ Lords,

LE He > avs. + c 2 TG . wy ” _ þ »” D ”_ 8 ut” n : CNT
- - - 385 Uo * Ss -
- 4 A 4 y WR
p_— &
4 ”
y : ; b
4
.

804 | The Hiſtorie of = 25 6.8

1563 Lords of their owneparr ; which if they did [pend ill, they did finncand in-
£>-<"\ cave the wrath of God, as cuery other man did, who ſpendeth his goods a-
Fzzpman» mMiſſe ; but if they were diſpencers for the poore, they ſhould bee bound to
Ezazzra. reſtitution, which cannot be ſaid. There were many difcourſes, the ma-
Prarie? 9 jor part defending that beneficed men were Lords of the fruits, or vſufructu.

aries, and others ſaying,as the French Ambaſſadour had done in his Ora-
tion, that they hauc but the vie onely. Some defended the words of the
Decrce thatthey were dilpencers,alleadging the place in the Goſpell of the
faithfull ſeruant, and the Doctrine of if the holy Fachers. Buttheprecipi-
ration to finiſh the Councell, cauſed thoſe words, that is, of which they are
appointed fairhfull diſpencers for the poore, tobe omitted, as alſo other
difficulrics to be paſſed oucr in ſilence.

In the Article of Patronages, the Ambaſſadours of Sauoy and Florence,
maderequelt that thoſe of the Princes might bee accepted allo, or that all
might be comprehended but thoſe of the Emperour and Kings, SarisfaCti-
on was giuen them, by accepting, beſides the Emperour, Kings, or Poſleſſors

Adifpure of Kingdomecs,other great and ſupreame Princes, who haueoueraignety in
whether the their dominions. Afterwards a propoſition was made for the reading in

Decrces made
racer £448 Seflion of all the Decrees made vnder Partand Tulins , to bee approoucd;

ulizes (hoy
berend. which Modena oppoſcd, ſaying thatir would beca derogation ro the autho-
ritic of the Counccll of thoſe times, if ic ſhould ſeeme that rhe rhiogs then
done had nced of a new confirmation of the Fathers, and would ſhew that
thisand that was notall one, becauſe none can confirme his owne things.
Others ſayd,it was neceſlaric ro docir, for that cauſe that authoritic might
not beetaken from them, ſaying, that they were nor of the ſame Councell,
And the ſame French-men, who before did fo carneltly defire that it mighr
be declared that the Councell was new,and not continuated with that vnder
Tauland Inlins, did now labour more then others, that all cauſe of doubting
might betaken away , thatall the acts from the yere 1545. vniillthe cnde;
wcerenot ofthe ſame Synode. Thus it happeneth, as injhuwane affatres, ſo
in religionallo, that one credulity is changed with his intereſts, Therefore
now, all aiming at one marke, it was determined, f1mply to read them , and
lay no more. For ſothe vnitic of the Counccll was molt plainely declared,
'andall difticulry remooued which the word confirmation might bring,
lcauing cucry one to thinke what he liſted, whether the reading of them, did
couſcquently import a confirmation, ora declaration of their validity, or an
A” thatit was one Synode which made them with thatwhich read
TNcem.
Theveion  Finallya propoſition was made to anticipate the Seſſion, and to celebrate
red. it the nextday; and, if all the ations could not then be diſpatched, to con-
tinue it the day following, and rodiſmiſſe the Fathers, and ſubſcribe all the
acts of the Councell on Sunday. The Spaniſh Biſhops oppoſed this, ſaying,
that there was'no neceſlity to abbreuiate the time. Notwithſtanding Card.
Morone (ayd,that the Seſſion ſhould bee held. And Loraine and the Emperors
Ambaſladors renewed their perlwations totheCount of Luna,that he would
yeeld to that which is ſo vaiformely reſolucd. Who in the cnd, after ma-

ny things ſpokenand replycd, was content ypon two conditions; one, that
a Decree

_—_—

—— Ws 3 FER %
E1z.8. the Conncellsf Then. "Lo5
adecroe might be maderhar the Popefliould- make: prouifion' for all things x 563
that romaine; anotherthatincho handling of. Iaitlpences itſhould norbee OO
Gid that they:aught to bee giuen grat#s; Horanyiorher thing tharmight pro Faroinane.
iudicerhoCra/adeesof | pate. 15? i 050 nid ont '” Ecnanorh, =

*

.' That:daytherefpre beingeoms which was Friday, thethird of Decetn» $22nint:
ber, they wentro the Church with theviuall Cercttionics, and thee Maſſe was KELIS;
aid, in which lcrolamus Ragazzone,:Bilkop of Nagianzo, made the Sermon. 3.December.
Hee ſummonedallthe world ro admire thar motthappicday; in which the The Sermon.
temple of God was reftared, and cheſhip broughe:into' the hauen, ' after ſo
many cempeſts, and ſtormes ; andthatthe ioy had*becne | ' if the
Proteſtants:would hauc had their parrin ir; which was nottheFathers fault.
Helaid, they had choſenthar citic forthecouncell, (ciruared *in' the niouth
of Germanie,cucnatthe threſhold of their:houles, without atly gard, not'ro
giue ſuſpition of want of libcrtic; that the Proteſtants had beenc invited, by
a Safe-condudty cxpeaedand prayed ; thar, for the ſafcticof their ſoules, the
Catholike faith was cxpounded,andrhe Ecclefiaſticall diſcipline reſtoredHe
ſhewed theabulſcs raken away in holy Rites. He aid that if there had beenie
no-orher cauſe to call aCouncell, it had beene-neceſfary ro doeir for the
prohubitionof Clandeltine mariages. And, paſhng to the things conſtitu-
ted for reformation, he ſhewed, from ſtep to ſep, the publike ſervice the
Church would recciue by thole decrees. *Hee added, rhat the explication' of
faith, with the reformation of manners, had beenc handled in former Coun-
cels, but not more diligently in any, thatthe arguments and reaſons of 'the
heretikes had becn ofren nandled and diſcuſſed, andmany times with great
contention, not becauſerhere was any diſcord amongſt the Fathers, which
cannot becamongl[t choſe who are of the ſame opinion, but to proceed with
{inceritie, and lo to clecremhetructh as that more could not hauc becnedone
if the heretikes had beenepreſent. He erhorted all, that, being returned
ro their Dioccſlcs, they would pur the Decrees in execution ; as alſo ro
thanke God firlt, and then the Pope, ſhewing what hee hath done to fauour
the Councell, ſcading Nwuncy into the Proteſtant Countries, Legates ro Treng,

exciting Princes to ſend Ambaſſadours, ſparing no colt ro maintaine the
Councell ia libertic. Hecommended the Legares,as being good guides,aud
moderators, and, in particular, Cardinall Morone, and concluded with the
commendation of the Fathers. | | |

 Afterthe ceremonies were ended the Decrees were read. In the do&t- T' Pracs

rine of ©Purgatorit it was ſaidchat the Catholike Church hath raught, 'out 771
ofthe Scriprurc, traditions, and in this fame Synode,that there is Purgatorie,

and that the ſoules deraincd in it,are afkifted by the fuffragesof the faithful,

and the facrifice of the Meſſe. Therefore ir doth command Biſhops to teach.
ſounddo&tine in this marter,and caulc ito bee preached, without handlin
ſubtile queſtions before the ignorant people, nor ſuffering yneertaineand MM
likely rhings to bepubliſhed ; prohibiring curioſities, ſeperſtition,andvnko-
n6ſtgaine,procuring thatthole ſuffrages bee fully executed which areviually
 madeforthedcad by cheliuing,asalſo thartherhings ordainedin laſt wils,or
in-any ocher manner be fully performed, 099 00 OG

In macrer of che Saincs,it doth cofatnand Biſhops and all others who _ Of Sainns;
$f >-+ Y YY tne

 &
k .

2066 a> The Hiftorpof Wy Liz'8
.1563 -thecharge of ecachivg,tharthcy/inſlituckriiepoapltzcbncerninghe incerceſ}
== Hfopandiguecation ofitlice), honousrot'relikes; davatullovie ptrimages act

VS 4.1; 2-7 . : "Bay
1445865: gording coghnancientdaatrinc ofrheGhurch, can{tor of Fiarhers; and Be.
-Enazzery Crees of Councels, teaching that the Saints doc pray tor meh}. thavitiis pro.
Renee. fixable roinuocatcthem|,atid:ro hauc-recaurle/to: cheiv/pragers/and afliſt.

> ,ancc:; Afrerwards , all.inonc pariodc! it: docthicondemne feuen-afferri-
© * ansinthis matter, , Tharthe Saintsof (Heaucnpyghtnatroboetinuocared;
- Jbargbey doc notprayformen. |/Phar' it is idolarric to/ignocaretheryts

pray for vs, though {ingularly. | That-ir'is repugnant ro 'the/ word'tof

(od, comraric co,clic;honour of Cxix 15 T,-anda fooliſhtieſſe ro pray

ato them, cither with-heart or: voyce. Thar the>bodies:of 'Saints, 'for
whole ſake God docth giue vs many» benefits, ought: orice: bee wot-

: ſhipped; .,, That their: reliques and; tepulcurces ought not ro-ee honou\
> red. And. that'it.is in yaiue to make mention of them, to: obtain aſſi-
ſtance. | ar) >13 241 36005 ; by LEE DSII YES INDO TIRO 7;

Of !mages, Concerning images,that thoſe of. Cxix 1's T;of theVirgin,and of Saints
oughtito bekeptinthe Churches,andtoihaucdue honour giuen:them ; nor

that cherce is any divinitie,oryertucia them, burbecauſe the honourredoun-

deth: to the thing repreſeuted, Ck 1.5T andthe Saints beingworthipped

by the images, whole ſimilituderhey;bcare; as hath beene detined by the
Councels,e{pecially in theſccond of Nice. ..T hatfor hiſtories, themylterics

of religion, expreſſed in pictures,are taught to thepeople,and the Articlesof
fairhcalled rotheir mind ;andnot onely the Benefires. of CHR158T arc ſug-

geliedeo them, but the myracles and cxamples of Saints are cucnpur before
theireyes, that they maythanke God farther; and imitate them; anathema-

tizing thole.thatreach or belecue the contraric. - *'© f5
Afterwards it addeth.; that,defiring to take away theabuſes; and occa-
{10nsof pernicious errors, it docth ordainc,thar, if there be cauſe to make an
imageof che Djuinity,to declarethe Hiltorical pi&turesof the holy Scripture;
the people be taught thatitis not done becaulc'itican be ſecne with bodily
cycs,thatall ſuperſtition in inuocation of Saints, worſhip of rcelikes;and-yſc of
images betakenaway, that all diſhoneſt gaine becaboliſhed,all exceſſe auoi-
ded, images not pictured, noradorned lalciuioully,nor banquets made inche
Fealts of Saints,or viſiration.ofrcliques, thatno vnuſuall image bepurin any
Church or other place, but approoucd by the Biſhop,that no new miracles be
admitted, or new reliques recciued,andin caſe of any doubt orabuſchard to
be remooucd,or great difficultie, the Biſhop ſhall cxpe&t the opinion of the
Prouinciall Councell, ncither ſhallany thing new,/or ynuſuallinthe Church

be decreed without the conſent of his Hohincſle, ii + 1 3001 $166

The Decrees / , The Decree of the reformation. of the Rrgwlats did. containei two and
mr peu rwentic heads, with theſe particular precepts, in ſumme, 1. That allſhatl
Gore. oblerue the rule of the profeſion,eſpecially.in regard of the perfetio, which
conliſteth in, yowesand ellenciall Precepts,asalloin regard of their common

toode and apparcll. 2. Noneſhal poſſefle goods mooucable or immooucable,

Fj their owne; neicher ſhall their Supbrigurs grant itamooucables, ſo muchas

of vc, goucrnement, or (ommenda, and in the /v{c! ef' mooucables, | there

»a-2 -» ball þencither fuperfluitic, nor want... 3. The+Synode granteth to all

HI00777 Y Fa

Monaſte-

Liz.8. the (ouncellof Trent. _

Monaſteries , though Mendicant, except the Capuchins, and the minor Obſer- 1 «c6z_

wants, to poſſ:{ſc immoucable goods, with command, that hetinenbet 66 PH

religious in the Monalteries may beccſtabliſhed to containeas many as can Faroe;
be maintained by the rents or vſuall almes, neither ſhall ſuch places bee built Frwagrg

hercafter withour licence of the Biſhops. 4. No religious perſon ſhall goc perhaade

to the ſeruice of any place or perſon, without leaucof his Superiour, nor de. VV;

part from his Conuent, without his command. 5. Biſhops ſhall haue care

to reſtore, aud preſcruc the cncloſurcof the Nunnes, exhorting Princes, and

commanding Magiltrates, ypon paineof cxcommunication, toaſliſt them,

Nunnes ſhall notgocout ofthe Monaſterics, and none ſhall enter, ypon

paincof excommunication, without exception of ſex, condition, or age,

except it bee with licence. The Cloiſters of Nunnes which are without t

wallcs of the Cities and Caſtles ſhall be brought within. 6s. Thar cle-

tions bee made by ſecret (crutinie, and ritulars, ſhall not beecreated ro

this cffe&, or theyoyce of theablent ſupplied, otherwiſe the eleQion ſhall

bevoyde, 7. ln the Cloilters of Nunnes the Supcriour ſhall bee fortic

yeeres of age, and eight yeeres profeſſed or,where Fo cannot bee of thirtic

yecres of agcat the leait, and five yeeres profeſſed. No woman ſhall haue

{upcrioriticin two Nunries.and hethat is to oucrſee the EleQtion;ſhall ſtand

without the gates. 8. "The Monalterics, immediatly ynder the Apoſto-

lique Sea, ſhall be reduced intoa Congregation, and ſhal give order for their
oucrnement, and cheir ſuperiours ſhall hauethe ſame authotitie as others

| ayers haue beene tormerly reduced intoa Congregation. 9. The

Monaſteries of Nunnes,lubiect immediatly to the Apoſtolique Sea, ſhall bee

goucrned by the Bilhops, as Delegates, 10. The Nunnes ſhall confeſſe YJ

and communicate, once a monerh, at the leaſt, and, beſides the ordinatic

Confeſlor, one cxtraordinary ſhall be giuen twice or thrice a yeete, and

they ſhall not keepe the Sacrament within the Monaſtery. 11x. That in

Monafleries, which hauc cure of the ſoules of Secularmen, thoſe who doe

excrcilc it, ſhall be ſubic&t to the Biſhop as farre as concerneththeminiſte-

ric of the Sacraments, except the Monalteric of Clugni, or where the Abbats,

Generals,or Heads of the Orders doe re{ide, or whete the Abbars haueEpiſco+

pall or temporall iuriſdiction. 12. The Regalars ſhall publiſh, and obſerue

the Papall and Epiſcopall ccnſures, and interdi&ts,as alſo the feaſts which rhe

Biſhop (hall command. 13. The Biſhop ſhall bee judgeof allcontro« "

uerſies for precedence, betweene Eccleſiaſticall perſons, whether Secular

or Regular, and no appcale from him ſhall lie; and- all ſhall bee'Bbund'ts

gocto publique proceſſions , except thoſe who live in ſtri melolures.

14. The Regular, who refideth in : Cloiſtcr, and committerh att exceſſe

abroad ſhall be.gultiſhed by his Superiour, when the Biſhop ſhall appoint, ©

whoallo ſhall b:ecertified of the puniſhment, or otherwile'the delinque!

may bepuniſhed by him. 15. Profeſſion made before the age f ſixe-

recne yeeres compleatygndayedttafprobarion; ſhall be yoyde:** 16: "'N6
renunciation oroblipatioh c

of A eye er > ru
moneathkbeforerhepro and with licence of the Oxliare; and's

time ofprobationi beringended, the Superiours, ſhall admit the-Nowle 4b
the profeſſion, or ſend chem ow of the Monaſtefies ; but hot incanings
Go comm:

ww

__—  ——— —

—— + The Hiftory of L1s: 8.

' 3563 comprehend the Teſuices. . The Monaſteric (hall nor receiue anything of a
I \Nouice beforethe profellion,cxcept Foode and apparell,and, ar his departure,
Exz>ixana. al] ſhallbereſtorcd that belongeth to him. . 17, No virgin ſhalb-recciuc
Etizazery. the habit, or make profeſſion, except {hee bee examined by the biſhop, and
Prz9: her will well vnderliood, and that ſhee bath the conditions required by the
S—V> rulcof that Monaſtcric. 18. Thacall ſuch bec anathemarized, of whar
condition ſocuer,who ſhall (except in lawtull caſes) force any woman to en-

"I ter intoa Monaſterie, receiuc the habir, or make profeſſion, as alſo thoſe
iext401 Ce Who ſhall, without juſt cauſe, binder thoſe who would cnter willingly,

Nunnes who EXCePt the *Penitenth, Of conuertite. 19, Hee that ſhall pretend a nullicic in

hue be:ve  theprofellion ſhall not bec heardafter fiuc yeeres from the firſt day thereof,
and ſhall allcadgethe caule before the Superiour and Ordinarie, before hee

depoſe the habit, and none ſhall goc to a more Jarge religion, nor haue leauc

co weare the habit ſecretly. 20. The Abbats and Heads of the Orders

ſhall yific the Monaſteries, ſubic&t vnto them, though bur by Commenda,

and the Commendataries [hall be bound to execute the Ordinations ; and, in

thoſe, Priors.and Superiours, who haue ſpirituall goucrnement ſhall bee

created by the Chapters, or viſiters of the Orders. 21. Thatthe Synode

docth defireto reſtore dilcipline in all Monaſteries, but ſecth it is impolsible,
inregardofthe [tifkencckedand difhcult age, yer they will not, omit to vic

mecanes, that hereafter prouifion may beemade therein, and doe hope that

his Holineſſe, as farrcas hee ſhall ſec the times will comport, will pro-

uide that a Regular profeſſed perſon ſhall bee made gouernour of Mona-
fteriescommended, and tholc that ſhall bee vacant hereafter ſhall nor bee

conferred but ypon Regwars; and thoſe who haue Monafteries in ( ommenda,

and are Heads of Orders, if prouifion bee not made within {ixe moneths of

a Regular ſucceſlor, they ſhall make prouiſion, or quit the place, otherwiſe

the ( ommendzes (hall bee vacant, And, in the prouifion of Monaiteries, the

qualitic of cucry one ſhall bee expreſſed by name, otherwiſe the prouifion

Gal becaccounted {urreptitious. - 22. That ir ſhall bce vaderltood that

all Regulars arc lubiettorthele Decrees, notwithitanding any priuiledge,
though by foundation ;commanding Biſhops and Abbars to cxccute them
immediatly, and praying, and commandiog Princes and Magiltrates, toaf-

{alt chem,as often asthey (hall be required. "TN

The grnerall , . Thereadiog of thegenerall reformation did preſently follow; which,
on gfcrancxhortacion.to;Biſhops for cxcmplary life, modeltic in apparell and
food, and.frugality, doth forbid. 1. That they ſhall giue ro their kin-

xed, or any of-cheir family , any. part of the. reuenues of the Church, except

they bee pore ; extending the ſame to all behebecd perlons, ſecular, or regu-

har, andalſgivnco Cardinals, 2,;; Tharthe Biſhops ſhall, in the. firſt Pro-

giaciall Qounccll, receiue the Decrees of this Synod'of Trent, promiſe obe-
dience tathe Pape, nathematize the herefies condemned), and ceuery Biſhop
promored hereatrer ſhall doc the (ame, tin+hofrib bypod ; and all beneficed
mga, who arc toalliſtin the Dioceſan Syttidd) dhalldadahc ſametharcin,
Khole whahancthecateof Voiucrſities, a pony” ome ehdeca-
nourtomakethe Neactees tobe receiuedin thetn gandehe Doftourg to reach
the Catholique faith inconformitic of cham, and ſhalltake a ſolcmine- oath

h cr cin ,

o

-£01C | & V! 4

E118. ] the CaunceBof Trent. 809
hergin cyery.yeore. . And. for thoſe-whigh':arg jmmediatly.ſubie&-to:the i 63
Jais Holineſſe will baue care chaxchey be reformed in the famemanner ;> =

by bis Delegars,oras hee {hall chinke fit. 3.- ,, That, howfogucrthe ſwaorg Frome.
keepe men in obedience, tis tobevſed wich lobriegyandemcumſpeRiongha- pron
uing found by experiencethat it is;more comemned then feared, when. it is
denounced ra(hly,for a ſmall. cauſe,” Thereforeit ſhallnot bedenouncedby

any, bur by che Bilboptorthings loſtorfiollen; who ſball- gat granc it at the
petlwaſton of any [ccular authority whatſoeuer,though a Magiſtrate. And

1n iudiciall, cauſes, in whicha recall or. perſonall execution may Þee made,

they ſhall abſtaine from cenſures.; and.in ciuill,belongiog in- what manner
ſocucr,tothe Ecclclialticall Court, they, may yſe pecuniary puniſhments, or
proceed by dilttaining of gaods, orimpriſonment of the parties themſclucs,

with thcir executors,or others ; and.incale they benot ableto execute really —
or perſonally, they _ proceed to excommunication. And the ſame ſhall
beobſcrucd.incriminall caufes.  Theſecular Magiſtrate ſhall nor prohibire

the Ecclefiaſticall ro cxcommunicarte, or, reuoke .excommunication, vpon
pretence that the Decree hath norbegngobſeruce.;.; The perſon cxcommu-
nicatcd ſhall not onely nor be recetyedto participate with the faichfull, bur,

if he perſeuercin che cenſures, hemay be proceeded againſt, as ſuſpeted.-of
On 4 lItdoth giue powerto.che Biſhops, in-the Diocelan Synods,

and to the Heads of the Qrders, in.chegengrall.Chaprers, to ordaine for their
Churches thar phi net bec for the honor of Gad, and beriefite of them,

when there {hall be.anobligation toTelebyate ſo many 2s by teſtamen-
raric legacies, that they cannot beeperformet,gr ae Mg, is lo ſmall
that none can bee foung.to performe,the charges but with condition;thar
- memory be alwaies made of thole partigsdecealed who haue Jeftthe legacies, _

- 5» That, inche collacion, os any otherdiſpoſition of Benefiees, no der

tion bec mage jo the qualities, conditions, and charges required, or im

inthe erctignor foundation, or by any other conttitution; otherwiſe the
Prouiſion (hall bec accounted furreptitious, 6. When cheBilhop, notjn
vmrof vilation, doth | plea againſt rhe Canons, the Chapter ſhall -cle&t

two inthe beginning of cuery yeere, by, whole councell and conſenr;the;Bj-

[ſhop (ball proceedinall theacts, andtheyoyces. of both ſhall bee as! one;
aiidin calc they both diſſent, fromthe Biſhop; airbird (hall-bee-cleted, by
.thetn, whoſhall dererminethe comrayerlic ;andjt they. canngt, agree; the

third man (hall bee clected by the nexe Bilhop, | Bur, in caules, of .concubi-
naries,or othermore hajnous,the Biſhop may receiue information alone, -&
procecd to retention ; andfor the reſadue, ſhall ;gþferue, wha; is ordaingd.
'Ths Pibop hal banc the firlt ſeate.in ghequircyGhapter, orotþer publique
| places, andfhall chooſe his place. + The Riſhop ball prefide)in the, Chaprar,
| excoptincales belongingcabimor his which amhoriry ſhall nor bee cam-
mynicated ta hjs vicar z and choſewho arenor 'of; the! Chapter ſhall, in; <a1-
AagEccleſialticall, beallſubiec ro theBiſhop, and.where Bilhops haue age
 Ing/dictionthen ths aforelaid, the Degree (hall not.haue place.«c7. ; Heare-
(alrerno ragrefſe or acceſſe. to any Eecleſialticall bencfice ſhald bee granted,
\andeholewhich be Sranpedalecaty;ſhallavicher brovereaded Roy: Sram.
$4 is 5 YY 3 :

— OO A+,
—_—— — —C———

Lis: i

” "wy

- — he

1 The Hiftoryof

$363
Pivs* 4.

»

| CmantEtsS 9.
VarLIiP '2.

Adrandhenin che Cardinals ſhall becomprehended alſo. Copdiliters ; with
» fiitufeſuccefſjon, thall nor be made in any Eccleſtaſticall'benefiees whatſo-
xa». eter; and if, if Cathedrall Churches or Monalteries, it ſhall be gieceſlary to

mn doeit;rhe cauſe ſhall firſt be knowen by the Pope, andthedue qualities ſhall

' concerre. |'8:* All beneficed men ſhall vie asmuch hoſpitality as their re-
uctiuewill giuethem leaue : and it doth command thoſe who haue* the go-
ucrnement of Hoſpitals, ynder what ticle ſocuer, to 'exercile it, as they arc
bound by the reuenues depured hereunto ; and if perſons of that ſorr- as the
inſticurion dorh require be notfound in the place, thereuenucsthall be con-
ucrted to a pious vie as necre ascan beto thar, as ſhall ſceme good to the Bi-
ſhop with two of the Chapter. And thoſe who will not giue fatisfaQtion in
this charge of hoſpitality may be compelled (choughthey be Laikes)by cen-
ſures, and orher remedics;to performe their duety, and ſhall be bound to the
reſtitution of fruits in court of conſcience, andſuch gouernements ſhall nor
beoiucn hereafrerto any; for longertime then three yeeres. g. The title

of Parronage ſhall be ſhetyed to be authenricall by foundation, or donation, -

or by preſerications multiplied timeout of mind, or by ſome other lawfull
manner. Butii perſons and communiities,in whom vſurpationis vſually pre-
ſumed, theproofe ſhall b&niore exa&t, and rime immemoriall ſhall nor ſuf-
fice, except preſentations of hiftic yeeresat the leſt bee authentically ſhewed,
andthar they han all taken effeft. Other ſorts of Patronages ſhall be vn-
derſtood to be abtogated; except thoſe of the Emperour, Kings, poſlef-
ſours of Kirigdotmes, and fuprerfie Princes, and of 'gencrall ſtudies. The
Biſhop may refuſe to idmit thoſethar are preſented by the Patrons, if they be
not fit ; and the Patrons ſhall not mdddlewith thefruirs, neither ſhall the
right of Patronage be transferred againſt the canonicall ordinations: and
theynions of ſimple benefices tothoſe which hauerighe of patronage, if they
haue not really raken effect, ſhall wholly ccafe, and $f benefices ſhall be rc-

| 'duetd to liberty, and thoſe that haue beene made within fourtie yeeres,
' Tthoughthey hauc beene executed, ſhall be reuiewed by the Biſhops,and if a-

s mage of the Church.
thetn hereafter, ro whom they are intirely obliged,and he chat with-hi
*DYIL e \

'riy detect be found, ſhall be made void, andlikewiſe all Patronages ſhalt bec
Teuiewed, made within fourty yeeres, for augmentation of 'dowric of the
Church, | or for building it anew; -and if they ſhall not bee found'to
bee for the euidenr vrility of the bencfice, they ſhall bee reuoked, | and
that ſhall bee reſtored tothe Patrons Which is' due ynto them. 10. Thar
'&PtouincialfCouncels or Diocefatt, foure perſons at the leaſt, ſhall bec
efeQed, cndowed wirh firqualities, towhom Eeclefiaſticall cauſes ſhall bee
corned which are to'bee delegated by the Legares, Nancy, or Apoſto-
liqueSca,artdall other delegations ſhall bee thought ro bee ſurrepritious.
14:'' Moti&ythall not bee received before hand forEcclefiaſticall goods,
:n\preividice''of "the fucceſſours} "hor Ecclefiaſticall iutiſdidtions' retited
-6iſt; neither hall the Fatmours of thetn havepower ro exerciſt- chem ©and
thefarming of Eccleſiaſtical things; though cofifirmed by the Pope, 'd6nc
withinthircie yeares, for'a longtime, that is, for rwenty ninebr more yeates,
6tzhe to be judged by the Prouinciall'Synod ro have bir done with dath-
iz. Thofewhoarc boundropay wrmne rene
ah

them

* 1% by ?
pee 2 *

rig, ihe Gmmwdlf Tom. "ee
chem ought to bee excommunicated, andingero be abſolucd before reſtiruti- peg
oy And ir cxhortethall, rowhom God hath giuew wealth, ro ir ſome AN
of'ir co'Bifhops and Priefts, who haue;pdare;Chutches: - » a= wane FS 4.45. 54
fourthof che tunerals was ylually paid} yatill within theſe forey yeeres; vato jrmaanea

choEpiſeopall or Pariſh Church, and was afrerwatds/graunted ro pious 0 —

ces, irfhall bee reftorcd toithem againe».114 It doeth forbid all Clearkes ro wv: ].

keepe Concubines, or any ſulpe&ed women, at homezor abroad;which if

they. forbeare nor ro doe/afrer admonirion;, they ſhall bee depriucd of the

third partof cheir Ecclefuaſticall rents; & of all after theſecond admonirion,

and {uſpendedalſo from adminiſtrationofithe'Sactameors ; and,incaſe they

perſeuere, they ſhall be deprived of all-Benefices, and made vncapable of any

other;vnrill they thall bee diſpenſed with-: and if, after:they haue: forfaken

chem, they. ſhall cerurne; thay{hall beeexcommunicatedalſo, andthe cogni> - + +

tion of EW INT WPA h rs aan | ſummarily. Burt Cleatkes, \:...- --

not beneficed, ſhall bee puniſhed with impriſonment, ſuſpenſion, or-inhabi. / *** *

litic. Andif the Biſhops thetn(eluesthall fall into che like errourgand notia-

mend; after admonition, giuen by the Prouinciall Synod, they ſhall bee ſuſ-

ſpendcd, and, if they perſcuere, they thall bee delared to the Pope.” 15 | The ]..

ſonnes of Clearkes, not borne of -lawfull matrimony, (hall nor wat any Be- |

nefice; or miniſtery in Churches wherethcir. fathers haue, or haue had a Be-

nefice, nor haue any Penſions in Benefices,, which the fathers cither hauc

now, or hauehad : and if, at any time; the/father and-ſonne ſhall bee bene-

ficed in the ſame Church, the fonne (hall bee bound co refigne within three

moneths ; prohibiring alſo reſignations which the father ſhall make to-ano-

ther, that hee :may reſtgne his owne'to: his ſore. ' 16. -Benefices with

ctire ſhall nor bee conuerted- into ſample Beneficesy: and in- thoſe which

are conuerted already , if the perperuall-Yicar hath not a/conuenjeat reue-

nue; it (hall bee afligned to him ,7Aat the pleaſurezof the: Biſho JI.

Whereas ſome Biſhops catry themfelucs: batcely-trowards che Miniſters gf

Kings, men of preheminence, and Barons, as well:in the Churclr,as with-

oi; and not _ giuc them. place, 'with roo muchiindignity;, bur ſerye

them in perſon.,/ the Synod deteſting this, and reuiuing the Canans conger-

ning the Decorum of Epiſcopall dignitie, docth cortimaund Biſhops: ro for-

beare this, and 'regard their Decree, both in Chuxchrand widhaue;-rememt-

bring they are Paſtors; and alſo commaundeth Pririces,andothers, to'gitic

them honour, and reverence, due to fathers, ' 18. /Fhe Candi thallbeob-

ſcruedindiſtin6tly. by all, and ſhall not beediſpenced; bur for atauilc; heard

with maturity,and without colt, - 19... Thc Emperqur;Kings,arid:Princes, Ln

who ſhall grant ducll berwceene Chriſtians, ſhall beexcommunicacd;ahdds-
rided of thc dominion of theplace in which thedudlis commincd,if they
old irfromtheChurch; and:che Combarrants, atid Ludges off the — :

ſhall bee cxcommunicatedjhauc thei
infamous: andifthoydicancheduell;jehey « buriedinaty acted ...._.
:6;and choſewhogiuerthen countoikcicherive ther 2i ſaidzorpatiwade ©

them'co the ducll,and the dookers onrfhall-bee aheamonn ; 2olleD nf—_
the end, che Article of 'Ecclefaſticall-libertie ; or-seformatitin -bbcPripecy, <<. ;
which had boene fo much examined, was read; Iniit the 'Synad-domt.ad-

moniſh

© < 2

Fe: - 5” þ | : ke” 5
T>* Pg SBS
Y Fi F6 ov, $87. -—4 5
- _ A . ».
ww F5

182 The Hiftorr of - ' L3n$6
563 moniſh: ſecular Prinoks; hops

| ingalicywill grane tothe Church the reſtiru-
v7 enef herpights, reduce their Subicits co reverence the Cleacgic aud age per-
Ezapreess.qmiirtheir officers and inferiour Magiltratcs'te violate the immunitiewhirhe
Erxramuns, Chur chand/Ecclczafticall perſons, bur char; togerher with themſelnes; «he
Tres: Princes; they will beobedicnt crorheconſtitutions of the Pope, and-of Coun»
> eels, determining thar all conſticutionsot generallCouncels, & of the;Apo:
Rolike Se, in fauour of Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and libertic,ſhall beg obler-
ued by all : admoniſhing the Em , Kings, Republiques, Princes, and
all;to reverence the-rhings that'belong iro Ecclefialticall right, and nor. to
faffer them be violated by inferiour Lordstheir Magiltratcs,or Miniſters;
tharrhe Clerkes may reſide and performetheirdutie, withour impediment,
A Decres and with cdificationof the peopleciAfter this aDectee was read, never men-
che Apoſto. rioned inany Congregation ; bywwhich the Synod doth declare , that in all
like Sea ncuer . ; o_=
mencioned The Deggees of reformation,madevadetPurl, Inkrs,and Pimsinthe Councel,
betores with what words or clauſcsſocuer; it ſhall be vnderſtood, that the auhoritic
of the Apultolike Segis excepted and;preſerued. |
1.1... | Being not able ro diſpatch all;zhe day being farre ſpent, the refiduc was
of Indulzen- deferred vntill che next morninggactording to adetermination made in the
ces, tiniſthing - + 07 UAE. . .
he Comy, generall Congregation in which the Congregation was made before day,
andof de- howſocucr,newcs was comethartho Pope was better, and out of danger of

Nags death. 'The decrees of Indulgences, finiſhing the Councell, and demaun-

—_— ding confirmation wereread,andapproucd by all. After dinner,the Scflion
was held, in which the decree of ludulgence was read, . containing in ſub-
ſtance. That Cn x 1s T-hath giuenauthoritic of granting them to. the
Church, and hath vſcd the ſame from all antiquitic. And therefore the
'Synod docth teach, and command; that the vſe of chem ought to bee conti-
-nucd as profitable for Chriſtian people , and approoucd by Councels ; and
docth anarhematizethoſe that ſhallfay, they arc vnprofirablce, and that the
*Church hath not power to graunt. them. And to preſeruc the ancient cy- *
ſtome;andprouide againſt abuſcs, itdocrh commaund thar all thoſe offices
of Pardonmongers beaboliſhed,and, for the other abuſes;irdoth command
"rhe Biſhops;thar cuery onehall collec all of his owne Church, and propoſe
them' inthe Prouinciall Synod,to be referred corthe Popezmho will take or-
der therein, Concerning faſts, diftercnce of meates, and iobſcruation-of
»feaſts, irexhorterh Biſhops to obſerue the preceprs of the Roman Church;
-and for the Index, howlocuer irwasfiniſhed, iw regard the Synod bath: not
"time to iudpe of it, icdbth ordainehacit (hall becarcied rothePope,and re
ferred to his cenſurc; andthe ſameThall beedoneconceraing the ( |atechifme,
-Brewiariez 8-Miſsall. It publiſhed alfoatocherdecree,thatyby the placeb aflig-
med to. Ambal. it thall bevnderſtood that noman is preiudicadoln theend ic
prayerh che Princes to vſermeanestharthedectees of rhe Cauncell be.npt vi
vlated by yheheretickes, bur receinediand oblcrued by them; and by2ll:.in

The Decrees Which/if any:difficulticornecefſivierot declaration ſhall avife;, ahe Popeseal

pn. ngthoſewhom he fhalkindge tin from he:

þ places wherc the difficulgieis,or
=ocniemiSeth]ling generall Councels, or by:kbme other: meatcs, will-make proviſion.
:-> Afeerwatds all the detrecvof reforitiation made-inithis Councell'vnder Bawl

and'Inlivs;as'welbof faith as'of reforniation;were recited Forchelaſtthing,

SLELCLOTCS the

>
Tony
J' : 4
« , =

Lins, the Gncellof Then, (Beg
the Secretarie, going into- the mid(t theda errogate Ly wel ſr on theFathers 156,
werepleaſed thatan cnd ſhould bee made of that Synod; andin'the name of, =
ir, of the Legats, and Preſidents, a confirmation demaundcd of Pope Pius Froriaxo
the fourth, of all things decreed ynder Pasl, Julius jand his Holineſſe, And £55595

they anſwered not one by one, butall together , *F laces, Cardinall Morone, Cianzas g,
as chiefe Preſident, granted to cuery one that was preſent in the Sefſjon, or
had aſlilted in the Councell, aPlenary Indulgence, and bleſſedthe Councell, Mont wn

Anda plena-

and diſmiſſed them all; laying,that after they had giuen thanks ro Gop, GNEY ry Indulgence

might goe in peace. is given,
It was an ancient cuſtome in the Orntall Churches, to handle the mat-

ter of Counccls in a publique mecting of all, and, ypon occaſion, popular
acclamations didoften happen, and ſometimes tumultuous, which noewith-
ſtanding did concludein concord. And,intheend, the Biſhops, tranſported

with ioy, for the vaiforme determinations, did paſſe to acclamations, in

praiſe of the Emperours who had aſſembled and fauoured the Councell, in
commendation of the doctrine declared by the Councell , in prayers to Thccutome
G o Þ for his continuall divine alliſtance to che Church, for the welfare of *f acchma-
the Emperours , and for the health and prolperitic of the Biſhops ; which ted 64 Trims
were not premeditated, but as the ſpirir did excite ſome Biſhop more zealous

to breake our fitly into ſome one of theſe conceipts, 1o the common con-

courſe did cry with him. "This was imitated in Trent, yet not giuing place

ro the extemporary ſpirit of any, but medicating what ſhould bce propoſed,
andanl[wered, and —_— itout of apaper. TheCardinall of Leraine, Whercinthe

, . . Card. of Z7.
rooke ypon him to beethe chicfe, not onely to compolethe acclamations, -;c na

but ro thunder chem out alſo; which was generally conſtrued for a light- ***
neſſe and vanitig, not beſeeming ſuch a Prelate, andprince, ro;doe anoffice

which did bel$ng rather rothe Deacons of the Councell, then to lo princi-

pall an Archbiſhop and Cardinall. The Cardinall roaring, and the Fathers
an{wcring , Along life for his Holineſſe, and eternal felicitie for Paul, and

Tulius, were prayed for; likewiſeeternall memory torCharles the fift, and for

the Kings, protectors of the Councell, long life for the Emperour Ferdinand,
andforthe Kings, Princes and Repuqligues, many thanks were giuen tothe

Legars and Cardinals,and long life wiſhed vato them, life and happy returne

tothe Biſhops,and the fairhof the holy general Synodof Trent was commen-

ded as the faith of S.Peter,of che Fathers and of the Orthodoxe, An Anathema *n excom-
was denounced againſtall Hereticks ingenzrall,in one wordonely, nor {pc- of breuque
cifying cithcr ancient or moderne. The Fathers were comanded,vpon palne oncy.
of cxcommunication, to ſubſcribe the Decrees with-their owne hand. The

next day;being Sunday,was ſpent in this: and codoe.ic in;order, there was,

as it were,a congregation. , And the ſubſcriptions were of toureLegats,two Thenumter
Cardinals, three Patriarkes, fiue-and;tyventic Archbjſhops, 268. Bilkaps, fared. |
ſcuen Abbats, nineand thirty Protours of men abſent, ſeuen Generalsof
Regular orders. And -howſoguerirhad beene determined thatthe Ambaſla-

dours ſhould ſubſcribe after the-Bathers ;,yer acontrary reſolution was then
raken;for rwo reſpe&s. One was, that theFrench Ambaſſadour being not E pam
chere; if che ſubleriptions of choothers ſhauld be ſecne, and nor his,it might ſubſribe,for
bee thought a manifeltarion,; thatithe Fronchemen would nat recciue the ©

Councell.

814 The Hiſtory of Liz.8,

1.63 Councell. The other becauſe the Count of Luna had ſaid that hee would
—> not ſubſcribe abſolutely,but with reſeruation, becauic his King had not con-
 ---1xax». ſented to the ending of the Councell. And the Legats publiſhed, that ir nor
-12:rn. being the cuſtome that the Decrees ſhould bee ſubſcribed by any that hath
_,,**559. notadeliberatiue voice, it would bee athing vnuſuall, if the Ambaſſadours
— ſhould.
= Pops {n Rome when the Pope fell ſick, all fearing his life, there was much
"cone: Confuſion in the Court. For neuer hauing knowen a Pope dic in time ofa
2 ..c:ircontu- CON: UNIO | - P
"mi  Councell, they were very fearcfull what mighc happen. They hadthe cx-
ample of the Councell of (,onflance, which, in the cleCtion, ioyned other
Prelars to the Cardinals , and they were afraid thatthis,or ſome worle thin
might happen. And howſocucr the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour Yargas aftirmed,
that the Spaniſh Ambaſladour and Prelats in Trent had commiſſion, that the
el-&ion ſhould be madeby the Cardinals, yer in reſpect of their ſmall num-
ber, theſe words did nor fully aſſurc them. But the Popes recoucric gaue
them much ioy : which was increaſed by the concluſion of the Councell, as
being now fully delivered from great danger. And the Pope ordaincd a ſo-
Icmne proceſſion to giue thankes to Go Þ for this great benefite, In Con-
{iltory he ſhewed what contentment hee had in the Councell. He ſaid hee
would confirme it, adde many reformations ynto it, that hee would ſend
three Legars, into Germanie, France, and Spaine, to perſwadc the execution of
the Decrees, to grantthings honelt, and rocaſe them in matters of poſt-
tiuc Law. |
TheLegates , Morone aud Simoneta returned to Rome before Chriſtmas,
from whom the Pope was willing to hauea particular relation, in many au-
a "ipurein djences, Of all tharhappened, and rookea note of the names of the Prelates

rh confirms who hadraken paines it, che Councell, that he might create them Cardinals.

=. The Court,vnderltanding that the Pope was reſolued for the confirmation,
changed their ioy into griefe ; and al the ofticers complained of the loſſe
they ſhould receiue in their ofFces, if that reformation were executed. And
they conſidered moreouer, that thole Decrees being conceiued ingenerall
rermes , and withoutclauſes of ſubtill explication, as often ac any difficultie
did ariſe, the world now accuſtomed to barke againſt the Court, would
makean interpretation contrary to their intereſts ; which would be embra-
ced, as athing of faire ſhew, coucred with the title of Reformation, Su
109 pvp and memorials were giuen to the Pope by thoſe, who, hauing

ought the offices, aud foreſecing this loſſe , demanded reſtitution : a thin
which the Pope did not negle&;, and thought irdid deſerue agood remedie,
leſt there might be a deſolation in Rome. Whereof hauing diligently confi.
dered, hedeputed Cardinalsto conſult vpon the confirwation,and tothinke
vpon ſomeremedie for the complaints of the Court. Some Cardinals did
aduiſe ro confirme immediatly the Decrces of faith, and ro proceed' with
maturiticin theother. For ſome did deſcrue much conſideration, inregard
of their ſmall profit, and great confuſion they might bring, and others muſt
be neceſſarily diſpenſed with, inregard of their impoſlibilitic, or great difh-
cultic,arthelcaſt ; which could nor be done with any decorum, nor without
giuing much marter of diſcourſe. Beſides, it would bee neceſſary ro con
: 'muc

Jy1s.8, t the Counerethof Trent. $15

muakicon({ideration.that they might be ſq,cxccurcd , tharno manimightre-. 1 563

cod lofſe.ot preiudice, that prouilion nor deſeruing the name of reforma- >

policigngJjit.was beter ro doc it jn.che beginning , the giying cheap repura-,
ton by ggntirming, ro modcrate them after.

FzxpiNAaNd.

5%
_

, N P
—_
&

86 The Hiftory of © Li. 8;

£584 Councell,becauſc inthem the Apoſtolike authoritieis reſerued, which may
-- >> (erue himfor a buckler to denierche impartunatedemands of rhofe whom
Frepmax» hee will deeme vnworthy of fauour, and, in time, things will inſenfibly;the
ni world tot obſcruing it, returne ynto the ſame ſtare. He ſaid thiscourfe was
30 ;9 eakeenh hererofore when neceſlity compelled to yeeld to theſe humors, which
<a—_ vi ually arc bred inſubic&ts againſt the gouernours, that when others doe op-
ole the Decrees, it was fir to maintainerthem, for reputation of ſo- many of
is creatures, of his Legates, and of himſclfealſo ; much more ought he nor
ro nuflific them wholly, as would beedoneby cucry little moderation, cor-
rection, ordclay of confirmation ; which the world would judge ta bee a
mortallwound vnto them all. Beſides, the vulgar, who doe alwayes make
the worlt interpreration , will haue nothing to ſay , butthat the Court and
Pope will not endure arcformation. |
This was oppoſed by almoſt all the officers of the Courr , __—
their loſſes and preiudices, and ſhewing howall would redound tothe of-
fenceof his Holineſſe, and of the Apoſtolike Sea, and diminution of his re-
ucnues. Onely FHygo Buoncompagno, Bifhop of Beſtice,vho was Cardinall
afrerwards, a man much conucrſant m Court affaircs, faid hee could not
chooſe but wonderatthis great feare, which heſaw did ariſe withourreaſon; -
thar, by confirmation of th? Councel, more authority was not giuen itthen
othergenerall Councels had, or then was giuen to the Decree, or Decrerals,
by thegreatnumber of which , andby their plaine ſpeaking againſt the pre-
ſcent manners,many more preiudices and offences might ariſe, then could do
by theſe few decrees of Trent , much reſerucd in Pe former words ; that
nolaw doth confiſt in the tearmes, bur in the meaning, not in that which
the oulgar and Grammarians doe giue it, but which vic and authority doth
contirme ; that Lawes hauc no power but whart is giuen them by him that
goucrneth, and hath the carero execute them ; that hee,, by his expoſition,
may giue them a morcample, or a more ſtri&tſence, yeaand contrary to that
which the words docimport, and that it would bee no moreto reftrame or
modcrate the Decrees of Trent now, then to ſuffer them to bee reſtrained b
vic, or by expoſition, in times conucnient, Hee concluded that hee faw
no cauſe why there ſhould bee any difficultic about the confirmation. Bur
hce put them in minde to withſtand preſently the inconueniences which
might ariſe by the temeritic of the Do&tours , who, the more ignorantthey
arc of goucrnment and publike affaires, the mote they take ypon them to
giuc interpretation to Lawes, which doth confound authoritic ; that expe-
rience ſhewcth that Lawes doc no hurt, nor cauſe any ſuit, bur by the
divers ſenſes giuen ynto them; that by the conſticution of Nicolas the
third, vpon the ruleof Saint Francis, a matter full of ambiguities in itſelfe,
ncuer any diſorder did ariſe, becauſc hee forbade all Gloſlators, and Com-
mentarors to expound it; that if ſuch prouiſion bee madeforthe Decrecs of
Trent, and all men forbid to write ypon them , a grear part of that which is
fcarcd will bee wichſtood. Bur if his Holinefſe will forbid all interprera-
tions, cuch to the Iudges alſo , and ordaine that in all doubts they ſhall
come forexpoſttionto the Apoſtolique Sea; no man will bee able ro make
vic of the Councell in preiudice of the Court, which by vic, and by inrcr-
F pretations,

wa

p———

CT the Councell of Be 87

pretations; may bec accommodated to that which'will bee for the benefirof 1563
the Church, And as there is a Congregation which, withgrear fruit, dorh {*-—
take care of the Inquiſition , fo his Holineſle may appoint another-for this F=zxomane,
particular of cxpounding the Councell , *to whom all doubts ſhall bee re- Ecirazers,
ferred from all parts of the world. - This beibg/dbne, hee aid hee forcſaw punts
that, bythe Decrees of the Councell, the authoriticof the apoſtolike Sea, the —V—.
rights and prerogatiues of the Church of Rowe will nor onely nor be dimini-

ſhed, bur increaſed and inlarged much, in caſe they know howto make vſe

of theſe meanes. Thoſe thar heard him were mooued by theſe reaſons ; and

the Pope ſaw it was neceſlarie to come to the abſolute confirmarion , with-

out any modification ; and being perſwaded thar it would fall our as the Bi- all glodes's:
ſhop had ſaid, he was gas roric not to hearken toany thing thagcould be Mgpreriios

vow againſt it, bur, full of hope ro collect much fruit by the paines taken we 1pon
0

Rp 4 k the Deerecs of
r finifhing the Councell, hee refoluedto confirmeir, to reſerue the inter- the Councell.

pretationto himlelfe,and ro inſtitureaCongregarion,as the Bifhop had coun-
{elled : and, hauing imparted this to the Cardinals apart, heedetermined to
effect it.

Thereforc the ſixc and twentieth of Tanuary, Morone and Simoneta bauing
related in Confiſtoric the tenor of the Decree, made in the laſt Seſſion, thar
theconfirmation ſhould be defired by them , they demanded that his Ho-
lineſſe would vouchſafe to confirme all that which hath beene decreed, and
definedin that Councell , vnder *Pawl,Iulins, and his Holineſſe. The Pope,
firſt cauſing the Decree to bee read, asked the opinions of all the Cardinals.
They wereall for the confirmation vnitormely ; exceptthe Cardinals , Saint
( lem:nt,and Alexanarinus; who ſaid that too much authoritic had been giuen
ro Biſhops in that Councell, and that it was neceſſary to moderate it, and
then to makean exception of thoſe points thatdid inlarge it roo much, which
were notedalready. In the end, the Pope concluded , that it was good to
confirmeall without exception, and (o bh did in words, in the confiltoric,
confirming them,and commanding that they ſhould be recciucd; and inuio-
lably obſcrucd by all che faichfull ; and the ſame day he publiſhed a Bull,ſub-
{cribed by all the Cardinals , in which, hauing related rhe cauſes of calling
the Councell , the progreſle, the impediments and difficulties which hap-
pened from time to time,and his diligence in fauouting the libertie thereof,

raunting them free powerouer the things reſerucd ro the Apoltolike Sea,

hee thanked God that it was ended with an intireconſent. Therefore,being

defired,in thename of the Synod, for confirmation, knowing the Decrcesro
be all Catholike, and profitable for Chriſtians, hee hath confirmed them in
Confiſtory , and dothconfirme them by that writing , commanding all Pre-
lats to cauſethem to bee obſerued, and exhorting the Emperour, Kings, Re-
publiques, and Princes, to aſſiſt for the obſcruation of them alſo , rotauour
the Prelares , notto permit their people, but ratherto prohibire them by all
mcanes to imbrace opinions contrary tothedoGtrine of thar Councell; and,
to auoid confuſion, he forbad all ſorts of perſons, as well Clerkes as Laiques,
romakeany Commentarics , Glofſes, Annotations, or any interpretation
wharſocuer ypon them, orto make any kinde of Starute, though ynder pre-
tenceofgreat ſtrength , or better execution ofthe' Decrees, but that, if any
Zzz obſcure

3.
#21
2*, #1

= . | .:Tthilkwwe

Ls. 8,
£463 abſ{cure placc wanted interpretation' or decilion,, they (hould hauerecourſe
—\ tothic Apoſtolike Sea, becauſe hee. did reſcrue vnto himſelfe power to de-
For clare the difficulties or controucrfies,as allo the Synod had alreadie decreed.
—— This Conſiſtoriall Ac of confirmation, and the Bull , wereprinted,, to-
Caries 9. cerher with the decrees ; which gauc matter of ſpeech, it appearing by the
PaiLlaip. 2, j24 : . M
-_ - renorofthem, that the Decrees had not vigor , as con{tituted by the Coun-
Te Can? cell, butas confirmed by.the Pope. Whereupon it was faid, thatone had
cen heard the cauſe, and another had giuen the ſcntcence. Neither could it bee
Popescoafir- ſaid that the Pope bad ſcene the Decrces before he confirmed them, becaulc
ET” | iedid appeare , by che confiltoriall Act, that hec had onely ſcene the De-
cree for deſiring rhe confirmation. They faidalſo, that the Decrees made
vader Paul and Iulins were read in Trent, and that it was fit they ſhould bce
confirmed by thoſe that heard them, rather then by him that did not know
them. Bur others anſwered, thatthere was no neede the Pope ſhould then
ſecthem, becauſe nothing was done in Trent which was not firſt reſoſucd by
him. In many conflltories following the Pope ſpake forthe obſeruation of
the Decrees of the Councell, ſaying he would obſcrue them himlſelfe, though
hee was notbound, and gauc his wordthat heewould neuer derogate from
them bur for cuident and vrgent cauſes,” and with conſcar of the Cardinals.
He charged Moroye, and Simoneta, to bee diligent in aduertifing him, ifavy
contrary thing were propoſed, or handledin confiſtoric : which was but a
ſmall remedicagainit the tranſgreſſions, becauſe notan hundreth part of the
grants made in Rome arcdiſpatched in confiſtoric. He fcntthe Biſhops to
their reſidence, and reſolued ro make vie of the Protonoraries, and Referenda-
ries in goucrning the citie of Rome, and the Ecclefiaſticall itare. But how-
ſocucr hewas freed from great trouble, by the concluſion of the Councell,
yetthere were ſome remainders of it in all kingdomes, which brought new

difficulties ypon him. '

andaeex- =Aquice came out of Spaine that the King was offended with the cnding of

cutcd 1n

5amcby the Councell , anddeterminedro call the Biſhops and agentsfor the Clergic

me kinz# = of Spaine before him, to ſer downe in what manner it might bee exccured.

authority

ondy. 08 Andthcaduicewas notfalſe. For nor only all that was done in Spaine , for
receiuingandexccuting the Decrees of the Councell thar yeere, partly in the
Spring, and partly in the Autumne, was by ordcr and reſolution taken in the
Kings Councell , but the King l[enralſo his Preſidents to the Synods, which
were held , cauſing to bee propoſcd that which pleaſed him, and was fit for
his ſeruice ; to the great diſtalt ofthe Pope, who was angry the King ſhould

Which ma- : , , |
| kekche Pepe rake fo much vpon him in matters Eccleftaſticall. Burt hee made no de-
angry. monſtration heereof ro his Miniſters , purpoſing ro make vle. of it in
- another opporrunitie, deſigned by himſclfe; which ſhall bee related in dye
lace.

The Preſident de Ferrieres , hauing, while hee remained in Venice , madc
obſcruationsvpon the Decrees of the two laſt Seſſions held after his depar-

TheCard.of ture from Trent, and ſentthem to the Court, the Cardinall of Loraine, at his
© France Teturne into France, had many aſſaults, and reprehenſions , for conſenting
«luscune. rg things preiudiciall tothe Kingdome. They aid, that, by the words of the
firſt Article of rcformarion in the laſt Sceflon, where it is ſaid, that the

Pope

XUM

L1s. 8. the ConncellofT; TOY $19 a

Popchath charge of the vniuerſall Church., in Latin, Sollicitndinem Ectlef 1 563
Vniuerſs, hee had yeelded thepoint which himſclfe and all the French Bi: Pg
ſhops had {o long contended for,” and obtained , thar preiudice might not Furman».
bee done to the apinion of France, ofthe fuperioritie of the Councell '5-5,,5335
bouerthe Pope ; that hee might haucremedied rhis with onelittle word , by ©**==5. 9:
making them ſay, as'S. Paul had done, care of all the ( burches,becatiſe no man —v—.
would haue denied that kind of ſpecch which $S.- Pawdid vſe ; that prein-

dice was likewiſe done to the ſame opinionof the upctioritie of the Coun-

cell in rheone and twentieth Article of the Jaſt ſeſſion, fauing* in all the

Decrees , the authoritic of the Apoſtolique Sea: and in the laſt Decree fot
demanding the Popes confirmation. It was oppoſed alfo, that the King ,and

French Church , hauing conteſted that theCouncell might bee declared to

bee new, and not the old continued, thecontinuation was declared, that

it was one Councecll with that of Paul and Tulins , inthe ſaid one and rwen-

ticth Article, and in the Decree for reading the things conſtituted ynder

choſe Popes; by which all was baſely yeelded which had beenetwo yeeres
maintained by the King. They fayd moreouer, thar the approbarion of

the things done vader {ulius was diſhonourable, and preiudiciall to the pro-
tcltation then made by King Henry the ſecond. Bur they reprehended a-

boue all, that honourable mention having beene alwayes made ynder Paul

and Ialius , of King Francisthe firſt, and King Henry the ſecond, rogerher

with Charles the fifth, the Cardinall had not cauſed a memories ro bee made*

of them in the acclamations, when it was made of Charles , nor the preſent

King to bee named , when the Jiuing Emperour was. The Cardinall cx-'

cuſed other things, ſaying , that, with fixe Prelares, (for hee had no more

in his company } hee was nor able to reſiſt the conſent of more then two
hundred. Bur this lalt oppoſition hee knewv nor how to cxcuſe , though

hee ſayd it wasto preſerue the peace of the two Kingdomes. For it was

xeplicd that he might haue ſuffered others to ma ketheintonation;and not to -

hauc been the authour himſelfe of thar preiudice. "Ando ir iFfeenc, that

Vaine MEN Otten Tmes, thinking tO gatne repuratioiyby retail: : doc loſe it_

in grofſe. | WE:
Bncrhe Counlcllers of the Parliamentfound many other things to Op- Thecenſcre

- Ie : ; . C F of the Parlia-
poſe againſt the Articles-of Reformarion, publiſhed in thoſe rwo Seffions, menipt 2:47
where the Eccleſiaſticall authority they faid was inlarged beyond its hounds; Fand***
with the wrong and diminution of the temporall, by giuing power to Bik
ſhops to proceedero pecuniary mulcts, ard impriſonment ; againttrhe Lai-
tic; whereas no authority was giuen by Cu r1sT' tohicMinitters, bur
mcere and pure Spirituall; that when the Clerpie'vwas made a jember
and part of the policie, rhe Princes did, by fauour , allowrhc Biſhops co pu-
niſh inferiour Clergic-men with temporal! punifhmthrs, that dilcipling
mighr bee obſcrucd amongſtrhem, bur to vc ſuch kinde of puniſhments
againſt theLaiques,they had neitherfrom the Law of God nor of tan, bur,
by vſurparion onely ;' that , inthe marter of Ducll, they prercnd to proccede
againſt rhe Emperour , Kings" and other Senereignes, who grattit it 1n
rheir Kingdomes , even by excommunication, whereas their opinion was

that to permit Dull, in ſome caſes, was not amiffe, a5 rhe permitting of

L277 2 | forni-

-_

820 The Hiftorie of L188,
"1563 fornication, and other offences , howbcitthey arc {innes, was not ill, inre-
17,5 gard of publiquevrilitie, and to auoyd greater inconueniences. They aid,
Fre>maxy that this power becing naturall, and giucn to the Princes by God, could nor
Emamra bectaken away, or reſtrained by any power of man. They thought it allo
Cnarirs 5 jnrolcrable , to excommunicate Kings and Princes, holding ir for a ſure ma-
\— ximcin France, that the King cannot bee excommunicated , nor his officers,
for execution of their offices. They added, that to depriue Princes of their
States , Lords of their Fees, and to confiſcate the goods of private men, were
all vſurpations of the remporall authoritic , becauſe that which was giuen
by CHR15ST tothe Church , docth not extend it ſcIfe ro things of this
nature. o

Concerning Patronages, they ſaid great wrong was done to the Seculars,
indifabling their proofes , and that the whole Article was grounded ypona
falſe maxime, that all benefices are free, if the Patronage bee not prooucd.
For Churches hauc no temporall goods bur granted by the ſeculars, whocan
not bee preſumed togrant themlo, as that they may bee managedand diſli-

' patcd at the plcaſure of the Ecclefiaſtiques 3'by which meanes it ought ro
ws preſuppoled , that cucry benefice had a Patrone, from the beginning of
it, exceptan abſolute donation, with a totall ceſſ1on of rhe patronage, can
be ſhewed. Andas the Common-wealth or Prince doth ſucceed himthat
hath no heire, ſo all bencfices, the Patronage of which docth nor belong to

' any, oughtto bee vnder the publique patronage. Some mocked that forme
of ſpeech, that benetices which had Patrons were in {eruitude and the others
free, asif ir were not plaine ſeruitude to bee vnder the diſpoſition of the
Court of Rome., which doth manage them contrary to the inſtitution, and
foundation, whereas the ſeculars doe preſerue them. Beſides the cenſure
of ſome decrees for thiscaule, they addeJ, that others were againſt the cu-
ſtomes and immunities of the French Church ; as the reſcruation of great
criminall cauſes againſt Biſhops to the cognition of the Pope alone, raking
away the power of Prouinciall and Nationall Councels, which haucalwaies
adiudgedthem in all caſcs , andburthening the Biſhops, by forcing them to
litigate out of the Kingdome, contrary not onely to thecultome of France,
but ro the Canons of ancient Councels alto, which haue determined thar
ſuch cauſes ſhould bee iudged, and ended in their proper Countries. They
ſaideit was againlt juſtice, and the vic of France. that benefices ſhould bee
clogged with Tenfions and Reſeruations of Fruits , as was obliquely determi-
ned. Likewiſe , that it was not tolerable , that cauſes of the firlt inſtance
ſhould be taken out of the Kingdome by the Pope, becaule ir raketh away

a very ancient vſe , confirmed by many conſtitutions of Kings. Neither

_ could it bee iuſtifiedby the exception , of vrgent or reaſonable cauſe, experi-
enccof all times hauing ſhewed, that all cauſes may bee taken out of the
Kingdome by this pretence, For hee that would diſpute whether the cauſe
were vrgent or reaſonable , doeth enter imto adouble charge and difficulty,
becauſe not onely the principall cauſe, but that Article alſo muſt bediſcufled
in Rome. Thcy did, by no meanes, approoucthat the poſſeſſing of immoue-
ables ſhould beegranted to begging Friars; and ſayd, thar they hauing been
recceiucd into Fraxce with that inſticution, it was iuſt that they ſhould bee
maintai-

XUM

So EET Lad-.. _” t WS oo : 4 — o—_— , $
37 OE br Ga ' p ; | | K-
IL a * -
of v7; Ga 41 i _

” = . E
* :

[zrs, 9. rhe Councellof rene."

-— ———— —— _——— _ =

p
—_tis ES

821

maintained inithe-fame {tate ; that this was a'perpernail Arrifice of the 1564
Coutt of 'Rome,corakegoodsout ofthe hands of feculars,andteraw them CA
into rhe Clergte,and afterwards co. Rome-; tharthe MunkesdrÞfirlt gaine Fand iaþ!
ctedit, by prerence of che vow of pauerty., as if cheyajtned at to remporall £m,
thing, bur didall in charuy, forthe good the people; afectwirds, bauitiy C14nrs
gained repurarion, the Court doctydaipence with theta for rhiirryow by \—
which meanesthe Monatterjesbeing made rich, are gitich iri'( omiends; and
tinally all commerh rottie Court: + 'T o'this' (they added ary exhortation-in
theawclfth article, maderoall the fairhfult, to ginelargely*to Biſhops, and
Prickis;; whicthad becne good, in-cale they did-lerae the'people av-they
oughr, and were in need. For fo Paul doth exhorrt,thar hee thats inftriifted
in marcersof taich, ſhould giue ſome"part of his g66ds to Him'that doth #n-
ftru&him. But when heethat/bcaredh the natne- 6f'2 Paſzuy” /*doilvintend
rather any other thing then co inltruct the people, theexhortation is nor fie; od
and the rather, becauſcEcclefiaſticall goods formerly were for' maintatning 27
the poore, and redeeming tlaues; for which caule/torthe' tmmoncables' on-
ly y but cuen thevery ornaments of the Church , and holy veſſels were fold!
Bur-inthele la{t cimes it is prohibited rodoe it}, withour the Pope ; which
hath enriched ihe Clergie exceeding much. In the Moſaicall law , God ghue
the renth to the Leuites who were the thirteenth partof the people, prohibi-
ting. that any more {houldbe giuen vnto them; but the Clergie now, which
is not the fftierh part, hach gorren already, not a tenth onely\, bura fourtY
art, and dotht1]| proceed and gaine;, vling alls '\many Arrifices therein.
"They ſaid rhar Mofes , bauing 1u1ted rhe people to offer for ths fabrique of
the Tabernacl:, when as much was offeredas did fuffice, did forbid them, in
the nameof God, rooffterany. more; bur here noend will bee found, ymill
they hauc yocten all if men; will continue in the lerhargie. If ſome Prieſts,
and rel1gi0us pzrions bee poore, it is becaule others arc exceſſively rich ; and
an cquall divifon would make them all rich abundantly. But ro omic
thcie to cuidenr conſiderations, if they did exhort the people, to aſſiſt the
oorc Biihops and Prietts in their neceflities, it would beerolerible; butrs
lay they (hould bee atliſtedro maintaine their dignitie , which is their pride
and luxurie, doth {1gnificnorhing bur that they are quite withour ſhame:
It is true that, 1nexchange,'another Decree was made in the eighteenth Ar-
ticle, infauour of the people, that diſpenfations ſhould be ginen gratis; which
becing commanded byCHR 15s T, andnot obſcrued;ithere was no hopethat
this Decree would doe atiy moregood.
Thelc things being obicCtcd to the Cardinal! of Loraine, that hee had anu-
thorized them,againit the exprefſe commandement oftheKing,in his letters
of the tweatie eighth of Auguſt before mentioned hee defended himfclfe _
in one word onely, that inthe Congregation of the renth-of Nouchber ;the bx ry
Decrecs being read, tobee publiſhed in the Scſſow; the next day;the righrs *f 12s:
andaurhority of the French King , and ptiviledge&s of rhe Gallican Chutch
werereſerued. Whereunto Monſiexre le Feure replied, rhat himfclfe” and
his colleague hauing vſcd all diligence to have acopicot tharDeerce , they
could neucr obraincit,and that, in humane affaires , not ro appeate was 5
muchas nor robee. 0 Belides , this did not lerueto ettſe the things publi-,
Z2% 13 ſhed

822 The Hiſtorie of | Lis.8.

— —

"1563 ſhed in rhelalt Seſſhon. But that which was aide concerning the Synode
> 1n the Councelsof the King and Parlament , was nothing to that which the

Pivs 4

FERDINAND. Biſhops and Divines, and their {eruamts allo, according to the French liber-
Ezavzrn. TIC, did rclate to cucry one, vpon all occaſions, making iclts at the diſcords,

Panrrs 9: and contentions berweens the Fathers, ar the practiſes and intereſts with

\—— which the matters of reformation were handled. And thoſe who were
Thecenfure moſt familiar with the Cardinall of-Loraine., ſpake molt:of all. And

made by the ; :
Fr ncb BB, of jc paſſed in France , in manner of a Prowerbe , that the moderne Coun-

the Counccll,

afterrhcir rej CCL] had more authoritie then chat of: the Apoltles, becauſe their owne
Frewce, Plcaſurconely was alufficicot ground for the Decrees , withour admitting

France.

A Prouerbe the holy Gholt.

made 1n R

Francecon- Bur, in Germany, the Decrees of reformation were not thought conſide-

cerning thc ' : |

Councell, Table, neither by the Protcitants, nor by the Catholiques. The Proteſtants

Thecencce Gid examinethe matter of faith onely. They faid , rhat ro haueſpokenone

o:the Coun- Word incidently in handling the Maſſe, thatit doth aſlilt the dead , which

—_ may recciuediuers ſences, and, 1h the decree of Purgarerie, toalleadgeir
as adctinition'ot the Article, was a thivg not to be vicdin Councels, elpeci-
ally in this, where the matters were minced, and an Article of faith made of
cucry queltion, which could be mooued in any imatter. Andro commend
Biſhops to teach the {ound deCtrine of Purgarorie, withour declaring what ir
is, did thew thar the Fathers had great haſt tro depart from Trent» Bur in the
martter of Saints the halt was greater, condemnine, in one breath, and in one
periodeleuen Articles, not declaring what condemnation it was, or whether

they were condemned oj herelie, or for any other cauſe, and, after along dil-

co.rlc of Images, anathematifing choſe that ſpcake againlt the Decrces,

without letting them know which it doth comprehend vnder the Anathema,
whether the immediatly precedent concerriing Images, or all theothers a-
bouc wricren. But of Tudwlgences they ſpake more then all the reſt; that theſe
gaue occaſion of the preſcntd:uifion amorglt Chriſtians ; that the Councell
was principally aſſembled for theſe; that , in thatmatter , there is no part
which is not controuerſed , and vncertaine, cucn amongſt the Schoolemen
themicJues ; and yetthe Synod hath paſſed them ouer, without cleering any
doubr, or deciding any controucrſie, And concerning the remedy of abu-
ſes, they ſpake in ſuch ambiguous tcrmes, that it could not bee vnderſtood
what they did approueor difapproue; ſaying, they did defire a moderation,
according to the old cultome approucd inthe Church. For it is certaine,
and cannot bee concealed, that, in no. Chriſtian Nation - of the Eaſterne
Church, cithcrin ancient or moderne times , there neucr was any vſe of In-
 dulgences, of any kind whatſocucr. And inthe welt, if by ancient cuttome,
they meane that which was obſerucd beforc Yrbanthe ſecond, inthe yeere
1995- Noproofe can b:c brought of the vic of Indulgences. If from that
timeyvonill the yeare 1300. It willappeare, thatthevicof them hath beene
very ſparing , and onely to free men from puniſhments impoſed by the (on-
feſſor. Afterwards, trom the Councel| of Yiennathe abuſes began, which did
increaſe very much, vnrillche time of Leo the tenth, ſo tharthe Councel de-
{ring the reſticution of the old cuſtome, approucd in the Church, it was

neceſlarytodeclarcin what Chutch,and in what time. But thoſe words,thar
| the

XUM

XUM

the Councell of Trent. $23 |
rhe Ecleſtaſticall dilcipline is weakened by ro0 much facilicic 10 graunting 1563 |
Indulgences ,area plaineconfethon , that they belong not to the conſcience, "Sox wag
nurdoe free men fromavy ching in che hghtof God, but couch the external] Frupmune. |

- onely, thatis,the Eccleſialticall dilcipline. ' For the difference of meates aud eriranzra,

CHARLES. g.

falts, chey, ſaid, thartocommand them was good}, bur that was notdecided pet”
of which the world;complained , tharis-,that they did binde the conſcience. —v—
Ti-refore the Princes of: Germany held none clteeme of chisCouncell. One-! __
ly ſome few miniſters af rhe Auguſta confetlion publiſhed aproceltation,

of which burlictle account was made. The Catholikes did not chinke of the

do@rinc of Purgatorie, andof Indulgences, deſiring oncly to obtaine the
Communion of the Cup, miariage of, Prieſts,and relaxation 1n the multitude |

of precepts De inre pofitiuo,concerning falts,fealts,and ſuch other things.

'For whole ſatisfaction the Emperour, and:Diake of Banaria made! in+'The tmpe- .
ſtance to the Pope. The Emperour wroteletters to him , dated the fourc- cpa. ©
rcenth of February ; ſaying, that, during the Councell, hee had laboured go $o=checom
obrainethe gtant of the Cup, not for any private interelt , or ſcruple of con- the Cup.
{ſcience which hee had, but becaufe hee did belecue, and docth (till , chat che
graunt is neceſſary,to bring backe tothe Church thoſe that wander; that ke
did then tolerate the impediments interpoſed , rotreatthereof withthe prin-
cipall Prelates , and Princes of the Empire, with whom hauing conferred
whether it were expedient to renew the ſame requelt , they thought fit hee
ſhould moue his Holincfle therein. Therefore, calling ro mind whar the
Cardinals Morone and Loraine had cauled to bee rold hint, which was confir-
medalfo by che Biſhop of Liefinahis Nuncio, hee would no longer deferre to
demand the grace of him, withoutrepeating any more the weighty caules
that did conitraine him,defiring him to aflilt the Germane Nation,ro which
all wiſe Catholikes doe thinkethat the graunt will bee very bencticiall; ad-
ding, thar to preſcrue the remainder of Religion in Germanie , and cxtirpate
hereſics, ir will be of great moment rograunt, that Prieſts, who are ſeparated
becauſethey are married , may bee reconciled , andretaine their wiues , and
that hereafter where there is nor a ſufficient number of Prieſts, married men
of good lifeand fame may beadmitted ro the Prieſthood. Forthis he pray-
ed him in his owne name, and in the namcof the Duke of © Bavaria, his ſonne

in law,aſſuring him that he ſhould doe a thing, worthy of his picty,and moſt

F

acceptable. | | | * RY |
Theletrers of the Duke of Bauaria did containe; that, hauing ſent often Aniſ@dody

ro his Holineſle, to ſhew che miſerable Stare of Germanic in matters of Reli- 3*««r1..
gion, he did hope heeſhould not long deſire the medicine; which ſecing ir
was not applicd vnulkehen, he,togerher with the Emperour,and Ecclefialti-
call Elefors, did pray him to grant power to the Arch-biſhop of Salz5wg to
giuc lcaucto Catholike Prielts roadminiſter the Cup tothoſe who hauc con-
teſſed,and arc penitent,and do belecue theother Articles of Religion : which

rant would giue fatisfation to his Subic&s, who remainein his Stare, & ro
thoſcalſo who goe forth of his Dominions to ſeeke thoſe who will miniſter
itvnrothem ; that himſelfe will alwayes be content with one kinde, nor mn
force any to'vie the Cup, who, as himſelfe , will bee content with thebrea i

oncly ; that for thele hee demandetrh nothing, but that it ſeemerh rohim not
inconuc-

_-
"

The Hiftory of |

1563 © inconvenient for theFicarof CH RI s T to have pitic ypon the orhers al(o.
>> Likewiſe he prayed his Holimefle that hee would grant, torfome timear the

Pivs 4. - = - dl : , j
Ezzprxaxy. Icaft; that married Pricfts may bee reconciled io the Church, keeping their

Eu i wines,and marriedmen ordained alſo, 9:49 91 . visi

5p 2, '' Fo theſe Lerters was added'a Remonltrance;, or conſideration ,compo-

+ >= ſedby the Diuincs of Germabiie in'which it was'faid: That ie was plaine,
that the Scripture of the New and Old Teſtament docth-permit Pricfts to

{trance con-

ccmingrhe aye wives, becaule the Apoltles, lore few excepred , were married ; neither

ſamc Grant.

—-

OC —— _— — —

them. That in the Pritnitiue Church, as well Qriemalt, as Qccidenrall; the
mariages of Prieſts were free, vntill the time of (aliflus the Pope, thar:the
ciuill Lawes did not condemne' the marriage of'Clerkes;;, thar'it is certaine,
' that ſinglelife is berrer m theCletge, and moreto bedefired; burtharyinire-

ipect of the fracilitic of farure ,anddifhculty robee continent,;there are-bur.

fevy who doe not teele the prickes of the fleſh; 1 Therefore Buſebins relaterh,
that Dionyſius did admonith Quintus the Bilhop',,that hee ſhould confider 'of
the weakeneſle of the maior parr,avd nor lay the burthen of fingle life-vpon
thebrethren. And *Paphnntins,in the Counceliot Nice, laying; jthar the ve
of ones owne wite was chaititie, per{waded the Counceltnot wo impolec the
law of {ingle life. Andche Synod of Conſtantinople did not forbid the vie of
wines, bur in the :ime when chey were to offer ſacrifice. Thar if cuer there
were cauſeto permit matrimony voro Clerkes ,it was in thar age. That a-
mongit fifric CatholikePriells, hardly one can bec found that 1s not a noto-
-rious fornicator. Thyznorche Prielts onely aclire matrimonie, but the Se-
culars alſo,that they "may! not feeſuch bealt]y behauiour, and the Patrons of
Churches will nor giue the benefices bur to married men. T hat there is
orcat want of Miniſters onely foft-rhe prohibiflton of Matrimonie, Tharthe
Church hath formerly remitted the ſeueritic of the Canons for this cauſe a-
lone. Thar the Pope did coni1me a Bithop in Saragoſa, who had a wifeand
children, and a Deacon , who had been twice marricd , and commuted the
Sacrament of Confirwation ro ſimple Prieſts,in defe of a Biſhop. There-
fore many Catholiques did then,and doe now thinke berter to diſpence with
theiaw of continencie, then, by retaining ir, to open a gateto vnelcane fſin-
gle life , leauing warriagefreefor all ; and therather, becauſe Cardinal *Pa-
normitan docth hold , that ir would bee good for the faluation of {oules ro
grant Matrimonic; and thar there are examples of the old Church , and in
the Anciran Councell, of Adam,and Eupſychins (eſarienſis, Prieſts. Thar ir is
cerraine, that the Pope may diſpznce with Secular Prieſts; which ſome alſo
extend ynro Regulars, "That it feemetha greatablurditicnor roadmirmar-
ricd Clerkes, and to tolerate fornicators and ro'remooue both would bce as
much as ro remaine without Minilters,and thar if they ought to'be bound to
the vow of chaſtitie, none ſhould be ordained bur old men. © T hart it is not a
good reafon to retaine ſingle life with the teeth, to preſerue' Eccleſiaſtical!
goods,it.not being 1uſt,in reſpe& ofremporall things to make ſhipwracke of
ſoules. Beſides, prouifion might bee made herein, by ſome other meanes;
which being done,concubinate would be baniſhed our of the Church , and

the ſcandall which offkendeth many taken away.
The

L1s8.-

is ir foundthat C 1 K1'5T,after their yocation,gdidleparate their wiucs from.

XUM

tt. A. —__—

L's. 8. he Councell of Trent. 815

———

ates | —— MY ——— —

EE I I CEE

The Pope, conlidering thele remonſtrances, was of opinion to call ro 1563.
Rome pious andlcarned men , of all Nations, to handle this point with ma- 5,
curity , aad ſpakcof ic tothe Ambaſſadours reſiding with him. But Cardi- F=xomano
nall Swwoxea did diflwade, ſaying , it would bee a kinde of Councell , and E:murs,
that if men ſhould come our of France, Spaine, Germanie, and cl[ewherc, they nyapeg
would bring intclligences and inſtructions of Princes, and would be gouer- vo
' ned and ſpeake according to their intercfts, and that, when his Holincſſe
would be quit of them , he could not doe ir at his pleaſure; that, if he did nor
follow cheir opinion,it would diftaltethe Princes; thathe ſhould remember
what troublesthe Councel pur him to,and not fall into the likedangets. The
Pope thought the counſell was fincere,and profitable, andthercfore, think-
ing no morcof itraagers, he deputed ninetecne Cardinals, giuing them order

cxamine diligently the writing that came our of Germany. : :

Thetwelfrh of March the Pope made a promotion of nineteene Cardi- 5; Pomorn®
nals, for reward of the greatſeruice they did himin Councell, in which hee ws
relolued not to comprehend any of thoſe who held the Reſidence, and In-
ſtirution of Biſhops, ro bee de iure dinino, howſocuer their qualities might o-
cherwile deſerue the degree; and did not forbeare to diſcouerſo much to all
ſorts of perſons, vpon cuery occaſton. Hecreared Marcus Antonius Colonna,
Archbiſhop of Taranto. Aluife Piſano, Biſhop of Padua. Marcus Antonius Bobo,

Biſhop of 4oſia. Hugo Buon ( ompagns, Biſhop of *Beſtice. Alexander Sforza,
Biſhop of Parma. - Smon Paſqua,Biſhop of Serzana. CarloViſconte,Biſhop of
Vintimiglia. Franciſcus Abondiuzs, Biſhop of "Bobio. Guido Ferrier , Biſhop of
Dercelli. Tohannes Franciſcus ( ommendone, Biſhop of Zante, Gabriel Paleorto,
Auditor of the Rota-: all which had Jabourcd faithfully in Councell forthe
ſcruiceof his Holincfſe. To theſe hee added Zacharias Delphinus , Bi-
{hop of Lieſma, who, becing reſident with the Emperour,
rooke no lefle paines for concluding the Councell

then the others had done in Trent,
* #* |

w -
I þ

v £ *% * t
»” a
a * JV , =
*
CR : S
F C25 <
W" £4 4 » þ 4 Bs
*% ſ T4 T5
Pe w * [ .
LY 3
) = WV
- - = - j =
\\ 05> ; Ft p ,
% 6 -
<p mmm rY. * wx
o , Q w_ — — 0 L
—_—T ©. W”, — — — —
_—
F

TO THE READER.

Courtcous Reader,

| Ow that thou haſt peruſed ths Hiſtory,
I [| intreat thee. to reade oner theſe ſmall
G parcels following. The firſt is an . Epi.
{ ſile of S. Gregone the great , who Ys
Biſhop of Rome about ſe, bundred
yeeres after C'n R1s T,and was as lar -
SI ned, and as conſctentious,as any that pre-
£ EI") cededinthat Seas; or that followed af
ter. ' T hou can{b'not but percriue , that howſaener hee aſcribetÞ ty
S Peter 41 much preheminence as any other ancient writer hath
done, if not more, yet hee doth renounce in nioft ample textmes ,"oy
rather abominate that ſwelling Antichriftian power Which was thth
chalenged by Tohn the Patriareh'sf Conſtantinople, bu: bil
fince hath been prafliſed by the Biſhops of R otne, and»? Wore,
nor more preindicrally tothe Chayh C arboliavve\, TEVR ths pre-
tended Councell of Trent Vee ly : :
eAnd that thou mayſt not wonder how theſe Biſhops could ſore
ſo high as to bee at lail abour Kings and Emperours , to whom $.
Gregorie and hu predeceſfours profeſſed and performed all ducti-
fall obedience and ſeruice, 1 haue_ tendred vnto thee in the next
place threeJenerall paſſages out of the Hiſtoric of Francis Guic-
ciardine, a famots Florentine , who knew their prafliſes as well
as any, and hath dared to relate them plainly. T he Papalins haue
been ſo wiſe_ in thrir wicked generation , azin all late Fditions, to
cauſe them to bee left out - thereby the better to conceale their vn-

inſt v/urpations, againſt both Ecclefiatiques and Laiques,
Non

Ss

\ |

a . a 2 *

MM OF 049 — W_ FP" — —_— _ -_

Bader, ©

* Invita Pau-
L 3.

N ow, left any might vncontrolably ſay, that howſoeuer they
might bee faulty at other times , yet thoſe were worthy who gouer -
ned theSeaof Rome when thu (ouncell was aſſembled , to cleere
the trueth concerning theſe , looke ouer the paſIages following, taken
out of ſome Fpifiles written by men of great efteeme, who refided
in the Councell; and gaue account to their Supertours of all that
paſſed, or by their Superiours to them backe againe. Hy theſe it
will appeare that the ſpirit of eAntichrift, and not the holy Ghoſt,
aid gouerneinit. They ſhew the prathiſes of Rome to be ſo groſſe,
an4 ſo abhominable,that thou mazyeſt eaſily beleeue, that* Papirius
Maſlonius, a Popiſh writer , had inſt cauſe to ſay, ſpeaking of the
Popes who liuedin the time of thu Councell; In pontificibus ne-
mo hodic ſancticatem requirit ; optimi putantur fi vel leuiter
maliſint, vel minus bom quam czteri mortales efle ſolent.
Englſhed thus: No man expetts any ſanditie in Popes now 4
dayes; they are thought to be excellent Popes , if they haue neucr ſo
little honeſtie,or be not /o wicked az other men wſe to be.

Laft of all, thou mayeſt reade_ an Epiſtle written by that fa-
mous Prelate , Biſhop Iewell, as an anſwere to a friend of his , who
lined neere the place,and in the time of thu vnlawfull aſſembly , or
conuenticle at Trent. In it thou mageft finde reaſon enough , why
the Church of England did neither ſend Prelates toit , nor re-
ceine afterwards the Decrees and Conſſlitutions of it. «A's like-
Wiſe the Church of France refuſed to doe, though their Biſhops

were preſent wit. When thou haſt read theſe things , confi-
der well of them. , and the Lord pine thee, a
true vnderflanding in all things.

GREGORIE

(TS eb %Y” 04 $.

"GREG 0&1 E to the Emperour M 4 V RICIVS, concerning
| o u v Biſhop of Conſtantinople , wha hath aſſumed the
name of Uniucrſall Biſhop. Chap.76: |

SN |

———mVr ——_— Lord, whom God hath placed ouer vs, Ep.32.

| amongſt other weighty cares belonging to the Empire,
| doth labour (by the iult rule of holy writ ) ro keepe the
 Clergie in peace and charitic. Hee truely and piouſly
conf1derceth thatno man can well gouernc matters ter-
| rene, cxcept he can manage well things Diuinealſo,and
that the Common-wealths peace and quict depends vp-
on the tranquillicy of the Church Vniuerſall. For (molt gracious Souc-
rcigne ) whar humane power or ſtrength would preſumeto lift vp irreligi-
ous hands again(t your moſt Chriſtian Maicſtic, if the Clergic,being at vni-
tic among(tchemſclucs, would ſeriouſly pray vato our Sauiour CyR1sTto
preſcrue you , who haue ſo well deſerucd of ys! or what Nation ſo barba-
rous as would exerciſc ſuch cruelty againſt the faithfull, except the liues of
vs, who are called Pricſts, but indcede are not , were moſt depraued and
wicked. Butwhilelt we Icaue thoſe, things which belong nor vnto vs, and
imbracc thoſe things for which wee are not fitte , wee raiſe the ©Barbari-
ans vp againſt vs , and our offences doe ſharpen the {wordes of our ene-
mics, by which meanes the Communewealth is weakened. For what
can wee ſay for our (clues , if the people of God,ouer whom wee are,though
ynworthily, placed, bee oppreſſed by rhe multitude ot our offences ? if our
examples deltroy that which our preaching builds, and our works giue,as it |
wete, the |yc to our dofrine? Our bones are wornewith faſting, but our
mindesare puftyp: Our bodies arc coucred with poore clothing, butinour
hearts wee areas brauc as may be: Welic groucling in theaſhes, buraymear
matters excceding high : Weearetcachers of humilitic,bur parternes of pride,
hiding the teeth of wolues vndera ſheepes countenance. "The end of all is
to make aſhew to men , though God knoweth the tructh. Therefore our
moſt pious Souereigne hath been molt prudently carcfull ro fer the Church
at ynitie , that hee might the better compole the tumults of warre , and to
ioyne their hearts rogether. This verily is my deſire, and doc yecld, for my
part, duc obcdienceto your ſoucrcigne commands. Howlocuer,in regard
it is not my cauſc, bur Gods; and farthat not I onely, but the whole Church
is troubled; becauſe religious Lawes, venerable Synods,and the very precepts
ofourLord [Esys CHR15T arcdiſobcyed by the inucntion of a proud
andpompous ſpecch , my defire is,that ourmoſt Religious Sonereigne would
Aaaa ' lance

%

COS” VS” OE no -

"Paſſages ftollen out _

W,
I

| the cauſeof God Almighty, and of the( burch Pnizerſall? Who is heewho
reſumeth to vlurpe this new name againſt both the law of the Goſpel and of
the Canons? Iwouldto Godthere might bee one called Pniuerſal, without
wronging of others. We know that many Prieſts ofthe Church of Conſtantino-
ple haue been not onely hereriques,butcuen the chiefe leaders of them, Our
of this {choole proceeded Neſtorins , who, thinking it tiot to be poſſtblethar
God ſhould be made man, did belecue that IEsvs CH ris rt, the Media-
rour berweene God and man was two perſons, and went asfarre in Infideli-
tic as the [evves themſelues. Thence came Macedonius , who denied the holy
Gholt, conſubltanriall ro the Father and the Sonne, to be God. If then eue-
ry one inthat Church doth aſſume that name, by which hee maketh himſelfe
the head of all good men , the Catholique Church ( which God forbid )
mult ncedes bee oucrthrowen when hee falleth who is called Vniverſal.
Bur letthis blaſphemous name be farre from Chriſtians; by which all honor
is taken from all other Prieſts; while it is fooliſhly arrogated by one. It was
offered to the Biſhop of Rome by the reucrend Councell of Chalcedon, in ho-
nour of S. Peter, Prince of the Apoſtles: bur none of them cither aſſumed,
or conſented to vie it; leſt while this priuiledge ſhould be giuen to one, all o-
thers ſhould bee depriued of that honour which is due vato them. Wh
ſhould we refuſe this name when it was offered, and another ſhould aſſymeir
withoutany offer at all? This man, contemning obedience to the Canons,is
the rather ro be humbled by the commands of our molt pious Sonereignes. He
is to be chaltiſed whodocth iniuric to the holy Catholique Church , whoſe
pf | heart

py of F rane#'Guicciardine,

;

heartis'puft vp,who fcckethto menos 9 of ſingulatity hers
by hee would make himſelfeto beeabourthe Emperour. Wee are all ſcams
dalizcd hercin: Let the author of this ſcandal} reformehimſelfe , and all dif-
ferences intheChurch will ceaſe. I amſeruantynto all Prieſts ſo long asthey
liuclike themſelucs : burifany (hall vaitiely ſer vp his briſtles contrary ro God
Almighty,and cothe Canons of theFathers, I hope in God thatheeſhall ne-
ucr beablerobring my necke ynderhis yoke,nonot by forceof armes, Whar

hath happencdin this Cirieby occaſion of this name hauemore exactly de- -

clared to Sabinianus the Deacon, my Agent. Let thereforemy religious
Souereignes thinke of nic their Seruant, whom they hauc alwaycs cheriſhed
and vpheld more thenothers ,\ as ofene'who defirerh ro yeeldethem obedi-
ence , and yct am afraid to bee found guilty of negligencein my duety in the
later fearcfull day of iudgement. Let our molt pious Soyereigne cither vouch-
fafe to determine the buſcneſf:, according to the petition of the forcnamed
Sabinianus the Deacon , or cauſe the man , ſooften mentioned, to renounce
this claime. In calohee doc ſubmit to your moſt iult ſentence, or fauoura-
bleadmonitions, wee will giue thankesro Almighty God , and reioyce for
the peaccof the Church ,,procured by your clemencie. - But if hee ſhall per-

fiſt in this contention, 'wee will hold the faying ro bee moſt rrue ; * Enery , , 1.5
one that exalteth himſelfe ſhall bze brought lowe. And'againe it is written, * Be-, ,

fore a fallthe heart will be lifxed op. In obedience to my Sonereignzs,] haue written
ro my brother Prieſt both gently and humbly rhathee would deſiſt from the
purluir of chis vaine-glory : if hee giue'careynto mee, hee hatha brother de-
uotcd ynto him: butif hee continue in his pride, T ſee alrcady what will be-

tide him ; hee will make him his enemic of whom it is written, © God reſts c lam.4

ſteth the proud, and giveth grateto the humble. | |

eA part of the Hiftorieof Francis Gvicciarpine,
 ftollen out of his third Booke concerning Pope A Lt XAN-
D-E R, the þaxt. | | wi Ei)

| | s

& Ve hee could not alwaycs auoiddomeſticall misfortunes, which
| EE J28 troubled the affaires of his family with tragicall examples, pro-
a2 ty cccding from ſuch luſt and cruclty,which would becaccounced
7 horrible cucn in any barbaxous nation whatſocucr. For hauing
refolucd from his firſt cntrance be eg acie , ro pur all the —_—
grcatneſſe ypon his cldeſt ſonne the Dy cof Cong *Cardinall of Valen-
tia , whole minde was wholly auerle fromall ecclefiaſticall protefiion; and
defired rather tobecxcrciſced in militaricaffaires, nar cnduring,to bee preyen-
ted herein by his brother, and beſides becing impatient that hee had a grea-
tcr ſhare in the louc of the Lady Lucretia, who. was comman.{iſterro them

both; cauſed him to be murthercd as he,rid. alone @gc night. chrough Rome,

WAL

and ſecretly ro bee calt intothe riuer Tyxr ; becing .incited rhercunto partly
by luſt, and partly by ambition 4 powerfull, muniſters) tocffect any wicked-

neſſe. There was afame (if poſlibly .caormous an:

be belecued ) chat not onely the Io. brot crs, bur'cuca che father hialelfe-

"Die ol \ aaa 2

* Hisſecond .
ſonne.

«Paſſages ftollenoue +

a orridels In, the love of this Lady \Lacretid. . Befotch aq eacarcd
Pops; hee gaue her in marriage to a man of meane degree ; frotri whom; fo

ſognc as hee began to fitin Pererschaire, he did ſeparate her ,as beeinignow

vnworthy ofher. Then hee married her co lobn Storas, Lord of\Peſars: Af
rerthat ,not enduring that this her huſband ſhould bee partaker:ofher louc
with him , hee diſſolued the marriage , alchough conſummated , by fub-
orning falſe witneſſes rodepoſe before Iudges, appointed by hitnfelfe for the

{ame purpole , who gaue ſentence that this John was frigid and impotcht by
nature. T his did afflit beyond meaſure, &c, |

. eA ſecond place conteimng 4 large diſcourſe by what meanes the
Popes 'of Rome attained to that greatneſſe which they now
enioy , taken quite out of the fourth Booke of the Hiſlorie of

Francis GvICCIARDINE,

2224 Or the liquidation whereof, and of many otherthings which
| E happened in after ages, it is neceſſayy to relate whar title the

* Church hath to the territory of Romania ,and to many others
ESZRE4 whigh it cicher hath poſlcfled atdipers other times,or docth poſ-
ſeſle at this preſent: as allo by what meanes, ir becing firlt inſtituted (as was
fir) for Spirituall gouernement, itcame to poſlcile temporal] States and Em-
ircs. Likewilc it is conucnicnt to exprefle (as a matter belonging to this
argument ) what contentions haue hapned at ſcucrall times berweene the
Popes and the Emperours ypon theſe and the like occaſions. |
The Biſhops of Rome , the farlt whereof was the Apoſtle Saint F eter, their
authoritic beeing founded by I Esvs CHR1 5s Tinthiogs Spirituall oncly,
did abound with charitie, humility , patience; and many, miracles were
wrought by them. Ar the firſt they were not oncly deſtitute of all rem po-
rall power , but were perſecuted by it ; neither 'was their name ſo much as
ſpoken of, but for the afflitions and the torments which they and their fol-
lowers didendure. For howlſocuer their proceedings were ſometimes not
obſcrucd, by reaſon of-the mulritude and yaricty of nations and profeſſions
in Rome, and ſome ofthe Emperours'did forbrare rs queſtion them , bug an-
ly when theira&ions did-ſeeme to crofle the publique gouernment, yer forte
others, cither becauſe they were indlinedro cruehtic,or for the loue theybate
ro their owne Gods, did bitterly perfettite thetti,/d8/inuenters of new ſuper-

-

ſitions;and'cnemicsofe&teReligion.

In this ſtate of lifethey'conrinued ; vnrillchetimmeof Silueſler the Pope,to
be moſt fambus'for their voluntary pourrty , fanCtity of life , 'and martyr-
domes. Afterwards, Conftantine hielo ror being/rarhed Chriſtian,moued
cherunto by thefiGlitiefle of choſe who followed CrxrsT, & by the miracles
done by thetti/thi Popes caitic ro bite ſecure from thoſe dangers ro which
they had beenefubie@tfor the ſpacc'of Job. yecres before, & had free exerciſe
oftheir Chriſtian profeſſioti."' Me nt the teuerence which the holi-
nefſe of their life nd reigierihad"fY Jeirrcd chem,and becauſe men arc prone
rofollow the example of their Prince)by reaſon cithet of ambition or of fearc,

13Y- © ££A6$2 Chriſti-

OO ET 0” IE Oro a "WR ©

© FaccdGwonnc

—_— — —————_—

Chriſtianiry began marueiloully co ſpreatic.clfe , andehopouerry of Chet
tians not-to beg ſo. great as it was, A Ir builtthe Church
Saint Johnin Lateran, of Saint Peer in'theFatican;of SaintPaul,and many

_ other3 in'divers places, notonely gauethemplate! and ornaments, bur alſo,
thartheſe mightbeepreſeruied and renewed, the Churches rep ed, andthe
Clergie bclontging to them maintained, hee endowed them withpoſleffions
and with reucnues. In aftcrtimes many, perlwadingthemſeluegthat they
ſhould gainc hcauen more eaſily by beeing liberalltoward Churches, either
buileand indowed other Churches , ot gaue rothoſe whichrwere built be-
fore. . Inlike mannercucry one payed them tirhes due-cicherby-lawor cu-
ſtqme , az in che old Teſtament is commanded. Whercin every one was the
more forward , becauſe Clergie-men in thoſe times contented themſclues

..-:* with ncceſſarics onely , and beſtowed the remainder either ro repaire theit

Churches, or to adorne them , or in workes of charitte and pietie: Now the
Biſhops of Rome (pride and ambition hauing nor as yet poſleſſed' their harts)
were acknowledged by all Chriſtians ro bee ſaperiours of all Churches,in all
Spirituall goucrament, as fucceſſoursvnto.the Apoſtle Saint Peter; becauſe
that Citie, by reaſon of the dignitic and greameſle thereof ;'retained'the
nameand maieſtic of theEmpireas head of all thereſt, and becauſe Chriſti
an Religion was thence diffuſed into the greater part of Europe, and becauſe
(onſtantine (hauing beene baprized byStueſter ) did willingly-acknowledge
thatſuch authority belonged to himvand hisſucoeſſors. > as
| Beſides , there is a famethat Conftantine, becing conſtrained to tranſlate
the: ſeate of the Empire to Bizantinm, now called ( by bis'natne ) Conftantt-
nople., by occaſion of ſorne accidenes: hapning in the WeſterdeProuinces,
gaueto the Popes the Lordſhip'of Rome, and of many other Citiesand Pro»
uinces in Tralie.; This fame,though cheriſhed by ſucceeding Popes ; and be
lecued by many, by reaſon oftheir authoritic and credit, \is'not onely dif
proucd by mare probablcauthors, bat cuen by the very things themſelues. |
For it is moſt manifeſt chat Rome, as alſo all Ttaly obeyed theEmperonty#nd
their, Magiſtrates, both then and many yeeres afret:!Some wit nor belecuta
thing atall that hath beenſpoken concerning (onflantine and Silneſfer, (fu
is the ob{curity of things.doneſo long agoc ) affirming that they liued ttot#t
the-ſame time 2.:yer. nomandenieth thar the rranſlatiofi of the Empite was
the firſt cauſ{cof the Popes authoritie, ' For the'people of Rome withdrew
their gbedienc<from che Empcrours by occaſion of their abſence, and ofthe
difficultics which they found in the Eaſt, and did the rather performe* wit.
lingly fore certaine obſequiouſneſſerg the Biliops'of Rome, though indeed
na abſoluteſubieftion. OY; bi (5 ODOT I 21 CLE TODERY
:--1i Theſe rhings//appeared bur lowly becauſe of 'the inundftions'of the
Gotherand 7/anidals, and other barbarous nations into Italy; by which Rome
hauing beene often ſacked; the Popetyjn reſpect oF temporall matters, were
obſcure andmeanc,andin Jealy the Emperours had very fall 7 wenn 3p
(ting leftic asia pray co the! Barbariane.-- Ofrhieſenations, theYelt gg t
away likea torrent, the-Gubes} whowere (Cbriftians both by name and by
profeſſion y ind had their curra@efhom ſore pats of Dacia, and of Ta-
tariaz, continuce:their power thedeſtueniticytetes together.” When thele

Wh g's" were

>

"Paſſages fallen ou. |

-
/
4 "4
Ch”

EE,

wetc driuen-out of Zalie., by che Empcrours , the Countrey began-apaine

_ tb-bet goucrted by Greeke. magiltratcs , thechicfe of which, called{by 2

Greekewword) Exarke, kept his reſidenceat Rawemna, a Citie very anciefit; and
then vety rich;;-and- much inhabited by reaſon of the fertility of the Coun-
trey, This Citic becing much augmented by the great armada which Ag-
pre Ceſar and other |Emperours continually maintained in the Port neere
adioyning , which now is vaniſhed, was inhabited by many Capraines , and
after a good-while together by Theodorick King of the Gothes , and by his ſuc-
ceflors , who made choyce of itfor the ſeare of rheir Kingdome, becauſethar
Sca was Heeter:tothe Emperours of Conſtantinople y whoſe power they ſuſpe-
Red. The Exarks ſeated themſclucs in the ſame place,becauſe of the oppor-
cunity thereof, though vpon acontrary groun d, and deputcd particular ma-

iſtrates , whom they called Dukes , to gouerne Romy and other Cities of Jra-

4. Hence the Exarchare of Rauerma. tooke the name , vnder which was
contcined wharſocucr was not goucrned by particular Dukes. In thoſerimes
*rhe BB. of Rome had no temporall power atall; and hauing loſt their former
Spirituall reucrence , becaule their liues began to be more corrupt, they were
ſubic&srothe Emperours, without whoſc cenfirmation , or of their Exarks,
they durlſt nor accept the Papacie, though they were ſolemnly choſen by the
Clergic and people of Rome : Nay , becauſe the principall ſeate of Religion
followeth the power of the Empire, and of armies, the Biſhops of ConStan-
tinople, and Raxenya did oftcn iuſtle with them for ſuperioritie.

- But the State of thoſe Countreys was changed not long after. - For the
Lombards ; fierce Nation, enzred into. Jralie, poſlciicd that part which was
called Galla(yjalpina, and now Lombardia from their name, as alſo Ranenna -
andthe whole Exarchat,, and aduanced their forces as farre as the Marqui-

ſate of Ancona,Spoletum, and Beneventum : in which two laſt places they crea-
tcd particular Dukes. The Emperours made no prouifiun againſt theſe
things , partly by reaſon of their _—_ , and partly becauſc they” were
hindercd by the affaires of 4fie- ; fo that Rome, having no aſſiſtance from
them,and the. Exarks becing driven out of 1talies, began to goucrne her-elfe
by thcaduice and authoritie of her Biſhops. © Thefte, together with the Ro-
mans becing a good whileafteroppreſſed by the Lombards,did finally implore
theaydeof Pipiy King of France: who paſling into Talie with a great armic,
chaſed the Lambards _ a part of their Dominion which they had enioyed _
more then rwo hundred yeercs. This part-(bcing:become his by rightef
warre) heegaue to the Biſhop and Church of Rome. : that isro ſay , Yrbina,
Fax, 4gobbo, and much. land ncerce Rome , Ravenna and the whole Exarchar,
vnder which is comprehended all from the confines of Placentia. which
are rontiguons to the territgry, of Fawa vnto Arimini, berweene the 'riucr
of Po,the Apenning mountaine,thelake of the Venetians andithe Adriatique Sea:
as alſo from Ariminj tothe riucr of Tegh, now called Jawoio > 11 tf
The Popes begjug molcſicd bythe:Lombards after Pipins death; Charles
his ſonne ( iultly ſurnamed-the Great, for thetgreat vidtorics he archicued)
vtterly rooted them,Qutand; confirmed his faters'donation co the Church
and while hee made-warre with tha Lowbards, ns gaue'ro:the Biſhop of
Rome, the Marquj/at of Awcena,and the Dukedome of Spoleto, which _—
enact

$7 7 .- ve
PTY

th a.” ls. ra ms. Ae tt. AM
> tal ht

of Francis\Quicciardine.

hendcththeCiticof Aquilaandsa artof Abrazgi. © Thele things are repor- |

ted. for ;certaine ; andfome Ecclefiafticall wricersadde thar Charles gaue"to
tho Church Ligaria vnrothe.river Yarus , whichvibthevimoR border of Fu-
lie; Mantua ,and whatfoewer the Lomba?ds polietiedbiwFrulijanih Hitria, An-
okicr writer fayth'as much of: Corfica, and obthe&wholoetritorie berweene
the Citic ob Lukyi and Parma. For theſe merits the King sof France haue been
magniticd by the Popes ,and haue obrainad\the-narhie of Hof Chriftian
gh: bo gums, 10h.) 16 0200! oapipalnEe 20
|. Afcerwatdsintheyeere: $00. after Cn r1isT, Pope Leo,and the people
bf.Romt, by the Pope's: anthoritic ancly as head of that-people, made this
Charles Emperour of Rome', ſeparating this patr ofthe Empire from thoſe
Emperours which had their ſcat at:(onflantiople:; becauſe Rome. arid the
Weltcrne:Proninces, becing abandoned by-them., could not well fabfift
withouta Princeof their owne. .The Emperoyrs of the Eaſt werenotyde-
priucd by this diuifion neither of Sicilie nor of tharpart of Ttalie which,coa-
{ting from-Naples ro Manfredenia,is bounded by the Sea , becauſe they were
alwayes vader thoſe Emperours. - By this alteration the cuſtome rhar'the
Pope'scletion ſhould be confirmed bythe Emperours was not changed 'ar
all,ncither did Rome ccaſeio bee gouenned by them : nay the Popes did date
allthcir Buls, Priuiledges and Grants withtheſeformall words, In the #igne
of ſuch an Emperour our Lord and Maſter. In this: cafic ſubieQtion or depen!
denciethe Popescontinued ynrill their owne proſperitic gaue them courage
to goucrnetbem(clues. Bur the Emperours power becing weakenedby the
di{cords of:Charlesthe Great hispoſteritie, and the Empire becing transfer-
red vpon-the German Princes, which were not {o-potent as thoſe who were
before, by reaſon of the'\greatneſle of the Kingdome of France, and of the
ſucceſſors of Charles, Rome began to bee goucrned by her owne Magiſtrates,
though but in a tumultuous maner; and the Popes, withdrawing themſeJues
from the Empcrours obedicnce as much as they could, decreed that their
election ſhould no more bee confirmed by them. This decree was diuerſly
obſerued according as the Emperours power did riſe or fall.

This powet being become great in rhe Orho's of Saxonie , Orho the third
made mcancs to. choole:Gregorie the fifr, his owne countriman, for Pope;
who, for the louc hee barero his owne nation, and for the perſecutions
which wererayſed by the Romans , gaue the Germans, by his Decree, power
to chooſethe RomanEmperors , in that forme as is now vſed. And(to giue
ſome prcheminence to the Pope ) hee forbad them to vie thetitle of Emperonr
orof Augnſtus,'but onely of King of the Romans, or of (,2/ar, vntill they
had recciued checrowne of the Empire. Hence grew thecuſtom of comming
ro Rome to be crowned.

After the Orho's the imperiall power,bcing not hereditaric to great Kings,
was much diminiſhed. Hercupon both Rome and many Cities beſides ,
when { onrade of Suewia was Emperour, did openly rebell. The Popes,'ta-
king aduantage to aduance their power , made themſclues Lords of the
Romans, though many times they were much troubled by them. Bur che
bercer co repreſſe chem, they obrayned of Henry the'ſecond Emperour, when

he was at Rem, that'the' (ardinals onely ſhould chooſe the Pope. 6
; is

-
Fg

O—— —O———— op _

2 : Paſſages flollen out”) ©

_ + This-their\greatnefſe was increaſed by. a new accident. For the' Nor
mens. (.the firſt of which-was William farnamed: Fronarme_. ) baving taken
Puglia. and Calabxialromithe Empire of (,o»ſtantiuople, Robert Guicciard ,one
of ahem; ,,cycherto; fortific himſelf by this calour, or. to:make 'him-
ſclfe, che Kronger, againſt theſe Empcrours,/or for ſome other; reaſon, firft
reltored Benewent to the Chixrch:zand then acknowledged that the Dukes
dome of Puglie, and Calabria» were held in vaſlallage of ic. In con-
formitie of this example Roger, one of his ſucceſſors , hauing chaſed W1l-
liam, aman of the ſamefamilic, out of this Dukedeme, and then poſleſlcd
himſclfe, of Sictie , hee acknowledged in the yeare 1130: that hee held
theſe Prouinces in vaſſallage ofthe Church , vnderthe title of King of both
the Sjcilies,the one beyond the other om:this ſide Faros. The Popes refuſed
not. to cheriſh the vſurpation and violence of others, in regard ir ſerucd to
aduance their owne atnbition and: profit. . For they proceeded further (as
the deſires of men are ncuer ſatisfied) and depriued one of the Kings of
theſe kivgdomes for difobeying their commands, and gaue them to ano-
ther, By this meanes they came to 'Henry the ſonne of Frederick 'Bar-
baroſſa ; trom him to his ſonnc Frederick the z.all which three were Em-
perours of Rome {ucceſſiuely. © But Frederick being a. bitter perſecuter of the
Church, and the faCtions of Guelfs and Ghib:lius being on foote,, of the onc of *
which the Pope, of the otherthe Emperor was head, the Pope after the death
of Frederick , granted theſe kingdomes to Charles, Earle of Aniou and Prouence,
of whom we pots belore, vpon condition he ſhould pay 6000. ounces of
could yearly for tribute , and that neither hee nor any of his ſucceſſors
ſhould accept of the Reman Empire. This condition hath beecne ſpecified
cucr {ince in the inucſtiture of the kingdome of Naples. The kingdome of
Sicilie, being uſurped by the Kings of Aragen , withdrew it {clfe within few
yeares from the obedience of the Church,both for the tribute, and for the
vaſſallage.

There hath bcene a fame, though not ſo ceriaine as thoſe things
which hauc beene ſpoken of , that the Connteſſe . Maude, a potent Prine
eſſe in Ttalie, gaue long before to the Churchthar part of Tuſcanie which is
bounded by the torrent Peſcia , the caſtle called Saint Quirico in the countic
of Siena the Sca called Mare inferum, and the riuer Tiber, now knowen by the
name of the © Patrimonie of Saint Peter. Some adde that ſhee gaue to the
Church likewiſe the Citic of Ferrara. Theſe things arc not certaine: and it is
more yncertaine (which notwithſtanding is related) that Authperris King of
the Lombardsthen flouriſhing,gaue the Pope the Alpes called Coccie, in which
they lay that Genua,and all the tract from + 2s ro Prouence is contained :'as
allo that Suithprandus, King of the ſame Nation , gauc him Sabina , a Coun-
trcy necre to Rome, Naruia, Ancona,and certaine orher Lands. |

Astheſc things did varic, fo the affaires of the Popes and Emperours did
vary allo. At the firſt, for many ages together , the Popes were perſecuted by
the Emperours : afterwards they were at quiet, (,onſtantine becing conucr-

_ tedro the faith; bur ſoasthatthey medled with. Spirituall matters onely,

and werelittlelefſe then wholly ſubic& ro the Emperours. After that they
liucda long time in ycry meane cſtatc, and had no commerce at all with
| chem

_
-

of Francis Guicciardine.

837

chem; by reaſon of the oreaty power of the Lombards'in-Ttatie, Bur after chey ;

had gotten temporall authority by the afliſtance of the Kings of France, they
adhcred yery much and very willingly co the Emperours, ſolong as the Em-
, Pire continued in thepoſteritic of Charles the Great, in'regard of benefites gi-

ucnand taken , as alſoin regard of the grearneſſe-of the Emperours. Bat
when the Imperiall greatneſle declined, they withdrew themſelues from
the Emperours, and profeſlcd thar the —_— of Rome ought to giuclawes
tochem, rather then to recciue any from them. Now becanſe they hated
ro come vader the old yoke , and feared that ſome of the Emperours, accot-
ding to the cxamplcof their moſt porentand brauelt predeceſſors, wouldar-

rempr to recouer the rights of the Empire in Rome.., they openly oppoſed |

them by warre, aſſiſted by ſome T yrants whocalled themſclues Princes, and
by ſome Cities who had ſerthemſclues at libertie, and did nomore acknow-
ledge the authority of the Empire. Hence it cameto paſſe chatthe Popes afſu-
ming cucry day morcand more, they conuerted their Spirituall weapons to
maintaine their temporall affaires. For making this interpreration,that,as i-
cars of CHR 18 Toncarth,they were abouc the Emperors,andthat in many
calcs the whole care of matters terrene belongedto them , ſometimes they
depoſed the Emperours,and mooued the Eleftors to make choyce of others
in thcir roome, and ſometimes the Emperours choſe new Popes, or cauſed
them to. be choſen by others. af
By theſe controuerſtes, and by the Popes abode ſcuenty yeeres at Auigni-
on, and by meanes of a Schiſme which happened in 7talie after thar the Popes
were returned ro Rome, it cameto paſſe thatin thoſe Cities which wereſub-
icct ro the Church,clpecially in thoſc of Romania, many potent Citizens, each .
in his owne Countrey, attained to ſouercigne power. ''Fhe Biſhops of Rome
cither perſecutedrhem,or,not being able to oucrcome them, gauerhem theſe
Citics, to bee held of them in Vaſſallage , or inueſted other commanders in
chem. Sothe Citicsof Remaniabegan to haue particular Lords,by the name,
forthe molt parr , of Yicars of the Church. Thus Ferran, firit giuen by the
Pope ro Agode Eftito be goucrned by him , was afterwards granted ro him
vnderthe title of Vicarſbip.. This familie was in proceſlc ordiidtugland co
moreilluſtrious honours, |
Bolonia being thus poſſeſſed by lohn Fiſconte Arch-biſhop of Milan, was
afrcr giucn him by che Pope as a Vicwybip of Rome: Vpontheſame ocgcalis
ons thercarole many particular Lords in many places of the Marquiſat of An-
conia, of the "Patrimone of Saint Peter ,, and of Umhigia, now called the Duke-
dome of Spoleto : all which was donecither againſt the Pope his will, or by his
forced conſent. Theſame variations being alſa-in Lombardie,, gy fr
Citics of the Empire, it ſonietimes fellourthat the Ficars of Romania, and of
other Ecclcſialticall territories; withdrawing themſelucs openly from the
Church, acknowledged to hold thoſe Cities in Yaſtalgge fromthe Empetours,
and thoſe who poſſc{ſed Milan, Maning,and other Imperial places, were cons.
ecured to hold chem from the Biſhops of Rome; -- |; A 1936 Yn
In theſe times Rome, though ſtill named the Demaines of the:(hurch, way
goucrncd by ic felfe,, When the. Popes ferurned from duignioninco [talie; for

a while they were obcycd as Lords: Ou the Roweans ſoone aktercredted the |

Bbbb | Magi:

— —

magz{tracie,of the. Bandetgf; and xelapled 1nto their womed 'contumiacic.
Hetcuponthe Popes y.tetaining bur {mall authoricie, ablented therfſeſtcs
wholly from thenccynillthe Rewenes, becing falleninto great poutcrtie and
gticuousdiſorders , by theabſence ofthe Court, and theyeere 1400. approa-
chiog,in which they hoped if che Pope were art Rome, there would be a great
concourſcofall Chriſtendom, by reafon of the Tubelie, they moſt humbly be-
ſoughrPopeBoniface to returneto them,oficring to put down theoffice of the
Banderefi, and to yecld him abſolute obedience.. Vpon theſe conditions hee
returned to Rome,and, while the people were intent ypon their gaine, made
himſelfc abſolute Lord of the Citic , and fortified and pur a garriſon in the
* Caſtle of S. Angelo. Thoſe who | ucceeded vnrill Pope Engenius found ma-
ny difficulties; bur then the ſoucreigntic was fo. well eſtablithed , thatall his
ſucceſſors gouerned the Citic,cuenar their owne pleaſure.

-- Being raiſed by thele ſteps vnto earthly power,they laid aſideby litrleand
lizlerhe care of (oules, and of divine precepts : forhar ferring their affections
wholly vpon carthly grearneſle, and vſing their ſpiriruall authoritic only
as an 1n{trument of their temporall, they ſcemed rather to bee ſecular
Princes then Pricſts. After this their care-and buſineſſe was no more
lanctitie of life, increaſcof religion , louc andcharitic towards their neigh-
bour, bur armies, and: wars. againlt Chriſtians, handling the facrifices,
cucn with bloudic hands ; but heaping vp of wealth ; but new lawes, new
arts, new. ſnares to-{crape monie from all parts. For this end they vſcd
their ſpiricuall weapons withourreſpe<t , and:{ould things both facted and
profanc, withourany ſhamearall. » The Popesand che Court thus abound-
ing with wealth, there followed pompe, rior, diſhoneſtie,luſt, and abomi-
nable pleaſures : no care of-polteritic, no thought of maintayning the per-

eruall dignitic of the Papacie; burin place hereof ſucceeded ambitious and
peltiferous defires tro exalt their lonnces, nephewes, and kindred, not onely ro
immoderare riches, bur to Principalitics and io kingdoms; beſtowing their
dignities and benetices\nor vpon virtuous and well deſeruing men, bur cy-
ther ſelling them co thoſe. who would giue molt, or miſplacing them ypon
ambitiouszcoucrous ,and impudently voluptuous perſons. oh

Hauing loſtby this meanes that reſpect and reuerence which formerly
theworld did-giucthem; they did horwithſtanding-maintaine in part their
altthoritic by-che powerful nameiand maicttic of religion ; and ſomewhar
they were belped by the facultie which they haue in gratifiing of great
Princes, and thoſe whp:were' potent abour-them, by beſtowing ſome
Ectlefrafticall fauours and dignitics'vpon them: Hence ir cometh ro paſſe
thatitheyare in high relpect amongft menjſothat whoſocuer takerh armes
againſt chem-@s clicemed infamous torr, and finderli/ttiany oppoſirions
by other Princes. - Whartocuer hapneth , there's but {male gaine to bee
madeby ftriuing; withehbn\ : For:thoſt that conquere themm'vſe thevitaric
asthe Popes.will,” whorbeing-cofiqaered' obrame what conditions they
pleaſe. Now becauſe they hauo'aigreardeſireto raife theirneereft Kinred
fgom the ſtare: of privarmen'ro-bes'great Princes , oftentimes rhey hauc
bene» for very many years' laſt puſt ; the occaſions and' the inftrijments
ofirbpfing-nort wars ali :rathalts inIghes- ooo Te |

$25 \y dd at Bur *

——OO—
nn —. _

of Francis Quicciardine?!'>.

Buri rojreturneire our, principall -purpdies;frota; whichymy mak, iuſt
griefe-for yþ& publique loſle hath cran{pareg, mes further then. the lawes
of an hiſtoric doe well permit, let vs declare that the ( ities of Romania-
being vexed, Cc. 0x cage

461 | / F ; | , , . wy. ; DMT ASS ;
eA part of the hiflorie of F Rancts GviccianDinE
ſtollen out of his tenth Booke. "XY 4c

FQ& aying, that the grear oppreſſign endured by the oEherous
Romans , and that thole ſpirits which conquered the world

'hould become ſeruile, may in part bee excuſed in reſpect of

& tormer-times. Such honor was then giuen co religion , and

4

religion was.ſo graced with miracles, and ſanCtiticd manners, thar their
ancelters , without any confſttaint of armes or violence, yeelded obedience
ro the government of Eccleſiaſtiques, and willingly ſubmirted their necks
ro the ſweet yoke of Chriſtian pore But now what neccſlitic,” whar

virtue, What digniticis there which can coucr*inaty part the infamie and
ſhame of this ſcruilitic? Isit integritie of life? holy, examples giuen by. theſs
Pricſts, or any miracles dane by them ? what* generation is there in
the world more corrupt, or more defiled with brutiſh and debauched'
manners? [x ismiraculousthat God, the fountaine of Iuſtice, hath ſo long
indured ſuch abominable wickedneſſe. Some+peraduenture may fay that
this tyrannic is ſupported by proweſle of armes, or mens afſiduous care and
indultric forthe preſcryation of the Papall greatneſle. © But whatgeneration
is there in the world more aucrle from the {tudies ofwar, or fore vnwillin
ro cndure thelabours belonging to it? more giuen ouer toidleneſſe and plea-
ſure ? more negligent of thehonor and profit of their ſucceſſors?  ..

The principalitic of the Soldans of great ( are 1s the molt like jimall che
worldto this of Biſhops of Rome.'For neither the dignirie of the Soldans,
nor the honors of the Memmalakes are. hereditaric , but , paſſing from one fa-

"):bs- 6 Ut? 2 -Þ , * "> Cv 1 L501 2 SY: ©.Y
milic to ayother, doc Sv vpan ſtrangers. Bur the ſerviljrigjofthe
aliane

omensis morchale thenthat of thele'Feyprians and Syriays: For
of theſc'is ſomwhat coucred in that the ſammalukes are watlicke andyali:
men, accuſtomed to labour, and wholy aucrſe froin pleafttes.” But whom
doc the Romanes ſeruc? marie idle and flourhfoull perſons," firangers ;'and

ſuch as many times are as baſe for their deſcent'hs forcheir'tnaners;” ris high

time toawake our of this lethargic , and to remember chat tube a'Roman is 4

moſt glorious name when it is accompanied with virtue ; and that their:

fhame is doubled whohaue forgStren' the h6ribre and renbine of theiran-
ceſters. They haue now a molt firoporrunivieco freetbemſclues.. For, yyhea

Italic is Fill-of arthesardÞtumules') antthe Papilltyrannic is ao
more odivus to all Prifices then tyerlir-veas! m—

the Pope dicth the Cardinals are diſunited , the Grandies arc of diucrs factions,

3 [3:4

| \ % 4 , q * "4 To ; , yl: 8 = / By , 'T 8 4
A) JELLOZLS J 03) 00 50h 2390091 2513 215,53 4t B WKa9 1 TI EH
4 7 », p pe — w O- , ' : Fab Y_
Wo ( 07 PRIAUTTNGN 0720100 I nr awe rn
2 =O i :
mn" A +7} * 1-4 . * , F ne TIT : £ bh 4
72 ,O'! TO 12103 32: ViiG en AO 2olyant 207 275900 50 biijey 2:
11EE 6 115) 4 . T ; ' © . 4 "Ww=
ea PIEUSL 1 23 10 DOULGIO0!. 24 301 aHainsh 2412 ?0 2ntogorq 5: } ; 0321001 NG 321 2*0929 4 S014 M00.”

0" WI. CSS 22 — mewn 4 om = - JDit- — anreAWz— ”
Cm —————

Letters concerning theConneell,

In a Letter of Monſieur de Lansac the French Ambaſſa-
*dor, refident in the Councell of Trent, written to the King
þ his Maſter. py a Dy | -

$2 Ec hauc not as yct propoſcd the articles of Reformation, becauſc
a we well perceiue ihe they will '\giue care ro nothing that may
hinderthe profit and authoritie of the Court. of Rome: Beſides,
me the Pope is ſo much maſter of this Councell , that his Penfoners,
wharſoeuer the Emperors Ambaſſadors or wee doe remonſtrate ynto them,
will doc but what they lift. >”

I a Letter of MonſieurdeP1B ac, the French Anibaſſa-
dorunthe ſaid Councell, to the Queene mother,

ISS Y Lords the Legates, together with the Ttalian Biſhops which
2d 1 IBcame from Rome, made a kind of Decree, that nothing thould be
HIE\NZS fpropoſcd for the Fathers to conſult of, but by the Legats onely,
OP or,at the lcalt; nothing but what pleaſed them. This wehaue

x

"This was
done that no-
thing might
be mouecd in
the Councell

Pore” [ecncoblerucd cuen tothe ſhurting vp of the Councell. |
__ In another place of the ſame Letter.

Adam , that they, may the better keepe the power which they haue,to

-'>* bethe only menthat may propoſe and pur into conſultation what plea-
ſcth chem, they hould it for a macter alxcadic determined tharthe Ambaſlz
dors of Princes may not make any remonſtrances in the aſſembly of thePre-
lars; fearing perhaps that, ifrhey were heard and vnderſtood by the Fathers,

they might yecld to their demands, eſpecially becing reaſonable,

bing but a faire appearance of flours, withour

a |

very: and Py BRA CT, hts

f . 1
# . . 4 c- . . .
E£04JH53;] C1 *JiÞ iG 4 bV?. C ..\ ILE-7

* T heſe were 7s

* Theſe were BOP * Articles which they hqpe/yt6@ pleaſed ro communicate ynto you.

the Reforms This would betopare the nayles of Kings, and let their owne grow.8&c.
mation Oo -
culer Prixces, which the Legats ſet on foote to hinder the propoling of the Articlis for the reformation of the EccleGaſtiques. In

x + ni TE TJ 0 -Vþ TT \ F: 3{J02 4. , (OO ITT HY
In a Letter tothe Kingof France bythe Loyds duFien are n,
- -anddePr rac, bis Ambaſſadors in the Councell Sep-

S.4 #4 54 * .

*
.
" n oy -

F an hundred and fiftic.Prelats, which then. were preſent in

» 8 che Conncell a whole hundred had * confpired together, and + 4 congic-
lublcribed ({ as the faid Legats bauc aſſured vs.) not ro yore — Sarhan $a
SS&ER Arcicle of the ſaid reformation, vntill the Articles of Princes t* ofa:

wete propoſed and giuento the Bathers, ' This hath not onely beene done, cletuſtiquet.

bur it * beendone more rigorouſty{(conrratic toalllawboth divine and

humane.) thea ar the firſt, 8c.

AnvrEtw Dvoirtalvs, Biſhop of Fiue| Churches,
in an' Epiſtleto Max1Wrutlan 2, Emperour, in which þe”
delivereth bis opinion about the miniſtring of the C up tothe
Laitie , and the mariage of Priefts. _—_

©3482 Har good could bee done in that Councelt, in which the yotes were
NA not weighcd , but numbred.? ,, If goodneſle of the cauſe}; if reafon
= had been the weapons to hight withall, though, wee were but few,
wee had:yanquithed a great armic of our enemies. But ſcing that, tnambetr
only cameihto the field, in which we,were far inferiourto them, though out
cauſe were good, wee could not poſhbly preuaile.  'The Pope bad an hundred
for one : and in caſe thoſc had not been. enough,he could hate created a thous»
ſand more to haue hclpedat a need. Wedayly faw hungrie and needie Biſhop
come to Trent, youths for the moltpart, which did bur begin to haue
Ducn ouer to. Juxurie and riot, hircdonly to\giuetheir- yoiccas ghe Bi
pleaſed. They were both valcarned and ſumple, yet fir, for the: purpofein
regard of their impudent bouldnefle. |When theſe were addedro the! Popes
old flatterers;, -iniquitie triumphed, and it was-impoſliblo to. determine: of
any thing bur as they\pleaſed, who thought it ro be the bigheſtpointoftheis
rcligion ro maintainc the authoritic and luxurieof: the Pape., There was a
graucaud learned man, who was natable roiendureſo greatainindigmtie:
he was preſently traduced as being no good Catholique,, ;and:owias: terrified
threatned and perſecured, that heanight apptoue things againſt bis will In
ſaw, matters were brought tothat;pafſe,, by the-iniquitic ofttioſe whomnic
thither fired and preparcd, har the Conveell fecmied to confiſt norof Biſk:
bur obdiſguiſed maskers;not of marjbusof images Sachas Dedalts madet
mooucd by nerucs which were none, their.avne. | They. were big
Biſhops, who,as Country bagpipes,,could not{pcake bur Breath wis pur
neo them; The balyGhoft hadacthing to doc inthibaſſembliacaltchocoam
ſelogiucatherc procecded from humanepolicieabd rendedioridy tonumimn
rainoache Popearmmaderare and fhamtbull dontinazidn:! | An(werev veerewvs-
pected framchcnacasfiomnbe omalenof III 7
qe. whic

EE

o— 0 iT AN 0%.

———————___ A
n V FS .

WW

Lens LE edits dota. 2 ——_ CO” Inn ©

"2 - > ll.

PO "IPUET"S > <SI"Y J LOLLI EC” WO WFIGTgT W*-2 ol | HO Ons a

. &

, 8 . oy 1 3 A ;
I x $ x $ -*
: p ; . 4 2 d:
EY 6 " Þ WS.
5-44. FM —
We EROS oof EG, ks.

hg * SY th

which,as they boaſt , doth goucrne thcir ( ouncels , was ſentirom thence in a
poſtilion's cloak+bag; whicb,in caſe of any inundations,, covldnotcomethi-
ther{ a ching moſt ridiculous) ynrill the waters were aſſwaged..Soir cameto
paſſethat the Spirit was not vpon the waters, as it is in Geneſis, butby the wa-
ters fide. Ohmonttrous cxtraordinaric madneſſe; Nothing could bee ratified
which the Biſhops ( as if they had becne the common people) did Decree
vnlefſe the Pope made himſelfe the author of it. >

eAn Eptiitle written by T on N I:wEL L, Biſhop of Sarum,

_ wnto one Seign” Sc 1710, a Gentleman in Venice, in an-

_ ſwere of an expoſtulatory letter of hu concerning the (ouncell
of Trent.

PFARAY Ir, according to that intimate acquaintance, Which hath been
4 $) Qq berweene vs , cuer ſince wee liued together at 7 adxa, (you

YH Pbecing imployed intheaffaires of your Comn:on-weale, 1in
MA Kh © my ſtudies) you write vnto me familiarly, that your ſelte,and
Sed A many others there with you, wonder, that fince aGenerall Coun-
cell at Trent hach been ſummoned by the Pope, for the {ctling of Religion, and
remoouing of Controuerſies ; and ſeeing alreadic all orher Nations from all

partsare thereaſſembled; The Realme of England alone; hath neuher ſent a- *

ny Zmbaſſadours thither ; nor by any meſſage or letter excuſed their abſence;
but withoutany (onncel,, hath altered almolt all the forme of the old ancient
Religion; the former whereof , as you ſay, argues a proud-ſtubborn-
neſſe, the other a pernicious Schiſme. For it 18 aſuperlatiuecrime, forany
man to decline the moſt Sacred Authoritie of the Pope of Rome ; or, being cal-
lcd by him ro a Councell, to withdraw himſclfe. As for the ( ontroxerfies a-
bout Religion, that it is not lawfull ro debate them otherwhere then in ſuch
Hſſemblig ; For there be the Patriarches and Biſhops : Therebce the learnedſt
menof all ſorts, from their mouthes the trueth muſt be required : There bee
thelighrs of each (hburch: Thereis the Holy Ghoſt : That all godly Princes,
ifany doubrhad rien concerning Gods worthip, ſtill referred it toa publique
contultationi:. 'Fhar Moſes, Toſhua , Dinid , Ezechias , Tofias , and other Judges,

Kmngs,*Prieſts, did notaduile, concerning marters of Religion, cllewhere then
- iIBaniafſembly*of Biſhops *- Thar Chrift's 4poRiles, and the Holy Fathers held

Councels : Thatby.chis meanes the Trueth dilplaycd herbeames : Herefies were
fſubducd ſo was Arrigs vanquiſhed,{o Ennomins,ſo Eutiches,lo Macedonins ,fo
Pelagius 5 Andithat by the ſame meanes the preſent diſtractions of theworld
may be compoſed, and the breaches'of rhe {burchrmade vp againe, if con-
tentjions and tations layd afjde;we would come toa ( onncell;yeurthout which
nothing -candamfully beatrempredin Religion. of (& byy oor

1 -F his ineffet was the furyme of your Letter. Iidoe not now take ypon

_

| mcetoahfivere youinthe behalfe of the :Realme of Exgland, ' by whar aduice

query thing -hath-beene done; neither:doe I thinke that you expect'ic from
mcez-Qr defire ir.”. The Connſets of Kings arc hidden and [ecrer, and ſo ovghtr
thee. 'Youknowthe olddaging ; 167 exery where,: nor to ail , nor toall forts of
13iv- | people.

XUM

XUM

pedplea: Yer Tolieur old and incirhate-agquainrance(boeduſeT fee you delite
it. ſo cataclily )/Lwill briefly and freindly ſhewe you what 1'thinke, but, as
hee laics 2, us farreas) I Knowe,and am able and I donbrnot butthat will ſatis-
fioryourncs 07 1535115137 92G 5 e] 2601, F-

| Wee wonder, fay you, thar'no Ambaſſadours from Bngland cometo the
(,0uncell. 1pray you Sir doc Englyhmen onely norcometo this ( ouncell? Were
you your {cite preſentat cheCounceli? Did you take a muſter ofthem? Did you
count them by the Poll? Did you lee thatall other nations were mettfrom
all parrs, except onely rhe Engliſh? If you haueſuch a mind ro wonder , why
doc not youwonder at this too ? that neither the three memorable Patziarchs,
of Conſtantinopl2 , antioch, and Alexandria, nor Preſbiter Tohn , nor the Grecians,
Armenians, Per{ians, Egyptians, Mores, Erhiopians,or Indians cometo the Conncell.
For doc not many of theſe people belceue in CHK1sT? Haue they nor

Biſhops? Are they nor baptizedin the nameof CH 1s T2? Bee they nor,

('hriſtians and ſo called? Or did there come 4mbaſſadours from all theſe nations
co the Councel? Or will you rather ſay that the Pope did nor call chem, or
that your Eccleſtalticall Decrees take no hold of them?

But wee wonder more atthis, thatche Pops would afterwards call ſuch
men to a ( ounce!l, whom before hand hee had condemned for Hereticks, and
opcnly pronounced them excommunicate , withour hearing cither them or
their plea. For that men ſhould bee firſt condemned and puniſhed, and
afterwards brought to thei: triall, is abſurd, and , as we ſay , The cart before the
horſe. But I wouldfainc bee reſolued of this, wherher the Popes meaning
be, to aduile in the Comnceil concerning Religion with ys, whom he accounts
Heretiques * or ratherthac wee ſhould plead our caulc at the Barre, and ether
change ouropinion preſently, or our ot hand bee condemned againe. The
former is without example, and denied heretofore by Julius the third, tothole
ofour fide; The other is ridiculous ; if heethinke fo; that the Engliſh will
come to the Councell, onely to bee indired, and ropleade for themſclues, elpe-
cially before him, who long ſince is charged with moſt heynous crimes ,nor
onely by our ſide, bur alloby their owne.

Now ifEnglandonelylceeme ro you thus ſtubborne, wherethen bee the
Ambaſſ adours of the King of D-nmarke , of the Princes of Germanie, of the King
of Sweden , of the Switzzrs , of the Griſons, ofthe Hanſe Townes, of the Realme
of Scotland, of the Dukedome of” Fruſ9ia? . | Seeing ſo many Chriſtian Nations
arc wanting itt your Counced, it isablurd ro:mifle in your reckoning onely the
Engliſh. But why doc I ſpcake'of rhc{c?» The Pope himfclfe comes nor ro
his owne Councelland why doc you noc wonder at chat allo? For wharapridc
15 this, for once man for his owne plcaſure,ro aſſemble together all (briftian
Kings, Princes, and © Biſhops , when hce lifterh', aid ro require them to bee ar
his call, and himlc/fenot ro come in their preſence, Surely when the Apo-
ſtles farimoned aflemblics ar. lera/alem, Peter the Apoſtle , of whoſe Sea, and
Succeſſion they brag , would not be abſcnr. Bur,as I conceiue,Pis the fourth,
the preſent Pope, remembreth what happened heretofore ro John che 22;thar
heccame hot1n a very happyhoare rothe Conncell of Conflance : turhee came
Pope, but returned Cardinal. - Therefore, ſincerthen', the Popes haue provided
for themſeluesmthetere ,andkept/homey and havewithitood all ( _
6% an

/
v4

he wouldnor willingly. S |
Indcede the name of a Generall Conncell carries a faire ſhewe, ſoit beaſſem-

bled as it ought, and( affections layde aſide) all things bee referred to the
rule of Gods word , andthe tructhonely aymedar. Burif Religion and god-
linefſe bee openly beaten downe,,. if tyrannie and ambition bee cſtaþlithed,
if men ſtudic faction,gluttonie, luſt, there is nothing more pernicious for the
Church of God. All this I haue ſpoken hitherto,as if this ( owuncell, which you
call ſo did ſubſilt ſomwhere, and were indeed a Conncell which I thinke
abſolutely tobe none. Or if it be one, and ſublilt any where,ſureiris an ob-
{cure one, andkept very cloſe. For though wearc nor very farre off, yet we
can by no meanes [carne,what is done there , what Biſhops haue mer, or ra-
ther indeed whether any atallaremet. Nay befides, aboue rwentic months
fince, when this Conncell was firſt ſummoned by Pope Pius, the Emperour
Ferdinand anſwered that though all other matters were accommodated, yer
hee did much diſlike the Place, which the Pope had made choice of for him-
ſclfe. For Trent, though a prety Ciric, yer neither was commodiouſly enough
ſeated forthe receipt of ſo many Nations,nor ablc torecciue fo gteatamul-
titude of men, as were likely in reaſon to meete ar a Generall Councell. The
ſame anſwere was returned from other Chriſtian Princes; and from ſome,
much ſharper. Therfore wee belecucd that all theſethings, rogether with
the Councell it ſelfe, had beene vaniſhed away into ſmoake.

But [ pray you, who is he that hath ſummoned this { ouncell, and called the
world together? You wil ſay,Pope Pius the fourth. And why he,rather then the
Biſhop of Toledo? For by what power, by what example of the Primitine ( burch,

by whatrightdoth heethis? Did Perer, Linus, Cletws, Clemens, thus tollc and
tumble the world with their Proclamations? This was alwayes whileſt the
Empire flouriſhed , the proper right of the Emperows of Rome. But now, ſince
the power of the Empire is [ellened , and Kingdomes by ſucceſſion ſhare part of
the Imperial power , that power is communicated to ( briflian Kings and Prin-
ces. Scarchthe Annals, lay rogetherthe memorials of all Antiquitie , you
ſhall finde the ancicnteſt Councels, the Nicene, the Epheſine, that of Chalcedon,
that of (onſtantinople, to haue beene called by the Roman Emperonrs, ('onſtan-
_ Theodofins the firſt , Theodofius the ſecond , Martian, not by the Popes of

Leo the Pope, a man otherwiſe louing enough ro himſelfe, and no way
negledtull of the auchority of his Sea, did humbly beſecech Mauritius the Em-
perenr, that hee would ſummon a Councelto be heldin Tale, as beeing the fit-

relt place. Althe Priefts ſayes hee, beſeech your ( lemencie, that you would command +

a Generall Councellto bee held within Jtalie. But thc Emperear cauſcd that Ceuncel
to beeallembled, notin kalie, which the Pope carncltly labourcd, butar( ba-

cedon,

XUM

————

—c—

concerning the (puncell of Trent.

345.

cedon , in "Bithynia; to ſhew, thar thatwas his right, and belonged to him

onely. And when Reffaus, inthat bickering which hee had with Ierome,
hadalleadged a certaine Synod , Tellmee, faycs Ierome , what Emperour cauſedis to
bee caled. Ierome did notthinke the authoriticofa Generall (ouncell firme c-
nough , valcſlſcan Emperonr had called it. I demand not now,, what Emperor
hath commandcd the Biſhopsto be called to Trent at this preſent : But with
what Emperor did the Pope , that hath rakenthus much to himſelfe, aduiſe
of holding the Councell, what Chriſtian King or "Prince did hee make priuy to
his deſign? To intrude vpon anothers right by fraude or force, and to
vſurpefor his owne, what belongs to others, 15 iniurious dealing. Bur to
abuſc the Clemency of Princes, and to rule ouer them as his vaſlalls, is an
egregious and an intollerable diſgrace to them. Bur for vs, by our comply.
ing , to goc about tobacke ſuch an iniuric, and diſgrace, were nolefle iniurie.
Wherefore if wee ſhould onely ſay thus much , that rhis Trent Councell of
yours is not lawfully called, that Pope Pins hath done nothing rightly or
orderly, no man could iuftly find fault with ourabſence.

I paſſe oucr the wrongs, which the Popes of Rome hauc done vs: Thar
they haucas oftcn as they pleaſed, armed our People againſt cheir Soucraigne:
That they bauc pulld the Sceprers out of our Kings hands, and the Crownes
from off their heades : That they would hauc the Kingdome of Englandro bee
theirs, and held in their name, and our Angs to Reigne by their fauour:
Thar within theſc later yeares, they haue ſtirred vp againſt vs, ſomtimes the
French, lomtimes the Emperor. What the intentions of Pins himſelfe haue
becye towards vs, whar hee hath done, what hee hath ſpoken, what hee
hath practiſed, what hee hath threatened, ris needleſſero rehearſe ; For his
actions and his words arc not ſocloſe, ſo concealed, bur that the aime of
both may be diſcoucred. By what courles hee was made Pope, and by what
ſteps hee mounted to ſo great adignity, Ifay nothing. I doe nor (ay, that
heaſpired ro the Popedome by corrupring of Cardinals, buying of voices , by

pu and purchaſe, by vnderminings, and ambulhes. I doenot fay thatlate-

, becing notableto quitr ſkores, hee caſt Carainall Caraffa into priſon and
there murthered him, by whoſe aſſiſtance he had compaſlcd the reſt of the
Cardinals ooyces, to whom for that ſeruice he owed agreat ſumme of money.
Theſe, and diuers other things, I leauc ro you , who both behold chem ar a
necrer diſtance, and better ynderſtand them. And can you wonder then,
that wecome notto a man of Blood , onethat purchaſes yoyces , thardenies
to pay his debts,to a Simoniacal perſon, to an Heretique? Belecue me,itis not the
part of a wiſe man wilfully to runne into a place infected, and to conſulc of
Religion with the enemics of Religion. Mymorber, {ayes one , forbade mee.
the company of infamous perſons. Tohn che Apoſile durlt nor ſit in the ſame Bath,
nor waſh witch Olympius,leſt he ſhould bee ſtrucke from heauen with the ſame
thunder. I hauc not ſare,layth Dauid, in the aſſembly of Vamtic,neither will
L walke with the workers of iniquitie.

Bur admitce thatthis is the Popes proper right ; let it bee in his power
ro call Councels, to goucrne. the whole world : Let thoſe rhings bee falſe
and yainc , whatſocuer wee haue ſpoken concerning the power of the Empe-
rour,and che right of Kings: Grant that Pope Pius isan honeſt man; _

| Cccc ce

IO

Bs eAnFpilleeſBiiplewels

he was ducly and lawfully made Pope;that he ſought no mans life;chat he jd
not kill Can} in priſon: yer it is fit that Conncels ſhould be free ; that euery
man may be preſent that will, and thoſe, with whole conucnience it ſtarids
nor, way bee abſcnt. And ſuch'was ancicotly the cquitic and moderation of
thoſe better men. The Princes were not then called rogether in ſucha ſlauiſh
manner, that if any one of them had ſtayed at home,or had nor ſent Ambaſſe-

| doars to the Councell, preſently eucry eye was ypon him, cucry finger poin-

ting at him. In the Njcen Connc.l, in the Ephefine , in that of Conftantmople,
what ſpic obſerucd who were abſent ? But there was never 3n Ambaſſadonr
then , ncither from England , nor Scotland, nor Poland, nor Spaine, nor out of
the two Pamnonia's, nor out of Denmarke, nor out of all Germanie. Sce,reade,
reexamine the Subſcriptions , you ſhall finde itſo, as I ſay. And why doe not
you maruailethen , that the Englyſhcame nor totholc Conmcels, beeing lo full,
fo famous, forenowned, lo frequented ? Or that the Popes in thoſe times
were ſo patient, as nor to condemne them of contumacic? Bur this tyran-
ny ofthe Popes was not yet r_ vp; it was lawfull chen for holy Bybops
and Fathers,as it ſtood with their conucnicnce, to ſtay at home withour pre-
iudice. The Apoſtle Paul would not pur himſclfe vpon the ( ouncell at Ieruſa-
lem , but rather appcal'd ro Ceſar. Athanafins the Biſhop , though the Empe-
rour furmoncd him to the "ouncelat Ceſarea, yet hee would not come. T] he
ſame man, inthe Syrmian ([ouncel,, whenhe ſaw that the Arrians were like to
preuaile, preſently withdrew himlelfc, and went his wayes: and the Wefterne
Biſhops following his example , refuſed ro come to that Councel, Tohy (,hryſo-

ftome came not to the Arrian Conncell, though the Emperour Conftantiua called

him,both by letter, andalſo by meſſage. Ar whar time the Arrian Biſbops
aſſembled in Paleſtine, and drew with them the vores of the maior parc,
old Paphnutius and Maximus Biſhop of Ieruſalem , went out together our of the
middelt of their aſſembly. Biſhop (yrit appealed from the Councell of the
*Patropaſſians. Paulinus Biſhop of Triers would not come to the Councell of
Millan, becauſe that he ſaw , that by the fauor and power of the Emperor
(Conſtantius , all rannc of Auxentins the Arrians ſide. The Biſhops that had
met in a Councel! at (onStantineple, being called to a (ouncellat Rome, refufed
ro come, Which notwithſtanding turned notro their prejudice, though
they were called by the Emperors letters. In thoſe dayes the excuſe ſeemed
reaſonable enough, thatthey were to intend the chargeand reformation of
their owne Churches. Though they fawe that the Arrians did play reakes
in all Churches land that their preſence would haue becne of great impor-
rance for the abating of their rage.

Whar if our *Byþops ſhould now giuc the fame anſwere, that they can
ſpare notimefrom their ſacred function ; that they are wholly imployed
in letting vp againc their owne Churches; that thcycannor beablſenr, five, fix,
ſcucn yeares, eſpecially there, where they ſhould bee able ro doe nogood,
For our Biſbopsarc not lo idlc,asthoſcat Rome thatfrolick it in theirpalaces,
and daunce attendance ypon the Cardinalls, and hun after liuings. Our

_ Churchesare {o miſcrably waſted and ruined by them, that they cannor bee

repaired in a {mall time, or with ordinaric diligence. But now wee fee
plaincly chat theſe men ſeckero.incroach vpon our times, that without any
neceſſ)-

——

———_

concerning the Ci vuncell of Trent.

ee

necellitic we might be drawen abroade and fo diſabled ro aduancethe Goſ-
pell ar home, andin the Conncell be hindred by them.

For the Pope, that you may not becmiltaken, docth but makea ſhewe
of a Councell, and meanes it not, for thinkenot that hee doth any thing
tiacecrely or truely, Lewis the eleucnth was wont to ſay to Charles the
cighth, that Hce that knowes not how to make ſheWes of what he meanes not,kens
not Kings-craft ; But, as the tines goc now, he that knowes not how to
make no ſhewe of what hce meanes, and to cloake his deſignes vnder a
diſguiſed countenance, is much more ignorant how to play the Pope.
For that Sea is wholly ſupported with mere hypocrific, which the leſle
naturall itrength it hath, ſo mu ch the more colour it needes. For if the
Popes thought a Generall Councell ſo efteCtuall for remouing of Schiſmes, why
did they difterre a thing fo neceſſaric thus long Why did they fit quiet
chirty ycares together, and ſuffered Luthers Dofrine. to take roote? Why
did they nor call a Councell, with the firſt > Why did they aſſemble the Trene
Councell with ſuch+reluQtancy and vnwillingneſle, more by the inſtigation
of the Emperour Charles, then of their owneaccord > And hauing beeneat
Trent well nigh tenne yeares, with all this dehberation why haue they done
1u{t nothing ? Why haue they left the matter yndone 2 Who hindred , who
with({tood them ? Belecue mee in this, Good Brother, the Popes are notin hand
now to Keepe aſolemne Conncell, or to reſtorereligion, which they makea
mocke of, That which they intend, and ſeeke, and labour for, is to delude
the minds of godly men, andthe whole world with a pompous expeCtation
of a Generall Councell.

They lee that their wealth hath beene leſſening now a pretty while,
and declining : That their tricks doe not findthe fame credit now ,as here-
toforc : Thar an incredible number of men eucry day fall from them : Thar
men doe not now runneto Rome in ſuch troupes : Thar there is not now a
dayes ſo highan eſtimation, or ſo dearca pricegiuen for indulgences, interdifls,
bleſſings, abjolutions, and empty Bulls : That their Mart of ('eremonies and Maſſes
and all their whorith paintings are flighted : Thar a great part of their
tiranny and pompe is ſhruncke : That their reuenewes are ſlenderer then
they were wont to bee : Thar they and theirs are laughed at cucry where,
cuen by very children: Thar their wholereſt lies now ar ſtake. And indeede
it isno wonder if thoſe things fall, which had no rootesto hold them. Our
Saniour | ESVs CH R1s T cxtinguiſkedall choſerhings, not by armes orforce
of men, but by rhe heaucnly blaſt and breath of his mouth; bur will conſume

and aboliſh them with the brightneſſe of his comming. This is the forceof_

Goas word ; this is the power of the Goſpel; theſe bee the weapons, by which
is oucrthrowne cuery fortification, which is raiſed againſt the knowledge of
God. This doctrine ſhall bee preached through thewhole world in deſpight
of them all: rhe gates of Hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it. Themerit-mon-
. gers ſhopps waxe cold now ar Rowe; their wares, as if Porſennd's goods
were pur to (ale, arc very lowe prigd ,--and yet can ſcarce finde a
chapman. The indulgence-broker trots vpand downe, and finds no fooles.
This is it; Hence growes their griefe ; This yexcs the "Popes. They ſeerhar
Cece 2 this

Iz

1,

—_—_
—_

An Epittle of Biſhop lewel's

this ſo great light broke foorth from one ſparke : Whar is it likerodoe now,
when ſo many fires are kindled in all places of the world? And ſo man

Chriſtian Kings and Princes acknowledge and profcſle the Gofpell ? For
they ſerucnotCHR1sTIESys, but their Bellies. They lay that Carneades

_ thePhilolopher, when hee was at Rome,and made that memorable ſpecch a-

14

gainſt Tuſtice ;amongſt other things he added this, that this vertue, if it were
one, would bee lee profitable to no kinde of men, then to the Romans : For
they by force and robbery had ſubdued other mens dominions to them-
ſclues, and had compaſſed the Empire of the Worldby high injuſtice. Now
if they would at length obſcrue Iuſtice, they mult reltore all thoſe things,
which they poſleſſe vniultly : They muſt returne to their ſhepheards hou-
ſes, and their cold Corrages, which was all chey had inthe beginning. So
vercly theſe mea, if they would deale plainely, and lay aſide their diſgui-
ſes, and doe their duety, and render cucry one his owne, they ſee they muſt
come to their ſtaffe and ſcrippe againe , to ſobrictie and modeſtic, rothe
labours and function of the Goſpell. For they haue heazd Aſtin lay, thar,
The name ofa Bithop , is a name of worke, nor of worſhip; and, Thar they
are no Biſhops that would haue the preeminenceaboue others, but not be-
nefit them. And therefore they ſec, that itis Jeſſe expedient for themlclues,
then for any ſort ofmen, to hauc the Goſpel] ſpread wider , and further pro-
pagatcd: for they cannot bee ſafe, if they will bee ſound. Therefore now
they raiſetumults, and puzzlecall, as Demetrius the Smith did of old, when
hee ſaw that his hopes of gaine were cur. Now therefore Conncels are ſum-
moned , the Abbats and Biſhops arc called ro make a partic. For this they
thought the cunningeſt plor, roſpinne out the time for ſome yeeres , tohold
mens mindesin ſuſpence with cxpeQation : many things, asitvſcrh, might
fall outin the meane time ; Some Warre might be raiſed : One of theſe Princes
might dic: that this ſo ſharpe edge of theirs for the Goſpell, might in proceſle
oftime bee dulled: mens mindes might waxe coole : In the meane while,
as one ſaycs, fomewhar will be done Ihope.

Long fince, the Perfians hauing beene vanquiſhed and led in triumph,
when as the Athenians had begun to repaire their walles , which the Perfians
had layd leuel| with theground ; and the Lacedemonians had ſraitly interdi-
&edthem,ro the end thatthey mightkeep them the caſter ynder their check:
Themiftocles the Athenian Generall,a wiſe man, ſecing he ſafery of his Coun-
trey might be hazzarded, promiſed that he would come to Lacedemon to con-
fer with them abourit. So,being vpon the way,to ſpend time,he faignes him-
ſelfc ticke, that hee might dwell the longer vpon his journey. Ar length,

| becing comerto Lacedemon, hee began to make many cauils on fer purpoſe:

Somtimesthe coucnants did not pleaſe him : Somrimes hee demands time
to aduiſe': Somrimes hee muſt waite for his fellowe Ambaſſadours, withe
out whom nothing could bec done : otherwiſc he muſt ſend Ambaſſadors to
Athens. In the meane- time , whileſt he trifles, the Athenians had walled
their City round ; and, ifany forcewere offered, were prouided of a defence.
So theſemen, whileſt they putt off from day today , and will haucall referred
to Corncels; in the mcanc while they build vp their walls, whilſt we fitt idle,

| # looking

es. Atl —_ -—_ es —_— _—_——

concernine the Councellof Trent.

lookingafter wee know nor what; that ar the laſt, when they bauemadeall
ſafe, they may ſhurr vs out wholly , and neither (owuncell, may be held, nor

any thinFat all done. |
For it is wotth the paincs to obſcruetheirtrickes, and fetches; How of-

ren (ouncels hauc been ſummoned, and not met i How oftena poore rumor

hath daſhed allthcir preparation, and all the expeation ! How often haue +

the Fathers made a ſtand vpon the ſudden in the middeſt of their journey !
How often haue the ſcarlct ( ounſailers, ſlipped home in the middeſt of the
Councell, hauing done iuſt nothing ; and haue rciourned thenext Seſſion rill
— the'ninth or tenth yeere following! Howoftenhaue they quarrelled with the
ayte, the victuals, the place, the time! For the Pope onely aſſembles the
Councels, and hee alone diſmiſſeth them when hee liſts. It any thing pleaſe
him nor, or the buſtneſſe beginne to goe awry, preſently the ſolemne cloſe
of the Playes is heard , Yalete, & Plaudite, Farewcll, and clap your hands. A
Councell is warn'd at Bafil : They mecte from all parts in greatnumbers :
They fall carneſtly vpon many matters : Eugenius the Pope is calt by all the
voyces, as a Simoniacall and Schiſmaticall Perſon: Amideus, Duke of Sanoy is put
in his place: Eugenius,as hee was to doe, takes this indignely, thinkes with
himſelte, thatchis might bee a dangerous preſident for poſtcritic : Thar his
_ and ſtrength was far abouc all { ouncels: That a Councel could not meer
ut by his command : nor determine of any thing , but whathcepleaſcd :
That ic was an vngodly act,to inquireinto his life in aConuenticle of hat
Preſently he cals backe the Councel to Ferrara in Tralie , afterwards tranllares ir
ro Florence. Why what doings is this,I pray ? Did Eugenivs thinke the climate
wouldalter mens mindes, orthat the Holy Ghoft would gine diſcreeter an-
{wers in Iralie, then he had formerly in Germany? Nay, nay, inall thoſechan-
ges he ſought not afrer CyrrsT,buthisown benefit. He faw that his enemy
SiziſmondcheEmperor, did ouertoppe him in Germante, both in power, and
infauour; Andthat thoſc Fathers which had mer at ©Baſil, if they were re-
mooued out of rhoſe harſh and rough Countreys into talie , they might( as
trees when they are tranſplanted ) bee made more mellow. For now adayes
( mercifull God ! ) the intent or ſcope of (ouncels, is not to diſcouer rrueth,
or to confute falthood. For theſe larer ages, this hath been the onely indea-
uour of the Popes, tocſtabliſh che Romane Tyranny; to ſet warres on Frome
ſer Chriſtian Princes togerher by the cares ; toraile money , ſomerimes for rhe
Holy Land, ſometimes for the building of Saint Peters (hurch, ſometimes for
other vſes ; I know not what, or rather abuſes, all which money was to be
caſt into ſome few bellics, in gluctonie , and laſt. And this hath beene the
onely cauſe ortourle of: Conncels for ſomeages laſt paſt. For of errours and
abuſes , as if there were none at all, hothing eucr could bee handled.
Peter de Alliaco made great complaintin the Conncelof Conſtance, concer-
ning the concrouſheſſe and prideof rhe Conrt of Reme, but what good did
hee? Was there any part of their controucrſ1cor pride reftrained by theau-

thoritie ofthe Conncel? The ſartemanſayes, that Holy dayes,andthe flocks

of idle Monkes ought in his opinion ro bee leflened : And another (ina
certaine Workeintituled , Tripartite , and ioyhied to the Lateran Councel) The

whole world almoſt, fayes hee, ſpeakes againſt it , andis ſcandalized —_
in J-

I5

16

Pn FT

_ —— —— — EEE

An Epiflle of * Biſhop lewels._

infinite multitude of beggerly Friars. And the Fathers in the Councellof La-
teran , wee [trictly.commaund ; ſay they, that for the future no man inuenr a
new religious order. Sincethat time whathath been done for H@ly dayes.
I know not: it is probable, that no abatementis made. Butfor theOrders
of Monkes, they are infinitcly multiplied. For the laſt Popes hauc added Je-

* ſuites, (apuchins and Theatines; as if there had not beene yer enough of

theſe vſlow-bellies. Tohn Gerſon, Chancellour of Pars, cxhibired in the Coun-
cell of (,onflance., ſeucntic five abuſcs inthe Church of Rome- , which
hee did carneltly defire might bee reformed. Bur of ſo greata number,
what one abuſe did they rake away ? John Picus Mirandalawrites to Pope Leo,
to abridge idle ceremonies,and to reſtraine the luxuric of Priefts. The Biſbops
afterwards, in the Lateran (,ouncell fate in great numbers, and moued much
expectation, Bur what one ceremonie did they abate ? what one Priefts
luxury or lewdneſſe did they condemne. Mantuan the Poet complaines by
nameof the manners of the Church of Rome. *©Bernard the Abbot writes thus
ro Pope Eugenius: your Court recciues goud men, but makes them not : lewde
mcn thriue there, the good pine and fall away. And ſpeaking of the woe-
full ſtate of the Church in thoſe dayes, From the ſole of the foore faith he,
to the crowne of the head, there is no health in her. And againe faies he,
where is there one to preach the acceptable yeare of the Lord? Now a dayes,
faith hce, they keepe not Chriſts ſpouſe, but deſtroy her; They feede nor
the Lords flocke but ſlaughter aad deuoure it. Pope Adrianthe f1xth, when
hecſent his Legat into Germanie , confeſſed trucly and ingenuoully, that the
ſlate of the whole Clergie was molt corrupt. All wee Prelates , faies hee,
hauc ſwcrued cucry one to his owne way, neither is there nowany one that
docth good,nonot one. Alberrus Pightus confeſſes, that in the Maſſe it ſelfe,
(which they would baueto bee molt ſacred, and in which alone they place
the main of (hriſtian Religion)are found errors and abuſes. What needs more?
[ paſſe ouer other witneſles, for they arc infinite. There were many Coun-
cels held after this ; the Byhops were called together ; the Synode of Bafill was
\unnnoned, as they then made ſhewe, cxpreſly for the reformation of the
whole Clergie. Bur fince thattime , thecrrors haue becne increaſed in all
places ;nay the vices of the Priets themſelues doubled.

The Cardinals choſen by Pope Paul the third, to conſider of the State

of the Church, made report, that there were many corruptions 1n it, cſpeci-

ally inthe manners of the Biſhops and (lergie men. That the "Biſhops were
idle; did not inſtruct the people, nor feede the flocke, nor looke to the
Lords vineyard: that they lived in Princes ( ourts,and kept not home: That
the Cardinals had ſomrimes three, ſomtimes fowre Biſhoprickes4m Commendam,
not without great prejudice tothe Church: for that thole offices arenor, as
they ſay, compatible, or to bee held together. That the. Conents ought to
be c baniſhed out of the Charch. Since this,the Trent Councell hath becne
ilar hauethe Biſhops ſince then begunne to feedethe flock? Haue they

left their nonreſidence, and living in Princes Courts ? Haue the Cardinalls

left ro be Biſhops ? Or is it prouided , that the Church ſuſtaine no preiudice
thereby ? Hath thenumber of Conents becne abridged , or rcligion amongſt
them reformed ? What necde then was there of calling together ſo many

*Bifbops

concerning the Cuncellof Trent.

Biſbops ſo farre off, orto aduiſe ſo many ycares in yaine of reforming the
Cburch2 This is iuſt the Phariſer going about to repaire Gods (hurch.
» They confeſſcerrors and abuſes : they call Councells, and pretend azeale |, g
of Religion and Godlineſſe : They promile their paines and indeauours; that
they will _ witty vs, to build vp againe, whatſocuer is fallen downe.
Luſt fo, as the cnemies of Gods people ſayd rhey would ioyne with Nebemias
to build the Lords Temple. Forthey did not intend the building of the Lords
Temple, but by all-poflible mcanes to hinderic. They will be reconciled to
vs, but ſo. as Naes the tyrant would long agoe with the {ewes of Jabes, vpon no
other conditions, bur that wee muſt ſufferour righreyesro bee plucked our;
thar is, that we ſhould ſuffer our ſelues ro be bereaucd of Gods word, and the
Go#p:ll of our ſaluarion. | |
- For hancthey any carc of Religion? Care they for Gods Church , that care 19
neither for Gods vengeance, nor the ſaluation of the people , norany part of
their owne ductic? Let Pan, ſay they, looketo his ſheepe; they in the meane
timc , manage Warres, hunt, fare dclicioully ; to ſay no worſcof them, Im-
mortall God 1 who would belceue thattheſe men cucr thinke of Gods Church,
or Religion > What errors will theſe men cuer take away or when? Whar
light will they reſtore ynto vs? Whatſocuer you ſay , though you carriedthe*
ſunne it ſelfe in your hands, yer they will nor ſee. Open crrors they excuſe
as farreas they are able,and colour and ſmooth chem,as anciently Symmachas
or Porphyrie did the errors and feppcries of the Heathen: And indeede they
are wholly ſetr ypon this, notrofecme to hauc ledde Gods people aſtray , or
at anytime to hauc erred themſelaes. Or if ir come in their heads roamend
any thing, which cither they neuer doc, or very ſeldome and ſparingly) as
it is reported of Alexander an Emperour of Rome, that beeing not altogether
 auerſe from the (| hriſtian Religion , he worſhipped Chrift and Orpheus in the
ſame Chappell: andas in times paſt the ancient Samaritans did retaine the
worſhippe of the true God, and of Holes both rogather. ) Sothey will re-
cciuc perchance ſonie part of the Goſpel ypon this condition, that therewith
they may admirr of ſuperſtitions, and old wifes tales : they recciue trueth,
ſo that they may retaine falſhood : they allowe of ours, ſo that they may nor
difallowe theircowne: And ſo they doc not take away butcolour abuſes and
onely new plaiſter old pillars.
*  Inthis manner doe they reforme Gods Church; fo be the ( owuncell and 20
 Synodes kept : Tructh is nor followed, burmens affections : The better part
is maſtred by the greater. Indeedethe very name of aGenerall ( ouncel carries
a plorious luſtre: Bur yer oftentimes poiſon is carowled our of a fairecuppe.
For it is not enough for a fevwy Biſhops and Abborrs ro haue met in one place;
The virtne of a Councellconfiſts not in Rechetts, and Skarlerts ; neither is cuery
Decree of a Conncel preſently to bee receiued for an Oracle. "That was aComn-
cell of which the "Prophes * Bſay writes. 7 *Chapgo.r.
That was a Councell of which che-Propher Dauid ſpeakes, The Kings ofthe 2;
earth ſet chemſclues, & the Rulers rake counfſell rogether againſttheLordand |
againſt his anointed. That was a Councell which condemned the Somme of
God Chrift I:ſus ro the Croſſe. Thar was a Conncel which was held at'Carrhage
ynder Cyprian ; in which it was Decreed that thoſe, who had n_

Ml

XUM

Md

An Epifile of Biſboplewels:, |

by Heretickes,whcn they returned tothe Churth, oughtto bee baptized -100

Which-crrorcould not bce aftcrwards zepealed but! ſo many Councels,and
writings of che Fathers. What: necdes many. words? The Second Epbefine
Councell openly rooke Entyches his part,thatthe humane naturecin. Chriſt was

 rurnedinto{ his diuinitic, ' The ſecond Nicene CounceI deerced flatt Idolarrie

21

about adotation of Images. The Counccl of ©Bafil,as Alhertus Pigbins ſayes,de-
ereedagainlt all antiquity, againſt nature, againſt reaſon, agait{t'the word
of God. The Councell of Ariminam decreed for the Arrians molt impi-
oully, that Chriſt was not God. Many other enſuing Councels,that of Smyrna,
the Arrian, the Seleucian, the Syrmian did both condemne the Homonuſrans,and
alſo ſubſcribe totheimpictic of the Councell of Ariminum. What would
you hauc more? The Councell of ( halcedon ir ſclte, which was one of thoſe
foure thar Gregorie compares with the:fower Goſpells, Pope, Leo did nor
ſicke to challengeirof voaduiſedneſle. = 7
- Therefore we ſee Conncels haue been often oppoſe one to another : And
as Leothe Pope abrogated the Ats of Adrian ; Srephanus of Formoſus , Tohn of
Stephanus ; And as Sabinian the Pope commanded all Pope Gregories writings
to bec burnt, as crronious and impious: So wee ſecoftentimes that a Jater
(ouncell, hath repealed allthe Decrees of a former. The Carthage Councell de-
creed , that the Biſhop of Rome ſhould not bce called either The High Frieft,
ot The chiefe of Prieſts, or by any other the likename. Butfollowing Councels
hauc tiled him, not onely Chiefe Prieſ? ,. but alſo Chiefe ©Biſhop , and Head of
the (atheligue ('burch. The Eliberine ([oancel}. decreed that nothing ſhould
bepainted on the wals of (,barches, thatought of right to bee worſhipped.
The Comncell of an 7 ON decreed that Images were not to bee ſuffered in
Chriſtian Churches. On the other {ide , the {ccond Nicen Councell, detcrmi-
ned,that Images were notonely to bee placed in Ebarches, but alſo to bee wor-
ſhipped. The Lateras Councell ynder Pope Iulivs the. ſecond, was ſummo-
ned for no other cauſe, butto repeale che Decrees of the Piſan Councell. So
oftentimes the later Bilhops oppoſe thoſe that went before them,and Coun-
celsdamme vp one anothers lights. For theſe men will notbetyed,no not to
their owne Councels, buras far as they pleaſe, and is commodious for them,
and wil bring grilt co their Mill. The Bafl Councel determined that a Coun-
cel of Biſhops was abouc the Pope. Bur the Lateran Councel vnder Leo de-
crecd,thatthe Pope was abouc the Councell, And the Pope docs notone]
bearc himſelfe ſo, buralſo commands him to be held for an heretike that ſhall
thinke otherwiſe. But yer all the Biſhops and Abbats inthe Councell of Ba-
fillay thus, He that oppolcth theſe truths is ro be accounted an heretike. How
wil you behaucyourſelfe,] beſecch you!, Whatſocuer you ſay,orthinke,cither
the Pope orthe Councell will cſtecme you an heretique, All Popes, for
ome ages faſt paſt , hauc oppoſedthele trueths: thereforcall Popes, thatli-
ucdin theſe ages, hauc been Heretiques in the iudgement of theCouncel of
Bafil. The ſame Councell did with an;vniforme conſent remooue Pope
Eugenus,aSimoniacal and Schilmaticall perſon,and pur Amiders in his place.
\ Bur Engenius vilifies the Councels Decree; and though hee were moſt Simo-
niacall and Schiſmaticall, yer he continued to bee theSucceſlor of Peter, rhe
Vicar of Cx &1s'T, and Head of thewhole Churchof. G o Þ. .: Hee rctai-

ned

XUM

-—  --

© © concerning the CuymellofTren.

ned his former dignitic in deſpjghr ofall rheirreerh , and was magnificently
cirticd LK vpon noble mebs thoulders. : fans allen from
kis horfe; walked on foote like a flimple man, an thoughchimſclfc happic,
thar ofa Pope he was madeaCardipall, Th Coupeell
ded thiat Biſhops ſhould teach the people, and char Phonc man ſhould: baue
more then one Spiricuall preferment at one rime: Bur they,contrary tothe
Edi& of their Councell ,accumulate Benefices, 'and inſtruct noratall, So
they make Lawes, bur obey them not, bur when they liſt. Thisis the e-
ſteeme they haue alwayes made of their owne Councels , and the Decrees
chercof.” | 4 an
And why ſhould wee hope for better ſucceſſeatthis preſent? With whar
| expectation or hope ean any one come to the Councell? Doc burthinke
with your ſclfe what manner of men they bee , vpon whole fidelicic
learning ald iudgement , the weightof this whole Councell, the diſcuſſing
of all queſtions , and the whole ſtate of all things muſt lyc and reſt, They
arc catſed Abbors and Biſhops, graue perſons, and fairctitles, men (asitis
belecucd} of great importance for the gouetnment of the Churchof Go Dp.

Burt rake from theſe men their. titles, the perſons they beare, and their trap-

pings , there will nothing tharbelongethro an Abboror a Biſhop remainein
them, * For they arcnotminiſters of Cx R 1 s T, diſpenſers of the myſteries

of GoD; they apply not themſcluesto reading , or to preach the Golpell,

they feedenot the flocke, they till nor theground, rhey plant notthe Lords
Vineyard, nor kindle the fire, nor bearc the Arke of the Lord, norare the
Ambaſfadours of CH x 1 8 T : they watchnor, nor doe the worke ofan E-
uaogclift , nor performe the duery of their; miniltery : they intanglethem-
ſclues with fecularbuſineſſes; they hide che Lords treaſure ; they take away
thekeyes of the Ringdomeof God ; they goe notin themlclues nor ſuffer
others ; they bcate their fellow ſcruants, they feede themielues, andnorthe
flocke:* rhey fleepe, ſnort, feaſt, and ryot: they arecloudes withour water,
ſtarres without light, dumbe dogges , {low bcllics ; as Bernard ſayth, nor
Prelates, bur Pilats; not Do&ours, bur ſeducers; not Paſtors, but impo-
ſters:. The ſeruantsof Cx Ry sT(faithhee) ſeruc Antichriſt. The Popes
will allow none burttheſe to haue placcand ſuffrage in the Councell : The
carc aid charge of ChriF's Catholike Church muſt depend vpon their power
and iudzement : Vpon none bur ſuch as theſe doth Pope Ps relic. But
(good GOD) what manner of, perſonsare they? They hold it ridiculous

toaskerhat queſtion. It is no matter ( fay.they ) how. Jearnced, or howreli-

gious they bee; what their aime is , or what they thinke : If they can fir
vpoti a Mule ; if they can ridechrough the ſtrectes yith pompe, and with
a noyle ; if they can'come into the Councell, and ſay nothing , itis ſufficient.
If yqu belcette'mec nor, andthinke I ſpeakein ieft , heare what che facultie
of Diuinitic,arid the whole Sorbone,hauc determined concernin this marter.

That whigh'our great maſters affirme ( fay they concerning theduc aſfem-
bling'of a Councell, is ro bee vaderſtood thus ; thax forthe lawfull callin
of a Ebtneell it is ſuffieient, thatthe forme of fant folemnel SOOT
Forif it ſhould be diſputed , whether the Prelares chere aſſembled haue a
goettttenrion , Whether they beelearned, elpeciallyin the Scriptures, and
{B 2ZJQQU 16 QOH: 5.25 39 D dad are

[

R) 2yv}

of Trent:comman-

21

——— —_
Ab. —_

tn Epi bihptewels”

+5

24

( :1.Cor.14 ;0.

are willing ro obcy wholeſotne? o&trine, itwould proue an infinite buſi.
nefſe. ' Thoſe; forſooth*, who fitmure, like the ſtatues of Mercarie..., not
knowing what belongs to Religion, will determine well concerning all
points of Religion, and, whatſocuer ny lay, they cannot poſſibly crre.
Theſe arc obliged'ro the Pope, not through error and ignorance, butby
oath andreligion: So that although they ſhould vnderſtand the tructh,they
cannor withour petiurie make profeſſion of it, and are neceſſitated ro breake
faith, ether with God or man. For this is theformal oath which they all rake.
N.C. Biſhop, will henceforward beare true faith toS.Peter,and to the holy A-
poltolike Roman Church, ro my Lord the Pope N. and his ſucceſſors, which

hall enter canonically. I will not be a meancs,cither by word or deede, that

he may looſe,cirher lifeor member, or be taken priſoner : I will nor reucale

2 any counſell chat hee ſhall impart ynto mcecither by letters or meſſage,

which may beany way dammageable to him: I will helpto defend and main-
raincagainſt all the world the Papacic of the Church of Rome, and the rules of
the holy Fathers. In old time, when the Prieſts of Apollo Pytheus began to
ſpcake plainly in fauour of King Philip, many would merrily ſay, that Apolls
began to Philippize. When we ſee thar nothing 15 decreed in the Councell,
bur arthe Popes pleaſure, why may wee not ſay thattheoracles ofthe Coun»
cels doc *F apize; that is, fay nothing but what the Pope will. When Perres

' was charged with many crimes,of which in probabiline he was guiltic, they

fay he was ſo wiſc,as notto commit his triall to any,bur.onely to ſome truſty
pcrſons of his ownetraine. The. Popes hauc dealt more wiſcly : For they
haue choſen ſuch judges, whom they know neither will-{ becauſcitis their
owne caſc, in regard they refer all ro yolupruoiiſneſle and gluttonie )norcan
if they would { becauſe they arc ſworne ) decree any thing contrary to his
will and pleaſure. They ſctthe holy Bible in the midſt, as if they would
doe nothing againſt ir :they looke vpon it afarre off, and readcit not. In-
deede they bring a preiudicated opinion with them, not regarding what
Chrift hath ſaid, bur decreeing wharſocuerthey pleaſe.
Therforetharlibertic which ought robe in all conſulcatjons, eſpecially (a-
cred,and which is moſt proper to L Holy Ghoſt,and the modeſtic of Chriſti-
ans, is quite taken away. "Paul {aith,If apy thing be reaucaled to another thar
{treth by , ler the firſt hold his peace: But theſe men apprehend, impriſon
and burne whoſocuer dareth but whiſper againſt them, - Wirneſle bercof
the cruel! death of rwo moſt holy and re{6]ute men, Tohn Fiuſſe and Hierom
of Prague, whom they put to deatti contrary to their ſafe condut, & ſo brake
their faich, borh with God and man. © So the wicked Propher Zedekias, when
he had put on iron hornes, ſtrogke Micheas the Prophet of the Lord on the
face, ſaying, how hath the ſpirit of God Jeft me, and is cometo thee? There-
fore theſe men alone domincere in Councels,all others beingexcluded; They
alone giue voices, and make lawes; like ynto the Ephefians ip times paſt : ler
ro man (ſay they) liue here,who is wiſer then the reſt, 'exceprt be hauca
mind tobe caſt into banifhment. They will not heareany of ourn FAlpeak.
Inthelaſt conuention of the Councel at Trent, tenne yeres Aanhey aſla-
dorsof the Princes and free Citics,of Germanje came thither with a purpoſe
to be heard, but were abſolutely, refuſed. For'the Biſhops and fp -

Iwerced .

_
,

-

" —_—_—

—_  —_ -

concening'the CouncelFof Trebs.

1 Oye
eee ent yen WED

»”

ſweted that they would*hortuffertheir eaultts hatic * tics heativg; nor
ſuffer controuerfies ro bedilcuſſed outof the word of God: thar'our men
were.not #0be heardarall except they 'would-recate;whith if they refuſed

ro doe;they thould tomeintro th&ECouncell vporr none orher condition but

to heare the ſentence! of condetnnarion pranounced againſt them. For
Inlivs.che third indis Bull of indiQtion of the Councell” declared plainely
that cither they ſhould changetheiropinions, or clc ſhoiild bee condemned
for hercriques .before\they were heard. Pius the fourth who hath now a

purpoſe 20 reafſemblethe Councell,/hath alreadie preiudgedfor hereriques |

all choſt who haue leftthe Roman: Church; thatis to fay, cthegreareft parrot
the Chriſtian world, beforethey were cuer either ſcene orheard. They lay,
and they fay it ofter,rhar alreadie all is well with chem , and'char they will

not alter one jor of their doEtrine and Religion. Albertus Pighius faith , that

withour the authoritic of the Roman Church one ought not to belcene the
clecrelt.and plainelt Seriprure: Is this ro reſtore the Church to her inte-
gritic2;Is this to. ſfecke the tructh ? Is this the libertie and moderation of
Councels? © | | bi e 7
Though theſe things bee moſt vniuſt, awdwwolt different from the fas
ſhion of ancicnt Councels and of modelt men; yet this'is more yniuſt, thar
whereas the world complainerhof the Papalliprideand tyrannic, and doth
belecue:that nothing can beamendedin the'Church of God yntill he bere-
duccd ihto order, yerall things ate referred vntohim,as'vnto a moſt conſcien-
cious peace makerand iudge. Andynto what akind of mani(good God )are
they referred? I will nor call him ati enemie of -the Fructh, ambitious,conc-
rous,proud,intolerable,euento his owne followers. But they would make
indgeofall Religion him who'commandeth that all his dererminarions ſhall
bee of £quall valew with thoſe of Saint Perer himſelfe,” and ſayth, that in
caſe brecarrica thouland ſoules with himſelte to Hell , -yerno manoughtts
reprcheod him for it: who auoucherh that he cat make injuſtice to bee ju-
ſtice:| whom (amvtenfis affirmerth ta hauc. corrupted the Sefiptures , that he
might haucfulneſſe of power: 'ahd*to cotichide , whom his owne fami-
liars and followersi(- Toarbimus Abbas , Petrarch, Marfilins Patauinus , Lauren
tins "Uoella,, Hieronymus 8 auanorola.); doc cleercly pronounceto bee The Anri-
chrift; Allis. referredrothe. iudgement and will of this tan alone;-ſo thar
the ſamernan is the pattie arraigned, and-thefudge: rheaccuiſery arc herd
from an inferiour placeand the parrie accuſed fitsin his Tribunal, and'pro-
nouncoth'the ſenrence concerning himſclfe.” Theſe lawes;forfooth,fo equal,
and foxeaſonable,Pbpe:Iulins hath giuen vs; No Councellffayth he)is of an
credig,nor cuer wil begvnleſſeir beconfirmed bythe auchority of the Charck,
of; Rome. ;Bonifacins 8.' ſayth\, Tharnocreaturein theworld can poflibly be
ſaucy , except he'bec ſubic&t ro theRomene, Church. And Pope 'Paſthal
thus; Aschough,, laych hee, any Councels bauernade Hyves for the Church
of Rome. when as all Councels doeſubliſtby ir; and teceiue theirfifenpgth
from ig; and dot exprelly excepr inall rheirDecrees the duthoritiE of rhe
Biſhop.ok:Roms. - Atiather layth',/Thar whichthe Pope apptooucth or diſ-
propygin, ye ought ts approuutpr diſproouelikewife\ * Andagain&Iris
not lawfgll for auyman to-difallow! chat whiththe Pope approotcth,””'I
THis: Dddd 2 know

&5

— L as. I
L

_ IS

ucnly ; therefore in thoſe things w
reaſon; ncither ought any man roſay to him, why doe youſo? To leaue
many the like ſayings, which are infinite, and to make an end, Pope Inno-
centthe ninth ſpcakes moſt impudently of all, The Iudge will nor bee iud-
ged,neither by the Empcrour , nor by Kings, nor by the whole Clergie, |
nor by all the people of the world. O immortall God! how neere are & |
come to fay thus; I will aſcend vpon the North-pole, and I will be like to
the molt High. If the Popes ſay true , what neede wee a Councell? ifthey
will holda fincere anda free Councell, away with theſe wicked and vaine«
glorious lyes: Let them not oncly not be practiſed, but let themeuen bce
raled out of all their Bookes, that all may not bec left to the will and
plealureof oneman whois molt iultly ſuſpe&ted. Butthe Popes, fay they,
cannot erre,and that theword of GoD is to bee regulated as they plealc :
Before they cnter into their place they ſweare to maintaine certaine late
Councels, which are moſt fowlly corrupted, and doe religiouſly promiſe
that nothing ſhall bee changed. What maruaile then that no good comes
of a Councell, if thaterrours andabules are not takehaway ? that the Am-
baſſadours of Princesare in yaine called thither from ſo many remote parts?
Notwithſtanding I heare that now there are ſome men , nor ill affeed, yer
careleſſe what they ſay , who , though they condemne the arrogancie and
Perfian pride of the Pope, and his cucn Epicurean contempt of Religion, yer
they defirethat his authority ſhould bee maintained : Though they ſome-
times confeſſe him to be Antichriſt, yer beeing mounted into that chayre,
they doubt not bur that he is /ujuerſall Biſhop and Head of the whole Church
of CHR1sT. Herethey triumph and plcaſc themſclues , as ifthe Hl
Ghoſt were affixed to the Pope's palace. ...Yet the laying is, The place dor
not ſanctific theman, but the man the place. And Hierome, as hee is ci-
 _ tedby them, ſaith, thar, They are not (onnes of the Saints who hold their pla-

' ccs, but who imitate their deedes. Likewiſe Chrift tellerhvs, that the'Scribes
and Phariſccs {it in Moſes chayre, but warneth vs noto allow of their au-
thoritic further then they ſpeake our of the word of Ged. Auguſtine fayth,
What {ayd Chriſt bur this , Hearcthe voyce ofithe Shepheard cuen by hires
lings2: For by fitting in the-chaire they teach the Lawof-God; therefore
Gaddocth inſtruct vs by them, If they will teach ought of their owne; hears
chem nor,docithnor. Likewiſe Paulfaith;thar Antichriſt;that manof ſinne,
mult far.inrhe Temple. Hierome ſayth, Well; doclt thou conſider Peter ?con-
lder Indesallo : doeſtthouallow of Stephen? marke alſv what Nicholas was.
Ecclefialticall dignity maketh not a Chriſtian. Thus farre Hierome. It'is re-,
ported that Pope Marcellinns ſacrificed to Idoles ; that Pope Liberius was: an
Arrian ; that Pope Jobnthe 22.hadan impious opinion concerning the-im-
mortaluicof the ſoulc ; thar Pope Jobnthe 8. was a woman, that thee'com-

_ e Sd] ming

XV}

concermmng rhe Guncell of Trent.

1mitred adultery during-her Papacie, and goingpompoin'y in proceſſion a-
bour the Citie, was deliuercd of a childe, eucn inthe very ſight of the Biſhops
and Cardinals. And Liranwaffirmerh , that many popes haue turncd infi-
dcls. - Wherefore we mult nor bee too confident of places, and ſucceflions
and'yaine titles of dignitics, Wicked Nero ſuccecded godly Merellus. An-

nas and {aiphas ſucceeded Aaron: and oftentimes Idoles are pur intheplace |

of GoD.
But what Ipray you is this great power and authoritic, whetecof they

doc ſo inſolently boaſt? whence comes it? From Heauen,or of men? Chriſt
ſpake vnto Peter, ſay they ; vpon this rocke I will build my Church ; by
which words, the Popesauthoritie is confirmed. Forrhe Church of Chriſt
is placed in Peter, as in the foundation. But Chriſt gauc nothing to Perer
by theſe words more then to the other Apoſtles: neither doth hee make
mention of the Pope,orof Rome. Chriſt is that rocke; Chriſt is that founda-
tion. No man, faith Sainc Pal, can lay another foundation then thar
which is alrcadic laid, which is (briſt Teſus.

Theſe words , ypon this rock will build my Church, Saint Auguſtine
expoundeth thus : ypon' this, ſaith he, which Peter confeſſed, ſaying, "Thou
art Chriſt the ſonne of the lining God. Ir is not ſaid thou art &Þ rock, but
chou art Peter: the rock was (hriſt. Saint Baſal ſaith thus : vpon this rock,
- thar is, vpon this faith I will build my Church. Origen, that moſt ancient
Father, ſaith that eucry diſciple is a rocke, afcerthat he hath drunke of thar
ſpiricuall rock; and vpon ſuch arocke all the doAtrine of the Church is buil-
Ja Bur if thou rhinkeſt that the whole is1built ypon Peter onely , what
fayeſt thou of Tobnthe ſonne of thunder, and of cach of the Apoſtles. For
ſhall we be ſo bould as ro fay, the Gates of Hell ſhall nor prevaile againſt
Peter onely , and they ſhall prevaile againſt the reſt of the Apoſtles; and
againſt good men ? Or ſhall wee not rather fay, let that which is ſpoken

and the Gates of Hell ſhall not preuaile againſt him; and thar other, vpon
this rock I|will build my Church )be trac in cucry one of thoſe of whom
ic-was {poken.” Were the keycsof the kingdome giuen to Peter only, {6
that none of the other Saints _ meddle with them. Then if this ſaying,
(to thee I'wvill giue rhe keyes of the kingdome of Heauen' )-be cammon
ro others alſd, why are notthe other fayings ſo co? Saint Fillarie ſaith, There

is-but one happic rockeof faith, which Peter confcfſed with his mouth,

And again he faith, Vpon this confeſſion of Peter the Church is built : and
aliccle afcer hee ſaith, Thisfaith is the foundation of the Church. In liks
manner other Fathers, Hierom , ( yrill, Beda, lay that the Church is built,
riot ypon Petey, bur vpon his faith , that is, vpoii Teſas Chrif che ſonne of
God, whom Peter, by diuine inſpiration, confelled. Peter ({aith Angyfienc)
takerh hisnatmefrom theRocke , nor the Rockeffom Peter; ncicher will
(faythhee)'bnild my Rife vponchee, butT will build thee ypon mice. So
alſo Nicholas Lira (though hee bee nor alwayes agooQaurhor ; for you kiiow
it vyhat age heefiucd) ſaw thus nach; Vponthis Rotke, ſayth hee, thar is,
ypon'Cakts 7: Bythisit appearcth;thartrhe Church catinot relic wholly
vpon any matt by reaſon of any power;or Eccleſjalticall digniticbecauſems-
ry Popes dre knowen to be:Apoſtats; liaue been Apoliges, '* © a
w ies dn 4 = . Lad y

26

A A OS

An Epiftle of Biſhop hewel's.

FF
PR”

£8 :.

- Why then, whercin docth-this Papall authoritic-conſilt2-In teaching ?
They tcachnoratall, ,In adminiltring. the Sacraments ?_ T hey adminiſter |

themnor. Infeeding? Why they docit not, Yet. this is the power which

CHR1s5Tbcſtowcd on his Apoltles. Goe (ſaith he) into the whole world,

and preach the Gol pell: Andafterward, Yee ſhall bee fiſhers of men., And,
.asmy liuing Father ſcnemee,lo fend I you. Bur theſe men whithcrgo they?

what doc they teach, or preach, orfilh for? From whence goe they, or by
whom aretheyſcor? This is not Apoltolicall authoritic , but aproud into-
Icrable domination, viurped by force andtyranny, Nonc'ot vs (faith Cypri-
an ) calleth himſelfe Biſhop of Biſhops , nor violently compe]leth his Col-
leagues to any neceflary obedience, {uh euery Biſhop may vle his libertic and
power according to his owne diſcretion, withour-becing indged by any,
{ecing that hee himſclfe ivdgeth no,man. Againe hee ſaith, The other A-
poſtles were that which Peter was, and had the ſame fellowſhip of honour,
and power, Saint Hierome faith , the authoritic ot the world is greaterthen
that of one Citic. Why doc you extoll the cuſtome- of one Citie 2 Why
doe you make a paucitic , whence pride began, to giuclawes tothe Church?
\Wherelocucrany Biſhop is, wherher at Rome, or at Eygubium , or at ( on/tanti«
nople , or at Rhegiums, hee 1s of the ſamedeſert and Priclthood. T he ſtrength
of riches, or humblenefle of.poucrtie maketh a Biſhop neither greater. nor
lefſe. Gregorieſayth , Peers the chiefe member in the bodice , lobn, Andrew,
Iames are Heads of particular people: yer all of them, are members of the
Church ynder one Head. / Nay, the Saints before the Law, the Saints vpder
the Law, the Saints vader the Goipel,'and all that make vpihe bodic of the
Lordareto bee accounted members, and none was'cucr willing to bee cal-
led Vniuerſall. » bn vet or; blue,

. This is that power which ſome, doe ſo ſtrenuquſly defend at this day,
which, whatſocuer they thinke of the Popes lifeand religion, they would
haucto bcc moſt religiouſly maintained, as if the Church could norſub(llt
without it; or as if a Councell were no 'Councell except the Pope did will
and command it to beſo; or as if the whole woxld mult needs þe deccaucd,
ifit, ſhould ihinke otherwiſe, Whergfoxe now thatyou ſee thatall things are
molt yniultly, handled ,,that nothing is ſincerely and faircly cariedin Coun-

' cels, you may. not: wonder that our,men had: rather. rarry. at home, then.

* take lo log), and fo idle aourney ,, ip which they ſhall boch loſe their

labour, and betray their.caule. , .;.;i'- (5 £:06 off £4.94 13114

©, You willſay, itisnotlawfull to make change in Religion without order
fromthe Pope andthe Cquacell. 1 . Yerthe Popes. have changedalmolt the:
wholc ſtareofthe Principe Church ,withour apy Councell atalls, You vic
afai c ſmogth {peach , brit. js.co caucrtoulecrrours, . The purpole is opc-
thy keepe mensminds.in expectation, that being:wearied withacdious de-
ayes, they may.atitholalt deſpairg of any good. For whar?: while the Pope
aſſembleth a Councell 5 whulc the, Biſhqps, and Aþþors returne, home, will:
they haucGQ Ds peoplaj che mcang'-while, to,bee deceiued, to crre, to;
miſtake chemlclues, to, bre-Ouerwhelmed with errquwy and..want of the;
knowledgeot Go Þ z;and{qto bee carticd to cuerlaſtiog, deſtruction? Is it;
not awful for any of,ys.t@ bclecuein CH kx 1's'T,, to profelle. the Goſpe),tq,

| {crue
cdlV, {crue

XUM

w ERS EE REY = <

_—

concerning the Gouncell of Trent.

ſcruc@od aright,to flic ſuperſtition, and idolarrie, except they will be pleaſed
to giuc vs lcauc? The ſtate of God's children were molt milcrable, if, there
being ſo many crtors, fo genen'y [pread; ſo grofle, fo blind, fo foulc, and ſo
perſpicuous and 'manifeſt,thar cuen our aduerfaries them{clues arc not able
to denie them , nothing could be done without the whole world *ſhould
meet it agenerall Counccll;the expectation whereof is very yncertaine, and
the cuent much more. Intimespaſt, when the Perfians inuaded Greece, and
began tolay all waſte, if then the Lacedemonians, whole virtue was then moſt
eminentamonglt the Grecians,whole help was requiſue as ſooneas mightbe,
had expected a moreſealonable moone to make warre in ( tor it was an anci-

cat ſuperſtition, which proceeded from Lycurgus,not to goe forth to fighs”

but ina full moone) their Countrie might haue beene ſpoiled whillit the

deferred the time. They ſay, delay breeds danger. The fafetic of God's
Church is in queſtion; the Deuill goeth about roaring like aLion, fcekin

whom he may deuoure. Simple men are cafily deceaued;and though they
be ofren touched with a zeal towards God, yer they perſecute the lonneof
God before they be/aware: And, as Nazianzen faith, when they purpole ro
fight for Chriſt, they fight againſt him: Nay the Biſhops themiclues, who
oughtto hauc acarcof theſe things, are ( as though they were but Ghoſts)
carcleſſe of them : or, to ſpeake truth, they increaſe the error, and make the

miſt that is in their Religion twice as greatas it was, Mult wee therefore

ſit idle, expecting how theſe Pathers will handle che matter ? muſt wee hold
our hands together and doc nothing. Nay , faith Cyprian, there is but one
Biſhoprique , of which cuery one holdeth an intire part, whereof he is co

ive account tothe Lord, I will require, ſaith the Lord, their bloud arthy
Pandey Tf any ſhall pur his hand ro cheplough and looke backe, and be
ſollicitous what others rhinke, and expect the quthoritie of a generall Coun-
cell, and hide the Lord's treafure, in the meane while, he ſhall here this, O
cuill andfaithleſſe ſerttant! rake him away and caſt him into outward darke-
neſſe. Suffer ( faith ('brift ) the dead to burietheir dead, bur come thou and
follow mee. In humane counſcls,it is thepart of a wiſe man to expe the

judgment and conſent'of men? bur in matters diuine, Gods word is all in all: -

the which'fo ſoone as a godly man hath receiued, hee preſently yeeldeth and
ſubmictech himſclfe; he is not wauering , nor expecterh others. Hee vnder-
ſtanderh chart heis got bound to giue care to the Pope, or the Councell, bur
ro the will of god, whoſe voice is to beobeyed, though all men ſay nay. The
Prophet Blias preſently obeyed God's command, though he thought he was
alone; Abraham, being warned of God, went 'our of Chaldea; Lot went out of
Sodome; thie three Ifratlires made apublikeconfellion of their Religion, and
did publiquely deteſt Tdolacry, without expeCting a generall Councell. Goe
(ſich the Angel) our of the mid ofher apr not of herfſinnes,leſt you
taſt of her Plagues' Hee fajth not,” tkpett a Synode of Biſhops. So God's
tructh was firſt publiſhed, ar{fitis nowto be teſtgred. The Apoſtles firſt
raught the Goſpel ; rich6ur” a publique Counee]l ; in like manner the ſame
Goſpell may be peftoredagaine without a publique Corineell.” If at the firſt,
Chriff ic his 4poles would hjitc raried;” and differed all ynrill a generall
Councell7when had their fo{h'fl gone forth inro all lands? how had the

2 kingdome

—__— —— Tr

—

An Epiftle of Biſhop lewels =_

22

25

kingdome of hcaucn ſuffered violence ? and how had the violent taken it by
force? Where now would the Goſpell, and the Church gf God haue beene?
As for our parts, we do not fearcand flic,but defare and,wiſh. for a Councell,
ſorhat it bee freely ingenuous, and Chriltian ; ſo that, men doe meet as the
Hpohiks did ; ſo thax Abbots and Biſhops be freed fromitheir oath by which
they are bound to the Popes; ſo thar, that whole conlpiracic be diſſolucd ;
fothatour men may be modeltly and freely, heard, and nor condemned be-
fore they be heard; ſo that one man may, not-hauc power ro ouerthrow
whatſocucr is done. Burt ſccing it impolsible ( as the times now arc) that
this ſhould bc obtcyned; and ſeeing thar all abſurd things, fooliſþ, ridicu-
lous, ſyperſticious, impious arc defended molt pertinaciouſly , aud that
for cultomeſake, becaule they haue becne once receiued, we haue thought
ic fic ro prouide for our Churches by a nationall Councell.

For wee know that the ſpiritof God is tied neither to places, norto num-
bers of men. Tel it to the Church, ſaith (brit: not to the whole Church
ſpread oucr the world, but to a particular, which may cafily meet in one
place. Whereſocuer, ſaith he, two or three ſhall bee,gathered rogether in
my vaime, there am I in the midſt ofchem. When Paul would reformethe
Churches of the Corinthians, and of the Galatians, hc did not command
them to expect a Generall Councell ; but oncly wrot vnto them, that whar
error focucr or vice was amonglt them, themſclues ſhould preſently cute
it off. Soin times paſt, when Biſhops did {leepe, or. .intended by-matters,
ordid defile and pollute the Lords Temple, God didjalwaies extraordinarily
rayſevp ſome, men of great ſpirit and courage, who madcall welland ſound
agalnec. | ; |

For our ſelues, wee haue done. nothing bur with very good reaſon ; no-
thing but what wee ſawe to bee lawfull,and to haue beene prattiſed by
the Fathers of the primitiue Church, withour any reprehenſ1on ar all. wher-

| fore wee called a full Synod of Biſhops, and, by common conſcar of all

ſorts, purged our Church, as it were 4ngeus his ſtable, of thoſe excrements,
which either the negligence, or the malice of men bad brought in. wee

' haue reſtored all things, as much as poſſibly wee could, ro the ancient puritic

of che Apoſtolicall times, and the fimilitude of the primitiue Church. This,
_ iy in our power to doc, and becaule wee could doe it, wee did is

pldly...._ | wes GE ny |
Herel thinke it fit that you ſhould hcare what Pape Gregory the firſt hath
written concerving this matter; which pleaſerh mecthe more, becauſe hee
wrotc it to Auguſtine, Biſhop of the Engl(h;abput the wyftirurio of the© burch
of England. Hee cxhorteth him, nor to call 2 Councel], bur to;orgdaine that
which he himſelfe in his own wiſdome did thinke would moſt promote pic;
tic and religion. Your DOPE layth hee, knowerh the Cuſtome of

4 4

the Romane Church , in; which you haye been brought vp. It pleaſerh mee

to heare,that you haue beene. carcfull ro.mgke choycaof as many things as

youcanfinde acceptable rq.G o D,, citherio the Chuxch of Rome , France,or.
of any other , that. you may bring them/ipto the E "Hl Church, which is.2s
yet but new infaith,, and, avg were, but now nts ne For things
arg notto bee yalewed becauſe of theplace yhere they are fopnd, bur places!

arc

S

_ CO EY

— ——— ——u_—

concerning the Councell of Frent. 861
are to bee valewedfor the things rharare in them? © Z |
Sothe Fathers in the Councell of Conſtantinople write ro Damaſizs Biſhop 34

of Rome, and tothe other Weſterne Biſhops: You know, (ay they , thatthe
old Decree, and definition of the Nicentarhers concerning the care of par-
ticular Churches, hath alwaycs becn'in force, that the buſbandmen of, the
Lord's vincyard in cucry Prouince, taking their next bordering neighbours
vato them, if chey pleafe, ſhould beltowe Eccleſiafticall honours vpon
thoſe whom they thinke wilbvſe them well. The Biſhopsof Africa wrote
thus to Celeſtinus Biſhop of Rome : Ler your Holineſle , as becommeth you,
rake away all wicked cuaſtons of Priclts, and inferiour Clergie-men, becauſe
noneof the Fathers hauc denicd this to-the Church of Africa. And the De-
crees of the Nicen Councell doc moſt plainely reterre not onely meanc
Clergie- men , but cucn the Biſhops themſclues totheir Metropolitans. For
buſineſſes are beltended inthe places where they are, neither is the graceof
the Holy Spirie wanting vnto any Prouince. Lerthis equiic be wiſcly obfer-
ued , and conſtantly maintainedbythe Miniſters of Ca r1 $T:.

Elentherius Biſhop of Rome writeth to Lucius Kg of ©Britannie much better,
and more appoſitcly ro our preſent purpoſe. You haue (ſaith he) defired,
that wee ſhould {cnd you the lawes of the Romans, and of the Emperours,
that you may make vicof them in the kingdome of Britannie. Theſe lawes
wee may abrogate when we will, butthe lawes of God we cannor. You haue
recciued (by God's mercic ) into your kingdome of ©Britannie the law and
faith of CHRIsT ; you hauc there the Old and the New Teſtament : from
them take, through the grace of God,lawes by a Councel of your owne king-
dome, and , God permitting you, inſtruct your kingdome of Britannie by
them. For you are Gods Vicar inthat kingdome; accordivg to that of the
Pſalmiſi, The earth is the Lords.

What (houldI ſay more? Vitor, Biſhop of Rome held a prouinciall Syned at
Rome:Iuſlinian the Emperor commandeth that Synods(it there were occaſton)
thoald be held in cuery Prouince ; proteſting to putuſh them, ifthey did nor
doc it. Euery prouince (faith Fierom)hath peculiar maners,and rites, and con.
ccipts, which cannot bealtered withoura great deale of trouble. Wharſhould
I repeatthole old prouinciall Councelsat Eltberis, Gangr4-, Laodrea, Ancyra,
Antioch, Tyrus,Carthage, Mileuitum, Tholouſe, & Burdeaux. This is no new inuen-
tion. The Church of G:qwas fo gouerned before the Fathers mer inthe Ni-
cen Councel: men did not preſently run toa general Councel. Trophilus held a
prouinciall Councel in PaleRina; Palmas in Pontus; Ireneusin France; ©Bacchylus
in Achaia,Origen againſt Berillus in Arabia.l omit many other National Coun -

cels held in Africa, 4fia, Gracia, Egypt without any order from the Biſhop of

Rome which Councels were godly, Orthodox, and Chriſtian. For Biſhops in
thole times vpon the ſudden;ifany occaſion had been offred,did prouide for
che neceſlity of their Churches by a domeſticall Councell, and ſomcimes cra-
ucdayd from their neighbor Biſhops; ſo that! they mutually helped one the
other. Neither did Biſhops onely belecuc, that the cauſe of Religion be-
longed rothem, but euen Princestoo. For to paſſe ouer Nabuchadnezar,who
commanded ypon paine of death,rhat the name of the Godof 1ſrael ſhould
not beblaſphemed ; ro omit David, Solomon , Exekias, boftas, who partly builr,

Eccc partly

35

pam er RII rn ern nn

862

en Epiftle of Biſhop luel's.

partly purged the Temple of the Lord, (onflantins the Emperow putdowne
1dolatrie without a Councell, and made a molt (cyere edict, that it ſhould be
capitall co ſacrifice to Idols. Theodofius the Emperor cauſcd the Temples of
the heathen Gods to bee pul'd ro the very ground. Jouinian, fo ſoone as
he was created Emperonr , made his firlt law for the reltoring of baniſhed
Chriſtians. Iuftinian the Emperour was wont to fay ,that hee had no lefle care
of Chriltian Reiigion,then of his owne life. When Joſua was made ruler of
the people, he prelently received command concerning religion, and the
worlhip of God. For Princes are nurſing Eathers of the Church,and keepers
of both tables. Neither is any greater cauſe that hath mooucd God to ere

olitique Starcs, then thar alwaics there might bee ſome ro maintaine and
preſcrue Religion andpietic.

Princes thercfore now a dayes doe more greiuouſly oftend, who indeede
are called Chriſtians, bur {it idly , follow their pleaſures, and patiently ſuffer
impious worſhips and contempr of God, [cauing all vnro their Biſhops, whom
they know to make but a mocke of Religion : as if the care of the Church,
and of God's people belonged not to them, or as if they were Paſtors bur of
ſheepcand oxcn,as ir were, to be carefull of their bodies, and negleR their
ſoulcs. They remember nor,that they are God's [eruants, choſen of purpoſe
to ſeruc him. Ezekias went not into his owne houſe; before he ſaw God's.
Temple purified. King Dauid ſaid, I will not giue ary fleepe vnto minecycs,
nor {uffer mine eye lids to ſlumber, vnrill I have found a placefor the Lord,
a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. O that Chriſtian Princes would heare the
voice of the Lord! Now, faith the Lord, vnderſtand O yee Kings, and
learne yes that bee iudges of the catth : I haue laid yecearc God's, that is, men
choſcn by God to honour his name. Thou, whem TI have raiſed out of the
duſt, and placed in the higheſt degree of dignitic and honour , and ſet thee
oucr my people, when thou art ſo carefull ro build and adorne thine owne
houſe, doc butthinke with thy felfe how thou canſt contemne mine houſe?
Or how doſlt thou pray daily,that thy kingdome may be confirmed to thee
and thy polteritie? Is.it that my name may be contemned? Thar the Goſpell
of my CHR15$T may bee put downe? That my lcruants, for my ſake, may
bee {laine betore thine eyes? That tyrannie may be further ſpread, my people
alwaics deceiued and ſcandall confirmed by thee? Woe vnto him by whom
ſcandal commeth;Wocalfo ynto him by whom it is confirmed. Thou abhor-
reſt materiall blood : how much more the blood of ſoules? Thou remem«
breſt what hapned to Antiochus , Herod and Iulian: I will giue thy kingdome

rothincenemie , becauſe thou halt ſinned againſt me: I change times,

and ſcaſons:I put downe and raiſc vp Kings; that thou maieſt
yaderſtand,thatT am the moſt high;that [ haue power over
thekingdome of men, and giucitto whom I will :
[ bring low , and I cxalt: I'glorifiethem
thatglorific me,and put to ſhame
thoſe, that deſpiſe me,

Epiſtola

Epiltola Reu. P. loannis [vELLi, Fpiſcopi Saril-

triclum Venetum.

VN Cribis ad me familiariter pro ea conſuetudine , que inter nos ſumma
We > /cmper fuit ( ex eo o/que rempore , quo Und viximis Patauic, Tu
SRV in Reip.tue traftatione pecupatus , ego un [tuaijs literarum ) mirari
5 Le te ,tecumg, alios iftic multgs,cum hoc tempore Concilium generale con-
NESTIeeR porends religionts, & cottutzionistollende cau/a Tridenti a Pontifice
indiftum fit , & co iam relique omnes nationes ondique conuenerunt , ſolum Angliz
regnum,nec Legatum ed aliquem miſiſſe , nec abſentiam ſuam per nuntios, aut literas
excuſaſſe : ſed ſins conſilio omnem prope rationen vereris, & avits religions imm1y.
taſſe : quorum alterum ſuperbe contumacie vid rt ais ,alterum perniciofi ſchiſmatss.
Nefas enimeſſe, ſi quis (an&tiſsimam authoritatem defugiat Rom.Pont.aut ocatus ab
ilo ad Concilium ſe ſubducat. Controuerfias autem ge religionenon alibi,quam in buinſ-
modi conuentibus fas eſſe diſceptari. Ibi enim eſ$e ©P atriarchas & Epiſcopos; Ibi eſs
ex gmni genere hominum viros dochiſ$1mos , ab illorum ore petendam eſſe oeritatem;
ibi - ſe lumina Eccleſiarum ; ibi eſſe» ſpiritum ſanFum ; Pios Principes ſemper omnes,
fi quid incidiſſet ambigui m cultu Dei,llud ſemper ad publicam conſulationem retuliſſe.
Moſen, Toſuam , Dauidem, Ezechiam , Tofiam , alieſque Indices , Reges , Sacerdotes,
de rebus diuinis non alibi, quam in Epiſcoporum (oncilio deliberaſſe ApoRtolss Chri-
ſti, pioſq,  Patres mter ſe Concitia cel-braſſe; fic oeritgteys emicuiſse ; ſic expugna-

zas eſſe bareſes ; ſic Arrium , fic Eunomum , fic Eutychetem, fic Macedoyinm , fic Pe-
lagium ſuccubuiſſe ; ſic hodte diſsidia orbis terrarum compani,&/ ruinas /Eccleſiz ſarci-

ri poſſe , ſi pofits contentionibus e& ſtndys oeniatur ad ( oncilium : ſune Concilio au-

tem quicquam in religione tentari nefas eſſe... |

Atque bac quidem fer literarum tuarum ſumma. fuit. Fgo vero non id mihi
nunc ſumo , Ot tibi pro regno Angle , quo quidque confilio faftum ſit , quicquan re-
fFpondeam. Neque teid ame requirere, aut elle arbitror. Regum conſilia recon-
dita & arcana ſunt , eſſe debent. Noſti illud , nec paſſin, nec omnibus , nec qui-
buſl:bet. Tamen pronoitra mter nos Teteri C7 priuata conſuetudine ( quoniam ty
id video ita prolixe petere ) quid mihi -Videatur , breuiter & amice refþondebo :
ſed ita, Vt ait ilie , quantum ſciam poteroque , idque tibi non dubito fore ſatis,

Miramur inqus,Legatos ex Anglia ad Concilium non coenire. Obſecro te, An
Angli ſol ad Concilium non Veniunt ? anergo tuConcilio interfuiſti? an cenſum egi-
fli? ancapita fingula enumeraſli? an videbas alias nationes ondique onnes conuenif-
ſe , prater Anglos? Quod fi tubi mirari tamcorai eft , cur non miraris hoc quoque :
aut tres illos memorabiles Patriarchas, Conſlantinopolitanum , Antiochenum, Alex.
andrinum, aut presbyterum Toannem, aut Grecos , Armenios , Medos , Perſas, Egyp-
tios, Mauritanos, Zthiopas, Indos ad ( oncilium non venire? An enim multi ex eſta

« Fece 2 omnibus

burienſis, ad virum nobtlem, D. Scirrtontgm, Pa-

B64 * EpiſtolaFpiſc, Ivelli

— G RY

omnibus non credunt in ( |britum ? non habent Epiſcopos * non baptizantur in no-
mine (_briſti *non ſunt, appellanturg, (briſtiani * An vero ab iſtis fingulis nationghus
enerant Legati ad Concilium ? An tu hoc potius dices, Papam illasnon pocaſſe, aut
ilosceclefraſticrs veſtris ſanFionibus non tener! * &
Sed nos boc miramur magis , Papam eos, quos inauaitos , maitta cauſa , prohe-
rettcis iam antea condemnauit ,& publice excommunicatos pronunciaut , eo/dem poſtea
pacare voluiſſe ad ( oncilium. Fomines enim primum dannart atque affici ſupplicio,
deinde coſdem wocari in indicium abſurdum eſt, © *51 6251, ©Oerum hoc mibicvelim
refponderi , corrum id agit pontifex , vt nobiſcum , quos habet pro hereticis , in ( on-
cult ae Religione deltveret ; an porius,Ot nos ex enferiort loco cauſam dicamus, ex vel
{latin mutenusſententiam,vel iterume veitigio condemnemurs alterum nouum eſt,c5
prorſus noftrarum parrium hominibusgam pridem a Iulio Papa tertio denegatum: alte-
rum ridiculum cf, {i 1d putat 4nglos pentnuros eſſe ad Concilium , tantum rot accuſen-
tar 73 cauſam dicant , apu4 illum praſertim , qui tamaudum non tantum a nostris, ſed
etiam a ſuis grauſsimrs criminibus accuſetur. ia
od fi Anglia ſola tibi adeo videtur eſſe contumax , vbi ergo ſunt l:gati Regis
Die , © rincipum Germanie, Regis Suetiz , Heluetiorum, Rhetiorum , liberarum
Cinifatum , Reoni Scotia , Ducatus Pruſſie* Cum in Concilio veſiro tot defiderentur
nationes ChriStiane,ineptumeſt Anglos ſolos numerare. Sed quidego iftos dico ? Pon-
rifex iþſe ad Concilium ſuum non venit, & cur tu hoc ctiam non miraris * Que e«
nim et iſta ſuperbia , vuum hominem animi cauſa , cum libet , conuocare omnes Re-
es, Principes , EpiſcoposChriſtianos , eoſque Tele ditto eſſe audientes: ipſum ſolum
in ilorum confpeftum non venire * Certe quum Apoſtoli agerent conuentus Flierofoly.
mis, etrus ApoFtolus , de cuins iſti ſede & ſucceſStone gloriantur, abeſſe noluit. Ve-
rum oper memint Pins apa quartus , is qui nunc t ont if atum obtinet , quid To-
aunt 22. olim acciderit : illumnon ſatis auſpicato ovemiſse ad ( oncilium ( onſtantienſe:
venice eniz2 Papam & rediiſse Cardinalem. Itaque ex co t:mpore pontifices , caue-
rint fibi poſt principia , & ſe continuerunt domi , & onpibus © oncilss ac liberis diſcepe
rationibus obſtiterunt. N arn ante annos quadrazinta cum DoFor Martinus Lutherus
omnibus Diris & fulminibus a pontifice peterctur , quod docere cepiſset Euangelium,&o*
ex verbo Dei religionem inflauraret , &* ſummijze petyſser, Ot cauſa ſua integra re-
tjceretur ad coonitionem ( oncil:j generalis , audiri non potuit vilo modo. Leo enim de-
cimus Papa ſatis videbar, fires ad Concilium redyſset , ſuam etiam remroenire poſſe
in periculum , &> ſeipſum fortaſſe audire ea poſſe , que nollet.

*Pulchrum quidem e$t nomen ( oncili gexeralis , modo ita , vt oportet , conuenia-
tur , & poſitis aff onibus omnia referantur ad preſcriptum oerbi Dei,es' vni cveri-
ratiſeruatur. At þ: aperte religto, &* pictas opprimatur , fi tyrannis,& ambitio con-
firmetur , ft faftionibus, ventri , libidini ſtudeatur, nibil poteſt cogitari Ecclefie Dei
pernicioftus. Atque hc quidem haftenus ita dico, quafi Concilium iſtud, quod ty di-
cis, V/quam aut vHum fit : quod ego prorſus nullum eſs: arbitror. Aut þ, Viþiam aut
evliuin eSt,cerre obſcurum & alde arcanum eſt. Nos enim quamuis non ita procul ab-
ſumus , tamen quid agetur , qui Epiſcopi conuenerint , Tel potins an li onmino con-
uenerint ſcire adhuc nullo modo poſsumus. Immo etiam ante viginti menſes cum (« oncili.
um iſtud 4 Pontifice Pio primum imdiceretur ,F erdinandas Imperator reſpodit quamuis
alia ommia conuenirent , locum tamen , quem Papa delegerat Abi magnopere diſplicere.
Tridentum enim tf; bella fit Cinitas $amen nec ſatis opporruna eſſe rot gentibus,nec tan -
tam frequentiam hominum , quantum ad generale Concilium connenire par fit poſſe ca-

| | pere,

XUM

XUM

_ deCondal.Trident.,. _

pore, Eadem fere ob alij Principibus C briflianis, d quiluſdan etiam non panlo aſþe-

ruora reſpondebantur. Itaque n0s iſta.onmia pd cum. ( oncilio in, fumos abijſsecre-

debamus. 3 (ann vn "v |

Sed obſecrote, quis ille tandem eſt, qui iſIud Concilian indixit , & orbem terrarum
conuocauit £ Pius inquies, Papa quartus,, Et cur ile. potins quam, Epiſcopus Tolleta-
nus: qua enim poteſtate , quo exemplo primitiue Eccleſte , quo inre hac facit * 4n ita
Petrus, Linus, ( letus , Clemens, ediflis {nis orbemterxarum commouerunt ? Fuit hoc

ſemper , ſaluis rebus,ius Imperatorum Romayorum propirium: Nunc autem poſtquan
inumunute ſunt Tires Imperijy © regna in parrew ( ,4/arce poteſlatis ſucceſserunt , ea
poteſias communicata e$t cum * Principibus'&> Regibus Chriſtianis. Scrutare annales,
collige memorias oetuſtatis. Innenies antiquiſima Concilia, Nicenum,Epbefinum, Chal.
cedonenſe, Conſlantinopolitanum ab Imperatoribas Ranagnis, Conſtantino , Theodoſio
primo, Theodoſio (ecundo, Martiano indiftafuſe , non }), pj Pontificibus.

Leo Pomifex, ſatis alioqui ſui amans, © nullain re negligens authoritatem ſedis
fue, Mauritium Imperatorem ſuppliciter orautt , ox Concilium indiceret intra Italian :
quod ille tum locus ci negotio conuenire maxim8 ideretur. Supplicant , inquit , om-
nes Sarerdotes manſuerudimi veſtrg , Dt .generalem Synodum inbeatis intra [taliam
celebrari. At Imperator ( onciliun illad non intra Italiam , quod Pontifex maxims
contendebat , ſed © halcedonemn in Bithynizm inſsit conuocart : ot oftenderet ins illud
ſuum eſſe, & ad ſe ronum pertinere. Et cum Ruffinus.in illa concertatione, quan ha-
buit cum Hieronymo, allegaſſet $ynodaum, doce inquit Hieronymus quis Imperator ean
zuſſerit conuocari. Non putabat D. Hieronymus ſatis firmam eſſe authoritatem Con.
cily generalis , nifi tlud Imperator coegiſſet. Ego vero non id quaro , qus Imperatar
Epiſcopos hoc tempore iuſſerit Tridentum euscari: ſed Papa , qui tantum fubi ſumpſr,
quocum Imperatore de habendo Concilio delib:ranerit , quem Regem aut Principem
Chriftianum conſcium fecerit ooluntatis ſug. In ins alterius per fraudem aut vim
irrumpere, quozque alienum fir, id fibt tanquam ſuum vſurpare iniurimeſt, Abutiau-
tem clementia Principum, ulli/qae tanquam ſeruis ſuis imperare, infignis eſt & non fe-
renda contumelia. Nos autem obſequio noſtro oelle tantam iniuriam, & contumelian
confirmare, non minus magna eſſet iniuria. Quare fi hoc tantumdiceremus, Concilium
iſtud veſtrum Tridentinum non eſſe legitime connecatumnibil a Papa Piorirtatque_
ordine eſſe fafIum, nemo poſſet abſentiam nofiram ſatis inſte reprebendere.

Mitto quibus nos iniurys a Romans Pontificibus affetti ſimus. 1los quoties (i-
buit, populum nostrum in ©Principem armauiſſe : Illos Regibus noftris ſceptra de mani-
bus, W+ diadema de capite detraxiſſe : Illos Regnum Angliz ſuum eſſe , 5 ſuo nomine_,
poſsideri, & Reges noſIros ſuo beneſicio regnare voluſe : Ilos proximis iſtis annis mo-
do Gallum 1n nos , modo Ceſarem commouiſſe. (uid autem Piua ite de nobis confily
caperit, quid egeri, quid di xeris, quid molitus, quid minatus fit , nihil opus eſt comme-
morare. Faftaenim cus, diftag non ita teftaſunt, & recondita, quin intelligi vicung,
poſsie, quid velir. Quibus autem ile rationibus Tontifex fatlus fucrit , quibuſque
quaſi gradivus ad ilam tantam dignitatem aſcenderit, nthil dico. Non dico illum cor-
ruptis ( ardinalibus,emptis ſuffragys , mercede ac pretio per cuniculos & infidias ad
Pontificatum aſpiraſſe. Non dico illum nuper admodum cum ſoluendo noneſſet, (/ar-
dinalem C araffam , cuius ope reliquorum Cardinalium ſuffragia collegerat , cnique co
nomine debebat magnam Vim auri, Dinum in carcere interfeciſſe, 1/ta, aligque com-
plura oobis relinquo potius, quis & propins oidetis & melias inteligitis. An ergo
tunos ad hominem ſanguinarium, ad mercatorem ſuffragiorum , ad &rid ales negato-
o_- rem,

_ |

en, ———

Epiſtola Epiſc. Tvelli | :

i... —__

10

11

rem. ad Simoniacum ad hareticum mirarisnon venire ? Non eft prudentis (mhi cred)
elle ſe conjjcere in ſedem peſtilentie,& cum boStibus Religionis velie de Religione con-
filium capere. 4d infames (inquit quidam) Tovernit me mater accedere. Toannes
olus non eft auſus in eedem balneo ſedere_, & onalanare cum Olympio, ne ona cum
illo fulmine decelo ferirerur. Non ſedi, inquit Dauid, m confilio vanitatis,e& cum ini-
qua agentibus non intros.

Sed efto: (it bec jus Pape proprinm : poſſit conuocare Concilia: poſvit terrarum orbi |
imperare : ſint ea falſa & oana que diximns de poteflate Coſaris & inre Regio © ſit
Pius Papa vir bonus, {it ref, fit legitime fattus Pontifex : nullius vitam petinerit ;
Caraffam in carcere non occiderit * tamen Concilia equum et eſſe libera , rot adit , qui
velit, cnt adeſſe non fit commodum, abeſſe liceat. Ea olim meloribus equitas & mode-
ratio ſeruabatur. Non ita tum ſeruiliter cogebantur Principes, ot ſi quis fort0 man(1/-
ſet domi aut Legatos ad Concilium non mifiſfet, ſtatim omnium digitis atque ocults nota-
retur, In Concilio Niceno, in Epheſino,in Conſtantinopolitano,in Chalcedonenfi,quſo
te, quis explerator obſeruauit, qui abeſſent? Atquinullus tum adfutt Legatus , nec ex
Angiia,nec 6 Scotia nec e Polonta,nec ex Hiſþania,nec e Pannonys,nec e Dania,nec ex
rota Germania. Tide, lege, recognoſce ſubſcriptiones : inuentes ita rem habere , cot
dico. Ft cur non miraris Anglos,tum adilla ( oncilia ita plena, ttapraclaragta celebria,
ita frequentia, non veniſſe * Aut Epiſcopos Romanos ita tum fuiſſe patientes , or illos
non cond:mnarent contumacie ? Oerum nondum crenerat iſa Tyrannis ©Pontificia:
fas tim erat Santtis Epiſcopis & Patribus pro ſuo commodo (ine fraude manere domi.
Paulus Apoſtolus nelut ſeſe dare in Concilium Hieroſolymitanum , ſed potins appella-
nit ad Caſarem. Athanafius Epiſcopus , quamuis oocaretur ab Imperatore ad con-
cilium Ceſarienſe, tamen venire noluit. Idem in Concilio Syrmiano,cum rem videret in-
clinare ad Arrianos, ſlatim ſubduxit ſe, atque aby : eiuſque exemplum ſequuti Epiſcops
Occidentis adillud Concilium venire recuſarunt. lohannes Chryſo8tomus ad ( oncilium
Arrianorum non acceſsit,quamuts ab Imperatore ( onſtantio & literis E7* nuntijs voca-

rettr. Cum Arrianorum Epiſcopi in ! aleſtina conueniſsent , & maximam partem
ſuffrag'iorum ſecum traherent, Paphnutius ſenex, & Maximus Hieroſolymorum Epi-
ſeopus vna e medio connentn diſceſserunt. Cyrillus Epiſcopus 4 Patropaſsianorii Concilio
appellauit. Panlinus Epiſcopus Treuirenfis oenire noluit ad ( onciltum Mediolanenſe,
quo1Dideret propter gratiam & potentiam Imperatoris ( onftanty , omnia nuere ad
Auxentium Arrianum. Ejuſcopi qui ad Concilium Conſlantinopolitanum connuenerant,
ad ( oncilium Romanum , quo vocabantur , venire noluerunt. Quod tamen illiy
fraudi non fuit , quamuis Imperatoris literis vocarentur. Satis ea tum iuſta excuſa-
tio efſe videbatur , quod Fecleftarum ſuarum cure, atque inſtaurationi ſtudendum ef-
fet. Quamuts cviderent Arrianos per omnes iam Ecclefias graſsari, & ad minuendam
dlorum rabiem magnum pondws habituram eſſe pr ſentiam ſuam.

Quid ft idem illud Epiſcopinunc noftri reſponderent , non eſse otium 4 ſacro Mini»
ſterio , ſe(e prorſus occupatos eſse in reſlituendis Eccleſys ſurs : non poſse abeſse domo
quinque , ſex, ſeptem annos ,ibi praſertim, vbi nihil poſsint promonere * non enim ita
otioft ſunt Epiſcopinoſtri , vt ſunt qui Rome delitiantur in palatys , & ſeflantnr (ar.
dinales , & oenantur ſacerdotia. Ita enim miſere perdite ſunt ab iſtus , atque e-
Herſe Feclefie noſtre , vt necparuo tempore , nec mediocr1 diligentia poſsint inſtaurari,
Nunc antem aperte Didemus obfideri ab iſtis noſtra tempora , ot cum ninime neceſ-
ſe fit, foras diſtrahamur , & nec domi propagare poſsimus Euangelium , & in Concilio
ab ipfis mpediamur.

Simulat

deConcil. Trident, 867

Simulat enim *Papa , ne neſcias: non cogitat Concilium: neque enim tu ilum 712
quicquam putes fincert, &* ere agere, (ui neſcit ſimulare ( dicere ſolebat olim Rex
Ludouicus ondecimus Carolo oftauo ) neſcit regnare: multo vero mags, quineſcit
diſsimulare , & confilia ſua vulra tegere , Vt nunc quidem eſt , neſcit agere Pontife-
cem. lila enim ſed:s tota mere nititur Hypocrth; : que quo minus habet natiai robo-
ris , eo pluribus coloribus opus babet. Nam ſt turabant Pontifices, tantam efSe vim
(,oncily 22neralis ad tollenda Schiſmata , cur illi rem tam neceſsa-iam tam diu di-
ſeulerunt ? cur criginta toros annos quienerunt, & Luthers gottrinam radices agere
pertulerunt ? Cur Concilium non primo quoque rempore indixerunt? Cur Synodum
Tridentinam reluttantes & inuiti , magi/g, Imperatoris ( aroli impulſu, quam ſua
voluntate conuocarunt * Cumgue Tridenti dccem prope arnos Verſarentur , cur tanta
delib:racione mil egzrunt? cur rem infeftam reliquerunt? Quis impediebat? quis obita-
bat ? Crede hoc mihi, mi frater , non agunt id nunc Pontifices , vt Concilium celebretur,
aut Religio Dei reſtituatur,quam 11s prorſus habent pre ludibrio. 1d agunt, id querunt,
1d pugnans, vt magnifica expeFatione Concaly generalis hominum piorum animos, atque
orbem tcrrarum ludi ficentur. |

Vident tamdudum imminut , & ruere opes ſuas : artes ſuds non eſſe nunc eodem
loco,quo fucrunt olim : incredibilem numerum bominum in dies fingulos 4 ſe dilati : ron
eſſe nunc , qui tanta frequen'ia currant Roman : non eſſe , qui [ndulgentias, inter-
diStiones , bencdiCtiones, ablolutiones, & inanes bullas, aut tanti fattant, aut
rantt emant. Ceremoniarum ſuarum, & Miſſarum nundinas,@r onnemillum
fucum meretricium , #0 magni frert ; magnam partem tyrannidis , & pom
ſue concidiſſe: reditus ſuos angultiores nunc eſſe , quamſol:bant ; lele, ſuoſque
rideri paſs1m a pueris ; emnino in diſcrimen v-iiſſe ſummam rerum. Nec mirum,
ea corruant , que nulis radicibus ſubtinebantur. Extinxit illa omiia [aluator noſter
IESvVS CHRISTVS ,n01 army , aut Vi muicam, fed Celefti impulſu , & ſþi-
ritu oris ſui . conſumet autem,atque abolel1t claritate aduentus ſu: Hee eft vis verbs
Det ec et poteitas Euangely, hec ſunt arma,quihus euertitur omnts muritio,que adi-
ficata et aduerſus cogmuonem Dei, Preaicabitur hec doth ina, invitts omnibus.per
eoniucrſum orbem. Ports inferorum non preualebunt aduerſus eam. Frigent nunc
Roms tabern meritorte : illorum merces ( quaſi bona Porſenne enirent) viliſimo
pretio proſcrtbuntur. Et ix quiſquam eſt , qui elit emere. ( 1rcuit mercator Tudul-
gentiarius, &* fatuos non inuenit. Hecilludeſt , hinc i1e lachryme, hec res Pontifices
male baber. 7ident hanc tantam lucemex vna ſcantilla erupiſſy. Oud nunc futurum,
poſtquam tot ignes vbique terrarum accenſt ſunt, & tot Reges & Principes (hrilt-
ant aonoſcunt,&s: profitentur Euangelium * NoneninilliltEsv ChRISsSPO ſer-
uiumt, ſed ſuo ventri. Atunt Carneadem Philoſophum , cum olim efſ-t Rome , ex me- +
morabilem illam habzret orationen contra Tuſtitiam , inter alia hoc etiam addidiſſe :

Ea virtutem, f1 quidem eavirtuseſler , nulli hominung generi minus cx v-
ſu fore, quam Romanis. Illos enim per vim, & latrocinium regna fibi aliena
ſubegiſſe, perque ſummam iniultitiam ad imperium orbis terrarum perue-
nifle. Quod { nunc tandem velinr Iuſticiam colere, reſtiruendaeſleilia om-
nia, qu 1niuſte tencant: ad caſas paſtoritias, & trigidatuguria,quz ſola ha-
buerant ab initio, cfſe redeundum. Ita provſus ifti, f oere lint agere-,o fi-
mulationem ponere , C3 officium facere;, ex ſum cuique reddere, vident fabi redeundum
eſſe al virgam & peram , ad ſobrietatem , & modeſtiam , ad labores , ad munus Ept-
ſcopi. Andiuerunt enim Auguſtinan dicere , Epiſcopum nomen cſle yon non

onoris ;

—

XUM

EpiſtolaE pilc, luelh

honoris : @ illos non ge Epiſcopes, qui oelint preſſe, & non prodeſſe, Itaque
ſtud Fuagelium latins diſfundi,& ad plures propagart, vident null: Lomwum generim:-
utts expedire , quam fibt : ſe enim ſaluos eſſe non poſſe , fi ſani eſſe oelinr. Ergo nunc
rumultuantur , & turbant omnia_, wt olim Demetrius faber , poſiquam roidit ſtbi
periſſe_. ſþem lucri. Ergo nunc Concilia indicuntur , & Abbates atque Fpiſcopi ad
partes aduocantur. Hec enim illis ratio viſa eft callidiſSima , vt tempus in aliquot
annos protrabererur , ot hominum animi expeftatione ſufpenderentur : milta , Vt fit,
poſſe internenize : bellumpoſse excitari : aliquem ex iftis principibus poſſe mori: iſtos
tantos impetus ad Euangelium diuturnitate poſse obtundi : languere poſſe hominum
Toluntates. Interea , inquit quidam , fiet aliquid , ſþero. |

Olm cum ( viftis ac triumphatis *Perfis ) Athenienſes menia ſua , que illi ſelo
&quauerant , cepiſſent inſtaurare , &* Lacedemony, quo mags baberent cos in poteſta-
rene id facerent , maonopere edixiſſent : Themiſtocles dux Athenienf:s , vir prudens,
cum videret ſalutem patrie ſue venire poſſe mn periculuy , pollicirus eſt ſeſe venturum
Lacedemona , & deea re velie cum ipfis vna deliberare. Tlle vliſe dediſſet in viam,
JuO Fempus exmerer primun morbum ſimulauit, vt dintius hereret i itinere : Dein-
de cum veniſſct Laced«mona , multa de induſtria fruſtrari capit, moao pafta non place-
re: modo deliberationem peterc ; modo-ſoctss legationts , fine quibus nihil agi poſſet,
expeFtare: mod legatos 4thenas mittere. Interea , dum ille cunftatur, Athenienſes

"clanſerant metbus cinitatem,@+ fi vis fier-t , [eſe parauerant ad defendendum. Ira.

itt , dumdicm d: die proferunt , & rem omnem referri volunt ad ( 'oncilia , adificant
entcrea ſua u;@nia ,nobis oriofis , EF neſcia quid expetantibus , vt ad extremum , con-
firmatis ſuis rationibus , nos prorſus exciudant , & neque Concilum haberi , neque
quicquam omnino agi poſSir.

Operepretiumenim e$t videre iflorum artes,& ſtratagemata; quoties indifta Conci-
lian9 cotticrint quoties exiguus rumuſculus vniuerſum apparatum,& onnem expetta-
tionem diſturbarit. quoties patres in medio itmere repente ſubſtater int: quoties purpura-
tt {ophictyones e medio conuentu,re infefta dilaph fint domum,ez proximum attum in
nonum,decimumg, anni dittulerintquoties © elum,quoties annona.quotieslocus,quoties
temps non placuerit? © Pontifex enm ſolus connocar ( oncilia,gs+ ſolus dimittit , cum
vult.98 quid no placuit,aut fares non refte we cepit flatim audirur:yalete, & plaudite.
Jnaicatur ( oucutum © Baſileam : conuenttur vndique magno numero , agitur ſerid de
rebus mulcis: Eugenius Papa vt Simoniacus & Schiſma:icus omnibus ſuffragys con-
aemnarur: 1m eus locum £mideus dux Sabaudie ſurrogatur. Accipit id indigne,vt
aebuit , Eugenius: rem cara peſami exemplt eſſe ad poſteros : poteſlatem , @ vim
ſxam longe eſſe ſuper omnia( oncilia: , Non polle Concilium necconuenire, niſt
iuſſuluo: necdecernere quicquam , nif1 quantum ipfe velit. Impium cle
11 conuenticulo Epiſcoporum 1nquiſitionem fieridevitaſua. Non mora, Con-
ctitum Ferraramreuocat in Iraliam, poſt idem transfert Florentiam. Quid hoc,quaſo,
reicſt: An putabat Eugenius Papacelum animos mutare, aut Spiritum ſanfAum pru-
dentins in ItaliareFfþonſurum eſſe,quam antea reſponderat in Germania * Im vers,
ile rot ill mutattonibus non Chriftum querebat, ſed ſuum commodum. Tidebat in
Germania Imperatorem Sigiſmundum inimicum ſuum , ntmium & authoritate roale-
re. & gratia. Etpatres illos , qui Bafileam conuenerant , fi ex illis duris & afperts
regionbus migraſſent in Italiam (rot arbores, cum traniþlantantur ) fieri poſſe mitiores.
Nam ( 0 Deun immortalem | ) non id nunc agitur , aut quaritur in Concilys;aut vt oe -
Tas mueniatur , aut ot mendacia refutentur. Hoc [olum ſemper fuit proximis iſtis

&culis

de Concil., Trident,

ſeculis ſtudium Pontificum m ( oncilys , ot Tyrannis Romana,conflitueretur i rob
Bella ſuſciperentur: ot Principes Chriſtiani inter ſe commirterentur : Te pe-
cunia colligererur,modo in tram ſanfFam , mods in fabricam 7etri , modo in ne-
cio quos jus , ſeu verins abuſus alies : que tota in paucos quoſdam ventres , in luxum
& libidinem conyceretur. Arque hec onica fut aliquot iam ſecila ratio Concilio-
rum. Nam de erroribus & abufibus , quaſi nulli eſſent , nihil onquam agi po-
fuk.

*Petrus Alliacenſis in Conſlantienſi ( oncilio multim queſtus eft de auaritia , 8
inſolentia curix Romanz. At quid promoutt? que onquam pars illorum auari-
tie aut inſolentie ( oncilij authoritate repreſſa et? Idem ait feftos dies, &* otioſo-
rum Monachorum greges fibivideri minuendos: & alins quiſÞþiam ( in opere quodam,
quod appellatur tripartitum , @ adiunftum eſt ad Concilium Lateranum) torus, inquir,
fere mundus obloquitur , & ſcandalizatur de tanta mmttitudine religioſorum paupe-
rum. Et patres in Concilio Lateranenfi , Firmiter, inquiunt, pracipimus, ne quis
d2 czrero nouam religionem inueniat, Ex eo tempore. quid de. feſtis
diebus faftum fit , neſcio: probabile tameneſt , nibil eſſe imminutum: At Monacho-
rum ordines auttt etiam ſunt in infinitum. Nam 4 proximts Pontificibus additi
(unt Ieſuite,Cappuchini, Theatint : quaſi pigrorum ventrum nondum etiam eſſet [atis.
Johannes Gerſon, ( ancellarius *Parifienfis , in Concilio Conſtantienſs obculit patribus
ſeptuaginta quinque abuſusin Eccleſia Romana, quos vehementer cupe-
ret emendatos. At ex tantonumero, quem illi ynum abuſum onquam ſuftulerunt *
Toannes Picus Mirandula ſeribit ad Leonem Papam, vt minuat inanes Ceremo-
nias, & cocrceat luxum facerdotum. Sederunt poitea Epiſcopi magna frequen-
tia , e* magna expeFtatione in ( oncilio Laterano. At quam nam ceremoniam im-
minuerunt , in quo ono ſacerdote laxum & nequitiam damnanerunt? Mantuanus
potra queritur nominatim de moribus Eccleſiz Romanz: Bernardus Abbas it as
[cribit ad Eugenium Papam : Aulatua recipit bonos, non facit; mali ibi pro-
ficiunt , boni deficiunt. Er de miſerabili flatu Ecclefie , qui tum erat ; A planra,
inquit, pedis v{que ad verticem capitisnon eſt in ea ſanitas. Er rurſus, Vbi
lt, inquit, qui predicetannum acceptabilem Domini? Noncultodiunr ,in-
quit , hoctempore ſponſam CH & 1 $T 1, ſed perdunt : non paſcunt gregem
Domini, ſed maCtant, & deuorant. Adrianus Papaſextus ,cum Legatum mit-
teret in Germaniam, ingenue , & ver® faſſus eſt corruptiflimum cfle ſtarum vnis
uerſicleri. - Omnes,mgquiz, nos PrzlatiEccleſtaſticideclinauimus, vnuſquil.

ucin viam ſuam, nec eſt iam qui faciat bonum, non cſt viquead ynum.
Albertus *Pighius fatetur in ipſa Milla , quam illi ſacroſanflam eſſe oolunt , <> in
qua vna Cardinem religionis ( hrifliane conſlituunt , abuſus & errores inucniri,
Quid pluras * mitto alios teſtes ; ſunt enim infiniti. Habita ſunt poſtea Conciliacom-
plura,conuocati ſunt Epiſcopi , Synodus Baſilienfis india et nominatim , vtiilli tum
pre ſe ferebant,de reformatione totius Cleri: At ex eo rempore errores vbique autti ſunt,
mDitiaetiam ſacerdotum conduplicata ſunt. ' IS

Cardinales 4 Paulo "Papa tertio deleFti ad conſiderandum flatum Eccleſie,renun-
tiarunt, malraeſle in ea, & preſertim in'Epilcoporum & Clericorum mori-
bus 'vitioſa.” Epiſcopos otiolos cle, nondocerepopulum , non paſcere gre-
gem, non curare Vincam : verfari in aulis Priucipum , abcſle 7 eons Car-
dinalibus Epifcoparus,modÞ ternos\, middd quaternos commendari, idque
magno cunEectefte detritmento fiert?"illa enim officia non efle (ori loquun-

Frif tur )

16

17

EpiſtolaEpilc, Iuell:

4.) compatibilia, Conucntuales ordings prorſusex Eccleſia tollendos efle.
Poſteahabitum eſt (oncilium Tridenti/: ſed an Epiſcopi caperunt ex eo tempore paſece-
YE greens ? an defierunt,aut abeſſe doms , aut verſars in aults © Principum ? an Car-
&imales deflerunteſſe Epiſcopi? aut proſpettum eſt, ne quid Eccleſia ex ca re detrimen-
ti caperet ? an imminuti ſunt ordines contentuales ? an religio apud cos eſt emendatior
quid ergo neceſſe ſuit tot Epiſcopos tam procul conuocart, aut de emendanda Ecclefra tot
annos fruſtra deliberari? hoc ſcilicet illud eſt , Phariſeos reflituere coelle Templum
Dei.

1$ Fatentur exrores & abuſus : conuocant Concilia , ſamulant ſtudiam religionis Cx

picratts,pollicentur operam & induſtriam , quicquid collapſum eſt id onine ſe velle yna
nobiſcum inſtayrare ; ſic ſcilicet,or ol:m boites popult Det dicebant, (e velle vna cum
Nchemia xdificare Templum Domini. Non enim ih id querebant,vt Templum

— Dominiedificarent, ſed vt.quam maxims poſſent <dificationem impedirent.Redire -00-
luns nob;{cum in gratiam , ſed ita , vt olim Naas tyrannus cum Judeis Jabenfibus , non
alia lege, quam vt ſinamus nobts exculpi dextros oculos : hoc eft ,vt verbum Dei,
& Euanoelim ſalutis noſlre nobis erip1 patiamur.

4n enimilis.cure eſt religio: anillicurant Eccleliam Dei, quibus nec Deirvin-
difla , nec ſalus populi , nec vila pars officij ſui onquam cure fuir ? Pan, inquiunt,
curet ouzs, ipſo interim belligerantur , venantur, obſonantur : vt ne quid dicam fedins.

0 Deum immortalem quis iſtos putet Ynquar de Eccleſia Dei, aut de religione cogita-

re! quando 1ſli , aut quos errores onquam tollent £ quam lucem nobts reflituent * quic-

quid dicas , ctiamfi ſolzm ipſum geras in manibus,tamen videre nolunt : manifeſts er-
rores, quantumPoſſunt , excuſant , pingunr, comunt , ot oiim Symmacbus , aut Por-
poyrius errores , E& ineptias Erhnicorum : omnindque id agunt , ne populum Dei in
fraudem induxiſſe, neue quid ipfi onquam erraſſe videantur. Aut (i quid in animum
inducunt emendare , quod aut nunquam, aut valde rare & perparce facunt . Of olim

Alexandrum Imperatorem Romantm , quum non prorſus abborreret a religione Chri-

ſliana, aiunt, in eodem Sacrario , & (,briſſum coluiſſe , & Orpheum : tque ve-

teres olim Samaritani vna & Teri Du cultumretinuerunt , & caltum Idolorum: ita
illt, ealege recipere oolunt partem forte aliquam Euangely , Vt ond [uperſtitiones

& antles errores admirtant : ita recepiunt roera, ut falſa retineant : ita probant noflra,

vt ſua non improbent. Atque ua non tollunt abuſus , fed colorant : & roeteres colum-

nas nouo tanium tectorio inducunt.

20 Ad bunc modum ab iſtis Ecclefia Dei emendatur , fic conuentys &* (oncilia.s
celebrantur : ver#tati nop ſeruitur ' ſed affelibus. Meclior pars 4 maiori ſuperatur.
Pulchrum quidem & glorioſum eſt nomen ipſum Concily generalts: ſed ex pulchro ca-
lice [pe venenum propinatur. Non enim ſatis eſt Epiſcopos galigaot & Abbates y-
num in locum conueniſſe : non in mitr a,aut purpura fita eb vis Conciliy , nec quicquid
Concilium decrenit , [tatim habendum eſt pro oraculo. ( oncilium erar,de quo 2 WY
Fſatas ſcribit; V'x filijs defeRtoribus , dirt Dominus , qui cogynt Concilium,
& non ex me: &, inte, inquit, Concilium, & diflipabitur. -(;oncilium em,

: de quo Propheta Dauidita loquitar ;. Excitati ſunt Roges terre, & Principes
conuenerunt invnum aduerſus Dominum, & adycr{us Chriſtum cius.. Con-
cilium erat, quod filium Dei Iclum Chriſtum damnauit ad crucem.. Concilium eras,
quo:! Carthagint celebratum eſt ſub: Cypriano , in quo decretum eſt , haptizatos ab he-

reticis , quum rediſſent ad Ecclefuam , eſſe rebapti2gnqos ; guem errorem oportu po-

[tearot  oncelys, & patram ſcriptis renacart. Et. quid. multis opus; off * ( oncilium

4 WM, © | Ephefinum

i9

XUM

ty I SEP A re

A * 4 — ww

de Concil. Trident.

871

Epbe/inum ſecundum aperte fecit pro Eutycbete; bumanamyr C brifto naturam conuer-
{arriam de adoratione ſtatuarum : Concilium:*Bofilienſery.rot Alberts Pighins ait,
decreuit, contra: omnem antiquitatem ;z contra naruramy contra ratiovem,
comma verbum Dei. - '(oncileum Ariminenſe-impi> decreuit:pro Arrianis , Chri-

ſum non eſſe Deum. Alia Concilia deinceps mulea., Smyrnenſe, Atrium , Seleucianum,

Syrmianun , & Homouſianos condemnauerunt ,'&+ Ariminenfis ( oncilij impietatiſub-
{eripſerunt. Quid queris * ipſum ctiam Conciliym ( balcedonenſe, quod ronumerat ex
ilis quatuor , que. Gregorin cum quaruor Enangelys comparauit; Leo Papa non du-
bitawit 4ccuſare kemeritarts. | K
| +: Jraque videmus,, Concilia Concilys ſepe contrariaextitiſſe : *otque Lzo Pontifex
atta ſuStulit Adriani ,Stephanus Formoſs, Toarnes Stephani : cotg, Sabinianus Papa,
Omma ſcripta Gregory Pape, vt peruerla:& jmpia juffir comburi : ira videmus
Concilium poſterius ſepe omnia.Þ ſuperiorts ( onsily decreza ſuſtuliſſe. (|arthaginenſe
( oncilium decreuit,ne Romanus Epiſcopusappellaretur,aurſummus ſacerdos,
aut princeps lacerdotum,aur aliud quippiamimile. Atpoſtera Concilia,iilum nen
tantum{ummunm ſacerdotem, Jedetiam ſummum Ponrificem, & capur Vniuer-
ſalis Ecclefz appellauerunt, 'Hliberinum Concelifi decrenit; ne quid,quod colitur
jus falque efſcr, vr in templorum parieribus pingeretur. Concilium Con#tantino-
licanum decreuit , imagines non cfſle ferendas in Terplis Chriſtianorum.
Contra,” oncilium Nicenum ſecundum, imagines intemplis nontantum ponendas

eſſeecnſuir,fed.criam adorandas. Lateranenſe (,ontilinm ſub Inlio Papaſecundo,

n0n alia cauſa indium eſt, quam vt *Piſani (ontity decreta'reſcinderet.” Ita Epiſco-
þi ſpe poſteriores prioribus adutrſantur , & (oncilia- alia aliorum luminibus ob-
firnunt. 1/ts enim ng ſuis quidem (oncilys tentri volunt , nifi quantum placet, quan-
tumque commodum ef, & facit =veriw4rs. Baſilienſe (ontium decreuit , Concili-
um Epiſcoporum cfle ſupra Papam. At Concilium Lateranenſeſub Leone. de-
creuit; Papam cfle ſupra Concilium. Papa ver0 non ſolum ita. ſe gerit , fed etiam
{1quis-contra ſenciat, cum habere iuberipto'hzrerieo. - Arqui omnes Epiſcopi
&» Abbates in Concilio. Baſilienſi,, 11 quis, inquinnt , iltis veritatibus {eſe oppotiir,
pro. hzretico habendus lt. .Obſecro te", quid ru'bic facias * quicquid dicas aut
ſentias, el Papa te, vel Concilinm'habebit protbaretico.”" Omnts auten-Pape, ali-
quot iam ſeculis , ſeſe iſtis Bafilienſis' Concilyrveritatibus"'oppoſuerunt : ergo'indicio
Baſalienfis Concaly,aliquot iam ſecula-omnes'Pape fuerunt heretici. © 1dem Contilium
onnibie /uffragijs fummouit *P apam"Eugmnium'; bominews Simoniatum, & ſehiſma-
ticum,&7 ulli ſucceſſorem dedit Amidlewm. 43 Eligenius Papa Concilipdetretum floe-
<1 fecit,ct quamuis maximeeſſet Simoniacus & Schiſmuticus tamin.non. difijt eſſe ſut-
cefſor Petri,ex *Uicarius ( Hriftd, &- caput evninerſe Ecclelie Dei : eo muitts on-
mew diguitatem priorem retinebat FOtqu? anteaJolitus fueran, incernicibus bominum
nobilium ſublimia magnifice ferebatur. 4mideusautem bomo'fimplex'; quaſh ex equo

 delapfua , bumi pedibus ambulabar;, fath/que ſehiveatus afſe. coidebatur , qudd de Papa

Z1

faftus efſet Cardinalis. ( oncilum jaroximumTrideutinamedixic;*vt Epiſeopt doce-

. rent; populuns , neue quiſquam vuts duo, plur due ſacerdatiababeret eodem tenjpore; iſti

contra ediftum C oncily ſui cunmlant ſacerdotia,; dmibil docent. ' 11a ſeribunt teg#s,

tp/etenerrualiet, nifi quondubet..\ Tamti/crtiert) ſemper fecerunt Condilin;

W-7 1) RAN" SOV 342 15% 1 U0RAS, 743 V DU CIOLIEAT 4K

Ver & quid o/þ.,, our eatutuat YT Per fywdentm
2

gratin,

23

—_—

- _—_ GC - — -

23

>

me cong

DILL | £ \\\L

Lravia, quaexpettationey que ſpe venitar in Conriliun** "Hor" enim tamuns reruns
cogita ; quam randem hourines vllifint ;\quorum fide ;dofirma;; indir; moles totins
Concily 25 omnium iStarumiueſhionum difceptatio , &* ſunin;z;yerummnire Hebeat *
Abbates quidem appeliantar,& Epiſcopi, graues perſone,Cx pulthra nominarvrg exiſti-
matur , magni_inſtar momenti imudminifirantia Beelefia Des. At frills nomina tan-
cumea, & perſonam , & roeftem tollas, nibil babenr-aliud nec Abbatis , net Epiſeop;
fimile.”. Non enim [unt mini$triChrifti non difpenſatores myſteriorum Dei now idicuey-
bunt lekioni, non docent Euangelium\, non paſcunt pregen , "non.colunt terram'\, no
plantant vineam , non accenannt ignem', non portant arcam Domini , 1100 obelirt le -
gationem proChriſts ; non vigilant , non faciunt opus Euangels/t-s ,.non implent mini-
flerium ſun * emplicant ſe negotys fecularibus': abſconduns. theſaur um Dowmimi ſut,
anferunt ( lanes regnt Dei ; non ingrediuntur ipft., nec-alr; ingredipatiuntur ;pulſant
conſeruos:ſuos , paſcunt ſeipſos , gregem non paſcunt: dormiunt., flertant , cortintn-
tur , luxtrigntur ;, nibes fine aqua ,ftellx fine luce, tanes mutt, <ventrespigri :''Vtque
Bernardus ait; non Prelati,ſcd Palati , non Doctorecs, ſed SeduCtores, non Va-
ltoresfcdimpoſltores, (crui ;mgait , Chriſti, ſeruiunc Ancichriſto, 1/tis folis
Pontifices wolunt locum efſe,&* ſuffragandi poteſtartem in Concilio: in iforum indi-
cio ac poteRate otr ſari lun curam , C9 proctrationem vniuerſe Ecclefis Chri-
ſti: iſtos nunc ſolos Pius Papadelegit ad ſpem ſuam.. At quos (10 Dens bone, bomi-
nes, quales wires? quanquam, Vt ipfiquidem putant,ridulun eit, velle hoc quarere.
Ouamenim aoth , quamque þij fit, quid oelnt., quid ſentiant,; iquiunt , nihil re-
fert. Satis videlicet et, fi [ederepoſiine inmila, © magna pompa.,, & ſtrepituvehs
per publicum ,&/ venire in Concilzum., & nihil dicere: . Stmihi forte non credis;ac me
potinis putas animi cauſd ifta fingere 3 dudi erz0 iuticinm Honorarium, quideg deve fa-
croſanfta facu'tas,, & Sorbona tota decreverit.\ - Quod magiftri,, inquiknt noftys,
dicunt de legitima congregatione, notandum ct ad hoc, vt Concilianvlegiti-

gregctur, lufhcere quod (olemnitas,' &: fotma iuris foleniniter ifir
[cruata. Quia1i quistrahere vellet hoc induſpurationem,virum Prelatiioai

. ibiſedent, habeant reRam intenrionem, & vrrutn ſint docti; & verum/h abe-

ant ſcientiam {acrarunlicerarum,& animum obedixndifanaedocrineteficc
praceſlys.in infinicun.. {i idelcer,quitanguam Mercuriales: ſlatuz muti ſede-
ant, $8: @ziid fic religia,prorſus neſetant; de Vnier/atolegione refle .commoderoſpon-
debut, & quicqgud dicunt., CNPANE DON uennt, i AA ky q\ MM Db-40) 0

-.... Itog onanes "7 ontiftx bobtt., mon tantumt errore: & iguorautia y ſed erin 1y-
reiurande;, gg religions obftriftoi fibi1\ V6. tiamfr.refte ſentiant.,. tameie wiſeperiar;
eſſe veling,,, quod ſentiunt pronuntiare,  veritarem palam:profiters,, & pre.fe ſerre
nop. poſiint; prorſus, vt vel hawnt ies fallendaifit 1 ruel Deo fic eninr om) in-
xaut concepts; verbis., Ego Nckpifcopus ab bachorainantea fidelis*&ro fan-
aPares fandayue Apoliolkte RomanxEtclohiz Fo Doywno) mad Pape
N.eiutgque ſuccefioribus Canvnice.intranmblus : Non: oro jneq\ieoh-
falio ,; neque in facto, y$ viranuperdatyauramembrunrules} caþiat#kindila

_  captione. | Confuliums,quodimbuzaur-perditermsy aucperidanciiativani-
fcltabis-yad, cius-damnuniaull-pandzmvs Papa RawnwineFeohd(+
, regzzlas ſagctorunnpatrunuadjuaaroroud:defendoridunt®, Br'rethf

j8c

-pret2cneshow es. Om quan cords pom. Py
rar in gratiam Philippi Regis ,erant qui facete dicerent, Pythinm Cepiſſe
Ver. ante yoms\ par ſþirms videamk' mibilth Conrileodecer nn) 3

wv; 049d aller; Comcidvant OYcultiacs, vg ET a
7@ p) Y Pruderttr- dl Tohyes, que unj | 1 OB ſcw re
is Footoge; -rohorceſus): -Atiadv'Þu98Y» I tid :
indeed War voluinhouos ſeinnt HOVs WAPB"Þ aBb: i
bus even ments ee \qrn2t Blom BAVRF fu pied: $

Bios ;iqu Ae ng, "mow Byhinr', qi" WcVa Wario Prefer ANA wa

nr. \ : Re aurthf"$06 ſeek Iþff If atfer wait Pr wv atoms MR, UW e [4

gail Clifhud dieat'ſ +0 latin yams if aubk Inb POCOIET W716 |

avs jain;-u Und Hiabrim® COAMeNS Spiirut fatiFto ; &3" MOMS (bhi.
ftithorum x20 00370 plant wi ««Pyabits art {rſt i affidenrti. reuelz- 1.Cor.14.3%
rams fueric;privtraceat? ifs pers comprebandl inbint; eo in care em detrudi;es* ig:

rooratir”, woluifſee
qNiequain ſlaturds\ptatter
- Trdque bibert ail, Ie i i beiGN ory miathd$4 "

niltus manulart , | hl qaiy icquarn \contrit mutiat” . Tots 1adÞhc fit ate hi Seins
anorem ſun bifeim mp3 2, tee virorwh; lohamis Hus,& Hie-
rohymrPragentis” Ip Jradriins fidem publitantinterſecerujit; & falth Deo,
bominibdſq uae fe efolieru. «waJIC impinspropheta'Zedechide., Fin apt et fibi-rornnL,
ferrea;coluphumiraperit Miches Prophets Domini” es nib mglhr, ri oh im
rirasDomini,; niſi adte f Jongueanont eelnfis vs} folk Fc

cilys., &-ſolt obrinemſuffraxia,, arquemts ribs, roms Be Eye.
fjz derind, ſingniqutiC)\hiſoviiuat oxreric prodaticiormitihoall Exul/arc ; EhroH-
ris vittere: :'Noftrorian evimi8ti bominhn provucuwpindin dro, 19.
002903 — — — — Legatr PriveipnptOcrniatins): wh Lats
qi (2 COS Yell-rant,vrumdercnromyab omintc ;
Epjes enim;&; Abbateorefpondelunn, FAY. ti maſon

cont tariex verbo. Dri: vo rinuns a

ys «Ne oudiendos mu Jicvebent recabtare: quolilf nobentioniatia FB;
Concillimr,xquam yt audbr axe. com/munioti feun.\' vi uws Tali x es 3 fs,
440 {Jones lint endaXet, . pablece deauloraanty, oy gue: kms. ms [ore
erent: pzovhwrorichs. — th
i {pnci/tuns jreuacare jouknes eot gui ub Reetefaie\ Rewind abi AW.
eff de ſt,maxima' partetaor binChriffiants neo'vifor nquantywWedak par Fubtthe.
| cenfaorpr ertdiciopte hrereticis bbberppufoe; Onnno jun Kubſeriper rh feotio-
nc-rathanzfojentaeftobaberoſuzomnia 146 nite rant News UE REN EH

Do aero ror
rtitting C ere fiiefles
2:17. oor $ boo diromicammrooequnrre bogy® ns >

a; So ters, B5TT © AmOonRed rand tans x: Ut

5/0 TSS.
ciltovan\ ©

TO TEERY BY

rban,
me edi

wn

XUM

" EpiſtolaEpiſe: Ivelli |

locorbaberi. inber , que rpoces ipſans Petri: qui fiaudlle animas. abducat ſecum. ad in-
fergz,tamen negar ſe £4 cara poſſe & quoguam reprepends: qui ait,} [eex iniuflitiafa.
ore poſſe itition : Ouem (ampten it carapſſe ſriptras , vt babes pleni
rudnens poteftatis. Quid plura? quem ipfes.conrubernales & ſatellites , Toachimus
Abbas, Petrarcha , Marplins Patawings., Laurentius V alla, Hieronymus Sauanore-
la non ambigue provunciarnnt efſe Autichriſtum. . Huins onius iudicio ac voluntati
omnia{wbycyunt » Bf dem rews fit\, id6mques index : ot accuſatores ex. inferiorilo-
0 audlantur ;1eas autemſedeat ſublimis progribumalibus, «3 ip/e de fe. pronuntiet.
Has enim leges tam Aquas , tdmque rationi conſentientes ſeripftnobis *Papa Iulins.
Nullum , nquit, ratum Concilumelt, aur grit vaquamsy quod:RomanxEc-
clefiz non tucritauthoritate.tulcitum. ' /Bonifacius oauus, omnem, ait, crea-
Lufam oportere: tubicftam eſſe Ecclelig Romanz, idquedenccelſirate falu-

. 4

=>. Us, "Er, aſehalis Papa, quaſi,inguit, Romanz Eccleſix legem Concilia vila

przfixerjnt, cum omma Conciliaper Romane Ecclefiz authoritatem, &
tctafipr, & roburacceperint , & in cotjun;ſtatutis Romani Pontificis au-
thoxicas patenter excipiatur.,,Fe. als quiipiam ,- quod Papa, inquir, approbat
vclreprobat,nosapprobarc,yclreprobaredobemus:.2 Erquod Papa _
bat, nanJiceraly improbare.. EReſcio qrizparaſitus, amiſſopudore, Exiam(1

ws mundus ſcarentietinaliquocontra Papam,tamen vxieturquodſtandum
{irfeprentiz Pape, Er alius quifpiam non mints impudenter; Sacrilegij , inquit,
ialtareflct, dilpytage.defactoPape, quiramer(i non fit bonus, ramen lem-
PE prolumiturgſle bonus. E6 akus etiam-ampudentius, Papa, inquit,haberc$-
leſtegbirriumeergoinallisque vulr,cltilli pro rationeyoluntas: ncceſt. qui
digarilli, cUuritagacis?-. equenla complurd, qi buc, addnci poſſunt , ſunt enim
infunita,relinguen\. Cn; finem aliquando: faciamr; -- Innocentius\Papa nonus,; omniun
anpudentiſimes,Neque ab Augulto, inquit,ncque a Regibus,-nequeab vni-
uctſo Cleo wmgg;arerapopute iudex tudicabitur. O Deum immoralem? quan-

tulwn akeſt , vt bocxetiam dicanta Alccndam-fuper Aquilonem , & crofſimulis

alzi 1,02. $4ſ{g D&ra/unt omnia', 9: Papenitil wientui funt., quid opus eft Con-
£402, Aut fu(; onculium fincerum v3 (;herum habete volunt , tollantur iſta omnia , vt
amprovg: &. ſuperba- mendacia:.necitantum ex v/u' 0 foro, oerum etiam 2x libris
anmubua auferantur., nt ſunmateturin vnius:bonint , cix/que multis tuſtiſsrms de

cans feſhefti. volunzate » ac libigine. relinquatur. Atqui Ponifices atunt , {ec cr-

by axenonpalle, Kad praſcriprumiſuum cxgendum efſeverbum Dei: arque_

eta iautequam:adearit ad dignitatem Pontificiam,. iurantur in fidem recentium quo-
TuBgdart.Conciliorugh guibus omitia fardum in madum. ſunt: depranats , C&- fantie pro-
mataxc{anollegquigquamijmmuari. - Quare quid mira eft; fs in: Concilys nis
bil praficitw 5) þrerrores <> abuſtis newtolluntur -ihovir Princefumfruſtratampro-
cul ex omnibus terris conuocantur > Tamen audio eſſe quoſdam oc temporg bomine's,
non.yalgs, [ed paginns,quiddicane, attendentes: gm quanuit arragantiam. imBontife-
<r,6 * jaihan Porfirues » X# Epicir eu. contemprum religions daruent:, tamentires
aut) ny aratſ wel wr ar 6 __

eo Auighraſtuns, bamen eundens poi quan ſome ajeandit iniliant{edens ;mtnaw-
Feel Faine/aemdiepr «que mien Eco hoof.
i@frapphant, Bro fbi placent a6 [1 Spirityes faiFina affixurs\efſet ad Mulen\dtie:
W. A923 locus landiaticathhminemysnquzant tedhomig locum. rEtdfiane
mm ghemaduoduncira abigfs, Non fily , aiguit , undorymunt jaquite-

23q nent

tO-

XUM

de Condil, Frident.

7 Geer ———__—

nent. loca ſanorum : ſed qui imicantur facta illorum. Aliogai CHrrgTys

att , in Cathedra Molis ſedifſe{cribas , & Phdhiſeos; authoritarem autem il-
lorum monet tantiſper eſſe agnoſcendam,' f1-reſpondcant ex'verbo'Dei.
Quid aliud, mquit Auguſtinus , dixit Chtiftus-, -niſt'per mercenarios vacem
paltoris audite? fedendo cnim in Cathedta legem Dei docent: ergo perillos
docet Deus. Sua vero f1illi docerevelint,nolire audire;nolite facere. Paulus
tiam att, Antichriſtum,hominem illumpeccati ſeſſurum eſſe in loco ſano. I-
raque Hieronymuus refte monet, Artendis ,inquit Petrum, ſed & Iudam confide-
ra: Stephanum ſulcipis, ſcd & Nicholaum reſpice. Non facit Eccleſiaſtica
digniras Chriftianum; Hec Fiteronwymus. Et certe ainnt Marcellinum Papam
facrificaſſe Idolis , Liberium Papam fuifſe Arrianum : Ioannem Papam' 22.
impie ſenſifſe de immorralitare animarum : Ioannem Papam 8. fuiſle foen:i-
nam, & in Paparu incelta |:bidinecum adulteris concubuiſſe, & in luſtranda
ciuitare ,in ipla pompa, atque in oculis Epiſcoporum & Cardinalium pepe-
rifſe: Et Liranus ait,multos Pontifices Romanosa fide Chriſti defeciſle. Qua-
re non nimium fidendum erat locis & fucceſsionibus , @ inanibus titulis dignitatum.
Imptus Nero ſucceſsit Metello pi. Annas & Caiphas ſutceſſerunt Aaront ; 5+ 1d0-
lum [epe ſucceſst in locum Dei, | =
Sed quenam, obſecro, eft illa tanta vis E& autboritas de qua iſtiita inſolenter glo-
riantur ? aut vnde ad eos delata eft? de clo, anex hominibus,? Chiiſtus,inquiunt,
ait Petro, ſuper hanc petram zdificabo Eccleſiam mean : his verbis authori-
ratem Pontificiam confirmari, Ecclefiam enim Chriſti in Petro, tanquam
in fundamenro collocari, Atqui ( briſtus his verbis nibil Petro dedit ſeorfom 4
ceteris Apoſtols. Neque aut Pontificis mentionem vilam facit , aut orbis Rome.
Chriftus illa- eft perra, Chriſtus eſt illud fundamenturn. Nemo, inquit Paulus,
otelt aliud fundamentum ponere, quam quod iam antea polirumelt,quod
eſt Chriltus Icfus. ED | "
Er Auguſtus, ſuper hanc Petram , inquit, xdificabo Ecclefiam m eam : ſy-
per hanc , mgui, intelligitur, quam canifeſſus eſt Perrus, dicens, tu cs: Chri-
{tus filius Dei viui, Non cnim, inquit, dictum clt,” Tu es petra, ſed tu cs Pe-

26

27

trus; petraautem erat Chriſtus. Er Duwns Baſllius, ſt uper hanc Petramyboceſt, Tra. r.in
inquit, ſuper hanc fidem xdificabe Ecclefiam meam. Et antiquiſimus pater Marth.

”

Origines, Pcerra,imquit, cſt quiſque diſcipulus Chriſti, cx quo biberuae de {piri+
tuali conſcquente Petra: Er ſuper ralem petram coliruitur omnis Eccleſia ſti-
ca doctrina. Quod fi ſuper vnum illum Fetrum tantam exiſtimas. edificari totam
Ecclefiam , quid difurus es de Toanne filio Tqnitrui , & ApoſZolorum vnoquoque * alio-
qui enim audebimus dicere, quod aduer ſus vuum Petrum non prevalitaye fav porte in-
ferorum , aduerſus ceteros Apaſtolos ac prefeos fins preualiture *, af yon potins in
omnibus & ſingulis eorum , de quibus dittum eſt , fit ilud »440d aichumeſt , port
inferorurs non preyalebunt aduerſus eam: & illud,ſuper bang petrarn «dificabo Eccleſia
meam? an oer0 ſoli Petro dantur 4 (brifto claues regni Celarutn, nec alius beatorum
805 epi och eſt? quod fi hoc difgum, Tbi dabd clayes regnixelorum,ceterhs
quog comminz &8t,cur non fimul omnia.) & queprius EN: que ſequuntur,ve-
lut ad Petrum difta Junt oninium communiat Vna,g q wit. darius,e/t [elixfidei petra,
dam ore ſuo Petris confeſſus eft., Er aL Baa, inquit., confeſgonem Petri
edificataeSt Ectlefia. Er non ita multg pot, Hec inquit, fides Eccleſia fundamentum
eſt.” Ad hunt madum aly etiam patres , Hierowymus, Cyrillus ,,Beda Ecclepam exadi-
ficatam aiunt , main Petro, ſed nfide Petri , boc eſt, m'Chriſto Ieſu filio Dei _
F efrus

—————

$76 M  Epiſtola Epiſc. Inelli

E Petrus celeſti inftinftu profeſſus fucrat.” Petrus, inquit Auguſtinus > 4 petra diftus
eſt ; on petra 4 Petro. Nec ego me inquit,edificabo ſuper te,ſed te edificabo ſuper me.
Imd etiam Nicolaus Liranus , cefi non ſemper bonus autho- , [cis enim in que tempor a
inciderit cius «tas, tamen hoe refte vidit, ſuper hanc, nquit , petram ,ideſt , ſuper
hritum. Ex quo non poteft Eccleſia conſtare in aliquo homine , ratione poteHtatis,
vel dignitatis Eccleftaſtice,quia multi Pape inuenti ſunt ApoState.

28 uz ergo in re fitaeſtifla authoritas Pontificia? In docendo * atnibil aocent. In
miniſtrando ſacramenta ? at non miniſtrant. In paſcendo * at niti! paſcunt. 4tqui
hac eſt illa poteſtas , quam Chriftus contulit in Apoſtolos. Tee, inqult , in onuerſum
mundum , & predicate Euangelium : &', potthac eritu piſcatores hominum : &, ſicut
me mifit viuens Pater ita ego mitto-v0s.1fti vero,quo ennt ? quid docent * quid pradi-
cant ? qui4 piſcantur ? onde eunt * 4 quo mittuntur> Non eſt iſia authoritas Apo-
ſtolica, ſed ſuperba & intolerabilis dominatio, per vim gr tyrannidem o/urpata.
Nemo noftrum, inquit Cyprianus , Epiſcopumſe Epiſcoporum azcit , aut tyrannicoter-
rore collegas ad obſ:quendi neceſSitatem compellit ; quando habeat onmis Epiſcopus
pro licentia libertatis & poteſtatis ſux arbitrium proprium, tanquam indicari ab altero
n0n poſſit , quum nec ipſe poſsit, alterum iudicare. Et hoc, inquit , erant Utique cateri
ApStolt , quodfuit Petrus , pari conſortio prediti & honorts, & poteftatis. Et Di-
au Hieronymus ; Maior inquit,est authoritas orbis,quam vrbis. Quid mihi profers
vnius orbis conſuerudinem * quid paucitatem, de qua ortum eſt (upercilium , in leges
Eccleſia oendicas ? obicungque fucrit Epiſcopus , fue Rome, fiue Enguby , fiue Con-
ſtantinopoli, ſiue Rhegij , euſdem eſt meriti , & eiuſdem ſacerdotiy. *Potentia diui-
tiarum , & paupertatis bumilitas, ſuperiorcm vel inferiorem Epiſcopumnon facit. Et
Gregorius, Petrus , inquit, precipunns in corpore membrum, Toannes, Andreas, Jaco-
bus, particularium plebium capita: omnes tamen ſub ono capite membra Eccleſie ſunt.
Ind /anfiantelegem , ſanfi ſub lege , ſanfti in gratia , & omnes pet ficientes corpus
Domini in membr1i ſunt conſtituti, e& nemo ſe vnquam vninerſalem dict ooluit.

. Hecilla eft poteſtas , quam hodie quidam ita [trenue defendunt , & quicquid de
Pontificis vel ita, vel religione ſentiant , tamen illam ſacroſanftam e+ integram
eſſe volunt , quaſi fine ea Eccleſia Dei incolumis eſſe non poſvit : aut nifi Papa elit
CT inbeat , ( onciliumnen fit Concilium ; E& fi totus mundus contra ſentiat gibil ſentiat.
Ouare cum ideas hac omnia iniquiſfime eſſe comparata,nihil hodie in Concilys ſincere
&* vere fiers, mirari nondebes, fi noſlri homines domi manere malint, quam tam pro-

- cul fruſtra proficiſct , vbi & operam luſuri fint , & cauſam perdituri.

30 Sed miuſſu Pontificis , inquies , & Concily , nefas erat in religione Voluiſſe quic-
quam immutare. Imo vers , Pontifices ipſt oniuerſum prope ſlatum primitiue Ec-
clefix fine rollo Concilio mutauerunt. Eft quidem iſta ſpecioſa & pulchra oratio , ſed
etroribus fediſmis pretexitur. Morari enim tantam volunt expeFatione animos
hominum ; vt mor at tedio hebeſcere incipiant , &- ad extremum ſþem abjciant. Quid
enim? an'dum' Papa connocet Concilium, & Abbates atque Epiſcopi domumredeant,
odlint inter2xPÞopulum Dei falli;errare, decipi , circumfundi erroribus 29 ignoratione
Det , &x abdyci ad interitum ſempiternum 2 non licet cuiguam noſtrum credere in Chri-
ſtun , profitefF Euangelinm, ritd & vere Deum colere , fugereſuperstitiones et cultus
idolorum, nifi ifti velint ? wiſerabilis vert cſſet latus Ecelefie Dei , ft in tot erroribus
em late diffuſes \ tam crafts , tam cacis , tam fedis , tam perſpicuts , et manifeſtis , ot
ed3 ne aduerſarij quidem noſtri negare queart , nibil pofsir effici fine concurſu orbus ter-
rarum, et (oncilio general, ens praſertimr, cuins et expeFtatio incerta fit , et exitus
muito ncertior. Quwum Perſ4 olim im Graciam rridelfan , &t cepiſſent ye
| & +0, | 4

XUM

:1de Concil, Teak,

—

»
he
o

Gygg

XUM

5

a 14

2a TT us, fin] arer EC "AY o oribiang £5 Galataram, _— "1
Tres 2426s IT | af

32

I<
a.

3 +

$3

— - +” a pag iS Cn 0 FOREI—_— — 7 —_—_

pittoha EpikJvelli

Rnd ale Contilrgs : ad i Rh gNicquad /]er ctraris aur wg, id
BPR $2coar 9 Fic aims, cunts Epi;capi dognureng, argue, aligd Act, ant cliam
WTO PBli2Fent remplum Det, Imper, Dieu exeqaordinerid ratitnt alin
ABBIE Magi Dire ÞIitmgare air G6 Origin inven frees
n28Nos ©2r0 hy tamere , mbil nf; ſumma cum ratione fecinus., nibil ni quod
*pMeBlinhus & ſemper Ueniſſe fieri, &-dfanttic patrizns [ape ſine Diareprebenſione
fine faftim. * Vague convocats. Eþiſcopis Frequenti Synodo , communi conſenſu
onith'ordinim, Ecttfix [ordes ;\ Gas Del incheria hominum , wel malitia infuderat,
tanquam Aiitte h /Iabultim repar a Vimus x& quantum aſſequizyaxime pothimug,om-
nie a Pthomnirotend pe eorim temparnny's Prowiine Reco fodids
HM heV.2E mus, " Tdglie & porumus rette facere,&7 quia patuinzas fidenter fecimns.
* Labet hic audiyc\, quid Gregorius Papa. 1. bac e re ſcripſerih,, quanquam magis
libet\, qu? Galle de Anglicarum Eccle Farum inſtgutione ad Anglonan. Epiſcopum clugu-

b]

ſlime ta ſripſrit. "Horcatar aucem, now ot gd Facilium refaxa 5 ſed Ot pſapr
fuapridÞntiadinſtittat;quo aa0r” ky maxame poſſe promaueri.. Noutgingint,
fraternicds taza Romab Ecclefize-conſucrydigem ,, in qua ſc meminuyg efle
nuctitilin.” Sed:mihi placet vi fiurin omang, luc Galligorum,ſiuc qualiber
Feeleſin mycniltiquod plus omnipvrenti, Deg pollit placere , cligas-{olicice,
& in Anglorum Eccleſtiam, que adhucintide nouaelt,,& inconſtitutione,
przcipua, quz de multis Ecclefus colligere.pateris,infundas, Non cuim pro
[ocis res,{ed pro rebus loca amanda ſunt> . - |
Ad eundem modum ſeribunt Patres in Concilio Con/lantinopolitano ad Damaſum
Epiſcopum rorbis Rome, & reliq 0x:Opicopes Occidentis. De Cura, mquiunt, ad-
miſtrarionjs fingularum Ecclcfrarum fcitis veterem {anionem & defini-
tionem Nicxnorum patrum ſempcr invaluifle, vtin vnaquaque prouincia
culroresaſſumpris etiam, {1 videatur, ftnitimis,conferantEccleftalticos hono-
res ijs, *quo> Vriliter gelturos eſſe. confidugt.. Er Aphricani Epiſcopi ad Cele-
ſtinum Romanum : Prx{bycerorum,inquiunt, & ſequentium.Clericorum im-
roba refugia, ficur re dignum elt, repellar-ſanctiras tua. - Quia &'nulla
patrum dehinitione hoc Eccleliz.dencgatumelt Aphricane r & decrera.Ni-
cxna, five inferioris gradus Clericos,fiuciplos Epiſcopos fuis Mctropolitanis
aperiiſhme commilerunt. Prudentifhme cnim iuſtifhmeque quzquenegotia
infuis locis, vbi ora ſunt, efle finienda : nec vnicuique prouincie grati-
am ſan ſpiritus defururam. Que. quiras a Chrilti {acerdotibus 8 pru-
denter videatur, & conltanter retincatur.
Multo vero meluus , & ad hanc. rem, qua de nunc agimus; \arcommotidrilts E-
leutherius Epiſcopus Romanusad Lycium Regem* Britannie: Periiſtis, mquit,a no»
bis leges Romanas, &-Czlaris.yobiz tran{mirti, quibus in regno Briritinke
vtivoluiſtis. Lees Romanas, & Czlaris ſemperpollumus reprobaret Legenh
Deinequaquam, Sulcepiſtis enum miſcratiovedmuinaiin regno Britannix'fe-
gem & hgem Chriſti: haberis. penes yos in Reguo veſtro ytranque pagt-
nam. Exillis Deigratia per concilium regni veltri ſue legem)\'& perillam
Dei parieftia pateritigiveſtrum Briranniz'regnum inſtituere. Vicarius yerd
De cis jnregno illo,tuxta,Pſalmiſiem : Dommi eſt terra: atk
Ko multis * "Vittor Epiſcopus Romanus babuit Rome Synodum provincialem:
Twſtinianus, Imperator mandat , fiquid opus fir , in fingulss provincys habere Syno-

=

| | i (OY c
- » ap # | i . #8 % ry 'Y c } C: O + f
-_- | | 1 4 C ws wu-4 abk+> F a =:

0 o ty %
C4 Fo

XUM

XUM

= — em en =

I

iſtola Epilc, Iuelli

dos : [a ni fiat ſe fore ratorem
cia aagtmores &rivus & 167

cil&'nÞ I&= =:

CER UT OE ESSPU-
tchenum, 1 uronen/e, arthagi

odicenum, Ancyranum, ONE} e e, Mileuranum, Toletanum,
Bari, Pp Poker cb Donut
ad Nictnun C oncilium A Nine Nav $0 aim $51 ne { gencrale.
Theoþbilie habutt 3 outhruMm provincidlem i tf Paieſtina: adÞ; Ponto : Tren&us in
Galli: Bachytu in; Heh : Otigeneagantrd Beryllart in Arabia;Mitta alis(Concilia mu-
nicipalia quamplura, , gag Fahitafnerfnrgn Africa; Afia ;Gracia;Aegypro,pia,orthodoxa,
( briſtiana miuſſu * F ont itrcks R0manh Bpiicepi ouun pom provenata ve quidque incidiſſtt,
flatim domeſtico ( onciito ſuccurrebant Eeclefiis ſuis, &3% modo vicinorii Epiſcoporum fidem
inplor apaut,n040 oper aq nu; 445 tradebars,& fi quid opus effet Joſe eicifiim ryltre inva-
bant,. Nex rantum Epi(cop;, ſed principes etiam indicabant religionis canſanad ſum of
cium pertinere. Najs,t mittam Naimchadutzarem,qu capitals ſancivit, fi quit blaſÞhe-

nen

:

maſſer Deu ljrael; aut Dauidem,Solomonem,Exechia, loſiamgquipartimexdhficarunt,.

”

pariim repurgarunt templum Dei ;,Cohſtantinus lnperator fine Concilio ſuſtullt eattum ido-
lorum,C7 graviſsimis verbis edixit,eapitale fore, {i quis 1dolo facrificaſſet. Theodofins T1z-
perator ſolo <quari iuſ$it templa.dearm... ovinianus. Imper ator , ftatim obieſſet renuncia-
tus, tnlit primam legem dereducendis exulibus Chriſtianis luſtinianus Imperator dicere ſo-
l:bat Religionem Chriſti non mingls abi eſs cur £,quam Ditamſuam.  To/ua. quum fattus
eſſet-Dux populi, ſtatin accepit precepraia Oe Cr de colendo Deo. Sunt enim Prin-
cipes nutrity Eccleſie,C cuſtodes veriufquetabule.Nec alia magis cauſa Deus ſemper ro0-
luit Politias exiſlere, quam Vt eſſent,qui religionem 6 pietatem incolamem conſervarent.

Quio magts hodit grawnufque peccant multi Principes, qui appcllantur quidem C hriſtiani,
qui ſedent otioſh,5- indaiz23t ooluptatibus, & batienter ferunt impios culcus & contemp-
rum numinis, 7 hac omnia deuoluunt ad Epiſcopos, ad i:os ipſos, quibus ſciunt omnzm rt-
ligton:m eſſe ludibrio:quaſt Cura Eccl:ſiarum & populs Dei ad ip(0s nihil pertineat,aut ipſi
rairquam paſtores quidem (int armentary, & corporum tartum, ac non etian anima! un cu-
ram gerans. Non meminerunt ſe ſervos eſſe Dei,ea cauſa deleAog,vi ſeruiant Domino, Exe-
chias rex non prifis 4{cerdit in domum ſham , quan idiſſet perpurgatum templum Dei.
Et Dauid rex, Non'dabo, inquit, fomnum oculis meis, nec patiar vtconniveant

37

palpebrz.mez,dohec inveniamlocumDomino, & Tabernaculum Deo Iacob.

O 6 Principes Chriſtiant audire vellent yocem Domini ſui. Nunc reges intelligitc,inquir
Dominus,crudimint,qui judicaris En” WH in ,dixi,dij eſtis,hoc eft,bomines divi-
nitas ele Fi, quibus nomen meum eſſet cure.( ogitatu, quem ego de ſterquilinio excitaui,@

in ſummo dignitatis & honorts gradu col.ocavi, & prefect populo meo, cum ita fludinſe 4di- -

fices © ornes domum tuam , qu0 animo potes contemnere donum mean ? Aut quomodo
quotidie oras,”ot regnam tuum tibi poſteriſq; tuis confirmetur ? An Ot nomen meum ſemper
afficiatur conturstia* ot evangeliam ( briſti mti extinguatur ? cot ſervi mei mea cauſa,
ante ocules tuos,te mſpeFrante, tracidenrar ? ot tyrannis longius graſſetur ? ot populo meg
ſemper tmponatur ? ot per te ſcandalyms confirmetur* T2 ill per quem roenit ſcandalum ;
eve etrum ih, per quent confirmetur fcantalam* Horres ſanguinem corporum; quanio mags
bovrete debes ſanguinem animarum'? Memmerts quid acciderit Antiocho, Herod:,luliano:
Ego regnum tuum transferanyatthoſtetn ruum,quia peccalti adycrſum me : ego
muto tempora CT vices temporum : abycioreges & inſtituo, vt intelligas me alfiffimum FA
& vim habere inregno hominam, Cx illud dare cui voto: ego bumilio, & ego exalto, ego
21hifttarites mc, y/orifico, + c05,qui me contemnant, afficio contumelias |

Goog 2 Andreas

VI RW *, =." M6
b I ** Bu i. "OE 2s 4
> C

o
\

S TES.1%.

\ % b go \ F 4 " | ” X
|'Þ I... | TY 4 \ k IOONIENL *2 ©, - *\\ og , G 44 %. Ro, 1 # $1 . . \
Lz2 | S | T'+%:7.C "KK 1h: a
; 0 \ \ hs. \g = - ++ : '*N -

ſuis momentis'poriderarentur ſententiz ?'fi cauſſa, ſi ratione
pugnandum fuiſſer, h1pauct quidam ſocy nobis adfuiſſen, yi-
ceramus , quamiuis pauci magnas copias aducrſariorum. Sed
cumhamerus tantum prodirct in aciem, quo longe inferiores
faturi fuiſſemus, in optima cauſa viftores diſceders non
potuimus: | Sjngulis noſtram centenos de fuis Papa'potuit opponere : ac,
ft centeni parum multi viderentur , repente mille creare potuir , \ quos ſuis
laborantibus ſubſidio mitterer. Icaque videre erat , quoridic famelicos &
egentes Epiſcopos, ex maioriparte barbatulos adoleſcentes, luxuqueperditos
Tridcritum volitare , conduCctos ad fententiam ſecundum Papx voluntatem
dicendam, indoQtos illos quidem & ſtolidos, ſed ramen impudcntia & au-
daciavtiles: Hi cum ad veteres adulatores Papzacceſſcrant, tum vero vidtrix
exulrabar iniquitas, neque decerni iam quidquam poruir, niſi in corum ſen-
tentiam, qui Papz potentiam, luxamque defendere, ſummam religionem
arbitrabantur, Erat aliquis vir grauis & eruditus, qui rantam indignitatem
ferre not porterat : hic, ve non bonus Catholicus, terrore, minis, ac inſca-
tionea Concilioad probandum quz noller, traducebatur. Inſumma, incum
ſtatum res eſt adduQta, iſtorum , quiilluc fa&i inſticurique venerant, im pro-
bitate, non vt iam Epiſcoporum, ſcd laruarum, non hominum, ſed ſimula-
crorum , quz nerujs mouentur alicnis, ve Dzdali ſtatuz fuiſſe perhibencur,
Concilium fflud vidererur. Erant Epiſcopi illi condutitij plerique, vt vtres,
ruſticorum muſicum inſtrumentum , quos, vt vocem mittant, inflare neceſle

Io) 7
LD \f
|
BY WY,

|
/ #
\

eſt. Nil habuit cum illo conuentu S. Spiritus commercij, omnia cranthu-

mana confilia,quz in immodica,& ſane quam pudenda Pontificum tucnda do-
minatione conſumebantur. Illincreſponſa,tanquam Delphis,aut Dodonacx-
pectabantur : illinc nimirum Spiritus ille S. quem {uis Concilys przeſlc
iactant, tabcllarij manticis incluſus mirtebatur : qui, quod admodum ridicu-
lum cſt , cum aliquando, vr fir, aquz pluuijs excreſcebant,, non ante aduolare
poterat,quam inundationes deſedifſent. . Ira fiebar, vt Spiritus non ſuper aquas,
vteſt in Genel1, ſed ſecus aquas ferretur. - O portentoſam & ſingularemde-
mentiam ! Raturn nihil eſſe potcrat,quod Epiſcopi, ranquam plebs, [ciſcerent,
nif1 Papaautor ficrer. |

ALPHA.

 XUM

gn n—_———_— RR Ss

CE i. —_—

£ WD - a —_——— "—_ FRY _ —_ "I i. At. _— i.

- - _ 4 1
\g AY dQ} 2K BUY Cl

| ALPHABETICALL |

"TABLE" OF ALL FF HE

Principal matters conteined inthis Hiſtorie

of the Comncell of T « x wr.

| I IDEY gion ; and his conſlanciz cauſeth 4 ereat in-
A. | creaſe of the ref! —_— ko gh #- |
oh in the Charch of Annats are ſpoken againſi by i bepfor *
: Rome are colletted, robe  Niſmes. .._
reformed. \ page-$3,84 Appealcs , and. their original 334, 33

I}. Acclamations w/ed in for- Apoſtolique Sea what it is. 21

mer Councels, and imita» Arch-Biſbop of Collen 5s cited by the Sx

| > tedin Trent. 813 row? to cleare —_ of -utheraniſmc ob-
Adrian 6.48 "created Pope © is mach COM for ietted gamfp him 717 34
his ſe ueraie. ; 19 eng by the Pope at the ſame time, 123

' fs learned in ſchoole-diuinitie : was boyne in Is ſentenced by the Pope ; but th: ſentence : is
Vere : reſolweth ta reforme the Court of .not executed by the Emperot wvntill certaine
RK ome. 20 Jopre! after... 165
Isdiſſmaded from its” 23 "Hewobeyedby his people. 189
He lamenteth becauſe the Popes cannerdor i proceeded againſt by the Emperour , and

go04,though they defire it newer ſomuch. 24 , Prince Adolphus put in his place, 259
Hee confſſeth the abuſes of the Clergte, not Arch-biſhp of Otranta. o poſeth the Cardinall
exempring the Apoſtolique SCA. i 25 .of Loral nc, and th orty TOES at his com-
His death, and prayſes, | 20 mand. 719
Amante Scruira 4 Friar of Breſcia comcurreth 75 reprebeuded by the Spaniſh Ambaſhdour
in opinion with Luther concerning the En- for making riuate congregations, 759
chariſt, and is /ilenced. , $22 Arch-biſhop of Toledo #s inthe Jaquiliti tion of

Ambaſſadors in Trent hold a conſultation how Spainc 3 his boake is examined 1 inC _
ta remedie the proceedings in Councell 5 and and approueca,
chooſe the French. Ambaſſador Lenke to Aremboldus Fs agent. for the Popes fi iter, . 1
eake for them. 570,571 . ventber indulgences. 5
The Ambaſſadowrs in Trent did. not ſub- * uguſtan Confeſſion whence it had the_>
ſeribe the Deerees when the Councell _ en- name ; and when the firſt liberty to ee
ded.  feſſed publiquely. 63
Andreas Vega,chiefe of. the Fragciſatnapdes Yann hl againſt the Pope. 42 9:4 30
puteth, that the opinions of the Luthezans

” 04 ght not to be condemned without c— | B
\the opinion. of the Catboliques. «179 B A ndo /et forth by the Zager agrinſt the
C '\ Heewriteth againſt Soto. 21 216 Dake of Saxony, and the Landgrauc of

P ous du Bourg « burned in France for reli» Haſlia. 201
| Baptiſme

\þ

Ras 6 Md
= Px _—

© Baptiſme diſcuſſed.
tether 3 ab of Iohn be equal fo Chrilts.. Y
nano. Quintin, is which the Ea

received 4 great o ow.
x i# France © equity the Protef
and Pads, ,inwhich ores of
was taken priſoner, "|
Cauſeth ys ioy-in Trent. © |
Bauaria dcſrreth libertic of religion. 397. bn

The Bavarian Ambaſiadour maketh a biting -
Oration in Councell againſt th: corruptions

527 - Bull of faculrres for the Leewrof the Councell

of the Clergie.
A tumult « raiſed in Bauatja for the com-

v14810p of the Cup ; ard marriage of Prieſts.

716

Beſſarion was created C:rainall, and nas
not much of being Pope. 75
Beza ſpo:keth in the Colloquic of Poiſi, 45*,

453454
Birague the french Ambaſſadour commeth ts
Trent. 714
The Councels anſwere. 718

Hee partethfrom Trent, & goeth to the | ms-
per our : His negotiation. 720
Fifhop of Bitonto maketh afoolifh Oration as
the Councell was opent 132
is in danger to beeexcommunicated in Rome
for not paying his Penſionaries. 153
Biſhops of Fieſole av Chiozza are complained
of to the Pope by the Legats for ſpeaking free.
ly in Councell. 167
piſho of Vintiraiglia #5 the Popes ſecret mint-
fer inCo'ncel, 517
Biſbops imployes in the Councell by Card. Simo-
nerta to iſt at others. 526
Biſhops what qualities thy ought to haut. 249
261.
By what law Biſb7ps ave inſlitated,js not per-
mitied to be drſpated in Councel. 589
whether their d gree be an order, 591
Wow they are ſuperiour 10 Prieſts. 595.596
whether th:ir inflitution be de iure diuino,
or Pontificio 596, 597,598, 599,604,
636,637-
Laynez General of the Teſuites fpendeth 4
whole congregation to ſpew . hat i is de jure
Pontificio. 609, 610
The French Prelats would hane this f
wholy omitted.
Biſh:ps not made wor confirmed by the ay

635

Cannons of the Inſtitution of Biſhops are made
in Rome, and brought to Trent. 657
The Decree of the Inſtitution male. 72 3

but deferred , for feure of making th: Coun-

cell too long. 731,732
A queſtion # diſcuſſed in the Conncel » Whe-

242

676 AER

ther the my worthy ought ro be ole clelled B&-
928

fe Spaniſh Prelats yeill not chanden thes #
pinion, that the inſtitation of Biſhops 5 de

406+ lure tiuino, - 548,40 99
* But "xe perſwaded rohee quiet: 11237
onde © Bull /iLevoke tenth pow Ly 3H, 11
ofahe commention of the Tonpeefp, 0

A” be belg*on Mantuzc: Yn ib hs, "þ 79
* Another of the conuocation of the Conncellts
be helde in Trent, ag inſt which the Empe-
r0ur except:th, 10T

of Trenr. 112
>Bull for the d;olution of the Conncell. 112
Bull of che Tranſlation if the Councell. 128

Bull of the Legation the Legats will not ſuffer
to be read. 130
Bull of che tranſlation of the Councell ts Bolo-
na. 266,267,268
Bul of the reftitutis of the(ouncel to Trent. 307
which the Emperour would baue to bee al-
tered. | 307,308
Bull of Pius 4 for the intimation of the Coun-
cellan Trent, 435
C

Aictan, the Popes Legar, in what x" hee
re W. -= _— b
is blamed in Rome for v/in im vaſel,
Califtini -» Bohemia, the LE
Camillus Oliuus , Secretarie to the Card. of
Mantua, ts z diſerace withthe Pope. 518
Campegio is ſent Legat to the Diet in No-

remberp.. 31
He maketh little reformation of the ciergie
of Germanic. 32

which is receine.! by ſome few Primers. 33
Is made Legate againe,”' 52,53
1s ſent into England about the _ of
Henry the eight, and recalled to gratifie the
Enperon”. 68
Canonical! bookes of the Scripture. 152,153
Catherinus writeth againſt Soto , concerning
the meaning of the eouncell in the point, De
natura & gratia. 229
CaraQter imprinted in the collitron of the S4-
craments, what it is. 239, 240
It is imprinted in the collation of Prieſthood.

738
Card, Colonna i is citedto " SORRY 38
facketh Rome. 41 #s excommunicated,

and appeal-th to a Conncell. 1
Cardinals impriſoned , mocked, and beaten in
Rome 44.
Cardinals created, 74,272,361,396,825
(aardinals are not contained within any generall

f$ermes f any law, if they be not particularly
named

4

N 'Tabſe.

Py I — —
—

wa of hit Oran of Enpland by

®ntreth Trent with mgeny French Prelats.

Is made Le egatefor England by Pope —

_.thetbird.

4
Commth. to London with the erofſe before
= and maketh an oration in the Parlja-

'385

Paulthe 4. SORSy --,

Cardinel Exeſcentius, the L gue i Conncell,
1 @oteth. Www.» $95

\te reed to Verona,and there dicth 377

(ard. Morone was impriſoned, and readyte be
ſextented for anheretiche by Paul. 4: 446

\ 4s made prime, Preſatent of the Councel(by

_ Pope: Pius 4. and hane ſecret inſiretfions.
688. hnesentry into Trent. 0. $93
Ig necciucd in congregation. \-- 694
Hs publicke negotiatton with the Emp. 695
- Hrs priuat negotiation with the Empe, 705

Hee #s taxed by. hi fellow Legats for _

too much w/pon him.

| 724
Cardinaltof Loraine feaketh in che Collo-
quic of Poill. _.' © 453

Haga atfire to be Patriarke of France 603

624
Maketh an oration in Councell. 629
Gaeth to [{ſpruc to conſult with the Emperor
about the effaires of the Councell. 664. 668

amend. * VA 3 WA We 262 > Returncths to Trac ani hefrith BSew-
Ned. xPooles is nd Hoh farvho(dencolt in "of the Countel. \ = ut

Trent. '1fi © Wis thechiefe man to make and Youre ou the
1. awd after his returne' from he i male '  #cclamations i in the, endof the. Councell.
\ ane of the: Seto Rome ouer the coun- EE mgad 7

c6l{rnTrevty v 22.168 AT axed tn France uthisretirne: $18
Is named tobe Pope, but not eleitedfor ſuſpi- * Hi defence, _, $821 j
cron of Lygtheraniſme. 298 | Catdinall of Ferrith 5 ſent Legate_ into |

France, wheye he ts ml intertained at Se

'He mubeth acqutintonc with the Elio
nots, 456
Hath a grant to exerciſe his faculties ; which
rhe Chancellor refaſ#th to ſubſcribe. 458

« Hee meereth the” ©apy; of Loraine-#» ti

of Pi 1emont, #9 perſ made bim 0 fanour the
Popes afaires inCountccll.” . Ig0
* But cannot effect any thing. C00

Cardinallaf Mantua, < pats a the c v onls

diff\ſtzd by the Pipe. - * 507

"Fs oppoſed by Carainall Simonera." 513
The alſpatcherare woo dire w pp208

SI
ts reconciled w; rith Cardinal Simbjirt

anna tothe pope t bat hee can dj jmble PT

longey, | 675

- Hee dieth, wary 5
Cerdinall of Burbon def5eth a d; ipruetio to
marry, ©... 668
But the French-men 4 we- not Propoſe it in
CondeeB:" = © 680

(arainall Seripa ad one of the Preſylents, di-

eth, 687

Cardizall Nauaggero , th: new Preſident en-

treth Trent.

699
writeth a conſolatorie letter to his mother Cardin:ll Chaſtillion calleth himſelfe Count of
after the drath of his brother , the Duke» of Beaundis, quitterh th+ Cap , mocketh the_s

Guiſe. 681

Pope and #ad:priucd by him, 767

Goeth to Venice #0'put away griefe.' 689 (utechiſme is handled. T2

175 ſaid to ſpeake i Councell like a Lutheran.

Ceremonies wſed in opening the Councelt. 130

7204 Charles the fifth Emperor is ſuſpetted by the_z

\ Remitreth his rieogfor. matter of the Coun-
«eb, by reaſon of the great change in France.

' 712
P oppoſe by the 41ch-biho of Otranto,
| 719
Reſolueth to giue the Pope all mantier of [1-
| tif attign. S 733
14 complained of by the. Spaniſh Prelates.
743-744
- Excuſeth his chang: of mind. 751

| Commeth to-Rome , wherehe is lodged in

the Popes Palace , and _ ted by the Pope in
peeſon 167
Hu nezotiation, 268
He taxeth the” Erench Ambelſauler PR4 pro-

ricfing &T rones'\. > | 778

Pope for his greatneſſe. +
Maketh two anſreeres to the two Briefes of
the Pop. =

writ'thto the Cardinal;.
Maketh ſhew of eriefe for th: » Popes hgrs-

ſonment, but keep:th him faſt. 44
Is &roned in Bolonia,. 52
Goeth to Rome; # proud of his tictore in
- ffica. | 78
1s diſtaſttdiwith th? Pave, 110
**Andrecontiled agame, IK

Maketh th: Pop; afraid by reſiding at 1-

puc, /o, neere the Copncell, 355

Vſeth meanes to make the Empire heredita-

re ; but is croſſed & Vis Nepheyy Maximili-

«211. — | 382
Aunteth

Ai:Fable.

#ittesbthe world.

. . Char Wm

—_ 404
rles the ninth the French King , ſee weth
_ fo fauour the Proteſtants. a

Alieneth Eccleſraſticall goods

- 449
without the
- Popes leaue. | 712.713

| + amber his Holineſſe « very angry. 713.
793

(hurch , what power it hath comterning the $4-
craments. | __669
whether it can make mariages vaia. 756
Cletnent the ſewenth Pope #binketh 4 Counce!!
to be dangerous when the Popes amthoritic

i in queſtion, 34
Hakerh aleague with Francis the faſt, the
French King , and macightth againſt the_-

E mperour. ah 37
He: ws illegitimate , andereated Pope} by
Simony. | \ +..$2

. 1s taken priſoner > ohh
Eſcapeth out of the Caſile in the hahit of 4
Merchant., |. 2 \ 45
Doth (adlenly recauer his greatneſſe, 47
Diſſwad:th the Emperour from deſiring 4
Conncell pA 50

' And perſreadeth him to proceed ſeuerely a-
'gaenſt the Lutherans. 131 ST
Sheweth adelire to call a Councell, but mea-
neth ro auoidit. 58

1s aliencd from the Emperonr , and ioneth
with France. 64
His death, vertues, and vices. 71
Colloquic betweene_ the Proteftants ana Pa-

piſts. 56
Anothrr in Aganoa, 92
In Wormes. 93
In Ratisbon. 95
en agame in Ratisbon. 126

Colloquee in Vormes of foure and twentie
Dodtors. 407
Of Poili iz France 451
Commendaecs, what they are, « ſhewed by the
Author in a large diſcourſe. 50O
Commenda #f all the Benefices mm the world,
giuen by Clement the /euenth to his Ne-
phew Hippolitus Card. de Medici. 251
Communion of the cap denied by the Pope. 2.90
Treated of in France. 457
Demanaed, ani diſcuſſed erm Rome. 458,
459, 519,520, 522,523, $26, 528, 529,

$37,556, 539» 560, |
Is denied in Councell bypluralitie of voices.

367
Concubines of Pricſts are of Eccleſzaſticallin-

,

riſdiftion.
Conclauitts and their priuiledges, 554
Conference at Marpurg betweene Luther &
Zuinglius, 49
Conference in Nizza betweene the Pope,

French King, and King of Spaine . «285
Conference betweene the Pope and Empeiocl

#n Lucca. 2060
And enather in Buſleto: © bog
Confirmation , the Satrament, i handled ;, and

4 queſtion diſputed whether Biſhops be the
onely miniſters of it. 244
Confirmation of the Decrees of thg Councell,
whether «t ought preſently to be made by the
Pope, # much diſputed. $14, $15 &#c.
Conſcruators 4re [udges granted raſome par-
ticular men by the Pope, tomaintaine them

in their pretended rights. 352,353
Conſpiracie is Genua of the Fielchi again/#
the Dori. \. 222
Conſpiratie.s im France againſt King Francis
the ſecond. FlY:
Contarini # Zegate for the Pope_ in Ratil-
1. 4 \ . 94
Speaketh as ambiguoufly as ann oracte_ : his
exhortation'to the Prelates, 96
Complaineth that hu anſwere was miſtaken,
97. 1sſuſpeted robe a Lutheran. 100
His death. 103
Continuation of the Coancell i diſliked by the
Emperour and the French King, but appr oo»
wed by the King of Spaine. 441,477,506
The Pope reſolucth the continuation (hill bee
aeclarea, that the Councell may be diſſolued,
but dareth not ian? to it. 511
Coronation of the Emperour in Bolonia. 49.53
Councelsfor what cauſes they began to be gele-

brated. 2
Councell of Trent opened by ſinging amaſſe
of the holy Gheſt onely. I

Councels held by Secular Princes. 136
Councels doe deliberate of faith, not by di-
wine inſpiration, but by hamane diſquiſiion,

220
The queſtion , whether they haae_ greater
authoritie then the Pope i forbid by the' Le«
gates to be handled . 231

How the Spirit dja worke in the Conncell of
Trent. \ 276
The Councell is remanded to Trent from
Boloma. 302,303
Councels doe not binde by their decrees the
Churches abſent. 320
T he (ouncell ef Baſil what authoritie it had,
566. The Councell of Conſtances commen.
ded by the Generall of the Serui. 567
The Counc-ll of Trent was aſſembled tore-
medy abuſes, but was vſed to increafe then,
T he State of it u quite altered, We:
The conclu(jon fe. $13
Connt of Luna # received in congregation,

and proteſteth about his place. 707,708

Creed eftabliſhed in the fourth Sefſiow. -1 47
Deerees

A Table.

D.

*. .

| & gue of Iuſtification. 3
And of Reformation. 226
"re cenſured in Germany. 227
A decree concerning the Sacraments, 263
Concerning Baptiſme. -2 64-
' Concerning Confirmation. 264.
A decree of Reformation. 264.
eA Decreeconcerning the Euchariſt.” 339
A decree of Reformation. 349
"The decree ( Proponentibus Legatis) x
wade,and contradicted, 469
The Spaniſh Ambaſſadour deſireth it may be
abrogated, | 720

The Emperor diſſwadeth the King of Spaine
from deſiring the abrogation of it. 727
. A decree of the inſtitution of Biſhops , and of

Reſrdence. 1723
Another concerning Reſidence. 6

Concerning Pricſt-hood and the ether Or-

a:rs. 738
Cnother concerning Order, 740,741.
A Decree of reformation. 237,788

Another concerning Purgatory. 799
Decrees of th: Councell of Trent muſt not
baue any. zloſſes or interpretations made wp-

on thems , but all doubts mnſt bee referred to
the Pope. 817
Degradation of Prelats, and the lawes thereof:
336,337

Denmark embraceth the reformed WY vs 84
Deputies appointed is Rome ouer the Conncell.
I 68,256,257

Diet of Wormes. 13
Of Noremberg. 24. Of Spira. 35,36

Of Ausburg. 52. Of Aganoa. 92
Of Ratisbon. 94,126,18
Dzets ix Ausburg. 272,292,306,3

Dioceſan Counſels held in diners Proninces,

296,297

Diſpenſations , whether they may be graunted
without a lawful cauſe, 253
what they are, 675

ave maintained at lerge by Laynez, General
of the [cſuits. 721
whether they hane brought more alluantage
or diſprofit to the Sea of Rome. 791
Diſtribations called Canonicall, what they are.
The pawer of Biſhops concerning them, LE
Diuorce ts handled by Dominicus'Soto. 670
and by Tohn Rarmhire. | 671
The Venetian eAmbaſ[adors deſire that the_»
Grerians withis their dominions may bee
permitted to put away their wines for forni-

cation, becauſe they haaue alwaits 4886 [0.75 5\- : bn

Dominicans were  &mploiet in" Saxonic 7s

mm,

vent Indulgences: 5
are oppoſite to the Frantiſcans in the point of

| thereall preſence, | 328
Dake of Saxonie, called Tohn Frederick , d&
ſputeth whether hee may cary the ſword be«

fore the Emperor ,and ſtand at the Maſle.52
Hee publiſheth 8 Manifeſt againſt the Ems
perour. n 190

rho ſetteth forth a Bando againſt him. 201
Hee had equall authority with the Land-
grauc of Haſha , which maketh them both
onfortunate, 204
Hee us taken in battell, and condemned to
aie. 2 70 BEnt pardoned "Vp0R8 Very hayd
conditions, 270
Duke of Saxonie, called Maurice, created Ex
leftor by the Emperour Charles the 5. ſen-
deth ambaſſadours to the Councell, 36%
Who demand a ſafe-condudt, 363

; Oneof them makth an Orationin Conncell,

367

The Duke taketh Tſpruc, ſearreth Charles
the Emperour very much, who ſetteth lohn
Frederick the depoſed Duke at hberty. 378
Duke off Wittenberg ſendeth ambaſſalours to
the Councell , who preſent the Confe (ion of
their faith. E - "280
Hee ſendeth order to them to proceed intheir
negotiation, 359
The Preſidents will not ſuffer their confefiion

zo be diſputed of in Councell, 359,360
One of the Ambaſſadours maketh an oration

in Conncell. 369
Duke of Alua might hane taken Rome, but in
ſtead of tht goeth thither for abſolution.$06
Duke of Sauoy taketh armes 1gainſt the Pro-
teſtants of bis valleys, 42.

1s onerthrowen by them, an maketh a peace.
446. Hath many Proteſtants within his
territories. * -- 7I0
Duke of Bauaria ſendeth ambaſſadors tos Rome
* for the Communion of the Cap... 646

' And defreththat his Prieſts nizy marry, 679

FE Cchius oppoſeth Luther. | '6
Eccleſiaſtical! roods are aliened in France
.. without the Popes conſent," © ns

Ecolampadius 4th with ſorrow for thedeat

of his fellow Zyuinglius. . 60
Edi&t of Ausburg about religion, _ .
Edi& of the French King Henry 2+ concer-

(ang religrnaneD) 00500 OC 207
Edi&of Tali »2de in France. © "448

Editof March made ix France,

471

Edward 6. King of Eogland ymakerh a change
We”. 295

-' He dieth. © WS. I 233
| Hhhh Eleffors

A. Table.

Ee itors of Mentz and Triers , craue leawe to
depart fromthe Conncell. 362
 Apd do arpart. | 374

. Aud ſo doththe Eleftor of Collen, 374
Elizabeth obtainerh the crowne of England :

the Pope refuſeth to acknowledge her : ſhes

- canſeth a diſputation ts bee, held in Welt-

miaſter in matter of religion. IE

Shes innited to the Councellin Trent. 436

But will net ſuffer the Popes Nunclo fo come

#nto England, | 440

The] Councell would hate proceeded againſt

hy; but # diſſmwaded by the Emperor. 727

Epiſcopal inriſdiction ts diſcourſed of by the Anu-

thor. 330.331.

Eraſmus & condemned for his annotations pon

| . the NewTeſtameit, which are confirmed by

Pope Leo thetenth, 473

| Excommunication # denounced againſt all He-
| rctiques in generallonely , inthe endof the
| Coniccll. S13
Exemptions what they are , 'i5 ſhew?dinalarge

diſcourſe maie by the Author. 2.20

Exemption of Cathedrall Churches in Spaine

from the iuriſdittion of Biſhops , raiſeth a
great ſtirre ia the (ouncell, 797

- Aber, ſent to Zuric by the Biſhop of Con-
ſtance, refuſerh to diſpute with Zuinglius,

| 1
Faction mae in (ouncell by the Pope and 54
- gates. 142.256
A faction betweene the Dominicans and
 Franciſcans. 175.229.258
k . CA fation made in (onncell by the Pope_J.
| | 463:304.589
The Pupalius themfelues did not like that the
Pope ſhould labour ſo openly to make a maior

part. 585

A fattion' mad? by (ardinall Simoneta a+

p bout the inſtitution of Biſhops. 607
Prattiſes wſed by the Lrgates to perſyade

the Prelats. 621

A fations banquet made by the Arch- biſhop

. of Otranto. 627

.-Cardmall Madruccio ſaid openly there was
«<Councel withinthe Councel, 65 8.6 59

Faith how many ſignifications it hath, 194.

| I
Ferdinant deſjrerh to poſſeſſe Trafiluants,
 anacauſeththe Biſhop of Veradino to bee_
© Sſnine : 15 abſolued by the Pope, 373
C Publiſncth an Edit againſt 1BORation 18
, Religion, Iz) |

; Js inſtalled Emperor 4 axd 219t acknowledged
. y Pope Paul the fourth, bus efter ts arknow-

(!

ledged by Pope Pius the fourth, wnto whom

he rendreth obedience. 420:

Goeth to Iſpruc, that hee may bee neerethe
Conncell, | | 649
Putteth in conſultation ſegenteene wyery, im-
portant pornts, concerning the preſent Conn-
cell. 673
Writeth to the Legats and the Popes very
effettually for a ſerious reformation, +682.
683. |

Gineth his word to Cardinall Morone teaſe
conninencie hereafter for matters of the;

Councell, | 705
His ſudden ſickneſſe maketh the Fathers in
Trent afa7d. 779780

Fiſher, Bop of Rocheſter, 2s created Card:-

nall for bis great worth ; and « beheaded 43.
dayes after. \.-p2

74
Florence becommeth free , and doth defacethe

Statues of Leo thetenth , andof Clement
the ſeucnth. . 44

Forme of proceeding in Councell. 344
Francis the firſt, the French Kine, # taken pri-
ſoner at Pauia,

NF. 5
It ſet at liberty , and abſolued from his oath.
37

Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, dzcth, _ 77
Francis «f Toledo is Ambaſſador for the King

of Spaine 11 Conncell, I54
Perſwaded that the reformation ſhoild be_
hanaled before the dottrine. 166
Francis the ſecond, the French King, perſeca-
teth the Proteſtants. 417,418
He dieth. 2 +86
Free will us aiſcuſſed - 208,209,210

French Ambaſſadour ſpeaketh in Councel. 509

The French _Ambaſſadours dejire that their

. 4nd a Catechiſme, 387,388 G France. 423

Prelats may be expected. $J2
_ The . French eAmbaſ/adonr De Ferricres
maketh an oration, G3TI
And another. 666
which vexeth the Fathers. "667
The French eAmbaſſadouts got ts Venice.

: 790
French petitions are writtenagainſt in Rome.
674

The Po ve1 not to conſent to them.

| 91 690

French Pretates cited to Rome for Luthera-
niſme. 693

_ Sentex 4s pronouncedagainſt them, 90

_ They axe acfended bythe King. + 195

bs :

Encua promoteth therefarmea relegionn

. The Pope perſrradeth, the French King to

. make warre againſt thas city, 423

Gcorge

O——_

_—_

|| A Table.

—

Ge ee Be err rn I" —— — ——

«%

... Dutchmcg, -corricthi auhalter. rowards
” Romeetolitns the Pope ; but aieth befars he
commeth thither. \ -\ 1 \ 43
George Martinaccip, 3p: of. Veradino,
.» deſereth to halde Tranliluania is liberties
refuſeth the offers of K. Ferdinand , and i
flaine by his miniſters, «. $73
Germanic & 7» #he power of the Emperonr; the
two Proteſtant Heads beeing, retired.anto
their countreys, 1 11221
Gloſles are forbidto be made ypon the Decrees
of the Counc:l of Trent. $13

Granucll publſbeth « booke,to compoſe religion +

#n Germanie. '95
Hes ſent tothe Diet in Noremberg..,103
Gro pores diſcourſeth of Appeates. $34
Guile p//cth into Italy with an army to aſ6i/f
the Pope. \ 404
1s defeated by the default of the Caratiiqos
Js recalled by the French King. 406

The Guiſards hoide a parly in Germanie
480
Th: Duke of Guile i [aine-vnder Orlience

with the Duke of Wittenberg,

by lohn Poltrot,s privat Gentleman. 681
His death maketh a great alteration. in
France, 632

| H.

H=-” 8. King of England, writeth againſt

Luther, and gaineth the Title of Deten> .

dcr of the Faith. 16
Marrieth Anne Bullen, 68
with lraweth his obedience from the Pope,

nd denieth topay the Peter pence. 69
. Proteſteth againſt the conncel of Mantua... 3
And againe againſt the councell of Vincen-
tia. 85 # excommunicated by the Pope,
and the reaſons are declared, 86,87
The excommunication was generally contem-
wed. 87 He maketh an Edi&t inmatter of
religion. v1 89
He dieth, and his death cauſeth much joy in
Rome az# Trent. 260
Henry 2, the French King , maketh a ſolemne
entry into France .: proceedeth ſeuerely
azainſt the Proteſtants. 297,298
Profe(ſ-th extraordizary good will to Pope
Julius the 3. 305
Protecteth Parma againſt the Pope and the
Emperonr, 3II
Proteſteth againſt th: councel of Trent. 315
319 Perſecuteth the Proteſlants, 522
But afterwards wſeth moderation, 407
Proccedeth againſt the Counſellors of Parlia-
ment in a Mctcuriall,
He dieth. 416
Hermit Friars were ordinarie publiſhers of nn

Hugonots in France doewas bold: ..

414-415 |

George Franſperg , General of an army of | -; dulgences is Saxonic, but wereexcluded by
\ -Aﬀemboldus. .- 6 75
Hicrazghie of the Church,,, what it 6." . 589,

: 590,59, + TT « £1717";
- » The forme of Hicrarchic in what it conſ3-
fttth, ; A $91, 593

#t ſhould rather be called Hicrodaqylia. 743
Hugonius 4 French Diune , betrayeth his
countrey-men in Gounell, ++.4-1, 632
but carnot endure the flattery of Laynez the
leluite, 41 7145nta/ning the Popes anthority.
722
| : 470
they hane 2150. Churches France, i480

= =”

Eſuites will obſerge narule inConncell, 543

4 why their Generall is not in the Catalogue of

.

| \ » 5

Salmeron #he Teſuite proceedeth by. faltivn
in matter of fatth.. A L «
Laynez,Gererall of the Icluites, benderh 4
whole congregation in a diſcourſe concerning
the Inſtitution of Biſhops, 609,610,611
Hy ſuffrage concernins a1ſpenſations.... 721
Fauors done to him is Councel by the Legats. .

| "28.724
The Ieſuites doe profeſſe to line hy begin,
bat vill not be bound to it. 799
They make wſe of the negligense of the F 4-

thersin.Councell, taraiſe their order tomore

the aſaſtants in (ouncel.

reatneſſe, | . .*\ 80]
Images, and their dofirine. 806
Inaex us diſputed on. + 4744475,502
4 Decree maalt concerning itt, \ 1: 480

Indulgences when they began to bring money to

the Popes coffers. _ 4.
a plenary Indulgence granted by Vrban the
 ſecond,and Leo the tenth, Wy
the profit of the Indulgences of SaXonie s
graxtea to rhe Popes ſiſter,
The doctrine of Indulgences w.ts neger Ke
vn4erſiood before Luther wrote againſt
them. * KEE 6
foure different opinions concerning them,and
all Catholique, = 24S
The Councell dareth not handle Indulgences
exadtty.” -M . - $0l
7 he Decree concerning them, 8I 2
an Indulgence granted by the Legates in

Trent wathout autharity. | >, 11-113
Inquilition brovght jnto Naples... 271
and mto the Low-Countreys, _ \. 13co

the office of Inquiſition #' mainly promoted

by Paul the fourth, | 409

the nu (ition | ſhould haxe beene_ brought
M

ints V an: which caaſeth a great tumult
' xhere Jand in the Conncel.. 757,758
Hhhh 4 Int ON-

1

A Table.

Intention of the Miniſter: to doe as the Church

doeth , whether it be neceſſarie in Baptiſme, -

and the other Sacraments. 240; 241,070.

Interim , #r peace of religion, u made in Ger-
manie. - * MIC G2.

1t deſpleaſeth both Papiſts and Proteſtants.

- 294. Ts abrogated. - 379
Tolin Tancherel # condemned # France, for
maintaining that the Pope may depoſe kings,

63,464 ©

Ireland i made a kingdome by Pope Paul the
fourth, which title it hal long before. 392
Iſpruc « taken by the Proteſtants. 378
Iubile publiſhed im Rome. y.-J$O
end in Trent. 203
Another Tubile celebrated in Rome for 70y
of the determination 80 celebrate the (onn-

cell 435
Tulius the 2. Pope was more 4 ſoulaier then a
Clergie man. 3
Julius the 3 createdPope. 298

1s more inclined to pleaſure then buſineſſe :
createth a yowe Car.of inknownparents.299
Reſtoreth the Councellto Trent. 302,303

Is aliened from the Empercar. 271
Suſpenadeth the Countell. 376
LMaintaineth his reputation by the Patriarke
of Armenia. 332,333
Retoyeeth for the reſtitution of the obedience
. of England : he ateth. 389
Iuſtice, by whom it ts to be adminiſtred in Conn-
cell. 82

Inftification s diſcuſſed in many articles, 192
which azd trouble the Prelates and Dinines,
becauſe it was newer well aiſcaſſed by the_,

 Schoolemey, | 194

on K

KK ing of Denmarke embraceth the refor-

med religion. 6 84
Kimg of Nauarre hath a guard ſet wpon him.
436
Ts ſet at libertie,and gouerneth France. 437
Writeth to the Proteitant Princes in Get-
manie , #hat hee will preſerue_ Religion in
France. 480
Was ſlaine with 4 Bullet at the ſiege of Roan.
640
His death waketh 4 ercat alteration in
France 641
Knights of Malta ſend an amba/ſadour to the
Councell;, whou receiged m Congregation,
andmakethan Oration. 762

L.
I * ndgraue of Hatha preventeth a dini/jon
amongſt the Reformatifts in the Dict of
Spira. | 47

Limbo « the place where children are , wo

publiſheth a Manifeſt againſt the Emp, 190
who ſetteth forth a Bando againſt him. 20l
Landgraue end Saxon had equall amthoriticin
: the warre againſt the Emperonr which was a

great diſaduantage to them, 204
He yeeldeth himſelfe priſoner to the Empe-
roar, 279
6 ſet at libertie 379

Lateran Comrcell what aduaytage it brought
to'rheSea of Rome.

-

| 155,156,157,0%
and is approued. | 159
it is ſaid that no errors of faith are in it.161
Layes of Popes are more ſtrictly obſerued then
1 he lawes of God. 4
League between the Pope andthe French King

us confirmed by marriage. 67
betweene the Pope and the Emperony againſt
the Proteſtants. 188

the League betweene Charles the Empe-
rour aud Henry 8. King of England offen-
aeth the Pope, 105
' a league of all Catholiques againſt the Pro-
teſbants treated by the Pope. Ft5
but cannot be effetted; - 516
a league betweene the Pope & the French K,
agaimit the Emp. confirmed by mariage, 252
another of the Proteſtants in» German y A
gainſt the Emperonr, 312,484
Legates in Trent defire to haue two ſorts of 1t-
zers from the Pope and acipher. 113
Leo 10, Pope his deſcription.

Lewis 12. French King © excommunicated.z

Libertie of Friars # held dangerous by the Le-

gates, and repreſſed. 228
a Friar of Breſcia & aigraced for ſpeaking
of the Euchariſt like Luther, 422

Libertie of the Councel violated by the Pope.

503
Libertie of the (ouncell is thought by the

Speaker zo be too great. 533
and by the Fremch Ambaſſadonrs to bee none
at all. : 542
as alſo by the Spaniards. 55T
The Preſidents ſe meanes to curbe the Spa-
niſh prelates. 620
the Cardinall of Loraine ſaid openly the
Conncell was not free, 635
The Biſhop of Veglia quatteth the Councell
for feare, : 644
the Prelates are terrified with the Popes au-
thorttze. | 645
Martin Guzdalin,« Spaniard,complaimnerh
that the Councell u not free. 661

and the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour deth the like:
who i anſwered by Cardinall Morone. 754

ae

. . I9
Latin tranſlation of che Bible is diſconrſed of

a

Pg

2A Table,

"tie without Bapti ſme , before the we ye

on..

© Perſecuteth the Proteſts, . "387
Her Amb adours come fo Rome: * "39l

Shee di
Matquis of Branden burg ſenaeth Po

dowrs to the Councell. *

3, eu diſcuſſed.

= Fo prooxe ittobea fave {Ha
x94

' 4 Portugall Dinine ſaith it can be prooucd by |

tradition only. 546; the dotrine of it.
the abaſes of it. $4,

which was neacr executed by the Princes of Martheo Langi, Archbiſhop of Salzburg 2/44

Luther ſpeaketh avainft todulgenees. Jonny, Q
And againſt the Popes aathoritie.”'' 7
apeatcth to the Councell,. D 'B, 12
Paſſeth to other point's of doftrine.” 9
Burneth the Popes Bull, and Dierotuſ in
; O— 12
, Ts called to the Diet of Wormes, ' 13
eAnd an Editt # publiſped a7ainſt him after
his departurt, I5
the Empire. 26,277.
His anſwere to Vergerius. 75
Hee dieth. 148

Diners fableſre raiſed of his death. 149

M Antua #s choſen to hold the Conncel in, 79
wherewith the Duke # contented at the
tf, but repenteth afterwards. 82
Marccllus the Secondcreated Pope, 389
Purpoſeth to make a ſeuere reformation of the
Conrt and Clergie , and toerect 4 religious

Order of an hundredperſons. 390
; Hee dieth , hauing ſate but twoanJ twentte
ayes, 392
Marriage of Prieſts what incognemience it
bringeth, 460
Why it is forbid. 680
| ' CMatrimonie ispropoſed to bee diſputed,662,
665.

The; inconuenience of ſecret marriages, 665,

668,07.

whether Prieſts may marry, 678,679

of Spaine betweene his s ſiſter , and his ſonne
Charles, 685

their parents is ſpoken againſt by the French

ambaſſadours. 746,7471754
Marriage of Prieſts is promoted, aRoppoſed
- in coutcell, © 747

oe abuſes of matrimonie are difeaſſed. 747,
jar diſcuſſed, whether one may be for-

ced to marry, 749,750
| | Diners opinions concerning clandeftine mar-

| | THage. 782
The dditrine of Matrimony u decreed. 784

creed, 784,585
The impediments of Matrimony are decreed.

Mat Oo rdner the Crowne Tron 383

Eſtabliſheth Popery. .. 384
. 1s married to King Philip,

F:
 Appointeth ambaſſadors to go to Rome. NY) 86

Merits, whether they goe before grace gr follow,

Nets doth mutin , _ of the 7. 4
| A marriage is deſired and ſought by the King

The reformation of the abuſes of it is ae-
OQauius Farneſc codudteth the Tedliay troops

not diſlike the aſſertions of Luther, but {cor-
neth that the world ſhoul4 bee reformed by
Monke.

5s
Maxime zn Councell about the maior pet. A

VOYees,

Maximilian #he fonne of Ferdinand pafeth

by Trent. 360
promiſeth the Proteſtants there tolabor with
hu Vacle , the Emperour , that the Councell

may be free. 361
is thought to ke a Proteſtant, 426
which hee doeth not deny to the Popes ne-
phemw, 429
# crowned King of Bohemia , and elected
King of the Romans, 641
refuſeth to promiſe | ghedjence to the Pope.

723

E98

N.-

tion brought in , and i cheriſhed by the

Pope.

N ations, whether ub, ought fo hage wel n

Conncell, or particular perſons. 137,508

Carriage of children without conſent of Nationall Councelt is prepared in France,'314,

425+.

Nwnber of the Prel, tes i the £ nar of

Trent, 62

' the number of thoſe who ſubſcribed rhe De-

crees of the Synod. = | 813

Nunnes which are caed Penitenti, or Con-

ner Hae beene Conrteſans.. ...... . .. $08

©. We”

Ot ——_— tobetaken by theſe: whe are

to be adam, ted to Bhoprickegyclbbactes,
' Benefices 7.324733

into Germany IG the Prote ants, 203
recezueth a French Gariſon into Parra. 311

Oratzon made in the: Eoungell by the Buſbep of

Bitonto. ©. 132
another made by the Encach dbaſe,

Guido Faber.
Hhhh 3 Aiplegeth

A Table.

-Diſpleaſeth the Faggerye. .
| And & anſiperee. ..

44. v \ 5309
. £418 Oration made by the Bauarian Ambs/-
2

= OE RIT INN ..y,27
I "An Oration made in Councellfor the Count
' sf Luna. 1. ,, 709
"Diſpteaſeth. all the Ambeſſazours., 710
'* Oratr0n made by the French _Ambaſſadour
. dc Ferricres again#, the, reformation of

- Princes 771772773
* Js anſwered. ITS
© Whichxcauſeth him to make an Apologie 775
Order 'z held to be. 4 Sacrament, and is aiſ-
cuſſed. 586
Seauen ' orders, and all Sacraments. 587
How the holy Gbeſbs giuen mm ordination,

r

592,593 "84
What ceremonies .bc neceſſary an conferring
ordcrs. 593
The number of orders , and their ſeucrall
functions: by 734
The Decree concerning them, 738
94 the eAnathematiſmes. 739
Ordnation.to the title of the Pagrimonie. is
diſcourſed on by the Author. 490
Diaers opinions concerning ite 491
Orientall Chriſtians. | 572

, Bf
"TR -

Alatine of Rhene/peakerh brancly in the
Diet. hs, I4
Embraceth the reformeg religion. 148, 398
 Pari(hes how they canye fo be dinided. 498
Parma 4rd Placentia are giuen by Pope Paul
the 3. to his baſtard ſoune. 121
whereat the Cardinals doe murmure. 128
Parma 7 reſtored to Duke Otauius by Pope
Tulius che 3. 5 == 1
Paſquins z244e ip Rome, agarn/t the Councel,
148. | WOOTHIS
Patriarke of Armenia cometh to the Pope, 382
Paul the 3. created Pope. -9f
His chiefeſt vertue was diſſimulation. 71
Hee perſwadeth the Cardinals to reforme_
"  themſelues.. _ -
Laboureth to gains Milan for bis faniity. t 0.4
Recalleth his forces out of Germanic , and is
zealous of the Emperour by reaſon of his vi-
Cory. 5 222
Recalleth the whole Parner of Reformati-
ve

0 to hymſelfe; of which th Legits durſt not
make viſe, | 254
 Beauth, | [6/2850 \ "290
Paul'zhe 4. receinerh the Engliſh Ambaſſa-
news. OD Þ IeT
Commandeth the reſtitution of the Charch
£0045 in England, and the Peter pence. 392

.

1s prod and cholericke. * ep a 77

.
Fa.
44 19h
: &

Createth Cardinals contrary to hwoath, 3.96
_Pretendeth to make peace betweene the Em
perour, and French King, but intendcrh no-

. thing but warre, __ | 401

Proceedeth againſt the Colonneſi, 402

 Threatueth the Emperowr and bis ſanne, and

prouideth for warre. 403
Impriſoneth many great perſons. abid.
Createth 10. Cardinals more... 494
Perſeenteth his owne family, and inſtituteth
a new gouernement in Rome, . 4.08
He aieth ; for which the Romans rezoyce,
and ſhew they did deteſt him 416
Peace concluded betweene the Pope and Empe-
rour. 46.4# renewed, 6

a peace between the Emp. FFrenchK. 109
Peace made betrreene the French King and
the Hugonots apleaſeth the Pope. 693,
6.954 .

The conditions of it. 696.
Peace 15 concluded betweene the Emperour

and the Proteſtants. 378
a peace of religion us eſtabliſhed in the Diet of
Ausburg. 394

the peace of Cambray betweene the: Kings
of France and Spaine, 412

Penance ant the Decree thereof. 24.6, 347,07
The cenſure of the Decree. 357» 358
Petrus Aloiſius, the Popes ſonne, Duke of Pla-
centia,was murdered in hs owne Palace.2 72
Phil p , King of Spaine, #s 1m great perill at Sea

in his zoarney into*Spaine. 417
He perſecuteth the Proteſtants at his arri-
mn os: ': , Jbid.
& angry with the Pope for countenancing the
King. of Nauarre, 443
and withthe French King, for making peace
with the Hygonots, *,'OI
Picardsz» Bohemia. - .. 2 R$
Pius the fourth is created Pope.” - 418

haſtneth the Genterall Councell zn, Trent for
feare of anationall in France. ._ 425,426
bat doeth ſecretly croſſe t, 427, 433
maketh leutes of ſoulaicrs, \. -$SE
Plotteth 30 make a mator part im Councell.

EI en Ped 6 DE OT
which the Papalins thenſelyes ſai he did
zoo openly. | Ed
#5 afratd to be accuſed of ſumonie. * , . 628
complaineth that hec.1s ſuſpected toboldthe
councell in ſeruitude. RT” 7
giveth rewaras to thoſe that fauonr hin irs

_ councell, ed <4. , 660
reſolueth to royne with the King of S five,
ana to neglect the, Emperour end Erenc
__—
falleth very ſicke; wtuch cauſeth the Fathers

fo anticipate the Sleuth AApredpuate. the
| rour

TE OE 6. ls Lak i 3

Wy TNT” OE

a — = —— - — 2 _— C—— ,  _

\Gannerd

» Keſerneth pow py to the Pope onely tg tnter-
Pt «te, the. Decrees of the Countel. '$17,318
Placencia is {eiſed by the. "bs of _—

the Duke bein 'T lain.

and the ofthe, 1 PAN by. =
l FP oPe . ' 287
Pluralitiz of Benefices how it beganne, and the

pr onreſfe of it, IP 250425467.
ow aſpute by what lavo tt t6 forbid. 253

Polouim _Ambaſailgur.maketh fiue aemanns
C..399
Polonians Amba(ſators come-to Trent; 94

:n Rome all di(taſtfull to the Pope.

depart preſently, 469 $63
'. Polonian Ambaſſador 6 receiurd, 617
Polygamie how it was permitted. - 0, 67

Popes authority was reſerued in Councell,by ſay-
zng, Sauing in all chings the Popes au-
thoritie, bat if i not ſuffered ſo to paſſe, 2.60
Popes lawes ate more. ftrietly obſerued then

the law;s of God. 483
Laynez ſaith the Pope is aboue the Coun”
cell. 613

Pope dying in time of the (ouncell, mhetber
che ſucceſſor ought to be created is. Rome by
the (ardinals, or in Trent by Nations.627
The French opinion comterning the 'Popes am-
thoritie, 641, 661
How farre hee may diſpence. ' _\ 675
The Emperont ts of opinion that the Coungell
# aboue the Pope.  * 1 ..682
* Bux Pius the fourth gocth about to ;proouc the
contrary by many quotations, which hee ſen- ©
deth to the Emperour 684
which are examined by the Cardinal of. Lo-
rainc and the other French Prelates.. © 687
The Popes authoritie_> is much extolled b y
 Laynez. SL
 Tathegreat uiſtaſt of the Frenchmen, 72 3
The point concerning the Popes . authoritie is

deferred for feare of prolonging the Conn-

; bell... . 731732
* The Decree ts read: fo {ein the. Papes aur
thorttie, which was neuer mentioned. þe-
; forte, > nl
T he. Popes aut baritic By 2 it be mece([a {ſar

'&0, confirme the. Decroes of the Councell, $:

Pope oncly muſt interpretethe Deereevof, the_
Councell of Trent, ...-._ $18
Portagal eAmb: _ anal zs receined in 'Congre- *
gation. _ 476
Ppeachang claymed by the Regulars, 4s is detane-
wngto them; wichs denied by the Prelats.
161 67

Pr: cedence i claimed by Don Dicgo on

% 3y 9 th Die of Elorence DAN; Babe.

= COT a p—_—_——
Ls
1A\cka

3.3

.. 802,80: —— | Ferrara. x

| 4 s
"4:5. hn had
ety 3

CD DI ITT — _- a +» la, - =

ble.

+ RIanGes. of - FF. F -arice paid a
dence of the Cardinals. - 449
» The Prelates in. .Frens, differ about noe:
: e, A\ * W an...
aud ſo dot the Ambaſadours of _—_
w— Hunegarie. .... .-.: 480
Likewiſe the Jengrlen and Venetian Cn
 baſſadors differ recedence. 5oT
: andſo doe the oY and Spaniſh. CAmbaſſa>

dorsin Trent; Y. -
Ry * Rome, » ' = «713

and 4gaine in Trent, | '7 27,728,729
Prede ; ny 15 diſcuſſed. 210,211,0%,
Prefs

ws 7 by. the Pope, did never gouerne

Conncels before that + Conſtance, 137 .
They gaue auricular voyces in Trent, 616
Preſ; / ws named for the ſecond reduttion of
the Councel in Trent. + 310
For the third redgition. 444.445

. : The Preſidents onely doe giue audience tothe
Ambaſſadours, 553.
Ts vew Preſidents. 681

Preſidents Councels , , whe authority they
hane, 707

Priefthooa,end the decyee concerning it. 738
_ The Anathemariſme 4, roit. 739

Prixce of Conde i impriſone 436
Prince. of Orange marrieth « daughter of he
Dake of Saxonie. 456

Prottersfent by the Vice-roy of Naples to giue

; , woyce in Councel for allthe caayy of that
kingdome. I18
The Pope decreeth that none ful Tine voyce
by Protfor. ; 0 1 5
" The. Prottors of the Arch-biſpop of Mentz

, are about to leaue the Countel, "122

Prohibigjon of Bookes is 4 jſcomſed on by, a au

thox.

Proteſlants make 4 conditional ſubmiſſion 70 bode

Conncell. 274
A conſultation bowthey are to be vreceined in

4% ouncel.. 367

rateſtant Ditines of Wittenberge and
'Strasburg come to Trent. 374
Fifty. thouſand. Proteſtants were exttyted in

_ the Low-Colltereys Wit bin” Cl ſoort =

413
'7h Broteſants aſſemble in NterBo: rg,
, «ndthe Pope ſendeth Nuneil. vnto Them
439

Proteſtation; q Doftirs , that Vee =

 ſelyes to the burch, are but words of wh
ment and of « 006d manyers.”

Wes Proteitation « 0 the. E _a_ ag ah ws t?
| Pk abs before the. 4rgr nes of 2 w $

celldf Bolonii:” 99280
bs Pro, Sn ww Rome before the
«S400 rok A\\ : ws Dm. 281

"1 phich

" 2A Fable.

hich the Pape» ſaith the ambaſſadiny did © Another is made in Romc of ſmall mutrers

make without commiſſion from bis maſter.
The ambaſſadear proteflcth againe," * -284
The French K, proteſteth againſt the Conn
cell ii Trent wall 319
The intended proteſtution of the French am-
baſſatlour about precedence 730,731
Proherbe in Trent very blaſphemous about the
bringing of the holy Ghoſt from Rome.

| x 48 prouerbe in Conncell,Weeare fal-
len ftom the Spaniſh Scab ro the French
POXC. | 640

A kinde of pronerbe made in France con-
cerning the anthoritie of the Councell, 822
Purgatoric « ſpoken of, 799

( Mary, gonerneſſe of the lowCoun-
—<treys,*fauourcth the Proteſtants, 89
DPucene mother of France refuſeth a Spaniſh
armie to aſſiſt her againſt the Hugonots.
648
5, oth to the Pope» and Cardinall of Lo«
ra1ne | 712
Ts complained of by the Pathers for being ru-
. ted by the Chaſtillons and other Hugo-
nots iz France. | 776

Oneene of Scotland writeth tothe Councell of

_ Trent, 703
Queent of England {bould haxe beene procee-
ded againſt in (ouncell, but the Emperonr

would not fuffer it. 747
Pucene of Navarre # citedto Rome for Lu-
theraniſme. 780

And us defended by the French King.794,

795
R.

IR EHormeics made by Cardmall Campeg-
-pio #2 the Dict of Noremberg, 32,

333076 ko
4 | Ghmy made in Rome vader Paul

the third, was ſuppreſſed, 79
_  Arcformation of the (ourt of Rome « ſet
on foot and much 4/5 ny 83,84
The Emper our would hane Reformation han-
led before Doitrine, 202

18 « wholly recalled by the Pope to be hand-

ted in Rome 3 but the Prelates will not yeeld
254,235 "" |

A. reformation of the Clrgie publiſhed by
the, micron. .__.: wh 1. 292
CA reformation made in Councell is camplai-
ned of by the Prieſts, "263

oxely. br | 505
Twewtie points of reformation. are propoſes
by the Emperonrs Ambaſſadours. 513
Nine points of reformation. $32,538
The chicfe points of reformation are omit-
ted. 568
Reformation us maincly promoted in Councell
by the [mperialiſts avd Spaniards. 588
The free ſpeeches in Councell concerning re-
formation, age trouble the Legats, 594,
600
The reformation of Princes how it began.
617
Articles of reformation propoſed in Conncell
by the French-men, 650,652
The Pope thinketh that 4 reformation will
not reduce the heretiches, 700
A reformation of Cardinals is marnely pro-
moted , but vaniſheth quickely. 726
A reformation propoſed by the Iraperialiſts.
P3S15752
The reformation of Princes is deferred
60 |
gs hundred Prelates doe combme to pro-
mote it. 766
It is acclared at lavge. 769, 770
The Emperour diftaſteth t, and the French
. ambaſſadour de Ferrieres, maketh an or ati-
on againſt it. : 771,772
The Decree_> of the generall reformation.
808,809,e*c. q
' The reformation of Princes. $11,812,c+c.
Regulars are complained of by the Prelats, and

defend themſelnes. 169
They begin to mutine about their exempti-
Ns, 761
Their reformation. 806
Religion iz) changed In England.2 95, 384,42T
Relizion' & changed in Denmarke. 84

Religion t changed in thePalatinate:148,398
Religion ts changed in Scotland 426, 451
Repatation is the chiefeſt ground of the Papall
eatneſſe. 4 29
Reſidence ts treated of. I91,216,217,07c.
' Whether it be de inre dinino. 218,219
The 'Cardjnall of Monte will not ſuffer that
queſtion to be dectaed. | 223
The queſtion # ſet on foot azaine. 4*6,
487, &T C

It canſeth great feare in Rome. 502
ts aifputed 0 againe. - FOS,FIO
The diſputation of it is digerted by the Le-
gates. 4990
Reſideme ts decreed, © * 122,736
The reformation of it is decreed. 739

Richard of Vercelli dieth withgriefe betauſe
he wa'in diſerace with the Leger
ng

—_

— _— "7

AG + So + — ——c —__— — —

Table.

hung freely in Councch, . 14: 566,569

Rites of the Roman Church are diwers. 548 -

Rome « fakes by the Colonnehic. . 41
And by the Datch-men,. awd Duke of Bor-

© > bon. 403 3
"Roti, Rome. f which is the greateſt Cours of

- guſtice there ) reietteth a cauſe of the Biſhop
of Segouia afoſting in Councel, for fuſþ1cion
of hereſie ,becanſe he aid not ſecond the Popes
defrencs. AIDS 678

SY »

Qutirancats in gtnerullare handled. 234,

235» CFC.

How they doe |tantaine, aud ranſe graces.

_ 237

A decree of reformation is made concerning
then, 245
and Anathematiſmes. 2 248
Safc-condutt i required by the Proteſtants to
goe to the Councell. 316
The Contents of it. 341

It ts diſliked by the Proteſtants, 343.3 44

The Councellrefuſeth toalter it. 369
Santa-Croce the Legate i threatned by the
Emperour to bee caſt into the riuer Adice,
202

Schiſme in the Councell, ſome remaining 1n
Trent, axd others being gone to Bolonia.

269,274

Scotland fo1keth off obedience to the Pope 5.
426,451

Seſfion the firſt, heldin Trent , Deoems. 13.47.
1545- | 130
The ſecond Ian. 7.1546. 139
The third, Feb, 4.1546. 147

The fourth, Apr. 8. 1545. I 62
The fift, Tune 17.1546. 184
The fixt, Ian. 13.1547: 223
Theſeuenth, March3.1547+ 263
The eight, March 11.1547» 267
The ninth , and firſt in Bolonia epril{21,

1547 | 270
The tenth , and ſecond in Bolonia June 11.

1547- 276

T he eleuenth Seſſion , and firſt in the ſecond
reduction in Trent May 1.1551, 313
The twelfth and ſecond inthe ſecond redu-
cron in Trent Sept. 1. 155l. 317
The thirteenth Seſon Oct, 11.1551. 339
The fourteenth Nouemb, 25.1551. 356
The fifteeath 1an. 25.1552. 369
The ſixteenth, which u the ſixt and laſt un-
- der Pope Tulius the third April 28. 1552,
76

The ſeuenteenth , and firſt under Pope pi us
the fourth Feb. 26.1562. 469
The eighteenth , and ſecond under Pins the

2 .

. foarth Feb,26, 1562, .- 480 $5
The nineteenth, May-1 4562 506
The twentieth Tune 4. 1562. oT
The one and twentieth 1ul. 16. 15 62. 539 2s
The two and twentieth Sept. 17. 1562. ym =

The three and twentieth tul.15.1563. 737
The foure and twentieth Nouem.11, 156 3.

| (a)
The fiue and twentieth and laſt of the _—_
cellef Trent, December 3. and 4.” 1 563.
80

Seſſion i# the Councell of Trent had ns Yeal

difference from a generall congregation, 662

Silueſter Prierias writeth againſt Luther. 6 \ |

Simoneta maketh a faition about the Inſtita- \

tion of Biſhops. 607
Simonie is diſcuſſed, with all doubts belonging
toit, 398,399,492;0<.

Stmonie 1s laid to the charge of Pope Pius the :

fourth, 628
Smalcalda, in which there was a great aſſem-
bly of the Proteſtants. m7
Soto is ſuſpetted to bee a Lutheran. 178
 writeththree bookes De natura & gratia,
as a (ommentarie vpon that Decree of the
Councell ;, and is oppoſed by Andreas Vega,
216,229
Being readie to die hee writeth a letter tothe
Pope concerning Conciliarie matters. 693

Subſcription of the Decrees of the Councell. $13
Suilles are diuided in religion. 4

5
Make aleagueafter the death of Zuinglius

£0

are innited to the (oancell by the _ 164

are much fanored by Pope Iulius the third.
7

313

Supplication ſent out of France into Spaine.

: 447

Suſpenſion of the (ouncell is made fer two years.
376 ,377

But continuerh ten yeares, 38r

H
T - 4

p "'Hechel, « Dominican, writeth again”

Luther. 5 *
Title of the Councell is much queſtioned 134) Fi
141, 142, 481, 4

Titalir Biſhops ſpoken againſt nd defended,

4.
The Biſhop of Conimvria ſpeaketh agamſt
them, 735
Traditions are difourſed on. 151,152, c.
Are mae toHt of equall author ty with the>

Scriptur'e 2 AI4
Tranſlanon of the Councell to Bolonia & reſol=

-A on in Rome. 259

and executed ip Trent, 266,267, 0,"

The diſcuſſion of the cauſe thereof ta referred
9 ts

ES.

_- rertylne delegatesim Rome. 283
Treeſurt of the Church what it is. "WY

Trenri named for the place to hold the Coun-
' - xoll ix: bat the Proteſtants will not conſent.

Viiaerſities of Louaine (& Collen condemne
Luthers Bookes. - | 9
and ſo aoth the Vniaerſtie of Paris.. 16

Voices in Councelt to whom they belong by

=. \ lot | right. <t 62
The Legates are recalled from Trent , be- How they have beene ginen in Conneelin all
'S cauſe they were left alone. I O04 LAGD b 135
and ave ſent thither againe, iI1T Whether they may be ginen by Prottors. 707
The (ouncell of Trent is proteſted «gainſt by Ipylgar tongue in the Chureh what incongeni-
the Proteſtants. 126 ence —_— - 460
It beginneththe 13, of December, Anno How it hath beene_, ned in former times.
Dom. 1545+ 129,130 io 577378
| 4

Va

\ 7 Ergerius is ſent Nuncio 70 King Ferdi-

nand. 52
Is made Nuncio in the place of Hugo Ran-
gone, Biſhop of Rheggio. , 66
Is recalled out of Germanic, 72
and ſent backe, | 73
Hu negotiation,

- Returnethtothe Pope,and is rewarded. 78
Goeth to the Colloquic in Wormes wnacr

a falſe name. 93
Fly:th tothe Councell for ſuccour , and after
quitteth both it ard Italy. I54

Diſcouereth the plots of the Romaniſls tothe
Suifſes and Griſons.

"v2

VV Aldenſes ,. or \ Albigenſes i» the_s
Alpes.
are miſcrably ſlaine by the-Frenchmen. 11 9
Obtaine a great victory againſt the Duke
of Sauoy. Sree nl 446
War betweene the Emperour , and the French
K1#2. 102
The Pope doth more intend the war againſt
the Proteſtants then the Councell, 144
Rumors of the Proteſtants armes cauſeth the

Counſel! to be ſuſpenatead, 377
Warre in France betweene the Proteſtants
and Papiſts. 647

Volley # delegated by the Pope to heave the
cauſe of the drnorce of Henry the cight, 68

34
1wrateth againſt the Bull of the intimation of Warkes of good men how they ave to be valued.

the Councell, 436
Bring in Valtellina , maketh objections 4-
gainſt the Councel. 743
Vincentia z5 choſen to hold ths Councell in. 34
Toree Legats areſent ther. 35
The Councell is deferred. 86
end afterwards ſuſpended during pleaſure.
90

The Venetians will not ſuffer the Councell to
be held in Vincentia, 100

Virgin Marie is exempted from ſinne by the

Franciſcans, 175,180
How [hz came tobe wor(hpped. I8I,1I 32
Vnion,and the doctrine of it. 350, 35t
Vii of Benefices was inuented to Palliate_

Plutlcic. 251

FFNFS.

"il 196
Warkes before grace, 198
Workes after grace. F. 199

Vinglius zz Zuric oppeſeth the Pope_,be-
ginning from the abaſe of Indulgences
preached by Friar Samſon amongſt the
Suiſles, [)
The Biſhop of Cenſtance writeth,and the_s
Dominicans preach againſt him, by which

meancs he #s the more ſtirred vp. 16
Hrs difference with Luther, 48
1s flane in battaile, 59
Zuric maketh a Decree in fanonr of the refor-
mea religion, 7

HC—_—_—— err La: a i etl.
t s

g—_—  —

ſt

1NSS INO

BD LILY
_— — —

CIE=ID

5
»

the K
Excellent Maicſtie,

ANNnNo Dom. M. Dc. XX1%,-

AN

£6
INters tO
%

ney
£3
Q
Co
©
and
d
Q
Os
-
O &
a A
To
©
AQ
- 8
wed
"kd

Bull, Pr

rinte

«>
(>

hn
