The Satapatha Brahmana, Vol. 2 (SBE 26)
=======================================
The Satapatha Brahmana, Vol. 2 (Sacred Books of the East 26), translated by Julius Eggeling (Oxford, 1885), public domain. Continues Eggeling's five-volume English rendering of the White Yajurveda ritual Brahmana. Scan via Internet Archive.

“> a


OF THE EAST pee


Volume 26 | ,


a ’


THE SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA


According to The Text of eam
The Madhyandina School


H 4 — oj


Part Il | BE eae


Books III to IV a


- al

. ; 7 Zz
4

+


THE
SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


Translated by
VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


Edited by
F. MAX MULLER


Vol. 26


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


(50 VOLUMES)
Series Editor : F. Max-Miiller


ISBN: 978-81-208-0101-1 (Set) Rs. 15000 (Each Vol. Rs. 350)


These volumes of the Sacred Books of the East series include translations of
all the most important works of the seven non-Christian religions that have
exercised a profound influence on the civilisations of the continent of Asia.
The Vedic Brahmanic system claims 21 volumes, Buddhism 10, and Jainism
2;8 volumes comprise Sacred Books of the Parsis;2 volumes represent Islam;
and 6 the two main indigenous systems of China. Translated by twenty
leading authorities in their respective fields, the volumes have been edited
by the late F. Max Miller. The inception, publication and the compilation of
these books cover almost 34 years.
I. BUDDHISM
Vol. 49: Buddhist Mahayana Texts (2 Parts)
Vol. 11: Buddhist Suttas
Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata
Vols. 35 & 36: The Questions of King Milinda (2 Parts)
Vol. 21: The Saddharma Pundarika or the Lotus of the True Law
Vols. 13, 17 & 20: Vinaya Texts (3 Parts)
II, CHINESE
Vol. 19: The Fo-Sho-Hing-Tsan-King
Vols. 3, 16, 27, 28, 39 & 40: The Sacred Books of China (6 Parts)
III]. A GENERAL INDEX
Vol. 50: A General Index to the Names and Subject-matter of the Sacred Books
of the East
IV, ISLAM
Vols. 6 & 9: The Qur'an (2 Parts)
V. JAINISM
Vols, 22 & 45: The Jaina Sutras (2 Parts)
VI. PARSIS
Vols. 5, 18, 24, 37 & 47: Pahlavi Texts (5 Parts)
Vols. 4, 23 & 31: The Zend-Avesta (3 Parts)
Vil. VEDIC-BRAHMANIC SYSTEM
Vol. 8: The Bhagavadgita with the Sanatsujatiya and the Anugita
Vols. 29 & 30: The Grihya-Sutras: Rules of Vedic Domestic Ceremonies (2 Parts)
Vol. 42: Hymns of the Atharva Veda together with Extracts from the Ritual
Books and the Commentaries
Vol. 7: The Institutes of Vishnu
Vol. 25: The Laws of Manu
Vol. 33: The Minor Law Books
Vols. 2 & 14: The Sacred Laws of the Aryas as Taught in the Schools of
Apastamba, Gautama, Vasishtha and Baudhayana (2 Parts)
Vols. 12, 26, 41, 43 & 44: The Satapatha Brahmana According to the Text of
the Madhyandina School (5 Parts)
Vols. 1 & 15: The Upanishads (2 Parts)
Vols. 34 & 38: The Vedanta Sutras (2 Parts)
Vol. 48: The Vedanta-Sutras (with the commentary by Ramanuja)
Vols. 32 & 46: Vedic Hymns (2 Parts)


THE SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA


ACCORDING TO THE TEXT OF THE
MADHYANDINA SCHOOL


Translated by


JULIUS EGGELING


PART II
Books III and IV


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Delhi ¢ Patnae Varanasi


® www.motilalbanarsidass.com © info@mlbd.co.in
©®@ motilalbanarsidass y @mlbdpublishers


10th Reprint : Dethi, 2023
First Published by the Clarendon Press, 1885


© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
All Rights Reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
or by any electronic or mechanical means including information
storage and retrieval systems without prior permission in writing
from the author or the publisher, except by a reviewer
who may quote brief passages in a review.


ISBN: 978-81-208-0127-1


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A., Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi-110 007, @ 011-43382798
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004, @ 0612-2671442
Chowk, Varanasi 221001, @ 0542-2412331


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series of the
UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, jointly sponsored
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cullural
Organization (UNESCO) and the Government of India


Published by Ravindra Jain
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi-110007
www.motilalbanarsidass.com « info@mlbd.co.in


RaASHTRAPAT!I BHAVAN,
New Decui-4
June 10, 1962


I am very glad to know that the Sacred Books
of the East, published years ago by the Clarendon
Press, Oxford, which have been out-of-print for a
number of years, will now be available to all
students of religion and philosophy. The enterprise
of the publishers is commendable and I hope the
books will be widely read.


S, RADHAKRISHNAN


a | |


pei


er ad =


le ?


‘ mn
1 : eA


_
a
% DP y
res
i
:
/
_
a
—
.


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE NEW EDITION


Since 1948 the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), upon the recom-
mendation of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
has been concerned with facilitating the translation of the
works most representative of the culture of certain of its
Member States, and, in particular, those of Asia.


One of the major difficulties confronting this programme
is the lack of translators having both the qualifications and
the time to undertake translations of the many outstanding
books meriting publication. To help overcome this difficulty
in part, UNESCO’s advisers in this field (a panel of experts
convened cvery other year by the International Council for
Philosophy and Humanistic Studies), have recommended that
many worthwhile translations published during the 19th century,
and now impossible to find except ina limited number of
libraries, should be brought back into print in low-priced
editions, for the use of students and of the general public. The
experts also pointed out that incertain cases, even though
there might be in existence more recent and more accurate
translations endowed with a more modern apparatus of scholar-
ship, a number of pionezr works of the greatest value and
interest to students of Eastern religions also merited republi-
cation.


This point of view was warmly endorsed by the Indian
National Academy of Letters (Sahitya Akademi), and the
Indian National Commission for UNESCO.


Itisin the spirit of these recommendations that this
work from the famous series ‘Sacred Looks of the East’’ is
now once again being made available to the general public
as part of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works.


PUBLISHER’S NOTE


First, the man distinguished between eternal and perish-
able. Later he discovered within himself the germ of the
Eternal. This discovery was an epoch inthe history of the
human mind and the East was the first to discover tt.


To watch in the Sacred Books of the East the dawn of
this religious consciousness of man, must always remain one
of the most inspiring and hallowing sights in the whole history
of the world. In order to havea solid foundation for a com-
parative study of the Religions of the East, we must have before
all things, complete and thoroughly faithful translation of their
Sacred Books in which some of the ancient sayings were pre-
served because they were so true and so striking that they
could not be forgotten. They contained eternal truths, ex-
pressed for the first time in human language.


With profoundest reverence for Dr. S. Radhakrishnan,
President of India, who inspired us for the task; our deep
sense of gratitude for Dr. C. D. Deshmukh & Dr. D. S.
Kothari, for encouraging assistance; esteemed appreciation of
UNESCO for the warm endorsement of the cause; and finally
with indebtedness to Dr. H. Rau, Director, Max Miller
Bhawan, New Delhi, in procuring us the texts of the Series
for reprint, we humbly conclude.


CONTENTS.


vACs
INTRODUCTION . ; : : ; . : : : xi


THIRD KANDA.
A. Day (or Days) of Preparation.


Diksha, or Consecration . , , ‘ : ; I
PrayantyeshA, or Opening Sacrifice. : 47
Hiranyavati-ahuti, or Offering with Gold; and Homage
to Soma-cow . : ; : ‘ ‘ F » AGS
Purchase of Soma-plants_ . ; . : - 968
Procession and Entrance of King Soma ‘ an
Subrahmanyé-litany . ‘ . : . om
Atithya, or Guest-meal to King at ; , «Oe
TanQnaptra, or Covenant of Taninap&t. , - 92
Avantara-diksh&, or Intermediary Consecration . - “97
Upasadah, or Homages (sieges) . ‘ . . 104
Preparation of Soma-altar with High-altar . : III
Agni-pramayana, or Leading Forward of the Fire to the
High-altar . ‘ a2t
Construction of Sheds, and Preparation of Pressing-
place and Dhishwya-hearths  . : : : ee
Havirdhana, or Cart-shed . ; ; ; . 126
Uparava, or Sound-holes . . , > . ¥S5
Sadas, or Tent ; . : ; . 140
Dhishnya-hearths .  . 148
Vaisargina-offerings, and Leading Recwtard of ie ina
Soma (to Agnfdhra) ; : : : : - 355
Animal Sacrifice : ; : koe
Setting up of Sacrificial Stake : , - ¥en
Slaying of Victim . : : : t oo 298
Oblations :—
Fore-offerings with Apri-verses 3 : . LR
Offering of Omentum (vap4) : : . Igo
Pasu-purodasa, or Cake-offering . ; - 199


Cutting and offering of Flesh-portions . . 201


Vill CONTENTS.


Offering of gravy (vasa)
Offering to Vanaspati .
After-offerings
Purificatory Bath, &c.
Ekadasini, or Set of Eleven Victime
Vasativari-water
B. Day of Soma-feast.
Pratar-anuvaka, or mera Panis and Preparatory
Ceremonies ¢
Pratah-savana, or Morning- -prtianig’ —
Preliminary Pressing .
Nigrabhy4-water .
Nigrabha-formula


FOURTH KAWDA.


Upamsu-graha
Great Pressing :—
Antaryama-graha .
Aindravayava-graha
Maitravaruma-graha
Asvina-graha ;
Sukra- and Manthi-prahas ‘
Agrayana-graha ,
Ukthya-graha
Vaisvanara- and Dhrova-grahas
Viprud-homa, or Oblation of Drops
Bahishpavamana- stotra ;
Asvina-graha
Offering of Savanfya- -purodisth
Ritu-grahas, or Libations to the Seasons
Aindragna-graha .
Vaisvadeva-graha .
A sya-sastra
MAadhyandina-savana, or Midday- -pressing
Sukra and Manthin; roe and Shiva.
grahas : : ,
Marutvattya- ~erabae
Mahendra-graha .
Dakshin4-homas


PAGE
205


208
210
215
237


222


226


238
242
245


248


257
265
265
272
278
288
292
298
3°5
397
312
314
318
322
323
325
33!


332
334
338
340


CONTENTS. 1X


Tritiya-savana, or Evening-pressing . ; » 350°
Asvina-graha ; ; 7 : ‘yous
Agrayana-graha . 5; : ' . SEs
Sivitra-graha , ., - 387
Vaisvadeva-graha , : . 359

Offering of 4aru (rice-pap) to Soma . 363
Patnivata-graha . , ; . 365
Agniméruta-sastra , ‘ ; : ; . 369
Hariyogana-graha ; : , . 370
Concluding Ceremonies. : : » 374
Samish/ayagus . ‘ , + 374
Avabhritha, or Purilicatory Bath ; : «998
Udayaniya-ish/i. ‘ . 386
Udavasinty4-ishA, or Completing Oblation F . 389
Offering of Barren Cow. . : , -. 393

C, Additional Forms of Soma-sacrifice.

Shodasin . : ; ; d ‘ - j . 367
Dvadasaha ; , , : : ; cee toy
Atigrahyas . : ‘ : ; - 402
Avak4sas . ; 7 - - : ; . 409
Triratra sahasradakshina_ . ; ; Aaa tt
Dvadasaha vyfidha-khandas . d ; ‘ . 418
Amsu-graha - : : : . . "423
Gavém ayanam . ; - 3 : ‘ ;, » 426
Mahfavratiya-graha_ . , , , . . 40
Brahma-séman . . . hase


Diksha, or Consecration, for Sacrificial Simone’. 440
Sattrotthana, or Rising from a Session ‘ » 447


Xaturhotrz-formulas . : q ; 2488
Brahmodya . , . ‘ ‘ : a. SES
Inpex To Parts I ann II (Vors. XII anv XXVI) : 2 ER?
Additions and Corrections . ; d ; - - . 474
Plan of Sacrificial Ground . : : : : ; fee? |]


Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the
Translations of the Sacred Books of the East . core Si;


ia


wei


hietaccmin ck OF , ti
‘Weg natant
ts i anita LR ey SE
he


¥

Da

ay
pare id


5
tie ra
a
it buen
7 a


“


ey, ¥ d
e eo” Ve
|


?


ences


INTRODUCTION.


THE contents of the third and fourth books of the Sata-
patha-brahmama form an important chapter of its dogmatic
explanation of the sacrificial ceremonial. This portion of
the work treats of the ordinary forms of the most sacred of
Vedic sacrificial rites, the Soma-sacrifice.” The exposition
of the Soma-ritual also includes an account of the animal
offering which, though it may be performed as an inde-
pendent sacrifice, more usually constitutes an integral part
of the Saumya-adhvara.

Since F. Windischmann, in his treatise ‘ Ueber den Soma-
cultus der Arier’ (1846), pointed out the remarkable simi-
larity of conceptions prevalent among the ancient Indians
and Iranians in regard to the Soma, both from a sacrificial
and a mythological point of view, this subject has re-
peatedly engaged the attention of scholars. In A. Kuhn's
masterly essay, ‘Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Gét-
tertranks’ (1859), the Soma-myth was thoroughly investi-
gated, and its roots were traced far back into the Indo-
European antiquity. Within the last few years the entire
Rig-vedic conceptions regarding Soma have, for the first
time, been subjected to a searching examination in M.A.
Bergaigne’s ‘La Religion Védique.’ This book forms an
important contribution to the interpretation of the Vedic
hymns; and though the combinations and theories put
forth by the author may not always commend themselves
to scholars generally, there can be no doubt that his en-
quiries exhibit a rare analytic faculty, and have yielded a
mass of new and valuable suggestions.

Among the numerous features which the Vedic Aryans
had in common with their Iranian kinsmen, and from which
it is supposed that an intimate connection must have sub-


XII SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

sisted between these two easternmost branches of the Indo.
European stock for some time after they had become
separated from their western brethren, the Soma cult and
myth are not the least striking. Both the Vedic soma
and the Zend haoma—derived from the root su (Zend hu),
‘to press, produce’—denote in the first place a spirituous
liquor extracted from a certain plant, described as growing
on the mountains; the words being then naturally applied
to the plant itself. But the Rig-veda, not less than the
Avesta, distinguishes between an earthly and a celestial
Soma; and it is precisely the relation between these two,
or the descent of the heavenly Soma to the world of men,
which forms the central element of the Soma-myth. To
the childlike intellect of the primitive Aryan which knew
not how to account for the manifold strange and awe-in-
spiring phenomena of nature otherwise than by peopling
the universe with a thousand divine agents, the potent juice
of the Soma-plant which endowed the feeble mortal with
godlike powers, and for a time freed him from earthly cares
and troubles, seemed a veritable god, not less worthy of
adoration than the wielder of the thunderbolt, the roaring
wind, or the vivifying orb of day. The same magic powers
are, upon the whole, ascribed to Soma by the Indian and
Persian bards: to both of them he is the wise friend and
mighty protector of his votary, the inspirer of heroic deeds
of arms as well as of the flights of fancy and song, the
bestower of health, long life, and even immortality. The
divine personality of Soma, it is true, is, even for Vedic
imagery, of an extremely vague and shadowy character ;
but it 1s difficult to see what plastic conception there could
be of a deity whose chief activity apparently consists in
mingling his fiery male nature with the teeming waters of
the sky, and the swelling sap of plants. The principal cause,
however, of the vagueness of Soma’s personality, and the
source of considerable difficulties in explaining many of the
Vedic conceptions of this deity, is his twofold nature as a
fiery liquor, or liquid fire,—that is to say, his fluid and
his fiery or luininous nature.


INTRODUCTION. Xl


The Soma, with whom the worshipper is chiefly concerned,
is thie Soma-plant, and the juice extracted from it for the
holy service. This is the earthly Soma, or, so to speak,
the Avatar of the divine Soma. The latter, on the other
hand, is a luminous deity, a source of light and life. In the
Brahmavas, Soma, in this respect, has become completely
identified with the Moon, whose varying phases, and tem-
porary obscuration at the time of new-moon, favoured the
mystic notions of his serving as food' to the Gods and
Fathers (Manes); and of his periodical descents to the
earth, with the view of sexual union with the waters and
plants, and his own regeneration®. Though this identifi-
cation appears already clearly in several passages of the
Rik, Vedic scholars seem mostly inclined to refer this con-
ception to a secondary stage of development*. According
to Professor Roth, indeed, this identification would have no
other mythological foundation than the coincidence of
notions which finds its expression in the term indu‘* (com-
monty used for Soma, and in the later language for the
moon), viz. as ‘a drop’ and ‘a spark (drop of light).’ This
is not unlikely, but it does not of course help us to settle
the point as to how that term came ultimately to be applied
exclusively to the moon among heavenly luminaries. To
the Vedic poet it is rather the sun that appears, if not iden-
tical, at any rate closely connected, with the divine Soma.
The fact was first pointed out by Grassmann‘, who pro-
posed to identify Pavamana, the ‘ pure-streamed, sparkling '
Soma, with the, apparently solar, deity Puemuno of the


1 Or, as the vessel containing the divine Soma, the drink conferring immortality.

? See, for instance, Sat. Br. I, 6, 4,5 seq. Possibly also the shape of the
‘homed moon’ may have facilitated the attribution to that luminary of a bull-
like nature such as is ascribed to Soma; though a similar attribution, it is
true, is made in the case of other heavenly objects whose outward appearance
offers no such points of comparison.

3M. A. Barth, The Vedic Religions, p. 27, on the other hand, is of opinion
that this identification goes back to Indo-European times.

* St. Petersburg Dict. s.v. According to A. Kuhn, the two myths of the
descent of Fire and of the divine Liquor spring from one and the same con-
ception, whence the spark of fire is conceived as a drop. ‘ Herabkunft,’ p. 161.

5 Kuhn’s Zeitsch. f. Vergl. Spr. XVI, p. 183 seq.


XIV SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.,


Iguvian tablets. M. Bergaigne has also carefully collected
the passages of the Xzk in which Soma appears either com-
pared or identified with the sun. Although a mere com-
parison of Indu-Soma with the sun can scarcely be
considered sufficient evidence on this point, since such a
comparison might naturally enough suggest itself even to
one who had the identity of Soma and the moon in his
mind, there still remain not a few passages where no such
ambiguity seems possible. Somewhat peculiar are the re-
lations between Soma and Sfrya’s daughter (probably the
Dawn), alluded to several times’ in the Rzk. In one passage
(IX, 1, 6) she is said to pass Sfirya through the perpetual
filter (sasvat vara); whilst in another (IX, 113, 8) ‘Sdrya’s
daughter brought the bull (Soma?), reared by Parganya (the
cloud); the Gandharvas seized him and put him, as sap,
into the Soma (plant?).’ A combination of this female
bearer of Soma with the eagle (or falcon) who carried off
Soma (IV, 27, &c.) seems to have supplied the form of the
myth, current in the Brahmamas, according to which Gayatri
fetched Soma from heaven. The hymn X, 85?, on the other
hand, celebrates the marriage ceremony of Soma and Sfiryé,
at which the two Asvins act as bride’smen, and Agni as the
leader of the bridal procession to the bridegroom’s home.
There are, however, other passages in the Rig-veda, in
which Soma, so far from being identified with the sun, seems
to be regarded as some sovereign power which originates
or controls that luminary, as well as the other lights of
heaven. Thus in Rig-veda IX, 61, 16 Soma is represented
as producing (ganayan) the bright light belonging to all
men; in IX, 97, 41 as producing the light in the sun
(aganayat sdrye gyotir indud); in IX, 28, 5; 37, 4 as
causing the sun to shine (rokayan); in IX, 86, 22; 107, 7
as making him rise (4-rohayan) in the sky; in IX, 63, 6


* M. Bergaigne, II, p. 249, identifies with SQrya’s daughter the girl (? Apala)
who, going to the water, found Soma, and took him home, saying, ‘I'll press
thee for Indra!’ On this hymn see Prof. Aufrecht, Ind. Stud. IV, 1 seq.

* On this hymn see A. Weber, Ind. Stud. V, 178 seq.; J. Ehni, Zeitsch. der
D.M.G. XXXII, p. 166 seq.


INTRODUCTION, XV


is harnessing Svar’s Etasa; in IX, 36,3; 49,5 as causing the
lights to shine (gyotimshi vi-rofayan; pratnavad rofayan
rusak); in LX, 42,1 as producing the lights of the sky (and)
the sun in the (heavenly) waters; in IX, 41, 5 as filling the
two wide worlds (rodasi), even as the dawn, as the sun, with
his rays. Nay, the poet of IX, 86, 29,‘Thou art the
(heavenly) ocean (samudra)... thine are the lights (gyo-
timshi), O Pavamana, thine the sun,’ seems to conceive
Soma as the bright ether, the azure ‘sea of light’ generally ;
and a similar conception is perhaps implied when, in IX,
107, 20, the bard sings, ‘Thine I am, O Soma, both by
night and by day, for friendship’s sake, O tawny one, in the
bosom (of the sky'): like birds have we flown far beyond
the sun scorching with heat.’

On the other hand, it must not be forgotten that similar
functions to those here referred to are ascribed to other
deities besides Soma, without there being any cogent reason
for assuming an intentional rapprochement, still less iden-
tification of these deities with Soma; and, in point of fact,
the allusions in the hymns are too vague to enable us to
determine the exact relations between Soma and the
heavenly light. Indeed, it may be questioned whether
there was any very clear apprehension of these relations;
or whether, prior to the ultimate identification of Soma
with the moon, we have not to deal with a body of floating
ideas rather than with a settled mythological conception of
the divine Soma. During his brief term of existence on
earth—from his mountain birth to his final consummation
as ‘the supreme offering’ (uttamasz havis)—the outward
form of Soma passes through a succession of changes from
which the poet would draw many a feature wherewith to
endow the divine object of his fancy. He might thus repre-
sent Soma now as a shining tree springing from the moun-
tains of the sky; now as a luminous drop or spark moving
through the heavens, and sledding light all around; or as
innumerabie drops of light scattered over the wide aerial


* Udhani, lit. in, or on, the udder (whence Soma is milked, i.e. the sky).


XVi SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


expanse; now as a glittering stream, or again, as a vast sea
of liquid light.

The references of the Avesta to the divine Haoma are
even less definite and explicit than those of the Vedic
hymns. His connection with the heavenly light, though
not perhaps so close as that of Mithra and other deities, is
unmistakable enough!; but we look in vain for any clear
indication as to what the exact relations are. It is certain,
however, that nowhere in the Avesta is there any passage
which could warrant us to assume an identification of
Haoma with either the Sun or the Moon. In Yasna IX,
81-82, we are told that Haoma was the first to be invested
by Ahura-Mazda with the zone, spangled with stars, and
made in heaven, in accordance with the good Mazda-yasnic
law ; and that girt therewith he dwells upon the heights of
the mountain to uphold the sacred ordinances. It is difficult
to see what else the star-spangled zone (the heavenly
counterpart of the ordinary Kusti of the orthodox Parsi)
could here refer to, except the milky way, or perhaps the
starry sky generally ;—unless, indeed, as is scarcely likely,
some special constellation be implied ;—but neither this nor
any other passage enables us in any way to define the divine
personality of Haoma.

Soma’s descent to the earth, as pictured in the Vedic
hymns, is attended with violent disturbances in the regions
of the sky, in which Indra generally plays the principal part.
It is admitted on all hands that we have to look upon these
supernal struggles as mythic impressions of ordinary atmo-
spheric phenomena, especially those of the Indian monsoon
and rainy season, and the violent thunderstorms by which
they are usually accompanied. According to the needs and
anxieties by which he was swayed at the moment, these
atmospheric occurrences presented themselves to the poet’s
mind chiefly in two different lights. Either, the approaching
masses of clouds brought with them the long-desired rain,
and the prospect of abundant food for man and beast: in
that case the gods were doing battle for the possession of


* Cf. Spiegel, Eranische Alterthumskunde, II, p. 114.


INTRODUCTION. XVil


the celestial waters, or the heavenly cows, too long confined
by malicious demons in their mountain strongholds; or,
after a time of tempest and gloom, one longed to see again
the bright sky and the golden sunlight, to cheer life and
ripen the crops: in which case it was a struggle for the
recovery of the heavenly light.

The relation in which Soma stands to Indra is mainly
that of the fiery beverage, the welcome draughts of which
give the warrior god the requisite strength and nerve for
battling with the demons of drought and darkness, Indra’s
favourite weapon is the thousand-spiked, iron or golden
thunderbolt, the lightning. But inasmuch as it is Soma
that enables Indra effectually to wield his weapon, the poet
might, by a bold, yet perfectly natural, metaphor, identify
the potent drink with the terrible bolt. This identification
is indeed met with in several passages of the Xzk', notably
in IX, 47, 3, ‘When his song of praise is brought forth, then
Soma, the powerful (indriya) liquor, becomes the thousand-
fold-winning thunderbolt ;’ in IX, 72, 7, ‘Indra’s thunder-
bolt, the bountiful (vibhdvasu) bull, the exhilarating Soma
clarifies itself in a manner pleasing to the heart ;’ and in IX,
77,1, ‘This sweet (Soma) has roared in the tub, Indra’s
thunderbolt, more beautiful than the beautiful one*.’ Not
less natural is the simile implied in epithets, properly
applying to Indra,—such as ‘vritrahan’ (slayer of Vritra),
and ‘ goda’ (cow-giver),—when applied to Soma, who helps
him to make good those titles of his; just as one can
understand their being occasionally applied to Agni, the
sacrificial fire, as the medium through which the libations
reach Indra. A similar kind of poetic figure is involved in
passages representing Soma as exercising an influence, not
on Indra himself, but on the weapons wielded by him®;


1 Cf. A. Bergaigne, Religion Védique, II, 253. In the Brahmamas it is not
Soma, but the pressing-stone, that is identified with the Vagra.

2 Prof, Ludwig proposes to read ‘vagrat’ instead of ‘ vagro,’ thus ‘more
beautiful than Indra’s beautiful thunderbolt.’ But even if we retain the received
reading, ‘vapusha’ might refer to the (real) thunderbolt; though, of course,
it may also be taken as referring either to the sun, or to Agni, or to some
other deity or heavenly object.

3 Cf. A. Bergaigne, II, 251.

[26] b


XViil SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


such as VIII, 76, 9, ‘O Indra, drink the pressed Soma,.. .
sharpening the thunderbolt with its strength;’ or IX, 96,
12, where Soma is called upon to join Indra, and produce
weapons for him (ganayayudhani); or VIII, 15, 7, where
the Soma-cup (dhishav) is said to whet Indra’s power, his
daring and intelligence, as well as the desirable thunder-
bolt.

But, while most scholars will probably be content to
apply this kind of interpretation to cases of an apparent
identification of Soma and the Vagra such as those referred
to, M. Bergaigne is evidently in favour of their identity
pure and simple. Now, it cannot be denied that the
authors of some of those passages may really have in-
tended to represent Soma as virtually or actually the same
as the thunderbolt; but even if that were so, we should
hardly be justified in assuming this identity to have been
anything like a settled and universally accepted conception
in the times of the hymns. There surely is some danger
in treating a miscellaneous collection like the Rig-veda, as
if it were a uniform and homogeneous production, and in
generalizing from one or two isolated passages. In this
respect I cannot help thinking that M. Bergaigne has often
gone farther than many scholars will be prepared to follow
him. Thus another of his favourite theories seems to be
the ultimate identity of Soma and Agni. But close as the
relations of these two deities undoubtedly are, and even
admitting that they may occasionally have been the object
of those syncretist tendencies which we See so often at work
in the mythological speculations of the Rishis, nevertheless
I cannot but think that to the generality of Vedic poets
Agni and Soma were perfectly distinct deities, as distinct
from each other as the two visible objects which represent
them on earth. Indeed, M. Bergaigne himself has to admit
(I, 167) that, ‘as the fire and beverage were in reality dis-
tinct on earth, this distinction was inevitably extended
sometimes to their divine forms.’ But if such is the
case, and if they are actually invoked together in one
and the same hymn, should one not think that even
in those divine forms of theirs they must at least have


INTRODUCTION. XIX
been regarded as two different manifestations of the same
divinity ?

Soma makes his descent to the earth in showers of rain,
amid thunder and lightning. Here a new problem presents
itself: in this strife of elements, what is the exact pheno-
menon in which we are to recognise the divine Soma as
temporarily embodied? It used to be taken for granted
that the rain of the thunderstorm must be so regarded, being
as it were the atmospheric counterpart of the earthly Soma
drops, expressed from the juicy stalk and flowing into the
vat. M. Bergaigne, however, has put forward the theory
that it is not the rain, but the lightning, that really repre-
sents Soma; and has tried to show, with no little ingenuity,
that several passages of the Azk can only, or at any rate
most naturally, be explained by the light of his theory.
Now, according to an old myth, frequently alluded to in the
hymns, Soma was brought down to the earth by an eagle
or falcon (syena). Thus we read in I, 93, 6, ‘ Matarisvan has
brought down the one (Agni) from the sky, and the Syena
has churned the other (Soma) from the (celestial) rock.’
A. Kuhn saw in this bird only another form of Indra who.
in two passages (I, 32, 14; X, 99, 8), is indeed directly
likened to a Syena. On the other hand, this identification
is rendered doubtful by two other passages (I, 80, 2; IV,
18, 13), in which the Syena is represented as bringing the
Soma to Indra himself. Here, then, is a veritable crux.
M. Bergaigne does not hesitate to cut the knot by identrfy*
ing the Soma-bearing bird with the lightning; and the
lightning again being to him no other than Soma, the myth
thus resolves itself into the rather commonplace fact that
Soma takes himself down to the earth. He only needed to
goa step further by identifying Soma, not only with Agni
and the lightning, but also with Indra himself, and the
phantasmagory would have been complete. Indeed, one
of M. Bergaigne's disciples, M. Koulikovski, has already
come very near supplying this deficiency, when he remarks
(Revue de Linguistique, XVIII, p. 3), that in the hymn IV,
26 ‘we have to do with a twofold personage, composed of
the attributes of Indra and Soma.’


b 2


xx SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


Now, if this myth were a purely Indian one, one might
be content to relegate it to the category of Vedic ‘paradoxes’
to the vindication of which M. Bergaigne declares himself
ready to devote his life. But as there can be no reasonable
doubt that the myth goes back to Indo-European times,
and that its object is simply to account for the mysterious
effect of spirituous liquor or the ‘fire-water,’ so to speak,
I for one find it impossible to accept M. Bergaigne’s ex-
planation of this myth, at least so far as the identification
of Soma and the lightning is concerned’. On the other
hand, his theory undoubtedly receives a considerable
amount of support from the fact that the Soma is fre-
quently compared with the Syena. But we saw that the
same term is applied to Indra, as it also is to the Maruts
(X, 92, 6), to the Asvins (IV, 74, 9; VIII, 73, 4), and to
Sarya (V, 45, 9); and there is in my opinion no evidence
to show that this comparison has any connection with the
myth which makes the fiery liquor to be brought down by
a Syena. Moreover, wherever that comparison occurs, it
undoubtedly applies to the Pavamana, or the drops or
streams of Soma flowing through the filter into the vat;
and I can see no reason why we should not consider the
showers of rain as the exact counterpart of the clarifying
Soma. But, of course, the real divine Soma is not the
rain-drop itself, any more than he is the drop of juice ex-
pressed from the Soma-plant; but he is the spark of celestial
fire enclosed in the drop. It would seem, then, that, as
the masses of cloud overspread the sky, Soma, the heavenly
light, is conceived as entering into union with the celestial
cows or waters, released by the thunderbolt from their
mountain keep, and coming down with them to the earth.


' For the same reason I find it impossible to accept M. Bergaigne's inter-
pretation of the hymn IV, 27, put forward at the end of his work (vol. iii,
p- 322 q.,. According to tlat interpretation, Soma, in the first verse, declares
that he himself flew forth from his prison as an eagle; and then, in the second
verseé—as it were rcprovirg those who might imagine the eagle to be a different
being from himsclf—he adds, ‘It was not he (the eagle) that bore me away
with ease, but I triumphed Ly my own cleverness and bravery!’ Iam afraid
this critical specimen of the feathered tribe will not find many admirers among


INTRODUCTION. XX!


But while I find it impossible, as regards the myth of
the Soma-bearing bird, to identify with M. Bergaigne the
winged bearer (probably the lightning) with its burden, the
Soma ; the descent of the fiery god is pictured in various
other ways, and it might still be possible that one or other
poet had conceived of the bull-like Soma, as the lightning.
uniting with the heavenly cows in their earthward course, so
that before reaching the earth the rain-drops would be im-
pregnated with Soma’s essence, and would, in fact, be of the
same nature as the Soma-juice. I am not prepared, there-
fore, entirely to reject the identification of Soma with the
lightning ; only I do not think that any one of the crucial
passages adduced by M. Bergaigne in favour of that iden-
tity necessarily requires the interpretation he proposes.
Thus, in IX, 41, 3,‘The sound of the mighty Pavamana
(the clarifying Soma) is heard like that of the rain: the
lightnings pass in the sky,’ it surely seems rather far-
fetched to take the lightning, instead of the rain, to be the
object with which Soma is compared, merely because in
the same hymn Soma is also compared with the sun and the
heavenly river Rasa. The same may be said of IX, 108, 11,
‘That joy-pouring (mada-4yut) thousand-streamed bull they
have milked out from the sky,’ and several other passages.
The verse IX, 87, 8, divo na vidyut stanayanty abhrai/,
somasya te pavata indra dhard, ‘Thy stream of Soma, O
Indra, clarifies itself, as (does) the thundering lightning of
the sky by means of the clouds,’ is more favourable to


prosaic Sanskritists. I.should prefer, with Prof. Roth, to read ‘nir adiyat’
instead of ‘nir adiyam,’ unless it were possible to read ‘syenagavasa’ instead
of ‘ syendé gavasa.’ M. Koulikovski, in the paper referred to, throws the hymns
IV, 26 and 27 together, and takes them as a sort of mytho-critical controversy
between the god Soma and some other person (perhaps the author himself),
advocating two different versions of the Soma-myth, viz. Soma contending that
it was himself who brought the divine plant, while his interlocutor (‘who has
the last word in the hymn’) maintains that it was brought bya falcon. Thus,
according to this scholar, the falcon was already (!) distinguished from Soma ;
and these two hymns ‘are, as it were, an echo of a religious, or rather mytho-
logical dispute, which had divided the theologians of the Vedic epoch.’
Perhaps Prof. Oldenberg’s theory of Akhyata-hymns, or detached pieces of
poetry connected by prose narratives, might have a chance with these hymns.


XXii SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

M. Bergaigne’s view, as may also be the doubtful passage,
V, 84, 3, yat te abhrasya vidyuto divo varshanti vrzsh/ayah,
‘When the rains of the cloud rain thee (O earth) lightnings
from the sky(?).’ As regards VII, 69, 6, addressed to the
Asvins, ‘Come, ye two men, to our libations this day, like
two thirsty bulls to the lightning,’ M. Bergaigne (I, 168)
thinks that the identification of Soma with the lightning
can alone explain this passage; since it would be impossible
to imagine that the two bulls could anticipate the falling of
rain from the appearance of the lightning. Though a poetic
figure like this hardly bears such critical handling, perhaps
M. Bergaigne will allow me to ask whether, if the passage
had read, ‘Come ye hither to our libations, like two bulls
to the thunder !,’ he would have thought it so very bold a
figure for a Vedic poet to use?

The most important of all passages, however, undoubt-
edly is IX, 84, 3: 4 yo gobhiz srigyata oshadhishu....A
vidyuta pavate dhdrayd sutad, indrazz somo madayan
daivyam ganam. M. Bergaigne translates (I, 172) the first
pada by ‘ Lui qui est répandu avec les vaches (i. e. the rain-
drops) dans les plantes,’ which, of course, fits either view
equally well; the only question being, whether Soma is
already united with the rain-drops when they are poured
forth by the clouds, or whether, in the shape of lightning,
he is still separate from them. The third pada, M.
Bergaigne remarks (I, 170), may be boldly (hardiment)
translated by ‘II se clarifie, exprimé en un torrent qui est
léclair.’ This rendering, if correct, would doubtless settle
the point ; but to my mind it is not only a very doubtful,
but a highly improbable explanation. What I believe to
be the true interpretation of the passage had been given
by Prof. Ludwig two years before the publication of M.
Bergaigne’s volume, viz. ‘ Expressed ina stream, he clarifies
himself by the lightning—Soma who exhilarates (or inebri-
ates) Indra and the divine race.’ It will be seen that this
alters the case completely. The lightning would be


' Cp. IX, 100, 3: ‘Send forth mind-yoked thought, as the thunder sends
forth rain,’


INTRODUCTION XXill


compared with the filter of white sheep’s wool, through
which the Soma-juice percolates into the vat. The same
simile, in my opinion, is implied wherever the formula pa-
vate (a) vrish/im, ‘he clarifies himself into rain,’ is used (IX,
49,1; 33 95,3; 24; 96,14; 108,10). And, in truth, the
simile seems to mea very striking one; but we must not,
of course, think of single flashes of lightning such as we
are accustomed to in our northern climes (and as are
doubtless implied in the Vedic conception of the Vagra
or thunderbolt), but of that continuous and widespread
electric illumination (vi-dyut) which forms a characteristic
feature of the monsoon, when the showers of rain seem to
flow through an immense space of light’.


* For a description of this phenomenon in the distr’cts where we must
imagine the Vedic poets to have composed their hymns, see Elphinstone,
Account of the Kingdom of Cabool, p. 126 seq.

I cannot forbear here to quote a few extracts from a graphic description
of the setting in of the monsoon in India proper, given in the Rev. H.
Caunter’s Oriental Annual (1834) :—‘ There was a slight haze upon the distant
waters which seemed gradually to thicken, although not to a density sufficient
to refract the rays of the sun, which still flooded the broad sea with one
unvarying mass of glowing light . . . . Towards the afternoon, the aspect of the
sky began to change; the horizon gathered blackness, and the sun, which had
risen so brightly, had evidently culminated in darkness, and to have his
splendour veiled from human sight by a long, gloomy period of storm and
turbulence. Masses of heavy clouds appeared to rise from the sea, black and
portentous, accompanied by sudden gusts of wind, that suddenly died away,
being succeeded by an intense, death-like stillness, as if the air were in a state
of utter stagnation, and its vital properties arrested. It seemed no longer to
circulate, until again agitated by the brief but mighty gusts which swept
fiercely along, like the giant heralds of the sky. Meanwhile the lower circle
of the heavens looked a deep brassy red, from the partial reflection of the
sunbeams upon the thick clouds, which had now everywhere overspread it. . ..
From the house which we occupied we could behold the setting in of the
monsoon in all its grand and terrific sublimity. The wind, with a force which
nothing could resist, bent the tufted heads of'the tall, slim cocoa-nut trees
almost to the earth, flinging the light sand into the air in eddying vortices, until
the rain had either so increased its gravity, or beaten it into a mass, as to
prevent the wind from raising it. The pale lightning streamed from the clouds
in broad sheets of flame, which appeared to encircle the heavens as if every
element had been converted into fire, and the world was on the eve of a
general conflagration, whilst the peal, which instantly followed, was like the
explosion of a gunpowder-magazine, or the discharge of artillery in the gorge
of a mountain, where the repercussion of surrounding hills multiplies with
terrific energy its deep and astounding echoes. The heavens seemied to be


XXIV SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


The striking coincidences between the Vedic Agnishfoma
and the Homa ceremony of the Parsis, pointed out by
Martin Haug (Ait. Br. I, p. 59 seq.), leave no doubt as to
the complete development of the Soma-ritual in its essential
features before the separation of the Indo-Iranians. The
exact identity of the plant from which their sacred liquor
was prepared is still somewhat doubtful. An official inquiry
which has been set on foot in consequence of two papers
published by Prof. Roth (Journal of Germ. Or. Soc. 1881
and 1883), and translated by Mr. C. J. Lyall, secretary to the
Chief Commissioner of Assam, and which, it is understood, is
now carried on, on the part of the Government of India, by
Dr. Aitchison, botanist to the Afghan Boundary Commis-
sion, will probably ere long settle the matter once for all.
The appearance of the first official blue-book on the sub-
ject has already led to a renewed discussion of the matter,
in the columns of a weekly journal?, in which Profs. Max
Miiller and R. v. Roth, as well as several distinguished
botanists, especially Drs. J. G. Baker and W. T. Thiselton
Dyer, have taken part. Of especial interest in this discus-
sion is a letter *,by Mr. A. Houttum-Schindler, dated Teheran,
December 20,1884,in which an account is given of the plant
from which the present Parsis of Kerman and Yezd obtain
their Ham juice, and which they assert to be the very same


one vast reservoir of flame, which was propelled from its voluminous bed by
some invisible but omnipotent agency, and threatened to fling its fiery ruin
upon everything around. In some parts, however, of the pitchy vapour by
which the skies were by this time completely o» :rspread, the lightning was
seen only occasionally to glimmer in faint streaks of light, as if struggling,
but unable, to escape from its prison, igniting, but too weak to burst, the
impervious Losoms of those capacious magazines in which it was at once
engendered and pent up. So heavy and continuous was the rain, that scarcely
anything, save those vivid bursts of light which nothing could arrest or resist,
was perceptible through it.... Day after day the same scene was repeated
with somewhat less violence, though at intervals the might of the hurricane
was truly appalling ....The breaking up of the monsoon is frequently even
more violent, if possible, than its setting in, and this happened to be the case
during the first season after my arrival in India. It was truly stupendous, and
1 shall never cease to remember it to the latest moment of my existence.’

* The Academy, Oct. 25, 1884—Feb. 14, 1885.

* Ibid., Jan. 31, 1885.


INTRODUCTION, XXV


bad —_———


as the Haoma of the Avesta. The Ham shrub, according
to this description, grows to the height of four feet, and
consists of circular fleshy stalks (the thickest being about a
finger thick) of whitish colour, with light brown streaks.
The juice was milky, of a greenish white colour, and had a
sweetish taste. Mr. Schindler was, however, told that,
after being kept for a few days, it turned sour and, like the
stalks, became yellowish brown. The stalks break easily
at the joints, and then form small cylindrical pieces. They
had lost their leaves, which are said to be small and formed
like those of the jessamine. This description, according to
the above naturalists, would seem to agree tolerably well
with the Sarcostemma (akin to the common milk-weed),
or some other group of Asclepiads, such as the Periploca
aphylla which, as Mr. Baker states, has been traced by
Dr. Haussknecht to 3000 feet in the mountains of Persia,
and, according to Dr. Aitchison, is common also in Afghan-
istan. A quotation from a medical Sanskrit work, to
which attention was drawn by Prof. Max Miiller many
years ago, states that, ‘the creeper, called Soma, is dark,
sour, without leaves, milky, fleshy on the surface; it destroys
(or causes) phlegm, produces vomiting,and is eaten by goats.’
The foul, sour smell of the Soma-juice is also alluded to in
our Brahmana (see the present volume, p. 266). Accord-
ing to Prof. Spiegel}, the Parsis of Bombay obtain their
Homa from Kerman, whither they send their priests from
time to time to gct it. The plant at present used by the
Hindu priests of the Dekhan, on the other hand, according to
Haug, is not the Soma of the Vedas, but appears to belong to
the same order. ‘It grows (he informs us, Ait. Br. II, 489) on
hills in the neighbourhood of Poona to the height of about
four to five feet, and forms a kind of bush, consisting of a
certain number of shoots, all coming from the same root ;
their stem is solid like wood; the bark grayish; they are
without leaves ; the sap appears whitish, has a very stringent
taste, is bitter, but not sour: it is a very nasty drink, and
has some intoxicating effect. I tasted it several times, but


ee ee ee ee a nae


1 Eranische Alterthumskunde, III, p. 572.


XXVI1 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


it was impossible for me to drink more than some teaspoon-
fuls.’ In fact, several varieties of Sarcostemma or Ascle-
piads', somewhat different from those of Persia and
Afghanistan, which are not to be found so far south, seem
to have been, and indeed seem still to be, made use of for the
Soma-sacrifice. And notwithstanding the objections raised
by Dr. G. Watt, in his useful ‘Notes,’ appended to the
translation of Professor Roth’s papers, every probability
seems to me to be in favour of the identity of the original
Soma-plant with the shrub, the stalks of which are used
by the Parsis in preparing their Him juice, or with some
other plant of the same genus. It certainly would seem to
have been a plant with soft, succulent stems. Dr. Watt
remarks, ‘ We know of no instance of a succulent plant re-
taining, for weeks or months, its sap within isolated twigs,
and, indeed, we can recall but few plants which could with-
stand, even for a day or two, the dry climate of India, so
as to retain the sap within their isolated and cut twigs.’
But, though at the time of the Vedic hymns fresh and juicy
plants were probably used for the preparation of the sacred
drink, in later times, when the plants had to be conveyed
some considerable distance into India, the withered and
shrunk plants were apparently found, with the admixture
of water and other ingredients, to serve the same purpose.
For we know from the description given in the Satras, that
water was poured on the plants previously to their being
beaten with the pressing-stones. This moistening or
steeping is called 4pyd4yanam, or ‘ the making (the
plants) swell.’ After being then well beaten and bruised,
they were thrown into the vat, or rather trough, partly
filled with water, and were pressed out with the hand.
Dr. Watt thinks Professor Roth ought rather to have
published briefly the leading passages in the hymns descrip-
tive of the plant, from which naturalists might have drawn
their own conclusions, One might as well ask a Hebrew


* Especially Sarcostemma intermedium, S. brevistigma, and S. viminale
(or Asclepias acida). See R. Roth, Zeitsch. der 1D, Morg. Ges. vol. xxxv,
p. 681 seq.


INTRODUCTION, XXVII


scholar to give accurate descriptions of the ‘lily of the
valley’ to enable the botanist to identify and classify the
lovely flower which delishted the heart of ki g Solomon.
It is exactly the want of an accurate knowledge of the
nature of the Soma-plant which prevents the Vedic scholar
from being able to understand some of the few material allu-
sions to it. Thus the term amsu, commonly applied to
the Soma-plant, used to be taken to mean simply ‘ plant’
or ‘sprig, shoot ;’ but Professor Roth seems now inclined,
perhaps rightly, to take it as referring to the internode, or
cylindrical piece between two joints of the stem. The
substitutes approved of by the Satapatha-brahmawa, in case
no genuine Soma-plants can be obtained, will be found
enumerated at pp. 421-422 of the present volume. A de-
scription of these plants, so far as they have been identified,
is given in Professor Roth's paper.

I cannot conclude these remarks without expressing my
hearty thanks tothose scholars who have done me the honour
of reviewing the first volume of this work. To Professor
Whitney I feel especially indebted for his most careful
examination of my translation, and the searching, yet appre-
ciative, criticism he has been good enough to apply to it.
I shall feel content, if the present volume finds at least one
reader as conscientious and painstaking. While I agree
with most of Prof. Whitney’s suggestions’, there are one or
two points raised by him, and these perhaps of the more
important, on which I have been unable to take his view ;
and as some of these points involve renderings adhered to
in the present volume, I take the opportunity here briefly
to advert to them.

The most important of these points probably is my
rendering of the term kapAla by ‘potsherd,’ instead of ‘cup,
dish,’ as proposed by Prof. Whitney. Instead of speaking
of a sacrificial cake on eleven or twelve potsherds, we are
to call it a cake on so many cups or dishes. The term


‘ American Journal of Philology, vol. iii, pp. 391-410; Proceedings of the
American Oriental Society, October 1882, p. xiv seq.


XXVill SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

ns ae al es a a a
‘potsherd’ no doubt is somewhat awkward, and, had it
been possible, I should have preferred to use the simple
obsolete word ‘shard’ or ‘sherd’ for it; but I decidedly
object to either ‘cup’ or ‘dish.’ I gather from his sugges-
tion, that we take entirely different views of the purpose
and nature of the kapala. I have to reject the proposed
renderings for the very reason for which they commend
themselves to Prof. Whitney, namely, because they imply
so many vessels complete in themselves. He asks, whether
I suppose ‘that the Brahmans made their offerings on frag-
ments of broken pottery?’ Well, I certainly believe that
the kapalas are meant to represent the fragments of a
broken dish. The sacrificial cake is to be baked on a dish,
but for symbolic reasons this dish is supposed to be broken
up intoa number of pieces or kapalas. The symbolic signifi-
cance of this seems to be a twofold one. Onthe one hand,
the dish is to resemble the human skull. Hence we read Sat.
Br. I, 2, 1,2, ‘The cake is the head of Yagiia (the sacrifice,
and symbolically the sacrificer himself); for those potsherds
(kapalani) are what the skull-bones (sirshvad kap4lani) are,
and the ground rice is nothing else than the brain.’ On the
other hand, the kap4las are usually arranged (see Part I,
p- 34, note) in such a manner as to producea fancied resem-
blance to the (upper') shell of the tortoise, which is a symbol
of the sky, as the tortoise itself represents the universe.
Thus with cakes on a single kapala, the latter is indeed
a complete dish. In the same way the term kapala, in the
singular, is occasionally applied to the skull, as well as to
the upper and the lower case of the tortoise, e.g. Sat. Br.
VII, 5, 1, 2: ‘ That lower kapila of it (the tortoise) is this
world, for that (kap4la) is firmly established, and firmly
established is this world; and that upper (kapdla) is yonder
sky, for it has its ends turned down, and so has that sky its
ends turned down; and that which is between is that atmo-
sphere : verily that same (tortoise) represents these worlds.’
More usually, however, the term is applied to the single


’ Or perhaps the lower shell which represcnts the earth, being as it were a
symbol of firmness and safety.


INTRODUCTION. XXIX
bones of the skull (and the plates of the tortoise-case).
Hence the Medini says (lanta 71), kapdlo 'stri siro-'sthni
sydd, ghafade/ sakale, vrage,—kapdla may be used in the
sense of ‘head-bone,’ in that of ‘fragment of a pot,’ &c.,
and in the sense of ‘ collection.’

Professor Whitney takes exception to my occasionally
translating 4tman by ‘ body,’—an inaccuracy, he remarks,
that might easily be avoided. I do not quite understand on
what grounds he objects to this rendering. The original
meaning of 4tman doubtless is (breath) ‘self, soul;’ but
surely there can be no question that it also commonly
means ‘body, trunk,’ in contradistinction to the limbs,
wings, &c. Thus we read Sat. Br. IV, 1, 2, 25, ‘The
sacrifice is fashioned like a bird: the Updamsu and
Antaryadma are its wings, and the Updmsusavana is its
body!’

My rendering of ‘videgho ha miathava’’ (I, 4, 1,10) by
‘Mathava the (king of) Videgha,’ instead of ‘ Videgha (the)
Mathava,’ is rightly objected to. Indeed, I had already
taken occasion, in the introduction to the same volume (I,
p- xli, note 4), to make that correction.

Prof. Whitney’s remarks on ‘ydpena yopayitva’ are
adverted to at p. 36, note 1 of the present volume; as are
also those on ‘ed’ at p. 265,note 2. In regard to the latter
point he rather does me wrong by supposing that I appa-
rently regarded the particle (or particles) ‘ ed’ (for which the
Kazva text seems to read ‘4 hi’) as a verb-form from the
root ‘i,’ to go. The fact is that I followed Prof. Weber-
(Ind. Stud. IX, p. 249) in taking it to be a popular expres-
sion, with a verb of motion understood, somewhat in the
sense of the German ‘hin;’ e.g. ‘Shall we go there ?’—
‘Hin denn!’ i.e. ‘ Let us go then.’

My translation of II, 4, 2,19 is not quite approved of by


1 Professor Max Miiller has been kind enough to send me a number of
passages from Upanishads and Aranyakas, in which tman has the sense of
‘body, trunk,’ and is usually explained in the commentaries by sarira
(AtmanaA = sarfravayava, Brihadar. Up. I, 1,2, 7). The adverb adhyditmam,
he remarks, always means ‘with reference to the body ;’ cf. Taitt. Up. lL, 7;
Sat. Br. IV, 1, 3, 1, the present volume, p. 265, note |.


XXX SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Prof. Whitney. There offering is made severally to the
sacrificer’s grandfather and great-grandfather with the
formula ‘N.N., this for thee!’ to which some authorities
add ‘and for those who come after thee.’ This addition is
rejected by the author on the ground that ‘svayam vai
tesh4m: saha yeshA4m saha,’ which I translated by ‘since he
himself is one of those to whom [it would be offered] in
common.’ Prof. Whitney takes exception to this, remark-
ing that in that case, the phrase ‘and those who (come) after
thee’ might be added, without any reason to the contrary.
But he forgets one important point, namely, that it would
be a fatal thing for the sacrificer in this way to associate
himself with the departed ancestors, and even make offering
to himself along with them: it would simply mean that ‘he
would straightway go to yonder world,’ that he would not
live his fulness of days. The clause under discussion is
elliptic, its literal translation being ‘ Himself surely (is) of
those withal of whom (he is) withal.’ This may either be
taken in the sense in which I took it (see also St. Petersb.
Dict. s.v. saha); or in a general way, ‘ He surely is one of
those with whom he associates himself;’ i.e. he would
himself be a dead man,

In the legend of Manu and the Flood (I, 8, 1, 1 seq.)
I find it impossible to accept Prof. Delbriick’s conjecture,
which Prof. Whitney thinks the best and only acceptable
one, viz. that (in par. 4) the sentence ‘ sasvad ha g/asha Asa,
sa hi gyesh¢iam vardhate’ is an interpolated gloss. My
reason for not accepting it is the fact that the passage occurs
likewise in the Kazva recension, and is thus authenticated
for so comparatively early a period that the difficulty of
accounting for the interpolation might be even greater
than that of the interpretation of the passage itself. Pro-
fessor Ludwig, in his kindly notice in ‘Géttinger Gel.
Anz.’ 1883, proposes to take sasvat in the sense of 1dvras:
‘It quite so (i.e. in accordance with the prediction) became
a large fish.’ Prof. Max Miiller has again translated this
legend in his ‘ India, what can it teach us?’ p. 134 seq., where
he renders this passage by ‘He became soon a large fish


INTRODUCTION. XXXI


(ghasha), for such a fish grows largest.’ I am still inclined
to take gdasha as. the name of sone kind of fish, real or
mythic.

Professor Whitney once more discusses the vexed question
as to the real meaning of ‘ Gatavedas,’ and thinks the trans-
lation ‘ Wesen-kenner, ‘ being-knower,’ or ‘he who knoweth
[all] beings’ to be unacceptable. He remarks that ‘The
word may, indeed, fairly be regarded as an obscure one: that
is to say, it is very strange that an appellation so frequently
applied to Agni should not have its meanings distinctly
pointed out, either by its applicableness, or by parallel
expressions used in the descriptions of the same god or in
ascriptions made to him; but no such explanation has been
found obtainable from the Vedic writings.’ It is no doubt
a fact that at the time of Yaska—who (7, 19) proposes five
different derivations of the term, the first of which is the
one given above, viz. gatani veda, ‘he knows (the things)
that are born’—the real meaning of the compound was
unknown; and even at the time of the hymns the epithet
seems to have been understood in different ways. That the
meaning ‘knower of beings’ was, at any rate, one of those
commonly assigned to ‘Gatavedas’ by the Vedic poets, seems
to me, however, sufficiently manifest from a number of
parallel expressions used in reference to Agni, such as Rig-
veda VI, 15, 13, visva veda ganima gatavedah', ‘ Gatavedas
knows all races (or existences);’ I, 70, 1, 4 daivy4ni vrata
Rikitvan 4 manushyasya ganasya ganma, ‘he who minds the
divine ordinances, and the race of the human kind;’ ib. 3,
devandm ganma martams ka vidvan, ‘knowing the race of
gods and the men;’ I, 189, 1, visvani vayunani vidvan,
‘knowing all works;’ ib. 7, tvam tan agna ubhayan v
vidvan veshi, &c. On the other hand, in Sat. Br. IX, 5, 1,
68, the term is explained by gatam gatam vindate; he
takes possession of being after being, or of whatsoever is
born. How easily terms such as Gatavedas and Wesen-


a ee


1 See Grassmann, Worterbuch s.v.; M. Bergaigne, III, 334, takes this
passage to supply the etymology of the word.


XXXIil SATAPATHA-BRAIIMANA.


kenner (knower of beings) may assume different meanings,
may be seen from Mr. Peile’s remark (Notes on the Nalo-
pakhydnam, p. 23), ‘ Gatavedas, the Vedic epithet of Agni,
is described as the “ knower of the essence” (gata), Grass-
mann, Dict. s. v.’

For the first chapter of the third book, treating of the
ceremony of consecration, I have had the advantage of
availing myself of the German translation, published by
Dr. B. Lindner in his pamphlet, ‘ Die Diksha,’ Leipzig, 1878.


SATAPATHA-BRAH MANA.
THIRD KANDA.


THE AGNISH7OMA.


THE DIKSHA, or CONSECRATION.


First ApDHYAYA. First BRAHMANA.


1. They choose a place of worship. Let them
choose (the place) which lies highest, and above
which no other part of the ground rises'; for it was
from thence that the gods ascended to heaven, and
he who is consecrated indeed ascends to the gods.
He thus sacrifices on a place of worship frequented
by the gods; but were any other part of the ground
to rise above it, he would indeed be lowered while
sacrificing: let them therefore choose (the place)
which lies highest.

2. While being high, that place should be even;
and being even, it should be firm; and being firm,
it should incline towards the east, since the east is
the quarter of the gods; or else it should incline


? Abhi-si, ‘to lie or rise above,’ with Say. Dr. Lindner takes
bhfimed as abl., and translates ‘whereon nothing but earth lies.’
The K4zva rec.has bhime4 (gen.) likewise in the preceding clause :
‘tad yad eva varshish/ham bhiimes tad eva devayaganam sy4d ya-
tranyad bhfimer n&bhisayiteto vai deva, &c.’ The gods evidently
ascended to heaven from the highest spot of the earth, and so is
the sacrificer to choose the highest available place. See Katy. VII,
1, rr scholl.; La/y. S.I, 1,17, ‘na Adsya sthalataram (higher place)
adfire syt.’


[26] B


2 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


towards the north, since the north is the quarter of
men. It should rise somewhat towards the south,
that being the quarter of the Fathers. Were it to
incline towards the south, the sacrifice would quickly
go to yonder world; but in this way the sacrificer
lives long: let it therefore rise somewhat towards
the south.

3. Let not the measure of the sacrificial ground
be exceeded on the east side, since such an excess
would be in favour of his spiteful enemy. It may
be so in the south, and also in the north; but that
place of worship alone is thoroughly efficient where
the measure of the sacrificial ground is exceeded in
the west; for to him (who possesses such a one) the
higher! worship of the gods readily inclines. So
much as to the place of worship.

4. Now YAgziavalkya spake,—‘We went to
choose a place of worship for Varshwzya*, SAtya-
yagva then said, ‘Verily, this whole earth is divine :
on whatever part thereof one may sacrifice (for any


* Or ‘subsequent ;’ a play on the word ‘ uttara,’ which has the
meanings ‘upper (superior), later, and left (north).’ Dr. Lindner
takes it in the sense of ‘from the north.’ Possibly uttara also
refers to the Soma-altars (uttara vedi and uttara-vedi) to be
prepared later on (see III, 5, 1, 1 seq.) on the eastern part of the
sacrificial ground.

* The Kanva text reads,—Accordingly Yagnavalkya spake, ‘ V4r-
shva intended to sacrifice (ayakshyata). Thus we went (ayama!) to
look for a place of worship.’ He who is known as Satyayagii said,
‘Verily, this whole earth is divine: a place of worship there is
wheresoever one sacrifices on it, after enclosing it with a yagus.’
And thus indeed he thought, but the officiating priests doubtless
constitute the (real) place (medium) of worship: where wise
(priests) perform the sacrifice in due form, there alone no failure
takes place. That (other definition) is not the characteristic of the
place of worship. (Without final iti.)


III KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 1 BRAHMANA, 7. 3


one), after enclosing (and consecrating) it with a
sacrificial formula, there is a place of worship.”

5. ‘It is, however, the officiating priests that con-
stitute the place (or medium) of worship: whereso-
ever wise and learned Brahmans, versed in sacred
lore, perform the sacrifice, there no failure takes
place: that (place of worship) we consider the
nearest (to the gods)?.’

6. On this (ground) they erect either a hall or
a shed, with the top-beams running from west to
east*; for the east is the quarter of the gods, and
from the east westwards the gods approach men:
that is why one offers to them while standing with
his face towards the east.

7. For this reason one must not sleep with his


} That is to say, one who employs such skilled Brahmans for
his. officiating priests (ritvig) may use sacrificial ground of any
description. Katy. VII, 1, 18.

* Pradina-vamsa (prag-vamsa, K.). The ‘vamsas’ are the
horizontal beams supported by the four corner-posts. In the first
place two cross-beams are fastened on the corner-posts, to serve as
the lintels of the eastern and western doors. Across them tie-beams
are then laid, running from west to east, on which mats are spread
by way of a roof or ceiling. The terra ‘pratina-vamsa’ refers to
these upper beams (upari-vamsa), and especially to the central beam
(prish/ha-vamsa or madhyavala) the ends of which rest on the
middle of the lintels of the eastern and western doors; cf. Sayama
on Taitt. S. I, 2, 1 (vol. i, pp. 279, 286); Katy. VII, 1,20 scholl.
Inside the PraAina-vamsa there is the Ahavantya fire immediately
facing the east door; the Garhapatya fire facing the west door; be-
tween the two the altar; and south of the latter the Dakshindgni.
The shed (vimita) is to be erected on the back (west) part of the
sacrificial ground, after the roots have been aug up. It is described
as a square structure of ten (or twelve) cubits, somewhat higher in
front than at the back; with doors on each side (except, optionally,
on the north). The sAla, or hall, is to measure twenty cubits by
ten. Katy. VII, 1, 19-24 comm.


B 2


4 SATAPATIIA-BRAHMANA.


head towards the west, lest he should sleep stretching
(his legs) towards the gods. The southern quarter
belongs to the Fathers; and the western one to the
snakes; and that faultless one is the one where the
gods ascended (to heaven) ; and the northern quarter
belongs to men. Hence in human (practice) a hall
or shed is constructed with the top-beams running
from south to north, because the north is the quarter
of men. It is only for a consecrated, not for an
unconsecrated person that it is (constructed) with
the top-beams runniiig from west to east.

8. They enclose it on every side, lest it should
rain upon (the sacrificer, while being consecrated):
this, at least, is (the reason for doing so in) the
rainy season'. He who is consecrated, truly draws
nigh to the gods, and becomes one of the deities
Now the gods are secreted from men, and secret
also is what is enclosed on every side: this is why
they enclose it on every side.

g. Not every one may enter it, but only a Brah-
man, or a Raganya, or a Vaisya, for these are able
to sacrifice.

10. Let him not commune with every one; for he
who is consecrated draws nigh to the gods, and
becomes one of the deities. Now the gods do not
commune with every one, but only with a Brahman,
or a Raganya, or a Vaisya; for these are able to
sacrifice. Should there be occasion for him to con-
verse with a Sidra, let him say to one of those,
‘Tell this one so and so! tell this one so and so!’


' (?) Iti nv eva varshés, The same particles occur III, 2, 1, rr.
The Kanva text has,—‘lest it should freeze in winter, lest it should


pour in the rainy season, and lest there should be burning heat in
summer.’


III KANDA, | ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 1. 5


This is the rule of conduct for the consecrated in
such a case.

11. In the first place, having taken the two
churning-sticks in his hand, he approves of the hall.
Taking hold of the chief post of the front (east) side,
he pronounces this sacrificial formula (Vag. S. 1V, 1),
‘We have come to this place of worship on
earth, whereinall the gods delighted.’ Thereby
that (place of worship) of his becomes acceptable to
all the gods, as well as to the learned Brahmans
versed in sacred lore; and that (place of worship) of
his, which those Brahmans versed in sacred lore see
with their eyes, becomes acceptable to them.

12. And when he says, ‘Wherein all the gods
delighted,’ thereby it becomes acceptable for him to
all the gods. ‘Crossing over by means of the
yzk and saman, and by the yagus; by means of
the 77& and sAman, and the yagus, indeed, they reach
the end of the sacrifice: ‘May I reach the end of
the sacrifice!’ he thereby says. ‘May we rejoice
in increase of substance andinsap!’ Increase
of substance doubtless means abundance, and abun-
dance means prosperity: he, thereby invokes a bless-
ing. ‘ May we rejoice in sap, he says, because people
say of one who enjoys prosperity and attains to the
highest distinction, that ‘he rejoices in sap;’ there-
fore he says, ‘ May we rejoice in sap!’


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. Let him perform the rite of consecration (di-
ksha)! in the afternoon. Previously to the shaving


1 The rite described in the following paragraphs is called apsu-
dtksh4, or ‘ consecration in water.’


6 SATAPATHA-BRAIIMANA.


of his hair and beard he may eat of what he likes,
or whatever comes to hand; for hereafter his food
consists of fast-milk (vrata) only. But, if he does
not care to eat, he need not eat anything.

2. Thereupon they enclose a place! north of the
hall, and place a vessel of water in it. Beside this
the barber takes up his position. He (the sacrificer)
then shaves his hair and'beard, and cuts his nails.
For impure, indeed, is that part of man where water
does not reach him. Now at the hair and beard,
and at the nails the water does not reach him:
hence when he shaves his hair and beard, and cuts
his nails, he does so in order that he may be conse-
crated after becoming pure.

3. Now some shave themselves all over, in order
that they may be consecrated after becoming pure all
over; but let him not dothis. For even by shaving
the hair of his head and his beard, and by cutting
his nails, he becomes pure: let him therefore shave
only the hair of his head and his beard, and cut
his nails.

4. In the first place he cuts his nails, first of the
right hand—for in human (practice) those of the left
hand (are cut) first, but with the gods in this manner.
Iirst (he cuts those) of the thumbs—for in human
(practicc) those of the little fingers (are cut) first,
but with the vods in this manner.

5. He first passes (the comb) through his right
whisker—for in human (practice they comb) first
the left whisker, but with the gods in this manner.

6. His right whisker he moistens first, with the
text, ‘May these divine waters be propitious


' It is to be square and covered in on all sides with mats, and
with a door on the east side. Katy. VII, 1, 25 scholl.


III KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 9. 7


unto me! The reason why he says, ‘ May these di-
vine waters be propitious unto me,’ is this: the waters
are a thunderbolt, for the waters are indeed a thunder-
bolt ; hence wherever these waters flow they produce
a hollow, and whatever they come near that they
destroy (lit. burn up). Hereby, then, he appeases
that same thunderbolt; and thus appeased, that
thunderbolt does not injure him. This is why
he says, ‘May these divine waters be propitious
unto me!’

7. Thereupon he lays a stalk of sacrificial grass
on (the hair of the whisker), with the text, *O plant,
protect me!’ For the razor is a thunderbolt, and
thus that thunderbolt, the razor, does not injure
him. Thereto he applies the razor, with the text,
‘O knife, injure him not!’ for the razor is a thun-
derbolt, and thus that thunderbolt, the razor, does
not injure him.

8. Having cut off (part of the stalk and hair), he
throws it into the vessel of water. Silently he
moistens the left whisker; silently he lays the stalk
of grass on it; and having silently applied the razor
thereto and cut through (it and the hair), he throws
them into the vessel of water.

9. He then hands the razor to the barber, and the
latter shaves off the hair and beard. When he has
shaved the hair and beard !,—


1 The text has, ‘when he shaves (vapati) the hair and beard
[when he shaves himself (vapate), K.] he bathes.' According to
this it would seem that he does not bathe unless he shaves (?). See,
however, Katy. VII, 2, 22, where the shaving is said to be optional,
but not so, according to the commentary, the bathing. There
seems also to be some doubt as to where the bathing is to take
place. While, according to Karka, the sacrificer is to bathe in the
vessel of water in the tent; according to other authorities he is to


8 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


10. He bathes. For impure, indeed, is man: he
is foul? within, in that he speaks untruth ;—and water
is pure: he thinks, ‘May I be consecrated, after be-
coming pure ;'—and water is cleansing: he thinks,
‘May I become consecrated after being cleansed!’
This is the reason why he bathes.

11. He bathes, with the text (Vag. S. IV, 2; Rig-
veda X,17,10), ‘May the waters, the mothers,
cleanse us!’ whereby he says, ‘ May they cleanse?!’
‘May the purifiers of ghee purify us with
(heavenly) ghee!’ For he, indeed, is thoroughly
purified whom they have purified with ghee*: accord-
ingly he says, ‘May the purifiers of ghee purify us
with ghee!’—‘For they, the divine, take away
all taint;’ now ‘all’ means ‘every,’ and ‘taint’ means
what is impure; for they do take away from him
every impurity: therefore he says, ‘For they, the
divine, take away all taint.’

12. He steps out (from the water) towards the
north-east ‘, with the text, ‘Cleansed and pure


do so in some tank, or other kind of bathing-place of standing
water. Cf. Taitt. S. VI, 1, 1, tirthe snatiY tirtham eva samananam
bhavati.

* IT now take pti (with Dr. Lindner) in the sense of ‘foul, filthy,
fetid,’ and would correct the passage (I, 1, 1, 1) accordingly. Pro-
fessor Ludwig (Géttinger Gel. Anz. 1883, p. 49) proposes to take
pfti in the sense of ‘pure,’ both here and in I, 1, 1, 1.

* The K4nva recension has the better reading, ‘For they, indeed,
now cleanse him when he bathes.’ According to Taitt. S. VI, 1, 1, 3,
he also sips (asn4ti) some water with the view of internal puri-
fication.

* Lit.‘ for that indeed is well purified, whom they purified (i.e.
when they purify anybody) with ghee.’ The imperfect is rather
strange. See also III, 1, 3, 22. The K4nvas read, ‘For that, in-
deed, is well purified what is purified (yad pfyate) with ghee.’

* Prén ivodan=uttarapfirvardham, K4ty. VII, 2, 15, i.e. ‘towards
the north with a slight turn to the east.’ Dr. Lindner takes ‘ udan’


III KANDA, 1 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAIIMANA, 18. 9


I go forth from them;’ for cleansed and pure he
indeed goes forth from them.

13. He then puts on a (linen) garment, for
completeness’ sake: it is indeed his own skin he
thereby puts on himself. Now that same skin
which belongs to the cow was originally on man.

14. The gods spake, ‘Verily, the cow supports
everything here (on earth); come, let us put on the
cow that skin which is now on man: therewith she
will be able to endure rain and cold and heat.’

15. Accordingly, having flayed man, they put that
skin on the cow, and therewith she now endures
rain and cold and heat.

16. For man was indeed flayed; and hence where-
ever a Stalk of grass or some other object cuts him,
the blood trickles out. They then put that skin,
the garment, on him; and for this reason none but
man wears a garment, it having been put on him as
his skin. Hence also one should take care to be
properly clad, so that he may be completely endued
with his own skin. Hence also people like to see
even an ugly person properly clad, since he is endued
with his own skin.

17. Let him, then, not be naked in the presence
of acow. For the cow knows that she wears his
skin, and runs away for fear lest he should take the
skin from her. Hence also cows draw fondly near
to one who is properly clad.

18. Now the woof of this cloth belongs to Agni,
and the warp to Vayu!, the thrum to the Fathers,


as meant to explain the preposition ‘vi. This, however, does not
account for the ‘iva.’
1 Agned paryaso bhavati, vaysr anushado(?). The Black Yagus


10 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the fore-edge' to the snakes, the threads to the
All-gods, and the meshes to the asterisms. For
thus indeed all the deities are concerned therein ;
and hence it is the garment of the consecrated.

19. Let it (if possible) be a new one?, for the sake
of unimpaired vigour. Let him (the Adhvaryu) tell
(the Pratiprasthatvz) to beat it, in order that whatso-
ever part of it an unclean woman has spun or woven
may become clean. And if it be a new one, let him
sprinkle it with water, so that it become clean. Or
let him be consecrated in one which is laid aside to
be worn (daily) after bathing, without being soaked
(in some sharp cleansing substance) *.

20. He puts it round him, with the text,‘Thou art
the covering‘ of consecration and penance;’
heretofore, indeed, this was the covering of him as
one unconsecrated, but now it is that of consecration
and penance : hence he says, ‘thou art the covering
of consecration and penance.’ ‘I put thee on, the
kindly and auspicious;’ whereby he means to
say,‘ I put thee on, the kindly and pleasing one ;’"—


(T.S. VI, 1, 1) reads, agnes tAshadhdnam (salakopadhanam tisha,
tatra tantinadm pilravam tishidhinam; Séy.), vayor vatapinain
(vayuna soshanam vatapanam, S.). The warp (prafinaténa) and
woof (otu), on the other hand, are by the Black Yagus ascribed to
the Adityas and Visve Devas respectively,

* Praghata, apparently the closely-woven part at both ends of the
cloth from whence the loose threads of the nivi, or unwoven fringe
(thrum), come out. The Black Yagus ascribes it to the plants.

* Literally, ‘unbeaten (ahata), unwashed,’

* That is to say, if it be not a new garment, it should be one
that has not been washed by a washerman (with mautra, &c.), but
worn daily after bathing.

* Or, outward form, tanu, Its meaning sometimes comes very
near to that of ‘skin,’ assigned to it by the lexicographers. Cf. III,
Rend, AGRO ae


III KANDA, I ADIIYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 21. Il
‘fostering a fair appearance;’ for evil indeed
is that appearance which he has heretofore fos-
tered while unconsecrated; but now (he fosters)
a fair appearance: therefore he says, ‘fostering a
fair appearance.’

21. He (the Adhvaryu) then makes him enter the
hall. Let him not eat (the flesh) of either the cow
or the ox; for the cow and the ox doubtless support
everything here onearth. The gods spake, ‘ Verily,
the cow and the ox support everything here: come,
let us bestow on the cow and the ox whatever vigour
belongs to other species'!’ Accordingly they be-
stowed on the cow and the ox whatever vigour
belonged to other species (of animals); and there-
fore the cow and the ox eat most. Hence, were one
to eat (the flesh) of an ox or a cow, there would be,
as it were, an eating of everything, or, as it were,
a going on to the end (or, to destruction). Such
a one indeed would be likely to be born (again) as a
strange being, (as one of whom there is) evil report,
such as ‘he has expelled an embryo from a woman,’
‘he has committed a sin?;’ let him therefore not eat
(the flesh) of the cow and the ox. Nevertheless
Yagziavalkya said, ‘1, for one, eat it, provided that it
is tender.’


* Vayasam, cf. III, 3,3,3. The Kamva rec. has‘ yad anyesham
vayasam viryam yad anyesham pasfinam.’

* A different translation of this passage is proposed by Professor
Delbriick (Synt. Forsch. III, p. 25); but the Kamva text (si tam
hesvaro 'dbhutam abhiganitor gayay4 va garbham niravadhid yad
veti tad u hovaa) shows that we have here, as frequently, to supply
isvarad to the infinitive in tos. The Kanva yad va (‘or some
such thing’) would also seem to indicate that we ought to trans-
late :—(as of one of whom) there is evil report: ‘he has committed
some such (iti) sin as the producing of abortion.’


12 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


THIRD BRAHMANA.


1. Having brought water forward’, he takes out
(the material for) a cake on eleven potsherds for
Agni and Vishzu; for Agni is all the deities,
since it is in Agni that offering is made to all
the deities. Moreover Agni is the lower half, and
Vishzu is the upper half of the sacrifice: ‘I will
become consecrated after encompassing all the
deities, after encompassing the entire sacrifice,’ thus
he thinks, and hence there is a cake on eleven
potsherds for Agni and Vishzu.

2. Some then offer a rice-pap to the Adityas.
This is referred to (in the passage, Rig-veda X,
72, 8), ‘ There are eight sons of Aditi who were born
from her body; with seven she went to the gods,
but MAartazda* she cast off.’

3. Now Aditi had eight sons. But those that are
called ‘the gods, sons of Aditi,’ were only seven, for
the eighth, Martazda, she brought forth unformed? :
it was a mere lump of bodily matter‘, as broad as it
was high. Some, however, say that he was of the
size of a man.


4. The gods, sons of Aditi, then spake, ‘ That


' Viz. the so-called ‘pranft4A,’ see part i, p.g note. The offering,
described in the following paragraphs, is called the Dikshani-
yesh/i, ‘Consecration offering.’ As to the formulas used at the
offering, see Ait. Br. I, 4 seq.

? The bird, Vishnu, the sun.

* Or, the eighth she brought forth undeveloped, as a mart4nda
(? either a bird, or, more probably, in accordance with Taitt. S. VI,
5, 6, 1,=vyriddham 4ndam, ‘an abortive egg’). Sce Rig-veda
Sanhita, translated by M. M., p. 239.

* Sandegha ; the St. Petersburg Dict. takes it in the sense of
‘doubt, uncertainty,’ in this passage.


III KANDA, 1 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 7. 13


which was born after us' must not be lost: come, let
us fashion it.’ They accordingly fashioned it as this
man is fashioned. The flesh which was cut off him,
and thrown down in a lump, became the elephant:
hence they say that one must not accept an elephant
(as a gift)*, since the elephant has sprung from man.
Now he whom they thus fashioned was Vivasvat,
the Aditya (or the sun); and of him (came) these
creatures.

5. He Spake,‘Among my offspring he shall be suc-
cessful who shall offer that rice-pap to the Adityas.’
Accordingly he alone succeeds who offers that rice-
pap to the Adityas. Only that (cake) to Agni and
Vishzu is, however, generally approved.

6. There are seventeen kindling-verses for it*®. In
a low voice he offers to the two deities. There are
five fore-offerings and three after-offerings. For the
sake of completeness they perform the patnisamzya-
gas‘; but he offers no samishé/ayagus, lest, having
put on that garment of the consecrated, he should
reach the end of the sacrifice before its completion ;
for the samish¢ayagus is the end of the sacrifice.

7. He (the sacrificer) then gets himself anointed
(with fresh butter), while standing east of the hall.
For, having been flayed, man is sore; and by getting
himself anointed, he becomes healed of his soreness :
for man’s skin is on the cow, and that fresh butter


1 Or, perhaps, after the manner of us (anu).

4 Muir, O.S. T. 1V,15, reads ‘ parigrzbatyat’ instead of ‘ pratigr?-
hniyat,’ and translates, ‘let no one catch an elephant, for an
elephant partakes of the nature of man.’

* For the ordinary eleven Samidhenis (raised to the number of
fifteen by repetitions of the first-and last verses), see part i, p. 102,
and for the two additional ones (dhayy4), ib. p. 112 note.

‘ See part i, p. 256; for the Samish/ayagus, ib. p. 262.


14 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


also comes from the cow. He (the Adhvaryu) thus
supplies him with his own skin, and for this reason
he gets himself anointed.

8. It is fresh butter,—for melted butter (ghee)
belongs to the gods, and creamy butter’ to men.
Here, on the other hand, it is neither ghee nor
creamy butter; it should rather be both ghee and
creamy butter, for the sake of unimpaired vigour:
by means of that which is of unimpaired vigour he
accordingly makes him of unimpaired vigour.

9. Heanoints him from the head down to the feet
in accordance with the tendency of the hair, with
the text (Vag. S. IV, 3), ‘Thou art the sap of the
greatones. The ‘great ones,’ doubtless, is one of
the names of those cows, and their sap indeed it is:
therefore he says, ‘thou art the sap of the great
ones, ‘Thou art life-giving: give me light!’
There is nothing obscure in this.

10. Thereupon he anoints the eyes. ‘Sore, in-
deed, is the eye of man; mine is sound,’ so spake
Yagviavalkya. Dim-eyed, indeed, he was (heretofore) ;
and the secretion of his eyes was matter. He now
makes his eyes sound by anointing them.

11. Now, when the gods slew the Asura-Rakshas,
Sushza’, the Danava, falling backward entered into
the eyes of men: he is that pupil of the eye, and


* Phan/a, explained as the first particles of butter that appear in
churning (?). The Kamva recension, on the other hand, reads
‘agyam nishpan/am’(!) instead. Cf. Taitt. S. VI, 1,1, 4, Ghrétam
devanam, mastu pitrmim, nishpakvam (i.e. surabhi ghrztam,
‘ well-seasoned butter,’ Say.) manushydvam ; tad vai etat sarvade-
vatyam yan navanitam; also Ait. Br. I, 3, 4gyam vai devanam,
surabhi ghritam manushy4a4m, fyutam pitr/n4m, navanitam gar-
bhanzam ; with Haug’s note, Transl. p. 8.

* The Kinva text (MSS. O. W.) reads Sisna.


III KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 13. 15


looks like a young lad’. Against him he (the sacri-
ficer), now that he enters on the sacrifice, raises a
rampart of stone all round himself, for the ointment
is (praduced from) stone.

12. It is such as comes from mount Trikakud:
for when Indra slew Vyritra he transformed that
eye of his (Vrttra’s) into the mount Trikakud?. The
reason, then, why (ointment) from mount Trikakud
(is used), is that he thereby puts eye into eye.
Should he be unable to obtain any Traikakuda oint-
ment, any other than Traikakuda may be used; for
one and the same, indeed, is the significance of the
ointment.

13. He anoints (the eyes) with a reed-stalk, for
the reed is a thunderbolt. It is one with a tuft, in
order to chase away the evil spirits’. For rootless,


1 Sa esha kaninakaA kumaraka iva paribhdsate. A play on the
word kaninaka, which has the double meaning of ‘youth’ and
‘pupil of the eye.’ The St. Petersburg Dict. assigns also to kuma-
raka the meaning of ‘ball of the eye’ in this (the only) passage.
The Kava recension reads, Sa esha kumaraka iva kaninakayam
(? both ‘maiden’ and ‘ pupil of the eye’).

2 ‘Indra slew Vritra, his eye-ball fell away, it became collyrium.’
Tait: S7 Vi, 1; 33 §

’ Professor Delbriick, S. F. III, 27, takes it thus, ‘He brushes the
eye with the end of a reed, for the reed is a thunderbolt capable of
repelling mischief.’ But, if ‘virakshastayai’ belonged to what pre-
cedes, it would probably have to be construed with ‘sareshikaya
’nakti,’ the clause with ‘vai,’ giving the reason, being inserted
parenthetically ; while, in an idiomatic rendering, it would have to
be placed at the end: He anoints the eyes with a reed-stalk in
order to chase away the evil spirits, the reed being a thunderbolt.
This abstract dative of purpose is very common; it being generally
construed with what precedes, as, for instance, I, 1, 4,1; 3, 2, 8;
5, 3, 8; 15; III, 1, 2,13; 19; 3,6; 8; and, with a parenthetic
clause with ‘vai’ intervening, III, 2, 1,13; IV, 5, 7,7. Not less
common is the analogous construction with a clause with ‘ned’


16 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


indeed, and unfettered on both sides, the Rakshas
roams along the air; even as man here roams along
the air!, rootless and unfettered on both sides: the
reason, then, why it is (a reed-stalk) with a tuft, is
to chase away the evil spirits.

14. The right eye he anoints first; for in human
practice the left (eye is anointed) first, but with the
gods (it is done) thus.

15. He anoints it with the text, ‘Thou art the
eye-ball of Vrztra,—for V7ttra’s eye-ball it indeed
is;—‘ Eye-giving thou art: give me the eye!’
in this there is nothing obscure.

16. The right eye he anoints once with the sacri-
ficial formula, once silently; and the left one he
anoints once with the formula, twice silently: thus
he makes the left (or upper) one superior’.

17. And the reason why he anoints five times, is
that the sacrifice is of equal measure with the year,
and five seasons there are in the year: he thus
obtains possession of the latter in five (divisions),
and therefore he anoints five times.

18. He then purifies him with a cleanser (pavitra,
Strainer) of sacred grass; for impure, indeed, is
man :—he is foul within in that he speaks un-
truth ;—and sacred grass is pure: ‘Having become
pure, I shall be consecrated,’ thus he thinks ;—and the
stalks of sacred grass are a means of cleansing,—


(‘lest such an event should happen’) instead of the dative of the
abstract, cf. I, 2,1, 8; 9; IV, 5,9, 3.

* I now take this passage differently from my interpretation of
I, 1, 2, 4 (‘and, in order that this man may move about the air,
rootless and unfettered in both directions’). See also IV, 1, 1, 20.

* «Tad uttaram evaitad uttaravat karoti;’ ‘uttarfm évaitad utta-
ram karoti,’ Kamva recension. Cf. p. 2, note 1.


III KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 22. 17


‘Having become cleansed, I shall be consecrated,’ thus
he thinks; and therefore he purifies him with a
cleanser of sacred grass.

19. It may consist of one (stalk of grass); for
that blower (or purifier, the Wind) is one only, and
in accordance with his nature is this (cleanser) :
hence it may consist of one (stalk).

20. Or there may be three (stalks); for one, in-
deed, is that blower, but on entering into man he
becomes threefold, to wit, the out-breathing, the
in-breathing, and the through-breathing’, and in
accordance with his measure is this (cleanser): hence
there may be three (stalks).

21. Or there may be seven (stalks*); for there are
seven vital airs of the head: hence there may be
seven (stalks). There may even be thrice seven,—
one and twenty: such indeed is perfection.

22. He purifies him with seven (stalks) each time,
with the text (Vag. S. IV, 4), ‘May the Lord of
thought purify me!’ The lord of thought doubt-
less is Pragdpati*: he thereby means to say, ‘ May
Pragapati purify me!’ ‘May the lord of speech
purify me!’ The lord of speech doubtless is Praga-
patit: he thereby means to say, ‘May Pragdapati
purify me!’ ‘May the divine Savitrz purify
me, —for well purified indeed is he whom the divine


1 See part i, p. rg, note 2.

® The Taitt. S. VI, 1, 1 allows the option between (one), 2, 3, 5, 6,
7, 9, and 21 stalks; while the Ait. Br. I, 3 mentions only the
highest number.

$’ The KAnva text adds, sa hi fittandm fsh/e, ‘for he rules over
the thoughts.’

‘ The Kanvas read, ayam vava vakpatir yo 'yam pavate, tad
enam esha punati, ‘the lord of speech doubtless is that blower
(purifier, the wind): hence it is he that purifies him,’


[26] C


18 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Savityz has purified'; therefore he says, ‘May the
divine Savitry2 purify me!’—‘with a flawless
cleanser;’ for that blower (the wind) is indeed a
flawless cleanser: ‘with that one, he means to say;
‘with the rays of the sun;’ for they, the rays of
the sun, are indeed purifiers; therefore he says,
‘with the rays of the sun.’

23. ‘O Lord of the pavitra’ (means of puri-
fication),—for he (who is consecrated) is indeed
the lord of the pavitra—‘of thee, purified by
the pavitra,—for he is indeed purified by the
pavitra ;—‘with whatsoever desire I purify
myself, may I be able to effect it!’ whereby he
says, ‘May I reach the end of the sacrifice !’

24. He then makes him pronounce the beginning
of the benedictions (Vag. S. 1V, 5), ‘We approach
you, O gods, for desirable goods, at the open-
ing of the sacrifice; we call on you, O gods, for
holy? blessings. Thereby the officiating priests
invoke on him those blessings which are their own.

25. He (the sacrificer) then bends his fingers
inwards, viz. the two (little fingers), with the text
(Vag. S. IV, 6), ‘Hail, from the mind (I take
hold of) the sacrifice !’—the two (nameless or ring
finyers) with, ‘Hail, from the wide ether !’—the
two (middle fingers) with, ‘ Hail, from the sky and
earth !’—with, ‘Hail, from the wind, I take hold
(of the sacrifice)!’ he clenches both fists*. Not visibly


' See p. 8, note 3.

* IT take yagniydsah as acc. pl. fem., as does Mahidh. Perhaps
it ought to be translated ‘for prayers proper at the sacrifice,’ whereby
he makes sure that each priest uses his own proper prayers during
the sacrifice.

* For the symbolic meaning of the closing of the hands, see
Hil, 2, 1,63 Alt. Be, 1 3."se.


III KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 28. 1g


indeed is the sacrifice to be taken hold of, as is either
this staff or the garment,—but invisible indeed are
the gods, invisible is the sacrifice.

26. Now when he says, ‘Hail, from the mind
(I take hold of) the sacrifice,’ he takes hold of it
from the mind ;—in saying, ‘From the wide ether,’
he takes hold of it from the ether ;—in saying, ‘From
heaven and earth,’ he takes’ hold of it from those
two, heaven and earth, on which this entire universe
rests ;—and in saying, ‘From the wind I take hold of
(the sacrifice)’"—the wind being the sacrifice—he
takes hold of the sacrifice directly.

27. And when he calls, ‘Hail! Hail'!’—the
‘Svaha’ being the sacrifice—he thereby appropriates
the sacrifice. Here now he restrains his speech ; the
sacrifice being speech: he thereby appropriates* the
sacrifice.

28. He (the Adhvaryu) then makes him enter
the hall. He walks along the back of the Ahava-
nfya and the front of the Garhapatya*,—this is his
passage until the Soma pressing. The reason why
this is his passage until the Soma pressing is this.
The fire is the womb of the sacrifice, and the conse-
crated is an embryo; and the embryo moves about


1 That is, ‘svaha’ in each formula. The Samhita has twice
‘svaha’ in the last formula (svaha vatid drabhe svaha), to which
this might refer, but neither recension of the Brahmanza mentions
the final ‘ svaha.’

2 Literally, ‘he takes within him’ (as the speech confined within
him through silence).

* That is, he enters the hall by the front (east) door, then walks
along the north side of the Ahavaniya and altar, and passes between
the Garhapatya and altar to his seat south of the Ahavaniya. The
Pratiprasthatr? then silently anoints and purifies the Dikshita’s wife
and leads her into the hall, either by the front or back door.


U2


20 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


within the womb. And since he (the sacrificer)
moves about there (between the fires), and now
turns round and now back, therefore these embryos
move about, and now turn round and now back.
Hence this is his passage till the Sora pressing.


Fourti BRAHMANA.


1. All formulas of the consecration are audgra-
bhava (elevatory), since he who is consecrated ele-
vates himself (ud-grabh) from this world to the world
of the gods. He elevates himself by means of these
same formulas, and therefore they say that all formu-
las of the consecration are ‘audgrabhaza.’ Now they
also (specially) designate these intermediate ones as
‘audgrabhava,’ because these are libations’, and
a libation is a sacrifice. For the muttering of a
sacrificial formula is an occult (form of sacrifice), but
a libation is a direct (form of) sacrifice: hence it is
by this same sacrifice that he elevates himself from
this world to the world of the gods.

2. And again, the three libations which he makes
with the dipping-spoon (sruva) are said to be ‘ Adht-
tayagus*.. The fourth libation is made for the sake
of completeness ; while the fifth, which is made with
the offering-spoon (srué, viz. the guhf), is the real
audgrabhawa-libation: for he makes it with an


' While all the formulas of the Diksha are supposed to be of an
‘elevatory (audgrabhama)’ character, the designation ‘ audgrabha-
nani (yagQmshi, or elevatory formulas)’ is specially applied to the
five libations described in the succeeding paragraphs. The Kanva
text reads,—atha yad ctany avintarim audgrabhaminity akhydyanta
ahutayo hy eti dhutir hy eva yagfiak paroksham iva hi tad yad
yagur gapaty etena hi tad yagfienodgr/bhuite.

* I.e. yagus for some ‘ meditated’ object.


III KANDA, I ADIIYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 8, 21


anushéubh verse, and the anush/ubh is speech, and
the sacrifice also is speech.

3. By means of the sacrifice the gods obtained
that supreme authority which they now wield. They
spake, ‘ How may this (world) of ours be unattain-
able by men!’ They then sipped the sap of the
sacrifice, as bees would suck out honey; and having
drained the sacrifice and effaced its traces by means
of the sacrificial stake, they disappeared: and because
they effaced (scattered, yopaya) therewith, therefore
it is called yQ pa (stake).

4. Now this was heard by the Azshis. They col-
lected the sacrifice, just as this sacrifice is collected
(prepared)'; for even so does he now collect the sacri-
fice, when he offers those (audgrabhama) libations.

5. He offers five libations, because the sacrifice is
commensurate to the year, and there are five seasons
in the year: thus he gains it (the year) in five
(divisions), and therefore he makes five libations.

6. Now then of the oblation (V4g. S.IV,7): ‘To
the Purpose, to the Impulse, to Agni, hail!’
At the outset he indeed purposes to sacrifice. What
part of the sacrifice (is contained) in this (first lika-
tion), that he now collects and makes his own.

7. ‘To Wisdom, to Thought, to Agni, hail!’
with wisdom and thought he indeed conceives that
he may sacrifice. What part of the sacrifice (is con-
tained) in this (second libation), that he now collects
and makes his own.

8. ‘To Initiation, to Penance, to Agni, hail!’
This is merely uttered, but no libation is made.


1 Sam-bhr?'; on the technical meaning of this verb (to equip,
prepare) and the noun sambhara, sce part i, p. 276, note I.


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


i)
to


9. ‘To Sarasvati, to Pashan, to Agni, hail!’
Now Sarasvati is speech, and the sacrifice also is
speech. And Pishan represents cattle, because
Pashan means prosperity (push/i), and cattle also
means prosperity, since the sacrifice means cattle.
What part of the sacrifice (is contained) in this (third
libation), that he now collects and makes his own.

10. As to this they say, ‘These (three) libations
are offered indefinitely; they are unestablished,
without a god: therein is neither Indra, nor Soma,
nor Agni.’

11. ‘To the Purpose, to the Impulse, to Agni,
hail !'—not any one (god we obtain) from this'! But
Agni surely is definite, Agni is established: when
he offers in Agni (the fire), surely those (libations)
are thereby made definite, are thereby established :
for this reason he offers at all libations with, ‘To
Agni, hail!’ Moreover, these libations are called
‘adhitayagdweshi.’

12. ‘To the Purpose, to the Impulse, to Agni,
hail!’ he says; for by his own mind he purposes to
sacrifice, and from his own mind he impels it (the
sacrifice) when he performs it: these two deities—
the Purpose and the Impulse—are meditated upon
(adhita) in his mind.

13. ‘To Wisdom, to Thought, to Agni, hail!’ he
says; for with wisdom and thought he indeed con-
ccives that he may sacrifice: these two deities—


* This last sentence has probably to be taken ironically. In the
Kanva text it seems to form part of the objection raised: Sa yat
sarveshv agnaye sviheti guhoty anaddheva va eta 4hutayo hiyante
‘pratish/Aita iva na hi kasyai Aana devatdyai hQyante  4kutyai pra-
yuga iti tan nagnir nendro na somo, medhdyai manasa iti nito
‘nyatarad Aanaivam eva sarveshy, agnir uv addha.. .


_-> yy, eeelREyYyR?SRR$S soo ee


Wisdom and Thought—are meditated upon in his
mind,

14. ‘To Sarasvati, to Pdshan, to Agni, hail!’ he
says; for Sarasvati is speech, and the sacrifice also is
speech: this deity—Speech—is meditated upon in his
mind. Pdshan, on the other hand, means cattle, for
Pishan means prosperity (push/i), and cattle means
prosperity, since the sacrifice means cattle: hence
cattle are meditated upon in his mind. And because
these deities are meditated upon (a-dhita) in his
mind, therefore (these libations) are called adhi-
tayagtmshi.

15. He then offers the fourth libation, with the
text, ‘Ye divine, vast, all-soothing Waters!
Heaven and Earth, wide Ether! let us render
homage unto Brzhaspati with offering, hail!’
This (libation) truly is nearer to the sacrifice, since he
praises the waters, and water is sacrifice. ‘Heaven
and Earth! wide Ether!’ he says, because he
thereby praises the worlds. ‘Let us render homage
unto Brzhaspati, with offering, hail!’ he says; for
Brzhaspati is the Brahman, and the sacrifice also is
the Brahman: for this reason also this (libation) is
nearer to the sacrifice.

16. But the fifth libation which he makes with
the offering-spoon (srué), doubtless is the veritable
sacrifice; for he offers it with an anushéubh (verse),
and the anush/ubh is speech and so is the sacrifice.

17. In the first place he pours the butter, which
remains in the dhruva, into the guhd. He then
ladles with the sruva three times butter from the
melting-pot into the guhd: with what he takes the
third time he fills the sruva?.


1 The third time he holds the sruva over the guha and pours


24 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


18. He offers, with the text (Vag. S. IV, 8; Rig-
veda V, 50, 1), ‘May every mortal espouse the
friendship of the divine guide! every one
prayeth for wealth: let himchoose glory, that
he may prosper, hail!’

19. Now this (verse and libation) consists of five
parts in respect of deities!: ‘visvo devasya’ refers
to the Visve Devas; ‘netur’ to Savitz; ‘marto
vurita’ to’ Mitra; ‘dyumnam vrzzita’ to Brzhaspati,
since Brzhaspati means dyumna (glory); and ‘ pu-
shyase’ (for prospering) refers to Pfishan.

20. This (libation), then, consists of five parts, in
respect of deities ;—fivefold is the sacrifice, fivefold
the animal victim, and five seasons there are in the
year: the latter he accordingly gains by this (liba-
tion) consisting of five parts in respect of deities.

21. He offers this libation with an anushéubh
verse, because the anush¢ubh is speech, and the
sacrifice is speech; so that he thereby obtains the
real sacrifice.

22. As to this they say, ‘Let him offer only this
one: for whatever object the others are offered, that
object he gains even by this one.’ And, indeed’, if


ghee from the pot into the sruva, so as to fill it; after which he
pours it from the sruva into the guhf. Ké4ty. VII, 3,18 comm.

' The Taitt. S. (VI, 1, 2, 5) divides the couplet into its four
padas, which it assigns to Savitr/, the Fathers, the Visve Devad,
and Pshan respectively. The various reading ‘ visve’ of the Black
Yagus, instead of ‘ visvah,’ is very remarkable.

* The author here states, in his own words, the reasons (by ‘ vai’)
which have led the teachers referred to to maintain that by offering
this one oblation one gains all the objects in view. The K4viva
text includes the entire passage regarding the fivefold division of
the formula and oblation (pars. 19-21) in the argument of those
teachers. Fora detailed description of the pOrm4huti, or full-offering,


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, I. 25
he offers only this one, he would offer a full-offering ;
and the full means everything: hence he gains
everything by this (oblation). And by filling the
dipping-spoon (sruva), he fills the offering-spoon
(guhd), and the latter he offers full. This, however,
is a mere statement (of others’ views)'; but all (five)
libations are offered.

23. He offers this one with an anushéubh verse.
Being an anush/ubh verse, it consists of thirty-one
syllables. Now there are ten fingers, ten toes, ten
vital airs, and the thirty-first is the body wherein
those vital airs are contained; for this much consti-
tutes man, and the sacrifice is a man, the sacrifice is
of the same proportion as a man*. Thus, whatever
the extent of the sacrifice, whatever its measure, to
that extent he takes possession of it by means of
this (libation), when he offers it with an anush/ubh
verse of thirty-one syllables.


Seconp ApHyAya. First BrRAHMANA.


1. South of the Ahavantya he spreads two black
antelope skins on the ground, with the neck parts
towards the east: thereon he consecrates him. If
there are two (skins), they are an image of these two
worlds (heaven and earth), and thus he consecrates
him on these two worlds.


see part i, p. 302, note 2. A similar view, that the full-offering
renders other oblations unnecessary, is there given (II, 2, 1, 5).

1 Saish4 mimamsaiva, ‘This, however, is mere speculation,’
Kava recension.

2 See I, 2, 5,14, with note. The sacrifice represents the sacri-
ficer himself, and thus he makes sure of his offering up his entire
Self, and obtaining a new divine Self, and a place among the
immortals.


26 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWNA,


2. They are joined (fitted) together along their
edge’, for these two worlds are also, as it were,
joined together at their edge. At the hind part they
are fastened together through holes: thus, after
uniting (mithunikyztya) these two worlds, he conse-
crates him thereon.

3. But if there be only one (skin), then it is an
image of these (three) worlds; then he consecrates
him on these (three) worlds. Those (hairs) which
are white are an image of the sky; those which are
black are (an image) of this (earth) ;—or, if he likes,
conversely: those which are black are an image of
the sky, and those which are white are (an image)
of this (earth), Those which are of a brownish
yellow colour’, are an image of the atmosphere.
Thus he consecrates him on these (three) worlds.

4. And let him, in that case, turn in the hind end
(of the skin)*: thus, after uniting these worlds with
each other, he consecrates him thereon.

5. He then squats down behind the two skins,
with his face towards the east and with bent (right)
knee; and while touching them thus‘ at a place


’ The two skins are fitted together at the inner sides, and stretched
along the ground by means of wooden pins driven into the ground
and passed through holes all round the edge of the skins; the hairy
sides of the latter remaining outside (above and below). At their
hind parts they are tacked together by ‘means of a thong passed
through the holes and tied together in a loop.’

* Yany eva babhrfwiva harizi. The Kazva text reads, Yiny eva
madhye babhrfii v4 harivi va, ‘those in the centre (or between the
black and white) which are either brown or yellow (grey).

* According to Katy. VII, 3, 21 it would seem that the two hind
feet, or one of them, should be doubled up (at the joint) and sewed
under, According to the Sfitras of the Black Yagus, on the other
hand, the right fore-foot is turned under.

* According to the Sfitras of the Black Yagus, he is to touch at


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 9. 27


where the white and black (hair) jein, he mutters
(Vag. S. IV, 9),‘Ye are the images of the Ark
and Saman;'—an image doubtless is what is con-
formable': ‘Ye are conformable to the r7és and
sdmans’ he thereby means to say.

6. ‘I touch you.’ Now, he who is consecrated
becomes an embryo, and enters into the metres:
hence he has his hands closed, since embryos have
their hands closed.

7. And when he says,‘I touch you,’ he means
to say, ‘I enter into you.’ ‘Doye guard me up
to the goal of this sacrifice!’ whereby he says,
‘Do ye protect me until the completion of this
sacrifice !’

8. He then kneels down with his right knee (on
the skin), with the text, ‘Thou art a refuge:
afford me refuge!’ for the skin (4arma) of the
black deer it is indeed among men, but among the
gods it is a refuge (sarma): therefore he says,
‘Thou art a refuge: afford me refuge.” ‘Homage
be to thee: injure me not!’ Nowhe who raises
himself upon the sacrifice! doubtless raises himself
to one that is his better; for the black deer skin is
a (means of) sacrifice. Hereby, now, he propitiates
that sacrifice, and thus that sacrifice does not injure
him: for this reason he says, ‘ Homage be to thee:
injure me not !’

9. He must indeed sit down first on the hind part
(of the skin). Were he, on the other hand, to sit
down at once in the middle (of the skin), and were


the same time the white hair with his thumb and the black with his
fore-finger. Say. on Taitt. S, I, 2, 2 (vol. i, p. 297).

1 Sreyimsam va esha upadhirohati yo manushya/ san yagviam
upadhirohati. Iasva recension.


28 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


any one there to curse him, saying, ‘ He shall either
become demented or fall down headlong!’ then that
would indeed come to pass. Let him therefore first
sit down on the hind part (of the skin).

10. He then girds himself with the zone. For
once upon a time when the Angiras were consecrated,
they were seized with weakness, for they had pre-
pared no other food but fast-milk. They then
perceived this (source of) strength (viz. the zone),
and this (source of) strength they put in (or round)
the middle of their body as a (means of attaining)
completion: and thereby they attained comple-
tion. And so does he now put that (source of)
strength in the middle of his body and thereby
attain completion.

11. It is made of hemp. Hempen it is in order
to be soft. Now when Pragdpati, having become an
embryo, sprung forth from that sacrifice, that which
was nearest to him, the amnion, became hempen
threads: hence they smell putrid. And that which
was the outer membrane (and placenta) became the
garment of the consecrated. Now the amnion lies
under the outer membrane, and hence that (zone) is
worn under the garment. And in like manner as
Pragapati, having become an embryo, sprung forth
from that sacrifice, so does he become an embryo
and spring forth from that sacrifice.

12. It (the cord) is a triple one, because food is
threefold, food being cattle. (Moreover) the father
and mother (are two), and that which is born is a
third: hence it is a triple (cord).

13. It is intertwined with a shoot of reed (muziga)
grass, for the sake of chasing away the evil spirits,
the reed being a thunderbolt. It is plaited after


II] KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 18, 29
the manner of a braid of hair. For were it to be
twisted' sunwise (from left to right) as any other
cords, it would be human; and were it twisted con-
trary to the course of the sun, it would be sacred to
the Fathers: hence it is plaited after the manner of
a braid of hair.

14. He girds himself with it, with the text (Vag. S.
IV, 10), ‘Thou art the strength of the Angi-
ras,—for the Angiras perceived this (source of)
strength ;—‘ soft as wool, bestow thou strength
on me!’ there is nothing obscure in this.

15. He then tucks up the end of his (nether) gar-
ment, with the text, ‘Thou art Soma’s tuck.’
For heretofore it was the tuck of him, the unconse-
crated; but now that he is consecrated, it is that of
Soma?: therefore he says, ‘ Thou art Soma’s tuck.’

16. He then wraps up (his head)*. For he who
is consecrated becomes an embryo ; and embryos are
enveloped both by the amnion and the outer mem-
brane: therefore he covers (his head),

17. He covers himself, with the text,‘ Thou art
Vishzu’s refuge, the refuge of the sacrificer.’
He who is consecrated indeed becomes both Vishzzu
and a sacrificer; for when he is consecrated, he is
Vishzu ; and when he sacrifices, he is the sacrificer :
therefore he says, ‘Thou art Vishzu’s refuge, the
refuge of the sacrificer.’

18. Thereupon he ties a black deer’s horn to the


1 Twisted and plaited is here expressed by the same term
‘ srish/a.’
Literally, but now (it being that) of (him) the consecrated, (it


is that) of Soma.
$ With his upper garment, or, according to others, with a turban.


Katy. VII, 3, 28 scholl.


30 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


end (of his garment'), Now the gods and the
Asuras, both of them sprung from Pragdapati, en-
tered upon their father Pragapati’s inheritance: the
gods came in for the Mind and the Asuras for
Speech. Thereby the gods came in for the sacri-
fice and Asuras for speech; the gods for yonder
(heaven) and the Asuras for this (earth).

19. The gods said to Yagiia (m., the sacrifice),
‘ That Vas (f., speech) is a woman: beckon her, and
she will certainly call thee to her.’ Or it may be, he
himself thought, ‘That V4aé is a woman: I will
beckon her and she will certainly call me to her.’
He accordingly beckoned her. She, however, at
first disdained him from the distance: and hence
a woman, when beckoned by a man, at first disdains
him from the distance. He said, ‘ She has disdained
me from the distance.’

20, They said, ‘ Do but beckon her, reverend sir,
and she will certainly call thee to her.’ He beckoned
her; but she only replied to him, as it were, by
shaking her head: and hence a woman, when
beckoned by a man, only replies to him, as it were,
by shaking her head. He said, ‘She has only
replied to me by shaking her head.’

21. They said, ‘Do but beckon her, reverend
sir, and she will certainly call thee to her.’ He
beckoned her, and she called him to her; and hence
a woman at last calls the man to her. He said,
‘She has indeed called me.’


' The Madhyandinas tied the horn to the unwoven end (thrum,
dasa) of the nether garment which was tucked through (par. 15)
and then allowed to hang down in front. The Kamvas, on the
other hand, tied it to the hem of the upper garment (uttarasife !
Kanva text) ; cf. Katy. VII, 3, 29 scholl.


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 23. 31


22. The gods reflected, ‘That Vaé being a woman,
we must take care lest she should allure him'.—Say
to her, ‘Come hither to me where I stand!” and
report to us her having come.’ She then went up
to where he was standing. Hence a woman goes
to a man who stays in a well-trimmed (house). He
reported to them her having come, saying, ‘She has
indeed come.’

23. The gods then cut her off from the Asuras ;
and having gained possession of her and enveloped
her completely in fire, they offered her up as a holo-
caust, it being an offering of the gods* And in
that they offered her with an anush/ubh verse,
thereby they made her their own; and the Asuras,
being deprived of speech, were undone, crying, ‘ He
‘lavah! he ‘lavah?!


* Yosha va iyam vig yad enam na yuvita. The St. Petersburg
Dict. (s. v. yu) takes it differently, ‘That Vaé is indeed a woman,
since she does not wish to draw him towards herself (i.e. since she
does not want him to come near her).’ Sayawa, on the other hand,
explains it elliptically, ‘Since she has not joined him (no confidence
can be placed in her)’ The Kanva text reads: Ta u ha deva
bibhaydm Aakrur yosha va iyam iti yad va enam na yuviteti.
Perhaps in our passage also we should read ‘yuvita’ (as proposed
by Delbriick, Syntact. Forschungen III, p. 79), and translate, ‘ Verily
that Vas isa woman: (it is to be feared) that she will (or, it is to be
hoped that she will not] allure him [viz. so. that Yagzia also would
fall to the share of the Asuras];’ ‘Dass sie ihn nur nicht an sich
fesselt!’ For similar elliptic constructions with yad and the op-
tative, see paragraphs 26 and 27; and II, 2, 4, 3 [‘ Dass er mich
nur nicht auffrisst !"]; IV, 3, 5, 3 (‘Dass uns nur die Rakshas nichts
zu Leide thun!’); IV, 6,9, 1. One would expect an ‘iti’ here.

2 And therefore requiring no priests’ portion &c, to be taken
from it.

$ According to Sdyawa, ‘He ’lavo’ stands for ‘ He ’rayo (i. e. ho,
the spiteful (enemies))!’ which the Asuras were unable to pronounce
correctly. The Kanva text, however, reads, te hattavifo ’sura
hailo haila ity etém ha vasam vadantah parababhivus; (? i.e. He


32 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
24. Such was the unintelligible speech which they
then uttered,—and he (who speaks thus) is a Mle&da
(barbarian). Hence let no Brahman speak barba-
rous language, since such is the speech of the
Asuras. Thus alone he deprives his spiteful ene-
mies of speech; and whosoever knows this, his
enemies, being deprived of speech, are undone.

25. That Yag#a (sacrifice) lusted after Vaz
(speech!), thinking, ‘May I pair with her!’ He
united with her.

26. Indra then thought within himself, ‘Surely
a great monster will spring from this union of Yagza
and Vaéé: [I must take care] lest it should get the
better of me.’ Indra himself then became an em-
bryo and entered into that union.

27. Now when he was born after a year’s time,
he thought within himself, ‘Verily of great vigour is
this womb which has contained me: [I must take
care] that no great monster shall be born from it
after me, lest it should get the better of me!’

28. Having seized and pressed it tightly, he tore
it off and put it on the head of Yag#ia (sacrifice*);—
for the black (antelope) is the sacrifice: the black
deer skin is the same as that sacrifice, and the black
deer's horn is the same as that womb. And because
it was by pressing it tightly together that Indra tore
out (the womb), therefore it (the horn) is bound
tightly (to the end of the garment); and as Indra,


ila, ‘ho, speech.’) A third version of this passage seems to be
referred to in the Mahabhazhya (Kielh.), p. 2.

' Compare the corresponding legend about Yagiia and Dakshina
(priests’ fee), Taitt. S. VI, 1, 3, 6.

* ‘Yagiiasya sirshan ;’ one would expect ‘krishma(s4ra)sya_sir-
shan.’ The Taitt. S. reads ‘tém mrgeshu ny adadhat.’


Ill KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 31. 33


having become an embryo, sprang from that union,
so is he (the sacrificer), after becoming an embryo,
born from that union (of the skin and the horn).

29. He ties it (to the end of the garment) with
the open part upwards, for it is in this way that the
womb bears the embryo. He then touches with it
his forehead close over the right eyebrow, with the
text, ‘Thou art Indra’s womb,’—for it is indeed
Indra’s womb, since in entering it he enters thereby’,
and in being born he is born therefrom: therefore
he says, ‘ Thou art Indra’s womb.’

30. Thereupon he draws (with the horn) the
(‘easterly’) line, with the text,‘ Make the crops
full-eared!’ Thereby he produces the sacrifice;
for when there is a good year, then there is abun-
dant (material) for sacrifice; but when there is a bad
year, then there is not even enough for himself:
hence he thereby produces the sacrifice.

31. And let not the consecrated henceforth scratch
himself either with a chip of wood or with his nail.
For he who is consecrated becomes an embryo; and
were any one to scratch an embryo either with a chip
of wood or his nail, thereby expelling it, it would
die. Thereafter the consecrated would be liable to
be affected with the itch; and—offspring (retas)
coming after the consecrated—that offspring would
then also be liable to be born with the itch. Now his


1 In the Kaava text ‘ata4 (therewith)’ refers to the head of the
sacrificer,—sa ya’ 4Airasta upasprisaty ato va enfm etad agre pra-
visan pravisaty ato va agre gayamfno g&yate tasm4é Atirasta
upasprisati.

? Apdsyan mrityet=apagatshan mritim prapnuyat, Say.—? ap4-
syet, ‘he would force it out and it would die.’ The Kanva text has
merely ‘ayam mrvtyet (!).’

[26] D


34 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ethan eee ee a aN EMCEE ee Rf STAC JIE pe ee
own womb! does not injure its offspring, and that
black deer’s horn being indeed his own womb, that
(horn) does not injure him; and therefore the conse-
crated should scratch himself with the black deer's
horn and with nothing but the black deer’s horn.

32. He (the Adhvaryu) then hands to him a staff,
for driving away the evil spirits,—the staff being
a thunderbolt.

33. It is of Udumbara wood (Ficus Glomerata), for
him to obtain food and strength,—the Udumbara
means food and strength: therefore it is of Udum-
bara wood.

34. It reaches up to his mouth,—for so far extends
his strength: as great as his strength is, so great it
(the staff) is when it reaches up to his mouth.

35. He makes it stand upright, with the text,
‘Stand up, O tree, erect; guard me from in-
jury on tothe goal of this sacrifice!’ whereby
he means to say, ‘ Standing erect, protect me till the
completion of this sacrifice !’

36. It is only now that some bend the fingers
inward* and restrain their speech, because, they
argue, only from now will he not have to mutter
anything. But let him not do so; for in like manner
as if one were to try to overtake some one who runs
away, but could not overtake him, so does he not
overtake the sacrifice. Let him therefore turn in
his fingers and restrain his speech on that (former)
occasion.

37. And when the consecrated (after restraining his
speech) utters either a ~z&, or a saman, or a yagus%,


' That is, the womb from which he (the sacrificer) is born.
‘2,3. 2:48
* Viz. in muttering the formulas mentioned above, III, 2, 1, 5 seq.


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 40. 35
he thereby takes a firmer and firmer hold of the
sacrifice: let him therefore turn in his fingers and
restrain his speech on that (former) occasion.

38. And when he restrains his speech—speech
being sacrifice—he thereby appropriates the sacri-
fice to himself'. But when, from speech restrained,
he utters any sound (foreign to the sacrifice), then
that sacrifice, being set free, flies away. In that
case, then, let him mutter either a 77z& or a yagus
addressed to Vishwzu, for Vishzu is the sacrifice:
thereby he again gets hold of the sacrifice; and
this is the atonement for that (transgression).

39. Thereupon some one? calls out, ‘ Consecrated
is this Brahman, consecrated is this Brahman:’ him,
being thus announced, he thereby announces to
the gods: ‘Of great vigour is this one who has
obtained the sacrifice ; he has become one of yours :
protect him!’ this is what he means to say. Thrice
he says it, for threefold is the sacrifice.

40. And as to his saying, ‘ Brahman,’ uncertain, as
it were, is his origin heretofore’; for the Rakshas,
they say, pursue women here on earth, and so the
Rakshas implant their seed therein. But he, for-
sooth, is truly born, who is born of the Brahman
(neut.), of the sacrifice: wherefore let him address
even a Raganya, or a Vaisya, as Brahman, since he
who is born of the sacrifice is born of the Brahman
(and hence a Brahmaza). Wherefore they say, ‘ Let
no one slay a sacrificer of Soma; for by (slaying) a
Soma-sacrificer he becomes guilty of a heinous sin*!’


1 Or, puts it in himself, encloses it within himself.

* That is, some one other than the Adhvaryu, viz. the Pratipra-
sthat?' or some other person, Katy. VII, 4, 11 scholl.

’ That is, inasmuch as he may be of Rakshas origin

4 Viz. of the crime of Brahmanicide (brahmahatya).
bD 2


26 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. He maintains silence; and silently he remains
seated till sunset. The reason why he maintains
silence is this:

2. By means of the sacrifice the gods gained that
supreme authority which they now wield. They
spake, ‘ How can this (world) of ours be made un-
attainable to men?’ They sipped the sap of the
sacrifice, even as bees would suck out honey; and
having drained the sacrifice and scattered it by
means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared: and
because they scattered (yopaya, viz. the sacrifice)
therewith, therefore it is called yfpa (post) '.

3. Now this was heard by the Aishis. They
collected the sacrifice. As that sacrifice was col-
lected (prepared)*, so does he who is consecrated
collect the sacrifice (by keeping his speech within
him),—for the sacrifice is speech.


* Professor Whitney (American Journal of Philology, III, p. 402)
proposes to take yopaya here in the sense of ‘ to set up an obstacle,
to block or bar the way.’ He remarks, ‘How the setting up of a post
should operate to “ efface traces” cannot easily be made to appear.’
I am not aware that any one has supposed that it was by the ‘ setting
up’ of the post that the traces of the sacrifice were obliterated. From
what follows—‘ They collected the sacrifice '—it seems to me pretty
clear that our author at any rate connects ‘yopaya’ with the root yu,
to mix, Stir about, and hence to efface the traces by mixing with the
ground, or by scattering about. This causative was evidently no
longer a living form, but resorted to for etymological purposes.

* Or, perhaps, They collected the sacrifice in the same way as
this (present) sacrifice has been collected. See, however, the cor-
responding passage III, 2, 2, 29; 4, 3,16. The Kava text is
clearer: Tam yatha yatharshayo yagiiam samabharams tathdyam
yagniah sambhrito yatho vai tad rishayo yagtiam samabharann
evam u va esha etad yagfiam sambharati yo dikshate.


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 7. 37


4. When the sun has set, he breaks silence. Now
Pragapati is the year, since the sacrifice is Pragapati ;
and the year is day and night, since these two revolv-
ing produce it. He has been consecrated during
the day, and he has gained the night: as great as
the sacrifice is, as great as is its extent, to that extent
has he gained it before he breaks silence.

5. Some, however, make him break his silence on
seeing the (first) star’, arguing that then the sun has
actually set. But let him not do so, for what would
become of them if it were cloudy? Let him therefore
break silence as soon as he thinks the sun has set.

6. Now, some make him break silence by the
formula, ‘Earth! ether! sky!’ arguing that thereby
they strengthen the sacrifice, they heal, the sacrifice.
But let him not do so; for he who breaks silence
with that (formula) does not strengthen the sacrifice,
does not heal the sacrifice.

7. Let him rather break silence with this one
(Vag. S.1V,11),‘Prepare ye the fast-food! pre-
pare ye the fast-food! [prepare ye the fast-
food!}] Agniis the Brahman, Agni is the sacri-
fice; the tree is meet for the sacrifice.’ For
this indeed is his sacrifice, this is his havis-offering at
this (rite of consecration), even as the Agnihotra was
heretofore*. In thus preparing the (Soma) sacrifice
by means of the sacrifice, he establishes the sacrifice


1 “After pointing out (some) stars [nakshatrémi darsayitv4],’
Kanva recension. Cf. Taitt. S. VI, 1, 4,4,‘ when the stars have
risen, he breaks silence with “ Prepare the fast-food !”’

2 That is to say, the eating of the fast-food, consistiny chiefly of
milk, takes, as it were, the place of the Agnihotra, or evening and
morning sacrifice, which he is not allowed to perform during the time
of his consecration.


38 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


in the sacrifice, and carries on the sacrifice by means
of the sacrifice; for (the partaking of) that fast-food
is indeed carried on by him till the pressing of the
Soma. Thrice he pronounces (the first words’), for
threefold is the sacrifice.

8. Moreover, he breaks silence, after turning
round towards the fire. He, on the other hand, who
breaks silence with any other (formula) but this’,
does not strengthen the sacrifice, does not heal
the sacrifice. In pronouncing the first (part of the
formula)* he utters the truth of speech‘,

9. ‘Agni is the Brahman’ (neut.), he says, for
Agni is indeed the Brahman (sacerdotium) ;—‘ Agni
is the sacrifice, for Agni is indeed the sacrifice ;—
‘the tree is meet for the sacrifice,’ for trees® are
indeed meet for the sacrifice, since men could not
sacrifice, if there were no trees: therefore he says,
‘the tree is meet for the sacrifice.’

10. Thereupon they cook the fast-food for him.
For he who is consecrated draws nigh to the gods and
becomes one of the deities. But the sacrificial food
of the gods must be cooked, and not uncooked:
hence they cook it, and he partakes of that fast-milk


* Viz. the injunction ‘Prepare ye the fast-food!’ which is indeed
read thrice in the Kfmva text, where the arrangement of these
paragraphs is much clearer.

* Thus SAy. ‘ato ’nyena, bhfir bhuva/ suvar ityanena’ (MS. I. O.
657). Dr. Lindner makes ata’ refer to Agni. The KAmva text
begins the passage, corresponding to paragraphs 7 and 8: ‘So’gnim
ikshamano visrigate vratam krinuta (thrice) etad v4 etasya havir
esha yagfio yad vratam,’

* That is, the words ‘ Agni is the Brahman.’

* Viz. because ‘the Brahman (neut.) is the truth (or essence,
satyam),’ Say.

* Viz. trees from which sacrificial implements, fire-wood, the
sacrificial stake, &c., are obtained.


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 14. 39


(vrata) and does not offer it in the fire. The reason
why he eats the fast-food and does not offer it in the
fire is this:

11. By means of the sacrifice the gods gained that
supreme authority which they now wield. They
spake, ‘How can this (world) of ours be made un-
attainable to men?’ They sipped the sap of the
sacrifice, even as bees would suck out honey; and
having drained the sacrifice and scattered it by
means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared.
And because they scattered (yopaya) therewith,
therefore it is called yQpa (post).

12. Now this was heard by the Azshis. They
collected the sacrifice. As that sacrifice was col-
lected, so does he who is consecrated now become
the sacrifice, for it is he that carries it on, that pro-
duces it. And whatever (sap) of the sacrifice was
sucked out and drained, that he now restores again by
sipping the fast-milk and not offering it in the fire ;
for, assuredly, were he to offer it in the fire, he would
not replenish (the sacrifice). But let him, nevertheless,
think (that he does so) sacrificing and not the reverse.

13. For, verily, these vital airs are born of the
mind, endowed with mind’, of intelligent power? :
Agni is speech; Mitra and Varuva are the out-
breathing and the in-breathing ; Aditya (the sun) is
the eye; and the All-gods are the ear,—it is unto
these deities that offering is thereby made by him.

14. Now, some add both rice and barley to the
first (day's) fast-milk, arguing,—“ By means of these
two substances (rasa) we restore what part of the
sacrifice was sucked out and drained; and, should


1 Manoyug (?), ‘mind-yoked,’ i.e. having thoughts for their team.
2 Cf. paragraph 18.


40 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


TTL


the vrata-cow yield no milk, he may prepare his fast-
food of whichever of these (cereals) he pleases ; and
thus both the rice and the barley are ‘taken hold of’
by him.” But let him not do this ; for he who adds
both rice and barley (to the milk) neither replenishes
the sacrifice nor heals it. Let him therefore add only
the one or the other (cereal). Both the rice and
barley doubtless form his (havis) material for offering
(at the New and Full-moon Sacrifice), and when they
do so become his material for offering, then they are
also ‘taken hold of'’ by him. Should the vrata-cow
yield no milk, let him prepare the fast-food of which-
ever of them he pleases.

15. Some, again, add to the first (day’s) fast-food
(vrata) all manner of vegetables and fragrant (season-
ing), arguing,—‘ If disease were to befall him, he
might cure it by whatever thereof he pleases, as if
he cured it by the fast-milk*.’ But let him not


* Anvarabdha has here the usual sacrificial meaning of ‘ taken
hold of (from behind),’ with perhaps something of that of ‘taken (as
medicine=einnehmen). Thus at the invocation of the Id&, the
sacrificer has to touch (anv-4rabh) the id& from behind, thereby
keeping up his connection, and identifying himself, with the sacrifice.
Cf. part i, p. 228, note 1; and III, 2, 4, 15. Hence the author,
making use of the term suggested by those he criticises, argues that
as both kinds of material have already been used and therefore
touched (anvaérabdha) by him at the New and Full-moon Sacrifice
(Sayama), they have therefore been taken possession of by him. It is
possible, though scarcely likely, that the verb may have reference
here to the anv4rambhanfy4 ish/i,—or preliminary ceremony of
the first performance of the New and Full-moon Sacrifice,—with
which the present use of these cereals would, in that case, be identified,
as that of the vrata-milk was with the Agnihotra (cf. paragraph 7
above), The Kanva text has the verb 4-rabh instead, yatha
havisharabdhena bhishagyed ity evam etat.

* That is to say, though the restoration might be due to the


medicinal properties of some of those ingredients, it could be
ascribed to the milk.


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 17. = 4!


do this, lest he should do what is inauspicious to
the sacrifice; for those people do at the sacrifice
what is a human act, and inauspicious to the sacri-
fice assuredly is that which is human. If any disease
were to befall him who is consecrated, let him cure it
wherewith he pleases ; for completion is proper’.

16. He (the Adhvaryu) hands the fast-food to
him, after letting the ordinary (meal-)time pass,—viz.
the evening-milk in the latter part of the night, and
the morning-milk in the afternoon,—for the sake of
distinction : he thereby distinguishes the divine from
the human.

17. And when he is about to hand the fast-food
to him he makes him touch water?, with the text,
‘For protection we direct our thoughts to
divine devotion, the source of supreme mercy’%,
the bestower of glory and the bearer of sacri-
fices*: may it prosper our ways, accerding to
our desire!’ Heretofore, indeed, it was for a
human meal that he cleansed himself, but now it is
for the sake of divine devotion: therefore he says,
‘For the sake of assistance we turn our thoughts to
divine devotion, the source of supreme mercy, the
bestower of glory, the bearer of sacrifices: may it


1 Sayama takes this to mean, that, as above all the consumma-
tion of the sacrifice is desirable, one should in case of disease cure
it by any of those drugs without their being taken (anvarabdha)
sacrificially, or as part of the sacrificial performance.

* According to the K4nva text, the sacrificer first washes himself
(nenikte) and then sips water (444mati); and having drunk the
fast-milk, he touches water (apa upaspr?sati).

> Or, perhaps, ‘we meditate on the divine intelligence, the most
merciful.’

‘ Yagiavahasam (‘bringing, or bearing, worship’); thus also
Tait. S. I, 2,2. The Kanva text reads visvadhayasam, ‘all-
nourishing, all-sustaining.’


42 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


prosper our ways, according to our desire!’ When-
ever, being about to take the fast-food, he touches
water, let him touch it with this same (formula).

18. Thereupon he drinks the fast-food, with the
text, ‘May the gods favour us, they who are
born of the mind, and endowed with mind},
and of intelligent power! may they protect
us! Hail to them!’ Thus that (fast-food) comes
to be for him (by means of the Sv4ha) as an oblation
consecrated by the Vashaé.

19. Having drank the fast-food, he touches his
navel’, with the text (Vag. S. IV, 12),‘ Ye waters
that have been drank, may ye become palat-
able and auspicious within us! may they
prove agreeable to us, freeing us from dis-
ease and weakness and sin,—they the divine,
the immortal, the holy!’ Now, he who is conse-
crated draws nigh to the gods and becomes one of
the deities; but the sacrificial food of the gods is
not increased (with other material): hence, if in
handing the fast-food (to the consecrated) he increases
it (with other milk), he commits a fault and breaks the
fast. This (formula), however, is the atonement for
that (transgression), and thus that fault is not com-
mitted by him, and he does not break the fast (or
vow): therefore he says, ‘Ye waters....!’ When-
ever, after drinking the fast-food, he touches his
navel, let him touch it with this (formula); for who


* See p. 39, note 2, The KAmva text here again identifies the
divinities referred to in the text with the vital airs.

* Having eaten and touched water, he strokes his belly (udaram
abhimrisate), Kanv. The Kanva text renders the meaning quite
clear: Uta vai tivram vratam bhavati tat kshudrataram asad iti
vopotsifkaty, alpam va bhavati tad bhiyaskimyopotsifAati.


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 21. 43


knows whether (or not) he who hands the fast-food
(to the consecrated) increases it (with other milk)'!

20. When he intends to pass urine, he takes up
a clod of earth or some other object by means of the
deer's horn, with the text (Vag. S. 1V, 13), ‘This
(O Earth) is thy covering meet for worship.
For this earth truly is divine, and serves as a place
for the worship of the gods: it must not be defiled
by him who is consecrated. Having lifted up this its
sacrificially pure covering’, he now relieves himself
on its impure body, with the formula, ‘I discharge
not offspring, but waters,—for so indeed he
does’; ‘delivering from trouble, and conse-
crated by Svaha,—for they do indeed deliver from
trouble what is pressed together inside: therefore
he says, ‘delivering from trouble,—‘consecrated
by Svah4, enter ye the earth!’ whereby he means
to say, ‘Having become offerings, do ye enter the
earth, appeased !’

21. Thereupon he throws the clod of earth down
again, with the text, ‘Unite with the earth!’ for
truly this earth is divine, and serves as a place for
the worship of the gods: it must not be defiled by
him who is consecrated. Having lifted up this its


1 No other fresh milk is to be added to that obtained by one milk-
ing of the vratadughA (fast-milk) cow (K4ty. VII, 4, 29); but the
preceding formula is to be muttered in order to obviate any evil
consequences arising from a possible secret breach of this rule, on
the part of him who hands the milk to the sacrificer. Dr. Lindner
takes upotsié in the sense of ‘to spill,’ but I find no authority for
this rendering, which neither the prep. upa, nor abhi (in the equiva-
lent abhyutsif) would seem to admit of.

* See p. 10, note 4.

* «Ubhayam va ata ety Apas 4a retas Aa; sa etad apa eva mu7iAati
na pragdm,’


44 SATAPATIIA-BRAHMANA,


sacrificially pure covering, he has relieved himself on
its impure body, and now restores to it this its pure
covering : therefore he says, ‘ Unite with the earth!’
22. He then gives himself up to Agni (the fire)
for protection and lies down to sleep. For he who
is consecrated draws nigh to the gods and becomes
one of the deities; but the gods do not sleep, while to
him sleeplessness is not vouchsafed; and Agni being
Lord of vows to the gods, it is to him that he now
commits himseif and lies down to sleep, with the
text (Vag. S.1V,14), ‘O Agni, be thou a good
waker: may we thoroughly refresh ourselves!’
whereby he says, ‘O Agni, wake thou: we are going
to sleep!'—‘ Guard us unremittingly!’ whereby
he means to say, ‘ protect us heedfully !’"— ‘Make us
awake again! whereby he means to say, ‘ Order
so that, having rested here, we may awake safely.’
23. And when he has slept and does not wish to
fall asleep again, (the Adhvaryu) makes him mutter
the text (Vag. S.1V,15),‘ Thought and life have
come back to me, breath and soul have come
back to me, eye and ear have come back to
me;’ for all these depart from him when he sleeps ;
the breath alone does not; and after he has slept
he again unites with them: therefore he says,
‘Thought and life have come back to me...-—‘May
Agni Vaisvanara, the unassailable preservet
of lives, preserve us from mishap and shame!’
whereby he means to say, ‘May Agni save us from
whatever mistake (may be committed) on this occa-
sion, either by sleep or otherwise:’ this is why he
says, ‘May Agni Vaisvdnara, the unassailable pre-
server of lives, preserve us from mishap and shame!’
24. For, when he who is consecrated utters any-


II] KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 26, 45
iin aera ew on ~~~
thing that is foreign to the vow, or when he becomes
angry, he commits a fault and breaks his vow, since
suppression of anger behoves him who is consecrated,
Now, Agni is the Lord of vows among the gods,—
it is to him therefore that he resorts (Vag. S. IV, 16;
Rig-veda VIII, 11, 7): ‘Thou, O Agni, art the
divine guardian of vows among men, to whom
praise is due at the sacrifices.’ This, then, is
his atonement for that (transgression); and thus
that fault is not committed by him, and he does
not break his vow: therefore he says, ‘Thou, O
Agni, art the divine guardian of vows among men,
to whom praise is due at the sacrifices.’

25. And whatever (gift) people offer to him},
thereon he (the Adhvaryu) makes him pronounce the
text, ‘Bestow this much,O Soma, bring more!’
for Soma indeed it is that appropriates for the con-
secrated whatever people offer to him: when he says,
‘Bestow this much, O Soma,’ he means to say, ‘ Be-
stow this much on us, O Soma;’ and by ‘Bring
more, he means to say, ‘Fetch more for us!’—‘ The
divine Savitzz, the bestower of wealth, hath
bestowed wealth on us;’ whereby that (gift)
comes to be impelled by Savitryz with a view to
(further) gifts.

26. Before sunset he (the Adhvaryu) says, ‘ Con-
secrated, restrain thy speech!’ and after sunset he re-
leases speech. Before sunrise he says, ‘Consecrated,
restrain thy speech!’ and after sunrise he releases


1 «And if they were to bring him either a garment or a cow, let
him address it with the text—.’ K4nva text. According to some
authorities the Dikshita is to go about for twelve days begging his
means of subsistence, and whatever he obtains he is to touch and
consecrate by the above text. Katy. VII, 5, 3, comm.


46 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


his speech,—for the sake of continuity: with the night
he continues the day, and with the day the night.

27. Let not the sun set on him while abiding
elsewhere (than the hall); nor let the sun rise on
him while asleep. For were the sun to set on him
while abiding elsewhere, he (the sun) would cut him
off from the night; and were the sun to rise on
him while asleep, he would cut him off from the
day: there is no atonement for this, hence it must
by all means be avoided. Prior to the purificatory
bath he should not enter water, nor should it rain
upon him; for it is improper that he should enter
water, or that it should rain upon him, before the
purificatory bath. Moreover, he speaks his speech
falteringly, and not effusively after the manner of
ordinary speech'. The reason why he speaks his
speech falteringly and not after the manner of ordi-
nary speech is this:

28. By means of the sacrifice the gods gained
that supreme authority which they now wield. They
spake, ‘ How can this (world) of ours be made unat-
tainable to men?’ They sipped the sap of the
sacrifice, even as bees would suck out honey; and
having drained the sacrifice and scattered it by
means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared.
And because they scattered (yopaya) therewith,
therefore it is called yQ'pa (post),

29. Now this was heard by the Azshis. They
collected the sacrifice; and as that sacrifice was col-
lected, so does he who is consecrated now collect the
sacrifice (by keeping back his speech),—for the sacri-
fice is speech. And whatever part of the sacrifice


' Literally, ‘ Falteringly (i.e. hesitatingly, cautiously) he speaks
speech, not human effusive (speech),’


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I. 47


was then sucked out and drained, that he now
restores again by speaking his speech falteringly and
not effusively after the manner of ordinary speech.
For were he to speak effusively after the manner of
ordinary speech, he would not restore (the sap of the
sacrifice): therefore he speaks his speech falteringly
and not effusively after the manner of ordinary speech.

30. He verily anoints himself,—it is for speech
that he anoints himself!, since he anoints himself for
the sacrifice, and the sacrifice is speech. Dhtikshita
(the anointed) doubtless is the same as dikshita (the
consecrated).


THE PRAYANIYESH7I, or OPENING-SACRIFICE,
THIRD BRAHMAMNA.


1. He prepares the Prayamtya rice-pap for Aditi.
Now while the gods were spreading (performing)
the sacrifice on this (earth) they excluded her (the
earth) from the sacrifice. She thought, ‘ How is it
that, in spreading the sacrifice on me, they should
exclude me from the sacrifice?’ and confounded
their sacrifice: they knew not that sacrifice.


1 Dhikshate, apparently the desiderative of dih (Weber, in
St. Petersb. Dict. s. v.) Cf. III, 1, 3, 7 seq. The construction
(especially the first hi) is rather peculiar. This paragraph apparently
is to supply further proof why he should be cautious in his speech,
and the words ‘sa vai dhikshate’ have to be taken parenthetically :
‘He speaks his speech cautiously....; for (anointing himself as he
does) he anoints himself for speech, &c.’ The Kanva text offers
less difficulty: Atha yad dhikshito nama vase va esha etad dhik-
shate, yagftiaya hi dhikshate, yagvio hi vak, tasmad dhikshito nama,
dhikshito ha vai namaitad yad dikshita ity 4hu4. Sayana’s com-
ment (MS.) is not very satisfactory: Vasam yagnasadhanatvena
prasamsati; sa vai dhikshita iti prasangad dhikshitasabdam nirvakti
dhikshito ha va iti yasmad dikshita iti nadma tadrzst diksha vak
sadhyeti vak sruti.


48 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


2. They said, ‘How comes it that our sacrifice
was confounded, when we spread it on this (earth) ?
how is it that we know it not ?’

3. They said, ‘In spreading the sacrifice on her,
we have excluded her from the sacrifice: it is she
that has confounded our sacrifice,—let us have
recourse to her!’

4. They said, ‘When we were spreading the sacri-
fice on thee, how was it that it became confounded,
that we know it not ?’

5. She said, ‘ While spreading the sacrifice on me,
ye have excluded me from the sacrifice: that was
why I have confounded your sacrifice. Set ye
aside a share for me; then ye shall see the
sacrifice, then ye shall know it!’

6. ‘So be it!’ said the gods: ‘ Thine, forsooth,
shall be the opening (prayaziya'), and thine the
concluding (udayantya) oblation!’ This is why
both the Prdyavtya and the Udayantya (pap) belong


* At IV, 5,1, 2, the name prfyantya is derived from pra-i, to
go forth, because by means of this offering they, as it were, go forth
to buy the Soma. Similarly, udayanfya is explained as the offer~
ing he performs after coming out (ud-i) from the bath. In Ait.
Br. I, 7, on the other hand, the name prfyantya is explained as
that by means of which sacrificers go forward (pra-i) to the heavenly
world. In the Soma sacrifice, the Prayanty& and Udayantya
may be said to correspond to the Fore-offerings and After-offerings
(prayaga and anuy4ga) of the New and Full-moon Sacrifice ;
though, of course, the Fore- and After-offerings form part of the
prayaniya and udayanty4, as ishfis, But they are peculiar in this
respect, that offering is made at both to the very same deities, and
that the invitatory prayers (anuvaky4) of the prayamiyesh/i form the
offering-prayers (yagy4) of the udayantyeshéi, and vice versa. For
these formulas, see Asval. Srautas. IV, 3; Haug, Ait. Br. Transl,
p. 16. The offering formula of the oblation to Aditi at the Prayanty4
(and invitatory formula at the Udayanfy4), strange to say, is not
a Rik-verse, but one from the Atharvan (VII, 6, 2).


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 12. 49


to Aditi; for Aditi truly is this (earth). Thereupon
they saw and spread the sacrifice.

7. Hence, when he prepares the Prayaztya rice-pap
for Aditi, he does so for the purpose of his seeing
the sacrifice: ‘After seeing the sacrifice I shall buy
(the Soma) and spread that (sacrifice); thus think-
ing he prepares the Prayaviya pap for Aditi. The
sacrificial food had been prepared, but offering had
not yet been made to the deity (Aditi),—

8. When Pathya Svasti! appeared to them,
They offered to her, for Pathya Svasti (the wishing
of ‘a happy journey’) is speech, and the sacrifice
also is speech. Thereby they perceived the sacri-
fice and spread it.

9. Thereupon Agni appeared to them: they
offered to him; whereby they perceived that part
of the sacrifice which was of Agni’s nature. Now
of Agni’s nature is what is dry in the sacrifice: that
they thereby perceived and spread.

10. Then Soma appeared to them: they offered
to him; whereby they perceived that part of the
sacrifice which was of Soma’s nature. Now of
Soma’s nature is what is moist in the sacrifice: that
they thereby perceived and spread.

11. Then Savity?7 appeared to them: they offered
to him. Now Savit// represents cattle, and the sacri-
fice also means cattle: hence they thereby perceived
and spread the sacrifice. Thereupon they offered
to the deity (Aditi), for whom the sacrificial food
had been prepared.

12. It is to these same five deities, then, that he
offers. For that sacrifice, when thrown into dis-


1 I,e, ‘welfare on the road, or a happy journey,’ a genius of
well-being and prosperity.
[26] E


50 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


order, was in five parts; and by means of those five
deities they recognised it.

13. The seasons became confounded, the five: by
means of those same five deities they recognised
them.

14. The regions became confounded, the five: by
means of those same five deities they recognised
them.

15. Through Pathya Svasti they recognised
the northern (upper) region: wherefore speech
sounds higher here’ among the Kuru-Pa#Aalas;
for she (Pathy4 Svasti) is in reality speech, and
through her they recognised the northern region,
and to her belongs the northern region.

16. Through Agni they recognised the eastern
region: wherefore they take out Agni from behind
towards the east*, and render homage to him; for
through him they recognised the eastern region, and
to him belongs the eastern region.

17. Through Soma they recognised, the southern
region: hence, after the Soma has been bought,
they drive it round on the south side; and hence
they say that Soma is sacred to the Fathers; for
through him they recognised the southern region,
and to him belongs the southern region.

18. Through Savityvz they recognised the western
region, for Savityz is yonder burning (sun): where-
fore he goes towards the west, for through him they
recognised the western region, and to him belongs
the western region.


? Atra, ? ‘there.’ In the St. Petersb. Dict. uttar4hi is here taken
in the sense of ‘in the north,’ instead of ‘higher.’ See also part i,
pref. p. xlii, note 1; Weber, Ind. Stud. I, Pp. 191.

* That is, from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya fire-place.


If KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 22. 51


19. Through Aditi they recognised the upper
region, for Aditi is this (earth): wherefore the plants
and trees grow upwards on her; for through her
they recognised the upper region, and to her belongs
the upper region.

20. The hospitable reception' (of King Soma)
verily is the head of the sacrifice, and the opening
and closing oblations are its arms. But the arms are
on both sides of the head, and hence those two obla-
tions, the Prayaziya and Udayaniya, are made on
both sides of (before and after) the reception.

21. Now, they say that whatever is done at the
Prayaxiya should be done at the Udayaniya?, and
the barhis (grass-covering of the altar) which is used
at the Prayaviya, is also used at the Udayantya: he
lays it aside, after removing it (from the altar). The
pot (in which the rice-pap was cooked) he puts aside
with the parched remains of dough, and (so he does)
the pot-ladle after wiping it. And the priests who
officiate during the Prayaviya, officiate also at the
Udayaniya. And because of this identical perform-
ance at the sacrifice the two arms are alike and of
the same shape.

22. But let him not do it in this way. Let him
rather® (at the proper time) throw both the barhis
and the pot-ladle after (the prastara, into the fire‘),
and let him put the pot aside after rinsing it. The
priests who officiate during the Prayaviya, officiate
also at the Udayaniya; but should they (in the


1 See Ill, 4, 1.
2 See p. 48, note 1. For the Udayantya, see IV, 5,1.
3 Or, perhaps, ‘let him, if he chooses (kamam)...;’ see Katy.
VII, 5, 16-19; cf. also note on III, 2, 4, 14.
* Sce I, .8,. 34.403 9.2, 29.
B-2


52 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


mean time) have departed this life, others may off-
ciate instead. It is because he offers to the same
deities, and the same oblations, that the two arms
are alike and of the same shape.

23. To five deities he offers at the Prayaziya, and
to five at the Udayaniya: hence there are five
fingers here and five there. This (Prayaziya offer-
ing) ends with the Samyu. They perform no Patni-
samyagas'. For the arms are on the fore-part of
the body, and the fore-part of the sacrifice he perfects
by this (opening ceremony). This is why it ends
with the Samyu, and why no Patnisasyagas are
performed.


HIRAWV YAVATI-AHUTI, or OFFERING WITH GOLD;
AND HOMAGE TO THE SOMA-COW.


Fourtu BraAumana.


1. Now Soma was in the sky, and the gods were
here on earth. The gods desired,—‘ Would that
Soma came to us: we might sacrifice with him,
when come.’ They created those two illusions,
Suparai and Kadra. In the chapter on the hearths
(dhishzya*) it is set forth how that affair of Suparzt
and Kadri came to pass.

2. Gayatri flew up to Soma for them. While she
was carrying him off, the Gandharva Visvavasu stole
him from her. The gods were aware of this,—
‘Soma has indeed been removed from yonder (sky),


but he comes not to us, for the Gandharvas have
stolen him.’
acetates ek DE a's S \ok eee


' For the Samyuvaka, see I, 9, 1, 24; for the Patnisamy4gas, I,
9, 2, I seq.


? See III, 6, 2, 2 seq.


Ill KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 7. 53


3. They said, ‘The Gandharvas are fond of
women: let us send V&é (speech) to them, and she
will return to us together with Soma.’ They sent
Vaé to them, and she returned to them together
with Soma,

4. The Gandharvas came after her and said,
‘Soma (shall be) yours, and Vaé ours'!’ ‘So be
it!’ said the gods; ‘but if she would rather come
hither, do not ye carry her off by force: let us woo
her!’ They accordingly wooed her.

5. The Gandharvas recited the Vedas to her,
saying, ‘See how we know it, see how we know it?!’

6. The gods then created the lute and sat playing
and singing, saying, ‘ Thus we will sing to thee, thus
we will amuse thee!’ She turned to the gods; but,
in truth, she turned to them vainly, since she turned
away from those, engaged in praising and praying, to
dance and song. Wherefore even to this day women
are given to vain things: for it was on this wise that
Vas turned thereto, and other women do as she did.
And hence it is to him who dances and sings that
they most readily take a fancy’.

7. Both Soma and Vas were thus with the gods.
Now, when he buys Soma he does so in order that
he may sacrifice with him, when obtained, for his
(own) obtainment (of heavenly bliss‘); for he who


1 “Yours (shall be) Soma, and ours Vaé, wherewith you bought
(Soma) from us.’ Kazva text.

2 The G. proclaimed the sacrifice and Veda to her, saying,‘ Thus
we know the sacrifice, thus we know (the Veda); mighty are we.’
Kanva text.

$ «And hence it is to him who is given to vain things, who
dances and sings, that women are most attached.’ Kamva text.

* Literally, ‘that he may sacrifice with the arrived (guest) for his
own arrival (? in the world of the gods).’


54 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


sacrifices with Soma that has not been bought, sacri-
fices with Soma that has not been (properly) obtained'.

8. In the first place he pours the butter, which
remains in the dhruva spoon, in four parts into the
guhd; and having tied a piece of gold with a blade
of the altar-grass*, and laid it down (in the guhd), he
offers (the butter), thinking, ‘I will offer with pure
milk ;’ for milk and gold are of the same origin, since
both have sprung from Agni’s seed*.

9. He lays down the piece of gold, with the text
(Vag. S. 1V, 17), ‘This (butter) is thy body, O
shining (Agni)! this (gold) is thy light,’ —for
that gold is indeed light: —‘unite therewith
and obtain splendour!’ When he says, ‘ Unite
therewith,’ he means to say, ‘ Mingle therewith ;’ and
when he says, ‘ Obtain splendour, —splendour mean-
ing Soma,—he means to say, ‘Obtain Soma.’

10. And as the gods then sent her (Vaé) to Soma,
so does he now send her to Soma; and the cow
for which the Soma is bought being in reality V4é,
it is her he gratifies by this offering, thinking,
‘With her, when gratified, I shall buy the Soma.’

11. He offers, with the text, ‘Thou art the
singer of praises‘, —for this (word ‘gdh’), the
‘singer of praises,’ is one of her (VAé’s) names ;—
‘upholden by the Mind,’—this speech of ours


' Lit.‘ with Soma that has not come’ (to him as a guest), so that
the guest-offering (Atithya, III, 4,1) could not take place.

* Because of this piece of gold, the offering here described is
called Hiramyavati-Ahuti, or ‘offering with gold.’

“SGI 3, 3, 53.3, 4, Bh

* The author seems to take gf/ here as nom. of gur=gur (gr/,
gir), cf. gfirni. Some of the native dictionaries give g(i as one of
the names of Sarasvati. The St. Petersb. Dict. takes it here in the
sense of ‘ drangend, treibend (pressing forward).’


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 15. 55


is indeed upheld by the mind, because the Mind
goes before’ Speech (and prompts her), ‘Speak
thus! say not this!’ for, were it not for the Mind,
Speech would indeed talk incoherently: for this
reason he says, ‘Upholden by the Mind.’

12. ‘Well-pleasing to Vishzu,’ whereby he
means to say, ‘Well-pleasing to Soma whom we
approach’,’ [He proceeds, Vag. S. IV, 18], ‘In-
spired by thee of true inspiration,’ whereby he
means to say, ‘ Be thou of true inspiration! go thou
to Soma for us!'—‘ May I obtain a support for
my body, Svaha!’ for he who reaches the end of
the sacrifice, indeed obtains a support for his body:
hence he thereby means to say, ‘May I reach the
end of the sacrifice!’

13. Thereupon he takes out the piece of gold
(from the spoon), whereby he bestows gold on men;
but were he to offer (the butter) together with the
gold, he would doubtless cast the gold away from
men, and no gold would then be gained among men.

14. He takes it out, with the text, ‘Thou art
pure, thou art shining, thou art immortal,
thou art sacred to all the gods.’ When, having
offered the whole milk, he now says, ‘Thou art
pure. .., it is indeed pure, and shining, and im-
mortal, and sacred to all the gods. Having loosened
the grass-blade, he throws it on the barhis, and ties
a string round the gold *.

15. Having then taken butter a second time in


Mano hidam purastad vakas Aarati, Kanva text.
To whom we send you, K.

’ The concluding ceremonies of the Prayaniya (see III, 2, 3,
23) are now performed; the offering of the Barhis being optional,
as the barhis may be used again for the Udayantya (ib. 22). Katy
VII, 6, 11 comm.


1
2


56 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAMNA.
ede mate it
four parts, he says, ‘Sacrificer, hold on behind?!’
They open the (south and east)? doors of the hall
(and walk out). On the right side (of the front door)
approaches the Soma-cow®: (by having) her thus
put forward‘, he has sent her forth (to Soma); for
the Soma-cow is in reality V4é: it is her he has
gratified by this offering, thinking, ‘ With her, when
gratified, I will buy Soma.’

16. Having gone up to her, he (the Adhvaryu)
salutes her, with the text (Vag. S. IV, 19), ‘Thou
art thought, thou art the mind, —for speech,
doubtless, speaks in accordance with thought, with
the mind’;—‘ Thou art intelligence, thou art
the Dakshiza*,—for it is by means of their re-
spective intelligence’ that people seek to make
their living, either by reciting (the Veda), or by
readiness of speech, or by songs: therefore he says,
‘Thou art ‘intelligence ;’ and ‘ Dakshiza’ (gift to the
priests) he calls her, because she is indeed the Dak-


* According to the Kamvas, the Adhvaryu’s formula is,—Ihi,
Yagamina, ‘Go, Sacrificer!’ In Katy. VII, 6, 12 only the above
formula is mentioned.

* The eastern door is for the Adhvaryu (and Sacrificer) and the
southern for the Pratiprasthatrr,

* Soma-krayani, ‘the cow for which the Soma.is bought.’

* Prahitam seems to be taken here in the double sense of ‘ put
forward or in front’ (from pra-dh4) and despatched (from pra-hi).

* ‘In accordance with the thought of the mind,’ manaso vai
Aittam anu vag vadati, K,

* The omission of ‘asi’ in the Brahmama is curious; the Kanva
text has correctly ‘ dakshinAsi.’

" Dhiya-dhiya, or rather ‘by means of this their respective
genius (in regard to speech).’ Dhi seems to mean ‘thought ex-
pressed by speech,’ hence often ‘ prayer, hymn;’ cf. III, 5, ,, 11.

* Prakamodya, rather either ‘fondness for. talk’ or ° effusive
speech.’ It seems to refer to story-tellers (?amusing spe¢ch).


III KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 BDRAHMANA, 20. 57


shiza;—‘ Thou art supreme, thou art worthy
of worship, —for she is indeed supreme and worthy
of worship;—‘Thou art Aditi, the double-
headed, —inasmuch as, through her (V4é, speech),
he speaks the right thing wrongly, and puts last
what comes first, and first what comes last, therefore
she is double-headed: that is why he says, ‘Thou
art Aditi, the double-headed?!’

17. ‘Be thou for us successful (in going) for-
ward and successful (in coming) back!’ when
he says, ‘Be thou for us successful (in going) forward,’
he means to say, ‘Go to (fetch) Soma for us!’ and
when he says, ‘ Be thou successful (in coming) back,’
he means to say, ‘Come back to us with Soma!’
This is why he says, ‘ Be thou for us successful (in
going) forward and successful (in coming) back !’

18. ‘May Mitra bind thee by the foot!’ For
that rope, doubtless, is of Varuza ; and were she (the
cow) tied with a rope, she would be (under the power)
of Varuza. And, on the other hand, were she not tied
at all, she would be uncontrolled. Now that which
is of Mitra is not of Varuza; and as (a cow), if tied
with a rope, is under control, so it is in the case of this
one when he says, ‘May Mitra bind thee by the foot!’

19. ‘May Pitshan guard thy paths!’ Now
Pishan is this Earth, and for whomsoever she is the
guardian of his paths’, he stumbles not at any time:
therefore he says, ‘May Pishan guard thy paths!

20. ‘For Indra as the supreme guide;—
whereby he says, ‘ May she be well-guarded!’ [He


1 In Taitt. S. VI, 1, 7, 5, this epithet is explained by the fact that
both the prayamiya and the udayaniya belong to Aditi.

2 ¢And her he thereby makes the guardian on his path,’ imam
evasma etad adhvani goptaram karoti, K.


58 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


proceeds, Vag. S. IV, 20], ‘May thy mother
grant thee permission, thy father, thine own
brother, thy fellow in the herd!’ whereby he
says, ‘Go thou for us to fetch Soma, with the per-
mission of all thy kin.—‘O goddess, go to the
god,—for it is indeed as a goddess, as Vaé&, that
she goes to a god, to Soma: therefore he says,
‘O goddess, go to the god;’—' To Soma for the
sake of Indra!’ Indra truly is the deity of the
sacrifice: therefore he says, ‘To Soma for the sake
of Indra.’ ‘May Rudra guide thee back!’ this
he says for her safety, for cattle cannot pass beyond
Rudra’. ‘Hail to thee! come back, with Soma
for thy companion!’ whereby he says, ‘ Hail to
thee, come back to us together with Soma!’

21. Even as, at that time, the gods sent her to
Soma, and she returned to them together with Soma,
so does he now send her to Soma, and she returns
to him together with Soma.

22. And as the gods then wooed her with the Gan-
dharvas, and she turned to the gods, so does the
sacrificer now woo her, and she turns to the sacri-
ficer. They lead her (the Soma-cow) northwards
round (to the. place where the Soma is to be sold);
for the north is the quarter of men, and hence it is
that of the sacrificer: for this reason they lead her
northwards round.


Tuirp ApuydAya. First BRAHMANA.


1. He follows her, stepping into seven foot-prints
of hers*; he thereby takes possession of her: that


* Rudra rules over these (cows); the cattle do not pass beyond
(natiyanti) him ; and thus she does not pass beyond him: therefore
he says, ‘ May Rudra turn thee back!’ KAzva text.

* Viz. into seven foot-prints of her right fore-foot. According to


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 3. 59


is why he steps into seven of her foot-prints. For
when the metres were produced from Vas (speech),
the one consisting of seven feet, the Sakvarl, was
the last (highest) of them. It is that (metre) he
now draws down towards himself from above: this
is why he steps into seven of her foot-prints.

2. It is as Vas" that he steps into them; (with the
text, Vag. S. IV, 21), ‘Thou art a Vasvl, thou
art Aditi, thou art an Aditya, thou art a
Rudra, thou art Aandra; for she is indeed a
Vasvi and Aditi, an Aditya, a Rudra, Xandra.
‘May Brzhaspati make thee rest in happi-
ness!’—Brzhaspati being the Brahman, he thereby
means to say, ‘May Brrhaspati lead thee hither by
means of the good (work)?!’ ‘Rudra, together
with the Vasus, is well-pleased with thee:’
this he says to secure her (the cow's) safety, for
cattle cannot pass beyond Rudra.

3. They now sit down* round the seventh foot-
print; and having laid down the piece of gold in the
foot-print, he offers. For offering is made on nothing
but fire, and the gold has sprung from Agni’s seed:
and thus that offering of his is indeed made over


Taitt.S. VI, 1, 8, rhe steps into six foot-prints and offers on the
seventh. According to Katy. VII, 6, 17 they pass (or overstep,
atikram) six foot-prints and sit down round the seventh.

1 Literally, ‘by a form (riipea) of Va’ (speech), viz. the text
which is pronounced.

2 This can scarcely be the correct reading. The Kamva text has
the more acceptable reading, ‘ Brzhaspati being the Brahman, and
felicity the sacrifice, he thereby says, ‘“ May the Brahman make thee
rest (or delight, ramayatu) in the good (work), the sacrifice !””’

* According to the comm. on Katy. VII, 6, 17 the Brahman and
the Sacrificer are to sit on the south, the Adhvaryu on the west, and
the Nesh/r7 on the north side of the foot-print.


60 SATAPATIIA-BRAHMANA.


the fire. And the clarified butter being a thunder-
bolt, he now delivers her (the cow) by means of that
thunderbolt, the butter; and by delivering her he
makes her his own.

4. He (the Adhvaryu) offers (with the text, Vag.
S. IV, 22), ‘On Aditi’s head I pour thee;’ for
Aditi being this earth, it is on the head of the latter
that he offers;—‘on the worshipping-ground
of the earth’—for on the worshipping-ground of
the earth he indeed offers; —‘Thou art I d4a’s foot-
print, filled with butter, Hail!’ for Ida being the
cow '!, he indeed offers on the cow's foot-print; and
‘filled with butter, Hail!’ he says, because it indeed
becomes filled with butter when offered upon.

5. Thereupon he takes the wooden sword and
draws lines round (the foot-print): the wooden sword
being a thunderbolt, it is with the thunderbolt that
he draws round it. Thrice he draws round it, so
that he encompasses it on all sides with a threefold
thunderbolt, for no one to trespass upon it.

6. He draws the lines (with the texts), ‘ Rejoice
in us!’ whereby he means to say, ‘ Rejoice in the
sacrificer!’ Having then, by tracing, cut out the
foot-print all round’, he throws it into the pan, with,
‘In us is thy kinship,’ whereby he means to say,
‘In the sacrificer is thy kinship.’

7. He then pours some water on (the place whence
the earth has been removed). Wherever in digging
they hurt her (the earth) and knock off anything


' See the legend, part i, p. 216 seq.; especially I, 8, 1, 7; 20;
and p. 216, note 3.

* According to the comm. on Katy. VII, 6, 20, it would rather
seem that he scratches with the sphya all over the foot-print and
then takes out the loose dust (p4mstin) and throws it into the pan.


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 12. 61


from her,—water being (a means of) soothing,—that
he now soothes by means of water, that he heals by
means of water: that is why he pours water thereon.

8. He then hands (the dust of) the foot-print to
the sacrificer, with, ‘In thee is wealth,/—wealth
meaning cattle, he thereby means to say, ‘in thee
is cattle.’ The sacrificer receives it with, ‘With
me' is wealth,—wealth meaning cattle, he thereby
means to say, ‘with me is cattle.’

9. The Adhvaryu then touches himself (near
the heart), with, ‘May we not be deprived of
prosperity! Thus the Adhvaryu does not exclude
himself from (the possession of) cattle.

10. Thereupon they hand (the dust of) the foot-
print over to the (sacrificer’s) wife. The house being
the wife’s resting-place, he thereby establishes her
in that safe resting-place, the house: for this reason
he hands over the (earth of the) foot-print to the wife.

11. The Neshérz makes her say, ‘ Thine, thine?
is wealth;’ whereupon he causes her to be looked
at by the Soma-cow. Now, Soma is a male, and
the wife is a female, and that Soma-cow becomes
here (exchanged for) Soma: a productive union is
thus effected;—this is why he causes her to be
looked at by the Soma-cow.

12. He causes her to be looked at (while she
pronounces the text, Vag. S. IV, 23), ‘I have
seen eye to eye with the divine intelli-
gence, with the far-seeing Dakshiva: take


1 The Kazva text (Samhita and Br.) has asme instead of me.

2 See St. Petersb. Dict.s.v. totas. The Kamva text explains it
similarly: ‘tvayi tvayi pasavahk.’ The Taitt.S. VI, 1, 8,5 has ‘Tote
rayah’—“ Thine (?) is wealth” thus for the wife, for she, the wife, is
one half of himself.’


62 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ne nncnEEEREEINRRENEEREEEEEEENEERERRE?


not my life from me, neither will I take
thine; may I obtain a hero! in thy sight!’
She thereby asks a blessing: a hero meaning a son,
she thereby means to say, ‘May I obtain a son in
thy sight!’

13. One that is brown, with red-brown eyes, is
(fit to be)a Soma-cow. For when Indra and Vishzu
divided a thousand (cows) into three parts, there
was one left*, and her they caused to propagate
herself in three kinds; and hence, even now, if any
one were to divide a thousand by three, one would
remain over.

14. The brown one, with red-brown eyes, is the
Soma-cow ; and that ruddy one is the Vr‘tra-killer's
(Indya’s) own, whom the king here chooses for him-
self* after winning the battle; and the ruddy one
with reddish-white eyes‘ is the Fathers’ own whom
they slay here for the Fathers.

15. Let, then, the brown one, with red-brown
eyes, be the Soma-cow. And if he be unable to
obtain a brown one with red-brown eyes, let it
be a dark-red® one. And if he be unable to obtain
a dark-red one, let it be a ruddy one, one of the


’ The Kanva text reads ‘may I obtain heroes.’

* This arithmetical feat of Indra and Vishnu is apparently already
referred to in Rig-veda VI, 69, 8, though nothing is said there as to
the difficulty regarding the oddcow. The threefold division seems
to refer to Vishnu’s three steps, by which (as the sun) he measures
the sky; or to the division of the universe into the three worlds (?).
See also Ait. Br. VI, 15.

* Or, drives forth (from the enemy’s stables). The red cows
are compared with the red clouds, which appear after the thunder-
storm (i, e. after king Indra’s battle with Vritra).

* Sayama takes $ syetikshi’ as ‘ black-eyed (krshnalofan4),’

* “Aruna ;’ the Kanva text adds, ‘for that one nearest to it (the
brown one, or Soma-cow proper) in appearance.’


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. 63


Vritra-killer’'s own. But let him nowise turn his
fancy upon a ruddy one with reddish-white eyes.
16, Let it be one that is not impregnated. For
that Soma-cow is in reality Va4é, and this Vaé
(speech) is of unimpaired vigour; and of unimpaired
vigour is one not (yet) impregnated ;: let it therefore
be one not impregnated. Let it be one that is
neither tailless, nor hornless, nor one-eyed, nor ear-
less', nor specially marked, nor seven-hoofed ? ;—for
such a one is uniform, and uniform is this speech.


THE BUYING OF SOMA.


SEcoND BRAHMANA.


1. Having thrown the (earth of the) foot-print
(into the pan), he (the Adhvaryu) washes his hands.
Now as to why he washes his hands ;—clarified
butter being a thunderbolt, and the Soma being
seed, he washes his hands lest* he should injure
the seed, Soma, with the thunderbolt, the ghee.

2. Thereupon he ties the piece of gold to this
(finger*). Now, twofold indeed is this (universe),—
there is no third,—the truth and the untruth: the
gods are the truth and men are the untruth. And
gold having sprung from Agnis seed, he ties the
gold to this (finger), in order that he may touch the
twigs (of the Soma) with the truth, that he may
handle the Soma by means of the truth.


1 ‘Akarna;’ the Kava text has ‘anuparsh/akarw4 (one whose
ears are not perforated ?),’ and instead of ‘alakshité (not specially
marked),’ it reads ‘ asrow& (aslo), not lame.’

2 That is, with one hoof undivided (seven-toed).

* The construction in the original is as usual in the oratio
directa.

* Viz. to the nameless (or ring) finger. KaAty. VII, 6, 27.


64 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

3. He then orders (the sacrificer’s men), ‘ Bring
thou the Soma-cloth! bring thou the Soma-wrapper:!
bring thou the head-band!’ Let some shining (cloth)
be the Soma-cloth ; for this is to be his (king Soma’s’)
garment, and shining indeed is his garment: and
whosoever serves him with a shining (garment), he
truly shines. But he who says, ‘(Bring) anything
whatsoever, he will indeed be anything whatsoever :
let the Soma-cloth, therefore, be some _ splendid
(cloth), and the Soma-wrapper one of any kind.

4. If he can get a head-band, let there be a head-
band; but if he cannot get a head-band, let him cut
off from the Soma-wrapper a piece two or three
fingers long, to serve as the head-band. Either the
Adhvaryu or the Sacrificer takes the Soma-cloth,
and some one or other the Soma-wrapper.

5. Now, in the first place, they pick the king
(Soma). A pitcher of water is placed close to him,
and a Brahman sits beside him*, Thither they (the
priests and sacrificer) now proceed eastward.


6. While they go there, he (the Adhvaryu) makes


* Ido not think ‘asya’ could refer to the sacrificer, in opposition
to ‘etasya’ (Soma); nor can the latter be construed with the following
relative clause ‘sa yo...’ The K&mva text reads, Tad yad eva
sobhanatamam tat somopanahanam syAd, vaso hy asyaitad bhavati;
sa yo haitaé Ahobhanatamam kurute, sobhate haiva sah, &c.

* The Pratiprasthatrs, in the first place, takes the Soma-plants
(from the seller) and puts them on an ox-hide, dyed red and spread
on the ground at the place (in the east of the hall) where the
‘sounding-holes’ will be dug (see III, 5, 4, 1 seq.). The seller of the
Soma, who is to be either of the Kutsa tribe or a Sidra, then picks
the Soma, breaking the plants at the joints. A jar filled with water
is placed in front of the Soma, and a Brahman (or the assistant of
the Brahman, viz. the Brahman4khamsin) sits down by the (right or
south) side of the Soma, Katy. VII, 6, 1-6.


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 8. 65
(the sacrificer) say the text (Vag. S. 1V, 24), ‘Say
thou, for me, unto Soma, “ This is thy gayatrt-
part (bhaga)'!” Say thou, for me, unto Soma,
“Thisis thy trishéubh-part!” Say thou, for me,
unto Soma,“ This is thy gayati-part!" Say
thou, for me, unto Soma, “Obtain thou the su-
preme sovereignty of the names of metres!"’
Now, when he (king Soma) is bought, he is bought
for one (destination*)—for the sovereignty of the
metres, for the supreme sovereignty of the metres;
and when they press him, they slay him: hereby now
he says to him, ‘It is for the sovereignty of the
metres, for the supreme sovereignty of the metres
that I buy thee, not for slaying thee.’ Having gone
there, he sits down (behind the Soma) with his face
towards the east.

7. He touches (the Soma-plants), with, ‘Ours
thou art,—thereby he (Soma), now that he has
come (as a guest), becomes as it were one of his
(the sacrificer's) own (people): for this reason he says,
‘Ours thou art;'—‘ Thy pure (juice) is meet for
the draught,’ for he will indeed take therefrom the
‘pure draught*’.’ ‘Let the pickers pick thee!’
this he says for the sake of completeness.

8. Now some, on noticing any straw or (piece of)
wood (among the Soma-plants), throw it away. But
let him not do this; for—the Soma being the nobility
and the other plants the common people, and the


1 The three parts refer to the three Savanas, at which the
respective metres are used. See IV, 3, 2,7 seq.

2 Bhagam appears to have been lost here, since a play on that
word seems to be intended, which might perhaps be reproduced by
‘lot.’ It is given both at the Kamva text and at IIT, 4, 2, 7.

’ For the Sukra-graha, see IV, 2, 1, 1 seq.


{26] F


65 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


people being the nobleman’s food—it would be just
as if one were to take hold of and pull out some
(food) he has put in his mouth, and throw it away.
Hence let him merely touch it, with, ‘ Let the pickers
pick thee!’ Those pickers of his do indeed pick it.

9. He then spreads the cloth (over the ox-hide),
either twofold or fourfold, with the fringe towards
the east or north. Thereon he metes out the king
(Soma); and because he metes out the king, there-
fore there is a measure,—both the measure among
men and whatever other measure there is.

10. He metes out, with a verse to Savitrz; for
Savityz is the impeller of the gods, and so that
(Soma) becomes for him impelled by Savitrz to the
purchase.

11. He metes out with an atié/Zandas-verse; for
that one, viz. the atiéAandas!, embraces all metres ;
and so that (Soma) is meted out for him by means
of all the metres: therefore he metes out with an
ati£fandas-verse.

12. He metes out, with the text (Vag. S. IV, 25),
‘Unto that divine Savityz within the two
bowls’, the sage, I sing praises, to him of true


* Atid&handas (‘ over-metre’) is the generic name for the metres
which number more than forty-eight syllables: hence it is said to in-
clude all the other metres which consist of fewer syllables. See VIII,
6, 2, 13, where the term is explained by ‘atti-Ahandah (metre-eater).’

* Or, that divine invigorator of the two ‘oni.’ According to the
St. Petersb. Dict., ‘oni’ would seem to refer to two parts of the
Soma-press. Professor Ludwig takes it to mean ‘ press-arm’ and
the ‘arm’ generally, which suits very well some of the passages in
which the word occurs. Here, in the loc. or gen. case, it can
scarcely mean ‘arms’ (though Savitri’s two arms are often referred
to as dispelling the darkness and keeping asunder the spaces, cf.
Rig-veda II, 38, 2; IV, 53, 3; 4; VI, 71,1; 5; VII, 45, 2), but
appirently refers to ‘heaven and earth’ being thus equivalent to


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 15. 67
impulse, the bestower of treasures, the wise
and thoughtful friend ;—he at whose impulse
the resplendent light shone high, the golden-
handed sage hath measured the ether with
his form.’

13. Therewith' he metes out (the Soma) with
all (five fingers), therewith with four, therewith with
three, therewith with two, therewith with one:
therewith with one, therewith with two, therewith
with three, therewith with four, therewith with all
(fingers); having laid (the two hands) together? he
throws (Soma) thereon with the joined open hands.

14. He metes out while bending up and bending
down (the fingers). The reason why he metes out
in bending (the fingers) up and down is that he
thereby makes those fingers of separate existence,
and therefore they are born separate (from each
other); and as to his meting out with all (fingers)
together, these (fingers) are to be born, as it were,
united. This is why he metes out in bending (the
fingers) up and down.

15. And, again, as to his meting out in bending
them up and down,—he thereby renders them of
varied power, and hence these (fingers) are of varied


the two 4amQi (originally the two receptacles or bowls into which
the pressed Soma flows) in Rig-veda III, §5, 20.

1 Viz. with the same formula, repeating it each time. The meting
out of the Soma is done with the fingers of the right hand, first with
all five, and then successively turning in one (beginning with the
thumb), till the little finger remains with which he takes Soma twice,
whereupon he again successively releases the fingers.

* There is some doubt as to whether this refers to the preceding
‘with all (viz. ten fingers);’ or whether he is to take for the tenth
time some Sona with the five fingers of the right hand, and then
once more (without muttering the text) with the joined hands. See
Katy. VII, 7, 18, 19. The text seems to be purposely vague.

ee


68 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


power. That is why he metes out in bending them
up and down.

16. And, again, as to his meting out in bending
them up and down,—he thereby harnesses a virag?
(to ply) thitherwards and hitherwards: going thither-
wards, namely, it conveys the sacrifice to the gods,
and coming hitherwards it assists men. This is why
he metes out in bending (the fingers) up and down.

17. And as to his meting out ten times,—the
virag is of ten syllables, and the Soma is of virag
nature: for this reason he metes out ten times.

18. Having gathered up the ends of the Soma-
cloth, he (the Adhvaryu) ties them together by
means of the head-band, with, ‘For descendants
(I tie) thee;’—for it is indeed for (the purpose of
obtaining) descendants that he buys it (Soma): what
(part of man) here is, as it were, compressed between
the head and the shoulders, that he thereby makes
it to be for him (the sacrificer)*.

19. He then makes a finger-hole in the middle (of
the knot), with the text, ‘Let the descendants
breathe after thee!’ For, in compressing (the
cloth), he, as it were, strangles him (Soma and the
sacrificer) and renders him breathless; hereby now
he emits his breath from inside, and after him breath-
ing the descendants also breathe: for this reason
he says, ‘Let the descendants breathe after thee.’
Thereupon he hands him (Soma) to the Soma-seller.
Now, then, of the bargain.


* The virag (the ‘ shining’ or ‘ruling’ metre) consists of (generally
three or four) padas of ten syllables each: hence it is here con-
nected with the ten metings out of Soma.


* The Soma representing offspring, he gives the bundle a shape
resembling the human body.


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 4. 69


Turirp BrAuMAna.


1. He bargains for the king (Soma); and because
he bargains for the king, therefore any and every-
thing is vendible here. He says, ‘Soma-seller, is
thy king Soma for sale ?’—‘ He is for sale,’ says the
Soma-seller.—'‘I will buy him of thee !’—*‘ Buy him!’
says the Soma-seller.—‘ I will buy him of thee for
one-sixteenth (of the cow).’—‘ King Soma, surely, is
worth more than that!’ says the Soma-seller.—‘ Yea,
King Soma is worth more than that; but great, surely,
is the greatness of the cow,’ says the Adhvaryu.

2. ‘From the cow (comes) fresh milk, from her
boiled milk, from her cream, from her sour curds,
from her sour cream, from her curdled milk, from
her butter, from her ghee, from her clotted curds,
from her whey:

3. I will buy him of thee for one hoof'!’—' King
Soma, surely, is worth more than that!’ says the
Soma-seller.—‘ Yea, King Soma is worth more than
that, but great, surely, is the greatness of the cow,’
replies the Adhvaryu; and, having (each time)
enumerated the same ten virtues, he says, ‘I will
buy him of thee for one foot,’—‘for half (the cow),—
‘for the cow !’—‘ King Soma has been bought!’ says
the Soma-seller, ‘name the kinds!’

4. He (the Adhvaryu) says, ‘Gold is thine, a cloth
is thine, a goat is thine, a milch cow is thine, a pair
of kine is thine, three other (cows) are thine!’ And
because they first bargain and afterwards come to
terms, therefore about any and everything that is
for sale here, people first bargain and afterwards


1 That is, for one-eighth of a cow, each foot consisting of two
hoofs (or toes, sapha).


70 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


come to terms. And the reason why only the
Adhvaryu enumerates the virtues of the cow, and
not the Soma-seller those of the Soma, is that Soma
is already glorified, since Soma is a god. And the
Adhvaryu thereby glorifies the cow, thinking, ‘ See-
ing her virtues he shall buy her!’ This is why only
the Adhvaryu enumerates the virtues of the cow,
and not the Soma-seller those of the Soma.

5. And as to his bargaining five times :—the sacri-
fice being of equal measure with the year, and there
being five seasons in the year, he thus obtains it
(the sacrifice, Soma) in five (divisions), and therefore
he bargains five times.

6. He then makes (the sacrificer) say on the gold?
(Vag. S. IV, 26), ‘Thee, the pure, I buy with
the pure,’ for he indeed buys the pure with the
pure, when (he buys) Soma with gold;—‘the bril-
liant with the brilliant,’ for he indeed buys the
brilliant with the brilliant, when (he buys) Soma
with gold;—‘ the immortal with the immortal,’
for he indeed buys the immortal with the immortal,
when (he buys) Soma with gold.

7. He then tempts* the Soma-seller (with the
gold): ‘In compensation® for thy cow,’ whereby
he means to say, ‘ With the sacrificer (be) thy cow!’


' That is, according to K4ty. VII, 8, 5, in making him touch the
ag The Kava text has,‘ Thereupon he buys him (Soma) with
gold.

* Or, according to the commentaries, ‘he frightens the Soma-
seller (by threatening to take back the money).’

*?Sagme (? compact), explained by the commentators as
meaning the sacrificer. Perhaps it may mean, ‘ one of the parties to
an agreement,’ and hence here the sacrificer as the bargainee.
The Kaava text reads, He then takes it back again (punar Adatte)
with ‘Sagme te god,’ and throws it down with ‘Ours thy gold.’


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 9. 71
He then draws it (the gold) back towards the sacri-
ficer, and throws it down, with, ‘Ours be thy gold!’
whereby he (the sacrificer) takes unto himself the
vital energy, and the Soma-seller gets only the body.
Thereupon the Soma-seller takes it’.

8. He then makes him (the sacrificer) say on the
she-goat, which stands facing the west, ‘ Thou art
the bodily form of fervour,—that she-goat was
indeed produced as the bodily form of fervour, of
Pragapati; hence he says, ‘Thou art the bodily
form of fervour, — Pragdpati’s kind,’ because she
brings forth three times in the year, therefore she is
Pragapatis kind. ‘Thou art bought with the
most excellent animal,’ because she brings forth
three times in the year, she is the most excellent of
animals. ‘May I increase with a thousandfold
increase! Thereby he implores a blessing: a
thousand meaning abundance, he thereby means to
say, ‘May | obtain abundance!’

9. With that (text) he gives the she-goat, with
that he takes the king?; for aga (goat) doubtless


? According to some authorities, the gold is again taken away
forcibly from the Soma-seller by the Adhvaryu, after the sacrificer
has uncovered his head (paragraph 12), and the seller is driven
away by blows with a speckled cane. Katy. VII, 8,27. According
to Apastamba (ib.), he buys off the Soma-cow with another cow, and
then dismisses her to the cow-pen; and if the Soma-seller objects,
he is to be beaten with a speckled cane. The Manava-sitra
merely says, that they are to give the Soma-seller something for
compensation. The whole transaction was evidently a feigned
purchase, symbolising the acquisition of the Soma by the gods
from the Gandharvas. The real bargain was probably concluded
before the sacrificial performance. See also Haug, Ait. Br. Transl.
p. 59, note 2.

* While making over the she-goat to the Soma-seller with his
left hand, he receives the Soma with the right.


72 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


means the same as 4ga (driving thither’), since it is
through her (the she-goat) that he finally drives him
(Soma) thither. It is thus in a mystic sense that
they call her ‘aga.’

10. He takes the king, with the text (Vag. S. IV,
27), ‘Come to us, a friend, bestowing good
friends!’ whereby he means to say, ‘Come to us,
as a kind and propitious one!’ Having pushed
back the garment on the sacrificer’s right thigh, he
lays him (Soma) down thereon, with the text, ‘Seat
thee on Indra’s right thigh,—for he, the sacri-
ficer, is at present Indra’*: therefore he says, ‘Seat
thee on Indra’s right thigh ;—‘ willing on the will-
ing, whereby he means to say, ‘beloved on the
beloved one ;'—‘tender on the tender!’ whereby
he means to say, ‘ propitious on the propitious one.’

11. Thereupon he (the sacrificer) assigns (to the
Gandharvas) the objects constituting the purchase
price for the Soma, with the text, ‘O Svana,
Bhraga, Anghari, Bambhari, Hasta, Suhasta,
Krzsanu! these are your wages for Soma:
keep them! may they not fail you!’ Now
those (Gandharvas) are instead of the hearth-
mounds—these being the names of the hearth-
mounds—it is these very (names) that he thereby
has assigned to them ®.


* Sayama takes 4-ag in the sense of ‘to go to, to come’ (44,
the comer); because the sacrificer through her comes to Soma.

* See part i, introduction, p. xix, note 4.

* ‘For those same Gandharvas, the overseers of the Guardians of
Soma, they are (meant) in lieu of those (? hearth-mounds), for
those are their names: it is to them that he thereby assigns those
(objects constituting the purchase-price), and thus he becomes
debtless towards them,’ K4&nva text. See also part i, p. 183,
note 2.


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 15. 73

12. He now uncovers (his head'); for he who is
consecrated becomes an embryo, and embryos are
enveloped both in the amnion and the outer mem-
brane: him (the sacrificer or sacrifice) he has now
brought forth, and therefore he uncovers himself.
Now it is he (Soma*) that becomes an embryo, and
therefore he is enveloped, since embryos are, as it
were, enveloped both in the amnion and the outer
membrane.

13. He then makes (the sacrificer) say the text
(Vag. S. IV, 28),‘Keep me, O Agni, from evil
ways! let me sharein the right ways.’ Now
he (Soma) approaches him while he is seated, and
when he has come, he rises: thereby he does wrong
and breaks the vow. This, then, is his expiation
of that (transgression), and thus no wrong is thereby
done, and he breaks not the vow: therefore he says,
‘Keep me, O Agni, from evil ways! let me share in
the right ways!’

14. Having then taken the king, he rises, with
the text, ‘With new life, with good life, am I
risen after the immortals;’ for he who rises
after the bought Soma, rises indeed after the im-
mortal: therefore he says, ‘ With new life, with good
life, am I risen after the immortals.’

15. Thereupon he takes the king and goes towards
the car, with the text (Vag. S. IV, 29),‘We have


1 See III, 2,1, 16. His wife does the same.

2 According to a former passage (III, 1, 2, 28), the sacrificer is
supposed to remain in the embryonic state till the pressing of the
Soma. The KAzva recension reads, ‘Sa etam yagiam agiganat sa
esha garbho bhavaty 4 sutyayaA ;’ where ‘agiganat’ seems to mean
‘he has begotten.’ I am not quite certain whether Soma himself is
really implied. See III, 3, 4, 6.


74 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


entered upon the path that leadeth to well-
being, free from danger; whereon he eschew-
eth all haters, and meeteth with good!’

16. Now, once on a time, the gods, while per-
forming sacrifice, were afraid of an attack from the
Asura-Rakshas. They perceived that prayer for
a safe journey; and having warded off the evil
spirits by means of that prayer, they attained well-
being in the safe and foeless shelter of that
prayer. And so does he now ward off the evil
spirits by means of that prayer, and attain well-
being in the safe and foeless shelter of that prayer.
For this reason he says, ‘ We have entered upon the
path that leadeth to well-being, free from danger ;
whereon he escheweth all haters and meeteth with
good,’

17. They carry him thus?, and (afterwards) drive
him about on the cart; whereby they exalt him:
for this reason they carry the seed on their head (to
the field), and bring in (the corn) on the cart.

18. Now the reason why he buys (the Soma) near
water is that—water meaning sap—he thereby buys
Soma sapful; and as to there being gold, he thereby
buys him lustrous; and as to there being a cloth, he
thereby buys him with his skin; and as to there
being a she-goat, he thereby buys him fervid; and
as to there being a milch cow, he thereby buys him
with the milk to be mixed with him; and as to there
being a pair (of kine), he thereby buys him with a
mate.—He should buy him with ten (objects), and


* Compare the slightly different verse, Rig-veda VI, 51, 16.
* The sacrificer carries the bundle of Soma on his hand resting
on his head.


* Viz. the vessel of water mentioned III, 1, #;%.


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 2. 75


not with other than ten, for the virag consists of ten
syllables, and Soma is of virag nature: therefore he
should buy him with ten (objects) and not with other
than ten.


PROCESSION AND ENTRANCE OF KING SOMA.


Fourtu BrAHMANA.


1. In the enclosed space (of the cart)’ he (the
Adhvaryu) lays down the black deer-skin, with the
text (Vag. S. 1V,.36), ‘Thou art Aditi’s skin;’ its
significance is the same (as before)*. Thereon he
places him (Soma), with, ‘Seat thee on Aditi’s
seat!’ for Aditi being this (earth), and she being
indeed a safe resting-place, he thereby places him
on that safe resting-place: therefore he says, ‘ Seat
thee on Aditi’s seat!’

2. He then makes (the sacrificer) say, after touching
(the Soma), ‘The bull hath propped the sky,
the welkin*.’ For, when the gods were spreading
the sacrifice, they were afraid of an attack on the
part of the Asura-Rakshas. Now by what he
says,‘ The bull hath propped the sky, the welkin,


1 The cart stands south of the place where the purchase of Soma
took place, with the shafts towards the east, fitted with all the appli-
ances, and yoked with a pair of oxen. The antelope skin is spread
with the hairy side upwards, and the neck part towards the east.

2 See I, 1,4, 1seq. The K4mva text has: ‘the significance of
this yagus is the same.’

$ In Rig-veda VIII, 42, 1, this verse relates to Varuna. In
adapting it to the present sacrificial requirements, ‘vrishabho
(rishabho, K.) antariksham’ has been substituted for the original
‘asuro visvavedas ;” Soma being meant by ‘the bull.’


76 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


thereby they rendered it (the sacrifice or Soma)
superior to the deadly shaft’.

3. ‘He hath measured the breadth of the
earth;’—thus he gains through him (Soma) these
worlds, for there is no slayer, no deadly shaft for
him by whom these worlds have been gained: there-
fore he says, ‘He hath measured the breadth of the
earth.’

4. ‘Asall-ruler hath he taken his seat over
all things existing (bhuvana) ;'"—thus he gains
through him this All, for there is no slayer, no deadly
shaft for him by whom this All has been gained:
therefore he says, ‘As all-ruler hath he taken his
seat over all things existing.’

5. ‘Verily, all these are Varuza’s ordin-
ances ;'—thereby he makes here everything what-
soever obedient to him, and every one that is re-
fractory: therefore he says, ‘Verily, all these are
Varuza’s ordinances.’

6. Thereupon he wraps (the Soma) up in the
Soma-wrapper, lest the evil spirits should touch him.
For this one doubtless is an embryo, and hidden
(tiras), as it were, are embryos, and hidden also is
that (which is) wrapped up ;—hidden, as it were, are
the gods to men, and hidden is that which is wrapped
up: therefore he wraps him up.

7. Hewraps him up, with the text (Vag. S. 1V, 31;
Rig-veda V, 85, 2), ‘Over the woods he hath
stretched the welkin, for over the woods, over
the tops of the trees, that welkin (or air) is indeed
stretched ;—‘strength (hath he laid) into the
coursers, milk into the kine,’—strength means


‘ Or, superior to (beyond the reach of) the slayer (or the blow),
‘gyayamsam vadhat,’


111 KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 9. 77


manliness and the coursers are the men: he thereby
bestows manliness upon men; and ‘milk into the
kine’ he says, because this milk is indeed contained
in the kine;—‘Into the hearts Varuza (hath
laid) wisdom, into the homesteads’? fire;’ for
into the hearts that wisdom, the swiftness of
thought, has indeed entered; and ‘into the home-
steads fire’ he says, because that fire is in the home-
steads, with the people;—‘Into the heaven hath he
placed the Sun, and Soma upon the rock;’ for
that sun is indeed placed in the heaven; and ‘Soma
on the rock’ he says, because Soma is in the moun-
tains. This is why he says, ‘In the heaven hath he
placed the Sun, and Soma upon the rock.’

8. If there are two deer-skins*, he then puts up
the other by way of a flag*;—and if there is only one,
he cuts off the neck of the deer-skin and puts-it up
by way of a flag ;—with the text (Vag. S. IV, 32),
‘Mount thou the eye of Sidrya, the eye-ball of
Agni, where thou fliest along with the dap-
pled (horses), shining through the wise (Sarya).’
He thereby places Sirya (the sun) in front, thinking,
‘May Sfrya, in front, ward off the evil spirits!’
They now drive (Soma) about on a safe (cart), un-
molested by evil spirits.

g. At the fore-part of the shafts two boards have
been put up: between them the Subrahmamvyéa *


1 ‘Into the waters (apsu),’ Rig-veda.

* See III, 2, 1, 1 seq.

’ He is to fasten it to a staff fixed to the pole of the cart near the
yoke. Katy. VII, 9, 9.

* The Subrahmazy4 is one of the assistants of the Udgatr?
(chanter cf SAma-hymns). He stands on the ground between the
two shafts in front of the yoke; the two planks, according to
Sayama, reaching up to his chin.


78 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


stands and drives. He (Soma), indeed, is too high
for (the driver) mounting beside him, for who is
worthy of mounting beside him? Therefore he
drives while standing between (the boards).

10. He drives with a palasa branch. Now when
Gayatri flew towards Soma', a footless archer
aiming at her while she was carrying him off,
severed one of the feathers (or leaves, parva), either
of Gayatri or of king Soma; and on falling down
it became a parva (palasa) tree; whence its name
parza. ‘May that which was there of the Soma
nature, be here also now!’ so he thinks, and for this
reason he drives with a palasa branch.

11. He urges on the two oxen. If they be
both black, or if either of them be black, then let
him know that it will rain, that Parganya_ will
have abundance of rain that year: such indeed is
science.

12. He (the Adhvaryu) first yokes them, with the
text (Vag. S. IV, 33), ‘Ye oxen, come hither,
patient of the yoke!’ for they are indeed oxen,
and they are patient of the yoke ;—‘ Let your-
selves be yoked, tearless!’ for they are now
being yoked; and tearless means unscathed ;—‘ not
man-slaying, this means ‘not doing wrong ;'—
‘speeding the Brahman,’ for they are indeed
speeders of the Brahman (worship, or the priests) ;—
‘Go ye happily to the sacrificer’s dwelling!’
this he says in order that the evil spirits may not
injure them on the way.

13. Having then gone round to the back (of the


" See I, 7, 1, 1; part i, p. 183. According to Ait. Br. III, 26,
Krisinu the Soma-keeper’s arrow cut off one of the talons of
Gayatri’s left foot, which was turned into a porcupine.


II KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 14. 79


cart) and taken hold of the drag', he says (to the
Hotrz)?,‘ Recite to the bought Soma!’ or,‘—to Soma,
now driven about!’ whichever way he pleases.

14. He then makes (the sacrificer*) say the text
(Vag. S. IV, 34), ‘ Thou art gracious unto me, go
forth, O Lord of the world—,’ for he (Soma) is
indeed gracious to him, wherefore he heeds no other
but him. Even his (Soma’s own) kings‘ come (to


1 Apalamba, a piece of wood fastened to the back part of the
cart to prevent its running backwards when going up-hill; or,
according to others, a rope used for retarding the progress of the
cart in going down-hill. Katy. VII,9,15 comm, The cart stands
with the oxen towards the east; it is then wheeled round towards
the right to the west and driven to the hall, in front of which it is
turned towards the north; the Soma being then taken down. See
Ait. Br. I, 14.

* The duties of the Hotrz, while the Soma-cart is driven to the
hall, are set forth Asv. Srautas. IV, 4: He stands three feet behind
the cart between the two wheel tracks, and throws thrice dust
towards the south with the fore-part of his foot without moving the
heel, with the formula, ‘Thou art wise, thou art intelligent, thou
upholding all things: drive away the danger arising from men!’
Thereupon, after uttering the sound ‘ Him,’ he recites eight verses,
or, the first and last being recited thrice each, in all twelve verses.
Cf. Ait. Br. I, 13. He first remains standing in the same place and
recites thrice the first verse. Then in following the cart he recites
the five following verses. The catt having now stopped, he walks
round it on its right (south) side, and while looking on the Soma
follows it while it is placed on the throne. He then touches it and
completes his recitation by the last two verses. The first of these
two verses is the same which the sacrificer is to mutter (with the
Adhvaryu) while Soma is carried into the hall, and which is given in
paragraph 30.

3 While the Soma is driven to the hall, the sacrificer has to hold
on to it from behind.

‘ ‘Asya raganah sabhagah ;’—Soma seems to be compared here
with an emperor or overlord of kings (adhirago ragiam, V, 4, 2, 2),
who is holding a royal court (ragasabha), or a Darbar, to which the
under-kings are flocking. Sayama seems to interpret the passage


A A


differently : apy asya rag4nas iti sabhaga ity anena rag7%am anatikra-


80 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


him) to attend the assembly, and he is the first to
salute the kings, for he is gracious. This is why he
says, ‘Thou art gracious.’ ‘Go forth, O Lord of the
world,’ he says, because he (Soma) is the lord of
beings. ‘To all dwellings,’ ‘all dwellings’ doubt-
less means the limbs; with reference to his limbs
he says this, ‘May no prowling enemies meet
thee! may no waylayers meet thee! May no
malicious wolves meet thee!’ this he says lest
the evil spirits should meet him on his way.

15. ‘Having become a falcon, fly away!’ he
thereby makes him fly forward after becoming a
falcon; for the evil spirits fly not after what is
fearful: now he, the falcon, forsooth is the most
fearful, the strongest of birds, and as such a one
he makes him (Soma) fly forwards when he says,
‘Having become a falcon, fly away!’

16. Now they (can) only hit his body’. ‘Go to
the sacrificer’s dwelling,—that is the place pre-
pared for us.’ In this there is nothing obscure.


maviyam uktam bhavati; api sambhaévanayam madhuparkam 4ha
‘rigie Aakiryasvasurapitrivyamatulanam feti’ (Asv. Grrhyas. I, 24)
sambhavanfyanam madhye ragfam prathamato nirdisena(!) sre-
sh/hyAvagamAd itarapQgyopalakshakatven4py asya ragéna iti nirdesa
iti mantavyam, ragfa 4gatin svayam prahva eva san pfirvas tebhyah
prig evibhivadati vagvyavahdram karoti. The KAmva text reads:
For he is his gracious lord, therefore he heeds not even a king; and
yet (?) he is the first to salute the kings: thus he is indeed gracious to
him : ‘esha v4 etasya bhadro bhavati, tasm4d esha na raganam kan4-
driyate tho pfirvo ragio’bhivadati tathasyaisha eva bhadro bhavati(!).’

1 Or, they can only shoot after his body, ‘sarfram evanvavahanti.’
The Kanva text has ‘athasyedam sariram evdnas4 ’nv4vahanti,’ i. e.
‘Now they only bring his body with the cart.’ The MS. of Sdyana
also has ‘anv4vahanti,’ but it explains it by ‘syenibhavad updde-
yasya saramsasya badhabhavad dhantaé sariram evanugatya hanti
natmanam,’


III KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAVA,18. 81


17. Thereupon he recites the Subrahmamya litany.
Even as one would say to those for whom he in-
tends to prepare a meal, ‘On such and such a day
I will prepare a meal for you;’ so does he thereby
announce the sacrifice to the gods. ‘Subrah-
mazyém! Subrahmazyém! Subrahmazyém!’
thus he calls, for the Brahman indeed moves the
gods onward. Thrice he says it, because the sacrifice
is threefold.

18. ‘Come, O Indra!’ Indra is the deity of the
sacrifice: therefore he says, ‘Come, O Indra!’
‘Come, O lord of the bay steeds! Ram of
Medhatithi!! Wife of Vvrzshamasva*! Be-
striding buffalo! Lover of Ahalya*!’ Thereby
he wishes him joy in those affairs of his.


* This myth, according to which Indra was supposed to have
assumed the form of a ram and to have carried off \ledhatithi, the
Kanva (or, according to others, to have robbed him of his Soma),
appears to be alluded to in Rig-veda VIII, 2, 40. On the possible
connection of the myth with the Greek one of Ganymede, see
Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p.40. Sdyana does not explain the Subrah-
mamya formula, but remarks, that he has already done so in the
Sama-brahmama (viz. in the Shadvimsa).

2 According to Rig-veda I, 51, 13, Indra became the wife
(men4) of Vrishanasva (Mena); the reason for this transformation
being, according to the Shadvimsa Br., that he was in love with Mena
or Menaké, the daughter of that king (or sage). Ind. Stud. I, p. 38.
The later explanation of the simple statement of che Rik seems of
doubtful authenticity, unless the choice of the word mena for
‘wife’ was intended by the bard as an allusion to the name of the
king’s daughter. It is more likely that the myth alluded to in the
Rik had been forgotten at the time of the Brahmamas, and a new
version of it was invented, based on the ‘mend’ of the original.
Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 383, takes Mena here as a name.

$ This is another of Indra’s love-myths about which very little is
known. Ahalya (Maitreyi) is said to have been the wife of the
Rishi Gautama (or of Kausika, according to Shady. Br:) and to
have been loved by Indra.


[26] G


82 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


19. ‘O:'Kausika!, Brahman, thou who callest
thee Gautama®, Just so has this (formula) been
devised in these days by Aruni, to wit, ‘thou who
callest thee Gautama :’ he may say it, if he choose,
and if he does not choose, he need not attend to
it*, ‘In so and so many days, to the Soma-
feast,’ (stating) in how many days from hence the
pressing is to be.

20. ‘Ye gods and priests, come hither *!’
This he says to the gods and Brahmans, because it
is of these two, the gods and Brahmans, that he
has need.

21. Thereupon the Pratiprasthatvz steps up to
the front of the hall with the victim for Agni and
Soma. Now Agni and Soma have seized him, who
consecrates himself, between their jaws, for that con-
secration-offering above® belongs to Agni and
Vishzu, and Vishzu, forsooth, is no other than


* According to Sayama on Rig-veda I, ro, 11 (where Indra is
called Kausika, ‘favourable to the Kusikas’) Kusika desired to
have a son equal to Indra, whence the latter was born as
Kusika’s son Gathin (GAdhin), Differently Say. ‘on Taitt. Ar. I,
12, 4.

* The Shady. Br. (Ind. Stud. I, p. 38) explains this as follows: —The
Gods and Asuras were at war with each other. Gotama was per-
forming austerities between them. Indra went up to him and said,
‘Go out as our spy.’ ‘I cannot,’ he replied. ‘Then I will go in
your form.’ ‘As thou thinkest fit!’ And because he (Indra) went
about in the form of Gotama, passing himself off as Gotama, there-
fore he says, ‘thou who callest thee Gotama.’

* The Kanva text also states that this last portion of the formula
was devised by Aruzi, but nothing is said as to its use being
optional.

* For variations of this concluding part of the Subrahmanyé in
different schools, see Laty. Sr. I, 3, 3 seq.; also notes to III, 9, 3, 10;
IV, 9, 6, 25; Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 383.

* See III, 1, 3, 1 seq.


Ill KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 25. 83
Soma, and the offering is he himself who is
consecrated: thus they have seized him between
their jaws; and by this victim he now redeems
himself !.

22. Now, some take a firebrand from the Aha-
vaniya, saying, ‘Here is Agni, and here is Soma:
with these two thus being together we will redeem
ourselves. But let him not do this; for whereso-
ever these two are, there they are indeed together.

23. It (the victim) is two-coloured, because it
belongs to two deities: ‘For the sake of concord
between the two deities let it be a black-spotted
(buck)!’ they say; ‘for that is most like those two
(gods). If he be unable to obtain a black-spotted
buck, it may be a red-spotted one.

24. Thereon he makes (the sacrificer) say (Vag.
S. IV, 35; Rig-veda X, 37, 1), ‘Homage be to
the eye of Mitra and Varuza! perform ye dili-
gently this holy service to the god! singye
unto the far-seeing, god-born light, to Sarya,
thesonofthesky!’ Thereby he renders homage to
it (the victim) and makes it a token of the covenant.

25. The Adhvaryu then removes the Soma-
wrapper. With(V4yg. S.1V, 36)‘Thou art Varuzas
stay, he props (the cart) with the prop. With ‘Ye
two are the rest of Varuza’s stay, he pulls out
the two wedges. The reason why he says, ‘Ye two
are the rest of Varusa's stay?, is that he, the bought
Soma, now indeed is of Varuza*.


1 « By this victim he redeems himself, the victim, and with that
redeemed self, now his own, he sacrifices.’ Kazva rec.

2 Skambha visargani (‘support or pin of the prop’) is taken by
SAyana in the sense of ‘offshoot of the prop’ or ‘that which is let
go (srish/a) by the prop.’

3 J.e. belongs to Varuma or is of Varuna’s nature (varuzyo

G 2


84 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


26, Thereupon four men take up the king’s throne;
two men, it is true, take it up for the human king, but
four take up this for him who rules over every-
thing here.

27. It is of udumbara wood—udumbara meaning
sap and food—for (the sacrificer’s) obtainment of
sap and food: therefore it is of udumbara wood.

28. It reaches up to his navel, for it is there that
the food settles, and Soma is food: therefore it
reaches up to his navel. Moreover, there is the seat
of the seed, and Soma is seed: therefore it reaches
up to his navel.

29, He (the Adhvaryu) touches it with, ‘Thou
art the rightful seat (vztasadani) of Varuza!’
He then spreads on it the black deerskin with,
‘Thou art the rightful seat (r/tasadanam) of
Varuza!’ and places him (Soma) thereon with,
‘Seat thee on the rightful seat of Varuza!’
The reason why he says, ‘ Seat thee on the rightful
seat of Varuza,’ is that he (Soma) is now of Varuma’s
nature,

30. Thereupon he makes him (king Soma) enter
the hall; and in making him enter, he causes (the
sacrificer) to say (Vag. S.1V, 37; Rig-veda I, 91,
19), ‘Whatsoever powers of thine they wor-
ship with offering, may they all encompass
the sacrifice’! Go forth to our dwellings, O
Soma, prospering our homes, ever helpful,
bestowing abundance of men, not slaying our
ee Ae alt ki lil sti ea Bn


bhavati), Sdyana (if the MS. is correct) takes it in the sense of
‘is Varuna himself,’ etasmin kritavasare somo varuno bhavati.

* Or, ‘may the sacrifice encompass them all,’ if, with Grassmann
and Ludwig, we read ‘ yagfah’ instead of yagiam.’ This verse is
likewise recited (?at the same time) by the Hotrz, see p. 79, note 2.


II KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 3. 85
men!’ dwellings meaning houses, he thereby means
to say, ‘Go forth to our houses, kind, propitious,
not doing evil.’

31. Some now pour out a vessel of water beside
him, saying that this would be as one would bring
water for a king that has come to him. But let him
not do this, for they (who do this) do at the sacrifice
what is human, and inauspicious for the sacrifice
forsooth is that which is human: let him therefore
not pour out water, lest he should do at the sacrifice
what is inauspicious.


THE ATIZAYA, or GUEST-OFFERING
(HOSPITABLE RECEPTION GIVEN TO KING SOMA).


Fourtu ApDHYAYA, First BRAHMANA,


1. Verily, the guest-offering is the head of the
sacrifice, and the Prayamiya and Udayantya are its
arms. But the arms are on both sides of the head :
therefore those two oblations, the Prayamiya and
Udayantya, are on both sides of the guest-offering.

2. Now as to why it is called ‘guest-offering.’
He, the purchased Soma, truly comes as_ his
(the sacrificer’s) guest,—to him (is offered) that
(hospitable reception): even as for a king or a Brah-
man one would cook a large ox or a large he-goat—
for that is human (fare offered to a guest), and the
oblation is that of the gods—so he prepares for him
that guest-offering.

3. Here now they say, ‘Let him first walk past
(Soma) and take out (the material for offering) !’
For (they argue) where people do not show respect


86 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


to a worthy person (arhant) who has come to them,
he becomes angry,—and in this way he (Soma) ts
indeed honoured.

4. Then only one (of the oxen) is to be unyoked,
and the other to be left unyoked!; and thereupon he
is to take out (the material for offering): for (they
argue) in that one of them is unyoked, thereby he
(Soma) has arrived; and in that the other is left
unyoked, thereby he is honoured.

5. Let him, however, not do this; but let him
take out (the material for offering) only after un-
yoking (both oxen) and after making (Soma) enter
(the hall); for the ways of men are in accordance
with those of the gods. And accordingly, in human
practice, so long as (a guest) has not unyoked,
people do not bring water to him and show him no
honour, for so long he has not yet arrived; but
when he has unyoked, then they bring him water
and show him honour, for then he has indeed
arrived: let him therefore take out (the material
for offering) only after unyoking and after making
(Soma) enter (the hall).

6. Let him take it out with all speed, for thus he
(Soma) is honoured. The housewife holds on to it
from behind*; for the sacrificer holds on to him
(Soma), while he is driven around, and here his wife
does so. Thus they enclose him on the two sides
by a (married) couple: and, indeed, wherever a


' This is the practice recognised by the Taittirtyas (T.S. VI, 2,
1,1), on the ground that, if one were to unyoke both oxen, he
would interrupt the sacrifice ; and if he were to leave them both
unyoked, it would be as if a hospitable reception were given to one
who has not actually arrived.


* That is, by touching the Adhvaryu while he takes out the sacri-
ficial food. See p. 79, note 3.


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAyA, I BRAHMANA, IO. 87


worthy person comes, there all the inmates of the
house bestir themselves, for thus he is honoured.

7. Let him take out (the material) with a different
formula from that wherewith (one takes out) any
other oblations', since, when he (Soma) is bought,
he is bought for one special destination,—for the
sovereignty of the metres, for the supreme sove-
reignty of the metres. The metres act as attendants
about him; even as the non-royal king-makers, the
heralds and headmen, (attend upon) the king, so do
the metres act as attendants about him (Soma).

8. In no wise, then, is it befitting that he should
take out any (material for offering) solely ‘for the
metres ?;’ for whenever people cook food for some
worthy person’, then the attendants about him, the
non-royal king-makers, the heralds and headmen,
have their share (of the food) assigned to them after
(or along with their master): hence, when he takes
out that (oblation to Soma), let him assign the
metres a share in it along with (the deity).

9. He takes it out, with the text (Vag. S. V, 1),
‘Thou art Agni’s body,—thee (I take) for
Vishzu!’ the Gayatri is Agni: to Gayatri he thus
assigns her share,

10.‘Thou art Soma’s body,—thee for
Vishzu!’ Soma is the nobility, and the Trish¢ubh


1 For the ordinary formula with which material for offering is
taken out at an ishA, ‘At the impulse of the divine Savitri, I take
thee with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pdshan, thee
well-pleasing to —!’ see I, 1, 2, 17.

2 According to Taitt. S. VI, 2, 1, the five portions are taken out
for the metres Gayatri, Trish/ubh, Gagati, Anush/ubh, and Gayatri,
with the texts, ‘Thou art Agni’s hospitable feast, for Vishnu (I take)
thee,’ &c.

* « Arhant’ seems rather to mean ‘ruler’ here,


88 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


aepaerst escent on SND See OANA LOSI AP A A
is the nobility: to Trish¢ubh he thus assigns her
share.

11. ‘Thou art the guest’s hospitable enter-
tainment!,—thee for Vishzu! This is his (Soma’s)
special share: as there is a special share for a chief,
so is this his special share apart from the metres.

12. ‘Thee for the Soma- -bearing falcon! thee
for Vishnu!’ thereby he assigns to Gayatri her
share. Because G4yatri, in the form of a falcon,
carried off Soma from the sky, therefore she is the
Soma-bearing falcon: in virtue of that heroic deed
he now assigns to her a second share.

13. ‘Thee for Agni, the bestower of pros-
perity! thee for Vishzu!’ Prosperity means
cattle, and the Gagati (the moving, living one)
means cattle: to Gagati he thereby assigns her share.

14. Now as to his taking five times ;—the sa-
crifice is of equal measure with the year, and five
seasons there are in the year: the latter he gains in
five (divisions);—for this reason he takes five times.
And as to his taking it with ‘For Vishzu (I take)
thee! for Vishzu thee!’ it is because he who takes
out (material) for the sacrifice, takes it for Vishzu.

15. It is a sacrificial.cake on nine potsherds ;—for
the guest-offering is the head of the sacrifice, and
the Gayatri consists of nine syllables?: eight (syl-
lables) are those he recites and the sacred syllable?
is the ninth; and the GAyatrti is the fore-part of the


* Atither Atithyam, ‘the guest’s guest-meal.’

* According to Taitt. S. VI, 2, 1, 4, it is because the head has
nine seams, ‘navadha siro vishy(Qtam.’

> The final syllable of the prayers recited in offering is pro-
tracted and nasalized, a final ‘a’ becoming 6m,—this drawing out
of the syllable is called ‘ pranava.’


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 18, 89


sacrifice 1, and so is that (cake) the fore-part of the
sacrifice: therefore it is a cake on nine potsherds.

16. The enclosing-sticks are of karshmarya
wood (Gmelina Arborea’), for the gods, once upon a
time, perceived that one, the karshmarya, to be the
Rakshas-killer among trees. Now, the guest-offer-
ing being the head of the sacrifice, the enclosing-
sticks are of karshmarya wood, in order that the evil
spirits may not injure the head of the sacrifice.

17. The prastara-bunch® is of asvavala-grass
(Saccharum Spontaneum). For, once upon a time,
the sacrifice escaped from the gods. It became a
horse (asva) and sped away from them. The gods,
rushing after it, took hold of its tail (vala) and tore
it out; and having torn it out, they threw it down
in a lump, and what had been the hairs of the
horse's tail then grew up as those plants (of asva-
vala-grass). Now the guest-offering is the head of
the sacrifice, and the tail is the hind-part (of animals):
hence by the prastara being of asvavala-grass he
encompasses the sacrifice on both sides.

18. There are two vidhvztis* of sugar-cane, lest


1 Because the Gayatri metre is connected with the pratafsavana
or morning pressing. See IV, 2, 5, 20 seq.; Ait. Br. III, 27 seq.

2 See I, 3, 3, 19-20, where the approved kinds of wood for the
paridhis at an ish/i are enumerated.

’ For the prastara, or bunch of reed-grass, representing the
sacrificer, see I, 3, 3, 5 seq.; 8, 3,11 seq. The asvavala (horse-
tail) grass (generally called kasa) is said to resemble horse-hair, and
is used for twine, mats, thatch, &c. Sir H. M. Elliot, ‘ Races of the
N. W. Prov.,’ IJ, pp. 371, 372, describes it as growing from three to
fifteen feet high, and flowering in great profusion after the rains ;
the base of the flowers being surrounded with a bright silvery fleece,
which whitens the neighbouring fields so much as frequently to
resemble a fall of snow.

‘ For the vidhrrti or stalks laid across the barhis (sacrificial


go SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.,


the barhis and the prastara should become mixed
up together. Having then purified the ghee’, he
takes all the butter-portions in four ladlings®, for at
this (sacrifice) there are no after-offerings.

19. When he has placed the sacrificial dishes (on
the altar)*, he churns the fire. For the guest-offer-
ing is the head of the sacrifice; and in churning
(the fire) they produce that (sacrifice); and one who
is born is born with the head first: hence he thereby
makes the sacrifice to be produced with the head
first. T'urther, Agni means all the gods, since
offering is made in the fire to all gods; and the
guest-offering is the head of the sacrifice: hence,
through all the deities, he secures success to the
sacrifice from the very head (beginning). This is
why he churns the fire ¢.

20. He takes the bottom piece of wood5, with
the text (Vag. S. V, 2),‘ Thou art the birth-place
of Agni;’ for it is thereon that Agni is produced:
hence he says, ‘ Thou art the birth-place of Agni.’

21. Thereon he lays two sprouts of a kusa stalk
(with the tops towards the east), with, ‘Ye are


grass covering the altar), to keep the prastara separate from the
latter when laid upon it, see I, 3, 4, 10. As no special mention is
made of the barhis, the same material has to be used for it as at the
model ishAi (New and Full-moon sacrifice), viz. Kusa grass (Poa
Cynosuroides),

* See I, 3, 1, 22-23. * See I, 3, 2, 8-9.

* See I, 3, 4, 14:

* On the production of the fire by ‘churning,’ see part i, p. 294,
note 3.

* The adhimanthana sakala is a chip of wood used for the
lower churning-stick (adhardrani), wherein the upper churning-stick
is drilled, to rest upon. It is laid down on the altar-grass (barhis)
from south to north. According to Sayama it is a chip obtained in
rough-hewing the sacrificial stake.


Ill KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 23. 91


males';’ thereby these two are as two (sons) born
together here from a woman.

22. Thereon he lays the lower churning-stick
(with the top to the north), with, ‘Thou art Ur-
vasi!’ He then touches the (ghee in the) ghee-
pan with the upper churning-stick, with,‘ Thou art
Ayu,’ he puts it down (on the lower arazi) with,
‘Thou art Purdravas. For Urvast was a
nymph, and Purdravas was her husband; and the
(child) which sprung from that union was Ayu?: in
like manner does he now produce the sacrifice from
that union. Thereupon he says (to the Hotr?), ‘ Re-
cite to Agni, as he is churned ®!’

23. He churns, with the texts, ‘With the Gayatri
metre I churn thee!—With the Trishéubh
metre I churn thee!—With the Gagati metre
I churn thee!’ For it is with the metres that he
churns him (Agni, the fire); the metres he recites to
him when he is churned, whereby he attaches the
metres to the sacrifice, even as the rays (are attached)
to yonder sun.—‘ Recite to the born one!’ he says,


1 In this sense ‘vrishamau’ is taken by Mahidhara (sektarau,
from vrzshan), Sayama, and apparently also by our author. Per-
haps it means ‘testicles’ (vv7shava) in the text. See III, 6, 3, 10;
and parti, p. 389, note 3.

2 The myth of Purfiravas and Urvast is given at length XJ, 5, 1,
1-17. Compare also Max Miiller, Chips, vol. ii, p. 102 seq.; A. Kuhn,
Herabkunft des Feuers, p. 78 seq.

8 The verses which the Hotr# has to recite are (a) one to Savity?’
(the Vivifier, viz. Rig-veda I, 24, 3); (b) to Heaven and Earth (LV,
56, 1); (c) atriplet to Agni (VI, 16, 13-15). If fire has not appeared
by this time, he recites the so-called Rakshas-killing verses (X, 118),
repeating them until fire has been produced. See Ait. Br. I, 17;
Asv. Sr. II, 16.


92 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


when he (Agni) is produced’; and ‘To him who is
thrown?!’ when he throws him (on the old Aha-
vaniya fire).

24. He throws (the fire on the hearth), with the
text (Vag. S. V, 3), ‘For our sake be ye two (fires)
friendly to one another, of one mind, un-
blemished! Injure not the sacrifice, nor the
lord of the sacrifice! be gracious unto us this
day, ye knowers of beings!’ He thus bespeaks
peacefulness between them, that they may not injure
each other.

25. He then takes out some clarified butter with
the dipping-spoon, and pours it on the fire, with the
text (Vag. S. V, 4), ‘Agni resorteth to Agni, he
the son of the seers that shieldeth us from
curses: graciously offer thou for us now with
good offering, never withholding the oblation
from the gods, Hail!’ For the purpose of offering
they have produced him, and by this offering he has
now gratified him: that is why he thus makes
offering unto him,

26. It (the guest-offering) ends with the IdA; no
after-offerings are performed. For the guest-offer-
ing is the head of the sacrifice, and the head is the
fore-part: he thus fits him up as the head of the sacri-
fice. But were he to perform the after-offerings,
it would be as if, by reversing, he were to put the
feet in the place of the head. Hence it ends with
the Ida, and no after-offerings are performed.


' The Hotr/ recites the two verses, Rig-veda I, 74,33 VI, 16, 40.

* The verb is ‘ pra-hr?,’ which is also the common term for the
hurling of the thunderbolt. The six verses, recited by the Hotrz,
are Rig-veda VI, 16, 41-42; I, 12, 6; VIII, 43, 14; VIII, 43, 8;
I, 164, 50.


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 3. 93


THE TANUNAPTRA, or COVENANT OF
TANUNAPAT?.


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1, When the gods had performed the guest-
offering, discord befell them. They separated into
four different parties, unwilling to yield to each
other’s excellence,—Agni with the Vasus, Soma with
the Rudras, Varuza with the Adityas, and Indra
with the Maruts. Brzhaspati with the All-gods,
say some, but, indeed, those who separated into
four parties were ‘all the gods.’ When they were
separated, the Asura-Rakshas came after them and
entered between them.

2. They became aware of it,—‘ Forsooth, we are
in an evil plight, the Asura-Rakshas have come in
between us: we shall fall a prey to our enemies.
Let us come to an agreement and yield to the excel-
lence of one of us!’ They yielded to the excellence
of Indra; wherefore it is said, ‘Indra is all the
deities, the gods have Indra for their chief.’

3. For this reason let not kinsmen fall out, for
any (enemy) of theirs, be he ever so far away, steps
in between them; they do what pleases their
enemies and fall a prey to their enemies: therefore
let them not fall out. For he who, knowing this,
quarrels not, does what displeases his enemies and


1 The Tanfnaptra is a solemn covenant made by the sacrificer
and his priests, in the name of TanQnapat, and while touching
sacrificial butter; thereby pledging themselves not to injure each
other.

* Thus Ait. Br. I, 24, where moreover the Rudras are assigned
to Indra, (the Vasus to Agni, and the Adityas to Varuma.)


94 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


falls not a prey to his enemies: let him therefore not
quarrel.

4. They said, ‘ Well then, let us contrive so that
this (concord) of ours shall be for ever im-
perishable !’

5. The gods laid down together! their favourite
forms and desirable powers ?, one after another, and
said, ‘Thereby he shall be away from us, he shall be
scattered to the winds, whosoever shall transgress
this (covenant) of ours!’— Whose (is it) as wit-
ness?’ —‘ Tandnapat, the mighty!’— Now the
mighty Tandnapat indeed is yonder blowing (wind),
he is the witness of living beings, entering thus as
the in-breathing and out-breathing.

6. Wherefore they say, ‘The gods know the mind
of man.’ In his mind he proposes; it passes on to
the breath, and the breath to the wind, and the wind
tells the gods what the mind of man is.

7. Hénce it was in regard to this what was said
by the A7zshi, ‘In his mind he proposeth, and it
goeth on to the wind‘; and the wind telleth the
gods what thy mind is, O man.’

8. The gods laid down together their favourite
forms and desirable powers, and said, ‘ Thereby he
shall be away from us, he shall be scattered to the
winds, whosoever shall transgress this (covenant) of
ours!’ And even now the gods do not transgress
that (covenant), for how would they fare, were they


1 Literally, ‘cut off together, part by part.’

? Or, attributes, resources, ‘ dh4mAni.’

* Kasya upadrash/ur; the Kaava text has, Tasya nad ka upa-
drash/a, ‘who (shall be) the witness of this (covenant) of ours?’


* Cp. Atharva-veda XII, 4,31, ‘In his mind he proposes and it
goes forth to the gods.’


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAIIMANA, II. 95


to transgress it ?—they would speak untruth, and
verily there is one law which the gods do keep,
namely, the truth. It is through this that their
conquest, their glory is unassailable: and so, for-
sooth, is his conquest, his glory unassailable who-
soever, knowing this, speaks the truth. Now, the
TAndnaptra is really that same (covenant of
the gods).

9. The gods laid down together their favourite
forms and desirable powers. Now it is by taking
portions of butter that they (the priests) lay down
together the desirable forms and favourite powers.
Let him, then, not covenant with any one and every
one, lest his favourite forms and desirable powers
should be mixed up (with those of others). But let
him not deceive one with whom he makes a cove-
nant ; for thus it is said, ‘ Let there be no deceiving
of him with whom one has made the covenant of
Tandinapat.’

10. In the first place he takes (butter) there-
from!, with the text (Vag. Bay; 5), ‘For him
that rushes onward, for him that rushes
about, I take thee.’ He that blows yonder (the
wind) does indeed rush onward and rush about;
and it is for him that he takes (the butter): there-
fore he says, ‘for him that rushes onward, for him
that rushes about, I take thee.’

11.‘For Tanfnapat, the mighty. The
mighty Tantnapat truly is yonder blowing (wind),
and it is for him that he takes (the butter): there-
fore he says, ‘For Tandnapat, the mighty.’


1 Viz. the butter in the dhruv4 spoon, pouring it into the ‘ vrata-
pradana,’ or vessel in which the fast-milk is handed to the
sacrificer.


96 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


12. ‘For the powerful, the most strong!’ He
is indeed powerful and most strong; and for him he
takes it: therefore he says,‘ For the powerful, the
most strong.’

13. They then touch it at the same time. Now
the gods were fully agreed on this point, ‘ Verily, so
and thus shall he of us fare who shall transgress this
(covenant) of ours!’ And so are these (priests and
sacrificer) now agreed on this,—‘Verily, so and thus
shall he of us fare who shall transgress this (cove-
nant) of ours!’

14. They touch it simultaneously, with the text,
‘Thou art the strength of the gods, unassailed
and unassailable; for the gods were indeed un-
assailed and unassailable while being together, and
speaking with one accord and holding together.
‘The strength of the gods’ doubtless means the
favourite forms and desirable powers of the gods,
‘uncursed, curse-averting, uncursable,’ for the
gods have overcome every curse;— ‘May I
straightway go to the truth!’ whereby he means
to say, ‘May I| speak the truth, may I not transgress
this (covenant) ;’—' Establish me in welfare!’ for
in welfare the gods indeed established themselves
by speaking the truth, by performing the truth:
therefore he says, ‘ Establish me in welfare!’

15. Now those favourite forms and desirable
powers which the gods put together, they then
deposited in Indra!;— Indra verily is he that burns
yonder (the sun); but he indeed did not burn in the
beginning, but as now everything else is dark, so
was he then; and it is by that very energy (derived


-_-


* According to Ait. Br. I, 24 the gods deposited their forms in
the house of king Varuna.


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 2. 97


from those divine objects) that he burns. Hence,
if many persons perform the consecration’, let it (the
Tandnaptra butter), after pouring the fast-milk to it,
be handed only to the master of the house, since he,
among them, is the representative of Indra. And if
he perform the consecration by means of an (offering)
with a dakshivza, let them hand it (the butter) to the
sacrificer, after pouring the fast-milk to it, for thus
it is said,—‘ The Sacrificer is Indra.’

16. Now what favourite forms and desirable
powers the gods then laid together, all that was
wrought together and became the Saman: where-
fore they say, ‘The Sdman is the truth, the SAaman
is born of the gods.’


THE AVANTARADIKSHA, or INTERMEDIARY
CONSECRATION.


THIRD BRAHMANA.


1. When the gods had performed the guest-
offering, discord arose between them. They allayed
it by means of the TAndnaptra (oaths). They
desired an atonement for having spoken evil to one
another; for they had appointed no other consecra-
tion-ceremony till the expiatory bath. They per-
ceived this intermediate consecration?.

2. By means of fire they enveloped (the body) with
askin. Now, fire being fervour, and the consecration
being fervour, they thereby underwent an interme-
diate consecration ; and because they underwent that


1 That is, in a Sattra or sacrificial session, where all the officiating
priests are consecrated and ‘ sacrificers ;’ the Yagam4na proper being
styled Grzhapati (master of the house). See IV, 6, 8, 1 seq.

* The Avantaradiksha extends to the end of the sixth Brahmana.


[26] H


98 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


intermediate consecration, therefore this in terme-
diary consecration (avantaradikshé, is performed).
They turned in their fingers more tightly and drew!
their zone tighter, whereby they (again) put round
them what had been put round them before ?;—and so
does he thereby make atonement for what heretofore
he has done injurious to the vow, for what he has
spoken injurious to the vow.

3. By means of the fire they (the priests) envelop
him with a skin. Now, fire being fervour, and the
consecration being fervour, he thereby undergoes an
intermediate consecration. He turns in his fingers
more tightly and draws the zone tighter, whereby he
(again) puts round himself what was put round him
before. Moreover, it was offspring the gods thereby
obtained.

4. By means of Agni (fire) they enveloped (the
body) with a skin. Now, Agni being the causer of
sexual union, the progenitor, they thereby obtained
offspring. They turned in their fingers more tightly
and drew their zone tighter, whereby they produced
offspring for themselves. And in like manner does
he (the sacrificer) thereby obtain offspring.

5. By means of Agni he envelops himself with a
skin. Now, Agni being the causer of sexual union,
the progenitor, he thereby ® obtains offspring. He
turns in his fingers more tightly and draws his zone
tighter, whereby he produces offspring for himself.

6. Now, while the gods were consecrated, whichever
of them fetched fire-wood or uttered his appointed
texts, him the Asura-Rakshas endeavoured to


: Our text has no verb; the KAnva recension reads ‘auhanta.’
. Viz. the diksh4, as symbolised by the zone (or the skin).
° Viz. through Agni, or the Avantaradiksha,


II] KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 9. 99


strike—the one by (assuming) the form of this one,
and the other by that of another. They came to-
gether, upbraiding one another, saying, ‘See, what
thou hast done to me! see, how thou hast struck
me!’ But Agni alone did not speak thus to any
one, nor did any one speak thus to Agni.

7. They said, ‘Have they spoken thus to thee
also, Agni?’ He said, ‘Verily, I have not spoken
to any one, nor has any one spoken to me.’

8. They became aware,—' He verily is the greatest
repeller of the Rakshas among us; let us be like him :
thereby we shall escape from the Rakshas, thereby
we shall attain to the heavenly world.’ They accord-
ingly became like Agni, and thereby escaped from
the Rakshasand attained to the heavenly world. And
in like manner does this one now become like Agni,
and thereby escape from the Rakshas and attain to
the heavenly world. It is in putting a kindling-stick
on (the Ahavaniya fire’) that he enters upon the
Avantaradiksha.

9. He puts on the kindling-stick, with the text
(Vag. S. V, 6), ‘O Agni, protéctor of vows; on
thee, O protector of vows—’ for Agni is lord of
vows to the gods; wherefore he says, ‘O Agni,
protector of vows, on thee, O protector of vows —’
‘what bodily form® there is of thine, (may that be)
here on me; and what bodily form there is of
mine, (may that be) on thee! May my vows be
bound up with thine, O lord of vows!’ whereby
he envelops himself with the skin by means of Agni.
‘May the lord of consecration approve my


1 The sacrificer’s wife performs silently on and near the Garha-
patya fire the same ceremonies as her husband.
2 Tanu, see p. 10, note 4.
Wi’ 2


100 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


consecration, and the lord of penancé my pen-
ance!’ Thereby he enters upon the intermediary
consecration. More closely he turns in his fingers,
and closer he draws the zone; whereby he (again)
puts round himself what was put round him before.

10. They then attend on him with the boiling
lustral water (madanti) ;—fire is heat, and the lustral
water is heat: that is why they attend on him with
the lustral water.

11. Having touched the lustral water, they (the
priests and sacrificer) therewith strengthen! the
king (Soma). The reason why, after touching the
lustral water, they strengthen the king is this ;—ghee
is a thunderbolt, and Soma is seed: hence they
strengthen the king after touching the lustral water,
lest they should injure the seed, Soma, by the thun-
derbolt, the ghee.

12. Here now they say, ‘ Him, Soma, for whom that
strengthening (meal), the guest-offering, is prepared,
they ought first to strengthen, and then (ought to
be performed) the Avantaradiksha, and thereupon
the Tanfnaptra.’ But let him not do this. For such
indeed was the course of the sacrificial performance :
discord arose between them (the gods) thereat ; they
attained to their former tranquillity ; then the Avan-
taradiksha and finally the strengthening.

13. Then as to why they strengthen (Soma).
Soma is a god, since Soma (the moon) is in the sky.
‘Soma, forsooth, was Vritra ; his body is the same as
the mountains and rocks: thereon grows that plant
called Usana,—so said Svetaketu AuddAlaki;

* On the ‘ 4pyayana’ (4-py ai, ‘to swell, make swell,’ to strengthen,
become strong, increase, fill), see part i, p. 178, note 2. According


to Apastamba and other authorities, they tie a piece of gold to their
nameless (gold) finger, and touch the Soma with their moist bands.


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 18, IOI


‘they fetch it hither and press it; and by means of
the consecration and the U pasads, by the Tandnaptra
and the strengthening they make it into Soma.’ And
in like manner does he now make it into Soma by
means of the consecration and the Upasads, by the
Tandnaptra and the strengthening.

14. ‘It is bees’ honey,’ they say; for bees’ honey
means the sacrifice, and the bees that make the
honey are no other than the officiating priests; and
in like manner as the working-bees make the honey
increase, so do they (the priests) thereby strengthen
the sacrifice.

15. By means of the sacrifice the gods gained
that supreme authority which they now wield.
They spake, ‘How can this (world) of ours be
made unattainable to men?’ Having sipped the
sap of the sacrifice, as bees would suck out honey,
and having drained the sacrifice and scattered it
by means of the sacrificial post, they disappeared ;
and because they scattered (yopaya) therewith,
therefore it is called ydpa (post).

16. Now this was heard by the Avshis. They
collected the sacrifice; and as that sacrifice was col-
lected, so does he collect the sacrifice who is con-
secrated. The sacrifice is speech: hence he thereby
again supplies what part of the sacrifice here has
been sucked out and drained.

17. They strengthen (the Soma), being six? ;—
there are six seasons: having become the seasons,
they strengthen it?.

18. They strengthen him with (Vag. S. V, 7),


1 Viz. the five priests —Brahman, Udgitr:, Hotrs, Adhvaryu, and
Agnidnra—and the sacrificer.
2 That is, as the seasons make the Soma-plant grow.


102 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.,


‘Let stalk after stalk of thine wax strong, O
divine Soma!’ whereby they strengthen (increase)
stalk after stalk of his ;—‘for Indra, the winner of
the ekadhanas';’ Indra indeed is the deity of the
sacrifice: therefore he says, ‘For Indra, the winner
(or bestower) of the ekadhanas.’ For verily every one
of those stalks swells to fill a hundred or ten? eka-
dhana cups for the several gods. ‘May Indra wax
strong for thee, and wax thou strong for Indra!’
for Indra is the deity of the sacrifice: he thus strength-
ens him who is the deity of the sacrifice. By saying,
‘Wax thou strong for Indra,’ he instils that invigor-
ating draught into him. ‘Strengthen us friends
with gain and understanding!’ ‘With gain’ he
says with reference to what he gains; and ‘with
understanding’ he says with reference to what he
recites. ‘Mayest thou thrive, O divine Soma,
and may I attain to the Soma-feast!’ They,
the priests and sacrificer, have one prayer in
common, ‘ May we reach the end of the sacrifice!’
hence he thereby means to say,‘ May I reach the end
of the sacrifice!’

19. Thereupon they make amends on the pras-
tara. For the sacrifice requires a northward attend-


' Ekadhana-vid; the meaning of ‘ekadhana’ (apparently ‘ one
prize’ or ‘ one part of the booty or goods’) in this compound is not
clear. The author of the Brahmana seems to take it in its technical
sense, viz. the ekadhana pitchers in which the ekadhana water, used
for mixing with the Soma juice, is kept, see III, 9) 93.165 373-94:
According to Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p.114 notes, they are so called
because the Adhvaryu throws one stalk of Soma (eka-dhana)
into each pitcher to consecrate it.

* This anticlimax is rather curious. The KAnva text reads: dasa
dasa va ha smaisha ekaiko ’msur devin pratindrayaikadhanan dpya-
yayanti(!) satam satam v4 tasmad Ahaikadhanavida iti.


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 21. 103


ance ; but now they strengthen (Soma) after going, as
it were, towards the right (south)!; and, the sacrifice
being the fire, they thereby turn their back on the
sacrifice and thus do wrong and are cut off from
the gods. Now the prastara also is (part of) the
sacrifice, and by (touching) it they again get hold of
the sacrifice. And this is his expiation of that
(transgression); and so no wrong is committed by
them and they are not cut off from the gods: for
this reason they make amends on the prastara.

20. Here now they say, ‘On the anointed ?—let
them rather make amends on the unanointed ?#!’
They should indeed make amends on the un-
anointed (prastara), since anointed it is thrown into
the fire.

21. They make amends ® with, ‘ Desirable trea-
sures (may come) forth for strength and well-
being—the right for the right-saying’—whereby


1 Soma’s throne stands south of the Ahavaniya fire, and in going
to perform the 4pyayanam upon him, the priests and sacrificer have
to move round the fire, along the east side of it towards the south
(the region of the Fathers).

2 This seems to be Sayama’s interpretation of the passage ‘ akte
nihnuviran anaktai.’ The two words, with their final syllable pro-
tracted, being intended to strongly contradict the preceding ‘akte.’
It is hardly possible to take the latter absolutely, ‘it being anointed
(when thrown into the fire), let them make amends on it while un-
anointed.’ On the throwing of the prastara into the fire, see I, 8,
3,17. The prastara referred to is that of the guest-offering (4ti-
thyeshA), which was broken off after the Ida ceremony (see III, 4,
1, 26) and has to be completed after the present ceremony. Neither
the prastara nor the barhis is burnt on this occasion.

’ In performing this propitiatory rite, the priests and sacrificer
lay their hands on the prastara, either both of them with the palms
upwards, or only the right one, and the left in the opposite way.
Katy. VIII, 2, 9. The latter mode is the one practised by the
Taittiriyas. Say. on Taitt.S.I, 2, rr.


104 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


he means to say, ‘ the truth for the truth-speaking ;’—
‘Homage be to Heaven and to the Earth!’
whereby they make amends to these two, heaven
and earth, on whom this All is founded.

22. Having then picked up the prastara, he says,
‘Agntdh, does the water boil?’—‘It boils,’ replies
the Agnidh'. ‘Come hither with it!’ He holds (the
prastara) quite close over the fire. The reason why
he does not throw it into the fire is that he (the
sacrificer) is to perform therewith? during the days
that follow; and in that he holds it quite close over
the fire, thereby it is for him as if it were really thrown
into the fire. He hands it to the Agnidh, and the
Agnidh puts it aside (in a safe place).


THE UPASADS, or HOMAGES.
Fourtu BRAHMANA.,


1. Verily the Upasads (homages or sieges) are the
neck of the sacrifice, and the Pravargya is its head.
Hence when it is performed with the Pravargya’,


* According to the KAmva text, this conversation takes the place
of the colloquy (samudita) held by the Adhvaryu and the Agnidhra,
after the prastara has been thrown into the fire at the normal ish/;
sec I, 8, 3, 20.

* Or, ‘in the shape of it (tena),’ the prastara representing the
sacrificer himself. This sentence seems also to imply, that the
sacrificer thereby continues to live during the days that follow.

* The Pravargya, an offering of heated milk, which precedes
each performance of the Upasads,—except at the first performance
of the Soma-sacrifice, when i: is prohibited by many authorities, —
seems originally to have been an independent ceremony, and as
such it is treated by most ritualistic books apart from the exposi-
tion of the Soma-cult. The Satapatha-brahmana deals with it in
XIV, 1-3 (Vag. S. XXXIX). Its mystic significance appears: to
have been that of supplying the sacrificer with a new celestial
body. There seems to have been a tendency towards exalting its


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 4. ‘105


they perform the Upasads' after performing the Pra-
vargya, and thereby they put the neck in its place.

2. The anuvakyds (invitatory prayers) in the fore-
noon are the yagyds (offering prayers) in the after-
noon ; and the yagyds are the anuvakyds*. He thus
interlinks them, whence those joints and those bones
of the neck are interlinked.

3. Now the gods and the Asuras, both of them
sprung from Pragapati, were contending against each
other*. The Asuras then built themselves castles in
these worlds,—an iron one in this world, a silver one
in the air, anda golden one in the sky.

4. The gods then prevailed. They besieged them
by these sieges (upasad); and because they be-
sieged (upa-sad) them, therefore the name Upasads.


importance—if not, indeed, towards making it take the place of the
Soma-cult. The hot milk (gharma) is even styled ‘Samrag’ or
supreme king—as against the title ‘ragan’ or king, assigned to
Soma; and a throne is provided for it, just as for the latter. The
rules for its performance, according to the Apastamba Srauta-sitra,
have been published, with a translation, by Professor Garbe
(Zeitsch. der D. M. G. XXXIV, p. 319 seq.). See also Haug’s
Transl. of the Ait. Br. pp. 41-43; Weber, Ind. Stud. IX. pp. 218-220.

1 The Upasada4, consisting of three offerings of ghee to Agni,
Soma, and Vishau, followed by a Homa, have to be performed twice
daily, for at least three days (the normal number at the Agnish/oma).
The first day’s performance is called (from the corresponding
Homa) the ‘ayafsay4’ (lying in iron, made of iron), the second
day’s ‘ragahsay4’ (silvern),and the third day’s ‘harisay4’(golden).
If there are six, or twelve Upasad days, each of the three varieties
of performance has assigned to it an equal number of successive
days ; and if there are more than twelve the three varieties are to be
performed alternately.

* For the anuvaky4s and yagy4s, as well as the kindling-verses
(simidhenfs) to be recited at the Upasads, see Ait. Br. I, 26;
Asv. IV, 8.

’ For other versions of this myth, see Ait. Br. I, 23; Taitt. S.
Vio as3s


106 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


They clove the castles and conquered these worlds.
Hence they say, ‘A castle is conquered by siege;’
for it is indeed by beleaguering that one of these
human castles is taken.

5. By means of these sieges, then, the gods clove
the castles and conquered these worlds. And so
does this one (the sacrificer) now,—no one, it is true,
builds for himself castles against him in this world ;
he cleaves these same worlds, he conquers these
worlds: therefore he offers with the Upasads.

6. They have clarified butter for their offering
material. For ghee is a thunderbolt, and by that
thunderbolt, the ghee, the gods clove the strong-
holds and conquered these worlds. And so does
he cleave these worlds by that thunderbolt, the
ghee, and conquer these worlds; therefore they
(the Upasads) have ghee for their offering material.

7. He takes eight times (ghee) in the guhd, and
four times in the upabhrzt; or conversely, they say,
he is to take of it only four times in the guhf and
eight times in the upabhvvt},

8. He takes eight times in the guhd, and four
times in the upabhv’t. He thereby makes the
thunderbolt heavy in front, and with that thunder-
bolt heavy in front he cleaves these worlds, and
conquers these worlds.

g. Agni and Soma verily are yoke-fellows among
the gods: for these two he takes (ghee) in common’.
For Vishzu (he takes) singly. He makes only the
one libation (aghdra) which (he makes) with the
dipping-spoon (sruva)*, For when he has made


* This would be the regular mode of ladling. See 1, 3, 2,8 seq.
* See p. 108, note 1.


* For the two 4gh4ra, or libations of ghee, made with the


Ill KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 13. 0


the northern (higher) libation he retires': ‘ May
I conquer for conquest’ so he thinks, and there-
fore he makes only the one libation, that with the
dipping-spoon.

10. When he has called (on the Agnidhra) for
the Srausha/, he does not elect the Hotr?#?. ‘Seat
thee, O Hotv?!’ he says. The Hotri sits down
on the Hotrz’s seat. Having sat down he urges
the Adhvaryu; and he, thus urged, takes the two
offering-spoons®.

11. While passing over (to the south side of the
fire and altar) he says‘ (to the Hoty), ‘ Recite the
invitatory prayer to Agni!’ and having called for
the Srausha/, he says, ‘ Pronounce the offering prayer
to Agni!’ and pours out the oblation when the Va-
sha¢ is uttered.

12. Thereupon he says, ‘Recite the invitatory
prayer to Soma!’ and having called for the Srau-
shaZ, he says, ‘Pronounce the offering prayer to
Soma!’ and pours out the oblation when the Va-
sha¢ is uttered.

13. Thereupon, while pouring tiie ghee which is
in the upabhzzt®, together (with what is left in the
guhd), he says, ‘Recite the invitatory prayer to
Vishzu!’ and, having called for the Srausha¢, he
says, ‘Pronounce the offering prayer to Vishzu!’


sruva north of the fire and guhQ south of the fire respectively, see
I, 4,4,1 seq. At the Upasad-ishd neither fore-offerings (prayaga)
nor after-offerings (anuydga) are performed.

1 Viz. to the offering place on the south side of the fire. The
covert meaning is that, were he to make the second libation, he
would have to recede from the higher (uttara, northern) position
already gained.

SSce 4, 5, 15.1 9e9- *SeeI,5,2,1seq. ‘* SeelI, 7, 2, 1 seq.

’ Of the ghee in the guhQ (obtained from eight ladlings with the


108 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


and pours out the oblation when the Vashad is
uttered.

14. The reason why in offering he remains stand-
ing in one and the same place, and does not move
about as he is wont to do here in performing, isthat
he thinks ‘I will conquer for conquest'!’ And the
reason why he offers to those deities is that he
thereby constructs the thunderbolt: Agni (he makes)
the point (anika), Soma the barb (salya), and Vishzu
the connecting piece (kulmala)*.

15. For the thunderbolt is the year: the day ts
Agni, the night Soma, and what is between the two,
that is Vishzu. Thus he makes the revolving year.

16. The thunderbolt is the year: by that year,
as a thunderbolt, the gods clove the strongholds
and conquered these worlds. And so does he now
by that year, as a thunderbolt, cleave these worlds,
and conquer these worlds. This is why he offers to
those gods,

17. Let him undertake three Upasads; for, there
being three seasons in the year, it is thereby made
of the form of the year: he thus makes up the year.
He performs twice each.


sruva) he first offers one half each to Agni and Soma. There-
upon he pours the ghee from the upabhrit (obtained from four
ladlings with the sruva) into the guhQ and offers it to Vishnu.

* ‘Tt is for conquest that he does not move about as he (does
when he) performs here in any other sacrifice.’ KAnva recension.

2 ? The socket; compare Ait. Br. I, 25, ‘The gods constructed
that arrow, the Upasads: Agni was its point (? anika, shaft, Haug),
Soma its barb (salya, steel, H.), Vishmu its shaft (teganam, point, H.),
and Varuna its feathers (parma)... . For the arrow consists of
three parts, anika, salya, and tegana . ... For the arrow consists
of two parts, salya and tegana.’ Here salya would seem to be the


barbed head-piece (with the point, anika), and tegana the shaft or
reed of the arrow.


III KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 23. 109


18. These amount to six; for, there being six
seasons in the year, it is thereby made of the form
of the year: he thus makes up the year.

19. And should he undertake twelve Upasads,—
there being twelve months in the year, it is thereby
made of the form of the year: he thus makes up the
year. He performs twice each.

20. These amount to twenty-four ;—there being
twenty-four half-moons in the year, it is thereby
made of the form of the year: he thus makes up
the year.

21. As to his performing in the evening and in
the morning,—it is because only thus completeness is
obtained. When he performs in the forenoon, then
he gains the victory ;—and when he performs in the
afternoon, he does so that it may be a good (com-
plete) victory ;—and when he offers the Homa, (it is
as if) people fight here for a stronghold, and having
conquered it, they enter it as their own.

22. When he performs (the upasads), he fights ;
and when (the performance) is completed, he con-
quers; and when he offers the Homa’, he enters
that (stronghold) now his own.

23. He offers it (with the verse) with which he


? On the completion of each performance of the Upasad offerings,
after the anointing of the prastara (see I, 8, 3, 11-14) and pre-
viously to taking up the enclosing-sticks (ib. 22), a homa (or gu-
hoti) offering (part i, p. 263, note 2), called Upasad-homa, has to be
performed with the dipping-spoon; the sacrificer holding on to
Adhvaryu from behind, while the ghee is poured into the fire. Its
performance over, the Upasads are brought to an end by a repetition
of the ceremony with the prastara (which is not burnt) described
above, III, 4, 3, 22, and the minor concluding ceremonies (I, 8, 3,
23 seq.; 9, 2,19 seq.); whereupon the Subrahmazya litany (III,
3, 4,17) is recited.


1IO SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


—


will have to perform twice in one day’ (Vag. S.
V,8), ‘What most excellent iron-clad body is
thine, O Agni, established in the deep, it hath
chased away the cruel word, it hath chased
away the fearful word; Hail!’ for such-like it
was, it was indeed iron.

24. Again he offers (with the verse) with which
he will have to perform twice in one day, ‘What
most excellent silver-clad body is thine, O
Agni, established in the deep, it hath chased
away the cruel word, it hath chased away the
fearful word; Hail!’ for such-like it was, it was
indeed silver.

25. And again he offers (with the verse) with
which he will have to perform twice in one day,‘What
most excellent gold-clad body is thine, O Agni,
established in the deep, it hath chased away
the cruel word, it hath chased away the fear-
ful word; Hail!’ for such-like it was, it was indeed
golden. If he undertakes twelve Upasads, let him
perform each of them for four days.

26. Now then of the fast-homages. Some Upa-
sads get wider and wider, others narrower and nar-
rower: those at which he milks out one (teat)* on
the first day, then two, and then three, are those
that get wider and wider; and those at which he


* While the Hotr7, as we saw (parag. 2, above), uses the same
two verses twice in one day, viz. one for the anuvakyd in the
morning and for the y4gy4 in the afternoon; and the other for the
yagya in the morning and for the anuvakyA in the evening,—the
Adhvaryu is to use the thtee formulas here mentioned on the
three Upasad days respectively, both at the morning and afternoon
performances.

* Viz. of the vratadughd, or cow supplying his fast-milk. The
milk so obtained is to be his only food during the Upasad days.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 1 BRAHMANA, I. Ill


milks out three on the first day, then two, and then
one, are those that get narrower and narrower.
Those getting narrower and narrower are (as good
as) those getting wider and wider; and those getting
wider and wider are (as good as) those getting nar-
rower and narrower.

27. Verily, the world is conquered by austere
devotion. Now, his devotion becomes ever and
ever wider, he conquers an ever and ever more
glorious world and becomes better even in this world,
whosoever, knowing this, undertakes the Upasads
that get narrower and narrower’; let him, therefore,
undertake the Upasads that get narrower and nar-
rower. And should he undertake twelve Upasads,
let him have three (teats) milked out for four days,
two for four days, and one for four days.


PREPARATION OF THE SOMA ALTAR WITH
THE HIGH ALTAR%


FirtH ApuyAyA. First BRAHMANA.

1. From that post which is the largest on the
east side (of the hall)* he now strides three steps
forwards (to the east), and there drives in a peg,—
this is the intermediate (peg) *.


1 The simile is apparently taken from the arrow, which pierces
the deeper the more pointed it is; cf. parag. 14, above; Ait. Br. I,
25. Also Taitt. S. VI, 2, 3, 5, where a goad (ara?) is compared.

2 The preparation of the special altars—viz. the large Soma altar
(mah4-vedi, or saumiki-vedi) and the ‘high altar’ (uttara-vedi) on
the former—takes place on the last but one Upasad day, after the
morning performance of the Upasads.

’ This post stands in the middle of the east door of the hall
or Pragina-vamsa, just in front of the Ahavantya-fire. See p. 3,
note 2.

‘ AntaApata, lit. ‘falling within or between, because it stands


112 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


2. From that middle peg he strides fifteen steps
to the right, and there drives in a peg,—this is the
right hip.

3. From that middle peg he strides fifteen steps
northwards, and there drives in a peg,—this is the
left hip.

4. From that middle peg he strides thirty-six
steps eastwards, and there drives in a peg,—this is
the fore-part?.

5. From that middle peg (in front) he strides
twelve steps to the right, and there drives in a peg,—
this is the right shoulder.

6. From that middle peg he strides twelve steps
to the north, and there drives in a peg,—this is the
left shoulder. This is the measure of the altar.

7. Now the reason why it is thirty steps broad
behind is this: the Virag metre consists of thirty
syllables, and by means of the Virag the gods ob-
tained a firm footing in this world; and even so does
he now, by means of the Virdg, obtain a firm foot-
ing in this world.

8. But there may also be thirty-three (steps); for
of thirty-three syllables also consists the Virag; and
by means of the Virag he obtains a firm footing in
this world.

9. Then as to why the ‘easterly line?’ is thirty-six
steps long ;—the Brvzhatt consists of thirty-six sylla-
bles, and by means of the Bvzhatt the gods obtained
between the (new) altar and the Prafina-vamsa fires and altar. See
Ill, 5; 2, 2-

* That is, the middle of the front side of the altar, or, as it were,
its head, where the ‘high altar’ is to be raised.

* The ‘pri’ is the line drawn from the middle of the west side
to that of the front side of the altar, forming as it were the spine
(prish/Ay4) of the altar.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 15. I13
the heavenly world: and so does he now, by means
of the Brzhatt, obtain the heavenly world and that
offering-fire (Ahavantya) of his is in the sky.

ro. And as to (the altar) being twenty-four steps
broad in front ;—the Gayatri consists of twenty-four
syllables, and the Géyatri is the fore-part of the
sacrifice: this is why it is twenty-four steps broad in
front. This is the measure of the altar.

11. And why it is broader behind,—‘ Wider behind,
broad-hipped,’ thus they praise a woman. And by
its being wider behind, he makes that womb at the
hind-part (of the altar) wider, and from that wider
womb these creatures are born.

12. That high altar (Uttaravedi') is the nose
of the sacrifice; because they throw it up so as to
be higher than the altar, therefore it is called ‘ high
altar.’

13. Now, in the beginning there were two kinds
of beings here, the Adityas and the Angiras. The
Angiras then were the first to prepare a sacrifice,
and having prepared the sacrifice they said to Agni,
‘Announce thou to the Adityas this our to-morrow’s
Soma-feast, saying, “ Minister ye at this sacrifice of
ours!”’

14. The Adityas spake (to one another), ‘ Contrive
ye how the Angiras shall minister unto us, and not
we unto the Angiras!’

15. They said, ‘ Verily by nothing but sacrifice is
there a way out of this?: let us undertake another


1 On the uttara-vedi (lit. ‘higher, upper altar’), now about to be
raised on the fore-part of the great altar (mah4-vedi or saumiki
vedi) described in the preceding paragraphs, see also part i, p. 392
note.

? The K4nva MS. reads, napakramamam astv iti, which, if correct,


[26] I


114 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


——


Soma-feast!’ They brought together the (materials
for) sacrifice, and having made ready the sacrifice,
they said, ‘ Agni, thou hast announced to us a Soma-
feast for to-morrow; but we announce to thee and
the Angiras a Soma-feast even for to-day: it is for
us that thou art (to officiate as) Hotrz!!’

16. They sent back some other (messenger) to the
Angiras; but the Angiras going after Agni, were
exceeding angry with him, saying, ‘Going as our
messenger, why didst thou not mind us? ?’

17. He spake, ‘The blameless chose me: as the
chosen of the blameless, I could not go away.’ And
let not therefore the chosen (priest) of a blameless
man turn away from him. The Angiras then offh-
ciated for the Adityas in the sacrifice with Soma
bought (kri) on the same day (sadyas) ; whence this
Sadyakkri*.

18. They brought V4é (speech) to them for their
sacrificial fee. They accepted her not, saying, ‘We
shall be losers if we accept her.’ And so the perform-
ance of that sacrifice was not discharged (completed),
as it was one requiring a sacrificial fee.

19. Thereupon they brought Sfrya (the sun) to
them, and they accepted him. Wherefore the An-
giras say, ‘ Verily, we are fit for the sacrificial office,
we are worthy to receive Dakshizds; yea, even he
that burns yonder has been received by us?!’


would mean, ‘ Let there be no going away!’ i.e. ‘ Let us not go (to
the Angiras)!’ or perhaps, ‘Do not thou (Agni) go away!’

? Tesham nas tvam hotdsiti, perhaps ‘thou wilt sacrifice for us.’

2 «Sent by us, why didst thou not return?’ K4zva rec.

* An ekaha (one day’s) performance of the Soma-sacrifice at
which the consecrations, buying and pressing of Soma, are com-
pressed into one day.

* Api va asm4bhir esha pratigrzhitah, ‘Ist doch jener von uns
empfangen worden,’


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 23. 115
NE EE inh Tar
Hence a white horse is the sacrificial fee for the
Sadyahkrt.

20. On the front of this (horse) there is a golden
ornament, whereby it is made an image of him that
burns yonder.

21. Now V&é was angry with them: ‘In what
respect, forsooth, is that one better than I,—where-
fore is it, that they should have accepted him and
not me'?’ So saying she went away from them.
Having become a lioness she went on seizing upon
(everything *) between those two contending parties,
the gods and the Asuras. The gods called her to
them, and so did the Asuras. Agni was the mes-
senger of the gods, and one Saharakshas for the
Asura-Rakshas.

22. Being willing to go over to the gods, she said,
‘What would be mine, if I were to come over to
you ?’—‘ The offering shall reach thee even before
(it reaches) Agni.’ She then said to the gods,
‘Whatsoever blessing ye will invoke through me,
all that shall be accomplished unto you!’ So she
went over to the gods.

23. And, accordingly, when he pours ghee on the
high altar’, while the fire is held (over it)}—since the
gods said to her on that occasion, ‘The offering shall
reach thee even before Agni’—then that offering
does reach her even before (it reaches) Agni; for
this (high altar) is in reality Va&. And when he raises


1 The Kamva text reads, Na mad esha kena ana srey4n iti na
bandhuna na kena dana katham etam pragrihniyur na mam iti;
‘That one is not my superior by anything, not by kinship, not by
anything, why should they accept him and not me?’

2 Adadaind sak’ra=gighatsaya samipastham sarvam svikurvati,
Say.

5 See III, 5, 2, g-11.

12


116 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the high altar, it is for the completeness of the sacri-
fice, for the sacrifice is Vaé (speech) and that (high
altar) is Vaé,

24. He measures it with the yoke and pin ;—
namely with the yoke (that place) whither they take
(the earth); and with a yoke-pin that, from whence
they take (the earth’), for the team is harnessed with
the yoke and the pin: it is because she (V44), as a
lioness, at that time roamed about unappeased that
he thus yokes her here at the sacrifice.

25. One must not therefore accept a Dakshina
(sacrificial fee) that has been refused (by another
priest’), for, having turned into a_ lioness, it
destroys him;—nor must he (the sacrificer) take
it home again, for, having turned into a lioness, it
destroys him ;—nor must he give it to any one else,
as he would thereby make over the sacrifice to some
one other than himself. Hence if he have any
wretched kinsman, let him give it to him; for in that
he gives it away, it will not turn into a lioness and
destroy him; and in that he gives it to a kinsman,
he does not make over (the sacrifice) to one other
than himself: and this is the settling of a refused
Dakshiva.

26. He now takes the yoke-pin and the wooden
sword; and from where the northern peg of the
front side is, he strides three steps backwards and
there marks off the pit (44tvala). The measure for
the pit is the same (as for the high altar)’; there


" That is to say, the pit (44tvala) whence the earth for the high
altar is taken is measured with the yoke-pin, and the high altar
with the yoke. S4yama seems to take it differently: Yatra yasmin
dese yugena haranti yato yasmAt tatra samyay4pi haranti.

? Or perhaps, one must not take back a Dakshin4, refused by apriest.

* The earth taken from ‘the pit being used for constructing the


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAWA, 30. 17


is no (other) measure in regard to it: wherever he
himself may think fit in his mind (to fix it), in front
of the heap of rubbish (utkara), there let him mark
off the pit.

27. From the (north) edge of the altar he lays
down the pin from south to north, and draws the
(western) outline, with the text (Vag. S. V, 9), ‘Thou
art for me the resort of the afflicted!’ Thereby
he means this (earth), for it is thereon that he walks
afflicted.

28. Thereupon he lays down the pin in front from
south to north, and draws the outline with, ‘Thou
art my wealth-resort.’ Thereby he means this
(earth), for it is thereon that he walks having acquired
(wealth).

29. He then lays down the pin along the (north)
edge of the altar from west to east, and draws the
outline with, ‘ Preserve me from being in want!!’
Thereby he means this (earth): ‘ Wherever there is
want, from that preserve me!’

30. He then lays down the pin on the north side
from west to east, and draws the outline with, ‘ Pre-
serve me from being afflicted'!’ Thereby he


high altar, both are of the same size or cubic content. The pit is
to measure thirty-two angulas (about two feet) on each side. As
to the exact distance of the pit from the north-east peg, this is to
be left to the discretion of the Adhvaryu, provided it be in front of
the utkara, or heap of rubbish formed in making the large altar (on
which the high altar is raised), and a passage be left between the
utkara and the pit. The latter is contiguous to the north edge
of the large altar. As described in the succeeding paragraphs, the
west side is marked off first (by drawing the wooden sword along
the inner side of the yoke-pin), then successively the front, the
south, and the north sides.

1 For ‘nathitat’ and ‘ vyathitat,’ the Kamva text, as the Taitt. S.
VI, 2, 7, 2, has the readings ‘ nathitam’ and ‘ vyathitam.’


118 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


means this (earth): ‘wherever there is affliction,
from that preserve me!’

31. He then flings (the wooden sword)'; at the
place where he flings’, the Agnidh sits. He flings
while mentioning the names of the Agnis’. For
those (three) Agnis whom the gods at first chose for
the office of Hotzz passed away: they crept into
these very earths,—namely, into this one and the
two beyond it. It is really with this one‘ that he
now flings.

32. He flings with the texts, ‘May the Agni
called Nabhas® know (thee)! Go thou, O Agni,
Angiras, with the name of Ayu (life)!’ What
life they passed away from® that he bestows, that
he re-animates. Having with, ‘Thou who art in
this earth, taken (the loose soil dug up by the
wooden sword), he puts it down (on the altar’),
with, ‘Whatever inviolate, holy name of thine,


* Compare the Stambayagur-haramam (which has also to be per-
formed on the present occasion, in preparing the large altar), I,
2, 4, 8 seq.

* That is, at the place where the uttaravedi is to be raised,
whence the Adhvaryu throws the sphya to where the pit is to be
dug. While he throws (or thrusts in) the wooden sword, the
sacrificer has to take hold of him from behind.

* See I, 2, 3, ¥.

‘ I.e. with the Agni who entered into this earth.

* Apparently ‘vapour, welkin.’ The K4amva rec. reads, ‘ Mayest
thou know Agni’s name Nabhas’ (Vider Agner, &c.). The Taitt.
S., on the other hand, reads ‘vider Agnir nabho n4ma,’ which
Sdyana explains by ‘the Agni of the vedi (!) is Nabhas by name.’

* Yat pradhanvams tad 4yur dadhati. Perhaps we ought to read
with the Kanva text, Yat prddhanvat tad asminn Ayur dadhati
tad enam samirayati, ‘the life which passed away (?), tat he bestows
on him, therewith he re-animates him.’

" He throws it on the fore-part of the altar, close to the peg


marking the middle of the front side, where the ‘high altar’ is to be
raised on it.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 34. ‘19


therewith I lay thee down!’ whereby he means
to say, ‘whatever holy name, unviolated by the
Rakshas, is thine, thereby I lay thee down?,.’—With
‘Thee, moreover, for the delight of the gods,
he takes (earth) a fourth time?; whereby he means
to say, ‘I take thee well-pleasing to the gods.’ He
takes that (high altar) from a quadrangular pit, for
there are four quarters: thus he takes it from all
the four quarters.

33. Thereupon he shifts (the earth) asunder, with
the text (Vag. S. V, 10), ‘ Thou art a lioness, over-
coming the enemies; be thou meet for the
gods!’ Inasmuch as, on that occasion, she became
a lioness and roamed about unappeased, therefore
he says to her, ‘ Thou art a lioness;’ and by ‘over-
coming the enemies’ he means to say, ‘ Through thee
may we worst our enemies.’ ‘Be thou meet for the
gods’ he says, because the high altar is a woman:
her he thus renders meet for the gods.

34. He makes it on each side either of the size
of the yoke, or ten feet of the sacrificer’s*; for the


1 He repeats the same ceremony a second and a third time with
the same texts, except that, instead of ‘Thou who art in this earth,’
he says, ‘Thou who art in the second (third) earth.’

?-He takes with the spade as much as is required to make the
high altar of the proper size.

’ This statement seems to have greatly puzzled the later ritualists,
as Katy. V, 3, 32-35 and the comments thereon show. In rule
32 itis laid down, in accordance with paragraph 26 above, that the
Adhvaryu is to make the high altar of the size of the yoke-pin and
the pit, i.e. about two feet square. The next rule then leaves an
option between four other measurements, viz. he may make it either
one third of the area of the large altar, or of unlimited size, or of
the size of the yoke (86 angulas=c. 5— 5} feet) or of ten of the
sacrificer’s feet. This latter measurement is explained rather in-
geniously by Harisvamin, as meaning that the high altar is to form


120 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.,


Virag consists of ten syllables, and the Virag is speech,
and the sacrifice is speech. In the middle! he makes,
as it were, a navel, thinking, ‘Seated in one and the
same place, I shall sprinkle (ghee) all round?.’

35. He sprinkles it with water: inasmuch as, on
that occasion, she became a lioness and roamed about
unappeased — water being (a means of) appease-
ment—he appeases her with water. And, the high
altar being a woman, he thereby fits her for the
gods: this is why he sprinkles it with water.

36. He sprinkles it with, ‘Thou art a lioness,
overcoming the enemies: get thee pure for
the gods!’ He then bestrews it with gravel.
Now gravel certainly is an ornament, because gravel
is rather shining. And that gravel being the ashes
of Agni Vaisvanara, he is now about to place Agni
thereon, and so Agni does not injure it: this is
why he bestrews it with gravel. He bestrews it
with, ‘Thou art a lioness, overcoming the
enemies: array thee for the gods!’ He then
covers it*, and thus covered it remains during that
night.


an oblong of three feet by one foot, when, in counting the number
of sides of the three squares thus obtained, we obtain ten sides of
one foot each. However, the repetition of ‘dasa’ in our text—
which can only mean ‘ten feet on each side ’—does not favour this
explanation, The last two alternatives, according to rules 34-35,
only apply to the Soma-sacrifice, because otherwise the altar (as in
the case of the ‘ northern altar’ at the XAturmésya, cf. part i, p. 392)
would not be large enough to contain a ‘high altar’ of that size.

* The Kava text wants it to be made at the back (gaghanena).

* When he makes the libation of ghee on the high altar (III, 5,
2,9-11), he pours it on the four corners of the ‘navel’ and thereby,
as it were, on the whole ‘high altar.’


* Viz. with branches of udumbara or plaksha (see III, 8, 3, 10),
or with darbha grass.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. 121


THE AGNI-PRAWAYANA, or LEADING FORWARD
OF THE FIRE' TO THE HIGH ALTAR,


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. They put fire-wood on (the Ahavantya fire),
and prepare the underlayer (of gravel*). He (the
Adhvaryu) puts the butter on (the Garhapatya to
melt), and cleans both the dipping-spoon and the
offering-spoon. Having then clarified the ghee,
he ladles five times thereof (into the offering-spoon).
When the fire-wood is ablaze—

2. They lift the (burning) fire-wood, and place it
on the underlayer*, Thereupon he says (to the
Hotrz), ‘ Recite for Agni as he is taken forward*!’
(and to the Pratiprasthatyz), ‘Come up after me
with the single sword(-line)!’ The Pratiprasthatr?
goes up after him with the single sword(-line) as far


1 The transferring of the Ahavantya fire to the high altar takes
place in the forenoon of the last Upasad day (that is, on the day
preceding the pressing day, and called upavasatha, or preparation
day). It is preceded by the double or combined performance
of the Upasad offerings (one of which took place in the afternoon
on the two preceding days).

* Some gravel is put in a pan for the burning wood to lie upon,
when it is to be transferred from the Ahavantya to the new altar.
The Taittirlyas mix with the gravel one-fourth part of the
dust of the foot-print of the Soma-cow (III, 3, 1, 6), the other
three parts being used respectively for anointing the axle of the
Soma-cart (III, 5, 3, 13), for the underlayer of the Agnidhra fire
(III, 6, 3, 4), and for scattering about behind the Garhapatya (III, 6,

» 4-7).
; ' ti they lift the underlayer underneath (the burning wood).

‘ For the eight verses (or twelve, the first and last being recited
thrice each) which the Hotr# has to repeat while the fire is carried
eastward and laid down on the high altar, see Ait. Br. I, 28; Asv.
Sr. II, 17, For the Brahman’s duties, see Katy. XI, 1, 9.


122 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


as that middle peg on the hind-part of the altar’:
whatever part of the Garhapatya? is cut off from
the altar by that intermediate (peg), that he thereby
carries on to (connects with) it.

3. Now some walk up behind (and draw a line)
as far as the high altar; but let him not do that:
let him walk up only as far as that middle peg.
They proceed and come up to the high altar®

4. The Adhvaryu takes the sprinkling-water. He
first sprinkles (the high altar) in front, while stand-
ing (south of it) facing the north, with the text (Vag.
S. V, 11), ‘May Indra’s noise‘ shield thee in
front with the Vasus!’ whereby he means to say,
‘May Indra’s noise protect thee in front with the
Vasus.’

5. He then sprinkles it behind with, ‘May the
Wise® shield thee from behind with the Ru-
dras!’ whereby he means to say, ‘May the Wise
One protect thee from behind with the Rudras!’

6. He then sprinkles on the right (south) side
with, ‘May the Thought-swift shield thee with
the Fathers on the right!’ whereby he means


1 See II, a ae

* The Ahavaniya or offering fire being now transferred to the
new altar, the old Ahavantya hearth is henceforward used as Garha-
patya ; and a line is drawn from it up to the anta/pata, marking the
middle of the west side of the great altar.

* In ‘leading forwards’ the fire they proceed along the north
side of the large altar.

* Indraghosh4, perhaps ‘Indra’s name;’ Mahidhara and S4yana
take it as ‘he who is noised abroad as Indra’ (i.e. called Indra), which,
however, would require the accent ‘{ndraghosha,’ Perhaps ‘the
noise of Indra’ means Agni, the roaring fire: for Agni and the Vasus,
see IIT, 4, 2, x.


® Praketas, here Varuna according to Mahidhara and Sayama.
Cf. III, 4, 2, 2.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, IO. 123


to say, ‘May he swift as thought? protect thee on
the right with the Fathers!’

7. He then sprinkles on the left side with, ‘May
Visvakarman (the All-shaper) shield thee with
the Adityas on the left!’ whereby he means to
say, ‘ May Visvakarman protect thee on the left with
the Adityas !’

8. The sprinkling-water which is left he pours
outside the altar close to where is the southern of
those two front corners (of the high altar) with,
‘This burning water I dismiss from the
sacrifice.’ Because she (Va4é—the altar) on that
occasion became a lioness and roamed about unap-
peased*, he thus dismisses from the sacrifice that
sorrow of hers,—if he do not wish to exorcise. But
should he wish to exorcise, let him indicate it by
saying, ‘This burning water I dismiss from the
sacrifice against soand so!’ He then smites him with
that sorrow, and sorrowing he goes to yonder world.

9. Now as to why he pours ghee on the high
altar, while the fire is held (over it). Because the
gods said to her on that occasion, ‘The offering
shall reach thee before Agni,’ therefore the offer-
ing now does reach her before (it reaches) Agni.
And because she said to the gods, ‘ Whatsoever
blessing ye will invoke through me, all that shall
be accomplished unto you!’ therefore the priests
now invoke through her that blessing upon the
sacrificer, and it is fully accomplished unto him.

10. When he pours ghee on the high altar, he


1 «Manogavas’ is taken by Mahidhara and Sayama as referring to
Yama.
* « Sokanti (sorrowing),’ Kazva rec.


124 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


does it twofold even while doing it in one’. Now
that which is the southern of the two front corners
of that navel, so to say, which is in the middle of
these (sides of the high altar)—

11. On that? he pours ghee, with the text (Vag.
S. V,12), ‘Thou art a lioness, Hail!’ Then on
the northern of the two back corners with, ‘Thou
art a lioness, winning the Adityas’, Hail!’
Then on the southern of the two back corners with,
‘Thou art a lioness, winning the Brahman,
winning the Kshatra, Hail!’ Manifold, verily,
is the prayer for blessing in the sacrificial texts: by
this one he prays‘ for the Brahman (priesthood) and
the Kshatra (nobility), those two vital forces.

12. Then on the northern of the front corners
with, ‘Thou art a lioness, winning abundant
offspring, winning growth of wealth, Hail!’
In that he says, ‘winning abundant offspring,’ he
prays for offspring; and in that he says, ‘winning
growth of wealth’—growth of wealth meaning
abundance—he prays for abundance.

13. He then pours ghee into the middle with,
‘Thou art a lioness, bring thou hither the
gods for the sacrificer! Hail!’ whereby he
causes the gods to be brought to the sacrificer.
He then raises the offering-spoon with, ‘To the


* Viz. by pouring the ghee cross-wise on the corners of the
‘navel’ of the altar.

* The south-east is sacred to Agni, the north-west to Vayu.

* Because the Adityas brought her as a Dakshina, Kanva rec.; cf.
Lil, yi28.

* But for the lack of a demonstrative pronoun with Asif one
would like to take the passage thus: ‘ Plenteous, forsooth, is this
prayer for blessing among sacrificial texts: he thereby prays for
the priesthood and the nobility.’ Cf. I, 2, 1, 7.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 18. 125
beings thee! Hail!’—beings meaning offspring—
he thereby means to say, ‘ To offspring thee !’

14. He then lays the enclosing-sticks' round (the
navel); with the text (V4g. S. V, 13), ‘Thou art
firm, steady thou the earth!’ the middle one;
with, ‘Thou art firmly settled, steady thou the
air!’ the right one; with, ‘Thou art immovably
settled, steady thou the sky!’ the left one.
With, ‘Thou art Agni’s provision’ he throws
the ‘equipments’ upon (the high altar). Where-
fore are the equipments ?—for Agni’s completeness.

15. The pine-wood, namely, is his body*: hence
in that there are enclosing-sticks of pine-wood,
thereby he supplies him with a body, makes him
whole.

16. And the bdellium, forsooth, is his flesh: hence
in that there is bdellium, thereby he supplies him with
flesh, makes him whole.

17. And the fragrant reed-grass (sugandhi-tegana),
forsooth, is his fragrance: hence in that there is
fragrant reed-grass, thereby he supplies him with
fragrance, makes him whole.

18. And as to why there is a wether’s hair-tuft,—
Agni, forsooth, dwelt once for one night between the
two horns of a wether: ‘Whatever of Agni’s nature
is inherent therein, let that be here too,’ so he
thinks, and therefore there is a wether’s hair-tuft.
Let him, therefore, cut off that (tuft) which is nearest
to the head, and bring it; and if he be unable to
procure that, let him bring any kind (of wether's
hair). And why there are enclosing-sticks >—for the


1 They are of pitudéru (Pinus Deodora) wood, a span (of thumb
and fore-finger) long.
* The K4nva text makes it his bones.


126 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,


protection (of Agni): for it is somewhat long before
the next enclosing-sticks will come nigh to him}.


CONSTRUCTION OF SHEDS, AND PREPARATION
OF PRESSING-PLACE AND HEARTHS (DHISHWYAS).


THIRD BRAHMANA.


1. The sacrifice is a man; it is a man for the
reason that a man spreads (prepares) it. In being
spread it is made just as large* as a man: this is
why the sacrifice is a man.

2. The Soma-cart (shed) is no other than his
head, and has Vishzu for its deity*, And because
Soma is therein—Soma being havis (material for
offering) for the gods—therefore it is called Havir-
dhana (receptacle of havis).

3. The Ahavantya is no other than his mouth:
hence, when he offers on the Ahavantya, it is as if
he poured (food) into the mouth,

4. The sacrificial stake is no other than his crest-
lock; and the Agntdhriya and Marg4ltya‘ are his
arms,


* Ordinarily the laying round of the paridhis takes place immedi-
ately before the fire is kindled for the offering; but as the next offering
is not to come off for some time, the fire would be without a protec-
tion, if he were to leave it without the enclosing-sticks. Sdyana takes
‘dfire’ in the sense of ‘in a long time,’ as above; but it might be
taken of space ‘ far off,’ when the passage would refer to the offering
about to be performed on the old Ahavantya (III, 5, 3, 10 seq. );
and it may be noticed in reference to this point, that, according to
Katy. VIII, 3, 30, that fire does not become the GArhapatya till
immediately after that offering.

* YAvat-tavat would rather seem to mean here ‘of corresponding
(or relatively the same) proportions’ as a man, viz. as the respective
sacrificer. ‘Sa vai tdyam4no y4vdn eva purushas tavan vidhtyate,
purushasyaiva vidham anu.’ Ka4ava rec.

* Soma himself is Vishau. + See: ITL,.6, 1,,93 3: 2,22


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 9. 127


5. The Sadas! (tent for the priests) is no other
than his belly: wherefore they feed in the Sadas,
for whatever food is eaten here on earth all that
settles down here in the belly. And because all
the gods sat (sad) in it therefore it is called Sadas:
and so do these Brahmans of every family now sit
therein.

6. And the two fires which are behind? it are
his feet. In being spread it is made just as large
as a man: this is why the sacrifice is a man.

7. The cart-shed has doors on both sides; and
so has the Sadas doors on both sides: hence
this man is perforated from one end to the other.
He steps to the Soma-carts when they have been
washed down.

8. They turn them round, the southern one on
the south side, and the northern one on the north
side’, The larger of the two should be the southern
(or right) one‘.

9. Over them, having been turned round (and
placed on the altar), they put a mat of reed-grass ; or,
if he cannot procure a reed-mat, a frame of split cane


1 See III, 6, 2, 21.

? That is, the (old) Ahavantya and Garhapatya fires of the Praéina-
vamsa.

’ The southern (and larger) cart is under the charge of the
Adhvaryu and the northern one under that of his assistant, the Pra-
tiprasthatr?, Each now drives his cart westward along the south
and north sides respectively ; and when they are opposite the hall
(sala), they make the carts turn round from left to right; where-
upon they drive back to the altar, and place them thereon with the
shafts towards the east, near the anta/pata (‘ intermediate’ peg, see
III, 5, 1, 1), south and north of the ‘spine’ (cf. p. 112, note 2), each
at the distance of one cubit from the latter.

‘ In order to make the shed incline towards the north, cf. III,
$15.9,


128 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


made in like manner as a reed-mat. They fasten
a front-band (to the posts of the front door’). They
enclose (the carts) within two upright hurdles; and
lay a (second) reed-mat, or a frame of split cane
made in like manner as a reed-mat, behind (the first
mat?),

10. Now’, having again entered (the hall), and


1 It is not clear to me whether the arrangements mentioned in
this paragraph refer to the carts in the first place, and have then to
be repeated after the shed has been erected, or whether, as I think,
some of them refer to the shed only. Even at the time of the Katy.
Sfitras there seems to have been some confusion in this respect, and
the rules VIII, 4, 7-12 (10-15, in edition) were entirely misunder-
stood by the commentator. It is, however, certain that the carts
were covered with mats, previously to being shifted from the back to
the front part of the altar. As regards the shed, it seems to have
been constructed in the following way. In front of the carts, as
well as behind them, beams are driven into the ground, six on each
side, according to Sayama on T.S. I, 2,13; the two middle ones,
one cubit north and south of the ‘spine’ respectively, forming a
gateway on each side (K4ty. VIII, 4, 24 scholl.). On these two
rows of beams other beams are laid, running from south to north,
and forming, as it were, the lintels of the gates; and thereon the
tie-beams rest (west to east), This frame of timber is to form a
square of nine (or ten) cubits. Over the tie-beams three mats of
reed-grass(4adis)—measuring nine (or ten) cubits by three (3})—are
spread, from south to north; first the middle one and then the two
others, behind and in front of it. Upright hurdles (or reed-mats)
are then stretched between the respective corner-posts, so as to form
the south and north sides of the shed; and are ‘sewn’ to the
corner-posts. Between the tops of the two front door-posts a band
or garland of plaited reed-tufts (or, according to Haug, a bunch of
Darbha grass, consisting of dry and green stalks) is hung up, to
represent either a fillet or wreath worn on the forehead (?), or as a
door-garland.

* This remark would seem to imply that there are only two mats
(cf. parags. 23, 24), but perhaps it is merely intended to show that two
mats are spread behind and in front of the first mat (i.e. from south
to north, and not west to east); not that there are only two mats.

* If the preceding paragraph refers (at least partly) to the shed,


Ill KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 12. 129


taken ghee in four ladlings, he makes offering to
Savitvz for his impulsion, for Savitr7 is the impeller
(prasavitrz) of the gods: ‘ We will perform the sacri-
fice, for one impelled by Savitrz,’ thus (the priest
thinks and) therefore he makes offering to Savitr7.

11. He offers with the text (Vag. S. V, 14; Rig-
veda V, 81,1),‘They harness the mind and they
harness the thoughts’—with the mind and with
speech they truly perform the sacrifice. When he
says, ‘They harness the mind,’ he harnesses the
mind; and when he says, ‘and they harness the
thoughts (dh!),’ he harnesses speech; for it is thereby?
that people seek to make their living in accordance
with their respective intelligence (dhi), either by
reciting (the Veda), or by readiness of speech, or by
songs,—with these two thus harnessed they perform
the sacrifice.

12. ‘The priests of the priest, of the great
inspirer of devotion,—the learned Brahmans
versed in sacred writ, truly, are the priests: it is
regarding them that he says this. And ‘of the great
inspirer of devotion?, —the great inspirer of devotion,
truly, is the sacrifice: it is regarding the sacrifice
that he says this. ‘The knower of rites alone
hath assigned the priestly offices, for, in per-


then the atha here means ‘ Now, in the first place,’ thereby intro-
ducing details preliminary to what has just been stated.

1 See III, 2, 4, 16. I now refer ‘etaya’ to ‘yakam,’ as does
Sayana,—yada buddhir gayate tada khalv etaya vaka gugydshanti.
He explains ‘ prakamodya’ by ‘ mlaiféhikam laukikam bhashazam,’
barbarous, worldly speech.

2 Vipaskit, probably ‘thinker of hymns.’ It remains doubtful
what meaning our author assigned to the word. Mahidhara
explains it by sarvagzia, ‘ all-knowing.’ Sayama, on Taitt. S. 1, a,
13, refers ‘ viprasya brihato vipastitah ’ to the sacrificer.


[26] K


130 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

scent ae icienstsiceitiiadiacallletisiin ilalica acliccnieticecadiires.
forming the sacrifice, they indeed assign the priestly
offices. ‘Great is the praise of the divine Savitz7;
Hail!’ Thus he offers to Savit7z for his impulsion.

13. Having then taken ghee a second time in four
ladlings, he walks out (of the hall by the front door).
The (sacrificer’s) wife is led out by the south door.
He then lays down a piece of gold in the right wheel-
track of the southern Soma-cart, and offers thereon,
with (Vag. S. V, 15; Rig-veda I, 22, 17), ‘Vishzu
strodethrough this(universe), thrice he put down
his foot: itisenvelopedinhisdust; Hail!’ The
residue (of ghee) he pours into the wife’s hand. She
anoints the burning (part) of the axle! with (Vag.
S. V, 17), ‘Audible to the gods, announce ye
unto the gods!’ He hands to his assistant both
the offering-spoon and the melting-pot. They lead
the wife round by the back of the two fires?.

14. Having taken ghee in four ladlings, the assist-
ant lays down a piece of gold in the right wheel-
track of the northern Soma-cart, and offers thereon,
with (Vag. S. V, 16; Rig-veda VII, 99, 3), ‘Be
ye too abundant in food and milch kine and
pastures, through benevolence to man!
Thou proppedst asunder these two worlds,
O Vishzu; with beams of light didst thou
hold fast® the earth on all sides; Hail!’ The
residue (of ghee) he pours into the wife’s hand.
She anoints the burning (part) of the axle with,


’ That is, the iron pins driven into the axle, round which the
naves of the wheels revolve. See also p.121, note 2.

* They make her enter the hall by the south door and walk
round by the back of the (old) Garhapatya fire-place to the wheel-
tracks on the north side where the Pratiprasthatr7 is about to offer.

* The rays of the sun are apparently likened to ropes wherewith
he keeps the earth straight and firm,


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 17. 131


‘Audible to the gods, announce ye unto the
gods!’ Then as to why he thus offers.

15. Now, once on a time, the gods, while per-
forming sacrifice, were afraid of an attack on the
part of the Asura-Rakshas; and, the ghee being
a thunderbolt, they kept off the evil spirits from
the south by that thunderbolt, the ghee; and
thus they came not after them on their way.
And in like manner does he now keep off the evil
spirits from the south by that thunderbolt, the ghee ;
and thus they do not come after him on his way.
And the reason why he offers with two verses relating
to Vishzu, is that the Soma-cart belongs to Vishzu.

16. And in that the wife anoints the burning (part)
of the axle, thereby a productive union is effected ;
for when woman and man become heated, the seed
flows, and thereupon birth takes place. She anoints
in a direction away (from the cart), for away the
seed is cast. He then says (to the Hotv7), ‘ Recite
to the Soma-carts as they are wheeled forward!!’

17. He makes (the sacrificer) say,‘Go ye both
forward, furthering the cult!’ The cult, namely,
is the sacrifice: ‘go ye both forward, furthering the
sacrifice’ he thereby means to say. ‘Conveyyethe
sacrifice upward; lead it not astray?!’ whereby
he means to say, ‘convey this sacrifice upward to
the world of the gods;’ and by saying ‘lead it not
astray,’ he prays for this (sacrificer) that he may not


1 While reciting his hymn of eight verses (brought up, as usual,
to twelve by repetitions of the first and last verses) the Hotr?
has to follow the carts so as to have the north wheel-track of the
south cart between his feet. Cf. Pp. 79, note 1. For the verses
recited by him, see Ait. Br. I, 29; Asv. Sr. IV, 9.

2 Or, ‘falter not!’

K 2


132 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

i Sia een Rei oa acne aldara ameeci Poitier hale
stumble. Let them wheel (the carts) forward, as it
were lifting them, so that they may not creak ; for
of the Asuras is that voice which is in the axle’:
‘Lest the Asuras’ voice should speak here!’ so he
thinks. But if they should creak,—

18. Let him make (the sacrificer) say this, ‘Speak
ye unto your own cow-pen, ye divine resorts;
speak not my life away, speak not my offspring
away!’ This, then, is the expiation thereof.

19. As to this they say, ‘Let him stride three
steps from the high altar westward and make the
Soma-carts stop there: this is the measure for the
Soma-carts. But there is no (fixed) measure in
this; wherever he himself may think fit in his mind,
only not too near’, nor too far (from the high altar),
there let him stop them.

20. He salutes them with, ‘May ye rejoice
here on the height of the earth!’ for this (altar)
is verily the height (top) of the earth, since his offer-
ing-fire is in the heaven. He makes them rest on
their naves‘ for that is the appearance of repose.


' The Taitt. S. VI, 2, 9 refers it to Varuza, on account of the axle
being bound firmly with strings (thongs), resembling Varuza’s noose.
* Rather, ‘not so very near,’ ‘nicht allzu nahe, nicht gar zu nahe.’

* Both here, and on Taitt. S. I, 2, 13, Sayama takes ‘ varshman’
in the sense of ‘ body (sarira),’

* Or rather, ‘ nave-boards (mabhya).’ The cart wheels are de-
scribed as consisting, after the fashion prevalent in Malava (Katy.
VIII, 4, 5 scholl.), of three parallel boards: the two outer ones
form segments, and the middle and largest one has the nave fixed
to it, the axle-pin running through its centre. It is on this middle
board that he is to make the carts stand. Perhaps ‘kshema’
should be taken in the sense of ‘security, firm position,’ instead of
‘repose, rest,’ in which case the upright position of the middle
board would seem to be compared with a man in upright position;
‘nabhi (nabhya)’ meaning both ‘navel’ and ‘nave.’


II KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 23. 133


21. The Adhvaryu, having gone round along the
north side (of the carts), props the southern cart,
with (Vag. S. V, 18; Rig-veda I, 154, 1), ‘Now will
I declare the heroic deeds of Vishxu, who
measured out the earthly regions; who
propped the upper seat, striding thrice, the
wide-stepping! For Vishzu (I prop) thee!’ He
fixes the prop in a different place from where (it is
fixed) in ordinary practice’.

22. The assistant then props the northern cart,
with (Vag. S. V, 19), ‘Either from the heaven,
O Vishzu, or from the earth, or from the
great, wide airy region, O Vishzu, fill both
thine hands with wealth and bestow on us
from the right andthe left! For Vishzuthee!’
He fixes the prop in a different place from where
(it is fixed) in ordinary practice. The reason why
he performs with prayers to Vishwu is that the
Soma-cart belongs to Vishvzu.

23. He then makes (the sacrificer) say, after touch-
ing the middle reed-mat? (Vag. S.V, 20; Rig-veda I,
154, 2), ‘Let Vishzu then be praised for his
power, terrible like a wild beast prowling
about the mountains, on whose three wide
stridesall beingsabide!’ Now that (mat-covering)
indeed is his (Vishzu, the shed’s) upper skull-bone®


1 Sdyava, on Taitt. S. I, 2, 13, remarks:—‘ The southern and
northern parts of the yoke represent the ears of the cart. Through
a hole (is effected) the firm tying (of the yoke parts) to the shafts.
At the juncture (sandhi) at the (place of) fastening of the southern
(part of the yoke) the prop is fixed.’ In ordinary practice the prop
is put up to support the extreme end of the shafts or pole.

* See p. 128, note r.

’ Apparently the parietal bone is meant; or perhaps the frontal
bone. The Kamva text reads: ‘ He then touches that reed-mat, or


134 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

ile Rear 15 allan Me anime ew carmen
for thereon, as it were, the other skull-bones rest:
this is why he says ‘ they abide on.’

24. Thereupon he makes him say, after touching
the front-band (Vag. S. V, 2), ‘Thou art Vishzu’s
fillet;’ for it indeed is his fillet. He then makes
him say, after touching the two upright hurdles,
‘Ye are the corners of Vishzu’s mouth;’ for
they indeed are the corners of his mouth. Then
that mat which is behind there, that indeed is that
skull-bone of his here behind (viz. the occiput).

25. With ‘Thou art Vishzu’s sewer’, he sews
(the hurdles to the four door posts) with cord by
means of a wooden pin. With,‘Thou art Vishzu’s
fixed (point)?,’ he then makes a knot, ‘lest it should
fall asunder. That same (knot) he undoes when
the work is completed; and thus disease® befalls
not either the Adhvaryu or the Sacrificer. The
completed (cart-shed) he touches with, ‘Thou art
Vishzu's own,’ for the Soma-cart (and shed) be-
longs to Vishzu.


cane-frame, above, with ‘Let Vishwu...’’ for that is for him (Vishzu,
the shed) what that skull-bone is up here. And when he says “they
abide upon,” it is because that rest on the other skull-bones [? adhi
hy etad anyeshu kap4leshu kshiyanti!]. Then what two reed-mats
there are on the two carts, they indeed are for him what the two
skull-bones are here on both sides. And that reed-mat, or cane-
frame, which he puts on there behind (or behind that one), that is
for him what the skull-bone behind is.’

* Sy, explained by Sfyana as ‘thread, cord,’ by Mahidhara as
‘needle.’

* ? Dhruva4, the ‘firm one,’ (? ‘pole-star.’) The St. Petersburg
Dictionary gives the tentative meaning ‘knot.’ The Taitt. S. reads
‘dhruvam,’

* Graha, lit. ‘seizing.’ For Varuaa, whose attribute the knot is
(I, 3, 1, 16), seizing upon men by means of disease ; see II, 5, 2, 2.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 4. 135


Fourtu BrAHMANA.


1, It is for a twofold reason that the sounding-
holes are dug. The cart-shed, truly, is the head
of the sacrificer; and what four holes there are here
in the head—namely, these two and these two'—
those he thereby makes: for this reason he digs the
sounding-holes.

2. Now the gods and the Asuras, both of them
sprung from Pragapati, were contending. The Asuras
then by way of witchcraft buried charms? within
these worlds, thinking, ‘ Peradventure we may thus
overcome the gods.’

3. The gods then prevailed. By means of these
(sounding-holes) they dug up those magic charms.
Now, when a charm is dug up, it becomes inopera-
tive and useless. And in like manner, if any mali-
cious enemy buries here charms by way of witchcraft
for this (sacrificer), does he thereby dig them up:
this is why he digs sounding-holes. He digs just
beneath the fore-part of the shafts of the southern
cart.

4. He takes up the spade’, with the text (Vag. S.


1 Viz. the ears and nostrils.

® Krityim valagin nifakhnud, ‘they dug in, as a charm, secret
(magic) objects.’ Valaga is explained as charms, consisting of
bones, nails, hair, foot-dust, and similar objects, tied up in a piece of
worn matting or cloth, or the like, and dug into the ground arm-
deep, for causing injury to enemies. See Taitt. S. VI, 2, 11, where
Professor Weber refers to Wuttke, Der Deutsche Volksaberglenbe,
§ 492 seq.

’ The instrument used seems to be a kind of scoop or trowel,


136 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


V, 22), ‘At the impulse of the divine Savitvz,
I take thee with the arms of the Asvins, with
the handsof Pishan: thouarta woman. The
significance of this formula is the same (as before).
That spade (abhri, fem.) is indeed a female: there-
fore he says ‘thou art a woman.’

5. He draws their outlines, saving? the measure
of a span, with, ‘Here do I cut off the necks of
the Rakshas!’ For the spade is the thunderbolt:
it is with the thunderbolt that he thus cuts off the
necks of the Rakshas.

6. Let him first mark off the right (southern) one
of the two that are in front; then the left one of the
two behind; then the right one of those behind;
then the left one of those in front.

7. But they say conversely, that he should mark
off first the left one of the two behind ; then the right
one of those in front; then the right one of those
behind; and then the left one of those in front.
Or he may also mark them off in one and the
same direction*?: but let him, in any case, mark
off last of all the one which is on the left of those
in front.

8. He digs them, in the very same order in which
they have been marked off, with, ‘Thou art great,


sharpened on one side. For a fuller description, see VI, 3, 1,
30 seq.

* Vind, i.e, leaving that space between each two adjoining upa-
ravas. They are themselves to be round, a span in diameter.
Hence by connecting the four centres by lines, a square of two
spans (of thumb and forefinger), or one cubit, is obtained. See
Baudh. Sulvas. tor.

* That is, successively the south-eastern, the south-western, the
north-western, and last, the north-eastern hole.


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, I 3. 137


of great sound!’—he praises and extols them, when
he says, ‘Thou art great, of great sound ;’—‘ Utter
thou the great voice unto Indra!’—Indra, for-
sooth, is the deity of the sacrifice; and the cart-shed
belonging to Vishzu, he thereby makes it to be
connected with Indra: therefore he says, ‘ Utter
thou the great voice unto Indra!’

9. ‘The Rakshas-killing, charm-killing
(voice),’ for it is indeed for the killing of the charms
of the Rakshas that these (holes) are dug ;—‘ Of
Vishzu;’ for that voice in the cart-shed is indeed
Vishzu's.

10. He throws out (the earth from) them in the
order in which he has dug them, with (Vag. S. V, 23),
‘Here do I cast out the charm which the alien,
which the inmate of my house has buried for
me!’ Either an alien or an inmate of his house
buries charms by way of witchcraft : these he thereby
casts out.

11. ‘Here do I cast out the charm which
my equal, which my unequal has buried for
me!’ Either one equal, or one unequal, to him
buries charms by way of witchcraft: these he
thereby casts out.

12. ‘Here do I cast out the charm which
the kinsman, which the stranger has buried
for me!’ Either a kinsman or a stranger buries
charms by way of witchcraft: these he thereby
casts out.

13. ‘Here doI cast out the charm which the
countryman, which the foreigner has buried
for me!’ Either a countryman or a foreigner buries
charms by way of witchcraft: these he thereby casts
out. With ‘I cast out witchcraft!’ he finally


138 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


throws out (the earth remaining in the several
holes'), whereby he casts out witchcraft.

14. Let him dig them arm-deep; for that being
the end (extreme limit to which he can reach) he
thereby in the end brings witchcraft to naught.
He connects them crossways by (underground) chan-
nels’; or, if he cannot crossways, he may do so
in one and the same direction. This is why these
(openings of the) vital airs are connected by channels
farther (inside).

15. In the same order in which he has dug them
he makes (the sacrificer) touch them, with the texts
(Vag. S. V, 24), ‘Self-ruling thou art, a slayer
of enemics! Ever-ruling thou art, a slayer
of haters! Man-ruling thou art, a slayer of
Rakshas! All-ruling thou art, a slayer of foe-
men!’ This is the blessing of that work: he thereby
invokes a blessing.

16. The Adhvaryu and Sacrificer then touch one
another (with their right hands through the holes),
the Adhvaryu is at the right one of those in front,
and the Sacrificer at the left one of those behind.
The Adhvaryu asks, ‘Sacrificer, what is here ?’—
‘Happiness!’ he says.—‘(Be) that ours in common!’
says the Adhvaryu in a low voice.

17. Thereupon the Adhvaryu is at the right one
of those behind, and the Sacrificer at the left one of
those in front. The Sacrificer asks, ‘Adhvaryu,
what is here ?’—‘ Happiness!’ he says.—‘(Be) that
mine!’ says the Sacrificer. Now in that they thus


* That is, these words are to be pronounced at the end of each
of the preceding four formulas, and the remaining loose soil is
therewith to be removed from the respective hole.

* Lit. he inter-perforates, inter-channels,


III KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 21. 139


touch one another, thereby they make the vital airs
yoke-fellows: hence these vital airs meet together
farther (inside). And in that, when asked, he replies,
‘Happiness (bhadram),’ thereby he utters the wish
of ‘prosperity (kaly4zam)’ of ordinary speech : that is
why, being asked, he replies, ‘Happiness. There-
upon he sprinkles (the holes with water): one and
the same forsooth is the significance of sprinkling ;
he thereby renders them pure.

18. He sprinkles, with the text (Vag. S. V, 25),
‘You, the Rakshas-killers, the charm-killers;’
for they are indeed Rakshas-killers as well as charm-
killers; ‘Vishzu’s own, I sprinkle;’ for they
indeed belong to Vishzu.

19. What remains of the sprinkling-water he then
pours out into the pits ;—what moisture there is here
in the vital airs’, that he thereby puts into them:
hence that moisture in the vital airs.

20. He pours it out with, ‘You, the Rakshas-
killers, the charm-killers, Vishzu’'s own, | pour
out.’ Thereupon he spreads barhis-grass, both such
as is turned with its tops to the east and such as is
turned to the north?; what hair there is here at (the
openings of) the vital airs, that he thereby bestows :
hence that hair at (the openings of) the vital airs.

21. He spreads it with, ‘You, the Rakshas-
killers, the charm-killers, Vishzu’s own, I
spread. He, as it were, covers the bodies on
the top, for that (grass) is indeed his (Vishzu’s)
hair *.


1 The K4zva text has fidra (‘holes, openings’) instead of
prana.


RICO. bs Be 7 UES
3 Or, the hair of the sacrificial man; see III, 5, 3, 1 seq.


140 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


22. Thereon he lays two pressing-boards' with,
‘You, the Rakshas-killers, the charm-killers,
Vishzu’s own, I lay down;’ they are indeed his
(Vishzu's) jaws. He surrounds them (with earth)
with, ‘You, the Rakshas-killers, the charm-
killers, Vishzu'’s own, I surround;’ he thereby
steadies them, makes them immovable.

23. Now the pressing-skin is cut straight all
round and (dyed) red all over, for it is his (Vishztu’s)
tongue: the reason, then, why it is quite red, tis
because this tongue is, as it were, red. He lays it
down with, ‘Thou art Vishzu’s own;’ for it
indeed belongs to Vishzu?.

24. He then brings down the (five) press-stones.
The press-stones, doubtless, are his (Vishzu’s) teeth :
hence, when they press (the Soma) with the stones
it is as if he chewed with his teeth. He puts them
down with, ‘Ye are Vishzu’s own;’ for they
indeed belong to Vishwu. Thus, then, the head
of the sacrifice is complete.


Sixtn ApHYAYA. First BRAHMANA.


1. The Sadas® is no other than his (Vishzu, the
sacrifice's) belly; therefore they feed (drink) in the


’ The pressing-boards are a cubit long, and somewhat broader
behind than in front. They are placed one south of the other, and
so as to lie close together behind (sambaddh4nte, K4mva rec.), or
the space of two inches between them. The space between them
is filled up with earth.

* East of the ‘sound-holes’ he raises a square mound (khara),
covered with gravel, for placing vessels on, KAty. VIII, 5, 28.

* The Sadas is a shed or tent, facing the east with its long side,
which is to measure eighteen (or twenty-one, or twenty-four, or,
according to the Sulva-sftra, twenty-seven) cubits, the breadth by


111 KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 5. 141


Sadas; for whatever food is eaten here on earth, all
that settles down in the belly. And because all the
gods sat (sad) in it, therefore it is called sadas: and
so do these Brahmans of every family now sit therein.
By way of deity it belongs to Indra.

2. In the middle of it he puts up a (post) of
udumbara wood (Ficus Glomerata); for the udum-
bara means strength and food; now the Sadas
being his (Vishzu’s belly), he thereby puts food
therein; this is why he puts up an udumbara (post)
in the middle of it.

3. From the peg! which stands in the middle on
the hind-part of the altar, he strides six steps east-
wards (along the ‘spine’); the seventh he strides
away from it to the right, for the sake of complete-
ness, and there marks off a pit.

4. He takes the spade with (Vag. S. V, 26), ‘At
the impulse of the divine Savitvz, I take thee
with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands
of Pdshan: thou art a woman; the significance
of this formula is the same (as before). That spade,
indeed, is a female (feminine): therefore. he says
‘thou art a woman.’

5. He then marks off the pit with, ‘Herewith


six cubits (or ten, or one half that of the long side). The udumbara
post, according to some, is to stand exactly in the centre of the
shed; or, according to others, at an equal distance from the (long)
east and west sides; the ‘spine’ (cf. p. 112, note 2) in that case
dividing the building into two equal parts, a northern and a southern
one. In the middle the shed is to be of the sacrificer’s height, and
from thence the ceiling is to slant towards the ends where it is to
reach up to the sacrificer’s navel. According to the Black Yagus,
the erection of the Sadas precedes the digging of the Uparavas,
described in the preceding Brahmana. Taitt. S. VI, 2, ro, rr.
1 The anta/pata, see III, 5, 1, 1.


142 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


I cut off the necks of the Rakshas!’ for the
spade is the thunderbolt: it is with the thunder-
bolt that he cuts off the necks of the evil spirits.

6. Thereupon he digs: eastwards he throws up
the heap of earth. Having made the udumbara
(post) of the same size as the sacrificer’, he cuts
it smooth all round, and lays it down, with the top
to the east, in front (of the pit). Thereon he lays
barhis-grass of the same length.

7. Now the sprinkling-water (used on this occa-
sion) contains barley-corns. For the essence (sap)
of plants is water; wherefore plants when eaten
alone do not satiate; and the essence of water, on
the other hand, are the plants; wherefore water
when drunk alone does not satiate; but only when
the two are united they satiate; for then they are
sapful: ‘with the sapful I will sprinkle,’ so he
thinks.

8. Now, the gods and the Asurus, both of them
sprung from Pragdpati, were contending. Then all
the plants went away from the gods, but the barley
plants alone went not from them.

9. The gods then prevailed: by means of these
(barley-grains) they attracted to themselves all the
plants of their enemies; and because they attracted
(yu) therewith, therefore they are called yava
(barley).

10. They said, ‘Come, let us put into the barley
whatever sap there is of all plants!’ And, accord-
ingly, whatever sap there was of all plants, that they
put into the barley: therefore the latter thrives
lustily where other plants wither, for in such wise


* It is the part which is to stand above ground that is to be of
the sacrificer’s size,


111 KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, cc) eas


did they put the sap intothem. And in like manner
does this one now by means of those (barley-grains)
attract to himself all the plants of his enemies: this
is why the sprinkling-water contains barley-corns.

11. He throws the barley-corns into it, with,
‘Thou art barley (yava): keep thou (yavaya)
from us the haters, keepfromus the enemies!’
In this there is nothing obscure. He then besprinkles
(the post) ;—the significance of the sprinkling is one
and the same: he thereby renders it sacrificially pure.

12. He sprinkles (the top, middle, and bottom
parts), with, ‘For the sky—thee! for the air—
thee! forthe earth—thee!’ He thereby endows
these worlds with strength and sap, bestows strength
and sap on these worlds.

13. And the sprinkling-water which remains he
pours into the hole, with, ‘Be the worlds pure
wherein the Fathers reside!’ for a pit that is
dug is sacred to the Fathers: this he thereby
renders sacrificially pure.

14. He now strews barhis-grass therein, both
eastward-pointed and northward-pointed with, ‘Thou
art the seat of the Fathers;’ for that part of it
(the post) which is dug into the ground is sacred to
the Fathers: as though it were (naturally) established?
among plants, and not dug in, so does it become
established among those plants.

15. He raises it, with the text (Vag. S. V, 27),
‘Prop thou the sky! fill the air! stand firm on
the earth!’ Thereby he endows these worlds with
strength and sap, bestows strength and sap on these
worlds. |


1 Svaru/, ‘naturally grown,’ Taitt. S. VI, 2, 10, 4.


144 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


16. He then sinks it (in the hole, with),‘May Dyu-
tdna, the son of the Maruts, plant thee!—
Dyutdna the son of the Maruts, doubtless, is he that
blows yonder (the wind): by means of him he thus
plants it;—‘Mitra and Varuza with firm support!’
Mitra and Varuvza are the in-breathing and out-
breathing: he thus plants it with the in-breathing
and out-breathing.

17. He then heaps up (earth) round it, with, ‘I
enclose thee, winner of the priesthood, winner
of the nobility, winner of growth of wealth!’
Manifold, verily, is the prayer for blessing in the
sacrificial texts: by this one he prays for the priest-
hood and nobility, those two vital forces}. ‘Winner of
growth of wealth,’—growth of wealth means abun-
dance: he thereby prays for abundance.

18. He then presses it firmly all round, with,
‘Uphold thou the priesthood! uphold the
nobility, uphold our life, uphold our progeny!’
this is the blessing of this rite: that blessing he
thereby invokes. He presses it so as to be level
with the ground: with an (ordinary) hole (round
trees for watering) it is higher than the ground, but
in this way it is with the gods ;—and thus it is not
planted in an (ordinary) hole.

19. He then pours water thereon ;—wherever, in
digging, they wound or injure this (earth),—water
being a means of soothing,—there he soothes it by
that means of soothing, water, there he heals it by
water: therefore he pours water thereon.


* See III, 5, 2, 11 with note. The K4nva text has, bahvi va Asir
yaguéshu te asmé ete Asish& va sAste yad brahma a kshatram fa.


III KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 22. 145


20. He then makes (the sacrificer) say, while
touching it thus (Vag. S. V, 28), ‘Thou art firm:
may this sacrificer be firm in this homestead
through progeny '—or, ‘through cattle!’ thus
whatever wish he entertains that wish is accom-
plished unto him.

21. Thereupon, having taken clarified butter with
the dipping-spoon, he pours it upon the (forked)
top', with ‘O Heaven and Earth, be ye full of
ghee!’ whereby he endows the heaven and the
earth with strength and sap, bestows strength and
sap on them: upon them thus full of sap and affording
subsistence, these creatures subsist.

22. He then lays on a mat?, with, ‘Thou art
Indra’s mat,—for the Sadas belongs to Indra,—‘ a
shelter to every one,’ for Brahmans of all families
sit therein. He adds two mats, one on each side
thereof, and three north of them and three further
(to the north): these make nine. For the sacrifice


1 The post is to be furcate at the top, and between the branch-
stumps (forming as it were its ears) he is to put a piece of gold and
pour the ghee thereon; when the ghee reaches the ground, he is
to pronounce the final ‘Svaha!’ in accordance with the practice at
the homas; the gold representing, as it were, the sacrificial fre.
Sayama on Taitt. S. I, 3,1; Katy. VIII, 5, 37 seq.

2 That is, after putting up the posts of the front and back doors,
and laying the beams on, both longways and crossways, in the same
way as was done in erecting the Pradinavamsa and Havirdhana, he
is to spread over the beams the nine mats that are to form the
ceiling,—viz. first the middle, and then the two others, of the
three southern ones, thereupon three alongside these, across the
central part of the shed, and finally the three across the north side.
According to some authorities the central mats are laid down first,
and then those on the south and north sides. See Sayama on
Taitt. S. I, 3, 1 (p. 450).


[26] i


146 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Od NS ON Rae Hs Pe ET A eee ae
is threefold and nine also is threefold : for this reason
there are nine.

23. That Sadas has its tie-beams running (from
south) to north, and the cart-shed (from west) to east.
For this, the cart-shed, belongs exclusively to the
gods: hence neither food nor drink is taken therein,
because it belongs exclusively to the gods; and were
any one either to eat or to drink therein, his head
would verily burst asunder. But those two, the
Agnidhra and the Sadas, are common (to the gods
and men): hence food and drink is taken in these
two, because they are common (to the gods and men).
Now the north is the quarter of men: therefore the
Sadas has its tie-beams running (from south) to
north,

24. They enclose it!, with the text (Vag. S. V, 29;
Rig-veda I, 10, 12),‘ May these songs encompass
thee on every side, O thou that delightest in
songs! May these favours be favourably
received by thee, invigorating the vigorous!’
He that delights in songs, forsooth, is Indra, and
songs mean the people: he thus surrounds the
nobility with the people, and therefore the nobility is
here surrounded on both sides by the people.

25. [Thereupon he sews (the hurdles to the posts)
with a needle and cord ?, with the text (Vag. S. V, 30),
‘Thou art Indra’s sewer. With, ‘Thou art
Indra’'s fixed (point), he then makes a knot, ‘lest it
should fall asunder.’ He undoes it again, when the
work is completed ; and thus disease befalls not either
the Adhvaryu or the Sacrificer. When completed, he


' Viz. with hurdles, or upright grass-mats, fastened to the door-
posts by means of cord.
* see Til, §, 2, 86.


III KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 28. 147


touches it (the Sadas) with, ‘Thou art Indra’s
own!’ for the Sadas belongs to Indra.

26. In the north—with regard to the back part of
the Soma-carts '—he then raises the Agnidhra (shed).
One half of it should be inside the altar, and one half
outside; or more than one half may be inside the
altar and less outside ; or the whole of it may be in-
side the altar. When completed, he touches it with,
‘Thou art theAll-gods’ own!’ To the All-gods
it belongs, because on the day before (the Soma
feast) the All-gods abide in it by the Vasativart water.

27. Now, once on a time, the gods, while per-
forming sacrifice, were afraid of an attack on the part
of the Asura-Rakshas. The Asura-Rakshas attacked
them from the south and forced them out of the
Sadas, and overturned those hearths (dhishzya) of
theirs which are within the Sadas.

28. For, indeed, all of those (hearths) at one time
burnt as brightly as this Ahavaniya and the Gar-
hapatya and the Agnidhriya; but ever since that time
when they (the Asuras) overturned them they do not
burn. They forced them (the gods) back to the
Agnidhra (fire) and even won from them one half of
the Agnidhra. From there the All-gods gained
immortality ?,—-whence it (the Agnidhra fire) is sacred
to the All-gods.


1 North of the clog (apalamba) of the carts, Kavva rec.

? They gained it, as would seem, by means of the other half of
the Agnidhra fire. Cf. Ait. Br. II, 36. Sdiyana interprets ‘tan
apy ardham Agnidhrasya gigyus’ by, ‘[They forced those (gods)
back to the Saas ;] and they (the gods), having reached the side
(ardham=samipam) of the Agnidhra (fire), conquered the Asuras
and won immortality. The Kava rec. reads:—‘ Te hipy Agni-
dhrasyardham gigyus te 'rdhin (l!read ‘rdhad) etad visve deva
amrvtatvam apagayan.’

L 2


148 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


29. The gods kindled them again, as one would
(light the fire where he is going to) stay. There-
fore they are kindled at every Soma feast. Where-
fore the duties of the Agnidh should be discharged
by one who is accomplished. Now he who is known
and learned in sacred lore?! is truly accomplished :
hence they take to the Agnidh his Dakshiva first’,
since it is from thence (from the Agnidh’s fire) that
the gods gained immortality. And if weakness were
to come upon one of those that are consecrated, let
(the Adhvaryu) say, ‘Lead him to the Agnidhra !’—
thinking ‘that is unscathed, there he will not meet
with affliction ®.’ And because the All-gods gained
immortality from there, therefore it is sacred to the
All-gods.


Second BRAHMANA,
1. The Dhishzya-hearths‘, forsooth, are no other


* Or, as Sayama takes it, ‘he who is known (as well-conducted)
and a repeater (reader) of the Veda.’

* See IV, 3, 4, 19 seq.

> Or, ‘that (fire) will not suffer evil’ (Artim na labheta, Sayana).

* There are altogether. eight dhishnyas, two of which, viz. the
Agnidhra and the MargAltya, are raised north and south of the
back part of the cart-shed (havirdhana) respectively ; ; while the other
six are raised inside the Sadas along the east side of it, viz. five of
them north of the ‘ spine,’ belonging (from south to north) to the
Hotri, Brahmandkhamsi, Potrt, Nesh/rt, and A&havika re-
spectively ; and one south of the spine, exactly south-east of the
Udumbara post, for the Maitravaruma (or Pras&str?) priest. These
six priests, together with the Agnidhra, are called the ‘seven Hotris.’
The Agnidhra and Margiliya have square sheds with four posts
erected over them, open on the east side and on the side facing the
cart-shed. The Agnidhra hearth is thrown up first, and the M4r-
galiya last of all; and the Maitravaruza’s immediately after that of
the Hotrs, For ‘the formulas by which they are consecrated, see
Vag. 5..V, 33, 32.


III KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 5. 149


than its (the sacrifice’s) congeners'. They have the
same marks, and those which have the same marks
are congeners; and these, then, are those (corres-
ponding limbs) of its trunk.

2. Now Soma was in heaven, and the gods were
here on earth. The gods desired, ‘Would that
Soma might come to us; we might sacrifice with
him, when come.’ They produced those two illu-
sions, Suparzi and Kadri?; Suparmi, forsooth, was
Va4& (speech)*, and Kadrd was this (earth). They
caused discord between them.

3. They then disputed and said, ‘Which of us
shall spy furthest, shall win the other‘.'"—' So be it!’
Kadrfi then said, ‘ Espy thou!’

4. Suparzt said, ‘On yonder shore of this ocean
there stands a white horse at a post, that I see;
doest thou also see it?’—‘I verily do!’ Then said
Kadrd, ‘Its tail was just now hanging down; there,
now the wind tosses it, that I see.’

5. Now when Suparmt said, ‘On yonder shore of
this ocean, the ocean, forsooth, is the altar, she
thereby meant the altar; ‘there stands a white horse
at a post, the white horse, forsooth, is Agni, and
the post means the sacrificial stake. And when
Kadra said, ‘Its tail was just now hanging down;


1 That is, the parts of the body corresponding to one another,
as arms, loins, &c.

* See III, 2, 4, 1 seq.; Oldenberg, Zeitsch. d. Deutsch. Morg.
Ges. XXXVII, p. 67 seq.; Weber, Ind. Stud. VIII, p. 31.

3 In Taitt. S. VI, 1, 6; Kasé. XNIII, 10, suparni, ‘the well-
winged,’ is identified with the sky.

* Lit. ‘she shall win both of us,’ i.e. each saying that the other
would win herself.


150 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


—


there, now the wind tosses it, that I see;’ this is
nothing else than the rope.

6. Suparmt then said, ‘Come, let us now fly
thither to know which of us is the winner. Kadrd
said, ‘Fly thou thither; thou wilt tell us, which of
us is the winner.’

7. Suparzt then flew thither; and it was even
as Kadri had said. When she had returned,
she (Kadrd) said to her,‘ Hast thou won, or 12.
—‘ Thou!’ she replied. Such is the story called
‘Suparwi-K adrava!.’

8. Then said Kadrd, ‘Verily I have won thine
own self; yonder is Soma in the heaven: fetch
him hither for the gods, and thereby redeem thy-
self from the gods?!’—‘So be it!’ She brought
forth the metres; and that GAyatrt fetched Soma
from heaven. :

9. He was enclosed between two golden cups?®;
sharp-edged they closed together at every twinkling
of the eye’; and these two, forsooth, were Consecra-
tionand Penance. Those Gandharva Soma-wardens
watched over him; they are these hearths, these
fire-priests.

10, She tore off one of the two cups, and gave it
to the gods,—this was Consecration: therewith the
gods consecrated themselves,


* ‘And because these two there disputed, therefore the story
called “ Sauparmakadrava” is here told,’ Kamva text. It is difficult
to see how this statement came to be inserted here, unless it be be-
cause of a division in the text,—this paragraph being the nineteen
hundreth in the Madhyandina recension. This explanation would
not, however, apply to the Kamva text.

* ©Therewith redeem thee from death,’ Kanva rec.

* Kusi?=kosi, ‘pod’ (or case). Sayama explains it by ‘Ayudha’
(? weapon, or vessel, sheath).


Il KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, Ls... Bee


11, She then tore off the second cup, and gave it
to the gods,—this was Penance: therewith the gods
underwent penance, to wit the Upasads, for the
Upasads are penance.

12. She took possession (4-4akhada)! of Soma by
means of (a stick of) khadira wood (Acacia Catechu),
whence (the name) Khadira; and because she thereby
took possession of him, therefore the sacrificial stake
and the wooden sword (sphya) are of khadira wood.
She then carried him off while he was under the
charge of the A&f#avaka, wherefore this AéAavaka
priest was excluded (from drinking Soma).

13. Indra and Agni preserved him for the produc-
tion of creatures, whence the A&/avaka priest belongs
to Indra and Agni.

14. Therefore the consecrated keep charge of the
king (Soma), ‘lest (the Gandharvas) should carry
him off.’ Let him therefore guard him diligently,
for verily in whosesoever charge they carry him off,
he is excluded (from the Soma).

15. Wherefore the students guard their teacher,
his house, and cattle, lest he should be taken from
them. Let him therefore guard him (Soma) dili-
gently in that place, for verily in whosesoever
charge they carry him off, he is excluded therefrom.
By means of him Suparzi redeemed herself from the
gods; wherefore they say, ‘He who has sacrificed
shares in the world of bliss.’


1 Sdyana takes it in the sense of ‘she swallowed (khad),’ but 1
should feel inclined to refer it to the same verb ‘khid’ (? khad) as
‘Akhidat’ coming immediately after it. Could Pamini’s Satra VI, 1,
52 refer to this passage? [Ka4s. V., Benares edition Aikhada; MS.
Indian Office Aakhida.] The Kazva text has the same reading:
akakhida-akhidat.


152 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


i


16. Verily, even in being born, man, by his own
self, is born as a debt (owing) to death. And in that
he sacrifices, thereby he redeems himself from death,
even as Suparmt then redeemed herself from the
gods.

17. The gods worshipped with him. Those Gan-
dharva Soma-wardens came after him; and having
come up they said, ‘ Do ye let us share in the sacri-
fice, exclude us not from the sacrifice; let there be
for us also a share in the sacrifice !’

18. They said, ‘What will there be for us, then ?’—
‘Even as in yonder world we have been his keepers,
so also will we be his keepers here on earth!’

19. The gods spake, ‘So be it!’ By saying, ‘(Here
are) your Soma-wages...’ he assigns to them the
price of the Soma'. They then said unto them,
‘At the third pressing an offering of ghee shall fall
to your share, but not one of Soma, for the Soma-
draught has been taken from you, wherefore ye are
not worthy of a Soma-offering!’ And accordingly,
when he pours ghee on the hearths by means of
fagots*, at the evening libation, that same offering
of ghee falls to their share, but not one of Soma.

20. ‘And what they will offer in the fire that
will satiate you;’ hence that which they offer in
the fire satiates them. ‘And when they will move
about, holding the Soma over each’, that will
satiate you;’ hence when they move about, holding
the Soma over each (hearth), that satiates them.


Se
—-—


' See III, 3, 3, 11.

* For these oblations poured upon burning bundles of chips and
grass held over the several hearth-fires, see 1V, 4, 2, 7.

* Yad va uparyupari somam bibhratah samfarishyanti, Kava rec.
(? holding the Soma close above the dhishnyas). This passage


111 KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 23. 153


Wherefore let not the Adhvaryu pass between! the
hearths, for the Adhvaryu carries the Soma, and
they sit waiting for him (Soma) with open mouths,
and he would enter into their open mouths; and
either Agni would burn him, or else that god who
rules over beasts (Rudra) would seek after him;
hence whenever the Adhvaryu should have busi-
ness in the hall, let him pass north of the Agnidhra
shed.

21. Now it is for the protection of Soma that
those (hearths) are thrown up, to wit the Ahava-
niya in front (on the high altar), the Margallya in the
south, and the Agnidhriya in the north; and those
that are in the Sadas (protect him) from behind.

22. They are in part raised*, in part they are
assigned*. And, in truth, they themselves insisted
thereon, saying, ‘They shall in part raise us, and
in part they shall assign us; thus we shall know
ayain that heavenly world from which we have
come, thus we shall not go astray.’

23. And whichever of them are raised they are


apparently refers to the Aamasa-Adhvaryus or cup-bearers, who at
the time of the Savanas hold up their cups filled with Soma, which,
after libations have been made of it on the fire, is drunk by the
priests.

1 Samay4; the KAzva text has ‘ pratyan (in going to the back)’
instead.

* That is, bestrewed with gravel.

’ When the dhishnyas have been completed, the Adhvaryu,
standing east of the front door of the Sadas, has to point at the
Ahavaniya, the Bahishpavamana-place, the pit whence the earth for
the hearths and high altar was taken, the slaughtering place, the
Udumbara post, the Brahman’s seat, the (old Ahavaniya at the)
hall-door, the old Garhapatya, and the Utkara (heap of rubbish)
one by one with the texts, Vag. S. V, 32, 2, &c. Katy. VIII, 6,


23, 24.


154 SATAPATIA-BRAHMANA.


eT -


thereby visibly in this world; but whichever of
them are assigned they are thereby visibly in
yonder world.

24. They have two names; for, in truth, they
themselves insisted thereon, saying, ‘We have not
prospered with these names, since Soma has been
taken away from us; well, then, let us take each
a second name!’ They took each a second name,
and therewith prospered, inasmuch as they from
whom the Soma-draught had been taken had a
share in the sacrifice assigned to them; hence they
have two names. Wherefore let a Brahman, if
he prosper not, take a second name, for verily he
prospers, whosoever, knowing this, takes a second
name.

25. Now what he offers in the fire, that he offers
unto the gods, thereby the gods exist; and what
(Soma) is consumed in the Sadas, that he offers
unto men, thereby men exist; and in that the
Nardsamsa’ (cups of Soma) stand with the Soma-
carts, thereby he offers unto the Fathers, thereby
the Fathers exist.

26. But those creatures which are not admitted
to the sacrifice are forlorn; wherefore he now admits
to the sacrifice those creatures here on earth that
are not forlorn; behind? the men are the beasts;
and behind the gods are the birds, the plants, and


* Narfsamsa, ‘pertaining to Narasamsa (man’s praise, i.e. Agni, or
Soma, or the Fathers),’ is the name given to certain remains of
Soma-libations (or potations) sacred to the Fathers, which, in the
nine Soma-cups, are temporarily deposited under the axle of the
southern Soma-cart, till they are drunk by the priests at the end of
the libation,


* Or, alongside of, corresponding to, included in, them (anu).


111 KANDA, 6 ADIYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 3. 155


— ae


the trees; and thus whatsoever exists here on earth
all that is admitted to the sacrifice. And verily
both the gods and men, and the Fathers drink
together’, and this is their symposium; of old they
drank together visibly, but now they do so unseen,


THE VAISARGINA OFFERINGS AND LEADING
FORWARD OF AGNI AND SOMA.


Tuirp BRAHMANA.


1. Verily he who consecrates himself, consecrates
himself for the sake of this All; for he consecrates
himself for the sacrifice, and this All indeed results
from* the sacrifice; having prepared the sacrifice
for which he consecrates himself, he now sets
free (or produces) this All.

2. The reason why he performs the Vaisargina
offerings is this. Theyare called Vaisargina, because
he sets free (vi-sarg) this All; wherefore let him
who takes part in the rite* touch (the sacrificer)
from behind; but if he have to go elsewhere (on
business) he need not heed this. When he sacri-
fices, he sets free this All.

3. And again why he performs the Vaisargina
offerings. Vishzu, forsooth, is the sacrifice ; by his
strides he obtained (vi-kram) for the gods that all-
pervading power (vikranti) which now belongs to
them; by his first step he gained this same (earth) ;
by the second, the region of air; and by the last,


1 *Sma’ does not seem here to have its usual force, which it has
in the next sentence, combined with ‘ pura.’

* Or, corresponds to (anu).

* That is, a blood-relation of the sacrificer, dwelling together
with him. Cf. also p. 40, note 1.


156 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the heaven. And that same pervading power
Vishzu, the sacrifice, obtains by his strides for this
(sacrificer) when he sacrifices: this is why he per-
forms the Vaisargina offerings.

4. In the afternoon, having covered the altar
(with sacrificial grass), and handed (to the sacrificer
and his wife) one half of the fast-milk, they enter
(the hall), put fire-wood on', and prepare the under-
layer (of gravel). He (the Adhvaryu) puts the
butter on (the old GAarhapatya), and cleans the
spoons. The sacrificer takes the king (Soma) on
his lap. He (the Adhvaryu) scatters about the
(dust of the) foot-print of the Soma-cow behind
the (new) Garhapatya for the sake of a firm stand-
ing, for it is with the foot that one stands firmly.

5. Now some divide it (the dust) into four
parts*: one fourth part (they put) into the under-
layer whereon they take up the Ahavantya (for
transferring it to the high altar); with one fourth
part they anoint the axle; one fourth part (they
put) into this underlayer (for taking out the Agni-
dhriya fire); and one fourth part he scatters about
behind the Garhapatya.

6. But let him not do this; let him rather scatter
it about entirely behind the Garhapatya. Having
then purified the ghee, hé takes thereof four ladlings
(with the sruva), both in the guhd and in the upa-
bhvzt; and clotted ghee in five ladlings, with (Vag.


" Viz. on the Ahavantya of the Prasinavamsa (hall) now serving
as the Garhapatya, and generally called saladvarya, i.e. the one
near the (front or eastern) hall-door.

* See p. 121, note 2.

* Prishad-Agya (lit. mottled butter) is clarified butter raixed with
sour milk,


III KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 9. 157


S. V, 35), ‘Thou art a light endowed with al!
forms, the flame of the All-gods;’ for the
clotted ghee belongs to the All-gods. When the
wood is well kindled, they hold the spoons for him.

7- He then offers', with, ‘Thou, O Soma, wilt
widely withhold thy protection from the life-
injuring* hatreds put forth by others, Hail!’
Thereby he takes a firm stand on this resting-place,
the earth, and gains this world.

8. He then offers the second oblation to (Soma)
the Nimble, with, ‘May the Nimble graciously
accept the butter, Hail!’ For he (Soma) spake
upon that time, ‘ Verily I am afraid of the Rakshas : do
ye make me to be too small for their deadly shaft, so
that the evil spirits (the Rakshas) shall not injure me
on the way; and take me across in the form of a
drop, for the drop is nimble.’ And accordingly,
having made him too small for the deadly shaft,
they lead him safely across in the form of a drop,
from fear of the Rakshas, for the drop is nimble:
this is why he offers the second oblation to (Soma)
the Nimble.

9. They lift the (burning) fire-wood, and place it
on the support. He then says (to the Hotr~),
‘Recite for Agni, taken forward!’ or (say some),
‘__ for Soma, led forward.’ But let him say, ‘ Recite
for Agni, taken forward °!’


1 He offers some ghee from a substitute spoon (prafarami), as
the proper offering-spoons now filled with ghee and clotted ghee
have to be carried with the fire to the Agnidhra.

2 Mahidhara explains ‘tanfikrit’ by ‘tanm krintanti Aindanti.’
It ought rather to mean ‘ body-making,’—? from the enemies that
assume (various) forms.’

’ The KAnva text, on the contrary, enjoins that he is to say,
‘Recite for Soma...!’ In the Hotr?’s ritual this is called the


158 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAMA.


-_- A a ee eee


to. They take the pressing-stones, the Soma-
trough (drova-kalasa), Vayu’s cups’, the (twenty
pieces of) fire-wood, the enclosing-sticks of karsh-
marya wood (Gmelina Arborea), one prastara of
asvavala grass*, and the two Vidhvrtis of sugar-
cane; that barhis (which was used before’) is tied
up therewith. Further, the two spits for (roasting)
the omenta‘, the two ropes (for binding the stake
and victims), the two churning-sticks (for producing
fire), the adhimanthana chip, and the two vvzshana’,
—having taken up all these they go forward (to the
Agnidhra) : thus the sacrifice goes upwards ®.

11, While they proceed thither, he makes (the
sacrificer) say the text (Vag. S. V, 36; Rig-veda I,
189, 1),‘O Agni, lead us on a good path unto
wealth, thou, O God, that knowest all works!
keep thou from us the sin that leadeth astray,
and we will offer unto thee most ample adora-
tion!’ He thereby places Agni in front, and Agni
marches in front repelling the evil spirits; and they
take him thither on a (way) free from danger and


Agnishoma-pravayana. For the seventeen verses (brought up to
twenty-one by repetitions) of the Hotrz, see Ait. Br. I, 30 (Haug,
Translation, p. 68); Asv. IV, 10. The Soma is carried either
by the Brahman himself or by the sacrificer. Katy. XI, 1, 13, 14.

* The‘ Viyavya’ are wooden cups shaped like a mortar. It seems
here to include all the Soma-cups, see IV, 1,3,7-10; Katy. VIII, 7, 5.

* See III, 4, 1, 17—18.

* Viz. at the guest-offering, see p. 103, note 3. It was tied up
with the three objects mentioned immediately before.

* The vapdsrapani are sticks of kirshmarya wood.

* Tor these objects, see p. go, note 5.

* “Thus that sacrifice goes upwards to yonder heavenly world,
and, the sacrifice being the sacrificer, the sacrificer thus goes thither,’
Kanva text. See III, 6, 1, 28, where the gods are said to have
attained immortality from the Agnidhriya.


II KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 3 DRALIMANA, 15. 159
injury. They proceed, and reach the Agnidhra ;
and he (the Adhvaryu) puts (the fire) down on the
Agntdhra hearth.

12. Thereon, when laid down, he offers with the
text (Vag. S. V, 37),‘May this Agni make wide
room for us; may he march in front smiting
the haters! May he gain riches in the win-
ning of riches: may he, fiercely rushing, con-
quer the enemies, Hail!’ By means of him (Agni)
he thus takes a firm stand in that resting-place,
the aerial region, and gains that world.

13. In the same place they deposit the pressing-
stones, the Soma-trough, and Vayu’s cups'. Having
then taken up the other (objects), they proceed and
deposit them north of the Ahavantya.

14. The Adhvaryu takes the sprinkling-water, and
sprinkles first the fire-wood, and then the altar. They
then hand to him the altar-grass. He puts it down
with the knot towards the east, and sprinkles it.
Having poured (the remaining sprinkling-water)
upon (the root ends of the altar-grass), and untied
the knot,—the Prastara-bunch of asvavala grass is
tied together (with the altar-grass),—he takes that;
and having taken the Prastara, he spreads the altar-
grass in a single layer. Having spread the altar-
grass, he lays the enclosing-sticks of karshmarya-
wood round (the fire). Having laid the enclosing-
sticks around, he puts two kindling-sticks (on the
fire); and having put on the two kindling-sticks,

15. He offers with the text (Vag. S. V, 38),‘Stride
thou widely, O Vishzu, make wide room for
our abode! drink the ghee, thou born of ghee,


1 Also the two fringed filtering-cloths (dasapavitre), according to
the Kava rec.


160 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


and speed the lord of the sacrifice ever on-
wards, Hail!’ Thereby he takes a firm stand in
that resting-place, the sky: he thus gains that world
by offering with that (verse).

16. And as to his offering with a verse addressed
to Vishzu, it was thus that they made him (Soma)
to be too small for the deadly shaft and led him
safely across in the form of a drop, for the drop is
nimble. And having attained to safety, he now
makes him the one he really is, namely, the sacri-
fice, for Vishzu is the sacrifice: therefore he offers
with a verse addressed to Vishzu.

17. After depositing the spoons’ and touching
water, he makes the king (Soma) enter (the Havir-
dhana shed). The reason why he makes the king
enter, after depositing the spoons and touching
water, is this. The ghee is the thunderbolt, and
Soma is seed: hence it is after depositing the
spoons and touching water that he makes the king
enter, lest he should injure the seed Soma with
the thunderbolt, the ghee.

18.. He spreads the black deer-skin on the en-
closed part of the southern Soma-cart, and sets him
down thereon with (Vag. S. V, 39),‘O divine Savi-
tvz, this is thy Soma: shield him; may they
not injure thee!’ whereby he makes him over to
the God Savits?7 for protection.

19. Having quitted his hold of him, he (the sacri-
ficer) renders homage to him with, ‘ Now, O divine
Soma, hast thou, a god, joined the gods, and


’ ‘He then deposits the Prastara on the mound (p. 140, note 2),
deposits there the guhii and the upabhrit and the prishadagya; and
having touched the sacrificial materials and touched water, he takes
the king and enters (the cart-shed),’ &c. Kanva rec.


III KANDA, 6 ADHYAYa, 3 BRAHMANA, 21. 161


here I the men with increase of wealth.’ Now
Agni and Soma have seized him who consecrates
himself between their jaws', for that consecration-
offering belongs to Agni and Vishzu, and Vishnu
forsooth is no other than Soma; and he himself that
consecrates himself is the food of the gods: thus
they have seized him between their jaws, and he
now expressly redeems himself from Soma, when he
says, ‘ Now, O divine Soma, hast thou, a god, joined
the gods, and here (have I joined) the men with


increase of wealth;'—increase of wealth means
abundance: ‘with abundance’ he thereby means
to say.


20. He then walks out (of the cart-shed), with,
‘Hail! lam freed from Varuza's noose!’ For
he, truly, is in Varuza’s noose who is in another's
mouth: he now frees himself from Varuza’s noose,
when he says, ‘Hail! I am freed from Varuza's
noose.

21. He then puts a kindling-stick on the Aha-
vaniya in this way*, *O Agni, protector of vows,
on thee, O protector of vows—’ for Agni is lord
of vows to the gods, wherefore he says, ‘O Agni,
protector of vows, on thee, O protector of vows '—
‘what bodily form of thine hath been on me,
(may) that (be) on thee; what bodily form of
mine has been on thee, (may) that (be) here on
me! Our vows, O lord of vows, (have been per-
formed) rightly: the lord of consecration hath


+ See lil, 2. 4.198,
? Thus (iti), viz. with the following modifications of the corres-


ponding formula, used at the ‘intermediary consecration, TIT, $s 30,0
Perhaps ‘iti’ may mean ‘thus,’ i.e. while still keeping his fingers
turned in; or, it may mean ‘as such’ (as a free min).

[26] M


162 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


approved my consecration; the lord of pen-
ance hath approved my penance. Thereby he
frees himself visibly from Agni, and sacrifices with
a self (body) now his own: hence they now partake
of his food, for he is a man (again); hence they now
use his (real) name, for he is a man. And as to their
not eating (of his food) heretofore, it is as one would
not eat of sacrificial food, beforé offering has been
made thereof: therefore let no one partake of
the food of one consecrated. He now loosens his
fingers.


THE ANIMAL SACRIFICE? TO AGNI AND SOMA.


FourtH BrAHMANA.
A. Tue Setrinc Up or THE SacriFiciaL STAKE.


1. Being about to cut the sacrificial stake, he
offers * with a verse addressed to Vishvu. For the
stake belongs to Vishzu; therefore he offers with
a verse addressed to Vishzu.

2. And again, why he offers with a verse ad-
dressed to Vishnu—Vishnu being the sacrifice, he
thus approaches the stake by means of the sacri-
fice: therefore he offers with a verse addressed to
Vishzu.

3. If he offers with the offering-spoon, he offers
after taking ghee by four ladlings; and if he offers
with the dipping-spoon, he offers after ‘cutting out’
(some ghee from the pot) with the dipping-spoon;—
with the text (Vag. S. V, 41), ‘Stride thou widely,


On the Animal Sacrifice, cp. Dr. J. Schwab’s dissertation, ‘ Das
altindische Thieropfer,’ 1882.


* This oblation is called yGp4huti, or ‘stake-offering,’


11 KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 7. 163
O Vishzu, make wide room for our abode!
drink the ghee, thou born of ghee, and speed
the lord of the sacrifice ever onwards!
Hail!’

4. He takes the ghee which is left (in the melting-
pot). Whatever chopping-knife the carpenter uses,
that the carpenter now takes. They then proceed (to
the wood). Whatever (tree) they select for the stake,

5. That he touches while muttering (Vag. S. V,
42),—or he salutes it while standing behind it with
his face towards the east,—‘I have passed over
the others, I have not gone nigh the others—’
he does indeed pass over others and does not go
near to others: wherefore he says, ‘I have passed
over the others, I have not gone nigh the others.

6. ‘Thee have I found on thé nearer side
of the farther, and on the farther side of the
nearer; he does indeed fell it on the nearer side
of the farther, of those that. are farther away from
it; and ‘on the farther side of the nearer,’ he says,
because he does fell it on the farther side of the
nearer, of those that are on this side of it. This
is why he says, ‘Thee have I found on the nearer
side of the farther, and on the farther side of the
nearer.’

7. ‘Thee do we favour, O divine lord of the
forest!, for the worship of the gods.’ As
for the good work, he would favour (select) one from
amidst many (men) and he (the chosen) would be
well-disposed to that work, even so does he now,
for the good work, favour that (tree) from amidst
many, and it becomes well-disposed to the felling.


1 «Vanaspati’ is a common synonym of vr7ksha, tree,
M 2


164 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


8. ‘Thee may the gods favour for the wor-
ship of the gods!’ for that is truly successful
which the gods favour for the good work: therefore
he says, ‘ Thee may the gods favour for the worship
of the gods!’

9. He then touches it with the dipping-spoon,
with, ‘For Vishzu, thee!’ for the stake belongs
to Vishzu, since Vishzu is the sacrifice, and he fells
this (tree) for the sacrifice: therefore he says, ‘ For
Vishzu, thee!’

10. He then places a blade of darbha-grass be-
tween!, with, ‘O plant, shield it!’ for the axe is
a thunderbolt; but thus that thunderbolt, the axe,
does not hurt it (the tree). He then strikes with
the axe, with, ‘O axe, hurt it not!’ for the axe is
a thunderbolt, but thus that thunderbolt, the axe,
does not hurt it.

11. The first chip? which he cuts off, he takes
(and lays aside). Let him cut (the tree) so as to
cause no obstruction to the axle%. For, indeed, it is
on a cart that they convey it, and in this way he does
not obstruct the cart.


_'* Viz, he places or holds it against where he is about to strike
the tree, so as first to cut the grass.

* For the destination of this chip of the bark, sec ITI, 7, 1, 8.

‘ That is to say, he is not to cut the tree too high from the
ground, so that the axle of the cart might readily pass over the
remaining stump without touching it. The Kazva text reads, ‘tam
anakshastambhe vrsted uta hy enam anasa vakshyanto bhavanty
uto svargam hasya lokam yate (sic) ’kshastambhaA syft tasmad
anakshastambhe vrisfct.’ Nothing is said anywhere about the yfipa
being conveyed on a cart to the sacrificial ground, if, indeed, that
statement refer to the yfipa atall. Sfyana’s comment is very corrupt
here, but he scems to interpret the passage to the cffect that some
people might convey the stake on the cart (pakshe anasi yfipam
nayeyuh) and that in that case the cart would be obstructed.


II KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 16. 165


12. Let him cut it so as to fall towards the east,
for the east is the quarter of the gods; or towards
the north, for the north is the quarter of men; or
towards the west. But let him take care to keep it
from (falling towards) the southern quarter, for that
is the quarter of the Fathers: therefore he must take
care to keep it from the southern quarter.

13. The falling (tree) he addresses with the text
(Vag. S. V. 43), ‘Graze not the sky! hurt not
the air! unite with the earth!’ for verily that
(tree) which they cut for the stake is a thunderbolt.
and these worlds tremble for fear of that falling
thunderbolt; but he thereby propitiates it for these
worlds, and thus propitiated it injures not these
worlds.

14. Now when he says, ‘Graze not the sky, he
means to say, ‘Injure not the sky!’ In the words
‘hurt not the air’ there is nothing obscure. By
‘Unite with the earth, he means to say, ‘ Be thou in
harmony with the earth!’ ‘lor this sharp-edged
axe hath led thee forward unto great bliss,’ for
this sharp axe indeed leads it forward.

15. Upon the stump he then offers ghee, ‘lest the
evil spirits should rise therefrom after (the tree) :’
ghee being a thunderbolt, he thus repels the evil
spirits by means of the thunderbolt, and thus the
evil spirits do not rise therefrom after it. And
chee being seed, he thus endows the trees with that
seed; and from that seed (in) the stump trees are
afterwards produced !.

16. He sacrifices with, ‘Grow thou out of this,
O lord of the forest, with a hundred shoots!


1 Or, ‘hence trees grow up again from the stump (? after felling,
“A vraskanat”) out of seed.’


166 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


May we grow out with a thousand shoots!’
There is nothing obscure in this.

17, Thereupon he cuts it (the stake of the proper
length) : of whatever length he cuts it the first time,
so long let it remain.

18. He may cut it five cubits long; for fivefold is
the sacrifice and fivefold is the animal (victim), and
five seasons there are in the year: therefore he may
cut it five cubits long.

19. He may cut it six cubits long; for six seasons
there are in the year; and the year is a thunderbolt,
as the sacrificial stake is a thunderbolt: therefore he
may cut it six cubits long.

20. He may cut it eight cubits long, for eight
syllables has the Gayatri, and the Gayatri is the
fore-part of the sacrifice, as the sacrificial stake is
the fore-part of the sacrifice: therefore he may cut
it eight cubits long.

21. He may cut it nine cubits long, for threefold
is the sacrifice, and ‘nine’ is threefold: therefore he
may cut it nine cubits long.

22. He may cut it eleven cubits long, for eleven
syllables has the Trish¢ubh, and the Trish¢ubh is
a thunderbolt, as the sacrificial stake is a thunder-
bolt: therefore he may cut it eleven cubits long.

23. He may cut it twelve cubits long, for twelve
months there are in the year, and the year is a
thunderbolt, as the sacrificial stake is a thunderbolt :
therefore he may cut it twelve cubits long.

24. He may cut it thirteen cubits long, for thirteen
months there are in a year, and the year is a thun-
derbolt, as the sacrificial stake is a thunderbolt:
therefore he may cut it thirteen cubits long.

25. He may cut it fifteen cubits long, for the


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 2. 167


fifteen-versed chant is a thunderbolt!, as the sacri-
ficial stake is a thunderbolt: therefore he may cut
it fifteen cubits long.

26. The sacrificial stake of the Vagapeya sacrifice
is seventeen cubits long. Indeed, it may be un-
measured?, for with that same unmeasured thunder-
bolt did the gods conquer the unmeasured; and in
like manner does he now conquer the unmeasured
with that unmeasured thunderbolt: therefore it may
even be unmeasured.

27. It is (made to be) eight-cornered, for eight
syllables has the Gayatri, and the Gayatri is the
fore-part of the sacrifice, as this (stake) is the fore-
part of the sacrifice: therefore it is eight-cornered.


SeEvENTH ApDHYAYA. First BRAHMANA.


1. He takes the spade, with (Vag. S. VI, 1), ‘I take
thee, at the impulse of the divine Savitrz,
with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands
of Pishan: thouartawoman. The significance
of that formula is the same (as before); and that
spade (abhri, fem.) is indeed female: therefore he
says ‘thou art a woman.’

2. He thus draws the outline of the hole (for the
stake’), with, ‘Herewith I cut off the necks of


1 On the connection of the Panéadasa-stoma with Indra, the
wielder of the thunderbolt, see part i, introduction, p. xviii.

2 The Kava text leaves an option first between stakes six, eight,
eleven, fifteen (and for the Vagapeya seventeen) cubits long; and
finally lays down the rule that no regard is to be had to any fixed
measure.

’ According to the Kazva text, one half of it is to be within, and
one half outside of the altar. See Katy. VI, 2, 8.


168 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the Rakshas!’ The spade is the thunderbolt: with
the thunderbolt he thus cuts off the necks of the
Rakshas.

3. He then digs, and throws up a heap of earth
towards the east. He digs the hole, making it equal
(in depth) with the (unhewn) bottom part (of the
stake). In front of it he lays down the stake
with the top towards the east. Thereon he puts
sacrificial grass of the same size, and thereupon he
puts the chip of the stake. In front on the (north)
side (of the stake) he puts down the head-piece?.
The sprinkling-water has barley-corns mixed with
it: the significance of this is the same (as before’).

4. He throws the barley-corns in with, ‘Thou
art barley (yava), keep thou (yavaya) from us
the haters, keep from us the enemies!’ There
is nothing obscure in this. He then sprinkles: the
significance of the sprinkling is one and the same:
he thereby renders it sacrificially pure.

5. He sprinkles (the top, middle, and bottom parts)
with,‘ For the sky—thee! for the air—thee!
for the earth—thee!’ the stake being a thunder-
bolt (he does so) for the protection of these worlds?:
‘I sprinkle thee for the protection of these worlds,’
is what he thereby means to say.

6. The sprinkling-water that remains he then
pours into the hole with, ‘Be the worlds pure


—


* Of the part of the tree cut off from the sacrificial stake, a top-
piece or head ring (Aash4la) is made some eight or nine inches
high, eight-cornered (like the sacrificial stake); narrower in’ the
middle like a mortar, and hollowed out so as to allow its heing
fixed on the stake.

* See III, 6,1, 7 seq.

* For the construction, see p. 15, note 3.


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 10. 169


wherein the Fathers reside!’ for a pit that is
dug is sacred to the Fathers: this he thereby renders
sacrificially pure.

7. Thereupon he strews barhis-grass therein, both
eastward-pointed and northward-pointed, with,‘T hou
art the seat of the Fathers!’ for that part of it
(the stake) which is dug into the ground is sacred to
the Fathers: as though it were (naturally) established
among plants, and not dug in, so does it become
established among those plants.

8. He then throws in the (first) chip! of the stake.
Now that chip of the outer (bark) doubtless is the
vigour of trees; hence, when a chip of their outer
(bark) is cut off they dry up, for it is their vigour.
Hence, when he throws in the chip of the stake,
he does so thinking, ‘I will plant it (the stake) full
of vigour. The reason why it is this (chip) and no
other, is that this one has been produced with a for-
mula, is sacrificially pure: therefore he throws in the
chip of the stake.

9. He throws it in with (V4g. S. VI, 2), ‘Thou
art a leader, easy of access to the Unnetr?s?;’
for that (chip) is cut from it in front, wherefore he
says, ‘Thou art a leader, easy of access to the Un-
netvzs. ‘Be thou mindful of this: it will stand
upon thee!’ for it (the stake) will indeed stand on
it, wherefore he says, ‘Be thou mindful of this: it
will stand upon thee.’

10. Having then taken out ghee with the dipping-
spoon, he offers it into the hole, ‘lest the evil spirits
should rise from below :’ ghee is a thunderbolt, he


1 See III, 6, 4, 11.
* The Unnetris are the priests that have to draw the Soma.


170 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


thus repels the evil spirits by means of the thunder-
bolt, and thus the evil spirits do not rise from below.
Having then gone round to the front, he sits down
facing the north and anoints the stake. He says (to
the Hotvz), ‘ Recite to the stake as it is anointed?!’

11. He anoints it with, ‘The divine Savitrz
anoint thee with sweet drink (milk)!’ for Savitrz
is the impeller (prasavitvz) of the gods, and that stake
is in reality the sacrificer himself; and sweet drink
is everything here; he thus puts it in connection
with all that, and Savitvz, the impeller, impels it for
him: therefore he says, ‘The divine Savitzz anoint
thee with sweet drink!’

12. Having then anointed the top-ring on both
sides, he puts it on (the stake) with, ‘To the full-
berried plants—thee|!’ for that (top-ring) is as its
berry. And as to its being, as it were, contracted in
the middle, the berry? here on trees is fastened (to
the stalk) sideways; what connecting part there is
between (the fruit and stalk) pressed in, as it were,
that he thereby makes it. This is why it is, as it
were, contracted in the middle.

13. He anoints from top to bottom the (corner)
facing the fire; for the (corner) facing the fire is the
sacrificer, and the ghee is sap: with sap he thus
anoints the sacrificer; therefore he anoints from top
to bottom the (corner) facing the fire. He then


' *Recite to the stake being anointed!’ or, ‘we anoint the stake:
Recite !’ Kfnva rec. The latter is the formula mentioned Ait. Br.
II, 2 (but ‘aiigmo ypam,’ for Kanva ‘yGpam afigmo’); where
the seven verses recited by the Hotr/ (brought up to cleven as
usual) are given. See also Asv. III, 1, 8.


* Pippala refers especially to the berry or fruit of the Ficus
Religiosa.


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 17. 171


grasps the girding-part all round, and says (to the
Hotrz), ‘ Recite to the (stake) being set up!’

14. He raises it with, ‘With thy crest thou
hast touched the sky; with thy middle thou
hast filled the air; with thy foot thou hast
steadied the earth;’—the sacrificial stake being
a thunderbolt, (he raises it) for the conquering of
these worlds; with that thunderbolt he gains these
worlds, and deprives his enemies of their share in
these worlds.

15. He then plants it (in the hole) with (Vag. S.
VI, 3),‘To what resorts of thine we long to
go where are the swift-footed, many-horned
kine; there, forsooth, was imprinted wide-
striding Vishzu’s highest mighty foot-step.’
With this trish¢ubh verse he plants it; the trish¢ubh
is a thunderbolt, as the sacrificial stake is a thunder-
bolt; therefore he plants it with a trish¢ubh verse.

16. That (corner which was) facing the fire he
places opposite the fire; for the (corner) facing the
fire is the sacrificer, and the sacrifice is fire. Hence
were he to turn the fire-corner aside from the
fire, the sacrificer would assuredly turn aside from
the sacrifice; therefore he places the (corner which
was) facing the fire opposite the fire. He then
heaps up (earth) round it and presses it firmly all
round, and pours water thereon’.

17. Thereupon he makes (the sacrificer) say
while touching it (Vag. S. VI, 4; Rig-veda I, 22,
19), ‘See ye the deeds of Vishzu, whereby he
beheld the sacred ordinances, Indra’s allied


1 The same formulas are used on this occasion as at III, 6, 1,
17-18.


172 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


friend!’ For he who has set up the sacrificial
stake has hurled the thunderbolt: ‘See ye Vishzu’s
conquest!’ he means to say when he says, ‘See ye
the deeds of Vishzu, whereby he beheld the sacred
ordinances, Indra’s allied friend.’ Indra, forsooth,
is the deity of the sacrifice, and the sacrificial stake
belongs to Vishzu; he thereby connects it with
Indra; therefore he says, ‘ Indra’s allied friend.’

18. He then looks up at the top-ring with (Vag.
S. VI, 5; Rig-veda I, 22, 20), ‘The wise ever
behold that highest step of Vishzu, fixed like
an eye in the heaven.’ For he who has set up
the sacrificial stake has hurled the thunderbolt: ‘See
ye that conquest of Vishzu!’ he means to say when
he says, ‘ The wise ever behold that highest step of
Vishzu, fixed like an eye in the heaven.’

19. He then girds (the stake with a rope of kusa-
grass). Now it is to cover its nakedness that he
girds it; wherefore he girds it in this place (viz. on
a level with the sacrificer’s navel), for it is thus
that this (nether) garment is (slung round)!. He
thereby puts food into him, for it is there that the
food settles ; therefore he girds it at that place.

20. He girds it with a triple (rope), for threefold
is food, and food means cattle; and (there is) the
father and the mother, and what is born is the
third; therefore he girds it with a triple (rope).

21. He girds it with (Vag. S. VI, 6),‘Thou art
enfolded; may the heavenly hosts enfold


* According to the Kémva text it is to be slung round nivi-
daghne, ‘on a level with the nether garment’ (nabhidaghne, Taitt.
S. VI, 3, 4, 5). According to Katy. VI, 3, 1, the girding is pre-
ceded by a call on the Hotr? to recite to the post being anointed ;
but neither recension mentions this.


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, 1 BRANMMANA, 25. 173


thee! may riches enfold this sacrificer among
men!’ He invokes a blessing on the sacrificer,
when he says, ‘May riches enfold this sacrificer
among men.’

22. Thereupon he inserts a chip of the stake
(under the rope) with, ‘Thou art the son of the
sky.’ For it is doubtless the offspring of that (sacri-
ficial stake); hence if there be the full number of
eleven stakes’, let him insert in each its own (chip)
without confounding them; and his offspring is
born orderly and not foolish. But whosoever inserts
them in confusion, not its own in each, verily his
offspring is born disorderly and foolish ; therefore let
him insert its own in each without confounding them.

23. Moreover, that chip of the stake is made an
ascent to the heavenly world; there is this girdle-
rope; after the rope the chip of the stake; after
the chip of the stake the top-ring; and from the
top-ring one reaches the heavenly world.

24. And as to why it is called svaru (‘very
sore’),—that (chip) is cut off from that (stake), and
thus is its own (sva) sore (arus); therefore it is
called ‘svaru.’

25. With that part of it which is dug in, he gains
the world of the Fathers; and with what is above
the dug-in part, up to the girdle-rope, he gains the
world of men; and with what is above the rope,
up to the top-ring, he gains the world of the gods ;
and what (space of) two or three fingers’ breadths


1 When, instead of a single he-goat to Agni, eleven victims are
slaughtered, they are either bound to one stake cach, or all to one
and the same. See lII, 9,1, 4seq- The chip alluded to is one of
those obtained in rough-hewing the stake and making it cight-
cornered,


174 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


there is above the top-ring,—the gods called the
‘Blessed'!,,—their world he therewith gains; verily,
whosoever thus knows this, he becomes one of the
same world with the blessed gods.

26. That (sacrificial stake) he sets up on the
fore-part (of the altar); for the stake is a thunder-
bolt, as the club is a thunderbolt. But in hurling
the club one takes hold of its fore-part; and that
(stake) is the fore-part of the sacrifice; therefore he
sets it up on the fore-part (of the altar).

27. Verily, by means of the sacrifice the gods
yained that supreme authority which they now wield.
_ They spake, ‘ How may this (world) of ours be made
unattainable to men?’ They sipped the sap of the
sacrifice, as bees would suck out honey, and having
drained the sacrifice and scattered it by means
of the sacrificial stake, they disappeared. And
because they scattered (yopaya) therewith, there-
fore it is called ypa (sacrificial stake), At the
head stands intelligence, at the head swiftness of
thought; therefore he sets it up on the fore-part
(of the altar).

28. It is eight-cornered; for the gdyatri metre
consists of eight syllables, and the gdyatri is the
fore-part of the sacrifice, as this (stake) is the fore-
part of the sacrifice; therefore it is eight-cornered.

29. Now the gods once threw it after (the pra-
stara into the fire) even as now some throw it after,
thinking, ‘So the gods did it.’ Thereupon the Rak-
shas sipped the sacrifice (Soma) after (the gods).

30. The gods said unto the Adhvaryu, ‘ Offer
thou only a chip of the stake; thereby this (sacri-


' On the ‘sidhyas’ see Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 6, note 2.


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. 175


ficer) will be bid good-speed'; and thus the Rakshas
will not hereafter sip the sacrifice, thinking, “ that
(stake) surely is a raised thunderbolt.”’

31. The Adhvaryu, then, offered up only a chip
of the stake, and thereby that (sacrificer) was bid
good-speed; and thus the Rakshas did not there-
after sip the sacrifice, thinking, ‘that surely is a
raised thunderbolt.’

32. And in like manner does he now only offer
up that chip of the sacrificial stake*; thereby this
(sacrificer) is bid good-speed; and thus the Rakshas
do not thereafter sip the sacrifice, thinking, ‘that
surely is a raised thunderbolt!’ He offers it* with
the text (Vag. S. VI, 21), ‘May thy smoke rise up
to the sky, thy light to the heavens! fill the
earth with ashes, Hail!’


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. Verily, as large as the altar is, so large is the
earth. The sacrificial stakes are thunderbolts; and
by means of these thunderbolts he obtains posses-
sion of this earth, and excludes his enemies from
sharing therein. Hence there are eleven stakes, and
the twelfth lies aside rough-hewn; he puts it down
south (of the altar). The reason why the twelfth
lies aside is this.

2. Now the gods, while performing this sacrifice,


1 See I, 8, 3, 11 seq. 2 See Ait. Br. II, 3.

’ The offering of the chips does not take place till the end of
the after-offerings (see note to III, 8, 5, 6). It is somewhat strange
that it should be anticipated in this place, both in this and the
Kanva recensions.


176 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


were afraid of an attack from the Asura-Rak-
shas. Those raised (sacrificial stakes), then, were
as a discharged arrow,—therewith one either smites
or smites not; as a hurled club,—therewith one
either smites or smites not. But that twelfth (stake)
lying aside,—even as an arrow drawn but not dis-
charged, as (a weapon) raised but not hurled, so
was that a thunderbolt raised for repelling the evil
spirits on the south; therefore the twelfth (stake)
lies aside.

3. He lays it down with (Vag. S. VI, 6), ‘This
is thy place on earth; thine is the beast of
the forest.’ There are the animal (victim) and
the sacrificial stake; to this one he thereby assigns
of animals that of the forest, and thus it, too, is
possessed of an animal (victim). That setting up
of the eleven sacrificial stakes is said to be of two
kinds,—some, namely, set (them all) up (on the pre-
vious day) for the morrow's Soma feast, and others
set up (one) stake for the preparation’ of the mor-
rows Soma feast.

4. Let him, however, not do this; but let him
only set up the one opposite the fire. For after
setting it up the Adhvaryu does not quit his hold
of it till the girding; but those (others) remain


' No satisfactory explanation of ‘ prakubrati’ occurs to me. It
seems to be derived from ‘kubra,’ to which the dictionaries assign
the meanings ‘ hole for sacrificial fire’ and ‘thread’ (besides those of
‘forest,’ ‘ earring,’ and ‘cart’). Uviad. II, 28, derives this from a root
‘kub,’ to cover, shelter. ? For the safe foundation (or the pro-
traction) of to-morrow’s Soma feast. The Kavzva text, on the other
hand, reads: * Some, now, raise all (the stakes) on the upavasatha
(lay before the Soma feast) for the sake of quickening (? prakudra-
tayai) the work, thinking, ‘we will quickly bring the sacrifice to
a close.’


Ill KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 8. 177


ungirt during that night. Thus there would be an
offence, since it is for the victim that the stake is set
up, and the victim is (only) slaughtered on the next
morning: let him therefore set up (the others) on
the next morning.

5. Let him first set up that (stake) which stands
(immediately) north of the one opposite the fire,
then the one on the south, then a northern one,—
last of all the one on the southern flank: thus it
(the row of stakes) inclines to the north.

- 6. But they also say conversely’, ‘Let him first
set up that which is south of the one opposite the
fire, then the northern one, then a southern one,—
last of all the one on the northern flank: and thus in-
deed his work attains completion towards the north.’

7. Let the largest be the one forming the southern
flank; then shorter and shorter; and the one form-
ing the northern flank the shortest: thus (the row
of stakes) inclines to the north.

8. Thereupon they set up the wife-stake for the
wives. It is for the sake of completeness, forsooth,
that the wife-stake is set up: there they seize (and
bind) the victim for Tvashérz, for Tvash/rz fashions
the cast seed, and hence he fashions the seed now
cast. It (the victim to Tvashérz) is an animal with
testicles, for such a one is a begetter. Let him not
slay that one, but let him set it free after fire has
been carried round it. Were he to slay it, there
would assuredly be an end to offspring, but in this
way he sets free the offspring. Therefore let him not


1 The K4ava text first mentions the practice set forth in the pre-
ceding paragraph, as the teaching of ‘some,’ but then rejects it in
favour of the second alternative.


[26)} N


178 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


slay it, but let him set it free after fire has been
carried round it.


THIRD BRAHMANA.


B. Tue Kituinc or THE VICTIM.


1. There are both an animal and a sacrificial
stake, for never do they immolate an animal without
a stake. Andas to why this is so :—well, animals did
not at first submit thereto that they should become
food, as they are now become food; for just as man
here walks two-footed and erect, so did they walk
two-footed and erect.

2. Then the gods perceived that thunderbolt, to
wit, the sacrificial stake; they raised it, and from
fear thereof they (the animals) shrunk together and
thus became four-footed, and thus became food, as
they are now become food, for they submitted
thereto: wherefore they immolate the animal only
at a stake and never without a stake.

3. Having driven up the victim, and churned the
fire, he binds it (to the stake). And as to why this is
so :—well, animals did not at first submit thereto that
they should become sacrificial food, as they are now
become sacrificial food and are offered up in the fire.
The gods secured them: even thus secured they did
not resign themselves.

4. They spake, ‘ Verily, these (animals) know not
the manner of this, that it is in fire that sacrificial
food is offered, nor (do they know) that secure resort
(the fire) : let us offer fire into the fire after securing
the animals and churning the fire, and they will
know that this truly is the manner of sacrificial food,


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 9. 179


this its resort; that it is truly in fire that sacrificial
food is offered: and accordingly they will resign
themselves, and will be favourably disposed to the
slaughtering.’

5. Having, then, first secured the animals, and
churned the fire, they offered fire into the fire; and
then they (the animals) knew that this truly is the
manner of sacrificial food, this its resort; that it is
truly in fire that sacrificial food is offered. And
accordingly they resigned themselves, and became
favourably disposed to the slaughtering.

6. And in like manner does he now offer fire into
the fire, after securing the animal and churning the
fire. It (the animal) knows that this truly is the
manner of sacrificial food, this its resort; that it is
truly in fire that sacrificial food is offered; and
accordingly it resigns itself and becomes favourably
disposed to the slaughtering. Therefore having
driven up the victim and churned the fire, he binds
it (to the stake).

7. As to this they say, ‘Let him not drive up (the
victim), nor churn the fire; but having taken the
rope and straightway gone thither and put (the rope)
round it, let him bind it.’ Let him, however, not do
this; for it would be as if he intended to commit
secretly some lawless action. Let him therefore go
round there.

8. Then, taking a straw, he drives it up, thinking,
‘having a companion, I will secure it;’ for he who
has a companion is strong.

9. He takes the straw with (Vag. S. VI, 7), ‘ Thou
art a cheerer!’ for a companion does cheer one:
therefore he says, ‘Thou art a cheerer. ‘The
celestial hosts have approached the gods;’

N 2


180 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
Oe a ae


the celestial hosts, forsooth, are those beasts: ‘they
have submitted to the gods’ he means to say, when
he says, ‘The celestial l:osts have approached the
gods.’

10. ‘The considerate’, best of leaders;’ for
the gods are wise: therefore he says, ‘The con-
siderate, best of leaders.’

11. ‘O divine Tvashérz, settle the wealth!’
for Tvashév7 is lord of beasts (cattle), and wealth
means cattle, it is with regard to those which did
not submit that the gods then said to Tvash/¢vz,
‘Quiet them,’ when he says, ‘O divine Tvashévz,
settle the wealth !’

12. ‘May the offerings be relished by thee!’
Since they themselves submitted thereto that they
should become sacrificial food, therefore he says,
‘May the offerings be relished by thee!’

13. ‘Rejoice, ye prosperous!’ for cattle are
prosperous: therefore he says, ‘ Rejoice ye prosper-
ous. ‘O Lord of prayer, preserve our goods!’
The Lord of prayer, forsooth, is the Brahman; and
goods mean cattle: those, which did nat submit, the
gods on that occasion enclosed with the Brahman
on the farther side, and they did not pass over it.
And in like manner does he now enclose them with
the Brahman on the farther side, and they do not
pass over it: therefore he says, ‘O Lord of prayer,
preserve our goods!’ Having made a noose he
throws it over (the victim)*. Now then as to the
binding itself.


* Usig rather means ‘ willing, loving, devoted.’
; According to the Taitt. authorities (Sayama on Taitt.S. I, 3, 8),
the rope is wound round the right fore-leg and then passed upwards


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 3. ‘181


Fourtu BrAHMANA.


1. Having made a noose, he throws it over (the
victim) with (Vag. S. VI, 8), ‘With the noose of
sacred order I bind thee, O oblation to the
gods!’ for that rope, forsooth, is Varuza's : therefore
he thus binds it with the noose of sacred order, and
thus that rope of Varuxa does not injure it.

2. ‘Be bold, O man?!’ for at first man dared
not? to approach it (the victim); but now that he
thus binds it with the noose of sacred order, as an
oblation to the gods, man dares to approach it:
therefore he says, ‘ Be bold, O man!’

3. He then binds it (to the stake) with (Vag. S.
VI, 9), ‘At the impulse of the divine Savitry,
I bind thee with the arms of the Asvins, with
the hands of Piashan, thee agreeable to Agni
and Suma!’ Even as on that occasion*, when
taking out an oblation for a deity, he assigns it, so
does he now assign it to the two deities. He then
sprinkles it,—one and the same, forsooth, is the


to the head. From Katy. VI, 3, 27, on the other hand, it would
seem that the rope is passed either between the horns (and under
the neck ?), or round the horns.

1 Thus the author appears to take the formula ‘ dharsha manu-
shah.’ It would rather seem to mean, ‘ Be bold: [I am (or he, the
slaughterer, is)]}a man.’ Mahidhara interprets, ‘May he (the Sami-
tr’) be bold enough!’ Either the Kauva reading ‘dharshin manu-
shak’ or that of the Taittiriyas ‘dharsha manushin’ would seem
preferable.

* The Kanva text has ‘dhrishnoti’ for ‘adhrishnot,’ which ren-
ders it more simple: ‘At first the man (the slaughterer) dares not
approach it, but when he thus binds it, &c.’

> Viz. atthe Haviryagnia; see I, 1, 2. 17.


182 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


significance of sprinkling: he thereby makes it
sacrificially pure.

4. He sprinkles with, ‘For the waters—thee,
for the plants!’ whereby it (the victim) exists,
thereby he thus makes it sacrificially pure. For
when it rains, then plants are produced here on
earth; and by eating plants and drinking water
that sap originates, and from sap seed, and from
seed beasts: hence whereby it exists, wherefrom it
springs, thereby he thus makes it sacrificially pure.

5. ‘May thy mother grant thee permission,
and thy father—-;’ for it is from its mother and
father that it is born: hence wherefrom it is born,
thereby he thus makes it sacrificially pure; ‘—thine
own brother, thy fellow in the herd;’ whereby
he means to say, ‘whatever kin there is of thine,
with their approval I slay thee.’ ‘I sprinkle thee,
agreeable to Agni and Soma;’ he thus makes it
pure for those two deities for whom he slays it.

6. With (Vag. S. VI, 10), ‘Thou art a drinker
of water, he then holds (the lustrak water) under
(its mouth), whereby he renders it internally pure.
He then sprinkles it underneath (the body), with,
‘May the divine waters make it palatable,a
true palatable offering to the gods!’ he thus
makes it sacrificially pure all over.

7. Thereupon he says (to the Hotrz),‘ Recite to
the fire being kindled!’ when he has made the
second libation of ghee’, and returned (to his former
place) without letting the two spoons touch one
another’, he anoints the victim with the (ghee in the)


SE <A ST ce


’ For the course of performance, sce I, 3, 5, 1 scq.; I, 4, 4,1 seq.
Pipee] Say eik:


III KANDA, 7 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 10. 183


guht. For the second libation is the head of the sacri-
fice, and the sacrifice here indeed is that victim:
hence he thereby puts the head on the sacrifice and
therefore anoints the victim with the guhd,

8. With ‘May thy breath unite with the
wind!’ he anoints it on the forehead; with ‘Thy
limbs with those worthy of sacrifice’ on the
shoulders; with ‘The lord of sacrifice with (the
object of) his prayer!’ the loins; whereby he means
to say, ‘For whatsoever object the animal is slain,
do thou obtain that!’

9. For, indeed, the breath of the victim when
slain here passes into the wind: ‘ Obtain thou that
thy breath may pass into the wind!’ is what he
thereby means to say. ‘Thy limbs with those
worthy of offering’ he says, because it is with its
limbs that they sacrifice: ‘Obtain thou that they
may sacrifice with thy limbs’ is what he thereby
means to say. ‘The lord of sacrifice with his
prayer, hereby they invoke a blessing on the sacri-
ficer: ‘Obtain thou that through thee they may
invoke a blessing on the sacrificer’ is what he thereby
means to say. He then deposits the two spoons
and calls for the Srausha/ with a view to the Pravara
(election of the Hotvz)'. The significance of this
is the same (as before).

10. Thereupon he calls a second time for the
Srausha/, for on this occasion there are two Hotr?s:
it is with regard to the Maitravaruva* that he now
calls for the Srausha¢, But it is the sacrificer whom
ep te Nie BU ew is ek Ss Sl ta


1 See I, 5, 1, 1 seq. (also note to parti, p. 115).
2 The Maitravaruza or Prasdstr/ is the Hotr?’s chief assistant.
He receives, as the badge of his office, the staff which the sacrificer


184 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


i ensneestnememii iii e ana


he chooses, saying, ‘Verily, Agni is the leader
of the divine hosts,’ for Agni is the head of the
deities; wherefore he says, ‘Verily, Agni is the
leader of the divine hosts;'—‘this sacrificer of
the human;’ for that community wherein he sacri-
fices is behind (inferior to) him; wherefore he says,
‘ This sacrificer (is the head) of the human.’ ‘May
the household of these two shine brightly, not
(like a cart yoked) with one bullock, for a hun-
dred winters,—two yoke-fellows!’ whereby he
means to say, ‘May their household matters be
free from calamities for a hundred years?.’

11. ‘Uniting blessings, not uniting bodies;’
whereby he means to say, ‘ Unite ye your blessings
only, but not also your bodies;’ for were they also
to unite their bodies, Agni (the fire) would burn
the sacrificer. Now when this one sacrifices in the
fire, he gives gifts to Agni; and whatever blessing
the priests here invoke upon the sacrificer, all that
Agni accomplishes. Thus they unite only their
blessings, but not also their bodies: wherefore he
says, ‘ Uniting blessings, not uniting bodies.’


EicutuH ApuyAya. First BrRAHMANA.
C. Tue Osrations.


1. Thereupon the Hotr?, having sat down on the
Hotr7’s seat whereon he sits down after being chosen’,


held while he was consecrated, and has, at the instance of the Adh-
varyu, to call on the Hotr? for the offering-prayers,—his summons
(praisha) beginning with Hota yakshat, ‘let the Hotr? worship
(or, pronounce the offering-prayer) . . .,’—and occasionally himself
to pronounce the invitatory prayer.

* See I, 9, 3, 19.


* Viz. at the north-west corner (or left hip) of the altar. For the
formulas used by him, see I, 5, I, 24-2, I.


111 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 1 BRAHMANA, 4. 1185


urges, and thus urged the Adhvaryu takes the two
spoons.

2. They then proceed with the Aprt (verses).
The reason why they proceed with the Aprts is
this. With his whole mind, with his whole self.
forsooth, he who consecrates himself prepares and
endeavours to prepare the sacrifice. His self is, as
it were, emptied out; with those Apris they fill it
again; and because they fill' it therewith, therefore
they are called Apri. For this reason they proceed
with the Apris.

3. Now there are here eleven fore-offerings; for
here in man there are ten vital airs, and the eleventh
is the self wherein those vital airs are contained;
this is the whole man; thus they fill his whole self,
and therefore there are eleven fore-offerings.

4. [The Adhvaryu] having called (on the Agntdhra)
for the Srausha¢, he says (to the Maitravaruza),
‘Prompt (the Hotrz to recite to) the kindling-
sticks*!’ Thus he proceeds with ten fore-offerings,


1 The text has only ‘4pyayayanti,’ but the verb with which the
author connects the verb ‘Apri’ is either 4-prnati, he fills; or
(more correctly) ‘4-printi,’ he gratifies, propitiates, corresponding
to the Zand 4frinaiti. Perhaps some words have been lost here.
The K4nva text has: sa yad etabhir 4pribhi4 punar Apydayata eta-
bhir enam 4prinati tasm4d 4priyo nama. Onthe Apri verses, which
form the offering-prayers (yagy4s) at the fore-offerings of the animal
sacrifice, and vary according to different families, see Ait. Br. II, 4;
Max Miiller, Hist. of A. S. L., p. 463 seq.; Haug, Essays, p. 241.

2 See I, 5, 3, 8. The Adhvaryu calls out to the Agnidh, ‘O
sravaya (make listen)!’ The Agnidh calls out,‘Astu srausha/ (yea,
may one hear)!’ The Adhvaryu calls on the Maitravaruma, ‘ Pre-
shya samidhah (prompt as to the kindling-sticks)!’ (or, ‘ Preshya
Tanfinapdtam or Nardsamsam’ &c. in the succeeding fore-offerings. |
The Maitravaruma calls out, ‘Hota yakshat samidham [Tanfina-
pitam, &c.], (let the Hotrz pronounce the offering-prayer to the
kindling-sticks, &c.!)’ Each offering-prayer (Apri) is introduced


186 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAMNA.


saying, ‘Prompt...’ at each, and pouring the ghee
together at every fourth fore-offering'. Having
performed ten fore-offerings, he says, ‘Bring the
slayer!’ ‘Slayer, namely, the (butcher’s) knife is
called.

5. He then takes the (svaru) chip of the sacrificial
stake, and having anointed both (the slaughtering-
knife and the chip) at the top (with ghee) from the
guhi-spoon, he touches the forehead of the victim
with them, saying (Vag. S. VI, 11), ‘Anointed
with ghee, protect ye the animals!’ for the chip
of the stake is a thunderbolt, and the slaughtering-
knife is a thunderbolt, and ghee is a thunderbolt ;
having thus fitted together the entire thunderbolt *
he appoints it the keeper of this (victim), lest the
evil spirits should injure it. He again conceals
the chip of the stake (under the girding-rope of the
stake). In handing the slaughtering-knife to the
butcher, he says, ‘Be this thine approved edge!’
and deposits the two spoons.

6. Thereupon he says (to the Hotrz), ‘ Recite to
Agni circumambient*!’ Having taken a firebrand,


with the formula ‘Ye yagdmahe, &c.’ See part i, p.148 note. The
divine objects of these oblations of ghee are: 1. the Samidhs or
kindling-sticks; 2. either Tanfinapaét or Nardsamsa; 3. the
Idas; 4. the Barhis (sacrificial grass on the altar); 5. the gates
(of heaven and worshipping-ground) ; 6. Dawn and Night; 7. the
two divine Hotrz's; 8. the three goddesses (Sarasvati, Ida, and
Bharati); 9. Tvash/r/; 10. Vanaspati (the tree, or lord of the
forest); 11. the Svahakrvtis (calls of ‘ All-hail,’ which at this, the
last offering-prayer, are repeated before the names of the principal
deities of the sacrifice). Tor this last fore-offering, see III, 8, 2,
23 seq.

See I, 5, 3, 16.

* For the three parts of the thunderbolt, sce p. 108, note 2.

* The Hotr# recites the triplet, Rig-veda IV, 15, 1-3.


111 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 1 BRAHMANA, 9. 187


the Agnidh carries the fire round (the victim). Why
he carries the fire round, is that he encircles it (the
victim) by means of the fire with an unbroken fence.
lest the evil spirits should seize upon it; for Agni is
the repeller of the Rakshas; therefore he carries the
fire round. He carries it round the place where they
cook it (the victim ').

7. As to this they say, ‘Let him take back that
firebrand (to the Ahavantya); and having there (at
the Samitra) churned out a new fire, let them cook
it (the victim) thereon. For this (firebrand), surely,
is 4havantya (fit to offer upon); it is not for the
purpose that they should cook uncooked (food)
thereon, but for this that they should sacrifice
cooked (food) thereon.’

8. Let him, however, not do this. For in that
he carries fire round it, it (the victim) becomes as
food swallowed by that (firebrand), and it would be
as if he were to seize and tear out food that has
been swallowed and offer it to some one else; let
them, therefore, crumble some coals off that same
firebrand, and thereon cook that (victim).

9. Thereupon the Agnidh, taking a (new) firebrand,
walks in front: whereby he places Agni in front, think-
ing, ‘Agni shall repel the evil spirits in front!’ and


1 Sayama seems to take ‘abhipariharati’ in the sense of ‘he
takes it round to the place where they cook.’ According to Katy.
VI, 5, 2, 3, the Agnidh circumambulates thrice from left to right,
either the place comprising the victim, the ghee, the slaughtering-
place, the sacrificial post, the 4atvala, and Ahavaniya; or only the
ghee, the victim, and slaughtering-place. He then throws the fire-
brand back on the Ahavaniya, and performs the circumambulation
as many times in the opposite direction. On the Paryagnikarama,
see also part i, p. 45 note.


188 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANQA.
anal aE Ae fe. AER Ate IF,
they lead the victim after him (to the slaughtering-
place) on a (way) free from danger and injury. The
Pratiprasthatr7 holds on to it from behind by means
of the two spits!, and the Adhvaryu (holds on to) the
Pratiprasthatvz, and the Sacrificer to the Adhvaryu.

10. As to this they say, ‘ That (victim) must not
be held on to by the sacrificer, for they lead it unto
death; therefore let him not hold on to it.’ But let
him nevertheless hold on to it; for that (victim)
which they lead to the sacrifice they lead not to
death; therefore let him hold on to it. Moreover
he would cut himself off from the sacrifice, were he
not to hold on to it; therefore let him hold on to it.
It is held on to in a mysterious way; by means of
the spits the Pratiprasthatzz (holds on to it); to the
Pratiprasthatzz the Adhvaryu, to the Adhvaryu the
Sacrificer; thus then it is held on to in a mysterious
way.

11. Thereupon the Adhvaryu takes two stalks of
grass from the covered altar, and having called for the
Sraushaé, he says (to the Maitravaruza), ‘O Hotzz,
prompt again (the Hotzz to recite for) the offerings
to the gods*!’ This is what belongs to the All-gods
at the animal offering.

12. He then makes (the Sacrificer) say the text
(Vag. S. VI, 11), ‘O thou prosperous! upon


’ For the two omentum-spits, see note on III, 8, 2, 16.

* The Maitravaruma’s additional cue or order (upapraisha) is
‘Agni has been victorious; he has won wealth!’ On the Hotr?’s
recitation—the so-called Adhrigu litany—commencing ‘Ye divine
quieters (slaughterers), commence, as well as ye that are human!’
and consisting of formulas usually pronounced by the Adhvaryu
(and hence perhaps going back to a time when the Hotr? had to
perform all but the menial parts of the sacrificial Service), see
Ait. Br. II, 6-7; Roth, Yaska XXXVII seq.


111 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 15. 189


the Sacrificer,—the prosperous one, forsooth, is
Speech, it is because she speaks much, that Speech
is prosperous,—' bestow thou what is agreeable
unto him! Approach thou,’—thereby he means
to say, ‘Approach thou an existence free from afflic-
tion,— ‘from the wide air, along with the
divine wind; for the Rakshas moves about the
air rootless and unfettered on both sides, even as
man here moves about the air rootless and unfet-
tered on both sides: he means to say, ‘ Meeting
together with the wind, protect thou this one from
the wide air, when he says ‘from the wide air,
along with the divine wind.’

13. ‘Offer thou with the self of this obla-
tion!’ whereby he means to say to Speech, ‘ Offer
thou with the soul of this unblemished oblation ;'’—
‘Unite thou with its body!’ whereby he means
to say to Speech, ‘ Unite thou with the body of this
unblemished oblation!’

14. In front? of the place where they cut it up,
he throws down a stalk of grass, with, ‘O great
one, lead the lord of sacrifice unto greater
sacrifice!’ he thus strews barhis (an underlayer of
sacrificial grass) for it, that no sacrificial food may
be spilt; whatever may now be spilt of it when it is
cut up, that settles thereon and thus is not lost.

15. They then step back (to the altar) and sit down
turning towards the Ahavantya, ‘lest they should be
eye-witnesses to its being quieted (strangled).’ They
do not slay it on the frontal bone’, for that is human


1 According to Katy. VI, 5,15, the stalk is put down behind the
Samitra (i. e. the fire at the slaughtering- place) with the top towards
the east.

2 Lit. ‘by means of the frontal bone.’ Sayama explains it by ‘in


190 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


manner; nor behind the ear, for that is after the
manner of the Fathers. They either choke it by
merely keeping its mouth closed, or they make a
noose. Therefore he says not, ‘Slay! kill!’ for
that is human manner, but, ‘ Quiet it! It has passed
away!’ for that is after the manner of the gods.
For when he says, ‘It has passed away,’ then this
one (the Sacrificer) passes away to the gods: there-
fore he says, ‘It has passed away.’

16, When they hold it down, then, before the
strangling, he offers with ‘Hail, to the gods!’
And when (the butcher) says, ‘Quieted is the
victim,’ he offers with, ‘To the gods, Hail!’
Thus some of the gods are preceded by ‘ Hail,’
and others followed by ‘ Hail;’ he thereby grati-
fies them, and thus gratified both kinds of gods
convey him to the heavenly world. These are the
so-called ‘paripasavya'’ oblations ; he may offer them
if he choose; or, if he choose, he need not mind
them.

SeconD BrAlUMANA.


1. When he (the slaughterer) announces, ‘The
victim has been quieted!’ the Adhvaryu says,
‘NeshZar, lead up the lady!’ The Neshévz leads
up the (sacrificer's) wife bearing a vessel of water
for washing the feet.

2. He makes her say (V4g. S. VI, 12), ‘ Homage
be to thee, O wide-stretched!’—the wide-
stretched one, forsooth, is the sacrifice; for they
stretch the sacrifice (over the sacrificial ground):


seizing it by the horn;” Professor Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 222, ‘by
striking it with a horn.’ The Kémva text reads, tasya na kfi/ena
praghnanti minusham ha kuryad yad asya kQ/ena prahanyuA.

' That is, surrounding, relating to, the victim.


111 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 6. 1g!


hence the wide-stretched one is the sacrifice. But
that wife, forsooth, is the hind-part of the sacrifice,
and he wants her, thus coming forward, to propitiate
the sacrifice. Thereby, then, she makes amends to
that sacrifice, and thus that sacrifice does not injure
her: therefore she says, ‘Homage be to thee, O wide-
stretched !’

3. ‘Advance, unresisted!’ whereby she means
to say, ‘Advance on (a way) free from injury!’
‘Unto the rivers of ghee, along the paths of
sacred truth!’ whereby she means to say, ‘ Unto
good.’ [V4g. S. VI, 13],‘ Ye divine, pure waters,
carry ye (the sacrifice) to the gods, well-pre-
pared! May we be well-prepared preparers!’
Thereby she purifies the water.

4. Thereupon the wife cleanses with the water
the (openings of the) vital airs of the victim. The
reason why she thus cleanses with water the (open-
ings of the) vital airs is this: the food of the gods
is living, is immortal (ambrosia) for the immortals ;
but in quieting and cutting up that victim they kill
it. Now the vital airs are water; hence she now
puts into it those vital airs, and thus that food of
the gods becomes truly living, becomes immortal
for the immortals.

5. Then as to why it is the wife that cleanses. The
wife is a woman, and from woman progeny is born
here on earth; thus he causes that (creature) to be
born from that woman; and therefore the wife
cleanses (the victim).

6. With (Vag. S. VI, 14)‘ Thy speech I cleanse
she wipes the mouth; with ‘Thy breath I cleanse,’
the nostrils; with ‘Thine eye I cleanse, the eyes;
with ‘Thine organ of hearing I cleanse, the


192 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
eh kali ig


ears; with ‘Thy navel I cleanse,’ that mysterious
(opening of a) vital air; or with ‘Thy sexual organ
I cleanse;’ with ‘Thy hind-part I cleanse,’ that
(opening of a) vital air behind. Thus she puts the
vital airs into it, revives it. Thereupon, holding the
legs together, (she wipes them) with ‘Thy feet
I cleanse;’ for it is on its feet that it stands firmly ;
she thus makes it stand (on its feet) for the sake of
a firm position.

7. With one half or the whole of the water that
is left, he (the Adhvaryu) and the Sacrificer' then
sprinkle it, beginning from the head; thereby they
put those vital airs into it, and revive it (beginning)
from that part.

8. Thus, wherever they wound it*, wherever
they hurt it—water being a means of soothing—
there they soothe it by that means of soothing,
water, there they heal it with water.

9. They sprinkle with (V4g. S. VI, 15), ‘May
thy mind grow full! may thy speech grow full!
may thy breath growfull! may thine eye grow
full! may thine ear grow full!’ Thus they put
the vital airs into it and revive it: ‘Whatever is
sore, whatever hurt in thee, may that fill up
and become firm.’

10. Thus, wherever they wound it, wherever they
hurt it—water being a means of soothing—they
soothe it by that means of soothing, water, there

* Or, perhaps, she and the sacrificer, as Sayama takes it (yaga-
m4naf patni 4a), Katy. VI, 6, 4 leaves it doubtful; but the com-
mentator interprets the rule as referring to the Adhvaryu and Sacri-
ficer, in accordance with the reading of the KAanva text—‘ atha y4h


parisish/4 4po bhavanti tabhir adhvaryus 4a yagamanas Aanu-
shifikatah.’


' Asthapayanti=samgfapayanti, Sayama,


iI KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 15. 193


they heal it with water: ‘May that become pure
in thee!’ thereby they render it sacrificially pure.
With ‘Auspicious be the days!’ they pour out
(the remaining water) behind the victim.

11. Thus, wherever they wound it, wherever they
hurt it,—lest thereafter the days and nights should
be inauspicious',—they pour out (the water) behind
the victim with, ‘ Auspicious be the days.’

12. Thereupon they turn the victim over so as
to lie on its back. He (the Adhvaryu) puts the
(other) stalk of grass thereon, with, ‘O plant, pro-
tect!’ for the knife is a thunderbolt, and thus that
thunderbolt, the knife, does not injure it (the victim).
He then applies the edge of the knife to it (and
cuts through it) with, ‘Injure it not, O blade!’
for the knife is a thunderbolt, and thus that thunder-
bolt, the knife, does not injure it.

13. He applies that approved edge of his, for
that has been made sacrificially pure by a text*.
That which is the top part of the stalk he puts in
his left hand, and that which is the bottom part
he takes with his right hand.

14. And where he skins (the victim), and whence
the blood spirts out, there he smears it (the bottom
part with blood) on both ends with (Vag. S. VI, 16),
‘Thou art the Rakshas’ share!’ for that blood is
indeed the Rakshas’ share.

15. Having thrown it away (on the utkara), he
treads on it with, ‘Herewith I tread down the
Rakshas! herewith I drive away the Rak-
shas! herewith I consign the Rakshas to the


1 Ned idam any ahoratrami sofin iti, Kanva recension.
* See Il, 8, 1, 5.
[26] O


194 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

a hci lt gp nn in erate peices oe et
nethermost darkness!’ Thus it is by means of
the sacrifice that he drives away the evil spirits,
the Rakshas. And as to its being rootless and
severed on both sides,—rootless, forsooth, and
severed on both sides, the Rakshas moves about
in the air, even as man here moves about in
the air rootless and severed on both sides: there-
fore it (the grass-end) is rootless and severed on
both sides.

16. Thereupon they pull out the omentum,
and envelop the two spits? therein with, ‘May
ye envelop heaven and earth with ghee!’
whereby he endows those two, heaven and earth,
with strength and sap, and puts strength and sap
into them; and upon those two, thus filled with
sap and affording the means of subsistence, these
creatures subsist.

17. The two omentum-spits are made of karsh-
marya wood. For when the gods in the beginning
seized (slew) a victim, then, as it was drawn upwards,
its sacrificial essence? flowed downwards, and from
it sprang a tree; and because it flowed down from
the (victim) as it was drawn (karsh) upwards, there-
fore (it became) a karshmarya tree*, With that


? The two vapisrapanis (omentum-roasters) consist of sticks of
karshmarya wood (Gmelina Arborea), one of them being quite
straight, while the other is bifurcate at the top, thus resembling
a prop.

* Or, its flesh-juice, medha. The Kazva text reads throughout
medhas.

* The Kanva text has the preferable reading,—Sa yat krishya-
mamat samabhavat tasmat karshmaryo néma, ‘arid because it


sprang from that drawn-up (victim), therefore it is called kar-
shmarya.’


111 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 20. 195


same sacrificial essence he now perfects it, and
makes it whole; therefore the two omentum-spits
are of karshmarya wood.

18. He cuts it (the omentum) off on all sides
(from the belly) and heats it at the cooking-fire :
thus it becomes cooked for him already at this
(fire)'. The Agnidh again takes a firebrand (from
the Samitra, and walks in front). They go behind
the pit (4atvala) and proceed to the Ahavantya.
The Adhvaryu throws that (top part of the) grass-
stalk into the Ahavaniya with, ‘O Vayu, graci-
ously accept the drops!’ for this is the kindler
(samidh) of the drops*.

19. Thereupon he heats the omentum while stand-
ing on the north side; for he is about to pass by
the fire and to roast (the omentum) after walking
round to the south side. Hereby then he pro-
pitiates it, and thus that fire does not injure him
while passing by; this is why he heats the omen-
tum while standing on the north side.

20. They take it along between the sacrificial
stake and the fire. The reason why they do not
take it across the middle (of the altar)*, where they
take other sacrificial dishes, is lest they should bring
the sacrifice in the middle into contact with the
uncooked (omentum). And why they do not take
it there outside (the altar) along the front of the
sacrificial stake, is that they would thereby put it
outside the sacrifice; therefore they take it along


1 [He does so, thinking]. ‘Lest I should cook it on the Aha-
vaniya uncooked.’ Kavva rec.
2 ‘For it is for the drops that he thus lights it.’ Kaveva rec.
3 That is. across the altar immediately behind the fire or high
altar.
O 2


196 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


EEE ESE


between the sacrificial stake and the fire. Having gone
round to the south side, the Pratiprasthatvz roasts it.

21. Thereupon the Adhvaryu, having taken ghee
with the dipping-spoon, pours it upon the omentum,
with, ‘May Agni graciously accept the ghee,
Hail!’ Thus those drops thereof reach the fire after
becoming cooked offerings, made with Svaha (hail)!

22. He then says (to the Maitravaruza’), ‘ Recite
to the drops!’ He recites to the drops verses
addressed to Agni. The reason why he recites to
the drops verses addressed to Agni, is that rain
originates from gifts made from this earth, for from
here it is that Agni obtains the rain; by means of
these drops (falling from the omentum) he obtains
those (rain) drops, and those drops rain down; there-
fore he recites to the drops verses addressed to
Agni. When it is roasted,—

23. The Pratiprasthatvz says, ‘It is roasted: pro-
ceed*!’ The Adhvaryu, having taken the two spoons
and stept across (to the north side of the fire) and
called for the Sraushaé, says (to the Maitravaruma),
‘Prompt for the Svahas‘!’ and offers (the ghee)
when the Vashaé has been pronounced ’®.


‘ Thus according to the commentator on Katy. VI, 6, 18. See
also note on IV, 2,5, 22, and Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. ro1 note.

* The (invitatory) formulas are Rig-veda I, 75, 1, and III, 21,
1-5; Ait. Br. Il, 12; Asv. Sr. III, 4, 1.

* The Pratiprasthatr7 withdraws the omentum from the fire, and
takes it (between fire and stake) to the north of the pit, where the
Adhvaryu in the first place performs the so-called prazadana (vol. i,
p. 438 note), after which he deposits it on the altar. KAty. VI, 6, 20.

* That is, for the offering-prayer or yagy4 of the last fore-offering,
being the last verse of whatever Apri hymn may be used; followed
by a number of Svahas, each with the name of some deity or deities
(cf. I, 3, 3, 22-23).

* Cf. Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 100, note 4.


11 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 26. 197


24. Having offered, he bastes first the omentum,
then the clotted ghee. Now the Xaraka-Adhvaryus,
forsooth, baste first the clotted ghee, arguing that the
clotted ghee is the breath; and a Xaraka-Adhvaryu,
forsooth, cursed Yagziavalkya for so doing, saying,
‘That Adhvaryu has shut out the breath; the breath
shall depart from him!’

25. But he, looking at his arms, said, ‘ These
hoary arms—what in the world has become of the
Brahman’s word?!’ Let him not heed that (objection
of the Xarakas); for this is the last fore-offering,—
and this being a havis-offering, at the last fore-
offering he first pours ghee into the dhruva, being
about to offer the first two butter-portions with it?.
Now, on the present occasion, he will first offer the
omentum ; therefore let him first baste the omentum,
then the clotted ghee. And though he does not
baste the victim with ghee, ‘lest he should baste
the uncooked,’ that whole victim of his yet becomes
(as it were) basted with ghee in that he bastes the
omentum ; let him therefore first baste the omentum,
then the clotted ghee.

26. Thereupon he makes an ‘underlayer’ of ghee
(in the guhi-spoon), and lays a piece of gold thereon.
Then, cutting off the omentum (from the spits and
putting it into the spoon), he says (to the Hotz),
‘Recite (the invitatory prayer) to Agni and Soma


1 That is, so much time has gone by since I first adopted that
practice, and here I am grown old and still in full vigour, Say.
‘But he, lying old and worn out, said, “ These two arms have be-
come gray—what in the world has become of the Brahman’s word!"


K&nva text.
2 On the two butter-portions to Agni and Soma, succeeding the


fore-offerings, see part i, p. 174 note.


198 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


pS eA otal 2 a tered RID, ele RA DONATE LL Ce
for the omentum and fat of the buck!’ He then
lays (another) piece of gold on (the omentum) and
bastes it twice with ghee above.

27. The reason why there is a piece of gold on
both sides is this. When they offer the victim in
the fire they slay it; and gold means immortal life:
hence it (the victim) rests in immortal life. And so
it rises from hence, and so it lives; for this reason
there is a piece of gold! on both sides. Having
called for the Srausha/, he says (to the Maitrava-
ruza), ‘Prompt (the Hotvz to recite the offering-
prayer? on) the omentum and fat of the buck for
Agni and Soma!’ He does not say, ‘... {the omen-
tum and fat) brought forward ;’ when the Soma has
been pressed he says, ‘brought forward*.’ He offers
when the Vasha¢ has been pronounced.

28. Having offered the omentum, he lays the two
spits together and throws them after (the omentum
into the fire), with, ‘Consecrated by Svaha, go
ye to Urdhvanabhas‘, son of the Maruts!’ He
does so, thinking, ‘Lest these two wherewith we have
cooked the omentum should come to nought.’

29. The reason why they perform with the omen-
tum is this, For whatever deity the victim is seized,
that same deity he pleases by means of that fat (part);
and that same deity, thus pleased with that fat, waits


? The Kanva text has ‘hirazyasalk4 (masc.)’ here and elsewhere.

* The anuvakya and yagya for the omentum are Rig-veda I, 93,
1 and 5 respectively.

* At the animal offerings on the Soma-days he adds to his praisha
(order) the word ‘prasthitam,’ lit. standing before (the altar), Katy.
VI, 6,27. Seealso S. Br. IV, 4, 3, 9.

* Urdhvanabhas, ‘he who drives the clouds upwards’ (or, keeps
the clouds above), or, perhaps, ‘he who is above (in) the welkin,’
is apparently a name of V4yu, the wind. Cf. III, 6, 1, 16.


If KANDA, § ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 2. 199


patiently for the other sacrificial dishes being cooked ;
this is why they perform with the omentum.

30. They then cleanse themselves over the pit!.
For in quieting and cutting up (the victim) they
wound it; and water being a means of soothing,
they now soothe it by means of water, heal it by
means of water; therefore they cleanse themselves
Over the pit.:


Tuirp BRAHMANA.


1. For the same deity for which there is a victim,
he subsequently prepares a sacrificial cake» The
reason why he subsequently prepares a cake is this.
Rice and barley, truly, are the sacrificial essence
of all animals (victims) *; with that same essence he
now completes that (victim) and makes it whole.
This is why he subsequently prepares a sacrificial
cake.

2. And why he proceeds with that cake after
performing (offering) with the omentum is this. It
is from the middle (of the victim) that this omentum
is pulled out, and from the middle he now completes
that (victim) by means of that sacrificial essence and
makes it whole; therefore he proceeds with that cake
after performing with the omentum. The relation of


1 They do so with the mantra, Vag. S. VI, 17 (Atharva-veda VII,
89,3; cf. Rig-veda I, 23, 22; X, 9, 8).

2 The technical name of this cake to Indra and Agni is pasu-
purodasa (animal-cake). The anuvikya and yagys fer the chief
oblation, are Rig-veda I, 93, 2 and 6 respectively ; for the Svish/a-
krit, HI, 1, 23, and Ill, §4, 22; Asv. III, 8,1; 5,9. Fora similar
performance, described in detail, see note on III, 2, 5, 22.

* On the sacrificial essence passing successively from man into
the horse, the ox, the goat, and finally into the rice and barley, sec
I, 2, 3, 6-7.


200 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


i


this (cake to the animal offering), indeed, is one and
the same everywhere; that cake is prepared after
(and supplementary to) a victim.

3. Thereupon he cuts up the victim: ‘Move
thrice!, and make the heart the uppermost of the
thrice-moved!’ thus (he says to the slaughterer),
for threefold is the sacrifice.

4. He then instructs the slaughterer: ‘If one
ask thee, “Is the sacrificial food cooked, O Samitar ?”
say thou only ‘“ Cooked!” not “Cooked, reverend
sir!” nor “ Cooked, forsooth !”’’


1 The order of proceeding is not quite clear from the context,
and seems to have puzzled the later ritualists. From Katy. VI,
7-8 it would seem that the author of the Sfitras means the per-
formance of the cake-offering to go on simultaneously with the
cutting up of the victim (and the cooking of the portions and
roasting of the beast). The comm. on Katy. VI, 7, 29, how-
ever, protests against this arrangement as contrary to the order
laid down in the Brahmaza; and insists especially on the
‘atha (now)’ at the beginning of this paragraph. This particle
is, however, often used in a vague sense; as very frequently
when, after sketching the chief course of performance, the author
turns back to fill in the details. There seems also a difference
of opinion as to the exact meaning of the above direction given by
the Adhvaryu to the Samitar after (as would seem) the portions
have been cooked. The commentator on Ké4ty. VI, 8, 1 ap-
parently takes ‘trid prakydvaya’ in the sense of ‘shake thrice’ or
‘turn thrice.’ Sayaza, on the other hand, explains it as meaning
that the Samitr? is to divide the portions into three parts, according
to whether they are destined for the chief offerings, or the Svish/a-
krit, or the by-offerings(?). As the direction cannot refer to the
taking out of the portions from the cooking-vessel (ukh4) it would
seem that the Samitar is either to move (shake) the vessel itself, or
to stir the contents, perhaps hereby separating the respective por-
tions. The Kanva text reads, Tris prafy4vay4d ity uttame prafy4va
uttamardhe hridayam kurutad iti. The heart, when done, is to be
removed from the spit and laid on the portions; whereupon the
Adhvaryu pours ghee on the portions (paragraph 8).


II KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, IO. 201


5. Having then taken clotted ghee with the guhd,
the Adhvaryu, stepping up (from the altar) to (the
SAmitra), asks, ‘Is the sacrificial food cooked, O
Samitar ?’ ‘Cooked,’ he says. ‘That is of the
gods, says the Adhvaryu in a low voice.

6. The reason why he asks is this. Cooked,
forsooth, not uncooked (must be) the gods’ food;
and the Samitvz indeed knows whether it is cooked
or uncooked. |

7. And again, why he asks. ‘I will perform
with cooked (food),’ so he thinks; and if that sacri-
ficial food be uncooked, it is yet cooked food for the
gods, and is cooked as regards the Sacrificer; and
the Adhvaryu is guiltless; on the slaughterer that
guilt lies. Thrice he asks, for threefold is the sacri-
fice. And as to his saying, ‘That is of the gods,’
that which is cooked, indeed, belongs to the gods;
therefore he says, ‘That is of the gods.’

8. The heart he bastes (with clotted ghee) first
of all; for the heart is the self (soul), the mind;
and the clotted ghee is the breath; he thus puts
the breath into its (the victim's) self, into its mind ;
and thus it verily becomes the living food of the
gods, and immortal for the immortals.

9. He bastes it with (Vag. S. VI, 18), ‘May thy
mind unite with the mind; thy breath with
the breath!’ He utters no Svaha (‘hail’), for this
is not an oblation. They remove the victim (from
the cooking-fire)'.

10. They take it along the back of the pit, and


1 The Adhvaryu removes the dish northwards from the fire,
takes the portions out of it, puts them into some kind of basket,
and performs ‘ prazadana’ (p. 196, note 3) on them.


202 SATAPATIIA-BRAHMAN.A.


between the sacrificial stake and the (Ahavaniya)
fire. The reason why, though it is cooked, they
do not take it across the middle (of the altar), as
they take other sacrificial dishes, is ‘lest they.
should bring the sacrifice in the middle in connec-
tion with that which is cut up by limbs and mangled.’
And why they do not take it outside (the altar) in
front of the stake, is that they would thereby put
it outside the sacrifice: therefore they take (the
flesh) along between the stake and the fire. When
they have put it down south (of the fire), the Prati-
prasthatvz cuts off (the portions). There are Plaksha
branches?(Ficus Infectoria) by way of an upper barhis
(covering of altar); thereon he cuts. The reason
why there are Plaksha branches by way of an upper
barhis is this,

11. For when the gods, at first, seized an animal
(to sacrifice), Tvashérz first spat upon its head,
thinking, ‘Surely, thus they will not touch it!’ for
animals belong to Tvash¢vz. That (spittle became)
the brain in the head and the marrow in the neck-
bone?: hence that (substance) is like spittle, for
Tvash¢77 spat it. Let him therefore not eat that,
since it was spitten by Tvash¢vz.

12. Its sacrificial essence flowed down and there
a tree sprang up. The gods beheld it; wherefore
it (was called) ‘prakhya’ (visible), for ‘plaksha,’


* Or, the Plaksha branches with which the altar was covered on
the preceding night. See p. 120, note 3. The Kazva text (as
Taitt. S. VI, 3, 10, 2) speaks of one Plaksha branch put on the
barhis.

* Antika, of which anfkya is the adjective, means ‘the fore-


part of the spinal column.’ The KAzva text reads,—yan mastishko
yad antke mage.


Il KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I4. 203


doubtless, is the same as ‘prakhya.’ With that
same sacrificial essence he now completes it (the
victim), and makes it whole: hence there are
Plaksha branches as an upper covering.

13. He then makes an ‘underlayer’ of ghee both
in the guhd and the upabhz“t, and in the vasdhoma-
havani', and the samavattadhani?; and puts a piece
of gold® both in the guhd and the upabhv’tt.

14. Thereupon he addresses (the Hoty?) for the
recitation on the havis to the manota deity‘. The
reason why he addresses him for the recitation on
the havis to the manota deity is this. All the deities
draw nigh to the victim while it is immolated, thinking,
‘My name he will choose, my name he will choose!’
for the animal victim is sacrificial food for all deities.
The minds (manas), then, of all those deities are,
fixed upon (ota) that victim; those (minds of theirs)
he thereby satisfies, and thus the minds of the gods
have not drawn nigh in vain. For this reason he
addresses him for the recitation on the havis to the
manota deity.


1 That is, the ladle used (asa substitute for the guhQ) for offering
the fat-liquor or gravy. See paragraph 20.

2 That is, the vessel used for holding the cuttings (samavatta) of
the id4 ; also called idapatri, see part i, p. 219, note 3.

3 See p. 198, note I.

* Thereupon he says, ‘Recite to the manota (deity) the invitatory
prayer for (of) the havis which is being cut in portions (havisho
’yadiyamanasya).’ Kanva text; cf. Ait. Br. II, 10.—While the sa-
crificial portions are being cut into the respective spoons, the
Hotrz recites the Hymn to Agni, Rig-veda VI, 1, 1-13, beginning,
‘Thou, O wondrous Agni, the first thinker (manotr?) of this
hymn, wert verily the priest... .’ From the occurrence of this word
manot, the latter has come to be the technical name both of the
hymn itself and of the deity (Agni) to whom it is recited.


204 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
Lis I ae eRe RE Ak OSI NE RES

15. He first makes a portion of the heart!, The
reason why he first makes a portion of the heart
which is in the middle, is that the heart is the
breath, since it is from there that this breath moves
upward?; and the animal is breath, for only so long
does the animal (live) as it breathes with the breath;
but when the breath departs from it, it lies there
useless, even (as) a block of wood.

16. The heart, then, is the animal; thus he first
makes a portion of its very self (or soul). And,
accordingly, if any portion were omitted, he need
not heed this, since it is of his entire animal victim
that the first portion is made which is made of the
heart. He therefore first makes a portion of the
heart, that being in the middle. Thereupon accord-
ing to the proper order.

17. Then of the tongue, for that stands out from
its fore-part. Then of the breast, for that also (stands
out) therefrom?, Then.of the simultaneously moving
(left) fore-foot*. Then of the flanks. Then of the
liver. Then of the kidneys.

18. The hind-part he divides into three parts;
the broad piece (he reserves) for the by-offerings® ;
the middle one he cuts into the guhda after dividing
it in two; the narrow piece (he reserves) for the


* Literally, he makes a cutting of the heart (hrzdayasya-avadyati),
that is to say, he puts the entire heart into the guhfi as an offering-
portion.

? Etasmad dhy ayam drdhvad prava ufarati, Kanva rec.

* Or, that (comes) after that (tongue): tad dhi tato ’nvak,
Kazva rec.

* According to Katy. VI, 7, 6, it is the foremost (or upper) joint
(pirvanadaka) of the left fore-foot which is taken. The Kazva text
has simply ‘atha doshza2.’

* See IIT, 8, 4, 9 seq.


III KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 22. 205


tryanga’. Then of the simultaneously moving (right)
haunch*, This much, then, he cuts into the guha.

19. Then into the upabhvzt, he makes a portion
of the upper part of the fore-foot belonging to the
tryanga (viz. the right one); of the (narrow piece
of the) hind-part, after dividing it in two; and of
the haunch belonging to the tryanga (viz. the left).
Thereupon he puts two pieces of gold on (the flesh
oblations in the spoons) and pours ghee thereon.

20. He then takes the oblation of gravy*® with(Vag.
S. VI, 18), ‘Thou art trembling,’ for quivering,
as it were, is the broth: hence he says, ‘Thou art
trembling ;’—‘ May Agni prepare‘ thee!’ for the
fire does indeed cook it: hence he says, ‘May Agni
prepare thee !’—‘ The waters have washed thee
together, for the water indeed gathers together
that (fat) juice from the limbs: hence he says,
‘The waters have washed thee together.’

21. ‘For the sweeping of the wind—thee!’
for verily yonder blower sweeps along the air, and
for the air he takes it: hence he says, ‘For the
sweeping of the wind (I take) thee.’

22. ‘For the speed of Pdshan,—Ptshan's
speed, forsooth, is yonder (wind)*, and for that he
takes it: hence he says, ‘For the speed of Pfishan.’


1 Literally, the three-limbs, the technical name of the portion for
Agni Svish/akrit.

2 For ‘athaikakardyai sroneh’ the Kanva text reads ‘ath&dhy(-
dhasah sréneh,’ of the hip above the udder.

3 Vasi, i.e. the melted fat (and juice) mixed with the water in
which the portions have been cooked, and forming a rich gravy,
offered with the Vasahomahavani.

‘ Literally, ‘mix ’—sri, this root being here, as usual, confounded
with srz, to cook.

6 Esha vava pisha yo ’yam pavata etasméa u hi grihnati, Kanva
recension.


206 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
rr ee er

23. ‘From the hot vapour may totter—;’ the
hot vapour, namely, is yonder (wind), and for that he
takes it: hence he says, ‘From the hot vapour may
totter—. Thereupon he bastes it twice with ghee
above.

24. He then mixes it either with the crooked
knife or with the chopping-knife', with ‘—Con-
founded hatred?!’ whereby he chases away from
here those evil spirits, the Rakshas.

25. The broth which is left he pours into the
Samavattadhani, and therein he throws the heart,
tongue, breast, the broad piece (of the back part),
the kidneys, and the rectum. He then bastes it
twice with ghee above.

26. The reason why there is a piece of gold on
each side is this. When they offer up the victim
in the fire, they slay it, and gold means immortal
life: thereby then it rests in immortal life; and
so it rises from hence, and so it lives. This is why
there is a piece of gold on each side.

27. And because he cuts crossways,—of the left
fore-foot and the rigkt haunch; and of the right fore-
foot and the left haunch,—therefore this animal draws
forward its feet crossways. But were he to cut
straight on, this animal would draw forward its feet
(of the same side) simultaneously: therefore he cuts
crossways. Then as to why he does not make
cuttings of the head, nor the shoulders, nor the
neck, nor the hind-thighs,


1 Sdsena va parsvena va, Kazva text.

* This forms part of the preceding formula (as subject to the verb
‘may totter’), though the author seems to separate it therefrom, as
does Mahidhara. The meaning of the formula seems to be, ‘May
the enemies perish, confounded by (?) the hot vapour!’


II KANDA, 8 ADIIYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 30. 207


28. Now the Asuras, in the beginning, seized a
victim. The gods, from fear, did not go near it’.
The Earth? then said unto them, ‘Heed ye not this :
I will myself be an eye-witness thereof, in whatsoever
manner they will perform this (offering).’

29. She said, ‘ Only one oblation have they offered,
the other they have left over... Now that which they
left over are these same portions. Thereupon the
gods made over three limbs to (Agni) Svish/éakr7t,
whence the Tryanga oblations. The Asuras then
made portions of the head, the shoulders, the neck,and
the hind-thighs: therefore let him not make portions
of these. And since Tvash¢vz spat upon the neck,
therefore let him not make a portion of the neck.
Thereupon he says (to the Hotzz), ‘ Recite (the in-
vitatory prayer) to Agniand Soma for the havis of the
buck!’ Having called for the Srausha/, he says (to
the Maitravaruzva), ‘Prompt (the Hotz? to recite
the offering-prayer? for) the havis of the buck to
Agni and Soma!’ He does not say ‘(the havis)
made ready:’ when the Soma has been pressed
he says ‘ made ready.’

30. In the interval between the two half-verses of
the offering-prayer he offers the oblation of gravy.
It is from out of this that that essence (juice) has
risen upwards here,—that sap of this earth whereby
creatures exist on this side of the sky‘; for the


1 The St. Petersburg Dict. takes ‘Na-upadveyu’ in the sense of
‘they did not fall in therewith; they did not feel inclined for it;’
as above, III, 7, 3, 3. Sayama explains it by ‘nopigata’ ’ (MSS.
napagatah).

2 That is, Aditi, according to the Kazva recension.

> The yagyé and anuvakya are I, 93, 3 and 7 respectively.

‘Ito vi ayam Grdhva ufkArito raso yam idam imaA praga
upagivanty arvag divo ’sminn antarikshe, Kanva recension,


208 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
eR
oblation of gravy is sap, and essence is sap: thus he
renders the sap strong by means of sap, whence this
sap when eaten does not perish.

31. And as to why he offers the oblation of gravy
in the interval between the two half-verses of the
offering-prayer, — one half-verse, forsooth, is this
earth, and the other half-verse is yonder sky. Now
between the sky and the earth is the air, and it is to
the air that he offers: therefore he offers the oblation
of gravy between the two half-verses of the offering-
prayer.

32. He offers with (Vag. S. VI, 19), ‘Drink the
ghee, ye drinkers of ghee! Drink the gravy,
ye drinkersof gravy! thou art the havis of the
air, Hail!’ With this prayer to the All-gods he
offers, for the air belongs to the All-gods: because
creatures move about here in the air breathing in
and breathing out therewith, therefore it belongs to
the All-gods. As the Vashaé (of the offering-prayer
for the meat portions) is pronounced, he offers the
portions that are in the cuht.

33. Thereupon, while taking clotted ghee with the
guht, he says (to the Hotrz), ‘ Recite (the invitatory
prayer) to the Lord of the forest!’ Having called
for the Srausha¢, he says (to the Maitravaruza),
‘Prompt (the Hotvz to recite the offering-prayer) to
the lord of the forest!’ and offers, as the Vashaé
is pronounced'. The reason why he offers to the
lord of the forest (the tree) is—he thereby makes
that thunderbolt, the sacrificial stake, a sharer (in the
sacrifice); and, the lord of the forest being Soma?,

’ For the formulas used with this oblation, as well as the Svish/a-


krit, see Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. pp. 95-96 notes.
* Or, Soma. being a tree (plant).


II KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 36. 209
Ale Pie <a 9 Vt PR SRR TE Sc la aS A Mad
he thereby makes the victim to be Soma. And as
to his offering (to the tree) between the two oblations,
he thus fills both completely: therefore he offers
between the two oblations.

34. Thereupon, while pouring together the meat
portions that are for the upabhr7t, he says (to the
Hotrz), ‘Recite (the invitatory prayer) to Agni
Svishéakrzt (the maker of good offering)!’ Having
called for the Srausha¢, he says (to the Maitra-
varuza), ‘Prompt for Agni Svishéakrzt!’ and offers
as the Vasha¢ is pronounced.

35. With what is left of the offering of gravy, he
then sprinkles the quarters, with, ‘The regions,—
the fore-regions,—the by-regions,—the inter-
mediate regions,—the upper regions,—to the
regions, Hail!’ For the offering of gravy is sap:
thus he imbues all the regions with sap, and hence
sap is obtained here on earth in every region.

36. Thereupon he touches (what remains of) the
victim’; now is the time for the touching. And
whether he has touched it before, fearing ‘those
(evil spirits) that hover near will tear it about,’ or’
whether he be not afraid? of its being torn about,
let him in any case now touch (the victim).


' This touching takes place either before or after the invocation
of Ida (see I, 8, 1, 1 seq.), whereupon the priests and sacrificer eat
their respective portions; the straight gut being the Agnidh’s, the part
above the udder (adhyidhni) the Hotrz’s, the kloman (apparently
the right lung) the Brahmans, the pericardium (? puritit) the Adh-
varyu’s, and the spleen the sacrificer’s share, while the Ida is eaten
by all of them.

2 Or perhaps,—And as to his touching it before this, (he did so)
fearing lest those (evil spirits) that hover near would tear it about ;
and even if he be not (any longer?) afraid of its being torn about,
let him now touch it in any case. The Kanva text has simply,—


[26] Pr


210 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


a a nn nr


37. (Vag. S. VI, 20} ‘To Indra belongeth
the out-breathing: may it attend’ to every
limb! To Indra belongeth the in-breathing:
it is attended to in every limb. Where it has
been cut up limb by limb, there he heals it by
means of the out-breathing and in-breathing.—' O
divine Tvashérz, let thine ample (forms)
closely unite together, that it be uniform
what is of different shape:’ whereby he makes
it completely enclosed (in its limbs and _ flesh).
‘May thy friends, thy father and mother’, to
please thee, joyfully welcome thee going to
the gods!’ Thus, having made it whole wherever
he has offered (a piece of) it, he afterwards unites it
firmly, and that body (self) of it is complete in yonder
world.


FourtH BRAHMANA.

1. Now there are three elevens at the animal
offering,— eleven fore-offerings, eleven after-offerings,
and eleven by-offerings: ten fingers, ten toes, ten
vital airs, and the out-breathing, in-breathing and
through-breathing—this much constitutes man, who
is the highest of animals, after whom? are all animals.


This is the time for touching; but if he think, ‘ Those standing
about here will meddle with it,’ he may also touch it before: but
this is certainly the time for touching.

1 The St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that ‘ nididhyat’ and
‘nidhita’ are probably corruptions of forms from ‘dh4;’ the Taitt.
S. (I, 3, 10) having ‘ni dedhyat—vi bobhuvat’ instead. Mahi-
dhara also takes ‘nididhyat’ from ‘dhi’ in the sense of ‘dha,’—*‘ In-
dra’s out-breathing is infused into every limb; Indra’s in-breathing
has been infused into every limb.’ The K4mva text has ‘-nidhitaA,
-nididhe.’

* Rather, ‘the mothers (or mother) and fathers.’ The Taitt. S.
Separates mata pitarak, the mother and the fathers.’

* That is, inferior to whom, or, after the manner of whom.


111 KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 7. 211


2. Now they say,‘ What, then, is done at the sacri-
fice whereby the vital air is kindly to all the limbs ?’

3. When he divides the hind-part into three
portions,—the hind-part being (an opening of the)
vital air, and that (animal) extending from thence
forward, that vital air pervades it all through.

4. And in that he cuts the hind-part into three
portions,—one third for the by-offerings, one third
into the guhd, and one third into the upabhvzt,—
thereby the vital air is kindly to all the limbs.

5. He alone, however, may slay an animal who
can supply it with the sacrificial essence’. And if it
be lean, let him stuff into the hind-part whatever
may be left of the fat of the belly: the hind-part
being (an opening of) the vital air, and that ‘(animal)
extending from thence forward, that vital air per-
vades it all through. The animal, forsooth, is breath ;
for only so long (does) the animal (live), as it breathes
with the breath; but when the breath departs from
it, it lies there useless, even (as) a block of wood.

6. The hind-part is (part of) the animal, and fat
means sacrificial essence?:, thus he supplies it with
the sacrificial essence. But if it be tender (juicy),
then it has itself obtained the sacrificial essence.

7. Thereupon he takes clotted ghee; for twofold
indeed is this (elotted ghee),—to wit, both ghee


' Sdyana takes ‘medham’ as apposition to ‘enam,’ and explains
it by ‘medharha, pravriddha,’ and ‘upanayet’ by ‘ prapnuyat’ (it
is, doubtless, ‘ zufiihren’). The Kava text, however, reads,—Tad
ahuh sa vai pasum labheteti ya enam medha upanayed iti.

? Gudo vai pasuh, medo vai medhas ; this is one of many excep-
tions to the rule laid down by Professor Delbriick regarding the
order of subject and predicate, Synt. Forsch., III, p. 26. Copulative
sentences with a tertium comparationis likewise do not generally
conform to that rule.


| ae


212 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


nT


and sour milk!,—and a productive union means a
couple: thus a productive union is thereby effected.
8. Therewith they perform at the after-offerings.
The after-offerings mean cattle, and clotted ghee
means milk: hence he thereby puts milk into the
cattle, and thus milk is here contained (or beneficial,
hita) in the cattle; for clotted ghee means breath,
because clotted ghee is food, and breath is food.

9. Therewith he (the Adhvaryu) performs in front
(on the Ahavantya) at the after-offerings,—whereby
he puts into (the victim) that vital air which is here
in front;—and therewith he (the Pratiprasthatrz)
performs behind (the altar) at the by-offerings *,—
whereby he puts into it that vital air which is here
behind: thus two vital airs are here contained (or bene-
ficial) on both sides, the one above and the one below.

10. Here now, one (Hotvz) pronounces the Vasha#
for two,—for the Adhvaryu (who performs the after-


Bee pr 156) Note: 3.

? When the priests and sacrificer have eaten their portions of the
I7a. the Agnidh fetches hot coals from the Samitra (or, at the
animal offering connected with the Soma-sacrifice), optionally from
the Agnidhra, and puts them on the Hotr?’s hearth (p. 148, note 4),—
or at the ordinary animal offering (nirfidsa pasu), on the north hip
(north-west corner) of the altar after removing the sacrificial grass.
On these coals the Pratiprasthatr? performs the by-offerings (upa-
yag), while the Adhvaryu performs the after-offerings (anuy4ga) on
the Ahavaniya. For the by-offerings the Pratiprasthatr7' cuts the
respective part and the hind-quarter (III, 8, 3, 18) into eleven parts,
and at each Vasha¢ throws one piece thereof with his hand into the
fire. The recipients of the first eight and the last after-offerings,
on the other hand, are the same as those of the nine after-offerings
at the Seasonal sacrifices (part i, p. 404). The Hotrz’s formulas for
the additional two offerings, inserted before the last, are: 9. The
divine lord of the forest [1o. The divine barhis of water-plants]
may graciously accept (the offering) for abundant obtainment of
abundant gift! Vausha/!’ (cf. part i, p. 235; Asv. Sr. III, 6, 13.)


III KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 17. 213


offerings) and for him (the Pratiprasthatyz) who per-
forms the by-offerings. And because he offers them
by (in addition to) the offering (Adhvaryu), therefore
they are called by-offerings. And in performing the
by-offerings, he produces (offspring)!, since he per-
forms the by-offerings behind (the altar), and froin
behind offspring is produced from woman.

11. He offers the by-offerings with (Vag. S. VI, 21),
‘Go thou to the sea, Hail!’ The sea is water,
and seed is water: he thereby casts seed.

12. ‘Go thou to the air, Hail!’ It is into
(along) the air that offspring is born: into the air he
produces (offspring).

13. ‘Go thou to the divine Savitzz, Hail!’
Savitz is the impeller of the gods: impelled by
Savitz he thus produces creatures.

14. ‘Go thou to Mitra and Varuma, Hail!’
Mitra and Varuzva are the out-breathing and in-
breathing: he thus bestows out-breathing and in-
breathing on the creatures.

15. ‘Gothoutothe day andthe night, Hail!
It is through (along) day and night that offspring 1s
born: through day and night he causes creatures to
be born.

16. ‘Go thou to the metres, Hail!’ There
are seven metres; and there are seven domestic and
seven wild animals: both kinds he thus causes to be
produced.

i7. ‘Go thou to heaven aia earth, Hail!’
For, Pragdpati, having created the living beings,


ee


1 Praivainam tag ganayati, ‘he causes it (the victim) to be born
(again),’ Kanva rec. The above passage has apparently to be
understood in a general sense, ‘he causes birth to take place among


living creatures


214 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAMNA.
enclosed them between heaven and earth, and so
these beings are enclosed between heaven and earth.
And in like manner does this (offerer), having created
living beings, enclose them between heaven and earth.
18. He then makes additional by-offerings (ati-
upayag). Were he not to make additional by-offer-
ings, there would only be as many living beings as
were created in the beginning; they would not be
propagated; but by making additional by-offerings
he indeed propagates them; whence creatures are
again born here repeatedly’.


Firti BRAHMANA.


1. He makes the additional by-offerings :—with
‘Gothou tothe sacrifice*, Hail!’ Thesacrifice
is water, and seed is water: he thus casts seed.

2. ‘Go thou to Soma, Hail!’ Soma is seed:
he thus casts seed.

3. ‘Go thou to the heavenly ether, Hail!’
The heavenly ether is water, and seed is water: he
thus casts seed.

4. ‘Go thou to Agni Vaisvanara, Hail!’
Agni Vaisvanara (‘belonging to all men’) is this
earth, and she is a safe resting-place: upon that
safe resting-place he thus produces (creatures).

5. He then touches his mouth, with, ‘Give me
mind and heart!’ thus indeed the by-offerer does
not throw himself after (the oblations into the fire).


6. Thereupon® they perform the Patnisamyagas
i noe ee ag Oak se ee ol

' Or, ‘by making additional by-offerings he reproduces them:
whence creatures are born here returning again and again’ (metem-
psychosis).

* The Kava text (as the Taitt. S.) reverses the order of this and
the following formula. Nor does it begin a new Brahmana here.

* Having completed the last after-offering, the Adhvaryu, in the


Ill KANDA, 8 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 9. 215


with the tail (of the victim), for the tail is the hind-
part, and from the hind-part of woman offspring
is produced: hence offspring is produced by the
Patnisamyagas being performed with the tail.

7. For the wives of the gods he cuts portions
from the inside, since it is from the inside of woman
that offspring is produced ; for Agni the householder
from above, since it is from above that the male
approaches the female.

8. Thereupon they betake themselves, with the
heart-spit, to the purificatory bath". Now, the anguish
of the victim, in being slaughtered, concentrates
itself into the heart, and from the heart into the
heart-spit; and whatever part of cooked (food) is
pierced that becomes palatable?: therefore let him
roast it on the spit after piercing it. Uppermost on
the thrice-moved (portions of the) victim he places
that heart after pulling it off (the spit).

9. He (the slaughterer) then hands the heart-spit
(to the Adhvaryu). Let him not throw it on the


first place, throws the first chip of the sacrificial stake into the fire,
in accordance with III, 7, 1, 32. For the four Patnisamyagas, the
deities of which are Soma, Tvash/r?, the wives of the gods, and
Agni the householder, see part i, p. 256. The first two offerings
may consist only of ghee, or, as the last two, of a piece of the tail.

1 The technical term for this purificatory ceremony is slava-
bhrztha, or ‘spit-bath.’ On the present occasion it is not per-
formed (see paragraph 11), but it is inserted here because it forms
the conclusion of the ordinary animal offering, not connected with
the Soma-sacrifice (nirfidha-pasu), as well as of the offering of a
sterile cow (termed andbandhy4) to Mitra and Varuza, which con-
cludes the Soma-sacrifice. See parti, p. 379, note 1, and IV, 5,
2,3 $cc;

2 ? Alamgusha, ‘sufficient for eating,’ Sayava; ‘sufficient in
itself,’ St. Petersburg Dict. The Kava text has the probably
preferable reading,—atha alamgusham sritam eva paritrindanti,—
‘they then pierce (with the spit) what is already sufficiently cooked.


216 SATAPATIA-BRAHMANA.


ne


ground, nor into the water; for were he to throw it
on the ground, that anguish would enter into the
plants and trees; and were he to throw it into the
water, that anguish would enter into the water:
hence neither on the ground, nor into the water.

10. But on going down to the water, let him bury
it at the place where the dry and the moist meet.
But if he feel disinclined to going down (to the
water), he pours out a vessel of water in front of the
sacrificial stake and buries (the spit) at the place
where the dry and the moist meet, with (Vag. S.
VI, 22),‘Injure thou not the waters nor the
plants!’ thus it injures neither the waters nor the
plants; ‘From every fetter’—therefrom de-
liver us, O king Varuza! That they say, we
swear by the “Inviolable(cows),” by “Varuza’,”


1 This is a doubtful rendering in accordance with the suggestion
in the St. Petersburg Dict., that ‘dhamno-dhamnad’ in this passage
is an old corruption of ‘damno-damna.’ The Taitt.S. has the same
reading. Sayama and Mahidhara take it in the sense of ‘from every
place (infested by enemies, or, rendered fearful by thy noose) deliver
us!’ Could ‘dhémno-dhamnah’ be taken as gen. to ‘ragan?’

* ? Or, ‘That they say (i.e. mention the word) ‘‘Cows,’—that we
swear by “ Varuza,’—therefrom deliver us, O Varuna!’ If the
mentioning of words for cow (as well as the taking in vain of
Varuma’s name) is meant to be censured in this passage, Sat. Br.
II, 2, 4, 14 (part i, p. 326 nole) may be compared. It seems, how-
ever, doubtful whether the author of the Brahmaza took the
term aghny4A as referring to ‘cows’ here. The St. Petersburg
Dict., s.v. sap, translates, ‘when we swear by the name of
Varuna.’ Instead of ‘Yad ahur aghnya iti varumeti sapdmahe,’
the Taitt. S (I, 3, 11, 1) reads ‘Yad Apo aghniya varuveti sapé-
mahe,’ which Sayama explains by ‘O ye waters, O ye Aghnyah
(?inviolable ones, cows, waters), O Varuna! thus we solicit thee
(to avert evil from us);’ adding a passage to the effect that he who
approaches his better (addressing him) by name, wishes him ‘ pu-
nyarti;’ while in the present mantra, he contends there is no mere
‘taking the name of Varuza in vain.’


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 2. 217


therefrom deliver us, O Varuza!’ Thereby he
delivers him?! from every noose of Varuza, from all
(guilt) against Varuza.

11. He then addresses (the water)? with, ‘May
the waters and plants be friendly unto us,
unfriendly to him who hateth us, and whom
we hate!’ For when they proceed with that (spit),
the waters, forsooth, as well as the plants, keep as it
were receding from him; but hereby he now makes
a covenant with them, and so they again approach to
him, and that expiation is performed (to them). He
does not perform (the spit-bath) at the animal offer-
ing to Agni and Soma, nor at that to Agni, but only
at that of the Anfibandhyd-cow , for therewith the
whole sacrifice attains to completion. And in that
they perform (the ceremony) with the heart-spit at
the cow (offering), thereby indeed it comes to be
performed also for the animal offering to Agni
and Soma, as well as for that to Agni.


NintH ApuHYAyvA. First BRAHMANA.


1. Now Pragdpati (the lord of creatures), having
createdliving beings, felt himself as it were exhausted‘.
The creatures turned away from him; the creatures’
did not abide with him for his joy and food.

2. He thought within him, ‘I have exhausted


1 T.e. the sacrificer (or the victim representing the sacrificer).

2 According to the Kanva text and Katy. VI, 10, 5 they (the
priests and sacrificer) touch the water while muttering the formula—
‘From every fetter... . and whom we hate.’

* See IV, 5, 1, 5 scq.

‘ Ririsinad4, lit. ‘emptied,’ as A4pydy means ‘to fill.’

* ‘Prag&i’ has likewise here the meaning of ‘ people, subjects,
constituting the power or glory (sri) of the king.


218 SATAPATIIA-BRAIIMANA.


iT


myself, and the object for which! I have created has
not been accomplished: my creatures have turned
away from me, the creatures have not abode with
me for my joy and food.’

3. PragApati thought within him,‘ How can I again
strengthen myself: the creatures might then return
to me; the creatures might abide with me for my
joy and food!’

4. He went on praising and toiling, desirous of
creatures (or progeny). He beheld that set of
eleven (victims). By offering therewith Pragapati
again strengthened himself; the creatures returned
to him, his creatures abode for his joy and food. By
offering he truly became better.

5. Therefore, then, let him offer with the set of
eleven (victims), for thus he truly strengthens him-
self by offspring and cattle; the creatures turn unto
him, the creatures abide with him for his joy and
food;—he truly becomes better by offering: therefore,
then, let him offer with the set of eleven (victims).

6. In the first place he seizes? a victim for Agni.
For Agni is the head, the progenitor of the gods, he
is the lord of creatures: and thereby the sacrificer
truly becomes Agni’s own.

7. Then one for Sarasvati. For Sarasvatt is
speech: by speech Pragdpati then again strengthened
himself; speech turned unto him, speech he made
subject to himself. And so does this one now
become strong by speech, and speech turns unto
him, and he makes speech subject to himself.

8. Then one for Soma. For Soma is food: by


" For ‘asma u kimaya’ we ought to read ‘yasma4 u kamaya,’
with Sayava and the Kava text.
* Alabh, to touch, seize, is a euphemistic term for immolating.


Ill KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 12. 219


food Pragapati then again strengthened himself;
food turned unto him, and he made food subject to
himself. And so does this one now become strong
by food; food turns unto him, and he makes food
subject to himself.

9. And as to why it comes after that for Sara-
svati,—Sarasvati is speech, and Soma is food: he
who is incomplete by (having only) speech, now
becomes indeed an eater of food.

10. Then one for Pishan. For Pishan means
cattle; by means of cattle Pragdpati then again
strengthened himself; cattle turned unto him, he
made cattle subject to himself. And so does this
one now become strong by means of cattle; the
cattle turn unto him, and he makes the cattle sub-
ject to himself.

11. Then one for Brzhaspati. For Brzhaspati
means the priesthood (brahman); by means of the
priesthood Pragapati then again strengthened him-
self; the priesthood turned unto him, he made the
priesthood subject to himself. And so does this
one now become strong by means of the Brahman ;
the priesthood turns unto him, he makes the priest-
hood subject to himself.

12. And as to why it comes after that for Pt-
shan,—Ptshan means cattle, and Brzhaspati the
priesthood; hence the Brahmava (priest) has the
most power over beasts, because they are ‘placed
in front (are protected) by him’, because they are
placed at the head (or in his mouth); therefore


a


1 Purahitah (pura-ahitar, KAzva rec.) has both the general mean-
ing of ‘ put before him (as food)’ and that of ‘being placed next in
order before him.’


220 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

hist PUN SEBO IIONE ST rol SSE
having given all that, he walks clad in sheep-
skin'.

13. Then one for the Visve devad. For the
All-gods mean everything (or the All); with every-
thing Pragdpati then again strengthened himself;
everything turned unto him, and he made everything
subject to him. And so does this one now become
strong by everything; everything turns to him, and
he makes everything subject to himself.

14. And as to why it comes after that for Brzhas-
pati,—Brzhaspati means the priesthood, and the All-
gods this All; he then makes the priesthood the
head of this All; wherefore the Brahman is the head
of this All.

15. Then one for Indra. For Indra means power
(indriya) and vigour ; by power and vigour Pragapati
then again strengthened himself; power and vigour
turned unto him, and he made power and vigour
subject to himself. And so does this one now become
strong by means of power and vigour; power and
vigour turn to him, and he makes power and vigour
subject to himself.

16. And as to why it comes after that for the All-
gods,—Indra is the nobility, and the All-gods are the
clans (people); he thus places the food before him.

17. Then one for the Maruts. For the Maruts
mean the clans, and a clan means abundance; with
abundance Pragdpati then again strengthened him-
self; abundance turned unto him, and he made
abundance subject to himself. And so does this
one now become strong by abundance; abundance


* ‘Since the lordship over cattle belongs to the Brahman, there-


fore (the sacrificer) having given all his property to the Brahmans,’
&e. Say.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 23. 221


turns unto him, and he makes abundance subject
to himself.

18. And as to why it comes after that for Indra,—
Indra is the nobility, and the All-gods are the clans,
and the Maruts are the clans; he thus guards the
nobility by the clan, and hence the nobility here is
on both sides guarded by the clan.

19. Then one for Indra and Agni. For Agni
means penetrating brilliance, and Indra means power
and vigour; with these two energies Pragapati then
again strengthened himself; both energies turned
unto him, and he made both energies subject to
himself. And so does this one now become strong
by both these energies ; both energies turn unto him,
and he makes both energies subject to himself.

20. Then one for Savitvz. For Savitrz is the
impeller (prasavitzz) of the gods; and so all those
wishes become accomplished for him, impelled as
they are by Savitvz.

21. Then finally he seizes one for Varuza;
thereby he delivers him (the sacrificer) from every
noose of Varuza, from every (guilt) against Varuza!,

22. Hence if there be eleven sacrificial stakes,
let him bind Agni’s (victim) to the one opposite
the fire; and let them lead up the others one by
one in the proper order.

23. But if there be eleven victims’, let them
only immolate at the stake that for Agni, and after
that the others in the proper order.


1 VarunyAd evaitat sarvasmat kilbishad enaso ‘ntato varumapasat
pragah pramuvikati, Kanva rec.

* That is, if there be eleven victims and only one stake, in that
case Agni’s victim is tied to the stake, and each succeeding victim
is tied to the neck of the preceding one. Katy. VIII, 8, 28.


222 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


a eee


24. When they lead them northwards, they lead
the one for Agni first, and then the others in the
proper order.

25. When they throw them down, they throw
down first the one for Agni, as the southernmost ;
then the others after leading them round north-
wards in the proper order.

26. When they perform (offerings) with the
omenta, they perform first with the omentum of
Agni's (victim); then with those of the others in
the proper order.

27. When they perform with those (chief obla-
tions), they perform first with that to Agni; then
with the others in the proper order.


THE VASATIVARI WATER.


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. Now, when the head of the sacrifice (victim)
was struck off, its sap, running, entered the waters.
It is by that very sap that those waters flow; that
very sap is believed to be flowing there!.

2. And when he goes for the Vasativari water,
he fetches that same sap and puts it into the sacri-
fice, and makes the sacrifice sapful; this is why he
goes for the Vasativari water.

3. He distributes it over all the Savanas (Soma-
pressings); thereby he imbues all the pressings


1 Yatra vai yagnasya siro *khAidyata tasya raso drutvapa pravisat
sa esha rasa eti ya eta pak syandante tenaivaina etad rasena syan-
damana manyante yah sa yagiiasya rasas tam evaitad rasam syan-
damanam manyante, Kanva rec.

* ‘He divides it into three parts for all the pressings,’ Kava text.
Sce note on IV, 2, 3, 4.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 8. 223


with that sap, makes all the pressings sapful: this
is why he distributes it over all the pressings.

4. Let him take it from flowing (water); for
that sap of the sacrifice was moving!: let him
therefore take it from flowing (water).

5. Moreover, it is taken for the purpose of pro-
tection. Now, everything else here on earth, what-
ever it be, takes rest, even yonder blowing (wind) ;
but these (waters) alone take no rest: therefore let
him take it from flowing (water).

6. Let him take it by day, thinking, ‘Seeing, I will
take the sap of the sacrifice *:’ therefore let him take
it by day. For it is for him that burns yonder (the
sun) that he takes it, since he takes it for all the
gods, and all the gods are his rays of light : therefore
let him take it by day. For it is by day alone that
he (shines): therefore, then, let him take it by day.

7. And again, all the gods, forsooth, now come to
the sacrificer’s house; and if one takes the Vasativari
water before the setting of the sun, it is as when
one’s better comes to visit one, he would honour
him by trimming his house. They draw nigh to that
sacrificial food, and abide (upa-vas) in that Vasativari”
water,—that is the Upavasatha (preparation-day).

8. And if the sun were to set on any one's (Vasati-
varis) not having been taken, then expiation is made.
If he have performed a (Soma-)sacrifice before this,
let him (the Adhvaryu) take it from his tank‘, since


1 Aid hi; see p. 222, note I.

2 Or perhaps, ‘I will take it while I see the sap of the sacrifice.’

$ ‘Vasativari’ seems to mean ‘affording dwelling ;’ or perhaps,
‘that (water) which abides, remains (over night).’ Cf. par. 16.

‘ ‘Nindhya’ (nindhyah kumbhas, Kanva rec. each time); a
vessel or cistern, dug into the ground for keeping water cool.


224 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


that (water) of his has been taken before (sunset)
by day. But should he not have offered before, if
there be one who has offered (Soma) settled close
by or somewhere thereabout’, let him take it from
his tank, since that (water) of his has been taken
before, by day.

9. But if he cannot obtain either kind (of water),
let him seize a firebrand and betake himself (to the
flowing water), and let him take thereof while hold-
ing that (firebrand) close above it; or let him take
it while holding a piece of gold close above it: thus
it is made like yonder burning (sun).

10. He takes therefrom with the text (Vag. S.
VI, 23), ‘Rich in havis are these waters, —for
the sap of the sacrifice entered into them, wherefore
he says, ‘Rich in havis (sacrificial food) are these
waters;'—‘ One rich in havis wooeth for (them),
for the sacrificer, rich in havis, woos for (wishes
to obtain) them; wherefore he says, ‘One rich in
havis wooeth for (them).’

11. ‘Rich in havis (may be) the divine cult;’
cult, namely, means the sacrifice; thus he makes the
sacrifice for which he takes it rich in sacrificial food,
therefore he says, ‘ Rich in havis is the divine cult.’

12, ‘May Sdrya be rich in havis!’ For he
takes it for yonder burning (sun), since he takes it
for all the gods, and all the gods are his (the sun’s)
rays of light; therefore he says, ‘May Sirya (the
sun) be rich in havis!’

13. Having fetched it, he deposits it behind the
Garhapatya?, with (Vag. S. VI, 24), ‘I seat you in


* Upavasito va paryavasito (prativeso, Kanva text instead) va.
* That is, behind the old Ahavantya of the Prasinavamsa, where
the altar would be prepared at the ordinary haviryagfia.


Ill KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 16. 225


the seat of Agni, the safe-housed;’ whereby he
means to say, ‘I seat you (waters) in the seat of
Agni, whose house is unimpaired.’ And when the
animal offering to Agni and Soma comes to a close,
then he carries (the Vasativart water) round. He
says (thrice), ‘Disperse!’ The sacrificer is seated
in front of the Soma-carts (holding Soma on his
lap'). He (the Adhvaryu) takes it (the water stand-
ing behind the Garhapatya).

14. He walks out (of the hall) by the south (door),
and puts it down on the south hip (of the high altar),
with, ‘Ye (waters)are Indra and Agnis share!’ for
he takes it for all the gods, and Indra and Agni are
all the gods. He takes it up again and puts it down
in front of the lady (who, seated behind the Garha-
patya, touches the water-jar). Walking round behind
the lady he (again) takes it.

15. He walks out (of the hall by the east door),
along the north side (of the altar), and puts down
(the water) on the north hip (of the high altar),
with, ‘Ye are Mitra and Varuvza’s share!’ Let
him not put it down in this way-, that is redundant,
and no fitting conclusion is thus attained. Let him
rather (here also) say, ‘Ye are Indra and Agnis
share!’ only thus there is nothing redundant, and
so a fitting conclusion is obtained.

16. That (Vasativari water) is carried round for
the sake of protection ; Agni is in front (of the sacri-
ficial ground), and now that (water) moves about
all round, repelling the evil spirits. He puts it


1 According to Katy. VIII, 9, 16.

2 *Some put it down with this (formula), but let him not put it
down so, for thus completeness is left behind (or, has a surplus,
sampad rifyate).’ Kazva text.


[26] Q


226 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,


down in the Agnidhra (fire-house) with, ‘ Ye are all
the gods’ share!’ whereby he makes all the gods
enter it. It isa desirable object (vara) to the dwellers
(vasat), hence the name Vasativari!, and verily he
who knows this, becomes a desirable object to the
dwellers,

17. Now there are here seven formulas; with
four he takes (the water), with one he puts it down
behind the Garhapatya, with one he carries it round,
with one (he puts it down) in the Agntdhra,—this
makes seven. For when the metres were produced
from Vaé (speech), the one consisting of seven feet,
the Sakvari, was the last (highest) of them ;—that
completeness (he brings about): hence there are
seven formulas.


THE SOMA FEAST.


THIRD BRAHMANA.


A. PRATAR-ANUVAKA (MORNING-PRAYER) AND PREPARATORY
CEREMONIES.


1. They (the priests) are wakened (towards morn-
ing). Having touched water?, they proceed together
to the Agnidhra (fire-house) and take the portions
of ghee (for the Savantya animal offerings). Having
taken the portions of ghee, they betake themselves
(to the high altar), When they have deposited the


ghee,—
nt eile EE ee eters Tare
* Cf. Taitt. S. VI, 4, 2, ‘devas... abruvan, vasatu nu na idam


iti, tad vasativarindm vasativaritvam.’

* After performing their ablutions they have to perform the pre-
liminary work and ceremonies, such as preparing the Garhapatya,
fetching and arranging the vessels, cleaning of spoons, &c. up to
the depositing of the ghee, near the high altar.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA. 3 BRAHMANA, 5. 227


2. He (the Adhvaryu) takes down the king
(Soma)'. Now this (earth) is a safe resting-place,
and the birth-place of living beings; it is to this
safe resting-place that he now takes him down; he
spreads him thereon, produces him therefrom.

3. He takes him down between the shafts; for
the cart is (a means of) the sacrifice, and thus
alone he does not put him outside the sacrifice. He
puts him on the pressing stones lying there with
their heads (mukha, mouths)? towards each other;
for Soma is the nobility, and the stones are the
clans (people); he thereby raises the nobility over
the clan. And as to why they are lying with their
heads together,—he thereby makes the clan of one
head (or mouth) with, and uncontentious towards,
the nobles; therefore they are lying with their heads
towards each other.

4. He takes (Soma) down, with (Vag. S. VI, 25),
‘Thee forthe heart,thee forthe mind!’ This he
says for the (accomplishment of the) sacrificer's wish,
since it is with the heart and mind that the sacrificer
entertains the wish for which he sacrifices; therefore
he says, ‘ Thee for the heart, thee for the mind!’

‘Thee forthe sky, thee forthe sun!’ This,
on the other hand, he says with a view to the world
of the gods. When he says, ‘Thee for the sky, thee


? According to Katy. VIII, 9. 24-25, on the previous evening,
immediately after the carrying round and depositing of the Visatit
vari water,—the Soma is placed on a seat (isandi) in the Agnidhra
fire house, where the sacrificer has to watch over it during that night.
This is not mentioned in the Brahmawa, and from what follows it
would rather seem that the Soma is taken down from the cart (see
III, 6, 3,17 seq.). Otherwise we might translate, ‘He brings him
down (from the Agnidhra).’

2 That is, with their broad sides turned tow ards each other,


QO 2


228 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Tecan De. Sherer ric SOME EL 2 sd Sema
for the sun,’ he means to say, ‘ Thee for the gods!’
‘Upwards convey thou to the sky, to the gods,
this cult, these invocations!’ Cult, doubtless,
means sacrifice: he thereby means to say, ‘ Upwards
carry thou this sacrifice to the sky, to the gods!’

6. [Vag. S. VI, 26], ‘O Soma, king, descend
unto all thy people!’ whereby he brings him
down for the lordship, for the sovereignty of these
people (creatures).

7. Having quitted his hold (of Soma) he sits
down by him, with, ‘May all thy people descend
to thee. Now, in saying, ‘Descend unto all thy
people,’ he does what is unseemly, for Soma being
the nobility, he thereby, as it were, confounds good
and bad!,—and, indeed, in consequence thereof,
people now confound good and bad. But in this
(formula) he does what is right and according to
order,—in saying, ‘May all thy people descend to
thee,’ he makes all his subjects go down (on their
knees) before him; and hence when a noble ap-
proaches, all these subjects, the people, go down
before him, crouch down by him on the ground?.
Sitting near (Soma), the Hotvz is about to recite
the morning-prayer.

8. Then, while putting a kindling-stick (on the
fire), he (the Adhvaryu) says, ‘Recite to the gods


? «He commits a papavasyasam, i. e. according to Haug, Ait. Br.
p- 413, ‘a breach of the oath of allegiance ’ (where Sayaza explains
it by ‘exceedingly bad’); or ‘an (act of) perversity,’ Weber, Ind.
Stud. IX, p. 300. Sayama, to our passage, explains it by ‘ mixing
the bad with the good (or better).’ The literal translation is ‘a
bad-bettering.’ What is chiefly implied in the term is evidently
the showing of disrespect by an inferior to a superior person.

* Tasmat kshatriyam upary 4sinam adhastad visa imaA praga
upasate. Kanva text.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 10. 229


the early-coming!’ Now the early-coming gods are
the metres, as the after-offerings are the metres; and
the after-offerings are performed with, ‘ Prompt (the
Hotvz to recite) to the gods! Recite (the offering-
prayer) to the gods!’

9. And so some say, ‘ Recite to the gods!!’ But
let him not say so; for the early-coming gods are
the metres, as the after-offerings are the metres, and
the after-offerings are performed with, ‘ Prompt—
to the gods! Recite (the offering-prayer) to the
gods!’ therefore let him say, ‘ Recite to the gods,
the early-coming!’

10. And when he puts on a kindling-stick, it is
the metres he thereby kindles. And when the
Hotvz recites the morning-prayer’, he thereby


1 Here now, some say only, ‘ Recite to the early-coming!’ not
‘to the... gods!’ but let him not say this. Kazva text.

* The Pratar-anuvika, or morning-prayer (matin chant), has
to be recited by the Hoty? in the latter part of the night before any
sound (of birds, &c.) is to be heard. It may begin immediately
after midnight, and conclude as soon as daylight appears. When
called upon by the Adhvaryu to recite the morning-prayer, the
Hotr? first makes an oblation of ghee on the Agnidhra fire, with
the mantra, ‘Protect me from the spell of the mouth, from every
imprecation, Hail!’ and then two oblatigns on the Ahavaniya with
appropriate mantras. Thereupon he betakes himself to the Havir-
dhana (cart-shed), in entering which, by the east door, he touches
successively the front-wreath (rara/a, cf. I], 5, 3, 9) and the door-
posts, with formulas. He then squats down between the yoke-
pieces of the two Soma-carts, and begins his recitation with Rig-veda
X, 30, 12,‘ Ye, O wealthy waters, verily possess good things; ye
confer desirable energy and immortality ; ye command riches with
abundant offspring: may Sarasvat? (the river S., and Speech)
bestow on the bard that vital vigour!’ The ‘ early-coming’ deities
to whom the recitation is successively addressed, are Agni, Ushas
(the dawn), and the two Asvins (the precursors of the sun); the
prayer thus consisting of three sections, termed kratu (Agni-


230 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Sn ee aoe
again strengthens the metres, makes them to be
of unimpaired vigour; for the metres had their
vigour impaired by the gods, since it was through the
metres that the gods reached the heavenly worlds ;
they neither sing praises (chants) nor recite (sastras)
here. Hereby he now again strengthens the metres
and makes them to be of unimpaired vigour ; and by
means of them, thus unimpaired in vigour, they


kratu, &c.). The hymns and detached verses making up these
sections are arranged according to the seven metres (thus forming
seven sub-sections of each), viz. gAyatri, anush/ubh, trish/ubh,
brhati, ushzih, gagati, and pankti. The prayer may consist of as
many verses as can be recited between midnight and daybreak ;
but there should be at least one hymn in each of the seven metres
to each of the three deities; nor should the recitation consist of
less than a hundred verses. From the beginning of the recitation
up to the end of the last hymn but one, Rig-veda I, 112, there is to
be a gradual modulation of the voice so as to pass upwards through
the seven tones (yama) of the deep scale (mandrasvara). More-
over, that hymn is to be repeated (if necessary) till daylight appears.
As soon as this is the case, he passes on without any break from
the last (25th) verse to the last hymn (v. 75, 1-9), which he intones
in the lowest tone of the middle scale, after shifting his place further
east towards the gate. The recitation of the first eight verses
of this hymn again gradually ascends through the whole of the
middle scale; when—after once more shifting his place so as to
be seated between the two door-posts —he intones the last verse—
‘The Dawn hath appeared with her shining kine, Agni hath been
kindled at his appointed time: your car hath been yoked, ye
mighty, mead-loving(?) Asvins, showerers of wealth, hear my call!’
in reciting which he makes his voice pass through the several tones
of the high scale. The Subrahmazyé, likewise, has to chant the
Subrahmamya litany (see III, 3, 4,17 seq.)—as he had to do on
the previous evening—inserting in it the names of the sacrificer’s
father and son. The Agnidh, in the meantime, prepares the five
havis-oblations (savaniyah purodasaf) to be offered at the morning-
pressing (cf. IV, 2, 4, 18), and the Unnetr? puts the numerous
Soma-vessels in their respective places on the khara, and about
the Soma-carts.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 14. 231


perform the sacrifice; this is why the Hotz? recites
the morning-prayer.

11, Here now they say, ‘What is the (Adh-
varyus) response to the morning-prayer!?’ The
Adhvaryu should wait through (the prayer) waking,
and when he blinks, this is his response. But let
him not do this; if he fall asleep (again) he may
as well sleep. When the Hotz? brings his morning-
prayer to a close?,—there is an offering-spoon
called Prafarazi,—having therein taken ghee in four
ladlings, he (the Adhvaryu) offers it.

12. For when the head of Yagiia (the sacrifice)
was struck off, his sap, running, entered the waters ;
that (sap) he fetched yesterday with the Vasativari
water ; and he now goes for what sap of the sacri-
fice remains therein.

13. And when he offers that offering, he pours
out (the ghee) towards that same sap of the sacri-
fice (in the water) and draws it to him. And,
indeed, he pleases those deities to whom he offers
that offering, and thus satisfied and pleased, they
fit that sap of the sacrifice together ® for him.

14. He offers with, ‘May Agni, with his flame,
hear my prayer; whereby he means to say, ‘ May
he hear this prayer of mine, may he vouchsafe it to
me;’—‘May the waters and the Soma-bowls
hear, the divine!’ whereby he means to say,
‘May the waters hear this (prayer) of mine, may
they vouchsafe it to me.—‘ Hear me, ye stones,
ite Wai ag BA Pe aE FY

* CIN apap eed.

2 That is, when he recites the last verse, ‘Ushas hath ap-


peared,’ &c.
3 Literally, ‘ Bend together (sam-nam),’ which refers to the ‘ bend-


ing together’ of the cups at the Aponaptriya ceremony.


232 SATAPATHA-BRAH MANA.


a ba i sec a em meme ae nace
as knowing the sacrifice!’ whereby he means
to say, ‘ May the (pressing) stones hear this (prayer)
of mine, may they vouchsafe it to me; and ‘as
knowing the sacrifice,’ he says, because the stones
are indeed knowing’. ‘May the divine Savitzz
hear my prayer, Hail!’ whereby he means to
say, ‘May the divine Savitrz hear this (prayer) of
mine, may he vouchsafe it to me;’ for Savitvz is
the impeller of the gods; impelled by him he goes
for that sap of the sacrifice.

15. Having then a second time taken ghee by
four ladlings, he says, while going forth towards
the north, ‘Summon the waters!’ whereby he
means to say, ‘ Desire the waters, O Hotar!’ The
reason why the Hotzz then recites? is this: by that


1 The text has rather to be construed, ‘ Ye stones, hear (my
prayer) as (of one) knowing the sacrifice.’

2 While the Adhvaryu and assistants go to the water to fill the
Ekadhana pitchers, the Hotr? recites the so-called Aponaptriya
hymn (Rig-veda X, 30) to the waters, omitting verse twelve, which
was already recited as the opening verse of the morning-prayer.
The first verse is recited thrice, and the. tenth verse is recited after
the eleventh, while the priests are returning with the water. As
soon as they are in sight, the Hotr? recites verse 13, followed
by Rig-veda V, 43,1; and (when the Ekadhana and Vasativari waters
meet together, paragraph 29) Rig-veda II, 35, 3; and, in case
some of the water is actually poured over into the Hotr?’s cup,
I, 83, 2. When the water is brought to the Havirdhana, the How?
addresses the Adhvaryu as stated in paragraph 31; whereupon he
pronounces a ‘nigada’ (for which see Ait. Br. II, 20; Asv. Sr.
V, 1, 14-17), followed by Rig-veda I, 23,16; while the Ekadhana
pitchers are carricd pasthim. The water in the Maitravaruza cup
and one third cf both the Vasativari and Ekadhana water having
been poured into the Adhavaniya trough (standing on the northern
cart), the pitchers with the remaining water are then deposited in
their respective places behind the axle of the northern cart, where-
upon the Hotr7 recites the two remaining verses (14 and 15) of the


II KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAIIMANA, 21. 233


(oblation) he (the Adhvaryu) pours out (the ghee)
towards that sap of the sacrifice (in the water), and
draws it to him; and he (the Hotvz) then stands
by those (Ekadhana pitchers) lest the evil spirits
should injure them on the way.

16. He (the Adhvaryu) then gives directions,
‘Come hither, cup-bearer of the Maitravaruza!
Neshéar, lead up the wives! Ye bearers of the
Ekadhana (cups), come hither! Agnidh, step over
against the pit with the Vasativart water and the
Hotvz's cup!’ this is a composite direction.

17. They walk northwards out (of the sacrificial
ground)—by the back of the pit and the front side
of the Agnidhra; whereupon they proceed in the
direction in which the water is. They go thither
together with the wives. The reason why they go
thither with the wives is this.

18. When the head of the sacrifice was struck.
off, its sap, running, entered the waters; those
Gandharva Soma-wardens watched it.

19. The gods then said, ‘Those Gandharvas,
surely, are a great danger to us here, how can we
carry off the sap of the sacrifice to a place free
from danger and injury ?’

20. They said, ‘ Well, the Gandharvas are fond
of women; let us go together with the wives! The
Gandharvas, surely, will hanker after the wives,
and we shall carry off that sap of the sacrifice to a
place free from danger and injury.’

21. They went with the wives; the Gandharvas
did indeed hanker after the wives, and they (the


Aponaptriya hymn, and sits down in front of the Soma, behind
the northern door-post of the Havirdhana (cart-shed).


234 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


gods) carried off that sap of the sacrifice to a place
free from danger and injury.

22. And so does that (Adhvaryu) now go (to the
water) with the wives; the Gandharvas hanker after
the wives, and he carries off that sap of the sacrifice
to a place free from danger and injury.

23. He offers (the ghee) upon the water; for that
sap of the sacrifice, indeed, draws near to that obla-
tion, when offered ; it rises (to the surface) to meet it;
and having thus brought it to light, he seizes it.

24. And again why he offers this oblation: he
thereby pours out (ghee) towards that sap of the
sacrifice, and draws it to him, and craves it of the
waters. And, indeed, he pleases those deities towhom
he offers that oblation, and thus satisfied and pleased
they fit that sap of the sacrifice together for him.

25. He offers with (Vag. S. VI, 27), ‘Ye divine
waters,—the son of waters; the waters are
indeed divine, hence he says, ‘Ye divine waters,—
the son of waters; ‘That wave of yours, suit-
able for offering; whereby he means to say,
‘That wave of yours which is suitable for the sacri--
fice;’) ‘Mighty, most grateful;’ by ‘mighty’ he
means to say ‘powerful, and by ‘most grateful’ he
means to say ‘most sweet; ‘Give ye that unto
those gods among the gods,’ in saying this he
has craved it of them; ‘The drinkers of the pure
(Soma) ;’ the pure, doubtless, is the truth; in saying,
‘the drinkers (pa) of the pure,’ he means to say,
‘the defenders (pa) of the truth;’ ‘Whose portion
ye are, Hail!’ for this indeed is their portion.

26. Thereupon he makes that oblation (ghee)
float away by means of the Maitravaruzza’s cup,
with (Vag. S. VI, 28), ‘Thou art furrowing!’ Even


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 29. 235


as a coal is consumed by Fire, so is that obla-
tion consumed by that deity. Now that water,
which is in the Maitravaruza’s cup, he will have to
pour on the king (Soma); and ghee being a thun-
derbolt, and Soma seed, he makes (the ghee) float
away lest he should injure that seed, Soma, by that
thunderbolt, the ghee.

27. He then takes (water) with, ‘I draw thee up
for the imperishableness of the ocean;’ for the
ocean is water; he thus confers imperishableness
upon the waters; wherefore, in spite of so much
food (and drink) being consumed, the waters are
not diminished. Thereupon they draw (water in)
the Ekadhana pitchers, and thereupon the vessels
for washing the feet?.

28. The reason why he takes (water) with the
Maitravaruza’s cup is this. When the sacrifice
escaped from the gods, the gods endeavoured to
call it up by means of (sacrificial) calls (praisha)? ;
by means of the purorué (‘shining before’) formulas *
they pleased it (pra-rofaya), and by the nivids they
made (their wishes) known (ni-vid) to it. Therefore
he takes (water) with the Maitravaruza’s cup.

29. They come back. The Agnidh takes up his
position opposite to the pit with the Vasativari
water and the Hotvz’s cup. Close over the pit he


1 These are filled by the sacrificer’s wife, or, if there be more
than one sacrificer (or, if the sacrificer have more than one wife),
by all the wives, each having two vessels. For the use of this
water, see note on IV, 4, 2, 18.

2 The praishas or sacrificial directions to the Hotrz, for the
recitations of offering-formulas, are given by the Maitravaruma ;
see p. 183, note 2.

> See note on IV, 1, 3, 15; the nivids, part i, p. 114, note 2.


236 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Aig Seis Metical Diddacereinandln ab pated
(the Adhvaryu) makes the Vasativart water and
the Maitrdvaruza’s cup touch one another, with,
‘Water hath united with water, plants with
plants!’ the sap of the sacrifice which was fetched
yesterday and that fetched to-day, both kinds he
thereby mixes together.

30. Now some indeed pour (some of) the Vasati-
vari water into the Maitravaruza’s cup, and from the
Maitravaruza’s cup (back) to the Vasativari water,
arguing, ‘Thereby we mix together both the sap of
the sacrifice which was fetched yesterday and that
fetched to-day.’ But let him not do this; for when
he pours (the water) together into the Adhavaniya
trough!, then both kinds of sap are mixed together.
Thereupon he pours the Vasativari water into the
Hotvz’s cup for the Nigrabhyds*?. And as to why
he makes them touch one another close over the pit,
it was from thence, forsooth, that the gods rose to
heaven; he thus makes the sacrificer look along the
road to heaven.

31. They return (to the Havirdhana). The Hotrz
asks him, ‘ Adhvaryu, hast thou gained the waters ?’
whereby he means to say, ‘ Hast thou obtained the
waters ?’ He replies to him, ‘ Yea, they have yielded
themselves!’ whereby he means to say, ‘I have ob-
tained them and they have yielded to me.’

32. And if it be an Agnish/oma, and there be left
a residue (of ghee poured together) in the prafaravi


1 See p. 232, note 2 to paragraph 15.

? Nigrabhyad is the technical name the Vasattvari water in
the Hotrz’s cup henceforth bears. It is handed to the sacrificer to
carry to the Havirdhana; and is afterwards used for moistening


the Soma plants (or, for being poured thercon) at the time of the
pressing. Sec III, 9, 4, 14 seq.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 34. 237


spoon sufficient for an oblation, let him offer that.
But if it be not sufficient for an oblation, he takes
another portion of ghee in four ladlings and offers
it, with (Vag. S. VI, 29; Rig-veda I, 27, 7),‘What-
ever mortal thou favourest in battles, whom-
soever thou speedest in the race, he winneth
unfailing strength, Hail!’ He offers with (a
prayer) to Agni, because the Agnishfoma (‘ Agni’s
praise’) means Agni; thus he establishes the Agnish-
toma in Agni. [He offers] with (a verse) containing
the word ‘ mortal, because the Agnish/oma is of the
same measure as man. Let him then offer in this
manner, if it be an Agnish¢oma.

33. And if it be an Ukthya, let him touch the
middle enclosing-stick,—there are three enclosing-
sticks and three recitations (uktha)!; and by means
of them the sacrifice is there established. And if it
be either an Atiratra or a Shodasin ?, let him neither
make an oblation nor touch the middle enclosing-
stick ; having merely muttered (the above verse),
let him silently betake himself (to the Havirdhana)
and enter it’, In this way he duly distinguishes
the forms of sacrifice from one another.

34. The Ekadhana pitchers are always of uneven
number,—either three, or five, or seven, or nine, or
eleven, or thirteen, or fifteen*. Now two and two


1 See note on IV, 4, 2, 18; Haug, Ait. Br., Transl. p. 251.

2 And if it be a Shodasin, or an Atiratra, or a Vagapeya.
Kanva rec. See note on IV, 5, 3, I.

’ According to Katy. 1X, 3, 20-21 he may, while muttering that
verse, touch the front wreath at the Shodasin, and the side-mat at
the Atiratra.

‘ The original has,—either three, or five, or five, or seven, or
seven, or nine, &c. The Kazva text, on the other hand, has
merely,—either three, or five, or seven, OF nine, or ninetcen.


238 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Wie suet Be eae Sone Sty STS ek oe oo ee ger
(an even number) means a productive pair; and the
one that remains over, remains over for the sacri-
ficer’s prosperity. And, moreover, that which remains
over for the sacrificer’s prosperity is the common pro-
perty (sa-dhana) of these (others); and because it
is the common property of these, therefore they are
called Ekadhana (having one as their common


property).


FourTH BRAHMAMNA.


B. Tue PRATAMSAVANA, OR MORNING-PRESSING.
I, UpAsssu-GRaHA.


1. Thereupon they sit down round the two press-
boards'. He (the Adhvaryu) then ties a piece of gold
to that (nameless finger). For twofold, verily, is this ;
there is no third, namely, the truth and the untruth;
the gods, forsooth, are the truth, and men are the
untruth. And the gold has sprung from Agni's
seed: ‘With the truth I will touch the stalks,
with the truth I will take hold of Soma,’ thus he
thinks, and therefore he ties a piece of gold to that
(ring-finger).

2. He then takes a press-stone?. Now those


1 The Adhvaryu and sacrificer sit north of them, looking towards
the south; and the assistants of the former—viz. the Pratiprasthatrz,
Nesh/rz, and Unnetr?—on the south side, Jooking northwards.
The press-boards were laid down on the ‘sound-holes,’ under the
fore-part of the southern Soma-cart, and the pressing-skin was
spread over them; see III, 5, 4, 22-23. The Udgitrzs, or chanters,
are seated behind the carts.

* Viz. the upamsusavana, or ‘low-voiced pressing (stone),’ (see
paragraph 6,) with which the Soma for the Upamsu libation (or
cup, graha) is pressed.


Ill KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, a aa


press-stones are of rock, and Soma is a god—for
Soma was in the sky, Soma was Vvitra; those
mountains, those rocks are his body—he thus per-
fects him by means of his body, makes him whole;
therefore they are of rock. Moreover, in pressing
him they slay him, they slay him by means of that
(stone, Soma’s own body); thus he rises from
thence, thus he lives; therefore the press-stones
are of rock.

3. He takes it with (Vag. S. VI, 30), ‘At the
impulse of the divine Savitz I take thee with
the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of
Pdshan; thou art a giver!’ For Savitzz is the
impeller of the gods; thus he takes it, impelled by
Savityz, ‘With the arms of the Asvins,’ he says,—
the Asvins are the Adhvaryus (of the gods): with
their arms he thus takes it, not with his own. ‘With
the hands of Pishan,’ he says,—Pishan is the dis-
tributor of portions: with his hands he thus takes
it, not with his own. Moreover, that (stone) is a
thunderbolt, and no man can hold it: by means of
those deities he takes it.

4. ‘I take thee: thou art a giver, he says; for
when they press him by means of that (stone), then
there is an oblation; and when he offers an oblation,
then he gives sacrificial gifts,—thus, then, that (stone)
gives twofold, oblations and sacrificial gifts; where-
fore he says, ‘ Thou art a giver.

5. ‘Perform thou this deep cult!’ Cult means
sacrifice; he thereby means to say, ‘ Perform thou
this great sacrifice !’—‘well-gotten for Indra;’
by ‘well-gotten’ he means to say, ‘well-produced ;’
and Indra is the deity of the sacrifice, wherefore he
says, ‘for Indra ;’—‘ by the most excellent bolt,’


240 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ES


for he, Soma, is indéed the most excellent bolt!,
therefore he says, ‘by the most excellent bolt ;’W—
‘the (cult) rich in food and sweetness and
drink, whereby he means to say, ‘the (cult) rich
in sap.’

6. Thereupon he restrains ‘speech. For once on
a time, the gods, while performing sacrifice, were
afraid of an attack from the Asura- Rakshas.
They said, ‘Let us sacrifice in a low voice, let us
restrain speech!’ They sacrificed (with formulas
muttered) in a low voice and restrained speech.

7. He then fetches the Nigrabhyds (waters), and
makes him (the sacrificer) mutter over them’, ‘Ye
are the NigrabhyAs, heard bythe gods; satisfy
me, satisfy my mind, satisfy my speech, satisfy
my breath, satisfy mine eye, satisfy mine ear,
satisfy my soul, satisfy mine offspring, satisfy
my flocks, satisfy my followers, let not my fol-
lowers thirst!’ For water is sap, and over it he
invokes this blessing, ‘Satisfy ye my whole self,
satisfy my offspring, satisfy my followers, let not my
followers thirst!’ Now that Upamsusavana (stone),
forsooth, is in reality Aditya Vivasvant (the sun), it
is the pervading vital air (vydna) of this (sacrifice).

8. Thereon he metes out (the Soma). For in
pressing him they slay him, they slay him by means
of that (stone); thus*® he rises from hence, thus he


2 Tt is doubtful what ‘pavi’ may mean here. It seems to mean
originally a metallic mounting. especially of a shaft. The com-
mentators explain it by ‘thunderbolt.’

* The sacrificer holds the Hotrz’s cup with the Nigribhy4/ to
his breast.

* Viz. by being placed upon the stone. which is identical with
the sun (?); but cf. ITT, 8, 2, 27.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, II. 241


lives. And because he metes him out, therefore
there is a measure,—both the measure among men},
and what other measure there is.

9. He metes out with (Vag. S. VI, 32), ‘Thee
for Indra, with the Vasus, with the Rudras!’
For Indra is the deity of the sacrifice: therefore he
says, ‘Thee for Indra;’ and by saying ‘with the
Vasus, with the Rudras,’ he assigns a share, along
with (or after) Indra, to the Vasus and the Rudras.
— Thee for Indra, with the Adityas!’ whereby
he assigns a share to the Adityas along with Indra.
—‘ Thee for Indra, the slayer of foes!’ a foe is
an enemy: ‘ Thee for Indra, the slayer of enemies,
he meanstosay. This is his (Indra’s) special share :
as there is a special share for a chief, so is this his
special share apart from the (other) gods.

10. ‘Thee for the Soma-bearing falcon!’
this he metes out for Gayatri—‘ Thee for Agni,
the bestower of growth of wealth!’ Now
Agni is Gayatri: he metes this out for Gayatrt.
And since Gayatri, as a falcon, fetched Soma from
heaven, therefore she is (called) the Soma-bearing
falcon: for that prowess of hers he metes out (for
her) a second portion.

11. Now as to why he metes out five times*,—the
sacrifice is of the same measure as the year, and
there are five seasons in the year: he takes posses-
sion of it in five (divisions) ; hence he metes out five


times.


1 Tasmad v iyam manushyeshu mitra yat kaush/ho yat kumbhi


yeyam ka 4a manushyeshu matra. Kanva text.
2 According to Taitt. S. VI, 4, 4 he metes out five times with
the above texts, and five times silently.


[ 26} R


242 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ERE SL OLE

12. He touches it with (Vag. S. VI, 33), ‘What
light of thine there is in the heavens, O Soma,
what on earth, and what in the wide air, there-
with make wide room for this sacrificer, for
his prosperity: speak thou for the giver!’
Now when he (Soma) first became sacrificial food
for the gods, he thought within himself, ‘1 must not
become sacrificial food for the gods with my whole
self!’ Accordingly he deposited those three bodies
of his in these worlds.

13. The gods then were victorious. They ob-
tained those bodies by means of this same (formula),
and he became entirely the sacrificial food of the
gods. And in like manner does this (priest) now
thereby obtain those bodies of his, and he (Soma)
becomes entirely the food of the gods: this is why
he thus touches it.

14. He then pours Nigrébhy4 water on it. Now
the waters, forsooth, slew Vv77tra and by virtue of
that prowess of theirs they now flow. Wherefore
nothing whatsoever can check them when they flow ;
for they followed their own free will, thinking, ‘ To
whom, forsooth, should we submit (or stop), we by
whom Vrztra was slain!’ Now all this (universe),
whatsoever there is, had submitted! to Indra, even
he that blows yonder.

15. Indra spake, ‘ Verily, all this (universe), what-
soever there is, has submitted unto me: submit ye
also to me!’—They said, ‘What shall be our (re-
ward) then?’—' The first draught of king Soma
shall be yours !’—‘ So be it!’ thus they submitted to


1 The Kanva MS. has twice ‘tatsthana,’ as Ait. Br. VI, 5, and
twice ‘tasthana ;’ cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. 1%, p. 295.


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 18. 243


him ; and they having submitted, he drew (ni-grabh)
them to his breast; and because he thus drew them
to his breast, therefore they are called NigrabhydAs.
And in like manner does this sacrificer now draw
them to his breast: and this is their first draught of
king Soma, in that he pours Nigrabhya water thereon.

16. He pours it with (Vag. S. VI, 34), ‘Ye are
grateful, the subduers of Vr/tra;’—the waters
indeed are propitious: therefore he says, ‘Ye are
grateful;’ and ‘the subduers of Vz7tra’ he says
because they did slay Vzztra;—‘the beneficent
wives of the immortal (Soma);’ for the waters are
immortal ;—‘ Ye goddesses, lead this sacrifice
to the gods!’ there is nothing obscure in this ;—
‘Invited, drink ye of Soma!’ Thus invited they
drink the first draught of king Soma.

17. Being about to beat (the Soma with the
pressing-stone), let him think in his mind of him he
hates: ‘ Herewith I strike N. N., not thee!’ Now
whosoever kills a human Brahman here, he, forsooth,
is deemed guilty'—how much more so he who
strikes him (Soma), for Soma is a god. But they
do kill him when they press him ;—they kill him
with that (stone): thus he rises from thence, thus he
lives; and thus no guilt is incurred. But if he hate
no one, he may even think of a straw, and thus no
guilt is incurred,

18. He beats with (Vag. S. VI, 35), ‘Fear not,
tremble not!’ whereby he means to say,‘ Be not
afraid, do not tremble, it is N. N. I strike, not thee!’
—' Take thou strength!’ whereby he means to
say, ‘Take sap!’—‘Both ye bowls, that are


1 ¢ Parikakshate* ought rather to mean ‘they despise him.’


K 2


244 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


mel


firm, remain firm, take strength!’—' Surely,
it is those two (pressing-)boards that are thereby
meant,’ so say some ;—what, then, if one were to
break those two boards!? But, forsooth, it is these
two, heaven and earth, that tremble for fear of that
raised thunderbolt (the stone) : hereby now he pro-
pitiates it for those two, heaven and earth ; and thus
propitiated it does not injure them. By ‘Take
strength!’ he means to say, ‘Take sap!’—‘ The
evil is slain, not Soma!’ he thereby slays every
evil of his.

19. Thrice he presses’, thrice he gathers together,


1 That is to say, in that case the formula would prove to have
been a failure. According to the Taitt. Kalpas., quoted to Taitt. S.
I, 4, 1 (p. 590), he presses the skin down upon the two press-boards
while muttering this formula. The Kava text argues somewhat
differently,—ime evaitat phalake 4hur iti haika 4hus tad u kim
Adriyeta yad athaite bhidyeyatam eveme haiva dyavaprzthivyav
etasmad vagrad udyatat samregete,—‘Some say those two boards
are thercby meant; but who would care if they should get broken ;
for it is rather those two, heaven and earth,’ &c.?

* The pressing of the Upamsu-graha—also called the ‘small’
pressing, distinguished from the ‘great pressing’ (mahabhishava)
for the subsequent cups or libations (graha)—consists of three turns
of eight, eleven, and twelve single beatings respectively. Before
each turn Nigrabhya water is poured upon the Soma plants by
the sacrificer from the Hotrz’s cup. After each turn of pressing
the Adhvaryu throws the completely-pressed stalks into the cup,
and when they have become thoroughly soaked, he presses them
out and takes them out again; this being the ‘ gathering together’
referred to above. At the same time he mutters the Nigrabha
formula (paragraph 21) ; after which the pressed-out juice, absorbed
by the water, is poured into the Updmsu vessel in the following
manner. Before the pressing the Pratiprasthatr? had taken six
Soma-stalks, and put two each between the fingers of his left hand.
After each turn of pressing he takes the Upamsu vessel with his
right hand and holds one pair of the Soma-stalks over it (or, accord-
ing to others, all six at the same time), through which (as through


III KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 21. 245
anemone ee ee
four times he performs the N igrabha,—this makes
ten, for of ten syllables consists the virag, and Soma
is of virag nature: therefore he completes (the
ceremony) in ten times.

20. Then as to why he performs the Nigrdbha.
Now when he (Soma) first became sacrificial food
for the gods, he set his heart on those (four) regions,
thinking, ‘Could I but consort with those regions as
my mate, my loved resort!’ By performing the
Nigrabha, the gods then made him consort with the
regions as his mate, his loved resort; and in like
manner does this (sacrificer) now, by performing the
Nigrabha, make him (Soma) consort with those
regions as his mate, his loved resort.

21. He performs with (Vag. S. VI, 36), ‘From
east, from west, from north, from south—from
every side may the regions resort to thee!’
whereby he makes him consort with the regions as
his mate, his loved resort. ‘O mother, satisfy (him)!
may the noble meet together'!’ A mother


a strainer) the Adhvaryu then pours the Soma-juice from the press-
ing-skin into the vessel. After the third turn the pressing-stoné
itself is put into the Hotrz’s cup, either with or without the mutter-
ing of the Nigrabha formula. According to the commentary on
Katy. IX, 4, 27, the Soma-juice is transferred from the skin to the
Upamsu cup, by the straining-cloth being made to imbibe the
juice and then being pressed out so as to trickle down through
the plants between the Pratiprasthatsy’s fingers. The description
given by Haug, Ait. Br., Transl. p. 489, is somewhat different.

1 The interpretation of this formula is very doubtful. The author
evidently takes ‘arth’ as nom. plur. of ‘ari’( = arya); but it does not
appear how he takes ‘nishpara,’ while Mahidhara explains it by
‘pfiraya (give him, Soma, his fill).’ The St. Petersburg Dict. sug-
gests that ‘nishpara’ may mean ‘come out!’ and that ‘ari’ seems
to be a nom. sing. here. I take the last part of the formula to
mean, ‘May he (Soma) win (or, perhaps, join) the longing (waters)!


246 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Ee erste katie, A eel liastllh 2 sheet AE oe
(amba) is a woman, and the regions (dis, fem.) are
women: therefore he says,‘O mother, satisfy (him)!—
May the noble meet together!’ The noble doubtless
means people (creatures, offspring): he thus means
to say, ‘May the people live in harmony with each
other!’ Even the people that are far away (from
each other) live in harmony with each other: there-
fore he says, ‘ May the noble meet together.’

22, Now as to why he is called Soma. When he
first became sacrificial food for the gods, he thought
within him, ‘I must not become. sacrificial food for
the gods with my whole self!’ That form of his
which was most pleasing he accordingly put aside.
Thereupon the gods were victorious; they said,
‘Draw that unto thee, for therewith shalt thou
become our food!’ He drew it to him even from
afar, saying, verily, that is mine own (sva me):
hence he was called Soma.

23. Then as to why hé is called Yagzia (sacrifice).
Now, when they press him, they slay him; and when
they spread him’, they cause him to be born. He
is born in being spread along, he is born moving
(yan gdyate): hence yan-ga, for ‘yaziga, they say,
is the same as ‘ yagzia.’


24. Also this speech did he then utter (VAg. S.


some of the Nigrabhya water being poured on the Soma at each
turn of pressing; and small stalks of Soma being, besides, thrown
into the Hotrz’s cup containing that water. As to the first part of
the formula, it may perhaps mean, ‘ Well, pour out (or, pour forth,
intrans.). Professor Ludwig, Rig-veda IV, p. xvi, thinks that ‘ nish-
para’ is a correction of the Taitt. reading ‘ nishvara,’ which Sayama
interprets, ‘©: mother (Soma), come out (from the stalks, in the
form of juice), and according to the Sftra quoted by him, the
sacrificer is at the same time to think of the wife he loves.
' That is, when they perform the Soma-sacrifice.


IIT KANDA, 9 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 25. 247


VI, 37; Rig-veda I, 84, 19),‘ Verily thou, a god,
shalt extol the mortal, O most mighty! than
thee there is no other giver of joy', O lord!
unto thee do I speak this word, O Indra!’
For it was indeed as a mortal that he uttered this,
‘Thou alone wilt produce (me) from here, no other
but thee!’

25. And from the Nigrabhya water they draw the
several grahas (cups or libations of Soma). For it
was the waters that slew Vrztra, and in virtue of
this prowess they flow; and it is from flowing water
that he takes the Vasativari water, and from the Vasa-
tivart the Nigrabhya water ; and from the Nigrabhya
water the several grahas are drawn. In virtue of
that prowess, then, the grahas are drawn from the
Hotvz’s cup. Now the Hotz? means the Azk (fem.),
a woman; and from woman creatures are born here
on earth: hence he makes him (Soma) to be born
from that woman, the “zk, the Hotrvz; wherefore
(he takes the grahas) from the Hotr?’s cup.


1 This is the traditional meaning (sukhayitr7’) assigned to marda-
yitr? (the merciful, comforter); but it is not quite clear how the
author of the Brahmamwa interprets it.


248 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


en EEE


FOURTH KANDA.


First ApuyAya. First BRAHMANA.


1. The UpAmsu (graha), forsooth, is the out-
breathing of the Sacrifice’, the Upamsu-savana
(press-stone) the through-breathing, and the Antar-
yAma (graha) the in-breathing.

2. Now as to why it is called Up4msu. There is
a graha called Amsu?, that is Pragdpati: his out-
breathing is this (graha); and because it is his out-
breathing, therefore it is called Upamsu.

3. This (graha) he draws without a strainer®:
whereby he puts the out-breathing into him as one
tending away from him, and thus this forward-tending
out-breathing of his streams forth from him. He
purifies it with sprigs of Soma, thinking ‘it shall be
pure. He.purifies it with six (sprigs), for there are
six seasons: it is by means of the seasons that he
thus purifies it.

4. As to this they say, ‘When he purifies the
Updmsu by means of sprigs, and all (other) Soma-


1 That is, the sacrificial man, or the sacrifice personified in
Soma and the sacrificer.

* Lit. ‘the Soma-plant, hence the (Soma)-sacrifice itself, or
Pragapati. See IV, 6, 1, 1 seq.

* Bahishpavitrat, lit. from (a vessel, or Soma) having the strainer
outside (away from) it. While no proper strainer is used for the
Upamsu-graha, the Soma-juice being poured through Soma-plants
(see p. 244, note 2); at the great pressing it is passed through a
fringed straining-cloth (dasdpavitra) spread over the Dromakalasa
(the largest of the three Soma-troughs, the others being the
Adhavaniya and P&tabhrit). See IV, 1, 2, 3.


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 8. 249


draughts are purified by means of a. strainer,
whereby, then, do its sprigs become pure?’

5. He throws them down again (on the unpressed
plants) with (Vag. S. VII, 2), ‘What inviolable,
quickening name is thine, to that Soma of
thine, O Soma, be Hail!’ Thus his sprigs become
purified by means of the Svaha (‘ Hail!’). But this
graha means everything, for it is the type of all the
pressings },

6. Now, once ona time, the gods, while performing
sacrifice, were afraid of an attack from the Asura-
Rakshas. They said, ‘Let us completely establish
the sacrifice: if the Asura-Rakshas should then
attack us, our sacrifice will at least be completely
established.’

7. Even at the morning Soma-feast they then
completely established the entire sacrifice *,—at this
same (upamsu) graha by means of the Yagus; at the
first chant (stotra) by means of the SAman; and at
the first recitation (sastra) by means of the zk:
with that sacrifice thus completely established they
subsequently worshipped. And in like manner does
this sacrifice now become completely established,—
by means of the Yagus at this same graha; by means
of the SAman at the first chant; and by means of the
Rik at the first recitation ; and with this sacrifice thus
completely established he subsequently worships.

8. He presses (the Soma) eight times ; for of eight


1 Viz. inasmuch as the Upamsu-graha is obtained by three turns
of pressing, and each of the three Savanas (pressings, Soma-feasts)
consists of three rounds of pressing of three turnscach. Seep. 256,


note I.
2 Cf. Taitt. S. VI, 4, 5, where this theory (divested of its legendary


form) is ascribed to Aruma Aupavesi.


250 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


syllables consists the Gayatri, and the morning Soma-
feast belongs to the Gayatri; thus this (first turn of
pressing) is made to be the morning Soma-feast.

9. He draws (the juice of the first turn of pressing
into the cup) with (Vag. S. VII, 1), ‘Grow thou
pure for Vakaspati!’ for Vakaspati (lord of speech)
is the out-breathing, and this (Upamsu) graha is the
out-breathing : hence he says, ‘Grow thou pure for
Vakaspati!’—‘ purified by the hands with the
sprigs of the bull;’ for he purifies it with sprigs of
Soma: hence he says, ‘with the sprigs of the bull;’
and ‘ purified by the hands (gabhasti-piita’),’ he says ;
for—‘ gabhasti’ being the same as ‘ pani’ (hand)—he
indeed purifies it with his hands.

10. He then presses eleven times; for of eleven
syllables consists the Trish¢ubh, and the midday
Soma-feast belongs to the Trish¢ubh: thus this
(second turn of pressing) is made to be the midday
Soma-feast.

11. He draws (the juice into the cup) with, ‘Grow
thou pure, a god, for the gods—;’ for he (Soma)
is indeed a god, and for the gods he becomes pure;
—‘whose portion thou art;’ for he indeed is their
portion.

12. He then presses twelve times; for of twelve
syllables consists the Gagatt, and the evening Soma-
feast belongs to the Gagati: thus this (third turn of
pressing) is made to be the evening Soma-feast.


+ Sayama, on Taitt. S. I, 4, 2, interprets it, ‘ Having been purified
by the ray of the sun (while growing in the forest), do thou now
become pure for the gods through the sprigs of the bull!’ Cf,
however, Taitt. S. VI, 4, 5, ‘gabhastinad hy enam pavayati,’ where
‘gabhasti’ would seem to be taken in the sense of ‘hand’ (? the
forked one). See p. 244, note 2.


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, I BRAIIMANA, 17. 251


13. He draws (the juice) with, ‘Make thou our
draughts sweet!’ whereby he imbues him (Soma)
with sap, and renders him palatable for the gods:
hence, when slain, he does not become putrid'.
And when he offers (that graha) he thereby com-
pletely establishes him.

14. ‘For one desirous of spiritual lustre (brahma-
varkasa) he should press eight times at each (turn),
so they say;—for of eight syllables consists the
Gayatri, and the Gayatri is the Brahman: he indeed
becomes endowed with spiritual lustre.

15. Thus the pressing amounts to twenty-four
times (of beating). Now there are twenty-four half-
moons in the year; and Pragdpati (the lord of
creatures) is the year, and the sacrifice is Pragapati :
thus as great as the sacrifice is, as great as is its
measure, so great he thereby establishes it.

16. ‘For one desirous of cattle he should press
five times at each (turn), so they say ;—the cattle
(animal victims) consist of five parts : he indeed gains
cattle; and there are five seasons in the year; and
Pragapati is the year, and the sacrifice is Pragapati :
thus as great as the sacrifice is, as great as is its
measure, so great he thereby establishes it. This,
however, is mere speculation : it is the other (manner)
which is practised.

17. Having drawn the graha, he wipes (the vessel)
all round, lest any (Soma-juice) should trickle down.
He does not deposit it; for this is his out-breath-
ing, whence this out-breathing passes unceasingly.
Should he, however, desire to exorcise, he may


1 The Kanva text adds, ‘while whosoever else is slain becomes
putrid.’


2h0 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


deposit it! with, ‘I put thee down, the out-breathing
of N. N.!’ Thus, forsooth, inasmuch as he (the
Adhvaryu) does not quit his hold of it, it is not
again in that (enemy) ; and thus both the Adhvaryu
and the Sacrificer live long.

18. Or he may merely cover (the vessel by his
hand) with, ‘I shut thee off, the out-breathing of
N. N.!’ Thus, forsooth, inasmuch as he does not
deposit it, it is not again in that enemy; and thus
he does not disorder the vital airs.

19. While he is still inside (the Havirdhana) he
utters ‘Hail!’ For the gods were afraid lest the
Asura-Rakshas should destroy what part of this
graha was previous to the offering. They offered it
(symbolically) by means of the Svaha, while they
were still inside (the cart-shed), and what was thus
offered they afterwards offered up inthe fire. Andin
like manner does he now offer it up by means of the
Svaha, while he is still inside, and what has thus
been offered he afterwards offers up in the fire.

20. He then walks out (of the Havirdhana) with,
‘I walk along the wide air®.’ For along the air


1 That is, he may set it down on the khara for a moment without
quitting his hold of it. While the subsequent cups of Soma are
deposited in their respective places after they have been drawn, the
Upamsu and Antaryama are offered immediately.

? With the Taittiriyas the order of proceeding is somewhat dif-
ferent: The Adhvaryu pours the Soma through the Soma-plants into
the Upamsy cup after each turn of pressing, with, ‘Become pure
for Vakaspati, O courser!’—‘ The bull purified by the hand with
the plants of the bull!’—‘ Thou, a god, art a purifier of the gods
whose share thou art: thee, to them!’ respectively. He then takes
the cup from the Pratiprasthatr? with, ‘Thou art self-made!’ eyes
it with, ‘ Make our drinks sweet ;’ and wipes it clean upwards with,
‘Thee for all powers, divine and carthly!’ He then rises with,
‘May the mind obtain thee!" steps to the Ahavaniya with, ‘1 move


IV KANDA, I ADHYAY., I BRAHMANA, 22. 253


the Rakshas roams rootless and unfettered on both
sides, even as man here roams along the air, rootless
and unfettered on both sides!; and, that formula
being the Brahman (prayer), a slayer of the Rakshas,
he, by means of that Brahman, renders the air free
from danger and injury.

_ 21. Thereupon he (the Sacrificer) asks a boon. For
the gods, forsooth, greatly desire to obtain the
offering of that graha, and they grant to him that
boon, in order that he may forthwith offer that graha
to them: this is why he asks a boon.

22. He (the Adhvaryu) offers with (Vag. S. VII, 3),
‘Self-made thou art, for, this graha being his
(Yagiia’s) out-breathing, it is indeed made by itself,
born of itself ?: hence he says, ‘ Self-made thou art ;—
‘forall powers, divine and earthly, —for it is born
of itself for all creatures *;—‘ May the mind obtain
thee!’—the mind being Pragdpati, he thereby means
to say, ‘may Pragdpati obtain thee!’ ‘ Hail! thee, O
well-born, for Sdrya!’ thus he utters the second‘


along the wide air,’ and offers, while the sacrificer holds on to him
from behind, with, ‘ Hail! thee, O well-born, to Sfrya!’

1 See III, 1, 3, 13.

2 «For this libation is the out-breathing, and the out-breathing is
he that blows yonder (the wind); and he indeed is made by:
himself, begotten (gata) of himself, since there is no other maker
nor begetter of him.’ Kazva text.

* Perhaps we ought to translate the passage, ‘from all the
powers, divine and earthly, for it is born by itself from all the
creatures. But cf. Taitt. S. VI, 4, 5: ‘ Thereby he puts out-breathing
both into gods and men.’

‘ While, in its force of ‘subsequent,’ avara here refers back to the
first Svaha, pronounced by the Adhvaryu (par. 19); it also has here
the meaning of ‘lower,’ and, developed out of this, that of ‘ preced-
ing’ (in which meaning it occurs in the Arkpratisikhya). Hence it is
quite impossible adequately to render this play on the words avara,
‘subsequent, lower, preceding,’ and para,’ higher, subsequent.’


254 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,


(or inferior) ‘ Hail!’ with regard to a subsequent?
(or higher; the highest) deity.

23. Now it is in him that burns yonder (the sun)
that he has just offered that (libation); and the latter
is the All: hence he makes that (sun) the highest of
the All. But were he to utter the second (or higher)
‘Hail!’ with regard to a preceding (or lower) deity ?,
then it would be even higher than yonder sun:
therefore he utters the second ‘ Hail!’ with regard to
a subsequent deity.

24. And, having offered, he wipes the (vessel of
the) graha upwards; whereby he puts that out-
breathing into him as one tending away from him.
Thereupon he rubs (the wiped-off Soma) upon the
middle enclosing stick from west to east with the
palm of his hand turned upwards*—whereby he puts
that out-breathing into him as one tending away from
him—with, ‘Thee to the gods sipping motes of
light!’

25. For in that orb which burns yonder he has
just offered this (libation), and those rays thereof
are the gods sipping motes of light: it is these he
thereby gratifes; and thus gratified those gods
convey him to the heavenly world.

26. For this same graha there is neither an
invitatory prayer nor an offering prayer?*: he offers it


1 That is, coming after Svaha in the formula.

* The Kanva text reads: etasmin va etan mandale ‘haushid ya
esha tapati; sarvam u va esha graha#; sarvasmad evaitad asmad
enam uttaram karoti ya esho ’smat sarvasmad uttaro yad dhavaram
devatam kurydt param svahakdram anyad dhaitasmad uttaram
kuryat.

* That is to say, he is to pass his hand, palm upwards, under
the middle enclosing stick.

* Such (2k verses) as are ordinarily recited by the Hotr“, When


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 29.) 285


with a (Yagus) formula, and thereby it becomes for
him supplied with both an invitatory and an offering
prayer. And if he desire to exorcise, let him offer
some spray (of Soma) which may adhere either to
his arm, or to his breast, or to his garment, with,
‘O divine plant, let that be true wherefore I pray
thee: let N. N. be struck down by destruction falling
from above, crash!’ Even as one of (enemies) that
are being slain might escape, so does this (sprig) fly
away from those that are being pressed : thus nothing
(hostile)—either running thither or running away'—
remains to him for whom he performs this. He de-
posits that (cup) with, ‘Thee for the out-breath-
ing!’ for this (graha) indeed is his out-breathing.
27. Now some deposit it on the south part (of the
khara?), for, they say, it is in that direction that


the Upamsu cup is drawn, the Hotrs says, ‘Restrain the out-
breathing (praza)! Hail! thee, O well-calling one, to Sfirya!’
whereupon he breathes into (or towards) the cup with, ‘O out-
breathing, restrain my out-breathing!’ After that he remains silent
till the Antaryama is drawn, when he addresses that graha with,
‘Restrain the in-breathing (apana)! Hail! thee, O well-calling one,
to Sfirya!’’ whereupon he draws in his breath over the cup, and
says, ‘O in-breathing, restrain my in-breathing!’ He then touches
the pressing-stone with, ‘Thee to the through-breathing!’ and
therewith frees his speech from restraint. Ait. Br. II, 21. On the
terms out-breathing (praza)and in-breathing (apana, or up-breathing,
udana) see part i, p. 19, note 2; J. S. Speijer, Jatakarma, p. 64 ;
Sayama on Taitt. S. I, 4, 3 (vol. i, p.603); Taitt. S. VI, 4, 6. Dif-
ferent Haug, Ait. Br. Transl. p. 118.

1 ‘Na dhavan napadhavat parisishyate ;’ perhaps we ought to
read ‘napadhavan;’ unless indeed ‘tasya’ refers to Soma, as
Sayama seems to take it. The Kava text has: tathd ha tesham
napadhavazis kana mufyate yebhyas tatha karoti.

2 According to the Sftras of the Black Yagus (cf. Sdyamza on
Taitt. S. I, 4, 2, p. 598), the Upamsu cup is ‘deposited’ on the
south-east and the Antary4ma cup on the north-cast corner of the


256 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


—_———


yonder (sun) moves. Let him, however, not do
this, but let him deposit it on the north (uttara) part
(of the khara), because there is not any higher (uttara)
graha than this. He deposits it with, ‘ Thee for the
out-breathing!’ for this (graha) is indeed his out-
breathing.

28. He then takes the Upamsu-savana (pressing-
stone). He neither touches it with the fringe nor
with the straining-cloth, for that would be like rinsing
it in water. If there be any spray adhering to it,
let him remove it with his hand, and then lay down
(the stone) beside (the Upamsu cup), with the face
towards the north, with, ‘Thee for the through-
breathing!’ for this (stone) is indeed his (Yagiza’s)
through-breathing.


SEcoND BRAHMANA.
II. Tue Great Pressrne }.


1. The Up4msu (graha), forsooth, is his out-
breathing, the Updssu-savana (stone) his through-


khara or mound; the Upa&msu-savana stone being placed between
them. Before depositing the vessel, the Adhvaryu pours some of
the residue of Soma-juice from the Updmeu cup into the Agrayana-
sthal?, and having put a large twig of Soma into it for the evening
pressing (? the Adabhya graha, cf. Say. on Taitt. S. I, 603), he
‘deposits’ it on the mound.

* The ‘Great Pressing’ (mahabhishava) from which the Antar-
yama and following libations are obtained is performed by the
four priests, viz. the Adhvaryu and his three assistants, Pratipra-
sthatrz, Nesh/rz, and Unnetr?, each having an equal portion of
Soma-plants and one of the four remaining pressing-stones assigned
to him. The ceremonies mentioned in III, 9, 4, 1 seq. are repeated
on the present occasion, each of the priests tying a piece of gold to
his ring-finger. The pressing is performed in three rounds of
three turns each, the number of single strokes of the several turns


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. 257


breathing, and the Antary4ma (graha) his in-
breathing.

2. Now as to why it is called Antaryama. That
which is the out-breathing is also the in-breathing
and the through-breathing. Now, in drawing the
Upamsu (graha), he puts into him that out-breathing
which tends away from him; and in drawing the


being, however, not limited, as was the case at the pressing of the
Upamsu. Only before the first turn of each round Nigrabhy&
water is poured on the plants. After each turn the scattered plants
are gathered together on a heap. At the end of each round (of
three turns) the Soma is touched (or ‘ strengthened’); whereupon
the completely pressed-out stalks are thrown into the Hotrz’s cup
and the Nigrabha formula is pronounced (III, 9, 4, 21). The stalks
which are still juicy are then ‘ gathered together’ (see III, 9, 4, 19)
into the so-called sambharazi and poured into the Adhavantya trough,
and having been stirred about therein by the Unnetrs, are taken
out, pressed out, and thrown on the skin, when the same process
is repeated. On the completion of the third round the Droaa-
kalasa is brought forward (from behind the axle of the southem
cart) by the Udgatrs (for the mantras used by them see Tandya
Br. I, 2, 6-7) and placed on the four stones covered with the
pressed-out Soma husks, the straining-cloth being then stretched
over it, with the fringe towards the north. The Hotr#’s cup (held
by the sacrificer and containing the remaining Nigrabhya water)
having then been filled up by the Unnetr/ with the Soma-juice in
the Adhavaniya trough, the sacrificer pours it in one continuous
stream from the Hotrz’s cup upon the straining-cloth, spread over
the Dromakalasa by the chanters (Udgatris), muttering a mantra
(Tandya Br. I, 2, g) all the time. From this stream the first eight
(at the midday pressing the first five) libations are taken, by the
respective cups being held under, the remaining libations or cups
being drawn either from the strained (or ‘ pure,’ suk ra) Soma-juice
in the Dronakalasa, or from the Agrayamasthali or the Patabhrit.
Sayama on Ait. Br. II, 22, 1 seems to exclude the Antaryama graha
from the ‘great pressing:’ antaryamagrahahomad drdhvam mah4-
bhishavam kritva. Also in II, 21,1 he mentions the Dadhi graha,
Amsu graha, and Adabhya graha (see p. 255, n- 2) as intervening
between the Aponaptriya ceremony and the drawing of the Upamsu


graha.
[26] 9


258 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ne nnn LUE EEE


AntaryAma, he puts into him that in-breathing which
tends towards him. But this same in-breathing is
confined within his self; and because it is confined
(yam) within (antar) his self, or because these
creatures are sustained (yam) by it, therefore it is
called Antarydma.

3. He draws it from inside the strainer’, whereby
he puts that in-breathing into him as one tending
towards him, and that in-breathing of his is placed
(or beneficial) within his self. And thereby also
that Up4msu (libation) of his comes to be drawn
from inside the strainer (i.e. from the pure Soma),
for one and the same are the Upamsu and Antar-
yama, since they are the out-breathing and in-
breathing. And thereby, moreover, that (vital air)
of his comes to be unceasing also at the other
grahas.

4. Now as to why he purifies the Soma by means
of a strainer (pavitra). When Soma had oppressed
his own family-priest Brzhaspati, he restored to him
(his property); and on his restoring it, he (Bvzhas-
pati) became reconciled to him. Still there was
guilt remaining, if only for having contemplated
oppressing the priesthood.

5. The gods purified him by some means of purifica-
tion (or a strainer, pavitra), and, being cleansed and
pure, he became the (sacrificial) food of the gods. And


* Antahpavitrat, lit. from (the vessel or stream of Soma) which has
the strainer inside it; the straining-cloth being spread over the Droma-
kalasa, into which the pressed-out Soma-juice is poured. The
Petersburg Dictionary assigns to it the meaning ‘ the Soma within the
filtering vessel’ (see 1V, 1, 1,3). Perhaps it means ‘from that which
has a strainer between,’ i.e. from the poured-out stream from which
the libation is taken, and which is separated from the Dromakalasa
by the straining-cloth,


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 7. 259


in like manner does he now purify him by means
of that strainer, and, being cleansed and pure,
he becomes the food of the gods.

6. Then as to why the grahas are drawn with the
Upayadma’. Now Aditi is this (earth), and hers was
that prayamtya oblation, that Aditya rice-pap%. But
that was, as it were, previous to the Soma feast :
she desired to have a share along with the gods in
the Soma feast, and said, ‘ Let there be for me also
a Share of the pressed Soma!’

7. The gods said, ‘ This sacrifice has already been
distributed among the deities: by means of thee the
grahas shall be taken and offered to the deities !’—


1 The term Upay4ma, lit. ‘foundation, substratum,’ referring
properly to ‘that which is held under’ while taking the libation,
that is, the cup of the respective graha (and hence also identified
with the earth, as the substratum of everything, cf. Say. on Taitt. S.
I, 4, 3), has come to be applied likewise to the formula ‘ upay4ma-
grihito ’si,’ i.e. ‘thou art taken with (or on) a support,’ which is
repeated at those libations before the formulas muttered while they
are drawn into the respective vessels or cups (see par.15). Haug,
Transl. Ait. Br. p. 118 note, makes the following distinction between
the graha (cup) and patra (vessel) of the Antaryama (and Upamsu)
libation: ‘The patra is a vessel resembling a large wooden jar
with but a very slight cavity on the top, in which the Soma-juice is
filled. The graha is a small cup, like a saucer, made of earth,
and put over the cavity of the Soma vessel, in order to cover the
“precious” juice. The bottom of it is first put in water, and
a gold leaf placed beneath it. There are as many grahas as there
are patras ; they belong together just as cup and saucer, and are
regarded as inseparable. The word graha is, however, taken
often in the sense of the whole, meaning both graha and p§tra.’
I doubt, however, whether this distinction is in accordance with
the old authorities. The graha vessels or cups are described as
resembling the shape of a mortar. For other peculiarities, see IV,
1, 5,19. With some libations there is both a patra (cup) and
a sthali (bowl).

2 See III, 2, 3,1 seq.


260 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANWA,

pci ees. soe amedenlata deena alti 8 S822 PEA sa
‘So be it!’ This, then, is her share of the pressed
Soma.

8. And, again, why the grahas are drawn with the
Upayama. The Upay4ma indeed is this (earth),
since it is this (earth) that bears (upa-yam’) food
here for cattle and men and trees; and the gods are
above this, for the gods are in heaven.

9. The reason, then, why the grahas are drawn
with the Upay4ma, is that they are drawn by means
of this (earth); and why he deposits them in the
womb?, is that this earth is the womb of everything,
that it is from her that these creatures have sprung.

10. That same Soma the priests carry about as
seed. And seed which is cast outside the womb is
lost; but that which he deposits in the womb is
indeed deposited in this earth.

11. Now these two grahas are his out-breathing
and in-breathing; one of them he offers after sunrise
and the other before sunrise, in order to keep the
out-breathing and in-breathing distinct from each
other. He thus keeps the out-breathing and in-
breathing distinct from each other: hence these two,
even while being one and the same, are yet called
differently ‘out-breathing’ and ‘in-breathing.’

12. Now those two grahas are for him day and
night; one of them he offers after sunrise and the


? Lit. forms the support or basis for it. The sentence could
also be translated, ‘this earth doubtless is an upayama (support),
since she bears food.’ Apparently he means to say that, as the
gods:are above, the food to be offered to them requires some sup-
port, something to ‘hold it up’ by for the gods to reach it.

? This refers to the formula ‘This is thy womb,’ with which
most libations, after being drawn, are deposited in their proper place
on the khara until they are used for offering. See IV, 1, 3, 19.


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 15. 261
ER ts eh OI a
other before sunrise, in order to keep day and night
distinct from each other: he thus keeps day and
night distinct from each other ?.

13. The Upamsu, being the day, he offers in the
night; and thus he puts the day into the night:
whence even in the deepest darkness one distin-
guishes something ?.

14. The Antarydma, being the night, he offers
after sunrise, and thus he puts the night into the
day: whence that sun, on rising, does not burn up
these creatures; whence these creatures are pre-
served.

15. He draws (the AntaryAma graha) therefrom *
with (Vag. S. VII, 4), ‘Thou art taken with a
support!’— The significance of the Upaydma
has been told4.— ‘Restrain thou, O mighty
(Indra), guard Soma!’ the mighty, forsooth, is
Indra; and Indra is the leader of the sacrifice:
wherefore he says ‘O mighty!’ and by ‘guard
Soma’ he means to say ‘protect Soma!’ ‘ Pre-
serve the riches! gain thee food in the sacri-
fice!’—riches mean cattle: ‘ Protect the cattle’ he
thereby means to say. ‘Gain thee food in the sacri-
fice !'"—food means creatures: le thus makes these
eager to sacrifice, and these creatures go on sacrificing
and praising and toiling.


1 «Were he to offer both after sunrise, there would only be day,
and no night; and were he to offer both before sunrise, there
would only be night, and no day.’ Kazva text.

4 Tasmad v idam ritrau tamasi sati nirgwdyata iva kiméid iva.
Kanva text.

$ Viz. from the stream of Soma poured from the Hotri’s cup on
the straining-cloth. See p. 256, note 1.

* See paragraph 6, with note.


262 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
aches mete ea iter ss 2 ey cao

16. ‘Intothee I lay dayand night’; into thee
I lay the wide air: allied with the gods, the
lower and the higher,—thereby he makes this
(graha) one belonging to all the gods: because by
means of it these creatures move about in the air
breathing out and breathing in, therefore it belongs
to all the gods.—‘ Delight thyself in the Antar-
yama, O mighty one!’ the mighty one is Indra,
and Indra is the leader of the sacrifice, wherefore he
says ‘O mighty one!’ and in that he draws it with
‘into—into,’ thereby he means to say ‘I lay thee
into his (Indra’s) self.’

17. Having drawn it, he wipes (the vessel) all
round, lest (any Soma-juice) should trickle down.
He does not deposit it; for this is the in-breathing:
hence this in-breathing passes unceasingly. But
should he desire to exorcise, let him deposit it with
‘I put thee down, the in-breathing of N. N.!’

18. If he deposits the Updmsu, let him also
deposit this (Antaryama cup)?; and if he does not
deposit the Upamsu, let him also not deposit this.
And if he covers the Up4msu (with his hand), let
him also cover this; and if he does not cover the
Upamsu, let him also not cover this: as the per-
formance regarding the Up4msu, so regarding this
(graha); for one and the same are these two, the
Upamsu and Antaryadma, since they are the out-
breathing and in-breathing.

19. Now the Xarakas, forsooth, offer these two


1 Mahidhara offers the alternative interpretation, ‘through thee
I place day and night between (Soma and the enemies),’ which is
also Sayama’s interpretation on Taitt. S. I, 4, 3; as apparently that
of the Taitt. S. itself, VI, 4, 6.

® See IV, 1,1, 17-18.


IV KANDA, I ADHVAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 23. 263
Som Saeed SSA i See ee
(libations) with two different formulas’, saying,
‘These two are his out-breathing and in-breathing :
we make the out-breathing and in-breathing of varied
vigour. But let him not do this, for they diso der
the sacrificer's out-breathing and in-breathing. Now,
one might also ? offer this one silently :—

20. But, as he offers the Updmsu with a formula,
even thereby this (libation) also comes to be offered
with a formula. - How then could one offer it silently,
for these two, the Upawesu and Antarydma, are one
and the same, since they are the out-breathing and
in-breathing ?

21. With the very same formula with which he
offers the Upamzsu, he offers this (libation),—‘ Self-
made thou art: for all powers divine and
earthly: may the mind obtain thee! Hail!—
thee, O well-born, for Sdrya!’ The significance
of this formula has been told.

22. And, having offered®, he wipes the cup clean
downwards. For even now, after offering the U pamsu,
he wiped (the cup) upwards; but here he wipes it
downwards; whereby he puts the in-breathing into
him as one tending towards him.

23. He then rubs (the wiped-off Soma) upon the
middle enclosing stick from east to west with the
palm of his hand turned downwards. For even now,
after offering the UpAmsu, he rubbed it upon the


1 This does not appear to refer to the Taittiriyas, since by them
the same order of proceeding is prescribed for the Antaryama as
for the Upimsu (p. 252, note 2); cf. Siyava on Taitt. S. I, p. 603.
See, however, Maitray. Samh. 1, 3, 4-5.

2 « Apid (vai)’ seems to have much the same meaning (‘ perhaps’)
as the later ‘api nama.’ Cf. I, 9,1, 19.

* He offers the entire Soma in the Antaryama cup, without
leaving any, or pouring any juice into the Agrayamasthali.


264 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,.


middle enclosing stick from west to east with the
palm of his hand turned upwards ; but here he does
so from east to west with the palm of his hand
turned downwards—whereby he puts the in-breathing
into him as one tending towards him—with, ‘ Thee
for the gods sipping motes of light!’ The
significance is the same as before.

24. Having returned (to the cart-shed), he deposits
that (cup) with, ‘Thee for the in-breathing!’ for
this is indeed his in-breathing. He deposits them’
so as to touch one another; whereby he makes out-
breathing and in-breathing touch one another, joins
the out-breathings and in-breathings together.

25. Now these (cups and stone) repose without
being moved until the evening Soma feast, whence
men sleep here on earth; and at the evening Soma
feast they are used again, whence these men, having
slept, awake and are bustling and restless ;—this,
forsooth, is after the manner of the sacrifice, for the
sacrifice is fashioned like a bird: the Upamsu and
Antary4ma (grahas) are its wings, and the U pamsu-
savana (stone) its body.

26. They repose without being moved until the
evening Soma feast. The sacrifice is spread along ;
but what is spread along moves, whence those birds
fly spreading their wings, not drawing them in. At
the evening Soma feast they are again used ; whence


* According to the Kaava text he is to place the Antaryama cup
on the south-east corner (dakshizardhe) of the khara (see p. 2535,n. 2);
while, according to K4ty. IX, 2, 1, both the Upamsu and Antar-
yama are to be placed on the north-east corner, the former south
of the latter. This arrangement, however, would scarcely agree
with IV, 1,1, 27-28. The UpAmsu-savana stone, doubtless, is to
lie between the two cups, with its face towards the Upamsu.


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 4. 265


these birds fly drawing in their wings to fold them:
this indeed is after the manner of the sacrifice.

27. The Upamsu, forsooth, is this (earth), for the
Upamsu is the out-breathing, and breathing out one
breathes upon this (earth). And the Antarydma
is yonder (sky), for the Upamsu is the in-breathing
(up-breathing), and in breathing up one breathes
towards yonder world. And the Upamsu-savana
(stone) is the air, for the Updamsu-savana is the
through-breathing, and he who breathes through (in
and out), breathes through this air.


TuirD BRAHMANA.

1. The Aindra-vayava (graha), forsooth, is his
speech; and as such belonging to his self'. Now
Indra, when he had hurled the thunderbolt at V7“tra,
thinking himself to be the weaker, and fearing lest
he had not laid him low, hid himself. The gods also
hid themselves away in the same place.

2. The gods then said, ‘ Verily, we know not if
Vritra be slain or alive: come, let one of us find
out, if Vzztra be slain or alive !’

3. Theysaid unto Vayu—VaAyu, forsooth, is he that
blows yonder—‘ Find thou out, O Vayu, if Vzztra be
slain or alive; for thou art the swiftest among us: if
he lives, thou indeed wilt quickly return hither.’

4. He spake, ‘ What shall be my reward then?’—
‘The first Vasha¢ of king Soma!’—‘So be it!’ so
Vayu went, and lo? Vvztra slain. He spake, ‘Vretra


is slain: do ye with the slain what ye list!’

2 GL RE SIR RR SMES Le
' That is, to Yagita’s body (madhyadeha, Say.) as distinguished from

his limbs. The Petersb. Dict. takes adhy4tmam in the sense of ‘in re-

gard to the self (or person). See lV,1, 4; I, with note; IV, 2, 2,1 scq.
PALL 6.8, 2s Ahn d erroneously supplied a verb of


266 SATAPATITA-BRAHMANA.
ncaa Asin tories etchant

5. The gods rushed thither,—as (those) eager to
take possession of their property, so (it fared with)
him (Vritra—Soma)!: what (part of him) one of
them seized, that became an ekadevatya (graha,
belonging to one deity), and what two of them,
that became a dvidevatya 2, and what many (seized),
that became a bahudevatya;—and because they
caught him up each separately (vi-grah) by means
of vessels, therefore (the libations) are called graha.

6. He stank in their nostrils,—sour and putrid he
blew towards them: he was neither fit for offering,
nor was he fit for drinking.

7. The gods said to V4yu, ‘Vayu, blow thou
through him, make him palatable for us!’ He said,
‘What shall be my reward then ?’—‘ After thee they
shall name those cups.’—‘So be it!’ he said, ‘but
blow ye along with me!’

8. The gods dispelled some of that smell, and laid
it into the cattle,—this is that foul smell in (dead)
cattle : hence one must not close (his nose) at that
foul smell, since it is the smell of king Soma.

9. Nor must one spit thereat®*; even though he
should think himself ever so much affected, let him
motion with the particle ed, following the original interpretation in
the Petersb. Dict. and Weber’s Ind. Stud. IX, 249. 1 now adopt


the later explanation put forth in the ‘Nachtrage.’ Professor
Whitney, Amer. Journ. of Phil., III, p. 399, apparently draws from
the same source. .

1 “As (those) wishing to take possession of their property, so
did they seize upon him each for himself (evam tam vyagrzhmata) ;’
Kanva text. The construction of our text is quite irregular.

* The dvidevatya grahas (libations belonging to two gods) at
the morning Soma feast are the Aindra-va4yava (Indra and Vayu),
the Maitra-varuza (Mitra and Varuma), and the Asvina.

* That is, because of it, or away from it. Perhaps, however, it
belongs to the next clause, ‘ therefore, even... .’


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 14. 267


go round it windward'; for Soma means eminence,
and disease meanness: even as at the approach of
his superior the meaner man would get down (from
his seat), so does disease go down before him (Soma).

10. Then Vayu blew a second time through him
and thereby made him palatable; whereupon he was
fit for offering and fit for drinking. Hence those
(vessels), though belonging to various deities, are
called ‘ vayavya (V4yu's vessels)*.”’ His (Vayu’s)
is that first Vasha¢ of king Soma, and, moreover,
those vessels are named after him.

11. Indra then thought within himself :—‘ Vayu,
forsooth, has the largest share of this our sacrifice,
since his is the first Vasha¢ of king Soma, and,
moreover, those vessels are named after him: nay,
but I, too, will desire a share therein!’

12. He said, ‘ Vayu, let me share in this cup !'—
‘What will then be ?’—‘Speech shall speak intel-
ligibly ?!’"—‘ If speech will speak intelligibly, then
will I let thee share!’ Thus that cup henceforward
belonged to Indra and V4yu, but theretofore it
belonged to Vayu alone.

13. Indra said, ‘One half of this cup is mine !’—-
‘Only one fourth is thine!’ said Vayu.—‘ One half
is mine!’ said Indra.—‘ Only one fourth is thine!’
said Vayu.

14. They went to Prag4pati for his decision.
Pragdpati divided the cup (of Soma) into two parts
and said, ‘ This (half) is Vayu’s!’ Then he divided
the (other) half into two parts and said, ‘ This is


1 That is, in order to inhale as much of the strong smell of the
Soma as possible (?).

2 See p. 158, note 1.

$ Or, articulately, distinctly (niruktam).


268 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
Vayu's!—This is thine!’ then he assigned to Indra
a fourth part for his share—one fourth is the same
as a quarter: henceforward that cup belonged, one
fourth of it, to Indra.

15. Now with this libation there are two puro-
rué!—formulas,—the first belonging to Vayu alone,
and the second to Indra and Vayu; and two invitatory
prayers (anuvakya),—the first to Vayu alone, and
the second to Indra and Vayu; and two praisha
(directions),—the first belonging to Vayu alone, and
the second to Indra and Vayu; and two offering
prayers (yagy4),—the first to Vayu alone, and the
second to Indra and Vayu: thus he assigns to him
(Indra) each time a fourth part for his share.

16. He said, ‘ If they have assigned to me a fourth
part each time for my share, then speech shall speak
intelligibly only one fourth part!’ Hence only that
fourth part of speech is intelligible which men speak ;
but that fourth part of speech which beasts speak is
unintelligible ; and that fourth part of speech which
birds speak is unintelligible; and that fourth part
of speech which the small vermin here speaks is
unintelligible.

17. Wherefore it has been thus spoken by the
Fishi (Rig-veda I, 164, 45):—‘ Four are the measured
grades of speech; the Brahmans that are wise know
them: three, deposited in secret, move not; the
fourth grade of speech men speak.’

18. He now draws (the graha) from that (stream
of Soma)’, with (Vag. S. VII, 7; Rig-veda VII,
92, 1),‘Come nigh to us, O Vayu, sipping of


* Purorué (lit. ‘fore-shining’) is the designation of the formulas
preceding the Upayama, ‘ Thou art taken with a support, &c.’
* See p. 256, note r.


IV KANDA, | ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, I. 269


the pure (Soma)! Thine are a thousand steeds,
O bestower of all boons! Untothee hath been
offered the gladdening juice whereof thou, O
God, takest the first draught!—Thee for
Vayu!’

19. And, having withdrawn (the cup), he again
fills it?, with (Vag. S. VII, 8; Rig-veda I, 2, 4),
‘O Indra and Va4yu, here is Soma-juice:
come ye hither for the refreshing draught,
the drops long for you!—Thou art taken with
a support*!—Thee for Vayu, for Indra and
V 4yu!’—with ‘This is thy womb?: thee for the
closely united!’ he deposits (the cup). As to
why he says, ‘Thee for the closely united,—he who
is Vayu, is Indra; and he who is Indra, is Vayu:
therefore he says, ‘ This is thy womb: thee for the
closely united!’


FourTH BRAHMANA.


1. Mitra and Varuza, forsooth, are his intelligence
and will; and as such belonging to his self: when-
ever he desires anything in his mind, as ‘Would
that this were mine! I might do this!’ that is intel-
ligence ; and whenever that is accomplished, that is
will*. Now intelligence indeed is Mitra, and will is


1 When the cup is half-filled he withdraws it for a moment from
the stream of Soma flowing from the Hotrz’s cup into the Drona-
kalase trough; after which he again holds it under to have it filled
completely. For the shape of this cup, see IV, 1, 5, 19.

“ See IV, 1, 2, 6, with note. $ See IV, 1, 2, 9, with note.

4 The Kanva text adds, tad asyaitav atmanad, ‘and these two
are of his self,’ which seems to be intended to explain the pre-
ceding adhy4tmam, ‘belonging to his gel Cele, 1, 97 ty Wl
note,


270 SATAPATHA-BRAIIMANA.


—_


Varuza; and Mitra is the priesthood, and Varuma
the nobility; and the priesthood is the conceiver,
and the noble is the doer.

2. Now in the beginning these two, the priesthood
and the nobility, were separate: then Mitra, the priest-
hood, could stand without Varumza, the nobility.

3. Not Varuza, the nobility, without Mitra, the
priesthood: whatever deed Varuza did unsped by
Mitra, the priesthood, therein, forsooth, he suc-
ceeded not.

4. Varuza, the nobility, then called upon Mitra,
the priesthood, saying, ‘Turn thou unto me that we
may unite: I will place thee foremost, sped by thee,
I will do deeds!’—‘ So be it!’ So the two united;
and therefrom resulted that graha to Mitra and
Varuza.

5. Such, then, is the office of Purohita (placed
foremost, domestic priest). Wherefore let not a
Brahman desire to become the Purohita of any one
Kshatriya (he may meet with), as thereby righteous-
ness and unrighteousness unite; nor should a Ksha-
triya make any Brahman (he may meet with) his
Purohita, as thereby righteousness and unrighteous-
ness unite-—Whatever deed, sped by Mitra, the
priesthood, Varuza thenceforward did, in that he
succeeded.

6. Hence it is quite proper thata Brahman should
be without a king, but were he to obtain a king, it
would be conducive to the success (of both). It is,
however, quite improper that a king should be with-
out a Brahman, for whatever deed he does, unsped
by Mitra, the priesthood, therein he succeeds not.
Wherefore a Kshatriya who intends to do a deed
ought by all means to resort to a Brahman, for


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, IO. 271


he verily succeeds only in the deed sped by the
Brahman.

7. Now he draws (the Maitrd-varuza graha)
from that (stream of Soma)!, with (Vag. S. VII, 9;
Rig-veda II, 41, 4), ‘This Soma, O Mitra and
Varuza, hath been pressed for you; ye holy,
now hear my cry!—Thou art taken with a
support?!_-Thee for Mitra and Varuza!’

8. He mixes it with milk. The reason why he
mixes it with milk is this. Soma, forsooth, was
Vritra. Now when the gods slew him, they said
to Mitra, ‘ Thou also slayest!’ But he liked it not
and said, ‘Surely, I am every one’s friend (mitra) :
being no friend, I shall become an enemy (or, other
than Mitra, Amitra)..—‘ Then we shall exclude thee
from the sacrifice!'"—Then said he, ‘I, too, slay!’
Thereupon the cattle went from him, saying, ‘ Being
a friend, he has become an enemy!’ Thus he was
deprived of the cattle. By mixing (the Soma) with
milk, the gods then supplied him with cattle; and in
like manner does this (priest) now supply him (the
sacrificer or Mitra) with cattle by mixing (the Soma)
with milk,

g. As to this they say, ‘Surely he liked it not to
slay!’ Thus, what milk there is in this (mixture)
that belongs to Mitra, but the Soma belongs to
Varuva: therefore one mixes it with milk.

10. He mixes it with (V4g. S. VII, 10; Rig-veda
IV, 42, 10), ‘May we delight in the wealth we
have gained, the gods in the offering, the
kine in pasture! that unfailing milch cow,


1 See p. 256, note 1. For the shape of this cup, see IV,


red th
2 See IV, 1, 2, 6, and note.


279 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Inn


O Mitra and Varuma, grant ye unto us day
by day!’—with ‘This is thy womb: thee for
truth and life?!’ he deposits it. Now as to why
he says, ‘Thee for truth and life,—the truth is
Mitra 2. since Mitra is the Brahman, and the truth


’


is the Brahman (sacerdotium or sacred writ) ;—
and life is Varuza, since Varuza is the year, and life
is the year: therefore he says, ‘This is. thy womb:
thee for truth and life!’


FirTH BRAHMANA.


1, The Asvina graha, forsooth, is his organ of
hearing ; hence in drinking it he turns (the cup) all
round‘, since with that ear of his he hears all
round.—Now when the Bhrvzgus, or the Angiras,
attained the heavenly world, Ayavana the Bhargava,
or Ayavana the Angirasa, was left behind here (on
earth) decrepit and ghostlike °.


1 This is a false analysis of rztayu, ‘ righteous, holy.’

* The text has ‘Brahman,’ which must be wrong. The Kanva
recension has, correctly, mitro va rztam, brahma hi mitro, brahma
hy rztam.

* The Asvina graha is not actually taken at this time, but later
on, after the oblation of drops and the chanting of the Bahishpa-
vamana stotra; see 1V, 2, 5,12. The reasons for inserting it here
are given in parag. 15-16.

* Lit. ‘he drinks it while turning it all round,’ in accordance
with the regular Sanskrit idiom. The Asvina cup has three mouths,
from which the Soma is drunk by turns. See Haug, Transl. Ait.
Br. p. 132.

* On this legend, and its probable connection with that of Medea’s
cauldron, and the Germanic ‘quecprunno’ (Jungbrunnen, well of
renovation), see A. Kuhn, ‘ Herabkunft des Feuers und des Gdtter-
tranks,’ p. 11. For other translations, see Weber, Ind. Streifen, i.
p. 13 seq.; Muir, O.S, T. v. p. 250 seq.; Delbriick ii. p. 121. For


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 7. 273
Sa ia Nelda ceding sly ie a

2. But Sarydta, the MAnava, just then wandered
about here with his tribe, and settled near by that
same place. His boys’, while playing, setting
that decrepit, ghostlike man at nought, pelted him
with clods.

3. He was wroth with the Sarydtas, and sowed
discord among them: father fought with son, and
brother with brother.

4. Saryata then bethought him 2?~—‘ This has come
to pass for something or other I have done!’ He
caused the cowherds and shepherds to be called
together, and said—

5. He said, ‘Which of you has seen anything
here this day ?’—They said, ‘Yonder lies a man,
decrepit and ghostlike: him the boys have pelted
with clods, setting him at nought. Then Sarydta
knew that this was Ayavana.

6. He yoked his chariot, and putting his daughter
Sukanya thereon, he set forth, and came to the
place where the Avshi was.

7. He said, ‘Reverence be to thee, O Xizshi;


another version, apparently more modern, of the same legend, found
in the Gaiminiya (Talavakara) Brahmaza, see Professor Whitney,
Proceedings Amer. Or. Soc. 1883, p. ix.

' That is, youths of his clan.

2 Sarydta then bethought him, ‘From something I have done,
thence (has come) so great a calamity.’ It then occurred to him,
‘Surely, Xyavana, the Bhargava, or Angirasa, was left behind here,
decrepit: him I (must) have somehow offended sorely, thence so
great a calamity.’ He called his tribe together. Having called the
tribe together, he said, ‘Who, be he cowherd or shepherd, has
noticed anything here?’ They said, ‘Yonder in the wood lies
a decrepit, ghostlike man; him the boys have this day pelted with
clods: that is the only thing we have descried (? tad evadarishma),’
&c. Kaznva text.


[26] x


274 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


because I knew thee not, therefore have I offended
thee; here is Sukany4’, with her I make atonement
to thee: let my tribe live at peace together!’ And
from that same time his tribe lived at peace together.
But Sarydta, the Manava, departed? forthwith, lest
he should offend him a second time.

8. Now the Asvins then wandered about here on
earth performing cures. They came to Sukanyé,
and desired to win her love; but she consented not
thereto.

9. They said, ‘Sukany4, what a decrepit, ghostlike
man is that whom thou liest with; come and follow
us!’ She said, ‘To whom my father has given me,
him will I not abandon, as long as he lives!’ But
the Azshi was aware of this.

10. He said, ‘Sukanyda, what have those two said
to thee ?’? She told him all; and, when she had told
him, he said, ‘If they speak to thee thus again, say
thou to them, “ But surely, ye are neither quite
complete nor quite perfect, and yet ye deride my
husband!” and if they say to thee, “ In what respect
are we incomplete, in what respect imperfect ?” say
thou to them, ‘“‘ Nay, make ye my husband young
again, and I will tell you!”’ They came again to
her, and said to her the same thing.

11. She said, ‘But surely ye are neither quite com-
plete nor quite perfect, and yet ye deride my husband!’
They said, ‘In what respect are we incomplete, in
what respect imperfect ?’ She said, ‘ Nay, make ye
my husband young again, and I will tell you!’


’ That is, ‘the fair maiden.’
* That is, ‘he broke up his camp and departed with his tribe’ (so
‘payuyuge gramak, Kazva recension).


IV KANDA, 1 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAMA, 15. 275


12, They said, ‘Take him down to yonder pool’,
and he shall come forth with whatever age he shall
desire!’ She took him down to that pool, and he
came forth with the age he desired.

13. They said, ‘Sukany4, in what respect are we
incomplete, in what respect imperfect ?? The shi
himself answered them,—‘In Kurukshetra yonder
the gods perform a sacrifice and exclude you two
from it: in that respect ye are incomplete, in that
respect imperfect !’ And the Asvins departed forth-
with, and came to the gods, as they were performing
a sacrifice, after the chanting of the Bahishpavam4na.

14. They said, ‘Invite us thereto!’ The gods
said, ‘We will not invite you: ye have wandered
and mixed much among men, performing cures.’

15. They said, ‘But surely ye worship with a


1 Or, according to the Petersburg Dictionary, ‘Throw him into
yonder pool.’ In the Kamva text no mention is made of a
pool (hrada), but merely of water to which the Avshi is taken by
his wife. I subjoin Professor Whitney’s translation of the corre-
sponding passage of the Gaiminfya Br. version: ‘They (the Asvins)
said to him: “Sage, make us sharers in the Soma, Sir.” “ Very
well,” said he ; “(do you now make me young again.” They drew
him away to the saisava of the Sarasvati. He said: “Girl, we
shall all come out looking alike; do you then know me by this
sign.” They all came out looking just alike, with that form which
is the most beautiful of forms. She, recognising him .... ‘‘ This
is my husband.” They said to him: “Sage, we have performed
for you that desire which has been your desire; you have become
young again; now instruct us in such wise that we may be sharers
in the Soma.”....

‘Then Ayavana the Bhargavan, having become young again,
went to Karyata the Manavan, and conducted his sacrifice on the
eastern site. Then he gave him a thousand; with them he sacri-
ficed. Thus Ayavana the Bhargavan, having praised with this
siman (the syavana), became young again, won a girl for wife,
sacrificed with a thousand,’ &c.

- 4


276 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


eer ee EE IS LSS AS EE Ss
headless sacrifice !'—‘ How with a headless (sacri-
fice) ?’—‘ Nay, invite us, and we will tell you !’—' So
be it!’ so they invited them. They drew this
Asvina cup for them; and those two became the
Adhvaryu priests of the sacrifice, and restored the
head of the sacrifice. Then, in the chapter of the
divdkirtyas!, it is explained how they did restore
the head of the sacrifice. Hence this libation is
drawn after the chanting of the Bahishpavamana,
for it was after the chanting of the Bahishpavamana
that they arrived.

16. They said, ‘Well, but we two, being the
Adhvaryus, are the heads (leaders) of the sacrifice :
transfer ye that graha of ours to this earlier time, to
those belonging to two deities?!’ Accordingly they
transferred that graha for them to a former time, to
those belonging to two deities: hence that graha is
drawn in the tenth place, and is consecrated by
Vashaé in the third place. And as to (the signifi-
cance of) the Asvins,—the Asvins are manifestly?
those two, heaven and earth‘, for it is those two


1 Certain verses which are ‘to be chanted by day.’ According

to Benfey (Ind. Stud. III, p. 228) also called mahadivakirtya, and
consisting of eleven verses (not in Sama-veda), thes first of which is
called ‘ siras (head),’ the second ‘ grivah (neck),’ &c. The term is
also applied to Sama-veda II, 803-5 (Rig-veda X, 170, 1-3) in the
Uhyagana II, 12. The reference in the text seems to be to Sat. Br.
XIV, 1, 1,8 seq. See, however, Weber, Ind. Streifen, I, p. 15,
note 4. The Kanva MSS. read ‘ divakirteshu.’
One might expect the dual ‘dvidevatyau,’ as, besides the
Asvina graha, there are only two dvidevatya (belonging to two
gods) grahas, viz. the Aindra-vayava and Maitra-varuma. See
p. 266, note 3.

* Or, in their visible form (pratyaksham).

* See Muir, O. S. T. v, p. 234. The identification of the Asvins
with heaven and earth may have been suggested by Rig-veda VI, 70, 5,


IV KANDA, I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 19. 277


that have obtained possession of everything here ;—
‘the lotus-crowned’ they (the Asvins) are called:
Agni, forsooth, is the lotus of this earth, and the
sun that of yonder sky.

17. Thus he takes (the Asvina graha) from that
(stream of Soma)', with (Vag. S. VII, 11; Rig-veda
I, 22, 3), ‘Mix ye the sacrifice, O Asvins, with
that goad of yours, rich in honey and joyful-
ness!—Thou art taken with a support?! thee
for the Asvins!’ with ‘This is thy womb: thee
for the honey-loving® (Asvins)!’ he deposits it.
Now as to why he takes (the graha) with a verse
containing (the word) ‘honey (madhu),’ and deposits
it with ‘thee for the honey-loving !’

18. Dadhya#é, the Atharvaza, imparted to them
(the Asvins) the brahmaza called Madhu‘: that
(Madhu) is their favourite resort, and with that
(favourite resort) of theirs he now approaches them ;
—hence he takes (their graha) with a verse contain-
ing (the word) ‘honey, and deposits it with ‘ thee
for the honey-loving !’

19. Now those vessels (other than those of the
three dvidevatya grahas) are smooth®. The vessel
of the graha for Indra and Vayu has a (wooden)


where heaven and earth are called upon to mix the sweet drink,
just as is the case with the Asvins in the verse with which their
libation is taken.

1 See p. 256, note 1.

2 See IV, 1, 2, 6, and note.

$ The real meaning of this epithet (madhvi) is uncertain.

4 ?¢The mystery called Madhu (sweet drink, Soma).’ See parti,
Introd. p. xxxiv; Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 290.

> It might also mean, that those (three dvidevatya) vessels are
smooth, straight, save the peculiarities noticed above. The Kanva
text, however, reads, tak&/lakshwiny anydni paitrivi bhavanti.


278 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


SS


‘belt’ round it: this is its second (peculiarity of)
shape, and therefore it belongs to two deities. The
vessel of the graha for Mitra and Varuma is goat-
like!: this is its second shape, and therefore it
belongs to two deities. The vessel of the graha
for the Asvins is lip-shaped: this is its second
shape, and therefore it belongs to two deities. And
the reason why (this belongs to) the Asvins is that
the Asvins are the heads (mukhya, viz. of the sacri-
fice), and this head (mukha’) is supplied with lips :
hence the vessel of the Asvina graha is lip-shaped.


Seconp ADHYAYA. First BRAHMAWA.


1. The Sukraand Manthin (grahas), forsooth, are
his eyes. Now the Sukra, indeed, is he that burns
yonder (the sun); and because it burns there %, there-
fore it is (called) Sukra (‘bright’). Andthe Manthin,
indeed, is the moon.

2. He mixes it with (barley) meal: thus he makes
it to be gruel (mantha), whence it is (called) Man-
thin. Now those two (sun and moon), forsooth, are
the eyes of these creatures; for were those two not
to rise, these (creatures) could not distinguish even
their own hands.


3. One of them is the eater, and the other the


1 Or rather, according to the commentary on Katy. IX, 2, 6, it
resembles the breast of the goat (agak4).

? Lit. ‘ mouth,’

* This is how Sayaza takes the passage: sukragrahas tapati
sokati dipyata iti tasya sukranamadheyam. It is doubtless the
correct interpretation, though the pronouns ‘esha’ and ‘etad’
might lead one to refer them to the sun,


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 7. 279


food!; to wit, the Sukra is the eater, and the Man-
thin the food.

4. To one of them corresponds the eater, and to
the other the food; to wit, the eater corresponds
to the Sukra, and the food to the Manthin. Now
these two (cups) are drawn for one (person) and
offered to another. There are two Asura-Rakshas,
Sazda and Marka: for them they are drawn; and
to deities they are offered. The reason for this is
as follows.

5. Now when the gods drove away the Asura-
Rakshas, they could not drive away these two; but
whatever (sacrificial) work the gods performed, that
these two disturbed, and then quickly fled.

6. The gods then said, ‘Contrive ye how we
shall drive away these two!’ They said, ‘Let us
draw two cups (of Soma-juice) for them: they will
come down to us, and we shall seize them and drive
them away. They accordingly drew two cups (of
Soma) for them, and they both came down, and,
having seized them, they (the gods) drove them
away’. This is why (the two cups) are drawn for
Sazda and Marka, but are offered to deities.

7. Also Yag#avalkya said, ‘Should we not rather
draw them for the deities, since that is, as it were,
the sign of conquest’ ?’ In this, however, he merely
speculated, but he did not practise it.


1 The one that is to be eaten (ddyah).

2 Muir, O. S. T. ii, p. 386, translates apa-han by ‘to smite,’ which
would seem to suit this passage much better than the ordinary
meaning ‘to beat off, repulse, eject ;’ but see paragraph 20. The
corresponding version of the legend in Taitt. S. VI, 4, 10 has
‘apa-nud (to drive away).’

’ Thus this passage is interpreted by Sayava, who refers to
Pan. III, 3, 161 (samprasne lin) and VIL, 2, 97 (vidaryamixindm


280 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


eer nme


8. Now some make this the purorué formula of
the Sukra, ‘He, the longing, light-enveloped, urged
the daughters of the dappled (cloud) along the
measurer of the welkin,—saying, ‘We thus make
it like him that burns yonder, in that he says “ the
light-enveloped.” ’

9. But let him make this one the purorué formula
of the Sukra (Vag. S. VII, 12; Rig-veda V, 44, 1),
‘In the olden way, in the former way, in every
way, in this way (drawest thou) supremacy
from him, the barhis-seated, and the bliss-
attaining, —for the eater corresponds to this (Sukra
cup), and the eater is supreme: hence he says,
‘Supremacy from him, the barhis-seated, bliss-
attaining, —‘and onward strength drawest
thou from him, the roaring!, the swift, that
winneth those? through which thou waxest
strong.—T hou art taken with a support: thee
for Saxda!’—With ‘This is thy womb: protect
manhood!’ he deposits (the cup); for to this one
corresponds the eater, and the man (hero) is the
eater: hence he says, ‘This is thy womb: protect
manhood!’ He deposits it on the south part (of the
mount), for it is in that direction that yonder (sun)
moves.


10. Thereupon he draws the Manthin with (VA4g.


plutaz). Possibly, however, ‘no svid’ may have to be separated
from what follows: ‘by no means! for deities we should draw
them,’ &c. The Kamva text reads, ‘no svit khalu devatabhya eva
grihniyameti viditam hidam iti, tad u tan mim4msdm eva 4akre
nety u tak &akara.’

* The Rig-veda reads ‘ gira (through song)’ instead of ‘ dhunim.’


9 . - o . 8 .
_Viz. Waters, Juice, sap. Professor Ludwig supplies ‘ plants.’
This verse is extremely obscure.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 1 BRAHMANA, 12. 281


S. VII, 16; Rig-veda X, 123, 1), ‘He, the long-
ing’, light-enveloped?, urged the daughters
of the dappled* on the measurer of the
welkin*: him the bards kiss like a child with
songs at the union of the waters and the sun.
—Thou art taken with a support: thee to
Marka!’

11. He mixes it with (barley) meal: the reason
why he mixes it with meal is this. Varuza once
struck king Soma right in the eye, and it swelled
(asvayat): therefrom a horse (asva) sprung; and
because it sprung from a swelling, therefore it is
called asva. A tear of his fell down: therefrom
the barley sprung; whence they say that the barley
belongs to Varuza. Thus whatever part of his eye
was injured on that occasion in (that part he now
restores him and makes him whole by means of this
(barley): therefore he mixes (the libation) with meal.

12. He mixes it with (Vag.S. VII, 17; Rig-veda X,
61, 3), ‘At whichever offerings ye two, rush-
ing swiftly as thought, accept with favour
the songs—he, the manly, who by the reeds
of this (one) hath seasoned® in the hand the


? Vena, according to Roth and Grassmann, refers to the Gan-
dharva, as the representative of the rainbow. This view is, however,
rejected by Ludwig. The entire hymn is extremely and purposely
obscure.

* Gyotir-garayu, lit. ‘having light for his chorion, or placenta.’

§ Prisnigarbhad, lit. ‘those who have the dappled (cloud) for
their womb (or, are contained therein);’ apparently the rain-drops.

‘ Ludwig identifies the measurer of the welkin with the moon
(Soma). Grassmann takes it in the sense of ‘in measuring through
the air.’

5 The verse is manifestly corrupt. Professor Ludwig omits the
accent in ‘asrizita,’ thus taking it out of the relative clause; but


282 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


—reeg  a
(object of his) desire;'—with ‘This is thy
womb: protect the creatures!’ he deposits it
(on the north part of the mound) ; for to this (graha)
corresponds the food, and these creatures, the people,
are food: hence he says, ‘ This is thy womb: pro-
tect the creatures!’

13, There are two sprinkled and two unsprinkled
chips of the sacrificial stake’: the Adhvaryu takes
a sprinkled and an unsprinkled one; and in like
manner the PratiprasthAtv7 takes a sprinkled and an
unsprinkled one. And the Adhvaryu takes the
Sukra, the Pratiprasthatvz the Manthin.

14. The Adhvaryu cleanses (his cup) with the
unsprinkled chip, with, ‘Swept away is Sazda!’
In like manner the Pratiprasthatre with, ‘Swept
away is Marka!’ Thus even while drawing (the
cups), they drive away the two Asura-Rakshas. With
‘May the Sukra-sipping gods lead thee
forward!’ the Adhvaryu walks out (of the cart-
shed); with ‘May the Manthin-sipping gods
lead thee forward!’ the Pratiprasthatvz: thus they
lead forward those two (libations) to the deities.

15...Behind the Ahavantya fire they put their
(right) elbows together, and deposit (the cups) on
the high altar: the Adhvaryu on the right hip,
and the Pratiprasthatvz on the left—without quit-
ting-their hold of them—with ‘ Unassailable art


even thus, no satisfactory sense, it seems to. me, can be extracted
from this line. When the Soma is mixed with milk or some other
substance (as meal) two stalks of (kusa) reed-grass are laid on the
cup, the accessory substance being then poured through them.
Katy. IX, 6, 9-10.

1 In paragraphs 13-31 the libations from the Sukra and Manthin


cups are anticipated. For their proper place in the actual perform-
ance, see note to IV, 3, 1, 1.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 18. 283


thou!’ whereby they make the high altar unassail-
able by evil spirits; for they are about, in walking
round it, to pass by the fire: hereby, then, they
propitiate it, and so the fire does not injure them,
while they walk round it on different sides}.

16. The Adhvaryu walks round jt (on the north
side) with (Vag. S. VII, 13), ‘Abounding in
heroes, producing heroes ’—for to this (libation)
corresponds the eater, and the hero is the eater:
hence he says, ‘Abounding in heroes, producing
heroes !’—‘ encompass thou? the sacrificer with
growth of wealth!’ By saying ‘Encompass thou
the sacrificer with growth of wealth!’ he invokes
a blessing upon the sacrificer.

17. And the Pratiprasthatvz walks round (on the
south side) with (Vag. S. VII, 18),‘ Abounding in
creatures, producing creatures’ —for to this
(libation) corresponds the food, and the creatures,
the people, are the food: hence he says, ‘ Abounding
in créatures, producing creatures, —‘encompass
thou the sacrificer with growth of wealth!’ By
saying ‘Encompass thou the sacrificer with growth
of wealth!’ he invokes a blessing on the sacrificer.

18. They step out (from the altar) after closing
the two (cups with their hands): thereby they make
them invisible; whence no one sees yonder sun and
moon when they go forward (eastwards). Having
gone round to the front (of the stake), they uncover
(the cups), and offer them while standing in front:
thereby they make them visible; whence every one


1 The Petersburg Dictionary takes ‘vi-pari-i’ in the sense of
‘to turn round.’ Cf. Katy. IX, 10,8; ‘vividham dakshiva utta-
ratas ka paribhogam ishyantau (!),’ Sayaza.

* Or, ‘walk round to the sacrificer.’


284 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


sees yonder sun and moon when they go backwards.
Hence also no one sees the seed whichis cast forwards,
but every one sees what is produced backwards.

19. They put their elbows together behind the
sacrificial stake, unless the fire should blaze up'; but
if the fire blaze up, they may join their elbows in
front of the stake,—the Adhvaryu with, ‘The Sukra
(bright), uniting with the sky, with the earth,
with the brightly shining;’ the Pratiprasthatrz
with, ‘The Manthin, uniting with the sky, with
the earth, with the manthin-shining. Thus
they make these two (cups) the resting-places of the
eyes, and join the two eyes together: whence these
two eyes are joined together with bones all round’.

20. The Adhvaryu throws the unsprinkled stake-
chip outside (the altar) with, ‘Cast out is Sazda!’
and in like manner the Pratiprasthatzz with, ‘Cast
out is Marka!’ Thus they drive away the two
Asura-Rakshas before the offerings.

21. Thereupon the Adhvaryu throws the sprinkled
stake-chip on the Ahavantya with, ‘Thou art the
abode of the Sukra!’ and in like manner the
Pratiprasthatvz with, ‘Thou art the abode of the
Manthin!: These two (chips), forsooth, are the
kindlers of the eyes,—he kindles the eyes therewith ;
whence these eyes are kindled.

22. Thereon he mutters (Vag. S. VII, 14), ‘May


1 The sacrificial stake stands immediately in front of the high
altar and fire. ‘ Yadi tato ’gnir nodbadheta,’ Kazva text.

* That is, the cups represent the sockets of the eyes, and the
libations the eyes themselves. Perhaps, however, we ought to
translate, ‘whence these eyes are joined together (so as to be) on
both sides of the bone,” the sacrificial stake representing the bone
or bridge of the nose. See paragraph 25.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAIIMANA, 27. 285


we be the preservers of thine unbroken man-
hood and prosperity, O divine Soma!’ This is
the benediction of that performance: he thereby in-
vokes a blessing.

23. He then calls (on the Agnidh) for the Srausha/,
and says, ‘Urge thou for Indra the Soma-draughts
brought forward, the pure, sweet-flowing, of the
morrow’s morning feast!’ As the Vasha‘ is uttered,
the Adhvaryu offers; then the Pratiprasthatv7:
then the cup-bearers (4amas4dhvaryu).

24. Those two offer while standing in front (of
the fire); for these two (libations) are the eyes:
thus they put those eyes in the front; and hence
these eyes are in the front.

25. They offer while standing on both sides of
the stake; for what the nose is, that is the sacrificial
stake: hence these two eyes are on both sides of
the nose.

26. Being consecrated by Vasha/, these two (liba-
tions) are offered with a prayer. Now it is because
the entire Savana is offered after these two (libations)
that they attain to this (distinction)'; and the reason
why the entire Savana is offered after them, is that
they are most distinctly Pragdpati’s own: for they
are the eyes, and the eye is the truth, and Pragapati
is the truth ;—this is why the entire Savana is offered
after them.

27. He offers with, ‘This is the first consecra-
tion, assuring all boons: heisthe first, Varuvza,


1 «And because these two (libations), having been consecrated
by Vashas, are offered with a mantra, therefore they attain this
(distinction) that the entire Savana is offered after them; and the
reason why the entire Savana is offered after them, is that these two
are its eyes,’ &c.


286 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Beh a ee eas
Mitra, Agni;—he is the first, Brzhaspati, the
wise: tothat Indra offer ye the liquor, Hail?!’

28. Now when he offers with, ‘ This is the first—
he is the first,’ it is just as with cast seed; for the
eyes doubtless are formed first”: hence he offers
with, ‘ This is the first—he is the first.’

29. He then gives directions :—‘ Let the Hotvz's
cup advance! let the Brahman’s, the Chanters’, the
Sacrificer's (cups) advance! Ye cup-bearers of the
fire-priests *, approach and fill up (the cups) with pure
Soma!’—this is a composite direction. Having gone
round (to behind the high altar) the Pratiprasthatzz
pours his residue (of Soma) into the Adhvaryu's
(Sukra) vessel; whereby he makes the food pay
tribute to the eater. The Adhvaryu pours it into
the Hotvz’s cup for drinking ; because the draught
belongs to the utterer of the Vasha¢; for the Vashaé
is the breath, and that breath has, as it were, de-
parted from him while uttering the VashaZ. Now
the draught is breath: thus he puts that breath
back into him.

30. And the reason why they do not take those


1 Or, according to Mahidhara, ‘ To that Indra offer ye the liquor
with Svahal’ The Pratiprasthatrz’ makes his libation after the
Adhvaryu. The Kanva texts read, ‘When the Vasha/ has been
uttered, the Adhvaryu offers, then the Pratiprasthatr7, then the
others offer;’ and, according to Katy. IX, 11, 2, the Aamas4-
dhvaryus make libations from the cups of the nine A’amasins (see
note 2, next page) with, ‘This to Indra’ at the Vasha¢, and
‘This to Agni’ at the Anu-vasha/4, These libations are evidently
referred to in paragraph 31.

? ? Sasvad dha vai retasaA siktasya sambhavatas sakshushif eva
prathame sambhavatas tasmad v evam gapati; KAnva rec.

* ‘Sadasyanam hotrizam.’ The subordinate priests to whom
the dhishvyas (except that of the Hotr7) belong, both those in the
Sadas and the Agnidhra. See page 148, note 4.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 32. 287


two (cups) behind’, but do so take the other cups,
is that those two are the eyes. The residue (of
Soma), then, he pours into the Hotv7’s cup.

31. They now fill up the cups of the fire-priests.
For those residues? are remains of oblations, in-
sufficient for offering: he now fills them up again,
and thus they become sufficient for offering: there-
fore they fill up the cups of the fire-priests.

32. Thereupon they make the fire-priests offer
together*. Now the fire-priests combined convey


1 That is, to the Sadas, for the priests to drink from.

? Viz. the residues in the £amasas of the Hotrakas. The filling (by
the Unnetrz)of the cups of the Xamasins—Hotr?, Brahman, Udgatrz,
(and Sacrificer); Prasastr?, Brahmanakhamsin, Potr?, Nesh/rz, and
Agnidhra ; that of the A&Aavaka remains empty for the present—
takes place before the libations from the Sukra and Manthin grahas.
Their cups are filled by the Unnetrz with Soma-juice from the
Pitabhrzt, with an ‘underlayer’ and final ‘sprinkling’ or ‘ basting’
of ‘pure’ Soma from the Dromakalasa. Previous to the filling, the
Adhvaryu calls on the Maitravaruza to ‘recite to (those cups) being
drawn,’ the latter then reciting the hymn, Rig-veda I, 16, while the
cups are filled. When the Srausha/ is about to be pronounced by
the Agnidh for the Sukra and Manthin libations, the cup-bearers
lift (udyam) the cups, and, after the Pratiprasthatr? has made his
libation, they also pour some Soma-juice into the fire. The cup-
bearers of the first four Kamasins do so twice (and then take their
cups back to the Sadas), the others only once. Thereupon the
cup-bearers of these last five—the so-called Hotrakas, or subordi-
nate Hotr’s—are summoned again, and their cups having been filled
up with ‘ pure’ Soma, the Adhvaryu makes, after the Srausha/, two
more libations from each at the Vasha/and Anuvasha/ respectively.
For the offering-formulas and Anuvasha/karas, see Asv. V, 5, 18-19.
Holding the Agnidh’s cup in his hand, he then goes to the Sadas
and sits down facing the Hotrz, whereupon they drink together the
Soma in the dvidevatya cups.

3 The phrase ‘hotrah (fem.) samyAgayanti’ is apparently analo-
gous to the ‘ patni# samyagayanti’ [they perform the Patnisamyagas,
or, make the wives (of the gods) participate in the sacrifice] of the


288 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the sacrifice to the gods,—it is them he thereby
satisfies together, thinking, ‘Satisfied and pleased
they shall convey the sacrifice to the gods:’ there-
fore they make tlie fire-priests offer together.

33. When (the libation of) the first, or last! fire-
priest has been offered, he addresses them (Vag. S.
VII, 15), ‘Let the priests’ offices be satisfied,
they that have obtained a good sacrifice of
sweet drink; they that are well-pleased,
when they have obtained good offering with
Svah4!’ for this is the satisfaction of the priests’
(offices). Thereupon he approaches (to the Hotvz’s
hearth) and sits down with his face to the west, with
‘The Agnidh hath sacrificed!’ for on this occa-
sion the Agnidh sacrifices last of those that sacrifice :
hence he says, ‘ The Agnidh hath sacrificed.’


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. The Agrayawza graha, forsooth, is his self
(body, trunk), and as such it is his all; for this self
is one’s all. Therefore he draws it by means of this
(earth), for of her is the bowl ?, and with a bowl he
draws this (libation) ; and this (earth) is all, as this


Haviryagna. See parti, p. 256. Indeed Mahfdhara identifies the
hotras with the metres of the offering-formulas, thus treating them
as a kind of deities.

1 The order of the dhishzya-priests is (1. Hotrz), 2. Prasastrz
(Maitravaruza), 3. Brihmanikhamsin, 4. Potri, 5. Neshir7, 6. Akha-
vaka—the fires of all of whom are in the Sadas—and 7. the Agnidh
(in the Agnidhra fire-house). The Akhavaka, however, is for the
present excluded from offering.

* Viz. inasmuch as the bowl is made of clay,—asya/ prithivyah
sakisat sthalf bhavati utpadyate ; SAy. The Agrayava, Ukthya, and
Dhruva grahas are drawn in a sthalf (pot or bowl).


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 8. 289


graha is all: hence he takes it by means of this
(earth).

2. He draws it full; for the ‘full’ means all, and
this graha is all: therefore he draws it full.

3. He draws it for the All-gods; for the All-gods
are all, and this graha is all: therefore he draws
it for the All-gods.

4. He draws it at all (three) Soma feasts; for the
(three) feasts mean all, and this graha is all : there-
fore he draws it at all the feasts.

5. And if the king (Soma) become exhausted, they
extend him from out of that (bowl), make him issue
therefrom; for the Agrayawa is the body, and from
the body all these limbs issue. Therefrom they
draw at the end the Hariyogana cup!: whereby the
sacrifice is established at the end in this resting-place,
the body (or its own self).

6. Thenas to why it is called Agrayaza. His speech
which he restrains, on taking up that press-stone ?,
spoke out again first at this (libation) ; and because
it spoke out first (agre) at this (libation), therefore
this is called the Agrayaza’.

7. It was from fear of the evil spirits that (the
gods) restrained their speech. Previously to this he
draws six grahas, and this is the seventh: for there
are six seasons in the year, and the year is all.

8. And all being conquered and free from danger
and injury‘, the gods now first uttered speech; and


+ Seer LV 4yces

2 The Upamsusavana, cf. III, 9, 4, 6. f

* The primary meaning seems to be ‘firstling.’ For the Agra-
yaneshA, or offering of first-fruits, see part i, p. 369.

‘ Or perhaps, ‘and their entire conquest being free from danger
and injury;’ or, ‘security and peace (abhayam andsh/ram) having


[26] U


290 SATAPATHA- BRAHMANA..


verve


in like manner does he first utter speech now that
everything is conquered and free from danger and
injury.

9. He now draws it from that (stream of Soma’)
with (Vag. S. VII, 19; Rig-veda I, 139, s1), Ke
Gods, who are eleven in heaven, who are
eleven on earth, and who are eleven dwelling
in glory in the (aerial) waters: do ye graciously
accept this sacrifice!—Thou art taken with a
support: thouart Agrayaza, a good firstling
(sv-Agrayaza)!’ Hereby he makes that speech of
renewed vigour; whence he speaks therewith in a
different way, while yet the same, in order to avoid
sameness; for were he to take it with, ‘Thou art
Agrayama, thou art Agrayaza,’ he would commit (the
fault of) sameness: therefore he says, ‘Thou art
Agrayaza, a good 4grayama.’

10. ‘Guard the sacrifice! guard the lord of
the sacrifice!’ whereby he utters freed speech,
meaning to say, ‘Protect the sacrifice! protect the
sacrificer !’ for the lord of the sacrifice is the sacri-
ficer. ‘May Vishzu guardthee with his might!
guard thou Vishzu!’ whereby he utters freed
speech—Vishzu being the sacrifice—‘' May the sacri-


been completely gained.’ Cf. 1V, 3, 3, 5; also III, 6, 3,11; 8,1,
9; 8, 2, 3.

1 The Agrayama is taken rather from two streams of Soma, viz.
from that poured by the sacrificer from the Hotr’s cup into the
Dronakalasa, and from another poured out by the Unnetr?, and
consisting either of Soma taken from the Adhavaniya or, according
to others, of the residue of the Upamsu libation, which had been
temporarily kept in the Agrayana bowl (see p. 255, note 2), and has
to be emptied by the Unnetv7' into some other vessel, when that


bowl is about to be used for the Agrayama libation. See Katy. 1X,
6, 15 comm.


Iv KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 14. 291


fice protect thee with its power! protect thou the
sacrifice !"—‘ Guard thou the Soma feasts all
around!’ whereby he means this very graha, because
that belongs to all (three) Soma feasts'.

11. Having then wrapped up (the bowl in) a fringed
filtering-cloth, he utters ‘Hin!’ Now that same
speech (Vas, fem.), being unsupported, lay exhausted.
By means of the ‘ Hin’ the gods infused breath into
that exhausted speech, for the ‘Hin’ is breath, the
‘Hin’ is indeed breath: hence one cannot utter the
sound ‘hin’ after closing his nostrils. By means of
that breath she rose again, for when one who is ex-
hausted takes breath, he rises again. And in like
manner does he now infuse breath into the exhausted
speech by means of the ‘Hin, and through that
breath she rises again. Thrice he utters the ‘ Hin,’
for threefold is the sacrifice.

12. He then says (Vag. S. VII, 21), ‘Soma be-
cometh pure!’ For that (speech) which, for fear of
the Asura-Rakshas, they (the gods) did not utter,
he now utters and reveals when all is conquered
and free from danger and injury: therefore he says,
‘Soma becometh pure.’

13. ‘For this priesthood, for this nobility’—
whereby he means to say, ‘for the priesthood as well
as for the nobility ;'—‘for the Soma-pressing
sacrificer he becometh pure;’ whereby he
means to Say, ‘for the sacrificer.’

14. Here now they say, ‘Having said this much,
let him deposit (the cup); for as much as the priest-
hood, and the nobility, and the people are, so much


1 The Agrayana libation is repeated at the midday as well as at
the evening feast.
U2


292 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


means this All, since Indra and Agni are this All’:
hence, having said this much, let him deposit (the
cup).

15. Let him, nevertheless, say this more, ‘ For
sap and pith he becometh pure, —by saying ‘ for
sap’ he means to say ‘for rain;’ and ‘for pith’ he
says with a view to that pith or juice which springs
from rain ;—‘for the waters and plants he be-
cometh pure, this he says for the waters and
plants ;—‘for heaven and earth he becometh
pure, this he says for those two, heaven and earth,
whereon this All rests;—‘for well-being he be-
cometh pure, whereby he means to say ‘for good.’


16. Here now some say, ‘for spiritual lustre he
becometh pure;’ but let him not say so, for in say-
ing ‘for this priesthood,’ he says it with a view to
spiritual lustre. With, ‘Thee for the All-gods!
this is thy womb: thee for the All-gods!’ he
deposits (the cup); for it is for the All-gods that he
draws it. He deposits it in the middle (of the
mound); for this is his trunk, and that trunk is, as
it were, in the middle. On the right (south) side of
it is the Ukthya bowl, and on the left side the Aditya
bowl.


TuHrirD BRAHMANA.


1. That Ukthya (graha), forsooth, is his unde-
fined breath (vital air)*, and as such it is that self of
his; for the undefined breath is the self; it is his


* On Indra and Agni, as the divine representatives of the two
privileged castes, see part i, Introd. p. xvi seq.

* We ought doubtless, with the Kazva text, to read ‘pranah’
instead of ‘4tma.’


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, me 293
Pema er neiaatecheicela + mmonnes riper ian yah ght ee Wo hw
vital energy. Hence he draws it by means of this
(earth), because of her is the bowl, and he draws it
with a bowl ;—for undecaying and immortal is this
(earth), and undecaying and immortal is the vital
energy; therefore he draws it by means of this
(earth or bowl).

2. He draws it full; for full means all, and the
vital energy means all: therefore he draws it full.

3. That Dhruva (graha)!, forsooth, (also) is his
vital energy; by it his body is held together, and
the joints are knit together. For (when) the last
cup has not yet been drawn from that (Soma juice
in the Ukthya vessel) for the A&AAvaka priest,

4. Then he takes the king (Soma) down (from the
cart)’, and pours one third of the Vasativaris (into
the Adhavantya trough). Thus the joint unites ; for,
indeed, he makes (the Ukthya cup) the first of the
second pressing (Soma feast), and the last of the
first: that which belongs to the second pressing he
makes first, and that which belongs to the first he
makes last. Thus he interlocks them; whence these
joints are interlocked: this one overlapping thus,
and this one thus.

5. In like manner at the midday pressing: (when)


1 See IV, 2, 4, 1 seq.

? At the end of the morning feast the Soma in the Ukthya bowl
(sthalt) is poured into the Ukthya cup (patra) in three portions ;
and part of each having been offered, the remaining juice is drunk by
the Hotr?’s assistants, viz. the Prasdistrz, Brahmamikhamsin, and
Akhavaka. Each of these potations is preceded by the chanting
of an 4gya-stotra, and the recitation of the A4gya-sastra (see next
page, note 2). But before the portion of the last-named priest is
poured into his cup (£amasa), fresh Soma-plants are taken down
from the cart for the midday pressing ; one half of the remaining
Vasativari water (or one third of the original quantity) being also
poured into the Adhavaniya trough. See III, 9, 2, 3.


294 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


NT


the last cup has not yet been drawn therefrom for
the AZAavaka priest, he pours (the remaining) one-
third of the Vasativart (into the Adhavantya). Thus
the joint unites; for, indeed, he makes it the first of
the second pressing, and the last of the first pressing’:

that which belongs to the second pressing he makes
first, and that which belongs to the first he makes
last. Thus he interlocks them; whence these joints
are interlocked: this one overlapping thus, and this
one thus. And because his body is thereby held
together, therefore this (graha) is his vital energy.

6. This (Ukthya graha) is the cow of plenty,
Indra’s special portion. At the morning feast he
(the Adhvaryu) divides it for three songs of praise ’,
and at the midday feast for three,—this makes six
times, for there are six seasons, and the seasons
mature all wishes here on earth: for this reason,
then, this (libation) is the cow of plenty, Indra’s
special portion.

7. He draws it without (reciting) a purorué; for
the puroru& is a song of praise, since the puroru&
is a Rzk, and the song of praise is Az&; and the
libation is Saman; and what other (formula) he
mutters, that is Yagus. Formerly these same
(purorué verses) were apart® from the Azés, apart
from the Yagus, and apart from the SAmans.


That is to say, the last (thing) of the first of the last two press-
ings, or of the midday pressing.

? Uktha, lit. ‘ recitation,’ is the old term for ‘sastra’ (IV, 3, 2,
1 seq.). Regarding the three sastras of the Hotrakas, for the reci-
tation of which the Ukthya graha is divided between those priests,
see notes on IV, 3,1, 25; 3, 3, 19.

* The Kanva text reads thrice ‘abhyardhe.’ Regarding the
purorudé formulas see p. 268, note 1.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, II. 295


8. The gods said, ‘Come, let us place them
among the Yagus: thus this science will be still
more manifold.’ Accordingly they placed them
among the Yagus, and thenceforward this science
was still more manifold.

g. And the reason why he draws this (graha)
without a purorudé, is that the purorué is praise,
(being) a Az, and the song of praise is Azé; and
in that he divides it for recitations, thereby indeed
it becomes possessed of a purorué: hence he draws
it without a purorud.

10. Now he draws it from that (stream of Soma’),
with (Vag. S. VII, 22), ‘Thou art taken with a
support: thee for Indra, possessed of the
great (chant), possessed of vigour,—for Indra
is the deity of the sacrifice; wherefore he says
‘thee for Indra;’ and by ‘possessed of the great
(chant), possessed of vigour, he means to say ‘for
him, the strong ;’—‘I take (thee) the song-
pleasing, for he indeed takes it for songs of
praise ;—‘ what great vigour is thine, O Indra’
—whereby he means to say, ‘ what strength is thine,
O Indra’—‘for that (I take) thee! for Vishzu—
thee!’ for he takes it for the life of the sacrifice:
hence he says, ‘for that—thee! for Vishzu—thee!’
With, ‘This is thy womb: thee forthe songs of
praise!’ he deposits it; for he indeed takes it for
songs of praise.

11. He distributes it? with, ‘Thee, the god-


1 See p. 256, note 1.

4 That is, he pours, for each of the three assistant priests, his
respective portion into the Ukthya-patra. This distribution does
not however take place till the end of the morning performance ;


see note to IV, 2, 2, 43 3,1, 25.


296 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


eee


pleasing’, 1 take for the gods, for the life of
the sacrifice. He who would perform it in this
‘manner would assume the command?; but let him
rather distribute it to the respective deities.

12, With, ‘ Thee, the god- pleasing, I take for
Mitra and Varuma, for the life of the sacri-
fice!’ (he takes the portion) for the Maitravaruza
priest ;—for in verses to Mitra and Varuma they
(the Udgatv7s) chant praises for this (libation) ;
and he (the Hotvz) afterwards recites verses to
Mitra and Varuza for the sastra, and offers with a
verse to Mitra and Varuma.

13. With, ‘Thee, the god-pleasing, I take for
Indra, for the life of the sacrifice!’ (he takes
the portion) for the Brahmaz4zamsin; for in verses
to Indra praises are chanted for this (libation); and
verses to Indra are afterwards recited as a sastra,
and offering is made with a verse to Indra.

14. With, ‘Thee, the god-pleasing, I take for
Indra and Agni, for the life of the sacrifice!’
(he takes the portion) for the A&#f#avaka; for in
verses to [Indra and Agni praises are chanted for
this (libation); and verses to Indra and Agni are
afterwards recited as a sastra, and offering is made


1 Or, the god-prospering (i. e. the one prospering the gods), devavi.

* Prasasanam kuryat. ‘The same phrase occurs I, 9, 1,14, where
I translated ‘ will ensure dominion,’—probably wrongly, though I am
by no means sure of the correct meaning. Sdyaza there seems to
take it in the sense of ‘he bids(the gods grant his request), thus having
chiefly his own interest in view’—‘ pras4syante ’to deva/ prarthya-
mana iti prasdsanam parusham syat sakshat svarthaparatvam kuryad
ity arthaz.’ The Kanva text reads, ‘let him not divide (the libation)
with this (formula), for he who divides it thus—prasasanam kuryat’
Perhaps he means to say, that by using that formula one would
pit oneself above the gods. At I, 9,1, 14 ‘one would give orders
(to the gods)’ is probably the right translation.


Iv KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 18. 297


with a verse to Indra and Agni. With,‘ Thee....
for Indra,’ he performs at the midday feast, for the
midday feast is sacred to Indra.

15. Now the AarakAdhvaryus' divide (the Ukthya
libation into three portions), with ‘Thou art taken
with a support: thee, the god-pleasing, I take for
the gods; (thee) the praise-pleasing, for praises,—
agreeable to Mitra and Varuza !’—with ‘This is thy
womb: thee to Mitra and Varuza!’ he (the Xara-
kadhvaryu) deposits it; and with ‘Thou art a re-
offering’ he touches the sthAli.

16. ‘Thou art taken with a support: thee, the
god-pleasing, I take for the gods; (thee) the praise-
pleasing, for praises,—agreeable to Indra!—This is
thy womb: thee to Indra!’ thus he deposits it; and
with ‘ Thou art a re-offering’ he touches the sthali.

17. ‘Thou art taken with a support: thee, the
god-pleasing, I take for the gods; (thee) the praise-
pleasing, for praises,—agreeable to Indra and Agni!
—This is thy womb: thee for Indra and Agni!’ thus
he deposits it. He does not at this (third por-
tion) touch the sthali with ‘Thou art a re-offering.’
‘,... Thee for Indra!’ he says each time at the mid-
day feast, for the midday feast is sacred to Indra.
Twice he touches the sthali with ‘Thou art a re-
offering ;’ and silently he puts it down the third time.

18. But, in order to avoid sameness (of perform-
ance), let him not take it out with the ‘support ;’ nor
let him deposit it in the ‘womb;’ for this (Ukthya


1 “Such is the rule (sthiti); but the Aarakadhvaryus divide it in
this way.’ K4nva text. The formulas of the Taitt. S. I, 4, 12, and
Maitray. S. I, 3, 14, differ from the above; perhaps the Kashaka
is referred to; see v. Schroeder, M. S. I, p. 36, note 3.


298 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


EE


libation) has at first been taken with the ‘support,’
and it has at first been deposited in the womb ;—and
were he now also to take it with the ‘support, and
deposit it in the ‘womb,’ he would assuredly commit
(the fault of) sameness. And as to his touching the
sthali with ‘Thou art a re-offering, he will indeed
again take a libation therefrom. Let him not heed
this, but let him put down (the vessel) silently.


FourtH BRAHMANA.


1. That (opening of) vital air of his which is in
front, that, forsooth, is the VaisvAnara (graha);
and that which is behind is the Dhruva. Formerly,
indeed, both these grahas, the Dhruva and Vaisva-
nara, were drawn; and even now one of them is
still drawn, to wit, the Dhruva’. And if he acquire
a knowledge of that (Vaisvanara graha) either from
the Karakas, or from anywhere else, let him pour it
into the sacrificer’s cup; but this (Dhruva graha he
pours) into the Hotvz’s cup?.

2. Now, what part of him there is below the
navel, that part of his self, that vital energy of his,
is this (Dhruva): hence he draws it by means of this
(earth), because of her is the bow] (sth4li)*, and with
a bowl he draws it ;—for undecaying and immortal
is this (earth), and undecaying and immortal is the


vital energy: therefore he draws it by means of this
(earth).


* ‘Formerly they took these two separately, as Dhruva and Vai-
svanara; but now they take them as one only.’ Kazva text.

* Both these libations are reserved for the evening feast.

* See p. 288, note 2.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 7. 299


3. He draws it full; for full means all, and the
vital energy means all: therefore he draws it full.

4. He draws it for (Agni) Vaisvanara; for Vaisva-
nara (‘he that belongs to all men’) is the year,
and the vital energy (life) is the year: therefore he
draws it for Vaisvanara.

5. Having been drawn at the morning pressing,
it reposes apart from that time: thus he guides him
(the sacrificer) safely through all the pressings.

6. Let him not pour it (into the Hotzz’s cup)
during the chanting; for, verily, were he to pour it
out during the chanting, the sacrificer would not live
through the year.

7. He pours it out during the recitation of the
sastra; whereby he guides him safely over the
twelvefold chant of praise: thus he obtains ever
continued life, and thus does the sacrificer live long.
Therefore the Brahman should sit through the
praise of Agni (Agnish/oma)!; till the offering of
this (libation) he must not slip away*—nor must he


1 1Tasmad brahmano ’gnish/omasat syat. The obvious meaning
of this sentence is, ‘hence the celebrator of the Agnish/oma should
be a Brahman,’ or, perhaps, ‘hence a Brahman should celebrate
the Agnish/oma;’ but I do not see how it can have that meaning
here, without at least a double-entendre in the term ‘agnish/o-
masad,’ Agnish/oma in that case (‘the praise of Agni’) referring
both to the sacrifice generally and to the chanting (stoma or stotra).
See next note. My MS. of Sayana’s commentary (from the library
of the Mahdraga of Bikaner) has unfortunately an omission here.

2 Viz. from the Sadas; ‘nifsarpet,’ Kamva text. The verb
sarp, ‘to glide or creep,’ is used technically of a peculiar noiseless
mode of leaving (nifsarp) the Sadas and returning thither (prasarp
or pratisarp, see paragraph 10), and respectfully approaching the
dhishwya fires. If it has to be taken here in that sense, the first
prohibition would seem to refer to the Hotr# (cf. Ait. Br. I, 2a,
where the question is argued whether or not the Hotr? ought to


300 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


nn ESET


discharge urine: thus he obtains the full life—for
this (libation) is his life—thus he reaches the full
(measure of) life.

8. For, what part of him there is below the navel,
that part of his self is this (Dhruva libation). Hence
were he to slip away or discharge urine before the
offering of this (libation), he would discharge the
Dhruva (the firm, constant one): hence, lest he should
discharge the Dhruva, he sits through the praise of
Agni. This, indeed, applies only to the sacrificer’,
for this (libation) is part of the sacrificer's self.

9. He sits through the praise of Agni* ;—for
Soma is glory: hence they both approach, he who
partakes of the Soma and he who does not,—they
approach, forsooth, to behold that glory. And thus
indeed the Brahmans, having crept near together,
take unto them that glory, when they drink (the
Soma) ;—and verily whosoever, knowing this, drinks
(Soma), becomes glorious® indeed.

10. Now, those same (priests) having, while gliding
along‘, deposited that glory in him who sits through
(celebrates) the praise of Agni, they glide along
and turn away from that glory’: having thus en-
compassed it, he again takes that glory unto him-


proceed to the chanting-place with the other priests, and is decided
in the negative); since the sacrificer, to whom the second prohibi-
tion refers (Katy. IX, 6, 23), goes along with them, according to
IV, 2,5, 4. According to the commentary on Katy. IX, 6, 33,
in performing the sarpava the priests and sacrificer should move
along sitting at the morning feast; walking with bent bodies at
the midday feast; and walking upright at the evening feast.

* Tad u tad yagamanasyaiva. Kanva text.
Or, he indeed becomes a celebrator of the Agnish/oma.
The Kanva text has ‘yasasvi.’
See p. 299, note 2.
The Kanva MS. (W.) reads, ‘agnish/omasad etad ydsah sanni-


2
3
4


5


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, I4. 301


self ;—verily, whosoever, knowing this, sits through
(celebrates) the praise of Agni, he passes away after
becoming the most glorious of these (men).

11. Now, the gods and the Asuras, both of them
sprung from Pragapati, were contending for this sacri-
fice—their father Pragdpati, the year,—saying, ‘ Ours
he shall be! ours he shall be!’

12. Then the gods went on singing praises and
toiling. They devised this Agnish¢oma feast, and
by means of this Agnish/oma feast they appropriated
the entire sacrifice and excluded the Asuras from the
sacrifice. And in like manner does this (sacrificer), by
means of this Agnish¢oma feast, now appropriate the
entire sacrifice, and exclude his enemies from the
sacrifice: therefore he celebrates the Agnish/oma.

13. Having drawn it (the Dhruva graha), he de-
posits it with the northern cart’, lest he should con-
found the vital airs, for the grahas are vital airs:
now the other grahas he deposits on the raised
(mound), but this one (he deposits) after pushing
(the dust) aside without leaving as-much as a blade
of grass between’.

14. For those (other cups of Soma) are that part
of his body from the navel upwards, and above, as it
were, is what is from the navel upwards, and above,
as it were, is what is raised: therefore he deposits


dhayata etasmat pardfiko yasdso (sic) bhavanti’ (‘they turn away
from that glorious one’).

+ The dhruva-sth4li is placed just in front of the northern prop.

? Lit. not putting a blade of grass between (the sthali and the
ground on which it stands). Cf. Katy. IX, 2,18. Apparently
he is to shift the sthalt along the ground from the khara to’ the
place where it is to stand, all grass and other objects being thus
removed between this vessel and those standing on the mound
(‘vyuhyaitam na trinam kanantardhaya,’ Kanva text).


302 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

(the others) on the raised (mound), and this one (he
deposits) after pushing (the dust) aside without leav-
ing as much as a blade of grass between.

15. For this (cup of Soma) is that part of his body
from the navel downwards; and below, as it were,
is what is from the navel downwards; and below, as
it were, is what (one deposits) after pushing (the
dust) aside and leaving not so much as a blade of
grass between: therefore he deposits this (Dhruva
graha) after pushing (the dust) aside, without leaving
so much as a blade of grass between.

16. Now, that sacrifice which is being performed
is Pragapati, from whom these creatures on earth
have been born,—and indeed even now they are
born after this (sacrifice). The creatures that are
born therefrom after those (libations) which he de-
posits on the raised (mound), stand on this (earth)
with something different from their own self,—for
those which stand on hoofs indeed stand on this
(earth) with something different from their‘own self.
And when he deposits this (Dhruva cup) after shift-
ing aside (the dust), and not leaving so much as a
blade of grass between,—the creatures that are born
thereafter from this (sacrifice), stand on this (earth)
with their own self, namely, men and wild beasts?.

17. Moreover, on the one hand, in throwing up
(the mound) he puts upon this (earth) something dif-
ferent from it; and those creatures that are born
from this (sacrifice) after those (libations) which he
deposits on the raised (mound), they stand on this
(earth) with something different from their own self,
namely, with hoofs.


1 Svapada, lit. ‘dog-footed’ beasts.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 20. 303


18. And, on the other hand, they offer in the
Ahavantya! a sacrificial cake, parched barley-grains,
porridge, sour curds, and clotted curds,—this is like
pouring (food) into one’s mouth. But this (libation)
remains apart, (being) of one form like water. Hence
while he eats the multiform food with that mouth
(the fire), he lets flow from that opening the uniform
(libation) like water. Then as to why it is called
Dhruva.

19. Now, once on a time, the gods, while perform-
ing sacrifice, were afraid of an attack from the Asura-
Rakshas. The Asura-Rakshas assailed them from
the south, and overturned those southern cups of
Soma,—even that southern Soma-cart they over-
turned; but that other (cart) they could not overturn :
the northern cart then kept the southern cart steady*.
And because they could not overturn that (northern
cup) therefore it is called Dhruva (firm )*.

20. They indeed watch over it; for this (cup of
Soma) is the head of Gayatri, Gayatri being the
sacrifice,—there are twelve chants (stotra) and twelve
recitations (sastra): that makes twenty-four, and of
twenty-four syllables consists the Gayatri. This cup
of Soma is her head; but the head means excellence,
for the head indeed means excellence: hence people
say of him who is the best man of a place, that ‘so
and so is the head of such and such a place.’ And,
indeed, the best man would come to harm, if this


1 See IV, 2, 5, 15 seq.

2 «They (the gods) then made the southern cart firm from (or
by means of) the northern cart.’ Kanva text.

3 It is more probable that the Dhruva (firm, constant) derives its
name from the fact that it remains intact till the very end of the
Agnish/oma, as suggested in the Petersburg Dictionary.


304 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


(cup) were to come to harm; and, the best man being
the sacrificer, they watch (this cup) lest the sacrificer
should come to harm.

21. Moreover, this (graha) is Gayatri’s calf, Gaya-
tri being the sacrifice,—there are twelve chants and
twelve recitations: that makes twenty-four, and of
twenty-four syllables consists the GAyatri. This is
her calf ;—when they watch it, then they watch these
calves for the sake of the milking: ‘as they yield
this milk, even so may this: Gayatri yield all the
sacrificer’s wishes, —this is why they watch it.

22. And when both the Adhvaryu and the Prati-
prasthatvz walk out (of the cart-shed) and (afterwards)
enter (again)}, it is as if (a cow) were to come with
the calf tied to her. They come to this cup of Soma,
and he (the Adhvaryu) pours it out; whereby he lets
loose the Gayatri: ‘ Made over to the sacrificer, may
this Gayatri yield all his desires!’ for this reason he
pours it out.

23. He pours it (into the Hotrvz’s cup!) with (Vag.
S. VII, 25), ‘The firm Soma I pour out—or, I
take—with firm mind and speech: now may
Indra make our people of one mind, free from
enemies!’ whereby he means to say, ‘so that Indra
may make these our creatures, the people, of one.
mind and free from enemies, for their happiness and
glory and nourishment!’


24. Here now he draws it from that (stream of
Soma)’, (Vag. S. VII, 24; Rig-veda VI, 7, 1),‘ Agni


1 Viz. at the evening feast, when the Adhvaryu pours the Soma
from the Dhruva-sthali into the Hotr:’s cup (paragraph 23).

* See p. 256, note 1, The preceding paragraphs anticipate the
future rites regarding this libation, the original drawing of which is
only now described.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAWA, 2. 305
+o REALONE LSND Le AR iain
VaisvaAnara, the crest of heaven, the disposer
of the earth, bornin the sacred rite, the wise
all-ruler, the guest of men—him the gods
have begotten as a vessel for their mouth,
Thou art taken with a support: thou art firm
(Dhruva), of firm abode, the firmest of the firm,
the most solidly founded of the solid! This
is thy womb—thee for Vaisvanara!’ therewith
he deposits it after pushing (the dust) aside, and not
leaving so much as a blade of grass between: for he
indeed takes it for (Agni) Vaisvanara.


FirtH BrRAHMANA.


1. Having drawn the cups of Soma, and gone out
(of the cart-shed to the high altar)!, he offers the
oblation of drops. The reason why he offers the
oblation of drops is this. Whatever drops of that
(Soma) are spilt here, to them he now wishes a safe
journey to the Ahavantya, for the Ahavantya is the
resting-place of offerings: this is why he offers the
oblation of drops.

2. He offers with (Vag. S. VII, 26; Rig-veda X,
17, 12), ‘Whatever drop of thine leapeth


1 The libations (grahas) having been taken, and the remaining
Nigrabhya water, mixed with Soma-juice, poured from the Hotrz’s
cup into the Drowakalasa (p. 256, note 1), the Adhvaryu, Pratipra-
sthaitv7, Prastoty7, Udgatrr, Pratihartr?, and Sacrificer walk out of
the Havirdhana shed, each following one touching the hem of the
garment of the one before him, and betake themselves to the altar.

2 The viprud-homa, an expiatory oblation for the Soma spilt
during the pressing, consists of a prafarani spoon full of ghee.
According to Asv.V, 2, 6,and La/y. I, 11, 9, it would seem that each
of those taking part in the Sarpawa (see p. 299, note 2) makes two
oblations (called ‘ pravritta-homa’ by La/y. Sr. and Pavikavimsa Br.),


[26] xX


306 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

gas ig di a I tnssiamincapnseaaiaaaanimaaani
away, whatever stalk of thine,—whatever par-
ticle (of Soma) is spilt, that is a drop, that indeed he
means; and by ‘ whatever stalk of thine’ he mentions
the stalk ;—‘stone-pressed, from the lap of the
press-bowls;’ for pressed by the stone? it leaps
away from the two press-bowls ;—‘ be it from the
Adhvaryu or from the strainer,—for it leaps
away either from the Adhvaryu’s hands or from the
strainer,—‘that I offer unto thee in my mind
consecrated by Vashaé, Hail!’ whereby it be-
comes for him as an offering consecrated by Vashaz.

3. Thereupon the Adhvaryu takes two stalks of
grass from the covered altar. The two Adhvaryus’”
proceed first (to the chanting-place beside the pit),
as the out-breathing and in-breathing of the sacri-
fice; then the Prastotvz,as the voice of the sacrifice ;
then the UdgAtv7, as the self (or body), the Pragapati,
of the sacrifice; then the Pratihartvz, either as the
physician or the through-breathing®.

4. The Sacrificer holds on to those five priests
from behind‘, for as much as those five priests are,
so much is the whole sacrifice, the sacrifice being
fivefold: hence the Sacrificer thereby holds on to
the sacrifice.

5. He (the Adhvaryu) then throws one of the two


1 ‘Grava-kyuta’ seems to be taken by the author in the sense of
‘set in motion by the (pressing) stone.’ The Rig-veda reads
‘ bahu-Ayuta ;’ also ‘ dhishamayah’ instead of ‘ dhishazayo/.’

* That is, the Adhvaryu and his assistant, the Pratiprasthatrz.

* Ait. Br. II, 20 enumerates Adhvaryu, Prastotrz, Pratihartry,
Udgatr7, and Brahman (see also Asv. V, 2, 4-5); the Lasyay. Sfitra
I, rr, Adhvaryu, Prastotrz, Udgatr:, Pratihartr7, Brahman, and
Sacrificer.

* That is, each holds on to the hem of the garment of the one
who precedes him.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 7. 307


stalks of grass forward towards the pit!, with, ‘Thou
art the ascent of the gods!’ for when the gods
through the sacrifice attained to the heavenly world,
it was from that pit that they went upwards to the
heavenly world: he thus makes the sacrificer look
along the road to heaven.

6. He then throws down the other stalk in front
of the chanters, silently, for those chanters represent
the hymn of praise (stotra), Pragapati (the sacrifice),—
he (Prag4épati) draws to himself everything here, and
takes possession of everything here: it is to him that
that stalk is offered, and thus he does not draw the
Adhvaryu to himself,and take possession of him. And
when they mutter *,—for the chanters mutter now *,—

7. Then he bespeaks the chant, saying, ‘Soma
becometh pure!’ He bespeaks the chant right off*,
and they chant right off; for these chants, the
Pavamanaf§, are directed towards the gods, since


1 The Udgatris (chanters) also throw stalks of grass to the south
with their left hands, with the text, Pavidav. I, 3, 3

2 And when he thinks ‘they have muttered’ (atha yada manyate
’gApishur iti)—for the chanters mutter now. Kavva text.

’ For the mantras the Udgatr/s have to mutter on this occasion,
previous to the chanting, see Tandya Br. I, 3, 4-6. The recita-
tion of the Agyasastra, by the Hotr/, succeeding the chanting of
the Bahishpavamana-stotra, is likewise preceded by a prayer mut-
tered by that priest, for which see Ait. Br. LE 98 ASV.IV5"0:

‘ That is, without repeating that formula, in the same way as
the Pavamana chants are ‘performed without repeating single
verses. See p. 308, note 2.

6 The first stotra at each pressing is called pavamana (puri-
fying, i.e. during the chanting of which the Soma becomes clari-
fied), viz. the Bahishpavaména at the morning, the Madhyan-
dina pavamana at the midday, and the Arbhava (or trittya)
pavam dna at the evening pressing. The other stotras are called
Dhurya, ‘to be harnessed, belonging to or forming a team.’ For
the correspondence between the stotra and sastra, see p. 325, note 2.

x 2


308 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the gods thereby attained to the heavenly world
right off (straightway): therefore he bespeaks the
chant right off, and right off they chant.

8. With ‘Turn ye back?!’ (he bespeaks) the other
chants (viz. the Dhuryas), and turning back (or re-
peating) they chant the Dhuryas?, for the latter


1 This is Sdyama’s interpretation of ‘upavartadhvam,’ instead of
‘draw near,’ as translated by me at I, 5, 2,12. He is probably
right in connecting it with the repetitions which certain verses have
to undergo in the dhurya-stotras.

* There are many different stomas, or forms of chanting stotras,
named from the number of verses produced in each form (generally
by repetitions of certain verses). Those required for the Shadaha and
Dvadasaha (see IV, 5, 4, 1 seq.) are: trivr7't (9), paw&adasa (15),
saptadasa (17), ekavimsa (21), trinava (27), trayastrimsa (33),
katurvimsa (24), Aatuskatvarimsa (44), and ash/akatvarimsa
(48). The first four of these are those most frequently used, and
the only ones used at the Agnish/oma. All these stomas, with one
exception (24), have two or more different varieties or arrange-
ments, called vish/uti, differing from one another either in the
order in which the several verses are to be chanted, or in regard to
the number of repetitions which the corresponding verses have to
undergo. Besides, stomas are generally performed in three turns or
rounds, pary4ya, consisting of a triplet of verses (some of which
may have to be repeated more than once), and preceded bythe sound
‘hum’ (Hinkara). Thus the first Agyastotra, Sdmav. II, ro-rz,
(consisting of three verses, a, b, c,) is to be performed in the pavka-
dasa-stoma; that is, the three verses have to be so treated, by
repetitions, as to produce fifteen verses in three turns. Now, as
there are three different varieties of performing the pavkadasa-


stoma, the stotra might be chanted in one or other of the following
three arrangements :—


Hum a bbb c¢ panini,’ i.e. consisting
Hum a b cece of five in each row.

Or 2. Hum aaa b Cc
Hum a b Cc


Hum a bbb cce


1.Hum aaa bc ! this form is called ‘ pawtfa-


\ (‘apara’ or ‘other, second’).


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 9. 309


are directed towards these creatures: whence crea-
tures are produced here repeatedly.

9. And as to why they chant the Bahishpava-
mana here (near the £atvala). In the beginning,
forsooth, yonder sun was here on earth!. The sea-
sons embraced him and ascended from hence to the
heavenly world: there he burns firmly established


Or 3. Hum a b
Hum a bbb
Hum aaa b. ccc

The three paryayas of a stoma (or vish/uti) show each three
subdivisions (viz. aaa—b—c. being those of the first paryaya
above), called vish/iva. When the Udgatris are about to com-
mence a chant, the Prastotr/ spreads in their midst a cloth, doubled
up so that the unwoven fringe lies over the selvage, either towards
the east or north, Thereon he marks the subdivisions of the
rounds, by means of sticks (kusa), a span long, of some kind of
wood suitable for sacrifice, split lengthways along the pith (the
bark being left outside) and somewhat pointed at one end, then
smeared over with some fragrant substance, and wrapped up singly
in pieces of the same kind of cloth as that spread on the ground.
The marking of the vish/avas, or subdivisions, takes place at the end
of the prastava or prelude (see next page, note 1) in this way, that
each vish/Ava is marked by as many sticks as the corresponding
verse has to be repeated; those of the first vish/ava being laid down
with the point to the north, then behind or west of them those of
the second turn with the point to the west, and behind them those
of the third turn with the point to the north. Thereupon those of
the other two rounds are laid down in the same way, each turn
north of the preceding one. Hence the arrangement of sticks for
the first of the above varieties of the pavadasa-stoma would be
three straight, one across, one straight; one straight, three across,
one straight; one straight, one across, three straight.

With the exception of the Bahishpavamana, the chanting is
performed in the Sadas by the side of the Udumbara post (see
III, 6, 1, 2 seq.), the latter being likewise enclosed in a cloth of
the above description, wrapt round it from left to right, with the
unwoven fringe towards the top.

1 Cf. Tandya Br. VI, 7, 24.


Cc ‘ . a
A \ this form is called ‘udyati,’
or the ascending one.


310 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


in the seasons. And in like manner do the priests
thereby embrace the sacrificer and ascend from hence
to the heavenly world: this is why they chant the
Bahishpavamana here.

10. The Bahishpavam4na? chant truly is a ship


1 The Bahishpavam4na-(stotra), or ‘outside-pavamana,’—so
called because (on the first day of a Soma-sacrifice) it is performed
outside the altar (commentary on Pazidav. Br. VI, 8, to—11 ; or out-
side the Sadas, Say.on Samav. S. p. 47),—is chanted in the Trivr?t,
or threefold, stoma; consisting, as it does, of three gayatri triplets
(Samav. II, 1-9 for the Agnish/oma), and none of its verses being
chanted more thanonce. This stoma has three different varieties, viz.
the udyatf, or ascending mode, the first turn of which consists of
the first verses of the three triplets, the second turn of the second
verses, and the third turn of the last verses, hence a! a? a3—b! b?
b’—c' c? c®; the parivartini, or reverting mode, following the
natural order, a’ b’ c'—a’ b® c?—a’ b* c*; and the kuldyint, or
web-like mode, performed in the order a! b! c!—b? c? a?—c! a b’.
Cf. Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 237, where, however, these forms are
described quite differently. The term used for the natural order
of verses in the parivartint vish/uti is ‘parafi,’ i.e. thitherwards,
straight off. From the statement in paragraph 7 above, that ‘ they
chant straight off (parak),’ one might therefore infer that that par-
ticular mode of chanting ought to be used for the Bahishpavam4na-
stotra; but the term ‘parak’ may also be taken as referring to
each of the several verses being chanted ‘straight off,’ without any
repetition. Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 120 note, remarks: ‘Each of
these verses is for the purpose of chanting divided into four parts :
Prastdva, i.e. prelude, the first being preceded by hum, to be
sung by the Prastotar ; Udgftha, the principal part of the Sdman,
preceded by Om, to be chanted by the Udgatar; the Pratihéra,
i. e. response [? rather check, stop ; cf. IV, 3, 4, 22], introduced by
hum, to be chanted by the Pratihartar; and the Nidhana, i.e.
finale, to be sung by all three. To give the student an idea of
this division, I here subjoin the second of these ras in the Sdman
form, distinguishing its four parts :—

_[The connected rzk form is: Abhi te madhun$ payo—athar-
vano asistayur—devam devaya devayu. |

‘ Prastdva ; abhi te madhuna payom.

‘ UVdgitha : om Atharvano asisradeyurvam devayada.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, II. 311


bound heavenwards: the priests are its spars and
oars, the means of reaching the heavenly world. If
there be a blameworthy one, even that one (priest)
would make it sink: he makes it sink, even as one
who ascends a ship that is full would make it sink.
And, indeed, every sacrifice is a ship bound heaven-
wards: hence one should seek to keep a blameworthy
(priest) away from every sacrifice.

11. Thereupon, when the chanting is over’, he


‘ Pratthéra: hum avayo.

‘ Nidhana : sim.

‘The Nidhanas, i.e. finales, are for the nine Pavam4na-stotra
verses the following ones: sat, sim, suv4A, ida, vak, and 4 (for
the four last verses). See also Burnell, Arsheyabr. p. xlv seq.

1 Lavy. I,12; II,1; Tasdya Br. VI, 7 seq. give the following
details: The Prastotr? takes the prastara (bunch of grass, repre-
senting the Sacrificer) from the Adhvaryu and says, ‘ Brahman, we
will chant, O Prasdstar!’ The Brahman and Maitravaruaa having
given their assent (Asv. V, 2, 12-14). the Prastotr/' hands the pra-
stara to the Udgatr. The latter touches his right thigh with it
(or bends his right knee thereon) and ‘harnesses’ (introduces) the
chant by the formula, ‘With Agni’s fire, with Indra’s might, with
Sfirya’s brilliance, may Brrhaspati harness thee,’ &c. (Tandya Br.
I, 3, 5); whereupon he mutters, ‘I will make food,’ &c. (ib. 6):
and after looking towards the pit and a vessel of water and the sun.
he commences the chant. The three chanters are seated west of the
Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthatr? (who look towards them), viz. the
Udgitr’ facing the north, the Prastotr/ the west, and the Prati-
hart? the south (or south-east). To the west of them are seated
three, four, or six subordinate singers. or choristers (upagatr?),
who accompany the chanting in a deep voice with the sound ‘ Ho.’
When the chant is completed, the Udgity? says, ‘I have made
food,’ and makes the sacrificer mutter the formula, ‘Thou art a
falcon, &c. (Pans. Br. I, 3, 8): whereupon he takes a stalk of
crass from the prastara, cuts off the top and bottom, so as to make
it of the length of four thumbs’ breadths, and throws it into the
pit with, ‘If it has been chanted,’ &c. (ib. II, 1, 8). They then
pour out the vessel of water into the pit, with, ‘I send you to the
sea, &c., and make 3. 5, 7 or 9 steps northwards outside the altar.


312 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Fe OEE NE I 2S OLAS SSR
utters this speech,—‘ Agnidh, spread the fires! strew
the barhis! Prepare the cakes! go on with. the
victim!’ The Agnidh spreads the fires, that is to
say, kindles them’; he strews that barhis’, thinking,
‘When the barhis is strewn, I will offer to the gods
on the kindled (fire). —‘ Prepare the cakes, he says,
because he is about to proceed with the cakes; and,
‘Go on with the victim,’ because he is about to get
ready the victim *%.

12, Having again entered (the cart-shed) he draws
the Asvina graha‘. Having drawn the Asvina graha
he goes out and girds the sacrificial stake*; and having
girt the stake he gets ready the victim: he thereby
puts flavour (juice) into him (Soma— the sacrificer).

13. Having been slain at the morning feast, it
continues being cooked till the evening feast;
whereby he puts flavour (juice) into the whole
sacrifice, imbues it with flavour.

14. Let him therefore, at the AgnishZoma, slay a
(victim) sacred to Agni, for there is harmony when,
at the Agnishéoma, he slays a (victim) for Agni. If


Ww hereupon they betake themselves to the Agnidhriya. During the
chanting, the Unnetrv: pours the Soma-juice from the Adhavaniya
trough through the strainer into the Paitabhrvt.

1 The Agnidh takes burning coals from the Agnidhriya fire, and
puts them on the dhishzya hearths, in the order in which they were
raised. See p. 148, note 4.

* He sprcads a layer of (ulapa) grass along the ‘spine’ (the line
from the middle of the back to the middle of the front side) of the
altar. 7

* Pasum hy Alipsyamano (!) bhavati. Kazva MS.

* Having taken this cup of Soma or libation (with the formula,

Vag. S. VI, 11) from the Droma-kalasa or the Patabhrit, he makes
the sacrificer eye the several cups and Soma vessels, as set forth IV,
5,6,1seq.; the Asvina being looked at sixth in order (or fourth of the
grahas), not tenth (as was its order of drawing). See IV, 1, 5, 16.
woee Tl. ar, £6 seq:


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 14. 313


it be an Ukthya sacrifice, let him slay one to Indra and
Agni in the second place, for songs of praise (uktha)'
refer to Indra and Agni. If it be a Shodasin sacri-
fice, let him slay one to Indra in the third place, for
the sixteenfold chant (shodasin)* means Indra. If it
be an Atiratra, let him slay one to Sarasvati in the
fourth place, for Sarasvati is speech, and speech (vad,
fem.) is female, as the night (ratri, fem.) is female:
he thus duly distinguishes the forms of sacrifice °.


1 Or, the (three) Uktha-stotras (Samay. II, 55-62) and sastras,
the characteristic feature of the Ukthya sacrifice. Cf. p. 325, note 2;
and IV, 6, 3, 3.

* The Shodasi-stotra (Sdmav. II, 302-304) chanted in the
ekaviszsa stoma is the characteristic stotra of the Shodasin sacrifice.
The term meaning ‘having a sixteenth’ (viz. stotra), it evidently
refers originally to the sacrifice, and has then also been applied to
_ the stotra and sastra. See also Haug, Ait. Br. Transl. p. 255, note 2.

* On this occasion the same rites are performed as at the sacri-
fice of the Agnishomiya buck (III, 6, 4, 1 seq.), viz. from the girding
of the stake (III, 7, 1, 19) to the election of the Hotr* (III, 7, 4, 9).
Then the other priests are elected, viz. Adhvaryu (and Pratipra-
sthatrz), the Prasastr? (Maitravaruma), the Brahmanakhamsin, the
Potr?, the Nesh/r7, the Agnidhra, and finally the sacrificer himself;
after which each of them makes two election-oblations (Shave
homa) of ghee, the first with, ‘ May I be well-pleasing -to Speech,
well-pleasing to the Lord of speech: O divine Speech, what
sweetest, most pleasing speech is thine, therewith endow me!
Hail to Sarasvati!’ the second with, ‘May the holy Sarasvati,
of abundant powers, rich in devotion, accept favourably our sacri-
fice!’ Thereupon they proceed with the animal offering up to the
offering of the omentum (vapa) and cleansing (III, 8, 2, 30); after
which all the eighteen priests and the sacrificer perform the Sar-
pana (see p. 299, note 2), that is, they step up to the eight dhishzya
hearths (with formulas Vag. S. V, 31 a-d; 32 a-d respectively),
the Adhvaryu then pointing out the Aitavantya! the Lahishpava-
mana place, the Katvila, &c. (with Vag.S.V, 32 e seq.); and
touching the Sadas and its door-posts, and addressing Sarya (the
sun), the Zestvigs (officiating priests) and dhishvya hearths (with V,
33-34). Katy. 1X, 8, 8-25. For the dutics of the Udgatris, see
Lisy. Sr. II, 2, 10 seq.


314 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

15. Thereupon he proceeds with (the offering of)
the cakes of the Soma feast. Now Soma is a god,
for Soma was in the heaven ;—‘ Soma, forsooth, was
Vritra; the mountains and stones are his body:
thereon grows that plant called Usanda,’ said Sveta-
ketu Audd4laki; ‘that they bring hither and
press.’

16. Now when he slays the victim, he thereby
puts flavour into it; and when he proceeds with (the
offering of) the Soma feast cakes, he puts sap into
it: thus it becomes Soma for him.

17. They all belong to Indra ; for Indra is the deity
of the sacrifice: that is why they all belong to Indra.

18. And as to why there are a cake, parched
barley-grain, a porridge, sour curds, and clotted
curds,—it is that those who are the deities of the
sacrifice shall be well-pleased.

19. For, when one has eaten cake here, he wishes,
‘I should like to take parched grains, I should like
to eat porridge, I should like to eat sour curds,
I should like to eat clotted curds!’ All these (are
objects of one’s) wishes : it is in order that those who
are the deities of the sacrifice shall be well-pleased.
Now as to why that offering of clotted curds (payasya)
is prepared only at the morning libation, and not at
the two other libations (Soma feasts).

20. The Gayatri, forsooth, bears the morning
libation (to the gods), the Trish¢ubh the midday
libation, and the Gagati the evening libation,—but,
then, the Trish¢ubh bears the midday libation, not
alone, (but) with both the Gayatri and the Brzhati';
and the Gagati (bears) the evening libation, not alone,


* For the metres of which the Madhyandina-pavamina stotra is
composed, see p. 333, note I.


IV KANDA, 2 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 22. 315


(but) with the Gayatri, the Kakubh, and Ushvih, and
the Anush¢ubh}.

21. The Gayatri alone bears singly the morning
libation,—with those two sets of five (pankti) 2, the
set of five chants, and the set of five oblations:
there are four Agya (chants)? and the Bahishpava-
mAna is the fifth,—the Pankti metre is five-footed—
with that pankti of chants, not alone, the Gayatri
bears the morning libation.

22. To Indra belongs the cake, to the two bay
steeds the parched grains (dhana/) *, to Pishan the
porridge (karambha), to Sarasvati the sour curds
(dadhi), and to Mitra and Varuva the clotted curds
(payasya)*>,—the Pankti is five-footed—with that
pankti of oblations, not alone, the Gayatri bears the


1 The Arbhava or Trittya-pavamina stotra, Samay. II,
39-52 (see note on IV, 3, 5, 24), is made up of five parts, com-
posed chiefly in the GAyatri, Kakubh, Ushwih, Anush/fubh, and
Gagatt metres respectively. It is chanted in the Saptadasa-stoma,
the seventeen verses being obtained in the following way. The
Gayatri triplet (II, 39-41) is chanted twice, in the Gayatra and
Samhita tunes, making six verses. Then verses 42 and 44 once
each, in the Sapha and Paushkala tunes respectively. ‘Then the
triplet II, 47-49 twice, in the Syavasva and Andhigava tunes (six
verses). And finally the triplet II, 50-52 once, in the Kava tune
(three verses). This makes together seventeen verses. Verses 43,
45, and 46 of the Samhita are omitted in the chanting.

2 Pankti means both ‘a set of five,’ and the pankti metre, con-
sisting of five octosyllabic feet.

e mee Dp. 3276, NOE 2.

* Taitt. Br. I, 5,11 assigns them to the Asvins, for the reason
that they performed cures therewith.

> These five sacrificial dishes, called savaniya (or aindra’)
purodas4h, are placed together in one vessel (patri)—the puro-
dasa proper, or rice-cake to Indra, being placed in the centre—and
oblations are made from them to the respective dcities at one and
the same time, two pieces being cut from each dish into the guht
for the chief offering, and one piece from each into the upabhyrt


316 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


morning libation (to the gods): for the sake of com-
pleting that pankti, that oblation of clotted curds to
Mitra and Varuza is prepared only at the morning
libation, and not at the two other libations.


Tuirp ApuYAYA. First BRAHMANA.


1. Having drunk (Soma)' and said, ‘We are


spoon, for the svish/akrzt. While cutting the portion he calls on
the Maitrivaruza to ‘ Recite (the invitatory prayer) of the cakes of
the morning feast for Indra!’ The anuvakya (Rig-veda III,
52, 1) having been recited by the Maitravaruva, the Adhvaryu
steps to the fire, calls on the Agnidhra for the Srausha/ formula
(see I, 5, 2, 16, with note), and thereupon on the Maitravaruza to
‘Urge the cakes of the morning feast brought forward for Indra|’
That priest then urges, ‘Let the Hotr? pronounce the offering prayer
to Indra! May Indra with his bays eat the grain! [O Hotar, pro-
nounce the offering prayer! |) Whereupon the Hotr7 recites, ‘We
who worship (part i, p. 142, note),—May Indra with his bays eat
the grains, with Pishan the porridge; with Sarasvatt, with Bha-
rati, the sour curds, with Mitra and Varuma the clotted curds! [cf.
Ait. Br. II, 24; Taitt. Br. I, s,11; Asv. V, 4, 3] Vaushat !’ when
the Adhvaryu pours the oblation fits the fire. For the oblation to
Agni Svish/akrt the invitatory prayer is Rig-veda III, 28, 1, and the
offering formula ‘ Havir agne vihi,’ ‘graciously accept the offering,
O Agni!’ The offerings completed, the dishes of sacrificial food.
are placed on the Hotrz’s hearth.

* The Purodasa offerings, described in the preceding paragraphs,
are followed by libations from the dvidevatya cups, viz. the Ain-
dravayava, Maitravaruva, and Asvina. Each time the Adhvaryu is
about to make a libation, the Pratiprasthatr? draws Soma-juice
into the Aditya cup (patra) and makes libations therefrom immedi-
ately after the Adhvaryu on the north side of the fire. And each
time he pours the remains from the Aditya cup into the Aditya
sthali with, ‘Thee to the Adity as!’ finally covering the latter with
the former (see IV, 3, 5, 6). Then follows the tea of the cups
of the Kamasins (see p. 287, note 2), and the libations from the
Sukra and Manthin grahas (already anticipated in IV, 2, 1, 13-
31) and from the cups of the Aamasins. Thereupon the Adhvaryu
goes to the Sadas and sits down opposite the Hotr?; and in
alternate draughts and with mutual ‘invitations’ they empty the


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 3. 317


invited together’, he (the Adhvaryu) rises. He
takes a piece of the cake, and at the place where
the A&#favaka, being seated, is now (about to) recite,
he puts the piece of cake in his hand and says,
‘O Akhavaka, say what thou hast to say!’ Now,
the A#savaka was excluded (from the Soma) *.

2. Indra and Agni preserved him for the produc-
tion of creatures, whence the A#/avaka priest belongs
to Indra and Agni. But it is by means of that
sacrificial food, the piece of cake which he now puts
in his hand, and by means of that (saying) of the
seers which he now recites, it is thereby they (Indra
and Agni) preserve him.


3. When the A&#avaka has (again) taken his seat


dvidevatya cups. The remains are poured into the Hotrz’s cup,
and portions of the puroddsas having then been put into those
cups, they are deposited in the left track of the southern cart. The
Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthatrz then drink the remains of the Sukra
and Manthin cups ; the other priests also drinking from their cups,
without, however, quite emptying them, after which the cup-bearers
deposit them in the Havirdhana, behind the axle of the southern
cart. Henceforward, till the Vaisvadeva cup is drawn (IV, 3,1,
25), those cups are called narasamsa. The Adhvaryu then takes
a piece of the sacrificial cake and rises, calling out, ‘We are invited
together ;’ after which follows the rehabilitation of the AsAavaka,
referred to above. Being called upon by the Adhvaryu, he recites
the verse Rig-veda V, 25, 1 (beginning with ‘aka,’ whence perhaps
his name), ‘Hither will I sing Agni the god for your protection,’
&c., and then says, ‘Ye Brahmans, invite us Brahmans also!’
whereupon the Adhvaryu says, ‘This Brahman desires an invita-
tion: invite him, Hotr7!’ Being then invited, he pronounces an
anuvaky4, and his cup-bearer fills his cup, which henceforth ranks
last but one, thus preceding that of the Agnidhra. He now drinks
from his cup, and the latter is then deposited along with the other
Kamasas; whereupon the priests, who have taken part in the
offering of the purod4sas, and the sacrificer eat the Ida in the
Agnidhra fire-house.
1 Or rather, we have been mutually invited.
+ See lil, 6, 2, 12.


318 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

(behind his hearth), he (his Adhvaryu) proceeds with
the libations of the seasons (/¢ztugraha). The
reason why he proceeds with the libations of the
seasons when the A&savaka is seated, is that the
A&havaka represents a sexual union, since the A&/a-
vaka belongs to Indra and Agni, and Indra and
Agni are two, and a productive union means a pair:
from that same productive union he produces the
seasons, the year.

4. And again why he proceeds with the libations
of the seasons, when the A&/avaka is seated. The
seasons, the year, are everything; he thus produces
everything: this is why he proceeds with the liba-
tions of the seasons when the A&/avaka is seated.

5. Let him draw twelve of them,—twelve months
there are. in the year: therefore he should draw
twelve (cups of Soma). But he may also draw
thirteen, for, they say, there is a thirteenth month?.
Let him nevertheless draw twelve only, for such is
completeness.

6. He draws them from the Drozakalasa (Soma
trough), for the Drozakalasa is Pragapati, and from
out of that Pragdpati he produces the seasons, the
year.

7. He draws them by means of double-mouthed
cups ?;—for where is the end of those two (cups)
that are double-mouthed ? Hence this year revolves
without end. When he has drawn this (libation), he
does not deposit it: whence this year is ceaseless.

8. He recites no invitatory prayer; since one


1 See part i, p. 321, note 6.
* The two Avtu vessels are made of karshmarya or asvattha wood,


of the shape of spoon-bowls, with spouts on both sides. Katy.
| ea ae


—


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, IO. 319


invites with an invitatory prayer, and the present
season has already come, either by day or by night.
Nor does he utter a second Vasha/é, lest he should
turn away the seasons. Simultaneously they (the
Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthatvz) draw the two first
and the two last libations: thus they embrace every-
thing here by means of the year, and everything
here is embraced within the year.

9. Out (of the Havirdhana shed) walks the one,
in steps the other, whence these months pass follow-
ing one another. But were both to walk out to-
gether, or were both to enter together, these months
would assuredly pass separated one from the other :
therefore while out walks the one, in steps the other.

10, Six times they perform' with, ‘With the


1 The twelve Rztugrahas are drawn alternately by the Adhvaryu
and Pratiprasthatr7—the first two and the last two simultaneously,
the others singly, so that the one enters the cart-shed while the
other leaves. Both in entering and leaving the Pratiprasthatr?
passes by the Adhvaryu on the north side, and for a moment
encircles him by passing his arms round him and holding his own
vessel south of him. With the exception of the last two libations,
the libations are offered up entire (holocausts). When either of
them is about to offer one of the first six libations, he calls on the
Maitravaruza to ‘Prompt (the Hotr?, &c.) by the season |’—and at
the four succeeding ones (after turning round the vessels so as to
put the other mouth in front) to ‘Prompt by the seasons!’ For the
last two libations they again reverse the vessels to the previous
position and call on him to ‘ Prompt by the season!’ The Maitra-
varuza’s formula runs thus: ‘ Let the Hot? pronounce the offering
prayer to Indral—From the Hotrz’s cup, from heaven to earth,
may he drink Soma together with the season (or, seasons)!
O Hotr7, pronounce the offering prayer!’ Whereupon the Hotr?
(Potrz, &c.) recites—‘We who worship,—From the Hotr?’s cup,
from heaven to earth, may he drink Soma together with the season
(or, seasons)! Vausha/!’ These formulas are slightly varied
according to the deity to whom the libation is offered, and the
priest who pronounces the offering praycr and Vausha/, The


320 SATAPATIIA-BRAIIMANA.


season’—thereby the gods created the day; and
four times with, ‘With the seasons’—thereby they
created the night. And, assuredly, were only this
much (used), there would be nothing but night: it
would never pass away.

11, Over and above they perform twice with the
formula ‘With the season ;’ thereby the gods subse-
quently gave the day (again), whence it is now day
here, then it will be night, and to-morrow day.

12. By ‘ With the season’ the gods forsooth created
the men, and by ‘ With the seasons’ the beasts ; and
because they created the beasts in the middle of those
(men), therefore these beasts (cattle), being shut in
on both sides, have come into the power of men.

13. And having performed six times with, ‘With
the season,’ they both turn round their vessels to the
other side; and having performed four times with,
‘With the seasons, they turn round their vessels to
the other side: from the one side (or mouth) indeed
the gods created the day, and from the other side
the night; from the one side the gods created men,
and from the other beasts.

14. Now he draws the cups (for the seasons)


deities and offering priests of the twelve libations are: 1. Indra—
the Hotr’; 2. the Maruts—the Potrz; 3. Tvash/r7 and the wives
of the gods—the Nesh/r7; 4. Agni—the Agnidhra ; 5. Indra-
Brahman—the Brahmanakhamsin; 6. Mitra-Varuza—the Maitr4-
varuza; 7-10. Deva Dravinodas—the Hotrv, Potrs, Neshérz, and
Akhavaka respectively; 11. the Asvins—the Hotr’; 12. Agni
Grchapati—the Hotrz. . For this last libation, the Maitravaruma in
the first place calls on the sacrificer with, ‘O lord of the house,
pronounce the offering prayer!’ and the sacrificer then again on the
Hotr? with, ‘O Hotr?, pronounce the offering prayer upon this!’
whereupon the Hotrz pronounces the (sacrificer’s) offering prayer.
Katy. IX, 13; Sankhdyana Sr. VII, 8; Haug, Transl. Ait. Br.
P- 135.


Iv KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 18. 321


therefrom’, with (Vag. S. VII, 30), ‘ Thou art
taken with a support: thee for Madhu!’ the
Adhvaryu takes (the first); with ‘Thou art taken
with a support: thee for Madhava!’ the Prati-
prasthatrz (the second). These two are the spring
(months?): because in spring plants sprout and trees
are brought to ripeness, therefore these two are
Madhu (sweet) and Madhava.

15. With ‘Thou art taken with a support:
thee for Sukra!’ the Adhvaryu draws (the third);
with ‘Thou art taken with a support: thee for
Sui!’ the Pratiprasthatvz (the fourth). These two
are the summer (months): because during them it
burns fiercest, therefore these two are Sukra (clear)
and Sui (bright).

16. With ‘Thou art taken with a support:
thee for Nabhas!’ the Adhvaryu draws (the fifth) ;
with ‘Thou art taken with a support: thee for
Nabhasya!’ the Pratiprasthatvz (the sixth). These
two are (the months) of the rainy season: it rains
from yonder sky, and hence these two are Nabhas
(mist, cloud) and Nabhasya.

17, With ‘Thou art taken with a support:
thee for Ish (sap)!’ the Adhvaryu draws (the
seventh); with ‘Thou art taken with a support:
thee for Urg (food)!’ the Pratiprasthatrz (the
eighth). These two are the autumn (months): be-
cause in autumn food (rg) and juice, (namely) plants,
ripen, therefore these two are Isha and Urga.

18. With ‘Thou art taken with a support:
thee for Sahas!’ the Adhvaryu draws (the ninth) ;
with ‘Thou art taken with a support: thee for


1 Viz. from the Dronakalasa trough; see paragraph 6,
2 The K4nva text adds r7tf in each case,
[26] Y


322 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

jul camille caeaaaecetacisacs tear ean etal tes
Sahasya!’ the Pratiprasthatvz (the tenth). These
two are the winter (months): because the winter
by force (sahas) brings these creatures into his
power, therefore these two are Saha and Sahasya.

19. With ‘ Thouart taken with a support: thee
for Tapas!’ the Adhvaryu draws (the eleventh) ;
with ‘Thou art taken with a support: thee for
Tapasya!’ the Pratiprasthatvz (the twelfth). These
two are (the months) of the dewy season: because
during them it freezes most severely, therefore these
two are Tapas and Tapasya.

20. With ‘Thou art taken with a support:
thee to Amhasaspati (lord of trouble)!’ he (the
Adhvaryu) draws the thirteenth libation, if he
draw a thirteenth. The Pratiprasthatvz then pours
his residue into the Adhvaryu’s vessel, or the
Adhvaryu pours his residue into the Pratiprasthatrz’s
vessel. He (the Adhvaryu) takes it (to the Sadas)
for the purpose of drinking it}.

21. Thereupon the Pratiprasthatyz draws the
Aindragna graha with the vessel not used for the
drinking. The reason why he draws the Aindragna
libation with the vessel not used for drinking is that


1 The Kanva text has ‘bhakshyam’ instead of ‘bhaksham.’
Each of the priests who have pronounced the offering prayer and
Vausha/ partakes of this Soma in his respective order,—the Hotr7
thus taking four draughts; and the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthatr7
(who, after drawing the Aindragna cup, join them in the Sadas)
drinking alternately from the same vessel with those Hotz?’ priests,
who pronounced the Vasha/ at their libations. As at the drawing
of the libations, the vessel is turned round after the sixth and tenth
offering priests have drank. The vessel having been emptied, the
Adhvaryu takes it outside the Sadas, and then sits down in front of
the Hotrv’s hearth, with his face to the east, till the recitation of the
Sastra (IV, 3, 2, 2).


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 25. 323


no second Vasha# is pronounced on the Aztugrahas,
and for them he is about to take the Aindragna
graha: thus they become consecrated for him by a
second Vasha/¢ through the Aindragna.

22. And again, why he draws the Aindragna graha.
By drawing the libations to the seasons he has gene-
rated this All, and having generated this All, he now
establishes it on the out-breathing and in-breathing :
hence this All is established on the out-breathing
and in-breathing, for Indra and Agni are the out-
breathing and in-breathing, and these two, heaven
and earth, are the out-breathing and in-breathing,
and within these two this All is established.

23. And again, why he draws the Aindragna cup.
By drawing the libations to the seasons he has gene-
rated this All, and having generated this All, he lays
the out-breathing and in-breathing into this All:
hence these two, the out-breathing and in-breathing,
are laid into (or beneficial, hita, in) this All.

24. He now draws it from that (drovakalasa
trough) with (Vag. S. VII, 3,1; Rig-veda II], 12, 1),
‘O Indra and Agni, through our songs come ye
hither to the Soma, to the agreeable fume:
drink thereof, urged by our hymn!—Thou art
taken with a support: thee toIndraand Agni!’
—with ‘This is thy womb: thee to Indraand
Agni!’ he deposits it (on the mound), for it is for
Indra and Agni that he draws it.

25. Thereupon he draws the Vaisvadeva cup’.


1 According to Katy. IX, 13, 33 seq. the order of performance is as
follows. In the first place the first Agya-sastra is recited. There-
upon the Adhvaryu fetches the Aindragna cup from the Havirdhana
(where it was deposited by the Pratiprasthatr’), makes a libation
from it—after calling on the Hotr/, as at all libations accompanied


Y2


324 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAN A.
a RNs. tr one RN RARE edo Tee RS Se


For by drawing the Aztugrahas he has generated
this All; but were there nothing but that, there would
indeed be only as many creatures as were created in
the beginning: no (more) would be generated.

26. Now, in that he draws the Vaisvadeva graha,
thereby he sends forth this All, these creatures in
due order: whence these creatures are generated
again repeatedly. He draws it with the Suéra cup,
for the Sura (bright) is yonder burning (sun), and


by a sastra, ‘Singer of praises, recite Soma’s offering prayer ;’ the
narasamsa cups being shaken by the cup-bearers at the same time
—and then drinks the remaining Soma with the Hotrz. There-
upon he draws the Vaisvadeva cup from the Dromakalasa, pours
the remaining juice from the latter into the Patabhr:t, and spreads
the straining-cloth over the empty vessels for the midday pressing.
He also prepares the Savanitya purodasas (see p. 315, note 4),
for the midday feast, omitting however the dish of clotted curds
(payasya). Then follows the chanting of the first Agya stotra by
the Udgatrzs, and the recitation of the Pratiga-sastra by the Hotrz,
after which takes place the Vaisvadeva libation (and emptying
of the cup) in the same way as with the Aindragna—the £amasas
being also drained of their contents by the respective priests.
Then follows the distribution—already referred to 1V, 2, 3, 11 seq.
—of the Soma in the Ukthya bowl into three parts for the three
Hotrakas, now about to recite their sastras (preceded by their respec-
tive stotras). The Adhvaryu takes one portion of the Soma, calls on
the Udgatr7s to chant the stotra, and afterwards on the Prasastr? (Mai-
trdvaruza) to recite his sastra; after which he makes a libation from
the portion of Soma, and pours the remainder into the Prasastrz’s
cup, to be drunk by that priest. In the same way the Pratipra-
stnatrz then proceeds with the portions of the two other Hotrakas,
viz. the Brahmanakhamsin and Akhavaka. Each time also the ten
kamasas are filled, and after libations therefrom, are emptied by
the Kamasins. See also p. 287, note 2. At the end of the per-
formance the priests pass silently out (nidsarp, see p. 299,
note 1) of the Sadas by the hack-door and out of the Vedi; the
midday performance afterwa:ds beginning with the pratisarpama,


or ‘creeping back’ to the Sadas, with homage to the dhishrya
hearths, &c.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, I. 325


what rays of his there are, they are the All-gods:
therefore he draws it with the Sukra cup.

27. He draws it from that (Soma in the Droma-
kalasa) with (Vag. S. VII, 33; Rig-veda I, 3, 7), ‘Ye
protectors and supporters of men, O All-gods,
come hither, ye givers, to the giver’s liquor!—
Thou art taken with a support: thee to the
All-gods!’ with ‘This is thy womb: thee to
the All-gods!’ he deposits it!, for it is for the All-
gods that he draws it.


SECOND BRAHMAMNA.


1. Now truly when the Hotz praises (recites the
sastra*), he sings, and to him thus singing the


? Viz. in the place of the Sukra cup, on the south-east corner of
the khara or mound.

2 Every chant or hymn (stotra) of the Udgajr7s is followed by a
‘song of praise’ (sastra) recited by the Hotr7 or one of his three
assistants (Maitravaruva, Brahmanakhamsin, and Afshavaka); the first
two sastras at each savana being recited by the Hotr?, and the three
additional ones at the morning and midday feast by his assistants
(Hotrakas). The exact correlation between the stotras and sastras
at the three savanas will appear from the following table :—


I. Prata4-savana.


1. Bahish-pavam4na-stotra. 1. Agya-sastra (Hotr?).
2. Agya-stotra 2. Praiiga-sastra (Hotr7).
3- ” 3: A
4. " dhuryas. 4: Agya-sastras (Hotrakas).
5: ” 5:
II. Madhyandina-savana.
6. Madhyandina-pavam 4na- 6. Marutvattya-sastra (Hotr7).
stotra.


4. Prish/ha-stotra ». Nishkevalya-sastra (Hotr7).
st 4: dhuryas y 54 4

9. Fo ide 9s » ? (Hotrakas).
° °.


”? ”


” ”


I


”


326 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


nnn EE


Adhvaryu responds (prati-d-gar), whence the name
response (pratigara).

2. [The Hot77] calls upon that (Adhvaryu) seated
(before him) with his face towards the east’. For all


III. Tritiya-savana.
11. Arbhava (or Tritiya)-pava- 11. Vaisvadeva-sastra (Hotr7).
m 4na.
12. Agnishfoma-sdman (Yagiia- 12. Agnim4ruta-sastra (Hotr7).
yagitiya).
These are the twelve stotras and sastras of the Agnish/oma. At
the Ukthya sacrifice, the performance of the evening feast is
completed by the addition of three uktha stotras and sastras, one
for each Hotraka.

1 While the Adhvaryu sits before the Sadas, with his back to the
Hotrz (p. 322, note 1), the latter performs the (tQshzim-) gapa—
i.e. the muttering of the formula ‘May Father Matarisvan grant
flawless (verse-) feet! may the bards sing flawless hymns!’ &c.
Ait. Br. II, 38; Asv. Sr. V, 9, 1—after which he addresses to the
Adhvaryu his call (ahava), ‘sdms4vdm (let us two recite, Om)!’
—which formula is used at all sastras, except that, at the midday
and evening libations, it is preceded by ‘ Adhvaryo’ (O Adhvaryu) ;
while at the evening savana the first syllable of the verb is repeated,
thus ‘ sosomsavo.—The Adhvaryu rises, turns round so as to face
the Hotrz, and responds by ‘ somsamo daiva (we recite, O divine
one)!’ According to Ait. Br. III, 12, the Ahava and Pratigara
together are to consist of the number of syllables corresponding
to the metre of the respective libation, viz. 8, 11, 12 respectively.
Then follows the Hotrz’s Tfishnim-samsa or ‘silent praise ;’ viz.
‘Earth! Agni is the light, the light is Agni, Om !—Indra is the
light, Ether! the light is Indra, Om! Sfirya is the light, the
light, Heaven! is Surya, Om!’—This is followed ‘by a Purorué,
or preliminary invocation of a deity, recited in a loud voice,
and consisting of twelve short formulas resembling the Nivid
(part i, p. 114, note 2; ib. I, 4, 2, 5 seq.), which, indeed, takes its
place in the sastras of the midday and evening libations, being
inserted in the middle or before the last verse of the hymn of the
sastra; viz. ‘Agni kindled by the gods, Agni kindled by man,
Agni the we'l-kindling, the Hoty? chosen by the gods, the Hotr/
chosen by men, the carrier of offerings, the leader of sacrifices, the
irresistible Hotrz, the swift carrier of oblations: may he, the god,


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 3. 327


others except the Udgatr7 perform their priestly
duties while facing the east, and in this manner that
priestly duty of his is performed towards the east.

3. Now the Udgatr7 is Pragdpati, and the Hot,
(being) the Azk (fem.), is a female. And when he
chants, then the Udgatrz, Pragdpati, implants seed
in the female Hotrz, the Rzk; this the Hotv7 brings
forth by means of the sastra (recitation), he sharpens


bring hither the gods! may Agni, the god, worship the gods!
may (Agni), the knower of beings, perform the sacrificial rites!’
(Ait. Br. II, 34.) Then follows the hymn, the Agya-s(kta, the
chief part of the sastra, viz. Rig-veda III, 13, ‘To him, your
god Agni, will I sing with loudest voice; may he come hither to
us with the gods; may he, the best offerer, sit down on our sacred
grass!’ &c.; the seven (anush/ubh) verses of which are recited in the
order 1, 5, 4, 6, 3, 2, 7. The first and last verses being, however,
repeated thrice, the number is thus raised toeleven. The recitation
of the hymn is followed by the so-called ukthavirya (‘the strength
of the praise’), consisting of the formula uktham va4i, ‘ praise
hath been sung,’ with some words added to it differing at different
sastras,—at the present sastra ‘ghoshaya tva,’ ‘thee (I have recited)
for sound (praise)!’ [for school-differences as to these formulas,
see Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 177],—to which the Adhvaryu responds,
Om ukthas4A, ‘yéa, singer of praise!’ The Ukthavirya, together
with the response, is again to consist of as many syllables as the
characteristic metre of the respective libation. Then follows the
recitation, by the Agnidhra (Ait. Br. VI, 14), of the yagy4 or offering
prayer, viz. Rig-veda III, 25, 4.—As regards the term ‘agya,’ the
Paws. Br. VII, 2, 1, 2, derives it from agi, a race, in accordance with
the following legend: When Pragapati offered himself as a sacrifice
to the gods, the latter could not agree as to which of them should
have the first share. Pragdpati then proposed that they should
run arace for it. In this race Agni came off first, then Mitra-
varuna, then Indra. To each of these three divinities an agya
was thereupon assigned; and, by a secret understanding between
Indra and Agni, these two divided the fourth agya between them.
Hence the Agneya, maitravaruna, aindra, and aindragna sastra (and
stotra), belonging to the Hotr/, Maitravaruna, BrahmandkAamsin,


and AsAavaka priests respectively.


328 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


it even as this man is sharpened’, and because he
thereby sharpens (so) therefore it is called sastra.

4. Having turned round (so as to face the Hotvz,
the Adhvaryu) then responds : thereby he quickens *
that implanted seed. On the other hand, were he
to respond while standing with his face turned away
(from the Hotv7), that impianted seed would assuredly
perish away, and would not be brought forth; but thus
facing each other (the male and female) bring forth
the implanted seed.

5. Now the strength of the metres was exhausted
by the gods, for it was by the metres that the gods
attained the world of heaven. And the response
(song) is ecstasy (mada *)—what ecstasy there is in
the 724 and that which there is in the SAman, that is
sap: this sap he now lays into the metres, and thus
makes the metres of restored strength; and with
them of restored strength they perform the sacrifice.

6. Hence if (the Hotvz) recites by half-verses, let
(the Adhvaryu) respond at each half-verse ; and if he
recites by pddas (hemistichs), let him respond at
each pada. For whenever, in reciting, he (the
Hotz) draws breath, there the Asura-Rakshas
rush into the sacrifice: there he (the Adhvaryu)
closes it up by means of the response, so that the
evil spirits, the Rakshas, cannot rush in; and thus he
destroys the world of the sacrificer’s enemies.


1 That is, fashions him, or makes him slender. A fanciful
derivation of sastra (sams, to recite, praise, cf. carmen), from the
root s4 (so), to sharpen (? or from sas, to cut, carve). ‘Yathayam
purovarti purushas tikshzakritah, avaya(va)vibhagena spash/ikrztas
tatha sastrenaitad retahk syati spash/am karoti,’ Say.

* Upanimadati, ‘ cheers ;’ the Kazva text (W.) has ‘ upanivadati.’

* Or, intoxication, intoxicating drink. See paragraph ro, and
Pp. 330, note 1.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 10. 329


7. Now, in the beginning the metres consisted
of four syllables. Then Gagatt flew up for Soma
and came back, leaving behind three syllables. Then
Trishéubh flew up for Soma and came back, leaving
behind one syllable. Then Gayatri flew up for
Soma, and she came back bringing with her those
syllables as well as Soma. Thus she came to consist
of eight syllables: wherefore they say, ‘ Gayatri. is
octosyllabic.’

8. With her they performed the morning feast of
' the Soma-sacrifice.—whence the morning feast per-
tains to Gayatri. With her they performed the
midday feast. Trish‘ubh then said to her, ‘To thee
will I come with three syllables: invite me, and
exclude me not from the sacrifice !’—‘ So be it!’ she
said and invited her. Thus the Trish¢ubh came to
consist of eleven syllables, and therefore they say,
‘The midday Soma feast pertains to Trish¢ubh.’

9. With her (Gayatri) indeed they performed the
evening feast. Gagati then said to her, ‘To thee
will I come with one syllable : invite me, and exclude
me not from the sacrifice !'"—‘ So be it!’ she said and
invited her. Thus the Gagati came to consist of
twelve syllables; and therefore they say, ‘The even-
ing Soma feast pertains to Gagatt.’

10. As to this they say, ‘Surely all the Soma
feasts pertain to G4yatri, since Gayatri alone went
on increasing. At the morning feast he should
therefore respond with a complete (formula), for
complete! GAyatri returned. At the midday feast


1 Or perhaps, successful, samsiddha [svaktyany aksharazy apari-
tyagyavikrita (?avikritta), Say.]. The response (pratigara) here
alluded to, is probably the one ordinarily used by the Adhvaryu,
whenever the Hotrs' pauses in his recitation, at the end of half-


330 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


(he responds with a formula) containing once (the
verb) ‘to rejoice (mad)?,’ for she (Trish¢ubh) came
back, leaving one syllable behind; and with that
same (formula) he then completes her, makes her
whole,—

11. When trishéubh verses were recited. At the
evening Soma feast (the Adhvaryu responds with a
formula) containing thrice (the verb) ‘to rejoice’,
for she (Gagatt) came back leaving three syllables
behind; and with these (formulas) he then completes
her, makes her whole,—

12, When (the hymn) to Heaven and Earth is
recited, Now these creatures subsist on those two,


verses (or padas), nivids, &c., viz. ‘Othamo daiva,’—or, Oth4vo
daivom, whenever the Hotrz puts in the sacred syllable ‘om.’
‘Tasmat karanadd gayatra-pratahsavane samsiddham avikritam vi-
dhasyamanam omantam prati-grzhaiyat,’ Say. For the Adhvaryu’s
response, ‘ samsamo daiva,’ to the Hotrz’s summons (ahava), see
p. 326, note 1.

+ When the first verse of the trish¢ubh hymn, Rig-veda X, 73, is
recited by the Hotrz in the Marutvattya Sastra at the midday feast,
the Adhvaryu’s response is ‘madd4mo daiva’ (we rejoice, O divine
one). Katy. X, 3, 8; cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, p. 37.

* According to Katy. X, 6, 6 ‘madamo daiva’ is optionally the
Adhvaryu’s response at the recitation in the Agnimarutra Sastra of
three of the so-called Anupantya (or Svadushkiliya) trish/ubh verses
VI, 47, 1-4 (see note on IV, 4, 2, 18). Possibly the present paragraph
may refer to those verses, in which case the words ‘ when trishfubh
verses are recited’ would begin a fresh paragraph. Sayama, how-
ever, seems to take it in the same way as above; cf. also the
Kazva reading in next note.

* This is the (Gagatl) hymn I, 159 recited in the Vaisvadeva
Sastra. According to Katy. X, 6, 5, the response is to be thrice
(after each of the three first verses) ‘madamo daiva.’ The Kanva
has for paragraphs ro-12, ‘At the morning feast he responds by
a complete (formula), for complete Gayatri returned. At the
midday feast he responds once with one containing “ mad,” when he


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I. 331


the heaven and the earth—he thereby imbues those
two, heaven and earth, with vigour; and upon those
two, thus vigorous and affording the means of sub-
sistence, these creatures subsist. Let him respond
with ‘Om!’ only, for that is truth, that the gods
know.

13. Now some respond with ‘ Oth4mo daiva vak,
saying, ‘The response is speech (v4k): thus we
obtain speech.’ But let him not do this; for surely,
in whichsoever way he may respond, speech is
obtained by him, since he responds by speech. Let
him therefore respond with ‘Om!'!’ only, for that is
truth, that the gods know.


Turrp BRAHMANA.
C. Tue MaApnyanpina Savana, or Mippay Soma Frast.


1. He presses out (the Soma-juice) with ‘Tha!
Tha?!’ (hither), whereby he draws Indra nigh; and


recites trish/ubh verses, for she (Trish/ubh) returned leaving one syl-
lable behind: hereby now he completes her, makes her whole. At
the evening feast with something containing thrice ‘‘ mad,” for she
(Gagatt) returned leaving three syllables behind: hereby now he
completes her, makes her whole. At the (hymn) to Heaven and
Earth he responds with one that contains “ mad;” when he recites
(the hymn) Heaven and Earth—these creatures subsisting on those
two, Heaven and Earth—he thereby puts juice into them, and
upon those two, thus rendered juiceful, these creatures subsist.
He responds with “Om,” for that is truth, that the gods know.’

1 That is, instead of ‘vak,’ hence ‘Othamo daivom.’ ‘Om’
pure and simple is the response at the end of the sastra.

2 ‘Tha’ (here, hither) with the last syllable protracted. The
Hotr?’s cup with the Nigrébhy4 (vasativari) water having been
handed to the sacrificer, and the fillet or band (ushzisha) with
which the Soma-plants are tied together, to the Gravastut, the
pressing is performed in the same way as the ‘great pressing, at


332 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


with ‘Brzhat! Brzhat!’ (great), whereby he draws


Indra? nigh.
2. The Sukra and Manthin grahas he draws


first, for thereby the Soma feast comes to be supplied
with pure Soma (sukra). Thereupon the Agrayana,
for that (cup) is drawn at all (three) feasts. Then
the Marutvattya cup; then the Ukthya, for here
also there are songs of praise (Uktha)

3. Now some draw the Marutvatiya after they
have drawn the Ukthya; but let him not do this,—
let him rather draw the Ukthya after he has drawn
the Marutvattya.


the Pratahsavana (see p. 256, note 1). Meanwhile the Gravastut
takes the band, and winds it thrice round his head and face from
left to right. And whenever Soma-stalks are taken out for pressing
he rite the stones by chanting the Grava-stotra or ‘praise of the
stones. According to Asv. Sr. V,12; Ait. Br. VI, 4, 2, this chant
consists of the verses Rig-veda I, 24, 3; V, 81,1; VIII, 81,1;
VIII, 1, 1, followed by the hymn X, 94, ascribed to the hereon
Rishi Arbuda. Before the last verse of this hymn he inserts the
hymns X, 76 and X,175 (ascribed to the serpents Garatkarma and
Arbuda respectively) ; and either before, or between, or after these
two hymns he throws in the pavamanif (Rig-veda IX) according
to requirement, till the pressing is completed, or the libations are
to be drawn, when having wound up with the last verse of the
first Arbuda hymn, he makes over the band to the sacrificer.
The five cups mentioned in paragraph 2 are filled from the stream
of Soma flowing from the Hotrz’s cup into the Drozakalasa ;
the Agrayama (p. 290, note 2) however being taken (in the futie
yama sthali or bowl) from that and two other streams, poured
by the Unnetr? from the Adhavantya, and by the Pratiprasthatr?
from some vessel containing the Soma previously kept in the
Agrayana sthalt.

* Probably on account of the connection of the Brzhat-siman
with Indra; see part i, p. 196, note 2.


* See p. 294, note 2. Sdyana here curiously explains the term by
‘ stotrani.’


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, + 333


4. These, then, are five grahas he draws ; for that
midday Pavamana chant is a thunderbolt ; hence it
is a fifteenfold five-hymned chant, for the thunder-
bolt is fifteenfold?. He is so by means of these
five grahas (cups of Soma’): for five are these
fingers, and with the fingers he hurls (the thunder-
bolt).

5. Indra hurled the thunderbolt at Vyvztra; and
having smitten Vvztra, the wicked, and safety and
peace being secured‘, he led forth the dakshizds
(gifts to priests). Wherefore now also, when they
(the Udgatr7zs) chant the midday Pavamana, and
safety and peace are secured, the dakshizds are
led forth. And so, forsooth, does he now by means
of those five cups of Soma hurl the thunderbolt
at the wicked, hateful enemy, and having smitten
Vrztra, the wicked, and safety and peace being


1 The Madhyandina-pavamana-stotra, Samav. II, 22-29,
is made up of three hymns (sfikta), consisting of three gayatri
(22-24), two brzhati (and satobrzhati, 25, 26), and three trish/ubh
verses (27-29) respectively. These are chanted in such a way as
to produce five Saman hymns (i.e. a hymn of three verses), viz.
the gayatr? triplet is chanted twice, in the Gayatra and Amahiyava
tunes ;—the brzhati-satobrzhatti couplet is likewise chanted twice, in
the Raurava and Yaudhagaya tunes, the two verses being as usual
(by the repetition of certain padas) made into three. These, with
the addition of the trish¢ubh hymn, chanted in the Ausana tune,
make five Siman hymns of three verses each, or altogether fifteen
verses (pavikadasastoma).

? Or consists of the fifteenfold (chant), as Sayama takes it.
Regarding the connection between the pafidadasa-stoma (the
characteristic stoma of the midday pressing) and Indra (the deity of
the midday pressing), see part i, introd. p. xviil.

$ Perhaps ‘graha’ has here a double meaning, viz. ‘that which is
taken, a draught, cup of Soma,’ and ‘the taker, se zer.’

* See p. 289, note 4.


334 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


SE sno alla
secured, he leads forth the dakshivds. This is why
he draws those five cups.

6. Then as to why he draws the Marutvatiya
cups. Now this, the midday pressing feast, is
Indra’s special (nishkevalya) feast: thereby he
strove to smite Vvztra, thereby he strove to van-
quish him. But the Maruts, having on that
account! withdrawn, were standing on an Asvattha
tree? (Ficus Religiosa). Now Indra is the nobility,
and the Maruts are the people, and through the people
the noble becomes strong: therefore the two A7ztu
cups (they say)* may be of asvattha wood ; but in
reality they are of karshmarya wood.

7. Indra called on them, saying, ‘Do ye join me
that with you as my force I may smite Vvztra!’
They said, ‘What will be our (reward) then?’ He
drew those two Marutvatiya cups for them.

8. They said, ‘Having put aside this one (cup)
for our vigour, we will join thee. Having accord-
ingly put it aside for their vigour‘, they joined him.
But Indra sought to obtain it, thinking, ‘ They have
come to me after putting aside their vigour.’


1 Lit. ‘thus ;’ ‘itisabdenapakramamaprak4ro ’bhinayena pradar-
syate, Say.

* This passage would seem to be based on a mistaken interpre-
tation of Rig-veda I, 135, 8, where the bard says that ‘ the victorious
(gayavah) have come nigh to the asvattha,’ the ‘gdyavah’ here evi-
dently referring (not to the Maruts, as in I, 119, 3), but to the
powerful draughts of Soma flowing into the asvattha vessel. The


Kanva text reads, Sa (i.e. vis, the people or Maruts) hasvatthe
tish/Aate.


’ The Kanva text inserts ‘ityahud.’
‘ The context seems to be purposely ambiguous, as it may also
be construed thus: They said, ‘ After putting aside this (cup), we


will come (attain) to strength.’ Having accordingly put it aside,
they came to strength,


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 12. 335


9. He said, ‘Do ye join me with vigour!’—
‘Then draw a third cup for us,’ they said. He
drew a third cup for them, with, ‘Thou art taken
with a support,—thee for the vigour of the Maruts!’
They then joined him with vigour,—and he con-
quered with them, and smote Vvztra with them ;—
for Indra is the nobility, and the Maruts are the
people, and through the people the noble becomes
strong. Hence he now bestows that strength on
the nobility, and therefore he draws the Marutvatiya
cups. .

10. Let him draw them for Indra Marutvat
(accompanied by the Maruts), and not for the
Maruts likewise. For were he also to draw cups
for the Maruts, he would make the people re-
fractory to the nobility. He thus assigns to the
Maruts a share therein after Indra, whereby he
makes the people subservient and obedient to the
nobility: therefore let him draw the cups for Indra
Marutvat, and not for the Maruts likewise.

11. But he was afraid of their desertion,—‘ Lest
they should desert me, lest they should take to
some other (party)',’ so thinking, he by that (share
in the libation) made them unwilling to desert him.
This is why he should draw the grahas for Indra
Marutvat.

12. He draws them with the two vessels of the
seasons, for the year, the sacrifice, means the sea-
sons. There, at the morning Soma feast, they are
overtly attended to, in that he draws the grahas for
the seasons?; and now they are covertly attended


Sc ee


1 For the construction, see p. 33, note I.
2 See IV, 3, 1, 3 seq.


336 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

i i sh ati ie I
to, in that he draws the Marutvatiya grahas with
the two vessels of the seasons.

3. He draws (the first) from that (stream of
Soma)!, with (Vag. S. VII, 35; Rig-veda III, 51, 7);
‘O Indra, leader of the Maruts, drink thou the
Soma here, as thou drankest of the liquor
at (the sacrifice of) the Son of Sary4ti: by thy
guidance, in thy protection, O Lord, do the
wise serve thee with good offerings!—Thou
art taken with a support: thee to Indra
Marutvat!—This is thy womb: thee to Indra
Marutvat!’

14. [The second he draws? with Vag. S. VII, 36;


1: See p. 331, note 2.

2 Here the author again anticipates, important parts of the per-
formance being not even referred to. On the present occasion
only one Marutvattya cup is drawn and deposited on the mound
(khara). The Ukthya cup having then been drawn and deposited,
the priests leave the Havirdhana in the same way as at the morning
performance (see IV, 2, 5, r, with note), and perform the Viprud-
homas, or drop-offerings. ‘Thereupon the priests ‘creep’ (sarp),
with their upper bodies bent parallel to the ground, to the Sadas,
where, near the Udumbara post, the chanting of the midday
Pavamana-stotra now takes place after the necessary pre-
liminaries. If the Pravargya has been performed on the pre-
ceding day (see III, 4, 4, 1, with note), the Dadhi-gharma, or
libation of hot milk mixed with sour milk, is now made. Then
follow the oblations from the Savaniya-purodasa (see IV, 2, 5,
15 seq., and p. 323, note 1). Thereupon filling of the cups of the
ten Kamasins, and the libations from (and drinking of) the Sukra
and Manthin cups. After the eating of the Ida of the purodasas,
the Dakshiza-homas and distribution of the sacrificial fees take
place, as set forth in the next Brahmaza. Thereupon the Adhvaryu
calls on the Maitravaruza to pronounce the invitatory prayer to
Indra Marutvat (viz. Rig-veda III, 51, 7), ‘O Indra, attended by the
Maruts, here drink the Soma,’ &c., followed by the order (praisha),
‘Let the Hotv# pronounce the offering prayer to Indra Marutvat |’


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I4. 337


Rig-veda III, 47, 5], ‘The mighty bull, followed
by the Maruts, the bountiful, divine ruler
Indra,—him, the all-subduing, the terrible
bestower of victory, do we now invoke for
new favour.—Thou art taken with a support:
thee to Indra Marutvat!—This is thy womb:
thee to Indra Marutvat!’—with ‘Thou art


The Pratiprasthatr: now draws a second Marutvattya cup in the
other Aztu-patra. The offering prayer (Rig-veda III, 47, 2,
‘United with the host of Maruts, O Indra, drink the Soma,
O wise hero!’ &c.) having meanwhile been pronounced by the
Hotr7, the Adhvaryu makes libations from the first cup at the
Vasha¢ and Anuvasha/. Then pouring the remains of the juice
into some other vessel, to be taken to the Sadas, he enters the
Havirdhana and draws the third Marutvatiya graha with the cup
just emptied. Having deposited it, he betakes himself to. the
Sadas to drink with the Hotrz the remains of the first libation.
Thereupon the Hotz? recites the Marutvatiya Sastra.

The Marutvatiya Sastra consists of the following parts.
After the summons (4h4va) to the Adhvaryu, and the response
(pratigara) of the latter, the Hotr#' intones the

Pratipad (opening triplet), Rig-veda VIII, 57, 1-3, followed by
the Anufara (sequel), VIII, 2, 1-3.

Then the Indranihava pragatha (VIII, 53, 5) and the Brah-
manaspatya pragatha (I, 40, 5).

Then follow the three Dh4yy4s (complementary verses), III,
20,4; I, 91,2; 1,64, 6; and the Marutvatiya pragatha, VIII,
89, 3, succeeded by the hymn X, 73, the chief part of the Sastra,
in the middle of which (after the sixth verse), the Nivid (‘Let us
sing, Om! may Indra with the Maruts drink of the Soma,’ &c.) is
inserted.

Having recited the last verse (paridhaniya or closing verse) of
the hymn, he concludes the Sastra by the Ukthavirya, ‘ Praise has
been sung to Indra who hears thee!’ Thereupon the offering
prayer III, 47, 4 is pronounced, and libations are made, both at the
Vasha/ and Anuvasha/, by the Adhvaryu from the third, and after
him each time, by the Pratiprasth4trs from the second graha.

The priests having drank in the Sadas the Soma remaining
from the grahas and in the #amasas, the Mahendra cup is
drawn.


(26] f


338 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


taken with a support: thee for the strength
of the Maruts!’ he draws the third cup.

15. Thereupon he draws the M4hendracup. For
Indra was then bound up with evil, in the shape
of the people, the Maruts; as one might, for the
sake of victory, eat from the same vessel with the
people!, so it was when they drew a cup for him in
common with the Maruts.

16. When all was conquered and free from danger
and injury, the gods plucked him from out of all
evil—even as one might pluck out a reed from its
sheath— when they drew the cup for the Great
Indra. And evenas the reed becomes leafless, so is
he thereby freed from all evil, when one draws the
Mahendra cup.

17. And again, why he draws the Mahendra cup.
Before the slaughter of Vvztra, he was indeed Indra ;
but when he had slain Vvztra, he became the Great
Indra, even as one who has conquered all around,
becomes a Great King (mahdraga): therefore he
draws the Mahendra cup. And, moreover, he for-
sooth makes him great for the slaughter of V7ttra:
therefore also he draws the Mahendra cup. He
draws it in the Sukra vessel, for bright (sukra) and
great indeed is he (the sun) that burns yonder:
therefore he draws it in the Sukra vessel.

18. He thus draws it from that (Drozakalasa or
Patabhzzt), with (Vag. S. VII, 39; Rig-veda VI, 109,
i), ‘Great is Indra and hero-like, gladdening
the peorle, of double stature and unimpaired
in power. For our sake he waxed strong for
heroic deed—great and broad was he, and


* That is, as a chief, or lord, might do so with a clansman (vais-
yena, Kazva text); or as the master of a house with his servants.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 19. 339


well-shapen by the shapers'—Thou art taken
with a support: thee to Mahendra!’—with
‘This is thy womb: thee to Mahendra!’ he


deposits it; for it is indeed for the Great Indra that
he draws it.


19. And having bespoken (the chant*), he says
this speech,—‘ Pressers, press ye! make the mortars


1 Or, according to Ludwig, ‘rendered favourable by the per-
formers (priests).’

* That is, the (first) P7sh/Aa-stotra, consisting of the Rathan-
tara-siman, Sémav. II, 30-31. For the way in which the two
verses are manipulated (by repetition of the last pada of the
first, and of the second pada of the second verse), so as to yield
a three-versed choral, see Haug, Ait. Br. II, p. 198; Weber, Ind.
Stud. VIII, p. 25. These chants derive their name from the circum-
stance that the Sdmans employed in them are capable of being
used as ‘prish/has,’ that is, of being chanted twice with another
S4man inserted between them,—or, to speak symbolically, to
serve as the womb for the reception of an embryo. For this pur-
pose the Rathantara and Brshat Samans are thiefly used. See
note on IV, 5, 4,13. Whenever the Prish//as are chanted in this way
(which they are not at the ordinary Agnish/oma), it is chiefly at this
very place in the Soma performance, at the midday libation. The
chant is succeeded by the recitation, by the Hotr?, of the Nishke-
valya Sastra, consisting of the following parts. The Ahava
(and pratigara) is followed by the Stotriya (Rig-veda VII, 32,
22-23, identical with the Rathantara) and Anurfpa (VIII, 3,
7-8) pragathas; then a dhayyd, X, 74,6; the Sama-pragatha,
VIII, 3, 1, and the hymn (to Indra) I, 32, with the Nivid
inserted in the middle (after the eighth verse). Finally the Hotr?
pronounces the Ukthavirya, and the offering prayer, VII, 22, 1,
after which the Mahendra libation is poured into the fire.

Then follows the distribution of the Ukthya graha among the
three assistants of the Hotr/, and the recitation of their (nishkevalya)
sastras—each preceded by a PrishéAa-stotra (Samay. II, 32-34
(chanted to the Vamadevya-siman) ; 35-36 (Naudhasa); 37-38
(Kaleya) respectively]—as at the conclusion of the morning per-
formance; seep. 295, note 2. Thereupon he addresses the above
summons to the respective priests, for the preparations necessary
for the evening pressing.

22


340 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

pt 3 ein ann beanie Stic tes acest cate ME deacon! ae MIS TIE
resound! Agntdh, stir the sour milk! be thou mind-
ful of Soma’s (pap)!’ It is for the evening's press-
feast that those pressers press out (the Soma-juice),
for the evening feast they make the mortars resound,
for the evening feast the Agnidh stirs the sour milk,
for the evening feast he boils the pap for Soma. For
these two press-feasts, the morning feast and the
midday feast, are indeed rich in pure Soma, are rich
in juice; but that third press-feast is emptied of
the pure Soma. Hence he forms it from out of this
midday feast; and thus that third press-feast be-
comes for him rich in pure Soma, rich in juice:
this is why he now speaks that speech.


FourtH BRAHMANA.


1. Now, they slay the sacrifice, when they spread
(perform) it :—to wit, when they press out the king
(Soma), they slay him; when they quiet the victim,
they slay it; and with mortar and pestle, with the
upper and nether millstone, they slay the havis
offering.

2. When slain, that sacrifice was no longer vigor-
ous. By means of dakshiz4s (gifts to the priests)
the gods invigorated it: hence the name dakshizé,
because thereby they invigorated (dakshay) it. What-
ever, therefore, fails in this sacrifice, when slain, that
he now invigorates by means of gifts to the priests ;
then the sacrifice becomes indeed successful: for
this reason he makes gifts to the priests.

3. Now at the Haviryag#a, indeed, they give as
little as six or twelve (cows!), but no Soma-sacrifice
should have dakshiz4s of less than a hundred. For


1 See II, 2, 2, 3-5.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 6. 341


he, Pragdpati!, forsooth, is the visible sacrifice; and
man is nearest to Pragdpati, and he has a life of a
hundred years, a hundred powers, a hundred energies.
Only by a hundred he invigorates him, and not by
less than a hundred: wherefore no Soma-sacrifice
should have dakshizdAs of less than a hundred; nor
should any one officiate as a priest for a sacrificer
at a (Soma-sacrifice) where less than a hundred are
given,—‘lest he should be an eyewitness when they
will but slay and not invigorate him (Soma).’

4. Now, truly, there are two kinds of gods; for
the gods, forsooth, are the gods; and the learned
Brahmans versed in sacred lore are the human gods.
And the sacrifice to them is twofold, oblations (being
the sacrifice) to the gods, and gifts to the priests
being that to the human gods, to the learned Brah-
mans versed in sacred lore. With oblations, forsooth,
one gratifies the gods, and with gifts to the priests
the human gods, the learned Brahmans versed in
sacred lore. These two kinds of gods, when grati-
fied, convey him to the heavenly world.

5. But it is to the officiating priests, forsooth, that
these gifts of his belong, for they prepare him an-
other self—to wit, this sacrifice, consisting of Rzé
and Yagus and S4man and oblations,—that becomes
his self in yonder world: ‘It is they that have
generated me,’ from this (consideration) he should
give the gifts to officiating priests and not to non-
officiating.

6. Having gone back to the Garhapatya fire’, he


1 ‘For he, Soma, doubtless is the visible PragApati (pratyaksham
pragfpatih).’ Kanva text.

? That is, the fire at the front door of the hall (the old Ahava-
niya fire). Each priest has to perform two such dakshina-homas


342 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ene nn ET


offers the gift offerings. Having tied a piece of gold
in a fringed cloth’, and laid it (into the spoon), he
offers. ‘May there be a place for me in the world
of the gods!’ With this hope he offers whoever offers:
that same sacrifice of his goes to the world of the
gods; and behind it goes the gift he gives to the
priests, and holding on to the gift follows the
sacrificer.

7. Now, there are four (kinds of) gifts to priests,—
gold, the cow, cloth, and the horse. But it is not
proper that he should lay a horse’s foot or a cow's
foot (into the spoon): hence he ties up a piece of
gold in a fringed cloth, and having laid it (into the
spoon) he offers.

8. He offers with two verses to the Sun. For
yonder world is shut off by darkness; and dispelling
the darkness by that light he reaches the heavenly
world: therefore he offers with two verses to the Sun.

9. He offers with this gAyatrt verse (V4g. S. VII,
41; Rig-veda I, 50, 1), ‘The lights bear on high
that divine knower of beings, Sarya, that all
may see him,—Hail!’—for the gayatrt is this
earth, and she is a safe resting-place: hence he
thereby stands firmly on this safe resting-place.

10. He then makes the second offering with this
trish¢ubh verse (V4g. S. VII, 42; Rig-veda I, 115, 1),
‘The brilliant front? of the gods hath risen,


of ghee. For the Hotrz’s formulas, see Asv. Sr. V, 13, 44.2 For
the proper place of these offerings in the performance, see p. 336,
note 2.

? Or rather, in a cloth such as is used at a dasahoma, or obla-
tion at which the fringe (or unwoven end) of a cloth is used
(dasahomfya).

* That is, either ‘face’ or ‘ van-guard,’ antka.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 14. 343


the eye of Mitra, Varuza,and Agni: Sdrya, the
soul of the movable and immovable, hath
filled the heaven and the earth and the air,—
Hail!’ whereby he approaches the world (of the
gods).

11. He then makes either one or two oblations on
the Agntdhra (fire). The reason why he makes one or
two oblations on the Agnidhra fire is that Agni rules
over beasts (cattle)', and they lie round about him on
every side: it is him he pleases by this oblation, and
thus pleased he is gracious unto this (sacrificer), and
the latter offers (to the priests a cow) graciously
given up by him (Agni).

12. He offers with (Vag. S. VII, 43; Rig-veda I,
189, 1), ‘O Agni, lead us on a good path unto
wealth; thou, O god, that knowest all works!
keep thou from us the sin that leadeth astray,
and we will offer unto thee most ample adora-
tion,—‘ Hail!’ Thereupon, if he intends to give
away a horse, harnessed or unharnessed, let him
make a second oblation; but if not, he need not
attend to this.

13. He offers with (Vag. S. VII, 44), ‘May this
Agni make wide room for us: may he march in
front smiting the haters! May he gain riches
in the winning of riches: may he, fiercely
rushing, conquer the enemies! Hail!” for the
horse is a winner of riches (spoils, prizes).

14. Thereupon, taking some gold, (the sacrificer)


1 For this usurpation, on the part of Agni, of one of Rudra’s
functions, Sayama refers to a legend in the Taittirlyaka (Taitt. S. I,
5,1), where Agni is identified with Rudra, Agni being so called
because he roared (rud). See also Sat. Br. I, 7, 3, 8.


344 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


goes to the hall. South of the altar stand the
Dakshiv4 (cows). Standing in front of the hall, he
respectfully addresses them ' with (Vag. S. VII, 45),
‘By your beauty have I come to beauty.’
Now at first cattle did not submit to being
given away. Laying aside their own beauteous
forms? they approached with their (bare) bodies.
The gods then went up to them from the offering
ground with their (the animals’) own forms; and
they, knowing their own forms, resigned them-
selves and became well-disposed to being given
away. And in like manner does he now go up to
them from the offering ground with their own
forms; and they, knowing their own forms, resign
themselves and become well-disposed to being given
away.

15. ‘May the all-knowing Tutha distribute
you!’—Now, Tutha is the Brahman: he thus dis-
tributes them by means of the Brahman. And the
Brahman knows who is fit to receive a dakshiza and
who is unfit: thus these (cows) of his are given away
only to him who is fit to receive a dakshiv4 and not
to him who is unfit.

16. ‘Go ye forward in the way of truth, —for
whosoever walks in the way of the gods, walks in
the way of truth ;—‘ ye of shining (4andra) gifts!’
whereby they walk with that light (4andra, the
moon).


? The cows are driven past him along the back of the altar,
between the hall and Sadas, and then along the north side of the
altar, south of the Agnidhra and between the pit (4atv4la) and heap
of rubbish (utkara), the sacrificer following them as far as the
Agnidhra. At the same time the Subrahmanya litany (see III, 3,
4, 17 seq.) may be recited.

* Sayana explains ‘ rfipani’ by ‘ samarthy4ni,’ capabilities, powers.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 20. 345


17. He then goes to the Sadas, saying, ‘Behold
thou the heaven, behold the air!’ whereby he
means to say, ‘ May I through thee, the dakshiwA, see
the (heavenly) world.’

18. Thereupon he looks on the Sadas, with,
‘Unite with the Sadas-priests!’ whereby he
means to say, ‘ May the Sadas-priests not go beyond
thee!’

19. He then takes the gold and goes up to the
Agntdhra (fire- -house), saying (V4g. S. VII, 46),
‘May I this day obtain a Brahman who has a
father and forefathers!’—for he who is renowned
and of renowned family, is one who has a father and
forefathers; and by the gifts which he gives to a
renowned (priest), though they be but few, he gains
great things.—‘ A Azshi, the scion of Azshis,’ for
he who is renowned as learned in sacred lore, is a
Rishi, the scion of ARzshis ;—‘of well-bestowed
gifts, for he indeed is one on whom gifts are well-
bestowed.

20. Having thus respectfully sat down by the
Agnidh, he gives him the gold, with ‘Given (rata)
by us, go ye to the gods! ’—for whatever sacrificial
gift he gives unhesitatingly, with a liberal (rata) mind,
thereby he gains great things, ‘Go ye to the gods,’ he
says, for he who sacrifices, sacrifices with the hope,
‘May there be a place for me in the world of the
gods ;’ and he thus makes him a sharer in the world of
the gods.—‘ Enter ye to the Giver!’ whereby he
means to say, ‘Enter ye into me!’ and thus those
(cows)! do not get lost to him. And as to his giving


1 The cows (and other gifts) are presented at the same time, viz.
either a hundred to each officiating priest, or to each his propor-
tionate share of an aggregate of a hundred cows, viz. twelve cows


346 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


a dakshizA first to the Agntdh, it was from thence
(from the Agnidhra)! that all the gods gained
immortality : therefore he gives the dakshiva first to
the Agnidh.

21. Then, approaching in the same way, he
gives some gold to an Atreya?. For, at the time®
when they recite the morning prayer, they were
once upon a time singing praises here in front‘.
Now Atri was the Hotz of the Azshis. Then the
darkness of the Asuras came rushing into the Sadas.
The Azshis said to Atri, ‘Come back here, and
dispel this darkness!’ He dispelled that darkness ;
and thinking, ‘He indeed is the light who has dis-
pelled this darkness,’ they brought him this light,
gold, for a sacrificial gift,—for gold is indeed light;
and by that same splendour and energy the Azshi
dispelled the darkness. And so does he now also
dispel the darkness by that light: therefore he be-
stows gold on an Atreya.


to each of the first four priests, six to each of the second four
(Brahmanakhamsin, &c., see § 22), four to each of the third four,
and three cows to each of the remaining four priests.

1 See III, 6, 1, 27-28.

2 That is, one of Atreya descent, who does not officiate as a
priest, and who is seated in front of the Sadas. According to the
Kanva text (and Katy. X, 2, 21) the Adhvaryu approaches him
with ‘Ka Atreyam’—who (? sees) the Atreya?—thrice repeated.
Katyayana specifies some subdivision of the (female line of) the
Atreya race—also mentioned in the same order in the Pravara-
dhyAya—as excluded from this privilege. On this legend cf. V, 3, 2,
2; Taitt.S. II, 1, 2,2; Tandya Br. VI, 6, 8; Ind. Stud. III, p. 464.

* Viz. early in the morning of the sutya day, when the Pratar-
anuvaka is recited. See p. 229, note 2.

* I take ‘pura’ in the sense of ‘in front’ (cf. III, 9, 1, 12), that
is, in the havirdhina shed, and not in that of ‘formerly’ (Ind. Stud.
X, 158). The K4zva text brings out the meaning still more clearly :
Sa yad atreyaya hiranyam dadaty, atrir hi va r:shinim hot sa yatro


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHIMANA, 24. 247


ee


22. Then to the Brahman, for the Brahman watches
over the sacrifice from the south. Then to the Udga-
tvz (chanter); then to the Hotz7; then to the two
Adhvaryus, seated in the cart-shed. Then, having
returned (to the Sadas he presents gold) to the
Prastotvz; then to the Maitravaruza; then to the
Brahmazdshamsin; then to the Pots: then to the
Neshévz ; then to the A&/ZAavaka; then to the Unnet?7:
then to the Gravastut ; then to the Subrahmazya. To
the Pratihartv7 he presents it last, since he is the re-
strainer(pratihartrz)1: he thus in the end restrains (the
cows) for him, and so they do not become lost to him.

23. Thereupon he (the Adhvaryu) says (to the
Maitravaruza), ‘Recite (the invitatory prayer) to
Indra, followed by the Maruts!’ Now when, in the
beginning, Pragapati gave gifts, Indra thought within
himself, ‘Everything here, forsooth, he will give
away, and not anything will he leave for us. He
then, to stop the giving, raised up that thunderbolt
‘Recite to Indra Marutvat!’ and thereafter he
(PragApati) gave no more. And in like manner is
that thunderbolt ‘Recite to Indra Marutvat!’ now
raised up to stop the giving, and thereafter he (the
sacrificer) gives no more.

24: There are, then, four (kinds of) sacrificial gifts:
Gold—thereby indeed he preserves his own life, for


gold is life. That he (Pragdpati or Varuza) gave


ha va ada 4sinaf prataranuvakam anvaha tad dha smaitat pura-
sino hota samsaty atha pashit tama’ sado ’bhipupluve. Te hokus
tamo va idam sado ’bhyaprosh/¢eti pratyan prehiti pratyan prehiti sa
pratyan prait sa tat tamo ’pahan, &c. Sayama also interprets it by
‘pfirvasmin pradese 4havaniyasya samipe.’

1 For the part taken by the Pratihartr7 in the chanting of stotras,
see p. 310, note I.


348 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


to Agni, performing the office of the Agnidh (fre-
kindler): wherefore now also gold is given to the
Agnidh.

25. Then the Cow—thereby he preserves his own
breath, for the cow is breath, since the cow is food,
and breath also is food: her he gave to Rudra, the
Hotvz.

26. Then Cloth—thereby he preserves his own
skin, for the cloth is skin: this he gave to Brvzhas-
pati, who chanted.

27. Then the Horse—for the horse is a thunder-
bolt: he thereby makes the thunderbolt the leader.
And, moreover, he who sacrifices, sacrifices with the
hope ‘ May there be a place for me in Yama's world!’
He thus makes him a sharer in Yama's world. This
he gave to Yama, the Brahman.

28. The (proffered) gold he (the Adhvaryu) goes
to meet (accepts) with (Vag. S. VII, 47), ‘Let
Varuza give thee to me (who am) Agni!’ for to
Agni Varuza gave it. ‘MayI obtainimmortality!
be thou life to the giver, joy (mayas) to me,
the receiver!’

29. And the cow he accepts with, ‘Let Varuza
give thee to me, Rudra!’ for to Rudra Varuza
gave her. ‘May 1 obtainimmortality! be thou
breath to the giver, strength (vayas) to me, the
rechiver!:

30. And the cloth he accepts with, ‘Let Varuza
give thee to me, Brzhaspati!’ for to Brzhaspati
Varuma gave it. ‘May I obtain immortality!
be thou a skin to the giver, joy to me, the
receiver!’

31. And the horse he accepts with, ‘Let Varuza
give thee to me, Yama!’ for to Yama Varuna


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 32. 349


gave it. ‘May I obtain immortality! be thou
a steed (haya) to the giver, strength (vayas) to
me, the receiver!’

32. And whatever other gift he gives that he gives
with the hope, ‘May I also have this in yonder
world!’ That he accepts with (Vag. S. VII, 48),
‘Who hath given it? to whom hath he given
it? Hope hath givenit, for Hope hath he given
it: Hope is the giver, Hopethereceiver. This
to thee, O Hope!’ Thus he assigns it to a deity.

33. Here they say1,—Let him not assign it to any
deity; for whatsoever deity he here kindles, that
deity, being kindled, becomes ever more glorious
from one day to the morrow; and to whatever fire
he here adds fuel, that fire, being kindled, becomes
ever more glorious from one day to the morrow; and
ever more glorious does he become, whosoever, know-
ing this, accepts (a gift): even as one offers in kindled
fire, so does he offer that (gift) which he gives to
one learned in the scriptures. Therefore he who
is learned in the scriptures need not assign (the gift
to a deity).


1 The Kava text of this paragraph seems more correct: Thus
he assigns it to deities; for when he bestows (abhyadha) anything
on a deity, that deity thereby shines ever more brilliantly ; and
whatever (fuel) he adds to the fire, thereby it shines ever more bril-
liantly: and more glorious does he become from day to day who-
soever, knowing it, accepts it thus. Here now Asuri said, ‘ But he
who is learned in the scriptures need not regard this; for as one
puts fuel on kindled fire, and offers on kindled fire, thus he gives
who gives gifts to one learned in the scriptures.’


250 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Etat


FirtH BRAHMANA.
D. Tue Taritiya SAvANA, OR Eventnc Pressinc.


1. Now there are three kinds of gods,—the
Vasus, the Rudras, and the Adityas. Between them
the press-feasts are divided: the morning pressing
belongs to the Vasus, the midday pressing to the
Rudras, and the third pressing to the Adityas.
But the morning pressing belonged to the Vasus
exclusively, and the midday pressing to the Rudras
exclusively, and the third pressing to the Adityas
conjointly (with others).

2. The Adityas then said, ‘As that morning
pressing belongs exclusively to the Vasus, and that
midday pressing exclusively to the Rudras, so offer
ye now to usa libation before the common (pressing).’
The gods said, ‘So be it!’ After the completion of
the midday pressing, they offered that (libation) pre-
vious to the third pressing’. And in like manner is
that libation offered to this day after the completion
of the midday pressing and previous to the third
Re tee:

. The Adityas said, ‘ Neither in the one pressing
Gove we a share nor in the other: we fear lest the
Rakshas might injure us!’

4. They said to the (cups) belonging to two deities


(dvidevatya?), ‘We are afraid of the Rakshas: pray,
let us enter into you!’


* The Aditya-graha, with which the succeeding paragraphs
deal, is considered as not belonging to the Trritya Savana proper,
but as a preliminary ceremony,

> For the three dvidevatya grahas ane Ue Maitra-
varuza, and Asvina), see Brahmamas IV, 1, 3-5


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 7. 351


5. The Dvidevatyas said, ‘What will be our re-
ward then ?’—‘ By us ye shall be supplied with the
AnuvashaZ'!’ said the Adityas.—‘ So be it! '—They
entered into the dvidevatya cups.

6. Hence, when at the morning pressing he (the
Adhvaryu) proceeds with the dvidevatya cups, the
Pratiprasthatvz draws Soma-juice from the Droza-
kalasa into the Aditya vessel, with this much (of the
formula, Vag. S. VIII, 1), ‘Thou art taken witha
support!’ The Adhvaryu calls for the (Agnidh’s)
Srausha¢, and after the Adhvaryu’s libation the Pra-
tiprasthatrz pours (his juice into the fire), and with
this much ‘ Thee to the Adityas!’ he pours the
remains (into the Aditya-sthalt). In the same way
at all (three dvidevatya libations).

7. Thus, the reason why the Pratiprasthatyz draws
the Soma-juice, is that they entered into the dvide-
vatya cups. And the Adityas then said, ‘By us ye
shall be supplied with the AnuvashaZ!’ For, that
second libation which he (the Pratiprasthatrz) makes,
he makes to (Agni) Svish¢akvzt, and by means of
the Svishéakvzt these (dvidevatyas) are supplied
with the Anuvasha¢; and thus those (libations) of


1 At the three dvidevatya libations no Anuvasha/kara is per-
mitted; that is to say, the Hotrz is not to pronounce the words,
‘O Agni, accept of the Soma!’ after the Vasha/, with which the
offering prayer (yagy4) concludes. But as the libation, ordinarily
made at the Anuvasha/, corresponds to the oblation to Agni Svish-
fakrit made after each chief oblation at the haviryagiia (see I, 7, 3;
Ait. Br. III, 5), there is apparently no such Svish/akrzt oblation at
the dvidevatya libations. Now, as each of these chief libations,
made by the Adhvaryu, is followed by one made by the Pratipra-
sthatr? from the Aditya vessel (see p. 316, note 1), these latter liba-
tions are here, as it were, identified with the Svish/akr:t and the
Anuvasha/kara.


352 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


his are supplied with the Anuvashaé, having the
(oblation to Agni) Svish¢akvzt performed for them.
He offers on the north part (of the fire), for that
is the region of that god: hence he offers on the
north part.

8. And again, why the Pratiprasthatvz draws the
Soma. They entered into the Dvidevatyas; and
from those which they entered he thereby draws
them out. He then covers it*—for they were afraid
of the Rakshas—with ‘O Vishzu, Far-strider,
here is thy Soma, protect it lest they should
injure it!’ For Vishzu is the sacrifice: to the
sacrifice he thus makes it over for protection. Now,
after the completion of the midday Soma feast and
before the evening feast he says, ‘Come hither,
Sacrificer !’

9. They enter (the Havirdhana) together,—the
Adhvaryu, Sacrificer, Agnidhra, Pratiprasthatzz,
Unnetrvz, and whatever other attendant (of the
Adhvaryu) there is*: They close both doors,—for
they (the Adityas) were afraid of the Rakshas. He
(the Adhvaryu) takes up the Aditya-sthali and
Aditya-patra, and holds them close over the Piita-
bhvzt, ‘lest (any Soma-juice) should be spilt.’

10. He then draws (the juice from the sth4li into
the patra) with (Vag. S. VIII, 2; Rig-veda VIII,
51, 7), ‘At notime art thou barren, and never
failest thou the worshipper, O Indra; but


1 See I, 7, 3, 20.

* The remains of Soma-juice he pours after each libation from
the Aditya-p4tra into the Aditya-sthalt, and finally puts the former
on the latter by way ofa lid. See p. 316, note r.

* While they enter by the front door, the mistress of the house
enters by the back (west) door. Ké§ty. X, 4, 2.


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 14. 353
RRSP CAR PE BE a Mit ENS Le ist a a
more and ever more is thy divine gift in-
creased, O mighty lord!—Thee to the Adityas!’

11. Let him not draw it with a ‘support’—for it
was originally drawn with a support—to avoid a
repetition (of sacrificial performance); but were he
now also to draw it with a support, he would cer-
tainly commit a repetition.

12. Having withdrawn (the cup for a moment
from the flowing juice), he again pours it in with
(Vag. S. VIII, 3; Rig-veda VIII, 52, 7), ‘At no
time art thou heedless, but watchest over both
generations; the Soma feast? is thy strength,
O fourth Aditya: the ambrosia is ready for
thee in the heavens!—Thee to the Adityas!’

1% Thereupon he takes sour milk; for the even-
ing pressing belongs to the Adityas, and cattle are
after (the manner of) the Adityas?: he thereby puts
milk into the cattle, and thus that mjlk in cattle is
beneficial’. ‘He should put it right in the centre
(of the Aditya cup),’ they say, ‘for that milk is right
in the centre of cattle.’ But let him rather put it in
the back part (of the cup), for that milk is in the
hind part of cattle.

14. And the reason why he takes sour milk is that
those remains (of Soma) poured together are the
leavings of offerings, and insufficient for an oblation:
he now increases those (remains), and thus they


1 The Rig-veda reads ‘havanam’ (invocation) instead of ‘sa-
vanam.’ ’

er, cattle correspond, stand in relation, to the Adityas. Sayana
takes ‘anu’ in the sense of ‘behind, inferior to, dependent upon
(hina). The cattle are inferior to, or dependent upon, the Adi-
tyas, inasmuch as the Adityas give the rain on which the cattle
depend for their food.

> Or, ‘put’ (hita) into them.

[26] Aa


354 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


become sufficient for an oblation. This is why he
takes sour milk.

15. He takes it with (Vay. S. VIII, 4; Rig-veda
I, 107, 1), ‘The sacrifice draweth nigh to the
glory of the gods: be ye merciful, O Adityas!
Let your favour incline unto us, that it may
set us free from all trouble!—Thee to the
Adityas!’

16. He mixes it by means of the Upamsusavana
stone’. For, indeed, that Aditya Vivasvat (the sun)
is really the same as the Upamsusavana, and this
is the Aditya libation: thus he makes him delight in
his own share.

17. He touches it neither with the fringe nor with
(the woven part of) the straining-cloth; for those two
pressings, the morning pressing and midday pressing,
forsooth are rich in pure Soma, rich in juice, but this,
the third pressing, is emptied of its pure Soma.
Now, in that he does not touch it either with the
fringe or the straining-cloth, thereby that third press-
ing of his also becomes rich in pure Soma and juice :
therefore he touches it neither with the fringe nor
with the straining-cloth.

18) sFle: mixessaits- witht (VagieS.a VILE A 5). 1‘ O
Aditya Vivasvat, this is thy draught of Soma:
feastthouuponit!’ Thereupon he hands the U pam-
susavana to the Unnetvz. Then he says to the Un-
net7z, ‘ Drop in the pressing-stones!’ He drops them
either into the Adhavantya or into a cup?.


1 See p. 238, note 2.

* «Into the Adhavantya trough or into a 4amasa cup containing
Soma-juice,’ K4ty. X, 4,10; ‘into the Adhavaniya or the Sam-
bharanf,’ Kazva text; ‘into the Adhavaniya or into the graha,’
Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 386. Perhaps the next paragraph has to


IV KANDA, 3 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 21. 355


19. After drawing the king (Soma)—the third
press-feast belonging to the Adityas, and the
pressing-stones being after (the manner of?) the
Adityas, he thus makes them delight in their own
share—they open the doors.

20. He now walks out, covering (the cup with
his hand or the sthali); for they (the Adityas) were
afraid of the Rakshas. He then says (to the Mai-
travaruza), ‘Recite (the invitatory prayer) to the
Adityas!’ If he likes, he may now enumerate (their
qualities); but let him rather enumerate them, after
he has called for the Srausha¢—‘ Prompt (the Hotzz
to recite the offering prayer) to the Adityas, the be-
loved, rite-loving, law-loving lords of the great
abode, the rulers of the wide air.’ He offers, as the
Vasha¢ is pronounced. He (the Hotvz) pronounces
no Anuvasha/, lest he should consign the cattle to
the fire. The remains (of juice in the sthali and
graha) he (the Adhvaryu) hands to the Pratipra-
sthatrz.

21. Thereupon he again enters (the Havirdhana)
and draws the Agrayaza graha%. They spread
(over the Pitabhr7t) a straining-cloth with the fringe
towards the north. The Adhvaryu pours out (the


be taken along with this: ‘Or into a samasa, after drawing Soma
(into it).’ According to Ka4ty., the stones are taken out again
immediately and laid down in their places on the presen -skin.

1 See p. 353, note 2. Sdyava again takes ‘anu’ in the sense of

‘after, behind,’ apparently on the ground that, in the above formu-
las, the stones are mentioned after the Aditya. The text of my
manuscript is, however, rather corrupt at this place.

2 The Agrayana Soma was originally drawn into the Agrayana
bowl (sthali) and deposited in its place in the centre of the khara.
It_is now poured from the bowl into some other vessel, and
thence through a straining-cloth into the Patabhrit.


Aa 2


356 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


rence


juice) of the Agrayana; the Pratiprasthatrz holds
out (and pours in) the two residues (of the Aditya
graha'); the Unnetrz adds thereto (some juice from
the Adhavantya) by means of a £amasa cup or a
dipping-vessel (uda#éana).

22, Thus he draws the Agrayama graha from four
streams; for the evening pressing belongs to the
Adityas, and cows are after the manner of the
Adityas; whence this milk of cows is of a fourfold
nature: therefore he draws the Agrayaza from four
streams’.

23. And as to why the Pratiprasthatrz holds out
the two residues: this is (the remains of) the Aditya
libation, and for the Aditya libation he pronounces no
Anuvashaf; and from that (Agrayaza graha) he
intends to draw the Savitra graha,—so that the
Anuvasha¢ is performed for it by means of the
Savitra graha.

24. And again why the Pratiprasthatrz holds out
the two residues. Previous to that mixed (press-
feast), previous to the evening feast, they have offered
that (unmixed or special) libation to those (Adityas);
but this libation is taken for the evening feast: thereby
the Adityas take part in the evening feast, and thus
they are not exciuded from the sacrifice. This is
why the Pratiprasthatvz holds out the two residues*.


1 ‘Sampraskandayati pratiprasthatadityapatrayoh samsravam,’
K4nva text.

? In drawing the Agrayana cup he uses the same formula as at
the morning pressing. See IV, 2, 2, 9 seq.

* In the actual performance of the Agnish/oma the drawing of
the Agrayana graha is followed by sour milk being poured to the
Soma-juice left in the Pfitabhr:t, the compound being consecrated
by the lady eying it with an appropriate mantra. Thereupon they
leave the Havirdhana shed in the same way as at the morning feast


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 2. 357


SSS eg tn shee


Fourtu ApuyAya. First BRAHMANA.


I. Savitvz, forsooth, is his! mind: therefore he
draws the SAvitra cup. And, forsooth, Savits? is
his breath (vital air);—when he draws the Updmsu
cup, then he puts into him that vital air in front; and
when he draws the SAvitra cup, then he‘ puts into
him that vital air behind: thus those two vital airs
on both sides are beneficial (or, put into him), both
that which is above and that which is below.

2. And: the sacrifice, forsooth, is the seasons, the
year. There, at the morning feast, they are overtly
attended to, in that he draws the cups for the seasons ;
and at the midday feast they are covertly attended to,
in that he takes the Marutvattya libations by means
of the two Aztu vessels. Now here (at the evening
feast) they neither draw any libation expressly for
the seasons, nor is any libation taken with the two


Aitu vessels.


(see IV, 2, 5, 1, with notes), and perform the Viprud-homas, fol-
lowed by the Sarpama and chanting of the Arbhava, or Tritiya
Pavaméana stotra (for an account of which, see p. 314, note 2).
Then follow the oblations from the victim (which has.been cooking
since the morning, see IV, 2, 5, 13), &c., up to the eating of the
pasvida (see III, 8, 3, 4 seq.); and offering of the four Savaniya-
purodasas, likewise up to the eating of the ida. Previous to the
eating, small pieces of rice-cake are thrown into the 4amasa cups,
as an oblation to the sacrificer’s deceased ancestors, with naming
of his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather (as at the Pindapi-
triyagna, II, 4, 2,19 seq:); whereupon the pieces are eaten along
with the ida.

1 Viz. that of Yagfia, the sacrificial man, representing the sacn-
ficer himself, with a view to the preparation of a new body in a


future existence.
Bee TV; 5/3) 17.


358 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,


3. But Savitvz, forsooth, is he that burns yonder
(the sun); and he indeed is all the seasons: thus the
seasons, the year, are overtly attended to at the
evening feast,—for this reason he draws the Savitra
cup.

4. He draws it with the Upamsu vessel. For
Savitvz is his mind, and the Upamsu is his breath:
therefore he draws it with the Updmsu vessel; or
with the Antaryaéma vessel, for that is one and the
same, since the Upamsu and Antarydma are the out-
breathing and in-breathing!.

5. He draws it from the Agrayana graha; for
Savitv? is his mind, and the Agrayana is his body
(or self): he thus puts the mind into the body.
Savitr? is his breath, and the Agrayama is his body :
he thus puts the breath into the body.

6. He thus draws it therefrom with (Vag. S. VIII,
6; Rig-veda VI, 71, 6), ‘Bring thou forth boons
for us this day, O Savitar, boons to-morrow,
boons day by day: O God, through this our
prayer may we be sharers of boons, of a good
and plenteous abode!—Thou art taken with a
support!—Thou art Savitrz’s joy-giver, thou
art a joy-giver: give me joy!” speed the
sacrifice; speed the lord of the sacrifice to
(receive) his share!’

7- Having drawn it, he does not deposit it; for
Savitvz is his (Yagita’s) mind, and hence this mind
is restless. And Savitvz is his breath: hence this
breath passes to and fro MP OESUP EL, He then
says (to the Maitravaruza), ‘ Recite (the invitatory
prayer) to the god Savity7!’ Having called for the


See IV, 1,1 1.


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, IO. 359


Sraushaé, he says, ‘ Prompt (the Hotvz to recite the
offering prayer) to the god Savitrz!’ The Vasha¢
having been pronounced, he offers. He (the Hotzz)
pronounces no Anuvashaé!,— for Savitrz is his
mind,—‘lest he should consign his mind to the
fire ;’ and Savitvz being his breath,—‘ lest he should
consign his breath to the fire.’

8. Then with the (same) vessel, without drinking
therefrom’, he draws the Vaisvadeva graha. The
reason why he draws the Vaisvadeva graha with the
(same) vessel, without drinking therefrom, is this:
on the Savitra graha he (the Hotvz) pronounces no
Anuvasha/é, and it is therefrom that he is about to
draw the Vaisvadeva graha,—thus it is by means of
the Vaisvadeva that it becomes supplied with the
Anuvasha/¢ for him.

g. And further why he draws the Vaisvadeva
graha. Savitz, forsooth, is his mind, and the
Visve Deva (All-gods, or all the gods%) are
everything here: he thus makes everything here
subservient and obedient to the mind, and hence
everything here is subservient and obedient to
the mind.

10. And again why he draws the Vaisvadeva
graha. Savitrd, forsooth, is his breath, and the All-
gods are everything here: he thereby puts the out-
breathing and in-breathing into everything here, and


1 See p35, note tf.
2 Lit. ‘with the not-drunk-from vessel.’ He is not to drink with


the Hotr? the remains of the Sdvitra graha, which is to be offered
up entirely (holocaust).

3 In Ait. Br. III, 31 five classes of beings, viz. the gods and
men, the Gandharva-Apsaras, the serpents and the manes, are in-
cluded in the term Visve Deva.


360 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


thus the out-breathing and in-breathing become bene-
ficial (or put) in everything here.

11. And again why he draws the Vaisvadeva
graha. The evening feast belongs to the All-gods:
thus indeed it is called on the part of the Saman, in
that the evening feast is called Vaisvadeva on the
part of the Azé!, and in the same way on the part of
the Yagus, by way of preparatory rite, when he draws
that Mah4-vaisvadeva graha.

12, He draws it from the Pftabhvzt; for the
Pitabhvzt belongs to the All-gods, because there-
from they draw (Soma-juice) for the gods, therefrom
for men, therefrom for the Fathers: hence the
Pitabhvzt belongs to the All-gods.

13. He draws it without a purorué’, for he draws
it for the All-gods, and the All-gods are everything,
the zk and Yagus and Séman; and even in that he
draws it for the All-gods, thereby it becomes supplied
with a purorué for him: therefore he draws it with-
out a purorud,

14. He thus draws it therefrom with (Vag. S. VIII,
8), ‘Thou art taken with a support: thou art
well-guarded, well-established, —for well-guarded
and well-established is the breath,—‘ homage to the
great bull!’—the great bull is Pragdpati (the lord of
creatures): ‘homage to PragApati,’ he thereby means
to say.—‘ Thee to the All-gods! this is thy
womb,—thee to the All-gods!’ Therewith he


-+ The first sastra of the Tritlya-savana, now about to be recited
by the Hotr#' (Rig-veda priest), is the Vaisvadeva sastra ; hence also,
he argues, it is Vaisvadeva on the part of the Saman, because of
the intimate connection of the SAman chants (here the Tretiya, or
Arbhava, pavam4na stotra; see p. 325, note 2) with the sastras.

* See p. 268, note 1.


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 15. 361


deposits it; for it is for the All-gods that he draws
it. Thereupon he goes (to the Sadas) and sits down
(in front of the Hotz) with his face to the east}.

15. And when he (the Hotvz) recites this (verse),
‘With one and ten for thine own sake, with
two and twenty for offering, with three
and thirty for up-bearing (the sacrifice to the
gods); with thy teams, O Vayu, do thou here
unloose them!’—during (the recitation of) this
verse to V4yu the drinking-vessels are unyoked?,
for beasts have V4yu for their leader; and Vayu


1 He remains thus seated till the Hotr utters the AhAva
‘Adhvaryo sosamsévom’ (Adhvaryu, let us sing!), when he turns
round and makes his response (pratigara) ‘Samsamo daivom.’
See p. 326, note 1.

The Vaisvadeva sastra consists of the following parts :—

Pratipad (opening triplet), Rig-veda V, 82, 1-3.

Anufara (sequel), ib. 4-7.

Sakta (hymn) to Savitrz, IV, 54. Before the last verse the
Nivid (‘ May the god Savitr? drink of the Soma!’ &c.) is inserted ;
to which the verse to Vayu, referred to in paragraph rs5, is added.

Sfikta to Heaven and Earth, I,159, with the Nivid ‘ May
Heaven and Earth delight in the Soma!’ &c., inserted before the
last verse ; the Adhvaryu’s response being thrice ‘ Madémo daiva,’
see-p. 330, note 3.

Dh4ayyé verse, I, 4,1.

Sfikta to the Rybhus, I, 111; with Nivid before the last verse.

Three Dhayy4s, X,123,1; X, 63, 3; IV, 50, 6.

Sfiktato Visve Devah, I, 89; with Nivid before the last verse.

The concluding verse (paridhAnty4) is recited thrice; the
first time with stops at every half verse, the second and third
time at every p4da.

Ukthavirya, ‘ Praise has been sung to Indra, to the gods, to
hear thee!’

Then follows the recitation of the offering prayer VI, 52, 13,
after which the libation is made, the remaining juice being then
drunk, as well as that in the £amasas.

2 That is, having been rinsed in the MArgdliya, the three dvide-
vatya are deposited on the khara by the Pratiprasthatré.


362 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


(wind) is breath, since it is by means of the breath
that beasts move about.

16. Now once on a time he went away from the
gods with the beasts. The gods called after him at
the morning pressing,—he returned not. They called
after him at the midday pressing,—but he returned
not. They called after him at the evening pressing.

17. Being about to return, he said, ‘If I were to
return to you, what would be my reward ?’—‘ By
thee these vessels would be yoked, and by thee they
would be unloosed!’—Hence those vessels are
yoked by that (VAyu), when he (the Adhvaryu)
draws the (cups) for Indra and VAyu and so forth’.
And now those vessels are unloosed by him, when
he says, ‘with thy teams, O Vayu, do thou here
unloose them;’—teams mean cattle: thus he un-
looses those vessels by means of cattle.

18. Now, had he returned at the morning press-
ing—the morning pressing belonging to the Gayatri,
and the Gayatri being the priesthood *—then cattle
would have come to be with priests only. And
had he returned at the midday pressing—the mid-
day pressing belonging to Indra, and Indra being
the nobility—cattle would have come to be with
nobles only. But in that he returned at the evening
pressing—the evening pressing belonging to the
All-gods, and the All-gods being everything here—
therefore there are cattle everywhere here.


1 See IV, 1, 3-10.

* Perhaps we ought to read, with the Kava text, gayatram vai
pratafsavanam gayatram agnes khando brahma va agnir, brah-
mazeshu haiva pasavo ’bhavishyan, ‘the morning pressing relating
to the yayatri, and the gayatri metre belonging to Agni, and Agni
being the priesthood.’


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 4. 363


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. He proceeds with (the offering of) Soma’s rice-
pap; for Soma is the sacrificial food of the gods;
and here now sacrificial food is prepared for Soma
on his part; and thus Soma is not excluded there-
from. It is a rice-pap (4aru), for rice-pap is food
for the gods, since rice-pap is boiled rice, and boiled
rice is clearly food : therefore it is a rice-pap.

2. Neither at the morning feast, nor at the mid-
day feast does he offer it, for those two press-
feasts, the morning feast and the midday feast, are
the exclusive feasts of the gods; and Soma is sacred
to the Fathers.

3. But were he to offer it at the morning feast, or
at the midday feast, he would cause discord between
the gods and Fathers. He offers it at the evening
feast, because the evening feast belongs to the All-
gods?: thus he does not cause discord. He recites
no invitatory prayer (but only an offering prayer), ‘or
the Fathers have passed away once for all: hence
he recites no invitatory prayer.

4. Having, in the first place, taken ghee in four
ladlings, and having called (on the Agnidh) for the
Sraushaz, he says, ‘ Recite the offering prayer of the
ghee!’ and offers as the Vasha¢ is uttered. What-
ever oblations have been offered previous to this
(Zaru), therefrom he separates this one (to Soma), and
thus he causes no discord.


1 Probably, because Soma is slain in being sacrificed (see IV, 3,
4, 1), and therefore belongs to the Fathers or Departed Spirits.

? And the All-gods (or all the gods) mean everything. See IV,
4,1, 4-


364 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


5. Having poured (into the spoon) an ‘ underlayer’
of ghee, he makes two cuttings from the rice-pap;
and bastes them with ghee above. Having called
for the Srausha/, he says, ‘ Recite the offering prayer
of the Saumya (rice-pap)!’ and offers as the Vasha¢
is uttered.

6. He then takes ghee a second time by four
ladlings, and having called for the Srausha/, he says,
‘Recite the offering prayer of the ghee!’ and offers
as the Vasha¢ is uttered. From whatever oblations
he intends to offer hereafter, he thereby separates
this one (to Soma), and thus he causes no dis-
cord. If he chooses, he may offer (ghee) on both
sides (before and after the Soma’s rice-pap) ; or, if he
chooses, he may offer on one side only!.

7. Now there is an offering-spoon called ‘ pra-
karan. Therein the Adhvaryu takes ghee by four
ladlings (with the dipping-spoon) and pours it on the
Dhishzya hearths by means of fagots (held over
them). The reason why he pours ghee on the
hearths by means of fagots is this. Because, on a
former occasion *, the gods said to those (Gandharva


1 The homa of ghee, made before the rice-pap oblation to Soma,
belongs to Agni, and the one made after the oblation, to Vishzu.
If only one homa be made, it belongs tu Agni and Vishvu. The
Kanva text reads, ‘Tad v4 4hur anyatarata eva pariyaget purastad
eveti,’ now they say, ‘He should offer on one side only, and that
in front (previously to the daru).’ For the offering formulas, see
Asv. V, 19, 3; Ait. Br. III, 32. After the completion of these
offerings, the Adhvaryu pours ordinary ghee on the rice-pap and
presents it to the Hotrz, who looks at it while pronouncing some
formulas (Asv. V,19, 4, 5), and he smears his eyes with the ghee
on the pap, after which the latter is handed to the chanters
(udgatrz) to be eaten by them.

*. Sée LIL, 6a. tg:


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 10. 36 5


Soma-wardens), ‘ At the third pressing an offering of
ghee shall fall to your share, but not one of Soma,
for the Soma-draught has been taken from you,
wherefore ye are not worthy of a Soma-offering,’
that same offering of ghee now falls to their share at
the evening pressing, but not one of Soma, in that
he pours ghee on the hearths by means of fagots.
One after another, in the order in which they were
thrown up, and with the same formulas!, he pours
ghee upon them; on the Ma4rgAltya last of all.

8. Now some make a second pouring on the
Agnidhrtya hearth, thinking, ‘In the North (or up-
wards) shall this sacred work of ours be accom-
plished!’ but let him not do it in this way, but
rather the MAargaliya last *.

9. Now, while the Adhvaryu pours ghee on the
hearths by means of fagots, the Pratiprasthatrz
draws the Patnivata*® cup. For from the sacrifice
creatures are produced; and being produced from
the sacrifice, they are produced from union; and
being produced from union, they are produced from
the hind part of the sacrifice ;—hence he thereby
produces them from a productive union, from the
hind part of the sacrifice: therefore he draws the
Patnivata cup.

10. He draws it with the Updmsu vessel. If he


ONG Ver, SV Paty 32.5 The Agnidhra hearth is prepared first,
and the MArgAliya last of the eight dhishzyas. See p. 148, note 4.

2 Or, uppermost (uttamam; the K4mvas read ‘ antamam’).

’ The meaning of the term patnivata is ‘ relating to the patnivant
(i. e. wived or mated one),’ the ‘ patnivant’ being probably Soma with
the water mixed with it; or Agni with the wives of the gods, (with
special reference to the sacrificer’s wife); cf. Taitt. S. VI, 5, 8,1, 2.
According to the Kazva text, Agni associated with the goddess
Speech (V4k patni) seems to be understood.


366 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


draws the SAavitra libation with the Upamsu vessel,
(he draws) this one with the Antarydma vessel ; and
if he draws the SAvitra with the Antary4ma vessel
(he draws) this one with the Updmsu vessel ;—for
one and the same indeed are the Upamsu and
AntaryAdma, being breath, and that which is the out-
breathing is also the in-breathing. Now the breath
(praza, masc.) is male, and the wife is female: a
productive union is thus brought about.

11. He draws it without a purorué!,—the purorué&
being manhood,—lest he should bestow manhood on
women: therefore he draws it without a purorué.

12. He thus draws it from that (Agrayawa graha)
with (Vag. S. VIII, 9), ‘Thou art taken with a
support: Of thee, divine Soma, begotten by
Brzhaspati’—Brvzhaspati is the priesthood: ‘of
thee, divine Soma, the priest-begotten’ he thereby
means to say—‘ Of thee, the potent juice —‘of
the powerful (manly) juice’ he means to say when he
says ‘of thee, the potent juice —‘ May I prosper
the draughts of thee, the mated one®!’ he does
not now draw it for the wives, lest he should bestow
manhood on women: therefore he does not now
draw it for the wives.

13. He (the Adhvaryu) then mixes it with the
residue (of ghee) which is left in the prasarazi spoon.
Now other libations he completes by mixing, but
this one he diminishes; for ghee is a thunderbolt,


? See p. 268, note 1.

2 In the St. Petersburg Dictionary ‘ patnivatak’ seems to be
taken as qualifying ‘grahan;’ but cp. Rig-veda VIII, 82, 22,
‘United with their wives (i.e. the water mixed with the Soma-
juice ?) these Soma-draughts (suta#) go longing to the rejoicing.’


Iv KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 16. 367
eae Ri Le Se calls. ne ce Ra
and by that thunderbolt, the ghee, the gods smote
the wives and unmanned them, and thus smitten and
unmanned they neither owned any self nor did they
own any heritage. And in like manner does he now,
by that thunderbolt, the ghee, smite the wives and
unman them; and thus smitten and unmanned, they
neither own! any self nor do they own any heritage.

14. He mixes it, with (Vag. S. VIII, 9), ‘Il am
above, I am below; and what space there is
between, that was my father;—I saw the sun
on both sides: I am what is highest to the
gods in secret. In that he mixes with ‘[]—I,’
thereby he bestows manhood on men.

15. He then says, ‘Agnidh, pronounce the offer-
ing prayer of the Patnivata!’ The Agnidh is male,
and the wife is female: thus a productive union is
brought about. He offers with (V4g. S. VIII, 10),
‘O Agni, wife-leader?!’—Agni is male, and the
wife is female: thus a productive union is brought
about.

16. ‘Together with the divine T vash¢rz’—
for Tvash¢/vz transforms the cast seed: thus he
thereby transforms the cast seed;—‘drink the
Soma, Hail!’ therewith he offers on the north
(left) part (of the fire); what other offerings there
are, they are the gods, and these are the wives: thus
alone it is a proper union, since the woman lies on
the left (north) side of the man. The Adhvaryu
takes a draught of Soma to the Agnidh, and the
latter says, ‘Adhvaryu, invite me!’ [It might be said


1 «45,’ etymologically connected with ‘ own.’
2 Or, wived, mated one, ‘patnivan;’ the Kamva text reads ‘Agne
Vak patni.’ See preceding page, note 2.


368 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

pA Ria CT ARM eae aT ot Pr Rs HAR ENS EES
that] he should not invite him, since how can there
be an invitation of one smitten and unmanned? He
should nevertheless invite him: they offer in his fire,
and utter the Vasha/——therefore he should invite
him.

17. He then gives orders, ‘Agnidh, sit in the
Nesh/vz’s lap! Neshérz, lead up the lady, and make
her exchange looks with the Udgatrz! Unnetz?,
fill up the Hotvz’s cup, and let no Soma-juice re-
main!’ Thus, if it be an Agnish¢oma sacrifice.

18. But if it be an Ukthya?, let him say, ‘ Lengthen
out the Soma!’—Holding the same vessel (from
which the Patnivata libation was made, the Agnidh)
sits down in the Nesh/¢rz’s lap,—for he, the Agnidh,
is in reality Agni, and the Nesh¢vz is female: the
Agnidh is male, and the Nesh¢vz female,—a pro-
ductive union is thus brought about. The Neshérz
leads up the lady and makes her exchange looks
with the Udgatrz?, with ‘Thou art Fragdpati, the


1 ¢But ifit be an Ukthya, or Shodasin, or Atiratra, or Vagapeya,
Kanva text. See towards the end of next note.

* Katy. X, 7 and schol. supply the following details. The
Unnetr? puts down the samasa cups behind the high altar, and
pours into them the entire Soma-juice remaining in the Pitabhrtt,
putting but little into the Hotrz’s cup, to leave room in it for the
dhruva libation. Besides this the Agrayama is the only Soma that
remains. The Adhvaryu then, by touching the Soma in the
Hotrz’s cup with two stalks of grass, gives the signal for the
chanting of the Agnish/oma Sa4man (viz. the Yagtayagiiiya,
Samay. II, 53, 54), wrapping up his head, if he chooses, in the
same way as the Udgatr7s. Meanwhile the Nesh/r7 leads up the
lady through the back door into the Sadas, makes her sit down
north of the Udgatrz and exchange looks with the latter three
times (at the ‘ Him,’ see p. 308, note 2). Three times also (at every
Nidhana) she uncovers her right leg and pours on it some of the
pannegani water fetched by her in the morning (see III, 9, 3, 27),


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I. 369


male, the bestower of seed: lay thou seed into
me!’ The Udgatrz is Pragdpati, and the lady is a
woman : a productive union is thus brought about.


Tutrp BRAHMANA.


1. The metres, forsooth, are the (draught) cattle
of the gods. Even as harnessed cattle here on earth


whereupon she returns to her own tent. Then follows the
recitation of the Agnima ruta sastra, consisting of the fol-
lowing parts :—

Sfikta (hymn), Rig-veda III, 3, to Agni Vaisvanara, with Nivid
(‘May Agni Vaisvanara feast on this Soma,’ &c.) inserted
before the last verse.

Dhayyé, I, 43, 6; or (verse to Rudra) II, 33, 1

Sfikta, I, 87, to Maruts, with Nivid (‘May the Maruts feast on
this Soma,’ &c.) before the last verse.

Stotriya pragatha, VI, 48, 1-2 (identical with the text of
the Yagnayagniya Saiman).
Anurfipa pragatha, VII, 16, 11-12 (antistrophe).

Sfikta to Agni Gatavedas, I, 143, with Nivid before the last verse.

Tristich to Apah (waters), X, 9, 1-3, recited in breaks, the Hotr?
having previously uncovered his head (as do the other priests)
and touched water, and the others holding on to him from
behind. This and the following parts also have the Ahava
(‘somsavom ’) before each of them.

Verse VI, 50, 14 to Agni Budhnya.

Verses V, 46, 7-8 to wives of gods.

Verses II, 32, 4-5 to Raka.

Verse VI, 49, 7 to Paviravi (daughter of lightning).

Verse X, 14, 4 to Yama.

Verse X, 14, 3 to Kavyas (manes).

Verses X,15,-1, 3, 2 to Pitarah (fathers), with the Ahava before
each verse.

Anupantya (or Svadushkiltya) verses VI, 47, 1-4 to Indra. After
each of the first three the Adhvaryu may respond to the
Hotrz’s Ahava, with ‘madamo daiva’ (instead of ‘ samsimo
daiva’). See note on IV, 3, 2, 11.

Verse to Vishnu and Varuma (Atharva-veda VII, 25, 1).


[26] Bb


370 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


draw for men, so do the harnessed metres draw the
sacrifice for the gods. And whenever the metres
gratified the gods, then the gods gratified the metres.
Now it has been previous to this, that the har-
nessed metres have drawn the sacrifice to the gods,
that they have gratified them?:

2. He now draws the Hariyogana?® graha—the
Hariyogana being the metres—it is the metres he
thereby gratifies: this is why he draws the HA4riyo-
gana graha.

3. He draws it as an additional (libation); since


Verse to Vishzu, Rig-veda I, 154, 1.

Verse to Pragipati, X, 53, 6.

Paridhaniya (concluding verse) IV, 17, 20, in reciting which the
Hotrz touches the ground; and during the recitation of the
last pada the Dhruva graha is poured into the Hotrz’s cup.

Ukthavirya, ‘Praise has been sung to Indra, to the gods, for
hearing (?) thee!’

Yagya (offering prayer) V, 60, 8, at the conclusion of which
libations are made to Agni and the Maruts, both at the
Vasha¢ and Anuvasha/s.

Then follow the after-offerings of the animal sacrifice (see III, 8,
4, 1 Seq.).

At the Ukthya (and other Soma-sacrifices) the Ukthya graha
is drawn immediately after the drawing of the Agrayama (see IV,
3, 5, 24, With note). Previous to the after-offerings the Ukthya
graha is divided, as at the morning and midday performances
(see p. 293, note 2), between the three Hotrakas, with a view to the
recitation of their sastras which form the distinctive feature of the
Ukthya sacrifice, bringing up the number of sastras (and stotras)
from twelve (of the Agnish/oma) to fifteen. Besides, the Ukthya
requires the immolation of at least two victims on the Soma-day.,
viz. a he-goat to Indra and Agni, besides the one to Agni.

1 See I, 8, 2, 8; the translation has been amended in accord-
ance with Professor Whitney’s suggestions, American Journal of
Philology, III, p. 406.

* That is, referring to the ‘hari-yogana,’ or (Indra’s) team of bay
steeds.


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 7. 371


he draws it when he (the Hotr?) pronounces the
‘All-hail and blessing’.’ For there ave here the
gods, and the metres in addition to them; and there
are men, and beasts in addition to them: therefore
he draws it as an additional one.

4. He draws it in the Drovzakalasa. Now Soma
was V77tra. When the gods slew him, his head
rolled off?: it became the Drozakalasa. Thereinto
flowed together so much of the juice as it could
hold*; that was in excess; and so is this graha in
excess: he thus puts the excess to the excess,—
therefore he draws it in the Drozakalasa.

5. He draws it without a purorud-formula, for he
draws it for the metres; and in that he draws it for
the metres, even thereby that (graha) of his bécomes
supplied with a purorué: therefore he draws tt with-
out a purorud,

6. He now draws it from that (Agraya#a graha)
with (Vag. S. VIII, 11), ‘Thou art taken with a
support: of bay colour art thou, meet for
the team of bay steeds,—thee to the pair of
bay steeds!’ Now, the two bay horses are the A7&
and Saman: it is for the A7s* and Sdman that he
draws it.

7. He then pours parched grain into it with,‘ Ye
are the bays’ grains, united with the Soma for


1 For the Sam-yos, see parti, p. 254, note. The pronuncia-
tion of that formula takes place after the offering proper is


completed.
2 ? Or burst (udvavarta), as the St. Petersburg Dictionary takes it.


The KAmva text reads.—-Vv/tro vai soma Asit tam yatradevah paitreshu
vyagrrhaata tasya mirdhno (!) vyavartta sa dromakalaso "bhavat.
1 Yavin va yavin va rasaf, (? some indeterminate quantity of the
juice.) Cf IV, 4, 5, 13.
Bb2


7 2 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


Cd


Indra!’ Whatever metres there are, both measured
and unmeasured, they all thereby drink (of the
Soma’).

8. For this (libation) the Unnetvz? calls for the
Srausha¢ ;—for the Unnetvz is in excess (additional),
since he does not call for the Srausha¢ for any other
(libation); and this libation also is in excess: thus
he puts the excess to the excess,—therefore the
Unnetvz calls for the Sraushad.

9. Placing (the Drozakalasa) on his head, he calls
for the Srausha¢,—for this (vessel) is his (Soma’s)
head. He first says (to the Maitravaruza), ‘ Recite
(the invitatory prayer) for the Soma-draughts with
grains!’ Having called for the Sraushaé, he says,
‘Prompt (the Hotvz to pronounce the offering prayer
on) the Soma-draughts with grain brought forward*!’
and offers as the Vasha¢ and Anuvashaé are uttered.
They then divide the grain between them for the
sake of the Soma-draught.

10. Now some take the Drowakalasa over to the
Hotvz, on the ground that ‘the draught belongs to
the utterer of the Vasha¢. But let him not do it
thus; for the other draughts are (taken by the
respective priests) according to the £amasa cups, but
this one is in excess: therefore there is a draught
in it for all of them,—for this reason’ they divide
the grain between them for the sake of the Soma-
draught.


ee ee ee alleen hls HE ia ested A Me el all Sh


' The text might also be taken in the sense of ‘ Whatever metre
tnere is, both measured and unmeasured, all that he thereby con-
sumes.’ The libation is, however, taken out for the metres or
cattle, represented by the grain.

? Instead of the Agnidhra, see I, 5, 2, 16, with note.

* Regarding ‘prasthitam,’ sce p. 198, note 3.


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 13. 373


— ee re ee


11. They must not bite them with their teeth,—
for these (grains) mean cattle,—thinking ‘lest we
should do aught to crush our cattle!’ They only
drink it in with their breath’, with (Vag. S. VIII,
12),‘What horse-winning, what cow-winning
draught is thine?;’ for they are cattle: therefore
he says, ‘what horse-winning, what cow-winning
draught is thine;'—‘Of that draught, offered
with Yagus, praised by chants*’—for Yagus-
prayers have indeed been offered, and chants have
been chanted ;—‘sung by hymns,’—for songs
(sastras) have been sung ;—‘ Of the invited‘ do I
drink, invited,—for invited, he now drinks of the
invited.

12. They must not throw them into the fire, lest
they offer remains (of offerings) in the fire. They
rather throw them on the high altar: thus they are
not excluded from the sacrifice.

13. Thereupon they touch the vessels filled (with
water®) which some call Apsushoma/ (Soma-draughts
in water). For even as a yoked (animal) draws, so


1 They are only to smell the grains steeped in the Soma-juice.

2 The Kazva recension adds, ‘O divine Soma!’

3 Lit., having Yagus offered, and chants chanted for it,

4 ?T.e. ‘that to which I am invited.’

6 That is, the ten Aamasins touch their respective £amasa cups,
filled with water and placed in the proper order from south to
north, behind the pit (Aitvala), after putting fresh kusa stalks on
them, Those priests who. have no cups of their own touch the cups
of those with whom they are most nearly connected, viz. the four
Adhvaryus that of the Nesh/r/, the Udgatr?’s assistants that of their
principal, the Gravastut that of the Hotve. Thereupon they touch
their faces and betake themselves to the Agnidhra fire-house, to
partake of sour milk. Then follow, on the Garhapatya (at the front
hall door), the Patnisamy4gas of the cakes of the animal offering,
followed by the Samish/ayagus. See also Lavy. Sr. 1], 11, 16 seq,


374 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


do they who perform the priestly duties. But the
yoked (animal) galls or scratches itself; and water
is a means of soothing, a medicine: thus wherever
in this (sacrifice) they gall or scratch themselves—
water being a means of soothing—they soothe by
that means of soothing, water; they heal it by water.
This is why they touch the vessels filled (with water).

14. They touch them with (Vag. S. VIII, 14),
‘With lustre, with sap, with bodies! have we
united,—with the happy spirit: may Tvashé¢vz,
the dispenser of boons, grant us riches, and
may he smooth what was injured in our body!’
thus they heal what was torn.

15. They then touch their faces. There is a two-
fold reason why they touch their faces ;—water, for-
sooth, is the elixir of immortality : it is with the elixir
of immortality that they thus touch themselves. And,
moreover, they thus deposit that holy work into their
own self: therefore they touch their faces.


FourtH BrRAHMANA.


E. Conciupinc CEREMONIES.,


1. Now, it is nine Samishéayagus? he offers on
this occasion. The reason why he offers nine Sa-
mish/ayagus is that those stotra-verses at the Bahish-
pavamana® chant amount to nine. Thus there is
at both ends an inferior (incomplete) virag‘, for the


* See I, 9, 3, 6. Cf. Atharva-veda VI, 53,3. The Tandya Br. I,
3, 9 reads ‘sam tapobhif’ (with fervour).

* See I, 9, 2, 25 seq.

* See p. 310, note 1.


* The virég consists of p&das of ten syllables, For the same
speculation, see II, 5, 1, 20.


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 6. 375


sake of production: it was from that same inferior
(lower) source of production on both sides that Pra-
gapati produced the creatures,—from the one (he
created) the upright, and from the other those tend-
ing to the ground. And in like manner does he
(the Adhvaryu) now create creatures from that lower
source of production on both sides,—from the one
the upright, and from the other those tending to the
ground, |

2. The call ‘ Hiwz’ is the tenth of stotra-verses,
and the ‘ Svaha’ (the tenth) of these (SamishZayagus) :
and thus does this incomplete virag come to consist
of tens and tens.

3. And as to why they are called Samish/ayagus.
Whatever deities he invites at this sacrifice, and for
whatever deities this sacrifice is performed, they all
are thereby ‘sacrificed-to together’ (sam-ish/a);
and because, after all those (deities) have bcen ‘sacri-
ficed-to together, he now offers those (libations),
therefore they are called Samish/ayagus.

4. And as to why he offers the Samish/ayagus.
Now, the self of him who has sacrificed has, as it
were, become emptied, since he gives away of what-
ever is his: it is him he fills again by three out of
these (oblations).

5. And as to the three following which he offers,—
whatever deities he invites at this sacrifice, and for
whatever deities this sacrifice is performed, they
continue waiting till the Samish/ayagus are performed,
thinking, ‘ These, forsooth, he must offer unto us!’
It is these same deities he thereby dismisses in due
form whithersoever their course lies.

6. And as to the three last which he offers,—in
performing the sacrifice he has produced it, and,


376 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


having produced it, he firmly establishes it where
there is a safe resting-place for it: this is why he
performs the Samish/ayagus.

7. He offers (the first) with (Vag. S. VIII, 15;
Rig-veda V, 42, 4), ‘With thought lead us, O
Indra, to meet with kine, —‘with thought:’ him
who was emptied he thereby fills with thought;
‘with kine;’ him who was emptied he thereby fills
with kine ;—‘ with patrons, O mighty Lord, with
well-being; with prayer which is divinely in-
spired!,—‘with prayer:’ him who was emptied he
thereby fills with prayer ;—‘ with the favour of the
adorable gods! Hail!’

8. [The second with Vag. S. VIII, 16], ‘With
lustre, with sap, with bodies, —‘with lustre:’
him who was emptied he thereby fills with lustre;
‘with sap,—sap is vigour—him who was emptied he
thus fills with sap ;--‘We have united, with the
happy spirit: may Tvash¢rz, the dispenser of
boons, grant us riches, and may he smooth
what was injured in our body!’ Thus they heal
what was torn.

9. [The third with Vag. S. VIII, 17; Atharva-veda
VII, 17, 4], ‘May the gracious Dhatzz, Savitvz,
Pragapati, the guardian of treasures, and the
divine Agni accept this (offering); and Tvash-
¢yvz and Vishzu: grant ye willingly to the
sacrificer wealth together with children!
Hail!’ Him who was emptied he fills again, when
he says, ‘grant ye wealth to the sacrificer, Hail!’


en lthinmetcintadnchslhcamctthdeeniensadiuntceosaiicnaentaadeasticnamscstat ig tit!


* ? The author of the Brahmana would rather seem to take it in
the sense of ‘ with the priestly authority (sacerdotium) instituted by
the gods.’


Iv KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 12. 377


10. [The fourth with Vag. S. VIII, 181], ‘Acces-
sible homes have we prepared for you, O gods,
who graciously came to this Soma feast;’—
whereby he means to say, ‘seats easy of access we
have prepared for you, O gods, who have graciously
come to this Soma feast ;—‘ Carrying and driving
the offerings,’ thereby he dismisses the several
deities ; ‘Those forsooth who are without cars may
go away carrying; and those who have cars may go
away driving, this is what he means to say; there-
fore he says, ‘ Carrying and driving the offerings ;’—
‘bestow goods on him, ye good! Hail!’

11. [The fifth with Vag. S. VIII, 19; Atharva-veda
VII, 97, 3], ‘The willing gods whom thou, O
God, broughtest hither, s peed them each to his
own abode, O Agni!’ For to Agni he said, ‘ Bring
hither such and such gods! bring hither such and
such gods!’ and to him he now says, ‘ Whatever
gods thou hast brought hither, make them go whither-
soever their course lies!’—‘ Ye have alleaten and
drunk, —for they have eaten the cakes of the animal
offering, and they have drunk the king Soma: there-
fore he says, ‘ ye have all eaten and drunk ;—‘ Draw
ye nigh to the air, to the heat, to the light!
Hail!’ Hereby, then, he dismisses the deities.

12. [The sixth with Vag. S. VIII, 20], ‘Thee, O
Agni, have we chosen here for our Hotvz at
the opening of this sacrifice: severally hast
thou offered to them, and severally hast thou
toiled; well-knowing the sacrifice, draw thou
nigh*, thou the wise! Hail!’ by this (verse) he
releases Agni, dismisses Agni.


1 Cf. Atharva-veda VII, 97, 4.
2 That is, according to Mahidhara, ‘knowing that the sacrifice


378 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


iT


13. [The seventh with Vag. S. VIII, 21], ‘Ye
path-finding gods,—for the gods are, indeed,
the finders of the path;—‘having found the
path,’—‘ having found the sacrifice, he thereby
means to say ;—‘go ye inthe path!’ therewith he
dismisses them in due form;—‘O divine Lord of
mind, this sacrifice—Svaha !—give thou to the
wind!’ for the sacrifice, indeed, is yonder blowing
(wind): having thus completed this sacrifice, he
establishes it in that sacrifice, and thus unites sacri-
fice with sacrifice,—hence he says, ‘Svaha! give (it)
to the wind!’

14. [The eighth with Vag. S. VIII, 22], ‘O sacri-
fice, go to the sacrifice, go to the lord of the
sacrifice, go to thine own womb, Hail!’—the
sacrifice, thus established, he thereby establishes in
its own womb. [The ninth he offers with], ‘This
is thy sacrifice, Olord of the sacrifice, bestow-
ing numerous heroes, together with the song
of praise: dothou accept it, Hail!’ the sacrifice,
thus established, bestowing numerous heroes, toge-
ther with the song of praise he thereby finally
establishes in the sacrificer.


FirtH BRAHMANA.


1. He now betakes himself to the expiatory bath
(avabhvztha). The reason why he betakes him-
self to the expiatory bath is this. What vital sap
there has been in him (Soma and the sacrificer), that
(sap) of his he (the priest) has produced (extracted)
for the offerings. Now that body (of Soma, i.e.


is accomplished, go thou to thine own house!’ Cf. Atharva-veda
VII, 97, 1 (‘draw near to Soma!’).


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 3. 379


the Soma-husks),—there is no sap in it; (yet) it
is not to be cast away: they take it down to the
water and—water being sap—he puts that sap into
it. Thus he unites him with that sap, and thus he
produces him from it,—he (Soma), even when pro-
duced, produces him (the sacrificer)!: and because
they take it down (ava-hvz?) to the water, therefore
(the bath is called) avabhvztha.

2. In the first place he performs the Samish¢ayagus
offerings, for the Samish/ayagus are the extreme end
of the sacrifice. As soon as he has performed the
Samishéayagus, they go together to the #atvala (pit)
with whatever he (the sacrificer) has about him’:
both the black-deer’s horn‘ and the girdle he throws
into the pit,

3. With (Vag. S. VIII, 23), ‘Be thou nor adder
nor viper!’ Now when they take the Soma-husks
down to the water, that forsooth is the wishing of
‘good-speed®!’ to it, and this now Is the ‘good-speed !
to him (the sacrificer); for snakes are like rope, and
snakes’ haunts are like wells (pits), and there is as
it were a feud between men and snakes: ‘ Lest that
should spring therefrom,’ he thinks, and therefore he
says, ‘Be thou nor adder nor viper!’


1 ? That is, as the Soma plants become juicy again, so the sacri-
ficer has his vital sap or spirit restored.

2 Or, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ‘they throw it
into the water.’

’ Or, whatever is connected with Soma(?). According to Katy.
X, 8, 12,19 the throne (asandi) and Audumbari, as well as the
Soma vessels, Dromakalasa, &c., are to be carried in the first place
to the £atvala, and from there to the water.

* See III, 2,1, 18. The Pratiprasthatrs is silently to throw after
the lady’s zone and peg (for scratching herself).

5 For the ‘svagakara,’ see I, 8, 3, 11.


380 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


4. He then makes (the sacrificer) say (Rig-veda
I, 24, 8), ‘Broad forsooth is the path which
king Varuza hath made for the sun to walk
along,—whereby he means to say, ‘even as there
is for the sun that broad path, free from danger and
injury, so may there be for me here a broad path,
free from danger and injury.’

5. ‘For the footless hath he made feet to
put down!) for, although he (the sun) is footless,
yet he is able to walk ;—‘ And the forbidder is
heofallthat woundeth the heart, —thus he frees
him from every guilt and evil of the heart.

6. He then says, ‘Sing the Saman!’ or ‘Speak
the SAman!’ but let him rather say ‘Sing, for they
do sing the SAaman. The reason why he sings the
SAman is that the evil spirits may not injure that
body of his outside the sacrifice, for the Saman is a
repeller of the evil spirits.

7. He (the Prastotv7) sings a (verse) to Agni, for
Agni is a repeller of the evil spirits. He sings in
the AtifZandas; for this, the Atif#/andas, is all
the metres”: therefore he sings in the Ati£/andas.

8. He sings, ‘Agni burneth, Agni en-
countereth with flames—Ah4avak! Ahavad?!’
Thus he drives the evil spirits away from here.


? Or, ‘To the footless he has given to put down his feet:’ in
either sense it seems to be taken by the author of the Brahmanza
(and the St. Petersburg Dictionary). Perhaps, however, ‘apade’
had better be taken, with Mahidhara (and Sayaza?), in the sense of
‘ padarahite,’ i.e. ‘in the trackless (ether) he caused him (the sun)
to plant his feet.’ Similarly Ludwig, ‘Im Ortlosen hat er sie die
Fiisse niedersetzen lassen.’

? “Esha vai sarvam ati yad atiAanda,’ Kanva text. AtiAhandas,
i.e. Over-metre, redundant metre, is the generic term for metres
consisting of more than forty-eight syllables.

* All the priests, as well as the sacrificer, are to join in the


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 13. 381


9. They walk out (from the sacrificial ground)
northwards, along the back of the pit and the front
side of the Agnidhra : then they proceed in whatever
direction the water is.

10, Where there is a standing pool of flowing
water, there let him (the sacrificer) descend into the
water—for whatsoever parts of flowing water flow
not, these are holden by Varuza; and the expiatory
bath belongs to Varuza—to free himself from
Varuva. But if he does not find such, he may
descend into any water.

11, While he makes him descend into the water,
he bids him say,‘ Homage be to Varuza: down-
trodden is Varuza’s snare!’ thus he delivers him
from every snare of Varuza, from every (infliction ')
of Varuza.

12. Thereupon, taking ghee in four ladlings, and
throwing down a kindling-stick (on the water), he
offers thereon, with (Vag. S. VIII, 24), ‘The face
of Agni, the waters, have I entered, escaping
from the power of demons, O son of the
waters! In every homestead offer thou
the log, O Agni! let thy tongue dart forth
towards the ghee,—Hail!’ |

13. Now, once on a time, the gods made so much
of Agni, as would go in’, enter the water, in order
that the evil spirits should not rise therefrom;
for Agni is the repeller of evil spirits. It is
him he kindles by this kindling-stick and by this


nidhana (finale, or concluding word of the Saman). According to
Katy. X, 8,16, 17 the Saman is chanted thrice, viz. in starting
from the 4Aatvala, midway, and at the water-side.

1 Or guilt against Varuva. See p. 221, note r.

2 Agner yavad va yavad va. Cf. p. 371, note 3.


392 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


oblation, thinking ‘On the kindled (fire) will I offer
to the gods!’

14. Then, having taken ghee a second time in
four ladlings, and having called for the (Agnidhra’s)
Srausha¢, he says, ‘Pronounce the offering prayer
to the Kindling-sticks!’ He offers four fore-
offerings, omitting that to the Barhis '—the Barhis
being offspring, and the expiatory bath belonging to
Varuza—lest Varuza should seize upon his offspring.
This is why he offers four fore-offerings, omitting
that to the Barhis.

15. Then follows a cake on one potsherd for
Varuza. For whatever sap there had been in him
(Soma), that sap of his he has produced (extracted)
for the offerings. Now that body: there is no sap
init. But the cake is sap: that sap he puts into it.
Thus he unites him with that sap, and so produces
him from it,—he (Soma), even when produced, pro-
duces him (the sacrificer): hence there is a cake on
one potsherd for Varuza.

16. Having made an ‘underlayer’ of ghee (in the
offering-spoon), he says, while making the cuttings
from the cake?, ‘ Recite (the invitatory prayer) to
Varuza!’ Here now some make two cuttings from
the Soma-husks, but let him not do so; for that
(heap of husks) is an empty body, unfit for offering.
He makes two cuttings (from the cake) and bastes
them once with ghee, and anoints (replenishes the
places whence) the cuttings (have been made).
Having called for the Srausha/, he says, ‘ Recite the


’ For the usual five prayadgas, see I, 5, 3, 8-13.

* As a rule, cakes on one potsherd are to be offered entire.
The present cake, however, is to be an exception, and the usual
two portions are to be cut from it. See part i, p. 192, note.


IV KANDA, 4 ADIIYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 19. 383


offering prayer to Varuza!’ and offers as the Vashaé
is uttered.

17, Then, having made an underlayer of ghee, he
says, while putting the (remainder of the) cake (into
the spoon), ‘Recite the invitatory prayer to Agni
and Varuza!’ This is for (Agni) Svish¢éakrzt}; and
as to why he does not say ‘To Agni,’ it is lest
Varuza might seize upon Agni. If before he has
cut twice from the Soma-husks, he now does so
once, but if (he did) not, he need not heed it. He
then bastes it twice with butter on the upper side;
and having called for the Srausha/é, he says, ‘ Recite
the offering prayer to Agni and Varuza!’ and offers
as the Vashaz¢ is uttered.

18. Now these are six oblations; for there are six
seasons in the year, and Varuvza is the year: hence
there are six oblations.

19. This is the course of the Adityas?; and these
Yagus, they say, belong to the Adityas. Let (the
Adhvaryu) endeavour to perform as much of it as is
his (the sacrificer’s) wish. And if the sacrificer tell
him to do otherwise, then he should do otherwise.
He may also perform those same four fore-offerings,
—omitting that to the Barhis—two butter-portions,
(the oblations of cake) to Varuza and Agni-Varuza,
and two after-offerings,—omitting the one to the
Barhis ;—this makes ten. Now the viradg consists


nT Mis ike ay aa 6

* Professor Weber, Ind. Stud. X, p. 393, refers us to XIV, 9, 4,
33, where it is stated that the Vagasaneyin Adhvaryu has to study
the Yagus of the Aditya Rishi. One might also be inclined to
think that, by ‘Adity4nam ayanam’ and ‘ Angirasim ayanam’ the
author intended to connect the Agnishfoma with the sacrificial
sessions designated by those terms, for which sce Asv. Sr. XII.

; Ait. Br. IV, 17, with Haug’s notes.


384 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


of ten syllables, and the sacrifice is virag: thus he
makes the sacrifice to be like the virag.

20. This is the course of the Angiras. Having
performed the offerings either way, (the Adhvaryu)
makes the pot, in which the husks are, float with
(Vag. S. VIII, 25), ‘In the ocean, in the waters,
is thy heart (O Soma)’—for the ocean is the
waters, and water is sap: that sap he now puts into
him (Soma), and thus he unites him with that sap, and
produces him therefrom; and he (Soma), even when
produced, produces him (the sacrificer) ;—‘ May the
plants and the waters unite with thee!’—
thereby he puts two kinds of sap into him, that
which its in plants, and that which is in water,—‘that
we may serve thee, O lord of the sacrifice, in
the singing of praises and the utterance of
worship’, with Svaha!’ Whatever is good in the
sacrifice, that he thereby puts into him.

21, Thereupon, letting it go, he stands by it with
(Vag. S. VIII, 26), ‘Ye divine waters, this is
your child,—for he (Soma) indeed is the child of
the waters,—‘ bear ye him, well-beloved, well-
nourished!’ he thereby makes him over to the
waters for protection—' This, O divine Soma, is
thine abode: thrive thou well therein, and
thrive thou? thoroughly!’ whereby he means to
say, ‘ Be thou therein for our happiness, and shield
us from all inflictions!’


1 See part i, p. 249, note 1.

* *Vakshva’ is by Mahidhara (and apparently by the author of
the Brahmaza) referred to ‘vah;’ by the St. Petersburg Dictionary
to ‘vas’ for ‘vatsva.’ Ihave referred it to ‘vaksh. The Kanva
text reads, Pari £a vakshi sam ka vakshifti pari 4a no gopadya sam
ka na edhity evaitad aha.


IV KANDA, 4 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 23. 385


22. He then immerses it with (V4g. S. VIII, 27),
‘O laving bath, laving thou glidest along:
with the help of the gods may I wipe out the
sin committed against the gods; and with
the help of the mortals that committed against
mortals!’—for the sin committed against the gods
he has indeed wiped out with the help of the gods,
namely, with the help of king Soma; and the sin
committed against mortals he has wiped out with the
help of mortals, namely, by means of the animal
victim and the sacrificial cake -—‘ Preserve me, O
god, from injury from the fiercely-howling
(ceiumicitaie ’ whereby he means to say, ‘ Preserve me
from all inflictions!’

23. Thereupon both (the sacrificer and his wife)
having descended, bathe, and wash each other's
back. Having wrapped themselves in fresh gar-
ments! they step out: even as a snaké casts its skin,
so does he cast away all his sin,—there is not in him
even as much sin as there is in a toothless child.
By the same way by which they came out (from the
sacrificial ground), they return thither ?; and, having
returned, he puts a kindling-stick on the Ahavantya
(at the front hall-door) ith Thouartthe kindler
of the gods!’ He thereby kindles the sacrificer him-


1 According to the Manava Sfitra, as quoted on Katy. X, 9, 6
the sacrificer wraps himself in the cloth in which the Soma stalks
were tied (somopanahana), and his wife in the outer cloth tied
round the Soma bundle (paryavahana). The Soma vessels and
implements are likewise thrown into the water.

? While going thither they all mutter the Amahiya verse, Rig-
veda VIII, 48, 3,‘ We have drunk Soma, we have become immortal,
we have gone to the light, we have attained to the gods: what
now can the enemy do unto us, what the guile, O immortal, of the
mortal ?’


[26] cc


386 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

wi scnl acm ec gs aomant asa Gade cancbne ear sete mare
self, for along with the kindling of the gods the
sacrificer is kindled’.


Firty ApuyAya. First BRAHMANA.


1. He proceeds with the rice-pap to Aditi, as the
concluding oblation. The reason why there is a
rice-pap for Aditi is this. Because, on that former
eccasion?, the gods said to her, ‘ Thine forsooth shall
be the opening, and thine the concluding oblation,
therefore he prepares that share for her at both
ends (of the Soma-sacrifice).

2. And because, on that occasion, he offers when
about to go forth (upa-pra-i) to buy the king (Soma),
therefore that (opening oblation) is called Praya-
miya. And because he now offers after coming out
(ud-4-i) from the expiatory bath, therefore this (con-
cluding oblation) is called Udayamtya’. For this
indeed is one and the same oblation: to Aditi be-
longs the opening, to Aditi the concluding (oblation);
for Aditi is this (earth).

3. To Pathy4 Svasti he offers first (at the open-
ing sacrifice): then the gods, through speech, saw their
way in what was unknown to them, for by speech the
confused becomes known. But now that it is known,
he performs in the proper order.

4. To Agni he offers first, then to Soma, then
to Savitvz, then to Pathy4 Svasti, then to Aditi.
Now Pathy4 Svasti (the wishing of a ‘happy journey’)


? The sacrificer sits down behind the saladvarya fire and spreads
the black deer-skin over his knees; the Adhvaryu then making an
oblation of ghee from the dipping-spoon.

© See III, 2,3, 6. * See p. 48, note 1.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 8. 387


is speech, and Aditi is this (earth): on her the gods
thereby established specch, and thus established
thereon speech speaks here.

5. Thereupon he slaughters a barren anfban-
dhy4! cow for Mitra and Varuza. And this indeed
is performed as a different sacrifice, and that an
animal offering ; for the Samish¢ayagus form the end
of the sacrifice.

6. The reason why there is a barren cow for
Mitra and Varuwa is this. Whatever part of
his (sacrifice)? who has offered is well-offered that
part of his Mitra takes, and whatever is ill-offered
that Varuza takes,

7. Then they say, ‘ What has become of the sacri-
ficer ?’—whatever well-offered part of his (sacrifice)
Mitra here takes, that he now again surrenders to
him, being pleased with this (cow); and whatever
ill-offered part of his Varuwa takes, that indeed he
makes well-offered for him, being pleased with this
(cow), and surrenders it again to him. This forsooth
is his own sacrifice*, his own merit.

8. And again, why there is a barren cow for Mitra
and Varuza. Now, when the gods caused the cast
seed to spring,—there is that sastra called Agnima-
ruta‘: in connection therewith it is explained how


1 The meaning of this technical term would seem to te ‘to be
pound (or immolated) after’ the sacrifice.

2 Or, of him, the sacrificer.

’ That is, the sacrifice of his own self.

‘ The same passage occurs at I, 7, 4, 4, where I erroneously
supplied ‘samabhavat.’ It is a broken, incoherent construction.
The explanation, referred to in these two passages, may be Ait.
Br. III, 34, though in that case one might have expected a some-
what closer adherence to the order of production there proposed ;


cc 2


388 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


the gods caused that seed to spring. From it the
coals (angara) sprung, and from the coals the An-
giras; and after that the other animals?.

9. Then the dust of the ashes which remained:
therefrom the ass was produced,—hence when it is
dusty anywhere, people say, ‘A very place for asses,
forsooth?!’ And when no sap whatever remained,—
thence was produced that barren cow belonging to
Mitra and Varuza; wherefore that (cow) does not
bring forth, for from sap seed is produced, and from
seed cattle. And because she was produced at the
end, therefore she comes after the end of the sacri-
fice. Hence also a barren cow for Mitra and Varuza
is the most proper here: if he cannot obtain a barren
cow, it may also be a bullock’.

10. Then the Visve Deva applied themselves‘ a
second time: thence the Vaisvadevi (cow) was pro-
duced; then the Barhaspaty4: that is the end, for
Brzhaspati is the end.

11, And whosoever gives a thousand or more


see parti, p. 210, note 1. Regarding the Agniméruta sastra, see
above, p. 369 note.

1 ? Or, the others, the animals (tad anv anye pasavak). Cp. the
French idiom, ‘ Les femmes et nous autres hommes.’ The Kazva
text reads, tad anu pasava.

* The Kanva reads, And when they (the coals) became dust of
ashes, the ass was produced therefrom: hence they call ‘asses’
place’ where the dust of the ashes (lies).

* Katy. X, 9,15 allows, in lieu of the animal offering, an oblation
of clotted curds (payasya or Amiksha). See also II, 4, 2, 14.

* ? They applied their minds, or, they took hold (amarimrzsanta) :

Tad u visve deva marimrisim kakrire tato dvittya vaisvadevi

samabhavat.’ Kanva text. Perhaps the verb has here the same
meaning as ‘dha’ in the passage of the Ait. Br. referred to, tad
(reto) maruto ’dhunvan.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 13. 389


(cows to the priests), he will slaughter all these ;—
indeed, everything is obtained, everything conquered
by him who gives a thousand or more. Those (three)
cows are everything, (when offered) thus in the
proper order: first one to Mitra and Varuma, then
one to the All-gods, then one to Brzhaspati.

12. And those who perform a long sacrificial
session, for a year or more, they will slaughter all
these! ;—indeed everything is obtained, everything
conquered by those who perform a long sacrificial
session, for a year or more: those (cows) are every-
thing, (when offered) thus in the proper order.

13. Thereupon he performs the Udavas4niya
ish¢i (completing oblation). He prepares a cake
on five potsherds for Agni. Its invitatory and of-
fering prayers are five-footed panktis?. For at this
time the sacrifice of him who has sacrificed is, as it
were, exhausted in strength: it, as it were, passes
away from him. Now all sacrifices are Agni, since
all sacrifices are performed in him, the domestic
sacrifices as well as others. He thus takes hold
again of the sacrifice, and thus that sacrifice of his is


1 The immolation of the three anubandhya cows is prescribed at
the end of the Gavamayana (see note on IV, 5, 4, 14), and at other
Sattras (sacrificial session) lasting at least a year, and endowed with
fees of at least a thousand cows, except the Sdrasvata Sattra.
Katy. XIII, 4, 4, 5.

2 The Udavas4Anfy4 ish/i is performed, with certain modifica-
tions, on the model of the Paunaradheyiki ishd, or offering for the
re-establishment of the sacred fire; for which see II, 2, 3, 4 seq.,
and especially the notes on part i, p. 317 seq. Itis to be per-
formed somewhere north of the sacrificial ground on a fire pro-
duced by the churning of the aramis or (pairs of) churning-sticks,
with which the priests have previously ‘lifted’ their several fires.
See p. go, notes 4 and 5; and part i, p. 396, note 1.


390 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


not exhausted in strength, and does not pass away
from him.

14. The reason why the cake is one on five pot-
sherds, and the invitatory and offering prayers are
panktis (verses of five feet), is that the sacrifice is
fivefold. He thus takes hold again of the sacrifice,
and thus that sacrifice of his is not exhausted in
strength, and does not pass away from him.

15. The priests’ fee for it is gold; for this is a
sacrifice to Agni, and gold is Agni’s seed: therefore
the priests’ fee is gold. Or an ox, for such a one is
of Agni’s nature as regards its shoulder, since its
shoulder (bearing the yoke) is as if burnt by fire.

16. Or!, he takes ghee in five ladlings, and offers
it with the verse to Vishzu (Vag. S. V, 38), ‘Stride
thou widely, O Vishzu, make wide room for
our abode! drink the ghee, thou born of ghee,
and speed the lord of the sacrifice ever on-
wards, Hail!’ For Vishzu is the sacrifice: he thus
takes hold again of the sacrifice, and thus his sacri-
fice is not exhausted in strength, and does not pass
away from him. And let him on this occasion give
as much as he can afford, for no offering, they say,
should be without a Dakshiza. When this Udava-
santya-ish¢i is completed, he offers the (ordinary)
evening (milk-)offering?,—but the morning offering
at its proper time.


" According to Katy. X, 9, 20 (as interpreted by the commen-
tator) this (Vaishzavi) ahuti may optionally take the place of the
Udavasaniya ishA. ‘Atho’ has evidently the force of ‘or’ here, as
in IV, 6, 4,5. The Kanva text has atho apy dhutim eva guhu-
yat; with the same meaning, cf. I, 1, 3, 33; also ‘uto,’ note to
DV era rs.

* For the Agnihotra, or morning and evening libation of milk,
see II, 2, 4; 3, 4. The performance being completed, the tempo-


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. 391


SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. They lay hands on the barren cow!, and having
laid hands on it, they quiet it. It having been
quieted?, he says (to the slaughterer), ‘ Pull out the
omentum!’ The omentum having been pulled out?,
let him tell (the slaughterer) to search groping for an
embryo. Ifthey do not find one, why need they care ?
and if they find one, atonement is made therefore.

2. For surely it is not right that, thinking it to be
one (cow), they should perform, as it were, with that
one; or that, thinking them to be two, they should
perform, as it were, with two’. Let him bid (the


rary erections, as the Sadas, cart-shed, Agnidhra fire-house, &c.,
are set on fire, and the sacrificer and priests go home.

1 The order of this and the succeeding Brahmamas differs con-
siderably in the two recensions. In the Kava recension the pre-
sent Brahmana (the text of which also differs very much) is preceded
by three others (V, 6, 1-3), corresponding to M. IV, 5, 3; IV, 5,
4 and IV, 5, 6, respectively.

* The text has simply, he (viz. the Samitr# or butcher) having
quieted it, he (the Adhvaryu) says, (S.) having pulled it out, let
him (A.) bid... .

* The meaning of this would seem to be, that they should not
content themselves with the supposition of its being a barren cow,
but that they should ascertain whether she is not—as the term is—
‘ashApadi,’ or eight-footed, i.e. a cow with calf (cf. par. 12), and
should in that case make atonement. The K4mva text reads, Now
when they thus proceed with that (animal offering), they, thinking
it to be one (cow) only, pronounce the 4pri verses (Aprizanti).
They turn out to be two (te dve bhavatah); and surely it is not
right that one should cast away that on which the Apri verses have
been pronounced. Now that juice has flowed together from all
the limbs: thus offering is also made with those sacrificial portions
of that (embryo). And the sacrifice is as much as the havis and
Svishfakrit: he thus connects that whole (embryo) with that sacri-


392 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

i SA ELAR A ETE BBE INES 5 TE
slaughterer) get ready the pot (sthali) and the cloth
(ushzisha)?.

3. They then perform with the omentum, just as
its mode of performance is*. Having performed
with the omentum, both the Adhvaryu and Sacrificer
return (to the sacrificial ground), The Adhvaryu
says, ‘Pull out that embryo!’ otherwise he would not
pull it out from the womb, since it is only pulled out
from the womb of a sick or dead (female); but when
the embryo is full grown, then indeed it comes out
through birth: let him bid him pull it out even after
tearing asunder the thighs.

4. When it is pulled out, he addresses it with
(Vag. S. VIII, 28), ‘May the embryo of ten
months move together with the caul!’—by say-
ing, ‘May it move,’ he puts breath into it; and ‘of
ten months’ he says, because when an embryo is full
grown, then it is one of ten months: thus, even though
it is not ten months old, he makes it one of ten months
by means of the Brahman (prayer), the Yagus.

5. ‘ Together with the caul’—this he says so that,
like a ten months’ (calf), it may go out with the
caul?—‘ As yonder wind moveth, as the ocean
moveth;'—thereby he puts breath into it;—‘So
hath this ten months’ (calf) slipped out with
the caul;’—this he means to say so that, like a ten
months’ calf, it may slip out with the caul.

6. Here now they say, ‘What is he to do with


fice, and thus that which is superfluous (atirikta) becomes not
superfluous.

» The comm. on Katy. XXV, 10, 7, describes the ushwisha, used
on this occasion, as a small cloth, or kerchief.

? See III, 8, 2, 16 seq.

* Or, even as a ten months’ calf moves with the caul, so he
means to say (that) this (should take place).


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 8. 393


that embryo ?’—They might cut off a portion from
every limb, even as (is done) the portioning of other
portions. But let himnotdoso; forthat (embryo) surely
has its limbs undeveloped. Having cut it below the
neck, they should let that fat juice drip into the pot;
for that same juice drips from all its limbs, and thus
it is a portion cut out from all its limbs. He then
cuts the sacrificial portions of the cow in the same
way in which they are (usually) portioned off.

7. They cook them on the cooking-fire of the
animal offering : at the same time! they cook that fat
juice. Having wrapped the embryo in the cloth, he
lays it down by the side of the cooking-fire. When
it (the victim) is cooked, he puts together? the
(flesh) portions and bastes only them, but not that
juice. They remove the victim (from. the fire); and
at the same time they remove that juice.

8. They take it along the back of the pit, between
the sacrificial stake and the fire. It having been put
down south (of the fire), the Pratiprasthatz cuts off
the sacrificial portions. He then makes an under-
layer (of ghee) in both offering-spoons, and addresses
(the Hotvz) for the recitation to the Manota deity
on the havis. Thereupon they make cuttings from
the portions of the cow, in the same way in which
cuttings are made from them *.

9. Now there is an offering-spoon called prazaravi :


1 Or, in the same place. The K4mva text reads, Having cut off
the head, and let the juice (rasa) flow out, he cooks it by the side
of (prativesam) the (flesh) portions. And when they proceed with
the havis, then having made an underlayer of ghee, and, taking
twice from that juice, having basted (the portions therewith), he
replenishes the (places of the) two portions.

2 ? Read ‘samuhya’ for ‘samudya.’ See III, 8, 3, 5 seq.

3 See III, 8, 3, 15 seq.


394 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


therein the Pratiprasthatr2 makes an underlayer of
ghee for the fat juice, takes two portions (from the
juice), bastes them once (with ghee), and replenishes
(the juice whence) both portions (have been taken).
He (the Adhvaryu) then addresses (the Hotvz) for-
the recitation (of the invitatory prayer). Having
called for the Srausha/, he says (to the Maitrava-
ruza), ‘Prompt (the Hotz to recite the offering
prayer)!’ As the Vashaé is uttered, the Adhvaryu
offers (the flesh portions). After the Adhvaryu’s
oblation the Pratiprasthatvz offers (the fat juice)—

10. With (V4g. S. VIII, 29), ‘Thou whose fruit
is fit for sacrifice,—for embryos are unfit for
sacrifice: this one he thus makes fit for sacrifice by
means of the Brahman, the Yagus;—‘thou who
hast a golden womb,—for on that former occa-
sion}, they rend the womb when they tear out (the
embryo); and gold means immortal life; he thus
makes that womb of her (the cow) immortal ;—
‘Him whose limbs are unbroken, I have
brought together with his mother, Hail!’
Thus, if it be a male (embryo) ; but if it be a female
one, with, ‘Her whose limbs are unbroken, I have
brought together with her mother, Hail!’ And, if
it be an indistinguishable embryo, let him offer in
making it male, since embryos (garbha, masc.) are
male, ‘Him whose limbs are unbroken, I have
brought together with his mother, Hail!’ For on
that former occasion, when they tear out (the em-
bryo) they separate it from its mother: now, having
rendered it successful by means of the Brahman, the
Yagus, he brings it again together with its mother in
the midst of the sacrifice.


nr Oee Dal. 4.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 13. = 395


11, Thereupon the Adhvaryu makes the oblation
to the Lord of the forest'. Having made the obla-
tion to the Lord of the forest, the Adhvaryu, while
pouring together the sacrificial portions that are for
the upabhvz¢, says (to the Hotrz), ‘ Recite the invita-
tory prayer to Agni Svishéakrzt!’ The Pratipra-
sthAtxz comes and takes all that fat juice, and pours
twice (ghee) thereon. Having called for the Srausha¢,
the Adhvaryu says, ‘Prompt!’ and offers as the Vasha/
is uttered. After the Adhvaryu’s oblation the Prati-
prasthatvz offers,—

12, With (V4g. S. VIII, 30), ‘The bountiful
multiform juice?,—by ‘bountiful’ he means to
say (the bestower) ‘of numerous gifts;’ and ‘the
multiform’ he says, because embryos are, as it were,
multiform,—' The strong juice hath invested
itself with greatness:’'—for it (the embryo) is
indeed invested * in the mother.—‘ May the worlds
spread along her, the one-footed, two-footed,
three-footed, four-footed, eight-footed—
‘Hail!’ He thereby magnifies her (the cow): far
more, forsooth, does he gain by offering an eight-
footed one, than by one not eight-footed.

13. Here now they say, ‘What is he to do with
that embryo*?’ They may expose it on a tree; for


1 See III, 8, 3, 33-

2 Indu, lit. ‘droop,’ a term usually applied to the draughts of
Soma, a connection with which doubtless is here intended.

3 A different simile is implied in the original ‘antar mahimanam
Ananga.’

‘ The K4mva text is much briefer here: He then ties up the
head (siraA pratinahya, ? with the body) either with a cloth (ushisha),
or with bast (vakala), and having pushed asunder the cooking-fire of
the animal offering, he lays it above them, with ‘ Verily, O Maruts
...,’ for the common people are eaters of raw flesh, and the Maruts


396 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.,


embryos have the air for their support, and the tree
is, as it were, the same as the air: thus he establishes
it on its own support. But, say they, if, in that case,
any one were to curse him, saying, ‘They shall
expose him! dead on a tree,’ then verily it would
be so.

14. They may throw it into the water, for water is
the support of everything here: he thus establishes
it in the water. But, say they, if, in that case, any
one were to curse him, saying, ‘He shall die in
water!’ then verily it would be so.

15. They may bury it in a mole-hill; for this
(earth) is the support of everything here: he thus
establishes it on this same (earth), But, say they, if,
in that case, any one were to curse him, saying, ‘ They
shall quickly prepare a burying-place for him, being
dead!’ then verily it would be so.

16. He may offer it to the Maruts on the cooking-
fire of the animal sacrifice; for the Maruts, the clans
(common people) of the gods, are not oblation-eaters
(ahuta-ad)’, and the uncooked embryo, as it were, is no
oblation (ahuta) ; and the animal cooking-fire is taken
from the Ahavantya: thus indeed it (the embryo) is


are the people: he thus establishes it with the Maruts. Or (uto)
with a verse to Heaven and Earth, ‘The great Heaven and Earth
..., for additional superfluous (atirikta) is that (garbha), beyond
these two, heaven and earth, nothing whatever remains (or, nothing
surpasses them, atirifyata): thus he establishes it within those two,
heaven and earth; and while being superfluous, it comes to be no
longer superfluous (or redundant).

* *Enam’ apparently refers both to the sacrificer and to the
embryo (garbha, masc.).

> For the common people are eaters of raw flesh (amad), and
the Maruts are the people. KAamva text. Neither a Kshatriya nor


a Vaisya can eat remains of offerings, but only a Brahman is hutad,
Ait. Br. VII, 19.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I. 397


not excluded from the sacrifice, and yet is not
(offered) directly in the Ahavantya (offering-fire).
And the Maruts are of the gods: he thus establishes
it with the Maruts!.

17. As soon as he has performed the Samish/a-
yagus offerings, when the coals are only just extin-
guished, he takes that embryo with the cloth, and
standing with his face to the east, he offers it with a
verse to the Maruts (Vag. S. VIII, 31; Rig-veda I.
86, 1)—‘ Verily, O Maruts, in whosesoever
house ye drink, the heroes of the sky, he is
the best protected man. He utters no Svaha
(hail), for the Maruts, the clans of the gods are no
oblation-eaters, and no oblation, as it were, is what is
offered without Sv4hé. And the Maruts are of the
gods: he thus establishes it with the Maruts.

18. He then covers it over with the coals with
(VES Seu Wed dly 325. RI SeVOC Rath 22; iia) solale
great Heaven and Earth may mix this our
sacrifice, and fill us with nourishments!’


THIRD BRAHMANA.


1. The Shodasin? (graha) forsooth is Indra.
Now, at one time the beings surpassed (ati-rif)


1 One might expect ‘deveshu:’ thus he establishes it with the
gods; unless it is intended as the final decision: ‘hence he consigns
it to the Maruts.’ The wording is, however, the same as in the
preceding paragraphs.

2 The author has now completed his exposition of the simplest
form of Soma-sacrifice, viz. the Agnish/oma, the libations of
which are accompanied by twelve chants (stotra) and as many
recitations (sastra), and which (on the press-day) requires one victim
to Agni (see IV, 2, 5,14). He has also incidentally (IV, 4, 2, 18)
touched upon the characteristic features of the Ukthya sacrifice,
viz. its second victim, a he-goat to Indra-Agni, and three additional
Uktha stotras and sastras (p. 370 note). He now proceeds to


398 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

of > a ELE OPE CERT EL Ese ME EES SS
Indra—the beings being the creatures—they were
in a state of equality, as it were, with him.

2. Indra then bethought himself, ‘How can I
stand forth over everything here, and how may
everything here be beneath me?’ He saw that
graha, and drew it for himself. Then he stood forth
over everything here, and everything here was


consider another libation which, with its accompanying stotra and
sastra, forms the distinctive feature of the Shodasin sacrifice, i.e.
the one having sixteen or a sixteenth (hymn). This sacrifice also
requires a third victim on the press-day, viz. a ram to Indra. By the
addition, on the other hand, of the Shodasin graha, with its chant
and recitation, to an ordinary Agnish/oma, another form of one
day’s (ek4ha) Soma-sacrifice is obtained, viz. the Atyagnish/oma,
or redundant Agnish/oma, with thirteen stotras and sastras. This
form of sacrifice is, however, comparatively rarely used, and was
probably devised on mere theoretic grounds, to complete the sacri-
ficial system. A somewhat more common form is the Atiratra,
lit. ‘that which has a night over and above,’ differing as it does
from the Shodasin in that—besides a fourth victim (a he-goat to
Sarasvati)}—it has in addition a night performance of libations, with
three rounds (paryayas) of four stotras and sastras each (one for
the Hotr? and for each of his three assistants), and concluding at
daybreak with one more stotra, the sandhi (twilight) stotra, and the
Asvina sastra and offering. These are the forms of Soma-sacrifice
referred to in the present book, as required for the performance of
sacrificial sessions (twelve days and more) of which its concluding
portion treats. With another form, the Vagapeya sacrifice, the
author deals in the next Kanda. These—with the Aptoryadma,
which to the Atiraétra adds another course of four Atirikta, or
superadded stotras—constitute in the later official classification the
seven fundamental forms (samstha) of Soma-sacrifice. This term,
meaning properly ‘termination, consummation,’ probably applied
originally to the concluding rites of the Soma-sacrifice proper, as
the distinctive features of the several forms of sacrifice, but by a
natural transition, became the generic terms for the complete forms
of sacrifice. See Professor Weber’s somewhat different explanation,
Ind. Stud. IX, 229.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 5. 399


beneath him. And, verily, for whomsoever, know-
ing this, they draw that cup of Soma, he stands
forth over everything here, and everything here is
beneath him,

3. Wherefore it has been said by the Ashi (Rig-
veda III, 32, 11),‘ The sky hath not reached thy
greatness, when thou didst rest on the earth with
thine other thigh,—for, verily, yonder sky did not
reach up to his other thigh’: so did he stand forth
over everything here, and everything here was be-
neath him. And, verily, for whomsoever, knowing
this, they draw that cup of Soma, he stands forth
over everything here, and everything here is beneath
him.

4. He draws it with a verse to the lord of the bay
steeds (Indra Harivant); they (the Udgatvzs) chant
verses to (Indra) Harivant, and he (the Hotrz) after-
wards recites verses to (Indra) Harivant. For Indra
seized upon the strength, the fury (haras) of his
enemies, the Asuras; and in like manner does he
(the sacrificer) now seize upon the strength, the fury
of his enemies: therefore he draws the graha with a
verse to (Indra) Harivant; they chant verses to
Harivant, and he (the Hotvz) afterwards recites
verses to Harivant.

5. He draws it with an Anush/ubh verse; for the
morning press-feast belongs to the Gayatri, the mid-
day feast to the Trish¢ubh, and the evening feast to
the Gagatt. The Anush¢ubh, then, is over and above?
(ati-rikta), and he thus makes that (Soma of the


1 ?Or either of his thighs. The situation depicted in this verse
would seem that of the warrior Indra lying or kneelin,r on Vrvtra,
whom he has thrown on the ground.

2 Or, additional, in excess; see IV, 4, 3, 4.


400 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Shodasin) to remain over: hence he takes it with an
Anush¢ubh.

6. He draws it in a square cup; for there are
three worlds: these same worlds he gains by three
corners, and by the fourth corner he makes that
(Soma) to remain over ;—therefore he draws it in
a square cup.

7. Let him draw it at the morning pressing, after
drawing the Agrayaza. Having been drawn at the
morning pressing, it reposes apart from that time:
he thus makes it to outlast all (three) pressings.

8. Or he may draw it at the midday pressing,
after drawing the Agrayaza,—but this is mere
speculation: let him rather draw it at the morning
pressing, after drawing the Agrayawa: having been
drawn at the morning pressing, it reposes apart
from that time.

9. He thus draws it therefrom with (Vag. S. VIII,
33; Rig-veda I, 84, 3), ‘Mount the chariot, O
slayer of Vrztra, thy bay steeds have been
harnessed by prayer! May the stone by its.
sound draw hitherward thy mind!—Thou art
taken with a support: thee to Indra Shodasin
(the sixteenfold)!—This is thy womb: thee to
Indra Shodasin!’

10. Or with this (verse, Vag. S. VIII, 34; Rig-
veda I, 10, 3), ‘Harness thy long-maned, girth-
filling bay steeds! Come hither to us, O
Indra, drinker of Soma, to hear our songs!
Thou art taken with a support: thee to Indra
Shodasin!—This is thy womb: thee to Indra
Shodasin!’

11. Thereupon he returns (to the sadas) and be-
speaks the chant with, ‘Soma has been left over:


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, II. 401


Turn ye back'!’ for he indeed causes it to remain
over by that (Shod@asin graha). He (the Adhvaryu)
bespeaks it before the setting of the sun; and after
sunset he (the Hotvz) follows it up by reciting the
sastra: thus he thereby joins day and night toge-
ther,—therefore he bespeaks (the stotra)* before the


1 See 1V,2,5,8. The verb, here and elsewhere translated by
‘to bespeak,’ is upa-krz, the proper meaning of which would seem
to be ‘to prepare, to introduce, to bring up’ the chant. As the
same verb is, however, also used for the ‘driving up, or bringing
up’ of cattle (to the stable), it may perhaps have a similar meaning
in connection with the stotra ; the metres of the chant (which are
often called the cattle of the gods): being, as it were, ‘led up’
(or ‘put to’) by the Adhvaryu, to be ‘harnessed’ or ‘ yoked’ (yug)
by the Udgatrz; see p. 311, note 1. Instead of the Prastara,
handed to the Udg4tr?' on the occasion of the Pavamanas, two
stalks of sacrificial grass are generally used with other chants; but
certain stotras and samans require to be ‘introduced’ by special
objects, such as a fan, or the two churning sticks (for producing
fire), or water mixed with avak4 plants, or an arrow.

2 ? Read ‘tad’ for ‘tam;’ or ‘he calls upon him (the Udgatr?).’

> The Shodasi-stotra usually consists of the Gaurivita Saman
(S. V. II, 302-4); but the Nanada Saman (ib. II, 790-3) may be
used instead. It is performed in the ekavimsa stoma, i.e. the three
verses are chanted in three turns, so as, by repetitions, to produce
twenty-one verses; the usual form being aaa-bbb-c; a-bbb-
ccc; aaa-b-ccc. Forsome modifications in the present case,
see Haug, Transl. Ait. Br. p. 258 note. The first turn is to be per-
formed in a low voice, while the sun is going down; the second in
a middle voice, when the sun has disappeared, but not entirely
the daylight; and the third turn in a loud voice, when darkness
is closing in. If, for some reason or other, the stotra is entirely
performed after sunset, it is chanted with a loud voice through-
out. During the chanting a horse (black, if possible), or a
bullock, or he-goat is to stand at the front (or back) gate of the
sadas, facing the latter. Besides, a piece of gold is to circulate
among the chanters, each of them holding it, while his turn of
chanting lasts, and the Udgatr? (or all three) doing so during the
nidhana or finale.


(26) pd


402 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


setting of the sun, and after sunset he follows it up
by reciting the sastra’.


THE DVADASAHA?
FourTH BRAHMANA.


1. Now, at first the gods were all alike, all good.
Of them, being all alike, all good, three desired,
‘May we be superior®!’—Agni, Indra, and Sfrya.

2. They went on praising and toiling. They saw
those Atigrahyas’, and drew (grah) them for them-


1 The Shodasi-sastra is minutely described in the Ait. Br. 1V,
3 seq. The opening verses are in the Anush/ubh metre (of sixteen
syllables), but otherwise also the Hotr7 has by means of pauses and
insertions of formulas (nivid) to bring out its ‘ sixteenfold’ character
so as to accord with its designation.

2 The Dvadasaha, or twelve days’ performance, forms the con-
necting link between the so-called Ahina sacrifices (consisting of
between two and twelve press-days) and the sattras, or sacri-
ficial sessions (of twelve press-days and upwards); since it can
be performed as one or the other. Asa sattra (which seems to be
its usual character) it consists of the DasarAtra, or ten nights’ (or
days’) period, preceded and followed by an Atiratra, as the praya-
niya (opening) and udayanfya (concluding) days. The Dasa-
ratra, on its part, consists of three tryahas (or tridua), viz. a
Prish/hya shadaha (see note 4), and three Ukthya days, the
so-called KAandomas (on which see Haug, Ait. Br.Transl. p. 347).
These are followed by an Atyagnish/oma day, called Avivakya
(i.e. on which there should be ‘no dispute, or quarrel’).

* Ati-tish/Aavanaé, lit. ‘standing forth over (all others,’ see IV,
5, 3, 2). In this, as in the preceding Brahmama, the prefix ati has
to do service repeatedly for etymological and symbolical purposes.

‘ T.e. cups of Soma ‘to be drawn over and above’ (Weber, Ind.
Stud. 1X, 235; for a different explanation see Haug, Ait. Br.
Transl. p. 490). These three grahas are required at the Pri‘sh-
thya shadaha, which forms part of the Dvadas4ha (see note 2),
and of sacrificial sessions generally. The shadaha, or period
of six Soma days, which (though itself consisting of two tryaha, or


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 3. 403


selves over and above (ati): hence the name Ati-
grahyas. They became superior, even as they are
now superior’: and verily he becomes superior for
whomsoever, knowing this, they draw those cups of
Soma.

3. And at first there was not in Agni that lustre
which is now in him. He desired, ‘ May that lustre
be in me!’ He saw this graha, and drew it for
himself, and henceforth that lustre was in him.


tridua) may be considered as forming a kind of unit in sattras, or
sacrificial sessions, is of two kinds, viz. the Abhiplava shadaha
and the Przsh/hya shadaha. Both require (for the Hotrz’s prish-
tha-stotra at the midday pressing) the use of the Rathantara-saman
on uneven, and that of the Brzhat-saman on even days. The chief
difference between them is that while the przsh/ha-stotras of the
Abhiplava are performed in the ordinary (Agnishfoma) way, the
Prish/hya shadaha requires their performance in the proper prish¢ha
form, see p. 339, note 2. Besides, while the Abhiplava shadaha
consists of four Ukthya days, preceded and followed by one Agni-
sh/oma day; the first day of the Pr/sh/Aya shadaha is an Agnish/oma,
the fourth a Shodasin, the remaining four days being Ukthyas.
There is also a difference between the two in regard to the stomas,
or forms of chanting, used; for while the Prsh/Aya requires succes-
sively one of the six principal stomas (from the Trivrit up to the
Trayastrimsa, as given p. 308, note 2) for each day, the Abhi-
plava requires the first four stomas (Trivr/t to Ekavimsa) for each
day, though in a different order. In this respect, three groups or
forms are assumed for the performance of the stotras at the Agni-
shfoma and Ukthya, viz. the Gyotish/oma (a. Bahishpav: avamina
in the Trivrit; b. Agyastotras and c. MAadhyandina- -pavamana in the
Parkadasa ; = the Prish/ha-stotras and e. Arbhava-pavavamana in
the Sapiadara ; and f. the Agnish/oma siman in the Ekavimisa
stoma]; the Gosh/oma [a. Pafifadasa; b. Trivrit; c, Saptadasa,
e. f. (and g. Ukthastotras) Ekavimsa]; and 5 fudth font (a. Trivrit;
b. Pafikadasa; c.d. Saptadasa; e. f. g. Ekavimsa]. These forms
are distributed over the two tridua of the Abhiplava in the order :
Gyotish/oma, Gosh/oia, Ayushfoma; Gosh/oma, Ayush/oma, Gyo-
tish/oma.

1 Lit. even as they are now the superiority, i.e. a superior power.


Dd 2


404 SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


4. And at first there was not in Indra that power
which is now in him. He desired, ‘ May that power
be in me!’ He saw this graha and drew it for himself,
and henceforth that power was in him.

5. And at first there was not in Sfrya that splen-
dour which is now in him. He desired, ‘ May that
splendour be in me!’ He saw this graha and drew
it for himself, and henceforth that splendour was
in him. And verily for whomsoever, knowing this,
they draw those cups of Soma, he takes unto him-
self those same fires (energies), those same powers.

6. Let him draw them at the morning pressing,
after drawing the Agrayama ; for the Agrayana is the
self (body), and many parts of this self are one each
(and thus) over and above (the others), such as the
lung! and heart, and others.

7. Or he might draw them from the Patabhv#t, at
the midday pressing, after drawing the Ukthya, or
when about to bespeak (the chant), for the Ukthya
indeed is the same as that undefined self of his.
But this is mere speculation: let him rather draw
them at the morning pressing, after drawing the
Agrayana.

8. They are offered after the offering of the
Mahendra graha; for that, the MA4hendra, is Indra’s
special cup; and so are the (Nishkevalya) stotra
and sastra specially his. But the sacrificer is Indra;
and for the sacrificer’s benefit (these cups) are drawn :
therefore they are offered after the offering of the
Mahendra graha.

9. He thus draws them therefrom [the first with


—_—


* That is, the right lung (kloman), the left lung being called by
a different name. See St. Petersb. Dict. s. v.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 13. 405


Vag. S. VIII, 38; Rig-veda 1X, 66, 21]!,‘O Agni,
skilful in works, become thou pure, bestowing
upon us lustre and manly vigour, and upon me
health and wealth!—Thou art taken with a
support: thee to Agni, for lustre!—This is thy
womb: thee to Agni, for lustre!’

10. [The second with Vag. S. VIII, 39; Rig-veda
VIII, 76, 10], Uprising by thy power didst thou
move thy jaws, O Indra, drinking the cup-
drawn juice!—Thou art taken with a support:
thee to Indra for power!—This is thy womb:
thee to Indra for power!’

11. [The third with Vag. S. VIII, 40; Rig-veda
I, 50, 3], ‘His beacons have appeared, his beams,
wide and far over the people, shining splen-
didly like fires!—Thou art taken with a sup
port: thee to Sfirya for splendour!—This is
thy womb: thee to Sadrya for splendour!’

12. The drinking of these (cups is performed by
the sacrificers with the resp. texts), ‘O lustrous
Agni, lustrous art thou among the gods: may
I be lustrous among men!—Most powerful
Indra, most powerful art thou among the gods:
may I be the most powerful among men!—
Most splendid Sdarya, most splendid art thou
among the gods: may I be the most splendid
among men!’ And, verily, these same splendours,
these same powers he takes unto himself for whom-
soever, knowing this, they draw these cups.

13. Let him draw them on the first three days of
the Prish¢Aya shadaha*; namely, the Agni cup on


1 The Kanvas use a different formula, viz. Rig-veda IX, 66, 19.


See Vag. S. ed. Weber, p. 254 (XII).
2 See page 402, note 4. In conjunction with the Rathantara


406 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


cle


the first day, the Indra cup on the second, the Sfrya
cup on the third—thus one day by day.

14. Some}, however, draw them on the last three
days; but let him not do so: let him rather draw
them on the first three days. But should he intend
to draw them on the last three days, let him first
draw them on the first three days and let him then
draw them on the last three days. In like manner
they are drawn (all three) in their proper order, on
one and the same day, at the Visvagit? with all the
Prisht¢has.


FirTH BRAHMANA.


1. Pragdpati, forsooth, is that sacrifice which is
performed here, and from which these creatures have
been produced: and in like manner are they pro-
duced thereafter even to this day.

2. After the Updmzsu cup goats are produced.
Now that (cup) is again employed in the sacrifice:
hence creatures are here produced again and again.

3. After the Antaryama cup sheep are produced.
Now that (cup) is again employed at the sacrifice:
hence creatures are here produced again and again.


(Sama-veda II, 30-31) and Brzhat (II, 159-60) smans, the other four
principal prish‘ha samans—viz. the Vairfipa (II, 212-13), Vairaga
(II, 277-9), Sakvara (II, 1151-3 ; or Mahanamni, 1-3), and Raivata
(II, 434-6)—are used respectively by the Hot? on the last four
days of the shadaha. As regards the Hotrz’s assistants, while the
Maitravaruza always uses the same s4man, as at the Agnish/oma,
viz. the Vamadevya (II, 32-34), the samans used by the other
Hotrakas are given in the Sama-veda immediately after the respec-
tive saman of the Hotrz, mentioned above.

1 The Kanva text ascribes this practice to the Xarakas.

* Regarding the sacrificial session, called Gavam ayana, of
which the Visvagit forms part, see p. 426, note 3.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 8. 407


4. And because of those two (cups) which are
together he offers the Updmsu first, therefore, of
goats and sheep when they are together', the goats
yo first, and the sheep behind them.

5. And because, having offered the UpAmsu, he
wipes (the vessel) upwards, therefore these goats
walk like nimbly? climbing spokes.

6. And because, having offered the Antaryama, he
wipes (the vessel) downwards, therefore these sheep
walk with their heads down, as if digging. Now
they, the goats and sheep, are most conspicuously
Pragapati-like: whence, bringing forth thrice in the
year, they produce two or three * (young ones).

7. After* the Sukra cup men are produced. Now
that (cup) is again employed at the sacrifice: hence
creatures are here produced again and again. But
the Sukra (bright) is the same as he that burns
yonder, and he indeed is Indra; and of animals, man
is Indra-like®: whence he rules over animals.

8. After the Aztu cup the one-hoofed species is
produced. Now that (cup) is again employed in the
sacrifice: hence creatures are here produced again
and again. And such-like is the Aztu cup®, and such-
like the head of the one-hoofed. The Agrayava


1 That is, in mixed flocks. In the compound ‘agavika’ (Kazv.
agavayah, alyes xa dies) also the goats come first.

* Perhaps ‘ara’ has to be taken in the sense of ‘quick, nimble,’
instead of ‘spokes,’ and ‘ditara’ might mean ‘flying up,’ ‘ popping
up their heads,’ as opposed to ‘ avainasirshan.’

5? Or, three (times) two, ‘dvau trin iti;’ the Kava text reac's
(of goats alone) ‘ trims trin.’

* Or, along with, correspondingly with, anu.

> Or, connected with Indra, Indra’s own (aindra).

* The two Ritupatras are shaped like spoon-bowls, with spouts
on both sides.


408 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


cup, the Ukthya cup, and the Aditya cup,—after
them cows are produced. Now, these are again
employed in the sacrifice: hence creatures are here
produced again and again.

g. And because goats are produced after the
fewest cups, therefore, though bringing forth thrice
in a year, producing two or three, (they are) very
few, for they are produced after the fewest cups.

10. And because cows are produced after the
most cups, therefore, though bringing forth once in
a year, and producing one each time, (they are) most
numerous, for they are produced after the most
cups.

11, Then, in the Drozakalasa (trough) he finally
draws the H4riyogana graha. Now, the Dromaka-
lasa is Pragdpati;—he turns unto these creatures,
and fosters them, and kisses them!?!: he fosters them
in that he produces them.

12. Now, these same cups after which creatures
are produced, are five,—those of the Upamsu and
Antary4ma (counting as) one and the same, the
Sukra cup, the Ritu cup, the Agrayaza cup, and the
Ukthya cup; for there are five seasons in the year,
and Pragdpati is the year, and the sacrifice is Pragé-
pati. But if there be six seasons in the year, then
the Aditya cup is the sixth of them.

13. But indeed there is only that one cup after
which creatures are produced here, to wit, the
Upamsu cup; for the Updmsu is breath, and
Pragapati is breath, and everything here is after
Pragapati.


? Or, smells, sniffs at them (as a cow does the calf).


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, 3. 409


SixTH BRAHMANA.


1. PragApati, forsooth, is that sacrifice which is
here performed, and whence these creatures have
been produced, and in like manner are they pro-
duced therefrom even to this day. Having drawn
the Asvina graha, he makes (the sacrificer) eye
(the several cups, while muttering) the Avak4sa
formulas’.

2. The Updmsu cup he eyes first with (Vag. S.
VII, 27), ‘For mine out-breathing, (a) giver of
lustre?, become thou pure for lustre!’ Then
the Up4msusavana stone with, ‘For my through-
breathing, giver of lustre, become thou pure
for lustre!’ Then the Antary4ma cup with, ‘ For
mine up-breathing, giver of lustre, become
thou pure for lustre!’ Then the Aindravayava
with, ‘For my voice, giver of lustre, become
thou pure for lustre!’ Then the Maitravaruza
with, ‘For mine intelligence and will, giver of
lustre, become thou pure forlustre!’ Then the
Asvina with, ‘For mine ear, giver of lustre, be-
come thou pure for lustre!’ Then the Sufra
and Manthin with, ‘For mine eyes, givers of
lustre, become ye pure for lustre!’

3. Then the Agrayaza with (Vag. S. VII, 28),
‘For my mind, giver of lustre, become thou
-pure for lustre!’ Then the Ukthya with, ‘ For


1 For the proper place of this ceremony in the actual performance
of the Agnish/oma, see p. 312, note 4.

1 Either, thou who bestowest lustre on my out-breathing ..., or,
Thou who art a bestower of lustre, become thou pure for lustre
to my out-breathing.


410 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


my vigour, giver of lustre, become thou pure
for lustre!’ Then the Dhruva with, ‘ For my life,
giver of lustre, become thou pure for lustre!’
Then the two Soma-troughs (Patabhvzt and Adhava-
niya) with, ‘For all mine offspring, givers of
lustre, become ye pure for lustre!’ Now the
two troughs belong to the All-gods, for therefrom
they draw (Soma) for the gods, therefrom for men,
therefrom for the Fathers: therefore the two Soma-
troughs belong to the All-gods.

4. Then the Drovakalasa with (Vag. S. VII, 29),
‘Who (ka) art thou? Which one art thou ?’—
Ka is Pragapati;—' Whose (kasya, or Ka’s) art
thou? who (ka) art thou by name ?’— Ka (‘who’)
by name is Pragapati;—‘ Thou upon whose name
we have thought, for he indeed thinks upon his
name ;—‘ Thou whom we have gladdened with
Soma;'—for he indeed gladdens him with Soma.
Having drawn the Asvina cup, he prays for blessing
part after part (of the sacrifice) with, ‘May I be
abundantly supplied with offspring,’ thereby
he prays for offspring ;—‘abundantly supplied
with men, thereby he prays for men (heroes) ;—
‘abundantly supplied with food!’ thereby he
prays for prosperity.

5. He must not let every one eye them, but only
him who is well known, or one who is his friend, or
one who, being learned in sacred lore, may acquire
these (texts) through study. Having drawn the
Asvina cup, he (thus) produces the whole sacrifice :
and having produced the whole sacrifice, he deposits
it in his own self, and makes it his own.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMANA, 4. 4it


SEVENTH BRAHMANA.


1. Now, there are here thirty-four utterances,
called expiations'. Prag&pati, forsooth, is that sacri-
fice which is performed here, and from which these
creatures have been produced,—and in like manner
are they produced therefrom even to this day.

2. There are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve
Adityas; and these two, Heaven and Earth, are
the (thirty-second and) thirty-third. And there are
thirty-three gods, and Pragapati is the thirty-fourth ;
—thus he makes him (the sacrificer, or Yagyia) to be
Pragapati?: now that® is, for that is immortal, and
what is immortal that is. But what is mortal that
also is Pragapati; for Pragapati is everything: thus
he makes him to be Prag&pati, and hence there are
these thirty-four utterances, called expiations.

3. Now some call these (formulas) the ‘forms of
the sacrifice ;’ but, indeed, they are rather the joints
of the sacrifice: this same sacrifice, in being per-
formed, is continually becoming those deities.

4. Now should the cow, which supplies the
gharma 4, fail (to give milk), let them go to another ;
and at the same place where they otherwise make
that gharma (milk) flow®, let them place her with her


1 Viz. the formulas, Vag. S. VIII, 54-58, employed for making
good any mishaps during the Soma-sacrifice. Cf. Sat. Br. XII,
6, 1, 1 seq. In the Kava recension, V, 7, 4, kandikas 5-10 cor-
respond to the present Brahmama, while kandikas 1-4 contain the
account of the Mah4avratiya graha corresponding to M. IV, 6, 4.

2 ? Or, this then he makes Pragapati to be; but see IV, 6, 1, 5.

3 ? T.e. that divine race or element. The Kanva text reads, eta-
vad va idam asty, etad dhy amr:tam, yad dhy amrvtam tad asti.

* See p. 104, note 3.

6 That is, when they milk the cow with the Mantras ‘ Flow thou


412 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
cee ale eiabaa sci oh ia shaaestaersatinne. dee smite ok eal


head towards the north, or in front of the hall with
her face to the east.

s. And that which is the right one of the two
bones with hair-tufts which protrude on both sides
of her tail-bone,—thereon he offers those thirty-
four oblations of ghee; for as much as are those
thirty-four utterances, so much is the sacrifice: thus
he lays the whole sacrifice entirely into her ; for there-
from she lets the gharma (milk) flow, and this is the
atonement therefore.

6. And if any part of the sacrifice were to fail, let
him make an oblation with regard thereto on the
Ahavantya during the consecration and the Upasads,
and on the Agnidhra during the Soma feast—for
whatever point of the sacrifice fails, that breaks—
and whichever then is the deity in that (special
offering), through that one he heals it, through that
he puts it together again.

7. And if anything’ be spilt, let him pour water
thereon—everything here being pervaded (or ob-
tained) by water—for the obtainment of everything? ;
with a verse to Vishzu and Varuza,—for whatsoever
distress one undergoes here on earth, all that Varuza
inflicts °5—-(Vag. S. VIII, 59; Atharva-veda VII, 25,


for the Asvins!’ &c., see IV, 2, 1, 11 seq. Perhaps yasyam
veladyam has to be taken in the sense of ‘at the same time at which
they make it flow,’ as is done in the St. Petersb. Dict. Compare,
however, the Kazva reading, tad yam upasamkrameyus tam agrena
va dikshitasilam yatra vainam etat pinvayanti tad endm pradim
vodizim va sthapayitavai brfyat.

* Viz. any Soma, cccording to Katy. XXV, 2, 9; or any clotted
ghee (przshadagya), according to the Kamva text.

* For this construction, see p.15, note 3.

* Or, whatsoever undergoes (suffering) here on earth, all that
Varuna causes to undergo it.


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMANA,9. 413


1), ‘They by whose vigour the spheres were
propped up, who are in strength the strongest
and mightiest; who sway with powers unre-
sisted, to Vishvu and Varuza hath it gone at
the morning prayer!’ For Vishzu is the sacrifice,
and it is that (sacrifice) of his which now undergoes
distress ; and Varuva is the inflicter: thus by both
these deities—that whose (sacrifice) undergoes dis-
tress, and that which inflicts it—he heals (the joint
of the sacrifice), by both he puts it together.

8. And let him then touch (the spilt material) with
(Vag. S. VIII, 60), ‘To the gods, tothe sky hath
the sacrifice gone: may wealth thence accrue
to me! tothe men,to the air hath the sacrifice
gone: may wealth thence accrue to me! tothe
Fathers, tothe earth hath the sacrifice gone:
may wealth thence accrue to me!’—‘ To what-
ever world the sacrifice has gone, thence happiness
has come to me’!’ this is what he thereby means
to say.

9. Here now Arumi said, ‘ Why should he sacrifice
who would think himself the worse for a miscarriage
of the sacrifice ? I, for one, am the better for a mis-
carriage of the sacrifice?!’ This, then, he said with
reference to the adoption of those benedictions.


1 This last sentence (‘To whatever world...’) is treated as if it
belonged to the sacrificial formula, to which it is attached in the
Samhita. The mistake (which doubtless there is) probably arose
from the omission of the ‘iti’in the Brahmama. In the Kava text
of the Brahmaza, the analogous sentence appears clearly as belong-
ing to the exposition, and not to the Samhita.

* Kim sa yagnena yageteti yo yagnah syat tena vyriddhena sreyo
nabhigakfed iti. Kanva text.


414 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


EIGHTH BRAHMANA.


1. Now when at that TrirAtra!’ sacrifice he gives
those thousand (cows), then that one is made the one-
thousandth2. On the first day he brings three hundred
and thirty-three; and likewise on the second day he
brings three hundred and thirty-three; and likewise
on the third day he brings three hundred and thirty-
three. Then that one-thousandth is left over.

2. She should be three-coloured, they say, for that
is the most perfect form for her. But let it be a red
one, and spotted, for that indeed is the most perfect
form for her.

3. Let it be one that has not been approached
(by a bull), for she, the Sahasrf, is in reality Vaz
(speech) ; but V2, forsooth, is of unimpaired vigour,
and so is one of unimpaired vigour which has not
been approached: therefore it should be one that
has not been approached.

4. He may lead her up (to the sacrificial ground)
on the first day; for she, the Sahasri, is in reality
Vaé, and hers, Vaé's, is that thousandfold progeny *.


1 The Sahasradakshiva Triratra, or sacrifice of three
(pressing) days, with a thousand cows as the priests’ fee, is men-
tioned Katy. XIII, 4, 15 seq. as, apparently, an independent
Ahina sacrifice. I do not, however, know whether it might not
be added on to some other sacrificial performance, as, for instance,
to the Prish/hya shadaha, thus forming together with this the
Navaratra (or first nine days of the Dasaratra, see p. 402, note 2).
Katy. gives no indication as to the particular forms of Soma-sacri-
fice required for the several days; but, guided no doubt by the
Brahmazaa, he confines his remarks to the manner of distribution of
the dakshinas.

? Sahasri, lit. ‘she who makes the dakshina to consist of one
thousand.’

* Or,—and from her,Va4, those thousand (cows) were produced ;


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMANA, IO. 415


She walks at the head (of the other 333 cows), and
behind her follows her progeny. Or he may lead her
up on the last day; then her progeny precedes her,
and she herself walks behind. This, however, is mere
speculation: let him lead her up on the last day,—
her progeny precedes her, and she herself walks
behind.

5. North of the Havirdhana shed, and south of
the Agnidhra fire-house he makes her smell the
Dromakalasa; for the Drozakalasa is the sacrifice;
thus he makes her see the sacrifice.

6. With (Vag. S. VIII, 42), ‘Smell the trough:
may thedrops enter thee, O mighty one!’ Now
he who gives a thousand (cows) becomes, as it were,
emptied: him, thus emptied, he thereby replenishes,
when he says, ‘Smell the trough: may the drops
enter thee, O mighty one!’

7. ‘Return again with sap!’ him who is emptied
he thus replenishes when he says, ‘Return again with
sap!’

8. ‘And milk to us a thousandfold!’ him
who is emptied he thus replenishes with a _ thou-
sand (forces), when he says, ‘And milk to us a
thousandfold ! ’

9. ‘Broad-streamed, milk-abounding,—may
wealth come back to me!’ him who is emptied he
thus replenishes when he says, ‘May wealth come
back to me!’

10. He then mutters in her right ear, ‘O I,
blithesome, adorable, lovable, bright, shining,
Aditi (inviolable), Sarasvati (sapful), mighty,


or,—and from her (the thousandth cow) that thousandfold progeny
of Vak was produced; see IV, 6, 7,3, where the thousandfold pro-
geny of V4é is identified with the Vedic texts generally.


416 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.
gt a tel ai a a ce eMac
glorious,—these are thy names, O cow: tellthou
the gods of meas a doer of good!’—or, ‘speak
thou.... These indeed are her names with the
gods : he thus means to say, ‘whatever thy names are
with the gods, therewith tell the gods of me as a doer
of good.’

11. They release her. If, not urged by any man,
she goes eastwards, then let him know that this
sacrificer has succeeded, that he has won the happy
world. If she goes northwards, let him know that
the sacrificer will be more glorious in this world. If
she goes westwards, let him know that he will be
rich in dependants and crops. If she goes south-
wards, let him know that the sacrificer will quickly
depart from this world. Such are the ways of
knowledge.

12. And what three (cows) there are each time
over and above the (three hundred and) thirty,
thereto they add that one’. Now, when they draw
out a Virag (verse), they pull it asunder, and a Virag
which is pulled asunder is torn in two;—and the
Virag consisting of ten syllables, he thus makes the
Virag complete. Let him give her to the Hotzz;
for the Hotvz is a thousandfold?: therefore let him ~
give her to the Hotzz,


* I am not certain whether I understand this passage rightly.
According to paragraph 16, and Katy. XIII, 4, 23, he is to give
away the cows by tens. This would leave three each day, or nine
on the three days. To them he is to add the Sahasri, and give
the ten cows to the Hotr?——A common Virég verse consists of
three times ten syllables; but there are also such as consist of
three times eleven syllables. These latter the sacrificer is thus
represented (by withholding three cows out of thirty-three) to make
into a proper Virag.

* That is, according to the St. Petersb. Dict., he possesses a


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMANA, 16. 417


13. Or let him appoint two Unnetrzs, and let him
give her to him, of the two, who does not call for the
Sraushaé; for defective, indeed, is he who, being an
officiating priest, does not call for the Srausha/; and
defective also is the Virag which is pulled asunder :
thus he puts the defective to the defective.

14. Now they say, one ought not to give anything
above a thousand (cows), because by a thousand he
obtains all the objects of his desire. But Asuri said,
‘Let him give according to his wish: by a thousand
he indeed obtains all his wishes; and anything else
(that he gives) is likewise given at his wish.’

15. And should he intend to give a cart yoked
(with a team of oxen), or something else, let him give
it either after the offering of the omentum of the
barren cow, or at the concluding (udavasdani) 4)
offering.

16. In bringing the dakshivzas, let him bring com-
plete decads. If he intends to give one (cow) to any
(priest), let him pass over a decad to ten such
(priests). If he intends to give two to any one, let
him pass over a decad to five such (priests). If he
intends to give three to any one, let him pass over a
decad to three such”. If he intends to give five to


thousand verses ;—if it does not rather refer to the extent of the
Rig-veda, consisting of rather more than a thousand (1028) hymns.
Cp. also ‘the thousandfold progeny of Vas,’ p. 414, note 3.

1 The Kadmva text has much the same reasoning, but does not
ascribe it to any once.

2 In this and all other cases the text has ‘to those three (ten
&c.),’ It is not clear in what manner he is to divide the ten
cows between the three priests, unless indeed he is to repeat the
same process three times, giving the odd cow each time to another
priest. The Kanva text only mentions two of the cases here
given, viz. that if he intends to give one cow to each (ekaikam),


[26] Ee


418 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


any one, let him pass over a decad to two such.
Thus up to a hundred: and thus this perfect Virag
of his becomes a cow of plenty for him in yonder
world.


NintH BRAHMAWA.


1. When he performs a twelve days’ sacrifice with
transposed metres (Dvadasaha vytidhakhandas),
then he (the Adhvaryu) transposes the grahas (cups
of Soma); and both the Udgats? and the Hotvz
transpose the metres. Now there is first that normal
Tryaha (triduum), with settled metres!: there he
draws the cup beginning with the Aindravayava.


he is to give ten to ten such; and if he intends to give two to each, he
is to give ten to five such. Professor Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 52, remarks
that this paragraph is not clear to him, and suggests that it may
be interpolated. It does not appear, what the exact proportion of
the thousand cows is for each of the sixteen priests; but we may
assume that it did not differ much from that given at the Agni-
shfoma (see p. 345, note), and that this result was brought about by
repeated distributions among varied groupings of the priests.

1 That is, three days, on which the order of the Agnish/oma is
observed. Hence, having drawn the Upamsu and Antary4ma
cups (IV, 1, 1 and 2), which must always be drawn first, he draws
the Aindrav4yava cup (IV, 1, 3) and so on. The same order is
preserved on the fifth, eighth, and last three days. On the fourth
and ninth days, on the other hand, he follows up the Upamsu and
Antaryma by the grahas of the third pressing, beginning with the
Agrayana (IV, 3, 5, 21 seq.); these being then succeeded by
those of the morning and midday pressings; and on the sixth and
seventh days the Upamsu and Antary4ma cups are succeeded by
the grahas of the midday pressing, beginning with the Sukra cup
(IV, 3, 3, 2). This change of the proper order of performance, of
course, involves a different arrangement of the stotras and sastras
(or ‘the metres,’ as they are called in the texts). This dislocation
of the three pressings is afterwards to be rectified by the various
cups being ‘ deposited’ on the khara in their normal order. In the
last two paragraphs of the present Brahmana the author, however,


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 5. 419


2. Then, on the fourth day, he transposes the
grahas, and they transpose the metres. There he
draws the cups beginning with the Agrayawa,—for
that fourth day is PragApati’s own; and the Agrayana
is the self, and Pragdpati is the self: therefore he
draws the cups beginning with the Agrayaa.

3. Having drawn that (Agrayama) cup, he does not
deposit it—the grahas being the vital airs—lest he
should disorder the vital airs!; for he would indeed
disorder the vital airs, were he to deposit it. They
sit near holding that (cup)?; and (the Adhvaryu)
draws (the other) cups; and while he draws the
cups, then whenever the time of that cup (in the
order of performance comes), he utters ‘ His’ and
deposits it. Then follows that normal®’ fifth day;
on that he draws the cups beginning with the
Aindravayava.

4. Thereupon, on the sixth day, he transposes the
grahas, and they transpose the metres. There he
draws the cups beginning with the Sukra; for that
sixth day is Indra’s own, and the Sukra (bright, clear)
is he that burns yonder, and he (the sun) indeed is
Indra: therefore he draws the cups beginning with
the Sukra.

5. Having drawn that (cup), he does not deposit
it—the grahas being the vital airs—lest he should
disorder the vital airs; for he would indeed disorder
the vital airs, were he to deposit it. They sit near


discountenances this practice of changing the natural order of
drawing the cups.

1 For this construction see p. 15, note 3.

2 «Having given it to some one else (to hold), he diaws the
other cups. Kanva text.

3 Or, that ‘known’ fifth day, i.e. performed in the manner
known, or explained before (viz. at the Agnish/oma),

E€ 2


420 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


holding that (cup); and he draws (the other) cups;
and while he draws the cups, then whenever the
time of that (cup comes), he deposits it.

6. Then, on the seventh day, he transposes the
grahas, and they transpose the metres. There he
draws the cups beginning with the Sukra cup; for
that seventh day belongs to the Bvzhati (‘great’
metre); for the Sukra is he that burns yonder, and
he indeed is great: therefore he draws the cups
beginning with the Sukra.

7. Having drawn that (cup), he does. not deposit
it—the grahas being the vital airs—lest he should
disorder the vital airs ; for he would indeed disorder
the vital airs, were le to deposit it. They sit near
holding that (cup); and he draws the (other) cups;
and while he draws the cups, then whenever the
time of that (cup comes), he deposits it. Then
follows that normal eighth day: there he draws the
cups beginning with the Aindravayava.

8. Then, on the ninth day, he transposes the
grahas, and they transpose the metres. There he
draws the cups beginning with the Agrayama; for
that ninth day belongs to the Gagati (metre), and
the Agrayaza is the self, and the self(soul) is this
whole world (gagat): therefore he draws the cups
beginning with the Agrayawa.

9. Having drawn it, he does not deposit it—the
grahas being the vital airs—lest he should disorder
the vital airs; for he would indeed disorder the vital
airs, were he to deposit it. They sit near holding
that (cup); and he draws the (other) cups; and
while he draws the cups, when the time of that (cup
comes), he utters ‘ Hi’ and deposits it.

10. Now they say, He should not transpose the


IV KANDA, 5 ADHYAYA, IO BRAHMANA, 2. 421


cups—the cups being the vital airs—lest he should
disorder the vital airs; for he would indeed disorder
the vital airs, were he to transpose them: therefore
he should not transpose (the cups).

11. But let him, nevertheless, transpose them ; for
the cups are the limbs, and in sleeping one likes tc
turn? his limbs from one side to the other : therefore
let him nevertheless transpose them.

12. Nevertheless, he should not transpose them—
the cups being the vital airs—lest he should disorder
the vital airs; for he would indeed disorder the vital
airs, were he to transpose (the cups): therefore let
him not transpose them.

13. What, then, is the Adhvaryu to do in that
case, when both the Udgatvz and Hotz?z transpose
(change) the metres?? In that, at the morning
pressing, he draws first the Aindravayava cup; and
at the midday pressing the Sukra cup; and at the
evening pressing the Agrayaza eup,—thereby for-
sooth the Adhvaryu transposes (the cups).


Tentu BrAHMANA 8.


1. If the Soma is carried off, let him say, ‘Run
about and seek!’ If they find it, why should they
care? But if they do not find it, atonement is made


therefore.
2. Now there are two kinds of Phalguna plants,


1 In the text our subordinate clause is, as usual, the principal
clause: ‘one sleeps in turning his limbs from one side to the


other.’
2 The chanters and the Hotrs in any case use different metres,


as the principal ones, at different pressings.
3 In the Kamva text I have met with nothing corresponding to


this Brahmaaa.


422 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

Te -p ABR ROI Naar St Sone tec ae meme
the red-flowering and the brown-flowering. Those
Phalguna plants which have brown flowers one may
press; for they, the brown-flowering Phalgunas, are
akin to the Soma-plant : therefore he may press those
with brown flowers.

3. If they cannot get brown-flowering (Phalgunas),
he may press the Syenahvzta! plant. For when
GAyatrt flew up for Soma, a sprig of Soma fell from
her, as she was bringing him: it became the Syena-
hvzta plant: therefore he may press the Syenahvzta
plant. |

4. If they cannot get the Syenahvzta, he may press
Adara plants. For when the head of the sacrifice
was cut off, then Adara plants sprung from the sap
which spirted from it: therefore he may press Adara
plants.

5. If they cannot get Adaras, he may press brown
Dab (darva) plants, for they, the brown Ddb plants,
are akin to the Soma: therefore he may press brown
Dab plants,

6. If they cannot get brown Dab plants, he may
also press any kind of yellow Kusa plants. In that
case let him also give one cow; and, when he comes
out of the purificatory bath, let him again become
consecrated, for the atonement for that (use of plants
other than Soma) is a second sacrifice. So much then
as to those robbed of their Soma.

7. Now as to those who burst their Soma-trough
(kalasa). If the trough bursts, let him say, ‘ Try to
catch it!’ If they catch a handful or a goupenful? (of
Soma), let them perform, as far as is in their power ,


' That is, the plant ‘carried away by the falcon (or eagle).’

* Scotch for the measure of both hands placed side by side; Ags.
geap, Low Germ. gopse.

* Yathaprabhavam: Katy. XXV, 12, 24 seems to take it in the


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, I. 423


after pouring (water) to it from other ekadhana
pitchers. But if they do not catch any, let them
perform, as far as is in their power, after pouring out
some of the Agrayaza and pouring (water) thereto
from other ekadhana pitchers. And if the trough
bursts before the dakshiza (cows) have been led up,
let him then give one cow; and after coming out from
the purificatory bath, let him be consecrated again ; for
the atonement for that (mishap) is a second sacrifice.
So much then as to those who burst the trough.

8. Thenas to those by whom any Soma is left over.
If any (Soma) be left after the Agnish‘oma, let him
draw the Ukthya cup from the Puttabhzzt. If any
be left after the Ukthya, let him undertake the
Shodasin. If any be left after the Shodasin, let
them undertake a night (performance). If any be
left after the night (performance), let them undertake
a day (performance)*. But nothing, surely, remains
after that®.


Sixty ADHYAYA. First BRAHMANA.


1. Now, the Amsu (graha), forsooth, is no other
than Pragdpati: that (cup) is his (Yagéa’s or the


sense of ‘abundantly,’ as he circumscribes it by ‘ prabhavayantah
(which the commentator explains by ‘distributing over the several
vessels’).

1 That is, he is to perform an Atiratra, see p. 397, note 2.

2 Katy. XXV, 13, 12-14, in that emergency, prescribes either
the Brihat-siman (by which a seventeenth stotra is obtained at the
Vagapeya sacrifice, for which see more in Kinda V), or the
Mahivrata (see IV, 6, 4, 1, with note), or the Aptoryama (see
p. 398, note).

3 The meaning of this seems to be, that after the Apioryama,
no other sacrifice remains at which he could dispose of any Soma
that might be left (and hence one must finish it at that sacrifice).
According to Katy. ib. 15, he is to repeat the Aptorydma, if any
Soma remains after the first performance.


424 SATAPATIJA-BRAHMANA.


Sacrificer’s) self', for Pragdpati is the self. Hence
when they draw that (cup) they produce that self of his.
Therein they lay these vital airs, according to as these
vital airs, the grahas, are explained?; and verily the
sacrificer is born with his whole body in yonder world.

2. Where they draw that (cup), then that is (like)
having a hold*; and where they do not draw it, then
that is (like) having no hold: therefore, then, he
draws the Amsu.

3. He draws it with a vessel of udumbara wood ;
for that (cup) is Pragdpati, and the udumbara tree is
PragApati’s own: therefore he draws it with a vessel
of udumbara wood.

4. He draws it with a square vessel ; for there are
here three worlds: these three worlds he obtains by
three (corners). And Pragdpati is the fourth over
and above these three worlds: thus he obtains Praga-
pati by the fourth (corner): therefore he draws it
with a square vessel.

5. Silently he takes up the pressing-stone ; silently
he throws down the Soma-plants (amsu); silently he
pours water thereon; silently raising (the stone), he


? Or body (atman); amsu meaning the Soma-plant, and hence
the body of the Soma, This graha seems to consist of im-
perfectly pressed Soma-plants in water. Cf. Katy. XII, 5, 6-12.
See also Sat. Br. IV, 1, 1, 2; Taitt. S. VI, 6, 10; Say. on Taitt.
S. I, p. 603. In the Kamva text this Brahmama is followed by one
,on the Adabhya graha, which is identified with speech.

* Or, perhaps, according to as the grahas are explained as
being these vital airs.

* Or, like something that has a handle. The K4ava text reads,—
for whomsoever they draw that (cup), his vital airs are, as it were,
supplied with a firmer hold, and, as it were, firmly established
(arambhazavattara iva pratish/Aita iva). And for whomsoever they
do not draw it, his vital airs are, as it were, without any hold (‘halt-


loser’) and quite unrestrained (anarambhamatara iv4sy4yatatar4
iva prinih),


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 12. 425


presses once; silently he offers that (libation) without
drawing breath: thus he makes him (the sacrificer)
to be PragApati.

6. Now there is a piece of gold in that (spoon) :
that he smells at. And if he either galls or scratches
himself at this (sacrifice),—gold being immortal life,—
he lays that immortal life into his own self.

7. As to this Rama Aupatasvini said, ‘ Let him
freely breathe out and freely breathe in: if he but
offers silently, thereby he makes him (the sacrificer)
to be PragApati.’

8. Now there is a piece of gold in that (spoon):
that he smells at. And if he either galls or scratches
himself at this (sacrifice)—gold being immortal life,—
he lays that immortal life into his own self.

9. As to this Budila Asvatardsvi said, ‘ Let him
draw it after merely raising (the stone), and let him
not press; for they do press for other deities: thus
he does different from what he does for other deities ;
and in that he raises (the stone) thereby. indeed the
pressing takes place for him.’

10. As to this Yag#avalkya said, ‘ Nay, let him
press: “The unpressed Soma delighted not the mighty
Indra, nor the outpressed draughts without prayer,”
thus spake the Rzshi (Rig-veda VII, 26, 1). For no
other deity does he strike but once: thus he does
different from what he does for other deities,—there-
fore let him press!’

11, Twelve heifers pregnant with their first calf
are the priests’ fee for this (graha). Now there are
twelve months in the year, and Prag4pati is the year,
and the Amsu is Pragapati: thus he makes him (the
sacrificer) to be Pragaépati.

12, They have twelve embryo calves,—that makes


426 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,


twenty-four. Now there are twenty-four half-moons
in the year, and Pragdpati is the year, and the Amsu
is Pragdpati: thus he makes him to be Praydpati.

13. Now Kaukidsta! indeed gave as many as
twenty-four heifers with their first calf as dakshizds,
and a bull as the twenty-fifth, and gold; and truly that
is what he gave.

14. This (graha) should not be drawn for every
one, since this is his (Yag#a's) self. It should only
be drawn for one who is well known, or one who is
his (the Adhvaryu’s) friend, or one who, being learned
in sacred lore, would acquire it by his study.

15. It should be drawn at a (sacrifice with) a
thousand (cows as the priests’ fee); for a thousand
is everything, and this (graha) is everything. It
should be drawn at (a sacrifice) where the entire
property is given away, for the entire property is
everything, and this (graha) is everything. It
should be drawn at a Visvagit with all the Pzzsh¢has,
for the Visvagit (‘all-conquering’) is everything,
and this (cup) is everything. It should be drawn
at a Vagapeya and RAgasttya, for that is everything.
It should be drawn at a sattra (sacrificial session),
for the sattra means everything?, and this (cup)
means everything. These are the drawings.


THE GAVAM AYANAS
SECOND BRAHMANA.


1. Verily, they who sit (sacrificing) for a year, by


means of six months go to him that burns yonder :
SPE ten eis: mile ent he. Baath ae Pei ae a TE A eel


1 The Kanva MSS. read ‘ Kaiikthasta.’

* Perhaps the author here means to connect sattra (satra) with
the adverbs satram, satrA, ‘ altogether, always,’ instead of with the
verb sad, to sit; but cf. IV, 6, 8, 1.

* The great sacrificial session (sattra), called Gavam ayana, or


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, I. A427


so it is told on the part of the SAman, in as much as
it is made of the form of that (sun) it is told on the
part of the Rik’; and now in like manner on the
part of the Yagus, by means of preparatory rite,
when they draw that (graha)?, they thereby also go
to him (the sun).


cows’ walk (or course), usually extends over twelve months (of
3o days), and consists of the following parts:
Prayamiya Atiratra, or opening day.
Katurvimsa day, an Ukthya, all the stotras of which are in
the Katurvimsa stoma.
Five months, each consisting of four Abhiplava shadahas
and one Prish/hya shadaha ( = 30 days). Cf. p. 402, n. 2.
Three Abhiplavas and one
Prish/Aya.
Abhigit day.
Three Svarasiman days.


28 days, which, with the two
Opening days, complete the
sixth month.


VISHUVANT or central day.


Three Svarasdman days.
Visvagit day.
One Prish/Aya and three
Abhiplavas.
Four months, each consisting of four Abhiplavas and one
Prish/hya.
Three Abhiplava shadahas. P
One Gosh/oma (Agnish/oma, p. 403,n.). |
One Ayush/oma (Ukthya). 30 days.
One Dasardtra (the ten central days of f
the Dvadasaha, p. 402, note 2). 4
Mah4vrata day.
Udayaniya Atiratra.


28 days, which, with the two’
concluding days, complete
the seventh month.


In imitation of the retrograde course of the sun, the order of
the performance during the second part of the year is, generally
speaking, the reverse of that of the former half.

1 Ta etam shadbhir mAsair yanti, tasmat paraiso graha grzhyante
parAnAi stotrani paraAi sastrani. Ta etam shash/Ae mase gaéhanti
tad etasya riipam kriyate. Kava text.

2 Viz. the Atigrdhya cup to Sfrya (IV, 5, 4, 2 seq.), which has


428 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


2. He thus takes it therefrom with (Vag. S. VIII,
41; Rig-veda I, 50, 1)',‘ The lights bear on high
that divine knower of beings, Sdrya, that all
may see him!—Thou art drawnwitha support:
thee to Siarya for splendour!—This is thy
womb: thee to Sirya for splendour!’


THIRD BRAHMANA.


1. Now as to the manner of animal offerings.
One may perform with the (ordinary) set of eleven
victims. He seizes one for Agni as the first victim,
and one for Varuma (as the last); then again one for
Agni: in this way let him perform with the set of
eleven victims *.

2. Or one may day after day seize a victim for
Indra and Agni; for all the gods are Agni, since in
Agni offering is made to all the deities ; and Indra is
the deity of the sacrifice: thus he neither offends any
of the deities, nor does he offend him who is. the deity
of the sacrifice.

3. Then as to the manner (of animal offering) in
accordance with the Stoma*. At the Agnishfoma


to be drawn on the Vishuvant or middle day of the Gavam ayana ;
an animal sacrifice to the same deity being also prescribed.

1 The Kazva text allows the alternative mantra, Rig-veda I, 50, 3;
Vag. S. VIII, 40, Adresram asya ketavah, &c. See IV, 5, 4, 11.

? See ILI, 9, 1, 5 seq. He is to sacrifice one victim each day,
and if after the eleventh day, the performance is to go on (as at
the Dvddasaha), he is to begin anew with the first victim of
the ekadasint. According to the Kamva text and Katy. XII, 6, 17
he is on such an odd day to immolate all the remaining victims of
the set of eleven. Thus on the last (twelfth) day of the Dvadasaha
—the Udayantya Atiratra—he would have to sacrifice the entire
set of eleven victims.


" Ie. the particular form of the Gyotish/oma, which is being
performed.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, I. 429
let him seize a (victim) for Agni; for it is befitting
that at the Agnish¢oma (‘Agni’s praise’) he should
seize a victim for Agni. If it be an Ukthya sacrifice,
let him seize as the second (victim) one for Indra
and Agni, for the hymns (uktha)! belong to Indra
and Agni. If it be a Shodasin sacrifice, let him
seize as the third (victim) one for Indra; for the
Shodasin (graha) is Indra. If it be an Atiratra, let
him seize as the fourth (victim) one for Sarasvatt ;
for Sarasvati is Vaé (speech), and Vaé is a female,
and so is ratri (fem., ‘night’) female. Thus he duly
distinguishes between the sacrificial performances.
Such are the three manners (of animal offering):
he may perform in whichever manner he pleases.
Two victims must needs be seized,—for Stirya he
seizes the second cn the Vishuvant day, and for
Pragapati at the Mahavrata.


FourTH BRAHMANA.


1. Then as to the Mah4vratiya (graha)*» Now
when Pragdpati had created the living beings, his


1 That is, the hymns of the Rig-veda, the single collections of
which begin with the hymns to Agni, followed by those to Indra.
The ‘ukthani’ here can scarcely refer to the three additional
sastras of the Ukthya sacrifice, as they are composed of hymns to
Indra-Varuma, Indra-Brzhaspati, and Indra-Vishzu_ respectively.
Avs. Vit Ait. Bro Hl, go. Cp. TV, 2, 5; 54:

2 The drawing of this cup forms part of the performance of the
last but one day of the Gavam ayana, the so-called Mahavrata
(great vow) day, on which the following particulars are supplied by
Katyd4yana XIII, 2, 16 seq. The particular form of sacrifice pre-
scribed for the day is the Agnish/oma. A victim to Pragapati is
to be immolated. The Mah4vratiya-graha is drawn as an addi-
tional libation (like the Atigrahyas, IV, 5, 4, 2). The signal for
the chanting of the Prishsha-stotras is given by (a Brahman) play-
ing, with a rattan plectrum, on a harp with a hundred strings of


430 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


joints were relaxed: with his relaxed joints he was
unable to raise himself. Then the gods went on
praising and toiling. They saw this Mahavratlya
(cup) and drew it for him: thereby they restored his
joints.

2. With his joints thus restored, he approached
this food, what food of PragApati there is,—for what
eating is to men, that the vrata (fast-food, or religious
observance generally) is to the gods. And because
(they say), ‘Great, indeed, is this vrata whereby he has
raised himself,’ therefore it is called Mah4vrattya.

3. Now, even as Pragdpati then was, when he had
created the living beings, so are those who. sit (in
sacrificial session) for a year; and as Pragdpati then,
after a year, approached food, so do they now, after a
year, approach food, for whomsoever that knows this,
they draw that cup.

4. Let him draw it for Indra Vimvzdh (the Averter
of scorn), for, verily, the scorners of those who sit for


Muga grass. During the chanting and recitation, the Udgatry sits
on an arm-chair, the Hotr# on a hammock or swing, the Adhvaryu
on a board, and the other priests on cushions of grass. Then
follow several curious ceremonies, performed partly inside and partly
outside the Vedi. The performance of the Sattra is alternately
lauded and vituperated by two persons [the one, a Brahman, seated
at the front door of the Sadas; the other, a Sfidra, at the back door;
both facing each other ;—thus Lafy. IV, 3, according to which
authority, however, they are merely to say respectively, ‘ These
Sattrins have not succeeded!’—‘ They have succeeded!’] At
the same time a harlot and a theological student (brahma&Afrin)
upbraid one another (in front of the Agnidhriya fire shed); while
(south of the Marg4liya) a sham contest takes place between an
Arya (Vaisya) and a Sfdra for the possession of a round white
skin, the Sfidra having to give in (after the third effort, when the
Arya beats him with the skin). Thereupon a couple is shut up in
an enclosed space south of the MArgaliya (or behind the Agni-
dhriya, La/y.) for maithuna.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 6. 431


a year are smitten, and all is won by them: hence
for Indra Vimvzdh,—with (Vag. S. VIII, 44; Rig-
veda X, 152, 4), ‘Scatter thou our scorners, O
Indra, lay them low that war against us, and
send them, that persecute us, to the nether-
most darkness!—Thou art taken with a sup-
port: thee to Indra Vimvzdh!—This is thy
womb: thee to Indra Vimvzdh!’

5. Or for Visvakarman (the All-worker), for all
work is done, everything is won by those who sit in
session for a year: hence for Visvakarman,—with
(Vag. S. VIII, 45; Rig-veda X, 81, 7), ‘V4éaspati
Visvakarman, the thought-speeder’, let us
invoke for protection in our struggle’ this
day: may he, the all-beneficient worker of
good, delight in all our offerings® for our pro-
tection!—Thouarttakenwithasupport: thee
to Indra Visvakarman‘!—This is thy womb:
thee to Indra Visvakarman!’

6. But if he knows the (verse) referring to Indra
(and) Visvakarman, let him draw it thus® (Vag. S.
VIII, 46), ‘O Visvakarman, with strengthening
libation madest thou Indra an invincible
champion: to him did the people bow down of


1 Or, the thought-swift (manogf).

2 For the different meanings of ‘vaga’ see Max Miller, ‘ India,
what can it teach us?’ p. 164.

$ Or, in all our invocations (havana).

‘ The identification of Visvakarman with Indra was probably
suggested by the final pada of the preceding verse of the hymn
(Rig-veda X, 81, 6): ‘May there be (or may he, Visvakarman, be)
for us a Siri Maghavan’ (a rich patron; terms frequently applied to
Indra). But cp. Muir, O. S. T. vol. iv, p. 7.

* The KAnva text does not give the verse, but remarks merely, —
But if he can get (vindct) an aindrf vaisvakarmani (verse), let him
draw it therewith.


432 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


old, because! he, the mighty, is worthy of
adoration.—Thou art taken with a support:
thee to Indra Visvakarman!—This is thy
womb: thee to Indra Visvakarman!’


FirtTH BRAHMANA.


1. Now the graha?, forsooth, is he that burns
yonder, since by him all these creatures are held
(swayed). Hence they say, ‘We take (grah) the
grahas,’ ‘ They walk, seized by the grahas.’

2. The graha, forsooth, is Vaé (speech); for by
speech everything is swayed (grah) here *,—what
wonder, then ‘, that Vaé is the graha ?

3. The graha, forsooth, is the name, for everything
is held (fixed) by a name here,—what wonder, then,
that the name is the graha ? We know the names of
many, and are they not thereby held by us? ?


1 I see no other way of rendering ‘ yatha-asat’ in this passage.

? That is, the seizer, holder, swayer. According to the St.
Petersb. Dict. the word ‘graha’ probably has not already in this
passage the later meaning of ‘planet’ as the one holding or in-
fluencing man; but that of some demoniac being. The whole
Brahmama is a play on the word ‘graha’ in its active and passive
meanings of seizer, holder, influence; and draught, libation. The
corresponding Brahmana of the Kanva text (V, 7, 1) differs widely
from our text. Its general drift is as follows: The graha is the
breath,—the graha of that breath is food,—the graha of that food
is the water,—the graha of that water is fire——the graha of the fire
(Agni) is the breath,—thus the deities are seized by him, and he
wins a place in the world of the deities.

* Perhaps with the double-entendre, ‘everything (libation &c.) is
drawn with speech here.’

* ? Kimu tad yad vag graha4. The usual mcaning of kim u,
‘how much more,’ ‘still more so,’ seems hardly to suit this passage.

* ? Or, ‘are not those of us (that have a name) held (known)
thereby?’ In either case, however, the intcrrogative force of ‘ atha,.’
without any other particle, is rather unusual.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, 5. 433

4. The graha, forsooth, is food ; for by food every-
thing is kept (grah) here: hence as many as eat our
food, all those are kept by us. Such is the natural
order of things.

5. And as to this graha of Soma, that is food ; for
whatever deity one draws this graha, that deity,
being seized by this graha, fulfils that wish of his
for which he draws it. He approaches either the
rising or the setting sun, thinking, ‘Thou art the
seizer, seize thou N.N. by such and such a disease!
may N.N. not obtain such and such!’ (naming) him
whom he hates; or with, ‘ May such and such a wish
not be fulfilled to him!’ and, assuredly, that wish is not
fulfilled to him for whom he thus approaches (the sun).


SIXTH BRAHMANA.

1. Now once on a time the gods, while performing
sacrifice, were afraid of an attack from the Asura-
Rakshas. They said, ‘Who of us shall sit on the
south side; we will then enter upon the sacrifice on
the north side in a place free from danger and injury.’

2. They said, ‘ He who is the strongest of us, let
him sit on the south side; we will then enter upon
the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from
danger and injury.’

3. They said, ‘ Verily, Indra is the strongest of us :
let Indra sit on the south side ; we will then enter upon
the sacrifice on the north side in a place free from
danger and injury.’

4. They said to Indra, ‘Verily, thou art the
strongest of us: sit thou on the south side; we will
then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side
in a place free from danger and injury.

5. He said, ‘What will be my reward then ?’—
‘The office of Brahmazashamsin shall be thine, the

[26] Ff


434 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Brahmasdman! shall be thine!’—Hence one elects
the BrahmazA4féfsamsin with, ‘Indra is the Brahman,
by virtue of the Brahmaship!’ for to Indra belongs
this (office). Indra sat on the south side, and they
entered upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place
free from danger and injury. Therefore let him who
is the strongest sit on the south side, and let them
then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a
place free from danger and injury. Now he, for-
sooth, who is the most learned of Brahmans, is the
strongest of them; and as now any one is (able to
become) a (superintendent) Brahman?—nay, does he
not sit still ?—therefore whosoever is the strongest


1 That is, the SAaman which supplies the text for the Stotra
chanted in connection with the Brahmamakhamsin’s Sastra, and
forming the Stotriya verse of the latter. Thus, at the midday
savana, the (Przsh/ha) Stotra of that priest usually consists of the
Naudhasa-saman (Sama-veda II, 35-36), if the Rathantara-saman
(Sdma-veda II, 30-31) is used for the Hotrz’s Stotra; but, if the
Brihat-saman (ib. II, 159-160) is used for the latter, then the
Syaita-saman (II, 161-2) is used as the Brahma-séman. See p. 339,
note 2. The reason, however, why special mention is made of
the Brahmanakhamsin in this place, probably is that at the Gavam
ayana the Brahma-saman is treated in a peculiar way. For, while
on 142 days of the first half of the year,—viz. on the Xaturvimsa,
on all (6 x 23) Abhiplavika days and on the three Svara-siman days,
—one and the same tune, the Abhivarta-sdman, is to be used day
by day, but each time with a different pragatha stanza (thus the
pragatha S. V. II, 35-36, usually chanted to the Naudhasa tune,
being on this occasion chanted to the Abhivarta tune); on the
corresponding days of the second half of the year, one and the
same stanza, ‘!ndra kratum na 4 bhara’ (S. V. II, 806-7), is to be
used day by day, but with different tunes (six such being given in
the Calc. ed. vol. iv, pp. 529-34). Tasdya Br. LV, 3, 1 seq.

* According to XII, 6,1, 40 only priests of the Vasish/fa
family could beco:ne Brahmans, or superintendent priests, in olden
times ; because they alone knew the Somabh4ga mantras; but now
every one learns them, and can therefore become a Brahman.


Iv KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, 8. 435


of them, let him sit on the south side, and let them
then enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a
place free from danger and injury. Hence Brah-
mans sit on the south side (of the vedi), and they
enter upon the sacrifice on the north side in a place
free from danger and injury.

6. When (the Prastotzz) says, ‘Brahman, we will
chant, O Prasdstar!’ then the Brahman mutters
(Vag. S. II, 12), ‘This thy sacrifice, O divine
Savitar, have they announced unto Brv-
haspati (the lord of prayer), the Brahman’:
therefore speed the sacrifice, speed the lord
of the sacrifice, speed me?#!—Praise ye at the
impulse (prasava) of Savitvz!’ The significance
is the same (as before)*®. With this (text) most pro-
bably enter upon (the chant).

7. But one may also enter upon it with, ‘O divine
Savitar; this,O Brzhaspati,forwards!’ There-
with he hastes to Savitz for his impulsion, for he is
the impeller (prasavits7) of the gods; and ‘O Brzha-
spati, forwards!’ he says, because Brzhaspati is the
Brahman of the gods,—thus he announces it to him
who is the Brahman of the gods: therefore he says,

O Brzhaspati, forwards *!’
8. The Maitravaruva then mutters, ‘Impelled


1 Mahidhara interprets, ‘This sacrifice, O divine Savitar, they
announce to thee and to Brrhaspati, the Brahman.’ Perhaps the
correct meaning (though not that assumed by the Brahmaaa) is,
‘This sacrifice they announce to thee as the Brvrhaspati, the
Brahman !’ and similarly the mantra in the next paragraph.

4 The KAanva text adds here the verse Vag. S. II, 13; see Sat.
Br. I, 7, 4, 22, with the same various reading ‘ gvotir.’

* See I, 7,4, 21. Asau nvaivaitasya yagusho bandhur ya evasau
darsapOrmamasayo/ ; Kanva text.

* On ‘pra’ see part i, p. 101 note.

¥i-2


436 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA,


by the divine Savitrz, acceptable to Mitra
and Varuza!’ Therewith he hastes to Savitvz for
his impulsion, for he is the impeller of the gods; and
‘acceptable to Mitra and Varuza’ he says, because
Mitra and Varuma are the deities of the Maitra-
varuza (Prasdstvz),—thus he announces it to those
who are the deities of the MaitrAvaruza: therefore
he says, ‘acceptable to Mitra and Varuza.’


SEVENTH BRAHMANA.

1. Threefold, forsooth, is science; the Azés, the
Yagus, and the SAmans. The Azés are this (earth),
since it is thereon that he who sings them, does sing
them ; the Fz&s are speech, since it is by speech that
he who sings them, does sing them. And the Yagus,
forsooth, are the air, and the SAmans the sky. That
same threefold science is used in the Soma-sacrifice.

2. By the Azé he conquers this world, by the
Yagus the air, and by the SAman the sky. There-
fore whosoever has learnt one of these sciences, let
him endeavour to learn also what is contained in the
two others :' by the A7z&, forsooth, he conquers this
world, by the Yagus the air, and by the Saman the sky.

3. This, then, is the thousandfold progeny of V4é
{speech)?. Indra (obtained for his share) two-thirds,
and Vishzu one-third?: the Azés and SA4mans are
Indra, and the Yagus are Vishzu. Therefore in the
Sadas they perform (the Sastras and Stotras) with
the Azk and Sdman, for the Sadas is Indra’s own.

4. And by means of these Yagus they, as it were,
bring forward (puras) that Vishzu, the sacrifice: hence
the name ‘ purasfaraza’ (preparatory ceremony). —

? See IV, 5, 8, 4.


* Thus according to the K&mva text,—dvau bh4g4v indro
‘phagataikam vishnuh.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMANA,9. 437


5. Both the Az&s and the Samans are Speech, and
the Yagus are the Mind. Now wherever this Speech
was, there everything was done, everything was
known ; but wherever Mind was, there nothing what-
ever was done, nothing was known, for no one knows
(understands) those who think in their mind.

6. The gods said to Speech, ‘Go thou forward
and make this known!’ She said, ‘What will be


my reward then ?’—‘ Whatever in the sacrifice is
offered with Sv4h4, and without Vasha/¢, that shall
be thine!’ Hence whatever in the sacrifice is


offered with Svah4, and without Vasha/, that belongs
to Speech. She then went forward and made that
known, saying, ‘Do this so! do this so!’

7. Therefore they also perform with the /z& in
the Havirdh4na: he (the Hotvz) recites the morning
prayer, he recites the kindling-verses; he (the Gra-
vastut) praises the pressing-stones,—for thus, in-
deed, they (Speech and Mind) became yoke-fellows.

8. And hence they also perform with the Yagus
in the Sadas: they raise up the Udumbara post,
they erect the Sadas, they throw up the dhishzya
hearths,—for thus they became yoke-fellows.

9. That same Sadas they enclose on all sides with
a view to that generation, thinking, ‘Quite secretly
shall be carried on that generation!’ for improper,
indeed, is the generation which another sees hence
even when a husband and wife are seen, while carry-
ing on intercourse, they run away from each other,
for they give offence. Therefore to any one looking
into the Sadas, except through the door, let him say,
‘Look not!’ for it is as if he were seeing intercourse
being carried on. Freely (one may look) through the
door, for the door is made by the gods.


438 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


10. In like manner they enclose the Havirdhana
on all sides with a view to that generation, thinking,
‘Quite secretly this generation shall be carried on!
for improper, indeed, is the generation which another
sees: hence even when a husband and wife are seen,
while carrying on intercourse, they run away from each
other, for they give offence. Therefore to any one
looking into the Havirdhana, except through the door,
let him say, ‘Look not!’ for it is as if he were seeing
intercourse being carried on. Freely (one may look)
through the door, for the door is made by the gods.

11. Now there, in the Sadas, that male, the
SAman, longs after the female, the Azz. From that
generation Indra was produced: from fire, indeed, fire
is produced, viz. Indra from the Az and the Saman ;
for Indra they call him that burns yonder (the sun).

12. And there, in the Havirdhana, that male, the
Soma, longs after the female, the water. From that
generation the moon was produced: from food, in-
deed, food is produced, viz. the moon from water
and Soma; for the moon is the food of him that
burns yonder’. Hence he thereby produces the
sacrificer, and for him he produces food: from the
Atk and Saman he produces the sacrificer, and from
water and Soma he produces food for him.

13. Now with the Yagus the gods first performed
sacrifice, then with the 4, then with the SAman:
and in like manner do they now perform the sacrifice,
first with the Yagus, then with the Az, then with
the Saman; for Yagus, they say, is the same as
Yagas (worship).

14. Now when the gods milked (the objects of)
their wishes from these sciences, the Yagus scienc


* See'l, 6,°4) rz seq.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMANA, 19. 439


milked most wishes. It became, as it were, emptied
the most ; it was not equal to the other two sciences,—
the air-world was not equal to the two other worlds.

15. The gods desired, ‘How can this science be-
come equal to the other two sciences; how can the
air-world become equal to the two other worlds ?’

16. They said, ‘Let us perform in a low voice
with the Yagus: then that science will become
equal to the other two sciences; then the air-world
will become equal to the two other worlds!’

17. They performed with them in a low voice, and
thereby strengthened them; and henceforth that
science was equal to the other two sciences, and the
air-world was equal to the two other worlds.
Therefore the Yagus, while being distinct, are yet
indistinct ; and therefore the air-world, while being
distinct, is yet indistinct (indefinable).

18. He who performs with the Yagus in a low
voice, strengthens them ; and they, thus strengthened,
strengthen him. But he who performs in a loud voice,
weakens them, and, being weak, they weaken him.

19. The Rzés and Samans, forsooth, are speech,
and the Yagus are the mind; and so those who per-
form with the /t7& and Sdman are speech, and
those who perform with the Yagus are the mind.
Hence nothing whatever is done, unless ordered by
the Adhvaryu: when the Adhvaryu says, ‘Recite
(the invitatory prayer)! Pronounce the offering
prayer!’ then those who perform with the 4vé per-
form it. And when the Adhvaryu says, ‘Soma be-
cometh pure: turn ye back?!’ then those who per-
form with the SAman perform it,—for speech speaks
not but what is conceived by the mind.


1 See IV, 2, 5; 8.


440 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


20. Thus, then, the Adhvaryu, the mind, walks, as
it were, in front (puras-Zarati): hence the name ‘ pura-
skarana';’ and verily, he who knows this, stands, as
it were, in front through prosperity and glory.

21. Now that same puras#araza (going before) is
nothing else than yonder burning (sun): one ought
to perform in accordance with his (the sun’s) course.
When he (the Adhvaryu) has drawn a cup of Soma,
let him turn round in accordance with his course;
when he has responded (to the Hotvz’s recitation),
let him turn round in accordance with his course;
when he has offered a graha, let him turn round in
accordance with his course: he (the sun), verily,
is the supporter; and whosoever, knowing this, is
able to perform in accordance with his course, he,
forsooth, is able to support his dependants ?.


EIGHTH BRAHMANA.


1. Now the consecration-ceremony? (for the sacri-
ficial session) is a sitting down, is a session (sattra) :
hence they say of them, ‘they sit. And when
thereafter they perform the sacrifice, then they
(under)go; then he, who is the leader, leads : hence
they say of them, ‘they (under)go 4,’


? That is, preparation, preparatory ceremony ;—and hence also
the ‘ taking the lead, being the precursor.’

* In the Kava text this is the last Brahmama of the (fifth)
Kanda.

* For the Diksha see III, 1, 1, 1 seq. In the Kamva text I
have found nothing corresponding to the present Brahmaaza.

* That is to say, the verb ‘i’ (to go; more especially its com-
pound upa-i, to undergo, go through, undertake) is used of sacri-
ficial performances in the Sattra lasting for twelve (pressing) days
and upward, to distinguish the latter from thé ahina-sacrifices,
lasting for from two to twelve (pressing) days.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMANA, 5. 441


2. The consecration-ceremony, then, is a sitting
down, it is a session, it is an (under)going, it is the
(under)going of a session. And when afterwards,
having reached the end of the sacrifice, they rise,
that is ‘the rising:’ hence they say of them, ‘ They
have risen. So much, then, for preliminary remark.

3. Now those who are about to consecrate them-
selves settle (the time and place) between them. If
they intend to construct a fire-altar, they take up
their (ordinary sacrificial) fires on churning-sticks !
and betake themselves together to where they are
about to perform the animal offering to Pragapati.
Having churned (the fire), and put fire-wood on,
they take out the Ahavantya fire, and perform that
animal offering to Pragdapati.

4. Its head they keep?. If their consecration
does not fall upon that same day (of the animal
offering), then, taking up the fires (again) on the
churning-sticks, they disperse to their several
(homes) and perform the (daily) offerings.

5. But if their consecration falls upon that same
day, then, taking up the fires (again) on the churning-
sticks, they betake themselves to where they intend
to perform the consecration-ceremony. The Grzha-
pati? churns (his fire) first somewhere about the
centre of the hall; and one half of the others settle
down south and one half north of him. Having


1 That is to say, they hold their churning-sticks to the fires to
get warm ; see part i, p. 396, note I.

? The head of the victim (or victims, sce VI, 2, 1 seq.) will have
to be put in the bottom layer of the fire-altar, to impart stability
to the latter.

> See p. 97, note 1. At a Sattra the Grrhapati, as well .as all
the other ritvig, should be a Brahman ; Katy. I, 6, 13-16.


442 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


churned (their fires),and put on fire-wood, they take
one fire-brand each and betake themselves together
to the Grzhapati’s Garhapatya fire. Having taken out
the Ahavaniya from the Grzhapati’s Garhapatya,
they perform the consecration-ceremony. They
have one and the same Ahavaniya, but different
Garhapatyas, during the consecration and the
Upasads}.

6. Then, on whatever day their purchase (of Soma-
plants) takes place, on that day he raises the Garha-
patya hearth; and on the Upavasatha day? the
dhishzya hearths for the others. At the time of
the Vaisargina®’ offerings, the wives come forward
together; and they (the sacrificers) abandon those
other (Garhapatya) fires‘. As soon as the Vaisargina
offering has been performed,—

7. He leads forward the king (Soma). That
Agnidhriya fire has just been taken up on the sup-
port *, when they take one fire-brand each (from the
fire at the hall-door) and disperse to their several
dhishzya hearths: ‘They who do so,’ said YAagfa-
valkya, ‘slay with those fire-brands of theirs.’ This
now is one way.


* At Sattras there are usually twelve Upasad days. See p. ros,
note 1. Ait. Br. IV, 24 enjoins twelve days for the Diksha and as
many for the Upasads of the Dvadasaha. Katy. XII, 1, 1g; 2. 14
gives no special rule regarding the duration of the Diksha, but
enjoins twelve Upasads. See also Lavy. III, 3, 27; Asv. Vis.

* The day before the first pressing day.

= Ge Ling 0; ay ge meKy

* Or, those minor (? western) fires, viz. they extinguish those
south and north of the Grzhapati’s Garhapatya, or (optionally) also
the latter, it being again supplied by the fire-brand from the
Sailadvarya fire. Cf. Katy. XII, 1, 25-26.

* See III, 6, 3, 9 seq.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMANA, 12. 443

8. Then there is this second. Having taken up
their fires on churning-sticks, they betake themselves
to where they intend to perform the animal offering
to Pragadpati. Having churned (the fire), and put
on (fire-wood), they take out the Ahavantya and per-
form that animal offering to Pragdpati.

9. Its head they keep. If their consecration does
not fall upon the same day, then, taking up the
fires (again) on the churning-sticks, they disperse to
their several (homes), and perform (the ordinary)
offerings.

10. But if their consecration falls upon the same
day, then, taking up the fires (again) on the
churning-sticks, they betake themselves to where
they intend to perform the consecration-ceremony.
The Gvzhapati churns first, and then the others
churn, seated round about him, and throw each the
(fire) produced by him on the Gvzhapati’s Garha-
patya. Having taken out the Ahavaniya from the
Grzhapati’s Garhapatya, they perform the Diksha.
Theirs is the same Ahavaniya and the same Garha-
patya during the consecration and the Upasads.

11. Then, on whatever day their purchase (of
Soma-plants) takes place, on that day he piles up the
G4rhapatya hearth, and on the Upavasatha day the
dhishzya hearths for the others. At the time of the
Vaisargina offerings the wives come forward to-
gether ; they (the sacrificers) abandon that (common
GA4rhapatya) fire. As soon as the Vaisargina offer-
ing has taken place,— :

12. He leads forward the king. That Agnidhriya
fire has just been taken up on the support, when they
take one fire-brand each and disperse to their several
dhishzya hearths. But those who do it thus, raise


444 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANWA.


up strife, and strife comes upon them; they become
contentious, and, moreover, strife comes upon that
community where they sacrifice. This is the second
way.

13. Then there is this third. They commune with
each other over the Gvzhapati’s churning-sticks,—
‘What fire shall be produced therefrom, be that ours
in common! what we shall gain by this sacrifice, by
this animal offering, be that ours in common! In
common be our good work! whosoever shall do evil,
be that his alone!’ Having thus spoken, the Gvz-
hapati first takes up (the fire on the churning-sticks)
for himself, then he takes it up for the others, or
they take it! up for themselves. They betake them-
selves to where they intend to perform the animal
offering to Pragdpati. Having churned (the fire)
and put on (fire-wood), they take out the Ahavantya
and perform that animal offering to Pragapati.

14. Its head they keep. If their consecration
does not fall on the same day, then, taking up
(again) the fires on the churning-sticks, they disperse
to their several (homes), and perform (the ordinary)
offerings.

15. But if their consecration falls on the same day,
they commune with each other over the Grvzhapati’s
churning-sticks,—‘ What fire shall be produced there-
from, be that ours in common! what we shall gain
by this sacrifice, by this session, be that ours in
common! In common be our good work! Whoso-
ever shall do evil, be that his alone!’ Having thus
spoken, the Grzhapati first takes up (the fire) on the
churning-sticks for himself, then he takes it up for


* Or, according to Katy. XII, 2, 8-9, each takes up two fires,
viz. his own and that of the Grshapati.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMANA, 18. 445


the others, or they take it up for themselves. They
betake themselves to where they intend to perform
the consecration-ceremony. Having churned (the
fire) and put on (fire-wood), they take out the
Ahavantya and perform the consecration-ceremony.
Theirs is the same Ahavantya and the same Garha-
patya during the consecration and the Upasads.

16. And on whatever day their purchase (of Soma-
plants) takes place, on that day he piles up the GAr-
hapatya hearth, and on the Upavasatha day the
dhishzya hearths for the others. At the time of
the Vaisargina offerings the wives come forward
together; and they (the sacrificers) abandon that
(Garhapatya) fire. As soon as the Vaisargina offer-
ing has been performed,—

17. He leads forward the king. That Agnidhriya
fire has just been taken up on the support, when
they take one fire-brand each and disperse to their
several dhishvya hearths. Thus is this done, and
not (left) undone. The reason why they have dif-
ferent dhishzyas, is that there may be wider space
for moving about; and why they have different
purodasas', is that more sacrificial food may be left
over for completeness.

18. Now then the sacrificial session is explained,
whereby the gods quickly drove out evil, and gained
the supreme authority which they now wield : having
one Grihapati, one purodasa, one dhishvya, they
quickly drove out mischief and quickly were born
again. And in like manner will these (sacrificers),
by having one Gvzhapati, one purodasa, one dhish-
nya, dtiiclly drive out evil and be born a again.


1 The usual Savaniya-purodasas (IIT, 8, 3, 1) are to be Siac
separately on each fire.


446 SATAPATIHA-BRAHMANA.


19. Now, in that former case, there is a hall with
the roof-beams running from south to north ',—that
is human practice. There are one and the same
Ahavantya, and different Garhapatyas—that is dis-
similar. On the Gvzhapati’s Garhapatya they per-
form the Patnisamyagas with the tail (of the victim),
and the others sit offering in response with ghee—
that is dissimilar.

20. But here there is a hall with the roof-beams
running from west to east’: that is as with the gods.
There are the same Ahavantya, the same Garha-
patya, and the same Agnidhrtya : thus this sacrificial
session is successful, even as the one day's Soma-
sacrifice was successful, there is no failure for it.
Its course is one and the same in everything except
the dhishzyas.


NintH BRAHMANA.


1. Now, once on a time, the gods were sitting®
in a sacrificial session, thinking, ‘May we attain
excellence, may we be glorious, may we be eaters
of food!’ That same food, gained by them, wished
to go away from them,—and, food being cattle,
it was the cattle that wished to go away from
them, thinking, ‘It is to be: feared lest they, being
exhausted, may hurt us‘: how, indeed, will they deal
with us ?’


2. They offered these two oblations in the Gar-

* Viz. the Sadas, see p. 128, note r.

° As in the case of the Prasina-vamsa of ordinary ish/is. See
III, 1, 1, 6—%.


* The Kava text has nishedud, ‘they sat down.’ See IV,
6, 8, 1.


* See p. 31, note 1.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 7. 447
SSIES a TS ARN eet ls See SS fo
hapatya; and—the Géarhapatya being a house
(grzha), and a house being a resting-place—they
thereby secured them in the house, and thus that
food, gained by them, did not go away from them.

3. And in like manner do these Sattrins now sit
through a sacrificial session, thinking, ‘ May we attain
excellence, may we be glorious, may we be eaters of
food!’ That food, gained by them, wishes to go
away from them,—and, food being cattle, it is the
cattle that wish to go away from them, thinking, ‘It
is to be feared lest they, being exhausted, may hurt
us: how, indeed, will they deal with us ?’

4. They offer these two oblations! in the Garha-
patya; and—the Garhapatya being a house, and the
house being a resting-place—they thereby secure
them in the house, and thus that food, gained by
them, does not go away from them.

5. And in like manner that offered food wishes to
go away from him, thinking, ‘It is to be feared lest
this one will hurt me: how, indeed, will he deal
with me ?’

6. He first eats a very little from the further
(back) end of it;—thereby he encourages it: it
knows, ‘It was not so as I thought: he has in no
wise hurt me.’ Thus it becomes attached to him,
and, indeed, whosoever, knowing this, is able to
observe the vow thereof, he becomes an eater of
foed, dear to food.

7. This, then, is done at the Sattrotthana (rising
from the session) on the tenth day?.. Each of them


1 Viz. those referred to in paragraphs 8 and 9.

2 That is, on the tenth day of the Dasaratra, and hence either
the last but one day of the sessional Dvadasiha (p. 402, note 2), or
the last day but two of the Gavam ayana (p. 426, note 3), called


448 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


——_—_—_———_eeeE—eeee———E—_—_————


sits speechless, strengthening his voice’: with that
(voice) strengthened and reinvigorated they perform
the last day. Then the others are dismissed, either
(for) fetching fuel or to their day’s reading of the
scriptures. Now also they take food.

8. In the afternoon, having come together and
touched water, they enter the ladies’ hall?, and
while the others hold on to him from behind, he’


Avivakya. The ceremonies here described take place in the after-
noon, after the regular performance of that day’s (atyagnish/oma)
Soma-sacrifice.

1 ‘Each of them (? or, one by one), speech-bound, guards Soma
till the wakening,’ Katy. XII, 4, 1. According to the Kanva text
only one (eko haisham) does so (but perhaps at a time), while the
others disperse (vitish/Aante).

2 The Patnisala seems to be identical here with the Prafina-
vamsa (see Katy. XII, 4, 7), unless it be some shed or tent adjoining
the latter, cf. Apast. Sr. X,5,comm. The sacrificial formula of the
first offering seems to refer to the domestic hearth, the centre of the
family life, as a source of joy and strength to the householder.

’ According to the Kamva text, the Adhvaryu makes the obla-
tions; but if he does not know how to perform them (i.e. if they
are not recognised by his school as belonging to the Adhvaryu’s
duties), the Grrhapati does so; and if he cannot do so, any one
that knows them, may perform them. Regarding these oblations,
and the order of the subsequent ceremonies, there is indeed con-
siderable difference of opinion among the ritualistic authorities.
According to Asv. VIII, 13, 1-2 all of them offer, but only the first
oblation is to be performed on the Garhapatya, and the second on
the Agnidhriya. Lavy. III, 7, 8 seq., on the other hand, enjoins
the Udgatr? to perform two oblations on the Garhapatya; the first
with the (somewhat modified) formula, assigned in our text to the
second oblation, while the second oblation is to be made with
‘Svaha’ simply. [The first of the above formulas is, according to
that authority, to be used by them, when they touch the Udumbara
post, see IV, 6,9, 22.] The oblations completed, they are to pro-
ceed to the Ahavaniya, where the Udg4tris are to chant thrice the


Saman II, 1126 (?); after which they enter the Sadas to perform
the Manasa-stotra.


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 12. 449


offers (on the Saladvarya fire) those two oblations;
(the first) with (Vag. S. VIII, 51), ‘Here is joy:
here rejoice ye! here is stability, here is (your)
own stability,—Hail!’ He thereby addresses the
cattle; they thereby secure cattle for themselves.

g. And the second he offers with, ‘Letting the
sucking calf to the mother, —he means to say by
this, ‘letting the fire go to the earth ;’—‘a sucking
calf drinking from the mother,—he thereby
means the fire sucking the (moisture of the) earth;
—‘may he maintain increase of wealth among
us,—H ail!’ increase of wealth is cattle: they thus
secure cattle for themselves.

10. They go out eastward, and enter the (shed of
the) Havirdhana carts from behind towards the
front; for from the front towards the back (they
enter) when about to perform the sacrifice, but thus
(it is done) at the rising from the session.

11. On the hinder shaft of the northern cart! they
sing the SAman (Vag. S. VIII, 52), called ‘the
completion of the session, —there it is that they
reach completeness; or on the northern hip of the
high altar; but the other is the more usual,—

12, That is, on the hinder shaft of the northern
cart. ‘We have gone to the light, we have
become immortal,’'—for they who sit through a
sacrificial session become indeed the light, they


1 According to Katy. XII, 4, 10 and comm., the southern shaft
of the northern cart isintended. Similarly the Kaava text,—while
touching the right shaft of the northern cart he sings thereon the
Sdman ‘the completion (success) of the session.’ The words
‘sattrasya riddhih’ are doubtless the name of the Saman, which
has been erroneously made, with ‘asi’ appended to it in the Madhy.
text of the Samhita, the beginning of the Saman.


(26] Cs


450 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.

become immortal;—‘to the sky have we as-
cended from the earth, —for they who sit through
a sacrificial session indeed ascend from the earth to
the sky ;—‘we have attained to the gods, —for
they indeed attain to the gods;—‘to heaven, to
the light!’ thrice they repeat the finale; for they
indeed become (partakers of) heaven and bliss.
Thus, whatever the nature of his Sdman is, that
they come to be who sit through a sacrificial session.

13. They creep’ along right under the axle of the
southern cart: even as a snake frees itself from its
skin, so do they free themselves from all evil. They
creep along with an atié/andas verse; for that, the
ati#dandas (redundant metre), is all the metres ;—
thus evil does not overtake them: therefore they
creep along with an ati£/andas verse.

14. They creep along with (Vag. S. VIII, 53;
Rig-veda I, 132, 6), ‘O Indra and Parvata,
leaders in battle, smite ye every one that wars
against us, smite him with the thunderbolt!
him that is hidden may it please in the far
retreat which he hath reached: our foes, O
hero, on all sides may the tearer tear to
pieces,—on all sides!’

15. They go out eastward, and enter the Sadas
from the front towards the back ; for from the back
towards the front (they do so) when about to per-
form the sacrifice; but thus (they do) at the rising
from the session.

16. They sit down by their several dhishzya-
hearths. Now, once on a time, the pith of Vas
(speech) wished to desert the gods who had won it:


it tried to creep away along this earth, for VA4é is
i ere ai Bai ecclesia


1 See p. 299, note 2.


IV KANDA, 6 ADIIYAYA, 9 BRAIIMANA, 17. 451
this earth: her pith are these plants and trees. By
means of this SAdman!? they overtook it, and, thus
overtaken, it returned to them. Hence upwards on
this earth grow the plants, and upwards the trees.
And in like manner does the pith of Vas wish to
desert these (sacrificers) who have won it, and tries
to creep away along this earth,—for V4é is this
earth: her pith are these plants and trees. By
means of this Saman they overtake it, and, thus
overtaken, it returns to them. Hence upwards on
this earth grow the plants, and upwards the trees.
17. They chant verses of the queen of serpents;
for the queen of serpents is this earth: through her
they thus obtain everything. The prelude is per-
formed by (the Udgatzz) himself?, and the chant is
not joined in (by the choristers*), lest some one else
overhear it. For he would cause (the performance)
to be in excess were another to chant; he would
cause an excess, were another to join in it; he would
cause an excess, were another to overhear it: there-
fore the prelude is performed by (the Udgatvz) him-
self, and the chant is not joined in.


1 Viz. the so-called Manasa-stotra (mental chant), Sima-veda
II, 726-8 (Rig-veda X, 189, 1-3, ascribed to the queen of serpents):
‘The spotted bull has come up, &c.,’ performed inaudibly. In
connection with this Stotra, an imaginary libation to Pragapati-
Vayu is performed, everything connected with which, from the
upAkarama (or introduction, on the part of the Adhvaryu, see p. 401,
note 1) up to the bhaksha, or drinking of the cup by the priests, is
done ‘mentally’ (that is, as would seem, by gestures merely).
According to Asv. II, 13, 6, however, the Hotrz recites the same
hymn in a low voice (updmsu), but not inaudibly,as a Sastra. But
see p. 452, note I.

4 Not by the Prastotr?, as is otherwise the case; see p. 310,
note 1.

? See p. 311, note 1.

Gg2


452 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


18. The Hotr? recites the Four-Hotv7 formulas,
whereby he follows up that chant by a Sastra'. If
the Hotrz does not know them, let the Grzhapati
recite them; but it is the Hotvz’s recitation ”.

19. Then the Adhvaryu’s response ® is, ‘These
sacrificers have prospered: happiness hath
accrued unto them!’ whereby he bespeaks success
to human speech.

20. Thereupon they utter the Brahmodya‘ in


1 According to this (and Tazdya Br. IV, 9, 13) it would seem
that the Hotr?’ is not to recite the hymn of the Manasa-stotra, as
prescribed by the Ait. Br. and Asv.

? The &aturhotr?z formulas—so-called from four priests, Ag-
nidh, Adhvaryu, Hotrz, and Upavaktr?, being mentioned in them
—are as follows: ‘ Their offering-spoon was (the power of) think-
ing ; the ghee was thought; the altar was specch; the barhis was
object of meditation; the fire was intelligence; the Agnidh was
understanding ; the oblation was breath; the Adhvaryu was the
Siman; the Hotrs was Vadaspati; the Upavaktr?’ was the mind;’
—at the end of each of these ten formulas the Adhvaryu, according
to Asv., responds, ‘ Yea (om), Hotar! So (it is), O Hotar !|’—(the
Hotr?' proceeds), ‘They forsooth took that (manasa) graha; O
Vakaspati! O disposer (or decree), O name! Let us praise thy
name! Praise thou (and) by our name go to heaven! What success
the gods have obtained with Pragdpati as their grzhapati, that
success shall we obtain !’

$ ? That is, at the conclusion of the faturhotr:-mantras. Asv.,
on the other hand, makes the Hotr? conclude the Brahmodya with
the benediction, ‘O Adhvaryu, we have succeeded!’ to which the
latter is to respond, ‘ We have succeeded, O Hotar |!’

“ That is, a discussion, or disputation, regarding the nature
of the Brahman. According to Tazdya Br. IV, 9, 14, as inter-
preted by the commentary, the performance consists rather in (or
is followed by ?) vituperative remarks on Pragfpati, whom they have
now safely got into their power (allusion being made, for instance, to
his criminal relations to his daughter ; to his having created thieves,
gad-flies and mosquitos, &c.); but this, it seems to me, is probably
a wrong interpretation of the ‘ parivadanti’ in the text, which may
mean that ‘they discourse’ upon Prag4pati. So also Katy. XII, 4,


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 21. 453


(the form of a) dialogue. For everything, indeed, is
obtained, everything gained by them that sit through
a sacrificial session—they have performed with
Yagus prayers: these have obtained so much, have
acquired so much; they have recited A7k verses:
these have obtained so much, have acquired so
much; they have chanted Sdmans: these have
obtained so much, have acquired so much. But this
has not been obtained, this has not been acquired
by them, namely, the (theological) discussion, the
sacred discourse: this is what they thereby obtain,
what they acquire.

21. Having ‘crept’ up to the Udumbara post,
they restrain their speech. Now, they who perform
the sacrifice with speech, milk and suck out the


21, Pragapater agumikhyanam, ‘aguaa’ may have to be taken in the
sense of ‘nirguva’ or ‘nirgumatvam’ (unqualifiedness, uncondi-
tionedness), rather than in that of ‘vice;’ and it is worthy of note
that the Pragapati-tanu formulas, preceding the Brahmodya proper,
consist chiefly in the enumeration of negative qualities. ‘The
twelve bodies of Prigapati are qualified as follows :—the eater of
food and the mistress of food ; the happy and glorious ; the abodeless
and dauntless; the unattained and unattainable; the invincible
and irresistible; the unpreceded and unmatched.’ Then follows
the Brahmodya :—‘Agni is the house-lord (gr/hapati),’ so say some :
‘he is the housc-lord of this world ;’—‘ Vayu is the house-lord,’ so
say some: ‘he is the house-lord of the airy region ;’—yonder (sun),
forsooth, is the house-lord: he who burns yonder, he is the lord,
and the seasons are the house. Verily, to whatsoever (sacrificers)
he becomes the gr/hapati, who knows that divine gr/hapati, that
gréhapati prospers, and they, the sacrificers, prosper: to whatsoever
(sacrificers) he becomes the grrhapati, who knows the divine averter
of evil, that gr/hapati averts evil, and they, the sacrificers, avert evil !
See Ait. Br. V, 25. According to Asv., the Hotrs alone would
seem to repeat the Brahmodya. The expression vikovakya (dia-
logue) apparently refers to the controversial form of this discourse.
See also A. Ludwig, Rig-veda, III, p. 390 seq.


454 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


sacrifice; for sacrifice is speech. And previously to
this, each of them sits speechless, strengthening his
speech!, and with their speech thus strengthened
and reinvigorated they perform the last day. But
at this (disputation) the entire speech, thus obtained,
becomes exhausted: that speech they all strengthen
(by remaining) speechless, and with it thus strength-
ened and reinvigorated they perform the Atiratra®.

22. They sit touching the Udumbara post’, for
strength is food, and the Udumbara tree is strength:
with strength he thus invigorates specch.

22. When the sun has set, they go out (of the
Sadas) eastward, and sit down behind the Ahavantya,
in front of the Havirdhana shed. Round them,
sitting speechless, the Pratiprasthatrz carries the
Vasativart water‘. For whatever object they per-
form the session, therewith let them release their
speech. For in olden times the Avshis were wont
to hold sacrificial sessions for certain objects,—‘ such
is our wish: may that be fulfilled!’ And if they be
desirous of different objects, desirous of subjects,
desirous of offspring, desirous of cattle,—


* The construction of the text is quite irregular, and I am by no
means ccrtain whether ‘tam esham pura’ should not be separated
from what follows, and have the verbs ‘viduhanti’ and ‘ nirdha-
yanti’ supplied after them,—That (speech) of theirs (they milk and
suck out) before this. Each now sits speech-bound, strengthening
his speech, &c.

? That is, the last day of the Dvadasaha, or of the Gavamayana,
the so-called Udayaniya-atiratra.

* According to Laty. III, 8, 11 they form a circle round the
Udumbara post and touch it, muttering the mantra, ‘ Here is stability,
here is (our) own stability! Here is joy: here rejoice ye!’ or, ‘In
me is stability, in me is (your) own stability! in me is joy: in me
rejoice ye!’ or both. See p. 448, note 3.

* See IIT, 9, 2. 1 seq,


IV KANDA, 6 ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 25. 455


24. Let them release their speech with this (Vag.
S. VIII, 53), ‘Earth! Air! Sky!’ Thus they
render their speech auspicious by means of the
truth, and with that auspicious (speech) they pray
for blessings,—‘ May we be abundantly supplied
with offspring!’—thereby they pray for offspring ;
—‘May we be abundantly supplied with men!’
—thereby they pray for men;—‘May we be
abundantly supplied with food!’ thereby they
pray for prosperity.

25. Thereupon the Grzhapati, or whomsoever the
Grzhapati may call upon, recites the Subrahmawya
litany’, Some, indeed, recite the Subrahmazya
each separately; but rather let the Gvrzhapati, or
whomsoever the Grzhapati may call upon, recite
the Subrahmazya. Having desired an invitation
to that (Atiratra feast), they put kindling-sticks on
the fire *.


‘Seeslhhagig, 1p sed:

* According to the comm. on Katy. XII, 4, 28 it is the reciter
of the Subrahmazy& who, having said ‘O Subrahmany4, invite
me thereto!’ puts sticks on the fire.


c - 22. ce 7
* $5 are ip?
‘> = :


| i. papers % a ay —


a

ne oe So ; P is aa eens ener Send Saeeninte teeae aan alin Neneh yt it
: ‘ : 2

i te The: censiract air -oF Tit BES 6 ate prepulss, and 4 am by a


oa ne me corals. wetnehet pies ‘onhdiay perk. bhevnt hel Be eaperated
leew eh fel: i. Ai sae ae Heres." Weta” ond * geepalya-
7a. orpylied ghier ims -« Tit (speech) mp theice Chex. iis and
eR ea) Rennes: eae Bec, ft Roe sits haces telat, . ovengeaaning


owt


oe


be pens aes


ay wi ePEy ; y wit ;


ek Te oe eget Bree are 3 M4 4
7 Pris 4 wa § he ie: 7 aN. siete


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


(KANDAS I—IV.)


4, Part I, page ror.

abhigharaaa, I, 192.

abhiplava-shadaha, II, 403.

abhivarta-saman, II, 434.

abortion, causing of, II, 11.

adabhya-graha, II, 424.

adara plant, a substitute for Soma-

plants, II, 422.

adhitayagus, II, 20, 22, 23.

adhrigu litany, II, 188.

adhvara, I, rr4q.

Adhvaryu, I, introd. xx seq., xxvi;
must not pass between dhish-
nyas, II, 153; passes north of
Agnidhra shed, ib.; his re-
sponse (pratigara), 231, 326,
328, 330, 3313; he is the head
of the sacrifice, 276; goes in
front, 440.

Aditi, I, 25, 73, 307; has seven or
eight sons, II, 12 ; to her belong
the Prayaniya and Udayaniya-
ishti, II, 48, 386; is the earth,
51; two-headed, 57; her share

, ._ in the Soma feast, 259.

Aditya, seven or eight Adityas, sons
of Aditi, II, 12; they accom-
pany Varuaa, 93; Vivasvat (sun)
the Aditya, 13; is the eye, 39;
the vyana, 240; Adityas and
AngirasaA, 113; Indra-with Va-
sus, Rudras, and Adityas, 241,
350; evening feast is theirs,
ib.; cattle after their manner,
353; the press-stones, 355; to
them belong the yagus, 383;
Adityanam ayana, II, 383;
twelve Adityas, eight Vasus,
and eleven Rudras, 411.

aditya-graha, II, 350, 352.

aghara, two libations of ghee (to
Prag4pati and Indra), I,91, 124;


(to Agnishomau and Vishzu), II,
106.

Agna-vishafi, cake to, IT, 12; tothem
belongs dikshaniyesh¢i, 82.

Agni, representative of priestly caste
pager i I, introd. xvi seq.;
our different forms, I, 47, 136,
452; their names, II, 118;
shuts out Asuras, I, 54; is the
youngest, 108; messenger of
gods, 110, 156 ; ancestral Hotri,
115; repeller of Rakshas, 158;
II, 99; best of gods, I, 163;
seeks for Indra, 175; identified
with Rudra, 201 ; II, 343; with
Pragapati, I, 346, 386; with
Rudra, Varuma, Indra, Mitra,
Brahman, 340 seq.; unites with
waters, 277; gold is his seed,
277; milk ditto, 326; Agni first
created by Pragapati, 323 seq.,
342 seq., 389; the root and pro-
genitor of deities, 386; II, 98;
is tegas, 1, 418, 419; originally
alone immortal, 310; covets the
beasts deposited with him, 347;
all forms (rfipa) deposited with
him, 314; Agni Vaisvanara, 104
seq.; oblations to Agni pava-
mana, pavaka, and suZi, 304
seq.; Agni pavamana and indu-
mat, 320; Agni anikavat, 408 ;
Agni kavyavahana, 430; the
woof of cloth belongs to Agni,
IT, 9 ; Agni is all the deities, 12;
the lower (Vishzu the upper)
half of the sacrifice, 12; Indra,
Soma, and Agni, 22; Agni is the
brahman (sacerdotium) and sa-
crifice, 38; speech, 39; Vrata-
pati, 44, 45; guardian of the
east, 50; Agni attended by


458


the Vasus, 93; messenger to
Angiras and Adityas, 113; Agni
Vaisvanara’s ashes is gravel,
120; Agni head of deities, 184 ;
his victim, 218; the lotus of
the earth, 277; Varuaa, Mitra,
and Agni, 285; Agni vaisvanara,
305; rules over beasts, 343;
officiates as Agnidh, 348; Agni
with Vayu and Sfirya, I, 325,
327; II, 453; Agni, Varuza,
and Indra, leaders of the gods,
I, 449 seq.; Agni, Soma, and
Vishzu form the thunderbolt,
II, 108; five-kapala cake to
Agni, 389; Agni, Indra, and
Sirya superior to the others,


402.

Agnidhra (Agnidh), identical with
Agni, 1, 58; ought to be learned,
and receives first the dakshiza,
II, 148; heads procession with
a firebrand, 187, 195; with
the vasativari water, 235; sits

, inthe Nesh¢ri’s lap, 368.

Agnidhriya (Agnidhra) fire - shed.
Yagvia’s arm, II, 126; erection
of, 147, 148; from thence the
gods gained immortality, 147;
sacred to the All-gods, 148;
the gods stay therein beside the
vasativari water, 226.

Agnihotra, I, 2, 320 seq.; isthe Sun,
327; time of, 328 seq.; two
libations each time; 332, 334;
a domestic sacrifice, 333; first
of sacrifices, 344; a heavenward
sailing ship, 345 ; number of, in
the year, 346.

agnihotra-havani, ladle, I, 11, 67,

ye

agnimaruta-sastra, I, 209; II, 369.

agni-pramayana, I, 298; II, 121 seq.,
157 seq.; cf. fire.

agnirahasya, I, introd. xxx seq.

Agnishomau, I, 169, 373 seq., 377,
379; Agni and Soma (offered
to separately, I, 364); seize
the Soma sacrificer between
their jaws, II, 82, 161; are
yoke-fellows, 106.

agnishomiya he-goat, II, 82; black-
spotted, 83; sacrifice of, 162
seq.

Agnishtoma, II, 301; stotras and
sastras, 325, 326, 397.


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


agnishtoma-saman, II, 368.

Agnyadhana (agnyadheya), I, 1, 2,
274 seq.

agnyanvadhana, I, 2.

agnyuddharama, I, 2; time of, 328
seq.

agnyupasthana, I, 339 seq.

agrayana-graha, II, 288 seq., 332,
355; -sthali, ib.; drawn for
All-gods, 289; at all three Sa-
vanas, ib.; mode of drawing,

. 290; depositing, 292.

Agrayaneshti, offering of first-fruits,
I, 369 seq.

agur (‘ye yagamahe’), I, 142, 148.

agyabhaga, butter portions to Agni
and Soma, I, 159 seq.

Agya-sastra, II, 293; -stotra, 293,


324.

Ahalya, Indra as lover of, II, 81.

ahava, II, 326, 361.

ahavad, II, 380.

Ahavaniya, used for cooking, I, 18;
when taken out from Garha-
patya, 328 seq.; is Yagza’s
mouth, II, 126.

ahavaniya, I, 208; II, 187.

ahuti (guhoti-offering), I, 263.

aindragna-graha, II, 322 seq.

aindravayava (graha), II, 265 seq.;
shape of cup, 277.

airs, vital, three, I, 19 seq.; nine,
140; seven, II, 175 ten, 25;
ten (besides out-breathing, in-
breathing, and through-breath-
ing), 210; speech, out-breath-
ing and in-breathing, eye and
ear, 39. :

Aksavaka, priest, II, 317 seq.

akhGtkara, mole-hill, I, 441; earth
of (akhukarisha), 278.

akhyanavida4, I, introd. xxiv.

Akuli, Asura priest, I, 29.

akyuta, I, 156.

altar, see vedi.

Amaravyati, I, 110.

amavasya, I, 172, 177.

amsu-graha = Pragapati, II, 248,
423 seq.

Anasnat sangamana (as the sabhya
fire) resides with man, I, 338.

Angiras and Adityas perform a
Soma-sacrifice, II, 113 ; aname
of Agni, 118; Angirasdm ayana,
284.

anika, I, 408 seq.; II, 342.


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


animal (victim), fivefold, II, 243; sa-
crifice, 162 seq.

anointment of Dikshita with fresh
butter, IT, 13; of his eyes with
Traikakuda ointment, 14; of
the sacrificial stake, 170; of the
victim, 183.

antaApata, peg, II, rrr.

antaryama (graha), II, 257 seq.; is
the night and offered at sunrise,
261; offered entirely, 263.

anfibandhy4d, barren cow slaughtered
at Somassacrifice, I, 379; II,
2173 maitravaruni, 387, 391
seq.; vaisvadevi and biarhas-
patya, 388.

anumantrana, I, 124, 154.

anushtubh, metre, is speech, II, 21,
Th;

anuvakya, invitatory prayer, I, 119,
135, 170 Seq., 195.

anuvasharkara, II, 351.

anuyaga, after-offering; three at
haviryag/a, I, 80, 230 seq., 445;
nine at Vaisvadeva, Varuma-
praghasas, &c., 390, 404, 418;
eleven at animal offerings, II,
210,

anvaharya, I, 7, 49.

anvaharyapagana fire (dakshinagni),
I, 339; when taken out from
Garhapatya, 340.

anva-rabh, II, 40.

anvarambhaniy4-ishti, J, 7, 386; II,
40.

apana, I, 120.

apasalavi (apadakshina), I, 4413; re-
ferring to the Fathers, I1, 29.

Apastamba, I, introd. xxxix seq.

aponaptriya sikta, II, 232.

apri-hymns, I, introd. xv; II, 185.

apsu-diksha, II, 5.

apsushoma/, II, 373.

Aptoryama, II, 398.

Aptya, I, 47 seq.

apfipa, cake, I, 317.

dpyayana, strengthening of Soma-
plants, I, 178; II, 100, 103.

arani, I, 275; are held while the
pridina-vamsa is approved of,
ile §.

Araru, I, 57.

Arbhava, or tritiya pavam4na stotra,
PD's 18:

Arguni (phalguni), nakshatra, I, 235.

arsheya, I, 115.


459

Arua Aupavesi, I, introd. xli, 313,

. esas

Aruni, I, 14; Taksnan recites for
him, 335; arranger of Subrah-
many litany, I], 82, 413.

Arunmukhas, I, 57.

Arurmarhas, I, 57.

Arvavasu, I, 137.

Asat Pamsava, resides with man, I,


shel 2,3 8s

Ashadha Savayasa, I, 4.

ds-patra, I, 117.

asravana (sraushat), I, 132, 140, 142
seq.

Asuras, contend against gods, I, 54 ;
by speech (numerals), 153;
divide the world with gods, 59
seq.; have darkness and magic
(maya) assigned to them by
Pragapati, 362; defile plants,
370; deprived of (intelligible)
speech, II, 31; build three
strongholds, one in each world,
105; bury magic charms, 135;
the blood spirting out from
victims is their share, 193.

Asuri, I, introd. xxxv, 169, 300, 432,
448; II, 349.

asvavala-grass, II, 89.

Asvina-graha, I1, 272 seq.; drawn in
the tenth place and offered in
the third, 276, 312; shape of
cup, 278.

Asvins, Adhvaryus of gods, I, 16, 53;
II, 276; wander about on earth
performing cures, 274seq.; are
heaven and earth, 276.

Atharvangirah, I, 38.

atigrahya (graha), II, 402 seq.

atié/andas, II, 66, 380.

Atiratra, II, 398.

Atithyeshri (guest-offering to Soma),

_ II, 51, 85 seq.

Atreya, II, 346.

Atri, etymology, I, 131; hotri of
Rishis, I1, 346.

Atyagnishfoma, II, 398.

audgrabhaaa, [I, 20.

audumbari. See udumbara post.

Aupoditeya (Tumiziga Vaiyaghapa-
dya)jl, 371.

austerity (tapas), world conquered
by liyprrys

avabhritha, expiatory bath, I, 406;
Il, 378; sGlavabhritha, 215,

avadana, portion, I, 191.


460


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


avahana (devatanam), I, 118, 157.

avakasa formulas, II, 409.

avantaradiksha, II, 97 seq.

avantareda, I, 221.

avara, 11,353,

avivakya, II, 402, 448.

ayavan, I, 199.

Ayu, I, 389; II, 91; a name of
Agni, 118.

ayushtoma, II, 403.


bahishpavamana (stotra), II, 307, 309
seq.

bali, I, 329.

barhis, I, 84 seq., 147, 233.

Barku Varshaza, I, 5.

beasts, ruler of (Rudra), I, 201; II,
153; Ivashtri, II, 180.

Bhaga, is blind, I, 210.

Bhallaveya (Indradyumna), I, 206,


293.

Bhava (Rudra-Agni), I, 201.

Bhrigu-Angiras, I, 38.

bhiir bhuvas svaA, I, 296; II, 37.

Bhftavat (Rudra), I, 209.

black-deer skin (krishzagina), I, 23;
two, representing heaven and
earth, II, 25; Soma placed
thereon, 160.

brahmabhaga, I, 214.

brahmahatyA, I, 48.

Brahman priest, I, introd. xx seq.,
223; II, 347, 434.

Brahman, the glowing fire, I, 341.

Brahmaza, human god, I, 309, 374;
follows the Kshatriya, 47, 452;
may be without a king, but not
vice versa, II, 270.

b:ahmaza, I, introd. xxii seq.

Brahmanakhamsin, is Indra, I], 433.

brahmanicide, I, 47; II, 243.

brahmasadana, I, 6

brahmasaman, II, 434.

brahmodya, II, 452.

Brihaspati, I, introd. xvi seq.; Angi-
rasa, I, 67; as Brahman priest,
211; the brahman (n.), II, 23,
59; is dyumna, 24; animal
offering to, 219; Brzhaspati the
purohita of Soma, oppressed by
Soma, 258 ; Brihaspati the wise,
is the first, 286; officiates as
Udgatri, 348.

brihati, metre, I, 1753; Il, 112.

brshati-sastra, 11, 430.

brihat-sdman, I,196, 222; II, 339, 403.


Budila Asvatarasvi, II, 425.

bull, at Sakamedha4, representative
of Indra, I, 416.

butter, fresh, used for anointing the
Dikshita, II, 14; melted: see
ghee.


calf, first-born of season, dakshina at
Agrayaneshti, I, 373; dakshiva
at Vaisvadeva (seasonal sacri-
fice), 390.

carpenter, unclean, I, 23.

cart, receptacle of havis, I, 12 seq. ;
bound with thongs, 452; turned
round and placed on altar, II,
127 seq.; description of, 132.

caste, I, introd. xii, xvili, 28, 452; II, 4.

castles, three, built by the Asuras,
II, 105.

cattle, threefold, II, 28.

charms, only effective when buricd
in the ground, II, 135; for-
mulas against, 137.

chip, first of the sacrificial stake, I],
164, 169; Svaru, 173, 186; four
chips, 282.

cloth, its parts assigned to various
deities, II, 9.

confession of sin, I, 397.

consecration (diksha) for Soma-
sacrifice, II, 1 seq.

covenant of Tanfinapat, not to be
broken, II, 95 seq.

cow, when created, coveted by Agni,
I], 326; her skin originally on
man, II, 9; her flesh not to be
eaten by the consecrated,11; to
be eaten according to Yag#aval-
kya, ib.; her ten properties, 69.

creatures, of three kinds, I, 384;
the upright and those tending
downwards, 387, 404.


dadhigharma, II, 336.

Dadhyazk Atharvana, teaches the
Asvins the madhu - brahmaza,
Hi a7%.

Daivya, messenger of Asuras, I, 111.

Daksha (Pragapati), I, 375.

Daksha Parvati, 1, 377.

Dakshayamas, I, 377.

Dikshayana sacrifice, I, 374 seq.

dakshina, I, 48, 308; (the greater
the bettcr), 309, 322; not to be
accepted, if refused by some
one else, II, 116; different


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


461


kinds of, 340seq.; are the sacri-
fice to human gods, 341, 417.

Dakshinagni (anvaharyapaéana ),
when taken out from Gé§rha-
patya, I, 339 seq.; altar near it
at pitriyagfia, 422.

dakshina-homa, II, 336, 341.

dakshinikarana, I, 37.

Danava (Vritra), I, 166.

Danay{Q, I, 166.

Danu, I, 166.

darbha grass, I, 84.

DarsapGirmamisa-ishéi, I, 1 seq.

darvihoma, oblation of spoonful of
boiled rice, to Indra, I, 415.

dasapavitra, straining-cloth, II, 248,
258.

dasaratra, II, 402.

deasil (deiseil, dessel), I, 37.

death, identification with the sun, I,
343 Seq.

debt, owed by man to Rishis,
fathers, and men, I, rgo.

deva (Savitri), I, 46.

Devabhaga Srautarsha, purohita to
Kurus and Srivigayas, I, 377.

dhaman, I, 74, 93.

dhanya, I, 39.

dhayya, I, 112.

dhishnya, hearth-mounds, represent
the Gandharvas, II, 72; over-
turned by Asuras, 147; pre-
paration of, 148 seq.; fagots
held over them, 364.

dhrishti, I, 33.

dhruva (graha), II, 293, 298 seq.;
-sthali, 298.

dhruvia, spoon, I, 67; II, 23.

dhurya (stotra), II, 307.

Diksha, consecration, II, 1 seq.;
apsu-d., 5 ; intermediate, 97 seq.

Dikshaziyeshri, II, 12 seq.

Dikshita, consecrated, is an embryo,
II, 19; is Vishnu, 29; (dhi-
kshita), 47.

doshavastar, I, 354.

drona-kalasa, 11, 257 seq., 268, 318;
is Vritra’s head, 371.

drop, Soma as bindu, II, 157; obla-
tion of drops (stoka), 195 seq.

durvi (dfib) plant, a substitute for
Soma-plants, II, 422.

dvidasiha, II, 402; vyGdbakbandas,

418,

dvidevatya grahas, II, 266 ; shape of
cups, 277, 316, 351.


Dyavaprithivi, heaven and earth,
cake-offering to, at Agrayane-
shri, I, 369 seq.; ditto at Vai-
svadeva, 388; contain the uni-
verse, II,19, 26; when agreeing
(uniting) they give rain, I, 196,
241; hymn to, 330.

Dyutana, son of the Maruts, IJ, 144.


Earth, trembling like lotus-leaf, I,
279; creation of, 280; goes to
witness the Asuras’ animal of-
fering, II, 207.

east, quarter of gods, II, 1, 3, 4;
(faultless) man offers, facing
east, II, 3; assigned to Agni, 50.

ekidasini, set of eleven stakes, II,
173, 176 seq., 218 seq.

ekadhana, II, 102, 232, 233, 235,


ae7

ekaviszsa (stoma), II, gor.

elephant, its origin, IT, 13; not to
be accepted as a gift, ib.

embryo, expulsion of, II, 11, 19;
have their hands closed, 27; en-
veloped in the amnion and pla-
centa, 28, 29, 73; found in cow
slaughtered, 391; unfit for sa-
crifice, 394, 396.

ewe, image of, at VarumapraghasaA4,
I, 395 seq.

eye, the truth, I, 78; man’s eye is
sore (secreting matter), II, 14;
entered by Sushzathe Danava, ib.


falcon (? eagle), Soma as falcon, II,
80; Gayatri, 88.

fast. See vrata.

fast-food, II, 37 seq.

Fathers (manes). See Pitarad,

fingers, bending in of, II, 18, 98;
(nameless) ring-finger, eating
with, I, 332; gold tied to it, II,
63; different fingers used in
meting out Soma-plants, 67;
loosening of fingers, 162.

Fire, kindling of, I, 95 seq.;
production of (by churning,
agni-manthana), 275, 294,
297, 311, 389; II, go seq.;
carrying fire round (paryagni-
karana), I, 45; II, 187; leading
forwards (agni-pramayana), I,
$00 bis tal SCC... £57 eG, |
homage to, at time of Agni-
hotra, I, 301, 322 seq., 348 seq. ;


462


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


ec nnn eee EEE EEE


homage to, when leaving home,
360 ; mounting gf (samaropaaa),
396; womb of the sacrifice, II,
19; serves as a skin to the sacri-
ficer (as embryo), 98.

fire-place, fivefold lustration of, I,
2, 276, 359-

fish, accursed, I, 452; Manu’s, 216
seq.

five, number, I, 16.

flood, legend of the, I, 216.

food, threefold (cattle), II, 28.

Full-moon sacrifice, I, t, 17, 180.


Gagati, metre, means cattle, II, 88.

Ganaka Vaideha, I, introd. xxxi, xlii
seq.

Gandaki, I, 104.

Gandharvas, steal Soma, II, 52; fond
of women, 53, 2333 receive
purchase price for Soma, 72,
1523; Soma-wardens, 150 seq.,


23-35

GAarhapatya, used for cooking, I, 18;
sacred to sacrificer, 339.

gatasri, I, 98, 183.

Gatavedas, I, 119.

gaurivita-saman, II, 401.

Gavam ayana, II, 426.

Gayatri, I, 80, 91, 97, 100; fetches
poma,:183;.all, 62. 150, 329;
as a falcon, 88, 241; by means
of a khadira stick, 151; is the
earth, 1, 194; Agni, 234; II, 87;
fore-part of the sacrifice, 89;
her calf is the dhruva graha, 304.

gharma, I, 44; (samrag), II, 105,
41l.

ghasha, I, 216.

ghee (ghrita), sap of heaven and
earth, I, 372; a purifier, II, 8;
belongs to the gods, 14; a thun-
derbolt, 106, 170.

girdle, hempen, putting on for con-
secration, I], 28, 98; of sacri-
ficial stake, 172.

Givala Kailaki, I, 336.

goat (he-) tied up at agnyadhina, I,
292; she-goat given for Soma,
II, 71,74; goat and sheep, 407.

gods, path to, I, 267; how they be-
came immortal, 310 seq.; do
not sleep, II, 44 ; thrice eleven,
290; three kinds of, 350; eight
Vasus, eleven Rudras, and
twelve Adityas, 411.


gold, Agni’s seed, I, 277; II, 59, 390;
piece of gold used in offering,
II, 54; tied to the ring-finger
(as a symbol of truth), 63, 70;
symbol of the sun, 115, 224;
put in right wheel-track and
offered on, 130; with oblation
of omentum, 198.

goshtoma, II, 403.

Gotama Rahfigana, I, 104 seq.

Graha, cup of Soma, II, 247, 259;
meanings of, 432 seq.

grava-stotra, II, 332.

Gravastut, assistant of Hotr:, I, 223,
332.

gravel (sikata), the ashes of Agni
Vaisvanara, II, 120.

grihapati, I, 97, 441, 453, 455-

Grihya-sitra, I, introd. xlviii.

guhii, offering-spoon, I, 67 seq., 139;
II, 23; portions of victim for
guhii, 204.

Gyotishtoma, II, 403.


hari, the two bay steeds, are the Rik
and Siman, II, 371.

Harivant (Indra), II, 399.

hariyogana (graha), II, 289, 370 seq.

Hasta (nakshatra), I, 286.

havirdhana, I, 14; Soma-cart shed,
II, 126 seq.; sacred to Vishzu,
126, 1313 belongs exclusively
to the gods, 146; Soma placed
there, 160.

haviryagéa, I, introd. xv, xlviii.

havis, I, 151.

havishkrit, I, 27.

havishpankti, I, 16.

havyadati, I, 107.

heart, of victim, is roasted first, IT,
201; Offered, 204.

Heaven and Earth.
prithivi.

hin, I, roo, 325.

Hirazyagarbha, I, 271.

Hiranyastfipa, I, 175.

hiranyavati-ahuti, II, 52 seq.

horn, of black antelope, used for
scratching, II, 32, 33; taking
up earth, 43.

horse, present at production and
carrying forward of fire, I, 297
seq.; white horse (symbol cf
sun), dakshiza at Sunasiriya,
4473 at the Sadyadkri, II, 115;
at Soma-sacrifice, 348.


See dyava-


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


463


hotra (samyagay-), II, 287.

Hotraka (Maitravaruna, Brahmana-
khamsin, and Afsavaka), II, 295
seq., 324.

Hotri, seven, I, 223.


ida, I, 216 seq.; II, 60.

Idah, 1, 147, 152.

immortality, gained by the gods, II,
147.

Indra, representative of the Kshatra,
I, introd. xvi seq.; slays Vritra,
I, 20, 52, 166,175, 416, 452; Il,
265; slays Visvariipa, I, 47, 164;
is deity of sacrifice, I, 129; the
Vasu of gods, 176; overturns
Asuras’ fire-altar, 287; resides
with man, 338; is the blazing
fire, 340; Indra Vimridh, 375;
II, 430; Indra and Maruts=
Kshatra and Vis, I, 399; Agni,
Varuna, and Indra, leaders of
gods, 449 seq.; Indra, Soma,
and Agni, II, 22; he is born
of Yaga and Vak, 32; the
ruddy cow belongs to Indra
vritrahan, 62; Indra’s amours,
81; called Kausika, Gautama,
82; attended by the Maruts,
93; Indrathe chief of gods, 93 ;
is the Sun, 96; delights in songs,
146; animal offering to, 220;
Indra with the Vasus, Rudras,
and Adityas, 2413 is assigned a
special (chief’s) share, 241;
everything submits to him, even
the wind, 242; leader of the
sacrifice, 262; the cow of
plenty (Kamaduh) his special
portion, 294; Indra marutvant,
3355e€q., 347; stands over every-
thing, 398; Indra harivant, 399;
Indra shodasin, 400; Indra,
Agni, and Sfirya, superior to
others, 402; Indra visvakarman,
431; Indra, the strongest of
gods, 433; is the Brahmana-
khamsin, ib.; to Indra belong
Rik and Saman, 436; he is pro-
duced by them, 438 ;' Indra and
Parvata, leaders in battle, 450.

Indragni, win the race, I, 371; cake
to, at Agrayaneshti, ib.; at
Dakshayaneshti, 375, 378; at
Varunapraghasah, 393; at Ma-
hahavis, 419; are the Kshatra,


371; oOutbreathing and _in-
breathing, 393; animal offering
to, 221; are all the gods, 225;
the universe, 292; cup to them,
323.

indrasatru, I, 165.

Indravishni, divide one thousand by
three, II, 62.

Iravatt, I, rro.

ishti (yagati-offering), I, 263.


Ka (Pragapati), I, 8, 395; II, 410.
Kadri (and Suparni), II, 52 seq.,
149 seq. ; is the earth, 149.

Kahoda Kaushitaki, I, 370.

kamaduh, cow of plenty, Indra’s
special portion, II, 294.

Kamasadhvaryu, II, 287.

Kamasins, enumerated, II,
touch the cups, 373.

kamyeshti, I, 97.

Kanva-sakha, I, introd. xxviii seq.,
XXXviii, xliv seq.

kapalas, I, 32; arrangement of, 34.

Karakas, I, introd. xxvi; a Karaka
Adhvaryu curses Yagziavalkya,
II, 197, 262, 297, 298.

karambha, porridge, I, 395; II, 303.

Karatoya, I, 104.

Karira fruit, offered at Varuma-

eg praghasa/, I, 394.
karshmarya tree, Rakshas-killer, I],


287;


89.

karu (pap of whole rice-grains), I,
7, 211, 410,

K4thaka, I, introd. xxvi seq.

daturhotri formulas, II, 452.

katurmasya, seasonal sacrifice, I, 383
seq.; detached sacrifices, 407.

katushprasya, I, 275, 292, 373.

Aatvala, pit, II, 116, 379.

KAtyayana, I, introd. xxxv seq., xl.

Kaukista (Kaiikthasta), II, 426.

Kavasha Ailfisha (Ailushiputra), I,
introd. xxxv.

khadira stick, therewith Soma car-
ried off by Gayatri, II, 151.

khandoma, II, 402.

Kilata, Asura priest, I, 29.

kim-purusha, I, 51.

kim u, II, 432.

king, paying homage to (Soma as)
supreme ruler, II, 79; attended
by heralds and headmen, 87.

Kitra (nakshatra), I, 286.


464


SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


knot, attribute of Varuza, I, 73; II,


146.

Kosala-Videhas, I, introd. xlii.
Krisanu (Gandharva archer), I, 183 ;
II, 72 ; footless archer, 78.

Krittikas, I, 282.

Kshatra, served by the Vis, I, 393;
Kshatra and Vis, Indra and
Maruts, 399; Varuza and Ma-
ruts, 40!.

Kshatriya, oppressor of Vaisya, I,
82; served by Vis, 94; lives on
them, II, 66; before a Ksha-
triya approaching the people go
jown, 228; should always have
recourse to a Brahman, 270.

kukkuga, I, 30.

Kurukshetra, II, 275.

Kurus, I, introd. xliii, 377.

Kuru-Paffalas, I, introd. xli seq.,
192; nature of their speech,
IT, 50.

kusa-plant, yellow, a substitute for
Soma-plants, II, 422.

kusa, II, 309.

Kusri Vagasravasa, I, introd. xxxiii.

Kyavana Bhargava (Angirasa), II,
272 seq.


lines, drawing of, on hearth, I, 2,
276; round the altar (pari-
graha), 62; round foot-print of
Soma-cow, II, 60; one line
drawn with the sphya in follow-
ing the fire carried to uttara-
vedi, r2r.

lute, created by the gods, II, 53.


madanti, (hot) lustral water, II, roo.

madhukanda, I, introd. xxxiv; ma-
dhu-brahmaza, II, 277.

Madhuki, I, 300.

madhyama (kinda), I, introd. xxix.

Madhyandina, I, introd. xxviii seq.

madhyandina-pavamAna (stotra), II,
333, 336.

madhyandina-savana, belongs to
Trishrubh, II, 250; to the Ru-
dras, 330, 331 seq.

Maghavan, I, introd. xi.

mahabhishava, great pressing, II,
244, 256.

mahad uktham, II, 430.

mahahavis, great oblation, at Saka-
medhaA (offeringsto Agni, Soma,
Savitri, Sarasvati, and Piishan,


Indragni, Mahendra, and Visva-
karman), I, 417 seq.

mahiaraga, II, 338.

mahavrata, II, 429.

mahavratiya-graha, II, 429.

Mahendra, I, 182, 419; II, 338.

mahendra, graha, II, 337 seq.

Maitravaruza (or Prasastri), assistant
of Hotri, I, 223, 2243 II, 183;
prompts the Hotri, 188; his
cup meets the Vasativari water,
235 seq.

Maitravaruva-graha, II, 269 seq.;
mixed with milk, 271; shape of
cup, 278.

Maitrayani-samhita, I, introd. xxvi.
man, the highest of animals, II, 210;
his skin now on the cow, 9.
Manas (mind) and V4& (speech), I,
124 seq.; II, 55; inherited by
gods and Asuras respectively,

303; are heaven and earth, ib.

manasa-stotra, II, 451.

Manavi, wife of Manu, I, 29.

Manes (Fathers). See Pitaras.

Manota deity, offering to, II, 203,


393.

mantha, gruel, II, 278.

Manthin graha, II, 278 seq., 316
Seq., 332.

Manu, his bull, I, 29; Manu and the
fish, 216 seq.

Margaliya, shed, in Yag#a’s arm, II,
126; erection, 148.

Marka and Sanda, two Asuras, II,
279 seq.

marriage between kinsfolk, I, 238.

gree rigor abortive child of Aditi,
(es

Maruts, representative of the Visadé,
I, introd. xvii, 387, 393, 3993
divided into troups of seven
each, 394; threaten to destroy
Creatures, 393, 394; Marutads
sintapanas, 409; Maruto gri-
hamedhinaA, 409 ; Marutad4 kri-
dinad, 416; Maruts accompany
Indra, II, 93; Dyutana, son of
the Maruts, 144; Urdhvanabhas,
son of the Maruts, 198; animal
offering to Maruts, 220; assist
Indra in smiting Vritra, 334;
embryo of slaughtered cow
offered to Maruts, 396.

marutvatiya (graha), II, 332, 334,
3363; sastra, 337.


INDEX


MaA&tarisvan’s cauldron, I, 186.

Medhatithi’s ram, Indra, II, 81.

Mena (? wife) of Vrishanasva, II, 81.

metres, I, 80, 96; Soma supreme
ruler of metres, II, 65 ; they are
his attendants, 87; their part in
the guest-offering, 88; in the
production of fire, 91 ; at Soma-
sacrifice, 314, 315, 329; are the
draught cattle of the gods,

69 seq.

milk, should be cooked, I, 330;
sustains creatures, 385 seq.,
388; offered to Vayu, 446.

mill-stones, I, 38 seq.

mind, is sacrifice, 11, 30; heaven, ib.

Mitra, the waning fire, I, 341; the
waning moon, 380; implants
seed in Varuna, ib.; (friendly)
tying of foot by Mitra, II, 57;
what is of Mitra is not of Va-
ruma, ib.; Mitra, priesthood,
can exist without the Kshatra,
but not vice versa, 270; every
one’s friend, 271; Mitra is the
brahman, the truth, 272; Va-
runa, Mitra, and Agni, 285.

Mitr4varuzau, offering of payasya to,
at Dakshayaneshri, I, 375 seq.,
378 seq.; they are the out-
breathing and in-breathing, II,
39; intelligence and will, 269;
brahman and kshatra, 270;
anfibandhya cow to, 387.

Mle&ééa, speaks barbarous, unintelli-
gible language, II, 32.

mole-hill used for hearth, I, 278;
for burying Rudra’s oblation in,
4413 for burying the embryo
of a slaughtered cow, II, 396.

months, names of, II, 301.

moon, waxing and waning = Varuaa
and Mitra, I, 383.

Mrigasirsha I, 284.

MfigavantaA, I, 443.

musala (mortar), I, 26.


Nabhas, a name of Agni, I], 118.

Nada Naishadha, resides with man,
I, 338.

nails, cutting of, II, 6.

Nakshatra, etymology, I, 288, 452 ;
lights of righteous men, 269;
those suitable for agnyidhana,
282 seq.; the meshes of cloth
belong to them, II, ro.


[26]


TO PARTS I AND II.


465


nakshatra name, I, 251.

name, a second, to be taken, II, 154.

nanada-saman, II, 401.

Narasammsa, I, 136, 146, 233.

narasamsa cups, belong to Fathers,
Lathes.

navaratra, II, 414.

Neshtri, priest, leads up the Patni,
II, 190 ; takes the Agnidh in his
lap, 368.

nidhana, II, 310, 311.

nigada, I, 114, 202.

nigrabha formula, II, 245.

nigrabhya, the Vasativari water
poured into the Hotri’s cup,
II, 236; used for moistening
the Soma-plants, 240, 242; ety-
mology, 243, 247.

nirvapaaa, I, 168.

nishkevalya-sastra, II, 339.

nivi, tuck of nether garment, sacred
to Manes, I, 368, 435; (Soma),
II, 29.

nivid, formulas, II, 235.


north, quarter of men, II, 2, ; of
Pathya Svasti Speaaes 503
sacrifice performed north, roz.


north-east, I1, 8.


omentum. See vapa.

oni, II, 66.

oshadhi, etymology, I, 323.

Otos and Ephialtes, myth of (piling
of Ossa on Olympus, and Pelion
on Ossa), I, 286.

ox, present at production and carry-
ing forward of fire, I, 297; its
flesh not to be eaten by conse-
crated, II, 11; to be eaten ac-
cording to Yag#avalkya, ib.;
black oxen, insure rain, 78; is of
Agni’s nature, 390.


pakayagza, I, introd. xlvili, 333.

palasa, tree, identified with the brah-
man, I, 90; central leaflet of
palisa leaf used for offering on
to Rudra, 439; branch used
for driving the calves from the
cows, 183; for driving Soma,
II, 78.

Panini, I, introd. xxxv seq.

pastkadasa-stoma, I, 96; II, 308, 333.

Pavkalas, I, introd. xli.

Pari, 1, 61, 300.

pankti, II, 315.


Hh


466


SATAPATHA-BRAHMAWA.


pannegana water, used by Patni for
cleansing the victim, II, 190.

parak, II, 310.

Paravasu, I, 137.

paridhi, enclosing-stick, I, 87 seq. ;
offering of, 245 ; II, 125.

parigraha, line of enclosure, I, 60


seq.

parva, I, 183; II, 78.

Parvata, Indra and Parvata, leaders
in battle, II, 450.

paryagnikarama, I, 45; II, 187.

paryaya (turn of chanting), II, 308


seq.
pasupurodasa, II, 199 seq.
Pata@gali, I, introd. xxxvi seq.
path to Gods or Fathers, I, 267.
Pathya svasti, offering to, II, 49, 50,


386.

Patni, girding of, I, 71 seq.; seat,
72; interrogated by Pratipras-
thatri as to her lovers, 396; the
house her resting-place, II, 61;
exchanges looks with Udgatri,
368; touches (bids welcome to)
Soma when he enters the hall,
87; anoints axle of Soma-cart,
130; is led up by Neshtri to
cleanse the victim, 190 seq.

patni-sala, I1, 448.

patnisamyaga, I, 75, 256 seq.; not
performed at Prayaniyeshti, II,
52; at animal offerings per-
formed with tailof victim, II, 215.

patnivant, II, 365 seq.

patnivata-graha, II, 365 seq.

patra, cup, II, 259.

pavamiana (stotra), II, 307.

pavamaneshfi, I, 304,

pavitra (strainer, purifier), consisting
of two stalks of grass, I, 19; II,
16; of one, three, seven, or
twenty-one stalks, 17; (strain-
ing-cloth), 258.

payasya, clotted curds offered to
Mitravaruzau, 378 seq.; prepa-
ration, 381; sexual union with
whey, 388, 394.

pebbles, used for hearth, I, 280.

phalguna plants, a substitute for
Soma-plants, II, 421.

Phalguni, I, 285.

Pinda, (round) rice-cakes to deceased
ancestors, I, 366.

Pindapitriyagva, I, 361 seq.

pishfa-peshaaa, I, 41.


Pitarah (Manes, Fathers); condi-
tions of existence assigned to
them by Pragapati, I, 361;
Pitarah somavantas, barhisha-
dah, agnishvattas, 421; path to
Pitarah, 267; the nivi (tuck)
sacred to Pitarah, :368, 435;
the thrum of cloth sacred to,
II, 9; ruddy cows with reddish-
white eyes belong to Pitara4,
62; part of post dug into the
ground is sacred to them, 143;
pit ditto, 169.

pitritirtha, I, 365.

Pitriyagza, oblation to Manes, I,
361 seq., 420 seq.

plaksha (ficus infectoria) branches
used to cover the altar, II, 120,
202. ;

plants, are the vis, II, 65.

porcupine-quill used for shaving, I,
450.

prapdjpsorssll,445:

pradakshima, I, 37, 45, 272, 442: cf.
prasalavi, apas., dakshizik4ra.

Pragdpati, father of gods and Asuras,
I, 54; I], 301; creates and be-
comes exhausted, I, 173; ena-
moured of his daughter, 208
seq.; creates Agni, 322 seq.,
342; creates living beings, 384;
heals the creatures stricken by
Varuna, 391; assigns conditions
of life to creatures, 361; iden-
tified with Agni, 346; with
Agni and Savitri, 386; is Dak-
sha, 3753 is vasishtha, 376;
man nearest to him, 384; Pra-
gapati,” lord of thought and
speech, II, 17 ; becomes an em-
bryo, 28; is the sacrifice, the
year, 37; exhausted, fortifies
himself by animal offering, 217
seq.; arbiter between Indra
and Vayu, 268; is over and
above the thirty-one gods and
heaven and earth, 411; over
and above the three worlds,
424; libation to Pragdpati-
Vayu, 451.

pragapati-tanu formulas, II, 453.

praéi, the easterly line, I, 63; II,
33; forms the back-bone of
vedi, 112.

prafina-vamsa, II, 3; used for the
consecrated, 4; approved of, s.


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


467


prana, I, 19,120: cf. airs, vital.

pranadana, I, 94, 438.

pranitas, I, 9, 23, 265; II, 12.

pra-rué, I, 161.

prasalavi (pradakshina), I,
strings twisted, II, 29.

prasitra, fore-portion (Brahman’s),
ae

prasitra-harama, I, 69, 212.

prastara, I, 84 seq., 92seq.; (the sacri-
ficer), 240 seq., 389, 405; II, 89;
amends made on the prastara,
102; anointed when thrown
into the fire, 103, 104.

prastava, II, 310.

prasthita, II, 198, 372.

Prastotri, II], 310, 311.

Pratassavana, IJ, 238 seq.; belongs
to Gayatri, 250; to the Vasus,
350.

Prataranuvaka, morning-prayer, II,
226 seq.

Pratidarsa Svaikna, I, 376.

pratigara, Adhvaryu’s response, II,
231, 326, 328, 361.

pratihara, II, 310.

Pratihartri, II, 310, 347.

Pratiprasthatri, assistant of Adh-
varyu, roasts the omentum, II,
196.

pratyabhigharaaa,
201, 414.

pratyasravama, I, 132, 140.

praiiga-sastra, II, 324.

pravara, I, introd. xvi, 95, 114 seq.,
131 seq.

pravargya, I, 44; II, 104.

pravritta (pravrita) homa, II, 305.

prayaga (fore-offering), five at havir-
yagva, I, 138 seq., 318 seq.,
445; four at avabhritha, II,
382; nine at Vaisvadeva, Va-
runapraghasah, &c., 390, 400,
418; eleven at animal offer-
ing, II, 185, 210.

Prayaniyeshti, belongs to Aditi, II,
47; oblations to Pathya svasti,
Agni, Soma, Savitri, and Aditi,


442;


replenishing, I,


press-board (adhishavana), II, 140.

pressing-skin, round and dyed red,
II, 140.

press-stones (five), II, 140, 227.

priest, medium of worship, II, 3.

prishad-agya, clotted butter, I,


404.


Uo anpie Se II, 339, 403; -sdman,

406,

prishthya shadaha, IT, 402, 403, 405.

prokshawi, sprinkling water, I, 20,
835 II, 122, 139, 142, 159, 168,
181,

Prometheus, I, 186.

Punaradheya, I, 285, 313 seq.

Punarvas@, I, 285.

puraskarama, II, 436, 440.

purisha, I, 64.

pirnahuti, full-offering, I, 302; II,
25.

purodas, I, 32.

purodasa, preparation of, I, 42 seq.;
etymology, 162.

purohita, I, introd. xii, 377; II, 270.

purorus, preliminary formula, II,
235, 280, 295.

Purfiravas, I, 389; II, gt.

Pfishan, distributer of portions, I,
53; toothless, 211; identified
with the earth, 418; Il, 57;
represents (prosperity) cattle,
II, 22; guardian of paths, 57;
Pfishan’s speed is the wind,
205; animal offering to, 219.

pati, II, 8.


Quarters’ (dis), oblation of whey to
disah, pradisah, adisad, vidisad,
uddisa4, I, 382; oblation of fat
gravy, II, 209.


Rakshas, etymology, I, 8; roam
about the air, ib.; II, 16; pur-
sue women, 35.

ram, image of, at Varuna-praghasa4,
I, 395 seq.; Varuma’s victim, ib.

Rama Aupatasvini, II, 425.

rathantara-saman, I, 196, 222; II,
339) 403- |

rauhina (fire-altar constructed by
Asuras), I, 286.

razor, copper, I, 450; II, 7.

reed, used for anointing, being a
thunderbolt, II, 15; for inter-
twining with zone, 28.

region (dis), See quarter.

repetition. of sacrificial performance
to be avoided, I, 80.

Ribhus, 11, 361.

Rig-veda, arrangement of hymns, I,
introd. xvi, xx seq.

riksha (ursa major), I, 283.

Rishi, the seven, 1, 282.


Hh 2


468


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Ee


ritu-graha, oblations for seasons, II,
318 seq.; -patra, 407.

Rohini (nakshatra), I, 283.

Rudra, purification after mention-
ing his name, I, 3; identified
with Agni (Sarva, Bhava, Pa-
sfinam pati), 201; is the newly-
kindled fire, 340; pierces Pra-
gapati, 209; to Rudra is due
what is injured in the sacrifice,
2113 pursues creatures, 340;
Tryambaka oblations to Rudra,
on a cross-road, 438; the mole
sacred to him, 440; Rudra with
Vasus, II, 59; the Rudras ac-
company Soma, 93; (pasfindm
fshze, 153. See Tvashtri) ;
Indra with Vasus, Rudras, and
Adityas, 241, 350; Rudra offi-
ciates as Hotri, 348; eleven
Rudras, eight Vasus, and twelve
Adityas, 411.


sabhya, hall-fire, I, 302; resides with
man (as Anasnat sahgamana),
338; worship of, 339.

sacrifice, Indo-Iranian, I, introd.
XV, 49; is man, 78; II, 25, 126;
passes from priest to priest, I,
140 seq.; from father to son,
162; as tortoise, 161; place of,
II, 1 seq.; Brahman, Raganya,
and Vaisya, able to sacrifice,
4; of equal measure with the
year, 16; is invisible, 19; is
speech, 23, 24; the Brahman,
ib.; fivefold, 24; changed into
a horse, 89; animal sacrifice,
162 seq.; the Sacrifice (Yag#a)
is Soma, 246; fashioned like a
bird, 264.

sacrificer (yagamana), is the victim,
I, 49, 62, 78; his foot used for
measuring uttara-vedi, II, 119.

sacrificial essence (medha), I, 50.

Sadanir, I, introd. xlii, 104 seq.

Sadas (text), is Yagsia’s belly, II,
127; Construction of, 140 seq.;
sacred to Indra, 141; iscommon
to gods and men, 146. .

sadasya, II, 286.

sddhyaA, ‘blessed’ gods, II, 174.

sadyadkri, kind of Soma-sacrifice, II,


114.
Sahadeva Sarfgaya, I, 376.


Saharakshas, messenger of Asuras, I,
110; II, 115.

sahasri, II, 414.

Sakamedha4 (seasonal sacrifice), I,
384, 408 seq.; cake to Agni
Anikavat, 408 ; 4aruto Marutad
santapanas, 409; ditto griha-
medhinaA, ib.; darvihoma, 415;
cake to Maruts, 416; mahahavis,
417 $eq.; Pitriyag#a, 420.

Sakvari metre, II, 226.

sala (hall), measure of, II, 3.

salt, used for hearth, I, 278.

saman, I, 100; is the truth, II, 97.

samaropama, lifting or mounting of
fire, I, 396.

samavatta, cuttings from ida, I, 219;
II, 203; -dhani, 207.

sambhira, I, 276 seq.

Samgivi-putra, I, introd. xxxii seq.

sami leaves, offered at Varumapra-
ghasah, I, 395.

samidh, I, 91 seq., 95 seq., 146,
153.

simidheni, I, 95 seq.; II, 13.

samishtayagus, one, I, 262seq., 4453
three, 390, 406, 418; nine, II,
374; the end of the sacrifice,
13, 374 seq.

samitri, butcher, cooks the victim,
II, 200.

samsrava, Offering of, I, 236.

samstha, II, 398.

samya, yoke-pin, used as wedge, I,
29; II, 116 seq.

samyagye, I, 164, 307.

Samyu Barhaspatya, I, 254.

samyuvaka, I, 236, 247, 254 seq.

Sanda and Marka, two Asuras, II,
279 seq.

sandhya, twilight worship, I, 344.

Sandilya, I, introd. xxxi seq., xlvi.

sannayya, I, 162, 178 seq., 381.

saptahotr’, I, 223.

sarabha, I, 52.

Sarasvati, river, I, 104 seq.

Sarasvati, goddess, oblation to, I,
418; speech, II, 22; animal
offering to, 218.

sarpaza, II, 299.

Sarparag7i, Il, 451.

Sarva (Rudra-Agni), I, 2or.

Saryata Manava, II, 273 seq.

sasni, I, 15.

sastra, twelve at Agnishéoma, II,
303, 325 seq.


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


469


LL LS


Satapatha - brahmaza,
XXVili seq.

Satarudriya-homa, I, 346.

Sattra, sacrificial session, II, 402,
426, 440; sattrasya riddhi, 449.

sattrotthana, II, 441, 447.

Satyayag#a (Satyayagzi), II, 2.

saumya-adhvara, I, 26, 114.

saumya Aaru, Il, 364.

sautramani, I, 165.

savaniya purodasa, II, 230, 314, 315,
324.

savitra-graha, II, 357.

Savitri, the intermediate progenitor
(Pragapati), I, 386; is netri
(leader), 11, 24; repres. cattle,
49; (the sun) guardian of the
west, 50; animal offering to,
221; the sun, the mind, 358.

Savitri (gayatri), I, 356.

seasons (ritu), five, 1,98; II, 16, 24,
Boy 441% six, J, a8ts Thiy 20r,
289; siding with Asuras, I, 155
seq.; identified with gods and
fathers, 289; with the castes,
290; the divine coursers, 382;
oblation of whey, ib.; consort
with Soma, 245.

session, sacrificial. See sattra; rising
from, sattrotthana,

shadaha, II, 402.

shadavatta, I, 229.

shashtipatha, I, introd, xxix, xxxii,
xvi.

shaving, II, 6.

sheep, goats and, II, 407.

shodasin, stotra, II, 313, 401; sastra,
402; graha and samstha, 398;
Indra, 400.

silver, not suitable for dakshinds,I,3 22.

sin, confession of, I, 397; expiation
of, 398, 406; II, 385..

snakes, west their quarter, II, 4;
the fore-edge (?) belongs to
them, 10.

Soma, plant (juice) and moon, I,
176; fetched by Gayatri, 183,
452; Il, 52, 2413 establishes
the fire, I, 313; offering to
Soma (and Agni) at Pitriyagza,
3643; Indra, Soma, and Agni,
II, 22; purchase of, 63 seq.;
Soma is seed, ib.; Soma-cloth,
wrapper and head-band, 64;
picking of Soma-plants, ib. ;
Soma the Kshatra, 65, 87;


I, introd,


meting out of Soma, 66; tied
up in the form of a man, 68;
bargaining for Soma, 69 seq.;
Soma driven on car, 74; grows
on mountains, 77; seated on
throne of udumbara wood, 84;
enters the hall, ib.; guest-
offering to Soma, 85 seq.;
Soma attended by the Rudras,
93; Soma strengthened (3-
pyai), 100; Soma is Vritra,
100, 271, 3143; Agni, Soma, and
Vishnu form the thunderbolt,
108; Soma, when carried off
by Gayatri, was enclosed in two
golden cups, 150; Soma placed
on sacrificer’s lap, 156; Soma
the nimble, 157; enters the
Havirdhana, 160; is Vanaspati,
208; animal offering to, 218;
Soma taken down from cart,
227; watched in the Agni-
dhra, ib.; pressing of, 238 seq.;
meting out, 240; deposits his
three bodies (or lights) in the
three worlds, 242; consorts with
the seasons, 245; explanation
of the name, 246; pressing,
249% great pressing, 256; op-
presses his family-priest Br:-
haspati, 258; king Soma struck
in the eye by Varuza, 281; aru
to Soma, 363; substitutes of
Soma-plants, 421 seq. —On
Soma-myth generally, II, introd.
xi seq.

Soma-krayani, cow, is Vas, IT, 54,
56, 58; her seven foot-prints,
59; colour of, 62; her virtues,
69; dust of foot-print scattered
behind Garhapatya, 156.

Soma-sacrificer, sacred, II, 35.

Soma-sseller, II, 69; beaten, 71.

south, quarter of Fathers, II, 2,4, 165.

spaces, the six (urvi), I, 136.

speech. See Vas; four grades of
speech, II, 268.

sphya (wooden sword), I, 6, 13, 54,
G+ 11,,.00,:1 43,

spoons, sacrificial, I, 67 seq.; brush-
ing Of, 69 seq., 78 seq.; separa-
tion (vyfhana) of, 236, 404.

sprinkling (with lustral water), I, 2,
20, 83; II, 122, 139, 143, 159,
168, 181.

sraddha (pitriyag/ia), 1, 361 seq., 420.


470


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


sraushat, I, 132, 140, 142, 239.

Srauta-sacrifices, I, 26.

Srivigayas, a prosperous tribe, I, 376.

sritavadana, I, 429.

srué, offering-spoon, I, 67; II, 20, 23.

sruva, dipping-spoon, I, 68; II, 20.

staff, the Dikshita’s, a thunderbolt,
II, 34; reaches up to his mouth,
ib.

stambayagur-harana, I, 55; II, 118.

stoma, kinds of, II, 308.

stomayoga, I], 311.

stotra, twelve at Agnishtoma, II,
303; preparation (upakarama)
for, 307 seq.; 325 seq.

strainer, straining-cloth.
vitra, dasapavitra.

Subrahmanya,priest,drives the Soma-
cart, II, 77; litany, 81, 230.

Sifidra, must not enter the prafina-
vamsa, II, 4.

Sukanya, daughter of Saryata Ma-
nava, II, 273.

Sukra graha, II, 278 seq., 316 seq.,


See pa-


332.

sfGiktavaka, I, 236 seq., 247 seq., 405.

slavabhritha, spit-bath, II, 215.

Sun, rays of, are the righteous dead,
I, 269; are purifiers, II, 18;
they are the gods, 224 ; the sun
is the final goal, I, 271 ; moving
north and south, 289; (Viva-
svat) is the Aditya, II, 13;
the eye, 39; wards off- evil
spirits, 77; is Indra, 96; (sfirya)
given as dakshina to the Angiras,
114; its rays are the gods sipping
motes of light, 254; the lotus of
the heavens, 277; offering to,
342; the eye of Mitra, Varuaa,
and Agni, 343.

Sunasiriya (seasonal sacrifice), I, 384,
444 Seq.

sunwise circumambulation. Cf. pra-
ie ea dakshizikara, prasa-
avi.

Suparni (and Kadrfi), II, 52 seq.,
149 seq.; is Vak, 149.

Suparnikadrava (Sauparnakadrava),
hi e3 so.

Suplan Sarvigaya, I, 376.

sGrpa, winnowing-basket, I, 11, 30,


398.

Sfrya (with Agni and Vayu), I, 325,
327; II, 453; Sfrya is death,
1, 343; his rays attached to


creatures, ib.; wards off evil
spirits, II, 77; given as da-
kshina to the Angiras, 114; the
soul of the universe, 343; Indra,
Agni and Siirya, superior to
others, 402.

Sushna, the Danava, enters the eye
of man, II, 14.

svaga, I, 244, 259; II, 379.

svaha, I, 324 (derivation of), 148 seq.,
1532 1], 253,

svaru, chip, II, 173, 186.

Svetaketu (Auddalaki), I,
xli seq.; II, 100, 314.

Svishtakrit, I, 129, 151, 199 seq,,
372.

syenahrita plant, a substitute for
Soma-plants, II, 422.


introd.


Taittiriyas, I, introd. xxvi seq.

Takshan, recites for Aruni, I, 335.

tanu, II, ro.

tanfihavir-ishti, I, 304, 317.

Tanfinapat, I, 146 seq., 152; is Vayu,
IT, 94; 95.

Taninaptra, covenant of Tanfinapat,
II, 93 seq.

tapas (austerity), world conquered
by, H,.314.

thousand, one, divided by three, II,
62.

thunderbolt, composed of anika,
Salya, and kulmala, II, 108.

Tittiri (sloka4), I, introd. xxxviii.

Traikakuda ointment, II, 15.

trayi vidya, II, 436.

trees, fit for sacrificial purposes, I, 9o.

Trikakud, mount, originally Vritra’s
eye, Tl, 15.

triratra (sahasradakshina), II, 414.

Trishtubh, is the sky, I, 195, 205;
the air, 234; the kshatra, I],
8


Trita, I, introd. xvii, 47 seq.

Tritiya-savana, II, 350 seq.; belongs
to Gagati, 250.

Tryambaka4 (seasonal offerings), I,
437 seq.; offered to Rudra, 438.

tryanga, the three limbs, the portion
of Agni svishtakrit in animal
offerings, II, 205, 207.

Tumizga Aupoditeya, I, 271.

Tura Kavasheya, I, introd. xxxi
seq.

Tutha (the brahman), II, 344.

Tvash¢ri, father of Visvarfipa, I, 47,


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II.


164 seq.; offering to, 258; ob-
tains the forms from Agni, 314;
victim and stake for Tvashfri,
II, 177; pasGindm ishre, (? 153),
180; spits upon the head of a
victim, 202; fashions the seed,
367; dispenser of boons and
healer, 374.
tyaga, dedicatory formula, I, 303.


udana, I, 19, 76, 120.

udavasaniyeshri, II, 389.

udayaniyeshfi, II, 48, 51, 386 seq.

Udgatri, I, introd. xx seq.; chanting
of, II, 307 seq., 310; exchanges
looks with Patni, 368.

udgitha, II, 310.

udumbara post (in Sadas), II, 141;
made of the sacrificer’s size,
142; touching of, 448, 453, 454

udumbara wood, food and strength,
TT, 34.

uktha ( =sastra), II, 294, 313.

ukthavirya, II, 327.

Ukthya-graha,II, 292 seq., 332, 3363
distribution among hotrakas,
295 seq., 339, 370; -sthali and
patra, 293.

Ukthya sacrifice, II, 326, 370, 397.

ulfikhala, I, 26.

Unnetri, calls for the sraushat at
the hariyogana libation, II, 372;
two Unnetris, 417.

upabhrit, I, 67 seq., 139; portions
of victim for upabhrit, II, 205.

upakaravza, the introducing of the
stotra, II, 401.

upamsu-graha, II, 238 seq., 244,
248; offered, 255; is the day,
and offered at night, 261.

upamsu-savana, stone, II, 238; is
Aditya Vivasvat, 240, 256, 354.

upamsuyaga (low-voiced offering),
1,118, 192, 372.

upanamuka, I, 326.

uparava, sounding-hole, II, 135 seq.

upasad (homage or siege), II, 104
seq.; three, 108; or twelve,
109; the fasting connected with
them, 110; at sattras, 442.

upasargani, I, 42, 65.

upastarana, I, 192.

upavaktri, II, 452.

upavasatha, fast-day, I, 1, 5,291; Il,
223.

upavesha, I, 33, 125.


471


upayaga, by-offerings of Pratipra-
sthatri, II, 204; eleven, 210,
212; four additional (aty-upa-
yag), 214.

upayama, formula of ‘support,’ II,


259 seq.

Ordhvanabhas (? Vayu), son of the
Maruts, II, 198.

Urvasi, I, 389; II, 91.

urvi, I, 136.

ushana (the Soma-plant), II, 314.

ushnisha, II, 392.

utkara, I, 25, 54.

utpavana, I, 76.

uttara, II, 2.

uttarahi, II, 50.

uttaravedi, I, 388, 392, 393, 417; II,
113; is Vas, 115; measure of,
116; is a woman, 120,


Vagapeya, II, 398.

Vagasaneyaka, I, introd. xxxix.

Vagasaneyina4, I, introd. xxxvi seq.

Vaikarzau, I, introd. xlii.

vaisargina oblations, II, 155 seq.,
442.

Vaisvadeva (seasonal sacrifice), I, 383
seq.; cake to Agni, 386; aru
for Soma, ib.; cake for Savitri,
ib.; 4aru for Sarasvati, ib.;
cake for Maruts, 387; payasya
to Visve devas, 388; cake to
Heaven and Earth, ib.

Vaisvadeva-graha, II, 323 seq., 359
seq.; (maha-), 360.

Vaisvadeva-sastra, II, 360 seq.

Vaisvanara-graha, II, 298.

Vis (speech) and Manas (mind), I,
124 seq.; II, 55 seq.; inherited
by Asuras and gods respectively,
II, 30; Vak wooed by Yagva,
30 seq.; sent by the gods to
the Gandharvas, 53; given as
dakshina to the Abgiras, 114;
becomes a lioness, 115; Vak
speaks intelligibly in men, 267,
268; her thousandfold pro-
geny, 414, 436; pith of Va,


450.
Viakaspati, lord of speech, is the
out-breathing, II, 250.
vakovakya, II, 453.
vakshva, II, 384.
Vamadevya-saman, I, 222.
vamsa (root-beam), II, 3; 146.
vamsas, lists of, I, introd. xxxiv.


472


SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


vanaspati (lord of forest, tree), obla-
tion to, II, 208, 395; is Soma,
208.

vapa, omentum, cut out and roasted,
II, 194 seq.; offered, 198, 392.

vapasrapami, omentum-spit, II, 194.

varsha, varshaA, I, 315.

Varshnya (Varshaa), II, 2.

Varuza, noose of, I, 72,
Il, 161; (noose of sacred
order), 181; knot, I, 73;
rope, II, 57,181; he establishes
the fire and becomes king Va-
runa, I, 313; is the brightly-
burning fire, 340; the waxing
moon, 380 (cf. Mitra, the wan-
ing); seizes creatures by disease,
391, 398; is the Kshatra, 393,
401; the ram his victim, 395;
Varuna guardian of conjugal
vow, 397; Agni, Varuza, and
Indra, leaders of gods, 449 seq.;
oblation to Varuma and the Ma-
ruts, 394, 395; Varuza attended
by Adityas, II, 93;swearing by
Varuaa (?), 216; animal offering
to, 221; Varuza the Kshatra,
cannot exist without the priest-
hood, 270; strikes king Soma
in the eye, 281; Varuaa, Mitra,
and Agni, 285; king Varuza has
made a path for the sun, 380.

VarunapraghasaA (seasonal sacrifice),
I, 384, 391 seq.; cake to In-
dragni, 393; payasya to Varuna
and to the Maruts, 394; cake to
Ka, 395; dishes ot karambha
(porridge) to Varuza and the
Maruts, 395 seq.

vasa, fat gravy, II, 205; offered
(vasahoma), 207.

vasahomahavani, II, 203.

vasativari water, II, 147, 222 seq.;
Carrying around of, 225, 454;
etymology, 226, 231; meets
the water in Maitravaruaa cup,
235; in the Hotr?’s cup it be-
comes the Nigrabhya4, 236, 293.

vasha¢ (vaushas), I, 88, 135, 143, 171,
193 seq., 197 Sseq., 198.

Vasishthayagza, I, 376.

Vastavya (Rudra), I, 200.

Vasu, I, 176; the Vasus accompany
Rudra, 59, Agni, II, 93; Indra
with Vasus, Rudras, and Adi-
tyas, 241, 350; eight Vasus,


391;


eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas,
riey

vayavya, Soma-cups, II, 158, 267.

Vayu (with Agni and Sfirya), I, 325,
327; II, 453; oblation of drops
(stoka) to Vayu, II, 195; sent by
the gods to ascertain if Vritra be
slain, 265; leader of beasts, 361;
libation to Pragapati-Vayu, 451.

veda, bunch of grass, I, 41, 84.

vedi, etymology, I, 60; measure and
construction of, 62 seq.; lustra-
tion of, 423 ; Soma-altars pre-
pared, II, 111; vedi is as large
as the earth, 175.

Vedic science, threefold, I, 24.

victim, kinds of, I, 50; killing of,
II, 178 seq.; mode of killing,
189; Skinning and cutting open,
193 seq.; cutting up, 200 seq.;
offering of portions, 204 seq.;
touching of, 209; the eleven,
218 seq:; those suitable for cer-
tain forms of sacrifice, 312, 313,


428, 429.

Videgha Mathava, I, introd. xliseq.,
104 seq.

Videhas, I, introd. xlii.

vidhriti, stalks of grass laid across
the barhis, I, 93; II, 89.

vikanhkata tree, when created, I, 325.

virag, I, 11; II, 68, 112; incom-
plete, I, 390; II, 374.

vis, serves the Kshatra, I, 393; eat
no offerings, 398; is the Ksha-
triya’s food, II, 66; go down
before a Kshatriya, 228.

Vishnu, three steps of, I, 15, 268;
I], 155; ~Vishzu a dwarf, I, 59;
etymology, 73; is the upper
(Agni the lower) half of the
sacrifice, II], 12; is the conse-
crated, 29; formula referring
to Vishnu used for atonement,
35; Agni, Soma, and Vishazu form
the thunderbolt, 108; fixed like
an eye in the heavens, 172; to
Vishnu belong the Yagus, 436.

vishtava, II, 309.

vishtuti, 11, 308 seq.

vishuvant day, II, 427.

visvadhayas, I, 188.

visvakarman, I, 188.

Visvakarman, offering to, I, 419;
with the Adityas, II, 123; Indra,
431.


INDEX TO PARTS I AND II,


473


Visvarfipa, son of Tvashrri, I, 47,
164 seq.

Visvavasu, Gandharva, I, 90; steals
Soma from Gayatri, II, 52.

visvayu, I, 188,

Visve Devas (All-gods), representa-
tive of Vis, I, introd. xvi, 204,
371; oblation of aru at Agra-
yaneshti, 369 seq.; share with
Indra and Agni, 371;the threads
of cloth belong to them, II, 10;
they are the ear, 39; the air
belongs to them, 208; animal
offering to, 220.

viti, I, 107. ,

Vivasvat (the sun), is the Aditya, II,
13; Aditya Vivasvat, the vyana
of the Soma-ssacrifice, 240.

vrata, [, z seq,; LI, 6.

vrata-dugha, cow, II, 40, 43.

vratopanitya, I, 2.

Vrishanasva’s Mena (wife?), II, 81.

Vritra, slain by Indra, I, 20 seq.;
52,452; 11, 265; by the waters,
II, 242, 243, 247; (Danava), I,
166; Vritra is Soma, II, roo.

vyana, I, 19, 20, 120.

vy Gidbakhandas (dvadasaha), II, 418.


water, a thunderbolt, II, 7; the
waters slay Vritra, 242, 243,
247.

west, quarter of snakes, II, 4; of
Savitri (the sun), 50; sleeping
with head towards, forbidden,
Shas

wether, hair-tuft of, II, 125.

whey, offering of, to divine coursers
(seasons), I, 382; is seed, 388.

wind, tells the gods the thoughts of
men, II, 94.


woman, given to vain things, II, 5 3.
worlds, three, II, 26.
worship, is truth, I, 313.


Yag#ia (sacrifice) wooes Vaé, II,
30 seq.

Yaga#avalkani brahmanani, I, introd.
XXXVi seq.

Yagaiavalkya, I, introd. xxx seq., 5,
76, 77, 271, 333, 379, 384 (con-
tradicted); II, 2; (advocates
the eating of the flesh of cows
and oxen), 11, 14; cursed by a
Karaka Adhvaryu, 197, 279,
425, 442.

yagviayagaiya (siman), II, 368.

yagzopavitin, I, 361, 424.

Yagur-veda, J, introd. xxvii.

yagya, I, 119, 135,142, 170Seq., 195.

Yama, king, resides with man, I,
338; chief of Fathers, 364;
Yama angirasvat pitrimat, 429;
officiates as Brahman priest, II,


348.

yava, II, 142, 168.

yavan, I, 199.

yavihotra, I, 199.

yiipa, sacrificial stake, I, 160; II,
21, 36, 39, 46, 101; is Yag#ia’s
crest-lock, 126; belongs -to
Vishnu, 162, 164; cutting of,
162 seq.; size of, 166; raising
of, 167 seq.; anointing of, 170;
girding, 172; means of ascend-
ing to the ‘blessed’ gods, 174;
it is eight-cornered, 174; is not
thrown into the fire, ib.; is a
thunderbolt, 175, 176; wife-
stake, 177; eleven: see eka
dasini.

Yfipahuti, stake-offering, II, 162 seq.


474 SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA.


Sse enTnn en


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.


PaRT I. (VOL. XII OF SERIES.)


Page vii, line 15. Read,—Stambhayagus.


rs
F;
| of


Wid


a0 ee


ge Bea


or re


SO


xvi, 1. 8. Read,—arrangement.

xxx, 1. 2. Read,—‘ sixty’ for ‘ forty.’

xliv, 1, 28. Read,—‘ recensions’ for ‘ relations.’

3, 1. 2 seq. I now take ‘piiti’ in the sense of ‘foul,’ and would translate
thus, —The reason why he touches water is this: man forsooth is impure ;
in that he speaks untruth, thereby he is foul within. Now water is pure:
‘ Having become pure, I will enter on the vow,’ &c. See Part II, p. 8, n.1.


. 9, paragraph 18. Cf. ‘mas ignis, quod ibi semen, aqua femina, quod fetus


alitur humore.’ Varro, L. L. 5, 61.


. 65, last line. Read, —a composite direction.


94, 1. 8. Read,—*‘ vedi’ for ‘ prastara.’

142, l. 1, Read,—* Turn ye back !’ for ‘ draw near!’ see Part II, p. 308, n. 1.

166, par. 13. Read,—Now while Indra, being thus pushed aside, was moving
on, he addressed...


. 183, 1. 6. Dele,—(the moon).
. 210, note 1. Read twice,—‘sastra’ for ‘sastra.’
. 221, 1. 4 seq. Instead of,—‘ Before the Rakshas (come),’ B. R.’s Dict. inter-


prets, perhaps rightly, ‘Safely from the Rakshas.’


. 263, par. 27.—These same deities . . .; for an improved rendering, cf. IV,


4) 4 5-6.


. 308, 1. 21. For,—‘and in pressing,’ read ‘to wit, in pressing.’
» 323, 1. 15. ‘whom, surely, he would not eat ;’ for this construction, see Part


Ii, p.. 3m. J:


- 338, 1. 9. Read,—Verily, with him. ..
. 389, 1. 26. Read,—‘ Ayu’ for ‘ Ayus.’


PART II. (VOL. XXVI.)


. 2, 1. 4. Read,—‘ sacrificer’ for ‘ sacrifice.’
- 31, note 3. Cf. J. Muir, O. S. T. II, p. 114 note.
- 71, note 1, According to Ap. Sr. X, 20, 12 he is to buy the Soma from a


Kautsa Brahman ; otherwise from any Brahman; otherwise from one who
is not a Brahman.


- 77, ll. 27, 32. Read,—Subrahmavyé.
- 103, note 1. Read,—Apydyanam.

. 128, 1. 26. Read,—(f/adis).

. 153, 1.6, to Rudra cf. I1I,.7, 3, 11.

- 201, 1. 4. Read,—Samitar.


224, ll. 17-20. Dele thrice ‘ for.’

267, par. 10. Cf. A. Bergaigne, La Réligion Védique, I, pe izt.
286, note 3. Read,—sadasyanam hotravam.

305, last line. Cf. Ap. XI, 20, 1 (prav7zta-homa).


- 324, ll. 8, 9. Read,—Sukra.


334, note 2. Cf. Atharva-veda V, 4,3; Kuhn, Herabkuntt, p. 126 seq.


- 441, 1.15. Read,—all-beneficent.


PLAN OF SACRIFICIAL GROUND. 475


PLAN OF SACRIFICIAL GROUND.


w
Sacrificial stakes (yQpa)
“eet m.*. fe) O_O Oo. 0
Se 7&3
aga e -
tye 4 2
eas 2% a
ze‘s; 8 5
S33 ‘
qe)
. |
x
=) ! a
Z >
<<
= 3
Q 4
= F
< 3
po
z
S_
AS
P|
$5 t
yy
z | wo
EXPLANATIONS. EXPLANATIONS.


Seat of Patni (Sacri-
ficer’s wife).

Seat of Hotrt.

Seat of Agnidhra.

Place for prazitaA.

Utkara (heap of rub-
bish)


A= Ahavantya fire

G = Garhapatya fire.

D = Dakshin4gni.

C = Seat of Brahman.

y = Seat of Yagamina
(Sacrificer).


PraMina - vasnsa (Hall)


Se =. "a
oe ei 3a) Dah te
aT eet ) cre ei


477


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


sg
4
; u
se ne
uu
ees N
syd)
d
ee C
eee E
WM} Cc
4 =


‘soury> | “a21q2H


2 |---
a} ¢<@)
2\—
a, ;
Po eee
) =f


45

6

‘| ow

ee 7 £

° Y. a
= Hilly 642"
* ° ee q,
PS hace ae tab


WD IIT | FD | FDI


‘LHGVHdI1V AUVNOISSIA


CE) LS a re © |


are ar --- menses © oF
eee @ © eee ee BIpayW cl
of rae ae ar ejendsy s6 FI


Pee is 8s Ss Pee «OE. ¢ |


(‘o2p ‘soTe3eTed)
SBIBIBIPOM soel[vinjjny


ey C 8N4zBOLIy stua| te cl


++ gnyeoussedss “TTT


‘+ gyeoneystuaz “= =O


‘+ © gronry zadse a 6
er era $as.s pity 66 +]
ct eee zadew snzimdg 2


o'er © * SeeeaT 6


ss se 9 © SITBIQRI-o1n}4Ny ¢


me -ceyndss “ 5
ea ee ce es gIpaW ¢
ore -ayendee “ 2
eM dN |
*soTBIN}INE
SLNVNOSNOD


“LSV7T AHL AO SHOOG AaADVS AHL AO
SNOILVISNVUYT AHL YOd GALdOGV SLAAVHdATY IVLNAIYOG dO NOILVUALIISNVA LL


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS


478


"zg esnunuedss le
at) on — eo 4due 2 ve (?) z oth aaa lk Gor aa se 7 snunsedss «“ 9
¢ rey t S 5 TOT ere) (eat ar en ey Wel ey Zz tate od | “ce Ce


K
{ .

veel AS ea 0 ee ee TEES A Fa pe ean teat Rennes : bE
2 sees eee 7 gadse snyuidg gg


%

J

=
N-


Sholay: ce fbn Sg Sana dS 8 aa A ome 2 Sa a ea Gt Sopmene ner stone oneme cosmo
Sree See ee eee ee OCs et - l i eo] es «+ s 7 sie “ Ig
I G C C Cai 2 era at ae I ceceee see siMoAIOg’ OF
u c a ra ( f Lb et ec Lee u ou hee e+ sme SIESMAT EZ
ae ee eee ce e » ote be cs wee | so Te Ha ee oe 2 6s 82
- es L Rete eS Soke © ay a R eeeehee «up Cocco + cqundse § 4g
ss ‘i ¢ c 7 6 d + peer Sa ae oe p @ only 4h*, 2 %ic*y* ae POPUP GS
een ie ae Pa oD S oo pe eee A he ee HL ee CC eh I Cd 6s CZ
"3 re ee


° Rey Sat >) hb eS 6 eae ea uy a0 ¢ 8 © & Sf eyeridse 66 $2
0 p A eee ce 6 4 ee: 6 6 © © 6 9 6s tee snug], €Z
*go[8] U0


eA)
4 ee ke eee (@ Pe) oP eee ol] oe @ Z ee e e7 6 SNzBIIQISsB stud ce Ze
O- Cre Bb S) oF..e* «@ Ss ee ° °° SNYBIIQISSB 1adse é¢ iz


ee. ee e qe ee ee oe e@ o 8 © (4) oe tp te tess, GPSS TST 66 02
sss + godse snyiidg 6]


°
°
e
°
°
e
e
°
e
°
e
°
°
°
e
°
°
°
e
e
~-~
a)
—
e
°
e
°
°
°


f£ 6 5 >) ¢ ¢¢t bh bef «) «6 °° @ k cs ee ee se © SITBOOAIMIIG QT


“SSEID TIT | ‘SSPIDIT | “SStID I
*(p29t8¢17%402)
‘2saulyD | ‘M2iqeH | ‘2IqQeay | ‘URISIag | “A319 “pueZ yaysues || CG —_—____—______~ SrivNUEeOS
“LHAVHA IV AUVWNOISSIIT


479


FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.


“ae ohh
eX |
« b
Aree ee
m9 ; os
4 k
“eee R
— h
* eee uh
@ h

h

¢ 2

«a R

“eee 2
Q =

oeoeee 2
a 2


x


Y?


see ee ee eee 6 * BAIBSIA 6S


Pate os ere a ies sigasnuy gs
A Wow bate“ ioe eS


tees eyeridse ir ea
PG el an on ne! © SITBIOAIMIIG FS
Bae ae hace oes °° * sITVseny ¢¢
AE Eee * *eullssinuay, ZS
pares eyendse 8 “ [Gg
oe ee ee * sIpew OS
[sas aw eyeidse =“ 6F
CM State oe eee * sinuoy, gp
*SOTBIQB'T


ee ed ea situs, =“ Lt


sss + gonoRIp + cP


er BVO a 5 P
Sore SI[BIOAIWIOG €f


7° 9 * * SITBSBN OP
eee eee e * eyerdse 66 IP


+e ee ot ake 68 eee SIpPI OF
ea ee * exendse: “*.. '¢8


i ek Ge ee ere) we sinuay, 8¢


(‘o2 ‘sopenSutq)
EBJBOYIpOU soTB}UEd


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


480


& © Gt. 8s eee 7 2 © @ 7 e & “ee @ ee e@ oO
n ef @ a SR @ eee eeee e.¢ 5 oee#e eee n
. e ese ¢ efile « eee oee eeee ee 8 oe @ eee .
ar ae Fad ae Sek « ae etait 4 cians « cece ss ee] © I(ng)no
cee le rel ee et owe fore] eee oe | eee tee eof ee © I(mg)na
nme feces] o€ —€ |°°° (nv) m3 Th sex" (nv) ny
Se a Pea hratets ( a Ma [---+] (0) [(me)9
2 aus ehe- 6 Ser eee te eo ies oO
4": », we cauntdletaceetiocas ve Aye cee} ew ee] oe © © 1(ngQ)t0
ef ees Cate t Chet et ees. ee ee oe eo ]e ew oe oo © | (tg) 12
1 ee >) =? eee 2 see el (tw) hf
erie | Se ¢ 1M ‘a 2 cee se] (a) [Cree


*asouty


—


*uRIsIag


a
1G
%
eee eee
ee . e e ° se
* ° e e e 2
$ S
1 xh
¥ +
B teats “qt
«er ee eee
3 MS. &
SS\ID IIT | SSID ITI SSVIDI


e
Sede,

&
——

or

~-~

o
——

WwW
e


-B RE worl PP pb 6


“LHGVHdITV AUVNOISSIN


|


+e 8 © Bony sI[BIqEl-oanzyny Lz


" * wyoway sITerqery


a ° . e ° ° ° ° BpBly SITVzBlVeqT


oee ees e BypBly sI]BIN}AN


“é


6e


sITeIqel-01n44n3 snJZuoyqiydiq
‘= « 6 sZu0[ “
*, 5% © SfAOtq STBIQey-omn9qns)


«cs


66


s118}8(8d-01n}4nF snZuoyyydiq
eee eZu0[ “

* * © staoiq sITeze[ed-om}44yn5y
Me | iii


* PRieetg Sete]
* eZuol Hy
* staoiq sivengury
* * eZuol es
“ * SAsrq SIs} ued
- * eSuoy “
Sa ee
* eZao0[ “
* Slaorq STTVIN;4NF)
_coee a
siteyeped-oFuLre]


e e e a e SI[BIzNI AT


STIAMOA


96
SG
ba
£6


; = Oem eye! 8
we Meee Me 5 Vier cic


ay Pe ac


Sri, aa?


bh eigeters 22 0
; sae, rary?
> , wae : fa


a saee (4-)


Pr. ieee
-
ae ae ©
i ou ee i {=
a+ Oa es, :
ay- Tra : wa — — —_
; = -
f = _
'
, Gn)" 4
ya
a? 1 7 -
Hott +“
" has oe diet “oe She ie +
iz a > Al fey id
ne ‘s Ce ah ie ae ae
> : : + . 5h ° - = -
i p + ‘ _
a (Ps a . « m : a
, — wa we, ; £< } 7
; ee 7 Shes * “ . . P '
r, , > 7 a° e a a f a
. 3 ~ a ae As ie
t é a 7 ’
, a af . ’ >
J 8 ~ na
S Cie ; ey at
ee ’ Leena iy mae
’ a , i ' ie a
} f (a ee é Am
es “\" ae an _
4 F re Toate ‘ -
x
; ; hg to 7 bor <
" ‘ i? : ae -
* “ 3 4 “yal ; r ay 2 Sh he tly \ ore
F : . i he! P oll tes
ae = j +0 . Sa-18 ay a
F te . os oe ee — 2. re > a
. ‘i é LO eR ek Sw oP
- ~ as €
ai at 7
ye Avy ‘
( j ‘
bn ‘
1 «f
. % =f
‘ : a= ,
o a a
ol Pa i
= *
das >
c Pes ce ides ms ay
3 e pies a pts) « .
4 e


,s
‘ 5
ie ae ee a ear


oS Me oe a
So


a Prone) dwar rtd
3 So


ISBN 978-81-208-0127-1


© www.motilalbanarsidass.com “ info@mlbd.co.in | | |
881201801271


(©) @ motilalbanarsidass w @milbdpublishers
Reference Work = 750
