!^^^M!?B
THE
JESUIT MISSION PRESS
JAPAN.
1591 — IQIO
ERNEST MASON SATOW
^MISSIONS
N  d.1
YALE  UNiVERSITY  LIBRAHY
3  9002  02960  0930
PRIVATELY fR'IiXTED.
i888.
c
THE  DAY X
MISSIONS  LTBI^VRX
©i-f a2e  '  uNivil'sn
WFH \l.lUUMUtMIIWMW>WnWW»iW^lltlWWMIWIlibWWMM*fc
THE  JESUIT  MISSION  PRESS  IN  JAPAN.
THE
Jesuit  Mission  Press
Japan.
i5©i  —  leio.
ERNEST MASON SATOW.
[Privately Printed.]
1888.
Ni
PREFACE.
Some  years  ago,  in  the  course  of  an  investigation  into  the  history  of  printing  in
Japan,  I  found  that  the  earliest  book  printed  with  movable  types  in  that  country,
under  purely  native  management,  bore  a  date  corresponding  to  a.d.  1596,  and
from  various  evidence  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  invention  had  been
introduced  about  that  time  from  Korea,  where  it  had  been  in  use  for  over  two-and-
a-half  centuries.  I  was,  however,  unaware  that  there  existed  in  various  European
libraries  at  least  five  sepsirate  works,  all  of  earlier  dates,  printed  in  Japan  with
Roman  type  by  the  Jesuit  missionaries.  So  that  the  art  had  been  actually
practised  on  Japanese  soil  by  foreigners,  for  some  years  before  its  adoption  by  the
people  of  the  country.  On  the  other  hand,  the  earliest  dated  work  from  the  local
mission  press  in  which  the  Japanese  character  is  used  belongs  to  1598.  A  letter
of  1594  speaks  of  devotional  treatises  in  Japanese  with  Japanese  characters,  but
these  were  probably  engraved  on  blocks.  It  seems  possible  therefore,  though
perhaps  not  very  probable,  that  the  Japanese  may  have  learnt  the  advantages  of
typography  from  the  missionaries,  and  not  from  the  Coreans.

From  Bartoli  we  find  that  Valignani  returned  to  Japan  from  Europe  on
July  2ist,  1590,  bringing  with  him  a  fount  of  European  type,  and  that  the  first
extant  work  produced  at  the  new  press  was  published  the  following  year.  It  forms
No.  I  of  the  present  list.

It  is  only  fair  to  add  that  I  was  greatly  aided  in  my  searches  by  the
Bibliographie  Japonaise  of  M.  L^on  Pages,  although  it  was  the  "  Bibliofh^que
Asiatique  et  Africaine  "  of  Ternaux-Compans  that  first  drew  my  attention  to  these
books.  To  Bodley's  Librarian,  to  the  Authorities  of  the  British  Museum,  as  well  as
to  those  of  the  National  Library  and  Library  of  the  Institute  in  Paris,  to  the  gentle-
men in  charge  of  the  BibUoteca  Angehca  and  Biblioteca  Casanatense  at  Rome  and
to  the  Director  of  the  Torre  do  Tombo  at  Lisbon,  I  am  greatly  indebted  for  their
courteous  aid  in  my  investigations ;  as  well  as  for  permission  to  have  facsimiles
made  of  the  title-pages  of  books  under  their  control. I  owe  also  a  large  debt  of


VI

gratitude  to  a  German  friend  in  Rome  who  procured  for  me  the  opportunity  of
studying  one  work  which  was  not  to  be  found  in  any  pubhc  Hbrary.  Last  and  not
least,  my  sincerest  acknowledgments  are  due  to  the  Authorities  of  the  Leyden
University  Library,  who  in  response  to  a  request  made  on  my  behalf  by  Mr.  Bullen,
sent  a  rare  and  probably  unique  volume  over  to  England,  in  order  that  it  might
remain  long  enough  at  the  British  Museum  for  its  complete  transcription.

The  facsimile  title-pages  of  the  volumes  in  the  Bodleian  were  executed  at  the
University  Press,  Oxford,  those  of  the  British  Museum  books  and  of  the  Leyden
volume  by  Mr.  Praetorius  and  that  of  the  Manuale  of  Cerqueira  by  Signer
Martelli. .  My  endeavours  to  procure  facsimile-titles  of  other  books  in  Rome  have
been  unsuccessful,  cving  to  that  gentleman's  inability  to  find  time  for  taking  the
necessary  negatives.


LIST OF CONTENTS.


•Sanctos  no  Gosagueo .  .  .  .  ,

Heike  Monogatari  and  Esop's  Fables

SUMARIO DE la InTRODCCCION DEL SyMBOLO DE LA Fe

Alvari  De  Institutione  Grammatica
DiCTioNARiUM  Latino-Lusitanicum  AC  Japonicum
Thomas  1  Kempis:  Contemptus  Mundi
Racuyoxu  .......

conpbssionarivm .....

Catechism  (Barberini  Library)  .  .  .  .

GUIA  DO  Pecador

Catechism  (Biblioteca  Casanatense)

Vocabulario  da  Lingoa  de  Iapam .

Arte  da  Lingoa  de  Iapam  .  .  .  .

Manuals  ad  Sacramenta  Ecclesiae  Administranda
Appendix .......


FAG^

I

12

ao
a6

47

28

35
36

38

43

44

45
46

47
5'


ERRATA.


{


p. I, line  3,  for  "  co  reuo  "  read  "  core  uo."
p.  17,  line  12,  for  "  tococo  "  read  "tocoro."

line  1 6,  ybr  "  Toqin  "  read  "  Toqini."

p.  18,  line  6,  for  "  icattereba  "  read  "  icattareba."

line  31, /or  "xeifuruzo  "  read  "  xeifuruzo."

p.  22,  line  2  from  the  bottom.ybr  "  oqi  "  rccui  "  yooi."
p.  73,  line  C),for  "  nijui  chinichi  "  read  "  niju  ichinichi.'
p.  30,  line  15,  for  "  japonica  "  read  "  japonico."
p.  4.1,  note,  for  "  Graca  "  read  "  Graga."


SANCTOS

NOGOSAGVEONfQ


VC  HI  N  V<^IC  A  <:^


^  [  I  E  \'  N  O  C  V  V  I T  A  C  A  C  V  N  O  G  V  M

ESVSNOCOMPANHIAN3COI LEGlO
Cn7.ufa  ni voite  fuptridres  no  von  yuruii  no c6
SMii  con  uo  fw  to  nifu  mono  nari.GoxuxM'tftf

M  D  L  XXXIi  I.


SANCTOS

NO  GOSAGVIO

NO  vcm  NvqiciA<>i.


-/■'


iBiVS  NO  COMPANHtA  NO  COLtH

po  Carzufint  voire  Supcrioiesiio  vonyuTu-
Xitoxitecoreuoranto  mdi  tnoliotUiL*

Cokuxxeitsu  t;^i«


\


/. BODLEIAN LIBRARY.

(Pressmark  8°.  Z.  21.  Th.  Seld.)

SANCTOS  I  NOGOSAGVEONO  |  VCHINVaiGAQI  |  quan  dai  ichi.  |  FIIENNO
CVNITACACVNOGVN  |  lESVSNOCOMPANHIANOCOLLEGIO  |  Cazzufa  ni  roite
Superiores  no  von  jrurim  uo  cb  |  mnri  co  reuo  fan  to  nafutnono  nari.  Groxuxze  irai  |  M  D  L
XXXXI.  I  8vo.

[Compendium  of  the  Acts  of  the  Saints,  Volume  First.  Printed  by  permission  of  the  Superiors
at  the  College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  at  Katsusa  in  the  county  of  Takaku,  province  of  Hizen,
A.D.  1591.]

pp.  294,  besides  list  of  contents  a  pp.,  errata  4  pp.,  and  last  leaf,  on  the  reverse  of  which  is
TCVZZVGV  I  VA  DAINI-  |  aVAN  NARI.  |  [Continuation  in  Volume  the  Second]  title-page
of  vol.  2  :

SANCTOS  I  NO  GO  SAGVIO  |  NO  VCHI  NVQIGAQI  |  FIIEN  NO  CVNI  TACA-
CVNO  GVN  I  lESVS  NO  COMPANHIA  NO  COLLE  |  gio  Cazzulani  voite  Superiores  no  von
yuru-  I  xito  xite  core  uo  fan  to  nafu  mono  nari.  |  Goxusxe  irai  1591  [

pp.  3-340,  besides  list  of  contents  4  pp.,  errata  5  pp.,  and  glossary  of  difficult  words  74  pp.
This  is  a  dictionary  of  the  difficult  words  with  explanations  in  Japanese,  and  the  Portuguese
equivalents  or  explanations.

In  the  centre  of  the  title-page  of  each  volume  is  a  small  copper  engraving,  representing
St.  Peter,  surrounded  by  other  Saints.  This  plate,  as  well  as  the  others  used  for  several
subsequent  publications,  was  almost  certainly  engraved  in  Japan  by  a  native  artist  who  received
his  training  in  one  of  the  Jesuit  seminaries.  In  the  "  Lettera  Annua  del  Giapone  dal  Marzo  del
^S9Z<  sino  al  Marzo  del  94,"*  the  writer  says  that  some  of  the  pupils  had  made  great  progress  in
painting,  both  in  distemper  and  in  oils,  and  in  engraving  on  copper,  copying  the  painting  and
engravings  which  had  been  brought  from  Rome  by  the  Ambassadors.t  It  is  true  that  the  pictures
here  spoken  of  were  for  hanging  up  in  houses  as  objects  of  devotion,  and  that  no  special  mention
is  made  of  such  unimportant  pieces  of  work  as  small  plates  for  title-pages,  but  careful  inspection
of  the  prints  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  the  work  of  natives.

Cotton  (Typographical  Gazetteer,  p.  276)  has  the  following  note  :-^"  Tacaeuin,  or
Tacoxac/jajn,  Takagus,  a  town  ot  Japan,  situate  in  the  island  of  Niphon,  which  was  one  of  the
settlements  occupied  by  the  Jesuit  missionaries  in  the  XVTth  century.

"  In  the  Bodleian  Ubrary  (marked  8°.  Z.  21.  Th.  Seld.)  is  a  small  volume,  in  Roman  type,
but  Japanese  language,  and  on  silk  paper,  which  was  printed  here  by  the  Jestlits  of  the  College
of  Cazzusa,  a  settlement  three  miles  distant  from  the  town  of  Arima.  This  work  is  in  tw(J'parts,
and  appears  to  contain  lives  of  the  apostles  and  of  some  saints,  having  at  the  end  a  short  Japanese

*  Milano.  1597,  pp.  59  and  60.

t  Non  minor  profitto  vanno  facendo  alcuni  di  loro  cad  in  dipingere,  come  in  intagliar  lame  di  rame  per
ftampe,  perche  otto  di  loro  fi  efercitano  in  varie  pittnre  a  guazzo,  &  altri  a  oglip,  &  cinque  in  intagliare
iame ;  .  .  .  Qnelli  cb'intagiiano  in  rame.  non  fanno  meno  nel  fuo  vffitio,  perche  gia  tntagliano  molto  al
Datnrale  rimagini,  cbe  vengono  da  Roma,  delle  quali  fe  ne  fono  andate  ftampando  molte  con  gran  piacere,
&  fodisfattione  delli  chrirtiani.


1

i


SANCTOS

NO  GOSAGVIO

NO  VCMI  NVQlOA^I.


■3


^IIENnO  CVNt  TACACVNO  GVH

iBivs  NO  companhIa  no  collb

po  Cazziiftni  voire  Supei  ioies  iio  voii  yuTu-

Xitoxite  core  no  fan  td  nadi  moliotuiL,

CoXuxxeitAi tjfj^i*


^


7. BODLEIAN LIBRARY.

(Pressmark  8°.  Z. 21.  Th.  Seld.)

SANCTOS  I  NOGOSAGVEONO  |  VCHINVQIGAQI  |  quan  dai  ichi.  |  FIIENNO
CVNITACACVNOGVN  |  lESVSNOCOMPANHIANOCOLLEGIO  |  Cazzufa  ni  voite
Superiores  no  von  yuruxi  uo  cb  |  muri  co  reuo  fan  to  nafu-mono  nari.  Goxuxxe  irai  |  M  D  L
XXXXI.  I  8vo.

[Compendium  of  the  Acts  of  the  Saints,  Volume  First.  Printed  by  permission  of  the  Superiors
at  the  College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  at  Katsusa  in  the  county  of  Takaku,  province  of  Hizen,
A.D.  1591.]

pp.  294,  besides  list  of  contents  2  pp.,  errata  4  pp.,  and  last  leaf,  on  the  reverse  of  which  is
TCVZZVaV  I  VADAINI-  |  QVAN  NARI.  |  [Continuation  in  Volume  the  Second]  title-page
of  vol.  2 :

SANCTOS  I  NO  GO  SAGVIO  |  NO  VCHI  NVQIGAQI  |  FIIEN  NO  CVNI  TACA-
CVNO  GVN  I  lESVS  NO  COMPANHIA  NO  COLLE  |  gio  Cazzufani  voite  Superiores  no  von
yum-  I  xito  xite  core  uo  fan  to  nafu  mono  nari.  |  Goxuxxe  irai  1591  [

pp.  3-340,  besides  list  of  contents  4  pp.,  errata  5  pp.,  and  glossary  of  difficult  words  72  pp.
This  is  a  dictionary  of  the  difficult  words  with  explanations  in  Japanese,  and  the  Portuguese
equivalents  or  explanations.

In  the  centre  of  the  title-page  of  each  volume  is  a  small  copper  engraving,  representing
St.  Peter,  surrounded  by  other  Saints.  This  plate,  as  well  as  the  others  used  for  several
subsequent  publications,  was  almost  certainly  engraved  in  Japan  by  a  native  artist  who  received
his  training  in  one  of  the  Jesuit  seminaries.  In  the  "  Lettera  Annua  del  Giapone  dal  Marzo  del
1^93,  sino  al  Marzo  del  94,"*  the  writer  says  that  some  of  the  pupils  had  made  great  progress  in
painting,  both  in  distemper  and  in  oils,  and  in  engraving  on  copper,  copying  the  paintings  and
engravings  which  had  been  brought  from  Rome  by  the  Ambassadors.t  It  is  true  that  the  pictures
here  spoken  of  were  for  hanging  up  in  houses  as  objects  of  devotion,  and  that  no  special  mention
is  made  of  such  unimportant  pieces  of  work  as  small  plates  for  title-pages,  but  careful  inspection
of  the  prints  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  the  work  of  natives.

Cotton  (Typographical  Gazetteer,  p.  276)  has  the  following  note: — "  Tacacum,  or
Tacaxuctium,  Takagus,  a  town  ot  Japan,  situate  in  the  island  of  Niphon,  which  was  one  of  the
settlements  occupied  by  the  Jesuit  missionaries  in  the  XVIth  century.

"  In  the  Bodleian  library  (marked  8°.  Z.  21.  Th.  Seld.)  is  a  small  volume,  in  Roman  type,
but  Japanese  language,  and  on  silk  paper,  which  was  printed  here  by  the  Jesftits  of  the  College
of  Cazzusa,  a  settlement  three  miles  distant  from  the  town  of  Arima.  This  work  is  in  twtfparts,
and  appears  to  contain  lives  of  the  apostles  and  of  some  saints,  having  at  the  end  a  short  Japanese


*  Milano.  1597,  pp.  59  ajid  60.

t  Non  minor  profitto  vanno  facendo  alcuni  di  lore  casi  in  dipingere.  come  in  intagliar  lame  di  rame  per
rtampe,  perche  otto  di  loro  fi  efercitano  in  varie  pitture  a  guazzo,  &  altri  a  oglio,  &  cinque  in  intagliare
lame :  .  .  .  Quelli  cb'intagliano  in  rame,  non  fanno  meno  nel  fuo  vffitio.  perche  gia  intagliano  molto  al
naturale  I'imagini,  che  vengono  da  Roma,  delle  quali  fe  ne  fono  andate  ftampando  molte  con  gran  piacere.
&  fodisfattione  delli  chriftiani.


and  Portuguese  Vocabulary;  the  whole  comprising  about  700  pages.  On  the  title-page  of  each
part  is  a  tolerably-executed  engraving  from  a  copper-plate,  and  both  parts  bear  the  date  of  1591.
Not  professing  myself  to  be  intimately  acquainted  with  the  niceties  of  the  Japanese  tongue,  I
here  submit  to  the  reader  the  entire  title-page  and  imprint  of  one  part,  literatim-  '"  Sanctos
nogosagueono  uchinnuqigaqi  quan  dai  ichi.  F"ii  en  no  cuni  Tacacunogun  lesus  no  companhia  no
CoUegio  Cazzuza  ni  voite  Superiores  no  von  yuruxi  no  c6  muri  core  uo  fanto  nasu  mono  nari.
Goxxuxxe  irai.  1591,"  which  amiable  morijeau  is  commended  to  his  best  attention.  Need  I
add  a  sylbble  on  the  degree  of  rarity  of  this  curious  volume,  of  which  this  copy,  formerly
belonging  to  the  learned  Selden,  may,  perhaps,  be  unique  in  Europe  ? "  Where  Cotton  obtained
the  authority  for  his  so-called  town  of  Takagus  in  the  island  of  Niphon,  I  have  been  unable  to
discover.  It  is  clear  that  Tacacu  is  not  the  name  of  a  town,  but  that  of  one  of  the  subdivisions
(gun  or  koTi)  of  the  province  of  Hizen.  FII  EN  is  Fijen,  the  local  pronunciation  of  what  in  the
dialect  of  the  capital  becomes  "Hizen."  His  mistake  is  the  more  curious,  as  he  remarks  that  the
book  was  printed  "  at  the  College  of  Cazzusa,  a  settlement  three  miles  distant  from  the  town  of
Arima,"  which,  as  every  one  knows,  is  in  the  island  of  Kiushiu,  not  in  the  larger  one  which
Europeans  used  to  call  Niphon.  Cazzusa  is  evidently  identical  with  Katsusa,  distant  4f  miles
from  Minami  Arima,  and  6\  from  Kita  Arima,  on  the  peninsula  formed  by  the  county  or
department  ot  Takaku*

The  seminary  seems  to  have  been  removed  :>  the  island  of  Amakusa  shortly  after  the  date
of  this  book  At  p.  52  of  the  Llterae  annuae  japonenses  anni  1591  et  1592,  there  is  a  section
entitled  "  De  Collegio  Canzucano,  quod  nunc  est  in  Amacusa."  At  p.  56  of  the  same  we  read
"P.  Vifitator  [Valignani]  tandem  Canzucam  reuertit,"  and  at  p.  57,  "  Hoc  tempore,  e  principibus
viris,  qui  venerut  I'alutatum  patrem,  fuit  Dominus  Joannes ;  qui  (quoniam  Meaco  nunciabatur
Quabacondonum  non  cogitate  de  Patribus  reftituedis,  foreque  neceflarium,  vt  CoUegiu  Canzucanu
ob  portus  inarini  celebritaterrx,  e  medio  tollatur)  operam  I'uam  offerebat  pro  conferuando  Collegio,
in  dilione  lua,"  and  lastly,  at  p  66,  "  maxima  diligentia  vfi  fumus,  tfl  in  aptado  Semiiiario,  in
loco  quoda  dicto  Fachirao,  tnbu-.  palfuu  milibus  ab  Anma  disiuncto,  tu  in  locado  Collegio  &
Nouitiatu  in  vrbe  Airpaulana.  '

The  "  bilk  paper  '  on  which  the  book  is  printed  was  probably  manufactured  from  a  mixture
of  gampi  (Wikstroemta  canescens)  and  milsumnla  (Edgeworthia  papyrifera),  and  has  no  more  to
do  with  the  produce  of  the  silkworm  than  the  so-called  rice-paper,  upon  which  Chinese  artists
are  wont  to  paint  for  the  delectation  of  the  foreigner,  has  to  do  with  the  grain  which  furnishes  the
food  of  their  countless  millions  of  fellow -countrymen.  Perhaps  the  earliest  writers  in  Latin  spoke
of  charta  serica,  i.e.  Chinese  paper,  which  later  on  was  interpreted  by  its  other  meaning
"silk  paper."

Contents of Vol. I.

p  I.  TATTOQ]  APOSTOLOS  NAPxV  S.  PEDRO.  S.  PAVLONOGO  SAGVEO.
NARABINI  SONO  MARTYRIO  NO  YODAI  COREAMATA  no  Doulores  noqirocu  nari.
(Lives  of  the  Holy  Apo.stles  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  with  the  manner  of  their  martyrdom  ■.  this  is
from  the  writings  of  several  doctors — [in  reality  the  life  of  S.  Peter  only].)


Handbook  for  Japan,  second  edition,  p  5^0


F


p.  12.  SAM  PAVLO  APOStolo  no  gofagueo :  core  SiMEON  METAPHRASTES*
toju  gacuxo  no  qirocu  nari,  (Life  of  St.  Paul  the  Apostle,  written -by  a  learned  man  named
Simeon  Metaphrastes  )

p.  45.  SANCTO  ANDRE  Apoftolo  no  gofagueo :  naraBINI  SONO  MARTYRIO
NO  yodai. Core  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari. '

p.  64.  SANCTO  lACOBE  Menor  Apoftolo  no  gofaGVEO,  NARABINI  SONO
MAR  tyrio  no  yodai. Core  Eufebio  Cefarienfef  toyu  gacuxo  no  qirocu  nan.

p.  75.  SAN  lOAN  EVANGELISTA  NO  GOSAGVEO  :  core  Laodicia  toyu  zaixo  no
Mileto  to  mofu  Bifpo  nq  qirocunari.  (Life  of  Saint  John  the  Evangelist,  written  by  the  Bishop
MiletusJ  of  a  place  called  Laodicea.)

p.  95.  SANCTIAGO  MAIOR  APOSTOLO  NO  GO  SA  gueo,  narabini  fono  Martyrio
no  yodai :  core  S.  Antonino§  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  1:3.  SANTHOME  APOSTOLO  NO  GOSAGVEO,  NARA  bini  fono  goxiqio  no
yodai.  Core  S.  Ifidoro  no  qirocu  nari.  (Life  of  Saint  Thomas  the  Apostle,  with  the  manner  of
his  death,  written  by  St.  Isidore.)

p.  122.  SAN  PHILIPPE  APOSTOLO  NO  MARTYRIO  NO  yodai  core  S.  Ifidoro  to,
S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  126.  SAN  BAR  THOLO-  MEV  APOSTOLO  NO  GOSAGVEO;  NARABINI  SONO
M ARTYRIONO  yodai :  core  Simeon  Metaphraftes  to  y^  gacuxo  Grego  no  cotoba  yori  Latim  ni
fonyacu  xerarexi  nari.  (Life  of  St.  Bartholomew  the  Apostle,  with  the  manner  of  his  martyrdom,
translated  from  the  Greek  language  into  Latin  by  a  learned  man  named  Simeon  Metaphrastes.)

p.  133.  SAN  MATTHEVS  APOSTOLO  EVANGELISTA  no  goikgueo,  narabi  ni
Martyrio  no  yodai. Core  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  140.  SAN  SIMON  TO  SAN  IVDAS  THADEV  APOS  tolos  no  martyrio  no  yodai :
core  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  150.  SAN  MATTHIAS  A-  POSTOLO  NO  VON  IVAIBI  no  Bangui.  (Discourse
on  the  festival  of  St.  Matthias  the  Apostle.)

p.  164.  ANTIOCHIA  NO  BISPO  SANCTO  IGNATIO  NO  gofagueo:  narabini
sono  martyrio  no  yofu. Core,  S.  Eufebio  Bifpo  to,  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  173.  MENORES  NO  Mompa  no  caifan  Patriarcha  San  Francifco  no  gofagueo,  core  S.
Boauentura  to,  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  ni  miyetaru  nari.  (Life  of  the  Patriarch  St.  Francis,  founder
of  the  Order  of  the  Minorites,  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  St.  Bonaventura||  and  St.  Antonino.)

p.  206.  SANCTA  FEBRO  nia  Virgen  Martyr  no  GO  SAGVEO  :  NARABINI  fono
Martyrio. Core  Simeon  Metaphrafte  no  qirocu  nari.


•  All  the  lives  here  attributed  to  Simeon  Metaphrastes  will  be  found  in  De  Vitis  Sanctorum  ab  Aloysio
Lipomano  .  .  .  a  F.  Laurentio  Surio  .  . emendatis  &  auctis,  .  .  .  Venetiis,  :58i,  6  vols,  folio.

t  See  Historia  Ecclesiastica  Eusebii  Caefarienfis.

X  Usually  known  a-;  Melktus. See  Giles'  Codex  Apocryphus  Novi  Testamenti.

§  This  and  other  lives  taken  from  S.  Antonino  are  to  be  found  in  ■•  Chronica  .  .  .  Domini  Antonini
Archipracsulis  Florentini  .  .  Lugduni,  1543."  or  in  "Divi  Antonini  archiepiscopi  Florentini  .  .  Cbronicon,
Lugduni,  1586."

II  Aurea  legenda  maior  beati  Francifci :  compofita  per  facctum  Boaauenturam.


f


and  Portuguese  Vocabulary;  the  whole  comprising  about  700  pages.  On  the  title-page  of  each
part  is  a  tolerably-executed  engraving  from  a  copper-plate,  and  both  parts  bear  the  date  of  1591-
Not  professing  myself  to  be  intimately  acquainted  with  the  niceties  of  the  Japanese  tongue,  I
here  submit  to  the  reader  the  entire  title-page  and  imprint  of  one  part,  literatim  r  "  Sanctos
nogosagueono  uchinnuqigaqi  quan  dai  ichi.  Fii  en  no  cuni  Tacacunogun  lesus  no  companhia  no
Collegio  Cazzuza  ni  voite  Superiores  no  von  yuruxi  no  c6  muri  core  uo  fanto  nasu  mono  nan.
Goxxuxxe  irai.  1  jpi,  which  amiable  morijeau  is  commended  to  his  best  attention.  Need  I
add  a  syllable  on  the  degree  of  rarity  of  this  curious  volume,  of  which  this  copy,  formerly
belonging  to  the  learned  Selden,  may,  perhaps,  be  unique  in  Europe?"  Where  Cotton  obtained
the  authority  for  his  so-called  town  of  Takagus  in  the  island  of  Niphon,  I  have  been  unable  to
discover.  It  is  clear  that  Tacacu  is  not  the  name  of  a  town,  but  that  of  one  of  the  subdivisions
(gun  or  koTi)  of  the  province  of  Hizen.  FII  EN  is  Fijen,  the  local  pronunciation  of  what  in  the
dialect  of  the  capital  becomes  "  Hizen."  His  mistake  is  the  more  curious,  as  he  remarks  that  the
book  was  printed  "  at  the  College  of  Cazzusa,  a  settlement  three  miles  distant  from  the  town  of
Arima,"  which,  as  every  one  knows,  is  in  the  island  of  Kiushiu,  not  in  the  larger  one  which
European.s  u.sed  to  call  Niphon.  Cazzusa  is  evidently  identical  with  Katsusa,  distant  4J  miles
from  Minami  Arima,  and  6}  from  K.ita  Arima,  on  the  peninsula  formed  by  the  county  or
department  ol  Takaku.*

The  seminary  seems  to  have  been  removed  3  the  island  of  Amakusa  shortly  after  the  date
of  this  book  At  p.  j2  of  the  Literae  annuae  japonenses  anni  1591  et  1592,  there  is  a  section
entitled  "  De  Collegio  Canzucano,  quod  nunc  est  in  Amacusa."  At  p.  56  of  the  same  we  read
"P.  Vilitator  [Valignani]  tandem  Canzucam  reuertit,"  and  at  p.  57,  "  Hoc  tempore,  e  principibus
viris,  qui  venerijt  I'alutatum  patrem,  fuit  Dominus  Joannes ;  qui  (quoniam  Meaco  nunciabatur
Quabacondonum  non  cogitare  de  Patribus  reftituedis,  foreque  neceflarium,  vt  Collegiu  Canzucanu
ob  portus  mariiip  celebritatent,  e  medio  tollatur)  operam  luam  offerebat  pro  conferuando  Collegio,
in  ditione  lua,"  and  lastly,  at  p  66,  "  maxima  diligentia  vfi  fumus,  tu  in  aptado  Seminario,  in
loco  quoda  dicto  Fachirao,  tribus  palfuu  milibus  ab  Arima  disiuncto,  tu  in  locado  Collegio  &
Nouitiatu  in  vrbe  Amaculana.  '

The  "  silk  paper  '  on  which  the  book  is  printed  was  probably  manufactured  from  a  mixture
of  gampi  (Wikstrcemia  caiiescens)  and  milsumntii  (Edgeworthia  papyrifera),  and  has  no  more  to
do  with  the  produce  of  the  silkworm  than  tlie  so-called  rice-paper,  upon  which  Chinese  artists
are  wont  to  paint  for  the  delectation  of  the  foreigner,  has  to  do  with  the  grain  which  furnishes  the
food  of  their  countless  millions  of  fellow-countrymen.  Perhaps  the  earliest  writers  in  I^tin  spoke
of  charta  serica,  i.e.  Chinese  paper,  which  later  on  was  interpreted  by  its  other  meaning
"silk  paper."

Contents of Vol. 1.

p  I.  TATTOQl  APOSTOI.OS  NARV  S.  PEDRO.  S.  PAVLONOGO  SAGVEO,
NARABINI  SONO  MARTVRIO  NO  YODAI  COREAMATA  no  Doulores  no  qirocu  nari.
(Lives  of  the  Holy  Apostles  St.  Peter  and  St  Paul,  with  the  manner  of  their  martyrdom  -.  this  is
from  the  writings  of  several  doctors — [in  reality  the  life  of  S.  Peter  only].)

' Handbook  for  Japan,  second  edition,  p 5^0


f


3

p.  12.  SAM  PAVLO  APOStolo  no  gofagueo :  core  SiMEON  METAPHRASTES»
toyu  gacuxo  no  qirocu  nari.  (Life  of  St.  Paul  the  Apostle,  written -by  a  learned  man  named
Simeon  Metaphrastes.)

p.  45.  SANCTO  ANDRE  Apoftolo  no  go<ag:ue6 :  naraBINI  SONO  MARTYRIO
NO  yodai. Core  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  64.  SANCTO  lACOBE  Manor  Apoftolo  no  gofaGVEO.  NARABINI  SONO
MAR  tyrio  no  yodai. Core  Eufebio  Cefarienfef  toyu  gacuxo  no  qirocu  nan.

p.  75.  SAN  lOAN  EVANGELISTA  NO  GOSAGVEO :  core  Laodicia  toyu  zaixo  no
Mileto  to  mofu  Bifpo  no  qirocu-nari.  (Life  of  Saint  John  the  Evangelist,  written  by  the  Bishop
MiletusJ  of  a  place  called  Laodicea.)

p.  95.  SANCTIAGO  MAIOR  APOSTOLO  NO  GO  SA  gueo,  narabini  fono  Martyrio
no  yodai :  core  S.  Antonino§  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  113.  SANTHOME  APOSTOLO  NO  GOSAGVEO.  NARA  bini  fono  goxiqio  no
yodai.  Core  S.  Ifidoro  no  qirocu  nari.  (Life  of  Saint  Thomas  the  Apostle,  with  the  manner  of
his  death,  written  by  St.  Isidore.)

p.  122.  SAN  PHILIPPE  APOSTOLO  NO  MAR.TYRIO  NO  yodai  core  S.  Ifidoro  to,
S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  126.  SAN  BAR  THOLa  MEV  APOSTOLO  NO  GOSAGVEO'.  NARABINI  SONO
M ARTYRIONO  yodai :  core  Simeon  Metaphraftes  to  yu  gacuxo  Grego  no  cotoba  yori  Latim  ni
fonyacu  xerarexi  nari.  (Life  of  St,  Bartholomew  the  Apostle,  with  the  manner  of  his  martyrdom,
translated  from  the  Greek  language  into  Latin  by  a  learned  man  named  Simeon  Metaphrastes.)

p.  133.  SAN  MATTHEVS  APOSTOLO  EVANGELISTA  no  goikgueo,  narabi  ni
Martyrio  no  yodai. Core  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  140.  SAN  SIMON  TO  SAN  IVDAS  THADEV  APOS  tolos  no  martyrio  no  yodai :
core  S,  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  1  jo.  SAN  MATTHIAS  A-  POSTOLO  NO  VON  IVAIBI  no  Bangui.  (Discourse
on  the  festival  of  St.  Matthias  the  Apostle.)

p.  164.  ANTIOCHIA  NO  BISPO  SANCTO  IGNATIO  NO  gofagueo:  narabini
sono  martyrio  no  yofu. Core,  S.  Eufebio  Bifpo  to,  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  nari.

p.  173.  MENORES  NO  Mompa  no  caifan  Patriarcha  San  Francifco  no  gofagueo,  core  S.
Boauentura  to,  S.  Antonino  no  qirocu  ni  miyetaru  nari.  (Life  of  the  Patriarch  St.  Francis,  founder
of  the  Order  of  the  Minorites,  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  St.  Bonaventiu-a|l  and  St.  Antonino.)

p.  206.  SANCTA  FEBRO  nia  Virgen  Martyr  no  GO  SAGVEO  :  NARABINI  fono
Martyrio. Core  Simeon  Metaphrafte  no  qirocu  nari.


•  All  the  lives  here  attributed  to  Simeon  Metaphrastes  will  be  found  in  De  Vitis  Sanctorum  ab  Aloysio
Lipomano  .  .  .  a  F.  Laurentio  Surio  .  . emendatis  &  auctis,  .  .  .  Venetiis.  1581,  6  vols,  folio.

t  See  Historia  Ecclesiastica  Eusebii  Caefarienns.

+  Usually  known  a-;  MelHtus. See  Giles'  Codex  Apocryphus  Novi  Testamenti.

§  This  and  other  lives  taken  from  S.  Antonino  are  to  be  found  in  '  Chronica  .  .  .  Domini  Antonini
Archipraesulis  Florentini  .  .  Lugduni,  1543."  or  in  "Divi  Antonini  archiepiscopi  Florentini  .  .  Chronicon,
Lugduni,  1586."

II  Aorea  legenda  maior  beati  Francifci :  compolita  per  facctum  BoaaiMntnram.


p.  239.  TATTOQI  CON  felTores  S.  Barlan  to,  S.  lolaphat  no  gofagueo  :  core  S.  loan
Damafceno*  no  qirocu  ni  miyetari.

p.  275.  S.  EVSTACHIO  No  go  sagueo,  narabini  sono  MARTYRIO  NO  YODAI :  CORE
.  S.  ANTONINO  NO  CAQI  TAMO  joguanto,  Pedro  anatalibusf  to  yu  Bifpo  no  qirocu  ni
miyetari,  (Life  of  St.  Eustace  and  the  manner  of  his  martyrdom,  to  be  found  in  the  first  voh:me
written  by  St.  Antonino,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  Bishop  called  Petrus  de  Natalibus.)

Contents  of  Vol.  II.

p.  3. PATRIARCHA  lO-  feph  no  gofagueo  no  coto.

p.  43.  GLORIOSO  MAR  tyr  Sancto  Sebaftian  no  gofa  GEO,  NARABINI  MARTYRIO
NO  GORIVNNOYODAI.  TCVNE  NO  XONI  NOXERARVRV  TOIYEDOMO  BEXXI  te
Sancto  Antonino  no  caqi  tamo  joguan  noiccagio  ni  arauaruru  mono  nari.  Ian.  20.  (The  Life  and
manner  of  the  triumphant  martyrdom  of  the  glorious  martyr  St.  Sebastian.  Although  contained
in  the  ordinary  books,  it  is  especially  made  known  in  a  certain  chapter  of  the  first  volume  written  ■
by  St.  Antonino.  J

p.  61.  GLORIOSA  VIR-  ge  Sancta  Catherina  no  >lar  TYRIO  NO  YODAI.  CORE
SIMEON  METAPHRASTES  TO  YV  Fifo  NO  QIROCVNI  MIYETARI.  NOVEMB.  25.

p.  86.  SANCTO  ALEIXO  confeflbr  no  gofaguio.  Core  SIMEON  METAPHRASTES
rOYV  FITO  NO  QIROCV  NI  MIYETARI. lulho.  17.

p.  109.  SANCTA  EVGENIA  Virgen  to  vonajiqu  fono-  GOQENIN  NARV  PROTHO,
MA-  TA  lACINTONO  GOSAGVIO,  narabini  Martyrio  no  yodai.  Core  S.  Hieronymo  no
aibbafaretaru  Vitas  Patrum§  to  S.  Antonino  no  caqitamo  joguan  ni  arauaruru  mono  nari.
Decemb.  35.  (Life  of  Saint  Eugenia  Virgin,  and  of  her  servants  Prothus  and  Jacinthus.  This
is  found  in  the  Vitas  Patrum  by  St.  Jerome  and  in  the  first  volume  written  by  S.  Antonino.)

p. 141. ICHIBANNO  MAR  tyr  naru  .  S.  Efteuan  no  go-  SAGVEO,  NARABINI  SONO


*  An  eaily  edition  cf  this  legend  is  "Histona  duorum  Chnsti  militum.  e  Graeco  in  Latinum  versa."  in
Beati  loannis  Damasceni  orthodoxae  fidei  accurata  explicatio.  ItH  Hbris  distincta,  Basileae,  1548
(Bodlei.in)

t  Or,  Petrus  de  Natalibus,  Bishop  of  Isola  in  the  Venetian  territory  in  372.  He  completed  a  catalogue
of  saints,  with  their  hves,  first  published  at  Vicenza  in  1493,  and  again  at  Leyden  in  1543

*  The  Lyons  edition  of  the  Chronicon,  of  15S6,  has  the  following  note

Haec  S.  Sebafitiani  vita  in  linguam  laponicam  translata  singularem  animi  constantiam  addidit  cuidam
adolescent!  ex  illis  remotissimis  regionibus  Catholicae  religionis  neophyte.  CCim  enim  ad  eum  a  Catholica
rehgione  avocandum  daemon  suorum  administrorum  neruos  oranes  intenderet,  &  patrib.  Societatis  lesu  ad
eum  consolandum  &  confortandum  omnis  aditus  interclusus  esset,  dederunt  illi  cperam.  ut  haec  D.  Sebast.
vita  in  manus  illius  veniret,  qua  ille  confirmatus  mirabilem  de  daemone  eiusq .  asseclis  potentissimis
victoriam  reportauit,  lege  litteras  laponicas  P.  Ludouici  Froes  sexto  lunij a,  1577  scriptas.

This  letter  of  Froes  was  published  under  the  title  of  Brevis  lapaniae  insulae  descriptio.  Col.  Agripp-
1582,  and  the  passage  referred  to  will  be  found  on  f.  9  near  the  bottom  of  the  page  But  it  does  not  refer
by  name  to  St.  Antonino's  life  of  St.  Sebastisin.  Still  the  note  in  the  Chronicon  shows  that  before  the
introduction  of  Roman  type  into  Japan  there  existed  MS.  Lives  of  the  Saints,  and  the  present  collection  may
have  circulated  for  years  previous  to  its  being  printed.

§  Hieronymus  In  vitas  patrum. Lugduni,  1520


r


MAR  TYRIO  NO  YODAI  core.  S  LVCAS  EVANGELISTA  NO  CAQI  TAMO  ACTA
APOSTOLLORVM  to  Hiftona  Ecclefiaftica  nt  arauaruru  mono  nan.  DECEMB.  26.  (Life  of
St.  Stephen  the  Proto-martyr  with  the  manner  of  his  martyrdom.  This  is  found  in  the  Acta
Apostolorum  written  by  St.  Luke  the  Evangelist  and  in  tlie  Historia  Ecclesiastica.)

p  148.  S  LAVRENCKJ  NO  Martyrio  no  yodai.  Core  S.  ANTONINO  NO  QIROCV
Nl  MIYETARl. August  10.

p  .00  HISPANIA  NO  VCHI  no  Valenga  toyu  zaixo  ni  VOITE  MARTYR  NI
NARITAMO  S  V'ICENTE  NO  GOSAGVEO.  Core  .  S.  Antonmo  no  qirocu  ni  miyetan.
Ian  22.  (Life  of  St.  Vincent  who  was  martyred  at  a  place  called  Valencia  in  Spain.  This  is  to
be  found  in  the  writings  of  S.  Antonino.)

p.  169  FIDARI  NI  SATASV  beqi  coto  uo  araualu  no  jo.  (Preface  declaring  the  things
which  are  to  be  explained  below.)

p  170.  MARTYRES  NO  XOco,  narabini  fono  curai-taCAQI  COTO  VO  ARAVAIu
cocoroye  no  coto.  Capu'.  16.  (The  testimony  of  the  martyrs  and  what  is  to  be  understood  as
showing  the  high  rank  of  the  martyrs.  Chap.  16.  This  and  the  preceding  section  form  one  in  the
original  with  the  heading  "  Preambulo  para  tratar  del  testimonio  que  nuestra  Fe  tiene  con  la  sangre
de  lob  Santos  Martires,  donde  se  declara  quan  gloriosa  cosa  sea  padecere  martirio  por  Dios."
It  IS  Capitulo  XVI.  of  Parte  Segunda  de  la  Introduccion  del  Symbolo  de  la  Fe,  of  Fr.  Luis
de  Granada,  at  p.  162  of  Vol.  X.  of  his  collected  works,  Madrid,  1788.  The  remainder  of  the
volume  before  us  consists  of  a  free  translation  of  this  work  of  Kr.  Luis  up  to  and  inclusive
of  Cap.  XXVIII.  But  in  the  Madrid  edition  of  1659,  the  division  of  chapters  is  the  same  as
that  of  the  Japanese  translation  The  edition  used  by  the  Jesuit  fathers  was  of  course  that  of
Caragoga,  1584.)

p.  192.  Dai  17.  facari  gataqi  MartyRES  NO  CAZV  VO  MOITE,  CHRISTAN  NO
VON  VOQITE  NO  XINIIT  uo  arauaxi  tamo  coto.  Core  mata  Fides  uo  tijuyomu  beqi  ju
xiban  no  tocugui  naru  coto.  (De  la  dezimaquarta  excelencia  de  la  Fc,  y  Religion  Chrii'tiana,  que
es  auet  lido  confirmada  con  el  teftimonio  de  innuifierahles  Martires,  Cap.  XVII.)

p  208.  Dai  ju  fachi  Diocleciano  to  Maximiano  riotoi  no  Perfegui^an  no  coto.  (Perfecucion
de  Diocleciano,  y  Maximiano,  Capitulo  XVIII.)

p.  218.  Dai  JU  cu  Sancta  Olalha  no  Martyrio  no  coto  (Martirio  de  la  Virgen  Santa  Olalla.
Capitulo  XIX.)

p,  226  Sancta  Martina  no  Martyrio  no  coto.  (M.irtirio  de  la  Vugcn  Santa  Martina.
Capitulo  XX.)

p.  234.  Dai  JU  ichi  Sancta  Anafiafia  no  Martyrio  no  coto,  core  ua  Siineo  Metaphrastes
TO  YV  GACUXO  NO  QIROCV  NARI.  (Martirio  de  la  Virgen  Santa  Analufia,  elcripto
por  Simeon  Metaphrafte.)

p.  246.  Dai  ju  ichi,  S.  Clemente  to  gofobai  no,  S.  "Agatangelo  NO  MARTY'RIO  NO
COTO.  (Comien^a  la  hiftoria  del  Martirio  del  bienaueiUurado  San  Clemente,  y  de  fu  compaiiero
Agathangelo.)

p.  289  Dai  niju  ichi  Antonino  Vero  toyij  Roma  no  teiuo  no  jidai  NI  ARIXl
ECCLESIANO  SAINANNO  coto  core  ua  Franca  no  cum  no  vchi  Leon  to,  Viena  toyu  rioxo
no  Chriftan  yori  caqi  t9ucauaxitaru  jo  ni  arauaretaru  uo  Eufcbio  Cefarienfe  toyu  gacuxo  caqitamo
nari. (21. Calamities of  the  Church in  the  time  of  a  Roman emperor named  Antoninus


Verus  :  written  by  a  learned  man  named  Eusebius  Cesariensis,  from  what  is  found  in  letters
written  by  the  Christians  of  two  places  in  France  called  Lyon  and  Vienne.)

p.  ,305.  Dai  nijiini  Perfia  to  yu  cuni  ni  voite  Sapor  to  yu  acuvo  NO  IIDAI  NI  ARIX7
PERSECVCIONNO  GOTO.  (Siguel'e  otra  perlecucion  que  padecieron  los  Fieles  en  Perfia
en  t;empo  del  Rey  Sapor :  en  la  qual  padelcieron  Simeon  Obifpo  de  Seleucia  y  Vstazades  varo
excelete,  y  otros  fanctos  Sacerdotes.  Cap.  XXI J.  The  spelling  persecucion  in  the  Japanese
shows  that  the  original  was  Spanish.)

p.  310.  Dai  nijulkn.  S.  Simeon  to  ichi  MAN  ROCVXENNIN  NO  MARTYRES
N(J  COTO  :  CORE  VONAIIQI  Vl'tazades  no  jibun  no  coto  nari.  (No.  2.3.  St.  Simeon  and
sixteen  thou.sand  martyrs,  which  also  happened  at  the  same  time  as  that  of  Vstazades.)

p.  315.  Dai  nijuxi.  S.  loan  Euangelilla  no  midexi  naru  S.  PoLICARPO  NO
MARTVRIO  NO  COto ;  core  funauachi  HiUoria  Ecclefiaftica  no  xiquan  ni  arauaretari.  (EL
NL^RTYRIO  DE  SANT  Policarpodilcipulo  de  S.  luan  Euangelifta,  y  Obispo  de  Smirna:  referido
por  Eulebio  Cefarienfe  en  el  quarto  libro  de  la  Hiltoria  Ecclefialfica. Cap.  XXIIIL)

p.  322.  Dai  niju  go  miguini  qirocu  xitaru  Martyres  no  gol'agueo  NI  TCVITE  NO
QVANNEN  no  coto.  (CONSIDERACION  SOBRE  las  glorioi'as  batallas  y  victorias  de  los
fanctos  martyres,  que  aqui  ie  han  relatado. Cap.  XXV.)

p.  332.  Dai  niju  rocu  Chriltan  uo  taigi  xen  to  xeraretaru  acuvo  VA  TACHIMACHI
TEMBAT  NI  ATARI  MATA  YEiaiN  VO  CAtamuqeraretaru  teivo  no  gueo  ua  choqiu  ni
arixi  coto.  (De  como  cafi  todos  los  Emperadores  que  perliguieron  la  Fe,  y  Religion  Chriftiana,
acabaron  delaftradamente,  y  los  que  la  honraron,  fueron  en  todas  las  cofas  ayudados  de  Dios,  y
profperados. Capitulo  XXVI.)

From  this  list  it  would  appear  that  the  volume  before  us  is  no  translation  of  a  then  existing
compendium  of  the  Lives  of  the  Saints,  but  rather  a  compilation  from  various  sources  within
reach  of  the  writer  or  writers.  The  Chronicon  of  S.  Antoninus,  Archbishop  of  Florence
(probably  the  Lyons  edition  ■>(  1543),  furnished  the  greater  portion  of  the  materials;  and  the  next
numerous  are  the  lives  by  .Sinienn  Mutaphra.^itrs,  in  the  compilation  of  Lipomanus  edited  by
Suriu3  ,  the  thi'd  in  point  of  frequent  retereru  p  being  the  Historia  Ecclesiastica  of  Eusebius.
The  '■  Hi;toria  "  of  John  of  Damascus  furnibbed  ihe;  basis  •-'(  the  legend  of  Barlam  and  Josaphat,
a.nd  the  rernaming  lives  '.vere  taken  from  T'l'llitu:.  Pishop  of  Laodicea,  St.  Bonaventura,
St.  Jt.'::m£ Ptti-u;  de  Natal'bui,  a.^d  the  Acts  of  th'-  Apostles.

T.he  fil'iwing  exti^aits  will  suffice  as  ipecimcnb  of  the  style  . —


TATTOQ!  APOSTOLOS  NARV  £.
PEDRO  .  £-  PAVLOXOGO  iAGVEO,  XA-
RaLLM  :.0XG  :vL\RTYRIO  XO  yudai  .
CORLAIs^aTA  .'io  Douiorct  no  qirocu  .^ari.
COX'XIch'  Sancta  Ecclefia  yori  S.  Pedro,
S.  Paulo  \:\d  ninguen  no  mit(;u  no  teqi  ni
taixerarc'.t  j-"  'i-  "-i<^  firaqi  tamo  tocoro  uo
yorocob:  ;i.  :'ar'jru  mono  nari.  Mit(;u  no  teqi
toua  •,3s;ani!,  cono  xecai,  tengu  core  nari.
Connichi  no  iuai  ua Chriftan  no  vchi  no  dai


Tr.-..>  .jL.iTiox. — To-day  the  Holy  Church
celcbi-atc;  th-  victory  gained  by  St.  Peter
and  bl.  Paul  over  the  three  enemies  of  the
human  race.  These  three  enemies  are  the
flesh,  the  world  and  the  devil.  To-day's  is
the  most  important  of  Christian  celebrations,
because  it  is  the  day  on  which  the  chief
captains  of  Christianity  gained  Ihe  victory.  It
would  be  the  natural  course  to  celebrate  sepa-
rately the  gaining  ol  the  victor)-  by  these  Two,


ichi  no  iuai  nari.  Sonoy^yeua,  Chriflan  no
dai  ichiban  no  taixo  go  xori  uo  ye  tamo  fi
nareba  nari.  Cono  go  rionin  no  govn  uo  firaqi
tamo  von  vye  uoba  caccacu  ni  iuai  mofaru  beqi
coto  fony  nari  toiyedomo,  go  rionin  no  vye  uo
ichidoni  iuai  mofaruru  coto  ua,  Chriftan  no
yorocobi  nio,  xinjinmo  connichi  cafanari,  fono
von  cagami  mo  connichioy  ri  [for  yori]  cafa-
nareba  nari.  Sono  inyen  no  cafanaru  toqimba,
Deus  uo  tattomi  tatemat^uru  coto  mo  cafanaru-
beqi  coto  mottomo  nari.  Mata  cono  gorionin
connichi  ichidoni  Martyr  ni  nari  tamaitaru
cotomo  mata  Deus  no  von  ladame  nari.  Go
zonjo  no  vchi  ni  go  ichimi,  goixxin  ni  voboxi-
mexi  ai  tamo  ga  yuyeni,  connichi  vonaji  fi,
vonaji  tocoro,  vonaji  acuvo  no  guegi  vomotte
vonaji  Fides  uo  fodat9uru  tameni,  go  ichimei  uo
fafague  tamo  nari.  S.  Paulo  ua  Roma  no  fito
nite  maximafu  nari.  Soreniyotte  inixiye  yori
no  fatto  ni  macaxete  von  cubi  uo  vchi  tatemat-
^uritaru  mono  nari.  S.  Pedro  ua  ludeo  no  xifon
tarn  ni  yotte  von  aruji  lefu  Chrifto  no  go  cafu
ni  macaxete,  Cruz  ni  cacari  tamo  nari.  Corera
no  dori  ni  xitagatte  connichi  Ecclefia  yori
fucaqu  iuai  tamo  mono  nari.

Sareba  Beato  ni  yotte  Deus  no  jonaixo  ni
canai  tamo  fito  nite  maximafu  toyii  tncoro
bacari  uo  iuai  tatemat5uru  mo  ari.  Mati  fono
Ecclefia  uo  firomuru  tameni,  famazama  no  go
xinro  uo  coraye  tam.ai,  fono  michi  yori  xixi
tamo  tocoro  uo  iuai  mofaruru  mo  aru  mono
nari.  Xicareba  conniciii  no  Beato  ua  cono
futafama  no  dori  ni  yotte  iuai  tatcmatguru  nari.
Cono  go  rionin  ua  iflai  Chriiian  no  bumo  nue
maximafu  nominarazu,  mata  xixo  nite  mo
maximafu  nari.  Sareba  fito  no  \-j-e  niua  tare
mo  cotnicu  no  bumo  ninia  no  i.jca  ua  naxi
to  iyedomo,  Spiritual  no  \^'eni  ua  mata  mo  ara
mono  nari.  Sore  uo  fa.\i  tamaite  lefu  Chrifto,
Qui  facit  voluntatem  patris  mei,  qui  in  caelis
eft,  ipfe  meus  frater,  mater  &  foror  eft,  to
notamo  nari.


and  the  reason  why  they  are  celebrated  together
is,  that  on  this  day  Christian  joy  and  devotion
were  redoubled,  and  a  double  example  was
afforded.  It  is  right  that  when  the  cause  is
doubled,  the  respect  paid  to  God  should  be
doubled  also.  Again,  it  was  determined  by
God  that  these  Two  should  be  martyred
together  to-day.  During  their  lifetime  they
were  united  in  thought,  and  on  this  selfsame  day
they  offered  up  their  lives  at  the  selfsame  place,
at  the  command  of  the  selfsame  wicked  prince
for  the  support  of  the  selfsame  faith.  St.  Paul
was  a  Roman,  and  therefore,  in  accordance  with
an  ancient  law,  was  decapitated.  St.  Peter,
being  a  descendant  of  Judah,  was  hung  on  the
cross,  following  the  precedent  of  Our  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  For  these  reasons  the  Church
to-day  solemnly  celebrates  their  memory.

Some  saints  are  celebrated  solely  because
they  obeyed  God's  will.  Others  because  they
died  by  reason  of  the  manifold  hardships  they
underwent  for  the  purpose  of  spreading  His
Church.  To-day's  Saints  are  celebrated  for
both  these  reasons.  These  Two  are  not  only
the  parents  of  all  Christianity,  but  are  aUo
teachers.  So,  although  no  man  has  more  than
two  (lesh-and-blood  parents,  he  has  spiritual.
parents  likewise.  It  was  with  reference  to.
this  that  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  Whosoever  shall
do  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven,
the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister  and  rnotHer."


T


8

[ExTRAi:T.]

TATTOQI  CON  feflbres  S.  Barlan  tOj  S.  lofaphat  no  gofagueo  r  core  S.  loan  Damafceno
no  qirocu  ni  miyetari.

Xococu  ni  von  voxiye  facaye  tamai,  cazucazu  no  Ecclefia  uo  tate,  mata  ua  yo  uo  futguru  fanqio
no  doxinja  reqireqi  arixi  jidai,  India  no  cum  ni  Auennir  to  mofu  micado  fucqi  yeiyo  yo  ni  fugure,
cotolara  vo  catachi  fito  ni  coye  tamaixicaba,  guenje  no  coto  nomi  tanoximi  tamo  to  iyedomo,  vo  curai
uo  yuz/.uri  tamo  beqi  voji  vo  fitori  mo  maximaianeba,  core  nomi  fucaqu  nagueqaxe  tamo  nari.
Saroba  cano  micado  Gentio  nite  maximalu  yiiycni,  yocoxima  no  fonzon  ni  taixi  tamaite  go  xinjin
ala^irn/.u,  C'hrillan  no  von  voxiye  uo  fucaqu  qirai  tamo  nari.  Saredomo  fanqio  no  jennin  tachi  ua
iono  von  irari  uomo  vnCore  tamauazu,  Iclu  Chrifio  no  go  foco  toxite,  Martyr  no  nozomi  uo  vocoxi,  yo
ni  arauarPtP  lefus  no  mina  uo  fonaye,  lito  ni  mo  I'ul'ume,  cono  yo  no  adanaru  coto  to,  nochi  no  yo
no  nagaqi  fanoximi  uo  nego  beqi  cotouo  nomi  firome  tamai  xicaba,  titobito  core  uo  xitai,  foxxinja
no  vouocanxi  Ibno  vchi  n'  teivo  no  xmca  ni  fucqi  yeiyo  ni  xite,  canno  fito  ni  fugure,  yo  no
fomare  cacure  nacanxi  fito  an  qeru  ga,  teivo  Chrifta  uo  coco  caxico  nite  aruiua  vcfii  fataxi,  aruiua
vm  '-xinai  tamo  uo  mite,  lyoivo  yo  uo  itouaruru  cocoro  afacarazu,  tenjo  no  majiuari,  xacurocuni  mo
cocoro  uotodcmezu,  nenrai  fummare  tamaixi  tactu  uo  fute,  jinrin  touoqi  yama  no  vocu  ni  comori
ytamaite,  mi  uc  yatquxi,  Anim.a  uo  migaqaruru.  Fitoye  ni  Deus  no  von  coto  uo  nomi  tgutome
voconai  mofarexi  nan.  Figoro  yeirio  ni  canauarexi  xinca  naru  yuyc  ni,  micado  vo  nagueqi
fucaqereba,  core  ni  tguqite  mo  Chrilia  ni  tai.xerare  teivo  no  go  gueqirin  fanatadaxiqu,  ifogui  xofo
ye  chocuxi  uo  tatc,  icanaru  no  no  fuyc,  yama  no  vocu,  tani  no  foco  made  mo  nocorazu  tazzune
idaxi,  mexiguxite  maire  tono  xenji  xiqirinaru  vomotte,  focuji  ni  tazzune  idaxi,  fandai  mofaretaru
nari.  Sarcba,  cono  daijin  yo  ni  ari.xi  toqi  ua  qinguin  uo  chiribame,  xuguiocu  uo  tijuranetaru
xozocu  uo  chacu  xi,  cazucazu  no  tomogara  ni  ynfiu  catgo  xerarexi  fito  narixi  ga,  imaua  fiqicayete
ganxocu  cui-omi,  catachi  votoroye,  mi  niua  rucat  uomatoi,  cachi  fadaxi  nite  dairi  ni  main,  teixo  ni
tatazumareqeru  uo  micado  goran  atte,  go  gueqirin  no  naca  nimo  vo  nagueqi  fucoxite,  icani  qiojin
nani  no  yuycnica  tacaqi  uo  futetc,  iyaxiqi  ni  caye,  bibixiqu  cacayaqixi  coto  uo  furi  futete,  cafodo
made  miguruxiqi  coto  uo  tazzune  motome  qeru  ua,  core  nanigoto  zo  ?  nangi  uo  vaga  x  ta  nite
daiichi  no  t<;ucafa  to  fadame,  cotoni  buxi  no  taixogun  ni  fonayexi  ni,  ima  ua  cacu  varambe  no
varaigufa  to  nari  fatete,  faritomo  to  cocoro  uo  foycxi  chijn  uo  faye  vomoi  vafure,  mi  uo  fanarenu
faixi  uomo  me  ni  caqezu,  fonzon  uomo  tattomazu,  lESV'S  to  yaran  ni  taixite  yo  no  ycigua  uo
fute,  cacaru  tgutanaqi  mi  to  narite  ua  nani  no  yeqi  ca  arubeqi  ya  to,  touaxe  tamayeba:  jennin  icani
mo  yemeru  cauobaxe  nite,  somon  mofareqeru  yd  ua.  Sono  mare  uo  qicoximefan  to  voboxime-
fareba,  teqi  uo  xirizoqe  tamaye :  fonoyuyeua  teqi  no  maye  nite  ua  mofu  coto  mo  tatgubecarazu,
tadaxi  ri  ni  cacauari  tamauazumba,  vare  uo  cfiochacu  laxc  tamaye,  icanaru  zaiqua  nimo  voconai
tamo  bcxi.

The  Latin  text,  from  which  the  foregoing  abridgment  was  taken,  fills  95  folio  pages  of  ^3
lines  each,  while  the  Japanese  version  occupies  no  more  than  36  pages  of  a  small  octavo  size.
For  the  sake  of  comparison  the  Latin  to  which  it  corresponds  is  here  subjoined.

\ITA  BEATORUM  BARLAAM  ET  lO.SAPHAT  CONFESSORVM,  Et  Sanctomm
Monachorum  agones  &  martyria  fub  Auenniro  rege  Indiae  palTorum,  per  D.  loannem  Damafcenum
fcripta,  nupcr  c  Grieco  in  Latinum  versa  .  .


I


CAPVT  I.

Cum  coepiffent  monafteria  conftrui,  ac  monachorum  cogregari  multitudines,  &  illorum
virtutum,  &  angelicze  conuerfationis  faelix  fama  fines  orbis  occuparet,  &  vfque  ad  Indos  penieniret,
csoidem  ad  fimilem  zelum  excitauit :  ita  quod  multi  eorum  omnia  defererent,  ac  peterent  deferta,
&  in  corpore  mortal!  conueri'ationem  I'ufciperent  angelorum.  Rebus  igitur  fie  bene  fe  habentibus,
&  aureis  (vt  ita  dicam)  pennis,  multis  in  ccelum  volatibus,  fiirrexit  quidam  rex  in  eadem
prouincia  Auennir  nomine  :  magnus  quidem  factus  diuitijs,  &  potentia,  &  contri  aduerlarios  fuos
victoriofiis,  &  in  beliis  ftrenuus.  Erat  enim  corporis  magnitudine,  pariterque  vultus  decore
veneradus,  omniumque  mundialium  rerum  cito  marcefcentium  fuccefsibus  gloriabatur :  fecundum
verb  animam  vltima  grauabatur  inopia,  multis  malis  fuffocatus  :  Gentilis  namque  erat  profefsionis,
nimiumq;  fuperftitiofo  errori  idolorum  deditus.  Cumque  in  multis  delitijs  viueret,  &  delecta-
tionibus  atque  iucunditatibus  praefentis  vitae  deditus  eflet  ex  toto  corde,  nihilque  quod  vellet,  atq  ;
defideraret,  ei  deeflet:  vnum  tamen  videbatur  effe  quod  laetitia  illius  minuebat,  curisque  ac
folicitudinibus  ipfius  animam  aifligebat,  videlicet  Iterilitatis  malum  :  nam  filios  habere  no  poterat,
&  idcirco  multum  folicitus  erat  quatenus  tali  vinculo  folueretur,  [ut]  pater  filiorum  vocaretur  :  quae
res  multis  eft  optabilis. Talis  itaque  rex  erat,  &  tale  intentionem  habebat.

Gloriofifsimum  vero  genus  Chriftianorum,  &  monachorum  multitudines,  regis  cultum
vilipendentes,  &  prorfus  minas  eius  non  formidantes,  profipiebant  Christi  gratia,  ad  fermonis
meliorem  plenitudinem  traditi,  paruipendentes  regem,  regisque  fermonem  :  ea  vero  quae  ad  Dei
cultum  pertinebant,  ftudiofius  agebant.  Et  ideo  multi  qui  monachicum  fufceperant  ordinem,  omnes
quidem  aequaliter  mundi  delectationes  ii  fe  repellebant :  Ad  vnius  vero  Dei  cultum  tota  intentione  fe
■contiilerant,  &  pro  Chrifto  mortem  fitiebant,  xtei-nam  defiderantes  beatitudinem.  Praedicabat
ergo  fine  timore  aliquo,  &  dilatione,  &  valde  cofidenter  falutare  Dei  nomen,  &  nihil  aliud  nifi
Chrifliim  in  ore  habebant.  Fluidam  vero  &  corruptibilem  naturam  praefentium  rerum,  &
,ftabilitatem  atq;  incorruptione  futurse  vitae,  aperte  cunctis  demonftrabant,  &  fe  ipfos  illis  exemplu
praebebat,  &  praedicationis  iemina  fpargebant,  vt  familiares  illos  Deo  efBcerent,  quatenus,  quae  in
Christo  abfcondita  eft,  vitam  mererentur.  Hinc  multi  dulcifsimam  illam  doctrinam  fufcipientes,
amaras  quidem  deceptionis  deferebant  tenebras,  ckrifsimoq;  veritatis  lumini  iungebantur :  adeo
vt  quidam  nobilium  atque  fenatoru,  omnia  deponentes  vitae  feculi  onera,  monachi  fierent.

Rex  avtem  vt  hoc  audiuit  ira  maxima  repletus,  atque  furore  fuccenfus,  edictum  ilico  pofuit,
omnem  Chriftianum  coarctari,  vt  negaret  fide  Christi.  Vnde  nouas  contra  ipfos  quidem
Chriftianos  fpecies  tormentonim  excogitabat,  &  ftudiose  perquirebat,  nouos  mortium  modos
minabatur  eis,  &  literas  per  vniuerfas  fibi  fubiectas  prouincias  delegabat  principibus  atq ;  ducibus,
pocnas  aduerfiis  pios,  &  neces  iniuftas  decemens  :  Praecipue  vero  aduerfus  monafterij  [sic]  ordinis
praepofitos  furens,  atrocifsimum  contra  eos  atq;  ineflabile  excitauit  bellum.  Tunc  multi  fideliu
mente  commouebantur :  Alij  vero  tormenta  fuftinere  non  valentes,  execrabili  illius  obediebant
praecepto.  Monaftici  autem  ordinis  duces  ac  principes,  paUm  quidem  atque  in  facie  regis
impietatem  redarguentes,  per  martyrium,  temporalem  vitae  finem  fortiebantiu",  &  aetemam
acquirebant  beatitudinem.  Alij  verb  in  folitudinibus  &  montibtis  abfcondebantur,  non  quod
tormeta  metuerent,  fed  difpenfetione  quadam  diuina  hoc  agebant.

Huiufmodi  ergo  obfcuritate  Indiam  occupante,  &  fidelibus  quidem  vndique  repuUis,  impietatis


VGro  miniffrls  omnia  tenentibus,  cruoribus  &  nidoribus  facrificiorum  etiam  ipso  iam  aere
inquinato  quidam  regis  Archilatrapa,  qui  dignitate,  qui  animi  coftantia,  magnitudine,  atque
forma,  &  omnibus  alijs,  quibus  pulchritudo  corporis  &  fortitude  fignificari  poteft,  ab  alijs  omnibus
differebatj  vt  audiuit  impium  illud  praeceptum,  valefaciens  huic  vanae  gloriae  deorfum  trahenti,
atque  delitijs  temporalibus,  monachorii  praepofitis  femetipfum  commifcuit,  montium  deferta
petens :  ibique  ieiunijs  &  vigilijs,  ac  diuinorum  eloquiorum  meditationi  intentus,  fenfus  fuos
vigilanter  emundabat,  &  animam  ab  omni  liberans  pafsibili  aifectu,  impafsibilitatis  lumine
illuftrabat.  Rex  autem  hunc  valde  diligebat,  &  in  honore  maximo  habebat :  Qui  poftquam
audiuit  de  eo  talia,  doluit  quidem  animo,  quoniam  amicum  perdiderat:  contra  monachos  veiO
amplius  exarfit  in  iram.  Mifit  itaque  vbiq;  ad  eius  inquifitionem,  &  omnem  lapidem,  ac
montium  concaua,  &  fpeliicas,  vt  inueniretur,  perquiri  fecit.

Port  aliquantum  vero  temporis  hi  qui  ad  inquifitionem  illius  directi  fuerant,  vt  fenferunt  in
defertis  eum  habitationem  habere,  perfcrutantes,  inuenerunt  eum.  Quern  compraehendentes,  regis
tribunah  exhibuerant.  Videns  autem  rex  fie  in  paupere  &  afperrimo  veftitu,  ilium  videlicet,  qui
fplendidis  aliquando  induebatur  veftimentis,  &  multis  affluebat  delicijs  :  nunc  verb  maceratum
dura  anachorefeos  conuerfatione,  &  eremiticae  vitae  patienter  opertum  veftimentis,  triftitia  fimul  &
ira  replebatur,  &  ex  ambobus  fermone  mifcens,  ait  ad  eum  :  O  ftulte  &  mentis  perditae,  cuius  rei
gratia  mutafti  honorem  in  contumeliam,  &  fplendente  gloriam  in  hunc  ignominiofum  ac  vilem
afpectum  :  as  primus  in  regno  meo,  Si  meae  archiftrategos  potentiae,  Ludii  puerorum  temetipfum
conftituilti,  non  solum  noftrae  amicitiae  atque  fiduciae  oblitus,  fed  &  contra  ipfam  infurrexifti
naturam,  &  neque  propriorum  filiorum  milertus,  diuitias  &  omne  vitse  gloriam  pro  nihilo  reputafti,
&  tantam  inhonorationem  inclytae  praepofuifti  gloriae  :  vt  quid  hoc  fecifti  ?  &  quid  hinc  lucraberia
quod  omnibus  dijs,  videlicet  &  hominibus  ilium,  qui  dicitur  lefus  practulifti,  duramq;  etiam  ifta  &
fuperftitiofam  conuerfationem  delectation ibus  atq;  iucuditatibus  dulcifsimae  vitse  huius  ?

Haec  audiens  ille  homo  dei,  hilariter  fimul  ac  plane  refpondit;  Si  rationem  i  me  audire  vis,
6  rex,  inimicos  tuos  de  medio  praetorij  tui  eijce,  &  tunc  refpondebo  tibi  de  quibufcunque
interrogare  volueris.  lUis  namque  praefentibus  nuUus  k  me  tibi  fermo  reddetur.  Praster  rationem
verb,  torque,  occide,  fac  quod  vis. (Antverpiae,  Apud  loannem  Bellerum.  s.  a.)

The  endeavour  now  being  made  in  Japan  by  the  Society  known  as  the  Romaji  Kai  to
introduce  the  Roman  alphabet  as  the  medium  of  communication  in  place  of  the  Chinese
characters  and  the  native  syllabaries  is  well-known  to  all  those  who  are  interested  in  Japanese
matters,  and  its  success  is  ardently  desired  by  all  those  who  wish  to  facilitate  for  the  rising
generation  the  acquisition  of  Western  knowledge  in  all  its  branches.  European  students  have
for  many  years  past  devised  various  systems  of  transliteration,  chiefly  for  foreign  consiunption,
and  the  first  modem  attempt  to  popularize  such  a  system  for  the  use  of  the  Japanese  themselves
was  made  only  a  few  years  back  by  Dr.  J.  C.  Hepburn  in  the  publication  of  the  Romanized  New
Testament  in  Japanese.  But  nearly  three  hundred  years  ago  the  Jesuit  Fathers  did  the  same  thing
for  their  converts,  as  well  as  for  tJie  use  of  the  missionaries  themselves.  The  Sanctos  no  Gosagueo,
the  first  book  that  issued  from  their  presses,  was  directed  towards  this  end.  It  was  followed  by
several  other  works,  some  of  which  are  described  in  this  pamphlet,  while  of  others  the  libraries
of  Europe  do  not,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  possess  any  copies.  And  later  on  it
would  appear  that  the  romanized  style  was  partially  abandoned  in  favour  of  a  mixture  of  Chbese


?


and  syllabic  characters,  probably,  as  may  be  conjectured,  with  the  object  of  obtaining  foi
religious  books  a  wider  circulation  among  the  people.  The  suppression  of  the  Christian  missions
in  the  seventeenth  century  has,  however,  rendered  it  impossible  for  us  to  say  with  certainty
whether  romanization  actually  turned  out  a  failure,  and  we  cannot  consequently  predict  failure  oi
success  for  the  efforts  which  are  being  made  in  the  nineteenth  century.  It  is,  however,  worth
while  to  analyze  the  texts  of  which  examples  have  been  given  above,  in  order  to  show  what  was
the  system  then  adopted.  Mr.  B.  H.  Chamberlain  has  already,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  Asiatic
Society  of  Japan  on  October  nth,  1887,  done  this  for  the  Arte  da  lingoa  de  Japam,  printed
between  1604  and  1608,  and  I  propose  now  to  give  an  idea  of  what  had  preceded  the  transcrip-
tion  of  Rodriguez,  from  which,  however,  it  does  not  differ  to  any  serious  extent.  An  examination
of  the  printed  Cartas  de  Japao  would  enable  me  to  carry  it  back  to  a  still  earlier  date,  as  far  as
proper  names  are  concerned,  but  I  have  none  of  them  within  reach  at  this  moment.

In  the  following  wble  the  elements  of  the  Japanese  syllabary  are  arranged  according  to  the
so-called  go-ju  in,  the  sonants  bemg  m  brackets  : —


ye


ca(ga>

sa  (za)

ta  (dai

na

fa(ba)

ma

qi  (guit

xi  (ji)

rhi  vgi)

ni

fi(bi)

mi

iqu  '•S

SU (2U)

tijU  tzzu)

ou

fu  (bu)

mu

qe  (gue^

xe  (jei

te  (de)

ne

fe  (be)

me

CO  (go)

so  (ZO)

to  (do)

no

fo  (bo)

mo

|ua
1  va


ya


yu


— re —


yo


The  long  0  is  represented  by  6  and  6.  These  were  doubtless  intended  to  be  distinguished,
but  as  far  as  1  ran  see  the  hrst  is  chiefly  employed  in  writing  Japanese  words,  the  second  in
words  of  Chinese  origin.  Long  u  is  u.  nyo  and  nyu  pre  rendered  by  nho  and  nhu,  in  accordance
with  the  Portuguese  method,  xa,  xu  and  xo  represent  the  sha,  shu  and  sho  of  the  Romaji  Kai,
corresponding  sonants  being  gia  and  ja,  ju  and  gio,  but  jo  of  the  modem  system  is  jo.  For  ju  the
Portuguese  missionaries  had  giu.  For  bio,  they  used  both  l>eo  and  bid,  no  doubt  intending  some
distinction  no  longer  recognized.  Now  and  then  an  inconsistency  may  be  observed,  as  ^uijte  foi
kiile,  w^hile  it  is  either  yi  or  iy.

The  romanized  way  of  writing  Japanese  evidently  facilitated  the  introduction  and  adoption
of  foreign  words,  spelt  either  as  in  Latin  or  Portuguese,  but,  as  we  learn  from  Rodriguez,  to  be
pronounced  in  Japanese  fashion.  Thus  in  the  extracts  already  given,  we  have  Doutores,  Sancta
Eoclesia,  Christan,  Deus,  Martyr,  Fides,  lesu  Christo,  Cruz,  Beato,  Spiritual,  Gentio  and  Anima.
Rodriguez  says,  p.  179,  "Of  the  manner  of  introducing  some  of  our  words  into  the  Japanese
language,  in  which  they  are  wanting,  and  of  how  they  should  be  pronounced  : —

"  Seeing  that  the  Japanese  tongue  wants  words  to  express  numerous  new  things  required  by
the  holy  Gospel,  it  is  necessary  either  to  invent  such,  which  is  difficult  in  Japanese,  or  to  take
them  from  our  language,  corrupting  them  as  may  best  suit  the  Japanese  pronunciation,  so  as  to
be,  as  it  were,  indigenous.  And  as  the  Portuguese  language  has  much  resemblance  to  that  of
Japan,  both  in  many  of  the  syllables  and  in  pronunciation,  they  can  usually  be  taken  from  it,
although  some  have  been  taken  from  the  Latin  also.  These  words  are  solely  such  as  relbte  to
God,  to  the  saints,  to  the  virtues,  and  other  things  which  they  (the  Japanese)  have  not  got.


"  For  this  purpose  it  should  be  noted  that  every  Japanese  word  ends  either  in  a  vowel,  or  in
one  of  two  consonants,  N  and  T.  They  are  also  without  the  liquids  L,  R,  and  other  intermediary
letters,  as  used  in  ipse,  tactiis,  npto,  &c.  Also  the  syllables  Di,  Du,  Ti,Tu,  as  has  been  said  else-
where ;  and  conformably  to  this  should  be  accoiiiinodated  the  names  given  to  Christians,  as  well
as  other  names.  "

"  It  should  be  observed  ihat  as  the  Japanese  pronounce  all  their  words  as  if  consisting  of
simple  syllables  formed  of  a  vowel  and  a  consonant,  they  say  Patere  for  Padre,  Nataru  for
Natal,  Yequerejia  for  Ecclesia,  &c.  Nevertheless,  when  such  names  are  written  with  our
alphabet,  it  is  well  to  write  them  after  our  fashion,  and  not  after  the  Japanese."

How  this  expedient  was  put  into  practice  may  be  seen  from  a  list  of  the  Latin  and  Portuguese
words  which  occur  in  the  "  Confessionarium  "  (No.  8  of  this  list),  one  of  the  earliest  works
printed  in  native  type,  of  which  a  complete  copy  has  been  preserved  in  Europe.


2. BRITISH  MUSEUM.

(Pressmark,  C.  24.  e. 11.)

NIFON  NO  I  COTOBA  TO  |  Hiftoria  uonarai  .xiran  to  |  FOSSVRV  FITO  NO  TAME-1
NI  XEVA  NI  YAVA  RAGVETA-  |  RV  FEIQE  NO  MONOGATARI.  |  lESVS  NO  COM-
PANHIA  NO  I  Collegio  Amactifa  ni  voite  Superiores  no  go  men-  |  qio  to  xite  core  wo  fan
ni  qizamu  mono  nari.  |  Go  xuxxe  yori  M.  D.L.  XXXXII.  J  8vo.

[Heike  monogatari  explained  in  colloquial  for  the  use  of  persons  desiring  to  study  the
language  and  history  of  Japan.  Priiited  by  permission  of  the  Superiors  at  the  Amakusa  College
of  the  Society  of  Jesus, a.d.  1592.]

At  the  back  of  the  title-page  is  a  preface  dated  23rd  February,  1593.  Then  comes  the
address  to  the  reader  2  pp.,  followed  by  406  pp.  of  text,  and  6  pp.  not  numbered  of  a  table  of
contents  and  errata.  Then  a  fresh  title-page  :  ESOPO  NO  |  FABVLAS.  |  Latinuo  vaxite  Nippon
no  I  cuchito  nasu  mono  nari.  |  lEVS  NO  COMPANHIA  NO  |  Collejio  Amacufani  voite
Superiores  no  gomen-  |  qiotoxite  coreuo  fanni  qizamu  mono  nari.  |  Goxuxxe  yori  M.  D.  L.
XXXXIII  I  .  [Esop's  Fables,  translated  from  Latin  into  the  Japanese  tongue.  Printed  by
permission  of  the  Superiors  at  the  Amakusa  College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus, a.d.  1593].

At  the  back  of  this  title  is  an  "  Address  to  the  Reader,"  followed  at  p.  409,  by  "  ESOPO  GA
XO  gaino  monogatari  riacu. COREVO  MAXIMO  PLANVDE  toyu  fito  Gregono  cotobayori


NIFONNO

COTOBA TO

Hiftoria  uo  narai  xiran  to
fossvrv  fito  no  tame-

M XEVA Nl YAVA RAGVETA-
R.VFEiQ.ENO MONOGATAKU


lESVS NO COMPANrfiA NO

Coilegio  AnucuU  rd  voice  Superictn  no  go  men<

^o  CO  xirt  cere  do  Qin  ni  qiz^mu  mono  n.vi  •

Goxuxxcpn  M.D.L.XXKXiU


"  For  this  purpose  it  should  be  noted  that  every  Japntiese  word  ends  either  in  a  vowel,  or  in
one  of  two  consonants,  N  andT.  They  are  also  witliout  the  liquids  L,  R,  and  other  intermediary
letters,  as  used  in  ipse,  taclus,  opto,  &c.  Also  th.;  syllables  Di,  Du,  Ti.Tu,  as  has  been  said  else-
where ;  and  coaforniably  to  this  should  be  accoininodatcd  the  names  given  to  Christians,  as  well
as  other  names.  "

"It  should  be  observed  diat  as  the  Japanese  pronounce  all  their  words  as  if  consisting  of
simple  syllables  formed  of  a  vowel  and  a  consonant,  they  say  Patere  for  Padre,  Nataru  for
iVatal,  Yequerejia  for  Ecclesia,  &c.  Nevertheless,  when  stich  names  are  written  with  our
alphabet,  it  is  well  to  write  them  after  our  fashion,  and  not  after  the  Japanese."

How  this  expedient  was  put  into  practice  may  be  seen  from  a  list  of  the  Latin  and  Portuguese
words  which  occur  in  the  "  Confessionarium  "  (No.  8  of  this  list),  one  of  the  earliest  works
printed  in  native  type,  of  which  a  complete  copy  has  been  preserved  in  Europe.


2. BRITISH  MUSEUM.

(Pressmark,  C. 24.  e. 11.)

NIFON  NO  I  COTOBA  TO  |  Hiltoria  uo  narai  .ciran  to  |  FOSSVRV  FITO  NO  TAME-)
NI  XEVA  NI  YAVA  RAGVETA-  |  RV  FEIQE  NO  MONOGATARI.  |  lESVS  NO  COM-
PANHIA  NO  I  Collegio  Amacufa  ni  voite  Superiores  no  go  men-  |  qio  to  xite  core  wo  fan
ni  qizamu  mono  nari.  |  Go  xuxxe  yori  M.  D.L.  XXXXII.  ]  8vo.

[Heike  monogatari  explained  in  colloquial  for  the  use  of  persons  desiring  to  study  the
language  and  history  of  Japan.  Printed  by  permission  of  the  Superiors  at  the  Amakusa  College
of  the  Society  of  Jesus, a.d.  1592.]

At  the  back  of  the  title-page  is  a  preface  dated  23rd  February,  1593.  Then  comes  the
address  to  the  reader  2  pp.,  followed  by  406  pp.  of  text,  and  6  pp.  not  numbered  of  a  table  of
contents  and  errata.  Then  a  fresh  title-page :  ESOPO  NO  |  FABVLAS.  |  Latinuovaxite  Nippon
no  I  cuchito  nasu  mono  nari.  |  lEVS  NO  COMPANHIA  NO  |  Collegio  Amacufani  voite
Superiores  no  gomen-  |  qiotoxite  coreuo  fanni  qizamu  mono  nari.  |  Goxuxxe  yori  M.  D.  L.
XXXXIII  I  .  [Esop's  Fables,  translated  from  Latin  into  the  Japanese  tongue.  Printed  by
permission  of  the  Superiors  at  the  Amakusa  College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus, a.d.  1593]-

At  the  back  of  this  title  is  an  "  Address  to  the  Reader,"  followed  at  p.  409,  by  "  ESOPO  GA
XO  gaino  monogatari  riacu. COREVO  MAXIMO  PLANVDE  toyij  fito  Gregono  cotobayori


NIFONNO

COTOBA TO

Hiftoria  uo  narai  xiran  to
possvrv  fito  no  tame-

M XFVA Nl VAVA a  AG  VET  A-
RCFB|Q,ENO MCNOGATaRI.


FESVS NO COMPANrfiA NO

Collegio  Aiqacufa  nl  voice  Sup«ricre»  ao  go  men.

^io  to  xirt  core  no  fin  ni  qtijmu  mono  n.iri .

Goxuxxcjon M.D.L.XXXXii,


^


i3

Latinni  fonyacu  xerarexi  mono  nari. [Short  life  of  Esop,  translated  into  Latin  from  the  Greek
by  one  Maximus  Planudus.]

At  p.  443  the  fables  themselves,  under  the  title  of  ESOPOGA  TCVCV  rimonogatarino
nuqigaki,  ending  on  p.  502.

List  of  fables  4  pp.,  503-506.

At  p.  507  a  new  heading,  XIXO,  XIXXO  |  nadono  vchiyori  nuqi  idaxi,  |  qincuxvito  nalu
mono  nari.  |  Vocata  foreforeiji  chiifuru  mono  nari.  [A  collection  of  maxims  extracted  from  the
Four  Books,*  and  Seven  Books,  etcetera,  mostly  with  explanations.]

At  p.  554  (number  inserted  in  MS.)  a  new  heading  GOIO  (i.e.  gojo,  the  Five  Cardinal
Virtues),  followed  by  CONO  FEIGtE  MO  |  nogatarito,  Efopono  Fabu  |  lasno  vchino  funbet
xinicu  I  qi  cotobano  yauarage  |  [explanation  of  difficult  words  in  the  Heike  Monogatari  and
Esop's  fables],  22  pp.  unnumbered.  At  the  end  of  the  volume  is  bound  up  a  MS.  Japanese-
Portuguese  vocabulary,  consisting  of  some  26  or  27  pp.  in  double  colunms,  in  very  minute  but
legible  handwriting.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  fables,  identified  as  far  as  possible  with'  the  titles  given  in  the
Latin  version  published  at  Paris  by  Rob.  Stephanus,  1545  : —

Vocameto,  fit^ujino  tatoyeno  coto  (De  lupo  et  agno).

Inuto,  fitguji  no  coto  (De  cane  et  ove).

Inuga  nicuuo  fucunda  coto  (De  cane  gerente  camem).

Xixito,  inuto,  v6cameto,  fi6tono  coto  (De  leone  et  quibusdam  aliis).

Tguruto,  vocameno  coto  (De  lupo  et  grue).

Nezumino  coto  (De  mure  rustico  et  urbano).

Vaxito,  catat^uburino  coto  (De  aquila  et  comicula).

Carafuto,  qitguneno  coto  (De  vulpe  et  corvo).

Yenocoto,  vmano  coto  (De  catulo  et  asino).

Xixito,  nezumino  coto  (De  mure  et  leone).

Tgubameto,  xochono  coto  (De  yrundinibus  et  aliis  avibus).

Efopo  Athenasno  fitobitoni  nobetaru  tatoye  (De  gentibns  rege
carentibus  et  de  ranis  rege  carentibus).

Tobito,  fatono  coto  (De  accipitre  et  golumbis).

Voeameto,  butano  coto  (De  suscula  et  lupo).

Cujacuto,  carafuno  coto  (De  graculo  et  pavone).

Faito,  arino  coto  (De  formica  et  musca).

Xixito,  vmano  coto  (De  leone  et  equo).

Vmato,  robano  coto  (De  equo  et  asello).

Torito,  qedamonono  coto  (De  equis  et  avibus).

Xicano  coto  (De  cervo  et  canibus).

Farato,  xixi  rocconno  coto  (De  ventre,  manibus  et  pedibus).

Pastorto,  vocameno  coto  (De  vulpe  et  venatoribus).


•  The  Four  Books,  ij.  the  Confucian  Analects,  the  Learning  for  Adults,  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean  :uid
Mendos. The  Seven  Books  are  on  the  Military  Art


14

Xemito,  aritono  coto  (De  formicis  et  cicada).

Vocameto,  qitguneno  coto  (Leo  et  lupus).*

Fatoto,  anno  coto  (De  formica  et  columba).

Niuatorito,  guegiono  coto  (Mulier  et  ancillae).

Nininno  chiinno  coto  (De  duobus  amicis  et  urso).

Xuroto,  taqeno  coto  (De  calamo  et  oliva).

Daicaito,  yajinno  coto  (De  pastore  et  man).

Sumitaqito,  xendaciminno  coto  (De  carbonario  et  fullone).

Biojato,  cufuxino  coto  (De  aegroto  et  medico).

Gintono  caifuqino  coto  (De  buccinatore).

Fauato,  cono  coto  (De  puero  quodam  fure,  or  Filius  et  mater).

Niuatorito,  inuno  coto  (De  cane  et  gallo).

Xixivoto,  cumatono  coto  (De  leone  et  urso).

Tonyocuna  monono  coto  (Avarus).

Robato,  qit^uneno  coto  (De  asino  et  vxjlpe).

Vmato,  robatono  coto  (De  asino  et  equo).

Ninin  dodo  xite  yuqu  coto  (Viatores  duo).

Yaguiuto,  vocameno  coto  (Hoedus  et  lupus).

Robato,  xixinocoto  (Asinus  et  leo).

Mitgutgucurino  coto  (Apiarius).

Carafuto,  fatono  coto  (Monedula  et  columbae).

Faito,  xixivono  coto  (Culex  et  leo).

Nufubitoto,  inuno  coto  (Fur  et  canis).

Voita  inuno  coto  (De  cane  venatico  qui  ab  hfero  contemnitur).

Mamuxito,  cogatanano  coto  (Vipera  et  lima).

Yamato,  fomabitono  coto  (De  sylva  et  rustico).

Qitguneto,  itachino  coto  (De  vulpe  esuriente).

Cameto,  vaxino  coto  (testudo  et  aquila).

Q-uiojinno  coto  (De  piscatoribus  quibusdam).

Yaguiiino  co  to,  vocameno  coto  (Hoedus  et  lupus).

Varambeno  fitgujiuo  cota  coto  (De  puerp  oves  pascente).

Vaxito,  carafunocoto  (De  aquila  et  corvo).

Qitguneto,  yaguiunocoto  (Vulpes  et  caper).

Fiacuxfito,  codomono  coto  (De  agricola  et  filiis).

Vonagadorito,  cujacuno  coto  (Pavo  et  monedula).

Xicato,  CO  no  coto  (Hinnuleus).

Catamena  xicano  coto  (Cervus  altero  oculo  captus,  or  simply  cerva).

Xicato,  budono  coto  (Cerva  et  vitis).

Canito,  febino  coto  (Serpens  et  cancer).


*  The  Japanese  version  begins  with  the  story  of  the  manner  in  which  the  wolf  lost  h'3  tail,  and  thea
goes  on  as  in  the  original  l.atin.


J5


Nhoninto,  vozaqeuo  nomu -yottono  coto  (Mulier).

Pastomo  coto  (Agricola  et  canes).

Robato,  qit(;uneno  coto  (Asinus  et  vulpes).

V6cameto,couo  motta  vonnano  coto  (lupus  et  vetula).

Cairuto,  nezumino  coto  (De  mure  et  rana).

Aru  toxiyotta  xixivono  coto  (De  leone  senectute  confecto).

Qitguneto,  vocameno  coto  (De  lupo  et  vulpe).

Rojinno  coto  (Senex  et  mors).

Xixito,  qitguneno  coto  (De  leone  et  \rulpecula).
This  volume,  as  far  as  I  know,  is  not  mentioned  by  any  bibliographer,  and  the  only  preceding
notice  of  it  that  has  come  in  my  way  is  in  a  little-known  periodical  entitled  the  Phwnix,
published  by  the  Rev.  J.  Summers,  formerly  Professor  of  Chinese  at  King's  College,  London.
At  p.  216  of  Vol.  II.  (for  1871-2)  a  brief  notice  of  Part  I,  (the  Feiqe  Monogatari)  is  given,
together  with  an  extract,  containing  as  many  as  thirty  misprints,  besides  numerous  imperfectly
marked  accents.  A  translation  (which  I  conjecture  to  be  from  the  pen  of  my  friend  Professor
A.  Severini  of  Florence)  will  be  found  at  p.  36  of  Vol.  III.  of  the  same  periodical.


PREFACE.

Cono  ychiquanniua  Nipponno  Feiqetoyu
Hiftoriato,  Morales  Sentengasto,  Europano
Efopono  Fabulasuo  Vofu  mono  nari.  Xicareba
corerano  iacuxaua  Getio  nite,  fono  daimocumo
fanomi  vomovomoxicarazaru  gui  narito  miyuruto
iyedomo,  catqiiua  cotoba  qeicono  tame,  catguua
yono  tocuno  tame,  corerano  taguyno  xomotuo
fanni  firaqu  cotoua,  Eccleslianivoite  mezzuraxi-
carazaru  gui  nari.  Cacunogotoqino  qiuameua,
Deusno  gofocouo  cocorozaxi,  fono  Gloriauo
coinegoni  ari.  Xicareba  cono  Collegioni  voite
imamade  fanni  firaqitaru  qioua  corera  no
guini  tguite  fadamevocaruru  fattono  cocoroateni
vojite  xenfacu  xitaru  gotoqu,  cono  ychibuuomo
Superiores  yori  fadametarao  fitobitono  xenfacu-
vomotte  fanni  firaqite  yocaranto  fadameraretaru
mono  nari.  Amacufani  voite  Feuereirono.  23.
nichi  ni  coreuo  xofu.  Toqini  goxuxxeno  nenqi.
^593-

Docujuno  fitoni  taixite  xofu.
Sore  lESVS  no  Companhiano  Padre  Irmam
coqiouo  iktte  sofa  banriuo  touoxito  xitamauazu,
bobotaru  cocaini unauatari  xite  focufa  fetigino


TRANSLATION.

In  this  volume  are  printed  the  Japanese
history  called  Heike  Monogatari,  some
moral  sentences,  and  the  fables  of  Esop
the  European.  The  authors  thereof  being
heathens,  the  subjects  may  appear  not  very
recommendable,  but  it  is  not  at  all  extra-
ordinary for  the  Church  to  publish  such  books,
whether  for  study  or  for  the  benefit  of  the
world  m  general.  Such  a  determination  lies  in
aiming  at  God's  service  and  in  praying  for  his
Glory.  And  just  as  the  books  hitherto  printed
at  this  college  have  been  selected  in  accordance
with  the  rules  laid  dow^n  with  respect  to  such
matters,  so  also  as  respects  this  volume  it  has
been  decided  that  it  would  be  desirable  that
the  persons  whom  the  Superiors  have  deigned
to  fix  on  should  select  and  publish  the  same.
Amakusa,  February  23rd,  a. d.  1593.


ADDRESS TO THE READER.

The  Fathers  and  Brethren  of  the  Society
of  Jesus,  abandoning  their  homes  and  regard-
less of  the  immense  distance  over  sea,  have
crossed  the  wide  ocean  until  they  set  their  feet


i6


Fuioni  atouo  todome,  tenno  minoriuo  firome,
mayoyeru  xujo  uo  michibicanto  xeijeiuo
nuqinde  tamo  coto  coconi  xet  nari.  Yomo
mata  zoacu  fujenno  mi  ni  xite,  ilalacamotte
cUriqi  naxito  iyedomo,  cono  fitobitouo  xi  toxi,
fono  xiriyeni  xitagai,  negaiuo  vonaju  fu.  Coreuo
mononi  fifuru  toqimba,  fai  qini  t^uqu  ni
cotonarazu  :  xi  coconi voite  yoni  ximexi  tamoua,
coxono  cauocuuo  tgucuranto  foffuruniua,  mazzu
fono  vtguuamonouo  tocuxi,  guiojinno  guiorin
uo  yen  to  vomo  toqimba,  xirizoite  amiuo  mtifu-
buni  xiqu  coto  na  xi.  ■  Sareba  varera  cono
cunini  qitatte,  tenno  minoriuo  tocanto  furuniua,
cono  cunino  fiizocu  uo  xiri,  mata  cotobauo  talFu-
beqi  coto  moppara  nari.  Carugayuyeni  cono
riogiono  tafuqeto  narubeqi  lichiiqino  xouo  vaga
cunino  monjini  vt^uxi.xini  chiribameto  fu :  nagi
fono  xouo  yerande  coreuo  ameto :  vara  motoyori
tacumi  afo  xite,  lai  mijicaxi :  chicarano  voyobu
tocoroni  arazaruni  yotte,  xenji  bantai  luto  iye-
domo, Sancta  Obedientiano  muneni  macaxe,
jefiuo  ronjezu,  qimeini  xitago  mono  nari.
Xicareba  cotobauo  manabigaterani  lichijqino
vojiuo  tomurobeqi  xo  core  vouoxito  iyedomoy
nacanzzucu  Yeizano  jiirio,  monfaini  na  tacaqi
Guenyefoinno  xeilacu  feiqemonogatarini  xiquua
arajito  vomoi,  coreuo  yerande  xoja  xento  foffu-
runi  nozonde,  mata  vaga  xi  notamoua:  ima  cono
feiqe  uoba  xomotno  gotoquni  xezu,  rionin
aitaixite  zotanuo  nafuga  gotoqu,  cotobano
tenifauo  xoja  xeyoto  nari :  fono  yuyeuo  tazzu-
nureba,  cagacu  xite  xotat  furuua  t^unenof 6  nari :
nanzo  motouo  tgutomezu  xite  fuyeuo  foranya  ?
caxicoqi  yori  caxicocaranto  naraba,  fono
tedateuo  caye,  ichiguuo  mamorubecarazu.
Carugayuyeni  cotobano  tenifa  nomini  arazu,
cono  cunino  fiizocu  toxite,  ichininni  amatano
na,  quanyno  tonaye  am  coto  uomo  faqubexito
nari  ;  yuyeicantonareba,  core  monono  riuo
midafuni  yotte,  tacocuno  cotobauo  manabanto
luru  xoxinno  fitono  tameniua  voqinaru  fama-
tague nari. Ima cono cotobauo manabanto


on  the  soil  of  the  Japanese  Archipelago,  t-
spread  the  Divine  Law,  and  devote  themselves.
to  leading  erring  mankind  in  the  right  way.
Bad  and  wicked  as  I  am,  and  altogether  with-
out merit,  I  have  taken  these  men  for  my
teachers,  and  following  after  them,  am  filled
with  the  same  longing.  This  may  be  compared
to  a  fly  alighting  on  a  tree.  My  teachers  then
said  to  me,  "  If  a  carpenter  wishes  td  build  a
house  he  must  first  sharpen  his  tools.  If  the
fisherman  wishes  to  catch  fish,  he  had  better
take  time  to  make  his  nets.  In  order  that
coming  to  this  country  we  may  preach  the
Law,  it  is  essential  that  we  should  be  acquainted
with  its  customs  and  speak  the  language.  We
propose,  therefore,  to  copy  out  in  our  letters
and  print  some  Japanese  book  that  may  be  of
assistance  to  us  in  these  two  matters.  Do  you
make  choice  of  a  book  and  prepare  it."  Being
of  slender  skill  and  deficient  in  intelligence,  I
was  greatly  reluctant,  seeing  that  it  was  a  task
beyond  my  strength,  but  complying  with  the
obligation  of  Holy  Obedience,  I  have  obeyed
their  respected  command  without  objecting
further.  There  are  many  books  which,  while
affording  instruction  in  the  language,  investigate
the  past  of  Japan,  but  being  of  opinion  that
among  them  all  there  was  none  like  the  Heike
Monogatari  composed  by  Genye  Hoin,  the
abbot  of  Hiyeizan,  so  celebrated  for  his  literary
gifts,  I  made  choice  of  it,  and  prepared  to  copy
it  out.  Upon  this  my  teachers  said  to  me
again  :  "  Do  not  make  this  Heike  like  a  book,
but  give  it  the  style  of  a  conversation  between
two  persons,  because  it  is  the  rule  that  in  order
to  attain  perfection  one  must  learn  the  rudi-
ments. You  should  not  neglect  the  means  in
order  to  grasp  the  result.  If  you  wish  to  be
very  clever,  change  your  plan,  and  do  not  be
obstinately  unwise.  It  is  not  merely  a  question
of  grammar,  but  you  must  also  I  avoid  giving
several  names  to  the  same  person  and  callin5


17


jita  cuuatat^uru  coto  mattacumotte  betno  guini
arazu :  tattoqi  von  aruji  lefu  Chriftono  Euangel-
liono  minoriuo  firomen  tame  nareba,  cona
xigiianno  tayorito  narazaru  cotouoba  mina-
motte  nozocazuba  arubecarazu  tono  gui  nari.
Yo  xirizoite  gvanuo  cuuoruni,  cono  coto
macotoni  fono  iuare  naqini  arazu  :  ichi-
ichimotte  mina  xica  nari.  Yotte  mig;uino
xiguanno  atedocoroni  voji,  xi  no  meini  xita-
gatte,  azaqeriuo  banminno  xitoni  vqe  cotouo
cayerimizu,  cono  monogatariuo  chicara  po
voyobu  tococouafonjono  cotobauo  tagayezu  xoja
xi,  nuqigaqi  to  naxitaru  mono  nan;  Fuxite  c6,
facuga  no  cunxi  coreuo  yonde,  jo  fuco  xite
faino  mijicaqi  uo  choro  funi  coto  nacare.
Toqin  goxuxxe.  1592  Dexembro.  10.
FucaiijFabian,  tguxxinde  xofu.


him  by  his  title,  as  is  the  Japanese  custom.
For  as  these  only  confuse  the  argument,  they
are  great  stumbling-blocks  to  beginners  in
leaminga  foreign  language.  The  object  of  our
learning  the  language  is  solely  that  we  may
spread  abroad  the  gospel  of  our  Blessed  Lord
Jesus  Christ, andallwordsmust  be  got  rid  of  that
are  of  no  help  in  the  attainment  of  this  desire."
On  applying  my  humble  intelligence  to
the  matter,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  this
view  was  grounded  in  reason,  and  that  they
were  right  in  every  particular.  Consequently,
in  accordance  with  the  object  of  their  desire,
and  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  my
teachers,  while  regardless  of  exposing  myself
to  popular  ridicule,  I  have  written  out  this
Monogatari,  adhering  to  the  language  of  the
original,  as  far  as  my  means  would  allow,  and
have  made  this  abridgment.  I  humbly  beg  that
all  learned  gentlemen  who  may  read  it  will
kindly  abstain  from  mocking  at  my  want  of
intelligence.  10,  December,  1592  a.d.  With
profound  respect,  Fucah  Fabian.


As  specimens  of  the  Fables,  the  following  may  serve  : —

Vocameto,  fitgujino  tatoyeno  coto.

vocamemo, fit^jimo


Aru  cauabatani
mizzuuo  nomuni,  vocameua  cauacammi  y,
fit^ujino  coua  cauafufoni  yta  tocorode,  cano
vocatoe  cono  fit9Ujiuo  curauabayato  vomoi,
fitqujino  fobani  chicazzuite  yuua :  fochiua  najeni
mizzuuo  nigoraite  vaga  cuchiuoba  qegaitazoto
icattareba,fit(jujino  jruua  :  vareua  minafufoniyta-
reba,  najeni  cauano  camiuoba  nigofozoto :
calanete  vocameno  yiiua  :  vonorega  faua  roc-
cat^uqi  mayenimo  mizzuuo  nigoraxitareba
icadeca  fono  tgumiuo  nangiua  nogareozo  ?
fit^ujino  yuua  :  fonotoqiua  mix6  yjenno  coto
nareba,  farani  fono  tqumi  vareni  ataranu :  mata


De  lupo  et  agno*

Lupus  quum  agnum  inuenijfet  errantem,
eum  non  cepit  fortiffima  manu,  fed  caufam
cfuaejiuit  quo  iure  uel  iniuria  ernn  comederet.
Igitur  agno  uerba  huiufmodi  fecit,  Tu  mihi
abuvde  iam  diu  intulifli  iniurias.  Agnus  gemendo
ait,  Quomodo  id  fieri  potuit,  quum  nuperrime
uenerim  ad  lucem  9  Lupus  denuo  ait,  Agrum
mihi  pafcendo  deuaftqfti.  Agnus  inquit  ei,
Quum  dentibus  etiS  caream,  id  facere  -nequiui.
Lupus  Turfum  ait.  Ex  meo  quoquefonte  hihifli.
Ei  inquit  agnus,  Quq_  pacta  idfieri  potuit,  quum
aquam  ex  cetate  nondum  biberim .-  fed  lac  matris,
cibus  is"  potus  adhuc  mihi  fit  ?  Lupus  demil  ira


*  The  Latin  versions  are  taken  in  each  case  from  the  same  edition  as  the  list  of  contents.  But  as  the
Japanese  translations  are  by  no  meaas  close  renderings,  it  is  possible  tbat.this  was-not  the  edition  actually
used  in  their  preparation.

3


i8


vocameyon  yuua  :  nangi  mata  miganoyamano
cufauo  curota  ;  coremata  giubon  nareba,  najeni
nogalozo  ?  fit^uji  cotayete  yuua  ;  vareua  mada
toxinimo  taranu  jacufaide  gozareba,  cufauo
famucotomo  mada  gozanaito  :  cafanete  vocame
nangiua  najeni  zogon  furuzoto  voqini  icattereba,
fitgujino  yxiua  :  vareua  larani  accouo  mofanu  :
tada  toga  no  nai  iuareuo  mofu  bacari  giato :
fonotoqi  vocame  xoxen  mondoua  muyacu  gia  :
nande  arotomo  mamayo,  jefini  vonoreuoba  vaga
yumexinixozurutoyuta.  Coreuo  nanzotoyuni :
doriuo  fodatenu  acuninni  taixiteua  jenninno
dorito,  fono  fericudarimo  yacu  ni  tatazu  :  tada
qenpei  bacariuo  mochiyozuru  gui  gia.

Xuroto,  taqeho  coto.

Arutoqi  xuro  taqeni  mucote  yiitaua  :  Icani
taqe,  yo  qiqe,  varefodo  yoni  youote  mimonai
monoua  arumajij :  vazzucano  cajenimo  vofore
vononoite,  nabiqu  bacari  gia  :  vareua  fucoximo
cocorrzaxiuo  tauomezu,  fudan  qenagueni  xite
'•ruto  iyeba,  taqeua  cono  cotouo  qiqedomo
(.Tiacoto  nareba)  tocacu  ronzunmi  voyobaide,
feico  :uite  caxicomattaga,  yagate  fonofi  voqina
tqujicajega  fuite  meidoxite  qitaga,  taqeua
motocara  voforeuo  naite  cobeuo  chini  fague  feri-
cud^ittareba,  tqutijugano  voqiagatta :  xicanmi
xuroua  qenjitno  ricono  gotoqu  cocorozaxiuo
cudafazu,  figiuo  fatte  ytauo  nanicaua  corayo;
fanzanni  fuqivotte,  negoreni  natte  fateta.

Xitagocoro.  Tacaburu  monoua  gaixerare,
xitago  monoua  cayette  tauo  xeiteuzo.

Xixito,  inuto,  vocameto,  fiotono  coto.

Cono  xifiqiga  doxin  xite,  fanchiiuo  caqe-
meguru  ni,  qedamono  yppiqi  yuqtyotareba,
curai  coroite,  fono  xifocuuo  yotguni  vaqete
cubaroto  furuni,  xixino  yutaua :  vareua arufodono
qedamonono  v6  nareba,  yeda  fitotguua  voyno


concilus  ait,  Licet  tua  foluere  nequeam  argu-
menta,  cnenare  tamen  opipare  intendo :  agnum-
que  cepit,  ac  ilium  manducauit.

Fahula  Jignifical  quod  apud  improbos  ratio
iSf  ueritas  locum  hand  halent.


De  calamo  et  oliua*
QuiBnam  effet  forlior,  durior,  isf  magis^
refiftens,  canna  isf  oliua  inuicem  contendebant.
Oliua  calamo  humilitatem  obijciebat,  eb  quod
uentis  facile  cederet.  Huic  dicto  ununt
arundo  hand  reddidit  uerhum.  Paulo  poft
turbine  uehementi  afpirans  uentus,  radicitus
euuljit  oliuam,  lotis  uiribusjibi  objiflentem.  At
canna  Jiatibus  fe  inclinans,  falutem  facile  eft
ajjecuta.  Fabula  Jignificat,  quod  potetioribus
Jine  conirouerfia  mos  eft  in  tempore  gerendus.


De  leone  fs*  quibufdam  alijs.
Cum  oue  quibufddmque  aliji  pepigerat  leo
uenationem  fore  communem.  Itur  uenatum.
Capitur  cernus.  Partiuntur.  Singulas  fingulis
partes  tollere  ut  couenerat  incipientibus,  leo
rugijt, Fna inquiens,  pars  mea eft,  quia  fum


V


'  In  the  Japanese  versioo  tie  dialogue  takes  place  between  a  pahn  (the  Ckamaerops  excelsa)  and  the
tamboo.


1


T


^m


19


tocuni  fonayei  :  mata  vare  iqiuoimo  nangirani
fixozuru  monode  naqereba,  fono  ytocubunni
ma  fitoyedaua  vareni  curei  :  mata  iniua  nangira
yori  fayo  vaxirucotoua  denquono  gotoquni  xite
coreuo  todometareba,  fono  xinrobun  ni  ma
fitoyedauoba  vareni  curei :  ainoconi  ma  fitot(juno
yedanimo  teuo  caqeozuru  monoua  funauachi
raga  teqide  arozuruto  yuniyotte,nocorufanbiqino
qedamonoua  chicarani  voyobazu,  mutaini  xixini
vbaitorarete,  fugofugoto  cayetta.  Xitagocoro.
Fitoua  tada  vareni  fitoxij  fitouo  tomonauo  coto
gia  :  foreuo  icanitoyiini  :  yxeino  lacanna  qininuo
tomoni  fureba,  canarazu  fono  tocubunmo,  tano-
ximimo  fono  yxeino  aru  fitoni  vbaitoraruru
monogia.

Faito,  arino  coto.
Aru  fai  ariui  catatte  yiiua :  tgurat<jura
monouo  anzuruni,  xejoni  quafono  imijij  monoto
yuua  funauachi  vareraga  cotode  arozu  :  fuxo
xigocuna  aridomoua  nacanaca  fa  xitatetemo
voyobu  majijzo :  fore  uo  najenitoyuni,  tenxi
xogunni  falaguru  monoto  iyedomo;  mazzu
varera  fono  yjenni  foxijmamani  cii,  xicano-
minarazu  cami  ychinin  yori,  ximo  banminno
zzujouo  fumuni  voforemono,  nantaru  yoi  faqe,
mezzuraxij  facanato  yutemo,  izzureca  vareraga
teuo  caqenuuo  xocufuru  fitono  aru  ?  Izzureno
fitono  caxiraca  vareraga  fumimononi  naranuga
anicato  jima  ftireba,  arino  yuua :  faidonono
voxe  fitot^utoxite  itguuariua  vorinai :  tadaxi
xejo  ni  fata  itaitaua,  faifodo  birona  monoua
vorinai :  teno  voyobi,  chicarano  voyobu  fodoua,
chtibat  xoto  aitacumaruru :  £areba  varerauo
iyaximefaxeraruredomo,  faru  fugui,  natgu  taqete,
aqimo  cure,  fuyuga  qureba  :  tgubafamo  chini
vochi,  chicaramo  tijuqiyumino  fiqitaterareo
tayorimo  note  cogoyete  cabaneuo  faraiaruruua,
mata  yoni  taguymo  nai  asamaxij  guigia :  mo-
nono  cazudeua  naqeredomo,  vareraga  ychimonua
icani  faguexij  fuyutoyiitemo,  qicatni  xemeraruru
curuximimo  naxi :  faru  natqu  miraino  cacugouo


dignijjimus.  Altera  itidem  mtj.  eft,  quia  uirilu.^
prceftantigimus.  Porro  quia  in  capiudo  ceruo
plus  fudauerim,  uendico  tertiam.  Quartam
denique  ni  concefferitis,  actum  eft  de  amicitia.
Socij  hoc  audita,  difcedunt  uacui  isf  taciti,  non
aufi  mutire  contra  leonS.

Morale.  Rara  femperfuit  fdes,  apud  hoc
fecula  rarior  eft :  apud  potentes  55"  eft,  tsf  fuit
femper  rariffima.  Quocirca  fatius  efi  ut  uiuas
cum  pari.  qui  enim  cum  potentiore  uiuit,
necej/'e  habet  fcepe  de  fuo  iure  concedere.  Cum
cequali  eequale  tilt  ins  erit.


De  mufca  i^ formica.
Mufca  altercabatur  cum  formica  fe  nolilem,

illam  ignobilem :  fe  uolitare,  illam  repere :  fe
uerfari  in  tectis  regum,  illam .  cauernis  latere,

fegetem  rodere,aquam  bibere :  fefplendide  epulari
iactitabat,  isi  hcEC  tamen  otio  nancifci. E  regione

formica  fe  non  ignobilem  effe,fed  fuis  natalibus
contentam  :  mufcam  uagam  effe,fe  ftabile,  fapere

formicce  grana  isffiuenla,  quod  mufcce  pajlilli  fs"
uina.  Atque  hcecfe  nonfegni  otio,  at  ftrenua
opera  nancifci.  Porro  formicam  Icetam  ejje  tS*
tutam,  charam  omnibus,  exemplar  denique
laboris:  mufcam  anxiam  cum  periculo  efj'e,  cunctis
infeftam, cunctis inuifam, exemplar denique

fegnitiei:  formicam  hyemis  viemorem,  alimenta
reponere:  mufcam  in  diem  uiuere,  hyeme  aut
efurituram,  aut  certe  morituram.

Morale.  Qui  pergit  ques  uult  dicere,
quce  non  uult  audiet.  Mufca  fi  bene  dixijfet,
bene  audiffet.  Affentior  autem formicce.  Fidetur
enim  optabilior  uita  olfcura  cum  fecuritate,  quam
cum  periculo  fplendida.


fureba,  aqifuyu  ua  yutacani  fiuo  vocuruto  iyeba,
faiua  yjenno  quoguenuo  tachimachi  fiqicayete,
votnevometo  xite  tachifatta.

Xitagocoro.  Tozano  yxeini  vogoru  monoua
yraino  nanguini  t^umazzucozu  :  vareto  miuo
voqini  fomuru  mono  ua  mada  fono  cotobamo
finu  vchini,  menbocuuo  vxino  mono  gia.

Yaguiuno  co  to,  vocameno  coto.
Yaguiuno  faua  cufauo  curaini  noni  izzuru
toqi,  codomoni  iyvoqu  yona  :  cono  anano  touo
vchiyori  yo  togite  iyo :  nanito  focayori  yobi
tataquto  jrutomo,  vaga  coyeto,  mata  conoyoni
tatacazuua,focotnifiraqunatoyute  deta.  Vocame
fauano  noni  deta  fuqiuo  nerote  qite,  fauano
coyeuo  nixete,  fono  touo  tataita.  Yaguiuno
codomo  vchicara  qijte,  coyeua  fauano  coye
naredomo,  tono  tatsniyoua  vocame  zoto  yute
chittomo  aqenanda.


De  hcedo  el  lupo.
Capra  cum  ejjfel  paftum  itura,  hoedum  don^i
concludit,  moneJis  aperire  nemini  dum  redeat  ip/a.
Lupus,  qui  id  procul  audicrat,  poft  matris
difceffum  pulfat  fores,  uoce  caprijfat  iubens
recludi.  Hcedus  dolos  prcefentiens,  Non  aperio,
inquit  :  Nam  etfi  uox  caprijpit,  tamen  equidera
per  rimulas  lupum  uideo.


3.  LIBRARY  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  LEYDEN.

FIDES  NO  DOXI  |  to  xite  P.  F.  Luis  de  Grana-  |  da  amaretaru  xo  no  riacu.  |  Core  no
Companhia  no  Superiores  no  go  faicacu  |  vomotte  Nippon  no  cotoba  ni  vafu.  |  lESVS  NO
COMPANHIA  NO  |  CoUegio  Amacufa  ni  voite  Superiores  no  go  men  |  qio  toxite  core
uo  fan  ni  qizamu  mono  nan.  |  Go  xuxxe  yori  M.D.L.XXXXII.  |  [Epitome  of  a
book  composed  by  Padre  Frei  Luis  de  Granada  as  a  guide  to  faith,  translated  into  the
Japanese  language  by  contrivance  of  the  Superiors  of  the  Society.  Printed  at  the  Amakusa
College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  by  permission  of  the  Superiors,  a.d.  1592]  8vo.  Contents: —
Preface  of  the  translator  3  pp..  Brief  of  Pope  Gregory  XIIL  addressed  to  Padre  Frei  Luis,  4  pp..
Preface  of  the  Author  5  pp.  Then  comes  the  alternative  heading  SHINJINROKU  [Treatise  of
Faith]  619  pp.,  errata  i  p.,  table  of  contents  7  pp.,  and  glossary  24  pp.


FIDES  NO D6xr

to  xitc  P.  F.L-uis  de  Grana-
da amaretant  xo  no  riacu.

Co(euoCo<n{ianh\ino  Siipcdoittfiogpttoca
ToffiMBN^poii  MMnkmi  vaTu*


JESVS  tiO eOM^ANBlA NO
QoUegio  AnuKuIiini  voir  Supcrioits  no  go  men
<yo  toxiB  ooib  00  fin  id  i{lzainu  mono  naot
.  Go  xjxse  yad  M.  D»  U  2(  2S  S  X 1 1.


fiireba,  aqifuvu  ua  jTitacani  fiuo  vociinito  iyeba,
falua  yjenno  quoguenuo  tachimachi  fiqicayetc.
vomevometo  xite  tachilatta.

Xitagocoro.  Tozano  j'xeini  vogoru  monoua
yraino  nanguini  tgumazzucozu  :  vareto  miuo
voqini  lomuru  mono  ua  mada  Ibr.o  cotobamo
finu  vchini,  menbocuuo  vxino  mono  gia.

Yaguiuno  co  to,  vocameno  coto.
Yaguiuno  faua  cufauo  curaini  noni  izzuru
toqi,  codomoni  iyroqu  yona  :  cono  anano  touo
vchiyori  yo  togite  iyo :  nanito  focayori  yobi
tataquto  yutomo,  vaga  coyeto,  mata  conoyoni
tatacazuua,focotnifiraqunatoyute  deta.  Vocame
fauano  noni  deta  fuqiuo  nerote  qite,  fauano
coyeuo  nixete,  Ibno  touo  tataita.  Yaguiuno
codomo  vchicara  qijte,  coyeua  fauano  coye
naredomc,  tone  tatr.riyoua  vocame  zoto  yute
chittomo  aqenanda.


Dc  hcsdo  et  tupo.
Capra  cum  ejjil  paftum  itura,  hcedum  dori.t
concludit,  monens  aperire  neinini  dum  redeat  ipfa.
Lupus,  qui  id  pTocul  audierat,  pqft  malris
difcejfum  pulfat  fores,  voce  caprijfal  iubens
recludi.  Hasdus  dolos  prwfentiens,  Non  aperio,
iiiquit  :  Nam  etfi  uox  caprijfat,  tamen  equidem
per  rimutas  lupum  uideo.


3. LIBRARY  OF  THE UNIVERSITY  OF  LEYDEN.

FIDES  NO  DOXI  |  to  xite  P.  F.  Luis  de  Grana-  |  da  amaretaru  xo  no  riacu.  |  Core  co
Companhia  no  Superiores  no  go  faicacu  |  vomotte  Nippon  no  cotoba  ni  vafu.  |  lESVS  NO
COMPANHIA  NO  i  CoUegio  Amacufa  ni  voite  Superiores  no  go  men  |  qio  toxite  core
uo  fan  ni  qizamu  mono  nari.  |  Go  xuxxe  yori  M.D.L.XXXXII.  |  [Epitome  of  a
book  composed  by  Padre  Frei  Luis  de  Granada  as  a  guide  to  faith,  translated  into  the
Japanese  language  by  contrivance  of  the  Superiors  of  the  Society.  Printed  at  the  Amakusa
College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  by  permission  of  the  Superiors,  a.d.  1592]  8vo.  Contents.- —
Preface  of  the  translator  3  pp.,  Brief  of  Pope  Gregory  XIIL  addressed  to  Padre  Frei  Luis,  4  pp..
Preface  of  the  Author  j  pp.  Then  comes  the  alternative  heading  SHINJINROKU  [Treatise  of
Faith]  619  pp.,  errata  i  p.,  table  of  contents  7  pp.,  and  glossary  24  pp.


FIDES  NO d6xi

to  xitc  P.  F.Luis  dc  Grana^
da  amaretant  xo  no  riacu.

OoRuoCofflptnUino  SapedomttogofiicMi


JESVS  ttO eOM^ANBlA NO
OoUcgio  AiDKuitni  voiit  Superioiet  no  go  mea
iqpo  toxin  ooft  no  fin  id  qjizarnu  mono  nao*
Gosaxxeyad  M.Dt  UiiXSXll.


1


fiireba,  aqifuyn  ua  yutacani  fiuo  vocunito  iyeba,
faiua  yjenno  quoguenuo  tachimachi  fiqicayetc,
vomevometo  xite  tachilatta.

Xitagocoro.  Tozano  yxeini  vogoru  monoua
yraino  nangiiini  tqumazzucozu  :  varoto  miuo
voqini  tomuru  mono  ua  mada  fono  cotobamo
finu  vchini,  menbocuuo  vxino  mono  gia.

Yaguiuno  co  to,  vocameno  coto.
Yaguiuno  faua  cufauo  curaini  noni  izzuru
toql,  codomoni  ip-oqu  yona  :  cono  anano  touo
vchiyori  yo  togite  iyo :  nanito  focayori  yobi
tataquto  yutomo,  vaga  coyeto,  mata  conoyoni
tatacazuua,focotnifiraqunatoyute  deta.  Vocame
fauano  noni  deta  fuqiuo  nerote  qito,  fauano
coyeuo  nixete,  Ibno  touo  tataita.  Yaguiuno
codomo  vcUicara  qijte,  coyeua  fauano  coye
naredomc,  tono  tat-f-iyoua  vocame  zoto  yute
chittomo  aqenanda.


De  hoedo  et  lupo.
Capra  cum  ejit  paftum  itura,  hoedumdon.i
conc/udit,  monens  aperire  nemini  dum  redeat  ipja.
Lupus,  qui  id  prucul  audicrat,  pqft  matTis
d'/ceffiim  pulfat  fores,  uoce  cnprijjat  iulens
recludi.  Hivdus  dulos  prcefentiens,  Non  aperio,
inquit  :  Nam  etji  uox  caprijpit,  tamen  equidem
per  rimulas  lupum  uideo.


3. LIBRARY  OF  THE UNIVERSITY  OF  LEYDEN.

FIDES  NO  DOXI  |  to  xite  P.  F.  Luis  de  Grana-  |  da  amaretaru  xo  no  riacu.  |  Core  no
Companhia  no  Superiores  no  go  faicapu  |  vomotte  Nippon  no  cotoba  ni  vafu.  |  lESVS  NO
COMPANHIA  NO  |  CoUegio  Amacuia  ni  voite  Superiores  no  go  men  |  qio  toxite  core
uo  fan  ni  qizamu  mono  nari.  |  Go  xuxxe  yori  M.D.L.XXXXII.  |  [Epitome  of  a
book  composed  by  Padre  Frei  Luis  de  Granada  as  a  guide  to  faith,  translated  into  the
Japanese  language  by  contrivance  of  the  Superiors  of  the  Society.  Printed  at  the  Amakusa
College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  by  permission  of  the  Superiors,  a.d.  1592]  8vo.  Contents: —
Preface  of  the  translator  .3  pp..  Brief  of  Pope  Gregory  XII!.  addressed  to  Padre  Frei  Luis,  4  pp.,
Preface  of  the  Author  5  pp.  Then  comes  the  alternative  heading  SHINJINROKU  [Treatise  of
Faith]  619  pp.,  errata  i  p.,  table  of  contents  7  pp.,  and  glossary  24  pp.


1


FIDES  NO d6xi

to  xitc  P.  F.  Luis  de  Grana-
da amaretam  xo  no  riacu.

OoceuoCompanhVino  Supedorohogo&iaca
voalotfie^%laD  Mcaoobmi  vafu*


■r* -■'■» — "
JESVS  tfO COM^ANHIA NO
Cioliegio  AmacuTani  voite  Supcnoies  no  go  men
(yo  toxiic  con  ue  fim  m  (jizainu  mono  naot


1


i


T


%


r.


This  is  a  translation  of  "  El  Sumario  de  la  Introduccion  del  Symbolo  de  la  Fe,"  which  is
most  readily  accessible  in  Vol.  XIII.  of  the  Obras  del  Venerable  P.  Maestro  Fr.  Luis  de  Granada  de
laorden  de  Santo  Domingo  .  .  .  Madrid:  PorDon  Antonio  de  Sancna.  Ano  de  M.DCC.LXXXIX.
But  the  edition  used  by  the  translator,  in  default  of  an  earlier  Portuguese  version  than  that
published  at  Lisbon  in  1780,  must  have  been  one  of  those  mentioned  by  Antonio,  see  below.

Cotton  in  the  first  series  of  the  Typographical  Gazetteer,  p.  10,  has  the  following  remarks :
"  Chevillier,  in  his  Origine  de  U imprimerie*  notices  a  book  which  Scaliger  had  bequeathed  to  the
university  library  of  Leyden,  written  by  F.  Luis  de  Granada,  and  printed  by  the  Jesuits  in  their
College  at  Amacusa,  in  the  language  of  Japan,  but  in  European  characters,  in  the  year  1582.  The
book  is  set  down,  according  to  Chevillier's  description,  in  page  313  of  the  Leyden  university
library  catalogue  (folio,  1716);  yet  still  I  cannot  help  suspecting  some  mistake  of  a  figure,
an  8  perhaps  for  a  9,  inasmuch  as  in  the  account  of  the  twenty-six  martyrs  crucified  in  Japan,
which  is  to  be  found  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum  (in  the  first  volume  for  February,  page  735),  it  is
distinctly  stated  that  this  college  of  Amacusia  was  not  founded  until  the  year  1591.  I  much
doubt  whether  there  be  a  second  copy  of  the  work  nearer  to  us  than  that  at  Leyden,  by  help
of  which  this  question  might  be  set  at  rest."

What  Chevillier  says  is  this : — "  Enfin,  pour  terminer  la  question,  on  voit  ^  Paris  de  ces
Livres  imprimes  a  la  China  :  le  Roi  en  a  dans  sa  Bibliotheque :  il  y  en  a  meme  d'imprimez  au
Japon.  Scaliger  en  avoit  deux,  dont  on  rapporte  les  titres  au  Catalogue  de  la  Bibliotheque  de
Leyden,  page  250.  Racuyoxu.  Lingua  isf  Charact.  Japan,  in  Kollegio  Jfaponico  Soc.  y.  1598.  in
fol.  &  page  2j8.  Luis  de  Granada  Jides.  no  doxi  to  xite,  edita  a  Pair.  Soc.  J.  in  Collegia
Amacusano  in  yaponia  1582.  Lingua  yaponica  sed  Lit.  Eurap.  in  8°."

In  the  "  Bibliotheca  Hispana  Nova"  of  Nicolaus  Antonius,  at  p.  40  of  Tom.  I.,  there
is  a  reference  to  this  translation.  In  enumerating  the  works  of  Luis  de  Granada  the  author
says : — "  Introduccion  al  symbolo  de  la  Fe  ;  quatuor  primum  partibus,  quibus  postea  addidit
quintam,  qua;  est  antecedentium  compendium,  totidem  &  ipsam  distinctam  partibus.
Salmanticae  apud  heredes  Mathiae  Guafs  1J82.  fol.  Italice  hoc  opus  prodiit  venetiis  ex  ofBcina
Francifci  de  Francifcis  anno  1587.  in  4.  Sed  lego  &  ibidem  editum  fuifle  anno  1590,  apud
Damianum  Zenarum,  L' Epitome,  0  vera,  compendia  dell'  Inirbduttione  del  Symbolo  delta  Fede.
Hanc  in  Latinum  vertit  Joannes  Paulus  Gallutius,  Salodienfis,  atque  edita  eft  Venetiis  1587,
Coloniaeque  apud  Calenium  &  heredes  Quentelii  1589.  Partem  quoque  ejus,  quae  estde  mirandis
naturae  operibus,  integrum  fecit  Gaspar  Manzius,  jurisconsultus,  hujusmodi  incriptionis  opus,.
Philosophia  Christiana,  de  qua  mox  dicimus.  Japonica  lingua,  sed  charactere  Europeo,  edita  est
haec  pars,  cum  titulo  Fides  no  doxi  xite,  a  patribus  societatis  Jesu  in  coUegio  Araucusano  [sic].
Extat  in  bibliotheca  Lugduno-Batava,  ut  ex  ejus  catalogo  constat,  pag.  2J  8,"  which  looks  like  a
mere  blind  following  of  Chevillier.  Temaux-Compans,  in  his  Notice  sur  les  imprimeries  qui
existent  ou  ont  existe  hors  de  I'Europe,  Paris,  A.  Bertrand,  1842  (?),  after  having  taken  credit  to
himself  for  correcting  the  mistakes  of  Cotton,  says  (p.  4) :  "  Amacusa. — Ville  du  Japon,  dans
I'ile  du  meme  nom. C'etait  U  que  les  jesuites  avaieut  etabli  leur  principale  college. On  trouva-


*  Paris,  1694,  p.  277. Chevillier  also  mentions  No.  7,  see  below.


dans  le  catalogue  de  la  bibliotheque  de  Leyde,  I'indication  d'un  ouvrage  du  P.  Louis  de  Grenade,
traduit  en  langue  japonaise,  et  imprime  dans  cette  ville,  en  1582,  en  caracteres  europeens;  mais
je  pense  que  c'est  une  indication  erronee,  car  d'apres  les  Acta  Sanctorum  (vol.  de  fevrier,
p.  ijifiy,  ce  college  ne  fut  fonde  qu^n  1594."  Here  there  seems  to  be  an  error,  namely,  that  in
the  "  Literae  annuse  japonenses  anni  1J91  et  1592,"  there  is-  a  section  entitled  "  Pe  CoUegio
Canzucano,  quod  nunc  est  in  Amacusa,"  so  that  Cotton's  conjecture  of  a  9  for  an  8  was  not  only
more  carefully  made  than  Temaux-Compans',  but  also  turned  out  to  be  actually  correct.

Father  Luis  de  Granada  was  born  1505  and  died  in  1588.  See  Bibliotheca  Hispana  Nova,
tom.  L,  and  Nouvelle  Biographie  Universelle.  He  lies  buried  in  the  church  of  S.  Domingo  at
Lisbon.

The  printing  of  this  work  is  probably  alluded  to  in  the  following  passage  from  the  "  Lettera
annua  del  Giapone  dal  Marzo  del  M.D.XCIH.  sino  al  Marzo  del  XCIV.  In  Milano,  1597,"  at
p.  13: — "  Si  e  compito  anchora  di  ftampare  nella  lingua  Giaponefe  il  fommario  della  Dottrina,
6  Catechilmo  di  Fra  Luigi  di  Granata,  &  fi  fon  ftampate  anchora  altri  Ubri  cofi  per  quelli
ch'  imparano  la  lingua,  come  per  quelli  ch'  imparano  latino,  &  anchora  alcuni  trattati  dmoti  nella
lingua,  con  caratteri  Giaponeii  per  li  Chrilliani."

In  the  collected  edition  of  the  works  of  Luis  de  Granada  there  is  nothing  which  resembles
a  catechism,  properly  so-called,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  word  may  have  been  applied  to  an
elementary  treatise,  such  as  the  "  Sumario  del  Introduccion,"  not  drawn  up  in  the  usual  form
of  question  and  answer.  The  well-known  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent  is  another  instance
of  a  work  declaratory  of  doctrine  in  the  form  of  a  continuous  treatise.

As  specimens  of  the  style  of  translation  the  following  version  of  the  brief  of  Pope
Gregory  XIII.  to  the  author  and  two  or  three  extracts  from  the  body  of  the  work  will  serve  for
comparison  with  the  Latin  original  of  the  former,  and  the  Spanish  text  of  the  latter.

PAPA GREGORIO XIII.  yori  I'adre  Frei  Luis  ye  no  goxo.

Icani  choai  fucaqi  co,  nangi  no  vye  ni  focufai  to,  Apolfolica  Bengam  uo  coinego'coto
afacarazu.  Xicareba  moromoro  no  fito  acu  uo  xirizoite,  jen  ni  fufuman  tameni  toxi  fifaxiqu  yamu
coto  noxite,  faguemal'aruru  xinro  uo  vare  itcjumo  canzuru  coto  yonotgune  narazu :  fono  vye  mata
vare  fito  no  Spiritual  locul'ai  to,  Deus  no  Gloria  uo  nego  fodo  no  fitobito  mo  fucaqu  core  uo  yeql
aru  coto  to  yorocobi  ayeri.  Sareba  fonocami  ten  no  minori  uo  toite  fito  uo  michibiqi,  tattoqi
cotouari  uo  come,  fuguretaru  vouoquno  xo  uo  amite,  yo  ni  tgutayerarexi  coto  imamotte  yurucaxe
naxi.  Carugayuyeni  chicaqi  uo  futezu,  touoqi  uo  qirauazu,  chicara  no  voyobu  tocoro  ua  amanecu
fito  uo  vaga  qimi  lefu  Chrifto  ye  michibican  to  cocoro  uo  tijucularuru  coto  imani  yamu  toqi  naxi.
Yo  coco  ni  voite  catijuva  cacunogotoqu  naru  nangi  no  yoqi  xiuaza  to,  catguua  mata  lore  yori
izzuru  yojin  no  tocu  vomotte  yorocobi  uo  nafu  coto  fanafadaxi.  Sareba  nori  uo  firome,  qio  uo
amite,  tattoqi  michi  ni  lulumeraretaru  fodo  no  fito  ua,  Chrifto  no  von  tameni  moqe  no  qimi  nari.
Core  mata  cano  fitobito  no  tameni  ua,  Deus  uo  tanomi  tate  mat^urite  me  xijtaru  mono  ni  ficari
uo  ataye,  xixitaru  fito  uo  yomigayefaruru  yorimo  nauo  fucaqi  vo  nari.  Sareba  nangi  cacunogotoqu
vouoqu  no  fito  uo  michibicaretaru  gotoqu,  imani  tayexezaru  coto  ua,  yo  ni  curacarazu.  Xicareba
cano  voLutri  naqi  quomio  to,  vye  naqi  tanoximi  uo  qiuametaru  ichimei  uo  mixini  coto  to,  mata
tatloqu  oqi  voconai  uo  naxite  chicara  voyobu  fodo,  cono  quafo  imijiqi  coto  uo  toguen  to  naguequ
coto  ua,  tomi  I'acayete,  facanaqi  cono  inochi  uo  fnmochi,  quoin  uo  voquru  coto  yorimo,  farucani


••i^j


thafaritaru  coto  nari.  Macotbni  cono  fuguretaru  faguemi  ni  cocoro  uo  tqucufararu  vomotte
mizzucara  Deus  no  von  maye  ni  iro  iro  lamazama  no  cudocu  no  camuri  uo  totonoye  vocaretari.
Xicaru  toqimba,  ima  made  no  gotoqu  cono  nagueqi  uo  cocoro  yori  faguemafan  to  iyo  iyo  xei  uo
irerarubexi  :  cotofara  conogoro  ua  mata  ataraxiqu  xo  uo  amaruru  no  yoxi  tgutaye  qiqinu.  Ifogui
'  cono  xoia  uo  joju  xite,  toga  no  yamo  uo  vqetaru  fito  no  tameni  focufai,  youaqi  fito  no  tameni-
ua  xeiriqi,  yugon  no.  fito  no  tameni  ua  yorocobi,  Militante,  Triumphante,  nixe  no  Ecclefia  no
tameni  ua  Gloria  to  xite,  yo  ni  firomerarubexi.  Yotte  Roma  no  honji  S.  Marcos  no  Ecclefia  ni
voite  guiojin  no  yubigane  no  xita  yori  core  uo  xofu.  lesu  Chrifto  no  go  xuxxe  yori  xen  gofiacu
fachijii  ichinen  lunho  no  nijui  chinichi. Vaga  Pontificado  no  jujen  yori  ua  ju  ichinen  nari.

Dilecto  filio  Aloifio  Granaten.  ordinis  Praedicatorum  Gregorius  Papa  XIII.

DILECTE  filj  falute  &  Apoftolica  benedictionem.  Diuturnus  atque  afsiduus  labor  tuus  in
hominibus  turn  a  vitijs  deterredis,  tu  ad  vitee  perfections  vocandis,  fuit  Temper  nobis  gratifsimus :
ijs  vero  ipfis  qui  fuae  caeterorumque  falutis  &  Dei  gloriae  defiderio  tenentur,  fructuofifsimus,
iucundifsimufque.  Multas  olim  conciones  habuifti,  libros  prscftanti  doctrina,  &  pietate  refertos
edidifti,  idem  quotidie  facis,  nee  vnquam  ceflas  praesens,  atque  abl'ens  quam  plurimos  potes
Chrifto  acquirere.  Gaudemus  ifto,  turn  aliorum,  tum  tuo  ipfius  tarn  praeftanti  bono,  &  fructu.
Quot  enim  ex  concionibus,  Icriptifque  tuis  profecerunt  (profecifle  autem  permultos,  quotidieque
proficere  certum  eft)  totidem  Chrifto  filios  genuifti,  longeque  illos  maiori  beneficio  affecifti,
quam  ft  caecis  afpectum,  aut  mortuis  a  Deo  vitam  impetraffes  :  Praeftat  enim  multb  fempitemam
illam  lucem,  &  vitam  beatifsimam  (quoad  mortalibus  datum  eft)  nofle,  &  pie  iancteque  viuentem,
ad  earn  afpirare,  qu3m  mortali  hac  vita  &  luce  frui  omni  cum  terrenarum  rerum  affluentia  &
voluptate :  Tibi  vero  ipfi  quammultas  a  Deo  coronas  comparafti,  dum  omni  cum  charitate  in  eo
Audio  verfaris,  quod  conftat  eflTe  longe  maximum.  Perge  igitur,  ut  facis,  in  iftam  curam  toto
pectore  incumbere,  quaeque  habes  inchoata  (habere  enim  te  nonnulla  accepimus)  perficere,  &
proferre  ad  aegrorum  falutem,  debilium  confirmationem,  valentium,  &  robuftorum  laetitiam,
vtriufque  tum  militatis,  tum  triumphantis  Ecclefiae  gloriam.  Dat.  Romae.  apud  Sanctum  Marcum
fub  annulo  Pilcatoris  Die.  xxj.  lulij.  M.D.LXXXII. Pontificatus  noftri  anno  vndecimo.

Book  I. Chapter  I. §  II.


Grulha  toyii  voqinaru  tori  no  vye  nimo  core
ni  votorazaru  xoco  ari :  cono  tori  ua  tocoro  uo
cayen  tote,  tobi  faru  toqi  ua,  gunjei  no  izzuru
gotoqu  ni,  muragari  atgumarite  tobu  mono
nari :  fa  uo  yafiimen  tameni  mure  yru  toqi  ua,
bandori  uo  fitotgu  fadame  voqu  mono  nari.
Cono  fitot^u  ua  nemuri  uo  fuxegan  ga  tameni
cata  axi  ni  fuuari,  cata  axi  niua  mata  ixi  uo
niguitte  iru  mono  nari  :  moxi  madoromu  ni
▼oiteua,  votguru  ixi  no  voto  ni  vocafarete,  nemuri
no  famafanga  tame  nari.  Satemo  fuxigui  naru
coto  cana  t


Mas  a  todas  eftas  artes,  y  prouidencias,  excede
la  de  las  gruUas,  que  quando  van  caminando,  y
paran  a  dormir,  tienen  fu  centinela  que  las
vela  con  vna  piedra  en  la  mano,  para  que  ft  fe
durmiere,  defpierte  al  fonido  della.


24


Vuo  uo  xocufuru  tori  no  tei  uo  miru  nimo,
axi  nagaqereba,  cubi  mo  mata  nagaxi :  core
funauachi  iqe  nado  uo  ayomite  mizzu  no  loco
nam  vrocuzzu  uo  tayaliiqu  toranga  tame  nari
to  miyuru  nari.  Mizzu  no  vye  ni  vcamu  gan,
camo  to  ua  axi  no  nari  ua  cai  no  gotoqu  nari  :
fore  vomotte  cai  uo  caqu  yo  ni  xite,  fudan
voyogu  ni  yotte  nari.  Cuchibaxi  ua  firaqu
xite,  vchi  niua  nocoguiri  no  fa  no  yo  nam
mono  fixito  am  nari.  Core  funauachi  nameraca
nam  vuo  uo  torn  ni,  fuberafu  majiqi  tamu  ni
to  miyum  nari.  Corera  no  gui  ua  v  nado  no
vye  ni  aqiraca  ni  miyum  nari.  Camelo  toyu
qedamono  no  fugata  uo  mireba,  taqe  tacacji
ga  yuyeni,  cufa  nado  uo  famu  tameni
nagaqi  cubi  uo  motazumba,  canoniajiqi
niyotte,  taqe  ni  vojitaru  nagaqi  cubi  uo  Deus
yori  ataye  tamo  nari.  Z6  no  xei  ua  vobita-
taxiqi  coto  nari  :  fore  ni  vojite  nagaqi  culii  uo
ataye  tamo  ni  voiteua,  vgoqi  fataraqu  coto
tayafucaru  majiqi  ni  yotte,  cubi  ua  mijicaxi  to
iyedomo,  fono  cauari  ni  mague  yafuqi  nagaqi
fana  uo  ataye  tamo  nari.  Core  uo  te  no  goto-
quni  jiyu  ni  at^uco  mono  nari.  Core  macotoni
banji  ni  tguite  souo  xitam  dogn  to  miyuru  nari.


Las  aues  que  fe  mantlenen  de  pezes  (como  el
cifne,  y  otras  femejantes)  tienen  las  piernas  largas
para  andar  por  las  lagunas,  y  los  cuellos  en  la
misma  proporcion,  para  alcangar  los  pezes  que
andan  en  lo  baxo,  y  los  pies  como  palas  4^
rcmos,  con  que  ellos  reman,  y  nadan ;  y  algunas
con  los  picos  llanos,  y  con  vnos  dentezillos
dentro,  para  retener  el  peze  que  no  fe  les  vaya.
El  Camello  tambien  tieneel  cuello  alto  (porque
tal  tiene  el  cuerpoj  paraque  pueda  Uegar  a  la
tierra  para  pacer.  fY  porque  fuera  cofe  fea,  y
pefada,  fi  el  Elefante  tuuiera  el  pefcuezo
conforme  a  la/  grandeza,  y  proporcio  de
fu  cuerpo,  en  lilgar  de  efto  fe  le  dio  aquella
trompa  flexible,  y  temillofa,  de  la  qual  le  firue
tan  facilmente  como  de  vna  mano  para  comer,
y  beber,  y  para  todo  lo  que  quiere.


Book  II. Chapter  i.


XINIIN  ROCV  QVAN  DAI  NI.

Deus  uo  xinjit  ni  agame  vyamai,  raifai  xi
tatematguru  govo<i^ite  ua  Chriftan  no  go  voqite
nari  to  arauafu  coto.  Fides  ua  futafama  ni  ari
U)  yu  coto.


Sareba  cono  daini  no  qio  ni  ua  Fides  ni  ataru
chojo  no  giogio  uo  arauafu  gui  nareba,  faixo  ni
Fides  ua  nanigoto  zoto  yii  coto  uo  arauafu  beqi
coto  canyo  nari.  Xicareba  Fides  u.i  futafama  ni
ari:  fitotcju  ni  ua  Humana  to  yite,  iito  no  chicara
nite  mono  uo  xinzuru  coto: iina  fiiotcu  ni  na


SEGVNDA  PARTE  DESTE  SVMARIO
EN  EL  QVAL  SE  DECLARA  COMO  LA
verdadera  Fe,  y  Religion,  con  que  Dios  ha  de
fer  honrado,  es  la  que  la  Iglefia  Chriftiana
profeffa.  Primero  Preambulo,  en  que  fe  declara,
que  cofa  fea  Fe,  y  de  dos  maneras  de  Fe.
Capitulo  1.

Por  quanto  en  efta  Quinta  Parte  de  nueftra
Introduccio  del  simbolo  fenaladamente  fe  trata
de  la  verdad,  y  Excelencia  de  nueftra  fanta,  y
verdadera  Fe,  y  de  los  principales  Articulos,  y
fundamentos  della ;  ferii  neceflario  declarar
primero  que  cofa  fea Fe. Para  lo  qual  es  de


25


Diuina  to  yite,  Deus  yori  Anima  ni  ataye  tamo
Natura  no  vye  no  Fides  no  coto :  core  I'una-
aachi  Chriffan  no  Fides  nari.  Humana  Fides
uo  fax!  voqite  Diuina  Fides  no  vye  uo
ronzu  bexi.  Cono  Diuina  Fides  ua  Spiritu
Sancto  yori  vareraga  funbet  ni  cacayacaxi  tamo
Natura  no  vye  no  ficari  nari.  Cono  ficari
ua  Deus  no  goxeiriqi  vomotte  Fides  no  giogio
to,  Deus  no  go  tgugue  no  gui  uoba  rtagai  naqu,
xinji  tatemat^uru  yoni,  naxi  tamo  ficari  nari.
Corera  no  coto  uo  xinzuru  coto  ua  mono  uo
mini  yorimo,  nauonauo  taxica  naru  coto  nari.
Sono  yuyeaa,  Charidade  toyu  jen  ua  Deus  uo
mi  tateiuatgurane  domo,  gotaixet  ni  zonji
tatemat^uru  coto  uo  fufume,  cono  michi  ni
Anima  uo  catamuquru  gotoqu.  Fides  no  giogio
ua  funbet  ni  voyobi  gataqi  coto  nari  to  iyedomo.
Fides  no  jen  ua  cono  giogio  uo  xinzuru  yoni,
funbet  ni  fufume,  fono  cata  ye  Anima  uo  fiqi
nabiquru  mono  nari.  Cono  xoco  ua,  Martyres
tachi  no  vye  ni  aqiracani  miyuru  nari.  Mar-
tyres  no  vchi  niua  ichimon  futgii  no  fitobito,
foaofoca  toxi  nimo  taranu  vonna,  varambe  mo
rouocarixi  to  iyedomo,  Deus  no  goqidocu
uomo  mizu  xite  cono  taxicanaru  Fide ;  no  jen
nomi  ni  michibicarete,  Deus  no  von  c";^  uo
fitofugi  ni  xinjite  Fides  no  coto  in  tagauan
yori  mo,  mi  uo  funzun  ni  qiraren  coto  r.o  r.-iuo
yerami  tori  tamo  nari.


(abcr,  que  ay  dos  maneras  de  Fe  :  vna  acquifta,
y  }iamana  :  y  otra  infula,  fobrenatural,  y
Diuina,  que  es  la  de  los  Chriftianos.  Y  dexada
i  parte  aquella,  y  tratando  de  la  nueftra,
dezimos :  que  Fc  es  vna  lumbre  fobrenatural,
que  el  Efpiritu  Santo  infunde  en  nueftro  entendi-
miento  (que  los  Teologos  llama  habito  de  la
Fe)  elqual  por  virtud  de  Dios  inclina  nueftro
entendimiento  i  creer  los  Articulos  de  Fe,  y
todo  lo  dem^s  que  Dios  no.s  tiene  reuelado
fus  Efcrituras,  con  mucha  mas  firraeza,  y
certidumbre,  que  lo  que  fe  vS  con  los  ojos,  y
toca  con  las  manos.  Porque  afsi  como  el
habito  de  la  caridad  inclina  nueftra  voluntad  i
amar  a  Dios  fobre  todas  las  cofas,  puefto  cafo
que  no  le  veamos :  afi  el  habito  de  la  Fe,  inclina
nueftro  intendimiento  i  creer  todos  los  Articulos
de  la  Fe,  puefto  cafo  que  con  nueftra  razon  no
lo  cGprehendambs.  Esto  fe  ve  claramete  en  la
I'e  de  los  lantos  Martires,  muchos  de  los  quales
eran  perfonas  fimples,  y  fin  letras  (como  lo
eran  las  mugeres)  las  quales  fin  faber  Teologia,
ni  auer  vifto  milagros,  mouidos  por  efte  habito
rle  la  F6  (que  es  por  efta  liunbre  interior  del
Efpiritu  Santo)  eftauan  tan  certificados  y  tan
firmes  en  el  conocimiento  defta  verdad,  que
dezauan  alar,  y  defpedazar  fus  cames  por  ella.


The  chapters  entitled  in  the  original  "  Relacion  de  Siete  Sacerdotes  que  padecieron  por  a
Fe  de  la  Iglesia  Romana,  el  ano  de  1582  en  Inglaterra,"  and  "  Relacion  del  Padre  Campion  de
laCompaiiia  de  Icsus,  yde  los  companeros  que  con  el  padecieron,"  are  omitted  from  the  Japanese
version,  and  the  whole  of  Book  IV.  is  j^rcatly  ab-idged  in  the  translation.  It  should  be  noted
furthe:  tlial  sheets  Ee  and  Ff  have  been  transposcJ  by  the  binder.


a5


4. BIBLIOTECA  ANGELICA,  ROME.

(IX.  3,  13.)

EMMANUE-  1  LIS  ALVARI  E  SO-  |  CIETATE  lESV  1  DE  INsTITVTIONE
GRAMMATICA  |  LIBRI  TRES.  |  Coniugationibus  accefsit  interpretatio  |  lapponica.  ]  IN
COLLEGIO  AMACV-  |  SENSI  SOCIETATIS  lESV  |  CVM  FACVLTATE  SVPERI-
ORVM.  I  ANNO  M.  D.  XCIIII  |

According  to  the  Diccionario  Bibliographico  Portnguez  of  Innocencio  Francisco  da  Silva,  the
earliest  edition  of  Alvarez's  grammar  is  that  published  at  Lisbon  in  1572.  There  was  another
printed  at  Rome  in  1574  by  Sebaldus  Mayer.

This  volume  of  170  leaves,  including  the  title-page,  numbered  only  on  one  side,  sm.  4to.,  is
on  Japanese  paper,  probably  made  from  gampi  (see  above).  Besides  the  conjugations  in  Latin,
Japanese  and  Portuguese,  it  gives  a  number  of  examples  of  Japanese  sentences  in  illustration  of
the  Latin  rules  of  construction,  the  dialect  of  which  reminds  one  strongly  of  the  kiogen,  or  farces,
of  the  Middle  Ages.  There  are  also  a  few  quotations  from  the  Confucian  Analects,  the  Heike
Monogatari,  and  the  Hiaku  Monogatari.  It  was  bound  in  Japan,  as  appears  from  the  boards
being  made  of  sheets  of  a  printed  vocabulary  pasted  together.  This  is  part  of  the  vocabulary  at
the  end  of  Vol.  II.  of  the  Guia  do  Pecador  (see  below  No.  10).

The  following  are  some  examples  of  the  style  of  Japanese  used  : —


Codono  caxxenni  fannin  bacari  vchijini
itaitato  mofu  fono  vye  xinazumba  yocarozu
monouo.

Quenagueni  naru  yoni  meiarei.

Connichi  vaga  tocoroye  guioyni  caqera-
reyocaxi.

Ego  te  consulem  putem  ?  (Cic.  3  de
Orat.)

The  following  sentences  are  examples  showing  how  to  translate  the  participial  (or  gerundive)
form  by  the  Latin  conjunctive :; —


Aiunt tres obiifse, vtinam  non  obierint
plures.

Cura  vt  valeas.

Rogo  te  ad  me  divertas  hodie,'  1.  caqetareyo
caxito  zonzuru.

Sonatauo  xugodaito  vomouoca  ?


Buxi  ni  natte  alayii  qizzucai  itafu.

Qixoua (aburaide gozatte cayono  cotouo
voxeraruruca  ?

Miua finindeatte,  qixoni  coriocuuo  yeita-
fananda.

Mayeua  fuccoxi  biojadeua  n6te,  niuacani
vazzurote  xinareta.

Buxini  natte,  buxino  yacuni  a;taru  cot'ouo
qeico  itasozu.

The  verb  amo  is  translated  by  Fare  taixetni  vomo.

The  following  is  a  quotation  from  the  Confucian  Analects :  Cunxiniua  mitqu  no  vofore  an  :
tenmeiuo  vofore,  taijinuo  vofore, -xeijinno  cotouo  voforu :— There  are  three  things  of  which  the
superior  man  stands  in  awe.  He  stands  in  awe  of  the  ordinances  of  Heaven.  He  stands  in  awe
of  great  men. He  stands  in  awe  of  the  words  of  sages  (Professor  Legge's  translation).


Ciim  miles  fim,  &c.
Cum  fis  nobilis,  &c.

CQm  eflem  pauper,  &c.

Cilm  antea  nunquJm  aegrotus  fuiflet,  &c.

Cdm,  1.  poftquam  miles  ftiero,  &c.


X^'/st^f


DICTIONARIVM

LATINO  LVSITANICVM.AC

lAPONICV M  EX  AMBRO  SI  ICA  LE«

pini  voluraine  depromptum :  m  quo  omifsis  no-
minibus  proprijs tani  locomm, quamhomi-

tarn  ydc  <iuibufdam<diis mkus  rvfmtis  ,ciw»«  tocabukti
ftgnljicationcs ,  ekgdnr/orej^j  dhertdi  modi  apfonumr:

in  vftmyfc  patiam  laponioe  iuaennitw.qu*  Utino  idiofrati  ope*
ram  iubk/wc  noo  Europeoni/pii  Upoiuairennooanaddifcunt.


IN  AM  A  CVS  A  INCOLLEGIO

lAPONICOSOCIETATIS  lESV

cum  facultate  Superiorum.
ANNOM.  D.  XCV.


»r


5. BODLEIAN LIBRARY.

(Pressmark,  Jap,  e.  3.  Purchased  1829) .

Also  in  the  BIBLIOTHEaUE  DE  L'INSTITUT,  Paris,  and  in  the  LIBRARY  OF  THE
UNIVERSITY  OF  LEYDEN  (860  c  25,  worm-eaten  at  beginning  and  end  of  the
volume,  besides  a  copy  in  the  MARSDEN  LIBRARY  at  King's  College,  London,
an  inferior  copy  slightly  wormed).

DICTIONARIVM  |  LATINO  LVSITANICVM.  AC  |  lAPONICVM  EX  AMBROSII
GALE-  I  pini  volumine  depromptum  :  in  quo  omifsis  no-  |  minibus  proprijs  tam  locorum,
qu4m  homi-  |  num.  ac  quibufdam  alijs  minus  vfttatis,  omnes  vocabulorU  |  fignificationes,
elegantiorefq ;  dicendi  modi  apponuntur :  \  in  vfum,  &  gratiam  laponicae  iuuentutis,  quae  Latino
idiomati  ope-  I  ram  nauat,  nee  non  Europeoru,  qui  laponicii  fermonem  addifcant.  |  IN
AMACVSA  IN  COLLEGIO  |  lAPONICO  SOCIETATIS  IESV  |  cum  facilitate  Superiorum.
I  ANNO  M.  D.  XCV. 410.  on  Japanese  paper.

Title-page.

Ad  lectorem,  a  pp.

Dictionary,  901  pp.

Supplementum,  pp.  902-6.

Errata,  pp.  906-8.

The  copy  in  the  Library  of  the  Institute  has  on  the  title-page  a  stamp  with  the  legend  libl.
s.  germania  pratis,  i.e.  St.  Germain  des  Pres,  and  Langlfe"  name  in  MS.  on  one  of  the  end-papers.
According  to  Cotton  and  other  authorities,  this  copy  was  sold  for  650  francs  at  Langl^'  sale  in  .
1825.

There  is  a  modem  reprint  with  the  following  title  : —

Lexicon  |  latino-iaponicum  |  depromptum  ex  opere  |  cui  titulos  |  Dictionarium  Latino-
lusitanicnm  ac  laponicum,  |  t3rpis  primtmi  mandatum  in  Amacusa  in  Collegio  laponico  |  Societatis
lesu  Anno  Domini  m.d.xcv  |  nunc  denuo  |  emendatum  atque  auctum  |  a  |  Vicario  Apostolico
laponiae  |  Romae  |  typis  B.C.  de  Propaganda  Fide  |  S()cio.  Eq.  Petro  Marietti  Admin.  |  mdccclxx.  |
The  Portuguese  spelling  of  the  Japanese  words  is  carefully  preserved.


jUr  ^/8^f


DICTIONARIVM

LATIN  O  L  V  S  I  T  A  N  I  C  V  M.A  C

lAPONICV M  EX AMBRO  SI ICA  LE#

pini  voluniine depromptum: m  quo  omifsis  no-
minibus  proprijs  cam  locomm ,  quam  homi-
vm  ,<tc  (lutbufdam  alijs minus ^fmtis  ,cn;nes  -cocabulalt
ftgmj{c<ttiones,eleg<inmrc{fiydKendi  modi  apfommir:
in  vfcm^  gratiam  laponicx  niuenniti»,qu«  Latino  idioroati  ope#
ram  xuaxptc  non  Europeori/jui  Uponiaireraaooemaddifcunt.


IN  AM  A  CVS  A  INCOLLEGIO

lAPONICOSOCFETATIS  lESV
cuai  faculcate  Superiorum.

ANNOM.  D.  XCV.


I


I


:'-:


1


»r


-J

8


3


I


I
ii


"i


5. BODLEIAN LIBRARY.

(Pressmark,  Jap.  e.  $.  Purchased  1829)

Also  in  the  BIBLIOTHEQUE  DE  L'INSTITUT,  Paris,  and  in  the  LIBRARY  OF  THE
UNIVERSITY  OF  LEYDEN  (860  c  25,  worm-eaten  at  beginning  and  end  of  the
volume,  besides  a  copy  in  the  MARSDEN  LIBRARY  at  King's  College,  London,
an  inferior  copy  slightly  wormed).

DICTIONARIVM  |  LATINO  LVSITANICVM,  AC  |  lAPONICVM  EX  AMBROSII
CALE-  I  pini  volumine  depromptimi :  in  quo  omifsis  no-  ]  minibus  proprijs  tam  locorum,
quam  homi-  |  num.,  ac  quibufdam  alijs  minus  vfitatis,  omnes  vocabuloru  |  fignificationes,
elegantiorejq ;  dicendi  modi  apponuntur :  \  in  vfum,  &  gratiam  laponicae  iuuentutis,  quae  Latino
idiomati  ope-  I  ram  nauat,  nee  non  Europeoru,  qui  laponicu  fermonem  addifcunt.  |  IN
AMACVSA  IN  COLLEGIO  |  lAPONICO  SOCIETATIS  IESV  |  cum  facultate  Superiorum.
I  ANNO  M.  D.  XCV. 4to.  on  Japanese  paper.

Title-page.

Ad  lectorem,  2  pp.

Dictionlry,  90  x  pp.

Supplementum,  pp.  902-6.

Errata,  pp.  906-8.

The  copy  in  the  Library  of  the  Institute  has  on  the  title-page  a  stamp  with  the  legend  bM.
s.  germania  pratis,  i.e.  St.  Germain  des  Pres,  and  Langles'  name  in  MS.  on  one  of  the  end-papers.
According  to  Cotton  and  other  authorities,  this  copy  was  sold  for  650  francs  at  Langles'  sale  in  .
1825.

There  is  a  modem  reprint  with  the  following  title : —

Lexicon  |  latino-iaponicum  |  depromptura  ex  opere  |  cui  titulus  |  Dictionarium  Latino-
lusitanicum  ac  laponicum,  |  tjrpis  priraum  mandatura  in  Amacusa  in  CoUegio  laponico  |  Societatis
lesu  Anno  Domini  m.d.xcv  |  nunc  denuo  |  emendatum  atque  auctum  |  a  |  Vicario  Apostolico
laponiae  |  Romae  |  typis  S.C.  de  Propaganda  Fide  |  S<Scio.  Eq.  Petro  Marietti  Admin.  |  mdccclxx.  |
The  Portuguese  spelling  of  the  Japanese  words  is  carefully  preserved.


28


6. BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.

(Pressmark  8°.  V.  9.  TH.  BS.) X


COiXTEMPTVS I mundi
gocoxeqiuo manali tatematru- \


jenbu.  I  CORE  YOVOITOI,  lESV  CHJUS-  |  tono
ru  michiuo  voxiyuru  qio.  |  NIPPON  lESVSNO  COM-
PANHIA  ]  no  Collegio  nite  Superiores  no  goguegiuo  |  motte  coreuo  fanni  firaqu  mono  nari.  \
Toqini  gniuxxeno  nenqi,  I59'5. 8vo.

[The  Con'temptus  Mundi  in  one  volume.  This  is  a  book  which  teaches  the  way  to  despise
the  world  and  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  Jesus  Christ.  Printed  by  order  of  the  Superiors  at  the
College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  Japan,  a.d.  1596.]

Title-page.

Preface,  2  pp.

Text,  pp.  3-43 2-

Table  of  Contents,  1 1  pp.

Glossary,  15  pp.

In  the  Lettera  Annua  del  Giappone  dell'  anno  m.d.xcvi.  Scrilta  dal  P.  Luigi  Frois,  al  R.  P.
Claudio  Acquaviva,  Roma,  1599,  at  p.  45,  we  find  the  following  passage: — "In  vna  parte
leparata  dal  Collegio,  come  altra  volte  gli  fi  e  fcritto,  s'e  accommodata  la  Itampa  fi  della  lingua
Latina,  come  Giapponele.  Q.uelV  anno  fi  ftampo  il  Catechilmo  del  Concilio  Tridentino  in
latino,  il  quale  fi  legge  nel  Seminario ;  fi  ftampo  ancora  il  libro  chiamato  Contemptus  mundi  in
lingua  latina,  e  Giapponele,  infieme  con  reflercitij  del  noftro  Padre  Ignatio  latino."

Copies  of  these  editions  of  the  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  and  of  the  Exercitia
Spiritualia  of  Ignatius  Loyola  are  not,  so  far  as  at  present  appears,  extant  in  any  European
library,  but  the  second  one  here  mentioned  seems  without  doubt  to  be  the  Contemptus  Mundi  of
which  there  is  a  copy  in  the  Bodleian.  It  was  believed  by  the  late  M.  Leon  Pages,  on  what
authority  I  know  not,  that  Senhor  Merello,  of  Lisbon,  a  well-known  collector,  possessed  a  copy
of  the  Catechism  here  referred  to,  but  that  gentleman  has  assured  me  that  this  is  not  the  case,
and  that  he  has  never  even  seen  the  edition  in  question.

In  his  "  Bibliographie  Japonaise,"  M.  Pages,  under  No.  59,  has  the  following  entry  : — "Le
Contemptus  Mundi  (Disprezzo  del  mundo)  du  P.  Stella,  imprime  au  Japon  en  latin  et  en
japonais  en  1596."  But  it  seems  pretty  evident  that  he  is  in  error.  It  will  be  observed  that  he
gives  no  place  of  impression,  nor  does  he  mention  any  library  in  which  the  book  is  to  be  found,
as  is  his  practice  in  the  case  of  other  rarities.  It  is  consequently  in  the  highest  degree  probable
that  he  never  saw  a  copy,  and  that  he  made  this  entry  on  the  authority  of  the  "  Lettera  annua  "
which  I  have  already  quoted.  For  his  No.  57  is  "  Exercices  de  S.  Ignace,  en  latin,  imprimesau
Japon  en  1596,"  and  No.  58  is  "  Catechisme  du  Concile  de  Trente,  imprime  en  latin,  en  i59<5,"
and  to  each  of  these  entries  the  note  "  Ann.  de  1596  "  is  appended.  Father  Diego  de  Estella
was  either  a  native  of  Navarre,  or  a  Portuguese  of  Navarrese  parent.'.ge ;  he  lived  long  in
Algarve,  and  among  other  things  wrote  the  "  Libro  de  la  vanidad  del  .mundo"  in  three  parts,
which  was  published  at  Salamanca  in  1574,  and,  translated  into  Italian  by  J.  B.  Peruschi,  was


[A^t^i^-^l


V


CONTEMPT VS

mundi  jcnbu.

COREYOVOITOI,IESVCHRIJ»
ru  rni^o  vtndjyuqid.


^<p^<ym


NIPPON  lESVSNOCOMPANt^III

noColieglo  nite  Sapskaa  no  go^egivo

motte^coreao  fanni  6nqu  mono  nan .


2  3


6. BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.


(I'le'-smark  S".  V.  9.  TH.  BSO -^


CC).\TE.MPT\"S I mundi
'tvt''i!ti(> mannli tatcmatru- \


jcnbu.  I  CORE  VONOITOI,  lESV  CHWS-  |  tono
ru  michiuo  voxiyuru  qio.  |  NIPPON  IES\'SXO  COM-
PAXHIA  I  no  CoUegio  iiite  Suporiores  no  goguegiuo  |  motte  coreuo  fanni  firaqu  mono  nari.  |
Tnq'ini  ^iiTuxxeno  7ieii<]\,  i59'^- 8vo.

[The  Contemptus  Mundi  in  one  volume.  This  is  a  book  which  teaches  the  way  to  despise
the  world  and  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  Jesus  Christ.  Printed  by  order  of  the  Superiors  at  the
College  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  Japan,  a.d.  ijy^.]

Title-page.
• Preface,  2  pp.

Text,  pp.  3-432.

Table  of  Contents,  1 1  pp.

Glossar)',  15  pp.

In  the  Lottera  Annua  del  Giappone  dell'  anno  m.d.xcvi.  Scrifla  dal  P.  Lnigi  Frois,  al  R.  P.
Claudio  Acquaviva,  Roma,  1599,  at  p.  45,  we  find  the  following  passage: — "In  vna  parte
I'^parata  dal  Collegio,  come  altra  volte  gia  li  e  fcritto,  s'e  acconamodata  la  (tampa  fi  della  lingua
Latina,  come  Giapponefe.  Queft'  anno  li  ftampo  !1  Catechil'mo  del  Concilio  Tridcntino  in
latino,  il  quale  fi  legge  nel  Seminario  ■,  fi  ftampo  ancora  il  libro  chiamato  Contemptus  mundi  in
lingua  latina,  e  Giapponefe,  infieme  con  rell'ercitij  del  noftro  Padre  Ignatio  latino."

Copies  of  these  editions  of  the  Catechism  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  and  of  the  Excrcitia
Spiritualia  of  Ignatius  Loyola  are  not,  so  far  as  at  present  appears,  extant  in  any  i^uropean
library,  but  the  second  one  here  mentioned  seems  without  doubt  to  be  the  Contemptus  Mundi  of
w  hich  there  is  a  copy  in  tlio  Bodleian.  It  was  believed  by  the  late  M.  Leon  Pages,  on  what
authority  I  know  not,  that  Senhor  Merello,  of  Lisbon,  a  well-known  collector,  possessed  a  copy
of  the  Catechism  here  referred  to,  but  that  gentleman  has  assured  me  that  this  is  not  the  case,
and  that  he  has  never  even  seen  the  edition  in  question.

In  his  "  Bibliographie  Japonaise,"  M.  Pages,  under  No.  59,  has  the  following  entry : — "I.e
Contemptus  Mundi  (Disprezzo  del  mundo)  du  P.  Stella,  imprime  au  Japon  en  latin  et  en
japonais  en  1596."  But  it  seems  pretty  evident  that  he  is  in  error.  It  will  be  obsen'ed  that  he
gives  no  place  of  impression,  nor  does  he  mention  any  library  in  which  the  book  is  to  be  found,
a.-5  is  his  practice  in  the  case  of  other  rarities.  It  is  consequently  in  tlie  highest  degree  probable
that  he  never  saw  a  copy,  and  that  he  made  this  entry  on  the  authority  of  the  "  Lettera  annua  "
which  I  have  already  quoted.  For  his  No.  jj  is  "  Exercices  de  S.  Ignace,  en  latin,  imprimesau
Japon  on  ijg^>,'  and  No.  jS  is  "  Catechisme  du  Concile  de  Trente,  imprime  en  latin,  en  1596,"
and  to  each  of  these  entries  the  note  "  Ann.  de  1396"  is  appended.  Father  Diego  de  Estella
was  either  a  native  of  Navarre,  or  a  Portuguese  of  Navarre.se  parent.'g'f ;  he  lived  long  in
Algarve,  and  among  other  things  u  rote  the  "  Libro  de  la  \-anidad  del  .mundo"  in  three  parts,
uliich  was  published  at  Salamanca  in 1J74,  and,  translated into  Italian  by  J.  B.  Peruschi,  was


n


'9

I


i


I


CONTEMPTVS

muiidi  jcnbu.

CORE  VOVOITOI,  lESV  CHRIS*

tono  goc6xc(iiuo  mambi  tatemat^y»

ru  inichttio  voxi]V>UHi6.


NiPPOiN  lESVSNOCOMPANlilA

fio  G>1legio  nite  Supxiom  no  gOTuegiuo

motte^coreuo  f^nni  Inqu  mono  nari .


tlM^  ^^ "^  //^^iv^  ^tr^^  , ^zv/.  ^.  /  ^<P.3


29
X

published  at  Florence  in  1585.  This  Italian  version  very  likely  had  the  title  of  "  Disprezzo  del
nuindo."  The  identification  of  this  with  the  book  mentioned  in  the  "  Lettera  Annua  "  vas
consequently  not  unnatural.  Still  it  is  altogether  different  from  the  "  De  imitatione  Christi,"  as
M  Pages  no  doubt  knew.  If  he  had  referred  to  either  Cotton  or  Ternaux-Compans,  and  had
then  taken  the  trouble  to  inspect  the  volume  in  the  Bodleian  which  they  both  mention,  he  would  have
avoided  the  manifest  mistake  in  his  "  Bibliographie."

The  question  is,  how  did  the  work  of  Thomas  a  Kempis,  usually  known  under  the  title  of
De  Imitatione  Christi,  come  to  be  called  "  Contemptus  Mundi  "  by  the  Jesuit  missionaries  in
charge  of  the  press  in  Japan.  From  the  list  of  MSS.  given  at  the  end  of  Kettlewell's  discussion
of  its  authorship,  it  appears  to  have  been  at  one  time  known  in  England  as  "  De  Musica
Ecclesiastica."  Many  of  the  early  printed  copies  are  preceded  by  a  page  on  which  appear  the
headings  of  the  first  chapter  of  each  of  the  four  books  into  which  it  is  usually  divided,  Now
these  headings  are — De  imitatione  Christi  et  de  cuutoniptu  omnium  vanitatum  mundi ;  De  interna
conversatione ;  De  interna  locutione  Christi  ad  aninium  fidelcm,  and  Cum  quanta  reverentia
Christus  sit  suscipiendus. Some  had  no title-page at  all,  but  simply  began : "  Incipit liber

primus  ( )*  de  Imitatione  Christi  et  de  contemptu  omnium  vanitatum  mundi,

capitulum  I.",  which  was  merely  the  heading  of  the  first  chapter,  and  had  usually  at  the  end  a
colophon  running  either  "  Fratris  Thome  de  Kempis  de  imitatione  Christi  et  de  contemptu  mundi
devotum  et  utile  opusculum  finit  feliciter,"  or  "  Johannis  Gerson  cancellarii  parisiensis  de
contemptu  mundi  devotum  et  utile  opusculum  finit.''  The  book  thus  came  to  be  familiarly
known  as  "  Liber  de  imitatione  Christi,"  in  spite  of  the  colophon  (which  was  practically'
equivalent  to  a  title-page),  as  is  indeed  remarked  in  the  prefatory  note  to  the  reputed  editio
princeps,  of  which  the  British  Museum  possesses  two  copies.  "  Incipit  libellus  consolatorius  ad
instructionem  devotorum  Cujus  primum  capitulum  estde  imitatione  Christi  et  contemptu  damni
vanitatimi  mimdi.  Et  quidam  totum  libellum  sic  appellant  scilicet  libellum  de  imitatione  Christi,
sicut  evangelium  Matthei  appellatur  liber  generacionis  lesu  Christi,  Eo  quod  in  primo  capitulo
fit  mentio  de  generacione  Christi  secundum  camem."  Nevertheless  die  colophon  runs :  "  Viri
egregij  Thome  montis  fancte  Agnetis  in  Traiecto  regularis  canonici  libri  de  xpi  imltatide  numero
quatuor  finiunt  feliciter."

We  see  that  the  real  title,  if  one  was  ever  given  to  the  book  by  the  author, himself,  was
neither  De  imitatione  Christi,  nor  Contemptus  mundi.  A  perusal  might,  however,  readily  cause
the  latter  to  be  adopted  instead  of  the  former,  as  at  any  rate  a  more  correct,  though  not  entirely
comprehensive  description  of  the  contents,  and  this,  as  we  have  seen,  was  in  fact  done  in  some
colophons.  It  is  a  probable  conjecture  that  the  Japanese  version  was  prepared  from  one  of  the
editions  w^hich  have  a  colophon  in  this  form.  ^^

Cotton  says  of  the  volume  in  the  Bodleian  :  "Toquinum,  qu.  Tokis,  or  Tokoesi,  a  town  of
the  island  Niphon,  in  Japan  ?  A  book  entitled  Contemptus  Mundi,  in  the  language  of  Japan,
was  printed  here  by  the  Jesuits  in  1596,"  and  Ternaux-Compans  in  his  Notice  sur  les  imprimerics
qui  existent  ou  qui  ont  existe  hors  de  1' Europe,  p.  44,  merely  repeats  this  statement.  It  is,  of
course,  evident  that  Toqini,  instead  of being  the  genitive  case  of a supposed place named

•  Insert  either  "Johannis Gerson  cancellarii  farisiensis,  "  or  "fratris  Thome  de  Kempis  canonici  regularis
ordinis  Sancti  Augustini."


7


J-Vt'


';/-cc-i.


a^  h^  'ZX'i-<<^<>-v« eX, yCv<!>;^(a,/L<:^  g  /tCe  ^ca,^


30


Toquinum,  is  nothing  else  than  the  Japanese  for  "at  the  time,"  or  "when  it  was."  Tokis  or
ToRoesi  was  perl^ps  'suggested  by  Tokitsu  near  Nagasaki,  but  this  place  is  in  the  island  of
Kiushiu,  not  in  the  main  island,  usually  known  to  Europeans  as  Niphon.

Inside  the  cover  there  is  a  MS.  note  to  the  following  effect:  "Liber  dictus  CONTEMPTUS
MUiSTDI,  lingua  Japonica,  imprelTus  Toquini  i^g6.  Ex  dono  viri  Reverendi  ex  India  nuper
reducis,  D.  Johannis  Evans,  S.T.D.  1695,"  from  which  Cotton  got  his  "Toquinum."  On  the
ne,xt  page  we  find  a  MS.  note :  "  Goiuxxe  iray  xengqfiacu  fachiju  gonen  meni  papa  Sixto  yori
Xippriii  710  Companhia  no  padre  combo  ni  yotte  sazzuqetamb  go  curiqi  no  coto.  Tarenitemo  are
cnno  qio  no  vchi  iccagid  uo  yomu  tatigoto  nijunen  no  Indulgencias  uo  comuru  nari.  Beatifsima
Maria  tattomare  tamaye,"  which  means  "merit  granted  by  Pope  Sixtus  in  Anno  Domini  1585,
at  the  earnest  request  of  the  fathers  of  the  society  in  Japan ;  whoever  shall  read  a  single  chapter
of  this  book  shall  on  each  occasion  receive  ten  years'  Indulgences.  Hail  Beatissima  Maria."  It
is,  no  doubt,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  Japanese  convert  who  owned  the  book.

A  comparison  of  this  volume  with  the  "  Dictionarium  latino-lusitanicum  ac  japonicum "
(No.  5)  dated  "  In  Amacusa  in  CoUegio  japonica  societatis  Jesu  anno  1595,"  seems  to  show  that
the  italic  type  used  in  the  preface  of  the  dictionary  is  the  same  as  that  employed  for  the  text  of
the  Contemptus  Mundi,  while  the  roman  type  of  the  former  is  identical  with  that  in  which  the
headings  of  the  chapters  in  the  latter  are  printed.  Further,  the  ornaments,  as  Mr.  W.  H.
Allnutt  has  pointed  out  to  me,  are  the  same  in  both.  It  may  therefore  safely  be  concluded  that
the  Contemptus  Mundi  likewise  issued  from  the  Amakusa  press.


Docviv  NO  Fi-  1  toni  taixite  xofu.
Cono  Contemptus  mundi  lichiiqi  ni  voite
lESVS  no  Companhia  no  Superiores  gofocqini
yotte  Latinno  xofon  yori  taxicani  fonyacu  xi,
qeogo  dodoni  voyode,  jinxiuo  yatiaraguete  motte
xini  chiribamu.  Core  Deusno  michiuo  yuqi,
goxouo  tafucaritaqu  vomo  fitouo  tQumazzucazu,
michibiqu  coto  mottomo  taixet  nam  gui
nareba,  tomo  Copanhiano  xito,  narabini  xezocu
no  tomogarauo  xite  yomi  yafucaraximenga  tame
nari.  Xicaruni  cono  xono  vchini  voite  tocu
fucaqi  coto  vouoxito  iyedomo,  vaqite  tocuuo
raotomentono  xiguanuo  motte  coreuo  docujuxen
fito  izzureno  tocorouo  naritomo  firaqi  miba,
ima  vaga  tameni  canyono  cotouariuo  xirufare-
tarito  vaqimayezaru  coto  arubecarazu.  Xoxen
Deusno  facari  naqi  jenno  minamoto  nite
maximafu  von  vye  yori  cono  tamamonouo
ataye  tamayeba,  quagui  yuyacuno  cocorouo
motte .  cono  xoquanuo  tguneni  motealbbi,
yomiteua  yomi,  icutabimo  yomicayexite,  jenno
raichino  xifanto  auogubeqi  mono  nari.


TO THE READER.

This  Contemptus  Mundi  is  now  impressed
on  paper,  after  having  been  exactly  translated
from  the  Latin  original  at  the  instance  of  the
Superiors  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  Japan,
several  times  revised,  and  its  deeper  meaning
made  easy.  Since  it  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest
concernment  to  guide  without  stumbling  those
who  desire  to  walk  in  God's  way  and  to  obtain
salvation,  the  object  aimed  at  has  been  to
facilitate  its  perusal  to  those  of  the  Society  as
well  as  to  laymen.  And  whereas  this  book
contains  many  things  most  profitable,  those
who  may  read  with  the  desire  of  obtaining
special  profit  thereby,  should  understand  that,
wherever  they  may  open  it,  they  will  find
truths  most  important  to  them  there  written.
Lastly,  as  this  gift  has  been  bestowed  by  God,
who  is  the  fountain  of  infinite  good,  let  this
book  be  constantly  delighted  in  with  a  joyful
and  jubilant  heart,  let  it  be  read  and  read  over
and  over  again,  and  be  revered  as  the  teacher  of
the  path  of  virtue.


31


The  extract  from  Frois'  letter  above  quoted  speaks  of  the  work  as  being  printed  in
Japanese  and  Latin.  This,  however,  is  not  necessarily  to  be  understood  as  meaning  tlmt  the
whole  of  the  Latin  original  was  reproduced,  but  only  certain  important  texts,  as  will  be  seen  from
the  following  specimens.

VON  .\RVn lESV I CHRISTOVO
MANABI  i  tatemal<;uru  qib,  quan  daiichi.
^  Dai ichi. Xecaino mimonaqi cotouo
iyaxime. Von aruji lESV Chnltouo manabi
tateniatc,uru  coto.

l^'On  arujino  notnmauaqu  .  QlVI  SEQVI-
TVR  ME,N(3N  AMBVLAT  LN'TRNEBRIS;
SED  HABEBIT  LVMEN  V1T.E.  [can.  8.
l^areiii:  x't'i  inonoua  yamigiuo  i/ucazu :  tada
jumiono  Jicariuo  motpj  hexitn  nari.  Cnrurnno
yinniuo  nogore,  macotimn  Jicariuo  vi/erito  vomd
VI  voiteua,  Chrijiono  gocoxeqitn,  von  aitaguiuo
manabi  tatematQureto,  1:0110  wicotoLa  uomotte
Ju/ume  tamo  nari.  Xicarutoqinia  Chrijlono
gocoxeqino  cannanuo  vareraga  daiichino  gacu-
monto  fubexi.  Chrijlono  von  voxiyeua  moro-
mnrono  jenninno  voxiyeni  fuguretamayeri  :  Jenno
michini  tachiiri  taran  fitoua  govoxiyeni  comoru
fucaxigui  no  canmiuo  voloyubexi.  Xicaruni
vouoqu  no  Jito  Chrijlono  minoriuo  xiguequ
ch6mofuredomo,focqifucunaqi  cotoua,  Chrijiono
gonaixoni  chigu  xitatemat^uranu  yuye  nari.
Chrijiono  micolobauo  agiuai  fucaqu,  taxxite
funbet  xitatemal^uranto  vomoni  voiteua,  vaga-
minu  guioguiuo  cotogotocu  Chri/ioni  Jituxiqu  xi
lalemalQuranto  naguequ  texi.  Fericudaru  cocoro
laqini  yotte  Trtdadeno  gonaixouo  fumuqi  tate-
matfuru  ni  voiteua,  fono  Trindadeno  tacaqi  von
cotouariuo  ronjitemo  nanno  yeqixo  P  Macoto  ni
cobitaru  cotobaua  fitouo  jennin  nimo,  tadaxiqi
Jilonimo  nafazu,  tada  jenno  guiogui  coj'o  Jit,ouo
Deusni  xitaximaxe  tatematguru  mono  nare.
Contrifdo  loyu  coquaino  cotouariuo  xiru  yorimo,
J'onu  ContrifSouo  cocoroni  voboyuru  cotoua  nauo
conomaxiqi  coto  nari.  Biblia  toyu  tattaqi
qiomono  mocuuo  cotogotocu  foranji,  moromoruno
gacuxono  gouo  minaxiritemo,  Deusno  gvtaixetto,
I'ono  gocoriocu  naqunba,  core  mina  nario  yeqica


DE  IMITATIONS  CHRISTI
LIBER  PRIMUS.

Caput  I.

De  contemptu  omnium  vanitatum  mundi.

Qui  fequitur  me,  non  ambulat  in  tenebris,
fed  habebit  lumen  vitJE.dicit  Dommus.  Hiec  font
v';rha  Chnfti,  quibus  admonemur,  quatenus
vitam  ems  et  mores  imiteniur,  fi  velimus
veraciter  llluminan,  &  ab  omni  caecitate  cordis
liberari.  Summum  igitur  ftudium  noffrum  fit
in  vita  lesu  Chrilli  meditari.  Doctrina  Chnfti
omnes  doctrinas  Sanctorum  praecellit ;  &  qui
Spintuin  Chnfti  haberet,  abfconditum  ibi  manna
inuenirtit.  Sed  contingit,  quod  multi  ex  fre-
quenti  auditu  Euangelii  paruum  defideriura
fentiunt,  quia  fpiritum  Chrifti  non  habet.  Qui
autem  vidt  plene  &  sapide  Chrifti  verba  intelli-
gere,  oportet,  ut  totam  vitam  fuam  illi  Ihideat
conformare.  Quid  prodeft  tjbi  alta  deTrmitate
dilputare,  li  careas  humilitate,  unde  dilpliceas
Trinitati  ?  Vere  alta  verba  no  faciut  fanctum  et
iufl^im,  fed  virtuofa  vita  efficit  Deo  charu.  Opto
magis  fentire  compunctionem,  quam  fcire  eius
definitionem.  Si  teneres  tota  Biblia  memoriter&
omniimiPhilofophoriidicta:  quid  totuin  prodelfet
fine  charitate  Dei  &  gratia  ?  Vanitas  vanitatum,
&  omnia  vanitas,  praeteramare  Deum,  et  illi  foli
feruire.  Ifta  lumma  eft  Ikpientia,  per  contemp-
tum  mundi  tendere  ad  coeleftia  regna.  Vanitas
igitur  eft,  diuitias  perituras  querere,  &  in  illis
Iperare.  Vanitas  quoq ;  eft,  honores  ambire,
&  in  altum  fe  extoUere.  /anitas  eft,  camis
defideria  lequi,  &  illud  deuderare,  vnde  poft-
modii  grauiter  oportet  puniri.  Vanitas  eft,
longam  vita  optare,  &  de  bona  vita  paru  curare.
Vanitas  eft,  praelentem  vitam  folClm  attendere,
&, quap  futura  lunt,  no  praeuidere. Vanitas  eft.


32


aran  ?  Deus  go  iltaiuo  taixetni  vomoi,  Ifucaye
tatematguTu  yori  focaua  mina  mimonagi  cotono
naca  no  mimonaqi  coto  nari.  Cono  youo  itoite,
lenno  von  cunini  cocofrozafu  coto  faijono  chiye
nari.  Cacunogotoqu  am  toqinba,  fuguifaru
fuculocuuo  tazzune  motome,  foreni  tanomiuo
caquTU  cotoua  mimonagi  coto  nari.  Curai,
fomaretto  nozomi  nagueqi,  miuo  tacaburu  cotomo
mata  mimonaqi  coto  nari.  Cotnicuno  Jofsuru  ni
macaxe,  jgo  fanafada  meiuacu  fubeqi  cotouo
nozomuua,  mimonaqi  coto  nari.  Guioguino
tadaxicaran  cotouoba  naguecazuxite,  chSmeiuo
nozomuua,  mimonaqi  coto  nari,  Guenzaino  cotouo
nomi  mopparato  xite,  miraiuo  cacugoxezaru  coto,
mimonaqi  coto  nari.  Saximo  fayaqu  fuguifaru
cotoni  aigiacu  xite,  nagciqi  tanoximino  aru  tocoro
yeifogazaru  coto,  mimonaqi  coto  nari.  OCVLVS
non  vidit,  nee  auris  audiuit,  nee  in  cor  hominis
afcendit,  quae  prseparauit  Deus  ijs,  qui  diligunt
ilium.  I.  Cor.  2.*  Manacoua mirucotoni  acazu,
mimiua  qiqu  cotouo  motte  taxxezuto  iyeru
tattoqi  qiomonno  gouo  tfuneni  vomoiidafubexi.
Xicarutoqinla,  mocujenno  coto  yori  cocorouo
fanaxi,  meni  miyezaru  tocoroni  cocorouo  vt^ufu
yoni,  naguequbexi :  fono  yuyeua  xiqixinno
midarini  nozomu  cotouo  xito  monoua,  fonomino
Cofcienciauo  qegaxi,  Deusno  gocago  naru
Gra<:auo  vxinai  tatematguru  nari.


diligere  quod  crnn  omni  celeritate  tranfit,  &
illuc  no  feftinare,  ubi  fempitemum  gaudinm
manet.  Memeto  illius  frequentur  proverbii :
quia  non  fatiatur  oculus  vifu,  nee  auris  impletur
auditu.  Stude  ergo  cor  tuum  ab  amore  vifi-
bilium  abftrabere,  &  ad  ir.u''^;bUia  trSflerre.
Nam  fequentes  fuam  Ibuf--  i.em  maculant
confcientiam,  et  perdunt  Dei  gratiam.


Dai  ni.
Mina  Jito  x6tocu  monouoxiritaqu  vom&nari:
xicaritoiyedomo Deusno von vofore naqunba,
gacumonuo  t^umitemo,  nan  no  yeqi  zo  P

Dai  rocu.
Fitoto  xite  midarini  mtmouo  nozomu  loqi  ua,
canarazu  xingiu  fauagaxiqu  naru  nari.


Caput  II.
Omnis  homo  naturalitur  fcire  defiderat ;  led
fcientia  fine  timore  Dei,  quid  importat  ?


Cap.  VI.

Quandocunque homo aliquid inordinate
appetit,  ftatim  in  fe  inquietus  fit.


»  What  follows  is  not  a  translation  of  this  text,  but  of  the  verse  quoted  in  the  Latin  version.  The  latter
is  taken  from  Ecclesiastes  i.  8,  thirfrom  1  Cor.  iij  9.  All  the  Latin  copies  I  have  seen  agree  in  having  the
quotation  from  Ecclesiastes.


33


Dainijuichi.
Sucoxinitemo  are,  tocuuo  ye  taqu  vomo  ni
voiteua,  Deusno  von  voforeuo  taixi,  foxijmamam
aru  coto  Tiacare.  Mata  mimcmouji  yorocobiuo
xirizoqi,  roccduo  yoqu  vnfame,  qengoni  mamoru-
hexi.  Miuo  cayerimite  cocorouo  itamaximuru
cntouo  xinareyo:  xicarala  xinjtnuo  molmne  vhexi.
Foxijmamani  coorouoyurufuuo  motte  vxinaitaru
vnuoquno  cojiuoba  miuo  cayerimiru  canaximino
vchinite  mitQuquru  nari.

Quan  dai  ni,  ^  Dai  ichi.
.  .  yonarujino  go  yqu6lo,  vonjtQucu-
rifaua  naixoni  ari:  mala  foconi  voile  gocan-
u6  uo.  naxilomo  nan.  Naixouo  mopparato  furu
tnmngaraun  tfunent  inxm  xitamai,  mut^umaxtqu
tomoni  rotari  tamai,  canni  tayetaru  yurocoliuo
idacaxe  tamai,  jinjin  nam  bujito,arigata/)i  go  co
xetuo  careni  t<;ucuxi  tamo  nan.

Dai  xichi.
fe/ii Chrijlouo  taixetni  vomot  talemalguru
cototn,  Chr\floni taixi.  tatematgurite  vagami  uo
iyaxiviuru,  michiuo  xiru  monoua  daiquajo  nan

Q.uan  dai  Ian,  Dai  jii
Icani  CO  macotovo  quajouo  yetaqito  vom6  ni
voiteua,  vareuo  nangiga  cuqibto  xeyo.

Dai  nijuzichi.
fcant lej'u  ChViJIo  facarinaqi  goqvbnibno
quoyouo  motte  vaga  cocorouo  aqirame,  cocorono
yami  uo  teraxi  tamaye.

Dai  zijufan-

Icant  CO  namtaru  tocoronitemo,  nanitaru
focano  xqfanimo,  icanimo  'xingiiiua  jiyuni  xite
vagamiuo  xitagaye,  banjiuo  vare  yori  xila  ni
voqi,  namtaru  midari  nam  colonimo  xitagaye-
rarezaru  yonifaicdni  naguequbexi
Dai  gojijcu.

Icani  CO  vmaretQuqino  focqito,  Graga  yori
vocoru  cncorotouo  icanimo  faicani  quanzubexi  ■
fono  yuyeua  tagami  voqini  Joy  xite,  aqiracani
miyezaru  ga  yuyeni,  naixoni  quomiduo  vqerare-


Cap.  XXI.

Si  vis  aliquid  profacere,  conferua  te  in  timore

Dei,  et  noli  efle  nimis  liber :  fed  fub  difciplina

cohibe  omnes  fenfus  tuos,  nee  ineptje  te  tradas

laetitije. Da te ad •- .rdis co^p'inctionem.


et inuoiiies c"


vjnctio  enim


multa  bona  reperit,  quae  diffclutio  cito  perdtre
confueuit.


LIBER  II.  Cap.  I.
......  Omnis  gloria  eius  &  decor  ab

intra  eft,  &  ibi  complacet  fibi.  Frequens  illi
vilitatlo  cum  homineiatemo,  dulcis  fcr—.ocinatio,
grata  conlolatio,  multa  pax,  familiaritas  ftupenda
nimis.


Cap.  VII.
Beatus  qui  intelligit  quid  lit  amare  Tefum.
&  contemnere  feipfum  propter  lefum.

LIBER  III.  Cap.  IX.
Fill,  ego  debeo  efle  finis  tuus  fupremus  &
I'ltimus,  fi  vere  defideras  elfe  beatus.

Cap.  XXVII.
Clanfica me,  bone  lefu,  claritate  aeterni
lumiriis, & educ de habitaculn  cordis mei
tenebras  vniuerfas

- Cap.  XXIIl
Fili.adiftuddiligenter  tendere  debes,  vt  in
omni  loco,  actione,  leu  occupatione  externa  lis
interius  liber,  &  tui  jpfius  polens,'&  finJ  omnia
fub  te,  &  tu  nd  fub  eis.

Cap.  LIX

Fill,  diligenter aduerte motus  naturae  &

gratiae,  quia  valde  cotrarie  &  fubtifiter  mouetui\

& vix nifi h. fpirituali & intime illuminato

homine  difcemutur. Omnes quide bonum


34


taruje  no  guioja  yorijocauu  coreuo  vacat^u  riuo
cataqi  coto  vari .  tarcmo  wiiiu  jS  nn  no^uynn.
cotobanimo,xofa'nimo,  naviintcnni  arrjS  uo  connmi
tazzunuTU  mono  nari  ■  cuTugoyvyeni  Jeimu  iruvu
catte  mayocoto  vounxi.

Dai  rocujufan
Icani  CO  tacaqi  coto,  mala  cacuretoru  vago
qenrinnn  fatauo  Tondafuru  coto  nncarf

YO  VO  ITOI,  lESV
Chriltouo  manabuno  qio
Quan  dai  xi.
*[[srattoqi  Euehariftiauo  vqe  tatematqurelo
notamo  Chriftono  vonfuj'umeno  coto.

VON  arujino  notamauaai  :

Venite.  ad  me  omnes,  qui  laboratis,  &  onei-
ati  eftis  :  &  ego  reficiam  vos.  Matt.  Cap  ii.
Panis.quem  egodabo  &c.  loan. cap. 6.  Xlrouo  xi,
vomoniuu  mochitara  monnua  mina  varcm  qitare,
vare  culQurogutexi.  f^arf  alayuheqi  Paoua
vago.  cotnicu  nan,  zecaino  Jitobitono  i/wchino
tame  nan.  Coreua  nandachiga  tameni  tetjino
tern  vatnfaruhi'qi  vaga  riq'ai  nari,  coreuo  torivo-
coftaunn  inqjua  canarazu  vaga  cotni/o  vomoiidaju
tomf  to  cocorin.nful'fxi^  imgn  nicuiio  hucuxi.  vaga
•  h.mo  nomii  "iiirioTta  vnreni  giuri,  varemo  matn
forto  monovi  gtufuten.  l^are  nandachi  ni
iytar'i.  (.of^lnua  Spinfuto,  tchim'''  nari.

Dam'..

leant  jonaruji  von  mino  von  cocoroyoqu
7n.cxinafu  cototo.  von  auarcmi'ii  tanomiuo  caqe
t3.tcmj.tcunte yair.ono mito naru. vare tenno


appetunt,  &  aliquid  boni  in  fuis  dictis  rel
tactis  praetendunt :  ideo  fub  fpecie  bpni  tnulti
faliutur


Fill,  caueas  difputare  de  altis  matenjs  &
occultis  Dei  cudicijs.

DE rMITATK)NE
CHRI.STl LIB nil
LliU;R  aVARTVS.
Oeuoia exhoriaiio ad tanrtani corpon.«)
Chnlti  Communioiiem

Vox  Chrifti.

Venite  ad  me  omnes,  qui  laboratis,  &
onerati  eftis,  &  ego  reficia  vos  Dicit  Doniinus.
Panis  quern  ego  dabo,  caro  mea  eft,  pro  mundi
vita.  Accipite,  &  comedite:  hoc  eft  corpus
meum,  quod'pro  vobis  tradetur.  Hoc  facite  in
meam  commemorationem.  Qui  maducat  car-
nem  meam,  &  bibit  meum  fanguinem,  in  me
manet,  &  ego  in  illo.  Verba  quae  ego  loquutus
I'ura  vobis,  fpintus  &  vita  funt.


Cap.  11.

Super  bonitaie  tua,  &  magna  milencordia
tua.Domme,  confifus,  accedo  aeger  ad  medicum,
&  Saluatorem.


gcme:ii,  Jon  tafuqi::eye  ■mmri  Catemat^ru  nari.

The  foregoing  examples  from  the  Japanese  translation,  when  compared  with  the  correspond-
ing extracts  taken  from  a  printed  text  of  the  sixteenth  century,  sufficiently  prove  that  the  book  is
none  other  tlian  the  famous  work  of  Thomas  a  Kempis.  And  if  need  be,  the  hst  of  contents  in
boiti  could  be  shown  to  be  Identical.  The  translation  is  much  closer  than  in  the  case  of  either
the  SumAno  or  the  Guia  de  Pecadores.


4


.5«1


»^


O


'3


v£  !b


^^


^'


.^ ASQw'


A9Q4. 6i®Gar2r<?iL^'a£>ea^


►j^V^^'^'v^^i^


35


7. BRITISH  MUSEUM.

RACVYOXV.  1  IN  COLLEGIO  lAPO-  |  NICO  SOCIETATIS  |  lESV.  |  CumfacuLtate
Superiorum.  \  ANNO M.D.XCVIII.  |

A  dictionary  of  Chinese  compound  words  (juku-ji),  arranged  according  to  the  iroha  order  of
the  first  component,  the  Japanese  equivalent  (kun)  of  the  second  component' alone  being  given  ;
62  sheets  on  minogami  paper,  followed  by  23  sheets  of  a  dictionary  of  Japanese  words  and  the
corresponding  Chinese  characters,  entitled  iroha  ji  shu  (this  title  is  in  Chinese  cursive  characters),
or  "  Collection  of  characters  in  iroha  order."  Next  comes  a  third  title  (also  in  Chinese
characters),  hyakkan  narabi  ni  tomyo  no  taigai,  or,  "  Official  titles  with  the  corresponding  Chinese
terms."  Then,  also  a  Chinese  title,  Nihon  rokuju  yo  sha.  "the  sixty  and  more  provinces  of
Japan."  Finally  Ko  Gyokuhen,^  "  Littfe  Dictionary,"  the  Chinese  characters  being  mainly
arranged  under  the  radicals,  which  are  first  divided  into  categories,  as  temmov  (celestial
phenomena),  chiri  (terrestrial  principles),  and  so  on,  1 7  sheets.  In  all  62  4-  23  4-  1 7  =:  1 02
sheets.

This  copy  was  purchased  by  me  in  japan,  and  brought  to  England  in  1883.  The  title-page
is  slightly  damaged.

There  is  another  copy  in  the  University  Library  of  Leyden,  concerning  which  Dr.  Serrurier
says  in  a  private  letter : — "  The  Library  number  of  the  book  is  847  B  i.  It  is  in  an  excellent
condition  of  preservation,  a  most  beautiful  copy,  and,  according  to  a  note  inscribed  on  it,  it  has
been  acquired  "ex  legato  Josephi  Scaligeri."  "

The  Earl  of  Crawford  is  tbe  owner  of  a  third  copy


*  Gyoku-ken  {yii-pien)  the  title  ol  a  famous  Chinese  Dictionary,  came  to  be  a  general  name  for  all
aictionaries,  just  a$  Calepinus.  the  name  of  the  author  of  a  Latin  lexicon,  was  at  one  time  used  as  a
common  noun  meanin?  "vocabulary  '


3<S


8. BIBLIOTECA CASANATENSE  AT  ROME.

(Also  known  as  the  Minerva  Library. Pressmark,  g.  I.  9.)

SALVATOR  MUNDI.  [On  the  other  side  of  the  sheet]  CONFESSIONARIVM.  |
IN  COLLEGIO  lAPO  |  NICO  SOCIETATIS  1  lESV.  \  Cum  facultate  Superiorum  |  ANNO
M.  D.  XCVIII.  I  A  small  volume  printed  in  a  mixture  of  cursive  Chinese  characters,  and
hiragana  on  rather  coarse  paper  of  the  kind  known  as  hanshi,  made  from  the  bark  of  the
Broussonetia  papyrifera.  There  are  30  sheets  of  text.  It  is  bound,  or  rather  stitched,  and
covered  in  Japanese  paper.  On  the  inside  of  the  first  cover  is  part  of  the  ten  commandments
in  Japanese,  printed,  as  seems  to  me,  with  movable  kata-kana  tjrpes,  probably  wooden.  On
the  other  end-paper  is  a  portion  of  the  Salve  Regina  in  Japanese.  These  two  fragments  are
from  some  earlier  work  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  identify,  and  I  do  not  know  any  complete
copy  of  it.

The  contents  of  this  book  are  :

Konkisan  ivo  yoku  mosu  yd  to  mata  zensa  ni  hi  wo  okurubeki  gi  wo  oshiyuTu  koto*  or  How
to  make  a  proper  confession  and  to  live  a  good  life,  divided  into  the  following  seven  sections :

Dai  ichi.  Konkisan  no  tokugi  no  koto  (i.  The  advantages  of  confession).

Dai  ni.  Konhisan  wo  mosuleki  kitolito  tamotsu-heki  jojo  (2.  Things  to  be  observed  by  those
who  are  about  to  confess).

Dai  san.  Konshienshiya  wo  tadasu  michi  wo  oshiyuru  koto  (3.  How  to  examine  the
conscience) .

Dai  shi.  Madamentosu]  no  hajime  no  san  knjd  ni  tsuite  tadasubeki  koto  (4.  Examination  as
to  the  first  three  commandments).

Dai  go.  Ai-nokuru  shichi  kajo  no  madamcntosu  no  koto  (5.  The  remaining  seven
commandments) .

Dai  roku.  Shichi  no  morutaru  toga  ni  tsuite  konshienshiya  wo  tadasubeki  jojo  (6.  Rules
for  examining  the  conscience  as  to  the  seven  deadly  sins).

Dai  shichi.  Zerna  ni  hi  wo  okurubeki  tame  ni  ta.iiolsu  tekijdjd  (7.  Rules  to  be  observed  in
order  to  live  a  good  lift).

To  this  succeeds  a  glossary  of  theological  terms  used  in  the  text.  These  are  all  adopted
from  the  Portuguese  or  Latin  languages.  They  are  here  transliterated  according  to  the  system
of  the  Romaji  Kai,  as  nearly  as  possible,  the  Portuguese  or  Latin  equivalents  being  added,  as  the
case  may  be.

Sanchiishima  Chirindnade,  Santissima  Trindade
Deusu  Paatere,  Deos  Padre


•Here,  as  elsewhere,  in  transcribing  from,  a  Japanese  text  printed  in  the  native  character,  I  have
endeavoured  to  conform  to  the  practice  of  the  Romaji  Kai.

t  This  is  a  transcription  of  Mildamentos,  the  mark  over  the  first  a  having  been  somehow  neglected.  It  may,
however,  be  that  the  Japanese  din  the  local  dialect  used  by  the  missionaries  was  pronounced  nd  in  the  body
of  a  word.


37


Deusu  Hirtyo,  Deos  Filho
Deusu  Supiritsu  safiio,  Deos  Espirito  santo
Eukarisiicha,  eucharistia
A/lima,  anima  (Latin)
Hiidesu,  fides  (Latin)
Saserudote,  sacerdote
Kunhtsoru,  confessor
Anjo,  an  JO

Sakaramento,  Sacramento
MoTutaru,  mortal
Beniaru,  venial
Penitenshia,  penitencia
Purugatorio,  purgatorio
Supiritsuaru,  espiritvial
Madamento,  mandament(S~
Ekerejia,  igreja  or  ecclesia
Beyatoli,  beato  -)-  hi  (Japanese,  day)
Kuwarezuma,  quaresma
Bsukiritsuura,  escrituia
yaizo,  juizo
Paraiso,  paraiso
/hheruno,  inferno
Osucha,  hostia
Karisu,  calis
Garasa,  gra^a
Domingo,  domingo
Secunda,  secunda  (feira)
Terusha.  tercia  „

Kwarvta,  quarta „
Kinta,  quinta  „

Seiuta,  sexta  .,

Sabato,  sabbado.
Other  words  of  this  sort  which  appear  in  the  body  of  the  work,  but  are  omitted  from  the

Glossary,  are

Konhisan,  confissao

pashon,  paixao  (Old  Portuguese  paxa)

kurusu,  cruz

orasko,  oratio  (Latin)

sakirirejo,  sacrilegio

ckishipirina,  disciplina

zejun,  jejuai

orutaru,  altar


r


^


38

zencho,  gentio
santo,  santo
miisa,  missa
konchirisan,  contriqao
liruxen,  virgem
poroshimo,  proximo
perusona,  persona  (Latin)
paaterunosuteru,  paternoster
abe  maria,  ave  maria
guToria,  gloria
kontas,  contas
bensan,  ben^ao
finally  a  list  is  given  of  the  Chinese  characters,  with  their  si nico- Japanese  pronunciation
and  Japanese  equivalents.


9. BARBERim  LIBRARY  AT  ROME.

A  volume  printed  on  Japanese  paper  known  as  mino-gami,  sewn  in  Japanese  fashion,
in  a  kincob  cover.  There  is  an  outer  title,  in  Chinese  cliaracters,  on  a  much-worn  slip  of
paper,  which  would  be  read  "  DochiTina"  and  from  other  traces  it  may  be  guessed  that
the  remainder  must  have  been  "  Kirishilan,"  i.e.  Doutrina  Christam.  Inside  the  cover  are
in  MS.  the  words,  "Dotrina  Christiana  fata  a  modo  di  dialogi  fra  il  discepolo  e  in  lingua
Giaponese."  On  the  inner  side  of  the  first  sheet  is  a  copper  engraving  representing
Christ  with  a  globe  on  which  is  planted  a  cross,  surrounded  by  the  legend,  EGO  SVM
VIA  ET  VERITAS  ET  VITA.  By  a  mistake  of  the  binder  tlie  list  of  contents  has  been
placed  at  the  end  of  the  volume;  instead  of  at  the  beginning.  This  volume  is  without  date
or  place,  but  it  is  evidently  earlier  than  No.  1 1,  which  is  a  later  and  somewhat  enlarged  edition  of
it. It  is  printed  in  cursive  Chinese  and  hiragana,  probably  with  movable  types.

Contents :
I.  Dochiriina  (Doctrine).

a.  Kirishitan  no  shiruski  to  nam  tattoki  kurusu  no  koto  (the  blessed  cross  which  is  the  sign
of  a  Christian).

3.  Haaterunosuteru  no  koto  (the  Paternoster).

4.  Abe  Maria  no  koto  (the  Ave  Maria).

5.  Sarube  rejina  no  koto  (the  Salve  Regina).

6.  Keredo  no  koto,  Isuite  Hiidesu  no  aruchigo  no  koto  (the  Creed  and  the  articles  of  faith).

7.  Deusu  no  on  okite  no  to  no  madamento  no  koto  (the  Ten  Commandments  which  are  the
law  of  God).

8  and  9.  On  haha  Santa  ekerejia  no  on  okite  no  koto  (the  Laws  of  Holy  Mother  Church).
10.  Nanatsu  no  morularu  toga  no  koto  (the  Seven  Deadly  Sins).


39


11.  Santa  Ekerejia  no  nanatsu  no  sakaramenlo  no  koto  (the  Seven  Sacraments  of  tlie  Holy
C3iurch).

12.  Kono  koka  kirishitan  ni  ataru  kanyo  nojojo  (other  important  rules  implied  by  the  word
"Christian").

Note. — Hidari  jii  kurusu  no  aruleki  kotoha  7va  Rachin  no  kuchi  to  kokoro-u-teshi  (the  words
below  preceded  by  a  cross  are  to  be  understood  as  belonging  to  the  Latin  language).

This  work  seems  cO  be  an  original  composition,  and  not  a  translation  of  any  existing
catechism,  inasmuch  as  it  is  so  arranged  that  the  questions  are  put  by  the  catechumen  and  the
answers  are  given  by  the  catechist.  At  least,  I  hzvc  not  been  able  to  find  any  catechism  ot
that  period  constructed  on  such  a  model.  In  its  main  lines  it,  however,  follows  the
smaller  catechism  of  Bellarmine,  which  to  this  day  is  reprinted  for  use  among  Roman
Catholics.

The  following  extracts  from  the  two  forms  of  the  Catechism  illustrate  the  preceding
remarks.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  version  in  the  right-hand  column  is  more  detailed  m  one
place,  while  in  others  it  is  better  done.  But  for  the  most  part  the  two  are  identical.  Then,  the
second  uses  the  monograms  for  Deus  and  Jesu  Chrifto,  which  occur  also  in  the  Guia  do  Pecador
(No.  ID  of  this  list).  These  are,  in  all  probability,  an  expedient  to  save  trouble  in  writing  those
Names,  and  it  may  consequently  be  assumed  that  they  are  of  later  date  tlian  the  syllabic  spelling.
While  the  first  questions  are  asked  by  the  Teacher  and  answered  by  the  Catechumen,  this  order,
is  soon  reversed,  and  in  No.  1 1  the  latter  arrangement  prevails  throughout.


Barberini.

DoCHIRINA

T  Kirishitan  to  no  on  okite  ■wa  shinjitsu
no  on  oshie  nareba  Kirishitan  ni  nam  mono  wa
sono  iware  wo  chomon  suru  koto  kanyo  nari
sono  on  okite  no  koto  wo  kikarekeru  ya.

C  »J«  Katekidzumo*  w^o  chomon  shite  dori
no  hikari  wo  komuri  Kirishitan  ni  naru  mono
nari.

T  Fumbetsu  serarekeru  koto  wa  ikan.

C  Fumbetsu  seshi  koto  oki  nari.

T  Sono  mune  kotogotoku  iwaruru  ni
oyobazu  tata  sono  on  fumbetsu  no  hodo  wo
shiru  tame  ni  daiichi  kanyo  no  daimoku  wo
mosareyo.

C  Hitotsu  ni  wa  naki  tokoro  yori
tenchi  wo  arasetamau  go  sakusha  Deusuf
wa  go  ittai  nomi  nite  mashimasu  nari. Kore


*  Catechismo.

t  Written  in  K(7ua.


T  Teacher
C  CatechumcD


Minerva.

DOCTRINA ChRISTAM.

T  Kirishitan  ni  naru  mono  wa  sono  oshie
shinjitsu  kanyo  naru  mune  wo  chomon  suru
koto  moppara  nareba  sono  iware  wo  nanji  yoku
kikuya  inaya.

C  Goseppo  no  omomuki  w^o  yoku
chomon  shite  Deus*  no  on  hikari  wo  komuri
Kirishitan  ni  naritatematsuru  mono  nari.

T  Sono  fumbetsu  wa  ikan.

C  Fumbetsu  seshi  koto  oki  nari.

T  Sono  mune  kotogotoku  iu  ni  oyobazu
tada  fumbetsu  no  hodo  wo  shiru  tameni  daiichi
kanyo  no  daimoku  wo  mosareyo.

C  Hitotsu  ni  wa  ichimotsu  naki  tokoru
ni  tane  nakushite  tenchi  manzo  wo  tsukuri
arasetamai yorodzu  no saku no mono  wo


'  Expressed  by  a  monogram  (Jj

of  3  Chinese  character.


in  the  nature


40


sunawachi  warera  ga  genze  gose  tomo  ni
hakaritamau  on  aruji  nari.  Kono  go  ittai  wo
ogami  tattohi  tatematsurazushite  wa  gosho  no
on  tasuke  ni  adzukaru  koto  sara  ni  nashi  mata
kono  gosho  no  michi  wa  Kirishitan  no  on  okite
nomi  ni  kiwamuru  nari  Sore  ni  yote  Kirishitan
ni  narazumba  gosho  wo  tasukaru  koto
arubekarazu  to  fumbetsu  shinu.


T  N'-ngon  no  koto  woba  nani  to
funibct-'Ji  serarekcru  zo.

C  Ningen  wa  shikishin  bakari  ni  arazu
ha'.^rin  ko'.o  naki  anima  'a'o  molsu  nari.  Kono
ar„;v.a  \vi  shikishin-  ni  inochi  wo  atac  tatoi
ihiiiishin  v/i  tsuchi  hai  to  naru  to  iu  tomo  kono
anima  wa .-."-arj koto  nashi tata  zenaku  ni


oboshimesu  mama ni go shindai nasarura. "
Sono  go  saku  nasaretewa  shozen  mandoku  no
on  minamoto  hakari  naki  on  chie  banji  kanai
tamau  go  jiyu  jizai  no  on  aruji  Deus  go  ittai
mashimasu  koto.

Futatsu  ni  wa  kore  sunawachi  warera  ga
genze  gose  tomo  ni  hakarai  zenaku  no  go
hempo  wo  tadashiku  atae  tamau  on  aruji  nari
Kono  go  ittai  wo  ogami  tattobi  tatematsurazushite
wa  gose  no  on  tasuke  ni  adzukaru  koto  saraiii
nashi.

Mitsu  ni  wa  on  aruji  Deus  wa  Paatere'  to
Hiiriyot  to  Supiritsu  Santot  to  moshi
tatematsurite  Perus6na§  wa  mitsu  nite
mashimasedomo  susutanshiya||  to  mosu  go
shotai  wa  tada  go  ittai  nite  mashimasu  nari.

Yotsu  ni  wa  Deus  Hiiriyo  issai  ningen  no
toga  wo  okuri  tamai  gosho  wo  tasukaru  michi
wo  oshie  tamawan  tame  ni  amakudari  tamai
umanidade^  to  moshite  ware  ra  toShitoshiki
Anima  shikishin**  wo  on  mi  ni  ukeawase
tamai  fufu  no  majiwari  naku  tattoki  Biruzen
Mariyaft  yori  makoto  no  hito  to  mumare  tamai
tsui  ni  kurusutj  ni  kakerare  hito  nite  mashimasu
on  tokoro  wa  shishi  tamau  koto.

Itsutsu  ni  wa  gosho  no  michi  wa
Kirishitan  no  oshie  ni  nomi  kiwamaru  nari
Sore  ni  yote  Kirishitan  ni  narazumba  gosho  wo
tasukaru  koto  arubekarazu  to  fumbetsu  itasu
koto  kore  nari.

T  Ningen  no  koto  woba  nani  to
fumbetsu  scrare  keru  zo.

C  Ningen  wa  shikishin  bakari  ni  arazU
hatsuru  koto  naki  anima  wo  motsu  nari  Kono
anima  wa  shikishin  ni  inochi  wo  atae  tatoi
shikishin  wa  tsuchi  hai  ni  naru  to  iu  tomo  kono
anima  wa  owaru  koto nashi tada zenaku  ni


*  Padre.

;  Espirito  Santo.

:]  Sustancia.
*'  Material  body.
::  Cruz.


t  Filho.
§  Persona.
H  Humanidade.
tt  Virgem  Maria.


41


shitagatte  gosho  no  kuraku  ni  adzukaru  mono
nari.

T  Yoku  fumbetsu  serarctari  »J«
Katekidzumo  no  dangi  no  kotowari  yon  hoka
ni  mo  Kirishitan  no  shirazu  shite  kanawazaru
koto  oki  nari.

C  Sono  gi  wo  uketamawareba  koso  on
kyoke  ni  adzukaritaku  to  zonzuru  nare.

T  Kore  warera  ga  negau  tokoro  nari.
Madzu  Kirishitan  ni  naraniru  koto  wa  ikanaru
hito  no  shiwaza  to  ka  shireru  ya.

C  Deusu  no  garasa*  wo  mote  Kirishitan
ni  naru  nari.

T  Dfusu  no  garasa  wo  mote  to  wa
nanigoto  zo  ya.

C  Sono  gi  wa  komaki  fumbetsu  sezu
negawakuba  oshie  tamae  kashi.

T  Deusu  no  garasa  wo  mote  to  wa  waga
mi  chichi  haha  go  saku  no  mono  no  chikara  ni
arazu  lata  Deusu  no  ►p  go  bondaadet  to  go
jihi  to  mata  on  aruji  Zezu  Kirishito  no  on
kuriki  wo  mote  Kirishitan  ni  naru  koto  nari.

C  Hitobito  Kirishitan  ni  nararuru  toki
wa  nanitaru  kurai  wo  ukeraruru  zo.

T  •}»  HensanJ no koto Deusu no go
yoshi ten no  on  yudzuri  wo  uketatematsuru
mi to naru mono nari Sono yuye  wa tj«
b6chidzumo§  wo  sadzukaru  hitobito  wo  kono
kurai  ni  agetamawan  to  oboshimesu  ni  yote  nari.
C  Kirishitan  ni  arazaru  hito  wa  ikan.
T  »J<  bochidzumo wo sadzukarazaru ni
yote go  yoshi  to  nashi  taniawazu  ten no  on
yudzuri  wo  hanashi  tamau  mono  nari.
C  Kirishitan  to  wa  nanigoto  zo  ya.
T  On  aruji  Zezu  Kirishito  no  on  oshie  wo
shinchu ni Hiidesu|| ni  ukuru nomi narazu
kotoba  wo  mote  mo  arawasu  hito  nari.

C  Nanno  yue  ni  ka  on  aruji  Zezu
Kirishito  no  on  oshie  wo  Hiidesu  ni  uke  kotoba
wo  mote  arawasu  hito  to  wa  iwarekeru  zo.


Graca.

Ben<;am

Fides


t  Bondade.
^  Bautismo


shitagatte  gosho  no  kuraku  ni  adzukaru  mono
nari.

T  Yoku  fumbetsu  seraretari  Katekidzumo
to  iu  shodangi  no  kotowari  yori  hoka  ni  mo
Kirishitan  no  shirazu  shite  kanawazaru  koto
oki  nari.

C  Sono  gi  wo  uketamawareba  koso  on
kyoke  ni  adzukaritaki  to  zonzure.

T  Kore  waga  negau  tokoro  nari
Kirishitan  ni  nararuru  koto  wa  iltanaru  hito
no  shiwaza  to  ka  shireru  ya.

C  Deus  no  garasa  wo  mote  Kirishitan  ni
nararuru  mono  nari.

T  Deus  no  garasa  wo  mote  to  wa
ikanaru  koto  zo  ya.

C  Sono  gi  imada  tsubusa  narazu
negawakuba  oshie  tamae.

T  Deus  no  garasa  to  wa  waga  mi  chichi
haha  go  saku  no  mono  no  chikara  ni  arazu
tada  Deus  no  on  jihi  no  uye  yori  on  aruji  Jesu
Christo*  no  on  kuriki  wo  mote  Kirishitan  ni
naru  koto  nari.

C  Hitobito"  Kirishitan  ni  nararuru  toki
wa  nanitaru  kurai  wo  ukeraruru  zo.

T  Deusy^o  go  yoshi  ten  no  on  yudzuri #7
wo uketatematsuru mi to naru mono nari. L
Sono  yuye  wa  Bochidzumo  no  on  sadzuke  wo
ukuru  hitobito  wo  kono  kurai  ni  agetamawan
to  oboshimesu  ni  yote  nari.

C  Sate  Kirishitan  ni  arazaru  hito  wa  ikan.
T  Bochidzumo  wo  sadzukarazaru  ni  yote
go  yoshi  to  nashi  tamawazu  ten  no  on  )mdzuri
wo  ukemajiki  mono  nari.

C  Kirishitan  to  wa  nanigoto  zo  ya.
T  On  aruji  Jesu  Christo  no  on  oshie
wo  shinchu  yori  Hiidesu  ni  ukuru  nomi  narazu
kotoba  to  mimochi  wo  mote  arawasu  hito  nari.
C  Nanno  yue  ni  ka  on  aruji  Jesu  Christo  no
on  oshie  wo  Hiidesu  ni  uke  kotoba  to  mimochi
wo  mote  arawasu  hito  to  wa  iubeki  zo  ya.

* Represented  by  a  monogram  composed  of  JX"


42


T  Moromoro  noKirishitan  on  arujitJiZezu
Kirishito  no  tattoki  on  koto  wo  shinchu  ni
Hiidesu  ni  ukezu  shite  kanawanu  nomi  narazu
shisuru  to  iu  tomo  kotoba  ni  mo  mimochi  ni
mo  arawasuheki  to  no  kakugo  aru  koto  moppara
nari.

C  Kirishitan  to  iu  wa  nani  wo  kata-
doritaru  na  zo  ya.

T  >J<  Kirishito  wo  katadori  tatematsuru
nari.

C  Kirishito  to  wa  ikanaru  on  aruji  nite
mashimasu  zo.

T  Makoto  no  Deusu  makoto  no  hito  nite
owashima.su  nari.

C  Makoto  no  Deusu  nite  owashimasu
to  wa  nanigoto  zo  ya.

T  Banji  kanai  tamau  Deusu  Haatere  no
makoto  no  <"in  hitorigo  nite  mashimasu  nari.

C  Makoto  no  hito  nite  mashimasu  to  wa
ikan.

T  Tattoki  Biruzen  Domina  Santa  Mariya
no  makcto  no  on  hitorigo  nite  mashimasu  nari.
Sore  ni  yote  Deusu  nite  mashimasu  on  tokoro
wo  ten  ni  oitp  on  haha  wo  mochi  tamawanu
gotoku  hito  nite  mashimasu  on  tokoro  mo  chi
ni  cite  wa  on  chichi  wo  mochi  tamawanu
nari.

C  Nam  ni  yote  ka  Kirishito  to  wa  tonae
tatematsuru  zo.

T  Kirishito  to  wa  tattoki  «Ji  oreyo*  wo
nurare  tamau  to  iu  kokoro  nari  sono  kami  teio
>J«  saserudotet  ►{<  horoheeta^  kono  mitsu  sama
no  hito  tattoki  oreyo  wo  nurare  tamaishi  nari
on  aruji  Zezu  Kirishito  hito  nite  owashimasu  on
tokoro  wa  teio  no  naka  no  teio  saserudote  no
naka  no  saserudote  horoheeta  no  naka  no  horo-
heeta  nite  mashimasu  ni  yote  kudan  no  oreyo
no  kawari  ni  Supiritsu  Santo  no  garasa  wo
michimichite  mochi  tamau  ni  yote  Heato§
to  tonae  tatematsuru  nari.

*  Oleo.  t  Sacerdofe.  J  Pmpheta.

I For Beato It is of  coarse a mistaJse for
Kirishito.


T  Moromoro  no  Kirishitan  on  aruji  Jesu
Christo  no  tattoki  on  koto  wo  kokoro  yori
Hiidesu  ni  ukezu  shite  kanawanu  nomi  narazu
kanyo  naru  toki  wa  shisuru  to  iu  tomo  kotoba
ni  mo  mimochi  ni  mo  arawasuheki  to  no
kakugo  moppara  nari.

C  Kirishitan  to  iuw^a  nani  w^okatadoritaru
na  zo  ya.

T  Christo*  wo  katadori  tatematsuritaru  na
nari.

C  Christo  to  wa  ikanaru  on  aruji  nite
mashimasu  zo  ya.

T  Makoto  no  Deus  makoto  no  hito  nite
mashimasu  nari.

C  Makoto  no  Deus  nite  mashimasu  to
wa  nanigoto  zo  ya

T  Ban)i  kanai  tamau  mi  oya  Deus  no
makoto  no  hitorigo  nite  mashimaseha  nan.

C  Makoto  no  hito  nite  mashimasu  to  wa
ikan.

T  Tattoki  on  haha  Biruzen  Mariya  no
makoto  no  hitorigo  nite  mashimasu  nari  Sore
ni  yote  Deus  nite  mashimasu  on  tokoro  wa  ten
ni  oite  on  haha  wo  mochi  tamawanu  gotoku
hito  nite  mashimasu  on  tokoro  mo  chi  ni  oite  wa
on  chichi  wo  mochi  tamawanu  nari.

C  Nani  ni  yote  ka  Christo  to  wa  tonae
tatematsuru  7.0.

T  Christo  to  wa  tattoki  abura  wo  nurare
tamau  to  iu  tokoro  nari  sono  kami  teio
saserudote  poroheeta  kono  mitsu  sama  no  hito
tattoki  abura  wo  nurare  tamaishi  nari:  On
aruji  Jesu  Christo  hito  nite  owashimasu  on
tokoro  wa  teio  no  ue  no  teio  saserudote  no  ue
no  saserudote  poroheeta  no  ue  no  poroheeta
nite  mashimasu  ni  yote  kudan  no  tattoki  abura
no  kawari  ni  Supiritsu  Santo  no  garasa  wo
michimichite  mochi  tamau  ga  yue  ni  Christo
to  tonae  tatematsuru  nari.

*  Monogram  composed  of  X  and  °.


\  jac)afc2j?t>G«3»£X2tf  eaeX5«;


^V


<i^


jjl^GVIA  DO i^^\ PECADOR.gl.j


c;


4


v.;


■^1


1


,S^


IN  COL  LEG  I O  lA  PON  ICO


50CiEl^Ti6 »ESV.
Otim fmiiix: <.).«ii>  r,j^  &  Supcnonxn.
A N N O i}J9


§55


GVIA  DO  PE
CADOR


4.3


JO BRITISH  MUSEUM.

GVIADOPE  I  CADOR  |  IN  COLLEGIO  lAPONl  |  CO  SOCIETATIS  |  lESV.  \  Cuih
facultate  Ordinarij,  &  Supenoruni.  |  ANNO  M.D.XCIX.  2nd  vol.  GVJA  DO  PECADOR.  |  IN
COLLEGIO  lAPONICO  |  SOCIETATIS  lESV.  |  Cum  facultate  Ordinarij,  &  Superiorum.  |
ANNO  1599.  I

On  the  other  side  of  the  title-sheet  of  Vol  I.  there  is  a  title  in  Japanese,  which  reads  from
right  to  left

Go  shusse  irai  sen  go  hiaku  ku-jvi-ku  nen  (a.d.  1599).

Kiya  to  Hekatoru  Zainin  wo  zen  ni  michibiku  no  gi  nari  (Guia  do  Pecador,  i.e.  guiding  the
wicked  man  into  virtue).

Keicho  yo  nen  shogatsu  gejun  rosai  nari  (engraved  on  wood  third  decade  of  the  first  moon  of
the  4th  year  of  Keicho).

In  Vol.  II.  the  two  titles  are  combined  on  one  page.
Vol I Title- sheet.

List  of  contents,  2  sheets.
Translator's  preface,  i  sheet.
Author's  preface  and  text,  sheets  2-107.

Glossary  of  Chinese  characters  explained  in  Japanese,  1 1  sheets.
Vol.  II.  Title-page  and  translator's  preface,  i  sheet.
List  of  contents,  2  sheets.
Text,  sheets  2-78.

Glossary  of  Chinese  characters  explained in  Japanese, lo  sheets  (second  half  of
this  sheet  wanting  in  the  British  Museum  copy).
The Bibliotheque  Nationale  at  Paris  possesses  a  copy  of  Vol.  II.,  wanting  the  last  three
sheets  of  the  text  and  the  first  sheet  of  the  glossary.

The  Barberini  Library  at  Rome  possesses  a  fragment  of  the  glossary  belonging  to  Vol.  II..
consisting  of  12  sheets,  but  apparently  from  a  later  edition  than  the  British  Museum  copy.

Printed  on  Japanese  paper  known  as  mino-gami  (a  finer  kind  manufactured  from  Brous-
sonetia  bark),  in  cursive  Chinese  characters  and  hiragana. In  addition  to  the  genuine  Chinese

characters,  the  printer  has  used  four  others  of  European  contrivance,  namely  Qj for  Deos,  J^

for  Christo  ^^  for  Jesus  and JC^  for  Jesu  Christo,  as  in  No.  9.

I'his  is,  a  translation  of  the  Guia  de  Pecadores  of  Fr.  Luis  de  Granada,  very  likely  from  the
Salamanca  edition  of  1573,  of  which  the  British  Museum  possesses  a  copy

It  is  referred  to  more  than  once  in  the  printed  Annual  Letters  of  the  Missionaries.  Thus,
at.  p.  14  of  the  Lettera  Annua  di  Giappone  del  M.DC.III,  Scritta  dal  P  Gabriel  de  Matos,
Koma  1605,  "e  nella  Cafa  della  Misericordia  due  volte  la  fettimana  s'e  radunata  la  Compagnia  di
ella,  con  moltif  altri  principal!  di  Nangasachi,  leggedofi  e  dichiarandofi  loro  la  Guida  de  Peccatori.
fiampata  in  carattere  e  lingua  Giapponefe  ;"  and  again  in  the  Tre  lettere  annue  del  Giappone  de
gli  anni  16^03,  1604,  1605  e  parte  del 1606. Mandate  dal  P.  Francel'co  Pafio  .  . Roma  1608,  at

6  ♦


44

p.  165,  "  In  tutto  quel  viaggio  troub  in  vna  terra  del  Regno  di  Micaua,  vn  fol  Chriftiano  Medico
antico,  il  quale  con  hauer  moglie,  e  figliuoli  Gentili,  e  habitare  in  mezo  di  gente  peruerfa,  fi  conferua
nella  puritA  della  Fede,  &  eflatta  offeruanza  de'  Diuini  commandamenti.  Haueua  varij  libri
fpiritua!!,  I:  il  catechifmo,  che  gli  feruiuano  per  aiutare  i  Fedeli  di  quel  Regno,  c  conuincer
i  Gentili  :  Sei  volte  lelTe  la  Guida  de  Peccatori  ftampata  in  lingua  Giapponefe."

'I'hc  japaripse  version  is  to  a  certain  extent  an  abridgment,  for  while  the  Spanish  original
com  •i;is  aitogethcr  '^3  chapters  and  60  sub-sections,  this  has  only  42  chapters  and  45  sub-sections.


11. BIBLIOTECA  -CASANATENSE.

DOCTRIXA  CHRIST  AM.  |  NAGASAQn  EX  OFFICINA  \  Goto  Thome  Soin  typo-
grapki  Societatis  lESt-^.  |  Cum  facultate  Ordinarij,  &  Superionim.  |  Anno  1600.  |  Printed  on
Japanese  p^per  (mino-gami)  in  cursive  Chinese  characters  and  hiragana,  from  the  same  type  as
the  Quia  do  Pecador,  and  stitched  in  Japanese  style.  It  is  apparently  a  new  and  enlarged
edition  of  tUe  Doctrina  Christam  in  the  Barberini  Library,  and  consists  ol  fifty-five  sheets,
including  the  title-page,  on  the  back  of  which  is  a  short  preface.

Contents.

1.  Kirishitan  to  iu  zra  nanigoto  zo  to  iu  koto  (the  meaning  of  "  Christian  ").

2.  Kirishitan  no  shiruski  to  nara  tattuki  kurusu  no  kuto  (the  bletsed  cross  which  is  the
sign  of  a  Cliristiari).

3.  Paateru  nosuteru  no  koto  (the  Paternoster).

4.  Abe  Maria  no  koto  (the  Ave  Maria).

—  Tattoki  Birjtzen  Maria  no  Rozdiro  moshite  hiakugojippen  no  orasho  no  koto  (the  Hundred
and  fifty  prayers  which  consist  in  reciting  the  rosary  of  the  Blessed  V'irr'n  ^J;irT).

—  On  yorokobi  no  kannen  go  kajo  no  koto  (Meditation  on  the  Five  joyful  if-y?teries).

—  On  kanashimi  no  kc.r.cn  go  kajo  no  koto  (Meditation  on  the  Five  sorrowful  mysteries).

—  Gororia  no  kannen  go  kajo  no  koto  (Meditation  on  the  Five  glorious  n.ysteries).

—  Korowa  no  orasho  no  koto  (the  Prayers  of  the  Chaplet  =  Portuguese  "  coroa  ").
J.  Sarube  rejiina  no  koto  (the  Salve  Regina).

6.  Keredn  narahi  ni  hiidesii  nn  aruchigo  no  koto  (the  Creed  and  the  Articles  of  Faith).


'*!


VOCABVLARIO

DA LINGOA DE lAPAM

com  adcclara^ao  em  Pormgufs,  feito  por

ALGVNS PADRES,  E IR-
D E 1 E S V.


COM  LICENCA  DO  ORDINARIO,  ,

^SuperioresemNangafaqui  noColIcgio  dc  la-
pamdacompanhia  deiesvs
ANNO.  M.D.  C  [11.


7- Dcusu  no  on  okilf  to  no  mnnilamcntusn  mi  hatu  (tlic  Ten  Cominandinenls  which  are  ihe  La-.v
of  God).

—  On  okite  nu  mandamenlosu  (the  Law  or  Coniinandnienls).

8.  Tattola  ckfri'jia  nn  ov  okile  no  knla  (the  l,av/s  ol  the  Holy  Church).

9.  Nanntsii  no  mnrutaru  logn  no  kuto  (tlic  Seven  Di-adly  Siii^).

10.  Santa  ekertjia no  nanalsu  nu  sakarunu-nto  no  knto (the  Seven Sacraments  of the Holy
Church).

11.  Kono  huka  Kirishitan  7ii  ataru  kanyo  no  jojO  (other  iniporlant  rules  implied  by  the  word
"  Christian  ").

—  Jihi  no  shosa  (Works  of  Charity).

—  Teyorogiiresu  no  lirutsuudesu  to  iu  mitsu  no  zcn  iiri  (there  are  three  virtues  called  Vntuclfs
thcologaes) .

—  Khni/hiaresu  no  Lirutsuudesu  to  iu  yotsu  nu  zen  ari  (there  are  four  virtues  called  l^irtudfs
Cardinaes).

—  Supiritsu  sanlo  no  donesu  to  moshite  on  atae  wn  nanatsu  ari  (there  are  seven  gifts  called
the  Gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  =  Dons  do  espirito  santci).

benalentsuransa  wayatsu  ari  (there  are  eight  beatitudes  =  Portuguese  '  lemaveitturanfas  ').


'^' I .  <^~  W.V  ^.  i.t'  .'TO <r^  .  ■ - / ' ''^  ■ -^  . ^- . ^ --  — -f 1- .-  z' . ,  ..- ^ ./*,-


12. BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.

(Pressmark,  Jap.  d.  4.)

VOCABVLARIO  \  DA  LINGOA  DE  lAPAM  |  com  adeclaraqao  em  Portugues,  feito
por  I  ALGYXS  PADRES,  E  IR-  \  MAOS  DA  COMPAXHIA  |  DE  [ESV.  |  COM
LICENCA  DO  ORDIXARIO,  |  &  Superiores  em  isar.gnfhqiii  no  Collegio  de  Ja-  |  ?.\M  DA
COMPAXHIA  DE  lESVS.  I  AiXNO  M.D.CIII.  I [410.]

Title-page.

PROLOGO,  alguas  aduertencias neceflarias pera  o  \ib,  &  intelligencia  delte  Vocabulario.

2  pp.

Approua^ao,  signed  Xicolao  dauila,  and  permission  to  print,  signt-d  O  Bifpo  de  lapao,  i  p„
dated  4  Agol'to,  160.;.


VOCABVLARIO

DA LINGOA DE  lAPAM

com  adeclara(;ao  cm  Pormgues,  feito  por

ALGVNS PADRES,  E IR-

M^OS HA COMP  A'KHlJl

D E ! E S V.


COM  LICENCA  DO  ORDINARIO,

^SupcrioresemNangafaqui  noCollcgio  <ic  U-
PAMDACOMPANHIA DEIESVS

ANNO.  M.D.  C  III.


»


45

7.  Deusu  no  on  okite  to  no  mandamentosu  no  koto  (the  Ten  Commandments  which  are  the  Law
of  God).

—  On  okite  no  mandamentosu  (the  Law  or  Commandments).

8.  Tattoki  eierejia  no  on  okite  no  koto  (the  Lav/s  of  the  Holy  Church).

9.  Nanatsu  no  morutaru  toga  no  koto  (the  Seven  Deadly  Sins).

10.  Santa  ekerejia  no  nanatsu  no  sakaramento  no  koto  (the  Seven Sacraments  of the Holy
Church).

11.  Kono  koka  Kirishitan  ni  alaru  kanyo  no  jojo  (other  im.portant  rules  implied  by  the  word
"Christian").

—  yihi  no  shosa  (Works  of  Charity).

—  Teyorogaresu  no  lirutsuudesu  to  iu  mitsu  no  zen  ari  (there  are  three  virtues  called  Virtudes
theologaes).

—  Khrujinaresu  no  birutsuudesu  to  iu  yotsu  no  zen  ari  (there  are  four  virtues  called  Firtudes
Cardinaes).

—  Supiritsu  santo  no  donesu  to  moshite  on  atae  wa  nanatsu  ari  (there  are  seven  gifts  called
the  Gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  =  Dons  do  espirito  santo).

—  benalentsuransa  wa  yatsu  ari  (there  are  eight  beatitudes  =  Portuguese  '  lemaventuranfas).


— iTl -L.  ^.. -t^i^  £\yi^ >-| o ff^~i


^o  (c...;


'  Ccn-^


'^


yv-^, ^ C>J


■^/-Cyti_


-)


12. BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.

(Pressmark,  Jap.  d.  4.)

VOCABVLARIO  |  DA LINGOA  DE lAPAM  |  com  adeclara^ao em Portugues, feito
por I  ALGVNS PADRES, E IR-  \  MA  OS DA COM  PA  NH I A \  DE lESV.  | COM
LICENCA  DO  ORDINARIO,  |  &  Superiores  em  Nangalhqul  no  Collegio  de  /^-  |  PAM  DA.
COMPANHIA  DE  lESVS.  |  ANNO  M.D.CIIL  | [410.]

Title-page.

PROLOGO,  alguas  aduertencias  neceflarias pera  o  vfo,  &  intelligencia  defte  Vocabulario.
2  pp.

Approua9ao,  signed  Nicolao  dauila,  and  permission  to  print,  signed  O  Bifpo  de  lapao,  i  p„
dated  4  Agofto,  1602.


46

Licenca,  signed  Francifco  Pafio,  i  p.,  dated  2  Janeiro,  T603.
Vocabulary,  330  leaves,  numbered  only  on  one  side.

SVPPLEMENTO  DESTE  VO  \  cabulario  impreffo  no  mefmo  CoJIegio  da  Co  |  PANHIA

DE  JESV  COM  \  afolredita  licenqa,  iS*  approuafao.  \  Anno  1604  |

Ac  leitor,  2  pp.

Vocabulary,  leaves  332-402,  numbered  only  on  one  side.

The  Bibliotheque  Nationale  at  Paris  possesses  an  imperfect  copy,  wanting  the  Approva^ao
and  Licenga,  leaves  90,  91,  no.  in,  ij;8,  159,  222,  223,  234,  235,  286,  287,  310,  311,  and  the
whole  of  the  supplement.  This  book  came  from  the  Langles  sale,  and  cost  6^g  francs.
The  Bodleian  copy,  which  is  perfect,  was  bought  in  1829  for  640  francs,  according  to  Cotton.
Of  the  Spanish  translation,  published  at  Manila  in  1630  byTomas  Pinpin  and  lacinto  Magaurlua,
a  copy  has  been  recently  added  to  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum.  There  is  another  copy  of
this  in  the  Bodleian  Library.  The  words  contained  in  the  supplement  have  been  distributed  in
their  proper  places.  A  French  edition,  based  on  the  imperfect  copy  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale,
was  published  in  Paris  in  1S62-8  by  the  late  M.  Leon  Pages.  The  spelling  of  the  Japanese  words
has  been  Frenchified,  without  the  utility  of  the  book  being  thereby  increased  to  any  important
txtent.


75. BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.

(Pressmark, Jap. d. 5.)

ARTE  DA  LINGO  A  DE  lA-  \  PAM  COMPOSTA  PELLO  \  Padre  Mo  Rodriguez
Portugiies  da  Copa-  \  nhia  de  lESV  diuidida  em  tres  |  LIVROS.  \  COM  LICENCA  DO
ORDI-  I  NARIO,  E  SI^PERIORES  EM  \  Nangafaqui  noCollegio  de  lapao  da  |  Companhiade

/E^T  I  Anno.  1604.  I [4to.]
Colophon  :

COM  LICENQA  DO  ORDINARIO, i E SVPERIORES  EM  NANGASAQVI  |  no

CoUegio  de  lapam  da  Companhia  |  de  lESV. Anno  1608.  |

Title-page.

Licence  to  print,  signed  by  Pasio,  1  p.,  approva^am  by  Pero  da  Cruz ;  and  permission  to
print,  signed  O  Bispo  de  lapao,  i  p.

Proemio,  2  pp.

Algvas  advertencias  pera  mayor  intelligencia  do  que  nefta  Arte  le  trata,  4  pp.

Grammar,  239  leaves  numbered  only  on  one  side.

Table  of  contents,  2  pp.


%ARTE "DA  LI  NGOA  "D  E  I  Ar
PAM  COMPOSTAPELLO

'Padre  loao  RoirigueZjPortugues  da  (p^Or

nhia  de  I E  S  V  diuidida  emcres

LIVROS.


COM  LICENgA  DO  ORDI-

NAR/Oy  E  SFPER/ORES  EM '
Nangaiaqui  no  Coll^o  de  lapao  da
^omfanhiade/ESy
Anno.  i6o^


^ — ^^OOi ll_  I


46

T.icenca,  signed  Francifco  Pafio,  i  p.,  dated  2  Janeiro,  1603.
\  ocabulary,  330  leaves,  numbered  only  on  one  side.

SVPPLEMENTO  DESTE  VO  |  cabulario  Impreiro  no  mefmo  Collegio  da  Co  |  PANHIA

DE  J F.Si'  CO M  I  a Ji'ii\'dita  lidnra,  i^  approitar'io.  |  Anno  1604  |

Ao  leitor,  2  pp.

Vocabular}',  leaves  352-402,  numbered  only  on  one  side.

Tl'.e  Bibliotlieque  X.iiionale  at  Paris  p^isse^scs  an  imperfect  copy,  wanting  the  Approva^ao
and  Licen^'a,  leaves  90,  91,  iio,  iii,  i-,b,  i -<;,  222,  22",  234,  235,  286,  287,  310,  311,  and  the
v.hole  of  the  supplement.  This  book  came  from  the  Eangles  sale,  and  cost  639  francs.
The  Bodleian  copy,  which  is  perfect,  was  bought  in  1829  for  640  francs,  according  to  Cotton.
Of  the  Spanish  translation,  published  at  Manila  in  1630  by  Tomas  Pinpin  and  lacinto  Magaurlua,
s  copy  has  been  recently  added  to  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum.  There  is  another  copy  of
th  ..  in  l::e  jJod''j;an  Library.  The  words  contained  in  the  supplement  have  been  di'^trihuicd  In
their  proper  places.  A  French  edition,  liased  on  the  imperfect  copy  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nalionale,
was  published  In  Pari--  in  iS'o-S  lyihe  late  .\L  Leon  Pages.  The  spelling  of  the  Japanese  words
has  been  F.-enchifml,  w::l.or.t  the  utility  of  tlie  book  being  thereby  increased  to  any  important
extent.


13. BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.

(Pressmark, Jap. d. 5.)

ARTE DA LIXGOA DE lA-  \  PAM COMPOSTA PELLO  |  Padre  Mo  Rodriguez
Portug'u; da Copa- \  nhia de  lESV  diuidida  em  tres | LIVROS.  | COM LICENgA DO
ORDI-  j  XARIO,  E  SyPERlORES  EM  \  Xangalaqui  no  Collegio  de  lapao  da  |  Companhia  de
lESl'l  Anno.  1604.  I [4to.]
C'llophdTI  :

COM LICEX^A  DO ORDINARIO, i E SVPERIORES EM  NANGASAQVI  |  no

Collegio  de  lapa.m  da  Companhia  |  de  IES\'. Anno  1608.  |

Title-page.

Licence  to  print,  signed  by  Pasio,  1  p., approva^am  by  Pero  da  Cruz  ;  and  permission  to
print,  signed  O  Bispo  de  lapHo,  i  p.

Proeniio,  2  pp.

Aigvas  advertencias  pera  mayor  intelligencia  do  que  nelta  Arte  le  trata,  4  pp.

Grammar,  239  leaves  numbered  only  on  one  side.

Table  of  contents,  2  pp.


€^RTE rOA  L'r  NGOA  rD  E  I  A-
PAM  COMPOSTAPELLO

'Fadre  loao  RiirigueZj  Portugues  da  (p^a-

nhia  de  I E  S  V  diuidida  emcres

LI  V  RO  S.


COMLICENCA  DOORDI-

NAR/Oy  £  SFPER/ORES  EM '
Islar^aiaqui  no  Collego  de  lapao  da
^ompankia  de  J  E  S  l^
Anno.  1604..


47

Bought  at  Langles'  sale,  for  £31.  los.  in  1827.  He  purchased  it  in  18  jo.  It  had  previously
belonged  to  the  Colleg.  Paris.  Soc.  Jefu. The  Earl  of  Crawford  possesses  a  copy  of  this  work.

The  Bibliotheque  Nationale  at  Paris,  (MS.  department,  N.  F.  Chinois  1069,)  possesses  a  MS.
copy  of  the  abridgment,  with  a  title-page,  dated  1620,  but  having  Licenfa,  Aprovajam  and  Licence
to  print,  dated,  respectively,  i  (for  the  first  two)  and  2  March,  1720,  for  the  last.  So  it  was
probably  intended  to  reprint  the  book.  Antonio  Ribeiro  dos  Sanctos  in  Memorias  de  Litteratura
Portugueza  publicadas  pela  Academia  Real  das  Sciencias  de  Lisboa  (torn.  VIII.  p.  143),  states
that  *  printed  copy  of  this  work  exists  at  the  Palace  of  the  Necessidades  at  Lisbon  (according  to
Innocencio  da  Silva,  torn.  IV.,  p.  29),  and  there  is  a  copy  in  the  Marsden  Library  at  King's
College,  London.


U. ROME,

In  Private  Hands.


MANVALE  I  AD  SACRAMENTA  \  ECCLESIAE  MINISTRANDA  ]  D.  Ludouici
Cerqueira  yaponenfis  Epi/copi  \  opera  ad  vfum,  fui  cleri  ordinatum.  \  CVM  APPROBA-
TIONE,  ET  FACVLTATE.  |  Nangalaquij.  |  In  Collegia  Japonico  Societatis  lESV.  \  Anno
Domini  M.DCV.  | [410.]

In  Roman  and  Italic  type,  on  Japanese  paper.

Approbationes  (four  in  number,  signed  respectively  Antonius  FrajKifcus  de  Critana,
Balthaiar  de  Torres,  Aluarez  Dias  and  Petrus  Crucius).

Facultas  (dated  Nangafaquij,  30  die  Aprilis  anni.  160^. Epifcopus  laponenfis).

Address  to  Ministers,  2  pp.

Calendarium  Romanum,  12  pp.

Manuale,  pp.  i  to  414.

Index,  4  pp.
Colophon  :

NANGASAQVII.  \  In  Collegia  laponico  Societatis  JESV.  \  Anno  M.DCV.  ]

This  copy  is  perfect  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  wants  the  Japanese  translations  to  which  reference
is  frequently  made  in  the  text  with  the  words  "  Haec  in  vulgarem  fermonem  tranflata  habes  poft
finem  huius  Manualis."


I


:§'  •


\ ? '^iloiikf  C'  :7i\:,A^> l.n^n.Jifh  Lp-'fiOpi

«


* t


V4


:^:a^


■■•■ *V-^,.  ?;V-


H ,-;.  /-  ;^  ^^.


•■  -  ■■•>


-  ,-.J


Ms-


\  t.-c-


Mr


M.A>P  "  o  "  "  T  :  n  v  r  ^ -  T F  A  c  \-  UT


K:-.


-...^u.j,


?^  Cr:ii./v J.ivcrw  So'Setaiii  &.S^''


■\;^:r?  i-'^.:vi^!.


U<ill)'lll  .It l,;illf,l( '. -..ill-,  I'lr  /,  ;  r  . l'.: m (!',// 11'-  (,' jf  h.i  .'"I >■ ::, I'U'.. It l.:i'! [,r'v, ',;■.]/
bpl<>ii)Vil  I' I  (111-  (',.11. I.,  r.in..  So.  . |.|m. 'I  Ii.-  I..11I  ..i  (  :,!  ■//!•, 7 '1  ;.■, / •■•.  .-I  <.,;./  -A  ll,.  .  ■//■,:'/:


Th.- Hll.ll..tli..|il.- N.ilK.ii.il.-  ..I I'.u.-,.  (\r '|.;,,i!


'■■'■■/.)  1


•.  :: MS


cony  ol  the  .iI.rliljMn.-iit .  witil  .'!  I  itl."  ])  i;'. ■,  (l;it.  '1  r  ''..■■>,  hut  r  ■  ,1.  /  [,,'■■.',.;;:.  A  ;jr'.7.'if^;:itj  .-irj'!  L.t  'W  '■
to  |>rilll.  il.ll<-il,  ii'.|ici  liv.-ly.  1  (lor  iIk-  fir. I  lv.'.,j  .ii.'l  /,  M.!:'i,,  I  >  >.■-,  i'..'  »).'■.  I.i-.t.  So  ll  v/;;  .
proli.iMy  inlcnilrd  In  icpi  nil  t!ic  l.'.ok.  A  ntoiii..  1*  li..  no  .1',  .  '.;:.':.  i-/,  u,  .'.J.;  j,o, -,.-],  fj.-  |,:i'.r.'i*!jr;:
l\>r(ii(Mir/,.i [iiiIiIk  .iil.i'. |n-l;i A.  .hIi-iiu.i Rr.il (l.r,  S.  un.  i.r.  rli. (,.i,o.i ('',;i;. 'v'lll. p. .'.r;y, ';'':■.

•lull  .-l piMllCll lopy  of tins H.ill{ IV|  .!■.  .!l ill.- I'.ll.l'.-  .,f ill.- .'"O-"-  .  .i'i.l'i.-  .  :.t \. ..'■,■,:, <-:"■,:■',.:.■/ *',

Iniioicncii)  <l;i  Silv.i,  toin.  IV.,  |>.  '.';),  .111. 1  tli.i<^  r,  ;i  '  o;.y  in  l.'i':  .M.m  ,■!<■:.  I,.!.;  :.-y  r:t  K:.'.:;  .
(^oUfgo,  IxjndoM.

/... r,-.  ,'. ., ■ ^.r '^■■


/


'-  '/  '^^ 'r-'


14. HOME.  B.-  -

!:.■ I'Riv,\Tf; }1a.vi)S.

MANVAI.E  I  AD  SACRAMEXTA  |  ECCLESIAE  MIXISTRAXDA  D.  Luc;v:a
Cerqucira  yafxincnjis  Efnfi:iipi  \  opera  ad  vju-.i  Jul  cirri  ordinutum.  j  CVM  APPROBA-
TIONE,  ET  KACVLTATE.  |  Nangafaquij.  |  In  Cotlt-gw  Jap'micj  S'xutatu  lESi'.  Ar.r.o
Domini  M.DCV.  | [410.]

In  Roman  and  Italic  type,  on  Japane.se  paper.

Approbationes  (four  in  number,  signed  respectively  Antonius  FraBciicui  de  Cr.-^r.^.
Balthafar  de  Torres,  Aluarez  Dias  and  Petrus  Crucius).

Facultas  (dated  Nangafaquij,  30  die  Aprilis  anni.  160J. Epil'copus  laponenfis;.

Address  to  Ministers,  2  pp.

Calendarium  Romanum,  12  pp.

Manuale,  pp.  i  to  414.

Index,  4  pp.
Colophon  :

NANGASAQVIl.  |  In  Collegia  laponico  Societalis  JES!'.  |  Anno  M.DCV.  '

This  copy  is  perfect  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  wants  the  Japanese  translations  to  which  reference
IS  frequently  made  in  the  text  witli  the  words  "  Elaec  in  \-ulgarem  lermonem  tranllata  habes  poit
finem  huius  Manualis."


48

Index  eomm,  quae  in  hoc  manaali  Sacramentorum  continentur.

Kalendarium  Romanum.

De  Sacramento  Baptifmi.

Canones,  &  documeta  administrationis  Sacrameti  Baptif.

Ritus  baptizandi  in  genere.

Admonitio  de  Baptifmo  ex  catechefi  Romana.

Ritus  baptizandi  vnu  niafculu,  (iue  infantem,  (iue  adultum.

Forma  admonitionis  faciendae  adulto  iam  iam  baptizando.

Ritus  baptizandi  vnam  foeminam  fiue  infantem,  liue  adulta.

Ritus  baptizandi  plures  fiue  infantes,  fiue  adultos,  fiue  malculi  tantu  fint,  fiue  mafculi  fimal,
8:  fcEminae.

Ritus  baptizadi  plures  tatu  foeminas,  fiue  infates,  fiue  adultas.

Ritus  baptizandi,  fi  Baptifmus  ab  Epifcopo  celebretur.

De  Sacramento  Confirmationis.
De  Sacramento  Poenitentiae.

Canones,  &  documeta  adminiftrationis  Sacrameti  Pcenis.

Admonitio  ex  catechefi  Romana  de  Sacrameto  Poeniae.

Ritus  adniiniftrandi  Sacramentum  Poenitentiae.

Forma  admonitionis  pcenitenti  faciendae  in  ipfa  confefsione  ad  contritionem  habendam.

Forma ordinaria abfoluendi ab excomunicatione  maiori tam  in  foro  facramentari,  quim
exteriori.

Forma  abfoluendi  i  mdion  excomunicatione,  quado  abfolutio  fit  foleniter  ante  fores  Ecclefiae
in  publica  poennitentia.

Forma  ibloluendi  ab  excommunicatione  maiori.

Forma  difpeniandi  in  irregularitate.

Forma  abfolmionis  i  fufpenfione.

Forma  abfoluendi  ab  tnterdicto.
De  Sacramento  Eucharifliae.

Canones,  &  documeta  adminiftrationis  Sacrameti  Euchariftiae.

Forma  admonitionis  ex  catechefi  Romana  facienda  pro  tempore.

Alia  admonitio  breuior,  quae  fieri  poteft  A  Sacerdote  ad  communicaturos.

Ritus  ad  adminilb'aLndam  Euchanffiam  ianis.

Ritus  deferendi,  &  adminiftrandi  viaticiun  Corporis  Domini  noftri  lESU  Chrifli  Infinnis.

Modus  minifirandi  viaticu  inrirmo,  cu  in  ems  domo  ex  iicetia  Ordinarij  necefTe  eft  mif&m
celebrari.

Modus,  quo  Sacerdotes  Societatis  lESV  vtuntur  in  deferendo,  &  miniftrando  viaticu  Corporis
Chrifti  fuis  religiofis.

De  Sacramento  Ordinis.
De  Sacramento  Matrimonij.

Canones  &  documeta  adminiftrationis  Sacrameti  Matrimonij.

Ritus  celebrandi  Sacramentujn  Matrimonij.

Admonitio  de  Matrimonio  ex  catechefi  Romana.


49

Alia  admonitio  de  peq5etuiti.te,  &  indiflblubilitate  matrimonii  facienda  iam  iam  matrimonio
iungendis.

Ritus  nuptialis  benedlctionis  cum  fit  extra  Miffam.

Ritus  Miflae  nuptiali«,  &  benedictionis  in  mifia  dandae.
De  Sacramento  cxtremae  Vnctionis.

Canones,  &  documenta  adminiftrationis  Sacramenti  extremae  Vnctionis.

Ritus  adminiftrandi  Sacramentum  extremae  Vnctionis.

Admonitio  de  extrema  Vnctione  ex  catechefi  Romana.

Forma  confolandi  infirmu  poll  sumptam  extrema  vnctione.

Pfalmi  poenitentiales  cum  litanijs,  quae  dicuntur  in  adminiftratione  extremae  Vnctionis.
De  iuuandis,  &  Deo  commendandis  morientibus.

Obferuationes  de  hac  re.

Ordo  iuuandi  morientes  ex  loanne  Gerfcn.

Exhortatio  facienda,  cum  animaduertitur  aegrotii  &  fi  firmu  in  fide,  non  tamen  explicite
credere,  prout  ex  praecepto  tenetur.

Alia  exhortatio  facienda,  cCim  aegrotus  agitatur  tentationibus  fidei,  aut  in  ea  vacillare  videtur.

Alia  exhortatio  ad  excitandam  fpem  in  moriente  praefertim  cum  defperatione  tentatur.

Alia  exhortatio  ad  excitadS  in  moriete  charitate,  &  cotritione.

Ordo  commendationis  animae  du  adhuc  moratur  in  corpore.

Commendatio  animae,  vbi  primum  eggrcffus  eft  c  corpore.
De  Officio  Scpulturae.

Canones  Ecclefiafticae  fepulturae.

Olficium  fepulturae  clerici,  vel  religicfi,  quod  etia  fit  in  fcpultura  folenni  laicorum

Officium  ordinarium  fepulturae  laicorum.

Officium  fepulturae  paruulorum  baptizatoram.

Ordo  faciendi  abfolutionem.

Ordo  recitadi  refpoforia  finitis  Miffis  priuatis  fupra  corpus  defuncti,  vel  locum  fepulturae,  '
lociun  paratum.

Ordo  procefsionum  generalium,  quae  fiunt  pro  defunctis.


De  reconciliatione  Ecclesise,  vel  coemiterij.
Canones  de  hac  re.

Ordo  reconciliandi  Ecclefiam  fimul  cum  coeniiterio.
Ordo  recociliadi  Ecclefiam  fine  coemiterij  reconciliatione.
Ordo  reconciliandi  coemiterium  per  fe  fine  Ecclefiao  reconciliatione.
Alius  ordo  breuior  reconciliandi  Ecclefiam.
Alius  ordo  breuior  reconciliandi  coemiterium.

Variae  rerum  benedictiones.
Ordo  ad  faciendam  aquam  benedictam.
Bencdictio  facerdotalium  indumentorum  in  genera.
Benedictio  nouae  crucis.
Genedictio  agni  pafchalis.


so

Benedictio  panis.

Benedictio  nouorvun  tructuum

Benedictio  ad  quodcuuq,  coraeltibile.

Benedictio  candelarum

Benedictio  loci.

Benedictio  domus  nouae

Benedictio  domus  nouae  breuior

Benedictio  nouae  nauis

Benedictio  nouae  nauis  breuior.

Benedictio  retium.

Benedictio  ad  quaciiq , rem  ad  vfus  homm3  creatam.  I.  facta.

Benedictio  terrae  feminatae,  feu  plantatae

Benedictio  pro  animalibus  infirmantibus.

Exorcifmi  ad  expelledos  daemones  de  corporibus
Canones,  &  documenta  exorcifmorum.
Forma  exorcifmorum.
Alia  forma  exorcifmorum.

Exorcifmus  contra  imminente,  vel  iam  exortam  tepeftate.
Exorcilmus  domus  a  demonic  vexatae.

Benedictio  agrorum,  1,  aquaram,  vt  ab  eis  animalia  nociua  expellantur
Oratio  facienda  a  Sacerdotibus  in  vifitatione  infirmi
Alia  oratio  breuior  facienda  in  vifitatione  infirmi.
Ordo  ad  recipiendum  procefsionaliter  Praelatum.
Ordo  ad  vifitandas  parochias.

Modus  le  purifica'ndi,  cum  plures  milFae  eade  die  celebratur,
Ordo  diccndi  MilFam  ficcam  in  mari,  &  fluminibus.

Modus  breuis  baptizandi,  quo  ij,  qui a  fede  Apoftolica  priuilegiu  habueruni  baptizadi fine
coiuetii  ccerimonijs  vti  poterint,  in  cafu  videlicet,  1,  cafibus  in  ipfo  priuilegio  concefTis.


5'


APPENDIX.


Besides  the  fourteen  works  above  described,  which  are  extant  in  European  libraries,  M.  Leon
Pages,  in  that  part  of  his  Bibliographie  Japonaise  which  is  devoted  to  printed  books,  mentions
several  others  of  which  up  to  the  present  I  have  been  able  to  discover  no  existing  copies.  Such
are  his  Nos.  57,  58  and  59,  the  Exercitia  Spiritualia  of  S,  Ignatius,  the  Catechism  of  the  Council
of  Trent,  and  the  Vanidad  del  Mundo  of  Father  Estella,  already  mentioned  on  p.  28.

With  regard  to  the  last,  I  have  given  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  Contemptus  Mundi  of
1596  is  not  Father  Estella's,  but  that  of  Thomas  a  Kempis.  I  will  now  go  through  the  remainder
of  his  list.

"  73.  Opuscule  du  r  Pedro  Gomez,  sur  I'Excellence  du  Martyre,  imprime  en  caracteres
japonais,  a  Amacusa,  en  1 5iy> Paez,  lottre  de  1598,  Guerreiro,  ann.  de  1603."

The  authoriiy  for  tlilj  u  ill  be  found  in  "  laponica,  Sinensia,  Mogorana Leodii,  Anno

1601,"  at  p.  4  of  a  letter  of  P.  Fr.  Paez  (Pasius)  :  "P.  V.  Prouincialis  opufculum  quoddam
confcripfit,  &  lingua  charactcreque  laponico  excufum,  diuulgauit,  in  quo  quid,  martyrium  :  qua»
eius  vtilitas,  &  e.Kcellentia  :  quae  conditiones,  quidque  requirat :  &  maxime  prepofitum,
affectioque,  quae  tempore  eiulmodi  tempeftatis  habere  conuenit  tractatur,  quod  opus  in  Chriftianos
fparl'um  erexit  eorum  animos  iuuitque  plurimum."

"  97  Belchior  Nunes  Barreto.  Traite  des  vertus  et  des  vices.  (En  langue  japonaise)
Nangasaki,  1604. 4°."

I  have  been  unable  to  trace  the  origin  of  this  entry.  The  author  would  appear  to  have
passed  only  three  months  in  Japan,  as  appears  from  his  letter  dated  Cochin  iiij  Idus  lanua.
1558

"  99.  Relaqao  da  morte  que  VI  Christaos  Japoes  padeceram  pela  fe  de  Christo,  escripta  e
€nviada  a  el  Rey  aos  20  de  Janeiro  de  1604  (par  D.  Luis  de  Cerqueira  ev.  du  Japon).
Impression  chinoise  dun  seul  cote. ^o/lf. 4°. Torre  do  Tombo. Voir  Fig.,  1460."

Figaniere  (Bibliographia  Historica  Portugueza,  Lisboa,  1851)  's  entry  is  as  follows:  —
"  D.  Luiz  de  Cerqueira,  bispo  do  Japao,  natural  de  Alirto.  E.  Retardo  da  morle  que  seis
christaos  yapoes  padeceram  pela  Fe  de  Christo.  Escripta  e  enviada  a  Elrei  aos  25  ''''  laneiro  de
1604.  E  impressa  em  folhas  coladas,  segundo  o  uso  das  impressoes  da  China,  e  niio  declara  o
nome  do  Impressor.  Consta  de  quarenta  paginas.  4.  D'ella  existe  um  exemplar  no  Archivio
Nacional  da  Torre  do  Tombo."

The  same  statement  is  repeated  almost  word  for  word  by  Innocencio  da  Silva  (Tom.  V.
p.  280,  of  his  Diccionario  Bibliographico  Portuguez).  It  is  probable  that  he  copied  from
Figaniere,  without  attempting  to  verify  the  description  given  by  him.

The  courteous  director  of  the  Torre  do  Tombo  assured  me  that  no  printed  book  with  such  a
title  existed  in  the  archives  under  his  charge,  nor  was  there  any  indication  of  it  in  the  catalogue.
But  he  showed  me  a  manusa  ipt,  which  bears  the  following  title  : —


/


5^

"  Relai^ao  da  morte  q  seis  christaos  lappoes  padeceraS  poUa  fee  de  Christo,  Efcrita  E
enuiada  a  elRei  Nosso  s  por  dom  Luis  cerqueira  Bispo  de  lappao  aos  vinte  E  cinco  de  Jan!  de
1604." It  is  signed

"  O  Bfpo  de  Jappao
de  Nangassaqui  quinze  de  N'ouembro  de  mil  e  seis  centos  e  cuatro  anos."

There  are  forty  p^-iges,  of  an  ordinary  quarto  size,  and  if  my  memory  serves  me  right,  they
are  pasted  {loladas)  by  the  inner  margin  on  to  a  backing,  provided  for  the  purpose  of  binding
the  separate  sheets  into  a  volume.  The  paper  is  probably  Japanese,  similar  to  that  used  for  the
books  printed  with  Roman  type  at  the  Jesuit  press,  as  well  as  for  many  of  the  original
missionary  reports.  There  seems  hardly  room  to  doubt  that  this  MS.  is  what  Figaniere  and
others  after  him  have  described  as  a  printed  book.

"  100  bis.  Le  meme  prelat  a  fait  imprimer  :  Manuale  casuum  conscientiae,  Japonice  versum
(typis  editum  in  parochorum  usum)."

The  earliest  authority  for  this  which  I  have  found  is  Sotvellus'  edition  of  the  Bibliotheca

Scriptorum  Societatis  j-  ju,  i6y6,  p.  561,  where  it  is  said  of  Cerqueira,  "  Scripsit Manmle

Casuum  Conscientia,  qu(y\  I-por.'ce  redditum,  typis  vulgatum  est  in  usum  Parochorum."

"  116.  Le  livre  de  I'lmitation  de  J.  C.  (dcsignc  alors  sous  le  litre  de  Gersen),  traduit  et
public  en  japonais  vers  I'an  1609,  par  Jean  Canaya,  qui  fut  martyr."

There  is  no  indication  to  show  where  this  statement  came  from.  Considering  that  a
translation  into  Japanese  had  already  been  published  in  1596,  the  need  of  a  new  version  does  not
appear  self-evident.

"  139.  Manuel  du  saint  Rosaire,  en  japonais,  imprime  en  1616.  Minerve."
With  the  courteous  assistance  of  the  ofRcials  of  the  Minen-a  Library  (Biblioteca  Casanatense)
at  Rome,  I  have  examined  the  catalogue  of  that  collection,  but  failed  to  find  any  indication  of  this
book.  Perhaps  it  may  have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  convent  of  the  Minerva."  The  library,
which  has  long  been  a  public  institution,  on  being  searched,  yielded  the  "  Confessionarium  "  and
"  Doctrina  Christam,"  -.liich  form  Nos.  8  and  11  of  the  preceding  pages.

"  139  bis.  Sommaire  de  la  Confrerie  du  saint  Rosaire  et  ses  indulgences,  mis  en  japonais
par  les  Peres  dominicains.  Probablement  le  meme  ouvrage.  Une  image  f'  i  dessinee  d'apres
les  idees  du  P.  Navarrete :  c'ctalt  Notre- Dame  a vec  le  divin  Enfant  entre  ses  bras.  Elle  et  le
divin  Enfan  repartissaient  le  saint  Rosaire  a  des  pontifes,  cardinaux,  rois,  etc. — Pour  bordure
etaient  les  mysteres  du  Rosaire,  et  au  bas  il  etait  ecrit  que  saint  Dominique  avait  institue  la
confrerie  du  Rosaire. — L'image  fut  fondu,  et  on  en  tira  des  empreintes."
^  _  I  hare  nut  Ittii  ablo  to  trace  thio  entry, t/f'^  ^^/<:z.-uxe^ "f.  ^^ i--rVi^  ^--^T^t^^x/v-ti. ,

"  158.  Le  P.  Navarro  (Pedro  Paulo)  tradulsit  en  japonais  I'ouvrage  du  P.  Pietro  Antonio
Spinelli,  Thronus  Dei,  Maria  Deipara,  public  i  Naples,  en  1613. — A  Nagasaki,  s.  d.  (av
1622).

"  159.  Le  meme  Pere  publia  aussi  en  j'aponais  une  Apologie  de  la  Foi  contre  les  calomnies
des  gentils. A  Nangasaki  .  s.  d.  (av.  1622)."

These  entries  are,  perhaps,  derived  from  Sotvellus,  who  says  (p.  689),  "  Scnpsit . .  Multos


■'  ^ ^er .


53

librus  in  usum  laponum  Chrisiianorum.  Item  Apologiam  Fidei  Christianee  advenui  calumnias
Gentilium.  Traduxit  vero  laponice  librum  Petri  Antonij  SpinelU  nostri,  qui  inscrilitur  Thronus
Dei  Maria  Deipara."  There  is  here  no  assertion  that  these  works  were  ever  printed.  M.  Pages'
';  (av.  1622)"  refers,  of  course,  to  the  date  of  this  missionary's  martyrdom.

"  168.  Le  P.  Fr.  Francesco  Galve,  dominicain,  traduisit  en  japonais  trois  vol.  in-fol.
espagnols :  Les  Fleurs  des  Saints  et  une  Doctrine  chretienne  (D'apres  Diego  de  S.  Francesco  qui
les  a  vus)  (av.  1623)."

"The  authority  for  this  is  apparently  the  Bibliolheca  Franciscana  of  Fr.  Juan  de  S.  Antonio
Tom.  I.,  p.  388.  "  Franciscus  Galve  ....  Proditus  enim  k  falso  Christiano,  foris  fideli  intus
idolatra,  in  carcerem  dejectus  est,  cum  P.  Hieronymo  ab  Angelis,  Societatis  Jesu,  &  aliis  quin-
quaginta,  &  uno  fidelibus,  die  4.  Decembris,  anno  1623.  ignis  combustione  in  odorem  suavitatis
Deo  oblatus  est.  ^ic  primus  volumina  tria  in  fol.  Hispanice  conscripta  De  Fitis  Sanctorum,
sub  titulo  Flos  Saiictorum.  in  Japponicum  sernionem  transtulit.  Pariter  libellos  alios  :  De  doctrina
Christianp.  Ex  oculato  teste  V.  Fr.  Didaco  a  S.  Francisco  in  Relatione  Martyrum  Japponens.
Manilae  impressa  1625."  But  whether  these  two  works  were  ever  printed,  and  if  so,  when  and
where,  does  not  appear.

"257.  Michael  de  Preces  (le  P.)  ecrivit  un  Arte  japonais  et  des  catechismes  en  japonais
et  en  tagale  (avant  1639),  "

This  notice  is  perhaps  derived  from  the  Bibliotheca  Franciscana  of  Fr.  Juan  de  S.  Antonio,
Tom.  II.,  f.  376.  "In  insulas  Philippinas,  opprobriis  saciatus,  reversus  ;  ut  etiam  atramento
Christi  fidem  prEedicaret,  Jappohico,  aliisque  peregrinis  idiomatibus,  scripsit :  Artcm,  etiam
Synarum  caractcrihus.  Catechismum  Christianum,  idiomate  Japponico,  fs"  Tagalo.  Utroque  opere
passim  utuntur  Missionarii  nostri.

Michael  de  Preces  is  apparently  the  missionary  who  is  called  Miguel  Perez  by  Father
Huerta  (Estado  geografico,  etc.  p.  507).  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  these  works  were  ever
printed,  but  even  if  they  were,  it  must  have  been  in  the  Philippines,  and  not  in  Japan.

To  the  foregoing  should  be  added  from  Sotvellus  (p.  188)  "  Emmanuel  Barreto  ....
CoUegit,  &  edidit  Latine  Flosculos  de-  virtutibus,  isf  vitiis,  ex  veteris,  ac  novi  Testamenti,  iS"
Sanctorum  Doctorum,  tsf  P hilosophorum  Floribus  selectos  orditie  alphabetico  Nangasachi  typis
Collegii  laponici  Societatis  lesu  1610,  in  4." I  do  not  know  of  any  existing  copy.

Bartoli  in  the  second  volume  of  his  history  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  Japan  (Rome,  1660)
at  p.  279,  gives  the  following  information  as  to  the  books  printed  by  the  Missionaries  :  "Poi  un
monte  di  libri,  che  gia  n'era  pieno  ogni  cosa,  per  le  stamperie  dell'  uno  e  I'altro  carattere,  e
nostrale  e  Giapponese,  aperte  dalla  Corapagnia  in  Macao  e  in  Nangasachi,  con  incomparabile
giouamento,  cosi  a  dar  cognitione  della  Fede  nostra  a  gl'  idolatri,  e  convincere  le  lor  Sette,  come  a
mantenere  e  crescere  la  pieta  ne'  Fedeli  :  tali  erano,  i  misterij  della  vita  e  passione  di  Christo,
divisati  m  piu  maniere ;  e  de'  pregi,  e  della  divotione  di  Nostra  Signora ;  e  le  vite  de'  Santi,*


'  No.  I  Sanctos,  &c.


54

per  ogni  stato  le  sue ;  e  le  gloriose  morti  de'  Martiri  piu  illustri,  che  leggendole  non  si  puo  dir
quanto  accendevano  in  desiderio  d'imitarli  :  e  un  trattato  dell'  eccellenza  del  martirio,  divisatovi
quel  ch'  era  saviamente  rispondere  a'  Guidici,  e  da  dirsi  a  fare  sostenendo  i  tormenti  e  la  morte  :
un  altro  della  confessione:*  e  la  storia  dell'  Ambasceria  de'  Giapponesi  loro,  inviata  alia  S.  sede
di  Roma  da"  Re  di  Bungo,  e  d'Arima,  e  dal  Signor  d'Omura  :t  e  il  Calendario  alio  stile  Romano,
'  dio-iuni  e  le  feste  consuete  guardarsi :  e  il  Gersone,  cioe  i  quattro  libri  dell'  imitatione  di
..■!sto,t  ristampati  piu  volte,  e  il  Catechismo,  e'l  Simbolo  del  Granata,  una  parte§  ;  e  la  Guida
de'  peccatori  pur  sua,|l  e  lo  Stella  della  vanita  del  Mondo,  e  altre  simili  opere  di  valent'  huomini,
trasportate  da  altre  lingue  nella  propria  Giapponese,  e  diverse  meditationi,  oltic  agli  Esercitij
Spiritual  di  S.  Ignatio,  e  la  sua  medesima  vita ;  e  fmalmente,  per  quanto  io  ne  truovo,  I'ultimo  di
pochi  anni  indietro  su  la  vita  dell'  Apostolo  di  que'  Regni,  e  primo  fondStore'di  quella  Christianita,
S.  Francesco  Saverio."


•  No.  8  Salvator  Mundi,  &c.
+  No.  6  Contehiptus  Mundi.
11  No.  10  Guia  do  Pecador.


t  Published  at  Macao.
§  No.  3  Fides  &c.


END.


L^^-'fm-^mm-^w

:k

:k

m

^y^^.

£

21

/

Kl' '

+

+

a

psa

E

S

/

(1

Jp

*

s«

\

+

+

*

^^^^ffi

H

I

ffM ,

K

_^

E« '■

EP

n *s

^^

£3g

m

fr

B

B

HBI

*

* «

S

ED

rt

^r

KU

s  >

3!

1 *Bq

il j

ift  «

IS  « 14-  if!

«

^

S  S

fli

HP*

n

Date  Due


im^

WOT

OCT  a  1  n

n

Rem:ngton  Rand

Inc.  Cat.  no. 1  139

.  (ip.Mi  1.1,1  II  ij 1 ij


'a.tc^^-


V.  1

Kal
•<-SaS3
-- 3?U


fV


e  Jesvut


'  jic  e


.T,---.


B


M


*


Aii^


Nal


r5a83


ik '  -'7/  -


MISSIONS


V


i2l


B

5R


-CSIE


3t


(Z)


^


0


It


S
'jc


-^m

?J

rr

Ijffl

ra

^

*

m

fl^rr

^

Jtm

Sih

ffl

'S^

C'^:l

C^^)

m
m


/^^^S^S'lf^' ■*


m

S&

!:

;:)

^£

_h

75>

m

i^

-L

m

f)

hh

0-

ic

JJJ

fill

#

^

?>

Ir

,',i

^

to

'v

0

ms

fz

?f

#

b

—

c

TJ

\

C

y

t:

-'''*

ft

i^

^

T

^

•f^-

6i:)

1

Y

U

-^

tf£

1

r

ff

s

^

i^

A"

iili

o

-^

t^

o

/.?

6'^

1'

V

0

o

!:

llli

""

'-'.-

^.v-

/;•'

0

jt

-t'

•y

N

u

-t

!a

T

'H-

^

T

0

i-j

JflJ

/"^

i^

i

rn

•

>!

^x

/J

()

«

4^

®!

"\

^

(i

*

'd^

u

7

>

[Jiii

>ff

P

p^

Sc

#

—

0

I)

rf

7

y.

r^

o

0)

?

;j

%"

^

;*:

Hi

?Jf

^

r

y

■<

•a

— ,

-Lf-

HI

c*

i:

?p

m

1?

-If"

li)'

•y

f}>

K

^1-

\

n

-y-

--!;•

c

A

*

t'

0

:x

Jl

i:

11

0)

*'

o

yi^

J!fr

4|-:

o

jn

■t

z2

x

iffi

A^

"u

TJ-

1-

o

—

/■3>

/"^

i^

m

H-

M

,'li

A

:f/

f:

/;!

■»

^s

;^

Y

L

SU

L

li

j^

ffi^

fill

:^l.-

^

•

f"

^

T

t.

1z

3

-"ft

IIH

?ii

b

?4

*:

7

JE.

21

JS

n

V?

t£

^

i:

5^

0)

f^]

jr.

yi^

jr.

pq

'if

I

T?

?t

iE

^

^

A'

m

L

1

i:

Wx.

'r-

as
to

(i

'x:

^

T

-y

-1-
/■■»

m

0

f«

M

•»

\

i<.

J-.

•t

-'!■-

a

'X

1/

IT

-"s

li

>1^-

]%

—

■»

^

-1-

>K

i-

•y

?4

-V

t3

;^.c

;■!

^ji

J/i".

rx

li

—

■?t

A

H

«-

7

0

nn.

i:

f.h

}/f.

:?§

11

JJ

Vl^

^li

t:

7^.
14.

•7

ii

CD

fa;

■i'Sf

—

i.'i]

A^

3

in

-L-

A

it

ii

"S

1  J

o

YK

^1^

?r

Jc

-7-

0

y\

^^rl

^

i:

E

^

T

■1'

'L-

N

Jj>

V

«

m

L

JJ;

JiS

5il

/7

>!■-

t:

ii!i

'£

"•r

L'

/j>

L

r

7

il

;&

lit

jT

i-iii

0

n

y

^i

y<

'l

'^

rr.

•&=

M

5

0

^

III

■J]i

L

•

to

%

Fr

•

y"^

*

m

N

U\\

C7)

■*

ill]

"C

c^

■*

i:

Lf

-,»

^

L

f

5(.

5

-^■»*

m

^

>

H

Vr

ftfl

L

y

y

^

'K

-K

11

1

m

^Sc

7

r

%t

o

'l

•v

r

m

%t

:iH

-'IV

1'

fzTt

nri

-L>-

r

^^

I'iiji

rz

/J

.V"

y-'

II

fUli

A

u

u-

i&

^:

X

-1^:

!i

ll.t

fz

0

"L""

i:

'1'

^r^

m

•

^

^

Ml  I

tri

^?£

l^^

3>

f¥

if:)

■t'lj

ik

i:

n

;^

m

0

0

'>

*

■feii

•»

i?e

o

o

h

^^*

V?

A

m

^

ii:

L

iiff

^c

7k

%

t3

i

-V-

1

i'i

y.

L

i-L;

iic

t

a

L

iii

—

o

"c-

(

1'

f)'

•

1z

i/K

■I'i-

\l\

rs

1z

•I:

-'!■-

liO

'rri"

11

L^

■*

7

L

f:

as

1^

;

^i--

0

A

c

;*:

—

s.

TI

(1

•\

f(i!c

■^

J-.

'_

" ■

'rt-

ii

Ba

nn

^■

■^J

-^

,-i>

r.'.]

o

«•

-)<.

'v

- 1*

11

<r

=ff

il

A

-Cj

^.

%

r

"l

"C

{'-

y.

11?^

y

L

a

^

A\

<?3

—

y"^

®J

TJiij

\%

a

^1;-

11

\'

r:

ij!

4

c

,1;^

j/r.

y

M

'«

m

(.>

0

\

A

L

yi'

&iJ

m

-I-

T

m

i:

'£

11

a

^>

)v

^:

-r

T

[--

I'q

'^

it

#

)§.

^

¥-

li

I

-7

0

^^

o

III

iV-

-7

^

W

l:

nn

P

^f

r

y

li

z:r

i!ii

'l

-\-

I-

it

L

P-

0

M

4"

/"^

•

-'/-'

-P

j

fj

)]

)lf|

%'i

■»

0

:A:

Ji;

11

•
/

ly

u*

A

li

s

zi^

c

m

"c

iii

i'i

>1-

^

3

jr.

■k

1^

o

u

^JF-

i&

-L-

■*

V?

0

-":r;i
rtn

y'

7-

)^

\H

^

m

^•IJ

ih

r

A

/'j>

l-I

c

)V

V

■€.

tl

ffi

■*

L

-W

;j

)V

■l!!t

5£

,0^

^

•

-Jt-

0


fij
It


^


it


^15


m  n  -r-  m  \-  '-^

R  m  m  ^^  m  i~

i:

0 li ^ S t5- ^

[>' s ^ o u- ,13

ti JE

M ^ ,41 * t -

;fL -c- m ^3 ^ "i:

o 4p

^ M IS # ^ X

if J) -c h ^ ^

'C t:

^ i< ^ Mk ~^- ^

^ 7-, ?l 0 t: 2)

3is ^.

m  ^-  fA  I ?.  -

i: ° n .-i> ^ -

fz o

,8^ CO Jh^ -tz r i^

/]■- li ^> " » <£

0 -c

CO m fz U ^ ~^

ilt 0 ?, ^ " li

li iH

m ii: :. ¥ -^ i-

cf tn ill &. r^  ^

"  >t^

X '4c d ^ i5 (i

ft i! O '^g u 51

i ff

m

J.).: 15: li c^ 0 W

n ^ ^ rir. # t-

0 3fiJ

i: c — ;f: '^f [>'

if  =[s  9 ^  #a  X

Dill ^

.

K- la // L ri% -t-

Li  m  i-  0  =^f?  ^

i«[ i^'h

<^«&

l? «^ 1 ' i: it

ffl ^± 'i ^ r- -c-

li X

^S

z -C ^ U i ^

i i: o :fj M i

T  m

j*=»

Vf ffe" i: P^ ^ ft

0 nJl f: i: U ';

i-  0

?ij vi *^i m -L ?4

^ 0 (f ii iH- i"

H rf? 0 1 'C c^
'/ pq ii o /J °

^

n ¥- o ^ it i:

ffr i- ^ -L -L ^^

0 Urf

:

ISi 'M. M ii^- 0 J^
0 fe- li c -r'r 'C

i: - m  m ^ h
1f> zi jti M f4 1

ri m

4^ T-i]

^

.

t& J: '; i )i5 f?)

'C -^1-- 0 -e- 4!, 0

1115 rr

§^ Tj- c< o y|>: :$'[-

^ _ A ?> i: W

M W

^ 1t -ic *?. B* 7

-:^c — // ^t -T- ;!)>
i: X 0 "^t=- r- X

T-1] 'i

m

r 'f* jF. A\ ->fv ^

-;< '^^ -^k ','K- A *

rf  £'

-r 0 -i' "C-- L 7

i]-: A 'i: U li li

w  ^f

%

h m  '^  m  -z -y

-1- ^ 2. * '; m

tc2\ ^|S£

<D

'•■■

m L  T  rt ?

^> # 4-' ?. !) ^

t; :

\

21  -t li-  ?g  m  i^

^ -m  m li li ?>

® L 0 i!^ m i^

m

5"- i/ t: fll5 ?> °

-r T ^<v /-I. * -L

c- lii

X i^ fll 15 iV !.>

?^ gS '/f £ 31 *

°  *

>;: 0 i: ^ T 'J
-■';- ffc ?j r^ ?J ii

n it m 'C i^ H

i??]" 0

m

-„- Jf--. Z) f')li z> ^

0) ^ 0 fj 0 JJ

0 ?>

n  CO  m  w  M  T

it ^T^ li z> ti PA

a ^

;

ifiic S ^!i ° ftd P%

#  li

if

T M a o'^' T' ^

m  'I  -i-  ^^  ?  0^)

isi ^:

.

•'.^ 4: 0 pif A iX;

m % »i ^^ i^ ®

-:^- ^'.  .

•{'- i: ^ Yni 2. 0

>|i M? ^-^ t.^ :f' ^"

B: ;!)>

^i; li ^f W] ° ??

t: ?^ [li 'C K 0

li r

w

:f n 2) i»si ^, ?i^

Kr S 3fl }li ^ ft£

^ I-

iVf :1>: %■ i: T*T i:

it < 0 ^fc '-^ J^

ii^ ^

3,- lit  iiii  ^  j'>  ;^.  i1

0 *ni -a- it fJi? 3

?-, ? 31i ^c t i:

i: SS:

gic ft- A -^ • la

X CO

4(8 ip ?■' ?-> fl f

|»s| ^ li 0 ^ igJ

o %

ia \i o m i< ?j

>>t i!l ^ ^ y ^

-'. W

0)  ^  m  •^•v  ^ z-

i5ii c a^ IS] ;>- i

A'- U

# ^ -c- nli 0 -

0 /) 0 14 ^ iv

'* 1®

ill

IH fr ^ tg -ic i

m  i'f I'J^  K  1- '

0 o

r tl? o ^ rn u

M ?'J '{'- ^ 0 3}I

Si 1z

in ° K ?4 '

^  :Jc  IK  ie  Hi  m

'i- ^

T- i- i: K- ^

S) n -4^ m m :k:

U 0

^ -I: L ^ ^^

c, ic m '1' *> Wf

# c

^ -;g ir  Mc ^'

ii ^ ^ i: A i

?Iv ^

.-bpfcTplff


^  f-


O


f1^


*{c


*5C


^^


■V


/'I'


^  m


0 0


1^  Tij  - M.  m  ^


Ifi:


V J1s B# ii CO


=ff ^ "f- -& i:


^ -b


|WI f#


ft


JiZ.


EH ?W|


1^


7 ;i^ 0 L -' fV ^ i: a S


-A- f1^ it-

T


^IP 3i^-


^^ 0 :^


;ft


f- 0 i:


fl


-T-


ffif


;^^ :a l[i o
0 en ^3


-^ f; *


jS 9^ fi ?i^ 0


1^ fls y


1^ i- ^ -i-


3£ ^^ T O' #P #


fx. ^- 0 Ji FrU i\- < n

/A 0 M -C L Ju ^ >t-


£l 11^


y


/-


r  I


R i:


Si 4" iS!/ 31 ^ t;^ Hi-


l!6


M S ?; ^ J£ ^ ,"i1 0 (i


<
Jfl5


f1^ ffl ^ K


ft


o-


ffl io^


/>


m


0 A 1^
-c- li; ifis


0


^^ iT? M i:


^/ ?L) ti ^ li) » f? fj


-y -^ >• ^ ^)k ^ U -e -Til -f


A


^


■iii- _)K CO ?r


Ml 0 tS^
^3 w t:


A>


-r-


fS a


0

It
r.

m


"/


0


0  -T-IJ  ^
fiii  =fr  PfJ
?>  0  <
i;


-fj-


oy 4^ iz
#p ^ 0


11

f  I


-t  r[i  o  M  jL  ^-^  iz  M  n  z '■'  ^^  fr  M  "^


;^


m \) {:


■c  f"]  &  -tz  m  ^

W S3 -^- HH n & 3£


f L K 35 ^^ iv i:


?: m  A'  pj  :^ 1-


i:


L o Hi (i II ^ m


-?^ ffli


i^


•y
T- ft


_14-1


^ S5


PfT


J?-  f&  ?i  *  -m  ;^

0  M  o  ff  IKi  i&

^  L  -C  li  ii-  li

s()  T  fJ  'm-  Pit  ^

S  ^  z>  ?;)  c^  ^it

?)  :f3  ,-i)>  nu  -C  0

ifli  y  ^  0  2)  i:


rf(


^


tk


-e m  n\:  'P

i %  9^  t^

'^ JH  T?  :f3

i:  :i  0

IS  ^  -c-

T  IK  ^^

h  +i-  (i

?>  ^  M

0  ^^  U

£  f2  #

L  0  a

T  li  t-

"^  '*  ^

■ ?Jc  a;  ■#


6^


0


li


li
die


if


n


u

A>

L

^_

it

il

K

I'li

T-

^

fi

JE.

?

4P

^v 3

*

h

b

t,^

\

J£

m

^:

M

m

ft

fz

L

:f'

i^

/^r

fe'

;f2 £

^i

m.

^

i)'^

o

Fl

^

CD

5

;5^

1:

^>

^

T

:x

1z

0

m

° iz

f)

m.

T

0-

t^

>t-

HE

ifc

P

C

\i

0>-

£

X)

V

0

IS

0)

1

^

^

2)

U

Ii

0

tg

<f

L-

/J

'i

?f*

;^>

7'

IJ;

ff

o

h

fp

ii-

i:

(.'

z-

S

T

J:

<?:)

^:

A>

#

«

o

'J

h

#

T

-

'i:

S

T

o

Xh

2ff

o

^

o

^

o

i:

o

a

^

^

i)>

;^^

ii'

()

i;

\

H

i

i:

o

c

/^>

?

?:

i

/-!;>

rail

0

m

w

-t

L

if

^2

t;

ii

«

M

?

ii

■\

%

o

"T

\

1z

(i

T?

^

b

I-

%

0

ft

Mo

^

C

^

->^

^

•^i

i

?3

3$

II

o

*

m

!>

^^

U

«

0

i%

j>!b

T

I-

I

«

ISl

Tz

H

t:

{

T

O

m

ft

£

b

0

#

A

»

^j

J,

^

<jf

4:^

a

^

:a

*

^2

M

0

T-

m

^

Jfe

h

B

r:

M

-7,

b

isg

CD

»

m

#

Z,

0

B^

g

6

ffl

m

A>

'4i

4"

fn]

l:

l:

n

->"■

t

CD

'I

^

y

a

ft

1^

2.

u

%-

m

m

?>

£c

-^

Ift

'f'

1

S

^

^

m

r

?>

m.

:*:

0

b

^

Si

T?

1^

0

<

b;j

0

^

'iC

M

CD

ft

1/

^

^-

T?

f

{:

2i:

0

ch

f

^

/j^

L

^s

^

^>

^

1?

CD

—

jE

A

*

—

^

L

#

h

't

Ih

G

"l

m

CD

)!f

Ji

Si

ir

S'

+

*

O

w

't

T

^

r>

h

(i

H

?j

c

m

:ic

^:

h

4^

^

4[-^

7

?2

I^

h

H

ft!

•\

m

l!fl

>t:

?3

M

m

^

»>'

o

T?

0

ft

t^

H

its

,,_

*

^

_^

•te

CD

tl

IT

£

\

iffi

^

H

^

(d

*

^

<^

L

ih

'di

m

x

T

L

&

^_

(_'

it

ii

0

M

ib

i)>

fij

1z

kt

*>'

F$

^

i>

<«

T

i:

0

^

ft

rfcr

*

#

f'J

L

V^

^

in

m

3)

^

^

fi

o

r

fi

*

S5c

0

^

:*:

:'c

5

T

*

^

<

^

c>

L

^

i:

^3

>

#

!i

2>

m-

K

S

^

fj-

*e

2.

■X

■*

i>

\i

<

^

—

!>

L

2-

(f

—

o

I?

U

&

jt

0

^

^

h

i^

i

c

O

i-

ft

L

A-

^_

fci

T

ft-

ffi

.^^

&

ii

0

^

h

h

6

a

?^

^

p'c

U

/:.

^

&^

0

A

0

*p

k

m

a

jE


IilIU


h- i)'


<  ^[1

^  m

^  ft

b  crj

i: f) m

lEil  X 0 i: ^ 0


fell iPl

b n

O -I-


'^  1?

D  T

^  0

-  lii

^L  0

O  z

-L-  i

4ii  f„i


^r »•


0  ^i-  w  ® pg


f:


^ 0 () L ft-


I L


n

(.^

?f

V

f2

,_

2.

tf*

#

i:

TIJ

s

i*^

?>

i^

4%

t&

i

o

0

ft-

^

=fT

fr

;?

ffi

it

Pnl

;!)>-

L"

T-

#

3r

0

ii

at

*>

it

1 1

^^

0

fo;

A

h

ft-

;^

;*:

t,^

rtr

N

0

0

ill

i'

o

h

It

i^

ii

m

;&>

—

ffi

tili

"c-

*

i.

?;

ii-

i^

i^

1!

m

*^

A

^-

■M

h

li

^_

0

\

m

V

"?"

L'

m

A

;>

ii

t

V.'r

<6

C

r^

h

4%

i:

5)

+

A

^

^n

7

i'f

TJ-

illE

^■

0

?f

il

2.

^

^

-6L

*

0

(i

i>^

1

ft

;4i

*^

l±'

o

m

m

u

:;»<

^

f-

0

'af

fe

-r-

ffl

ii

j;ic ^|i 0 ;=J -ti- -A^
M

(-1


0 US -^ ii- W Jfc

<;^ ft r -fa S|s aV '51 =fT


t: H m A

^  ^/  i^:  m  n

t h -u- 4^ i: 4^ i:


L Mi ii K L


^n -y- ^


0 a-


u


h  C'  X  4n  ^
^h  #  0  -^  i:  L  ^
ii I.-4I ^ 2. m ° 'L-


j>: a * ffi w -c
0 ;j^ o ig < if)


^ ./^ t '-2
P3 "^ * If


M r: :f: ii ^15 o if ^fe T _L


j'i 0 s H ^t- -f: ft IF. <&


i: Ii


0


0 i-


«j


"HT


TJ- l^f gc M- ±


0
I'll ^


-HJ


nt M


i: P 0 ?^


S^ ^ ?


rf)


i:


9 Si- « M ^ i 2]^ ^ lj^ m


m ^  re  A 2> ^2

^RE tic /J ^ fi


0 ? 7K Hi \Z Jif ffr" 0 5 JiS


M U 0


l:  Ii  0  i:  ii  o  7jc  S  -^  H

J:  lix  ^  ^$  :f3  ^;  >P  ^  :?■:  *

o  2,  y  ^  ^  0  m  3i  o:>  m

T  "  i/  ?  t-  T?  0  1:  fe  I?

$li  H  ^  <i  J^  .5  /l^  ^  M  #


BE

"3"
h


^

IE

a

o

S

h

^

L

z.

0

A

IS

^

?

ix

){5:

h

^i

-I?

BS

+

m

13

^

•\

&

*

*

0

—

>'

?

l:

n

';

*

/^>

;ii

£)

«g

s:

o

m.

&

+

<

^

#

fP

r

^^

m

"C

i,^

?.

\

^

h

0

^

m

"

CO

&

.

7'

0

4^

^

gn

^:

L

^

;<)'

i^

m

^

i)^

H

{:

(7)

li^

I"

-^'

if

^

^^

3.

%"

b

£

^

1z

%

X

^-

^

t§

m

—

_h

Ii

^

^

m

J?

K

2-

m

s

-

m

CO

M

m

li

0

*^

m

R]

n

9

^

m

^

X-

ii

M

#

^

^t

5?

«

M

p;]

1'

^

M.

' ".

f:l

^

■r

m

m.

1^

*

•^

L

m

"C'

-)<i

^n

-;c

3

^-

f-

^

0

o-

m

m

m

Kfi

CO

gilJ

?.

V

'C

®

^

^

o

^

iy

^

y

?,

M

^

pH

0

m

(D

fiS

t^

b

1;

1i-

0

Z.

0

T

5i

o

u

^

iQ

^

-?

t#

^

^

m

M

?.

o

^

c

w

o

HI

S

*i-

'^

#

•

o

*

=.

d:

m

*

m

#

S

CO

M

fj-

III

o

ii

1?

FI

^

M

4"

0

?>

#

£

#

0)

K

H

/2

^i

0

#

o

N

rr

y

*1i

^

U

^

;i

ff

i3>

n

::k

!:

l!^

^^

jfe-

if

*

tI

Z:

ii[]

•y

it

S3

(D

!:

BJJ

m

m

gr

m

'm

f:

t

B:

21-

0

0

tl:

i!?

C

\--

n

:t

K

L

M

*>

0

i!x

0

M

M

/^>

IE

i'l

#

i

-y

li

#

m

'd?

0

T

+

•ttf:

^

'i

ii

#>

0

Vt

m.

m

IS

!)

CO

*

T

m

o

:^

tl

3i

{:

;()^

A

(iS

<

at-

/h

li

#

^

^-

Ptl

M

(

i:

n

^-

db

i^f

C

0

^

^sS

li

5S

^

=fT

lie

m

2ft:

't

?

J:

ic

m

c.

{1

t:

^n

-^

*

«

>!c

*

0

^

nx

%

u

i^

2.

w^

CO

?f

/fr

h

c

c

S

J^

■dt

CI

i)>

m

t:

li

\

?>

c

m

11

Bt

0

<£

A

t)>

*!

r^

i}>

*

f'J

m

0

#

b

e

CO

A

&

iv

?

fe

-

i-t

=r

"TT

»

-.'r"

t:

;£

fc

IP,

t.

—

B

Tr

S

M

h

kx

0

/)

i

1/

2^

11

(

^_

n

-a-

^r

if

/^

tff

N

V3

m

^

~Z

■T?

L-

n

T

0

m

T-

Z:

m

o

i

6

o

rl-

^

P

^

9

h

^

h

IT

A

«?

T3^

??

h

m

i-L

tR

i^

A

ii

^x

i:

^

i:

O

tJ

7j

■*

•y

a

S

o

&

.1^

'C

P

f:

if.

:^

c

Z

^

?i

1z

/:'

;&>

^

•

'£

0

<

li

c

?:>

0

— ^ if5: ?. R

^ . -^13;$:
5f ^ ?, J14 i:


?i


(o  =L  b  -j-  m  m  m m  r-  y^  m-  u 7  ^
5 m  \f  ^  M.  m  m  Mi  ft  &  ^  ^  t^^ ^ 5

t, 0 -e ^. %■ HJ ::g^ i£ li < it ;^ j!)^ J^ ?;


2


* 0


i(^


vf


T- 0 i(L ?> U /:'
* ,ii3 75> 0 t: tt


CO ^ m T ^ a I'


CO

tn


P*


li


CO


m


i:


A 0 n bE /-!j>


at


L

'C
Jt


:^ 0) ^ CO ■")-

i&  r-  m  -r  i^ \'


f^] 00 M.


h c


^  ra #  ^  /^>


11


T 4^ in H ;i> /^>


* li 2) 0 < % jK


i'J


* f, 0 Hfl b ; L %-


^ :^ T? ^


0


*» jE
M i: 0


li 0 -L 0 ^z


at


10 If


0


=«•


5>C f::fe 5 L >li ti- l;
If ;^c -


r:


i:


Itg ;i^


CO CO


?. ^ [, T? ?) i> m -A^ ^f ii i)^ -is ?-iJ


H 4f. :^
JZ -^ 7. S


11 I-


ft r& l:f i T :;jn n li t /:


-^ li i^ r tt


t-  0  i^-

l^  fSi  0

°  c ^  -^

&.  ^  -^'  m  z  ^  11

± ;5> ^i: -y- 0  S  1


K i^


ix ^ ?> ^f- I? -f ix ?i: i^ i£ 0 (i*


tp 2. 2. f2 0 m


o —


?) M li (>


tl5 ?i: /P m --i-


^ :k \}


%


''if u (r


^i:


?i


^ ^


^X ^ 0 Z)


'i: m


It li


IP,


?>  Kfi  la  if  n  H

■>  0  A  ;^  S'  ;^

R  n  i:  0  ?>  ¥

:4^  ^  c^  fiife  ^  fifc

TY  *  J.  ®  S  ^

?-iJ  III-  /^>  ^  (ifi  THJ

S  il*  "  M  lis  ^f

fi-  Jl  > 9  0;^

US  ffi  ^  T  ISl  T-

IZ  'K  J'  d)  yjx  li

1-  li  lis ()  H  (


«t gfe 0


<«


;^


(i* i^g n 2. i: ^


L

(D

m

^

*R

m

1

cry

f)

t

m

^

0)

W

!)

O

B#

ss

0)

1:

^

i:

O

CD

li

o

5

i

t^

#

m

lilj

m

f2

ti

f^

JL

T

>J

L

t?

m

ift

+

f

fti

^

"C

m

i3>

'S

h

H

-o

—

o

h

T

"C

fi

^4

I—'

^

0

•y-

fKj

3-

h

n

mf

0

*

fo

fP

^

>"'

Ji.

^)

i:

o

"2-

fTj

^

?.

hB

l}^

h

a

d^

S

i:

[

jE

5

^

J:

!)

S

h

EJ

n

?f^

ih.

5t

&

2fc

it

&

#

«■

9

^

'f

i

L

CO

•y;

J?

ra

1z

^

CO

n.

X

ef

^x

W

-r

(£

T

T

*>

>

"3

-y

CO

a^

■?*?

n

^

i:

?.

Z)

J^

CO

o

4
1

c

j

rr

A

%

i:

m

T

«

^

«

7"

m.

=-.

-^

—

t,

^

—

iS

^

^

^

m

^

-»

m

5

^f

^^

T?

-'

r;

])ff

— 1

?t

/^

#

cr>

rh

?2

pn

5

M

5

f&

i:

(D

^

ifj

-3

^

\

H

C7)

n

^

U

0

0

«ij

U

at

tic

h

7^

5

•

'Jl

"f*

2-

:*:

^

m

?,

;a:

^

T-

0

nmj

f4

h

b

^

^1-

1

7.

0

1

U

i:

ix

#

i:

^)

m

X

-HJ

i  f

^

i:

31

■»

4^

"3

r)

A*

At

"C

1?

te

!)

a

4"

o

"^

CO

t

m

TT

ffi

k

)— *

o_

1  1

l^

(.^

^)

h

o

i

M

#1

;t

^

■»

o

m

5'

ii

(.^

^

-T-IJ

T

T

h

h

T

L

fi

IS

y

at

*

*

m

U

^

A

n

§■

^f

\l

^

^

It

55

^:

0

L

-

:f

^

0

np

m

M

U

,^

s-

4-

m

^

W

!^

#

;6>

0

^J]

■f

J'.

>

It

'df

^2

M

f

^

-hr

CO

?

?f

0

133

i:^

^

^

y

Zl

ii

Pf-t

iv

m

Mr

i:

to

if-

L_

ft

it

m

ifc

0

'^"

K

&

^

o

[Sil

L

i

IP

yp

'i

'^

JE

^

\

^

$T.

— .

i:

m

iz

1

. ,

.m

iz

L

1^

m

b

ffio

0

IE

-•i-

/j>

fO

Ji

>"  ■*

m

i

!•'

llif

0

1>

■f:

C7)

-e

t

;;

3

^l

—

581

?>

|a^

u

m

A^

i^

^

0

m

CD

m

-■>•

^

t

c
X

CO

tfli

C

il

■/+H

fS

?,

,-!)>

*•

-—

^

li

^

5'

^

0

■*

"■

T-

^^

2-

%

41-

'f-

n

f«

N

1-'

;/£

(7)

7]^

^

(6)

^J'

<

H

(5)

"^

^j

(4)

CO

(3)

Ji

fiS

■i

ii

(2)

'M

f?

5i

— 1

5>

■ifZ

"1

^

P^

—

•

- — ■

fP

r

V

?1^

fSI

0

—\

V

f^

It?

y

i?-

4li

^

m

1

^

y^

;^

X

^

7

P

^

ft!

r

?

1^

7

o

>1-

•

1
I-

5^

1

i:

m

T

y'

2P

^

i^

o

y.

-TlJ

1/

^

y

i^

n

THJ

i^

m

0

u

T-fJ

y

7Ji3C

ti

o

—

7*

o

•HJ

^

^

#}

y

y

o

7,'

n

—

1

o

j^.

0

■^

9

:-£

■p

—

^^

CO

ir'

J7,

Vf

— -

— 1

m

.7f.

1-

fil

o

nil

M

y

A

;?

m

•

■W

-y

y-

Bf-

«ff

#>/.

o

X

i/'

Ji

—

"1)

;*:

*

r

H

m
m

A

-A

o

A

IS

i<

*

jiii

31-

c

0

T

m

, ,

y

^

Hi

—

o

1

, 1-

m

m

o

*

0

m
m

-H-

1
1'

1"

o

n
III

T3
1

r

-7-'

.rtti

o
*

4li

fp

y

0

It

f

*

*

41-

>K

■*

1

0

m

0

A

4|i

t

i

\

o

m

ft";

/rr

m

>l^

0

I'

31
.1-

*

m
n

0

o

JVC

.4^

fP

^
f*

7

>

*•
F

A

Li

11

-T-IJ

o

I'll

o

5^

J,

^

TiJ

V'

'b

ill

Mr

n

—

loi

-HJ

i%

o

r

o

A

i

O

■^

\

m

4^-

m

>l^

o

-T-IJ

'^

—

^

^

if-

f*

5^

o

^_^

o

o

^

o

^

m

J-H

yc

11

m

3"^

m

s:

y

■f-

'^

m

^

o

>

S

m

^

■T-IJ

>1>:

s-

A

,_^

m

ft

ISl

i^

N

■?&

±

o

0

T

Jjl

o

i5

A ^


5 0


^T


?5

3  3

A  i

<^  (i


i1  cr.  S'

2,  -•  §•

s  «-  ;

m  ^i  ^

^£  m  t

()  A  $g

pf-t  A  r


A. L ti' fi]


i ^


©


-r-


-  «i  ^ I


-r  #  I?


^T ;


^i


h z


«?) 'C- 0 Se


T-


i


£JL 0


^ - t:r -c- 1) ()


#


2: i) 0 i i,j t^i


T *g li i^ f)


^ t" fiJ ^ ? flii
•ti- ix ii ©


PI '> <f^  tfl j> ^ Pf-i

0 [nl c^ ^ 3t Jjf ?. {- 2' ^^P


# 0 t!)^ L

If ^ «•■ L
-a- 0 \1 iz


^ U: T? /^> i^ )At 1


b


m


t ^ j^


r


0)


# ^ b 'P .^>
/i. r; u 1


'i.


< A iv C


(i ^ 0 ^ L ill ?)


•y- ii: a


0 2> A


i:


: L T- ;« o

^^ li ?) b 0 5


i: M A. #

'i 75» iS m: U


ts


0


1: #


£ -(SiJ- ffl5 ^S @ -^ 2, gi fIJ


=rT


0


?i < o M li -[0


o S.


re 5


<


X


e. •<


0 1:


S  HJ  ff  ^

2.  ^T  ^  A

^  0  ^  A>

5-  M  li  0

^  &  -^  m


^«—

^L


■* ~  -7-


{: 1»^


0
M


fj'


m

A


;!)><*?>  ^  #  Pll

^ - () 0  #  !l  -a-

IE X i ^  -#  ifiJ  i

la ^ T l^f  -e  ?i  i^

0 ^ ° g\!  *  #  f3

:'/ ^ ?: 3  !)  0  fi


(i r" 0 i^

^ vo Wi h BiJ 1& ^


:^ i: !i t M
0 = fi ^t ?^ >l^


r mi 2, i -# :^/ g :!i B# A (


S ^ *^ f- Jl;.,


li; §■ ^K 0 'j!f Vi


i|^ II fr ^ L L-


t:


t?  tf  n


L > u m  A


i' 0 '7i? -t^
5PP ^1- A ^


m


w \i r- /T -^


FP  i  m  n  ^ ^  ir  Hi  ii  m

iU T #• 1: (i 2. r^ ^JJ 4BE 0


^ M M b 2. i« J'J- T M


m
&


i\iik


A


*>■

■>

£Jl

I

Jb

1^

i)>

(

^

A>

ii

I-

I-

^

m

L-

L

m.

^

.ir

A.

1-H

3

.

CO

*>■

A.

N

Ii

=)■

n

T

h

!f

Sfe

i:

m

"C

^

0

#

o

T3

w

m

*

;6>

I

H

1

-f-

■^

0

-y.

<

m

0

^

Wi

1^

a

X

<'

o

Tfc-

#

fil5

ii

;4^

y

i:

^

£

6^

•—

b

*

f>

WE

%

^

(?

m

0

i:

Ji

jj>

i

;^

>J|J

m

ffi

i

i£

2>

i

L

n

i:

-1,1-

tr

m,

fIJ

IS

i:

-T

!)

-7-

l:

m

[}

T

^j

T

0

T

T

%

^

5

^

ff

m

i'^

h

iS

0

32

^

i

o

f)

l£

Ii

;i>

i

4"

0

S

i:

■y-

^s.

5'

?>

a

»

^

T

IP

i

— 1

it

^

f)

ttj

#

m

m

m

o

cf

/^

fe

?.

ir

DIP

<x

m

e.

i:

0

b

f

•It

;

i

T-

IE

^

o

ix

3

0

?'

i:

i^

^

i:

3.

;!)>

^

T-

0

■y-

b

ff|5

U

ic

T

T

<x

M

!)

~i

f:

-3

C^

n

-k

>1^

*

*

^

i_

«"

T

o

a

'df

4

HE

L

El

^

T

^

!;■

Si

2t

^

Ii

o

^

^^

*

T

*>

{)

m

l:

;*:

*

Y/-

0

5c

m

rf

i

®'

:fT

^

^f

A:

2.

h

^

4

m

^,<i

2)

m

1?

L

ii

^

i:

i:

"f

/5>

0

b

\

f:'

f

iff-

*>

i^

^

0

Ii

■f

^^

Z

*«

-,

0

i:

—

i

;i

,'f"

W

iilP

li

;;

f:

L

li

U

/J

0

0

n

?r

—

f

;^=:

L

i:

m

T-

^

^

;&

m

'—

Ii

1-^

o

H

T?

ir

L

Jf-

Ii

7'2

i£

m

0

<

6^

m

(1

It

^>

0

;^

n

-

i:

^>

^h

/-P*

L.

M

L

^

m

^

ii'

1

m

£

T-

P

;4^

ii

"T

Ml

h

Jli

•V

T

0

-rfl-

i>

^

iz

:£

i-

Tj

i:

,W.

2-

ii

m

ii

c?)

L

o

?-1s

-

— I

^

BJ

u

o

3

L

^f

6^

Jjl

n

0

?

o

— >-

T

^

n

W

j^

TP

m

i)^

L

-B-

1:

^

Ii

Wli

9

H

1^

A"

«i

7JK

m

o

Ii

■tf-

%

a

«)

-r-

t

OPP

>K

Ii

-p

;^

0

0

1:

\z

w

^

t-

0

5

^>

!)

%

o

Ii

A-

^JU

<i)

P

f-

!k

Iris

0

tf

o

!)

^

m

i

!)

J:

?s

IJIJ"

U

'I'

i:

0

h

*

i:

Fr

't

3"

i

m

n

■t

i

T

&

SC

o'

i:

^i.

^

ill:

i'

?<;

Bi

»wC

h

0

•y-

u

iy

0

i:

iP

— 1
-J-

*

t"

m

—1

?s^

ii

J,

2-

s"

f-

W

£

•\

— .

IF]

0

S

1 1

B:

;!)>'

M

#

G

^-

0

0

1.

'^l

o

m

-Ai

FJ

m

nli

r

U

^

— I

P

0

0

5

>l-

«jC

^

^j>

0

m

CO

-4^

iik

a

H

u

-

u

L

5:2

W

7i

iit

m

IIP

i<

tli

^

+

f-

m

•y-

A^

0

i^

•^

\

<

w

0

St

0

•

0

c^

:^

^

m

jiv

r.

i,

i:

:/j

^

r

^'

»

J£

'4f

3l

*^

^-

i5?

i;

t^

*

n

■—

^-^

i^

-//^

1

i:

Ii

V

0

m

L

^1

i:

u

jzE

M

m

'I

?

&.

0

—

fz

i^

te

±

I-

*«

T

^

n

h

n

a

b

-o

ii

9\-

2

-L-

;/.-

T

%

^

£

V

#

KH

0

o

^

>'■■

Ji

\

"L

iz

CT)

b

A

0

?;?

;_

L

^

•

?

:i5^

^

T

(

i:

i:

-^f

•K

CO

i

i:

A

-\-

H.^

;f

"C

»

^<

i^

*^

S.

*

0

/J*^

l¥

l:

t>>

"c-

OJ

^

^<ti

m

105

Tj-

rr

A

;^^

iz

iz

t"

iTi:

(,'

L

n

-a

>

^'

<^

11

n

^

jP.
-1-

«

>f.J-

X

v^"

u

?f

0

6

U

^>

T

C'

m

X

!)

?

3:

c

1  1

f)

t'ij-

■7'

2)

i:

T-

/^>'

^2

A>

^

*S

L

-j'j-

i

•**

1

n

a:

iS

0

±

^

^

Ii

'«

%

^>

^>-

Si

<fr

0

L

I-

~L

is

-T'

1

T

■\

L-

— ,

— ,

'j

^>

^

111

i:

i)>

L

m

^3

' (

^

4[i

z>

!;•

o

ill

';

?^

?i--

M

^_

?

^

1^

t3

%

o

2.

'

b

T-iJ

; — \

{

i:""

;^

3^

L

0

0

1}X

A

A

tt

s

4^

ii

-13

->^

\y

^r

'i-

T^

a

^

s

4%

?3

i^

#

T

o

^

f&

#

T-

t

S

T

c

?

m

u

m

^

lit]

o

P']

0

Ilk

■f2

it

0

i:

^_

T

J'J-

JC

Ii

ii^

m

m

--N^

-,

^

s

'M

lii

i:

IISI

\

2

m

^■

fj

2t

J^

A

iz

LJ

•\

JIIL

?j

1^

— .

Jl

^

IS

Pf-J-

'^

^■

%

m

^

S

iS^

flip

!)

n

O

"1

I'lM

,_

:/

<i^

0

m

^

-y-

A>

c5

M

m

1

w

0

i:

i

m

m

i^

■^

b

1t

'[J

c-

B*

?.

fr

m

%

%

0

"t?

te

■y-

Ii

m

•

r-

^

U

T?

T

Ii

1^7.

Ii

^^

u

ft

#

i>

5

o

^

1^

m

m

Ui

0

^

^

Ii

^

2.

n

m

^"■'

^

?£

9

■^

T

o

h

m

'J'F

*

m

m

m

Wc

(£

"k

m

Ii

^

t.

i

u

1:

&E

9

I —

m

J;

w^

•\

i:

i:

L-

X

u

>

0

*>

U

1z


■>r  TT^v^TflTT'ir^r^


1z


L


0
nn

m
b

CO


M *fi ^ «^t

I, ,r«.  O  i

A (D — '^',!


^<  *. O u

^*  ^ ^ ;3r

fill)  ^

CL  ^

m  r:

T"  «-

Hi  ^>

us  m

iz  ^J

r," z.

^.  5C

A  -

b  A

0  ;;^
H —


CD


V

CD


o
1


*'


(12)

n

W5


Jl


O


fit


o


flff

o


,B|


(11)


/fe


^ 1

Bf. *


'0. g


y

o


o
El
ffi


A


Bel  HiS


-a-


T-i]

o


-^  /I/

7-  ^°

:/  _-

ZC  o

Die  4fi

o

°  a:


(10)

r


o

tfj-
m


*'
^


7

7

/I-

ii

•

;:

Z)


o


.B^i


/"^


izg

4ji


Jl  ^
ml  S
a US


J)


(9)

— !
u

1)

!)
L

A.


P


1


y
y

^


i-

T

5


^f? I^J f^
fifi Ml 2t

It  ^^  ;■!?


?


(8)


m

u

y
4


y

5£ ?

m  m

o o

m  m


(14)

—1

y


o lltj

*

±  m


^  R  m

^  *  Jlt
^1-' 1 *

^ I- !)
i.


y

7


TiJ ^


0

;*:

Bn
=^

iiiin

1z

0


i _


-ti- ?'


,-*•


0 'oU


—  0


0
W

r


t:

0

sfe


•y

m

fiS.  0

0  @

-jC  0

Jill  Z.


till

T-+ -Ki 0


1-


m


it


iJf'


1-


r
\-

m

iiii
u


0

Ira


;7^


n

o


0


Mt ;!)' 1


'£

0


^ Jfls
%  ^^

0 i

^ ^^

o ^1-

^ J.
S'

y

-%■


a-


A Si
Mi 5ff

o ^

f


(13)
fl] u

o K

\\\ V

C '/


li
y
1/
'y'
u
^.
0

IS


iSC


o


*

^

T

I:'

^.

?.)

^)

1

i

2.

t

;i>

1

^>

K;

\

7


0  ::^

m  R

0  ;4^  4^

a  *  ^

If  A  ic

a  ^o  -r


■S?  TO

o  W

^:  M

T  b

-  iz


O
A


O


^p

li

»

5

f>

b

3)

T

Z)

IS

0

U

-V,

h

^^

■fz

rr

\

*+

sa

iS

(I

Ht

m

R

^

r>'

^i:

■41

^^

fi^

a:

o


±


m.


jE -t

m  m
CD  m


0


IB  -yj

i'd.'.  ^ft

2-  i

■X  i:

lE  lis


ii^^


0

[yra

0


#;


JR


L


0  te

b  m

T?

^  F-U

;  c

&  L

{:  t:

#  ^

ft  7

0  ^

^  Hfi

Hi  0

B#  #

^  ?>

ft  i

0  Z)


m


#


0  &li fl- 0 JL C t^ t B'C * ?;

1  0 ;4i T' X ^ (; i)> ^ ■€■ r
0 n li ^ ff (i Ff'J- ^ Tr ?, ?)


stt


Tt T


B 3)


b


X

-f

m

L

Vp

—

i

4{i

#

0

±

?l

0


ft # 5


;*: fe b \'. m ^1 :¥■ h th ^ m i. Is


0 j5C ^ i HH


^ L Ift C -^ 3r
0O-CL?)-L0-^


^2
t, 0

L T


ii'

<

i:

V


% Vi b ^ 0 JiS L ^


1 L ?! H


V-


H


;^ 0

m  m

II 0


— -fnr


0

2.


m

i

o

t

i
h

3-)

b

i ^

■$■ ?*

^ i'i


'£
IE
L

0


0


b sx
^  jt

I- (i
b


M  0

1-  ?i

Z)  l«

^  bG

FbI  »

B#  T-

j:  i

"  b


? ^


S ±


^

0

{:

kh

^

b

U

m

G

T-

i

/Mi

o

li

^

L

c^

T

^

/?r

"C

T

*g

ix

^

%

JE

<fh

(•

#

*f

<

•y-

0

^

l¥

?.

m

W

0

IB

ix

#

!>'

f;

ti

^

IS

=1

fe

i5¥

5t

±

li

m

m

m

•

ix

i:

u

■^

Ul

~C

^

b

ft

ffl

<

H

m

^

*

z,

c

%

^

n

?.

i&

ii

^

ft

0

'V

b

ai

•

*>•

7i

^

#

*t

t'

m

ft

^

L

n

0


A.

T

if


ili


o


m  m  r-

/]-  H  m

H ^t^ ^2


i^i


m


••is il

ix i
f2


ft- ;'L ak -*?J


0 i^ Hi S 'C
HE fi^ W f  J- ifc


«f m.


'£x


_h 0 !:


^ m


Wi


c


i:

it

5^


0


^^ ft? '?i^ t ci ^


!•- ft-

f" 0


n ^ t;

T


■y- ±- ^;j li ^ u y 1^


?> 0 4- ''i
i-h IE o <^


m


ii


fg J{f


^  5


fr f jji*


m


ffl


JS


¥  ?ft


t:


m


ifc


15}


•?&


Ik
L


U


IJ W I f2


ti '^ I?


0


c


x:  0  Its  at  f


R- ^ .=^ fHi il if IK]


l: -^


5i°


lijt  la  2t  ?^j  rv

tf  M  I*  fii  0

^^ ^;j *ij  c  5c  ?  *a

^ 4p ^  #  ^  ix  #

-t: c i^  o  lis  i  u

i)i[  Hi  ic  -c  T.  u  II


o
r.ii


o


'&

■X

+

m

m.

w

I-

#

^•^

£

H

11

,B.

it

n

6^

K

w.

ft

•\

t

*^

— )

^

n


afe


■sr


m


;; m


R


^ iE


^  -b  M  -c II  \-

u  ^  II-  a  m  i%

L  —  b  0  s  SiJ

iz  m  i.  ^  ^-  -4^


I 1Z


b


±


-»


0 & Htl fij fj I' fi


ix C


IE ^


tf -(:■ U -y- .a


^ h n


e> ^i■


ti- f * L

^


^ ^


< ^ ?> < |ii-  If


I- }» ?r^ ?. < 0 *


C W*


?i L L A> ^


#t  tz


o  la  ^  •if;  m  -fr  :;jn  i^  f2  fn  6^  ?:
"tz  ^  ii^  i)  ii>  j)-  fv  U  fe  #  ^  U  9
0

T-


< < 2. O fIJ


?: 1^ 0 t2 ;*: &P !)


f2 0 1^ 0 ^ flU


^ IS


0 h T- ?>

K 5' * 0 # -'-■


0 K


dfr fs lil 0 °


-1 «t t> ' TiJ fJ^ »
^ _ #|S K 0

15 r: % m ^ '<± \.


i-h 35


^


< ij;


J, t^


i-h #


^


- 0 -H-


o ^


C, f,


^


0 ,Hi ^x 15 0 is


k-h Wt 'J^ t i- :^ ix

m - ;3 T + lh!p


n i:


I: O 0 li a a


l5^0^O,P^ii'?.


t:- -^ m
-^ fz i>


0


i: b ^  wr


-C iX U IE ^
ff # -tz


cD


0 L L


r^ f^ m 0

?. Fr 0? tf-


a


&[i L- *> IS; ft Kill


T  0  «  fz  i^

1:  0 b w.  m  ^,  i,  ^  (

MX- £ #  *ie  0  0  0  m

O ^Bf IE 0 ^i  A  T-  A>  iJJf


6P A>


1; s ?> ^ ^ -5 i 1^
M r. (D m M "C t '• '^'


m  # -e IT 'X

fz h fk  m X  ^  ii ^ ^


i z  m  u


-. 0


l^ 0 C- :^^ 0 :^ 0 0 ^


HiJ (D ^ &


m


0  £

—  I'

m  -

0  x<


1^  m  m  ^p  i>  -n:  w


m^m^itt-\'z>^±^^


0


u  i^


o ^


'■) 0

T- #1S


ro


m  '?\  %  h u  ^ -f.  ?;  ^> k


hj ih t)^ i>


m ^ ^ i)^ ki


o i^


0


H


a;


_  t«l


4:


m
m.


+  0


^  i


^ c.


m

«^
ii*


-a-


t + ^' i

*> fit T? JH
- 4ii t ^


^


0 4


4ii


O


# 0 ^


■f :ffifc T 0 0 *^


? U


G —


T, 1? it" /h *> iE # 1=iJ -^


K


ffi * T? ^


# * ff -


f) Pf-1- h ^ m ^ -c-


;i 0 J5 /^


i^ U O


a-)


r li L &


:^ T ?) tr- i- e. li PR \i (D b ;^ If ?2 i^


h t


iv  ^ m -^  m t


L


() ^ ?: -f: ^> 0 {: ;6> f i^ < ^ r +


lj^ ? sjc  M  m  *


;^' ± X :^ 0 (1 0


li ^
0


4^, ^


5 ?, ac li -'r^ A -f- t^ 0 -^


t3


ft ^


^


S-


—  <  |J^  T  (i  3^  :«)>  a^  f;
U:  L  i:  M  ^  o  li  T  a^
Ji li li *^ 5 -< >^


S'


0 J4 r y>^
3E* iltiS ^-^ •-


U f& r- Wi ^ 1- it ^i- M "c- -fil


it^  li  m


m  ik  h  m


i* S- Is 5 0 L


ii  -  m


^i-  /!?:


- ^ x2 i5 I: i}^ -C- <: ^: li x O


^  gfe 0 L -r


M r


-c ^ H o :ljii -c


0 in ^ :^ t,' ra3 t -^ ^


X

5£ ".(f ^ B: ii T !) I
0 *^ ;&> i ^ i S


r


l^ili
1:


0 iL T


in] &■ iix c -I: fe fi m


^ m < i<:


TIJ „


=ic


1:


& T.


^


o'  m  m  t-
^  ^  J?-  0  -^


ai¥f  L^^mm-^SfM-^n'^

X  ±

s

jT. jT.

%

I

jr.  ji
if.  if.

«jll

+  +

i *

w

«

fig

H  n

31  "■

XM

; Eu

^

M

£^

J »i

^r

H H

=»r

1 *

iK

ft  81

«

> K

5>c

S

atg

r.

IK

iff

*

it

a  III

tK

Sf

#

w

fi^l

JS

IP"*

K

i£^

Mil

EM


ft


mm  LTS-mm-^MM^iv


'n  pji  »  m


EU

m


3


BP


^1


IX


ft


>c

:»;

TF.

TF.

+

+

Jf.

at

¥

^

+

+

n

I

ji

—

B

B

«f

EO

=f5

e«

r\

*

IE

\^8,1


+2a5'2.

\.%

i:al

t-  ^£97

'R?j !.  r.


v^r^i-Ui


Emdenr


Date  Due


Remington  Rand

nc.  Cat.  no.  1 139.
