TRANSACTIONS
OF
THE ASIATIC SOCIETY
|afan.
VOL. IX.
(Reprinted October, 1906)
TOKYO.
N
OiMTRAL
UBBr-.U ■ . .. *.,i.
A««. No. _X^^/Sr Miw
..... zsy^/;£7
CONTENTS OF VOL IX*
PART I.
PAGE.
The Lacquer Industry of Japan. By J. J. Quin I
Notes on the Dialect Spoken in Ahidzu. By Basil Hall Chamberlain 32
On " Kaki-no-shibu.” By I. Ishikawa, Graduate of the Univer.sity ot Tokyo. 37
Notes on some Recent Earthquakes. By J. A. Ewing, B. Sc. F. R. S. D. ... 41
The Mineral Springs of Ashi-no-yu in the Hakone Mountains. By Dr. A. J.
C, Geerts 49
Evidences of the Glacial Period in Japan. By J. Milne. ... 54
Hideyoshi’s Invasion of Korea — Chapter II— The R<=treat. By W. G. Aston. 89
Analyses of 'I'en Japanese Mineral Spring Waters. By Dr. A. J. C. Geerts ... 97
Minntes of Meetings '
PART II.
Contribution to the History of the Jajianese Transcription of Chinese Rounds.
By Joseph Edkins, D. D 107
Historical Notes on Nagasagi. By W. A. Woolley 125
A Memorandum on the Coleopterous Genus Damaster with Notes on Six
Species or Forms in it. By George Lewis 152
The Capture and Captivity of P^re Giovan Battista Sidotii in Japan from 1709

to 17 ^ 5 ' Rev. W. B. Wright 156

Descriptive Notes on the Rosaries (Jiu-Dzu) as' used by the Different Sects of

Buddhists in Japan. By J. M, James 173

Ancient Japanese Rituals. — Part III. By Ernest Satow 183

Minutes of Meetings '


PART III.

Ilideyoshi’s Invasion of Korea: Chapter III - Negotiation. By W. G. Aston. 213
A Translation of the “ Dou-zhi-ken.” Teachings for the Young. By Basil

^ Hall Chamberlain ... 223

On the New Mineral Reinite. By Dr. Otto Luedecke: Translated by M.

Yokohama 347

The History of Japanese Costume : II— Armour. By J. Conder, M. R. I. B. A. 254

Minutes of Meetings

Report of Council

List of Members


THE LA.CQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.


By J. J. Quin.


[Read Octoher 12, 1880.]

Among the Art Industries of Japan, that of lacquering undoubtedly
holds the first place, not only as furnishing occupation to thousands of
people in various parts of the country, bat also as displaying skill,
patience, and in many cases the highest kind of artistic excellence.
Its utility also is undoubted, for a large number of tlie utensils used
in Japanese households owe their strength and durability to the lacquer
which covers them.

The object of the present paper is to sketch in a cursory manner
the rise and progress of this act, the localities where it has principally
flourished, and to give a short description of the mode of making and
painting lacquer ware.

The extent and ramifications of the lacquer industry, as well as
its great antiquity, preclude the possibility of giving as detailed a
description as the importance of the subject deserves.

I am indebted for a great portion of the following information
to a Avork called Kd-f/ci Shi-riyu, and to notes furnished by a lacquer
manufacturer, which have been supplemented by personal observation
of the ware in its various stages.

For convenience of reference it is proposed to divide the subject
into the following headings : —

1. — History and origin of lacquer ware.

2. — The various changes that have taken place in the styles of gold

lacquer.


QUIN : TIIK LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.


2

— Names of the princii>al kinds of lawpier ware and the localities
in which tliej have flourished.

4. — Various kinfis of lacquer.

5. — ^Cultivation of the lacquer tree, and the mode of obtaining the

lacquer varnish.

8. — Various ivockIs used in making lacquer ware.

7 . — Method of making lacquer ware; (1) Black lacquer; (2) Red
lacquer ; (M) Him-iJialii/e ; (4) To^l-dmhi ; (5) Taka-‘niaJdye.
— .Various kinds of gohl <lust, etc., nml in the ornamentation of
lacquer ware.

f).— Tools and other articles used in the manufacture of lacquer ware.

10. — Noted workers in lae<]uer, and the period in which tliey lived.

11. — A ft-nv noted pieces of old lacquer.

L—mSTORY OF THE LACQUER TRAHE.

It is not known whether the lacquer industry flourished previous
to the time of the Emperor JImmii, B. C. 660-581, Le., daring the
ages known as Kmtihjo or times of the Gods, but it is mentioned in
the old records, that during the reign of the Emperor Iv6-an, who
ascendetl the throne B. 0. 302, and was the sixth Emperor from
Jirama Tenn5, a person namtri Mitsuiie no Sukune was the first on
whom tiie office of Chief of the Imperial Lacquer Department was
(conferred (JJt'mhi-he no Miii’iiji), but tiiough this title exists, un-
fortunately it is not known what articles were manufactured.

The next notice of lacquer is during the reign of the Emperor
Ktl-toku, who came to the throne A.D. 645. In hk time the names
■of all the offices were changed and that (4' Urvshl-he nn Mnraji was
altered to that of Urmhlh- no 'fmkma. In the various provinces
where the lt«|uer industry was curri&I on, lacquereii articles were
received by the Government in lieu of taxes, and a notification was
wued that in future the joints of the Imp<!rial eoffiu.s should he
cwvered with lacquer. In this reign also, rules were established
respecting the Kammui-l or ceremonial head«eovering, and mention is
ititde of the {>endant being stiffened with lacquer. From this time
lacquer began to he used on numerous articles.


: Tiiv: i,ACtiri:ri iNurnruY ok .iakan.


In tiie reign of the Emperor Temmu, A.l). r,7JS-fi8(>, a work-
man whose name has not been preserved invented the mauufaeture
of reci lacquer, and he Jaeqnerefl a set of slielves for the EmixTfjr.

In the reign of the Emperor Mommu, A.D. <397-708, the otfi-
cials of the liacquer Department were dividefl into three grades, viz.,
Vfmhi-he no ku/tu\ Ju, and >'<al-u/rn]t. Twenty workmen were engag-
ed, and orders were issue<l that all articles manufactured by these
men should be certified by their names, and a prohibition was
issued' by tlie (rovernment against the manufacture of 1 acqiier except
by these workmen.

During the reign of the ICmperor Geramio, A.D. 708-715, and
the two following reigns, viz., those of the Empress OenshS, A.D.
715't2o, and the Emperm- Shmmi, A.D. 724-748. the lacquer in-
dustry made great pn>gre>s. uml five diiferent coloured bnpiers were
used. 'I’he jn-acti'-e "t‘ inlaying witli niothcr-of-jM‘arl, and of lacquer-
ing gold, silver, enppi.T aud Icatlier, was adopted ; while about this
time, also, gold powde'-ed and mi.xeil witli lacquer was applied to
the articles. This was the origin of “ lacquer drawing ” (liLakii/tS).

In the reign of the Emperor Kwammu, A.D. 782-800, the taste
for lacquer ware spread greatly throughout tlie country, and gr<^at
attention was paid to fliis industry.

In the following reign of the Emperor Heizei, A.D, 80tj'809,
the Lac(juvr Department was incorporateil with the Talmml-ri^d,
answering to tlie J*u})lic Works Department of the present day.

In the reign of tin* Enqieror Duigo, A.D, 89S-931, the luoquer
industry made ra])id strides, aud it is mentioned that lacquereii
articles were largely recelveil iu lieu of taxes. It would ap|)ear,
therefore, that at this period the restriefion as to twenty workmen
only iaaiig jxn-mitted to work iu lacquer must have been removefl,
though there is no sjiecial mention of the fact in tlie records of that
time.

In the reign of the Emperor Sujaku, A.D. y3]-!K3f5, Taira no
Masaka<lo ami Fujiwara no tSnrnitomo rebelled and made war, the
firet, in the eastern provinces (ShiraOsa) and the latter in the western ‘
provinces (Shikoku^ in consequence of which disturbances the lacquer
industry in those districts and in the neighhouring prtn inces declined


4 C^UIN : THE LACQUEE INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.

greatly, and other articles had to be substituted for the lacquer work
paid in yearly to the Government for taxes. Only the commonest
articles for daily use continued to be manufactured.

At that time, however, the Kvges at Kioto became very luxuri-
ous and fond of display, so that in that city alone the lacquer trade
continued to prosper, and the manufacture of gold, silver and mother-
of-pearl lacquer ware improved considerably. The attention paid to
this branch of industry at Kioto did not flag during the period ex-
tending from the reign of the Emperor Murakami, A.D. 94t-968,
to the reign of the Emperor Antoku, A.I). 1181-1185, and the fame
of the Kioto lacquer ware was such, that moneyed person.?, and those
who were fond of handsome furniture, induced numbers of the Kioto
workmen to come and settle in their provinces, and this tended
greatly to the development of the lacquer trade.

The Bakufu (or Government of the Shoguns) was established
during the reign of the Emperor Go-Toka, A.D. 1186-1198, at
Kamakura, and thither numbers of artisans in lacquer flocked eager-
ly, but they did not attain to the excellence of workmanship arrived
at by the Kioto tradesmen.

Disturbances broke out at Kioto <luring the reign of the Emperor
Chiukio, A.D. 1222, in consequence of which the lacquer indu.stry
received a check and declined for a time.

During the previous period, viz., between A.D. 947 and 1181,
a number of priests as well as officials became very expert in working
in lacquer, and they sold quantities of articles of their own manufacture.

In the reign of the Emperor Go-Karaeyarna, A.D. 1868-1392,
Yamana Ujikiyo, and Ouchi Yoshihiro, two powerful retainers of the
Ashikaga family, built castles at Sakai, in the province of Idzumi,
and the locality prospered greatly, Kumerous \vorkers in lacquer
were attracted thither, and this to so great an extent that the ware
made there acquired a high reputation.

During the reign of the Emperor Go-Hanazono, A.D. 1429-1464,
the Shogun Ashikaga Yoshimasa had a passion for lacquered articles.
The best workers assembled round him in Kioto, and as he gave
large orders for all kinds of ware- the industry wms greatly stimulat-
ed, while the style and finish improved vastly.


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.


5


During tlie reign of the Emperor Go-Tsuclii jNEikado, A.D. 1465-
1500, tile country was disturbed. Yoshimasa, however, did not trouble
himself about affairs of state, but devoted himself entirely to frivolous
pleasures, the encouragement of the fine arts in general, and the
manufacture of lacquer, so that this art continued to prosper in Kioto.
About this time the Chinese patterns and modes of working w'ere
copied and introduced, such as Tmi-ahu (embossed red lacquer), Tmi-
holm (embossed black lacquer), i.e., incised lacquer on wood, and
several other methods of applying gold lacquer.

During the first three quarters of the 16th century Japan was
a constant scene of civil wars, wdiich caused the lacquer trade to
decline greatly, until the advent of Taiko Hideyoshi, who conquered
the whole country and re.stored quiet, thus enabling the lacipier trade
in Kioto and the neighbourhood of Sakai to revive again. It (con-
tinued to prosper during the reign of the Emperor Go-Yozei, A.D.
Ib87-1611, when lyeyasu came into power, and the lac(|uer industry
flourished all over the country. From that date until now it has
spread in a manner unknown in former times.

ir.-CHANGES THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN THE
STYLE OF MANUFACTURING GOLD LACQUER.

"What is undei’stood as gold lacquer or makiye consists of pictures
of flowers, trees, uuitnals, landscapes, etc., painted on the lacquered
article witli gold dust. The date when this industry was commenced
is unknown, hut the oldest {)ieee of gold lacquer now extant is a
kesa~hnko, or box for holding the scarf worn by Buddhi.st priests
across the shoulder, formerly belonging to Shu-toku Tai-slii (b. 572,
d. 621), and the next oldest is the sheath of a sword which belong-
ed to the Emperor Shd-mu, A.D, 724-748 : both of these pieces are
preserved in the temple of To-dai-ji at Nara, in the province of
Yamato. The term makiye was not used at that time, hut the style
is mentioned in old records as onalc-kin-rd.

The mode adopted in lacquering the sheath was as follows : On
the groundwork, which was black lacquer, figures of birds, animals,


6


QXJIN : THE LACtiUER IXDHS'i'RY OF JAPAN.


flowers and plants -were designed in j-ough angular gold dust ; a second
t®] coat of black lacquer was tlien given, and afterwards ground down
till the picture appeared. This style is considered very interesting
and curious, and dilfers materiall}'’ from that in use later.

In the same temple are preserved also nutnerous lacquered
articles, known by the name of JJiyd-inon. This ware was manufac-
tured by cutting out the figures of flowers and plants on a thin gold
plate, which was then lacquered on to the article. Mak-lcin rd, pro-
perly so-called, is very rare, and it is evident from the specimens that
no great excellence of workmanship had been attained up to that time.

After the Emperor Kwammu fixed the capital in Yamashiro
(the modern Kioto), A.D. 794, a taste for luxury and grandeur grew
up, and it is recorded in old works that people wore swords, the
sheaths of which were lacquered with gold — Makiye Hei-jin.

Up to the beginning of the lOth century the manufacture of
lacquer had not attained any high degree of artistic excellence, but
. from the extant .specimens dating from this period it can be seen that
the gold powder was of a vei’y much finer quality, and the painting wa.s
much more minute and elaborate than in the middle of the 8th centuiy.
The kind of powdered gold lac(iuer called nu><lujl, from its resem-
blance to the spotted skin of a pear, was introduced about the
beginning of the 10th century. About the middle of the 10th century
the nobles began to u.se articles of furniture covered with gold
lacquer. The Emperor Kwan-zaii (reigned 985-980, d, 1008) was
extremely fond of good gold lacquer. Amongst the works he is
said to have had made for himself were a landscape representing
Ho-rai-zan, the Elysian Mountain, and figures of men with enor-
mously long arms, and others with extiraordinarily long legs, known
in Chinese and Japanese fables. These j>ieces of workmanship were
much admired at the time. In constructing these articles, the edges
were for the first time covered with powdered silver or tin by a
process called oki-r/uchi.

Great improvements were made in the art of lacquering during
the reign of the Emperor Konoye (1142-56), and about this time
figures were occasionally painted in gold lacquer ; mother-of-pearl,
also, and glass of many colours were inlaid on a groundwork of


quin: the lacquer ixdustrv of jauax.


nashiji, much more tliickly sprinkled with gold than is ever done
at the present day, as much as from Id to 18 mommc of gold dust
(855 to 102G grains) being used per square foot. A noble named [7]
Doi Toshitomo, residing in Tokio, has at present in. his possession a
very fine box (iebato) attributed to this period. The groundwork of
this box is thick wixldji, inlaid with various coloured shells: it is
estimated that the gold dust used per square foot is considerably
over 10 momine (570 grains).

During the reign of the Emperor Takakura, A.D. 1169-1180
nearly every article was lacquered with gold, and the nobles werej,
in the habit of having their bullock-carriages lacquered with gold
opemwork- — Hiijd-mon. The art of lacquering in gold is considered
to have arrived at its highest degree of perfecti n daring the reign
of the Emperor Go-Shirakawa, about the year A.D. 1175.

About the middle of the 15th century flourished the Sho-guii
Ashikaga Yoshimasa, who, abandoning the reins of government to
others, devoted himself to pleasure and the eiicoiirageineut of the arts,
and set the fashion of collecting antique curiosities. A mafked
change took place in the style of the gold lacquer. Previously the
decoration had consisted for the most part of floral designs, but now
landscapes, figures and architectural subjects came greatly into fashion.

The term Kwne-maki (metal appliqud) appears to have been some-
times employed to denote mukh/e.

Yoshimasa, who was a great patron of lacquer-ware, ordered a
letter-box to be made for him covered with gold-figured lacquer on a
rich ground of naxhiji, which was considered a chef d'aneore. To this
period the first introduction of Tal-a-mnJdije, or raised gold lacquer,
is also attributed.

As has already betm observed, the civil wars which raged
during the latter half of tlie 10th century greatly interfered with
the progress of the arts, aud the lacquer trade declined greatly.
There was only one good w'orkman at that time, one Igarashi Do-ho;
all the ware made by other workmen was vastly inferior to what
had been produced in former days.

A celebrated frork in lacquer, belonging to the second quartet
of the 17th century, is the tomb of the 8b5-gun Plidetada, still


8


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.


existing in tlie Mausoleum created to his memory in -what is now
known as the ‘Shiba Public Garden.’ Hon-ami Ko-yetsu was an
admirable contemporary worker in lacquer.
iP] Towards the end of the 17th century the .lacquer trade prospered
greatly, and many judges assign the palm of excellence to the
ware then manufactured. The ware of this period is spoken of by
the name Jd-lceii-Lirjidai, signifiying “ of the time of Jo-ken-In,”
that being the posthumous name of the. Sho-guu Tokugawa Tsuna-
yoshi. A reading stand (Kendai) manufactured during this period
was sent to the Vienna Exhibition, but the vessel in which it was
being brought back was wrecked off the coast of Idzu, and the
stand was not recovered for eighteen months afterwards, when it was
ascertained not to have received the slightest damage from its long
‘ immersion — a fact which proves the excellence and durability of the
ware made at that time.

About the beginning of the 18th century a style called Oiyo-bu
Nashiji was introduced, differing from the ordinary nash-iji, in that
small squares of gold leaf were applied instead of powdered gold.
The name of Giyo-bu Kashiji was most probably given to this style
of ware from a workman of this period residing at Yedo called
Giyo-bu Taro, by whom, as far as is known, it was first made. It
met with a good deal of favour, but as the workmen strove principal-
ly after careful painting and extreme minuteness of detail, without
paying so much attention to the artistic elegance of the design, it
cannot properly be compared with what was manufactured during
the preceding epoch.


III.-VARIOUS NAMES BY WHICH LACQUER WARE
IS KNOWN.


Some kinds of lacquer take their names from a specialty in the
mode ot manufacture, others from the locality, others from the maker j
and some kinds have always steadily improved, while other kinds
have declined and gone out of fashion. Below are recorded some of
the best known and most renowned kinds:—


QUfN : '(’HE I.ACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.


5)


“ Urushi-ye ” — Picture Lacquer. — This kind consists, as ifs
name implies, of all kinds of designs jiainted on the lacquered articles
with different coloured lacquers. The date when this was first done
is not known, but the earliest record of it is during the reign of the
Emperor Daigo, who in the year A.D. 906 ordered sixteen flower-
dishes of Picture lacquei’. The next notice of this style of lacquer
is met with in the records of the reign of the Emperor Takakura, [9]
A.L. 1169-1180, whjen it ia mentioned that a woi'kman from Nambu
in (j-shu painted flowers, birds, grasses and trees, in red, green and
yellow lacquer, on a black ground, and the production of this species
of ware spread, from that period, over the whole country. In the
year 1688 a man named Kan-shichi, in Yedo, was famed for painting
representations of waves, and he gave liis name to that kind of
painting, calling it’ Sci-gai-Kan-sMchi — Green sea Kan-shichi. In
1868 a certain Shibata Ze-shin discovered a method of painting in
coloured lacquers on paper and silk, which must also be classed as
imishi-yc.

‘‘JuGA-iiANA Urusui-ye.” — This lacquer derives its name from
the locality where it was made in the province of Etchiu, in the
district of Tonami, and like the former kind, consists of paintings of
various designs on black lacquer in colours. This special kind
flourished greatly a hundred years ago, and the trade was kept for
many generations from about A.D. 1470 in the family of one
Ji-go-za-ye-raon,

'‘Mitsuta Ye” — Pictures painted with Mitsuta, a kind of lacquer
obtained from a tree of tliat name not now known. The date when
this species of painting was introduced is unknown, but in A.D.

756 the Empress Ko-ken presented several flower-trays of it to the
temple of To-dai-ji at Nara. The method of making these trays was
as follows : Cotton cloth was pasted over the wood and then lacquered,
on the upper side of the tray white Mitsuta was applied, and over
this various designs of flowers, tree.s, men, birds, etc., were jminted *
in yellow lacquer. On the under part of the tray a quantity of de-
signs were painted on the black lacquer in red Mitsuta. These trays
are preserved in the temple at the present day. The fashion for this
species of ware increased from the date mentioned above, till in the


' 10 QUIN ; THE LAC!QUEE INDUSTEY OF JAPAN.

year A.D. 795, when the Emperor Kwaramu fixed the Imperial
residence at Kioto, and the existing fashions underwent a change
and the taste for gold lacquer, nctshiji and lacquering with mother-
of-pearl came in. Prom that date the Mitsula-ye gradually declined,
and finally died out.

“ Cno-MOKU ’’—C arved Wood. — T he lacquer ware known as
Cho-niolm consisted in lacquering over with vai’ious colours carved
wooden articles. The date when this method was introduced is not
known, hut it is mentioned as being much used in the year A.D.
£10] 906. At that time the term Clid-mohu was confined to small Japa-
nese carved lacquered writing tables, but later the name came to be
applied to any article treated in the same manner, ix., carved and
then lacquered over.

: “KIamakura bori.” — T his kind, fimt made at Kamakura in

1198, resembles the former in being carved and then lacquered. The
carvings ^vere principally of the Botan (Pmonia Moutan), Plum
flowers. Water caltrop, etc,, painted in red over black lacquer, which
was always the foundation colour.

The ware known as Echizen hori does not differ from the above,
but the kind called Odawara hori is very inferior to the others.
The taste for all these kinds changed in the year 1573, since which
date none has been manufactured.

“Kambu nitri.” — This ware derives its name from the district
where it was manufactured, namely, Nambu, in the province of
0-shu. It is principally red lacquer, and specimens over ‘six and
seven hundred years old still exist. Among the wooden bowls or
cups there are some very fine specimens, black outside and red within.
On the outside, flowers, cranes, etc., are painted in red, green and
yellow lacquer, while the ground work is dotted over with small
^ ^.squares of gold leaf. The colour of the red lacquer i.s considered,
very fine. This kind of lacquer was, and still is, made in various
localities in 0-shu, but it is all called Nambu lacquer. At the
village of Jo-ho-ji, in Kambii, the trade continues to prosper at the
present day,' •

“ Aidzu nuri.” — ’The lacquer made at and near tlie town of
Wakamatsu, in the province of Iwashiro, is known as Aidzu lacquer.


QUIN : THE LACQUER INHUSTKV OK JAPAN.


11


This industry was first introduced in the year InOl, when Ganuf
Ujisato became the dai-mii/o of tliat province, and employed work-
men to imitate the Nnmbu bowls. This style was continued till about
the year 170(1, when the workmen discontinued imitating Nambu
ware and introduced a style of their own, by painting their designs
in gold dust, since which date they attained great perfection. Since
the opening of Japan to foreign trade in 1859, great attention has
been paid to the manufacture, and large quantities of articles useful
for export still continue to be produced.

“IsTegoro nuri.” — This ware derives its name from the temple ;
of Negoro, in the district of jN'aka, province of Kii, where it was
first made. In the year 1288, a number of monks migrated from [11|
Ko-ya-san to ISTegoro, Avhere they founded four monasteries and
numerous temples, from which period the industry prospered greatly,
and the ware was manufactured in large quantities. The principal
articles produced were small Japanese eating tables (.reJi), howls, cups,
small jars and trays, for the most part ij) red lacquer, though black
lacquer was occasionally u.sed. In the year 1585, Hideyoshi attacked;
and dispersed the priests of Negoro, who had created disturbances,
and they were juostly killed. The few survivors fied to a place in
the province of Satsuma called Nejime, where vermilion was pro- , ,
dueed, and settling there, introduced the trade of raakiug red lac-
quered bowls, of coarser quality, however, than the old Negoro ware.

These bowls went by the name of Satsuma -?r(f/o The articles made
did not find much favour, and the industry gradually died out.
Subsequently, some Kioto workmen imitated the Kegoro ware, giving
it the name of Kio^Kef/oro. The manufacture ha.s been continued
by their descendants, and it is made and used at the present time.

At Yoshino, in the province of Yamato, a ware was manufac-
tured in which, though certain deviations were made, the Negoro
ware was the basis of the style adoi>ted. It was called Yoshino-
Negoro lacquer. There are specimens of this ware extant over 5D0
years old, and it is still manufactured in Yoshino to the pr®ent

” Kuroye nuri.” — This ware is made at the village of Ivuroye,
in the district of Nagusa, province of Kii. Between 1624 and 1644


12 quin: the lacquer in'dustry of japan.

a lacquer workman first applied transparent lacquer on plain wood
stained with persimmon juice and made many articles of furniture-
This style came rapidly into favour, and was imitated in various
localities. In 1840 the Dai-iniyo of Ki-sliu had a census taken of
the lacquer workers in the village of Kuroye, when it was ascertained
that the number amounted to more than 4,500 persons, besides over
2,000 journeymen who had come to settle from other parts of the
country to earn a living. Since the opening of the country to
foreign trade, gold lacquer has also been manufactured at Kuroye.

“SnuNKEi Nuri.”— This lacquer derives its name from the
inventor, a w'orkman of Sakai, in the province of Idzumi, who lived
during the reign of the Emperor Go-Kameyama, A.D, 1868-1392.
This ware, like the last, leaves the natural wood to be seen, and
i[12J the mode of manufacture was as follows:— The wood having been
carefully smoothed and prepared, a coating of alum glaze was well
rubbed in to fill up the pores of the wmod , it was then coloured
either with gamboge, or Beiiigam (red oxide of iron), mixed Avith
persimmon juice ; this was rubbed till it became polished. A coating
of pure transprrent lacquer, combined Avitli a small j^roportion of
Ye oil (from Perilla ocymoides), was then applied Avith a hard brush,
and when dry it presented a beautifully polished surface. This
invention was plentifully copied by the workmen of Sakai, and met
with great favour and a ready sale. About the jDeriod extending
from A.D. 1614-1644, a chajiii (a master in the ai’t of preparing
powdered tea) named Kanamori So-wa collected a number of workers
in shis kind of lacqner at Takayama, in the province of Hida, and
manufactured quantities of articles for use in tea-drinking. The
Avorkraen from Sakai lacquered trays of a colour between yellow
and red, which were held in great repute, owing to the fine grain
of the Avood employed, and the Avare obtained the name of Hida
Shunkei. It rose rapidly in faAmur, and the quantity made in-
creased yearly. The Hida Avorkmen, moreover, copied a species of
lacquer of a light yelloAV colour, over fine grained wood, manufac-
tured at Koshiro, in the province of Dewa, and this Avare became
known as Hida Noshiro. Later, as time Avore on, this ware, finding
wide favour, was imitated in all parts af the country, but none of


QUIN ; THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OE JAPAN.


18


it could compare in excellence with that made in Hida and at
JSToshiro. The places where the Sluinbei ware was imitated are the
following ; —

Shimo Ichi Mura, province of Yamato.

Takeda Machi, province of Tajiina.

Yamada Machi, province of Ise.

Shimo Ichi Moto hlachi, Awa Mura and Kami Ichi-ge, provine of
Hitachi.

Kami Shibotare Machi province of Shimotsuke.

Odaira and Yuda Machi, province of Iwashiro.

Hashiba hlaehi, province of Mutsu, and at Tokio.

This ware is still made in all the above name<l places,

“Noshiro nuri.” — This Avare <lerives its name from the village
of Koshiro, in tlie district of Yamato, province of Dewa, where it
was first made. The date when this industry Avn.s introduced is un-
known, but some say that during the reign of the Emperor liei-gon, A.D.
1G63-1686, a Avorkmnn called Yamauchi San-ku-ro came from Hida [13J
and introduced the nianufactiire. This Avare is of a light yellow
transparent lacquer, shoAving the grain of the Avood, and the name
of Noshiro Shunkei Avas given to it. This Avare and that made in
Hida, already mentioned, are the best in Japan. When tliis AA’are
was first made, the articles Avere taken out to sea and lacquered on
board junks, so as to prevent the possibility of any dust settling on
them Avhile drying. The things principally made were sets of
shelves, large trays (Hii'o-hiifa), Jv-bako, or nests of boxes fitting
one on the otlier for holding food, trays, etc., which AA'ere made with
great care, and met Avitli much favour in the eyes of the Japanese.

At the present time one Ishioka Slio-ju-ro, living at Noshiro, has
the reputation of being the most skilful Avorkmsin of the day,

“ WAkasa NURI.” — This Avare takes its name from the province
of Wakasa, and is made in the toAvn of Obama. It is imitated from
a Chinese kind called Zen-f-ei. It Avas made Avith a mixture of red,
green, blue, yelloAV and black lacquers, and presented a cloudy
appearance : gold and silver leaf also AA'ere used in many cases,
forming a floral design, and the ware Avas considered very handsome.

The method adopted in the latter case Avas as follows : — The article


14 QUIN : THE EACQUER INDUSTRY OP JAl'AN.

received a coat of lacquer of the colours required, upon which the
leaf, flower, or spray of fir tree, etc., desired to be reproduced, was
pressed while the lacquer was still fresh. It was then removed, and
the lacquered article which had received the impression was set to
dry. Afterwards gold or silver leaf was applied to the whole of the
surface so prepared, and another coat of the coloured lacquer given.
When dry, the whole wuis then ground down till the pattern came
out. Over this a final coat of transparent lacquer was applied.
Good ware is very hard. It was in great request from about 1624,
and the demand has been steadily maintained. The articles principally
made were cabinets, book-shelves, tables and tebako, boxes for hold-
ing papers, etc,, and continual iinjirovements and excellence of work-
manship were aimed at. Of late’ years this ware has been imitated
in the neighbourhood of Nikko, but it cannot be compared to the
Wakasa lacquer.

“ Tsugaru nuki.” — This ware is manufactured at the town of
[14] Hirosaki and the village of Tsukurirnichi, in the district of Tsugaru,
province of Mutsu. The oidgin of this ware is unknown ; it resem-
bles greatly the Wakasa lacquer in presenting a cloudy and spotted
appearance, but in this ware gold and silver are not used. Of late
years a kind called vishiki lacquer has been made, which consists in
■ painting on the lacquer, birds, grasses, plants, etc., in colours.
Numerous articles, long in the possession of, and made expressly
for, the Lords of Tsugaru, were beautifully made, and though it has
been imitated in various other localities, the articles produced cannot
be compared with this ware for excellence of workmanship, hardness
or durability. The principal articles made are tables, tebako, tobacco
boxes, writing boxes, etc.

“Nikko nuri.”— This ware, somewhat resembling Wakasa lac-
quer, is made in the neighbourhood of Nikko, The date of its first
being manufactured is unknown, but ware made at the village of
Hachi-ishi, in the"- neighbourhood, was ordered by lyeyasu about the
year 1600. This ware is rough in its finish, l)ut is exceedingly
hard, and still maintains a certain popularity.

“ Yoshino nuri.’’ — This lacquer is made throughout the district
of Yoshino, jyrovince of Yamato, but as in the former case, the pre-


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OK JAPAN. 15

cise date of cotnraeucing the industry is unknown. It consisted
principally in the manufacture of cups and bowls in black lacquer,
with devices painted in red lacquer. This ware is also made at
Tawara, in the district of Toichi, and at Gojo, in the district of
Uchi, in the same province.,

“Hino nuri.” — This ware is made at Plino, in the province of
Omi. Date of commencing the manufacture not known. Originally
cups and bowls were the chief articles made, but between 1688 and
1704 all kinds of table requisites were manufactured, and found a
ready sale in the neighbouring provinces. About ten years later the
manufacture prospered very greatly, and large quantities of the ware
were made, but it cannot be compared to that made at Ozaka or
Kioto, either in quality or finfsh.

“Wajima nuri.” — This ware is made at Wajiiua, in the pro-
vince of Koto, the original date of its invention being \inknown. It
consists only of red and black lacquer for all kinds of table retpii-
sites, but though plain, it is substantially made and the lacquer is
hard, so that it is much liked by the Japanese. Since the opening
of tlie country to foreign trade, the artisans have not confined them-
selves to making table furniture only, but have made many other
kinds of articles for general use.

“Zu-KOKU NURi.^’ — This lacquer derives its name from a man
called Tamakaji Zo-koku, who resided at Takamatsu, in the pro-
vince of Sanuki, about 1()24. This man, having learnt the Chinese
method of lacquering, invented several improvements. The method
used in making this ware was to lacquer over bamboo baskets (a
wooden foundation was also sometimes used') either with red or
black lac(|uer, and upon this surface lloral desigms were most
minutely carved in the lacquer. Over this a coating of cither the
same or different coloured lacquer was applied, and then ground
down and polished in such a manner tliat the curved pattern could
be seen through. This is looked upon as very excellent workman-
ship. This man’s younger brother and one of hi.*^ sons attained
great excellence in this ware, which is still made by the descend-
ants of the originator, and the manufa<.*ture of wdiich is couHned to
the one family.


* 16 quin: the lacquer industry of japan.

“ Yamanaka nuri ” derives its name from the place where it
is manufactured, namely, Yamanaka, in the district of Inuma,.
province of Kaga. The date when this lacrpiev was first made
• is unknown. The ware consisted of articles of every-day use, and
in 1858, when foreign trade commenced, various kinds of furniture
were manufactured for export, and the trade still flourishes.

“Zo-GAN NURI.” — This kind of lacquer is manufactured by
inlaying silver or gold wire in the shape of birds, animals and
flowers. This is afterwards covered over with black lacquer, and
then ground down until the inlaid iiicture comes out. The earliest
date of this style is unknown, but during the period extending
from 1804-1818, a workman of Nagoya, in the province of Owari,
manufactured it to great' prefection, and lately workmen at Tokio'
have produced it in imitation of the old style.

“Ha-ritsu Saiku.” — About the end of the 17th century or
beginning of the 18 th a man named Ha-ritsu, a native of Ise,
invented a special kind, by inlaying various designs made of
porcelain, ■ lead, tin, horn or ivory, in the lacquer, and this style
was much appreciated on account of its quaintness. Later, Ha-ritsu
[16] moved to Tokio, leaving behind him a pupil called Mochizuki
Han-zan, known also as Ha-ritsu the second, who manufactured
even finer ware than his teacher. At the present day imitations
are to be found everywhere.

“ SuEUGA nuri ” was originally made at Fuchiu, now called
Shidzuoka, in Suruga. The date of its origin is unknown. The
ware consists of ai-ticles made of several different kinds of wood
joined together and lacquered over, showing the grain of the wood :
as the work, however, was roughly finished, it was never much
appreciated. In the first year after the JRestoratiou in 1868, the
new head of the Tokngawa family moved there with his retainers*
and this gave a great impetus to the lacquer trade. The workmen
began to manufacture several kinds of lacquer ware, such as inlay-
ing with mother-of-pearl and painting in various colours, The chief
products at the present day are book-shelves, cabinets, ink boxes, and
ju-baJeo (nests of boxes), of which large quantities are made.

‘ “ Kuwana noN.” — This ware is manufactured at Knwana, in


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN. 17

Ise, and according to tradition was first made tliere about the end of
the 17th or beginning of the 38th century. This kind consists eX’^
clusively of round black lacquered trays, with a silver turnip lacquered*
on the upper surface. Later, gold was occasionally used, but these
specimens are rare, and most of the devices are in silver, as at first.
This ware was formerly so rouglily finished that only the lower orders-
used it, but the workmanship has gradually improved so much that
it has come to be generally used by the upper classes.

“ Tsuishu and Tsuikoklt ” Lacquer. — It is said that in the-
reign of Go-Tsuchi Mikado (A.I). 1465-1501) a Kioto workman
named Mon-niu first manufactured this kind of ivare. It consists of
either red or black lacquer laid very thickly on the article, and .
afterwards, landscapes, flower.s, birds, or figures were deeply carved'
in the lacquer in imitation of Chinese ware. Another ordinary kind .
consisted of black, red or green lacquer, on -which a lloral design
was lightly carved, and this was called Ko-him Biyohuyd, “red
flower, green leaf.” There is also a kind of Tsuishu and Tsiukoku
called llushilca horl, the only difierence being that the engravipg' is '
shallower than on the real ware ; another kind is called Quri.

The mode of manufacture was to lay on lacquer of various colours,
mixed together, very tliickly, and on this surface circular and -[17
spiral patterns ivere carved. Between 1696-1615 a workman named
Hei-ju-ro excelled so greatly in the manufacture of this style, ?.e.,
Tsui-shu, that he took the name of Tsui-shu Hei-ju-ro. He was
employed by lye-yasu, and his descendants followed his trade.
Between the years 1716 and 1736 this ware was greatly in fashion.

At Kioto there was a workman named Tsui-shu-ya Ji-ro-ye-mon
who is said to have produced much finer ware than his ancestor
Mo]i-niii ; also Tsui-shu Yu-sei of Dai-ku cho in Yedo, and Tsui-
shu To-shiclii and Tsui-shu Kuu-shichi of Nagasaki had the reputa-
tion at that time of being very skilful workmen. At the present
day the Kioto, Nagasaki and Tokib workmen manufacture an
imitation of this ware.

“Chinkin boei.”— In this kind of ware the pattern was very
lightly engraved on the lacquer, and powdered gold was afterwards
worked into the lines. The date when this kind was commenced is


X8 QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OP JAPAN.

unknown, but it is said to have been imitated from the Chinese.
During the first half of the 18th century a Nagasaki workman,
•whose name has not been preserved, excelled in this kind of work,
and towards its cud a Tokio -workman named Ninomiya To-tei
manufactured this ware. To-tei carved the designs on the lacquer
with rat’s teeth instead of knives, and the articles made by him
are still preserved and greatly jirized. The design of one piece of
lacquer made by him, representing a peony in fully bloom growing
beside a rock on which a peacock is standing, is greatly admired
as a beautiful piece of workmanship. .In the year 1868 the manu-
facture of this ware started at Wajima, and it lias of late been
made in several other localities.

Besides the styles above mentioned there are, both in plain
and gold lacquer, fully two hundred kind.s slightly differing in
appearance, and lioaring distinctive names, derived either from their
appearance, or the names of the persons wlio first introduced them,
but it would be manifestly impossible to attempt any description of
them within the limits of the present paper.

IV.— THE VARIOUS KINDS OP LACQUER.

The name of Ki-urusTii, or crude lacquei-, is given to the sap
taken from growing trees. It is used for various purposes, accord-
ing to the age of the tree from Avliich it is taken. The sap
obtained from old trees is used in tlie manufacture of 8uhi Urushi
or transparent lacquer. The manner in which the lacquer is
treated to make it transparent is kept secret by tbe manufacturers.
It is used for the final coat over Nashiji, or for any work in
which transparency is required, such as trays, etc., showing the
grain of the wood. It is also used in making red lacquer, and
when colours are mixed with the crude lacquer, and in making
Wakasa lacquer, already described.

The lacquer obtained from young trees is used for the first
coat, and in making lid, Nuritate, Ju-hana, Chu-hamt, Ge-hana,
Nakornuri, and Seshime. A description of the composition of each
kind is given below.


CJUIN : THE LACQUEE INDUSTRY OP JAPAN.

Jt^o— black lacquer — is made by . addiug to the pure lacquer
the tooth dye used by women — Hctguro (a liquor formed by steeping
iron filings in vinegar) — and exposing it to the sun for about three
(lays, stirring the mixture frecjuently; it then becomes a deej) black:.
Without subsequent polishing, M does not present a shining sur-
face. , • . !

Nuritatc . — ^'fhis is made by the addition to the pure lacquer of
water that has been used with a whetstone {To-midzu) and con-
taining the finest particles in suspension, together with a small
quantity of powdered turpentine. This kind is used for, under
coatings.

Jo-harm is made by mixing with the lacquer a certain propor-
tion of whetstone water and turpentine, with a little oil from the
Ye plant (Perilla ocymoides). The whole is then exposed to the
,suu and stirred till it becioines black. CJiTi-liaiia and (ic-hwia difi'er
from the above only in liaving more oil added to the mixture,
which produces a lustre witliout extra polishing, hut detracts in
proportion from the durability of the ware.

Xiik/ruui’i is pure lacquer from which every particle of water
is carefully extracted. It is then exposed to the light and stirred
till it becomes black, or nearly so.

Serdiinu; is a mixture of pure lacquer with finely powdered ,
charred wood (not charcoal) and fiiuori, a glaze made from set-
Aveed.

Ki-mshime. — This kind is obtained from the lower branches of
the lacquer tr(H‘, which are cut away, as well as from the branches
of old trees that have been (uit down. It is also sometimes called
Veda-vriixhi or branch lacfquer. The ]ae(|iier is drawn during the [10]
.rainy season in the month of July, and from then till the month
of September. When the sap ceases to How freely from the trunks
of the young trees, branches are cut ofi* to relhfve the tree. These
are cut u}) into lengths and sunk in a stream. As the sap exudes,
and rises from tlie sunken branc]H^s, it is gathered, and is called
Ki-aeshimc. lacquer. In former times the sap was obtained from tlie
branches by pressing in a machine called ke/il, which gave risq to
the name of ka-shime. This kind of lacquer is scarce, not more than


20 quin: the.lacqueu industry ou japan.

oue tub of it being made for every huudred tubs of tlie ordinal y
kind.

In making MaUye, or gold lacquer, Se-shime lacquer obtained
from young trees is used in tlie proportion of seven parts of pure
Se-shme to three parts of foreign matter.

The folloiviug are some of the modes of using Se-shime lacquer

1. For priming, coats, when the lacquer is exposed to the sun
or placed before a fire to get rid of the water, and then mixed with
Benigara (red oxide of iron), again exposed to the sun, and filtered
through thin paper.

2. When the priming coat is required to be softened, some cam-
phor is mixed with the above, and the .whole filtered through thin
paper.

3. The mode of iireparing lacquer in the best maimer for a first
coat consists in mixing lid (black lacquer) with the ^e-sJmne lacquer.
When this has become hard the outline of the device can then be
easily traced. Benigara is mixed to enable the workman to see
whether the lacquer is laid on thickly or not, a.iid moreover it helps
to dry the lacquer more quickly. When gold lacquer is to be
painted on red lacquer ware, the lacquer foi the first draft of the
picture is mixed ivith powdered charcoal, and sometimes a yellow
foundation is used, according to the colour of the ware.

4. Tahi-ma]d.~Tl\\^ mixture, which is used for making raised
lacquer, consists of lid and IS nritate in equal parts. Half of the
mixture is boiled, and camphor and powdered charcoal are stirred in
according to the consistency required ; then the other half is added,
and the whole, after being well stirred together, is filtered through
thin paper. This mode of dealing with the lacquer is only adopted
during the summer, when lacquer is required to be dried quickly.
The amount to be boiled differs according to the nature of the
climate : for instance, in ' winter, only one-fourth is boiled. Taka-
maki is always applied after a coating of Sabiko (described further
on) has been given to the article.

5. iSe-shime' nobe is made by mixing camphor and Se-shime lacquer :
after being well wfirked together the mixture is filtered through
paper.


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN. 21

6. Nobe lacquer is made by mixing caraplior with Yoshiuo
lacquer and filtering the preparation through paper. There is also
a mixture known as iSeshime-Yoshino lacquer, which is, as the name
implies, composed of Seshime and Yoshino lacquer mixed with cam-
phor. If the lacquer is required to be hard, only a small quantity
of camphor is mixed, but when desired soft, a larger quantity of
camphor is added. It enables the workman to spread the lacquer
with greater facility, especially for very fine strokes, but for the
liighest class of work hardly any is used.

7. Sahi-ho . — This mixture, used in making raised lacquer, is
composed of finely powdered to-no-lco — burnt clay from tlie Inari Hill
ill Kioto — mixed into a paste with water, to which an equal portion
of Seshime laG(|uer is added, taking care to thorougldy mix the
preparation.

V.-CULTIVATION OF THE LYCQUER TREE,

“ RHUS VERNICIFERA.”

In ancient times no lacquer trees were specially planted ; the
lacquer was obtained from such as were found growing wild in the
woods; but as the amount of lacquer ware used increased largely,
enough lacquer could not be procured from the wild trees. Planta-
tions were therefore commenced, and between the years A.D, 701-
704, during the reign of the Emperor Mommu, a notification was
issued to the effect that each farmer employing six hands and over
should, during the ensuing five years, plant eighty lacquer trees on
his grounds ; those employing four hands, forty trees. Further, that
the annual taxes should bo paid in lacquer, making it evident that
the lacquer trade was a very nourishing one at that time. After
that plantations were made in every province and village ; thus more
or less was produced all over the country.

Lacquer trees can grow' anywhere— on mountains, in woods, or
plains — and the mode of cultivation is not difficult. They require no
manure, but weeds and grass ought to he cleared away round the
trees during four or live years after planting them. By the time
they are ten years old weeds growing them cause no injury.


22


qVlN ; THE LACQUER INDUSTUV OE JAPAN.


A small quantity of sap is taken from tlie trees wlien they are
about three years old, by making an incision in the bark. This also
makes the trees grow better and faster. The best time for collecting
the lacquer is during the rainy season in summer, but it may be
continued to be drawn from the trees till Sei)tember, and the sap is
given three different names nc(‘ording to th(‘ season, viz;., >Shiii-mi,
Nihaii^ and Nahuko.

The method of drawing tiie sap is as follows ; — Five horizontal
incisions are made in the bark about an inch apart, at the I»ottom
of the, tree on one side, with a small saw, and as the sap exudes
from the gashes, it is removed from tlie first, or bottom, line with
an iron hook, then , from the second line, and so on until sap ceases
to run from the wounds. What has been obtained is kept in a bamboo
tube. The next set of lines are cut in the same way, on the other side
of the tree, a little higher up, and so on every year. The trees are
said to supply the best quality of lacquer when they are between
fourteen and fifteen years old ,* when tliey are thirty or forty years
old, if the trees do not continue to give a good yield, they are cut
down close to the roots, so that young shoots may sprout again.
When the tree is <;ut down, the lacquer is taken from the 'l)ranGh(!.s
(as previously described), and is called Ki-Seshime lacquer. The
district where the best quality of lacquer is produced iii the country
is Aidzu, in' Iwashiro, particularly that known as or transparent
lacquer. Most of the trees are old, and the soil in that province
Seems to suit them better than any other. The Aidzu lacquer, how-
„ Sver, is not suitable for the manufacture of black lacquer, and there
are also' some other kinds for which it cannot be used to advantage.
The next best localities for lacquer are the provinces of Xodzuke
and Shimotsiike.

The best Seshime lacquer is produced in the district of Tsukiii,
in the province of Sagami. When this lacquer is used for the first
or priming coat, it is more durable than any other kind, but only a
small quantity is produced.

The sap obtained from the trees grown in the district of Chichibu,
in the province of Musashi, is very good for black lacquer. A great
[22] quantity is in’odiiced at Yoshino, in the province of Yamato, as well


QUIN : THE LAGQUEB INDUSTKY 01' JAPAN.


23


as ill the provinces of Kii and Owari, but the Tokio workmen do
not use the lacquer from these three provinces for making the best
ware, preferring that obtained from the Kwanto — i.e., those provinces
lying east of Hakone.

The best quality of lacquer is of a light yellowish hue, and
ought not be thick, but sufficiently gelatinous to make strings when
lifted up. All lacquer turns black on exposure to the air.

VI.— VARIOUS WOODS USED.

The choice of the wood to he used naturally depends upon the
description of article to be lacquered. For making book-shelves,
cabinets and boxes of all kinds, the best woods for first class worM
are : —

HinoM, Chamascyparis obtusa, and

Kiri, Paulownia imperialis, that having the finest grain lieing selected.
Next in reipiest are : —

Hu-no-hi, Magnolia hypoleuca, a fine light wood, of which all sword
sheaths are made.

Tsuga, Abies tsuga (a kind of pine),

Himehomaimi, a species of pine. This wood is the best for carved
figures of men, animals, etc. For goods of an inferior kind
^xigi, Cryptoraeria japonica, is generally employed. For such' articles
as are turned in a lathe, as bowls, cups, small trays, etc., the
best wood is

Keyaki, Planera japonica. That obtained from the province of Hiuga
is accounted superior to the wood grown elsewhere.

Sahura, Prunus pseudo-cerasus, cherry, is also extensively used. The
best comes from Chichibu, in the province of Musashi, and
from Nikko, province of Shimotsuke.

Inferior to the above, though largely used for the same purposes,
are : —

Katmm, Cercidiphyllura japonicum.

Ichd, Gingko biloba.

Hego, Cyathea ■ arborea, growing in large quantities in the neigh-
bourhood of Hakone. It is principally used for toys.


24 QUIN : 'XHE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN.

J23] Besides these, many other woods are used ; those that are hard
and dark, Avith a handsome grain, often have merely ornamental
devices in lacquer on the natural wood.


VII.-METHOD OF APPLYING LACQUER, FROM THE
FIRST COAT TO THE FINISH.

1. — DT.ACK.

When the cabinet or other article on which the lacqlier is to be
applied has been made and the surface carefully smoothed, the wood
is, slightly cut away along each joining, so as to form an angular
hollow : this is called with Ko-huso, —hemi) cut up small, mixed Avith
glue and paste— and the whole surface is painted over with Seshime
lacquer. This process is called Ki-ji-gatame, “ hardening the Avooden
basis.” A coating of “ wheat lacquer ’’—lacquer mixed Avith equal
parts of wheaten flour — is then given to the article, and hempen
cloth is stretched over it, great care being taken to lay it on smooth-
ly and to leave no Avrinkles or perceptible joinings. This hempen
surface is then painted Avith a thin coat of Sabiko ; a coating is
then given of Ji-no-ko, a paste made of imgla/.ed earthenAvare ground
up, and Avater. Next a coating of Seshime lacquer, then another
coating of Ji-no-ko, then another of Seshime lacquer. The article
is then painted with Kiri-ko, a mixture of Seshime lacquer and
Ji-no-ko. After that it is ground smooth Avith Avhite Avhetstone and
then given another coating of Sabiko : again ground Avith a whet-
. stone, then rubbed over Avith Japanese ink applied Avith cotton wool.
A coat of Naha-nuri then follows, and the Avhole surface is rubbed
over Avith charcoal made of Ho-noki, giving it a dull but smooth
surface. A coating of Ro is then applied, after which it is rubbed
smooth with a piece of charcoal made of Hiyakujikko, Legerstrcemia
India ; another coating of Eo is then rubbed on Avith the finger, and
the article afterwards receives a preliminary polishing Avith finely
powdered calcined deer’s horn and whetstone applied with a cotton
cloth. A final coat of Seshime lacquer is given, it is then polished
with the same kind of powder on the cotton cloth, the finishing


(iUIN ; THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAJiT.


25


polish being given with the finger and the powder, and the very
slightest quantity of oil, till it gradually assumes a most brillant
polish.

2. — RED.

The method of making red lacquer is the same as for black
lacquer in the earlier stages, but subsequent to rubbing the article
with Hs-nO'ki charcoal, a coating of red lacquer (Seshime lacquer
and vermilion mixed together) is applied, and the next process is to
polish off with cotton cloth and the powder ; the intervening pro-
cesses from the rubbing with Hiyakujikko charcoal being omitted.

The methods above described are for the manufacture Of the
best ware ; for second-rate ware, “ Mine paper ” — a strong paper
without any size, — is substituted for the linen cloth pasted over the
wood ; and again for the very common ware, neither cloth nor paper
is used, and the wood is only smeared over with the persimmon fruit,
then given a coat of Ji-uo-ko, and after that ground smooth only
once, before the final coat of lacquer of the colour needed finishes
the work.

The above is a very simple mode. The workmen have several
plans for saving themselves trouble and scamping the work, but as
these are not recognized, they are not detailed in this paper.

It must be mentioned that after each ai)plication of lacquer, ‘ or
a mixture thereof, to any article, it has to be put aside till it dries
and hardens. To effect this, the article is j)laced in a press, the in-
side boards of Avhich are quite rough and unplaced. The inside of
this press is thoroughly wetted, and afterwards carefully closed to
exclude the outer air. The article is kept in this press for about
24 hours, but this period is slightly lengthened or shortened accord-
ing to the season of the year, the lacquer drying more quickly in
summer than in winter. Lacquer will not dry or harden properly in
the open air ; it absolutely requires a damp closed atmosphere to do so,
otherwise it would run and always remain sticky.

3.— niRA-MAKIYE — FLAT GOLD LACQUER.

When it is desired to apply flat gold lacquer to an article that has
received the plain coats, as related, the process is as follows : —


26 QIUN; THE LACQ.ITEU INEUSTEY OV JAPAN.

A thin species of paper, prepared with siiiing jiuule of glue and
alum, is used. On this paper the design required to be transmitted to
the lacquered article is drawn. On the reverse of this paper, the outline
is lightly traced in lacquer— p)i‘6viously j'oasted over live; charcoal to
[25] prevent its- drying — with a very fine brush made of rat’s hair. This
paper is then laid on the article to be lacquered and is rubbed with
a spatula made of Hi-no-lci or whalebone, where the lacquer has
been applied, and on removing the paper the design is observed
lightly traced in lacquer.

To make it perfectly plain, this is rubbed over very lightly
with a piece of cotton wool, charged with finely powdered whetstone,
or tin ; this brings the pattern out white. From one tracing, upwards
of twenty impressions can be taken off, and when that is no longer
possible, from the lacquer having become used up, it only requires
a fresh tracing over the same paper to reproduce the design cd
niivm. This tracing does not dry, owing to the lacquer used for the
purpose having been roasted, as previously mentioned, and can be
wiped off at any time.

The pattern thus traced out is then filled in with groundwork
lacquer, with a brush made of hare’s hair, great care being taken
not to touch or paint out the original tracing line. This is then
powdered over with fine gold dust, silver dust, or tin dust, according
to the quality of the ware. This dust is applied with a piece of
cotton wool, charged with the material to be used, and the article
is then gently dusted with a very soft brush made from the long
winter coat of a white horse, to remove any loose metal dust that
might adhere to the article, and to slightly smoothen the surface. If
the article under manufacture is large, only a small portion is done
at a time, and it is at once enclosed in an air-tight press, so as to
^ prevent any dust or outside matter adhering to the freshly lacquered
surface. At the proper time, -when the lacquer has sufficiently har-
dened, the article is taken out, and the part over which the gold
dust has been sprinkled, receives a coat of transparent varnish (Sulci
urusM), laid on with a hare’s hair brush, and a further portion is
„ prepared with a coating of gold dust,, as on the previous day : the
article is again closed up in the air-tight damp press as before, till


. QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OF JAPAN. 27

dry. When tlie portion which has received the second coat of lac(][uer
over the gold dost is quite hard, it is rubbed smooth with a piece
of hard charcoal made from camellia wood, or Ho-no-ki, until the
whole is level with the surrounding parts. Then it is rubbed with
the finger and some finely powdered whetstone and deer’s horn, with
the smallest (juantity of oil, till it attains a fine polish. If tipoft
this surface any further ivork takes place, such as the veining of [26j
leaves, or the painting of stamens, etc., of flowers, these are traced
in lacquer aiid covered with gold dust, and when dry the final polisli
is given with the Auger and powdered deer’s horn. The above is
the usual mode of making fiat gold lacquer.

4. — TOGI-DASHI— BRINGING OUT T'.Y POLISHING.

This style consists in applying to the plain lacquered article the
design required, in the .same manner as in Jffira-v)ah'j/e. The whole
surface of the article then receives a coat either of black lacquer or '
transparent lacquer, which, when dry, is ground down with Ho-no-ki
charcoal till the pattern .shows out. It is then polished off in the i,';.

same manner with deer’s horn and oil, on the point of the finger.

For making Toffi'dashi, gold dust of a slightly coarser quality is ,
used than for ordinary Mim-makiye.

5 . — TAKA-MAKIYE — RAISED (iOLD LACQUER.

The first and .st“C(md processes are the .saiue as when making
flat lacquer, but instead of gold dust, finely powdered camellia char-
coal is shaken over the fre.slily lacquered .surface. After drying, the
article is carefully dusted with a soft rag, to remove any loose char-
coal powder, and the parts are further wa.«hed Avith a brush and
water, to bring out the fine lines, etc. Some Yoshino lacquer is
then rubbed on the charcoal surface with a piece of cotton wool, a
coating of Bahiko applied, and the article set tu dry in the damp
press. Aftgi’Avards the surface is ground smooth with Ho-no-ki char- "

coal, and a further rubbing is given Avitli camellia charcoal powdered,
on a piece of cotton cloth. A coating of Taka-mold lacquer is then
given, and the article is put again in the press to dry ; on removing
it the process of grinding with Ho-no-ki and powdered camellif


28


QrriN : the lac;quhr industry of japan.


charcoal is repeated. Yosliino lacquer Is then rubbed on with a piece
of cotton wool as before, and the article is again set to dry. When
taken out it is polished smooth with powdered whetstone on tlie
point of the finger, a coat of SMta-viaki, or groundwork lacquer,
given, and then the gold powder is applied, — for small work, with a
fine brush, and for large work, shaken through a quill with muslin
over one end. 'rhe article is then again set to dry, and the re-
mainder of the process is the same as for fiat lacquer.

[27] According as the lacquer is to be more or less raised, two or
more coats of Taha-maki lacquer have to be given, till the required
height is obtained, and it is at this j^eriod of the process thfit the
shape of the lulls, rocks, trees, or flowers is worked out.


VIII. -VARIOUS KINDS OF POWDERED METAL USED IN
ORNAMENTING LACQUER.

'1. K&^hi-ko, gold or silver leaf reduced to powder by mixing with
glue. When the leaf has been reduced sufficiently fine,
water is stirred in to 'get rid of the glue, the metal sinking
to the bottom. After drying, the powder is ready for use.

2. Goku Mi-mi Ko.


These are all names given to
gold and silver filings of various
degrees of fineness, Qohu Mi-jin
Ko being the finest, and Naka
Tsiuie the coarsest.


3. Ara-gohu.

4. Mi jin.

5. Jrlana-ho.

6. Mijin Thuiw.

7. JECom-me Tsttne.

8. Kaica Tsnne.

9. Nasliiji and Mira-ine are likewise gold and silver filings. After

filing, the dust is sifted, the finest being called Nashiji, and
the dust which has not passed through the sieve is then put
on an iron plate and covered with a thin sheet of the same
metal. This is then rubbed Avith a heavy metal bar, so as
to flatten the dust as much as i^ossible, Avhich is .then called
Kim-me.

The gold used is of various qualities.

1. Yahi kin Pure gold.

2. Ko-han gold 7.4, silver 2.6.


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY OP JAPAN.


29


8, Jiki-han gold 4.4, .silver 5.6.

4, Tmgi’han gold 2.2, silver 7.8.

There are also many qualities of powdered tin.

IX.— INSTRUMENTS, ETC., USED IN Tim IMANUFACTURE
OP LACQUER WARE.

1. Spatula made of Hi-no-ki ; used for mixing Sabiko or other

compounds : corz’esponds to an artist’s palette knife.

2. Epatula made of whalebone; is the best for laying on the first [28|

coat of lacquer; it is also used for mixing. The material is
called Island whalebone and is obtained from China, - as
Japanese whalebone, owing to its liability to split, is practic- ■
ally useless.

3. Bamboo tubes or funnels, of three difierent sizes, with wire netting

at one end aecoi'ding to the fineness required ; used in making
Nashiji.

4. A goose quill, with a, fine piece of muslin fastened over one end for

scattering the very fine.st gold and silver powder.

5. Charcoal, made from Camellia, Azalea, Ho-no-ki and HiyakujikkS

woods.

6. To-no-ko, the clay from the Inari Hill at Kioto, burnt and ground

to a fine powder.

7. Hiki-ko, the line powder obtained by .scraping a -whetstone with a

knife.

8. Rape seed oil, and Yc (Perilla) oil.

9. Hair brushes of different sizes made from the long hairs of the

winter coat of a horse, used for dusting and wiping the -work.

10. Brushes used for painting with lacquer : — ■

(a) Rat’s hair brushes, made (4* the longest hairs in the
body, for fine work.

(l>; Rut’s hair brushes made of ordinary hair, u.-ed for
common brushes.

(c) Brushes made from hare’s and cat’s hair. Various
sized brushes are used, and are known in the
trade as ‘ichU, iehd-han, nlo/m, etc. They

are used for groundwork,


30


(iUIN : THE l.AGQUER INDUSTRY OF .TA1>AN.


(d) Bru-slK'.s of different sizes of Imman luiir, used for
n’iping off any extra loose gold or silver dust,
after application.


X.— WORKERS IN LAOt^UER, AND d'HE PERIOD
IN WHICir THEY LIVED.

Norisuye, period of Angeu, A.D. 1175.

Sadayasii, period of An gen, A.D. 1175.

Ki no Sukcinasa, period of Juyei, A.D. 1182.

Nakaliara Suyetsunc, period of Juyei, A.D. 1182.

Kiyowara Sadamitsu, period of Juyei, A.D. 1 182.

Butsujo, period of Showa A.D. 1312.

Suketoki, period of Shown, A.D. 1312.

Riyoyen, period of Shown, A.D. 1312. ,

Ko-a, period of Shown, A.D. 1312.

Rengetsu, period of Showa, A.D. 1312.

ZempQ, ijeriod of Showa, A.D. 1312.

Shinsho, period of Shown, A.D. 1312.

Grensho, period of Shown, A.D. 1312. •

Sanetoki, period of Showa, A.D. 1312.

Igaraslii, period of Hokoku, A.D. 1449.

Igarashi D5ko, period of Tensho, A.D. 1573.

Hon-nanii KSyetsu (resident of Yedo), period of Kwauyei, A.D. 1624.
Koma Kiuhaku (resident of Yedo), period of Kwanyei, A.D. 1624.
Ogata Korin (resident of Kioto), period of Hoyei, A.D. 1704.

Nonaka Kenzan (resident of Kioto), period of Hoyei, A.D. 1704.
Shiorai Kshei (resident of Kioto), period of Hohei, A.D. 1704.
Kajikawa Kinjiro (resident of Yedo), period of Temmei, A.D. 1781.
Yamamoto Shiiusho (resident of Kioto), period of Temmei, A.D. 1781.
Nagata Yuji (a pupil of Ogata Korin), period of Temmei, A.D. 1781.
Koma Kwan-sai (resident of Yedo), period of Kwau-sai, A.D. 1789,
Inouye Haku-sai (resident of Yedo), period of Kwan-sai, A.D. 1789.
Hara Yoyu-sai (resident of Yedo), j)eriod of Kwan-sai, A.D. 1789.


QUIN : THE LACQUER INDUSTRY QE JAPAN.


31


Shibata Ze-shin, 'I

Watanabe Tbsen,

Ikeda Tai-sliin,

Nakayama Ko-min,

Ogawa Sbo-miii.

Ogawa Shu-iuiii is noted for liis clever imitations of old ware. ;

Watanabe Td-sen is at present employed by a company in Tokio
<'.alled tbe Sei-ko-sba, and is at work on a tobacco box for the Empress. ! '

The pattei'n is landscape and water, with cranes in tbe foreground, and
embraces the various styles, viz., Togi-daslii Him-mahiye and [^0]

mahiye. It has been six months on hand and will jorobably be completed ■ . ;

in a couple of mouths. The estimated cost is about three hundred yen. ^

The .above facts will give a slight idea of tbe time it takes to complete , , ■
a good piece of laccpier ware ; tbe dimensions of this box are about ten v ■
inches long by six deep and eight inches high.

Tbe great drawback to making lactxuer ware of a high order in the
Xjresent day consists in the fact that tbe workmen cannot afford the
time necessary, but are obliged to work as rapidly as jiossible. In '

former days time was no object.

XI.— NOTED PIECES OF OLD LACQUER. . J

A Kesahalco, box for bolding the scarf w'orn by Buddhist priests *

over tbe shoulder, formerly belonging to Shotoku Taishi, who lived
during the reign of the Emperor Kinmei, A.D, 540-572. This is pre- /

served in the temple of Todaiji at Nara.

A hhvord sheath, formerly belonging to tbe Emperor Shomu, A.D. *

724-748, also preserved at tbe temple of Todaiji at Nara.

A 'Wrliiinj ho.i', formerly belonging to tbe Emperor Go-Toba, A.D.
1186-1198. This is preserved in the Shinto temple of Ilacbiman at
Kamakura.

A Minor stand, formerly belonging to Masago, wife of the Sho-
gun Yoritomo, A.D. 1192-1199. Preserved in the tisraple of Gk)n-gen,
in the province of Idzu, *

A Tehaho, box formerly belonging to the Sho-gun Ashikaga Yoshi-
niasa, A.D. 1449-1490, preserved in the museum at Uyeno. ;


Tokio workmen of the present
day. Tliey are all elderly men.


NOTES ON DJALEC^' SPOKION IN AIIIDZIT.


By Basil Hall (Jitamiucrlain'.


• [liead November 9, 1880.] ;

During a journey last year in the north-western portion of
Ahidzu, bordering on the province of Weehigo, I observed some
peculiarities in the speech of the peasantry which may interest those
who occupy themselves with linguistic matters. The dialect is allied
to that spoken round Yonezaha,^' but marked by some characteristic
differences. The following are the most salient points :

Ai is always contracted to ; tlms iaita]’ (from tuhu, “to kindle,”
“ to boil,”) becomes t&ta, viorannm becomes mortmim, etc.

JSi in some localities sounds like fi-, the / being not our English
labiodental /, but tlie true labial as sounded in the Japanese
syllable fa. Thus at the hamlet of Kanafutsu, the name of
the village of Yoshi-ga-hira on the other side of the Hachi-
zhifu-ri Pass, was pronounced Yoshi-ga-fira.-
In general the pronunciation may be said to be indistinct and slightly
lisping, but to have none of that tendency to an undue use
of the nigori and to nasalization (except in the word mnhu,
for 'bhu, “ gadfly,”) which marks other northern varieties of
Japanese.

* See Mr. Dallas’s paper on '‘The Yonezawa Dialect,” in Vol. III. Part 2 of
these Transactions.

t In representing colloquial and dialectic words and forms, I have spelt by
ear, phonetic spelling being in their case as scientific and necessary as is historic
spelling when dealing with the standard written tongue.


CHAIMBERLAIN : NOTES ON THE DIALECT SPOKEN IN AIIIDZIJ. -33


Passing from pronunciation to grammar, we find the chief charac- [32J
teristic of the dialect to consist in the retention of the use of honorific
verbal forms which belonged to the general colloquial language in
mediaeval times, but which have left in the modern speech of Yedo
but two or three isolated representatives. Thus we have saffarassharu,

“ to walk down ” ; vorasshaw, “ to ride ” ; tomorassJiccru, “ to stop ’’ ;
tdrasshaont, “ to pass through.’' These old forms are perpetually in
the mouths of the peasantry, who have not learnt to make use of the
compound honorifics o nori nasani, o toman nasani, etc. In the second
conjugation, old forms in survive, thus : mite isam (=yedo, go
mil nasaru), "to see”; kisasii (— Yedo, c ide nasani), "to come.” . “
The use of these ancient honorifics gives a very quaint sound to
conversation.

Another curious verbal form is yas, " to be,” doubtless for gas-
(from gozarimasii). The "negative gozaranu is likewise retained in pre-
ference to the doubly honorific form gozaimasen.

Of Pronouns, orr for the Pirst Person is most used in speaking^
to equals, and wish! (^Plural icashi-ra) to suqieriors. The almost
universal form for the Second Person is omS (for omai, from o mahey
with a Plural omi^-gata. Even in addressing superiors, no more polite-
word seems to be known.

The vocabulary differs so little from that in use at the capital
that a person well acquainted with the Yedo dialect will, as a rule,,
have no difficulty in understanding what is said around him. In
words, as in grammatical forms, what will strike him most is the
retention of what, in the .>-^tandard colloquial, has long been antiquated,,
for instance :

ishd, for kimono, “ clothes.”
kaJdtsubaia, for hana-shobn, "the iris.”
sakadzuki, for choko, " a saZ:e*cup.”

The above remarks luv. oflered to the Society less for their own-
s^e than for the purpose of shoiving how extremely little can be-
done in this field by a mere passing traveller, even if he use the best
endeavours to draiv the country folk into conversation; for I am
persuaded that much deserving of attention escaped ine. Where,,
again, as in the provinces of Uzen and Eikuzen, the speech of thp-


34 CHAMBERLAIN : NOTES ON THE DIALECT SPOKEN IN AHIBZU.

£33] common people is as different from that of Yedo as is the Yorkshire
dialect from standard English, nothing short of a lengthened sojourn
could entitle one to give a satisfactory account of it. The proper
persons for working in this field are, not tourists, but I'csidents, of
whom, as school-masters, missionaries and others there must be not
a few scattered over the outlying districts of Japan. May not some
of them be induced to undertake the task, — to sketch out for us at
' least the main features, and, if possible, to furnish us with complete
vocabularies of the chief rustic dialects, taking as their standard the
colloquial language of Yedo as set forth in Mr. Aston’s Gram-
mar of Spoken Japanese and Mr. Satow’s or Dr. Hepburn’s Dic-
tionary, and noting the various differences in inflection, pronuncia-
tion and vocabulary ? On the importance of the study of dialects it
is needless to enlarge in the presence of an}’' one at all acquainted
with linguistic research ; and Japanese is an idiom deriving so little
* side-light from any sister-tongue, that the various sections into which
it • is divided in its ancient and modern forms mu.st be investigated
with the utmost minuteness if Japanese philology is to stand on any-
thing like a satisfactory basis.


DISCUSSION.


After a few remarks by tlie President, who regretted the absence of the
author, and by Mr. S. Tsuda,

Mr. Satow said : There are four points to which the student of a particular
dialect ought to direct his attention ; ist, to the collection of words and forms
different from those of the standard speech ; 2ndl5r, he should endeavour to dis-
tinguish those which are peculiar to the particular dialect from those which are
found in other rural dialects ; 3rdly, he should mark those which are archaic words
preserved, and 4thly, note those which are merely corruptions of the standard speech.

Of all the dialects, that of Satsuma probably differs most widely from the
£34] standard. Two natives of the province conversing in it would be quite incom-


CIIAMBEllLAIN : NOTES ON THE DIALECT SPOKEN IN AII1D2E. S5


preliensible to a person aO(iuauUed solely with the Yedo dialect. A few years ago,
while hurriedly crossing the province, I obtained tlie following specimens : —

.SATSUMA TJlALKCi',

Satsiima, yedo.


GaNsiti'i


dlanibo


Jioshika


Koshiko


Toaojo


Okata


Kambo sambo .


Qbinka


Fufoka


bkii

big.

Yasoaivs/ii


vaTOarakai


Jlavaisitki -


Chaka


Teshkoo


...plate.

Jioi7ta)i


jabott


Modoni


.Vukid


.VuktHJlc'l-J!


Aytiiim


J3u


A’as/iiia


Jlakanc


...to go.


Verbs of the 2 n(l conjugation are conjugated like verbs of the 1st, except in
the participle, e.g., niiraiiti for miru, mhv for

The Kioto dialect, as hxr as pronunciation is concerned, differs from that of
Tdkid (the Yedo dialect) very slightly. In the introduction to Dr. Hepburn’s
larger Japane.se-English Dictionary, it is stated that at Kioto has the hard sound
•of ,i,'- in !^ef, and that sr and r.i’ are pronounced s/ti and Je. I have been severa't
times in KiCto for several days together, in constant coversation with the inhabi-
tants, but have failed to detect these peculiarities. It is also usually supposed
that the Kidto people pronounce jv instead of e when that syllable occurs at the
beginning of a word, but though I have listened very carefully for tills j' I have
never heard it, except when pronounced rapidly after a word immediately preced-
ing, when the passage from the final nasal « or , a vowel naturally gives- rise to
the semi-vowel j', as is tlie case inthe Yedo dialect also. It is this fact which
has led foreigners to call the j apanese dollar _nv/- instead of i'/i, because they always [35]
hear it immediately after a numeral ending in a vowel. At the beginning of a
•sentence no j' is heard either in the Kidto or in the Yedo dialect.


( )


The Kiftto dialect is certainly more correct in pronouncing certain Chinese
syllables i-rvaii, kivatsu, hvai, etc., instead of /^an, katsii^ kai-,

gan, gatsu, gat, etc., like the inhabitants of Tdkio. It is a curious fact that in the
province of Kadzusa, on the easlorn side of Yedo Bay, therefore further from the
ancient capital, the correct pronunciation is preserved. vSlill the Kioto people use
several corrupt grammatical forms and corrupted expressions of which the Yed(o
dialect is not guilty, and I think it is going somewhat too far to say tliat the
language of Kioto is the .standard, h'or instance they say sent! naratt', must do, for
scncha vantt^ ; kMe, kCda, I)iiying, bought, for katte, kaita, which latter forms are
certainly nearer to the classical kahite, kahifa. They have corrupted done yatia
done yflni mio donaina, doitaini, and da. is changed into ja. They have a
great tendency to drop final ti, as in go vici ase for go men asobase.

Another characteristic of the Kidto dialect is the use of honorific verbs iir
sshartt, as ommoassliam from omon, to think, misass/tant from ttttftt, to see, sass/tartt
from sttfti, to do. Imssliant, arnss/tarti and ossharu are the only such forms known
to the Yedo dialect.


Nitkui

Nttktmern

Inurti

Modorn . . .

Oforit

Neki

A' nr id

I 'osar!

A'a-moshi\ , ,

Sakai

A'nrki/iama
O ided ka

Gozarii

ISIessbna ...


,,wann.

.to warm.

..to go.

,to return.

.to be inferior,
.vicinity, side,
.weak (of tobacco.)
• the evening.

. I say !

.because.

.snake.

Tor kanai ka.

,fo come, to go.

.by no means !


These are of course only a few of the c.xpressions found in the Kioto dialect
and absent from that of Yedo, and it is also probable that none of them are-
peculiar to the ancient capital.


ON “ KAKI-NO-SHIBU/


By I. IsHiKAWA, Graduate op the University of Tokio.


■ [Mead 2so(iemher 9, 1880.]

KakMW-cIdbu is the juice of certatu, varieties of persinmion, the
fruit of the Diospyros kaki. The edil)le persimmon, when quite ripe,
is very sweet to the taste, but when unripe is very astringent ; other
varieties, even in the mature condition, do not lose their astringency.
By drying in the sun, the skin being first removed, even these
varieties liecome quite sweet, the tannin apparently disappearing
completely. The Kaki-no-sluhii is always prepared from the latter
variety ; the fruit is gathered early in the summer and is beaten in
stone mortars. It is next transferred to wooden tubs, in which the
pulp is covered with water and allowed to stjind for half a day.
After this it is filtered through a straw bag, and the milky juice
thus obtained is known as the best idiihu. The residue in the bag is
treated once more in the same way.

The juice is milky at first, but it soon grows darker when
exposed to air and light, and a thin film forms on the exposed
surface. As sold, it is a light or dark-grey liquid, holding minute
particles of solid matter in suspension. It is strongly acid to litmus
paper, and it gives a copious Avhite precipitate with gelatin. It pos-
sesses a very unpleasant smell.

The applications of this liquid are numerous ; whenever a
substance is to be rendered unchangeable in the air it is -washed over
with the juice, and then becomes permanent and miioli stronger. It
is especially used for giving strength and durability to paper, which
in 'Japan is applied to many uses.


38


ISHIKAWA : ON “ KAKI-NO-SHIBU.'”


The first question which may be asked is how the juice causes the
material covered with it to become stronger and more durable. In one
specimen of the juice which I examined, the total weight of solid
matter was C4.G grams per litre, of whicli more than one-half Avas
tannin. The antiseptic properties of tannin are Avell knoAVJi, but
it does not seem that the presence of the tannin is sufficient to
account for the great change in the character of the paper which
actually takes place. Besides, paper painted with other tannin solu-
tions does not present the same j)roperties. Nor does the effect appear
to be due to the presence of albumenoid substances, which by slowl}’-
combining with the tannin in the 23ore.s of the 2 >fiper would form a
kind of leather. The juice contains nitrogen equal to 0.18 % of
the total solid matter, which would correspond to 1,1 % of albumen-
oids, but this supposition seems improbable.

During the course of the exj)eriments on this substance, the
following facts Avero observed, and they suggest the exifianation
which follows them.

1. The blackening of the milky juice is only effected in an
open vessel, its colour remaining unchanged AA'hen left in closed
vessels. In this respect it resembles lacquer (v. Isliimatsu, Ghem.
NeAVS, March 14, 1879, p. 113).

2. By exjjosure to the air in a flat vessel the colour become.^
darker and a membranous film forms over its surface. The film i.s
almost insoluble in Avater and alcohol, and it is not perceptibly at-
tacked by boiling with dilute sulphuric acid.

3. When left in closed bottles with only a small space above it
a thin film is formed, but when this has been made to sink by
shaking, no further formation of film takes place.

4. When the film formed in an open vessel has been removed,
a fresh one forms, but ihe production of ncAV films becomes sloAver
and slower.

>5. Of the suspended matter the coarse particles settle to the bot-
tom, but the finer ones remain suspended in the form of an emulsion.
It is not cellulose, for it is insoluble in an ammoniacal solution of cupric
oxide. It is but slightly soluble in alcohol, 3.4 % of the dried residue
being dissolved by alcohol of 97 ^ strength. It has a greyish colour.


ISHIKAWA. : ON “ KAKI-NO-SHIBU.’’ .


39


but when dried becomes black and forms a hard mass. It is in fact
a gum-resin. In addition to the above mentioned facts the dealer
stated that the juice loses its peculiar properties when exposed to the
air for a few months.

Taking the above facts into consideration, it is probable that
the following is the exidanation of the action of this liquid upon
paper and such bodies : —

(а) The strength gained by the paper is due to -the formation
on its surface of the film above described.

(б) The formation of this film is due to the presence of small

particles of gum-resin held in suspension which, on oxida-
tion, becomes solid and darker in colour, like lacquer.
Hence the dark colour which paper so treated always
possesses,

(e) The tannin present acts as an antiseptic.

The peciiliar smell of the juice appears to he due to the presence
of butyric acid. About half a litre of the liquid was distilled, 200
c.c. being collected. The distillate bad a slight acid reaction, and a
strong, unpleasant odour. On the- addition of calcic carbonate, efferves-
cence took place, the liquid was filtered and evaporated, first over the
water bath then in vacuo over oil of vitriol. A thin film formed on the
surface, which increased till the liquid was covered. The vessel was
then removed and heated, by which a fresh amount of solid matter ap-
peared, as would happen if the solution contained calcic butyrate. The
liquid was dried up at 70° G. and weighed, then heated to 140° C. by
which it lost 8 ^ of its original weight at 70° C. 0.519 gram of the
dried powder after ignition left 0.1425 gram of lime, which amounts to
19.61 per cent of calcium.

Obtained. Calculated, Ca (C^H 702)2 Ga (C^H 702)2 + H20'
Ca . 19.61 X 18-69 ^ '

HaO 8.0 ^ 7.76^

It appears, therefore, that the volatile acid is principally butyric

acid.


DISCUSSION.


Mr. S. Tsuda, speaking in Japanese, which was translated by the correspond-
ing secretary, said that at Tanatniira in Oshin, a place well known for the number
of poisonous snakes which infest it, the peasants lake with them to the fields
supply of kaki-no-shibu in bamboo tubes, and apply it to the wound when they
receive a snake-bite, to prevent the poison fiom taking effect. With regard to the
•conversion of the tannin of the astringent kaki into sugar, he mentioned that the
Japanese sometimes beat up one very astringent variety of the fruit into pulj), and
•add finely powdered barley which has previously been roasted. The mixture after
standing for three hours becomes sweet and very agreeable to the palate, and is
used in some localities as a substitute for sugar. The dried skin of the astringent
kaki is also used instead of fish to flavour soup. The best quality of sMbu is made
from a sort of kaki no bigger than a grape, which is so astringent that it does
not turn sweet, however long it is kept. It sweetens, however, if subject to frost
before it is plucked from the tree. The black kaki wood so much esteemed for
the manufacture of boxes and other small articles, is chiefly but not altogether
derived from the astringent or skilnt-kaki tree. The colour of the wood is very
uncertain, and the only sure way to tell before the tree is -felled whether its timber
is black or not is to drill a hole in the trunk. Two trees growing together and
apparently quite alike may turn out to be one of them white and the other black.

Mr. Ewing asked whether the black paint used for fences, etc., composed of
shibti and lampblack, had an effect in preserving the timber to which it was applied
at all comparable to the effects of foreign methods of preservation.

Mr. Atkinson replied that it had some preservative effect, but not much. He
added that kaki juice after it has become sweet acidifies on exposure to the air,
the change being apparently effected by the presence of a small organism of the
shape of a lemon, which is also observed in Europe to be present during grape
fermentation.


NOTES ON SOME EEOENT EARTEQUAKES.


By J. A. Ewing, B. Sc, F. R. S. E.


[^Read December 14, 1880.]

The earthquakes which are the subject of the following notes
took place during the mouth of November, 1880, and were of the
usual slight kind familiar to residents in Toki}^. "Whatever interest
they may have is due to the fact that they formed the first tests to
which a new seismo-graph of the writer’s design was exposed, and
that, by its means a complete record of the horizontal movement of
the earth’s surface was obtained from the beginning to the end of
each shock.

The new seismograph, a fuller account of which will soon be
published elsewhere, consists of two horizontal levers pivoted on
vertical axes which are rigidly fixed to posts stuck in the earth. At
the short end of each lever there is a heavy bob of metal, whose
inertia keeps it at rest during the earthquakake. The long end of
each presses very lightly upon a smoked-glass plate, which is kept
revolving continuously by clock-work. The construction of the levers
is such that the axis on which each of them is pivoted is the centre
of percussion relatively to the centre of the bob, which is the
corresponding centre of oscillation. The effect is, that when any
small horizontal movement of the earth’s surface takes place at right
angles to either lever, the bob of that lever remains stationary while
the axis moves, and consequently the long end moves on the revolving
plate through a distance which is a certain multiple of the earth’s
motion. The two levers are placed at right angles to each other, so as


42 EWING ; NOTES ON SOME RECENT EARTHQUAKES.

to record two rectangular components of a displacement in any horizon-
[41] tal direction. In the instrument now in use, the ratio Avhich the re-
corded motion bears to the actual motion is ‘six to one. During an
earthquake the motions of the levers, together with that of the plate,
inscribe on the latter a pair of undulating lines which show the am-
plitudes, periods, and character of the successive waves of earth motion.

The instrument stands in one of the rooms of the engineering

laboratory in Tokiyo University. Beside it is another seismograph,

0

a description of which will be found in the volume of the Transac-
tions of the Seismological Society of Japan. This consists of a long
pendulum with a massive bob, against Avhich press the short ends of
two levers, whose long ends touch smoked-glass plates in a manner
similar to that described above. As the bob of the pendulum will
either remain steady or move in a determinate manner during an
earthquake, the recorded motions of the levers show on a magnified
scale the successive displacements of the surface of the earth. The
pendulum is 20 feet long, and hangs from a rigid frame which has no
connection with the roof of the building in which it stands, — conditions
which ai-e designed to make it probable that the pendulum will not be
set swinging by a shock.

Of the earthquakes now to be described the first was recorded both
by the horizontal lever seismograph and by the long pendulum seismo-
graph. Afterwards the latter instrument was taken down to have
alterations made in it, and the other earthquakes were recorded by the
horizontal lever seismograph only. One lever in the last named instru-
ment registered east and west motion, the other north and south motion,
approximately. The following are the earthquakes already recorded,
with the dates of their occurrence : —

I. — ^Nov. 3bi>, 5h. 45m. A. M.

Record given by the Horizontal Lever Seismograph.

The glass plate of this instrument was revolving at the rate of one
turn in thirty" seconds, and the record extended over three complete
revolutions. In other words, the earthquake lasted continuously during
one and a half minutes of time. During this time no fewer than 15(>


EWJNG : NOTES OX SOME RECENT EARTHQUAKES.


43


complete (double) oscillations of tbe earth’s surface took place. The
mean period of a complete oscillation was, as nearly as possible, three-
fifths of a second. The motion was almost wholly N. and S.; the other [42}
lever showed a very small but still perceptible amount of disturbance.

The records given by both levers began simultaneously, as well as can
be judged, but the E. and W. movement soon disappeared, while the N.
and S, movement lasted, as has been said, for 14 minutes and consisted
of more than 160 complete waves.

The earthquake did not begin suddenly. Tbe Avaves began to ap-
pear so gradually that it was impossible to say to which side the first
deviation took place. The amplitude increased, however, pretty rapidly,
and reached a maximum after about three complete Avaves. It Avas then
If millimeters. This is the recorded total amplitude (or movement
from one side to the other side), and is six times the actual amplitude
of the earth displacement. The latter Avas therefore 0.29mm. This
extent of movement was perhaps equalled but certainly not exceeded
during the remainder of the disturbance.

This motion took j)lace in the direction of K. and- S. The Avaves ‘
recorded by the other leAmr Avere too small to be easily measurable, and
their amplitude never exceeded 0.3mm. This gives a greatest earth
movement in, the direction E. and W; equal to 0.05mm.

Combining the two displacements and taking the direction of the
levers more exactly than they have been stated above, Ave find for the
actual greatest displacement of a point on the eai th’s surface during the
disturbance the direction N. 15° W. and E. 15° S. and the total am-
plitude 0.3 millimeter.

Owing to the very imperfect construction of the clock and its con-
nection with the plate, the motion of the plate was very far from uni-
form during even a single revolution and AA'hen this record was obtained
no appliance was in use for the purpose of markiug time on the plate
during the shock. . It is therefore impossible to draw any conclusion
from the record as to the relative length of the jAeriods of the successive
earth waves, except this, that they Avere certainly not equal. Both in
amplitude and in period the successive waves Avere far from regular j
the disturbance did not consist of a series of similar simple harmonic
displacements.


44 EWIXC4 : NOTES ON SOJIE RECENT EARTHQUAKES.

After about the third wave from the beginning of the disturbance,
the amplitude of displacement ceased to increase. It then fluctuated
£43] considerably — sometimes becoming quite small and then increasing again
to a value approaching its first maximum. Before the earthquake
ceased there were several maximums and minimums in the amount of
displacement, but never a complete cessation of displacement until the
whole disturbance was over.

Record given by the Long Pendulum Seismogratii.

The record of the long pendulum seismograph shows that the pen-
dulum was set swinging by the shock, through a total amplitude of about
1mm. of actual motion. (This wave was recognised as due to the swing
of the pendulum by its length, which agreed with the pendulum’s free
.period.) Considering the very large number of successive movements
of the earth’s surface during the disturbance, this result will scarcely
cause surprise, except perhaps at the fact that the arc of oscillation was
not much greater than it was. As the swinging of the pendulum con-
tinued with gradually diminishing amplitude during many revolutions
of the plates, the record.s were much obscured and it was quite impossible
to trace the beginning of the earthquake. It was, however, easy to see
the comparatively rapid undulations of the earthquake superposed upon
the long wave due to the swing of the pendulum. The pointer which
registered north and south motion showed these very clearly. Their
greatest total amplitude on the record was 2mm., corresponding to an
actual total displacement of fmm., since the multiplying ratio was 7 to
1 in this case. The other pointer showed scarcely any true earthquake
motion : it was just visible and no more. These results agree very
closely with tliose obtained by the other iustrument. It is interesting
to notice that although there Avas hardly any true earth motion in the
E. and W. direction, the pendulum swung quite as much in that direc-
tion as in the other.

The results .show hoAV little reliance can be i)laced on the indications
of pendulums when no provision is made for recording their indications
in conjunction with the time. In this case the swing of the pendulum,
although more than three times as great as the true earth motion, was
absolutely so small that it might very readily haAm been confused with


EWING : NOTES ON SOME KECEIST EARTHQUAKES. 45

the latter, had the revolution of the plates not given a means of distin-
guishing them.

If we assume that a displacement of the earth's surfacs take.s place [44J
approximately according to the simple harmonic law, then taking the
periodic time as O.Gsec. and the total amplitude as O.Smm., we have for
the greatest velocity of disjdacement 1.57mm. per second, and for the
greatest rate of acceleration 16.4mm. per second per second. The value .
of p in the same units is 9797. Bodies connected to the surface of the
earth sufficiently rigidly to move with it must therefore have experi-
enced a maximum horizontal force equal to about one-sixtieth of their
own weight. An old form of seismoscope consists of circular cylinders
of homogeneous material and of various lengths, standing on a plane
rough horizontal surface, their ends being planes exactly normal to
their axes. In order that a cylinder of this kind should have been
overthrown by a single wave-'' of the earthquake of Nov. 3rd, its length
must have been not less than sixty times its diameter.

II. — Nov. IOth, lir. 9m. A.' M.

This shock produced the impression of much greater vioieuee^than ,
that of Nov, 3rd. Its record is different in many ways from the one , , ;
just described. \i

Both pointers moved considerably. The pointer registering E. and*

W. motion described three long waves of nearly 1 second period and
2mm. total amplitude (that is on the record: the actual motion is one-
sixth of this). But upon these long waves there were superposed much
* shorter ones, whose period was only about one-fifth of a second ; their
- amplitude was about one-third of a millimeter. After the three long
waves the record showed nothing but a continuous and very irregular
ripple of short waves, of very variable amplitude, the maximum being
about 1mm. This occurred nearly ten seconds after the beginning of
the shock.

*This restriction is necessary, for a number of successive waves, applying
opposite forces witb rapid alternation, might only make the cylinder rock instead ;

of overthrowing it. This is probably the reason why the cylinder seismoscope
has been found not to answer well in practice. ;


46 EWING : NOTES ON SOME REGENT EARTHQUAKES.

The other pointer, showing N. and S. motion, gave an irregular
ripple of short waves merely. From their changing form they were
clearly the resultant of two or more inharmonic constituents. Their
period was also about one-fifth of a second, and their greatest amplitude
a little over 1mm. The visible distiii’bance extended over a distance
equivalent to about half a minute of time.

Comparing this with the shock of Nov. drd, we see that the differ-
ence in “intensity ” was due not so much to a difference in the extent
of the earth movement as to greater frequency of the waves in this
instance. The kinetic effect of a wave varies as its amplitude and as
the square of its frequency. The frequency of the waves was here about
three times as great as in the former case, but their amplitude was less
in the ratio of about two to three. Prom this we should expect to find
the “ intensity ” of the shock of Nov. 10th about six times as great as
that of Nov. 3rd. It need scarcely be pointed out that the data involved
in this estimate are known only tery roughly, and the result must be
accepted with caution. It is, however, interesting to find that accord-
ing to the observations taken in the observatory at Yamato Yashiki,
the “ intensities ” of the two shocks did differ in just this ratio of six to
one.

III. — Nov. 12th, 5h. 36m. P. M.

In this case the motion was chiefly but not wholly north and south.
There was first a very slight ripple of small waves for two or three
seconds ; then came a number of large waves of various periods and ampli-
tudes. Their magnitude rose and fell several times during the distur-
bance, which continued for about 40 seconds. In this, even more than
in the former case; there is an evident mixture of inharmonic waves,
giving rise to the excedingly irregular curve traced on the plate. The
greatest amplitude in the record was 1.2ram., corresponding to a total
earth movement of 0.2mm. The earthquake died out slowly in a long
sequence of small and fairly regular waves.

IV. — Nov. 27th, 3ir. 1 m. P. M.

This was a very slight shock. The record showed N. and S,
movement, but none in the direction of E. and W. The circular line,


EWING: NOTES ON SOME RECENT EARTHCJUAKES.


47


however, traced by the pointer which registers E. and W. motion had
become somewhat broad, so that a very small motion might have taken ’[46'}
place without leaving any trace. The N. and S. motion began with a
• series of four distinct and fairly regular waves ; the period of each was
as nearly as ^wssible half a second, and their total amplitude Iram. on
the record, corresiionding to an earth motion of 0.17mm. nearly. Then
followed an interval of scarcely visible waves lasting for about 5 seconds;
then the amplitude again increased to Imin. Two or three more waves
of this amplitude w'ere registered, after which the motion again became
so faint as to be almost invisible. Slightly greater motion could again
be traced at a , point corresponding to an interval of about 20 seconds
from the beginning of the shock. This continued for a few seconds,
and then the record died away completely.

V. — Nov. SOtii, III. Om. a. M.

Hero again the motion was almost wholly N. and S. It began
very gradually: the first waves were of almost inappreciable size.

Then came a group of very irregular undulations, unequal both in period
and in amplitude, the maximum amplitude being about 1mm. on the
record, which corresponds to 0.17ram. of actual motion. Lastly, the
disturbance died away slowly in a long ripple of very small waves. •
The periods of the earlier large waves were greater than those of the
subsequent small waves ; they varied from about one-half to one-quarter
second. Altogether at least 60 successive waves could be counted, but
they died away so gradually that one could not say when the disturbance
ceased.

The E. aud W. record showed some 20 barely visible undulations,
the largest of which came about 2^ seconds after the beginning of the
earthquake.


It would be hazardous to draw general conclusions from these
examples, which are neither numerous nor individually important. The
most strikiug features appear to be :— (1) The very gradual beginning
and ending of the disturbance. In none of the ol)servations did the


48 E.WING : NOTES ON SOME KECENT EARTHQUAKES.

maximum motion occur until after several complete oscillations hud
taken place. (2) The irregulutity.of the motion. The successive undu-
lations are widely different both in extent and in periodic time. (3)
The large number of undulations in a single earthquake, and the contin-
uous character of the shock. (4) The extreme minuteness of tlu‘
motion of the earth’s surface.

Several other earthquakes which came in November were missed
because the apparatus was dismantled occasionally, to have small im-
provements made in it. It is now working regularly, and the ’writer
hopes that it will in time yield results of a much more definite chaiTicter
as to the true nature of earthquake motion than any information \ve
possess.


DISCUSSION.


The PresideiiL coiigratulaled Profe.s.sor Ewiag on having obtained what were,,
he believed, the first comidcte trustworthy records of the horizontal motion during
an earthquake. The accuracy of the results would of course depend on whether the
part of the apparatus wlricli was intended to remain stationary during a shock did
really remain stationary. If it did not then the records would contain an element
of error due to the proper motion of that part.

Professor Ewing replied that the ix)ssibility of instrumental error, to whiclx the
President had alluded, had been carefully considered by him, and he had made
experiments in order to find whether it existed and to what extent. The question
was whether the hob or mass of metal at the short end of each lever did or did
not remain steady during an earthquake. To test this he placed the apparatus on
a table, by the shaking of which artificial earthquakes could be produced. 'I he
two levers were placed side by .side. The bob of one of them was held absolutely
fixed by means of a braket from a neighbouring wall, while that of the other was
left free, as it would be in the actual use of the instrument. The table was then
shaken and two recqrds of, its motions were given side by side on the revolving plate,
oneby the free lever, the other by the lever whose bob was held fixed. The two
records were found to agree with retnaricable closeness. This proved that the bob
of the free lever did actually remain very nearly at rest during the experiment.
The motions of the table w'ere made to resemble, as closely as possible those of '
an earthquake. T*’ofessor Ewing added that he expected to exhibit the new
seismograph at the next meeting of the Seismological Society, when he hoiked, by
repeating this experiment, to be able to satisfy the members that the instrumental
error was insignificantly small.


GKICKTS : THE MINERAL SPRINGS OF ASHI-NO-YU,


49 *


THE FUNERAL SPRINGS OP A8HI-NO-YU IN THE
HAKONE MOUNTAINS.


By a. J. C. Geerts.


[lieacl December 14, 1880.]

Asbi-no-yu is (jue of the bathing places in Japan, -well known to
foreigners who reside in this country. Situated in the Hakone Moun-
tains, at a relatively short distance from Yokohama or Tskiyo, it enjoys
a certain pojailarifcy as one of the seven celebrated Hakone mineral
springs, and is consequently frequented by numerous visitors during the
summer season. The village being at a height of 836 metres above the
level of the sea, it is easy to understand that its temperature in the hot
summer months remains much below that of the surrounding plains im
which Tokiyo and Yokoliama are situated.

But it is especially the quality of the waters which attiTicts raanjr
patients, who try to recover their health by the use of the strong
sulphureous springs. .Whilst Miyanoshita, Sokokura, Kiga, Tonozawa,
Hakone and Yumoto are mostly visited by pleasure-seekers or by people
whose health is not in a very bad state, we see in Ashi-no-yu principally
the really sick. The nauseous smell of the waters of Ashi.no-yu and
the inferiority of its lodging-house, as compared with those of the
places just named, are too unattractive for persons who visit the water-
ing-places merely in pursuit of pleasure. Dogashima, Ubago and-
Senkoku-hara-no-yu are three mineral springs in the Hakone range
mostly used by poor people.

None of all the springs of Hakone is, however, of such real value


50 GEERTS : THE MINERAL SPRINGS OP ASHl-NO-YU.

.£49] and utility as are the springs of Ashi-no-yu, and it is for tliat reason
that the constitution of the water there has been subjected by me to
a careful analysis.

The springs which are analysed are :

1. TekkO’Sm, a slightly sulphureous ferruginous mineral spring.

2. iSeii-yelci-to, strongly aciduh/us sulphur water.

3. Daruma-yu, do. do. do. do.

These waters have never been analysed before in full. Dr.
Martin^ in 1875 estimated only the amount of sulphuretted hydrogen
in the Ashi-no-yu springs. The numbers found ])y Martin did’er
only very slightly from those found by me.

As to the geological description of tlie place itself and its sur-
roimdiug solfataras, I may refer to an article of Dr. Cochins- in
the Journal of the German Asiatic Society.

1. TEKKG-SUf. (THE WARM FERRUGINOUS SPRING
ASPII-NO-YU.)

Tliis water possesses a smell of sulphuretted hydi-ogen, but its
smell is much less strong than that of the two other (sulphur)
springs. It has a yellowish coloiu’ and is not clear. After it has
been exposed to the air, it becomes more and more tur])id and of a
stronger yellowish colour, whilst at tlie same time small clouds of
iron hydroxide are separated from the water in the form of a red-
dish deposit. The water has a slight acid reaction, caused- by the
presence of a small amount of free sulphuric acid. When boiled it
loses its gases (sulphuretted h 3 Mrogen and carbon ic> acid) and also
nearly all its iron, which sejDarates from the water as a reddish
■deposit.

General appearance of the water Turl)id.


Dolour Yellowish; after boiling, reddish.

Taste Sulphureous.

Smell Sulphureous.

Reaction Slightly acid.


1 Mitth. der Deutschen GssellscllafL fiir Natur und Volkcrk. Osi-Asiens Vel.
X., July, 1876, p. 24.

2 Ibid, VoL, in, 'Sept. 1873. p. 3- • ■


GEERTS : TIIB EINERAL SPRINGS OE ASHI-NO-YU.


51


Gases.


Sulphuretted hydrogen 0.000566 gramme in one litre.

Carbonic acid much [not estimated].

Total amount of fixed matter in 1000 parts 0.160 gramme.

Oxide of iron 0.048 “

Chloride of sodium 0.039 “

Sulphate of lime 0.048 “

Silicic acid 0.016 “

Sulphuric acid (free) ; 0.009 “

Phosphoric acid trace

Alumina trace _

Sulphur (free) as insoluble deposit trace

It is consequently an acidulous and slightly sulphureous ferrugi-
nous mineral spring, with a I'elatively large amount of iron and a
very small amount of saline components. The water might be used,
both for drinking and for bathing in, by persons with the followiug
diseases : —


Anmmia.'

Chlorosis.

Dyspepsia, caused by anmmia.

Chronic diarrhoea.

Leucemia and amyloia swelling of the milt.
Chronic hydropisia, caused by anrnraa.
Scurvy.

Difficult convalescence.

Trigeminal neuralgia.

Some forms of hypochondria and hysteria.


2. SEN-YEKI-TO. (HOT SITLPHUP.-SPRING.)


General appearance of the -water,

Colour

Smell

Taste

Reaction


.Slightly turbid.

.Whitish.

.Strongly sulphureous.
Sulphureous, disagreeable.
.Slightly acid.


52


GEEIITS : THE MINERAL SPRINGS OP ASHI-NO-YU.


Gases.

Sulpliuretted liydi-ogeii 0.0272 gramme iu one litre.

Carbonic acid much [not estimated].

Total amount of fixed matter 0.620 gramme in one litre.

Free sulphur (as deposit) •. 0.013 “

Sulphide of sodium 0.017 "

Chloride of sodium 0.129 "

Sulphate of lime 0.318 “

Free sulphuric acid 0.011 "

Oxide of iron 0.003 “

Silicic acid 0.103 “

Phosphoric acid trace «

Alumina ...trace

The water is therefore an acid, strongly sulphureous spring, with
a large amount of sulphuretted hydrogen, a small amount of sulphide
of sodium and with relatively little saline matter in it.


3. DARUiMA-YU. (HOT SULPHUR SPRING.)


General appearance of the water..

Colour

Smell _.

Taste

Reaction

Gases.

Sulphuretted hydrogen

Carbonic acid

Total amount of fixed matter

Free sulphur (as deposit)

Sulphide of sodium

Chloride of sodium

Sulphate of lime

Free sulphuric acid

Oxide of iron

Silicic acid

Alumina

Phosphoric acid


...Slightly turbid.

...Whitish.

...Strongly sulphureous.
...Sulphureous, disagreeable.
...Slightly acid.

.0.0328 gramme in one litre,
.much [not estimated].

.0.600 gramme in one litre.
.0.008
.0.023
.0.151
.0.285
.0.008
.0.007
.0.143
.trace
.trace


GEERT8 : THE MINERAL SPRINGS OP A8III-ON-YU.


63


Tliis water is consequently of the same quality as the former, [^2]
Both the latter springs might he very useful in the following
diseases : —

Acute and chronic muscular rheumatism.

Stiffness of the muscles.

Diseases of the skin, such as Eczema, Prurigo, Psoriasis, Chronic
Erysipelas.

Syphilis.

Chronic poisoning by lead or mercury.

Abdominal plethora.

Chronic catarrh of pharynx and larynx.

Chronic inflammation of the uterus and ovaiia.

Irregular menstruation.

Neuralgia, caused by rheumatism.

The importance especially of the two latter sulphur springs
would make it very desirable to ameliorate the present uncomfortable
arrangement of the bathing places at Ashi-no-yii. The hotels, the
food, the bathing rooms, the bathing tubs, tlie dwellings, all require
a better arrangement especially for the spring, autumn, and winter
months. The road leading from the foot of the hills at Yumoto to
Ashi-iio-yu could also be arranged so tliat the sick might be conveyed
more easily to the latter place. Finally an arrangement must be
made for collecting the water directly from the springs for drinking
purposes, as the patients ought not onl})" to bathe iu the water, hut
also to drink a certain quantity (say from 300 c.c. to one bottle
daily), after it lias been cooled to the ordinary temperature. It
would indeed be a great boon to the many sufferers from rheumatism
ill this country, if there were erected at Ashi-no-yu a well arranged
sanitarium and bathing establishment, with an educated, specially
trained Japanese doctor attached to it.

The short distance of Ashi-no-yu from densely populated towns
and from the metropolis, combined with the excellence of its sulphur
waters, seems to be a sufficient reason why that place should be pre-
ferred above other sulphur siirings beyond Nikko and elsewhere.


( '>^ )


58]


EVIDENCED OF TIIE GLACTAL PEUIOD IN JAPAN.


By J. Miia'e.


[liead JMccmbcy 14, 1880.]

When in 1840 Agfissiz first announced to the scientific world
that the curious striations which cover the rocks of Northern EurojX'
had been jJ^odueecl by the agency of glaciers, and that in consequence
it was probable that countries like Scotland had once been buried
beneath a sheet of ice, he furnished materials for astonishment and
scepticism. His views, however, have withstood the test of rigid
examination, and every one Is conversant with what may now be
called a fact, namely, that in bygone times much of Northern Europe
was shrouded in a veil of ice as great and may ho greater than that
which now envelopes Greenland. Since this time the subject of
glaciation has been studied in all its aspects. The glaciated coun-
tries have been described and mapped, theories have been formed to
explain the causes which produced these great phenomena, and gene-
rally the workers in this interesting field have been so busy amassing
facts and evolving theories that the writings on the subjects connect-
ed with glaciers and the glacial i)eriod would of themselves form a
goodly library. Notwithstanding all these labours, so far as I am
aware it is but little that has been written about the evidences of a
glacial period in the western portion of the Pacific Area, and about
the evidences of this period in Japan not anything.

The general object which I hove in view is to show that at .the
time of the Glacial Epoch in Europe and America, there was in
Japan a period colder than the present one, and previous to this


MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL DERIOD IN JAPAN. 65


time, also, as iu other countries, there was a period which was
warmer than tlie present one.

To prove this, various arguments are brought forward. Many
of these are purely speculative; others, however, are, I hope, suffi-
ciently well supported by facts. The facts which I adduce are to a
great extent the result of personal observation made whilst travelling
over various portions of Japan and the Kurile Islands. Others have
been collected from the writings and remarks of those who have
studied the subjects to which I refer. If my speculations are found
to be at fault, I at least hope that the few facts which I bring
forward may be of value.

EEASONS- WHY WE SnOULD EXPECT TO FIND TRACES OF A GLACIAL
PERIOD IN JAPAN.

1. As to whether we are justified iu seeking for traces of a_
glacial period in Japan will depend very largely upon how we suppose
that glacial period to have been occasioned. There is no doubt, as
has been so ably advocated by Sir Charles Lyell, that a glacial
period might result from geographical changes. An alteration in the
direction of the C4ulf sti-eara, say for example by the opening of a
huge, inter-oceanic canal through the Isthmus of Panama, might
possibly convert raucli of north-western Europe into a dreary waste
of ice and snow, and countries like Britain, whose wealth depends
upon her fleet <'>f mercluint ships, might at six months’ notice become
bankrupt and he inearcei-ated in a glacial prison. Alterations in
the areas of our continents might produce similar results. If we
regard a glacial period to have occurred in any such manner as
these, because there has been a glacial period in the Western Hemis-
phere it is no reason why we should endeavour to find one in the
Eastern. If, however, the vicissitudes of a glacial period were brought
about by changes taking place outside our earth, the case would be
different.

Thus, for instance, if a glacial period had been produced by a
diminution in the quantity of heat radiated from the sun, as ha&
been suggested, then the glacial period of one hemisphere ought ta
he coutemporaBcoas with that of the other, and if in Europe we


56 MILNE : EVIDENCE OP THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

find ice markings in the latitude of Southern Sweden, ive certainly
should he justified in expecting to find them also in latitudes appro-
ximately the same all round the Northern Hemisphere.

Among the various astronomical theories .which have been brought
forwarcl to explain the glacial period, the one so ably advocated by
Mr. James Croll is that which apj)eai*s to have gained the greatest
acceptance.

Following the view of Mr. James Croll, a glacial period would
occur when the eccentricity of the earth’s orbit was at its greatest
limit and the winter in aphelion. By this the winter temperature
would be lowered and the winter lengthened, and snoiv would accumu-
late. In the Southern Hemisphere an opposite effect would take
place, and these conditions, amongst other things, would cause a de-
flection of ocean currents. And just as Mr. Croll shows that the
;Gulf stream might be cut off from the North Atlantic, so might the
Kuro Si wo be deflected from Japan.

To determine accurately what would be the effect of cutting off
the Kuro Si wo from Japan would he a difficult matter, but that the
effect would be great there is but little doubt.

The Kuro Siwo as a carrier of warm water from the tropics
towards the poles has been reckoned three times as great as the Gulf
stream. Its general course may he seen on every pliysical atlas.
Its average width might be roughly stated as being about 100 miles :
its velocity three miles per hour. Its temperature has been observed
to be from three to four degrees above that of the surrounding
ocean : eight to ten degrees above certain streaks of cold water which
along the coast of Japan appear to be ‘ interstratified with it. The
southern ■ shores of Japan are altogether bathed by it. As it goes
farther north it trends away out into the Pacific. fSee Transactions
of the .Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. II., “ Winds and Currents in
the Vicinity of the Japanese Islands : ” by Capt. A. K. Brown.] A
portion of it passes through the Straits of Korea, and from the
manner in which vessels bound toivards the north appear to overrun
their distances, as is indicated by their logs, it makes itself felt as
far as and beyond the Tsugaru Straits.

Mr. Croll tells us that in consequence of the Gulf stream our


JIILISTE : EVIDENCE OF THE GLACIAL PEHTOD IK JAPAN. 57

mean annual temperature is raised 15'^ above the normal, and Prof.
Haughton calculates that the mean annual temperature of Spitzbergen
is raised in conseuence of the Gulf stream 11°.5 F.

If the effects of the Gulf stream are then so great, ^ve can infer
that the effects of its Pacific rival may be even greater, and the [56]
cutting off of this stream from the shores of Japan might be certain-
ly sufficient to cause a glacial period on many of its mountain tops,
if not also on its plains.

Should the Kuro Siwo, instead of being altogether cut off from
the shores of Japan, be only partially retarded or deflected, its
course would probably be invaded by the cold current called the
Oya Siwo coming from the Okhotsk. This current, which is from
12° to 20° colder than the Ivuro Siwo, already come.'^ as far .south
as the southern parts of Yczo, and even at times a short distance
down the shores of the main i.sland. In the northern part of Yezo,
which is altogether in this current, every winter we have a fringe
of ice many mile.s in width. If this current flowed all round Japan,
its influence in altering the climate would certainly be very great

Between Inuboye and Kinkazan it would appear that sometimes
a current is experienced running towards the north and sometimes
towards the south. Several explanations might be offered for this
phenomenon. Should it mean that the Oya Siwo sometimes forces
itself farther south and displaces the Kuro Siwo, evidence of which
might be given by temperature observations, ^ve should here have a
means of understanding the variations in the fauna of Yedo Bay,
which seem to have taken place in recent times. The same pheno-
menon might, however, be explained on tlie supposition tiiut the
relative position of this current and its eddy are interchangeable.

Many othei theories have been brought forward to explain a
glacial period, but in most if not in all cases, if they are the means
of explaining why there was a glacial period in Europe, they demand
that a glacial period should also have taken place in Japan. Look-
ing at the theoretical aspect of the question, we may say that it is
possible that a glacial period may have existed, and in looking for
it we are certainly not acting unreasonably.

2, Another .strong reason why we .should search for traces of glacial


58


]\I1LNE ; EYIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PEEIOB IN JAPAN.


notion in Japan iis that such indications have been found at latitudes
farther south than portions of Japan iij other countries which are also
situated in the Northern Hemisphere,

Tlius, in North America the drift extends as far south as 39°
[57] N, Lat., to about the latitude of Sendai. In Europe it only
extends to 50° N, Lut. On high mountains botli in America and
Europe, in latitudes fiir to the south of all Japan, there are evidences
to show that the glaciers once extended much lower than they do
at present.

Ill the Sierra Nevada we have evidences of old glaciers down
to 30° N. Latitude. Many of these old glaciers have been described
in detail." Le Conte speaks of one which was 40 miles long and
1000 feet in thickness. Evidences of glacial action have been found
in Virginia, in Nicaragua, the south of Spain, the Atlas Mountains,
Lebanon, to within 4000 ft. of sea level on the Himalayas, and in
Brazil even under the Equator.

Under these circumstances it is hard to imagine that while all
these countries to the east and to the west of Japan were passing
through a period when the climate was evidently so much severer
than it is at present, Japan Avas omitted and left out, not in the
cold, but -in the heat.

DISTRICTS WHERE THE EFFECTS OP GLACIATION ARE MOST LIKELY
TO BE MET WITH.

In searching for glacial action in Japan we should probably be
most successful if we were to choose those districts where the climate
at the present time is most severe and the conditions are such that
the greatest quantities of snow accumulate. For these reasons we
should be more likely to find what we seek for in northern rather
than in southern regions, and in the western rather than in the
eastern. The difference in the climate between the east and west
part of Japan has been remarked upon by almost every traveller.
On the east side, for instance, ive see during the summer a mountain
like Fujiyama, nearly 13,000 feet in height, entirely devoid of
snow, whilst upon the west coast almost every mountain half the
height is perpetually covered with patches and large fields. The


MILNE : EVIEEKCES QF THE GLACIAL AERtOD IN JAI’AN. 59

different teiiiperatures which we find in different parts of Japan and
the different amounts of moisture which is precipitated in the form
of rain or snow, may be judged of from the following records, which
have been extracted from the tables published at the Imperial
Meteorological Observatory of Japan for 3 879, kindly furnished me
by Mr. Arai Ikunosuke.


Tlie great difierences in temperatin-e which may be here observed
are to a great extent due to latitude, but also, I imagine, to the
influence of ocean currents. Most parts of Japan are characterized
by the great extremes of temperature they experience. The lowness
of temperature which is experienced in the latitude of Tokio may
be judged of from the fact that during the month of December,
1880, Messrs. Satow and Hawes, whilst travelling round the eastern
part of Yedo Bay, observed that in the early morning the sea was
frozen out from the shore for a distance of fifty yards. Records
enabling us to compare the east and west coasts of Japan are rare.

Dr. Rein tells us that the average annual temperature of Riigata
(Lat. 39.58 K) is 13.11° C. (65° F.), which is from 1° to 2° 0.
(1.8° to 3.6° F.) lower tlian that of Tokio (“Tlie Climate of Japan
Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. VI., Part V).
This difference in temperature docs not appear to ho due to varia-
tions in the summer mouths, but rather to the greater cold of


60 MILNE ; EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL FERIOD IN JAPAN,

Niigata in the winter months. On the average, in Niigata there
are 32 days of snow-fall, whilst in Tokio we seldom have more thati
three or four. The depth to which the snow accumulates in some
of the towns and villages in the northern and Avestern parts of
Japan is often very great. In Awomori I have been assured that it is
the usual thing to have the snow in the streets level with the eaves of
[59 j the houses. A long distance farther south, but at higher elevations,
the accumulation is equally great. Dr. Rein says that at heights of
700 to 800 metres in villages situated in the mountains of Kaga
it is not unusual to liaA-e a depth of from 18 to 20 feet of snow, whereas
at similar elevation on the opposite side of the range there is not more
than one to one and a lialf feet.

The great difference between the durafion of tlie snow upon the
mountains on the western side of Japan as compared with its duration
upon the eastern, I should be inclined to attribute to the following
causes : First, upon the western jJortion of Japan we Imve, during
the winter months, a greater accumulation of snow than there is
upon the eastern, and the quantity being greater, the time required to
melt this must be greater, and therefore we see snow lingering upon
the Avestern mountain long after the eastern mountains have become
bare ; secondly, the eastern side of Japan, in consequence of its great-
er proximity to the Pacific Ocean and the main bodyof the Kuro
Siwo, is AA'arnier than the Avestern parts.

The greater snow-fall of west Japan is apparently due to the
cold dry north and north-Avest Avinds AAdiich prevail during the winter
months, picking up moisture from the Japan sea and depositing it
upon the first high land, wliich Avill be the mouutatus of West and
North Japan, Avith Avhich it comes in contact

If these' winds Avere colder or continued for a longer period, as
they might if the length of our Avinters Avere increased,, they Avould
greatly assist in bringing about glacial conditions.

We have, then, in Avestern and northern Japan, conditions emi-
nently suited for the production of a glacial climate on the recurrence
of phenomena like the increase in the eccentricity of the earth's orbit,
which has been shown to be the best explanation for the glacial
period of Northern Europe.


MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PEKIOD IN JAPAN. 61

From the calculations of Leverrier, which Avere corrected and
increased by Stockwell, Ave know that if the glacial joeriod depended
upon eccentricities in the earth’s orbit it must have taken place many
thousands of year ago. As many of the highest mountains in Japan
are modern volcanoes of very recent origin, it may be Avell to con-
sider Avhether it is probable that these peaks were in existence at
the time of a glacial period.

According to StockAvell’s tables, our glacial period may have
occurred betAveen 980,000 to 720,000 years ago, during Avhich time
the length of the Avinters exceeded the length of the summers, from
14*to 23 days. This period might also have been between 240,000
to 80,000 years ago, when the Avinters exceeded the summers by from
15 to 26 days. Mr. Croll tells us that most geologists assign the
glacial period to the former of these epochs. He himself, however,
refers it to the more recent period.

The question which here presents itself to us then is, Avhat may
have been the state of some of the Japanese mountains 800,000 years
or even 80,000 yeans ago ? So far as the most prominent of these
mountains, which, like Fujiyama, are of I'ecent volcanic origin, are
concerned, we can reply that the probability is that in those times they
did not even have an existence. Most certainly they did not have
their pre.sent forra,s. Even if we take the shortest period, viz., that of
80,000 years, we should still assert, and I think with reason, that even
if these volcanoes had an existence, their contours, if ever moulded
by ice, were lung ago destroyed or else buried by subsequent eruptions.

It is not then tOAvards the volcanic mountains of Japan that
Ave should turn if Ave expect to find traces of glaciation, but rather
towards mountains Avhicli are not of a recent volcanic origin, and
Avhich are composed of materials not liable to be easily decomposed
or Avorn away.

THE PRESENT STATE OF SNOAV FIELDS AND GLACIERS (?) IN JAPAN.

At the first sight it Avould appear that the most likely localities
in Avhich to find trace, s of glaciation avouM be on those mountains
where aa'C still find siioav fields of considerable magnitude. Unfortu-
nately the greater number of those on which there is perpetuai snow


62 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

are mountains of recent volcanic origin. However, as the beds of
snow and snow consolidated into ice upon these mountains help us
to conceive of the changes necessary for the glaciation of lower levels,
I will enumerate those with which I am acquainted, commencing
from the north and coming south.

Iimhisau, N. Lot. 40° 22'. — I climbed this mountain on the 5bh
[61] August, 1879. At a height of about 4100 feet narrow gulches filled
with thick i)eds of snow were met with. The mountain is of recent
volcanic origin.

Ituafesau or OwijTisan, JSF, Lut. .39° 50'. — Tliis mountain lies on the
eastern side of the western hills. I ascended this on the 21st August,
1877. Its height is about 7000 feet. Ho snow was met with. The
mountain is an active volcano.

Ghokaizan, N. Lat 39° 5'. — This mountain was ascended on July
30th, 1879. The first snow field was met witli at a height of 4800
feet. One snow field up which I travelled was from one-half to
three-quarters of a mile in length and upwards of 100 yards in
width. Its surface w'as covered with moraine and in places it appeared
to be consolidated into ice. The total lieight of the mountain I
found to be about 6000 feet'. Mr. Gowland of Ozaka makes it 6800
feet. The mountain is of recent volcanic origin.

Gmsm.n, iV. Lat. 58° 35'. — Details of this mountain >vill be found
further on. Its heiglit is about 6000 feet (Gowland, 6100 feet).
The snow fields (27th July, i879) were from one to 400 yards in
length. The core of this mountain may be composed of volcanic
rock, but, the flanking schists seem to indicate that it is of great age.

Bandaisan, L. Lat 37° 35'. — This mountain is in the central part
of the main island, to the east of the western mountains. When I
ascended it (July 20th, 1879) no snow was met with. , Its height is
about 5100 feet. It is of recent volcanic origin. Snow was seen in
patches on the mountains to the N. W.

One of the most important groups of mountains in Japan are
those which are situated in and around the province of Hida. The
most noticeable chain in this grouxi is that which commences near
the west coast, in the south of the i>rovince of Etchiu, and then
runs southwards between Hida and Shinano. Personally, I know


MILNE ; EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.


63


but little of these mountains, only having made a single journey
along their eastern flanks. At the time, however, I Avas able to collect
a feAV rock specimens and to observe their general form. The great-*
er number of these rtiountains have been ascended by Mr. W. Gow-
laud, of Ozakn, who has furnished me with a table of their heights,
and given me the opportunity of examining the rock specimens which
he has collected from them. In the following notes upon these moun-
tains (for Avhich notes my thanks ai'c almost entirely due to Mr.
GoAvland) I will commence at their northern end — that is, Avith those
hills situated most closely to the western coast.

Miohozan, N. Lot. 36° 55'. and Kuroliime N. Lai. 36° 50’.
These are well formed cones and therefore probably volcanic.

. Yakeyama, N. Lot. 36 55’, Height 7,600 fed. — ISTear the top of
this mountain there is a small solfatara. From its rocks it is pro-
bably an old volcano. Scoriaccous lava, however, has not been
observed.

Tareyama, N. Lat. 36° 35', Height 9,500 feet. — An old volcano,
parts of which are in a solfatara-like state. Mr. Gowland tells me that
this is by far the most snowy of any mountain he is acquainted with.
Several of the snoAV-fields are over half a mile in length and perpetual.

Jiidake, H. Lat. 35° 40', Height 8,600 feet. — This mountain is
rounded on the top and granitic. On July 18th Mr. Gowland met
the first snow field at a height of about 4,700 feet.

Gorokudake, H. Lat. 36° 33', Height 9,100 feet. — The summit of
this mountain is rounded. It is made up of a felspathic porphyry
(old volcanic) and granite.

Yarigatake, N. Lat. 36° 15', Height 10,300 feet — This moun-
tain, Avbich appears to be the highest in the range, seems to be
made up of volcanic rocks which in places are somewhat vesicular.
Mr. Gowland met the first snow at a height of about 6,300 feet
(Bar. 23.63), and from this elevation it Avas continuous to the
summit. As this mountain appears to be the t)ldest part of the
range, it Avould seem that we ought here to find evidence of the
former existence of glaciers if any existed. Mr. Gowland, however,
did not obserAm any such evidence. On July the 28th the beds of
snoAV may have been 20 feet in thickness.


64 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE CLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.


JSforikura, iV. Lat. 36° 40', Height 9,800 feet . — Here old lava
streams are to be observed, and also hot springs. The rocks are in
places scoriaeeoiis.

Ontake, JSf. Lat. 35° 52', Height 9,930 feet . — On the sides of
this mountain you find porphyritic granite and also obsidian. On
the top, which is much weathered, a gray trachyte, which in places
is pumiceous.

On the whole, we might describe this range as being to a great
extent granitic, with here and there a peak which is volcanic. Some of
these peaks, like Tateyama, Norikura and Ontake, shew evidence of
[63] having been in a state of eruption at a later date than many of the
others. However, as all these mountains are, as compared with
other volcanic mountains of JapaUj exti’emely old, it is possible that
some of them inay^ yield us evidence of former glacial action.

On the JST. W. side of Hida there is another group of high
mountains, the most important perhaps of which is Hakusan, N.
Lat. 36° 8'. Its height is 8,600 feet. Flanking its sides there are
beds of sandstone, but on the top dark coloured andesite; at the
base there are some hot springs. Like the mountains just spoken
about, it is volcanic, but probably very old. At the bottom of one
of the snow-fields on this mountain Mr. Gowlaud tells me that there
is a crevass 20 feet in depth.

Mr. K. W. Atkinson, writing to me about the snow-fields of
these districts, says that he should think that the snow-line on
Hakusan was about 5,000 feet, and on Tateyama 5,300. These
are the lowest points at which snow occurred in the month of August.
On both of these mountains the snow was only found in those
valleys which faced east and north. Mr. Atkinson remarks that
the surface of the snow was hard, and it would not be improper to
call it ice. The length of these snoiv fields ivas from 300 to
400 yards.

Mr. Edward Kinch, writing to me. about the Hari-no-ki toge,
which is one of the highest passes in Japan, lying to the North of
Tateyama, says: ‘‘The height of the mountain is roughly about
8000 feet, and there was snow on it down to about 3000 feet from
the top. On the east side we crossed three or' four snow beds and.


MILNE: EVIDENCES OP THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 65

miniature glaciers. On the west side there was scarcely any snow.’’
This was on the 25tli July, 1878.

Dr. Divers, speaking to me about the snow-fields in the same
districts (as seen in midsummer), remarked that some of them- shewed
all the characters of glaciers. There were lateral moraines on the
surface and terminal moraines at the end, whilst beneatli there was
a stream of water which ran out of a caverii-like opening in the
face of their lower extremity. Other visitors to this district confirm,
these observations.

We may therefore conclude our remarks upon this portion of
our subject by paying that at a height of about 6000 feet in Middle
Japan, and about 4000 feet a little farther north, near to the
western coast, we find fields of perpetual snow. And some of them
are so far consolidated a.« to form pumj glade

TERRACE FORMATIONS AS AN EVIDENCE OP GLACIAL CONDITIONS.

Assuming a glacial -climate to have occurred over Morthefn
Eui'ope, at such a time w’e should have a large accumulation of ice
round the polar regions, and in consequence a displacement in the
earth’s center of gravity. According to Mr. Croll, this shifting of
the earth’s center of attraction farther towards the north would,
occasion a rise in the waters round the North Pole of 380 feet, and
in the latitude of Edinburgh of 312 feet. This may have been-
increased by the melting of the ice upon the Southern Hemisphere
more rapidly than its formation at the poles. According to other
computations, the rise at the North Pole may have been .from 650-
to 2,0000 feet. As a proof that conditions such as here implied have
really had an existence, Mr. Croll tells us that geology is fast
establishing the fact “.that when the country was covered with ice^
the land stood in relation to the sea at a lower level than at present,
and that the Continental periods or times when the land stood in
relation to the sea at a higher level than now were the warm
inter-glacial periods.” As during the glacial epoch there was a
succession of cold and warm periods, there would consequently be
elevations and depressions of sea level. Evidences of actions such


'66 MILNE: EVIDEDOES OP THE OLA-OIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

as these are furnished to us in our submerged forests and our raised
beaches.

Assuming Mr. OrolPs conclusions to be correct — and they are
•certainly most difficult to escape from — the terraces or old sea cliffs
which we find in so many places round the shores of Northern Japan
may possibly be an evidence of glacial conditions. These terraces
are especially well marked round tlio shores of Yezo, and in the
Kuriles certainly as far as Iterup.

In connection with the subject on which we now write, Dr.
Woodward has, iii a presidential addre.ss to the Geologi.sts’ Associa-
tion, })ointed out that since the close of the great Ice Age there is
clear and indisputable evidence of the rise of land towards both the
[66] North and the South Pole. Here and there I may remark that we
have evidence of movements in the opposite direction. In regions which
are between the tropics were have evidences both of rises and falls.

’ No doubt some of these movements may be due to movements
in the crust of the earth, but as Mr. Croll has argued, they may
also be due to the movement of the waters. In countries which are
volcanic, movements of the land may be due to exjmnsions in the
erust of the earth.

As a further confirmation of Mr. CrolPs theory, might we not
•enquire whether the raised beaches and terraces of high latitudes are
in the average higher than tho.se of low latitudes ? Speaking froni
my own experience in Japan, this may be answered in the affirm-
tive. On the main island of Japan I have no distinct recollection
•of raised terraces, but in Yezo and the Southern Kuriles I have
seen many. On all the coast line near Hakodate (42 N. Lat.)
terrace formations are well marked. I have seen them all along
the east coast as far as Cape Erirao, and on the -west coast near
Matsumai, and in the north at Nemoro. In the Kurile Islands I
have seen them in Kunashiri and Iterup.

The following are a few out of a large number of notes relating
to sea terraces which I have made when on visits to Yezo and the
Kurile Islands.

To the south of Esashi and between it and Matsunami, well
formed terraces may be seen at many points along the coast. They


MILNE: EVIDENCES OF THE CLAGUL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 67

usLuiliy appear like three steps or cliffs. The lowest one is a short
distance above sea level. The total height from sea level to the
foot of the upper cliff may be perhaps 50 to 100 feet.

Near Iwanai, after crossing Raiten yama, there is a well marked
old sea cliff about 40 feet in height. It forms the termination to a
gently sloping plain running down from the hills. The materials
of which this plain is composed are boulders and gravel.

The road leading out of Hakodate going towards the farm at
Nanai rises up over two terraces. The first of these is a sudden
rise of about 20 feet.

On the west coast of Iterup, at Furabets and its neighbour-
hood, the coast is very clearly marked with terraces. From sea
level up to the top of the first, which is at the same level as the
foot of the second, the height as measured by an aneroid was
130 feet.

On the east coast of Yezo terraces are also to be seen. At
Horoidzumi there are two such terraces. The height of the lower
one (which will be the foot of tlie_ higher one) is perhaps 50 feet
above sea level. [See* Report on the Gold Fields of Yezo ; by
Henry S. Munroe, E. M.]

Very much might be written on the sea terraces of the northern
parts of Japan. Every visitor to Yezo niust of necessity observe
them. They are several times referred to in Mr. Lyman’s valuable
reports on the Geology of Yezo.

Mr. Lyman, writing to me about sea terraces in Yezo, speaks
specially of one to the south of Iwanai which is very well defined.
It is perhaps 20 feet in height.

Speaking generally, I should then say, first, that the old sea
■clifis of Northern Japan are very well defined, and that those in
the higher latitudes indicate a descent of the sea relatively to the
land, greater than that which is indicated by the more southern
ones. It would be interesting to compare this observation with
• others made in different parts of the Northern Hemisphere.

Mr. Henry H. Howarth, in a paper on “ Recent Elevations of
the Earth’s Surface in the Northern Circumpolar Regions ” (see
Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, Vol. XLIII.), tells ua


68 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

that M’Clure found shells of Oyprina Islandica at the suiumit of
Coxcomb Range, in Baring Island, at an elevation of eight hundred
feet above the sea level.

Captain Parry records the occurrence of sub-fossil shells in
Byam, Martin Island, at heights of from 100 to 500 feet.

Near the North Cape there is evidence of an elevation of 600

feet.

Oyster beds have been found at a height of 200 feet near lake
Wener.

Near Stockholm there is evidence of an elevation of 70 feet.

From my own observations in Newfoundland, I should certainly
say that there is evidence to shew that in very recent times the sea'
relatively to the land has been 50 feet higher than it is at present.

To the North of Japan, in Behrings Straits, we have evidence
of considerable elevation, and also in British Columbia, on the
western side of North America.

In looking over the few examples which have been quoted, it
might seem that in the more northern latitudes we have traces of the-
sea having been relatively to the laud at higher levels than it has been-
in more southern latitudes. This, however, is a conclusion which,
before it can be accepted, needs the collection and careful examina-
tion of a very much larger number of records than I have been
able to bring forward. As a further confirmation of Mr. Groll’s-
theory, we should generally expect to find indications of the same
extent of oscillation so long as we examined places lying in the
same latitudes. And lastly, if the change in level of the ocean is
taking place in consequence of conditions similar to those suggested
by Mr. Croll, the districts where we should expect to find these
oscillations the niost pronounced, would be in the Arctic regions, —
and. certainly, from all that we know of the rapid changes which
are taking place on the movements of the sea level, they do not .
seem to be anywhere better marked than they are in northern
latitudes.

In conclusion then, we may say that the evidence, such as-
we have, respecting the recent elevation of coast lines generally,
appears to support the theory advanced by Mr. Oroll, and us the


MILNE : EVIDENCES OP THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 69

•old sea cliffs of Japan arc in conformity with this evidence, it
seems just as likely that they are indications not simply of changes
in level of the sea, but of changes of level of the sea produced by
•changes of climate, as that they are the indications of an upward
movement of the earth’s crust.

RELATION BETWEEN THE DISTRIBUTION AND NATURE
OF THE PRESENT FAUNA AND FLORA OP
JAPAN TO ITS FORMER CLIMATE.

l.—Tke Flora.

A more definite and satisfactory manner of answering the ques*
tiou which is before us would be to bring forward evidence to show »
•that there are actual traces of a glacial period still existing in the
country. For instance, it might be asked whether any of the
peculiarities in the distribution of plants and animals which we see
around us can be satisfactorily explained by tbe former existence of
■a glacial period ? Do we, for instance, find upon tbe summits of
the higher mountains a fauna and flora characteristic of higher lati-
tudes ? The explanation of phenomena like these by their relation
to a glacial period are familiar to us all. Unfortunately we are
hardly yet in the position to enter upon questions of this description
— the distribution of the fauna and flora of Japan being at present [683
in most of its departments but .imperfectly known. A few general
remarks, however, upon these points may not perhaps be out of
place. Dr. Savatier, writing “ On the Increase of the Flora of
Japan ” (see Transactions Asiatic Society of Japan, Vol. 11 .), points
out the connection which exists behveen the plants of Japan, those
of Eastern Asia and the eastern region of North America. In look-
ing through the list of plants given by Dr. Savatier, we also notice
that many plants which are found upon the high ground in Central
Japan, as for instance at Hakone and Nikko, are also found farther
north, but at lower levels, as for instance at Hakodate.

Dr. J. Rein, speaking generally about the flora of Japan, re^
marks (see “ Der Fuji no yama and seine Besteiguug ” Petermann’s


70 MILNE; EYIDENC'KS OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

Geograph: Mitt: 1879,, Heft X) that tlie flora of the high moun-
tains of Japan seems to consist of a mixture of plants of the north-
ern forest regions of the old continent and those from Canada, the
Polar regions, and some Alpine ranges. It has reached Japan from
East Siberia and Kanischatka by currents and winds.

Whilst travelling in Japan I have ascended a few of its moun-
tains. In central and northern Nippon I climbed Asaitia, 8,500 feet ;
Bandaisan, 5,100 feet ; Gsvassau, 0,100 feet (Gowland) ; Chdkuizian,
6,800 feet (Gowland) ; Ganjusan, 7,000 feet ; Iwaliisan, 5,000 feet ;
and from the higher part of each of these I have brought away a
few specimens of common plants. These were placed in the Ininds
of ray friend Mr. James Bisset of Yokohama. In no case, so far
as I am aware, did I collect anything which was not found at lower
^ levels or a few degrees farther to the north. A few' notes collected
from conversations with Mr. Charles Maries, a gentleman who spent
several years in collecting plants in various parts of Japan, confirms
this view'. Amongst the many plants which repeat themselves
farther north, the follow'ing are a few prominent examples : At an
elevation of 4,000 feet, in 36.48 N. Lat., at Chuzenji, we find the
Berberry; on Hakodate head, 41.46 N. Lat,, we find tlie same plant.
Again, in all the forests of Yezo we meet with the strongly scented
Magnolia maerophylla. This repeats itself in 36.43 N. Lat. u])on the
[69] Nikko mountains. Ahiesjirma, which is common on all the mountains
of Japan, is found at lower elevations in T'ezo. The white-leaved
climbing Actinulia polygavia, which is common on all the mountains
of Central ^Japan as far south as Kobe, is also found in Yezo.
The Magnoleaceous Cireidiphyllum japonicum in toimd on the slopes of
Fuji yama in the south, and again in Yezo in the north. The
, white-barked birch (Betula alhaf) occurs in the mountains of mid-
Japan and again at lower levels in Yezo. The beech and horse
chestnut, which are found on the low' ground in Yezo, are, fartlier
south, only found at elevations of from 6,000 to 7.000 feet. 'ib
these, others might be added, but as Mr. Maries remarked to me,
and I do not know of any one who had better opportunities of
acquiring information, in central Nippon above 2,000 feet, you find
nearly every thing which is to be found in Yezo,


mime: evidences of the glacial period in japan. 71


As examples of a similar distribution I may mention Anemone
mddeana, which was found by Mr. Satow on the top of Midko-zan
(6000 feet), occurring close to Hakodate. Glaueidium j^nlmatiim and'
Dipliyll&ia Qrayi, found at a height of 4000 feet on Mio-k6-zan, and
6,000 to 6000 feet on Tateyama, have been found at Soya in North
Yezo.

Also on the top of Ibukiyama in Mino (about the same height
as Hakone), Dr. Rein found a similar vegetation to that inhabiting
the highest points of the Hakone range lying farther to the north.

If we were to strictly adhere to the well known theory of Pro-
fessor Forhes respecting the relation between the distribution of
plants and glacial periods, such a distribution as the one just-
indicated might be taken as a strong indication of a former period
of cold. In the cases of most of the mountains ivith which I am
personally aequaintsd, Forbes’ theory, which so well explains the
origin of the fauna and flora of the Alps and other mountains, will
hardly bo applicable. These mountains are in nearly every case
volcanic, and if they have not been active within the historical
period, their shape and structure shows that they most certainly
have been active within a period of 80,000 years, which is the
smallest limit of years which we can allow to have elapsed since
the occurrence of a glacial period. At the time of these eruptions^
every plant upon their higher slopes must have been repeatedly
destroyed, and the vegetation which we now see upon their summits
and filling their old craters has established itself subsequently to a
glacial period. In cases like these, an Arctic flora upon the higher
portions of a mountain situated in a temperate clime would not he
indicative of a glacial climate. Neighbouring mountains which are
not volcanic may possibly have received their colonics of plants
which belong to more northern latitudes at the time of the with-
draival of a snowy covering from the lower grounds, and perhaps it
is from these, ns waifs and strays carried by the w^ind, that the
volcanic cones have received their peculiar floral If this has been
the case, then the flora of the mountain tops, repeating themselves
farther nortli in Yezo, may be taken as an indication of a former
climate which was more severe than the present one.


72 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

The Flora of Yezo as Gmnpg/red with that of Nvpj)on,

If you travel in the north part of Nippon, you notice almost

•everywhere large quantities of Conifers. Directly you cross the
Tsugaru Straits and enter Yezo, you are at once struck hy the ab-
sence of Con.iferw and the predominance of deciduous trees. You
seem to have suddenly entered into a country where the character
of the forests has entirely changed. Had I not travelled a con-
siderable distance in Yezo, I might have left the country with this
belief. The fact, however, is that the hard wood so characteristic
■of the neighbourhood of Hakodate (excepting the town itself, where
there are one or two groves of Oryptomeria) and the road to
Sapporo, is only to be found upon the lower ground. On the
mountains, as for instance along the south-east coast of Yezo and
also farther north, as near Nemoro, a great variety of Comfera', are

to be met with. Mr. Maries told me that he had met with no less

than eight species, one of which, Pinus cembra var. pygmea, was
only found ‘in Yezo and Northern Asia. A ti-ee which is veiy
similar, Finns c&nhra, is found on the west coast of North America.
Mr. Maries also remarked that so far as he knew, the probabilities
were that the only plants peculiar to Yezo and not found in Nippon
might be a few ferns and herbaceous plants.

2. The Fauna of Japan.

From the plants I will pass on to the fauna. Mr. Wallace,
writing on the fauna of Japan, says, in conclusion to previous
remarks : " Prom a general view of the phenomena of distribution,
we feel justified in placing Japan in the Palmarctic regions ; although
some tropical groups, especially of reptiles and insects, have occupied
its southern portions" (Geographical Distribution of Animals, Vol.
I., p. 230). Further on he remarks upon the mixture of Palaearctic
and tropical which occur in Japan, and in the extreme south he
tells us that the “ most abundant forms of mammal bird and insect
are modifications of familiar Palsearctic types. The fact clearly indi-
cates that the former land connections of Japan with the continent
have been in a northerly rather than in a southerly direction." So


MILNE,: EVmENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 78

far as the observations upon the insects of Japan are concerned,
nearly the whole of Mr. Wallace’s remarks are based upon the
unrivalled collections of Mr. George Lewis. As Mr, Lewis has
returned to Japan to continue his researches, I have fortunately
been able to communicate with him on the distribution of the insect
fauna of this country. Speaking generally, he says : “ The fauua.

of Yezo is essentially the same as in the north of the main island,
and amongst the Geodephaga, I found several species at the sea
level near Hakodate which I used to get 'on the highest elevations at
Nagasaki; but this feature is not to my mind so prominent as it is in
the same area of Europe. Roughly speaking, the Coleoptera of Japan
consist of species derived from the same source as those of Northern
Asia and Europe, wuth a considerable element from the tropics. A few
links come from America, and I was under the impression that the
Aleutian and Kurile Islands might have bridged over the space
between the two continents (before the life-time of the present
species), but it is easier to believe that the paucity of tlie analogous
genera is owing rather to the comparatively recent formation of
these groups. I am indebted to you for this last observation, which
has interested me very much. The connection of the beetle fauna
of Japan with that of the Phillipines, has to my mind been much
strengthened by my recent investigations in Yezo, etc.”

Sir Charles Lyell (Principles of Geology, Vol. 11. p. 345) also
makes reference to the fauna of Japan. He says: "Although the
batrachians of Japan are all Palscartic, the snakes agree in genera
and species with those of the more southern parts of Asia in the
Indian region.” After this he speculates on Japan having once been
united, 1st with Northern Asia and received its batrachians, and
2nd, with Southern Asia through Loochoo to receive its snakes.

Differences Between the Fauna of Yezo and that of Nippon.

What differences may exist between the fauua of Sagalin and
the mainland or lietween Sagalin and Yezo I am not at present in
a position to state. There does not appear to be any reason why
the fauna should be raucli different to that of the mainland. The .

differences between the fauna on the two sides of the Straits of , ,


74 MILNE: BVIDENOIOS OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN,

TstigarUj so tar as the larger animals are concerned, are very striking.

In Yezo wo find a large northern bear, a ptarmigan and nine
other birds which are not found on the main island. In the north
of the main island wo find a small southern bear, sheep-faced ante-
lope, monkey, the pheasant and other species of birds which do not
cross over into Yezo. Tliese remarks are founded on an article ujx)!!
the birds of Japan by Messrs. Blakiston and Pryor (see Transactions
of the Asiatic KSociety of Japan, Vol. VIII. pttrt 11). As an ex-
planation for tliese differences in the fauna on the two sides of the
Tsugaju Straits, vv'hieh are only 21 miles in width, these authors
suggest the prol lability of a glacial period.

Whon the fauna of Yezo has been studied, it seems very probable
that the distinctions between the larger animals of the two sides of
the Tsugaru Straits will be found to be much more marked than it
is at present. For instance, it does not seem improbable that there
may be two large bears in Yezo one black and the otlier broAvnish
red — which are not met with in Nippon, whilst in Npipon we have the
racoonfaeed dog, moles, and tlie hoar, which are not found in Yezo,
Tluse latter statements are made on Japanese authority. The great-
est differences, however, will be amongst the animals of tropical
origin, as, for instance, the snakes. In Nippon Mr. Fryer tells mo
that there are no less than 13 species. Although I have paid some
six or .seven visits to Yezo, I do not rememiier having seen in that
island more th;iu tV70 species. Bats also arc scarce in Yezo, whilst
in Nippon there are several varieties.

THE FORMATION OP THE TSUGARU STRAITS,

The straits which cause this marked division are at their narrow-
est point about 10 miles in width. Their deptli varies in the central
parts from 70 up to ISO fathoms. Judging fioin the sea terraces
upon the sides of these straits, which terraces I may remark are
characteristic of the whole of Yezo and also of tlic Southern Kujiles,
it would seem that the last movement of the land has here been rela-
tively to the sea an upward one. The indications of elevation
which we have further to the south, as for instance in Yeclo Bay,.


MILNE: EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 75

are well known to us all. Under these circumstances, and also
considering the depth of the straits, we can not imagine them to
have been Ibrmcd by subsidence. It would rather appear that they
have been formed by the ordinary processes of marine denudation,
and Yezo has been separated from the main land just as England
has been cut oft* from France. The manner in which headland faces
headland, on the two sides of the Straits of Tsugarii, is another point
which T take as an indication of the separation having taken place
by marine denudation, these headlands being, so far as I am aware,
built up of similar rocks, which therefore have been cut through in
a similar manner. The Straits of La Perouse may have been
formed in a manner similar to those of Tsugaru, and just as Yezo
%vas cut off from the mainland, if marine denudation continues and
Volcano Bay becomes much deeper. Northern Yezo may be cut off
from Southern Yezo, and one more channel will be opened to connect
the Japan sea with the Pacific Ocean. How long it has taken to
form such a channel as the Tsugaru Straits it is difficult to answer
correctly. However, by comparison with the rate at which other
coast lines have been worn away, it is not difficult to obtain data
which will aid us in forming some conception. Thus, for example,
we might compare the coast of Japan with that of England. From
numerous observations and calculations, the eastern and southern
coast of England is being -worn away at a very rapid rate. For
example, the coast of Yorkshire is cut backwards, as calculated by
the late Professor Phillips, at an average rate of 21- yards per
annum. In Norfold the rate has been from 1 yard to 3 feet 2
inches per annum. The chalk clifi’ near Ramsgate have on an
average lost about 3 feet per annum.

Taking the lowest of these rates at which portions of the coast of
England are being worn away, as the rate at which the rolling of
the Pacific is cutting into the rocks of Japan, 'or even taking one-
third of this rate, that is one foot per annum, it is a simple calcu-
lation to shew tliat long subsequent to any period which has been
assigned for that of Glaciation, there was in every probability a land '
connection between Nippon, Yezo, Sagaliu and the adjoining continent. [74],
■ During the period that these straits were being cut, it is not un-


7^ MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

likely that other causes may have been actively engaged in com-
pensating for the waste and tending to maintain a land surface.

DIRECTION PROM 'WMICH JAPAN WAS COLONIZED.

Wlicn we look at an atlas and see the Kurile Islands like a
row of stepping stones connecting Northern Japan with Kamschatka,
it is a very natural supposition to imagine that Japan may have
received some — at least some portion — of its present fauna by im-
migrations from the continent along this line. After two visits to
the islards, the first of which ■was in 1878, when I went as far
north as the southern extremity of Kamschatka, I quickly came to
the conclusion tliat it was almost beyond the pale of possibility to
imagine Japan to have been colonized from this direction. After
passing Urup, all the remaining islands are perpetually capped with
snow. With the exception of a fringe of green near the shore-line,
they are destitute of vegetation. The general appearance of many
of them is that of a huge, black cone of cinders. From the tops of
several of these, steam is issuing Altogether the aspect of these
islands is dreary in the extreme. Between neighbouring islands the
currents issuing from tlie Okhots are so rapid, and in consequence
meeting with a swell from the Pacific, so rough, that it is a rare
occurrence even for the few inhabitants who linger on these islands
to cross from one to another. Should they attempt it, they carry
with them tlie whole of their .household gods, so that on reaching
the opposite shore a new home may be established. The dreariness
is increased by the long continuance of dense fogs, not to be sur-
passed even by those of world-wide fame which characterize New-
foundland. Everything is most unpromising for animal life.

The geological nature of these islands shows them to he of very
recent origin — in fact, some of them are still in the process of
formation. This being the case, at the time that Japan was colo-
nized, these stepping stones were probably without existence. Had
they been used in modern times, convenient as they are, we ought
to find upon them some evidences of the animals which have
£75] migrated over them. What animals there are, however, upon the
Kuriles, so far as I am acquainted with them, seem to show that,


MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.


77


rather than Japan having been colonized from the Kurilas, tlie Kuriles
were colonized from Japan. Thus, in Ye/o we find the fox, bear, laud
otter, deer, wolf, etc. Of these, the fox I believe ranges throughout
all the larger of the Kurile Islands. I have seen its skins in the
most northern island and also in the two southern islands. The bear
and land otter, however, only reach to the second island, Iterup.
Possibly they go to Urup, but this is doubtful. The remainder of
the larger fauna of Yezo does not even cross over to the first island,
although it often happens that the Yezo straits, which are not more
than ten or twelve miles wide, are nearly bridged over with ice.
Occasionally they are quite bridged over, and several of the in-
habitants of Kemoro, I am told, have repeatedly crossed to K!iina-
shiri on foot.

By a similar argument, I think it could be showui that the
islands to the south which form the stepping stones towards Loochoo,
are also of too recent an origin to have formed the bridge for the
colonization of Japan. The only other route by which Japan could have
received its fauna is the island of Sagalin. If we accept this as the
bridge connecting Japan wdth the adjoining continent, we fall in with
the conclusions deduced from a study of the fauna by Mr. Wallace.
Fi’oin a geological or geographical point of view, the connection of
Japan with the main land through Sagalin will be a matter simpler
to understand and more probable than a connection through the Kuriles
or Loochoo.

When we look at a chart and see that the straits separating
Sagalin from the main land are at one point only 5 miles in breadth,
and learn that everywhere they are filled up with extensive banks
of suud and mud, which renders them so shallow that at low water
they become impassable for ships (see “ Mikado’s Empire,” p. 26),
we see that even now' it is jjossible for Sagalin to be colonized from
the continent.

Between Sagalin and Yezo, however, we have the Straits of La
Pdrouse, 25 miles in breadth and with a depth of 40 fathoms. These
were probably formed at or about the same time as the Tsugaru Straits.

It is sufficient for our purpose to rest witli the assurance that
prioi- to the glacial period, and for some time after, the sti-aits of [76]


78 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.


which I have spoken were probably without existence, and therefore
there w'as a free comniunicution for all animals whicli desired to
inigrate throughout Nipon.

CLIMATE OP .TAPAN PREVIOUS TO THE GLACIAL PJORIOJ).

The next -point to wliich I wish to call attention is the fact
that before the glacial period, there was probably a period when the
climate was warmer than it is at present. Of this we have in
Europe abundant evidence. In Japan, however, our evidence is as
yet blit scanty. As an example of sucli evidence, I will call atten-
tion to the beds of clay rocks which are found in Yezo. Those
containing ammonites Dr. Naumann assigns to the orefcaceons period,
because, I presume, tlie ammonites they contain are similar to the
ammonites of the cretaceous period in Europe. From the reptilian
remains with which ammonites occur in Europe, it seems tolerably
certain that the annual mean temperature of the period when these
creatures lived must have been a high one — certainly equal to that
of the tropics. Prof. Haughtou, arguing from premises like these,
assigns an annual mean temperature of 68° F. to the Jurassic
period — that is to say, a climate with a temperature equal to that
of ]Nev 7 Orleans. At the time the ammonite lieds ivere formed in
Yezo, we may conclude that the yearly mean temiierature was 68°
F., or 23° greater than it is at present in the same locality. How
long this high temperature period occurred before the glacial period
it is difficult to say, but we must remember that the period at which
ammonites like the cretaceous ammonites flourished in Yezo was not
necessarily the same period at which the cretaceous rocks were form-
' ed in Europe. It is by no means impossible that ammonites like
the Nautilus may have flourished in the Eastern Hemisphere long
after they had become entirely extinct in the AYestern Hemisphere.

Regarding these rocks from a lithological point of view — and I
have ridden along the whole length of their exposure upon the
south-eastexm coast of Yezo — they are certainly .not suggestive of
great age.

As a second indication of warm climate pi-evious to the time at
[77] which we can imagine a glacial period to have occurred, ‘ I will


MILNE : EVIDENCED OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 79


refer to the discovery made by Mr. Toshiwo Nakano of corals in
the rocks which surround the bay of Tokio. These corals were
identified by Dr. Edward Naumann as reef liuilders, who, in an
article on the “ Plain of Yedo ” in Petermann’s Oeograph : Mitthei-
•liingen (26 Band, 1879. p. 184), thus refers to them:— “In the
more recent tertiary period, reef-building corals developed their
beauty on the coast of the Awa island, and built up from chalky
masses an extensive wall. As reef-building Polypi are at present
strange to the Japanese seas, we obtain an estiinate of the tempera-
ture for the last phases of the most recent geological period. When '
the reef- forming corals lived on the coast of Awa, the temperature
may have been 6° warmer than at present.”

Ill a foot note Dr. ISTaumann tells us that these corals were
found by Mr. Nakano at the foot of a hill about 60 feet above the
level of the sea. They are chiefiy Astreeidm and Fungidno and occur
in large masses. In the winter of 1876 I visited the locality which
Dr. Faumaim here refers to. The corals whieli I met with occurred
irregularly mixeil up with shells, siliceous pebbles, etc., in tlie form
of boulders lying on the beach between Tateyamji and Shiwomi.

The rock from which these boulders are derived is met with a short
distance back inland. From its position it appears to be a member
of the stratified tertiary tuffs whicli are so extensively develojied on
nearly all .sides of Yedo Bay. As these tuffs are well defined strati-
fied rocks, ‘in places liuried under 100 feet or so of more or less
stratified gravels and alluvium, I should certainly regard them as
having been formed prior to any glacial period.

Our evidence respecting the nature of the climate before the
time at which wo can suppose a glacial climate to have occurred
then is : first, at some time previous to such a period the mean
annual temperature of Northern Japan was much greater, perhaps
23° F., than it is at present ; and second, that this high temperature
probably decreased until at a period immediately before glacial times
it was only about 0° warmer than it is at present.

The analogy between the changes of climate which took place
in Europe poievious to the glacial period, and the changes which
took place in Japan at aliout a corresponding time may, I think, be [78]


80 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PEEIOD IN JAPAN.


taken as a further proof that Japan passed through a cycle of climatic
conditions similar to those of European countries.


A SUGGESTION OF THE CONDITIONS WHICH ATTENDED THE
GLACIAL PERIOD AS EXPERIENCED IN JAPAN.

The point which we have now reached in our argument is that
previous to the time of the glacial period the Northern Islands of
Japan were united with each other and also with the main laud.
Under these conditions the whole of Japan from north to south was
in eveiy probability covered with a more or less tropical flora and
fauna.

We have also shown, that just as In the AVestern Hemisphere,
there was a glacial period, there was no reason why a similar period
should not have happened in Japan.

To continue, let us imagine such an occurrence to have taken
place. As the cold increased and tlie mountains became covered
with snow', there would be a gradual retreat of species tow'ards the
south. Those upon the main land vvoiild have an interrupted course
before them, hut those upon the penirmila of Japan wDuld find
themselves suddenly arrested. Being arrested, they would then have
to struggle with the climate. In this struggle some would })ecome
extinct, w'hilst a few of the more hardy, or those which were the
most pliable Avoiild gradually accommodate themselves to the new
conditions. These would survive, but probably in an altered form.

Living between tliese tropical forms and the barrier, we should
have many palmarctic forms. Subsequent to this period, or even
perhaps before the climate had ameliorated to its present conditions,
the cutting of the Tsugaru Straits was completed. This was probably
followed by the cutting of the La Perouse Straits, whilst the straits
between Sagalin and the main land can hardly as yet be said to
have had their severance properly completed.

Before the continuity of the land was interrupted, certain of the
animals which had been driven southwards migrated back towards
the north ; others, however, owing to the climate not having suffi-
ciently ameliorated, or to causes which it is not for us to enter du,


MILNE : EVIDENCES OP THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN, 81

lingered behind until the formation of the straits had been completed
and they were then cut oflP. In this way, perhaps, we may have
obtained some of the peculiarities observable in the ■ present geo-
graphical distribution of the Japanese Fauna and Flora. At the
time of the cold period the icy barrier from the north may not
have descended beyond the same latitudes which it reached in the
Western Hempisphere, say to 55 IST, Lat,, — that is not farther south
than the middle of Kamschatka. This would bring the outer edge
of the Arctic pack ice about 700 miles farther south than it is at
present, or to within 1200 or 1500 miles of the latitude of Tokio.

At the present time, in the longitude of Great Britain, icebergs
and drift ice have a limit at about '65 N. Lat. In the Kortli
Pacific the limit is about 55 IST. Lat. If at the time of the glacial
period drift ice extended as far south as the latitude of London
(52 hr. Lat.), as it might have done from the evidence of scattered
boulders, it would be 13° lower than at present. If the descent of
the drift ice in the Pacific was proportional to that in the Atlantic,,
pieces of it might now and then have reached latitudes as far south
as Hakodate (42 N. Lat.), that is to within 500 miles of T5ki6.
The same causes which produced this increase in the Arctic ice
would increase the snow fields upon the mountains, cause glaciers to-
exist, and make the winters more rigorous. By making tlie assump-
tion of ‘these glacial conditions in Japan, which in other words is-
assuming that Japan has passed through yiscissitudes similar to those
of other countries in northern latitudes, We have the means of
explaining many of the peculiarities we observe in the distribution
of the flora and the fauna — and therefore I am inclined to accept
the phenomena presented in the distribution of the fauna and the
fiora of Japan as evidence of a glacial period.

EVIDENCE OP THE ABOVE CONDITIONS AS AFFORDED RY FOSSILS.

It might now be asked whether we have any direct evidence of
the period we have spoken off? If, for instance, southern types of
animals became extinct in Japan, traces of these animals may
possibly be found? Or again, might we not find evidence of the
cold amongst the beds of recent shells, etc. ? Evidence of this


82 jriLNE : evidences of the glacial period in japan.

description is but scanty, but as archaeological researches are con-
£80] tinned, no doubt it will be generally increased. As an indication
of a southern animal which has become extinct, we may quote the
discovery of the fragment of “ the right lower jaw of what may
prove to be a large baboon-like ape,” by Professor Morse in the
shell mounds of Omori. Professor Morse, remarking upon this, says :
“It may possible be Cynopithecus, a species of which is found in
the Philippine Islands and Celebes.” As another illustration indi-
cating a wanner climate in Japan, I may mention the remains of
• -eleplnints found in the alluvial deposits of Japan and recently
described by Dr. Ed. Nauraaun. Dr. Nauinann tells me that with
one exception— a tooth of Elephas primigeniius which is said to have
been ibiind in Japan — they are all Indian species.

Dr. David Brauns, writing to me on the fossils found in the
■surface deposits, says; “I consider the coexistence of Elepluis
meridionalis and Eleplian antiguiis to be proved in the diluvial
deposits of Central Japan. The former — a jaw "with teeth— was
found in 1868 at Yokohama and brought to Paris by Savatier.”
The above notes, together with others, will shortly be published by
Pr. Brauns in a piper entitled “ Geology of the Environs of
Tskio.”

As ail indication of climatic conditions which were colder than
the present one, we may quote a result obtained by Dr. Hilgendorf
from the examination of the recent shells occurring in the beds of
Mluviuin at Shinagawa, viz., that they are characterized by some
forms which are now solely found in the north of Japan. As an
-eiiample of such shells we may cite Pecten Ymoemis which, although
tolerably abundant in the Shinagawa deposits, is now confined to
the surroundings of Yezo.

. In the deposits which are still more recent than those at
^Shinagawa, we also appear to have indications of a change in
fauna which may perhaps be partly referable to a change in
climate. I refer to the fauna of the shell mounds which have been
•so ably investigated by Professor Morse. Professor Morse, speaking
of the great changes which he clearly shows to have taken place
in the molluscan fauna of Yedo Bay since the formation of the


MILNE : EVIDENCES OF TOE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 8^

•O.nori deposits, remarks that “the extinction of certain forms
within a comparatively recent tinie might be accounted for in
considering the upheaval of the water basin, and the consequent
narrowing of the bay and shoaling of the waters, but the profound
•changes which have taken place in the size and contour of certain
species demands time.” I myself have suggested that the silting up
of the waters of the bay and the gradual change which for the last
SOO years has been coming over the purity of the waters, may
perhaps be in some way connected with these alterations. May we
not also ask ourselves whether they do not indicate to us changes
in the climate ?

Looking over Professor Morse’s results, -we observe that two of
the shells. Area granosa and Turbo granulatus, the former of which
is exceedingly common in the mounds and also in the beds passed
through iu sinking wells, appear to have retreated southwards.
Supposing this migration to be due to a lowering in the temperature
in tlie water of Yedo Bay, how far such a supposition will agree
with the other changes which have been obsi^rved by Professor Morse
is a matter to be decided by naturalists. I must here remark that
I have only suggested a change in climate as one of the many
means which might bring about a migration. We have records of
the sudden migration of a shell Avithin a period of a few years, the
reason for which appears to be inexplicable.

DIRECT EVIDENCE OF (5LACIATION.

I will now turn to what I call the direct evidence bearing on
a glacial period. This evidence consists of rounded rocks, apparently
roches moutonnh^ on the sides of a mountain in the northern part
of Nipon, called Gwassan. As this evidence is amongst the most
important ivhich I have to bring forward, and also as Gwassan is
for several reasons an interesting mountain in itself, I will describe
my visit to it in detail.

Gwassan is a large mountain situated at, the junction of the
kern of Yamagata and Akita. If you approach it from the city of
Yamagata you first travel over a large alluvial plain bordering the
Mogami-gawa. This takes you to Sugaye, a distance of about 4i- n.


84 MILNE : EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PEEIOD IN JATAN.

Prom Sagaye you follow tlie banks of the Sagaye-gawa. Ou the
banks of this river you meet with many exposures of stratified tuffs
and clays dipping up the stream at an angle of about 20°. The
usual colour of these beds is white and grey, but a few of them are
red. At a distance of 8 ri from Yamagata you reach a large
village called Kaishiwo, and at this point you are fairly in amongst
the mountains. One and half H fartlier brings you by a mountain
[82] path to Iwanezawa, a small village, which is one of the places from
which the ascent of Gwassan may be made. Tlie latter part of this
road is rather steep, and is over rocks which are similar to those
which had been observed at lower levels. It was from this point on
July 27th, 1879, in company with Dr. If. Lange, that I made the
ascent of Gwassan. After leaving Iwanezawa you make a slight
ascent and then descend to cross a small stream running towards
the left. Prom the bed of this stream there is a short ascent which
brings you to the top of a ridge along which you walk towards the
left for nearly an hour, most of the time gradually ascending.
After this you make a sharp descent of about 800 feet to the bed;
of the Karasu-gawa, a rapid stream running towards the right.
Along the ridge from which we descended the rocks appear to be
stratified, but somewhat broken and altered by metamorphio action.
Similar rocks arc met with us boulders in the beds of the Karasu-
gawa. Mixed with these there wei’e a few boulders of a porphyrxtie
andesite. Before descending to the river 1 obtained a good view of
Gwassan. In general form it might be described as a huge green
hummock. Near its summit it was covered with many patches of
snow. Neither its sliape nor the rocks which were met with uporr
its flanks seemed to shew that it was of recent volcanic origin.
Tip to the bed of the Karnsu-gawa our guide reckoned that we had"
travelled a distance of 3 n, and to reach the top of the mountain —
the base of the steep portion we had fairly reached — we were told'
that we had 2 more ri. We reached this 61 hours after starting.
The height of the mountain I estimated at about 600 feet; ou the
top it is undulating and its sides are scooped out into shallow valleys, .
which are apparently perpetually filled with snow. These patches -
of snow varied in length from about half a mile to one mile. At


MILNE: EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PEEIOD IN JAPAN. 85

tbe bottom of one of these valleys the ground was hummocked and
its contours looked as though they might have been produced by
glacial action.

Cropping up through the grass which covers the top of the
mountain, there were many boulders of a much decomposed andesite.
On the top of the mountain there is a small temple and a number
of liuts for pilgrims. From here we descended the opposite side to
the village of Hagita, a distance of about 9 rL This we reached
at night, after 14 hours of continuous walking. A great portion of
the descent was down a very clayey road, along which no exposures
of rock were visible. At the bottom of the steep portion of the
mountain, upon the left land side of the road, there is a small tract
of gently sloping country with a very singular appearance. This
stretclies in the direction of the town of Sakata. The peculiarity of
this country lies in its contour, -which is that of a series of waves
or hummocks, the average height of which may perhaps be 20 feet.
The steep slopes of these in many cases were observed to point to-
wards Gwassan.

At the time I saw these undulations they were thickly covered
with grass, and from this and also from the soil on which the grass
grew, it was impossible for me to determine the nature of the rocks
which lie beneath them. Their appearance was certainly very sug-
gestive of glacial action, and not unlike the hummock districts we
meet with in Labrador and Newfoundland.

As to whether these rounded rocks -which exist upon Gwassan
—which it will be observed is one of those mountains on which
glacial action might be found — are really the results of ice work, I
am not prepared to make any definite statement. The appearances
are, however, sufficiently -well marked that they should be carefully
examined, and the attention of travellers drawn in search of similar
marks to the valleys of the high mountains of AVestern Japan. Mr.
Gowland, writing to me on the subject of glaciation in Japan, remarks
that “ in none of the mountain districts which I have visited here
have I ever seen sure evidences of glacial action. ’ I myself am in
the same position, hut the indications which I have met with an?
certainly strong enough to demand a close investigation.


86 MILNE: EVIDENCES OP THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.


CONCLUSION.

The. line of iirgunient which I have followed, whilst endeavour-
ing to show that thoi-e ai-e traces of the glacial period in Japan,
has heeu briefly as follows : —

Pirsfc, because we find so many evidences of ancient glaciation
in countries lying in the same latitude as, and to the south of, Japan,
it would, on the assumption that any of the present accepted theorie.s
which ,are given as an explanation for the glacial period are true
ones, be contrary to reason to suppose that Japan altogether escaped
|84] effects of the glacial period. Next, it is shewn that Japan is
admirably well situated to experience a change in climate by a slight
variation in the direction or strength of the ocean currents which wash
its shores, or by an alteration in the winds which sweep across its
-mountains. The districts in Japan where small glaciers still exist were
next spoken about, and the districts where we should be most likely to
find traces of glacial action Avere pointed out. After this the terrace
formations of northern Japan have been referred to as possible evidences
of a change of climate. If terraces were formed by the drawing off’
of W'aters to the poles, the height of the terraces which lie in northern
latitudes ought to be greater than those farther to the south, and this
is shewn to be tlie case for Japan, Also, the average height of sea-
terraces on the two sides of an open sea at places in the same latitude
ought to be of the same height. If certain peculiarities in the dis-
tribution of fauna and flora in Europe can be explained on the
supposition of a glacial period, similar peculiarities, as observed in
Japan may possibly be taken as an indication of somewhat similar
conditions in Japan. After this, these peculiarities were pointed out,
and it was shewui to be possible, that previous to a time at wdneb we
can suppose a glacial period to have taken place, the Tsugaru Straits
and those of La P4rouse had not been formed, and also it was shewn
that from fossil remains the climate of Japan iras tropical. These
being the conditions, the main island of Japan received a tropical
fauna and flora, coming from the north. As the climate became
colder the territory of these fii-st emigrants Avas invaded by others
coming from the nonh, and all, excepting the more hardy of the first


MILNE: EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN. 87

comers, gradually died out. Conditions like these explained the curious
mixture of seinitropical and palsearctic species which are now found
in Japan. As evidences of the extinction of tropical forms and also
of a climate colder than the present, certain fossils of the alluvial
deposits were referred to. The most important evidences of cold con-
ditions are markings on Gwmssan, a mountain in north Japan, which
seem to shew that its present snow fields once extended further down
its sides, but instead of being in the form of snov', were in the form
of glaciers. These markings howmver, yet need to he closely examined.

By a glacial period in Japan it is not meant what is meant by a
glacial period in Northern Europe. We must not, for instance, ,[85|,
suppose that any portion of the country was shrouded by ice, or
even that the cold was sufficiently intense to bridge across the
Tsugaru Straits. What we can imagine, however, ivithout any vio-
lation of reason, is that at the time of the glacial period in Europe,
there was a climate in Japan not unlike that which at the time of
the glacial period probably prevailed in a country like northern
Spain. The winters were longer than thej^' are at present and also
more severe. On some mountains which previously had been destitute
of snow, beds of this material accumulated. Where glaciers had
previously existed, these became enlarged and descended farther down
the mountain flanks on which they rested. And generally, the ; ^
country was colder than it is at present, but it was by no means ‘
uninhabitable.

I will now conclude. What I have said has to a great extent
been a matter of speculation, but still I hope it has not been specu- ;
lation without reason. To the speculations I have appended certain
facts which appear to support the notion that once Japan, like other
nortliern countries, has been subjected to a climate colder than the
present one. As time continues, facts will gradually be accumulated, ,
and in a few years more I hope their number and their nature may
be sufficient to fairly establish the ideas which have been here enun-
ciated.


■88 MILNE: EVIDENCES OF THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN JAPAN.

DISCUSSION.


Dr. Brauns said the paper fell rather short of giving evidence of a glacial
period in Japan. It would have involved such a lowering of temperature that a
sheet of inland ice must have existed, which the author had found not to be the
case. All the instances of animals and plants wliich had been nienticmcd to prove
the presence of a state of low temperature might be matched by others which
would equally prove the contrary. In fact, arguments from flora and fauna were
always rather hypothetical.^ He considered that the evidence brought forward in
Mr. Milne’s valuable paper tended rather to show that there had been no glacial
period in Japan.

Professor Milne replied that he quite agreed with Dr. Brauns. His own
conclusion was, that although there were evidences that the temperature had once
been lower than it is now, there was no conclusive evidence of a glacial period,
properly speaking.

Dr. Faulds said that I’rofcssor Milne seemed to have expressed himself
cautiously. The evidence derived from the vertical distribution of the mountain
flora was often very dubious. Even within the same area. of distribution, varieties
of moths and butterflies of the same species might be notably limited to the
narrowest patches of a particular soil, the subtile colour or food relations of
which had perhaps helped to develop the variety. Even more readily might plants
have their areas of occupancy determined by degrees of temperature, etc., on the
simple basis of natural selection without the vast machinery of a glacial age. The
speaker had not yet seen any veritable glacial scratching.s even on hard rocks in
the ranges near Tokiyo — ^where, however, appearances were to be observed not
ve*y unlike those sometimes attributed to glacial action in Scotland.

No doubt the distribution of the fauna of Japan had not yet been very minutely
studied, but known facts were as yet perhaps capable of being explained without
the agency of ice. Species had been lurown to die out of a district utterly in a
short time, through such changes in cultivation or population of a country as
would involve diminution of special food or increase of special enemies. A curious
and suggestive fact had been communicated to him by Japanese friends interested
in natural history, viz., that the fox is quite unknown in the island of Shikoku.
The author had done well to call attention to the subject, and had contrived to
.give us an interesting and suggestive paper.


HIDEYOSHI’S INVASION OF KOREA.


CHAPTER II.— THE RETREAT.


By AV. G. Aston,


[Read January 11, 1881.]

It was on the 6th day, of the 1st month of the Chinese year
corresponding to A.D. 1593 that the Chinese army advanced against
Pingshaug. The Japanese garrison had little time for preparations
of defence. It was too late for them to call to their assistance their
countrymen stationed in the surrounding district, but they made a
skilful use of the means at their command, strengthening their posi-'"
tion by constructing palisades and throwing up breastworks loopholed
for musketry. The attack was maintained for two days. Both sides
fought with great determination, but the Chinese were far superior
in numbers,* and the Japanese were at last forced back within the
citadel, having sustained a loss of about sixteen hundred men. The
Chinese general was too discreet to drive a beaten enemy
to make a desperate resistance. He remembered the proverb, “ When
the rat is hard pressed, and cannot escape, it has been known to
•overthrow the cat,” and on the evening of the second day’s fight he

* The Japanese writers talk of 200,000 Chinese, but the Korean liistorian of
the war, who was a high official of his government, and must have been well
informed, gives the more sober estimate of 40,000. It should be remembered,
however, that there was a large auxiliary force of Koreans, whose numbers are
nowhere stated.


90


ASTON : HIDEYOSHI S INVASION ON KOREA,


withdrew his army without the walls of Pingshaii*,^, purposely leaving-
one side unguarded. During the night, the Japanese crossed the
river on the ice, and a few forced marches placed them beyond all
immediate danger of pursuit. Indeed, there was little disposition
shown to follow them closely. Weary, f>ot-sore, and starving from
cold and hunger, they pursued their way southward unmolested. Ri
Josh6 made no attempt to follow them, and notwithstanding that the
Korean generals wdio occupied positions near the Japanese line of
march were strongly urged to cut off their retreat, none was found
bold enough to attack tire dreaded invaders even in tlieir present well-
nigh desperate condition. They liad, however, tire satisfaetimi of
capturing and beheading some sixty unfortunate stragglers who,
from sickness or fatigne, ^Yore unable to keep np with the rest of
the array.

The fall of Pingslmng was the turning point in the Japanese
invasion of Korea. If the Chinese and Koreans had followed up
their victory with greater energy, the consequences to the Japanese
would have been utterly disastrous, but even ns it was they were
sufficiently grave. It became necessary for them to evacuate the
whole province of Hwanhaido where they had numerous

garrisons, and to eonceutrate their forces at some point further south.
In the depth of winter, and in a country desolated by the war,
this operation ivas accompanied by great hardships. It -was at first
intended to make a stand at Kaishimg, but for strategical reasons
this plan was almndoned, and the capital itself selected as the rendez-
vous for all the Japanese troops stationed to the north of this city..
Among the generals whose position was rendered untenable by the
reverse at Pingsliang was Kiyonmsa, who, along with Nabeshiina,
held the north-eastern province of Hankifingdo. Several castles
in the south-eastern province which were garrisoned by his men
had been attacked by the newly raised Korean levies, which was
another reason for Kiyomasa to abandon his position in the
north. He marched direct to their assistance, but was too late
to prevent a disaster which rendered the situation of the Jap-
anese in Korea still more precarious than before. The Koreans,,
who had flocked in numbers to the standard of a new ami


ASTON ; HIDEYOSHl’s INVASION OF KOREA.


91


popular general, had already succeeded in capturing several of the
most important strongholds^ in this province, and as this was the
first success of any consequence which the land forces of the Koreans
had achieved, its moral effect was of no small importance. They
even ventured to intercept Kiyomasa himself on his march south-
ward, hut he cut his waj' through, and efiected a junction with
Konishi at Hanshiung.

After some delay, caused by (he want of supplies, the badness
of the roads and Ki Josh6’s disposition to magnify these difficulties,
the Chinese army, with their Korean auxiliaries, at length moved
southwards, and on the 24th day of the 1st month arrived at
Pachiung one day’s march from the capital, where on the

same day a council of war Avas being held hy the Japanese com-
manders. Most were in favour of retreating to Fusan, but Kiyo-
masa and a few other bold spirits could not bear to relinquish Avith-
out a struggle the fruits of their victories, and it was ultimately
resolved to make a stand and give battle to the Chinese. Fearing
that, Avhen they were engaged Avith the enemy Avithoiii the walls,
there might be an outbreak among the remnant of a native ]3opula-
tion Avhich still inhabited the capital', the Japanese had recourse to
a cruel measure, Avhich was o'nly too characteristic of the warfare
of the age. d'hey massacred all the Korean toAvns-peopIe except a
feAV Avho AA'ere useful to them as porters and as camp-folloAA^ers, and
destroyed by fire all that remained of the city.

Near Pachiung’, the Chine.se and Japanese met for the first
time in the field. A blootly skirmish, in Avhich a party of Chinese


Tlie following incident, which occurred at one of these sieges, shews that
bomb-shells were used in this war by the Koreans. “ A man called Ri Ch6-son
invented a cannon called Shin-ten mi or Heaven-shaking- thunder, whicli by his
art he .secretly brought to the foot of the castle. It was put in operation and shot
into the castle, where it fell in the courtyard. The Japanese troops were ignorant
of its construction, and rushed forward to see what curious missile had been shot
at them by the enemy, when all of a sudden the gunpowder poison burst forth,
with a noise which made heaven and earth to tremble, and it broke up into
splinters of iron, which caused instant death to any one whom they struck. More
than thirty men were killed in this way, and even those who -were not hit were
flung to the ground.”


92


ASTON : HXDEYOSHl’s INVASION OF KOREA.


and Koreans had the advantage^^ had encouraged Ri Joshd to assume
the offensive. He advanced with a considerable force towards the
capital, a little distance to the north of which he was encountered
:[90] by a division of the dapauese army. In tlie engagement which
followed, the Chinese were repulsed with great loss, the success of
■ the Japanese being due partly to tlieir superior tsictics, and partly
to their weapon, the famous katana, which to us needs no descrip-
tion. The Korean historian of the war informs ns that in this
battle “ the Chinese liad no firearms— only short blunt swords. The
Japanese, on the other hand, w’ere foot-soldiers, armed with swords
three or four feet long. With these they stabbed and slashed, so
that none could stand before them.” Many of Ri JosluVs personal
followers were slain in this engagement, and be was himself so
much discouraged that he at once withdrew to Tongpa and

from thence to Kaishuug. In his despatches to his government he
reported that the Japanese were 200,000 strong, and requested that
a successor might be appihnted to him, as he was in weak health,
and could not longer endure the hardships of the campaign. At
Kaishuug, a rumour reached him that Kiyomasa was on the inarch
from the province of Hankiungdo to attack the city of Pingshang.
He was glad to have so good an excuse for increasing his distance
from tlie Japanese, and fell back on Pingshang, leaving a few hundred
men to occujiy Kaisliung.

Our historian, Riu, was at this time charged witii the thankless
office of condueting the relations of his government with the Chinese.
It was his business to superintend the supply of provisions, and he
also felt it his duty to urge their generals to a more active prosecu-
tion of the war. Any short-coming in the matter of supplies, — any
remonstrance against inactivity or cowardice, exjiosed him to insult
and ill-usage, and on move than one occasion he narrowly escaped
with his life. He had not even the satisfaction of knowing that he
was doing liis country good service. The food obtained with great
difficulty for the Chinese army was wrung from his starving country-
men, while the invaders seemed as far from being expelled as ever.
Korea was indeed in a pitiable condition. Weighed down by the
burden of maintaining two foreign armies, of which the ally was


ASTON : HIDEYOSHl’s INVASION OF KOREA.


93


scarcely less oppressive tliau the enemy, the population were reduced
to the greatest straits for subsistence. Many thousands died of famine,
and Eiu’s lodgings were besieged by crowds of famishing wretches,
to whom he doled out a mixture of one part of rice-flour with ten
parts of a pow’der made by pounding down the leaves of the hr.

With the country in this exhausted condition, and with the roads [91]
rendered impassable by the winter rains, military operations had
become well-nigh impracticable, and the Chinese and Japanese
armies I'emained for a time inactive. The position of the latter, however,
became daily more untenable, as the country became more destitute of
resources, and the Korean irregular trooj)S, who swarmed on all sides
of them, became daily bolder, until at last the Japanese had to
content themselves with what store of provisions they had laid up
within the city, not venturing to send out forage parties into the
surrounding country. Disease was rife in both armies, and large
numbers of the horses of both camps were carried off by an epidemic.

Both Chinese and Japanese were now anxious for jieace. One
of the Japanese generals having intimated .a desire to come to
terms, Ikei, notwithstanding his previous treachery, had the courage
to venture once more into the Japanese camp, and to recommence
the work of negotiation. Among the points discussed on this occasion
are said to have been the following : Peace between China and
Japan ; — recognition or investiture of Hideyoshi as King (3E) of
Japan cession of Korean territory to Japan ; — tribute payable by
Korea to Japan. There was also talk of a Chinese princess being
given in marriage to the K6tei, i.e., the Mikado, of Japan. We
have little means of judging how far these proposals were seriously
considered. The points mainly insisted on by Ikei were the surrender
of the captive Korean princes and high officials, and the withdrawal
of the Jiipanese to Fusankai, Avhicli was to be accompanied by
the simultaneous retirement ol the Chinese array from Korea. But
there were serious obstacles to the success of these negotiations.
Kiyomasa was unwilling to give up his prisoners without express
authority from Hideyoshi, and Eiu, burning with revenge for his
country’s wrongs which no hardship and no humiliation could quench,
steadily urged Ri Joshd to make no terms with the brigands from.


94 ASTON,' niDEYOSHl’s INVASION OS' KORIiA.

Japan. Nor had either party the least confidence in tlie good
faith of the other — a difficulty which Ikei was not exactly the man
best fitted to remove. He was accordingly recalled, and other
envoys were sent in his place, but they had little better success.
The only tangible result of the negotiation was the stipulation
by the Japanese to evacuate the capital on the 19th day of the 4th
month, and this they would probably have soon been conii)eUed to
do in any case. The Chinese army entered the city on the following
day. They had been gradually drawing nearer during the progress
of the negotiations.

There was probably also some understanding in the nature of an
armistice between the Chinese and Japanese, for we find that the
latter, in spite of Riu’s remonstrances, were allowed to retire peaceably
to the neighbourhood of Fusankai, where they entrenched themselves
in fortified camjis, and that they were accompanied by Ikei and his
colleagues, who were on their way to Nagoya (now Karatsu) -where
Hideyoshi was then staying. The Chinese army followed the Japanese
some weeks late]-, and took up their quarters at KioshO (m) and
other places in the same vicinity.

The Chinese ambassadors arrived at Nagoya on the 23rd (hiy of
the 5th month, and w’ere received by Hideyoshi in the most friendly
and magnificent manner. During their stay, -wdiich lasted till the
beginning of the 7th month, the chief nobles of his court vied with
each other in their attentions to the strangers. Every day saw
some fresh entertainment in their honour. Hideyoshi set the example
himself by inviting them to a banquet as soon as they arrived when
the ceremony of exchanging wine-cups — the neglect of which was
complained of by the Korean envoys — was not forgotten. Presents
of silk stufis, robes, money and swords were lavished on them. They
were greatly delighted with the scenery of the neighourhood (to the
beauty of which the present writer can bear personal witness)— r
with its winding inlets and wooded bluffs rising steeply from
the water’s edge, and they composed verses in its praise which
have been preserved to us in the Japanese histories. To add to their
enjoyment, Hide 3 mslii entertained them with a fite, of which the
principal feature was a procession of boats, a minute description of


ASTON: HIDEYOSHl’s INVASION OF KOREA. 95

■which has been handed down to us. “ Several hundred barges, -with
the ensigns and pennons of the various (Zaijmds waving to the breeze,
rowed past in order over the surface of the sea. The chief boatmen
and their mates chanted a song as they plied their oars, and
the loud voices of the crews, numbering many liundreds, echoing far
over the sea, arose to the clouds and mingled harmoniously with the
sound of the breaking billows. Hideyoshi shai-ed the same barge
with the ambassadors. It was adorned with the utmost elegance and
splendour. Two hundred lances with tiger-tail sheaths and tens of [93]
halberds inlaid with gold were set up on the bows. Three hundred
foot-soldiens, all clad alike in scarlet jackets, formed a guard of
honour. Sake was served, and the pleasure of the day was enhanced
by the presence of singers of the two famous schools of Kwanze and
Komparu.’’

It has been stated that a Treaty of Peace was concluded on
this occasion, but an apparently authentic account of the interview
at which Hideyoshi discussed political matters with the Chinese envoys,
shows that no definite terras of peace were made. Both parties
exchanged the most friendly assurances, and agreed to throw the
blame of all that had happened on the Koreans, who, as usual,
were kept in the dark about everything which passed. This embassy
had, however, one important result. Hideyoshi, as an earnest of
his willingness to make peace with China, consented to release the
Korean princes and grandees who had been made captive by Kiyomasa,
and Ikei returned to Korea in advance of his colleagues, bearing
instructions that they should be given up. That nothing more was
intended by this friendly measure is shown by the fact that almost
simultaneously the Japanese army, by Hideyoshi’s orders, advanced
against Chinchiu a castle about fifty miles west of Fusan,

which they had already made an unsuccessful attempt to take. The
Koreans assembled a large force at a town east of Chinchiu and
endeavoured to check the advance of the Japanese, but, to use the
wmrds of one of their generals, they were more like a flock of birds
than an army, and offered but a feeble resistance. They were
defeated with great slaughter, and the Japanese immediately afterwards
invested the castle. At this siege Kiyomasa is said to have used


96


ASTON : HIBEYOSHl’s INVASION OF KORRA,


a testudo made of ox hides strectehed on a framework, ivliicli was
pushed forward on wheels to the base of the castle wall. Under its
protection, the corner stones -svere removed by crow-bars, and the
wall fell, leaving a breach by which the Japanese effected an entrance.
The Korean losses here and at the battle which had just been fought
amounted, according to Riu, to 60,000 men, the greatest which they
had suffered since the var began. This was the last fighting of what
has been called the first invasion. The Japanese levelled the castle
with the ground, and then returned to their former quarters in I'lgan
and its neighbourhood, where they awaited the result of the negotiations
with China.


ANALYSES OF 'rEN JAPANESE AIINERAL SPRING
AVATERS.


By Dr. A. J, 0. Geekts.


[J/mJ January 11, 1881.]

The following juiiil3^ses of not yet analyzed mineral springs have
been made at the Yokohama Laboratory. They comprise


Seven

niinernl springs

of the province

of Sagami.

One

do.

do.

Tstomi.

One

do.

do.

Bungo.

One

do.

do.

Ise.


Two of the seven Sagarni springs have the peculiar character
of solfatara-springs rif fumarole Avaters, the five others being all of
the same class of alkaline, chalybeate mineral spings.

The springs of Totomi, Bungo and Ise are all strong muriatic,
alkaline, chalybeate Avaters,

No. 1. — TSURU-NO-ON-SEN, situated at the tillage of Haramura,
didricf of Nisiu-TAMA-Gom, province of Sagami (Kanagaaa'A
Ken).


A HOT, ALKALINE, CHALYBEATE SPRING, AVITII A TOLERABLY LARGIC-
AMOUNT OF SULPHURETTED HYDROGEN.

The gases (sulphuretted hydrogen and carbonic acid) have not
been estimated, as the AA'ater was sent to the Laboratory in bottles not


"98 GEERTS : ANALYSES OF TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPRINGS.


sufRciently dosed, and I have not as yet had any opportunity of
making this estimation (as it ought to ho done) on tlie spot.


Physical Character of the Jf'a ter.

The water is dear and eolourlc.ss, with a strongly siilphui'ous
and disagreeable smell, and with a slightly alkaline and sulphurous
taste. Jteaotion on litmus slightly acid, hut after boiling alkaline.

(ruMs In the Water.

Sulphuretted hydrogen Ratlier nmdi.

Carbonic acid ... Tolerably much.

Total amount of fixed matter in one litre or

.1000 C.C. of water 0. 1700 grammes.


Chloride of sodium

“ “ potassium

“ " magnesium

Sulphate of soda

“ “ lime

Present as Bicarhonates :

Carbonate of soda..

“ lime..
“ iron ..

Silicic acid

Total


t < rammeH in one litre.
. ... 0.082D

. ... ().()012
. ... 0 . 001)8
. ... 0.0205

. ... 0.0083

. ... 0.0302

0.0013

. ... 0,0056

. ... 0.0081


. ... 0.1134


Ro. 2.— COLD SPRING of the village of Minami-kosacg-mura, district
of Nisiii-tama-qori, p'orince o/S^GAMi (Kanagawa Ken).

A COLE, ALKALINE, CHALYBEATE SPRING, WITH TRACES OP
SULPHURETTED HYDROGEN.

Physical Character of the Wafer.

The water is clear and colourless, witlv a very slight smell of
sulphuretted b3n]rogen and with a slightly alkaline, not agreeable


GEERTS : ANALYSES OP TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPRINGS. 91)


taste. The reaction is slightly acid, but after boiling the ^Yatel■ it
becomes alkaline.


Oates ill the Water.

Sulphuretted hydrogen Trace only.

Carbonic acid Tolerably much.

Total amount of fixed matter in one litre or

1000 C.O. of water .' 0.6230 grammes.

Grammes in. one lifi\'

Chloride of sodium

“ “ potassium

“ “ magnesium

■Sulphate of soda

” “ lime

Present as Bicarbomites :

Carbonate of soda
“ “ iron...

Silicic acid

Total ...


... 0.1 163
... 0 . 0012 '
... 0.0123
... 0.0311
... 0.0124

... 0,3018
... 0.0513
... 0.0964


... 0.6228


iSlo. 3.— TAM A.-ltsO-YXJ, situated at the vlilaje of Ajuio-^wra Yi'ea-
YEKi, district of Nisi-ii-tama-oori, jn'ovluce of Sagami
(Kanagawa ken.)

A COLD AND WEAK ALKALINE, CHALYBEATE SPRING.

Physical Character of the Water.

The water is nearly clear and colourless, without any smell and
-with a good, not astringent, taste. The reaction is slightly acid, but
after boiling, alkaline.

Oases ill the Water.

Clarbonic aci<l ... Tolerably mucli.

Total amount of fixed mafter in one litre or

1000 C,C. of wrter. 0.2480 grammes.


100 GEERTS : AKjMA’SES OF TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPRINGS.


Chloride nf sodium

“ “ potassium

“ “ magnesium

Sulphate of soda

“ lime

Present as Bicarhoiiutcs :

Carhonate of Sdda
“ iron

Silicic acid

Phosphoric acid

Total


Grammes in one litre,

. ... 0.0225

. ... O.OOIS
. ... 0.0061
. ... 0.0261
. ... 0.0465


... 0.1241
... 0.0090
... 0.0056
... 0.0008


.. 0.2396


No. 4.— COLD SPRING OP HOKOJI, of the village
MURA, district of Nisiii-tamagOri, province
(Kanagawa Ken).


of

of


lilRAGI-

Sagami


a cold and aveak alkaline, ciialybeaie spring, with traces
OF sulphuretted hydrogen.


Physical Character of the If ate)'.

The water is clear and colourless, with a slight sulphurous smell
and with a slightly alkaline, but not disagreeable taste. Reaction
of the AA^ater neutral, hut after boiling, alkaline.

, Gases in the Water.

Carbonic acid Rather much.

Sulphuretted hydrogen 'I'race.

Total amount of fixed matter in one litre or

1000 CC. of water ... 0.1948 grammes.

Giximmes in one litre..

Chloride of sodium 0.0431

“ “ potassium ... ... ... None.

“ magnesium 0.0046


GJSEETS ; ANALYSES OF TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPRINGS. 101


"Sulphate of soda

0.0123

“ lime ... '

0.0034

Present as Bicarbonates;


Carbonate of soda

0.1082

“ “ iron

0.0154

Silicic acid

0.0075

Phosphoric acid

Trace.

Oxide of manganese

Trace.

Organic matter

Trace.

Total

0.1945


No. 5. — KAME-NO-YU, aituatod at the ri/%e 0 / Naga-fuchi-mura,
district of Nisiii-tama-gori, province of Sagami (Kanagawa
Ken).


A COLD AND WEAK ALKALINE, CHALYBEATE SPRING.
Physical Character of the Water.

The water shows a slight whitish turbidity and a slightly whitish
colour. There is no smell perceptible. The taste is good, — not
disagreeable. The reaction is neutral, blit after boiling, alkaline.

Gases in the Water.


Oarbonic acid Tolerably much.

Total amount of fixed matter in one litre or


1000 C.C. of water .


... 0.1547 grammes.

Chloride of sodium

“ “ potassium

“ “ magnesium

Sulphate of soda


Grammes in one

0.0237

None.

0.0041

0.0102


102 Giaa.TS : analyses of ten Japanese minkeal springs.

... 0.1081
... 0.0085
... 0.0027
... Trace.

... Trace.

Total ■ ... 0.1573

These five mineral witers are weak elialybeate springs, varying
from 0.1547 to 0.0230 grammes of fixed matter and 0.0050 to 0.0513
grammes carbonate of iron in one litre.


Present as Bicnrbonate.« :

Carbonate of soda...
“ “ iron...

Silicic acid

Phospborie acid

Organic matter


No. 6. — SENGOKU-KO-ON'SEN, aitvated near the village of Sen«
GOKtr-iiARA, dlsiriet of Ashigara-gOri, iwovinee of Sagami,
Kanagawa Ken (at the foot of the mountain where the
^olfataraH called “ O-fi-goku ” are found).

A HOT, chalybeate, SLIGHTLY SULPHUROUS SPRING, CONTAINING
BORA GIG ACID.

The water is brought from the solfataras to the bathing place
by means of a roughly-made wooden aqueduct. The bathing house
itself is rather badly arranged, and only used by poor people.

Physical Character of the Tfater.

The water is not clear, but possesses a whitish turbidity, caused
By small particles of condensed sulphur. The smell is slightly
sulphurous. The taste is also sulphurous, — not agreeable. The reac-
tion is slightly acid and remains acid after the water is boiled, showing
that the acidity is not caused by carbonic acid, but by a fixed acid
(sulphuric and free boracic acid).

Gases in the Water.

Carbonic acid Little.

Siiljihn retted hydrogen Trace.


(iKERTS: ANALYSES OF TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPEINOS. lOo


Vapour of sulphur Tolerably muelu

Total amount of fixed matter in ono litre or

1000 O.C. of water ... ... 0.87G2 gramnus.


Chloride of .sodiutn ...

“ “ potaijsiurn

“ “ magnesium

Sulphate of soda
“ " iron

• “ “ lime

“ “ alumina

Silicic acid

Sulphur (free, suspended

Boracic acid

Organic matter

Phosphoric acid
Free .sulphuric acid...


sulphur)


Tatal

The water was taken at the end of the w<
bathing place, — not at the s})ot on the mountain where it conies out
of the ground of the solfatara.


Grammes in one litre.


0.0870


0.0000


0.0043


0.182.5


0.0243


0.2771


0.0158


0.0030


0.0031


0.0498


0.1331


0.0013


Trace.


0.7437

ooden

pipes near the


No. 7. — U BAG 0-N O' ON-SEN, at the village of Ubago, near FIakone
Lake, province of Sagami.

A HOT, STRONGLY CHALYBEATE AND SULl'HUROUS SPRING, CONTAIN-
ING A CONSIDERARLE AMOUNT OF BORACIC AGIO AND OF AN
ORGANIC SULPHUR COMPOUND (BARE GINE).

Physical Character of the Water.

This interesting spring is found at the solfataras of Ubago, at a
short distance from the fumaroles of 0-ji*goku, which produce the
water of the Seugoku-hara bathing place. The Ubago water is like the


[ 100 ]


104 GEEETS : ANALYvSES OP TEN' JAPANESE SIINERAE SPRINGS.


£101] Sengoku-hara mineral water, a product of the boiling sumaroles of
this extensive solfatara-ground, and it has, anning the Japanese, a
certain reputation as a cure for inflaination of the eyes and for various
skin diseases.

The water is not clear, but has a reddish turbidity and a slight
reddish colour. After being exposed to the air, a gelatinous organic
sulphur-compound is separated in films. During the evaporation of
the water this gelatinous matter is separated in a considerable quantity;
after drying and burning it gives off much sulphurous acid.

The smell of tlie water is sulphurous; its taste is sulphurous,
not agreeable, afterwards slightly astringent on account of the iron it
contains. Its reaction is slight'y acid and remains acid after boiling.
Total amount of fixed matter in one litre of water 1,;1890 grammes.

Oase-^ in the Water,

Sulphuretted hydrogen Trace.

Vapour of sulphur Tolerably much.

Carbonic aci<l ' ... Little.


(iruiniiitiH ill one litre.

Chloride of sodium

0.0648

" ” potassium

0.002 f

“ “ magnesium

0.0075

Sulphate of soda

0.1988

“ “ iron

0.0840

“ “ lime

0.5291

“ “ alumina

0.02 1 4' ••

Silicic acid

0.0510

Sulphur (free suspended)

0.0078

Boracic acid

0.0691

Organic sulphur compound (Bar^j ginej

0.8741

Phosphoric acid ;

Trace.

Sulphuric acid (free)

Trace.

Total -

1.4093


On a former occasion (see p


295 of the 1st part of my work


on Japanese products) I have noted the probability that several


GEERTS : ANALYSES OF TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPRINGS. 105


Japanese hot springs, situated at solfatara ground, may prove to
contain boracic acid. The examination of two solfatara springs has
shown a not inconsiderable amount of this acid in the XJbago and
Sengoku springs.

The boracic acid has been estimated after Marignac’s method, with
■double chloride of magnesium and ammoniiun.

The water at the bathing place at Sengoku-hara has no doubt lost
part of its boracic acid by running through the pretty long wocden
pipes, in which it is greatly cooled. It is important to examine the
boiling water at the solfarata 0-jigoku itself, which task I hope to
fulfil on a future occasion.

Perhai)S it wdll be possible to turn the boiling lagoni of that
place to a profitable account, as sources of boracic acid.

The hot spring establishment of Ubago could easily be ameliorated
.and made more comfortable. At present the discomfort is so great
•that it is ne.irly impossible to stay there for even a few days.

This place, as well as Sengoku-no-yu, is visited only by coolies and
poor Japanese, who cannot pay the expenescs at the better arranged
bathing places of Kiga, Miya-no-shita and Yumoto.

The neighbourhood of the lake should however, induce enterprising
people to make a good and comfortable bathing establishment at
Ubago.


JSfo. 8.— COLD SPRING at Futa-.wata-mura, rUstrict of Toyoda-
GORi, proinnce of Totomi.

A COLD AND STRONG MURIATIC, ALKALINE, CHALYBEATE SPRING,
CONTAINING TRACES OF SULPHURETTED HYDROGEN.

Physical Character of the Water.

The appearance of the water is nearly clear, with a slight
ferruginous sediment. The colour is yellowish. Its smell is slightly
•sulphurous and its taste strongly saline and alkaline, — not agreeable.
The reaction of the water is alkaline and becomes very strongly
.alkaline after boiling. Acids produce much effervescence in the
■water.


106 CIEEETS: ANALYSER OF TEN JAFANESE MINERAL SPRINGS.


Gases in the Wafer.

Carbonic acid Very large quantity.

Sulphuretted hydrogen Trace.

Total amount of .solid matter in one litre of

the water ... - 7.022 grammes.


Chloride of sodium ...


Grammes per
2.1791

“ " potaRsium


0 0749

“ “ magnesium .


o.nio

Present as Bicarbonates:

Carbonate of soda

3.1182

ti

“ lime

0.9058

(C

“ iron

0.0631

Sulphate of lime

,

0.1379

Silicic acid

• *. • »

0.4233

Organic matter •.

. ••• #.*

0.0301

Phosphoric acid ... .


Trace.

Total


7.0434


iitre.


No. 9.— COLD SPRINC at the village o/ F uji-kawactii-mura, distrieb
of ITMABE.'GdRi, 2 >'t'ovinee of Bungo.

'A COLD AND STRONG MURIATIC, ALKALINE, CIIALYREATK SPRING,
CONTAINING SOME SULPHURETTED HYDROGEN.

Physical Character of the Water.

' TJie water is orignally very clear and colourless, but soon
becomes turbid and reddish, after exposure to the air, with formation
of a ferruginou.s sediment. Its smell is sulphurous, on account of
the sulphuretted hydrogen present. Its taste is stiline and i.dcaline,.
and afterwards slightly astringent, — not agreeable.


GEEETS : ANALYSES OF TEN JAI’ANESE MINERAL SPRINGS, 107


The reaction is neutral, but becomes strongly alkaline after
boiling. During the evaporation a strong deposit of carbonate of
lime and iron hydroxide is formed in the water. Acids cause a strong
effervescence in the water.


(htses in the Water,


Carbonic acid

Large quantity.

Sulphuretted hydrogen

Little.

Total amount of fixed matter in one

litre of

water

5.732 grammes.

Chloride of sodium

Clravnncs per
. .; 3.1027

“ “ potassium

0.0262

“ “ magnesium

0.0989

Sulphate of soda

0.0578

Present as Bicarbonates :

Carbonate of soda...

1.2060

“ “ lime...

1.0710

“ “ magnesia.

0.0451

“ “ iron...

0.0688

Silicic acid

0.0540

Total

5.7306


No. 10. — COLD SPIIING of the village of Aso, cUsIrict of Takai-
GORT, 'province of Ise.

A COLD AND STRONG MURIATIC, ALKALINE, CHALYBEATE SPRING.
Physical Character of the Water.

The appearance of the water is very clear, colourless and fine.
When shaken it evolves numerous gas bubbles. Its taste is saline
and stimulating, — not disagreeable. It has no peculiar smell. Its
reaction is slightly acid (on account of the carbonic acid), bnt after


[104J


108 GEERTS ; ANALYSES OF TEN JAPANESE MINERAL SPRINGS.


being boiled it becomes strongly alkaline, with formation of a yellowish
sediment of carbon te of lime and iron hydroxide. Aoids cause a
strong effervescence of the water.


Oases in the Water.


Carbonic acid


.. Very large quantity,


Total amount of fixed matter in one litre of
water


4.3892 grammes.
Grammes per litre.


Chloride of sodium

1.7058

“ “ potassium

0.0153

“ “ magnesium ...

.., 0.1421

Pi'esent as Bicarbonates :


Carbonate of soda...

1.4312

“ “ lime...

0.8014

“ “ iron...

0.0521

Sulphate of lime

' 0.0281

Silicic acid

0.0431

Bromide of sodium

Trace.

Chloride of lithium

Trace.

Total 4.2792


CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE JAPANESE
TRANSCRIPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


By Joseph Edkihs, D.D., Peking.


[Read June 29th, 1880.]

Sec. 1. — Eaely Interoouese op China and Japan.

Perhaps Mr. Satow’s views on the uutrustworthiness of the early
Japanese chronology are extreme. To ignore all notices of the know-
ledge of the Chinese language on the part of the Japanese before A.D.
400 is trenchant work.

Let me mention some points from the Chinese side. In the Heu
Han Shu by Fan ye we are told that on the conquest of Korea by Han
Wu Ti, B.C. 110, more than thirty out of the three hundred states
into which Japan was then divided had communicated with him. The
title of wang 3E j hereditary investitures was used by all these
states. The great Wang lived in Yamato. This we must call, if we
would follow the old Chinese pronunciation, Yamado

This work was composed in the fifth century, in South China,
under the Sung. A commentator and prince of the Tang dynasty adds
that Yamato was called in his time Yamat’o. From this I infer

that d had probably changed to t in the time between B.C. 110 and
about A.D. 620. This was a change in the Japanese pronunciation. It
rests on the statement of Fan ye, who had the use of the court records,
as had in their time all the dynastic historians. The form of the ex-
pression implies that either in the time of Han Wu Ti or later the
Japanese Mikado and his feudal barons took a Chinese title Wang, the
vox.. IX.


I


108 EDKINS: TEANSORIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS.

Mikado being distinguished as the great Wang of Japan. The historian
does not say whether the Chinese word was used or some native equiv-
alent, such as himi. The word dai-miyau is of late introduction.

In the year A.D, 57 the Japanese ambassador is said by the
Chinese historian to have styled himself Tai-Ju, and to have said

that he belonged to the extreme south of Japan. Prom this it may be
judged that he did not come from the Mikado, but from the ruler of the
Satsuma country at that time. The emperor gave him a seal and a sash.

Here we are again in a difficulty to know whetlier the Japanese
then used the title Tai-fri, or whether it was a translation of some native
term.

In A.D. 107 another ambassador came to China with a present
from the ruler of Japan of 160 men. The name of the Mikado given to
the Chinese was represented by the characters gijj simi ^ shiyou. This,
however, may be the name of the ambassador, his title being Shwai,
^‘general.”

The next name is that of Pi me ko, the princess who reigned with
the Chinese title of Empress according to the Japanese annals. The
name in the Chinese account is Hime, ‘‘princess," with ko, “son,"
appended. The Chinese mistook this title for a proper name, forgetting
that the Japanese are as fond of concealing the real name of a ruling
sovereign as they themselves are. The Chinese assume that the want
of honorific feeling of this kind indicates the absence of true civilization,
and they would not wish to believe that the Japanese were civilized.
Probably similar reasons have prevented the Japanese from making
much use of the early acco\ints of Japanese embassies contained in old
Chinese history. The language is not sufficiently, honorific to please
Japanese taste. They prefer their own accounts of things, where the
Mikado is exalted and other rulers degraded to inferior rank. They
content themselves with the remark that these embassies, when they are
not mentioned in the Japanese annals, must have been embassies, not
from the Mikado, but from inferior persons.

What should our position be in regard to the trustworthiness of
these accounts of embassies in the Chinese history ? Let us do with
them as with those we can investigate more thoroughly. Por example,
A.D, 166 an embassy arrived in China from the Roman Emperor Marcus


EDKINS: TRANSCRIPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


109


Aurelius Antoninus. The emperer is called An ton ^ At this
time that emperor was already dead, but we allow a long time to have
been occupied by the embassy before arriving by the Cochin-Ohinese
route, and although the embassy is not mentioned in Eomau annals, w e
accept the Chinese account as historically correct, 'and should do the
same with the Japanese. The Japanese Empress Pi mi hu is called Nii
Wang by the Chinese annalists. She is so called in the sense of reign-
ing queen in the Heu ban shu and in the Tsin shu. In this last work
she is said to have sent an ambassador in the time known as Tai shi
A.D. 265 to 275 to the first emperor of the Tsin dynasty. This is
mentioned by the Japanese annalist as belonging to the year A.D. 266,
and the empress died in A.D. 269. On this occasion an interpreter was
employed. The expression ^PP ehung yi may mean “interpreting
through the medium of two languages.” This would imply, perhaps,
that the Japanese ambassador brought with him a Korean who knew
both languages. It was not the first embassy, for there were embassies
in the time of Wen Ti of the Wei dynasty, A.D. 220 to 227. It is
mentioned that before the time of Wen Ti the Japanese empress (she
held power from A.D, 201 to 269 according to the Japanese chronology)
sent an embassy by way of Tai fang in Korea and frequently afterwards.
These frequent embassies must have come, then, between the years A.D.
201 and A.D. 220. Under the year A.D. 239 the Wei history mentions
that the Japanese queen sent a Tai fu named Kan tu mi to China with
others. Arriving at the frontier of China he requested permission to go
forward to the capital. The governor of the place sent him in charge
of an ofiicer in falfilment of his request. The next year the same his-
tory records that the Wei emperor sent an embassy to Japan, and
entrusted a seal and sash to his messengers for the queen. These entries
are added in small text in the Japanese account of their empress in the
Ki-hon Shiyo-ki. Three years later, A.D. 243, the King of Japan sent
a Tai fu called I sei sliiya and others, in all eight persons, with presents
to the Emperor of Korthern China.

In the 5th century there were several embassies to the emperors of
the Sung dynasty, which ruled south China from A.D, 420 to 479.
These would proceed either directly by sea or by way of Korea.

The title loang, “king,” was employed, but in addition that of


110


EDKINS: TEANSCEIPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


Tsiang Kiim. The Japanese monarch is spoken of as the Tsiang Kiun
of Japan, Petsi, Sinra, Mamena, Kara, Tsln han, Muhan. All these
five states were subject to Japan at that time, and they were all a part
of the modern Korea. Since the expeditions of Zhin-gou Kuwau-gu,
Japan claimed suzerainty over them. The title Shiyau-gun, afterwards
conferred on Yoritomo and Tokugaha by the Mikados, was first con-
ferred by the Chinese on the Mikados themselves. In the history of the
Sung dynasty we find the Mikados requesting the Chinese emperor to
cease using the title An tung Tsiang Kiiin (shiyau-gun), “ The general
who pacifies the east,” as a designation of the ruler of Japan. The re-
quest is granted, A few years later, A.D. 444, another embassy
arrives, and it is noticed by the Chinese historian that the old title
which was objected to was again used.

When the Mikado died no honorific term was used by the Chinese
historian. The ordinary word Si was used. It was the 19th Mikado
Win-giyou Teu-wau. An embassy was sent to China in A.D. 463. The
new Mikado was raised to the throne in 464 according to the Japanese
chronology, and was assassinated three years later, when his brother
succeeded to the throne. The Chinese account says that the new
Mikado sent an embassy and that he was brother of the last. The
proper names of the Mikados are some of them difiTerent in the
Japanese and Chinese accounts.* The disc]’ej)ancy in chronology is
about six years. The 20th Mikado Win-giyou, being the father of
the 21st and 22nd, and the son of the 22nd becoming the 23rd
according to both accounts, we must recognise the facts staled as
trustworthy in the main.

The chain of Chinese testimonies to tlie ancient intercourse of
China and Japan, reaching from B. C. 110 to the fifth century after
Christ, should have an influence on our opinion as to the period of the
introduction of Chinese writing into Japan. There probably never was
a time since the days of the Shang dynasty, which fell in B. C. 1122,
when the Chinese writing was unknown in Korea. Diplomatic in-
tercourse and the engraved seals and titles of investiture written on
either side implied it. A Chinese king, a native of Chili, ruled Korea


^ The name Bo, “ military ” for the aist mikado, agrees in the two authorities.


EDKINS : TEA.NSCRIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS,


111


before Han Wu Ti subdued it, as Pan ku tells us in the Early Han
History, his immortal work. The Chinese words and institutions were
indelibly impressed on the Korean people, customs, and language, from
that time. They would filter through to Japan. The intercourse of
Japan with Korea was long anterior to the reign of Zhin-gou Kuwan-gii,
and that period seems to me a very convenient stage in the natural
development of things for the establishment of the regular teaching of
the Chinese language in Japan.

• The title of heg was introduced into the Turkish language in this
way. Han Wu Ti carried Chinese institutions into the regions east of
the Caspian, where the Turkish language prevails. Pek is the third of
the five titles of investiture and hereditary rank under that of Wang.
Kemusat was the first in his Recherches Tartars to point out the
identity of the two words.

The use of the word Shiyau-gun, Viceroy or Governor-general,
given in ancient times to the rulers of Korea and Japan by the Chinese
emperors, would be adopted with many other words as a part of the
language, and hence its use in the early history of Japan. So of other
words.

The mythological and fictitious element is in the old Japanese books
undoubtedly large, and the temptation to invent history and chronology
was very great. Scholars educated in the Chinese way constructed the
chronology of the mythical Japanese period, and did not hesitate to
assign the day of the month and year to events which by oral tradition
could not in the nature of things be transmitted with so much verbal
accuracy as they profess.

Our task is to select carefully the grains from the chaff in this mass
of traditionary statements. We ought to be the more anxious to do
justice to Japanese legendary history in this respect, because the Japan-
ese authors who transmitted it have certainly not taken the old Chinese
accounts as a basis, and erected on this foundation a structure of inven-
tions. Their object has rather been to record their own traditions as
the staple of their history, and to make use of Chinese history or not as
it suited their view, and as it agreed or not with the native accounts
they had before them.

The historical reality of the Empress Zhin-gou Kuwau-gu being


112


EBKINS : TRANSCRIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS.


proved by the early Chinese notices, we must allow the general correct-
ness of the Japanese statements in regard to Wani. If the J apanese are
Wrong in regard to him, I should incline to think it is in assuming too
readily that the Chinese language was quite unknown before his time,
and in representing him as being absolutely their first instructor in
Chinese learning. They would more correctly describe him perhaps as
being the most prominent among their early instructors. The engraved
seals and accompanying documents sent to Japan two centuries and a
half before the time of Wani may have been not entirely unintelligible.
The Chinese historians say that the ancient Japanese tattooed their faces
and pricked in patterns the relative ranks of the persons tattooed,
according as they were patrician or plebeian. Is there here some
notion akin to that of writing ? At any rate it is true that a few miles
from the island of Tsushima, the blue mountains of the Korean coast
presented to the petty navigators of ancient Japan a point of perpetual
attraction. Tsushima itself, as it lies in the channel, is nearer to Korea
than to Japan. Yet it has always been counted as part of the Japanese
empire, and the real distance between Korea and Japan is not the width
of the whole channel, but that of the channel between Korea and
Tsushima. We must not listen to the legends which, claiming au-
tochthonous descent for the Japanese race, place too Late in time the dates
of early intercourse with Korea, and ignore the circumstance that for
ages before the eaidiest instance.s recorded; Tsushima and the other
islands in the channel pointed out the way from Korea to Japan and
from Japan to Korea.

Seo. 2. — The Comparative Age op the Kan on and Go on.

Mr. Satow states, p. 165, that it is uncertain whether the Go on is
more ancient than the Kan on and vice versd. I wish to draw attention
to the fact that physiologically the Kan on occupies a middle place
..between the Go on and Mandarin. Thus ^ Amp, “metropolis,” is Manff
in Fukien, %enp in Shanghai and cAmp in Peking. As the Shanghai
pronunciation is intermediate between the Fukien and the nothern
Mandarin, so the Kan on iei is intermediate between the Go on /ciyau
and the Mandari n Ainp or cAmp. Further, that part of China from
which the Kan on is derived has at present a much newer dialect than


EDKINS: TRANSCElPTIOIir OF CHINESE SOUNDS. 113

that part of China from which the Go on was chiefly taken. The fact
that the Ko-zhi-ki and Man-yefu-shifu use the Go on is strongly in
favour of the superior antiquity of the Go on. This has a bearing on
the question whether Wani taught the Go on or the Kan on, Mofcowori
(p. 164 of Mr. Satow) says that he taught the Go on. This is likely,
because the Go on is used in these two old books and in the oldest
histories. The Chinese characters used in these works for native
Japanese words were probably so used before in books and documents
now lost. They may be regarded as representing the mode of writing
in use from the time of Wani till the invention of the hiragana. As such,
the characters used in these books for native Japanese words reprasent
more or less accurately the sounds of those words as spoken daring the
fourth, fifth and sixth centuries. This is true if we adopt the native
date for Wani’s arrival, and also suppose that the Japanese began at
once to write down their own words with the Chinese characters they
were learning. This they would naturally do. Thus we carry back
our knowledge of the Japanese pronunciation to the third century, or
nearly so. In the interest of philological research this is highly import-
ant, for we can recover by this means the sounds of native words
fourteen hundred years ago at the most, and eleven hundred at the least.

For example it is very common to hear aspirates k‘a, t‘a, etc., in
modern Japanese, but they seem to be unknown in the Ko-zhi-ki All
syllables such as ha and ta in native words are ha and ta in the Chinese
transcription, and never h‘a or Pa. The habit of aspirating has grown
up since, and has not become uniform. It is therefore still a proper
thing to represent t, h, is, ch, of the Japanese syllabary without a mark of
aspiration, and to describe the aspirations that we hear as an irregularity.

Another fact that may be culled from the mode of writing Japanese
words in the Ko-zhi-ki is that the division into surds and sonants in the
Japanese pronunciation of their own words existed at the time of the
Ko-zhi-ki, though the nigori was not invented to represent the sonants
till long after. (See Transactions, Vol. VIII., pp. 168-9.)

Among 32 characters used to write the Japanese syllable m (shi)
three are sonant. Perhaps these are best explained by the supposition
that the native words they are used in representing, underwent the
change by a S])ecial law. Thus shita, below, becomes shita-zhita, and


114


EDKINS: TRA.lSrSOEIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS.


sAi is here sonant by position. In my search I have not yet found the
words Mr. Satow refers to. Among seven characters for zhi there are no
surds. Mr. Satow states that the nigori was introduced about 1500.

In considering the bearing of the Chinese transcriptions in the early
works on the question of the antiquity of the Go on, reference must be
made to the occurrence of some Kan on spellings in those books, as
pointed out by Mr. Satow (p. 169). The Ko-zhi-ki transcriptions are
not in any case dissyllabic. The finals ng, w, m of Chinese sounds arc
consistently ignored. If ju sheng words are used, the final h, t, or p, as
they may be, are neglected. A characteristic principle ruling the tran-
scribers was that only the initial should be expressed. Tliis is quite
enough to entitle the Ko-zhi-ki transcription to be described as difierent
from both the Go on and Kan on. I would recommend that we regard
it as such. Thus shai, in old Chinese shiak, is in Kzk ski, in
Go on shiM and in Kan on sMyoku, shortened into shoku.

occurrence of ^ to and so in tables of the Japanese kaTia
as in the beginning of Hepburn’s Dictionary, may be explained in this
way. They belong to the monosyllabic or Ko-zhi-ki transcription. In
the Kan on they are toio and sou and the same in the Go on. In the
Ki-hon Shiyo-ki ^ is tsu and in the Ko-zhi-ki it is shiu. It means
“ ford,” and is equivalent to the common Chinese word tu, du, “ a
fi)rd,” “ to ford.” It is this last word that is intended by the sign
isu, and ^ is written as agreeing in sense though not in sound. After-
wards, however, the Japanese used it as a sign of the sound few.*

The Ko-zhi-ki transcription was made then in the time of the


- The character ^ /‘m, iu, do. Go on isu, Kan on to, is another case in point.
Note that tsu is called the Go on of ^ but the meaning of which settles the
point I contend for, that no is in Chinese is read tsu in Japanese. For the Kan
on is to. The word ^ has as its Kan on shi or zhi. Its Kon or meaning is tsugi,
which is a native word. Tsugi for tugi is the Mongol dogar in nig-dogar, first,”
amidogar “ tenth.” In tsuzuke, tsumki, the first syllable is repeated. Ultimately
it has the same root with the Chinese su, zhok, dok, “ connect,” ^ ts% ts'ik,
tHk, “ order,” “ succession.” In the time of the transcription this original identity
was hidden from view by letter-changes, and ^ could only be written in Japanese
by shi, zhi.

These instances seem to shew that in the time of the transcription tu and du
must hS'Ve been the values of the sign' and that tsti, dzu must have been later.


EDKINS : TRANSCRIPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


115


prevalence of the Go on, and was probably the fruit of a reaction in
favour of Shintauism and native conceptions as contrasted with Bud-
dhism and a foreign cast of thought. The Kan on appears to belong to
a later period. For insufficient reasons, native scholars have ascribed
to the Kan on an unnecessarily high antiquity as compared with the
Go on. The Go on came to Japan from Korea. The Kan on was
sought by the Japanese in China, It was Buddhist missionary zeal
that was the main instrument in giving the Go on to Japanese ; it was
the love of Chinese learning among the educated of Japan that brought
the Kan bn into that country.

If occasionally an example of Kan on occurs in the Ko-zhi-ki, this
may arise from a selection having been made from the extant mode of
pronouncing certain words, such selections afterwards becoming Kun on.
In the Ni-hon Shiyo-ki the character sha, Kan on sa, Go on shiyai
occurs with the sound su. It belongs neither to the Kan on nor Go
on, but to the older transcription of which we have examples in the
Ko-zhi-ki. Any Kan on spellings found in the Ko-zhi-ki and other old
books may be placed in the same category.

The settlers in Japan from the peninsula of Korea and from China
itself have been very numerous, as attested by the native history.
Many varieties of pronunciation of Chinese characters must have found
their way into the country, and we need not be surprised if we find
them in the old literature.

For the character ^ jen, “ benevolence,” ni is the sound in the
old spelling without finals. The Go on is nm, as in the present
pronunciation of the Wu country. The Kan on is zMn, and is an
imitation of the new or Mandarin sound.

It may be asked, “ How do we know that the Wu country, that of
Sucheu and Shanghai, has retained the old sound ? ” I answer by a
reference to Julien’s Mbthode, pp. 115,116. Jang, pour nya. Lalita
vistara,, liv. iv., fol. 8 ; ^ Jang, pour nya, dans Poun-jang-che-lo ^
Jo pour na. Lai. v., liv. XII, traduction Franpaise, p, 141. 'Four nya
dans Fan yi liv. VII, fol. 12. Pour nya, Fan yi liv. VI., fol. 40.
Pour nya, Jung wen yun tung, A. Jou, pour nya, Fan yi, liv. Ill, fol. 14.

Under the letter J there are given by Julien 16 examples. Of these,
nine represents n or ni in Sanskrit. One represents sh, six represent


116 EDxms: tbajtsoriftiojst of Chinese sounbs.

With the light derived from this information we conclude that in
China from A.D. 400 to A.D. 700, the flourishing period of Buddhist
translations into Chinese, the sound of the modern ‘Chinese initial j was
chiefly ni but also dj. The Go on represents the one of these, and the
Kan on the other. Since ni is now retained only in the old middle
dialect, that is. in Chekiang and Kiangsu, and the soft French j is now
heard throughout the north and west of China over all the vast region
where mandarin is used, it follows naturally that the Go on is older than
the Kan on, and that the Kan on zi or dji represents a J, which in the
8th century was springing up in North China in place of the old ni,
from which it was developed by sibilization, and by discontinuing the
habit of touching the palate when pronouncing this initial.

The Go on has final k in some words where the Kan on has not.
For example G. saku, K. so, to defame (shikodzuru), inform, tell
(tsugeru). The native Japanese word in both cases retains the k, and
is doubtless the same word. Thus taking the root sok as a common
root in the mother language from which the Chinese and Japanese are
derived, the Chinese has gradually dropped the k, but not till about the
8th century of our era. The Japanese has retained it. The same root
(if we may venture to say so) has lost k in the English “say” and
retained it in the German “ sagen.” In this instance also the Go on is
certainly older than the Kan on. Compare® also p‘a. “fear,”G.
paku, K. pa. The phonetic Q pe, formerly , haik, shows that this root
for fear had lost a final K, just as our word “ fear ” compared with the
German “furehten,” has lost ^ in a similar way. In this case, also,
the Go on is certainly older than the Kan on, for there are no traces
now of the final k of this root in Chinese dialects known to foreigners.

The Go on keeps sonant initials more uniformly than does the Kan
on. Thus t'sing, “ feeling,” “ kindness,” is G. zhiyau, K. sei. The


“Compare ^ Go on Kan on “mutually.” InK'anghi, /‘z, “slip the

foot,” T‘af, “ run away,” Da^, “ arrive at,” same as also “ mutually.” The
Japanese dictionary makes the fourth meaning the prominent one, and just notices
the third. This is the Giyoku Hen.

The character ^ is given Go on retsu, Kan on sel, and in the ® ^ 3^ ri.

But these are different pronunciations in the Chinese, and should perhaps be regard-
ed as Kan on.,


ED KINS ; TKANSCEIPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


117


sounds the Japanese had to represent were dziang and t‘seing, as
nearly as we can restore them. The Shanghai people say zing, and
keep the old sonant initial. The Kan on has taken the surd form,
and . thus represents a time of transition from the period of the old
established sonants to the modern mandarin epoch.

Sometimes the Kan on retains a form which is really older than
the Go on. Thus ^ G. /catm, K. kafu, old sound hap. The Go on in
this case has final t for p through the influence of local dialects. In the
old dialects it is not uncommon to meet with t for p, as in the Hakka
and Amoy, e.g. fa, old sound pap, Amoy hwat. Such forms belong
to a transition period. The oldest known form was certainly hap, but
this does not at all prove that the Kan on was older than the Go on.
It only^proves that in the Wu country p changed to t before disaj)pear-
ing, while in Shensi and Honan it remained p till it was dropped.

Sec. 8.— On the Chinese Pbonunciation of Words written by
THE Japanese with “ chi " and 'y “ tsu

The character e/i’i is used in Julien’s Liste for the Sanskrit ti
in one passage and tH in another. In the Korean transcription it is
both t‘i and tsi. The first of these is of course the older. The latter is
more modern. In the Chinese Tonic Dictionary Kwaug yiin it is found
under Shang sheng in the sixth heading jb must be there read,

with the other words grouped with it, t‘i. The Japanese read it chi,
but if it had been really pronounced in that way by the Chinese at the
time they wrote down the sound, they would have spelled it si 3 / as
they have done with jp, and many other words called by the

Chinese c/ii, or c'h'i.

I copy from Julien’s Methode the characters now heard chi, oh%
and which occur as Chinese transcriptions of the Sanskrit ti, t‘i or di.

ti, ^ dya, ^ tya, ti. ^ di, di, dhi. ^0 ih M
di, ^ di, ti, li, g tri, # H, M in very

many cases. But also used for ehi in China. ^ ti, di, ^ ta, ^ di,
^ ti, g| thi. The following are the characters used in J alien to write
the Sanskrit syllables chi, chai, cha, and |^j chai, chi, chi, ^
chi, ^ chi, H chi, cha, chi, ^ dji, dji, ^ chi, chi,


118


JDDKINS: TRANSCRIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS.


I lists is explained by remembering that they were all characters which

I were destined afterwards to take ch for t. They made this change

I gradually, and some sooner than others.

I The old normal initial of the 22 characters first mentioned was

I tor d. There is nothing against the view that the Japanese was

,{ used to express the sound t and d in these words, just as it is used to

write U which has not become chi in any Chinese dialect.

The Japanese pronounce the 1st, 2nd, 6th, 16th, 16th, all shl, as also
the 22nd. They would therefore be called ehi by the Chinese vhoin the
Japanese heard pronouncing them when they wrote the transcription,
just as they would in a different part of the country be heard ti, dya, etc.,
by the Buddhist translators who use them for those Sanskrit syllables.
In regard to tsu it is certain that the Chinese had it as a clearly
I; pronounced syllable, or part of a syllable, at a time when 'y tsu and

■i its JSiragana forms began to be used. The Japanese did not, however,

Si write' the Chinese tm with these marks. They preferred to express it

by au. See Kwang yun in 10 ^ where there are six words with the
phonetic pronounced tsu and in Japanese m.

The present Chinese ^ clieu, ^ tseu, are now pronounced so as
to rhyme with our English '' cow,” “ now.” Formerly they were dm,
tm. The Sanskrit syllable dm is represented by in Julien's list.
All such words, whether pronounced with oh or is are written by the
Japanese V p shiu or sou.

Under the heads Jjr; yeu, ^ heu, ^ you, in the Tonic Diction-
aries, all such words are found. The initials under these three headings
-are the following : — Upper y, lower H, t's, another lower y, with the
usual i, ng, dz, another dz, si, e% another e% Id, di, dj, n%, shi, k‘, h,
sh, c% ts, another dj, h, z, d, t, g, v, m, lower h, u, n, I, s, ¥, ts, P, ng,
k, t, dz, h, m, yu, g, p, h, ts, sh, ng, h, on.

Ts and s are kept separate as initials in Chinese, though joined in
Japanese.

Mr. Satow states, p, 169,* that ja. M. used in the

* Mr. Satow’s words are : “ They must have been originally pronounced fu, tui,
tung in the Go on, from which all but the last were taken.” I do not see why,
if such an admission is made in regard to tm, a similar admission should not be
made in reference to chi.


EDKINS : TEANSCRIPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


119


Kozhiki and other early books must have been pronounced by the
Chinese tu, iung, and tui. With this I fully agree, except that the 2nd
and third were du. The dictionary Giyoku hen gives the Go on of
tsu and the Kan on tou. In other words, the old sound was du and the
new deu. The last afterwards became t'eu. Teu ^ Go on dzu Kan
on tou. Ikmg ^ is Go on tsuu, Kan on, tou, Chui ^ Go on tai
Kan on tmi. This last was tai before it was tui and tui (for so I read
tsui) before it was chui.

In the case of ^ tu, Kan on to, let it be noted that in the modern
Shanghai dialect the vowel u is very much used. Thus to ^ k tu
ta is du. This may account for the Go on of this character being im
(tu) when in North China it was to (Kan on).

In p. 168 Mr. Satow enunciates the principle that when the Japan-
ese transcribers had not any Chinese sounds “ they used the nearest
approach they possessed.” This is a safe principle. Below he con-
siders the case of the syllable tm and claims that they used su to write-
it because they wished for uniformity’s sake not to abandon the dental
sibilant series. I regard this reasoning as of doubtful validity, and
prefer the former principle. It is better to admit that the sibilization
of the syllables ti and tu was after the invention® of the kana.

Neither the alphabets of western languages nor the syllabaries of
eastern languages can check the progress of letter changes. Letter
changes go on in spite of prevailing systems of writing, although educa-
tors do much, and might do more, to modify and improve national modes
of pronouncing.

Sec. 4. — The Third Transcription or that known as

“ Tau on.”

I have only one book on this subject. It is H ^

gives no information on the time, place, and manner of introduction

® Tlie question is somewhat complicated. The syllabary of any nation is both
natural and graphic. The graphic syllabary dates from the historical epoch of
its introduction. The natural syllabary changes gradually and irregularly. Some
parts of a country change faster than others. The change from ii, tti, to' chi
tm, is natural, not graphic. It must have taken place earlier in some parts of
Japan than in others, and may have begun long before Kou-bofu Dai-shi’s time in,
certain localities.


120


EDKINS : TRANSCRIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS.


of the Tau on. Mr. Satow, page 165, gives us the following account,
apparently following Mr. Aston : *' The Tau in was introduced by the

monks of "Wau-baku san, near Uji in Yamashiro, towards the end of the
17th century.”

Mr. Satow does not mention or attempt to meet the difficulties
which yjrwnrl faeie occur in the examination of this transcription. He
answers the question why it was called Tau in by merely saying that it
was supposed to be the “ Chinese sound ” of the Chinese characters at
the time of its introduction.

I formerly tliought it belonged to the Tang dynasty, because it
marks the sonants with the nigori. Thus is spelled djiang and ^ is
dzung. But this is an error. There are many peculiarities in this
transcription which do not accord with the pronunciation which we
know to have prevailed in China in the. Tang dynasty.

' That the sonants of the old Chinese language still existed in the
Yuen dynasty we know from the Baschpa transcription. The existence
of the sonants in the Tau on is in agreement with the hypothesis that
it was the central dialect of China as spoken about the mouths of the
Yangtse and Yellow Kiver, and in the country stretching westward
along the lower course of those rivers to the centre of the country
that is represented by the Tau on.

Can the hypothesis that the dialect intended by the Tau on had
this locality be sustained? lu' favour of it there are, the following
arguments. That dialect probably had sonant initials as given in the
# nl Chung yueu yin yiin of Cheu te ts‘ing, but this dictionary
was made in the Yuen dynasty and belongs therefore to a time some-
where near the heginning of the 14th century. Jesuit writers of the
IGth and 17th centuries give uo new information in regard to the dialect
of that part. They recognize only mandarin proper and in some cases
the Amoy dialect. But the sonant initials still exist on the south bank
of the Yangtse and on both sides of Hang cheu Bay. (1) If the existence
of sonant initials be counted a first argument for the hypothesis, a
(2) second may be derived from the existence of final m. Cheu te ts‘ing
gives final m uniformly. So do the Baschpa inscriptions examined by
Mr. Wylie. Final in is now lost from the region referred to, but it
may have existed there down to the date of the Tau on transcription.


EDKIN8 : TEANSORTPTION OF CHINESE SOUNDS.


121


In my copy of the Tan on san Zlii kiyaii, final m occurs freq[ueiitly, but
it is often placed on the wrong words. Some words that ought to have
it have n in place of it. It will probably be found uniform in
carefully edited copies.

In the cases I have examined, out of 105 characters m is rightly
used in 14 instances and wrongly in 21. Final n is rightly used in
62 instances and wrongly in 8. These figures indicate that there was
originally a distinction between on and a, but that for some reason
great confusion has come to prevail in Japanese usage. There is
manifestly a tendency to push out the final m formerly registered in
the transcriptions of Chinese characters.

Another hypothesis that may be considered is conveyed in the
question, — “Is the Tau on the same in its main features with the
existing Old Middle Dialect or that of Sueheu, Ningpo, Shanghai and
Plang cheu ? ” This must be affirmed or negatived for the reasons
more or less valid that (1) no final h occurs as at Shanghai. Thus
^ is Me at Shanghai and ro in the Tau on. The vowel o is in favour
of the hypothesis, but the dropping of k is against it. (2) Initial
h and / are often dropped. Thus wa, uweu, % u, ^ in, ^ u.
In Shanghai or its neighbourhood these words are heard wak, wu, wu,
or vu, yeoig, mt. In this particular there is a certain amount of likeness
between the Go on and Tau on. The words ^ ovaoig for hwmig,
^ ya for hia, are additional examples.® (3} The sonants agree in most ,
cases. Thus JpJ is doing, ZJS is being, giemg, dziuen, ^ dzin »
In this respect the Tau on agrees with the Old middle dialect as spoken
in the four cities mentioned above, as also with the Baschpa monuments
of the Yuen dynasty.

Another hypothesis is worth considering. Is the Tau on made up
of fragments from various dialects under Japanese editorship ? If it
is really no older than the 17th century, the sonant initials can only be
referred to Central China and the right bank of the Yangtse. But
there are anomalies which the dialects of that region do not explain.
Why is spelled cliang, boya and Uui f In these peculiar


“ So also ait- for hau, ^ yen, for Jiien, youg for Jihmg, “p* ya for hia.


122


EDKIKS: TEANSCBIKTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS-


spellings "we seem not to be among Chinese dialects but, to be enveloped
in the fog of the indistinct conception of some native scholar groping
his uncertain way along the paths of a subject not well mastered.

Here I leave these hypotheses, pending further knowdedge of the
history of this transcription, the publication of which may throw fresh
light on the subject.

The Tau on teaches some interesting facts in regard to the
powers of the letters in the Japanese syllabary in the 17th cen-
tury.

1. The labial series ivns well advanced to its present position.
Thus ^ hiang, “incense,” is in Go kaUy in Kan kiyan, and is
shortened into ko. But in Tau it is hiang if only we give to the
common value ng. The sign t is used for hi in Chinese. Since this
sign was in the early transcriptions used for pf it is quite clear that
its current value had changed in the interval between the first and
second transcriptions and the third.

It may be asked, Why is ^ written Tdya in Tau while ^ is
himxg ? I suppose the reason to be in the fact that ^ belongs to the
sonant series. In the Dictionary before referred to Chung yuen yin
yiiu, it is Man in the Hia p‘ing tone. At Shanghai it is ok and yak,
the commencing vowels being pronounced low and very slightly
aspirated. At Amoy it is oh and hak. In the Giyoku hen, the syllable
spelling ^ is meant for yak, or ak. In Kanghi it is hak with the
aspiration weak. The Tau on hja is evidently a despairing effort to
write something which the transcriber did not know how to write with
the means at his command. He fell back on the old initial k of the
earlier transcription. He did so in ^ hwang, which he writes hvang.
But ^ hwang he writes wang as it is pronounced in the old middle
dialect. He keeps k in writing ^|[ him. It is h.oan instead of being
kun, which is the old mode of pronouncing it.

There are just enough examples to shew that t was in the 17th
century called hi (and even i, as is ^ in Tau called t yin).

2. In the 17th century ^ and were pronounced as now , — chi
and t$u. Thus is used to spell ^ chiung, ^ ehing, chiung
^ chau, It ehio, djiuen, ^ chiun, ^ chiang, djin, ^
chym, ^ djin. The words here spelled with dj all belong to the sonant


EDKINS : TRANSOKIPTION OP CHINESE SOUNDS.


123


series. The rest are all surds. Let it be noticed here that this Japan-
ese syllabic sign has in all cases the value chi.'’ But in the early
transcriptions it was used to spell Chinese words with an initial t.
Evidently it changed its value between the period of the two transcrip-
tions and that of the third. It is so, also, with y tsu. This symbol
was in the old transcriptions used for t'u, du. But in the Tau it is tm.
The characters ^ are spelled ind, tsugen, tsuimu. Then we

have also hui, tmi, tsid, tsn, jL tsui, ^ tsui, iseng,
dzid, ^ is tmi.

If the transcriber wishes to write the syllable ti or tu, what does he
do ? He writes tei for ti and to for tu. Thus ^ and are t&i, while
is to, and ^ is ion.

In the time of the old transcriptions represented the Chinese
tu, but in the time of the third transcription the Japanese signs to and
tou were preferred. The inference is easy. The symbol in Japanese
had changed its value in the interval from tn to tau,

8. The final n of the old transcriptions has in the Tau transcription
become ng. This may be concluded from the disappearance of ^ %i as
a representative of ng. A thousand years ago there was no tendency
among the Japanese to pronounce their final n like our ng. Conse-
quently it never occurred to the transcribers to use it for ng. At present
it is very commonly heard ng, and this must have also been the case two
centuries ago, for it is only in this w’ay that we can account for its ,
regular use to represent the Chinese ng in the Tau on.

Mr. Satow tells^us that mu -was the form -first used, and that it
was subsequently introduced. In this case mu first became n and
afterwards ng. [See page 28 of Mr. Satow’s Transliteration of the
Japanese syllabary.] 1 take mu here to represent n.

The symbol represents therefore a very changeable sound. This
symbol was invented later than the other symbols, and it met a want
occasioned by the change of the final m to n, of which Mr. Satow has
given examples. Let me add some here. Em, “ woman,” in Mongol

’’ The character S2im£- is called chiang. This is an anomaly I do not know
how to account for. It takes ch at Amoy, but that dialect is not like the Tau
in other respects.

VOL. IX.


2


124


EDJKINS : TRA.NSORIPriON OF OHIS’ESE SOUNDS.


is the Japanese onna. The Mongol ijamora, “ what,” called in some
dialects namora, is the Japanese ncmi. The Chinese sheii mo, "what,”
is compounded of two words shin, old form, dim and mo, old form ma,
both meaning " what.” But d and n are interchangeable letters.

The final n which anciently replaced final oi is rapidly changing to
ngr. In China a change very like this luis taken place. The old final
on became iig formerly. More recently it has become oi. In central
China at present the final n and ng coalesce to a considerable extent.
In some dialects n is preferred for the united group. In others oig is
the favoured sound.

In some words Japanese and Mongol keep ni where the Chinese
has changed it for n. Yoon, the old Chinese for " drink,” lias become
yin. The Mongol is oondagan, " drink.” The Japanese is oioooii, “ to
drink.” That the initial oi is here no bar to the identification of the
words is clear from another example which in the dictionaries will be
found near these. Japanese nemuri, "sleep; ” Mongol oondaho, "sleep ; ”
omdagolho, “ cause to sleep.” Chin ^ t‘sin, “ to sleep,” " lie down to
sleep.” The old form of i‘sm is fiin.. Butt and n are interchangeable.
The Mongol has omitted the initial in both words.

I have indulged in an etymological digression of a sort which is
to niy mind exceedingly interesting as pointing out the way to the proof
of the ultimate identity of the languages at a time prior to the origin of
the Mongolian and Japanese grammatical .systems, and when language
consisted, as in Chinese, only of words and syntax.


( 125 )


HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


By W. a. Woolley.


[Iiead January 11, 1881.]

My apology for the following notes on the iutrofluction of foreign
commerce and religion into Nagasaki, find on its early history, must be
the special interest attaching to this place by all who study the early
relations of Japan with foreign countries.

IMy information has been chiefly derived from a manuscript in 14
volumes entitled “Nagasaki Kokon Shhran,” compiled by one Matsura
To, of Nagasaki, in 1811, and now preserved in the archives of the
Kencho at Nagasaki. A list of the books referred to in this compilation
is appended to this paper.

The obscure village, rarely visited in early times even by the
Japanese themselves, from which Nagasaki has sprung, was not called
by its present name, but by the following : —

Tamakina Mura,

Fukatsuye,

Fukaye no lira,

Fukutomi no Ura,

Nigitutsu,

Tamaua no Era,

Tama no Ura,

of which Fukaye no Ura, Nigitatsu, and Tama no Ura were the best
known. -It is not clear, however, at what dates these names were
applied to it.


126


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


In the reign of the Emperor Keik6 (A.D. 71-130), Toyotowake
. no Okimi received Hi no Kuni as his domain, and passed through
Fukaye no Ura.

Hizen and Higo, it may be mentioned, once formed one province,
called Hi no Kuni, “ the province of fire.” The story goes that in the
reign of the Emperor Sujin (B.C. 97-30), Tsuchigumo and ITchizaru,
two persons of Mashiki no Kori in Higo, with 180 of their followers,
revolted. Take Ogumi speedly overthrew tliem, and he attributed his
victory to divine agency. Having reached Shiraga no Yama, in the
■ district of Yatsushiro, he perceived, after sundown, a fire burning in
the sky, which gradually descended upon the mountain and hung there
like a lamp. He reported this to the Emperor, who at once named
this part of the country Hi no Kuni, and, that Take Ogumi’s name
might not be forgotten in after-time, he called him Hi no Kimi Take
Odzumi and made him lord of this province. Keik6 Tennd, when
making a progress through Tsukushi, is said to have been guided by
this light. The old name of Kiushiu was Tsukushi, “Erected stones,”
stone forts having been erected, in various parts, to protect the land
against foreign invasion. This name at first was synonymous with
Chikuzeu and Chikugo, but as the government office for the control of
the western provinces was at Dazaifu, in Chikuzen, the whole of Kiushiu
came to be called Tsukushi. Kiushiu was also called Cliinzei, and on
the Torii in front of the Suwa temple in Nagasaki were inscribed the
words “ Ohinzei Taisha ” (the large shrine of the country subjugated
in the west). Tametomo, the brother of Yoshitomo, lived for a long
; time in Aso, and was known as Chinzei no Hachir6.

' Jingcj K6g6, when on her expedition against Korea, is said to have
;V Stopped at Fukaye no ura, aud many of the islands, capes and rocks at
the entrance of the harbour are supposed to have derived their names
.from her visit. The stones which the Empress put in her breast to
: prevent her being delivered until after her return from Korea, are said
to have been taken from the village of Hirasliiku, about a W to the
, 'Btorth of Nagasaki.

In the 5th year of the reign of the Empress Siiiko (598. A.D.),
Kmsh6, the heir of the King of Kudara (one of the divisions of Korea),
visited Fukaye.


WOOLLEY : IIISTOKIOAL EuTES ON NAGASAKI.


127


In the time of Saga Tenno (810-842), the temple of Jin-gu-ji, on
the site of which is the present Suwa shrine, was built.

In 998 A.D. the Government at Dazaifu reported to Kioto that
Chinese pirates had ravaged the coast of Tsukushi, and in the following
year troops were sent out to punish them.

In April, 1019, pirates again ravaged the coast of Tsukushi and
the Island of Iki, and killed Piijiwara Masatada, who was in charge of
that island.

In the time of Takakura Tenno (1169-1181), Norimori Chiunagon,
of the Taira family, received Pukaye for his domain.

Fukaye no Ura formed one of the 48 villages of Oniura in the
Sonogi district. This name was in existence in 1552, for one of the
yema (thank offering picture) in front of the shrine of Tarayama Gongen
has inscribed upon it the words, “ Presented l^y Nagasaki Jinzayemon no
JO Yoridzumi, of Fukaye no Ura, in the 21st year of Tembun ” (1552),

Nagasaki KotarO is said to have received Fukaye no Ura as bis
fief from Yoritomo during the period Bunji (1185-1190), and to have
lived on the hill above Shun-loku-ji. It is from liim and his descendants
that Nagasaki is thought to have derived its name. Previous to his
coming, boats which touched here were called Fukaye bwie, but after-
wards Nagasaki hnne, and the people who dwelt here Nagasaki men,
and this name gradually came to be given to the place. About this time
Yoi-itomo is also said to have rewarded other Samurai by grants of land
in the Western Provinces. Among these were Toniaehi Tdjird, Chiwata
Taro, Tokitsu ShirO and Urakami Kodayu, from whom the names of the
villages Tomachi, Chiwata, Tokitsu and Urakami may have been derived.
These Samurai built yashiki for themselves on the fiefs they received,
and conducted themselves as independent chieftains, taking the side, in
time of war, of one or other of the three notable daimius of Kiushiu.
When Kotaro came, Fukaye was poor and the laud untilled, the only
inhabitants being a few fishermen and salt manufacturers in the part
now known as Yedo Machi.

Nagasaki Samenosuke was the 8th in descent from Kotai‘6, and
having no heir he adopted Yasunaga, the 3rd son of the chieftain of
Arima. His son Jinzayemon married the daughter of Omura Mimbu
no Shdyu, Sumitada, better known as 6inura Risen (Risen being his


128 WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL ROTES OR NAGASAKI.

Buddhist name). Jinzayemon inhabited tbe castle above Shun-toku-
ji, which had been built by his ancestor Nagasaki Kageyuzayeraon no J6
Taira no Tainemoto in 1333. hie was a man of considerable influence,
which was enhanced by his family connection with the houses of Omura
and Arima, and was continually engaged in feuds with his neighbours,
who envied his prosperity.

During the period Tembun (1532-1655), Shimadzu Yoshihisa of
Satsuma, Otomo of Bungo ami Eiuzdji Takunobu of Hizen, contended
for the supremacy in Kiushiu. Jinzayemon’s chief enemy was Fukahori
Shigeiye, who fought under Eiiizuji’s flag. He repeatedly invaded
Nagasaki, but without success.

Owing to the frequency of attacks made on Nagasaki, canals were
formed for the protection of the town. In 1592 a large canal was made
between Shimabara Machi and Moto Hakata Machi, and in 1596 another
was made between Sakura Machi and Bungo Machi. In 1600 the
iGlo^etnor ordered the people to make two canals, one passing from
(Kagawa Machi' in a N. W. direction to Funatsu Machi, between the
inner and outer towns, and one in a S. E. direction from Kago Machi
to Shita Machi.

In 1539, or according to other accounts in 1542, a kurofune
(black ship) with Nmnhanjin (a name applied especially to Portuguese
and Spaniards) on board visited Tanegashinm in Osumi. Amongst
those who landed on this occasion was one of the literati of China, who
acted as interpreter between the foreigners and the chief of the island,
Hi6bu no j6 Tokitada. In reply to questions, this interpreter is repre-
sented as having described his friends the foreigners as being ignorant
of etiquette and characters, of the use of wine cups and chop sticks, apd
a;S being, in fact, little better than the beasts of the field. The chief
' Of the foreigners taught Tokitada the use of fire-arms, and, upon
: leaving, presented him with three guns and ammunition, which were
forwarded to Shimadzu Yoshihisa, and through him to the Shdgun.
Suginobd, a priest of Negoro-ji, is said to have spread the use of fire-
; arms through the Eastern Provinces.

In 1549, a Namban ship touched at Usuki, in Bungo, for the purpose
of trading and spreading religion — a combination of God and Mammon
worship which characterized all the early visits of foreigners to Japan.


WOOIiLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


129


After this, foreigners came from time to time to Funai in Bungo,
Kucliinotsu in Shimabara, Fukuda and Yokose ura in Omura, and Ake-
nokonchi in Hirado, until 1569. Owing to the indifferent anchorage
in Omura, the Portuguese wei’e compelled to seek for a better harbour,
and eventually, in 1570, they discovered Nagasaki (at that time
governed by Jinzayemon), and asked permission to trade there. In
the following year, for some reason not clearly assigned, Jinzayemon
retired from Nagasaki. For the next 21 years, until 1592, it was under
the jurisdiction of Omura. He received the foreigners in a cordial
manner, and pretended to lean towards their religion merely for the
sake of inducing them to visit his dominions exclusively, and thereby
debarring other chieftains from obtaining fire-arms, etc. The priests
were deceived by his complaisance, and asked him on behalf of their
chui'cli for the territory of Nagasaki, with jurisdiction over the same.
Omura refused at first to grant their request, whereupon tiie priests
and merchants threatened to withdraw, and to select some other port
for their countrymen. Arima happened to be in Nagasaki at the time,
and acted as a mediator, the result being that Nagasaki, in 1573, be-
came the territory of the Christian sect.

Nagasaki became a flourishing place after the advent of foreigners,
and merchants from neighbouring provinces settled here, hoping to
enrich themselves by foreign trade. Omura had the town laid out in
six streei.s — called Shimabara Machi (the present Manzai Maohi),
Omura Miichi, Hokaura Machi, Hirado Machi, Yokose Machi, and
Bunclii Machi. These streets formed tlie commencement of the inner
town. No ground rent was levied upon it even after Nagasaki became
Imperial territory. As the town grew, paddy and arable land outside
this inner town were turned into 40 streets, and a fixed annual ground
rent was paid to Government. In 1673 this rent amounted to 3800
me of silver ; in 1677, to 4700 me ; in 1678, to 5000 me (one momme=.
58.33 grs. Troy).

In 1672 some of the larger streets were divided into two or three
streets, the total number then being 77 in the inner and outer towns,
exclusive of Deshima, Yoriai Machi and Maruyama.

For purposes of Government service, by land and sea, these stieets
were divided as follows : —


130 WOOLLEY: HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.

Inner town : 11 Sea service.

15 Land do.

Outer town : 20 Sea Service.

34 Land do.

[I may mention that the road over Hi mi tOge was made on the
occasion of Omura’s retainer’s visit to Nagasaki to lay out the town,]

Fjom 1558 to 1592, the whole of Japan was convulsed with civil
war. The feudal loi’ds obeyed neither Emperor nor ShOgun, but each
strove only for bis own aggrandizement. During such a period, it is
not surprising that a place like Nagasaki, far distant from central
control, should have been allowed to manage its own affairs, and that
the people, whose imaginative feelings were worked upon by miracles,
and whose hearts had been won by the self-denying and devotional
character of the Jesuits, should have adopted the Cliristian faith. So
strongly did they become imbued with it, that in 1567 there was hardly
a person in Nagasaki who was not a Christian. The zeal with which
the Fathers carried ou their propagandism led them in November of
the same year to set fire to the temple of Jin-gu-ji, and to attribute the
cause of the fire to the wrath of God. After this, all the branches of
this temple, some 80 in number, in and around Nagasaki, were
destroyed. The zealotry of the Christian converts was encouraged by
the fact of Otomo Sorin Munechika, Lord of Bungo, who had been
converted through the influence of his Karo, Tawara Tsugitada, having
burned all the temples and idols in his dominion and put many of the
priests to death. The priests of Hikusan [)rayed for his death, upon
which Otomo sent out 4300 men and destroyed that large temple on
the 6th of May, 1576, the birthday of Shaka.

The overthrow of the Shinto and Buddhist faiths in Nagasaki
lasted from 1587 to 1603, during which period there were eleven
Christian churches (called by the Japanese Ki-kuwan — strange sight)
in the town, with jurisdiction over it and Urakami.

The three largest churches were on the site of 8hun-toku-ji, Hon
ren-ji, and Tateyama Yashiki. The remaining eight w'ere used by the
Fathers as private residences, alms-houses and offices.

In 1587, after Shimadzu had gained the supremacy in Kiushiu,
Hideyoshi led an expedition against him. On his return he stopped at


WOOLLEY : HTSTOEICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


131


Hakozaki, near Hakata. The head men. of Nagasaki purposed to pay
court to him here, but Hideyoshi declined to receive them in audience,
and having heard that two Christian converts were among his retinue,
he had them crucified at the Torii of the temple of Hachiman in
Hakozaki. He further commanded the Jesuits to leave Japan, and not
to return. In the same year he sent Todd Sado no Kami to expel them
and to prohibit the Christian religion. Tdcld was recalled, but returned
to Nagasaki with Terazawa Shima no Kami in 1588. They presented
the people of the inner town with a charter signed by Hideyoshi, remit-
ting all taxes. The Government was afterwards entrusted to Nabeshima
Hida no Kami, as Daikwan. He carried it on from 1588 to 1591.

After Tddd’s coming, the head men of Nagasaki were four in num-
ber, one of whom ivent yearly to pay his respects to Hideyoshi. Tera-
zawa, the first Governor (1592), gave them official permission to act
under the title of Machi-doshi-yori. Nobunaga having heard, when at
Adzuohi in Gdshiu, that the Jesuit Father Organtin was living at
Nagasaki, invited him to an audience at Ozaka, and thinking that the
doctrines of Christianity might as well be tolerated as those of Buddhism,
which had also been introduced from abroad, gave him four gM of land
in B0mon-d6ri in Ki6to whereon to built a temple, and a yearly stipend,
and further told him to invite others of his persuasion. This temple
was called Namban-ji. These Fathers gathered together in the temple
numbers of sick persons and beggars, and distributed food, clothing and
medicine among them. Some of the nobility, and many of the lower
classes, believed in the new doctrines, and Christianity spread rapidly
over the Gokinai. Nobunaga was astonished at their liberality, and
fearing that they had designs on Japan, repented that he had invited
them, and in 1581 intended to destroy the temple and priests, but was
prevented, owing to the disturbed state of the country. It was, however,
destroyed in 1589 by order of Hideyoshi, and all Japanese Christians
were condemned to death.

In 1694, six Bateren (Jesuit Fathers) and 24 of their followers,
w'ho were in hiding in Kidto and Ozaka, were sent to Nagasaki and
there put to death.

Hideyoshi recognized the important position Nagasaki was likely to
take, and sent five commissioners to inquire into its condition, to order


132


WOOLLEY : HISTOB.ICA.L NOTES ON NAGASAKI,


the people to obey the rule of Omura Kisen, to return to the faith of
their forefathers, and to repair the temples, etc. The Cliristian churches
were reduced to three. To counteract the power of the priests, Hide-
yoshi appears to have selected some merchants of ability in Hakata, and
to have transferred them to Nagasaki. The place where they lived was
called, after them, Hakata Maclii, Here they traded with tlie foreigners,
and endeavoured to suppress the evil doctrines of Christianity. The
Christians Avere contunuieious and refused to obey the officials set over
them, and constant quarrels took place. The influence of the priests was
again in the ascendant, but the presence of Hideyoshi, at tins time (1592)
at Nagoya on his way to invade Korea, awed them. Tenizawa was sent
as Governor, with orders to expel the foreigners. To execute these he
summoned the head men of Hakata Machi and GotCMachi ; but they took
umbrage at the place assigned them at the meeting, and whilst the
altercation was going on, Terazawa was recalled to take part in the
command of the van of Hideyoshi’s army. It also appears that the
li'athers made rich presents to the favourite mistress of Hideyoshi at
Fushimi, and thus, in one way and another, this ' attempt to expel the
foreigners was frustrated. The three principal churches once more con-
trolled the people, and issued their orders regardless of the authorities.

The head men of Nagasaki determined to visit Hideyoshi at Nagoya,
but on their way they incurred the displeasure of some daimid by not
descending from their palanquins when meeting his train. Their
presents, also, were not equal in value or workmanship to those given
by the Fathers to Hideyoshi’s mistress, Yodo doiio. This, coupled with
their rudeness to the daimid, enraged Hideyoshi, and they fled to Naga-
saki for their lives. Then the people of Nagasaki thought it necessary
to obtain Hideyoshi’s pardon, and looked about for some suitable person
to undertake the office of conciliator. A person named ltd Kosbicbird,
of Nagoya in Bishiu, chanced to be living in Nagasaki, wlnther he had
come in the period Tenshd (1573-1692) with the object of advancing
his interests by foreign trade. Being an able aud eloquent man, of
prepossessing mien, as well as a popular favourite, he was chosen to
ingratiate himself with Hideyoshi, and obtain pardon on behalf of his
fellow townsmen. Terazawa was also a Bishiu man, and knowing ltd’s
parentage, he spoke in his favour to one of Hideyoshi’s councillors. Being


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


133


received in audience, he falsely represented himself as one of the
head men of Nagasaki, Hideyoshi was pleased with his address, gave
him the name of Tdan Murayama, and appointed him Daikivan of the
outer town. TOan’s nickname was AntO, short for Antonio, as he was
thought to resemble in appearance the figure-hetid of a Portuguese
ship.

He paid 25 kwamme of silver yearly to the Government, being
allowed to farm the taxes and keep fur himself the surplus over the
above sum. This occurred in 1692. TOan held office for over 20 years,
and lived in luxury and extravagance, which excited the envy of one
Suyetsugu Heizu, and made him plot to compass Tuan’s ruin. The case
he brought against T6an was heard in yedo in IhlG. T6an gained the
day. ITeizo, however, had another charge to prefer against him, to the
effect that TOan was concealing in Nagasaki his third son, who was a
Bateren, and had been exiled ; and further, that when lyeyasu was
besieging Hideyuri, this son had conveyed provisions, etc., into the
enemy’s camp, TOan was convicted and beheaded in Yedo. Pleizd
succeeded him in the government of the outer town in 1616, and paid 50
kivamme of silver to the government. His family retained this office till
1676, when Suyetsugu Shigesada Avas banished to Oki for having traded
illegally with Taiwan. After this the Machi-doshi-yori conducted the
business of Daikwan. In 1699 the names of Inner and Outer town were
abolished, and six Machi-doshi-jmri managed all municipal affairs.

In 1603 tlie Christian sect fell into disrepute, and the following
year saw the revival of the native religions. Five MeUuke (afterwards
called Machi-chukai) were, appointed as spies on the people.

Ogasawara Ichian, Avho was Governor at the time, heard that one
Hochi, a Buddhist priest who had laboured for many years to bring the
people back to the true faith, was living in retirement in Nagasaki,
and having sent for him ordered him to build a temple in Kawaguchi.
This was called Sho-gaku-ji. In 1606 it was removed to the site of a
Christian church in Funatsu Mura, the superior of which had been the '
blind Bateren TaAvara Moriichi, the younger brother of Tsugitada, the
Karo of Otomo Sbrin.

Moriichi afterwards apostatized, and was appointed by Hidetada
one of tlie inquisitors to search for Christians throughout Japan. Sho-


134


^A!^OOLLKY : HISTORICAL. NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


gaku-ji was burnt by the Christians, rebuilt on the site of the present
temple of JO-an-ji, and in 1676 removed to its present site in Koshi Mura.

The five priests who were the most zealous Buddhistic revivalists
were the Superiors of the temples, Sho-gaku-ji, Dai-on-ji, Ko-yei-ji, Dai-
kb-ji and Ko-tai-ji. They received the special thanks of the Government,
and in addition, substantial rewards and presents, which, indeed, they de-
served, for they were cruelly persecuted and stoned by the Christian sect.

The population of JSTagasaki in 1604 is j)ut down at 24,693.

In 1613, owing to the Buddhist priests having reported that the
foreigners intended to seize Japan, Okubo Sagami no Kami was ordered
to arrest Christians in the Gokinai, Chiugoku and Kiushiu, and to give
them into the charge of various daimios. In July or August, 1614,
Yamnguchi Suruga no Kami was sent by lyeyasu to expel the priests
and destroy the churches. In October, over 100 Bateren and others,
who had been arrested in various parts of the country, among whom
were Takayama Ukon, the Lord of Takatsuki in Sasshiu, and Nait6
Hida no Kami, were banished to Macao. The daimiOs present at the
destruction of the churches were Nabeshiraa Shinano no Kami, Teraza-
wa Shima no Kami, Arima Sayemon-no-suko, Matsura Iki no Kami
and Oraura Tango no Kami. The altars, made of bronze and gold,
were buried. In 1626, Midzuno Kawachi no Kami avus sent to Naga-
saki, and for three years carried oil a rigid search for Christians,

In 1629, the practice of Fumi-ye, or trampling on the picture of
Christ, was instituted. Paper pictures were first used, but as they
were soon Avorn out, wooden slabs {ye-ita) were substituted ; and again,
in 1669, twenty bronze plates Avere cast and engraven with the image
of Christ by one Yusa, an engraver who lived in Nagasaki. These
plates were made of metal taken from the altars of the Christian
churches. They Avere about five inches by four inches, and one inch in
thickness. The ceremony of trampling on them was performed annually
from the 4th to the 9th of the 1st month. Recusants Avere expelled from
their homes, and had to take refuge in the fields and Avoods, When
arrested, if still contumacious, they Avere taken to the hot springs of
Shimabara, sprinkled with the boiling water and thrown in.

Takenaka Uueme no Kami, who was Governor from 1629 to 1632,
brought the Government into disrepute by acting for his own selfish


WOOLLEY : HISTOEIOAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


135


ends. His property was confiscated and lie was sentenced so commit
hara-Hri in Yedo. He established a still more rigid inquisition, and by
arrangement with Matsukura Bungo no Kami, sent the Christians to
the hot springs of Shimabara, where their backs were slit open and hot
■svater poured over them. Eecusants were thrown into one of the springs
called Plachiman jigoku. In Nagasaki, at Nishizaka, they were cruci-
fied, burnt and subjected to various kinds of refined cruelty.

In 1633 two Governors were appointed in order to prevent the re-
currence of the abitrary conduct displayed by the last named Governor.
They reached Nagasaki about the end of July, the usual time of the
arrival of foreign Amssels, and returned about the end of the year, after
the departure of the ships. From 1638 the Goveimors lived at Naga-
saki without returning to Yedo.

During their absence, the inner town ivas subject to the Machi-
doshi-yori, and the outer town to Suyetsugu Heizu, the Daihwan.
When in doubt how to act, they sent to Yedo for instructions.

Upon the arrival of a foreign ship, a guard-ship, with an official
called CJhdj.i, was sent out to watch her movements, and no cargo could
be discharged before the Governors had come down.

In 1684 two inspectors of merchandize were sent from Yedo.

In 1687 three Governors were appointed, of whom two lived
in Nagasaki, each taking his turn to be relieved by the third, who
resided in Yedo.

In 170D there were four Governors, two of whom resided in
Nagasaki and two in Yedo.

In 1635, on the occasion of the escape of Kintsuba Jihei, a Japan-
ese Bateren, and one of the most influential of the Christian sect, guard-
houses were erected at all the land approaches of Nagasaki, and persons
without passports from the municipal authorities were stopped.

In 1636 the Shogun’s ministers issued an edict to the Governor of
Nagasaki, the articles of which were to the following effect : —

Japanese not to go abroad.

Japanese attempting to go abroad to sufier death.

The cargo imported in a foreign vessel not to be purcbased by one person.
Persons of military rank not to buy direct from Chinese traders.

Persons returning from abroad to be put to death.


136


WOOI-LBY : HISTORICAL ROTES ON NAGASAKI.


The Prince of* 6muni to provide a guard-ship from time of foreign ship’s
arrival until receipt of instructions from Yedo.

Foreigners propagating their religion to he imprisoned in Omura.
Foreign ships to be inspected.

Half-breeds not to reside in Japan. (In accordance- with this article,
287 children were banished to Macao.)

Persons adopting half-breeds to be banished, and their relations to be
punished.

ISTature of merchandize in foreign ship to be reported to Yedo.
Merchandize, excepting silk, to be sold by private arrangement.

Goods not sold cannot be stored in the country.

Agents of merchants to be in Nagasaki before the arrival of a foreign
, vessel ; in event of their being five days late, they were not to
share in the Ijusiness or the proceeds.

Silk to be purchased l)y merchants of Yedo, Kibto, 6zaka, Sakai and
Nagasaki. Value of goods brought to Hirado to be determined
in Nagasaki.

In 1636 the Portuguese were prohibited from living in the town
of Nagasaki and were removed to Deshima, a tract of land which had
been reclaimed by twenty-five Japanese merchants. The object in
secluding the Portuguese here was to prevent the spread of Christianity.
They lived in Deshima for throe years, until the autumn of 1638, when
owing to the revolt of the Christians of Shimabara in the preceding
year, they were expelled by Ota Bitcbiu no Kami and ordered never to
return. For two years Deshima remained unoccupied.

The Dutch first received official permission to trade in Japan,
on September 6th, 1608, when lyeyasu issued an edict to the Dutch
Captain, whereby Dutch ships were allowed to visit any port in Japan,
and were in fact invited to come. On the 16th of September, 1617,
Hidetada permitted Dutch ships in distress to visit any port in the
country. The English received a similar permission.

From 1608 to 1638 the Dutch traded periodically at Hirado, and
enjoyed freedom of action. In the latter year Matsudaira Idzu no Kami
came on a visit of inspection, and destroyed the Dutch fort in Hirado,
thinking from its size and strength it might endanger the peace of the
country.


WOOLLEY: HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI. 137

In the winter of 1640, when on the point of starting on their
annual visit to Yedo, the Dutch were ordered to move to Nagasaki, and
on their return, in 1641, they repaired there and took up their abode
in Deshiraa.

In 1641 nine Dutch vessels entered Nagasaki, after which from
seven to ten came annually. The annual value of cargo imported
amounted to from 7,000 to 10,000 kwamme of silver.

From 1641-1671 the trade between the Dutch and Japanese was
. carried on without tlie intervention of the Government,

In 1664 the Dutch began to purchase koban at the rate of 68
ynomme each, the market price at the time being 56 or 57 me. In the
course of four years 81,000 kohan were purchased. The profit was
divided between the people in the inner and outer town, but in 1666
it was divided according to the number of houses. Till the end of 1667
trade was carried on in silver currency, but owing to the latter becoming
scarce, gold was substituted, one kohan being reckoned at 56 or 57 me.

In 1672, a mode of trade called xliiM shubai was established.
Upon the discharge of goods from a ship, appraisers, appointed by the
merchants of Kioto, Bakai, Ozaka, Nagasaki and Yedo, resident in
Nagasaki, drew up a price list of the articles of import. This was
sent in to the Governor, who, with the Daikwan and Maehi-doshi-yori,
then forwarded a copy of it to the Dutch Captain, who agreed to sell
such of the goods as had prices affixed which came up to his ideas.
The merchants then tendered amongst themselves for the goods, the
highest tender ])eing taken. When the purchasers had taken
delivery of their goods, the captain informed the assembly of merchants,
from whom he received the price originally appraised. This practice
continued until 1684. In 1685, unrestricted trade was again established,
save only that the amount of imports was limited to 50,000 riyo,
and that raw silk could be purchased only by certain Japanese
merchants.

The value of the riyo was fixed at 68 Jne, the market price being
60 me : thus the Japanese received a profit of eight me on each riy6.

The chief articles of import were silk, of which about 1,000
kioavime of silver worth was imported, and piece goods, etc., about 2,000
kwamme worth.


138


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


Five per cent commission was levied by Government on eacli tan
of piece goods and every kin of silk, and 50 me on every 1,000 kivamvie
of drugs and miscellaneous goods.

In 1603 the Portuguese imported a quantity of raw silk, but there
were no purchasers. After waiting two years they applied to the
Governor, who reported the matter to Yedo, whereupon the Govern-
ment ordered certain merchants to buy it in 'proportion to their means.
This occasioned the formation of a sort of silk guild, the members of
which could trade in silk alone. But in 1654, the price of silk being
very high, the merchants sustained a heavy loss and began to trade in
other articles.

The dimensions of Deshima are : —

S. 118 ken 2 ft. 7 sun (a /i*en.=nearly 2 yards).

N. 96 “ 4 “ 9 “

W. 35 “ 4 “ 6 “

E. 35 “ 3 “ 5 “


The houses (25 in number), godowns, etc., were built by the 25
Japanese merchants. The wall, gates and bridge by Government.

The rent paid by Portuguese to their Japanese landlords amounted
to 80 kwamme of silver, but the Dutch refused to pay so much, and it
was finally settled that they were to jiay 55 kwamme, at the rate of 268
me Sfun for each ken in a house.

From 1661 the Dutch left Deshima every year on the 14th of
February with presents for the Shdgun, arriving in Yedo in March.
Previous to this they had been used to start in January.

In 1662 a bazaar for the sale of Iraari porcelain was opened at
Deshima by permission of the Government.

From 1654 the temple grounds of Go-shin-ji were used as a place
of burial by the Dutch.

The value of presents annually given by the Dutch to the Shdgun
was 21,500 me; to Nishi no Maru (heir apparent), 10,750 me; and to
the Court Officials, 33,020 me. From 1716 only two Dutch vessels
were allowed to come yearly, and the value of imports was fixed at
80,000 kwamme. The export of copper was fixed at 1,600,000 kin.
From 1744 the value of imports was reduced to 600 kwamme, and export
of copper to 650,000 kin. From 1746 the value of imports was raised to


AVOOLLEY: TIISTORIUAL notes on NAGASAKI.


1B9


1000 kwamme, and 3,100,000 kin of copper and 1000 riyo of gold were
allowed to be exported. From 1790 only one Dutcli vessel was allowed
to come.

The value of imports was reduced to 500 kin and the export of
copper was 600,000 kin.

The Dutch Captain was to proceed to Yedo once in every five
years, and the value of the presents was reduced by one-half.

After the edict of 1637, prohibiting their visits to Japan, the Por-
tuguese and Spaniards made several attempts to renew their intercourse,
but without success.

In 1639 the governor was dismissed for having sent a Namban
vessel away without having reported her arrival to the Yedo Governs
ment. Three other vessels came in this year, and Inouye Ohikugo no
Kami was commissioned to ord^r their immediate departure, andjo state
that a second infraction of the laws of Japan would be severely punished.

In 1640, on July 7th, a ship from Luzon arrived. It was seized
and the creiv were imprisoned in Deshima, 61 of whom were put to
death at Kishizaki on August 3rd, and the ship with its cargo consisting
of 60 kwamme of gold, gold ornaments and piece good-s; was sunk off
Sudzure in Nishidoinari. Thirteen of the crew, who stated that they
had come to Japan against their will, were spared and sent home on
September 12th in a Chinese junk to inform their countrymen of the
fate of their comrades and of the prohibition against the coming of for-
eigners. In 1663 the sunken cargo was presented to the Machi-doshi-
yori, who succeeded in raising over 45 .of gold. On September

30th six Bateren and three Japanese were shipwrecked off the const of
Loochoo, conveyed to Satsuma and thence to Nagasaki, where they
were itnprisoned.

On July 26th, 1647, two Portuguese vessels anchored ofi' YuwO-
jinui, with ambassadors from Goa, and asked permission to trade. Oxi
the 28th they entered the harbour and anchored off Minagi. They
refused to give up their arms and ammunition, saying that they intended
to return after they had presented their petition. On the 30th, Matsu-
daira Chikuzen no Kami arrived ; he was succeeded by the Kard and
soldiers of most of the daimi6s in Kiushiu. In consultation with the
Governor, it was decided that a bridge of boats should be stretched

3


VOL. IX.


140 WOOLLEY: HISTORIOAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.

across the harbour from Ogaini to Megami to prevent the ships escap-
ing. For the purpose of terrifying the foreigners, Sawada Kunaizaye-
mon, a retainer of.Oinura and a skilled horseman, is said to have
appeared on this bridge on a powerful chestnut horse in full armour,
brandishing a spear. In the course of a month troops from the various
daimiates 30,488 strong, and sailors to the number of 19,795 assembled
at ISTagasaki and took up positions on the islands at the entrance of the
harbour, on both shores of the hari)our, and at Fukahbri. Never before
in Japan had such an array of men gathered together to guard their
country against foreigners. All the roads, too, leading to Nagasaki
were guarded. On the 28th August Inouye Chikugo no Kami and
the Governor arrived from Yedo, and presented Matsudaira with a
letter from the Government recommending a lenient policy. The
ships were, accordingly, suffered to leave on September 4th, and
after a few days the troops dispersed.

The revolt of the farmers and peasants in Amakusa and Shimabara,
•vyhich broke out in 1637, may be traced far more to the exactions of their
tyrannical feudal lords than to the Government edicts prohibiting
the exercise of the Christian faith in Japan. An ignorant peasantry,
ground down by taxation to the lowest state of poverty and misery,
rose rather to take revenge upon their hated masters than to defend the
new religion, which they had in fact outwardly abjured. Many doubtless
remembered the munificence of tlieir Jesuit teachers in distributing
alms in money and kind, their skill in healing the sick and their promises
of eternal bliss in a future world. They had beard, too, of the ease in
which their neighbours in Nagasaki lived, and of the riches to be made
by commerce with the foreigners. They longed to throw off their yoke.
A pretence for revolt was wanted, and their leaders, a hand of reckless
rdniii anxious for their own aggrandizement, and enemies of lyeyasu,
found it in Christianity. Pretended miraculous manifestations of the
Divinity were made use of to incite the people, and they raised the
standard of revolt in the name of Christianity and fought and fell
beneath banners inscribed with the figure of God. They paid, however,
a fearful penalty for their folly, and died most cruel deaths, refusing to
the last to recant froin a religion, to which the sheer hopelessness of their
condition drbve them to yield a blind belief.


WOOLLEY ; HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI, 141

The following is a brief outline of the rebellion. It is needless to
remark that the accounts given by Japanese authors are highly embel-
lished and the figures grossly exaggerated.

The Nanushi of the village of Oyei, in Ainakusa, one Oyei Jihei,
had concealed in his house a picture of Jesus Christ, which was stolen
by Geusatsu, mounted by Akaboalii and secretly hung up before his
(Oyei’s) private altar. Oyei was at heart a Christian, and being de-
lighted at what he thought to be a divine manifestation, summoned
Gensatsu and the neighbours, who all bowed down before the picture.
As the news spread, the villagers round about assembled to the number
of 4000 or 5000. Mikae Toyemon, the retainer of Terazawa Hi^o
no Kami, in charge of the castle of Tomioka, ordered the people, to
disperse, and upon their refusal, some of his men tore down the picture
and trampled upon it. Their temerity cost tliom their lives. Oyauo,
Chijiwa, Asliidzuka and Akahoshi, some of the ringleaders of the plot,
then summoned to Oyei’s house the Nanushi of the neighbouring vil-
lages, and advised immediate revolt and the seizure of Tomioka.
"Whereupon leaders were chosen, aud ten white flags adorned with the
picture of God wmre got ready.

On October 1st, 1637, 8,300 men and 1,000 women with 300 stand
of arms assembled at Oyei Mura. Shiro Tokisada, son of the Kauushi
of Hara Mura, in Shimahara, wms chosen leader in chief.

Various miracles were wrought to please the people.

The plans Shiro laid before them were to seize Nagasaki, subdue
Kiusbiu, open intercourse witli foreign countries, invite the assistance
of a foreign army and thereby compel their lords to change the haz’sli-
ness of their imle, and, if they failed, to call on the name of the Lord
and perish in the attempt.

On October 9tb Haruda lyo, in charge of Karatsu, landed at Hondo
in Amakusa to assist Miake. The villagers falsely represented themselves
as Buddhists, and led him into a trip, in which Haruda’s men were set
upon at night in the temple of Sai-ho-ji, and it was with difiiculty that a
few reached the castle. Ashidzuka, who appears to have been the lead-
ing spirit in the rebellion, recommended that they should cross over to
Shimahara, Shiro, however, attacked the castle, but without success.
Ashidzuka aud other rmin, with 120 followers, then crossed to Shima-


142


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


bara, leaving Sliiro behind with 10,000 men. There they ^^’ere joined,
at Harn, by Kozayemon, Shiro’s fathei", and by most of the Nanushi
and villagers of the neighbouring districts. The Government rice
godown in Kami-Fukaye mura was seized, and 58,000 sacks of rice and
4000 sacks of daidzti, were conveyed to Hara in one day in boats.
Ashidznka and others broke into the castle of Shimabara in charge of
Matsukura Jimbei, and seized arras and ammunition, which were also
sent to Hara, whither they all ivithdrew. Ashidznka next directed
26,000 sacks of rice and otber provisions to be sent over from Amakusa,
and on November 7th Sliiro, with 10,000 men, arrived at Hara. In-
cluding women and children, the rebels now’ numbered 40,200. In Hara
was a castle once inhabited by a member of the house of Nabeshiraa, but
deserted since 1601. It w’as supposed to be irajoregnable and capable
of holding 40,000 to 60,000 men. ' The rebels repaired this and prepared
for a siege. The Government in Yedo, upon hearing of the extent of the
outbreak, were alarmed, and thought that a foreign army had come to
attack the country, By the advice of Mito Chiunagon, Itakura Naizen
no Kami, one of the ministers, W’as sent dowm with plenary powers.
He arrived on the 11th December, and on the 31st the siege was com-
menced. The particulars of the siege are too intricate to he interest-
ing to any modern readei’. Attack after attack ivas made on all sides,
resulting merely in the worsting of the Government troo^is. Itakura
applied to Yedo fur instructions. All the daimius in Kiushiu sent out
men, bringing the number of the attacking force up to 160,000. Ita-
kura’s attempts having ntteily failed, Matsudaira Idzu no Kami and
Toda Samon were sent to command the troops, and arrived at Shimabara
on January IStli, 1638. Itakura, hearing that he was to be superseded
in the command, made a final attempt, which ended in the rout of his
men and himself being shot.

Matsudaira made but little progress, although it was evident that
the besieged wei'e short of provisions. On 10th April, H6jo Awa no
Kami came down from Yedo to consult with Idzu. He advised im-
mediate action, and persuaded Nabeshima Kai no Kami to attack the
Demaru without orders from Idzu. Kuroda Sayemonosuke and Nagaoka
Kemmotsu, the leaders of the van of Hosokawa Etchiu no Kami’s men,
made a simultaneous attack on the Ote and respectively. Breaches


WoOLLKy : HISTORIGAL NOTKS ON NAGASAKI.


148


were now made in the castle, and the besiegers poured in and drove
the rebels to the Ilomiiaru, where they were utterly defeated, the finale
being a fearful massacre of men, women and children.

The castle fell on April 12th, 1G38, about seven mouths after
the breaking out of the revolt and after a siege of 102 days. H6j0 Awa no
Kami and Nabeshima Kai no Kami especially distinguished themselves.

Kozayemon, Shiro's father, was crucified at Nagasaki, and Shiro’s
head was exposed at the Ohato (Great Pier) for seven days as a warning
to the people. The heads of those who were decapitated were biuded
at Nishizaka, a suburb of Nagasaki. Their grave is called Arima
tsuka.

For their raisgovernraent Terazawa was stripped of all his domains
but Amakusa, where he finally committed hara-kiri owing to the intense
hatred the people bore him, and Matsukura Kai no Kami, Lord of
Shimabara, was permitted to disembowel himself.

Previous to the edict of 1636, prohibiting Japanese from going
abroad, they had been in the habit of visiting Tonquin, Annam, Taiwan,
Luzon, Macao, Cambtxiia and Siam.

It may lie mentioned that Japanese first went abroad for the sake
of commerce in 1592, when Shirayama Kozayemon of Nagasaki having
received permissiem from Plideyoshi to go abroad, and having built a
junk at Kiyddomari in Satsuma, went to Annam.

In the period Keicho (1596-1615) Tsuda Matazayemon went, to
Siam. That country was at war with ^ ppf a neighbouring tribe (?)
and, as the Siamese were being worsted, Tsuda and Yamada with 600
or 700 Japanese, who were living in Siam at the time, assisted them.
The King, as a reward, gave Tsuda his daughter in marriage and ap-
pointed Yamada to somehigh office, In the period Kwanyei (1621-1644)
Tsuda returned to Nagasaki and wms made the Otona of Zaimoku Alachi
and afterwards Siamese interpreter. Pie brought with him from Siam
a tree called Shaku Seudau (Melia Azedarach ?) and an image of
Buddha. The tree was divided into three parts, one being given to
Nabeshima, Lord of Saga, one to Heizo, and the third part used for the
image of Buddha in the temple of No-nin-ji.

In 1622 Araki Sataro went to Annam and had an audieuce with
the King. He married the King’s daughter, and received a document


144 WOOLLEY : HISTORICiiL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.

contaiuing the royal recognition of his relationship. [The original of
this doctmient was given to the Governor in 1681, and exhibited at the
exhibition in Nagasaki last year,]

In 1628, Hasegawa, the Governor of Nagasaki, wrote to the King
of Chaban (?), forwarding 20 huavme of silver for 100 catties of aloes-
wood, and requesting that better samples and full weight should be sent
in future. As a mark of friendship he presented the King, in the name
of the SIAgun, with a sword, and his consort and sisters with two

dresses each.

In this same year, Itakura Suwo no Kami received from the King
of Siam a present for the Sliogun of two elephants’ tusks and four pieces
of white mino. In return he sent from the Shogun a pair of gold
screens.

In this year, also, Hasegawa sent a letter to the Governor of
Luzon, thanking him for having sent an envoy to Japan, and presenting
him with two swords.

On July 9th, 1656, an ambassador from the King of Siam arrived
with presents for the Sh6gun, and asked permission for his countrymen
to come periodically. This was refused and the presents declined.
Some time after, however, the Siamese were allowed to trade at Naga-
saki. Chinese acted as interpreters.

In 1605, Ariina of Shimabara sent a vessel to Annam to buy aloes-
wood. She ivas driven by bad weather to Macao, and whilst undergo-
ing repairs, the sailors quarrelled with the Portuguese, who killed 50
of them and seized the treasure on board. On board a Namban. vessel
which arrived in June, was a Japanese who had seen the fight, and who
reported to the authorities that the Portuguese who had killed the
Japanese were on board another vessel then in port. Ariina had
received permission from the Government to burn this ship, but the
Christians w^arned the captain of his intention, and the vessel weighed
anchor and left with north-east wind. Arima, persued her to the east
of Yuw^jiina, where she anchored. A south wind sprang up and fire-
ships were sent against the vessel. She was destroyed on the 18 th of
December, 1609. Her cargo consisted of silk, treasure, embroidered
stuffs, chains and bracelets.


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


145


111 1641, two guard-houses were erected at ISfisliidomari and
Tomachi. Two daimios from the neighbouring provinces took each his
turn to be on guard in the. 4th month of every year. The men on guard
numbered 1,000 and were changed every 100 days.

In 1648, naval and military equipments were stored at the guard-
houses, and a conijilete staff of officers, soldiers, sailors and watchmen
was kept up.

Another guard-liouse was established at FukabOri, and the Kaf6 of
Nabeshima provided a contingency in case of necessity, the captain of
the guard being sent yearly from Hizen.

After the Sliimabara rebellion, Matsudaira Idzu no Kami was
ordered to inspect places in Nagasaki suitable for coast-guard stations
and signal fires. Look-outs were established at Nouio, Kosedo and
Hokwazau, That at Nomo was situated on the top of Hinoyama. Two
boats, manned by five cars each, with the words Nome imperial report-
ing boats ” on the sails, and with masts painted black in the middle and
white at each end, were attached to it. Two men were on watch
t^wenty days each throughout the year. When Chinese vessels
left, four were on duty. When a foreign ship appeared, she was
signalled at Nomo, the signal being taken up at Kosedo and passed
on to Jiuzenji Mura (the present Jiu nin Machi), and thence to the
Governor’s yashiki.

In 1689, a look-out was erected at Kosedo. Ten watchmen, ten
sailors and four boats, painted similarly to those at Nomo, formed the
complement of the guard.

In 1641 a look-out w^as erected on Hokwaztin and provided with
two farmers, who were changed every ten days. Upon the farmers
objecting to this service, Heizo appointed men of his own retinue in
1659, and after HeizO’s banishment, Government official.-^ were ap-
pointed. A signal fire was kindled on this mountain in case of danger :
it was taken up by another on Taradake Yam a and thence on to Yedo.
In October, 1764, the watch on Hokwazau was abolished. After this
in 1 808 a guard-house was erected below the old place.

In 1799 guard-houses were erected at Ich6yama and Ushibuka in
Ainakusa.

In 1653 or 1655 seven forts were built by Matsura Hizen no Kami


146


WOOLLEY ; HI8TOEIOAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


— three within the harbour of Nagasaki, at Odawo, Megami and
Kozaki, and four witliout it, at Shirasaki, Takaboko, Naginata and
Kagenowo (tlie two last on Koyagi Island).

Chinese tra<Iers had been in the habit of visiting Japan from very
early days : their visits became less frequent in the time of the Yuen
dynasty. During the Ming dynasty both Japan and China were troubled
by internal dissensions. The dwellers on the sea-coast of Kiuslui took
advantage of this state of lawlessness, and having crossed over to China,
ravaged the coast and committed all sorts of atrocities. On the sails of
their ships were written two characters meaning Hachiman, and owing
to this the Chinese called their vessels “ Bahan-sen,” “ Bahan ” being
the Chinese sound for these chai*acters and “ sen ” of course meaning
ship. Intercourse between the countries was in consequence partially
broken off by order of the Chinese Government, the only Japanese
vessels allowed to visit the ports of China being those licensed by Ochi
Yoshitaka,

At the restoration of peace, in the beginning of the reign of lyeyasu,
Chinese junks came and traded at Kagosliima, B6notsu, Kiyddoraari,
Kuchinotsu, Yokose Ura, 6mura, Karatsu, Hakata,Sliiraonoseki, Waka
no Ura, Sakai, Anotsu, Nambu, Kadzasa and Nagasaki ; but in 1666
they were forbidden to trade at any other place but Nagasaki.

Upon the arrival of a Chinese junk, some of the merchants of Naga-
saki went out to Kolaki to meet her and to make arrangements about
the lauding of cargo and the lodging of the officials and crew. As an
inducement to make the townspeople recant from Christianity, Hase-
gawa, when Governor, allowed them to lodge the Chinese, and charge a
commission on the cargo, which amounted to 10 per cent of the value of
general stores and one momme per tan of piece goods. In 1633 this
commission was reduced by one-half.

In 1636 the inspection of the cargo imported in Chinese junks
was introduced.

The following appears to be the mode in which trade was carried on
bet\.veen the Chinese and Japanese. Certain streets took it in turn to
control the trade. Merchants sent in their tenders to the Otoiia of the
street, the average of the three highest tenders being held to be the
price at which the goods were to be purchased. The Machi-doshi-yori


WOOLLEY : HTSTOLICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKT.


147


reported tlie price appraised to tlie Governor, who informed the Chinese.
In case of the latter refusing to accept this price, their goods were sent
back.

In 1672 the Otona of ITcliinaka Machi and Zaimokii Machi were
ordered to receive tenders, but disputes having arisen between the
merchants, the system of general tendering was abolished, and twelve of
the most influential merchants of Ki6to, Yedo, Ozaka, and Naga-
saki were chosen to tender on behalf of the merchants. As before, the
average of the three highest tenders was taken, and held to be the rate
at which the goods were to be bought.

In 1666 the Chinese were not allowed to lodge where they pleased,
but only in the street whose turn 'it was to control the trade.

The entrance and clearance of Chinese junks were first registered in
the time of the Government of Takenaka Uneme (1629-1 632).

In 1602 Chinese were permitted to bury their dead in the grounds
of Go-shin-ji, at Inasa, and this formed the precedent for the burial of
foreigners there.

In 1688-1704 a settlement for Chinese was formed at ’ Jiuzenji
Mura., which they could not leave without permission. Three Chinese
temples Avere built for the burial of the dead. Priests were sent for
from these temples, and festivals, which were formerly held at Go-shin-ji,
came to be held in the settlement. Yearly subscriptions, however, were
still paid to Go-shin-ji, and burials took place there now and then.

It may be interesting to know that by an order given to the Dutch
and Chinese interpreters on May 4, 1668, the import of the following
goods was prohibited : —

Trees and plants (except those used for medicine).

Vermilion.

Living animals.

Articles de Paris.

Gold lace.

Coral. ■

Foreign clothing (except flannel and woollen clothes).

Red oxide of lead.

Dutch Magemouo (round boxes ?).

Aloes- wood.


148


WOOLLEY : HI8TOEIOAL KOTES ON NAGASAKI.


Also that by an order dated 16tli September, 1715, the following
articles were prohibited to be exported : •

Gold.

Silver.

Gold and silver ware.

Arms and ammunition.

Portraits of warriors.

Swords and razors.

Edged tools.

Sulphur.

Oil, etc.

Lacquer.

Money coined in Kwanyei.

Rice, wheat, millet, brans and sorghum (except what was required
for ship’s use).

Silk.

Pongee.

Light silken fabrics.

Gx*ass cloth.

Ploss silk.

Ginned cotton.

Raw cotton.

Hemp.

Portraits of the Emperor, officials in full dress.

Obscene pictures.

Pictures of battles or strategic movements.

“ “ camps and castles.

I will conclude this paper by giving a short account of a visit paid
to Nagasaki by an English man-of-war in 1673, and by a Russian man-
of-war in 1804.

On July 9th, an English man-of-war, carrying 10 guns, arrived at
Nagasaki, and produced a letter said to have been given by the Japanese
Government about 44 years since to the captain of an English ship
which had touched at Hirado. Upon examination it was found that
this document was without any official seal.

, In reply to enquiries, the captain said that war between England


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL ROTES OK NAGASAKI.


149


and HoUanrl, and the idea that small profit would accrue to them if
they were to trade with Japan, had prevented their visiting the country
for some forty years ; that now their country was at peace with Hol-
land ; that they had no Portuguese on board, nor any articles of church
furniture ; that their religion differed from that of the Portuguese and
that they were willing to give up their arms and ammunition during
their stay. The Dutch told the Governor, with a view of influencing
him in his report to Yedo, that the English King had married a
daughter of the King of Portugal, and that friendship existed between
the two nations.

The English said they left England in Kovember, 1671, in com-
pany with two other vessels, and arrived off Bantam, in Java, in April,
1672, where they remained 40 days; that one ship went to Tonquin,
whilst the other two arrived at Singapore in June ; that one of these
then returned to Bantan), her cargo having first been transferred into
the vessel bound for Japan.

The vessel anchored off Nishidomari. Five guard-ships and two
ships with Chorji on board were appointed to watch her movements.
Permission to trade was refused, but as they ivere short of provi-
sions they were allow’ed to sell some of their goods. These realized
848 riyo 8 hi, 260 riyo 3 hi of which they spent in purchasing pro-
visions, etc.

On October 9th, 1804, a Eussian ship with four shipwrecked
Japanese on board visited Nagasaki. She anchored off YuwOjinm and
afterw'ards at Odawo. The Eussians said they desired to offer presents
to the Shogun and to make a treaty of friendship and commerce. Na-
beshima kept guard over the ship with seven large and a number of
small boats, while the Lords of Hizen, Chikuzen and Omura guarded
the approaches to Nagasaki by land and sea. On the 30th they were
allowed to live on shore. In December a house ivae erected in Mega-
saki where 19 Eussians (the Envoy and his staff) and the shipwrecked
Japanese livek for 17 days. People w'ere not allowed to look at or
associate with them. On 5th March, 1805, seven Eussians proceeded
in a boat from Megasaki to Ohata, and thence to visit the Governor at
Tateyama yashiki. The roads through which they passed were hung
with curtains on each side to prevent the Eussians seeing or being seen.


150


WOOLLEY : HISTORICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


The Governor informed them on the 6th, when they visited him again,
that Holland, Korea, China and Loochoo were the only countries with
which Japan had intercourse and that he could not receive their pre-
sents. Floss silk and rice were given them.

On the 9tli the Government received the shipwrecked Japanese,
and on the 10th the ship left.

The above notes will doubtless strike readers as being somewhat
disjointed, but the confused mass from Avhich I had to extract the
information rendered this almost unavoidable. On a future occasion I
hope to be able to supplement them by a more detailed account. I
have endeavoured to put ray gleanings into as readable, consecutive and
condensed a foi’m as possible, and trust they may not he quite devoid
of use or interest.


List of Authors Consulted xn Matsura Td’s Compilation.
Nagasaki Yawagusa.


do.

Sink 6.

do.

Dzushi.

do.

Jikki.

do.

Kiaku-genji.

do.

Nikki,

do.

Go YO Kibutsu Shoku.

do.

Ki.

do.

Yengi Riaku.

do.

Yengi liiyb.

do.

Nukigaki.

do.

Kagami.

de.

Kagami Hikaye.

do.

Shugai.

do.

Irai no Oboyegaki.

do.

no Shoki. .

do.

Jitsu Roku.

do.

Shizoku Hen.

do.

Shichiii Meisai Roku.


WOOLLEY : HISTOEICAL NOTES ON NAGASAKI.


151


Kiy6 Eiakki.

Amakusa Seibatsu Ki.

K6yei Kemmon Jikki.

Takatani Uji Nen rai Ki.

Seikoku Tsiislio Sambutsu Kiakki.

Matsuniai Sekijin Ikken Kikigaki.

Araki Uji uo Ki.

Kwambun jiu san ueu America Sen niiik6 Nikki.
Tenki Eei-d Ki.

Hizen Fii-clo-ki.

Wa-ji-ga.

Sai-ran-i-gen
Tensbo Ki.

Kwai-tsii Sli6-ku.


( 152 )


A MEMORANDUM ON THE COLEOPTEROUS GENUS
DAl^IASTER, Wrm NOTES ON SIX SPECIES
OR FORMS IN IT.


Ay George Lewis.


[Bead March 8, 1881,]

From an entomological point of view, the fauna of Japan is ex-
tremely interesting to the naturalist, as the country is sufficiently
removed from the Continent of Asia to preserve any peculiar forms
■which, may arise in it, and we thus find in the insect- world of the islands
a fair amount of endemicity. Added to this partial isolation is the
geograpical position of the islands : they cover in latitude 12 degress,
while the main island at its widest jmrt scarcely occupies four degrees
of longitude, and this gives a great variety in climate, with many local
influences arising from it. In all parts of the world, apterous forms
of life exhibit more local peculiarities than flying ones — for insects fly
many hundreds of miles, and thus distribute themselves over large
areas, and where immigration is easy, affinity in form usually prevails.

In Japan there is a large apterous beetle of singular shape
called Damaster. It is allied to Carabus, a genus found throughout the
whole of the Northern Hemisphere, but Damaster is peculiar to Japan,
and will afford therefore an excellent type for studying the way species
are modified by climate or by the local results of thermal change. In
the genus there are some half-dozen species, all differing inter sese,
and they are distributed throughout the length and breadth of the land.
We are justified, I think, in attributing the changes in form and colour,
which together constitute the several species, to the causes mentioned
here, for we cannot well believe that the variation results from the
intrusion by migration of insects from other lands, with which they
might interbreed. In Nagasaki there is a long, sub-tropical summer.


LEWIS: THE OOLEOFTEROUS GENUS DAMA8TEE,


158


with little change in the temperature from clay to night, and the
latitude gives little or no twilight. Here we find H. blaptoides Kollar,
measuring nearly 2i inches, black in colour and nocturnal in habit.
It lives under the shade of large evergreen trees, and we can imagine
that the sun rarely shines upon it. Crossing the Bay of Shimabara,
adjacent to Nagasaki, we leave a half-clayey," half-granitic soil for a
sandy one with small conifers, and there is a volcano of sufficient alti-
tude as to be in winter sometimes topped with snow. Here the climate
changes enough tO' have its. effect on our genus Hamaster.- The trees of
the locality are small, owing to the soil, and are easily penetrated by
the wind chilled by the mountains in winter, and by the sun in summer.
We find here H. Lewisi, Rye, a half-starved form of the Nagasaki
species. It measures 1 inch 8 lines, has shorter legs, and (observe !)
a bluish tint is visible' in some examples. The country between Shiraa-
bara and Hiogo is unfortunately unexplored, but in these two districts
there is no difference in soil and apparently none in vegetation or
climate, for although the difference in longitude is great, a degi’ee and a
half will cover the space in latitude. In Hiogo the Shimabara form of
Damaster is found. Yokohama is our next district, the neighbourhood
of which has been worked more or less by entomologists since the
opening of Japan. The species here is D. paudurus Bates, a slightly
modified form of the last. The thorax is shorter, the general outline
less elegant, and the individuals more constantly blue. Indeed, in the
higher regions about Nikkd, to which place the species extends, I have
procured examples with metaUie blue thorax and elytra. These bright
specimens came from altitudes where, on the 16th June, snow remained
under the trees, and where in the end of September birch trees had lost
all their foliage.

At Akita and on northward to Awomori there is another species,
D. viridipennis Lewis, which has a bright crimson metallic head and
thorax and elytra green, somewhat obscure on the disc, but brightly
metallic at the margins, and it is in fact one of the most highly coloured
of Coleoptera in Japan. Now the climate of this district is many degrees
colder than that of Nikkff, especially on the west coast, for there the full
strength of the northwest wind — the cold wind in .Japan — 'is felt, and
prevails generally throughout tlie winter, and under these conditions we


154 LEAVIS: THE COLEOPTEEOUS GENUS DAMASTER.

find the brightest species in the genus. In Yezo there is D, rugipennis
Motschulsky. It has the thorax nearly as bright as the last, with deep
purple-coloured elytra, and in the south it is also about the same size,
but a specimen obtained from Cape Soya measures only an inch in
length.

The climate of south Yezo is more severe than that of the north of
the main island. In Satpoi’o, during the winter of 1878, the mean
temperatures for January and February were 21 and 25 degrees
Fahrenheit respectively, but we need not insist much on the qualifying
tendency of this inclemency, for the ground is covered with snow
throughout the winter, and this Avould have a very genial effect on both
animal and vegetable life. The summer of Yezo gives a mean of 05°
Fahr., which is probably very little less than that of the Akita district.

Now we have traversed the main islands, tracing .Damaster from
the south to the north without finding in any one locality two species of
the genus, and without finding any one limited to a small district
only. The species which are found occupy wholely the area to which
they belong, and these areas are suflSciently extensive to give to each
one a fair range. In concluding our researches, the question naturally
arises; — Are there any insular forms? Do any of the islands off the
coast posses Damasters difierent from the type ? In Sado there is a
fine species allied in colour to D. pandurus, but which is otherwise very
distinct. It is remarkable for the great' crassitude of its head and
thorax, and I have named it D. capito.

From these notes can any inductions be drawn which bear on the
variation we see displayed in the different members of the genus ? As
Damaster becomes separated from the parent type in the south, and
we follow it from the temperate to the colder regions, it gradually
decreases in size. And diminution is a common feature in nature under
like circumstances, for as we ascend a mountain we see a stunted
growth in plants which at a lower altitude give out vigorous branches.
Experiments prove also that light checks the development of growth
in vegetation, and perhaps the same result might be obtained from
trials in the animal kingdom, for Damaster is smaller as it becomes
diurnal. More can be said regarding colour. The species in travelling
northward lose the warmth of the sub-tropical summer, while from


LEWIS : THE COLEOPTEROUS GENUS DAMASTEE. 155

being nocturnal they become diurnal in habit, and thus rejoice in the
temperature essential to their nature and well-being. When for the
first time we meet with colour, we still have a night-roving creature,
but we have entered the region of twilight, and most likely D. pandurus
is crepuscular, or even perhaps diurnal in the early days of spring.
D, viridipennis and D. rugipennis, the bright coloured species, are
clearly both diurnal, for I have taken them, on several occasions crossing
the path in broad day-light, or feeding on the exuding sap of trees at
noonday. When also we consider the mountain varieties of D.
pandurus, how that metallic colour appears in them while the valley
specimens are black, it is naturally suggested to us that they see more
daylight than those inhabiting the warmer valleys. We are accustomed
to see bright-coloured insects glistening in the sun, and to observe the
more sombre ones appear at night. The gay butterfly at noon shows
a great contrast to the dusky moth which visits the lamp, and this is
explained by one of the laws of natural selection. The males single out
the brighter-coloured females, while the females favour the brighter males,
and this in a long series of races perpetuates the very pleasing result we
all observe in nature when we admire the colours of diurnal insects.
There is, I think, little doubt that in Daraaster colour has gradually
appeared from a dark species. The eye in nocturnal insects is a highly
developed organ, but it cannot be adapted for especially catching colour,
for colour itself is dependent on solar rays ; as for instance the scarlet
geranium looks black as night closes in, and could not attract a moth
by its brightness nor by any great contrast it might show to the
surrounding vegetation. We may think that in twilight or moonlight
we perceive colour in the landscape, yet it is impossible to define or
represent the obscure hues. When light is absolutely excluded from
the life of an animal, the eye becomes altogether obsolete, and there are
many instances of this in cavern insects. But why has it been assumed
that all the members of the genus have emanated from the south, from
D. blaptoides ? Because as truly as we see diurnal insects as a rule are
bright, so we observe throughout the whole range of the insect-world
that the nearer we touch the tropics the larger the species become,
and we also can often see this in individuals of the same species, by
following it to its most southern range.

VOL. IX.


4


( 156 )


THE CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OF PJ&RE GIOVANNI
BATISTA 8IDOTTI IN JAPAN PROM 1709 TO 1715.


Translated from the M of Arai PIaku-seki, by the

Rev. W, B. Wright.


[Mead March 8, 1881.]

On the 6th day of the 12th month of Boshi (the Rat), in the 5th
year of the Hoyei period (Jan. 16, 1709), I heard at the Sei-tei (?) that
in the proceeding 8th month there was a wild man who had come and
stayed in an island of the Osumi province. Except such words as
“ Nippon,” Yedo,” ‘'Nagasaki,” and the like, his language could not
be understood. He wrote on paper a number of circles, and jiointiug to
them said, “ R6ma, Namban, Roxon, Kasteria, Kirishitsn,” and so on.
When he said “ Roma ” he pointed to himself. The affair was reported
to Nagasaki. When enquiry was made of the Hollanders, they said :
“ROraa is the name of a place in Italy and belongs to the Lord of the
Teu-shu-kiyo sect. Roxon, Kasteria and so forth we don’t know at all.
Also, when they asked men af Nankin, Ningpo, Amoy, Taiwan, Canton,
Tonkin and Siam, they said they bad heard that Kirishitan was the
name of a corrupt sect, but they did not know anything more. The
government told this to me. ■ AVhen I heard this I said tliat I could not
understand the fact of his language not being comprehended. The
authorities once more asked why. I replied, “ I have heard and remem-
ber what men of old said, viz., ‘ as the men of that country understand
very well the tongues of all lands, in former times when the southern
barbarians first came, as they were able to understand very well the
languages of our country in five or six days’ time, at last they also


AYKIGHT GAPTUEE AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN. 167

preached their doctrine.’ That doctrine was spread abroad in this
country, and for many years the men of that country were always
coming and going. When their doctrine Avas prohibited, a great number
of my countrymen Avho followed that teaching AA'ere sent over to that
land. Therefore the men of that country perhaps will understand the
language of this land very Avell. If those who come seeking anything in
our country did not understand this language, how will they accomplish
their desire ? But as the languages of the Five Parts are not the same,
and among them are ancient words, I don’t know to what part of our
country the language they have learnt may belong. As it is nearly
a hundred years since the men of that country have ceased to come here
in the language of that time there will be differences from the present
mode of speech. If Ave tell the Roman’s words to men Avho knoAV those
old words, his words Avill not be beyond comprehension. I don’t
understand what the Hollanders mean. Again Roxoii from the time of
the Sd and Gen until now being Avritteu Roson, jars that haAm come
from that country are thought convenient by ray countrymen to keep tea
in, and the name of Roson jars is understood by every one ; and Kasteira
being a country near the land called Italy, formerly there was a time
Avhen cakes made and sent from that place were brought here, and now,
too, there are such cakes. These things eAmn such as I understood, ;
when I heard. Then is it not very absurd that men of thosb pkrts
should not be able to understand ? ” So I said, and the government
thought so too. Then I heard that that man, in accordance Avith the
law of Nippon, must be punished. The year passed over. As on the
10th day of the 1st month of Kichi in the 6th year (Feb. 19, 1709)
there Avas court mourning (for lyenobu), this matter could not be
heard. That year also came nearly to an end. In the beginning of the
11th month of last year the government said ; " The foreigner Avho came
to Osumi will soon arrive here. You must investigate the cause of this
affair.” Also they copied and sent to me the letter sent from Kago-
shima last year to the officials of Nagasaki. The reason of this was,
that they did not yet know the cause of his having come to Japan.
Again, as Avhat I said Avas previous to this, they summoned me to
the Shogun to cause me to make enquiries. And if it Avere only the
Nipponese language, I could have understood his language a little, but


168 WEIGHT : OAPTUEE AND CAPTIVITY OP PEEE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN.


as the Dames of places and men, and that doctrine had many peculiar
sounds, and tliis doctrine was prohibited ; as there were things not
understood, too, by the Hollander interpreters, truly this matter is
difficult. With respect to this, as I thought there might be some
translations of these words in the commissioners’ office, I said, “ If there
are such books, be so good as to lend them to me.” The officials were
ordered to do so, and three books came from the office. When they had
lent them and I looked into tliem, the principal doctrines of that religion
apjjeared, but those words were not translated. But in them were one
or two things not unworthy of attention. So then having heard that
that man was come, they summoned him on the 22nd day of the same
month to the commissioners’ office. On the previous day I met the
officials of the commission, Yokota Bitehiu no Kami and Yanagisawa
Hachir6zayemon, and made an appointment about this matter. On that
day, just after the hour of mi (11) I went to meet him there (Kirishitan
Yashiki is at Koishikawa), and having met the commissioners, I saw the
things he had brought with him. I saw money newly coined in this
country and vestments made of white linen, and on the back a red stamp-
with the name of Kara in this country. As 1 showed them also to
the commissioners and others, there could be no doubt. Though they
thought it so strange as not to be able to understand it, having all
finished looking they called the interpreters, wlio had been sent from
Nagasaki with this man. (The chief interpreter was called Imamura
Genzaj'einon Hidemari, the assistants Shinagawa HeijirO and Kafuku
Kiz6. I don’t know the jiroper names of these two.) When I saw these
men I turned to them and said : “Please say to the commissioners,

‘ Formerly, when the Namban came to Nagasaki, there wei’e interpreters
of their tongue in Nippon, and before that religion was forbidden by
law, there were also interpreters ; but since those men have all died, there
will not be any who understand this branch of learning. Much more,
from the commencement of the prohibitory laws, even by mistake to
have spoken of these matters invites severe punishment. Although
people may have heard and known them, they do not speak at all of
them. So then as 70 or 80 years have passed away, there won’t be any
one who can know that language. As the languages of the Five Parts
are not the same, for exanaple now, if we spoke the Mutsu dialect to a


WEIGHT : CAPTUEB AND CAPTIVITY OP PERE SIDOTTI IN JAPAK. 159

JSTagsaki man there would be many words not understood. But while
this is so, yet because they are all our mother tongue, if we smppose
^that’ to mean ‘this even if we are not certain of all, we have a
general notion of the meaning. If I look at the map of the world, Italy
and Holland are within the sanie continent of Europe, and not so far
separated as Nagasaki and Mutsu. Therefore if we suppose that you
speak with the Dutch language to an Italian, seven or eight words out of
ten will be understood. But when you are speaking on behalf of govern-
ment, it won’t do to speak by conjecture: you must learn to speak
correctly. The present mode, too, is different from former modes of
■speech. Now we don’t use the former mode of public speaking. Since it
is necessary for me to understand this man’s language, even though the
interpreters don’t understand all his words, yet let them make a con-
jecture and tell me, and I also, thinking that their words correctly agree
with the' meaning of his words, will accept and use them even though
I don’t understand. Therefore in conjecturing their meaning, though
they should mistake them a little, it will be no crime. Of course as they
have not studied this language, although there may be some things not
understood, please don’t blame this.’ ” They replied that they agreed
with all this. When it was past three o’clock he was called out, and
two men, one at each side, kept guard, and he saluted the persons
present. They ordered him to sit down, and then the commissioners
•came to the side of a table. (That house faced the south and there was
a wooden verandah ; the table was placed three feet from it. The
commissioners sat near the verandah, but I sat a little in the rear.
The chief interpreter was on the west side of the verandah. The
assistant interpreters knelt on the east sidCj, As the Roman had come
from a distance in a norimon he could not walk ; therefore even in
•coming from the prison he came in a l^a^o. Therefore, too, the two
men held him up by the armpits. When he had sat down by the table,
one horse-soldier and two foot-soldiers were beside and behind him,
and knelt on mats. The rest of the arrangements were similar to this.)
His height was over six feet; he was taller than ordinary men, his
head the shape of a censer, his hair black, his eye deep set, a high
nose, and he wore a brown stuffed small-sleeved Nipponese pongee silk
robe. This garment he had received from the Lord of Satsuma. Next


160 'WRIGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN.

the skin he wore a white calico shirt. (When he sat down he made
the ceremony of the sign of some letter with his right hand on h's
forehead, and afterwards he always did the same. I have written the
shape of it at the end of this book.) So then the commissioners spoke
to the Eoraan through an interpreter. When they did so, he made an
obeisance and replied. Then the commissioners said, that as the weather
was very cold they wished to give him a garment; but he would not
receive it. The reason was, as I heard, that he was not allowed by
the rules of his religion to receive from any but disciples. “ But since
such like as food was necessary to sustain precious life that he might
accomplish the commands of his King, it was quite enough to receive
the benevolence of this country by eating its rice I How could he
oppose this rule of his religion and receive clothes ? As he is wearing
a garment which he received at first- in Satsuma, he is not cold, and
they must not distress themselves.” After this talk was ended, all
the commissioners saluted me and bid me sit down beside them. And
that day I made no other enquiries except that I bid the interpreters
ask as to the condition of the Roman country, and heard the Roman’s
reply. (I brought the map of the world and enquired the state of the
various countries. This map, being made in Japan, was not precise ; but
as I had heard that there was an old raaj) in tlie commissioners’ office,
they promised to bring it.) When they asked him about this matter,
I found that it was not so difficult to understand as I thought it would
be. Only, as his words were a mixture of the dialects of the Five Parts
spoken with his native accent, though I thought the words were so and
so, I had some doubts. He also, thinking we did not understand him
well, often repeated the same words over, but there were a good many
mistakes in his talk. And moreover, he pronounced the names of those
places and persons according to the manner of his country, but enquired
carefully, and distinguished the names wmll, and as the interpreters
had learned the Dutch language well, be taught them to pronounce
what, led by former habits, they could not pronounce as the Roman
did. Also after one hour of questioning I myself conversed with him.
As it was now evening I informed the comnissioners that I would come
again, and then was about to return home. Just then the Roman,
turning to the interpreter, said : “ The cause of my coming to Nippon is


WKIGIIT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OP PERB SIDOTTI IN JAPAN. 161


to respectfully teach my doctrine and thus benefit all, and save men.
But since coming to Nippon, I have caused trouble to many, which
distresses my conscience. Since I arrived here, this year has nearly
ended. The weather is cold ; the climate, too, is severe and snow
will soon fall. It is truly a source of sorrow, that men, beginning with
these Samurai, should have to guard me day and night. I suppose the
reason of thus guarding me is from the fear that I may run away.
My coming without fear over many thousand miles of wind and waves,
is that at all hazards J may come and tell the message of my Lord to
Nippon. I have come by my own desire. And so I shall certainly
not leave and go elsewhere ; and though I ran away, I could not stay
one day in a place unknown, as I am not like the men of this country.
But if you are guarding me by the Shdgun's command, it would not bie
right to 1)0 negligent in this. The daytime does not matter, but as the
night is truly miserable for the guards, put on manacles and fetters
and place me bound in the prison. If you should do so, the night
guards will be able to sleep. Please mention this to the commissioners.”
When the commissioners had heard this, they thought it very frightful.
I said to them : “ I should not have thought him so deceitful ; ” and the
prisoner having heard me, and seeming to dislike me very much, Said ;
“ It would be shameful for any one not to apeak the truth ; much more
since there is a special commandment of my religion with respect to
telling lies. From the time I came to understand the principles of this
religion until now, I have not told any untruths. Notwithstanding,
how is it that you have said such a thing of me ? ” I asked him, “ In
what you said now, did you say, ‘ the year being nearly over and the
climate cold, it is unendurable to see these guards having to keep watch
day and night ’ ” ? “ Yes,” he replied. “ If so, then, I think you spoke

deceitfully, because it is considered very important, and Is by command
of the government ; and since the commissioners have received orders
and so commanded you to be guarded, as they are anxious that nothing
untoward should happen to you, inasmuch as your clothes are thin,
they wished to give you clothes, but you won’t receive those garments,
If it is as you now said, why do you cause them such anxiety ? If you
don’t care on account of your religious rule, why is it that at all evente
you don’t care for the sake of those who are in charge of you ? There*"


162 WRIGHT : OAPTORE AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE STDOTTI IN JAPAN.

fore if wliat you said now is true, what you said before is a lie. Any-
how explain to me what is your meaning.” He replied : “ Since I have
heard your words, I think that what I said before was a inistadke, there-
fore I will receive the garment, and set the commissioners’ minds at
rest,” The commissioners were glad that he had spoken such a good
thing. The Eoman, turning again to the interpreter, said ; “ If it is all
the same, I humbly wish not to receive silk I’obes, — Only cotton ones.”

As it had grown dark during this talk, they took him back to prison,
and I, too, went back to my house. On the 25th evening I called the
interepreters to ray house, and asked some things I had not understood
the day liefore. Again on the 25th I went there and met tlie commis-
sioners, and we summoned the Roman once more. On this day the map
of the world that was in the commissioners’ house was brought, and
I inquired many things about R6ma and rather in detail. He said :
“This map was made more than 70 years ago, and even at Roma
there are not many like it ; but in some parts it is unfortunately frayed
and torn. If these were mended, it might be handed down to the future.”
This day we spent in converse from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and sent him
back. That day he proffered his thanks a. second time for the cotton
clothes to the commissioners. I suggested that they should go and
see the interior of the prison, and went as guide ; and when they arrived,
they saw on the north side of the prison a house. Formerly the
teachei’s of that doctrine who had returned to orthodoxy were put
thei’e. There ivere living in it an old couple ; as the commissioners
came, they went out to meet them. These were the children of some
criminals, and having become slaves thereby, were given as servants
to some one kept here, and they had become man and wife. These had
not received that doctrine, but as they had been servants to Christians
from childhood, they were not allowed outside the prison. Well, they
looked at that prison. It was large, separated into three by thick
boards ; they had placed the missionary in the west room. He had
cut red paper into the shape of a cross and pasted it on the west wall,
and was reciting his prayers, so as to read them under the cross. To
the south of this dwelling was another house. There the warders
kept watch. After I had seen these things I returned home. On the
30th I went again. This day, as the commissioners said I need not


WRIGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OP PERE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN. 1B3

go with them, I did not go. We enquired more in detail this day
what we had asked briefly some days before. So the day passed over.
What we had enquired about before only related to his country. We
had not asked the cause of his coming here, and the object of his
religion. He used to explain the matters of his religion, whenever
the words came up, but I made no reply. On the next day I said to
the authorities, “ Up to yesterday this man’s examination has lasted
about three days. Now I can understand his words without mistake,
and I think that he can understand my words well. Henceforth I
think it would be well to enquire the cause why he has come. If not,
as assuredly his talk will be about the principles of his religion, perhaps
the commissioners will come together and you will be pleased to order
me to hear the reason of this matter.” They signified their approval. I
also told the commissioners and bid' them meet. On the 4th of the
twelfth month I went to the commissioners’ office, and the commissioners
also met there. They had him out of prison, and I asked him why he
came to Nippon, and what doctrines he came here to spread. When
I had done so, he rejoiced very much, and said : “ Six years ago I heard
that I was to come here as a messenger, and enduring many thousand
miles of wind and waves, at last I have arrived at this capital. But
as this day, if I lived in ray own land, would be the beginning of New
Year, a time when all men are rejoicing together, I think it truly a
joyful thing that to-day, for the first time since I came to Japan, I am
asked about my religion.” (In that sect at E6ma perhaps the calendar
may be different on the 4th of 12th month.) He spoke fully about his
religion. His doctrine was different in no respect from what was in the
three volumes lent from the commissionors’ office. Only there were a
few verbal differences, and the names of places and men were spelt
differently, all the sounds being slightly altered. In respect of general
knowledge and good memory even at Rdma he was considered very
learned. In astronomy and geography the Nipponese could not come ’
near him at all. I enquired as to the ancient matters at Koma, and
he said ; “ There are many kinds of learning there ; among these I am
acquainted with 16.” For example, as to astronomy and so forth, the
first day I met him, as the day was nearly ended, I enquired of the
commissioners, “ What hour may it be ? As there is no bell to


164 WEIGHT : OAPTITKB AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN.

strike the hoar in the neighbourhood, I don’t know.” Then turning
his head and observing the position of the sun, and looking at his own
shadow, bending his fingers, and calculating, he said : “ In my coun-

try’s fashion, it is such a division of such an hour, of such a day, of
such a month and year.” This was by the triangular sun-dial method,
and appeared very simple to him, but I don’t think you would say it
was very easy.

Again, I opened the map of the w'orld, made in Holland, and going
through all parts of Europe, at last I asked, “ Where is B6ma ? ” but
as the names were written in small barbarian letters, even the inter-
preters could not understand. But he said, “Is there a Chiruchisusuya ? ”
" There is not,” replied the interpreter. “ What is it ? ” I said. He
said, " In the Dutch language it is called hassuru, in Italian compass.”
When I said, “ I have one,” and taking it out of my pocket gave it, he
said: “This is not quite serviceable, because its point is shaky; but
it is better than nothing.” Seeing that there was in the map a measur-
ing scale painted small, he took a pen, copied those numbers and using
that compass, calculated the minute number. That map was on the
table, his body on a seat in the garden, but stretching out his hand, he
looked out a line drawn like a spider’s thread on that small painted
space, reaching with the compass a part his hand could not get to, so
as to be able to count on both sides, and saying, “ Be pleased to look
here,” he pointed with the compass to it. So when I looked, the point
of the compass had stopped within a small circle dike the eye of a
needle. The interpreter said that on the side of that circle the word
“ Rctma ” was written. Besides this, I asked about Holland and all its
provinces, and he knew them all without a mistake as before ; and when
we looked for Nippon in the map, and asked, “ Where is Yedo ? ” as
before, he said, “ Here it is.” And when we looked at the place, it was
written “ Yedo ” in foreign letters. It appeared that these things were
all fixed, but I imagine that if he had not been aceurate in these things,
it would truly be difficult to do. I said, “ If I studied all these things,
could I acquire them ? ” “ Truly, they are easy,” he replied. Again 1
said, “ As I don’t know mathematics w'ell, perhaps it would be difficult.”
“ By no means ; even without knowing mathematics, you can learn it
very easily,” said he. And again he was very careful to show his


WEIGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE SIDOTTI IN JiPAN. 165

approval, even in small things. When he sat beside the table in the
garden, he first folded his hands and made a bow, and with his right
hand he made the sign on his forehead, and afterwards closing his eyes,
sat down, but like a statue, without any movement. Whenever the
commissioners rose up, he also stood up and made obeisance and then
sat again. When they came back to their seat, he also stood and made
a bow. Every day he acted in the same manner. Once, on seeing a
commissioner sneeze, he looked at him and repeated a form of incanta-
tion, and then turning to the interpreter he said : '' The weather and

climate are cold. Can’t you put on another coat ? My countrymen are
careful about sneezing. Formerly, people in my land were everywhere
seized with this sneezing sickness.” Again, the interpreters using the
Eatin language, corrected the mistakes in his use of the Nipponese
language. When they did so, he praised them highly. I having heard
their words, laughed and said, “ The interpreters have only imperfectly
learned the Dutch language, and their old habits can’t be done away,
which are unlike the present mode of speaking. Of course you are
used to our language.” Again, as he could not say in our language the
words, ‘‘In the Dutch men-of-Avar there are placed in the sides many
weapons; these are in three compartments — nii<3dle, upper, and lower,
and they stick the great guns through the port holes,” and even to say
it by a figure was not very easy, I stretched out my left hand
sidewise, aud sticking out three finger tips of my right hand between
the four fingers, I shewed them to him, and he said, " It is exactly so,”
and turning to the interpreter said, “It is very clever.” Again when I
enquired how far the country of Ndw'a Oranda is from here, he did not
reply. I asked a second time, and turning to the interpreter, he said :
“ In the great laws of my religion there is nothing more important than
that about murder. How can I ttdl people and help them to find other
countries?” AVhen I heard his words, not being able to comprehend them,
I asked through the interpreter, “ How does he mean ? ” He said,
“ Even though I should know, I must not answer matters about those
countrifcs.” Once again, when I asked his opinion, he said. As I have
only lately seen the people of Nippon, I don’t know matters relating to
Nippon, but if you were an inhabitant of my country you would do fine
things. As N6wa Oranda is not far from here, if this person should


166 WRTGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OP PBRE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN.

desire to take that country, it would be very easy. Therefore I refuse/’
said he, “ plainly to tell the way there or to show how to conc[uer any
one’s country.” I heard this and felt sorry the commissioners too should
have heard it, and said, with a laugh, “ In regard to what I have now
heard, even if I had that desire, as there is a strict law in my country,
I could not send even one soldier there.” All his examination was in a
similar style.

"VYheu he came to speak about his religion, it appeared to be not
in the slightest respect like the true way. Wisdom and folly became
suddenly interchanged in him ; at first I had thought him very intelli-
gent, but when he began to explain his doctrine, he became like a fool ;
it was just as if one had heard the words of two men. At this point,
thongli I knew that although that Roman learning is well accustomed
to deal only with matter and mechanics, and is acquainted with things
derived from matter, yet it is not acquainted with things above matter ;
yet I thought that perhaps the doctrine of the existence of a Creator
may not be &lse. So then after that our talk ended.

I presented two volumes to the government, in which I had written
the main points of our conversation. As it already had been distinctly
determined, an order was given by the Shdgun to the commissioners to
this effect : " The religion of Yasohas been prohibited in Nippon from

of old. Now with respect to that Roman’s coining here, since he says
that he came here to complain that former messengers were truly not
deserving of punishment, he must have come to bring letters from R6ma.
However, he has come deceitfully without such letters to our land.
Even if his words Avere true, Ave must regard the subsequent circum-
stances Avith suspicion. But since he says he is an envoy from his
country, we must not put him to death. After this we shall Avait for the
production of testimony as to what he says, and deal accordingly.” I
thought to myself, — ^Hereafter, too, Romans Avill be continually coming
here. Therefore, for the sake of the future, I wrote doAvn all the cir-
cumstances of the present matter, said to the government that I would
present it, and when I had written it, did so.

A little while after this the Shdgun died, and in the 4th year of the
Bhdtoku period (1714), the winter of K6go, the couple who were ser-
vants of the Yaso teacher wha had conformed to orthodoxy confessed


WEIGHT : CAPTUEE AND CAPTIVITY OF Pi)EE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN. 167

openly. [This teacher’s name was Kurokawa Jhan. I dont know
well whether his true name was not Franchisuko Shhan ; and the names
of the servants were — the man, Ohdsuke ; the woman, Haru.] They
said : " Formerly when our master was alive; he secretly taught us his

doctrine ; but we did not know that he acted contrary to the laws of
the land forbidding the religion of Yaso, when he taught that doctrine.”
Now that we have become very old, we have seen how this Roman, not
regarding his life for the sake of religion, has come many thousand
miles, is captured and dwelling in prison, and loath as we are to lose the
short span of this life, yet as it is a fearful thing to fall into the soul
prison, we have received the doctrine from him and become believers.
As it would be opposing the goodness of the government not to confess
these things, we confess thus much. However it may turn out for us,
we ask that we may be dealt with for our crime according to the laws.”
When they confessed, the commissioners separated the two from each
other. The next year (1715), in the 3rd month, when the Hollanders
came to Nippon, we interpreted the Roman’s words. The crime of
having secretly given instruction to the old couple in opposition to his
former words was examined into, and he was bdtmd in prison. Then
he showed his real thoughts ; raising his voice, he dfbused the commis^
sioners, called out . the names of the old couple, and strengthening
their faith, ceased not day and night advising them to hold steadfast
until death. The Hollanders wdio came this year said they had heard
that Tomas Tetorunon, who went first to Peking, went there, but
immediately returned to Roma. The reason wms, that when he came
first to Peking, they heard that he could not remain because he was hated
by the people of Peking. And now this man’s coming to Nippon is
perhaps unknown to his country people ; but perhaps if we reflect, he
may have committed some crime in his native land, and in accordance
with the laws of the land was to be put to death ; but having thought
how he could expiate his crime, as he wished to come here and do
something to be of advantage for his country, perhaps the Roman
government thought, “ If he should go to Nippon and bring about
intercourse with our country, truly it would be good for us ; and even
though he should b^ killed in accordance with the law there, ive don’
care.” The Hollanders said to me that it was probably in accordance


16.8 WEIGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OP PERE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN.

with that wish that he had been sent to Nippon. What the Hollanders
said, too, was reasonable ; but I don’t think it was so. In ray opinion,
they thought the period had arrived when the religion of Yaso, as they
observed it, should be spread, and sent him to Nippon to try. If I ara
asked why, when I consider the gold and copper coins coined here
which he had with him, I see that when I first heard of his having with
him Ogon and other money and iron cash, he said : “ In my country

gold and silver is not sought for, but through the alms of all Europe
plenty comes into the country.” Also he said that “ much gold goes
out into the country of Roxon, and from all parts of Nippon much gold
and silver goes forth and is taken by the Spaniards.” And said
he, “ Without the trouble of enquiring of these things in my native
country, yet if I wrote a letter to Roxon an answer would come
immediately to Nippon.” These things were fixed in my memory and I
did not umlerstand at that time why he came to Nippon, but I thought
this : When he lived in his own land, he heard that the gold and iron
coins had become altered in Nippon, and thought, perhaps, people may
have become poor there ; if so there will certainly be distress. When
the people are suffering, the command of the government prohibiting the
religion of Yaso will not be kept. Eveu though it be observed, if I drew
people with money to this doctrine, that prohibition will cease. And so
he may have come to Nippon. After this we had no talk about the
mone 3 ^ However, on the 7th day of the 10th month of this year, that
ChOsuke died. He was 55 years old. After the middle of the months
the Roman also becoming ill, died on the 21st day of the month. . He
was about 47 years of age.

As there is something I had mentioned to the government
previously, I now write these things in full which were asked and replied
to, in three volumes. When I first wrote all the circumstances of this
affair, I copied out the whole of what the Nagasaki ofiicials told the Yedo
commiasioners, and advised the government of it. In it I wrote what
he said of all, foreign countries. In the end I have written all the
conversation that passed between us. As it is now a long time since
this happened, there are many things forgotten. As to the meaning of
those words and his language, there may be many blunders. The things
in it relating to all foreign countries I will publish and shew to any one


WRIGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OP PURE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN. 169

who seeks to know fully about foreign countries; but the things
written at the close of the book might be shown to any one, yet if
the government should ask about this, it can be said that it would
be wrong to shew them to other persons.


FLY SHEET (tHE FIRST COMING OP THE ROMAN TO NIPPON).

At a village named Kuriu, in the island of Yakushima, in the
country of Hamo and province of 6sumi, a fisherman named Kuboura
and some others of the province of Awa came, and staying there, were
engaged in fishing. On the 28th day of the 8th month of the Rat, in
the 5th year of the H^yei period (Oct. 10,1709), the seven men
were in their boat, and came to the part of the sea lying out from
Yndomari village in Yakushima ; more than three ri away from the
land they saw there was a ship larger than they had ever seen before.
As these seven men were returning to Kuriu, a boat was lowered from
the ship, a sail hoisted, and they came towards the fishermen. As they
came rowing towards them, and were only 10 ken away, they saw in
that boat 10 men such as they had never seen before. One was paddling.
They came quickly on, but the fishermen got to land, and that boat
returned to the ship. That evening the villagers looked and. saw out
at sea from a village of Yakushima named Onoma the many-sailed
ship that had pulled up the boat go towards the east. When it was
night, as it became cold, all went home and could not tell where
the ship had gone to.

On the morrow, the morning of the 29th, the ship which ap-
peared the day before on the sea near Yodomari village two ri west of
Onoma, was there, but as the north wind wms strong, it sailed away to the
south. At the half hour of the Horse (12.80 p.m.) that ship had quite
disappeared. That day a farmer named Tobei, of the village of Koido-
mari in Yakushima. went to a place called Matsushita to burn charcoal ;
and as he was cutting wood, hearing a voice behind, he looked back. A
man with a long sword beckoneil to him, but he did not understand
his words. As he appeared to be asking for water, Tobei went near
and gave biin some, and then ran away. When the other bad finished


170 WRIGHT : CAPTURE AND CAPTIVITY OP PE RE SIDOTTI IN JAPAN.

drinking, lie called Tdbei again, and he being afraid on account: of the
sword, would not go naer again. The naan, conjecturing TObei’s thoughts,
put away the sword, and then T6bei drew near and he gave TObei one
Ogon, Then as T6bei thought he must have landed from among the
men rowing the boat on the previous day, he would take neither sword
nor money, but went away towards the shore. No ship nor any other
man appeared. Then Tdbei, returning to his own house, sent a
messenger to the neighbouring village and reported this matter. He
then went with two men, one named Goroyomon, of the village of
Hirata, and the other Kihei to Matsushita, and met the foreigner.
Then that man, pointing to Koidomari, seemed to say that he would go
there. As it appeared as though his feet were tired, one helped him
on, another held his sword, and the third held something like a bag
which he had brought with him ; and they came together to the house
of the Koidomari villager without eating. That man also took out two
round Ogon and two square ones, and ofiered them to the house-
owner, but he would not receive them. They could not converse or
understand anything about him, but his form was the same as that of
the Nipponese. The tonsure was like that of the Nipponese ; on his
body he had a blue cotton garment with the Yotsumeyui crest, dyed
like the lines of a chessboard and with brown lining. The length of
the sword was two feet four inches ; he wore it on one side in our style.
When this matter came to the oars of the official who had charge of the
island, he caused a place to be made to put him in, at a village called
Miyanoura, and having removed him there, told the Lord of Satsuma.

The ministers of Satsuma sent up a report sealed with their names
to the commissioners at Nagasaki. (That letter they wrote on the 13th
day of the 9th month. Those JTard, viz., Shimaraura Okura, Shimamura
Shdgen, Niiro Ichi no Kami, and Tanegashima Kurando wrote and signed
it. The Nagasaki commissioners were Nagai Sanuki no Kami and Bessho
Harima no Kami. The Satsuma Kard requested the commissioners to
fetch them away to Nagasaki. After that, word was also sent from
Satsuma to Nagasaki of his making round signs, and of the words he
spoke — I mean, “Bdma,” “ Roxon,” and so forth, as mentioned above.)
The authorities summoned the Hollanders first, and them all the
foreigners living in Nagasaki, and enquired the meaning of the words


WEIGHT : CAPTUEE AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE 8IDOTTI IN JAPAN. 171

Spoken by biin, but no one understood them. Moreover, as the winter
was nearly over, and the north wind was constantly blowing, and waves
were rough on the sea, the ship that was conveying him was twice
blown back, but the Satsuma men worked hard, and not caring for wind
or wave, came at last to Osumi province, from whence they sent him to
JSTagasaki. He asked very earnestly to go to Yedo, and it- appeared he
did not like to go to Nagasaki, but as they could not go with him to
Yedo according to his wish, they came to a place belonging to Nagasaki
named Aba, escorted by many other ships. Here tliey left the ship,
took him to Nagasaki by land, and put . him in prison. Then they
made the interpreters who knew Dutch inquire the cause of his coming,
but though they knew the names of the places, they did not under-
stand anything else he said, and as the Roman said he disliked Hol-
landers, it was not thought well to shew them to him. So placing
paper screens between them, tliey caused the Hollanders to listen, but
there were many things they did not understand ; and inasmuch as his
speech was half Nipponese, it was yet more difficult to comprehend.
But he seemed desirous of saying many things, and so at last it was said,
“ You should tell what you wish to find out to the Dutch residents.^'
He replied, “ I will do so.” Among the Hollanders w'ere a man named
Atereyanto and Oapitan Yasufuru Han Masteru, who had learned the
old Roman language. They went together into the room where he was.
(The language of that country is the Latin tongue.) Through these
the reason of his coming was learnt, and so the Nagasaki commissioners
communicated with Yedo.

Afterwards I heard that when he met the Hollanders he seemed to
become very proud. They for some reason appeared to he afraid of
him. They had learned that language, but as it was six years before,
had forgotten it and did not understand very well what he said, but
after he had explained, they comprehended by degrees.

After that there is the matter of his conveyance hither from
Nagasaki.

In the summer of the next year the government told the Nagasaki
commissioners that he was to go to Yedo. Therefore, choosing three
interpreters who had become accustomed since the previous year to
his language, on the 26th day of the 9th month they left Nagasaki and
VOL. rx. 5


172 Wlil&HT : OAPTUBE AND CAPTIVITY OF PERE 8IDOTTI IN JAPAN.

<iame to Yedo in the middle of the 11th month. Then as the com-
missioners who presided over the prohibition of the religion of Yaso
received orders to that effect, he was placed in the prison of their
office. What happened after that is as I have written before. The
commissioners gave directions that his dailj rations should be fixed
without change at all at what he had from his first arrival in Nagasaki
until then.

(He always ate twice, after noon and sunset. At the two meals he
had rice ; in the soup were wheaten dumplings fried in thin sauce, and
in it herring or fish and onions were boiled ; a little vinegar and salt
was put in. The dessert consisted of four roast chestnuts, two oranges,
five dried persimmons, two round persimmons and one piece of cake.
On his day of purification he ate only once, — at noon, but he ate dessert
twice on, those days, — eight roast chestnuts, four oranges, ten dried per-
simmons/ four round ones, and two pieces of cake. 1 don’t know whether
he threw away the peel of his dessert. Even on fast days he ate fish,
and after he came to Yedo be would not enter a bath even once, but he
wasn’t a bit dirty ; and except when he was eating he drank neither
cold nor hot water.) In the bag which he first brought with him were
a copper image, a painted figure, vessels for oflering things to it, vest-
ments and a rosary ; and besides there were 16 valumes of books, 181
pieces of gold Offon shaped like a s-udzu (bell), 160 Oi/on like a ball (da?i),
48 pieces of gold coined in the Nippon Genroku period, 70 Nipponese
cash and 31 cash of the K6ki period. Six of the books were never out
of his hand; he used to r^^ite from them. (As it would be useless to
d.escribe their appearance exactly, I don’t write it.)

ShOtoku 5th year, the middle of 2nd month of Itsubi (1715).

(Signed) Chikugo no Kami, Jugoi-no-ge, Minamoto no Kimi-yoshi


DISCUSSION.

Mr. Satow thought it would be interesting to the members of the Society to
know that there existed an account of. the voyage of the Abbd Sidotti in the Spanish
-lang^ge, entitled “ Relation del viage que higo el Abad D. Juan Baptista Sidoti,
desde Manila al japon, embiado por el Papa Clemente XT,” 1717, which had also
been translated into Italian and published in Rome in 1718. There was also an
account in the 7th volume of Charlevoix’ “Histoire et Description du Japon,”
wtich concluded with the statement that he met with a violent death, but this was
clearly disproved by Arai Hakuseki’s narrative.


c 173 >


DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON TPIE ROSARIES (JIU-DZU)
AS USED BY THE DIFFERENT SECTS OF
BUDDHISTS IN JAPAN.


By J. M. James.


\Read April 12, 1881.]

The most casual observers amongst residents in Asiatic countries-
where the Buddhist religion predominates must be familiar Avith the
name and form of the rosary carried by the monks of the different sects,
either in their hand or twisted round the Wrist. Few can have failed to
notice this inevitable appendage to the costume of the priests met with
in one’s daily walks ; but the idea of investigating the origin and use of
apparently so trivial an ornament may not have suggested itself to many.
However, to a student of Buddhism the matter presents a different
aspect. He, if he wishes to attain any profi.eiency in the subject which
he has undertaken, must grapple w'ith and solve these— however trivial —
technicalities, for they are stepping-stones from which in the future he
may be able to obtain a comprehensive view of this vast dogma of Bud-
dhism, with all its intricate network of metaphysical, reasoning, round
which unceasingly revolves the Wheel of the Law.

It is a slow and up-hill struggle : perplexing theories and legendary
lore confront us at almost every step. These have to be surmounted^
and so doing, however trivial a subject may appear to outsiders, it must
not be passed over carelessly by the student, but must be throughly
analysed. With this object in view allow me to claim your interest this
even ing in describing one of the many molecular links out of which the


174


JAMES : DESOEIPTIVE NOTES ON EOSARIES.


Buddhist dogma is composed, so that in the future when our collection
is complete we may be able to assign to each its proper place and value,
and thus obtain a fair view of the whole fabric. By first describing
the Bho-zolcu-jiu-dzu (rosary), which all the sects use in common, and
afterwards those peculiar to each, taking the principal sects of the present
day in the order in which they first spread in Japan, I will now attempt
to explain in as clear a manner as possible the rosary and its use.

The rosary, or jiu-dzu, which, as its name implies, consists of a
number of beads, or counters for making the number of prayers recited,
seems to have been in use amongst the Buddhists for many centuries.
Possibly its use and the number of its beads were first determined at the
Council of Asoka, B. 0. 250. The original number seems to liave been
one hundred and eight, supposed to correspond to a like number of
sins — JSiahu'hachi-bon-nd, one hundred and eight sins, or “ Lusts
of the flesh,^’ which all human beings are supposed to be heir to.
Professor Monier Willianis, in his “ .Modern India,” thus alludes to the
rosary : — “Rosaries seem to be common in all religious systems which
• attach more importance to the repetition, than to the spirituality, of
prayer — or the oftener repeated the spirituality increases pro ratio.”
Again, he says : — “ High-caste Brahmans merely use their rosaries to
assist them in counting up their daily ])rayers,” etc., etc.

THE “ SH()-ZOKU-JIU-DZU,” OE EOSAEY USED BY ALL THE SECTS IN

COMMON.

This rosary consists of one hundred and twelve beads of a uniform
size, exclusive of two large ones, so placed that they divide the one hun-
dred and twelve into two equal parts, namely, fifty-six between each large
bead. Prom one of the large heads extend two pendant strings on
which are strung twenty-one beads, rather smaller than those on the
main string ; these are here terminated by two beads of an elongated
shape commonly termed Tsuyu-dama, or Dew-drop bead. These beads,
which extend from the large head called Ten-no-oya-dama, or Upper-
Parent bead, are so arranged that no mistake can be made in knowing
which is the upper or lower part of the rosary, and they also show
which is the left and which is the right side. They are as follows : —
Immediately above the large one is a solitary bead beyond ; this the


JAMJiS ; DESOlilPTIVE NOTES ON EOSARIE3.


175


strings are knotted. From tkis there are five beads on each string, when
the string is again knotted. Still again there are another five beads on
pach string, which then terjninates with a Tsuyu-dama (Dew-drop bead).
The use of the solitary head is that in . holding the rosary with the .
Ten-no- oya-dama uppermost, it should be on the left hand ; this will
ensure the right signification being attached to each bead during prayer.
The collective name of these pendant beads are Kami-deshi, Superior
disciples.

Extending from the other large bead — Ghi-no-oya-dama—ljovfei ,
Parent-bead, are three strings, on two of which are five small beads,
each being terminated by a Tsuyu-dama string. These are termed the ^
Shimo-deahi, or Inferior disciples. The third has ten beads, — similar
to those of the disciple-beads, — without any Tsuyu-dama ; these are
used simply as counters, termed Kadzu-iori. As the names of the
deity, or saint, assigned to every bead on the rosary will be fully
described in the catalogue further on, I shall here only mention the
significations attached to some of the most important. The upper large
bead has several appellations, namely, Ten-no-oya-dama, Upper- Parent i
bead; Fu, Father; Shiyaka-muni, Buddha; etc. The lower large
bead is styled Chi-no-oya-dama, Lower Parent-bead ; Bo, Mother ;
ho-oiiyo-rai, the Divine Spirit which inspired, and perfected the ifruF^
enlightenment of Shiyaka Muni, etc., etc. The orthodox name of the
Tsuyu-dama (4) is Shi Tenno, the Four Regents who are supposed to
preside over the four quarters of the universe. Placed as they are at
the ends of the strings on which all the other beads are strung, they
keep in harmony and order the entire rosary as it is intended
to be used. The rosary represents metaphorically the Buddhist
Pantheon, consequently the position assigned to the dew-drop-beads —
Shi Tenno — is supposed to be symbolic of their actual positions of
power and authority, according to the Buddhist philosophy, presid-
ing as they do for good or evil over the welfare of this and all other
worlds : San-zen-Kai, Three thousand worlds ; Jippo-Kai, worlds on
all sides — namely, the entire universe. Thus the working of this
boundless, mysterious, and incomprehensible “ Wheel of USTature ” is
kept in perfect harmony.


176 JAMES ; DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON ROSARIES.

On the main string of beads, at an interval of seven beads — either
way — from the Teri'no-oya-dama, are two beads rather smaller than the
others, and generally of some different material, in order that they may
be more readily *distinguished. Again from these smaller beads, at a
further interval of fourteen beads on either side, are other two of the
same sort. These are sometimes erroneously called SIvi 2'ennd, Four
Begents, or Shi BosaUti, Pour Saints, varying with the sect. The
material of the beads differs in considerable degree, according to the
taste of the possessor ; crystal, glass, ivory and jade stone are often used,
whilst others are of ebony or rose-wood, with the four internal beads, on
the main string together with the Kami and Shimo-deshi, and Tsuyu-
dama, of crystal, coral, and even silver and gold, according to taste or
fashion. Formerly rosaries were made from the wood of the Bodai tree
(Indian, Pipal tree), under the shade of which Shiyaka Muni is said to
have attained supreme and universal enlightenment ; but probably
owing to this wood not being easily obtainable, common rosaries are now
frequently made from the wood of the cherry and plum trees.

The rosary as above described is usually carried by the monks and
laity of all the sects, on all occasions of religious state, visits of ceremony
or condolence, funerals, etc., and varies as much in material and value
as do the rank and wealth of its owner.

TEN-DAI SECT.

Founder, Fen-giyo Daishi ; doctrines first taught in Japan, A.D. 804.

The rosary used by the monks and followers of this sect consists
of a string of one hundred and twelve beads of the usual size, and one
large bead, Oya-dama, Parent-bead. At an interval of seven beads
from the Oya-dama on either side are placed two beads smaller
than the others, and again from these at a further interval of fourteen,
two more of the same size ; these are invariably of some different
material from the main number of beads. These four beads are
generally termed the Shi Tenno. From the Oya-dama, independent of
the main string of beads, extend two pendant-strings, of about four
inches in length ; having on one, twenty, and on the other, ten small
beads. I hese are used as counters during the recital of prayers, and


JAMES: DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON ROSARIES.


177


when used as such, one of the ten beads is slipped to the extreme end of
the string after one round, that is when one hundred and twelve prayers
have been recited. After the ten have been exhausted, one of the twenty
is slipped to the extremity of its string, and the ten replaced as at com-
mencement of prayer. Thus by the time the whole of the twen^
countei-s have been once used, twenty-two thusand four hundred prayers \
will have been recited. TJiis operation can be continued over and ove®
again, according to the spiritual inclination or religious fervour of the
devotee.

SHIN-GON SECT. . \

Founder, Ku-kai (pommonly called Ko-hd JDaisht) ; doctrines first

taught in Japan, A,D. 805. ' , . /

The rosary as used by the monks and laity of this sect does not
differ in any great degree from the one previously described. It con-
sists of one hundred and twelve beads, and two Oya-dama — ^Parent-
beads, The relative position of the beads on. the main string is the
same as in that used by the Ten-dai sect. From the Ten-no-oya-dama — "
upper Parent bead — extend two strings of about five inches in length,
on one of which is a solitary bead; the strings are here tied with a
peculiar knot, said to resemble the ancient Chinese character [g ^ man,
or wan, — Ten thousand; all, a myriad. Beyond this, on either stringy
are five beads, terminated with an elongated shaped stopper-bead—
Tsvyu-da'ina — Dew-drop-bead.


JO-DO SECT.

Founder, FLo-nen Slio-nin : doctrines -first taught in Japan during the
end of the 12th century.

The rosary used by the monks and laity of this sect consists of
two separate strings of beads, rove one within the other. On one,
exclusive of tho Oya-dama, are forty beads ; and on the other, exclusive


^One of a combination of characters used in representing one of the many
attributes of Buddha, thus;~(|| ® Man-toku-son,— Virtue personified.


178


JAMES : DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON ROSARIES.


of its Oya-dama, twenty-seven of the same size as the forty on the
other string, and twenty-eight smaller beads placed alternately with the
larger ones. There are thus forty on one string, and fifty-five on the
other, making a total on both strings of ninety-five, exclusive of the
large beads. The string which has the fifty-five beads on it — in addi-
tion to its being rove through the other string of beads — is rove through
a metal ring sufficiently large to enable the rosary being passed freely
through it when being used. Attached to this ring are two string-
pendants, on one of which are ten small beads, and on the other six ;
these are used as counters. This style of double-rosary is peculiar to
the J5-do sect.

The manipulation during prayer is as follows : — Using it with either
hand, the string which has the forty beads on it is placed with its Oya-
dama lying over the first joint of the fore-finger with the other fingers
lying through the rosary. It is then turned by the thumb, one bead at
a time from the Oya-dama — ’One bead for each prayer — until the Oya-
dama comes round to its starting point. The other string, — which has
fifty-five beads on it — is placed between the second and third fingers of
the same hand, and used as the first set of counters. Thus, after one
round of the upper rosary has been completed, one bead of the lower
•rosary is slipped through between the fingers — also from its Oya-davia
— and so on, one bead for every turn of the upper rosary, until the whole
of the lower rosary has been exhausted, when recourse is had to one of
the small pendant beads to indicate the fact. The whole process has
then to be gone over again, so that by the time the whole of the sixteen
counters have been once used, thirty-six thousand seven hundred and
thirty-six prayers will have been recited.

This style of double-rosary was first introduced and used by Awa-
nosuke, one of the personal attendants of the founder of this sect, the
intention being that it should be manipulated only with, the left hand,
thereby leaving the right hand free for waiting on and carrying out the
orders of his superior. By this means, whilst attending to his master
with one hand, the faithful retainer could still uninterruptedly be carry-
ing on his continuous round of prayers with the left hand, thus
facilitating a happy combination of spiritual and secular duty.


JAMES : DlilSORIPTIVE JTOTES ON ROSAETES.


179


ZEN SECT.

Founder, Yei-sai Zen-shi; doetrines first taught in Japan during the
early part of the IBth century.

The rosary invariably used by the monks of this sect consists of oEe
hundred and twelve beads, exclusive of one large bead, or Oya-dama,
having no pendant-beads (Kami or Shimo-deshi) from the Oya-dama.
Prom the Ten no Oya-dama or large bead, extending about three inches
in length, are the ends of the strings on which the whole of the beads
are strung ; on these strings there is a small stopper- bead, Fusa-dome,
Tassel -stopper (either of ivory, crystal or sometimes wood), and beyond
this the strings are knotted together. On the main string of beads, at
intervals of eighteen beads apart, are four small beads (of some material
different from the others), two on either side of the Oya-dama. . They
are termed the Shi Tenno — Four Kegents.

ZEN SECT.

The rosary of the laity of this sect differs slightly from that which
the monks use. The main number of beads is the same, but the posi-
tions assigned to those representing the Shi-Tenno and the Kami and
Shimo-deshi (which are used as counters) are the same as in that used
by the Shin-gon sect,

MONTO SECT OR IKKOSHIU.

Founder, Shin-ran Sho-nin ; doctrines first taught during the early
part of the 13th century.

The rosary used by the monks and laity of this sect is very similar
to that used by the Ten-dai sect ; the position assigned to the Shi-Tenno,
Four Begents, is the same, the only difference being that it has two
large beads, Oya-dama (instead of only one, as in that of the Ten-dai sect),
and the number of Kami-deshi, superior disciple beads, is less. Extend-
ing from the upper large bead, — Ten-no Oya-dama, — are two short
strings having on each ten beads ; these are knotted at the fifth bead,
and the remaining five on each string are terminated by two Tsuyu-
dama or Dew-drop beads.


180


JAMES: DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON ROSARIES.


NICHI-REN HOKKE SHIU SECT.

Founder, JSfioM-ren Shd-7iin ; doctrines first taught during the
middle of the ISth century.

The rosary used both by the monks and followers of this sect is a
fac-siinile of the Sho-zoku jiu-dzu — one which is used in common by all
the sects, differing only in the size of the beads, which are as a rule
very small, for the convenience of carrying and for. being more easily
manipulated. The beads corresponding in position with the Shi-Tenn5,
Four Regents, of the Ten-dai and Monto sects are commonly termed the
Shi Bosatsu, Four special saints. -


KANO.

A term applied to the manner— also implying the acts of manipulat-
ing the rosary during the recital of Prayers of Request (of a just nature)
to a certain deity endowed with the power of granting or witholding
the desire of the devotee. It is as follows : — ^The rosary is held — ^having
one cross-turn taken in it — with its loops placed over the middle finger
of both hands, the large beads resting against the back of the fingers
close to the knuckle joint. The Ten-no oya-dama, — Upper-Parent bead,
— on the right, and the Ghi-no oya-dama — ^Lower-Parent bead, — on the
left hand, whilst the Deshi-dama, — Disciple-beads, — hang down the backs
of the hands.

The hands are then brought together — finger-tips touching, — with
the loop of the main string of beads lying between them, and raised
slowly and reverently to the forehead (very frequently as high only as
the chin) of the supplicant as the Prayers of Request are repeated.
During prayer the beads, together with the loops of the rosary, are
slightly or in a most energetic manner, according to the degree of
religious fervour, rubbed up and down, the friction of the beads causing
a peculiar grating and rather unpleasant noise. However, this custom
of rubbing the hands in too extreme a manner is considered excessively
vulgar by those of the orthodox school, who simply keep to the “ Middle
Path.”


JAMES: DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON ROSARIES.


181


KI-TO.

The ceremony of invoking the gods, peculiar to the Ten-dai, Shin-
gon and Nichi-ren sects — Riyo-bii — or those sects of Buddhists into
whose doctrines a certain proportion of Shinto formulas have been in-
troduced.


60 MA.

The ceremony of Go ki-to and Goma combined is exclusively coUf
fined to the Ten-dai and Shin-gon sects, and is thus performed -In
front of the altar — in temples of these sects — stands a large square wood-
en box, internally lined with metal, called Goma-dan ; in this a fire is
ignited with slips of a certain wood, which, whilst burning, makes a
crackling noise, and emits sparks abundantly on all sides. During this
interval the administering monk repeats the usual incantatory prayers
with great vigour, at the same time using the rosary in a manner simliar
to that described under Kan-o.

This is believed to have the desired efiect of causing the recovery
from, and prevention of, sickness, or dispelling evil spirits, and all
tendencies that way.

With the Nichi-ren sect the Go ki-to is performed' without the
Goma ; the manner of manipulating the rosary is different and peculiar
to this sect. The rosary used on these occasions differs slightly from '
that in ordinary use ; it has no counters attached, simply the Disciple-
beads ; beads on the main string are vulgarly termed Mikan-dama,
Orange-beads, from their similarity to the shape of an orange, being
slightly flattened at their sides. The ceremony is as follows : — The rosary
above described is tied to a small wooden sword (of about five inches in
length), the large bead — Oya-dama — being fastened near its point. On
the sword is written the Dai-nioku, or Original prayer of the Creed : —
“Namu-miyo-ho-ren-ge-kiyo,” besides other incantatory prayers. The
monk then commences : — Holding the sword in the right hand he first re-
peats the first article of the creed, “ Miyo-ho-ren-ge-kiyo-jo-hon-dai-ichi,’*
at the same time making nine passes in the air with the sword, which
are supposed (mentally) to correspond with the character Miyo ! Myste-
rious ! Wonderful ! Aud sometimes this figure is used, which


182


JAMES: DESCRIPTIVE NOTES ON ROSARIES.


is also made with nine strokes. Whatever prayers are recited the
metre is so arranged that it harmonizes with the nine passes used in
making the two figures as above. This is termed “,Ku-ji wo kiru/^
namely, cutting the nine figures, or words, and breaking the spell.
Whilst the passes are being made, the sword cuts are delivered in a
short, jerky manner, and the rosary clacking against the sword at every
cut assists greatly in marking proper time, and also serves to keep up
the effect. Monks who are entitled to officiate on the occasions of Go®
ki-to must have undergone a special training for this purpose. Those
who desire so to do have to repair to Sho-chu-zan,® a celebrated
monastery of this sect, in Shimbsa, and there for the space of one
hundred days (generally during winter) undergo the orthodox pro-
bationary course of asceticism.

Living on a most scanty diet (rice-porridge only), bathing in cold
water three times daily, the journey to and from the bath being made
almost in a state of nudity, nothing but a loin-cloth being worn — and
learning the necessary prayer of incantation by heart, is the course
prescribed. At the expiry of this time, and after passing the required
test examination, a diploma is issued by the abbot, which enables the
possessor to officiate in the ceremony required.

At an early date I hope to be able to append a glossary of the
Sanskrit significations.


* Go, an honorific prefix. ®Also called Hokke-Kiyo-ji.


( 183 )


ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS.-PAET IH.
(Nos. 6, 6, 7, 8 & 9.)


By Ernest Satow.


[Bead May lOtli, 1881.]


No. 5.— HIEANU NO MATSUEI, OE SERVICE OF THE
TEMPLE OF IMAKI.

The temple of Hiranu, now called Hirano, is situated in the
village of Kogitayaroa on the N. E. of Kiyau-to, and according to the
usually accepted account, derived from the Eu-zhi Koil-gefi, the gods
worshipped at the four shrines which it contains are the following :

At the Imaki shrine, Yamato-dake-no-mikoto ; at the Kudo shrine,
Chiu-ai Ten-wau ; at the Furuaki shrine, Nifi-toku Ten-wau, and
at that of the hime-gami (goddess), Amaterasu-oho-mi-kami (the
Sun-goddess). These four deities are regarded as the ancestral gods
(XJji-gami) of the Minainoto, Tahira, Takashiua and Ohoye families
respectively.

Mahuehi supposes the first of these four deities, to whom the
present ritual is addressed, to have been brought from a place called
Imaki in Yamato by Kuwan-mu Ten-wau, when he founded the present
city of Kiyaii-to, He adds that a temple called Kudo no Zhin-zbiya,
situated near the temple of the Gods of Wind at Tatsuta (see Yamato
Mei-shiyo Dzu-we vol S, f. 50), is mentioned in the “Catalogue of
Temples,” but that where the god of Furuaki came from is unknown.
Another point which Mahuehi was unable to exp)lain that besides the


184


8AT0W: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


four families above mentioued, tbe Yamato family was also represented-
among the persons who took an official part in the ceremony. In fact,
all that he is able to tell us about the service amounts to very little,
nor does Motowori throw any additional light upon the matter.

The following solution of the difficulty has lately been proposed by
a native scholar of independent views. He reads ^ Ima-ge, instead
of Imaki or Iniagi, and explains Ivia-ge no Kami to be ‘ the god of
New Pood,’ whose name was Waka-toshi no Kami (god of the new
harvest) The spot where a certain temple of this god stood came to be


* Ima-ge did not always mean ‘this year’s crop of rice,’ but seems to have
been also used in a slightly different sense. It was the custom in the very earliest
times to perform every month at the Mikado’s palace a rite called Kamu Ima-ge
no Maisicri (ijii!) the “Service of the Divine New Food,” which evident-
ly could not have been, on every occasion, the lately harvested crop of rice.
It was probably freshly hulled rice that was oflfered to the gods at these
celebrations, and afte;rwards partaken of by the Midado. In later times this
Matsuri was held only twice a year, on the lith day of the 6th and I2tli months,
immediately after the Tsuki-namt no Matsuri or so-called “ Monthly Service.”
Detailed directions are given in the Gi-shiki (bk. l, f. 26 v.), which show the
nature of the ceremonies observed in the 9th century. Towards evening the
Mikado proceeded to a special building called the Naka no Wifi, which stood west
of the Palace, where he immediately took a bath, and then the service called the
Oho-tmio Ilqgahi or “ Luck- wishing of the Great Palace,” was performed, after
which mats were brought in and his bed was made. This was supposed to be
symbolic of the rejoicings on the occasion of the completion of the first palace of
the first Mikado, and of his taking possession of it as his residence, sleeping in a
house being regarded as the sign of o-wnership. (For this reason a pillow is often
placed in the shrine of a Shifi-tau temple, as a symbol of the god’s presence.)
The Chief Cook, who bore the ancient title of Kashihade no tomo no miyatsuko,
kindled fire by means of the fire-drill and began to cook the rice, while the
Adssumi no sukune (originally called Watadzwrd no murazhi, a superintendent of
fishers) blew up the fire. Other persons prepared various dishes to be eaten
along with the rice. Towards eleven o’clock the procession was formed, headed
by the Chief Cook bearing a torch, and followed by other functionaries carrying
the utensils, dishes, soups, water and sake, part to be offered to the gods, part for
the Mikado. About midnight the meat was cleared away. The Mikado and his
suite passed the night in the building, and about half-past three next morning his
brealrfast was served in the same style. About five o’clock he changed his clothes,
and returned to his own apartments, where the Oho-tono Hogahi was again
performed.


186


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^PART III.

called Ima-ge after the god. But it was, in fact, the ancient custom
in every household to make offerings to the God of New Food, in
the palace of the Mikado as in the dwellings of the common people.
Besides this God of New Food, the Japanese worshipped the god of the
cauldron in Avhich water and rice are boiled and the goddess of the
saucepan in which food is cooked, under the names of OM-tm hiko amd
OM-tsu hime,^ names derived from the construction of the fire-place,
which is built up with clay, and always contains two compartments, one
for the kavia, or boiler, the other for the na^e, or saucepan. Other names
for the same things are kudo and kobe, after which the pair of deities
Kudo no karai and Kobe no kami were called,f The first of these is
one of the gods to whom the next ritual is addressed, and the second is
what, through a slip of the pen, has come to be called Furuaki.
Originally written in which the characters are used merely as

phonetic symbols, by some mischance or other it appeared as
in the MSS. from which the printed copies are descended ; and the
ordinary reading Furuaki rests entirely on a conjecture of Mabuchi, '
who himself confesses that he does not know whether the characters
should be read as oK, or as kuK, by the Chinese sound or the Japanese
translation. Another household deity was Toyo-uke-bime, the earth
conceived of as the goddess of Abundant Food. The rites in honour of
these gods were at first performed by the head of the household (to-
nushi, contracted into tpzhi), but in after times the duty came to be
delegated to the women of the family, whence the word tozhi to denote
women. In the same way the word miyazJd (miya-nmM), from mean-
ing the ‘ lord of the palace,’ came to be the title of the priest who
discharged the function of worshipping the gods of the kitchen. After
Kuwafi-rau Ten-wau founded this temple of Hirano about the end
of the 8th century, it became the custom for all the branches of the
monarchical family to be represented at the two annual celebrations.


*See Ko-zhi-ki Defi, bk. 12, f. 29. Hirata suggests that Oki-tstc is a contrac-
tion of Oki-tsuchi, earth put or piled up, which seems a probable derivation.

(•gr ^ li. bk. 16. f. 5).

f Kudo is still commonly used in the province of Ise for ‘ fire-place,’ the usual
term for which in other parts of the country is hetmi.


186


SATOW: ANCIENa? JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


His own mother belonged to the Yamato family, and his grandmother to
the Hazhi family, from whom were descended the Ohoye. The Taliira
were sprung from an illegitimj te son of Kuwali-mu himself, the Minamo-
tofrom his successor Saga Tef wau, and the latter had a secondary wife
who belonged to the Takasl ina family. In this way all these live
families came to share in the -'worship of the Mikado’s household gods,
being either connected with h.m by ties of agnatic relationship, or, what
was not recognized in earlier times, through females. It was Kitabata-
ke Ohikafuaa (1293-1369) who first invented the popular account of the
gods worshipped at Hirano, and knowing that they were in some manner
family deities, proceeded to allot as ancestors to the Tabira, Minamoto,
Ohoye and Takashina families, ancient members of the royal line taken
here and there at random, beginning with the Sun-goddess and coming
down to the prehistoric Nint.toku Tefi-wau.

In the middle of the 9th century the service was performed twice
a year, in the 4th and 11th months, on the first day of the ape, and
pearly the same nonto, with slight variations, was read before each of
the first three shrines. Whethei- any, or what, ritual was read before
the fourth is unknown. The ceremonies are laid down with great
minuteness in the Gi-shiki (bk. 1, f. 16). From the fact that the Heir-
Apparent and several Pj-inces of the Blood, together with Ministens and
Councillors of State, Avere obliged to take part in it, it is evident that
the service was one of great importance in apeient times. As already
observed, members of the Minamoto, Tabira, Takashina and Ohoye
families were expected to be present, on account of their relationship
to the Mikado. In some points the ceremonial observed resembletl that
of the Kosuga service, which has already been described. Horses were
led in solemn procession round the temples, pieces of music were
executed on wind and stringed instruments, and a loiig succession of
grave dances were performed by officials of high rank, such as lords-in-
waiting and vice-ministers of the Department for the Worship of the
Gods as well as by the women who prepared the rice-

offerings and the soldiers who took the part of peasants (^yama-hito) .
The principal point of difference is that at the beginning of the service
these fictitious peasants, twenty in numl)er, entered the courtyard of
the temple carrying branches of the ' sacred tree, sahaki (Oleyera


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RI'^UALS.— PAET III. 187

japoBica), and recited in turn the praiseSj of the four gods {hami no yo-
ffoto), the words of which have uufortunsliely been lost. This incident
harmonizes completely with the opinion tfiat the deities here worshipped
were originally such as would be all-impl|'tant in the eyes of a peasant,
namely, those who provide him with? his food and the means of
cooking it. ^

f '

Y

EITUAL'.

[teanslation.]

He says : The sovran who is called “ According to his great
WOED ” * deigns to say in the wide presence of the sovran great GOi>
who has been brought ® from Imaki ;

The divine treasures which he offers up after having, in accordance
with the request which the sovran great gob has deigned to make,
widely planted the HousE-pillars on the bottom-most rocks and exalted
the cross-beams to the plain of high lieaven, and having fixed on it as
his SHADE from the heavens and shade from the sun, and having
fixed on [surname, name, office, rank] of the Office of the Gods as
Kan-nushi, are a bow, a swoed, a mieeoe, a bell, and a silk baldaquin,
and a horse is led and ranged with them; for clothing, providing
bright cloth, glittering cloth, fine cloth and coarse cloth, and having
taken and ranged with them the first parcels of tribute set-up by the
regions of the four quarters ; as to liquoe, raising high the beer-jars,
filling-and-ranging-in-rows the bellies of the beer-jars ; as to things of
the mountains and wilds, — sweet herbs and bitter herbs; as to the
things of the blue-sea-plain, — things wide of fin and-things narrow of
fin, even unto the weeds of the offing and weeds of the shore, —
piling-up high the various kinds of things like a range of hills, he
fulfils praises saying : Peacefully accept the great OFPEEiNGS thus set-
up, and glorify the age of the sovran eternally and unchangingly, and
blessing it as a luxuriant age, cause him greatly to be for a myriad ages.

Again he says : I fulfil praises, saying : Cause the childeen, the
princes, the councillors and all the functionaries to deign to guard

i 6


VOL. rx.


188


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART III.


vvitL. nightly guarding and dailj’' guarding, and flourishing like the
perpetual growth of luxuriant trees ever higher and ever wider in the
count of the sovran, humbly to serve him.


NOTES.

'See Note i to the Kasuga Ritual, Vol. VII, p. 408.

® The expression here rendered “ brought ” is fsukahe malsuri kitaru, lit.,
" came serving.” See notes i and 4 to the Kasuga Ritual, Vol. VII, pp. 410
and 411.

There is some doubt as to whether “ he says ” in his ritual means that the
Mikado says, or that the reader of the Norito says, a doubt which arises in con-
nection with nearly all the rituals, and different views have been taken by differ-
ent commentators, as observed in Note i to the praying for Harvest. (See Vol.
VII, p. 112.)

* Toy swords and mirrors are still used very commonly as ex-voto offerings to
both Buddhist and Shifi-tau gods, the former by men, the latter by women,
being symbolical of what is most valued by each sex respectively.


m. 6.— KUDO AND FURU-AKI.

As has been observed in the introduction to the 5th Ritual, Faru-
uJci ought probably to be read Kobe.

The text of ^ the norito is almost identical with the last, with the
exception of the substitution of the words. “ being the two Houses of
Kudo and Furu-aki ” for “ from Iraaki \ and the omission of the words
“ Office of the Gods,^’ further down. It is therefore unnecessary to
translate it.


No. 7.~MINADZUKI NO TSUKINAMI NO MATSURI.

This service was celebrated in honour of the 304 shrines, dis-
tinguished as Great Shrines, the offerings to which were arranged upon
tables or altars. These shrines formed a portion of the much larger


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.-— PART III. 18^

number at which the “Praying for Harvest ” was celebrated, distributed

as follows, according to the Catalogue in the Yefi-gi Shiki :

Kiyau-to 34

Yamashiro 53

Yamato 128

Kahachi 23

Iziimi 1

Tsu 26

Ise 14

Idzu 1

Mnsashi 1

Aha 1

Shimo-fusa 1

Hitachi 1

Afumi 5

Wakasa 1

Tafi-go 1

Harima 3

Aki 1

Kii 8

Aha 2


Total 305


There is evidently a mistake of a unit here.

According to one view the object of this service was to render
monthly thanks to the gods for the protective care they bestowed
on the country in response to the petitions offered up at the Praying
for Harvest. It was, however, probably more ancient than the Praying
for Harvest (see Vol. VII, p. 108). The ritual is identical with
that of the Praying for Harvest, with the exception of the latter part
of the second paragraph, which runs as follows : “ As to the monthly

OEFERINGS for the sixth month of this year (in the twelfth month
say monthly offerings for the twelfth month of this year), providing
bright cloth, glittering cloth, fine cloth, coarse cloth, I fulfil praises
by settmg-ii,p the great offerings of the sovran grandchild’s august-


190 SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE EITXTAL8. — PAET III.

ness, as the morning sun rises in glory,” and by the omission of the
third paragraph containing the petition to the gods of the harvest.

A list of the offerings made at the 304 or 305 shrines is given in
the “ Ceremonies of the Services of the Four Seasons ” (0 0^ ^ ^),
Deha-bon edit., vol. 1, f. 28 v. For an account of the history of this
service see the “ Materials for a History of Shih-tau ”
of Kurita Hiroshi, vol. 5, f. 19.


No. 8.— OHOTONO HOGAHI, OK LUCK- WISHING OF
THE GREAT PALACE.

This was one of the Occasional Services, and in later times was
always celebrated before and after the Kamu Ima^ge no Matsuri (see
above note on p. 184) and the Ohonihe or OhoKbe (Coronation Festival.)
It dates, however, from the very earliest ages, namely, from the establish-
ment of the capital at Kashihara in Yamato by Zhih-mu Tefiwau. In
language closely resembling that of the ritual, the author of the Ko-go
Zhifu -ijoi ftn ’Kt describes how on that occasion the timber
was cut in the forests with a sacred axe, and the foundations of the
great hall or palace dug with a sacred spade. The pillars of the house
were firmly planted on the rocks beneath the surface, and the ends of
the rafters, crossed over the ridge-pole, were raised high towards the
sky. Offerings, or ‘ divine treasures,’ as they are called, namely, a
mirror, beads, spear, mantlet, paper-mulberry bark and hemp were
prepared by the imihe, who then, under the guidance of the head of
their tribe, deposited in the great hall the sword and mirror, which
constituted the sacred symbols of sovereignty, hung the bulding with
strings of red beads, laid out the offerings in due order, and read the
ritual. The service of the Palace Gates (Ritual No. 9) was performed
immediately afterwards.

Another indication of the extreme antiquity of the composition is
the comparatively large number of archaic words which it contains.
For some of these no precisely corresponding expression could be found
-in the Chinese language, and though equivalents were assigned to others.


8AT0W : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS.— PART III.


191


it was still judged necessary to mark by a note in hana the exact way
in which the Chinese characters were to be read. These hana were not
the derivative signs usually denoted by that term, but whole Chinese
characters used as phonetic symbols, such as are found in all the early
remains of Japanese literature before the 10th century.

The object of the service was chiefly to propitiate two deities who
are described as the Spirits of Timber and E,ioe, and to obtain their pro-
tection for the sovereign’s abode, so that it should be preserved from de-
cay, and its occupier from snake-bite, pollution through birds flying in, at
the smoke-hole in the roof and frona night-alarms. From tho language in
which these petitions were offered up, we learn incidentally that at the
period when this service was first instituted, the palace of the Japanese ,
sovereign was a wooden hut, with its pillars planted in the ground, instead
of being erected upon broad flat stones as in modern buildings. The
whole frame-work, consisting of posts, beams, rafters, door-posts and ,
window-frames, was tied together with cords made by twisting the long
fibrous stems of climbing plants, such as Pueraria Thunbergiaua (Jmzu)
and Wistaria Sinensis {fuji). The floor must have been low down, so
that the occupants of the building, as they squatted or lay on their mats,
were exposed to the stealthy attacks of venomous snakes, which were
probably far more numerous in the earliest ages when the country was
for the most part uncultivated, than at the present day. In the Ritu^il
of the General Purification, snake-bite is counted as an ‘offence’ or
cause of pollution, which has to he expiated by the sacrifice of a certain
quantity of valuable property, and it was in accordance with a very
natural impulse that the protective deities were besought to avert such a
misfortune. There seems some reason to think that the yuha, here
translated floor, was originally nothing but a couch which ran round the
sides of the hut, the rest of the space being simply a mud-floor, and that
the size of the couch was gradually increased until it occupied the whole
interior. The rafters projected upward beyond the ridge-pole, crossing
each other as is seen in the roof of m’odern Shifi-tau temples, whether
their architecture be in conformity with early traditions (in which case
all the rafters are so crossed) or modified in accordance with more
advanced principles of construction, and the crossed rafters retained only
s ornaments at the two ends of the ridge. The roof was thatched, aqfl


192


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUAL8. — PART III.


perhaps had a gable afc each end, with a hole to allow the smoke of the
wood-fire to escape, so that it was possible for birds flying in and perch-
ing on the beams overhead, to defile the food, or the fire with which it
%aS cooked. This is also one of the causes of pollution mentioned in
the General Purification as requiring expiation. Such a description of
the residence of the sovereign also seems to point to a very early origin
for the main part of the ritual, though the separation of the members of
the sovereign’s family into two classes, children (mikd), who corres-
pond to the modeim ‘Princes of the Blood.’ and princes (kivii), as the
grand-children and other agnates who are not themselves sons and
daughters of a Mikado are called, is an arrangement which dates from
the historical period (reign of Teil-mu Teii-wau), and the ending of the
ritual where these terms occur must therefore be regarded as more
modern.

The following account of the ceremony is taken from the Gi-shiki
(middle of the 9th century). The OfiBce of the Gods took

four boxes containing precious stones, cut paper-mulberry bark, rice
and sake in bottles, and placed them on two eight-legged tables, which
were then borne by four attendants (kaK-domo), preceded by functionaries
belonging to the ISfakatomi and Imibe tribes, the j^riests (miya-sM),
archivists and other attendants, all wearing wreaths and scarfs of paper-
mulberry bark, walking in double line, the rear being brought up by
virgin priestesses. On the procession arriving in front of the palace
gate, the tables were deposited under the arcade which ran along the
outside of the wall. A servant (oho-doneri) called out for admittance,
and the porter having announced the procession by saying that an officer
of the Imperial Household had asked for admission in order to pronounce
the Luck-wishing of the Great Palace, the order “Let him pronounce
it” was transmitted back from the Mikado. The porter thereupon
called out: “Let him declare his name and surname,” in reply to which
the officer advanced to a spot previously marked out by a wooden ticket
with his name on it, and said; “It is so-and-so (giving his name) of the
Office of the Gods who wish to perform the Luck-wishing of the Great
Palace.” To this the Mikado’s answer was: “Call them.” The
officer of the Household replied “O” (the old word for “Yes”), and
retiring, called the functionaries of the Office of the Gods, who in their


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS. — PART III.


turn replied “O.” The Nakatomi and Imibe then put on their wreaths
of paper-mulberry, to which the latter added sashes (tasuki) of the
same material, and advanced ahead of the tables up to the “ Hall of
Benevolence and Long-life” (one of the principal buildings of the
palace). The virgin priestesses had meanwhile entered by another
gate, and were waiting in the Palace enclosure. They now followed
the tables, and came up to the verandah on the east side of the building,
where they took charge of the boxes of offerings. The procession
thereupon entered the building. One Virgin Priestess went to the
Hall of Audience {shi-sME-deU) and scattered rice about it, while
another proceeded to the gate on its south side and performed the same
ceremony there. The Imibe took out the precious stones and hung
them at the four corners of the Hall, and the priestesses withdrew, aftelr
sprinkling sake and scattering rice and cut paper- mulberry fibre at the
four corners of the interior. The Hakatomi stood on the south side
of the building while the Imibe turned to the south-east, and in a low
voice read the ritual. The "whole company next went to the Mikado’s
bath-room and hung precious stones at its four angles, and the same
at his privy, while the priestesses scattered rice and sprinkled sake as
before. After this they retired through a gate on the west of the
palace, with the exception of the priests and attendants, who proceeded
to the palace kitchen to hang up paper-mulberry fibre and scatter rice
and sprinkle sake. When all was over, gifts were distributed to all
those who had taken part in the ceremony.


EITUAL.

[translation.]

He felicitates and brings to rest with the heavenly mysterious con-
gratulatory words, ^ thee Yabune® no Mikoto, who art the fresh Abode
which has been made for the sovran grandchild’s augustness’ shade
from the heavens and shade from the sun, by setting up the sacred®
pillars with the sacred spade, after cutting down with the sacred axe o


194


SATOW: A^TOIENT JAPANESE EITUALS. — PART III.


the Iraibe the trees which grew in the great gorges and small gorges of
the remoter hills, and offering the two ends to the god of the mountains,
and bringing forth the central parts— the abode nmmly of the sovran
grandchild’s augustness, who in succession to heaven’s sun rules over
the region-under-heaven, the dominion to which he deigned to descend
ofter that the sovran’s dear progenitor and progenitrix, who divinely
remain in the plain of high heaven, had caused the sovran grmidohild’s
augustness by their word to sit on the heavenly high seat, and deigning
to lift and bring the mirror and sword* which are the heavenly symbols,
had pronounced the words of luck- wishing, and appointed him, saying;
'‘Let our sovran great child, the sovran grandchild’s augustness,
sitting on this heavenly high seat here,® tranquilly rule the succession
of heaven’s sun,® the Great Many-islands, the Luxuriant Reed-plain
Region of Many Spikes'^ for long autumns, a myriad thousand autumns,
as a peaceful country,” and by the heavenly counsel-taking® the rooks,
trees and the least leaf of the herbs likewise that had spoken, had been
silenced.

He says ; I repeat the names of the gods who tranquilly and peace-
fully watch ® so that the great House where he sits ruling, as far as
the limit of the bottom-most rocks, may not have the calamity of
crawling worms amo7ig the lower cords wliiah tie it together, as far as
the limit of the blue clouds of the plain of high-heaven, may not have
the calamity of birds flying in at the smoke-hole^'* in the roof; the
meeting “ of the firmly planted pillars, cross-beams, rafters, doors
and windows have no movement or noise, have no loosing of the tied
rope-knots or unevenness of the thatch with which it is roofed, and no
harmful rustling in the joints of the eloor or alarms at night. And
having humbly praised their names as Yabune Kukunochi no Mikoto
and Yabune Toyo Ukebime no Mikoto, Isay: “In consequence of
your humbly praising the age of the sovran grandchild’s augustness,
eternally and unchangeably, and humbly blessing it as a luxuriant age,
sufficient age and long age, let the Divine Corrector’s augustuess and
the Great Corrector’s augustness tranquilly and peacefully govern the
^proceedings, correcting any omissions which they may have seen or
heard in the luck-wishing and bringing-to-rest uttered by the Imibe no
Sukune So-and-so, who hangs a thick sash on his weak shoulders, and


S.VTOW: AN'CIBN'T JAPANESE RrTUALS, — PAET HI.


195


adds bright fine cloth and glittering fine cloth to the fresh ever-bright
red-stones, the innumerable strings of beads of luck-wishing, which the
sacred bead-makers have made with due-care-to-avoid-pollutiou and at-
tention-to-cleanness.”

Parting the words, he says : As to declaring her name as Womau-
of-the-great-HousB’s augustness, Z fulfil her praises by declaring her
FAME as Woman-of-the-great-HousE’s augustness, because blocking up
the way within the same great House as the sovran geandohilAs
augustuess, she chooses and knows the persons who come in and go out,
by her word corrects and softens the grumbling and wildness of the
gods, prevents the scarf-\vearing attendants and the sash-wearing at-
tendants^® who present the morning food and evening pood of the
sovran geafdchild’s augustness from erring with hand or foot, and
prevents the children, princes or counsellors and all the functionaries
from indulging their ow'ii sej)arate inclinations, causes them to attend in.
the House and serve in the House without bad hearts or foul hearts,
and correcting whatsoever faults and errors she may see or hear, causes
them to serve tranquilly and peacefully.


NOTES.

Aina tsu kusushl ihahi-goto. Here we have first, the Chinese characters
which were thought to correspond most closely to the Japanese words of the
original, and second, in a note, those very words repeated in maH-yefu-gana, so
that there is no doubt whatever about tlie reiding. Perhaps ‘ nairaculous ’ would
be as good a rendering as ‘ mysterious ’ for knstishi, which seems to contain an.
allusion to the magical effect of the words which follow, and which act as a charm
to ward off every kind of calamity from the building. Hence the word iJiahi,
rendered ‘ congratulatory,’ is written with ^ ‘ to protect,’ The words in the
translation here referred to begin with : “ He says : I repeat the names of the gods
who tranquilly a‘ d peacefully watch,” etc. In all the editions of the Yeii-gi-shiki
and in the Norito kau the reading is ihahi-goto jnochite koto-hogi skidzume mawom-
Au, but Motowori proposes ihahi instead of skidsnme. Hirata has restored the
earlier reading, which there seems to be no adequate reason for altering,

- Mi araka imashi Yabune no mikoto, Yabune no mikoto ivho art the abode.
Ya is simply ‘ house,’ as the Chinese character indicates, and June is a general
term for all wooden things that contain, such as brewers’ vats, bathing-tubs, as
wen as ‘ boat ’ or ‘ ship,’ which is its roost common use. Mabuchi, indeed derives
the word ya-fu-ne from iya ofu »<?, < ever-growing root, and considers it to be an


196


SATOW : AKOIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART III.


epithet of trees and the rice-plant ; but this seems rather far-fetched. ‘ Abode
is the closest attainable rendering of the ancient araka (modern form arika),
which is here given in a note as the proper reading of These notes em-

bedded in the text of the Norito are of the highest value, because they preserve
to us archaic words which would otherwise have been utterly lost. The first
syllable of kado, ‘ house-door,’ is perhaps identical with the M of araka.* Observe
that mi araka, intashi, and YabuSle no mikoto are all in apposition, thus justifying
the insertion of ‘ who art,’ to help out the meaning.

“ The foundation and construction of sacred buildings was always attended
with these formalities. In the ceremonial rules for the Coronation of the Mikado
(^Gi-skiki, bk. 2, f. 15), we read that a special granary was built for storing the rice
used on that occasion. Young virgins first cleared and levelled the ground with
a sacred spade, and then dug the holes to receive the four corner-posts. After
this a large party proceeded to the mountain where the timber was to be cut, and
after rites had been performed to propitiate the forest god, the virgins took the
sacred axe and made the first cut. Labourers were afterwards sent to cut down,
the timber and bring it in. On all similar occasions the virgins are represented
as taking a sacred spade to dig the holes for the uprights In the “ Yamato-hime
no Sei-ki ” the foundation of the Sun-goddess’ temple in Ise is thus described :
“ On the ki-no-ye ne day of the vnnter, tenth month of the 36th year, hi-no-io mi,
they removed the From-heaven-shining- great-deity to the bank of the I-suzu-g^a
in Watarai. This year Yamato-hime no Mikoto commanded Oho-hata-nushi no
Mikoto and all the men of the eighty companies of the mono-no-fu to cut away the
rough herbage and trees on the plain of I-suzu, to level the big stones and the
little stones, to cut the timber standing in the big ravines and little ravines of
the distant hills and near hills with the sacred axe of the Imibe, and bring it away,
to offer the end to Yamatsumi and bringing out the central part to set up the
sacred pillars with the sacred spade, to raise-up the cross-beams to the plain of
high heaven, and widely plant the great HOUSE-pillars.” It was important to
propitiate the forest god beforehand. In the province of Tohotafumi, says Ma-
buchi, the woodmen, after cutting down a tree, break off a branch and stick it up-
right in the stump. Elsewhere the woodman lops off a branch, and setting it
up in front of the tree, together with his axe, clasps his hands and bows down, in
order to obtain permission to cut it down from the spirit which is supposed to inhabit
it. Some such practice as this is alluded to in the text where the ‘ends’ are
said to be offered to the god of the mountains.

* The Mirror and Sword are two out of the three precious objects regarded as
the regalia of the Japanese sovereigns, the possession of which was the evidence of
their title to reign. The third is a stone (or perhaps a necklace of stones), of what
kind is not precisely known. Its existence was denied by the Imibe, and hence


*This word occurs also in inaka (rice-dwellings), the country districts; “sumika,”
dwelling-place; “ kakureba,” hiding place; yamaga, mountain village.


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


197


the omission of it in this Norito, which had to be read by a member of their tribe.
These treasures, commonly called the ‘ Three Kinds of Divine Treasures ’ (Sali shiyu
no Zhin-pmt., H S If or ‘ Utensils ' {ki are mentioned in the Ko-
zhi-ki on the occasion of Ninigi no Mikoto’s descent, where they are called the
Yagaka no Maga-tama, the Kagami and the Kusa-nagi no Tsurugi, the ‘ Ever-
bright Curved-jewel,’ the ‘ Mirror,’ and the ‘ Herb-quelling Sabre.’ In the Ni-hofi-
gi the names of the first two differ slightly, being Yasaka-ni no Maga-tama, Ya-ta
no kagami. The Stone and Mirror are supposed to be identical with those which
play such an important part in the episode of the Sun-goddess’ retirement into the
cave, when they were hung on the sacred sakaki bush, together with other offer-
ings, as inducements to her to come forth again and shed the light of her coun-
tenance on the earth. In the latter passage of the Ko-zhi-ki the Mirror is called
Yota kagami, the ‘ Many-angled Mirror.” Ya-ta is a contraction of Ya-ata, ya^
which eventually came to mean eight, having originally been used to denote any
large number, while ata may either be the root of aia?na, head, or hata, fin, from
the resemblance in shape and position to the fin of the fish, looked on as a mere
appendage to the body. A mirror, called Yatama kagami, which is figured in the
Gun-shiyo Ruwi-zhiyuu, vol. 28, f. 23, is circular, with a raised design not unlike
the conventional form of the sacred lotus of the Buddhists.

The material of the sacred Mirror is said to havd been iron. Although the
traditional reading is simply kane, which might mean any kind of metal whatever,
the Chinese character in the text is iron, and by the Chinese char'acter we
must be guided when there is any doubt as to the meaning. In the Ko-go Zhifu-
wi the mirror is said to have been made of copper or bronze (^), but this book
is exactly a century later than the Ko-zhi-ki, and a hundred years after the
discovery in Japan of copper. The use of that metal having by that time become
well-known, the author of the Ko-go Zhifu-wi would naturally he inclined to
suppose that it mu.st have been the metal employed in making this mirror. The
word handed down by tradition was simply kane, which the compilers of the
earlier work understood was “iron,” while the later author by the light of addi-
tional knowledge, interpreted it to mean “ copper.” In the Ni-hofi-gi the mirror
is called by the same name (ya-ta kagami), but nothing is said with respect to the
metal of which it was formed. It would be curious if the Japanese should be
proved to have possessed the knowledge of iron earlier than that of copper.
According to one version of the legend in the Ni-hon-gi, it was suggested by
Omohigane no kami that a likeness of the goddess should be made, and it is added
that the image then made (i.e. a mirror) is now the deity of Hi-no-mahe in the
province of Ki-shiu. The Ko-go Zhifu-wi also says that the mirror was made
in the sun’s likeness : “ The first made was not quite perfect, but the second was
beautiful. The former is the god of Hi-no-mahe, in the province of Kii ; the latter
is the great deity of Ise.”


198


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUAI^.—PABT III.


The full name of the Jewel is Ya-saka no Maga-tamci no iho-tsu ??ii sumant
no iama. Motowori acknowledges that he cannot explain ya-saka^ Numerous
etymologies have b:en suggested, as, for instance, that ya=dya, and saka the root
of sakayeru, hence the meaning ‘ ever -flourishing.’ Again, that maga-tama, being
taken to signify ‘ bent stone,’ yasaka may be interpreted, according to the
Chinese characters with which it is written, ‘ eight feet ’ or ‘ many feet ’ (reverting
to the original meaning of ya)^ that being the length of the stone if it could be
straightened. This seems rather far-fetched. Other conjectures are that vasaka
was the name of the place whence the stone was procured, as well as that tlie tatna
being beads, yasaka (eight or many feet) denotes the length of the siring upon
which they were threaded. Hir.ata’s derivation of saka from sa-aka, ‘ very bright,
seems the best, and I have accordingly adopted it rendering yasaka by '■ ever-bright.
Motowori takes maga-tama to be ‘ curved jewel,’ such as are from time to time dug
out of the ground, and are shaped like a tiger’s claw. T'he y are formed of nephrite,
crystal, .serpentine, agate or more rarely' topaz, amethyst or jasper ; soapstone and even
clay has occasionally been used.”— von Siebold.) Hirata, however explains
fnaga to be a contraction of ma Jmga^ ‘ very sparkling,’ kaga being the radical
of kaga-yaku, ‘ to glitter, sparkle,’ and identical which kage, ‘ brightness,’ as
in ts-uhi-kage, ‘ moonshine.’ The former etymology is supported by the evidence
of the Chinese characters used, though there is nothing to prove that the modern
so-called maga-tama are identical with those spoken of in ancient writings,
while the latter is convenient, because it allows us to include amongst maga-
tama precious stones of other forms, especially the cylindrical beads popu-
larly known as kuda-tama, as well as globular beads that have been found
in tumuli. Iho-tsn, literally ‘ live hundred,’ is merely used to express a great
number. Mi is the honorific prefix, and sumaru is the equivalent of the Chinese
t'ung, to bring together, being in fact the same word as sument and suberu
(see note 4 to the “Praying of Pfarvest”). The whole, therefore, signifies the
‘ever-bright curved (or glittering) jewels, the many assembled jewels,’ and the
natural conclusion is that this member of the regalia ought to be a long string
of, perhaps claw-shaped, stone beads.

The Kusa-nagi was originally called Arne no Mwakamo 7to Tsuragi, the
‘ vSahre of the Assembled-clouds of Heaven.’ In the Ko-zhi-ki there is a very
curious account of its discovery. As a punishment for the misconduct which had
been the cause of the Sun-goddess’ retirement, a large fine was imposed upon
Susa-no-wo no Mikoto, and he was banished from heaven. " So, being driven
away, he descended on „Tori-kami by the source of the river of Hi, in the province
of Idzumo. Then there came a chop-stick floating down the river. So Susa-no-
wo no Mikoto thought that people must dwell up that river, and went up it in
search of them. There he found an old man and an old woman, two of them,
who had placed a young girl between them, and were weeping. Then he asked,

‘ Who are you ’ ? Whereupon the old man replied, saying ; ‘ I am a god of the


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


19 »

earth, the child of Oho-yama-tsu-mi no Kami (the god of mountains). My name
is called Foot-stroker (Ashi-na-dzu-chi) and my wife’s name, is called Hand-strok-
er (Te-na-dzu-chi), and my daughter’s name is called Miraculous-rice-field-sun-
maiden (Kushi-inada-hime).’ Again he asked. ‘ What is the reason of your
weeping ? * He (the old man) answered and said ; ‘ My daughters were originally
eight young girls, but the Eight-forked Serpent of Koshi came every year and
devoured them, and I weep because it is now the time for him to come.’ Then
he (the god) asked, ‘ What is his form like ? ’ He answered and said, ‘ His eyes
are red-glistering, his body is one, with eight heads and eight tails, and on his body
grow moss, hi and sugi (Chamaecyparis and Cryptomeria). His .belly extends
over eight valleys and eight hills, and if one looks at his belly, it is all constantly
bloody and inflamed.’ Then Haya-Susa-no-wo no Mikoto said to the old man,
‘If this is A our daughter, will you offer her to me?’ He replied, saying, ‘With
respect, but I do not know your august name.’ Then he replied, and said, ‘ I am
the dear elder brother of the From heaven-shining-great-deity, and have just
descended from heaven.’ Hereupon Ashi-na-dzu-chi-no kami and Te-na-dzu-chi
no kami said, ‘ If that be so, with respect (i. e., aa'c obey), we will offer [her to
you].’ So Haya-Susa-no-wo no Mikoto transformed the young girl into a many-
and-close-toothed comb, which he stuck in his hair, and then sa d to them, ‘Brew
some eight-fold filtered beer. And make a fence round about, and in that fence
make eight gates, and at each gate lie together a bench, and on each bench place
a beer-vat, and in each vat pour beer, and wait.’ And when they had thus-
prepared [every thing] in accordance with his bidd.ng, the Eight-forked serpent
came truly as [the old man] had- said. Then it dipped a head into each vat and
drank the beer. And thereupon it became drunk with drinking, and all [the-
heads] by down and slept. Then Haya-Susa-no-wo no Mikoto, drawing , the
sword of ten hand-breadths [length] which he wore, cut the serpent in pieces, and
the Hi river turned into blood and flowed on. Now, when he cut the middle
tail, the edge of his sword broke. Thinking it strange, he took the point of
his sword, thrust, split and looked, and there was a keen-cutting blade [within].
So he took this sword, and thinking it a strange thing, sent it up with a message
to the From-heaven-shining-great-deity. This is the ‘ herb-quelling sword ’ {Kusa-
nagi. no tachi). Thereupon Haya-Susa-no-wo no Mikoto sought for a place in
Idzumo where he might build a HOUSE, So he came to the place called Suga, and
said this : ‘ Having come to this place my HEART is pure,’ and there he built
a HOUSE. Wherefore that place is yet called Suga. When this great god first built
the HOUSE of Suga, clouds rose up from the place. So he made a Song, and that
SONG was:

Many clouds arise.

The manifold fence of the forth-issuing clouds

Makes a manifold fence

For the spouses to be -within.

Oh! that manifold fence.


200


SATOW: A3SfCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS^ — PART III.


“ Then he called that Ashi-na-dzu-chi no kami, and said to him, ‘ Thee do
I appoint chief of my house’, and also he gave him a name, calling him Inada no
miya-nushi Suga no yatsu-mimi no kami.” — {Ko-zhi-ki.')

In the Ni-hofi-gi version of the myth the locality is placed in the province of
Aki, and the parents of the maiden are called Ashi-nadzu-te-nadzu and Inada nor
miya-nushi. They besought Susa no-wo no Mikoto to protect their new-born babe
from the sei-pent, and by his orders made eight jars of wine from the fruits of
trees, which he poured into the mouths of the serpent, and the monster became an
easy victim. The sword used by him in slaying the Serpent was called “ Worochi
po Aramasa” the Rough-perfect-one of the Serpent, and is said to be worshipped
as a god at the ancient temple of Furu in Yamato. In another account this sword
is called “ Worochi no Kara-sabi,” the Foreign-spade of the Serpent. A third
version given in the Ni-hofi-gi differs considerably, but is worth translating chiefly
on account of its connecting Susa-no-wo with Korea, and showing that tradition
affords ground for conjecturing that the original civilisers of Japan crossed over
to Idzumo from that country. This version is as follows :

“ Susa-no-wo no Mikoto’s conduct was indecent, wherefore all the gods
imposed upon him a penalty of a thousand tables [of offerings], and finally
banished him. Then Susa-no-wo no Mikoto, taking with him his child Tso-takera
no Kami, descended into the country called Shiraki, and dwelt at a place called
Soshimori. Then he commenced to speak, and said : ‘ This is a place in which I
do not desire to dwell,’ and con.sequently making a boat of clay, he embarked in
it, and going across eastwards, arrived at Mount Tori-kami, which is at the source
of the river Hi, in the province of Idzumo. At that time there was a serpent which
swallowed human beings. So Susa-no-wo no Mikoto cut the serpeant with the sword
Ama-no-hawe-giri (the “Heavenly fly-cutter”}, and cutting the serpent’s tail, its
edge broke. So he split up [the tail] and looked, and within the tail there was a
strange sword. Susa-no-wo no Mikoto said, ‘ I must not make this my private
property,’ and sent his descendant in the fifth generation, Ama-no-fuki-ne no
Kami, and offered it to Heaven. This is now called the Kma-nagi no Tsurugi.
When first Iso-takeru no Kami descended from heaven, he brought down a quantity
of seeds of trees, but instead of planting them in Ka^'a kitni he brought

them all back, and eventually sowed them all over the Great Many Island Country,
beginning from Tsukushi, and made the mountains green. Wherefore Iso-takeru
no Mikoto was called Isawoshi no Kami, ‘ The God of Merit,’ and he is the great
igod who dwells in the province of YJa.l' -{Ni-hoR-gid',

The Sword, Mirror and Jewel (or Jewels! were brought to Japan by the
ancestor of the Mikados, the mythical grandson of the Sun-goddess, Ninigi no
Mikoto. In delivering the Three Sacred Treasures to him, the Sun-goddess said :
“ Look upon this mirror as my SPIRIT, and worship it as if you were worshipping
my actual presence.” — {Ko-zhi~ki.) One version of the myth which is given in
the Ni-hofi-gi makes the Sun-goddess deliver the precious mirror of her son Oshi-


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


201


ho-mimi, -witli almost the same words, adding an injunction to keep the mirror
always in the same house and on the same raised floor (toko) with himself. And
this was actually done by the Mikados down to the reign of Su-zhi& Tefi-wau,
when, as the Ni-hon-gi says: “In the 6th year some of the people abandoned
their homes, others rebelled, and the state of things was such that it was not to be
remedied by the virtue [of the Mikadoj. Wherefore he rose eafly in the morning
and in the evening was sol icitoits, and besought punishment from the gods. Before
this the two gods Ama-terasu Oho-kami and Oho-kuni-mi-tama, of Yamato, had
both been worshipped within the resioence of the sovereign. But now fearing
the might of these deities, he felt uneasy at living with them, wherefore he com-
mitted Ama-terasu Oho-kami to the charge of Toyo-suki-iri-hime no Mikoto, to
worship at Kasa-nuhi no Sato (the Village of the Hat-makers) in Yamato, and
there he built a stone-walled brushwood hut (shiki Mmorogi), and he entrusted Oho-
kuni-mi-tama of Yamato to Nu-na-ki-iri-bime no Mikoto to worship, but Nu-na-ki-
iri-bime no Mikoto’s hair fell off and her body wasted, so that she could not wor-
ship.” — {Nl-hoH-gi.)

The Ko-go Zhifu-wi says : “ In the reign of Shiki no Midzugaki (i.e., Su-zhih
Teh-wau), fearing at last the power of the god, and not feeling at ease in the same
palace, the Mikado ordered the Imibe tribe to bring the two families descended
from Tshi-kori-dome no kaml and Ama-mr-hitotsu no kami, to cast a new mirror
and make a new sword, to be the EMBLEMS to guard his person, and these are
the mirror and sword which are offered to the Mikado at his accession as the divine
symbols. At the same time he built a stone-walled brushwood hut at the Village
of the Hat-makers in Yamato, and removing thither the From-heaven-shining-
great-deity and the Herb-quelling sword, ordered the princess Toyo-suki-iri hime
no Mikoto to worship them. On the evening of the removal the people of the
palace all came and feasted throughout the night, singing :

Miya-bito no
Oho-yo sttgara ni
iza tohoshi
Yuki no yoroshi mo
oho yo sugara m.”

The Yamato hime no Mikoto no Sei-ki is the' history of the

Mirror and Sword from the time they left the Mikado’s Palace until they were
finally established on the banks of the Isuzu-gaha in Ise, at the present Nai-kuu
Temple. After the first priest-princess had been in charge of the sacred symbols
for some fifty-three years, in the course of which she had frequently removed them
from one site to another, finding herself getting old and feeble, she delivered them
into the care of her niece, Yamato-hime, a sister of Kei-kau Ten-wau, who wan-
dered about with her trust until the 26th year of Suwi-nin Ten-wau (B. C. 4
according to the popular chronology), when she settled down in Ise at a spot in-
dicated by a revelation from the Sun-goddess.


202


8ATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITEALS. — PART III.


This princess appears to have lived to a great age, for she is still found as the
high priestess of the Sun-goddess’ temple in the 28th year of Kei-kau Tefi*wau.
Here she was visited by Yamato-dake no Mikoto, when on his way to subdue the
barbarians of the east. She lent him the sacred sword for use against the enemy,
and it was an incident of his campaign that gave to the weapon the name of
“ Herb-quelling Sabre.” On his return he left the sword at Atsuta in Wohari,
where a temple was built for it, which still exists, and is well-known to travellers.
The story is recounted in the Ko-zhi-ki as follows : “ Now when the sovereign
again commanded Yamato-dake no Mikoto, saying, ' Subdue and pacify the
violent gods and disobedient men of the twelve eastern roads,’ and sent him,
attaching to him the ancestor of the Omi of Kibi, whose name was Mi-suki-tomo-
mimi-take hiko, he gave him a many-fathom-long spear of hihira-gi (Olea aquifolia)-
So when he departed, having received the command, he came into the House
of the great DeTIY of Ise, and worshipping the court of the deity, said to his
aunt Yamato-hime, ‘ The sovran’s augustness apparently desires that I should die
[as] quickly [as possible], for after he had sent me to take the unsubmissive men
of the west, as soon as I came up back, before any interval has elapsed, without
bestowing on me any fighting men, he now sends me to subdue the unsubmissive
men of the twelve circuits of the east Consequently, I think he certainly desires
me to die [as] quickly [as possible].’ When he tvent away, having spoken thus
with grief and weeping, Yamato-hime no Mikoto bestowed on him the ‘Herb-
quelling blade,’ and also bestowed on him a BAG, and bade him open the mouth of
the bag on an emergency. So, coming to the province of Wohari, he entered into
the house of Miyasu hime, ancestress of the Miyatsuko of Wohari, and thereupon
thought to marry her, but thought again that he would marry her when he came
back again, and having entered into a promise, went forth to the eastern pro-
vinces and subdued and softened all the turbulent gods and unsubmissive men
of the mountains and rivers. And when he came to the province of Sagamu, the
Miyatsuko of that province lied to him, saying, ‘ There is a lake in this province,
and the god who lives in that lake is a very turbulent god.’ So when be entered
into the prairie in order to visit that god, the Miyatsuko of the province set the
prairie on fire. So .knowing that he had been deceived, he opened the mouth of
the bag which his aunt Yamato-hime no Mikoto had given him, and looked [into
it], and there was a steel in it. So he first mowed away the herbage with his
SWORD, and with the steel he struck fire, and kindling a counter-fire, set it [the
herbage] on fire and drove-hack [the other fire], and returning forth killed and
destroyed all the Miyatsuko of that province. He then set them on fire and burnt
them. Wherefore [that place] is now called Yaki-dzu.”—

In the Ni-hon-gi version, the prince, after first suggesting that the charge of
subduing the rebels should he entrusted to his feebler brother Oho-usu no Mikoto,
finally offers to undertake the task himself. The Mikado appointed him to com-
mand the expedition, and describes to his son the savage enemies which he


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS. — PAET III.


208


would have to encounter, and says : “ I have heard that the Eastern barbarians
have a rough and violent disposition, and make violence their chief pursuit.
Their villages have no chief and their hamlets no heads, but every one encroaches
on his neighbour’s boundary, and they all rob one another. In the mountains,
too, there are evil gods, and in the open country wicked demons who obstruct
the roads and block up the paths, causing great annoyance to .others. Amongst
the eastern barbarians the Yemishi (Prawn barbarians) are the strongest. Male
and female dwell together promiscuously, and there is no distinction between
parent and child. In the winter they lodge in caves and in the summer dwell
in huts. They wear skins and drink blood. Brothers are suspicious of
each other. Their ascending the hills is like the flight of birds, and their walk-
ing though the herbage is like the running of quadrupeds. If they receive a
favour they forget it, but if they suifer an injury are certain to requite it. For
this reason they conceal arrows in their hair and swords underneath their clothes.
Sometimes they assemble in bands and harry the frontier, or spy the peasants at
their work and carry them off. If attacked, they hide in the herbage ; and if
pursued, enter the hills. For this reason, from ancient times till now they have
not been affected by the monarch’s teachin. s.” [It would appear from this that
these Yemishi, the modern Yezo or Ainos, were only one tribe out of many, but in
nearly all passages of the ancient chronicles, where savages are mentioned, the
term Yemishi is used. This name is said to have been given to them on account
of the resemblance in appearance between their hairy faces and the prawn’s head.]
The Mikado then proceeds to extol the qualities which seem specially to fit his
son for the undertaking, and he sets forth with two companions and a cook
called Seven-span-shin (Nana-tsuka-hagi). On his way he calls upon his aunt, in
Ise, and upon his saying that he is going to fight the savages, she gives him the
sword, bidding him to be diligent in the performance of his duty. When he
reaches the province of Suruga, the local rebels pretend to submit, and tell him
a story about a prairie full of deer, who are so numerous that their breath
resembles a mist, and their legs a plantation of young trees. He falls into the
trap, and goes off to hunt the deer on the prairie, whereupon the rebels set fire
to the herbage with the intention of destroying him. He pulls out a flint and
steel, kindles a counter fire, and so escapes. Another account is that the sword,
Murakumo, which he wore, of itself left the scabbard and cut down the herbage
all round, thus enabling him to escape, whence it was re-named Knsa-nagi, Herb-
queller. — (AH-hon-gi.')

On returning victorious from his expedition, the prince turned aside to the
dwelling of Miyasu-hime in Wohari, and married her. After a month’s stay, he
departed, leaving the sword with her as a pledge that he would send for her as soon
as he reached his home at the capital, telling her to keep it as a precious treasure,
but met with his death when engaged in an adventure with the god of Ibuki yama
and she never saw him again. Miyasu-hime fulfilled his injunctions, and laid
VOL. IX. 8 .


204


SA.TOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


the sword in the couch which the prince had occupied, but the weapon soon
manifested its divine character by working miracles in favour of those who prayed
to it, and she finally resolved to build a temple for its safe keeping. To this the
name of Atsuta, “Hot-field,” was given, from the circumstance of a tree which
stood there having burst into flame, and so fallen prone into the swampy soil
of a rice-field, where it continued to burn and so heated the gxoi\x\di.—{Ni-ho)l-gi).

This concludes the supernatural part of the history of the regalia,

®The reader of the Norito thus makes the gods refer to the throne in the
Hall of Audience.

Hi-tmgii written Q by following closely the meaning of the Chinese
■characters, may be interpreted either ‘sun’s succession’ or ‘sun’s successor,’ in the
latter of which senses it is usually understood by modei-n writers. In that case
the phrase Ama-tsu hi-isttgi is in apposition to Oho-ya-shima- Toyo-ashi-ham no
nridmAio no Ktati. It has been, however, suggested that disregarding the strict
meaning of the Chinese characters, hi-tsugi may be taken as if it were written
H ‘succession of days,’ i.e., continuation of existence, governed by yorodzu
■chi aki naga aki ni (where in modern Japanese we should have ni shile instead of
simply ni\ ‘ making the celestial continuation of days a myriad thousand autumns
of long autumns,’ i.e., live foreover. Another way of writing this word is 0
as in Ko-zhi-ki Defi, vol. 14, f. 36. Motowori here proposes to explain fsugi by
‘ to g ve,’ and to interpret Ama-tsu hi-tsugi shitoshimesamu as equivalent to Oho
tni kami no tsugi-yosashi-tamafu ine wo mochite kashiku mi he wo shiroshimesanm,
literally, ‘ shall enjoy the food prepared from the rice-plant bestowed upon him
by the great goddess,’ or more shortly, ‘ enjoy the gift of heaven’s sun.’ But
against such a theory there is the fact that ama-tsu hi-tsugi is the traditional
reading of such Chinese expressions as and |J|

’ Oho ya shima Toyo ashi-hara no midzu-ho no kuni. The first part of this
honorific and descriptive iitle of the Japanese realm. Oho ya shima, is explained
in a note on p. 424 of Vol. VII. Toyo is an honorific which may be variously
tendered by ‘flourishing,’ luxuriant,’ ‘abundant,’ ‘powerful,’ according to the
context. Ashi is perhaps PhragmitCs Roxburghii, and hana, tendered ‘ prairie ’ or
moor,’ means any wild uncultivated groimd. When the name of a plant or tree is
prefixed to it, it then means a tract of ground chiefly covered with that species, as
for instance maisu-hara, a pine wood. Ashi-hara is therefore ground covered with
the reed known as ashi (also called yoshi). Japan is sometimes called Ashi-harano
naka-tsu kunii country in the middle of reed-covered wilds, which perhaps
may have been a good description of the country as it appeared to the eyes of its
first settlers when unreclaimed swamps covered the flat ground now cultivated as
rice-fields. Some writers suggest that naka-tsu kuni should be understood as
meaning ‘ Central region,’ and that it was adopted in imitation of the Chinese
ijj [^, central region or “ Middle Kingdom.” In the compound here used it must


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITDALS. — PART IH.


205


not be supposed that Toyo refers to the luxuriance of the reeds but it is rather to
be taken as an epithet of the country. Midzu is found in the modern colloquial in
the word midzn midm-shii, applied to anything that is both young, fresh-looking
and beautiful, the essence of the idea conveyed by it being youthful freshness. It
would not be applied to anything old, however beautiful the thing might be. IIo is
the ear of the rice-plant, and the most general signification that can be given to
it is ‘spike.’ (See note 17, p. 188 ofVol. VII.) Hence we get as the equivalent
of the whole, ‘ Great hlany islands, the luxuriant reed-plain region of fresh-young
spikes,’

” This means the deliberations amongst the gods, assembled in Council by the
.Sun-goddess and Taka-'mi-musubi no Mikoto, to consider what measures should
be adopted for the conquest of Japan, which was then inhabited by the descendants
of Susa-no-wo no Mikoto. In Note 4 the myth of his settlement in Idzumo has
already been related, and also his marriage with Kushi-inade-hime, who is
probably a personification of agriculture. The seventh in descent from the pair,
counting both extremes, was Oho-kuni-niishi, also called Oho-na-tnuji, “ He had
a large number of brothers, but all left the country to him, the reason of which
was as follows; All of them wanted to marry Yakami hime of Inaba, and going
to Inaba in company, they took him wdth them as a servant to carry their bag.
When they came to Cape Keta (in Inaba) they found a perfectly bald hare lying
on the ground, and addressed it, saying: ‘You are to bathe in the brine, and
lie upon the spur of a high mountain breasting the breeze,’ and the hare did as
they bid him. As the brine dried upon him, the skin was split all over his body
by the wind, and he lay there weeping with pain. Oho-na-muji, who came by
last of all, seeing the hare in this plight, asked him why he lay there weeping.
The hare replied : ‘ I was in the Island of the Offing and wished to cross over to

this land, but having no means of doing so, cheated the sea sharks (warn), saying;
I should like to enter into a rivalry with you as to which of us has the largest
tribe. If you will bring all your tribe with you, and let them lie in a row front
this island to Cape Keta, I will tread on them, and count them as I run

across, thus learnii^^which of our tribes is the largest. "When I said this to

them, they were deceived, and lay down in a row, and I treading on them, counted
them as I came across. Just as I was about to land, I said: You have been
cheated by me, and as soon as I had finished speaking, the very last of the
sharks seized me and stripped off my clothing. As I was lamenting and weeping
thereat, the many gods who preceded thee commanded me to bathe in the brine,
and to lie exposed to the wind. And when I did as they had told me, the whole
of my body was hurt.’ Thereupon Oho-na-muji no Kami bade the hare go
quickly to the mouth of the river, and after washing his body with the fresh
water, to collect the pollen of the sedges which grew in the stream, and spreading
it on the ground, to roll upon it, so that his body would be restored. And [the

hare] having done as he was bid, his body became as before. This was the


206


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS. — PART III.


* White hare of Inaba/ and even now they call it the ‘ Hare god.’ The hare then
said to Oho-na-muji : ‘These many gods shall certainly not get Yakami hime,
but thou shalt, though thou bearest the bag.”

The scene then changes to the abode of the damsel, who rejects the suit of
the brothers, and declares her preference for Oho-na-muji. The disappointed
suitors determined to take the life of their fortunate rival, which they did by
rolling a huge red-hot stone down hill to Oho-na-muji, who supposed it to be
the wild boar for which they had told him to be on the look-out. The ruse
succeeded, and he was Inirnt to death. His mother appealed to the celestial
gods, who sent dov'n Kisa-gahi hime and Umugi hime (the shells called
and hama-gitri). The first calcined her shell, while the second brought water in
hers, and they made a paste with which they besmeared the burnt corpse. By this
process he was restored to life again, and made much more beautiful than before.
Next his brothers beguiled him into the forest, where they made him pass through
the split trunk of a tree, in which they had inserted a wedge, but as soon as he
was in the middle of the tree they suddenly withdrew the wedge, so that he was
caught as in a trap. His mother rescued him, and to save him from their
machinations, sent him to the care of Ohoyabiko, who lived in the province of
Kii, and was probably related to the ruling family of Idzumo. After that he
visits Susa-no-wo in the infernal regions, and after many adventures there, finally
returns with a famous sword, bow and arrows^ which have the power of conferring
long life on their possessor. With their aid he slays his brothers, and becomes
ruler of the whole country. While in the infernal regions he had married Suseri-
bime, the daughter of Susa-no-wo, and now he takes as a second wife his previous
love Yakami hime, who is afraid of the legitimate spouse, and takes to flight’
leaving the child she had borne to him in the fork of a tree. By other women
he begot a large number of children, amongst whom the most famous are Aji-
shiki-taka-hiko-ne (the god of Kamo in Yamato), Shitateru hime and Koto-shiro-
nushi, and in conjunction with Sukuna-hikona he brings the country under cultiva-
tion.

Suddenly the .Sun-goddess resolves to make a grant of the I.uxuriant Reed-
plain region of Fresh-young Spikes to her adopted child Masaka-a-katsu-kachi-
haya-bi-ame-no-oshi-ho-mimi no Mikoto, and despatches him on the journey
downwards. Taking his stand on the Floating Bridge of Heaven (which formed
the means of communication between heaven and earth in those days) he observed
that the earth was violently disturbed, and straightway returned to heaven.
Upon this Tarke-mi-musubi no kami and Ama-terasu-oho-mi-kami “ assembled all
the many hundreds of myriads of gods by the bed of the Peaceful River of heaven,
and spoke thus to Omohi-gane no kami ; ‘ This region in the midst of the reed
plains has been granted by us to our child to rule over. We see that the country
contains countless gods of great energy who behave turbulently, and ask you what
god shall we send down to subdue them.’ Ihen Craohi-gane no kami and all the
many myiiads of gods took counsel, and advised that Ame-no-hohi no kami should


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III,


207


be sent. So Ame-no-hilco no Icami was sent, but be sought to curry favour witb
Obo-kuni-nusbi, and three years passed without his returning to make a report.”
— {Ko-zhi-ki), In the Nihoh-gi, the god with the long name, which is usually
shortened to Ama-no-oshi-ho-mimi, marries a daughter of Taka-mi-musubi, and
begets Ninigi no Mikoto. Taka-mi-musubi was very fond of his grandson, and
resolved to make him prince of Ashi-hara no Naka-tsu kuni. “ But in that region
were gods who glittered like the fire-fly’s light, and bad gods who buzzed like
bees, besides whom there were plants and trees which could speak. Taka-mi-
musubi no Kami therefore assembled the gods and said to them ; ‘ I

want to subdue the gods of Ashi-hara no Naka-tsu kuni. Whom would it be best
to send? Let none of you conceal his opinion.’ All replied; ‘Send Araa-no
hobi no Mikolo, for he is a valiant god, and it would be well to try him.’ So
Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto deferred to their advice, and sent down Ama-no-
hohi no Mikoto to conquer the country. This god, however, flattered and
cajoled Oho-na-muji no kami, and three years passed without his making any
report.”

The Ko-zhi-ki says that under these circumstances Taka-mi-musubi no kami
and Ama-terasu-oho-mi-kami again asked the gods whom they should send, seeing
that the former messenger had not returned. Omohi-gane no kami suggested
the name of Ame-waka hiko who was accepted. Armed with a deer-bow and
winged arrows, the gift of the gods, he descended on to the earth, where he
married Shita-teru hiru hime, one of Oho-kuni-nushi's children, hoping to inherit
the kingdom, and eight years passed without anything being heard from him. A
council of the gods was again held to determine who should be sent to inquire
the reason of the delay, and the result was the despatch of a pheasant, whom the
Supreme Pair commanded to go and ask Ame-waka hiko for an explanation.
“ So the pheasant descending to the earth, perched upon the umbrageous katsura
outside the gate of Ame-waka-hiko’s house, and repeated to him what the
heavenly gods had bid him say. Thereupon Ame no Sagume (an evil spirit) said
to him: ‘The voice of that bird is very ugly; shoot it.’ So he took the bow
and arrow given to him by the heavenly gods, and shot the pheasant, and the arrow
passing through its bosom, flew back to heaven and came where Ama-terasu Oho-
mi-kami and Takagi no kami were sitting in the bed of the Peaceful River.
Takagi no kami is another name for Taka-mi-musubi. Taking up the arrow and
looking at it, he saw blood on its feather, and said : ‘ This was the arrow given
to Ame-waka hiko.’ Then showing it to all the gods, he said : ‘ If this arrow
came hither after Ame-waka hiko, faithful to the command laid upon him, had
shot the wicked gods, let it not strike him, but if he has an evil heart, let Ame-
waka hiko die.’ With these words he took the arrow, and thrusting it down-
wards through the hole by wliich it had entered, sent it back. It struck Ame-
waka hiko on the top of his breast, as he we was sleeping on his couch, and
killed him.

“ Then Ama-terasu Oho-mi-kami said: ‘What god shall we now send?’


208


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS. — PART III.


"V^Tiereupon Omolii-gane no kami and the other gods said : ‘ Send Itsu no Wo-
habari no kami, who dwells in the heavenly rock-built house near the source of
the peaceful River of Heaven. Or if not him, then send Take-mika-dzuch’i-no-
wo no kami, the son of that god. But as Ame-no-Wohabari no kami has turned
aside the waters of that river and blocked up the road, no other god can get to
him. Send, therefore, Arae-no-kaku no kami.’ So she sent Ame-no-kaku no
kami to ask Ame-no-Wohabari no kami, who said : ‘ I obey. But you should
send my son Take-mika-dzuchi no kami,’ and he gave [his son]. So Ama-terasu
Oho-mi-kami attaclied Ame-no-tori-fune no kami to Take-mika-dzuchi no kami,
and despatched them down to the earth.”

The two gods descended to the province of Idzumo, and obtained the sub-
mission of ICoto-shiro-nushi (see. p. 122 of Vol. VII), and the original proceeds to
say: “So they asked Oho-kuni-nnshi < Your son Koto shiro-nushi no kami has
thus spoken ; have you any other son who wishes to speak ? ’ He replied : ‘ There
is my son Take-mi-na-gata, but none other.’ and as he thus spoke, Take-mi-na-
gata came up, bearing on the tips of his fingers a rock such as a thousand
ordinary men would be required to move, and saying: ‘ Who is it that thus comes
to our country and secretly talks? Come, I will have a trial of strength with you.
To begin with, let me take your hand.’ So Take-mika-dzuchi no kami let him
lake it, whereupon it changed into an erect icicle, and then into tlie edge of a
sword, which frightened him so that he drew back. After that Take-mika-dzuchi
«#ked permission to take Take-mi-na-gata’s hand, which he grasped and crushed
like a young reed, and flung roughly from him. Take-mi-na-gata fled, and the
other pursuing him to the lake of Suwa, in the province, Shinano, was about to
kill him, when Take-mi-na-gata said to the god : ‘ I submit. Do not kill me.
I will never leave this spot, rebel against the commands of my father Oho-
kuni-nushi no kami, nor violate the promise given by Yahe-koto-shiro-nushi no
kami, but will surrender this land in accordance with the commands of the child
of the heavenly gods.’

“.So they returned, and asked Oho-kuni-uushi no kami, saying: ‘Your son
Koto-shiro-nushi no kami and Take-mi-na-gata no kami have declared that they
will not violate the commands of the CHII.D of the heavenly gods. What are your
feelings ?’ He replied, saying : ‘ Just as my two sons have said, I too will not
Tiolate them. In accordance with the (heavenly; command, I will give up this
reed-plain central region. But as to my place of residence, if you will make stout
the HOUSfi pillars on the bottom-most rocks, and make high the cross-beams to
the plain of high heaven, like the rich and sufficing NEST where the child of the
heavenly gods enjoys the succession of heaven’s sun, and will order matters well,
I will hide in the many road-windings (i.e., the abode of the dead) and serve him.
And if my children, the numberless gods, serve under the guidance of Yahe-koto-
shiro-nushi no kami, there will be no disobedient gods.’ And having said this he
disappeared.” — [luh-jhi-ki.)


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUALS.— -PART III. 20^

In the Ni*hon-gi version, Take-milca-dzuchi is accompanied by Futsu-nushi
instead of Ame-no-tori-ftine. They learn from Oho kuni-nnshi (who in this
chronicle is called Oho-na-muji) that it is necessary to obtain the consent of his
son Koto-shiro-nnshi, and despatch a messenger to the latter, who at once gives in
his submission and disappears. Upon the messenger’s return with this information,
Oho-na-muji announces his own determination to depart, in order to prevent the
gods of the country from o.ifering resistance, and having delivered to them the
spear with which he had originally acquired his donation-s, he disappears,

“ So they built a heavenly residence at Tagishi no Obama, in the province of
Idzumo, and Kushi-ya-tama no kami, the grandson of Minate no kami, was ap-
pointed cook, and offered up heavenly cookery. Then, after prayers had been
offered, Kushi-ya-tama no kami (‘god of miraculous and numerous offerings’)
changed into a cormorant, and entering the bottom of the sea, took clay from the
bottom in its mouth and made many heavenly dishes, and cutting a seaweed
stalk made a fire-mortar, and made a pestle out of Komo (a kind of seaweed),
and drilling out fire therewith, said : ‘ The fire which I have drilled will I burn
until the soot of the rich and sufircing heavenly new nest of the PARENT Kami-
musubi in heaven hangs down many hand-breadths long, and the earth below will
I bake down to its bottom-most rocks, and stretching a thousand fathoms of paper-
mulberry rope, will draw togetlier and bring ashore the fisherman’s large-mouthed
small-finned suztiki, [and] will offer up the heavenly fish-food on bending split
bamboos.’

“Then Take-mika-dzuchi went backup (to heaven), and reported how he had
subdued and pacified the reed-plain central region.”— (Ab-3/«‘-/^f.) Everything w^
therefore ready for the descent of Ninigi no Mikotp.

"Hirata reads ihahi ‘felicitate,’ apparently on the ground that it is the read-
ing of no f. 33, col. 5. prescribed in the note of the original transcriber. It
has no justification here.

For chidari and tahi ton consult Ko-zhi-ki Den, XIV., f- 39> Oho-bara-
hi Go-shiyaku, I, ff, $9

” luka/n. Mabuchi supposes this to be a corruption of yiiki-ahi, meetings.

’“Lit., dug, i.e., the holes for the pdlars.

In the Japanese text the following gloss is here inserted : “ This is the

Spirit of Wood,” and after the name of the second deity here addressed, is ano-
ther : “ This is the Spirit of the Rice-plant, commonly called Uga no Mi-tama,

Just as, at the present day, in the hut of a woman in child-birth, pieces of split
wood and bundles of the rice-plant are placed near the door, and then rice is
scattered about the interior of the hut.’.’ These glosses are perhaps as old as
the beginning of the 10th century, when the present collection of norifo was made,
or may be even earlier. The reference to the practice of removing^ a parturient
woman to a hut built for the purpose, where the worship of the spirits of timber
and the rice-plant was performed, and rice scattered about as a charm against
evil spirits, shows that the ceremony was at one time observed universally upon


210


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART III.


the erection of a new house, no matter what the station in life of its owner, and
not exclusively at the inauguration of a palace belonging to the sovereign. Yabune
has already been explained. Kukuchi is the old reading, for which Mabuchi, and
others following him, have substituted ktikiinochi, without any good reason, as
far as I can see. Kukuchi is probably the same word as hukide, * to sprout
forth.’ Toyo-uke-bime is the Goddess of Food, to whom Ritual No. 3 is addressed.
It has been suggested that this deity is primarily the Earth-goddess, zeke, and
uke-mochi in one of her other names, being taken in the sense of ‘ supporter.’ If
this be so, her worship here as the supporter of the foundation of the palace
would be perfectly logical.

**In the Ko-zhi-ki’s account of Izanagi’s lustration by bathing in the sea,
after his return from visiting his dead spouse Izanami in the nether world, we
read that “ the name of the first god who was produced when he dived into the
central current was Yaso-maga-tsu-bi no karai and next Oho-maga-tsu-bi no kami.
These two gods were generated from the pollution contracted by him when he
went to the dirty and ugly region (i.e,, of the dead). And the names of the gods
who were next generated to correct the evil were Kamu-naho-bi no kami and next
Oho-naho-bi no kami, and next Idzumo-me no kami.” Kaho is * straight ’ (Latin,
rectus) and nahosu, nahoru are the transitive verb and' intransitive verb ‘to
straighten,’ ‘ to correct.’ Bi is evidently the same m in maga-tsu-bi, and perhaps
in mmu~bi, which forms part of the names of the Creators. (According to the
Yamato-hime Sei-ki, Kamu-naho-bi and Oho-naho-bi are two names of one god*
Ibukido-nushi, who is the ‘ Rough Spirit ’ of Toyo-uke-bime.) These were the
gods to whom was assigned the task of counteracting all the evil of whatever
kind, whether moral, physical, ceremonial or natural, that might arise in the
world.

“ These are general expressions for female and male attendants. The hire
rendered ‘ scarf,’ was worn by the women, called uneme, who waited on the
Mikado, the tasuki was a cord or sash passed over the shoulders, round the back
of the neck, and attached to the wrists, to strengthen the hands for the support
of weights, whence the name, which means ‘hand-helper.’ It was thus different
both in form and use from the modern tasuki, a cord with its two ends joined
which is worn behind the neck, under the arms and round the back, to keep the
modern loose sleeves out of the way when household duties are being performed.


No. 9— MIKADO MATSURI OB SEKVICE OF THE GATES
OF THE PALACE.

This service was held twice annually, but nothing is known of the
ceremonies by which it was accompanied, beyond the fact that certain
Virgin Priestesses of the Gates officiated in chief. Some remarks upon


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART HI.


211


the names of the two gods Kushi-iha-ma-do no Mikoto and Toyo-iha-ma-
do no Mikoto, will be found in Note 31 to the “ Praying for Harvest,”
to which nothing need be added here. Motowori suggests that some
such introductory sentence as “ He declares in the presence of the
sovran gods of the GATES ” has been omitted by a copyist’s error from
the MS. of the Yen-gi Shiki, which seems very probable.


EITUAL.

[translation.]

He says, with reference to declaring the names Wonderful-rock-Gate’s
Augmtnesa and Powerful-rock-Gate’s Augustness, 1 fulfil the praises of
the NAMES Powerful-rock-Gate’s Augustness and Wonderful-rock-Gate’s
Augustness, because you deign to obstruct like innumerable piles of
rock in the inner and outer GATES of the four quarters, prevent the
servants of His Majesty from being poisoned and seduced by the wicked-
ness which may be uttered by the god called Ame no Magatsuhi, who
may come unfriendly and turbulent from the four quarters and the four
corners, and heeause you guard when they come^ from the top, and guard
the bottom when they come from the bottom, and waiting repel, sweep
and send them away, and refute them : in the morning open the gates, in-
quire and learn the names of the persons who come in and of those that
go out, see and correct, hear and correct with divine-correcting and
great-correcting* the faults and errors that may be committed hy them,
and cause them to serve peacefully and tranquilly.

NOTES.

* Mote literallv ‘ go ’ {yukaba). From tliis it appears that the service was
held at a temple situated just outside the Palace gates.

“I.e., in the same way as the gods called Divine-corrector and Great-corrector


( 213 )


HIDEYOSHI’S INVASION OF KOREA.


CHAPTER III.~NEGOTIATION.


By W . G. Aston.


[Read June 14, 1881.]

While their diplomatists were engaged in negotiating a formal
Treaty of Peace, the three countries were now to enjoy a few years of
precarious quiet. China and Japan were sincerely desirous of putting
an end to the war, and the Koreans alone were reluctant that any
compromise should be made with the enemy whom they so bitterly
detested. Still graver obstacles, however, to the success of the negotia-
tions were the complete mistrust with which each party regarded the two
others, and the difficulty in bringing about any real understanding
between the haughty Hideyoshi and a court whose sole idea of foreign
relations then, and peidiaps even now, was to accept graciously the
homage and tribute of the outer barbarian, or to chastise his insolence
when he proved contumacious. Nothing less would satisfy the Chinese
than to place Hideyoshi in the position of a humble vassal, who sought
by offering tribute to have his offences condoned, and Ikei was accused
by the Koreans of systematically humouring the pride of his Govern-
ment by keeping up the fiction that the Japanese were suppliants who
offered their submission and sued for pardon. He was said to have
always substituted in his reports to his Government the word ‘ submis-
sion ’ for ‘ peace,’ the word actually used by the Japanese, and a docu-
ment brought over by an envoy named Konishi Hida no Kami, who


VOL. IX.


8 .


■2L4 ASTON: HIDEYOBHi’S INVASION OF KOREA.

accompanied Ikei back from Japan, was described to the Koreans as
‘ Hideyoshi’s letter of submission.’ Konishi proceeded with this letter
as far as Laotnng, where he was detained by order of the Chinese
Government, who had heard of the expedition against Ohinchu and
were unable to reconcile it with Hideyoshi’s pacific assurances. It was
suspected that the document which he bore was a forgery of some of the
Japanese generals who were tired of the war, and longed to return 'to
their own country. Ikei did his best to smooth matters over, and his
efforts were seconded by the famine which continued to rage, and which
made the stay of either Japanese or Chinese in Korea extremely difficult.
Towards the end of the year (1594) the Chinese withdrew from the
■country altogether. Most of the Japanese were also recalled, a small
garrison being left in and about Pusan, and the King of Korea was at
last enabled to return to his capital and take up his residence there.
A.bout this time he received a Chinese official who had been sent to
impress on the Korean Government the necessity of making peace. The
following characteristic specimen of the language held by this officer is
preserved in the pages of the Korean historian Riu.

“The vehemence of the Japanese slaves when they invaded your
country was like splitting bamboos. They established themselves in
the three cities of Pingshaug, Kaishiing and the Capital : they took
possession of eight or nine tenths of your land and people ; they took
your princes and ministers prisoners. Our Emperor in his indignation
raised an army which in one battle took Piugshang and again advanc-
ing, captured Kaislmng. At last the Japanese slaves abandoned the
capital and fled, and sent back the captured princes and ministers.
They have also restored your territory for two thousand U. Our money
expenditure it is impossible to estimate, and our losses in men and
horses have been very great. Ko further protection will be vouchsafed
by the imperial Government to its dependency : the extreme kindness of
the Emperor has already been carried too far. It is needless any more
to transport supplies or to wage war. The Japanese slaves, in dread of
cur might, have begged for peace and have asked permission to render
tribute. The Emperor has been graciously pleased to accept their
tribute, and to receive them into the number of his outer vassals. They
will all be driven beyond the sea, and will not return to attack you. The


ASTON : HIDEYOSHl’S INVASION OE KOREA. 215

most far-sighted policy oa your part is to rest from war and to unravel
confusion. Your supplies are exhausted : your people devour one
another. On what do you place reliance when you wish for war ? We
will no longer supply your country with stores, and if we cease to
accept tribute from the Japanese slaves, they will assuredly turn their
wrath against Korea, and bring 3 mur country to ruin. Would it not be
better to take counsel beforehand ? When Kow tsien* was beaten at
Kvvaike, would he not gladly have eaten the flesh of his enemy Fucha ?
Yet for a time he bore his disgrace, and contained his mortification,
awaiting the time for his revenge. In that case, the prince became a
vassal, the wife became a concubine. But here we have made the
Japanese slaves ask leave to accept the ^position of vassals and con^
cubines to the Central Land.”

The ' tribute ’ to be paid by Japan to China is explained by an
allusion in another work to a proposition of Hideyoshi’s for the opening
of a ‘ tribute-market ’ at Kingpo. In other words, Kingpo was to be
opened to Japanese commerce, in consideration of a payment by w'ay of
customs duties. This proposal was ultimately rejected.

The Korean Government, after long hesitation; at last consented
reluctantly to make peace. Konishi Hida no Kami, who had been
detained all this time ha Laotung, was now permitted to proceed to
Peking, where he gave his solemn adhesion to the three articles of
peace thus briefly recorded by Riu.

I. — To grant investiture — not tribute.

II. — All Japanese to leave Korea.

III. — Never again to invade Korea.

Konishi’s language on this occasion has been fully reported, and
is eminently suggestive of the well-known witty definition of a diplo-
matist. One' of his most astounding assertions was that the Tmn6
(Mikado) and Kohu-6 (Shu-gun) of Japan were one and the same
person. In spite, however, of the so-called treaty signed by Konishi,
peace was still far from being assured. The J apanese generals at
Pusan apparently considered that they were not bound by it, for wben
the Chinese envoys arrived in Korea on their way to J ajaan to carry out


Vide Mayers’ Chinese Manual, Part I, §139 and 276.


216 Aston: hideyoshi’s invasion of koeea.

the agreeraent by -wbicli Hideyoshi was to receive investiture as King of
Japan, they found Pusan and some of the neighbouring towns still
occupied by Japanese garrisons. The envoys protested against this
failure to carry out the treaty, and said they were instructed not to
leave Korea so long as a single Japanese soldier remained in the
country. The Japanese consented to evacuate several of the castles
held by them near Pusan, but insisted on retaining that city itself and
one or two smaller places as a guarantee of the good faith of the Chinese,
which on former occasions they had had reason to suspect. They
agreed, however, to abandon Pusan also as soon as the Chinese ambas-
sadors gave proof of their friendly intentions by coming into the Japanese
camp. The junior ambassador did so in the 8th month of the year
1595, but the Japanese were not satisfied until the senior ambassador
also trusted himself with them. No sooner had he done so than fresh
difficulties were made. The Japanese generals now refused to give up
Pusan without renewed instructions from Hideyoshi, and Konishi
Yukinaga went to Japan for the purpose of copstiltiog hijn. Konishi
did not return until the first month of' the following year (1696), but
as there was still no definite order to withdraw the troops, Ikei left the
two ambassadors at Pusan and went to Japan with Konishi to arrange the
ceremonies, as he said, for the reception of the ambassadors. Nobody
knew what the real object of his visit was. During his absence, which
was very protracted, the chief Chinese ambassador, who was a timid
man was persuaded by some one that the Japanese did not really want
investiture, but that their object was to make prisoners of 'hiin and his
friends, and to treat them with harshness and contumely. He was
terribly alarmed, and fled from the Japanese camp at midnight disguised
and unattended, leaving behind him even his seals of office. The next
morning his flight was discovered by the Japanese, and parties
were sent out in all directions in pursuit of him, but without success.
He escaped by by-ways among the hills, suffering great hardships,
until he at last reached Kiung-chu, from which place he journeyed back
to his own country. His colleague remained quietly behind and reas-
sured the Japanese, who at first did not know what to make of the
.sudden disappearance of the senior ambassador. On Ikei’s return with
Konishi, the castles of Sesukai and Takejima were given up to the


ASTON: HIDEYOSHI’S INVASION OP KOKEA.


217


Koreans, leaving only Pusan in tlie hands of the Japanese. With this
concession the Chinese ambassador seems to have contented himself,
for after a little further delay, caused by the unwillingness of the
Korean Government to appoint an ambassador to accompany the Chinese
envoy, the embassy at length sailed from Korea. It consisted of
the junior Chinese ambassador, with Ikei, and two Korean officers who
accompanied the latter in a subordinate capacity. They landed at Sakai
near Osaka on the 16th of the 8th month, 1596, and proceeded a few
days later to Kidto, where they arrived shortly after the great earthquake
of that year.

Great preparations had been made for their reception, and at first
it seemed as if everything was about to pass off harmoniously. The
first discordant note was struck by Hideyoshi taking umbrage at the
circumstance that the Korean princes had not come in person to thank
him for their release, but had allowed themselves to be represented by
officers of inferior rank. These officers were not admitted to his
presence, and were excluded from the audience given to the Chinese
in the Castle of Fushimi on the 2nd of the 9th month, when the
ceremony of investing Hideyoshi as King of Japan was performed
with great state in the presence of all his court. It consisted in
presenting to him the patent of investiture, with a golden seal and a
crown and robe of state.

Hideyoshi gave a banquet on the following day to the two Chinese
ambassadors, at which he wore his crown and robe, and sat on a raised
dais, the ambassadors being seated on a lower platform. The members
of Hideyoshi’s Court who were present also wore the robes and caps
of honour presented to them by the Emperor of China.

After this entertainment, Hideyoshi retired to a summer-house
in the garden of the Castle, where he had commanded two learned
priests to meet him to explain the Patent of Investiture. He was
himself not only ignorant of the Chinese written character, but despised
it, and once declared that when his scheme of conquering Korea and
China was carried out, he would compel those countries to adopt the
Japanese phonetic system of spelling. Konishi, who was now in KiOto,
having accompanied the Chinese ambassadors from Korea, looked
forward with great apprehension to the reading of the Patent, which


218


ASTON: HIDEYOSHl’s INVASION OF KOREA.


lie knew well to be the critical moment of the whole proceedings. He
took the precaution of having a private interview with the priests, and
strongly impressed on them the expediency of modifying, in their
translation of the document, any expressions which might seem
calculated to wound Hideyoshi’s pride. But they were too conscien-
tious to accept this advice, and interpreted it faithfully. It ran as
follows: —

“The influence of the holy and divine one (Confucius) is wide-
spread ; he is honoured and loved wherever the heavens overhang and
the'earth upbears. The Imperial command is universal; even as far
as the bounds of ocean where the sun rises, there are none who do
not obey it.

“In ancient times our Imperial ancestors bestowed their favours
On many lands; the Tortoise knots^ and the Dragon writing were sent
to the limits of far Busang (Japan), the pure alabaster and the great seal
character were granted to the mountains of the submissive country.
Thereafter came billowy times when communication was interrupted,
but an auspicious opportunity has now arrived, when it has pleased us
again to address you.

“You, Toyotomi Taira TIidcyoshi, having established an Island
Kingdom, and knowing the reverence due to the Central Land, sent to
the west an envoy, and with gladness and afiection offered your
allegiance. On the north you knocked at the barrier of ten thousand R,
and earnestly requested to be admitted within our dominions. Your,
mind is already confirmed in reverent submissiveuess. How can we
grudge our favour to so great meekness ?

“ We do therefore specially invest you with the dignity of King of
Japan, and to that intent issue this our commission. Ti’easure it up
carefully. Over the sea we send you a crown and robe, so that you
may follow our ancient custom as respects dress. Faithfully defend
the frontier of the Empire; let it be your study to act worthily of your
position as our minister; practice moderation and self-restraint ; cherish


■ gives several specimens of letters from tire Emperor of China,

among others one addressed to the Sho-gun Yoshinori, in which he is styled kokn d
of Japan.


ASTON ; HlDEYOSfll’s INVASION 03? KOREA.


21&


gratitude for the Imperial favour so bountifully bestowed upon you;
change not your fidelity; be humbly guided by our admonitions;
continue always to follow our instructions.

“ Eespect this I”

The Patent was accompanied by the following letter of instructions;

“We, in reverent obedience to the command of Heaven, rule over
all countries. Our peaceful reign is not over the Central Land alone;
we are not contented until there is none who is not happy throughout
the whole world within and without the seas, wherever the sun and
moon shine.

“You, Taira Hideyoshi of Japan, lately made war on Korea>
a country which for two hundred years has been tributary to this
Empire. The Koreans having appealed to us in their distress, our
indignation flamed forth, and we despatched a body of troops
to their assistance. But it was against our real wishes to resort to
bloodshed, and when your general Toyotomi Yukinaga sent his
messenger Fujiwara Yukiyasu (Konishi Hida no Kami) to explain the
reason of your sending an expedition and making war, viz., that it arose
in the first place from your d^ire to request investiture from this*
Empire, that, you had asked Korea to prefer this petition on your behalf
but that that country had thrown obstacles in the way, and would not
consent to communicate to us your wishes. This you said had excited
your opposition and was the cause of troubling the Celestial troops. You
showed regret for your error, and retired, giving up the royal capital
of Korea and sending back the captured princes and grandees. You
also presented a respectful memorial embodying the above-mentioned
request.

“ The general purport of your communications was reported to us
by our ministers. But your people again attacked the Korean town of
Chinchu, conduct which betrayed a feeling contrary to your protesta-
tions, and we therefore declined to give you an answer. A short time
ago, however, you reiterated your request through King Riyen of Korea,
and it was further reported to us that the Japanese at Pusan had given
no trouble for years, but were awaiting the arrival of the envoy of
investiture, and showed themselves thoroughly respectful and loyal.
For these reasons we specially summoned Fujiwara Yukiyasu to our


220


ASTON : HIDEYOSHl’S INVASION OF KOKEA,


capital, where we assembled our civil and military officials in our Court,
and caused them fully to investigate the facts. The original Treaty of
three clauses was amended, and it was stipulated that all the Japanese
at Pusan should now be withdrawn, leaving not a single man behind;
that the matter would be considered as settled by the grant of in-
vestiture, the claim for a tribute-market being dropped, and that you
would not again commit a breach of friendly relations by a second time
invading Korea. When the true facts of the case were manifested,
your respectful loyalty was at length proved ; and we felt compelled to
abandon our suspicions, and to rejoice that you join with us in doing
good. We therefore first instructed Chin Ikei® to proceed to Pusan, and
to notify to your people that they must all return to their country, and
afterwards sent a special embassy consisting of Ei Sosei " ^ |^)

as chief, and Y6 H6ki6® (j^ 'jj assistant ambassador, with due

authority to invest you, Taira Hideyoshi, as King of Japan, and to bestow'
on you the golden seal and robe appertaining to that dignity. We have
also bestowed dignities on all your subordinate officials according to their ,
respective merits, making a liberal distribution of our favours. We
also make proclamation to the people of your country and enjoin on
them to be obedient to your orders : let none presume to disregard
them I Let your dynasty dwell in the land from generation to genera-
tion and rule over its inhabitants.

“ The investiture was first granted to your country by our ancestor.
Emperor Ohing-tsu (1403-1425), so that this is now the second time of
doing so. Our favour to Japan may well be said to be of old standing.

“ Now that you have received investiture, sedulously observe the
three articles of the 'Treaty; steadfastly maintain your singleness of
heart; show your gratitude to this Empire by your loyal behaviour; by
sincerity and justice preserve peace with all countries. '' In regard to
the dependent savage tribes on your borders, be studious to apply
measures of repression and restraint so as to prevent trouble from
arising along your coasts. We trust that you will constantly endeavour
to make the people of your sixty-six islands live together in harmony :
let it be your aim to cause those who have })een torn away from


Titles omitted in the translation.


ASTON : HIDEYOSHI'S INVASION OP KOREA.


221


tiieir proper avocations to settle down peacefully, and give them an op-
portunity of being reunited to their parents and families. By so doing
you will carry out our wishes, and will act in accordance with the will
of Heaven above. With regard to the question of rendering tribute
(i.e., the opening of Kingpo to foreign commerce), it is indeed a proof
of your respect and fidelity. But our officers by the margin of the sea
understand warlike defence. Their movements are uncertain as the
winds and waves ; stones and gems are hard to be distinguished.* Why
should we exact a recompense from those who are already confirmed in
the practice of submissiveness ? Everything is now pardoned, and occa-
sions of offence will be avoided in future.

“ Respectfully follow our commands : let there be no deviation
from them. Severe is the glance of heaven : resplendently bright are
the Royal precepts.

“ Respect this ! ”

The language of these documents at last brought home to Hide-
yoshi the real meaning of the JI6-6 (^j- J) or investiture. Konishi’s
fears that he would be displeased were realized to the full. He fiew
into a violent passion, exclaiming, “ I don’t want his help to be made
King of Japan. What Yukinaga (Konishi) led me to believe was that
the chief of the Mings was to acknowledge me as Ming Emperor.” He
tore off the crown and robes and flung them on the ground with the
commission, and sent for Konishi, that he might cut off his head on the
spot for his deception. He was somewhat pacified, however, by the
priests, who pointed out to him that it was an ancient custom for the
countries neighbouring to China to receive investiture from her, as she
surpassed them all in civilization, and that it was really an honour to
Hideyoshi that his fame and deserts had compelled so signal a recogni-
tion. Konishi, too, had no difficulty in showing that the three commis-
sioners whom Hideyoshi had entrusted with the supreme control of the
expedition were equally responsible with himself for everything that
had been said and done, and he was accordingly allowed to escape ;

* The meaning of this mysterious sentence is perhaps that the local mandarins
of Ningpo were a turbulent, warlike class, who could not be depended on to con-
duct the commercial relations with the Japanese, and might mistake their peaceful
traders for the pirates of that nation who then infested these seas.


222


ASTO^’ : HIDEYOSHI’S INVASION OB’’ KOHEA.


but the investiture, as Hideyoslii now understood it, was more than lie
could reconcile himself to. He ordered the ambassadors to leave Japan
at once without any answer or even the compliments to themselves and
their sovereign demanded by eastern diplomatic usage. On reflection,
however, he judged it politic not to carry his quarrel with China any
farther just then, and allowed himself to be persuaded to give suitable
presents to the Chinese ambassadors. All his anger was turned against
Korea, which as usual was made the scape>goat. He vowed that he
would never make peace with that unhappy country, and at once gave
orders to prepare a fresh expedition. Even the heads of the two Korean
officers were for a moment in danger. The embassy left Kidto on the
following day. At Nagoya, where they were detained by contrary
winds, they were overtaken by a messenger hearing a letter from Hide-
yoshi, which they hoped might be an apology, but which turned out to
be nothing but an enumeration of the wrongs which that meek and in-
offensive personage had suffered at the hands of th© Koreans, viz., when
the Korean ambassadors came to Japan some years before, they had con-
cealed the state of things in China — offence No. 1. At the request Of
Chin Ikei, the Korean princes had been released, but they had not come
to render thanks in person ; they had sent instead two officers of mean
position— oflence No. 2. The Koreans had for several years impeded
the negotiations of peace between China and J apan — oflence No. 3. On
the return of the ambassadors to Korea in the 12th month of 1596, this
document was communicated to King Riyen, who in great alarm appeal-
ed again to China for assistance to repel the new invasion which now
threatened him.


( 223 )


A TRANSLATION OF THE “DOU-ZHI KEU/^

(t ^ m


“ TEACHINGS FOR THE YOUNG.”


By Basil Hall Chamberlain.


[Bead June 14, 1881 .]

The little treatise on morals, of which the following is a translation,
has for several hundred years enjoyed great popularity in Japan. It is
found bound up with another work of similar style and purport entitled
“ Zhitsu-Oo K&u,” or “The Teaching of the Words of Truth ” ; and,
as the two are generally read together, it would seem most natural
to include them both in one paper. This, however, has not been
done, as a translation by the present writer of the “Teaching of
the Words of Truth ” has already been published elsewhere.* Very
few remarks are needed by way of introduction. While the “Words
of Truth ” are ascribed (with what justice it would be hard to say) to
the famous religious teacher Kuu-Kai or Kou-Bofu Dai-Shi, the com-
position, or rather compilation, of the “Teachings for the Young” is
attributed to a Buddhist priest of less notoriety named Ail-Nen. This An-
Nefi is said, in a standard collection of biographies of Buddhist worthies
entitled “ OeU-Kdu Shigaku-Shiyo” (yc ^ ^ S')’ P* ^

have been connected with the family of the well-known saint Den-Gen
Dai-Shi, to have studied under Zhi-Kaku Dai-Shi at the great monastery


* Comhill Magazine for August, 1S76. Art. “ Jifsu-go-Kiyd'


224 CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.”

of Hi-Hei-Zafi, to have written a number of works commenting on the
sacred books of the “Great Vehicle” (Mah^y^na) School, to have made
investigations in the Sanskrit [Pali?] language, and to have been
nominated by the Mikado to the post of Eector of the temple of Guwafi-
Giyau-Zhi Kiyau-to in the year 884. It is believed

that the present treaties was composed as a “ Reader ” for the children
who came to him there for instruction, all education being at that time
in the hands of the Buddhist priesthood. Like the rest of tlie Japanese
prose literature of that time, it is written in the Chinese language, —
Chinese in which it is easy enough for a Chinaman to detect ineleganoies
and even errors, but which had and has a learned and solemn sound to
the Japanese student, and especially to the Japanese child. The
references made and the examples quoted are likewise without exception
either Chinese or Indian. Several of the maxims have passed into
current proverbs, and all of them are as familiar to every Japanese
possessing a tincture of education as the stories and parables of the
Bible are to ourselves. The language employed is so uniformly chaste
that there is only one paragraph which it has been thought advisable
to leave untranslated, in order to avoid shocking modern sensibilities ;
and even that paragraph is simjily coarse, — not immoral in the proper
sense of the word.

There are several editions of the “ Words of Truth ” and the “ Teach-
ings for the Young but three in the possession of the present
writer offer little or no difference in the text, and seem even to have
copied the greater portion of the commentary from each other or from
some older authority. This commentary, thougli making no pretentions
to great depth, is invaluable to the translator, as it gives the names
of the Chinese Buddhist works (mostly versions from the P^li or
Sanskrit) from which An-Nen transcribed a great part of his moral
aphorisms ; and, as the references to the Chinese Classics (all of which
the translator has verified) are correct, it is to be presumed that the
quotations from those much less accessible books are equally reliable.
Besides this Japanese commentary, which he has perpetually quoted
in his notes,- and Dr. Legge’s “Chinese Classics,” the translator has
made use chiefly of Dr. EiteTs “Handbook for the Student of Chinese
Buddhism ” and of the late Mr. Mayers’ “ Chinese Eeader’s Manual,”


CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.” 22 &

both of them •works to which every student must feel himself so
greatly indebted that he can only long for the moment when, in the
case of the former at least, a second edition may fll the lacunm which
occur in the first. The text of the “Teachings for the Young,’’ trans-
lated as literally as the divergent genius of the English and Chinese
languages will permit, is as follows :

“TEACHINGS FOE THE YOUNG.”

If thou be seated in the presence of a superior, thou must not rise .
up abruptly if thou meet him in the street, thou shouldst bend the
knee and pass on.^

If he summon thee, listen with deference, turning towards him.
with both hands folded on thy breast : respectfully, and not looking
round to the right or to the left.

If he ask nothing, do thou answer nothing but if he address,
thee, then listen with reverence.

To the Precious Triad® make the full three-fold obeisance, and
worship twice before the Shin-tau Gods : to men make a single obei-
sance, but thy teacher and thy lord shalt thou lift up to thine head.^


^The second elau,se of this paragraph is taken almost literally from
the HIE or “.Record of Rites” (“Rules of Demeanour” [ ffiSfll Div. I,
Part I, Chap. I, ^ XXIII).

^“Record of Rites” (“Rides of Demeanour,” Part I, Div. I, Clxap. I,
^ XVI).

“ The Sanskrit “triratna,, or “ratnatraya,” signifying Buddha, the Law,
and, the Priesthood. Following the eomnientni'y, it may be remarked that,
though a three-fold oheLsance to the Triad is natural enough, there is no
special reason for the number two in connection with the Shin-tau divinities.
All that is meant is to show that the Buddhist objects of worship rank
first, while at the same time the sound of the word two as opposed to three
keeps up the parallelism of the verse. In the Yu'wi-Ichi form of Shin-tau
the Avorshipper elap.s his hands thrice when he goes to pray. '

•‘Interpreted as meaning: “Thou shalt rei’erence them as much as to
figuratively lift them up to thine head.” The. lifting of presents, etc., to
the head as sign of respect may still be seen every day in Japan; and the
common word for “to receive” {chiyau-dai,'^^ ) may perpetuate the
memory of this custom even after the latter shall have died out under the
influence of European manners. A man’s teacher and his lord are of course
to him the most to be venerated of all mortals. See also Note 41.


226 OHAMBEELAIN ; A TRANSLATION OP THE ‘‘ OOU-ZHI KBU.”

Be reverent wlien tlion goest past a grave/ aliglit from thin horse
when thou goest past a Shiil-tau shrine : when thou art near a Buddhist
temple or pagoda, thou must not commit any unclean act / when thou
art reading the sacred writings, thou must not do anything unseemly.

In the relations of men there is decorum f at tiie court there
must be laws / if men be without decorum, thei*e will likewise be
transgressions among the multitude.

When thou arc in the throng, speak not indiscriminately, and go
away as soon as thy business is over : let nothing lead thee into break-
ing faith with thy friend, and depart not from thy word.

The man of many words is poor in deeds ,* he is like unto an aged
dog that barketh at its companions ; the idle man is eager for his food ;
he is like unto a tired ape greedy for fruit.®

The bold man shall surel3’' fall into danger; he is like unto an
insect that flieth into the flame in summer : the simple mau^“ shall not


“Taken almost literally from the “Record of Rites” {“T‘'an Kiing,”
Dir, IT, Chap. IV, ^ XLVIII).

“ The eoniniontator quotes a Buddhist Stltra entitled “U-Hatsu Tei-Wau
Kiyau” ( ) in. which it is said that ho u'ho commits any un-

clean act in the gnnuuls of such an edifice will ho horn for ih'i* huudi'i'il
lives into the Batsxiba San.skrit ?) hell.

^ jfll (CMu. U, Jap. rei). Thi.s character, whose Bill meaning no single.
English word properly expresses, is thus defined in Dr. Williams' “Syllabic
Dictionaiy of tlie Cliinese Language”: "A step, an act, particularly acts
of worship wbich will bring happiness; propriety, etiquette, ceremony,

rites; the decent and the decorous in worship and social life; decorum,
usage, vails.”

“ I.e., the Wovoroign must make laws for the government of the ]K)oph'.

‘'The first wouls of this paragraph recall a remark of Confucius pre-
served in the “Family ' Sayings” (^^), where the sago says: “The
superior man speaketh by his deeds ; the vulgar man spoaketh with his
tongue.” The comparison of the dog seems, says the commentator, to have
been suggested by a maxim in the “Li Sao Clung” ( BS ^ ) to this effect :
“A man’s excellence is not measured by the number of his words; a dog's
excellence is not measured by the loudness of its bark.”

“ Observe that a sharp distinction is drawn between simplicity and
-folly. The fool is severely lashed, in this collection of precepts. The Japa-
nese author doubtless had in his mind the celebrated phrase (fu too mamora


CHAMBERLAIlSr : A TRANSLATION OP THE “DOU-ZEII KEIJ.” 227

err ; he is like unto a bird disporting itself among the woods in spring.

Human ears are listening at the wall speak no calumny, even in
secret : human eyes are looking from the heavens ; commit no wrong,
however hidden.

A chariot, with its linch-piii three inches long, will accomplish a
journey of a thousand miles ; man, with his tongue three inches long,
may ruin his body that is five feet in height.'®

It is the mouth that is the gate of misfortune, it is the tongue that
is the root of misfortune: if the mouth were njade liko unto the nose,
a man would have no trouble till his life’s end.*®

When a hasty word hath once been spoken, a team of four horses
may pursue, but cannot bring it back the flaw in a mace of white jade
may be ground away, but the flaw of an evil word cannot l)e ground
away.’®

(‘•Keep thy simplicity”), an abridged version of a maxim of Confucius
preserved in the “Family Sayings” (Book II, Chap. IX, f IV).

II “Walls have ears, and stones tell tales” is a common Japanese, pro-
verb; and in the Chinese “Book of Poetry” (|fif®), which was already old
in Confucius’ time (Gth century B.C.), we find these lines.

“Our so’cereign should not lightly utter his words.

Lest an ear be laid close to the wall.” — (Part II, Book V, Ode HI.)

^The power wielded by the tongue is alluded to in similar terms by
several Chinese writers.

“The words “The mouth is the gate of misfortune” are a quotation
from Confucius (‘Family Sayings,” Book III, Chap. XI, I), The rest
of the paragraph is said to be taken from Oiyau-Gi Bo-Satsu (
a celebrated Japanese saint of the eighth century, and the first Japanese
Buddhist archbishop. [For the legendary account of his life see the already
quotedTc^f:^^, Vol. XIV, pp. 2-5.) Ciyaii-Gi’s original words, as given by
the commentator, are remarkable. He says: ‘‘The tiger of the mouth
ruins the body; the sword of the tongue destroys the life. If the mouth
were made, etc.” The meaning of this latter expression is that if the
mouth were like the nose, it would not be able to speak, and would therefore
cease to be the gate of misfortune.

“ Four horses cannot overtake the tongue.” ( “Confucian . Analects,”
Book XII, Chap. VIII.)

“In the Chinese “Book of Poetry” (Part III, Ode II) are the
lines.

“A flaw in a mace of white jade
May be ground away;

But for a flaw in speech '

Nothing can be done.”


228 CHAMBERLAIN ; A TEANSLATION OP THE “ DOU-ZHl KEU.”

Calamity ami prosperity have no gate ; they are there only whither
men invite them:^® from the evils sent by Heaven there is deliverance;
from the evils we cause ourselves there is no escape.

In the house where virtue is accumulated there will surely be a
superabundance of joy : again, in the place where vice is delighted in
thei'e will surely be a superabundance of misfortunes,^’’

If a man be good in secret, he shall surely be rewarded openly :
if a man do good in secret, his name shall surely shine forth openly.*®

Before the gate of him that is strong and steadfast in believing, the
clouds of adversity shall not rise up : for the house of him that is strong
and valiant in prayer, the moon of blessing shall increase her lustre.

Hearts, like faces, are not alike, but are as water that followeth the
shape of the vessel which containeth it d® thou canst not bend another's
bow, thou canst not ride another’s horse.®®

they are not arbitrary dispensations of providence, but simply
the result of a man’s own actions. The Buddhist doctrine of retribution
in this world for sins committed in former existences provides a ready
explanation of apparent exceptions to this dictum. The words in (the text
are said by the commentator to be taken from the “Tso Chuan” ( ;gc||C ) j
but a search through that work to verify the assertion has failed to produce
them. The Japanese are so fond of appealing to the authority of the
“Sa-Den” (as they call it) that perhaps they may sometimes father on its
author texts for Avhich he is not re.sponsible. The second clause of the
paragraph is taken with a few verbal alterations from the Chinese “Book
of Historical Documents” ), Part IV, Book V, Part II, 11.

^’'This paragraph is taken almost word for rvord from the “Book of
Changes” ( ) , In China the phrase has passed into a proverb.

“This paragrapli is said by the commentator to be a quotation from
an ancient Chinese work on the duty of man by Huai Han Tzu ( ) •

“Tlie first feiv words of this paragraph are taken from the “Tso
Chuan” ( )> where the text runs thus: “Men's

hearts, like their faces, are not alike. How should I dare to wish thine
like mine?” The compiler of these maxims has spoilt the quotation by
introducing the irrelevant comparison of the water in the vessel, which
seems to say, in this context, that the dilTerenee in men’s hearts depends on
the difference of their faces. He has borrowed, but misapplied, a proverbial
expression whose origin is traced to a contemporary of the philosopher
Mencius. See Kahibara’s “Eoioioaza-Ghisa," Vol. VI, p. 40.)

^" Said to be a quotation from the Mu-Mon-Kuwan ( ), a Buddhist
work of ihe Zen sect. .


CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OP THE " DOH-ZHI KEU.” 229

To see the chariot that is in front overturned, is a warning to tlie
chariot that is behind not to forget what went before, is a lesson
for what followeth after.

When virtue standeth erect, fame is handed down : when love is
carried to excess, calamities are many.*®

When a man dieth, he leaveth his name : when a tiger dieth,
it leaveth its skin.*®®

The wise king ruling a country must not scorn the widowers and
the widows:®* if a prince do not praise men, then will the people
murmur.®®

When thou Grossest a frontier, enquire what is forbidden within it :
when thou enterest a country, enquire concerning that country.®*

When thou enterest a village, conform to that village ; when thou
meetest with a custom, conform to that custom.

When thou enterest an house, enquire after the private name,®’ so

^An ancient Cliinese saying.

“The eonmientary has more than a page of closely printed matter to
explain and illnstrate this danse. The meaning simply is that favouritism
on the part of a monarch works havoc in his kingdom. The word "love’'
has here no noeessaiy reference to love between the sexes, but signifies
rather "favour.”

“The Japanese commentator does not seem to have had any personal
acquaintance with tigers; for he quotes with confidence a CMnese statement
to the effect that this animal, "the prince of wild beasts,” is as large as a
cow, and that its whelps are called leopards.

“Adapted from the "Classic of Filial Piety,” where it is said: “He that
ruleth a country dareth not scorn the widowers and the widows, — much less
the people at large.” Widows and aged vidowers are considered the most
helpless and least important of the population.

“The ancient Oriental theory of government was that to reward
virtue publicly was as essential as to punish crime. Even at the present
day in Japan rewards of money are given by the Government to persons
eminent for their filial piety or faithfulness to their husbands.

“This paragraph and the two tliat follow are taken with few verbal
alterations from the "Eecord of Kites” {“Rules of Demeanour” Div. T,
Part I, Chap, V, f LXXIX). The phrase, "When thou enterest a village,
conform to that village (in Japanese "Omi ni trite wa, gau ni sMtagahe")
has become a provei'b answering to our English saying, "When in Rome,
do as Rome does.”

“ ^ (Chin. Iml, Jap. imi-tm), lit., "to shun,” to deny.” The
characters composing a man’s private (personal) name should not be lightly
VOL. IX. 0


230 CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEH.”

that thou mayesfc entreat the owner with reverence : but a man’s private
name vauisheth in the presence of his lord, for there cannot be two
honourable designations.®®

The fool taketh no thought about what is distant, but he shall find
sorrow near at hand he is as one that should scan the heavens
through a tube, he is like unto one that should dig the earth with a
needle.®*

The Gods®^ punish fools, not to slay, but to chasten them : the
master sniiteth his disciple, not from hatred, but to make him better.®®

No man is worthy of honour from his birth ;®® tis the garnering up


uttered in liis presence, and discreet enq[uiry should therefore be made afLtu'
them beforehand, in order to avoid giving offence. The emperor’s personal
name is considered so sacred that the characters composing it are altered
or disused during the time of the dynasty which he belongs.

^ Notwithstanding what has been said in the preceding note, a man’s
private name need not be avoided when it loses its importance by companson
with that of his lord, which is of course much more sacred. For Confucius
has said (in the "Family Sayings,” Book III, Chap. VTT, ^XVX) : "There
are not two hu]is in the heavens, nor two rulers in one country, nor two
honorable designations in one house.”

'“In this paragraph, \\hich is almost literally borrowed from Confucius
(see "Confucian Analects,” Book XV, Chap. II), the translator has not
dared to depart from Dr. Logge.’s version, which brings out the antithesis
perfectly. But to a modern Japanese reader, at least, the characters
suggest the idea of "tact,” “deference,” “civility,” so that a man
without (^/8 ) tactless, familiar, intrusive man rather than one who,
in the literal sense of the words “takes no thought about what is distant.”

This clause is taken almost literally from the Chinese 2)hilosopher
Chuang Tzu ( ]• '

Interpreted by the commentator with special reference to the Sun-
Goddess Amaterasu, though without sufficient reason for such limitation,
The characters used are

“ This doctrine of the necessity of corporal punishment is supported
in the commentary by reference to the examples of no lesser personages
than Confucius and Sakya IMuni themselves. For the former see “Coufucian
Analects,” Book XIV, Chap. XJ.VI.

'“‘In the “Record Of Rites” (“The Sacriflee of the Heifer,” Chap. XI,
^ XXT) it is said: 'Hhe Emperor’s eldest son is but a subject; no man is


CIIAMBEELAIK : A TRANSLATION OP THE “ EOU-ZHI KEU.” 231

of learning that bringeth him wisdom and virtue : the man that is
worthy of honour is not surely rich ; the rich man may not be worthy
of honour.

He whose heart hath many desires, though he be rich must be
called poor : he whose heart’s only desire is contentment, though he
be poor must be called rich,®*

A teacher that instrueteth not his disciple must be called a breaker
of the commandments ; a teacher that chideth his disciple must be called
an observer of the commandments.®®

If a teacher keepeth a wicked disciple, both teacher and disciple
shall go down into Hell : if a teacher nourisheth a good disciple, both
teacher and disciple shall attain to the state of an Arhat.®®

A disciple that will not obey instruction should be swiftly sent back
to his father and mother : an uncouth lad, w'hom thou attemptest to
soften, will become an enemy, and increase thy calamities.

He that perpetually followeth evil men is like unto a dog running
round the post to which it is tied he that is always in the fellowship
of good men is like unto a great ship floating upon the sea.

^He that imitateth good companions is like unto the mugwort which,
growing among the hemp, is straight : he that is familiar with evil
companions is like unto the. bramble that, growing in the thicket, is

crooked.®'*

made lioiiourable by his birth.” Confucius confirms and enlarges on this
text in the “Family Sayings,” Book VIII, Chai). XXXIII, ^ I. It reciuired
conrage to transfer this democratic Chinese teaching to Japan.

^‘The ‘'desire for confhntmcnt” seems a somewhat contradictory phrase.
The author meant to talk of the fecUmj of contentment, or simply content-
ment; and his words are explained in the commentary.

® I.e., the Buddhist eoinmniidments, whose number is variously estimated
at five, ten and five hundred.

“An Arhat or Arinin is a perfected saint. For details see Eitel’s
“Handbook for the Student of Chinese Buddhism,” s.v.

This simile is said by the commentator to be taken from a Buddhist
Sutra entitled “Butsu Eon-Ghjmi-Shifu Kiyaid’ ( )•

“No moral system attributes more imporiance to the force of example
than that of the Chinese sages partly followed by our author. “The mug-
W'ort growing ajnong the hemp” has hoeome a proverbial expression: it is
said by the commentator to have originated with the philosopher Tsgng Tzu
( j but the translator has not been able to verify this statement. Tlie


282 CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ BOU-ZHI KEU.”

Leaving thy kindred and cleaving unto a strange teacher, learn
to practise the commandments, to be tranquil, to be kind : and though
thou be slow of wit, thou mayest, if thou wilt, reach the seat of
intelligence.®®

If thou learn but one character each day, ’twill be three hundred
and sixty characters [in the year] : each character is worth a thousand
pieces of gold, each dot may be the saving of many lives.*®

He that has taught thee for one day must not be lightly treated ,*
how much more he that hath taught thee for many years ; thou art
sworn to thy teacher for three lives ; thou art bound to thy parents for

one life.*^

saying is, liowever, found in the work of the philosopher Hslin Tzii ^ M
^ , p. 3). The comparison of the bramble seems less happy, as that

plant is naturally crooked and twisted, without being made so by its
surroimdings. To illustrate this paragraph, the commentator aptly quotes
Confucius’ maxim: “Have no friends not equal to thyself.” — (“Confucian
Analects,” Book I, Chalx VIII.)

’"’The teaching of this paragraph is, of course, completely Buddhistic j
for in the eyes of Chinese philosophy it is not conceivable that any other
duty should be capable of overriding that which binds a man to his kindred,
and move especially to his parents. The character, s ^ and (“fooV’ and
“simple”), which elsewhere in the course of this treatise arc* us('d to express
very diiTerent and almost antagonistic ideas, are. h(‘V(' eumbined to form tlie
expression which has been translated by the word “show.” The characters
translated as “seat of intelligence” (a well-known Buddhist phi’ase answer-
ing to the Samskrit “Bddhi”) are erroneously given in the text as jp
instead of

^’’Thc commentator quotes a eoui>le of not particularly relevant Clviuese
stories to illustrate the saying that “each character is worth a thousand
pieces of gold.” The last words of the paragraph are Buddhistic, being
said to be taken from the “Saddharma Pundartka Sutra ( ) or “Lotus

of the V'onderful Law,” and must be interpreted to mean that tlie merit
obtained by one ^vho copies so much as a single dot in a character of the
Buddhist Scriptures will be so gi-eat as to save him from hell, and eau.se
him to be born as a human being during several lives,

^The teacliing of tliis paragraph again is completely Buddhistic, ami
the commentator makes fruitless efforts to bring it into harmony with
the dicta of the Chinese sages. Prom the Buddhi.st point of view, the one
life during e. portion of which a child owes everything to its jmi’ents is but
little in eonipai-ison to the three lives (past, present and to come), over
which his religious teacher’s instruction has such mighty influence.


OHA-MBEBIvAIN : A TEANSLATION OF THE '' DOU-25HI KEU.” 283

A disciple must walk seven feet behind his teacher : and not tread
on his shadow.*^

Kuwan-Ofi, for that he was his teacher, weareth Bfida in his
precious crown ; Sei-8hi, for the sake of filial piety, weareth on his
head his father’s and his mother’s bones. [In a precious jar are the
white bones deposited.]*®

Rise early in the morning, and wash thine hands ; collect thy mind,,
and recite the scrolls of the scriptures : lay thee down late at night,
and bathe thy feet ; compose thy spirit, and meditate on the meaning.**

He that learneth, but not with his whole mind, is like unto n


Tlie commentator, in illustration of this paragi'aph, makes the foolish
remark that, by remaining at a distance of seven feet Ijehind his teacher,
he will avoid treading on the latter’s shadow, forgets to quote the apposite
words of the “Record of Rites” (“Royal Commands” Part V, Chap. V, ^
XVIII) : “Walk to the rear of thy father’s contemporary, and slantingly
behind thine elder brothers. Friends must not get before each other,”
Of Kps Ch‘ai, a favourite disciple of Confucius, it is related in the “Family
Saying” (Rook III, Chap. XII, ^ I) that he never trod on his master’s
shadow. i

'“’’Mida stands for the Sanskrit Amitabha, Kuw^an-On (III#),

and Sei-Shi (^M) foi' two followers AvalOkitSsvara and Mahastana-
prapta. In Japan Kuwan-On is constantly represented as a female; but as ^
it is not possible that the author of tliis treatise should have made such a
mistake as so to have conceived of him, the masculine pronoun has been
used in the translation. The text naturally (owing to the want of genders
and of pronouns in the Japanese language) contains no indication of the
sex intended by the writer. The images of Kuwan-On in this country
commonly have on their head a small figure of Amitabha. The words placed
between brackets seem to be the addition of some unintelligent scribe.

** The first few words of this paragraph are a condensed quotation from
the “Record of Rites” (“Household Precepts,” Part XII, Chap. I, ^ 1).
The commentator says that the characters here translated “scriptures,”
must be taken to mean the Buddhist scriptures if the reader is a priest,
and the Chinese classics if he is a layman. But it is undoubtedly tire
Buddhist scriptures which the author had in view. The translator is not
awmre of its ever having been the custom in this country to bathe the feet
before retiring for the night. Probably the phrase is only used rhetorically;
in order to balance the first clause of the paragraph.


234 OHAMBEELAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KELT.

drunken man mumbling in liis sleep • be that readeth a thousand
scrolls, but readeth them once only, is like unto a moneyless man
hurrying to the market.

In thin raiment on a winter’s night, brave the cold and be
reading the whole night through : with scanty fare on a summer’s day,
repel hunger and be learning the whole day long.

Drunkenness maketh the heart mad,*® satiety maketh a man weary
of study : warmth increasetli drowsiness,*® comfort causeth sloth.

K'uang ‘H6ng,*^ for the sake of studying a night, made a hole in
the wall to admit the moonbeams : Sun Ohing,*® for the sake of study-
ing, closed his door to hinder folks from com ing in.

Excess in food and drink is severely condemned by the Buddhist teach-
ing. The commentator quotes different religious works which variously
compute at ten, thirty- five, and thirty-six the offences of which wine is the
cause, one of them being that mentioned in the text. Of Confucius it is said
(“Oonfucian Analects,” Book X, Chap.,Vin) that “it was only in wine that
he laid down no limit to liimself, but he did not allow himself to be confused
Ijy it”— words which are quoted by the commentator in support of the
doctrine of this paragraph, though the Western reader will hardly t think
them sufficiently strong to help to form a bulwark for the doctrine of total
abstinonco.

‘“Both Confucius and Ouddhii severely reprimanded laziness and un-
necessary sleep, it being told of the formoi’ that he likened to rotten wood
a disciple who slept during the day-time, while the latter, on a similar occa-
sion, is said to have used the derisive comparison of a clam. Sleep, says the
commentator’s Buddhist authorities, is the cause of twelve (accoiding to
others, twenty) offences.

«pe ^ (Jap. spelling Kiyaix-Kau). The commentator pieces together a
short biography of this worthy from various Chinese historical works. The
exact period of his life is not given, but he flourished in the 1st century B.O.
under tlie “Former Ilan” dynasty, and was at first but a simple peasant. His
studious habits attracted the attention of his employer, to whose service he
had been drawn by the knowledge that the latter possessed a well-furnished
library, and by its help and that of its owner he rose to be a scholar of
celebrity. The “moon-beams” are, it is said, not mentioned in the original
authorities ; but it is averred that K'uang ‘H6ng at one time made a hole in
the wall in order to obtain the benefit of his neighbour’s candle for the pur-
pose of reading at night. The commentator supposes that the “moonbeams”
are a poetic license, made use of by our author for the sake of embellishing
liis sentence.

‘*^^{.Jap. Sou-Iviyau). A native of the kingdom of Gh'u, who flour-


CHAMBEELAIN : A TEANSLATION OP THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.” 235


Su Ch'iii/® for the sake of studying stuck an awl against his thigh
that he might not sleep : Chun Ching [properly Sun Ching], for the sake-
of studying, tied a rope round his neck that he might not sleep.

Ch'6 Yiu®“ so dearly loved studying at night, that he collected
fire-flies to serve him as a candle ; Hsiian Sliih so dearly loved studying
at night, that he piled up snow to serve him as a light.

Hsiu Mu’s®^ mind was so much engrossed in his book, that he


ished in tlie 3rd century B.O., and made liimself famous as a student by the
habit mentioned in the text, which gained for him the nickname of “Doctor
Close-Door” ( >£ ) • See also next Note.

*‘“1® ^ (Jap. So- Shin). The intense studiousness of this worthy and
the next are comroiemorated by the autlior of the “Trimetrieal Classic”
( 3 ^ iH ) in the lines :

i « * ffl

a ^ fi H

s * ® »

of which the words in the text are an adaptation. Su Ch'in flourished
during the epoch of the “Warring States” and died B. 0. 318.

Chiin Ching miist be the same individual as the one mentioned in the last
paragraph as Sun Ching. The Japanese text has here the characters
instead of ; but, as there is no such surname as , and as, moreover,
the story (which in China has become a household word) of his tying the
rope round his neck to wake him by throttling him whenever he nodded over
his book is always told of Sun Ching, the Japanese author’s memory must
have played him false on this occasion.

(Jap. Shiya-In). This worthy and the next (^dbjJap. Sen-Shi)
are commemorated in the following lines of the “Trimetrieal Classic:”


^ % ill in
SI J* #


Ch‘€ Yin was a native of the kingdom of Chin (•^) and fl.ourished two or
three centuries after the Christian era, “Hsiian Shih” must be a clerical
error for Sun K'ang (^®), of whom the story of the snow is told, and
who was a contemporary of Ch^g Yin’s. It was of course on account of their
poverty, which did not allow of their purchasing candles, that these two
celebrated students resorted to such rmusual means of obtaining light.

(Jap. Kiu-Boku) is said by the commentator, who quotes a Chi-
nese biographical work entitled to have been a native of TIo-yang

Hsien (Mini)- K is told of liim that he was never seen without a book
even when walking in the street, and that he was always so deeply engrossed


236 CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OP THE “ DOU-ZHI KEIT.’'

perceived not that his hat had fallen off : Kao Fang's®* mind was so
much engrossed in his book that he perceived not that the wheat was
being washed away.

I/iu' Shih/® while weaving raiment, ceaselessly recited the Scrip-
tures : I K'uan,®* while ploughing the fields, ever carried a book in his
belt.

All these men, loving study day and night : filled the Empire with
their writtings, and at last attained to solid learning.

Even though thou be playing with the dice and tube, Jet thy

in his reading, that when one day a sudden gust of wind blew his hat off, he
did not notice the circumstance. Probably here, as in several other passages
in this little treatise, there is a mistake in the name of the personage mention-
ed, as there does not seem to be in China any such surname as .

M. (Jap. Kau-Hou). He is said by the commentator, who quotes
two Chinese works entitled respectively igtSI# and to have been a

native of Han Yang Yeh • Though but a peasant by birth, he was

always so completely wrapped up in his book, that when one day his wife,
who was going out on some other business, set Mih to watch some wheat
which was drying in the sun, he never heeeded a violent shower which came
down and washed it all away. However, Kau P§ng was not a loser in the
end; “for” [concludes the commentator] “such extraordinary devotion to
learning gained for him the reputation of a distinguished scholar.”

(Jap. Eiu-Shiyoku) is said by the commentator, who quotes a
Chinese eneyclopcedia entitled to have been a native of Kao T'ang

iu the Kingdom of Chin (^).

3K (Jap. Gei-Kuwan) ; but the authorities, the (^J06

^ ^ and E.I$ ) > whom the commentator quotes, all give, says he, the
first character as ^ (Chin, filrh, Jap. ji). This personage is said to have
been a native of Ch'ien Ch’6ng (=p fg) , and to have been in the service of a
celebrated scholar named K'ung An Kuo (JL 3^ PS).

The commentator is probably right in saying that the author means to
speak of checkers (go) or backgammon (sugoroku ) , — games which are not
(like some others) condemned as gambling games, but considered to be in-
nocent amusements. The teaching of the entire paragraph, therefore,
amounts to this: Even when imbending thy mind or following thy trade,
never he completely without any thought of study. We may also, from a
Buddhist point of view, suppose that the habit of incessantly jierusing the

sacred books might perhaps obtain for him who practised it an amount of
merit .sufficient to counterbalance the wickedness of pursuing such a calling

as that of the manufacture of iveapons intended to take life, that direct of

all offences.


CHAMBEKLAIN : A TEASTSLATIOK OP THE “ BOU-ZIII KEU.” 237

mouth be ever reciting the Scriptures : again, though thou be planing
a bow and feathering the arrows, always carry some writing at thy sid§.

Chang I’s recitations from the moderns and the ancients made
withered trees to bear fruit : Kuei Mao’s recitations of the historical
records made old bones to put on flesh.-

Po Ying®^ already in his ninth year attained to the rank of a
teacher; Tsung Shih at seventy first loved study, and rose to be the
Imperial Preceptor.

The wise man, however mean his birth, shall ascend into lofty
halls : the fool, however exalted his rank, shall fall to the nethermost
part of ISTairi.™

Though the sins coinrnitted by the wise man be great, he shall not
fall tino hell : though the sins committed by the fool be small, he shall
surely fall into hell.®®


apparently a clerical error for CMyau-gi). He was,

as the Japanese commentator remarks, a native of the state of Wei, and he
flourished in the fourth century B.C. But the translator has not been able
to find elsewhere any confirmation of the miracle here said to have been per-
formed, The same remark applies to Kuei Mao Jap. Ki-Bau), whose

very name must he erroneously given, as there is no such surname as Jg in
China. The commentator admits that no such person ever existed, and sug-
gests that the name may have arisen from the misconception of an expression
in an ancient text.

^ (Jap. Haku-Yei). The translator has not been able to verify
what is here said about this worthy and the next ^ (Jap. Sou-Shi), It
is strange that the author should not rather have quoted the familiar exam-
ples of precocious and tardy proficiency in learning given by Tsn Ying ( )
and Liang Hao (|g , and commemorated in the “Trimetrical Classic.”

This paragraph is interpreted by the commentator in a purely Buddhist
sense. The “wise man” is lie rvho keeps the commandments, the “fool” is tKe
evil-doer, and the “lofty halls” are the heaven of Brahma. Nairi
would seem to represent the Sanskrit Naraka, a general term for the various
parts and subdivisions of hell. (See Eitel s.v.)

This paragraph is said by the commentator to be a resume of a long
passage in the celebrated “Mahaprapna. Paramita Sfltra” ( and

is explained by the gloss that the w'ise and righteous man -will repent of
whatever sins he may commit, and thus render himself worthy of escaping
punishment, whereas with the fool the contrary will he the ease.


238 chamberlain: a transi^ation of the ''dou-ziii keu.”

The fool ever claspeth unhappiness, and may be likened unto a
prisoner in gaol : the wise man is ever rejoicing, and he again is like
unto the Heaven of Kadiant Sounds.®®

A father’s loving-kindness is higher than the mountains, and
Mount Shiytimi is low in comparison : a mother’s bounty is deeper
than the sea, and the Sea of Sau-Miyau is shallower far.

68

For ten moons a child is in the womb, and the mother constantly
suffereth in body and in spirit : for many years after being born, it is
nourished and cared for by father and mother.

In the day-time it sitteth on the knees of its father, who stroketh
its head during many years: at. night it lieth in the embrace of its
mother, who bestoweth upon it many measures of milk.®^

At morn a man hieth him to the mountains and wilds to kill beasts
wherewith to feed his wife and children : at eve, he goeth down to the
streams and seas to catch fish wherewith to support his life.

This paragraph causes some difficulty to the commentator, who quotes
from a Sfttra entitled I£ ijsl a stanza of diametrically opposite import,
the position of the words “wise man” and “fool” being reversed. The
sentiment in the text seems more natural and instructive, ])ut the tliought
is less gj’acefully conveyed than in a paragraph of the “Tea,ching of the
Words of Truth,” where it is said:

I-Ie that lovcth iniquity beckoiieth to mi.sfortune; it i.s, as it were,
the echo answering to the voice.

He that practiseth righteousness receiveth, a blessing: it is just like
the shadow following after the man.

Ul (Shiyu-Mi-Sen), the Sanskrit Sum6ru, a mountain of fabulous
height forming the axis of every univer.se, and composed of gold, silver, and
other precious substances. For details, see Eitel s. v.

^ ^ ( Sanskrit ? ) . The commentator quotes a statement

from a work entitled “Ka-Gaku Shifu” the effect that this sea

“is exterior to the eight oceans, and has a depth of ninety thousand
.yddjemas”

The Paragraph of the original text omitted in the translation is as
follows :

e f- * « go # Si * « ^ (?S for g)

S — B® fHo Si S # rS" W for i®)

“ The commentator says that the quantity of milk taken by a child to
its third year inclusive is estimated in one of the Buddhsit Scriptures at
about 280 measures. The character here vaguely rendered as “measures” is


CHAMBERLAIN. : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.” 239 '

To support Lis life early and late, he doth evil deeds day and
night : to please their palate morning and evening, he falleth into hell
for many eons.®®

He that receiveth benefits and is not grateful, is like unto the birds-
that despoil the branches of the trees they perch on : he that is the
object of favours and is not grateful, is like unto the deer that ravage
the grass of the fields they dwell in.

When Yu M^ng®® struck his father, lightning from heaven rent him '
asunder: when fan Fu®''’ reviled her mother, a wondrous serpent bit
her to death.

Kuo Chii,®® to support his mother, dug an hole and found a cauldron


(Chin, ‘hu, Jap koku), tlie precise degree of capacity designated by which
has varied greatly at different times and still varies in different parts of
China. See Williams’ “Syllabic Dictionary,” p. 233.

®®Thc character ^0, here translated as “eon,” is that employed teelmieal-
ly by the Chinese Buddhists in the signiffeation. of the Hindoo Icalpa, an eon
of millions of years (see Eitel s. v.). Taking life, — any life, — is with the
Euildhists tho greatest of crimes.

^ (Jap. lu-Mu). The commentator says that the story of this
iinfilial son is to be found in a Chinese work by entitled ►

It seems that he only struck his father on being provoked by a Wow from the
latter. But even such provocation was no excuse in the sight of Heaven;
and on his back, after he had been killed by the thunderbolt, were found
burnt in the words: “Yn IH^ng having struck his father, Heaven rendeth
him asunder.”

(Jap. Han-Pu). The. commentator says that the story of Pan.
Pu is to be found in a Chinese work by Jgllll ]£ entitled Jg ^ |E •

“IP S (Jap. Kuwaku-Kiyo) . This paragraph and the four following
give in a very succinct form ten instances of filial piety mostly selected from
the celebrated Chinese “Four-and-Twenty Examples of Filial Piety.” It may
be as 'Well here to transcribe the fuller account of KuoChli given in Mayers’
“Manual,” (Articles 303), only altering the spelling of the proper names so
as to make them accord v-ith Sir Thomas Wade’s system of trajisliteration,
which the translator aims at consistently following. Mayers says. “Kno Ghti
. . . , one of the patterns of filial piety, is said to have lived in the second
century A.D., and to have had an aged mother to support, beside bis own wife
and children. Finding that he had not food sufficient for all, he proposed to
his wife that they should bury their infant child in order to have the more
for their mother’s wants; and this devotednoss was rewarded by his discover-


240 OHA.MBEELAIN : A TEANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZH.I KETJ.

•of gold : Chiang 8hib,®® having divorced his wife, drew water and found
a spring in his court-yard.

M^ng Tsimg/® weeping among the bamboos, picked sprouts from
beneath the deep snow: Wang Hsiang weeping struck the ice, and
fishes leapt to the hard surface.

Shun the son supported his blind father, and in answer to his

ing, while engaged in digging a pit for this purpose, a bar of solid gold which
placed him above the reach of poverty, and upon which were inscribed the
words: ‘A gift from Heaven to ICuo ChO; let none deprive him of it!’ ”

(Jap. Kiyau-Shi). “One of the patterns of filial piety, said to
have flourished temp. Han dynasty. In conjunction Avith his wife he devoted
himself to waiting on his aged mother, in order to gi-atify whose fancy he
went daily a long distance to draw drinking Avater from a river and to obtain
flsh for her table. This devotedness was rewarded by a miracle, A spring
burst forth close by his dwelling, and a pair of carp were daily produced
from it to supply his mother’s wants.”—- (Mayers’ “Manual,” Articles 266.)

^ (Jap. Mou-Sou) . ‘An, official of the OMn dynasty, 3rd century
A..D., who is enrolled among the examples of filial piety. It is related of him
that on one occasion, during winter, on his mother expressing a longing wish,
for some bamboo shoots, he went into the woods bevvailing the misfortune
tliat tlie delicacy could not be obtained at such a season: when suddenly, as
a reward for his filial regard, the bamboos around him began to put forth
their sprouts.” (IMaycrs’ “Manixal,” Articles 499.)

n rgp (.Tap. Wau-Shiyau) . “A public oflicial under the first sovereign
of the Chin dynasty, A.U. 265. His fame rests chiefly upon an incident Avhich
illustrates his devotion to filial duty, and Avhich has given him a place
among the recognized examples of this virtue. His stepmother expressing a
wish one day during Avintcr to obtain some fresh fish, although all the riA’'ers
were frozen, he lay doAvn upon the surface of a sheet of ice until the Avarmth
of his body caused it to melt, by Avhich means he Avas enabled to take a pair
of carp and to present them to his stepmother.” — (Mayers’ “Manual,”
Article 810.)

” & (Jap. Sliiyun). “B.U. 2317-2208. The successor chosen to occupy
his throne by the ancient Emperor Yao, and I'evered Avith the latter as one of

the patterns of regal virtue His father, Ivu Son (lit. the ‘blind old

man’ ) , on the death of Shim’s mother, took a second wife, by whom he had a
son named Hsiang (|i) ; and preferring the offspring of his second union to
his eldest son, he repeatedly sought to put the latter to death. Shun, how-
ever, while escaping this fate, in no wise lessened his dutiful conduct toward
his father and stepmother or bis fraternal regard for Hsiang. He occupied
lumself in ploughing at Li Shan ( jg{l| ) , where his filial piety was rewarded


CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.” 241

tears his father’s eyes were opened : 'Hsing Oh’ii supported his aged'
mother, and, as he chewed the food for her, she was restored to youth.

Tung Yuiig’^* sold his body, making it an honourable instrumeat
of filial piety : Yang Wei'^® thought of his lonely mother, and when he
wept before the tiger, he was left unharmed.


by beasts and birds wlio spontaneously came to drag his plough and to weed
his fields. He fished in the Lei Lake (0 ^), and made pottery on the banks
of the Yellow River. Still has parents and his brother sought to compass his
death; but although they endeavoured to make him perish by setting fire
to his house and by causing, him to descend a deey well, he was
always miraculously preserved. In Ms 20th year he attracted by his filial
piety the notice of the wise and virtuous Yao, who bestowe upon him later
Ms two daughters in marriage, .and disinherited his son. .in order to make
Shun his successor upon the throne.” — (Mayers’ “Manual,” Article 617.)

3 fi| ^ (Jap. I\ei-Kiyo). Thi.s is not one of the orthodox. “Four-and-
Twenty Examples of Filial Piety,” and indeed there is no such surname in
China as 5fil- hlorecwer, the -whole clause, in the original is obscure and
even ungrammatical. The meaning, ho’ivcA'er, is that given in the tx'ansla-
tion. The commentator quotes a -work hy disentitled ^ in support of
the story, and says, among other things, that by thus eliewing his mother 's
food for her before putting it into her mouth he caused her, when past seven-
ty, to retain the looks of a woman of thirty.

” 3 ^ (Jap. Tmx-Yei). “One of the patterns of filial inety, who is

said to have flourished etira A.D, 200. On the death of his father, having
no means of fulfilling tlie due funereal rites, he borrowed 10.000 cas/i on the
security of his own person as a bond-servant, and proceeded to accomplish
the interment of his parent. When returning to his home, ho met a woman
•wlio oJTercd hei'scdf as his -wife, and who repaid the loan he had ijicurred
with ;100 Avebs of cloth. The pair lived happily together for a month, Avlien
the woman disclosed the fact that slie was no other than the star OM/i

NU Avho had been sent down by the Lord of Hcawn her father to

recompense .an act of filial piety; and saying this she A*anished from Ms
sight.” — (Mayers’ “Manual,” Article 691.)

(Jap. Yau-Wi). The conmmeulator, quoting a Avork by ^ ^
^ entitled # 0 ,supj>orts the text by saying that it aa'hs on the ground
of his being his aged mother’s sole support that he begged of, and obtained
from, the tiger the permission to live. The. story, however, may be but a
slightly differing Amrsion of that of Yang Hsiang (H^), succinctly told
by Mayers as folloAvs (“Manual” Article 882) : “When fourteen years old he ;
saAV his father pounced upon by a tiger, AA'hereupon ho threw himself under
the talons of the beast and thus enabled Ids father to escape Avith the
sacrifice of his ovm life.”


M2 CHAMBERLAIN ; A TRANSLATION OP THE '' DOU-ZHI KEU<”

When Yen was covering the grave with earth, crows came

•and carried earth to fill it in: when Hsii Tzii” had dug the grave
himself, he planted pines and cypresses to form the grave.

All these men tended their fathers and mothers with filial piety ;
and the Gods’^® were merciful unto them, and fulfilled all their desires.

Life, with birth and deatli, is not enduring, and ye should hasten
to yearn after Nirvana the body, with its passions, is not pure, and
je should swiftly search after intelligence.'^'’

Of all loathsome things the most loathsome is the Desert,®^ wherein

^ ^ (Jap. Gan-U) . In support of the incident nientioued in the text,
the commentator quotes the ^ IE,, but he gives no dates. Tlie presence
of the character ^ (“crow”) both in the name of the hero of the story and
in that of the graveyard tends to make it appear still more mythical. Very
likely the tale was invented to account for the name of the place.

” ff: (Jap. Kiyo-Shi). The commentator, who quotes a variety of
Chinese authorities, states that this personage was a native of Tumg Yang
(W^) in the Kingdom of Chin.(^)- Se also renders the iiiudligiblo
by a gloss to the effect that the trees which Hsii Tzu bad plar.U'vl i-oiind iVkj
last resting-place of his parents having been destroyed by some deer who
•came to browse on their branches, these deer were devoured by Avild beasts,
upon which the trees Avere able to grow again, and the graves were no longer
desecrated.

''®The text has the chai'acders ?jif , Avhieh may most eouAmniently bo
rendered by the comprehensive term “Gods,” if the reader Avill bear in mind
that the upper powers of both the Buddhist and Sin-tau religions are
intended.

'"'The obscure Japanese commentator on this little treatise is (it need
hardly be said) no authority on so much disputed a point as the_ proper
signification of tiie term KirAhna. Still Uio conciseness of his definition
may make it worth quoting. He says: "Nelian to 7ia shidzuka naru satori
ni itaru navi” (‘•Xii'vRna means attaining to tranquil insight”).

iS> Sanskrit Bodhi. The term is defined as “the act of keeping
one’s mind truly aAvake.” — (See Eitel s. v.)

in Buddhist parlance, this Avorhl. Other depreciatory names
for it are “the fiery abode,” “the polluted ground,” etc., which may remind
the European reader of such expressions as “the vale of tears,” “a Aveary
pilgrimage,” and others Avith AA’hich he is familiar.

The pain of parting mentioned in the text is one of the “Eight Pains”
Sanskrit Ashta DuWeta) of the. Buddhist theology, the other
seven being: Biith, Old Age, Sickness, Death, Disappointment, Persecution
-and DecrepitAide.


OHAMBERLAIN ; A TRANSLATION OF THE “DOU-ZHI KEU,” 248


all who meet must endure the pain of parting : of all fearful things the
most fearful are the Six Paths,®® where all who are born must endure
the grief of dissolution.

Long life is like unto the May-fly, — born in the morning and
dying at eve: our bodies are like unto the plantain leaf, flapping
in the breeze and easily torn to pieces.

Damask and gauze, brocade and embroidery are no provision for
the Dark Road gold and jewels are treasures for this world alone.

Prosperity and glory never help man .along tho Buddhist path :
rank and favour bring renown but in the present world.

Though ye give the pledge of the tortoise and of the crane, ’tis
but for the moment before your lives shall vanish like the dew though

the Sanskrit Gati, “the 0 paths of transmigration or 6 condi-
tions of sentient existence, riz.. d§ras, men, Asuras, heings in hell, PrStas

and animals.” (Eitel s. v.j The meaning of the entire paragraph is that

existence is the worst of all evils, — a commonplace of Buddhist theology.

^ the Sanskrit ISlaraka, “a general name for the various compart-
ments and divisions of hell.” — (Eilel s. v.)

'^The tortoise and the crane are favourite emblems of long life, and
many extraordinary statements concerning them are to be found in the
Chinese writers. In illustration of this, and also as a specimen of the Jap-
anese commentator’s style, the whole of his remarks on- the above clause
are here transcribed. He says : “ 'Giving the ’ means 'making a

promise.” The reference is to the pledge given and taken by husband and
wife, wherein each wishes that both may emulate the longevity of the tortoise
and of the crane, and live on for a thonsand or a myriad years. It is said
in the 'Collection of Important Hint.s cn Hygiene’ that the tortoise and crane
have hundreds and thousands of lives; and in the ‘Map of Happy Omens’ it
is said that the tortoise lives for throe thousand years. In the article on
the crane in the General outlines of Botany’ .a celebrated ancient

Chinese work on materia medical there is the following passage quoted
from tho ‘Crane Classic’ ‘The crane is a bird of the active ele-

ment [j^]. The male and female pair in their hundred and sixtieth year,
but it is only when they are one thousand six hundred yeai-s old that they
attain their perfect form. They then drink, hut do not eat, and are subjoefe
to transformations.’ Again it is said by Yii T'an: 'The pulse of the tortoise
and of the ci’ane is vigorous, whence their longevity and the fact that they
do not die. They are calm in their movements.’ ” [This quotation is loth
incorrect and incomplete. Bui the original Chinese toorh contains a great
number of curious statements illustrative of the superstitious reverence with


244 CHAMBERLAIN : A TRANSLATION OF THE DOU-ZHI JvEU.’’


ye draw over you tlie covering of the mandarin drake and duck, ’tis
but for the interval before your bodies shall be destroyed.®*

Even in the pearly palace of the Heaven of Indra,®® there is
mourning over change and dissolution : even in the lofty halls of the
Heaven of Brahma,®’’ there is grief for fire, blood and sword.

.icMoh the crane and ihc tortoise toere regarded.] ‘'‘The dew mentioned in
the next clause is a flgui'c, — tlie shoi-tness of human life being likened to the
fragility of the dew-drops. In Chinese literature we read of ‘the dews upon
the seallioiiH,’ and in Japanese literature we have such phrases as ‘short as
the moment before drop the de^vs from the convolvulus.’ In tlie ‘Biography
of Su Wu,’ in the ‘Chronicles of Han’ it is said: ‘Man’s life is like the morn
ing dew.’ So that all our fond pledges for the hundreds and thousands and
myriads of years of the tortoise and of the crane are valid only for the
moment before our life shall vanish like the dew-drops.”

® Speaking of the mandarin drake and duck, Mayers says ( “Manual,”
Article OfiG) ; “These beautiful waterfowl manifest, when paired, a singular
degree of attacdimcnt to each other, and they have hence bccji elovaiod into
an emblem of connuljial affection and fidelity.” It is unfortxuiate that their
somewhat ludicrous English name should spoil what in Chinese or Japaweso
is a very graceful allusion.

the Sunskrit Tvaiyastvimsas (see Eitel s. v. ). According
to the Buddhist tlu'ologj' whicli, while accepting the Bra])nunica] piintheon,
degraded its divinities to a rank inferior to that of the least of the Bud-
dhist saints, those divinities themHetve.s, though living through countle.ss ages,
are not immortal. Tlieir approaching end is indicatcnl by five' Hym]>toms
of decay, which are given hy the commentator as follows:

I. — The fading of their erown of flowers.

11. — The siuklon soiling of their heavenly raiment by the dust.

Til. — Sweat from the armpits.

I V.— Blinking with the eyes,

V. — A loss of joy in their abode.

the Sanskrit Brahmalbka. The Gods, as noticed in the
preceding foot-note, are neither immortal nor exempt from the law of trans-
migration; and if they sin, they will have, like men, to pass through the
“TTiree Hoads” of Hell (Fire), Demoniacal Existence (Sword) and Animal
Existence (Blood). Hell is said by the commentator, who quotes an old
Buddhist authority, to be called the Road of Fire, because the eyes of those
suffering there burn by night. Similarly in Demoniacal Existence, grass-
blades are used .is swords for cutting the demons in pieces, whence its al-
ternative name, while the name of the Road of Blood is given to Animal
Existence because animals bite and draw each other’s blood. These Three
Beads are states of punishment merited by three classes, of sins, viz., Anger,
Cruelty and Stupidity,


OHAMBEELAIN ! A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.’^ 24&


.Even Sadatta’s*® ten-fold excellence could not arrest his dissolution:
even As6ka’s®® seven treasures could not purchase length of life.

Even Tukhdra,®° with its strength to turn back the moon, was


“HjIIj tlie original name of AnatliapincZika, a contemporary of Bud-
dha’s, and a wealthy householder in Sfnlvastt famous, for his liberality. The
superior man excels, says the Japanese commentator, quoting an old Bud-
dhist authority;] I. in birth; 11, in rank; III in ridies; IV. in authority;
V. in wisdom; VI. in longevity; VII. in purity of life; VIII. in courtesy; IX.-
in the favour he finds with those above him; X. in the love with which he is
regai'ded by those beneath him.

For details of the life of this celebrated prince, the Constantine of
the Buddhist Church, see Eitel s. v. and the various European works on
Buddhism, The Japanese commentator states that his seven treasures were:
I. a golden wheel; II. a white elephant; III. a violet horse; IV. a divine-
gem; V. a pearly wife; VI. great riches; VII. a great array.

“Jap. Guwats;i-Shi Haid by the commentator to be another

name for India, but properly corresponding to the present Batlakshan (see
Eitel s. V. Tukliilra.). The .Tapaiiese author’s eoneiseuess has made him
obscure in this passage, as it is not of Tukhara itself as a country, but of
certain inhabitants of Tuldifira, that he would speak. TIio following (junta-
tion from the commentary will render the text intelligible;

‘‘The ‘Sutra of Religious Verses and Apologues’ ( commonly
known in Europe by its Pali title of Diiaminapada) tells us that there
were four brothers. Brahmans, each of- whom possessed the five supernatural
powers. So, it having come to their knowledge that they were one and all
of them to die on that day week, they took counsel together, saying:
‘Shall it be that we may not avoid death , — Vie who are in possession of the
five supernatural powers, — ^re who can turn heaven and earth upside down
and take tlie sun and moon in our hands, and move mountains, and make
rivers cease to liow, and find nothing impossible to us?’ So, that they
might escape from the mortal-slaying demon, they asked leave of absence
from the King; and one of them plunged into the ocean, one of them went
to Mount SumPrn, one of them hid in the air, and the fourth remained in
the haunts of men, but — ^^vben bbe appointed week was ended, they died all
foui', as drops the fruit when it is ripe. On being apprised of the circum-
stance, the King went to the place where Buddha was, and, having prostrated
himself, addressed the Venerable Rhkya, saying. ‘All these four Brahmans
possessed the five supernatural powers. How then might they not avoid
death ?’ To which Buddha graciously made this reply : ‘There are four things
which a man cannot avoid: Firfstly, with parents to procreate him, he can-
not avoid birth; secondly, having been born, he cannot avoid old age; thirdly,
having growm old, he cannot avoid sickness; fourthly, being sick, he cannot
avoid death.”

The messengers of Ybrna (Jap. Yen-Ma, ® Regent of

VOL. IX. 10


246 CHAMBERLAIN .* A TRANSLATION OP THE “ LCU-ZHI KEIT.”

■bound by the messengers of Y4ma: even tile Dragon-Emperor,®^ with
his power to hurl the dragons, was smitten by the staves of the host of hell.

•Above all things, men must practise charity ; it is by almsgiving
that Wisdom is fed ; less than all things, men must grudge money ; it
is by riches that Wisdom is hindered.®®

If a man be so poor that he hath no money wherewith to give an
alms : he must let a feeling of joy arise within him when he seeth
another give.®*

The merit of an alms given with a eotnpassionate heart to one

Hell (see Eitel s.v.), are, according to tlie Japanese commentatoi’, who quotes
a Sutra entitled ‘^Zliifu Wcm Kiyau” ( fe- “The SUtra of the Ten
Kings,” Sanskrit ?) three in number, and their names are “the Soul-
Snatching Demon” “the Spirit-Snatching Demon” jS|,) , and

“tlie Demon Who Binds the Animal Spirits” ( ) . FThe rendering of

and n.s signifying respectively Soul, SpiHts and Animal Spirits is
of course subject to correction by any technical theology definitions which
may determine the usage of these terms .and of their Sanskrit originals by
writers belonging to the Buddhist Church.]

“Apparently the Sanskrit Sflgara, “a NUga (Serpent) king, whose
palace, refulgent with pearls, is situated at the bottom of the Ocean N. of
the MSru.” (Eitel ,s.v.) The allusion in the text is not cleai*. The‘’hoBt of
hell” may be either Yftina’s messengers mentioned in the first clause of the
paragraph, or another .species of demons of which the hell entitled in Sanskrit
Avfhi (W^i^) is full. The commentator states that the mouths of these
demons are like those of the Yakshas, their teeth like the teeth of dogs
and spouting fire, their eyes four in number, and their heads eight in num-
ber, while they have no less than sixty-four horns whose tips are all ablaze.

^-Remember that “Wisdom” (RSdhi) in the Buddhist theological termi-
nology has a much higher moral signification than that which we ordinarily
attach to the term. The Japanese commentator quotes a number of authori-
ties to attest the extreme importance to be attached to almsgiving, or rather
to charity in its widest sense (for it includes the gift of religious instruction
to the soul as well as lower donations of food and money to support the
body). Charity is reckoned as the first and greatest df the Six Cardinal
Virtues. — (See Eitel s. v. Paramita. Also Spence Hardy’s “Easteim
Monarchism,” pp. 80 ef. seq.)

“ This paragraph is said by the commentator to be a quotation from one
of the Buddhist Seripturt!.s. The merit accruing to him who acts in the
maimer here prescribed ^vill be equal to that obtained by the actual giver of
the alms.


CHAMBERLAIN ,* A TRANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.” 247

poor man is like unto the ocean : the recompense of alms given to a
multitude for thine own sake is like unto a grain of poppy-seed.®*

He that pileth up sand for a pagoda will speedily obtain a golden
body : he that plucketh flowens for a Buddlia will soon be resting upon
the lotus-seat.®®

The strength of him that receiveth one line with faith exceedeth
the dignity of the Wheel-Turning King : tlie virtue of him that listeneth
to half a verse is better than the treasures of the Three Thousand
Worlds.®®

The first thing needful is to search after the Buddhist Path, the
next thing is gratitude for tlie Four Benefits ; the last thing is, extend-
ing thy care to every one of the Six Paths, to practise the Buddhist Path,
in concert with them.®®


“■^Tliis paragraph, says tlu> i-oiiniicntator, is a ciuoLaiion from a stanza of
poetiy in a Buddhist -work entitled ( Sanskrit ?).

“To huild pagodas (propeidy sttlpas) in which to preserve Buddha’s
relies, and to oirer flowers before his shrine are the two chief acts of the
original Buddhist worship. They who perform such service (even’ if they
be but children piling up a little sand in the shape of a pagoda, provided it
be done in a reverential spirit) will themselves attain to BuddhahoodL
Buddha is sometimes said to have had a golden body, and the lotus-seat is a
poetical name for the state properly entitled Nirvana.

“This paragraph is said by the commentator to be a free quotation from
a Bixddhist iSiltra entitled ^ ^ IS (“The Shtra' of Ornaments.” The full
title in Chinese is::k M IS [sometimes substituted for

] and the original Sanskrit name apparently Mahavipratha-Buddha-
gana-vyhha Stltra). The “Wheel-Turning King” (^^^) is the Sanskrit
Jvakravarttl Ihl(7a, “the military conqueror and monarch of part or the whole
of an universe.” — (Eilel s. v.) But even his royal strength falls short of
that of the earnest believer. The entire universe, according to the Buddhist
cosmogony, consists of three thousand worlds, each provided with its sun and
moon, its heavens and hells,- etc., etc.

“''The “Four Benefits” are said by the commentator to he:

I. — ^The bexiefits we receive from our parents.

TI. — The benefits we receive from the mass of our fellow-creatures.

III. — ^Tlie benefits we receive fi-om the king.

IV. — The benefits we receive from the Precious Triad (Buddha, the

Law and the Priesthood.)

The sentiment of this clause, though perhaps obscure to the European


248 GHAMBEELAIN : A TEANSLATION OF THE “ DOU-ZHI KEU.”

For the guidance of the young have I commented on the doctrine
of Retribution, drawing both from the Inner and the Outer Canon :
let not those that read contemn these teachings, let not those that hear
deride them.

reader unfamiliar with Buddhist terminology, is a beautiful one; for it
warns the learner that earo for his own future happiness does not constitute
the whole duty of the 'religious man: rather must he labour to make all
creation co-heirs of the inheritance of joy which he hopes himself to obtain.
The “Six Baths” are the six conditions of sentient existence already enum-
erated in Note 82, and the expression therefore signifies the totality of
living creatures.

This phrase may be variously interpreted as signifying
either the esoteric and exoteric Buddhist Scriptures, or else the Buddhist
Scriptures on the one hand and the Chinese Classics on the other. The
latter view best suits the present case; for (as will have been noticed) the
author frequently quotes as authorities the “Reeord-of Bites” and other
words of the Chinese sages. No words, however, could better resume his
entire teaching than the phrase ‘Tor the Guidance of the young have I
commented on the doctrine of Retribution;” that is to say, in words more
intelligible to the ordinary European reader, “I have presented in easy
language the chief precepts of Buddhism;” for the ground-ivork of the
morals of this little treatise is entirely Buddhistic, as is but natural in the
production of a priest of that religion. Eor the doctrine of “Retribution”
(0 Jil)j “the fundamental dogma of Buddhistic metaphysics,” see Eitel s. v.
“Nidhna,” Spence Hardy’s observations on Karma (“Eastern Monarchism,”
pp, 5, G, etc, ) , and Burnouf and the other European writers on Buddhism
passim.


( 249 )


ON THE NEW MINERAL, REINITE.


By I3r, Otto Luedecke.


Teanslited by M. Yokoyama.


[Read June 14, 1881.]

Some doubts having been entertained about the true nature of the
remarkable mineral found in Koma-gori, Yamanashi Ken, which was
taken to Germany by Dr. Rein, it was submitted to a careful examina-
tion, mineralogical as well as chemical, and thereby proved to be an
entirely new species. A paper was published about it in Germany in
the year 1879, which I was lately fortunate enough to read. The new
mineral having been discovered in our own country, I thought it
important to translate the paper into English, and thus make it better
known, especially in Japan. As the greatest possible care has been
taken as to the correctness of the translation, I hope the contents of the
paper will give a good idea of the state of the question concerning the
new mineral.

“ Herr Dr. Rein, now professor in Marburg, has brought over to
Germany a new. mineral which he found at Kimbusan in Kai 'during
his travels in Japan, to which Herr Prof, von Eritsch has already called
the attention of mineralogists in our periodical (the ‘ Zeitschrift fiir
gesammte Naturwissenschaft ’ published at Halle). However, as he was
prevented by other work from giving a complete description of the
mineral, he transferred that office to me.

“ The new mineral occurs associated with large crystals of quartz,
which commonly show the combination of ooP, R, and — R. Most of
these crystals are distinguished by well marked cleavage parallel to R ;
others have an imperfect cleavage along the prism ooP, 2. At a


250


luedeoke; on the new mineral, reinite.


meetiDg of the German Geological Society at Munich, Prof, von Fritsch
exhibited a quart 2 twin from the same locality which has P 2 for its
twinning plane, so that the principal axes include an angle of 84° 33'.
Quartz and Eeinite, as the new mineral is called by Herr Prof, von
Fritsch, are often found grown together, and both have frequently a
yellowish-brown coating of hydrous oxide of iron besides earthy particles
of malachite on the quartz. The new mineral handed over to me is in
the form of a single large crystal which shows a tetragonal pyramid ,
the lateral edges of which are all of equal length. They ai’e about 46
millimetres long and are slightly broken at the angles. The terminal
edges of the pyramid are slightly truncated by the pyramid of the second
order. On account of its tetragonal form and high specific gravity, a
sample of it was fused with bisulphate of potassium, and yielded a
metallic acid soluble in water. My friend Prof. E. Schmidt then proved
that this acid was tungstic acid, which is in combination with ferrous

Chemistry of — Before the blowpipe, tungstate of iron

melts to a brownish black drossy enamel which is not magnetic ; fusecl
with salt of phosphorus in an oxidizing flame, it becomes brownish-red,
in a reducing flame greyish-green, especially on addition of metallic tin.
Its behaviour- is, therefore, just that of tungstic acid in presence of
much iron (jET. Mosc, Handbook of Analytical Chemistry'). Fused with
bisulphate of potassium, it is so completely decomposed that tungstate
of polassium can be separated by means of water whilst the iron
remains undissolved. A similar result is obtained with sodic carbonate*
When it is treated with zinc and acid, the aqueous solution of the
, fused maBS is colored blue, owing to the reduction of tungstic acid to
: dioxiilo of tungsten. By aqua regia it is also completely decomposed,
|he iron going into solution, and tungstic acid remaining as a yellow
mass which colors a borax bead reddish brown in the oxidizing flame,
and blue in the reducing flame. Hydrochloric, nitric, and sulphuric
acids do not completely decompose ‘the tungstate of iron, even when
boiled with it.

“ The quantitative estimation of the tungstic acid and protoxide of
• iron was performed in the laboratory of the University of this place
(Halle) by my ahoye mentioned friend Dr, E. Schmidt, professor of


LUEDEOKE,' ON THE NEW MINEBAE, RBINITE. 261

ciiemistry. The naineral was heated with sodic carbonate and potassic
nitrate, when the well known manganese reaction was not observed.
The resulting potassic tungstate was separated by water and the re-
maining sesquioxide of iron dissolved in a(iua regia.

“ The estimation of tungstic acid was performed according to the
method of Berzelius, as described in jKose’s Hcmdhuoh der amlgUsehm
Chemie. Besides oxide of iron and tungstic acid, there were found traoea
of lime and magnesia and yellow spangles of a heavy metallic acid,
insoluble in ammonia, and probably tantalic. The following table gives
the mean result of two conoordant determinations made upon 0.8dl7
grm., and 0.2685 grm. respectively.


FOUNP.

CALCULATED FOR FeO, WOs,

Ferrous oxide

24.33

23,68

Tungstic oxide

75.47

76,32

Lime

traces


Magnesia

ic


Tantalic oxide


99.80 100.00

“ Genther in the Annals of Pharmacy and Chemistry has described
an artificially prepared tungstate of iron. It is a dark violet-brown
powder of specific gravity 7.1, and consists of 24.32^ FeO and 75.7
^ W 03 , and exactly agrees with our native one- Hence in his Ohe-
mieal Compounds he includes Keinite among the tungstates.

Hiibnerite MnWO^

Wolframite (MnFe) WO4

Reinite FeWO 4

“Its Crystallography . — The crystal which was presented to me
does not belong, as might have been expected, to the raonoclinic system
but to the tetragonal system, and in its external form much resembles
scheelite (CaW 04 ) and stolzite (PbW 04 ); it shows the fundamental
pyramid P. (Ill) slightly truncated by the pyramid of the second order
Poo (101). The faces of the pyramid of the second order, however,
are not all exposed to view, there being 3 in the upper half of the
crystal, and only 2 in the lower half. The positions of the remaining
faces are partly overgrown with quartz, and partly broken. On many


252


lttedeoke; on the new mineral, rbinite.


parts of the crystal there are other crystals of a smaller size whose prin-
cipal axes are not parallel with that of the main crystal. The blackish-
brown crystal is partially coated with a crust of hydrous oxide of iron.
Measured with the contact goniometer, the terminal edges of P were
found=103“~103°50' ; those of P ; Poo = 14U°~U2k°.

“ For more accurate determination, a portion of tlie crystal with
the terminal edges (111): (in) was detached, and the faces (111) and
(iTi) were laid over with fine laminae of mica, and thus the angle was
measured with a medium-sized Groth’s reflecting goniometer- The
average of six measurements was 103° 32,' from which we find, by cal-
culation,' the ratio of the tetragonal secondary axis a to the principal axis
c to be 1 : 1.279. As one of the mica plates gave a strong reflection of
light, a greater accuracy than 3 decimal places could not be obtained.
Calculating from this axial ratio we get the angle of the lateral edges
eq[Ual to 122° 8V whilst measurements with the contact goniometer were
rendered impossible owing to the fact that the place of the lateral edges
was overgrown with numerous subindividuals having their principal
axes running in various directions. The angle P : Poo was found equal
to 141° 46' from calculation, while measurements with the contact
goniometer gave 141° 15' — 142° 30'.

“If we put the new mineral together with those crystallized
tungstates which are already known, we obtain the following table : ”


NAME.

CHEMICAL

CRYSTAL

LATERAL


COMPOSITION.

SYSTEM.

EDGES of T.

Scheelite

CaW04

tetragonal. 130° 33'

Stolzite

PbW04


131° 23'

Eeinite

FeW04


122° 8'

Hubnerite

MnW04

monoclinic (?)

Wolframite rich

fFeWOx


in manganese

1 J- T T

1 10 MnW04

monoclinic

According to Des

(Rammelsberg)


Cloizeaux

Wolframite of

[2 FeW 04


/3=89° 6'

medium com-

l3MnW04

<<

a : b : 0=

position

1


0.830 : 1 :

Wolframite

(MnW04


0.8881.

-rich in iron.

i4FeW04


LUEDECKE : ON THE NEW MINERAL, REINITE.


253


“Now as wolframite is made up of a mixture of isomorplious
tungstates of iron and of manganese, and crystallizes in the monoclinic
system, each of these tungstates must be in itself monoclinic ; and
we may therefore count Hiibnerite (Mn’W’ 04 ) among the minerals
crystallizing in that system. On the other hand we know that ReinitC
crystallizes in the tetragonal system ; hence with great probability we
may assume that both compounds, viz., tungstate of iron and tungstate
of manganese, are dimorphous, and that therefore a separate tetragonal
tungstate of manganese may exist, although such has not, been met with
hitherto.

“ Oiher Physical Properties . — The hardness of the mineral agrees
with that of fluorite; its specific gravity is 6.640 — the average of six
determinations.

“ The mineral is rather opaque, and blackish-brown ; the streak
is likewise brown ; its lustre is dull metallic to glassy and it has a very
imperfect cleavage along 00 P, and an uneven fracture.

“ The mineral in very fine plates transmits a violet-brown light ;
it thus shows chromatic polarization. Splinters, when completely rotated
between the ‘ nicols,” appear like tetragonal plates cut perpendicular to
the principal axis.

“ In some places the mineral encloses a yellowish-green mineral,
which also shows chromatic polarization,”


( 254 )


THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


By JosiAH CoNDER, M. R. I. B. A.


[Read Jime 20, 1881.]


n.— ARMOUR.

The forms exhibited in Japanese armour within the periods of
trustworthy record appear to have been almost as changeless as those
of the civil costume. As has been remarked with regard to the
ceremonial dress, so we find in the armour, — the oldest examples
remaining exhibit the greatest completeness, whilst those of later date
are distinguished by omissions and irregularities in certain parts. The
changes which took place during the development of European armour,
remarkably that of France and England, can be distinctly traced to
several causes. Such are, — the gradual improvement in the technique
of steel, the continual changes in the style of the civil costume (to the
fashions of which the armour always assimilated itself), and the develop-
ment of the offensive arts, necessitating corresponding changes in the
defensive dress, and rendering useless those forms which were designed
for a less advanced warfare. Thus we have, during the few centuries
of the middle ages, a complete change in European armour, from the
hauberk of mail, resembling the robe of the 12th century, to the tight-
fitting, puffed and ribbed steel suits hf the Tudor period, in imitation of
the slashed dresses of the day.


CONDEIi : THE HI8TOB.y OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


255 '


The armour of Japan, on the contrary, cannot be said in any way
to have taken its shape from that of the civil costume, from which it
entirely differed in its external form.

The introduction of guns into the warfare of the country was the
cause of certain small changes in the armour, but these were insignificant
compared with the revolutionary alterations in the defensive dress of
Europe from the same cause. It has been stated above that the oldest
remaining examples exhibit the. greatest completeness in their parts,
but by this it is of course not intended to imply that previous to the-
date of such remaining specimens there was no earlier form and no
■gradual development. The most ancient pieces of armour of which we
know are chiefly from old temples, and profess an age of about six or
seven centuries. For the earlier history of Japanese armour some
information may be gathered from books and old pictures, from which
sources the following facts have been gleaned by the writer.

The word Yoroi, now commonly used to denote armour in general*
aud especially the armour of the trunk, was not employed before the
Yengi peidod (901-923), the word in use before this being Kawara,
This word, now used for a roof-tile, is the same originally with Kora,
the word used for the scales of a tortoise shell. Thus the ancient word
used to indicate armour implies the scales or shell of the body- The
body armour of the KOnin period (810-824) appears to have been made
of sheep skin or ox hide, from the account which we read of the
equipment for the defeat of the rebels in Oshiu at that time. Previously
to this, historical references lead us to suppose that the armour was
made of cloth, thickly padded with cotton, the exterior being often of
highly ornamented silk or brocade. In the year 780 an order was
issued by the government that leather armour should be used, because
the kind hitherto worn was continually requiring repair. The order
permitted the use of iron instead of leather, and advised that all armour
should be gradually changed to metal. We read again that in the time
of Kwammu Tennd (782-806), on the occasion of a war in Yezo, 2000
suits of leather armour were ordered, aud a fixed allowance for armour
was settled for each province, to be granted every three years. The
helmet seems to be of later origin than the body armour, in the time of
Jingd KOgu (201-269) body armour of padded cloth being used, but


256 CONDER ; THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME.


epparently no helmet. When first used the helmets appear to have been
of padded silk or cloth, there being record of an order issued in the
epoch Tembi6 H6ji (757-765) for 60,000 cotton helmets made in the
shape of Chinese helmets.

Iron helmets were brought into common use in the time of liCwammu
Tenn6, as indicated by an order for 2,900 given at that time ; before
this, however, metal helmets seem occasionally to have been worn.
As far back as the time of Jingd Kdga a retainer of the name of Take-
no-uchi-no-sukune is said to have caused a metal suit of armour to be
made ; but this is mentioned as a marvel and seems to have been quite
an exceptional case. During the wars of the K6nin period (810-824) one
of the leaders wore a suit of iron armour called Usugaw-no-yoroi, which
created great notice ; and there were many instances of tlie use ofKogane-
tymjiri-no-yoroi, w'hich was a mixture of leather and iron. The use of
plates and scales of iron in armour seems to have gradually increased from
this period until its employment was finally established in the epoch
Tensh6 (1573-1592), after the introduction of guns, which took place
in the previous era Tembun, The complete use of metal plates caused
a great increase in the weight of the armour, and this necessitated its
curtailment and the omission of many parts which had previously
belonged to it. From the time of sucli a change, the armour which had
before been roomy and accommodating in shape and size had to be made
carefully from measure so as to fit closely to the body. The particular
alterations in special parts of the armour will be better explained after
the description of the details referred to.

Much as the Japanese defensive attire differs in its general
appearance from that of Europe, there are sufficient resemblances in
the disposition of its principal parts to enable us to adopt in most
cases the technical terras commonly used in such classifications.
There are certain points in the human body wliich call for special
protection, and bends and joints requiring freedom ^ of motion, and
consequently requiring a covering which shall not impede ready
action. Again, these members in their movement leave exposed certain
hollows wliich need screening by excrescent defences. Thus, the
solution of the same problems leads to certain resemblances in the
armours of different nations ; and though we consider that of the


GONDEE ; THE HISTOEY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


2oT


Japanese to have been unique and widely dissimilar from that of
Mediseval Europe, there are still in the subdivisions a correspondence
sufBcient to enable us to find equivalent English terms whereby to
describe them.

The first article of attire waich we shall describe is the.

KABUTO OE POT-HELMET.

A comparison of the Japanese defensive head-covering with European
forms shews that the word “ helmet,” by which it is commonly translated,
is, strictly speaking, misapplied. The kabuto neither forms the com,-
plete covering for the head and neck, nor rests for support upon the-
shoulders as does the European heaiwie or helmet It resembles more-
the chapel-de-fer or pot-helmet used in the time of Charles I., having
an attached eouvre-nuque at the back, which continues well round to the-
sides of the face. The word “ helmet,” however, apart from its strictly
technical meaning, has become so generally employed to denote any
defensive head-covering that it will be convenient still to use it in our
descriptions. The Kabuto consists of three principal parts, — the HacU
or skull, the Shikoro, an articulated eouvre-nuque, and the Maye-msH
or peak. Also two curious curved wing pieces at the sides called.
Fuki-gayeshi, which sometimes form part of the eouvre-nuque and-,,
sometimes ai'e separate. In addition to this there are various fittings-
and furnishings, such as crests, badges, rings, cords and linings.

The HaeM or skull of the Kabuto was made in many different
shapes, named according to the natural form they most resembled. Of'
these some were more or less hemispherical, such as Dsu nari and
Saku nari, which were so called from their resemblance to the shape-
of the crown of the head, and Mono tiari, or peach-shaped form.
Another shape exists called To-kamuri, made in imitation of the-
ceremonial hat called Kamuri, described in a previous paper. A.
favourite form also was the Kimen— that of a demon’s head. Others-
more or less approach the conical in form, such as the Shii nari or '
nut-shape, and the Toppai, which is a tall conical form, the sides-
flattening into a blade shape towards the top. Native writers ascribe
to the long conical forms the advantage of more secure protection and
greater coolness to the wearer, but consider them inconvenient for the-


258 OONDEE: THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME.

HSS of the bow of sword. Those fittiug more closely' to the head were
■eoflSidered less of an eniuimbrance, but were very oppressive to the
Wearer, causing great heat and dizziness. For the most part the
JEaehi is a hollow bowl of iron or hard lacquered leather, either
wrought in one piece or made of strips strongly rivetted together. An
exception, however, exists in the Tatami habuto or folding-helmet, of
which the skull is made of horizontal articulated rings, loosely joined in
Such a way that it could be shut down to a flattish form. The outer sur-
face of the ordinary Haehi is provided with thin projecting ribs radiating
from the centre of the crown to the outer edge. These raised ribs vary
in number from seven to about 100. They are intended to turn the edge
of any sharp weapon, and the greater their number the stronger the
helmet is supposed to be. When the helmet is of iron the ribs are
generally oast or wrought out of the same piece, but they are sometimes
let iu afterwards, being of some different material to that of the Kaclii
itself, such for example as shakudd fukurm, gold or silver ; thus adding
decoration as well as strength to the whole. In order to protect the
metal skull from corrosion, it is covered mostly with some lacquer
preparation. This sometimes receives a bright polish, but is oftener
dull in colour and made to imitate the appearance of the natural
unpolished metal. When lacquered, the process is a very long one,
several layers of different preparations being used, each coat, when
dry,’ being carefully rubbed with a polishing stone. The finishing
colours are black, red, green, yellow, blue, rusted iron colour, gold,
silver, tortoise shell, etc., etc.

In place of, or in addition to, the ribs, the surface of the Machi
is often covered with a number of elevated knobs or points called Hoshi,
which somowlint resemble nail heads and are intended to break the
force of a blow. Some helmets have no ribs, but the Hoshi only, and
then they are called Hoshi-kabvio; but generally the two are combined,
the studs being placed in rows of five, seven,, or nine between the ribs.
In later times they became merely ornamental, being made of gold or
Silver weakly attached, but in the best helmets they are as originally
designed, of iron, rivetted right through the metal bowl. They have
several different names, according to the shape of the nail-head and the
method of fixing.


CONDBR ; THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME. 259

To the centre of the crown of the helmet is fixed a large metal
socket called the Tenku or Hachwian-m, forming an opening apparently
intended to ventilate the interior. The outer rim of this socket serves as
an important part of the decoration, being embossed and engraved gener-
ally in conventional imitation of a chrysanthemum, from which it
receives the name of Kikuza. This point also receives special atten-
tion, being considered particularly sacred to the god of war, as one of
its names implies. This opening was sometimes protected from the wet
by a silk cloth tied over the top of the helmet by strings attached to
four metal knobs provided for the purpose. These metal prominences
are called 8hirten-hiy6 (the four-D^va knobs) by some writers, who
attribute to them entirely a symbolical meaning, ignoring the practical
explanation of their use. According to such a theory they were named
BisJiamon Ten, Jikoku Ten, K6moku Ten, Z6ch6 Ten. Whatever
symbols may have been afterwards attached to them, their original pur-
pose was evidently that of attaching some appendage.

The above parts completed the furnishing of an ordinary Machi, but
for those of higher ranks other ornaments were added in the form of
quarterings in gold or silver. These are in bands extending from the
JTaehwian-za to the front and back, and sometimes also to the sides, so
as to divide the helmet ornamentally into two, four, or eight parts^
When only two lines ai’e used, front and back, the ornamentation is
called Kata-jiro ; when four, it is called Shih6-jiro ; when eight, the
named used is JSappd-jiro. These bauds are often so broad as to leave
but little of the black helmet showing between, and they are further
ornamented sometimes by two or three raised lines, which are giit and
which end in small barbs or foliations named according to the shape
they suggest. Such names are Tokage-ga&hira (lizard head),
gashim (icAd-leaf head).

On the four sides of the helmet are small holes fitted with metal
eyes and called Shida-nO'ana, from which thin strips of leather tied
into a tight bow generally project, being used to councct with the
inside cap.

The Shikoro or couvre-mique is of various kinds. It consists gener-
ally of three, five, six, or seven laminated plates of metal of stiff
leather of a curved form, each fastened to the next with silk cords. The


260 CONDER: THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.

axrangeKiemt of these silk cords varies, sometimes being placed closely
and sometimes with wider intervals, the general styles being similar to
those more fully described under the word Hode (epauliere). in some
the laminations are each composed of a number of kozane or small metal
scales, from 100 to 136 in a row, strongly stitched together with the
silk cord. The tof) plate of this couvre-niique is firmly rivetted with
metal rivets to the back of the lictchi, and the lowest plate is generally
lined with leather, so as to prevent its clattering noisily against the body
armour as tlie wearer walks. This is called Hislii-toji, a name given to
it in common with the lower plates of other portions of the armour, on
account of the cross stitches of a star-shape in which the end of the silk
cords are finished upon it.

The inside of the Shikoro is generally lacquered to a bright red,
and this is said to be for the purpose of reflecting a fierce colour on to
the face of the warriorh

At each side of the helmet is fixed a curious curved wing piece
called Fukirgayeshi, which is generally fastened to the edge of the two
or three upper plates of the shikoro and curled round outwards, pro-
jecting at the side. They are generally covered with ornamented leather
and a decorated border, the crest of the wearer in metal being rivetted
on to the centre. The Fuk/i-kcnjeshi are sometimes formed out of the upper
portion of the convre-ymque, the edge of which is curled round for the
purpose. In some instances tho Fuki-kayeshi on the right side is
made hinged, so as ter be moveable, that it may not impede shooting
with the bow.

The peak or frontlet of the helmet is called Maye-zasM, and differs
slightly in shape in different styles. In some cases it slopes more down-
wards than in others, thus forming a more perfect shade for the eyes.
It is made of a separate plate rivetted on to the front of the Hachi, and
is covered generally with ornament leather of the same kind as the
Fuki-gayeshi. To it is fixed a three-branched metal socket, into which
certain ornamental additions to the helmet are fitted.

This socket is called the Harai-date. The underside of the Maye-
zashi is gilt, lacquered red, or lined with red leather, the outer edge
generally having a metal border.

^ From, tliis it seems that the mark-shaped vizor attached to tlie helmets
was not always worn.


COXDER : THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


261


As stated above, the Harai-date receives three ornaments : one
erect in the centre in the form of a dragon or crest of some kind and
called Mayedate, and one branching out on each side like the horns of
some animal, from which indeed it derives its name Tsunomoto,
These are carved metal horn-shaped pieces, broad and thin, with foliated
ends. Their purpose is entirely ornamental, being intended to give
to the head-piece a grotesque appearance. The Japanese helmet
throughout appears to be intended to impart to the wearer a fierce and
monstrous ajjpearance. This object may also be gathered from the
descriptions of methods for lining the inside with red to reflect upon the
face, and from the mask-shaped vizors designed in imitation of some
real or imaginary monster.

The Tmmmoto vary very much in length, some being out of all
proportion to the helmet.

At the back of the hacM is attached a handsome brass ring, from
which is hung a thick tasselled silk cord, suspended behind in a large
bow. Tills is called KasajiniaJd no kuwan, on account of its being used
occasionally for the attachment of the KasajirusJii, a white cloth badge
worn in battle for purpose of distinguishing sides. Above this ring
in some old helmets we find another similar ring intended for the point
of attachment of the ATdrd.

The J3.6r6 is a large soft bag filled with cotton, or sometimes
stretched only on a wicker-work frame, which was worn hung at the
back by the cavalry to protect the rear from arrow shots.

In addition to the crests called Mayedate mentioned above, other
badges were sometimes worn on the sides or back and called respectively
Wakidate and TJshirodate. In the helmet said to have belonged to..
Yoshitsune and preserved in the temple of Kurama in Yamashiro, a
large slmhi is fixed upon the top.

The face is protected by a kind of vizor called Menko or Saku-bd,
which is quite separate from the helmet and attached to it by strings.
The Menko is a metal mask either covering the whole features,’ having
holes for the eyes and nostrils, in which case it is named Mempo, or
smaller, covering only the cheeks and the portion of the face below
the nose, in which case it is named JS6~ate, These mask-shaped vizors
have various distinguishing names, according to the countenance that

VOL. IX. II


262


CONDER: the history op JAPANESE COSTUME.


they represent. Such names are Tsubanie-b6 (swallow face), Saru-h6
(monkey face), Okina-men (old man’s face), 8hiioadzura (wrinkled face),
Waraioadmra (young boy’s face), Oiina-men (women’s face), Kiyo
(female demon), Moriyd (ghost), Tengu and Akuriyd (evil demons),
Namban-b6 (southern barbarian’s face), Korai-bd (Korean’s face), etc., etc.

Most of these are intended to give a hideous and deceptive aspect to
the wearer, and it is recommended that the older faced ma^ks shall be
used by young warriors and the younger ones by older men.

The Menlco is generally made in one piece of metal, with the
exception of the portion which covers the nose and upper lip, which is
generally in a separate piece and attached by moveable rivets so that
it can be removed if necessary for the purpose of eating and drinking.
(Sometimes the surface is inlaid with other metals, or it is gilt or
lacquered upon the outside, the inside being generally lacquered red,
Near the bottom of the mask, one or two small holes with short metal
tubes are provided, being intended to form an outlet for perspiration.
Sometimes deep wrinkles are formed in the modelling of the cheeks for
the purpose of preventing an offensive weapon from slipping on the
smooth metal surface and entering the eye hole. The metal lip pieces
generally project forward to guard the mouth in the same manner.
The upper lip, chin and cheeks are furnished with hair in keeping with
the general character of the face represented in the mask, either black,
red or grey. The hair used is wild boar’s hair, horse hair or deer’s hair.
When real hair is not provided, a representation of hair is often painted
upon the metal. Projecting metal knobs are provided for the attach-
ment of the fastening cords.

Hung to the bottom of the Menko is a kind of gorgette called
Yodare-gane or Yodare-hahe or Yen~ii. It is generally, in construction
and finish, similar to the eouvre-nuque, consisting of laminated plates
connected with cords and widening gradually towards the bottom,
Sometimes it is made of leather or of chain-mail sewn upon leather or
padded cloth.

The lining of the helmet consists of a soft cap of quilted silk or
cloth called the Uke bari, Uke wa or Uehi bari. The edge of this bag-
shaped lining is firmly fixed to the bottom of the inside of the HaoM,
and it is made rather shallower than the inside of the helmet, so that


CONDER : THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME,


263


the weight of the metal does not fall immediately upon the head. To
fulfil this purpose the cloth cap is strengthened on the inside with cross
straps called Ghiharorgaiva. Attached to the lower part of the helmet
are two strong silk cords for tying it under the chin.

HAN BURI— HALF-HELMET OR SKULL CAP.

Sometimes instead of the ordinary Kahuto was worn a metal or
leather skull cap only covering a portion of the hand, and called San
buri. Some covered only the crown of the head, being of a shallow cup
shape. Others were deeper, protecting also the temples and being in
the shape of a half skull. This form was made in several hinged plates
for putting on easily, holes being left for the ears and for the tuft of
hair on the top. The San huri was often covered with leather, the ends
of which were left for the purpose of tying under the chin. It is said
that the S.an huri was sometimes worn under and in addition to the
Mabido. It was generally used, however, for night sorties or by
foraging parties, etc.


d6 — CORSELET.

The term Do includes the general armour of the trunk, with
connected guards for the thighs and posterior. The name Do-marti
is used to indicate those metal corselets which are of a more or
less tubular form, the front and back plate being in many cases
continuous. One kind of D6~maru consisted of a single piece of
metal wrought into the form of a naked torso, having large protrud-
ing muscles, and was called Sotolce-do. Such armour is generally
black, and is said to have been taken from the images of the
Indian saints. It is sometimes covered with a kind of shark skin,
which sort of treatment is called /Same tsudzumi. Other kinds were
veneered with tortoise shell (BekM ’tsudzumi), or covered witli velvet
(Birddo-tsudzumi) or with silk (Iloji-tsudzimi), or cane work, of
which there were different kinds (Anda-tsudzumi and Ajiro-gah^, or
with leather and called Kawa-tsudzumi. The leather coverings were
many and there were many distinguishing names, according to the
leather employed ; such as : —


264 CONDEE : THE HI8TOEY OP JAPANESE COSTUME.


Kara-hawa tsudzwni


Kin-lcawa

<(


Ai-gawa

tc


Nuri-kawa

a


Mon-liaim


Some-gaim

<(


Aka-gauu,

<(


Kuro-kawa

(<


Sana-gatva

it


In addition to this there were some Dd-maru which were of
polished brass and others of iron, inlaid with coloured and precious
metals.

Such continuous metal corselets required large openings for the
arms, and were even then inconvenient from, their want of flexibility,
and were found useless for riding,^ as they caused great pain .under the
armpits.

The Tatami-dd or folding corselets, as their name signifies, were
arranged in two or four plates hinged at the sides and fastening with
clasps or strings. Those made in four plates are called Shimai-kane-
no d6, and those in two plates are called Nimai kcma no do. Sojne of the
Tatami-dd had curved and ridged breasts and rounded back, the two
meeting over the shoulders and narrowing at the waist and resembling
the European cuirass in shape. A name sometimes applied to this
form was Hato-munc-dd , corresponding to our term pigeon-breasted
corselet. These metal corselets were also sometimes called Tate-nashi-
dd (cuirass without a shield), from the fact that they were supposed to
have great strength in resisting the force of a sword or projectile, and
thus rendered a .shield unnecessary.

Another kind of Dd-niaru was composed of separate scales of metal
or hard leather, made to overlap and fastened by rivets, or connected by
small strips of chain mail. This kind was called 01ce-gawa-d6, but the
exact reason for this appellation is disputed.

When the body armour was made of metal scales (Kozane)
connected by silk or leather cords, as was the ease in the more elaborate
suits, the names used were Kebiki D6-niaru or Sugahe Dd-maru, accord-


CONDEJR ; THE HISTOIiy OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


265


ing to the style of sewing. The cord-bound armour was considered to
possess great elasticity, and was said to be cooler in hot weather and
warmer in cold weather than the other kinds. The large number of
silk or leather cords, however, would absorb much moisture in wet -
weather, and wore out somewhat quickly. Those generals who used
such armour required also a change of suit.

HAEAMAKI-D6.

This name was applied to a kind of body armour resembling the 1)6-
mam, but not quite meeting behind, its elasticity allowing of its being
tightened or extended, the gap, which could be increased or diminished,
being closed by a separate piece called the 8ei~iia, It is I’elated that
this kind of armour was invented hrst for the use of the Empress
Jingd on the occasion of her expedition to Korea, when being enceinte
it was necessary that some method of regulating the size of her body
armour should be devised. Somewhat similar, but not to be confounded
with this, is a kind of Do called Shiwari-guaoJcu, which also opened
behind, but was made to meet and close by means of clasps and -cords.
Such armour was worn by the common soldiers.

As has been stated above, the most elaborate body armour wa^
composed of metal scales connected by ornamental cords. The arrange,
ments of small scales are always bounded by larger plates as borderss
and to these special names are applied. The front part of the D6 is
provided at the top, just below the gorgette, with a narrow border-plate
called the Hfiina-ita (breast plate).

The front of this is covered generally with ornamented leather, and
has a metal edging. To it are fixed certain metal rings, with stout silk
cords with buttons, to which are connected the shoulder braces (IFafo-
gami) which form part of the back plate. The Muna-ita is sometimes
called the Mika-dzuhi-no-ita, on account of its cresent-shaped form. When
of metal the plate is called Muna-kana-mono. Immediately below the
Muna-ita is a plate bearing the name of Tauruhashiri-no-ita, a term used
principally in archery and meaning the meeting plate of the bow string.
Th s portion of the cuirass is sometimes in one continuous plate, but
often in the Kozane-yoroi it does not differ in construction from the


266


CONDEE : THE IIISTOKY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


rest of the trunk armour. To the right side of this portion is fixed an
ornamental ring, from which was suspended the cloth or the learler’s
staff.

The word Ita, signifying jjZafe, is applied alike to the single raetaj;
plates which form the borderings of portions of the armour, and to the
various rows of flexible overlapping scales which in some suits form
the general body. ISrearfy every row had some special name, but we
only describe here such as have some special function. That part of
the corslet which covered the left side Avas called Wahi-iia or Jmuke,
and it Avas connected to the back and front portions of the cuirass with
cords or hinges. The top portion of this consisted of a curved piece
fitting under the armpits, called the 8entan-ita or Kana-mmoari. This
AA^as much hollowed out and never allowed to fit closely under the armpits,
and Avas connected loosely by means of a strip of mail or cords to the
rest of the Wahi-ita, these precautions being taken to prevent pain
whilst riding or using the arms. The Smtan^ita was. ornamented in
a similar Avay to the Muna-ita, generally with printed leather and a
metal border. In order to facilitate the putting on of the the right
side Avas made of a separate piece resembling the Waki-date, but
detached and called the irai-date or Tsiiho-ita, This piece, Avhen, as
AV'as often the case, it was sejmrate from the rest, Avas suspended in
position by cords pa.ssed round the neck, and wms afterAvards connected
by cords to the rest of the corselet. This arrangement, however, only
applies to certain kinds of Do, in others the Wai-date being hinged to
the rest, and in the kind called JlaramaJci-dd there is no separate side
piece, but a detached piece fitting into the back instead. There are
also corselets (generally of a more modern date) in Avhich the WaJd-ita
and the Wai-daie are both made in tAvo divisions, half of each being
jointed to the back plate and the other half to the front plate of the
cuirass, in such a Avay that when worn, both opposite halves overlapped
and Avere secured by cords. This latter style distinguishes the later
suits from the older and more orthodox. The back portion of the
cuirass, Avhich is similar in most respects to the front portion, is called
osJdtsuke and is finished at the top with a border plate called Moko-ita, cor.
responding to the Muna-ita of the front. To this are fastened tAvo curved
braces passing over the shoulders for the purpose of connecting to the


CONDER : THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME. 267

breast-plate. These curved braces are called Wata-gami. They are
made of leather, generally in two or three thicknesses, having
mostly an ornamental facing of patterned leather, and a soft lining.
Originally, as their name implies, they were made of padded cotton.
They act as a support by means of which the armour is hung from the
shoulders. In some old suits of armour two stiff crescent-shaped pieces
are fixed to the top of the Wat<x-gami, forming a sort of “ garde
They are omitted in the later armour, together with other appurtenances,
such as the JETato-wo-no-ita, Saka-ita and SJioji-no-ita, to be afterwards
described. Below the Moko-ita, just in a line with the Sentcm-ita of
the side plate, the back armour was furnished with a stiff plate formed
by one or two rows of scales bound together by cross stitches (hisJiE
11111). This was called the Sata-ita, and it hung by loose loops to the
Moho-iia, the next row of loose flexible scales being suspended from it
in turn by silk cords. In the centre of this plate was fixed a large
ornamental ring, from which hung a large silk coixi with bow and
tassels culled the Age-inaki. The Haka-ita naturally shelved out when
the body was bent forward, and the use of the Age-maki is said to have
been originally intended to correct this tendency by binding it down
to the lower portions of the corslet. The Age-maki, however, seems
afterwards to have degenerated into a merely ornamental appendage.

The Age-maki is of different colours, the 8 h 6 -gun generally wearing
purple. The loops of the bow are utilised as points to which small
cords coming from each Sode are attached. This was in order to
prevent the epaulieres (sode) from dropping out of position when the
body was bent forward.

In addition to the Age-maki, the Moko-ita often carries a projecting
metal s'cket called Sashimono-gane, through which passes the small
banner which certain Knights Banneret carried at the liack. The end
rested in another socket lower down called the Jjke-inochi.

KUSADZUEI — TACES.

Forming a skirt to the corslet hang certain loose pieces called
Kusadzuri, corresponding somewhat to the European taees. In the old
example these Kusadzuri of the front and back plates were each in one
continuous piece, widening out considerably towards the bottom and


268


CONDER: the history op JAPANESE COSTUME.


■eacli provided with a central slit opening to facilitate the movement of
the legs. The Kusadzuri of the Imuhe and Wai-dale were quite separate
up to their attachment with the trunk armour, and hung so as to
slightly lap over those of the front and back. In later armour the
Kusadzuri consisted of a number of separate taces hanging quite loosely
and overlapping. The front portion was divided into three, the back
three or four, and the side parts each had one piece. They were of
laminated plates or scales, and were hung by a row of silk cords resem-
bling in style the rest of the suit. This divisional arrangement un-
doubtedly rendered easier the movement of the legs, but the great facility
: with which they flapped about left the thigh and loins less protected.

Separate names were given to the individual taces according to
their position.


SPiN-I>AN-NO-ITA)

V — MAMELLIERE8.

HATO-WO-NO-tTAj

Among the pieces which are only found in the oldest and most
perfect specimens of armour are the Sendan-no-ita and the Saio-wo-no-
ita, which were pieces intended to protect the front of the armpits, and
thus corresponding in purpose, though not in form, with the Mamellih'es
of European armour. The riglit and left defences differed in shape, and
hence the difference in the names. The Sendan-no-ita was a narrow
board composed of three plates or rows of scales connected together
by cords and lined with leather. The size was generally three inches
by nine inches long. The top is mostly ornamented with a narrow
border plate, covered with patternated leather or embossed metal work.
The whole is suspended from the JVatagami by cords, protects, the right
armpit, hides the bow of the silk cord by which the body armour is
fastened, and permits free action to the right arm. The Hato-ioo-no-ita
is somewhat smaller than the Sendan-no-ita, and consists of one oblong
piece of metal or thick lacquered leather surrounded by a metal edging,
its form spreading out towards the top into a foliated shape somewhat
resembling a dove’s tail in its general outline. It is covered generally
with ornamented leather and is suspended from the Watagami, and
protects the front of the left armpit. The reason for its being narrower


CONDER: TflE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME. 269

than the right hand piece is on account of the encumbrance that it
would otherwise cause to the use of the bow and other w^eapons, the left
arm being often held out straight to the front, whilst the right describes a
somewhat wider circle.

The inside of the D6 or trunk armour is lined with padded silk,
velvet or leather, but in inferior armour is merely lined with cloth
lacquered or gilt.

giyo-y6*ita.

This is the name given to small leaf-shaped plates worn as
Mamelltbres on both sides in place of the JBCato-ioo-no-ita and Sendan-no-ita
in some armours. The name is derived from a Chinese word indicating
the leaf of the icM tree, which the Oiyo-yo-itn is supposed to resemble
in shape. This form is said to have been worn by officers of inferior
rank to those who wore the above. The face is covered with orna-
mented, leather, the inside being lined and being hUng in place by cords
attached.

SODE — EPAULIERE.

The next piece of armour by way or importance was the Sode or
upper sleeve, corresponding somewhat to the European Mpaulihre
being a protection for the shoulder and upper arm.

The 8ode, however, by no means follows the shape of the arm or
shoulder, being a broad flat piece very slightly convex and suspended
by cords of leather tied to the Watagami, and kept in position and
prevented from sliding forwards by silk cords which connected its back
edge with the bow of the Age-maki ; another connection paasing round
the chest tied together the front edges of both 8ode.

It is generally composed of laminated plates or overlapping scales
bound together by numerous silk or leather cords, and lined with
leather. The top edge is provided wdth a narrow border of one single
plate, with an edging slightly turned up so as to form a guard for the
neck, this piece going by the name of Kushi-gata from its resemblance
in shape to a Japanese hair comb. In addition to this top plate, which
is generally covered with leather, there are generally four rows of scales
called respectively 1st, 2nd, and 3rd plate and “ cross stitched plate,”
Hishi-nid-ita.


270


CONDER : THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.


The last mentioned term is applied to most of those parts of scale
armour where the cords which are threaded through the upper scales are
finished off in the last row in the form of cross stitches forming a star-
shaped pattern. Eings are provided for the attachments of the cords
which unite the Sode with the Age-mahi,

The Sode forms au important decorative feature of the armour.
The system of joining portions of the armour by small overlapping
scales (Kozane) or laminations of leather connected with cords, gradually
developed into a highly elaborate decoration. At first the connecting
strings were of leather (Kaioa-odoshi), but cords of coloured silk and
Ohinese damask were afterwards introduced and the sewing was used
in a way capable of great varieties of arrangement. In a certain class
of armour previously described, the greater part of the trunk was
covered with ornamental leather, leaving for the display of the arrange-
ment of coloured silk cord [Odoshi-ge) only the Kmadzuri and the Sode.
Other suits had the OdosM-ge used throughout ^le whole armour, but
the Sode, being the most exposed, was generally that which fixed the
style of ornament of the rest.

A curious explanation is given of the origin of the word Odoslii-ge
which literally means “ terrifying thread ” and is applied to the coloured
cord ornamentation of the armoui’. It is said that the gay appearance
given to the armour by means of the coloured silk or leather had the
effect of awing the enemy by a dazzling exterior, the wearer, howevej
weak-liearted he might he, in-esentiiig thus a terrifying aspect to his foe*
The arrangement of the Odoshi-ge differed according to the importance
of the wearer, the cords being very thickly placed in the armour of
persons of importance, but more scantily used for wearers of inferior
rank. The full arrangement was called Kebiki and the coarse one
Oarcme. As mentioned above, leather was sometimes used. It was
softened, cut into thin strips and dyed of some bright colour, and the
name given was applied either to the colour or quality of the leather
used. Such names are Ai-kawa, Kuro-kawa, Fusube-kawa etc.

There are other special names which designate the colour and
pattern of the cord, whether it be silk or leather. A few of such special
names are : —

Sirodoshi, applied to the use of cord of a deep crimson colour.


CONDER: the history op JAPANESE COSTUME.


271


Bmi-odoshi, another term for the use of red cord.

Ai'ai-hawa-odos'hi, light red' leather corded armour.
FusM-nawa-me-odoshi, a name given to a diagonally striped arrange-
ment of cords alternately light-green, white and dark-blue, so called
on account of a supposed resemblance in pattern to the cross plaits
of a rope. This kind is only known in leather.

Ko-mhura-odosM, light-blue cords of leather, closely arranged with a
conventional cherry-blossom pattern in white stamped over it.
There are several varieties of the Ko-zakura-odoshi.
Shida-lcawa-odosld, light-blue leather cord work with a diaper of fern
leaves in white.

Nerinuhi-odoslii, cords of silk thread braided in several colours, generally
' white and blue or white with some other colour.

There arc a great number of the Ito odoshi, being differently named
according to the different colours used. These are red, yellow, white,
black, blue, light-green, dark-blue, mauve, etc. Other arrangements
exist in which cords of two colours are arranged so as to form a
diagonal, V-shaped, or checkered pattern. The Iroiro- odoshi is so called
when cords of several colours (generally five) are used in some variegated
arrangement. There are still other arrangements Avdieu one colour is
used in different shades, so as to shade off the colour from deep to light.
Such an arrangement is the Moyegi-nioi-odoshi, where green is used
in a shaded arrangement. Again, different colours are sometimes used
in horizontal bands.

Much difference of opinion exists as to the adoption of any par-
ticular colours in the silk cord-work employed in the armour of different
important families. Some writers assert that to the Taira family be-
longed purple, to the Fujiwara light-green, and to the Tachi-bana
yellow, this being fixed in the time of Seiwa Tennb (869-876). Other
authors, however, deny any such fixed rules, and it appears that whether
or not any laws existed, they were not retained for any length of
time. The colour adopted seems mostly to have been a matter of
caprice, its choice being determined sometimes by certain arbitrary rules
of luck which existed with reference to the “ star ” of the wearer.
Thus we read that for the man of the “ nature of wood,” according to
the laws of soothsaying, black was the lucky colour, etc., etc.


272 CONDER : THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME.

In addition to the laminated 8ode, highly decorated with silk threads
as above, there were other kinds more or less used and distinguished by
their particular shape or material.

Of these the Kusari-sode was made of one oblong piece of leather
or padded cloth, covered with chain mail, having a narrow plate at the
top, Kaiimri-ita, to stifFen it and form its point of attachment.

The Kcmara-sode consisted of one large oblong plate, with two
moveable plates at the bottom attached by leather cords.

The Nanhan-sode or Qalm-sode was a kind of sode resembling in
shape the framed tablets hung in front of temples and gateways under
the eaves. The central portion was of one plate of metal, upon which
was lacquered a dragon or some other device. The border, which
resembled the frame of a tablet, was of some bright oimamental metal.

The Maru-sode, as the name implies, was round, or rather oval,
instead of the ordinary oblong shape. .It generally consisted of one
plate decorated upon the outer surface with some pattern and the crest.
A favourite ornament was a conventional wave pattern.

The Ha-soda and Taka-no-ha-sode resembled in shape a bird’s
wing.'

The Hiyotan-sodc was in outline the shajje of a gourd.

The Ki-no-lia-sode was shaped like a leaf.

KoTE— AVANT BRAS AND BRASS ARTS.

The Kote is that portion of the armour which forms a tight defen-
sive sleeve for the whole of each arm, occupying in one piece the place
held in European armour by the brassarts, condiSres and avant bras.
It consists of a close-fitting sleeve of padded cloth, silk or leather,
widening at the mouth, where it fits over the shoulder, and is tied -by
strings round the chest. The Kote is covered in parts with mail and
additional metal plates, and terminates in a .metal hand-guard or semi-
gauntlet called the TeUu-gai. These metal defences are applied only
to the outer portion of the arm, the inside portion towards the
body not requiring such protection. It is upon the inside that the
cloth or leather which forms the body of the sleeve is laced up
faghtily with leather or silk cords to within a few inches of the mouth-


CONDBR : THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME. 27S

piece. The uppermost plate of Kote covering the shoulder below the
Sode is called the Kamuri-ita, and to this are attached the three cords,
two of which' are tied round the chest, while one connects with the
string of the opposite Kote. Immediately below this, for the protection
of the principal muscles of the upper part of the arm, is a large metal
plate or a collection of scales connected by mail, called the Oatm-no-ita.
At the point of the elbow is a circular metal plate forming a kind of
couditire and called the Hiji-gane. The lower part of the fore-arm is
provided with a plate called the IJcada, which sometimes consists of long
parallel splint-like strips of metal connected by chain mail, and some-
times is in one piece of pierced and embossed metal. Attached to the
bottom of the same piece of armour is the which generally

consists of a rounded plate following the sliape of the back of the hand
above the knuckles, lined with leather and having loops in the lining
through which to pass one or two fingers. In addition to this, leather
gloves are worn. In some of the older and more complete suits the
hand-guard has metal finger-pieces separately attached by a chain to the
body of the gauntlet. The idea followed in the arrangement of the
parts of the Kote is evidently to leave the motion of the arm as free as
possible, employing plates of metal se^vn on to the flexible sleeve only
in order to protect the most fleshy parts of the arm. There are several
distinct kinds of Kote, of which the following are the principal : —
Tsutsu-gote is the special name given to that kind of Kote of which the
whole is covered with mail, the outer portion of the upper and
lower arm being further protected by large parallel splints or
curved metal plates sewn on, so as leave the elbow' joint free and
covered only by tbe mail.

Tsugi-gote is that kind of Kote which, being covered with chain mail,
has its upper portion further protected by a wide piece loosely
attached to the shoulder, in all respects resembling the Sode, but
smaller. The lower arm is provided with the ordinary metal plate,
avant bras and gauntlet.

Shino-gote, Yetehiu-gote, and Awaae-gote are names all applied to one
particular kind of Kote, the difference in the names indicating merely
' slight alterations in the modes of tying. This kind is entirely


■274 OONDER : THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME.

covered with chain mail, with small strips of metal averaging about
two inches long by half an inch wide, sewn over it at regular
distances.

Oshi-no-gote is the name used to indicate that kind of hote which has the
outer part of the fore-arm covered with thin splint-shaped plates
and strips of chain mail alternately,

Tominagoi-gote is the distinguishing name used when both the hote are
connected together by a silk or leather collar-piece instead of, as
usual, being tied round the body separately by cords.

JSmsho-goie is the name applied to a kind of avant-bras or curtailed
Kote, consisting of three longitudinal plates connected with chain
mail and lined with padded cloth, silk or leather. It is tied round
the fore-arm .

Ya-gote is the particular name given to a Kote of padded silk or brocade,,
having no metal furnishings, and used specially for archery.

There are other names used to denote slight differences in make, but
for the most part they indicate no great departure from the kinds
before mentioned.


HAI-DATE — CUISSARTS.

The name Hcd-date is applied to that part of the armour correspond-
ing to the Guissarts in European armour, protecting the thighs but
hanging loosely like a double apron piece. The upper portion consists
of a continuous slashed apron piece of silk or leather, with strong bands
for tying round the belly, this portion being hidden by the body armour.
The lower portions hang down in the form of two strong plates for the
protection of the thighs. Among the distinguishing names for different
kinds of Kai-date ai'e : —

hTe ItOrhcd-date, which has for the protection of each thigh a continuous
metal plate mostly comj)osed of numerous square scales sewn over
a leather or silk lining, with leather cords. The surface is often
engraved or inlaid in gold with a crest or some device. When
worn, the plates of the Kai-date lie more or less flatly over the
front, having a certain amount of flexibility but not closely
following the curve of the thigh.


OONDER ; THE HISTORY OF JAPANESE COSTUME. 275

Thft OdosM-hai-date, of which the thigh pieces are made of metal scales
overlapping and fastened with silk thread in the same manner as
the Sode and Kusadzuri. Either the Kehihi or Sugake kind of sewing
is used, there being three row's of scales and a bottom border
Qmhi'ita). The upper apron-portion, which is always called
Koshi-tsuJce-no-nd, is of damask or silk, with the crest of the wearer
woven or embroidered upon it, and in all respects treated as the
Makama, having slits at the sides to be used as pockets and called
Muohi-gashi-no-ana.

The Igo-hai'date, of which the lower portion is covered with very small
plates sewn upon a cloth or silk body. This kind is worn mostly
by horsemen, as being more flexible and less inconvenient in riding.
The YecMu-hai-date, which forms a complete covering for both the
front and back of the thighs, the thigh-pieces being of chain mail
with small metal plates attached. The upper portion consists of a
regular “ Hakmna ” of plaited silk. On the inside are various bands
of leather used to stiffen the whole and suspend the heavy weight
of the lower portions. There are several different kinds of the
Yeehiu-hai- date.

The Sodo-hai-date, which is so called from the resemblance in shape
which its upper apron-shaped portion bears to the Mbdo-bata, a
religious flag. It is somewhat similar to the OdosM-hai-date but
more complicated, the thigh pieces being in several overlapping
flaps. The upper flap of each thigh is in one plate, composed of
closely arranged scales, and under this, hanging considerably
below the larger plate and as a fringe, are four small separate pieces.
These lower pieces hang over the knees, where their detached
form allows free movement.

SUNE-ATE— GREAVES OR GREVIERES.

The defences for the lower parts of the legs, corresponding to the
greaves of European armour, are called Sune-ate, of which there are
various kinds. For the most part they are of curved plates following
the modelling of the calf of the leg, being fastened by clasps of strings,
very much like the old Greek and Roman greaves. In some cases they
are of more flexible material, more resembling thick padded gaiters.


276


condee: the histoky of Japanese costumk


TBe Bishmiorirsum-ate is the speci.ol name given to that kind of grevihre
which is composed of three continuous metal plates hound together,
the central one being prolonged upwards for the protection of the
knee cap, this upper portion being called the Kakudmn. The
metal plates. are lacquered in different ways, or are engraved or
inlaid.

BMnotaie-smie-ate. — This kind is composed of a number of long parallel
metal plates divided by strips of chain mail.

Tsutsu-sune-ate. — This kind is composed of two curved metal plates
hinged in the middle, having no lining, but worn over the inner
leggings, which act as a soft padding. To this kind the Kohudzuri
is not fixed, but is sometimes added separately.

Nmo-mne-ate. — This kind is the same as the former, but is lined.
Kiyahan-mnerate. — This kind is mode entirely of chain mail sewn upon
a padded lining, and has no Kahudzuri. The lower portion ends
in a rounded pad without mail, wliich partly covers the foot.
Budare-swie-ate. — This kind is covered alternately with strips of chain
mail and long metal plates, about eight in number.

The greaves, when of long narrow jilates and mail intermixed, had
those plates at the inner ankle curtailed in order not to cause pain or
inconvenience in walking. The Kokudzuri ivere generally in one of two
principal shapes, named respectively Yama-gata and Jiiwo-gashira,

K UTSU — SHOES.

As a covering for the feet were worn shoes with curved pointed
toes, completing the dress of an armed warrior. These were, however,
only worn during ceremonies or by the leaders whilst riding, the ordinary
straw sandals* being preferred for inarching or fighting dismounted.
The soles of these shoes were of stiff leather and the uppers of bear’s
skin, lined inside with handsome silk brocade.

KATA-ATE.

The Kata-ate were pieces of some soft padded material put over
each shoulder to cover the top of the Watagami, Sometimes they were


oondeb: the history op Japanese costume.


277


both united to the Yeri-mawari, which was a kind of gorgette going all
round the neck, made of padded cloth or leather covered with metal
plates or shark skin.


WAKI-BIKI.

The Wahi-hiki, which were sometimes called WaM-date, consisted
of two pieces of padded material, sometimes covered with chain mail,
which were hung to the sides under the armpits to form an extra
protection under the body armour or to form a padding for it. Some
of the Wahi-hiki are of odoshi, some of chain mail with small shino, some
of large metal plates hinged together. They are mostly rounded at the
bottom and always hollowed at the top, leaving two horns provided
with cords and buttons for fixing round the shoulders.

IMANJIYUWA.

The Manjiyuwa was the name given to a combination in one piece
of the Kata-ate, Yeri-mawari and Wahi-hiki.

JIM-BAOBI^ — HABARD OB SUBCOAT.

The 3im-haori was a kind of habard or surcoat worn over the armour
for purposes of display. Some kinds have large sleeves and are called
Sode-haori ; some have merely openings for the arms and are called
Hampi. The shape is similar to the ordinary Japanese haori, being,
however, slit up behind for convenience in riding. It is generally made
of some highly ornamented fabric, — silk, damask, or brocade.

The Karako-haori was a curious kind of surcoat, having no sleeves
but a curious frill round the arm openings.

The clothes worn under the armour will be separately described.

HdBd.

A curious additional defence was worn over the armour,- which, as
far as we know, has no equivalent in the defences of any other nation,
and which went by the name of H6ri. It consisted of a large cloth or

VOL-. IX


12


278


COlilDBR: THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME,


bag, general attached loosely to the back of mounted warriors so as
to fill with the wind and form a large pillow-shaped projection at the
back while riding. Sometimes it was kept filled with air by means of
a light oval core of wicker-work attached firmly to the back of the
armour. This curious device was supposed to shield the wearer from
arrows shot from the side or behind.

The ordinary length is nearly six feet, and made out of about five
strips carefully sewn together lengthwise and strengthened by plaits.
Upon the centre, top and bottom the crest of the wearer is worked,
and both the upper and lower edge are piwided with a fringe. Near
the top and bottom, each side is provided with a cord, the top cords
being attached either to the helmet or to the large ring at the back of
the body armour, which is otherwise used for the Agemahi or handsome
silk tassels. In some paintings Mri is shown as supported upon a
rod fixed into a socket on the back ; but no particular authority is
known for this mode. The lower cords were fastened round the waist.
In some cases the hdfi was worn at the front, hung from the helmet
across to the forehead of the horse, being kept in this position by long
cords tying it to the stirrups. It thus formed a screen to the face and
front of the body, considerably impeding vision.

SODE JIRUSHI — SLEEVE-BADGE.

The Sode jirushi was a small silk or cotton cloth about the same
length as the sode, which was attached to it by cords tied to two rings
fixed to the sode. Its other end was left loose and allowed to flutter
in the wind. It generally bore some crest or the name of Hachiman,
the god of war, in some fixed colour. The device upon this badge
was fixed by the general, being difierent on different occasions, as it was
used for the purpose of distinguishing friends and foes, and only put
on on the eve of some action.

The Kasorjirushi was a similar cloth badge attached to the hat or
helmet, for which a ring was provided on the helmet. It was somewhat
longer than the Sode jirushi, measuring about one foot four inches in
length. Sometimes, intead of being hung by a ring to the back of the
helmet, it was attached to a small rod about one foot eight inches long,
fixed vertically to the front of the helmet. That of the general was


CONDER: the history of JAPANESE COSTUME. 279

usually of some ricli bracade, with the device in, gold or silver thread.
That of the common soldiers was of white silk or cloth, with the device
in black.

Another kind of the Kasa-jirushi distinguished by tlie name of Ghm-
Icasa-jirusM, is similar to the former, but has cords at its bottom end by
which it is attached loosely to the bottom of the helmet. The top edge
is held up above the front of the helmet by means of a metal rod with
three prongs. This kind was made for use in stormy weather.

The Sashi-mano was a, small banner worn attached to the end of a
long rod, which was fixed into sockets at the back of the armour,
reaching higher than tbe head behind. Such banners were not worn
before the Tensho period (1573).

Much as the different armours herebefore described vary in the
degree of ornament bestowed upon them, it is not supposed that the
ordinary soldiers wore defences anything like them in completeness.

The armour worn commonly by the lower class of retainers was
called Nuko or Ban-gusoku, and in earlier times, Tonoi-noSaramaJd.

Such armour consisted generally of a eapel-de-fer or small helmet
and a corselet, for the rest the soldier being clothed in usual travel-
ling dress, with gaiters and sandals. Of the common helmet there were
three kinds, namely Kusari-kabido (chain mail helmet), Kawagasa
(leather hat) and Akagane-gasa (copper hat). The Kusari-kabuto or
Tatami-kabuto was made of small pieces of iron plate, connected with
double chain mail sewn on to padded cloth or leather stuff, both the
the skull-piece and the couvre-nuque being made in the same way. The
shape as nearly as possible resembled the ordinary padded fire-bonnet
still Avorn by firemen. There was a hole in the top for the cue of hair
to protrude from. The shikoro or couvre-nuque was slit up in the
middle. The Kdioagasa Avas a leather hat which Avas best made of
a particular kind of leather called Nari-gasa, and the best class of hat
thus made Avas considered superior to the mail helmet. The leather was
perfectly stiff, and Avas well lacquered on both sides so as to produce a
hard, tough material, Avhich in the best kinds would stand the test
of long immersion in water. The crown Avas generally brought to a
point and the brim Avas broad. The usual colour outside was black,
with a gilt crest in the centre.


280


CONDER : THE HISTORY OP JAPANESE COSTUME.


The Ahagane-gasa or copper hat was of the same shape as the
leather hat and was considered more durable. There is said to have
been one special kind much used in the eastern provinces, of which the
crown was covered with a revolving piece so as to move when struck
by a thrust or missile. A copper hat is also said to have been used, if
needs occurred, as a pan for cooking, which added to its utility in time
of war.

Of the corslets worn by the lower ranks were the Sewari-
gusohu, the Uchi-awase-gusolm, the Tatami-gwoJcu and the Hara-
ate or Hara-ate-gaim. Of these the iSewari-gmoku was a leather
corselet made in large pieces of N&ri-kawa lacquered black. It was
fitted and laced together to form one piece, opening in the back,
for Avhich latter reason it was sometimes called Yoroi-haramaki.
Unlike the haramaJd of the better armour, howevei-, there was
no separate piece to fill in this opening, ' Which was closed either
by clasps or by laced silk cordk There were several difierent
shapes, of which the pigeon-breasted one was considered the best.
The trunk was generally short and had five hmdzuri (taces) at-
tached, which \^ere also short. Such suits could easily be adapted to
any wearer, and were generally made full for this purpose, being
tightened up by lacing and by a tight girdle wound round the waist.
Upon the black body the crest of the lord was marked in gold or red.

The Ueld-awase-gusoku only differs from the former in that front
and back are separated, being joined at both sides after putting on.
Such armour is more portable and easy to pack.

Of the Tatami-giisoku there were two kinds ; one of iron and the
other of leather. As the name implies, such corselets were made to
double up in a similar way to the Tatami-d6.

The Hara-ate or Sara-ate-gawa was a leather corselet made of A’m-
hawa, and similar in shape to the fire-jacket worn now by firemen.


MINUTES OF MEETINGS.


Tokiyo, Oct. 12, 1880.

A General IMeeiinf,' was held at the Sho-hei-kuwan, Seiclo, Tokyo, on'
Tnc,s<'ayj Oer. 12, 1880, Dr. Divers, President, in the chair.

1 he Minutes of the .preceding meeting were read and approved.

Tlic Librarian roporlod the receipt of various presents, a list of wliieh
is appended. Thanks were ordered.

]>aper by l\lr. John J. Quin on “The Lacquer Indusiry of .fapan”
read by the Corre.sponding Secretary, in the absence of the author. A
vote' of thanks was ])aHsed to the author. The meeting was tluni adjourned.-


PfiESENTS.


J, E.vchanges: —

American Geographical Society; Bulletin: Nos. 8, 4, 1807.

do. do. 1, 1880.

American Oriental Society; Journal: Vol. X., No. 2.

Anthracite Coal Fields of Pennsylvania; hy P. W. Sheafe.r, Esq.
AntJ’.ropological In.stitute of Great Britain and Ireland; Journal: IX.,,
No. 4.

Asiatic Society of Bengal; Journal; Yol. XLIX., Pt. 2.

do. Proceedings: Nos. 4, 5, 1880.

Bataviaaseh Genootsehap; Notulen, Deel. XXVII., Nos. 2, 8. 4.

do. Verhandlingen, Deel. XXXIX., XL.

Celestial Empire. Vol. XV., Nos. 23, 24, 20.

do. Vol. XVL, Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, !), 10, II.

China Review, Vol. VIIL, No. 6, and Vol. IX., No. 1.

Chinese Recorder, Vol. XL, No. 4-

Cosmos, by Guido Cora, Vol. VL, Nos. 1, 2, 8, 1880.

Geographical Survey of India; Records: Vol., XIII. Pts. 2, 3.


Imperial Eussian Geographical Society; Bulletin: 2 Xos.

Japan Weekly Mail, Vol. IV., Nos. 27-41.

La Litterature des Japonais; par Ldon de Rogny.

Monthly Exports, Prices Current, and Trade Report; London: July and
August, 1888.

New South Wales, Council of Education; Report: 1878.

Oesterreichlschc Jlonatsschrift fiir den Orient; Kos. 5, 0, 7, 8, 1880.

Roinan-Urdu Journal. Nos. 23, 24, 25, 1880.

Royal Asiatic Socdety, Bombay Brancdi; Jourmil; Vol. XHC, No. 37.
do. A'orth China Branch, Journal; No. 14.

Royal Society of Edinburgh, Proceedings: 1878-1870.

do. New South Wales, Journal and Prot'cedings; ^'ol. Nil.

Roj'al Geogvaidiieal Societj'-; Proceedings: Vol. II., Nos. 5, (i, 7, 8. 1880.

Boeiedad Geograflea do Aladrid; Boletin: Tom. Nos. 4, 5, (>.

Soei^tg de Geogi’aphie; Bulletin: March and Api'il, 1880.

Tijdsehrift r'oor Indische Taal, Land en Volkenkund, Deel. XXV., Allever-
iiig, 4, 5, 0, 1878.

Tijdsehrift voor Indische Taal, Land en Volkenkund; l)cel, XXVI., Aflever-
ing, 1, ISSO. ■

Beveral eataloguo.s of books from different puhlisbiug bouses.

Jf. Donations: —

Boru-Boudouv (Great Buddha) dans Pile de Java; ])ublie d‘a))r&s les
ordres do Son KNcoIlonee le Ministre des (’olonit's, ])ar !(> Dr. C.
Ledmans.
do. in Dutoli.

303 Plates in folio, illustrating the above.

17 Plates in quarto do. do.

2 Japanese '.Molric and English WeighLs and Measures, by K. Kineb, Esq.

1 Jndion in ^\'ort niul Bild; von E. Seblagintwoit: spoeiinen sheet.


Tokiyo, Xov. 0. 1880.

A General Mooting was lield at the Sbo-lioi-kuwan, Seido, I'okiyo, on
Tuesday, Nov. 9, 1880, Dr. Divers, President, in the cluiir.

The Minutes of the preceding meeting were read and approved.

It was announced that Lady Mary Thompson had been eloeteal a mem-
ber of the society; also that Mr. James IMaiu Di.xon bad been aiijjointed
Treasurer, in place of j\Ir. Stand, who had declined office; also that Messrs.
E. G. Holthain and H. T. Terry had been elected members of ('(mncil to
fill the vacancies caused by- the departure of Messrs. Bramsen and Gubbins
from Japan.


( j'i )


The Corresponding!; Secretary, in the absence of tlie atitlior, read a
jjaper by i\Ir. ]b 11. Chamberlain entitled “Notes on the Dialects spoken
in Ahidzu.”

Mr. R. Atkinson read a ))aper by Mr. T. Tshikawa, graduate of
the Univei’sity of Tokiyo, on ‘‘Kald-no-shihu.”

Some discussion followed the reading of both papers, and the thanks
of the HOcdety were voted to the atiihors.

The Librarian exhibited and descriised a number of plates illustrative
of the Teniph' of Roro-boudour iji Java, ivcently presented to the society
by the Dutch (TO\'ernineiit. The nn'et.ing was then adjourned.


Tokiyo, Dee. 14, 1880.

A General meeting was held at the ,Sho-hei-kuwan, Heido, Tokiyo, on.
Tuesday, Dec. 14, 1880, Dr. Diver’s, President, in the ehair.

The Minutes of the jrroceding nK'cding were rimd and ajrproved.

It was announced that 'Mr. Naibu Knnda and Profes.sor II. M. Paul
bad be('n elected nnnnbers of the society.

The librarian reported tbe receipt of various presents, a list of which
is appended. Tbaidcs were ordered.

The following papers were read: —

■‘Notes on Rome Recent Earthquakes,” by Prof. .1. A. Ewing.
“Evidences of the Glacial Period in Japan,” by Prof. John Milne.
“The Mineral Springs of Aslii-no-yu, in the Ilakone j^fountains,” by.
Dr. A. J. C. Geerts.

The nuvliiig was then adjourned.

Pbesexts.

1. E.Kchanges: —

Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland; Journal: 'Vol. X.,
No. 1.

Asiatic Society of Bengal; Journal: I'ol. XLIX., pt. 2, Nos. 1, 2.
Bibliothgcpie Orientale et .Linguistiqiie de Jules Thonnier; Catalogi’C.
"(Vlestial Einjiii’e; Vol. XVI., Nas. 12-20.

China Review; Vol. IX., No. 2.

I'hinese Recorder- and Missionary Journal; Vol. XI., No. 5.

Japan Weekly Mail; A^ol. IV., Nos. 42-40.

Museum of Comirarative Zoology, Harvard College; Bulletin; July, 1880.
Oesterreichische Monatssehrift frir den Orient; Se])t. 15, 1880.

Roman-Urdu Journal; Vol. III., Nos. 2(1, 28.

Royal Geograjjhieal Hociety; Proceedings: Vol. IL, Nos 9, 10.


( iv )


Sociedad Googi-afica de Madrid; Boletiii: Tom. IX., Nos. 1. 2.

Socigtg de Geographie; Bulletin: -Tnin, 1880.

II. Donation: —

Diagram of the Prospects of the Anthracite Coal Trade of Pennsjdvaniii ;
presented by P. H. Sheafer Esq.


Tokiyo, Jan. 11, 1881.

A General Meeting \va.s held at the Sho-lici-kiiwan, Saido, Tokiyo, on
Tuesday, Jan. 11, 1881, Dr. Diver.s, President, in the chair.

The Minutes of the preceding meeting wei'e read and appi’oved.

Tlie Treasures announced that subscriptions for the year 1881 we re-
new due.

Mr. ,T. M. Dixon exhibited a piece of painted faience in the form of a
plate, and gave a version of the story which was. the subject of the painting,

A paper by Dr. A. J. C. Geerts, entitled "Analyses of Ten Japanese
Mmeral Spring Waters,” was laid on the table, Th6 Corresponding
Secretary, in the absence of the authors, read the following papers:—

"Historical Notes oh Nagasaki,” by AV. A. Woolley, Esq.

"Hideyo.shi’.s Invasion of Korea; Chapter IT. — ^Tbc Retreat,” by W. G.
Aston, Esq,

The meeting was then adjourned.


MINUTES OF MEETINGS.


T6KIY5, Feb. 8tb, 1881.

A General Meeting was held at the house of the I’resident, KObu-dai-
gakkd, on Tuesday, Feb. 8th, 1881, Dr. Divers, President, in the chair.

The Minutes of the preceding meeting were read and approved.

It was announced that Mr. James M. Gardiner had been elected a mem-
ber of the Society.

The Corresponding Secretary reported the receipt of variou.s presents,
a list of which is appended. Thanks were ordered.

Capt. F. Brinkley, 11. A., read a paper on “The Ui.stovy of Japairese
Keramic.s,” after which the menihers and visitors visited the museum of the
college to examine the author’s colieetion of keraiuics. There was no
other business.


PaKSEXTH. ,,

Repertorio Sinico-Giapponese, eompilato dai Profossori A. Severini e C.
Puini, fasc. IV, completing the work,

Jajjan naeh Reisen und Studien im Auftrage der Kdniglieh Preussischen
Regiernng dargestellt von J. J. Rein. 1 Band.

Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, Nos. 1 to 3 of Vol. IV.
Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, Vol, 11. No. 12.

Bulletin of the hhtseuiu of Comparative Zoblogy, Harvard, Vol. VI,.
Nos. 8-11.

Annual Repoi't of the Curator of the Museum of Comparative Zodlogy,
Harvard.

Records of the Geological Survey of India, Vol. XIII, pt. 4.

Bulletin de la Soeigtg de Geographic for Aug. 1880.

Monatssehrift fiir den Orient, Nov. 1880.

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. XLIX, pt. 1, No. 3.
Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Nos. 7 and 8, July and
August, 1880.

China Review, Vol. IX, No. 3.

Roman-Uixhi Journal, Vol. Ill, No. 20.


( Vi )


On a new Seismometer, by Dr. G. Wagener.

Aet and Bull (Numismatic and iVntiquarian Society of Pliiladelpliia ) ,
The Celestial Empire, 9, 10, 23, 30 Dee., 1880, and 6, 13, 20 Jan., 1881.


TOkiyD, March 8th, 1881.

A General Meeting was held at the ShO-hei-lcuwan, SeidS, Tokiyo, on
Tuesday, March 8th, 1881, Dr. Divers, President, in the chair.

Tlie Minutes of the preceding meeting were read and approved.

It Avas announced tlmt tlio Rev. W. C. Davison and General T. B. Van
Buren had been elected members.

Professor J. A. EAving exhibited a glass plate containing a record of an
earthquake which had occurred at 12.20 p.m. on the day of the meeting, and
explained that iho record sliOAA'od there had been a change in the direction of
vibration during the shock.

The Corresponding Secretaiy, in the absence of the author, read a
paper by Mr. George Dents entitled “A hfemorandum on the Coleopterous
Genus Damaster, with notes on six species or forms in it.”

The Rev. W. B. Wright read the first part of a translation from the
Japanese of Arai Halmseld “on the Capture and captivity of PSre Giovan
Battista Sidotti, Missionary to Japan.”

The meeting was then adjourned.


TOkivo, April 12th, 1881.

A General jMeeting was held at tlio 8ho-hei*kuwan, Seido, Tokiyo, on
Tuesday April 12th, 1881, Dr. DiAurs, President, in the chair.

The Minutes of the preceding meeting A\'ero read and approved.

The Recording Secretary, acting on behalf of the Council, gave notice
that he should propose an amomlmcnt to the Constitution at the next general
meeting, to the elfoet that the present Rule XI be abolished and the
following Rule substittited for it: — “The otficers and Council shall hold
office for one veav and shall be elected by ballot at the Annual Meeting.
Persons who have previously serAmd are open to re-election.”

The Librarian reported tlio receipt of various pi'cscni.-?,, a list of Avliich
is appended. Thanks Avere ordered.

The Corresponding Secretary intimated that Messrs. Trlibner & Co,, the
London agents for the sale of the Society’s Transactions, had expressed their
desire to procure copies of Vol. II, now out of print, and that they were
willing to pay a sum in excess of the publishing price for them. Persons
having spare copies AA’ere therefore requested to communicate AA’ith the Cor-
responding Secretary,

Dr. H. Paulds exhibited some petrified specimens from Kaga, alleged
to have been petrified within the last ten years by the action of warm water.


( vii )


The Rev. W. B. Wriglit read the second part of a translation from the
Japanese of Arai Hakuseki ‘^on the Capture and Captivity of P§re G-iovan
Battista Sidotti.”

Capt. J. M. rJaoies read a paper entitled “Notes on the Rosaries
(Jiu-dzu) as used by the different sects of Buddhists in Japan.”

The meeting was then adjourned.

PKESEK-TS,

American Geographical Boeiety; Bulletin, No. 5, 1879.

American Oriental Society. Proceedings, Oct., 1880.

American Philosophical Society; two papers by Henry Phillips, jr.

Asiatic Society of Bengal; Jorirnal, Vol. 49, pt. I, No. 4; 1880.

“ “ 49, pt. ir. No. 3; 1880.

“ “ “ Proceedings, Nos. 0-10, 1880; No. 1, 1881.

Belfast Natural Hi.story and Pliilo-sophical Society; Proceedings, 1878-1880..
Boston Society of Natural History; Proceedings, Vol. XIX and XX, pts. 1, 4,
Celestial Empire, Vol 10, Nos. 21. 25, and Vol. 17, Nos. 1-12.

China Ee’sdew, Vol. VI 11, No. 6; Vol. IX, Nos. 1, 2, 4.

Chinese Recorder, Vol. XT, No. 0; Vol. XU, No. 1.

Cosmos di Guido Cora, Tom. VI, Nn.s. 4, 0.

Harvard College iluscuni of Comparative Zoology; Bulletin, Vol. VI,
Nos. 4-7; Vol. VU. XTos. 1, 2.

H. I. M. Customs Rc'port of Jupau; Peb., 1881.

Imperial Russian Geographical Society; Bulletin.

Numismatic and Antiquarian Society of Philadelphia, Pa.; Proceedings,
1880.

Numismatic and Anticpuirian Society of Philadelphia, Pa.; Papers by H.
Philips, jr.

Roman-Urdu Journal, Vol. Iff, Nos. 30, 31.

Royal Geographical Society; Proceedings, Vol. 11, No. 11.

“ .III, Nos. 1, 2,

Royal Dublin Society; Proceedings, Vol. I, II.

“ “ “ ' Transactions, Vol. I and Vol, II, pts. 1, 2.

Sociedad de Gegraffca de Madrid ; ; Boletin, Tom. IX, Nos. 3-6,'

Socidtd de Geographie; Bulletin, Juillet-Novembre, 1880.

Socifitd des Etudes Japouai.scs, Chinoises, Tartares, etc.; Memoires, Tom.^
II, pt. 2.

The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography; Vol. 11^, Nos. 1-3.
The Japan Weekly Mail, Vol. IV, Nos. 46-53. and Vol. V, Nos. 1-14.

TOkitu, May 10th, 188L

A General Meeting was held at the Sho-hei-kuwan, Seido, Tokiyo, on
Tuesday, May 10th, 1881, Dr. Divers, President, in the chair.

The Minutes of the preceding meeting v'ere read and approved.


( viii .)


Tlie Librarian reported tire receipt of various presents, a list of wbicli
is appended. Thanks wei'c ordered.

It was announced that 1 he Bev. A. D. Gring had been elected a member
of the Soeietj'- and the Rev. W. B. \^Tight a member of Council.

The Recording Secretary, acting on beJialf of the Council, moved that
the existing Rule XT of the Constitution be abolished, and the following Rule
substituted for it: — “The Officers and Council shall hold offisee for one year,
and shall be (dected by ballot at the Annual Meeting. Persons who have
previously served are open to re-election.”

The motion was .seconded by ilie Rev. C. T. Blanehet and carried un-
animoii.sly.

Mr. E. M. Satow read a ]»apor entitled ‘'Ancient Japanese Rituals,
pt. III.”

The meeting was then adjourned.

PRESEXTS,


Agricultural and ITorticultui'al, Society of India; Journal, Vol. VI, pt. 3.
American Geographical Soaiety; Bulletin, No. 2, 1880,

Asiatic Society of Bengal; Journal, Vol. XLIX, pt. % No. 4.

“ . “ Proceeding's, No. 2, 1881.

Celestial Empire, Vol. XVIT, Nos. 14, 15, 17.

Geological Siuwey of India; Recoi'ds, Vol. -XIV, pt. 1. . „ '

Oesterreiehisohe Monateseluift fi3r|den Orient, March 15, 1881.

Roman-Urdu Journal. Vol. .32.

Royal Geographical P^'

Royal Society of Tasinania'r Procceding.s, 1870.

Sociedad GeogTafica.,,de'"Madrid ; Boletin, Tom. X, No, 1,

Societe do G^O^W^duc ; Bulletin, Dec. 1880.

SocidtS Iinperiale Russe de Geographic, Vols. XVI, XVII. ,

Documeu'ls sur I’Asie Contrale, par C. Imbanlt-Huart ; from the Director of
Ife School of Oriental Languages.

^panese Pottei-y, edited, by A. W. Pranks; from the author.

Paper ou Old Amei'ieaii Aliiuiiiaes. by rienvy Pbilip.s, jr; from the author.


ERRATA IN PART I, VOL. IX.

Page 44, line 8 ; for “one-sixtieth” read “one six-hundredth.”
“ “ line 14; for “sixty” I'ead ‘‘six hundred.”


( ix )


MINUTES OP MEETINGS.


T6Kiy5, June 1831.

A General Meeting was held, at the Slid-hei-kuwaa, Seid(», TOkiyS, oa
Tuesday, June 14th, 1881, Dr. Divers, President, in the ehair.

The Minutes of the preceding meetizig were read and approved.

It was announced that General A. C. Jones had been elected a member’
of the Society.

The Libraiian reported the receipt of various presents, a list of wliieht
is appended. Thanks were ordered.

The following papers were read: —

‘‘Hideyoshi’s Invasion of Korea: Part III. — ^Negotiation,” by W.G. Aston,
Esq.

“A translation of the Dou-zhi-keu, or Teachings for the Young,” by B. H.
Chamberlain, Esq.

“A Translation of a paper by Dr. Otto Luedecke on the new Mineral,
Peinite,” by M. Yokoyama, Esq., communicated by Dr. D. Brauns.

The izzeeting was then adjourned,

PBESBNTS.

American Geographical Society; Bulletin, Nos. 1 and 3, 1881.

Asiatic Society of Bengal; Proceedings, No. 3, March, 1881.

“ “ " Journal, Vol. L., pt., L, No. 1; pt. II., No. 1.

Celestial Empire; Vol. XVII., Nos. 16, 18-22.

China Review; Vol. IX., No. 5.

Cosmos di Guido Coi'a; Vol. VL, pts. 7, 8,

Harvard College Museum of Comparative Zoology; Bulletin, Vol. VIII.
Japan Mail; Vol. V., Nos. 16-23.

Natural History of Montreal; Constitution and By-Laws.

“ “ “ “ Annual Report, 1867.

Horticultural Society of Montreal; List of Premiums, 1881.

Province de Manitoba et Territoire du Nord-Ouest du Canada, 1878,

New South Wales; Council of Education, Report, 1879. '«

“ “ “ Dept, of Mines, Annual Report, 1878.

ei Cl ce u a cc cc ce 1879

“ , “ “ “ “ “ Maps for Annual Report, 1879.

“ “ Royal Society, Journal and Proceedings, Vol. XIII.

Roman-Urdu Journal; Vol. IV., Nos. 33, 34, 1881.

Royal Geographical Society; Proceedings, April, 1881.


{ X )


Russian Imperial Geograplucal Society; Bulletin, 1881.

Socieclad de Geografica dc Madrid; Bolotin, Feb., 1881.

Tbe Canadian Antiquarian, Vol. IX., Xo. 3, Jan., 1881; presented by
Major Huguet-Latour, jM. A. X. T., etc., etc.

Ville-Mario; Aiiuuaire et supplement, Jan. 1881.

Gnology of tlic Environs of TokiyO, by Dr. D. Brauns, presented by tlie
author,

Japan iiacdi Keisen imd Studien, by Dr. J. J. Rein; presented by the author.

A new form of renduluni Seismograph, by J. A. Ewing; presented by the
author.


TokiyD, June 28th, 1881.

The Annual Meeting was held at the Shd-kei-kuwan, SeidO, TokiyO, on
Tuesday, June 28th, 1881, Dr. Divers, President, in the chair.

' The Minutes of the preceding meeting were read and approved.

The Librarian reported the receipt of various present’s a list of which
is appended. Thanks were oi’dercd.

The President announced the receipt of a medal commemorative of the
accomplishment of the Xorth-Asisn passage by the ‘^'Vega,” presented by
the Su'edish Royal Academy of Sciences. A vote of thanks to the donors
was passed.

.The Rev. W. B. Wright read Part III. of his translation from the
Japanese of Aral Hakuaoki on ‘’The Capture and captivity of P5re Giovan
Battista Sidotti.”

Ml’, J. Condev read a paper on ‘‘Japanese Armour,” and exhibited a
number of specimens.

. . . . The Report of the Council for the Session 1880-81 was read by the
Recording Secretary, and adopted without discussion.

OiBeers and Members of Council for the ensuing year were then elected
by ballot, with the following result; —

President: J, Gordon Kennedy, Esp.; Vice-Presidents: Rev. J. L.
Amerman, A. J. C. Geerts, Esq.; C-'i- Bn Secretary: E. M. Satovq
Esq.; Recording Secretaries: C.H. I p, i. Ewing, Esq.; Treasurer:

J. hL Dixon, Esq.; Librarian: .Rev. C. T. Blanchet; Members of Council:
B. H. Chamberlain, Esq., Dr. Edward Divers, Y. Duer, Esq., Rev. 0. S.
Eby, Rev. J.H. Guliek, D. D., A. G. S. Hawes, Esq., John Milne, Esq., W.J.S.
Shand, Esq., T. Walsh, Esq.

A vote of thanks was passed to the retiring Council and the meeting
was then adjourned.

PKESE?fT..

Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland; Journal,

Celestial Empire, Vol. XVII., Xos. 23, 24.

Asiatic Soeiety of of Bengal; Journal.

GebJLogical Survey of India; Records.

Japan Weekly Mail; Vol. V., Xos. 24, 25.

Socaedad de Geografica de Madrid; Boletiu.


( xi )


Soeifit^ (le GeograpMe de Eoeliefort; Bulletin.

TCkiyO Dai Gaku Memoirs of Scientific Department; Nos. 4, 5.

Medal of the Expedition around the. Northern Coast of Asia, by Prof>
Nordenskjold and Capt. Pullander; presented by the Royal STredlsh
Academy of Sciences.

Sanskrit Grammar, by W. D. Whitney; presented by the authoi*.

I— I ^

REPORT OP THE COUNCIL FOR THE SESSION 1880-81.


During the past session the activity of the Society has in some
measure diminished, owing to the decrease in the number of resident mem-
bers and the temporary absence of others, among whom were several fre-
quent contributors to its Transactions. Nevertheless, the usual number of
general meetings have been in T6kiy6, at which twenty papers were read,
showing a slight numerical excess over the preceding session. A list of
these papers will be found in Appendix A.

Eight new members have been elected, and tlie same number have resign-
ed. Of those who cease to be Resident Members in consequence of their
leaving the country permanently, six have been placed at tlreir own request
on the list of Non-Resident Members. The number of members temporarily
absent is twelve.

The Council have much pleasure in announcing that a considerable de-
mand has sprung up in Europe for the publications of the Society, wluch
would probably grow larger if the means could be found of reprinting the -
earlier volumes (1 to 3), which are almost exhausted (vol 2, and vol. 3 ,
part 1, have been out of print for some time past). This might be accom-
plished if a sufficient number of members, say thirty, were to express their
willingness to *subseribe for copies of each volume, and the remainder of
the cost of reprinting Avould, it is hoped, be covered by increased sales, tO'
the public.

Appendix B contains a list of the Journals, Transactions and Proceedings
received from various learned bodies in different parts of the world, in ex-
change for the Society’s Transactions.

In Appendix 0 ’will be found a list of additions made to the library
during the past year by donation.

The Ooxmcil beg leave to tender their thanks to the Minister of Educa-
tion for the continued use of a large hall at the ShS-kei-kuwan for the
General Meetings of the Society in T6kiy0, and to the Proprietors of the
Grand Hotel for the offer of a room for meetings to be held at Yokohama.

The following annual Balance sheet shows the. present condition of ,the
Society’s finances.


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN in Account with J. M, DIXON.


( xii )

88 88888

^Tunrs vod

M Tt* ^ M lO w


c

^ o

S3'8 . .

rH ca o O

Ml


• '.b •

■ bo i

f

^gb i

o<i c i 3

.. :

>-• ti 3 o (A t
.0 a oj ih
^ r/^ ^

r

2 g S’fi «

U ft-S Jij o OQ

X S SS ^

g S 8-S J,

a O S ^ .O

S o\oo

... I


O O Q .fl
t) 'd "O 3
CO


00 Oi Q IH

00 t^OOOO

« !g oo 00 00

V, «

^• 7 i 2 ‘ 2<2

2§ g CO ^00


, d w d ,d w d 00
qn

M , o ;z ^2,


VO \n 10

lA. 00 vd Ov


Ov vO O ^ O
O Ov O O

2


ro


4J


••


t* ^


>■ 0


0

--i a


0 CO

N CO :

..

■§.> 5 ! J


...s S g

Co'S ? a
O-K o'^


Iwi

...s'S'i

-: 'g aj 3


rj.g h-Qf) S O-^
^ J 3 u .a 2 y .a

cy T 3 ^ -c /3 rS

a q “a o c SPq

jq ‘5 .5 S .q ‘X! ,S «J

O a TO fc 0 B T 3 S
jj ‘s £ 3 ^‘C 3 a
3 ixg w 3 c^o «
M & »«’3 S*£

S&c SCstSfe fife
« 6 (14 6


£ 5 d

i, CCT^ea

a q J
g;| gjg
•" n 3 *0?

•C

I cfas

^6 «


•S '•■M^'2 2 §.

^ CO C ® ^ ^ ^
P vi -S Q U J 3

< 3.2 ft

A 3 oJ •

c.frfe-ss
- « ■•5 s eg S .
'•c a c M 5
OuC*l fe<M .S ^ S

U hi IM Vi 'U >.1 b

o O o O .-OS
fcgCtifePl, 0(1, S


o ) V n •

4-1 H ■<-» hfl *

3 o 3 a t
o a « o •

S J :

Sg S M :
g W m B
3 r ’ P J2 ca

.a H XI CC g
.a • .a a
■CJ U "U a -3 XI

^ . *j XI a a

sii"gs

■s^is"i-9

« 3 « oj

M ’C b O 5 <.>

o S ..o d c3

^ _Q ^ rt PQ ^


. ^ 00

c 8 :

<S bo ^

w 3 a

■•«i o


Tlie tibove account bas been examined and found to be correct.

J. Milne and Edward Divers, Audi


( xiii )

APPENDIX A,

List off Papees Read Dobing the Session 1S80-1.

The Lacquer Industiy of Japan; by J. J. Quin.

Notes on the Dialects spoken in Ahidzu; by Basil Hall Obamberlain.

On Kaki-no-sbibu ; by I. Isliikawa, graduate of the Universiiy of Tdkiy6.

Notes on some Recent Earthquakes; by J. A. Ewing, B. So., E. R. S. E.

Evidence of the Glacial Period in Japan; by J. Milne, F. Gr. S,

The Mineral Spring of Ashi-no-yu, in the Hakone Mountains j by Dr.
A. J. 0. Geerts.

Analyses of Ten Japanese Mineral Spring Waters; by Dr. A. J. 0. Geerts.

■Historical Notes on Nagasaki; by W. A. Woolley.

Hideyoshi’s Invasion of Korea: Chapter II — ^The Retreat, and Chapter
III — ^Negotiation; by W. G. Aston.

The History of Japanese Koramics; by Capt. F. Brinkley, R. A.'

A Memorandum on the Coleopterous Genus Damaster; by George Lewis.

The Capture and Captivity of PSre Giovan Battista Sidotti, Parts I, H, and
III; by the Rev. W. B. Wright

Descriptive Notes on the Rosaries (Jiu-dm) , as used by the different sects
of Buddhists in Japan; by J. M. James.

Ancient Japanese Rituals; by E. M. Satow.

A translation of the “Dou-zhi-keu,” or Teachings for the Yoimg; by Basil
Hall Chamberlain.

A Translation of a paper by Dr. Otto Luededce on the new Mineral, Reinite;
by M. Yokoyama.

The History of Japanese Costume: II. — ^Armour; by J. Conder, M. R. I. B. A.


APPENDIX B.

Exchanges.

Agricultural and Horticultural Society of India; Journal.
American Geographical Society; Bulletin.

American Literary Record; Triibner.

American Oriental Society; Proceedings.

American Philosophical Society; Proceedings.

Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland; Journal.
Asiatic Society of Bengal; Journal.

do. do. do. Proceedings.

Bataviaaseh Genootschap; Verhandlingen.
do. do. Notulen.


( xiv )


Belfast Natural Histoiy and PhilosopMcal Society; Proceedings.

Boston Society of Natural Philosophy; .Proceedings.

Celestial Empire; Shanghai.

China Review; Hong Kong.

Chinese Recorder and hlissionary Journal; Shanghai.

Cosmos; di Guido Cora.

Customs Report (H. I M. ot Japan) Pcbruaryj 1881.

Geological Survey of India ; Recorchs.

Harvard College Museum of Comparative Zoology; Bulletin.

Imperial Russian Geographical Society; .Bulletin.

Japan Weekly Mail; Yokohama.

New South Wales, Council of Education; Report, 1879.

do. Department of Mines; Annual Report, 1878-9.

do. do. do. Maps for Annual Report, 1879.

do. Royal Society; Journal and Proceedings.

Numismatic and Antiquarian Society, Philadelphia; Act. and Bull.

do. do. do. do. Proceedings.

Oesterreicbische Monatsschrift ftir den Orient.

Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography.

Repertorio Sinico-Giapponese ; A. Severini, 0. Puini.

Royal Asiatic Society, Bombay; Journal,
do. do. do, ■ Edinburgh; Proceedings,

do. do, do. North China Branch; Journal-

Royal Dublin Society; Scientific Proceedings.

do. do. do. do. Translations.

Royal Geographical Society; Proceedings.

Royal Society of Tasmania; Proceedings.

Sociedad Geograflea de Madrid; Boletin.

Societe des Etudes Japonaises, Ohinoises, Tartares, etc.; M&noires.

Society de Geographie; Bulletin.

Soci^tfi de Geographie de Rochefort; Birlletin,

TOkiyO Dai Gaku, Scientific Department; Memoirs, Nos. 4, 5.


APPENDIX 0.

Books Pbesented to the Society.

Boro-Budur in Java, by Dr. C. Leemans, in Dutch,
do. do. do. do. in French,

do. do. illustrations, 8 vols. folio; presented by the Govertt^

meat of Java.

Canadian Antiquarian (the); presented. by IMajoV Huguet-Latour.-"**'’


( XV )


Doeximents sur I’Asie Centrale, per C. Imbault Htiart.

Creology of the Environs of T6kiy0, by Dr. D. Branns; presented by the
author.

Japan naeh Keisen und Studien, by Dr. J. J. Hein ; presented by the author.

Japanese Pottery, by A. W. Franks; presented by the author.

Sanskrit Grammar (A), by Prof D. W. Whitney; presented by the author.

Pamphueits and Leaflets.

Anthracite coal fields of Pennsylvania, by P. W. Sheafer.

Diagrams of the Progress of the Anthracite Coal Trade of Pennsylvania, by
P. W. Sheafer; presented by the author.

Horticultural Society of Montreal, List of Premiums; presented by Major
Huguet-Latour.

Japanese Metric System in English Weights and Measures; by E. Kinch,
Esq., presented by the author.

Natural History of Montreal; Constitution and By-Lavps.

do. do. do. Annual Report 1857; presented by Major

Huguet-Latour.

Old American Almanacs, Prospectus by Dr. H. Phillips, Jr.; presented by
the author.

Pendulum Seismograph (a new form) by J. A. Ewing, Esq.; presented by
the author.

Province de Manitoba et Territoire du Nord-Ouest du Canada; presented by
Major Huguet-Latour.

Ville-Marie — ^Annuaire et Supplement; presented by Major Huguet-Latour.


( xvi )


1, 1ST OF MEMBERS.*


Honokabt Members.

Admiral Sir 0. SliadweU, K. C. B.

Captain Arthur, R. N.

S. Wells Williams, LE. D.
yir Rutherford Alcoek, K. 0. B.

Sir Tkomas F. Wade, K. O. B.

Professor Geo. E. Day, Yale College, tJ. S. A.
Professor W. D. Whitney, New Haven, U. S. A.
Hon. Geo. P. Marsh, Rome.

A. W. Pranks, British Museum,

Professor J. J. Rein, Marburg, Germany.

Baron A. Nordenskjbld, Stockholm.

Rev. E. W. Syle, D. D.

Rev. Joseph Edkins, D. D.


ReSIDEJJT JifeMBBRS.

IThe Black, Roman, and Italic types indicate residence at Yokohama, in
T6kiy6, and at the Outports and in the Interior.- Members changing
their addresses are requested to notify the Correspondingly Secretary.]

Amerman, Rev, J. L. Bellamy, A.

Aston, W. G. Bingham, Hon. J. A.

Beadon, R. Bisset, J.

Begbie, J. Blanchet, Rev, C. T.


^Coixfected to November, i88i.


{ xvii )


Bramsen, W.

Brauns, Dr. D.

Brinkley, Capt. B., M. A.
Brooke, J. H.

Brovm, A. B.

Oiiamberlaiix, B. H,
Chaplin, W. S.

Cocking, S.

Conder, J.

Cox, W. D.

Balias, a R.

Davisson, Rev. IF, •

Divers, Ed., M. D.

Dixcfia, J. M.

Buer, Yeend

Dyei*, b:, . V v

Eaton, Isaac

Eby, Eev. C. S.

Eusden, R. -■

Ewing, J. A,

Farley, 0., Jr.

Paulds, H., M. D'.

Eenollosa, E.

Fischer, Ed.

Flowers, M. 0.

Fraser, J. A.

Gardiner, J. MoD.

Gay, A. 0.

Geerts, A. J. C.

0-lover, T. B.

Gowland, W. M. .

Gray, T.

Greene, Eev. B. G>

Gregory, G. E,

Gribble, H.

Gring, Bev. A. D.

Gnbbins, J. H.

Hall, J. C,

Harris, Eev. M. 0. ,

Haswell, E. W.

Hattori, leMji
Hawes, A. G. S.


Hellyer, T. TF.

Hepburn, J, C., M. B., LL.;B.

Hodges, G. 3. L. '

HoUham, E. O.

Houghton, W. A.

Howe, IL A,

Hunt, H, J.

Irwin, E. W.

James, F. S.

Jaudon, Peyton
Jones, Gen. A. 0.

Ivanda, Haibu.

Keil, 0.

Kennedy, J. G.

Kingdon, H. P.

ISrkwood, M.'

Knippuig, E.

lillcy, R.

Lojigford, .T. H.

McDonald, Eev, Br. D.
Maclaffan. R.

Mason, L, W.

Maimdretl, Rev. H.
McClatohie, T. E. H.

Meacham, Eev. S. G.

Milm, Alex.

Milne, John.

Nakamura, Masanao
Naiimann,, Dr. E.

Nelson, B., M. B„ E. N.
Parkes, Sir H. B., K. 0. B.
Paul, H. M.

Pole, Rev. G, E.

Fryer, H.

J.

Eickett, J., Jr.

Robertson, R. B.

Eosen, Baron E.

San jo, K.-
iSalow, E. At.

Shand, W. J. S.

Slanv, Rev. A. 0,


( xviii )


Soper, Rev. J.

Stone, W, H.

, Struve, H. E., C. do
fiummers, liev. J.
Teny, H. T.
Thompson, A. W.
Thom])Hon, Tlev. T).
Tripler, Dr. T.

Troii-i), J.

Tsuda, Sen

Van Buren, T. B.
Van der Pott, J. J.
Vawdre , W.

Waddell, Eev, H.
Wagoner, G.. Pli. D.,


Walsh, J. G.
Walsh, T.

Wairen, Rev. 0. F.
Watson, E. B.
Wheeler, E., M. D.
Whittall. E.
Wilkin, A. J.

WillHnson, E. S.
WiUon, J. A.
Wilson, W. J.
Winstanleyj A.
Woolley, .W. A.
Wright, Alex.
Wright, Rev. W. B.


I^^'os-Resioskt Members.


Anierman, Chas. H.

Anderson, Win., St. Tliomas’ Hospital, London.

Atkinson, R. W-, To-vsii Hall Bdgs., Newcastle on Tyne,
Audsley, G. A., care of MoUison, Fraser & Co., Yokohama.
Bowes, J. - do. • do.

Bnrty, Fh,, 11 his Boulevard des Batignolles, Paris.
Coughtrie, J. B., Hongkong.

Cowper, 0. J., Bromwich Grange, St. Johns, Worcester.

De Boinville, 0. A. C., Kingston on Thames.

Dicldns, F, V. cave of H. Bellasis, Esq., Yokohama.

Billon, E., care of W. Gowland, Esq., Mint, Ozaka.

Dixon, W. G., 14 Scotland Street, Edinburgh.

Fraser, F. W. D., M. B., 20 Chester Street, Edinburgh.
,HaU, F., LL, D., care of Walsh, Hall & Co., Yokohama.
Hay, Drummond, Shanghai.

Hayllar, T. C., Q. C,, Hongkong.

Keswick, J. J,, Shanghai.

Kinch, E., Agricultural Coll., Cirencester, England.

Leland, Dr. G. A., care of Anglo-Austrian, Bank, Vienna.
Lyman, B. S.

Malan, Rev. C.S., Broadwindsor, Dor,set.


(' SXK )


Marshall, D. H.

McCartee, D, B., M. D., 79 Okambers Sti'eet, New York City.
Mori Arikata, H. B., Japanese Legation, London.

Mounsey, A. H., British Legation, Bogota.

Murray, David, LL. D., Albany, N. Y.

Pitnaan, John, care of B. Fiseher & Co., Yokohama.

Seott, M. M. Honolulu.

Smale, Sir John, Hongkong.

Smith, Hon. 0. 0., Singapore.

Tarring, 0. J., 3 Dartmouth Park Hoad, Higligate Boad, London.
Thompson, Lady Mary, Cliff End House, Scarborough.

Veeder, Rev. P. V., D. D., Pittsburg, Pennsylvania.

Von Brandt, H. E. Max. Peking.


R. MEIKXEJOHN AND CO., PRINTERS, YOKOHAMA, JAPAN.


**A hooh that is shut is but a block^’


GOVT. OF INDIA
iV Department of Archaeology

^ NEW DELHI. ry

& -y ^


Please help us to keep the book
clean, and moving.


S. B\y 148. N. DELHI.
