TEANSACTIONS
01 •
so .
THE ASIATIC SOCIETY
„ 0F JAPAJ^. . T..
r
VOL. III. PART I.
f From l-ith October, 1874, to 23rd December, 1874.
S^I-05
T-A-S-J.
BBPBINT OF THE FIRST EDITION, 'T^TJBLISHEB IN 1875, EDITED
BY THE SECRETARIES,
YOKOHAMA:
DANE, CRAWFORD & Co,; KELLY & Co.
Shanghai: Kklly & Walsh.-— Lonoon : TrObnek & Co.
Paris ; LBRonx. ,
central Afr OGIGill
LJBRaKY, 1\. HU
Am« No*....,
,.,
cut
• ««»•« MM
B.MBmEJOHNAHDCO.
WATEB
I
CONTENTS.
: ' ' ' PA'Gf®
tJseJivil Minerals and Metjillitrgy of file Japanese. By Dr. Geerts, of Nagasaki. ^
Observations on the Bay of Sendai. By Captain St. John, H.M.S. Sylvia ^ ... 17
Useful Minerals and Metallurgy of the Japanese. By Dr. Geerts, of Nagasaki. 27.
Description of a Trip to Niigata along the Shinsliin Bead and back by the
Mikuni Pass. By J. A, Lindo, Esq. - 5*2
Useful Minerals and Metallurgy of the Japanese. By Dr. Geerts, of Nagasaki. 85
The Preparation of Vegetable Was. By Henry Gribhle, Esq., of Nagasaki ♦ . 98


APPENDIX.

The Eovival of Pure Shintau. By E. M. Satow, Esq.


USEFUL MINEEALS AND METALLUEGY OF THE
JAPANESE.


By a. J, C. Geeets.


{Bead before the Asiatic Society of Japan ^ IMli October; 1874y\

The knowledge which the Japanese possess of Mineralogy and
Metallurgy is chiefly given them by the Chinese. It is a fact, that
the old civilization of the Chinese is at least two thousand years older
than the Japanese culture. China (and Corea) have influenced largely
the scientific, philosophical, technical and religious development of the
Japanese. Some few Japanese believe that already before Zin-mu
Tenno (G60 B. C.) literature was known in Japan, but this is very
improbable, because there are many proofs that the Chinese of the 2nd
century before Christ considered the Japanese to be “ savages,” whilst
Japanese chronicles only speak of this period in a legendary or mytho-
logical manner. It does not matter much what we may think about
• the descent of the Japanese. We may believe with Yon Siebold^ that
several tribes from ‘‘ Dats ” (Tartary) have retreated to Japan / we may
take the Japanese with Malte-Brun a . / others for Autochthones, or
Aborigines;^ we may even adhere to the strange, nearly ridiculous
hypothesis of the pious Kaempfer,^ who carries [2] the Japanese from
Babel to Japan ; or we may finally think with Thunberg ® that the

^Bevised by the author, 1882.

^Siebold. Verhandeliug over de afkomst der Japauners. Verb, vai? het
Batav. genootsohap, (Transactions of the Batavian Society.)

s Malte-Bmn. Precis de la Gr6ographie IJniverselle. Tome HI, p. 485.

^Kaempfer, History of Japan. 1 Book, Chap. VI.

^Thunberg. Voyage an Japon, traduit par Langl^s. Paris, 1796, Tc^a ,
n. p. 97.


2 GEEETS : USEFUL MINEEALS AND METALLUKGY OF THE JAPANESE,

inhabitants of these islands took their origin from the Chinese. So
much is at least sure that the Japanese till the time of Zin-mn Tenno
consisted of different hunting tribes, 'which were gradually united and
polished by the developed mind of the first emperor. That Zin-mu at
least was not an Autochthone, but from Tartar descent, we think veiy
probable, afthough this is not proved. From this time the culture of
the Japanese comes from China, either directly or through Corea. The
time of the first contact of the Japanese with the Chinese lies in
darkness. The Japanese chronicles Nippon-' 0 -(laMclii--ran and Wa-nen-
kei speak of a Chinese doctor Jofiilm or Jo~fii who came to Japan in
219 B. C.,^ together with many other Chinese colonists, and landed at
Kumano in the province of Ivii. Jo-fuku is said to have come to Japan
by order of the Chinese emperor Sclii-Hoang-ti, to seek and find in this
country a herb for immortality. There is some doubt as to the truth
of this story, which is accounted by Professor Ilofimaiiu as a myth.®
This however is pretty sure, that in the year 27 B. C. a Corean envoy
out of Binra (old kingdom of Corea) came to Japan, and presented to the
Mikado Suinin different precious objects. Prince Atogi, a son of a
Corean king, brought in 284 A.I). the first knowledge of Chinese
literature to Japan, and in the following year (285) a Chinese philoso-
pher Wang-schin (Japanese Wa-ni) was sent out to teach the Chinese
language in Japan. The culture of silk was introduced in Japan by
Chinese colonists in the year 463. Chinese artisans built in 468 the
first two-storied houses in Japan. But it was principally after the
introduction of the Buddhist religion that arts and sciences found
their way to Japan by many priests and doctors. The Buddhist
religion was brought from India to China in 68-75 A.B,, spread in 372
to Corea, from which country Buddhist priests brought this faith to
[3] Japan in the year 552.^ At that time numerous artists, artisans,
and physicians joined the Buddhist priests in their travels to Japan,
whilst the Japanese in the 7th century also commenced to go abroad to
learn medicine, the arts and sciences. Thus a Corean priest KuwanAdn
brought in 602 chronological and astronomical works to Japan. Another

® Nippon Arehiv VII. p. 107.

7 Nippon Arehiv YU. p. 111.

8 Nippon Aroliiv TH. p. 126, out of the Japanese chjconiele Nippon M.


GEEKTS : tJSEFTO MINEBALS AND METALLURGY OP THE JAPANESE. 8

Oorean priest, Tan-t$ching, introduced the manufacture of paper and ink
in Japan, which industry was energetically farthered by the famous
prince-priest Slio-tolm-da'i-slii.^ Until that time the Japanese had written
on silk or hemp-tissue. All metallurgical processes, and especially the
art of minting, the Japanese also learned from the Chinese. In the year
708 A.D. the first Japanese copper-coin called IVa-clo-lcai-elim was cast
after the model of Chinese cash, which were till that time circulating in
some parts of Japan, although in other parts of these islands only a
barter-trade existed. This event has been immortalized in Japanese
history by the institution of the Wa-do nengo (Japanese copper %engo)
(708-714), as the reign of the Mikado Gen-met is called.

Although gold and silver were known in China from the earliest
times, the first Japanese gold was found and melted in 749 A.U., and
the first Japanese silver in the year 074. It is a remarkable fact that
the discovery of these metals, which were known to the Egyptians, the
Chinese and old Greeks, and of which Moses and Homer already speak
very distinctly, was not made'in Japan at an earlier period.

Tims we see that the art of I\Ietallurgy — although very primitive —
was ' introduced in Japan, together with other arts, sciences and the
Buddhist religion. Von Biebold has expressed this very view in the
following words The Hindoos and Chinese were for the Japanese
what the Greeks and Eomans were for the west of Europe, the [4]
promoters of language, letters, arts, sciences, religion and politics.”

The Metallurgy of the Japanese docs not differ much from the
Chinese and has, even in the present time, a purely practical, and not
the least scientific basis.^® Chemistry was as unknown to the old
Japanese as it was to the Chinese. The latter have still the most
extravagant, nay absurd, ideas of the changes to which matter is liable.
By means of a long and patient experience the practical Chinese have
originally found out their different melting processes ; they have digged
their ores and fused their metals from the oldest time, without knowing
the rudest elements of geology or chemistry. They do not differ in this

Hofmann, Japan’s Beztige mit der Xoraische Halbinsel nnd mit ScMna,
naoh Japanischen Quellen bearbeitet, in Nippon Archiv Leiden 1832.

The few metallurgical institutions, lately erected in Japan after the European
system, of course excepted.


4: EBERTS 1 "USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE*

respect from the oH Celtic, Egyptian and other nations who knew in the
most ancient times a rough manner of melting metals, without having the
slightest scientific knowledge of it. Chemistry is the youngest of all
natural sciences, and even in Europe till the middle of the 18th century
(when Lavoisier, Scheele and Priestley founded the quantities period),
the most extraordinary and false ideas prevailed about the changes to
which matter is liable. But the western nations have largely profited
by the discoveries of chemical science in ameliorating their Metallurgical
processes, whilst the Chinese and Japanese have made no progress at
all in this direction. Their methods are still the same as they have
been for many centuries. Hence the melting of metals by these nations
stands at present much behind our western methods.

Hitherto the Metallurgy of the Japanese has been described by
no author. The classical and doubtless the best work which at any
time has been written about Japan — the Nippon Arehiv of Von Siebold,
was never finished and contains but very little about this subject,
whilst Kaempfer’s History of Japan contains only some insignificant
notices, which are often wholly erroneous

[6] Two valuable contributions to our knowledge of Chinese and
Japanese Metallurgy are known to us : 1st, Stanislas Julien et Paul
Champion’s Industries anciennes et inodernes de VEwpire OMnois. Paris,
1869; and 2nd, Dr. Burger’s paper on the copper mines of Japan
in the transactions of the Batavian Society (VerJiandelwgen van liet
Bataafsche genootscJiap 1836). Burger, the successor of von Siebold,
was formerly at Desima in the service of the Dutch Government, and
has also contributed very valuable materials to the knowledge of the
Fauna and Flora JaponicaJ^

For instance, page 81, “ Antimony is wanting absolutely ” (Antimony ores
are very common in this country). According to Kaempfer “ lead is not in Japan,
whilst iead-ore is found in several provinces of Japan.

12 After this paper was written (1874) there liave appeared several interesting
treatises and papers on this subject. It may be useful to mention them here : —

H. S. Munroe. The mineral wealth of Japan, a paper read before the American
Institute of Mining Engineers, at the Philadelpbia meeting, June, 1876.
Published also in the Weekly Mail of February 3rd, 1877, p 41, and

February 17th, 3rd March, April 14th— and in the Mngineering mid Mining
Journal^ YoL XXII, 9th December, 1876. ^


GEEBTS : USEFUL MINEKALS AND METALLUEUY OF THE JAPANESE. 5

In the following paper will ho found partly the results of my own
observations, made during five years’ residence in Japan, and partly
the translations of Japanese works on this subject. A collection of
more than 800 different specimens of minerals out of different parts of
Japan, enables me to give an exact account of many useful mineral
products of this country. The Japanese works which I have perused
are : —

I.—* San-kai mel-hutsu dm-JmtvaL This work was written by Hirase


OrricrAii CATAnoeuB of the International Exhibition at Philadelphia in 1876,
published by the Exhibition Committee.

Plunkett. Beport on the Mines of Japan, published by H. B. M. Legation at
Toldo, 1875. •

CoiGNET. Annales des Mines, Tome VI, 1875.

J, H. Gubbins. Notes of a visit to the Mines of Sado. Trans. Asiatic Society of
Japan, Yol. Ill, Pt, 11, p. 88-100. 1875.

Benjamin Smith Lvman. Kaitakushi Beports on the geological survey of Yezo.
Tokio, 1874-76, 5 vols.

Benjamin Smith Lyman. A general Beport on the Geology of Yezo. Tokio, 1877.
Published by the Kaitakushi.

Benjamin Smith Lyman. Geological Survey of Japan. Beports for 1878-79. Tokio,
1879, — published by the Public Works Department.

Benjamin Smith Lyman. Two Beports of the Survey of the oil lands of Japan.

Tokio, 1877 and 1878, published by the Public Works Dept.^5"

C. Netto, M. E, On mining and mines in Japan, in the Memoirs of the Science
Dept. University of Tokio. Published by the University, Tokio, 1879.

J. G. Hoghstbtteb Godebey. Notes on the Geology of Japan, in the Quarterly
Journal of the Geological Society for August, 1878.

Kin-seliUgaku, Hand-book of Mineralogy, by Wadalshiro and Tanaka
Yoshiwo, published by the National Museum at Tokio, 1878.

^ ^ Kin-sehugajtu-hitm-lcei. Treatise on Mineralogy by Sugimura Jix6.
Tokio, 1878.

^ IS ^ Kin-uU-taUnei-ldyo. Vocabulary of Mineralogy, published by the
National Museum at Tokio, 1879.

A San-so-hi-rohii. Treatise on Mineralogy and Metallurgy by Sato Gen-

haku. Tokio, 1876, 2 vols.

H Bai-nuhon’kiiwa-liel-M. The History of coins and minting in

Japm, published by the finance department, 1876-79. 87 volumes. This
, large work contains in Vols. 1-12 of the first Appendix a full descriptfda
with illustrations of the metallurgy of copper, gold and silver.


6 GEBETS : XJSEEUL MINEEALS AND METAXLDEGY OF THE JAPANESE.


Tatsu-yai and illustrated by Hasegawa Mitsnno. It is published at
Osaka and consists of 5 volumes 8vo. The first volume contains the
description and representation of mining and smelting works.

2. — Hon-zo-ko-w.o]cu Kel-mo^ a large work written by the celebrated
Japanese naturalist Ono Eanzan and edited for the second time in
1847 by Ono-Tsunemori and Te-ken-sbi-yeki. It is a kind of com-
mentary and Nomenclator on the famous Chinese work on natural
history, called Hon- zo - ho - moku (Chinese Tun - Uaou ^ - kanii "
written by the Chinese savant Le-she-chin and published in Cliina in
the year 1596. A Japanese edition of this latter work was piunted and
edited 1714, by Ina-waka-sui. Banzan’s work gives explanations of
Japanese names, synonyms and the places of occurrence in Japan of
the numerous natural products, described in the above-named Chinese
work. The work is interesting for every one who occupies himself
with the natural history of China and Japan. Siehold calls the author
Banzan, who has a [6] famous name throughout this country, the Linnaaus
of Japan, and he has justly done so, because Banzan’s work has aided
von Siebold and his coadjutors largely in composing their Mora and
Fauna Japonica.

8. — Eo-do-shu-rokn or Manual for the Metallurgy of Copper, a small
work with illustrations.

We intend to describe the different metals in the following order :

a. The metallurgy of Iron, bar-iron and steel, with a list of the different

iron-ores found in this country,

b. The metallurgy of Coyyer, constitution of Japanese bronzes and a list

of the different Copper-ores.

c. The metallurgy of Lead and 8ilv&i\

d. “ of Quicksilver.

e. “ of Gold. *

f. Ma?iufacture of Arsenious Acid, with a list of Arsenic-minerals . —

A.

Iron.

(Cast iron, bar-iron, steel.)

Literature : Siehold Nippon Arehiv II. von denWaffen, page 18. '

Stan. Julien eb Chaminon. Industries etc. de
TEmpire Chinois. Paris, 1869.


G-EBBTS : U^EFtJL MINEBAJDS AND METALBUBaY OF THE JABAOT8B. %

I\ R. H* McGlatohie. The sword of Japan. Trans-
actions Asiatic Society of Japan, Nov. 78.

There are numerous iron -ores to be found in Japan. Those which
are used in smelting iron are : 1°. Magnetic iron ore, the chief ore of
Japanese iron-industry. There are two varieties, the massive magnetic
iron ore with an iron grey colour and of compact constitution and the
magnetic iron Sand with black colour and of sandy character. The
Loadstone, another variety [7] of this ore, is also found in Japan,
The Japanese esteem this ore highly and believe rightly that it produces
the best steel for their swords. It is generally known that the good
quality of the Swedish iron is chiefly due to this ore, which forms
in Sweden only large mountainous masses.

Loadstone has been found in Japan for the first time in the year
718 A.D. in the province of OmL The Japanese make use of it for
manufacturing compass-needles, and as a medicine in disease of the
heart. The Japanese name for ordinary magnetic iron-ore is :
Gen-seki, ^ ® ® Ji-tetsxi-ko, Synon. RoJca-slm, Te-nu-sliOy Gen-hu-
sekiy Gan-tetm, It is found in large quantities in Rikuchiu, Iwaki,
Satsuma, Idzumo, Wakasa, Iwami, Hinga. The magnetic iron sand
is called ^ Tetsu-sha and occurs in nearly every province of Japan,
although it is chiefly worked on iron in the province of Hoki, Idzumo,
Bingo, Bitchiu and Btarima.

The loadstone is named: Ji-seki or ^ Ji-shaku, Syn.

Hari-sui-ishiy Riu-tetsu-scJdj Sliinan-seki, An excellent kind of load-
stone is found in Sendai, Nambn, Bizen, Okayama, middle quality in
Shinano, Kai and an inferior stone in Mino.

2°. — Specular iron-ore (oiigist ore or iron glance) having a steel
grey colour with a brilliant lustre. The Japanese call this ore also
Gen-seki, the name which they give to massive magnetic iron-ore.
The difference in chemical constitution with the above named ore is not
great, both being oxidic ores. We got a good specimen from Hiiiga,
and were informed that this ore is found also in other provinces, where
it is also used in melting iron.

8^.^ — Brown Hematite (Brauneisen stein of the Germans), IB ®
KatBU-tetsu-ko^ It occurs in Japan in different varieties, one of which
is a very peculiar ora in spheroidical grains, closely resei^bling om


8 aEBRTS ; USEFUL MINEKALS AND METALLUBGY OP THE JAPANESE.

Limonite or Pea-iron ore (Bohnerz). Ordinary brown hematite is
found in Idzumo, Mutsu, Hiiiga, Satsuma, Shinano, Bizen and other
places. The Limonite occurs in Japan in the provinces of Toza,
Satsuma, Idzu and Totomi. The latter ore is also used in medicine as
a beemostaticum and is named : ^ ^ S Mu-miyo-i, Mu-mei-i, Syn,
Do-sJii,

4°. — Bed Hematite, ^ ® SeH-tetsihko, An impure variety.

(Rotheisenstein). The Japanese red hematite is of an ochry, soft
q^uality. One fine crystallised ore seems not to be [8] found in Japan,
because it was sometimes imported in very small quantity from Europe
and used by the Japanese as a much valued hsemostaticum for bloody
wounds. The Japanese call the foreign hard fibrous haematite there-
fore, as we do, Jfl. Ketsu-seki (pron. kis-seki) lit. bloodstone. It is
also called EananoTf after the place Cananoor in Malabar.

The impure, ochry variety is very common in Japan and called
^ Tai-sha-seki, Syn, To-sJm^ SIm-seJd, Ski-slm, SM-sJni, It
has much resemblance to our red chalk and is used in Japan chiefly as
a medicine and for drawing.

Another still more impure variety, containing much clay, is very
soft and powdery. It is quite equal to our red ochre and called
M i Seki-do, Syn. Aka-tsicchi, Ni-tsuchu It is used as a veterinary
medicine.

Tai-sha-seki is found in Mino, Akasaka, Owari, Totomi Kakekawa,
Suruga, Aiga-mura, Bango, Ono-gori Kiura, Seki-do occurs at very
many places.

5^. — CLAY-iRON-OEE,fili ^1^ Neu-tetsii-seU, is very common in Japan.
Besides the ordinary kind, I have several varieties in my collection. In
Japan however it is not used — as in England — in large quantity for the
purpose of smelting iron.

Far. A is a kind of tunicated clay-iron-stone (Thonige Sphserosi-
derit), also called in England kidney -foiin clay-iron-stone. It consists of
hydrated sesquioxide of iron with silicic acid, alumina and some manganic
oxide. The kidney form masses have a yellow-brown colour and are
often hollow. Sometimes they contain petrifactions. It is the same hind
of stone which 'formerly was used in Europe in pharmacy under the
name of Lapis Aetites, In China and Japan this stone has still a great


<^EEETS ; TJSEEUL MINEBALS AND jMETALLDRaY OF THE JAPANESE. 0


reputation as a remedy against dysentery. It is named M ^ U-yo-
EiYO, Syn. Ishi-nadanffo (stone cake), Ko-moclii-islii, Ra-tai-isU and
is found (according to Eanzan) in Yamato, Satsuma, Cliikuzen, Tazima,
Noto, Kai, Idzumi, Yechiu, Hiuga. Tar. B consists of very large masses
kidney-form clay iron stone, does however not diJBfer in cliemical con-
stitution from the former. It is called by the Japanese : — II ^ ^

Tai-iohi-u-yo-eiyo, Syn. Tsuho-ishi (lit. pot-stone), Yoroi-i-uhif Oni*
no-tsuhate^ F^ihuro-islii and is found in [9] Yamato Ikoma-yama, Yama-
sliiro, Kitsube-no-yama, Sanuki, Kii, Idzumi.

Far. 0 is a yellow, ocliry clay -iron- stone, very soft and not used
for melting. It lias a reputation as a medicine against liead-acbe, bears
the names W ^ Ran-sIskj-o, Syn. Manjii-ishi^ Dango-uhiy Tmchi^
dango^ Dango-iwa, and is found in Buzen, Nakatsu, Awa, Higami-gun,
Suwo, lyo, Oshn, Tsugaru, Hoki, Noto, Kai, Arayi-yama.

6. — Stauaotitic Spathic iE]^n-oee (Stalactitiscber Spbaerosiderit)
is, as far as we know, rare in Japan and seems to be found only in
Yamasbiro, Inari-yama and Yamato-yama. It forms small stalactitic
masses of a yellow-brown colour, and bears the Japanese names :
dfc® ^ Do-in-ketsu, Syn. I)o-niii, Kitsune-no-lxo-makxiva (Fo os-pillow
Kuda-ishi (stick- stone), Kitsune-no-rosohu (Fox's candle) and is a much
valued old Chinese medicine. It is not used for melting iron. It seems
to me that ordinary Spathic iron ore (Spatheisenstein) is also very rare
in Japan, because I did not meet with samples and found no description
of this ore in the above named Japanese works.

7. — ^Ibon pyrites. O-riii-tetsn-ko, All four varieties,

the cubical^ dodekaJiedral, xnagnetic and nodular are duly represented in
Japan. The quantity of ordinary, dodekahedral pyrites, as well as of
copper pyrites, is enormous in the countiy. There is scarcely any place
where iron pyrites is wanting. It does not serve for melting iron, but
finds a place in every drug- shop as a Chinese remedy.

A .^ — Cubical Pyrites occurs in fine crystallized specimens of circa
1 Cub. oentim. and is wrongly called ® Ji-nen-do or Ji-zen-do
(N atural copper), Syn. Km-san-reJd-sh\ Km-riki-shi^ San- sari. It is
found in Shiuano, Take-ishi-mura, Fuji-yama, Suwo, Yamaguchi^ Bingo
Yamaken-gun, Dewa, Satsuma, Kii Kumano, Idzu Nikkai and many
other places.


10 GEEBTS : USEFUE MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JABAHES.E,

B. — DodeJcahedral Pyrites is kept by tlie Japanese for a wholly
different use to the former. They distinguish, according to the colour,
two kinds, namely ^ Kin-ge-seki, Syn. Plo-km-ye^ Kana-Zako^
pyrites with a yeliOjW (gold) colour and Gin-ge-brki, Syn. Ho-

yin- ye, Bo-yin, [10] H‘rt/ireJ«s'i7u*:=:r:pyrites with 'white ( silver! colour.
Some of the yellow kinds contain sometimes a little gold and were
formerly used for the extraction of gold, especijilly in Iwami
Kinsan.

The chief places of occurrence are: Toza, Shinano, Mikawa,
Tajima, Yamato, Iwami Kinsan, etc,

0. — ^Pyrites in Rounded Nodules of radiated structure, superfi-
cially covered with oxide of iron, are called Ja-gan-seki or Ja-wo

(Snake- stone). Old physicians use it againjit epilepsy and diseases
of the heart.

I) .—Magnetic ibon pyrites or PyjIrhotite, Ji-riu-telm-ko

is a very common ore in Japan and used for the manufacture of Sulphate
of iron (copperas).

8.— Chromite or Chromofebbit, Kiirrormu - tetm -^ ho ,

occurs in heavy greenish masses in the mine of Kiura, district of Ono,
province of Bungo.

These are the principal iron ores which we found in Japan, Only
the three first named species of ores are used in Japanese metallurgy.

The Japanese distinguish, as we do, three kinds of iron :

^ ® Namaganb or Ltetsu, Cast-iron (pig-iron),

JUEU-TETSU on Kera or Kitaye-tetsu, Bar-iron (wrought iron,
lit. ripe iron),

^ Wk Hagane or Ko-tetsii, Steel.

The extraction of cast iron from the ore in Japan proceeds on the
same principlo as our blast-furnace method j there exists however a
great difference of the form of the furnaces and accessory apparatus.
Iron industry of the west has received in the last century a high degree
of perfection, by the aid of modern chemistry. In China and Japan
very imperfect small and rough furnaces are used. No care and no
money are spent to erect large and more durable furnaces, and even
although lately some Japanese are convinced of the advantage of
European ovens, the people do not like to lay out money for the con-


OEEETS : XJSEETJL MINERALS AND METALLURaY OE<^HE JAPANESE. 11

struction of roper working apparatus. This want of care and mistaken
eGonomj in the construction of utensils and pro23er furnaces is the chief
fault in all bi'anehes of Japanese metal industry. Although there is
an abundance of good material, I believe that it nevertheless will be
still a very long time before the Japanese iron founders can compete
with the 2 >rices of western metal. Whilst iron, with the exception of
platina, is the least fusible of useful metals, it can easily be compre-
hended that the price of this metal is much more costly in this country
than it is in Europe. After Japan was [ 11 ] opened to foreign trade,
we saw therefore bar-iron become a regular article of import, which
fact gave a heavy blow to the Japanese iron industry. For the
last 15 years tbe Japanese have made little or no bar-iron fjtiku-
tetsu)^ because they ca^ buy it cheaper from European merchants,
than make it 'themselves. Cast-iron and steel are still made in
Japan, although the fabrication of refined steel bas lost a great deal
by the abolition of tbe old feudal system, wliich caused the downfall of
tbe famous Japanese sword. The now weapons of the army or at least
the materials for the same are nearly all introduced from Europe, The
Japanese believe, however, their steel to be of much better q[uality than
that made in the west ; the price of the first is more than the double of
the latter.

After the ore has been selected it is piled up iu rude kilns with
wood and calcined (roasted) in order to expel the water, carbonic acid,
sulphur, etc. This calcination makes tbe ore more porous and better
fitted for the smelting process. This process is done near the places,
(mountains) where the ore has been found.

The calcined and powdered ore, or the washed iron sand, if the
latter be used, wliicli is mostly the case, is now smelted in a furnace
with a bottom or heartli (called /it/ri- de/m or fulahtoko)^ made up, at tbe
depth of five feet, with hot charcoal and wood-ashes. The furnace is
aboul four feet liigh, three feet broad and nine feet long and is built up,
for each operation, with a few stones and much fire-proof clay. The
clay is laid in layers till the wall of the furnace has sufficient thickness.
The thick bottom of this small blast-furnace is on both ends a little
inclined. Half a foot above the bottom a number of opposite openings ,
are made iu the wall for receiving so many tubes of the two large b^ow# ♦


12 GKEEBTS : TJSEIUL MINEBALS AND METALLEBGY OE THE JAPANESE.

Besides, there are two other openings near tlie bottom of about 0.4 foot
diameter, which are closed with clay- stoppers and afterwards opened to
collect the fluid pig-iron and the slags which run onl. Now the furnace,
previously perfectly dried with a wood-fire, is filled with charcoal and
the powdered calcined ore or iron sand, nearly equal weights of charcoal
and ore being required. Some wood- ashes made of the fresh wood of
ma-H (Podocarpus madrophylla) are added to act as a Jliuv and to
separate, aided by the ashes of the charcoal itself, the metallic iron from
the impurities which are taken by the slag. When the heat produced
by the continuous stong stream of air, pressed into the furnace by
means of the large treading bellows (called Tatara), worked by four to
six workmen, has been suflieient to smelt the ore, the iron will gradually
run in a liquid state to the bottom of the furnace and then runs partly
off, with the slags, through the two lower openings in the walls of the
furnace. When the fire has become about half a foot under the upper
border of the furnace, another load of nearly equal weights of iron-ore
and charcoal is put on and so on repeatedly as long as the blast lasts
(about three days and nights). The furnace is broken to pieces on the
fourth day and the pig-iron and, raw- steel at the bottom collected and
broken into smaller pieces by large hammers or falling weigh fcs, [12]
The pig-iron obtained is sometimes purified by a second smelting in
another similar, but smaller furnace, and oast in the desired
forms. •

The process is — as in our blast furnace system — founded on the
reduction of the oxidised ore by means of the carbonic oxide, which is
formed, when the carbonic acid, proceeding from the burning of the
lowest parts of coal, passes over the red-hot fuel above the burning coal.
It is this carbonic oxide which reduces the ore to the metallic state
when it comes into contact with it at a red heat. The carbonic oxide
is converted by this means into carbonic acid, while the iron is left in
the metallic state. The iron and the slag both run to the bottom,
where the slag forms a layer above the heavier metal. Old iron is
worked by the Japanese in the same manner.

In the province of Satsuma, not far from Kagosima, a European
blast-furnace has been erected for several years. Lately the Japanese .
Government has erected at Kamaishi, province of Eikuchiu, two large


Gi^SEBTS : TJSEPTJL J^EBALS AND METALLT7B©Y OP THE JAPANESE. IB

charooal-blast-fiH’jQacGS, with puddlbg ovens. The ore there is massive
magnetic iron. Another blast furnace in foreign style has been erected
at Naka-kosaka, province of Kotsnke.

The conversion of. cast-iron into bar or* wrought iron consists in
removing as far as possible the carbon, silicon, sulphur, phosphorus and
other substances from the cast-iron. This purification rests upon the
principle, that when east-iron is strongly heated in contact with air or
oxide of iron, its. carbon is partly evolved in the form of carbonic oxide,
while the silicon is converted into silicic acid, which unites with another
portion of oxide of iron to form a fusible slag.. The Japanese follow the
same principle, without however knowing the theory of this imMling
process; they mix cast-iron with a little hnck-ashes and some iron^
scaleSj heat the whole with charcoal in small furnaces of fire-proof clay —
similar to but smaller than tbe one already described — and keep the metal
during several days (our Japanese author says semn days) in a fluid state,
under continuous blowing with the bellows. We have not seen this
process ourselves, because as already stated, the manufacture of bar-iron
according to the old system is now almost abandoned in Japan. The
puddling of the [13] iron is continued until the whole has assumed a
granular, fluidless appearance. The Japanese seem to know this point
exactly and at that time take the metal away, to bring it directly under
tbe hammer, in order to squeeze out the liquid slag and to force the
iron-particles into a coherent mass. Japanese wronght-iron is delivered
to the trade in square or sometimes round cakes, under the name of
jiilm-tetsn (ripe-iron). This Japanese method has much analogy with our
old continental Catalan process, which is still in operation in the
Pyrenees. The Japanese, however, make no use of the water-blast-
pipe, used in the Catalan process. The bellows used by Japanese are
of Chinese origin and already described by many writers on China.
The large one (Tatara) worked by treading, in tbe manner of a seesaw,
is only used in iron melting, the smaller one (Fugigo) is in use in all
other melting furnaces as well as in ordinary forges. The metallurgical
bellows are much larger (sometimes 5 ft. long, 8 ft. high, ft. br.)
but the construction is the same as the smaller. Bessemer’s process for
converting iron into bar-iron was unknown to the J apanese.

According to our Japanese author, refined steel is prepared in fee


14 GEEETS : USEFUL MINEEALS ANB METALLUBGY OF THE JAPANESE.

following manner : A certain (^^aantity of pig-iron is mixed witii a little
bar-iron in a crucible of fire proof clay ; the whole is covered with borax
(Hosha) and smelted in small furnaces daring several (the Japanese
author says elevoi) days; The metal being separated from the slag,
is hammered strongly and alternately cooled in •water or oil. The
Japanese author observes that forging and cooling is to be done :


For Ordinary Knives 4 times.

Gruns 11 ‘‘

Eazors ....13 “

‘‘ Swords 15 ‘‘


During the forging of the blades the greatest care should be taken
that the anvil and its surroundings are clean, because Japanese armourers
believe that the smallest particle of dust, and particularly lead or copper-
filings, spoil even the best blades when forged.

The Japanese manner of preparing steel is difierent from our
method. It is known that steel differs from cast-iron in its smaller
quantity of combined carbon and from [14] bar- iron by a larger quantity
of carbon. Now with our western processes steel is produced : 1st, by
extracting carbon from the pig-iron (raw-steel) ; or 2nd, by combining
bar-iron with the requisite amount of carbon (cement- steel). It seems,
however, that a third method which is not used by us, but is used in
Japan may produce good steel. It consists in smelting pig-iron and
bar-iron together in certain well defined .proportions. The borax dis-
solves mp.ny impurities in the slag. It must be said that chemistaiy has
not yet explained the production of steel in a sufficiently satisfactory
manner. Although steel owes its properties in a great measure to the
presence of a just proper quantity of carbon, it is pretty sure that small
quantities of silicon, nitrogen, aluminium, titanium and perhaps other
elements are not without influeil^e on the quality of the steel. Hence
steel-manufacture is still a matter of chance, and this is proved also by
the excellent kinds of steel manufactured by many oriental nations who
have no knowledge of chemistry. Raw steel is produced in Idznmo at
the same time with pig-iron by melting magnetic iron sand at a very
strong beat.

When steel has been cast by the Japanese in the above mentioned
way, and the different objects have got their shape and are sufficiently


GBKETS : USEFUL MINEKALS AND METALLUEUY OF THE JAPANESE. 15

forged, it is cemented and tempered, in order to convert the soft steel
into hard steel. The old armourers of Japan seem to have taken great
care in this operation. The most famous armourers were held in high
distinction, as has already been shown by Mr. McClatchie in his in-
teresting paper. They kept their method of cementing secret. The
Japanese blades are hard and noj very elastic, and belong for this reason
to the class of cement- steel. An armourer told me that different blade-
forgers cemented their swords in different manners, one of which con-
sisted in finally covering the strongly-hamm'ered blades with a liquid
mixture of clay, loam, ashes, charcoal-powder and water. After ,dx‘ying
this layer, the whole is exposed to a red heat and the glowing blades
are cooled very slowly and gradually in ,.warm water. The Swords are
then ground on - a very precious [15] kind of whetstone, which is
extremely rare in Japan, and finally they are polished.

Japanese historians give no exact account of the time when iron
and steel were for the first time cast in Japan. They have noted only
the first copper, silver and gold melting. On the authority of Von
SieboIcP^ a certain Princ(^ called Inn sliild^ who lived under the reign of
the Mikado Sui-nin (29 B.C.— 71 A.D.,) has the credit of having invented
the forging of the first Japanese sword, but Mr. McClatchie gives us
another version in his paper and informs us that the exact date cannot
be fixed, because the history of the sword is mixed up so much with
mythological relations, at least in those Japanese works which he had
perused. According to Mr. McClatchie the Koto Meijifij a Japanese
work on the history of the sword, written by Kcvmctdct Sahiiro-^datyu in
1791, tells us first, that a certain Amakuni from Uda in the province of
Yamato is b ©lived to have forged the first old divine sword (kenj niider
the reign of Siu-jin Tenno, (that is in 97-80 B.C.), and 2nd, that
.another Amakuni from the same place in the same province, it is
believed, made the sword in imitation of the divine blade called
‘‘ Clustering Clouds,” daring the reign of Mon- mu Tenno (697-707
A.D.) It seems to us, too, that the exact time of the first iron-industry
cannot be given, and that it is certain only that the Japanese have
worked their iron-ores from the 10th century.

IS Transactions oX the Asiatic Society of Japan, Nov. 1873.

Nippon Archiv ; Von den Waffen : page 18.


16 GEERTS; UBEEUL MINERA.LS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE.

Tlie principal districts where iron is worked in Japan are, according
to Eanzan and others, Idzumo, Bingo, Rikuchiu, Hiuga, Tajima, Wakasa,
Satsuma, Suruga, Shinano, Kai, Totomi, Bizen and Bichiu.

The best steel is manufactured in Harima, Hoki, Idzumo and Iwami.

According to an estimate of the Mining Department (1877) the
yearly average of iron produced till ncjw in Japan is nearly 10 million
lbs., or 4,800 tons, worth about 107,000 yen, which proves that the
production of iron is as yet very insignilicant. The Customs Statistics
in Japan show that the medium yearly import of crude and manufactured
iron is about eqiml to 11,200 tons, representing a value of 1,831,577 yen.
Although the Japanese ore and iron sand are of an excellent quality, it
will be difficult to predict a great movement forward in the Japanese
iron industry, because the necessary coal is not found here, like in
England and Belgium, in the immediate neighbourhood of the iron ore,
whilst charcoal, although giving excellent results, rises in late years,
too much in price to expect an economical use of it in the blast-fmmaces*

[to be continued,]


(17)


OBSEEVATIONS ON THE BAY OE BENDAL


A SHORT ACCOUNT OF A FEW DAYS SPENT IN SENDAI
BAY IN QUEST OF AN ANCHORAGE
OR HARBOUR.


By Captain St. John, H. M. S, ‘‘ Syl-nha.”


[Read before the Adatic Society of Japan^ on the 14th October^ 1874.^
[16] On tlie 15th of July, after feeling the way slowly into the
north-west corner of Sendai Bay, I found a partially sheltered anchorage
ill 3 fathoms behind the northern island of this numerous group, which
are clustered together, according to the Japanese minibering 808.

The coast line of the main bay is here deeply indented, and the
group of islands spreading across the mouth of this bight forms inside
an inner bay, 8 miles long, by 4 broad, named Matsushima, after a
village on the main shore. Unfortunately this fine space of protected
water is merely a lagoon. At high tide it has 6 feet of water, px*etty
iiniformly throughout, but at low tide a few boat passages leading
through masses of ribbon seaweed and crossings from the islands to the
mainland are the only open water. The eastern shores of these islands
(i.e, facing Sendai Bay) are thickly studded with reefs and rocks, making
the approach very troublesome. Probably there are as many reefs under
water as there are above.

The highest of these islands is about 300 feet, the lowest about 30 ;
generally speaking 60 to 80 feet is their mean height. They are cut
up in a wonderful manner by narrow creeks and tiny inlets which
frequently almost [17] join, being only separated by narrow ridges.
I am unaware what distinguishes an island from a rock with the Japanese,
but considering those that. have trees or herbage of some kind on them
as islands, the number 808 cannot be far out.

VOL, m. — 3.


18 ST. JOHN : OBSERVATIONS ON THE BAY OE SENDAI. '

The foundation of these islands is either a yellow sand-stone rock
of soft texture, or grey grit, closely approaching conglomerate. ^ The
stratification is very distinct and horizontal ; a few slips and faults I
observed, but they were i^are. The surface soil is a rich vegetable
mould mixed with an arenaceous compost. At tho head of most of
these creeks there are a few small paddj^-fields ; but excepting these
patches there is hardly any cultivation. This of course is easily
accounted for by the scarcity of inhabitants. The principal village,
speaking of this group of islands and tho main shore in their immediate
neighbourhood — in other words the w^est portion of Sendai Bay, is
Ishibama, consisting of about 100 houses, and built on one of the
islands ; it has an anchorage capable of holding half a dozen small
vessels between the island on which it is situated and the one next to
it, and is in consequence considered the port of Sendai. The next most
important village is Sabusawa, about one mile from Ishibama, consisting
of about 150 houses : it is situated on another island. Shiwogama with
about 500 inhabitants, built in the B.W. coriler of the lagoon on tho
mainland, is 5 ri from Sendai and 2^ from Ishibama ; it is the nearest
village on the coast to Sendai. From here the produce of that large
town and rice district is carried across in small boats to Ishibama, and
there shipped for further transit in junks and other Japanese craft.
Matsushima, a village on the mainland 5 miles west of Ishibama, has a
population of about 500. Tona, auotlier village on the mainland, built
on a low spit of land runuing out from the northern side of the lagoon,
produces salt, as well as being a fishing establishment. With the
exception of these few insiguificaut villages, there appears nowhere else
a suificient number of houses huddled together to deserve that name.

[18] The main land on this (W.) side of Sendai Bay is hilly, ‘wooded,
and wild, but does not appear to be farmed, %s in most parts of Japan,
and the patches of cultivated ground are few and far apart. In fact I
have never seen, except further north in the province of Mutsu, a more
scanty population, and so little cultivation. Ishx no Maki is a dirty,
dilapidated town, built on the banks of the river Kitakami. It com-
mences at about half a mile from the mouth of this river, and extends
in an irregular way for three-quarters of a mile up both bauks. The
population I shoukl judge to be about 7,000, all of a very poor class of


ST* JOHN : OBSERVATIONS ON THE BAY OF SENDAI. 19

people, I did, however, meet one or two rice merchants at the head
man's establishment at another town near here, which I shall mention
presently. There is no Government Official at Ishi no Maki, merely a
head man, an authority found in even the smallest Japanese villages.
The Kitakanii is a fine and swift body of water, having a width abreast
of the town of about 800 yards and a depth of 30 feet, but unfortunately
like most other rivers falling into an open bay, has a bar, with only 12
feet of water on it. It is not a tidal river, the body of water being too
great and powerful to allow of its being so ; it is also clear enough to
be drinkable half a mile up. A few large junks were anchored off the
town, but the banks, which are piled and rudely wharfed, were crowded
with large and perfectly flat-bottomed boats, 50 and -60 feet long by 12
and 14 ft* broad ; these boats go 50 ri up the river (according to the
boatmen) and bring rice from the interior, and when loaded draw about
18 inches of water. When the rice is being brought down in the
autumn, I have no doubt the town will show a little more life, but at
the present time (July) a more torpid place I have never seen in Japan.
In the extreme north-east point of the bay, three and a half miles
from Islii no Maki, is a fishing village, named Watanoha, with a popula-
tion of about 2,000, and very filthy. The stench from the rotting debris
of fish, which covered the wharf, was sickening. Skin disease certainly
was evidently prevalent. Ishi no Maki depends on its supply of fish from
[19] this village, and as I walked hack from the former river I met
ponies, men and boys laden 'with bonito. These fish are caught in
large set nets, each net having a look-out station attached to it, stuck
on poles. The poles, for there are several lashed end to end, are 80 and
90 feet long, being erected in 12 fathoms. These flimsy-looking look-
outs are kept wonderfully steady by large stones made fast to the bottom
end of the poles, and guyel’ and steadied at the surface by anchors and
cables. There are often as many as half a dozen men on the platform
fixed on the top. These things when approached look like beacons,
and even when sufficiently ■ near to make out their real purpose,
fishing, any one, unless he knew to the contrary, would expect they
were on a rock, or at any rate in shoal water.

From "Watanoha, the coast of the Bay trends S; E*, 11 miles,
terminating in the bluff point Amichanda, and after turning the corner


20 ST, JOHN : OBSERVATIONS ON THE BAY OF SENDAI.

Ttins along to the north, passing Kin-kazan within half a mile distance.
Along this 11 miles of coast, which is rough, bold and hilly, there are
several bays, but all open and devoid of shelter. A few miserably
small fishing villages are scattered about the extreme ends of the bay.
Occasionally a very small patch of cultivation is seen, but the country
is almost all perfectly wild and wooded excepting the cape itself and a
couple of miles back from it, which is clear and covered with short
grass ; here small herds of ponies were grazing.

Kin-kazan is entirely covered with old wood, though none of great
size. Pine, cedar and a few deciduous trees form the chief cover. The
temple is quite small and insignificant, and, except for some late slight
repairs, would be in a ruinous state. It is one quarter of a mile from the
landing place, and from it a path loads to the sharp peak of the island
1,000 feet high.

Another small ruinous temple and a few rude stone figures of
Buddha, some on their heads, some on their shins or on their backs,
point to the neglect and little interest now felt by the Japanese in their
old customs. Large figures of the same god were lying about down below.
I [20] walked up to call on tbe priest, but he was at Sendai. The
chief individual about tbe place was a little stout old man, in European
clothing. He was very civil, and excessively fond of sake, for he kept
sipping at a bottle of the strongest alcohol. I gave him some claret to
taste, but this he hardly appreciated as much as his own burning liquor.
There are numerous beautifully clear streams in the island of delicious
cold water. The coarse sand at the bottom and sides of these water-
courses is thickly filled with mica. The ancient custom allowed no
women to land on the island, but this is not now enforced. The deer
which were grazing about the bare slopes as I landed were of old con-
sidered sacred ; they are not so now. ""

I was rather amused when steaming across the bay, and wanted
to communicate with a fishing boat. I stopped, as the small craft
passed close to the interpreter, hailed the men to come alongside, but
though only a few yards off, they paid not tlie slightest attention to
him : he was dressed as a European. I then steamed after them, and
got the boat close alongside, but nothing would induce the men in her
to have the slightest eommuncation with him. The fact was they did


ST. JOHN: OBSEBVATIONS ON THE BAY OP SENDAI.


21


not believe be was a Japanese. I have observed frequently, that they
lose weight and respect among their own people when dressed as
foreigners. The natives about this northern part of Nippon appear to me
to be a variety of the true Japanese, They are coarser built, have
higher cheelc bones, are larger limbed and unmistakably darker ; this
latter peculiarity I take from the -small children and women. The
men, of course, being mostly fishermen and exposed to the sun and salt
water, would naturally soon become very dark.

The north side of Sendai Bay is a low fiat sandy beacli : im-
mediately behind this are rice-plains running far back into the interior,
so far, in fact, that their extent cannot be seen. Some magnificent
mountains towered in the extreme blue distance, still retaining a quantity
of snow on the grand slopes.

[21] I have little else to say regarding this Bay, except that I
expected to find a much more rich and populous country than I did,
especially about Isbi-no-Maki. Pheasants and duck must abound
in the winter, a few heron, gull (Larus argentatus), oyster- catchers
(lioematopus ostralgeus), ospreys (Aquila halicetus) and the common
cormorant, were almost the only birds I saw.

On one of the Islands I found a most perfect specimen of the lower
part of the trunk of a large tree, petrified in the sand- stone 60 feet
below the surface. It -was in a small cleft, where the outer portion of
rock had fallen out. The large roots were clearly seen, and the position
of the tree was evidently such as it had grown in.


A General Meeting of the Society was held on ■Wednesday eyening, the 14tli
October, 1874, at the Grand Hotel. There was a good attendax:ice. Tho Chair
was taken by Sir H. S, Parkes, one of the Vice Presidents, shortly before nine
o’clock.

The Minutes of the Annual Meeting haying been road and approved, it was
announced that the following gentlemen had been elected Ordinary IVlembors of
the Society sii^ce the last General Meeting the Eev. I). 0. Greene, Messrs,
Kingdon, Drummond Hay, J. Sichel, W. G. Howell, Hatakeyama, C. do Struve,
and B. H. Chamberlain, It was also announced that several valuable donations
to the Library and Museum had been made, the in'ineipal of which, a model of
a gold mine and works at the Island of Sado, presented by Erasmus Gower,
Esq.., was exhibited on a side table and attracted considerable attention from those
l^resent.

The author being absent, Mr. Wilkin then proceeded to read the first of the
two Papers for the evening, being tho first of a series on “ The Useful Minerals
and Metallurgy of the Japanese.” The subject principally treated *in this Paper
was the manufacture of Hon and Steel.

The Chairman said he was q^uito sure all the members' and visitors present
would join him in presenting the Society’s best tbanks to Dr. Geerts for his very
valuable and interesting paper, and they would look forward with much pleasure
to the future contributions of the series, which promised to bo a very com-
prehensive one. He was glad to see many members inesent who were competent
to discuss such an important subject, and he hoped thoy would favour the Society
with the’ result of their valuable experience.

[22] After a few remarks from Mr. Erasmus Gower, who stated that ho was
then engaged in putting up some furnaces for the Japanese in the province of
Kddzuke (Jdshiii), where there was a considerable bed of ironstone, varying in
thickness from 18 ft. to 8 ft., and needing only to be q^uarried,

Mr. Brunton said that in reference to tho process described in the paper as
being common in Japan, of keeping pig iron in a molten state for a lengthened
time, which sometimes extended to seven days, and by this means producing a
malleable or wrought iron, he thought he saw in this some resemblance to tlie
principle of the Bessemer process as carried out in England. The Bessemer
process consisted of a rapid combustion of the earthy matters and other substances
in the iron, and this combustion was obtained by the introduction of large
quantities of oxygen into a vessel containing molten metal. Although the paper
did not mention the means by which the Japanese maintain the iron in a melted
state, it might be supposed that it was done by blowing air through it with
bellows, but whether this was the case or not, it seemed to him that this practice


( 23 )


of the Japanese was similar in principle to the Bessemer process, as it maintained
the iron for varied periods at very high temperatures, and so consumed the
impurities contained in it.

Professor Ayi'ton remarked that in the paper a description had been given of
the method of making steel employed by the Japanese. Could the reader inform
him whether any of this steel was used to make steel wire of ? He (Prof. Ayrton)
had lately ret^uired steel wire of different thicknesses but the Kdgaku-riyd had
stated that they had been (jiiite unable to obtain any for him, even of foreign
manufacture. Now if Japanese steel wire could be i^rocured anywhere this
difHculty might be overdome.

In reply to this, Mr. Wilkin said that he was not the author of the paper, but
he was not aware that any steel wire was manufactured by the Japanese, though
ho believed copper "wire was to some considerable extent.

Pi'ofessor Ayrton then continued, and said that mention had been made of
the badness of Japanese copper who. Borne of it had at any rate one good
quality, about which he would say a few words. It would probably be known to
many of those present that coi:>per wire was largely employed in the manufacture
of telegraph instruments and submarme cables. Now the wire, like all other
conductors, offered a certain obstruction (or resistance as it was called) to the
l)assag6 of tlie electric current, but this resistance might, for the same lengtli and
thickness of tlie wire, be immensely diminished by increaBing the purity of the
copper employed. Up to the laying of the first Atlantic cable it was imagined
that any extra resistance in the conductor of a cable, produced by impurities in
the copper, could be compensated for by increasing the battery power employed.
Before, however, the construction of the second Atlantic cable of 1865, Sir
William Thomson (whose name had lately been prominently brought , before the
Society in Ciiptain Belknap's paper on Beep Sea Sounding in the Pacific) was led
from purely [23j theoretical considerations to conclude that the commercial value of
a long submarine cable could be doubled if pure copper wire were substituted for the
impure w’irc previously eniidoyed ; for he show'ed that the speed of sending, or the
number of words that could be sent per minute, was c^steris paribus inversely
proportional to the specific resistance of the copper employed, and could not be
increased by increasing the battery power. Consequently those wfiio up to that time
had looked on the systematic electric testing of copper wire as unnecessary had
now become most strenuous in urging its regular adoption, so that at the present
time no coil of copper wire was employed in a submarine cable which had not, by
being x^^‘<5vioualy tested, xjroved itself to have less than the contract resistance.

A number of sj^ecimens of Japanese copper wure, of different gauges, had
recently been electrically tested in this w^ay in Prof. Ayrton’s laboratory, and the
result had been that, while many samples had as much as twenty or thirty per
cent more resistfince than pure copper, and therefore would be quite valueless for
submarine cable or telegraph instruments, other samples had scarcely more
resistance than if they had been composed of pure copper, in a few cases, indeed,


( 24 )

not even one per cent more. Conse(itiently, as far as conduction was concerned,
wire like the good samples would he of great practical value for telegraphic purposes.
The price per pound of both had and good samples was practically the same, and
less, or at any rate not more, than the wholesale price in England of commercial
copper wire.

Mr. Gowland, E.G.S, of the Imperial Mint, Osaka, said that in reply to the
remarks of the last speaker respecting the variable electro-conductivity of Japan
copper, exceedingly high numbers having been obtained in some cases and low
numbers in others, he would state briefly a few of the results to which he had
been led by the chemical and physical examination and metallurgical treatment
of about eight hundred tons of cox)per. The copper of Jai)an as a rule, when
'properly refined in a suitable furnace, ’was calculated to take a foremost place
amongst the various kinds of commercial copper destined for electro-telegraphic or
other purposes where special purity was essential. It was almost invariably free
from the injurious metals antimony and arsenic, as well as from phospjhorus.
Antimony he had never found excepting in traces, and arsenic when present rarely
in larger (^nantities than *03 per cent. In fact whexi the crude copper was
carefully selected and subjected to the Welsh process of refining, the resulting
metal should consist of almost pure cox)per with traces only of lead, iron and
silver. The importance of the purity of copper and of its special freedom from
antimony, arsenic and phosphorus had been exhaustively treated by Matthiessen
in a paper communicated by him to the Boyal Society and afterwards published in
their “ Transactions.” His results were obtained from experiments made upon
impure, pure, and alloyed specimens of copper, the composition of which he had
previously determined by chemical analysis. These results w’-ere opposed to some
experimental [24] results obtained by Sir Wm. Thomson, not however because
the experiments of Sir W. Thomson were imperfectly conducted, but because
alloys of inaccurate composition were supplied to him. The reason, however, why
Japanese copper wire, or copper in other forms, was so variable in its physical
character were these: —

The Japanese were unable to produce uniformly by their refining process, a
pure copper in the technical sense of the term. They could produce a copper as
free from foreign metals as we could by our methods of refining, and thus far as
pure, but they could not produce a coi^per which should uniformly contain just
that proportion of cuprous oxide which was absolutely necessary to give maximum
toughness, tenacity, ductility, and electro-conductivity, and without winch uniform
proportion the purest commercial copper was worthless for most purposes. A
deficient quantity of cuprous oxide or an excess would equally condemn an other-
wise pure commercial copper. Tiie variations in the physical characters of
Japanese refined copper, especially in the form of wire, he had found to be usually
due to excess of cuprous oxide, and not to the presence of foreign metals. The
defects, however, produced by excess of this oxide could not be remedied by any
treatment excepting that of remelting under proper conditions.


( 25 )

Japanese crude copper occasionally contained excess of iron, and also of lead,
metals however which were removed by refining, and when req.uired for the
production of a copper to bo used for special purposes, as for alloying gold in
minting, or for electro-telegraphy, it was advisable to mate frequent careful
analyses in selectiong it.

Eor further notes on Japanese copper Mr. Gowland would refer those
interested to the appendix of the Eeport of the Imperial Mint, Osaka, for the
present year. The copper ores usually worked in Japan yielded from 2J to 12 per
cent, of copper, although richer specimens occurred in small quantities. The
smelting process of the Japanese was one for which he had great respect, fox
although it was rude and yielded hut a small out-turn compared with European
methods, yet he had seen it economically conducted amidst difficulties and in
localities where no other process would succeed. Strange as it might appear, the
principles upon which it was conducted and the chemical reactions which took
place were identical with those of the process followed in Wales at the present time.

The following minerals of iron were worthy of note in addition to those
mentioned in the paper

Magnetic Iron Sand. — A fine Hack sand consisting of more or less perfect
octahedra of magnetic oxide of iron. It occurred largely in the province of Aki,
and was smelted there by native method.

Magnetic pyrites occurred massed in large quantities in several parts of
Settsu, in Omi and Yamato, and, probably in many x^arts of Japan, It occurred in
the interior of Yamato [25] in veins 2 to 3 feet or more iii thickness, mixed with
copper pyrites, jdelding often as much as 12 per cent of copper and being thfen
worked as a copper ore. In Omi it occurred rather extensively, associated with
a rich argentiferous galena and arsenical x>yrites.

The old process of native steel manufacture by melting together wrought iron
and cast iron was curiously interesting, as an almost identical process had been
patented and worked by a Sheffield firm during late years.

The process for manufacturing wrought iron described in the pai>er ax^poared
to he a kind of lengthened puddling process, and must be attended with gi'eat loss
of iron.

\

Professor Ayrton then again rose, and said tliat he had derived much pleasure
from listening to Mr, Gowland’s remarks, especially those connected with the im-
purities which chemical analysis showed to exist in Japanese copper wire. Like
him he had found the wire brittle, but he had to a great extent got over this objeo-
tion by insisting on the wire being carefully annealed before it was supplied to him.
He was afraid Mr. Gowland had somewhat* misunderstood what he (Prof. Ayrton)
had said regarding the action taken by Sir W. Thomson. Prof. Thomson’s con-
clusions regarding the connection existing between the exceed of signalling and the
resistance of the conductor of the cable were based on mathematical reasoning, and
not, as Mr. Gowland appeared to think, on tests of alloys of copper submitted to
VOL. m. — 4.


( 26 )

aim. Probably, after theoretical considerations had led Sir William to see the
immense practical value to be derived from the systematic testing of the resistance
of copper •wire, he might have asked wire-drawers to furnish him with samples in
order that he might see how good it was practically possible to get copper wire ;
^ but the testing of these samples could not in any way affect the results he had
previously obtained mathematically, and to which Prof. Ayrton had referred in his
previous remarks.

The Chairman (Sir HaiTy S. Parkes) then closed the discussion on this paper
with a few observations on the subject generally, and after a few introductory
remarks proceeded to read the second Paper, by Captain St. John of H. M. S,
Sylvia, entitled “ Observations on the Bay of Sendai.”

Mr. Brunton then made a few remarks to the effect that Ishi no Maki had
seemed to him on his visit there a short time ago to he a tolerably clean and well-to-
do town. The bar across the river moufch, however, on which there was not more
than 2 or 3 feet of water, was a great ohstructiou to the shipping importance of
the place. There is no shelter for vessels lying off the mouth of the river, and it
was therefore ejuite unsuitable as a port. There was harbour, however, to the
eastwaa:d of Ishi no Maki called Ai-kawa, which offered good shelter to vessels, being
open only on a very small arc towards the south east ; hut as this harbour was
surrounded by steep hills, it also was useless as a commercial port.

The meeting then terminated in the usual manner.


USEFUL MINEEALS AND METALLUEGY OF THE
JAPANESE.


By a. J. C. Geebts.


[Emd before the Asiatic Society of Jayan on the ISth Novemhei*y 1874.]


COPPER.

[26] LITERATURE:

Kaempfeb. — History of Japan, Book I.

Meylan. — G OS cliiedk undig overzicht van den bandel der
Europezen op Japan. (Transactions of the Batavian
Society, Vol. XIV., 1833, p. 140.)

SiEBOLD. — Nippon Archiv. von Japaniselien Handel, page 67.

Bueg-ee. — Besebryving der Japansche Kopermynen in the
Transactions of the Batavian Society, Vol. XVI., 1836,
page 8, 28.

Stan. Julien et Champion. — Industries, &c., Paris, 1869,
page 49.

Geeets. — Japan in 1871, in the ^*Gids’' 1872, No. 8.

Martin. — Transactions of the “ Gesollschaft fiir Natur imd
Volkerkiinde Ost-Asicns;” No. 4, 1874, page 5.

Gowlanh. — Third Annual Report of the Director of the Imperial
Mint in Japan, in the Japan IVeeldy Mail, November
7th, 1874.

Japanese Technology. — San-kai mei-butsu dzu-kuwai, Vol. I.

Japanese Mineralogy. — Seki-hin-san-sho-ko.^


1 See also the works mentioned on p. 5.


28 GEEETS : USEFUL MINEE^LB AND mTALLDEGY OF THE JAPANESE.

AccordiBg to tli6 Japanes© naturalist Oiio Hctnzci%i coppor was
melted in Japan for the first time in the year 698 A.B. at Inaha in the
province of Suwo, whilst ten years [27] later— in 708— the first Japanese
copper^money ^^Wa^lo-hai-chki'' was cast in the province of
Musashi.^

The different ores of copper in Japan which have come to our
knowledge, are :

— CoppEE Pyeites, Chalcopyeite ^ 5jit ® 0-rm-dd-l(d tho
most important of all Japanese copper-ores. It varies greatly (mostly
between 2-14 per cent) in the quantity of copper which it contains,
although I have found in some fine specimens up to 24^0 copper.
Several samples which we collected in different parts of Japan contain
much less copper than the good copper-pyrites from Devonshire. With
few exceptions, the quality of tho Japanese copper-pyrites cannot be
said to he excellent ; the quantity, however, in which this ore seems to
he found in nearly .every province of this country, makes a worthy
compensation. We sometimes saw bright brass yellow ore, but often
yellow-gray amorphous masses, containing a considerable admixture of
magnetic iron-pyrites and arsenical- pyrites. The old Japanese names
for this ore are: Do-hd-Heki or Haku-iakk Syn. Akagaue-no-

arakane. It forms with the three following minerals the source of
all Japanese copper. Besides there are also several other copper
minerals in Japan, but these are not, or very seldom, used in copper
smelting.

The Japanese copper pyrites of some provinces (Sado, Akita, Ani,
Kosaka in the province of Bikuchiu,. Iwami, Tajima, etc.,) contains a
little gold or silver or both metals, which the' Japanese know very well
how to separate by a liquation and cupellation process [see later under
silver] .

Second . — Ooppee G-lance or Ohalcogite occurs in many places
with copper pyrites, and is used with the latter ore in the copper-
metallurgy. The specimens which we have received constitute amor-
phous masses of a dark gray colour and are of good quality; The


^Wa^nen'kel or Ohronicle of Japan, translated from the Japanese by Prof,
Hoffmann in BiebolcTs Nippon Arehiv.


GEERTS : trSEPTJL MINERALS AND METALLTOGY OF THE JAPANESE. 29

Japanese know very well that copper glance gives a mncli richer copper-
slag than copper pyrites. They often melt it with the latter ore together,
because it promotes the fusibility of pyrites and gives a better kind of
copper. The scientific Japanese name for this ore is ® Ki-dd-kd,
[28] It is not found in such large quantity as copper pyrites, but still
it is far from being rare. It is found in large quantities in the province
of Ugo at Akita.

Third . — VARrEOATED Coppe& Ore or Peacock Copper or Bornite
Ran-clo-ko^ seems to be rarer in Japan than the two former
ores. Burger (1. c. page 10) states that it occurs in large quantities in
Sendai, Nambu, Mount Monoko, where it is smelted together with copper
pyrites. I was not able to find a description of this ore in the above
mentioned Japanese sources, and the Japanese name here given has
lately been coined by Japanese chemists. In many pieces of copper
pyrites out of different provinces, I saw an admixture of peacock copper.
In lyo and Toza especially it occurs in considerable quantity mixed
with copper pyrites. ^

Foiirtlu — Gray Copper Ore or FaJilerz,''
very compound mineral, containing variable quantities of sulphides of
copper, iron, arsenic, antimony, lead and often silver. This ore is not
rare in Japan; we have seen good specimens from Satsuma, Hiiiga,
Cho-shu, Toza, lyo, Setsu, etc. Gray copper ore and copper-pyrites
are the chief ores of Sumitomo’s large copper- works at the mountain
Besi-san in the province of lyo (Shikoku) where the silver is also
extracted by a process of cupellation.

These four ores are the sources of Japanese copper ; the two first
named are the most important for copper metallurgy. The last named
is also of value in gold and in silver smelting. These minerals have
produced the large quantities of copper smelted in Japan since the 10th
century ; they formed the chief article of export of the Dutch and
Chinese at Hirado and Nagasaki during the period 1609-1858. The
quantity of copper exported by the Dutch during that time amounts at
least to more than four millions of piculs, whilst the Chinese probably
have exported a still larger quantity. Besides the use of copper in daily
life for all kinds of household goods, doors of godowns, roofs of temples,
ornaments, temple-furniture, mirrors, smoking utensils, bronzes and


30 GEEB^B : USEEtJL MINEBAIaS AND METALLUBGY OE THE JAPANESE.

especially copper money, has been for many centuries and is still so
common and general, that it may be just called ‘‘ the national metal of
the Japanese.”

[29] We will now mention some otlier Japanese copper-minerals,
which are not used in copper smelting, but find, nevertheless, some
useful applications in other branches of industry or daily life.

Fifth. — Malachite (green) Kii-jakihseld is found mostly

scattered with the former ores, but seems not to be found in any large
quantity. It occurs in irregular stalactitic aggregates of a radiate,
fibrous structure with a silky lustre on the fracture and also in amorphous
masses. An earthy variety of it, equal to our Mountain- fjreen^ is called
SWEoku-sho or IwA-BOKU-SHO, Byn. Seld-roJm, Kon-ron-

rokn. The best kinds are found in the copper mines of Tada in the
province of Settsu, Ani in the Ugo province, Yamashiro-yama in Choshu,
Ashiwo-yama in Kotsuke, Kusakura in the Aidzii district orf the province
of Iwashiro, etc., although very fine kinds of malachite used as a drug
and paint were formerly imported by the Chinese at Nagasaki. Irregular
pieces of fine coloured malachite are sometimes found as an ornament
of the “ Tokonoina*' in Japanese houses.

It is used in the Japanese porcelain-industry as a green porcelain-
paint, and also as an ordinary painting or drawing stuff. It can he
found in the drug shops and is also used as an external medicine against
some diseases of the eye^ and skin. For use in painting, powder of
malachite is. mixed with chalk and w’^ater ; from this paste small half
spheroidal grains arc made, which are known under the name of SilS#
Tama-roku-sJio or Ma^ne-rolai-Hho (Bean-malachite), and which are sold
in every drug-shop. An impure sandy variety of malachite-sand, which
is much cheaper, wdll he found under the name of W Suna-boku-sho
and a greenish- white coloured kind of silicic-malachite (earthy variety),
is sold under the name of ^ H Haku-boku.

Sixth. — Blue Malachite or Azulite or Chessylite (earthy variety),
[Erdige Kupferlasur or Berghlaui\ W S Do-sel-seM occurs in amorphous
earthy masses. We seldom met with fine crystallized specimens. It is
dissolved easily in acids, with evolution of carbonic acid. It should be
found— -according to Ono Banzan — in tlie copper mines of Ani in Ugo,
Tada in Settsu, Ashiwo-yama in Kotsuke ; at Uyeno in the province


ge:eets : useful minerals and metallurgy of the Japanese. 31

of Iga an inferior kind is said to occur. In tke older Japanese works it
beai's the names : §SWKu-SEXor Iwa-konjo, [30] Syn. Gcn^ui^ Seki-
sei, Tai-sei, and is used in Chinese medicine as a caustic against some
diseases of the and malignant ulcers. But the chief use is as a
drawing and painting material.

It should be observed that the name Kon-jo is a common name
used by the common people for the most different him dyes,, such as
Berlin blue, ultramarine, Japanese indigo (Bye of Polygonum tinctorium,
Lour.). This latter substance has, however, its own proper name,
namely, Ean-dek or Ai-no-ori, True Kon-jo is blue copper
malachite.

A sandy variety of this ore is found also in Japan and is called fi
W Hen- SEI or Suna-konjo. It should bo known that, since the introduc-
tion in Japan of European ultra-marine, the name Smia-honjo is also
given by Japanese drug-merchants to this latter substance. Beal Sima-
Icovjo is mountain -blue.

Seventh, — Blue Yitriol, Blue Stone (sulphate of copper) is found
in several Japanese copper mines either as an earthy aggregate, or in
solution as “ blue water,'' both being disintegrating products of copper-
pyrites formed by a long continued action of air and water. The Japan-
ese also know how to prepare this salt by roasting copper-pyrites and
copper slags with free access of air and treating the roasted mass with
water. This salt is, however, very impure and mixed with much
sulphate of iron. It can be found in every drug- shop under the name of
H # Tan-pan or ^ H Seki-tan, Syn. Sei-seJei-shi, Ao4shi-no-ko, Since
the earliest times it has been used in Chinese medicine as a caustic in
eye- disease, blennorrhoea and bites of snakes and other animals. Its
conserving properties for w^ood are also known to the Chinese and
Japanese. Tan-pan is prepared either out of the mineral, or by evapora-
tion of the blue water" in Akita, province of Ugo ; Tokoro-no-
kuchi in Noto ; Satsuma ; Ashiwo-yama in Botsuke and many other
places.

The preparation of cement copper out of the “ blue water by
means of precipitation with iron or zinc, was formerly unknown to the
Japanese but is now practiced in some places.

Eighth. — ^Metallic, Bendbitical Copper (copper moss) i


82 (JEERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE.

nen-do seems to be rare in Japan, according to Burger 1. c. [81] page 8
and Martin Lc. page 5. We Lave seen a few specimens at the museum
in Tokio. It is said to be found in Iwashiro and Eikuchiu.

Ninth, — Bed Copper Ore (euivre oxydule, IIauy) # ^ SeJd-dd-
ho is also found in Japan in company with ochre (brown, ochry
haematite) and copper green (mountain-green). We have seen several
specimens fromHiliga, Satsuma, andNagato. The (^^uantity in which it
is found seems, however, to be very small, although it occurs scattered in
several mountain ranges. It constitutes the mineralogical guide for the
Japanese miners, for they consider it as the chief criterion for good cop-
per ores and learn from this mixture of copper-green, iron-ochre and red
copper where to construct mines. The Japanese miners call it sometimes
Take, The experts of mines believe they can determine d priori the
q^uality and quantity of the copper ore which will be found in the
mountain, if they have examined the colour, the grain and other
properties of 7jake, Thus the directions in which the mines are to he
laid out, and the degree of declivity of the mine-roads, are chiefly
determined by the occurrence of this mineral.

These are the Japanese copper- minerals known to us. We will
now describe the metallurgy of copper, since the 16th century such a
valuable branch of industry in this country. It will in future remain an
industry of the highest interest for Japan. It is true, many of the very
old mines, worked for several centuries, commence to be exhausted or
at least give, by their long mine-roads and thin veins, so much trouble
in bringing the ore to light, that they do not pay the cost of working.
But in a country like this where copper-ore, and, especially, copper-
pyrites, is found in nearly every province, new mines can be opened
after proper borings and mineralogical surveys. The exhaustion of a
few very old mines does not by any means involve the exhaustion of the
Japanese soil. Exaggerated as were many of the old accounts of the
enormous wealth of Japan, the opinion that the sources of copper-ore are
also exhausted seems equally erroneous, because Japan has for
centuries and without interruption been able to export copper, this metal
having never been imported into this country. The relatively large
quantity of copper exported by the Dutch and Chinese from 1609 to
1858 is small when compared with the [32] quantity of ore existing in


GBERTS : USEFUL MIKBBALS ANU METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE. 88

different parts of . the country. We think, however, that for giving
practical results and pecuniary profit to the explorers of new mines,
three principal changes will be necessary in Japan.^

First , — Better ordinary roads throughout the whole country and
especially in the mining districts.

Second , — Liberal mining laws on the same basis as those in
Western mining countries.

Third , — The introduction of Western knowledge, Western experience
and Western machinery in working the mines, in removing the mine"
water and smelting the ores.

The first point is so, clear to every European that it is unnecessary
to dwell on it. It would seem, however, that the Japanese Government
is not yet convinced of this truth. What is the advantage of a few
miles of railway for the thirty-five millions of an agricultural people, if
even provinces so fertile as Kiushiu remain without good ordinary roads
on which the numerous products of agriculture, the fisheries, mining and
commerce can be transported on wheeled vehicles ? A great many
products cannot now be brought to market, because the cost of transport
by means of pack-horses, oxen or human labour costs so much
money and time. In Kiushiu, one of the most fertile and prosperous
islands of the Japanese Archipelago, the roads are generally m a
deplorable condition, and have become much worse since the abolition
of the daimiates. To convey ores or metals over considerable distances,
good roads or canals are matters of vital necessity.

The second point should also be a question of serious consideration
with the Japanese Government, because the present mining laws are
mimical to the interests and welfare of the country. There is no good
reason why mining companies should not he formed from the union of
Japanese and foreign capital, if these companies work under the supervi-
sion and control of the Government, so far as the stipulated royalty or
percentage on the net proceeds, and the sanitary police are concerned.

The third point we believe also to be necessary in order to secure

' 8 In the very interesting report (1879) of Mr. B. S. Lyman, who visited in
1878-79 most of the mining districts of lapan, we find the same remarks, although
he is of opinion that many of the copper mines now worked must rather give loss
instead of profit, on account of the veins being too thin.

VOL. in.— o*


34 GEERTS : TTSEFTJL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE.

good practical results. It is true that the Japanese [33] methods of mining,
but especially of smelting, are in a high degree laudable and practical,
considering that only a small outlay of capital is wanted. But their
methods are defective when compared with those at present employed
in Europe, and also if we compare the quantity of metal obtained with
that which could be obtained. Much metal always remains in the slag
and stones which are cast away. Even until the year 1600 the
Japanese did not separate the gold and silver from the copper ores
which contained these metals.

Burger has already described with much accuracy the manner in
which the Japanese work their copper^mines (1. c. page 14-99). Every
one who has seen a Japanese coal-mine may learn from this how all
other ores are dug, for, in Japan, there is no difference between the
processes. On a greater or less, though generally on a moderate, incline,
the Japanese miner digs at the foot or in the middle of a mountain his
chief entrance, and is guided by his omnipotent yake as to the direction
of the subterranean incline. As soon as he meets with veins of proper
richness, he follows the direction of these veins. If the veins seem not
rich enough, he digs steadily in the first or in another direction to meet
with the main lode of the mine. Perpendicular shafts are not sunk by
the Japanese in search off the ore. If the mine has a considerable length
and depth,' they sometimes construct small perpendicular ventilating
shafts, as the air is not sufficiently renewed if there is only one opening.
These air shafts, which unite the inclined road with the top or side of
the mountain, cause a better draught of air and are therefore called
skakuhachi (a kind of flute) or ka^e-mawashi (wind wheeler). In most
mines however these air shafts are wanting, and in these cases the
miners often suffer much in health from the effects of bad ventilation.
The quantity of carbonic acid is sometimes so great that the flames of
the small open mining lamps are extinguished. The greatest labour of
the Japanese miner, however, is spent upon the removal of the water
from the mine. The means resorted to for [34] this purpose are very
primitive and insufficient, and the daily and nightly labour of more than
a hundred men is often required to keep this enemy at bay. It some-
times happens that the whole mine has to be abandoned, when the water,
especially in April and June, has flooded the mine unusually and


(3-EBRTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF T3TE JAPANESE. 35

demands excessive labour and expense to remove it. A number of
defective bamboo and square wooden pumps, together with small
hydraulic foot wheels, constitute the only machinery for removing the
water. The combined system of sucking and forcing pumps, used in
Western mines, is not known in Japan, whilst the use of steam as a
motive power has as yet been introduced in but very few cases.

To bring the ore to light, the Japanese miner goes to the mine in the
morning with a primitive kind of Boman lamp, consisting of a shell or
small basin filled with oil, and a wick made of the pith of a, kind of rush.
He detaches the ore with two kinds of instruments, one of which closely
resembles our double cutlass, the other being a mining chisel and
hammer. The ore is nearly always extracted in small pieces to prevent
the falling down of the inside of the mine, though proper care is taken
to support it by wooden stays. A straw or bamboo basket receives the
ore, bat cannot contain more tJian 80-00 lbs. of mineral. The filled
baskets’ are then dragged along the often long and steep incline of the
road by means of a straw rope bound round the body of the workman or
of women or children. Some times the baskets are carried on the backs
of the miners. The wages paid to the miner are mostly according to
the weight and quality of the haku-uht (ore) brought out by him. The
ore is cleaned from the adhering stones by hammering, mostly clone by
women and children. Thus prepared it is ready to be roasted. The
roasted ore is then powdered and afterwards melted, till the so-called
hlisteml co 2 ^per {schwa r^Jaqrfer — Jap. ara-do) is obtained. In former
times this ara-do was sent to the Imperial copper refining works at
Osaka. Here it w^as lengthened and refined to get pure bdr copper”
(tough or poled copper — Jap. Sao-buld-do). [35] Lately the art of
refining has been better understood in the provinces where the ore has
been dug and smelted. This industry still fiourishes, especially in the
districts round Osaka.

The extraction of copper from the ore in Japan rests principally on
the same basis as our Western continental copper smelting. The
melting process according to the most complete Japanese method, called
Eitsu-huM, is divided into several sections, but there is some difference as
to the number of subsequent meltings in different parts of the country.
The following melting processes are used at Osaka.


36 GEBBTS : TJSEBtTL MINEBALS AND lIETALLimaY OE THE JAPANESE,

1, — Calcining or roasting the ore to expel part of the sulphur,
arsenic, 'water, etc,, and powdering in order to obtain the black powder
Kiidzxh.

2nd, — ^Fusion with silicate (ashes) to remove the oxide of iron
formed by the roasting process, to convert at the same time the oxide
of copper, formed by the roasting, into copper sulphide, and to obtain
finally a coarse metal {Simrstein) Jap. ^ KAWA-no^Sheave copper,

8rd. — Calcination of the coarse metal : (a) to convert the still
remaining parts of sulphide of iron into oxide of iron : {h) fusion with
some of the clay of the covering to remove the whole of the iron in the
slag : and (c) boiling the metal to expel the sulphur as sulphurous acid.
^ ^ ABA"r) 0 =::Crude copper. .

4th. — Befining, to remove the cuprous oxide and bring the copper
to tough-pitch. Tough copper, bar copper, K Ma-buki-do and
^ ^ SAO-BUKi-i)o=Copper melted bar.

1st, — Boasting the ore.

The dressed and coarsely powdered ore is calcined in a rude kiln
[YaJd-gama) of about 25 metr. in length 2 in breadth and H metr. high.
The kiln is covered with a shed, and, near to the bottom of it, has
many openings for the entrance of the air. On the bottom of this
furnace a layer of dry wood is placed, then a layer of ore, and thus
alternately wood and ore till there are five double layers. Fire is then
placed below, and the whole left for a period of 20-25 days. Part of
the sulphide of iron is converted into sulphate of iron, by absorbing
oxygen at the beginning of the roasting, and tliis sulphate is afterwards
decomposed by a higher temperature, evolving sulphurous acid and
leaving oxide of iron. A very small portion of the sulphide of [86]
copper is also converted into oxide of copper, so that the roasted ore
consists actually of a mixture of oxide and sulphide of copper with
oxide and sulphide of iron. During the roasting of the ore dense white
fumes constantly escape from the furnace. The Japanese are rightly
afraid of this poisonous * copper smoke,’ and very seldom resort to the
place where the copper is burning so long as tliey perceive it. It
contains often arsenions acid, antimonious oxide and always sulphurous
acid, sulphuric acid, etc., all more or less poisonous substances, which
have an intensely destructive effect upon the vegetation of the neigh-


GEEBTS : XTSEFUL MINEBALS AND IHETALLTTRGY OP THE OTAPANBSE. 37

bourhood. 'When the fire is extinguisbed and the furnace cooled, the
coarse copper slag is taken away to be powdered and to undergo the
second operation. In the powdered state it is called Kudzit. It will
be remarked that the roasting process of the Japanese is very rough,
and constitutes one of the reasons why they do not obtain as much out
of their ore as would be possible with a better system of furnaces.

2ncL — Fusion loith silica of the hearth-ash to obtain coarse metal
(Kaiva-do).

The roasted slag is sometimes, but seldom, mixed with loam or
ashes if the original ore does not already contain a sufficient quantity
of quartz or silicial stone. The whole is exposed to a much stronger
charcoal fire in order to get the slag fused. The small quantity of oxide
of copper in the roasted slag acts upon the sulphide of iron still present
in the ore, forming sulphide of copper and oxide of iron. The quantity
of oxide of copper in the roast slag is, however, too small to decompose
the whole of the sulphide of iron. This excess of the sulphide of iron
now combines with the sulphide of copper to form a fusible compound,
which separates itself from the slag and runs to the bottom of the
furnace. The oxide of iron combines with silicic acid and forms a slag/

The furnace for this operation consists merely of a nearly hemi-
spherical hollow made in the ground, and has a peculiar thick round
bottom. This cavity is surmounted by a square chimney of bamboo
and loam. The chimney is open on two sides up to a [87] height of
6 feet, and closed on the two other sides like ordinary forging hearths.
The hearth and cavity (crucible) are formed of a mixture 'of fire-proof
clay, charcoal and buck-ashes. The nozzles of a pair of bellows are
inserted into one of the sides of the furnace at some small* distance
under the upper border of the same. The powdered roast slag, either
mixed' or not with ashes, is put into this furnace on the ash-hearth, the
whole covered with charcoal, and heated until the mass is in a state of
fusion. The melted black metal, consisting chiefly of sulphide of iron
with sulphide of copper, is received in the cavity at the bottom. From
time to time the silicic iron slag is removed from the surface of the
molten metal, the coarse metal is cooled superficially by a little water
and taken out of the cavity in the form of discs. In this state it is
named Kaioado or sheave copper.


88 0EERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OP THE JAPANESE.

8rcl. — Calcination of the coarse metal^ fusion xcith a claxj covering,
and expulsion of sulphur as sulphurous acid, in order to obtain blistered
copper {Ara-dof

The coarse metal of the former operation is now placed with
charcoal in cavities (thick crucibles) of fire-proof clay and buck ashes
fixed in the ground and surmounted by square chimneys similar to
that already described, and heated. A strong current of air is then
directed upon the metal, and the latter is stirred with an iron rod to
facilitate the oxidization of the remaining parts of the iron sulphide.
The cavity is then covered with a thick plate, made from fire-proof clay
and sand. The joints are plastered with a mixture of clay and buck-
ashes, and, after drying, the whole is heated strongly. The remainder
of the iron is absorbed as oxide by the slag, tlie latter being produced
by the clay and buck-ashes of the covering plate and cavity. The
tempei’ature is raised gradually until the heat is as intense as possible
and the metal commences — as the Japanese say — “to boil..” This
‘ boiling ' is caused by the action of oxide of copper upon sulphide of
copper in a strong heat. By this action metallic copi^er and sulphurous
acid gas are formed, the latter escaping with violent ebullition from the
molten mass. After the ebullition, [88] the temperature is again raised
to ensure the complete separation of the copper from the slag. The slags
are removed and the metal is finally cooled with a little water and taken
out of the cavity in the form of sheaves. It bears the name Ara-do=
crude copper ( Fmcgh blistered copper : Germ. schvarz-Jmpfer) and is
now carried from the melting place into the refinery.

4th. — Refining to obtain dry coppjer {GaarAtiipfer) (Ma-buld-do).

The two following operations were formerly practised at the
(rovernment Refinery at Osaka only ; but are now common in all the
provinces.

The blistered copper obtained by the foregoing process still con-
tains some quantity of iron, sulphur and often a small proportion of tin,
lead, arsenic, etc. To remove all these impurities about 150 kilogrammes
of the metal are placed in cavities of fire-proof clay and buck-ashes
similar to that already described, the whole is covered with charcoal,
and air is allowed to pass over the surface of the melted copper. By
these means small quantities of iron, tin, and also of copper are


GBBETS : tJSEFUL MTNBEALS AND METALDITKaY OF THE JAPANESE. B9

oxidized, and form witli tlie'" silicic acid of the liearth or ashes a slag
which floats upon the surface of the melted copper. At the same time
any remaining traces of sulphur are removed as sulphurous acid. The
slag is constantly removed with long iron ladles until the surface of the
metal remains pure. Finally, a little water is thrown upon it to
produce the solidity of the upper x^ortion, so that a sheave of copper
may be taken out of the cavity. This is repeated until the cavity is
empty. The cakes of dry copper thus obtained still contain an excess
of cuprous oxide, which is removed in the following manner. In the
stage last described it is called by the Japanese Ma-buk:i-do=“ often
melted copper” ( Gaar-hiipjer),

5th, — Casting the bar cupper [tough cop^par) [Sao-hvki-do),

In order to obtain the fine Jax>anese bar copper, which has a just
reputation for its purity, tlxe dry copper of the former process is smelted
in q[uantities of from 80 [89] to 85 kilos in loose crucibles of fire-proof
clay. The copper is covered with powder of pure charcoal in order to
reduce the small (quantity of sub- oxide of copper contained in the dry
copX)er. This x>ortion of sub-oxide makes the copper brittle and must
therefore he partly at least removed if copper of great tenacity is req^uired.
The whole of the cuprous oxide is not to be removed, because copper
which is perfectly free from the sub- oxide does not possess the maximum
of toughness, a fact which the copper smelters in England fully
recognize, taking the greatest care to avoid ‘ underpoled ’ as well as
^ overpolcd ' copper. When the metal is liquified and all the impurities
have been carefully removed from the surface, it is cast in iron moulds
which are divided in 10-12 bar- forms, or sometimes also into square
cakes. These moulds are ^flaced in imrni water and are then filled with
liquid metal. As soon as the bars or plates are solidified, they are taken
out of the moulds with a pair of pincers and immediately put for a short
time into the vapour of boiling-water. By this means — which is not
resorted to in Europe^ — the copx>er bars or plates assume the beautiful
high red colour characteristic of Japanese bar copper. It now bears the
name of Sao-buki-do, i.e., copper melted in bars. If the roasting has


Europe a very small admixture of lead is sometimes used in order to
obtain a fine red colour for the bars or plates.


40 aEEETS : useful MINEEALS and METALLUEGY of the JAPANESE*


not been sufficient, there remain some traces of arsenic in the bar copper
which make it brittle and greatly depreciate its commercial value. If
the copper ore — as is the case with many kinds of copper pyrites and
grey copper ore— contains enough gold or silver, the coarse metal
obtained from the second operation is worked in another manner in the
refineries. We will describe afterwards the process of separation of
these precious metals, which consists of a liquation and ciq)eUatio7i
Ijvocess, in the “metallurgy of silver.”

Eanzan states that copper is found and smelted in more than 40
provinces of Japan. Our diiferent Japanese sources and my own
observations give the following places as the most interesting ( vide
Japanese Mineralogy [40] Seki-Un-san-sho-ko^ 2 voL, and Ko-san-sei-
ran-sen or Short Indication of the chief Ore-bearing mountains).

Provinces. Districts. Places. Besiarks.

{ Chalcopyrite mixed
with much iron
pyrites.


Yamato


Yoshino-gori


Kawamata-mura . . i

Imai-mura |

Nakatsu-ga wa-mur a

Arako-mura !

Sakamaki-mura and
\ other places


In all 24 places, b'
• mostly thin unwor
able veins.


fKawabe-gori Tamida-mura, Ina-

Settsu .......

Yabe-gori..


[Muko-gori


j'Ishidzure-mura,

Ise

Inabe-gori

J Haruta-yama.

1 Humata- shinmachi -


( mura.

Mikawa ....

Yana-gori

Abe-gori


Suruga ....


/Taki-gori .


Gunjo-gori


Hatasa-mura,

Jiino J

Mugi-gori ,

^ijikawa-mura and

Kamo-gori

Kaki-no-mura.


nami-do-mura.


iPuwa-gori


'Obalcopyrite with iron
pyrites and galena.


G^BERTS : USBEUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OP THE JAPANESE. 41


Provinces. Districts. - Places. Bemarks.

Omi Gamo-gori Kita liata-mura.


Hula


Shinano ....


/Ono-gori . . , .
Yosliiki-gori
"iMasliida-gori

f Siiwa-gori .

( Pakai-gori . .


Shokawa-mura, SM-'
ra-kawa-no-go ....


J Kamiyoka-mura . . , .
( Wasa-ho-mura . , . .

rMasbe-miira

" Takame-mura, Dogo*
( san


Chalcopyritewith gray
copper ore and galena.


Yoko-gawa.

Ogo-miira.


Shiniotsiche . . Aso-gori


I Chalcopyrite witli

* variegated copper
ore ; yields about 500
piculs copper a year.


Iwaki Kdrita-gori Obara-mura.

'Kusatsu-mura
Gamo-mura.

Sliitaya-mura . . .

Itani-mura.
Shimotani-mura.
\Onnma-gori One mine.


Xxoashiro .


Aidzu-gori . , . . .
1 Kawanuma-gori


and


/ Associated with zinc
‘ 1 blende.


Rikuzen . . . . .(Tamatsukuri-gOri
(Kami-gori


Hllc’uchia . .


Mutsu


Uzen


'Kadzuno-gori
Waka-gori

\

Sannohei-gori .
^Tsugaru-gori ...

I Murayama-gori .

Mogami-gori . . .
Tagawa-gori . . .


Vgo


'Akita-gori . .

^Semboku-gori


j Naniko-mura.
(Motoyama.
Miyazaki-mura.


/Osaruzawa


Nigorigawa-mura.
\SMrane, Oyu-mura.
JYuta-mura.

( Y amaguclii-mura.

jYago-mura.

( Daikoku-mori-yama.
Ikari-gaseki-mura.

f Tanuki-inori-mura.

\ Sachibu-mura.
‘NTinami -yam a-r.iura.


/Large mine; yields
about 5,000 piculs
copper a year, cbal-
copyrite with born-
, ite and zinc blende.


' Ani-do-san andKago-
yama

^Kasuda-mura


/Large mines ; yidld
about 6,000 or 7.000
piculs copper a year,
besides 1,600 piculs
lead and some
silver and gold.


Yamatani , Kawa-
saki-mura.
Arakawa-mura.


VOL. III.— 6.


42 aEEETS : USEFUIi MINERALS AND ^METALLURGY OF THE JARANESB.
Provinces. Districts. Places. Bemarks.


JVakasd .... Oi-gori Hojiri-mura.


YecJiizen .... Ono-gori


/ N alcashima-mura . , \
Kadono-mura ......

Hosono'guolii-mm’a .

^ Waka-ubulco-mura. ,

' Kami-aldbivmura . . (
Hakogase-mtira ....

Kami-daina-mui'a ..
VAIigiirasM-mura


Old and important
mines, said to pro-
duce tlie best copper
of Japan, fine chal-
copyrite with some
silver and • lead
glance.


Kaga ...... Nomi-goii


Yusenji, Kanabira-
mura


Fine ore ; yields about
1,000 to 1,200 piculs
copper a year.


Yechm , h[ikawa-gorz ...... Inamura.


Yechigo


Kambara-gori


XTwonuma-gori ....
,Mishima-gori


^Kusakura |

Funa-uchi-sawa.
Ofcani-mura.
Kase-mura.
i^Nishi-mtira.
Imokawa-mura.
Masa-niura, Nodzumi-
mura.


Yield about 1000 to
1200 piculs copper
yearly.


(Island). Hamoohi-gori Toyoda-mura


Ohalcopyrite with some
gold and -silver.


Tango Kasa-gdn,<

Tajima .... Asaku-gori
Inaha

[Kata-gon


Yu-goii


Idztmo . . . .s


Shimane»gori

Tatenui-gori


^Kando-gori .


f Kanazald f Ohalcopyrite with

I Nobara. \ galena

raisS”""-*

Gin-zan-mura, Gamo. Very poor ore.
Mitsunioto-inura.


/Higashhiwasaka-
mura

^ Adalcaye-mura , . .

^^XJshirono-tani . . ,

Shimo-ub ewo-mur a.
KawasMmo-mura.


Udo-mura


[ Copper pyrites and
copper glance ; yearly
produce about IdOO
i3iculs coarse copper.
'Yearly produce about
700 piculs coarse
copper.


'Copper pyrites with a
little silver ; very
good mine; yearly
produce about 4000
, or 5000 piculs.


GEEBTS ; ESEFTJL MINEBAtiS ANT) METAEI.EKGY OE

>1'


Peovinoes. Distbicts. Places.


Iwami


{


Nima-gori


Kano-ashi-gori ....

Oclii'gciri

VMino-gori


{ Sama-miira, Gin-zan
i MiMyama, Sliorenji .
(Kombu-yama


fToyokase-miira,
'[ Sasagatani ..
Otobara-mura.
Tsumo-mura.


Ilarma .... Jinto-gori


Hisbi-obata-mura.


Ulimasa'ka


/Kume-nanjo-gori . .

4 Kiime-bokiijo-gori . .

Sai-saijo-gori

lYeta-goii


Sbimo-Bikayamate-

mura.

'Kume-kawa.

Minami-mtira,

Horii-kami-jnura.

Sbimo-bara-mura.

Poge«mura.


Bizen


( Akasaka-goi’i
Wage-gdri .


Toshiya-mura. . . .
Sliimo-nibo-mura
Nisbi>naka-mnra

Ida-mura

i^Yamagiicbi-mura

Aidaue-mura.


I

)


Bitchiu


Aid


j'Kawakami'gori ..

Jobo-gdri

^Kayo-gdri

. . Takamiya-gdri ....


fPuldya-inura \

\ Maniyama-mura . .

( Kawaseld-mura . . . . ^
|Nagasbiro-mura. . . . ^
Yama - no > kami-mii -
ra. >

Sliimo-fukagawa-mu-

ra.


Suwo ...... Knga-gdn Putaka'yama.


Naguto Amu-gdri Zomeki-mura


Kii


'Miiro*gdri

■ Ita-gdri

Hitaka-gdri ........


Yosbikawa-mnra . .

J Amano-mnra

(Maruyaina

lyatanbmnra ......


Aw a (Sbiko -
ku)


'Oye-gdri .
MiotO'guri

■ Mima-gdri


\Miyosai-gori


Kawada-yama .....

Tf- .

I Handagucbi-yama.
Jin-riyo-mura . . . . .


THE JAPANESE* 48
Eemaees.

Old and celebrated
silver mines which
also produce some
copper.

Copper and arsenic
mine.


Fine copper pyrites.


Fine co};)per pyrites.


Copper pyrites with
bornite and gray
copper ore ; fine cop-
per.


^Clialcopyrite with
bornite ; yearly pro-
duce about 1000 ta
1100 piculs coarse
, copper.

Copper pyrites with
- iron jjyrites, poor
veins.


Copper pyrites with
iron pyrites. Hone
of the copper mines
seem to be very
promising.


44; GBEETS : USEFUL' MINEEALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE*


Proyinoes. Districts.


lyo Dma-gori


Places.


Betsu-sM do-zan . . (


Bemabks,

join and very large
copper mine (tlie
largest in Japan) ;
copper pyrites as-
sociated with iron
pyrites anji gray
copper ore ; seems to
he the most pro-
fitable copper mine
\ of Japan.


Tosa


fHata-gori Kami-tanoknchi-mnra.

(Agawa-gori Yastii-miira.


Oldhigo .... Kosuma-gori Yokoyama-mura.


Bimgo


Hipo


Iliuga


'j Copper pyrites asso-

f nnn-/ 5 -,it-T J Ohira-ko-san [ ciated with tin ore,

® * ' * * ( Kiura-ko«san j iron pyrites and

J arsenical pyrites.

[ Poor veins of chal-
cop^'ite with iron
pyrites and mis-
piokel.


'Mashild-gori

' Kami-mashiki-gori
^ Shimo-mashiki-gori


Asliikita, and several '
other places.

do

do


Copper pyrites. The
veins seem to he poor
and the copper
mines not in a flonr-
ishing state.


Takachiho


Knradka-mxira and] Small, olcl, and, as it
several other - seems, not profitable-
places. J mines.


[Takarashima.

Batsnma , , , . ICawahe-gori ...... j Hekami— yama.

(Sagiga-saki,

[41] This list shews at how many different places copper has already
been found in Japan. It will not astonish us that copper and also gold
and silver have been exported from this country on a large scale since the
Japanese first came into contact with Europeans in about 1545. These
large quantities of metal must have been found and smelted in Japan,
because no Japanese history speaks of the import of these metals.® We
have endeavoured to estimate the quantity exported out of this country

®With the exception of some silver ducats imported in 1769 by the Dutch, and
some veiy old copper cash imported in ancient times by the Chinese.


GEEETS : USEFUL MINEEALS AND METALLUBUY OF THE JAFANESE, 45
• *

by examining the journals kept by the old Butch factory at Besima.
Although we cannot guarantee the following numbers to be exactly correct,
still we can Touch for their being tolerably so.


PERIOD.

THOUSANDS OF PICULS

ANNUALLY.

TOTAL AMOUNT IN PICULS
EXPORTED (mediums)

1609-1692

25 h 30

2,810,000

1693-1713

30 h. 31

640,500

1714-1720

15

105,000

1721-1742 ,

10

220,000

1743-1751

6

54,000

1752-1763

11

132,000

1764-1789

8

208,000

1790-1796

5

86,000

1796-1819

8

184,000

1820-1831

11

182,000

1882-1858

7

189,000

Total in this x^eriod of 249 years J

4,209,500 piculs.


[42] Mr. Gowland in his very satisfactory report (l.c.) of 1874
states, that as a rule Japanese copper is exceedingly free from the
.presence of injurious metals. Out of thirty-eight analyses of different
samples of Japanese copper he made the following summary : ‘‘Sulphur,
“ silver., lead and iron were present in small and varying proportions, in
“ every case ; in one specimen however an abnormal quantity of lead
“ existed. The whole of the samples were remarkably free from the
“ specially injurious metals, antimony and arsenic, antimony being pre-
“ sent in only one specimen, and then only in faint traces, while the
“ maximum amount of arsenic oiAy reached 0.057 7o> it

“ was either absent altogether, or the merest traces only were found.”

In the rectangular cake copper (dry copper ma-huJd-du)^ Mr. Gow-
land found, as we did, an excess of cuprous oxide.

We only analysed throe different kinds of bar-copper, and found in
each of them traces of arsenic, besides some sulphur and iron.

The average composition of Japanese crude copper, made up out of
the numerous analyses by Mr. Gowland (1. c.), may be stated as follows:


46 &BERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METAI.LUR0Y OF THE JAPANESE*


Copper ..
Lead

Sulphur...

Iron

Silver ...

Arsenic

Antimony


98.940

traces.

0.947

0.101

traces.

traces.

absent.


99.988

We must advise the commercial community to make a careful dis-
tinction between the different kinds of Japanese copper, there being some
of a very impure character, as for instance the copper plate-roofs of
Japanese temples, which are very impure and mixed with lead. Bar-
copper (Sao-buki-do) is the purest of all Japanese coppers.

The Portuguese from 1550-1039 exported chiefly gold [43] and
silver. The total amount exported during this period of 89 years we
estimate to have been at least ^659^ millions sterling. Meylan,® who
has written an excellent account of the ancient trade of Japan, estimates
the yearly average to have been about d6000,000 sterling; whilst
Kaempfer and other writers speak of some years in which the Portu-
guese exported as much as £2^ millions sterling annually.

The Dutch exported in the first years of their trade silver and
copper. The foregoing table shows the copper export during the period ,
1609-1858. It will he seen that after the year 1713 a considerable
decline in the copper trade took place. From 1640-1 G71 a considerable
quantity of gold (obaa and koban) was also exported by the Dutch.
In the year 1671 the export of silver was prohibited by the Japanese
Government,

The Chinese exported probably a nearly equal quantity of copper
during this period. It is impossible for us to give an exact account
of this trade. We must accept the statements of many former chiefs

^Meylan. Handel der Eiiropezen op Japan. Trade of the Europeans in
Japan, 1833.

History of Japan. Book II. Gap. III.

VaUntyn. Oud, en nieuw 0. Indie ; Beschryving van Japan V. deel II. afd.

Siehold Nippon Archiv YI.


GEEETS : USEFUL MINEBA.LS AND MBTALLUEGY OP THE JAPANESE. 47

of Desima and those of Von Siebold, who tells ns (1°) that in 1790 the
the export of copper by the Chinese aniouuted to 18,000 piculs, at which
time the Dutch could only obtain 5,000 piculs as back-freight ; and (2^)
that the average amount per annum exported by the Chinese may be
estimated at 15,000 piculs. According to this estimate the total amount
of copper exported by the Chinese was not less than 8,785,000 piculs.
We think, however, the estimate of Yon Siebold to be too low. The
Superintendent of the Government Copper Eefinery at Osaka told Yon
Siebold^ that the yearly 2 >i'Ocl action of copper about the period 1880
amounted to 50 to 00 thousand piculs. We were also informed by
Sumitomo, the proprietor of the largest copper works in [44] Osaka,
that in the neighbourhood of that place alone more than 40 thousand
piculs of copper were smelted yearly. According to the government
statistics there were exported in 1878 25,000 piculs of copper, whilst
the medium j^early produce of copper in Japan during 1874-1878 is
set down as 7,679,619 lbs. having an estimated value of 1,805,584 yen.
It seems thus that the quantity of copper produced yearly remains pretty
stationary, and that nowadays, as in Siebold’ s time, about 60 thousand
piculs copper are produced annually.

JAPANESE BEONZBS.

The Japanese name for bronze is ® ^ Kara^hane (Chinese metal)
and shows that the art of smelting this alloy was originally taken from
the Chinese. Japanese bronzes contain copper and tin as the chief
constituents, together with a little lead, zinc and iron.

Although Chinese bronze must have been known in Japan for a
very long time, still the art of casting bronze guns and muskets must
undoubtedly liave been learned by the Japanese from the first Europeans
with whom they came in contact (the Portuguese, English and Dutch).

The Japanese historians® without exception, give to the ‘‘Nan Ban
Jin (Europeans) the honour of inventing fire-arms and contradict the
common report in Europe that the Chinese were the first to discover
gunpowder and fire-arms. The prince of Bungo was the first one in


s Nippon Archiv, VI., page 68.

®Tsu-kai hu-yo-ben-riyo. Manual of military art, etc.


48 ^EEBTS : TJSEETJL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE.


Japan who possessed hre-arms, a few being presented to bim by tlie
crew of a European (Portuguese ?) vessel, which happened to come to
Funai in his province. In the year 1548 the manufacture of gunpowder
and the handling of fire-arms was taught to the Jaiianese by the crew
of a Portuguese ship which happened to anchor near the island of Tanega^
shima. It is probable that this is the same vessel in which Ferdinand
Mendez Pinto came to Japan. The Japanese, however, speak in their
history of two Portuguese named irura-shuku-sha and Krista Mota^^ as
the persons who first brought in the knowledge of gunpowder and fire-
arms. There still exists among the Japanese a kind of fire-arm called
Tanegashima.’'

The clever pilot William Adams, who came to Japan in 1600 as first
mate of the Dutch ship de Ltpfde, and w^ho [45] died in 1621 after
having lived 21 years in this country, got an appointment as ship-builder
and gunnery-instructor from the Shogun’s Government. Later on (from
1648-50) a Dutchman, W. By lev eld by name, and three Dutch marines
(A. P. Spelt, H. Yan Elsfort and J. Scholten) lived in Yedo, and
instructed the Japanese in the manufacture and manipulation of guns,
muskets and gunpowder. The following table gives the result of our
analyses of four different gun-bronzes. These old guns were admirably
cast, and shew the cleverness of the Japanese in being able to found
mch pieces of metal without the aid of western machinery.

Sf ost of the large bronze guns which were placed in former times on
the fortifications 6f many harbours in order to keep away the feared
foreigners, have now been removed and sold as old bronze to Eutopean
merchants^, so that this metal will now very likely have been metamor-
phosed into different kinds of western machinery and steam engines.
New Ejiiropean steel-made guns have taken the place of the large
bronzfj guns in Japan.

!|}he constitution of old bronze guns cast in Japan after the year
1600 1 is as follows: —


Siebolffs Atlas will be found a copy of a Japanese i^rint where these two
Porltuguese Diego Keimoto and Chistoval Borallo are represented with their muskets.


GEEETS : USEFUL MINERALS AND MBTALLUEGY OF THE JAPANESE. 49


Ingredient

per cent.

Large

gun

Battery,

Long and
small
gun.

Yery long

gun.

Large

gun.

Copper

87.8

88.8

88.7

88.9

Tin

9.8

7.2

7.1

7.1

Zinc

1.5

—

—


Lead

1.4

2.6

2.7

2.8

Iron

Traces.

1.4

1.5

1.7


The amount of iron is very probably due to impure copper. Lead
and zinc are perhaps added purposely, although it is possible that the
tin used for smelting contained these metals, as Chinese and Japanese
tin is often impure.

The Japanese bronze does not differ much from the old European
bronze, as can be seen by the following table, [46] representing the con-
stitution of some European kinds of gun-mctal.


Gopiicr Tin,

Old French guns 90.1 9.9

Prussian guns 90.9 9.1

“ English guns 91.74 8.26


The slight difference proves that the formula for casting Japanese
guns has been given by the above named Europeans. A French chemist,
Boux, has analysed Chinese gun metal and found.


Copper.

Tin,

Zinc.

Iron.

Lead.

Old China gun 71.2

—

27.4

1.4

—

Old mortar from

Cochin China 88.1

8.2

7.1

1.6

—

Old gun from

Cochin China 77.2

3.4

6.0

1.2

18.2


It will be remarked that the Japanese gun bronze resembles much
more our old western metal than the Chinese alloys.

Another French chemist, M. Morin, published lately also several
VOL. m. — 7.


50 GEEKTS : USEFUL MINEBALS AND METALLUBGY OF THE JAPAHESE.


analyses of Climese bronzes and obtained nearly tbe same results as M.
Roux. (See Bulletin de la SocieU CJmnigue de Paris^ 1874, No. 11,
page, 519.)

We have also analysed specimens of old Japanese bronze from vases
and ornaments and found : —


1st, 2nd, Srd, 4th,

Copper 85.8 83.70 71.00 78.48

Tin 8.9 5.38 . 5.50 7.18

Lead 4.7 7.80 20.85 18.07

Iron 1.1 0.65 1.84 1.10

Arsenic traces. • traces. ... traces.

Zinc 1.85 1.34 5.18


Tbe relatively large quantity of lead is perhaps added to promote
the malleability and plasticity of the alloy.

JAPANESE BEASS.

Brass (ft S Shin cliiu) was formerly made in Japan by smelting
copper, zinc and zincblossom (a hind of very pure zinc ore imported
from China). Banzan gives the following formula ; —


Copper [47] 70

Zinc 50

Zincblossom (Eogan-seM) 48


168

We have analysed a specimen of yellow Japanese brass and found
Iron traces. '

Copper 67.1

Zinc 82,9


100.0

At the present time brasses always obtained by founding only cop-
per with zinc (without zinc ore.) Probably there are in Japan several
varieties of brass with variable quantities of copper and zinc. In 1878
there were rumours current in the mercantile community that the old
Japanese (cash) contained a considerable quantity of gold. At the
request of a mercantile firm we analysed two kinds of cash, one being


(JEERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE. 51

r

150 and the other 100 years old. We did not find a trace of gold, hut
on the contrary a considerable amount of impurities in them, consisting
of sand and clay.

The oldest ^eni contained : —


Copper 82.0

Lead 7.0

Tin 5.6

Zinc 4.1

Iron 0.2

Sand, etc 1.1


100.0


( S2 )


DESCEIPTION OP A TEIP TO NIIGATA, ALONG THE
SPIINSHIU-EOAD AND BACK BY THE MIKUNI PASS.


By J. a. Lindo, Esq.


[Read before the Asiatic Society of Ja^mn, 18th November, 1874.']

[48] From Yedo, Niigata may be reached by two different roads,
both of which follow for the first part the Nakasendo, the one as far as
Takasaki, and the other up to Oiwake, which is 12 ri farther on. From
Takasaki the first road branches off N. over the Miknni pass to Niigata.
At Oiwake the Nakasendo itself bends to the S. while the Hokkokukaidd,
as it is called, runs W. to the borders of the province of Echigo, and so
reaches Niigata.

Both roads running together up to Takasaki, a short description of
the Nakasendd may first be given.

The annexed itinerary gives the distances of the several villages
between Yedo and Takasaki, between which a daily coach is running,
leaving each place in summer time at 6 a.m. arriving at 7 p.m. at the
other, so that the trip is made in 14 hours.


[49] Pkovince of Musashi.


Yedo to Warabi 4 18 cho.

Urawa 2

Omiya 1

Tenjinbashi 1 4 cJid.

Ageo 1 4

Okegawa 1


<


LINDO: DESCRIPTION OF A TRIP TO NUG-ATA.


68


KOnosu

Kumagai

Fukaya


1 ‘‘ 80 oU.
4 “ 18 “

2 “ 85 »


Yedo to Fukaya


20 ri 1 ch6.


Hoi)j6


Province op Musashi.


2 ri 81 cM*


Pro^tnoe op Joshixj.


Shimmacbi
Knragano .
Takasaki .


2 7^ 7 cli6»
1 10
1 “ 19


Total distance between Yedo and Takasaki 27 82 clw.

The Nakasendo between Yedo and Taksaki is in a tolerably good
condition ; I estimate the breadth to vary between 10 and 40 feet ;
except near Todamura no very steep inclines occur, and without great
expense at least this part of it could be easily made a really fine road.
The chief difficulty would be as regards some of the villages where the
road has in many cases a minimum breadth ; but outside the villages it
extends through flat arable land, for the greatest part cultivated with
corn, rape seed, beans, etc. (while paddy fields are rare), and it would
certainly be no matter of great difficulty to appropriate here and there
a strip of these fields along the existing road, and to widen it in this
way.

At Todamura the Todagawa is passed by means of a ferry boat^ .
The Todagawa is the same river as the Sumidagawa ; like many other
rivers in Japan, its name is often changed ; higher up it is called Ara-
kawa, about 2 ri lower down from the village of Sumida to Bi6goku-
bashi, [50] Sumidagawa, and below Eiogokubashi it ultimately becomes
Ogawa, When I passed the Todagawa in May, 1878, 1 estimated the
breadth on the water line to he about 50 metres (165 feet) ; the velocity
of the current being small, so that the discharge must have been small
too. But after the rainfall of September and October of last year, I


64 UNBO: DESOEIPTION OF A TBIP TO NIIO-ATA,

heard that the river had swollen to an enormous degree, 'and had
overflowed its banks, part of the Nakasendo being inundated, and the
passage being for some days almost impossible.

From Sakato to Kumagai the Nakasendo runs along the top of
the left embankment of the Aragawa. Between this embankment and
the river-bed is an extended piece of arable land, and the river-bed is
only seen at a distance. It has here already quite the character of a
Japanese upper-river, in which may be seen more gravel and stones
than water, and .the piers, bank-defences and other river-works are all
constructed by means of material extracted from the river, while on the
lower parts of the river they consist entirely of wood.

Between Fukaya and Honjo the Nakasendo is sufficiently wide, but.
there are some steep inclines ; here the scenery becomes picturesque and
full of variation f exhibiting arable land wifch farms covered with flowers,
the latter even extending to the top of fche houses, which w^ere overgrown
with a blooming kind of hyacinth ; and Buddha- temples calmly .situated
at a little distance from the road at the end of a neatly paved alley ;
groves of matm and bamboo and those magnificent siuji trees, of which
often two, three, or even four, grown together at the lower part of their
trunks, are the principal features of this part of the road.

Honj6, like Konosu and Fukaya, is a very large place, but had
been burnt down for a great part a month or so before my arrival.
Here is a very prettily situated temple on the top of a hill, from which
there is a splendid view over part of the Tonogawa valley, the nearest
village on the Tonegawa being Tanakamura, at 1 ri distance. Along the
foot of the hill a brook is running, in which [61] naked men and children
were occupied in drawing up, by means of small baskets, a small kind
of fish, called fima. which is boiled and dried and sometimes used as
medicine, though it is also used as common food.

A little before arriving at Shimmachi, from which place a road
branches off to Tomioka, which has a large silk manufactory under
French superintendence, the Kannagawa bed is passed. This riyer is
the boundary between the provinces of Musashi and Joshiu. Such
remarkable points as this seem to impress the people : at least both
times I passed hero, my jinriJdsha coolie turned round to communicate
this fact to me. The Kannagawa falls to the right into the Karasu-


LINDO : DESCBIPTION OF A TKIP TO NIIGATA. 55

/

gawa, whicli in its turn falls into the Tonegawa at Gori6. Not a drop
of water was to be seen in the Kannagawa ; the river looked like a
gravel desert in the midst of the cultivated lands ; one or two small
rustic bridges were laid across the now dry channels.

At Iwabana, the Karasugawa itself is passed by means of a boat-
bridge ; as the river is very shallow, the boats are moored to baskets
loaded with stones, lying at the bottom of the river. The Karasugawa
is navigable here only for very small boats, being, as has already been
said, full of waterfalls and very shallow. At Iwabana is a large prison,
situated on the river, the loft bank of which rises here almost per-
pendicularly to a height of about BO feet above the water level.

From Iwabana the Nakasendo, not much broader than a footpath,
winds through arable lands until Kuragano is rcached~a place situated
on the right bank of the Karasugawa, a little above the mouth of the
Kaburakawa, on which Tomioka lies. From Kuragano a road branches
off to the right to Nikko. Between Kuragano and Takasaki the Naka-
sendosis in a very good condition, being about 30 feet wide, well-drained
and shaded by a row of matsu trees on each side. It has here quite the
aspect of a European road, with richly cultivated arable land on both
sides, bordered by low hills in the distance.

Takasaki is a large town, 68 miles from T6M6, with a gloomy
looking Daimio’s castle, and with a flourishing trade. It lies on the
confluence of the Karasugawa and the Usuigawa. Both these rivers
proceed from the mountains in the neighbourhood of Sakamoto.

As mentioned before, from Takasaki one road branches off in a
northerly direction to Niigata, while another leading to the same place
still follows the Nakasendo to Oiwake. I shall first describe this latter
road, known at Niigata by the general name of Shinshiu Kaido, in con-
sequence of its passing through the Province of Shinano or Shinshiu.

The following is an itinerary of the principal places which lie on


this road.

Yedo to Takasaki ..27 n S2ohd,

Amiaka 2 24 **

Province of Josliiu Matsuido 1

^Sakamoto 2 19 “


56


LINDO : DESCRIPTION OP A TRIP TO NnGATA.


Province of Shinano


Province of Echigo


Karuizawa

2 »

35

Kutsnkake

1 “

5

Oiwake

1 ‘‘


Komoro

2

18

Tanakamnra

2 “

18

Uyeda

2

18

Sakaki

3 ‘‘


Yashiro

3 ‘‘


Nagano

4 ‘‘


Aramachi

1 ‘‘


Mure

3


Furuma

2 »


Nojiri

1 »


Sekigawa

1 “


Sekiyama

3 »


Takata

5 ‘‘


Kasugashinden

2 ‘‘


Kuroi

..... 1


Katamachi -

2 ‘‘


Kakizaki

2 “


Hassaki

1 “

18

Omigawa

2 “


Kujiranami

1 “


Kasiwazaki

1 “


Miyagawa

.... 3

8

Shiiya

.... 0 “

24

Ishiji

2 “


Idznmosake

1 <<


Yamada

2 ‘‘


Teradomari

2 ‘‘


Niigata (directly along

the


coast) from Teradomari

10 “


Total distance between Yedo and Niigata, along the
Shinshiu Road


106 ri 3 cJio,


liINDO: DESOEIPTION OF A TBIP TO NIIGATA. 57

After passing tlie Karasugawa from tlie left to the right bank at
Takasaki, the left bank of the Usiiigawa is followed up to Sakamoto.
The Usiiigawa is not navigable so high up ; its heel being covered with
stones between which the rapid stream works its now through one, then

through different channels, over which rustic bridges are built. The scenery
becomes more and more beautiful, and after having passed Matsuida,
we are soon in the mountams. The Kakasondo is practicable to this
point for jinrlldsha, with two good coolies to draw them up the steep
inclines. For wagons drawn by liorses this part of the Nakasendo is
impracticable ; such wagons could not advance further than Takasaki.

’ ‘ The valley of the Usiiigawa becomes with every step, as it were,
narrower and more pictures{xue ; the mountain slopes on both sides of
the river are covered in early summer with a' carpet of hloomingfuji
flowers, which form, with the dark green of the aKyi trees, the rapidly
running streamlets, falling from the mountain slopes and crossing the
road, the winding Uakasendo itself, and the charmingly situated
mountain villages everywhere at a distance, a really fine picture —
drawing forth some admiring remarks even from my interpreter.

The Japanese mountain villages have, at least in the districts
wdiich I have seen, a cpito different aspect from those in the plains.
They consist chiefly of a row of houses on each side of the road, thus
forming a street which constitutes the whole village. The houses are
notable by their 'wooden roofs, on which blocks of stone are laid, and
ilieir poor and dirty appearance.

About rt from Matsuida the Usiiigawa is crossed over a bridge,
and here a straight road with 100 houses [54] ])lacod on both sides of
it, enclosed in a narrow valley forms the village of Sakamoto.

The next part of the Nakasendo is very interesting ; it ascends now
rapidly, jlnrlldsha are out of the question, and if one does not wish to
he tortured in a kar/Oy nothing remains but to walk or to go on
horseback. The scenery is fine, particularly in May, when fiiji and
azaleas are in full flower ; at every step the view of the surrounding
moimtaius and valleys changes, and especially that of the valley in
which Sakamoto lies is surprising. The highest point is reached at
Togemachi, about 2 rl from Sakamoto. I estimate the height of this
point, according to very roughly made barometric observations, at about


68


LINDO : DESCKIPTION OP A TKIP TO NHOATA. ,


1,000 meires (3,800 feet) above the sea level. Here is the border
between the provinces of Joshiu and Shinano, and at the same time the
separation of the lands which drain into the Tonegawa. Pack-horses
and female pilgrims form the bulk of the travellers on this part of the
road.

From Togemachi the road descends rapidly to Karuizawa, a poor
village on the extended plain surrounded by mountains, on which Hie
volcano of Asama yama is situated. Over this plain the road is more
interesting than beautiful; the place is covered with large blocks of lava,
thrown up by Asama yama, and has a very desolate aspect. Only the
western, very smoothly ascending slope of Asama yama is very nice to
look at, being covered here by a wood of matm trees : the large and
isolated mountain produces the impression of Grulliver with the
Lilliputians. Smoke is always issuing from the crater of Asama yama.

At Oiwake, situated at the foot of the mountain, the Niigata road
leaves the Nakasendo ; while the latter descends, the Niigata-road (called
Hokkokukaido), follows the table-land along the foot of Asama yama, and
is practicable here for jlnriJdsha, The average breadth will be about
12 feet ; some steep inclines are met with, but the way is generally well
shaded ; in the valleys rice is cultivated. ri from Oiwake is Komoro,
a large town situated on the Chikumagawa ; it was formerly the [55]
residence of a tlaimio^ whose castle is now in a dilapidated condition.
From here the road follows the right bank of the Chikumagawa down
to Yashiro. The Chikumagawa is the same river as the Shinanogawa,
which flows at Niigata into the Japan Sea. I believe the name is
changed between the villages of Hakura and Miyabara, where it enters
the province of Echigo ; hut I cannot say this for a certainty ; in the
course of this paper some further data about the river will be given.

Generally speaking, the road between Komoro and Tanaka is in a
bad condition, rugged and narrow, and in some parts with steep inclines
and sharp curves ; from Tanaka, Uyeda can be reached by jinnJcisha»
XJyeda is the largest place which I had until now passed ; it has an
important trade, particularly in silk, both raw and manufactured.
Numerous shops with European provisions are to he found in this ox-
tiamios seat, and a Eiiropean-modelied garrison patrols the streets of
the beautifully situated town.


^LINDO: BESOEIPTION OP A TRIP TO NIiaATA. 59

The general features of the Chiktimagawa yalley between Komoro
and Yashiro are a picturesgiue scenery, the valley alternately widening
and narrowing, while the broad river-bod in the depth is covered with
white boulders, over which the blue water rapidly flows and forms
numerous falls ; the mountains on both sides covered with flowers and
trees, (Every now and then a dirty village without a single comfortable
looking house.) At a little distance from the left bank rises the Bosha-
yama, a haunted mountain, with which the following romantic ” story,
as my interpreter styled it, is connected. In former times during a
war between two princes, the nurse of the infant son of one of them
“ took refuge in the mountains with the child and kept it concealed
there from the rapacity of the conqueror. At length both nurse and
child died, and nowadays during tho night, the nurse’s voice may at
times be heard among the mountains, calling for tho lost child I ”

If ail Japanese “romantic” stories were as romantic as [5 G] this
one, the Japanese might really he called a naively innocent people.

After crossing tho Chikumagawa from its right to its left hank, the
Hokkokukaido follows the left hank at a much greater distance, along
the mountains, as far as Mure, where it separates from tho Chikuma-
gawa valley. At Tambajima the Saiga wa (left tributary to tho Ohikuma-
gawa) is crossed by a bridge of boats. Every boat of this bridge is
moored to a heavy iron chain of Japanese manufacture, reaching from
one bank of the river to the other. At both sides it runs over a windlass
by which it may be stretched if the water in the river ri*ses, v/hile boats
may be added when the river thereby considerably increases in breadth^
For the rest, all these rivers have the same characteristics ; they look
like large stono flelds, of which in summer time only a comparatively
small portion serves for the flowing off of the water. But the Saigawa
'discharged even now a considerable volume, though the river was at a
low level. Judging from the Japanese maps, it seems to be the princi-
pal tributary of the Shinanogawa.

One ri from the place where the Saigawa is thus passed, lies Naga-
no, a large town with the renowned Buddha temple called Zenkdji,
situated at the end of the long, broad and regularly ascending street, by
which Ithe place is entered. This is one of the finest temples I had yet
seen ; it is well kept, and is admired for its beautiful wood carvings.


60


liINDO: DESCRIPTION OE A TRIP TO NIIGATA.


Tlie site of tlie temple is mtioli like Asalmsa at Yedo. It is sui'ronnded
by a great many iMdoro (stone lanterns) and by some very neat priestly
dwellings witb well arranged gardens. ‘

In tbe mountains, at a distance of about 1 ri -from Nagano,
petroleum wells are found ; they have only been worked for two years.
The wells are about 120 to 150 feet in depth, and are entirely under
Japanese management. The petroleum is twice purihed, once on the spot
and afterwards in the town : it is by no means as white as the American
oil, but the Japanese maintain that the light is splendid, which assertion,
when the light is compared ’with that of their andon, may well be true.

At Mure the road branches off in a W. direction, thus leaving the
Chikumagawa Valley, and now runs to Furuma, from wdienco it bends
N. to Sekigawa, the frontier-place of Echigo. The prettiest spot on this
part of the road is Nojiri, a place situated on the Fuydko lake, which is
surrounded by low hills covered with thickets. What rendered this
"beautiful spot all the more impressive for the time at Iqast, was a heavy
thunder-storm which overtook us here, and which formed a curious con-
trast with the snow-covered mountain tops we had been sighting since
leaving TJyeda, in a N, W. direction.

The small Ichigawa river forms here the border between Shinano
and Echigo; it is here but a i* mountain- stream rushing forth with great
velocity over rocks. Between its steep and densely grown high borders,
it is crossed by a rustic bridge of singular construction.

Between Sekigawa and Sekiyama (8 ri) the road is entirely shut in
by mountains, and when it rains heavily, it has sometimes more the
appearance of a stream than of a road, with not even a footpath to bo
seen. It passes zigzag up hill and down hill, with very steep inclines,
and is one of the most charming parts of the road between Yedo and
Niigata. The slopes of the high hills are grown all over with azaleas
and other flowering shrubs — one valley leads over the top of the hills into
another, and when looking upwards from the bottom of those beautiful
valleys with the blue and white, thundering and foaming streams, all
hastening to the Sekigawa, one cannot help being moved dee^fly.

After Sekiyama the country becomes much flatter, but the road
remains awfully had, especially between the villages of Matsusalii (2 ri
from Sekiyama) and Arai (1 ri before reaching Takataj, where it is very


LINDO: BESCEimON OF A TRIP TO NHOATA, 61

rugged aud full of holes. At Aral the road descends into the valley of
the Arakawa, a left tributary of the Sekigawa ; here the road becomes
much better, smoother and shaded by a row of trees on both sides.

[58] Takata is the first place which is reached in Eehigo ; this
extensive town is situated on the left bank of the Sekigawa, a little way
down from the mouth of the Arakawa, which was crossed from its right
to its loft bank by a wooden bridge. This Arakawa is about 100 feet
wide; there was a rapid stream running and the river was impracticable
for navigatioiii Takata consists properly of one street, which bends
itself repeatedly at right angles, while between two bendings a straight
part stretches as it were to the horizon. All tho houses are equally low
and built in the same manner, with a verandah or covered way sup-
ported by wooden columns placed at nearly equal distances from each
other. The upper story of the houses projects in many eases over the
ground-floor till in a plane with the columns. These verandahs serve
to keep a free passage during the wint(u’, when the street is sometimes
buried under 5 or 0 foot of snow. But they give a very monotonous
appearance to tho dull and silent town. They told me here the place
contains 5,000 houses. The principal business of tho people is cotton-
weaving, and the town abound>s with drapers’ shops.

Between Nagano and Takata no bamboo is to be seen ; at Takata
there is a very small kind, which seems to be the case throughout
Eehigo. On this part of the road, too, all pack-horses we saw were
mares, which is certainly an exception to tho general rule ; bulls were
also much used for transport purposes.

At Takata the road passes to the right bank of tho Sekigawa; the
river was much swollen by the rainfall of tho ])revious day ; a right
tributary of the Sekigawa is crossed at Kasuga-sbinden, and about 1
rf downward the Sekigawa Hows into the Japan Sea near Imamaohi.
Kasoga-^hinden was reached hy jinnkhhai the road between Takata and
Kasuga-shindeu being tolerably good. To tho left there are large
paildy-fiekls ; to the right the way is bordered by farms, separated from
the road by high hedges and broad ditches. From the latter the water
is carried off at several places across the road to irrigate the rice fields ;
and as" only a plank or the trunk of a tree [59] is laid over these
road crossings for pedestrians, the jlnrUmha had to be carried across.


62


LINDO: DESORIPTIOK OF A TRIP TO NHOATA.


At Kasnga- shin den we parted with jinrildBlia^ not to see them
again till Sliibnkawa (8 ri from Takasaki) on our way home, excepting
four or five broken ones at Niigata.

From Kasuga-shinden the road goes for some distance along the
right bank of the Sekigawa to Kuroi, situated on the sea-shore near the
mouth of that river, opposite Imamachi. From Kuroi we followed the
sea shore up to Teradomari ; on those parts where is a beach there is
no road properly speaking, but the strand is used as such, and one has
the difficult choice of either dragging oneself through the thick dusty
sand in the burning sun, or of having one’s limbs tortured in a kayo.
Fortunately there happened a circumstance which left me no choice at
all, as not only all our luggage but also the kayo had to be carried
by women and even young girls, the male population of the villages
being almost without exception fishermen ; and though it was not
perhaps directly to their pecuniary advantage, I had to refuse in most
cases the help of a kayo and to walk my way, One kayo was carried
by three, and another by four women at once. At longer or shorter
distances the beach is bordered to the right by hills, sometimes grown
with shrubs and dark pine-trees and consisting of hard clay ; at other
places there were downs of sand, grown with grass. Sometimes the
hills border the sea, leaving no beach between, so that the road passes
over them. This is first the case between Kuroi and Kakizaki, where
the hills are very low and for the greater part built, on both sides, with
houses and farms. Between Kakizaki and Hassaki the beach forms
the road, and it was at Kakizaki that for the first time luggage and kayo
were borne by women. The villages between Kuroi and Hassaki are
all poor in appearance and dirty. Hassaki is situated at the foot of
tolerably high hills and close to the sea ; from here the road passes over
the hills to Kujiranami ; the hills are grown with shrubs and flowers
and cultivated, the higher parts with corn, the [60] lower with rice,
while the road itself is not much more than a footpath, winding with
steep inclines through the hills. Every now and then a beautiful view
is to he had over the blue sea, with the island of Sado about 18 n
distant.

Between Kujiranami and Kashiwazaki, a large town, the road lies
at some distance from the sea and through a somewhat flat district.


LINDO; DESOBIPTION OF A ^EIP TO NIIGATA.


6B


Here we met witK several nicely dressed xiersons and whole families,
who were going to occupy the different tea-liouses along the road in the
villages we had passed, in order to wait upon the squire of the village,”
who had been on a travelling tour and was now expected back. What
was meant by the squire of the village” I could not make
out. ,

Kashiwazaki being a town, and, as it seems, a prosperous one,
coolies could here be had to carry our luggage and kago. Between
Kashiwazaki and Shiiya we followed the beach, which is hei*e very
broad and bordered to the right by barren sandy hills ; the sand of
which the beach and hills consist is of a dark grey colour ; the beach
slopes in a steep incline to the sea; therq is here under ordinary
circumstances a difference of seven English inches between ebb and
flood tide, according to daily observations, which are made also at Niigata.

Shiiya 'is situated very much like Hassald, i.e. close to the sea and
at the foot of a hill. I should not advise any one who is going to make
this tour to spend a night at Shiiya, at least if he wants to sleep. It was
perfectly impossible for me to shut my eyes for the barking and howling
during the whole night of these antediluvian Japanese dogs, which
seemed to be aware that a company of strange people had entered their
village : at least this is how my host ex|flamed the terrible noise they
made.

From Shiiya to Teradomari the road runs almost without exception
over the beach, and through some well-to-do looking places, of which
Idzumosaki, the principal one, is 1 rl in length and is situated close to
the sea. Teradomari is also a long prosperous town with some very
good hotels.

[61] As I was with some Government officials we were waited
upon at the entrance of every place by some of the local yakimin, who
walked before us through the village, or led us to a tea-house, according
to circumstances. It was interesting to note the different degi*oes of
respect wuth which we were waited upon in the various localities
through which we travelled. In general the politeness and submission
increased with the distance from Yedo, yet there was sometimes a
marked difference between two succeeding places. Moreover it may be
considered as a rule that in the large villages and towns much less notice


64 undo: description op a trip to niigata.

■vvas taken of us than in the small villages : in some o£ the towns, in fact,
there was nobody to receive us, though we were going to take our tiffin
or to stop for the night (which was alwa^^s notified the previous day),
so that we had to look and ask ourselves for our hotel. Eat along
the beach there was the same servile submission wherever we'
passed.

The most ridiculous reception we met with v/as at Teradomari, at
which place we were waited upon by six yaknnin, each armed with a
small sword, portable ink-pot and pencil, pipe and tobacco-pouch stuck
in his girdle and a small stick his hand. One of them walked before us,
the others following. The foremost cleared, as it were-, the street with
his stick ; children were taken up and put softly down into the
neighbouring houses, the inhabitants standing in front of their houses
were ordered to kneel down; by the incessant cry of m'via,
horse-leaders were ordered to take care of their horses, which were as
quiet as possible, but, frightened by the noise of tlie yakiinin, began
to kick and trample ; and passors-by were ordered to take off their
hats, at the cry kasa, kam'' As the village was veiy long, at last
nobody was to ho seen, and the street appeared as dull as if it had died
out; hut the most curious incident of the day was the furious look and
the cursing “ cMku-sIiO /” which the yaJninin cast upon a cock, which
dared to crow at the very moment we passed !

From Teradomari the road follows the beach to Niigata, but my
way led inwards to the Shinanogawa through the cutting which the
Japanese were in the act of making between the sea and that river.
That the Japanese aro not afraid of making large ground cuttings, the
neighbourhood of Yokohama will show, but this Teradomari cut is the
most remarkable one I have seen. It was originally undertaken to draw
off part of the Shinanogawa water from Okodzu (on the river) directly
to the sea. The cutting has a length of more than five miles, of which
about nearly two aro in the hills ; the highest hill to he cut through is
260 feet over the intruded water level. Generally the ground consisted
of layers of scale clay, in the beginning very bard, but becoming soft
after having been exposed for some time to the air. In many cases the
layers of clay are separated by thin layers of sand. The works have since
been stopped, as too much money would bo necessary to complete them


LINDO: DESCRIPTION OF A TRIP TO NIIOATA. 65

in such a manner as to make the canal prove really useful to the river,
which would only bo the case at very high floods ; in other cases it
would do more harm than good to the river.

Okodzu, the river- terminus of the canal, lies 15-J ri from the mouth
of the river at Niigata ; it is a small village, hut has lately somewhat
improved by the cutting of the canal.

Between Okodzu and Niigata the Shinanogawa is enclosed between
good embankments, which, with the exception of two or three iDlaces,
leave no space between them and the river. At Okodzu a small river,
called Nishi kawa, separates from the Shinanogawa to re-unite with it
at Heijima* (about 2 ri above Niigata). This river was dug in olden
times for irrigation purposes for the lands W, of the Shinanogawa. At
Dokin (2 ri below Okodzu) another and mlich more considerable part of
the water separates from the Shinanogawa ; the river separating here is
’called Naka-no-kuchi kawa, and reunites with the Shinano at Ono (3 ri
above Niigata). I think at low water this river even draws a greater
quantity of w’^atcr from tlie Shinanogawa than remains [G3] flowing
through the latter, the Naka-no-kuclii being shorter than the Shinano
between the points of separation and re-uniting, the water has a greater
velocity in the former than in the latter, and the river being moreover
deeper, most of the down-going boats go by the Naka-no-kuchi.

Formerly this river separated from the Shinanogawa at Oshima,
where the two rivers are now separated from each other only by
an embankment; the Naka-no-kuchi was then only a small brook,
even of less importance than the present Nishi kawa ; but about
150 years ago tbe part between Ddkin and Osbima was dug and the
existing part widened to its present state, probably in consequence of
inundations along the Shinanogawa, hut I could not clear up this point.
In those times, too, the Shinanogawa flowed through the now dry bed of
the Furu-Shinano, as it is called at present, between Osbima and
Idoba, over a length of about 9,000 feet ; but by-and-by it changed its
course by breaking in the right bank until it formed the sharp double-
curve which is now to be found between those two places.

The minimum depth of the Shinanogawa may he stated to he 8 or
feet at low water ; but this minimum only exists in some places,
while in general the depth is much greater, and I think that by the
VOL. HI. — 9.


66


LINDO: DESCKIPTION OF A TEIP TO NIIGATA.


construction of well arranged works the river might be so far improved
as to allow ships of 6 feet draft to come up as far as Okodzu, and
perhaps to the extensive town of Nagaoka (6 ri above Okodzu).

Between Okodzu and Niigata the course of the river is generally
speaking parallel to the sea coast at about 5 or 6 ri distance from it.
This comparatively narrow strip of land between the river and the hills
along , the sea coast is irrigated by the Nishi kawa and the Naka-no-
kuchi kawa, whereas at this side there are no feeders of the Shinano-
gawa. There are many of them at the right side of the river, ail
proceeding from the hills, which are at some distance from the right
hank. The principal of these confiuents arc : — 1, The Imamachikawa,
also called Kariyada-kawa, coming from Nagaoka, length about- 8 ?7‘,
[64] mouth at Ozaki ; 2, the Igarashikawa, length about 8 mouth at
Sanjo; it discharges a good g_uantity of water; 8, the Kamo kawa,
coming from Takemura over a length of 4 r?‘, mouth at Kaino-shinden ;
4, the Ko Aganogawa, connecting the Aganogawa with the Shinano
mouth at Sakayamachi.

Owing to these additions the discharge of the Shinanogawa varies
naturally between the points of conEueuce with the different tributaries.
The following itinerai-y may prove interesting. To facilitate com-
parisons I have added the corresponding figures for the Bhine at the
Netherlands frontiers : —


Discharge second in cubic feet»

Name of Diver. Loio Water. Ordinary Circes. High Water.

Shinano at Okodzu 9,000 15,000 170,000

Shinano at Niigata 12,000 22,000 200,000


Bhine in Netherlands Frontiers ... 47,000 86,000 896,000

In ordinary circumstances tbe water level is at Okodzu 88 feet
above the sea level ; hut the water has been known to rise there to 10
feet above this normal state.

The following are the principal places situated on the Shinano
between Okodzu and Niigata, beginning from upwards : —


Sanjd (i") distant 8 ri from Okodzu. '

Kosudo (r) “ 5 “ Sanjo.


J^INBO: BESCBIPTION OF A TBIP TO NIIGATA.


G7

Sakayamaclii (r) “ Kosudo.

Ono (1) “ 2 Sakayamachi.

Niigata (1) ‘‘ 3 “ Ono.


Okodzu to Niigata 15J- ri measured along the

river. They have in general a poor appea^'ance ; the chief industry
consists in cotton weaving.

All along the Shinanogawa rice is cultivated \ also, though in a
lesser degree, corn, beans, ai plants (of which a kind of blue pigment is
made, used in colouring dresses), cotton, rape-seed, etc. These latter
articles are cultivated on higher parts of the ground, bordering the dif-
ferent rivers, while the interjacent lower parts are used as paddy-fields.
Probably the higher situation of those parts [65] which immediately
border the river embankments, may he accounted for by the absence of
embankments in previous years, when all tlie sediment whicii tho river,
when inundating its banks in high flood, carried along, settled nearest
to those banks, while the more distant parts only received clear water.

Niigata is situated on the alluvial ground between the river
mouth and a range of low sandy hills or downs W. of it ; it is regularly
built and has a neat appearance ; the population, it is said, amounts
to 00,000. It is, or was, renowned for its beautiful '‘tea-houses,”
and princes from several parts of the country used to visit the place for
tho sole purpose of amusing themselves. Like Takata, the houses are
provided with covered ways or verandahs,' which offer an agreeable
shelter, in winter against the snow, in summer against the burning sun.
The lowest temperature occurs at the end of January or tho beginning
of February, the thermometer falling to — 9^0, the highest

temperature in the shade, during tho last days of July, 1878, amounted
to 33. C. (about 92*^ F.) When the weather is settled, in summer time
during the night a land breeze always blows, while daily at about
9 a.m. a sea breeze sets in. In winter N. and N. W*. winds prevail,
interrupted by storms from S.W. to N. W., when, as soon as the wind
changes to N., fine weather is re-established. I am indebted for the
above data to Mr. Weber, who is a resident at Niigata and who makes
daily meteorological observations.


68


LINBO: DESOBIPTION OF A TRIP TO NHOATA.


To all appearances Niigata is splendidly^ situated for trade ; the
Sbinanogawa being almost the only highway for goods-trafic in Echigo,
all goods which now go by pack-horses overland from the staple-places
of trade, would be sure to go to Niigata if only that place were provided
with good harbour accommodation. The bar which now lies before the
mouth of the river and which has this year even silted up in such a degree
that only 5 feet of water remains in the channel, is the cause that the trade
of Niigata has in the last few years almost entirely disappeared ; and there
can be little doubt that the constructions of suitable piers over the bar
would prove, in every respect, a profitable undertaking. Echigo is,
as the Japanese say, one of the richest provinces of Japan, boasting
indeed of never having suffered by famine, while all other provinces
have done so. The export trade from Niigata would certainly become
important. The iindernamed are the chief productions of this rich
province :

like, throughout the province, but particularly at Suyebara.

Tea, at Muramaehi, Murakami and Midzu.

Ai (blue pigment), at Suyebara.

Copj^er, at Yabiko, Toisbi, Otani.

Coal, at Akatani.

Petroleum, at Midzu, Kanaya, Garamold, Koguchi, Tatemura,
Yoshimidzu, Aida, Nio-bo-ji, etc.

At Midzu there is a jet of gas issuing from the ground, which is
lighted to the general amusement of the visitors to a tea-house, built
expressly for the purpose, on the spot.

SWe is cultivated at Goshen and Joshiu.

Hemp, at Chiujo and Manoshiro.

Moreover fish is much exported, of which in the first place, I
mention salmon, which abounds in the Sbinanogawa between Ono and
Heijima ; and wooden clogs are exported by long files of pack-horses. ’

Besides the common fruits and crops a small kind of apple is grown
in Echigo, which, if not plucked before being half-ripe, according to
Japanese custom, is very savoury and fragrant.

Following the coast N. E. of Niigata over a length of about 3 rl we
come to another large river mouth, being that of the Aganokawa. This
river, though generally much wider than the Shinano, does not discharge


LINDO : DESCBIPTION OE A TBIB 10 NIIGATA.


69


such a large volume of water as the latter ; a good portion of its water
flows from Sawa-umi, situated at about 4 ri from the mouth, through
the Ko Aganokawa into the Shinano. In former years the Aganokawa
had no separate mouth, but flowed through what is now called the
Shin kawa, parallel to the [67] coast, to unite with the Shinano opposite
Niigata, whence both rivers flowed into the sea by one single mouth.
The consequence was, that a much larger volume of water being
discharged, the channel over the bar had always a sufficient depth for
navigation, being in fact never less than 20 feet, as is reported. But
probably in order to prevent inundations along the Aganokawa, it was
resolved upon, 170 years ago, to lead its water directly to the sea, by
cutting through the hills which border the sea-coast, near the place
where the Aganokawa bended to the S. W. to unite with the
Shinano.

Echigo was divided between several princes (I believe there were 11
of them) ; to one of whom belonged the Sbinanogawa mouth, while the
new Aganokawa mouth came into the possession of another. In order
to prevent the trade of Niigata from being transfexTed to Matsu-ga-saki,
which lies at the mouth of the Aganokawa, and of which fear existed
(as, owing to the greater velocity of the current at the Aganokawa
mouth, its depth would probably he greater than that of the Sbinanogawa
mouth), a treaty was concluded between the two prihees, in which it
was stipulated that junks would never ho allowed to load or unload at
Matsu- ga- said, and would only be permitted to anchor in the Aganokawa
mouth in case of had weather, A guard-house was built near the coast
to watch the interests of Niigata, which was only removed last year,
though the* junks are not yet officially permitted to trade at Matsu-ga-
saki. This place is built against the slope and on the top of the downs ;
it is a fishing villago of very poor and dilapidated appearance, but with
its red-painted temple and large toru\ projecting above the houses on
the top of the hill, it is nicely situated, as looked at from the river. The
trade along the Aganokawa is by no means so important as that along
the Shinano ; the river is navigable up to Tsugawa, twelve or thirteen
ri fi*om its mouth. The part of the river I visited, over a length of S ri
upwards from the mouth, is very shallow, the greatest depth being
for a great part not more than 2|- or B feet. But as the river is


70 LINDO : DESCBIPTION OF A TRIP TO NIIOATA.

very broad, it could surely be made navigable for ships of 5 or 6
feet draught up to the mouth of the Aganokawa, and probably still
higher up.

A great portion of the land between the different rivers which run
through this part of Echigo, is situated much below the ordinary level
of the stiiTOundiDg rivers, which causes every year great injury to the
crops ; several lakes or pools of greater or lesser extent lie in this
otherwise prosperous district, which might, when properly drained, add
a considerable portion of paddy-field to the existing one. Much is to he
done here in the. course of time ; unfortunately money has hitherto been
wanting.

A remarkable instance of Japanese engineering skill may ho seen at
Ucliino, which is about 2^ ri S. of Niigata, betw^'oen the Nishi kawa and
the sea, which are here close to each other. At this place a considera-
ble area of the lands between the Shinano, Naka-no-kuclii and Nishi
kawa, and moreover the extensive lakes which are situated in this part,
throw their superfiiious water into the sea, the water flowing on through
several channels. The Nishi kawa, serving for irrigation, for which
purpose from distance to distance a dam is laid through its bed, its lovoj
is much higher than that of the lands around it ; so that the superfluous
water coming from the ]ow lying lands, has to pass underneath the bed
of the Nishi kaWa. For this purpose a large wooden lock, shut at both
sides by self-acting gates, is constructed; there are 5 of these gateways
adjoining each other ; each of them has a length of 210 feet, and 18 feet
in width ; 4 of them have a height of 6 feet and one of 4 feet. Perhaps
some more will he constructed, as after heavy rain- falls the locks prove
not to be sufficiently large.

I believe I have now sketched the chief features of the lower part
of tbe Sliinanogawa valley, partly in connection with the commercial
interests which adhere to it.

I will now give a description of the home-road which led over the Mi-
kuni pass. I reached Okodzn on foot along the J^ishi kawa embankments,
passing through a very prosperous district. From Okodzu I went by boat
up the [69] Shinauogawa to Nagaoka, which is a distance of nearly 6 ri.
About half-way between those two places, and situated at 5 or 6 cM
from the left hank of the river, is Yoita, a very large, hut poor-looking


UNDO : DESORXPTION OF A TKIP TO NIIGATA.


71


town, with a beautiful Honjin or Daimid’s hotel. The river between
Okoclzu and Nagaoka and down Okodzu as far as the separating point
of the Naka-no-kuclii, is very broad, but full of sand-banks and islands.
About 1 rl above Yoita the sand-banks are covered with heavy
gravel, which becomes larger and larger, until, before Nagaoka is arrived
at, the pieces reach the size of pebble- stones. Nagaoka, 40 miles above
Niigata, is the most important place in Echigo ; it is renowned for its
silk manufactures and is the staple place of trade from Echigo overland
to the South. It is not situated directly on the Shinanogawa, but its
suburbs extend to it. Formerly it was the seat of a Daimio, who was
Minister to the Taikun ; afterwards it became the capital of the Naga-
oka-ken, which was united last year with the Niigata-ken. The town
is spaciously built with wide streets ; about the number of the in-
habitants or of the houses I could not^get any information, but judging
from the extent of the place, it must be considerably greater than that
of Niigata.

Here follow the distances of the different places along the Mikuni
Eoad. I have added the height above the sea level, as I determined it
by means of an aneroid barometer, but these observations were very
roughly made, as I had neither the time nor the means of making them
with accuracy ; they may serve, however, to giv0 a general idea of this
part of the road.


Height above Sea
level in
English Feet,

Distance from Niigata to Nagaoka 21 I'i 18 cJw,

Province of Echigo. — Nagaoka — 80

Mioken t 3 ** — “ 115

Kidzu 2 280

Aikawa (between) — ‘‘ — 870

Kawaguchi 1 “ 18 “ 225

Tobisaka hill (between) — “ — 410

[70]Hori-no-uchi 2 “ — 280

Tochibara-toge 1 18 “ 805

Urasa 1 8 “ 870

Itsuka-machi 1 “ 16 “ 440


72 hmm : desceiption oe a teip to niioata.

Height above Sea
level in
English Feet.

Muika-maclii 1 20 clw 500

Shiwosawa — ‘‘ SO “ 575

Seki 2 745

Akasaka (between) — ‘‘ — “ 970

Yuzawa 1 “ 16 » 990

Niigata to Yuzawa 40 ‘‘ 6 “

Province of Ecbigo. — Nanatagiri (between) — “ — 1,425

Sbiba-bara-toge (between) — — “ 1,725

Tea-bouse at the highest point of this part of 2 135

the road (between) ’

Mitsumata : 1 ‘‘ 34 “ 1,825

Kaikaki (between) — ‘‘ — “ 2,000

Naka»no-t6ge 1 11 2,800

Valley between 2 successive hills (between) ... — “ 2,040

Second hill before reaching Futai (between) ... 1 “ 3,005

Futai 1 2,430

Yamadori tea-house 1 4 “ 2,845

KiridOshi (between) — “ — “ 2,955

Asakai 1 “ — 2,820

Tasuke-goya (hut) — 26 8,220

Highest point of the Kikuni road (between) ... — “ — 8,990

.Province of Joshiu. — G-ongen-no-betto, tea-house .. . — 26 “ 8,900

Nagai 2 “ — “ 2,865

Saru-ga-ki6 (between — ‘‘ — “ 1,765

Aimata 1 “ 20 “ 1,745

Passage of the Nishikawa at Kayabara (between) — “ — 1,505

[71]Su’kawa 1 ^ 1,660

Fuse — 28 ‘‘ 1,860

Kiri-ga-kubo toge (between) — “ — “ 2,600

Nakayama 2 “ 18 1,740

Niigata to Nakayama 55 n — cIio,


tiINDO: DESCRIPTION OF A TRIP TO NIIGATA.


Province of Josliiu. — Highest point of the roadbe-
' tween Nakayama and Yokobori


Yokobori 2 ‘‘ 13 “ 1,045

SMbukawa 2 2 “ 750


Kaneko 3 » 10 »]Noob-

Takasaki 2 “ 18 “ f

) tion.

Takasaki to Yedo ! 27 82 “


Total


distance between Niigata and Yeda
Mikuni Eoad


94 ri 32 cJw,


After leaving Nagaoka the road runs over a distance of 3 ri through
tolerably flat land, the hills enclosing us at a distance from all sides,
and the circle narrowing as we advance ; afterwards, at Midken, the
road begins to ascend very steeply. Eetween Nagaoka and Midken rice
and corn are cultivated, and the country has generally a prosperous
aspect ; but the road is not wider than 10 or 12 feet, excepting some
parts where it was in the course of being widened in an entirely un-
necessary degree.

From Midken the Shinanogawa valley is followed along the slopes of
the hills, in which the road is cut out having no more width than a
loot-path ; two or three times, indeed, it passes under the straw pent-
honse of a coolie’s tea-honse, the outside uprights of which stand on
the edge of the steeply descending mountain slope. The valley is
picturesque, the river winding its way in the depth betw^een gravel
and pebble-banks, and forming waterfalls everywhere.

[72] At Kidzu, to which place the road ascends with a steep
incline (as may he seen in the above-mentioned itinerary), a small tea-
house is situated on a beautful spot, where ice-cold water is to be had
from a deep well. From here to Kawaguchi is 1-i* ri, at which place
the XJitagawa flows into the Shinano ; this Uitagawa is the principal
right tributary to the Shinanogawa ; it is navigable for small boats up
to Muika-machi, at which place it alters its name to Iwonogawa.

Kawaguchi is the first place along this i^oad -where silk-indnstiy is
again met with, and from here throughout the way till Takasaki, it
seems to be the chief traffic of the population.
vox». irr. — 10


74 LINDO: DESCEIPTION OF A TRIP TO NIIOATA.

After crossing the XJitagawa at a little distance above Kawaguchi
by means of a ferry-boat, a stee^) hill, called Tpbisaka is ascended ; the
slopes of this hill are grown with beautiful 5U//vtrces, and on the top are
two very good tea-houses, from whence the road descends to Horino-
uchi. This is a very prosperous looking and nice place, with broad
streets ; it is situated at a little distance from the left Uitagawa bank ;
the valley is principally cultivated ,with rice ; and the narrow road
leads through the paddy-fields, and being unshaded and rugged it is
rather uncomfortable. But the Japanese were hard at work to improve
it, every village having to provide the necessary colics for the part of the
road lying within its limits.

From distance to distance parties of from 20 or 30 people were met
with, consisting of men, women and girls who were repairing the road
by filling up numerous gaps with the clay from the adjoining paddy-
fields, burying under it the blocks of stone which now formed part of
the rugged road, and widening it to about 9 to 12 feet. Besides the
spade, every workman or woman was invariably provided with a fan,
which gave them a very quaint aspect ; to shelter against the burning
sun, instead of being naked, they wore a kind of dress ; commonly
their legs were enwrapped with cotton, and over their kiviono they
were the ordinary straw rain-coats.

After leaving Horinonchi, over a distance of ri the [73] valley
of a streamlet is followed, which is about parallel . to the Kitagawa^
valley, and throws its water into the Uitagawa near Horinonchi, after
which the Tochibara-t6ge is ascended, the top of which is the boundary
between tho villages of Horinonchi and Urasa, which latter is situated
again in the valley of the Uitagawa, over which a fine view is to he had
from the tea-house on the top of the hill. Ascending the hill the Uita-
gawa is then followed, along an easy, hut always ascending, road to
Soki. The whole district seems to be x^rosperous, all the places are neat
looking ; the principal one being Muika-machi, which may be called a
town, and the chief trading place of the district.

On this part of the road women again were engaged to carry our
luggage over the mountains. From Seki the Uitagawa, or Iwonogawa,
as it is called above Muika-machi, and in which delicious salmon is
here found, is followed to Yuzawa, where we leave it to our left after


LINDO: DESORIPTION OF A TRIP TO NHGATA.


75


having passed over a steep hill, on tho top of which the tea-house of
Akasaka is situated. We travelled now in company with a long file of
cattle, on its way to Yedo.

From Yuzawa the road goes over the mountains, which form tho
boundary between tho lands draining into the Uitagawa and those drain-
ing into the Kiyotsugawa, another right tributaiy to the Shinanogawa ;
the valley of the Kiyotsugawa is reached at Mitsuinata, which is a
lovelily situated village. The Kiyotsugawa, enclosed by the densely
clothed mountains, rushes here with its clear blue ice-cold water over
largo blocks of stone, the white foam formed by the numerous w^aterfalls
embellishing the light hluo water, and contrasting, as it does, with tho
dark hue of the old siuji trees here bordering tho road, gives an almost
enchanting aspect to the scenery from the top of the hill, from where
the road steeply descends into tho valley. In many places the water,
turned olf fi;om the river and led through tlie gardens and through
several of the houses, and hastening back along tho streets on its way to
the river, sounds almost like music through the village. I think Mitsu-
mata is one of the most [74] charming spots on the Mikuni road.
Leaving Mitsumata the road becomes very bad, great sharp stone points
protrude everywhere, and the ascending of the steep inclines is very
difficult. Before Futai is reached two high hills have to he crossed,
which are separated from each other by a deep valley, Tho road is here
seen over all the length of tho valley, winding zig-zag along tho slope of
the hills through the dense verdure ; on tho top of the second one a fine
view is to ho had over the village of Futai, lying nearly 600 feet below.
This village consists of one street only, with some 40 houses ; it has,
like Asakai, quite a modern aspect ; for during the last war both places
were burnt down by the Tycoon’s troops, and are now being slowly rebuilt.
From Futai tho road gradually ascends to a spot named Kiridoshi, where
a narrow passage is cut through two hills, and from where it descends
rapidly to the valley of the Yogawa, a left feeder of the Kiyotsu-gawa,
'the last named river having been crossed at Futai. This Yogawa valley
was seen from Futai upwards, but the road remained at a considerable
distance from the river, which streams along the foot of the hills over
which the road is led, hid under the dense shrubs which cover the slopes,
and only heard in the rushing sound of its water.


76


LINDO: DESOEIPTION OP A TKIP TO NHOATA,


Very slowly ascending tjirough the Yogawa valley, through which
the road is comparatively so low situated that it is often submerged
when after heavy rainfalls the river is in high flood, Asakai is reached
where the properly named Mikuni-pass begins, which continues to
Nagai, the total length between those places being 3 n IG cM,

At Asakai the road begins to ascend tolerably slowly to Tasuke-
goya, whence it goes by zig-zag, and with heavy inclines to the small
temple of Gongen, which is at the highest point. It is throughout not
broader than 6 feet, and as it winds up the mountains, now from one
side, then from another, a superb view is to be had into the valley of the
Yogawa from which we ascend. The mountain slopes are all covered
with thickets, through which everywhere a path is broken, uniting
two branches of a zigzag, [75] and shortening the way considerably if
made use of; but this is only possible to unburdened travellers, who,
moreover, must not care for their clothes.

The small temple of Gongen at the highest point of the road, I
found to bo situated about 4,000 feet above the sea level. Here is the
boundary of the three provinces of Echigo, Joshiu and Shinano, and
from the fact that those three provinces unite here the mountain derives
its name of Mlhmi (three countries). The temple is a small wooden
building, and always closed ; there is only a small hole in the door,
through which however nothing is to be seen. A large wooden
torii with an ishiHlord on each side, is placed before the entrance ; on
this toriii the Japanese try their fortune in the usual way by attempting
to throw small stones on the cross-beam. After all I had heard about
the renowned temple on the top of this mountain, I was very much
disappointed in seeing this wretched place.

Though the scenery N. of the Mikuni was superb, it cannot be
called charming ; it was in all too green ; excepting a lovely white
Japanese lily on the mountain-slopes, no flower was to be discovered ;
and in this respect I think the Shinshiu-road is to bo preferred to the
Mikuni road. Perhaps, however, it was the fault of the time of the^
year, and that in May blooming azaleas mdfuji flowers will give to this
road an equally, if not more charming aspect than to the Sinshiu-road,

The road now enters the Province of Joshiu ; the first resting place
is a large but dirty tea-house, at a place called Gongen-no-bett6, the


LINDO: DESOBIPTION OF A TBIP TO NIIGATA,


77


road alternately descending and ascending to nearly the same height as
the Gongen temple. The scenery is finer here than on the North side
of the Mikuni top ; many cascades, coming from the mountain slopes
on one side, cross the road and fall into the deep valleys leading to the
Tonegawa.

After Gongen-nO“bett6 the road descends to Nagai ; it is broader
and shaded by high trees ; the mountain slopes are grown with the
Kashiioa (a kind of low, knotty oak), with a tree which has some
resemblance to a beech, and [76] with a kind of walnut tree, all rising
amidst thickets and encircled by ivy.

Nagai was also destroyed during the war in 1868. From this
place to Fuse the valley of the Nishi kawa is followed along its left bank
to Kayabara, where it is crossed by a bridge. The Nishi kawa is a
right tributary to the Tonegawa ; it has quite the aspect of a mountain
stream, and viewed from the hills with its clear water, with wooden
bridges of a particularly clover and quaint construction leading over it,
the whole enclosed by hills covered with fresh verdure, it furnishes a
pleasant sight. As far as can be seen the valley is moreover covered
with villages.

Between Fuse and Nakayama a new road has lately been opened,
shortening the distance, as it formerly was, by n. But this part is
certainly the most trying one of the whole road. The ascent of these
hills, along the slopes of which it has been cut, is steep ; at most places
it is not broader than five or six feet, this width being sometimes obtained
by trunks of trees, supported by props, or by large stone-blocks against
the descending mountain-slopes, and covered by branches of trees over
which one has to go. It looks very dangerous, and I think will be
wholly impracticable, and in many parts liable to be destroyed by heavy
rain-falls. After the highest point has been attained, at a place called
Kiri-ga-kuho toge, the road descends more slowly to the valley in which
Nakayama is situated, being for a great part an uncultivated and
solitary grass-land with a tree scattered on it hero and there, and with
a gently undulating soil. Nakayama itself is a place of very poor
appearance, quietly situated in the midst of the valley.

Leaving Nakayama the road gradually ascends for about 1 n; the
highest point is reached here between the Minami and the Komochi


78


liINDO ; DESCRIPTION OF A TRIP TO NIIGATA.


\

yama, two grass-grown Mils on both sides of the road, at a little distance
from it ; in clear weather Asama yama is to be seen from this in about
a S.W. direction. From here to Yokobori the road descends rapidly ;
about half way there is a splendid view between [77] the mountains into
the Tonegawa valley, and the whole silk- districts around Mayebashi, The
road is for the greatest part not shaded, tolerably smooth, but steep.
Yokobori consists of a row of houses on both sides of the street. One
ri further on, at Kitamoku, the Agatsumagawa is crossed by a largo
wooden bridge; this river is another right feeder of the Tonegawa.
After climbing the hill which rises here directly at the right bank of the
river, for the last time, on the home road one of those beautiful views is
to be had of the river valley and over the villages lying scattered in it,
such m one often sees in the interior of Japan.

The road leads now through a very fertile district to the large
town of Shibnkawa, where for the first time from Niigata jimildsha
were again met with ; this town is situated at a little distance from the
, right Tonegawa hank, and about 3 ri from Mayebashi ; it is an impor-
tant trading town.

While from Shibnkawa one road goes S. E. to Mayebashi, another
goes generally ascending S,, over Kaneko, to Takasaki. Almost uninter-
ruptedly the road is on both sides lined with houses and very prosperous
looking farms ; the intervals being occupied by temporary small booths,
in which fruits, such as siiika (water-melon), maJma (musk-melon),
pears and cucumbers are sold.

' On this part of the road, women and girls were always industriously
occupied in reeling off the silk cocoons ; while the chief business of
the men seemed to be sleeping ; there was, at least, scarcely any house
in which one or two were not laid stretched in the arms of Morpheus,
while their wives and daughters were cheerfully at work.

At Kaneko is the finest honjm (official inn) I have seen, but it now
belongs to a silk-merchant ; from this place to Takasaki the road slowly
descends through the fields, and Takasaki itself, as it is seen from this
side, stretching over a considerable extent with its castle walls and
numerous white plastered buildings, projecting against the green hills,
gives a pleasing impression.

[78] Throughout both roads between Yedo and Niigata, in every


LINDO: DESORimON OF A TEIP TO NHOATA.


79


place of importance, there was a house belonging to the ** Eiku-un-
kaisha” (an overland transport company), which was, as far as I could
see, very well organised. Here we were j)rovided with jinrikhha^ Jtago^
pack-horses and coolies, after a fixed tariff, which differed slightly
according to circumstances ; thus, mihe mountains, it was a trifle higher
than on the flat parts of the road.

For Jinn/nsha 1 ‘‘ shu ” per n was paid ; if with 2 coolies about 10
cents. In the mountains the weight which a man had to bear was 7
kwamme (about 57 pounds) ; he was paid for that 5.2 temprl per n;if
carrying more, his wages were increased in proportion. A kago, borne
by two men, pays for 2^ men, as a compensation for wear and tear. On
an average the Kaisha offices were 3 or 4 ri apart ; taking 3 J- n, a
coolie’s wages in the interior should be something between “ samJm ” and
Yery often the Kaisha offices were at the same time the
municipal offices of the villages, with the ‘‘ Kosatsu-ha ” (or official
notice-board) before the entrance. The distances which separate the
villages are measured from notice board to notice board.

By this company all merchandise is despatched by pack-horses
from office to office. The horses are often led by little girls ; when
arriving at the different stations the packages are at once taken from the
horses and thrown upon the ground, where they remain lying till fresh
horses are ready to carry them to the next station ; while the other
horses immediately return.

In order to assemble the necessary number of coolies in some of
the villages, 'a kind of roll had to be beaten with a wooden hammer on a
hollowed-out piece of w’'ood, hanging in front of the Kaisha-office. This
operation had often to be repeated 10 or 12 times before the required
number arrived; they came on very slowly and drowsily, but after
having weighed their load and prepared to start, they become jolly and
good-humoured, and all the way there was no end to their talking and
laughing,

[79] In general they are a very good-natured kind of people, and
though ‘‘ uncivilized,” as ^some call them, I think many of our own.
civilized races in Europe might take them as an example for their kind
and polite manners towards each other. I remember a young coolie
inviting an 0-jiisan ” (old man) who walked before him, to change


80


LINDO: DESCRIPTION OF A TRIP TO NIIGATA.


burdens, bis, (the 0-jiisan’s) being far the heavier of fcbo two, which
offer was gratefully accepted after the necessary courtesies and com-
pliments.

However not only the coolies, but all other people I came in contact
with seemed to me epally kind and well-disposed to foreigners ; all the
way I never met with the least ill-will.

It struck me that the inhabitants of Echigo and particularly of
Niigata were generally better looking and of larger stature than those of
Yedo, many of them having the Jewish type ; the girls too, are un-
doubtedly better looking, and Echigo used to be the principal recruiting-
place to fill the Yoshiioara at Yedo and Osaka.

I have had much assistance during this trip from 2 J apanese maps ;
one is the generally known ‘‘Fujimi Jiusan Shiu Yochi Zendzu”
(map of the 13 Provinces which are to he seen from the top of Fuji-
Yama.) ; the other is named “Echigo Shiu Shikiyenshi” (being the
Echigo-sheet of a map of the whole of Japan). I found the first to be
pretty accurate as to the direction of the road and the distances from
place to place ; the second one is merely descriptive and has not the
least claim to any accuracy as to measures or directions.

For the rest, though I have given here some details which may
prove interesting, I could have ^iven many more if I had been ac^juainted
with the Japanese language. This not being the case, I entirely
depended upon my interpreter, who never told me anything I did’ not
ask for, and whose answers I had, at it were, to draw from his mouth,
though I must do him the justice to say that he took more interest in
the incidents of the journey than Japanese generally.

[80] For any one acijuainted with the Japanese language, I think
no trip can be more interesting than the one here roughly sketched out.

J. A. LINDO,

Lieut. Boyal Engineers,
(Dutch Army).


A General Meeting of the Society was hold on Wednesday evening, the 18th
November, 1874, at the Grand Hotel. The chair was taken by Sir Harry S. Parkes, •
one of the Vice-Presidents,


( 81 )

The Minutes of the last General Meeting were read and approved, and it was
announced that the following gentlemen had been elected Ordinary lylemhers of
the Society : — ^Lieut. A. J. Liiido, B.E. Dutch Army ; Drs. A. J. Geerts and Dwight
Dickinson ; and Mestsrs. S. I’arry, T. Lepper, Julius Bryner, and F. Walker.

Dr. Geerts then read his second X)aper on the ‘‘ Useful Minerals and Metal-
lurgy of the Japanese.” It treated, on this occasion, of the mctallury and
properties of the copper of this country.

The Chairman tendered the thanks of the Society to the author for his valuable
and exhaustive i?aper on the metal for which, perhaps above all others, Japan was
most famous.

In reply to a (luestioii from the Dev. Dr. Sylo, Dr, Geerts said that “ yake ”
was a mineral of a greenish colour, which, though it did not itself contain much
copper, was nevertheless very useful, us it indicated wherever it was found that
copi)er ores also existed in the vicinity.

Mr. B. Vicars Boyle then read a pap)or hy Mr. J. A. Lindo entitled “A
trip to Niigata, and hack hy the l\Iiliuni Pass.” The reader had kindlj' furnished,
ill illustration of the paper, some maps upon wdiich the route might he followed.

The Chairman observed that Mr. Lindo had described not only one but two
interesting journeys, and his account showed that n trip to Niigata by either of
the routes which he had taken was full of attraction. The interest of the subject,
however, was not limited to travel only, Niigata is a place of considerable
promise ; as a Treaty Port it is said to bo opened to foreign trade but it is really
closed to it by the natural obstacle of the bar at the mouth of the Sliiuanogagwa.
It is of great importance to commerce that this obstacle sliould bo I’cinoved. As
the surrounding country is very rich, its vast crops of rice give it the name of the
granary of the nation, and it also produces minerals, petroleum, tea, tobacco, hemp,
[81] * and other products. PIo invited gentlemen present \Yiio were able to speak
on the subject of the port and bar to give the meeting the benefit of their observa-
tions.

After a few observations from Mrs. Ayrton on the subject of tbe tariff for the
Coolie /Stage, and a few remarks from Dr, Geerts about the Province of Echigo.

Blr. Brunton said that as Niigata was a Treaty port, and the only means by
which it could he made really a port was by the Shinanogawa, perhaps a few
particulars concerning this river would be of interest.

The Bhinanogawa was the outlet for the drainage waters of a large tract of
country in the provinces of Bhinauo, Musaslii and Eeliigo, as had been described
in tlie paper. Its general course "was in a north westerly direction, and its total
length was about 250 milCvS. On the 21st June, 1871, from actual gauging near the
mouth, Mr, Brunton had found the discharge to be 1,500,000 cubic feet per minute,
while on the 23rd June, after one day’s heavy rain, the river’s surface had risen
one foot, its velocity had increased in some places three times, and its discharge
was 3,000,000 cubic feet per minute. The Thames discharged only 400,000 cubic
von. III. — 11


feet per minute in floods, and 45,000 cubic feet per mmu|;e in ordinary summer
weather : and the Ehiiie 10 millions in floods, and 000,000 cubic feet per minute in
ordinary summer weather, which latter, conseciuently, had about the same Yolume
.as the Shinanogawa. Up to 40 miles from the sea, the river maintained an
irregular width varying from 4,000 feet to 1,200 feet, and over the whole of
that distance down to the mouth various shallows and sand bank had been
thrown ux), which not only impeded the flow of the water, but almost entirely
destroyed the use of the river for navigation purposes. Its depth over that
distance varied from 20 feet to 3 feet. For vessels drawing over this latter depth
it could not ho considered navigable more than a few miles above Niigata. From
all Mr. Bmuton could ascertain no attempts whatever had been made at any place
either to regulate the course of the stream, or to protect its hanks. The hanks of the
Shinanogawa were so low, and so easily washed away that great damage was done to
them and to the neighbouring country in floods. Thus he was informed that 12,000
acres of valuable rice land wore flooded five or six times every year. Instead,
Iiowever, of raising the hanks, and otherwise regulating the flow of the river, the
scheme to remedy this state of matters which had been adox)ted by the Japanese
authorities was the formation of a new channel of large dimensions to carry off the
surplus flood waters of the Shinanogawa. .At the entrance of the Shinanogawa to
the sea the bar wdiich had formed stretches across its mouth, having a channel
throughjit which at the time of klr. Brunton’s visit ran in a north-westerly direction
and had a minimum depth of water in it of from seven to eight feet, which had,
according to the paper just read, now been reduced to five feet. It was said that
this channel changed more or less every day, each flood and each gale of wind
moved it considerably, but its movements did liot, [82] so far as he could discover,
seoih to be ruled by any xoriiicixile. The bar, however, presented no iicculiarities
which were likely to render it difficult; to he successfully dealt with. It had on the
contrary many advantages which with proper treatment made it most capable of
improvement. It was composed of the finest sand, which was moved about by
every disturbance in the water, whether ■jvaves from seaward or river currents
from in shore. It was stated that there was at least thirty feet depth of this fine
sand on it, and with a properly directed stream carried through a channel of
l)roper width, this could not fail to be to a groat extent cleared away. Mr. Brunton
felt convinced, from the success of the W’orks at the Bulina mouth of the Danube,
the Oder, the Tecs, and other rivers which were in many ways similar to this, that
by the proper execution of a well devised harbour scheme having i:)iers running out
into deep water to cause a scour over the bar, a very fair commercial port might he
made at Niigata. The Shinanogawa, running for 250 miles through one of the most
productive districts in Japan, oflered, with a little imi^rovement of its channel, an
excellent means of transport for the various products to Niigata, and with a
harbour there capable of admitting vessels of a good draught there could be little
doubt of its success as a port. Works of the nature suggested would have the


( 83 )

effect of deepening the bar to admit vessels of a draught of from twenty-five feet in
very flue weather to about twenty feet when there was so ninch sea as to cause a
ship to pitch considerably below her line of flotation ; and though in some weathers
it would be hazardous and perhaps impossible to enter between the piers at all,
ITiigata had the^advantage of having, at a distance of thirty miles directly oil the
coast, the Island of Sado, where vessels might with safety anchor and wait for
suitable weather to enter in. In this respect it had an immense advantage over
all the harbours on the east coast of England, between the Thames and the Perth,
a distance of 400 miles, along which coast there were none but tidal and river
harbours, the entrance to which were most precarious, where the prevailing wmds
were easterly and right on the coast, and where the largest traflic in the world was
carried on without a harbour of refuge of any kind. The effects of the piers on
the bar at the Sulina mouth of' the Danube might bo here given, as the circimi-
sfcaiices in which tlicy were built were so analogous to what was required at
Niigata. “ The depth on the bar in 1829 was from 7 feet to 12 feet. In 1857 the
“ navigable channel was only 9 feet deep. In November, 1859, the North Pier had
“ advanced 3,000 feet and the South Pier 500 feet ; the depth on the bar vras then
“ 10 feet. On 30th November, 1800, the works being completed, there was a good
navigable channel of 12 feet ; on the 31st December, of 13 feet ; on 2Bth February,
“ 1861, of 14 feet. Then came the breaking up of tlxo ice, and the furious descent
“ of the extraordinary high flood, but this lime the swollen waters being confined
“ between the two piers and [83] directed in a proper line, instead of causing a
“ diminution of the depth fairly swept the remains of the bar on to the south
hank and into deep water. From that time to the present the depth has never
“ been less than 10 J feet, and frequently as much as 17 J feet.”^

In conclusion Mr. Brunton said that there could be no reason why similar
results should not follow the erection of properly executed piers at Niigata.

In reply to a question from the* Chairman, Mr. Brunton said that two years
ago he had estimated the cost of such works as lie Iiad described at about ^800,000.

Mr. Brent made a few remarks regarding the communication between Niigata
and Nagaoka, and said that a native company had already staiied a small steamer,
drawing only 1 J feet of water, to run between those places up the Shinanogawa,
and he thought they intended to put a second boat on the same river shortly.

In reply to a question from the Chairman, Mr. Boyle remarked that it did not
appear why the post did not use the road down the valley of the Shinanogawa to
Niigata, instead of the road along ^le coast, but he had been informed by the local
authorities that arrangements were being made for the post to follow the valley
route.

The Chairman thanked Mr. Brunton for the very interesting statement he had


iProm Sir G. Hartley’s paper on tlio Delta of the Danube, read before the Institution
of Civil Engineers in London.


(64)

given the meeting. Tlie history of the bar showed that it was of comparatively
recent growth. It appeared that as late as 1820 the Shinanogawa received near to
its mouth the waters of the Aganogawa, and it was said that the depth of the
entrance was then twenty or twenty-five feet. But in order, as it was supposed, to
imiu’ove the drainage of the plain and to check inundation the channel of the Aga-
nogawa was diverted and conducted into the sea by its present mouth, which opens
a few miles above the mouth of the Fihinanogawa. The waters of the former were
thus lost to the latter, the force of the stream was chocked just at the point where
it was most necessary to preserve it, and consequently the growth of the present
bar rapidly increased. The desired object was not attained for the obvious reason
that as the mouth of the river contracted in depth it could not carry off the same
volume of water as before, and the people were again troubled with inundations.
Unmindful however of the warning afforded }]y the opening of the Aganogawa,
north of Kiigata, the Japanese had lately sought to repeat the mistake by opening
a cutting from the Shinanogawa into the sea at Teradoinari, about 2G miles soutli
of Niigata. Fortunately this cutting had not been completed and the work upon it
w^as now stopped. ‘Were it allowed to be carried out it would comxfiete the ruin of
Niigata, as the mouth of the Shinanogawa would probably in that case bo soon
entirely closed. What was required was that the Shinanogawa should carry off all
its [84] waters by its own olianuel, and thus maintain a scour of sufticieiit
strength to prevent deposits forming at its mouth. It was well that the Terado-
mari cutting had been abandoned in time, and it was to be hoped that the attention
of the G-overnmont would be directed to sounder measures for the conservancy of the
river and the preservation of the port. • It was lamentable to hear it stated that
nearly eight hundred thousand dollars had been spent on this worse than useless
cuttiug, a sum believed to bo sufficient to construct the works advised by Ui\
Brunton and also by Mr. Liudo.

The meeting terminated in the usual maimer.


( 85 )


USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE
JAPANESE.


(\

By Dk. Greets.


LEAD AND SIL7ER.


IjAead before the Asiatic, Sncietjf of Japan on the 2Srd December^

[85] LITERATURE : Karmprer's History of Japan, Book I, Chap. Till.

Stan. Julien et Champion Industries, etc., page 40.
CfEERTS. — Japan in 1871. ‘‘Gids,” No, 8 and 9, 1872.
Japanese Technology. — Stui-lxal mci-hitHU DziiJiiarai, 1st
Yol. Japanese Mineralogy SeIdJiin’Sa7i-sho-ko, Ko-san-
sei-ran-sen, or sliort indication of the chief ore bearing
mountains.

Japanese history does not mention the year Avhen lead (Si ym
namarif Syn. Kokn yen, ii-jaku) was obtained for the first time in Japan.
Silver-ore was discovered accidentally, it is said, in the year 667, A.D.,
at Tsu-shima, during the digging of the foundations of a new castle,
named Kanedono-shiro U produced the first Japanese silver

metal in the year 674.^

1 Hoffman : Japan’s Bezilge mxt dcr Koraisehen Halbinsel imd mit China pag.
133 (translation out of Nippon ki XXVII. 10 2. Y.) edited in SiehoUVs Nippon
Archiv VII.

^Hoffman ; ibidem pag. 133 (transl. out of Nippon ki and Wa-kan-nen-kei) and
Wa-nendeei oder Geschichtstabollen yon Japan pag 40, published in Nippon

Archiv.


86 GEERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE,

[86] Lead is a^iuetal not mach used hy the Japanese, The reason
for this cannot be the want of ore, as has -wrongly been stated by many
authors ; for we have the best proofs that galena (the chief lead ore) and
even an excellent land of this mineral, is far from being I’are in Japan,

Silver was in former times, especially from A.D. 1,400 to 1,600 found
and melted in Japan in much larger quantities than at the present time.
It is stated by the Japanese that the mines of Gin-zan in Iwami alone
had formerly produced from 15,000 to 25,000 lbs, silver annually, whilst at
present only 100 lbs. of silver are produced there yearly. There has been
a time when there was an abundance of silver in this country, but after
the old trade of the Portuguese and Dutch ^ and particularly after the
opening of Japan in 1859, silver became scarce, because of the former
large export of this metal to foreign countries. We cannot agree with
some authors who say that at the present time the Japanese soil should
be very rich in silver-ore, because we have not found many samples of
rich ores, but chiefly a relatively small quantity of silver as an admixture
in several copper and lead minerals.

The ores in which lead occurs in Japan are :

1. — Galena or Lead Glance (sulphide of lead) W Ki-yen-Jeo.
We have seen several varieties ; the finest kind consists of crystalline
aggregates of large cubes, which readily cleave in directions parallel to
their faces. It is found frequently in the same veins wdth copper, pyrites
and contains often a small quantity of sulphide of silver. The extraction
of lead out of this mineral is effected by a roasting and melting process,
nearly similar to our western. niederseJdag ” method. In many samples
we found a small quantity of silver. The largest amount of silver we
found in lead glance is about 1 per cent. According to the Japanese
works on this subject, Galena is found in many places in Japan, but still
the quantity of lead produced by the Japanese has been relatively small — -
up to the present time about 4000-5000 cwt. annually. It is not easy
to understand why lead metal has been and is still a regular article of
import from Europe.

It is true, bar-iron is also an article of import although [87] good


8 Francois Valentyn Oud en Nieuw Dost Indie Yol 1. 2de Stuk. Beschryving
van Japan pag, 48.


GEERTS : ESEEUL MINERALS AND MElJALLURGY OP THE JAPANESE. 87


iron ore is abundant in Japan ; but this anomaly is caused by tlio
difficulty of smelting good bar-iron out of the ores, wbicli is not so with
tho extraction of lead out of galena. The latter process is much easier
than the extracting of copper out of copper pyrites or iron out of iron-
minerals.

The principal lead mines of the present time are at Ani, Yabetsu,
Daira, Kagoyama, all in Ugo province, Hosokura in the province of
Eikuzen, Kosaka in tho xn’ovmeo of Kikuchiu, Inohana in Omi, Kami-
yoka in Hida province.

Lead glance occurs also in the following Provinces of J apan : —


Pbovinces. Districts.


Yaniato ....


Yosliino-guii . . ,

f luabe-gori

(Imbe-guri .....


SettsiL Kawabe-guri


Onii


Mino


I Inuliana-gori
I Aiclii-guri . .

j^Koga-gdri. . . .

( Gunjo-gdri . .
* Hotosu-gdri . .
(iVIngi-gdri ..


Hida


|yoshilu-gdri . .

j

I^Masuda-gdri . .


IicasJuro . .


f Onuma-gdri . .
* * (Kawanuma-gdri


Bikuzea .... Kuribara-gdri . .


ItilmclUw . . Kadzuno-gdri


Places. Beiiarks.


Takahara-miira.

Isbidznre

Hai'uta-yama ......


- Contains a little silver.


Tada-mura

Kurokawa-mura ....

^Hase-mura

Yama - mnra and
\ several other places. ,

Inohana, Taga-raura.
I^Iandokoro-miira.
f Kurotaki-nmra.

\ Okawara-mura.

Hatasa-mura.
Omatsu-mura.
Motoohi-mura.

/ Kamiyoka-mnra
Sbikama-gumi .


Higashi-nrushi-
V yania-gumi.
/Atr.n:,gc-nirivn.

Oislii-da-mura.

Kurosawa-mnra.


(r

L'.,


To-ada Gin-zan ...


The veins seem to be
poor, as these mines
only produce a small
amount of lead.

Good mines.


i Contains silver, which
is separated from
the lead by cupella-
tion.


/Galena with 0.05%
silver, old silver-lead
mines, which pro-
I duce yearly about
1 :-i2,000 Ihs. lead, 14

lbs. silver.

Silver separated by old
V cupellation method.

[Very good galena with
\ some silver.


88 aEERTS : useful minerals ANL metallurgy of the JAPANESE.


Provinces.

Districts.

' Places.

Miitsu

Tsngaru-gori . . . ,

f Ikari-ga-seki-mura.

* * ( Soma-mura.

Uzen

Murayama-gdri . .

. . Takara-sawa-mura.

Ugo -

'Yamamoto-gori' ..

.. fYabetsu yon-saUi

] Daira


.Aldta-gdri

[Ani, Mukaiyama ..
1 Kosaka-no-ko-zan.


Behabks.


Fine galena, whicli
produces yearly
about 181,473 ibs
lead.

(yearly ]u’oduco about
1 200,000 lbs lead.


EcUzen Ono-gCad | Noj irtmura

( Sbimo-usliitachi- I

Ecliigo \,,, XJwonuma-gori inura -ditto. •

(Uyedaiio-Giiizan


Tajima .... Kita-gori Hajiri-mura.


Bichm

Bingo .
Ahi . . .
Nag a to

Kii ...


ICawakauii-gdri ....

Yasnua-guri

Yamagata-gdri ....
Aline-gdri

Muro-gori ........


f Ko-idzumi-mura . . ) Associated with copper
\ RoluTsbo-dani pyrites.

Mitani-yama.

Koliara-mura. '

Nagato-mura.

/ Ayu-kawa.

] Wada-mura.


Bungo

Binga

Bigo.


Yesso


Ouo-gori


Usuki-geri


Yatsuabiro-gori ....


near Hakodate


( Kiura-no-ko-zan.

- Osliiroya-mura.

( XJehi-no-kuebi-mura.

Iwato-inura Contains silver.


Obobata


] G-alcna with 0.1 %
[ silver.


(Yurap lead-mines at 1
'[ Ichinowatari ..... 1


V


Said to have produced
in- former years as
much as 150,000 lbs
lead annually. At
present the produce
is small.


Altlioiigli (jalena is the only lead mineral used in Japan for smelting
leaclj there are still some other compound lead-ores to bo found, of which
the following occur in the largest q^uantity,

2. — Lead Antimony Ores, several varieties.

Jamesonit in long radiated, fibrous crystalline masses of a leaden-
grey colour.


B. — Pla/fiomt or Bosenit in granular aggregates or amorphous
masses of a dark black grey colour.


GBERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE. 89

C . — HeteromorpJiit or Antimony feather-ore in fibrous aggregates of
a dark grey colour.

All these minerals contain lead, antimony and sulphur as chie
elements ; often some iron and other impurities. They seem to be found
at many places in Japan. We received samples from Higo : Qhobata ;
Higo : Hitoyoshi ; the island of Amakusa ; Hiuga and Satsuma. These
ores have little practical value, because it is too difficult to separate the
lead from the antimony by melting, and also because lead and antimony
are found in better minerals, as galena and antimony glance. At Tsubaki-
wara in the province of Bungo a lead-antimony mine is worked.


Metallurgy of Lead,

The galena is first roughly assorted by hand, separated by mechani-
cal treatment from the foreign stones, afterwards coarsely powdered
under dry stamps, sifted and washed by hand in wooden pans. It is then
smelted in a hemispherical furnace, the interior sides of which are covered
with a layer of fire-in’oof clay and charcoal-powder. The tubes of two
bellows roach through openings in the upper border into the furnace.
Charcoal is used as fuel. When the galena is fused, it is converted by
the air of the bellows, partly into sulphate of lead and paxily into lead
metal, whilst a portion of the sulphur escapes, together with the products
of combustion, as sulphurous acid. Immediately afterwards this portion
of metallic lead acquires oxygen and is thus converted into oxide of lead.
Another portion of the galena remains unaltered. After this roasting
process *the second operation commences. A fresh supply of fuel,
together with about 30 % of pig-iron in small lumps is thrown into the
furnace and the whole stirred when the heat is at its maximum. The
fiuid metal runs to the bottom covered by matte and slags. The latter
are removed by throwing water on the bath till the surface of the lead
is free. The lead thus obtained is very impure and contains still a lai'ge
amount of oxide of lead and some sulphide of lead. It is smelted
therefore again in a smaller furnace with some charcoal, in order to
reduce the oxide of lead. The sulphide [89] of lead still ingredient
rises with other impurities to the surface of the melted lead and is

VOL. ixi. — 1 %


90 (JEERTS : USEETTL MINERALS AND aiETALLDB&Y OP THE JAPANESE.

scooped away carefully. The pure ip:etal is then finally cast into small
iron cans, or into sheaves and cakes. Lead is also obtained from
litharge, produced by the cupellation process of silver, by smelting the
litharge with charcoal, to reduce the oxide of lead.

The silver ores met with in Japan, are ; —

1. — Lendritical Native Silver (silver moss) ^ M & Jl-nm-r/ln,
The ore seems to occur but seldom in Japan. We saw it only once in a
small quantity. It does not serve for the extraction of silver.

2. — Silver Glance ® M JaUu-ko-sU or®® Oin-lco ; Syn.
Sndzimo’yanL Mateyara oxM&M KUjin-ko» This valuable silver-ore
is found, though only in small quantities, in the mountain Beslii, in the
province of lyo, in Giman of Iwamiy in Tadayama, in the province of
Settsu. It produces some silver but much loss than the following ore,
which is the chief silver-mineral of Japan.

8, — Grey Goppee-orb (or Fahlertz) Yu<lo-lco, a very com-

pound mineral, mentioned already (Metallurgy of Copper). This ore is
worked both for copper and silver. It occurs in several places in
Japan.

4. — Lead Glance with a variable but small amount of silver sulphide.
This ore is also used in silver -metallurgy. The last mentioned silver-
ores are found and worked at the following places in Japan. At most of
these places the production of silver is, however, exceedingly small.

The principal silver mines of the present time are at Innai, Ani, both
in Ugo province, the island of Sado, Ikuno in the province of Tajima,
Kosaka in the province of Eikuchiu, Ginzan-machi in the province of


Iwami, Handa in the province of Iwashiro.


Provinces.

Districts.

Places,

Kemarks.

Ymnashiro ..
Yamato ....
Kawaclii , . . .

Kii-gori ........

Yoshino-gori , , . .
Nishikibe-gori. . , .

. , Fukakusa-mura.

. . Takahara-mura . .

. . Kagata-muxa.

. . Out of lead glance.

Settsu

Fawabe-gorx ....

/■Yosaki-mura ....

1 Tamida-mura ....

* * 1 Tada-mura

(Akamatsu-mura , . ,

..]_Oat of galena and
. . j grey copper ore.

Ise ........

/Miye-^gori

(.Inibe-gori ......

. . Midzusawa-nxura .
, . Haruta-mura

1 ] 1 Out of galena.


GKEETS ; USEFUli MINEBALS AND METALLUEGY OF JAFANESE, 91


PkOVINCES. DlSrCEIGTS. PliAOES.


Musaslii ,


-1


Chicliibu-gori
Pama-gori ..


Nakatsu-gawa.

Naruki-mura.


Bemaeks.


Orm


j Aichi-gori . ,
(Inoliana-gori


Mandokoro mura , . \
Inoliana, Kiirotaki . . J


Out of galena.


Mino


Hula


Gun-j o-gori Hatasa-mura.

Mugi-guri I-tatori-mura.


Toshiki-gori

jiasuda^gori


["Kamiyoka-raiira . . . .
-j Shikania-mura ....

[ Higashi-liira

j Yofcsumi-mura . . , .
[Kadzukawa-mura ..


Out of galena and grey
copper ore.


SMmotsuJie . . Tsuga-gori


fMukada-mura 1 Out of grey copper ore

i Sandokoya-mura . . j and galena.


/Date-gdri


Iwashiro

Onnma-guri


VKawanuma-guri ....


Kanda


f Karuisawa-mura.

\ Oishi-mui’a.

[ Midzu-numa-mura.

Yaslnki'inura.


''Silver glance and grey
coppper ore ; very
old mine, Freiberg
barrel amalgama-
tion ; yearly yield
about 000 only.


Bihizeii .


fKurihara-gori


(Kami-gori


Hosokura


Miyasaki-mura.


’Galena with a little
silver; yearly produce
only 14 lbs.; old
^ cupellation method.


'Kadzuno-gdri


mkucJMu . .


Jwate-gOri


Kozaka kanayama. .


Kushiki-mura.


Grey copper ore and
silver glance; Zier-
vogei and Hunt
Douglass process ;
produces about 2500
lbs silver yearly ;
good mine.


3Iut$u


J Tsugaru-gdri Ikarigaseki-mura , . ] Out of grey copper

(Sannohe-gdri Tago-mura .. J ore.


Uzen


Murayama-gdri .... Seldya-mura

Oitama*gdri Akayo-mura

Mogami-gdri Taniguchi Ginzanmura.


92 G-EEETS : USEFUL MINEBALS AND METALLURG-Y OF THE JAPANESE,


Provinces. Districts. Places.


Bemabks.


ft

/Yamamoto-gori . . . .


Vgo X Akita-gori


\Okaclii-gori


EchizeTi .... Ono-gori . . . .

EtcUu ..... Nikawa-gdri
[Kambara-gdri


Echigo


^Uwonuma-gori ....


Sado Idand.


Tajima . . . .


Inaha

Ilohi


/Asako-gdri


\Kita-g5ri

Takakusa-gdri ......

Hino-gdri


/Nima-gdri


lioami .. .... I


\Odii-gdri


Kago-yama


(^Yabetsu Daira

Ani, Mukaiyama ,


Innai


'Horiiia-mura

Hakosejrmura

Kadono-mura ......

^Nojui-iniira.

Kametani-mura . . . .

Miyazaki-mxira.

Otani-mura.

'Arayama-mura,

• Sliimo usliitacbi -
mura.

Seijiko

Hiugako ..........

- Jingoko

Torigoyeko

\Okireko


Ikiino


Hajiri-mura.

Seta-kiira-mura.


/Copper refining and
silver extracting
works for the neigh-
J bonring copper and
1 lead mines. Old
style furnaces ; pro-
duces only little
^ silver.

/G-alena with a little
silver.

/Produces yearly about
1100 lbs silver.
'Silver glance. Circa
®/p silver ; the best

duces yearly about
; 3,500 lbs silver,

I G-alena and grey
copper ore.

Grey copper ore.


Pan-amalgamation
process; yearly pro-
duce about 3000 lbs
silver,

I Silver glance with gold
in quartz gangue.
Very old mines ; Frei-
berg barrel amal-

rtn yvtfyi-i


Gin-san-mura.


Gin-zan-macbi *


Motobara-mura,


/Old celebrated silver
mine; furnaces old
Jap. style ; grey cop-
per ore and a little
, , *< galena. Yielded in
former times much
mor'-; o'l ly

aboui- loO .ib^ >

\ yearly.


GEERTS : USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE. 98

Provinces. Districts. Places. Bemarks.

Mimasaka .. Yeta-gori Nanliai-mura.

Bicliiu Kawakami-gori .... Koidzumi-mura.

Suwo Kuga-gori Putaya-yama Out of galena.

Kii Muro-gori Yoshikawa-mura.

ScmuJii .... Ano-gori Kokubu-no-imira.

Dma-gori Betsu-sM-do-san.

Ni'gdri Daislio-in-mura.


Tliuga Usuki-gori Iwato-mura.


Osumi ...... ?


Satsuma . , . .


Yamagano


JMukowoda
[ Seigano . ,


/Silver glance Tvitli
native gold in quartz .
Stamps and pan
J amalgamation for-
eign style ; yearly
produce about 60 lbs
gold and 40 lbs silver.

/Silver glance with a
little gold in quartz
veins, Amalgama-
J tion mills. Yearly
produce about 200
lbs silver and 20 lbs
gold.


Tsushima .. Bliimo-agata-gori .. Sliine-mura.


[90] Metallurgy of Silver.

Liquation and Cupellation Process.

The amount of silver smelted in Japan between the 15th and 17th
century was by no means small ; the Portuguese and the Dutch, in the
first years only of their trade with Japan, exported large quantities of
this precious metal. In the year 1671 the export of silver was
prohibited by the Japanese Government. It is a well known fact that
in later times comparatively little silver has been found and smelted in
Japan — about 25,000 lbs. yearly. Lead, which contains a small quantity
fo silver, silver glance and blister copper (ara-do) or metal mixtures,
obtained from grey copper-ore, form the mere material for the metallurgy
of silver. Formerly the separation of silver from lead or coj^per was
effected chiefly in the Government refinery at Osaka, but in latter times


94 &EEETS ; USEFUL MINERALS AND METALLURGy OF THE JAPANESE.

it has also been carried on in other places. The [91] process used by the
Japanese does not differ much in principle from our Western method.
The whole working is divided into four stages :

let. — Smelting of the coarse metal containing silver with a certain
quantity of lead, in order to' dissolve the silver by means of the melted
lead and to obtain a compound metal, called Awase-buki-do,
copper smelted together [with lead] .

2nd. — Heating of this alloy in a kind of liquation furnanee with an
inclined bottom, to carry off the lead and silver in a liquid state as ©
De-namari, lead which has run out [of the alloy] . The copper and
other less fusible metals remain in an unmelted condition, as porous
masses, at the bottom of the furnace. This porous metal is called
^ @ Nan-ban-buki-do (copper smelted’ after the manner of the
the southern barbarians).

8rd. — Cupellation in a low furnace with a bottom of buck-ashes, in
order to obtain raw silver, called K 8^ Jfi Hai-buki-gin (silver smelted
upon ashes).

4th, — Eefining or second cupellation in a small furnace. The old
Portuguese had very probably made known this operation to the Japanese.
Burger (l.o.) states that the Japanese used in olden times another
(Chinese) desilvering process, called Gin-zam-hilci, hut this method was
not very profitable and could only be used with rich ores. This old
process is described in an ancient Chinese technological work called
Tm^Jco^kai-hitsii. About the year 1590 a foreigner (Portuguese ?) named
Hahii’mi shewed, it is said, a Japanese called Sumitomo the manner of
separating silver from lead or copper, even when it occurs in a small
quantity only. Sumitomo introduced the new process into his metal-
lurgical works, rose in wealth and power, and got an Imperial patent
for the purification of copper and separation of silver from lead and
copper. He lived with his family in Osaka and took the family name
of TIahu-suiy in addition to his own, in honour of and out of gratitude to
the foreigner. Burger believes, and we think rightly, that the foreigner
Hahi-siii must have been a Portuguese, because the name namhan-buJd-
do (copper smelted after the [92] manner of the southern barbarians)
for the porous metal mass, left after the extraction of the lead, and the
year 1,590 gives some reasonable ground for this belief.


GEERTS : TJSEEUL MINERALS ANL METALLURGY OF THE JAPANESE, 95

The family Sumitomo exists still in Osaka. At the house of the
present head of the family, in Osaka, Nagahori ichome, may he seen
several old documents in relation to this fact, and also a collection of
old presents, given by the former Dutch Embassies to Sumitomo when
they paid the customary visit to his copper-works.

We will now proceed to the description of the desilvering process.

1st. — The silver containing raw metal (blister- copper, etc,) is mixed
with variable quantities of lead (according to the amount of silver) and
the whole’ smelted with a charcoal-fire in a small furnace of fire-proof
clay. The fluid metal is then cast in round or square plates, and leaves
the name of awase-Mld-tlo,

2nd. — This alloy (axcasG-hiikl-do) is now placed on the inclined
bottom of a small liquation furnace and the whole heated gradually.
The lead with the dissolved silver flows off from the bottom in a liquid
state, de nainari, whilst the copper and other less fusible metals remain
in a solid condition on the hearth. Thus the lead and silver are
separated from the copper and other metals. The porous masses which
remain on the bottom are afterwards smelted and purified to obtain dry
copper from them.

8rd. — The cupcliation or separation of lead and silver is ef-
fected in a low hemispherical furnace, with a loose covering : on
account of its form, this furnace is called a “ toad furnace.” The
rounded bottom of this furnace consists of a fire-proof hollow in the
ground, covered with a thick layer of sifted wood-ashes, previously
washed with water to extract the soluble matter. This ash bottom is
stamped and moulded with great care. In the middle a round cavity
is made, to receive the smelted metal. The ash floor is before-
hand carefully dried and heated, in order that there may be no chinks
by which the silver might be lost. The alloy of lead and silver
is then placed with charcoal on the bottom the furnace is closed
with a low covering of fire-proof clay, and the whole strongly [93]
heated till the metal flows, a strong current of air being constantly
thrown over the metal by the pair of bellows behind the wall. At this high
temperature the lead is oxidized and gradually absorbed as oxide by the
porous material of the ash floor. The red oxide of lead or litharge
forms at the end one solid mass with the bottom and is called then S Ffi


96 GEEBTS : USEFUL MINERA.LS AKL METALLURGY OF THE JAFANESE.

It Mitsu-da-so or Gin-rokasu, Syn. Sliiro-kam-no^mrmko. This
mixture of ash and litharge is afterwards worked for lead, for which
pm-pose it only wants to be smelted with some charcoal to reduce the
oxide of lead. During this operation the silver is not oxidized and
is therefore not absorbed by the porous ash bottom. At last the
silver, mixed with a little oxide of lead and lead metal, remains in the
cavity of the cupel bottom. The furnace is then allowed to cool. The
remaining metal is finally cooled with water and taken away. It bears
the name of hai-hiiki-gin (silver smelted upon ash).

4th, — Defining the silver.

The cake of impure silver is placed in another small cupellation
furnace with a fresh ash-hottom. The heat must bo regulated carefully,
otherwise the silver would he partly thrown away by the sudden dis-
charge of absorbed oxygen. When nearly the whole of the lead and
other impurities have been absorbed by the porous cupel, the surface of
the silver becomes iridescent, a phenomenon which is caused by very
thin films of oxide of lead. Immediately afterwards the silver obtains a
splendid, bright surface which serves as a sign of its purity. The metal
is then allowed to cool and to be taken away.

The process here described resembles closely, as has been already
said, our cupellation method, the construction of the furnaces and
especially its bottom being the only differences.

The ameliorated cupellation, known as Pattinson’s desilvering pro-
cess, by which even minim quantities of silver can be extracted with
advantage, is as yet unknown in Japan.

The amalgamation process, which is used on a large scale in Frei-
burg and in Ameiica, has only found in late years practical application
in Japan in those works which are erected by foreign mining engineers
and metallurgists.

According to the government statistics, the production of lead and
silver in Japan during the year 1877 was as follows : — ■


Lead, cwt., valued at Yen 28,435

Silver, 854,892 oz., ** 451,064

The estimate for the year 1874 was ; —

Lead 8,700 cwt.

Silver,... 812,000 oz.


aSEiiaJS : useful MINEEALS and tebALLUEGY OF TiiE JAPANESE* 97

It appears thus that the production of these two metals, although
relatively small, is on the increase.

There were imported in 1878, 520,000 catties of lead (in pigs,
sheets and tubes) whilst no lead was exported, thus showing that the
actual production in Japan does not supply the demand.


voii. III.— IS


( 98 )


THE PBEPAHATION OE VEGETABLE WAX.


By Henky Gkibble, Esq., of Nagasaki.


[Read before tke Asiatic Society of Japan on the 2Sril Jnccemhe)\ 1874,']

[94] The production of vegetable -wax lias always formed one of
the principal industries of the province of Kiushiii, and the trees hearing
the wax berries (called by the Japanese Haji-no-ki),, grow profusely on
the hill slopes and round the edges of most of the cultivated fields
(excepting rice ground) of Higo, Hizen, Shimabara, Chikugo and Chiku-
zen, whereas in Satsuma they appear to be less prevalent.

The process of producing wax suitable for export to Europe is a
tedious one, requiring the outlay of some capital on the part of the
manufacturer, wdio has to keep the berries on hand for at least one year,
and, in order to obtain a very superior product, docs so frequently for
six or seven years from the time of their being picked and sold by the
farmers.

The berries ripen in October and November, and are picked by
hand in the state shown by the sample marked No. 1 in the accompany-
ing box. After exposure to the sun in that state for about five days
they are packed in common straw bags and stored by the manufacturer
in his [9o] godown for periods varying from one to seven years. The
average value of 10 piculs of the berries in this, their first stage, is ten
yen^ the farmer’s selling price.

The manufacturer of wax can carry on his business all the year
round, being interrupted only by excessive heat or excessive cold. His
establishment consists of godowns for storing the berries, a large shed
containing the pans for heating, the presses for extracting liquid wax,


cribble: the preparation op yegetabt^e wax.


99


and as lai’ge a piece of levelled ground as possible for laying out the
wax during its bleacliing process. He establishes himself as near as
possible to a supply of good clear water.

When sufficiently ripe, the berries are thrashed with bamboo hails
and thus separated from their stalks. They are then crushed, as shown
in the diagram, and reduced to the stage of sample No. 2. This crushing
process, which can readily be done between. thumb and finger, discloses
a small, hard, red kernel surrounded by an apparently dry husk or fibre.
The wax is contained in this fibre and only to a very small extent in the
kernel, but it is not necessary to separate the two. .They are then well
steamed over an open kettle, the water in which is kept boiling by a
wood fire underneath.

From the steaming sieve the mixture is placed “ all hot” into the
press bags, surrounded by bamboo rings to fit the aperture in the press,
and as quickly as possible placed in the press, as shown in the diagram.
Wedges are driven home by repeated blows of a mallet, and the liquid
runs off into its receptacle at the bottom. Primitive as this style of
pressing is, the result has not yet been improved ux>on by the trial of
several hj^draulio presses which have at various times been tried by the
Japanese for expressing both oil and wax. Their own presses cost
little, never get out of order, last long, require nothing but cheap coolie
hire, and, in actual percentage of liquid extracted, do very nearly as
much work as an expensive “Langue’s” hydraulic press, requiring
steam or other power to drive pumps which frequently require overhaul-
ing and repairing. After being fully pressed, the ‘ cake ’ or residue of
the wax [96] fibre is broken up, again steamed and once more put
through the press, thus yielding ail its available wax.

Meantime the liquid quickly solidifies into a large block of«a dark
green, coarse and tallowy substance, which is at once boiled down and
run off into small earthenware saucers, then assuming the appearance of
sample No. 8.

The loss in weight of the manufacturer’s original purchase of 10
piculs of berries has by this time amounted to 8.00 piculs. His first
quantity was reduced to 8.80 piculs by the. thrashing process, and of
the liquid now xiroduced from the press he has only one picul and a-half
in the form of sample No, 3,


100 GBIBBLE : THE PBEBABATION OF VEGETABLE WAX.

In order to purify and bleach the wax for export, it now becomes
necessary to re-boil it in its iDresent stage mixed with water and ashes
(either shell or charcoal ashes), and again run it off into large blocks.
These blocks are tlien cut up into thin strips or stored, placed on mats
and exposed to the air, during fine clear weather only, for a period of
fifteen days, and occasionally sprinkled with water. The material is
then again boiled down, mixed with water only this time, and run into
large blocks. Once more are these blocks cut up into thin strips and
again exposed to the air ; this time for a period of about five days.

Again boiled down, with no water, the impurities rise to the
surface and are skimmed off, leaving the residite to be run into saucers,
assuming the shape and colour of sample No. 4, which is the vegetable
wax as known to the European consumer.

The various stages from sample No. 8 to the final one No. 4 have
further reduced the weight of wax from 1,50 piculs to 1.44 piculs, and the
cost of this production now stands at about the following figures, viz : —


Original cost of 10 piculs berries 'ijen 10.00

Coolie hire, thrashing and crushing “ 1.28

Steaming and pressing 1.44

Waste of press bags and bamboos in pressing “ 0.82

Coolie hire daring the bleaching process 1.20


Say yen 14.24

[97] for the final production of 1,44 piculs, being the equivalent of
about 10 yen per picul for the finished wax, without any allowance for
interest on the capital used in the first purchase of the berries or in the
plant and property of the manufacturer.

It only remains to he mentioned that the present market value
of the finished wax is from 10.50 to 11 yen per picul w'hen packed in
boxes ready for export, and even this price, which shows only a loss
to the Japanese manufacturer, is higher than the corresponding value
of the same article in Europe, so that for the present, at least, this
industry is not a profitable one either to the manufacturer or the shipper.
The value of wax, however, varies considerably, and about three years
ago it was worth for the London market about 20 ymi per picul !


GEIBBLE : THE PREPARATION OP VEGETABLE WAX.


101


Its use at home appears to he confined to the “ facing ” of candles
and the manufacture of “ vestas/’ and the frequent discoveries of cheaper
substitutes for these manufactures materially affect the value of vegetable
wax from Japan. For local consumption in the manufacture of Japanese
candles there is always a considerable demand for ^vegetable wax in its
unbleached state ; but with the prevailing and increasing consumption
of kerosino oil, even this outlet for the native industry is getting much
restricted.

A reference to the four samples accompanying this paper, showing the
various stages of vegetable wax from the berry to the finished saucer,
and to the native diagrams (which, Japanese-like, are rather in caricature)
showing some of the processes in its manufacture, will, .1 trust, clearly
explain what may well he .regarded as one of the chief industries of
Japan.


{ 102 )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


[98] A General Meeting of tlie Society was held on Wednesday evening, 23rd
December, at the Grand Hotel, C. W. Goodwin, Esp., Y. P., in the chair. The
minutes of the last meeting were approved, and A. 0. Gay, Esg., of Kobe, was
announced as having been elected an ordinary member.

The Committee on the Library reported that a new room had been engaged at
No. 28, which would be open daily from 4 to C p.m. Whereui3on Professor Ayrton
suggested that although the Librarian might only attend from four to six o’clock,
so that books could only be obtained during those hours, he would suggest that the
room itself should be open all day and furnished with pens, ink and paper, so that
it might be used by the members as a room for writing letters in, etc. He 'would
add that the small room at the Grand Hotel which formerly wms used as a Library
by the Society, had been found by himself as well as by other members residing in
T6ki5, very convenient for such purposes.

Ml'. Erunton read the following explanatory remarks, as supplementary to lus
statement made at the last meeting, in regard to the /lischarge of water from the
rivers Bhine and Shinanogawa respectively : —

At the last meeting of the Society during the discussion which followed the
reading of Mr. Lindo’a paper on a trip to Niigata, I made a statement giving some
particulars concerning the Shinanogawa, which' river has its mouth at Niigata. I
then compared the discharge of the Shinanogawa w'ith that of the Bhine, and I
have received from Mr. Liudo a letter taking exception to that comparison and
asking me to make a correction of my statement in such a manner as I deem most
suitable. As the matter occurred at the last meeting of this Society, and has
appeared as part of its proceedings, I think that this is the proper time and place to
bring the matter forward, Mr. Lindo informs me in his letter, that his paper, read
by Mr. Boyle, contains statements relative to the discharge of the Shinanogawa,
and also a compai'ison between it and that of the Bhine ; but that that gentleman,
in reading the paper, passed these over. His comparison and mine he says are
antagonistic, not as regards the discharge of the Shinanogawa, because on that we
agree, I may say, quite remarkably, but as regards the discharge of the Bhine ;
and he has been good enough to send' me very elaborate tables of the discharge of
the Bhine, which were, of course, not previously known to me, but wbicb place that
matter beyond a doubt. From these I find that the ordinary summer discharge of
the Bhine near its mouth is over hve millions cubic feet per minute, that its
maximum discharge in floods is over twenty-three millions cubic feet per minute,
and its minimum discharge is 2,700,000 cubic feet per minute. In my statement
I gave the ordinary summer discharge as 900,000 cubic feet per minute, and the
flood discharge as ten millions cubic feet per minute ; that is to say the summer


( 103 )

disoliarge as given hy me is between one-fifth and one-sixth of what it actually
is, [00] and the flood discharge between one-half and one-third of what it
actually is. In justice to myself I must say that I procured my information from
Beardmore’s Manual of Hydrology, which book is considered as good authority hy
all English Hydraulic Engineers ; but it is also necessary to say that on more
carefully investigating the matter, I find that Beardmore’s gauging was not taken
at tho mouth of the Ehiiie, but at Lauterbourg, which is some distance below
Strasboitrg. It is necessary, therefore, for me to correct the statement I formerly
made, to tho extent that the Shinanoga’wa discharges the same amount of water at
its mouth as the Khine does at Lauterbourg and that therefore the size of the two
rivers cannot fairly bo comi^ared. In reference to the actual discharge of tho
Siiinanogawa, it may be useful to have on the records of the Society a comparison
of the results obtained by myself and Mr. Liiido, as these aro so close that they
assuredly leave no room for uncertainty regarding it. On the 21st June, 1871, 1
gauged the discharge of the river and found it to be 1,500,000 cubic feet per
minute. During the months of June and July, 1873, Mr. Lin do took a succession
of observations the mean result of which was 1,320,000 cubic feet per minute, the
diflerenco between this and mine being so trifling as almost to appear extraor-
dinary. I calculated tho basin of the Shiuanogawa from government maps which
were necessarily more or less inaccurate, making it to be 10,000 sijuare miles in
area. And taking the discharge of that area at seventy cubic feet 2)ei' minute joei
sfjuare mile, wbicb is tbo average discharge of twenty-five rivers in difierent parts
of the world, gives the discharge of the Blunauogawa as 700,000 cubic feet per
minute. Mr. Lindo has calculated the low water discharge at 720,000 cubic feet
per minute, which two results verify each other surprisingly. Erom data procured
from a CQmi)arisou with other rivers, I estimated that the maximum flood dis-
charge of the Bhinanogawa would probably be about twenty times the latter
mentioned discharge, viz., fourteen millions cubic feet per minute. Mr. Lindo from
actual measurement has calculated the flood discharge to ho 12,000,000 cubic feet
per minute. Those calculations, made perfectly independently on different
systems and verifying each other so closely, conclusively determine the size of the
Bhinanogawa, and I therefore have though it well to give tho Society the in-
formation, which I do with Mr. Lindo’s sanction.

I’rofessor Ayrton then read a restiinq of Dr. Oeerts’ jjaper on Lead and
Silver ; and in reply to a question from the chair, stated that lie believed little or
no quicksilver was found in Japan. As far as he was aw’are, all the quicksilver
used in this country was imported from China, to which country it had been
brought fi’om Eui’ope. Gonsequenlly the price of quicksilver in Japan was far
higher than in England.

Mr. Brunton here remarked upon the black colour on the bronze image at Haro.

Professor Ayrton said in regard to the dark colour on Japanese bronze images
referred to by Mr. Brunton, he believed [100] this was produced not by any


( 104 )

admixture of quicksilver but by the bronze containing a considerable percentage of
lead, in consequence of which the bronze was soft. After the vase, or other bronze
ornament, was finished, the outside was strongly heated, and when on the point
of liquefaction it underwent a rapid oxidation, and thiis a dark uniform coat closely
adherent to the rest of the metal was formed. For the particulai's of this process
he would refer the society to the careful analysis of Japanese hrouze, made some
months back by M. Morin and communicated by that gentleman to the French
Academy.

Dr, Syle mentioned the New Almaden mines, near San Joso in California, as
furnishing a large supply of quicksilver.

A paper, contributed by Mr. Gribble of Nagasaki, on the Production and
Manufacture of Vegetable Wax in Japan, was read by Mr. W. H. Smith, who
exhibited specimens and diagrams illustrative of tbc subject.

Dr. Syle remarked on the similarity of the process employed to that uSed in
China for the extraction of oil from the bean. As to the employment of the
wedge rather than the screw, it was noteworthy that although the Chinese were
acquainted with the latter and used it for some purposes, they never seemed to
employ it as a mechanical power. The experiment made at Newchwang for oh*
taining the bean-oil by foreign machinery had not been successful.

Professor W. E, Ayrton said he could see why the wedge was used in pre-
ference to the screw both in China and Japan for extracting oil as stated by Dr.
Syle, since theory showed that in the absence of very great power a greater crush-
ing efiect could be produced by sudden blows on a wedge than by the continued
pressure of a screw. He thought that probably the considerable initial expense
necessary to be incurred in the purchase of a hydraulic press might be the' reason
why they were so rarely used in this country for the extraction of wax ; since as
far as he could judge from the diagrams lying on the table the apparatus at present
employed was of the rudest description and therefore cost but very little. He
would be glad if Mr. ^mith could inform them in what way Japanese vegetable
wax differed from Chinese wax.

Mr. W. H. Smith expressed his surprise that the hydraulic press was not
more used ; and read the following remarks of Sir H. Parkes from a note written
on the subject of the paper :

I am sorry to see that the wax cannot be produced at a paying price, but
this must be partly attributable to the very high charges of manufacture. I
cannot help thinking that it might be produced at a much less cost with more
industry and read hard work on the part of the Japanese. I was told in England
that it could be largely used in the process of printing manufactures (cottons) if a
large and steady supply could he reckoned on, hut as it came to market only by
fits and starts and in unreliable quantities, manufacturers were obliged to use other
material. I am sorry if this industry should fail, for the Japanese have hut few
available products for export, and they must work harder before they increase them.”


TRANSACTIONS


OB'


THE ASIATIC SOCIETY


OF JAPAN.


VOL. III. PART II.


(From 18th January^ 1875^ to BOth June, 1875.)


BEPBINT OE THE FIRST EDITIOH, PUBLISHED IN 1875, EDITED
BY THE SEGEETABIES.


YOKOHAMA:

R. MEIKLEJOHN & Oo.; KELLY & Co.
Shanohai; Kelly & Walsh.— London: TbIjbneb & Oo.
Paris: Ernest Lbeoex.


1884 *


B. MEIKLEJOUN CO., PBINTEBS, 26 WATEB STREET, YOKOIUHA, JAPAN.


CONTENTS,


PAGE.


Itinerary of Two Eoutes between Yedo and Niigata. By Captain Descbarmes,

Chasseurs d’Afrique 1

Constructive Art in Japan. By B. H. Brunton, Esq 18

An Excursion into the Interior Parts of Yamato Province, By Captain

St. John, B.N., H.M.S. “ Sylvia.” 32

On some Japanese Legends. By 0, W. Goodwin, Esq 45

Observations on the Climate at Nagasaki during the year 1872. By Br. Geerts. 63

Notes of a Journey from Awomori to Niigata, and of a visit to the Mines of

Sada. By J. H, Gubbins, Esq..,,. 74

Notes Collected in the Okitama Ken, with an Itinerary of the Bead leading

to it. By Charles H. Balias, Esq. 92

An Ancient Japanese Classic. By W. G. Aston, Esq 109

The Legacy of lyeyasu. By W. E. Grigshy, Esq., B.A 118

The Yonezawa Dialect. By Charles H. Balias, Esq., 129


Meteorological Observations, relating to article on page,


63


ASIATIC SOCIETY.


LIST OP MEMBERS.


HONOBAEY.

Admiral Sir G, Sbadwell, K.C.B. Captain Artbnr, B.N. S. Wells Williams, LL.D.
Sir Butherlord Alcoclc, K.G.B. T. E. Wade, Esq., C.B, Dr. Hooker, O.B., Kew,
Professor George B. Bay, Yale College, IJ. S. Professor W. B. Whitney, New
Haven, IJ. S. Honble. George P. Marsh, U. S.


BESIBENT.


Albinson, T. A.

Brown, Br. Nathan

Allen, H. Jnr.

Brown, B. M.

An^than, Baron d’

Burnside, Bevd. H.

Antisell, Br. T. A.

Brymcr, J.

Aston, W. G.

Caldwell, Br. J.

Atkinson, Prof. B. W.

CargiU, W. W.

Ayrton, Prof. W. E,

CasteU, A. T. van

Bate, C.

Chamberlain, B. H.

Bellamy, A.

Chipman, H. S.

Benson, E. S.

Cochran, Bevd. G.

Bingham, Hon, J. H.

Cocking, S.

Bisset, J,

Balias, C. H.

Black, J. B.

Bavison, J,

Boyle, B. V.

Be Boinville, C. A. 0.

Brennwaid, C.

Be Groote, His Excellency 0.

Brunton, B, H.

Be San, E.

Brent, A.

Bescharmes, Oapt.

Bridgford, Capt. S. T.

B’lffanger, E.

Brinkley, Lieut. E.

Bickins, E. Y.

Brooke, H.

Billon, E.

Brown, Bevd. S. E. Br.

Dickinson, B., M.D.

Brown, A. E,

Bodds, J.


Dtaer, G-.

Dyer, H.

Eldridge, Dr* S.
EHiott, Dr* W* St. G.
Elmore, T* F.
Eusden, B.

Exton, J.

Eagan, G. S, E.
Farmer, J.

Flanders, C. A.
Fisclier, E.

Flowers, M. 0.

Fraser, T, A.

Gay, A. 0.

Geerts, Dr. J. A.
Glover, T. B*

Green, Bevd. D* 0. *

Grigor, J.

Goodwin, C. W.
Gowland, W,

Gower, E.

Gregory, G. E.
Grigsby, Prof.

Gribble, H.

Gubbins, J. G.

Hall, 0. J.

Hail, Dr.

Hamilton, G.

Hartley, J.
Hatakeyama, Y.
Hawes^ Lient* A. G. S*
Hayller, T.E,

Hay, D.

Hellyer, F.

Henderson, J, Y.
Hepburn, Dr. J. C.
Holme, B.

Horne, Jnr., H, A*
House, E. H.

Howell, W. G.

Howell, G. H.

Hunt, H. J.


Inglisb, D. D.

Irwin, E. W.

James, F. S.

Jonas, F. M.

Kilby, E. F.

Kinder, Major T. W.
Kinder, C. W.

Kingdon, K. F.
Kirkwood, M.

Lawrence, G. W.

Lepper, T.

Lindo, Lieut. J. A.
Lotbrop, 0. K.

Lyman B. S.

McGartee, Dr. D. B,
MacDonald, Bevd. B. D.
Maelagan, E.

Mackenzie, H.

Maolay, Bevd. B. S. Dr.
MoBitcbie, J.

McDonald, W,

Marks, F. W.

Marsball, Prof. D. H.
Mayers, W. F. S.

Miller, Bevd. E. B.

Milne, A.

Mori, The Hon. A.
Mounat, J.

Muller, Dr. L.

Murray, Dr. D.

Ness, G. P.

Ojeda, Snr. Don E. de
Ouston, A.

Parkes, His Excel. Sir H.
Parry, S.

Parsons, Bevd. W. E.
Perry, Prof. J.

Pitman, F.

Pitman, J.

Plunkett, Hon. E. E.
Poate, T. P.

Pole, G. H.


( vii )


Pryer, H»

Pureell, T. A.

Kickett, J.

Binger, J.

BoTjerfeson, J.

Bober st on, B.

Eoclrwell, G*. I.

Sanjo, Jnr.

Savatier, Br.

Scott, M. M.

Sband, W. J, S.

Sbaw, Bevel. A. G.
Sicliel, J. P.

Sitwell, J. A.

Smale, Sir John
Smedley, J-
Smith, W. H.

Smith, J. H,

Smith, Prof. B.

Smith, Hon. 0. 0.
Stone, N. J.

S transom, S. J.

Struve, His Excel. 0. de
Summers, Eevd. J.
Sutton, E, W.


Syle, Bevd. E. W.
Thompson, G. W.
Thornieraft, Br. T. 0,
Thurburn, J.

Van der Pott, J. J.

Veeder, P. V.

Yon Brandt, His Excel. H.
Yon Siebold, Baron
Walker, E.

Walsh, J. G.

Walsh, T.

Warren, Bevd. 0. F.
Watson, E. B.

Wauchope, G.

Wetmore, E. B.

Whittall, E.

Wheeler, Br. E.

Wilkin, A. J.

Wilkinson, H. S.

Wilson, J. A.

Williams, G. B.

Wolley, W. A.

Wright, A.

Wright, Bevd. W. B.
Zappe, E.


( )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


The Third Annual Meeting of this Society was held at the Grand Hotel on
Wednesday evening, July 14th, 1875, at half-past eight o^clock.

The chair was taken by Sir Harry S. Parkes,

The Minutes of the last two General Meetings having been road and con-
firmed, the Annual Beport of' the Council was then presented as follows :


EEPOBT OP TEE COUNCIL OP THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OP JAPAN,
POB THE YEAB ENDING JULY, 1875.

The Council have much satisfaction in reporting that the advantages have
never been more marked, ox the progress of the Society more encouraging than
during the past twelve months.

In evidence of this they refer to the fact that it has been found expedient to
issue an extra number of the Society’s Journal, containing Transactions, etc., up
to the end of 1874. The contents of this, and of the supplementary number,
which is about to be issued, are as follows :

I. — Useful Minerals and Metallurgy of the Japanese; by Dr. Geerts of Nagasaki.

II. — Observations on the Bay of Sendai; by Captain St, John, H.M.S. Sylvia.

HI.— Useful Minerals and Metallurgy of the Japanese ; by Dr. Geerts, of

Nagasaki,

lY .—Description of a Trip to Niigata, along the Shinshiu-road and back by
the Mikuni Pass ; by J. A. Lindo, Esq.

V. — Useful Minerals and Metallurgy of the Japanese, by Dr. Geerts, of Naga-
saki.

YI. — The preparation of Yegetable Wax; by Henry Gribble, Esq,, of Nagasaki,

YII.— The Bevival of Pure Shinto ; by E* M. Satow, Esq.


( 1 > )

Vni.—Itmerary of Two Eoutes Ibetween Yedo and Niigata; by Capt.
Befjcliarmes.

IX. — Constructive Art in Japan ; by K. H. Brunton, Es(j.

X. — A Description of the Coast between Osbima and Toba Harbour ; and an
Excursion among the Forests and Mountain Eanges of the Province of Yamato ; by
Capt. St. John, B.N.

XI. — On some Japanese Legends ; by C. W. Goodwin, Esq.

XII. — Observations on the climate of Nagasaki in 1872; by Dr. Geerts.

XIII. — Notes of a Journey from Awamori to Niigata, and a visit to the mines
of Sado ; by J. H. Gubbins, Esq.

XIV. — Notes Collected in the Okitama Ken, with an Itinerary of the Boads
leading to it ; by C. H. Dallas, Esq.

XV. — On an ancient Japanese Classic ; by W, G. Aston, Esq.

XVI. — On the Legacy of lyeyasu ; by Prof. W. B. Grigsby.

XVII. — On the Yonezawa Dialect ; by C. H. Dallas, Esq.

On the evening preceding the Transit of Venus a valuable lecture was de-
livered to a large and interested audience, by Professor W. E. Ayxton of the
Imperial College of Engineering, at Yedo ; and on the occasion of the visit of the
Challenger to Yokohama, Professor Wyville Thomson favored ns with a lecture,
in wdiich he gave a resume of the results, as far as ascertained, of the deep sea
sounding and dredging in which he had been engaged. Such lectures are of great
value, and deserve the best acknowledgments of the Society,

Another token of progress is seen in the fact that it has become desirable to
hold Eegular Meetings alternately at Yokohama and at Yedo, a request being made
from the latter idace that the sessions of the Society be held there as often as
once a month ; which suggestion the Council take this opportunity of bringing
before the Annual Meeting for its consideration.

The pressing want of the present moment is a good, large room— conveniently
situated, and free of charge— in which all the Society’s Meetings might he held, its
business transacted, and its Museum and Library made accessible to members and
strangers.

The Treasurer’s Eeport, herewith submitted, shews a balance in hand of
5317.32.

The number of new members elected during the past year is 61, making the
present number about 200,

The number of Exchanges effected with other Societies has much increased,
and copies of the Journal have been sent by request to Triibners in London, and
also to New York, for sale.

The additions to the Library and Museum during the past year have been

— a fact much to be regre|ted. Some improvement, however, in this respect
may he expected if the Society shall adopt the suggestion, which the Council now
lays before the meeting, of increasing the Annual Subscriptions to 510,

VOL* III. VT, n.— B.


The following the Treasurer's} Beporfc.


Beoeipts and Expenditube,

1st July to 31st Becemlier, 1874.

Di\

To Balance in hand 1st July ^^586.23

“ Subscriptions collected from 21 members at 16 105.00

“ Subscriptions to Library * * 5.00

“ Amount received for sale of Transactions 15.00

“ Sundry receipts 1.43


^ 1712.65


Cr,

By printing, Stationery, Advertising, etc ^482.16

“ Books purchased 10.00

“ Librarian’s wages. 20.00

“ Grand Hotel rent of room, etc 43.75

“ Cost of Cabinet for insects 12.00

Diagrams, Professor Ayrton’s lecture 32.42

» Sundries 9.00

Balance .. 103.82


^712.65


Slst January to 30th June, 1875.

Dr. ‘

To Balance on ha:‘^ ^>103. 32

“Subscriptions ; ■ ' ■ members at |5 800.00

“ Amount received for sale of Transactions G.OO


15909.32


(7r.

gy Advertising, etc ^214.00

“ I : 111.94

“ Librarian’s wages 20.00

“ Cost of forwarding Transactions to London 21.09

“ Bent of room at No. 28, 7 months at ^20 a month 140.00

“ Burnishing rooms at No. 28 49.31

“ Grand Hotel, refreshments, etc 20.00

“ Eire Insurance l>400 to 20th April, 1870 8.00

Sundries 7.06

“ Balance. 317.32


^909.32


To Balance deposited in Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, London and

China ^317.32

*J0HN ThUEBXJBN,

Hon. Treasurer*


The following resolutions were then passed :

1. — Besolved^ That the Beport of the Council be accepted, and the thanks of
the Society tendered to the retiring officers.

Proposed hy Professor Summers, seconded by Principal Dyer.

2. — Besolved, That a Committee of ordinary members be appointed to take into
consideration the present state of the finances of the Society and to consult with
the Council concerning the same — the said Committee to consist of Mr. Cargill,
Dr. Purcell, Principal Dyer and Mr. Thomson.

Proposed by Professor Grigsby, seconded by Dr. Wheeler.

3. —Besolved^ That the subject of holding semi-monthly meetings at Yokohama
and Yedo alternately be referred to the same Committee.

Proposed by j\Ir. Aston, seconded by Mr. Wilkin.

4. — Besolvedi That the mode of electing the Council be considered by the above
Committee and reported on at the next General Meeting.

Proposed by Mr. Wilkin, seconded by Mr. Thomson.

The Committee appointed to nominate the officers for the ensuing year recom-
mended the following, who were unanimously elected.

President. — S. B. Browm, D.D.

Vice-Presidents . — Sir Harry S. Parkes, K.C.B.; C, W, Goodwin, Esq.

Councillors.— 0. De Groote, Esq.; J. C. Hepburn, Esq., M.n.; A. Wilkin,
Esq.; W. G. Howell, Esq.; Edwin Wheeler, Esq., m.d.; David Murray, Esq.,
Ph. D.; Bev. E. W. Sylo ; W. G. Aston, Esq.

Cor, Sec. — W. B. Ayrton, Esq.

Bee. Secs . — John Y. Henderson, Esq., Yokohama ; Professor James Summers,
Tokio.

Treasurer. — J. Thurburn, Esq.

A vote of thanks to the Chairman having been carried unanimously, the
mooting separated.


ITINEEAEY OF THE COUNTEY TEAVEESED BETWEEN
THE 3bd august AND THE 8th SEPTEMBEE, 1874,


By Captain Descharmes, Ohass-extrs h’Afeique.


[^Read before the Asiatic Society of Jay an, on the 18th January, 1876,^1
My principal objects in this journey were to travel northward in
the direction of Lake Inawashiro ; thence to pass through the province
of Aidzu ; to reach Niigata by the course of the river which flows from
Lake Inawashiro ; and to descend the West coast southwards to a point
favourable for reaching Fujiyama through the mountainous province of
Shinano to Kofu, and from Fujiyama to reach T6ki6 by one of the well-
known roads.

The 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th days were dedicated to Nikko, the
itinerary and features of which are well known.

From the 10th the itinerary may offer some interest to those who
may wish to visit less freq^uented parts of the country.

10th August. — ^From Nikko to Imaichi — a well-known road. From
Imaichi the path tends northward towards Ohowatari (2 ri) through a pic-
turesque country* The river Daiyagawa (the torrent of Nikk6) is passed,
afterwards that of Kinugawa, which is much ravined, [2] deep and
rapid, and abounds with a fish called ai. Pack-horses cannot pass this
stream, and the next station on the left bank being 80 ch6 from the river,
a considerable delay in the journey takes place. Halt for the night at
Funaniyu, a village of small importance,

11th August, — ^From Funaniyu to Ishigami.

From Funaniyu to Tamaniyu (1 ri 28 cJw) about Scho past Tamaniyu
is a rapid torrent which can only be passed by fording. It is about 80
metres broad, and is often impassable. It is called by the country
von. III. j?r. n. — 1


2 DESGHABMBS ; ITINERARY OF TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NIIGATA.

people the Arakawa. From this torrent to Taka-nchi (2 n 10 cho) the
road is wooded, picturesq[ue, and the stream swift ; the general direc-
tion East.

From Takauchi to Ishigami 3 rL Two unimportant streams may
be forded, and just before reaching Ishigami, a considerable stream,
often impassable, named Hokigawa, running from N, to S., has to be
crossed. The general direction of the road is N.

From Ishigami to Kiwatahara, 5 rL The last three ri traverse
the great plain of Nasunohara. This plain appears about ten to fifteen
ri long and from three to fve broad, and is covered with grass and fern,
like all the hara in Japan. There are few or no trees, and little water
or trace of cultivation. No houses are to be met with until Kiwatahara,
a village consisting of a few cottages. One ri before arriving there the
traveller is still among the mountains. Beautiful streams of fresh water
are to he met with, and vast dry beds of torrents, indicative of terrible
storms, and bearing enormous blocks of stone and uprooted trees.
From the plain of Nasunohara Mount Tsukubasan may be seen towards
the S.E., and the ‘Vast chain of the Nasusan running from S.W. to
N.E.

From Kiwatahara to Muronoi, three n, over a very bad road, an<i
with a second Aara to traverse. Before reaching the village of Murunoi,
a considerable torrent named Nakagawa is reached and must he forded.
From Muronoi to Yumoto, 2 ri. Leaving Muronoi the gorge of the
Nasusan is reached. The road becomes extremely difficult, in some
places very muddy, sometimes steep and [8] covered with rocks. The
gradients are very sharp. In fine weather the neighbouring summit of
the Nasusan may be seen with fine effect, the view embracing a vast
expanse towards the S. W. and E. and presenting a magnificent

18th August. — Halt at Yumoto.

The village of Yumoto consists of some 80 houses built solely
to receive the bathers of the summer season. A torrent of mineral
water runs through this open gorge from S. to N. at the foot of Mount
Nasu. The only street of the village is in this gorge and runs parallel
with the stream. Wooden pipes convey the water into the middle of
the street by two conduits, the one bringing cold, the other hot water.
Five square tanks of two compartments occupy about 30 metres of


BESCHABMES : ITINEBARY OF TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NIIGATA* 3

the road between these two streams. The mineral water contains
sulphur in small quantities and alum* The temperature is very high
(from 60^ to 62^ C.), but it can be reduced in the tanks in a few minutes
to a more moderate level by a simple and ingenious system of cocks, by
which the streams of hot and cold water can be regulated at will. These
mineral waters are called the Shika-no-yu (the waters of the stag).
Tradition relates that the first persons who made use of them were led
thither by observing a deer which had been wounded by hunters, its
instinct leading it to resort to the waters.

The village was formerly much larger than at present. It is over-
looked, in front, by several temples sufiiciently well preserved, at least
externally. It was built at about 800 metres distant from its present
site. But a terrible flood in destroyed the whole village, and

in order to avoid the repetition of a similar catastrophe, it was
rebuilt higher up the valley. It contains only about a hundred in-
habitants, its sole trade consisting in a little sulphur and some vegetable
products used in dyeing. In winter a few deer are killed, and though
rarely, bears of a small species. It is a good game country, and possesses
woodcock and pheasants. In the neighbouring stream ai and yamarne
(trout) are caught.

[4] To the north of the village, and after an ascent of a few minutes,
the tourist is brought face to face with Nasu, a beautiful and imposing
mountain. It consists of three principal peaks, one of which, called
Tansu-ga-take, is an extinct volcano. The Nasusan is, properly speaking,
a well-defined volcano. It still emits smoke and subterranean sounds.
The crater appears to be about 200 metres in diameter. The sides are
arid and bear traces of eruptions of lava. The last eruption is said to
have taken place in the year 17B0, The ascent to the crater is easy;
and that of the neighbouring peak, Bishamon,^ can also be made. This
station would afford an agreeable resort in summer ; the air is fresh and
the nights are cool ; b\it the bad state of the roads would for a long time
render access to it difiicult for the majority of travellers, and almost
impossible for European ladies.

Another hot spring station is to he found at a place called Shiwo-


i One of the seven gods of happiness, — Edd,


4 DESOHARMES: ITINERARY OF TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NIIGATA.

bai’a, towards the West of Nasu, and to the N. E. of the road from
Nikko to Aidzu, which passes not far from here. It is possible to go
direct from Nasu to Aidzu by the neck of the SantagOri, but the roads
are very bad by the confession even of the natives.

14th August.— From Yumoto to Ihidoyo.

Leaving Yumoto, the left bank of the river is passed, and the
traveller descends the slopes E. of the Nasu. For 4 ri these slopes are
well wooded but the roads are muddy, fail of ruts and impracticable
after rain. Not a house is to be met with until the miserable hamlet of
Tsunago is reached, consisting at most of 70 souls, and absolutely des-
titute of resources. From this point to Shirakawa, a great uncultivated
plain must he passed, marked with the peculiar characteristics of the
liara: the distance is 2 ri 15 cho.

At Shirakawa the great northern road from Tokio to Sendai and Aidzu
is regained. Shirakawa is a large town of about 2 kilometres in circum-
ference, with a large trade in silk. It has an ancient sliiro. At some
distance to the North the road branches off to the N.E. towards Sendai,
and N.W. towards Aidzu, In this latter direction, and at 2| ri from
Shirakawa is to be found the village of Ihidoy6 — 18 to 20 houses.

Leaving Ihidoy6 the road takes a general direction northward. The
country is very undulating and well wooded, and the following villages
are passed :

Kamigoya 1 n, 20 oho,

Makinouchi 1 “ 15 “

Naganuma 1 2 “

At the latter point you leave the Hon-kaid6 (or main road)® if it is
desired to go direct to the Lake luawashiro. Formerly a sliiro was
.standing in this important place, which is one of the gates of the
province of Aidzu, either by the direct road or by the defile which leads
to the Lake Inawashiro. To reach the latter point it is necessary to
proceed by way of Takinohara (1 n) with one relay of horses, passing
through a pretty valley variously cultivated, bounded on the N.E. hy
the mountains of Iwaki. On dismounting, the defile or neck of Ohiwake
is entered. IChe road follows, at a rounded angle, a stream which runs
from N. to S, Both banks are covered with thick wood rendered


3 Known as the dshiu-kaidd.-— JSdd.


DESCHAEMES: ITINEEAEY OE TWO EOUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NHaATA. 5

useless by want of roads. The right hank is formed by a somewhat
remarkable mountain, Hachiman-ga- take, the ascent of which is prolonged
for about 2 ri. Nearly at tlie summit a single post-house is to be found,
called Obiwake, and at 1,000 m. above this point one of the finest views
in Japan may be enjoyed. It extends towards the South and South-
east, with an immense horizon hounded by the lofty mountains of Sendai
and Oshiu,

Still continuing to climb these steep slopes, the traveller leaves,
with many regrets, this magnificent country and arrives at the boundary
which divides the waters of the Pacific from those of the Sea of Japan,
a venerable gate and a feudal barrier informing him of his entrance
into the province of Aidzu. This boundary is hardly reached before a
rapid descent towards the north is commenced, and a view is gained as
superb as that which has just been left behind. A succession of the
mountain chains of Aidzu and Sendai extends to the North. At a [6]
turn of one of the angles of the path, Lake Inawashiro is seen in a
hollow, shining like a mirror in the last rays of the setting sun. But
the steepness of the slopes which lead to the foot of the valley soon
eclipses this panorama, and after three ri of easy walking we arrive at
the village of Nakaji, close to Lake Inawashiro.

Nakaji is about three kilometres from the eastern extremity of Lake
Inawashiro. Taking boat on the lake it may he traversed towards the
N.E. as far as the point where it flows into the basin of Aidzu, from
whence Wakamatsu may be reached on foot. But strong westerly
winds are frequent on the lake, and at such times the passage is almost
impossible in the wi’etched boats ordinarily employed. Under these
circumstances the route to Aidzu must be regained by crossing from
Nakaji to Fukura.

Inawashiro is one of the largest and most picturesque lakes in
Japan. It is fed by two streams which flow from the East and North-
east and measures about 4 ri in all directions. It is surrounded by
mountains of no great elevation, except that of Bandaisan on the North
shore, one of the highest in Aidzu. On the same shore there are a few
villages where salmon and mmu are caught, and a fish, peculiar to
certain lakes in Japan, called the akaJiara (red-belly). A small trade is
carried on between Wakamatsu and the different points of the lake. But


6 DESOHARMES : ITINERARY OE TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NIIGATA,

tk© total absence of roads in the neighbouring regions renders all com-
mercial movement difficult, and it may be said, of this place, as of the
whole of the interior of Japan, that the growth of public wealth would
derive considerable impulse from the opening of good roads. The main
roads (called hon-lcaido), like that of Aidzu, are the only ones laid out
and those are only intermittently repaired. These even are detestably
bad in respect of the inequality of the surface and the steepness of the
slopes. Their reform is a work of paramount necessity to the Japanese
Government and would be productive of the best results.

The shores of Lake Inawashiro may be recommended as an agreeable
summer resort, although it should be stated that they are entirely
destitute of all resources for European life. The temperature is cool,
and in winter the streams are frozen for several weeks.

If desirous of regaining the Hon-kaido, the traveller must take the
route from Hakiji to Fukura, which is undulating and picturesque. From
Nakaji to Harajiku, by Fukura, there are five ri to traverse, over a good
country. The mountains assume a bolder character as you approach
Wakamatsu.

The slopes from Mount Kanebori and Takizawa are steep. Towards
the North lie the vast plain of Aidzu and its capital Wakamatsu, which is
reached after a march of 8 or 9 ri from Nakaji, — a fatiguing walk on
account of the disintegrated silex which forms the soil for several
kilometres before reaching Wakamatsu.

Wakamatsu is the capital of the ancient province of Aidzu. It is a
considerable town, but possessed formerly a far larger population than
at present. The Castle of the Princes of Aidzu, situated on a bill at a
short distance from the town, has been destroyed and razed to the
ground. The town is situated nearly in the centre of a great oval plain,
of from 10 to 12 ri in its longest diameter, and constituting what is
properly called the Aidzu country. This plain is fertile, cultivated with
rice, and watered by many rivulets which descend from the surrounding
mountains, and which unite in the principal stream which flows out of
the Lake Inawashiro.

Besides Lake Inawashiro, there are in the basin of Aidzu two other
tekes or lagoons, the waters of these three lakes uniting to form the
river which flows towards Niigata. A fourth lake named Kosemura,


DBSOHABMES: ITINEBAEY OP TWO KOXJTBS BETWEEN YEOO AND NUOATA. f

whicli is said to be situated on the N, E. slope of the mountains of Nikko,
also discharges its waters into the same basin, which also carries a large
volume of water in the Japan Sea.

The mountains which surround the plain of Aidzu are majestic, and
many are very lofty, among others the Bandaisan to the North-east,
the form of which is remarkable ; Miyojingatake to the South ; and the
Itoyosan [8] to the West. This latter mountain, even in summer, is not
exempt from snow, and furnishes ice which is cried about tbe streets of
Wakamatsu.

At a distance of one 7i from the town there is a very celebrated
place of resort, named Higashiyama. It is a collection of tea-houses
in a deep ravine formed by a stream of considerable volume. From the
clefts in the rocks which form the right bank, streams of hot water flow ;
and many resort to the spot to enjoy the cool air and take the benefit of
the warm springs, which are of a temperature of about 50-55° C ; but
they have neither taste nor smell, and do not appear to contain any salt*

On leaving Wakamatsu for Niigata, the western route must be
taken, which is a metalled road running through rice fields, and in as
detestable a condition as can be imagined.

From Wakamatsu to Bange — a considerable commercial town — ^is
3 ri 10 cJio,

From Bange to Funato, 1 ri, 20 cho. At the latter place a bridge
of boats must he passed, constructed similarly to those used in Europe.
The aspect of the river is picturesque. On leaving it the neck of the
mountain called Tabane-matsu-toge has to be attacked by a very steep
ascent of from 5 to 7 kilometres. From the summit, on which there are
two tea-houses, a fine view may be enjoyed. The descent is by an
abrupt and picturesque path towards Nozawa, a large town which must
formerly have been much frequented. The road, which preserves
a generally western direction, passes over the remarkable shoulder called
Kurumatoge.

In all these mountains the lacquer tree [iirmhi-noM) is found,
which is tapped by horizontal ineisions in the trunk. It is almost
useless to say that the aspect of the country from Wakamatsu is pictu-
resque in proportion to the badness of the roads, and the steepness of the
slopes. These conditions are unfortunately universal throughout ^


8 DESOHABMES : ITINEEABY OF TWO KOTJTES BETWEEN YEDO ANE NIIOATA*

whole of the ititerioi% and jf the eye is pleased the lower limbs are
tortured. The tourist should therefore be well shod, and fortified with
a patience which does [9] not belong to all Europeans. From all these
points of view the country situated between Nikk6, Aidzu and Niigata
deserves special mention.

The river becomes navigable at Tsugawa, which, in virtue of this
position, has become the important centre of a commerce and carrying
trade. From this point Niigata can be reached by water in a day when
the stream is strong. The distance by land between the two places
being from 18 to 20 ri, an estimate may be formed of the rapidity of the
stream, here called the Tsugawa. When the water is slack, a halt must
be made for the night and Niigata reached the next day, the native
boatmen being justly unwilling to descend the river during the dark
hours. The rapidity of this form of locomotion is not without some
disagreeables. For 4 or 5 rl after leaving Tsugawa a number of rapids
must be passed, and the river, being hemmed in by steep rocks, is much
of a torrent, studded with rocks, and all the skill, coolness and constant
practice of the boatmen are required to avoid grave and frequent
accidents. The boats are long and narrow (7 hm by 3 to 4 Hhaku
broad), a kind of canoe in which it is well not to indulge in any un-
necessary movements, and two men, standing, one in the stem the other
in the stern, direct a course in which the smallest error may cause the
wi’eok of the whole freight upon a rock. After three or four hours of
this exercise, the mouth of the defile is reached, the river becoming
broader and more calm as its mouth is reached ; but the sand-banks
and eddies render the navigation dangerous at night.

The overland route from Tsugawa to Niigata at first follows the
left hank, crossing the very difficult pass of Iwaya. It crosses the river
afterwards at a ford, and winds about in a bend on the right bank.
This road is only taken in going from Niigata to Tsugawa ; the ascent
of the river by water occupies from five to seven days, and it is im-
possible to pass its rapids without great trouble. This part of the basin
of the Niigata river is contiguous to coal and copper mines, rich enough,
it is said, but not productive on account of the want of good roads*

[10] The approach to Niigata is dull and desolate, the open plains
and environs being sandy and uninteresting* The town is very regularly


BESOHARMBS: ITINERARY OP TWO BOOTES BETWEEN YEBO AN© NOOATA 9

built, the streets are clean, well-kept and rectilinear, and a number of
canals keep the town in communication with the river. The population
^ is estimated at over 60,000, and represents the entire commercial im-

portance of all the West. It is at the same time the centre of pleasure
and recreation for the whole of the district. The climate seems to
* differ sensibly from that of the other side of the Pacific ; the heat is very
great in summer, and the winter is cold and long. As is usual on this
side of the Japan Sea, the houses are all fronted with a covered verandah,
which allows of exercise when the snow covers the streets. The roofs
are built at very open angles and weighted with heavy stones. The
typhoon which passed over Nagasaki and the South on the 20feh August,
1874, ended its course northwards, appearing in Niigata on the 21st from
6 p.m. to 11 p.m. The maximum intensity was during the hour
between 8 and 9 p.m. Every house was more or less injured, but
the destruction was less severe than at Nagasaki on the night of the
20fch. The typhoon swept the whole coast from south to north on the
20th and 21st.

The most- serious bar to the ultimate development of Niigata is the
existence of a very dangerous sand-bank at the mouth of the river.
Besides the waters which come from Aidzu, which, on account of their
volume, bring down vast q^uantities of sand, the river Shinano, the
largest in Japan, flows through Niigata, gathering on its course all the
waters of the central chain of the west, which again by their vast volume
contribute to the blocking up of the port of Niigata, An attempt has
been made to remedy this condition of affairs by the construction of a
canal, which, however, has been abandoned on account of its defective plan.

The island of Sado, noted for its gold mines, is about 16 n from
the coast. Most of the junks in which the traffic between this island
and Niigata is carried on, put [11] into port at Teradomari, south of
Niigata, to escape the dangers of the bar.

A detailed description of the island of Sado and of the works there*
which are under the direction of Europeans, will shortly he given by
recent explorers. Although Niigata is an open port, it contains very few
European residents (6 or 6 in 1874). There is no doubt that the
making of carriage roads from this point to Aidzu would contribute greatly
^ to the extension of business.

von. III. TT, XI.— -2


10 DESOHAKMES : mNERAEY OE TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NIIGATA.

From Niigata to Take-no “maclii the road follows the shore, passing
sometimes through sand, sometimes through paddy-fields or pine woods,
and offering little worthy of note.

From Take-no-machi the road, diverging from the South, runs
through rich paddy fields towards the East, skirting a bold ridge which
projects into the sea, and the very steep declivity of which does not
admit of an easy road by the shore. The sea is again struck to the
West and South-west, the road traversing the remarkable pass called
Saigatabatoge, from the summit of which a splendid view of the rich
plains of Echigo in the back-ground can be enjoyed, while the Sea of
Japan and the island of Sado lie in the foreground. On emerging from
this pass the little port of Teradomari may he seen, a fishing village
about two kilometres in length and well situated. (It would make an
agreeable watering place.) From Take-no-machi to Teradomari the
distance is 5 r-L

Leaving Teradomari there is no other road than the sea-shore,
which is of fine sand with a gentle slope more agreeable to the bather
than the pedestrian. According to circumstances the tourist can follow
the coast on foot, or engage a small vessel to go southwards coasting
along with a fair wind. Idzumozaki (4 ri) may thus be reached, a very
large fishing village, 4 kilometres long, and of considerable commercial
activity. There are some pleasant tea-houses near the shore, and the
beach is very agreeable.

The route continues as before, and the snow-clad summits of Echigo-
Tateyama are to be seen towards the southeast. [12] To Hishiya, 8 ri,
where an important annual horse-fair is held in the fifth month of the
year. In 1874 2,000 horses were brought there.

To Arabama (2 rl) a considerable fishing village, with a' miscellane-
ous trade. To Kashiwazaki, 2 ri, an important commercial town with
a population of 12,000. There was a sharp skirmish here in 1868, and
many houses still bear marks of the strife.

It is better to go by sea from Kujiranami (the shipping port of
Kashiwazaki) to Imamachi, if the weather be favourable.

On arriving at Imamachi, there, is a dangerous bar at the mouth of
the river, which can only be crossed when the wind is in any other
direction than northerly. In good weather this voyage is pleasant and


raSOHAEMES : ITINEEAEY OF TWO EOUTES BETWEEN YEBO AND NHOATA. 11

rapid, and in the distance may be seen the peaks of Tateyama in the
province of Eohigo. The foot of the Yoneyama is passed, a mountain of
fair altitude, on the summit of which there is a temple which can be
very distinctly seen from the sea* This temple is only frequented or
inhabited from the 4th to the 8th month. Near Kujiranami there are
some deep caverns in the cliffs, which may he entered by boats. All
this coast, from Teradomari to Imamachi, is well populated, commercial,
and possesses a good climate. The nights are cool, and the shore well
adapted for sea-bathing. The beach is soft and remarkable for the
absence of shells. The men are vigorous, tanned by the sun and sea-
air, and devoted to fishing. The women are strong and capable of the
hardest toil such as is usually undertaken by men. Imamachi is a large
town with a population of from 6,000 to 8,000 souls, built on the left
bank of a river, which conduces to a flourishing trade.

From Imamachi to Takata 2 rL Leaving the coast, the road opens
towards the south, crossing a vast and fertile valley and leaving to 'the
right in a south-easterly direction three peaks rather remarkable for
their form and dimensions, and known as Miyokosan, Gochisan and
Yakeyama, the ascent of all which appears difficult.

Takata is a town containing from 30,000 to 40,000 souls, [13] the
ancient seat of a daimio, and still important from a commercial point of
view. It is one of the great centres of production and supply of the
west side of the main island, and particularly of the province of
Echigo.

From Takata to Sekujawa . — Eoute by causeway in the middle of
the rice-fields from Takata to Arai 3 ?’t. Arai is a large village of from
4,000 to 5,000 souls. From Arai the road rises by gentle but continuous
slopes. Passing Nibongi you cross the very picturesque torrent of Seki-
gawa, of which the two steep banks must be climbed by a zigzag path
which has a pretty effect. Sekigawa is a wretched village, but the
honjin is good.

Immediately affcer passing this village you climb a stiffish pass
called Kuma-saka-toge, and on descending from this pass come upon the
pretty village of Nojiri, on the border of a little lake of the same
name .

The lake of Nojiri is very picturesque and well situated. The


12 DBSOHABMKS : ITINEBAEY OB TWO UOTJTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NDGATA*

form of it is somewhat curved and its length appears to me not to
e;soeed a ri and a-half. It is embellished with little well-wooded
islands, and has but few fish. On its banks tower the three summits of
Knroshime yama.

From Nojiri to Murei (3 ri) the road traverses some pleasant
woods, and redescends to Murei with tolerably rapid slopes* You then
find yourself by the side of a great torrent which empties itself into the
river of Shinano.

Leaving Murei you enter the mountainous part of the pass called
Kodama-zaka. From the top of this pass you behold the vast panorama
of the basin of the Shinanogawa, peopled with numerous and rich
villages, and the view is bounded to the south by the high mountains of
the Shinano district. The whole of this region appears rich and
cultivated.

As soon as you descend into the valley you meet a long succes-
sion of villages, nearly contiguous, which end at the temple of Zenkdji,
4 n 20 elw from Murei. This temple, which has no other merit than
that of being very large and situated upon a rather towering hill, is one of
the most celebrated and most frequented in Japan. The [41] aggregate
of the, villages of Mina, Naganomura, etc., which surround it, may
furnish a population of 50-60,000 souls. This agglomeration of people
seems to he fiourishing, and the superstition which attracts devotees to
this sanctuary is more earnest than ever.

From Zenkoji to Sakahi . — ^From Zenkoji to Tambajima, 1 ri 12 c/id,
the road traverses the plain and river Shinano. This river, as has
already been said, empties at Niigata into the Japan sea. It has its
source to the south of lake Suwa, runs there from S. to N., afterwards
turning towards the N. W. to Niigata. One may follow the right bank
as far as Niigata, hut this, which is called the Nagasaki route, is very
had, and for this reason it is preferable to proceed down the shore from
Niigata to Takata, according to the itinerary here indicated.

From Tambajima we may shape our course either towards Matsumoto
or directly to the east in order to reach Lake Suwa. This latter route
is preferable because we thus avoid three very difficult passes, which
are in the direction of Matsumoto.

We turn consequently to Shinanoi, 2 ri 10 c/io, and thence, follow-


mi^OHABMES; ITINEEABY OF TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NHGATA*^ 18

iBg the valley of the Chikumagawa an affluent of the Shlnanogaway
arrive at Sakaki, 4 n, by a picturesque road, traversing fertile and well-
peopled districts.

The plain before Shinanoi has been the theatre of battles famous in
the history of Japan (about 1520 ?) between the Princes XJesugi
Kenshin and Takeda Shingen. Two ri further on than Shinanoi and
about 1 ri from the road and on the right, a series of pretty high
mountains called Obasute-yama may be seen, at the foot of which is a
remarkable, large stone, about 20 inches high, at the side of a little pond,
which tradition represents as guarded by a fantastic dragon, and other
absurdities which merit no farther mention. Before Sakaki the river
Chikumagawa makes a way for itself across the mountains, by a vertical
fissure very remarkable and having a fine effect.

SaJcaJd to Nagalaibo, — The road follows the [51] right bank of
the Chikumagawa taking a straight direction to the east. After three ri
we arrive at TJeda, a very great centre of the production of silk, and
containing from 40,000 to 50,000 souls.

From Ueda to Honya, 2 ri 18 c/id, we follow the last offshoots of
the groups of Asamayama. On leaving Honya the road returns to a south-
erly direction, following the valley of the torrent called Yodagawa* On
this very picturesque road one may in returning enjoy the view of
Asamayama, the crater of which emits (and did so notably in 1874)
abundant vapours. Finally we rejoin the Kisokaido at Nagalmho, after
a march of 4 ri, which though interesting, is painful, the soil of all these
roads being always denuded (at least in 1874).

From Nagakuho to Shimonosuwa. — We proceed from Nagakubo ta
Wadajiku, and thence to Shimonosuwa total 8 ri 18 cJw) surmounting the
passes of Ueda and Waga by a picturesque road ; hut one of the most
difficult that one can travel, excepting the last part, which is good for
about 1 ri before reaching Shimonosuwa. At about this distance, one
has a delightful view of the lake.

Stag at SUmonostma. — The village of Shimonosuwa is built at a
short distance from the lake, which unfortunately is not seen from the
larger of the houses. In this village are found hot springs, and three
principal ones may be mentioned, which are :

1.— Watanoyu, near the principal post-house the


14: DESCHAEMES : ITINEBAEY OE TWO EOXJTES BETWEEN YEDO AND NIIGATA.

baths are clean, and are even closed to the public ; the temperature is
48°. The inhabitants pretend that these waters contain silver, and they
call them Ginyu.

2.— Koyu, containing alum. Temperature very high.

8. — Tagayu, temperature very high ; there are also the springs of
the Kunosawa at the other end of the lake. These are also much
frequented by the inhabitants. The climate of the borders of the
lake is always fresh; on the 27th in the morning the thermometer
indicated 12° 5 at 6 o’clock. One might make a summer visit here in
circumstances favourable to health. In winter, according to the state-
ments of the inhabitants, the cold is very [61] severe, and one might cross
the lake upon thick ice for 30 or 40 days (January and February). The
fishing is excellent and it is said that the country abounds in game.
On fine days one may see from the middle of the lake Fujiyama, which
appears in all its height through a large opening formed at the S. E. by
the mountains which encircle the lake.

The lake is not large, 2 ri by 1 ?7’, but it is well situated and
surrounded by remarkable mountains ; it empties its waters into the
Pacific, by the large river Tenriyukawa, which runs toward the S.E.
and has its outlet at Hamamatsu (province of Enshiu) into the Pacific.

This river is one of the most important in the island of Nippon. It
traverses mountainous regions almost impassable ; its course is torrent-
like, and presents rapids which are descended with some danger. The
navigation on it is considerable.

From Shmonosmva to KamitsutafcL — ^Froin Sbimonosuwa to Kami-
nosuwa, 1 ri 18 cM, wo follow the north bank of the lake. The view of
the lake and surrounding country is picturesque ; to the east the far ofi‘
summits of Hidanotakayama, which may he seen, preserve the traces of
snow in their fissures.

Kaminosuwa is a moderate sized village, situated at the end of the
lake, where is still to he seen the castle of the Prince who formerly lived
in the district. From Kaminosuwa to Kanagawa (8 ri 18 clw)^ a pretty
route, through a moderately well- cultivated country. From Kanagawa
to Kamitsutaki (8 ri) a hilly road with fine horizon. Fujiyama, which
commands the whole landscape, is nearly always visible.

From KamitsutaM to Kofit . — ^From Kamitsutalu to Tsuburai (5 n


MSOHABMES : ITINEEARY OE TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEDO ANJ> NUGATA. 16

lOl the road, which is very hilly, follows almost entirely the course of a
torrent (an affluent of the Fujikawa). The fields are traversed by
streams of water, very rapid and beautifully clear.

After leaving Tsuburai near Nirazaki the road goes into the bed
of the torrent itselt and becomes very often impassable (2 ri, 18 did).

[17] Nirazaki is a large market town of 10-16,000 souls, situated
at the entrance of the rich plain of Kdfu, On leaving this point you
quit the mountainous region properly so called, and survey the vast plain
of Kofu, rich in agricultural products and silks.

The road as far as Kofu, 8 n, 18 cM, is very good, and has been
repaired anew in 1874, April. This distance is traversable hy jinrikisha.
Kofu was in olden times a Tokugawa town ; its castle still exists. It is
situated in the basin of an affluent of the Fujikawa, at the foot of the
huge buttresses of Fujiyama and of the central mountains of Shinano,
in the midst of a country rich hy nature. The population is about 19,000
or 20,000 souls.

There is a considerable silk-trade, and a silk manufactory on the
European plan has been started by the care of the Government. There
is also a small trade in rock crj^stals, which come from the mountains of
Shinano, and in the autumn a large trade in grapes and fruits ; in fact
nearly all the grapes eaten in T6ki6 and Yokohama come from this place*

The wretched state of the roads and the absence of vehicles make
themselves greatly felt here. Thus, for instance, a basket of grapes
which is sold for 25 sen in Kofu costs more than a rlyo delivered in
Yedo. There is, however, a direct road fronoi Kofu to Yedo, called the
Kofu-kaid6, hut it is especially bad at the passes of the mountains.
The Fujikawa, on one of whose affluents the town of Kofu is situated,
is a small though rather important stream, whose fertile basin lies to
the eastward of Fujiyama. It empties itself into the Pacific, eastward
of Kambara.

The navigation is very dangerous, being in the midst of steep and
jagged rocks which form numerous rapids. It is impossible to descend
the river except in very narrow canoes, and without great danger of
capsizing. On the right hand of the river is to be found the celebrated
pilgrim-resort of Minobu.

From Kofit to Kawaguchi . — ^If however you wish to go straight


16 DE&CHABMBS : IfINERAEY OF TWO BOUTES BETWEEN YEBO AND NHGATA.

towards Fujiyama, it is necessary to- leave the basin of the Fujikawa,
and to take the road from Kofii [18] to Nitmadzu. This latter is a
small seaport of the Pacific situated on the bay of Suruga, from which
fish is sent to Kofu and the adjoining country*

The first part of this road is through the plain, from Kofu to Izawa
(In* 18). From this point it enters the mountains by ascents which
are rather easy as far as the pass called “ Jiurozaka,” which leads to
the village of Tonaki (^4 ri).

On leaving this place you climb very steep ascents without
interruption, called the pass of Mizakatoge, from the summit of which
you enjoy a magnificent view of Fujiyama and of the little lake of
Kawaguchi at the foot of the pass. You redesoend by gradual slopes to
the little village of Kawaguchi situated at the border of the lake of the
same name.

The pass of Mizaka is one of the most difficult to climb, but one of
the most interesting in the centre of the island of Nippon.

Lake Kawaguchi is about 1 or 2 ri (in length), and stellar in form.
It is sustained by a torrent coming from the pass of Mizaka ; has no
visible outlet, and does not seem to discharge its waters anywhere.
Here is found however the wasit^ an excellent kind of salmon, which is
generally found only in rivers communicating with the sea. There are
eight lakes of the same kind around Fujiyama, the greater part of
which have no visible outlet.

From Kawaguchi to SuhashirL — On leaving Kawaguchi the route
follows the bank of the lake ; this is also traversable in a boat. All this
passage is charming.

Hence to Kamiyoshida, a large market town at the foot of Fuji-
yama. Thence to Yamanaka, on the border of a little lake Mikka-dzuki,
which latter resembles in shape, as its Japanese name indicates, a
crescent of the moon. At length, one ri from Subashiri, one descends a
rather steep pass, and finds oneself at the foot of Fuji-yama and
the point.

The huge waste lands which stretch between Kawaguchi and Suba-
shiri are generally rather monotonous. One [19] finds a poor vegetation
and occasionally volcanic plots of ground*

From Subashiri to Elga , — The ordinary route from Subashiri to


ITINERARY FROM AUGUST 5th TO SEPTEMBER 8th, 1874.


02

g >

S P ^


2 p .g 2 3
.a 6 o'd

rS Q Q p:; .


o o


o d

. o


\ o o 3 ^

rn ^


W o 'X' rvi

35

a . §


I ns >*1-


o O) fp o

a S'^.a


nij

!=^ a

. O *
Q ,:5 .q o


6 ‘3 d

niS pEH »t3


§ § S


O 'TS o 2^


i J2q ^ >4


. tqj S • • nq nq

! §3 02.3 q ^

rcS 3 p4r-2 Pa F r- fq

■ . g g ^.a 2 § §

SSEn


♦ 5^ S ■»-* ^ £2 cS C}

^Ph 030302^4


q o q 3

•q q o ‘3


:cS'§0^p4fe0P53^p4Qp4'


05 ,

■fcS^ .1

o

■^qagc^05qq

: hS ^ *a ’S ,g ^ ^

l^a^P 5 PwpqOO


;4' O o O Q
CD *t 3 nq •rq
rq


ooooo>-*»o
COOi-HCOO'' '- o
ca CO oi G^ OQ


0 0 0 0 - 0 -
CM o o CO '' CD ''
50 CO CM CM CM


00000-- 0 -
COOCOrHrH'- O'-
CM CM CM CM CM CM


.* o O - - - O '

- ^ cq - - - oD ■
cq CM CM


o - o >

tH '• (M

CM CM


o o - - - o -

00 CD '• '• 00 -

CM CM CM


- o o o ■

*— CO C5 CO
CM CM CO


o - - o -

w^ - - oq -

CM CM


'•oO'* '-CO - - t^'*
CM CM CM


0-0

O « CM
CM CM


CMOlTHt-T-tTHCOiOCOCM


GD • c5 : : • cs
q D > • • ‘M -t-p

j %

.2 .3 o -"S fS i 2

SO C3 O

q -4^

^ o 05 c3 nrj _

gr2’a tf £,::§

o qo.q 02 -

^ q ts3 ^ rq.

3 OQ CQ O 02


C5 cq o 10 CM oq o

1 -H CM r-* CO CM -


CD '-


CM

tH '*

Tti

“

u o -

O rH '*

-

Z

o -
t- '*

- o
** CD

-

::

O


n


CM


CO

CO CO


CO CO


cq '

<M


CM


cq


W5


50


lO

50


50

o


o

SA

O - -

o -


O o -


o -


rH


O


'• '*

CO -


CD 05 '*


-«H -

CO '-


o


cq


CM


CM

CM


CM CM


CM

CM


CM


CM

CP

O


O O CO CD o


O


rH

- CM

*-


tH CM rH

CM rH

'•

- - -


th ::

'* '-


Z

■-


1 rH

iq CO


3

1

8

rH rH

50


05 hH

cq CO hh CO

cq

CM


o - - o
t'- '* '* tr
CM CM


-o - -0 '-oo
(M CM CM rH


- - O '*•

CM


-0--0--0'
'-CO'* - O'- “!>■'

CM CM rH


O cq O

- G<J tH rH


THlOXOOqCOCM^rHCO’^THCM'^COCM'^CMOO


■q q 1-3 -c,-!4 ‘f-t c5 M M

3i«qf25EHOj24 a qtCt>
^ 3 125


q q ill 05

22^ 2=§

c2 q o ip q

a I oc pa f= 4 1

i«3 qd 5 O o


' q q q:

:n!z;gtS3 S'


q -3 q _M ,

a d5 ^ a ^

3 3 tgD


< CD ■
O


^ mm t
c


3lQ IO
O - O - O ■

t> - “HH '* tH- '

CM CM CM


o o - - o .

O CM '* '- 5D '

CM rH rH


O - - O

CD rH

rH CM


- O - -

CM


o - -

CM *- '-
CM


- o - -
'- <M iq '- *-

cq CM


o - o •* o ■
rH « O'* ^

CM CM CM


- O o -
'• CM CM '-
CM CM


O 00 OO 00


rHCOCOiOCMCOrH-^'THCMC


iq<X)CMCMcMHtlOCOt>


tC «i-4 H

q o 9 q

^ >3
o q ••q


q _ q

§ a ^'o'

pQ O W> AS '


• =H


-


-

o

o


O

CO

lO


50

o

o

o

^ cq


cq

tH

CO


q q3 riii
rj tc O

EH

q o

' m m


0 pH ^

1 3 -2

0^0

^ q -

q bn H q


ill

flil

q‘3 H

o .q q


lOCCt-OOOO


f


DESOHAEMES ! ITINEEARY OP TWO ROUTES BETWEEN YEOO AND NIIGATA* 17

the coast is by Mishima ; but you may proceed direct to Kiga (Valley of
Miyanoshita) by Gotemba and pass of Senko Kubara, which is very high
and one of the worst roads possible to be seen.

From Riga to Toldo , — The rest of the return journey to Yokohama
and Tokio is well known, therefore we limit ourselves to the account
given above.


CONSTEUCTIVE AET IN JAPAN.


By E. H. Brunton, Esq.


[Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on the ISth January^ 187 5.

[20] In the papei' which I read before the Society on this subject
last year, I said that, if agreeable to the Society I would continue the
subject on another occasion.

In that paper I gave a description of the evidences of constructive
ability displayed by the Japanese before they had availed themselves of
the assistance of foreign experts. The continuation of the subject I
then thought might suitably consist of a description of the improve-
ments which these have succeeded in effecting. In setting myself to
this task, however, I find it is one which is involved in considerable
difficulty. In the first place the results which have been attained are so
few and of so limited a nature that there is but little to be said
concerning them, and in the second place the efficiency or practical
advantages of such results are subjects of so debatable a character that,
to treat of them from that point of view would form a paper hardly
suited to a society of this kind. If therefore, in attempting to fulfil a
promise which I [21] formerly made, I have not succeeded in forming a
vei'y valuable contribution to the proceedings of the Society, the difficulties
surrounding the subject which I have alluded to above arc my only
excuse.

In the minds of the modern Japanese there seems to be the same
desire for the adoption of a dwelling constructed after a European model,
as for the adoption of European clotlies. They argue, with a shew of
reason, that the one is necessary to the other. Thus when sandals or
clogs gave way to boots, and the loose flowing robes to the tightly-fitting


BEUNTON : OONSTEITOTIVE ART IN JAPAN.


19


European dregs, it became necessary to discard the old system of
squatting on mats and to adopt wooden floors with carpets, and to sit
on chairs and at tables, Europeanized dwellings are therefore now
common. The style of building most generally adopted throiigboiit the
country in these new houses is a bad copy of the houses to be found in
the European settlements. It is almost unnecessary to describe these.
They, however, display novel points in the practice of house building
which are worth mentioning on that account only. The foundations consist
of a stone wail generally about 8 inches thick and 2 feet high. On this
wall is laid a wooden sole-plate which is about G inches square, and into
which the vrooclen uprights forming tlie walls of the house are mortised.
The uprights, also about G inches square, are placed from 2 to 8 feet
apart, so that when they arc still uncovered they appear like a forest of
posts. There are very thin laths placed longitudinally along the uprights
at distances of G feet or so apart, which are secured to them by wooden
pins. Diagonal struts or ties are very seldom used, and the stability of
the building is therefore dependent on the stiffness of the different joints
in the framework, assisted by the nails used in the different parts of the
erection. The roof is formed of timbers veiy much larger than is required
for strength, and is laid with mud and tiles much in the same way as I
have described in my former paper as is adopted in Japanese temples*
Inside, the houses are generally lined with planks three-eighths of an inch
thick, on which wall-paper is placed, the ceilings of the rooms being
executed in the [22] same way. In some of the better class of houses,
however, the walls and ceilings are lathed and plastered, but this is by no
means general. Outside the walls there are sometimes fixed laths to which
square tiles are nailed — the joints of the tiles being pointed with
plaster ; sometimes the walls are plastered without any tiles, and in
those houses which are intended to be of the best description, thin stone
flags, of a thickness of about four to eight inches, are built on one
another and kept in their places by small iron dogs attached to the
woodwork. In some of the houses iron stove-pipes are let through the
walls surrounded by a stone, but the more pretentious have fireplaces
and chimneys erected with stone in their interiors. These are usually
about five or six feet square at the base, are generally badly built, and
as they project through the roofs they must be in some cases thirty or


20


BRXJNTON : CONSTBTJCTIVE ART IN JAPAN.


forty feet liigli. They can only be kept upright by the floor or roof
beams 'vyhicli project against them, and are a constant source of dread
and danger.

This is the new species of building common in Japan, and foreign-
ers are doubtless responsible for it : even at the present day very few
houses in the foreign settlements are built after a more secure or
substantial style, and in Japanese hands it has, if anything, become
worse. When foreigners first arrived in this country they may have
had reasons for adopting this method of construction. 1st, It is
somewhat similar to the Japanese method, and those wlio commenced
building might have been glad to adopt it on that account, as the work
would there be more or less familiar to the only workmen who were
available at the time. 2nd, It has the advantage of only requiring the
very cheapest and most easily procured materials, and so is well suited
for temporary purposes or for hasty erection, ,3rd, It is supposed by
some persons to be the best construction to resist earthquakes on account
of its elasticity and on account of the wooden framework preventing
the outside lining of stones oi\ other covering from being precipitated
inwards on the occasion of a shock. The first reason in its favour does
[28] not now exist in such strength as formerly, because, although
really efficient workmen are still very difficult to procure, there are now
in this country many Europeans of experience who, by their superintend-
ence and direction can efficiently cause to be executed almost any species
of building. Por merely temporary buildings it may still he, on account
of its cheapness, the best, but if the construction is to have any preten-
sions to he a lasting erection, or one which has to afford effectual
protection from outside disturbances, I have no hesitation in saying that
the system is the most uneconomical. From the fragile nature of the
materials which compose the outside casing, whether these are stone
flags, tiles or merely plaster, the walls are in want of constant repair,
and are never water or air tight. The wooden framework from its in-
sufficient covering decays with great rapidity, and it is in all points
excessively and dangerously weak. The third reason in its favour, vix.,
its efficacy to resist earthquakes, is one which qDens out a large field for
discussion on which I may have something to say further on.

In copying this system of construction, therefore, I need not'say that,


BRUNTON : CONSTRUCTIVE ART IN JAPAN.


21


in my opinion, the Japanese have been led into an egregious error.
And it is really a pity to see such buildings as the new Custom House
and the New Town Hall in Yokohama, the new Government offices in
Yedo, all of which should be buildings of real stability and durability,
built on this principle. These erections have all some iiretensions to
architecture ; they have each cost very large sums of money, and being
efforts at improvement in the way of construction, it is most unfortunate
that the system adopted w^'as not one formed on a more sound and sub-
stantial basis.

Since the great fire wdiich happened in Yedo in 1872, the minds of
the local authorities there have been greatly exercised in reference to the
construction of buildings which will afford greater resistance to the
spread of fire. A very creditable effort has been made in the new Boule-
vard at Yedo — where small brick houses liavo taken the place of the
slight wooden erections which are general in [24] all Japanese towns.
These new buildings are built with brick which has been coated with
Portland cement plaster. The walls of the houses are of course perfectly
uninflammable, and fire-places witli properly constructed chimneys are
placed in each wall. These houses present no perfect immunity from
fire, hut there can be no doubt that from the use of uninflammable
material in the walls, and by a well-devised system of construction they
offer great checks to the spread of fire, and the danger of taking fire is
immensely lessened. The buildings have evidently been designed so as
to retain as far as possible the Japanese system of house with open
fronts and movable partitions ; they are two-storied and contain four
small rooms, and have a small verandah in front supported on brick
columns. They seem to .be a very suitable species of building for the
class of Japanese occupying them, and they most certainly present an
infinitely better example of building to the people than the European
houses which I have just described.

The principal and most important move made by the Japanese
Government towards introducing into this country a better appreciation
of the art of building and, at tlie same time, furnishing the country with
those results of the ingenuity and labours of our great engineers which
have revolutionized the civilized world, is the establishment of the depart-
ment of public works and the prosecution of the undertakings under its


22


KRUNTON : OONSTEUCTIVE AET IN JAPAN.


care. The construction of two lines of railway after the English model
cannot fail to instil into the minds of the many Japanese employed- in
connection with them, the advantages of the principles of building
adopted in Europe. Although one of these lines does not unfortunately
present many features worthy of imitation, the oihei’ one in the excellence
of the details of the workmanship upon it, whether in ])rick, stone, or
iron, supplies a model of the greatest value, Tiie lesson that these
works afbrd the Japanese should be of the greatest use to them. The
various natural products of their country have in them beeji moulded,
formed and brought into combination with each other so [25] as to form
structures of precisely the necessary strongili and of the most certain
durability.

The graving docks and various other works at Yokosuka also present
to the Japanese aiiothor phase of constructive art from which they may
learn the properties and use of another species of material. While
the Lighthouses, though humble specimens of construction, and labouring
under the disadvantage of being placed in such situations that few people
see them, afford, I hope, their quota of information.

That the Japanese have not benefited so fully as they might by the
lessons given them in the carrying out of such works, I think, can be
safely affirmed. This has been occasioned more by a restlessness of
mind and want of application than by want of ability. Their natural
presumption of knowledge is proverbial, but in addition to this there
has not been established to my knowledge any definite system of educa-
tion among workmen. The methods of manufacture in all countries by
means of which the cheapest, the best finished and only reliable articles
are produced are well known to consist of keeping each workino-n con-^
fined to one very narrow branch of labour. In this way he becomes
expert in that particular line and is able to produce work with a rapidity
and of an excellence otherwise miattainblc. In building, a stone mason,
a bricklayer or a carpenter is obliged to serve a weary apprenticeship of
5 or 6 years, and after that has been completed a long probation of
many years on a merely nominal pay before being considered or trusted
as an efficient workman. In Japan, on the contrary, bricklayers or
masons are procured ready made ; a Japanese carpenter is a mason one
day and a bricklayer the next. And the introduction of the system of


BRXJNTON : CONSTRUCTIVE ABT IN JAPAN.


S3


appreiiticesliip — by which the intelligence and energy of youths are
brought to bear on one particular branch of labour — has not, as far as
I am aware, been thought of. This defect may be due in a great
measure to the exigencies of the country, which has only lately com-
menced to adopt these improvements, but I fear it is also occasioned by
the restlessness of disposition [2G] which is a well known feature in the
Japanese character.

The materials used for building have been but slightly developed
within late years. Wood, which still maintains its supremacy as the
principal and the most commonly-used building material, has not im-
proved in quality. It is of a most treacherous character as at present
to be purchased in the market, this being due to a want of care in felling
the timber, in seasoning it and in drying it. No trials have yet been
made so far as I am aware of the strength, durability or weights of
Japanese wood, so very little can be added to the information I gave in
my former paper concerning it. There can be little doubt, however,
that the extra demand for timber caused by the commencement of pubU<5
works of magnitude, and by a desire for larger and more extensive
edifices is causing a denudation of the forests of the country. The
rapidity of decay in the material itself and the wholesale destruction to
which it is exposed by confiagrations keep up a steady demand for this,
the stock building-material of the country ; but if to this is added the
demand caused by the various improvements which have been instituted,
the supply is unable to keep pace with it. With a recklessness which 1
fear is a characteristic of the people, the forests are being taxed beyond
their powers — timber itself has increased in cost within the last fivo
years to twice or thrice its former price — and fears not unnaturally arise
of certain climatic changes springing from the clearing of large ti^aets
of country of their former forests.

Bricks were introduced by foreigners some years ago and are rapidly
getting into extensive use. They do not, however, as yet attain to that
excellence of manufacture which make them at all a desirable building
material. The process of brick-making, like all other work requiring
skill, can only be carried out to perfection by exports. While the Japan-
ese are well acquainted with the manufacture of various porcelain and
terra-cotta articles for uso or ornament, and succeed in this most [27]


24


BEUNTON : CONSTRUCTIVE ART IN JAPAN.


admirably, tbe making of bricks, so as to turn out both a cheap and
reliable article, is a process requiring such entirely different methods of
work that their knowledge in tbe former is not of much avail to them.
The selection of the clay, its puddling and tbe shaping of tbe bricks are
at present all done more or less carelessly and without method, but it
is in the burning of the bricks that their principal defect lies. Their
kilns are formed in the shape of a cone, and are, when charged, generally
filled to the top with bricks. A wooden fire is inserted at the bottom
and the heated air is allowed to find its way through the large mass of
bricks to the top of the kiln. Those bricks at the bottom, we naturally
find, are overburnt and cracked while those on top are quite insufficiently
burned. A very small proportion only of really reliable bricks is there-
fore got from each kiln. I am informed that very excellent bricks are
procured in Kobe and Osaka, which are made at Sakai, but I have not
had an opportunity of testing these. I have, however, put bricks from
various other parts of the country to the ordinary tests, and the results
are anything but satisfactory.

The ordinary bricks in use in London absorb after immersion in
water not more than one-fifteenth of their own weight, and they withstand
pressure of 800 lbs. on the square inch. The ordinary bricks made in
Yedo absorb one-fifth of their own weight of water, and will not stand more
than 800 lbs. per square inch ; that is to say, they are three times as
porous as they ought to be and less than half of the strength they should
be. Bricks made in various other parts of the country shew almost the
s^me results. The best which I have had opportunity of trying were
those made at Hakodate ; they stood fully the standard crushing strain
but absorbed far too much water. Such bricks are in my opinion quite
unfit for building purposes. Their actual strength, ‘when new, may be
sufficient for the small erections built in Yokohama, but their porosity
renders them liable to rapid disintegration, and to actual rapid destruc-
tion from severe frost, while houses built of them must under any
circumstances, suffer from continually [28] clamp wails. A very
excellent instance of the character of the Japanese bricks may be seen
at Hakodate, where a series of large godowns recently erected by the
Kaitakushi are in ruins, owing to the splintering and reduction to
powder of the brickwork in their walls, caused by one winter’s frost.


BEtTNTON : OONSTETJOTIVE AET IN JAPAN*


25


A partial remedy for the badness of the bricks may be to coat the walls
with lime or cement plaster, but even with this I fear that sufficient
moisture will find its way to them as to have a very deteriorating effect
upon them. Another and a very grave reason against the ordinary use
of brickwork as at present carried out in thisjiart of Japan is the almost
useless character of the lime mortar. BrieJLS in a. building are beid
together by the lime mortar between them, and if -this mortar does not
possess the necessary connecting qualities each brick is dependent on
itself, and tlie edifice which is constructed of them is dexnived of almost
its entire stability. Good mortar requires clean sharp sand and newly
burned lime. Such sand in the neighbourhood of Yokohama is difficult
to procure and is almost never used, and the Japanese seem to have a
pride in using only the oldest lime, which from long keeping has entirely
lost its virtues.

The system of construction best suited to withstand earthquakes is
a consideration which should always hold a prominent place in the
design of any erection in Japan. I have net been able, though I have
made considerable efforts to do so, to procure any iiilbrination either to
verify the particulars I gave in my former paper regarding earthquakes
or to make additions to that. While wo arc perfectly aware, therefore,
of the liability of the country to shocks of destructive violence, we are
not aware of the nature of the shocks or the localities in which they may
be expected to be most severe. It is to be hoped, however, that with
the assistance which the Japanese Government now possesses, both as
regards instrnments and ]professioual men, that before long we may
have a regular system of observations affording us this information.
I have formed the opinion that the heavy [29] roof and the light
framework in Japanese erections are iibsuited to withstand these
shocks, and I believe my opinion to be sustained by the truest
principles of mechanics. This, however, is hardly the place to enter
into a disquisition upon that subject. I am also of opinion that a
solid erection, properly constructed, will afford the greatest safety during
an earthquake and at the same time is the only one which will
give reasonable security against ffre, wind or the other natural distur-
bances. An appliance has been devised by a well known English
engineer for the purpose of counteracting the disturbing force of an
voii. in. PT, II. — 4


26


BEUNTON : OONSTEXJC’TIVE AET IN JAPAN.


earthquake, the principle of which is very simple. It was said by him
that the moveraent given to the foundations of a building is transmitted
with accelerating force to its summit, and that to destroy this the
simplest method was to make a break in the continuity of the structure.

The designer, therefore, proposed that buildings should be made in two
parts, the lower part to be firmly embedded in the earth, the upper to
rest on balls which are made to roll in inverted cups. A sudden
movement in the lower part would not, then, be transmitted to the
upper on account of this break or joint in the structure, and the
experiments made shew that in point of fact this theory was perfectly
correct. He procured this idea from seeing in Japanese drawings the
uprights of their houses resting on round stones, imagining this to be
done in order to give them as slight a bold of the earth as possible.

But from enquiries I have made this does not seem to have entered the
minds of the Japanese, and the only way they can account for the
uprights being placed on round stones is to keep the wood away from
the moisture of the ground and because round boulders are more easily
and cheaply procured than square stones. The impracticability of this
scheme, which however deserves a fuller trial than it has yet had,
arises, in my mind, from the fact that a house resting on balls is liable
to be swung and rocked about in gales of wind to such an extent as to
render it unfit to live in, I may mention that the tables on which the
apparatus of some of the [80] Japanese lighthouses rest are constructed
with this joint, but they have been found to he unsuitable for the reason
I have just stated, viz., that when touched or trod upon they shake and
roll too much. It is quite possible, however, that some alterations
might be effected on the design to obviate this difficulty, and if this
were accomplished there can be no doubt that it would afford great
immunity from earthquake shocks. Any scheme which will afford this
should be welcomed in Japan, hut at the same time it is in my opinion
a great mistake to sacrifice the whole comfort and the safety of dwellings
from their dread enemies fire and wind to a supposed protection from
so remote a contingency as a severe earthquake is in Japan. The
building most truly suitable is one which to the fullest extent provides
a protection from both these disturbances.

Wooden houses, on the supposition that they are best during s


BRUNTON : CONSTRUOTIVE ART IN JAPAN,


27


earthquakes, are not well fitted to withstand the other disturbances to
which they are much more frequently exposed — and solidly constructed
houses, while they are less inflammable, and less liable to damage from
bad weather, whether they are well calculated to resist an earthquake
shock or not, at all events have this advantage, that they will always
afford their inmates time to escape. The more solidly constructed a
building is the longer it will remain standing, even though solidity is no
perfect protection against the rage of an eartliquake.

The matter of cost is an important one in regard to works of this
kind, and there is not an unreasonable fear that to erect a solid building
means a large expenditure. This, under present circumstances in Japan,
is probably the case, though not to that extent which might he imagined.
The present want of good material and the dearth of efficient workmen
enhance the cost of good work, hut we must hope that these hindrances
will soon be removed, and that in a short space the towns of Japan will
consist of something better than rows of tinder-boxes.


( 28 )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OP JAPAN.


[31] A General Meeting of the Society was held on Wednesday evening,
13th instant, at the Grand Hotel, C. W. Goodwin, Esq.., Y. P,, in the chair.

The minutes of the last meeting Avere approved, and it was announced that
the following gentlemen had been elected ordinary memhers of the Society since
the last general meeting : Dr. Elmore, Charge d’Affairs for Peru, Messrs. J. G.
Hayllax, Q. C., Honghong, J. Smedley, E. S. Benson, and S. Cocking.

The Bev. E.W. Syle then read the “Itinerary of two routes between Yedo
and Niigata ” by Captain Bescharmes.

Sir Harry Parkes observed that Captain Bescharmes had described a very
interesting, and a very extensive tour through the Northern, Western, and central
Provinces of Japan. He regretted that, owning to the want of a good map, those
who had heard the paper read would not fully profit by the information it contained
until it appeared in print. The same want had been felt on previous occasions,
and would continue to be felt when papers of travel were read before tho society.
He would therefore suggest the preparation of a map of Japan on a large scalo, to
be exhibited at the meotings of the society, wlilch should show in a manner that
would at once catch the eye, the Provinces and Kens, principal towns, mountain
ranges, rivers, roads, and other important geographical features of the country, as
far as these were at present known or might become known. The routes described
in the papers read before the Society might also in some instances be marked upon
it. Its use would then be felt, not only when papers wore being read, but also by
travellers planning a tour or an excursion, and wishing to profit by the experience
of those who had preceded them. He believed such a map could be constructed at
small expense, and he was satisfied that it would prove of great utility to the
Society.

Mr. Cargill, in seconding the suggestion, remarlced that any foreign maps of
Japan he had seen were very incomplete, while the Japanese maps, some of which
were very excellent, had for those who could not read Japanese, all the characteris-
tics of the old maps of Africa — a mere coast outline on a sheet of blank paper.
Mr. Cargill also enquired what tlie expense of xjreparing a map would l)e, and
whether the funds of the Society could afford the outlay, or whether a special
subscription would bo necessary.

klr. Sylo said tliat the matter had been under consideration. He thought that
if the Society determined on constructing such a map as that referred to, Mr.


( 29 )

Bymjton should he requested to superintend the execution of it. He was afraid,
however, that the funds of the Society would not admit of the undertaking at
present.

In reference to what had fallen from Mr, Syle, Mr. Brunton said that he would
he glad to superintend the execution of large maps for the use of the Society. He
would propose that they should he made to a scale of 2J miles to an inch [32] and
should be in six sheets, viz : one sheet for the island of Yezo, — one sheet for the
Main Island, to extend as far as Lake Inawashiro— second sheet for Main Island to
extend as far as Lake Biwa. Third sheet for the remainder of the Main Island.
One sheet for the island of Shikoku, and adjoining coast. One sheet for the island of
Kiushiu, and adjoining coast. The innhahle cost of exeeucing these completely and
in a finished manner would he about <^400, the j)rincipal items in which sum
consist of the Chinese, or Japanese, draughtsmen. Then maps might he enlarged
from Japanese maps, many of which are of very eonsiderahlo accuracy. In fact so
accurate are they that some of the present charts used hy navigators are compiled
from them.

The maps so made would be useful only for hanging on walls, and tracing
journeys on with a pointer. They would not he suitable for measuring from, or
for photographing or otherwise copying.

Mr. Brunton then read his paper on “ Constructive Art in Japan.”

Mr. Cargill acquiesced in the observations made hy Mr. Brunton on the
indifferent material used in building, such as spongy bricks, lime that had lost its
essential quality, and indifferent timber which began to rot as soon as it was put
to use, and that for the grotesque but pretentious specimens of the foreign style
of architecture in Yokohama, to which he had drawn attention in the New Town
Hall and Custom House, he might have added the new Post ofiice, and the British
Consulate, the latter being especially hideous. As for the adaptation of buildings
to resist earthquakes, and the general use of timber in Japan for the temples and
other costly structures which, from their antiquity, seem to have resisted shocks
that had proved so disastrous to many towns, he presumed that timber was deemed
well suited for resisting those terrible visitations. In other countries the same
idea prevailed. He had heard people in San Francisco taking comfort from
having so many of their houses built of timber, and being on that account more
safe. The town of Wellington in New Zealand is wholly built of wood, private
dwellings, public buildings, and churches, including even lofty steeples, that
neighbourhood being subject to constant severe vibrations of tlie earth, and no
other building material being deemed safe.

Sir Harry Parkes was of opinion that the light and elastic style of Japanese
architecture had no reference to the necessities, or app>rehensions occasioned hy
earthquakes. It is a primitive style of building taken chiefly from the Chinese,
who are said to have followed the tent as their model in the long sweeping roof,
supported, not on walls but on timber uprights. The Japanese have no experience


of solid structures. To them in building timber is a material of first necessity,
and scarcity of supply Tvould be very seriously felt. It is probable tliat altliough
the country •within districts easy of access has been denuded of its timber, belts
of forest still remain which cannot at present he made available for want of means
of transport. [8B] Forestry laws and the construction of roads evidently demand the
serious attention of the Government.

In answer to the Chairman, Mr. Briinton said that from the various authorities
which he had consulted he could not discover that the system of lightness and
pliability in the construction of houses had been adopted in any country subject
to earthquakes — except Japan. Certainly in South America and South Italy the
buildings which were now erected were of a most solid description — and those men
who were authorities on the subject had, so far as his investigations had carried
him, unanimously given a preference to strength as distinct from lightness or
elasticity. In a building wanting in strength, its overthrow becomes certain
when the velocity of the earthquake wave is such as to produce oscillation sufficient
to destroy the equilibrium of its upright parts. But in buildings where the mass
or inertia is great, and the connection of the different parts of the walls is
proportionately good, oscillation is checked, and it may he said that overthrow is
impossible— except of course in cases of irregular upheaval or cracking of the
earth’s surface, or when the foundations of a building are destroyed. In such
buildings fractures may certainly be caused at weak places in the walls, but their
great advantage is, that on account of their immunity from overthrow, they give
their inmates time to escape. The great destruction of buildings in Lisbon, Naples,
and elsewhere by earthquakes has been shewn to be entirely owing to the faulty
character of the masonry— there having been instances in the vicinity of the
latter place where the front half of a wall has come down leaving the hade half
standing, shewing that there was no hand or connection whatever between the two.
In regard to concrete, he believed that no substance could he found more suitable
for building in earthquake countries, and he founded this belief on the grounds
that there was no joint whatever in a concrete wall, that the whole building was
as one stone, and that tbe connection between its parts was equable and thorough
throughout. He could not conceive that a well-built concrete house could possibly
be overthrown so long as its foundations were left intact.

Mr. Syle observed, concerning the supposed absence of any system of aprentice-
fihip among Japanese workmen, that in China there was no such deficiency ; but
on the contrary, that every workman — especially every brioldayer — seemed to be
provided with two apprentices. As to the supply of timber in China ; it had
become the custom in some districts to cultivate hill-sides, and crop them annually
strip after strip, for thirty succesive years, at the end of which time the first portion
will have grown up again. For building purposes, large quantities of fine lumber,
brought across the Pacific from Oregon, were disposed of at Shanghai. Also a good
deal of magnificent hard wood brought up from the Straits, in the Singapore junks.


( SI )

ProL W. E. Ayrton remarked that he was not sure whether it had yet dawned
on the JaiDanese that porosity was an [34] objectionable character in bricks, since
he remembered when, some months back, he visited Tsukudashima, where bricks
were manufactured in considerable quantities by the convicts there, the G-oveinor
of the prison pointed out with great glee how a stack of black bricks absorbed
pailful after ]?ailful of water as it was thrown over them. Ke thought all must
agree that Mr. Brunton’s severe criticisms of the new buildings in TokiO and
Yokohama were most just, especially as regards the pastrj^-cook style of archi-
tecture, the one most in vogue ^vhich produced residences like sugared cakos, of
layers of white plaster hiding a framework of unseasoned and ill-jointed wood.
The builders of these houses appeared to have exercised the greatest ingenuity in
combining the flaws of Japanese dwellings with the vices of second-rate European
suburban villas ; for where, in the modern Japanese house was the graceful roof-
curves, the quaintly-moulded corner tiles, the grand entry with its curved scrolls,
the picturesque eaves, the ingenious arrangement of rafter, and decorated panels
of the Baimid’s home ? Whilst wax'mth and solidity, so rightly esteemed as most
important characteristics of European buildings, were conspicuous by their absence.
He could scarcely agree with Mr. Brunton that the new brick houses in the Od6ri
of Tokio, the main street of the metropolis of Japan, \vere satisfactory ; since he
considered the pretensions to tire classic style displa5"ed in the architecture had
produced a result not more haj)py than the absence of all architecture in the more
flimsy structures xu’eviously referred to. He doubted whether Europe’s ancient
Gothic architects would approve of the new mongrel red brick buildings of T6kid,
that bear so strong a resemblance to national school-houses. In addition, to a
race like the Japanese who loved brightness and sunshine, who passed the greater
portion of their lives in the open air, he could imagine nothing more distasteful
than the small windows, absence of verandahs, and general gloom of a medifeval
building. What was really wanted in this country at the present moment was an
architect who had thoroughly mastered the varieties and styles of the European
schools of architecture, and who, in addition had also studied the ingenious
development of wooden structures in the United States. Such a man after
arriving here would with similar industry study Japanese buildings and their
extreme suitability, in many respects, to the climate of the country and the tastes
of the people. He would then be in a position to evolve buildings that did not as
now combine the evils of all styles, but which would, instead, bear evidence that the
best points of native and imported art had been judiciously selected. We might
then have buildings possessing the beauties of the yashiki and the conveniences
and comforts of a flrst-rate English building.

The Meeting then terminated.


AN EXCURSION INTO THE INTERIOR PARTS OF
YAMATO PROVINCE.


By Capt, St. John, R.N,, H.M.S. ''Sylyia.”


[Piead before the Asiatic Society of Japan on the 17th February ^ 1875.]

[85] Before beginning a Bliort account of an excursion I made in
connection with tbe survey of this parfc of tlie coast, I should like, con-
sidering the little that is known about the east side of the provinces of
Kii, Yamato, and Ise, to draw a slight sketch of the whole coast-line
from Oshima, in the extreme south, to Tuba in the north.

Osliima, in Lat, 34.27 N., Long 135.52' E., with its two excellent
lights, one on the east point of the Island, the other on Shiwo misaki,
the extreme south and turning point of the Kii peninsula, is now well
known to Europeans who have travelled between Yokohama and Kobe.
Vessels also coming from Hongkong, or the ports of China, very fre-
quently make Oshima, either by day or night, thanks to the two good
lights mentioned.

Prom Oshima the coast trends N. E. for about 10 miles, to Arundel
point, just inside and to the southward of which is an excellent anchorage
for small vessels, called Urakami ; again immediately round and to the
north of the point is another equally good but small harbour, named
Katsura. The famed waterfall [30] Natchi no taki, 275 feet high, is
only 4J* miles from here, and strong hot sulphur springs are found close
to the village, and within the bay. So strong and effectual are the
waters, that seven days bathing is professedly ample time to cure the
worst form of scabies ; and fourteen for other diseases more serious than
ordinary cutaneous affections.

The waterfalls — for there are three — ^follow at a short distance from


ST. JOHN : AN EXCUESION INTO YAMATO PEOYINOB.


88


each other, in the following order. The lowest is 275 feet high and has
a clean drop, coining over a mass of rock which forms the back of an
amphitheatre-shaped mountain. It falls into a deep pool, then rushing
amongst great boulders for some distance, finds the more level valley
further on, and reaches the sea just behind Katsura. On following the
stream for 300 yards or so from the top of this fall, the second is
reached. This, like the first, falls over a slab of rock seventy feet or so
in height, into a beautiful clear pool, which is shut in all round ; and so
near do the trees approach overhead, growing out and almost hanging
from the rocks, that at first sight they almost appear to touch. The only
outlet to this extraordinary place for a river to find its way to, is its
own course, as it flows on to .the great firll. Above the second fall there
is another about fifty feet in height. They are all very beautiful, but
the second is as wonderful as it is beautiful.

Near the lowest fall is a cluster of temples, with a grand old avenue
leading up to them. One of the smji trees, which* had been cut down,

I made out to be 283 years old ; which agreed within a few years of the
date given by the Japanese. Here the head of all the Bhinto priests
resides and the principal temple is built.

A short way north of Katsura, the previously broken and rugged
coast line gives place to a long straight stretch of sand and pebbled
beach, which runs N. E. without a break for 15 miles, butting up against
a steep promontory, the beginning again of a wild, broken line of coast,
which, still keeping the same N. E. direction, continues 70 miles to
Toba, at the entrance of the Owari Gulf. Haibours and bays with
water too deep for anchorages, ^7] are found all along this 70 miles of
wonderfully beautiful coast.

Sbingo, a town eight miles north of Katsura, is the only place of any
importance whatever, and this mainly from its trade in wood, which is
brought down by means of no less than twelve rivers, which joining in
one, near Shingo, form a short way above the town a fine stream of water,
with ample depth for large junks, which, however, can only cross the
bar during calm and favorable weather. The population of Shingo is
about 4000.

A few ri up the river there is a' coal-mine. The coal is brought
to Katsura in boats, stored in largo quantities, and shipped off to

VOL. III. 3?T. II. — 5


84


JOHN : AN EXOXJRSION INTO YAMATO PROVINCE ,


Yedo and otlier ^ excellent in

appearance, but it simply refused to burn ; when mixed, and so assisted,
with some different kind I had on board, it did fairly well. It is very
hard and heavy, and free from dust.

None of these provinces grow sufficient rice for their own consump-
tion, but this is not surprising considering that the only rice cultivation
of any extent is near to Singo, -where a plain of some square miles
extends back from the beach to the foot of the mountains.

There is one other place worthy of note, more for the employment
of its people than for its extent or importance. This is Koza-ura, five
miles W. of Oshima, at the mouth of a river called Kozagawa. Wood
and whale’s fiesh are the two articles of export, and as the mode of
catching this leviathan of the deep may not be without interest, I will
try and describe the novel method which is pursued. I believe the
species of cetacea^ which finds its way into the open deep bays, and in
the different eddies, near points, caused by the great Kuro Shiwo, rushing
past the coast, to be the Balena Mystketus, but this I cannot with any
certainty affirm ; it is not unlikely that other smaller kinds are often
caught. In passing I may mention that in the east of Yeso I have seen
on numerous occasions the little known and rare species the high-finned
cachalot [Physeter Tursio), As soon as whales are seen, basking about
the surface, or lazily moving [38] near the coast, which very frequently
happens during the winter months, several boats put off in pursuit armed
with nets^ and rough iron spikes stuck in the end of long bamboos. As
nets are rather curious implements to capture these great monsters with,
a description of those which are employed is necessary.

The mesh is about a yard square ; size of rope about three inches.
It is made up in large squares, each side being 80 or 40 feet deep.
These squares are attached to each other lightly at the corners and
middle. The length of the whole net is about 200 feet, which is carried
in two boats, and on getting within distance of the whale, the boats
separate, dropping the net as they go, and again meeting on the other
side, enclose the whale. If this is successfully done, and the great brute
disturbed, he almost invariably strikes the net, as he dashes off. Which-
ever square of not he strikes breaks away from the rest, and now the
faster he goes the more it clings to him. He dives, plunges and kicks


ST. JOHN : AN EXCUESION INTO YAMATO PEOVINOE, 35

to 310 purpose, and soon becoming confused and worried, returns to tbe
surface, when the same process of surrounding him with another net is
gone through. Again he dashes off only to become more confused and
frightened, when coming to the surface once more, tired and worried, he
is pierced with the primitive harpoons mentioned, until killed. He is
then towed on shore, cut up, and sold for food — and very repulsive food
it looks.

Owashi Bay, one of the numerous indentations I have mentioned as
occurring along the coast, is situated about half way between Oshima
and Toba. It affords excellent anchorage for vessels of any size, particu-
larly in one of its long narrow arms, where the most complete shelter,
easy of access in all weathers, is found. It was from here I had to go
inland, to reach the summit of the highest range of a multitudo of ranges
of mountains, of which the Yamato province consists. Grand and
beautiful mountains they are. The peak of 0 dai san is seen from
seaward, when clear, for a great distance, the mountains north and south
of it gradually rising and [39] meeting in its flattish double-looking top.
On enquiry I ascertained that it was possible to get there, but the in-
habitants at Owashi knew little or nothing about it, beyond fabulous
stories of wild beasts, and the wonderful distance to bo seen from its
summit.

Having made arrangements for a ten days’ trip, I started to make
tbe ascent on the 15th October, 1874. The first five miles led up the
course of a beautiful clear stream, which winds down between steep
abrupt mountains, 2000 feet high, and falls into one part of Owashi Bay.

We soon left the level, — for in this five miles we had not ascended
60 feet — and for 51- miles toiled up a single mass of mountain, to a
height of 3113 feet. Of course the path zig-zagged, turned boulders,
crossed streams, sometimes found a flattish spot, then wound round
spurs, and, lastly, emerging on the peak, opened on a magnificent view.
What surprised me regarding these mountains was the mass of rock, the
huge stones and little soil of which they are composed, and at the same
time the wonderful exuberance of the Jfo 7 ’a,

Lowest down and particularly in sheltered valleys or dips, the sugi
trees flourish, growing so thick and close together that it is all but
perpetual night underneath their yellowish green tops. The sxigi vies


86 ST. JOHN : AN EXCTJESION INTO YAMATO PROTINOE.

with the ho mMsii (Tims massonianaji which is the commonest and
most utilized tree in Japan. The Idnoki appreciates the same sheltered
situations, but is never grown so thickly together. It also flourishes at
the very summit of the hills and mountains, as high at least as 5000 feet.
But these trees are self-sown, and always isolated, growing straight and
strongly, having evidently outrun or beaten their immediate neighbours,
which appear stunted and twisted. Next to these, — I am speaking of
the conifer m — comes that lovely tree Picea Firma, the native momi. It
is a true cedar in every way, and in appearance resembles that of
Lebanon. Only one more beautiful species do I know out here, that is
the Abies lezoniensis. This magnificent tree I found flourishing in the
far east of Yezo, and on the S. W. end of Kunishir Island. Abies
miGros 2 Jerma, a picturesque [40] though much smaller tree (none that I
have seen being over 40 or 50 feet in height) grows on the higher
ranges, particularly on the summit of 0 dai san. There also I found
Abies Veitchiit a beautiful species of silver fir. The cone of this species
is very small, dark purple, tinged with brown, growing erect near the
axilio3 of the branchlets. The scales are very horizontal, and the cone
usually splotched over with resin, Pinus Silvestris (Scotch fir) is not
plentiful, though found on these mountains.

I have now named most of the coniferoe growing in this locality.
There are a few other species, less common and only found in a few
places, and then generally as single plants. But those I have mentioned
constitute the cone forests, and of all these none gro-w to the height and
large dimensions of the Pinus Firma, Many a magnificent old patriarch
I came across, frequently a dozen or more, in the space of an acre or so,
all colossal trees, and in rare perfection as timber ; but as to their being
made timber of, they are perfectly safe, as it would be impossible to
transport them as such to the habitation of man. I am only 8100 feet
up and have but named the pines. To enumerate the deciduous shrubs
which I have passed through would he an endless task. I observed
great numbers of myrtles, camellias, the wild paper mulberry and
innumerable other species.

From the summit of the first range, where we now were, and
looking back, the whole sea-coast lay at our feet, the indentafeions and
harbours looking like threads of silver, running and twisting amongst


ST. jom : AN EXCURSION INTO YAMATO RROVINOE.


87


the ridge of a range at right angles to the one we had ascended, and for
miles we went very evenly, then dipped down 1000 feet, crossing a
mountain torrent, and immediately ascended to 4000 feet. Here was a
great change in the flora, nothing but oak, beech, chestnut and maple,
no pines, the under cover bamboo grass, identical, I believe, with that
in Yeso. Along this 4000 feet ridge we went for several miles, when
suddenly the path reached [41] the crest, and then descended with
terrible steepness, along only one shoulder of the mountain, to 1,500
feet. What a wonderful spot we here reached ! A few very poor
inhabitants had clustered together forming a village of about ten houses,
called Kingumi, situated on the steep slope of the hill side, in an
almost perfect crater, so steep and straight did the mountains rise all
round.

There was but one opening, where a clear stream of water rushed
over great boulders, joining a large river close by, which flowed away
to the southward for 70 miles before reaching Shingo. The small
patches of potatoes and other vegetables round the cottages were all
barricaded in with stout wood ((Quarter trees) to keep the deer and wild
boar out. I was charmed to find here a domesticated bee, even then
busily working, notwithstanding the lateness of the day and season.
One cottage had six hives, rough square boxes, sheltered with some
bark from the rain. The bee is similar to our own, but rather smaller,
and as for the honey, it is excellent. I must just add before closing
the first day that we had again left the oak and chestnut and returned
to the region of the Ivinold and sugi. From here and along the course
of the river these two cedars are grown, and when cut, floated to Shingo.

Here I must remark that immediately after topping the first range
of mountains from the sea, all the streams and rivers took a southerly
direction, and though close to the sea coast — about six miles as the
crow fixes — none found their way there.

Occasionally during the day I came upon men and women carrying
immense loads of staves for tubs, all ready cut, and soon found that
they went many, many miles into these wild forests, until finding a
suitable tree they felled it, and there and then cut it up into tub staves :
to do this they had to return to and fro. frequently, a tiresome and
laborious task. We had come from first starting at Owashi Bay not less


S8 ST. JOHN : AN EXOimSION INTO YAMATO PROVINCE.

than 18 miles, all the way, except the first 5 miles, np and down
mountains, the highest being 4000 feet. At Kiugumi we put . up for
the night.

Next morning we started at eight, almost immediately [42] into
the river’s^^bed, and for 3| miles followed its stony, rocky, upward course,
crossing it in that distance more than twenty times. Frequently the
cliffs obliged us to crawl round them through the thick tangled cover,
again taking to the slippery stony bed of the river, to leave it shortly
for another scramble. Fortunately it was all rather up hill, which
lessened the chance of falling. I know nothing more trying and dis-
agreeable to walk over than smooth water- worn slabs of rock and big
boulders. It would be impossible to give an idea of the extraordinary
steepness of the mountain sides as they rose from the river course,
many of them crowned by magnificent castellated rocks, 2,000 feet
above us. Marvellously grand they looked, covered with the lovely
autumn tints of the oak, maple, etc. After three and a half miles along
the river, we breasted the hill, and after a continuous climb of more
then three hours, reached the crest. Striking off along an irregular
plateau, we arrived at our destination at half past three, being still four
miles from the summit of 0 dai san.

The mass of mountains we had now reached, 4200 feet above the
level, spread out for a great distance, in an irregular plateau, here and
there varied by rises 600 or 600 feet high, and traversed everywhere by
numerous streams.

The highest peak on this singular table land was the spot I wished
to reach, and is called 0 dai san.

The whole of this immense extent of mountain is covered with
primeval forest ; generally there is no underwood, but a soft carpet of
the gi‘eenest moss covers the ground. The trees are likewise coated
with moss and lichen. As I gazed upon the great stems of these self-
planted and never disturbed trees, all I may say of good size, and most
of them of grand proportions, I could not help internally ejaculating,
‘‘What a waste of timber!”

Five years since, the Japanese Government decided to form a
settlement on this space of table-land, although there exists no way
means of getting there except by climbing the steepest and most precipi-


ST, JOHN : m EXCURSION INTO YAMATO PROVINCE.


89


tons mountains imaginable. . They cleared away — or rather merely cut
[43] down — about 12 acres of wood, on a spot or glade through which
three streams traverse, meet, and flow away in one. Here they built a
house for an official to superintend the settlement, etc., set up a water-
mill, — what for, I could not make out, — dug up a few square yards,
certainly not more than twenty, and planted potatoes. Then, as might
have been foreseen, they pronounced the. enterprise impracticable, shut
up the house, and left. The house, though partially in ruins, afforded
us good shelfeer. It was built on the bank of one of the streams, which
happened to be full of excellent trout. Here in half an hour, and with
an impromptu wooden spear, w^e caught daily as many as we pleased.

The magnificent great oak trees which had been cut down were
lying about just as they had been left, many of them three feet in
diameter, and fifty feet of clean stem. It appears unfortunate that none
of the good timber abounding on these mountains is ever likely to
be turned to use. I see no means of getting it down from these
heights. It is an undertaking of very considerable labour for a
man to get up or down when unencumbered, and the transport of
large logs of timber to the river would be, I consider, impossible. The
beech which flourishes on the nearer ranges, and which is of large
growth, might possibly be utilized. There are no people more persever*
ing than the Japanese in the way they farm the hill-sides with timber*
None appear too steep or rough, and wherever the sufji and Idnoki will
grow, there it is sure to he found cultivated. This, of course, is on the
mountains nearer to the sea, and close to the villages.

Having reached towards evening the dilapidated house I have
mentioned, and caught enough trout for supper, I was not sorry to turn
in and rest. Next morning, very soon after daylight, I started with only
the guide, for the top, in hopes by going quietly to come across a bear,
wolf, or 7iigoo, Crossing a stream, we came upon tbe fresh track of a
bear, whose wet foot-marks were still on the stones, where he had left
the water. But he was not to he found, though I followed him some
distance. In two [44] hours the summit was reached, rather more than
1000 feet above the rest-house, the total height being 5400 feet.
Here on climbing to the top of a tree, which most conveniently had its
top twisted off, I found the Japanese had not exaggerated the view to be


40 ST. JOHN : AN EXCTJBSION INTO YAMAlfiO PEO VINCE.

obtained. Although I shall never forget it, I feel it is useless to attempt
to describe it. Suffice it to say, all tbe coast, and the interior as far as
the eye could reach, lay before me. No higher range sprang up to
intercept the view. Far away in the distance Fuji yama rose out of a
curtain of mist, and another great mountain farther to the north and
west, the name of which I do not know, was also to be seen. The
former was 150 miles distant.; the latter not so far. It is surprizing
how great an extent of country 0 dai san, notwithstanding its moderate
height, commands. I had only half succeeded with the theodolite, when
down came a shower of rain, from the N. W., which quickly settled into
a wet afternoon. The next day was spent mostly in the clouds : it
cleared .away towards the afternoon, but not in time to reach the top
and return before dark. The day after this I was again at the summit
soon after daylight, but it thickened over before I finished, so I spent
an hour or two roaming through the beautiful primeval forest. The
perfect silence that reigned was only disturbed by the big black and
white woodpecker, as he tapped the trees with his hard sharp bill in
quest of insects. The w^olves were not howling as they (lid when I first
reached the tops two days before.

Next day it blew a good gale — and what a grand sight it was 1
These glorious forests, which yesterday were so still and silent, now
roared and howled, as the gusts of wind rushed through them ; branches
were broken offi and hurled away, trees felled, and cracked off like twigs,
and the air was thick with flying leaves. It was a wild and gi’and sight:
the streams soon became good-sized rivers, for it rained in torrents the
wholatime.

The storm lasted throughout the following day, but towards evening
the wind hauled to the north, and I felt sure fine weather would follow.

[45] The next morning the sun was scarcely up when I started
for the summit. Bitterly cold it was ; the ground was frozen and crisp
and the frost still silvered the trees and grass. The soft curtains of
mist which were floating lazily about the dips and sides of the rising
grounds soon dispersed as the sun rose higher in the heavens, and an
hour spent on the summit finished my work. I saw a nigoo when
going lip, but though I got a snap shot, he went away untouched.

Before quitting this elevated spot, on my downward journey, I must


ST, JOHN : 4^ EXCtFBSION INTO YA^IATO. BROVINGE, 41

add a few lines relative to the different natural objects wbicli I found there
To begin with the largest animal, bears ; they are certainly numerous,
almost every oak tree appeared to be scratched and clawed by these
animals. The moss covering their rough bark was torn off and hung
down in strips. They evidently climb these trees to feed on tlie acorns.
It is a small black species of bear, not half the size of that inhabiting
Yezo. Wolves are abundant ; they howled even during the day time
close to us. The nigoo is a true species of chamois, and a handsome
animal. I saw one of them : as I have said, they are numerous and
afford food for the wolves. Deer are scarce ; they prefer the lower
ranges. Wild hoar abound, and hares likewise.

All the streams at the top besides those lower down literally
swarmed with trout, which were busily engaged spawning, while that little
robber the water-oitzei. was as busily employed destroying the spawn,
singing and diving and thoroughly enjoying the good food before him.
This bird I may remark is identical with our own species, with the
peculiar and interesting difference of not having the white horse- shoe
patch on the breast, which the British species has. A single snipe of
that large species GalUnago Aiistrolis, remained several days about the
water near the house, and then disappeared. The common wren, often
in its funny, inquisitive manner, wouldL appear from some thick bush,
utter its very long song, and after watching me for a few moments bob
itself out of sight. I saw also a large spotted wood-pecker, a bird I
have only previously [46] found in the extreme north of Nipon, the
common jay, copper pheasants, and the robin red-breast. I was very
pleased to find this latter bird, and to notice how exactly he resembled
our own species in their bold impudent nature, as well as plumage ; they
appear only to differ in not having quite so much red on the breast as
those at home. I may also mention the bullfinch, whose note and habit
are exactly similar to the English birds.

What delighted me greatly was the beautiful open woodland clear
of brush- wood and undercover, the soft gi'een carpet of moss under foot
and the perfect stillness and quiet. Oak, maple, beech, and chestnut,
constituted the principal deciduous trees. Of these the oak, and beech
were invariably fine timber ; the chestnut frequently, if not generally,
sprang from the ground in two or three stems. The pines I have already

VOL. III. TT. II.— G s


42


ST. JOHN : AN EXCHBSION INTO YAMATO PKOVINCE.


mentioned, with the exception of a species of spi^uce, which I do not
know, but which flourishes on the higher slopes. Yew of fair dimen-
sions grew on the summit ; liinold only moderately. I do not think the
Japanese care much for the viomi pine ; at any rate I have never seen it
cultivated. That wonderfully hard close-grained wood of a yellowish
tint, much resembling box, and from which combs are manufactured, is
found on Odai Yama ; its native name is tsiige. Another very peculiar
deciduous tree, I saw, but only here and there, called sawara; it has a red
skin-like bark, and is very hard and close grained. I might go on almost
endlessly in speaking of the numerous species of deciduous trees, which
here, unmolested by man, spring up, flourish and die, but I fear I have
already dwelt too long on a single subject. Once more I may add I see
no means by which these great forests of excellent timber can be got
from their high and difficult situations, to the habitations of man.

The rocky courses cut through the mountains by the innumerable
streams and rivers, shew generally limestone, and rough coarse granite,
with a sprinkling of sandstone ; higher up the rocks and stones are
smaller, and granite predominates.

I started about noon for the downward journey, but [47] instead
of returning the same way, struck away to the N. W. for four miles,
along the ridge of a long spur of Odai Yama ; here we dipped down a
few hundred feet, and fell upon the main road, or rather path, between
Osaka and Shingo, Turning to the S. E. for eight and a quarter miles
along the path, we then suddenly descended from a height of 8,000 feet
to 480, where in a village situated on a beautiful stream, swarming
with trout, we found comfortable lodgings for the night. This afternoon
we passed a cluster of huts on the hillside some way to our right and
far up a deep valley. The old guide, when I enquired the name of the
village, said there was a gold mine there, worked by one hundred
people, under the superintendence of a Government official. Unfortun-
ately it was not feasible to reach the place that day or I should certainly
have visited it. It rejoiced in the name of Nishi no mura.

After resting for the night at Totchi mo to, where there may have
been about 50 houses, I started next morning at eight, mounted im-
mediately to 2,700 feet and then descended to a most rugged pass cut
through the mountains, by a torrent of the clearest water, which after


ST. JOHN : AN EXGUESION INTO YAMATO PROVINCE.


43


rushing down ifcs headlong course over boulders and masses of limestone
rook, joined one of the main rivers at a level of 400 feet above the sea,
where five houses constituted the village of Naga-uchi. We reached this
place about noon, wet to the skin. It had rained in torrents since
eight in the morning. From here we ascended again to a height of
3,000 feet. The coolies were nowhere, so I struck off along the sharp
ridge, knowing by compass that the direction was right, but being
enveloped in mist and rain, I was not sorry when in a couple of hours
time I came across the same jiath I had passed along eight days before.

Being now certain as to my whereabouts, I made the best of my
way to Owashi, reaching the ship at six, having since starting at eight,
done about twenty miles in distance, and ascended in the aggregate
about 8,000 feet.

And here finished a cruise I shall always remember with pleasure
and interest, I only wanted a little more [48] time for exploring, as
my hands tvere tied by having to watch my opportunity for making the
necesary observations at the summit. Before starting on the journey I
had estimated the height of Odai Yama at 5,000 feet, to enable me to
calculate the temperature, which proved however lower than I had
anticipated. During the nights it was very cold ; the lowest I registered
the thermometer was 28°, and it froze pretty hard on two occasions.

I have only to add, that this wild region which stretches almost
entirely across the peninsula, and far away to the north, is full of
interest to the naturalist, while to the lover of scenery it presents views
of the wildest and grandest description. The Japanese know very
little about it ; the charcoal burners are the only beings who penetrate
far into the interior, and they never aj)proach the inner masses of
mountain, of which Odai Yama is but a single chain.


A General Meeting of the Society was held on Wednesday evening, 17tli
February, at the Grand Hotel, Dr. Hepburn in the chair.

The minutes of the last meeting were approved and it was announced that
Mr. Montague Kirkwood had been elected an ordinary member since last general
meeting. ’’

Sir Harry Parkes then read “ A description of the coast between Ohosima and


Toba Harbours, and an account of an escm’'sion among tlie forest and mountain
ranges of the province of Tamoto,” by Captain H. 0. St. John, Commanding
‘‘ H. M. S, Sylvia,

After the paper had been read a vote of thanhs to Captain St. John for his
interesting contribution was moved by the Eev. Mr. Syle, seconded by Mr.
Briimmond Hay, and carried unanimously.

Mr. Syle then remarked on the especially interesting and valuable character
of the paper just read ; and-questioned whether there might not be constructed on
the hill-sides of Yamato such lumber-shoots or slides ” as were found in the
forests of G-ermany and Oregon : also, it seemed very desirable, if indeed the true
chamois is to be found in Yamato, that its skin should be utilized as leather, and
its flesh for food.

[49] Mr. Brunton said This country is no doubt, at present, badly off for
timber, and it would be a great matter if the Government could do something to-
wards utilizing the extensive forests described by Oapt. St. John. The only really
available hard wood at present in use is keyaU, and Capt. St. John mentions oak
trees as existing in this district, of immense size. We know of oak being found
in Yezo, but I have not heard before of its existence on the main island. If it is
the true oak, this is an additional and a very powerful reason for some steps being
taken to bring these woods into use. So long as the way to the sea is down-hill I
hardly think there can be any insurmountable difficulty in getting the timber to
the habitations of men.

Professor Ayrton said mention had been made in the paper of the evening of
the charcoal burners penetrating far into the forests to obtain the wood. Possibly
this would furnish an explanation of the comparative high price of charcoal, which
could scarcely be found either in the cost of the burning or in the value of the
wood, and therefore must be sought for in the difficulty of transport. In the case
of the hard kinds of charcoal, which were much dearer than the soft charcoal, the
cause might really be the great difference of value of the woods. Although all the
Japanese burnt charcoal, the actual consumption really was not as large as it might
atffist sight appear to be, since, the liihacM being closed at the bottom, the absence
of draught made the burning go on very slowly.

Mr. Brunton suggested that as Capt. St. John’s paper was confined to a
description of the coast between Ohosima and Owashi Bay, a request might be sent
to him, along with the note of thanks already agreed to by the Meeting, to furnish
another paper describing that part of the coast between Owashi and Soba. Prom
his own knowledge he was aware that the harbour of Mura Goza and Matoya were
among the most wonderful natural basins in this part of the world, and as Capt.
Bt. John had most excellent facilities for acquiring information, he was in a posi-
tion to supply papers of the greatest interest and value.

Sir Harry Parkes undertook to convey the requesf to Captain Bt. John, and
the meeting then terminated.


( )


ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.


By C. W. Goodwin, Esq.


[Head before the Asiatic Society of Japan, on the 17 th March, 15^5.]

[50] Ifc is more than sixty years ago since the publication by the
brothers Grimm of a collection of popular and nursery tales which they
had gathered from the lips of the German peasantry, laid the foundation
of a new study w^hich has ever since been pursued with interest and
ardour. The legends of nearly every countiy and province in the world
have been assiduously sought for and recorded, and a comparison of
them has led to many curious results. Some of these old wives tales,
now only related for the amusement of children, are found to be disguised
forms of old mythologies, others are the remains of poems or romances,
or perhaps even of veritable historical narratives. Stories 'which can be
traced to Central Asia are found localized in remote corners of Europe,
as though they had grown there spontaneously. Such a one is the story
of the faithful hound Gelert, whose tomb is shown in Wales to the present
day, at the village named Bedd- Gelert, although precisely the same
legend is found in the ancient collection of Persian tales known under
the name of Syntipas, of which we possess a Greek translation. The
question how and when these tales were spread over the world is one of
much interest. Some of them may have been carried by the Aryan
tribes [51] at their first emigration from their Asian homes. Others
may have been imported by wandering minstrels at later periods. Tbe
process of communication must have gone on from a very remote
antiquity. Quite recently Egyptian romances have been discovered in
manuscripts of the IBth or 14 th centuries before Christ, which have all
the childish 7iawete and the stock incidents of the modern fairy tale.
The intercourse which early existed between Egypt, the Western part of


46


GOODWIN ; ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS,


the Asian Continent and Europe explains sufficiently the diffusion of this
ancient literature over that portion of the earth’s surface which we are
accustomed to call the West. But we should be less prepared a iiriori
to find European legends making their appearance in a country like
Japan so isolated and remote, and which, so far as it has borrowed, has
done so chiefiy from China, itself a country of which the literature is
indigenous, and whose legends have not much affinity with those of
Western Asia.

Some instances, however, of Japanese legends bearing affinity to
those of the far West do occur, and one at least so remarkable that it
has appeared to me worth making the subject of enquiry. The object
of the present paper is simply to open the matter and to invite to it the
attention of Japanese scholars, who are more qualified than myself to
institute a comparison between the whole cycle of Japanese legends and
those current in different countries of the West.

A short story included among those given in Mitford’s ‘‘Tales of Old
Japan,” struck me when I first read it, as having a remarkable resem-
blance to one with which I had been familiar from my cliiidhood-r~an
Irish story first published by Crofton Croker about the year 1824 or
1825 — and called the Legend of Knockgraffeon. As I have unfortun-
ately no copy of Crofton Croker’s work by me, I must tell this tale as well
as I can from memory.

“The Legend oe Knockgeaeton.

“In some remote district in Ireland, but whereabouts I forget, is a
village called Knockgrafton, near which are the [52] ruins of an ancient
castle surrounded by a moat, known in ancient times as the haunt of
fairies or elves.

“ In the village of Knockgrafton lived a good-natured little hump-
backed man named Lusmore. He was a general favorite from his
cheerful and pleasant humour, and nature had endowed him with a good
pair of lungs and a taste for music.

“ One sunny day Lusmore lay down on the bank of the moat and
had a nap, from which he was awakened by the sweet sound of voices
apparently proceeding from beneath the water. He knew at once that
it must be the fairies singing. Their song was of a very simple


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.


47


character, for it was nothing, when translated into English (the fairies
of Knockgrafton of course sang in the Irish or Erse language) but —
Monday, Tuesday, Monday, Tuesday, and so on ad infinitum, Ltisxaore
listened for some time, and at length got rather tired of this perpetual
repetition, and seizing a moment when there was a slight pause he sung
at the top of his voice, but in a musical tone — ‘ and Wednesday too.’
Scarcely had he done this, when he found himself caught up and whirled
down to the bottom of the moat, where was a spacious hall full of elves
dancing and singing. They took up Lusmore’s words and went on
singing lustily ‘ Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday too.’ After this
had continued for some time Lusmore was conducted to a place of
honour, and two of the strongest elves came and with a saw made of
butter they cut off his hump, — and then they all sang —

Lusmore, Lusmore,

Weep not nor deplore
The hump that you bore
On your back is no more ;

Look down on the floor
And view it Lusmore.

Little Lusmore now found to his astonishment that he was no longer
bent double as he used to be, but that he could lift himself upright and
was a tall man, and in doing this he nearly knocked his head against
the ceiling. After much rejoicing and feasting it became time for the
elves [53] to give up their festivities. Lusmore fell asleep and when
he awoke he found himself again on the bank outside the moat. He got
up, rubbed his eyes, and felt his hack, and found that sure enough he
was rid of his hump. He went back rejoicing and told all the neighbours
how he had danced and sung with the elves, and how they had taken off
his hump. The story soon got wind and all the neighbourhood came to
see Lusmore and congratulate him upon his good fortune. Now there
was another humpback at Knockgrafton known by the name of J ack
Madden, an ill-conditioned young scamp whom nobody liked. His
mother was an envious old crone who did nothing but murmur at
Lusmore’s luck and wondered why the same did not happen to her son
Jack. By her advice Jack Madden went and laid himself one day down
by the moat, and there sure enough he heard the fairies singing their


48 GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.

song with Lusmore’s elegant addition — ‘ Monday, Tuesday and Wednes-
day too.’ Now Jack Madden, who was as deficient in taste as he was
in voice, thought to himself if Lusmore pleased the fairies by adding
another day to their song, why should not I do better still by adding all
the rest of the week, — so without waiting for a X‘>ause, or paying any
regard to time or measure, he began in a harsh loud voice shouting out
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Now the fairies have not only
an exquisite ear for rhythm and time, but they have also a peculiar
aversion to hear the Lord’s day named. No sooner therefore had Jack
Madden commenced this taKsteless uproar than he found himself whirled
into the moat and surrounded by fierce-looking fairies. Two of the
strongest of these, by orders from the chief, took up Lusmore’s hump,
which was still lying about, and clapped it on Jack Madden’s back,
where it instantly stuck as tight as wax. Then they all sang —

Jack Madden, Jack Madden!

Your words came so bad in
The tune we feel glad in —

This castle youTe had in
That your life we may sadden ;

Here’s two humps for Jack Madden.

[54] “ Immediately after this they kicked him out of the moat, and
he was found on the ground next morning by the old crone his mother,
when she came to look after him, with two humps instead of one. Such
was the reward of envy and bad taste.”

This is the Irish story picked up from the mouths of the
peasantry more than fifty years ago. I am not able to say whether it
has been found in any form in any other part of Europe, but my
impression is that it is not known out of Ireland. The Japanese tale
which resembles it is told very briefly by Mr. Mitford, and as he does
not give any reference to the source from whence he obtained it, I made
enquiries upon the subject, and my friend Mr. J. C. Hall, of H. M. Con-
sular Service, kindly ascertained for me where it was to be found. It is
given in the second volume of the Japanese work entitled “Uji Shu-i
monogatari” — f.c. Stories omitted from the TJji collection. This book
was first printed in 1664, but is supposed to have been 'written in the
13th century, the author being unknown.


aooB'wiN : ON some Japanese legends.


m


Mr. Hall Mndly transliterated the Japanese text and has also sup-
plied me with the following translation.

The Story of the Man with the Wen.

“ The following also happened now a long time ago. There was
an old man who had a big wen on the right side of his face. He went
to (cut wood on) mount Taiko. It came on to rain and blow without
stopping, so that he could not get back, and much against his will
stopped the night on the hills. There was not even a wood-cutter’s
(cabin) near. He was in a dreadful plight and did not know what to
do. So he crept into the hollow of a tree that was there, and whilst he
was crouching inside, unable to close his eyes, there came from the
distance a sound as of men hurrying along and talking loudly the while.
Sure enough, as he was all alone there in the midst of the hills, he felt
his si^irits somewhat revive within him at the indication of people
approaching, and he looked out and behold beings of all sorts of shapes
and appearances, [55] some of them of a red colour wearing blue
clothes and others of a black colour wearing red clothes. Eunning well
in front of the rest were some with only one eye and some without a,
mouth, and such like, and altogether, indeed, a quite indescribable kind
of beings. The whole throng, to the number of about a hundred, came
together with a whizzing sort of sound, and after lighting a great fire as
bright as the eye of heaven, they spread themselves about it in front of
the hollow tree in which the old man was, who thereupon lost the power
of his senses more and more. One elf who seemed to he their chief sat
on a seat set thwart- wise, while the elves ranged themselves on each
side of him in two rows. I don’t know how many there were of them,
and time would fail me if I were to attempt to describe the appearance
of them one by one. They enjoyed themselves drinking sakB just like
people of this world, and after passing the bowl round repeatedly the
chief elf seemed to get uncommonly drunk. Then one young elf rose at
the further end, and clapping a dish-tray on his head begged for some-
thing or other. Uttering witty sayings he marched up slowly to the
front of the elf on the thwart seat and seemed to be importuning him :
the latter remained seated holding the drinking cup in his left hand and
smiling good humouredly, just like a person of this world. Then he led
von. III. rr ii— 7


50


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAJ'ANESE LEGENDS.


off into a dance and the rest joined in order all down the line : some
danced well, others badly. When at length they seemed to have had
enough of it the elf of the thwart seat spoke and said : ‘We have
prolonged the fun to-night much beyond our usual time ; no wonder,
however; the jig was a sight to see.’ Hereupon the old man, whether
it was that something had bewitched him, or that some god or saint put
it into his mind to do so — at any rate he felt a desire to start out and
dance. Then all at once he changed his mind, hut the elves hereupon
without more ado struck up a tune of so pleasing a sound that he made
up his mind. ‘ So be it,’ said he, ‘I will run out and have my dance ; I
must, even if 1 die for it,’ and with his cap cocked over his nose and
[66] his woodman’s hatchet stuck in his girdle, forth he came dancing
up in front of where the elf on the thwart seat was. Up sprang ithe
elves, bounding and buzzing about him, to know what this meant, jhe
old man, now stretching himself out, now drawing himself together,
with quips and cranks and every gesture he was master of, went circling
round the entire area, singing in a drunken voice the while. All the
elves there assembled, and he on the thwart-seat amongst the foremost,
looked on applauding and amused. Then the elf of the thwart-seat said :
‘For many years we have indulged in this amusement, but never yet
have we come across anything like this. Henceforth this old man must
positively come and join in the amusement with us.’ The old man
replied : ‘No need to order me ; come I will. This being an impromptu
effort I forgot to keep time to the music, but if you are so good as to he
pleased with it I will endeavour to perform more cleverly next time.’
The elf of the thwart seat affably rejoined, ‘You must really come, you
know.’ Then an elf who was sitting three seats back said : ‘ Altbougb
this old man speaks in this way, it is possible he may not come at all ;
we had better take some likely pledge or other from him.’ ‘ Just so,
just so,’ said the elf on the thwart seat; ‘what ought we to take?’
Then some suggested one thing, some another, but the elf on the thwart
seat said: ‘We should take the wen which the old man has on his
face : a wen is a lucky thing and he will hardly be willing to part with
it.’ Then the old man said : ‘You may take my nose or my eye if you
like, but please do allow me to keep this wen : it would be unfair of you
to take away ffom me without cause a thing that I have had for so


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.


51


many years.’ ‘ Oh ! you are so unwilling to part with it as all that^
then T said the elf of the thwart seat ; ‘ that’s just the thing to take.’
Whereupon up come an elf, and ‘ off it goes,’ says he, and twisted it
off, causing hardly any pain. ‘ So you must come and play next time,
now/ said they, and as it was now dawn and the birds were beginning
to sing, the elves went [57] away. The old man felt his face and, lo !
the wen he had for years was clean gone, not even a trace of it being
perceptible on the smooth even surface. He went back to his home
forgetting even to cut the wood he had come for. When the old woman
his wife asked him what wonderful thing had happened him, he told her
it was so and so. ‘What a vexatious affair,’ said she.

Next door lived a certain old man who had a big wen on the left
side of his face. This old man observing that the other had lost his
wen, thought it very queer and asked him about it, saying : — * How did
you come to get rid of your wen ? What doctor took it off for you ?
Kindly tell me, for I want to have this wen of mine taken off.’ ‘It
wasn’t taken off by a doctor at all,* said the other ; ‘it happened on this
wise/ and he told him how it had been taken away by the elves. ‘I’ll
have mine taken off in the same way,’ thought he, and he questioned
the first old man closely, who told him the whole circumstances. Fol-
lowing out what he had heard, he went and waited inside the hollow
tree, and true enough, just as he had been told, the elves came, and
spreading themselves all about began to amuse themselves drinking
sake. Then they said, ‘ Has the old man come who was here ?’ The
other old man swung himself out, though very much afraid he was.
Then the elves said, ‘Yes, the old man has come ; here he is.’ ‘Come
here, dance, quick,’ said the elf on the thwart §eat. Now this old man
was not fit to he compared to the former one, and after making an
awkward attempt at a dance the elf on the thwart seat said to him,
‘You dance very badly this time ; ever so many times worse than you
danced before. Let him have back the wen we took from him as
pledge.’ Hereupon an elf from the far end came forward, saying,
‘ Here, you may have your pledge, the wen, back again,’ and with that
he threw it at him and it stuck on his other cheek, so that he now had
a wen on both sides of his face.

“Moral : People ought not to feel envious.”


52


aQODWW: ON SOME JAPANESE LE6^ENES»


[58] These stories are unmistakeably identical. Can it be supposed
that the same leading idea, that of the taking off the hump or wen of
one man, by the agency of elves, and clapping it on another in reward
for his envy and want of skill came into the heads of two different
story-tellers, one a Celt and the other a Japanese, independently? Is it
predibie that one of these stories is not borrowed from the other ? But,
if so, then at what age of the world did the loan take place, and which
country was the borrower and which the lender ?

As we know of no recent epoch at which the communication from
one country to the other is likely to have taken place, we are led to
think that this story may be one of the most ancient traditions of the
human race, and that it may date from a time far anterior to history,
when a Turanian tribe may have occupied Iceland, preceding the Celtic
tribes who are now the oldest stratum of humanity remaining in the far
west.

In the remarkable Dutch novel, entitled Max Havelaar,” of which
an English translation by Baron Alphonse Nahuijs appeared in 1868, a
Japanese legend is introduced, professedly taken from a periodical paper
.called “Dutch India,’' and attributed to a writer named Jerome. This
story, entitled “ The Japanese Stone-cutter, ” is told nearly as
follows : —

“There was a man who cut stones out of a rock. His labour was
heavy and he laboured much, but his wages were small, and he was not
content. He sighed because his labour was heavy, and he cried, ‘ 0
that I were rich, in order to rest on a couch, with curtains.’

“ And there came an angel out of heaven, who said, ‘ Be it as you
have said.’ And he was rich. ' And he rested on a couch, and the
curtain was of red silk. And the king of the country passed with
horsemen before his carriage, and likewise behind the carriage there
were horsemen, and the golden umbrella was held over the head of the
king.

“ And as soon as the rich man heard this he was sad, because they
held no golden umbrella over his head,* and [69] he was not content.
He sighed and cried, ‘ I should like to be a king.’

“ Aud there came an angel out of heaven and •said ‘Be it as you
have said.’


GOODWIN ; ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS* 68

And he became a king. And before his carriage were many
horsemen, and behind were also horsemen, and over his head they held
the golden umbrella.

And the sun shone with hot beams, and burned the earth in such a
manner that the grass was dried up.

“ And the king complained that the sun burned his face, and had
more power than he ; and he was not satisfied. He sighed and cried,
‘ I should like to be the sun.'

“ And there came an angel out of heaven who said, * Be it as you
have said.’ And he became the sun. And he sent up his beams on
high, and down to the earth ; to the right and to the left — everywhere.

“ An'd he burned up the grass on the earth and the faces of the
princes who were on the earth. .

“ And a cloud came between him and the earth and the beanas of the
sun were turned back.

“ And he was angry that his power was resisted ; and he complained
that this cloud had more power than he ; and he was dissatisfied.

“ He desired to be the cloud that was so mighty.

“And there came an angel fi*om heaven who said, * Be this as you
have said.’

“ And he became a cloud, and placed himself between the sun and
the earth, and intercepted the beams, so that the grass became green.
And the cloud rained in large drops on the earth and made the rivers
swell, and the fioods carried away the herds.

“ And the cloud devastated the field with much water.

“And it fell on a rock which did not move, and rattled in large
streams, but the rook did not yield.

“ And the cloud was angry because the rock would not yield, and
because the strength of its streams was vain, and it was not contented.

“ It cried, ^ This rock has more power than I have. I wish to be
this rock.’ ^

[60] “And there came an angel out of heaven who said, ‘ Be this as
you have said,’ and it became a rock, and moved neither when the
sun shone nor when it rained, and there came a man with pick-
axe and sharp chisel and heavy hammer, who cut stones out of the
rack.


64 :


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.


“ And tlie rock said, * What is this, that the man has power over me
and cuts stones out of my bosom ? And it was discontented. It cried,
‘ I am weaker than he, I should like to he that man.’

‘‘And there came an angel out of heaven who said, ‘Be this as you
have said,’ and he became a stone-cutter. And he cut stones out of the
rook with heavy labour, and he laboured hard for small wages, and tvas
contented.”

When I first came across this story, it reminded me of one which
is to be found in Grimm’s Popular tales, that entitled “ The Fisherman
and his wife,” the moral of which is, “Be content with your sta-
tion.”

The book which contains “ the Japanese stone-cutter ” being a
Butch one, and the tale evidently containing many touches of colouring
which are not Japanese, it was necessary before drawing any inference
from its resemblance to the well-known German tale, to make some
enquiry as to its authenticity and its real origin.

The result of the enquiry has been that no such tale is to be found
at present in any Japanese book, but that one in the main similar is
current in the mouths of the people, and that in a great variety of
forms. ' One version has been obtained for me by Mr, J. 0. Hall from a
Japanese teacher, who wrote it down from recollection. Mr. Hall has
kindly transcribed the Japanese text into English characters, and has
furnished me with a translation, which is as follows :

“ The Stoky op the Ambitious Mice.

“ In a certain place there lived a pair of mice, and a daughter was
born unto them. The parent mice were uncommonly fond of her, and
wished to marry their daughter to whatever was most powerful in the
whole world, so they set about choosing a son-in-law. A neighbour
mouse [61] said, ‘ The most powerful thing in the world, is, beyond
comparison, the sun. If you marry your daughter to the sun there will
be nobody in all the world to equal you.’ When the parent mice
heard this they were greatly delighted and went straightway to the sun
and told him of their desire that he should take their daughter to wife.
The sun replied — ‘ I am extremely obliged to you for coming such a
long journey and for your kind intention of allowing me to wed your


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGBNDS.


5S

dearly beloyed'daugliter. But what, pray, was your idea in choosing me
for a son-in law T The mice said, * We wish to marry our daughter to
^ whatever is most powerful in the world, and as you are, beyond rivalry,

the most powerful personage in the world, that is why we desire to give
you our daughter in marriage.’ The Sun rejoined : — ‘ You are certainly
not without reason in considering me the most powerful thing in the
world ; but there is one still more powerful than I am, for whose
strength I am in no way a match. It is to that you ought to marry
your daughter.’ ^ Can there be augbt more powerful than you ? ’ said
the mice. The Sun rejoined : — ‘ Ofttimes when I want to illumine the
world a floating cloud comes out and covers me so that I am rendered
powerless. My power is fno match for that of the cloud. If it is a
powerful thing you want there is nought like the cloud.’ The mice
answered, * What you say is certainly the truth,’ After that they went
to the cloud, and expressed to it their wish to have it for their son-in-law.
The cloud said, ‘ True, I have the strength to cover over the Sun, but
as soon as the wind begins to blow I am at once scattered to pieces and
can do nothing. I am no match for the power of the wind,’ Then
^ the mice went their way and coming to the wind, made their proposal of

marriage. The wind said : * True, I have the strength to blow the cloud
to pieces, but when a wall is put up to keep me off, I cannot blow through
that wall. I am no match for the power of the wall.’ Then the mice
went their way and coming to the wall told their story as before. The
wall said : * True, I have the strength [62] to keep off the wind, but
there is the mouse who sometimes gnaws my body, opens a hole through
me and hurts me. I cannot withstand the power of the mouse. Ear
better for you to make the mouse your son-in-law than me.’ The mice
were convinced by this reasonmg and returned home, and after all, it is
said, they married their daughter to one of their own kind.”

Although the stories of the stone-cutter and the ambitious mice
have evidently a common basis, there are, it will be seen, many
important points of dissimilarity, and it is possible that these may be
principally due to the Dutch author who may have had the German tale
in his mind. This is a point which I am unable now to determine.
I should be much] obliged to any Japanese scholar who would supply
%• other genuine Japanese varieties of the tale.


GOODWIK : OIT SOME JAPANESE LEGfEKDS.


The G-erman story in Grimm to whicli I have alluded is
substantially as follows : —

** The Fishbkman and his Wife,

“ A fisherman once lived contentedly with his wife in a little hut
near a lake, and he went every day to throw his line into the water.

‘‘ One day after angling for a long time without even a bite, the line
suddenly sunk to the bottom, and when he pulled it up again there was
a large flounder hanging to the end of it.

“ ‘ Oh I dear,’ exclaimed the fish, ^ good fishermen let me go, I pray
you ; I am not a real fish, but a prince in disguise. I shall be of no
use to you, for I am not good to eat ; put me back into the water, and
let me swim away.’

* Ah,’ said the man, ‘ you need not make such a disturbance. I
would rather Jet a flounder who can speak swim away, than keep
it,’

With these words he placed the fish back again in the water and
it sunk to the bottom, leaving a long streak of blood behind it. Then
the fisherman rose up and went home to his wife in the hut.

‘ Husband,’ said the wife, ‘ have you caught anything to-day ? ’

[68] I caught a flounder,’ he replied, * who said he was an
enchanted prince, and I threw him back- into the water, and let him
swim away.’

** * Did you not wish ?’ she asked.

“ ‘ No,’ he said ; ‘ what should I wish for

t Why, at least for a better hut than this dirty place ; how unlucky
of it. He would have promised you whatever you asked for. However,
go and call him now, perhaps he will answer you.’

** The husband did not like this task at all ; he though it was
nonsense. However, to please his wife he went and stood by the sea.
When he saw how green and dark it looked he felt much discouraged,
but made up a rhyme and said, —

* Flounder, flounder, in the sea
Come I pray and talk to me,

For my wife, dame Isabel,

Sent me here a tale to tell. ’


GOOBTOKT : QU SD3fflB J-^ANBSE LEGENDS* 57

Then the fish came swimming up to the surface and said, * What
do you want with me ?’

‘ Ah,’ said the man, ‘I caught yon and let you go again to-day,
without wishing, and my wife says I ought to have wished, for she
cannot live any longer in such a miserable hut as ours and she wants a
better one.*

“ * G-o home, man,’ said the fish ; ‘your wife has all she wants.*
So the husband went home and there was his wife no longer in
her dirty hovel, but sitting at the door of a neat little cottage,
looking very happy. She took her husband by the hand and
said, ‘ Come in and see how much better it is than the other old
‘ hut.*

“ So he followed her in and found a beautiful parlour, and a bright
stove in it, a soft bed in the bed- room, and a kitchen full of earthenware,
and tin and copper vessels for cooking, looking so bright and clean, and
all of the very best. Outside was a little farm-yard, with hens and
chickens running about, and beyond, a garden containing plenty of
fruit and vegetables. ‘ See,* said the wife, ‘ is it not delightful ? ’ ‘Ah
yes ! ’ replied her husband, ‘ as long as [64] it is new you will he quite
contented ; but after that we shall see.’

“ ‘ Yes, we shall see,’ said the wife.

“ A -fortnight passed and the husband felt quite happy, till one day
his wife startled him by saying, ‘ Husband, after all, this is only a
cottage, 'very much too small for us, and the yard and the garden cover
very little ground. If the fish is really a prince in disguise, he could
very well give us a larger house. I should like above all things to live
in a large castle built of stone. Go to the fish, and ask him to build ns
a castle.’

“ ‘Ah. wife,’ he said, ‘ this cottage is good enough for us ; what do
we want with a castle ? ’

“ ‘ Go along,’ she replied, ‘ the flounder will be sure to give what you

ask.’

“‘Nay, wife ;’ said he, ‘ the fish gave us the cottage at first, but if
I go again he may be angry,’

“ ‘ Never mind,’* she replied; ‘he can do what I wish easily, and
I have no doubt he will ; so go and try.’
von. III. PT II — 8


68


GOOD’WIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.


** The husband rose to go with a heavy heart. He said to himself,
‘ This is not right,’ and when he reached the sea he noticed that the
water was now a dark blue yet very calm, so he began his old song :

' Flounder, flounder in the sea
Oome I pray and talk to me —

For my wife, dame Isabel,

Wishes what I fear to tell.’

^ Now then, what do you want ?’ said the fish, lifting his head above
the water.

* Oh dear,’ said the fisherman, in a frightened tone, ‘ my wife
wants to live in a great stone castle.’

“ ‘ Go home, man, and you will find her there,’ was the reply.

The husband hastened home, and where the cottage had been there
stood a fresh stone castle, and his wife tripped down the steps saying,

* Come in to me, and I will show you what a beautiful dwelling we now
have.’

** The fisherman’s wife soon becomes discontented in the splendid
castle, and her next wish is to be queen.

[65] “ Her husband reluctantly complies with her desires and once
more addressed himself to the fish, with their new request, which is
granted and he returns to find his wife invested with all the splendours
of royalty.

She now desires to be empress and this wish is also granted.

Not satisfied with being empress she next requires to be the Pope,
and even this is conceded, and when the husband comes back he finds
her in a large cathedral.

< Well wife,’ says the husband, * and you are Pope ? ’ ‘ Yes,' she

said, * I am.*

“ He stood still for a time watching her, and at length he remarked,

* You cannot be higher than the Pope, so I suppose you are now
content.’

^ I am not quite sure,’ she said. But when evening came, and they
retired to rest, she could not sleep for thinking of what next she should
wish for.

“ Her husband slept soundly, for he had tired liimself the day before ;
but she rose even before the day broke, and stood at the window to


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE LEGENDS.


09


watch the sun rise. It was a beautiful sight, and she exclaimed as she
watched it, * Oh, if I only had the power to make the sun rise ! Husband,
wake up,* she added, pushing him in the ribs with her elbows ; ‘ wake
up and go and tell the enchanted prince that I wish to be equal to the
Creator, and make the sun rise.’

‘‘ The husband was so frightened at this that he tumbled out of bed,
and exclaimed, ‘ Ah wife, what did’st thou say 9 ’

She repeated the words.

Her husband fell on his knees before her, * Don’t ask me to do this :
I cannot,’ he cried ; but she flew into a rage and drove him from the house.

“ The poor fisherman went down to the shore in terror, for a dreadful
storm had arisen, and he could scarcely stand on his feet. Ships were
wrecked, boats tossed to and fro, and rocks rolled into the sea.

In his terror and confusion he beard a voice from amidst the
storm — ‘ Your wife wishes to be equal to the Creator. [66] Gro home,
man, and find her again in her dirty hut by tbe sea,’

He went home, to find the glories, the riches, and the palaces
vanished, and his wife sitting in the old hut, an example of the conse-
quences of impious ambition,”

Notwithstanding the general resemblance between tbe Herman story
of tbe fisherman and the Japanese one of the ambitious mice, the
differences in treatment are so great that it may fairly be questioned
whether they have a common origin. The story of the Japanese stone-
cutter, as told in the Dutch novel, forms a kind of link between tbe two,
but until we are sure tbat the peculiar features contained in it which
bring it nearer to the German legend, have not been added by the author
of the novel, we can form no satisfactory conclusion on the subject. The
three legends, however, together furnish an instructive example of the
manner in which one leading idea may be varied and decorated.

The last story I have to refer to is one which was printed in tbe
Japan Mail of November 28th, 1874, and which I am informed is
current amongst the old- wives of Japan at the present day.

Betokt in Kind.

“ Kisaburo, a man of a careful and saving disposition, abandoned
bis old lodgings and took a small dwelling next door to a famous eel-


aOODWIN : ON some japane&e leoends.


'house. Now as every one knows that the titillating odour of eels fried
jn soy may be perceived hir and near, Kisaburo found this change of
quarters vastly to his advantage* and eat his simple meal of rice to the
accompaniment of the delicious smell, dispensing with the usual adjuncts
of fish or vegetables.

“ The eel-man was not slow to discover this, and determining at
length to ask his frugal-minded neighbour for payment, took him an
account for the ‘ smell ’ of his eels. Kisaburo eyed him astutely, and
drawing from his pocket-book the amount claimed from him, laid the
money on the hill and began to converse with his visitor. The latter
[67] at length rose to depart, when Kisaburo quietly replaced the money
in his pocket-book. ‘ Hey ! ’ quoth the eel-man, ‘ I thought that money
was for me ; why don’t you give it to me ? ’ * Not so,’ was the reply ;

* you have charged me for the smell of your eels ; — pay you back with
the sight of my money.’ ”

It was pointed out by a writer in the Japan Daily Herald of the
Sth December, 1874, that the counterpart of this story is to be found
greatly elaborated in Eabelais in the 37th chapter of the 3rd Book.
The Rabelaisian version is as follows : —

“ At Paris, in the roast-meat cookery of the Petit-Chastelet before
the cook shop of one of the roast-meat-sellers of that lane, a certain
hungry porter was eating his bread, after he had by parcels kept it a
while above the reek and steam of a fat goose on the spit, tuniing at a
great fire, and found it so besmoked with the vapour, to be savoury ;
which the cook observing, took notice, till after having ravined his penny
loaf, whereof no morsel had been unsmokified, he was about decamping
and going away. But, by your leave, as the fellow thought to have
departed thence scot-free, the master-cook laid hold upon him by the
gorget, and demanded payment for the smoke of his roast-meat. The
porter answered, That he had sustained no loss at all,— that by that he
had done there was no diminution made of the flesh, — that he had taken
nothing of his, and that therefore he was not indebted to him in any-
thing. As for the smoke in question, that, although he had not been
there, it would howsoever have been evaporated : besides, that before
that time it had never been seen nor heard, that roast-meat- smoke was
sold upon the streets of Paris, The cook hereto replied, That he was


GOODWIN : ON SOME JAPANESE MGENDS.


61


not obliged nor any way bound to feed and nourish for nought a porter
whom he had never seen before, with the smoke of his roast-meat, and
thereupon swore, that if he would not forthwith content and satisfy him
with present payment for the repast which he had thereby got, that he
would take his crooked staves from off his back ; which instead of hav-
ing loads thereafter laid upon [68] them, should serve for fuel to his
kitchen fires. Whilst he was going about so to do, and to have pulled
them to him by one of the bottom rungs, which he had caught in his
hand, the sturdy porter got out of his grip, drew forfch the knotty cudgel,
and stood to his own defence. The altercation waxed hot in words,
which moved the gaping hoidens of the sottish Parisians to run from all
parts thereabouts, to see what tlie issue would be of that babbling strife
and contention. In the interim of this dispute, to very good purpose,
Seyny John, the fool and citizen of Paris, happened to be there, whom
the cook perceiving, said to the porter, ‘ Wilt thou refer and submit unto
the noble Seyny John, the decision of the difference and controversy which
is betwixt us ’ ? ‘ Yes, by the blood of a goose,’ answered the porter,

‘ I am content.’ Seyny John the fool, finding that the cook and porter
had compromised the determination of their variance and debate to the
discretion of his award and arbitrament, after that the reason on either
side, whereupon was grounded the mutual fierceness of their brawling
jar, had been to the full displayed and laid open before him, commanded
the porter to draw out of money, if he had it. Whereupon the porter
immediately without delay, in reverence to the authority of such a
judicious umpire, put the tenth part of a silver Philip into his hand.
This little Philip Seyny John took, then set it on his left shoulder, to
try by feeling if it was of a sufficient weight. After that, laying it on
the palm of his hand, he made it ring and tingle, to understand by the
ear if it was of a good alloy in the metal whereof it was composed.
Thereafter he put it to the ball or apple of his left eye, to explore by the
sight, if it was well stamped and marked ; all which being done, in a
profound silence of the whole doltish people, who were there spectators
of the pageantry, to the great hope of the cook’s, and despair of the
porter’s prevalency in the suit that was in agitation, finally caused the
porter to make it sound several times upon the stall of the cook’s shop.
Then with a presidential majesty holding his hawble, scoptre-like, in his


62 aooDwiN : on some Japanese legends.

hand, muffling his [69] head with hood of marten skins, each side whereof
had the resemblance of an ape’s face, spnicifiedup with ears of pasted paper,
and having about his neck a bucked ruff, raised, furrowed, and ridged, with
pointing sticks of the shape and fashion of small organ pipes, he first with
all the force of his lungs coughed two or three times, and then with an
audible voice pronounced this following sentence. The Court declareth,
that the porter, who ate his bread at the smoke of the roast, hath civilly
paid the cook with sound of his money. And the said Court ordaineth,
that every one return to his own home, and attend his proper business,
without costs and charges, and for a cause. This verdict, award, and
arbitrament of the Parisian Fool did appear so ec[uitable, yea, so admir-
able to the aforesaid Doctors, that they very much doubted if the
matter had been brought before the Sessions for Justice of the said
place, or that the judges of the Eota at Pome had been umpires therein,
or yet that the Areopagites themselves had been the deciders thereof,
by any one part, or all of them together, had been so judicially sententi-
ated and awarded. Therefore advise if you will be counselled by a
fool.”

I have no means at present of tracing this story in its migration.
It is one likely enough to have gone all over the world. But the
question arises here, as in the case of the story of the man with the
wen, have the Japanese received it in comparatively recent times,
whether by way of China or from Arabian or Indian merchants, or later
from Portuguese or Dutch missionaries or merchants, or does it belong
to the most ancient cycle of Turanian legend, which may have existed
all over Asia and Europe in times long antecedent to the dawn of
history ?

Becent discoveries have tended to show that the story of the Deluge
and others which had previously passed for Shemitic or Aryan are really
of Turanian origin, or at least were in the possession of Turanian tribes
before they were current among Shemites or Aryans.

It is possible that further enquiries into the Japanese legends may
throw some further light upon this strange but very interesting subject.
Would not a complete translation of the Uji stories, and of the supple-
mentary collection from which tho “ Man with the Wen ” is taken, be
worth the trouble of making ?


OBSEEVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAGASAKI
DUEING THE YEAE 1872.


By Dk. Geerts.


[Mead before the Asiatic Society of Japan on the 11 th March y 1876.]

[71] The climate of Nagasaki is better known than that of any other
place in Japan, because we have the most complete meteorological
records of it. The observations formerly made at Desima by order of
the Dutch Government and the continuation of these observations by
ourselves extend over a period of twenty years.

Professor F. J. Stamkart calculated from the journal 1st Januaiy,
1845, to September, 1848, a first series of averages. The results of this
elaborated report can be found in the Annals of the Koyal Academy of
the Netherlands {Yerhandelingen van het koninldijk Nederlandscli histitut
van W etenschap'pen),

A second series of averages was calculated by the Eoyal Meteoro-
logical Institute of Utrecht , out of the journal kept at Desima by
different physicians of the factory. These observations run down to
September, 1855. The results, together with an excellent review, are
published in the Annals of the said Institute over the years 1855 and
1856.

A third series calculated from the journal, kept at [72] Desima by
Pompe van Meerdervoorty comprises the years 1857-1862, and was
published at Desima in 1862.

Out of these three series a very valuble review was made by J, van
Goghy Captain E. N. Navy, and published in the Annals of the Eoyal
Academy of Amsterdam and also in the Annals of the Meteorological
Institute of Utrechiy for the year 1866, [Overzicht van de heerschmde
xoinden en darby waargenomen harometerstanden te Nagasaki),

In 1871 1 received the necessary instruments for instituting meteoro-
logical observations, and for these I erected a station at the Japanese


64


(JBEBTS : OBSEBVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAGASAKI,


Government medical school of Nagasaki, and commenced my journal
on the 1st November of that year. I have now the honour to present
to the Asiatic Society a series of observations for two months during
1871 and for the whole of the year 1872, and these will be followed in
a short time, by the results for 1873. Although my journal has been
kept according to the rules of the international congress for meteoro-
logy in millimeters and centigrade degrees, I have thought it advisable
to send to the Society the results reduced to English inches and
Eahrenlieit degrees, because it is still a fact, although very much to be
regretted, that the scientific metric system and the centigrade thermo-
meter have found up to the present time but few adherents among the
public of England and America.

Before speaking of my observations, I may here mention the
desirability that other observers in Japan should keep their journals
according to the rules of the Congress held last year at Vienna under
the presidency of Professor Buys Ballot of Utrecht. At the next
Congress of international meteorologists which will he held in Utrecht
in the month of September of this year, deliberation on many other
points will be held having the object of promoting unity in observing
and registering.

I am indebted to my learned friend Professor Buys Ballot for the
communication of the minutes of the Congress, and will mention here
the general rules adopted by the permanent Committee, for the sake
of other [73] observers in Japan, who perhaps would like to know them.
These rules are : 1st, Conformity of instruments and proved accuracy of
the same ; 2nd, Directions of wind to register with English initials N.
NNE, NE. etc.; 8rd, averages of clouds with the numbers 0-10 (0=a
perfect bright sky ; 10=a thick cloudy heaven) ; 4th, The year com-
mences with 1st January ; the days commence at midnight ; the hours
are marked 0-12 a.m. and 0-12 h.m.; 5th, it is recommended to calculate
the five days averages of temperature adopted by Dove. 6th, after each
Lustrum, commencing with the year 5 n + 1 the results of observations
of each station are published by the Congress in the same manner, 7th,
the centigrade degrees are to be used, at least in mentioning the results
of the barometer, (inches of Paris to he wholly abandoned).

I deem it unnecessary to prove the utility of adopting these rules,


GEEETS : OBSEBVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAGASAKI, 65

because it must be evident that by unity in registering and observing
only we can satisfactorily add to our knowledge of tbe great atmospheric
movements which take place over the whole globe.

In June, 1873 the Superintendent of the Danish Telegraph Com-
pany made an arrangement with me and other gentlemen in Hongkong,
Shanghai and Amoy to transmit daily by cable the following observations,
viz : reading of the barometer and the thermometer attached, direction
of wind, force of wind, dry and wet thermometer, state of the weather,
hours of rain, quantity of rain. These telegraphic records have been
published at the telegraph station at each of the places every day at
neon since July, 1873. We have adopted English inches and Fahren-
heit degrees in their publication, because they are designed for the use
of navigators in these waters, and these are chiefly English and
Americans, who are seldom acquainted with the metrical system. It is
much to be desired that Yokohama or Yedo should take a part in forming
the telegraphic meteorological returns, and that the Meteorological
Congress should find some means of financial aid towards the recording
and transmission of these observations.

[74] The present observers on tbe China and Japan coast have all
taken up their work without material profit or proper assistance. The
latter is absolutely necessary if there is to be a perfect regularity in ob-
serving. Great credit is due to the Great Northern Telegraph Company,
and its Director M, Dreyor, for the care with which they give their
disinterested aid. for the advancement of the meteorological knowledge
of the China and Japan coast.

As I have already mentioned, these observations are made at the
Physical School in Nagasaki, and the point of observation is 650 meters
distant E.S.E. from the former place of observation at Desima. The
reservoir of the barometer is placed 37 metres above the medium level
of the sea, which height was determined by myself by levelling.

The hours of observations are 9 a.'m., 12 m., 3 p.m. and 6 p.m. I
was obliged to choose these hours, because I had to bring them into
accord with my other daily occupations.

All observations are made with the same instruments, the correct-
ness of which were before exactly determined. The position of the
instruments remained unchanged.

VOL. III. PX. II.— 9


66


aEEKTS t OBSERVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAOASAHI.


The direction of 'wind is given in true bearings (not magnetic).
The magnetic deviation 'was determined by me on the 25th September
1871, -with a magnetometer by G-auss. I found it to be 2 degrees 37
min. W.

The Anemometrical degrees are those of Admiral Beaufort 'with
some slight alterations.


0 == Cailm.


1 )

2.

8 ,

?i

8

9

10

11

12


= Light breezes.

= Moderate breeze. ,

= Moderate wind.

= Strong wind.

= Very strong wind,

= Storm.

= Typhoon.

= All- destroying Typhoon.


1


[76] The barometer is a standard one of the Meteorological Institute
with a vernier to read to tenth parts of millimeters, and the thermometer
reads to tenth parts of centigrade degrees.

No fire is ever placed in the room in which the instrument is fixed,
and the direct sunlight has no access to it.

All barometrical numbers in these tables are corrected to the freez-
ing point (32 degrees Fahrenheit) and the level of the sea. Correction
for capacity and capillarity has been made by the placing and division
of the scale.

The thermometers were all examined in snow on the 18th December,
1870. All numbers of temperature are corrected. The psychrometer
hangs on the N. N. W. side of the institution in the open air, but
perfectly protected against direct sunlight.

Brightness of the sky * — ^In these tables we have adopted the old
style, that is 0 represents a very cloudy dark sky ; and 10 a wholly
cloudless atmosphere.

Bainmeter , — This instrument stands at 46 meters above the level


GBEETS : OBSERVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAGASAKI. 67

of the sea on the platform, which is erected on the roof of the school.
At the same place the weather-cock with wind-gnage is attached. The
quantity of rain is measured every 24 hours.

Eesults.

Vireetion and Force of Wind,

The experience and journals of many seamen have long since shewn
that, in the China sea, from the island of Formosa, along the China coast
up to the Japanese Archipelago, two monsoons of different duration
prevail during the year. These are the S. W. monsoon from June till
September, and the K. E, monsoon from October till May.

Hagasaki is decidedly situated within the regions of these monsoons,
but there is a slight variation in the direction of the north-east monsoon
at that place. During June, July and August the S. W. monsoon
prevails at Nagasaki perfectly in the same direction as in the China sea ;
the N. E. monsoon, however, turns more towards the N. and N.N.W,,
a fact chiefly caused by the geographical [76] situation of the place,
which is wholly surrounded by hills of from 400 to 1,400 feet in height,
except between the points of S.W. and S.S.W.

As is the case in the China sea, we find that in Nagasaki the north
monsoon (for here it is more correct to speak of it as a north and not a
N.E. monsoon) has more than twice as long a duration as the S.W.
wind. September and sometimes the first days of October are the
periods at which the S.W. changes to the North monsoon , whilst the
change from the N. to the S.W. wind takes place much more gradually
daring the two months of April and May (and sometimes in the last
days of March). East and south-easterly winds are comparatively rare
in Nagasaki, although it must be said that these winds are the true ram‘-
carriers for this place, as well as for a large part of the east coast of the
Japan islands. It is nearly always sure that there will be rain if E. and
S.E. winds prevail for one day or longer. This fact is easily explained.
The E, and S.E. winds, which have travelled over the warmer parts of
the Pacific Ocean must necessarily get saturated and yield their water
when they are cooled by the vegetation on the Japanese coast, in the
same manner as is the case with the S,W, wind on the west coast of
Europe,


68 GEEETS : OBSERTATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAGASAKI*

■ In regard to the prevailing winds and the height of the barometer,
the year may be divided into two monsoon periods, and in order to give
a simple review of these periods I have constructed Tables 1, 1871, and
Tables I. II. III. for 1872. These figures show how many times in
each hundred observations the wind has been F. E, and S. W. and so
on. The length of the triangle outside the circle gives, by comparison
with the scale, the relative number of winds, which have prevailed
during each period. If for instance the N. wind only should have
prevailed in the month of December, 1871 (Table 1. 1871), the radius IST,
would have had the length of the whole scale (100). But the N. wind
blew only 23.2 times in each hundred observations, and therefore the
length of the radius is 28.2 parts of the scale. We have placed the
numbers expressing [77] the per-centage of wind directions inside the
circle of the diagram.

It can immediately be seen from these diagrams that northerly
winds have prevailed during the months of November and December, 1871.

The wind-rose on Table I. 1872, shews the direction and percentage
of winds (^i) over the whole year, 1872, (Z>) over the changing months
April, May and September, (c) over the time of the S. W. monsoon in
June, July and August, and (d) over the period of the N. monsoon,
October, November, December, January, February and March.

The first diagram shows that N., S.W., N.E., N.W. winds are the
most prevailing during the whole year, whilst S., S.S.E., S.E., and E.
are much more rare.

The following diagram shows how in the changing months April,
May and September, the direction of wind is very variable, and that N.
and N.B. winds have still during these months a preponderance over
the S.V7. wind. The wind diagram c. shows clearly how the S.W.
monsoon prevails in June, July and August, whilst diagram d. explains
the N. monsoon.

Table 11. contains diagrams made up from 1,000 observations
formerly made at Deshima, during a period of 15 years. ' Although they
agree in the main with our diagrams over the same months of the year,
1872, they differ slightly in some subordinate points.

They are, however, not very important, because the diagrams agree
in the main points.


aEEBTS : OBSERVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAO-ASAKI, 69

Table III. 1872, contains tbe diagrams for each month of the year
1872, and can easily be understood after the explanations we have
already given.

Table V. shows that the highest barometer prevails in the coldest
months January and February, when the atmosphere has its maximum
density, whilst the lowest barometer occurs in August, during the
prevalence of the S.W. monsoon.

It is, however, a very remarkable fact, not easily to be explained,
that during June, July and August at the [78] time of the S.W. monsoon,
the barometer is higher during S.7/. winds and the lowest with the
northerly and N.E. winds. In the winter, when thpN. monsoon prevails,
we see the highest barometer, quite as in other countries, with N.N.E.
and N.W. winds, and the lowest with S.Y7. winds, when the monsoon
wind is disturbed. Thus we find that in each monsoon period the highest
pressure of the atmosphere exists %i)hen the relative monsoon tvind reigm
freely %citJiout disturhance.

The greatest difierence of barometer in 1872 was 1.29 inch. The
fluctuations or diferences between lowest and highest barometer are the
following : —


January ..
February ,
March ....
April ......

May

June

July

August ...
September
October ..
November
Pecember.


0.73

0.66

0.74

0.61

0.86

0.39

0.71

0.60

0.88

0.67

0.74

0.86


It will be seen that the greatest fluctuation took place in May

( 0 . 86 ).

The highest barometer of the year was on the 19th February=30.62.
The lowest oh the 31st July=29.23.


70 GEEETS : OBSEEVATIONS ON THE CLIMATE AT NAGASAKI.

The temperature of Nagasaki is largely affected by the warm
current, lixm shiivo or black stream,” which runs as another gulf
stream along the whole east coast of Japan, and causes chiefly the much
milder climate of the eastern coast as compared with that on the west
coast. The meteorological data which have been procured on the west
coast of Japan are unfortunately very few. It is, however, certain that
a most decided difference of temperature is to be observed between
places on the east and west coast of Japan, It would be of great
value to have an [79] accurate journal of one or more places on
the west coast, to show the very great influence of the Japanese Gulf
stream.

Although in regard to direction of wind the year in Nagasaki is
divided into two monsoon periods, it is not so in regard to the tempera-
ture^ that place. The thermometer shews us that the year must be
divided into foiix* nearly equal seasons.

The lowest temperature in the open air (shade) was in 1872 on the
4th Fehruary=25.9 degrees Fahrenheit, and the highest on the 2nd and
8rd August=93.0 degrees Fahrenheit.

The coldest month is January with the medium temperature 41.2;
the warmest month is August with the medium temperature 82.3. In
the t'|vo months July and August the heat is quite tropical (81.9 and
82.8.) Inside the house the thermometer in 1872 never fell to the
freezing point. The lowest temperature was on the 23rd January— 35.6,
The highest on the 2nd AugUBt==89.6,

The number of rainy days in 1872 was 122 or exactly one-third of
the 366 days of the year. The quantity of rain over the whole year was
47.71 inches, or about 2.5 times as much as falls in London during one
year and nearly twice as much as falls in Amsterdam. This year was
characterized by a very short rainy season, which period ordinarily
commences in the beginning or middle of June. In 1872 the greatest
number of rainy days occurred in April, it having 15 rainy days with
a fall of 11.04 inches. Next to April comes June with 13 rainy days
and 5.66 inches of fall, then follows August with 12 rainy days and
5.73 inches of fall, October was in 1872 the dryest month, it having
only 4 rainy days and 0.95 inch of fall.

December gives the largest number of misty days 19.1, although it


GEBRTS : OBSEBVATIONS 01^ THE CLIMAOJB AT NAGASAKI. 71

musfc be observed that mist in Nagasaki exists chiefly in the morning
and evening. Mist very seldom prevails during a whole day. Snow
only fell in 1872 in January and February together on twelve different
days.

[80*1 Thunder and lightning are rare in Nagasaki. The year 1872,
however, embraced more thunder days than is usual. The number of
thunder days during the year was sixteen ; April alone had four.

The brighest month of the whole year was October (7.6) and the
most cloudy month was April (4.5). In October and November the
greatest number of cloudless days was observed (together 10). '

Only three earthquakes were felt, and particular care was taken in
observing them. None of the earthquakes were very severe, and none
of these caused any accident. '

The number of storms in 1872 was 19. April gives the largest
number (5), and then March with 4 storms. In September, October,
November, January and February no storms took place in 1872.

In Nagasaki no typhoon occurred during 1872.

The relative humidity was greatest in April (87), and after that
July (79). The least humidity occurred in November (66), October (67)
and February (67).


ASIATIC SOCIETY OP JAPAN.


A meeting of tSis Society was Iielcl o£ 17th ultimo, at the Grand Hotel, Dr.
Hephurn in the chair. The minutes of the last meeting were read and approved,
and it was announced that the following gentlemen had been elected ordinary
members of the Society : Dr, Milller, Yedo ; Mr. P. E. Wetmore, Yokohama.

The Eev. Mr. Syle then proposed that in view of the increased number of the
foreign community residing in Yedo the Society’s meetings should in future be held
at Yokohama and Yedo alternately.

Professor Ayrton said he cordially seconded the motion made by Mr. Syle,
because, in addition to adding to the convenience of the few of the Tokei members
who now regularly attended, he considered that alternate meetings in that city
would largely increase the utilty of the Society, since there were resident there
many men who, from their ability and profession, were able to contribute valuable
papers, but who now but rarely coming to the meetings scarcely bore in mind how
important such a Society as this might ultimately become. Also he thought that
of those who were anxious to come many were completely deterred by domestic
arrangements preventing them leaving home for the night. The resolution was
tmanimously agreed to.

[81] Mr. Goodwin then read his paper On some Japanese popular Legends.”

At the close of the paper Professor Ayrton asked whether the tales Mr.
Goodwin had related were really proved to have any connection with one another.
Their apparent identity was indeed very striking, but he thought there were other
stories somewhat resembling the above, and which would tend to shew that in any
country there were many tales all more or less of the same kind, so that among
the number there might happen to be e.ocidentally a legend in one country almost
identical in illustration with the legend of another country ; for instance the
moral of the tales of ” the Wen ” and of “ the Hunchback ” is that of the “Forty
Thieves ” in the Arabian Nights and of the “ Tongue-out sparrow ” as told by
Mitford, Again, the tales of idle wishes narrated to ns by Mr. Goodwin are some-
what similar in character to the German tale of the “ Three Slack Puddings.”
The study of the legends of diferent countries would, however, as it becomes
gradually developed, lead to this result, if it led to no other, that it would shew
whether or not legends similar in character had a common origin, and consequently
such a study would certainly be valuable.

Dr. Hepburn agreed in the main with Mr. Ayrton, and adduced the fact that
proverbs teaching identically similar lessons are to be found among all nations.

Mr. Howell said that the identity of the moral would not be sufficient to
establish the claim to relationship, but that identity of illustration went far to
prove it.


( 73 )

A paper by Dr. Georts Qiitiiled “ Observations on tlio Climate of Nagasaki in
1872 ” was then read, in the absence of the writer, by Mr. Ernnton.

Mr. Ayrton remarked that mention bad been made in Dr. Geerts’ paper of the
observations being taken at the time appointed by the International Congress,
He would be glad to know whether Dr. Geerts observed four times or only twice
during the twenty-four hours. The suggestion contained in the paper that
observations made at Toldo, or Yokohama, would be very valuable combined with
those of Nagasaki, reminded him of the instruments offered some time back to
the Asiatic Society by the Signal Bureau at Washington, the conditions of the
acceptance being that the observations should be recorded at the hours settled by
the International Congress. The matter was, as far as ho remembered, placed
at the time in the hands of a committee consisting of Mr. Briinton and Dr.
Murray : he would be glad to hear the result, if the plans were matured. Ad-
ditional interest has been given to Meteorological observations by Professor
Balfour Stewart’s review of Provost Lloyd’s “New Treatise on Magnetism,” in
which it is shewn that there is a stroiig reason for believing that the variations
of the magnetic elements of a place are produced by atmospheric disturbances
in the upper regions : fii’sfcly, because the rare air being a partial conductor
would have generated [82] in the electric currents clue to its passage across the
earth’s lines of force, which currents would attract or repel magnets on the
earth’s surface and vrould also react on the earth’s magnetism: secondly, because
it has been shewn that there is a connection as regards periodicity between the
connection currents of the earth and the sun’s spots, between cyclones and hur-
ricanes and the sun’s spots, and between the sun’s spots and disturbances of
terrestrial magnetism, so that there is every reason for thinking that variations
of meteorology are associated with variations of terrestrial magnetism.

The Meeting then terminated.


VOL. III. PI. n.— 10.


NOTES OP A JOUENEY PEOM AWOMOEI TO NIIGATA,
AND OF A VISIT TO THE MINES OP SADO.


By J. H. Gubbins, Esq.


[Bead before the Asiatic Society of Jaimn on the 14th Aiml, 1876.]

[83] The Bay of Awomori, at the extreme end of which stands the
town of the same name, is among the best in Japan, the harbour being
well protected, while there in deep water close to the shore on all sides.

The town of Awomori, which is the seat of the Awomori Km^ is
extremely uninteresting, and there was comparatively little left to see of
it on the occasion of our visit, as more than half of the place had been
destroyed by fire the year before. Its Meihutsii ox production for
which it is famous, is a kind of sweetmeat made of beans and sugar.
No particular industry is carried on, but a considerable trade passes
through the town, as it is the fixvourite place of communication between
this part of the country and Hakodate, owing to its proximity to
Hirozaki, which was formerly the oastle-town of the district ; while on
the other hand it is conveniently situated with respect to the great
cattle-province of Nambu. Cattle and rice are the chief exports to
Hakodate, while from that place skins, fish, and foreign merchandise
of all kinds are imported. Another thing which tends to give a certain
importance to [84] Awomori is the fact of its being the principal outlet,
so to speak, of the large yearly emigration of the country people who
flock in large numbers in the spring of every year to Hakodate —
either to join the fisheries on the coast of Yexo, or to pick up what
living they can in Hakodate and its neighbourhood, returning as regularly
in the autumn to their native places.


atJBBINS t NOTES OF A. JOURNEY FROM AWOMOEI TO NIIOATA, 75

Considering the comparatively short period during which out-door
work can he carried on in the northern parts of Japan, it seems strange
that these people should choose for their periodical flitting the very time
of year when, as one would be apt to think, their labour would pay
them best ; and the reason assigned — which the fact of the yearly
emigration itself proves to be in a measure correct — namely, — that the
fisheries are so lucrative that the amount which they earn by this
livelihood serves not only to keep them through the winter months, but
to defray the cost of their journeys to and fro — leads us to infer that
agriculture in these northern districts of the country is not a remunerative
pursuit This emigration is not confined to the male portion of the
population ; the women emigrate in just as large if not in larger numbers
than the men.

V

At Awomori commences the long chain of hills which runs down
intersecting the country from north to south as far as Takasaki and on
through Shinshiu. A lesser ridge of hills has a direction from north-east
to south-west, but is irregular, there being breaks at intervals and some
of the peaks being much higher than others. In this last chain is the
mountain Iwakiyania, which like so many other mountains in Japan is
shaped like a volcano, and stands out a little distance from the rest of
the chain. It is of course impossible to form any accurate conclusion as
to the height of a mountain without ascending it, but judging from the
size of the hills near Iwakiyama over which we passed, we estimated its
height roughly at about 5,000 feet.

Proceeding from Awomori towards Namioka, the first post stage on
the road to Hirozaki, one X)n.sses over the [85] last-mentioned ridge of
hills at a point called the Tsugaruzaka, the ascent of which is somewhat
tedious, though there is a nice view4o be had when the top is reached,
of Iwakiyama and of the valley in which Hirozaki lies. In the district
between Awomori and the Tsugaruzaka the chief product is of course
rice, but the cultivation is altogether very scanty. Some of the hills
were covered with a coarse-looking medium-sized bush which, seen from
a distance, bears a certain resemblance to the mulberry-plant, though the
leaf is larger. The name given by the Japanese to the plant is Qomagiri^
and the hark is employed to make the incense-sticks in common use in
Japanese temples. The Sasa or scrub-bamboo, dwarf-oak, and ordinary


76 G-UBBINS : NOTES OF A JOUBNEY FBOM AWOMOBI TO NIIOATA*

pine grow everywliere in great profusion. On the other side of the
Tsugaruzaka the country opens out into a broad valley in which the
villages of Namioka, Fnjizaki and the town of Hirozaki are situated,
and which is bounded by the two ranges of hills already mentioned.
The scenery loses much of its desolateness, the broad valley full of
rice presenting a cheerful contrast to the country already passed
through. The valley is watered by the Hiragawa, which flows through
it from North-east and South-west, and is crossed by the road some
two miles from Namioka. The river when we saw it was only about
thirty yards wide, but in flood it attains a considerable breadth.
The houses in the villages along the road are almost all built of
clay with slight wooden frames, but the better class of buildings
in the villages and the houses in the towns are ordinary wooden
structures, presenting in point of architecture no marked differ-
ence to those seen in Yedo and its environs. I should not forget to
mention the water-melons, which one sees everywhere growing in the
wildest profusion, sometimes trailing up the sides of the houses and
almost hiding the roofs altogether from view with their rich luxuriance
of foliage, and at other times forming the hedge-row to a garden. All
the way from Awomori to Niigata water-melons are grown, and as they
are also found in great quantities down south, this plant may he said to
be [BC] almost as universal a production of Japan as the staple product,
rice.

Hirozaki is an old castle-town containing some 80,000 inhabitants.
By old castle4own is meant that the town in former days was the
residence of a northern Daimio, and possessed a castle. This is now no
more. It was burnt down four years ago and the site is now occupied
by barracks for the 800 soldiers who are quartered in the town. The
stream called the Tsudzubudzugawa intersects Hirozaki.

The towns here in the north are built in a curious style. Though,
as I have said, the houses in the towns have no particular peculiarities
of architecture to distinguish them from those further south, yet owmg
to the heavy snow-fall in the winter, when the snow attains an average
depth of 12 or 18 feet, the roofs of the houses and the verandahs m^e
built very strongly, and these latter are made continuous — each verandah
connecting with those of the houses on each side— so that in winter


auBBiNS : JsroTBs of a jotoney fboh awohori to nhoata. 77

liowever groat tlie depth of snow, the inmates of the houses are able to
go in and out of their dwellings with comfort and even to take a certain
amount of exercise. As is the case in all mountainous localities, the
roofs are further protected by large boulders and stones, which are placed
on them in the usual way.

Hirozaki considered in any way is a very uninteresting place. All
old castlo-towns in Japan have more or less a dull and dead-alive
atmosphere pervading them, which has a depressing effect upon a new
comer, and Hirozaki is no exception to the rule. Owing to the increasing
trade passing through Awomori, Hirozaki has been quite superseded by the
former place, and though still a large town, business appears to be almost
at a stand still. Yery good apples are grown in the neighbourhood, and
a kind. of green lacquer- ware is manufactured, which, however, though
of some repute in the locality, is held in small estimation at the capitaL

It was a long day’s ride from Hirozaki to Odate, our next stopping
place. After emerging from the valley the [87] road led us over the
crest of a densely wooded hill some 500 feet high, and it was all the
ponies could do to carry us up, the path being entirely composed, as is
not uncommon in mountain tracks in Japan, of small logs of wood cut
to the same size and laid so as to form steps up the hill side. A
curious feature of the scenery further on, was that the hills on our left
were covered with fine turf, but otherwise destitute of vegetation, with
the exception of some dwarf-shrubs scattered here and there, whereas
those immediately opposite these, and to the right of us as we went
along, were clothed with the densest vegetation from their bases to their
summits, chestnuts and a species of elm being chiefly noticeable.
Fortunately for our rate of progression our road skirted the sides of the
first named hills, and we were thus enabled to push on at a rapid rate,
We saw numbers of horses grazing on the hills all round even in the
steepest and most precipitous q^laces, and now and again some of these,
answering to the call of their owners who had come out to collect them,
would ^^come bounding down the bill sides uttering shrill neighs and
indulging in the wildest of gambols. Our own steeds betrayed an
intimate acquaintance with the geography of the neighbourhood, which
could only have been acquired in this way, and shewed at times an ^
evident inclination to join their friends playing in the vicinity.


78 GUBBINS : NOTES OF A JOURNEY FROM AWOMORI TO NIIGATA,

Of Odat<^, as of HirozaM, tliere is lifctle to be said. Like Hirozaki it
also possessed a castle once, and was tlie residence of a HatamotOy and
like that of Hirozaki the castle is no longer in existence. The town
holds about 4,000 inhabitants. The principal products of the district
are rice and the indigo plant. Curious looking clay ovens were to be
seen along the road side as we came from Hirozaki, in which this plant
is subjected to some mysterious process before the dye is extracted.
Tea has latterly been grown, but not as yet with much success.

We found on arriving at Odate, that we should have to continue
our journey by boat for 13 ri as far as a place called Tsurugata, as the
bridges had been all swept away by recent floods, which floods are of
common occurrence, [88] taking place five or six times in tho course of
a year. The Yonetsurugawa, the river which proves so troublesome,
rises in the district of Kadzunog6ri in Nambu and flows into the sea on
the west coast a little below the town of Tsurugata.

The boats or rather canoes used on this river are of two sizes. It
was in the smaller kind that we. embarked. Their shape is somewhat
peculiar, and a description of them may not be out of place. They are
flat-bottomed, long and narrow, the length of the one in winch we
embarked being about 25 feet, while the breadth was only 2-^ feet.
They lie low in the water, there being hardly a foot of free-board, and
the sides are slightly rounded so as to curve inwards. The draught of
the smaller boats, such as the one in which we were, I should take to be
about six inches. The prow is very long and high, and does not project
sharply outwards, as is the case with ordinary Japanese boats, but is
continued in a line with the body of the boat in a gradual long curve.
The breadth of these canoes is the same all over, except at the bows,
where they become slightly narrower. They are worked by two
boatmen. One of these stands in the stern of the boat and steers with
a long paddle ; the other either sits in the bow and rows with a very
unwieldy paddle fixed in rowlocks made of rope, or else stands up with
a pole to ward the canoe off from the rocks and keep it well into the
stream. The canoes seem on the whole adapted to the locality, and are
managed with great skill when shooting the small rapids which occur
, here and there on the river.

Swinging down with the current at some ^ix miles an hour, we


GUBBINS : NOTES OE A JOUBNEY FROM AWOMOBl TO NHGATA. 79

passed tbrougli a beautifully undulating country, tbe scenery being very
pretty at times and very picturesque all along. There is a fine view
about twelve miles above tbe village of Tsurugata, Here tbe bills on
each bank rise to a height of 300 or 400 feet, and tbe stream gradually
grows narrower and narrower, until at last making a sharp turn to tbo
right it dashes into a steep gorge. From tbe boat, as it is whirled down
amidst tbe [89] strong eddies of tbe current, tbe view of tbe bills
overhead, shaded as they are by dark pines and cryptomerias, is very
grand.

From Suyama close to Tsurugata, wbei'e we landed, on to Hado
tbe country is beautiful. Large tracts of rich meadow-land, varied here
and there by small bits of lightly wooded country, extend down to tbo
sea on the one hand and as far as tbe bills on tbe other. In these
meadows wild boars, so our guides said, are frequently to be met with
even in the day time. Beyond Kado the country becomes more
cultivated ; the villages are more numerous and more thickly populated,
and tbe houses composing them differ from those further north in not
being mere clay structures but built of wood in tbe usual stylo. Near
this latter place we saw the ordinary bamboo for tbe first time, not
growing wild but carefully cultivated in a hedgerow with other trees.
Shortly after leaving Kado an extensive lagoon, about 15 miles long by
five broad, as far as we could roughly estimate it, and connected with
the sea by an arm so narrow that tbe first impression formed by the
traveller of it is that it is an isolated piece of water, comes into view on
the right. Near tbe outlet to tbe ocean, as if specially stationed there
to guard tbe entrance, are two high bills called respectively Honzan and
Sbinzau, or old and new mountain, tbe latter being tbe name of tbe
higher of tbe two. As we proceeded further tbe meadow land gave way
entirely to cultivation. Tbe uri or small melon seemed to be tbe chief
production of tbe district, and those we saw were much larger than those
grown near Yedo.

A nice view of Kub6ta, tbe capital of tbe Akita prefecture, is
obtained a short distance from tbe town, which is situated in an exten-
sive valley at the foot of Taiheisan, a mountain of some 4,000 feet, and
on the river Omogawa. This river has its source at Iwasaki and flows
intb tbe sea on tbe west coast near Kubota. Kubota has a population of


80 GUBBINS : NOTES OE A JOURNEY FROM AWOMORI TO NHOATA.


60,000 inliabitanfcs, and though, like Hirozaki, an old castle-to*wn,
has considerably more life in it than the latter place. The houses,
tliough huillt like those at Hirozaki [90] have a more finished appear-
ance, the streets are “wider and better kept, and there are some good shops
and fine large tea-houses in the town. Jinrikisha ply to and fro, the
roads, however, being too bad to admit of their being used outside of
the suburbs, the streets are thronged with a busy crowd, and there is
every sign of a brisk trade being carried on. The IleUmtstt of Kubota ,
are Tsimugi} a silken fabric much used in making JiaJcama and himonoy
and the pattern of which is usually black and yellow in stripes, white
Chijimiy a species of crape with a raised woof which fetches a high price
at Yedo, and KaraJcanii — the sliding-doors of Japanese houses.

Near Kubota we saw large tracts of woodland fenced in, and at
certain spots in the wide enclosures thus formed were fixed posts notify-
ing that the land in question belonged to the Kaitakuslii or Agricultural
Department. It is gratifying to see that the Japanese Government are
at length disposed to turn their attention a little nearer home, and
perceive that Yezo is not the only place where the influence of the
KaitahuM may bo exercised to advantage ; for certainly there is in the
northern districts of the main island great room for improvement, and
owing to the more genial accessories of position and climate the labours
of the Colonization Department in this direction, where such a large
field for agricultural experiments is open to tbem, would, it is presuma-
ble, be far more likely to be attended with success than in a country
with the Siberian climate of northern Yezo— where millions of dollars
have been expended— with what result is only too well known.

Hitherto all the way from Awomori to Kubdta and on as far as
Murakami we found that a knowledge of the language as spoken at
Yedo and the neighbourhood of the capital was of very little use when
speaking to the country people, though of course officials both in towns
and villages can invariably speak the Yedo dialect. The dialects vary
in every town to a certain extent. Near Awomori the Nambu dialect is
the one in common use. Owing, however, to the yearly emigration of
the country [91] people before alluded to, a medley of many different
dialects is the result, which to a traveller is utterly incomprehensible.
The harsh language of Kaga, the dialects of Nambu with its peculiaidfies


GUBBINS : NOTES OE A JOUENEY PBOM AWOMOEI TO NIIGITA.


81


of intonation, expression and pronunciation, tlie nasal twang which
distinguishes the dialects spoken near Hirosaki, and in the old province
of Aidzu — combined with the hard and clipped language of Hakodate, in
itself a compound of many dialects, when jumbled up together combine
to produce a jargon the disagreeable eifect of which on the ear of a
stranger may readily be imagined. As an instance of the local pecu-
liarities of dialect which fell under our notice, I may state that we met
with no less than five different expressions for the common word
namely He, Hai, Ne, Na, and Chi, By this alone some idea may he
found of the difficulties which stand in the way of a traveller under-
standing and being understood byAhe people with whom he is thrown
into communication.

The coast line from Hirazawa on loses much of the dreary desolate-
ness noticeable between Kubota and Hirazawa. Hitherto the coast has
extended in a straight unbroken line varied by no indentations or bays,
while endless sand, and nothing hut sand, has reigned uninterrupted
everywhere. Here, however, the monotony is broken by several tiny
bays, the entrances to which are almost concealed by bigb fierce-looking
rocks whicb bar the passage to all but small fishing boats, and on the
shores of which stand little fishing villages, whose inhabitants were
actively engaged when we passed by in the ordinary pursuits of a fishing
population. The character of the country too softens and improves.
The hills run down close to the water’s edge. Wild lilies of a bright
orange colour, harebells and wild pinks grow in great profusion, and
little hillocks rich in trees and shrubs are dotted all over the rice-fields.
Such is the country between Shokoslii and Kosagawa.

The road from Sbokoshi on towards Sakata lies along [92] the tops
of high cliffs overhanging the sea and over the Misaki-toge or Pass of the
Three Promontories. Owing to the hills all round, the view of Ch6-
kaisan, one of the highest mountains of Japan, is constantly changing,
although the mountain is clearly seen from a long distance back, yet it
is only when drawing near Sakata that one obtains a good view of it,
and of the chains of low hills stretching away from it, so as to form an
accurate idea of these. The whole presents a curious sight.

The volcano Chokaisan, which the natives of the place are fond of

* The affirmative “Yes” — as opposed to “No,” is of course not meant.

Ton. III. TT. II.— 11 .


'82 GUBBINS : NOTES OF A JOUBNEY FEOM AWOMOBI TO NHGATA,

likening to Fujiyama, stands out boldly against the sky, rising up to
a beigM of 8,000 feet and towering far above the low bills which
surround it. Seen as we saw it, it forms as it were the centre of a
circle of which only half is visible, or of a spider’s web, and from this
centre three ridges, like the radii of a circle or the principal threads of
a web, run westwards down to the sea and are continued out into it
in three promontories, forming two bays, and thus giving the mme of
Misaki Toge to the Pass, whilst a fourth chain of hills extends in a
south-easterly direction ending shortly above Sakata. Pilgrimages are
made up Chokaisan, the mountain being ascended from Fukuura, a small
village about 11 miles from Sakata.

The road all the way from Hirazawa is pretty and the scenery so
varied that the journey seems shorter than it really is, and thus when
wo reached the valley in which Sakata lies, and, entering it from the
North close to the foot of Chokaisan rode through the whole length of
it up to Sakata, we were not too fatigued to be able to enjoy the rich
landscape spread out before us.

The valleys in Japan may appear to some monotonous and un-
interesting. They may say that they are all so alike that the eye
becomes wearied by constantly dwelling on the same views. But it is
not so with a real admirer of Japanese scenery. True it is that these
valleys possess in a great measure a certain similarity, and that ap-
parently, to some, the same scene is often repeated. But these valleys
are peculiar to the country : it is in them [93] that we find lurking the
special charm attaching to Japanese scenery, and to us there is some
new beauty in ' each peculiarly its own. However much the principal
features of valley scenery are repeated, and it by no means follows that
they always are, there is ever some new accessory of mountain, forest
or river, which lends a special interest to each, and which is easily
discernible by those who are in any way close observers of nature.
Hirozaki, Kubota, Sakata, and Murakami are all situated in valleys, but
beyond a certain similarity which is always to be met with in the same
geological formations, the valleys in which these towns lie are far from
being counterparts one of another. The valley of Kubota presents a
striking contrast to the others on account of its vast extent, and in each
of the three others the prominent features of the landscapes, not to


GUBBINS : NOTES OE A JOtJBNEY FROM AWOMORI TO NIiaATA, 88

Bi^eak of the positions of the towns, which dijBfer in each case, h?ive a
distinct individuality which forbids the idea of any monotony or same-
ness pervading them. We must plead guilty to a fondness for Japanese
scenery. In spring, when everything appears dressed in its brightest
colours, fairer landscapes are to be seen here perhaps than in any other
country. In autumn there is also as much variety, and the many
coloured tints which light up the hillsides and bring the woods out in
their sombre richness of colouring have more attractions for some than
the brighter views of spring time. But this is digressing.

The town of Sakata, like all Japanese towns, is a very straggling
place. It holds about 12,000 inhabitants. Though a considerable trade
is carried on in the place it has no meihictsUy nor is any special industry
as far as we could learn carried on in it. The principal street deserves
a word said about it. The houses forming it stand each in a separate
enclosure, and as these enclosures are planted with evergreens and other
tfees, the effect is singular — giving the town the appearance rather of a
big village than of a town

When there we did not lose the opportunity of visiting the grave
of Mr. Smith. The site chosen for it is a quiet [94] retired spot in
a corner of the graveyard of the principal temple of Sakata, and there
are only one or two recent graves in the immediate neighbourhood.
The tomb is fenced in with a wooden railing, and a simple slab of stone
with the name, age and residence in Ja^^au of the deceased marks tho
head of the grave. We were conducted to the spot by the head-priest
of the temple, who seemed to take a certain pride in pointing out that
everything was kept in excellent order.

Murakami lies just at the point where the defile leads out into a
broad valley, which is shut in on the north and east sides, hut is open
on the west and south. Also an old castle town, it has a very deserted
appearance. The castle is in ruins, though some portions of it here and
there are still standing. The MeibuUu of Murakami are lacquer (though
lacquer ware is not made here in any quantity) salmon and tea, the
latter having improved much in quality during the last few years. A
great deal of pine-wood from the adjacent forests is cut into lengths and
sent to Niigata and even to Yedo to be made into chopsticks, so this may
also be included among the Meibutsiu


84: GtJBBINS : NOTES OF A JOXJENEY FROM AWOMOEI TO NHOATA.

Niigata is so well known tkat little need be said of the town itself.
Everybody is aware wbat difficulties in tbe sliai^e of insecure harborage
and imperfect road communication with the caiDital have stood in the
way of the development of its trade, and how, in spite of these draw-
backs, the town has gradually increased. It is also known how much
the town has gained by the appointment of the present governor; how a
prison, a hospital, a school conducted on the new system, and barracks
have sprung up, and with what good results the care bestowed in lay-
ing out new streets, in restoring the old ones, and in cleansing and
improving the network of canals which intersects the town, has been
attended.

Under the energetic administration of the present Governor the town
has made evident progress, and if the necessary works which are required
for the formation of a good harbour were only carried out, if the road
[95] communication with Yedo were improved, and if the various re-
sources of the neighbourhood were drawn out ,as they should bo, it
would not be long, we venture to predict, before Niigata took a leading
place among the towns of Japan.

But it is expecting too much to suppose that all this will be done.
Even the scheme for constructing a harbour will, it is to be feared, not
be carried out. The towns-people are naturally anxious for the execu-
tion of a plan which, if successful, — which there is every reason to
suppose it would be — must be of great benefit to their town. The local
officials are for reasons of their own desirous of being entrusted with the
works. The plans have been drawn up, the estimates, begun long ago,
should be finished by this time, but here the matter will probably rest.
The development of the scheme presents certainly great difficulties,
though not greater ones than modern engineering can surmount. But
it necessitates a considerable sum of money, and money the Japanese
Government are for various reasons chary of granting. The question
will probably be indefinitely shelved, and if the Government ever do
tako it into their consideration, it will probably be only when it is too
late to do any good, and the opportunity will thus have been lost.

Sado, which lies opposite to the mainland off Niigata, may he
reached in two ways — either by going direct from Niigata to Yebisu, the
Northern Harbour, or by proceeding from Niigata to Teradomari — a


GUBBINS : NOTES OE A JOUBNEY EBOM AWOMOBl TO NnGATAa 85

village 80 miles soutli of Niigata, and tlience to the south-east point of
the island. The former is the longer route by sea — ^being 40 miles, —
but though by taking the latter route one saves half the distance by
water, yet it involves a good day’s journey overland from Niigata to
Teradomari,

The former may be said to be the preferable route at ordinary
times, but in the stormy season the latter is the best. The Bay of
Yebisu, the northern harbour of Sado, 'is a fine bay, being ten miles
long with an average breadth of a mile, and affords good protection to
shipping, so that in bad weather ships lying off [96] Niigata put in
here for shelter, but it is unfortunately open on the north side, and
consequently in northerly gales, which are very prevalent during the
winter months, vessels have to make for the Bay of Omi, a small harbour
on the east coast, or Futami Bay, which is on the southern end of the
island. At Yebisu there is a temple picturesquely situated on the crest
of a steep hill, and from here to Aikawa, the locality of the mines, the
scenery is tolerably pretty, and the road just before Aikawa is reached
goes over a pass some 500 feet high.

Sado is well known on account of the gold mines to which it owes
its importance. Aikawa, the chief town of Sado, and the head-quarters
of the local administration, lies at the extreme south of the island. It
has a population of 10,000 inhabitants, but the rest of the island is but
thinly populated. The road connecting Aikawa with Yebisu, the small
town from which the northern bay takes its name, is the only decent
road on the island, and we fear we must xffead guilty to the charge of
damning with faint praise,” as all that can he said in its favour is that it
might be worse. There are several villages at certain distances along this
route, but the western and north-western portions of Sado are moun-
tainous and almost totally uncultivated.

From the fact of there being gold mines in Sado, one is naturally
inclined to look for signs of a certain degree of prosperity among its
inhabitants, but the reverse of this is the case. The villages are
wretched and dirty in the extreme, and the people appear to be misera-
bly poor. What natural wealth it possesses has done little for the
island, if we may judge from outward appearances. Even Aikawa,,
which should he a rich thriving town, has the appearance of an ordinary


86 GUBBINS : NOTES OF A JOURNEY FROM AWOMORI TO NIIGATA*

fishing village. The upper pai’t of the town, where the Kencho and
mining office are situated, is not so bad, but in the lower town dirtiness
and poverty prevail in a very marked degree, and the houses are mostly
wretched hovels.

As a natural consequence labour is absurdly cheap in [97] Sado,
and travelling therefore very inexpensive, — the oharge for one coolie per
day being 2i sen."^'

The mines are within a short walk of the Mining Office and are
prettily situated in high hills. The height of the highest of these hills
is 1,100 feet, but the principal entrance to the mines is only 700 feet
above the sea-level. The gallery which one enters here — the only one
which can be explored comfortably — is fitted with a tramway, and
extends for a distance of 800 yards with a slight ascent into the hill,
when three dark and uninviting shafts are reached — one descending to
the left — another to the right — and the third leading straight into the
heart of the hill. This latter has been dismsed for some time, and has
only lately been reopened. We had sufficient respect for our clothes,
in the absence even of other deterrent reasons, not to yield to any
inducement which might he held out to us to prosecute our researches
underground any farther, and indeed there were risks to be rnn which
we little dreamt of when we committed ourselves to the care of our
guides. Every now and then a huge truck full of ore would come
rolling down the tramway on its way with its load to the mouth of the
gallery, which forced our party to have recourse to a general ‘ sauve
jpeiif in the nooks and crannies within reach, and inexperienced as we
were, it was as much as we could do to save ourselves from annihilation
by clinging closely to the sides of the subterraneous passage.

Since the time the mines were first opened they have been subject,
at certain intervals, to inroads from water, and on the way from the
mining office we passed several old shafts long since abandoned owing
to this reason. From the primitive character of the old workings, it
naturally followed that from time to time casualties and loss of life
resulted from the water coming in. What up to sixty years ago used
to be the principal entrance to the mines, was at that date the scene of


This it should be borne in mind is the Government rate,


aXJBBINS : NOTES OF A JOTTRNEY FROM AWOMORI TO NIIGATA. 87

one of these catastrophes, when no less than 300 people are reported to
have perished. That [98] in the face of these accidents and the danger
attaching to mining operations conducted when modern appliances and
engineering skill were as yet unknown, the works should have been
proceeded with, — says something for the perseverance of the local
Japanese, but probably their greed for gain induced them to overstep
the bounds of prudence, and the very ignorance of the miners of the
common laws on which engineering is based possibly made them un-
derrate the dangers to which they are exposed.

Of late years the water has been gradually accumulating to such an
extent as effectually to obstruct the working of the mines, and in some
shafts, we were told, the water had attained a depth of 15 feet. With
a view, therefore, to freeing the mines from this obstruction, a survey of
them has been instituted and the necessary plans and estimates are
being prepared. The cost of removing this obstacle will, it is said, bo
very great, as it is calculated that it will take quite five years to get the
mines into good working order, but it is also equally the general opinion
that unless the requisite measures to this end are speedily put into
execution the mines will eventually have to be abandoned, as they
cannot otherwise be worked to advantage.

There is, however, a large quantity of ore on hand, enough, it is
stated, to occupy two years in smelting. The new smelting works,
which have only recently been completed, will thus come in very useful.

The tramway which was laid down three years ago for the con-
veyance of the ore from the mines to the towns is still in existence, but
the tramway system was not found to work well. Owing to the care-
lessness and ignorance of those in charge of the tramways, accidents
were of constant occurrence, and moreover, labour being so cheap, it
was found to be just as economical to employ manual labour. Another
consideration which probably had some weight is that the conveyance
of the ore in the old way from the mines gave occupation to a consider-
able number of people, and for this reason alone the tramways were
very likely unpopular. Women are chiefly employed in the transport
[99] of ore. They receive 4 sen a day and are supposed to make three
or four trips to and fro in that time.

In spite of the high quality of the ore extracted from them, the


0UBBINS : NOTES OF A JOUENEY EEOM AWOKOBI TO NUGATA.

cheapness of labour, and the favourable situation of the mines with
regard to the town, it is yet a fact that the Sado mines are worked at a
loss. On account of the smallness of the population, and owing also
perhaps in a measure to that aversion to a change of locality which is
common to all Japanese, all the inhabitants of the island are more or
less related to each other, and thus if one obtains an official position, it
is generally not long before his numerous relations are all similarly
lU’ovided. ConsQqneutly the number of officials employed in the Mining
Office and Kenchd as compared with the amount of work to be done is
perfectly ridiculous,

Not only do the mines not pay but they are a source of considerably
expense to the G-overiiment. We actually heard it stated on good
authority, the statement being subsequently confirmed on our return to
Yedo, that in one year $60,000 worth of gold was forwarded to Yedo,
but that in order to obtain this $75,000 were sent from the capital to
meet the working expenses. Unless a radical reform be effected, one
can foresee only one result from a state of things like this.


ITINERAEY OF ROUTE FROM AWOMOEI TO NIIUATA.


Awomori to Shinj6


27

Clio,

Shinj6 to Namioka

4

((

00

tt

Namioka to Fujizaki


((

20

tt

Fujizaki to Hirozaki


((

18

tt

Hirozaki to Ikaiigaslitiku


((

00

tt

Ikarigaahiiku to Sliirazawa

4

u

18

tt

Shirazawa to Odate

2

ct

19

it

Odate to Kmva

0


18

tt

KSwa to Tsurugata, by riyer


((

00

it

Tsurugata to Suyama.

1


18

tt

Suyama to Toyo6ka

2

tt

06

It

Toyooka to Kado


It

12

H

Kado to Shitoidzu , , . ,

‘ - 1 1 r

2

It

32

It

[100] Shitoidzu to Abukawa

2

tl

00

it

Ahuka^ya to Miuato

3

tt

84

tt

Minato to Kabota

1

tt

18

tt

Kubota to Araifia

1

tt

02

tt

Araiga to Nagatama


It

28

it

Nagatama to Miohigawa,


l(

00

a


GITBBINS : NOTES OF A JOURNEY FROM AWOMORI TO NIIG-ATA. 89

Michigawa to Madzugasaki. 1 Hi 18 Cli6*

Madzugasaki to Ichinowaki, 3 “ 00 “

Honjo to Hirazawa 3 “ 18 “

Hirazawa to Sliokoslu 3 00 “

Skokdslii to Kasagawa 3 “00 “

Koisagawa to Miga 1 “ 18 “

Miga to Fukuura 1 “ 03 “

Fukuura to Sakata 6 “ 00 “

Sakata to Hamanaka 3 “ 18 “

Hamanaka to 6yama 2 “ 25 “

Oyama to Sanji 3 “ 25 “

Sanji to Adziimi 3 “ 00 “

Adziimi to Nedzumigahiki 2 “ 25 “

Hedziimigaluki to Okawa 1 “ 18 “

Okawa to Kadzuki 1 08 “

Kadznki to Nakamnra 2 “ 25 “

Nakamura to 6sawa 1 “ 00 “

OsawatoBudo 2 “ 00 “

Budo to Shiunomachi 2 “ 00 “

Sliianomaclii to Saruzawa 1 “ 13 “

Saruzawa to Murakami 2 “ 08 “

Murakami to Iwafun6 1 “30 “

Iwafune to Sliiuya 1 “ 07 “

Sliiuya to Momozaki 0 “ 20 “

Momozaki to Tsuji 2 “ 18 “

Tsuji to Manogawa 3 “ 00 “

Manogawa to Niigata, by river 7 “ 00 “


Total distance in JR/* - . • • 126 Hi 34 Gho*


Total distance in Miles 31 7 J Miles.


* 36 c/jo=:l ru 1 n=2 J miles.


VOL, III. FT. n.— 12.


ASIATIC SOCIETY OP JAPAN.


[1011 The Eegular April Bleeting of the Society was held on Wednesday, the
14th, at 6 p.m. at the Imperial College, Yedo, in the Eeception Boom, which had
been courteously tendered to the Society for the purpose by the Director, J,
Hataheyama, Esq,.

The chair was taken by Prof. Murray, Ph. D., who congratulated the members
on the fact of holding a meeting of such a Society, for the first time at the capital
of an empire so progressive as that of J apan.

After reading the minutes of the last Meeting, the Secretary announced, as
new members, Mr. Charles H. Dallas; Mons. Gonil, and Professors E. W.
Atkinson, B. Smith, and D. Marshall. The donation of a ease of Butterflies by H.
Pryer, Esci., was also announced, likewise the receipt of Journals of the Bombay
Branch of the Eoyal Asiatic Society.

A motion was made by Dr. Murray and seconded by Dr. Antisell to the effect

“That the Council of th,e Society be requested to make arrangements for
giving a reception to tbe'ofiipers^, and especially the Scientific Corps, of H.M.S.
Challenger ^

In the absence of the jvriter, the Hon. E. E. Plunkett read a paper “ Notes of
a Journey from Awomori to Niigata, and of a Yisit to the mines of Sado,” by J.
H. Gubbins, Esq.

Mr, Dallas spoke of the dialects heard in the region referred to in the paper as
being very unlike the language spoken at Tokio ; and promised to present an
account of the Yonezawa dialect soon.

Dr, Antisell remarked that the description of the mountain ranges given in
the paper was interesting. Although not acquainted with the region, yet he*
recognised in these ranges some similarity to the mountain systems of Yezo and
farther north. In the northern part of the Empire there were two distinct ranges
of hills ; one coming directly from the north, a continuation of the chain in
Karafto, which, after passing down south along the weqt shore of Yezo, is found in
Dewa and farther south. The second system of mountains is that entering Yezo
from the Aleutian isles and Kamtsebatka, running N. 20 — 25 E. and S. 20 — 25 W.
and crossing in places the first described system : it is from the existence and
crossing of these chains that Yezo derives its quadrangular form. These two
systems have very different mineral contents for their axes : the first has essentially
a granitic and felspathic axis, produced perhaps by shrinkage, and is slow of
decomposition of its minerals forming thin soils ; the second has an axis plutonic
or volcanic yielding basalts, traps, and diorites, decomposing readily, forming
deep and rich soils ; lienco the different kinds of vegetation described by the
writer as occurring on the slopes of the two chains. Where the two chains cross,


also, there is found a rolling country closed up at the Korth and East by hills,
valleys opening to the [102j South and West. This volcanic chain is secondary
in the district described, but in Yezo, and again in Kiusliiu island, it attains
great prominence.

In reply to a question of Mr. Schenlc, Dr. Autisell also stated that the method
of getting the gold out of the quartz, at the Sado mines, was by stamping — as in
California — only that wooden stamps were used.

Reference having been made by Pi of. Smith to the mode of getting rid of
water, the Secretary stated that this, and the other processes, were exhibietd in
the model of the Sado mine which is in the Society’s Museum at Yokohama.

Mr. Syle questioned whether the low rate of wages mentioned in the paper —
from 2 J to 4 sen a day — conld include the labourer’s food ; but Mr. Dallas supposed
it might do so, because, in that region, workmen might be hired at 10 sen per diem ;
and only 5 rios a month were paid for school-teachers. In reply to Mr. Knipping
he also stated that the native maps found in those parts, though not drawn to
scale, were good and useful.

Dr. Murray remarked on the excellence of maps he had seen in and about
Kidto ; and on the ingenious method employed of giving the heights of mountains
by projecting an elevation of them in their site on the map.

As to the longitude marked on such maps, some gave it from Yedo and some
from Kioto.

The thanks of the Society were returned to Mr. Gubbins for his paper, and to
Mr. Plunkett for his kindness in - reading it ; and the Secretary was instructed to
convey to the authorities of the College the Society’s best acknowledgments for
the courteous manner in which the use of the room where the meeting was held
had been tendered.

The meeting then separated.


NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN, WITH AN
ITINEEABY OE THE ROAD LEADING- TO IT,


By Chakles H. Dallas, Esq.


[Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on the Slst May^ 1875.']

[108] The Okitama Ken, better known by the name of its chief
town Yonezawa, is situated in the mountainous country due north of
T6ki6 at a distance by road of 84 ri. A list of the stations and their
distances will be tound at the end of this paper. The principal road to
it follows the Oshiu kaid6 as far as the important town of Fukushima.
It is this town of Fukushima, 72 ri from Tokid, that was fixed upon
as the provisional terminus of the railw'^ay that certain hmazohu wished
to construct to Awomori. As this scheme, though postponed, is probably
not definitely abandoned, an itinerary of the Oshiu kaiko as far as
Fukushima may have some claim to interest at the present moment ;
but before going over it in detail, it may be convenient to sketch briefly
the physical geography of the country through which it passes.

The principal chain of mountains comes down from Awomori in
nearly a straight line to a point about 80 vi north of T6ki6, and then
tunnng towards the west, and keeping that distance as radius and with
Tdkio for a centre, describes a circular arc to Fuji-san. This chain is
the watershed of the country and throws out a series of spurs which
serve as guides to the various rivers. On the [104] way to Fukushima
one finds four principal channels. From the corner made by the turn
of the mountain chain comes towards the east a ridge of inconsiderable
height which forms the northern boundary of the plain in which T6ki6
is situated. On its crest, if it deserves the name, is the town of


DALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OEITAMA KEN.


93


Utsiinomiya, 28 ri from Tokio. The Osbiu kaiclo traverses the plain
as far as Utsunomiya, and then continues towards the north, parallel
to and at a short distance from the eastern base of the principal chain
of mountains.

The country between Tokio and Utsunomiya is drained principally
by the Siimita gawa and the Tone gawa ; by the former and one branch
of the latter into the Bay of Ye do, and by its remaining branch into
the Pacific.

Only 3 n beyond Utsunomiya is the Kinu gawa, which, pent up
for many miles inside the principal range of mountains, breaks through
them at the turn, and though checked by the ridge already mentioned,
soon rounds it and continues a southerly coarse for some miles farther
before uniting with Tone gawa and striking east to the Pacific, which is
reached at Chdshi. In the latter part of its course it receives several
affiuents.

Proceeding towards the north the next eastern spur shutting in
the Kinu gawa is only five ri further. The hill, between the towns of
Ujiye and Kitsuregawa, by wdiich the Oshiu kaido climbs over it, is
called Yagoro Saka. Past Kitsuregawa flows a river of the same, name
almost due east to the Pacific. It unites with four streams, that
separated each by a short spur of hills come from the central mountains,
to form the Kaka gawa, which thus carries off all the water between
YagorO Saka and the mass of hills called Ki-ju~san Saka between
Koyebori and Ashino.

North of these twenty- three hills and taking its rise in the moun-
tains at the south of Aidzu is the Abukuma gawa, which crosses the
Oshiu kaido at the large castle-town of Shirakawa, 60 ri from Tokio,
and then turning towards the north only reaches the Pacific at Arahama
in the Bay of Sendai. In its northeim course its principal [106] affiuents
are the Shakado gawa, the Nami gawa and the Su kawa, all of which cross
the Oshiu kaidO in their eastward descent from the central mountains.
They are separated from one another by abrupt and precipitous hills,
over which the Oshiu kaido toils laboriously, apparently scorning to go
round them. It is in the corner made by the junction of the Su kawa
and Abukuma gawa that Fuki^shima is situated.

TaWng now the western side of the central range, it will be suf-


94 DALLAS : NOTES OOLLEOTED IN THE OKITASIA KEN.

ficiani to say tliat at the southern extremity of the straight line the turn
seams to produce an enormous knot, in the southern portion of which lie
ensconced the far-famed temples of Nikko. Travelling northward through
this knot and mounting to its source the bed of the Kinu gawa, one
arrives at the water-shed whence rise the rivers flowing towards Niigata ;
and descending towards the north, the first level land reached aTter 80 ri
of mountain climbing is the plain of Wakamatsu or Aidzu, with its lake
and outlet to the west.

North of this plain there comes from the principal chain a spur, or
rather cross-chain, which starting from between the great mountains of
Adzuma and Bandai-san, just opposite to Fukushima, extend first
westerly and then scatters towards the north-west. A few rl further
one branch nearly unites with the main line, thus inclosing the Okitama
Ken, and then again diverges to the west to give space to the
■ magnificent plain of Yamagata, which is the northern limit of my own
travels. This western cross chain is of great breadth, the road from
Yonczawa to Niigata being known as the Ju-san T6ge. Certainly of
the thirteen, three are only small hills, but four or five are formidable
passes.

HaTing said thus much on the nature of the country, let us follow
the Oshiu kaidd, which leaving T6ki6 by the suburbs of Senji, stretches
to the north till it reaches the hanks of the Tone gawa at a small station
town called Kurihasbi, distant 14|- ri from the Nihon Bashi. All along
this part of the road the villages and station towns succeed each other at
such short intervals as almost to [106] make a continuous line ; none,
however, appear to he of any special importance, Kasukabe, 10 ri from
T6ki6, being the principal. The plain is fertile and carefully cultivated,
producing rice, wheat, barley and vegetables ; a few miles beyond Senji,
however, is a little grass land that seems to be waste. The black alder
and the weeping willow are common trees, and wood-pigeons are to be
seen in great numbers.

Approaching Kurihasbi along a causeway or bund built to confine
the river, one has a magnificent view of the Nikk6 mountains. The
Tone gawa is crossed by a ferry, and when full is 600 yards across.
When the water is low the channel is on the Kurihasbi side, leaving the
northern half of the bed exposed. In JiUy, 1872, in swimmin ^across it


Dallas : notes collected in the omAMA hen. 95

jEi'Oin tlie nortliem side when it was at its highest, I found three feet of
water on the shallowest part in the centre, while the stream was dash-
ing down the deep channel with a swiftness that was almost dangerous.

Crossing the ferry one finds on the northern bank the town of
Nakata, and from here the character of the road changes. An almost
continuous avenue of cryptomcria shades it all the way to Utsunomiya*
The ground is higher and gradually rises. One sees little rice, but
plenty of wheat, harley and vegetables, with large tracts of grass-land
that would apparently furnish excellent pasturage. A short distance
from Nakata is the castle-town of Koga, which seems a busy place.
The sliiro was of great extent, but the work of destruction has been
done so thoroughly, that the neglected moats, crossed by bridges
dangerously rotten, only shut in a wilderness of rank grass that has
obliterated all traces of the daimio’s mansion.

The road all the way from Tokio to XJtsunomiya is fairly passable
for carriages, and for a short time a public conveyance plied between the
latter place and Nakata. There is generally plenty of width, hut along
the avenues the road is often hemmed in by high banks, which keep in
the water, while the stately trees keep out the sun, so that in wot
weather and for long afterwards, travelling, [107] whether on foot, on
horseback, or on wheels, is disagreeable, difficult and slow.*

XJtsunomiya is a very large and important town, built on moder-
ately high ground. It was the seat of a daimio of 70,000 Kolaiy whose
castle has been turned into barracks. There is an old temple, standing
on the edge of an almost perpendicular bluff, which commands a fine
view to the north-east. The city seems an important centre of trade ;
there are numerous tohutsuya well supplied with Bass’s beer, or at least
beer with Bass’s labels, common claret and champagne, kerosene lamps,
slop-clothing, slates and stationery.

At XJtsunomiya the tourists to Nikko leave the Oshiu kaido, and
tuiming to the north-west reach their destination by a good road of 9 ri
along superb avenues of ci 7 ptomeria. From Imaichi, 2 H before one
reaches Nikkd, there is a most exquisitely picturesque but difficult route
up the course of the Kinu gawa due north to Wakamatsu and so to
Yonezawa, which seems almost as unknown to Japanese as to foreigners.
Following the Oshiu kaid6, 8 n- beyond XJtsunomiya is ihe small


DALLAS : KOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN.


town of Sliirasawa, where one crosses the Kirni gawa. The river
divides 3 H above the town, and reunites its branches 1 ri below it,
thus inclosing a long narrow sandy island thickly covered with small
trees and brushwood. On the left or farther bank of the northern
branch is the town of Akutsu, 1 ri from Shirasawa.

Akiitsu is not a regular station-town, and the traveller from the
south passes through it without stopping ; but it is an important for-
warding place for travellers and goods coming to T6ki6 from the north,
as there is communication by flat-hottomed boats down the Kinu gawm,
18 ri to a small village called Kubota ; whence 7 ri of level ground lead
to Sakai, a town on the Tone gawa, by which boats drop down the
stream to Tokio in about sixteen hours. All the goods traffic and nearly
all the passengers go by this route. There is an Vra-lmido from the
Aidzu [108] country by which produce reaches Akutsu, but it is reported
to be impassable for travellers.

From Akutsu after crossing one small hill, a level road bordered by
rice fields leads through Ujiye to the foot of Yagoro Saka, known to the
jinrikisha coolies as the worst hill this side of Sendai. On the other side
of the hill is the castle-town of Kitsuregawa, with its river famous for
eels and a fish called ciyit, which is esteemed a great delicacy. . The
town has the historical interest of having been the seat of the Ashikaga
family.

From Kitsuregawa to Sakuyama is a hilly road over high wild
gorse-covered moorland, with occasional plantations of young beeches.

From Sakuyama to Otawara the road is level through several
villages with gardens and rice-fields. A handsome avenue leads into
Otawara, from whence there is a cross-road to Imaichi, distant about 13
ri to the south-west.

Otawara "was the seat of a daimid of 80,000 Jcohu^ but was burnt
in the war and has never been wholly rebuilt. The however, is

one of the best on the road. The town is chiefly remarkable for the
immense number of pack-horses always standing in the streets, which
would seem to point out some special activity of trade, hut I am told
that it possesses no particular meibutsiu

The northern gate of Otawara is washed by a small river, from
which ajevel countiy extends to the Nasu kawa, on the south bank of


DALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OiaTAMA KEN. 97

wliicli is Nabekake, a largo town now almost entirely destroyed by fire.
The banks of the Nasu kawa are perpendicular cliffs, with the upper
edges most picturesquely wooded. On the north bank, exactly opposite
to Nabekake, is the station town of Eoyebori.

Between Eoyebori and Ashino are the Ni-ju-san saJca^ twenty- three
hills of corduroy roads. In very clear weather Fuji-san may be seen
from the top of the second hill, which is therefore known as Fnji-mi
salt a,

Ashino is in a long valley surrounded by wooded hills, over which
more corduroy roads load to Shirasaka. Between [100] Ashino and
Shirasaka is the boundary separating the provinces of Bhimotsuke and
Oshiu.

More hills, and a long stretch of magnificent moorland bring tLe
traveller to Shirakawa, a fine large castle-town with an air of prosperity
about it, such as one sees at Utsimomiya, Sukagawa, Koriyama, Nihon
Matsu and Fukushima. The Jionjin has been converted into a hospital,
and a conspicuous object in the principal street is the telegraph office. In
the castle is a small temple dedicated to Jimmu Teniio. Shivakawa was
the seat of a daimio of 110,000 koku, and x^^^yed a prominent part in
the civil war. It was occupied by each of the contending parties, and
appears to have been exceedingly lucky in having only slightly suffered
from fire. Leaving the town one crosses the Abukuma gawa, and a
short distance beyond, on a hillside sloping to the road, is a burial-
ground of the southern men who fell in the war. ^The tombstones and
inscriptions are kept in good order, and many a traveller alights from
pack-horse, kago or jmrikisJia to pause and pay a tribute of respect to
the memory of the gallant dead. Bound this same hill winds to the
left the road to Wakamatsu,

Between Shirakawa and Yabuki the country is mostly moorland.
Yabuki was a large town totally burnt in the war and only partially
rebuilt. From here to Sukagawa the road is very beautiful, through
woods and over undulating grass land.

Sukagawa, on the banks of the Shakado gawa, is one of the richest
and best kept towns on the road. After the conversion of Jian into ken
it became the seat of the Shitchojo or branch agency of the Fukushima
ken, but this has recently been abolished. It has a hospital built in
von. III. Tx. II.— '13


95 DALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN.

foreign style, attended by Japanese doctors wlio have studied in T6ki6.
Numbers of mulberry trees are to be seen in the neighbourhood, and the
practice is adopted here of cutting the trunk short off just above the
ground and keeping the shoots tightly tied together* The stage to
Koriyama is the longest on the journey, 8 vi 9 did. There are three or
four villages, and one stone (quarry on [110] the way. The last n or so
leading into Koriyama is over a carefully made v^ido road, the first piece
of real carriage road that one sees after leaving Tokio.

Koriyama is a large flourishing place, and its townsmen have the
reputation of being wealthy. In the outskirts some branch of silk
manufacture is actively carried on in almost every house.

Between Motomiya and Nihon Matsu are some valleys of rice-land
separated by hills crossed by a horrible corduroy road. The lofty
mountain of Daki rears its double p^ak from the range on the left.

Nihon Matsu is a large town extending up and down the sides of an
exceedingly steep hill. It was a castle town, the seat of a daimi6 of
110,000 kolm. It is the chief town of the Sbinobu Kori, one of the
principal silk producing districts of Oshiu, and has a silk-reeling factory
with machinery copied in wood from that used at Tomioka, and worked
by water-power. It is also noted for a kind of sweetmeat called yokan.

From Nihon Matsu through Hatchdnome to Fukushima is all up
and down terrible hills. At the end of February this year there was a
foot of snow on the road nearly the whole way, A short distance
before reaching Fukushima one emerges from a muddy village on to an
excellent piece of road which leads to a causeway forming the approach
to a magnificent bridge over the Su kawa, said to be 250 yards in length.

Fukushima is the chief town of the Ken to which it gives its name,
and was the seat of a dainiio of 70,000 holm. The sMro has been
dismantled, but the moats and banks are kept in good order, Fukushima
is a great centre of the Silk trade, and is the headquarters during the
season of the T6ki6 silk buyers. Yanagawa in the Bate Kori and Nihon
Matsu are the two chief silk producing places in the Ken, which is also
noted for the excellence of its dried kaki (persimmons). The town is
well lighted with kerosene lamps, and has a telegraph office. The Ken
authorities are paying attention to the great want of Japan, the making
of roads. In corgunction [111] with the Yamagata Ken a waggon road is


DALLAS : NOtES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA EEN< 09

being constructed to connect the two places, and a large portion in the
latter Een is already completed. A proposition was made to the Okitama
Ken to make a road between Yonezawa and Fukushima, the Fuku-
shima people offering to pay 50,000 Yen, if the Yonezawa people
would pay the same sum ; but the latter do not like parting with their
money. There is some talk of all that portion of the Oshiu kaid6
which is in the Fukushima Ken being put into proper repair ; but it
seems doubtful whether it would not be better to abandon it and make
a new road ; for as the Abukuma gawa finds it way from Shirakawa
to Fukushima, it is reasonable to suppose that it would be possible
by following its course to make a nearly level road, instead of as now
crossing all the spurs that strike out from the grand central range.
Some portions of the upper waters of the Abukuma gawa are navigable
for small boats, but near Nihon Matsu there are dangerous rapids.
From Fukushima there is a good deal of traffic by it to Arakawa on the
Bay of Sendai, IB ri from the sea port of Ishibashi on the opposite side
of the Bay.

In all the towns here named is to be found excellent accommodation
for travellers and exceedingly cheap, except indeed at some places south
of IJtsunomiya, where the inuli^eepers have learnt to demand a special rate
for foreigners. The charge for supper, bath, bed and breakfast is three-
quarters of a hu in the very best hotels. In villages it is even less ; at
Kubota, on the Kinugawa, there was a notice posted up announcing
that, in consequence of the high price of provisions the innkeepers had
madeun agreement to fix the price of first-class accommodation at 15 sen !

Ab a means of communication the Oshiu kaid6 is not to he com-
mended, the portion north of the Kinu gawa being in such had order as
to he only not absolutely impassable for carriages ; but one must not
leave it without saying something of the scenery through which it
passes. The blue mountains, along which one travels for days, [112]
yet seeming always to see the same, are somewhat monotonous, yet with
the distant hills in the east, the wood, the water and the undulating
ground, combine to form a picture or rather a panorama, which is nearly
always beautiful and possesses exquisite ‘ bits.'

Still this is not the route to be chosen by the lover of scenery. To
the road or rather track from Imaichi to Wakamatsu must be accorded


100 DALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN.

the palm in this respect. The bold mountains, wooded from, the peak
to the torrent at their base, with almost tropical •exuberance of foliage,
trees growing out of a few inches of earth, plants seemingly springing
from the very boulders, the dashing water and the varied tints give a
fresh picture every mile, and every picture a gem.

From Fukushima the traveller to Yonezawa turns off to the north-
west to. cross the central range by the pass of Itaya over a ridge of the
Adzuma mountain. The pass is about 2,600 feet above the sea. The
first 2^. ri are over level roads to a village called Niwasaka, and from
there the climbing commences. First up a mountain 1,600 feet above
Mwasaka to the village of Sumomo-daira, then down again to tho
borders of a torrent at the point where it divides into two streams, that
almost encircle the mountain and flow out past Fukushima ; then up
an ascent densely wooded, and down again to the same torrent im-
mediately under Itaya. The climbing so far is all unnecessary ; it
would be easy to trace a level road, that with all its windings would not
measure more than the present one ; and it would he easier still to
establish water communication. The banks of the gorge, at the bottom
of which the stream passes, rise perpendicularly to a considerable height
before commencing to slope upwards to the mountain -tops, so that there
would bo no difficulty in throwing a dam across a narrow part of each
stream just before its issue to the plain, and raising the water, of
which there is abundance, to any desired height between the stone walls
that nature has provided for it. Crossing this torrent, a zigzag ascent
leads to the village of Itaya, enclosed by a thick -belt of pine trees.
Grassy slopes [118] bring one to the summit of the pass, from which
there is a rapid descent through a picturesque glen to, Osawa, 8J- ri
from the town of Yonezawa. The whole distance from Fukushima is
12 ri, the 6 ri in the centre being difficult climbing. The road is an
excellent specimen of military engineering in the olden time, — it
succeeds in rendering travelling as difficult as may be without making
it absolutely impossible.

The plain of Yonezawa, about 12 n long and varying in breadth
from 6 to 17 n, is perfectly flat, and the lofty mountains by which it is
hemmed in appear in the distance to rise perpendicularly from its sides.
From the centre of the plain no break whatever is visible through this


DALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN. 101

roountain wall, but ou tbe D(5rtb a tortuous gorge with only a moderate
ascent communicates with th6 plain of Yamagata, and on the north-west
is the outlet of the Matsu kawa, a large river that rises from Adziima
yama in the south-east, flows past the town, traverses the whole extent of
the plain, forces its way though the mountains and eventually reaches the
Sea of Sakata. Just before leaving the plain it becomes navigable for
small boats, but the upper part is too shallow and irregular. No attempt
is made to guide or confine the water ; and nearly every year the floods
carry away all the bridges. Tbe chief summits of the surrounding
mountains are Adzuma, Kabuto yama, so called from its resemblance to
a helmet, lide san, and Asahi yama. The famous mountain Gas-san in
Mogami may be seen in very clear weather breaking through the
northern horizon. It is stated that the snow never ^uite disappears
from lide san, and the phrase “ Tide san no yulci im Idyetara'' is used
as the local equivalent for the Greek Kalends.

The plain thus enclosed does not all belong to the Okitama Ken ; a
portion called Yashiro Go on the right band of the Matsu kawa was
taken from the late claimid after the war, and is now included in the
Yamagata Ken. The whole plain forms the Okitama Kori, the southern
division of XJzen, and is about midway between the Pacific and the Bea
of Japan, the town of Yonezawa being [114] 86 ri from Niigata, and
82 ri from Sendai. Just 19 ri to the south is the famous town of
"Wakamatsu, and 12J- ri to the north is Yamagata.

Yonezawa itself is a large town of not very prepossessing appearance
situated near the south-eastern extremity of the plain. The houses are
all thatched, and have no verandahs. The streets are narrow, rough,
unpaved and altogether uncared for. Water from the numerous moun-
tain-streams is led along the centre of almost every street in open
conduits, which, with the addition of two or three wells, supply the
people with water for ail purposes. The late governor put up kerosene
lamps but the people demolished them, as they considered the lighting
of the streets an unnecessary expense. The sliiro is immense, and as all
the houses within its ramparts have large gardens separated by hedges,
it presents the appearance of an enormous village. There is no attempt
at fortification except the usual three moats. The inner one inclosed
the mansion of the daimid and a temple sacred to the memory of Uye-


102 DALt^AS: : NOTES’ COLLEOTED IN THE OKITAlSA HEN.

sugi Eensliia, his ancestor,— a mighty warrior of the 16th century. The
mansion has been razed to the ground, but the temple remains, and a
great festival is held on the date corresponding with the 18th day of the
8rd month of the old calendar, ^he streets or roads in the shiro were
formerly very broad, but three years ago the then governor allowed the
residents to take in a quarter, and in some instances a third, on each
side. This was after the conversion of Kan into Xen^ and was
intended as some sort of alleviation to the herai in their distressed
circumstances. Some idea of the severity with which the changes
pressed on the upper classes may be gathered from the fact that the
principal retainers, especially those few families from whom the Karo-
was selected, have pulled down their old mansions in order to grow rice
on their sites, and are now living in the out-buildings of their yasJdku
One family whose revenue was 1,600 Icohu now receives a pittance of 40
hags — about 18 IcoJcu, The upper class of savmrai did not draw an
allowance of rice from the daimid’s treasury, but received it direct
from the [115] farmers as rent of the land. As this right, though
ostensibly the salary of a sinecure office, was handed down from father
to son, the samurai were virtually owners of their land, and the manner
in which they acquiesced in the surrender of their revenues to the central
government reflects the highest honour on their patriotism. It has been
the fashion with many foreigners to bestow a great deal of commiseration
on the farmers or, as they may be more accurately styled, farm-
labourers. It is probably true that the government does exact from
them a higher rent than that with which the former owners were
satisfied, but the change of ownership does not affect them to any
perceptible fraction of the extent to which it affects their betters. In an
old and thickly populated country unskilled labour at a healthy occupation
cannot be expected to earn more than will provide the rude necessaries of
life, and these the field labourers certainly possess, if the healthy
sturdy appearance of themselves and their children may be taken as a
criterion.

The climate presents a striking example of the modifications produced
by the physical conformation of the country. In winter, although snow
to the depth of five or six feet lies on the ground from early in December
till late in March, yet owing to the protection afforded by the surrounding


DALLAS ; NOTES COLXiEOTED IN THE OlilTAMA KEN, 103

mountains, the cold is not by any means so trying as that experienced
at T6M6 during the prevalence of the northerly winds. The heat in
summer is about eq[ual to that of T6ki6.

There are several hot springs in the district, those of Onogawa,
Akayu and Go-hiki being the most noted. I believe that they all contain
more or less iron and sulphur, I have some bottles of the different
waters which I shall be happy to place at the disposal of any gentleman
who may desire to analyse them. Their medical properties are held in high
estimation, each spring being considered a specific for some particular
disease. The waters at Go-hiki are under the special protection of
whoever in the Japanese mythology may correspond to the goddess Lucina,
[116] The soil is exceedingly fertile : rice is produced in such quan-
tities as to allow of a large export to the west coast, whence a good deal is
said to be forwarded to Hakodate. Wheat, barley and the ordinary
potato, carrot and turnip of Europe are grown. Persimmons, grapes,
walnuts and chestnuts abound, and last year an attempt was made on a
very small scale to make wine. The result was not very successful,
but sufBiciently so to encourage a repetition of the experiment. Lastly
and most important of all, the mulberry fl.ourishes all over the district
and attains its highest perfection in the north-west corner, where are
the villages of Arato, Miya and Ko-ide, celebrated for their silkworms^
eggs. Silkworms' eggs are made throughout the Ken, but those of
Shimo-nagai, the northwestern portion, are considered the best,

A table of statistics published last August states that the amount
of ground under cultivation exclusive of garden ground is 24,206 c/id,
yielding a total production of 205,671 /co/m, of which 88,564 holm or
rather less than one-third are paid into the Ken treasury. The value of
this is set down at 195,293 yen, so that roughly speaking there are
60,000 acres of cultivated ground paying for rent and taxes an average
amount of 13 shillings per acre. The money value of the land is
estimated at 2,786,238 yen, equivalent to 384 mon per tsuho or d69.5 per
acre. The house and garden ground measures 1,498,787 tsuho or about
one forty-eighth of the farm land. Its value is estimated at 159,010 yen,
equivalent to 1060 mon per tsuho. The amount levied on it is only at
the rate of about one-third of that on the farm land, though its value
is estimated at nearly three times that of the latter.


104 DALLAS,:, NOT33S COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN.

The population belonging to the Ken nuixibBrs'159,716, divided as
follows ;


Males,

Females,

Total,-

Shizoku and their families..

13,150

13,584

26,834

Priests and their families

742

■ 318

1,060

Nil'll s ..... ' - T fi *


12

12

Heimin (plebeians)

67,230

64,680

131,910


81,122

78,694

169,716


[117] Of this number 528 persons have emigrated to other districts,
and 975 others have immigrated, so that the total number living in the
Ken is 160,163. No information is given about age, nor, so far as
I am aware, have the statistics pf births and deaths been published.

Public instruction is carried on under the supervision of a council
of officers chosen by the governor. There is one middle school with an
English and a Chinese department, and 212 lower schools with 217
teachers attended by 8,960 boys and 642 girls.

The annual revenue of the Ken amounts to 236,027 yen, derived,
from the following sources : — ■


Kolai, Yen,


Arable land — in kind ; :

Arable land belonging to private proprietors, —

in kind ; 1...

Arable land belonging to private proprietors, —

in money ’

Surcharge to meet sundry particular expenses

in kind' ■

House and Garden land — in money

Sundry taxes '


88,564.227=195,293.162
8.682= 8.157

— 558.869

8;454.047 7,616.877

— 1^590.103

— 28,125.110


Licenses for local purposes


233,187.268

2,840.274


Grand Total


Yen 236,027.542


PALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN.


105


The expenditure is not given in detail : the total amount is set
down at 34,255 holm of rice and 31,563 yen in money. Besides this
there is the Grovernment grant of 29,238 yen distributed as follows *. —


Salaries of officials yen 19,068

Sundry current expenses 2,050

Beserve-fund “ 5,850

Police “ 2,030

[118] Two Superintendents of Silk and Silkworm’s

eggs 240


yen 29,238

The officials number 69 ; one of the 5th class, one of the 7th, 48
from the 8tli to the 15th, and 19 below the 15th.

Statistics of the produce of the Ken are given under no less than
75 heads, of which I can here only cite some of the more important
figures. The number of young mulberry trees is a million and a half.
The quantity of leaf 69,046,668 lbs. The weight of Cocoons 1,800,000
lbs, Of Silk 88,176 lbs. Of Pierced Cocoons 231,400 lbs. The Silk-
worms eggs numbered 199,981 Cards; last year there wmre upwards of
230,000.

Of Silk i:>iece goods there were manufactured 14,000 double pieces
(/iz/ci), the length of the single piece (tan) being 28^ feet.

Of Lacquer gum there was collected 3,608 lbs, and of lacquer ware
there was made 110 horse-loads (one horse-load is 40 kwa)nme=:z^'^Z\
lbs). The lacquer ware is all made for the Yokohama market.

The Ken 346,775 lbs. of Tobacco, chiefly exported to

Echigo, its flavour being stronger than is liked in TokiO.

Sake is an important article of export ; 13,751 holm are brewed,
most of which is sent to Sakata.

The mountain sides are well wooded ; the quantity of timber felled
is given at 46,880 loads of Cedar and 16,489 loads of Pine.

Pen-making is one of tlie industries of tbe district. The number
manufactured is returned as 3,102,500 pairs. Of candles there wei’e
made 62,598 Ihs. and of pomatum 130,670 lbs. Indigo was produced
to the extent of 188,808 lbs, and the flax crop yielded 579,891 lbs.

TOL. III. PT. II. — 14


106


DALLAS : NOTES COLLECTED IN THE OKITAMA KEN.


The prices quoted m the table of statistics sufficiently illustrate the
difficulty of communication. In the outlying valley of Oguni the value
of best rice is stated to [119] be yen 1.33 per koku, while at Yonezawa^
distant only 10 ri, it is yen 2.24. In the carrying traffic over the
mountains, bulls are used instead of pack-horses. The cheapest com-
munication is in winter, when the snow allows the passage of little deds
drawn by men.

In conclusion I must apolozize for the crude form in which, fearing
to trespass too much on the time of the meeting, I have presented these
statistics.


ITINEBARY OF THE OSHIIF KAIDO.
FaoM THE Nihon Bashi.


ML

GU.

Ken,

Feet,

BL

ChCh

Ken,

Feet.

Senji

2

4

7

0

2

4

7

0

S6ka..

2

17

53

3

4

22

0

3

Kosliigaye...

1

S3

30

3

6

10

31

0

Kasnkahe


21

28

4

9

4

59

4

Sugido

1

29

42

3

10

34

42

1

Satte...

1

18

36

a

12

17

18

4

Kiirihashi


3

21

1

14

20

39

6

Nakata

0

3

49

1

14

26

29

0

Koga


21

33

4

16

12

2

4

Nogi

0

31

28

0

17

7

30

4

Momada

1

31

48

‘ 6

19

3

19

3

Oyama

1

19

13

0

20

22

32

3

Hagawa


18

23

3

22

4

56

0

Koganei


28

21

2

22

33

17

2

Ishibashi

1

20

39

0

24

17

56

2

>SiidznmmorQiya , . . . .

1 •

24

9

0

26

6

5

2

Utsunomiya

2

6

1

5

28

12

7

1

Shirasawa,

0 ,

25

0

4

31

1

7

5

Akiitsu,

0

29

5

0

31

30

. 12

6

l^jiye..

0

29

58

4

32

24

11

3

Kifcsiiregawa,

1

33

42

2

84

21

63

6

Sakuyama

2

82

68

5

37

18

62

4

Otawara * .

.....1

28

6

5

39

10

69

3


DALLAS ;

NOTES

COLLECTED

IN THE OKITAMA

, KEN.


107


Mu

cu.

Ken,

Feet,

Mi,

Cll6,

Ken,

Feet,

Nabelcake

...3

2

25

2

42

13

24

5

Koyehori

...0

10

11

5

42

23

36

4

AsMno

...2

5

45

0

44

29

21

4

Shirasaka

...3

0

15

1

47

29

36

5

Shirakawa..

...1

35

55

0

49

29

31

5

Eotagawa

...1

22

38

4

61

16

10

3

Yabuld

...2

0

26

1

53

16

36

4

Kasaishi

...1

2

44

0

54

19

20

4

Siikagawa

...1

15

53

0

55

35

13

4

Koriyama

...3

9

8

5

59

8

22

3

Takakura

...2

17

16

0

61

25

38

3

klotomiya

...1

G

56

5

62

32

35

2

Hi-hon-matsu ........

...2

23

33

3

65

20

8

5

Hachonome

...2

8

17

1

67

28

26

0

Sbimidzu-machi

...1

17

23

3

69

9

49

3

Fukushima

...1

23

5

3

70

32

55

0

Niwasaka

. . .2

13

9

5


Sumomodaira

...2

3

42

0


Itaya

...1

24

49

0


Osawa

. . .2

15

16

5


Yonezawa

...3

13

32

2

82

31

25

0


N.B . — 6 feet=l Jceiii 60 ?i:cn=l clul^ 36 c7iy=l n', 1 rt=4j320 yards or 2/^ of
m English mile.


• ( 108 )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


[120] The regular May meeting of the Society was held on Monday, the Slat
ult.j at 8.30 at the Grand Hotel, Dr. Brown in the Chair.

The Minutes of tho last meeting were approved, and it was announced that
Ijhe following gentlemen had been elected Ordinary Members of the Society since
the last General Meeting : Eev. 0. F. Warren, Messrs. A. J. Van Casteel, G. J,
Bockwell and John Farmer.

The following donations had also been received:— -A Comparative Vocabulary
of the Chinese, Corean and Japanese Languages, Proceedings of the American
Oriental Society and of the American Philological Association, etc.

Mr. Balias then read his paper entitled “Notes collected in the Okitama 7cen,
with an itinerary of the roads leading to it.’’

On its conclusion Br. Brown said In Japan we have no Nineveh or Babylon
to disentomb, no Jerusalem to uncover of its superincumbent dMiris, in order to
identify its ancient topograi^hy, no Ilium that was, to bring to light, after the
oblivion of ages, nor ancient ruins of any kind whatever to interest the antiquary.
The materials of which all structures have been built in this country have been
so perishable that we have but to scratch the surface of the soil, or penetrate a few
inches, or at most a few feet below it to lay bare all the structural antiquities it
contains. Hence the antiquarian who confines his researches to this country is in
danger of being disappointed, not because the country is not old enough, but
because it is so old that its perishable monuments have crumbled to dust. All are
turned to mould. The Asiatic Society is therefore indebted to those who, despite
the want of such monuments as might furnish them with themes for papers to
contribute to our Transactions, are willing to put themselves to the trouble of
giving us the results of their careful observations upon things that lie, as it were,
upon the surface. These things are not seen without travel, nor understood
without inquiry, nor is every one who does see them ready to take such note of
them as is requisite to furnish the basis of valuable communications to the
public. Even itineraries, in the present exclusion of foreigners from the interior
of the country, are valuable, and especially carefully prepared statistics like those
contained in Mr. Dallas’s paper on the Okitama Ken. I have much pleasure in
saying that the Asiatic Society are under obligations to him for this contribution
to their information respecting a part of the country to which few of us have had
access.

After some further conversation ,on[^the subject of the paper the meeting
teiminated,


( 109 ) ^


AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


{THE ‘‘TOSA NIKKI,” OK TOSA DIABYO


By W. G*. Aston, Esq.


\Eead before the Asiatic Society of Japan^ in Tokiol on the 80th

June, 1875,]

[121] The ancient literature of Japan contains few works of a
popular character. Almost without exception, everything which has
come clown to us from the period when the Japanese language was in
its greatest purity and perfection was written by and for a learned circle
composed chiefly of the Household of the Mikado and the officials of his
government.

The Tosa Nikki is not an exception to this rule. The author w'as
a Court noble named Tsurayuki, who traced his descent in a direct lino
from one of the Mikados, and whose history is little more than the record
of the successive offices he held at Kioto, and in the provinces. One of
his appointments was to the prefecture of Tosa, and it was on his
journey back to Kioto, after having completed the four years which were
then the fixed term for such offices, that he wrote the Diary which is
the subject of the present paper. Tsurayuki is also known as a poet of
considerable eminence, and as the author of the famous preface to the
Kokinshiu, extolled by Japanese critics as the most perfect specimen of
composition extant in the native style.

[122] The first entry in the Diary bears date the 21st day of the
12th month, and we learn from other sources that the year was the


110


ASTON : AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


fourth year of Shohei. This would be, according to the European
reckoning, some time in the months of January or February A.D, 985,
or now 940 years ago.

Tsurayuki begins by telling his readers that diaries being commonly
written by men, this is an attempt to write a woman’s diary. Hence
he always speaks of himself in the third person, under the vague designa-
tion of ^ a certain man.’ But in Tsurayaki’s day something more than
this was implied by the phrase ‘ a woman’s diary.’ The learned were
at this time devoted to the study of Chinese, and rarely composed in any
other language, whilst the cultivation of the Japanese language was in a
great measure abandoned to women. It is honorable to the women of
Japan that they nobly discharged the task which devolved upon them of
maintaining the credit of their native literature, I believe no parallel is
to be found in the history of European letters to the remarkable fact
that a very large proportion of the best writings of the best age of
Japanese literature was the work of women. The Genji Monogatarly
the acknowledged standard of the language for the period to which it
belongs, and the parent of the Japanese novel, was written by a w^oman,
as were also the Jm Monogatari, the Malntra ZdsJdy and much of the
poetry of the time. There is even reason to suppose that the traditions
collected in the Kojlkly the Bible of the Shint& religion, were taken down
from the mouth of a woman. With the exception of the last-mentioned
work, which was committed to writing before the invention of Icanay the
Chinese character was very sparingly used in books written by women, and
the use of Chinese vocables was also extremely limited. It is evident, there-
fore, that when Tsurayuki spoke of writing a ‘ woman’s diary ’ he meant a
diary composed in the style usually employed by the women of that period.

The first day’s entry also records Tsurayuki’s departure [123] from
the Government House of Tosa, and his arrival at the port from which
he was to set sail. He was accompanied here by large numbers of
people who came to take leave of him. Most brought with them parting
presents, usually of eatables or sake. The result was that in Tsura-
yuki’s words, “ Strange to say, here we were all fresli.by the shore of
the salt sea.” He did not actually set sail till the 27th, the intervening
six days being chiefly taken up in disposing of the presents, and in a
visit to the newly appointed Prefect, with whom he spent a day and


ASTON : AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


Ill


niglit in drinking and verse -making, after which he took a final leave,
Tsnrayuki’s successor in office shook hands with him at the bottom of
the steps leading up to the house, and they bade each other farewell
with many cordial, but tipsy expressions of good-will on both sides.
On the following day, however, we find Tsurayuki in a different frame
of mind. He tells us that during his stay in Tosa a girl had died who
was born in Ki6to, and that amid ail the bustle and confusion of leaving
port, her friends could think of nothing but her. Some one, he says,
composed this verse of poetry on the occasion : —

“With the joyful thought, ^ Home to Ki6to,’ there mingles the
bitter reflection that there is one who never will return.” We are
informed by another writer that Tsurayuki here deplores the loss of his
own daughter, a little girl of nine years of age.

But the jollifications had not ^-et come to an end. The new
Prefect’s brother made his appearance at a projecting cape .on their way
to the first stopping-place, and they were accordingly obliged to land on
the beach, where there was more drinking and composing of verse. Of
these verses Tsurayuki seems to have had no great opinion. He says
that it required the united eflorts of two of the party to make one bad
verse, and he compares them to two fishermen labouring along with a
heavy net on their shoulders. Their jollity w^’as interrupted by the
master of the juuk, who summoned them on board. There was a fair
wind, he said, and the tide served ; and Tsurayuki maliciously adds that
[124] there was no more sake to drink. They accordingly embarked,
and proceeded on tbeir voyage.

On tbe 29th they had got no further than Ominato, a harbour only
a few miles distant from their starting-point. Here they were detained
for ten days waiting for a* fair wind. Presents of eatables and drinka-
bles still came in, but more sparingly, and Tsurayuki records regretfully
the fate of a bottle of sake^ which he had stuck in the roof of the cabin,
hut which was displaced by the rolling of the junk and fell overboard.
One of these presents was a pheasant, which according to the old
Japanese custom was attached to a flowering branch of plum. Some
brought verses with their gifts. Here is a specimen : —

“ Louder than the clamour of the white surges on your onward
path will he the cry of me weeping that I am left behind.”


112


ASTON r AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSia.


Tsurayiikj remarks that if that were really so, he must have a very
loud voice* On the 9fch of the second month they at last sailed from
Ominato. As they passed Matsubara, they admired a large grove of
ancient firs which grew by the sea-shore. Tsurayuki mentions the
pleasure with which they watched the storks flying about among their
tops, and gives us this verse composed on the occasion : —

“ Casting my glance over the sea ; on each fir-tree top a stork has
his dwelling. They have been comrades for a thousand years.”

It became dark before they reached their next stopping-place, for
like most Japanese vessels even at the present day, the idea of pursuing
their voyage all night long does not seem to have occurred to them.
Besides, to judge from its having gone up the Osaka river as far as
Yamazaki, their junk must have been a very small one, and the diary
shows that it depended more on oars than on sails. Here is Tsurayuki’ s
description of nightfall : —

“ Whilst we rowed along gazing on this scene, the mountains and
the sea became all dark, the night deepened, and east and west could
not be seen, so we entrusted [125] all thought of the weather to the
mind of the master of our ship. Even the men who were not accustomed
to the sea became very sad, and still more tlie women, who rested
their heads on the bottom of the ship and did nothing but weep. The
sailors, however, seemed to think nothing of it, and sung the following
boat-song.” Tsurayuki gives a few lines of it, and then proceeds.
** There was a great deal more of this kind of stuff, but I do not write it
down. Listening to the laughter at these verses, our hearts became
somewhat calmed in spite of the raging of the sea. It was quite dark
when we at length reached our anchorage for the night.”

Throe more days leisurely travelling brought them to Murotsu, a
port just to the west of the eastern of the two horns which the island of
Shikoku sends out to the southward. The morning after their arrival
here, a slight but constant rain prevented them from starting, and the
passengers took the opportunity to go on shore for a hath. In the entry
for this day, Tsurayuki mentions a curious superstition. He tells us
that since the day on which they first embarked no one wore scarlet or
other rich colours or good silks lest they should incur the anger of the
sea. The next day the rain continued* It was a Bujddhjst fast-day,


ASTON : AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


118


and Tsuraynld kept it faithfully till noon, hut as suitable food for fast-
days was not obtainable on board, he bought with rice (not having any
copper cash) a tai which one of the sailors had caught the day before.
This was the beginning of a trade between him and the sailors, saM and
rice being exchanged for fish. There was no change in the weather till
the 17(;h, the fifth day from their arrival at Murotsu. On that day they
started early in the morning with the moon, then a few days past the
full, shining over a waveless sea, which reflected the sky so perfectly,
that, as Tsurayuki said, the heaven above and- the ocean beneath could
not be distinguished. He composed the following stanza on this
occasion : —

What is this that strikes against my oar as the boat [126] is
rowed along over the moon of the sea-depths ? Is it the bush^of the man
in the moon

The fine weather, however, did not continue. The dark clouds
which gathered overhead alarmed the master of the junk, and they put
back to Murotsu under a pelting shower, and very miserable. Three
more wretched days they were obliged to remain here, endeavouring
with indifferent success to while away the time by writing Chinese and
Japanese verses, and every morning counting the days that had been
already spent on the voyage. On the 21st they again proceeded on
their way. A large number of other junks sailed at the same time, a
pretty sight which was greatly admired by Tsurayuki. “ It was spring,*'
lie remarks, ‘‘ but it; seemed as if over the sea the leaves of autumn were
being scattered.” The weather was now fine, and they entered what
we call the Kii Channel. Here they were disturbed by a fresh cause of
anxiety. It seems that Tsurayuki during his term of office in Tosa had
had occasion to deal rather severely with the pirates of these parts, and
it was thought likely that they would now try to have their revenge.
One of the commentators attempts to save' Tsurayuki’s reputation for
courage by reminding us that this diary is written in the character of
a woman. The course of the narrative, however, shows that their alarm
was quite genuine, and indeed, to all appearance, well-grounded. Two
days later we find them praying to the Kami and Hotoke to save them
from the pirates. On the following days there were constant alarms,
and on the 26th they heard that the pirates were actually in pursuit of

VOL. Ill, PT. II.— 15


114


ASTON : AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


hem, so they left their anchorage at midnight and xDut to sea. There
was a place on their way where it was usual to make offerings to the
' Grod of the Sea. Tsurayuki made the captain offer They

were offered by being cast into the air, and allowing the wind to
carry them to the sea. The uusa fell in an easterly direction, and
the junk’s course was turned to the same quarter. To the great joy of
[127] all on board, they had now a favorable wind, sail was set, and
they made a good day’s run. The next two days they were again storm-
bound, but on the 29th they proceeded on their voyage. On the 30th
they crossed the entrance to the Naruto passage, and the same night, by
dint of hard rowing they reached the strait of Izumi. They had now
reached the Gokinai, or five provinces round Kioto, and here there was
no longer any fear of priates. The first day of the second month they
made little way, and on the second we have the following entry : — “ The
rain and wind ceased not ; a whole day and a whole night we prayed to
the ICami and Hotoke," On the next day the weather was equally had,
and on the fourth the captain would not put to sea from a fear of had
weather, which proved quite groundless. There were a great many
beautifal shells on the beach at this place, and Tsurayuki composed
these lines in' allusion to a shell which is called in Japanese the wasiire-gai
or shell of forgetfulness : —

“ I would descend from my ship to gather the shell of forgetfulness
of one for whom I am filled with sorrowful longing. Do ye, oh ye
advancing surges, drive it forward to the strand.”

' -vy He afterwards says that the true wish of his heart was not to forget
hei^'^whom he had lost, but only to give such respite to his sorrow that
■ it mij^it afterwards gain greater strength.

V The . record of the 5th contains a passage which has some
ph^logical interest as giving a specimen of the spoken language at this
period Tsurayuki noticed that a chance order of the captain to his
sailors was really a line of poetry of the regular number of 31 syllables.
The order was as follows : —

Mifiine yori | oJwse-tahu nciri | asayita no j ide-ltonu said ni j tsuna
de hay a hike^


*The strips of white paper seen in Shint6 Shrines, and also called Goliei.


ASTON ; AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


115


Thus it is ordered from the august ship (i; e, by Tsurayuki, the
owner) : before the morning north- wind comes forth, make haste and
haul the ship along with a tow-rope.” The only form here which
[128] is distinctively colloquial is de for ni te, while mifune and tabu nari
are now written forms, and would not be used in the spoken language.
There are one or two other examples of the colloquial language in the
Tosa NikJd, and although too few to be decisive, they point to the
conclusion that the spoken idiom of the time differed but little from the
language employed in literature. A curious colloquial form of the
future occurs, ending in as in the phrase mMa makarazic,'^ ‘I
will come again/ The same form of the future is still preserved in some
of the local dialects.

I translate part of the entry for the 6th, the day before they arrived
within the Osaka river. They were now opposite Sumiyoshi : —

Meanwhile a sudden gale sprang up, and in spite of all our efforts
wo fell gradually to leeward, and were in great clanger of being sent to
the bottom. ‘ This god of Sumiyoshi,’ said the Captain, ‘ is like other
gods. What he desires is not any of the fashionable articles of the day.
Give him mesa as an offering.’ The Captain’s advice was taken, and
7 iiisa were offered, but as the wind, instead of ceasing, only blew harder
and harder, and the clanger from the storm and sea became more
and more imminent, the Captain again said : — * Because the august heart
of the god is not moved for nnsa, neither does the august ship move.
Offer to him something in which he will take greater pleasure.’ In
compliance wdth this advice, I thought what it would be best to offer.
‘ Of eyes I have a pair — then let me give to the god my mirror, of
which I have only one.’ Tho mirror was accordingly flung into the
sea, to my very great regret. But no sooner had I done so, than the
sea itself became as smooth as a mirror.”

The next day they entered the Osaka river. All the passengers,
men, women and children, were overjoyed at reaching this point of their
voyage, and clasped their foreheads with their hands in ecstasies of
delight.

There is no mention of any city or town of Osaka in the Diary, for
the simple reason that it did not then exist. Naniwa, which has been used
in later times as a [129] poetical synonym for Osaka, is properly the


HG ASTON ; AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.

river mouth, as its etymology shows, meaning ‘ dangerous waves.*

The bar of the Osaka river had the same evil reputation in ancient times
that it has unhappily deserved too well in our own day. Several days
were now spent in dragging their vessel laboriously against the strong
current of the river. A fast day occurred on their way up it, which
Tsurayuki had this time the satisfaction of keeping properly by abstain-
ing entirely from fish. On the 12th, they reached Yamazaki, from which
place a carriage (i,e, one of the bullock-carts in which huge rode) was
sent for to Kioto, and on the evening of the 16th they left Yamazaki
for the capital. Tsurayuki was greatly delighted to recognize the old
familiar landmarks as he rode along. He mentions the children’s play-
things and sweetmeats in the shops as looking exactly as when he
went away, and wonders whether he will find as little change in
the hearts of his friends. He had purposely left Yamazaki in the
evening in order that it might be night when he reached his own
dwelling. I translate his account of the state in which he found
it; —

“The moon was shining brightly when I reached my house and
entered the gate, so that its condition was plainly to be seen. It was
decayed and ruined beyond all description — worse even than I had been
told. The heart of the man in whose charge I left it was in an equally
dilapidated condition. The fence between the two houses had been
broken down so that both seemed but one, and he appeared to have
fulfilled his charge by looking in through the gaps. And yet I had
supplied him by every opportunity with the means of keeping it in
repair. To-night, however, I would not allow him to be told this in
an angry tone, but in spite of my vexation offered him an acknowledg-
ment for his trouble. There was in one place something like a pond
where water had collected in a hollow, by the side of which grew a
fir-tree. It had lost half its branches, and looked as if a thousand years
had passed during the [130] five or six years of my absence. Younger
trees had grown up round it, and the whole place was in a most
neglected condition, so that everyone said that it was pitiful to see.
Among other sad thoughts that rose spontaneously to my mind was the
memory — ah I how sorrowful ! — of one who was born in this house,
but who did not return here along with me. My fellow-passengers were


ASTON : AN ANCIENT JAPANESE CLASSIC.


117


chaHing merrily with their children in their arms, but I meanwhile, still
unable to contain my grief, privately repeated these lines to one who
knew my heart.”

I shall not give the verses, but proceed to the last sentence of the
diary, which is as follows : —

“ I cannot write down all my many regrets and memories ; be it
for good or for evil, here I will fling away my pen.”

The Tosa JSlikU is a striking example of the truth of Buffon’s
dictum that “ style is everything.” It contains no exciting adventures
or romantic situations ; there are in it no wise maxims or novel infor-
mation ; its only merit is that it describes in simple yet elegant language
the ordinary life of a traveller in Japan at the time when it was written.
But these ^[ualities have gained it a high rank amongst Japanese classics,
and have ensured its being banded down to our own day as a most
esteemed model for composition in the native Japanese style.

I may observe in conclusion that tbe Japanese of the Tosa NiJcld
is on the whole tolerably easy, and it may be recommended as a good
book with which to begin the study of the ancient literature of Japan.


( 118 )


THE LEHACY OE HEYASU.


By W. E. GrjosBY, Esq., B.A.,

Op B.u:jLiol Oolheob, Oxford, and of the Inner Temple ; Professor of Law

IN THE ImPEBUL UNIVERSITY OF T(JKl6.


[Bml before the Asiatic Society of Japan^ at YedOy on 80th June^ 1875.]

[131] lyeyasu, deified under the title of Gongen Sama, the founder
of the Tokugawa dynasty, left, after a busy life spent first in attaining
power and then in consolidating it, the treatise which forms the subject
of this essay The translation used by mo is that of Mr. Lowder,
published at the beginning of last year. It has seemed to me that a
few notes on it, with illustrations from the laws and customs of other
nations, might be of some service in determining the place of Japan with
respect to Comparative Law. The Legacy of lyeyasu is the most original
monument which Japan has produced in the way of Legislation. Unlike
the other Codes before the rise, and after the fall, of the Shogunate, it is
purely native in its character, with scarcely any mixture of foreign
elements. It contains the leading principles of the system which ruled
Japan till a few years since, and it has given to the [182] Japanese
institutions, in spite of the debt they owe to China, a stamp peculiarly
their own.

The subject soems to divide itself naturally into three parts : — The
first is, the condition of society which is represented to ns in these

^Doubts have been cast on the authenticity of this document by those compe-
tent to form a judgment ; but as it is conceded that, if not tiie actual composition
of lyeyasu, it yet embodies his policy, and is of historical value, the (luestion of its
authorship is of slight importance ; I shall assume it is what it purposes to be.


GEIGBBY : THE LEGACY OE lYEYASXJ.


119


pages ; the second, ifcs nature and character considered as a code with
illustrations from other systems of law ; the third, its nature as a manual
of suggestions bequeathed by lyeyasu to his successors. 1. We shall
first enquire into the state of society depicted by the Legacy of lyeyasu.®
The following remarks are only a commentary and paraphrase on
on chapters 42 to 50 in this book. The basis of Japanese life then,
as now, was the family. The Japanese family was a corporation,
the most characteristic mark of which was its perpetuity. The
Paterfamilias^ head of the family, had a power similar, in nearly all
respects, to the Paterfamilias at Eome. Like him, the Japanese Father
had complete power over the persons and property of his children.
He could do as he pleased with both, fettered only by that custom which
is the great hindrance to despotism in ail early communities. But if
his rights wore great, his liabilities were great also ; he was responsible
for all the ill-doings of his family. But the Japanese family was not
what we understand by the word. It was often not natural but artificial.
That is to say, persons whom we should exclude from the family were
admitted into it ; and those who would find a place in it were sometimes
excluded from it. In other words, adoption on the one hand, and
emancipation or the sending away of a son from the family on the other,
were in constant practice. Adoption in Japan differed from that in
Eome. In Eome adoption was resorted to for the purpose merely of
enlarging the family : in Japan it was solely employed to perpetuate the
family. A man with no male heir was allowed to adopt a child from an-
other [133] family, who filled there exactly the same position as the natural
child would have done. In early times it was the rule that an adopted
son must he of the same name as the adopting parent. If the adopting
parent had a daughter, the adopted son married her, there being in
this respect a difference from the practice in the Eome, where the
natural tie of brother and sister was held to be formed and marriage
therefore was illegal. In both Eome and Japan, adoption followed the
course of nature. Only an adult was allowed to adopt, but in Japan if
the head of the family were himself an infant he could adopt. This


^ Every legal system tells us much of the past life of tho nation for which it
was framed, since laws are a natural product and not an artificial creation*


120


mmSM i THE LEaAOY OP IVEYASXJ.


practice was so much resorted to in Japan for two reasons. The earliest
and most important was a religious one ; adoption prevented the ex-
tinguishment of ancestral sacrifices f sacra gentilicia ) and the consequent
disgrace which would have fallen on the family. The second reason
will be considered when we speak of feudalism. The second method
which rendered the family artificial was the practice of TGu-ri or Kan-cld^
the sending away a son from the family, a custom analogous to
emancipation in Eome, with this difference, that in Borne emancipation
seems to have been bestowed on a favourite son to release him from the
bondage of the paternal power, while in Japan a son was only sent
away if he were of an irredeemably bad character.

We next come to marriage. Marriage in Japan was not a contract
between the parties or a religious institution, but a handing over of the
bride to the family of the husband by her own familly. Marriage was
allowed, or rather enjoined, in the case of a man at the age of 16, of a
woman at 13. A wife passed completely under the control of her
husband, both as to her person and property, subject to reference to a
council of family relations. So far we have considered the family in its
internal aspect. But each family was connected with other families, as
in early Borne and G-reece, and thus about 60 great clans were formed,
of which the four principal were the Gen, To, Hei and Kitsu. All the
families of those clans were descended from a common ancestor or
claimed to [IBl] be so. There were certain sacrifices peculiar to each
of the families. Certain dignities also were confined to certain families :
thus the Shfigunate was the property of the Gen ” family, and we find
that the Bulers of the Hojo family and Nobunaga never assumed the
title, though they wielded the power of Shdgun, because they did not
belong to the ‘‘Gen” clan. In the same way the office of Prime
Minister was confined to the “ T6 ” or Fujiwara family. Up to this
point, we find in Japan a condition of society analagous to that formerly
existing in Italy and Greece from about 1,000 B. 0. to the year 600 of
the Christian Era. In both we have family as the unit of civilization.
But that which is peculiar to Japan, and that which as such makes the
study of Japanese institutions interesting to the student of comparative
Law is that, with this primitive form of society remaining unchanged, we
find a system which did not arise in Europe till about the 11th century


GEIGSBt : THE LEGACY OE lYEYASU.


121


A.D,, the system of feudalism. Into the causes which gave rise to
feudalism in Japan it is not the purpose of this essay to enquire. Suffice
it to remind you, that here feudalism, or the holding of land on condi-
tion of military service, received perhaps its most elaborate development,
as it was unaffected by those causes which modified it in Western
Europe — the Church and the Empire. The following seems to have
been the condition of society in this respect at the time of lyeyasu. At
the head the Shdgun. Below him about 860 Daimid, each with a
territory of greater or less extent, which he farmed out to his samurai or
vassals in return for military service ; land so held was called kolcu. In
the greater daimiates these vassals underlet their lands on the same
conditiohs ; in other words, sub-feudation was common. This military
service was incumbent on every one wbo held lands ; and so far was this
theory carried that a vassal who was not able to perform the service by
reason of age or sickness, abdicated in favour of his son. Since lands
were only held on condition of military service, if a vassal died -and left
no male children, the lands escheated [185] to the lord. This naturally
extended the practice of adoption, and thus in time it came to be
considered that to prevent forfeiture of estate was the only reason for
adoption, although doubtless the religious one was always the deepest :
even if a man died without leaving any children, natural or adopted, by
a legal fiction the property was retained, since Ms death was concealed
till permission was given by the lord for him to adopt a son ; and only
after this permission was given, his death was announced. Not only
escheat, but forfeiture, as in England, was incurred, if the vassal proved
faithless to his lord. Each Daimio lived with his retainers in a walled
town ; while the other three classes of societj’', the agriculturists, the
artizans, and the merchants, lived outside — the farmer in different parts
of the territory, the latter in the Jdha^ or space immediately below the
wall. This is illustrated by the relative position of the patricians and
plebians in the early Latin communities, in which the patricians lived
on the aroo or hill, and the plebeians on the low ground beneath it.
Eox instance, the commons in Kome lived in the Suhiira at the foot
of the Capitoline Hill.

Again we find in Western Europe the exact contrast to this arrange-
ment ; for in it the barons and their retainers lived, in the country, and

VOIi. III. XT. II.-— 16


122


GEiaSBY : THE LEGACY OF IYEYAS0,


the commons in the ■walled towns, protected by which, commercial
interests grew and expanded. Each daimiate was isolated and provided
all things necessary for it from within itself, thus realising the idea of
independence which the Greek states strove in vain to accomplish. Thus
the other three classes were necessarily found in each daimiate, and the
members of these clans remained as a rule unchanged. Still there was
never a caste system in Japan ; there was no religious barrier between
each class. The condition of things was the same as in ancient Egypt
and was produced by the same instinctive tendency which we find
always present in antiquity, to abide in the old. ways as much as
possible.

2. Such is the condition of society in Japan as pictured to us in the
** Legacy of lyeyasu.” Eamily life formed [1B6] the basis upon which
(as it seems to us incongruously) a superstractuve of feudalism had been
reared. A code of laws for such a community must necessarily omit
much that we at the present time consider to he essential, and lay much
stress on what we consider unimportant. But, on the other hand, it
bears a striking resemblance to all the early codes, to the laws of Solon
and Lycurgus, the 12 Tables ; to the Mosaic, and the early Teutonic
codes.

Erom an analysis of the “ Legacy of lyeyasu ” the following results
have been obtained. The work consists of 100 chapters in no logical
sequence. Sixteen chapters consist of moral maxims and reflections, 55
are connected with politics and administrations, 22 refer to legal matters,
and in 7 lyeyasu relates episodes in his own personal history. The
Legacy of lyeyasu then resembles other early codes in the following
particulars. Eirst, it makes no sharp distinction between law and
morality, between the duties of the citizen and the virtue of the man.
The man who obeys the law is virtuous, he who disobeys it is vicious
and low. It is the province of the Legislator to inculcate virtue;
accordingly sixteen chapters of this short lecture are moral maxima
quoted apparently from the sages Confucius and Mencius. Secondly,
what is termed Substantive Law is nearly omitted. Since human life
within the daimiate was regulated by custom, not by agreement, (there
was hardly any intercourse between different daimiates) since the only
property of any importance was land, and no will was allowed, all that


GRiaSBY : THE LEGACY OF lYEYASU.


128


we chiefly understand by law, all that embraces the main bulk of modern
law, — the law of contracts, the law of personal property, of will,
commercial and maritime law, — ^find no place in this code. In this
respect too, there is an exact parallel between this and other early codes.
On the other hand great stress is laid on criminal law, including offences
and the different punishments allotted to each, and the law relating to
landed property ; on the law relating to the status of persons and of
classes, to etiquette and ceremonial, to tables of rank and precedence,
[187] to political administration and government. In these points,
especially the latter, minute details are entered into, and this with a
particularity which is striking when compared with the poverty of the
code in respect to those matters which seem to us most important in a
system of law. A third point of similarity between this and the other
ancient codes is, the provision it makes for the exercise of private
vengeance, of personal satisfaction for injuries done. As the power of
government is comparatively- weak, the individual does not (as he does
in more advanced societies) give up his right to take satisfaction in his
own hands. Thus we find in this code that he whose father or lord has
suffered from violence may revenge himself in a prescribed period, on
giving suitable notice. We have a parallel to this in the elaborate
provisions of the Mosaic code with respect to the avenging of blood.
Another point of similarity is the stress this code lays on class distinc-
tions. -Society in early stages is unequal, and early codes by reducing
these distinctions to writing render them more sharp and distinct. Such
expressions as ‘‘A girded sword is the living soul of a samurai " < —
‘‘ The scmurai are the masters of the four classes,” must have increased
the self-importance of those w^ho read them, and added much to the
already overweening pride of the military class in Japan. But there is
one great difference between this and all other early codes, viz., its
secrecy. It was in express terms forbidden to be promulgated ; the
perusal of it was only allowed to the “ G-orojiu” or chief councillors of
state. This is so unlike all our ideas of Law that it is difficult for us
even to imagine a state of things in which people are judged by laws of
which they are not only ignorant, hut purposely kept iu ignorance.
The question at once arises, How can people obey laws if they do not
know their nature ? But we have a parallel in the history of the Aiyan


124


anm ^ BY : the legacy of iyeyasu.


race previous to tlie foundation of the codes so often mentioned. We
find in Greece and Home at the beginning of their history that the
knowledge of the laws and their administration was confined to the [138]
aristoca*atic class, and tliat the first struggle of the commons was to force
the knowledge from them, a struggle which ended in these codes being
reduced to writing and promulgated. Had writing been unknown in
Japan at this epoch, the parallel would have been complete ; the only
difference is, that in the one case the laws were unknown, because not
written ; in Japan, though written, they were yet to be unknown. The
explanation of the matter is to be found in the fact that in early com-
munities custom has absolute sway. The magistrates are, as lyeyasu
says, reflectors of the mode of government ; they do in reality what
English judges do in theory — interprot, not make, the law. Any
additions made to the old customs (as in the case before us) were to
roach the multitude, as it were, by filtering down to them through the
magistrates, who alone would be conscious that they were new : to the
multitude they would only be slight modifications of the customs they
had always observed. And indeed regarded as a code of laws, this
seems to have been the character of the work before us. lyeyasu only
claims to be a transmitter, not a framer, of the law ; his work is rather
a compilation, than a creation ; a selection from old, not a series of new
laws.

3. If then in so far as it is a code of laws the originality of the
Legacy of lyeyasu does not appear, the question then remains in what
respects the genius of lyeyasu has manifested itself ? For there can he
no doubt that the Shfigunate after his time was a very different thing
from that it was before it. The Legacy of lyeyasu is original in so far
as it contains maxims of government in accordance with which the
successors of lyeyasu were to rule. It is this aspect which modern
historians have thrown into most xDromincnce, — a circumstance which
renders a detailed account of his policy unnecessary here. I shall only
mention what I consider the leading principles. The position of the
Shogun to the Mikado was to be one of reverential homage. The
Shoguns were in no way to interfere with the Mikado’s theoretical
[139] supremacy, but to strengthen it in every way. The same respect
was to be paid to the relatives of the Mikado and to the old court


GBIGSBY : THE LEGACY OF lYEYASU*


125


aristocracy. This was contrary to the policy of tho former Shoguns,
especially of tho Ashikaga family, who seem to have treated the Mikado
with rudeness or contempt. Secondly, as toward their superiors, so
toward their inferiors were the Shoguns to behave with courtesy and
consideration. Ail insult and tyranny wuis to be avoided ; the weight of
power was not to press harshly. This maxim is kindred to that one
which is the keynote of the Politics of Aristotle, and the neglect of this,
as shown in insolence of inferiors, was the rock on which the govern-
ments in nearly all ancient communities struck. This caution is perhaps
the best proof of the consummate knowledge lyeyasu had of human
nature and of diis greatness as a master of statecraft. Another recom-
mendation of lyeyasu was that the place of government of the lesser
Baimio should he fretjuently changed. The motive alleged for this was
for the prevention of misgovernment ; hut the real reason undoubtedly
was that they might not acquire local influence, and so endanger the
power of the Shoguns. This was similar in its purpose, though not in
means employed, to the policy adopted by William the Conqueror ‘in
portioning out the territories of his barons among several counties. In
England, this plan was completely successful ; in Japan it failed, because
the Shoguns never dared to enforce this measure in the case of the
greater daimios, who were the only ones to be dreaded. The best
feature of the policy of tho Shdgunate was to be the endeavour to
maintain peace in the Empire as far as possible. “ To assist the people,”
says lyeyasu, ^‘is to give peace to the Empire.” Japan, harrassed for
centuries by intestine feuds, was finally to be at rest under the strong
government of the Tokugawa Shdguns ; just as to the Eoman world,
wearied out with constant strife, the establishment of the Empire under
Augustus gave for centuries peace. These are tho loading principles
handed down by lyeyasu to his successors. Feudalism and [140] the
Shogunate have fallen together ; ^ and the policy of lyeyasu, hut a few
years since of such importance to the politician, is now of interest to tho
student of history only.


( 126 )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OP JAPAN.


A numerously attended meeting of tlie Asiatic Society was held on Wednes-
day, 30th June, 1875, at tho Imperial College (Kai-sei GahkO) in Tokid. The Bevd.
S. B. Brown, D. B., President of the Society, occupied the Chair.

A number of Japanese gentlemen were present and appeared to take much
interest in the proceedings, and several ladies graced the meeting with their attend-
ance.

The Chairman stated that the first business was to read the minutes of the
last meeting ; but the Corresponding Secretary explained that the minute book
was in the custody of the Eocording Secretary who resides in Yokohama, and that
the reading of the minutes must he postponed till tho next meeting in Yokohama.
Mr. Balias was then requested to act as Bccording Secretary for the meeting,

Mr. W. G. Aston then read a paper “ On an ancient Japanese Classic,” at the
conclusion of which the Chairman remarked that the Society was much indebted
to Mr. Aston for his paper, as being quite different to anything that had hitherto
been laid before this Society. The light thus thrown on the manners and habits
of Japanese nearly a thousand years ago was most valuable ; but one point that
had particularly struck his attention was the touching manner in which the writer
of the diary referred to the loss of his daughter, while the dry humour running
through so many of his comments shews that he was not a morose nor a melan-
choly man, but one who could turn even annoyances into pleasantry.

In reply to Mrs. Ohaplin-Ayrton, Mr. Aston explained that tbe Go-hei are the
strips of white paper to be seen in all the Shinto temples, and that they are usually
taken to be an emblem of purity ; but professed himself unable to satisfy Mr.
Ayrton as to the meaning of the twist in the strips of paper.

Mr. Syle inquired whether there was any satisfactory evidence that the Go-hei
were symbolical in the way mentioned, and also as representing, in their form, the
appearance of lightning yet further, if there was any play on the word A'ami, as
used to mean Beity, If so, then the Japanese had attained to a felicity of symbolism
very remarkable, by expressing Purity, Fire and Beity all combined in a simple
form.

Mr. Aston remarked that as the Go-hei were originally made of cloth, not
paper, he thought it improbable that any emblematic meaning was to be found in
the fact that the word for paper, Icami, is also the word for deity.

Sir Harry Parkes pointed ont the value of Mr. Aston’s paper [141] as introduc-
ing us to a very important unexplored branch of study — the ancient literature of
Japan — one that must he studied if the history of Japan and even if the iDresent
scheme of administration were to he understood. - He begged Mr. Aston to give the
meeting some account of this literature,


( 127 )

Mr. Aston explained the chief characteristics of the old language and 'litera^
ture as compared with those of modern times, and recommended strongly the study
of the Japanese ancient classics which, he said, far surpassed in value anything
which Japan has produced in later times.

Mr. W. E. Grigsby then read a paper ‘‘On the Legacy of lyeyasu.”

The President, in expressing the pleasure that the two papers had given him,
remarked on the contrast of the latter, which was of comparatively modern origin,
with the sketch of ancient life which Mr. Astoia had presented.

Mr. Aston thought that a warm welcome should be given to Mr. Grigsby’s
paper. It was the first instance that he was aware of, of a scholar having given
this Society the benefit of his attainments in his own special subject as applied to
the kindred subject among the Japanese. He considered that the production of
this paper argued well for the future of this Society, and hoped that it might be
the precursor of others.

Sir Harry Parkes was disposed to (Question the authenticity of the so-called
Legacy or lyeyasu and its legislative value. He believed the Japanese, in earlier
days before pov/er was usurped by the military class, had done better things in the
way of law-making.

Mr. Syle remarked that the problem was an exceedingly interesting one which
was presented by the actual national character of the Japanese — so permeated with
Chinese ideas (as shewn in the Legacy of lyeyasu), and yot continuing so little
affected by it that the general result has been a typo of character very unlike the
Chinese — in some points, strongly contrasted with it. There must have been
some very strong original element to have resisted the foreign influence so reso-
lutely ; and it will be a matter of great satisfaction if such investigations as we
have in both tho papers just read should lead to the ascertaining of what that
clement was. Mr. Syle then proposed that the special thanks of the Society be
given to Mr. Aston and Mr. Grigsby.

Sir Harry Parkes and Dr. Murray rose simultaneously to second the motion,
which was carried unanimously.

Mr. Syle announced that the Society was extending its relations in Europe,
» and that he had received from Italy, Austria and the United States, valuable
exchanges for the Society’s Journal. He also suggested that as the library of the
Society was constantly increasing, additional facilities be given to members for
obtaining access to it.

Mr. Grigsby supported the suggestion, and gave an amusing account of his
failure on a recent occasion to gain admittance to the library, even at an hour
when it was supposed to he open.

[142] Mr. Syle moved that the Council be invited to consider the desirability
of making the meetings in T&kid monthly, and added that it might be a question
whether it would not be well to have a local Secretary.

Sir Harry Parkes thought this was much too important a matter to be left to


( ns )

' the Council. The Annual General Meeting to receive accounts,' etc., would shortly
be held, and he considered that this would present a suitable opportunity for the
discussion of this question.

Mr. Aston suggested that the advertisement of the meetings should also
state the heads of the questions to be brought forward.

Mr. Ayrton repeated the suggestion he made last year that notice of the
meeting should be printed on post cards and sent to every member.

Sir Harry Parkes said that the Council had considered this suggestion, which
was a very excellent one, biit that besides the labour of having 150 post cards
addressed there was the question of what it would cost to have them printed. The
Society is neither numerous nor rich. The members of the German Society pay
^10 entrance and ^|25 a year, while those of this Society pay no entrance fee and
only |5 a year.

Dr. Murray thought that the time had arrived to increase the subscription.
He considered it impossible and absurd to attempt to carry on this Society with a
subscription of only |o. He therefore proposed that in future the subscription be
fixed at no.

Mr. Aston seconded this motion, which will he brought before the Annual
Meeting already referred to.

Some discussion then took place about the date of the next Meeting, hut it
was decided not to change it from the fixed date, namely 14th July.

The Meeting then adjourned.


( 129 )


THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


By Ceables H. Dallas, Esq.


[148] The dialect treated in tliis paper is that spoken in a large
irregularly shaped plain of some 250 square miles in area, lying about
midway between iSendai Bay and Niigata, just on the west of that
central range of mountains which stretches like a back-bone from
Ivodzuke to Awomori.

The word Yonezawa formerly designated the territory of tho
Uyesugi family, but being the name neither of a sliiii nor of a kori should
perhaps now be restricted to their castle-town, the present capital of tho
Okitama Ken. In common parlance, however, the name is still extended
to the whole of the plain at the southern extremity of Uzen (the new
southern division of Dewa), of which a part belongs to the prefecture of
Yamagata, a handsome town about 12^ ri to the north. Besides the
central range already referred to, which marks the boundary between
Dewa and Osliiu, lofty mountains separate this idain from Aidzu on the
south, and Echigo and Sakata on the w^est, so that it is entirely hemmed
in by these natural harriers ; except on tho north, where a narrow gorge
communicates with Yamagata and the rest of Dewa.

[144] It is said, but I have no means of testing the accuracy of
the statement, that some of the peculiarities of this dialect are to a
certain extent common to tho language current in the rest of Dewa and
the adjoining monster province of Oshiu ; but that the nasal intonation
does not there acquire that intensity?- which makes a Yonezawa peasant
hopelessly unintelligible to a man from Tokio. It is possible therefore
that some of the facts put forward in this paper may apply to the more

VOL. III. I’T. II.— 17


180


DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


widely diffused dialect of Oshin, but I limit my responsibility to the
assertion of their existence in the dialect of Yonezawa, where I have
collected them from the lips of the natives.

Taking the ordinary language of Tdki6 as the standard for com-
parison, the Yonezawa dialect differs from it,

(1) In its peculiar intonation.

(2) In the pronunciation of certain syllables.

(3) In the meaning attached to certain words.

(4) In the possession of certain words^not known in Tdkio.

(5) In its phraseology and choice of expressions.

(1) . — The intonation is exceedingly unmelodious, being deep, gruff,
and intensely nasal, both nose and teeth being kept tightly closed.
Among the lower classes this is aggravated by a peculiar lisp, from
which as a rule the educated men are free. The difference of the mode
of articulation is so great, that apart from the other peculiarities of the
dialect, it is alone sufficient to render it a matter of no small difficulty
for unaccustomed ears to understand the most ordinary sentence.

(2) . — In the pronunciation of the syllables a distinction is made
between -4 and both of which are in T6ki6 called the latter only
retaining this sound, the former being called e. Thus tliey commence
the syllabary 4, ro, /la, and say ‘a dog,’ eshl * a stone,’ hnt ulo *a
well,’ Met ‘a doctor.’

As at Tokio, no distinction is made between the syllables and
but the initial Y sound is invariably strongly pronounced, as YeGliizen,
Yeeldrio. The pronunciation [145] according to the spelling Echizen^
which from its use in the columns of the Japan Mail I imagine to havo
the sanction of the highest authority, is not only never heard, but is
hardly understood. ‘ EgIiujo ’ would be understood to mean the wild
strawberry.

The series bf aspirate sounds (in Tokio 7ia, ho), all take an

initial F, fe, fo. In the mouths of many of tho samnrai

this F often becomes En, i]iuB fuana,fmta,fmto, but the lower classes
say decidedly fana, fata, fato, for ‘ a ffower,’ ‘ a ffag,’ ‘ a pigeon.’
This interchange of the initial sound of F and H is of such freq[uent
occurrence in philology as not to require any comment, but I may
perhaps mention it as occurring in China, where Foochow becomes


DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT,


131


Hoohclioio in the moiiths of the Cantonese, while every schoolboy is
familiar with the fact of the ancient digamma having been replaced by
the rough breathing.

In the T series, f* is pronounced cld as at Tokio by the majority
of the educated class, but among, the common people it becomes a
lisping tsi, and as a natural sequence ^ is pronounced chi. In the
pronunciation of the contracted syllables usually spelt c7^a, cho, elm
(for chi-ya^ chi-yo^ chhyu) it is to be noted that the Y of the second
component part is preserved : as tsiyctj tsiyo, tsiyii. Students of Chinese
will remark that this change of cli into ts is identical with one of the
difierences existing between the Peking and Nanking dialects.

In the S series (at Tokio sa, s/u, su, se, so) the sli ap)pears to be
transposed, and the series runs sa, si, su, she, so. This also chiefly
applies to the lower classes, who lisp all the sibilants, and say shenshei
for sensei, and for ‘ seventy-one ’ say sitsi chiyii-itsi. The word for
^ seven ’ {sliiclii), which in Tokio is imonounced almost in one syllable,
has its two syllables distinctly pronounced by all classes, and is made
to rhyme with ichi (sitsi, itsi ). ^ has identically the same sound as

the Yonezawa dialect following the Tokid [146] practice of ignoring
the natural distinction^ between them.

The contracted syllables usually spelled ja, jo, jit, are pronounced
dziya, dziyo, chiyu.

The B in the syllable ri, the pronunciation of which varies so much
in different parts of Japan, is in most words absolutely silent ; .thus two
rios is ni 'iyo.

The diphthong ai, especially in the word nai, is commonly pro-
nounced ei, thus ivcckaranei.

With regard to the sounds of the consonants, the impure nasal n
before the g, wdiich is a cbaracteristio of the Tokio pronunciation, is
intensified in Yonezawa, where the dialect delights in inserting this
same n before d, z, and j ; and its equivalent ni before h. Thus I have
heard ‘ a spoon’ (saji) called semdzi, which, as the Governor at that
time happened to he a * Sanji,’ was slightly confusing. With many

is stated that the distinction is observed at Ki6to, as well as all over
Kiushiu ; it is certainly marked in Satsuma, where the initial sound of 5 ? is that
of the Trench I, retaining that of the English.


182


DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


persons the insertion of this n or m seems to be the only mode of
marking the distinction between the sharp and flat mutes ; /r, jo,
except when doubled, commonly taking the sounds of g, cl, h, while
the genuine g, d, h, become ny, 7icl, 7 nh,^ as wadagusi, iyanda, amhimai,
JJm (to go) appears to be an exception ; it is always pronounced mgu,
^8). — Of the words used in a sense totally difl‘erent to that which
they hear in Tokio, the list that I have been able to collect is not a
long one ; but being all words in common use they are intensely
bewildering to one unsuspicious of their local meaning. Thus soon after
my arrival I remember feeling no little astonishment at hearing a fine
powerful looking young fellow, who had been pointed out to me as
having distinguished himself in the war, decline a challenge to box with
the words JwicaJmte sarenaisJd I It was not till some time afterwards that
I [147] discovered thtii Jcoioai is used only in the sense of ‘fatigued’, its
ordinary meaning ‘ afraid ’ being invariably rendered by okkanai,

Wctkara not only means ‘ to divide ’ and ‘ to understand,’ but also,
and more generally, ‘ to be able, ’ ‘ to be suflicient, ’ ‘ to be suitable.’ Thus :
Kore de mo wakaru, ‘ this is enough,’ MijikaJmte mo ivakam, * though
it is short it will do.’ Omolmte hitori de wakaranai, ‘ it is too heavy : I
can’t carry it by myself.’

Bekini and deni seem to have in some sort interchanged meanings,
de7'u being used almost exclusively in the sense of ‘ to be finished’ ;
\no liamhun dcta kara, toka goro deru, ‘ it is half done already, so it will
be finished about the 10th.’ Bekiru, on the other hand, is never used
in the sense of ‘ to finish,’ ‘ to be able,’ but in that only of ‘ going ’ or
‘ coming ’ (the meaning by the way of the characters with which it is
written ffl 35). T\im \ Tadaima dekita, ‘He has just gone out’; Asii
deki beii ^ He will probably come to-morrow.’

Ippiiku, ‘ one puff,’ is used for one cupful (ippai). The invitation,

‘ Come in and have a cup of tea,’ if given at the door or near the house of
the speaker, is usually couched in the words Yotte ip}pukii yokamheisld,
while a guest is pressed to take more tea with * ima ippukud

Some important differences are to he noticed in the use of the

^^This observation must be borne in mind in pronouncing the local words
given in a subseq.ueut paragraph, since to avoid confusion the spelling does not
imitate the pronunciation, but, except in contractions, follows the, kana*


DALLAS ; THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


13B


pronouns. Wabahmhi and sesslia are used by persons of some pretension
to education, when speaking to a superior, but the word in everyday
use by all classes is ore. For this, or rather for its incorrect form ora^
the country-folks have a plural orcula^ while the townspeople and samurai
use the regular plural orera.

Ware, which in Tokio as well as in the written language indicates
the first person, is the ordinary word for ‘ you ' in addressing inferiors,
Kisaina, in Tokio usually expressive of extreme contempt, is used
politely and familiarly among equals, and has the plural kisama-fjata.
It is also commonly employed to [148] inferiors, and is in that case
expressive of kindness and courtesy.

Omaye is respectful, and is used to superiors only.

Ouiaije sarna expresses extreme deference and was used in address-
ing the Prince.

A.nata is never employed at all.

As in Tokio, hoku and Idmi arc the words chiefly used for ^ I ’ and
‘ you ’ by students, while their elders delight to display their Chinese
scholarship by employing inidomo, sokka, hiden, sokomoto.

For pronouns of the third person, though kore, sore, and are are
known, the most usual words are haitsxi, koitsu, saitsu, soitsu and aitsu
(contractions for kono yatsit, sono yatsu and ano yatsu), which are used
without any idea of rudeness, and for things as well as for persons, I
may mention here that the word yatsu, which in Tokio has the con-
temptuous meaning of our word ‘ fellow,’ has in Yonezawa the kindly
and familiar meaning of the same term. Thus rlko na yatsu, teinei na
yatsu are complimentary expressions for ‘ a clever man,’ ‘ a polite man,’
while an intimate friend is described as ‘ kokoro-yasui yatsud

(4.) Of the words peculiar to the dialect many of those I have
noted have no equivalents in Tokio, the articles they represent being as
little known as the names ; but specimens of nearly all of them have
been presented to the museum of the Asiatic Society, To this class
belong :

ISfizo, — A straw hat shaped like an inverted trowel, fitting closely to the
back of the head, and projecting beyond the forehead.

Sakata-hoshi, — A straw helmet ornamented with coloured cotton, with
a deep fringe falling over the shoulders.


134 DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.

Kucju-hOslii, — A hood and ca^De in one reaching down to the knees, made
of a grass called Ku()xh*

SicsO‘hoso. — Hakcma tight at the ancle, worn by both men and women
of the samnrai class.

TacU4suhe.—k similar garment to the preceding, but without the board
in the back, worn by the lower classes of both sexes.

[149] HabaU. — Gaiters made of reeds.

JimheL — Straw shoes.

Igara-jimheL — The same shaped shoe made of rushes {igara),

Oso-fuhk — k straw protection for the toes worn with the ivarajl,

Te no ura, — Similar to the last, made of plaited straw, and coming more
under the foot,

Fnka-gittsn, — Straw boots reaching to the knee.

Take ho kora, — Clogs made of split bamboo used by children for sliding.
lianjikL — Snow shoes made of the shoot of a tree bent to an oval, with
only a string across to fasten it to the foot.

Kana-kanjiki. — A bar of iron with three spikes worn under the foot to
prevent slipping,

TasxL — A basket, something like a knapsack, carried on the back, made
of strips of cane [matatahi],

Hakigo, — A basket either of bamboo or cane, also carried on the back,
but of a different shape.

MekkaL — A scoop made of withes to carry sand or snow.

Bokkai, — A wooden shovel with the blade slightly hollowed.

SiinaJiaJcL — A wooden spade with a flat blade and very long handle.

It will be observed that almost all the foregoing are the names of
conveniences necessitated by the snow, which lies from the middle of
December to the middle of March, and even on the level ground attains
a depth of five or six feet.

The remaining words, representing things and ideas not specially
pertaining to the locality, have equivalents in the language of T6]d6,
which I have in most cases appended in addition to the translation :

Abakeru to romp, Odokeru.

Baita firewood in lengths but not split.

iV, the word inaki is unknown,
a bull or cow..., Ushi.


Beko


DALLAS ; THE yONEZAWA DIALECT.


185


Bero


... the tongue

Shita.

Euijo noru.....

... to swing

Buranko suru.

Bimbo \


Bipp6 [
Boroku j


... bad

Warui.

Cbinto ]
Oliikuto j


... a little

Chitto.


Dada ....


... mother

Haha.

Da sama
Da sa

Da tsa


mother

Okkasan.

Hen nasbi

,... useless

Muyeki.

Jabara . .


... a very elastic crape

Shibori banashi.

Kase


.... an ornament for the hair,

Atama kake no


usually of coloui'ed crape.

kird.

Kata de


.... an interjection especially


used with negations.


Megoi ..


... dear little

Kawairashii,

Mogosai


•••■pity

Aware.

Mutsuri


. . . always

Itsu de mo.

Najo


... what sort ? how ?

Donna, Ikaga.

Nobeui . .


... freq^nently

Saisai.

Niinai (pron. niinei) ..

... yea

Hax.

Ogurisama

... the lady of the house ...

Okusama.

Oyagenai

... lamentable

Kuyashii.

Patanto


... bang

Battari.

Perori
Per otto

1

... all

Mina.

Sbaiko wa nai )

... prying, gossiping


Sunaslii

na J


Taka-asbi

... stilts

Tako-muma.

Tentsu . .


... a lie

Uso.

Tepikapite \
Tesozorasbii J

... ficlgetty


Tetchiri


f exact,

■■■ t plenty

Kippari,

Takusan.

Ddatei .


... disagreeable

lya na.

Ufcsukeru

... to romp

Odokeru.


18G


DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


Waraslii a lad of 5 to 15 (cf, ivarabe in book language.)

[151] Yaohimuchi valiant Isamasbii.

Yaobamucha headstrong Muyami

(5), — Of the phraseology and choice of expressions in the dialect,
the most marked features are its fondness for the simple forms of the
verb, and the recurrence of the suffix ski, and the words Nanai and Bel.
The polite verb inasii or masurUf behind which at T6ki6 the tyro in the
language can so comfortably veil his ignorance of the simple forms, has
no placo in this dialect ; go^avu moreover is never heard. By way of
replacing them a sentence is rendered polite by tacking on to the last
word the suffix slii. Thus : sago cle rjozarimasu, is rendered by so dash\
Icore dcsH ha by Jcor6 hasli\ or more often Jwitsu hash'. Respecting the
origin, deiivation, or history of this suffix, I have been able to obtain
absolutely no information. I have met with it as far south as the Taka-
hara.Toge, some ten ri from Nikko, and have traced it from there all
through the Aidzu country and Yonezawa and have heard it also in
Echigo. At Yamagata, already referred to, where the Mogami dialect
is spoken, the shi is not heard, nor have I observed it on the Oshiu
kaid6, along which, as far as Fukushima, I have travelled eight times.

Nanaii meaning ‘ yes corresponds to Haf, hut is rather more
decidedly affirmative. There is something inimitably comic about the
pronunciation of this word, especially in the mouths of the women : the
71 is prolonged indefinitely, and at length the vowel comes out with a
jerk. For the ejaculation to dffiiote attention while listening to a
superior the most common word is July hut liai is sometimes used.

For the formation of the future, or affirmations of probability, hei
is used to the almost total exclusion of the forms iu 6 and de aro ; thus,
kuriL hei, so damhei (for de am hel), Bel is a contraction for the besJd of
the written language, and its use in colloquial is said to be the distinctive
characteristic of the dialects of Oshiu and all the northern part of this
nameless main island. It is joined to the present indicative of verbs of
the first conjugation, and to the root or present indicative of those of
the second. [152] The two hardest worked works in the dialect are
dame and yokamhei. To attempt to render in English all their shades
of meaning would exhaust a dictionary. Suffice it that the primary
meaning of dame is * of no use/ while yokamhei means literally * will


DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


187


be good.’ They are generally exactly antithetical ; for instance ^ Will it
do if I go to- morrow ’ is Asi6 iite yohamhei hash * ? — Asu dame lcash\

‘ To-morrow will be too late.’

The meaningless n& so much used by the lower classes at T6ki6 is
changed into na and is used by every one. In polite conversation it
takes the suffix shl and becomes 7iash\ Occasionally a yokel, in his
desire to be excruciatingly polite, attaches the shl to the preceding word
as well ; as sd dash' 7iash' ! Amari samiiisld Qiash' ! But this is repre-
hensible and betokens a sad want of education I

Sa is pai* excellence the postposition of the dialect. Besides embrac-
ing all the ideas of motion towards and rest at, it occurs in such phrases
as Tsukiiye sa oite o hiire^ — ‘ Put it on the table.’ TJchi sa xvasurete
Idta^ ‘I left it at home Ohoho sa karetat ‘I gave it to the child.’

An expression of constant occurrence is Najo na konda, which is a
contraction for Naxii jd na koto da (jo meming ‘item,’ ‘particular’).
It is used interrogatively in the sense of ‘ what is the matter ? ’ and also
reflectively to express surprise or inability to answer a question, Najo
is much used in ^1 interrogations. I was once politely asking a little
lady of about eleven years old after the welfare of her mother, who had
recently been ill, and for want of this word utterly failed to make myself
understood, especially as none of the words that I knew for ‘ mother ’
seemed to be familiar to her. I was abandoning the attempt in despair,
when a student came to my rescue with Da sama xva najo de o idena*
shita kash\ which elicited the prompt answer shidai ni iish\

Saoi as a title is of quite recent introduction, and its use is considered
a sign of affectation, and is ridiculed as an imitation of a cockneyism of
the metropolis. A few years ago the word was not known, and a
gentleman said 8ama [158] at full length when speaking of or to the
Prince or a member of the Prince’s family, and to his own father and
elder brothers. For all other persons the title was Done, used not
wuth the family name, but with the xia or given name. The lower
classes use Sama more generally, and have for it the contraction sa and tsa.
The favorite word for feeling unwell is yameru: ha ga yameta^
ataina ga yameta are the only expressions ever heard for ‘I have a
tooth-ache,’ ‘ a head-ache, etc.’ It is written with the character for
itameru S not with that for yaxnai M as given in Dr. Hepburn’s Dictionary.

VOL. III. PX. II.— 18


188


DALLAS : THE YONEZAWA DIALECT.


Amari is especially used in the two phrases amari w, meanicg
fwith pleasure’ or simply ‘yes,’ and amari yohamhei, ‘that will be the
very thing.’

Namhu does duty both for iJcutsit miiJmra (how many, how much),
and namhu ha for sazo^ as Namhu ha o hoivahatta heisli' ! ‘ How tired you
must be I ’

There are a few other words which are known, but not much used in
Tdkio, but which are specially affected by the Yonezawa people of all
classes :

Oboho, for instance, is almost the only word for children of both
sexes.

Samazama and Shuju^ which in Tokio are considered to belong to
the book style, replace iro4ro with the meaning ‘various,’ ‘all sorts of.’

Zosa-nai is always used for ‘easy’ to the exclusion of [yasasMi/
which is never heard.

ItaviasJdi ‘deplorable,’ taxmvnai ‘senseless,’ and slwsld ‘pitiful,’
are all common ; and a coolie makes believe to decline a second cup of
sake with the phrase Ora fa o sMshi nal

JjLm'a?: (stinking) is used in the locution mi-lami ‘ugly,’ ‘unpleas-
ing to the sight,’ and sounds to Tokio ears singularly forcible and
inelegant.

It will of course be understood that in collecting the foregoing
words and phrases I have not attempted to exhaust the peculiar expres-
sions of the dialect ; but on the [154] eve of ^[uitting the district I threw
together those facts which had from time to time come under my
observation, in the belief that, to those who from a philological point of
view are making a study of the Japanese language, no contribution of
new material, hhwever humble, can be totally devoid of interest.

Tdkio, March, 1875.


B 2kIEIKLEJOim AND CO., PBINTEBS, 20 WATER STREET, YOKOHAMA, JAPAN,


TABLE 1.


WINDEOSES, SHOWING THE DIRECTIONS AND PERCENTAGE OP WINDS OVER THE
MONTHS NOVEMBER AND DECEMBER OF 1871.


NOVEMBER.


DECEMBER.


TABLE I.


For the whole Year of 1872.

WitKjroses showing the direction and average
of winds throughout the year 1872.


AVERAGE OF 1830 OBSERVATIONS
DURING THE YEAR 1872, MADE AT THE
PHYSICAL SCHOOL OF NAGASAKI.


Changino Months,
April, May, September, 1872.


TABLE II.


The whole Year.

Windroses showing the direction and average
of winds throughout the year, the changing
months, S. W, monsoon and N. monsoon.


AYERAGE OF 10,000 OBSEEYATIONS
DURING 15 YEARS MADE AT DESIMA
NEAR NAGASAKI.


Changing Months.
April, May, September.


SOUTH^WEST MONSOON.

June^ Juli/y August

I I I > t I 1 I i t I I < i i I- 1 — I

0 10 20 30


NORTH MONSOON

October y November ^ December ^ January^ February^ M<irch.

1 I 1 L > i L t t t 1 j -I i \ \ 1 i i I t I I I I I t t 1 J

40 50 SO 70 80 90 iM


TABLE IF.

RESULTS OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE STATION, NAGASAKI,
(82^ 45' N, L.; 129^ 52' East of Groenwicli) over Nov. and Dec., 1871.


BAHOsnsTEn (MotliumSj corrected)

Higliost stand of Barometer

Date of tliG Lighest stand of Barometer

Lowest stand of Barometer

Date of the same

THFm:\roMETER (in the shade, open air), Mediums

Highest Temperature in the shade

Date of the same

Lowest Temperature in the shade...

Date of the same

Thermometer (in the sun, open air), Mediums

Highest Temporaturc in the sun

Date of the same

Lowest Temperature in the sun

Date of the same

Thermomoter (inside the house), Mediums

Highest Temperature inside the house

Date of the same

Lowest Temperature inside the house

Date of the same

Number of rain days

hours of rain

Quantity of rain fallen

N umhor Of mi sty days

‘‘ hail days

snow days

‘‘ thunder days

“ foggy

Mediums of clouds (brightness of the sky)

Number of perfect cloudless days

‘‘ earthquakes

‘‘ storms

typhoons

Mediums of tension of the vapour of water

Relative humidity

Mediums of dew-points

Number of winds N. *

‘‘ “ N.N.E

“ N.E.

“ “ E.N.E .* .*

E

‘‘ » E.s.E ; !!.

» B.E

“ B.S.E

** S

** “ S.B.W

“ BAY

» W.B.W

W

“ W.N.W

“ “ NAY

‘‘ ** N.Nw. :

** Calm

Mediums of pressure of the winds

Number of observations, out of which all these Mediums
are calculated..


Nov.

Dec.

Mediums out
of these two
Months,

80.16

30.23

30.195

80.45

30.54

• • •

10

5


29.74

29.74

...

13

27

...

57.9

46.4

52.2

73.4

64.4


6

8


39.2

30.7

...

24

16


57.9

47.1

52.5

77.0

66.7


13

24

...

33.8

28.2


24

10


59.7

48.7

54.2

70.0

64.4

...

13

22

...

48.0

42.1

...

30

16

...

10

12

Sum 22

52i

6ii

“ 117

3.43

3.01

“ 6.44

12

7

19


3

‘‘ 8

it

4

“ 4

(t

1

1

It

tt

a

6.6

5.6

G.l

2

1

Sum 8

a

<<

tt

2

4

Sum 6

tt

u

it

0.35

0.25

0.30

70.8

71.5

71.1

46,0

35.4

40.7

22

86


12

12

•

13

17

o

02

9

5

O

12

4


3

1

0

1

’g

o

CD

0

1

U2

0

0

m

1

0

a

cs

3

6


6

6


8

8

<D

16

8

tiO

cS

14

18

s

21

25

o

10

8

o

8.4

4.15

151

155 ]

Bum 306


TABLE r.

EESULTS OP METBOSOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS,

On the station NAGASAKI (32° 45' N.L.; 129° 52' East of Greenwich) over the year 1872.


Jan,

Peb.

March,

April.

May.

June.

July.

Aug.

Sept.

Oct.

Nov.

Bee*

Bauometee (Mediums, corrected)

80.27

30.50

80.25

30.10

30.05

29.98

30.12

g

29.88

30.08
14

29.69

0

74.1

85.8

8 & 13
61.5

1

29.77

on 0.1


29.89

80.10

25

29.72

16

76:4

A1 A

80.06

80.31

81

29.74

10

68.9

82.6

14 (fe 17
51.4

81

70.0

87.6

30.21

30.49

27

29.75

23

57.9
79.2

8

84.9

18

59.0

81.5

8

80.4

1 Q

80.16

80.84

18

29.98

22

51.1

70.3

Highest stand of Barometer

30.52

30.43

80.89

on nci

Bate of the highest stand of Barometer

19

19

1

3


t>U.

20

oo


Lowest stand of Bai’ometer

29.77

7

29.86

29.69

29.78

29

29,20

29

69.4

82.4

24

54.0

' 6

71.2

86.2

26

xd

on oQ

ACi

Bate of the lowest stand of Barometer

8

18

31

81.9

92.7

29

70.5

o

-1 i


Theemometee (in the shade, open air, Mediums)

41.2

42.3

54.2

63.1

JLJL

QO Q

Highest Temperature in the shade

64.6

68.7

73.6

77.0

no

A

Bate of the same

5

23

26

17

O .9.. O

91. U

Lowest Temperature in the shade

26.4

25.9

33.4

39.4

^ a

r7A

U

n

gI.b

07

G

34.5

16

52.8

72.0

6

82.5

Bate of the same

22

4

9

3

/U.

27

84.

100.

rr

u

Thermometer (in the Sun, open air, Mediums)...

42.1

43.9

55.0

64.6

76.1
89.4

13

68.9

14 ‘

74.1
80.6

22

64.8

1

88.8

99.9

29

72.1

1

6

8

A i

78.4

94.8

Highest Temperature in the Sun

65.5

73.8

73.8

79.7

17

Bate of the samo

5

23

26

Lowest Temperature in the Sun

24.8

23.2

30.9

38.5

53.2


rj

61.9

07 ,C* OC‘

50.4

Bate of the same

22

4

9

3

6

31


Thermometer (inside the house, Mediums)

45.5

44.8

64.7

63.5

68.5

81.7

88.7

29

73.0

Q

3

Ai u/ -40-

77.5

86.4

7

70 n

ul

70.5

Q1 Q

lo

60.8

74.5

Q

Id

64.5

67.1

A

Highest Temperature inside the house

59.4

6

58.1

71.6

73.0

10

76.6

28

58.8

6

8

40i

4.89

6

ii

QQ n

Bate of the same....

23

26

VJt/.

O


oi .a

1 7

Lowest Temperature inside the house

3.56

23

86.7

41.9

45.9

CO.

X f

nn Q

O

A ,1 n

4:

Bate of the same

17

9

8

I V.

27

12

42

5.‘

1

c

I u.u

21

II

63i

5.58

1

uu.o

81

A

18

Q

4o.o

t)A

Number of Bain days...

11

34

1.05

11

a

9

9

15

84i

11.04

G

13

65

5.66

11

32

2.60

tt


10

B3i

9

of Hours of Bain

86

2.82

52

3.52


25i

0.95

A

1 HK

Quantity of Bain fallen

?3

Number of Misty days

11

12

X» i 0

14

ti

Z.ui

19

“ Hail- days

2

ti

it

tt

(t

ii


tt

tt

Snow-days

6

6

( t

tt

tt

it

tt

tt


ti

tt

tt

ti

Thunder-days

1

it

1

4

tt

ft

2

3

it


2

it

1

2 1
1 1

it it Foffuv days

tc

{(.

it

((

it

ft

{(


3

1

tt

Mediums of Clouds (Brightness of the Sky)

' 5.8

6.0

6.3

4.5

7.5

5.3

5.8


5.1

1

7.6

5

7.2

5

7.2

Number of wholly cloudless days •.

2

2

! 2

tt

2

tt

it

ti


“ Earthquakes

a

((

1

it

u

ft

tt

it


1

tt

tt

1

“ “ Storms

it

((

(on tlie

5

2

3

2

2


(on tlie 2)

tt

ti

(on tlie 1st)

it it Typiioons

it

tt

4

it

, it

IC

tt

it

<(


((

tt

tt

1

ti

Mediums of Tension of the vapour of the water

0,21

0.20

0.30

0.47

0.48

0.61

i 0.80

0*76

0.68

0.46

0.33

0.28

Belatiye Humidity

Mediums of Bew-points

70

' 29.7

44

67

28.6'

68

40.1

25

81

55.0

69

56.5

76

64.0

79

73.4

74

71.6

74

65.7

67

55.0

06

43.3

69

89.0

Number of Winds N

50

14

20

16

4

14


16

38

39

88 1

“ “ N.N.E

“ ** N.E

11

21

8

11 .
18

1

6

16

B

10

10

8

19

6

12

1

3

8

18


9

56

12

83

6

26

7

28

“ “ “ E.N.E

4

4

4

14

4

4


18

10

5

10

M “ “ B

7

8

4

5

6

5

8


7

6

G

10

» « « E,S.E

“ •“ be

8

5

0

0

1

0

1

8

8

1

2

1 14

8

9

8

20

5

6

8

7

6

5

10

4


4

7

2

8

8

8

9

11

“ » “ S.S.E

1

1

5

5

e


1

2

1

0

“ R

0

0

0

0

8

8

6

25

16

8

B

4

3

3

8


0

1

9

, 1

“ s.s.w

4

8

7

6


0

1 ^

1 ’

1

“ “ " s.w.

2

26

14

15

22 '

67 !

46


19

13

8

4

*« « » wsw

2

TO

20

4


2

5

2

1

Hi « <« ^

6

17

7

10

9

6


3

3

4

3

u u W.N.W

6

18

4

9

2

7


1

1

2

7

19

17

4

2.52

<( u tt ‘Kj'

17

20

8

11

7

7

8

9


5

8

12

9

» “ N.N.W

17

8

2.6

155

18

9

8

7

4

9

2

4


4

9

** “ Oahu

6

5

6

5

5

12


3

9

7

8.G5

nf Prp.R.cjuvA nf f.hft lATinds

8.5

4.5

4.16

8.51

3.86

4.4

4

|1

3.64

3.48

Number of Observations, out of which all these Mediums
are calculated

145

155

150

155

150

155

u


150

155

150

1 155


1


Mediums
out of tlio
year*


80.02
80.52
19 Feb*
29.28
31 July
03.5

93.0

2 H Aug.

25.9
4 Feb.

G5.1
100.8
7 Aug.
28.2
4 Feb.

04.9
89.G

2 Aug,

85.0
28 Jan.

Sum 122
533
47.71
Sum 85
2
12

“ 16
“ 5

6.2
Sum 19
“ 3

19

((

0.4G

71.7

51.8


Sum 1830


Table VI.


MONTHLY.

Mediums of Barometeb during 1872 .


Table VII.


MONTHLY.


APPENDIX.


THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHlf^-TAU/?'


By ^ pure Shin-tau ’ is meant tlie religious belief of the Japanese .
people previous to tbe introduction of Buddhism and the Confucian
philosophy into Japan, and by its revival the attempt which a modern
school of writers has made to eliminate these extraneous influences,
and to present Shin-tau in its original form. The very name of
Shin-tau is repudiated by this school, on the ground that the word
was never applied to the ancient religious belief until the introduc-
tion of Buddhism and Confucianism rendered its employment necessary
for the sake of distinction, and the argument that, becauvse this belief
is called by a Chinese name, it must therefore be of Chinese origin,
is of no value whatever.

The statement that the study of the Chinese classics was introduced
in the year 285 A. D., though received without mistrust by European
writers on the authority of native historians, may certainly be questioned.
The earliest extant account of historical events (the Ko-zhi-ki) dates
only from the year 711 of our era, while no attempt whatever of the
kind is recorded to have been made earlier than the 5th century ; and
yet the Isri-hon-gi (720 A. D.) affects to give the precise dates, even to
the day of the month, of events that are ascribed to the seventh century
[2] B. C., or fifteen centuries back. An even stronger ground for dis-
believing the accuracy of the early chronology is the extraordinary
longevity assigned by it to the early Mikados. Of the fifteen Mikados
from Zliifi-mu Ten- wan down to Ou-zhin Teu-wau^s predecessor, eleven
are said to have lived considerably over one hundred years. One of
them, Suwi-nin-wau, reached the age of one hundred and forty-one
years, and his successor Kei-kau Teii-wau lived to the age of one hundred
and forty-three, while to Ou-zhifi Ten-waii and his successor Niii-

* Revised by tlie author, 18S2.

AP. VOL. Ill — I


2


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OE PURE SHi:^-TAU,


toku Ttiu-wau are given one hundred and eleven and one hundred
and twenty-three years respectively. They are, however, surpassed in
longevity by the famous Take-uchi no Sukuiie, who is reported to have
died in A. D. 390 at the age of three hundred and fifty-six years. A
farther reason for doubting the statement is that the Ko-zhi-ki names the
** Thousand character Composition^' (SeK-zhi-moK) as one of the books
brought over in A. D. 285, although it is certain that it could not have
reached Japan much earlier than the middle of the 5tli century.^ All
that can safely be said is that Confucianism probably preceded Buddhism.

The first Buddhist images and Sutras were brought to Japan from
Korea in the year 552, if we can believe the Ni-hoil-gi, but it was long
before the religion obtained much hold on the people. In the beginning
of the ninth century the priest Kuukai (b. 774, d. 835, better known
by his posthumous name of Kou-bofu Dai-shi) compounded out of Bud-
dhism, Confucianism and Shin-tau a system of doctrine called Riyaii-
bu Shifi-tau. Its most prominent characteristic was the theory that
Shifi-tau deities were nothing more than transmigrations of Buddhist
divinities, and Kuu-kai is accused of perpetrating various forgeries in
order to obtain credit for his teaching. The alliance thus effected
between the native belief and the foreign religion enabled the latter
to obtain the ascendency to which it was entitled on account of its
superior adaptation to man's sense of his own shortcomings and
longing for perfection. Buddhism became the religion of the whole
nation, from the Mikado [3] down to the lowest of his subjects, and
■continued to hold that position until the period of the Tokugalia
Shiyaugufis, when it was supplanted in the intellects of the educated
class by the moral philosophy of Glioo He. The practise of pure
Shifi-tau was kept alive for one or two centuries at the Mikado's court,
and at a few Shifi-tau temples which might be counted on one's fingers,
but finally degenerated into a mere thing of forms, the meaning of
which was forgotten, while the forms themselves were perverted.

In addition to the Riyau-bu Shin-tau there arose at least three other
schools ; namely the Yuwi-itsu Shin-tau invented by Yoshido Kanetomi
about the end of the 15th century, that of Deguchi DTobuyoshi Kannushi
of the Ge-hm tem ple in Ise, about 1660, and the Suwi-ga Shin-tau of
^ICo-zhi-ki Defi, voi. xxxiii., f. 27.


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHI^^-TAXT. 3

Yamazaki An-sai (b. 1618, d. 1682). The first of these is chiefly
founded on the Buddhism of the Shin-goii-shiu, the second explains the
phenomena of the divine age by means of the Book of Changes (Yehi qt
I-king) ; the third is a combination of the Yoshida Shiii-tau and Choo
He’s philosophy.*

From these few remarks it may be inferred that the successive
waves of Buddhist and Chinese doctrine which had passed over Japan
during a period of more than a thousand years had considerably trans-
formed the belief of the people, and if the only means of discovering its
original nature were an analysis of the teaching of the above-mentioned
sects, and the rejection of whatever bore traces of a foreign origin, the
task would necessitate a wide knowledge of Buddhism in both India and
China, as well as of the Confucian philosophy, and perhaps of Taouism.
But fortunately, there exist independently in the Ko-zhi-ki, the Mafi-
yefu-shifu, the Ni-hoh-gi, the Ko-go-zliifu-wi and tlie Norito, abundant
materials for the student of the divine age, and it was to these hooks
that Mabuchi, Motowori and Hirata devoted their attention. Together
with Kada they form the revivalist school of pure Shin-tau. I propose
to give some account of their lives and works, and the views held by
them as to the essence of Shiii-tau.

[4] During the long period amounting to nearly three hundred
years which elapsed between the downfall of the Hou-deu family in 1334,
and the final establishment of the Tokugalia family as de facto rulers
of Japan after the death of liideyoshi (Taicosama) in tlie end of the
16th century, Japan had been the scene of constant civil war and
rebellions. The xishikaga family, which established itself at Kiyaii-to
with a branch of the Kuwan-tou, was utterly unable to control its
unruly vassals, and- the capital of the Mikado was frequently delivered
up to fire and sword. In 1467 and during the six following years, it
became the battle-field of the rival retainers of the Ashikaga family,
and the greater part of the city Avas twice burnt to the ground. The
loss to Japanese literature by the destruction of books is said to have
been immense. Apart from the immediate effects of civil war, learning
must necessarily have decayed during a period when the profession of
the soldier was the only honourable calling, and every man was obliged


- ZokU'Sliin-tau Tai-i, voi. iv,, f. 5 .


4


>SATOW: THE EEVIVAL OF PUIiE SKIH-TAU.


to be constantly under arms for defence or attack. Nobunaga, it is
true, restored peace at the capital and in tlie surrounding provinces,
but civil wars still went on in the more remote parts of the country,
and he had to be perpetually in the field against rival cliiefs, Idlideyoshi,
who succeeded him as the chief military leader^, did much to facilitate
the pacification of the Empire. He broke the power of the Mouri
family, conquered the turbulent dai-miyau of Kiu-shiu, annihilated the
•Wodawara Hou-deu who ruled over the Kwan-tau, and then despatched
Ms warriors to fight and die in Korea.

The fruits of these efforts were reaped by Iheyasu, whose power
was virtually rendered absolute by the victory of Sekigaliara, and who
became Shiyauguu in 1603. During the remainder of his life, with the
exception of the two short campaigns against Hideyoshi’s partizans in
1614 and 1615, he lived tranquilly at Sun-pu in Suruga, the modern
Shidzu-woka. His chief pursuit seems to have been the collection of old
manuscripts, and it is cliiefiy owing to his exertions that what remains
of the ancient literature has been preserved. The Suii-pu-ki, quoted by
[5] Hirata,® mentioned a large number of works brought to him from
various parts of the country, some from Kiyau-to, and others from
Kamakura, and a few from the monastery of Minobu Sail in Kafu-sliiu.
Before his death he gave directions that the library of Japanese and
Chinese books wbich he bad formed at Suii-pu should be divided between
his eighth son, the prince of Wohari, and his ninth son, the prince of
Ki-shiu. The former received the greater part of the Japanese books,
the latter the Chinese books. Under the direction of the Prince of Wohari
were composed the Zhifi-gMiofii-teu and Riiwi-zbiu Ki-hofi-gi. One
of Iheyasu 's grandsons, the famous second Prince of Mito (1622-1700),
known variously as Mito no Kuwammon Sama, and hlito no Gi-koii
{Mitsukuni was his nanori)^ also collected a vast library by purchasing
old books from Shiii-tau and Bviddhist temples and from the people.
With the aid of a number of scholars, amongst whom tradition says
were several learned Chinese wdio had fled to Japan to escape from
the tyranny of the Manchu conquerors, he composed the Dai-Ni-hofi-
shi, or History of Great Japan, in two hundred and forty books.
This book is the standard history of Japan to this day, and all sub-
*Tamadasuki, vol. ii., f. 5S.


SATOW: THE EEVIVAL OE F0EE SHIi^-TAU.


5


sequent writers on tlie same subject liave taken it as their guide. He
also compiled a work on the ceremonies of the Imperial Court, consisting
of more than five hundred volumes, to which the Mikado condescended
to give the title of Eei-gi Buwi-ten. To defray the cost of producing
these two magnificent works the Prince of Mito set aside at least

30.000 hohu of rice per annum (some accounts say 50,000 others,

70.000 holcii).

While the study of ancient history thus received powerful impulse
from men of high position, there manifested itself amongst the lower
ranks an equal desire to cultivate the native literature. Two of the
earliest who turned their attention to this subject wmre the Buddhist
priest Kei-chiyuu and the Shiii-tau priest Kada no Adzuma-maro.

[6] Kei»chiyiiu was the son of a aamuvahi in the service of Awoyama,
the dai-mij/au of Ama-ga-saki in Setsiitsu. He was born in 1640, and
early distinguished liimself by an excellent memory for poetry, having
as it is said, committed the Hiyaku-niu shin to memory in the space of
ten days, when lie was only five years of age. At the age of eleven he
became a neophyte at the monastery of Meu-hofu-zhi at Imasato near
Ohozaka, much against the inclination of his parents. Two years
later he shaved his head and removed to the famous monastery of
Kau-ya-saii in Ki-shiu. In 1662 he became an inmate of a monastery
near Ikudama at Ohozaka, but finding its proximity to the city disagree-
able, he absconded, leaving a verse behind on the wall. From this time
he travelled much in the central parts of Japan, studying Buddhism,
Sanscrit, Chinese literature and poetry, and Japanese history ; but his
favourite occupation was the study of Japanese poetry. In 1680 his for-
mer teacher, the abbot of Meu-hofu-zhi, died, and left directions that he
should be succeeded by Kei-chiyuu, who accepted the charge simply for
the sake of his mother, who was living at Imasato. About this time the
Prince of Mito above alluded to invited him to Yedo in order to complete
a commentary on the Man-yefu-shifu which had been commenced by
Shimokahabe Chiyau-riu. He declined the invitation, but pleased with
the Prince’s love for ancient learning, compiled a similar work for him
called Man-yefu-dai-shiyau-ki in twenty volumes, with a supplement in
two volumes. After the death of his mother he left the monastery, and
retired into private life in a small cottage in .the neighbourhood of Oho-


6 SATOW: THE EEVIVAL OF PHEE SBl^-TAV,

asaka, whence the repeated invitations of the Prince of Mito failed to
draw him. He died in the year 1701. His published works relating
to poetry and general literature number sixteen, and he is said to have
left a quantity of unfinished manuscript behind him.^

Besides Kei-chiyuu and Shimokahabe Chiyau-riii (1622-1684) Hi-
rata mentions Nashimoto Mo-suwi® as one of the [7] first who vindi-
cated the style of the Man-yefii-shifu against that of the modern school.
His works are extremely rare. The efibrts of these three men were,
however, confined to the department of poetry, and the credit of having
founded the modern school of pure Shiu-tau belongs to Kada.

I.

Kada Adzuma-maro, as he is most commonly styled, was born in
1669 near Kiyau-to, his father being the warden of the temple of
Inari between Kiyau-to and Pushimi. From his boyhood up he was
fond of study, and devoted himself to antiquarian investigation. He
thus acquired an accurate knowledge of the ancient national records, the
old laws, of which only fragments have been preserved, the early prose
and poetry and the chronicles of the noble families. Though absolutely
without any one to point out the way to him in these researches, he was
nevertheless enabled to make many valuable discoveries. When con-
siderably over sixty years of uge he went to Yedo, where his reputation
came to the ears of the government, and he received a commission from
it to revise and edit the ancient texts. After residing at Yedo for some
years he returned to Kiyau-to, and the governor of Fushimi presented
him with a considerable sum of money as a reward for his labours. It
is said that the commission came in the first place from the Mikado,
who was obliged to communicate with his subjects through the Shiyau-
guii, and that the money-reward came from the same source, but there
is no documentary evidence of this.

Kada had long cherished a scheme for the establishment of a school
for the study of Japanese language and literature, and he sent in a
memorial on the subject to the authorities at Kiyau-to, probably to the
macM-bihgiyaUf or to the Shiyaii-guil's Eesident (shiyo-shi-dai). But he


* M-zktif DeTi, San-^zhif u-roku Ka'shifti Riyaku-den^

* Immdasztki^ vol. ix., f, 2,


SATOW: THE BEVIVAL OF PUBE SHI^5'-TAU.


r


died soon after (in 1786), and the project was never carried out. The
Ki-zhifi Deh indeed says that the necessary sanction had been given,
and that Kada had already selected a spot near the burial-place of the
Higashi Hoh-guwan-zhi, but Hirata (in the Tamadasuki) thinks that
this so-called sanction, [8] if ever given, was not formal and official.
Kada’s memorial has lately been published in a separate form by
Hirata Kanetane and can easily be obtained. It is a most vigorous
protest against the utter neglect of Japanese learning for Chinese,,
which had up to that time been almost universal.

It is usually stated that Kada, shortly before his death, gave orders
to his to destroy all his manuscripts, on the ground that they

must contain many errors, and he therefore calculated to mislead stu-
dents, while the good which might be in them could easily be discovered
without their aid. Plirata Atsutane repeats this story, but it is stated,,
on the authority of Atsutane’s son Kanetane, that the Kada family
still possess several boxes full of unpublished writings of Adsuma-maro.
It may be doubted; however, whether they are of much actual value,
seeing that their author was the first who attempted to elucidate the
meaning of the ancient books, and as Atsutane says, ‘we can see from
the works which Kada published during his life-time, such as his com-
mentaries on the Maii-yefu-shifu and Zhin-dai no Maki, that he had good
reason to be dissatisfied with the conclusions which he had reached/
Kada’s views may be briefly stated as follows : “ Learning is a
matter in which the highest interests of the empire are involved, and no
man ought to be vain enough to imagine that he is able by himself to
develope it thoroughly. Nor should the student blindly adhere to the
opinions of his teacher. Any one who desires to study Japanese litera-
ture should first acquire a good knowledge of Chinese, and then pass over
to the Man-yefu-shifu, from which he may discover the ancient principles
of the divine age. If he resolve bravely to love and admire antiquity,,
there is no reason why he should fail to acquire the ancient style in
poetry as well as in other things. In ancient times, as the poet expressed
only the genuine sentiments of his heart, his style was naturally straight-
forward, but since the practice of writing upon subjects chosen by lot has
come into vogue, the language of poetry has become ornate and the ideas
[9] forced, thus producing a laboured appearance. The expression of


S SATOW : THE REVIVAL OE PURE SHIR’-TAU.

fictitious sentiment about the relations of the sexes and miscellaneous
■subjects, is not genuine poetry.’'^ Kada, true to his own principles,
never wrote a line of amatory poetry. We can readily understand his
eontempt for the modern versifiers, when we recall the picture of licen-
tiousness which some of the verses in the popular collection called
Siyaku-niTi shm present. What in English has to be disguised under
the name of love was too-often mere sensual passion indulged in at the
expense of the most sacred domestic relations. During the middle ages
it seems to have been the practice for persons skilled in the trifling
art of making stanzas of thirty-one syllables to assemble at drinking
parties, and to draw lots for subjects to write about. The 67th stanza
of tins collection contains an allusion to this custom.

Atsutane has a note in the Tamadasuki, the object of which is to
refute the common notion that Kei-chiyuu, Motowori, and Mabuchi ought
to be considered the ancestors of the antiquarian school, to the exclusion
of Kada. The cause of this notion is that the men who eu ter tain it are
merely versifiers and take verse-making to be an essential part of the
labours of the antiquarians. Kei-chiyiui, who was a Buddhist priest,
eertainly did some service in editing the Mail-yefu-shifu, but to praise
Mabuchi and Motowori for their poetry alone is to misapprehend the
real character of the work they performed. This consisted in the
revival of Shiil-tau, and poetry was merely secondary with them. Kada’s
memorial proves that he was the founder of tlie school of Pure Shifi-tau.
Mabuchi was his pupil, and Motowori in his turn the pupil of Mabuchi.

Kada had no children of his own, and adopted his nephew Arimaro
(1706-1751). Arimaro came to Yedo, and taught his uncle’s views
with some success. He was particularly learned in that branch of
Japanese archfeology which deals with the ancient system of govern-
ment under the Mikados, and having attracted the notice of [10]
Tayasu Kin-go (1715-1771), the first of the name, who took great
interest in the subject, he entered the service of that Prince. A dispute
subsequently took place, on account of wbich Arimaro resigned, but he
continued to take pupils at his own house. There is a notice of his life
and works in the Ki-zhifi Den.

• Preface of NobuyosM to the collection of Kada’s verses entitled Shiyun-
yefu-shifu, quoted in the Tamadasuki, vol, ix., p, 6,


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHIR'-TAU.


When Arimaro quitted the service of Tayasu Kin-go, he recom-
mended a certain Mabuchi in his stead.

II.

Mabuchi was a man of ancient lineage, )>eiiig descended from Take-
tsunumi no mikoto, the demi-god who took the form of a gigantic crow
and acted as guide to Zhih-mu Teh-wau in his invasion of Yamashiro,
as related in the Ni-hon-gi.^

About the middle of the 18th century there was a Shin-tau priest of
one of the lesser shrines of Kami-gamo near Kiyau-to, whose daughter,
one of the Emperor’s women, received a gift of 500 kohn of land at Wo-
kabe near Hamamatsu in Towotafumi. With these lands she endowed a
shrine to the gods of Kamo and made her brother Michi-hisa chief warden
of it. The living, if it may be so called, became hereditary in the family
of his young brother and heir, and three generations later the name
of the village was adopted as the family surname. In the end of the
17th century the wardenship was held by Wokahe Zhi-rau-za-we-moh,
and Mabuchi, who was his nephew, was born at Wokahe in 1697,

His biographer says that at one period he was desirous of entering
the Buddhist priesthood, but his parents refused their consent, and he
thereupon quitted their roof for that of the chief innkeeper at Hama-
matsu, whose daughter he married. Amongst his friends were two
SMn4au i)riests, Sugiura Shinano no Kami and Mori Min-bu no Seu-fu,
both pupils of Kada. Sugiura’s wife was a niece of Kada, who on his
way to and from Yedo used to stop with his relations, and Mabuchi thus
made [11] his acquaintance. It was about this time that he changed
his previous name of Masa-fuji for that of Mabuchi, by which he is
generally known.®

In 1733, at the age of thirty-six, he went up to Kiyau-to and became
one of Kada’s pupils, but as Kada died in 1736, he only profited by his
teacher’s lessons for a comparatively short period. Nevertheless, he
made excellent use of his time, as is shown by the fact that he alone of

^ Vide Klaproth’s introduction to the “ Annales des Dairi,” which contains a
fairly good translation of vol. iii. of the Ni-hoh-gi.

* Previous to this he had either received or chosen five other names in turn
at different periods of his life.


10


SATOW : THE EEVIVAL OF PURE SIIlS'-TAU.


ail those who studied under Kada, surpassed his master in learning. In
1738 he removed to Yedo, wliere he passed the remainder of his life.
Having established his reputation as a scholar, he entered the service of
Tajmsii Kill-go in 1746, with whom he remained fourteen years, until
old age compelled his retirement. He died in the end of 1759 at the
age of 72, and was buried at the Buddhist monastery of iou-dai-zhi at
Shinagaha.

Motowori in his Tamagatsuma,^ under the heading ‘‘ Agatawi^^ no
ushi’s claim to be considered the founder of ancient learning says : ^‘The
branch of study which consists of investigating the ancient language
and modes of thought with a mind perfectly freed from Chinese influences
was initiated by Mabuchi. Before his time the usual studies were con-
fined to the Ivo-kin-shifu and later collections. The Man-yefu-slufii was
considered obscure and unintelligible. Ko one was capable of appreciat-
ing its merits or of distinguishing between the more ancient an<l modern
poems which it contains, and no one ever attempted to acquire the langu-
age of the Mafi-yefu-shifu, so as to wield it as his own. Tiie power of
acquiring this ancient language so as to employ it with perfect ease, of
composing poetry in the style of the Mail-yefu-shifu and of writing prose
in the ancient manner, which some have attained to in later times, is
owing to the teachings of Mabuchi. The Moderns may imagine that
they have made this acquisition by their own efforts, but there is no
one who does not stand in debt to him. Every one [12] knows now
that in order to understand the ancient texts, such as the Ko-zhi-ki and
Ni-hofl-shiyo-ki,^^ it is necessary to avoid being misled by Chinese
notions, to study antiquity and to be guided by ancient ideas, but the
knowledge of these truths is the very spirit of Mabuciii’s teaching of
the Mamyefu. The service which he performed in founding a branch of
learning which has such high claims to veneration as the study of
antiquity, is one of incalculable value to mankind.”

Ka-tou Clukage, who for many years was a pupil of Mabuchi, is
the best authority for biographical and literary detail. He says:
** From a very early age I lived in Mabuchi’s service, and I was both

Name adopted by Mabuchi for liis place of abode.

Another name for the Ni-homgi.


SATOW: THE BEVIVAL OF PUEE Sni:^-TAtr.


11


a constant spectator of his mode of life and an auditor of his words,.
He was very different in appearance from ordinary men. From his
looks he might be taken to be a person of small acuteness and slow in
thinking, but sometimes the true heart of a Japanese burst forth in his-
language, which was then distinguished by the most perfect eloquence.
That his hand- writing resembled that of ancient manuscripts, was no
doubt the effect of his unwearied and long continued diligence in the
study of antiquity. His house and furniture were both formed upon
ancient models, and he neither lent ear to nor bestowed attention on
anything modern. In this way his mind naturally acquired an old-
fashioned mould, and all its productions, whether written or verbal,
were pervaded by the same tint.

In composing poetry he worked most conscientiously. Everj
stanza was the subject of much consideration and frequent correction.
Three separate styles are to be distinguished in his compositions.
The first was imitated from Kada no Adzuma-^maro, and is elegant
and feminine in form. The second is entirely his own ; polished,
musical, and yet manly. In his later years his range of thought was
highei', and his language was natural and simple to a degree not to be
attained by ordinary persons.’’'^® [13] Mabuchi’s chief aim was to
carry out the idea originated by Kada, namely to illustrate the pre-
historic age. For this purpose he considered that it was necessary to
begin by explaining the Mah-yefu-shifu. Poetry was with him only
the means to an end. At the only interview which ever took place
between Mabuchi and Motowori, the latter spoke of his own project of
writing a commentary on the Ko^zhi-M. Mabuchi replied tliat he also
had wished to explain the sacred writings, but in order to do this it
was first necessary to get rid of the effects of Chinese philosophy, and
discover the genuine beliefs of antiquity. The first step towards their
elucidation was to recover the ancient language, which could only be
done by studying the Mah-yefu-shifu. This preliminary task he had
himself accomplished, and he urged Motowori, who was yet young, to
apply himself diligently to the study of the Ko-zlii-hL


^ Eroiti th.e preface to a collection of Mabuclii’s prose and. poetical works>
entitled Agatawi Kamo no Ka-sliifu, quoted by Hirata.


12


SATOW : THE KEVIVAL OF PURE SIIIN-TAU.


It appears that some writers have accused Mofcowori of inventing
these views for Mabuchi, but the writings of the latter are evidence of
his having held these opinions. In his Nishi-manabi (quoted in the
Tamadasuki) he says : The Moderns have held the erroneous opinion
that the Man-yefu-shifu contains nothing but poetry, which is fit only
for women to amuse themselves with, and many shallow fools, who can-
not understand the ancient poetry and are ignorant of the ancient
books, have made att^^^mpts to explain the divine age according to ideas
derived from Chinese literature. Thus their utterances are mere so-
phistry, utterly opposed to the ancient Japanese ‘ way.^ ’’

Mabuchi then proceeds to lay down the course of study which
should be followed in order that the ‘ way ' of the gods and ancient
emperors may be thorouglily comprehended. The old poetry is to be
taken at the commencement, namely the collection entitled the Mafi-
yefu-shifu, and the Norlto, as being the earliest specimens of prose,
should come next. jSfext follow the Ko-zhi-ki, Ni-hoVi-ki (also called
Ni-’hoU-shiyO'Mj, SJiiyoku Ni-lio7L-gi, and other ancient histories. After
this the books whicli treat of rites and ceremonies, such as the Yeu^gi
Shiki^ the [14] SGi-kui'i^eiij the JEokihgari-scUy Gatt-ka Shi-dai, etc.,
must be carefully read in proper order, and the Monogatari^'^ or earliest
writings in syllable characters (kana), must be studied for tbe sake of
the traces which they contain of the archaic language.

Mabuchi was a very voluminous writer. A list of his works is
given at the end of the notice of liis life in the Sart-zhlfa-roku Kasliifu
JRiyaku-den. Many of them have been superseded by tbe writings of
subsequent authors, but a considerable number are still worthy of being
studied. There are the Mm-yefu-shifu, or commentary on the Maii-
yefu-shifu, and its supplement, iJie Koddfi’Shifu UGhi-giki, commentary
on the collection called Ko-kiK-shifuy IRyahc-nin-sIihi Ko’Setsu and
Siyaku-nin-shiu uhmanah% commentaries on the collection of verses
called Hiyaku-ni'K-sMu ; Ku%oan-zlii~kau, a lexilogus of Makum kotoba,
Ise’-Monogatari Kod and Tai-i; and the Gen-zhi Monogatari 8hi%-
shiyaku (new comments on), besides those which are noticed below.

list “of the chief Monogatari is given in the third volume of the biblio-
graphical work called Gun^shiyo ichi-ran. The Heike-monogatari does not really
belong to this class, as has been erroneously supposed by some students.


SATOW ; THE REYIVAL OF PURE SHXN-TAU. 13^-

In the Kohu-i-ha%i we have Mabiichi’s views upon the worthlessness
of the Chinese philosophy. He asks : “ Wherein lies the value of a rule
of conduct ? In its conducing to the good order of the state.’^ He
argues that ^ while the Chinese for ages past have had a succession of
different dynasties to rule over them, Japan has been faithful to one
uninterrupted line of sovereigns. Every Chinese dynasty was founded
upon rebellion and parricide. Sometime>s a powerful ruler was able to
transmit his authority to his son and grandson, but they in their turn
were inevitably deposed and murdered, and the country was in a per-
petual state of civil war. A philosophy which produced such effects
must be founded on a false system.

^ When Confucianism was first introduced into Japan, the simple-
minded natives, deceived by its plausible appearance, accepted it with
eagerness, and allowed it to spread its influence everywhere. Tbe con-
sequence was the civil [15] war which broke out immediately after tbe
death of Ten-ji Teii-wau in 671 between that emperor’s brother and son,,
which only came to an end in 672 by the suicide of the latter. In the
8th century the Chinese costume and etiquette were adopted by the
Court. This foreign pomp and splendour covered the rapid depravation
of men’s hearts, and created a wide gulf between the Mikado and his peo-
ple. So long as the sovereign maintains a simple style of living, the
people are contented Avith their own hard lot. Their wants are few and
they are easily ruled. But if the sovereign has a magnificent palace, gor-
geous clothing, and crowds of finely-dressed women to wait on him, the
sight of these things must cause in others a desire to possess themselves of
the same luxuries ; or if they are not strong enough to take them by force,
it excites their envy. If the Mikado had continued to live in a house
roofed AAdth shingles, and whose walls were of mud, to wear hempen
clothes, to carry his sword in a scabbard wound round Avith the tendrils of
some creeping plant, and to go to the chase carrying his how and arrows,
as Avas the ancient custom, the present state of things would never have
come about. But since the introduction of Chinese manners, the sover-
eign, while occupying a highly dignified place, has been degraded to the
intellectual level of a woman. The power fell into the hands of ser-
vants, and, although they never actually assumed the title, they were
Sovereigns in fact, while the Mikado became an utter nullity.’


14


SATOW; THE REVIVAL OP PURE SHIS--TAU.


Some one had observed to Mabuchi that it was owing to the Clii-
mese system of morals that the practice of marriage between brothers
and sisters was discontinued. He explains in reply that ' according to
ancient Japanese custom the children of the same niotlier were alone
regarded as united by the fraternal tie ; that it was not considered in
any way objectionable for cliildren of the same father by different
mothers to intermarry. The Chinese forbid marriages between persons
who bear the same surname, and it was the adoption of this ridiculously
■ strict rule that led to the gradual disuse of the ancient practice, which
was in itself quite Iiarmless.

• [] 0] In ancient times when men’s dispositions were sti’uightfojuvard,
a complieatod system of morals was unnecessary. It would naturally
happen tliat bad acts might occasionally be committed, but the straight-
forwardness of men’,s dispositions would prevent the evil from being
■concealed and growing in extent. So that in those da„v 3 it was unneces
. wy to have a doctrine of right and wrong. But the Chinese, being
; bad at heart, in spite of the teaching which they got, were only good on
■fee outside, and their bad acts became of such magnitude that society
was thrown into disorder. The Japanese being straightforward could
do without teaching. It is said on the other side that as the Japanese
had no names for benevolence, righteousness, propriety, sagacity and
truth, they must have been without those principles. To this Mabuchi
replies that they exist in every country, in the same way as the four
seasons which make their annual rounds. In the siiring the weather
does not become mijd all at once, nor the summer hot. Nature proceeds
by gradual steps. According to the Chinese view it is not spring or
summer unless it becomes mild or hot all of a sudden . Their princiiiles
sound very plausible, but are unpractical.’

Mabuchi rendered a great service to the study of Shiil-tau by the
pains which he took to illustrate the Norito in a commentary entitled
Nonto Kau (1768). The Norito consists of a selection of the liturgies
used at certain of the more important Shiil-tau festivals, and together
with those parts of the Jiym-gimaK Gi-sUU and Yen-gi Shiki which
contain directions for the celebration of such festivals, afford the most
authentic information as to the native religious ceremonies. Some of
them contain passages of remarkable beauty, especially those which are


SATOW: THE EEVIVAL OF PURE SHlI^-XAU.


15


considered to be most ancient in tlieir origin, sucb as the OJiobarahi no
Kotoba and ToBliigohi no Matauri no Kotoha, The festival of the
^'General Purification’^ {Ohobarali%) is first mentioned in the Ko-zhi-ki
as having been celebrated after the death of Chiyuu-ai Tefi-wau (200
A.D, according to the native chronology), but is supposed to have been
instituted as far [17] back as the time of Izanagi no raikoto. Mahuchi,
who may be taken as a pretty safe guide in such matters, attributes the
liturgy as it is preserved in the Yeil-gi Shiki to tlie reign of Teii-mu
Ten-wau (673-686), by which period the words, in the earliest times
composed by the Nakatomi on each occasion, had assumed a definite
form censecrated by precedent. The YeTi-gi Shikiy however, belongs to
the 10th century, and therefore the date at which the Isoriio are actually
known to have been committed to writing is two centuries later than that
of the Eo-^hi-M and Ni-hoK-gL Still more ancient than the OJiobarahi no
Kotoba is said to be the Idzumo Ktini no MiyatsuJco Kanin yogoto^ which
Mabuchi assigns to the reign of Zhiyo-mei Ten-wau (629-641), though the
origin of the ceremony at which it was used is evidently far back in the
prehistoric age. The Toshigohi, Hirose and Tatsuta A orito are later again
than the OhobavaliL By a fortunate coincidence the study of pure Shin-
tail cannot be successfully prosecuted at first hand, without a previous
acquaintance with ancient forms of the language, and the result has a na-
tural tendency towards a combined devotion to the two subjects, which is
explanatory of the wide meaning of term KoJcic-gaJcKy ‘ national learn-
ing,’ sometimes erroneously used to signify the study of poetry alone.

This notice of Mabuchi’s writings is unavoidably deficient, owing to
the difficulty of procuring copies of his works in the book-shops. Even
the public library, recently removed to Asakusa, does not possess three
volumes by this author which relate to the Ko-zhi-ki, and it is much to
be regretted that the means should therefore be wanting in order to
form an estimate of what he accomplished tow^ards tlie elucidation of
this most important and ancient Shiii-tau monument.

III.

Tlie mantle of Mabudhi fell upon the shoulders of Motowori Nori-
naga. This remarkable scholar and ciltic was born i n 1730 at Matsuzaka
in Ise, a town belonging to the Prince of Ivi-shiu. At the age of ten


16 SATOW : THE EEVIYAL OF PUEE SHIE'-TAU.

years he lost his [18] father, arid his mother was left in straitened
circumstances. Motowori displayed an ardent taste for learning from
his earliest childhood, and read every book, Chinese or Japanese, which
came in his way. In 1752 he went to Kiyau-to, where he studied
Chinese under Hori Kei-zan and medicine under Takegaha Hofu-gan,
in accordance with his mother's wish that he shouM become a doctor.
During his stay at the capital of the Mikado he became acquainted with
the works of Kei-chiyuu, and read them with avidity. Previous to this
his notions of poetry had been the same us those of the later versi-
fiers, but from Kei-ehiyiiu he learnt the principles of correct style. In
1757 he returned to his birth-place and set up in practice as a children's
physician.

Shortly after his return, a person who was passing through from
Yedo lent him a copy of Mabuchi's work on the mahvra kotoha, which
had just been published. A first perusal failed either to interest or
convince him, but after repeated readings he was compelled to acknow-
ledge the justice of the author's views, and their superiority over those
of Kei-chiyuu. It was this book which inspired him with his love for
the study of Japanese antiquity. In the year 1761 he had an oppor-
tunity of making the acquaintance of Mabuchi, when the conversation
before quoted took place, and he continued to correspond with him and
to profit by his lessons until the death of the elder scholard*^

The Ko-zlifh’ki Den, which is an edition of the Ko-zlii-ki with an
elaborate commentary, unquestionably his greatest work, was commenced
in 1764, but the first part, which contains the commentary on the first
book of the Ko-zhi-ldj was not comifieted until 1786. It must have at
once established his reputation, and one of his biographers states that
his fame drew nearly five hundred students from all parts of the country.
The second part was finished in 1792. Three years later he was invited
to Wakayama by the Prince of Ki-shiu, for whose sake lie refused a
pension of 300 hoku [19] annually, which had been ofiered to him by
another dai-miymu The concluding part of the commentary wms com-
pleted in 1796. The printing of the work was begun in 1789 and
finished in 1822.


^^Tamagatsuma, vol. ii,, p, 35, et infra.


8AT0W : THE HEVIVAE OP PUEB SHlJS^-TATT. IT

In 1801, at the request of a number of his admirers, he again
visited Kiyau-to, where crowds flocked together to hear his lectures.
The princes of the blood and many of the Court nobles sought instruc-
tion from him in matters relating to the early history of Japan. He
died in the autumn of the same year, and was buried in a tomb which
he had previously caused to be constructed at the monastery of Men-
raku-zhi near Matsuzaka.

This seems a fitting place in which to give some account of the
earliest extant historical records of the Japanese, and of those of which
only brief notices have been preserved, taking for our authority the first
volume of the Ko-zhi-hi DeK,

The Ni-lio%-gi states that in the year 403 (4th of Ri-chiyuu
Ten-wau) ‘‘historiographers were appointed for the first time to all
the provinces, to record words and events,” from which it may be
inferred that such officials had existed at the Court before that date*
The latter probably also had records of what was known of the earlier
ages, which would account for the existence of numerous independent
chronicles, such as are quoted in the Ni-hoK-gi, especially in the first
two books called the Zhin-dai-no~maM. The Ni-ho^-gi also says that in
the year 620 (28th of the Empress Suwi-ko Ten-wau) Shiyau-toku Tai-
shi and Soga no Umako [began to] compile by their joint efibrts “A Record
of the Mikado, a Record of the Country, and records of the Omi, Mum-
zhi, Tomo-no-miyatmhoy Icuni no miyatsuJco, of the chiefs of the Mikado^s
followers, and of the people.” This is the first mention of any records
of the court. Ten-mu Ten-wau also commanded Prince Kahashima and
eleven others in 681 to compile a history of the Mikados and an account
of ancient matters. Neither of these collections has been preserved.
In the 9th month of the year 711 the Empress Gen-miyau Tefi-wau
commanded the minister Yasumaro to commit the [20] Ko-zhi-ki to
writing, and he presented it in a finished state in the first month of the
following year, as it stated in the preface. This is therefore the earliest
of the extant records. The Shiyoku-Ni-hoil-gi says that the Ni-hoiL-gi was
completed in the year 720, the 6th of the Empress Geii-shiyau Tefi-wau,
and it so far superseded the Ko-zhi-ki that the latter was almost for-
gotten. The cause of this was no doubt the general adoption of Chinese
ideas, and the consequent preference of a work written in Chinese style


IB


«ATOW: t:hb ketival op puke ski^-tae.


to one of which the chief object was to preserve the form and spirit of
Japanese antiquity. In 714 Kiyohito and Fujimaro were instructed to
prepare a national history, but either they never completed the work at
all, or it must have been looked on as a failure, for no further mention
of it occurs anywhere.

The' preface to the Ko-zhi-ki is the only authority for the accepted
account of its origin. The Emperor Ten-mu, at what portion of his
reign is hot mentioned, lamenting that the records possessed by the
chief families contained many errors, resolved to take steps to preserve
the true traditions from oblivion. He therefore had the records care-
fully examined, compared and weeded of their faults. There happened
to be in his household a person of marvellous memory named Hiyeda
no Are, who could repeat without a mistake the contents of any
document he had ever seen, and never forgot anything that he heard.
•Ten-mu Ten-wau took the pains to instruct this person in the genuine
traditions and ‘old language of former ages,’ and to make him repeat
them until he had the whole by heart. “ Before the undertaking was
completed,” which probably means before it could be committed to
writing, the Emperor died, and for twenty-five years Are’s memory was
the sole depository of what afterwards received the title of Ko-zhi~Td or
Fum-hotO’-humit as it is read by Motowori. At the end of this interval
the Empress Gefi-miyau ordered Yasumaro to write it down [21] from the
mouth of Are, which accounts for the completion of the manuscript in so
short a time as four months and a half. Are’s age at this date is not stated,
but as he was twenty-eight years of age some time in the reign of Ten-mu
Tefi-wau, it could not possibly have been more than sixty-eight, while
taking into account the previous order of Tefi-mu Teii-wau in <581 for the
compilation of a history, and the statement that he was engaged on the
composition of the Ko-zhi-ki at the time of this death in 686, it would
not be unreasonable to conclude that it belongs to about the last year
of his reign, in which case Are was only fifty-three in 711.^^

Apart from the fact that all European writers who have dealt with
Shin-tau obtained their information from natives who were acquainted

^*Hirata in his Ko-shi Chiyon, voL i., gives reasons for supposing that Are
was a woman, and that the compijation of a history attributed to the year 68 1
and the project of the Ko-zhi-ki were identical.


SATOW : THIS EEVIVAL OF PURE SHi:S'-TATJ.


19


with its impure forms alone; another source of error has been the too
ready recognition of the Ni^hoh-gi as the only authority for the native
cosmogony and the ancient legends. It is not difficult, however, by the
aid of a comparison between the Ni-hoil-gi and the Ko-zhi-ki, to show
that the former contains numerous traces of direct Chinese influence, and
this is also what we should be led to expect from the fact of its having
been composed in a langua^ which is intended to represent the Chinese
idiom as nearly as possible, while the Ko-zhi-ki is to a very large extent
pure Japanese. Motowori has devoted several pages to the discussion
of the book in question, and I think that it will be useful to take note
of his observations.

‘ The very commencement of the Ni-hoii-gi affords an example. Its
first words are. Anciently, before heaven and earth separated and the
Negative and Positive Essences were parted, chaos was like a fowFs egg ;
and subsequently deity came into existence in the midst thereof/’ It
then proceeds to state, “ now it is said that in the beginning of heaven
and earth, the soil floated about like a fish floating on the surface of
water.” This latter passage is the real Japanese account of the begin-
ning of the world, and what 'precedes the words Now it is said ” is an
addition taken from Chinese books.

‘ [22] In the next passage the existence of the first three male deities
is attributed to the working of the Heavenly Mode by itself, and the
production of four pairs of male and female deities to the joint working of
the Heavenly and Earthly Modes. The Negative and Positive Essences,
and the Heavenly and Earthly Modes were philosophic terms utterly
unknown to the ancient Japanese, and are the inventions of ignorant
men, who instead of accepting with faith the true traditions which have
been handed down from the beginning of time, endeavour to discover
explanations for what man with his limited intelligence can never com-
prehend. The deities referred to as having been produced by the work-
ing of the Heavenly and Earthly Modes, came into existence by the
spirits of Takami-musubi no kaini and Kami-musubi no kami. What
the process was is beyond our ken ; we have only to accept the fact.
To call Izanagi no kami the '^Positive Deity,” and Izanami no kami
Negative Deity,” as the Nhhofl-gi does, is to make use of terms
which are entirely foreign to the Japanese language, which would have


20


SATOW: THE KEVIVAL OF FUEE SHjfJ-TAlT,


called them the Male Deity'' and '^Female Deity.'^ The effect
of the Chinese phraseology is to cause men to believe that Izanagi-
no kami and Izanami no kami are abstract principles, whereas they
are living powers. A proof that the terms ‘‘ Positive Essence " and
« Negative Essence " were imported from abroad, if one were needed,,
lies in the fact that the sun-deity is female and the moon-deity male
according to the ancient native traditior?^, which is in diametrical
opposition to the Chinese theory, according to which the sun is Male
or Positive and the moon Female or Negative. Most of the speeches in
the Ni-hon-gi, attributed to Zhin-mu Ten-wau, Suu-zhin Teh- wan and
other ancient Mikados, contain passages which in their meaning and form
are wholly Chinese, and cannot therefore be regarded as otherwise
than fictitious. The Shiyoku-Ni-hoh-gi contains speeches of the
Mikados in both Chinese and native style, and if the speeches
made in the 8th century contained so few. traces of Chinese expression,
it is pretty certain that those which were spoken [23] fourteen cen-
turies older must have been purely Japanese. Zhih-mu Teh-wau is
represented as making use of such expressions as the following ; “ It is

the part of a good general not to be haughty after conquering in battle,"
and, “ I am the descendant of the sun-deity, and to march in the sun's
face to conquer barbarians is contrary to Heaven's way," and “ Bely-
ing on the prestige of supreme Heaven, the evil horde has been cut to
pieces" ; in all of which the true Chinese ring is clearly heard. All
reference to Heaven as an intelligent acting power is of Chinese
origin, while in Japan heaven is merely the region where the heavenly
gods have their abode. In the same way the allusions to eating beef
in the Book of Zhih-mu, to divination by means of a tortoise's shell in
the Book of Sxm-zhih, and to the use of such weapons as battle-axes in
the Book of Kei-kau, are borrowed from the Chinese, as is also the title
of Kuwau4ai-kau, applied to the consort of Suwi-zei (B.C. 581-549 ?).,
Motowori has by no means exhausted his criticisms upon the Ni-hon-gi'
but is of opinion that he has said enough to show that it must be read
with careful discrimination.

■ There is another hook, of considerable age, which professes to give-
an original account of the divine age and of the early history down tO'
Suw^'ko Tefi-wau (593-628). It is called Kxi-zhvhi, and its author-


SATOW : THE EEYIVAIi OP PUEE SHlJJ-TAIT*


21


attributed to Shiyau-toku Tai-shi and Soga no XJmako, and tlia
preface by the latter states that it was completed in 622 ; it purports^
in fact to be the non-extant compilation already mentioned* Motowori
condemns it as a forgery, compiled at a much later date, chiefly from
the Ko-zhi-ki and Ni-hoK-gi. It further contains passages from the
Kb-go-zhifu-wi, composed in 807, and even mentions Saga Ten-wau, who
reigned as late as 810-823. Parts of it, however, seem to be based
upon other sources than those above mentioned, and are of considerable
value.

Motowori speaks of two editions of the Ko-zhi-ki which were in
existence when he commenced his own. One of which printed in the
period Kuwan-yei (1624-1644), contains many omissions erroneous
readings, and numerous [24] faults in the Jcana transcription. The
•second was published later in the same century by Deguchi iTobuyoshi,
who corrected most of the omissions and errors of the older edition, but
took upon himself to make some unnecessary alterations in the text>
thus diminishing to a considerable extent the value of his woi'k. Be-
sides these two printed editions Mofcowori obtained after much search
an old manuscript copy, unfortunately disfigured by a multitude of
mistakes, a copy of a manuscript with insertions by Nobuyoshi, an old
copy belonging to a Kiyau-to resident named Murawi, and a copy of an
ancient manuscript belonging to the monastery of Shin-puku-zhi at
ISTagoya in Wohari, all more or less incorrect, but useful for comparison#

The Ko-zhi-hi De% consists of forty-four large volumes of clear
print, of which two are devoted to prolegomena, three to indexes arrang-
ed chronologically and alphabetically, and one contains a tract on the
Cosmogony by Hatori Nakatsune, one of Motowori’s pupils.

The earliest work of Motowori upon Shin-tau was the tract entitled
Nahohi no Mitama, or the Spirit of Straightening,^' which forms part
of the first volume of the Ko-zhi-ki Den, and was written in the year
1771, about seven years after the commentary was commenced. It may
be summarized as follows :

* Japan is the country which gave birth to the goddess of the Sun,
Amaterasu-oho-mi-kami, which fact proves its superiority over all other
countries which also enjoy her favours. The goddess, haying endowed
her grandson Ninigi no Mikoto with the three sacred treasures, proclaimed


22


SATOW ; TH3E BEVIVAL OE PITBE SHIN'-TAXJ.


Mm. sovereign of Japan for ever and ever. His descendants shall
jBontinue to rule it as long as the heavens and earth endure. Being^
invested with this complete authority, all the gods under heaven and
all. mankind submitted to him, with the exception of a few wretches
who. were (juickly subdued.

* To the end of time each Mikado is the goddess’ son. His mind ia
in perfect harmony of thought and feeling with hers. He does not seek
out new inventions, but rules in accordance with precedents which dat^
from the age of [ 25 ] the gods, and if he is ever in doubt, he has resort to
divination, which reveals to him the mind of the great goddess. In this
way the age of the gods and the present age are not two ages, but one,
for not only the Mikado, but his Ministers and people also, act up to the
tradition of the divine age. Hence, in, ancient times the idea of mmfe*
or way (ethics) was never broached. The word was only applied to
ordinary thoroughfares, and its application to systems of philosophy,
government, morals, religion and so forth, is a foreign notion.

* As foreign countries (China and India, particularly the former)
are not the special domain of the sun-goddess, they have no permanent
rulers, and evil spirits, having found a field of action, have corrupted
mankind. In those countries any bad man who could manage to seize
on the power became a sovereign. Those who had the upper hand were
constantly scheming to maintain their positions, while the inferiors
iwere as constantly on the watch for oppotunities to oust them. The
most powerful and cunning of these rulers succeeded in taming their
subjects, and having secured ' their position, became an example for
others to imitate. In China the name of S&l-zhm (translated Holy
Men ” by Meadows) has been given to these men. But it is an error
to look upon these so-called Holy Men as in themselves supernatural
and good beings, as superior to the rest of the world as are the gods.
The principles which they established are called michi (ethics), and may
be reduced to two simple rules, namely to take other people’s territory,
and to keep fast hold of it.

* The Chinese Holy Men ” also invented the Book of Changes”
(Yeld, or I-kiug), by which they pretended to discover the workings of
the universe, a vain attempt, since it is impossible for man with his
limited intelligence to find out the principles which govern the acts of


SATOW ; THJE BEYIYAL OF PUKE SHlJR'-XAU- 23

the gods. In imitation of them the Chinese nation has since given itself
up to philosophizing, to which are to be attributed its constant internal
dissensions. When things go right of themselves it is best to leave
them alone. In ancient times, although there was no prosy system of
[26] doctrine in Japan, there were no popular disturbances, and the
empire was peacefully ruled. It is because the Japanese were truly
moral in their practice that they required no theory of morals, and the
fuss made by the Chinese about theoretical morals is owing to their
laxity in practice. It is not wonderful that students of Chinese litera-
ture should despise their own country for being without a system of
morals, but that Japanese who were acquainted with their own ancient
literature should have pretended that Japan also had such a system,
simply out of a feeling of envy, is ridiculoui

‘ When Chinese literature was imported into Japan, the people
adopted many Chinese ideas, laws, customs and practices, which they
so mixed up with their own that it became necessary to adopt a special
name for the ancient native customs, which were in consequence called
Kami 7io michi or ShiK4aUf the word michi being applied in the same
sense as the Chinese tau (tao)^ and Kami because of their divine origin.
These native customs only survived in the ceremonies with which the
native gods are worshipped.

< Every event in the universe is the act of the gods. They direct
the changes of the seasons, the wind and the rain, the good and bad
fortune of states and individual men. Some of the gods are good,
others bad, and their acts partake of their own natures. Buddhists
attribute events to retribution ’’ (m-ymya,),, while the Chinese
ascribe them to the '' decree of heaven ’’ QeK-md or tHen-ming). This
latter is a phrase invented by the so-called Holy Men ” to justify
murdering sovereigns and seizing their dominions. As neither heaven
nor earth have minds, they cannot issue decrees. If heaven really
could issue decrees it would certainly protect the good rulers and take
care to prevent bad men from seizing the power, and in general, while
the good would prosper, the bad would suffer misfortune. But in
reality we find many instances of the reverse.

‘ Whenever anything goes wrong in the world it is to be attributed
to the action of the evil gods called Magaisiibi no Jcami (gods of crooked-


24


SAXOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHlS'-TAU,


iiess)* whose power is so great [27] that the suu-goddess and the creator-
god are sometimes unable to restrain them; much less are human
beings able to resist their influence. The prosperity of the wicked and
the misfortunes of the good, which seem opposed to ordinary justice,
are their doing. The Chinese, not possessing the traditions of the
divine age, were ignorant of this truth, and were driven to invent the
theory of Heaven's decrees,"

* The eternal endurance of the dynasty of the Mikados is a com-
plete proof that the ‘ way ' called Kami no miehi or 8hi%4au infinitely
surpasses the systems of all other countries.

* The Holy Men " of China were merely successful rebels. The

Mikado is the sovereign appointed by the pair of deities, Izanagi and
Izanami, who created this country. The Sun-goddess never said, * Dis-
obey the Mikado if he be bad,' and therefore, whether he be good or
bad, no one attempts to deprive him of his authority. He is the im-
movable ruler who must endure to the end of time, as long as the sun
and moon continue to shine. In ancient language the Mikado was
called a god, and that is his real character. Duty therefore consists in
obeying him implicitly, without questioning his acts. During the mid-
dle ages such men as Hou-deu Yoshitoki, Hou-deu Yasiuoki, Ashikaga
Taka-uji and others violated this duty and took up arms against

him. Their disobedience to the Mikado is attributable to the influence
of Chinese learning.

' This way " was established by Izanagi and Izanami, and deli-
vered by them to the Sun-goddess, who handed it down, and this is why
it is called the way of the gods." The nature of this “ way " is to be
learnt by sfcudying the Ko-zU-hi and ancient writings, but mankind
have been turned aside from it by the Spirits of Crookedness to Bud-
dhism and Chinese philosophy.

^ The various doctrines taught under the name of sJiiMau are with-
out authority.

' Human beings having been produced by the spirit of the two
Creative Deities, are naturally endowed with the [28] knowledge of
what they ought to do and what they ought to refrain from. It
is unnecessary for them to trouble their heads with systems of
morality. If a system of morals were necessary, men would be in-


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OP PURE 8Hlf^-TAU.


25


ferior to the animals, all of whom are endowed with the knowledge of
what they ought to do, only in an inferior degree to men. If what the
Chinese call Benevolence Righteousness Propriety (Rei),

Eetiringness (Zhiyau), Filial Piety (FTati), Brotherly Love {Tei), Fidelity
(^Chiyxm) and Truth (Shin) really constituted the duty of man, they would
be so recognized and practised without any teaching, but as they were
invented by the so-called Holy Men ’’ as instruments for ruling a
viciously-inclined population, it became necessary to insist on more than
the actual duty of man. Consequently, although plenty of men profess
these doctrines, the number of those who practise them is very small.
Violations of this teaching were attributed to human lusts. As human
lusts are a part of maAs nature, they must be a part of the harmony
of the universe, and cannot be wrong according to the Chinese theory^
It was the vicious nature of the Chinese that necessitated such strict rules,
as for instance that persons descended from a common ancestor, no
matter how distantly related, should not inter-marry. These rules not
being founded on the harmony of the universe, were not in accordance
with human feelings, and were therefore seldom obeyed.

‘In ancient times Japanese refrained only from inter-marriage
among children of the same mother,^® but the distance between noble
and mean was duly preserved. Thus the country was spontaneously
well-governed, in accordance with the “ way established by the gods.

‘ Just as the Mikado worshipped the gods of heaven and earth, so
his people prayed to the good gods in order to obtain blessings, and per-
formed rites in honour of the bad gods, in order to avert their displeasure.
If they [29] committed crimes or defiled themselves, they employed
the usual methods of purification taught them by their own hearts. As
there are bad as well as good gods, it is necessary to propitiate them
with offerings of agreeable food, playing the harp, blowing the flute, sing-
ing and dancing and whatever else is likely to put them in a good humour.

• It has been asked whether the hami no michi is not the same as the

^®This was allowed among the Jews and by Solon (v. Lubbock’s Origin of
Civilization, p. 124). It was probably the result of polygamy. Although a dis-
tinction is made between the wife and concubines at the present day, that is pro-
bably of Chinese origin, for in more ancient times they were classed together as
* women.*


26


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OP PURE SHi:S'-TAU.


Taoism of Laotzu. Laofczii hated the vain conceits of the Chinese
scholars, and honoured naturalness, from which a resemblance may be
argued; but as he was born ‘in a dirty country not under the special
protection of the Sun-goddess, he had only heard the theories of the
succession of so-called Holy Men, and what he believed to be natural-
ness was simply what they called natural. He did not know that the
gods are the authors of every human action, and this ignorance con-
stituted a cause of radical difference.

* To have acquired the knowledge that there is no miehi (ethics) to
be learnt and practised is really to have learnt to practise the ‘ way ’
of the gods/

This attack on the current Chinese philosophy was resented by a
scholar named Ichikaha Tatsumaro, who in a pamphlet entitled Maga-
no-hire begins by saying: certain man having abandoned himself to

the study of the Ko-zhi-ki, Ni-hofi-gi, Mah-yefu-shifu and other books
of the kind, until he had thoroughly masticated the old fables about
, which later ages can know nothing, and acquired an extensive ac-
quaintance with them, the modern verse-makers have sounded his praises
as, a great teacher. It seems however that he had fancied the “ natural-
ness ” expounded by Laotzu to be a good thing, and he has violently
abused the Holy Men. I have now undertaken to refute him.”

Ichikaha starts by laying down the principle that ‘ unwritten tradi-
tions can never be accepted with implicit belief on account of the dif-
ficulties which stand in the way of their being handed down correctly,
and the most incredible stories are those which have the best chance of
being preserved. [SO] Now, even allowing that the Chinese system of
writing was introduced in the reign of Ou-zhin Ten-wau, the documents
which Hiyeda no Are committed to memory must have been produced
after that time, and for the period of about a thousand years which is
calculated to have elapsed between Zhih-mu and Ou-zliiii and the
immense period called the “ age of the gods” which preceded Zhifi-mu's
reign, no written records can have existed at all, since there was no
native system of writing in use in ancient times.^^ The stories told us
about the earlier ages must have been invented by the Mikados. The

Hirata Atsiltane has. made an attempt to prove the genuine character of the
z/itit-daz no mo'zhi^ which will be noticed further on.


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHlR-TAU. 2f

name of Amaterasu is probably a posthumous title conferred at a later
period. If the sim-goddess is the real sun in heaven, it must have been
quite dark before she was born ; and yet it is stated that before she was
born there were trees and plants, clothing, weapons, boats and build-
ings. If all these things existed before her birth, it seems probable that
both sun and moon likewise preceded that event. It is curious that the
stars are not mentioned in the Zhin-dai-no-mahi. To say that the sun
was born in Japan is a fiction which was probably invented by the
earlier Mikados in order to support the assertion that this country is the-
I'Qot and all other countries only branches. The gods in heaven make
no difference between different races ox mankind, who are formed into-
separate nations by the seas and mountain ranges which divide them off
from each other, and the sun shines equally over all.

‘ During the thousand years or so which are said to have elapsed
between the reigns of Zhin-mu and Ou-zhin there were no written
characters, and no cyclical signs by w^hich time could be measured and
its lapse recorded. Men knew that it was spring by the blossoming of
the flowers, and that autumn had arrived by the leaves falling from the-
trees. The statement that a thousand years did actually elapse cannot
be accepted with confidence.

* The Japanese word Jcami was simply a title of honour, but in con-
sequence of its having been used to translate [31] the Chinese character
shi'Ji (sMn)y a meaning has come to be attached to it which it did not
originally possess. The ancestors of the Mikados were not gods but
men, and ^vere no doubt worthy to be reverenced for their virtues, but
their acts were not miraculous or supernatural. If the ancestors of
living men were not human beings, they are more likely to have been
birds or beasts than gods.’

This is but a short summary of fifty- four pages of close print, a
great part of which is occupied wuth the defence of the Holy Men ”
and the Chinese philosophy. Some of the arguments remind us some-
what of the early deistical writers of Europe who maintained that religion
was invented by priests with interested motives. It is not improbable
that the author was indebted in some measure to the Ko-shi'-tsuu of
Ara-wi Haku-seki, a rationalistic work composed about the year 1716.

Motowori replied to Ichikaha in a book called Kuzuhana, written^


^28 SATOW : THE EEVIVAIi OF PURE SHIjS^-TAU.

in 1780. In reply to the accusation of being an admirer of Laotzu,
he says that it by no means follows that because that philosopher
.attacked the ‘'Holy Men,” all others who attacked them must be his
followers. It is quite possible to have a bad opinion of both Taoism
and Confucianism. To maintain the contrary is to resemble certain
who seeing a party of gamblers arrive first at the scene of a fire,
and work hard to put it out, believed some honest villagers who came
later, and aided in the good work, to be gamblers also. The teaching
^f the " Holy Men ” is like a fire burning a house, Laotzu is the
gambler who first tried to , extinguish it, and Motowori's own work
4;he' Nahobi no Mitama is the honest villager.

With regard to the first argument put forth by Ichikaha, he
argues that 'before the invention of writing the want of it could' not
have been felt in the same way as it would, if we were now deprived of
a medium of recording facts on which for ages past we have been ac-
customed to depend almost entirely. It is an acknowledged fact, how-
ever,^ that we still find ourselves obliged to have recourse to oral lan-
guage in matters of delicacy or detail which [32] cannot be conveniently
committed to writing, and it is probable that the ancient traditions,
which were preserved by exercise of memory, have for this very reason
come down to us in greater detail than if they had been recorded in
documents. Besides, men must have had much stronger memories in
the days before they acquired the habit of trusting to written characters
for facts which they wished to remember, as is shown to the present day
in the case of the illiterate, who have to depend on memory alone.

‘The facts that the sacred mirror bestowed by Amaterasu upon
Mnigi no Mikoto is still preserved at the Nai-kuu temple in Ise ; that
the sword "Grass-cutter” is to this day at the temple of Atsuta in
Wohari; that remains which date from the divine age are even now
to be found in various provinces ; that the sepulchres of the Mikados
from Zhifi-mu downwards exist in part of the Ki-nai ; that numerous
relics of the divine age remain in the possession of the Court, and that
the Nakatomi, Imibe and Ohotomo families have transmitted the func-
tions which they exercised in the age of the gods in unbroken succession
to their descendants of later times, vindicate beyond the possibility of a
doubt the truth of the old traditions.


SATOW; THE REVIVAL OF PURE BHI]S^-TAU. 29 '

‘ In reply to the argument that if Amaterasu and the sun be iden-
tical, there must have been perpetual night before she was born, which
is inconsistent with the fact of trees and plants being in existence before-
her birth; and that therefore the sun must have been previously
hanging in the sky, he reiterates the statement that the goddess and^
the sun are one and the same. For although she will continue to
shine as long as heaven and earth endure, she was born in Japan,,
and her descendants to this day rule over the empire. The difficulty
of reconciling the statements that the world was plunged into darkness
when she retired into the cavern, and that darkness did not exist
before she was born is one that would strike even a child's intelligence.
The critic need not make so much fuss about this point, as if it
were entirely a new discovery of his own. The very inconsistence is-
[38] the proof of the authority of the record, for who would have
gone out of his way to invent a story apparently so ridiculous and*
incredible. The acts of the gods are not to be explained by ordinary
principles. Man's intelligence is limited, and there are many things
which transcend it.

* If we reflect that Izanagi had to kindle a light when he visited
the nether world, because of the darkness which reigned there, while
the opposite was the case in the upper world, although the sun-goddess-
had not yet come into being, it will be clear that there was some cause,
which we cannot explain, for the darkness of the nether world, and for
light existing on the earth. Some principle was evidently at work with
which we are unacquainted. After the birth of the sun-goddess, no light
could be obtained except from her brightness, as she had been appoint-
ed to illuminate the space between heaven and earth, which accounts,
for night covering the earth when she went into the cave.

* Many other miracles occurred in the age of the gods, the truth of
.which was not disputed until men were taught by Chinese philosophy to
analyse the acts of the gods by the aid of their own feeble intelligence.
The reason assigned for disbelieving in miracles is that they cannot be


“The parallel between the creation of light and the vegetable world before
the sun, as given in the I. Chapter of Genesis and the Japanese account is very
curious; it might be useful to those who think that the Japanese are the descen-
dants of the lost tribes.


:30 SATOW: the revival of ftjee shi^-tau.

explained, bufe in fact although the age of the gods has passed away,
wondrous miracles surround us on all sides. For instance, is the earth
suspemied in space or does it rest upon something else ? If it be said
that the earth rests upon something else, then what is it that supports
t;hat something else ? According to one Chinese theory the earth is a
globe, suspended in space with the heavens revolving round it. But
'even if we suppose the heavens to be full of air, no ordinary principles
will account for the land and sea being suspended in space without
moving. The explanation offered is as miraculous as the supposition
£34] previously made. It seems plausible enough to say that the heavens
.are merely air, and are without any definite form. If this be true there is
•nothing but air outside the earth, and this air must be either infinite or
finite in extent. If it is infinite in extent, we cannot fix on any point
as its centre, so that it is impossible to understand why the earth should
be at rest ; for if it be not in tlie centre it cannot be at rest. If it be finite,
what causes the air to condense in one particular spot, and what posi-
'Hm shall wo assign to it ? In any case, all these things are miraculous
and strange. How absurd to take these miracles for granted, and at
the same time to disbelieve in the wonders of the divine age. Think
again of the human body. Seeing' with the eyes, hearing with the
ears, speaking with the mouth, walking on the feet and performing all
manner of acts with the hands are strange things ; so also the flight of
birds and insects through the air, the blossoming of plants and trees,
the ripening of their seeds and fruits are strange ; and the strangest of
all is the transformation of the &x and tanuhi into human form. If
rats, weasels and certain birds can see in the dark, why should the gods
not have been endowed with a similar faculty ?

In reply to an observation of Ichikaha’s that to obey and revere
a sovereign, no matter whether he be good or bad, is the part of women,”
after an argument intended to prove that it is not safe to allow subjects
to criticise the acts of their prince, Motowori says : Thus, even if the
prince be bad, to venerate, respect and obey him in all things, though it
may seem like a woman’s duty, is the right way of action, which does
not Allow of the obligations of a subject towards his prince ever being
violated.”

All the moral ideas which man requires are implanted in his bosom


SATOW : THE KEVIVAL OP PURE SHlSJ'-TAU.


31


by the gods, and are of the same nature as the instincts which impel
him to eat when he is hungry and to drink when he is thirsty. But the
morals inculcated hy the Chinese philosophers are inventions, and con**
tain something more in addition to natural morality.

* [36] The facts that many of the gods are invisible now, and have
never been visible, furnish no argument against their existence. Ex-
istences can be made known to us by other senses than those of sight,
such as odours and sound ; while the wind,^^ which is neither seen, heard
nor smelt, is recognized by the impression which it makes on our bodies.
The gods of the divine age are indeed no longer visible, but in that age
they were visible. The sun-goddess must be excepted, for she is visible
to all men even now. And as for the gods whose existence was never
perceived by the eyes of men, they are known by their special modes of
action upon men. All our knowledge comes to us in fact by our senses.
We thus know that fire is hot and water cold, but of the nature of heat
and cold we can discover nothing.

‘ There is a tradition in China that the left and right eyes of Puanku
became the sun and moon, which is, however, usually discredited be-
cause the natives of that country, being admirers of false knowledge,
assign the origin of thase two luminaries to the Positive and Negative
Essences. The real truth is that the sun and moon were produced when
Izanagi no kami washed his eyes after returning from his search after
Izanami no kami in the nether world. The tradition has evidently
travelled to China, and assumed the perverted form in which we find it
there, during the lapse of ages.’

Motowori disclaims any intention of endeavouring to resuscitate
pure Sliih-tau so far as to make it the rule of life in the present day.
His only object is to present the age of the gods in its real form. All
that comes to pass in the world, whether good or bad in its nature, is the
act of the gods, and men have generally little influence over the course
of events. To insist on practising the ancient way of the gods,” in
opposition to the customs of the present age, would be rebellion against
that '‘way,” and equivalent to trying to excel it. If men in their daily
practice obey the laws made from time to time by the authorities, and a<;t


He probably means ‘ air.^


32


SATOW : THE EEVIVAL OP PUEE SHlt-TAIJ.


in accordance 'With general customs, [36] they are practising
It was with this reservation that he vindicated the ancient practice of
intermarriage among children of the same father by difierent mothers,
and not in order to recommend its revival.

The Ke%-hiyau-‘zhi%y or ** The madman thrust into an iron collar,’’
is likewise a controversial work in reply to the Shiyoii-JcoxhJmtsUf which
was apparently an attack upon the ancient records. The latter is a rare
book, and we have not been able to procure a copy, but to judge from
the short quotations contained in the KeK-Uyau-zM^ the points in dis-
pute have no direct bearing upon the essential principles of Shin-tau.

From the central truth that the Mikado is the direct descendant of
the gods, the tenet that Japan ranks far above all other countries is -a
natural consequence. No other nation is entitled to equality with her,
and all are bound to do homage to the Japanese Sovereign and pay
tribute to him. These truths are enlarged upon in great detail by Moto-
wori in a work entitled Giyo-zhiyiiu Gai-gefi, Indignant words about
Euling the Barbarians,” written in 1778. It takes the form of a review
of the relations between Japan and other countries from the earliest
period down to the time of Iheyasu, as recorded in the histories of both
countries, but does not touch upon the subject of the intercourse with
Christian states in the 16th and 17th centuries, probably because
Christianity was a forbidden question.

* That on the earliest occasion when the Mikado exchanged letters and
envoys with the Chinese Sovereign, the first step should have been taken
by the former is a source of deep annoyance to Motowori, This deplor-
able event occurred in the year 707 under the Empress Suwi-ko, when
an envoy was sent to China to fetch a Buddhist Siltra which Shiyau-
toku Tai-slii remembered to have possessed during a previous state of
existence, when he was studying the sacred mysteries in that country.
It is true that the Chinese histories contain notices of tribute bearers
from Japaai much earlier than this date, but these envoys, whatever may
have been their character, [37] certainly were not commissioned by the
sovereign. As for their paying tribute, the statement is due to the in-
ordinate vanity of the Chinese, who fancy themselves superior to all
surrounding nations, whereas they are no better than barbarians them-
selves, and are bound to acknowledge the supremacy of Japan. The


SATOW: THE EEVIVAL OF PURE SHlS'-TAU.


S3


Ni-ton-gi speaks also of the despatch of Japanese to China in 464 and
468, but Motowori thinks that they were not accredited to any Cliinese
sovereign. One of the Chinese histories has an account of the mission
sent by Suwi-ko, and gives what purports to be a letter frona that
Empress, in which appears the famous phrase, The Ten-shi (son of
Heaven) of the place where the sun rises sends a letter to the Teh-shi
of the place where the sun sets.” ' If the Empress Suwi-ko really sent
such a letter, she treated the Chinese sovereign with far too much civi-
lity, and if she had addressed him with some such phrase as, The
Heavenly Emperor notifies (chiyohu) to the king of Go (Wii),” he ought
to have been filled with gratitude, instead of which he is represented by
the Chinese historiographer as having been oflfended at being treated as
an equal. But the truth is that Suwi-ko Tefi-wau wanted to get some-
thing from him, and therefore condescended to flatter his vanity/ The
Ni-hofi-gi relates that this Empress showered civilities upon the envoy
who brought the Chinese Emperor^s answer, but Motowori does not care
to dwell on this fact.

Uninterrupted intercourse seems to have continued between the
two Courts for about two centuries, and then to have ceased during a
period of about thirty years. ‘It was unworthy of Japan to enter into
relations with a base barbarian state, whatever might be the benefits
which she expected to obtain. It resulted in too many cases in the
shipwreck of the vessels and the profitless deaths of the envoys by
drowning. Had the Chinese ruler paid due reverence to the Mikado
as a being infinitely superior to himself, the objection would have been
less/ After the end of the tenth century the Mikados appear to have
ceased sending envoys to China, and Motowori remarks that ‘‘so long
as Japan wanted anything from China, she [38] overlooked the insolent
pretensions of the Chinese sovereigns, but now being no longer in a
position to gain by the interchange of courtesies, she rejected all further
overtures of friendship,”

The failure of the expeditions sent against Japan by Kublai Khan
and the Tai-kafu’s conquest of Korea of course afford much matter for
reflections of a gratifying nature, which are only clouded by the dis-
graceful conduct of the Shiyau-gufi Ashikaga Yoshi-mitsu, who in
writing to the Ming sovereign addresses him as Your Majesty Qiei-lca)^
Ap. voi.. m.— 3.


Si


SATOWJ TH’EJ REVIVAL OF PURE 8Hr^5’-TA^T,


and in one of his letters uses the title ^ King ’ (ho/m-wau) in speaking
of himself, of the Shiyau-gun Yoshihisa, in sending envoys to ask for
money (such sums as 50,000 and 100,000 strings of at a time),
and by the unfortunately obsequious language used by the Tai-kafu
and some of his generals in writing to the Chinese officials about the
negotiations for peace, * But the responsibility in these last cases lay
with the priests, who being the only men in those days with the slightest
tincture of learning, had charge of the correspondence.’

The most remarkable point about this long tirade against China is
that Japan was indebted to her for all the arts and sciences that make
life better than nonentity, for a complete system of government and
laws, and even for the very art of writing which enabled the writer to
record his arrogant and spiteful feelings.

Of Motowori’s other works relating to Shifi-tau the most im-
portant are his commentaries on the Oho’barahi no hotoha (1795) and
the Idzumo Kiini-no-^niyaUuko Kamuyogoto (1793), the Zhin-dai TJdzu
no Yama-haget which is a development of his criticisms on the first two
books of the Ni-hofi-gi called the Zhin-dai no maJci, and the Zhin-dai
Shiyau^go (1789). This last is a compilation from those parts of the
Ko-zhi'M and Ni-ho%-gi which describe the age of the gods and certain
other ancient books, written in the mixture of Chinese characters
and Hiragana called Kana-inazhiri, with a few explanatory notes.
[39] It is intended to give a clearer account of the ancient traditions
than either of the original works on which it is based, by eliminating
the Chinese order of characters, and substituting purely Japanese
sentences, To these may be added the Te^’Sodo-zfiiyau Be%-hen (1767),
a reply to two writers, one of whom had^tried to prove that the capital
of Amaterasu was at Nakatsu in Bu-zen, the other that it was in the
province of Yamato, and the Ise Ni-guu Sakitake no Ben, the object of
which is to refute the heretical notion that Amaterasu is not the sun,
and to show that the deity of the Ge-kuu, who is identified by some
writers with Ame-no-mi-naka-nushi, by others with Kuni-no-toko-tachi,
is in reality Uke-mochi no kami, the goddess of food.

The Rehi-teu 8eu~sM hai, in six volumes, published two years after
his death, is of great* value to the student of ancient Japanese history.


®®The string of cash was probably worth about a dollar.


SATOW: THE EEVIVAE OP PORE SHXf?-TAU.


35


It contains an amended text of all the mi-hoto-nori, or Imperial mes-
sages, which are recorded in the Shiyohu-Ni-hoK-gi during the period
which elapsed from the abdication of Ji-dou Ten-wan in 696, down to
791, the 10th year of Kuwan-mu Teh-wau. These messages were
delivered on various occasions, such as the recognition of the heir-
apparent, the abdication of the Sovereign, the creation of an Empress,
the punishment of criminals of rank, the outbreak of rebellions, the
granting of lands to distinguished subjects, and several were pronounced
in connection with the execution of a new kind of dance by the Princess
who afterwards became Kau-ken Teh-wau. Another was composed for
a thanksgiving service for the discovery of gold in Japan, celebrated in
749 at the temple of Tou-dai-zbi in Nara, when the Empress Kau-kefi
was present with her whole court, and worshipped the great image
commonly called Dai-hutsu. The style is in many cases pure Japanese,
and these messages, together with the norito preserved in the YeU-gl
ShiMf form the only native prose compositions which are of older date
than the 9th century.

Like the other members of this Pure Shih-tau School, Motowori
devoted a great deal of attention to the study of the [40] ancient lan-
guage, and composed numerous works of great value in this department of
learning. Mr. Aston has given the titles of several of these in the list
appended to his Grammar of the Written Language, to which may be
added the Ko-hin-slvifu Towohagami, a commentary on the collection of
poetry entitled Ko-JciH-sMfu, notes on the Ge-^i-zhi Monogcdwri under
the title of 6?.!/. Tana no WogusUj the Cki-mei Zhi’On Ten-you-rei, on
the etymology of local names, the ilan-yefu Tama no Wo-goto and Man-
yefu^shifu hal-kiiH, and the Uhi-yama-bumif a general introduction to
Japanese studies. The Tama-kushige is a highly interesting work on the
philosophy of government written in 1687, in which the abuses that
were even then beginning to sap the foundations of the feudal system
are laid bare with an unsparing hand. A summary of its contents
might be of value to those who are interested in modern Japanese
politics, but would be foreign to the scope of this paper,

Motowori’s style, less ornate than that of Mabuchi, is clear and
-correct, though sometimes wanting in terseness, and his controversial
writings give evidence of his logical powers in dealing with his own


36


SATOW : THE BEYIYAL OF PURE SHlS--TAtT.


premises. He may be said almost to have created the modern literary
Japanese language, and the influence of his example is seen even in the
lighter literature of the present day. The Yiolence of his prejudices in
faYOur of everything native and antique is probably due to a reaction
against the dominion of Chinese ideas and forms of expression, which at
the time he thought and wrote bade fair to extinguish every trace of
Japanese nationality. ITo author can be studied to such advantage by
those who wish to acquire a mastery of written Japanese,

IV.

Hirata Atsutane, the fourth in chronological order of these scholars
whom I have named as the founders of this school, was born in 1776
at the town of Kubota in Deha, the capital of that remote district in
the north of Japan commonly called Akita. His father was Ohowada
Seibei, a sdmirai of the Satake family, who traced back his descent
to the sun-goddess through Kuwan-mu Ten-wan, [41] the fiftieth
Mikado from Zhin-mu, and enjoyed a hereditary pension of a hundred
kohu of rice. Atsutane. was the fourth son of a family of eight chih
dren. At the age of eight he entered the school of a professor of Chinese
named Nakayama Sei-ga, and three years later commenced the study
of medicine under his uncle Ohowada Riu-gen, ' Up to his twentieth
year he chiefly devoted himself to Chinese studies, and practised
fencing under various teachers, hut he longed to distinguish himself
in some way more worthy of his abilities, and in the beginning of
1795 he suddenly quitted his father's house, leaving a letter behind
him bidding farewell to his relations. He had chosen the 8th of the
month for his departure, apparently on account of the popular belief
that a person who leaves home on that day never returns. With a riyau
in his purse he started for Yedo, where, after his arrival, avoiding the
society of his fellow-clansmen and friends, he sought on all sides for a
virtuous and learned teacher. Sometimes he obtained employment as
an under-teacher> and in his worst extremity was reduced to seeking a
livelihood by manual labour. In this manner he passed four or five
years, suffering great hardship and privation. In 1800, at the age of
twenty-five, he became the adopted heir of Hirata Fujihei, a retainer of


SATOW; THE BEVIVAL OP PUBE SHli^-TAU. 37

the daimiyau of Matsuyama iu Bhchiyuu, and took up his residence
in the yashiki of Honda Shiu-ri on Kagura-zaka in Yedo.

It was in the following year that Atsutane first became acquainted
with the writings of Motowori, and was seized with an enthusiastic love
for the study of Japanese antiquity. In the seventh month he formally
enrolled himself among Motowori’s pupils, about two months before the
death of the eider scholar. His first essay in the new branch of learn-
ing to which he had devoted himself was an attack upon the writings
of Da-zai Shiyun-tai (b. 1680, d. 1747), in a book entitled Ka-bau-shiyo,
which he wrote in 1803, and in the following year he began to take
pupils. It was in 1804 that he drew up a table of Chinese characters
relating to the practise of the five virtues. These he enumerates as
Eeverenee, Eighteousness, Benevolence, [42] Wisdom and Valour, and
nineteen characters are included under each heading. It is a more
curious than valuable production.

The Ki-zhiVh ShiVi-ToK^ completed first in 1805 and revised for
publication in 1820, is intended to prove that the ordinary Chinese
philosophers have misunderstood the teachings of Confucius with regard
to supernatural beings, and to show by quotations from the Confucian
Analects and other writings that he believed in their actual existence.
Hirata in this work refutes the opinions of Chinese and Japanese
scholars with regard to the non-existence of gods, and demonstrates
the correctness of the opposite view. We have not time to analyze
the work more minutely, and have had recourse to the bibliographical
list of Hirata’s writings printed at the end of the Nifu-gahu Mq%-
dafu for this brief notice of it.

In 1807 he resumed practice as a physician, and the study of
medicine. During this year he commenced the compilation of the
Chishima Shira-nami, or White Waves of the Kurile Islands, which
contains an account of the incursions of the Eussians under Davidoff
and Chwostoff against the Japanese possessions in Sagalien and Itorup
in the previous year. It was intended also to be a manual of the
way to ‘ restrain barbarians ^ and of maritime defence. It is to be
regretted that this interesting work still remains unprinted.

The year 1811 was an extremely fruitful one. Early in the spring
‘he began to revise the lectures on Shin-tau, Chinese philosophy and'


38


SATOW : THE BEVIVAL OF PUBE SHlS^-TAU.


Buddhism which during the two previous years he had delivered to his
pupils, and produced in succession the Ko-dau Summary of the

Ancient Way ; Zohu-8hi%4a%b Tai-i, Summary of the Vulgar Shin-tau ;
Ka%-gahu Tai4, Summary of Chinese Learning, the same as that which
was afterwards published under the tide of Sai-zhiyahu Gai-roE ; the
Butsu-dau Tai-% Summary of Buddhism, subsequently renamed Go-dau
Be¥i ; Ldau Tai4, Summary of the Medical Art, printed under the title
of Shidzu no lhaya ; the Ka-dau Tai-i, Summary of the Art of Poetry,
and the Tama-dcisuhi, which he [48] rewrote from beginning to end
some years later. Of the works in this list the first, second and last
are alone of interest to the student of Shiii-tau, but as the Zohu Shin-
tau Tai4 is a hostile criticism of the sects comprehended by the author
under the name of vulgar Shin-tau I shall not ask my readers to go
through a summary of its contents. It will be more useful to consider
it on some future occasion in connection with the works of the writers
against whom it is directed.

The Summary of the Ancient Way treats of the following subjects :
firstly, the reason why the subjecf-matter of his teaching is called the
Ancient Learning {Ko-gahu) ; secondly, the origin of this study, with a
brief account of those who founded it and spread it abroad in the
world ; thirdly, the foundations upon which it is based ; fourthly, the
age of the gods ; fifthly, the reasons why the gods are entitled to the
gratitude of mankind ; sixthly, why Japan is the country of the gods”;
seventhly, how it is certain beyond a doubt that every Japanese is a
descendant of the gods ; eighthly, the uninterrupted continuance of the
imperial line from the beginning of the world, together with proofs of
the superiority of Japan over all other countries in the world, both
materially and morally; ninthly, the truth that the Japanese, being
natives of ^ the country of the gods,’ are born with a naturally perfect
and true disposition, which from the most ancient times has been
ealled Yamato-dav'mhihi or Yamaio-gohorOf^^ and tenthly, how the
traditions of the Age of the Gods, and of their actions, appear to the
ordinary man to be mysterious and difficult of belief ; and the refuta-
tion of this error ; — in the course of which exposition the real ' way ^
will be disclosed.


Yamato^ one of the old names of Japan ; tamashihi^ spirit ; kokoro, heart. "


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OP PURE SHliJ-TAU.


39


Japanese learning may be divided into several branches, firstly, the
Way of the Gods ; secondly, poetry; thirdly, la^ ; fourthly, romances ;
fifthly, history ; and sixthly, archaeology. Under these there are sub-
divisions, such as the various schools of what is commonly called Shifi-
tau, [44] and two or three schools of poetry. Chinese learning also has
many subdivisions, and in Buddhism there are the doctrines of the
numerous sects, besides the Learning of the Heart, ^ which is an ofishoot
of Buddhism. Then we have astronomy and physical geography, the
learning of the Hollanders, and medicine, which is divided into three
schools, the ancien t, the modern and the Dutch. But Japanese learning
is the chief of all these. A man passes for a good Chinese scholar if
he has learnt to read the Four Books and the Five Classics, or, accord-
ing to another enumeration, the Thirteen Classics, has run hastily
through half a dozen other works, and can compose Chinese prose
and what they have a trick of calling poetry. There is nothing very-
difficult in all this. The Buddhist priests have a much larger task.
Their canon (which Hirata here says he has read) consists of some five
thousand volumes, seven or eight horse-loads, a tenth part of which is
far more than the sinologue has to study ; and to make the work harder
the priests have to study Chinese as well as their own religious books,
or else they could not read the latter. And owing to the strange
manner in which Buddhist and Chinese notions have been mixed up
with Japanese learning (ShiK4au), the student of the latter must possess
all the knowledge of the sinologue and the priest that he may be able to
separate the vheat from the chaff, and he must know all the possible
arguments which his opponents may have at their command in order to
refute them. Besides, if a Japanese studies foreign learning he will be
able to select whatever good things there are in it, and turn them to
the service of his country. From this point of view Chinese, Indian and
even Dutch studies may be looked upon as Japanese learning.

‘ In the first place it is necessary to state that the reason why this
teaching is called the study of the ancient way ” is because it aims at
explaining the facts which begin with the origin of heaven and earth,


^ This is the form of doctrine taught in the Kiu-wou Dmi-wa^ SMU-gaku MicM
nd^Hanashii Te-zkhna Dau-wa and similar works.


40 SATOW; THE EEVIVAL OP PURE SHlS-TAXT.

by means of the ancient ways of thinking and the ancient tongue,
[45] such as they were before the introduction of the Chinese and
Buddhist ‘' ways,'’ and at demonstrating that in those facts is embodied
the whole of the true “way."

Having disposed of his first heading in this manner, Hirata pro-
ceeds to deal with the second, namely the founders of the school to which
he himself belongs. A summary of what he has said about them in
the second and ninth volumes of his Tama-damki, has already been
given in the former part of this paper.

The foundations upon which the Ancient Learning is based are the
writings in which the Imperial Court has recorded the facts of antiquity.
Most people want to suppose that the only way to attain to a knowledge
of right conduct is to read books full of precepts, but they labour under
a mistake. Precept is far inferior to example, for it only arises
in the absence of example, while it is unnecessary when example
exists. AsLaotzu says, “When the Great Way decayed, Humanity
and Eighteousness arose.”®* In order to spur on a warrior to valiant
deeds, rather than show him a book which says, “ When you go to
battle strive to be first, do not lag behind others,” show him a book in
which are written the facts about ancient heroes who led the way,
fought bravely and achieved renown. The facts will sink deeply into
his heart, and he will say to himself, “ When the occasion arises, I will
distinguish myself like such an one of antiquity,” but the mere exhorta-
tion will scarcely stir his emotions. The story of Ohoishi Kuranosuke
and the forty-seven faithful retainers, who underwent a thousand hard-
ships and perils in order to slay Kira Koudzuke no suke, the enemy of
their lord Asano Takumi no kami, will do far more to keep alive the
flame of loyalty than any simple precepts about the duty of avenging a
master. The ethical writings of the T'ang dynasty are full of the most
admirable teachings of [46] this kind, but when we find that the authors
were themselves guilty of murdering their sovereigns and of treasons,
their words lose all their effect.


I'aCtS-king, cliap. xviii, Julien translates : Quand la grande voie eut ddperi,
On vit parattre Phumanit6 et la justice. That is, according to the commentator
whom he follows, When the way decayed, the absence of affection and the existence
of disobedience brought humanity and justice into prominence.


SATOW : THE BBVITAL OF PURE SHIST-TATJ.


41


As has already been said, the real principles of conduct are not to
be taught by precept, and we must go to the books to find the facts
from which the real ancient way is to be learnt. The most .important
of these is the Ko-zhi-ki. Most Japanese, including those who profess
to be students of the way of the gods, hold the Ni-hon-shiyo-ki in great
honour. Its first two books are printed separately under the title of
Zhi%‘dai’-no-mahi, and the common teachers of Shih-tau have written
various so-called commentaries thereon. They even assert that these
books are the only authorities about the beginning of the world and the
age of the gods. Motowori in the first volume of the Ko-zhi-ki Den
pointed out the erroneousness of this opinion. Part of the cosmogony
given in the Zhih-dai-no-maki can be actually traced to ancient Chinese
writing, from which it has been taken almost word for word. But on
the other hand the M-hon-shiyo-ki, or, as it should properly be called,
the Ni-hon-gi, has great merits of its own, which ought not to be passed
over. In addition to the main text of the first two books, it quotes a
number of other parallel passages from documents then extant, which
often thrown much light on the received traditions of the divine age,
and it gives much fuller details of the history of the Mikados from
Zhih-mu Ten-wau downwards than the Ko-zhi-ki does. When the
ornamental Chinese phraseology has been eliminated there remains a
great treasure of truth, and the Ni-hon-gi therefore does really deserve
the first place among the sacred books.

It is most lamentable that so much ignorance should prevail as to
the evidences of the two fundamental doctrines, that Japan is the
country of the Gods and her inhabitants the descendants of the Gods.
Between the Japanese people and the Chinese, Hindoos, Kussians,
Dutch, Siamese, Cambodians and other nations of the world there is a
diflTerence of kind, rather than of degree. It was not out of vain-glory
that the inhabitants of this country called it the land of the gods
{Shin-lcohUf [47] kami no hum). The gods who created all countries
belonged without exception to the Divine Age, and were all born in
Japan, so that Japan is their native country, and all the world acknow-
ledges the appropriateness of the title. The Koreans were the first to
become acquainted with this truth, and from them it was gradually
diffused through the globe, and accepted by every one.


42


SA.TOW: THE BEVIVAE OF PTJBE SHlS-TAH.


Before the origin of things there was Infinite space (oho-sora ) ;
neither heaven nor earth, nor the sun, nor moon, nor anything else
existed. In Infinite space were Ame-no-mi-naka-nushi no kami,^* and
next Taka-mi-musu-bi no kami and Kamu-mi-musu-bi no kami, by
whose miraculous power a thing whose shape cannot be described in
words came into existence in the midst of space. This thing floated
(or, was suspended) in space like a cloud, without any support. Prom
it came forth something sprouting like a horn, or like the young sprout
of the rush called haya ; but as to its nature there is no tradition. It
may however be conjectured that it was pure, translucent and bright,
for it afterwards became the sun, and from the time when Ama-terasu-
oho-mi kami became its ruler, the brightness of her august body has
shone through it. As this thing grew upwards it widened out infinitely,
just as a cloud rising from the top of a mountain looks like a rush
sprouting, but afterwards becomes immensely extended. This is what
in the Divine Age was called Ama4sii-hmi (the kingdom of heaven),
Takorma-no-ham (the high plain of heaven), and sometimes simply Arne
(heaven). In a similar manner there grew downwards a something,
which afterwards separated and became the moon. During the double
process fourteen other gods came into being, of whom the last were Iza-
nagi no kami and Izanami no kami. They are the parents of the deities
of the sun and moon and the progenitors of all the other gods.

[48] As to the signification of the word kami — it is applied in the
first place to all the kami of heaven and earth who are mentioned in the
ancient records, as well as to their spirits which reside in the temples
where they are worshipped. Further, not only human beings, but also
birds, beasts, plants and trees, seas and mountains and all other things
whatsoever which possess powers of an extraordinary and eminent
character, or deserve to be revered and dreaded, are called ka7yii. Eminent


^The Lord of the Middle of Heaven. TaM and ^amu are explained as
honorifics ; mi has the same force. Musu means to beget ; this word enters into
composition with ko and me to produce mtmiko and musttme, son and daughter.
Bi is the same as hh an archaic word applied to whatever is wonderful, miraculous
and ineffably worthy of honour, and to the sun par excellence. ^

This passage is copied by Hirata almost word for word from vol. iii. of the
Ko-zhi-ki Defi, without any acknowledgment.


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHi:^-TAU.


43'


does not mean solely worthy of honour, good or distinguished by great
deeds, but is applied also to the ^am^ *who are to be dreaded on account
of their evil character or miraculous nature. Amongst human beings
who are at the same time hami are to be classed the successive Mikados,
who in the Man-yefu-shifu and other ancient poetry are called towo-Uu--
haTili (distant gods) on account of their being far removed from ordinary
men, as well as many other men, some who are revered as hami by the
whole Empire, and those whose sphere is limited to a single province,
department, village or family. The hami of the Divine Age were mostly
human beings, who yet resembled ham% and that is why we give that
name to the period in which they existed. Beside human beings, the
thunder is called the 'sounding god’ Qiam-hamt), The dragon, goblins
(teH-gu) and the fox are also hami, for they are likewise eminently
miraculous and dreadful creatures. In the Ni-hon-gi and in the Maa-
yefu-shifu the tiger and the wolf^® are spoken of as hamL Izanagi
gave the name of Oho-kamu-dzu-ini no mikoto to the fruit of the peach-
tree, and the jewels which he wore on his neck were called Mi*kura-
tama no mikoto. In the ZhiK-dai-no-mahi and the Oho-haraJd no hotdbay
rocks, stumps of trees, leaves of plants and so forth are said to have
spoken in the Divine age ; these also were hami. There are many cases
of the term being applied to seas and mountains. It was not a spirit
that was meant, but the term was used directly of the particular sea or
mountain ; [49] of the sea on account of its depth and the difficulty of
crossing it, of the mountain on account of its loftiness.^^

Izanagi and Izanami, after descending by command of the Heavenly
Gods upon Onogoro-zhima, begot the eight islands of Japan, namely,.


Oho-kami, literally, great god.

JCamiy god, is evidently the same word as applied to a superior, as to
a master by his servant or to the sovereign by his subjects, to the chief officer of
a sub-department of the administration, and in ancient times to the governor of a
province. Its primary meaning is ‘ that which is above,* and hence *■ chief,* So
that Izanagi no Oho kami w’^ould mean Great Chief Izanagi. MikotOy which is a
title applied to gods, and forms part of the word Sw?iera-7mkotOy the ancient name
of the sovereigns of Japan, is composed of the honorific mi and koto, word, and
hence, thing. It might be rendered augustness, and Izanagi no mikoto would,
mean His Augustness Izanagi.


44 sATow: a?HJB nwivAh of pure shi:^-tau,

what are now called Ahaji, Shi-koku, Oki, Kiu-shia, Iki, Tsushima, Sado
and the main island. They begofa number of gods, and their posterity
gradually increased. Amongst the descendants of their child Susanowo
no kami was Oho-na-muji no kami, a god of surpassing powers. For
a long time he was subjected to great annoyance at the hands of his
numerous brothers, but having taken a journey to the nether world (the
moon) to consult his ancestor, he was enabled, by following the advice
he then received, to overcome his rebellious brethren, and establish
himself as the ruler of this country. One of his many names is Oho-
kuni-nusbi no kami, which means the ‘ great lord of the country.’ The
seat of his government was in the province of Izumo. He had many
children, the eldest of whom was Koto-shiro-nushi no kami, one of the
^eight gods worshipped in the Zhiii-gi-kuwaii ; second was Aji-suki-taka-
hiko-ne no kami, the god of Kami-gamo near Kiyau-to, and another
was Take-mi-na-gata no mikoto, the god of Kami no Suwa in Sliinano.
'Oho-na-muji is a corruption of Oho-na-mochi, the Great Possessor of
Names, a title given to him because of the numerous names which he
possessed. In conjunction with Sakuna-bikona no kami, the eldest son
of the two creators, he completed the work begun by Izanagi and
Izanami, and civilized the country. To these two gods are ascribed the
discovery of medicine and the invention of divination.

Amaterasii oho-mi-kami, having been appointed Queen [50] of the
sun by Izanagi, shares the government of the world with the two creators.
She in turn desired to make a son of her own ruler over the terrestrial
world, ihis was Oshi-ho-mimi no mikoto, a god who was produced
from the goddess necklace ; he was married to Tama-yori-liime no
mikoto, a grand-daughter of the two creators. The offspring of this
pair was Ninigi no mikoto, who was therefore the grandson of Ama-
terasu, and the title Sume-mi-ma no mikoto (Sublime Grandchild)
applied to him expresses this relationship. Ninigi no mikoto replaced
his father as sovereign-designate of the world, but as Oho-na-muji who
was in actual possession could hardly be expected to surrender peace-
fully, a council was held of all the gods. By the advice of the most
sagacious of the gods, one of the other children of Amaterasu, named
Ame-no^hohi no mikoto, , was sent on an embassy to the world, to
persuade Oho-na-muji to give up his rights. The envoy remained away


SATOW: THE EEVIYAL OF FUEE SHIN-TAU,


45 "


three years, and as no result had yet been obtained, a second envoy
was despatched, who was to induce Oho'-na-muji to submit by a display
of military force. The second envoy, however, fell in love with Shita-
teru-hime, a daughter of Oho-na-muji, and failed to perform his errand.
He even slew a messenger who was sent to stimulate him to accomplish
his mission. Upon this an expedition was started under two warlike
gods named Take-mika-dzuchi and Futsii-nushi, who in joint action
with Ame-nodiohi no mikoto succeeded at last in obtaining from Oho-
na-muji a renunciation of his sovereignty over Japan in favour of the
Sublime Grandchild. The only conditions which he exacted were that
he should have a temple built for his residence where proper services
might be performed in his honour, and that the Unseen (hahuri-goto)
should be placed under charge. This arrangement was ratified by
Ainaterasu and the two creators. The temple of Oho~yashiro in Idzurao ,
which exists to this day, was built for Oho-na-muji, and Ame-no-hohi,
from whom sprang the family of the Idzumo-no-kuni no miyatsiiko, at
first hereditary governors of the province, and afterwards priests of the
temple, became his servant.

[51] It now became possible for Ninigi-no-mikoto to descend and
take possession of his realm. Before starting from the sun he received
from the goddess, his grandmother, the three divine insignia, called
hiisanagi-no4suTxig% (a sword, which is enshrined at Atsuta in Wohari), the
Yasakani-no-maga4ama (a stone) and the mirror which is worshipped at
the Nai-kun in Ise as the representative of the goddess of the sun. Accom-
panied by a number of inferior gods, he descended on the Amm no uld-
liashi^ or floating bridge of heaven, to Taka-clii-ho no mine, now called
Kirishima yama, which lies on the boundary between Hiuga and Ohosumi
in Kiu-shiu. On this occasion grains of rice were thxwn broadcast in
the air to dispel the darkness which covered the sky, and it is said that
rice grows wild on Kirishima yama to this day.

The Avm no uki-hashl was a thing by which communication took
place betw^een heaven and earth in those days. It floated in the air, and
was also called Ama no iJichfime, literally, the heavenly rock-boat. It
was on this that Izanagi and Izanami took their stand when they stirred
about with the sacred spear to find land. There are still remains of the
hashi-date, lofty mounds by which the uJddiashl was reached, in the


46


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHlf^-TAU,


provinces of Harima and Tan-go. After the descent of the Sublime
'Grandchild, the sun and the earth, which had already receded from each
other to a considerable distance, gradually became farther separated,
and communication by the floating bridge ceased. The hasM-date fell
4own, and have since lain on their longest side : that near Miyadzu in
Tafi-go measures twenty-two thousand two hundred and ninety feet in
length.

The sun having thus ascended, became fixed in the centre of space,
where it constantly revolves on its axis from left to right. The earth
is far removed from it in space, and moves round it from right to left, one
revolution being called a year. At the same time the earth revolving
on itself, produces the phenomena of day and night. The moon which
split ofi* from the earth about the same period revolves round the earth
in a little over twenty nine days and a half, waxing and [52] waning as
it goes. The process by which the sun, earth and moon were thus
produced resembles the separation of the umbilical cord and the placenta
at the birth of a child, or the detachment of a ripened seed from the
capsule. It is not merely a fortuitous resemblance, but the processes
are identical in all three cases.

As it was Japan which lay directly opposite to the sun when it had
sprouted upwards and separated from the earth, it is quite clear that
-Japan lies on the summit of the globe. It is equally evident that all
other countries were formed at a much later period by the spontaneous
consolidation of the foam of the sea and the collection of mud in various
localities, when Tzanagi and Izanami brought forth the eight islands of
J apan, and separated the land from the water. Foreign countries were
of course produced by the power of the creator gods, but they were not
begotten by Izanagi and Izanami, nor did they give birth to the
goddess of the sun, which is the cause of their inferiority. The tradi-
tions about the origin of the world which are preserved in foreign
•countries are naturally incorrect, just as the accounts of an event which
Jias happened at the capital become distorted when they travel to a
province, and it finally comes to be believed that the j)rovince was the
-actual scene of the event. The fact is patent that the Mikado is the
true Son of Heaven, who is entitled to reign over the four seas and the
4;en thousand countries.


8AT0W : THE HEVIVAE OP PURE SHi:^-TAU.


47


People who have been misled by their foreign studies are wont to
say that Japan is a little country, as if extent of territory were any
criterion of the importance or rank of a state ; and they also point to
her tardy civilisation. But every one knows that great minds develope
late ; for example Ota Nobunaga, who was commonly called Baha dono
(Lord Idiot) until he was past the age of twenty, and the same was the
case with the famous Oho-ishi Kura-no-suke, whose fame will endure to
the end of time. Animals and birds know how to pick up and eat grain
and insects as soon as they are born, and some have offspring when they
are only two or three months old. If man were [53] to be judged by
such a standard, what a helpless, good-for-nothing creature he would be.
But his slow development is a proof of his superiority, and the same
holds good with regard to the development of nations.

A common but extremely erroneous phrase which has obtained cur-
rency, is the Seven Generations of Celestical Gods and the Five
Generations, of Terrestrial Gods/^ In the first place neither the Ko-
zhi-ki nor the Ni-hoii-gi, although they speak of the succession of gods
beginning with Kuni-no-toko-dachi and ending with Izanagi and Izana-
mi as seven generations of the Divine Age, call them Celestial Gods ;
the reason being that all these gods came into existence on the earth.
The Ko-zhi-ki gives the name of Celestial Gods to Ame-no-mi-naka-
nushi, the two creator gods, Umashi-ashi-kabi-hiko-ji and Ame-no-toko-
dachi. The term Terrestrial Gods was given to the gods of this country
after the time of Einigi no mikoto, to distinguish them from the Celes-
tial Gods. It is a huge error to call the succession of gods beginning
with Amaterasu and ending with the father of Zhin-mu Ten-wau the
Five generations of Terrestrial Gods, for in the first place Amaterasu,
though born on the earth, was made ruler over the sun, and is therefore
distinctly a Celestial God ; and secondly Oshi-ho-mimi and Ninigi were
both born in heaven ; neither was the title Terrestrial Gods ever applied
to their descendants. The inventor of the phrase was Imibe no Masa-
nori, the author of the ZhiVKlai no Maki no Ku-hetsu^ who wrote about
the middle of the fourteenth century. There exists no hard and fast line
between the age of the gods and the present age, and there is no justifica-
tion whatever for drawing one, as the Ni-hoii-gi does, between TJ-kaya-
fuki-ahezu and Zhiii-mu Ten-wau.


48


sAtow: the revival op pure shi^S'-tau.


The descendants of the gods who accompanied Ninigi no mikoto,
as well as the offspring of the successive Mikados, who entered the ranks
of the subjects of the Mikados with the surnames of Tahira, Minamoto,
and so forth, have gradually increased and multiplied. Although num-
bers of Japanese cannot state with any certainty from what gods they
are descended, all of them have tribal [64] names Qcahaifie) which were
originally bestowed by the Mikados, and those who make it their pro-
vince to study genealogies can tell from a man’s ordinary surname who
his remotest ancestor must have been.

From the fact of the divine descent of the Japanese people proceeds
their immeasurable superiority to the natives of other countries in
courage and intelligence.

It is not necessary to quote the opinions of foreigners in order to
prove that the heavens are immovable and that the earth revolves, for
these facts are clear enough from ancient traditions, but as tbe west-
erners have elaborated astronomy and physical geography to a very
high degree of minuteness, their account of the matter is more easily
comprehended. It will be unnecessary to follow Hirata in tbe exposi-
tion which he here gives of the formation of the earth and its division
into five continents, since he is candid enough to acknowledge the
source from which it is taken. It is only fair to say that he praises
the Dutch very >varmly for their achievements in natural science, and
accords to them a much higher place among philosophers than to the
Chinese, whom he regards as empty visionaries. He also mentions
Kaempfer, and gives a summary of his “ History of Japan.” There
exists a book called LzJmi-Jciyou-fii Den^ or the Way to Terrify Bar-
barians, which takes for its text that part of the “ History of Japan ”
in which Krempfer gives his reasons for approving of the policy of ex-
cluding foreigners. It is difficult not to suppose that Kmmpfer’s account
of the dangers which have to be encountered in navigating the Japanese
seas, and his statement that Nagasaki was the only port into which a
good sized vessel could enter, were prompted by a desire to serve Dutch
interests. The story of the seizure by Japanese of the Dutch governor
Units on the island of Formosa is quoted with much satisfaction
by Hirata, as an illustration of tbe superior valour of his country-
men,


SATOW : THE BEVIVAIi OP PURE SHlJ^-TAU. 49"

In the 12tli raontli of the same year, which would about correspond
to January 1812, he started oif secretly to Fu-chiyuu (now called Shi-
dzuwoka) in Suruga, where he [55] quartered himself in the house of a
friend, and began the composition of the Ko-shi - Sei-bun^ or ‘ Complete
Text of the Ancient Eecord/ After offering up a prayer®® to all the gods
for their aid he set to work on the 5th, and finished his labours at the
end of the month. As a proof of his remarkable memory, it is said that
he composed the three volumes of the Text and several volumes of the
prolegomena, entitled Ko-shi-chiyou, without making a single reference
to the works from which his materials were drawn. The Ko-sM Seirbu%
was apparently intended to have been brought far down into what is
usually called the historical period, but the part which relates to the
Divine Age is all that has at present appeared. It is a compilation
founded on the texts of the Ko-zhi-ki, Ni-hon-gi, Ko-go-zhifu-wi, Fu-do-
ki, Ku-zhi-ki, Norito and several other of the ancient books, with some
slight conjectural additions of his own, and is written in the style of the
Ko-zhi-ki. Many native scholars are of opinion that he has gone too far
in altering the ancient texts, and prefer the originals, inconsistent and
contradictory as they sometimes are, hut this is a matter on which I
have not had time to form an opinion. Those who care to investigate
the subject will find in the last six volumes of the Ko-shi-chiyou® the
grounds on which he adopted the text of each of the hundred and sixty-
five sections into which the Ko-shi Sei-bun is divided. In the course
of the same year he began to work at the commentary, entitled Ko-sH
Den. It was to have extended to about one hundred volumes, but only
twenty-eight have as yet been printed ; they cover the first one hundred
and forty-three sections. The Kai-dai-ki, or introduction to the Eo-
shi-chiyou, in five volumes, was begun in 1819 and printed shortly after-
wards. Besides discussions on the authority and relative value of all
the ancient records, it contains a great deal of information relative to
the introduction of Buddhism, and the gradual [56] substitution of

^ This prayer is given at the end of the supplement to vol. i. of the Kchshp^
chiyou.

The K.o-shi-chiyou was originally entitled Ko-shi Waku-mon, and the Ko-»
shi sei-bun simply Ko-sM. It is necessary to be aware of this, because he some-
times quotes these works by their earlier titles.

AP. VOL. III.— 4.


50 SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHlS^-TAU.

Chinese political insfcifeutions for those of native growth. Amongst
other matters of interest to the historical student, it is proved that the
hou^heK, or feudal system, the destruction of which only a few years
back was hailed as a ‘ return to the ancient regime,' was the original
form of government in Japan, and that a central power, ruling by
means of a council of state, ministries and local prefects, was an in-
novation derived from China.

Hirata’s next work of importance was the Tama no Mi-hashira,
oompleted early in the year 1813. It is of similar character to the
JSa^-dai-kaii, already named as forming a supplemental volume to the
Ko zhi-ki Deil. The peculiar feature of the Sah-dai-kau is that it for
the first time identifies the sun with Arne, usually interpreted ‘ heaven,’
and yomi no huni, the region of darkness, which Motowori had explained
as the abode of departed spirits, with the moon. According to this new
view, Arnaterasu oho-mi-kami, instead of being tlie ruler of heaven, is
the ruler of tlie sun, and Tsuku-yomi no mikoto is the ruler of the moon

not the moon itself. In the Ko-zlii-ki Deh Motowori had defined
Attib as a region above the sky, in which the celestial gods have their
abode, and Takama-no-hara as merely another name for it. In several
places in the same work he speaks of the sun as being identical with
Amaterasu oho-mi-kami, and his comments on the passage of the text
in which the origination of this goddess and Tsuku-yomi no mikoto
from the eyes of Izanagi is related, are “ the sun and moon originated
from this washing” (i.e, of the god’s eyes), and the sun and moon
did not exist before this.” He makes the same statement in the NaJiobi
no Miiama and in the TeJi-so To-zhiyan BeK-beK, and although the
passage in the Sakitahe no Amaieram oho-mikami * * ima mo

yo wo ierashi-tamafu ama4su-hi no kami ni mashimam nariA’ might
at first sight appear to imply that the goddess is the deity of the sun,
this view is negatived by a sentence which follows on the very next
page to the effect that this great deity actually is the sun in
heaven, which even now illuminates the world before our eyes, a
f57] fact which is extremely clear from the divine writings.” It is
toe that the expression ni mashimoBu used in this place may mean
-either * exists in ’ or 'is,’ but the use of sunahaehi (actually) favours the
latter rendering, which is also supported by the other passages in Moto-


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHI^^-TAU.


wori’s writings to which we have alluded. The Sah-dai-kau was written
in 1791, ten years before Motowori’s death, by hib favourite pupil Hatori
Nakatsune, certainly with Motowori's knowledge, for at the end of it is
a laudatory notice by the master. It is possible therefore that Motowori
changed his opinion on this important point towards the end of his life,
but was not willing to give more than an indirect sanction to the theory,
and this supposition has given rise to the belief that the Sah-dai-kau,
although published under the name of another, was in reality his own
work. It is somewhat atrange that, seeing that the Saii-dai-kau forms
a supplement to Vol. XVII. of the Ko-zhi-ki Deh, he should repeat on
p. 35 of the following volume the statement that Amaterasu is the sun.
Hirata has interwoven into the text of the Toma no Mi-hashira a great
part of the Sah-dai-kau, as he acknowledges in his preface, but in the
body of his work he frequently quotes Hatori almost verbatim, without
any special indication that he is using the words of another. A careful
comparison is therefore necessary in order to distinguish between the
theories which are the particular property of each writer. The follow-
ing extract from Hatorf s preface exhibits the vein of prejudice which
was common to both.

The accounts given in other countries, whether by Buddhism or
Chinese philosophy, of the form of the heavens and earth and the manner
in which they came into existence, are all of them inventions of men,
who exercised all their ingenuity over the problem, and inferred that
such things must actually be the case. As fpr the Indian account, it is
only nonsense fit to deceive women and children, and I do not think it
worthy of refutation. The Cliinese theories, on the other hand, are based
upon profound philosophical speculations, [58] and sound extremely
plausible, but what they call the absolute and infinite, the positive
and negative essences, the eight diagrams and the five elements are not
real existences, but are fictitious names invented by the philosophers
and freely applied in every direction. They say that the whole universe
was produced by agencies, and that nothing exists which is independent
of them. But all these statements are nonsense.

The principles which animate the universe are beyond the power
of analysis, nor can they be fathomed by the human intelligence, and all
statements founded upon pretended explanations of them are to be


52


SATOW: THE BEVIYAL OF PURE SHlSf-TAU.


rejected. All that man can think out and know is limited by the powers-
of sight, feeling and calculation, and what goes beyond these powers
cannot be known by any amount of thinking.

How is it then possible for men who were born hundreds and
thousands of myriads of years after the origin of the universe, to know
how it originated and the successive steps by which it assumed its pre-
sent form ? Our country, owing to the facts that it was begotten by the
two gods Izanagi and Izanami, was the birth-place of Amaterasu oho-
mi-kami, and is ruled by her Sublime Descendants for ever and ever,
as long as the universe shall endure, is infinitely superior to other
countries, whose chief and head it is; its people are honest and
upright of heart, and are not given to useless theorizing and false-
hoods like other nations, and thus it possesses correct and true
information with regard to the origin of the universe, This information
has descended to us unaltered from the age of the gods, and unmixed,
even in the slightest degree, with unsupported notions of individuals.
This indeed is the genuine and true tradition; The Chinese accounts
sound as if based on profound principles, and one fancies that
they must be right, while the Japanese accounts sound shallow and
utterly unfounded in reason. But the former are lies, while the latter
are the truth, so that as time goes on, and thought attains
greater accuracy, the erroneous nature of these falsehoods becomes-
eyer more apparent, while the true tradition remains intact. My [59]
reason for this observation is that in modern times men from coun-
tries lying far off in tlie west have voyaged all round the seas as their
inclinations prompted them, and have ascertained the actual shape of
the earth. They have discovered that the earth is round, and that the
sun and moon revolve round it in a vertical direction, and it may thus
be conjectured how full of errors are all the ancient Chinese accounts,,
and how impossible it is to believe anything that professes to be deter-
mined a priori. But when we come to compare our ancient tradition s,»
as to the origination of a thing in the midst of space and its subsequent
development, with what has been ascertained to be the actual shape of
the earth, we find that there is not the slightest error, and this result
confirms the truth of our ancient traditions. But although accurate
discoveries made by the men of the far west as to the actual shape of


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OF PQRE SHIN-TAtJ.


53


the earth and its position in space infinitely surpass the theories of the
Ohinese, still that is only a matter of calculation, and there are many
other things actually known to exist which cannot be solved by that
means ; and still less is it possible to solve the question of how the
•earth, sun and moon came to assume their form. Probably those
■countries possess theories of their own, but whatever they may be,
they can but be guesses after the event, and probably resemble the
Indian and Chinese theories.^’

The plan adopted by both writers is to give a series of diagrams
representing the gradual formation of the sun, earth and moon, together
with the evidence by which each diagram is supported, followed by a
commentary. Hatori quotes from the Ko-zhi-ki and Ni-hon-gi, while
Hirata relies for his proofs on the text of the Ko-shi, which he had
just completed. A minute examination of this work would probably
show that it contains deviations from the ancient authorities, prompted
by a desire to harmonize revelation and science. It appears that he
had acquired a slight degree of knowledge of astronomy, either from
some of his countrymen who were acquainted with the Dutch language,
or from translations of Dutch books. He had thus [60] learnt and
admitted as a fact, that the earth moves round the sun, and was there-
fore considerably ahead of Hatori, who preferred to believe what he
saw with his eyes, and only cursorily mentions the theory of the earth^s
movement as a matter of indbference to his views of the cosmogony.
Hirata of course assumed the truth of all ancient Japanese traditions,
but saw that they were sometimes inconsistent with each other and
with actual fact, and he hoped by reconciling these contradictions to
prove that Shin-tau contains all the knowledge necessary to man. He
is therefore not to be implicitly depended on for a correct view of the
ancient belief about the origin of things.

Diagram 1 in both books is a large circle containing three black
spots in its upper part. This is intended to represent the existence of
Arae-no-mi-naka-nushi, Taka-mi-musu-bi and Kamu-mi-musu-bi in
space, before the sun, earth and moon were formed. The circle means
nothing ; it is merely introduced to give the reader a definite idea of what
is meant by space, but as it is dispensed with in the third and succeeding
Diagrams, when the reader is requested to look on the blank part of


54 SA.TOW: THJE EEVIVAL OE PURE SHlIJ-TAU.

the page as representing space, it seems hardly necessary even here.
Hatori quotes the Ko-zhi-ki, which says that these three gods came
into existence in TaJcama no ham in the beginning of heaven and
earth (aine Unchi), while Hirata quotes his own Ko-shi to the effect
that they ' came into being in Heaven's Sky ' (Ama4s^c mi sora).. At
a later period, in publishing his commentary entitled Ko-shi Den, he
reverted to the old reading TaJcama no hava* A great deal of ingenuity
has been expended by the expounders of Pure Shin-tau to prove that
Takama no hara does not mean ' the plain of high heaven/ as its evident
etymology would suggest. Motowori is perhaps not unreasonable in ex-
plaining it to mean a region above the sky. Hatori says that ‘‘ Talcama
no ham did not exist at this period which was antecedent to all material
existence, but the region wherein these three gods originated afterwards
became Talcama no hara." The theory that this name signifies 'space ' is
[61] derived from one of the parallel passages in the M-hofi-gi, wliere the
Chinese characters Iciyo^chiyuu (emptiness) occur instead of Talcama no
ham ni But this would scarcely be sufficient to prove that the ancient
Japanese possessed the highly abstract idea of ' space,' and it is more
natural to suppose that they meant the blue sky which they saw over
their heads. Hirata has a fanciful theory about Ame-no-mi-naka-nushi
and the other two gods inhabiting the Pole star, which is not usually
accepted by other teachers of Shin-taii. In the Ko^sM DeK, on the au-
thority of a parallel passage in the Ni-hon-gi, he substitutes the word
" existed " Qnashihi) for " originated " (narimaseru), and draws thence
the inference that these gods never had a beginning, but the passage from
which the word 7nasu is taken refers not to Ame-no-mi-naka-nushi and
the other two gods, but to Umashi-ashi-kabi-hiko-ji and deities of later
origin. The difficulty of supposing that Arne could ever have meant
the sun, lies in the fact that it certainly signifies the sky or heaven, in
which sense it is employed in forming the name of the primeval god, as
Hirata himself states. Hirata says that the upper part of heaven is the
pole star, which must therefore have been the location of the three gods.
Heaven is limited on the outside, as is proved by the statement that
Susanowo no raikoto made the circuit of its boundary. Kami, translated
by 'god,' is the same as Icabi, compounded of the demonstrative root Jca
and bi, or hi, a word applied to^whatever is miraculous and supernatura:!,.


SATOW; THE KEVIVAE OF P.UEB mi^-TAV. 55^

ivliicli is seen in mum-li, termination of the names of the creator and
creatrix.®® In the Tama no Mi-hashira he deriyes kami from kahimoye^
^sprouting growing/ but later he became convinced that* this etymologj
was erroneous. Kamurogi and Kaymtromi, which are titles of the creator
and creatrix, he derives from the continuative form of the root Kami,
TO a particle, and gi and mi which are used in forming the names of
male and female deities. Motowori has suggested that gi is a contrac-
tion of wo-gimi, male [62] prince, and mi of mo-gimi, female prince but
nothing can be safely asserted on this point. With respect to the state-
ment that these three gods ‘ concealed their bodies/ Motowori’s sugges-
tion that it signifies their incorporeality is not to be admitted, for Taka-
mi-musu-bi no kami is represented as saying that Siikuna-bikona no
kami passed between his fingers,’’ and if he had a hand, he must have
had a body, so that the tradition must be accepted in all its literal
meaning.

Diagram 2 in both woihs represents space bounded by a circle, with
three black spots as in diagram 1, and underneath them a smaller
circle inscribed Holii-motBu,' or Thing. Hatori supports this by the
following quotations from the Ni-hoii-gi : In the beginning of heaven
and earth, there was a Thing in the great sky, whose shape cannot be*
described.” “ Before heaven and earth had originated a thing originated
in the midst, like as it were a floating cloud on the sea, without any
point of attachment.” ** In the beginning of heaven^ and earth, a thing
like lihe sprout of a rush originated in the great sky again a thing
like floating fat originated in tlie great sky.” Hirata quotes from his
own compilation a similar passage, without any reference to the rush-
sprout. Hatori ascribes the origin of this Thing to the creator and
creatrix, who gradually formed the sun, earth and moon out of it, and
brought various gods into existence at different stages. The fact of
these creative acts being performed by the two deities named is known
from a revelation made by the god of the moon, who in the year 487
entered into the body of a man, and declared to one Abe no Omi Koto-
shiro that ** his ancestor Takami-musu-bi no kami created heaven and


^‘^ICo-shi Defi, vol. i. f. 7v,

Or * tbe sun,^ if we accept the theory that ame signifies the sun.


.56


SATOW : THE BEVIVAL OF PURE SHlS^-TAU.


earth. People and lands must consequently be presented to him/' And
in the same year the sun goddess made a similar revelation to the same
Abe no Omi, in which she declared that Takami-musu-bi no kami was
her progenitor. The comparison of the Thing to floating fat and float-
ing cloud simply refers to its indefinite position, and involves no
statement as to [63] its composition, which was probably a mixture
of the natures of the sun, earth and moon.

In diagram 3 the Thing is presented in the form of a dumb-bell,
with the smaller end upper-most. In Hatori's diagram there is a small
projection depending from the bottom of the Thing, probably intended
to indicate the budding-out of the moon. The ancient books quoted
here say that ‘from the thing which floated in space something
sprouted up like the shoot of a rush, in which there originated two gods
named Umashi-ashi-kabi-hiko-ji no kami and Ame-no-toko-tachi no
kami, both of whom, like the previous three, were single gods, and hid
their Bodies/

From the name of the second god who is here mentioned it is in-
ferred that the thing which sprouted up afterwards became Ama, or the
sun, according to Hatori and Hirata, and according to Motowori, heaven.
This is nowhere explicitly stated, either in the Ko-zhi-ki or in the
Ni-hofl-gi, but is inferred from the name of the second god, toko being
the same as mho, bottom, and iaohi, to stand. Hatori supposes the
nature of ame to have been of the essence of fire, but Hirata repudiates
this as a Chinese notion, and conjectures that it was clear and bright,
like crystal. The name of the first god is derived from mnashi, pleasant,
<ishirhabi, rush-sprout, hiko, an honorific term applied to males, and ji,
another honorific, seen in the word woji, old man. He is identified by
Hirata with Sukuna-bikona, a diminutive god who afterwards aided
Ohokuni-nushi to civilize the country. The five deities who have now
been named are entitled the Amatsu-kmnif or ‘Celestial gods.'

Diagram 4 in the Tamano Mi-'hoshim, represents three globes of
gradually diminishing sizes, connected by short necks, the largest being
uppermost, and labelled Ame. The five celestial gods are represented
therein by the same number of black spots. How the three earliest of
them found their way into this particular portion of space is not explained,
and their being here somewhat favours the original explanation that Ame


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PITRE SHlf^^-TATJ.


57


is heaven. Ifc was [64] probably in order to get out of this difficulty that
Hirata suggested in the Ko-shi Deii, that they are located in the pole-
star. The central globe, which is of medium size, is marked ‘ earth, ^
and contains five small circles arranged in pairs. Underneath is the
third globe, marked Yomi, and containing two black spots to represent
a pair of invisible deities ; Yomi is shaded with black, to express the fact
that it is in darkness, owing to the interception of the sun’s light by
the earth. In the 8an-dai-kau the diagram is similar, but the globes
are not perfectly round, and the two black spots placed by Hirata in
Yomiy are placed above the five pairs of circles in the earth.

Hatori acknowledges that neither the Ko-zhi-ki nor the Ni-hon-gi
contain any tradition as to the formation of Yomiy but that probably
something grew downwards from the underside of the Thing, which de-
veloped into Yomiy just as from its upper surface something had sprout-
ed up which became Ame,

Hirata, however, finding in one of the parallel passages quoted in
the Ni-hon-gi, the sentence ‘‘ Next there was a Thing like floating fat,
which came into existence in the sky, from which a god originated
named Kuni-no-toko-tachi no kami,” converts this into Next, [from
the root of the Thing which was drifting about like a floating cloud], a
Thing came into existence. The name of the god who originated from
this thing was Kuni-no-toko-tachi no kami.’^ It may be observed that
the original text does not connect the second Thing with the first, from
which the Ame is supposed to have been formed, and in the Kb-shi S&i-
bun he afterwards omitted the sentence enclosed between brackets.
To this he added part of a passage from the Ko’zhi-M, which speaks of
Toyo-kumu-nu no kami. These two gods were single gods, and were
invisible, for which reason they are represented in the diagram by black
spots. They were succeeded by five pairs of deities, Uhi-jini and
Suhi-jini, Tsunu-guhi and Iku-guhi, Oho-to-no-ji and Oho-to-no-be,
Omo-daru and Aya-kashiko-ne, Izanagi and Izanami. The word
imoy which means either sister or wife, is [65] prefixed to the
name of the second of each of these pairs, and each pair counts
as one generation, making, with the two single gods previously
named, the seven Generations of the Divine period (hami-yo
nana-yo'). The title Icami is given to each, but I have omitted it to


58


SATOW; a?HE REVIVAL OF PURE SHIR'-TAU.


save space, as I shall continue to do henceforth in the case of all other
gods. TJlii-jini signifies ' first mud ^ Siihi-jini ‘ sand and mud/ The
names of the next pair are said to be derived from tsurnu, a germ in
which the hands and feet, head and tail are yet undistinguishable, g%ihi,
the same as hamu, to integrate, and iku, which signifies the commence-
ment of life, and is the same as iJciru^ to breathe. The names of the
next pair are interpreted to mean 'man and woman of the great place,'
pointing to the fact that solid land was formed. Omo-daru is ' complete
perfection,' and Aya-Jmhiho-ne • is ' awful one/ aya being an ejacula-
tion of awe (from which come ayaslii^ strange, and ayamhi, perilous),
and kashiJco, an adjectival root meaning awful. The name of the
female is said to express the sentiment which filled her when she
looked at the male. Iza in the names of the last part is supposed to be
the radical of izanafu, to invite, and to allude to their invitation to each
other to join in begetting the earth ; gi and mi are the same as in
Kamurogi and Kamuwmi, the titles already mentioned as being given to
the creator and creatrix. It appears from these etymologies that a
^adual progress in development is here indicated, and Hirata, suggests
that the first four pairs are not distinct deities, but merely names de-
scriptive of the various stages through which Izanagi and Izanami passed
before arriving at the perfection of existence. As it seems certain that
they were never worshipped in any known period of history, this theory
is accepted by many modern writers on Shifi-tau.

The globe called Yomd is identified by both Hatori and Hirata with
Yomo-tsu-kuni or Yomi no kuni, the region whither Izanami betakes
herself after the birth of Homusubi, the god of fire. Other names
for it are Ne no [66] hum, literally the ' root-region,' because of
its being at the root of the earth, Soho no kuni, or the 'bottom
region,' Shitortm-hmi, or the ' ' under region,' and Ne’^no-hatusu-huni
from katammi, one corner, used in the sense of lowermost or most
distant. Yomi is explained to mean darkness. The reasons for identify-
ing Y mi no kuni with the moon are several. In the first place the
element Yo7ni in the name Tsukuryomi no mikoio is evidently the same
m Y mi, ' the kingdom of darkness,' whither Susanowo no mikoto
finally proceeded. Secondly, although in the Ko-zhi-ki the rule of the
sea is given to the latter god, one of the parallel passages of the M-hon*


59‘


SA.TOW: THE KEVITAE OF PURE SHI^-TAXJ.

gi speaks of Tsaku-yomi no mikoto as being appointed ruler over the
multitudinous salt-waters. The murder of the goddess of food is-
attributed to the former by the Ko-zhirU, to the latter by the M-lioK-
The fact that the tides of the sea actually follow the moon’s move-
ments is another reason for assuming these two gods to have been one.
As the whole region pervaded by the light of the sun was called
hirUi or day, the expi^ession gom no 2W3u laini * the realm of night/ over
which the Ko-zhi-ki says Tsuku-yomi w^as appointed to rule, would be
extremely appropriate to yomi, from which the sun’s light would be
intercepted by the earth.®* Hirata further points out that the notion of
yomi being the abode of the dead is comparatively modern, and that the
few gods who are spoken of in the ancient records as having gone
thither, were still in the body when they did so.

Diagram 5 exhibits a marked difference between the two writers in
their theories as to the subsequent development of the system of the
three bodies. In Hatori’s diagrams the sun continues to be attached to
the earth until after the descent of Ninigi no mikoto, while Hirata places
the separation at some time antecedent to the descent of Izaiiagi and
Izanami, This divergence is owing to the different explanations given by
them of the cmia no nhi-hashi (literally, heaven’s floating bridge) which
Hatori represents [67] as an axis connecting the sun with the earth,
which is ever growing longer and consequently thinner, while Hirata
interprets it to mean some kind of huge boat, in which the gods went
backwards and forwards between the two bodies,®^ He argues that the
phrase '‘this floafeing region ” used of the earth by the celestial gods in
commanding Izanagi and Izanami to form and harden it, can only be
interpreted on this theory, for if the separation had not taken place the
term " floating” could not have been applied to the earth alone. He
consequently represents the sun detached, and to the right of the earth
above it. The spear (^nuhoko) which was given to this pair for the
purpose of forming the earth is supposed by him to have been of iron
in the form of the lingam, and mi, which is interpreted to signify iamay


Ko-zhi^ki X>eri, vol. ix. f. 9.

^ SaaH-dai-kaUy fF. 15. and i6.

^ Tama no Mi-hashira, vol ii, f. 26.


SATOW : THK REVIVAL OF PURE SHli^-TAU.


a ball, has a profound signification if this view be adopted.®® The pas-
sage quoted here by Hirata from the Ko-shi says that “The two gods,
setting forth on the ama-no-nki-hashiy pushed down the spear and
stirred the plain of the green sea.®® When they drew it up after stirring
it round and round, the drops which fell from its end, spontaneously
<jonsolidated and became an island. This was Ono-goro-zhima/’ This
name was given to it on account of its * spontaneous consolidation,’ and
to distinguish it from the other islands of Japan, which were begotten
by Izanagi and Izanami in the ordinary manner. They descended on
to this island, and planting the nuhoho in the ground point downwards,
built a palace round it, taking it for the central pillar which was to
■support their roof. The point of the spear became the axis of the earth.
Ono-goro-zhima is identified by the author of the ZkiK-dai Ku-heUu with
a small island at the north-west corner of Ahaji in the eastern part of
the inland sea, called Ye-shima.®’^ Close by is another island called
Seki-rei-shima( Wagtail island), and [68] there are many other traces of
the ancient tradition in the neighbourhood. The motion imparted to the
fluid mass of the earth by the stirring with the nuboho was the origin
of its daily revolutions.®® Ono-goro-zhima was thus originally at the north
pole, but subsequently removed to its present position. In what
manner this happened we are not told. Nevertheless, Japan continues
to be on the summit of the terrestrial globe. It appears that some one
having objected that, if J apan were on the top of the world and opposite
to the sun, the sun would be in the zenith at the equinoxes, Hatori was
puzzled and referred the point to Motowori, who replied that as the sun and
moon move round from East to West, and not from North to South, it
is evident that the globe, in spite of its being round, may be said to
have sides, that is, top, bottom, right, left, back and front. Just as the


^ AosJki Defi^ vol. ii, f. 23, note.

This IS a literal rendering of awo-una-bara, Hirata, however, assumes the
term to mean the appearance of the sembfluid earth as it was seen from heaven,
and rejects the common explanation.

^ Ko-shi jDen, vol. ii, f. 46,

"It is hardly necessary to note that this is not warranted by anything in the
anci^ records, as the earth was always supposed to be stationary untU the Japan-
'CSC learnt the opposite from Europeans.


8 AT 0 W : THE KE VITAL OF PUKE SHiJJ'-TAU* 61

face of a man is not on the top of his head, but on the front, so Japan,
being in the middle of the top has the sun and moon on its south, which
is therefore the front ; the north is consequently behind, the east is the
left side and the west the right side. From which it is perfectly clear
that Japan is on the summit of the terrestrial globe. The objector
replied that ail countries which have the sun on their south would have
an equal right to claim the same position. The answer to this is that
the position of Japan is not determined by the fact of the sun and moon
being in front of her, but tbe manner in which they appear to her is
owing to her position at the top of the earth. Hirata strengthens the
argument by pointing out that Japan altogether escaped the deluge
which took place in China in the reign of Yaou, and also the Noachian
flood which drowned occidental countries, solely througli her elevated
situation. China suflered less than the west, and Korea less again, on
account of their proximity to Japan.

The only mention made of the stars in the ancient [69] writings is
in the Ni-hoK-gi, where the star-god Kagase-wo-no-mimP is spoken of
as being at first unwilling to submit to tbe fore-runners of l^inigi no
mikoto, but nothing is said of the manner in which the stars came into
existence. According to a theory proposed by one Satou Nobu-fuchi,
which is quoted by Hirata with approval, when the two gods lowered
the spear and stirred round the chaotic mass out of which the earth was
to be formed, the muck which was unfit to enter into the composition
of the earth was removed by the action of the spear-point, and scattered
lump-wise in all directions throughout space, taking up positions more
or less remote. The five planets, the twenty-eight constellations and
the host of common stars being thus formed, revolve round the sun
together with the earth Hirata has another view of his own, which
is, that as the Thing which formed in space and afterwards developed
into the sun and the earth, is said to have resembled a hen’s egg in
shape, when the Thing separated, its shell must have burst, and the
fragments flying off on all sides would begin to revolve round the sun,
attracted hy the powerful rotatory motion of that bocly.*^ It is custom-

®“Also called Amatsu-mika-boslii and Ama-no-kagase-wo.

^ Ko^shi-DeH, vol. ii, f. 36.

^^Idem, f. 38.


62


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SITlf^-TAU.


.ary to suppose that the stars have no practieai purpose ; but it is
‘evident that they are intended to guide the course of those barbarian
mariners, who, if they knew their duty, would bring ships laden with
tribute to the Emperor of Japan.

Diagram 6 in the Tama no Mi-hashira represents the sun as in
the last, with the five black spots which stand for Celestial gods, and
the earth is now marked ofi* into Japan, foreign countries variously
dtuated below it, and the sea. The passage from the Ko-shi on which
this diagram is based narrates what may be euphemistically termed the
<courtship of Izaiiagi and Izanami,*^ which resulted in a [70] child of so
poor a consistency, that he was unable to stand on his legs when he
had reached the age of three years. They put him into a boat woven
■of rushes, which were the only available materials then existing, and
abandoned him to his fate on the wide ocean. Another child which
they begot, named Aha no shiiua, was also a failure, and they were
driven to ask the advice of the Celestial Gods. The Celestial Gods had
recourse to divination, which is explained to be a means of obtaining
knowledge or information from divine beings without their being aware of
it It seems strange that the three gods who hold the highest rank among
their race should not have been able to give a direct answer without
applying to some one else, but Hirata explains this apparent anomaly


“ The following is an almost literal translation. Tunc Izanagi quaesivit ab
Izanami, « corpus tuum quo in modo factum est ? Et ilia, “ Corpus meura

crescens crevit, sed locus est qiii continuus non Crevit.” “ Corpus meum,” inquit
Izanagi, ^'crescens crevit, sed locus est qui superfluus crevit. Nunc mihi propo-
situm est, si tibi, videtur, m.ei corporis eum qui superfluus crevit locum, corporis
tui in eum locum inserere qui non continuus crevit, et terram generate.” Izanami
respondit, « commodum erit.” Tunc Izanagi, “ Ego et tu, quin circumeimtes
ccelestem hanc columnam, thalamo jucunde coimus.” Hac pactione facta, “ Tu
sinistra,” inquit Izanagi, “ego autem dextra, circumeuntes occurremuSi” Hac
pactione facta, ubi circumeuntes faciem facei opposuerunt, Izanami primum “O
adolescens venuste,” deinde Izana^, “ O virgo venusta.” Postquam hsec locuti
sunt, Izanagi, nullo modo gaudens, dixit sorori, “ Me decebat primum loqui, quia
vur sum; non est foeminse primum verba facere.” Sed ubi incipientes (sc. opus
procreationis) coienint in tlialamo, artem ignorabant. Tunc advolavit motacilla,
qui caput caudamque movebat. Dii hoc imitantes, coitionis viam cognoverunt, et
filiuha hirudini similem pepererunt.


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF P0RE SHli?-TA0.


63


by tlie analogy of a prince who charges eacli of his servants with some
branch of affairs, and in answer to a request for information on any
point refers the inquirer to the servant who knows all about it. The
answer to Izanagi and his consort was that they should try over again,
and as they carefully avoided the error which they had committed on the
previous occasion, they were very successful. The first of the series
of children which they now begot was Oho-yamato Akitsushima, the
main island of Japan, and it was born with a caul, which is the present
island of Ahaji. Both of the names Yamato and Akitsu-shima originally
belonged to the present province of Yamato, the former dating from
a late period of the so-called Divine Age, the latter from the reign
of Zhin-mu Ten-wau.^® They were afterwards extended to the whole
[71] of the main island, but are no longer so employed. Next were
born the islands of lyo,^^ which had one body and four faces, TsukusbP
with one body and five faces, Iki, Tsushima, the triplets of Oki, and
Sado. According to a variation of the legend Oki and Sado were twins.
Ahaji is added to the others to make up the number of eight, whence
the name of Oho-ya-shima-huni^ the Country of Eight Islands, applied
to the whole empire of Japan. No mention is made of what are now
called Kara-futo, or Saghalien and Ye^o, which were probably discovered
at a much later date than the 8th century, when the Ko^zM-ki and
Ni-hoK^gi were committed to writing. The legend also speaks of the
birth of other islands, one of which was Kibi no Ko-zliima, now divided
into Bi-zen, Bifi-go, Bi-cbiyuu and Mimasaka, Adzuki-shima in the
inland sea, now called Seudzu-shima, Hime-shima off Hi-zefi, Chika-
shima, supposed to be the Go-tau islands,, and the Futago-shima, which
cannot be identified. The remaining small islands were formed by con-
densation of the foam of the sea. After the country had been thus
produced, the two gods begot all the gods {ya-ho yorodzu no kami) and


The Chinese posthumous names of the early vtifiados are supposed to have
been determined in the reign of Kuwan-mu (782-806). The earliest case of one
being applied was in 7 58, when the posthumous title of Shiyau-mu was given to
the reigning Mikado predecessor. See Ko-zhi-ki Detj, voL xviii, f. 3 *

**That is Shi-koku with its four provinces.

Tsukushi is the ancient name of ICiu-shiu, which was originally divided into
five provinces, Tsukushi, Toyo, Hi, Himuka and Kumaso.


64


SATOW: THE EE VITAL OF PUKE SHINT-TAU.


bestowed on them all things; and next, seeing that the land was
covered with mist, Izanagi produced the two gods of wind, male and
female, from his breath.

Hatori has a long note showing that the islands of Japan were
begotten in exactly the same manner as human beings and everything
else that has life, whether animal or vegetable, and being quite small
at their birth, gradually increased in size by the accretion of matter.
The result of the birth of Japan was that the sea and land were gradual-
ly parted, and the way thus prepared for the formation of foreign
countries by the spontaneous condensation of the foam of the sea.
Hirata finds this truth concealed in the statement about the remaining
[72] small islands,’’ a not unique example of interpreting ancient re-
cords so as to fit in with the progress of modern discovery.

The god of fire was the last child in whose conception the two gods
shared. He is called Ho-musubi and also Kagutsuchi, and Hirata thinks
he ought to be identified with the element itself The goddess suffered
great pain in bringing him into the world, and from the matter which
she vomited forth in her agony originated the god and goddess of metal
(Kane). Hirata derives the word Icana-yama (a metalliferous mine),
which forms part of the names of these two deities, from a contraction
of kare-nayamasMy to cause to wither and feel pain. In consequence of
Izanagi breaking her injunction not to look upon her face during the
period of her retirement, Izanami departed towards the nether region, but
bethinking herself that the god of fire, if left uncontrolled in his actions,
would bring ruin on the upper world, she returned for a short time and
produced from her fseces the gods of clay and from her water the god of
fresh water, whom she commissioned to pacify the god of fire whenever
he was inclined to be turbulent. Clay and fresh water were produced
at the same moment as the gods which rule them. From the statement
that Izanami forbade the god to look at her during seven days and nights,
Hirata argues that day and night already existed, which supports his
view that the sun was already separated from the earth. As the earth
revolved, it was day when it was opposite to the sun, and night when it
was turned away from the sun. He neglects, however, to explain how
the earth, to the bottom of which the moon was still attached, could do
this, and the expression * opposite to the sun ’ is extremely obscure. It


SATOW: THE BHVITAE OF FUEE SHlS'-TAU. 65

ia at least evident that aceoarding to tkis theory of Japan being on the
top of the earth, the ‘ kingdom of darkness ^ must have been illuminated
whenever Japan was in the dark.

After the departure of his companioo, Izanagi took vengeance for her
loss upon Kagutsuchi, whom he clove into three pieces with his sword.
From these pieces [73] originated the god of thunder (IkadzuGht)^ of
mountains (OAo-yamafewmi)* and of rain (^Tahawo-hcmdj. The blood
which fell from the edge of his weapon flew up to the sun, and was convert-
ed into unnumbered rocks in the dry bed of the Ama-no-yasu-no-gaha,
and the blood which fell from the guard and point, as well as that which
remained on his hand, spirted on to the rocks thus farmed. Blood and
fire being the same thing, the sun thus became a receptacle of heat.

The next event was the visit of Izanagi to Yami, with the object of
finding Izanami and inducing her to return to the upper world. No
precise information exists with reference to the road by which he
travelled, but it is supposed to have been a hole through the centre of
the earth, the outlet of which is at Ifuya-zaka (pronounced Ytiya-zaka)
in Idzumo, When Izanami no mikoto came forth from her palace door
to meet him, he addressed her, saying, * My dear sister, come back again,
for the country which you and I made is not yet finished.^ She replied,

* Lamentable indeed that you came not earlier. I have eaten of the
cooking of YomL Nevertheless, as my brother has graciously come
hither, I would desire to return. To-morrow I will discuss it fully with
the god of Yomi, Do not look for me, my brother.’ Saying this she
returned within the palace. A long time elapsed, and he felt impatient ;
so breaking off the end-tooth of the many-toothed comb which he wore
in the left bunch of his hair, and lighting it, he entered in to look. He
found her over-run with maggots and in a state of semi-putrefaction.”
The legend goes on to relate Izanagi’s struggle to escape, ‘during which
he created vai'ious gods, one of whom, called Kunado no kami, was
produced from his staff! Another was Chi-gaheshi no kami, the rock
with which he closed up the road. Izanami’s reason for not returning
was that she had eaten food cooked with unclean fire, and was defiled
thereby. The god of fire hates impurity, and she was afraid of his
wrath. It is well-known diat it is impossible to succeed with a casting
if the metal has been melted with fire which is not perfectly pure. [74]

AP. VOL. HI.— 5.


66 8AT0W: THE BEVIVAL OF PURE SHIl5*-TAU. '

As soon as Izanagi returnciJ to oartli ho hastouod to wash hiinsolf iu tli©
sea, at a locality which cannot be precisely determined, but it appears
to have been in either Hiuga or Chiku-zen, The legend says : The
names of the gods whom he produced by blowing when he plunged into
the middle shoal and washed, were Yoso-Maga-tsu-hi no kanii and
Oho-Maga-tsu-he no kami. These two gods originated from the pol-
lution which affected him when he went to that region of perpetual
foulness. * * The names of the gods whom he produced by blowing
in order to correct the evil [to be done by the two last] were Kamu-Nahobi
no kami and Oho-Naho-bi no kami. * The name of the god who
originated subsequently when he washed his left eye was Anaa-terasu
oho-mi-kami, also called Ama-terasu-oho-hiru-ine no inikoto, and the
name of the god who originated when he washed his right eye was
Tsuku-yomi no mikoto, also called Take-haya-Susa-no-wo no mikoto.
Then Izanagi no kami ]’ejoiced greatly, and said, I have i)egotteii
Child upon Child, and at the end of my begetting, I have begotten me
two rare Children.” Now the brightness of the Person of Ama-terasu
oho-mi-kami was beautiful, aiul shone through heaven and earth.
Izanagi no kami spake, and said, Though my children are many, none
of them is like this miraculous Child. She is not to be kept in this
region.” Then taking the necklace of precious stones from his neck,
and rattling it, he gave it to Ama-terasu oho-mi-kami, and spake,
commanding her in these words, ‘^Eiile thou over Takarna no hara.”
As the distance between the sun and earth was not great at this period,
he sent her up by the Ame-nO'-mi-hashira. ^ Next he spake unto-
Take-haya-susa-no-wo no mikoto, and commanded him, saying, Rule
thou over Awo-una-bara, and the multitudinous salt water ” * *

The statement that Take-haya-Susa-no-wo is another name of
Tsuku-yomi is not to be found in any of the ancient texts, and is an
emendation of Hirata’s founded upon the grounds already noticed for sup-
posing the two gods to be in reality one. The Ame no mi-liashira was [7 6]
supposed by Mabuchi to he one of the gods of wind, but Hirata explains
it to be one of the Jia^M-daie of which mention has alzeady been made.
In the Ko-shi De% he makes Yaso-maga-tsu-hi and Kamu-nalio-bi to be
simply alternative names of Oho-maga-tsu-hi and Oho-naho-bi. ’ The
KiftJiW the first was intended as a mark that Izanagi had purified his


8AT0W : THU BEYIVAU OF. PUBE SHli^-XAU,


67


body from the pollution which he had brought back with him from
Ydinii and he sprang from Izanagi’s strong resolve to get rid of those
pollutions. Hence this god utterly detests defilement of whatever kind,

^ and becomes violent in his conduct whenever any unclean thing is done.

His name is derived from the calamities, (mosp^a) which he causes. Moto-
wori’s view that this god was actually produced from the fifth of Yomi^
and is therefore an evil god, is wrong. Apart from the wrath which* he
manifests on certain occasions, he is disposed to do good, as is evidenced
by his having planted the whole of Japan with trees, the seeds of which
be brought down from heaven. hTaho-bi no kami was similarly produced
by the earnest desire of Izanagi to remedy the evils which might be pro-
duced by the zeal of Maga-tsu-hi no Kami. Both gods and human beings
have in them the spirit of these two gods, wherefore they are angry with
whatever is foul and wicked, and are tempted to act violently. It is Naho-bi
no kami’s spirit’s which moderates their wrath and disposes them to mercy.

Hirata endeavours to prove that aivo-wiarharcif means the whole
> earth, and that the phrase ^‘multitudinous salt-water ” is only added for

the sake of emphasis. He derives, timi (of which tina is only another
form) from mnu, to beget, to bear, and interprets tina-ham to mean the
‘just born plain.’ Awo is green, applied either in the sense of young,
or because the earth seemed to be of a green colour when viewed hy
the celestial gods -from above. It will be remembered that Izanagi and
Izanami dipped the spear into awo-iina-ba^^a, and separated the dry land
from the sea, so that if Hirata’s etymology were correct, the name would
be no longer applicable when Tsuku-yomi was invested with his king-
dom. The safest opinion is that [76] awo^una^bam means simply the
‘ blue waste as sea,’ and that the ancient inhabitants of Japan, amongst
whom these different legends sprang up, never thought of trying to
make them consistent with each other. Hirata’s theory seems to have
been invented to prove that Susa-no-wo was first made to rule over the
earth, but preferred to go to his mother in the moon, thus leaving the
earth vacant for Mnigi no mikoto, who, being in a certain sense the joint
offspring of Susa-no-wo and the sun-goddess, united in his person all the
rights of Izanagi and Izanami. The rest of the Tama no Mi-hashira is
occupied by the legends relating to Oho-kuni-nushi’s first occupation of
Japan and the descent of Niiiigi no mikoto which have already been


68


BviHOW : THE RETIVAE CJF PTJSE


Imafly sHmioairized in a part of tbk paper. The separation of

the moon from the earth, which is figured Iby him in his tenth and last
diagram, is supposed to have taken place after the visit of Oho-knni-
nnshi to the lower world. Hatori agrees with him on tMs point, hat
supposes Oho^kuni-Bushi to have gone to the moon after his surrender
of &e Em|Ae to Ninigi no naiikotoy whereas Hirata maintains that he
rules over the Hidden "Worldy which is on the earth.

In the year 1813 Hirata wrote the Mo^-dafu,. a short

work on the elements of the ancient way, intended for beginners. It is
an excellent introduction to his other works on Shin-tau, and may be
recommended to those who do not cure to gain more than a general
view of his opmom. At the end of the volume is an useful bibliograph-
ical list of all his acknowledged works;,, compiled by some of his
disciples. Two years later he completed the Ama-ts’u Norito Kau, a
commentary on a mriio which is not contained in the Ye^-gi Shiki, but
which, if genuine, supplies a lacuna in the Oho-baraki no hotobay and
serves to dear up a point therein which had considerably puzzled all
preceding commentators. During this period he was busily working at
the Ko'sM De^y which he did not live to complete. Besides this, he
completed a new edition of Hatori's Sm-dai-hwiiy an account of a
curious stone found by him in Kadzaisa, which he christened Ama-
no-Iha-buye, [77] and the Koshi-chiyau Kod^dai-ki ; began a new
edition of the Zhi%-mei ShiM, or list of Shiii-tau temples and gods given>
in the YeK-gi Shiki, drafted the Marokoshi Tai-ko DeK, a work on the
ancient traditions of Qrina, of which only the text and about one- fourth
of the commentary have yet appeared, began the Mdo Zaurshi, which
is said to have been intended for a complete treatise on Buddhism, and
printed a short life of Sugahara Michizane under the title of TeK-man-
gu Go-deK-hi. In the year 1819 he completed the draft of his work
on the Zhi^-dai no Mozhiy or so-called native Japanese alphabet of the
pre-historic age. This consists of two volumes entitled ZhiK-zlii Si-
fumi DeK and one entitled Oi-zhi Se%» The first contain some thirteen
or fourteen tables of square and cursive characters ; the latter is a
coUeetion of a number of specimens of widely different appearance, all
of which are aiSsertM to be native Japanese characters, but concerning
whose genuin^eSs Hii*ata does not venture to pronounce an opinion ►


SAHOW : 5FH1B BOTIVAjL OF PITRF BHlf^-TAUi


The first thing that will strike any onh who exarmnes the square char-
aaters given in volume 1. is their unmistakable identity whii the Korean
alphabet, the sole difference being that the Korean letters are comhimed
so as to form the forty-seven syllables used in spelling Japanese words*
The cursive forms, however, bear scarcely the remotest resemblance to
the square, and it is difficult to suppose that they have a common origin.
Having devoted several pages of Volume I, of the Kai-dcd-hi to the
discussion of the evidence for the existence of an indigenous method of
writing in pre-historic times, and having decided the question in the
affirmative, Hirata does not think it worth while to entertain the
suspicion that these so-called ZhiK-dai no Mo-zhi have been copied from
the Korean alphabet, but on the contrary maintains that the Koreans
made their alphabet out of the Zhm-dai no Mo-zlii, and arbitrarily
invented a number of additional signs to meet their own wants. He
supposes that the Zhin-dcd no JMo’-zlii must have been carried to Korea
after its conquest by Zhifi-gou-kuwau-gou (200 A.D.), and have been
preserved there in some [78] mysterious manner, until in the beginning
of the loth century they were utilized to form an alphabet, for which
the Sanskrit alphabet was taken as a model. From a Korean work
written in the Chinese language, quoted by Itou Kagatane in the
San-han Ki-rialcu, the Korean alphabet appears to have been in-
vented by a King of Korea who began to reign 1419. But if a
Japanese alphabet ever existed, it had been entirely forgotten by the
Japanese centuries before this date, and it js difficult to suppose that
is should have been preserved by the Koreans in such a manner that
they were still able, after so long an interval, to assign what Hirata
acknowledges to be very nearly the correct pronunciation to each letter.
An alternative supposition of course, is that those of the so-called Zhi^-
dai no Mozhi^ which are identical with combinations of the Korean
letters, were copied from that alphabet in comparatively modern tim»es,
and if we could obtain a sight of the original manuscripts said to be
preserved at various Shin-tau temples in Japan, af which Hirata himself
only had Been copies, it is probable that such conclusions might be
drawn as to the age of the material on which they are written, as would
serve to determine their value as authentic documents. Apart from
these considerations it would hardly seem probable, arguing d priori,


70


SMOW : THE KEVIVAL OF PtJBE SHlR-TAlL


that the Zhi^-dai no Mo-zh% which must have been alphabetic, should
only be preserved in a syllabic form, as is the case with the specimens
we speak of, or that the Japanese, if they had ever possessed such a
treasure as an alphabet capable of expressing all the sounds of their
language, should have abandoned it for the cumbrous method of ideo-
graphic writing which they afterwards learnt from the Chinese. The
question is of some importance; for if it were decided in favour of
Hirata’s views, we should he compelled to allow a greater degree of
credibility to the earlier historical records of Japan than there seems at
present reason to attribute to them.

Hitherto the teaching of Hirata had not appeared to differ much in
principle from that of his predecessors, whose object was to preserve
from oblivion the ancient [79] monuments of Japanese literature and
history, and to disprove the accusation that before the introduction of
Chinese philosophy the Japanese were a nation of savages without any
rule of conduct. But we shall see that the real goal to which his
efforts were directed was the establishment of a religion on a Shin- tan
basis, before which both Buddhism and Confucianism should disappear.
It is this endeavour which has caused him to be regarded in a certain
sense as the founder of a new school, although on a close examination
of his system it would no doubt be found that he was actually indebted
to the Chinese philosophy for the moral code which he attempted to
derive from Shiii-tau, and that the latter possesses only those character-
istics of a religion which belong to theological dogma.

The Thma-damHhas already been mentioned as one of the works
which Hirata wrote in the year 1811. It appears to have been originally
composed in a very colloquial style ; but in 1824 he completely rewrote
the first nine volumes, and gave to them a shape more worthy of the
subject. It is a commentary on certain prayers which he had drawn up
for the use of his pupils, and contains, half buried in a mass of irrelevant
matter, his views of Shifi-tau as a religion, and the biographies of Kada,
Mabuchi and Motowori, which have been utilized in the foregoing part
of this paper. The first five volumes were printed in 1829, the next
four some time after his death, and the tenth, which contains his teach-
ing as to the worship of ancestors and his life by his adopted son
Kanetane^, was published in 1874.


SATOW: THE revival OF PURE SHIJ^-TAU. ,71

As Hirata observes, tbe celebration of rites in honour of the gods
was considered in ancient times to be the chief function of the Mikados.
When Ninigi no mikoto descended from heaven, his divine progenitors
taught him how he was to rule the country, and their teaching consisted
in this : ^ Everything in the world depends on the spirit of the gods of

heaven and earth, and therefore the worship of the gods is a matter of
primary importance. The gods who do harm are to be appeased, so
that they may not punish those who have offended them, [80] and all
the gods are to be worshipped, so that they may be induced to increase
their favours. To compel obedience from human beings and to love
them, was all the sovereign had to do, and there was no necessity for
teaching them vain doctrines such as are preached in other countries.
Hence the art of Government is called Matsuri-goto, which literally
means worshipping.’’ Accordingly the early sovereigns worshipped the
gods in person, and prayed that their people might enjoy a sufficiency
of food, clothing and shelter from th<e elements, and twice a year, in
the 6th and 12th months, they celebrated the festival of the General
Purification,*® by which the whole nation was purged of calamities,
offences and pollutions.

^ Although in later ages many foreign customs were adopted, we
find that the religious rites of Shin-tau always occupied the first place
in the books wherein are recorded the rules and ceremonies of the court.
For instance, the first book of the ten which are called Riyau no
is occupied with the rules of the Department of Religion {Zhi%-gi Ri-
ywii). Of the fifty volumes of the Yen-gi ShiU^^ the first ten are
devoted to Shiil-tau matters. The nonto (liturgies) contained in the 8th
volume are not the private prayers of the Mikado, but are those used at
the festivals which he celebrated on behalf of the whole people. The


"The oho-harahi was one of the most characteristic of all Shin-tau festivals.
The liturgy used in celebrating it has been made the subject of numerous com-
mentaries besides those of Mabuchi and Motowori. It is still observed in the
present day*

"The text, called Riyau, dates from the year 718, and the commentary Gi^ge
from 833, Hirata is incorrect in saying that the Jifi-gi-Riyau comes first ; it is in
reality preceded by five other sections, forming Book I.

" The preface of the YePl^gi Shiki is dated 927


72 SATOW : TOE BEVIVAi::- oe bube shiI^-tatt.

9tli and 10th Tolumes contain the names of 3132 gods in 2861 temples
at which the court worshipped (either personally or by special envoys).
In the SJmjohvrg^-Beu (1431) of Takabatake Chikafusa the constitu-
’tion of the Department of Eeligion is described even before that of
the Council of State. In the reign of Kau-toku (645-654), in answer
to an inquiry as to how the people were to be ruled, all the minis-
ters of the [81] Mikado replied to him, “First serve the gods, and
aft^wards deliberate on matters of Government/' But the successors
of this Mikado neglected the worship of the gods for that of Buddha,
and the consequence was the decline of their authority. An oiffbrt
to reform the practice of the Court was made by the emperor Zhi-
yufi-toku (b. 1197, d, 1242), who in his KiK-'pi Mi-seu says : “ The

rule of the Forbidden Precinct is that the worship of the gods come
first, and other matters afterwards. At morning and evening the
wise resolve to do honour to the gods is carried out with diligence.
^Even in the slightest matters the Zhi%-gim^^ (of Ise) and the Nai-
M-doJcoro are not to be placed after the emperor. According as the
things arrive at maturity, they shall be offered up first (to the gods) ;
but things presented by Buddhist monks and nuns, and from all
persons who are under an interdict, these shall not be presented." As
it is the duty of subjects to imitate the practice of the incarnate god
(ara-Mto-gami) who is their sovereign, the necessity of worshipping
his ancestors and the gods from whom they spring is to be enjoined upon
all.

' As the number of the gods who possess different functions is so
great, it will be convenient to worship by name only the most important,
and to include the rest in a general petition. Those whose daily affairs
are so multitudinous that they have not time to go through the whole of
the following morning prayers, may content themselves with adoring the


^The Zkifl-guu are the two temples where Amaterasu, the Mikado^s an-
cestress and the goddess of food Uke-mochi no kami are worshipped. In the
Hairshi-BokoTo, a bnilding within tlie palace, were kept the copies of the sacred
of Ise and the sword of Atsuta, which have been already mentioned
as being among the divine treasures received by Ninigi when he descended from
heaven.


SATOW: THE REVIVAI- OP TORE 8Hli3'-TAIT.


73


residence of the Emperor/^ the doanestic kami-duna, the spirits of their
ancestors, [32] their local patron god, and the deity of their particular
calling in life.

* In praying to the gods, the blessings which each has it in his
power to bestow are to be mentioned in a few words, and they are not
to be annoyed with greedy petitions ; for the Mikado in his palace offers
nj) petitions daily on behalf of his people, which are far more effectual
than those of his subjects.

' Rising early in the morning, wash your face and hands, rinse out
the mouth and cleanse the body. Then turn towards the province of
Yamato, strike the palms of the hands together twice, and worship,®^
bowing the head to the ground. The proper posture is that of kneeling
on the heels, which is ordinarily assumed in saluting a superior.’

PRAYER.

“ From a distance I reverently worship with awe before Ame no
Mi-hashira and Kuni no Mbliashira, also called Shinatsu-liiko no kami
and Shinatsu hime no kami, to whom is consecrated the Palace built
with stout pillars at Tatsuta no Tachinu in the department of Heguri
in the province of Yamato.

I say with awe, deign to biess me by correcting the unwitting
faults which, seen and heard by you, I Iiave committed, by blowing off
and clearing away the calamities which evil gods might inflict, by caus-
ing me to live long like the hard and lasting rock, and by repeating to
the gods of heavenly origin and to the gods of earthly origin the petitions
which I present every day, along with your breath, that they may hear
with the sliarp-earedness of the fortli-gallopping colt.”


Adoration of the Mikado’s residence is not mentioned in the Tama-dasukh
hut is enjoined by the last edition (published in 1873) the Mai-tefu-zhiH-pai
Shiki (form of morning prayer). As no form of words is given, it is impossible
to say what the character of this prayer should be. The same book contains three
other prayers not given in the Taina-dasuki, namely to the three primeval gods, to
Ninigi no mikoto, and to Zhifi-mu Ten-wau, while it omits the prayer to Adzuma-
terasu oho-kami (Tou-seu-guu ' or Iheyasu commonly called Gon-geh Sama).

The word rendered here ^ worship ’ is wogamu, which Hirata derives from
tvori-kagamu, a compound verb signifying ‘ to bench’ If this etymology is correct,
,bow down ’ would be a closer rendering.


74


SATO'W : IHE EEVIVAL OF PURE SHlS-TAU.


The two deities who are here, addressed are the god and goddess of
wind. Their first names mean Pillar of Heaven and Pillar of Earth,
and are given because the wind prevades the space between Heaven and
Earth, and supports the former as a pillar supports the roof of a [88]
house. 8Una in the alternate names means ‘ long breath.'®^ ‘ Evil
acts and words are of two kinds, those of which we are ourselves
conscious, and those of which we are not conscious. Every one is
certain to commit accidental offences, however careful he may be, and
hence the practice of our ancient tongue was to say “ deign to correct
those failings of which I may have been guilty.^’ But it is better to
assume that we have committed such unconscious offences. If we pray
that such as we have committed may be corrected, the gods are willing
to pardon them. By evil gods are meant bad deities and demons
wbo work harm to society and to individuals. They originated from the
impurities contracted by Izanagi during his visit to the nether world,
and cast off by him during the process of purification. They subse-
quently increased in number, especially after the introduction of Bud-
dhism. The two deities of wind can of course blow away anything it
pleases them to get rid of^ and among other things the calamities which
evil gods endeavour to inflict. As man is dependent on them for the
breath which enables him to live, it is right to pray to them to give
long life. This is also the reason why they are besought to carry our
prayers to the gods of heavenly origin and to the gods of earthly origin.’
As an Illustration of the efficacy of prayer, Hirata gives a long account
of a boy who was carried off in the year 1806 by goblins, and after-
wards restored to his father, who had earnestly besought the inter-
cession of Shinatsu-hiko and Shinatsu-hime with the other gods.

The next prayer is addressed to Amaterasu and the other gods
who dwell in the sun, and consists simply in calling on them by name.
The common belief of the lower classes appears to be that the sun is
actually a god, and they may often be seen to worship on rising in the
morning, by turning towards it, placing their hands together, and recit"
ing prayers. The third [84] prayer is addressed to Izanarai and the


^ ® Tsu is the generic particle, and htko and hime might be translated lord and

Udy. lUme is still used in the latter sense.


SATOW.‘ THE EEYIVAL OF PUEE SHX^-TAtT. 7d

other gods who dwell , m the moon. Hirata says that although the
Man-yefu-shifu contains verses about the moon, it was generally con-
sidered unlucky to admire it, the reason of which is explained by a
verse in the Ise Mmogatari to be that man grows old by accumulating
moons but on the 15th day of the 8th month it is customary to make
offerings to the moon, because of her great brilliancy at that season of
the year. This however may be a practice derived from the Chinese.

The fourth prayer is addressed to the gods of Ise, namely Amaterasu
and Toyo-uke-bime no kami, with a certain number of subordinate
deities in adjacent shrines.®® Toyo-uke-bime was the daughter of
Waka-musubi, who was the joint offspring of the god of Fire and the
goddess of Soil. She has at least eight other names, all of which express
the fact of her being the goddess of food, both vegetable, fish and flesh.
Here we meet with a curious Shin-tau doctrine, according to which a
divine being throws ofi* portions of itself by a process of fissure, thus
producing what are called Parted-Spiri ts, with separate

functions. Two of the parted spirits of Toyo-uke-bime thus formed are
Kiikunochi no kami, the producer of all trees, and Kayanu-liime no
kami, the parent of all grasses. As rice and other seedvS, cattle and the
silkworm wei^e produced from the dead body of Toyo-uke-bime, it is to
this goddess and to the action of her ‘ Parted Spirits ’ above mentioned
that mankind owes the blessings of food, clothing and lodgment. It was
an ancient custom therefore to Avorship this goddess on moving into a
new house, built of the wood and thatched with the grass of which she
was the first cause. In one of the norito entitled Ohotono hogah% a
service of this kind performed twice annually at the Mikado’s court,
this goddess is besought to protect his Palace from harm.

She is also worshipped under the name of Uka-no-mi-tama [85] no
Mikoto, along with two other gods, at the great temple Inari betAveen
Kiyauto and Fushimi. Temples consecrated to ‘‘Inari sama” are
common all over Japan, and it is usually supposed that Inari is the
name of a god ; the mistake arises from the common Japanese practice
of calling persons, and gods also, by the name of the place where they

detailed account of the legends relating to these goddesses has already
been given in a paper on The Shrines of Ise published in the Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. ii.


SAlTOW : TH3G REVITAI. OF PURE

reside. Another erroneous belief is that Inari sama is a fox, .'and many
temples originally dedic5atedto foxes are consequently mis-ealled temples
of Inari. One origin assigned for the error is the use of a Chinese
character which means ' fox ’ in writing down phonetically Miketsu
kami, which is an alternative name of Toyo-uke-bime. The truth is
that the fox is the messenger of this goddess, and images of the
animal are placed in front of hei* temples, which may have aided in
eonhrming the error.

The worshipper is next directed to turn in the direction of the pro-
vince of Hitachi, and bowing down as before, to repeat the following
prayer : —

From a distance I reverently worship with awe before Takemika-
dzuehi no kami, Fatsu-nuslii no kami and Ftinado no kami, to whom are
consecrated the Palace of Kagushima** in the department of Kagushimain
the province of Hitachi, the palace of Kadori in the department of Kadori
in the province of Shimo-tsu-fusa, and the temple of Ikisu in the province
of Hitachi, which are reverently styled the three temples of Adziima/'

Take-mika-dzuchi and Futsu-uushi have already been mentioned as
the two gods who descended from heaven to conquer the country for
Ninigi no mikoto, and Funado no kami acted as their guide. After
persuading Oho-kiiiu-niishi to surrender the sovereignty of Japan, they
slew or expelled all the evil gods ' who glittered like fire-flies or were
disorderly as May-flies, banished to foreign countries all the demons
who made rocks, stumps of trees, leaves of plants and the foam of the
green waters to speak, and then ascended to heaven from the [86]
province of Hitachi on a white cloud. The evil gods originated from
the pollution contracted by Izanagi during his visit to the nether world,
and having greatly increased in numbers, began to behave in a dis-
orderly manner when Susanowo no mikoto showed them a bad example.
Take-mika-dzuchi and Futsu-nushi drove them into Hitachi, whence
they expelled them from Japanese soil. The two gods left their
Parted-Spirits here, in th-e temples which were built in their honour/

®*Kagushima and Shimo-tsu-fusa are .the archaic .spelling of ICashima and
Pmnfusa.^ The first-named two -temples have been described by Mr. C. W.
^wrmce in a paper published in the Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japai^


BATOW : THE KETIVAI^ OF FUEE SHlS:-TAir, 77

Hiratra says that ibese tro gods are an example of Dmality in
Ilnitj, of wbxcb many other similar cases exist. The gods of Wind
and Metal are in pairsy male and female^ but each is; qounted as a
single deity ; while Oho-wata-tsunai no kami, the god of the sea^ is a
Trinity in Unity. He remarks that these truths * have a profound
and mysterious signification/ burt omits to give any explanation of the
mystery, probably because no explanation is possible.

The sixth prayer is addressed bo Oho-kunhnushi, * who rules the
UnseeUy and to’ his consort Suseri-bimOr to whom is dedicated the
ancient temple of Oho-yaaliiro in Idzumo. By the term ** Unseen
(haJcuri-goto) are meant peace or disturbance in the empire,, its prosperity
and adversity,, the life and death, good and bad fortune of human beings ,
in fine,, every strpematural event which cannot be ascribed to a definite
author. The most fearful crimes which a man commits go unpunished
by society so long as they are undiscovered, but they draw down on
him the hatred of the invisible gods. The attainment of happiness by
performing good acts is regulated by the same law. Even if the gods
do not punish secret sins by the usual penalties of the law, such as
strangulation, decapitation and transfixion on the cross, they inflict
diseases, misfortunes, short life and extermination of the race. Some-
times th^ even cause a clue to be given by which secret crime is made
known to the authorities who have power to punish. The gods bestow
happine^ and blessings on those who practise good, as effectually as if
they [87]| were to maniifest themselves to our sight and give treasures^
and even if the good do> not obtain material rewards, they enjoy exemp*
tion from, disease, good luck and long life ; and prosperity is granted to
their descendants. Never mind the praise or blame of fellow- men, but
act so that you need not be ashamed before the gods of the Unseen. If
you desire to practise true virtue, learn to stand in awe of the Unseen,
and that will prevent you from doing wrong. Make a vov 7 to the god
who rules over the Unseen, and cultivate the conscience (m(t^go~koT6) im-
planted in you, and then you will never wander from the way. You
cannot hope to live more than a hundred years under the most favorable
circumstances, but as you will go to the Unseen Realm of Oho-kuni-
nushi after death,, and he subject to his rule, learn betimes to bow down
before him. In the TawLcn no Mihashin Hirata says that the spirits of


SA.TO^ : "THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHit-TAU,


78

the dead continue to exist in the unseen world, which is everywhere
about us, and that they all become gods, of varying character and
degrees of influence. Some reside in temples built in their honour,
•others hover near their. tombs, and they continue to render services to
their prince, parents, wife and children as when in the body. Besides
praying to the primary spirit Oho-kuni-nushi, Hirata enjoins on his
followers the necessity of addressing themselves also to his ‘‘Bough
Spirit,^’ worshipped in Yamato under the name of Oho-kuni-mitama,
his “ Gentle Spirit,^’ the god of the famous temple of Miwa in the
same province, and his son Kotoshiro-niishi, the god of truth. The
dogma here implied must not be confounded with that before alluded
to in speaking of “ Parted-Spirits.” “ Eough Spirit ” (ara mi tamo)
denotes a god in his character as a punisher of the wicked, while as
a “ Gentle Spirit ” {nigi mi tama) he pardons the penitent. There is
a third character called sulci mi tama in which a god confers blessings.
Human beings are also said to possess the rough spirit and the gentle
spirit, which are explained to be the powerful excitement of the soul
‘Separating from the body, and acting independently. Tlius the feeling
of hatred is capable [88] of avenging injuries, a notable case of which
is the death of unfaithful lovers caused by the indignation of the women
whom they have wronged and deserted. Frequently the indignation
puts on the form of the injured person, and appears to the doer of the
wrong, without the knowledge of the injured person. A well-authenticat-
ed case of a Gentle Spirit appearing to its correlative Kough Spirit is
mentioned in the hi-lioH-gi, where it is stated that when Oho-kuni-nushi
was walking on the sea-shore, and lamenting that the departure of
Sukiiiia-bikona had left him without a coadjutor in the task of civi-
lizing the country, a god came towards him from the sea, and proffered
his help. Oho-kuniuiuslu did not recognize his other half, and asked
his name, on which he received the answer, “lam thy said tama"'

The ninth prayer is addressed to Iha-naga-hime, the goddess of
long life. The legend says that Ninigi no mikoto, while making an ex-
cursion in the neighbourhood of his palace, fell in with a beautiful young
On his inquiring her name, she said that, it was Ko-no-hana-Saku-
ya^hime, daughter of Oho-yama4su.mi, the god of mountains, and that
had an elder sister named Iha-naga-hime. The young god-prince


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHI^-TAU,


79


fell in love with her and demanded her in marriage from her father *
Oho-yama-tsu-mi thereupon despatched the two sisters to him, but as
the elder sister was very ugly, Ninigi no mikoto was frightened and
sent her back. Upon this the father said, “'My reason for. offering
both my • daughters, was that if you had taken Iha-naga-hiine ' into
your service, the lives of the descendants of the heavenly gods would
have been eternal, and if you had made use of Ko-no-hana-Saku-ya-
hime, they would have been as beautiful as the flowers of the cherry-
tree. But now that you have rejected the one and kept the other,
they will be as frail as the blossoms, and the anger of Iha-naga-
hime will shorten human life.” This story presents all the characteris-
tics of the myth. The name of the ugly daughter is a compound of
lAu, “ rock,” and naga, “ long,” and is symbolical of longevity ; while
the name of the [89] other is explained to mean ^ the blossoming of the,
flowers of trees,’ and signifies perishable beauty. The ancient text
from, which the legend is quoted says “ this was the cause of the
short lives of the men of the present day,” and Hirata takes ad-
vantage of the occasion to remark that while it is very natural for
a man “ to prefer a beautiful , wife, as the object of marriage is to beget
children, he is far wiser who chooses his wife on account of her virtues.”
He says that although the son of Ninigi no mikoto lived 580 years at
his Palace of Takachiho, that was a short life compared with the lives
of those who had lived before him, and the lives of some of the early
emperors from Jimmu, which extended over more than a century,
were of course still shorter. In fact from the time of Niiiigi no
mikoto the years of the Mikado and his people continued to grow
always fewer, for although it might be supposed that the consequences
of Kinigi no mikoto’s act would only aflect his own immediate
descendants, the Mikado’s subjects were naturally bound not to live
longer than their sovereign. He concludes by the safe opinion that
those who wish to live long should constantly take care of their health,
and at the same time pray to this goddess for her bessing.

Another of the prayers is to be addressed to the ichi no iniycij or
chief temple of the province in which the worshipper lives. It is not
known with exactness at what period certain temples came to have this
designation, but at all events it is not to be found in any document


m


SATOWi THE BEVITAL OF PURE SHlI^'-PAU.


older than the 12th century^ Nevertheless, Hirata is of oplaion that
the practice of making such a distinction cannot be wrong, since it has
existed for so long a period that it must be supposed to have the sanc-
tion of the gods. Besides the ieM m miya, there exist in certain
provinces temples called Kimi4ama no yasMro, which Motowori thinks
are probably dedicated to persons who first settled there and cultivated
the land, and also a third class called The origin of the

latter term, which means general temple, is supposed to be that some
of the ancient governors (kohhsU), whose duty it was on arriving in
[90] their provinces, to make a tour for the purpose of worshipping at
dl the Shifi-tau temples within their jurisdiction, compounded by
worshipping only at the icM no miya, if there happened to be one at
the provincial capital, or built a new temple to which they gave the
name of 'general temple/ Another suggestion is that it was at the
idd-no-miya that the governor began his round of worshipping, and
that the name is derived from this circumstance. Kanetane, the editor
of the TamchdasuM, quotes a passage from the Tethya OiM-sai, which
shows that the new governor had to perform these religious rites before
entering upon his administrative duties.

Amongst the ancient Shiil-tau practices which have descended to
the present day is that of presenting iiew-l)orn infants to the local deity,
in order to place them under his protection. This god is commonly
called the uji-gami (family god), and the inhabitants of the district over
which he is supposed to extend his favours stand to him in the relation
of tiji-hy or children of the family. In Satsuma, Akita, and in some
other provinces it is also the custom before starting on a journey to
proceed to the temple of this god, and to beseecli his protection until
the person shall return home again. The priest gives him a paper
charm to protect him from harm on the road, and he procures also a
little sand from the site of the temple, to be mixed in small quantities
with wafer, and drunk whenever he feels uncomfoi^table during the
journey. Whatever remains of this sand has to be returned to the
temple when the traveller reaches home again, and he has of course
to give thanks for the protection which he has enjoyed.

The local deity ought correctly to be called Uhi-snna- no kami, the
god of the native earth (or sand), and this term is found in ancient


SATOW : THE REVITAE OF PURE SHit-TAU.


81


writings. Uji-gami should only be applied to the common ancestor of
a number of persons who bear the same family name, or if not to an
ancestor, to some one who has merited equivalent honours by acquiring
a title to their gratitude. The word uji being originally the same as
ucM^ ^ within,’ iiji-gaini must nieaii [91] the deity who is most closely
connected by ties of worship with the persons comprehended ‘ within ’ a
family or a community. The Zhm-viei Shiki contains the name of some
uji-gami who were simply ancestral gods ; but on the other haiid the
Fiijiwara family, which was descended from Ame-no-koya-ne no niikoto,
worshipped Take-mika-dzuchi and Fiitsu-nuslu as their uji-gami. The
importance attached in ancient time to the worship of the vji-gami is
shown by grants of rice and Immunities with respect to passjjorts being
given by tlie Mikado to nobles, in order that they might perform these
duties. A regulation of the year 895, after stating that the uji-gami
are mostly located in the Five Home Provinces,®^ says that any one
who asks for leave in the second, fourth and eleventh months for tlie
purpose of worshipping his ancestors, is to obtain it at once. It would
appear from tliis order that the term had not at that time lost its
original meaning. Hirata thinks that the confusion arose from the
fact that the uji-gami, or ancestral gods, of the hereditary local chieis
culled Kuui-710-miya-kn-ko were at the same time the patron gods of the
localit 3 ^ Their subjects would naturally use both terms as synonymous,
and as the one fell out of use, the other w’ould come to be employed for
the local god, whether he were an ancestor or not.

It is suggested by the author of the Malsu no Ochi-ha that what is
now called the Vji-gami of a village was originally the collective name
under which the inhabitants worshipped their respective ancestors in a
single temple, and that this family-god eventually came to be looked on
UvS the patron-god of the locality. Or perhaps, when there was already
a temple to the local god, they worshipped their ancestors in the same
building for convenience’ sake, and thus the two were in the end con-
founded in one. Hirata does not approve this conjecture, hub it
certainly seems as probable as his own view, which indeed it appears
to supplement. A third supposition is that ujigaini is a corruption of


that is Yanaashiru, Yamalo, Idzumi, Set^tsu and Kahachi,
AF. VOL. III.— 6.


82


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHII^-TAIT.


uM no kami, the god of a family or [92] community, and that %dm-myia
no kami is au alternative name for the uji-gami taken in the latter
sense; so that the supposed confusion would be no confusion at all.

Hirata quotes another author, who remarks that the character of
the patron-god affects the people, the animals, and the plants of the
locality, which fact accounts for the local differences found to exist
between individuals of one species takeji from various parts of the
country. All the nji-gami are under the orders of Oho-kuni-nushi, and
acting as his agents, they rule the fortunes of human beings before
their birth, during their life-time, and after their death. Consequently
when a person removes his residence, his original vji-gami has to make
arrangements with the vjl-gami of the place whither he transfers his
abode. On such occnsioiis it is proper to take leave of the old god, and
to pay a visit to the temple of the new god as soon us possible after
coming within his jurisdiction. The apparent reasons which a man
imagines have induced him to change his abode may be many, but the
real reasons cannot l)e other than that, either he has offended his vji-
garni f and is therefore expelled, or that the vgi-gavii of another place
has negotiated his transfer. As che uji-gami has such influence over
the welfare of his proiegi^ it is of the highest importance to stand well
with him, and to enforce this argument Hirata narrates several
stones of persons who were punished for neglecting tlieir nji-gavii.
Next to tlie uji-gami comes the hami-dana or shrine in which are
worshipped the Penates. Every Japanese, with the exception of the
more bigoted members of the Buddhist sects called Nichi-ren-shiu and
Itsu-kau-shiu, possesses such a shrine in his house. It contains various
tables covered with paper called o-harahi and o-Juda^ on which are
printed the titles of the gods of Ise and other gods in whom the house-
holder places his trust. Before these tablets are offered up on certain
occasions, as the New Year, and the 2nd, 15th and 28th days of the
month, sake (called for this purpose mi Jdj, rice, and the leafy twigs of
the (Cleyera japonica). The practice of different families [93]
with respect to offerings is not perfectly uniform, either as to the articles
offered, or the clays on which this is done, but no one omits the sake*
Every evening, too, a lighted wick floating in a saucer of oil is placed
in the kami-dana*


SATOW : THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHIR-TAU.


83


Hirata would add to the o-harahi of the two gods of Ise and the
fuda of the other gods worshipped in this ’vay an image of Sohodo no
kami, the scare-crow. Concerning this god he says : ‘ Sohodo no kami,
also called Kuye-biko, is the scare-crow placed in the fields to frighten
away birds and animals, and though it is a very ugly and miserable
creature, the divine books say of it this is a god which k hosts every-
thing in the empire, although liis legs are xtnable to walk/^ As the
spirits of all the gods have recourse to it, and perfornx wonders, it is a
very dreadful deity, and therefore an image of it should be placed before
the door of the shrine for the spirits of the gods who are bidden thither
to rest upon/ The ancient legend says that, as Oho-kuni-nushi was
walking along the shore, he saw a tiny god coming t<vwards him on the
crests of the waves, in a boat made of the milkweed shell, and dressed
ill the skin of a wren. When asked his name, he was silent, and none
of the gods who were in Oho-kiini-nushi’s following could tell. Then
the iaiiigvhu^^ spoke, and said, Kuye-biko will know.'' So they
called Kuye-biko, who replied, on being asked, This is Sukuna-biko-
na, the child of the IMusubi no kami."

The following prayer is to he addressed to the Icmni-dana : —
Eeverently adoring the great god of the two iialaces of Ise in
the first place, the eight hundred myriads of celestial gods, the eight
hundred myriads of terrestrial gods, all the fifteen hundred myriads®^
of gods to whom are consecrated the great and small temples in all
provinces, all islands and all places of the Great Land of Eight
Islands, the fifteen hundreds of [94] myriads of gods whom they cause
to serve them, and the gods of branch-palaces and branch-temples, and
Sohodo no kami, whom I have invited to the shrine set up on this divine
shelf, and to whom I offer praises day by day, I pray with awe that
they will deign to correct the unwitting faults which, heard and seen by
them, I have committed, and blessing and favouring me according to
the Powers which they severally wield, cause me to follow the divine ex-
ample, and to perform good-wo]*ks in the Way."

Hirata recounts several miracles worked by o-harahi of the Nai-


Either the toad or the bull- frog.

These nunibers are merely figurative expressions.


84 J3AT0W: THIS REVIVAL 01^ FURE SJUNVIAU.

kiiu, which I am unfortunately obliged to omit for want of space, and
gives a long explanation of the reason why Ainaterasu, who detested
Buddhism, allowed it to spread throughout the country. His arguments
resemble in logical form very closely those by which the origin of evil
is accounted for by theologians.

The fifteenth of the prayers is to be oflered to what are called the
hcorcthi-do no kami^ go<ls whose office it is to free the suppliant from
evils, sins and pollutions of all kinds. Then follow prayers to the gods
who keep off pestilence, to Ame-no-koya-ne no mikoto, who is regarded
as the god of wisdom, to Ame-no-uzume no mikoto, the goddess of
. happiness, Toyo-uke-binie in her capacity as the protector of the abodes
of men, the gods of tlie Imrvcst, of the gate and the front court, of the
kitchen fire-place (commonly called Kuwau-zhin-sarna), of the well,
of the privy, and of learning. Amongst the gods of learning he places
Kada, Mabuchi and Motowori.

Last of all comes a prayer to the shrine, commonly called
, in which are dep sited the monumental tablets of ancestors and
deceased members of the family, wdio are supposed to become koio/ce or
perfect buddhas immediately after their death. Usually the butm-daK
contains an image of the chief Buddhist god of the sect to which the
family belongs placed in the centre, the monumental tables being on
either side. Fresh flowers are offered up as often they are needed, and
the first portion of the rice boiled fur the daily food of the household, be-
sides a [9o] first portion of any fruit or cooked food which the deceased
are known to he fond of. Part of tliese practices, which are corruptions
introduced into the native ancestor-worship by the Biiddbisi^ priests,
should in Hirata's opinion be abandoned, and the name of the wooden
cupboard in which the tablets are kept should be changed from butsu-dau
(Buddhist altar) to tama-ya (spirit house). Water and sprigs of the
Cleyera should be offered up every day, and there is no objection to
using flowers as a decoration, but incense (joss-stick) is an abomination.
Amongst other observances which are in vogue, that of visiting the
tomb of a parent or other member of the family on that day in each
month which corresponds to the day of his death should be kept up,
for this is not a Buddhist custom, and although the home of the spirits
of the dead is in th^ tamorya, they are present wherever they are wor-


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OF PURE SHlK’^-TAU.


85


shipped, being gods and therefore ubiquitous. The festival in honour
of departed spirits, which is celebrated on the 14th and 15th days of the
7th month, called being of Buddhist origin, ought to be abolish-

ed, and the ancient rule of holding the festival in the 2ad, 4th and 11th
months be reverted to.

The origin of the worship of ancestors, says Hirata, dates from the
descent of Ninigi no Mikoto, who was instructed by the creator and
creatrix that the worship of the celestial and terrestrial gods was the
most important part of Government. They taught Ama-no-koya-ne
and Ama-no- fiito-dama how to perform the rites, and attached them to
his person. Zhih-mu Ten-wau, after victories, worshipped lus ancestral
gods on a mountain. It is equally the duty of a subject to be diligent
in worshipping his ancestors, whose minister he should consider
himself to .be. The custom of adoption arose fiom the natural
desire of having some one to perform sacrifices, and this desire
ought not to be rendered of no avail by neglect. Devotion to the
memory of ancestors is the mainspring of [90] all virtues. No one
who discharges his duty to them will ever be disrespectful to the gods,
or to his living parents. Such a man will also be faithful to his prince,
loyal to his iViends, and kind and gentle with his wife and children.
For the essence of this devotion is in truth filial piety. These truths
are confirmed also by the books of the Chinese, who say tliat the
loyal subject issues from the gate of the pious son,’’ and again, filial
piety is the ])asis of all actions.”

Hirata began to attract the notice of infiuential personnages in
1822, when he was requested by the Abbot of Uheno, who was a Prince
of the Blood, to present him with copies of his chief -works on Shin-tau.
In the following year he quitted the service of the dawiiyati Itakura,
and made a journey to Kiyauto, where lie obtained introductions to
nobles of the Court, who brought his writings to the notice of the
retired mikado Kuwau-kaku. On returning to Yedo, he devoted him-
self again to his studies, and during the next fifteen years produced a
considerable number of works on Shin-taii and various other subjects
In 1836 he printed a book called the JDai-ikhsaU’-koliu Kau, which


®’See Eilel’s Handbook of Chinese Buddhism; Art. T^lamba.


86


SATOW: THE REVIVAL OP PURE SHIR'-TAU.


drew forth warm praises from the Mikado and the Kuwau-bakii,*^ and
gave great offence to the Shiyaiiguh’s government, who ordered it to
be suppressed, on the ground, it is said, that it contained detailed
information about Japan, and might perhaps get into the hands of
foreigners. In 1838 he entered the service of the daimiyaii of Akita.
From the time when he quitted the Itakura family in 1823 he had
received many favoui*s from the princes of Mito, Tayasu and Wohari,
the latter of whom granted him an allowance of rice.

In 1840 he had a dispute with the government almanac makers
about one of his works named TeKAeu Mu-Jdu Reid upon the native
chronology, and his opponents had sufficient influence to get him ban-
ished to Akita, with an order to publish nothing more. He left Yedo
ten days after the issue of tlie decree, and died at Kubota in 1843,
being over sixty-seven years oi' age.

(97] His son Kanetane, in the biographical notice which forms
part of the last volume of the Tama-dasuki, Sixjs that the number of
pu,pils who entered his school was altogether five hundred and flfty-
thxee. His acknowledged works amount to over one hundred, besides
those which he never published. A list of the most important is to be
found at the end of the Nific-galm Mon-dafii^ and the biographical notice
just referred to contains the dates at which each of them was began
and completed.

Hi ratals works are composed in two styles, the one almost entirely
colloquial, the other foiuned on the model of the ancient prose- writers,
and crowded with obsolete -words which add considerably to the dif-
ficulties of the student. His graver writings fall far short of those of
Motowori in point of clearness for this reason. His scholarship appears
to have been very extensive, and without a wide acquaintance with
ancient Chinese literature and Buddhism it would be impossible to
follow him into the remote regions whither bis researches sometimes
ca3Ty him. He speaks so frequently of analogies between the native
traditions, and those of the Buddhists and ancient Chinese, which he
interprets by the theory that the latter borrowed from the Japanese,
that it is a matter of regret not to be able to test his statements ; since


Mikado’s prime minister, then merely a nominal office.


SATOW: THE KEVIVAE OF TUBE SHi:S'-TATJ.


87


if the supposed analogies really exist, they would be of considerable use
in tracing the relationship of the Japanese to the races of the Asiatic
Continent.

The object of this paper being merely to give some account of the
views entertained by a school of modern writers on Shih-tau, no attempt
has been made to determine which of their opinions are in accord-
ance, and which at variance, with the real nature of this religion.
It is, however, manifest that such of their conclusions as are founded
on the alleged infallibility of the ancient records or on any premises
which involve the miraculous or supernatural must for those very
reasons be discredited ; and the real nature and origin of Shih-tau
must be decided by the usual canons of historical criticism. The most
effectual means of conducting the investigation would be a comparison
of [98] the legends in the Ko-dii-id and the Ni-ho%-gi, and the rites and
ceremonies concerning which the Noriio and other parts of the Ye%-gi
Shiki afford so much information, with what is known of other ancient
religions. A correct interpretation of the extant texts is the first
requisite, and in arriving at this the philological labours of Mabuchi,
Motowori and Hirata, imperfect as their results must naturally be,
will be of immense assistance. At the same time, in order to estimate
the exact value of these results, the safest method would be to follow
the order proposed by Motowori for stuvlying the old literature, and to
begin by a careful analysis of the language of the GeK-zIii and other
Monogatarij which form the key to the MaK-yefihsJiifu ; for without an
accurate knowledge of the latter, the proper reading of the Chinese
characters in which the Ko-zhi-hl, Ni-hoK-gi and Norito have been
written down cannot be known witli any degree of certainty. By
carrying out this programme, and following in the footsteps of the
native scholars, it would be alone possible to check their work and at
the same time to arrive at cori’ccfc conclusions, for it is very clear that the
last word has yet to be said on the subject of Shin-tau.

Finis.


RE-PRINTED AT THE “ JAl'AK ITMES OFFICE TOKYO, JAPAN.


<(

GOVT. OP INDIA
Department of Archaeology^

NEW DELHI.


, '*P :


Please help lis to keep the book
cleap and moving.
