GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY
CENTRAL ARCH/EOLOG I CAL
LIBRARY
Gall No. 89 (»0 ^/ T*
Acc. No, J21-!^07-3.
D.G.A. 79.
GIPN— S4— 2D. G. Arch. N. D./57.— 25-9-58— 1,00,000.
: . unLr
.Sr
contentIV-^. ASi^
Across Europe and Asia ....
Analyses of the Take-no-ko .
Some Japanese Musical Intervals
Visibility of Mountains from Tokiyd .
Discovery of Human Remains
Ancient Japanese Rituals. — Part I. .
On A Karen Inscription .
The Chiirch at Yamaguchi from 1550
to 1586 ,
The Feudal Mansions of Yedo .
Inscriptions in Shimabara and
Amakiisa - -
Foreign Travel of Modern Japanese
Adventurers
On the Drinking Water of Yokohama.
Transliteration of the Japanese
Syllabary
A Discourse on Infinite Vision
WasSbySe, the Japanese Gulliver. .
Analyses of Surface Waters in T6kiy6.
The Chemical Industries of Japan. .
H. M. S. “ Phaeton ” at Nagasaki in
A History of Japanese Art ,
Notes on Osaka
Ancient Japanese Rituals. — Part II. .
Reports of General Meetings. 72-1, 94,
Reports of Annual Meeting
Report of the Council . ' .

List of Members


John Milne, F. G. S. .

I

D. W. Dwars .

73

Rev. P. V. Veeder, D. D.

76

Rev. P. V. Veeder, D. D.

86

T. R. H. McClatchie .

90

EroesrSatow, B. A. .

95

Rev. N. Brown, D. D.

127

Ernest Satow, B. A. .

■ 131

T. R. H. MoClatchie .

► 157

Rev. H. Stout

. i8s

J, M. James . . . .

, igx

A. J. C. Geerts

. 21 1

Ernest Satow, B. A. .

. 226

J. M. James .

. 267

B. H. Chamberlain

. 287

R. W. Atkinson, B. Sc.

. 314

R. W. Atkinson, B. Sc.

318

W. G. Aston, M. A. .

. 329

W. Anderson, F.R.C.S.E.

• 345

Rev. J. Summers .

' 388

Ernest Satow, B. A. .

‘ 4 og

130, 183, 205, 225, 261, 284, 3

16.445


■ 456

. . . ' .

■ 457


. 461


89 1-05

T-A-S- J-


OHifRAL ASI€t4A£OW3QlG4yi
USRAKY, NEW vJELHi.

Am. Ko, . A: ^o. i3-,


ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA

BY JOHN MILNE, ESQ,


[Read October 15th., 1878]
IlSfTRODUCTION.''*'


The following paper is a short narrative of a journey
from England, across Europe and Asia to Japan, For
convenience and also on account of the great differences
exhibited by the countries which are described, I have
divided it into four parts.

From London to S. Petersburg!!, across Russia and
Siberia to Kiachta.

Across Mongolia to Pekin.

3^^ From Pekin to Tien-tsin and overland to Shanghai.

Observations and general notes.

Because the greater portion of the road comprised in
the first section of my journey is daily travelled over by
Russians and Siberians, and much of it has already been
described by English and French writers, I shall (2) pass
over this strip of country, which for length and flatness
exceeds all others on the globe, as briefly as possible.

As in the second portion of my journey which was across
Mongolia, I describe a road which lies somewhat out of the
route of ordinary caravans, and as the journey described in
part three, has but seldom been made by Europeans, I shall
treat these with comparatively more detail than I have that
which is comprised under part one.

♦The Geological notes made during this journey have been published
as a series of papers in the Geological Magazine, from July 1877 to
February 1878.


2


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA,


Not being able to speak the languages of the countries
through which I travelled, I am sorry to say that I lost
many opportunities of gaining information which might
have been of great value. When in Russian territory it is
generally supposed that French and German are of great
assistance. In many cases this is true, but where a traveller
has to deal with post boys, peasantry, traders, and subord-
inate officials, these languages are usually of no more use
than they would be in Mongolia or China. In these latter
countries I had the same linguistic difficulties as in Russia,
in consequence of which I suffered physically, mentally,
and pecuniarily for my ignorance.


PART I.

ACROSS RUSSIA AND SIBERIA.


Before leaving England I discovered that the popular
opinions respecting a journey across Siberia were very
vague. Although I advertised in several (3) newspapers
and made diligent enquiries for a travelling companion it
seemed impossible to obtain one.

In China or Japan where every member of a community
must have travelled more or less, the idea of an overland
trip across Siberia is by no means preposterous, — almost
every one, if he does not actually know some body who
has made the journey, is at least acquainted with some one
who has discussed, it.

In England, however, where the name Siberia is to or-
dinary individuals but seldom associated with .more than
gangs of exiles, packs of wolves, and dreary plains of frost
and snow, the idea of starting on a journey across such a
country is received with astonishment and a supplement of
ridicule.


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


3


This state of feeling I found to be exhibited even as far
as Moscow, where an English resident to whom I had
letters of introduction, and to whom I almost daily paid a
visit, would, every time he saw me, tip his chair back and
roar with laughter at the absurdity of the scheme.

Finding that the help and encouragement which I re-
ceived in England was so extremely limited, after vainly
advertising in The Field and other papers for, a travelling
companion, I started off alone on August 3’’^ 1875.

The route I chose was via Hull to Gottenburg, from
Gottenburg by rail to Stockholm, and then by steamer
along the coast of Finland to S. Petersburgh, which I
/eached on the afternoon of the 13^^*

This was the longest way that I could well have taken.
A much quicker route would have been to have gone from
Hull or London to S. Petersburgh direct by steamer.
This would have occupied about 6 days. Or a still shorter
route would have been to have crossed (4) the Channel and
to have had 3^ days of rail across France and Germany.

I took the Sweden route chiefly on account of its new-
ness and its variety. Also I anticipated meeting friends in
Sweden. ^

On reaching Hull, instead of finding the passenger ship
I had expected, I was told that the vessel was a coaling
steamer. Not wishing to beat a retreat at this early period
of my journey, I took my passage amidst clouds of coal
dust, in company with a Dutchman who, like myself, had
been misled by newspaper advertisements. I narrate this
as I shall my other misfortunes, that others who may wish
to experience the pleasures of an overland trip, may have an
opportunity of avoiding at least some fractional portions of
.its discomfort.

Excepting difficulties with the language, I found every-
thing in Sweden very pleasant. This however only con-
tinued as far as Stockholm, where I fell in with an English-
speaking community. My linguistic troubles were over-
come by pantomimic representation, an art in which I
found, by practice, I became considerably improved. Everyr^


4


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA. ,


where many tourists were to be seen, the greater number of
whom had come across the Atlantic. I felt that we were
all fellow-countrymen,— we were certainly fellow-actors.

At Stockholm, after seeing all the museums, and after
having my passport vised, for which purpose I had to make
several visits to the Russian Consulate, and pay the usual
fee, I obtained a place in a well -filled steamer for S. Peters-
burgh, I think I may safely say that from 8o to 90 per
cent of my fellow-passengers were Americans. This jour-
ney was a very (5) pleasant one. It occupied two or three days
and was almost altogether through an archipelago of little
pineclad islands. Very often these islands were so thickly
packed that there was land on all sides, and in no direction
could the open sea be seen — We stopped at several places,
and at two of them, Abo and Helsingfors, we landed and
had rambles, through clean well-built towns. At the for-
mer of these places we were boarded by Custom house
officers, who, for some unknown reason, inspected the bag-
gage, not only of those who were landing in Finland but
also that belonging to the passengers who were proceeding
to S. Petersburgh.

All the country which I saw, was, like the islands, low
and undulating, and shewing evidence upon its surface of
having been modelled by some form of ice. The general
hypothesis amongst geologists is that these appearances
were due to a great sheet of ice which during the glacial
period covered this portion of the world. I, however, al-
though by no means disbelieving that in bygone times
there were periods which we might call glacial, am inclined
to think that the causes which produced the peculiar cha-
racter of the islands and low lying land along these Coasts
may yet be seen in action. First there is the elevation of
the land going on, which for this portion of the world has
been so often proved, and is so often quoted in text-books
on Geology and Physical Geography that I will assume its
truth. Secondly there is the action of Coast Ice. Eveiy
year these seas are frozen over, and during the formation
and breaking up of the icy sheet, huge fields of ice are by


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


5


the action of the wind and tide rubbed up and down upon
the shores. The effects of this in rounding, scratching,. (6)
and whitening the rocks are so evident to all who pass this
wa}^, that I will also take for granted the agent here refer-
red to. Now if we combine these two actions and imagine
a iow-Iying shore which, whilst every year being scratched
and rounded is also being slowly elevated, I think we ought
to have the same appearances as those we see upon the
coast of Finland. Along the shore line there will be whiten-
ed and smoothed rocks, worn out into shelving hollows
and gentle undulations ; above this, but a little removed
from sea level, will be similarly shaped rocks, but as these
are no longer scrubbed with moving pans and fields of ice,
instead of being clean and <white, they will be grown over
with a covering of lichen ; still higher we shall find the
same general features, but the details will be hidden by a
covering of vegetation ; and these three conditions are con-
ditions which I often saw so beautifully illustrated upon
the Coast of Finland that the hypothesis of Coast Ice
modelling rising areas, appears to me to be clearly demon-
strated."^^

I stayed in S. Petersburgh a week, occupying myself
with arrangements for my trip, and in visiting museums,
palaces, and other places of interest, of which this northern
capital is so full. Although I had many letters of introduc-
tion I was unsuccessful in finding a companion for Siberia.

Starting from the Russian Capital I had many advant-
ages which could nut be obtained by persons starting from
China or Japan. Foremost amongst these I may mention
the fact that through the kindness of our charge d affaires,
M. Doria, I was enabled to obtain in addition to my ordin-
' ary passport, ofBcial introductions, (7) which I subsequently
found to be of considerable value. I also secured myself
against the disadvantage of travelling with a large quantity
of money. This I did by paying a portion of my stock into

* For a more detailed account of the action of Coast Ice on a Rising
Area, see, Geolog : Mag: Vol III, Nos 7. 8. 9— also Vol IV, No y.—also
Quart : Jour t-Geolog: Soc: Nov. 1877.


;5 MILNE’S JOURl^Y Aeitqss B13R0PB ANP ASIA.

one of the hanks, and obt^inmg a circular note for the same
on the banks in Ekaterinburg, Tomsk, and Irkutsk#

The next stage of my journey was to Moscow, where
f i also spent several days in trying to find a companion.
Although I had letters of introduction to the directors
of no less than five banks, and each of these amongst
their ' man^ laequaintanbes at the exchange and other
places endeavoured find me a fellow-traveller, I was
stMl unsuccessful. nThe English Consul, Mr, Leslie,
following Russian custom,. very kindly advertised in several
of the daily papers for ms. The result of this was that
I had five or six applicants, three of whom, if I remember
rightly, Were young ladies,. As it happens in , England
and other countries, so in Russia, young ladies have often
to make long journeys alone, — ^but as in Russia the
distances have to be overcome by driving night and day
in carriages 'over rough and lonely roads,, it is more neces-
sary iq this country that the lady should have a companion.
Efom this, coupled with the fact that it is almost as cheap
for two to travel together as it is for one alone, the custom
of ladies travelling with umntrdduced gentlemen has
originated. Finding none of the applicants or rather the
conditions which the applicants suggested, suitable, on the
night of the 26 * 1 '- August, I left Moscow by train for Nijni
Novgorod, where, as the great fair was still going on, I was
’told that I should find many merchants returning to Siberia.
Immediately on my arrival I made my last attempt to find
a companion and being (8) once more unsuccessful I took
pc^ssage in a steamer on the Volga bound for Perm.

I had a day to spare before the steamer sailed and so had
an opportunity of seeing the fair, which of all fairs is
perhaps the most famed.

For a business man it might be extremely interesting,
but to a pleasure-seeker it is very disappointing. The
portion of the town in which it is held, consists of a great
number of one-storied houses built along the sides of
regularly planned streets. The houses are low and the
streets are straight. / ,


MXLJm’S JOUENE^y :A&IA. 7

These houses are filled with bales au 4 : ho;^&s
materials, and it is only here and there that one can s#@.
anything approaching in character to an ordinary shop or
stall, where toys and trinkets are sold, such as one expects
to find at fairs.

The journey to Perm took eight days. If our engines
had not broken down so often, and if we had not run upon
so many sand banks, I think this period might have, been,
made less. , , : -

The life , and arrangements on board a Russian steanier
were very different to thos>6 I had anticipated. Iri con-
sequence of this I was somewhat uncomfortable. In , the
first place, although most of the , passengers were on board
for at least three or four days, it did not seem to be
customary to provide beds* The only arrangements for
sleeping were a number of cushioned seats ranged in parallel
rows across what in an English boat would have been the
saloon. Each passenger secured one of these seats, on
which at night time he rested as he was best able., As it,
is usual for Russians when they are travelling to carry , with
them a plentiful supply of pillows for bolstering themselves
up in the carriages, when journeying (9) , along the roads,
most of my fellow travellers haid whh them rugs and other
means of making themselves toletably comfortable. In
addition to the general first -class quarters, there were one or
two cabins. These were apparently charged for^ according
to the number of persons they were built to hold. Here
however, you have also to do your own furnishing, The
only advantage of a private cabin is that if it has been
engaged by a paky, it may be made a means of economy,,
— it being, apparently permissible to cram four or six people,,
and as much baggage as possible into a cabin only built for
two. These .were the ftrst-dass quarters. 'In the after
part of the ship were the second class quarters,, which, so
far as, I could see, only differed from the first class
apartments,; in haying rfs seats ranged longitudinally and
in havih its inmates a little more tightly packed* ./Att
these were on the lower deck.


MitKE’S JOURNSy ACROSS EXTRORE AND ASIA*

Od the upper deck there was a sidall cabia in. which you
could take your meals. As there was nO fixed time for
these, and every one ordered from a buffet according to his
pleasure, it generally happened that some one or other of
the passengers might, at any time of the day, be observed,
staving off the pangs of hunger .

Most people brought with them their own tea and sugar,
arid many also a certaih portion of their food. This seems
to be a custom everywhere, and when you leave the large
towns it is even customary in the hotels. Corkage dues
are things unknowri. The chief amuseinents of the passen-
gers V^ere smoking and card playing, filling up blanks which
were unusually monotonous by a meal.

As day by day passed, I gradually made acquaintances.(io)
The first of these was a young Jew who kept a small shop,
where, he sold trinkets, pocket books, and a variety of small
articles for the benefit of the passengers. He held his shop
in'the second-class cabin. After I had bought all that he
could persuade me to invest in, he turned his attention to
my clothes, making daily bids for the coat I was wearing.
These bids carne in various forms; sometimes he offered
money, then he offered goods, then his own clothes, chang-
ing his offers in various ways to tempt rne. Altogether he
succeeded in making himself the most persistent nuisance
which I think I met with on my journey.

As the life on board the steamer was so very tedious^ it
was ^ith pleasure that I hailed the sight of Perm^ The
gerieral view whfch was usually before us, was one of banks
of mrid Id form a foreground, with tyide and open cultivated
plains stretching to the horizon for the background* Some-
times these were varied by a few miles of yellow and reddish
cliffs of sand and clay.

The first portion of this river journey had been down the
Volga, and the latter portion up the Kama, two rivers which
for moiiotomy and want of life would, I think, rival any-
thing in Europe. In Murray's Handbook for Russia, the
scenery on this latter river is said to be “ of the grandest
description.”


MILKE’S JOUENEY across EOROPR an© ASIA.

Perm is a place which I thipk may be takeia as giyipg^’ a
very fair representation of the conditions which a itiraye^^
will find in many of the Russian country towns* In the
plan of the place, which from its regularity is as admirfible
as the project of any building company, you see the good
intentions- of the founder. Here however from caprice, ivant
of money, (ii) or of energy, the original designs appear to
have been given up, and unity in design has been destroyed
by the eccentricities of individual enterprise. The result of
all this is, that you see a number of one-storied wooden
houses scattered here and there along the sides of regularly
planned streets. These are deep with mud and are, border-
ed with fragmentary planks, the remnants of a side walk.

Here and there, you see a building which towers: above ,
the rest. On enquiry you will find that it is either the
theatre or some club. In addition to these two omnipre-
sent buildings several churches are usually to be seen.
Even in the poorest village these buildings with, their green
roofs and multitudinous cupola-ttopped spires are always
observable. One church in Moscow, called, I belieye, the
Cathedral of S. Basil, which has domes like turnips and
spires like carrots,, is so peculiar in design, and magnificent
in its colours, that by an agricultural mind, it might be
aptly compared tp the closely packed contents of some
vegetable garden. .

Close to Perm is situated a famous Arsenal, or Russian
Woolwich, to. which I paid two, visits and saw the casting
of several large steel guns. l also saw what was said to be
the largest steam hammer in, the world, the anvil of which
was a sfingle casting of 6fi6 tons.

The coal which was used here., orginally came frow New-
castle, but now it is only found advisable to carry coke so
long a distance. They told me that this cost them about
£ 5 per ton, When, wp consider that the neighbouring
Urals are full of coal, one seam which has been discovered
in the district of Solikamsk being no less than 40 fqet in
thickness, we see what Russia will in future gain and
England lose. '


10 ' MlLNl’S JOURKEY ACROSS E0ROFB AND A$IA*

(12) At Perm I had my introduction to real Russian travel*
ling. The vehicleyou useis called a It is a seat-

less four-wheeled can-iage, the body of which is suspended
on three or four longitudinal poles, instead of springs. If
you are making a very long journey it is perhaps better to
buy one of these conveyances, which costs from too to 2ioo
roubles, according to their capacity and strength.

If your journey is a short one it may be better tb hire one
from the post station, either to go the whole distance you
are travelling, or else from station to station. If you adopt
this latter plan, at evejry station you must move yourself
and goods from one vehicle to another, and this when you
are travelling continuously both day and night, as is custo-
mary in Russia, becomes extremely objectionable. A ta-
rantass has room for twm people, but many of them will
carry four. To make myself as comfortable as possible:, I
followed bad advice and bought a mattrasa. This was
placed upon the top of my baggage, which Was stowed at
the bottom' of the carriage, the idea being that in this way
I migfit ward off some of the jolts, which, by looking at
-the streets in Perm, I saw I might expect when out upon
the country roads. I left Perm at 12, P» M* on the night
of Sep. 5th. Before daybreak the novelty had ceased to fee
a 'source Of pleasure, and I realised the miseries of the
roads. In the first place being always well provided with
honses wc were whirled along at a rate regardless of both
ruts and stones. My mattrass instead of acting as a reliev-
ing pad, acted as a spring, and bounced me so unmerci-
fully, that as soon as I had opportunity I exchanged it for a
quantity of straw. At each post station it was necessary to
turn out and (13) present an order for horses or padorojne ”
which had been received at the starting place at the rate of
so much per verst, in order to obtain new horsCs. As
this was often in the middle of the night, and you had to
wake up the station master, who perhaps told you in return
for the annoyance you had given him, that all the horses
were taken by the previous traveller, getting up to be thus
treated was really very unpleasant.


Milne’s joitri^eY'' across- bue5ope'AnF'4^®A.

By threats or persuasion yqn may iMildfe kim to prbonre
horses from the village^ or if th^re is no village, from some
neighbouring peasant. Having, by some means or Other,
obtained your horses, you pay for them at a fixed rate, Of
so much per verst, up to the next post station. To insure
yourself against being cheated you can, when not too sleepy,
refer to a table hung in a glazed frame against the wall,

• where these distances are distinctly written down. Should
you meet with any great annoyance at any of tkese stations
you can make a record of your grievances in a book which
ia attached by a government string and seal against the
wall or to a table. As the book is periodically inspected by
a travelling official, I should think that this system for the
encouragement of civility ought to be successful. •

At each of these stations there is generally a special
room for travellers, where you find a wooden bench, two or
three chairs,! a table, a holy picture or Icon tov the peasantry,
to bow to, a huge brick stove which wheh lighted gives out
an intolei-able heat, and thpusands of cockroaches,. The
stations are usually located at a village, but many of them
are' solitary buildings amongst tfie woods. Their distances
apart vary considerably, but you may generally calculate
on reaching one of them every two or (14) three hours. At
about every third station it will be necessary to, stop and
get something to eat. As there is seldom anything better
than black bread, milk, and eggs, to* be found at these
resting places, and not even, always that, it is customary
not only to cary tea and sugar with you, but alsoiyOur food.
However, at all stations there is one thing which you will
find, and that is a sammtif i This is a huge tea-urn, with
a central pipe filled with, m charcoal. It is full of -hot
water, which,, from the way in which it steams and spurts,
appears to be bbiUtag under pressure. You also get a tea-
pot and .some glasses. Being provided with these material.^
you are left to your own devices. ’ To make the tea, there is
no difficulty, but should it be winter and you are provided
with food, which will certainly be frozen as hard iky
stone, you may at first be somewhat perplexed. Soup' may


,12 .K^LNk’s journey AOR09S BUBDPE ANE ASKA.

i)© thawed by placing a lump of it in a glass, and standing
tbfsi m the slop basin, which you fill with hot water. To
thavw your bread or a piece of chicken you can place it on
the top of the samovar^ taking care however that it does
not fall inside. Proceeding in this Way, and exercising a
little ingenuity, which never fails the hungry when in search
of food, you will no doubt eventually, manage to procure a
meal. Travelling continuously day and night for three,
four> five or even ten days, the whole time being jolted in a
manner which it would be difficult, to describe,: every two
hours having to look after the changing of horses and the
signing of papers, is extremely trying. If two men are
travelling together, these duties, may be divided, each one
talcing alternate nights in endeavouring to sleep. For
the first night, although you have managed to stretch
(15) yourself out horizontally upon your bed *of straw, you
will find sleep impossible, but afterwards you sink into a
drowsy nodding state, which, the moment the carriage stops
for the changing of horses, immediately becomes Sleep.
Should a gentlemen tray eh with a lady, the duty of turning
out to Wake up sleepy post masters, apd of generally fighting
,the h'^tlies of the road, must, according to the usages of
European society, dev^olve upon the former. For hours to
thus wait upon a lady, is an act of gallantry which is pleas-
ing; but after that, when both passengers have aching hopes,
and wish to sleep, but can find no rest.; when only moans
and growls are to be heard at every rut you cross ; when at
a post station you get out to find fresh horses and are un-
mercifully grumbled at for creating a disturbance in the in-
ternal arrangements of the carriage, bodily and mental
aggravations will have arrived at such a pitch that I think
mosti hatur^^ and a gentleman wffien

travelling with a lady, Would see that i there were more
troubles than had been anticipated.

Now this was exactly my position when I crossed the
Urals. Farther on my journey I had again the opportunity
of taking a carriage ride in company with a lady; but the
fact that I found myself with much regret unable to accept


mtlne'b ' joTOsirsr across eot'o^bib Aifi' .asia.


-.all

the iiivitRtiOn, may be a drccmstanca, woi^thy df the
tion of future travellers, who may undertake a jotiruey aeto'ss
Siberian plains, ' ,

The chief point of interest on the journey between Berm
and Ekaterinburg is the crossing of the Urals; When I
looked at a map of Europe, and saw the formidable Alpine
baiTier which seemed to be indicated by this chain of
mountains as dividing Europe from Asia, I had anticipated
a little climbing before I (t6) crossed them. Myexpecta-
tions were however disappointed.

After leaving Perm the country was flat and coTered with
nodding fields of yellow corn or bristling stubble. Along
either side of the road there was a line of birch trees, which
by their yellow tints seemed to tell us that we, should not
have long to wait for wihter weather. Here and there
amongst the corn fields I saw a clump of spruce or fir. As
we went on, the road became undulating. On the aftet^
noon of the last day before we reached Ekaterinburg, Wl^cn
fairly in amorig the Urals, it might be described as being
hilly. No doubt this portion of the Urals, where they are
crossed by one of the main roads leading from Europe into
Asia, is one of the lowest points along thehr length, 'and
therefore it would hardly be fair to judge of th^ir magnitude
froni the little portion, which is visible between Ekatefrin-
burg and Perm . However, tbe h ighest point is only about
6000 feet above the sea, and the ascent to the water parting
is generally very gentle. If we compare the Urals with
mountains like the Alps, the Himalayas, or the Andes we
shall find that these latter ate mcomparably more important,
as physical features of the g^lobe. If, however, we examine
them geologically, we ahafl see that the Urals are the most
ancient^ it being found that they were raised high and dry
before the sediment of which the large mountains are form-
ed had begun to be accummulated at the bottom of the seas
from which they were gradually uplifted. We may even
imagine that the present Alps and other high mountains
were partly formed from materials which were degfaded
from the present Urals, and if thus regarded we i^ee m#hy


14 .MILNB’s journey, across EUROFE and ASIA.

of , the European mountain (17) ranges standing up like
children of greater stature than their parent. I might here
suggest that the comparatively low and undulating charac-
ter of the Urals is in great part due to their antic[uity, for
the longer .a mass of rock is exposed to the influence of
subaerial degradation the more worn must it become.

Although the Urals do not present , a serious barrier to
the, migration of the human species^ still from the few facts
that I could glean, they have played their part in prevent-
ing a wholesale mixture amongst creatures of a lower order,

: , To give an example, I may take craw fish, which up to
the year 1843 or 1844 only lived in European rivers. In
this year some phjlanthropically disposed accHmati^er
.helped a few of these creatures across the barrier and de-
posited them in the rivers on the Asiatic side, where they
have so thriven that certain rivers are said to swarm with
them. , As another instance I will take rats. Rats we
know will travel everywhere where there are, boats or rail-
ways. But across the Urals there are neither, boats nor
railways; so , the rats have to content themselves with
wandering in Europe. However at the time I made my
journey :a, railroad was . being built from Perm to Nijui
.Tagil and Ekaterinburg, and for this the rats were waiting*
It, now completed, and I think I ma,y predict that the
rats, have started eastwards. Asa farther consequence rat
trap- construction and other in dusteies must have arisen, in
this portion of .Siberia. This railway will, not only have, its
influence upon rats, but by lessening the difficulties of the
overland route it will produce its effect upon the human
species,, who .now will more easily be induced to perform a
journey which has become less tedious.

(18) Whilst travelling I was told that it was a Russian
custom, to carefully al)stain from ablution for fear of causing
a cracking and peeling of the skin. As I had followed
Russian custom, the first thing that I did on reaching
Ekaterinburg was to have a wash.

Ekaterinburg contains about 30,000 inhabitants, and it is
one of the best towns in Siberia. It has fine open streets,


MILNe’s jOtTRKBY across EtjROPte AnD ASIA* X5

and many large buildings, the greatei: ntimfeer of which are
built of wood. Dotted here and there amongst these hhuses
you observe the usual surfeit of green roofed churches Sur-
mounted by their gilt and silvered pear-shaped' cupolas and
domes.

As the hotel accommodation in Ekaterinburg is typical
of that which the traveller may expect to find throughout
the better portions of Siberia, T will describe it briefly.
First there is the room which may or may not be papered, "
generally hot, a little whitewash npon the rounded logs
which form the walls being usuiilly considered -sufficieht in
the way of decorations. The floor is carpetless. Two
chairs, a table and a bed-stead complete the furniture,
which often sfeems to have withstood in a greater or a less
degree the wear of many ages. Projecting from the wail
or reared in a corner of the apartment there is a huge brick '
stove, which is supplied by fuel through a door in the out-
side passage. Five minutes after this has been lighted you
reali2;e its capabilities, and I can easily imagine that in the
depth of winter it would be possible to dispense with bed
clothes. This may perhaps be in part an explanation of
the fact that at all these hotels you find your bedstead des^
titute of such accessories.

I may also mention that towels, soap, wash-hand basins,
and . other small necessaries,, which are found in (19) most
hotels, are Without representatives in Siberia.

After having engaged }-our rooiri you can sit in it as king,
and should you care' to do SO you may invite fifty strangers
to share your quarters without any serious objectiops being
made.

In Ekaterinburg I stayOd two or three days to rest myself
and to see an}- objects of interest which thOre might be in
neighbourhood. Amongst these there were Some large gold
mines at Berezovski, a village about ro miles distant. To
these I made several visits. One da}'', when about half way
upon one of these journeys, the axle of the carriage broken
which necessitated my sitting for nearly three' hburO iri ,a
snow storm, whilst the driver returned to Ekaterinburg to


0


IVIILNE^S JOU'RNS^V ACROSS EtJRORB AND ASIA*


fetch a substitute for the broken portions and . two new
wheels. I mention this as it is an accident which aH travel-
lers across Siberia must expect to meet with, but at the
same time I must also mention that they are not usually
luqky enough to have their break-down near a city of 30,000
inhabitants. Another journey which I made from Ekate-
rinburg was to the mining district of Nijni Xagil, lying
about 150 miles to the north. On account of the show and
sleet, the cold, the disgraceful condition of the roads, and
being obliged to travel on the system which compels you to
change carriage at, eyery station, this was one of the most
disagreeable journeys which I ejrperienoed whilst in Russian
territory. However the mines of Copper, Iron, Gold and
Platinum, together with the insight which I had into the
geology of the Urals and the entertainment which I received
from Russian and other officials who are employed ,^t Tagil,
well repaid me for all my troubles.

Altogether in and about Ekaterinburg I spent (ao) about
two weeks.

For the next section of my journey as far as Tomsk I
had now the opportunity of either travelling directly over-
land across the Barabinsk steppes, or of going by ro.ad to
Tumen, and there joining a steamer which was to tow a
barge-load of convicts along the Irtish and Obi towards
East Siberia, The former of these journeys represented a
distance of about j8oo and the latter about, 3300 versts,, or
1200 and, 2206 miles respectively. Having had sufficient
experience of the roads , I chose the latter route, preferring
to spend 8 or 10 days in a steamer, to 5 days jolting in a
carriage.

This time my ooffipaiiion was a penniless tailor’s appren-
tice, who forced himself upon me, olTering to do almost
anything if I would only take him as far as Krasnojarisk,
where he told me, his parents lived. Partly by working on
my feelings of compassiom by his untiring

sQliOhations, I agreed to take him if he would sew on my
buttons,, pay the fare at post-stations, and act generally as
servant, I of coqrse providing the money. He was a Jew,


atid his name was Kaib. After travelling over a country of
corn fields and fir woods, through villages of log-huts,
altogether very similar to that upon the Russian side of the
Urals, I reached Tumen upon the 23rd. September, 36 hours
after leaving Ekaterinburg. Here I joined a small steamer
on the River Toufa. This river, which is narrow and shal-
low, is one of the tributaries of the ToboL After running
several times into the bushes on the hanks, and grazii'.g over
many shallows we anchored for the night. As there was a
total absence of sleeping accommodation and the salon was
small and crowded with passengers > it was impossible to
derive more rest than that which can be obtained 'Whilst
(21) sitting vertically on a wooden bench* Next morning
' we reached the Tobol, where at a place called Evelewh we
changed ourselves and baggage over into a larger steamer.
Now commenced the river journey; Behind us we towed
a large barge, in shape sonlething like the toy representa^
tions of Noah’s: Ark, This was full of convicts, -r—I should
think from six hundred to a thousand. As this, was very
unwieldly it was a great impediment to our progress, con-
tinually running upon sandbanks which wd had been
fortunate enough to miss.. As we were travelling With the
stream, the river became wider, and deeper as we went
along, and our load in consequence became less and leSs of
a drag upon bur progress. Every day we generally stopped
once or twice to take in firewood. At these times the
monotony was varied by the sight of one or two log-huts
belonging to emigrants or native settlers.

It was very seldom that I saw anything applroaching to
what we 'could call a villai^e. If we stopped at such a place
there was invariably a rush amongst the male passengers,
many of them carrying empty bottles, to see if milk could
be procured. The first one or two were generally the lucky
individuals who secured the lion’s share. Excepting fbr
these small excursions, which sometimes lasted fialf ah
hour, everything was extremely tiresome. All that \ve had
to look at were low mud-banks capped with a fringe of
willow. When we stopped we had opportunity of making


j8 Milne’s joui^ney across Europe and asia.

a close inspection of the convicts. The sides of their con-
veyance were made of iron bars, which gave it a likeness
to a hage bird-cage, but as the inmates, whose only
impediments to walking freely about were some iron
shackles, clutched the bars with both hands and put as
much of their (22) faces through the vertical interstices as
the interstices would admit of, the ark was perhaps more
like one of those well hlled cages which attract so much
attention in any zoological collection. It seemed to me
that many of them had taken their wives, or else vice
versa^ the wives being the malefactors had taken the poor
husbands. Altogether with the wives, and samovars,
notwithstanding the iron bars and shackles, they did not
appear to be particularly unhappy, the free intercourse
with each other and with any compassionate outsider
who would stop to chat with them being conducive to
demonstrative hilarity.

The arrangements on board our steamer were very
similar to those I had experienced on the Volga. My
companions chiefly amused themselves with card playing,
a pastime in which the ladies seemed to be particularly
successful, having every night a lap-full of paper roubles to
count over as the day’s proceeds. Interims were filled up
with smoking, and cracking small nuts, which are called
from the monotonous gaps they often fill at Siberian parties
by a word which means Siberian conversation.” The
only place of any note at which we stopped was Tobolsk,
a large town of 18,500 inhabitants, built near the junction
of the Tobol with the Irtish. Here everything is built of
wood. Stone is such a rarity that I could not even find a
pebble. Tobolsk is chiefly interesting from its historical
associations, as connected with the home of many early
exiles. There is here a monument built to the memory of
Yermack, a robber chief, who is regarded as the conqueror
of Siberia. There is also another monument of a different
kind commemorating the folly of Ivan the Terrible, This
is in the form of a bell, which having been ringing at the
time of one of his (23) butcheries, or else not having been


Milne’s journey across Europe and Asia.


19


ringing upon that occasion, was shipped as an exile to
Siberia, and after having had a small piece broken from
it, it was ordered that, never so long as it was a bell,
was it to ring again.

After joining the River Obi, which in places was about
three quarters of a mile broad, our progress was much
slower because our course was now up stream. The ark
however became less of an impediment than it had been
when we were travelling down stream, because when it
happened to run upon a bank, the current instead of jam-
ming it tighter tended to loosen it. We here saw a number
of Ostiacks, who form a portion of the aboriginal inhabi-
tants of Siberia.

On Oct. 5th we reached the River Tom. Because this
was shallow we had to leave our large steamer and go
on board a smaller one. Through this not being strong
enough to tow us and our satellite against the stream,
which was very rapid, we were greatly delayed.

In this river I observed that there were many pebbles,
indicating that we had crossed the alluvial plains, and
that the hills were near. These alluvial plains, which
give such a monotonous character to Siberia, appear to
be the result of a deposition of sand and mud from a
huge fresh-water lake. This is supposed to have been
produced during the glacial period, through the damming
up of those great Asiatic Rivers which how into the
Arctic ocean by a barrier of ice. Without accepting such
an hypothesis, which requires for its just appreciation a
fertility of imagination, when we consider that the ice in
the southern portion of these rivers breaks up generally a
month before it does near their mouths, we can see that
we have annually a barrier of ice obstructing an unusual
flow of water. If we take this in conjunction with the
fact that the (24) northern portion of Siberia appears during
recent geological periods to have been rising, I think
that sufficient causes are now in action to produce all
the phenomena which the Siberia plains present us with.
' At last on the 6th. October we reached Tomsk. This,


20


MILNE’S journey ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA*


I should think, is the chief business town in vSiberia. It
contains many fine buildings in the form of churches
and government offices, and about 29,500 inhabitants.

Having on board the steamer made the acquaintance of
General Smirnoff, who was returning from an excursion
he had been making through Europe, and Baron Stackei-
berg ivho was on his way to Eastern Siberia to fill up
an official vacancy, I bought a small tarantass, and by
invitation I joined their party on route for Irkutsk*

As far as Krasnojarsk, a distance of about 523 versts
(362 miles), we continued night and day. Every two or
three hours we drew up at a small village and changed
horses. With the exception of having once or twice to
wait for horses, the breaking of axles and sundry portioUvS
of our vehicles, we had but little difficulty. The road
was straight, and as far as Bogotol, with the exception
of a few insignificant undulations, was quite flat. At
this point, however, the undulations increased in siare
and we saw some hills. On either side of us there was
generally a strip of cultivated ground, but beyond that
there came black woods of scrubby spruce and fir. If it
were possible to look down upon this main road of
Siberia fi'om a great height, I think that we should see
it like a narrow band of cultivation and log-hut villages
running through a wilderness of wood. However, seeing
it as I did, one might be easily impressed with the idea
(25) that Siberia was a highly cultivated country.

When we reached Krasnojarsk, where there are some real
hills, we were all so tired that it was unanimously agreed
we should stop for a wash and a sleep. On the evening
of our arrival we were very kindly invited by the militaiy
governor of the town to dine with him. He was evidently
delighted to have guests visiting the oasis of civilisation
over which he ruled. Every thing that he could think
of he did to amuse us, — he talked unceasingly, told
stories, brought in his pets for us to see, amongst which,
so far as I remember, there were a fox and a pony, all
of which were marched round the drawing room; but it


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia. 21

was no use, our inclinations for sleep were too great
to be overcome by these exhibitions. For some time I
listlessly regarded my enthusiastic host, until at last
completely overcome I fell asleep.

Krasnojarsk, like most Siberian towns has its club
and theatre, but the latter, unfortunately for the inhabi-
tants, who like all Siberians so far as I could see
are passionately fond of the theatre, has but seldom the
opportunity of securing the services of a troupe of
actors.

From Krasnojarsk to Irkutsk (1006 versts or 670 miles)
the road was very similar to that from Tomsk. At Nijni
Udinsk snow fell and greatly impeded our progress. The
roads were so very slippery that it often happened, both
night and day, that we had to get out of our carriages
and help our struggling horses in getting up the hills.
In going down one slope one horse was over-run, and
we had to leave him on the road side for dead.

Toiling along we at length reached the last station be-
fore Irkutsk, Here we found a number of General (26)
Smirnoff’s friends who had come to bid him welcome.
Just before reaching Irkutsk we passed a large church
containing the remains of S. Ennocainti (S. Innocent),
which are said to remain as fresh as when he died. S.
Ennocainti, who is regarded, I believe, as the chief of the
Siberian saints, was originally a missionary who in 1721
was sent to China ; the Chinese government refusing
him admission to that country, he finally in 1727 settled
at Irkutsk. Here we waited a short time,., whilst my
friends went inside to make an offering to the saint for
their safe arrival. After crossing the Angara by a flying
bridge we were in Irkutsk, the S.. Petersburg of the Eastern
Russia.

As an example of the prices of travelling, I may give
the following account of my expenses between Tomsk
and Irkutsk, a distance of 1559 1 versts or 1039 miles.
The time taken to travel this distance, exclusive of the
20 hours in Krasnojarsk, was about 8|; days.


22


MiLfTB’s' JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


West Siberia.


From Tomsk to within 30 versts of Krasnojarsk,
a distance of 523 versts, 3 horses each ij

roubles

kopeck

kopecks per verst.

23-

53

East Siberia.

30 versts into Krasnojarsk, 3 horses at 3 kopecks
per verst.

2.

70

Krasnojarsk to Irkutsk, 1006 versts at the
same rate.

60.

40

Drink money to drivers at 70 stations.

7-

0

Grease for wheels.

3-

50

Expenses in Krasnojarsk.

I.

50

Blacksmith for repairs to carriage.

2,

0

Food bought on the road, about.

4.

0

Roubles

104.

63


To this, which is about £ sterling, must be added
the cost of food which I took with me, and the padoro-
jne or order for horses.

(27) As the winter roads were not yet formed, and the
rivers not sufficiently frozen for the passage of sleighs,
whilst at the same time there was sufficient ice to obstruct
boats, I followed the advise of my Russian companions,
and took up my quarters for a month at Irkutsk. At
first I stayed in a hotel, but as this, like most Siberian
things, was very expensive, I removed to private lodgings
which were much. more economical. In Irkutsuk there is
a theatre which is open every other ' night, two clubs
where once a week there is generally dancing, a geogra-
phical society, a newspaper, and othec means for educa-
tion and enjoyment much as are found in Western Russia.

At the hotels, of which there are some six or eight,
you may choose your dinner from a list of 50 dishes.
The people, with whom through my travelling acquain-
tances I had every opportunity of associating, seemed to
be self-contained, — ^they knew little of the outer world
and they apparently cared less. A foreign visitors is, if
I may judge from the lengthy description he elicits in
the local paper, and the battery of glasses which are
brought to play upon him in the theatre, a “ rara avis.'"


Milne’s joleney across Europe and asia.


»3

On reaching Irkutsk one experiences the same kind of en-
joyment that you have after a morning bath, A sort of
reaction sets in, and you feel that you are once more in
a position to lead the life of an ordinary individual.
Whilst paying calls and visits in Irkutsk I was occasion-
ally startled by several of my friends and acquaintances
most seriously recommending me, if I wished to reach
Japan quickly, to turn back to England and go viS.
America- When I was at home, and travelling in im-
agination across a Mercator’s Chart, on which I staked
out the distances with a pair of compasses, I always
thought that if. (28) ever I was fortunate enough to reach
Irkutsk I could consider myself as being almost in Japan.
I had reached the expected goal, and then to be told that
I was farther off my destination than I was three and a
half months ago at starting, was most disheartening. For
numerous reasons having settled that it would never do
to retreat, I made enquiries and found that from Irkutsk
I had two courses open for me, one to go down the Amoor,
which before I could reach it would have been frozen
over, and therefore must have been travelled along in
sleighs rather than in steamers, and the other was to go
to Kiachta and travel with camels across Mongolia to
Pekin. Notwithstanding the poor trust which my friends
placed in the amiability of the Mongols, I chose this
route, for had I gone by the former it might have been
necessary to have remained in Yladivostock until the end
of April, before the ice would have broken up and I could
have obtained a vessel for Japan.

It was with feelings of sorrow that I took leave of
Irkutsk. This was partly on account of leaving friends
who had shewn me so much kindness, and partly because
I knew something of the miseries before me.

I started on t*lie 23"^^* November in a sleigh, and for the
.first time since leaving Novgorod, I was quite alone. The
roads were very rough, and I did not find sleigh travelling
that easy gliding motion I had anticipated ; it was in fact
quite the reverse, and I think that I bad as much bamping


24


Milne’s journey across europb and asia.


in the sleigh as I had previously experienced in the taran-
tass. As the Baikal lake was not yet frozen over and there
was so much ice that steamers were prevented from cross-
ing, I had to take the long road round its southern
extremity. Most of (zg) this was mountainous, and for the
first time I may say that I saw a country appx*oaching the
picturesque. However it was very cold and very lonely.
There were very few villages, and the post stations where
something enlivening might have been expected usually
consisted of solitary log houses built in amongst the firs
at the bottom of a sheltered valley. As I never met any
travellers on this road, the sudden appearance of two men
one night somewhat alarmed me. The driver had stopped
to do something to his horses, when in front of me I heard
a whistle which was immediately replied to. This roused
me from my drowsy state, and I sat upright in the sleigh
and ordered the man to drive his fastest. This he did. Dash-
down into the bottom of a ravine we rose quickly upon the
opposite side, when I saw two men standing beneath the
trees, one on either side of the rOad. We passed between
them ; nobody spoke and nobody did anything.

Before starting I had been told that this portion of the
country was very dangerous, being filled with escaped con-
victs. This, together with the general desolate character
of the district through which I was passing, may have
aroused fears which were as likely as not quite groundless.
Although there were but few cases that I heard of, where
travellers had been attacked along these roads, yet nearly
every Russian when travelling carries his revolver. This
is generally a tiny little weapon swung by a silken cord
about his neck, which I suspect is more for show and orna-
ment than for active service. When I left Irkutsk I was
fully assured that I should find snow all the way to Kiachta,
and it would be therefore advisable for me to buy my own
sleigh. After passing Selenginsk the snow became less
and less, (30) until I reached a small post station called
Povorotruya where I saw that it was impossible to go on
farther in my sleigh, and that I must hire a carriage. Feel-


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


^5


ing annoyed at having purchased a sleigh and having thus
to leave it, I persisted in having horses, and started over
the stones towards the next post station. The shaking
soon dissipated my obstinacy, and leaving my vehicle with
the post master, who gave me a receipt for the same, should
I or my friends ever return that way, I completed the rest
of my journey to Kiachta pcraclodnoi''

This may be a warning to future travellers never to buy
a conveyance during those months when the roads are nei-
ther lit for sleighs or carriages ; otherwise he may find
himself hundreds of miles away from any large town at a
small log hut amongst fhe iir trees, where he will have to
relinquish his vehicle, and proceed upon his journey with
the only comforting idea that he owns property in Siberia.

With regard to the purchase of carriages, so far as I
could judge, it would seem that when he relinquishes them
he must be prepared to be as great a loser as you are with
sleighs. In Russia he is told that by buying a carriage,
and driving in it to Irkutsk, he will then sell it at a profit.
The one I bought at Tomsk cost me 120 roubles. After
paying for horses to drag it nearly 1000 miles to Irkutsk,
for I myself rode in the carriage with Baron Stackelberg, I
occupied myself during my month’s residence in that city
in endeavouring to sell it. A preliminary wash, for it had
become, very dirty on the roads, and some slight repairs
cost me 10 roubles. After all this the highest bid was only
20 roubles, and this I had eventually to accept. The moral
to be derived from my experiences is, that foreigners (31)
when travelling in Russia, unless they make their journey
wholly by sleigh, or else wholly by carriage, ought not to
buy a vehicle, unless they are prepared to sacrifice from 80
to 100 per cent of their outlay.

After passing through an interesting volcanic district near
Kalenishnaya, I reached Trotiskojarsk very tired on the
28th of November. I was now upon the Mongolian front-
ier, 6388 versts or 4258 miles distants from S. Petersburg.

During this portion of my journey the cold had been
something intense^ my moustache and beard being often so


%


^5 MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA#

tightly frozen together that, without thawing off the ice, I
was unable to open my mouth. All my food, including
wine, was frozen solid, and in spite of sheep-skin clothes
and manj^ skin-covers I often felt bitterly cold.


PART II.

ACROSS MONGOLIA TO PEKIN.


Trotiskojarsk is situated near the head of an open sandy
valley between two ranges of moderately high hills. This
is a moderately large town, chiefly made up of small wood-
en houses, and containing about 5000 inhabitants. The
aristocratic portion of this community reside at Kiachta,
which is a small place made up of churches and a few well
built houses about two miles farther down the valley.
About 100 yards farther, you cross the Mongolian frontier
add enter (32) the Chinese town of Maimachin. At the
time of my arrival, excepting upon the hill tops, there was
but little snow, although farther to the East it had fallen in
quantity. In consequence of this want of snow about
Kiachta, sleighs are but seldom used.

On reaching this place it had been my intention to
proceed across Mongolia with a friend, a Russian oiHcer.
As he was travelling on official duty he was privileged to
travel as a courier by a special route. Although this route
which is traversed by couriers is much longer than that
taken by the trains of camels, which are ever crossing and
recrossing with loads of merchandise, it is accomplished
ihuch more quickly, as riders are sent on ahead to collect
horses from the inhabitants. This is not alwaj^s possible
upon the other route, and it is especially difficult to obtain
horses during the winter months when many of the summer


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


27


inhabitants have shifted their quarters. Although much
influence and argument were applied to the Commissary of
the Frontier, my project of proceeding by this route was
knocked on the head by his clearly shewing that there was
a compact between the Russian and Chinese Governments,
by which it was only allowable for couriers who were
Russian subjects to take this road, and therefore for him to
fill up the form required to be presented to the Chinese
governor of the adjoining town of Maimachin, and by the
outriders in search of horses, for Uvo couriers instead of for
one, would have been a breach of contract. My only alter-
native was now to say good bye to my friend, and to make
preparations for twenty extra days in crossing the tract of
snow which was before me. These were made with
difficulty, and I then hired camels to join a caravan which
was to cross in (33) a few days’ time.

It was eleven days after my arrival in Kiachta before I
was ready to leave it, which I did at midday on the 9th of
December. I had with me as an attendant, a Cossack
very kindly given to me by M. Pfaffins the Commissary.
I also had four camels, one of which was harnessed to a
small two-wheeled Chinese cart called a “Telega” or
“Turga.” The contract which I made with the Mongols
was to the effect that they should take me to Kalgan in 30
days for 100 silver roubles. For every day under that time
I was to pay three roubles extra, and for every day beyond
that time they were to pay me three roubles. There was
also a clause that a tent, fire, & water should be supplied.
In our train we had altogether nearly 100 camels, and these
were looked after by five Mongols. After crossing a small
open square outside Kiachta, we were under the palisading
of the Chinese frontier town of Maimachin, which, I may
remark, is the cleanest specimen of a Chinese town that I
have ever seen. The officials and merchants who live in it
are not permanent residents, and are said not to regard it as
a home, a feeling which may help in allowing it to be easily
separated from the Chinese Empire.

Immediately outside Maimachin we were in the country


28


JOURN^iY AGRQSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


which, like that round Kiachta, is very sandy. In the
plains between the hills there were ,tnany “Yourts” (the
Russian name for the Mongolian felt tent), around which
cattle were grazing on the ends of tall brown tufts of grass,
which cropped up through the snow.

By 8 P. M. we reached a place called Stamock, where
there were a few ‘ Yourts’. This was about 30 versts from
Kiachta. The temperature was — 2i^R, (34)After a cup of
tea round a fire, we travelled until 2.30 A. M. to a place
called Yeroh, where we got quarters in a small y6urt, inside
which, in addition to the men, women, and children, there
were three goats and a pig. Next day at about 10 A. M. we
walked over the frozen R. Ur a.

Our general plan of travelling was as follows. During
the day we were on the move until about 7 or 8 P. M.,
at which time we stopped at a yourt to get a cup of tea.
After this we continued until 12 P. M. or 2 A. M., when
we halted to have a sleep and then to start again at 8 to
10 A. M. in the morning. As we went on, the country
became more hilly and the snow more plentiful. During
the night I usually rode in the waggon, but I was com-
pelled to w^alk up the hills. The temperature at night was
generally about — 18° R. To withstand this I was clothed
in a suit of sheep skin, and wmre felt boots. When in
the waggon, in addition to a large wmlf-skin robe, I found
that two rugs of sheep-skin were also necessary. On some
of the hills there were a few fir trees, whilst in the valleys
where , the rivers were there were a few small willows. The
trees I often observed only grew upon the North side ot
the hills. During the afternoon of the nth I counted upon
our right 13 small lines of hills all running east and west ;
on their south sides these were steep and barren, whilsf
upon their north sides the slopes were gentle and were
covered with trees. The gentle slope upon the north is due
to the trees and other vegetation, which prevent rain and
other disintegrating agents from readily washing away the
materials of vi^liich the hills are made up. If the reverse
had been the case, and the gentle slope had given rise


IMILNE’S journey across EUROPE 4ND ASIA.


29


to the vegetation, I ought to have seen trees upon a few
(35) gentle slopes which I observed to the south, but this
was not the case. These trees were larch and pine. Near
the rivers I saw willows and also, I think, poplar. In some
of the valleys I saw sections of alluvium up to 40 feet in
thickness. It was made up of fine sand, and was filled
with fragments of granitic rocks. On the night of the 12th
we passed through the Makatah Pass. Our slippery snow-
covered road here led up a steep valley, bounded right and
left with precipitous hills covered with large birch trees.
We here met a caravan of about 200 camels travelling in
an opposite direction. To pass this train and get to the
top of the pass was a troublesome struggle. The camels
and two oxen, which it had been necessary to hire for my
waggon before entering the pass, slipped and fell con-
tinuously. I found walking at night very trying, from the
cold being intense enough to continually bridge icicles
across my mouth and to freeze my beard tightly to my
coat. At 2 P. M. we reached a few yourts at a place
called Barah, after 27 hours’ travelling and with only half
an hour’s rest. During this time the camels were without
food, and it was 18 hours since I myself had eaten. Eating
only once a day is at first trying, but it is almost impossible
to do otherwise when travelling during the winter months.
Our travelling was so arranged as to take advantage of
the moonlight. At about midnight on the 13th we passed
the Olindowa Pass, at 7 A. M. next morning the Gatinawa,
and in the afternoon of the same day we reached Urga,
the religous centre of Mongolia. I made my way to the
Russian Consulate,* which lies about i|' miles away fiom
the town on its east side, at which place I was very kindly
received. The approach to the town is down a broad fiat
valley, bounded on either side by (36) steep hills. At right
angles to the end of this valley is a high range of hills,
beneath which, at the juncture, so to speak, of three
Openings in the hills, Urga is situated. The houses in
Urga are very small and are made of mud, very much like
those of an Arab village. You cannot see much of them


30


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


on account of high palisadings of poles by which each of
them is surrounded. Walking along the streets you pass
between two such rows of palisades about lo feet in height,
the joints between which are carefully filled with clay.
There are many churches in the town, most of which in
shape are very like large circuses. These are the life of the
place, and the thundering boom of a Mongolian service may
be heard issuing from them at all hours. The inhabitants
number about 15,000. There is a famous Mongolian
Doctor living here,. Chio-in-dun by name, who is visited
not only by Mongolians, but by Russians and other
strangers, who make the arduous journey to Urgain order
to consult him. Round an open square in the town I
found several small stores kept by Russians, where many
things were for sale, even to walking dolls. In this part
of the town much business was going on. There were
many clusters of camels and ponies, all apparently exposed
for sale. Small huts of felt, about the size of large packing
cases, were standing about different parts of the square.
These were small shops which at night time could be
carried home. Black-smiths with portable forges, hawkers
selling hats, and pious Mongols turning the great vertical
drums, which are set up in many places as praying
machines,” filled up the blanks between the establishments
of those whose employments were more lucrative and
extensive. I left Urga on the morning of Thursday the
1 6th. {37) About 15 minutes after starting we skirted
along the palisaded walls of another town called Mai-
machin, a place which on account pf its Chinese owners,
the Mongols regard with jealousy. The valley is here about
three quarters of a mile broad, and is covered with large
limestone boulders. Not long after passing the town we
walked across the R. Tola, which was apparently made up
of 2 streams, each about 20 yards broad. On some of the
hills, where steep , scarps prevented an accumulation of
snow, red-coloured stratified rocks dipping to the south
were visible. In the valleys, however, the boulders were
of limestone and granite rocks. On the north and norths


Milne’s journey across europb and asia*


31

west sides of the hills a few trees remained, but before the
next day was ended all had disappeared. With this disap-
pearance of the trees, magpies, which had thus far accom-
panied us, also disappeared, and all that we had left to us
as companions were many large black ravens. These
were so bold in riding on the camels’ backs and tearing
open bags containing provisions, that they became very
troublesome. As yourts were not to be found, I had now
to live with my five Mongols in our own small canvas tent.
During the afternoon the temperature was usually —
or — 15° R. and at night it sank to — 20° and — 25"^ R. At
times between 12 and 3 in the afternoon we scraped a piece
of ground clear of snow, and pitched our tent- We there
cooked our daily meal in the pungent smoke of a fire made
out of camels’ dung. Whilst this was going on, the camels
were turned loose from half an hour to 2 hours, to ramble
about in search of food, after which they were brought back
to the tent and made to sit down between their packs, to
rest whilst we slept. At (38) 8 or 9 P, M. we were again
upon the move, and after travelling all night we continued
until the same time next day. The country was hilly, but
smooth in outline. On the morning of the 19th, we en-
tered a large plain, which was brown with grass cropping
up through the covering of snow. The hills surrounding
this plain, which was typical of the country for several
succeeding days, although not high, were very rugged.
They were made up of black, and in some cases, reddish
rock of a volcanic origin. On many of the plains between
the hills small herds of antelopes were dotted about, but
these, although, not appearing to be greatly alarmed at any
approach which was made to them, kept slowly trotting on
ahead at a distance of from 300 to 600 and 800 yards.
Where the snow had been blown away by the wind, or
worn away by traffic, I saw large quantities of agate and
chalcedony, resulting from the decomposition of the vol-
canic rocks. In several of the valleys there were a few
Yourts,” at many of which a few herds of cattle, together
with some sheep ^nd ponies, could be seen. Some of the


3 ?


MILNE’S journey across EUROPE AND ASIA»


herds of ponies numbered as many as 500. At night time,
when we camped, we generally did so at some place where
the snow was thin and there had been a previous encamp-
ment. In such places we were now able to pick up a little
cow and horse-dung, which made a much more cheerful
and warmer fire than that from camel’s. As the snow was
now becoming scanty we always picked up any pieces of
ice we met with along the road, to melt for water in the
evening. Being able to obtain plenty of water either from
snow or ice is the only advantage that Mongolia gives to the
winter traveller, as compensation for all the other disadvan-
tageSk Although it (39) was now usually dark at our start-
ing time, which was from 7 to g P. M., we were not deterred
from pushing on, as the track was clearly visible as a black
band through the white snow. At i P. M. on the 22nd we
reached a village called Teck-sha-buinta, It contained
about 150 buildings, many of which were like small store-
houses built of wood, which I presume must have come
from the neighbourhood of Urga,

There were also four churches. The town is situated on
a flat plain below a low rise. Immediately on my arrival
myself and my Cossack were surrounded by an inquisitive
crowd. Although we endeavoured to take all in good part,
this inquisitiveness soon led to impudence, and those at the
back tried to push those in front upon the top of us. Fear-
ing lest this should lead to hostilities, which under the try-
ing position of being buffeted and jeered at were difficult tp
refrain from, I hit upon a happy expedient of diverting tfieir
attention. I had in my pocket a number of small Russian
coins and brass buttons, Shewing one of these to the
crowd, I threw it in the air, and let them scramble. With
this they were so attracted, that before I had tossed away
40 kopecs and a few brass buttons, our caravan was on the
move out of the village. This was the largest sum of
money disbursed upon the road, and I always thought that
it was well spent. At 5 P. M. that evening we reached
Kooistelroi, a place where there were 5 or 6 yourts, the head
quarters of ^ Mongolian Mandarin or Niyin, called Besherilt.


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


53


On nearing the place I had to get into my cart, on account
of the dogs which at nearly all the yourts in Mongolia are a
plague to approaching strangers. Here it was declared that
our camels, through sore feet and other causes, were unfit
to go (40) any farther', and fresh ones must be obtained.
This took three days, during which time I lived in one of
the yourts, which was used as a kitchen, in company with
two cooks, several girls, and a variable number of passing
visitors. During my stay I had numbers of visitors to ex-
amine my property and watch my actions, all of which
were apparently both interesting and amusing. I was
never honored by an invitation to the yourt of the Mandarin,.
Perhaps I had committed a breach in some point of
Mongolian etiquette, but what my failings were I never dis-
covered. However, my objects of interest were taken in for
him to see, and in return he drew some pictures for me on
a piece of paper. ^

As my residence amongst the Mongols was of so short
duration, I had but little opportunity to gain much idea of
their character. Two features were however too prominent
to be overlooked, even by the most unobservant. The fix'st
of these was their light-heartedness, which contrasted very
strongly with the stolidity of their neighbours the Chinese.
They were ever ready to make and to enjoy a joke, and
mox'e especially so, if it were in any way pi*acticaL The
other feature was their hospitality. When visitors came to
our tent they were apparently always welcome, and they
seldom went away without having taken part in a meal.

When I w^as in Russia, the Mongols had always been
represented to me as charaters of the blackest dye, amongst
whom it was hardly safe to travel. This was the chief
reason why I was urged to take the Amoor route rather than
the one via Pekin. If our only ^acquaintance with the
Mongols had been from histories which described their
ancestors the Huns, (41) who overran Europe and Asia,
and of leaders like Ghengis Khan and Timour, who whilst
massacring their millions and building pyramids of human
heads, subjected an extent of territory which was unparallel-


34


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


ed by the warriors of other nations, we might naturally
expect to find in the relics of these conquerors, the embers
of a warlike spirit and a ferocious nature. However, to the
superficial gaze of a passing traveller the whole of this has
entirely disappeared, and you only see what is apparently a
simple-minded quiet pastoral people. By some these signs
are regarded as the slumbering of a Vesuvius -which may
yet burst forth to swallow up a modern Naples, as it did an
ancient Pompeii, but from my experiences I should say the
volcanic spirit of the Mongolians is no longer dormant, but
quite extinct. The country surrounding Kooistelroi, like
that which I had already passed over, was of a volcanic
nature. Most of the hills were low and undulating, but
there were a few which rose to heights of about 400 feet,
and had ragged summits. The ground was evex’ywhere
perforated by the burrows of small marmots, which were
very full of fleas. In addition to a few large kites and
ravens one or two finches were to be seen. These,
with the antelopes, a small sand partridge (?) and a doubtful
wolf were the only varieties of animal life which I saw.
The Mongols manage to shoot the antelopes by means of a
long rifle with a small bore. It has a flint lock, and costs
at Urga about £ i. We left Kooistelroi about midday on
the 25th Dec. The temperature rose to — 10° R, and in
consequence I had a wash.

For some distance the road led along the bed of a small
water course the sides of which, as well as an island in it,, ‘
were covered with tufts of tall grass. In (42) these there
were many hares. Their bodies were brown, but their tails,
which I had many opportunities of observing, were black.
The water was not a continuous stream, but in frozen pools
from 10 to 50 yards in breadth. In addition to the black
basaltic rocks which had been so common, there, were s6m'e
exposures of a pinkish porphyritic felsite. In the evening
I saw some large boulders of granite. These were lying on
the surface of the ground', and I think they had been pro-
duced by disintegration from the rocks on which they were
lying. Next day most of the country was granitic, and there


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


35


were so many boulders about, that during the night it was
necessary to have a lantern. As we went on vegetation
became scantier, and the country flatter. On the 28th the
boulders were so numerous and large that they formed quite
a rockerylike feature in the landscape. The hard ground
began to tell upon the feet of our camels, and several hours
were spent every night in doctoring them and stitching over
the sore parts small pieces of leather to act as shoes.

On the 2nd of January there was a high wind from the N.
W., and an increase of cold, the thermometer falling to
— 25° R. Our discomforts were increased by a driving snow
storm which prevented us from seeing many yards ahead.
During the afternoon a large herd of antelopes passed close
by us. Through the wreaths of drifting snow they looked
quite ghostlike. On the 3rd we were overtaken by a small
caravan going to Pekin, and that evening we camped toge-
ther at Borkon-lame-sum, On the 4th the character of thd
country changed, and the whole surface of the ground now
looked as if it had beep cut up into .earthvyorks for fortifica-
tion. Instead of the (43) gritty remains of a degraded
granite, there was now much red sand. In the moxming
I left the remainder of the caravan, and pushed on ahead
with my baggage for Kalgan. At ii A. M. we sighted
mountains before us, which, from the fragments of rock
strewn about, I think consisted of a greenish porphyry and
granite. These latter were very rugged. In the gap at the
entrance to these mountains there are about 20 yourts,
which showed their black tops sticking up through the tall
yellow grass covering. a small plain. This place was called
Haila. Magpies, but much smaller than those in Northern
Mongolia, and one stuntqd fir-tree here made an appear-
ance. In places the snow was knee deep.

Next day we were , crossing a yery open flat plain, in
which there were many yourts and several large herds of
horses. We travelled until 1.30 next morning, when we
reached a. place called Pogon, where there were a number
of yourts and low wooden houses. These latter mark the
limit to which the Chinese have pushed northwards. We


36


MILNERS JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


took shelter in a yourt. This was so hot, .that it was only
by keeping on the ground that the place was bearable; ■ At
the height of a standing man, and as far from the fire as it
was possible to get, the temperature was +48° R.

At this place my Mongols, having met with friends,
partook of so much liquor that at starting time on the
following morning they were unfit to move. This was ren-
dered more aggravating by myself and my Cossack being
kept prisoners in the yourt which had been set aside for us,
by some 7 or 8 dogs. These were sitting outside anxiously
waiting for our appearance.

Sparrows with brown heads began to appear again.
About 7 P. M. on the night of the 8th, after travelling (44)
over cultivated land, we reached Tourgeourta, a small vil-
lage in the hills.

Before daybreak on the following morning, we had left
the plains, and were descending the steep and rocky pass
towards Kalgan. This descent was down one of the rough-
est roads on which up to this time I had had to travel. In
the upper portions we passed between many beds of red
earth, but lower down there was nothing but huge boulders
and perpendicular clifts. In places the distance between
these cliffs was not more than 60 yards, and as this space
was in many places covered from side to side by a sheet of
smooth ice, owing to the freezing of a small stream, we had
considerable dificulties with our camels.

Before reaching Kalgan a few stunted trees and several
flocks of magpies were seen. : . .J ,

Now and then we saw a tower of the Great Wall standing
upon a peak, like the dilapidated base of a truncated obelisk.
Here and there between the rocks, small quantities of earth .
had accumulated, each of which had been taken possession
of to make a garden. Some of these in the upper portions
of the valley appeared to be surrounded on all sides by a
precipice, and it seemed as if it were impossible to approach
them without the use of a bridge. At other times they were
situated on a ledge, to reach which it seemed to me that it
would be necessary to use ladders. In places where it


MILNERS JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


37


seemed impossible for these industrious agriculturalists to
climb themselves, they had sent their oxen to feed, which
looked like flies clinging to the face of some huge wall.
Just before entering Kalgan, which is divided from Mongoli-
an territory by the Great Wall, you pass through to a small
village called Yamborshaw. At this place there are living
the officials of the (45) Russian post-office, and a few Rus-
sian merchants, who attend to the transport of tea and other
merchandise across Mongolia. Here I halted on the gth
of January, 31 days after leaving Kiachta. My host was
M. Shismaroff, chief of the Russian post-office, whom I
have to thank, as I have many of his countrymen, for the
hospitality he so kindly shewed me. After spending a day
and a half in washing, sleeping, visiting temples, admiring
the Great Wall and having a general introduction to
Chinese life, I started in a palaquin carried by two mules for
Pekin.

Passing through Kalgan, which seemed to be the busiest
town I had seen since leaving London, I was soon out upon
the country roads. Here I saw many villages and towns,
with uncountable numbers of inhabitants. At night time I
put up at an inn, when I had a room to myself and a small
coaHire. Although the floor and walls of this room were
made of dried mud, and it was seldom that there was any
furniture to be found, with my remembrance of Mongolia
still fresh upon my mind, I regarded these sleeping accom-
modations as being highly satisfactory.

After passing through the famous Nankow pass, where I
saw another branch of the Great Wall, I entered upon a
level country, which carried me to Pekin four days after
leaving Kalgan. Here I fouhd my friend the Russian officer
who had journeyed as a courier. From Kiachta to Urga he
had travelled in a **tarantass ” and had taken 48 hours to
perform a journey which had occupied me 5 days. From
Urga to Kalgan, owing to an absence of yourts for near 200
miles, and a consequent want of horses, his travelling had
not been so rapid as expected. On this section of the
journey he was 15 days, whilst I had been,24 days.


38


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


PART III.

PEKIN TO TIENTSIN AND OVERLAND
TO SHANGHAI.


At Pekin I spent a pleasant week with Bushell of the
English Legation, whom I have to thank for his kindness
and assistance in seeing the sights of that interesting city.
During the summer the greater portion of the journey from
Pekin to Tientsin may be performed by boat, but as the
river was frozen at the time of my visit, the journey had to
be made by the aid of mules. This was accomplished in
two days. In Tientsin I spent nearlj^ a week in making
preparations for the overland journey to Shanghai, and in
waiting for Colonel Unterberger, the Russian officer who
had preceded me in traversing Mongolia. The reason for
taking this journey was that the Gulf of Pechelee was frozen
over, and to wait for the breaking up of the ice which was
expected to take place in about three weeks’ time, would
have caused considerable delay.

^ At last, in company with my Russian friend, I left Tien-
tsin for Shanghai at 12 A.M. on Saturday the 5th of Feb-
ruary. We had with us four two-wheeled Chinese waggons,
each harnessed with two mules, and also a saddle-horse.^
Both carts and mules accompanied, us for 15 days as far as
Tsing-kian-pu, where we took boats upon the Grand, Canal,
and in 2 ^ day& more reached Ching-kiang. The distances
from station to station along the road were, estimated, very
differently by the different persons from whom we (47) sought
information. Taking in all cases the lowest figures that
were given, the total distance travelled in carts was, 1555 li


Milne’s journey across europe anjd asia.

or about ^ 66 ^ miles. The time actually spent in travelling,
exclusive of all rests, was 145^'^ 35 "^^ which gives an average
of about 10.16 li as the rate per hour. As our course was
pretty fairly divided over a country presenting the three
aspects of regions which were mountainous, hilly and en-
tirely flat, and the weather was moderate, I think that the
above average fairly represents the rate at which ordinary
travellers are able to pass through this country. On our
iirst day we reached Ching-hai-sai. The country passed
over was flat, cultivated, and open, very much like that
surrounding Tientsin, Our course was S.W., and we con-
tinued in this direction as far as Te-chung.

On the next day (Feb. 6^^) we struck some portion of the
Grand Canal at a place where it was about 50 yards broad.
It was frozen, and numerous sledges were being pushed
along its smoother parts. From the embankment, which
is a land-mark to the surrounding country, a good view
could be obtained. Everywhere the ground was flat and
under cultivation. Its monotony was varied by clumps of
houses, each of which had a few trees about it, and by the
conical mounds of numerous graves. Notwithstanding the
openness of the country and total want of any cover during
a great portion of the year, foxes and hares exist in large
numbers. The latter are caught with hawks, (Goshawk,
Astur palumbarius, and Sparrowhawk, accipiter nasus).
Not long before reaching Tsin^e we passed through a breach
in the two banks of an old canal, each of which was about
30 ft. in height. It ran east and west, and we were told
that at one time (48) it joined the Grand Canal.

Along the sides of the road, at the distance of three li
apart, there were small huts, one side of which was covered
with large Chinese inscriptions on a white ground. These
were government guard-stations for the protection of travel-
lers. As a rule they were tenantless, and it was not until
after several days’ journey that I saw one of the guards,
whose presence was indicated by three tall spears, a cross-
bow, and several pikes standing in a rack outside the door
of one of these huts.


40


MILNERS JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE A^D ASIA.


On our third day (Feb. 7^^) we passed along the east side
of the long embattled wall of Tsang-jow, about half an hour
past which, upon the, right hand side of the road, were the
remains, of an avenue of images.

Only eight of these were still in position. On the sides
of the avenue the images represented full-sized squatting
horses, whilst those at the end were large white squatting
images of men. The general arrangement of the figures
was very like that of the tombs of the Emperors to the
north of Pekin.

During a great part of the day a slight breeze from the
S. E. drove clouds of dust in our faces, which was painful
to the eyes. All the villages we passed through had much
the same appearance. The entrance was generally through
a gateway in a mud wall. The streets were narrow, uneven
and dirty. The houses had smoothly plastered mud walls,
the blankness of which was relieved by very few projections
or openings.

Early on the following morning (Feb.“ 8*^^) we passed
through the city of Tunghow, the walls of which were
much decayed. Before midday we mounted on an (49)
embankment, which was either that of the Grand Canal or
of some , continuation of it. It was from 40 to 50 yards in
breadth, and had a somewhat winding course. Owing to
the dust storms the ice which covered it was very rough.
At the town of Songer, which we passed through in the
afternoon, there were many trees and temples. Thus far
on our journey the only trees which we had seen, were
willows, but here there were a few black groves of Arbor
Vitae. At Dajorw, where we spent the night, the horse of
my companion broke down, and he had to take to a, cart.
We here saw soipething of ,New-Year Festivities. A large
paper dragon, from 20 to 30 yards in length, was the chief
object of attraction.: Its body was made of dong cylinder, s
of paper, ■ each-, of which , was carried on a pole, These
were united by bags of linen which gave it flexible joints.
Its interior was lighted up with candles. A band acco.m-
panied it as it was paraded through the streets.^


I^ILNE’S JOl^R?N:§V*AeRGS« EURCrPE ANE ASIA.


41


Next morning as we passed otit of the town, there was a
strong smell of fireworks, which, with the burnt end's of
paper lying in the road; told of the past night’s amuseihents.

We encountered these fireworks and dragons in towns
and villages for several successive- evenings. The' Chinese
seem to be fond of pyrotechnic displa}^^ ; yet we were told
that fires, which might in consequence be expected, were
not common. The wind which had been blowing rather
freshly on the previous day, slightly increased, and shifted
round to the S. W. It now brought with it such quantities
of dust from the roads and open ploughed-up land, that the
sky became like a fog, and from the unbearableness of it
we were compelled to halt much' sooner than we other-
wise (50) should have done.

The roads along these plains were covered with travellers,,
the greater part of whom, if riot journeying on foot, were
riding in wheelbarrows. Sometimes one barrow carried two
persons, one on either side. As long as the wind was
blowing and the barrows were going with it, a small sail
was hoisted.

On Friday the a sight of the hills of the Shantung
Province on before us promised a relief from the monotony
and dust of the alluvial plains. About 9 o’clock we passed
the walls of Chee-kan-chin close upoU our left, and five
minutes afterwards we were upon the banks of the Yellow
River, which the people here call the Pondechowe and not
the Hwang Ho. We were rowed over it in a small cranky
barge. The Water, which' was thickly charged with mud,
and covered with pieces of floating ice, was at least from
three hundred to font hundred yards in breadth. At this
time it Was’ apparently very low, at least 25 feet below
watermarks in its banks bn either side, which evidently
showed its level in flood tithe. Along the shores there was
a fringe' of ice about 6 feet in breadth. B'rom watching
pieces of ice floating down in mid-stream- and timing
several of them as I Walked along the bank, I found that
they travelled with' the current at the rate of about 206 feet
per minute.


4,2


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia*


I now saw along the roads numbers of Parson Crows and
Blue Jays, which I had not noticed farther to the north.
As we ascended the slope leading to the hills, we passed
through several deiiles or natural cuttings in the alluvium
which flanked their sides. This alluvium, instead of being
a homogeneous mass of consolidated silts, like that upon
the plains, (51) contained pieces of limestone derived from
the hills upon which it was lying. At a village called Kaisa
we were fairly at the entrance to the hills, as we now had
them upon our right and left, instead of their being only be-
fore us. In appearance, they were high and rugged. The
only indication of their nature which we couM see was a
bluish black limestone, which cropped up all around. For
the first time I now saw a few sheep and goats. At many
points whilst travelling amongst these mountains we passed
through narrow defiles of alluvium. These seem in a great
measure to have been cut out from the level of the valley
bed through which they run by means of traffic. We could
see them in all stages, from mere rut marks of two wheels
to deep cuttings flanked by perpendicular walls 40 & 50
feet in height. When from the bottom of one ‘of these
latter one looked up at the loose material of the walls,
charged with stones ranging from pebbles to boulders, one
could not but speculate on the risk incurred by passing
travellers. The villages in these mountains were strikingly
different from those in the plains. The entrance to them,
was through a high and massive gothic archway, over which
there rose a gable-ended house. Tfiese entrances, which
were notworthy from their picturesque , appearance, were
very similar in the various towns. The houses, , instead of
being built of mud, like those in the plains, were here built
of stones, and the roofs were thatched. About 8 A. M. on
Saturday -the limestone mountains ended, and gaye
place to granite. With the. change the roads and the hills,
on either side became rougher,

Everywhere there were people who like ourselves seemed
to be on the move from before, sunrise until (52) after sun-
set. The country roads were as much thronged as the


MILlte’s jOURKEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


43


streets of many small towns at home on a busy day.
Travellers were so numerous that we often had to wait at
the entrance to one of the alluvial defiles for the passing out
of a long line of barrows coming in our direction, before we
could enter. There were- also great numbers of beggars;
these were so "numerous, that for several hours along one
section of our course, we passed small groups of them at
distances - not greater than from 20 to 50 yards apart.
They were chieHy half-clothed and naked children, women
and old men, — all very dirty and many covered with sores.
Not far along the road outside Tientsin, where we took our
midday rest, there were several freshly decapitated heads
hanging up by the side of the road in wicker-work cages.
These I saw at several places. About i p. m. we had ap-
parently crossed a water-parting, for we now had a small
stream running in the direction in which we were travelling.
During the afternoon we passed through several crowded
streets, forming the suburbs of the town of Kinnati (or Tai-
nan). This town is large in area, and from its compactness
must contain many people. It is beautifully situated
beneath a high rugged granitic clump of mountains. Upon
these a few patches of snow were just visible. There was
also a little snow lying in heaps in the streets through which
we passed. No sooner were we through the town than we
saw from the broad flat plain before us, that the rough jolt-
ing we had been undergoing must be nearly over. Right
and left of us, however, there were still some mountains.
At night-fall we forded the River Vanko. It was about 100
yards broad, and deep enough to come up to the axle-trees
of our waggons.

(53) Next morning (Feb. 13th) shortly after starting we
bent our course towai*ds the East, and turned up a slope on-
to a low part of the hills, which on the previous day had been
upon our right. They were granitic. About 8.30 P. M.
we crossed what was apparently a second small water-
parting. The country in the neighbourhood is round and
undulating, in its contour not unlike some of the mining
districts in Cornyrdll..


44


MILNERS JOURNEY ACROSS ANJ? 'EUROPE A;SI4.


We now began to see new varieties of trees. From the
materials used in, building. .some of the houses and walls,
I think that in addition to the granite which I saw in sHu^
there inust also be limestone in the neighbourhood. During
the afternoon our course was S. S. E. along a plain about
6 or 8 miles broad, and bounded right and left by hills
which were partly of limestone and partly of granite.
Crossing the road there were many small streams, all of
which ran to ,the right. Next morning (Feb. 14th) we
were travelling over limestone. ■ Projections and boulders
produced by the w^eathering of this rock rendered the road
so uneven, that riding in the cart became unbearable and
we had to walk. The rivulets continued, as on the previous
day, to run towards our right until 7. 30 A. M., when we
passed a small river running to the left. During the
morning we saw hills upon our right, which were grey
with snow. Every few li upon the road there was a short
square tpwer-like fortress. Many of these were much
decayed, and all were unoccupied. Next morning (iSth)
the weather was dull, cold, aud drizzly, not unlike ordinary
• winter weather in England. As we went on the country
grew flatter and flatter, and the. mountains on either side
gradually became lower. The gentle termination of the
hills upon the south was very noticeable,, as being the
(54) reverse of that upon the north, where their ending is
abrupt. The limestone now shewed interstratified shales
and sandstone. In the afternoon, after crossing a sxnall
stream about 50 yards .broad, flowing to the left or S. E.,
we passed through :a large and formidable* wall into the
town of Ejow. This was one of the lai'gest and dirtiest
towns ! had seen hitherto.’ The side-walks were raised,
whilst the road-ways in : between them were like broad
gutters, filled with water, dirt ahd boulders. As we passed
through these the .wheels of our cart churned up the filth to
produce a sickening and disgusting .smell. ' We were 3.5
minutes in reaching the other side of the town and making
an exit, which we did through three courtyards, each of
which was guarded by a heavy gate. At night we forded


MILNE’S JOU^JSIEY ACROSS EUROPE ANP ASIA*


45


a broad and rapid river, called the R. Yee-kai, and reached
Yee-kai-sai, where we slept. , Here my companion lost his,
horse. It had been tied behind one of the carts, and proba-^
bly during the darkness and confusion before fording had
either escaped or been, stolen.

Next morning (Feb i6th) our course was S. by W.,
following a large embankment upon our ri^ht, which had
been built, I presume, to keep the waters of the Yee-kai '
back during hood-time. Although a few very low hills were
just visible to the west, the country around was very flat,
and all ploughed up. During the day the only novelties
that I saw were great numbers of geese flying about, one or
two thorn bushes bearing a few green leaves, and a drunken
man reeling along the road. That night we reached the
village of Kwun-kwa-poo. The pools in the streets through
which we had to pass were in most respects like, cesspools.
Great crowds of people followed us, and at aU the inns
(55) we were refused admittance, as foreign devils ” could
not be received. Although we made many applications, it
was not until we came to the limits of the village that we
found a private person, who put his yard ^and an empty
outhouse at our disposal. During the journey we had
several times been refused admittance to inns, and at
those where we did And shelter, we. had often to put up
with one of the worst chambers. At almost every town
through which we. passed we had to put up with imperti-
ment curiosity and insulting appellations from the crowds
of people who followed us. At this place, however, our
small inconveniences and annoyances were at their maxi-
mum. At 5 P. M. the next day (17th) we. crossed the
gravelly bed of an old river about 200 yards in width. At
the point of crossing there were 19 massive stone piers
standing, . belonging to. a bridge which at one time must
have spanned the course. When complete there must have
been at least 100 of these piers, for they ran some distance
on. to the land on; either side. Judging from the direction
in which their sharp edges pointed, the water must have
run to the left.. Our men called the old river the R- Lenda^


4-6


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


hoj and the bridge Oo-a-chau. During the wet season this
river-course is filled with water. Shortly afterwards we saw
the R. Yee-klan-ho upon our right. On the afternoon of the
next day (i8th) we travelled. a short distance along the em-
bankment of a canal, which was about 50 yards broad and
ran towards the east. The surrounding country was very
flat. Next morning at 1.30 P. M. we reached Tsing-kian-
pu. Here we left our carts and mules, which were appar-
ently as fresh as they were at starting, and engaged a boat
upon the Grand Canal., The strearri being with us, and the
wind generally (56) favourable, we journeyed rapidly. On
our way we passed many large towns, 'at each of which the
canal, which has an average breadth of about 140 feet, was
crowded with junks. The high sloping banks on either
side prevented our seeing much of the surrounding country.
At 9. 40 A. M. on Monday (21st) a breach in the right bank
gave us a view of Lake Koisokho. It is connected with the
Canal, and its depth is about 15 feet. The canal itself at
this point is narrow, and only from 2^ to 3 feet in depth.
Now and then we passed a war-junk carrying a cannon at
its bows. Just before reaching Yanxoo we passed several
large forts, some of which were however only in the process
of construction. Everywhere along the canal junks were
numerous, and so much so about the towns, that nothing
but a comparison with the shipping at the London Docks
will give any just idea of their numbers. Fishermen and
beggars were also numerous. These latter collected alms
from the passing boats in an extremely novel manner. They
had. several long bamboos lashed together forming a pole of
great length. At the end of this a small deep bag was at-
tached. In order to lift the immense rod thus made, and
present the bag to the passengers on the various levels of the
passing junks, the whole was supported on the top of a post
driven in the shore and turned about upon it like a swivel.
The master of this begging machine stood on the shore, and
whilst beating a small drum to attract attention, worked the
rod,: raising, lowering and swinging his bag into any position
where he thought a return might be expected.. :


Milne’s journey across europe and asia* 47^

On Tuesday at 2 P. M. we reached Ching kiang, where
we joined a steamer, and next morning were in Shanghai
after a quick trip of 19 days from Tientsin. (57)


IV

OBSERVATIONS AND GENERAL NOTES.


List of Principal towns in Siberia.


Distance in versts
Population Petersburg.


Barnaul

1738

12,927

4209

Blagovaitchinsk

1857

3.385

18159

Verkne Kamschatka. ...

1647

210


Vladevostock

Eneseesk

i6i8

2000?

7.147

9974

5069

Irkutsk.

1652

31,872

5745

Kansk

1645

2,472

4955

Krasnoyarsk

1626

12,532-

4738

Kiachta.

1728

944

6392

Nertchinsk.

1656

37

6898

Omsk

1716

27,722

3309

Okotsk

1713

210

9615

Petropaulovsky

1750

479

13.398

Samarkand.


30,000

4325

Semipalatinsk

1757

14.198

4035

Tashkend

186s

78,066

4052

Tobolsk

1586

18,459

29.481

2934

Tomsk

1604

4176

Troitskosarsk

1736

4.675

6388

Tinmen

1585

15.S12

2670

Chabarofka

1858

850

9005

Chit^

1851

2598

6624

Yakutsk

1632

4778

8563


In addition to the towns given in the above list there are
many others which contain about 3000 inhabitants.

From the foregoing table we see that in Siberia there
are several towns of considerable magnitude, and that it is
not altogether such a wilderness as is popularly supposed.


48 MILNERS JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.

At the same time we observe that the towns with which we
are perhaps the most familiar, (58) like Kiachta and Peti'O-
pauiovsky, are by no means those which contain the largest
number of inhabitants ; these latter being chiefly those
which are situated in districts which have been newly an-
nexed. The high population of towns like Tashkend, I
was told, was due to the large number of soldiers which
were quartered there at the time when the'census was taken.

From the first column of the table it will be seen that
many of the towns in Siberia boast of a considerable anti-
quity. Tthus Tobolsk was founded in 1586, and Irkutsk,
which is nearly 4000 miles away from S. Petersburg, was
founded in 1652.

By looking at the third column, an idea may be gained
of the difficulties which the Russian Government has to
contend with in dealing with places like Petropaulovsky,
situated 9000 miles away from the seat of government in.
S. Petersburg. The distances which separate such places
from their capital, have I think in many instances as in
other countries, given opportunities for abuses both social
and political, which would never have occurred had these
distances been less, or the means of communication more
easy.


Number of days of Rain & Snow
in various portions of Siberiav


Winter. Spring, Summer. Autumn, Total.


Ishim

36.2

38-7

39-3

45-0

159.2

Turinsk.

i 27m

23.0

28.2

20.0

98.0

Barnoul.

21.5 j

25.8

30-2

■ 2q.6 ^

107. 1

Verknie Udinsk., ...

23.8

20.5

28.0

^ 3-5

■■ 95-8

Irkutsk

9-5

17.0

25.0

II. 0

'62.5

Nertchin^k

5-0

17-3

25-7

11.7

59-7

Yakutsk

22.4

16.5

21.9

29.4

90.2


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


49


Table of Mean Temperatures (Reaumur) taken at
some of the more important Siberia towns.


N. Lat. E. Long. . Name. Winter. Spring, Summer, Autumn. Mean.


10.55

187.4

Ust Yansk

— 30.2

—14,5

6-5

0
d

1

— 13-0

68.32

178.36

Nijni Kolimsk

— 26.2

— 10. s

8-3

II.7

lo.o

68.2

147-25

Yakutsk

— 31-1

^ 7.7

1 1.5

— g.o

8.6

59.21

160.51

Okotsk

—17.9

— 3.6

8.9

__ 3,3

— 4.0

63.56

• 82.44

Bexezovsk !

— 17.1

— 5.1

II . 6

o.g

— 3.4

51.18

137.16

Nertchinsk

— 21,6

— 1.7

12.S

3.2

— 3.4

53.8

158.27

Nickolaievsk

— 17.0

5-5

11.9

5-4

— 2.1

56.30

102.50

Tomsk

—13-8

1.3

13-2

— 1. 1

— 0.4

52.16

121.58

Irkutsk

—14.8

— 0.7

' 13-1

— 0.6

‘ — 0.4

58.12

85.56

Tobolsk

'—13-5

0.1

14.0

0.2

— 0.1

57-49

125.24

Verkne Udinsk

—15.2

I.O

14.7

— 0.6

— 0.0

55-27

95-58

Kansk

■—14.5

— o.g

14,6

— 0.4

— 0.1

50.15

145.16

Blagovaitschinsk

— 18.0

3.6

15. 1

7.1

0.1

53.20

101.37

Barnoul

—13.9

— o.i

14.0

~~0.I

0.2

50.24

97-56

Semipalatinsk

— 12.8

6.4

15-3

5.2-

0.6

53-0

176.22

Petropavalovsky

— 5.2

1.2

10.4

2.6

2.3

56.6

87.7

Ishim

— 13-5

0,2

14.0

1. 1

0.5

55.20

82.40

Kurgan

-13.5

0.8

15.6

I.O

I.O

57-47

81.30

Turinsk

— 12.0

1.5

13.8

0.7

I.O


Table of the time of Freezing and Breaking up of
the Ice on Various rivers.


Name of River,


T Ice forms Ice breaks up
JM. L.at.


Syr Darya, near Aral

i 45° 0'

Nov. 20

March 21


Obi, near Barnaul

53 ° 14'

Oct. 30

April 15

the Obi

Tobol, near Kurgan
Irtish, near Tobolsk

55° 32'
58° 20 1

Oct. 26

April 15

Oct. 24

April 20


Obi, near Obdorsk

67° 28'

Oct. 20

May 20

Basin of

Angara*, near Irkutsk

' 52^ 20’

Dec. 30

May 20


Lake Baikal

53 ° 0'

Dec. 23

April 20-May 10

Yenisei

Yenisei, near Kras-
noiarsk

56'’ 6'

Oct. 29

April 20

Basin of (

Lena, near Kirensk'

57 ° 40'

Oct. 25

April 30

the Lena {

Lena near Yakutsk

61° 58'

Oct, 21

May 13

Basin of {
the Yana ]

Yana near Ust/ Yansk

j 71° 23'

Sept, 6

May 24


This table giving dates for the formation and for the
breaking up of ice on various rivers, shews in an approxi-
mate manner the mean of a series of results of observa-
tions extending over several years.


Milne’s journey across Europe and Asia.


so

(6o) As the, greater number of Siberian rivers have a
course from South to North, the . result exhibited in this
table, namely that the northern portions of a.ny particular
river freeze up earlier and break up later than the more
southern portions, is one that would be naturally anticipated.
The time of formation of ice in the north near the mouth of
a river, is roughly speaking, about one week earlier than in
the more southern portions, whilst the breaking up is one
month later. Both of these phenomena are influential in
producing floods, which will have caused a deposition of silt
to have been spread over the surrounding country-.

NOTE ON SIBERIAN EXILES.


According to the Siberian Calendar for 1875 from which
I extracted the preceding tables, 159,990 persons were
exiled to Siberia between the years 1827 and 1859, and of
these 134,231 were males, and 25,759 females. The causes
for which they were sent were various. Upwards of 6000
were serfs, who were sent by the will of their masters on
account of bad conduct.

About 40,000 were sent for robbery, 14,000 for murder,
for high treason about 440, for libel 398, for family quarrels
71, for arson, forgery, smuggling, deserting, sacrilege, each
from 1000 to 2000.

During these years from 1863-1866, about 18,606 political
exiles were distributed over various portions of Siberia, of
whom 3,894 were put to hard labour.

From what I saw of Siberian exiles, although in many
cases they have to abide beneath the arbitrary (61) rule of
the officers immediately above them, they are apparently
much more leniently treated than I imagine prisoners would
.be, if in a similar position, beneath the rule of any otI|er
European power.

Some of the exiles are only required to act as' colonists.
Others are, condemned for a period to hard labour. Several
of the many political exiles whotn I met with, had be^n


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


51


transported for 10 years, the first two of which had been
spent in the mines. After that time they had been permit-
ted to reside in some of the towns, where they were joined
by their friends from Europe, who had provided them with
capital to carry on some business. One gentleman with
whom I was acquainted, owned a farm, a large store, and
had also interest'in several mines and fisheries. In the
theatre at Irkutsk on one side you might see the governor-
general, who ruled over a territory as large as Europe, whilst
on the other side, in a box which was almost opposite, an
exiled Polish family. Although in this respect there appears
to be an apparent mixing of the rulers and the ruled, when
you know them more intimately you will see, as might
naturally be expected, that they each have their own society.

The other class of exiles have hardly so pleasant an ex-
istence, but nevertheless, as compared with the persons who
may be seen breaking stones at Portland, they lead a happy
life. Any day when walking in Irkutsk you see gangs o£
them employed in cleansing and repairing the roads. Should
you be charitably inclined you may find vent for your phil-
antlirophy in presenting them with a few kopecks. In cer-
tain cases, I believe if their offence has been a light one,
and their behaviour good, they are presented with a cottage
and a piece of land.

(62) In this way portions of Siberia are being colonized,
either by persons who have been transported for life, or else
by persons -who during the period of their exileship have
obtained so much property or other interest in the country,
that it becomes inconvenient to leave on the expiration
of their involuntary service. The remaining portions of the
Siberian population consist of government officials, chiefly
military, and merchants. A great number of these latter are
Jews who speak German. ""


52


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


NOTES FOR PERSONS INTENDING
TO MAKE THE
OVERLAND JOURNEY.


In making the journey from the Eastern extremity of
Siberia to Europe, I believe that it is possible for a Russian
to travel as quickly and at a cheaper rate overland than he
could by an ordinary mail steamer. The journey, however,
would be extremely fatiguing, and might be dangerous to
any one without a strong constitution. Murray in his hand-
^ book of Russia says that the journey from London to Pekin
by travelling without intermission, may be performed in 50
days, ,a statement which appears to me be very like that
which you see in almanacs about the cannon ball which
might reach the sun in so many thousands of years, quite pos-
sible if each continued at the rate at which (63) they started.
On enquiry I found that 50 days was the average time taken
for a letter which travels day and night, and it is said that it
has been accomplished by a courier who has had special
facilities for crossing Mongolia with relays of horses, — a
method of travelling which cannot be adopted by an or-
dinary traveller. For the journey I should allow from 70 to
80 days. , The rate at which you travel will depend greatly
on the season of the year, the best times being either in; sum-
mer or 'winter, and the v^orst times being between these sea-
sons, when there are roads for neither sleighs nor carriages,
and when the rivers are obstructed with hoating ice. The
advantages of winter travelling are that you travel quickly,
and that you can carry with you a large quantity and variety
of provisions, those like soup for instance, being in a frozen
state. The disadvantages are, that it is very cold, and you
are in consequence so hampered with furs, felt boots and
other necessary cumbersome covers that you can scarcely
walk, and secondly that everything is white with snow,


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA,


53


in consequence of which one portion of the country looks
pretty much the same as any other portion.

The disadvantages . of summer travelling are that
it is rather warm, very dusty, and there are many
mosquitoes.

In winter time, judging from my own experiences, I
should most strongly advise travellers to avoid Mongolia,
unless they wish to taste hardships which I strongly
suspect are very little inferior to those of an Arctic expedi-
tion. The easiest and quickest way to cross Europe and
Asia is to proceed to Irkutsk arid then to take the route
from Stretinsk, down the Amoor by steamer, then up the
Shilka to Lake (64) Hanka, and down the Siphoon to
Vladivostock. In this way a person may travel from the
Atlantic to the Pacific without having more than 20 days in
carriages, the journey being chiefly accomplished by river
steamers. The disadvantage however would be that such
a journey is altogether through Russian teridtory, which if
considered only with regard to its flatness would be ex-
tremely monotonous.

If a traveller starts from London or S. Petersburg to
make the overland journey, he has an advantage in obtain-
ing many introductions and perhaps even official letters
which he could not obtain, or at all event only with difficul-
ty, if travelling in the opposite direction. He also may
avoid the necessity of carrying a large quantity of money,
by paying a certain amount into one of the Banks at S.
Petersburg, and obtaining a letter of credit for the same to
several of the banks in the more importants towns, like
Ekaterinburg, Omsk, Tomsk and Irkutsk in Sibeida. On
the other side, however, you must remember that as you
travel eastwards your difficulties increase with your weari-
ness, and this will be especially noticeable if you cross
Mongolia.

The expenses of the journey will be considerably lighten-
ed if two persons travel in company, but it must by no
means be inferred from this that it is necessary to take your
companion with you from your point of starting. So long


54


MILNE’s journey across EUROPE AND ASIA,


as you are in Russia and Siberia, companions are to be
met with without difficulty, and in fact the most expedi-
tious and cheapest way of travelling would be to travel
in company with a Russian, and share the expenses. So
long as I was alone and travelling on steamers, my fellow
voyagers were one and all extremely attentive. They
were invariably desirous of giving me assistance, and
always helped me (65) off upon my next stage when we
parted company.

With regard to the carriage of luggage both in Russia
and China, there is little or no difficulty ; two portmanteaus
of moderate dimensions might be considered a reasonable
quantity. The clothes you need, will be those you would
use in any other country, — taking with 5^ou dress suits and
all the other paraphernalia of civilised societies, should you
intend to mingle amongst the inhabitants of any of the
towns at which you stay. In matters of dress Russians
are very punctilious, and it will be well to observe their
customs, even to the wearing of a dress coat for a morning
call ; that is, if you wish to leave a favourable impression
behind you. Winter clothes are best bought in the country,
and to attempt to wear others and defy the cold will be an
expensive and rash experiment, which will probably be
paid for by your being frost-bitten.

Food for the road can be bought at all the large towns.
English notes and English gold may be exchanged at the
banks there.

Persons crossing Siberia must not imagine that they are
diving into unknown regions, where they pay meet with
untold dangers and accomplish heroic deeds. On the
contrary, they will rather ffnd themselves travelling on
good roads, between good towns inhabited by a refined
community. Inhospitable frozen plains, packs of , wolves
and gangs of exiles ax'e to the observer upon the. ordinary
post-roads of Siberia almost as mythical in existence as the
capering sleek charger of the Arab or. the docile dog of
Newfoundland, ^^rarce which we often hear about

never see.


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA. 55

At times a voyager may be uncomfortable and cold, but
if he mingles with his fellow travellers he will probably
meet with kindness and hospitality which (66) will oblite-
rate all unpleasant feelings and leave behind an impression
which will ever make him think with pleasure of the days
he spent in Russia and Siberia.


List of temperatures taken on the journey across Mongolia
with a R6aumur Thermometer.


Dec. gth

8. P. M.

— 21°

at Stanock.

— loth

2.30 A. M.


at Yeroh.

— loth

S A. M.

— 18°


.. 3 P. M.

— . 13°


10 P. M.

~~ 3:3"

at Witun sham.

— nth

10 A. M.

— 9*5°

at Zaltra nars.


R. Sharin Kol.


7P. M.


By-yan-gulta.


8P. M.

1

H

00

0


12 P. M.


Makatah Pass.

— i2th

2 A. M.

~ 18°


2P. M.

in sun •— 17°

at Barah.


10 P. M.

— 21°


2P. M.


at Borogoldia.


3P. M.

- 7°


10 P. M.

— 10°


— i4tli

12 P. M.


OHndowa Pass.


7 A. M.


Gatinawa Pass.

— i6th

3 P. M.

- 14°


— 17th

3P. M.

— 21'’


8P. M.

— 24°


— i8th

3P. M.

- 15-5°


8 P. M.

— 20°


50 MILNE’S journey across EUROPE AND ASIA.


— iQth

gP. M.

— 20th

3P. M.


8 P. M.

— 2ith

5 P. M.

— 22th

t P. M.


8 P. M.

— 25th

10 A. M.

— 25 th

10 P. M.

— 26th

about 12 A. M.

— 28th

g P. M.

— 29th

12 A. M.

~~ 30th

II A. M.


12 A, M,

31st

12 A. M.

Jan. ist 1876

12 A. M.


I P. M.

— 2nd

4P. M.

— 3rd

after i P. M.

— 4th

2 P. M.

— 5th

Morning


12 A. M.

Dec. 6th

II A. M.


5 P. M.

— 7 th

I P. M.

— 8th

I A. M.


I A. M.

— gth

5 P. M,


— 15"

in tent; outside — 19°

14°


- i;'*

in tent.

— 20®

reached Teciisha

17°

buinta.

— 10°

in tent. — ig® outside.

- 17®

to— 3®

0®


™ iS”

at Khoburr.

70°

5 yourts Arroisosuin.
IngUotuk

Siatuk.

— II®

10 yourts & 2 large


buildings.

— 10®


- 25®

Boorkon -1 ama- su m.
Bortelroi.

Sakildig.

Torantasums (a shrine)

— 9 °

Mountains before us.
Haila.

Dam nur saza.

Porgon.

Tourgeourta,

Kalgan.


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


57


List of places passed between Urga and
Kalgan, as given to me by me
Mongol drivers.


Dec. 1 6th


Urga or Kreiidur

T arkura

Baindur

Olandowa .

Araksta

Kungalota

Dutch

Boim bulum

Ustan kalander

Bain alia

Baintal

Dakerunero

Et kayos

Tzoislung

Bus

Kokhul

Artim

Elan

Oorjirun

Kokus

Jodjr

Bara-ya-mata

Tunda-ya-mata

Choo-ya-mata

Tima-ya-mata


Dec. 22nd


Tecksha buinata
Kooistelroi

Bondo bullock
Hhargo pi
Harol
Bointolok


Left here
25 th
yourts.
yourts.


on the


58


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA. .


Dec. 27th


Jan. 3rd


Jan. 5th


Jan. 6th


j Kor pun har
I Botte’

Yast
Sainghar
• Mele kbit
Beedoot
Sekul
Zaird
Zowk
Olant otuk
Olanhad
Amra
Mogoi
Cosot
Bainzurch
Alahamba
Haratin sootch
Some cholo
Batka
Sabuk

Olon-otuk-sum

Tubungura

Tamjetalla-gat

Migee-suk

Khandar-sum

Bolkun-lamma-

sum

Torum elis
Tagant sum
No wan oroo
Japulun ungurr
Bunbun darwa
Cholo
Saganor
Umgwa Dowas
Nara khol
Manj bullock
Senjet Towa
Kasursum
Kalgan or Chan-
giku


9th Jan. 1876


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


59


(70) ITINERARY & OBSERVATIONS MADE
ON THE ROAD BETWEEN
TIENTSIN & SHANGHAI.


Itinerary of route from Tientsin to Ching Kian.


1876

Feb. 5th
Saturday

75

Left Tientsin at 12 P. M.

‘ Zwad-^odco, ^ Coden^a, ‘ Chee-leepoha
‘ Ele2;oan, Ching-hai-sai. Arrived here at

6.30 P. M. Temp : — 3° R. Large dirty
town, no wall seen, 75 li from Tientsin.

Feb. 6th
Sunday 1

no li 1

i

Left Ching-hat-sai at 5.30 A. M.

Jan^e mator 7.15. Ching-gwun-tun 7.40
‘ Deo-tai, Gow-tun, ‘Van-gun-tun, ‘ Chan-
gun-tun 8.45 “ Lu-gan-tun 8.50 ‘ Ya-go-tun,
Tung-wan-tun lo. 35 & left at 1 1.5. 50 li
“ Wung-gun-tun 12.15 “ Tsang-wun-tun

12.50 Lu-den-sai, Wan-jiin-za 2.45 awayside
inn. Crossed old Canal bed running N. &
S. at 3.50 ‘“Tsin^e 4,25. 60 li, no wall.

Feb. 7th
Monday

120 li

Left Tszinze 6.10 A. M.

Hownan-tun, ‘ Quy-3mn ‘ Tow-jafai 8.5
Tsang-jaw 8,55, “ Tso-dwang-ja, g.35

Chod^^ea 10. 0. left at 11.30. 50 li. “ Tan-
gun-tun 12.40 Lewa-winzonza 1.45 “ Pan-
pon-dai 2.10 “ Tschu-gun-tun 2.40 Nmipia
or Nanpia 4.15 ‘Nangoyer * Gonzanya,

‘ Oudzanfa Yanpi 6.30. 70 li.

Feb. 8th
Tuesday
no li

(71) Left Yanpi at 5.5 A. M.

‘Baidzoa. 7. Tunghow (walls much

broken) ““ Linjen. g. left at ii. 60 li.
Followed along the bank of the Grand Canal
for a short distance. ‘‘Tun-ja-fa 11.20^


6o


Milne’s journey across europe and asia.


Feb. gth
Wednesday
120 li


Feb, lotb
Thursday
100 li


Feb. nth
Friday
100 li


‘ Hoi-da-fa 12.5, “ Village on our right i. P.
M. Chow-dezoa 2.15 ‘ Laon-chan-dea 2.30
Songer 2.45 This has decayed walls.
Desondua 4 . . large plain “ Chetdera
4.45 ‘ Sawzar 5.15. ^ Dajow {Tochow (?) 6 .
P.M. 50 li.

Left Dajow at 6.10 A. M. & passed
through houses (Hung-tun) until 7.40.

Low-ja-how 7.25 Willage 8.5, Hwan-
Kon-hai 8.40, Left at 10.30.50 li. ‘ Small
village 10.50 Yow-zo-fona 11.15, old wall.
‘ Village 11.30 Be-jachow 12 Chee-lee-dia

12.30 Low-go- chea 1.45 (mud wall)
‘‘ Shee-wanshai 2.40 (mud wall) Urshili-
po 4,25.70 li.

Left Urshili-po at 5.45 A. M,

Le-jai-sai 7.25 (mud wall) Pyshow
8.15 ‘ Chanzoa 8.40 ^Nuboa 9. Village 9.5,
Chee-dzan-chow 9.50 Left at 11.45. 5 ^

li. Urchinsa^ on our left ^ Pongder 12.40
‘‘ Chee-ja-jow i. ‘Village 1.30 “ Chowdzoa

1.40 “ San-dza-jowa 2. ‘ Quoindur 2.30

‘ Conja-po 2.45 Yan-chen 3.30.50 li.

Left Yan-chen 6.45 (could see hills ahead)
“Village 7.10 “ Si-raan-jan 7.40 “ Sajow

8.30 Chee -kail-chin 8.55. Reached the banks

of the Yellow River (72) (Hwang-Ho &
aboard a ferry boat at 9.15. On the road
again at 10. ‘ Village 10.5 “ Shin-shan-da

10.40 “ Yonzoar ii (mud wall) Tolezoa
11.30. Village with mud wall 10.35. Tonja-
ma 12. Left at 2 P. M. 50 li Chowdza
2.35 mud wall. Panzun 2.50 (mud wall)
at foot of hills “ Kaisa 3,20 entrance to pass.

Fanzazoa 4.10 Ooza 4.40. small stream
flowing torwards Yellow River 5. ‘ Village
5,25 ‘ Village 5.35- Chan-za 5.40.50 li.


Milne’s journey across eurore and asia.


6i


Feb. 1 2th
Saturday
loo li


Feb. 13th
Sunday
100 li


Feb. 14th
Monday
no li


Left Chanza at 5.10 A. M.

“ Shidai 5.55 Thing-an-shua 6.20
Chingan 7. Tinva, ‘ Gwan-ja-jow 7.30 Sow-
ling-gwa 7.40 “ Showander 7.50 Gwanda
8.5. crossed a stream for the third time 8,50
‘‘ Chan-chung, 9 Chowden 9.30 Tientai
9.50. Left at 11.45 50 li-

Chadzoa 12.10. country gets open 12.30.
Fairly over the water parting Sc a stream
running with us 1.15. ^‘Tashenzo 1.18.

‘ Village 2 ‘ Ebilo 2.4. Kinnan or Taman
3.20 (largest town thus far) ‘ Poidzoar 4.5
‘ Gwandzoar 4.10 ‘Village 4.20 ‘ Shilear

5.30 ‘ Lienjow 5.50 “ Shididza 5.30 & river
Vanho, Village 5.55 & ford the river 80
yards broad ‘ Kaipanzoan 6.10. Sujoan

7.30.50 li.

Left Sujoan at 5.45 A. M.

‘Village 6 ‘Tanza 6.50 “ Chidzaw 7.20
“ Mowan 8.20 ‘ Hung-kwa 8.25 (72a) Moi-
ko-lin 8.55 “ Gw^anzer 9.10 “ Gwan-chow

9.30 ‘ Voujlen 10.5 “ Allejona 10.30.

“‘Yungluda (mud wall) 10.80 left at 12.59
50-li.

‘ Shinzar 1.50, ‘Village 1.40. Fou-son
mud walls 1.50 ‘ Soquishoa 2.15 ‘Yenzaw
2.45 a stream running to our right. ‘ Zairdzo
3.X0 Kwoie 3,30 2 Villages upon our right
‘ Kow-ma-chow 3.55 Bed of stream 4.15
““ Shing 4 ai-shai 4.45 a town with suburbs.
‘ Quoiur 5.5 small stream Ghin-ed-zoar

5.50 Noyan 50 li.

Left Noyan at 1.50 A. M.

‘Village 2.15. ‘Wanzaw2.40. white house
on right on top of a rise 2.55 “‘Tonzo 3.20.
‘Village 4.10. ‘Village 4.35 “Tung-tu-fu
5.15. Stream runs to right, Sc high mountains


62


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


Feb. I5tli
Tuesday
loo li


Feb. 1 6th
Wednesday
120 li


on the same side ‘Village 5.20 ‘Tuntai
5.40 top of a rise ‘Village 6. Moi-in-sha 6.
30 on our right ‘ Whoda 7.15 “ Bowja 7.30.
Honjicho 7.35. Tanzuma 7.45.

“ Kun-cha-chun 8 ‘ Sukadun 8.15. “ Min-
chow 8.25 Sowaja 9 we are here in an
open valley, Cluidanza 9.5 “ Jabochu 9.45*
‘ Patighin 10. Yanfer or Tainhai 10.40
‘Village 10.50 Tosanjow 11.^. “‘Dodjoa
12.15, left at 1.55 60 li. Chum-to-dzar 2.15
a walled village^ ‘ Shoipo 2.30 stream on
right running with as ‘Yenja 3. Bosh-ho-ha
3.20 ‘Village 3.40 “Kwang-ha4. ‘ Shang-
dur 4.25 Kai-za-kwo 440 (72b) Shing-da-
so 5.5 Mountains on right, those on the
left tail out. 50 li.

Left Chang-to-so (or Shing-da-so) at 5.15

A.M.

‘ Village on right 6.0 ‘ Mosetur 6.15 stream
to left, Village 6.30, rounded hills ahead,
make for western end of hills 6.40 ‘ She-gun-
da 7. Village 7.10 Stream to left 7.45 ‘ Wie-
ge-tun 8.10. ‘Village 8.30 ‘ Shidzao 9.5

Pon-sha-ho g.35 and left at 11.30. 50 li.

‘ Sinlaso 11.40 Hills in distance on the
right, but flat country ahead. ‘ Village 11.15.
“Low-gwa-hoo 12.15 ‘‘Natzoan 12.50 ‘ Vil-
lage 1.35 ‘Village 2,15 stream 50^*^® broad
flows S. E. 2.25 (Yechow) 2.45

left the town at 3.20, ‘Village 3.25 ‘ Village
4.10 ‘Village 4.30 ‘Tai-chun-lai 5 ‘Village
5.35. River Yee-kai 5.55 ‘Village 6.10. cross-
ed R. Yee-kai 6.15 about 250^^^® broad
flowing to right and reached Yee-kai-son

Left Yee-Kai-San 6.10 A. M.

‘ Village on left 6. 25. Hills to S. W.
‘Tienfur 5.50 ‘Village 7. 3o‘“ Village on left


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


63


Feb. 17th
Thurday
120 li


Feb. 17th
Friday
1 00 H


Feb. igth
Saturday
70 li


8 Newd2roa 8.30 ‘ Shechow 9. ‘‘‘Taboa 10

Sileepoo ii.io stream runs to right, left at

12.45. ‘ Quang-boe-khow 1.15 Embank-
ment right & left ‘ Village 1.25 Tun-chun
1.35 ^Village 2 ‘‘Towsuja 2.35 (72c) Village

2.45. ‘ Village 3 ‘ Yanzer 3.10 *Tung-shin-o
3.40. ‘Village 4 ‘Village 4.15 ‘Village 4.35
‘Village 4.50. Kwun-kwapoo 5.15 60 li.

Left Kwun-kwa-poo at 6 A. M.

‘Village 6.15 ‘Village 6.30. Songnan-
jan 7.5 Village 8.xo! Village on left 8,10
“ Village 8.45, 9.15 Village on left. Rivulet
runs to right. ‘Village 9,30 ‘Village to
I’ight 9.55 & can see a river to the left ‘ Vil-
lage 10.30 “Sahou, 10.35 12.40. 60 li.

‘Village 12.50 ‘Village 1.45 “Village 2.20
“‘Village 3.30, ‘Village 4.10. Village 4.35
“ Sil-un-tow 4.50. Bed of old River Len-da-
ho 5. ‘ Village on right 5.16 Village 5.25 8 c
River Yen-klan-ho Son-ka-dee 5.45. 60 li.

Left Son-ka-dee at 6.35 A. M.

‘Village on right 7. ‘ Village on left 7.20
‘Village on right 7.50 ‘Village 8.0. ‘Village
on left 8.3s ‘Village on right 9.15 Village
on left 9.20. Needzoar 9.45 (houses & well)

‘ Village 10.15 ‘ Village 10.25, Bed of River
broad 10,30. Yung-wha-den 11.20
(mud wall) left at 1.5. 50 li.

‘Village on left 1.30. House on all sides.
On embankment of Canal 2.15 travelled
with the stream East. Left embankment
5.25 Crossed to a raised-road all along which
were houses ‘Village 4*25. ‘Village 5.
(72d) ‘Village 5.20. “‘Toi-chan-gwa or Jon-
san-dzea (mud wall) 6. P. M. 50 li.

Left Toi-chan-gwa at 6. 40 A. M.

Mounted an embankment on the left em-


64


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


Feb. loth
Sunday
130 li


Feb. 2ist
Monday
160 li


Feb. 22nd
Tuesday


bankment at 7.35 Houses 7.45 Houses 7.55.
Houses 8. Houses 8.30. Houses continued
in a scattered manner until after g. Son-
karsho 10.12. Wangove, an enclosure J mile
square 10,25. Houses 10.35 solitary
stone arch ways in a field on the left ii.
Mounted embankment 12.15 see a town to
the right. Descended from the embankment
on the right & crossed sandy plain. Crossed
bed of almost empty canal 12.35. Crossed
through a breach in a second embankment
down to & then over a Canal. A quarter of
a mile further we passed through a third
embankment. These last two embankments
marked the bed of the old Yellow River.

Tsmg-kian-pu 1.25 & Grand Canal. 70 li.

Left Tsing-Kian-pu in a boat on the
Grand Canal at 6.30 A. M. Hagwa 8.15.

Hoo-de-la 9.40 ‘ Quoi-shu-rna. Ting-
yan-gwa, Ching-ho 1.45. Tayow-ha Kuon-
doo 2.25 Patchee 3.5 Pom-tee 3.45

Lig-a-baw 5.40. 130 li.

Left Lig-a-baw at 5.30 A. M.

Loyango 8. 30 Ma-jun-gwa g.40 (726)'
Lake Koi-eo-kho on our right, Chinggueda
10.40 Quoiyu 12.15 ‘‘“Tacbelou 2.25
‘‘Luchin 3.30 Sawba 5. 160 li.

Left Sawba at 5.45 A. M.

Wy-poa8 Gumer 8.30 Tabruchela. Ooda-
sa g. Passed a number of forts Yanzo
g.15 Yan-ge-chow 11.30. Palipoo 12.15.
Ching-kian 2. P. M.

One the afternoon of our arrival at Ching-
kian we joined a steamer on the Yang-tsi-
kiang & reached Shanghai at 12 o’clock next
day, Wednesday Feb. 23^^


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


65


In this Itinerary all the names printed in italics indicate
large towns with walls round them.

Those preceded by 3 small comas are large villages or
small towns at which several inns may always be found.
Those with 2 comas are small villages where inns may
perhaps be found, whilst those with one dash are only
clumps of houses.

The spelling of the names of these places, which names
are in many cases perhaps only local, is probably wrong,
and this itinerary as it stands will be of little use excepting
to those who actually travel along this route. For the
purpose of comparing my spelling with that which is re-
cognized as the best, I, append the following table kindly
drawn up for me by Mr. Byron Brenan of the British
Legation at Pekin.


Recognized spelling not always
like the local sound.

My spelling from the local
sound.

Chen-chia-tun.

Ching-gwan-tun.

Tang-kwan-tun.

Tung-wan-tun.

Chin-hsien.

Tsinze.

Tsang-cliow.

Tsang-jow.

Tung-kwan.

Tung-hou.

Lieu'WO'Chen.

Linjen.

Tea-chow.

Dajou.

Erh-shih-li-pu.

Urshilipo.

Li-chi-chai.

Lu-jai-sai.

Yu-cheng.

Urshinsa.

An-cheng.

Yan-chen.

Chi-ho-hsien.

Chee-kan-chan.

Tan-tsun,

Panzun.

Koshau.

Kaisa.

Chang-hsia.

Chausa.

Chieh-shou.

Chadzoa.

Tainan.

Kin-an-

Kwan-chwang.

Gwanjow.

Kwan-chiao.

Gwanjow.

Yang-lin-tien.

Yang-lu-da.

Hsin-tai-hsien.

Shing-tai.

Tung-chu-fo.

Tung-tu-fu.


66


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


Recognized spelling not always
like the local sound.


My spelling from the local
sound.


Meng-yin-hsien.

Ching-tO'SSii.

Yi-chow.‘

Ta-fou.

Hung-hwafou.

Siao-hu.

Liu-tang-ho.

Ching-kiang-pu.


Mounsha.

Shing*da-so.

Ejow.

Taboa.

Kwun-kwa-pu.

Sa-how.

Leu-da-ho.

Tsing-kian-pu.


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia.


67


ANALYSIS OF DISTANCE AND TIME
ALONG THE ROAD.


Mornig Afternoon Total


Date of

Time

Distance

Rest

Time

Distance

Time

Distance

Month.

travelling

travelled


travelling

travelled

travelling

travelled


hr, min.

li

hr. min.

hr. min.

li

hr. min.

li

Feb. 5th

—

—

—

6,30

75

6,30

75

— 6th

3*30

50

0.30

5.20

60

840

no

— 7th

4.20

50

1.30

7-30

70

11.50

120

— 8th

3-55

60

2. 0

7. 0

50

10.55

no

— gth

2.30

50

1.50

6. 5

70

8.35

120

— loth

4- 5

50

1-55

345

50

7.50

100

— nth

5-15

50

' 2. 0

3.40

50

8.35

100

— i2th

4.40 1

50 1

1-55

7.40

50

12.25

100

— 13th

5* 5

50

2. 0

5‘ 0

50

10. 5

100

— 14th,

10. 0 ;

60

1.40

3«ro

50

13-10

no

— 15th

4.20 ;

50

1.55

6.45

50

II- 5

100

— * 1 6 th

4. 0

60

i‘35

5-30

60

9.30

120

— 17th

4-35

60

2. 5

3* 5

60

9.40

120

— i8th

4.45

50

X 45

4‘55

50

g.40

100

— 19th

645

70

—

—

—

6.45

70


hr. min.

li


145-35

1555


This gives as an average rate of 10.16 li per hour.

My total distance is probably too short, because where
I have had any choice of distance I have always taken the
smaller.


’68


Milne’s journey across Europe and asia<


TEMPERATURES TAKEN WITH A
REAUMUR THERMOMETER.


Date of
Month, g


A.M.


Morning. Midday

I and g

Afternoon, p
A.M. P.M.


Evening.


Feb. 5 th
Cth

7th

8th

9th

loth

nth

I 2 th

13th

T4.th

15th

i6th

I7tl:

i«th

igth

20th
21th
22 th


+ 9 ° +3*50


8

+ 3 ° 9 P.M.— 1 ®

-j- 10


“L 30 g A.M.-H 4®


n

-b 40

12

+ 7.5O

9

— 3. 5


12

—3 I P.M. +12°

q

-b 3 °


-L lO II 3°

...

3 P.M, 150

9

-b 5

+ jo

12

4 -ico

8

-f- 4 ^

— lO

13

8° & -j-iio .

9

4 - 3 . 35 ®

+ 30


I P.M. -p 0®

8

4 - 70

-f 60


I P.M, ~f- 5 , 5 ® '

9

+ 6®

*f 2.50

12

+4°

8

zero

l.eiO


2 P.M. -bs®

8

-b 6°

JV ............

-f- 5® II A.M.-p 4°


6

4 - 30

-f 5°

12

+6

7

-b 3®

4 * 4 ° 1

12

4 - 10 °


4 - 4 °


Light breeze
from S. E.

I Wind in mor-
ning S. W.


Canal.


Ching kian.


Those temperatures which are underlined were taken in
the sun. The whole only represent a few rough observa-
tions taken at irregular times. The thermometer used
agrees in its I'eadings with several made by Casella.


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


6g


BAROMETRIC OBSERVATIONS MADE
BY MY COMPANION
COLONEL P. UNTERBERGER.


Date of Place Time Mili-

Month. metres


Feb. 5th

At Tientsin

12 A.M.

796.4

i

6th

Tsinze

9 P.M.

782.


iith

Tonja-ma

12 A.M.

1786.

A few miles past the Yellow
Kiver.

xith

Kaisa

3.20 P.M.

782.

Up the mountains and at en-
' trance to pass.

I2th

Chan-chung

9 A.M.

777'

I2th

Sujoan

9 P.M.

778.

ijust over the R. Vanko.

13th

On road

9 A.M.!

771.

1

15 th

i» jj

9 p.mJ

780.

K. Yee-kai.

15th

Yee~kai“Son

9 A.M.i

782.

1 6 th

She-chow

9 P.M.I

786.

1 *"

17th

On road

9 A.M.|

783*


17th

Son-ka-dee

9 P.M.;

786.

K. Yen-klan-ho.

iSth

On road

9 A.M.

789.


19th

Grand Canal

9 pA.

795'

At Tsing-kian-pu.


The instrument used was one of Goldsmith’s Aneroid
Barometers.


70


MILNE’S JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE AND ASIA.


An Itinerary from Pekin to Chingkiang given to
me by Mr, Byron Brenan of the British
Legation, Pekin. It may be useful in
the determination of my Itinerary.


Starting from Pekin.
Distance 30 li to Hwangtsun


70 —

60

60 —

70 —

80 —

60 — >

6s ~

100 —

70 ~

100 —

70 ~

70 —

60 ™

go —

90 --

90 ^

60 ^

90 --

90 ~

go --

go —

90 —


Kuanhien

Kung-chia-ying

Hiung-hien

Jen-chon-hien

Ho-chien-hsien

Fon-chwang-yi

Man-ho

Ping-ho-yen

Urh-she-li'pao

Yen-cheng

Lui t^e miao

Tientai

Tai-an-fu

Yang-liu-tien

Tsi-kia-chwang

Tien-tsin-miao

Hochwang

Hwang-kwa-pu

Siu-chow-fu

Tsing-to-sze

T a-fow

Sin-an-chen


Walled town

55 >>


Cross Yellow R.


Walled city


MILNE ’S

JOURNEY ACROSS EUROPE

AND ASIA. 71

( so -

Sze-wu


\ 50 —

Wre-hwa-kiao


1

Shun-ho-chi


60

Yang-hwa-chi


50 —

Chung-hing-chen


38 -

Wang-chia-tsum


40 —

Tsin-kiang~pu

Grand Canal

60

Hwei-kwan


200

Chao-cha


120

Yang-chow

Walled town

60 —

Chin-kiang

Cross Yangtze


The total distance is 2393 li or about 800 miles (English).
It generally takes about 23 days. The post travels this
way in winter.

I think that my route was to the East of this one, which
I fancy runs round the Shantung mountains rather than
through them. It will be seen that only a few of my places
corresponded with those above mentioned.


72


MIDNE’S journey across EUROPE AND ASIA.


The first General Meeting of the Society in Session 1878-79 was held
at the ShSheikuwan, Seido, TOkio, on the 8th October, 1S78, Dr. David
Murray, the President, in the chair. There was a very large attendance.

The minutes of the previous general meeting, having been already
published in “ The Japan Weekly Mail,” were taken as read.

The Recording Secretary announced the appointment by the Council
of the Rev. C.T. Blanchet as Librarian.

Mr. Dixon as Acting Librarian reported the receipt of various books
and periodicals, among others “ The Smithsonian Report for 1876 ’’ and
“ The Journal of the American Geographical Society of New York,
Vol 11 .”

Mr. John Milne, F. G. S., then presented to the Society his paper
entitled, Across Europe and Asia.” Owing to its length, he was un-
able to read it at the meeting, but he made some interesting general
observations on his journey across the two continents.

The president expressed much interest in what Mr. Milne had said.
Pie regretted that as there was another communication to receive atten-
tion at this meeting, there was no time for discussion. Pie was sure
that he complied with the views of all in expressing thanks to Mr.
Milne and admiration of the heroism displayed by him in crossing these
plains. A vote of thanks was unanimously carried.

Mr. J. A. Ewing, B. Sc., F. R. S. E., then exhibited the phonograph,
explaining the construction of the instrument, the principles on which
its action depended, and some of its scientific applications as an instru-
ment of research in connection with problems in acoustics. Several
sentences spoken to the instrument were reproduced by it' so as to be
audible in all parts of the room.

The unanimous thanks of the society were given to Mr. Ewing for his
courtesy in consenting to deliver his able and interesting lecture.

The meeting was then adjourned.


ANALYSIS OF THE TAKE-NO^KO.


BY

D. W, DWARS, Esq.


(Read October

The great value of the bamboo to the Eastern nations,
and especially to the Chinese and Japanese, is very generally
known. All parts of the bamboo are made profitable and
all sizes are utilized, the thinnest as well as the largest stems
being used as material in the manufacture of numerous domes-
tic articles. Even some of the buds from the rootstock are
utilized before they assume the form which we see in the
tall bamboo : these are used as food by the natives. When
these shoots are sufficiently developed under ground, they
bear in Japan the name of Take-no Some kinds of
bamboo, e.g. the Bampusa puherula, furnish good edible
shoots. In Java, as well as in Japan, foreigners make a
delicious pickle of them, and some prefer them to gherkins
and cucumbers as an addition to the table. Also when
boiled and properly dressed they are much in favour, as
they form a good substitute for asparagus and other
vegetables. The Japanese eat them in rather large quan-
tities, and this has induced me to analyse some bamboo-
shoots, the more so as I believe no analysis has ever been
made of this article of food.

On the 8th of April I procured of the first kind (i) two
pieces takeri from the plant called Mdsd-dake, 20 and zi
centimetres long, weighing together, after the yellow


74


DWARS’ ANALYSIS OF TAKE-NO-KO^


powder which was attached to them had been (74) brushed
away, 586 grm. As the white heart only is eaten, the outer
covering (scaly leaves) was also stripped off, and they then
weighed 309 grm. The second kind (2), obtained on the
2ist of May, were samples from the plant called Ma-dake,
These buds were more developed, 35 and 40 centimetres
long, and weighed 1060 grm., and after the outer covering
had been taken away their weight was reduced to 527 grm.
Each kind presented on the vertical section distinct forms
of the nodes and cavities of the ascending stem of the
bamboo : this was especially the case in the second kind,
and these became gradually less distinct, until at the top
the shoot consisted of a solid substance, which forms the
most palatable part of the entire shoot. Under the micros-
cope several small starch-granules were noticed. They
were almost spherical, and had a central hilum (nucleus).
In (2) the second kind they were less numerous, which may
be ascribed to their more developed condition.

The analysis of the two kinds proved them to contain
the following substances :


I. 2.

Water 90.21 per cent, 91.79 per cent.

Ashes 1, 01 1. 10 ‘‘

Fat 0.13 ‘‘ o.ii “

Albumen 3,28 ‘‘ “ 2.59 “

Sugar 1*93 “ 0.50 “ **

Organic, matter, free from
nitrogen, extracted by

water 1,17 “ ** i‘53

Cellulose 0.90 ** ** 1. 10

Starch, etc ^*37 “ 1.23 “


The ashes consisted principally of phosphates, carbonates,
and chlorides; only a> smalk quantity of sulphates was
present. Much potassium was found, but of sodiurh, mag-
nesium, calcium arid' iron very little. The matured stem
of the bamboo contains a considerable quantity of silicic
acid, but the Take-no-ho appears to be almost free from it.


DWARS’ ANALYSIS OF TAKE-NO>KO. 75

The analysis has proved that the bamboo shoots brought
to me at that period of their development must be considered
a nourishing vegetable, and that they may even rival the
cauliflower and asparagus. The taste cannot be brought
into account : de giistihus non est disputandum.

The Take-no-ko is also eaten in a more developed state.
Then of course a larger quantity of cellulose has been pro-
duced, and the quantity of albumen and sugar has become
smaller in proportion.


SOME JAPANESE MUSICALINT ERVALS.

BY

Rev. P. V. VEEDER, D.D.

(Read October 2 ’^rd, 1878.)

In the First Part of Vol. V. of the Transactions of this
Society there was printed in connection with the Rev. Dr.
Syle’s paper on Primitive Music, a diagram the original of
which was prepared by me and intended to exhibit to the
eye some Japanese musical intervals which I have measur-
ed, by means of the syren and the monochord, and to afford
the means of comparing these intervals with those of certain
European scales. Having been asked by several members
of this Society for an explanation of the diagram, and fur-
ther requested to describe' the results of my examination of
the intervals given by some very ancient flutes and flage-
olets brought from the temples at Nara, I propose in this
paper to comply with their request.

I may first be allowed to explain the meaning of a few
technical terms and to refer to some of the principles of the
physical theory of music. My task is rendered com-
paratively easy by the fact that public attention is just
now so powerfully drawn by the telephone and the phono-
graph to the physical nature, of the more or less musical
sounds produced by the human voice. Every musical
sound is now familiarly known to be produced by regular
vibrations, first imparted to the air or some other elastic
medium by a vibrating body, and then imparted by .that
medium to the ear: and further the pitch of (77) a


VEEDER’s JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS*


77


musical tone is . well known to depend solely upon the
number of vibrations per second. If, then, two tones are
each produced by the same number of vibrations per second.,
they have the same pitch and may be conceived of as being
on the same level, and in musical notation their notes
would be written upon the same line or in the same space
between lines. If one of two tones is higher than the other
it is because its vibrations are more rapid, and it is said to
be higher perhaps because its note in European notation
would be written on a higher line or space. A musical
interval, therefore, may be represented to the eye by a
difference of level or by a distance between two lines, and
this is the method adopted in the diagram. It should be
clearly understood, however, that, strictly speaking, a
musical interval is measured by a ratio of numbers — that
is, by dividing the number of vibrations producing the higher
tone by the number producing the lower tone. Thus, if
the vibrations are as 2 to i, that is if the ratio is 2, we have
the interval called an Octave : if the ratio is | the interval
is called a Quint or a Fifth. It follows from this that when
intervals are combined or added together, these ratios must
not be added but multiplied together. Thus, if we wish to
add a Fifth to an Octave we must multiply the ratio | by
the ratio 2, obtaining as the result the interval and not
the interval 2, which would be the result of the ratios.
In like manner, if a larger interval is to be diminished
by a smaller one, the ratio of the first interval must be
divided by that of the second. This will explain the
import of the fractions placed between the unbroken
lines on the diagram* Thus, in the Natural scale the
interval between the tones E3 and Fg (called a Major
semitone) is expressed by the ratio which is exactly equal
to the ratio between the number of vibrations producing
these two tones. The corresponding- interval in the Pytha-
gorean scale is Seen to be smaller, and is expressed by the
ratio 256, found by dividing ^ by g, because the Pythagorean
semitone is less than a Major semitone by the interval g^,-
called a comma. So, again, the second intaval from the


78


VEEDER’S JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS;


bottom in the Pythagorean scale is the ratio f,. called a
Major tone (the word ‘^tone ’’ being here used in the sense
of interval), while the corresponding interval in the Natural
scale is called a Minor tone, being smaller than a Major
tone by a comma, and we have but to multiply by |^, in
order to obtain the Major tone | so characteristic of the
Pythagorean scale.

(78) But there is a way of representing these ratios and
these processes of multiplication and division of ratios to
the eye by means of spaces between lines. Availing
ourselves of the fact that numbers may be multiplied
together by adding together their logarithms and divided by
subtraction, we may represent any number of successive
intervals by the significant figures of their logarithms, and
exhibit them to the eye by a succession of lines whose dis-
tances apart are measured by these significant figures.
For example, the logarithm of the Minor tone is .0511,
that of the Comma is .0054, and the logarithm of their
product is .0565, the sum of these two numbers. Taking
now from a scale of equal parts a distance equal to 511,
and another equal to 54, and another equal to 565, these
distances will represent respectively the two intervals and
their sum. As another example, the interval between the
third and fourth strings of the Koto tuned in Banjiki (see
the diagrams) is which may be called the Pythagorean
Minor Third, consisting, as it does, of the modern European
Minor Third p diminished by a Comma., If now we subtract
the logarithm of gj from that of | we shall have a remainder
of .0739, which is the logarithm of Comparing the dis-
tance 739 between the lines representing the tones of the
3rd and 4th strings, we find that the distance is less than
the distance between the lines representing the tones A4
and C4 in the Natural Scale, which latter distance represents
a Minor Third (|x^). It is also shown in the diagram
that the same interval 25 is equal to a Major tone increased
hy a Pythagorean semitone, or to

In order to compare different scales of intervals


feeder’s JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS:


79


together with respect to their musical value and effect it is
necessary to exanjine them in the light of the Physical
Theory of Music, and this I propose very briefly to do in
respect to the different series of intervals given in the
diagram.

Let us suppose that we have an instrument of sixteen
strings, all having the same size, density, and tension.
Then the number of vibrations of each string when struck
w'ill be exactly proportionate to its length. If the first
string vibrate (i.e. move completely to and fro) 134.6 times
in a second it will give the tone Ci, the easy C of the
ordinary male voice. If we make the eighth string half as
long as the first it will vibrate 269.2 times in a second, and
will give the tone C^, the low C of the female voice. If
the fifteenth string be oneTourth as long as the first its tone
will be C3 and its number of vibrations 538.4 (79) (See the
Diagram). Strike these three strings simultaneously, and
they will sound to an unpractised ear quite like a single tonb,
although they are in fact one and two Octaves apart. The
physical reason of this is, that every second pulsation com-
municated to the ear by the upper tone is coincident with
corresponding successive pulsations due to the next lower
tone. Thus the two tones mutuall}^ strengthen each other
while each retains its own character, and hence the qualities
of strength and life, and even of grandeur, which belong to
the music of voices and instrument in octaves.

If now the fifth string be made two-thirds as long as the
first it will give 201.9 vibrations per second, or 3 vibrations
while the first string gives 2, and we shall have the interval
I or a Fifth. Struck together, they give two tones
which harmonise so perfectly as to sound almost like a
single tone, for or the reason that every third vibration of
fhe, upper tone coincides with every second vibration of
the lower. The harmony is, however, slightly less perfect
than that of the Octaves, on account of a little confusion
created by the intervening vibrations. Making now the
third string four-fifths as long as the first, it will give
as may vibrations and produce the tone Ea, the inter •»


8o


VEEDER’s JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS.


val between which and Ci is called a Major Third. Struck
at the same time with the strings Ci, Gj, and Cj it forms to
modern ears one of the most pleasing tones of the brilliant
harmony called the Major Chord. Thus far we have mea-
sured these intervals from the first string, Cj. Let us now
form their similar intervals from the fifth string Gj, by
making the twelfth string the ninth string f, and the
seventh string as long as the fifth string. They will give
forth a pleasing harmony when sounded together, exactly si-
milar in character to the major chord just described. Making
now the 2nd string twice as long as the ninth, we have
the tone Dj, which will give 9 vibrations while Cj gives 8.
Let now the sixth string be made j as long as the first and
we shall have the tone A^, at an interval above Ci called a
Sixth (|). Let also the 4th string be made f as long as the
ist, we shall have the tone Fi at an interval of a Fourth
0 above Cj. If we now subtract this Fourth from the Sixth
we shall have the interval (|) or a Major Third. It is evid-
ent too that C2 is a Fifth above F, and thus the three tones
Fj, A2, and Cj will form another triad similar in musical
character to the two previously described. But we have
thus obtained all the eight tones of what is called the Natu-
ral (80) Gamut, or Diatonic Scale, without flats or sharps ;
and by an easy calculation from the simple ratios given
above we have the following intervals : —

C i D f E I F § G f A i B g C.

I have referred to the coincidence of vibrations as one
cause of the pleasing effects of the chords described above.
Another equally potent physical cause must be mentioned.
When a tense string vibrates, it vibrates not only as a
whole, but also in parts,, as in halves and thirds, each part
giving forth its own tone. Thus we hear not only the lowest
or fundamental tone of the string, but also the Octave, the
Fifth above the Octave, the second Octave, and the Third
above the second Octave. When the tone C is heard, for
example, we also hear the tones Cj, G^, C3, Eg, and yet
higher tones. In like manner if the fundamental tone of. a


VBEDEr’s JAPANESE MUSICAE INTERVALS,


8l


another string be Gj, its overtones will be Gg, Dg, Gg and
Cl, of which the first and strongest will coincide exactly with
the second overtone Gg of Cj, and blend well with the first
overtone C^. In the case of octaves it is evident that all
the distinctly audible overtones are in harmony. In the
case of Fifths the higher overtones are not in harmony, but
they are so feeble as to mar the effect but very little. As
the intervals grow smaller, the lower overtones grow more
and more dissonant. No ear can be pleased with such a
discord as that produced by the two tones of a semitone
when sounded together ; there is a confusion of beats which
is very disagi*eeable.

It thus appears that the modern Natural Gamut or Dia-
tonic Scale has its origin in the exigencies of harmony and
of what is called just intonation.

We must, however, observe at this point that this gamut
is an invention of modern times, and the reason is perhaps
not far to seek. If we attempt to tune a stringed instru-
ment according to just intonation, we have to follow a
somewhat simple but practically difficult rule. Starting
with some tone as Cj, tune Ei a Third and Gi, a Fifth above
Cj. This gives the Tonic Major Triad. Then tune Bz a
Third, and Dj. a Fifth above Gj. This gives the Dominant
Triad. Then tune Fj a I^ifth below and A2 a Third above
Fi. This gives the sub-dominant Triad. Lastly, tune an
Octave below D^ and we have all the eight tones of a Normal
scale without fiats and sharps. The difficulty here lies in
the inability of any but an ear of great delicacy and (81) the
utmost familiarity with the harmony of the Triad to tune a
Major Third perfectly. As late as the twelfth century the
Third was classified as an imperfect consonance. In fact
it is easy to see that when only every fifth vibration of the
upper tone coincides with ever}^ fourth of the lower tone the
intervening vibrations must produce some confusion, while
the overtones will increase this confusion. Hence, while
the ancients were familiar with the absolute consonances,
such as Unisons and Octoves, and with the perfect conso-
nances, such as the Fifth and the Fourth, they hardly


82


VEEDER’s JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS.


recognized the Third as a consonance at alL According
to Helmholtz, the earliest example of instrumental composi-
tions in several parts was the dance music of 1529. In
fact it is only in comparatively recent times that the true
physical theory of music has given to the musician those
specimens of perfect Major Thirds, by familiarity with
which he is now able to obtain just intonation.

Now the Pythagorean scale, the most celebrated of all
scales, ancient or modern, being the basis of the intervals
of all stringed instruments turned only in Octaves, Fifths,
and Fourths, presents no difficulties to the tuner of any
delicacy of ear. The violin and violoncello are tuned solely
in Fifths, and if we were to make a scale by means of these
two instruments, and a third and smaller violin having a B
string, we should have the Pythagorean intervals as the
result. The E of the violin would be a little sharper than
the E of just intonation, and a similar remark would apply
to the B of the third instrument. It follows that a violin
player, accompanying a violoncello played in just intonation
on the ke}^ of Cj would be unable to play E3 on the open
string. Without stopping to demonstrate this, I will give
here the Pythagorean intervals and then proceed to show
the extent to which the intervals of the Koto, as generally
tuned in Fourths and Fifths, agree with them.

The intervals are : — >

CiD|E|fF|GfA|B2|c. ,

Comparing these intervals with those of the Modern
Diatonic scale, we observe that between D and E, and
between G and Awe have two Major tones (|), in place of
two Minor-tones (j), and between E and F, and between B
and C, in place of two Major semitones (^), we have two
small semitones (^). ,

Turning now to the different intervals of the Koto given
in the (82) diagram, we, see that in three cases out of hve
all the intervals except two are Major tones. The interval
j is unknown in this scale.


VEEDER’s JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS, 83

The small semitone is wanting, but in reality it is
twice combined with a Major tone to form the two Pytha-
gorean Minor Thirds (“) which appear in each of the ex-
amples given in the diagram.

I have already shown that that is, this Third

is the sum of a Major Second and a Pythagorean semitone.

If we compare together the four series of intervals of the
Koto, including that given by the mathematical method
described by Dr. Muller, we find that the chief difference
between these consists in the positions of these two Minor
Thirds. The lower Third lies between the 4th and 5th
strings in three of the scales, and between the 3rd and 4th
in the remaining one. The upper Third lies between th^
6th and 7th strings in three of the scales, and between the
7th and 8th strings in the remaining one.

In all cases but one the ist string is tuned in unison with
the 5th string, and in that one case (that of the Koto
tuned in Socho) the ist string is an Octave below the 5th
string-

• The three chief methods of tuning — the last three in the
diagi*ams — were explained to me by Mr. Togi Suyehira
the chief musician of the Emperor’s band. The method,
are named after the pitch pipe from which the pitch of the
string tuned first is obtained. Thus in tuning the Koto in
Taishiki, the tuner began with the 2nd string, which he
put in unison with the third pitch pipe called Taishikicho
(668 vibrations), corresponding nearly to Eg. He then
tuned the other string in Fifths, Fourths, and Octaves, in
the following order. Making the 5th string a Fifth above
the 2nd string, the ist an Octave below the 5th, the 3rd
string a Fourth below the 5th, the 6th a Fifth above the
5rd, the 4th a Fourth below the 6th, he obtained all the
intervals necessary for tuning the rest of the strings by
means of Octaves, that is, he tuned the 7th an Octave
above the ,2nd, the 8th an Octave above the 3rd, etc., etc.
The mathematical method of tuning, described by Dr.
.Muller, gives the same intervals* In tuning the Koto in


84- VEEDER’s JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS.

Banjiki the 7th string was first tuned in unison with the
pitch pipe of the same name (1017 vibrations). Then in
order, the 2nd string was tuned an Octave below the 7th,
the 4th a Fourth above the 2nd, the 3rd a Fourth below the
5th, the 6th a Fifth above the 3rd, the ist an Octave below
the 5th (83) and then the 8th, 9th, loth, nth, 12th and
13th respectively an Octave above the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th,
7th and 8th. The Koto tuned in Sdcho had its 2nd and
1st strings in unison with the pitch pipe of that name (806
vibrations : nearly G3). Then the 3rd string was tuned a
Fourth below the 5th, the 6th a Fifth above the 3rd, the
4th a Fourth below the 6th, the 7th a Fifth above the 4th,
and then the 8th, gth, loth, nth, 12th and 13th strings
respectively an Octave above the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th
and 8th strings.

The astronomical method of tuning the Koto requires the
use of twelve pitch pipes, the names and intervals of which
are given in the diagram, and are in the following order, be-
ginning with the pipe whose pitch is the lowest. Ichiyedzu,
Dankin, Taishikicho, Shojio, Kamu, Socho, Fusho, Wosho,
Rankio, Banjiki, Shinsen, Jomu. The pipes which I ex-
amined were very ancient ones, and consisted of small
bamboo pipes, from 3 to 6 inches in length, and arranged
side by side. At the present day the pitch pipes are usual-
ly reed pipes, and give somewhat different tones and inter-
vals. The astronomical method of tuning is derived from a
supposed connection between tones and the seasons of the
year, and depends upon the use of a circular diagram, com^
monly placed upon a movable disk, in which the names of
the twelve months of the year are written in order near the
circular edge. Lines are drawn across the circle in such a
way as to pass from a selected month, first to one 6 months
forward then to one 4 months backward ; then again to pne
6 months forward and lastly to one 4 months backward. In
this way the five Koto tones, called in succession Kin, Sho,
Kaku,. Tshi and U, are determined by simply making one
of the strings, say the second,, agree in tone with one of the
pitch pipes, say Taishiki, and then .making the 5th, 3rd,


VEEDER’s JAPANESE MUSICAE INTERVALS.


85


6th, and 4th strings agree respectively with Rankio, the 6th
pipe above Taishikicho, Kamu the 4th pipe below Rankio,
Shinsen the 6th pipe above Kamu, Fusho the 4th pipe be-
low Shinsen. In practice the circular disk is placed on a
plate so that the circle containing the names of the months
may be adjusted at pleasure in connection with the names
of the pitch pipes.

According to Dr. Mliller, however, the two Koto tones,
Tshi and U, are made a little flatter than the tones which
the rule above would give.

This method of tuning is said to be much in use, but the
imperial musicians did not appear to use it in tuning the
Koto for the performance (84) of any of the ancient music of
wdiich they gave me specimens. It is probable that one of
its chief uses is to determine the normal for the position of
the two Minor Thirds in the different styles of tuning the
Koto, described in a preceding part of this paper.

I now propose to give the results of a careful examination
of the intervals given by a number of very ancient flutes
and flageolets brought from Nara by Mr. Machida, the
Director of the Hakurankai, who aided me in the ex-
amination.

For the sake of brevity I omit a detailed description of
these instruments, further than to say that the flutes were
of the ordinary sme of Japanese flutes, from 16 to 18 inches
in length, and provided with six large Anger holes at equal
distances, and a mouth-hole one-fourth of the whole length
of the flute from the closed end, and that their materials
were ivory, bamboo, and marble. The flageolets were of
the same description , and size, the mouth-hole being re-
placed by a mouth-piece at the upper end.

The accompanying diagrams will need but little explana-
tion. They give simply the intervals ascertained, and are
drawn, according to the method already described, by means
of the differences between the logarithms of the numbers of
vibrations of the successive tones ; produced first by closing
all the finger-holes and then taking the fingers off one by
one, commencing with the lower hole. The diagrams also


86


VEEDER’S JAPANESE MUSICAL INTERVALS.


afford the means of comparing the intervals obtained with
those of the normal scale.

It is apparent at a glance that these instruments, thus
fingered, give intervals very irregular and incompatible with
the requirements of the Koto, with which it is often played.
But it should be observed that the flute players of the im-
perial band succeed perfectly in playing in unison with the
Koto, and they do it by only partially closing, with the low-
er finger used, the hole which, fully stopped, would give too
low a tone. The most skilful performers are fond of flatting
or sharping a tone in playing both the Koto and the flutel
In the case of the Koto they do this by either pressing or
lifting the string behind the bridge with the left hand : this
hand, indeed, is seen to be very actively engaged in produc-
ing this effect.

If we inquire what estimate we should set on the musica.
character of these irregular intervals, giving in some cases
three semitones in succession, we may be guided by a con-
sideration of the difference( 85 ) between melody and' harmony.
The most perfect melody is of course that given in tones of
the normal scale, but the ear of the cultivated musician also
takes pleasure in chromatic runs and even in slides. A
melody gives no dissonances, and therefore it will tolerate
irregularities immensely greater than the sharp Thirds of the
Pythagorean scale. It would be a hasty thing to condemn
the music of the intervals given by these flutes. But we
have seen that skilful Japanese players are able to play their
flutes in perfect harmony with the Koto : in short there is a
near approach to just intonation. It should be remembered,
too, that until recently melody or homophonous music alone
was known to the Japanese. Even at this day melody
alone is intelligible to most of the people. The trumpet-
players in the army are, however, familiarizing the ear of
the people with the successive tones of the major chord, and
gradually making them acquainted with 'the Major Third,
and thus preparing the way for the introduction of modern
polyphonous music.


DIAGRAMS OF INTERVALS OF SEVERAL ANCIENT

FLUTES AND FLAGEOLETS.


JAPANESE


Intervals
of the
Normal
Scale


Marble Flute

Ratios

Logarithms

Vibrations
per second

Logarithms
of their
ratios


1054


rs -“"S


.033


979

—

1 -“St


.063

f ■°46


845

—


.048


757

—


.043

— .028


685


15


.030


640

—

f .046


.028


601

—

I- -“SI


.028


583


527

.029


Ivory Flute

w

c

CO

s

0


4 ^


nS


huO

>

0

1051

•055

925

.049

S26

.032

767

.038

7°3

.020

672

.026

633

*030

591

—


Two Bamboo

Flutes


CO

G

a


>

0

1002

—


.070

852

—


,046

767

—


.067

657

•043

595

—


•033

552

.022

525

—


.038

481

—


Ivory

Shakuhachi

(Flageolet)

CO

C

CO

a

.9


C 3

u


>0

tUO

>

0

8go

.041

810

.050

721

.036

664

.046

611

.043

555

.049

496

1

0

445

—


White Marble

Shakuhachi

CO

a

CO

s

3

X}


rQ

bfl

>

0

890

—

796

.048

726

.040

652

.047

579

536

.052

•033

487

.042

445

•039


Engraved

Bamboo

Shakuhachi

Vibrations

Logarithms

712

— •


.036

656

—


'O57

576

—


.062

499

—


.021

475

—


.042

431

—


.042

391:

—


.041

356


Bamboc


Bamboo


Bamboo

Shakuhac

hi


Shakuhachi


Shakuhachi

05

C

a


<0

c

CO

a


CO

C

CO

a


3


3


•M

03

s


0

rt

g?

ij


S


P


>


787

-

-


746

—


799

—


■0.

38


.049


,051

721

—

-


666


711


.049


,040


•°59

644

—


608

—


.042


CO

q


622

—

585

—

-


55s

. 1


.049


•053


.041


555


508

.029


•038

518

- —

-


.022


475

—


508

—

492


.045


,048


.044


428

—


445

1


455


.060


.054


.061

393

—

-


373

—


395


L


RESULTS OF OBSERVATIONS OF THE
VISIBILITY OF FIVE OF THE
PRINCIPAL MOUNTAINS
SEEN FROM TOKYO.

BY

Rev. P. V. VEEDER, D.D.


(Read October 1878.^

(86) The condition of the atmosphere with respect to the
visibility of distant objects is obviously a subject of great
practical interest to the astronomer and the navigator.
The most powerful telescopes are almost useless in a hazy
atmosphere : and the navigator who, after days of cloudy
skies, catches a glimpse of the sun over a well defined hori-
zon or of the moon and a lunar star in a clear sky, and is
thus enabled to determine his latitude, and longitude, feels
that to that glimpse he owes his safety. The state of the
lower strata of the atmosphere particularly is a matter of the
greatest moment to coastingvessels and to ships approaching
a coast. No mariner can be free from anxiety when he can-
not discern the outlines of the land near which he is sailing.
The clearness of the sky and especially the conditions of the
lower strata of the atmosphere, with respect to trans-
parency, are of the greatest scientific interest to the meteor-
ologist. No region on the globe presents to him, and the
astronomer and navigator as well, a more important field of
inquiry in this direction than Japan. The length of its
coast, the frequency of its atmospheric changes of all kinds,
its position in a region (87) often, hut not alwa3^s, reached
by the monsoons ; its proximity to the largest continent, the
magnitude of its maritime and agricultural interests, render
the researches of the meteorologists with regard to the
subject of this paper of great practical importance.


3g veeder’s visibility oe mountains. ^

I have not thus far seen any detailed account of observa-
tions of the clearness of the lower strata of the atmosphere
made and recorded for the purpose of throwing light on the
visibility of distant objects. During the past ten months
I have twice a day noted the visibility of the more prominent
mountains seen from Kaga Yashiki, in Toldo, situated about
four miles from the Bay of Yedo, the point of observation
being about 30 feet above the ground and 108 feet above
mean sea level. I have tabulated the results as follows : —

, (For table see page 89 . )

In this table the numbers of times of “ partial visibility ”
are given next below those of “ distinct visibility,” for the
reason that partial visibility is in most cases, so far as
it goes, a distinct visibility, the mountains being partly
hidden, not by a mist, but by a well defined cloud.

I regret that lack of time precludes all detailed discussion
of the results given above.

I can only say in general that a mere glance at them
shows the atmosphere of this part of Japan cannot be
claimed as a clear one, as compared with many continental
regions. At Bombay, seven days out of every ten are clear,
and the same remark applies to the Sacramento valley in
California ; while here not more than two days out of every
ten offered views of a lofty peak like Fujiyama, about 60
miles distant, or less than three days out of every ten of a
nearer peak like Buk6san.

It will be seen, too, on a nearer inspection, that the
warm months present very few clear days, at least this
year. This circumstance is probably due to the influence
of the south-west monsoons. In more southerly regions
the vapours carried by these winds are invisible, but coming
here in contact with colder masses of air are condensed
sometimes into clouds, and at others into a mist only,
These clouds do not often rest as fog on the surface of the
earth, ‘but are generally at considerable elevations, and
they are often accompanied by a haze or mist of a sufficient
impenetrability to hide the mountains entirely from view.


veedbr’s visibility of mountains.


89


TABLE SHOWING THE NUMBER OF TIMES THE MOUN-
TAINS NAMED WERE EITHER DISTINCTLY, PARTIAL^
LY, OR DIMLY VISIBLE FROM KAGA YASHIKI, TOKYO,
DURING THREE HUNDRED AND FOUR DAYS, FROM
DECEMBER 21ST, 1877, TO OCTOBER 21ST, 1878, INCLU-
SIVE, THE OBSERVATIONS BEING TAKEN AT 7 A.M.
AND 1.30 P.M, EACH DAY.


(88),

NAMES,

DISTANCES , 1


1 DECEMBER,

1 JANUARY, 3

FEBRUARY,

1 j MARCH, 31

1 1 APRIL, 30

;►

00

M

o

CJ

U)

0

a

r

<

OJ

H

>

a

0

c

w

H

OJ

1 1 SEPTEMBEB

1 1 OCTOBER,

TOTAL

c
S
0 td
25 W
0 pa
W 0
S ^

•z:

c:

s

H w

W hi

AND

VISIBLE.

H

0

0

>

I BAYS

K)

00

0

>

t 3

>

?

0

5

in

><

w

DAYS . .

DAYS . .

M

a

5

in

w

0

0

>

II DAYS


25 H

> M

S w

3

P w

HEIGHTS.


in


Cft


•


k!

in


. W

. w

> CO

w

. H


•


•


•


•


» 25

• %

Fujiyama:

Distinctly

I

12

15

13

2

2

I


1

4

55


60 miles, W.

Partially

1

. ,

I

I

, ,

3

5

1

2

I

15


by S.; Height,
12302 feet. ^

Dimly


4

2

6

2

I


2

I

I

X 9


Total

2

16

18

19

5

3

4

9

3

4

6

8g

75

7


Bukdsan : \

Distinctly

I

17

24

12

6

3

4

6

3

7

8

91


40 miles, N.
W. by W.; 1

Partially

Dimy


T


I


6

2

18


3

12

7

II

5

2

I

2

■T

1

2

2

48


Height, 4633


Total


feet. j

4

29

31

24

II

5

6

12

8

15

12

157

127

15

Asama yama : \

Distinctly

I

5

5

2

3


I

I


4

I

23


84 miles, N.
W.; Height, f

Partially

Dimly


X


I


I

....

8

-

I

••

I


I

3

15


8284 feet. J


Total

I

6

5

10

3

I

I

3


6

4

39

35

2


Nantai san

Distinctly

3

10

15

8

2

2

2

2


2

3

49


■■

(Nikko) : 76

Partially

» ‘

2


1


I


I ^

I

I

I

8


miles, N,; -

Dimly

a !'

9


e


25


■T

/

0


Height, 8196


feet. ^

Total

7

21

22

H

2

3

2

3

1

3

4

82

68

7

Tsukuba san : '

Distinctly

2

14


6

7

3

5

2

3

9

7

73


40 miles, N.

Partially

. .

, ,

1 I

. .

I

. .

I

I


4


E.; Height,
5000 ft. (est’d) ^

Dimly

4

*6

12

15

' 3


2


I

I

2

46


Total '

6

20

27

II

II

3

sl

2

5

II

9

123

97

14


1

Grand total

20

92

M

0

78

P!

|I5

21

29

17

39

35


In the cooler months, on the other hand, the prevailing
winds are from northerly directions ; and coming, as they


Esq.


*These distances and heights were kindly furnished by E. Knipping,


veeder’s visibility of mountains.


90

do in this part of Japan, from over the interior ranges
of mountains, they are generally dry and (89) transparent.
Hence the great amount of sunshine in this locality as
compared with Great Britain in the months from September
to April.

The totals of the number of times of the visibility of all
the mountains taken together for each month, and given at
the bottom of the tabfe, give the following as the order of
the months, beginning with the clearest month : —

February, January, March, October, December, Septem-
ber, April, July, June, August, May.

In this series December (1877) and October (1878) are
assigned places determined by multiplying their numbers
respectively by 3 and 2.


NOTE OF A RECENT DISCOVERY
OF HUMAN REMAINS IN THE
IBARAKI KEN.

BY

T. R. H. McCLATCHIE, Esq.


(Read October 2yrd^ 1878 J

The province of Hitachi, which forms the principal
portion of the district under the jurisdiction of the Ibaraki
KeUy is bounded on the south-east by the Tonegawa.
From this river, which is just here a very fine and broad
stream, there run inland, in a northerly and north-westerly
direction, ‘several large lagoons of considerable length. Of
these lagoons, that on the extreme east is styled Nishi-ura,
and between it and the Pacific Ocean stretches a long
narrow promontory, extending so far to the southward as
to face the town of Choshi at the very mouth of the Ton6-
gawa. This promontory comprises the whole of the depart-
ment of Kashima, so named after a very ancient and celeb-
rated shrine therein, situated half-way down the said pro-
montory. Just to the south of the Kashima shrine lie two
small villages called Hirai and Kitaki, and at this latter
place it was that there was made, towards the end of May,
1878, a very interesting discovery of human remains.

The locality in question is as a whole rather low, but at
intervals small blufis rise up abruptly from the rice-fields,
as in the neighbourhood of Kamakura. Near to the village
of Kitaki stands one of these bluffs, commonly known in


92


MCCI.ATCHIE ; DISCOVERY OF HUMAN REMAINS.


the vicinity as *‘the terrace/’ on the lands of the Ebisawa
Heihachi, of the above village. It is some (91) twenty feet
in height, and for the greater part overgrown with trees and
thick brushwood. Owing to a landslip, a portion of this
bluff recently fell away, and disclosed an aperture leading
to a small cavern within. The size of the aperture thus
discovered was about two feet square, and the floor of the
cave within was nine feet in length by six in breadth. The
aperture was in the centre of one of the longer sidesi The
roof within was cut in the shape of a rough dome, its height
from the floor being about six feet in the centre, decreasing
towards the walls of the cave. The floor was divided into
three sections, each six feet by three, by means of two
small earthen banks or ridges, each three inches high,
connecting the two longer sides of the cave. In the central
spa.ce thus marked off there lay, at the time of the discovery,
a rusty swordblade with sword-guard attached, while in
each of the two outer space were laid out at full length two
human skeletons.

The drawings appended to these notes were taken on the
spot by Japanese ofBcials ; and for copies of them, and of
certain documents relating to the discovery I am indebted
to the kindness of Mr. Hamada Katsuyoshi, Superintendent
of police in the Ibaraki Ken,

Fig. I shows the general physical structure of the local-
ity ; — Fig. 2 gives a plan of the space of the cave itself ; —
and Fig. 3 explains the division of the floor, with the posi-
tion of the sword and the skeletons.

Upon the news of this find being reported to the local
government office of the Ibaraki Ken^ at the large town of
Mito (some 12 ri, or say 30 miles, due north of the Kashi-
ma shrine), enquiry was instituted by that office in the hope
of acquiring some further information regarding this ancient
tomb, A shizoku residing in the neighbourhood, named
Kashima Mototoki, then sent in a paper containing extracts
from old family records in his possession. This document
seems so reliable that it may not be uninteresting to quote
it here in full. The translation of it runs as follows : — • ,


Fig. 2. — Plan of cave, with entrance.


Fig. 3. — Division of floor of cave, with position of
sword and skeletons.


mcclatchie: discovery of human remains.


93


The descendant in the 8th generation of Yoshimochi,
the Daij6 of Hitachi (whose name was afterwards changed
‘‘ to Kunika), was called Akimoto (originally named Nari-
“moto). He dwelt in the Castle of Kashima, and was the
ancestor of the Kashima family. When the family line
descended to Harutoki — in the 21st generation from Aki-
‘‘moto — -he possessed a fief yielding merely 35,000 hohn^ in
‘‘the department of Kashima. At this time the Satake
“ family dwelt in the Castle (92) of Mito they put forth
“their might, created disturbance in the country, and en-
“ deavoured to seize upon thie lands of Kashima also.

“ Harutoki opposed this, and in consequence troops were
“ repeatedly sent against him ; and in the 2nd month of the
“ igth year of the period Tenshd (1591 A.D.) a large army
“ laid siege to the Castle of Kashima. Being unable to cope
“with the superior numbers of the enemy, the Castle was
“ eventually taken, and Harutoki, in company with his son
“ Akichika, left it and preceded in the direction of the vil-
“lage of Hirai. While still on the road they committed
“ suicide. At this time large numbers of their young saimt-
^^rai and chief retainers fell in battle. Among these, one
“Tokisukd, grandson of Kitaki Nagato San^nobu, en-
“deavoured to reach the fortress under his charge at the
“village of Kitaku This place, however, was already sur-
“ rounded by the enemy, and so, being unable to enter it,
he is said to have committed suicide in its neighbourhood.
“ In my opinion, the cave in which were found the human
“ bones and the sword was probably the ancient tomb of
“ Tokisuk6 and the others who attended him.’’

This document is dated May 23rd, 1878, and the author
of it appends a note to the effect that he had copied the
above vevhcitwt from a record complied by one Isejiu-maru
Mototsura, the third son of that Kashima Harutoki who is
therein stated to have committed suicide in consequence of
having sustained defeat.

Whether these human remains were actually those of Ki-
taki Tokisuke and his followers, with whom the author of the
above document strives to identify them, is naturally open


94


mcclatchie: discovery of human remains.


to considerable doubt ; but it is beyond all question that the
whole of the locality is filled with the graves of those who
fell in the great battle. In several other places, and parti-
cularly on the same bluff that contains this tomb, there are
traces of numerous other apertures of a similar nature.
These have, of late years, often been brought to notice owing
to landslips, and in some instances resemble the small caves
visible in the hills around Kamakura. At the latter place,
however, these caves are said to be the remains of subter-
ranean dungeons, not of tombs.

The sword mentioned as having been found alongside the
skeletons is now preserved at Mito, in the office of the local
government, and I was there favored with a sight of it. It
was about three feet in length, and nearly straight, the
blade being very broad and heavy — all characteristic {93)
marks; of the swords made in the province of Dewa, over
which the Satak6 family formerly ruled. The metal was
completely destroyed by rust, but the general shape of the
blade could still be easily distinguished. About three inches
below the point a large portion of the edge had been broken
away, as though by a heavy blow. No metal mountings
or ornaments, such as are usually placed on scabbards,
had been found, and this would seem to imply that the
weapon was laid in the tomb unsheathed. An iron guard,
shaped like a heart, the point being towards the edge of the
blade, was fixed in its place on the sword when discovered :
this is a comparatively old style of Japanese swordguard.

The ancient custom of burying with a corpse different
articles that had belonged to the person during his life-time
has formed the. subject of discussion by this Society on a
former occasion. In some families of rank it was a com-
mon occurence to place in or on the coffin a drawn dirk,
supposed to act as a charm to defend the body from the
attacks of demons. And in the case of soldiers who had
fallen in fight, as it seems reasonable to suppose that these
men did, it would be an idea essentially Japanese to inter
with them some weapon that might have been wielded by
them at the time they met their death.


mcclatche: discovery of human remains.


95


I should add that as a good deal of attention appears to
be given at the present time to antiquarian research in the
Ibaraki Ken, it is not improbable that there may ere long be
made other discoveries of a similar nature.


96


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


(94) A General Meeting of the Society was held at the Grand Hotel,
Yokohama, on Wednesday, 23rd October, at 8.30 p.m Mr. J. Keswick,
Vi<?e-President, occupied the chair.

The following papers were read: — “Note of a Recent Discovery of
Human Remains in Ibaraki by Mr. T. R* H. McClatchie; “An

Analysis of the Bamboo Root,” by Dr. Dwars ; and “On some Japanese
Musical Intervals,” by the Rev, Dr. Veeder.

Dr. Veeder also gave an explanation of some Meteorological Diagrams
for 1878.

Announcement was made of the election of the following gentlemen as
members of the Society Mr. W, M. Angas, Mr. W. Barr, A.I.N.A.,
Mr. G. S. Brindley, Mr. J. A. Ewing, B.Sc., F.R.S.E., and Mr, A. W.
Thomson, C.E., B.Sc.


ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.


No* I,— THE PRAYING FOR HARVEST.

BY

ERNEST SATOW.


(Read November iSyS.J

One of questions most frequently asked by those who
take interest in Japanese subjects is, What is the nature
of Shiutau ” ? It might seem at first sight that the answer
should be easy, but this is not the case. In the first place,
there are several kinds of Shiutau to be distinguished
before an answer can be given. There is the Riyaubu
Shintau, in which the primitive belief has been overlaid
and almost hidden by a mass of Buddhist mysticism, and
I cannot sa}^ that I have had time to study it at all. Then
we have the Yuwiitsu Shintau, also consisting mainly of a
Buddhist superstructure on a Shintau foundation ; the
Deguchi Shiiitau, in which the ancient belief is explained
by means of the Chinese Book of Changes, and the Suwiga
ShiStau, which is a combination of Yuwiitsu Shintau and
the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Choohe. Besides,
these there is the real Shiiitau, by which I mean the belief
actual!}’’ held and the rites practised by the Japanese people
before the introduction of Buddhism and the Chinese philo-
sophy, to which must further be added the Shintau of
modern writers, such as Motowori and Hirata, whose views


gS SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I

I have attempted to summarize in a (96) paper entitled the

Revival of Pure Shintau,” Of all these kinds, unques-
tionably the most interesting to students of comparative
religion is the Shifitau of the primitive Japanese, because
if we can separate it from\he spurious counterfeits and
adulterations which are presented to us as Shintau, we

«

shall probably arrive at a natural religion in a very early
stage of development, which perhaps originated quite
independently of any other natural religion known to us,
and that would certainly be of value, as showing one
way in which a natural religion may spring up. The
materials for this study consist of certain books be-
longing to the earliest period of Japanese literature,
some of which are older than the introduction of the
Chinese art of writing, but in the absence of any
native system of writing, have been preserved iirst by
oral tradition and later through the medium of the Chin-
ese characters. As long as these books remain locked
up in the original language, they can be accessible, of
course, only to the very small number of students who
have specially directed their attention to this portion
of Japanese literature. There is a wide field for research
in Japan, and few if any can hope to find time to
explore it thoroughly, because of the difficulties which
the language presents. It seems, therefore, most prac-
tical to endeavour to remove the principal obstacle
which prevents inquirers from learning at first hand
what this primitive belief and these early rites were,
by making as accurate translations as possible of the
most important texts. For thus we shall be contri-
buting towards the stock of material, which must be
gathered together for examination by those whose special
training fits them to draw the proper inferences from
the scattered facts, of which each individual specialist
can know only a small portion.

In studying the primitive religion of the Japanese
people there are two principal avenues open to us. We
may examine the myths which are contained in the


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


99


Nihongi, Kozhiki and other early records of ti'adition,
and by analyzing the names of the gods and other super-
natural beings who figure in those legends, discover the
real relation in which they stand to ^ach other and the
true signification of the stories concerning them. In this
way we should gain a general idea of the accepted be-
lief concerning the gods, that was current at the time
when those records were compiled, that is to say, if
the expression be admissible, of the theory of Shintau,
and at the same time it would become possible to show
how and in what order these myths were evolved. But
of not (97) less importance than this inquiry would be
an investigation into the practical side of Shintau, by
considering the attitude which the worshipper assumed
towards the objects of worship, the means which he
adopted of conciliating their favour or of averting their
anger, and the language in which he addressed them.
To describe the ceremonies used in the worship of the
gods, the buildings in which it was celebrated, the
organization of the priesthood, such as it still is, or can
be shown to have been in earlier times, would also be of
great interest, but such researches would require more
ample leisure than falls to the lot of most foreign re-
sidents in this country. It would be necessary to visit
the chief temples 'in different parts of the country, to
enter into relations with the priests in charge of them,
and to be present at their principal festivals. Tied to one
spot almost throughout the year, as most of us are, we
must content ourselves with such kinds of information as
are to be obtained from books, which though not entitled to
be accepted as infallible guides, will yield valuable results
when studied with care and patience.

An important part of every performance of Shintau rites,
not less so fhan the presentation of offerings to the god
or departed human spirit, is the reading or recitation of
a sort of liturgy or ritual addressed for the most part to the
object of worship, in which the grounds of this worship
are stated and the offerings are enumerated. The Japanese


100 SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I

word for such a liturgy or Htual is norito'''% frequently pro-
nounced notto^ (98) according to a well-known law of phonetic
corruption. These norito may be, and often are, composed
for a single speciaroccasion, as for instance a funeral con-
ducted according to Shintau rites, and the Government
Gazettes of the years immediately succeeding the Mikado’s
restoration in 1868 contain a large number of these occasional
norito. Amongst them are rituals recited to add greater
solemnity to the oath b}^ which the sovereign bound himself
to govern in accordance with liberal ideas, to celebrate his
removal to the eastern metropolis, to obtain military success
over his enemies, to give sanctity to the institution of an
order of lay-preachers who were intended to spread abroad
the teachings of Shiiitau, in honour of the gods of war, and
to confirm the bestowal of posthumous titles on certain
predecessors of the Mikado who had hitherto not been
recognized as legitimate sovereigns. The norito used in
the celebration of the annual service called Chifikonsai
the object of which is to pacify the Mikado’s
soul, or, in other words, to ensure to him continuance in
bodily health, is also said to have been from the earliest

The etymology norito is not quite certain. It is evident, however,
that nori is the verb norl, to say, which occurs in the modern na-non-,
to say one’s name. Mabuchi thinks the complete expression should be
norito-goto, the last element of which is of course koto^ word, and he
considers to to be a phonetic corruption of tc, contracted from tabc, to
give, so that the whole would mean words pronounced and given,’ that
is, given by the gods to the priests. Motowori disputes this derivation
(K. Zh. K. D. VIII. 48, Ohob, Kot. Gosh. II. ii verso) and shows that
there is no evidence that the norito were ever supposed to have been
taught to the priests by the gods. He endeavours to, prove that the true
etymology is norUokigoto, and asserts that ioki as well as nori means
‘to say,’ ‘ to pronounce,’ so that it may be used of speech addressed by
an inferior to a superior, as well as vice versa, A more modern opinion
is that nori-goto was the original form into which a reduridapt syllable to
has been introduced for euphony’s sake. It is difficult to accept this last
veiw. Motowori’s certainly appears the least open to objection, and
the only point against him is that ioku properly means ‘ to unfold,’ ‘ to
explain,’ and that ‘ say’ is a meaning consequent upon the association of
toku with the Chinese character ‘


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^NO. I


lOI


ages composed afresh on each occasion ; but it is evident
that there would be a tendency for a regularly recurrent
ritual to settle down into a nearly constant form, from which
the variations would be insignihcant and might finally disap-
pear altogether. This apparently happened in the cases
of a considerable proportion of the rituals used in the ser-
vices celebrated in early times at the court of the Mikado,
for out of seventy-five such recognized services which are
enumerated in the Yengishiki, we find that in the tenth
century the precise wording of the rituals is prescribed for
nearl}^ thirty, and those undoubtedly the most important of
the whole number. Whether they had all been committed
to writing before the promulgation of the Ceremonial Laws
of the year 927 (Yengishiki) is not known, but there seems
good ground for supposing that some of them at least had
assumed their present form much earlier, Mabuchi a-
scribes the congratulatory address of the chieftains of Idzumo, ■'
which is included among the norito^ to the reign of Zhiyomei
Tenwau ^29-641), the General Purification to

that of Tefimu 673-686) and the Praying for Harvest,

which is the subject of this paper, to the reign of Kuwauniii
770"7^2), but his grounds for assuming these dates as
the probable age of the norito in question, are chiefly peculi-
arities in the use of certain Chinese characters to represent cer-
tain Japanese words (e.g. ^ for mikoto^ instead of from
(99) which no trustworthy inferences can he drawn, since
the scribes of that age were addicted to numerous irregu-
larities in the use of Chinese ideographs. It is more likely
that the 7ionto^ as we have received them, had been trans-
mitted orally, without any material alteration, for genera-
tions before they came to be written down. A principal
reason for holding this opinions is that they contain not a
few words, the meaning of which had been so far forgotten,
that no Chinese equivalents could then be found for them ;
and instead of being translated into Chinese characters,
they were written down phonetically. Of these words some
have been ingeniously interpreted by modern native philo-
logists, but there remain a good number that have hitherto


102


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


defied analysis, and the preservation of such unintelligible
words, instead of substituting something that could be readily
understood, is a powerful argument in favour of the antiquity
of the present text of those norito in which they occur.

A few bibliographical notes will be useful to those who
wish to study the rituals in the original. The YeSgishiki,
or Ceremonial Law referred to above, had been preceded by
two similar codes compiled by authority of the sovereign
and published respectively in 820 and 871, which took the
titles of Kounin-shiki and Jiyauguwan-shiki from the chro-
nological periods in which they were produced. The form-
er is believed to be no longer extant, and the author of the
bibliographical work entitled Gunshiyo-ichirafi condemns as
a forgery the twelve sections in MS. which go by its name,
but the latter has been preserved, and the first printed edi-
tion of it appeared only a few years since. It contains more
detailed instructions for the celebration of certain ShiStau
services than even the Yengishild which superseded it, and
is on that account esteemed of great value ; but the rituals
do not seem to have been included in it, probably because
there was still sufficient vitality in the Shintau religion to
preserve the tradition without the special sanction of an
authoritative publication. In 905 a commission of twelve
functionaries and scholars, to whom others were afterwards
added, was appointed to revise the ceremonial law, and the
result of their labours was a collection of regulations in fifty
books, to which the title of Yengishiki was given from the
chi'onological period in which it was begun (901-23), though
it was not promulgated until the year 927. Of these fifty
books the first ten are exclusively occupied with matters
concerning the practice of the Shintau religion, such as the
ceremonies observed (100) and the offering made at the fixed
annual, and at the occasional, services (bks* 1-3), the organi-
sation of the priesthood at the temples of Watarahi in Ise,
the 'Ordering of the services at those temples and the cere-
monies connected with their maintenance and reconstruction
every twenty years (bk. 4), the consecration of two virgin
princesses of the Mikado’s family, one as priestess of the


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


103


temples of Watarahi, the other for the temples of Kamo in
Yamashiro, with the I'egulations for the management for
their households and the services in which they took part
(bks« 5 and 6), the ceremonies which were performed to
celebrate the accession of the sovereign (bk. 7), a catalogue
of the chief Shistau temples recognized as entitled to state
support (bks. 9 and 10), while in one book, the 8th, were
collected together the norito or rituals to be used at the
chief services.

. The first printed edition saw the light in 1647 under the
editorship of Nakahara Mototada. It was complete all but
book 13, a copy of which was known to be in the possession
of the noble family of Kudeu, but Nakahara was unable to
gain access to it. A transcript of this copy was discovered
by the well-known scholar Hayashi Daushiyun in the library
of the prince of Wohari in the following year, and the whole
work was eventually published by a Kiyauto bookseller
named Idzumozhi in 1657. Ten years later the text was
revised by Matsushita KeSrin, and new blocks were cut. In
1723, a copy having been ordered by the government, it was
found that the blocks were much worn and worm-eaten, so
that a fresh set had to be engraved. Advantage was taken
of the opportunity to correct the text again, and an edition
was produced which satisfied everybody’s wants for the next
hundred years. This is the edition commonly found in the
booksellers’ shops.

A much better edition is that known as the Deha-bon, for
which the text has been carefully emended, and supplement-
ed by a collection of various readings. The credit of this is
due to Matsudaira Deha no kami Naritsune, the daimiyau
of Matsuye in Idzumo. It was published in 1828, in sixty-
one volumes, and is a splendid example of good Japanese
block-cutting and printing.

There is also a printed edition of the first ten books only,
omitting the prefatory matter and list of contents usually
given. At the end of volume 10 is the date 1503
signature at full-length of Yoshida Kanetomo, the originator
of the heretical form of the native religion called (loi)


104


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


Yuwiitsu (FH— ) Shintau, from which it is supposed that
he is responsible for the kana readings given by the side
of the Chinese text.

The well-known scholar Mabuchi wrote a commentary in
five books on the whole of the rituals contained in the YeS-
gishikij to which he gave the name of Norito Kai, but this
work has never been published. Just before his death he
completed a revised commentary, under the title of Norito
Kau, which was printed in 1800 by one of his pupils. It is
still the chief guide to the understanding of the Rituals.

Commentaries on the ritual of the General Purification
(Okobarahi ) under its more popular name of Nakatomi no
harahi, are very numerous, and a list of them is to be found in
the Gunshiyo Ichiran vol. ii. p. 73. Motowori’s

commentary on this ritual, entitled Ohobarahi no kotoba no
Goshiyaku which is an admirable work, has

been followed by the Ohobarahi no kotoba gogo shiyaku
Fujiwi Takanaho, the Ohobarahi Shiu-
fuchiuseu of KoSdau Yoshiki and the Oho-
barahi no kotoba Sandeuben Nemoto

Manahe. Motowori also composed a commentary on the

congratulatory address of the chieftains of Idxumo,”
entitled Idzumo no kuni no miyatsuko no kamu yo-goto
goshiyaku Finally, Hirata Atsu-

tane edited a very good text of all the rituals, which has
been published by his son under the title of Norito Shiyau-
kuS, or Connect Reading of the Rituals a,nd

prepared a commentary on the Ohobarahi, which has not
yet seen the light. The same scholar published, under the
title of Amatsu-norito Kau the texts of

several copies of an ancient ritual not contained in the
Yengishiki, which he had discovered.

The rituals are written entirely in Chinese characters,
used for the most part as ideographs ( inana ), which are to be
read into the corresponding Japanese words. No internal
evidence of the exact manner in which these ideographs are
to be read is afiorded by the text, the Japanese syllabic
characters at the side having been added in modern times,


SATOW ON. ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


105


and disputes have consequently arisen concerning the pro-
per reading of several phrases, the discussion of which may
be left until we come to the passages where they occur.
The terminations of verbs and particles, called teniwolia
by the native grammarians, are written with whole Chinese
charactei-s used phonetically, and belong therefore to the
kind of signs known as MaSyefu-gana. Further, the Man-
yefu-gana not (102) infrequently occur in the bodies of
words, of which, as stated already, the meaning had been
forgotten or could not be adequately expressed by any
combination of ideographs. In several places a note is
attached to ideographs showing how they are to be read,
which was an alternative expedient for avoiding the dif-
ficulties of inadequate expression.

The order in which the ideographs are generally arranged
is in accordance with Japanese syntax; and inversion, or
following the Chinese order of words, is very rare. The
following are all the cases of inversion which ! have been
able to discover. In writing the negative in zu, is
placed before the character which represents the negative
base, as ochizii arazu ahasetamawazii

7iasazii> Jiosazu mawosazu The causa-

tive termination shims is often represented by before the
base, but is also expressed in kana after it, as sasagsmiota-
shims masashime or sarashime

and sakayeshime but tsiUomeshhncte saka-

yeshime masashime Negatives

of such causatives are written with above, as nasashi-
mszii arashimezii Honorific derivative

verbs whose bases end in 5 are frequently written with pjf
prefixed, as shiroshi mm, kikoshi amohoshi

sonahashi mn, and the causative with their base in ^ are
written in the same manner, as iarahashi yosashi

In passive forms likt yakayete, which denotes
the passive, precedes the base yak Certain preposi-

tions are placed before the substantives to which they
belong, as kuchi yori g [J, shitayori ^"7^, imayori


I06 SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS, — NO. I

Gotoku ^ is as often placed at the end of the phrase as at
the begining. The adverb hakii, ‘thus,’ is always repre-
sented by 3.nd kaharu^ ‘ to be thus,’ by But

mochite ^ always appears after the noun which it governs,
with the exception of a single instance, and the same is
true of niyori ^ in consequence.’ In one place we find
the words isiihi hi, ‘moon sun,’ which is the Japanese
order of naming the two luminaries, written BM , sun
moon, according to the Chinese practice. These rare
departures from the Japanese syntactical sequence are for
saving time in representing certain grammatical forms, and
as they do not affect the general character of the composi-
tions in which they occur, it cannot be’ inferred from their
use that the rituals are in any way formed upon a foreign
model. In all other cases the usual order of words peculiar
to the (103) Japanese language is strictly preserved. It
may in fact be fairly claimed for the greater number of the
norito that they are the oldest specimens of indigenous
Japanese literature extant, excepting only perhaps the
poetry contained in the Kozhiki and Nihongi, and this alone
would render them of the highest value to students of the
language, even apart from the light which they throw upon
the practice and origin of the Shintau religion.

The following is a list of the Norito contained in the
Yengishiki.

1. Toshigohi no Matsuri, service of the Praying for
Harvest.

2. Kasuga no Matsuri, service of the gods pf Ka-
suga.

3. Hirose oho-imi no Matsuri, service of the goddess of
food.

4. Tatsuta kaze no kami no Matsuri, service of the gods
of wind.

5. Hiranu no Matsuri, service of the temple of Imaki (de-
dicated to Yamato-dake no mikoto),

6. Kudo Furuaki. Ritual for the service of the temples
of Kudo and Furuaki (dedicated to 'Chiuai Tenwau and
Nidtoku Tedwau respectively).


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


107


7. Minadzuki no Tsukinami no Matsuri. Half-yearly
service performed in the sixth month (originally a monthly
service, the ritual almost identical with that of the Praying
for Harvest).

^ 8, Ohotono Hogahi, or Luck-wishing of the Great Palace.

9, Mikado Matsuri, service of the gates.

to. Minadzuki Tsugomori no Ohobarahi, General Purifi-
cation celebrated on the last day of the sixth month.

11. Yamato no Fumi-no-imikibe ga tachi wo tatematsuru
toki no Zhiyu, or invocation pronounced by the hereditary
scholars of Yamato, in presenting a golden sword to the
Mikado before the reading of the Ohobarai.

12. Ho-shidzume no Matsuri, service of the Quieting of
Fire.

13. Michiahe no Matsuri, service to propitiate the gods of
pestilence.

(More probably this is in reality the service of the Road Gods).

14. Ohonihe no Matsuri, or Harvest Festival.

15. Mitama wo ihahido ni shidzumuru Matsuri, the ser-
vice of settling the spirits in the sanctuary.

16-24. Services at the Temples of Ise.

(104) x6. Kisaragi no Toshigohi, minadzuki shihasu tsu-
kinami no, Matsuri, or form used at the Praying for Harvest
in the 2nd month, and at the monthly services in the 6th
and 1 2th months at the sun goddess’ temple.

17. Toyuke no miya. The same form, slightly varied, to
be used on these three occasions at the temple of the god-
dess of food. Both were read by the Mikado’s envoy,

18. Udzuki no kamu miso Matsuri, or presentation of
sacred clothing at the temple of the sun-goddess in the
4th rnonth.

19. Minadzuki no tsukinami no Matsuri, or form used by
the chief priest at the temple of the sun-goddess at the
monthly service in the 6th month.

20. Nagatsuki no kamu name no Matsuri, or service of
the Divine Tasting (Harvest festival) in the gth month, at
the temple of the sun-goddess.

21. Toyuke no miya no onazhi Matsuri, or, same service


I08 SATOW ON ANCrENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I

at the temple of the goddess of food. This and No. 20 were
read by the Mikado’s envoy.

22. Onazhiku kamu name no Matsuri, service read on
the same occasion by the Chief Priest of the Temples of Ise.

23. Itsuki no hime-miko tatematsuri-iruru koto, read on
the induction of a Princess of the Blood as Priestess.

24. Ohomikami no miya wo utsiishi-matsuru norito,
ritual for the removal of the goddess to her new temple.

25. Tatari-gami wo utsushi-yarafu Matsuri, service for
the removal and dismissal of avenging deities. (Considered
to be really the Michiahe ritual).

26. Morokoshi ni tsukahi wo tsukahasu toki ni mitegura
tatematsuru, offerings made on the occasion of the despatch
of envoys to China.

27. Idzumo'no kuni no miyatsuko no kamu Vogoto, or
Congratulatory address of the Chieftains of Idzumo.

The Praying for Harvest, or Toshigohi no Matsuri, was
celebrated oh the 4th day of the 2nd month of each year, at
the capital in the Zhingikuwafi or office for the Worship of
the ShiEtau gods, and in the provinces by the chiefs of the
local administrations. At the ZhingikuwaS there were as-
sembled the ministers of state, the functionaries of that (105)
office, the priests and priestesses of 573 temples, contain-
ing 737 shrines, which were kept up at the expense of the
Mikado’s treasury, while the governors of the provinces
superintended in the districts under their administration the
performance of rites in honour of 2,395 other shrines. It
would not be easy to state the exact number of deities to
whom these 3,132 shrines were dedicated: A glance over
the list in the gth and loth books of the Yengishiki shows
at once that there were many gods who were worshipped in
more than half-a-dozen different localities at the same time,
but exact calculation is impossible, because in many cases
only the napaes of the temples are given, and we are left
quite in the dark as to the individuality of the gods to whom
they were sacred. Besides these 3,132 shrines, which are
distinguished as shikidaiy that is, contained in the catalogue
of the Yengishiki, there were a large number of un-


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I ZOg

enumerated shrines in temples scattered all over the
country, in very village or hamlet, of which it was impos-
sible to take any account, just as at the present day
there are temples of Hachiman, Konpira, TeSzhia sama,
Safiwau sama and Sengefi sama, as they are popularly
called, wherever twenty or thirty houses are collected to-
gether. The shrines are classed as great and small, the
respective numbers being 492 and 2,640, the distinction be-
ing two-fold, firstly in the proportionately larger quantity of
offering made at the great shrines, and secondly that the
offerings in the one case were arranged upon tables or alters,
while in the other they were placed on mats spread upon
the earth. In the YeSgishiki the amounts and nature of
the offerings are stated with great minuteness, but it will be
sufficient if the kinds of articles offered are alone mentioned
here. It will be sfeen, by comparison with the text of the
norito, that they had varied somewhat since the date when
the ritual was composed. The offerings to a greater shrine
consisted of coarse woven silk (askiginu), thin silk of five
different colours, a kind of stuff call shidori or sJiidzti, which
is supposed by some to have been a striped silk, cloth of
broussonetia bark or hemp, and a small quantity of the raw
materials of which the cloth was made, models of swords, a
pair of tables or. altars (called yo-kum-ohi and ya-knra-okt)^
a shield or mantlet, a spear-head, a bow, a quiver, a pair of
stag’s horns, a hoe, a few measures of sake or rice-beer,
some haliotis and bonito, two measures of kitahi (supposed
to be salt roe), various kind of edible seaweed, a measure of
salt, a sake jar and a few feet of matting for packing. To
each of the (106) temples of Watarkhi in Ise was presented
in addition a horse ; to the temple of the Harvest god Mi-
toshi no kami, a white horse, cock and pig, and a horse to
each of nineteen others.

Duxung the fortnight which preceded the celebration of
the service, two smiths and their journeymen and two car-
penters, together with eight inbe/‘' were employed in prepar-
ing the apparatus and getting ready the offerings. It was


See Note 44 to the translation of the Ritual, infra.


' no


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^NO. I


usual to employ for the Praying for Harvest members of
this tribe who held office in the Zhingikuwan, but if the
number could not be made up in that ofBce, it was supplied
from other departments of state. To the tribe of quiver-
makers was entrusted the special duty of weaving the
quivers of wistaria tendrils. The service began at twenty
minutes to seven in the morning by our reckoning of time.
After the governor of the province of Yamashiro had ascer-
tained that everything was in readiness, the officials of the
Zhingikuwaij' arranged the offering on the tables and below
them, according to the rank of the shrines for which they
were intended. The large court of the ZhiSgikuwan, where
the service was held, called the Sai-ifi, measured 230 ft. by
370, At one end were the offices and on the west side were
the shrines of the eight Protective Deities in a row, sur-
rounded by a fence, to the interior of which three sacred
archways {toriwi) gave access. In the centre of the court
a temporary shed was erected for the occasion, in which
the tables or altars were placed. The final preparations be-
ing now complete, the ministers of state, the virgin
priestesses and the priests of the temples to which offer-
ings were sent by the Mikado entered in succession, and
took the places severally assigned to them. The horses
which formed a part of the offerings were next brought in
from the Mikado's stable, and all the congregation drew
near, while the reader recited or read the norito. This read-
er was a member of the priestly family or tribe of Nakatomi,
who traced their descent back to Amenokoyane, one of the
principal advisers attached to the sun-goddess’ grandchild
when he first descended on earth. .It is a remarkable
evidence of the persistence of certain ideas, that up to the
year 1868 the nominal prime-minister of the Mikado after
he came of age, and the regent during his minority,
if he had succeeded young to the throne, always be-
longed to this tribe, which changed its name from: (107)
Nakatomi to Fujihara in the 7th century, and was subse-
quently split up into the Five Setsuke or governing families.
At the end of each section the priests all responded ‘ 01 ’


SATOW ON ANCiENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


III


which was no doubt the equivalent of ^Yes’ in use in those
days. As soon as he had iinished, the Nakatomi retired,
and the offerings were distributed to the priests for convey-
ance and presentation to the gods, to whose service they
were attached. But a special messenger was despatched
with the offerings destined to the temples at Watarahi.
This formality having been completed, the President of the
Zhiiigikuwafi gave the signal for breaking up the assembly.

The earliest account of the proceedings on these occasions
is contained in the Jiyauguwah Gishiki of the

year 871, and repeated with a few alterations in the Yefigi-
shiki (927), We find it also almost unchanged in the
Hokuzaflseu Dainagoh Kir:tafu (b. 966,

d. 1041), and in the Gouka no Shidai of Ohoye

no Masafusa (b. 1041, d. iiii). It may perhaps seem
curious that the ceremonies should have been directed by
officials organized on a Chinese model, but it can hardly be
doubted that the functions which they discharged were old-
er than the introduction of the Chinese system of administ-
ration, which merely furnished a convenient means of class-
ifying ?ind arranging what already existed, just as it is evi-
dent that even under the Tokugawa Shiyaugufi there were
organs of government which the new power has merely co-
ordinated and defined with greater clearness. The priestly
families of Nakatomi and lube, and the four tribes of Urabe
or diviners certainly date from a prehistoric period, and that
the sanctity which antiquity confers attached to the func-
tions with which they were clothed, is clear from their be-
ing taken up into the new religious hierarchy instituted in
the ninth- century, while still preserving their hereditary
character.

At some remote period it was the practice to hold a
monthly service at every temple or shrine of importance, at
which offerings were presented either in recognition of bless-
ings already enjoyed, or as inducements to the gods to con-
fer the favours which were besought from them. These
monthly services were afterwards curtailed to two half-
yearly services, but still retained their original name of the


II2


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I


Tsukinami no Mcitsiin, or monthly services. Mabuchi
thought that they were celebrated in honour of all the 3,132
shrines mentioned in the Yengishiki, but Motowori’s (108)
opinion is that only the 304 greater shrines, the charges for
whose services were defrayed by the Zhifiigikuwafi,.were con-
perned, and this was probably the case when the most recent
ceremonial laws were drawn up, although it seems likely
that in the beginning the services were performed at all the
recognized shrines. One reason for this view is that the
liturgy of the half-yearly (so-called monthly) services is
identical, word for word, with that of the Praying for Har-
vest, with exception of the passage in which the harvest god
is directly addressed, and it is more likely that this part was
inserted in a general liturgy which already existed for use
on other occasions, than that the liturgy of the Tsukinami
no Matsuri was borrowed from the Toshigohi, with the
omission of the passage from which it was named. It will
be seen that in the Praying for Harvest many gods are
addressed who have nothing at all to do with the success or
failure of the farmer’s toil. It seems to follow, therefore,
that the Toshigohi was the less ancient of the two services.
Mabuchi is of opinion that the Praying for Harvest dates
back to the reign of the Mikado to whom many hundred
years later the posthumous title of Suuzhih Tehwau, or
God-honouring Heavenly Sovereign, was given, and whom
the fabulous early chronology assigns to the first century
B.C. He gives as his grounds for this opinion the received
tradition that in the reign of this sovereign all the gods re-
ceived their due meed of honour, and that the wind and rain
consequently came in good season, so that the seed of the
field flourished ; but his motive probably was the occurrence,
in the .first paragraph, of the phrase, heavenly temples
and country temples,” for it is recorded of Suuzhifi: Teti-
wau that he divided the shrines of the gods into the^e
two categories. Neither Mabuchi’s alleged reason, nor
that which I suppose to have guided him, is satisfactory ;
but whether this ritual date from the extremely vague
epoch to which he ascribes it, there seems sufficient in-


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I II3

ternal evidence that it owes its origin to a very remote
period of antiquity.

The offerings intended for the Temples of Watarahi in
Ise were sent by the hands of a special envoy, and the short
rituals used in presenting them at the shrines of the sun-
goddess and the goddess of food are Nos. i6, 17 and 19 of
the preceding list.

In the following translation I have endeavoured to be as
literal as possible ; that is to say, to use English words
which exactly express in (109) their original and etymologi-
cal meaning the sense of the Japanese. I have also been
careful to use the same English equivalents for the same
Japanese words wherever they occur. Words in italics
have been supplied in order to complete the meaning.

RITUAL.

[translation.]

He'* says : ‘‘ Hear all of you, assembled kafmushi^ and

hafuri.”3

He says ; “ I declare in the presence of the sovran^ gods,
whose praises by the word^ of the sovran’s dear progeni-
tor’s^»^ augustness^ and progenitrix, who divinely remain in
the plain of high heaven, are fulfilled as heavenly^ temples*^
and country temples. I fulfil your praises by setting
the great offerings of the sovran grandchild’s^^ august-
ness, made with the intention of deigning^^ to begin the
HARVEST^* in the second month of this year, as the morning-
sun rises in glory.

He says : I declare in the presence of the sovran gods'*'*
of the HARVEST. If the sovran gods will bestow in many-
bundled ears and in luxuriant ears'^ the late-ripening
harvest which they will bestow, the late-ripening hai*vest
which will be produced by the dripping of foam from the
arms and by drawing the mud together between the opposing
thighs,'*^ then I will fulfil their praises by setting-up the
first fruits in ^ thousand ears and many hundred ears,*‘'^


1 14 SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I

raising-high the beer-jars, filling and ranging-in-rows the
bellies of the beer-jars, I will present them \i.e, the first-
fruits] in juice and in ear. As to things which grow in
the great-field-plain^^ — sweet herbs and bitter herbs : as to
things which dwell in the blue-sea-plain^^— things wide of
fin and things narrow of fin, down to the weeds of the offing
and weeds of the shore : and as to clothes — with bright
cloth, glittering cloth, soft cloth and coarse cloth^^ will I
fulfil praises. And having furnished a white horse, a white
boar and a white cock,^'*' and the various kinds of things in
the presence of the sovran god^^ of the harvest, I fulfil his
praises hy setting tip the great offerings of the sovran
grandchild’s augustness.”

He says: “ I declare in the presence of the sovran gods
whose praises the chief priestess^^ fulfils. I fulfil your
praises, declaring your names — Divine Producer, Lofty
Producer, Vivifying Producer, Fulfilling Producer, Soul-
lodging Producer, Woman of the great House, great (no)
goddess of Food and Events-symbol-lord,*^ thus: Because
you praise the age of the sovran grandchild’s augustness
as a long age eternally and unchangingly, and bless it as a
luxuriant age, I fulfil your praises as our sovran’s dear
progenitor’s augustness and progenitrix’s augustness hy
setting lip the great offerings of the sovran grandchild’s
augustness.”

He says : I declare in the presence of the sovran gods

whose praises the priestess of Wigasuri^^ fulfil. I fulfil
your praises, declaring your Names, Vivifying Well, Bles-
sing Well, Long-rope Well, Footplace and Entrance-limit,
thus : Because the builders have made stout the House^^
pillars on the bottom-most rocks, which the sovran gods
command(s), have, made high the cross-beams to the plain-
of-high-heaven, and have' constructed the fresh abode of the
sovran grandchild’s augustness, and he hiding therein as
a SHADE^^ from the heavens and as a shade from the sun,
tranquilly possesses the countries of the four quarters as a
peaceful country, I fulfil your praises hy setting-tip the great
OFFERINGS of the sovraii grandchild’s augustness.”


t


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I II5

He says: “ I declare in the presence of the sovran gods
whose praises the priestess of the Gate fulfils. I fulfil
3^our praises, declaring your Names, Wonderful-rock-gate’s
augustness and Powerful-rock-gate’s augustness, thus :
Because you obstruct like innumerable piles of rock in the
Gates of the four quarters, in the morning open the Gates,
in the evening shut the Gates, guard the bottom if unfriendly
things come from the bottom, guard the top if they come
from the top, and guard by nightly guarding and daily
guarding, I fulfil your praises by setting tip the great
OFFERINGS of the sovran grandchild’s augustness.”

He says : “ I declare in the presence of the sovran gods

whose praises the priestess of Ikushima fulfils : I fulfil 3^our
praises, declaring your names, Country-vivifier,^^ thus :
Because the sovran gods confer on him the many tens of is-
lands which the sovran gods^^ command, the many tens of
islands of islands, without any falling-short, as far as the limit
of the taniguku'^^’ spassing, as far as the bound where the salt-
foam^^ stops, making the narrow countries wide and the
hilly countries plain — I fulfil your praises by setting-up the
great offerings of the sovran grandchild’s augustness.”

He says : Parting the words, I declare in the

presence of the From-heaven-shinihg-great-DEiTY who sits
in Ise. Because the sovran (iii) great deity bestows on
him the countries of the four quarters over which her^^ glance
extends, as far as the limit where heaven stand-up like a
wall, as far as the bound where the blue clouds lie flat, as
far as the bounds where the white clouds lie away fallen : —
the blue-sea-plain as far as the limit whither come the
prows of the ships without letting their poles or paddles be
dry, the ‘ships which continuously crowd on the great-sea-
plain : — the i-oad which meti go by land, as far as the limit
whither come the horses’ hoofs, with the baggage-cords
tied tightly, treading the uneven, rocks and tree-roots and
standing-up continuously in a long path without a break : —
making the narrow countries wide and the hilly countries
plane, and as it were drawing together the distant countries
by throwing many tens of ropes over them, hecau^se she does


Il6 SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I

all this^ he will pile-up the first-fruits like a range of hill in
the great presence of the sovran great deity, and will tran-
4uill7 take to himself the remainder.”

“ Again, because you praise the age of the sovran
grandchild's augustness as a long age eternally and
unchangingly and bless it as a luxuriant age, I plunge
down the root of the neck cormorant- wise^^ before you as
our sovran’s dear progenitor and progenitrix’s augustness,
and fulfil your praises by setthig-up the great offerings
of the sovran grandchild’s augustness.”

He says : “I declare in the presence of the sovran gods
who sit in the Farms. Declaring your names, Takechi,
Kadzuraki, Tohochi, Shiki, Yamanobe and Sofu. , Because
the sweet herbs and bitter herbs which grow in these six
Farms have been brought, and the sovran grandchild’s
augustness takes them as his long food and distant food,^®

I fulfily our praises by setting-up the great offerings of
the sovran grandchild’s augustness.”

He says : “I declare in the presence of the sovran gods
who sit in the mouths of the mountains. Declaring your
names, Asuka, Ihari, Osaka, Hatsuse Unebi and Mimina-
shi.'-^'^ Because the bttilders, having cut the bases and ends
of the big trees and little trees which have grown-up in the
distant mountains and the near mountains, brought them
and constructed the fresh abode of the sovran grandchild’s
augustness and he^ ^hiding therein as a shade from the
heavens and as a shade from the sun, tranquilly possesses
the countries of the four quarters as peaceful country, I
fulfil your praises by setting-up the great offerings of the
sovran grandchild’s augustness.”

He says : ‘‘ I declare in the presence of the sovran gods

who dwell in the partings of the waters. I fulfil your praises,
declaring your names, Yoshinu, Uda, Tsuge and Kadzuraki,
thus : If you will bestow in many-bundled ears and luxuriant
ears the late-ripening harvest which the sovran gods^^ will be-
stow, I will fulfil your praises by setting-up the first-fruits in
ear and in juice, raising-high -the beer-jars, filling and* rang-
ing-in-rows the bellies of the beer-jars, and the remainder the


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I 117

sovran grandchild’s augustness takes with ruddy coun-
tenance as the divine grains of morning food, and evening
FOOD, as his long food and distant food. Therefore, hear
all of you, the fulfilling of praises hy the settmg-up of the
great offerings of the sovran grandchid’s augustness.”

He says: Parting the words, let the Kannushi and

the haftm receive the offerings which the Imibe,'^^ hanging
thick sashes to their weak shoulders, have reverently pre-
pared, and lifting, bring and set them up without erring.”

NOTES.

is the reader of the ritual, one of the Nakatomi tribe, and
the word rendered by ‘ says ’ signifies that the speaker is supposed to be
speaking the words of the Mikado. Mabuchi reads nori^amafUj and
supposes this word to issue from the mouth of the Nakatomi, but his
successors Motowori and Hirata read norii, according to .which ‘ He
says ’ are a rubric, and the ritual actually begins with ‘ Hear all of you.’
I think it probable, however, that in later times, after the rituals were
committed to writing, and were read instead of being recited from
memory, the word nom was also read, as if it were an integral part of
the norito.

^^Kan- mishi ’ is the general term for all Shintau priests in the
modern language, but it is more correctly restricted to the chief priest
in charge of a temple. The priesthood was for the most part hereditary,
and in many cases the priests could trace their descent from the chief
god to whom the temple was dedicated, a fact which is easily understood
when we find that a large number of gods were simply deified ancestors.
From this sense of property in the temple sprang the term Kami-nushi,
owner of the god, corrupted into Kamu-nushi and Kah^nnshi*

^The Hafnri (pronounced Mn) were an inferior class of priests,
whose chief functions were to present the offerings and read the prayers.
We might translate the word by ‘ deacon,’ but for the associations which
this rendering would call up. Mafuyi is said by some to be derived from
hci^ wings, andyiiJ'ii, to wave or (113) shake, and to represent the waving
of the sleeves in performing sacred dances ; but another derivation is
from hafuni (pron. hom\ to throw away, which is explained by saying
that their special function was originally to bury the dead and to read
the funeral service over them. Hafuvu is the same as hciiifuTU^ modern
hawnurUy to bury, which suggests the conjecture that in the earliest
times the dead were simply exposed to natural decay in the middle of a
forest or moor. The Chinese characters ha/nn is

written mean literally felicitating section or body, and refer to the recital
of the glorious deeds of the dead which formed a part of the ritual or
address spoken over his grave.


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS, — NO. I


IlS


Sovran* as an adjective or substantive is a translation of same
(adj.) or simicra (subst.) both written Most scholars, with the

exception of Motowori, consider sume to be the same as suhe-^ root of
sithemt to have power over, to rule, which survives in the spoken
language as suhe-knhtm^ to have the chief control of, and suhetey all
(adv.), the interchange of b and m being one of the commonest pheno-
mena in Japanese etymology. I have not been able to discover what
origin Motowori attributes to the word, but in one place he asserts,
without offering any proof, that it is merely an honorific. This is hardly
satisfactory, for a word which is now merely honorific must evidently
have. had some more specific meaning previously. Sumera is the ancient
term used to denote the ruler of the nation, derived from stmcru (perh.
like nahay rope, from najuy to twist), and ‘ sovran * appears to me to be
the fittest equivalent in English, on account both of its close corres-
pondence in meaning, and of its double applicability as a substantive
and adjective, thus resembling the employment of sumcra and smne* By
adopting the spelling ‘ sovran,* for which Milton is a sufficient authority,
all the secondary associations connected with the ordinary spelling
‘ sovereign ’ are avoided, while the meaning here intended is made
clearer.

sWoRD is a literal rendering ofmiliotoy compounded of the honorific
miy identified with may which is constantly used as an honorific prefix in
the old language, and appears in such words as ma^liotOy truth (real-
words), ma-sngUy perfectly straight, also in the xoolmarUy round, perfect.
Mi is prefixed to the names of things which derive their origin from the
gods or the Mikado or princes of the royal house, and conveys much
the same sense as ‘ august,’ but the perpetual recurrence of this word
in translation would be tedious and sometimes even ludicrous, and
the purpose which it serves can be equally attained by, printing the
English of the word to which it is prefixed in capital letters, Mikoto is
employed in another sense to form titles of gods and princes, where its
fittest rendering would be ‘ augustness,* used like ‘ majesty ’ or ‘ highness,’
as titles of European sovereigns and their children. Thus a son of the
Mikado was anciently styled milto no viihotOy literally ‘ august ^child’s
augustness.’ In the names of many gods it was used alternately with
kavii ; thus Izanami no mikoto and Izanami no kami are equally correct
as appellations of the All-mother, It must, however, not be supposed
that it can be employed by itself as a convertible term for kamiy or that,
as Kaempfer has erroneously stated, it was used alone as a designation
of the (114) Japanese sovereign, in the same way that Mikado, Tenwau,
TeBshi and so forth are applied to him.

^Progenitor and Progenitrix ar<e the most convenient renderings of
kamnrogi and kaimiromly which are written partly with Chinese characters
used as ideographs, partly as syllabic signs and ;

in the Ohobarahi jljj and are used for the terminal syllables). Kamu
evidently means ‘divine,’ but the etymology Of fogi and jwwrisby no
means so clear. Motowori derives the one from are-oyci-glmi (^fJJ


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — NO. I llQ

begetting-parent-prince,^ by dropping a and ya, contracting re o
into ro and. cutting off mi from the end, the other from are-oya-me-gimi
begetting-parent-princess, by the same process varied
by the contraction of me^gi into mi. This is a bold use of the
weapons which Japanese philologists claim to‘ have at their com-
mand, but is too far-fetched to be admitted for one moment. I am
inclined to accept the explanation given by my friend and teacher
Hori Hidenari, that ro is the second syllable of eVo, seen in the archaic
iroha, mother, h'otOy younger brother, irose, husband, and irone^ elder
brother, where iro apparently indicates a tie of natural affection, and is
identified by him with jVo, colour, beauty, love, as in the modern iro-
otoho^ lover. Gi is ki (with the nigori), a root which in one of its
significations is equivalent to * male,’ while mi correspondingly means
‘female,’ as seen in the pairs okhm and omlna^ old man and old woman,
in the names Izanagi, the male-who-invites, and Izanami, the female-
who-invites. It is probable that ko and me^ which appear in wotoko^
young man, and wotome^ young woman, in hiko and hime (/u‘=sun),
honorific epithets applied respectively to men and women, are variations
of the same pair of roots. If this etymology be correct, then the literal
equivalents of kamurogi and kamuromi are divine-dear-male and divine-
dear-female ; and as these titles are sometimes written with the Chinese
characters divine ancestor, and are applied generally to all the

ancestors of the Mikado, the terms used in the translation seem to
convey their meaning pretty closely. They occur altogether fourteen
times in the rituals contained in the Yengishiki. In the congratulatory
address of the Chieftains of Idzumo they denote the first pair of deities
Taka-mi-musubi and Kami-musubi, who, according to the cosmogony
of the Kozhiki, came into being next after Ame-no-mi-naka-nushi, ‘ the
lord in the very centre of heaven,’ who is called the oldest of the gods.
In the same ritual we have kamurogi used of Susanowo, the ancestor
of Ohonamuji. In the Praying for Harvest it will be seen that kamurogi
and kamuromi are used respectively of Taka-mi-musubi and the sun-
goddess, are then applied to a larger group of deities, several of whom
were never supposed to be ancestors of the Mikado (unless it be admit-
ted that the five Producers are the sun-goddess under other names), and
lastly both epithets are employed in speaking of the sun-goddess herself.
Much later, a couple of centuries after the beginning of the strictly
historical period, Koutoku Tenwau speaks of Chiuai

Tenwau more than twenty generations earlier, as his

‘ dear kamurogi y"* and in a poem presented to Nihmiyau Tenwau on
the occasion of his fortieth birthday,** the god Sukunabikona, one of
those who took the (115) greatest share in the work of civilizing the
country, is called his kamirogi. Closely allied to this epithet is the word
sumerogiy in' which the first element is the root already mentioned,
which is rendered by ‘sovran.* We find it in the Manyefushifu applied


ShiyOku Nihon Kouki, vol. xix,


5

■120 * SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.-^NO’. 1

to Ninigi no mikoto, the grandson of the^.sun^goddiess and first of the
Mikado’s ancestors to inhabit the earth, and also to other ancestors
of the Mikado, whether gods or human beings; In two places it occurs
written in ^ (Riyakuge, v. ri8, p. 22 and v. 20, /^,

pi xg verso), where there c^.' he no doubt of the true reading. Other
ways of writing it are i(v,. i8.j p. 23) ^|^|E (vi 18, pi 34)

SlEff' (’'■ 28 V.; V. 7, p. 15 aird v. 3 Jt, pv 15. v.; in

the last case lianiirofri is an alternative reading proposed by the com-
mentators) and (v. II p. 34 v.; w. 6, p. ir v, and v. sT.

p. 37) ; in the last two cases kamirogi is sug^gested as an alternative
reading. From thole examples it seems not unreasonable to infer the
former independent existence of a pair of words irogi and iromii, wfiich
were used to*, denote ancestors or note- worthy personages of previous
generations. „

7 The insertion of mikoto rendered * augustness’ after progenitor j
is probably the act of an ignorant copyist, who thought it was required
to correspond to the second translated WORD.

;8Mabuchi .takes the terms progenitor and progenitrix to denote
in this passage all the gods from Taka-mi-muspbi and Kami-musubi
down to Izanagi, Izanami and the sun-goddess, while Mofcowort thinks
that only Taka-mi-musubi and the sun-goddess are meant.- Thcf passage
in the Nihongi, which says that the distinction bet^^eeD ^heavenly
temples’ and / country temples ’ was made in the reign of -Suiizhin
TeHwau, represents it as the final act of that Mikado after making a
series of arrangements about the worship of certain other gods, but does
not give the slightest indication of the ‘progenitor and progenitrix’ her
ing concerned in the settlement.. It is safest to conclude that, the ph^^asie
is vaguely used without any particular significance being attached te It
Heavenly temples and country temples.’ Temple is here, a
metonymy for god. The only meaning which can possibly be attached
to this statement is that some gods were recognized as of heavenly
origin, who either remained on high or descended to the earth, and
others as of earthly origin, but that any ruler could ever be the arbiter
of such a question is inconceivable, and the assertion is only an
additional proof of the mythical character of the Mikado concerning
\yhom it is made. .

*<^The word yas/ww,; rendered, temples,’ deserves a passing notice,
lit is compounded of ya, house, and which must mean area or
enclosure. We find it in. naka^shirOt area or inclosure for the young
rice-plants (nahe)^ in im^skirOi a mat (wm is m?, body ; viu-shiro^ area
for one body), and the shiro^ usually translated ‘castle,’ is

identical with it. , Henoe yus/wm does not signify the buildings themr
selves, but rather the piece of land on which they are built. Metaphori-
cally employed, shiro came to mean that which was given in ‘place’ of
something, that is, price, and fience shiro-mono signifies price-things,
merchandise, goods. The idea th&t. shiro, a castle, is the root of the
adjective shiro-ki, white, because of the (116) white plaster parapets, is


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE EITIXAE®*^ — ^NO>,I


X^t


UBtenable, l)ec^use the use of it in that sense dates- firom a perlbd 'when
shirohi signified ‘ conspicuous,’ of which ‘white* is r at dexivative
meaningv ' . .

Set-up ’ is the literal translation of iaU-m^SurUi compounded of
taie^r to stand (t-Y-) and matmm, originally to sexvci and hence used as
an honorific auxiliary verh, just liike hai?mx>QT hanksru and se^fm^cifu or
samwyofu la the later language. MatsHfi^ usually translated ‘ festival,’
is- the toot of this verb, and properly signifijes * service ’ of a god, and
mdfsuri-goi^ 'i government, as we are acouathmed to render it, is simply
‘service’ of the sovereign, corresponding thus, in, etymology and
signification to our word ‘ adrniuistjation,’ indents of the epistolary
style are familiar with the use .of iatemais^ni .Written ,as aii , hondfl-
fic auxiliary, but this character properly means^ matmruy and
would he a more exact equivalent of the compound tah^atsitm, ^sxiy
one were to begin over again the labour of assigning correct Chinese
equivalents to Japanese wOrds. Words in the translation which are
printed iu Ttalics have heen^ supplied to qoinplete the sensp, to
mmUum, does actually occur in the original a little further Oh.

i^Grandchild, i.e. of Amaterasu oho-rai kami, the sun-goddess,
meant in- the- fitSt place Ninigi no mikoto, child of Oshi-ho-mi mi no
mikoto, adopted by her as her son. The latter was really the son of
SuSanowo, according to the myth, and consequently her nephew hy
birth. The Kozhiki (Notices of Ancient Things, tells the

following story of the miraculous birth of Oshi-ho-mi -mi. Izanagi divided
the"' uMiyerse he^een 'hiS' 'three h^dldr^, '.assigning the sovereignty of
the heayenis td the! sfin-goddMS, glvilig the kingdom of night‘ to- the
moon a:nd making Sulandwo luler over the sea. ' Susanqwo neglected
his royal functionsv and gave himself tip to sudh a violent fit of petulant
weeping,: that the land was laid bare and. the rivers dried up. On hedng
rebuked by his father, Be excused himself by saying that he wanted to
go to his mother in the lower regions, and was consequently expelled
from the earth. He then ascended to heaven to pay a farewell visit
to his sister, who was frightened by te rumbling of the mOuntato and
streams, and by the Earthquakes t^tod by his passing upwards, and
misdoubting the loyalty of his intentions prepared to defend her realm
against his attack. Susanowo explained the reasons which led to his
visit,: and protested that he liaibtoedho evil designs. In order to test
his good faith she demanded .Of hfrai a sign, to which he responded by
proposing 'thatlhey-'sho-uld'soe'Whidh'nouMhring ihto ■exfS.teri'C©'the best '
Oi#dren. Pot this? purpose they up their position on opposite
sides of the milky Way, and the goddess, first breaking the sword which
her brother wore into three pieces, plunged it into ^ yfclli aiid theiO
chewing it into minute fragments, blew them from her mouth Thr^
goddesses sprang from the cloud of spray. Then SusknoWO pEtfiiJ^
a similar series of operations with the chaplets which the goddess wore
in her hair, and produced five male gods, the eldest of whom was
Masaka-akatsu-kachi-hayabi Ame no Oshi-ho-mi -mi no mikoto. The


t2^ SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUAL’S^—NO. I»

suti-goddess claimed the five as hfei' own fO,ffs;pTiitg:, and told Susanowo
that he might take the three female children horn from the fragments
of his sword. Susanowo boasted that the purity of his intentions was
made clear by the birth of (iry) three gentle maidens, and commenced
the series of violent , actions which ended in the frequently mentioned
retirement of the sun-goddess into the ‘ heavenly rock-cavern.’ In this
way Oshi-ho-rai was, as it were, adopted by the sun-goddess, and his
eldest child was therefore her grandson, the effect of adoption being to
place the adopted person in the position which he would have held if
he had been legitimately begotten by the adopter. The epithet ‘ sovran
grandchild ’ having been first applied to the founder on earth of the
Mikado’s dynasty, came in time to be applied to each and all of his
successors on the throne.

•33* Deigning ’ is used of the Mikado, who by this service deigns, as
it were, to begin harvest.

: Beginning the harvest’ means soaking the seed and preparing

the ground for its reception. It has been suggested that the Chinese
character commencement, may be a copyist’s error for |pf, praying-
for. Tmhh which exclusively signifies year in its modern acceptation,
seems originally to have meant harvest, and is probably from ?the same
root as ioru^ to take. The ancient Japanese counted time by harvestSj
moons and suns ; the first term entirely lost its earlier meaning* th^t
of the second was: obscured, and a Chinese equivalent being substituted
for the third, the real nature of the units of measurement was forgotten.

As the morning-sun rises in glory,’ seems at first sight an allu-
sion to the time of day at which the service was held, i.e. between six
and seven o’clock in the morning, but from the use of this phrase it
appears to be adverbial, to tatahe-go^o icutafitftisurakUi I fulfil your
praises. . ■ ■

ifiWho the gods of the Harvest were is unknown.-, . Several temples
dedicated to such gods appear in the catalogue.of. the Yengishiki,' but
the names of the gods themselves are not mentioned, Aecording to the
Kpi 2 hiki,: S.uwowo begot, the Great Harvest god, Ohotoshi no kami,
'Who begot th6 Harvest god, Mi-toshi no kami, and several other names
of deities, supposed to provide the human race with the grain which
fofmed their chief food, occur in various myths. The most famous
of these are the goddess worshipped at the Outer Temple '(Gekuu) at
Watarahi in Ise, and the deity, Uka no mitama or Spirit of Food, to
whom is dedicated the temple of Inari on the road between .Kiyauto
and Fushimi. All other temples of Inari, of which there are thousands,
are erected in honour of this Spirit of Food, and those worshipped
with it, but although common speech uses the term Inari sama, as if
Inari were the name of a god, it must be remembered that it is merely
the name of a place.

^7The original is yatsnka ho no ikashi ho ni^

Ya originally signified ‘ many,’ and is no doubt connected with
the old word lya, still more, which I believe to be merely an interjection


SATOW ON ANCIENT. JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^NO< I


123


of astonishment, also used as a negative — No, identical with iya, hateful,
and the root of such words as iyashiki^ hateful,, conteihptible, iyashlmUi
to despise, and iyagaru (= iya ge am), to dislike. Ya settled, down
afterwards as the numeral height’ (the ordinary is ya, with the

generic particle tsu)^ and at the moment when, the norito were corn^
mitted to writing,, dts original meaning had.no doubt been forgotten.
Tsiika is the same as (118) tsukcu^ hilt, and is the , root, of tsuhamn^ to
grasp with the hand. Ho denotes anything which prominently attracts
the attention, as an ear of corn,,. the spike at the end of a, spear, a flanae
{honoho for hi no ho)^ in iha-ho^ 'Si big rock, also ho\ a sail, uami no
the crest of a wave, in ahani ho^ ruddiness (of countenance)^ perhaps
also iri kouy cheek. The so->called genitive particle no. is the most
interesting portion of this phrase, which is unintelligible if wo translate
no by ‘ of.’ Students of the Manyefushifu will have observed

that it has a dozen other uses besides this *of.’ In the present case
it is most easily interpreted if we look upon it as identical, with the
verb nit to be, the existence of which at an early stage of the language
has been conjecturocly with great appearance of truth, by Mr. Aston.
The phrase would then be literally rendered by, ‘ the luxuriant ears
which are many-bundled ears,’ which is, the same thing as saying
‘many bundled and luxuriant ears.’* It is not necessary,' in order to
support this view, to maintain that ^0 was any longer uniderstobd to
be h variation of the attributive form of a verb to he, at the morhent
when this phrase was woven into the present norlto^\^ on the contrary,
the infinitely varied uses of no and also of Tii, which in many cases is
held by Mr. Aston to be the root of nUt in the earliest extant specimens
of Japanese literature, * show that the Orginal meaning of these syllables
had long been forgotten.

j: ^BThe process of preparing the half-liquid soil of the rice fields

reception' of the young plants is thus described. An early
variety of rice called wcise is sown in nurseries in the beginning of April,
planted out early in May and harvested about the middle of September,
In the west of Japan these several operations are probably carried, but
a fortnight earlier respectively.

^^Kahi-t here rendered by ‘ear, ^ is more exactly the seed of rice
enclosed between the palese. The same word originally applied to
bivalves, which enfold the nrollusc' Just as the palese do the grain of
corn, and it is also supposed in the sense of a ‘deep valley,’

the sides’ of which appear to open Out like the two halves of a bivalve^
is Mentical with AaAl, a grain^ and a shell.

’ no he takashirL . Mabuchi explains mika to be an earthern-

wa^ Jar' in 'Which brewed, and afterwards offered up to the gods,

and to be the same as top* There are plenty instances of the
omission of an initial n after 0 in the old literature ; e. g. sakadzttkl no he
nit on the top of the cup (Manycfu v. 5, p. 27 v., 1. 1.). But by others mika
is said to have signified the liquor itself, mi being the honorific prefix, and
ltd the same as ke or ki, used to denote the grain in either iis solid form


124


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUAES.—- NO. I


as- boiled rice, or its f liquid form as rice-beer, and a flatr bottomed
vessel. If Mabuchi’s explanation were adopted, the phrase would have
to be rendered, ‘ raising^high the tops of the (beer) jars.^

Taka-shiri and its alternative ej^ptession taka-shiki^ must not be
understood literally ,; the secondary meaning of both sUrUi to know,
and shrku, to spread, is ‘ to govern,’ ‘to command but jn the compounds
which they form with adjective roots they have merely the force of the
English verbal termination ‘ en ’ in such words as heighterij widen.
A similar change is presented by nafu (or nnww), to spim which (iig)
forms the ending of a large number of derivative verbs, such as tomo^^
nckfu^ to accompany, aMnafu to taste, otonafu^ to ‘make sound, ni-nafuy
to carry as a burden. In iio-nafu^ to spin thread, it preserves ■ its.
original value, which was lost when, with the change of /intom, this'
Word came to be employed solely in a figurative sense,

, ^^Oho-nu-hara. Both nu (which is the archaic form of the modern,
no, on the authority of MaHyefu, v. 5 , p. 26 v., i. 9 , where we find haru
no nu ni written in kana) and hara are applied to uncultivated ground,
not occupied by trees, but not necessarily fiat, as might be inferred ^rpm
the use of the word ‘ plain ’ in the translation. ; If oirn, belly, is no dpqbt
identical. Still, the term no-hara is Very frequently applied to vidde
tracts of uncultivated level ground.

^^Aujomi no hara^ the blue sea plain. Awo is evidently connected
with aivi, the name of the plant (polygonum tinctorium) from which
the Japanese obtain a dye resembling indigo, and blue is therefore a
fair rendering for it, especially when applied to the sea. In the
Mariyefushifu, however, it is used as an epithet of horses (in the sense
of black, that also being a colour afforded by the n7£?i plant), also to
clouds (white), to willow-trees (green), and to mountains (green). Mi
for umi, sea, is another example of the elision of an initial u after a
terminal o» Some Japanese etymologists derive the sea, from umut
to give birth to, thus attributing, to it the mesming, of ‘ producer,’ on
account of its furnishing the inhabitants of these islands with a large
proportion of their daily , food in the shape of fish, shell-fish^ and
seaweed. Another derivation from awo^ blue, and mi^ water,, has also
been proposed, but is not, supported by any good authority in such
matters. . .

'(, ,.230n the word take, here rendered by cloth, Mabuchi has the
following note : “ As five kinds of silk cloth were offered up, and the
♦<texmsi ‘bright’ and ‘glittering’ express their colour, so ‘coarse’ and
“* soft ’ express the coarseness and fineness of the textures, is a

^^karlzki a character of which x.\\q yo mi or him is used as a

“Anna), and in the Manyefii we find which is the proper character
“ to use. Cloth, whether of take or of iiemp, when fine Was called nigo^

“ iokc^ soft cloth, and when coarse was named aret-tahe^ coarse cloth,.

“ but after the date of th.e foundation of the present capital silki was
“called ‘soft cloth,’ and hemp ‘rough,’ and It is in this semse. that tfie
“terms are used in the Yengishiki,” In the earliest ages tfie mat^fiiala


SATOW ON ANCIENT JA]?^U^ESE RITUALS. — ^NO., I


T25


used, were the bark of the paper •'mulberry (broussonetia papyrifera)^
wistaria tendrils and hemp, but when the silkwgrm. was- introduced the
finer fabric naturally took the place of the humbler in the offerings to
the godsJ The use of araiahe as a makura-kofcoba or ‘ pillpw^word,’:
to Fujihara, proves that the wistaria was used in making coarse cloth*
The wands adorned, with strips of white paper which are seen in modern
Shin ta,u temples are, the survivals of the offerings of cloth fastened to
the branches of the sacred tree {niasakalii). in ancient times. Yitfu^
which, seems to have strictly meant paper-mulberry bark, also; appears
in some passages; to include the doth woven from it, and even hen^
clpth -besides;.' • ' •

I ^'^The horse for the god to ride on, the cock tp tell the time, and:
the boar (a doniesticated animal^ — not the wild'boar.) for the god^s food;
Why white was the colour prescribed i:s unknowni, but perhaps its
rarity was a sufficient reason. >

' (i2o)^5ln the preceding sentence the plmaX kmti t(tcki occurs and
is probably to be understood here also, but as the original has simply
kami^ deiiy, I have, not considered it justifiable to translate *gods.'
Motowori is of opinion that only one deity is here meant. '

^^Oho mi kamu no ko is the reading given to which is

rendered here by ‘chief priestess.’ These were virgins taken for a
time to serve the gods, but there was nothing to prevent their being
married after they had quitted the priesthood. There were apparently
four such priestess, consecrated to the service of the twenty-three gods
woi^hipped in the chapel of the ^hifigi-kuwan, and the chief of thera^
was distinguished from the others by the prefix oho, great.

‘ *'7The Japanese names of these deities are Kami-musubij Taka-mi-
muSubi, Iku'-mUsubi, Taru-riiUSubi,'^ Tama-tsUme musubi, pho-miya-
no-me, ‘0ho-mi-ke-tsu'kami and Koto -shiro-nushi. Whether imtsubl in-
the first; five be compounded of musn^ to’grow, and hi, applied to every-
thing that is great' and' glorious, as the suu for instance, aceord,ing to
Motowori’s yiew^Jw whether it he simply the root of musubu, tp tie
together, matters very little as far as the signification is :conGerned.f
All agree in giving to it a meaning, tyliich is best rendered by ‘ Producer,,*
The Kozhiki calls the ,go4 who existed before the heavens ,, and hartjh ;
and before all other gods, Am,emo-mi*naka-nusbi, or the. Loi,d-in:t;be-

veryrcentre-oif>heaven> and the next gpds who came into existence, were

tbe .-pair. Taka- mi^musubh and Kami-musubi. The first part of each
of these appellations is simply honorific, and does not denote any^
special function ; nor is ^jther god to be regarded as superior .m:the
other, for the order in which they are named is a, matter of indifference.
The other three, Iku-musubi, Taru-musubi, and Tamahsume-musuhi
are. not mentioned in the Nihongi or Kozhiki, andjn the Kogo'-shmi
they are only enumerated together with the others, of the ^ght .deities
whose worship is performed by the chief priestess. Mabuchi points out
that their names closely resemble those of certain precious stones
brought from Heaven by one of the gods (Nigihayahi), which in con-


i;.26! SAtOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALSi — NO. I,

junction with several other treasures, had, the virtue of healing pain
and recalling the dead to life. These stones were tailed ihit tama^ taru
iama^ magaru-gaheshi tama and ohi-gaksshi tamely • In such compounds
ds these,, iku^ which signifies ‘ to live,’ ‘breathe,’ is to betaken in the
sense ,of ‘that by .which dne lives,’ as Motowori explains in the, case of
iku-’dacHi,.iku-ymni and sword, bow and arrows which have the

propert3' of giving life to the person” who. possesses them. So iku-tama
is ‘precious stone 'by which lil'e is ensured,’ and is literally

‘;th'© prodh^der ,hy/who|n life is ensured^’ which maybe rendered, more
fijeely, by .‘ vivifying, producer*’ Tanijama> is the precious stone by
which completeness, sufficiency, fulfilment of all requirements ate assured,
andi Taru-mtisubh is the producer through whose influence perfection is
attained.' By perfection is here meant the perfection of bodily strength
and beauty.; It is possible, too, that as Motowori thinks, these two gods
may have been identical with the Ikuguhi and Omodaru of the Kozhiki,
but the point is of minor importance, and the only argument in; favour
of' his view is the occurrence of iku and tdrti in the names of the two
pairs respectively. Tamatsume I take to be a (,i2i) compound of tama,
soul (the character ^ is a karizhi), and tsume- or tome-^ to stop, detain,
which is the interpretation hinted at by Mabuchi, when he compares the
effitient virtue of this god with that of the stones wl^ich ‘turn'bgck
from death ’ and , ‘ from the road ’ to tfie, region of the dead. , These
etymological interpretations do not necessarily conflict with a conjecture
of mine that the five names arc merely epithets 'of a single deity, probably
the ^un 'goddess, whose modes of action may have thus been distin-
guished. ; .

• In, the Yamashiro survey quoted by Motowori we find the name of a
deity which must be read Amaterasu (or Ama-

tei:ti^‘ taka' mimusubi no mikoto, ,and means the t Fr.om.-Heavea-^hining-
Loffy-P'ROhucBR’s augustness’,’' a combination of the ordinary epithet of
the sun. From.- Heaven- Shining, and the title Of one of the pair of creator
gods'. Mi-musubl, Producer, is often written and wherever

these two characters are found in the name of a god it seems legitimate
to give them that reading. Hence found in three places in

the Catalogue of Temples (Zhinmeichiyau) in vol. 9, pp. 7 v., 14 v, and
15 V. of the YeBgishiki, Deha-bon, where the kana of the editor is Ama-
teru mitam'a, may fairly be read Amateru (or Amaterasu). mi-musubi,
From-heaven-shining Producer. This, however, is not the only argu-
ment for identifying the sun with Taka-mi-musubi. We have seen
already that the terms progenitor and progenitrix of the Mikado are
sometimes taken to mean both the Divine Producer and the Lofty
Producer; that in some places the sun -goddess is substituted for the
Divine Producer and in one place both terms are applied to the sun-
goddess, who was thus both mother arid father of the race. It would
almost seem to have been a matter of indifference what epithets were
used in speaking of the Mikado’s piegenitors, which is easily accounted
for if we suppose those epithets to have been synonymous and therefore


SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^NO. I


t27


interchangeable. It is also worthy of , notice that^ : :^lth peafhaps the
exception of the Soul-lodging Producer, these name of deities do not
indicate distinctly separate functions (being combinations of laudatory .
epithets prefixed to the word ‘producer ’), but rather the different effects
which the beneficent workings of a single great and powerful deity
would produce.

There is still another point that deserves notice. We should naturally
expect to^ find that the first god of all, the Lord-in-the-vety-centre-of-
heaven,^ and perhaps the pair which followed him, the Lofty-pRODUCER
and -Divine-PRODUCER, would play a great part in the eafly legends of
the Japanese, and also that Izanagi, the parent of the sun and moon,
would take an important share in ordering events ; but as a matter of
fact we find that these deities have very little' to do, with the exception
Of the Lofty -P roducer, who is usually represented; as ruling the world
in conjunction with the sun-goddess. Izanagi and his consort disappear
from the scene after they have given birth to the land, sea, rivers and
the elements, and it is the child ofTzanagi who becotriess&e CeUtre 'Of
the mythology and worship of the ancient Japanese. It is difficult to
resist the suggestion that the sun was the earliest aUfong' the poWers of
nature to be deified, and that the long series of gods who precie(ie her in
the ! cosmogony of the Kozhiki and bTihongi, most of #hom are (122)
shown by their names to have been mere abstractions, were inyeuted ! to
give her a genealogy, into which were inserted two or perhaps more, of
her own? attributes, personified as separate deities.

Oh0“mi-ya-no^e is probably, as the meaning of the name suggests,
the personification of the successive generations of female attendants of
the Mikado. From the earliest times of which we have any record,
whether legendary or historical, the sovereign appears to have been
surrounded by a lar^e number of women, and during the most recent
period, that is, down to the reign of the last Mikado, none but women

were admitted to his presence. - The statement in the Kogo-Shiui that
Oho-mi-ya-no-me was appointed to serve before the sun-goddfcss, When
she issued forth from the cSve, simply indicates the great antiejuity of
the practice. Faithful service Was rewarded eventually by the erection
of an altar to the memory of -the mythical personage who was invented
to-be the type of all these female attendants. .

Olio-m: l^c isu-kami, ihc deity of ibc great FOOD, where * great’ is
merely an nonorific term like applied to anything belonging to a god

Or to the sovereign, is fio doubt the same as the goddess df Food Wor-
shipped at the Gekuu, or Otiter Temple at Watarahf in Ise. (See niy
paper on the temples bflse in vbl. 2 of the Transactions;)

Koto-shiro-nushi was a sou of Oho-kuni-nushi (who Is identical mth
Oho-na-muji), and his name contains a reference to the act by Which' he
symbolized his surrender of the sovereignty over Japan to the descendant
of the sun-goddess. When it had been determiried by the' council Of
the gods that possession should be taken of the earth in the name of
the -sun-goddess’ grandson, several messengers were sent in succession


faS SATOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS .—NO. I

fco:,claim the land from its ruler, but as no tidings were received from
them it was finally resolved to despatch Takemikadzuchi, to whom was
joined in the mission Ame-no-tori-fune. “ These two gods descended
upon the shore of the province of Idzumo. They drew their sword,
ten-hand'breadths long, and planting it on the crest of a wave, hilt
downwards, took their seat cross-legged on its point. They then 'made
inquiry , of :Qho-kupi-nushi, saying r The Fromdreaven^shining great
,GOi>i?®s&.and Takagi iio kami’(janother from of the name Jakaml-musubi)
have, sen(? pa, to .ask„ saying, > L have charged iny child to rule oyer the
pentralf region of, reed-pl^ins, which you possess as chipffealn. . What , is
your feeling cpi^erning this matter ? He replied ; I am unable to say^
My child Yahe-koto-shiro-nushi no kami will be ablp to speak, but he
has gone to cape Miho, pursuing birds and taking fish, nor; ha,s he .yet
returned. So Takeraikachfuchi sent Ame-no ■ tori-fune,no kami to summon
Kptp-shiro-nushi no kami, and when the question was put to him., he
said to the great god his father, , Lsuhmit. Deliver . up this region to the
ChilP of the heavenly god. He .then, trod upon the edge of hi, s boat
as tp overturn it, and with his hands crossed back to .back (in.. token, of
consent),; transformed his boat into a green fence of branches, and dis-
appeared.” ' ,

The daughter of the god who. thus surrendered the land to its new
ruler (123) married Ihaxehiko, who-.waa danohized as 12 hifimu-TeBwau,
and Koto^shiro-nuehi is therefore an ahcestor erf the Mikado by the female
side; but it is doubtful whether any consideration of that kind led to his
being mcluded among the eight gods who were supposed to he in a
speeiai sense the.protectors of the Mikado. The eight may be classified
'^^s follows, five synonyms of the .sun-goddess, ancestress of the Mikado
and bestower of the Kingdom, one deity representing the female m-
fluence that surrounded the sovereign and iiiiparl-.d a smoothness

to his relation's with his subjects, the goddess of food, and lastly one of
the chief gods of the conquered race, who represented the compromise of
antagonistic interests.

i2Wi-ga-*s.uri is held to be a corruption of Wi-ga-shlrij behind or by
the well, and of the five gods enumerated in the Zhiumeichiyau as being
served by the priestess of Wi-ga-suri, viz., Iku-wi no kami, Saku-wi no
kami, Tsunagu-wi no kami, Hahigi no kami and Asuha no kami, the first
three are the gods of tihe ‘vivifying well,’ the ‘blessing-well’ and the
* long-rope-well,’ which are probably synonymous epithets of some well,
highly esteemed fpr the quality^ of its water and the cool depths where it
lay. Asuha is explained to be ashi-bet, foot-place, that is, the first place
where the foot is set down after issuing from the house, and hahl'gi to
be derived from Imhirirgika-^ entrance limit. Motowori has an elaborate
and learned note on the subject of these two names which is worth con-
sulting, in the Kozhiki-deii, vpl. 12, p. 47. Jt appears from a verse in
the Manyefushifu, XX, pt. i, p. 24, that Asuha no kami was in ancient
times worshipped in the court-yard qf every house, which would be easi-
ly understood if he was supposed to be the guardian deity of court-yards.


SAtOW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE RlTXJAES.—lSfO. T. XZg

29House is mi-yaj composed of the honorific mi and house. It
was used indiscriminately for the house of a chieftain, the tombs of the
dead and the temples of the gods.

30This means that the house protects the Mikado from the weather
and the heat of the sun.

siKushi-iha-mado no mikotp and Toyo-iha-mado no mikoto are the
names of these two gods. In the Kogo-Shiui they are called by these
names in one place, while in another kami is used instead of inikofo^ a
common alternation, as I have already observed. The Kozhiki says dis-
tinctly that these are simply synonyms bf the single god Ihato- wake no
kami, who is the ‘ god of the Gate,’ so that we have here another case Of
alternative titles of a god coming to be looked on as separate gods. In
the Kozhiki there is the statement that the three are one, while at the
Mikado’s court, a century or two later, we find that two separate gods of
the gates are worshipped. The Catalogue of Temples says that there
were eight shrines to the two gods named in the ritual, one to each at
each gate in the four sides of the palace enclosure. Motowori’s explana-
tion of the names used in the ritual seems indisputable. Kuski and' Toyo^
wonderful and powerful, are honorific epithets ; mddd is not ^windoiv,’
but ‘gate,’ ma being the honorific prefix, so that would be the

correct equivalent in Chinese characters, and tha is rock, us6d iri the (124)
sense of strong, enduring, eternal. The genealogy of Ihatb-wake is an-
other instance of the confusion between Taka-mi-musubi and Kdmi-
musubi, for while the Kogo-Shiui makes him the grandchild of the form-
er through FutO'dama, the Shiyauzhiroku speaks of a family

of Tame no Murazhi descended from Ihatsu-wake (evidently the same as
Ihato-wake) the child of the latter. The Catalogue of Temples contains ‘
the names of eight, in Yamato,, Afumij Mutsu, Tsu, Mimasaka, Bizefi (2)
arid Tbsa, dedicated to I^hafo-wake, besides the original temple in Tanba,
with two shrines, sacred to Kushi-iha-mado. Besides the address to
these gods, or to this god, which forms a part of this ritual, there is an-
other whole ritual, called Hihado Matsurl^ the service of the Gates>
which is entirely dedicated to them, or to him,

3^The Japanese equivalents of these two names are Ihi-huni arid
Tani’hmi, the origin of which ;is not very clear. Perhaps they are
synonyms of a single deity'. ‘ From the Catalogue of Temples we learn
of a temple in Yamato called Iku-kuni no Zhinzhiya, of another in Shi- ^
nano called Ikushima Tarusliima no Zhinzhiya, and of a temple to Iku-
kuni Mitama, with two altars to a pair of gods. The last of these is pro”-
bably the full title. It means the ‘ spirit by which the country, or region,
In old Japanese, shima can scarcely have differed in meaning
ffbm ktinij and the signification common to both was more nearly that qf
the words tyegion,’ or ‘country,’ in such expressions as the ‘Black
couritry,’ ‘ the west country ’ amongst ourselves. It is found frequently
forming part of the names of places which are far inland, as for instance
Hixuko-jima in Idzu. This explains the occurrence of both shima and
kuni in the names of these gods and temples. The god or ‘ spirit who


139 §ATPW ON ANCIENT JAPANESE EITUAES — NQ. I*

yjvifips ’ or ‘ completes/ * fulfils’ the country, is the principal god of the
locality, and is represented in later times by the Ichirno-miya, or chief
Shintau temple, in each of the provinces into which the country came to
be formally divided for administrative convenience,

33 In the original the expression here rendered by ‘ Sovran gods’ is in
the singular number, while just above (below In the Japanese) it is plural.
But every student , knows how commonly the singular number is used
when plurality intended.

3 il have not been able to learn what species is meant by taniguhu^
but it is certainly a large kind of frog, which, as its name ‘ valley-creeper’
indicates, is found in damp sliady places.

3 S‘Salt’ is probably not the primary meaning of $kiho^ but rather
sea* water, from which salt, yaki-shiho, is obtained by desiccation.

UKoto wahete, parting the words, i.e. taking up a fresh and special
theme.

37 As already pointed out, the Japanese language generally makes no
difference between god and goddess, hut we kpow that Amaterasu is a
goddess. Hence tiae use of the feminine pronoun here, which, it must be
not^d, has no, representative in the original. Like the articles, relative
and nearly all other pronouns, it ha^ to be supplied by the translator,

?8Xhis is a simile descriptive of bowing the head. In the Manyefu
^0l 3 Tp- (125) 12, V.) we have a similar expression shishi zhi mono
hizcf. morifuse^ bending the knees like, due de^r,

,^^Ag.a.ta originally meant ^ upper fields’ {agp.iG)i that is to say,
arable land, such as, is now called hatcu Mi agata were therefore the
^august fields ’ of the sovereign. The Nihongi speaks of officials having
to be sent to the six Farms in the province of Yaraato to take a census
and to measure the rice-fields and arable lands. When the country was
parcelled, out into provinces (kuni) and departments [kohori)^ what had
previously been called agata were renamed kohori. The six farms here
spoken of ate the modern departments of the same name, Kadzuraki,
Shiki and Sofu having been each divided into two, so that there are nipe
instead of six. These were no doubt selected to form the household
domain of the Mikado at an early period, when the capital was still in
Yamato. It will be seen by looking at the map of Yamato that they
form nearly the whole of the northern half of the province, with the ex-
ception of Heguri, Hirose and Oshinomi. For further details see the
long note in the Kojjhiki-den., vol. 29, p,p. 59 et infra.

^^Naga mi he no toho mi ke in the Japanese. Here no places the
two terms of the phrase in apposition, uud has the force of ‘which is,’
i.e. literally rendered, distant Food which is (at the same time) long
Food. Both words, toho and naga^ have reference here to time. In
the Manyefu they are thus employed over and over again ; e.g.
hafu knzu no
iya toho nagaku
yorodzu yo ni '
tayezhi ta omahite ;


SATOW on ANC^ENt JAPAilESE RrTt/AxS.^NO. t.


I3t

“thmkmg that it would l^st for a myriad ages, evet longer and raorO
distant, like the creeping pueraria.” The idea is that the Mikado is to
partake of this food during a long life, and the whole phrase might niore
freely be rendered * perpetual Food ’ without itS' meaning being at all
sacrificed. , .

know nothing more about these gods than that they were
supposed to inhabit the mountains here named, whence timber was
brought for the palace buildings. All six are situated within three
departments of the province of Yamato, where most of the ancient
Mikados had their capitals, and the expression ‘ distant mountains ’ is
consequently not to be taken literally, but rather coupled with ^ hear
mountains,,’ as a poetical way of speaking of mountains in general, just
like the taka yama and hikiyama<t high mountains and low mountains,
of the Ohoharahi no Kotoha,

^'^Mikiimari is the reading of the two characters translated

* parting of the waters.’ This rests on the authority of the text of the
Koxhiki Den. vol. 5. p. 38), where Ame no mikumari no kami and Kuni
no mikumari no kami are enumerated amongst the children of Izanagi and
Izanami. Kumari is the more familiar kuhari, * to part ’ or * apportion.’
The four names in the text are those of localities where temples to such
gods of streams were raised. Several others are enumerated in the
Catalogue of Temples. They were supposed tp be able to control the
supply of water for irrigation ; and it was necessary to propitiate them
lest they should withhold it altogether or send such floods as would
destroy ithe crops. * Parting of the waters ’ might be rendered by
‘ watershed,’ if that expression were not slightly technical,
the gods who are here addressed.

corrupted later into Imube and Inbe, were a class of
hereditary priests, belonging to several families, whose duties were to
prepare the more durable articles offered to the gods at the principal
services, to cut down timber required for building the temples, and
further, to construct the temples. This appears from several passages
in the Kogo-Shiui. There were families of Imibe in Awa, Sanuki, Kii,
Tsukushi (i.e. Cbikuzen and Chikogo) and Ise. We learn from the few
lines of introduction to the Rituals in vol. VIII of the Yengishiki, that
the Imibe, besides these functions, were allowed to read the liturgies at
the two services of the Luck-wishing of the Great Palace (fihotono hogahi)
and Gates (mikado matsuri). It is not easy to see why^ this was the
case. Perhaps the fact of their being the builders of the palace was
considered a reason for their being allowed to recite the ritual in which
the Wood Spirit and Spirit of Rice are besought to watch over the
building and to protect its, occupant. Mabuchi observes that Oho-mi-
yamo-me, who is also addressed by name in the Luck-wishing of the
Great Palace, and Kushi-iha-raa-do and Toyo-iha-ma-do, to whom the
ritual of the ga'J'es is addressed, were children of Futodama no mikotp,
from whom the Imibe wete also supposed to be descended, and he
suggests that the collateral relationship betweefi them and these three


I3.a. SATpW ON .ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— NO. ,I

gpds sCatitled them to perform the services in which these gods were
concerned. It was Futodama who held the mitegiira or tree adorned
with beads, the famous mirror and the offerings of cloth before the door
of the cavern into which the sun -goddess had retired, on that great
occasion which has so often to be recalled in speaking of the myths, and
his descendants, natuplly performed a similar function, says IVlabuchi.
Imihe is* compounded of imi-y to dislike or avoid, because it was
pardcularly, necessary that these priests should avoid all uncleanness,
especially when performing their duties, and he is said to be identical
with me.f a contraction of mure, hock or body of persons, with which are
connected mura, village, and muragarti, to flock together. ,


(I27) ON A KARfeN INSCRIPTION.


By the Rev. Dr. Nathan Brown.


Yokohama, August 29, 1M78 *

My Dear Dr. Syle :

The Karen traditions to .which you ref^ are fortnd in the
Proceedings of the Americau Oriental Society for October,
1886. They were communicated by the Rey* Dr. Gross, of
TouHgoo, Burmah.. / i. :

The Karen account is as foilows; the ^diest and
‘^most ancient times we cajhe from the West We came
^^in company with the Chinese. The Chinese were our
elder brothers. Our brothers, the Chinese, went in a com-
‘ * pany in advance, and we ina company followed them. The
Chinese cornpany advapeed more rapidly than we didy and
‘^thus left us behind, and, we bemme separated ; and^ the
‘‘ separation gradually increased between us.”

After lingering for some time near a river Where there-
was an abundance of sheh-rfish, the Karens followed ori
after their companions, but faded to overtake them* /^We
continued,” says the narrative, to follow until we came
‘‘upon the place where pur- Chinese brothers had left ns a
“ bridle-bit, and a sickle to ept food for a horse, and a book
on a plate of brass and gold, which wae shining
“ black. It was only „a pprt of the plate. We therefore
“ said among ourAplypSj— Now our elder brothers have
“ determined not to wait for us any longer. They have
“ given us up and left for us our inheritance, that which we
“ were to receive. When this was done, we made no more


134 brown on a KAREN INSCRIPTION.

‘*(128) attempts to follow our brothers. We stopped and
made us cities and villages, and our palace, in the country
and place where the city of Ava now is. The name of the
‘‘ city, in which was our King’s palace, was Hotailaij or
‘‘Gold and Silver city. After we had been there a long
“time, a Burmese people called Kathai, who were in the
“West, came after us and fought with us, and utterly de-
“ stroyed our palace and our cities and our vilia|fe^^ We
“then fled and built again our villages and cities and
“palace in the land of Kyeel^yUf where we now are, and
“where, we have ever since remained.”

Is it not somewhat singular that the number of sacred
relics, or more properly, regal insignia, of so many eastern
kingdoms (generally regarded as having come down from
heaven) should be exactly thne^?^ Thus the Japanese have
their Sacred Mirror, their crystal ball, Tama, arid their
wonderful sword, TsiirugL

In an old history of the Shans', which I found in Assamy
it was stated that the imperial insignia brought down from
heaven by the two brothers, Khunlung and Khunlai, were
(i) the great Shield ; (2) the wonderful sword, Khorga; (3)
a pair of fowls for the purpose of divination.

My impression i3 that there are several other countries
which have siniidar traditions. This of the Karens may,'
or inay apt, have the same origin as the rest.

Dr. Cross gave me a copy of the Karen plate, taken b,
Rev. J. B. Vinton, while on a visit to the Red Karen chief,
at the beginning of 1869. custodians of this relic

would not allowtheir foreign wsitors to trace the characters,
or take an impression in wax, so that this copy cannot be
regarded as a perfectly exact transcript. Another copy,
taken by Rev. A. Bunker, was published in the Oriental
Society’s Journal for 1871. The characters bear considerable
resemblance to the Burmese, also to the Canarese, and
others in Southern India, but not a word has thus far been
deciphered, and the Karens themselves know nothing of
its meaning. It is conjectured that the small star-like
crosses iri the plate may be used to separate sentences,; ot


''%C^


<:n -^+^ '/, '

'' -' V/'o


N< C

^o"i-
^ ^


55 ;:?•

. fr^ *N


’■ '*”'''—.,■3 *’/


" 5 ^


^35


DR. ]jr, ^RQWN ON "A iN^TOTIQi!?

parts of sentences, and that the rude fig^in:es at the hoto
of the inscription represent the sheli-fish, spoken c^ ki t^^
tradition. The plate is si3f and a quarter inches long by
two and one-eighth inches broad, and of sonaewhat unequal
thickness about oneTpurth of an inch. It is oqnsiderably
worn, and has an appearance of great age, corresponding to
the native belief of its remote origin.

Dr. Cross has learned from reliable Karens that tfielled
Karen King, Khai-peho-gy^^y wht) holds this plate, ha^s a.lso
in his possession five ivory plates, in shape and si^^o hbout
like the ordinary Burmese palni-leaf, that is to say^ each
plate is about two feet in length, and two and a half inch'
es in width. These ivory plates are, covered toth the same
characters as the metal plate already mentioned.

I hope some of the members of your Society may be able
to discover a clue to the interpretation of this singular in-
scription. Although there seems to be no doubt of the ex-
istence of the five ivory plates also, no induCtaients haveias
yet been found sufficient to open the casket that contains
them' to the ga^e of foreign eyes.

Yours sincerely,

N. BROWN,


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


A General Meeting was held at the Shdheikuwaff, ^Seidd, Tdkiyo, on
November r2th, 1878, Dr.^, Murray, President of the Society, in the chair.

The minutes of the previous general meeting were read and approved.

The Kecording Secretkry reported the election of the Rev. Jas. L,
Amerman as a member of Council ih room of Mr. Augustus H. Mounsey, .
who had left the country. He also announced that at last meeting of
Council it had been agreed that the Society's Library should he open for
, the lending and returning of books a short time before and after each
General and each Council meeting in T6kiy6.

The Librarian reported the receipt of various magazines.

The President announced the death of Mr. Van Casteel, a member
of the Society. Mr* Van Casteel was a very estimable, and. hard- working
man, who, during a long residence in Japan, had acquired an excellent
knowledge of the Japanese tongue, which he had used in assisting to
translate various foreign works for the Japanese people.

Dr. Syle read a communication by ‘the Rev. N. 6rown, D.D., ^‘On
an Inscription of an ancient Karen Plate.” , ^ .

Mr. E. M. Satow read his paper entitled, “Ancient Japanese phials j
No. I, Praying for Harvest.”

The President testified to the pleasure with which he had listened to
Mr. Satow’s paper, and hoped that some of the scholars who had turned’
their attention to this class of subjects might have something to say.

; Dr. Syle felt that probably no one present was competent to make
remarks upon a paper of this kind. It was the best thing he had listened
to of the kind since Mr. Satow’s last contribution to the Society. He
mentioned the temple ceremonies which he had witnessed at Nikk6. On
the 17th and 20|:h, of each month, the birth-day of lyeyasu, a long prayer
was then used, the' words of which he regretted he had been unable to
obtain. These services were full of exceedingly interesting symbolical
meaning.

Mr. Chamberlain observed that as had just been remarked by the
Vice-President* it was difficult to say much with reference to a paper
whose subject was so completely a new one to most of the members ; but
that one thing had especially struck him, viz., the great likeness of the
style of the “ norito ” to that of the most ancient Japanese poetry. One
passage, in particular, seemed, as far as one could judge from a transla-
tion, to be almost word for word identical with a portion of one of the
odes contained in vpl. xvHi. of the Myahuge edition of the MaSyefushifu
collection. ^

The President said they were indebted to Mr. Satow for his permit-
ting the Society fo be the medium by which such a scholarly production
was given to the world. He was pleased to know that it was the first of
a series. Nothing could be more valuable in contributbig to a knowledge
of Japanese religions than work of this kind. The quesiiori of the affilia-
tions of the Japanese was most interesting and pressing, and Mr. Satow
was doing something towards throwing light on it.

The meeting was then adjouinedi'


VICISSITUDES OF THE CHURCH AT YAMA-
GUCHI FROM 1350 TO 1586. , , , , .


By Ernest Satsw.


. (131) (Read November 27, 1878.^

The part of Japanese history most £i::a,wghbt with personal
interest for Europeans, is the period, almost amounting to a
century, which Gommenced with the discpyety. of the coun-
try by the‘ Portuguese in 1542 and ended with ,thw;hhai
expulsion; in the year i640t During this ^me an active
conrmerce sprung up between Japan and the foremost of
European states, which was the cause; of the Japanese
themselves , becoming more enterprising in their, foreign
relations than at any previous epoch, and which also favoured
in an eminent degree the introduction of Christigmity, It
must be a matter of profound regret to every one who is
interested in . the welfare of Japa% that the conversion pf
the inhabitants to, the religion of Europe encountered such
powerful hostile influences ; . that after an extraordinary
success bad been achieved the first half century, the

tide turned back, and excluded the nation from the pale of
Christendom up tq fibia day^ Some hasty persons haye
said that Japan, falling under authority of the Jesuits, might
have become another Paraguay ; but such an opinion 0411
hardly be entertained by any one acquainted with ,t|ie
national character of the Japanese, and their proud im-
patience of anything which bears the slightest approach to
foreign control. Their religion, if they had become Ronran
Catholics, would not have affected their political conduct,


138 SA.TOW* THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM I550 TO I586.

except where the superior tenderness for suffering humanity
and recognition of equality which characterise Christianity,
had obtained their legitimate influence. It must not be
forgotten, too, by those who (132) deny the beneficent effect
of Christian ethics upon the progress of civilizing ideas;
that the men who brought Christian dogmas and precepts
belonged to races which directly inherited the Greek love
of knowledge, and the Kdniah devotion tb liberty and
respect for law. Not the Portuguese and Spaniards alone, "
but the English and Dutch also would have been the
teachers of the Japanese people ; and who can doubt that
the principles " of constitutional freedom, derived from
Protestant races, must have overcome the repressive
tendencies of Roman Catholic ideas ? Is it fair to throw
all the blame of their ultimate failiite upon the missionaries
themselves, or what other causes were also at work to bring
about the disastrous ending to so much noble zeal and self-
sacrificing devotion ? The question is scarcely ripe for
solution, for all the evidence has not yet been takdii. We
know the story from the side of the missionaries, variously
interpreted by prejudiced adherents and enemies, but
1he Japanese tale has still to be told and impartially ex*-
plained. It is of prime importance that we should become
acquainted with the Japanese history of that period so fat
it bears upon the rise and fall of Christianity, and in
doing Sb we may perhaps learn some lessons that will be of
hbe to Us even at the present day; for it must not be
forgotten that, 'though the religious intercourse of ' Japan
with the west in the i6th and 17th centuries has been
abundantly written about, the commercial relations, of
W'hich little has been recorded, at one time flourished quite
as vigorously as in our own clay. To trace the stoi'y from
its beginning to the end requires that we shall transport
ourselves from one part of the country to another in
succession, beginning in Kiushiu and ending far away north
in Aushiu. In Kiushiu there two principal seats of
missions, one in BuSgo, the other in Hizefi, while on the
mainland of Japan there were three chief centres, Yama-


SATOW. THB CBUma AT YAMAGUCHl FROM J 55 Q TQ XSSS.. 139

guchi, the Home Province round Kiyauto, and at a later
period the town of Sefidai in Mutsu. Putting aside'Kiushiu,
or the present, though it ought properly to be treated first,
If propose to sketch as briefly as possible, and omitting all
names except those of the principal persons, the vicissitudes
that befel the Church at Yamaguchi and the Japanese perr
sons of influence in that part of the country during the first
period of the progress of Christianity in Japan. The history
of the general persecution has been so well narrated by M.
L6on Pages from the European sources, that its illustration
from (133) Japanese records will be comparatively easy when
any one finds leisure to undertake the task. My authorities
have been principally the letters of the missionaries: on the
one hand, in Latin and Italian translations, and far the Japa-r
nese part of the subject such works by native annalists as are
easy of access and generally accepted as trustworthy, , I have ^
preferred in most,, cases that the missionaries should. speak
for themselves, a course which, though ^giving a patchwork
appearance to the narrative, renders it Less open to cavil,
while I have found it more expedient to summarizie than to
translate the Japanese Writers, ,Ih quoting from or translat-
ing the letters I have preserved the spelling of Japanese
names which, are there given, hut in other cases I have
followed what appears to me to approach most nearly to a
correct orthography. ; i
In looking oyer ^ copy of an old book entitled Rerum
a Societate Jesu in Oriente gestarum volumen,’^ printed at
Cologne in 1574 apud Geruinum Calenium et haeredes
lohannia Quentel,’' I lighted upon a curious transcript, ^ or
supposed facsimile of what purports to be a copy of a Japan-
ese grant made iri 1552 to the Jesuit missionaries at Ya-
niaguchi in Suhau of a hionastery or Buddhist Temple. An
interlinear Latin version is given, but as it doea not ^actly
conyeyrthe meaning erf the? original document, and the latter
itself is not easy to decipher, I have thought that it might be
worth while to rnake a correct translation and also to repro-
duce in a legible form the text of this old and undoubtedly
genuine document.


SA.^OW* THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM I550 TO I586.

Tfie Mission at Yamaguchi was originally founded by St.
Francis Xavier, whose first letter from there is dated on the
20th Noveniber 1550, and addressed to the Society of Jesus
at Goa. He relates therein that after passing a year at
Kagoshima^ where he had arrived on, the 15th August, 1549,
making more than a hundred converts with the aid of Brother
Ba#l coirverted Japnese? who had been instructed in the
Christmnr faith at the College of St. Paul in Goa), and study-
ing the language, , he left that city about the beginning 6f
July^?^ I550,..and (134) proceeded; to Hirado, then ruled by a
prince named Matsura Takanpbu. Here he and his com-
panions made nearly ;a hundred more converts in a few days.
Leaving .Cosmo Torresr to take charge of the neophytes, he
went on to' Yamaguchi, with Joam Fernandesr, alaymap, but
meeting there with very ilittle success, he judged it .better to
continue his journey to the capital. But on arriving there,
he found the city full of armed men, and in a state bordering
on anarchy, which did not appear likely to favour his at-
tempts to make proselytes, and the two missionaries therefore
retraced their steps to Yamaguchi.

The King, as Xavier calls him, of Yamaguchi, at that time
was Ohochi Yoshitaka, the descendant of a Korean prince,
who settled in Japan about the end of the 6th or beginning
of the 7th century. The family first rose into prominence
in the time'of Yoritomo, who made its then representative
vice-governor of Suhau. During the wars of 1331-34, when
the Houdeu family, who for the last hundred and thirty


, iB;artoli (lib. 3. c. 13) says Xavier le#: Kagoshima a^bout the
beginning of Se,ptember,; but, this date is hardly reconcilable with what
Xavier tells us in his letter above quoted. He there says that between
leaving Kagoshima and the date of his letter he had spent ten days
at Hirado, the same time at Yamaguchi, had made a journey to Kiyauto
and back, 'which took two radriths,,. and that in two other months he had
made fivd hundred converts-. * Allowing a fortnight for the two
journeys from Kagoshima to Hirado, and from Hirado to Yamaguchi,
five months at least must have elapsed since his departure from
Kagoshima. Torrez in one of his letters says that Xavier had spent
nearly a year at Kagoshima (annum ferme)^ and that would agree well
enough with my calculation. * ,


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHX TRO»t I55O TG 1586, 14x1

years had ruled the whole country from Kamakhra in the
name of the Shiyaugufi, were overthrown, the Ohochi dan
made themselves masters of the two provinces of Suhan
and Nagato, and sided for a while with the imperial party.
When it afterwards became apparent that the Restoration
was not destined to last, their chief ranged himself under
the banner of Yoshinori, the first Sei-i-tai-Shiyaugufi of the
Ashikaga ’ dynasty,* and was rewarded for this piece of
treachery with the office of High-Gonstable in the two
provinces/ to which was afterwards added the adjoining
province of Ihami. About the end of the 14th century the
family also acquired possession of Buzefi and nearly the
whole of Chiknzefi, which two provinces still owned
allegiance to Ohochi Yoshitaka, when Xavier found hint
ruling at Yamaguchi. One of the most important local
chiefs who held lands from the Ohochi, was Suwe Takafusa,
a general of great experience and renown, whose only rival
of importance was Mouri Motonari, who had lately joined
the fortunes of the Ohochi family; I am inclined to
believe that it was principally by the intervention of
Takafusa^ (135) that Xavier obtained leave for the mis-
sionaries to preach and reside in the capital from Yoshitaka,
because after Takafusa had been driven by unjust suspicions
and threats of confiscation to overthrow Yoshitaka, the
Ghristians continued to enjoy their privileges under the new
‘ King* whom Takafusa set up in the place of his former
lord.

Xavier says that on returning to Yamaguchi he presented
letters of credence and presents from the Portuguese
Viceroy of India and the Bishop of Goa. Amongst these
presents were a cldck and a harpsichord, which though of
little value, were highly appreciated by the King, as nothing
of the kind had ever before been seen in his province. A

^Takauji, who founded the Ashikaga power, was only Sei-
i“Shiyaugun.

^It is more convenient to use the nanori or historical names of these
chieftains than to use the family name. A list of those which
occur in this paper is added at the end for reference.


THE GH^RGH AT YAMAGUCHI PROM 15^0 TQ 1586.

eonsidierablo sum of money in silver and gfold was offered in
return for the presents, but Xavier declined to receive it,
and begged instead for permission to preach Christianity,
which was readily granted. A proclamation was published,
dectering that the King approved of the introduction of the
new tdigion^ granting to the people perfect liberty to
embrace it, and an empty Buddhist monastery Was assigned
to the missionaries as a residence. Their operations were
attended with great success. Five hundred converts were
made iti a couple of months, and further adhesions were
being received every day at the time when Xavier wrote.
We find him still- at Yamaguchi on the ist September, 1551,
where he was joined by Cosmo Torres about the loth of
that month, and leaving Torres and Joam Fernandeir in
charge, he started shortly afterwards for Bufigo, whither he
had been inyited by the ruler Ohotomo Yoshishige.*^ ,

A few days after the departure of Xavier occurred the re-
volution at Yamaguchi to which I have alluded. Among the
favourites of Yoshitaka was a man named Sagara Taketafu,
cunning and clever fellow, according to the Japanese, chro-
nicler, who presnmed very much upon the influence which he
posiss^e^ed with the King, and was constantly engaged in
inW%^es foil* his own advantage. Among other projects, he
gonceiyed ,:tte idea of mai'rying his daughter to the son of
^akafuea, ^already named as the most powerful vassal in all
Ypshitate'S dominions, (136) but the proposal, though
backed up by Yosbitaka himself, was scornfully rejected by
the young man '^ father. '

- Taketafu tpok his revenge by persuading: Yoshitaka to
confiscate 300b ku^aH Of land (about 2500 acres) belonging
to Takafusa, under the pretext that certain Buddhist monks
were really entitled to the property. At the same time that
be thus added a positive injury to the proposal of marriage
which Takafusa conBidered^ So insulting, he managed td
offend two of Yoshitaka’ s nearest relatives, one his cousin,


4 See De Rebu.s Indicis et Japonicis, p. 227, Xavier’s lette/, vol. 2
p. 230 of M. Leon Pages’ translation. / . . , ;


StATOW. TfiE CffClRfcft AT YAMA^SArCHI TO 15'86, 14.3

the other the husband of his maternal aunt, by inducing
Yoshitaka to fotbid them to use certain umbrella-bags and
saddle-cloths, which had been granted to them as signs of
distinction by the Shiyaugufi. The three angiy santur^hi
allied themselves for the purpose of rerhoving the favourite
from the vicinity of their lord. Taketafu tried to make it
appear that they were Conspiring against Yoshitaka himself,
but his accusations were not believed, and he was compelled
to seek safety in flight, thus leaving the field clear to the
confederates. This took place between October loth and
November 8th of 1550, and consequently shortly before the
date of Xavier’s letter of November 20th of that year- He
must have been in Yamaguchi, but makeS: no mention of
this event, which is narrated by all the Japanese historians
of the period. Takafusa and hiS confederates began to think
that they had gone too far ever to be frankly forgiven by: Yo-
shitaka, though the latter professed himself entirely satisfied
with their explanations. They resolved therefore to make
preparations to forestall any attack from his sideband left
the town for their own fiefs about the end of the year, be-
tween December 8th and January 6th- Everything remain-
ed quiet for some months, until the end of September, 1551.
On the 27th of that months in the midst of a banquet given
by Yoshitaka in honour of envoys from the ShiyauguS and
the head of the house of Ohotomo, the ruler of Buftgo, the
alarm T^as giVen that Takafusa was advancing on the town
at the head of ah armed -host. Yoshitaka at once sent for
his unde and cousin to come to his aid, but they did not
make their appearance. Some of his officers proposed tb
attack and kill these two leaders, who were evidently
disloyal, but Yoshitaka, believing that such near relations,
whom he had trusted and enriched in no small degree,
would never turn against him^ refused to take their advice.
The more courageous of his officers then ofrered to march
out and meet the enejny, so that in case of defeat a road for
(137) escape^ might he left open to their lord, but he still
continued to waver. At last he was induced by a traitorous
favourite to abandon the castle, and betake himself to U


144 SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM 155O TO I586.

iiaighbouring Buddhist monastery, aGCQmpanied by about
three thousand followers. Most of these deserted during
tht night, and when day broke he found himself with barely
a thousand men, surrounded by the three confederate leaders,
who commanded a force five times as great. Seeing that
resistance 'W he offered to make terms, but his

enemies were implaeable, and refused , to grant any condi-
tions,. Flight was ttie only resource left,, and taking
advantage of the darkness, he slipped out of the monastery,
intending to make his way across the sea; to ChikuEefi, but
on reaching the shore, he found the wind against him, and
was compelled to turn back and take refuge ' in another
monastery. Here he was again surrounded^ and .seeing
that all hope was now over, he disembowelled himself, after
confiding his two sons to the Care of the chief monk. This
happened on the 30th September, 1551. Most of his foUoWT
ers committed suicide or died sword in hand. According
to the received account, the monk escaped with the two
boys, but the party was overtaken by the foe, when the elder
was stabbed at his own request by a trusty attendant, who
immediately afterwards destroyed himself, and the younger
also met his death, in what precise manner is not stated.
Another version of the disastrous tale is that Ohochi and
his son died in company, and this agrees with the account
givepi by tfie missionaries. ^

In a letter written by Joam Fernandez, dated October
20th, to Xavier, ^ho was then at the capital of Bufigo there
is an account of the revolutionj and of the perils incurred by
Torrez and himself. He says : A war broke out in the

city, which was brought to: an end by the death of the King,
so. destructive anff deadly that the to\yn: was oh fire and
overflowed with blood for the space of eight days ; for with
the laws in abeyance, victorious wickedness raged every-
where with impunity. Murder and plunder in all directions,
and during the whoje tiriie diligent inquiry Was made fer: us
with a view to slay us, partly by those who hated us; partly

sGruiwasbi ho, bk. vii, and Crasset, Hist, de I’Eglise du Japon, vol. i,

p.T6o. . , . ? . , : I V., „


SATOW.. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM I550 TO I586. 1145

by those who coveted our poor baggag:e. Thus we were
often in great danger of our lives, but the most merciful
mother of the Lord, who protects her servants with special
care,( 1 38) -snatched us out of all our perils. While affairs
thus stood, Cosmo sent Antonio to the wife of Naitou'^ dono,
to ask for he^r advice, and she bade him bring back word
that we should come to her at once. On the way there we
fell in with many hands of armed men, who said to each
-Other as. we passed through the ranks, ‘Let us rid our-
selves of' these men from Cengecu^ (for thus they call
Europeans),’ since, it ds by their fault, denying that either
wooden op stone images can help themselves or others, that
the angry god,'s, by stirring up discord, have^ brought ^uoh
slaughter upon, this people.’ They said this because mahy
monasteries* with: their images had been consumed by fire
in this, very , war,: to the great diminution of the ir^uence
of the idols and thfe deceivers, or because, it proved that the
superstition hadheen of no avail to the King, one of the Most
superstitious, ^as thou kno.west Having escaped from- tfiese
dangers.,^we reached the house of Naitou dono,, whose wife
gave us^aboy-to attend us, and sent us away to a monastery of
Bonizes, 3 ;who werC' supported by her. But they being sorely
incensed, against us, rejected us ; they called us demons,
.laijici said -that, they had no-roOm to receive such a wicked
. radfe of ;.meh,., Why should not God, who dwells in the
heavens, , and whose law we teach, snatch us up into heaven
out of tbosd pwls?: However, at last, induced either by
the fear of the lady, or by the entreaties of the servant, they
allotted "to us a small part of the temple as a lodging. After
;We :had remained there, two whole days, the woman sum-
m^pned us again to her house, . and assigned to us a certain

'CTiSaid -to have'beisn the governor of Yamaguchi. Two persons of
this surname are mentioned by contemporary writers, Naitou Qkimpri,
k partizan of Takafusa, and Naitou Takaharu, who later on surrendered
the town to Motonari. I iiidine to think it was the latter.

^Probably a corruption of Tenjiku (5^®), India.

corruption of the Japanese word bauzu, a hiorik,pionouhced In the

western fashion of those days


; 1^6 satow. the church at yamaguchi from 1550 TO 1586.

passage at the back, part of the buildings for our accommoda-
tion. I will say nothing for the present about the perils
and hardships which we have undergone, lest I should
become tedious.” The letter is dated Amangutio (in the
Latin version), i.e. from, Yamaguchi ; perhaps the initial Y
was omitted in the Ideal pronunciation. Mention is also
made' of this revolution at Yarndguchi in a letter of /Forrez
to the Society of Jesus in Portugal, y to which I shall refer
later on. ■ , ^

(139) Although he had been strong enough , to overturn the
ancient lords of Yamaguchi, and to destroy all the members
of the family on whom he could lay his hands, Takafusa
did not venture to set up as ruler in their place/ Be thei'efore
threw the blame of the whole affair upon Su^gi Shigenori,
one of his own confederates, and put him to death, ,after
which, in order to disarm all hostility on the part of possible
rivals, he became a monk. He had changed his name to
Harukata immediately after the revolt, and now changed it
again to Zefikiyau. It was a common practice in the middle
ages of Japan for an unsuccessful soldier of fortune to adopt
the garb of the Buddhist monk, as a sign that he renounced
henceforth all connection with worldly affairs, and thus to
escape the fate which he would as a layman have received
from the hands of a victorious rival. Nevertheless Haru-
kat^ as he is still called by Japanese writers, in spite of his
change of name^ still held in reality all his power as chief
councillor of the . Ohochi family, and in that capacity sent
an envoy to Bufigo to ask Ohotomo Yoshishige to allow his
younger brother Haphirau to accept the succession of the
Ohochi family and reign at Yamaguchi. According to the
account given by a contemporary chronicler of the Ohotomo
family,^ Yoshishige did not wish to send his brother oyer to
Sithan, because he felt certain that Mouri Motonari, Haru-
kata’s powerful rival, would be too strong for. him, and
would eventually endeavour to make himself master of the


?Ofaotomo-lji in the, Gu^shiyo Ruwijzhiyuu of Hanawa

KeSgeu. , ^


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI EROM* I55O TO I586. 147

inheritance of the Ohochi family, and he therefore at first
refused his consent. But Hachirau insisted on going. To
decline would be interpreted as fear of Mouri, and would
bring contempt upon the family name. Yoshishige reconsi-
dered his decision, and finally allowed his brother to accept
the offer. Xavier, as we learn from one of his own letters,^®
was still at Funai when the matter was decided, and obtained
a promise from Yoshishige that he would request the new
King of Yamaguchi to take Cosmo Torrei and Joam Fern-
andez under his special protection. Thi^ was just before
Xavier’s departure from Bufigo, about the end of November
of that year.

It was no doubt in consequence of this promise that the
formal grant of a building was subsequently made to the
Jesuit missionaries. Their letters speak, indeed, of a Bud-
dhist temple, and also of building (140) lands assigned to
them, on the occasion of Xavier’s visit to Yamaguchi, but
they say nothing of title-deeds being given them, A facsi-
mile, and a legible copy of the document by which the grant
was made, with hanti at the side of the Chinese characters
to show how they are to be read, is annexed. Its date is
the 28th day of the 8th month of the 21st year of Te^buh,
which corresponds to the i6th September, 1552,
when Hachirau, who adopted the name of Ohochi Yoshinaga
on his succession, had already taken possession of his dorfii-
nions. The Latin . translator . attributed, the charter to the
King of Suhau,^Nagato, Buzeh, Chikuzefi, Aid, Ihami,
Buhgo and Bitsuchiuj Apparently supposing the grant to
have been made by Yoshishige, but there is nothing of all
this in the original, which simply states that permission is
given to build a monastery and house, and is signed Suhau
no suke,,j.the title borne by the young ‘King’ of Yamaguchi^

io Vol. 2. of M. L^on Pagis’ translation, P. 231.

ro For the ^printed comparative tables of the Japanese and European
caltndars, gbihg back as far as the year 1500, which have been used in
ascertaining the exact equivalents of the dates given by Japanese
authors, I am indebted tp Mr. William Bramsen, a member of this
society. But it must be recollected that the ISTew Style began only


148^^ THE CHURCH AT YAMACU CHI , FROM I550 TO 1586.

-!. , LATIN VERSION. ' TI^ANSLATION FROM THH ORIGINAL^

Dux Regni de Zuo, Regni Japanese.

Nangati, RegniBugen, Regni ; With respect to Daidauzhi
Chicugen caqui, Regni luami, (Le. monastery of the great
Rcgnf Bung:, Regni Bxchiyi, in Yamaguchi Agata,

conCGs.sit l)iiy i. mgignun^ Yoshiki department, province
dOgie i. aditum goeii p^tribus of Suhau-. This, deed witnes- .

Occidentis : qui venerunt ,ad aes that i, have .giyen permis- " *

de.clarandam , legem fapiendi sipn to , the priests , who have
sanctos iuxta, ipsorum volun- come to- tliiis country from
tatem ad finem vsq.t mundi. the westerh regions, in accoxv
is est locus positus intra Am- dance with their request a-nd r
angutium magnam vrbem, desire that they may found
cum preuilegiis vt nemo pos- and erect a monastery and
sit occidi nec apprehend: in, house in order, to develope
illo. Atque vt sit testqtum :<th^ law of Buddha,
meis successoribus ^do illis 28th day of the 8th month
hoc diploma, vt nullo tempore of the 21st year of Tefibufl.
eos deturbent ex hac posses- Suhau no suke.

sione. Regni de Teybum, August Seal. :

anno 21 ipsius octaui mensis
vigesimo octauo die.

SVBSCRIPTIO

,Dvx Daidiqui bozat

Forma sigilli

(141) To this version in Latin is appended a note that the . ; , " H
words which these ‘Japanese letters’ represent are wanting in •
the Spanish copy, Portuguese words having been substituted
for them, which the translator (Maffei) has turned into Latin
in the same order,' to the best of his power. A comparison ‘ ,

of my translation with the Latin version shows that the latter ^

contains a' great deal that is not in, the original Japanese -


document, as, for instance, the clause about the privilege of
asylum conferred upon ’^the missionary establishment, and
the . words: .‘ iuxta,, ipsorum , , voluntatera ad finem usque


on October 5', 1582, and a deduction of 'lo days' must bb made dn all
dates given by these tables, before that change was made.


SATOW. THE CHURCH .AT YAMACpUCHI from 1550: to; IgSei/ j 149,

mundi, ’ and ‘ Atque ut sit testatum meis.snccessoribus do: .
illis hoc diploma ut nullo tempore eos deturbent ex hac
possessions ’ are a very loose translation df zhiyau hudc^i
no gotoshi ‘Ad declarandam legem facij^ndiy

sanctos ’ means, I suppose, ^ in order to teach the law of
sanctification, ’ and is intended as the equivalent o^hutsu-
pofu seu-riyoic no ^ for the purpose of

developing the law of Buddha; ’ It would appear from this
and also from the application of the term td the

missionaries, that the doctrines taught by'Xavier and Torre:^
were looked upon by the grantor as merely a superior kihd
of Buddhism. The square which encloses the chsitactdr
with which the document begins, no ddu tit marks a place
where a seal had been impressed on the driglrial. With
regard to the words ^ Daidiqui bozat ’ in the' sighatui'e
attached to the Latin Version, I am unable to give any
explanations. It seems to be the name of some Buddhist
saint, and may possibly' have crept In through niistake.
The attribution of the sovereignty oVer all the dotninidns of
both Yoshishige and his brother, the hew King of Yaihagti-
chi, to the grantor of the character, though erroneous, goes to
confirm the statement that the permission to build a mission
at Yam'aguchi Was obtained through the influence of the
elder over the youilger bi'Other. '

This document is evidently the same as that of which‘
BartoH speaks in chapter 13 of book vilL Of I’Asia, part i,
when lie says that the king of Buhgo gave the missionaries
land" at Hakata in Chiku^efi and at Yamaguchl, to build
chiirches aiid colleges. He gives a translation in Italian,
which he says is ' word fOr word from the Japanese, but
^142) it is evidently merely a literal rendering of the Latin, or
perhaps of the Portuguese. II duca, de ’ regni .di Zuvo, ,
di Nangato, di Bugen, d ’Achi, d Tvami, di Bingo, dl Bicio.
Concede il gran Day, cammino del cielo, a ' Padri.di ponente, ,
venutiadichiarar la legge che fa santi, secondoilloropiacerje, .;
di qtia sinO alia fin del mondo, un campo nella grari;citta;
d’ Amangucci ; con privilegio, che niuno fossa essere ucc iso,


150 SATO^t THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI • PROM I55O TO 1586.


preso in esso* E affinch^ cid sia manifesto a’miei
,Siiccessori, do loro questa paten te, per cui virtfi mai in niun
tempo non , li tolgano di possesso. ” The duke of the
Kingdoms of Zuvo,.Nangato,Bugen, Achi, Ivami, Bingo and
Bicio^ grants the great Day, road to, heaven, to the Fathers
of the west come to make known the law which makes
saints, aaeording to their pleasure, henceforth until the end
of the world, a piece of ground in the great city of
Amangucci, with the privilege that no one may be killed or
arrested in it And that this may be made clear to my
successors, I give them , this patent by virtue of which they
shall not be deprived of it at any time. ”) Bartoli has
evidently been misled by the incorrect translation which
lay before him, to place the grant of this character at least
five years later than its real date, and thus posterior
to the death of Yoshinaga, whose signature was attached
to it.

The next mention of the church at Yamaguchi is in a
letter of Pedro Alcaceva to the Society of Jesus in Portugal,
dated from Goar in 1554, on his return from a visit to
Japanr In company with two other missionaries named
Duartes da Sylva and Balthazar Gago, he reached Japan
on the X3th, August, 1552, and disembarked at Kagoshima,
where they were well treated during their short stay.
Proceeding on their journey they came to Funai on the
2ist September., where they were immediately received in
audience by the King, and delivered the presents with
which they were charged by the Viceroy of India. As soon
as Cosmo Torrez, who was at Yamaguchi,, heard of their
arrival, he despatched Joam Fernandez to their aid to act
as interpreter. In October they set out for Yamaguchi,
where they were received with great rejoicings both by
Torrez and the w^h ole congregation of Christians. After
celebrating Christmas day with great pomp, and organizing
th^ church there, Alcaceva returned to Funai with Gago and
Fernandez, leaving Duartes da Sylva behind to help
Torrez.' *

i2De rebus Indicis et Japonicis, p, 178 ; Crasset, vol. i, 174.


. SAt6w. the church at YAHAGUCHI from, 1550 TO 1586, . 151


For two years after the instaUation of Yoshishige’s brother
under (143) the name of Ohochi Yoshinaga, peace seems to
have reigned at Yamaguchi, but in 1554 the standard of
revolt was raised by Yoslximi Masayori, commander of the
fortress of Tsuwano in Ihami, an hereditary epemy of. the
Suwe family, who was supported by Mouri Motonari,- lord of
the fortress of Yoshida in AH. The Mouri family, descended
from Ohoye no Hiromoto, one of the chief pillars of the first
dynasty , of Shiyauguti,: had settled in that province in the,
14th century, but had occupied a very unimportant position
amongst the local chieftains until a few years previously.
Motonari was the second son of a family which possessed
about 2506 acres, and as no provision for him copld. be
carved out of the hereditary domain, he was given in
adoption to di, scimur ahi yvho owned a little over 60 acres of
land. To this small fief Motonari added about 66po acres
more, the property of the High Constable .qf AH, who had
rebelled against the Shiyaugud, and who was overthrown
chiefly by Motonari’s efforts. 3 y the rdea^lh of another
relation without heirs, he came into a third property of
about 8000 acres. Ip 4523, on the failure of heirs in the
direct line of the Monri family, he wan chosen by the chief
retainers to succeed to the headship, and thus obtained a
larger field for the development of his talents as" a soldier
and statesman. It is he whom the missionaries so
frequently speak of as Mprindoeo. Various, interesting
anecdotes are told of his childhood, from which it appear
that he early gave promisejof, his future greatness* During
the first few years after he obtained possession of the heredi-
tary fief of his family, he was a depeaderTt of the Amako,
then lords of the province: of Id^umo, but he subsequently
quarrelled with them, andwent over to the sideof the Ohoohi,
whose chief, Yoshitaka, had given him aid in an unequal con-
testagainst his foripygr suzerain. In that period of Japanese
history, the holders of small fiefs were nominally vassals of
the Shiyaugufl, but they usually found it convenient to
attach themselves to some local chief of greater power ^ an
themselves,, who was also in theory a vassal of the


^ ^ 5 ? SAtOW. TUB CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM I550 TO I586.

ShiyaugiiS. There were instances of this also in Chikuzeti,

* where some of the less powerful saifmrahi acl<nowledged
fealty to the Ohotomo, lords of Bungb, though the whole of
the province was nominally under the sway of the Ohochi of

Just before he committed suicide, Yoshitaka- wrote a letter
to Motonari, entrusting to him the task of avenging his
death. Motonari (144) shed tears on reading it/ and vowed
to punish Harukata*s treasph, but for tie moment was afraid
to attack the successful rebeh then at the height ^ of his
power. By the advice of his officers he tprried. his^attention
to inCireasing his own mihtaty resources, whilst contriving
to let it appear as if he were too weak for an enterprise of
any ithportance* In r553 he began to lay his plans for an
attack .on Harukata,, and called a GOttncil of his chief
adherents.' His' soM Kobayakaha Takakage advisdd that the
Mikado should he requested ; to issue a commission for the
punishment of -the traitor, becanse that would justify the' War
and coriciliate public opinion. A memorial Was therefor
addressed to the court, dwelling upon the services of the
Ohochi^ family during successive generations, and its
unswerving loyalty to the throne, declaring Motoiiari’s desire
tb pa pish the rebel who had mhrdered his lord, and begging
: that' a commission might .be granted ‘to strengthen the
avenger’s' arm, ■ This was exactly what the court desired,
i It had ' & hearing of Yoshitaka’s death, given -

orders^ to the SMyaugua - and h lieutenants to march a-
gainst Harukata, but they had either refused or neglected to
execute the mandate, and Motonari’s petition was therefore
: granted with re'%di-n,eSs..' j.

On receiving his commission, Motonari )C%Qulated. copies
of it far and wide, and the first, to respond to the .summons
was YoShimi Masayori/o£Tsuwa;no in: Ihami, who at bace
took up arms and marched against Harukata, supported by
Motonari. In the 5th month of 1554 (May 31 — ^June 29, O.
S.), MotonSfri and his sons put their forces in motion,’ and
commenced their operations by capturing several fortresses
^aNihou Guwaislii, bk. xii. Ohotomo-ki j Ouwaishi ho, bk. ii.


f


s


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI PROM I55O TO 1 586. X53

in the west of Aki, which still belonged to the Ohochi family.
In the first engagement with a detachment of Karukata’s
troops Motonari was victorious, but soon saw himself
out-numbered by his opponent, who took the field With all
the men he could muster in the five provinces under his
sway, amounting to 30,000 men, to whom Motonari could
oppose only 5000. Seeing that he must assuredly be beaten
in the open field, he resolved to try vthat stratagem' would
do, and, much against the advice of his officers, began to
fortify the island of Miya-zhima off the coast: of Aki. The
fortress with its redoubts placed on the neighbouring coast
and on the littledsland of Niho, were completed and manned
in the 6th month of 1555, (May 21— June x8, 0 . S.).
Motonari then pretended to regret that he had Waste-d bis
time in fortifying a place that could he (145) so easily taken,
the fall of which must immediately he followed by the loss of.
all his other fortresses, * and he took care to spread about a
report to this effect, in such a manner that it came to the
ears of the enemy. Harukata fell into the trap. He march-
ed down to Ihakuni with 20,000 men in the gth month (Sept
16 — Oct 15, O. S.), and embarking his army in junks, easily
made himself master of the island. He then desjiatdbed a
defiant message to Motonari, who responded by at once
occupying Kusatsu on the mainland just over against Miya-
2:hima, thus cutting, off Harukata’s retreat. Most of the
$amiMrahi of the province believed that Motonari^s defeat was
certain, and refused to Join him, but he received the unhoped-
for aid of two chiefs from the province of lyo in Shitoku,
who placed their fighting vassals, numbering 300, at his
disposal. On the last night of the month his preparations
were complete, and taking advantage of a tempest, he em-
barked: his men arid 'Stood over to the island. Once landed
there, he sent hack his boats, so that the only hope for his
soldiers was in complete victory. Harukata’s officers, not
supposing that an attack was possible in the face of such a
storm, had neglected to post any sentries, and were taken by
surprise. Just as day hroke, the conches of Motonari’s men
sounded the signal for the assault, and they rushed upon the


154 SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM 1550 TO I586.

fortifications, which were carried with ease, owing to the con-
fusion among too numerous defenders. Hairukata in vain en-
deavoured to rally the fugitives ; they rushed to their junks,
and thousands were drowned in trying to get on board. Ha-
rukata is said to have been extremely corpulent, and conse-
quently unable to walk fast. Accompanied by a few
followers, he made his way to the shore at a short distance
from the battle field, hoping to find the means of reaching the
mainland, but there was not a boat to be had, and he finally
performed harakiri according to custom. A long and cir-
cumstantial description of his last hours is given by a Japa-
nese author, which would be extremely valuable as illustra-
tive of national manners, if it were the narrative of an eye
witness ; but as it is not pretended that any of his companions
survived to tell the tale, it is only interesting as an example of
what popular historians, one might almost say writers of ro-
mance, think ought to take place on such an occasion.^^

In the I2th month (January 15 to February 10 0 . S. 1556)
Motonari took Ihakuni, and was preparing to overrun the
whole of Suhau, (146) when he heard that his former master
and subsequent enemy Amako was threatening his rear in
BiSgo, but he speedily "provided against this danger, and
pursued his march upon Yamaguchi. The remainder of
Harukata's partisans, about lojooo in number, opposed the
progress of his troops at the fortress of Susuma, which he
captured by stratagem in the 3rd month (April 10 to May 8,
1556, 0. S.). The town of Yamaguchi now became the scene
of disorder. All the fighting men marched forth to bar his
advance at Nigita hill, but he speedily dispersed them, and
proceeded on his_,way. Yoshinaga, the unfortunate younger
brother of Ohotomo, fled to Kachiyama in the next province,
and Motonari entered Yamaguchi in triumph. Naitou Taka-
haru, the governor, and other leading persons came to offer
their submission. Troops were despatched to Chiyaufu and
Shimonoseki to cut off Yoshinaga's retreat into Kiushiu. Ar
nothei' detachment laid siege to Kachiyaiiia, and Yoshinaga


^^NihoS Guwaishi, bk, xii.


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCKI FROM J559 TO. I586 155

was killed, together with the only surviving son of Harukat a.

In a letter of Torrez to the Society of Jesus in Portugal, da-
ted the 8th September, 1557, troubles at

Yamaguchi had not interrupted the labours of himself and his
companion, which were so successful that by the year 1559
they had made two thousand converts; In that year, how-
ever, some of the leading men, joining together against the
new king and his adherents, set the town on hre, with such
thoroughness that the dwellings of more than 10, 000 families
were destroyed by the flames in the space of an bout. The
mission-house and church did not escape. With great dif-
ficulty the converts persuaded him to leave the town thtee
weeks later, though the enemy was reported to be advancing
again to the attack. It appears that Torrez at this time was
alone, Duartes da Sylva having left him to take Gago's place
in BuSgo. ■ Crossing the sea, he sought refuge Jn Butgo,
where letters from , Yoshinaga and the leading men shortly
afterwards reached him, inviting him to return, but Ohotomo
Yoshishige, to whom be addressed himself for an escort,
advised him to wait until it was seen how rnatters turned
out. The missionaries suspected that some conspiracy, the
existence of which was known, to Yoshishige, was hatching
against the King of Yamaguchi, for no long time elapsed
before a certain powerful chieftain attacked Yamaguchi, just
risen from its ashes, (147) destroyed the town, carried ofl' a
large portion of the inhabitants into slavery, and killed the
King with all his followers.^

From this account it seems that Motonari’s advance
upon Yamaguchi had been preceded by dissensions among
the samuraki of the fqwp itself, and it is not improbable
that some of them> who were not bound by special ties
either to the new ICing of Bufigq or to the Suwe family^
wished to. make terms with Motonari, whilst the others
were determined to hold out to the last. A tumult would
be the natural consequence, and the partizans of Suwe
must have gained the upper hand, for the resistance

ISTPf^rtkn^T^hftitri Ouwaishi, bfc. 3^1*


t 56 SATOW. THE CHURCH AT- YAMAOUCHI EROM 15^0 TO 1586


to Motonari could not otherwise have continued. It was
owing no doubt to the temporary success thus gained
by the Suwe party, who protected the missionaries, that
Torrez was enabled to stay in the town after the distur-
bances.- The speed with which the wooden houses of
a Japanese, town may be -rebuilt is well-known, and it is not
surprising, therefore that Torrez should speak of Yamaguchi
as being ‘ almost restored after the fire ’ (Jam ex incendio
ferme instauratum) when Motonari captured it. Torrez
says indeed that he destroyed the town (diruit), but it must
be recollected that he was not an eye-witness of what took
place, and on the other hand the Japanese account is that
it was surrendered peaceably.

Torrez concludes his. account of what had happened
at Yamaguchi by saying that Yoshishige, on hearing of his
brother’s fate, despatched troops to avenge his death, but I
do not find any mention of this in the Japanese sources. It
was not until thirteen years had elapsed, namely in 1569,
that Ohochi Teruhiro, the uncle of Yoshitaka, who had long
been a fugitive from his native province, was entrusted by
Yoshishige (then called Sourifi) with the command o
a body of troops, with which he invaded Nagato, and
pushed on as far as Yamaguchi. He held the town for a
short time, until Motonari’s forces, returning from the
invasion of Kiushiu, compelled him to retreat. ' Abandoned
by his men, and unable to find a junk to convey him back
to BuBgo, he committed suicide. This Ohochi Teruhiro is
the person whom Bartoli calls Tirofiro,^* ^nd speaks of as
the legitimate King of Yamaguchi.

For eighteen years after the flight of Torrez from
Yamaguchi, the Christians in that place were left without
any resident priest to maintain (148) them in the orthodox
practice of their religion. -A letter of Francesco Carrion* of
the year 1579 says that there were two churches, one in
the town of Yamaguchi itself, and another not far off, with
500 Christians, who had been deprived of the ministrations
either of priests or lay-brothers, during a period of twenty-

^ 7 De Rebus Indicis et Japonicis, p. 229. iSpAsia, bk. viii. ch. 44.


SATOW. CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHt FROM I 55 O TO*’X586.

four or twenty-five years, with the exception of a passings
visit from father Cabral, some five years before the date of
the letter. He remained with them a few days, confessing
them and animating them to perseverance, and he also bap-
tised a few new converts. Of the older converts, many had
been baptized by Xavier, and others shortly afterwards by
Torrez. Since the death of the younger brother of the King
of Bufigo, the tyrants who ruled over the province had re-
fused to allow any missionaries to reside there, but never-
theless, the Christians had not only adhered to their religion,
but had even multiplied, bringing up their children in the
same belief.”^^ '

The tyrants here alluded to are Motonari and his two
sons Takakage, given in adoption to the house of Koba-
yakaha, and Motbharu, who succeeded to the headship of
the Kitsukaha family.' Having successively got rid of
Harukata and his puppet-king, Motonari proceeded to triake
himself possessor of all the dominions of the Ohochi, with'
the exception of Chikuzeh and Buzehj which after some
fighting remained in the hands Of the Ohotomo and their
vassals. He still continued to claim them as his own, and
in the meantime made up for this loss by his acquisitions
in the east and north, by which Bitsuchiu, Idzumo, Ihami,
Hauki, Mimasaki, Bifigo, Bizefii and Inaba were added to
the three provinces of which he had previously made
himself master, thus bringing the number of provinces over
which he actually exercised or claimed authority up to
thirteen. His eldest son, Takamoto, having died in 1563,
shortly after his unsuccessful campaign in BuzeS, he
divided all his dominions between his two other sons,
Motoharu and Takakage, giving the provinces of the
Safiifidau, or north coast, to the former, and those of the
Safiysudau bordering bn the Inland Sea to the latter, while
to himself he reserved a^, voice in the general direction of war
and diplomacy. In 15^9 Motoharu and Takakage again
invaded Kiushiu, and took the castle of Tachibana in
Chikuzefi, from which the ^ king^ of Bufigo in vain endea-

^ 9 Lettera Annuale del P. Francesco Carrion, p. 77-


158 SA^W. THE CHURCH AT YAMAOUCHI FROM 155O TO 1586*

voured to expel them. It was during this war that Ohochi
Teruhiro was sent to (149) invade Suhau and Nagato, so
as to cut off the enemy’s supplies of men and provisions, and
it was owing to the absence of nearly all the Mouri troops
in-Kiu.shiu that he was at iirst so successful, and was able
to capture Yamagnchi. Finding himself in danger of losing
his own dominions^ in the attenipt to conquer those of
others, Motonari. recalled his sons to expel the invader.
Two years later he died, at the advanced age of seventy-five,
having maintained his faculties to the last almost undi-
minished,

Motonari was succeeded by his grandson Terumoto, who,
himself a brave and skilful young soldier, was powerfully sup-
ported by his two uncles. 'Before long they came into col-
lision with the partisans of Nobunaga, and the advancing
fortunes of the house of Mouri received a check at the hands
of Hideypshi, who was then Npbunaga’s principal lieuten-
ant. In 1582 they met face to face before the castle of
Takamatsu in Bitsuchiu, which was defended by an ally of
the, Mouri against Hideypshi. They endeavoured by stra-
tegy to relieve it, but were afraid to join battle with the most
redoubtable soldier in the empire. It was on this occasion
that a man who is frequently mentioned in the letters of the
missionaries as one of their best friends, first Came pro-
minentlyinto notice by the share which he took in concluding
a, peace between the contending parties. Nothing but the
assassination of Nobunaga would have induced Hideyoshi
to make terms, and the Mouri were greatly indebted to the
influence which the missionaries’ friend possessed with him
for the favourable conditions by which they were left in
possession -of night provinces and a revenue of j,2oo,ppo
kpku

In, a letter of Frpes dated ‘‘ Cocinpzch ” ;I3 February
1583, mention is made again of the church at Yamaguchi.

After our arrival in Arima, the Christians pf Amanguci
sent a letter thither on purpose^ in truth worthy of compas-

^0 NihoS Guwaishi, bk. xii. Kurbda-Ki bk. in the'

Asakusa Library. ^


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM 155O TO I586. I59


sion, saying : We are the first fruits of the Ghristians in
Japan, and mostly old men who were baptized by the chief
father Francesco Xavier and father Cosmo di Torrez^ and
yet for our sins and scanty deserts it is nearly twenty- five
years since we groan under the yoke of a iyrant, and this
little flock, entirely surrounded by Gentiles, is deprived of
all the sacraments, masses, sermons and all protection and
help of Fathers and Brothers. Two old Christians of
(150) great faith and virtue, by whose teaching and ex:ample
we have been in some measure sustained hitherto, to our
great ill-luck, have both " died lately in the sarnie month.
Wherefore we pray your Reverence from here humbly and
with prayers, to deign to remember our solitariness, in order
that these souls may not perish that cost so much to the
Redeemer of the world.”^^

Speaking of the Mouri, Froes says that they had formerly
been masters of fourteen or fifteen kingdoms, but that Nobu-
naga had deprived them of eight or nine. : And in spite
of his being a great idolater, he (Mouri) has three times
preferred a request to the visiting Father, and has since
repeated it to the Father Vice^ Provincial, to send him some
of our people. And we desired it bo less, but for want of
workers, as well as for other important reasons, and in
particular on account *of his beitig an enemy of Mobunaga,
the matter cannot be arranged for the present.”

Though I have nbt found anything in the Japanese annals
to corroborate this statement, there is no reason to discredit
it on the ground of k priori improbability. Christianity at
this moment was in a very flourishing condition^ and the
missionaries were received with open arms in most parts of
Japan from the capital westwards, and tolerated in several
others. As the Christian faith was evidently not openly
persecuted, it is possible that even the Mouri may have
thought it worth while to cultivate the friendship of the
Europeans, who would be useful as teachers of various arm
of which the Japanese were at that time ignorant. Be^des,
Froes Was a very careful and exact writer/and lie
accounts which he gave of the political events of the period


l 60 SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUGHl FROM I550 TO I586,

show that he was not in the habit of either inventing, ex-
tenuating, or exaggerating.

In anothei* letter dated January 2, 1584, he says : The

king of Ama:nguci, by the beginning of the year 1583, had
sent to , Fa2cibai‘(Lei Hashiba, which was the surname borne
by Hfdeybshi at this period) an ambassador concerning the
matters which were in dispute between them,, and Faxiba
kept him always close to himself on purpose that he might
afterwards recount to his King the successes which he had
aeen. And thereupon he gave him a letter, which he first
had read aloud before many cavaliers, and it was of the
following tenor: ^ Last year, not (151) being well armed,
I sent to say that you must let me have five of the nine
kingdoms that remained to you, because you had sO pro-
mised to Nobunaga. You pretended not to understand, im-
agining that my affairs would not get on well. Now I will
leave it to your ambassador to tell hpw they have turned
out. I am not very hungry for your kingdoms, but I wish
you to keep yoUr word, and if you satisfy me in this matter
we shall remain in peace, but if not, then we will see it with
arms in our hands. Success will be for him who has the
better luck. And if you resolve upon that alternative, I will
take care to come and look for you.’ The king of Aman-
guci, frightened by this letter, arid by the report of the am-
bassador, has found it best to accept the bargain, giving
him the kingdoms and hostages. And so peace has been
preserved.” The ‘letter reads remarkably like one of Hide-
yoshi’s missives to his enemies, and the discovery of it in
the brigihal Japanese is much to be desired. As regards
the despatch of an ambassador by Mouri Terumotb to Hide-
yoshi, who detailed him for some time at Ohosaka, we
have the confirmatory testimony of Japanese writers.

It has already beeh said that the Mouri obtairied favorable
tetms from Hideyosfei by the mediation of a friend of the
missionaries. This was Kuroda Noritaka, usually called
Condera Combioiendono in the letters of the Jesuit fathers.
It was only after a course, of reading in Japanese histories
Nuovi Avvisi del Giapbne, p. 27.


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM.1550 TO I586.

of the period and in European aceounts of^thd progress of
the missions that I discovered the identity of the two riames
Condera and Kuroda. This mistake has been repeated
nearly every European, writef on Japanese history who has
occupied himself- with relating the . inteoduetioh of Chris-
tianity/into Japan from the end of the i6th century down to
the present time. L find the. name first in Eroes’ letter
dated Shimonoseki, October 15, 1586.®^ The communica-
tions which the missionaries had held from time , to time
with tlie little band of Christians at Yamaguchi had made
them very desirous of getting a footing again in that town,
not only on acccount of the already existing converts, but
also because they hoped that once reestablished in the
capital of the Mouri’s dominions, they woudd be, able to
extend their operations, throughout the seven and a half
provinces still: ruled from that centre. Froes says that
a good opportunity given by ‘^Conder, as Gombixpius,
(152) who had become a Christian three years earliery
a noble and illustrious retainer of Qiiabacnndono at Vo^ka
(Kuwaabaku- dono, ; his lord^ip the Grand Vizier, i.e.
Hideyoshi,- at Ohosaka), who had employed his excellent
judgerhent in important affairs which he had with the King
of the AmangHGcini (pepple 6f Yamaguchi). The vice-
provincial, (father Coelho) called on him, and he, promised
to do all in his power to help Ike propagation of the faith,
and whatever else pertained to the worship of God. He
was shortly aboot to be sent to the king of Amangucci on a
mission. The vice-provincial then earnestly besought him
to obtain from the King’ of the Amangnccini leave for the
fathers of our society to: have a, residence among the
Christians , of his kingdom. He undertook to do this^ and
eventually^ fjod iriiclining:^ of the King thereto, he

obtained tetters for the Father vice-provincial, by which a
free residence ' for the ^ in the prayinoe ^of the

Amangucemi was, granted.’.^ This permission to live
at Yama^chi was of great value to the missionaries, for it

*^In Hay’s Collection, p. 92. The letters in this collection are
translated into' Latin.


l 6 z SATOW- THE CHURCH AT YAMA.GUCHI PROM I550 TO I586.


was their only place of refuge when they shortly afterwards
had to flee from Bungo before the invading armies of
Satsuma. During this war with Satsuma, in which the
regent of Yamaguchi (Kitsukaha Motonaga) took part,
Father Coelho profited by a visit to Shimohoseki to obtain
from Motonaga an order confirming these privileges,
addressed to the administrators of the dominions of the
Mouri.

Mention is again made of this same person by Froes in a
letter of February 20, 1588 addressed to the General of the
Society of Jesus. He says: ^^At that time several lords of
much importance became Christians^ as, a son of Nobunaga
and a cousin of his, and other nobles and chief personages
in the household of Quabacundono, and a nephew of his,
who expected to be his heir; and also another lord called
Condera Combiondono, who now has the name of Simone,
a great favourite of Quabacundono, a person of rare nature
and promise, and much esteemed by Quabacundono/'

We next find that when the ‘king’ of Buhgo {Ohotomo
Yoshishige) solicited the aid of Hideyoslii against the Satsu-
ma chieftain, who threatened to deprive him of all his pos-
sessionsj Hidei^oshi sent to his aid “a Gentile named Xen-
goca, lord of the kingdom of Sanoqui (i.e. Sehgoku Hidehisa,
lord of SanUki in Shikoku) and Condera Combioendono, a
Christian lord, of whom, we have already made mention, in
order that (153) he might march b)^ way of Buhgo and Chicu-
gen (Chikuzeii) against Achensuchi (Akidzuki), commanding
also Lorindono (Mouri) King of Maguccia (Yamaguchi), and
of eight other kingdoms, to send ail the men he could to Qua^
baicuftdono, in order that he might thereby make war on
Achensuki, declaring Quabaicundono (? a mistake for Cam-
bioiendono) commander-in-ehief of the arm\% until he him-
self should come.” Further bn Froes relates again how ‘ this
valorous captain, ’ arriving at Shimonoseki after his first vic-
tories over Satsuma and Akidzuki, found there father Coelho,
who had been negotiating with Morindono and Cobaicauan-
dono (either Mouri Terumoto or his. uncle Kitsukaha Moto-
naga, and Kobayakaha Takak'age, lord of lyo at that time)


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI PROM 1550 TO 1586. 163


for some days without any result, and speedily arranged
matters for him. “For Cambioindono havings been the me-
diator of the peace and compacts, that some years previously
were made between Qua bacundono,' lord of the Tenza/® and
Morindono, lord of the kingdom of Amangucci, was greatly
esteemed and loved by the said Morindono and Cambaicauan-
dono his uncle, and as he now came, sent by Quabacundono
with so much powet, and the people of Morindono had to
serve him in this war, he gave what commands he pleased to
the King of Amangucci.’^ After the war was over and S a-
tsurna had been reduced to obedience, Hideyoshi gave the
kingdom of Bugen to Quambiondono,’^ as Froes says, which
was nearly correct^ and further on he amends this state-
ment, by speaking of “Cambioindono (who, as we said above,
is lord of nearly lall the kingdom of Bugen).”

Again, when Hideyoshi ivas making preparations to invade
Korea, Froes says,' in a letter dated October 1592,^^ that
amongst' the four generals appointed from the Island of
Kiushiu to command divisions of the army was “Cainocami,
son of Quambioindono, lord of the greater part of the king-
dom of Bugen.”'

From a letter of Valentino Carvaglio, dated 25th February
r 6 oi ,^3 learn that during the contest between Iheyasu
and the pardzans of Hideyoshi in 1600, “Calnocami, who
, was with Daifusama (Iheyasu), contrived that one of his
servants should be sent by ship to his father QuambioiendDno,
a Christian prince, to inform him of -what had taken (154)
place up to that moment ih the parts where he himself was.
Quambioiendono, who had 8^000 soldiers with him in the
kingdom of Bugen, received the messenger, and after he had
made confession to a" priest of the sms of his whole life, he
led' these toward the kingdom of Bungo, which was held by
the enemies of Daifusama. The administrators (i.e^ the
guardians of Hideyoshi) sent down to the said kingdom of
Bungo %he son of Francisco, the previous King, who (i.e. the
son) had been detained at Meaco for several years by the

*^Perhaps a misprint for Tenka empire or supreme power.

2<fHay’s collection p. 169, ^sibid. p. 548.


164 5 AT 0 W. T«E CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM I55O TO I586.

order of Taitosama, so that he, as legitimate lord of that
kingdom, might more easily repel with his retainers the at-
tack of Quambioiendono., This new King of Buhgo had
scarcely arrived in Bungo with 4000 soldiers, when he received
information of - the approach of Quambioiendono. : An an-
gagemS'nt at ohce ensued^ the King was captured and carried
off prisoner to the fortress of B ungen (Buzefi).’^ . .

We also learn from: the same letter that ;‘*Cainocami ob-
tained the kingdom of Cicugen (Chikuzefi)j larger than the
kingdom of Bugen, of which he had previously owned two-
thirds.”

All this agrees closely with what is to be learnt about a
certain Kuroda, known at different times by different names^
in the, Nihon Guwaishi /and the continuation of that work
as Noritaka, but in the Kurodaki^' a MS. life preserved' in
the Asakusa public library, chiefly as ^ Kuwanbiyauwe
(pronounced Kambibye) and Kageyu, which are respectively
his familiar knd the first title which he

bore.. Cambioiendono and^'Quambioindono, or however else
the Jes,uit missionaries may have spelt the name, is evidently
nothing else but Kuwafibiyauwe with the title dono, about
equivalent to lord,’ suffixed. Condera is a corruption of
Kuroda, which we may feel sure was pronounced Kuronda
at that time in the west of Japan, .just as Adzuchi, the
name, of No;bunaga4’s castle-city by the Biha lake, is written
Anzuci, and^Hitado is iSpdt FirandO, ;to say nothing of the
other numerous oases which may be • found , throughout the
Annual .Letters./ How Kuronda or Curondh came to be
transformed into Qondera m not quite clear. Perhaps it is
a mere printer’s .or copyist’s mi$take, but at any rate it was
Tpade at la very: eally., period, for Condera is rhe spelling in
the Italiamh^andation of Proes’.^^^^ of a 5.88, published' at
Milan in, J590> / . was no doubt written in Por-

tuguese,, but I have no^:(x;55)^^c^^ that language to refer
to. Crasset, Bartoli and Charlevoix, who are the principal
historians of the church during the two centuries that
preceded our own, all call him Condera,,. and so does M.
Leon Pag^s in his unfinished ‘ Histoire de la R 61 ,igion


SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM 155O TO I586,. 165


Chretienne au Japan.’ ^ Of the identity of Simon Condera
Cambioiendono with Knroda Kuwafihiy^uwe there can be
no doubt. I have traced the career of this person in
the letters of the Jesuit missionaries, .and a similar search in
the Japanese records of the time ascribes exactly the same
actions to Kuroda Kuwafibiyauwe. It appears from, them
that Kuroda was a great favourite of Hidieyoshi, that he was
the principal negotiator of the truce with the Mouri, when
the assassination of NoSunaga suddenly rendered it neces-
sary for Hideyoshi to come to terms with his foe, and
to return from the siege of Takaniatsu to punish the traitor
Akechi Mitsuhide. It was also this JCuroda whom Hideyo-
shi sent down to summon the heads of the Mouri family to
join the expedition against Satsuma,/ and who afterwards
freed the unfortunate inhabitants of BuBgo from their in-
vaders. This Kuroda was then rewarded, with six out pf
the eight departments into which is divided, and

was consequently called ^King’ of that province by the
missionaries. He had a son, nailed Kai no karai, who was
a leader in Hideyoshi’s first expedition against Korea, and
afterwards took the side of Iheyasu in the struggle for
empire and peace with the guardians of Hideyoshi s weak
and unfortunate son. Kurdda Kuwafibiyauwe (then bearing
the name of Jiyosuwi) invaded Bugo and took prisoner Yo-
shitofu,' the son of the former ^ king’ of that province, who
had been sent down to Kiushiii py Hideyoshi’s guardians to
create a diversion in their favour. Finally, Kuroda Jiyo-
suwi is known to have been^a Christian. It may perhaps
seem' that I have devoted too much space to establishing
the identity of a single ihdividuai, but as this identity has
bfeen hithertd overlooked by every one Wbo has written on
the subject of tbe Roman 'Catholic missions in Japan, daring
nearly ‘ three centuries/' th^ accumulation of a sufficient
' ^rniouht 6f pioof to counteract the effect of so persistent an
error is indispensable. < ,

There is little more to add concerning the fortunes of the
Church at Yamaguchi. After the readmission of the Jesfuits
to the dominions of the Mouri in 1586 it flourished


l66 SATOW. THE CHURCH AT YAMAGUCHI FROM I550 TO I586.

exceedingly, but from the time when Christianity was
proscribed by Hideyoshi, and the missionaries were all
ordered to withdraw from Japan, it became involved in the
general persecution, (156) and its subsequent history, not
being affected by the disposition of the ruler of Yamaguchi,
ceases to derive any light from a study of the internal
political affairs of the Japanese people.


Hachirau : Ohotomo Hachirau, younger brother of the
^king’ of BuSgo- Became ‘king’ of Yama-
guchi, and was overthrown by Mouri.

Harukata : Suwe Harukata, originally called Takafusa.

Murdered his lord Ohochi Yoshimasa ; de-
feated at Miyazhima by Mouri, and com-
mitted suicide.

Motoharu : Kitsukaha Motoharu, son of Mouri Moto-
nari.;

Motonari : Mouri Motonari, founder of the fortunes of
that family, and ancestor of the daimiyaii
of Chiyaushiu.

Takafusa: See Harukata.

Takakage ; Kobayakaha Takakage, son of Mouri Moto-
nari.

Taketafu : Sagara Taketafu, favourite of Ohochi Yoshi-
naga and enemy of Suwe Harukata.

Xoshinaga : Ohochi Yoshinaga, same as Ohotomo Hachi-

, *

Yoshishige : Ohotomo Ypshishige, ‘King’ of Bufigo, a
! great friend of the missionaries. Sub-
sequently took the name of Souris. Bap-
tized as Francesco.

Yoshitaka : Ohochi Yoshitaka, , lord of Yamaguchi, last
of his line. Murdered by his traitprous
vassal Suwe Harukata.

Zeukiyau : Another name of Suwe Harukata.


THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.


By Thomas R. H. McClatchie.


[Read loth December^ 1878.]

In passing: through the streets of the city of Yedo, and
more especially in what is commonly termed the ^ official
quarter ’ lying inside the Castle moats, the attention of the
visitor is particularly attracted by long continuous buildings
lining the roadway on either side. These present towards
the street an almost unbroken frontage, save where a few
large gateways, composed of heavy timbers strengthened
with iron clamps, interpose to relieve the monotony of the
general style of architecture. These buildings mostly stand
upon low stone foundations, surrounded by small ditches ;
the windows are barred, and the general aspect gloomy in
the extreme. They often differ widely as regards sij^e,
shape, mode of ornamentation, etc. ; but there is yet mani-
fest a general likeness, there are still noticeable many com-
mon attributes which at, once serve to stamp them, to the
observant eye, as structures of one and the same type.
These are the nagaya^ or barracks for retainers, which
formed the outer defences of the yashiki or fortified man-
sions, wherein dwelt the feudal nobles of Japan until the era
of the recent Revolution in this country ; and though now
in many cases deserted; ruined, and fallen into decay, time
was when they played a conspicuous and honored part in
connection with the pomp and grandeur of the old feudal
system which received its death-blow only a half score of
years prior to the present date.


158 MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

The original meaning of the term yashiki is a lot of land
or site for building purposes, as opposed to rice-fields or
land otherwise under cultivation. (158) By degrees, how-
ever, as the style of building above mentioned came more
into favour, there would appear to have been introduced some
modification of the true acceptation of the word ; and al-
though, in the country districts, it even now retains its old
meaning, in Yedo and other large towns it is at present
used almost exclusively to designate the sites occupied by
the mansions of the nobles and gentry, together with the
buildings thereon, as opposed to the machi, or houses of
the towns people of lower class, in the ordinary commercial
quarter.

The yashiki does not appear to have been a very ancient
style of building. The houses in which dwelt the old Court
nobles at Kioto were totally different from the mansions of
the powerful territorial nobles of later times. The former
w.ere, in general, modest and unostentatious buildings, of
the ordinary Japanese style, and quite destitute of defences
of any kind ; they were adapted to the requirements of men
of letters who loved to pass their days in ease and quiet,
and to whom the .turmoil of the camp and the fluctuating
fortunes of a military career could offer little or no attrac-
tion. But as time passed on, and the feudal system gained
ground — ^particularly in the east of Japan — tbjs peaceful
aspect of affairs underwent a change. The rise of the sol-
dier class, and the commencement of the military domii1>a^
tion soon caused the whole of the country eastwards from,
Kioto to be divided into many districts, often differing
widely in extent, but each ruled by some powerful house
which had by force of arms acquired the supremacy there.
Every one of these influential nobles had his separate fol-
lowing of retainers devoted to his service, and the incessant •
feuds prevailing between himself and his neighbours forced
each one to take precautions for his individual safety by
gathering closely around his person his own select band of
trusty adherents. In this way it came to pass that a noble-
man or general, having constructed a stronghold for his


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF VEDO.

private residence, surrounded it with barracks for his vas-
sals, in the centre of which he himself could dwell in
greater security. These barracks were, for convenience’
sake, built in the style of the modern nagaya, and were
thus capable of affording accommodation to large bodies of
troops without occupying too wide an area of ground. Of
such a fortified stronghold the yashiki of later times was
but a modification, adapted to the less exigent requirements
of a town life. The wide moats, lofty ramparts, and other
defences necessary to a citadel in a (159) wild and remote
part of the country were not requisite in the city; but it
was nevertheless found advisable, in a period when the
hand of every man was familiar with the sword-hilt and an
appeal to arms was the ordinary method of deciding a dis-
pute, for each feudal chieftain To possess a mansion which,
in case of need, might do service as a post of vantage from
which to repel the attacks of besieging foes. The yashiki^
with the residence of the lord in the centre and the barracks
of the retainers ^hemming it in on every side, was thus
originated, being, as is aptly observed by Mr. Griffis in his
work “The Mikado’s Empire,”, essentially ‘ the growth of
the necessities of feudalism.’

The being, as noted above, merely a modification

or adaptation of the ordinary Japanese strongholds, it is
impossible to lay down any very definite date of its first
construction as a distinct style of building. In the second
volume of the small encyclopagdia entitled “ Wa’-jushi ”
(fp M- IS) there is, however, given a note which has some
bearing on the subject. The note reads as follows : — “ The
“ nagaya (lit. ‘ long houses ’) outside residences at the pre-
“ sent age (i.e. in the year 1697, when the work in question
“ was published) are styled (lit. ‘ many gates ’), One

Matsunaga Danjo Hi'sajhide — a personage of the time of
“Yeiroku and Yensho (1558-70, 1573-92), constructed
“above The shrine of Bishamon, at Shiki, in the province
“ of YamatQ, a castle with many gates (ta-mon) and erected
“ and; this, in later days, was adopted as a rule,

“ and they (i.e. fiagaya). were called, When the


l6o McCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

Tokugawa family rose to supremacy in 1590, and Yedo was
selected as the metropolis of feudalism, lyeyasu portioned
out to his vassals and the nobles who owned allegiance to
him plots of land in the immediate vicinity of the Castle,
whereon to erect for their accommodation. This,

was the first occasion of their erection in this city, and
although they are mentioned as having existed at Osaka for
a few years earlier, it may fairly be said that the yashiki, as
a separate building, dates from the close of the i6th century.
Prior to that time hardly any reference is made to the
subject in Japanese works, but from that period onward
constant allusions may be noticed in histories, public no-
tifications, and official records of all kinds. In particular, a
small manual called Awo-hiO'-shi'' published in

the year 1840 for the use and guidance of the Castle guards,
etc., and another work (160) entitled Ochihoshui ” ji)
published in 1728, furnish many items of interest, and it is
chiefly from these two sources that these notes have been
compiled.

With I'egard to the first allotment of yashiki sites in
Yedo, the Ochiboshiu ” gives the following information ;
— “In the 5th year of the period Keichd (1600 A.D.).
“after the crowning victory of Sekigahara, Todo Takatora
“(lord of Tsu, in the province of Ise) and Date Masamune
“ (lord of Sendai, in Oshiu), acting on beha.lf of the Western •
“ and Eastern daimid respectively, made a petition to the
“ effect that they were all desirous of having sites granted
“ to them near the Castle of Yedo. lyeyasu replied that as
“each one of them already possessed d, yashiki in Osaka, it
“ was not necessary for them to have fresh ones in Yedo,
“As, however, ' they still persisted in their request, sites
“were eventually granted, in the neighbourhood of outer
“ Sakurada, in the locality now stjded paimid-koji^ to the
“ Eastern and Western Tozama (daimio outside of the
“ Tokugawa family) according to their own fancy. *

“At that time the district of Daimio-koji was a plain
“ covered with reeds, so the sites were raised by means of
“ the earth dug out in excavating the moats.”


MCCLATCHIE : ON tHE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. l6l


A certain degree of method seems to have been followed
by lyeyasu in portioning out these grants of land for ya-
shiki sites to his vassals and feudatories. In the immediate,
vicinity of his own citadel, and within the line of the
Castle^s inner moat, large plots were marked off for the
more powerful nobles ; within the outer moat were stationed
the chieftains of lower rank ; while to the hatamoto^ or petty
nobility of the Shogunate, and the goke^nin^ or inferior
vassals of the house of Tokugawa, were granted smaller
lots to the west and north of the Castle. ^ The extent of
each lot was in proportion to the rank of services of the
individual upon whom it was conferred. ■ Very few sites
were altogether detached; they were for* the most part
arranged in rectangular blocks of from fouf to six, so that
when the buildings were erected thereon each yashiki had,
on an average, only two sides facing the street. The
boundaries were very carefully marked in the case of the
larger yashiki^ but iii the district called Banch 5 , and in
other quarters of the town where the hatamoto and goke-nin
dwelt, the streets were by no means so regularly laid out.
Bancho, in particular, was densely crowded, the streets
narrow, and the yashiki small and packed closely together ;
(i6i) the result being that that locality, with its tortuous
lanes and thickly clustered buildings, presented such a
labyrinth as afterwards to give rise to the proverb tlmt even
a person born in Bancho might yet not thoroughly know
Bancho.

As to the original system on which the land was portioned
out, there are not extant any very definite regulations. In
the year 1689, however, under Tsunayoshi, the 5th ShOgun
of the Tokugawa line, it was notified by one of his ministers,
named Okubo, Kaga no Kami, that for the future grants of
from 150 to 500 tsuho (i tsiibo = 6 feet square) would be
conferred, in the district of Honjo on the eastern bank of
the river Sumida,^ upon hatamoto holding certain official
appmntments. Palace attendants received 1^0 tsuho; but
by the year 1840 this allowance had been reduced to 100
tsuho^ as noted in the Awo-bio-^shi,"^ A minute scale was


i62 mcclatchxe : on the feudal mansions of yedo.

afterwards drawn up, and published in the year 1693 by Abe
Bungo no Kami, a member of the Gorojiu, or the Shogun’s
Council of State. This scale is shown in the following
table, from which it may be noticed that the size of the site
was in each case to be in proportion to the estimated total
yield of the fief of the individual upon whom conferred : —

Table.

ASSESSMENT. GRANT OF LAND.


From 300 to goo koku, ^ootsitho.


1,000

(f

1,900

it


it

u

2,000

ii

2.900

it


ti

((

3,000

a

4,000

(<

1.500

ii

a

5,000

(t

^7,000

a


it

a

8,000

a

9,000

it


ii


10.000 “ 20,000 “

“ 20,000 30,000

30.000 “ 40,000 “

40.000 50,000 ‘‘

“ 50,000 “ 60,000
“ 60,000 “ 70,000
“ 80,060 “ 90,000 “

100,000 150,000 “

(162) The Japanese tsuho being equivalent to 36 square
feet, it may thus be seen that in the year 1693, in the case
of a hdftamoto or other immediate vassal of the Shogunate
(assessment under 10,000 hohu) the smallest, grant was
18, OOP square feet, and the largest 82,800 square feet; and
in th£^t of a dainiio (assessment from 10,000 koku upwards)

90,000 square feet for the lowest, and 252,000 square feet
for the highest. To this notification was appended a note
to the effect that “for the future, yashiki sites would be
“granted, as a general rule, in accordance with the scale
“given, but that in view of any special circumstances the
“same might be increased or modified, according to the
“rank of the recipient or the physical nature of the locality,”


2.500 “
2,700 “

4.500

5.000 “

5.500 “

6.500 “

7.000 “


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 163

In 1701, certain grants were made to haiamoto holding
various official appointments, for so long a period as they


might be in office, as follows : — -

ASSESSMENT. GRANT OF LAND*

150 bags of rice (=75 koku) 200 tsuho,

200 ** ‘‘ “ ^=100 “ )..., 300 **

900 koku 600

1,000 yoo “

1,700 ‘‘ goo “

To certain other officials (named) 500


And again, in 1725, under Yoshimune, the 8th Tokugawa
Shogun, it was specially notified that sites varying from 70
to 200 tstibo would be granted to certain petty officials and
household servants employed at the Castle — all other grants
to be still regulated according to the scale of 1693, as given
above. Those persons upon whom the lowest lots, measur-
ing 70 tsubo ( = 2,520 square feet) each, were bestowed, are
enumerated below : —

The Shogun’s sandal-bearers.

Pages.

Palanquin bearers.

Petty officers of the Bureau of Works,

Cleaners of apartments.

Serving men.

Out-ddor attendants.

Lower men-servants.

Grooms.

(163) Porters of the Takabeya (hawks’ mews).

Petty building officers attached to the Fukiage gardens.

Cleaners of the Fukiage gardens.

Inferior foot-soldiers.

Clerks to the heads of the kobushin (apparently a body
of pensioners of the ShOgunate).

In the earlier days of the Tokugawa rule, the district
called Yedo was not very densely populated, and the town
itself was of such limited extent that it was no doubt easy
to find in the immediate vicinity wide uncultivated tracts of
ground available for yashiki sites. In later years, however,


164 MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

as the town increased in size and importance, such sites
became more difficult to find, and the rule then followed
was that any noble who might be desirous of erecting a
yashiki should petition the Shogun’s government for a
grant of land, naming, if possible, the exact locality be
might prefer. But here, again, abuses seem to have crept
in, and it was a not uncommon occurrence for requests to
be made for pieces of land actually under cultivation at the
time. Great hardship being thereby caused to the agricul-
tural classes, the attention of the Shogun’s ministers was
called to the fact, and in the year 1738 the following notifi-
cation was issued by Honda Nakadzukasa no taiyu, a
member of the Gorojiu : — '

Those persons upon whom yashiki have not as yet been
** bestowed by the Government have, up to the present
time, upon their applications for leave to. build being sanc-
“ tioned, petitioned for grants even of tax-paying lands as
sites ; but it is hereby announced that for the future it is
^^not permitted that application be made for lands upon
which taxes are levied.”

By this regulation it was at last definitely laid down that’
rice-fields, etc., were not to be destroyed in order to provide
yashiki sites.

It seems that originally only one site was granted to
each individual ; but this rule was afterwards altered, and
most of the great daimio received three lots, the mansions
erected upon these being styled respectively ^ Chief,’
^Middle,’ and ^ Lower ’ (kamuyashiki^ naka-yashiki, .0.0^
shimo -yashiki). Attached to the notification already men-
tioned as having been issued in 1725 is a special clause
conferring grants of 1,500 tsubo and 2,000 tsuho respectively
upon hatamoto holding ceitain rank, for the express purpose
of erecting shimo-yashiki. There w^^re also (164) occasion-
ally conferred sites iov hes so ^ or summer residences, within
which charming gardens were laid out and clumps of trees
planted, the defences , surrounding them being generally
very slight as compared with those of the larger mansions.
Many of these hesso are still to be seen in the suburbs of


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 1 65

Yedo, particularly on the eastern bank of the river Sumi da,
Last of all may be mentioned what were termed kaka&-
yashiki, which may be briefly described as smaller editions
of the hessoy being minor suburban residences in the country
round Yedo. These could be purchased at will by any noble
or official, and were not granted from the Government
direct : the only formality necessary was the forwarding of
a report to the Shogun’s Ministers upon the occasion of
such purchase.

So much for th.^ yaskiki sites ; the next point demanding
attention is the structures ordinarily erected thereon.

. All round the now existing yashikiy and immediately
below the outer buildings, runs a ditch or trench, faced
with stone, and often varying considerably in size ; in some
cases, indeed, it might almost be termed a moat,, being
very broad and deep. Perhaps one of the largest in Yedo
is that surrounding the yashiki formerly belonging to the
daimid Todo Idzumi no Kami, lord of Tsu, in the province
of Ise. This mansion (now converted into a poot-house) is
situated just outside of the Idzumi Bridge of the Castle — to
which in fact, it gave its name — and the moat is no less
than 14 or 15 feet wide. The average width of these
ditches, however, is from 3 to 8 feet ; but in many instances
they are little, more than mere drains, and some of the very
small yashiki oi the hatamotQj etc., do not possess any
ditch at all. At the gateways they are crossed by small
stone platforms, but where they are very wide they are
sometimes partially filled in by miniature causeways. On
the inner side of the ditch rises a low stone foundation,
generally of unhewn blocks roughly fitted together after the
style of the Castle defences. . In the case, however, of many
of the yashikiy and notably that of Matsudaira Mino

no |Cami (of Fukuoka, in Chikuzen), which is situated in
the Sakurada avenue, these, foundations are built of well
cut .Stones, regularly fitted, and rising to a considerable
height, often to as much as eight or ten feet. On the foun-
dation thus laid stand the nagaya, forming the whole of the
street frontage, except where at intervals a fire-proof store-


l66 MCCLATCHJE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

house, with thick mud sides, or a short strip of fencing or
ordinary wall is to be seen.

(165) The nagaya consist of long and narrow barrack>like
buildings, with tiled roofs and barred windows. In the
XdiVgtT yashiki they are nearly always two-storied, but in the
smaller ones have merely a single story. They are formed
of stout upright beams, supporting the roof, the walls between
being built of planks ; the upper third portion is ordinarily
coated with white plaster, and the lower two-^thirds painted
black. In the yashiki of the kokushiu datmio (those who
ruled over a whole province; also styled kunimochi daimio)
the lower portion of the nagaya is ^ however, nearly always
faced with square tiles of dark colour, fastened either upright
or diagonally, the joints being secured by small rounded
ridges of white plaster ; and at the corners of the building
small portions of the roof are sometimes elevated, so as to
rise to a height of a few feet above the level of the other roofs.
The windows of the nagaya are of rectangular shape, the
breadth slightly exceeding the height, and these are barred
by wooden posts (sometimes upright and sometimes hori-
zontal) measuring about two or three inches square, and
often coated with plaster. In some cases there project from
the wall, at intervals, small sills on which are erected narrow
roofed grills, enabling the inmates to look down the whole
length of the building. The roofs are covered with tiles,
though in very small yashiki they are sometimes merely
shingled ; the tiles are laid in regular rows from the high
central roof-ridge downwards. At each end of the roof-ridge
is a very large tile, of trefoil shape, serving as a cap to the
rest, and on this the badge of the owner of the mansion used
to be marked. The hips of the roof, or end beams supporting
the roof- ridge, used also to be ornamented in similar fashion.
In the case of yashiki belonging to hatamoto, etc., these
hips are always perfectly straight, and the roof terminates
with them ; but in those of daimio ^ there is at the end of
each nagaya a broad curved, piece of roof, resembling a
gable-end, which projects far out beyond the hips, from
beneath which it issues. This is the principal distinctive


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAI, MANSIONS OF YEDO. 1 67

mark by which the rank of the owner can be determined.
The smaller cap tiles along the edges of the roofs used often
to bear the second badge of the owner. Where the enclosure
is marked by a simple wall, instead of by a continuous
nagaya, such wall is from six to ten feet high, and formed
of mud and plaster, with large pieces of tile inserted therein
to give strength to the whole, a miniature roof running
along the summit. That side of the nagaya which faces
(166) the interior oi the yashiki is built like the frontage of
ordinary Japanese houses or shops, and closed with sliding
wooden screens running in a groove on a narrow verandah.
In the case of a retainer of superior rank a small entrance-
■porch is often added. To screen these rooms„from the
nobleman’s own mansion in the centre of the enclosure,
a tall wooden fence is erected, distant only a few paces from
the nagaya^ the whole of the inner face of which is thus as
completely shut in as is the street frontage. Occasionally
there may be noticed diyashiki in which the nagaya is closed
in on • the outer frontage by a wall built only two or three
feet away from its very windows, quite shutting out all view
except from the upper story. The chief instance of this
strange style of building was the yashiki of the Maeda
family, commonly known as the Kaga yashiki^ in the
district called Kongo,. This was in consequence dubbed by
the name of the mekurcc-nagaya^'^ or blind barracks ” of
Yedo. Anything more dismal and gloomy than such a
style of residence can hardly be conceived,' and the retainers
of the old feudal nobles certainly could not be congratulated
on the score of quarters.

The only government notification mentioned in the *^Awo-
l^io-shi'' as having special reference to the size of nagaya
was. published during the period Jokio (1684-88), By it the
length of the cross-beams running from side to side of the
pagay a (i,ei the breadth oi the building between the walls,
ejcclusive of any portion of the roof that might project
beyond them) was fixed at 18 feet in the cd.se of kahtshiu
daimidy at 15 feet for all other daimio for the hMai
haiamoto ,{^hose who, like the daimio, resided for a|;t^ni^.'te


x68, MCCLAtCKIE : ONT THE FEUDAL. UAt('SlOUS OF YEDd.

periods bn their fiefs, arid in Yedo),^ and at X 2 feet for all
other hatamoto and inferior vassals of the Shog^unate. The
rooms in the nag^ya were usually square in shape^ and in
the \2uXgtx ymhihi whtxt thi&rnag^ya were two-storied, five
retainers g^enerally Occupied one set of quarters, consisting
of an upper and a lower room of identical size; the servants
• of these retainers living on the grbund-Eobr and their
masters above. As one window was the ordinary allowance
for each room, it may be seen that by counting the number
of windows in a large nagaya^ and multiplying that number
by five, there may be formed a tolerably fair conjecture as
to the total accommodation the building was supposed to
afford. But such a calculation would hardly hold good in*
the case of the smaller yashiki^ where the breadth of the
nagaya is so much less.

(167) We next come to the gates, which form so notice-
able a feature in the whole building. Indeed, these gates,
and the porters’ lodges attached thereto, have for years
been the subject of so many notifications and such minute
regulations, that it is not too much to say that more atten-
tion has been bestowed on them than on any other portion
of the 'feudal mansions. The number' of the gates was
eventually determined in proportion to the size of the
yashiki and the rank of its owner. They consist of the
Q-mon or omote-mon^ i. e. the ‘Chief’ or ‘Front Gate,’ — ■
the tsU-yO'moTiy or ‘ Gate for ordinary thoroughfare,’-— the
ti^ra-mon^ or ‘ Back Gate,’ — and small posterns, known by
the various appellations of htjo-mon for extras

ordinary occasions ’) ydj'riz-gwc/ii (‘outlets in case of need ’)
and kiigitri (‘ posterns ’). The Front, Ordinary, and Back
Gates always consist of two large heavy folding doors,
fastened inside by a strong wooden- bar moving in iron
sockets ; they are studded on the outside with broad -headed
nails, and knobs of metal ; the posts on which they swing,
and also the beams overhead, are in places sheathed with
thin metal plates, and the hinges are strengthened by large
iron clamps and bars of considerable weight. The Posterns
are small gates, formed of but one single piece of boarding


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 169-

of diminutive size, often sliding in a groove above and
below, and fastened within by a small catch : they Were only
used in the event of fire, earthquake, or other extraordinary
occurrence. In the yashiki of daimid^ all these different
gates may be noticed ; those of the kotai-hatamoto possess-
ed Front and Ordinary Gates, and a Postern ; while those
of all other hatamoto were allowed but the Front Gate,
and a Postern. The Front Gate sometimes stands alone,
under a separate roof, but in other instances is let into the
fiagaya and stands under one and the same roof with them.
The Ordinary and Back Gates are always built in this latter
style, and the Posterps are generally cut through the small
boundary walls in the rear of the yashiki. The porters’
lodges are generally two in number, except in the case of
very small yashiki ; they are placed one on either side of the
Front and often of the Ordinary Gate ; at the other entrances
they are not built, but a small grilled window occasionally
does duty for them. In order to convey a more definite
idea of the rules for the construction of the Front Gates and
their porters’ lodges, it may be as well to call attention to
the following detailed list, which has been compiled from
numerous notes in the Awo-bid-shi,'' and which gives a
tolerably (i68) clear statement of the usage observed in the
later days of the Tokugawa regime : —

I . — kokushiu daimio : — gate either detached, or else built
into the nagaya ; X^no small side-gates or posterns, one on
either side, immediately adjoining it-; two porters’ lodges,
situated just beyond the posterns, built on stone founda-
tions jutting put into the roadway for about three or four
feet, and furnished with barred windows; roofs of lodges,
convex, formed of two slopes descending from a central
roof-ridge protruding' at right angles from the wall of the
nagaya. The above rules were finally notified in the 6th
year of the period Buuk’wa (1809). A magnificent speci-
, men of this style of gate, detached, is that of the yashiki
formerly owned by Matsudaira Inaba no Kami (lord of Tot-
tori, in Inaba), situated between the Babasaki and Kaji-
bashi Gates of the Castle, — now occupied by the War


lyo MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

Department. A similar gateway, undetached, forms the
entrance to the old yashiki of Ogasawara Sakiq^ no Daibu
(lord of Kokura, in Buzen), situated within the Kanda-hashi
Gate, — lately occupied by the Educational Department. '

2. — Tozama daimid of 100,000 and upwards, rank-
ing ‘with but after’ Kohushiu daimio : — ^gate and posterns
precisely similar to the above, except that the gateway is
never detached, but always built into the nagaya ; porters’
lodges same as above, only that the slopes of the roofs are
straight, not convex. , (Notified in 1809). A good example
of this style of lodge may be observed in the {ovmev yashiki
of Nambu Shinano no Kami (lord of Morioka, in Oshiu),
situated a short, distance within the Saiwai-bashi Gate; the
gateway itself has been walled up to form barracks for
troops, but the two lodges are still intact.

3. — Tozama daimio of less than 100,000 koku, but by
courtesy ranking ‘ with but after ’ that class : — same as in
No. 2.

4. — Daimio of 50,000 koku and upwards, whether tozama

or fiidai (direct feudatories of the Tokugawa family) : —
gate, posterns, and porters’ lodges as in No. 2, except that
the roof of each lodge is what is termed a ‘ lean-to roof,’ i.e.
formed of a single slope descending from the wall of the
nagaya outwards. (Notified in 1809). Example: the gate
of the former yashiki of Ita Shiuri no Daibu (lord of Obi, in
Hiuga), situated in the broad street leading from the
Sakurada avenue to the Saiwai-bashi Gate, and facing the
Nambu mentioned above.

(169) ^,-S2idai daimio who might be appointed members ‘
of the Gorojiu received, for use during their term of office,
special residences termed yahc-yashiki^ or ‘ Official Man-
sions,’ the gates of which were as in No/ 4. It may here be
noted that none hn\.fiidai were eligible for the above office.

6. — Any daimid) whether tozama or fndai, and without
reference to the estimated total yield of his fief, who might
be appointed to the post of jijiu (‘lord in waiting,’ an
honorary title from the Mikado’s Court) same as in No.

4. (Notified in 1809).


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. Ijt

7. — Fiidai daimio of 10,000 koku and upwards: — gate
and posterns as in No. 2 ; porters ’ lodges not resting on
outer s^one foundations, but built inside the nagaya ; lodge
windows projecting, strongly barred, supported by wooden
sills jutting out from the wall of the nagaya ; roofs to these
windows as in No. 4.

8. — Tozama daimio of less than 50,000 koku ; or .cadets
of kokushiu families, without reference to the estimated
total yield of their fiefs: — gate and posterns as in No. 2 ; of
the two porters ’ lodges, one as in No. 4, the other as in No.
7, Example : the gate of the former yashiki of Nambu
Totomi no kami (lord of Hachinohe, in Oshiu), situated in
Ichibeimashi, in the district of A^abu. This noble was a
cadet of the great family of Nambu of Morioka, mentioned
above as ranking ‘ with but after ’ kokushiu daimio*

9. — Fudai daimio holding seats in the gan no ma apart-
ment of the Shogun’s palace (i.e. the very lowest apart-
ment), even though of 100,000 koku : — same as iri No. 7.
Example : the gate of the former yashiki .of li Kamon no
Kami (lord of Hinone, in Omi; 250,000 koku), situated
outside the Castle moat above the outer Sakurada Gate.
This powerful noble was Chief Minister to the Shogun,
and actually ranked ‘ with but after ’ the kokushiu daimio,
but nevertheless, being himself a fudai in the gan no ma,
he was only permitted to make use of the smaller style of
lodge described.

IQ — Koke hatamoto (those sprung from daimio fami-
lies) : — gate as in the case of daimio, but with only one
postern ; two porters ’ lodges, as in No. 7. (Notified in
1684-88).

11. — Kotai hatamoto : — similar gate, with one postern,
and only one porters ’ lodge, as in No. 7.

12 . — All Other hatamoto, goke-nin, etc., same as in No. 1 1.

(170) So much importance was deemed to attach to the

front gate, that if it were destroyed by fire or any other
accident it could not, in the case of a daimio oi 50,000 koku
and upwards, be rebuilt in the same style as before. It
was then replaced by what was termed hahuki-monj being


1^2 MQCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

a gateway formed of two large upright posts crossed by a
beam of similar dimensions some few feet below the upper
extremity of the uprights, the ends of the beam jutting put
for an equal distance to the right and left. The two post-
erns and two porters' lodges could be added as before, with
the sole exception that, in the case of a kokushiii daimio,
the^iSlopes of the, lodge roofs were to be straight, instead of
conyex. , As examples of this may be quoted the gateway
to the old yashiki, already mentioned above, of the kokitshiu
daimio Matsu daira Mino no Kami, situated in the Sakurada
avenue ; and those of the iovvatv yashiki of Niwa Sakio no
Daibu (of Nihonmatsu, in Oshiu), situated in Nagata-cho —
lately ocoupied by the Mining Department, — and of Matsu-
daira Kai no kami (of Koriyama, in Yamato), situated just
within the Saiwai-bashi Gate, — now occupied by the offices
of the Tdkio Fu, In the first-named gate the cross beam
is not added, but in all other respects it resembles those of
the two daimio named afterwards, who ranked ‘with but
after ’ kokushiu daimio.

The privilege of affixing heraldic badges to yashiki gates
was, by a notification issued during the period ^okio (1684-
88) limited to kokushiu daimio^ to other daimio entitled to
seats in two of the apartments of the Shogun’s palace named
respectively the Teikan no m a and Yanagi no ma^ and to
the kotai hatamoto. Even in the case of these favoured
individuals, the badge could be affixed to the Front Gate
alone, not to any of the others ; — but, as has been already
remarked, every noble or official was at liberty to place his
badge on the roof tiles of his

In most of the yashiki gates there may be observed
several large rafters jutting out at right angles from the
huge beam immediately above the entrance. These rafters
are generally from 4 to, 8, inches square, and in many cases
tipped with metal caps. . Whether their number was in any
way indicative of the rank of the owner of the mansion does
npt appear to be clearly known, nor is any mention mad,© of
them in the Awo-hio-shi,^^ Personal observation, how-
ever, will prove to any. one interested in the matter that as


MCCLATCI-HE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. I73

a general rule, these (171) rafters are 9 in number in the
detached Front Gate of a kokushiu daimid / 9 or 7 for the
same when undetached ; and 7, or occasionally 6, for other
daimio — the Ordinary Gate, in each of these instances,
being surmounted by 5, and the Back Gate rarely having
any at all. In the yashiki of ordinary hatamoto, 5 is the
common number for the Front Gate, 3 only may sorne-
times be noticed, and in many instances there are none at
all. These remarks, however, must not be taken in any
way as a definite rule, for it is probable that in many cases
there may be noticed exceptions to what is here stated ; and
as there do not seem to have been any notifications on the
subject, the above may possibly be more of a common
usage than a fixed regulation.

Just outside many of the gateways may be noticed rows
of stalls for horses, built of timber, with tiled roofs. Some-
times the gate stands a short way back from the road, and
in the recess thus formed the stalls are erected ; as at the
Front Gate of the naha-yashiki of the dahnip of Satsuma,
situated within the Saiwai-bashi gate, — now occupied by
the Hakuhutsu-k'wan, or Exhibition Department, r— and at
the Ordinary Gate in the rear of the yashiki of li Kamon
no Kami, to which allusion ha§ already been made.

Immediately 'within the main gateway is a courtyard,
sometimes of very large size. In the case of the
of a daimid ofhigh rank, it is paved all over with broad
flagstones ; in some instances it is only partially paved,
the remaining space being covered with large pebbles;
while in a small yashiki there is often nothing but a narrow
paved pathway from the gate to the entrance of the main
hall, the rest of the courtyard being entirely bare. Into
this, yard open the inner rooms of porters’ lodges, and here,
in former days, there always sat a few guards, Their
guard-rooms were ornamented with bows and arrows,
lances, fire-arms, and staves with iron heads studded with
spikes, serving as grappling irons wherewith to seize and
disarm any unwelcome intruder. Whenever a retainer
passed out, he hung up in the guard -room the,, wopdeh


I;74 MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

ticket, inscribed with his name, which he always carried at
his girdle ; on his return to the yashiki this ticket was
restored to' him. By this means the porters could tell at a
glance how many retainers were absent on leave at any
time. In the larger mansions the courtyard also frequently
contained a row* of stalls to serve as stabling for visitors’
horses. In some instances, too, there may yet be noticed
a stone-faced (172) embankment (a miniature edition of the
Castle defences) shutting in the courtyard on the side im-
mediately opposite to the entrance gate, while gradually
ascending causeways to the right and left lead up to the
higher terrace on which is placed the main hall of the
yashiki. This would serve as an inner line of defence,
even though the gate itself should be forced by a besieging
enemy,

’ Within the yashiki grounds, and immediately between
the nagaya and the main hall or residence of the lord him-
self, there used to stand many other buildings. These
consisted of houses for the officers of the clan, — of what
were termed naka-nagaya, or inner barracks, — and of store-
houses. In the larger yashiki the officers’ houses were
those serving as residences for the Councillors (kar 6 )j the
Commercial Agent (yonin), the Representative of the lord
during his absence (rustn)^ the Financial Officer (kanjo
hngiyd)^ the Building Officer (sakuji hiigiyd), and the
Doctor (isha). In the great -clans, the number of these
officers was considerable, but in the yashiki of the lower
daimid and of the hcitamoto there were frequently fewer
officers than those named above. Their houses were in
the ordinary Japanese style, one-storied, with a large
entrance porch (genka ) ; each separate building being
surrounded by a wooden fence, a hedge of shrubs, or a
plastered wall, so as to divide the whole space within the
outer nagaya into numerous small compounds. According
to the extent of ground available, these '‘houses were larger
or smaller in size ; and frequently, for convenience sake,
some of the officers were actually lodged in the outer
nagaya; a porch, etc., being added to such quarters to


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAE MANSIONS OF YEDO. I75

render them more suited to the rank of the occupant.
Interpersed with the officers’ houses were the inner nagaya^
which in style of structure resembled the outer ones, — and
the storehouses, which were fire-proof buildings similar to
those already mentioned, above. In the centre of all stood
the main residence, that of the lord himself, surrounded by
a plastered wall or a screen of planks to ensure privacy.
The paved way from the Front Gate led directly up to the
entrance porch of this building, which was styled the
go-den.

The entrance porch, termed genha, as yet to be seen
in many of the old mansions, consists of a small square
hall, projecting .from the main building. It is built
of wooden posts and planks, the floor, which is raised
to a height of from six to ten inches above the level
of the flagstones in the courtyard, being often varnished.
This porch is open (173) on one side, and on the inner
side immediately facing the entrance are two or more
steps, leading up to the raised and matted floor of
the house itself. A book called San-sei-roku'' (Hit®),
published in 1843, mentions that at the very end of the
17th century the genka was ordinarily 12 feet in breadth,
and that a table, 6 feet square, was placed in the
centre of the boarding laid down to form the floor below
the steps ; to the right and left of this table were seated
various attendants whose duty it was to receive visitors and
usher them into the inner apartments. To the open space
left at the summit of the ' steps adjoined large waiting
rooms, known by the name of Sho-in, into which all guests
were ushered, and back frpm these waiting rooms there used
to extend numerous other apartments for the use of the
nobleman. It is of course impossible here to give any
Ypiy definite description of the arrangement of these rooms,
as they no doubt varied considerably in sixe, shape, etc.,
in different mansions. In the extreme rear was generally
situated the main hall of audience, a wide and lofty cham-
ber w^ith raised dais at the farther end. Here were received
einvoys fcom. the Shogun or visitors of distinction, and here,


1,76 McCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

too, any matter which the lord might wish to bring to the
notice of the whole of his retainers was publicly made
known to the latter. The ladies of the household occupied
separate suites of rooms, often of exceedingly wide , extent*
At different spots were Small guard-rooms, in which Were
Stationed the retainers who were on guard for the day and
night. Th'ese guards were ordinarily changed every twenty-
four hours, and they were the only vassals (with the excep-
tion of a few pages to attend on the lord) who were permit-
ted to pass the night in the go-den. All others, including
even the cooks and scullions^ had quarters allotted to them
in the nagaya^ and came oVbr early in the morning to
resume their duties. There vTas always one guard-room
immediately alongside of the gewka, with a separate en-
trance, of very small dimensions, from the courtyard >
person's of inferior rank, and vassals bearing letters or
messages usually transacted their business at this entrance
instead of at the main one.

The style of the apartments seems, from all descriptions,
to have been in no way different from the ordinary Japanese
rule, except in point of sixe. The posts and beams were
generally of finely grained wood, unvarnished, and orna-
mented at the joints by small pieces of metal marked with
the badge of the owner. The paper screens and (174) sliding
doors Were either plain, or adorned with paintings, according
to the rank and Wealth of the inmates. Dr. K^mpfer, in
writing of his visit to Yedo in 1691, thus briefly descHbes
these mansions There are many stately palaces in this
^^city. ^ ^ They are separate and distinguished from
other houses by large courtyards and stately gates ; fine
“ Vai'hished stair-cases, of a few steps, lead up to the door
“of the house, which is divided into several magnificent
“apartments, all cf a floor, they being not above one story
“high, nor adorned with towers, as the castles and palaces
“are where the Princes and Lords of the Empite reside in
“ their hereditary dominions.’’ ' *

The only other point in connection with the internal
structure of the yashiki that still remains to be noticed is


MCCLATCHIE I ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 177

the hinomi^ or fire look-out station, of which many speci-
mens may still be observed in this city. The hinomi is a
small wooden tower containing a fire-bell and striking-beam,
erected on the roof of the main hall af the yashiki, and
therefore commanding a good view of the immediate
neigbourhood. In a city where .fires are of constant
occurrence, it was of course a positive necessity that a
watchman should be posted in the hinomi in order to give
timely warning of the approach of danger. Even in this
respect, however, the regulations were strict, and it was
not permitted to every owner of a yashiki to erect a hinomi
thereon. The Awo-bio-shi” lays down the rule that no
one below the degree of a dcdmio (i.e. of 10,000 koku and
upward) was properly thus privileged, but adds that this
rule was in later years frequently transgressed by hatamoto.
In tlie period Hoyei (1704-1711), when orders were issued
for the organization of the Yedo fire-brigades, no less than
fifteen hatamoto^ who were appointed to the command of
these brigodes, constructed hinomi. By special sanction,
these officers were allowed to build hinomi of 30 feet in
height, those of other persons being only from 25 to 26 feet
high. From that time it became the regular custom for
any hatamoto appointed to command a fire-brigade at once
to erect his own look-out station, and it is told of one
Matsudaira SahiOye no Kami that having been charged,
“ in the year i8ig, with certain duties as to fires, he for the
first time hung , up a bell and striking-beam, and during
his term of office made use of the same.” Whenever
leave was granted to a noble to visit his country fief, and
also during his infancy, the hinomi was always closed. To
the daimio of Echizen, .Awa, Tosa, Oki, Sanuki, ( 175 )

Higo there was, however, accorded the privilege of pos-
sessirigwhat were knoym as jd-/u/eowz, i.e. fixed, or perpetu-
al fire-stations where a watchman was always on duty ; and
three of the above-named nobles, viz,, Awa, Tosa, and
Sanuki, erected them not only in their kamiyashiki but also
in their nakayashiki. Whenever a new hinomi was erected,
or an old one repaired, a special report had to be made to


lyS MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

the Shdgun’s government detailing the circumstances rend-
ering such procedure necessary.

* The foregoing is a general description of the Ordinary
style of architecture yet to be observed in this city, in the
case of thoseyashiki (now unfortunately very few in number)
that still stand as of yore. Some changes have, taken place
since their first construction in the very early days of Yedo,
but these have not been of any great importance. From
the observations, however, of the Ochihoshm” it would
appear that the yashiki of the hatamoto gradually improved
in condition, while those of the daimio deteriorated. To
give an idea of the original appearance of some of these
mansions, it may prove of interest to quote here the precise
words of the writer, — who, it may be remarked, was born in
the year X639 and published his work in 1728. His remarks
are as follows : —

^‘The buildings of the yashiki^ the townspeople’s houses,
^^and the temples and shrines in this city were, up to the
“time of the great fire in the 3rd year of the period Meireki
‘^(r657), pt'Gcisely the same as when lyeyasu entered Yedo.

iii j myself, in my younger days, inspected the
“ whole of the front rooms of the yashiki of li Kamon no
“Kami, and can therefore well remember what they were
^Hike. Both the entrance-porch and the front rooms were
“all coated with gold leaf. . The length of the front gate
“appeared to be about 10 km (i.e. 60 feet). The gate had
“ an upper story, and on its doors were carved five rhinocer-
“oses, each one of about the size of a small horse.' On, the
“large end-tiles on the roofs of the outer nagayci were kikio
“badges, of gold, which glittered even at night-time.”

It may here be explained that the kikio, a flower of five
petals, was the badge of Kato Kiyomasa*^ one. of the heroes
of Hideyoshi’s Korean expedition, to whom the yashiki in
question had originally belonged.

.“Apart from this, too, the yashiki of the kunimochi
daimio were, for the most part, built with two-storied
“gatewa3'S, ornamented with (176) various carvings. In
“every instance, it was at that time the fixed usage that


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 179

‘‘the walls of the yashihi of daimio possessing fiefs of about
“ 50,000 koJm should, from the genka on to the sho 4 n^ be
“ coated with gold leaf on which pictures were painted. In
“particular, the members of the go-san-he'^ (or “Three
Princely Families ” allied to the Tokugawa clan) “ possessed
what were termed 0 -nari-mon ” (i.e. separate gateways for
the special use of the Shogun himself, whenever he pa-id
his relatives a visit), “ built with tiled roofs of convex shape;
“and doors completely covered with plates of gold adorned
“with carvings, the whole. being of exceeding beauty. The
^^yashiki of my lord of Owari (one of the go-san~ke)
‘^situated within the Hanzo gate of the Castle, was totally
“destroyed by a fire that originated in the mansion itself;
“but I well recollect the O-nari'-mon zi the yashiki of my
“lords of Kii and Mito, within the Takebashi gate. It is
“ said, too, that when the Shogun was once going to pay a
“visit to Matsudaira lyp no Kami, there were issued to the
“ latter secret instructions for him also to prepare an O-Hari-
in like manner to the members of the go-san-ke^ and
“that such a gateway was accordingly constructed. The
“ doors thereof were carved with numerous representations
“ of sen-nin (genii), and being new, flashed and glittered all
“the more; and as the locality, too, was just facing the
“ Chief Gate of the Castle, there were many passers-by, and
“ consequently an endless throng of spectators. It is said
“ that at that period it was commonly called the ‘ Hi-gurashi
“ ‘ no go-mon ’ ” (meaning that this gate was so magnificent
as to cause the spectator to linger before it from morning
until night). “But every single possessed of such

0-nari-mo7i was destroyed in the great fire of 1657 ; and
“ subsequently to that time, on account of the frequency of
“ wide-spreading conflagrations, all the residences of the
“yarious daimio were constructed in less elaborate style,
u ^ ' Again, in the neighbourhood of Bancho ” (where

the hatamoto dwelt) “there was not a single residence on
“ the exterior of which stone foundations were laid or nagaya
erected, or that was even coated with white plaster.
“The hdundaries of these yashiki sites were for the most


l8o MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

part marked out by clumps of live bamboos, within which
‘‘ were built the dwelling house and nagaya^ with thatched
“roofs, — a small gate being also erected. But at the
“present time there is not to be seen a single yashiki
“with outer boundary so marked by live bamboo hedges.
(177) “Thus it would appear that while, as I have stated
“above, the dwellings of the daimid deteriorated, those, on
“ the other hand, of persons of inferior rank ameliorated.”

To these remarks may be added a quotation from the
“ San-sei~roku” to the following effect : —

“ In ancient times, both in Banchd and in other localities,
“none but the daimid possessed tiled roofs, although, of
“ late years, all roofs are covered with tiles, which serves
“ as a good preventive measure against fire. In the very
“ early period there were not, throughout the whole city of
“Yedo, more than some four or five buildings the roofs
“of which were covered with oyster-shells, but this sub-
“ sequently came into common usage, being also of great
“ use as a protection against fire. At the present moment,
“ however,” (i.e. in the years 1772-81) “such roofs laid
“•^with, oyster-shells are no longer to be noticed.”

The gardens and pleasure grounds in the yashiki used
to adjoin the main hall. They were in many cases of great
beauty, containing miniature cascades, pools of water,
turfed mounds, trees and shrubs. Those in the old Mito
yashiki^ ju§t outside the Suid 5 Bridge of the Castle, are
stated to have been the finest in the whole city, those of
the Owari yashiki ^ hard by, being, however, deemed very
slightly inferior. In both of these were miniature repre-
sentations of th® Tfikaido, (one of the highroads from Yedo
to Kioto), with small villages and towns erected thereon,
so as to make up the number of the fifty-three post-towns,
etc-, existing upon the actual road. The trees in these
gardens are still standing, forming magnificent groves
which serve as a familiar landmark in that part of the
city.

The points of etiquette^ rules, and observances connected
with the in older da3^s were exceedingly nungierpus


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. l8l

and intricate. Though want of space here necessitates
brevity, it is worth while recording a few of them.

istly ; — as regards the Etiquette of the Gates. The main
entrance-gate ■ was used only by the lord of the yashiki
himself, and by persons of rank who came to visit him.
The karOf or Councillors, as a rule made use of the Ordi-
nary Gate, while the inferior clansmen either passed through
it or through the two small posterns immediately adjoining
the main gateway. If a retainer from another yashiki
desired admittance, he gave his name to the porters and
stated his business. (178) If he bore a message to the lord,
he was escorted to the entrance-porch of the go-den; if,
on the contrary, his visit were to one of the vassals, he
was directed to the quarters of his friend in the nagaya*
The rules observed in this respect at the Kaga yashiki at
Hongo are said to have been more strict than anywhere
else : whenever any one went thither to see a friend among
the retainers, he was either sent under escort to that friend’s
quarters, or elso was kept waiting at the gate until the
person named by him were surnmoned. Upon being pro-
perly vouched for he was then, and then only, suffered
to enter. The yashiki gates were sometimes shut and
sometimes thrown open during the daytime, according to
convenience, but at night they were always carefully closed ;
when, however, the owner of the mansion was away at
his country fief, they were shut by day and night alike.
The number of porters or guards on duty at each gate
was usually from four to six men, but others were of course
within easy hail if needed. The writer of the “ Ochiboshiuf
whose words have been quoted above, gives a further
reminiscence of his own touching upon this point. He
says; — ^‘The household arrangements of the daimio in
this city were formerly on a very small scale in every
respect. ^ ^ i here quote one instance with

which I was myself well acquainted. There lived at that
‘‘time one Asano Inaba no Kami, to whom was entrusted
“ by the Shogun’s Government the superintendence of the
“ two departments of Yeso and Mitsugi, both in the pro-


i82 MCCLA.TCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

‘‘ vince of Bingo. This person possessed a fief of 50,000
“ kokii^ but having been from the first a Councillor of
“ Matsudaira Aki no Kami, the lord of the province of
Geishiu, his status was far superior to that of other
daimio of like assessment. The porter of his front gate
“ was one Yanosuke, who had a wife and family, and who,
single-handed, not only looked after the opening and
‘‘closing of the gate, but all other duties, even down to the
“cleaning of the premises. It chanced one day, at the
“very moment when Yanosuke was absent from the por-
“ter’s lodge, that my lord Koide Yamato no Kami came
“ on a visit, so the wife of Yanosuke ran forth in haste and
“opened the gate. Hereupon my lord Yamato no Kami
“ laughingly exclaimed, ‘ What ! Has Yanosuke gone
“abroad? I much regret putting his lady to so great in-
“ convenience.’ As he spoke, I, a mere child at the time,
“was standing close by and distinctly heard the words.
“After this, upon the (179) grounds that a porter who was
“ encumbered with a wife and family was unsuited to the
“ post, Yanosuke was dismissed, and his duties were per-
“ formed by one foot-soldier and one inferior attendant. In
“the great fire of 1657, however, the yashiki of Inaba no
“ Kami was also destroyed, and after the re-building was
“ completed and the nobleman again took up his residence
“there, it was decided that there should always be three
“ porters and three foot-soldiers on duty at the gate. On
“ the occasion of any reception of guests, an officer was also
“ stationed there as captain of the guard.”

When a visitor of high rank arrived, he was carried in his
jiorimono or palanquin through the main gate, across the
court-yart and up to the entrance porch of the go-den. If
of rank inferior to that of the lord of the yashiki, he de-
scended from his norimono at this spot, but if his position
were either superior or precisely equal to that of the noffi'e
whom he came to visit, he was carried up into the entrance
porch and only descended at the steps immediately leading
into the body of the building. During his stay within; his
retainers waited about the entrance, and prior to his depar-


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 1 83

ture due notice was invariably given , so as to allow them to
reassemble and form their ranks.

2ndly; — Exchange oiyashiki. The Awo-bio-shi'' men-
tions that in the year 1793, in consequence of an enquiry
addressed to the government on this matter, it was notified
thoX yashiki could be exchanged by mutual consent of the
owners, provided that the application for such exchange
were made to the proper authorities after the lapse of three
years from the original date of the bestowal of the mansions
from the government. To this was added a further notifica-
tion, in the period Bunsei (1818-30), to the effect that when-
ever a part only of a yashiki had thus been transferred to
another owner, the remaining portion could also be handed
over at any moment. In 1809 was made known a regula-
tion regarding the porters’ lodges oi yashiki thus exchanged.
By this regulation, any noble who, by exchange, might
come into possesssion of porters’ lodges of a style of archi-
tecture superior to that to which he was by his own rank
entitled, was permitted to make use of them as they then
stood ; but if they fell into decay and needed repair, he was
not allowed to rebuild them in the same style, but had to
erect fresh ones suited to his own inferior rank. Whenever
such exchange (180) was effected, the badges of the former
owner on the roof-tiles, etc., were always scrupulously
erased, their place being refilled by that of the new inmate,

3rdly ; — Rules relating to Fires, Owing to the frequency
of great fires in the city of Yedo, more than ordinary atten-
tion was given to this subject. Constant precaution was
taken, watchmen were stationed, firemen engaged, and
buckets and other utensils kept in readiness. Indeed, on
the occasion of any festival or ceremony, such utensils
formed a noticeable part of the gala dress of yashiki.
In olden times, if a fire, broke out from a ^ Chiti yashiki ^
the owner was obliged to send in a report at once, detailing
the. circumstances ; and he was then forced, as a punish-
ment, to keep within doors for a certain number of days.
Later on, this rule was made applicable likewise to * Middle ’
and ‘Lower yashiki,' and also to the smaller suburban


184 MCCLATCHIE I ON THE TIEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

residences to which allusion has been made above. In the
year 1723, the following Notification was issued Orders
are to be given to the various persons concerned, to the
«« effect that should a fire originate from a naka-yashiki,
shimo-yashiki, or kakae-yashiki, there must for the future
“ be sent into the Government, in like manner as in the
case of a Chief Residence, an enquiry as to whether the
“ owner is to confine himself within doors.” Twenty days
later it was notified bv Mid^uno Iki no Kami, a member of
the Gorojiil, that although the report must always he sent
in, the punishment might on occasion be remitted if the
mansion were other than the ‘ Chi&f y ash iki, ^ Thus if the
damage caused by the flames were confined solely to the
yashiki in which the fire originated, no confinement was
necessary ; but if, on the other hand, the conflagration
spread to any other building, even in the slightest degree,
the punishment was to be inflicted. This, however, was
not proclaimed, but was made known verbally to the parties
concerned. The Awo-bio-shi'' here gives the following
instance

In the I2th year of the period Kwansei (1800) there
“ stood at Gembei-mura,' Takata ” (to the west of Yedo) a
** kakae-yashiki belonging to Ito Kawachi no Kami, A fire
“ broke out from the nagay a of this yashiki^ and the whole
‘‘ of the buildings were burned to the ground. Kawachi no
‘'Kami therefore reported the matter to the government,
“ which report was forwarded to the Shogun, accompanied
“ by an enquiry as to confinement within doors ; the docu-
“ment was, however, (181) handed back with a slip at-
“tached, on which it was written that such a course was
“not necessary. Upon this, Kawachi no Kami visited
“ Uneme no Kami, an officer of the government, in order
“to express his .acknowledgments,”

4thly ; — Death of a noble outside his own yashiki. The
rule in such case was that the -estates of the deceased were
confiscated. In i860, when li Kamon no Kami, the Chief
Minister of the Shogun, was murdered near the outer
Sakurada gate of the castle, by a legal fiction it was given


MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO. 185

out that he had died inside his own yashiki, in order that
his heir might succeed to his fief. In this instance- it was
no doubt the high rank of the murdered noble, and the
influence of the family to which he belonged, that caused
to be remitted the penalty which would have been enforced
in the case of any one of less degree.

5thly ; — Confinement in yashiki as a punishment. Men-
tion has already been made of this mode of punishment, in
the case of fires ; but it seems to have been the one com-
monly inflicted whenever a noble incurred the displeasure
of the Shogun. The term of such imprisonment varied
from ten days to several months. The Kindai Geppio^*

M ^), a narrative of events from 1844 to 1863, states
that the daimio of Mito was on one occasion condemned
to seclusion in his yashiki from the 5th day of the 5th
month to the i6th day of the nth month of the same year.
This occurred in 1844, and throughout the work in question
are recorded numberless instances of sirnilar punishment
having been meted out to others of the most influential ^
daimio. It was customary also for political and other offen-
ders to be placed under the charge of noblemen, in whose
yashiki they were imprisoned. While a daimio was con-
fined to his own mansion the gates were always fast closed,
instead of standing open , during the daytime as under
ordinary circumstances.

Apart from the above, there existed many other regula-
tions of minor importance. The ceremony of suicide by
disembowelment (hara-kiri) was not allowed in ‘Chief
yashiki) their proximity to the Shogun’s palace forbidding
their being thus made places of execution : this ceremony
was therefore performed in the smaller mansions, when it
took place at night, either in the main building or in the
garden, according to the rank of the condemned person.
The discharge of fire-arms withxn yashiki grounds was pro-
hibited in olden times, but in (182) 1861 a notification was
issued by which permission was granted for the discharge
of blank cartridge for purposes of drill in any yashiki,
whether within or without the Castle moats.


l86 MCCLATCHIE : ON THE FEUDAL MANSIONS OF YEDO.

The feudal system having come to an end in this coun-
try, the old yashiki are fast disappearing. Many have been
destroyed by fire, others removed to afford sites for build-
ings in European style ; some few are still retained as
barracks for the soldiery, and in numerous instances the
iovmtr nagaya have been portioned out into rows of small
shops, etc., to be let to the townspeople. Ere many more
years have elapsed, this style of architeqture will doubtless
no longer be seen ; the yashiki have already fully played
their part in connection with Japanese history, and being
now of no further use, will shortly disappear from the scene
But for the foreign visitor at least these ruined mansions
will always possess a special interest, recalling, as they
do, so many a reminiscence of olden days, and affording so
clear an evidence of the utter decay of the ancient pomp
and state of this metropolis of feudalism.


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


(183) A General Meeting was held at the Shoheikuwan, Seids, Tskio,
on the loth December, 1878, at 4 p,m. Dr Murray, the President, ,
occupied the chair.

The minutes of the preceding General Meeting were read and approved.
The Librarian announced the receipt of the following : — The Celestial
Empire, Vol. 11 , No. 20; The Chinese Recorder, July-August, 1878;
Bulletin of the Imperial Russian Society of Geography, Part i. He also
reported that the library contained 18 complete sets of the Society’s
Transactions. He congratulated the Society on having secured the
Chinese Repository, together with the Chinese and Japanese Repository.

The President said that this was a most valuable collection of mate-
rial in reference to China and that it also contained valuable informa-
tion on Japan.

Mr. Thomas R. H. McClatchie then read his paper entitled “ The
Feudal Mansions of Yedo.”

The President expressed deep interest in the paper just read, especi-
ally as the yashiki were now fast disappearing,

Mr. Satow observed that the demolition of most of the yashiki and
the conversion of mgny nagaya into rows of shops had very much
changed the physiognomy of the streets of the city during the last ten
years. Without the aid of a map of Yedo as it formerly existed, it
would be difficult to convey to those who had not known the city when
it was still Yedo, an idea of the extent of the yashikh Starting for a
walk round the castle from the top of Kudanzaka, one passed a narrow
strip of ground unoccupied by houses, but behind it the whole space
between Kojimachi and the outer moat from the Yotsuya gate back-
wards to the ShOheibashi was occupied by yashikL Where the English
Legation now stands was a line of nagaya^ which was continued on
beyond KSjimachi down the hill. Next came the yashiki of li Kamon
no Kami and the daimid of Geishiu. Passing this and its neighbour
the Kuroda yashiki, one issued through the Toranomon gate into the
region called Atagoshita, completely occupied hy yashiku On the other
side of the high street, where the railway terminus now is, yasktU
belonging to the daimid of Aidzu, Sendai, and of Tatsuno in Banshiu.
Returning to the Sakurada gate and following the moat, what now is
called the Hibiya drill-ground was occupied entirely by yashiki, memora-
ble amongst which was that of Choshiu, destroyed by the ShOgun^s
government in 1864, in consequence of the attack on the' Mikado’s
palace at Kioto made by the retainers of that daimid. Passing through
the Hibiya gate and turning to the left, where now are the artillery drill-
ground, the courts of justice, and the bureau of police, were nothing
but daimids^ yashiki, and so on all the way up to Kudanzaka again.
This was without taking into account the enormous outside the

moat, one of which has been converted into a palace for the Mikado,
while on the sites of two others have been built the military (iS^J school


(i88)


and the arsenal. In the time of the ShSguns few foreigners ever
’ penetrated into the yasJdhi of daimid. The Foreign Representatives
paid visits to the ministers of the Shogun at their official residences, but
never saw more of the interior than the reception rooms set apart for
such interviews. Great jealousy was felt lest strangers should see into
the interior of the yashikh and in former days a notice board posted in
a conspicuous place on Atagoyama prohibited the use of telescopes for
looking at tht yashiU which lay below that bill. But nevertheless one
could observe enough to learn that the yashiki were little more than
barracks surrounding a living-house of not very durable material and
certainly did not deserve to be called ‘ palaces,’ as they so often were by
early visitors to Yedo. The real palaces of the daimid were at the
castles away in their own dominions.

The President asked what was the object of the stringent regulation
as to the confiscation of a daimid' s property in case of his dying outside
his yaskiki.

Mr. Satow was of opinion that confiscation took place only in case
of his dying a violent death.

Dr. McCartee suggested that perhaps there was someting supersti-
tious connected with this custom, and cited a similar practice prevalent
in China. ..

The President having observed that many would like to see a map of
a typical yasJiiki^ Mr. McClatchie mentioned that he had ordered one
some time ago, but that it was still in the draughtsman’s hands.

Mr. House observed that almost every yashiki had its peculiar legends
and ghost-stories, which were not always fanciful. All had been scenes
of important events, and it was worth almost any person’s time to con-
tinue this subject ol yashiki. As to the number of beams projecting
over the gateway of d^yashiki^ these, he believed, were almost invariably
of an odd number, and the number of the great daimids' beams was
eleven.

Mr. McClatchie said that as to the number of beams he had been
unable to get a rule; he had judged merely from repeated observation.

Mr. Blanchet remarked that no responsibility for fire attached to a
unless the gate of his were destroyed. The number of

wells in 3. yaskiki was alwa 3 ^s marked on the posts of its gate.

Mr. McClatchie was not sure that a daimid got off scot free if his
gate were not destroyed in a conflagration. It was a common thing now
to.put up the number of wells even on ordinary houses.

The President remarked that the present regulations in regard to
fixes remained as a relic of those feudal times. Any official through
whose carelessness a fire occurred must send in his resignation.

Mr. House asked whether or not it was regular to have a theatre
inside a yashiki.

Mr. McClatchie thought it was rather exceptional. It was customary,
however, to have no dances inside. *

The President voted the thanks of the society to Mr. McClatchie.
His paper had been of great interest to all, and it was to be hoped that
ere long he would give the society something further on the feudal
times of Japan.

The meeting was then adjourned.


INSCRIPTIONS AT SHIMABARA AND AMAKUSA.


By THE Rev. H. Stout.


(Read January iSyg.j

In the history of Christianity in Japan, reference is made
to the final struggle and destruction of the Christians in
Shimabara, in 1637. The people of the locality retain*
many traditions of the event, and monuments have been
erected where heroes fell, and over the common grave
of the slain.

It appears that some sixty years before, the old Castle,’’
as the place is called, h^d beer! abandoned by the petty
daimio for the more eligible location at the thrifty town
of Shimabara, some twenty miles farther north, where
a new castle had been built. So at the time the persecuted
sect made the ‘^old Castle” their rendezvous, nothing
remained of the fortifications but the foundation walls,
portions of whidi may still be seen. However, it was a
spot well chosen for defence. The promontory of soft
rock, now much worn away by the waves, extended at
that time eastward several hundred yards into the sea,
where it fell off on three sides, quite perpendicularly, at
a height of more than a hundred feet. It was therefore
quite inaccessible from that quarter. Its defence on the
land side was not difficult, for a deep, narrow valley leaves
an abrupt ascent on the west. Only on the north-west
is the approach at all' easy, which is over a ridge that
runs by gradual ascent from the valley up to the castle
walls. Here the principal fighting occurred, and here
stands the monument of the commander-in-chief, and just
upon the walls that of the common grave.

Among the various traditions are those of the gathering


igo STOUT : inscriptions at shimabara and amakusa.

of the Christians from different quarters, the encampment
of some of them for a time on the islands near at hand,
and in the earlier days of the siege, (i86) the extension
of their lines for more than a mile into the valleys. An
excavation, some thirty by fifty feet square, just under
the walls, is referred to as having been made for a retreat
for Nirada Shiro, and the other chief men with their
families. It was covered with bamboos, supported on
upright poles, and overspread with turf on a level with
the surrounding soil. It is said that when the besieged
were finally overpowered, and crowded into the narrow
limits of the bluff, they were there slaughtered in crowds,
and multitudes of both sexes and all ages pushed from
the cliffs into- the sea; One other matter of tra-ditiqn is
interesting, as it seems to confirm the statement made
by some, but denied by others, to the effect that the
Dutch came with a ship from Hirado, and assisted in
the siege, making a breach upon the fortifications with
their guns, and that several Dutchmen lost their lives
in the engagement. It may also be remarked that nothing
is known of a monument ever having been erected, bearing
an inscription impiously threatening to execute in the
same manner with the Christians there slain, any other
of the sect, or the Christians' God himself, if he ever
dared to come to Japan.

The struggle of the Christians with the government
is always spoken of by the people of Shimabara as ^^The
rebellion,” and as having been suppressed by “the daimios
of all Kiushiu.”

Four monuments, — if the smaller rough stones may
be so designated, — are found on the battle-field. Two
of them are over the graves of officers in the attacking
party, who must have fallen in the final onset, as they
are near the extrernity of the bluff, quite within the castle
walls. One bears the name Sabunri Kunojd, of hishiu.
The rest of the inscription merely tells of his . fighting
and death, and that the stone was set up about fifty years
afterwards by visitors to the place. Another, close by,


STOUT : inscriptions at shimabara and amakusa. 191

bears the simple inscription, Sahimri^Ku Daushichi, This
person was doubtless a retainer of Kiinojd.

The third stone has inscribed upon it the Buddhist
prayer, ^‘Namu Amida Butsu;' and The tomb ofhonesT
This was set up in 1766. From the inscription it would
seem that the remains of the killed were left upon the
held for many years, and the bones finally gathered and
buried. But there is no other evidence that this was the
case.

The larger and more pretentious monument is that of Ita-
hura Shigemasa, the Commander-in-chief of the army of the
Shogun. It is a (187) well-dressed stone, together with the
base, about eight feet high. The inscription is as follows
‘‘The monument of Itakura Shigemasa, Jiigobon Naizen-
no-sho. Corrected by Sentonchoku Mimpo.”

“ The’ thoughtful, benevolent man in seeking life does
not violate benevolence, and in losing his life he is also
benevolent. Life and death depend upon heaven, or fate.
The man who spares his life and considers his own happi-
ness is a disgrace to the perfect man ; but he who, though
seeing danger, disregards his life, acts the part of the per-
fect man. Therefore, if you wish to do what is right, and
put instruction into practice, do not choose between what is
easy and difficult ; if you wish to advance and make a name,
do not consider what is your advantage and disadvantage.
Itakura Shigemasa, Jugobon Naizen-no-sho was a brave
and eminent man. His father Katsushige, Jushihon-Jijiu
Iga-no-gon-no-kami, and his eldest brother, Shigemune,
Jushihon Shosho Suwo-no-gon-no-kami were successively,
father and son, appointed Shoshidai (Shdgun's resident at
Kioto), and guarded the Emperor’s palace. Their honors
and praises are spoken tOf everywhere. In his youth Shige-
masa saved Lord Tosho Daijin (lyeyasu) and assisted in
the government. He had a brave heart, was upright and
gentle,, but decided. He was in the service in turn both of
Taitokukd (lyetada) and Taikenkd (lyemitsu), receiving no
small honors from them* In Teichiu, the fourteenth year
of Kanyei (1637), the rebels who had been led astray by


192 STOUT : INSCRIPTIONS AT SHIMABARA AND AMAKUSA.

Jesus made their head-quarters at ^ The old castle,’ of Hara,
in the village of Arima, in the district of Korai, in the pro-
vince of Hizen. The gatherings of these multitudes, like
bees and ants, was known in Yedo. Taikenko, in order to
destroy them by the aid of the daimids and samurai of all
Kiushiu, gave special orders to Shigemasa that he should
take command of the army, and superintend the whole
affair. Shigemasa took his eldest son and set out immedi-
ately. When he arrived he went about to view the towers
and ramparts, the village and country, and from time to
time carried out his deep laid plans. On the first day of
the first month of the next year, Shigemasa, in his zeal and
courage, rushed impetuously into the midst of the enemy,
where his helmet being crushed, and his lance broken^ he in
the end perished, being fifty-one years old. How deplo-
rable ! how sad I Shigenori had followed him, and harassing
his soul, had valiantly put forth his strength, but alas I
victory and defeat are according to fate. (188) Taigi died
in the rebellion, and Yensai perished in the fortress, * and
for thousands of years their patriotic zeal and righteous
courage have remained untarnished,’ And the same will
be said of Shigemasa.' Not long after this the rebellion was
suppressed, as it is said, ^ One’s punishment comes upon
him as quick as thunder,’ and again, ‘ Is it not true that
the strength of a position is overcome from within ? ’ It
must be said that this man lost his life in doing worthy
deeds. And does not every one turn up his sleeve to wipe
the tears on his account ? Genyuko (lyetsuna) in time of
peace appointed Shigenori to office, and he kept the Castle
at Osaka. After this he was constantly advanced, and was
made Shissei (Minister), and had conferred upon him the
title of Shoshibon. He was appointed Jijiu (Lord in wait-
ing) and became guardian of the Castle of Karasuyama in
Yashiu. He received (lit. ate) an income of five thousand
kokii^^ so he made his house famous. His son Shigemitsu
Jushihon inherited his position and imitated his good deeds.
When the present Shogun (Tsunayoshi) began to reign, he
was employed in the government. His income was , in-


STOUT : INSCRIPTIONS AT SHIMABARA AND AMAKUSA. I93

creased, and he was transferred to the Castle of Iwaki, in
the province of Musashi. Behold how each generation
advanced by the abundance of good deeds. Shigemitsu set
up this monument for Shigemasa, on the spot where he
fought and died, and recording his brilliant deeds, wishes
to make them known perpetually. The disposition to re-
member ancestors, and to make them known is filial piety
and a pleasure. Shall we call this the monument of peace
at Waisei, or shall we call it the monument of weeping at
Kenzan ? I was asked to write something, to wit, an ab-
breviation of the most important events, and some poetry,
which poetry is the following : ” — (Here follows the poetry,
which is of no historical value.)

The ninth month of the ninth year of Yemp 5 ” (i68i).

An inscription on the back of the stone is to the effect,
that Hayashi Fuminari, apparently by direction of Shige-
mitsu, the hero’s grandson, had prepared the above writing,
and intended to erect the monument, but was prevented
from doing so. However, Sentonchoku (probably a priest)
carried out his design in 1791, one hundred and fifty-four
years after the rebellion. This was doubtless done by order
of Itakura Shigemasa’s descendants, whose names are there
recorded with their titles, etc.

(189) Near the village of Tomioka in Amakusa, some
twenty miles from the “ old Castle,” there is another
monument, bearing an inscription in some respects more
interesting than those on the battle-field. The stone is
an undressed, sea-worn one, about seven feet high, standing
upon a slightly elevated grassy mound. The tradition
of the place is that the Christians of the locality, captured
at the “old Castle,” were brought back to Tomioka, and
having been condemned, were decapitated and buried
there. The number, 3,333, is probably a complete number,
or used to indicate a great many. Near the top of the
stone is inscribed in a circle a Chinese character, used
doubtless as a Buddhist mystic symbol. Beneath this
is the statement, that “If any one hears (believes,?)
Buddhism, he will of course become a saint ” (hotoks)^ In


194 STOUT : INSCRIPTIONS AT SHIMABARA AND AMAKUSA.

the same line below are two more mystic Chinese charac-
ters. The remainder of the inscription is as follows : —

^‘The principles of Christianity are mainly established
in false doctrine, and have no other object than the seizure
of the country. In China, not otherwise than in Japan,
this sect has been interdicted. It appears evident that
lyeyasu formerly used severe measures in order to reform
the sect, but with dissimulation they cherished evil inwardly,
and neither reverenced Buddhism, nor obeyed the laws
of the Emperor. In the end they showed their perverse
hearts, as is related below. Therefore, the ShOgun sent
orders to the daimids of Kiushiu, Mand at that time the
whole of the sect was destroyed, and the world (Japan)
became tranquil. The many ten thousands of their beads
were cpllected, and - being divided Into three lots, were
buried in Nagasaki, Shimabara, and Amakusa. From
that time the peace of the whole of Japan was sung, just
as ‘ In the days of Shun, they fanned the breezes of Gio,'
Joy I Joy!”

“Nirada Shiro, of the district of Amakusa in Higo,
of Japan, was a young rebel. He established the Christian
sect and made known the false doctrines everywhere.
Those men and women only who were disaffected formed
the party. In the winter of 1636 they destroyed Buddhist
and Shinto temples, burned villages and farm houses, and
passed over to the district of Shimabara in Hizen, where
they prepared for siege. There were more than 31,000
of them. Their immediate object was to subvert the
country. Therefore all the dahnids of the land hastened
to the battle-field, and by night and day, by sea and land,
(rgo) the fighting did not cease. Finally, at the end of
the next spring, :they made a breach upon the castle,
and slew and captured the evil company, great multitudes.
But there was a remnant of the sect not destroyed. In
this village of this district, there were three, thousand
three hundred and thirty-three heads collected and buried, ,
making one grave. The honorable Governor .Suzuki
Shigenari,^ a distant descendant of Nomi Daijin Sbigetoku,.


# If g

® ® ®

5^ ® iS ^

^ !¥ g ilj it

tb ^ ^S * *

W ^ S a li

^te ;eF
■fe 33 ET © $

■fe 1& 35: 7

T T S i5l
ff ff &
SR m

P M

# te iE m

^ M M A

^ $S ^ ^

Si S S M

m

m m m t

E :t # B

p ® ® +

W S M W


M n ± ^

}M M M S W

W 18 * » a

^ ?E T

W 2: li IS 1i

Eff i& ;2

^ ^ 2 pg ^

^ IE fel ^S fi

^ » m ^ m

^ m m m

^ ffs ^ ^^e ^

H fS it EET ii

mium 0 ^§s‘^


^ , 5?i
& ^


S IS s #
W ^

^ $4

1=- j® 2f.
® M' §:

* ^ 4

t 'H SB ff


S ^
±


«


Z Z-


m. t! ^

^ ^ ^ ^ m

II o ff ^ ;f:

S” m S0 fit m

m ^ ^ %

Z B IE {B ^

IS ^ B J* +

* ^ 7C tt E0

S lb 0 1$ ^

® s t tie T

a 8 ft 2 a

5E 5? ^ BE


^ ^ ^ 0T :£.

«! 8g *■ ®e ±

S- •:»: # Eg m C

if ^ PD A

^ m iB sf. m

M W. 'M M

® « # St s

® o « « «

* i® #1 ff #

i'J -fi tf' Ji' C

m wl m ft ^

M ft a 11

USAH^i'

i® flJ 52 St


m

M ^ Ar
^ ^ rtc
® ^ tR

W A ^
A * M


H m m
^ m m
sn w m
^ m ^


. K ^
M K
^ f?

m ^

ig W
2: &.
^ E

m a


2 ft

n, m

Uf, s®


4 S 5E ^ ^
ffl K a 2 iH ®

p“ # ^ a ff

M

fs -a iF + . gp -g-

s fi up - it feg

& ® ^ »

EP K [^ S A ®

fH A 0 » ^ 1^

M ^ 2 ^ tb ®

w R a i. ^

It a ® iS -ji

s is 7 a jk ,

« j» ^ Iff a


^ fp a

fa R s

m m ^

« IE ^
:» ® ^
3ib :t S
fil 1 W
H ft SB
^ ft
S: ;g
# IS


a ^

'A',, ^.t


%

$

CT

pa

R

P

]E


ffl;

a

m


«

M

fg

m

A


a


fr

m

fAK.

ft Eg


c

5i


ig

a

fie

If

m

2

WE

ii

a

@

m

Bn


m


®

is


it

5H


IS

m

IK

ft

m

M

m

*


3SS

SfI

%

w

$g


ig

m


a

M

#

a


ft

ff


li

W.

!fE

s

H

2

m


m

IS

m

s.


m


M


K

K

§K

S

€


dfcf

jCiv

m


tin

ft


as

m


m


Pt


a 2K

#


s

S


-v

g

ft


m

HI


p

jS

ft

s


W-

■V


IM

m


w

M

!&


ife


±

1#


2:

«


m


a

m


a

a


js

iffi

ffp


PT


m

w


2

a

IP


?e

■tfe


if

a


2


m

si

ts

fif

ft

m


5


STOUT : INSCRIPTIONS AX SHIMAI^ARA AND AMAKUSA. I95

who was the chief of the retainers of Kumano Gongen, be-
ing a worthy and estimable person, is, moreover, benevolent
and just, and besides skilled in arms and a man of learning.
His Excellency seeing the mound grave of these people,
and pitying the many thousand evil spirits wandering in
pain, performed the meritorious act of setting up this
monument. I earnestl}!^ pray that by his good works
every one of these spirits may forthwith become a saint
(h'otoke)f and prove the benefit of being purified in hades.”
(There follow four lines of poetry).

The twenty-fifth of the seventh month of the fifth year
of Seiho” (1648).

“Written by Priest Chinlcaso.”

In the village graveyards, connected with the , temples,
are many tomb-stones of the ordinary shape, but bearing
no other inscription than that of a simple circle. These
are said to mark the graves of Christians. Such stones
are found in the graveyards about Nagasaki also. But
no positive proof has yet appeared to show that it was
the custom of the Christians to mark the graves of their
co-religionists in this manner. However, if it were the
custom, the circle with the cipher on the Tomioka monu-
ment may be very significant.

There is another monument at the village of Oye in
Amakusa, having an inscription that bears upon this
subject, but though an effort has been made to secure a
copy, it has not yet been obtained.


A SHORT NARRATIVE OF FOREIGN TRAVEL
OF MODERN JAPANESE ADVENTURERS.


By Capt. J. M. James.


(Read January 142?/^, 1879. j

(igj) The following is a translation from a small work
entitled Kai-gai-i-den^ by SaitS Masakane, oftheTsuHan,
in the province of Ise, dated 3rd year of Ka-yei (A.D.
1850).

Commencing with the preface, the words of the author
are as follows : —

Our Great Japan is said to have attained her military
prestige through the power of the Sacred Sword. Her
people were patriotic and sincere, and strictly revered the
truth. Her generals and soldiers were veteran warriors, to
whom death caused no fear. The fame of her glorious
deeds of arms having spread abroad over the whole world
(meaning probably China and Korea), she was feared and
respected by all neighbouring nations.

The routing of the Eastern barbarians by Yamato-dake-
no-mikoto. ^

The expedition undertaken to Korea by the Empress
Jingo.

The wonderful exploits of Hira-fu.

Tamura Maru’s power, which extended over the whole of
Yezo, or Inu.

The taking possession and colonizing of Loo Choo (Riu-
Kiu) by Minamoto no Tametomo.

(192) The military fame of Minamoto Han-gan Yoshi-
tsune, which was known over the whole of Eastern Tartary.

The defeat of the invading Mongolian army, over a hun-
dred thousand strong, by Taira-no-Hojo, Sagami no Kami.


JAMES: FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE. I97

The expedition to Korea carried out by order of Toyotomi
Taiko, and the defeat of the Ming troops who were opposed
to his forces at that time : these are well known historical
facts. But as to Yamada Nagamasa, one of the most
ambitious and successful adventurers of modern times, and
Hamada Yahei who fought and defeated the red barbarians
(Dutch) in Formosa (Tai-wan), these are interesting facts,
which are wanting in the pages of our history, and the
desire that these glorious deeds of our countrymen should
not be lost to future generations has induced me to record
them.

The country of Shamuro or Siam, is situated on the

southern boundary of India. A .Chinese work entitled Su-
shi Ft (a statistical and topographical work of the King-
dom of Su), states that the name assigned to it was Seki-do
#±, or Red earth, also that what is now termed Shamuro
(Siam), at that period consisted of two distinct kingdoms,
Shamu S and Ra-ho (Lao), but that they became

united under one sovereign during the Gen 5n period, (a.d.
1280 to 1368), Its circumference was over 10,000 Chinese
miles (3000 English), and from being most fertile and
productive, together with a dense population, it received the
appellation of -Zen Koku or Fortunate Country.

With regard to Yamada Nagamasa (more commonly
known as Tenjiku Tokubei), there are various reports. One
says that he was a buccaneer, and on one of his incursions
arrived in Siam ; another that he was the servant of a Shintd
priest attached to one of the shrines in Ise.

His own version was, that he was born in Owari, and
was a grandson of Ota Nobunaga, the Lord of that province.
The latter is the one which is generally believed to be
• correct.

He was a youth who was no exception to the rule, of the
type of individuals who in middle life invariably become
distinguished personages.

He bore all the traces of being considerably superior in
his traits of character, disposition, and temperament, to
other youths of his own years. Although extremely fond of


198 JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE.

all the games and pastimes of the day, (193) nothing delight-
ed him more,, when the opportunity occurred, than to listen
to the soldiers when relating any of their battle experiences,
and also those of travel.

He was now residing in F'u-chiu, province of Suruga.
From the commencement of the period Gen-na Tcfii (A.D.
1614), peace rejigned throughout Japan, and the numerous
unattached samurai ^ and others who had no permanent
means of subsisting, were applying to the various Dahnids
(provincial Lords) on all sides for employment

Not so with Nagamasa, who had arrived at the conclusion
that for him, at any rate, there seemed no possibility of
attaining any position of importance in his own country,
and that as soon as possible, whenever the opportunity was
afforded him, he ought to go (where he knew not, but any-
where from Japan) where there would be a probability of his
earning a reputation, and a position of independence as well.
Fortunately the edict interdicting Japanese from leaving
their country had not yet been promulgated.

Having during his residence in Fu-chiu made the ac-
quaintance of two merchants, named respectively Taki and
Ota, who had already arranged and were on the eve of
starting on a trading expedition to Formosa, he solicited to
be allowed to accompany them, offering his services in any
capacity which might seem fit to them. His offers were
refused, and Nagamasa knew of no means by which he
might induce them to change their mind on his behalf.

Whilst in their company, during conversation, he had
heard the outline of the proposed expedition, also the where-
abouts of the vessel then being equipped (at Osaka) in
which they intended embarking.

Immediately on parting company with the merchants, he
lost no time in starting for the above-mentioned place, where
on his arrival, and after due enquiries, he found the vessel,
which was already loaded, and waiting only for the arrival
of the merchants to set sail on their voyage. After learning
all particulars about the vessel, and her intended voyage,
he managed, unobserved by those on board, during the


JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE. 1 99

night to secrete himself away amongst the cargo. A short
time only had elapsed when the merchants, arrived on board,
and after some enquiries relating to the cargo and the
quantity of provisions on board the ship being satisfactorily
answered, the vessel’s anchor was weighed, and they started
on their voyage.

(194) They had scarcely got out of sight of land when
Nagamasa came out from his hiding place and discovered
himself to the merchants and crew of the ship. At first
they were so astonished that they would scarcely credit
their eyesight with the fact that the individual was the
same they had met at Fu-chiu, and to whom they had
positively refused a passage with them. A few moments,
however, convinced them that such was the case, and much
annoyed were they at it. After a deal of explanations on
both sides, it was decided that as nothing could be done
now to alter matters for the better, he should from this time
forth be considered as one of their party.

Nothing of any special importance took place on the
passage, and in due time the vessel arrived safely at her
destination, Formosa. After the trading business had been
concluded, and the ship loaded with her homeward freight,
preparations were made for starting on their return voyage,
and Nagamasa was expected to return as well, but on being
asked by the merchants, he distinctly told them that now
he was there, he intended to remain, and try if possible to
win a reputation and a fortune sufficient to give him an
independent position, before he should ever think of return-
ing home. He thanked them sincerely for all favours he
had received at their hands, and trusted that one day it
might be in his power to repay them. The merchants,
knowing his character full well, together with the ambitious
designs he had previously. disclosed to them in conversation
during the voyage, knew that persuasion would be of no
avail. After providing him with a few articles which might
be necessary during his stay there, they bade him God
speed, and sailed for home.

At this time there were already many Chinese adventurers


200 JA.MES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE.

in Formosa, who, the more easily to ingratiate themselves
with the native tribes, had assumed the Japanese garb.

Nagamasa had been in Formosa now some short time,
and had become fairly conversant with affairs which most
interested „him, namely, that of his future prospects of
poy^er and authority, and seeing no way by which his
desires could be fulfilled, owing to Formosa being an island,
and divided between so many different tribes, each with its
chief, he determined to start for other lands (to him as yet
unknown), and soon an opportunity presented itself. He
succeeded in obtaining a (195) passage in a foreign ship
(what nationalit}^ is not mentioned), bound to the West,
and eventually reached Siam.

War was being carried on between Rikkon and some
states which were friendly to Siam. The King of Siam had
already sent assistance to his allies, but, notwithstanding,
the forces of Rikkon were victorious.

Nagamasa now hoped a chance might be afforded him of
fulfilling his desires. Having gained access to the officials,
and hearing of their late defeat, he laid before them a system
of military tactics and organization (up to the present they
had, had no particular tactics in use), and by explaining it
in detail, convinced the officials it would be much to their
advantage to adopt his system. Within a short time he
was sent for to appear in the presence of the King, to ex-
plain all his novel idea of warfare in detail. He succeeded
in convincing the King to that extent in his favour that an
appointment as a general in his army was conferred on him.
It was also entrusted to Nagamasa to advise, and to make
use of the best means in his power for a defence against
Rikkon.

There were many Japanese adventurers settled in Siam
at this period, and one of Nagamasa ’s first steps was to
collect several hundred of his countrymen, and enlist them
in the Siamese army. In addition, he raised a corps of
over 10,000 followers, of different bold enterprising spirits,
ready for any sort of service, and having equipped and
armed them in the Japanese manner, added them to the


JAMES: FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE. 201

already existing force of -Siam. Having settled all pre-
liminaries with regard to the commissariat and transport
that would be required for the coming campaign, he caused
a false report to be freely circulated in the neighbouring
states, that a large army had arrived from Japan to fight on
behalf of Siam. This seems to have done him some service.
It caused the confidence which the soldiers of Rikkon up to
this time had had in themselves to waver on seeing such a
formidable force opposed to them, which they supposed
were some of Japan’s sturdy warriors. In the first engage-
ment Nagamasa defeated them, with great loss on their
side.

The King of Rikkon, nothing daunted by his late defeat,
determined to give battle again. Collecting nearly 100,000
of his chosen soldiers, he again made war, intending the
overthrow of Siam as a kingdom, and eventually adding it
to his own dominions.

Nagamasa, in no way discouraged by the superiority of
the enemy (196) in numerical strength, decided on trying
what stratagem would accomplish for him in the coming
contest.

Being aware of the route by which the invading army
intended advancing, he proceeded to divide his forces into
three divisions, under their respective commanders, two of
which were placed in ambush, one to the rear of a hill, the
other near the sea-shore, where there were long reeds grow-
ing, SO that they were completely hid from view. Both of
these positions commanded the road by which the enemy
would advance. Taking command, and heading the remain-
ing division, he led, them on to oppose and engage the
enemy. After a severe engagement, which lasted some
time, in which the invading force had the advantage, he
feigned a retreat, and succeeded in drawing the enemy
within his lines of ambush, when, at a preconcerted signal,
his troops fell on the enemy from on all sides (during the
heat of the action the shots fell like hail) with an over-
whelming and irresistible force. The troops of Rikkon
now broke into a. confused pell-mell retreat, leaving many


202 JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE.

thousands of their comrades dead on the field, the number
which escaped being comparatively few. Nagamasa follow-
ed up their retreat, pursuing them even to their capital,
where he succeeded in taking the King prisoner and bring-
ing him back to Siam.

Nagamasa’s fame now spread with great rapidity over all
the adjacent states, each of which sent an embassy bearing
tokens of friendship and messages of congratulation to the
King of Siam on the success of his army in defeating
Rikkon, which had, up to this time, enjoyed the reputation
of being a, very powerful country, and had been both feared
and respected in consequence.

The King, in recognition of the great services Nagamasa
had rendered the state, bestowed on him his daughter in
marriage, together with the title of Kan-pu-rah (Duke, or
Lord), also the conquered states of Rikkon and Ki-hi-ru.
The King of Siam was now well advanced in years, and
being weary of governing, and his son not being of sufficient
years to entrust the government to, he appointed (Kan-pu-
rah) Nagamasa to act as Regent, as well as commander-in-
chief of the army. The fame of (Kan-pu-rah) Nagamasa
was the theme of praise in' countries even as far as India,
but it is doubtful if it had yet reached Japan, owing to the
irregular communication between the two countries.

(197) After an interval of some .years, the two merchants
Taki and Ota again started on another trading voyage, and,
strange to relate, after some time arrived within Siamese,
territory. On this being reported to the government, orders
were isued and officers specially appointed to look after the
welfare of these Japanese merchants. They were provided
with an elegant residence, and had all their wants supplied
most bountifully, at the expense of the state, as if they had
been persons of distinction.

This greatly perplexed them, knowing that they were
receiving attentions they were in no way entitled to, and
impressed on their minds grave doubts as to their future
treatment and security.

Very shortly after their arrival, a message from the court


JAMES ; FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE. 20 3

was sent to them, the purport of which was, that the Regent
(Nagamasa) had expressed a wish to see the strangers, and
for this purpose they were to be conducted to the palace at
a time specified.

The reception at court is related by the merchants
thus : —

On arriving at the palace, after a short interval we were
conducted through many halls and finally into the audience
chamber, and after passing between the Ministers of State
(who were kneeling on the floor, in two lines one on either
side of the hall), were placed opposite the Regent, who sat
at the end, on the high throne, which was gorgeously
decorated with gold and precious stones The dresses of the
Regent and Ministers of State were also of great splendour ;
in fact the whole ceremony was so imposing, and conducted
with such grandeur and dazzling magnificence, to our
humble ideas, that we durst not raise our heads to meet
the gaze of the Regent, but kept them bowed to the ground,
so ovei'come were we by the magnificence of everything
around. After making our obeisance, and replying to some
few complimentary questions, we were bid to retire, and
conducted back to our own residence,, where a sumptuous
feast had, during our absence, been prepared for us.

During the night a messenger from the palace informed
us the Regent would pay us a private visit, as there was
some information he particularly desired, which possibly we
might be able to give him, and that we were on no account
to make any preparation to inconvenience ourselves for his
reception, as he intended coming without any attendants,
(198) and in ordinary costume. In due time the Regent
was announced, and on salutations being exchanged, desired
to go with us into a private apartment, where he soon dis-
closed that he was none other than Yamada Nagamasa,
our fellow-companion to Formosa years ago.'*

After a series of sincere congratulation on their present
meeting, and apologies on both sides for what had happen-
ed in former days, Nagamasa expressed to them his deep
sense of gratitude for all former favours^ and although years


/

204 JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE,

had elapsed, during which, through the srailes of fortune
and success, he had attained high rank together with vast
wealth, still he had never forgotten the two merchants with
whom his first steps in the path of destiny or fortune com-
menced, and vvithout whose aid and material assistance,
he possibly would not have been in his present position. In
token of which. he now bestowed on them innumerable cost-
ly presents, to take with them on their return to Japan.

On the return of the merchants, Nagamasa’s fame and
successful career became widely circulated in Japan, and, as
a consequence, many adventurers in search of wealth and
fortune, and equally as ambitious as he, were not long in
finding means of getting to Siam. Nagamasa, although
holding high rank, and wealth in proportion, still in secret
sighed for the sight once more of his native land, more
especially for that of Eu-chiu, where he had resided previous
to his departure for Formosa. Whilst there he frequently
had offered prayers at the Shinto shrine of Sen-gen-mio-jin
(rather a noted shrine in Suruga). Never had he yet gone
forth to battle without first invoking the power of the
guardian deity of Sen-gen-mio-jin on his behalf, and never
having failed to secure the victory at any time, he attributed
his success to the efficacy of his prayers.

The most noted artist of the time was now instructed to
paint a scene portraying the principal battles in which
Nagamasa had been successful. This having been complet-
ed in the most graphic and satisfactory manner, it wafe got
ready, together with many other costly presents, to, be
forwarded, when an opportunity offered, to the above-named
shrine, as a token from Nagamasa for all the favours that had
been showered on him. He also sent letters to the Govern-
ment of Japan from time to time, as opportunity offered,
affording information which (199) would be beneficial in
establishing a friendly intercourse between the two coun-
tries, accompanying the same with presents.

A merchant vessel was npw about starting for Japan, and
this opportunity was taken of forwarding his offerings to the
shrine of Sen-gen-mio-jin.


JAMES; FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN -JAPANESE, 2O5

Affairs in the government o£ Siam were now undergoing
a change. The King was dead, and was succeeded by his
son, who was favourably inclined towards Nagamasa. One
of his first acts, on assuming the reins of government, was
to appoint him ruler of the two tributary provinces Rikkon
and Ki-hi-ru, which had been bestowed on him by the
former king.

Before he was able to take his leave and departure,
rumours were spread that the ex-Queen and one of the court
nobles were suspected of adulterous intrigue, aud to further
their ultimate designs had decided to poison the present
King. Nagamasa’s presence was the only obstacle that
required removing, and to hasten his de^parture, partisans
of the intriguing party had given such assurances that all
doubt as to the possibility of such designs being contemplat-
ed were allayed, and Nagamasa, thinking all was secure,
left for his provinces. Very little time had elapsed before
news of the King’s death reached him. He was determined
to avenge this diabolical act of the Queen’s, and bring both
the guilty parties to justice. In the meantime, anticipating
Nagamasa’s wrath, and knowing full well what deserts
would be in store for them, they secretly despatched envoys
to poison him, in whicl\they succeeded, causing his death
in the loth year of Kanyei (A.D. 1633).

His only issue was a daughter named Ayin, who, on the
death of her father, collected all their available forces, and
heading them herself, led them on against the Siamese
troops, but suffering heavy defeat in the first battle, through
inferiority in numbers, fled, a,nd eventually reached Japan.

Some years previous to the ^oth year of Kanyei (A.D.
1633), a party comprised of Chinese and Japanese had set
out with the object of settling, and founding a colony in
Formosa. They had not long been established when some
Dutch ships arrived, and anchored off the same place.
After communicating with the Japanese, and on agreeing
to certain stipulations that were imposed on them, they
were granted a concession of (200) land on which they might
establish themselves"^ for trading purposes. They had no


2o6 JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE.

sooner installed themselves than they commenced levying
a series of black-mail on all Japanese vessels arriving,
which they had to submit to, not then being in a position to
make any retaliation. It became so intolerable, that even-
tually one Hamada Yahei, collecting a number of his
countrymen, equally as desperate and determined as himself,
attacked the Dutch settlers, and succeeded in worsting them
to that extent that they were only too willing to submit to
the terms he imposed, in order to retain their present
foothold in Formosa.

They were so restricted, however, that for the future there
was no . possibility o£the Japanese being in any way moles-
ted by them.

Tai-wan (Formosa), an island situated in the southern
portion of the China Sea, seems to have been little known
in ancient times, and not until the commencement of ^
Ten-kei (A.D. 1621), during the Ming, dynasty, does it
appear that any people from China or Japan had settled
there.

The first settlers mentioned are Gan Shiu-sen, a native
of Haiching, and Tei Shi-rio, a native of Sen Shiu (Chin-
Chew) two Chinese, who together with a number of Japan-
ese, migrated thither, and founde4 the first settlement of
which there is any record.

Gan Shiu-sen was the head of the party, and assumed
the title of Kora, ? S or chief (probably a corruption of the
Japariese word Kashira, head, or most important personage).
Not long after they had settled there, the death of Gan
Shiu-sen occurred, and Tei Shi-rio now became the head of
the party, until finding favour at court in China he received
an appointment as a military commander, which post he
accepted. The Japanese now elected a chief from amongst
themselves, who was termed the Kora, as usual.

The Dutch now appear to have first arrived, and for the
concessions granted them by the Japanese, in allowing
them to acquire land for settling on for the purpose of trade,
agreed to pay a yearly tribute of 30,000 deer skins. After
installing themselves on the land selected, their first act


JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MOPERN JAPANESE, 207

was to build a fort sufficiently large for -all their force to
reside in, and this done, they lost no time in assuming an
air of superiority and dictation towards their Japanese
neighbours. The tribute of deer skins, as agreed to, was
never paid, in fact the reverse took place, for all Japanese
vessels which arrived had to deliver up (201) whatever was
demanded from them by the Dutch, and passing vessels,
even those going to India, were plundered on every occasion.
The Kora of the Japanese settlers, having no force at hand,
had nothing to do but submit to these breaches of good
faith and acts of extortion.

One of the principal and most frequent traders to For-
mosa (in whose absence the Dutch had installed themselves)
at that time, was named Hamada Yahei, a native of
Nagasaki. On his next visit, hearing of all the extortions,
and the indignities his countrymen had had to submit to at
the hands of the Dutch, he resolved, on his return to Naga-
saki, to represent the same to the government, and to re-
quest the assistance of a force sufficiently strong to coerce
the Dutch, and if possible, expel them.

Hamada Yahei, the head of the opposing party, although
a merchant, was far from being a peaceable one ; there was
more of the ffilibuster element about him than otherwise,
and consequently when the task of chastising the Dutch was
imposed on him by his countrymen, he assembled his
brother Koxayemon, together with his son Shinzo and
twenty of the principal settlers, who were all determined
men and longed to appease their resentment and to have
their revenge on the red-haired barbarians (Dutch). He
started for home, and having on his arrival represented the
state of affairs in Formosa to the authorities, an order was
issued to the Governor of Nagasaki, Suyetsugu Heizo, to
fit out ships, and supply men and arms, to assist Hamada
Yahei in driving the Dutch out of Formosa, and in their
stead to establish their own countrymen there. The expedi-
tion, several hundred strong, composed of men who were
only too glad to get |he opportunity of leaving their own
country, and join any enterprise that might lead to their


208 JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE. '

future advantage, sailed and arrived in safety off the en-
trance to Taiwan-fu. It had been previously arranged, to
prevent the suspicions of the Dutch as to the real object of
such a force arriving, that every person (with the exception
of the seamen actually engaged in navigating the ships)
should attire themselves as farmers, dressed with straw
hats and" hemp" rain-coats, so' that the arms which they
carried could be in no way visible. Before coming near to
the anchorage a few agricultural implements were left here
and there about the decks, so as the more easily to deceive
the Dutch. No sooner had the vessels anchored than they
were bo'arded by the {soi-disant) Dutch (202) officials, who
required to know the object of so many ships arriving, with
such a number of.men on board. The answer returned was
that they were simply emigrants of the agricultural class,
who, hearing of the wonderfully productive soil of Formosa,
had come there for the purpose of trying to better their
condition in life, better prospects having been held out to
them than they could foresee in their own country. This
report was accordingly made to the Dutch Captain Kitsu,
who was in command there, and he, doubting the truth of
the statement, sent guard-boats to surround the vessels, and
prevent any communication with the shore taking place. A
special messenger was sent from the Fort to inform the
Japanese that their coming in such force led the Captain to
suspect that the object of the mission was other than
friendly.

Hamada Yahei explained that there need be no doubt ^s
to their intentions. If Japan had wished to invade and
occupy Formosa, it would have sent a properly organized
expedition, comprising many ships of war, and well equip-
ped soldiers, whereas with them, it was the case of a few
farmers who came with no other object than of bettering
their position in this n^w land. The messenger having
thoroughly examined the different ships, and what he saw
agreeing with Hamada Yahei’s account, returned to the
Fort and made his report to the Captain accordingly. His
mind being relieved from all further doubt, he allowed the


JAMES : FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE. 20g

new-comers to land. On landing, Yahei and a few of his
principal followers went to the Fort, and having gained
admission to the Captain’s presence, expressed a desire
that they might be received as his own people, offering to
place themselves under his jurisdiction, and to receive in
return the same advantages as the Dutch. Their request
not being granted, after an interval they wished to be allow-
ed to return to Japan ; this was also refused them. How-
ever, from time to time they went and pleaded with the
Captain to change his mind, to allow them to depart, but
without avail. Matters were assuming a serious form for
them, and Hamada Yahei and his followers, seeing nothing
before them, if they remained as they were, but a life of
slavery, and eventually an ignominious death, became
desperate, and one and all decided, rather than submit,
to sell their lives as dearly as possible, or free them-
selves. Having prearranged to attack the Fort,=^ Hama-
da Yahei, together with his brother and son, and a few
followers, (203) leaving the rest of their party outside the
Fort, went early one morning, and soon gained admittance tp
the sleeping apartments of the Captain, who was still in bed.
On their announcement, annoyed at the intrusion of his
uncalled fof visitors, he abused them in rather strong lan-
guage for their audacity in entering his apartments. Hama-
da Yahei, without making any apology or observation of
any kind, seized him by the throat, and drawing his short
sword, told him as far as apologies went, he was the indivi-
dual from whom they would come for the future, as he did
not intend to discuss any points of etiquette with an indivi-
dual for whom any kind of death would be too good. A
scene now ensued, in which the attendants of the Captain
tried to seize on Hamada Yahei, but Kozayemon and Shin-
z6 drew their swords, and by showing they intended their
immediate use in qase of resistance, compelled them to
refrain from interfering.

The noise from the inner apartments had aroused the sus-
picion of the troops whithin the Fort, who having now got
* With arms conceahcl on their pcrsonss.


210 JAMES: FOREIGN TRAVEL OF MODERN JAPANESE-


under arms, encountered Hamada Yahei’s followers outside.
A general fight ensued, and there was firing on all sides.
During the m61ee, the Captain still in custody of Yahei and
his two J<insmen, who had spared his life only on his pro-
mising to comply with their demands without delay, pro-
ceeded to where the fighting was going on, and on his com-
manding his men to desist, order was soon restored. The
Dutch were completely overpowered and submitted to the
terms dictated by Hamada Yahei,

The terms dictated by Yahei, and agreed to by the Dutch,
were as follows : —

He was ordered to return two-fold everything he had
plundered from the Japanese since the first offence.

No guns of any kind were to be fired from the Fort in the
future.

One foreign-built ship and two Japanese vessels were to
be loaded full with goods of every description, at Yahei’s
pleasure, and to sail for Japan, and the Captain was to be
taken there as a prisoner ; but after pleading and represent-
ing to Yahei the influence he had with the native tribes,'
together with the number that were already under his juris-
diction<^_gjld, that taking him might cause great trouble
amongst the different tribes, he suggested that ^his son, a
youth of twelve years, might be accepted in his st'^^ad, which
was finally agreed to.

(204) On Hamada Yahei’s return to Japan about twenty
chiefs [To-mokit) of different tribes accompanied him, who,
together with his kinsmen and other followers, on their
arrival at Nagasaki, gave a graphic account to the officials'
of their adventures in Formosa.

Yahei received . great praise and distinction from the
Government, and his fame became widespread in Japan.

Some time after, his services were solicited by Kato Kiyo-
masa, the Lord of Higo, who appointed him to a remunera-
tive post in his province. Kanyei, 5th year (A.D, 1628).


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


(205) A General Meeting was held at the ShSheikuwan, SeidS, TokiO,
on Tuesday, 14th January, 1879. Dr. David Murray, the President,
occupied the chair.

The minutes of the preceding General Meeting were read and approv-
ed.

The Recording Secretary announced that at the last Meeting of
Council a letter from Dr. Murray had been read, in which that gentle-
man, on account of his leaving Japan, signified his resignation of the
office of President, at the same time expressing a desire to retain his
connection with the Society. The Corresponding Secretary had accor-
dingly been instructed to communicate with Dr. Murray, thanking him
for his past services as Vice-President and President, and requesting
him to represent the Society in any of h e cities which he might visit
during his approaching journey. Thereafter the Rev, Dr. Syle had been
unanimously elected President, Dr. Divers, F. C. S., F.I.C., Vice-
President for Tokyo, in room of Dr. Syle, and Mr. William Anderson,
F.R.C.S., a Member of Council, in room of Dr Divers. He also
announced that Mr. Thomas Gray, C.E., B. Sc., and Dr. F. Eykman,
had been elected members of the Society.

The Librarian reported the receipt of the following :—Vol. I. to X.
with Index, and Vol. XL, part 4, of the Records of the Geological
Survey of India from 1868 to 1877; No. I, Journal of Straits Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society, Singapore, 1878; Bulletin of the Russian
Imperial Geographical Society ; Fourth Annual Report of the Minister
of Education, for 1876 (original and translation); Boletin de la
Sociedad Geogrdfica de Madrid,

The President said that, before proceeding with the business of the day,
he had the honor to submit his resignation as President, and hand over the
duty of presiding to Dr. Syle. From the very beginning of the Society
Dr. Syle had been a member, and one of the most active members;
indeed, but for his exertions, it was probable not only that the Society
would never have reached its present efficiency, but that it would never
have been originated at all. He expressed his thanks to the Society for
the honour conferred upon him in selecting him to preside over their
meetings. He congratulated the Society upon the degree of success
that had attended the mission of the Society in this country. The
volumes issued by ths Society gave a very good indication of the wisdom
of those who had established it. No better material could^ be found for
the formation of correct ideas regarding Japan than the Asiatic Society’s
Transactions. The work was still' but begun. Questions demanding
elucidation existed on all sides. He hoped to hear of this Society going
on in the career of progress on which it had entered. He begged now
to transfer the duty of presiding to Dr, Syle.


Dr, Syle then took the chair, briefly thanking the Society for the
honor conferred upn him.

(206) Sir Harry Parkes testified to the very great regret with which
the Society had heard that their President had resigned the chair. He
was sure they all cordially joined in wishing Dr. Murray a pleasant
voyage, and hoping that he might return and again fill that chair. He
rejoiced that Dt. Murray's post was to be so well filled. Dr. Syle was
the founder of the Society. The concluding remarks of Dr, Murray
were calciilaL«jd to stimulate him in the exercise of his presidential duties.

Mr. Satow then read a paper by the Rev. Henry Stoutj of Nagasaki,
entitled, '' Inscriptions at Shimabara and Amakusa.’'

The President eulogized this paper on account of its entirely unique
character and the authenticity of its information.

Mr., Satow said the question whether the Dutch sent a vessel pf war to
assist the government troops against the Shimabara insurgents, was con-
clusively settled in the affirmative by the testimony of Baron Onno-Swier
van Haren, who, in a work written by him in defence of the conduct of
the Dutch in Japan, and published in London and Paris in 1778, entitled
^^Recherckes Historiques sitr PHat de la Religion ChvHienne a%i Japon
fslativement a la nation Hollandaise^ quotes from the journals of the
Dutch factory at Hirado (Firando) the statement that a Dutch vessel
was present at the siege of Shimabara, landed guns, and opened fire
from batteries armed with these guns and from the vessel. It has also
been disputed whether these insurgents were driven to rebel on account
of the oppressive rule of the daimim whose subjects they were, or by the
hope of obtaining liberty to profess their religion. It is true that the
two daimids were afterwards punished by the Sh^igun’s government on
the ground that they had misgoverned their subjects, but this proves .
nothing. Any daimios in whose dominions an insurrection broke out
woqld have been condemned ipso facto for misgovernment. All Japan-
ese accounts agree in stating that the motive of the insurgents was the
desire to obtain freedom for the exercise of their faith. De Haren,
however, says that the rebels were chiefly oppressed peasants, with a
small sprinkling of apostate Christians, ten thousand nmlns and the
dissatisfied inhabitants of Amakusa, and this at least seems to have beeii
the account of the matter received by the Dutch residents at Hirado.

A' MS. journal kept by some one who took part in the siege, disco-
vered by Mr. Aston, states that on the 24th February, 1638, the garrison
offered to surrender, if the lives of all but the ringleaders weire spared,
but the reply from the besiegers was that not a single one could be
allowed to escape. The garrison then prayed that the women and
children might be spared, if the men all submitted to lose their heads;
but the answer was the same as before, that not a single one should be
suffered to escapfe the edge of the sword. The diarist says in another
place that out of the 37,006 people who filled the castle and the lines
around it, only 13,000 were fighting men, so that we must suppose that

some 24,000 women and children were slaughtered when the place was
taken.

Captain J. M. James then read ’“A Short Narrative of Travel of
Modern Japanese Adventurers.”

(207) The f*resident remarked that Captain James’ paper was most
interesting and valuable, and opened quite a new field of inquiry. It '


— 213 —


reminded one of an old romance. He hoped it was the first of a series.
The Japanese were a terror on the coast of China to this day.

In answer to a question from Dr. Murray, Captain James said that,
as far as he knew, the expedition to Siam referred to in his paper was
a historical fact.

Mr, Satow contributed the following additional information in
regard to the relations of the Dutch and the Japanese in the island of
Formosa : —

M, Pages, in his work entitled La Religion ChrHtenne ati at

page 680, says that Pieter Nuyts, in 1627, visited Yedo on behalf of the
Dutch East India Company, and gave himself out as ambassador of the
King of Holland. This was found out by the Japanese officials, who
treated him with a certain amount of contempt in consequence.

In 1628, Nuyts being made Governor of the Fort of Zelandia in
Formosa, found an opportunity of wreaking his vengeance upon two
Japanese vessels, which touched there on their way to China. He
seized the sails and yards, and made the junks miss the monsoon.
The Japanese, under command of their leader, Hamada (Famanda),
attacked Nuyts by surprise and made him prisoner. In the fight six
Dutchmen were killed and iS wounded; three Japanese lost their lives.
He was further forced to give up 200 piculs of silk, which he had
detained during a whole year, with compensation for loss of market,
to set free 12 Formosans who had been unjustly imprisoned by him,
and to beg pardon. Hamada kept him a prisoner for 12 days more.
On returning to Japan, they reported the affair to the Government, and
the Shogun claimed the surrender of Nuyts. In 1631 he was brought
to Japan, and handed over to the Shogun’s Government, which kept
him in prison for five years.

A more authentic account of these transactions is given by Meylan in
his Geschiedktmdig Overssigi van den Handel der Ruropezen of Japan
(Historical Review of the Trade of Europeans in Japan), as follows : —

“ In ,1627 Pieter Nuyts was appointed Governor of Formosa, On his
arrival there in the month of June, 1627, he found a report from the
Superintendent, Cornelis van Nuyenrode, informing Nuyts that he had
learnt that the Japanese merchants had determined to obtain by force
of arms the freedom of trade in Formosa, which had been refused them
in spite of all their representations, at the same time cautioning the
servants of the company to be on their guard, if more junks than usual,
and armed, should arrive from Japan at Formosa.

“It has remained unknown whether the Japanese merchants really
had such a design ; but on the appearance of the Japanese junks, which
arrived that year in Formosa, the Governor took the precaution of
placing them under the surveillance of the Dutch ships which were
there at the time. He next had them strictly searched, and finding
that they were better armed than usual, gave orders that the arms,
without exception, should be brought on shore and taken charge of,
until the {208) time of the departure of the junks, in the meantime
demanding the same duties as had hitherto been levied upon imported
merchandise.

“The Japanese were utterly enraged at this treatment, and threatened
the Governor that they would not only bring their complaints before
the Imperial Japanese Court, but would also take their own particular
revenge. .


“ Although the Governor disregarded this threat, he discovered only
too soon that it was not altogether made in joke, for having also in the
same year sailed to Japan, and having travelled to Yedo, in order to
acquit himself of his mission, he found himself anticipated there by the
new complaints of the Japanese merchants, with the result that an
audience of the Emperor was refused to him, so that he found himself
obliged to rkurn to his Governorship of Taiwan, without having
accomplished the object of his journey.

“The Japanese, fax from being hereby satisfied with regard to the
affront which they considered had been offered to them, returned in
^628 to Formosa, but so slightly equipped that the Governor considered
it unnecessary to take precautions against them on this occasion, t

“ It appears, however, that also some natives and Chinese had resisted
the levy of import and export duties, and had consequently been thrown
into prison, whilst the Governor, P. Nuyts, seems to have had grounds
for delaying the departure of the Japanese junks against the will of the
Japanese, although I do not find the reasons for this recorded; still
if it be permitted to make a guess concerning the matter, it is not
improbable that the resistance which the Governor had experienced on
the part of the Chinese and natives, was attributed by him to the advice
and suggestions of the Japanese, and that he would not consent to this
departure until he had assured himself how far his suspicions were
correct.

“However that may be, on the morning of the 29th June a few
Japanese applied for admission to the Governor, who was in a room
alone with his little son ; they demanded from him immediate consent
to their departure, and upon receiving an answer in the negative, fell
upon the Governor and his little son, and bound them hand and foot,
while another band of Japanese, now numbering in all 150 men, hurried
up immediately, made themselves masters of all the approaches to the
residence of the Governor, and dispersed at the first onset the sentries
stationed there, who, not suspecting any force, were easy to take by
surprise.

“ The garrison assembled with the^ design of effecting by force the
release of the Governor, though they in tlae first place demanded that
he should be delivered to them. The Japanese swore that they were-
prepared toMie, but that the first attack made upon them would be the
certain signal for the death of the Governor and his son, whom they
guarded with drawn swords.

“The Japanese now demanded from the Governor not only theif
unconditional free departure, but also the release of the natives and
Chinese, who, as we have seen above, were kept in confinement,
together with the restoration of 150 piculs of silk, which they main-
tained to have lost through the fault of the Dutchmen.

(209) “ The negotiations, about this affair lasted seven whole days,
namely, from the 29th June to the 5th July. The Governor, P. Nuyts,
who had remained in fear of his life all this time, agreed at last to
everything, .subjeet, however, to the approval of the council, consisting
of the principal functionaries of the Factory then present in Formosa,
who had assumed the administration during the imprisonment of the
Governor, and who were strong enough not to fear a further attack from
the Japanese.

“The council, considering that with any measures of violence the


~ 215 —


lives of the Governor and his son were inevitably lost, together with the
fact that such measures might moreover have the most regrettable results
for the servants of the Company in Japan and on the interest that the
Company had to remain in possession of the trade in these regions,
inclined on its own side also to peaceable sentiments, and ratified the
agreement which had been concluded between the captured governor
and the mutinous Japanese.

“ On both sides hostages were given to ensure the faithful fulfilment
of this agreement, amongst which hostages, on the side of the Netherland-
ers, was the son of the Governor. After that the Formosan and Chinese
prisoners were set at liberty and the 150 piculs of silk were made good
to the Japanese, partly in kind partly in money, according to a fixed
value, and they thereupon, returned in peace to Japan, where the ex-
change of the hostages took place; though this sad history did not end
therewith.

“ The Japanese, on returning from Formosa, took care to have the
affair represented to the Imperial Court in the most favourable manner ;
and found means to obtain approval of their behaviour and disapproval
of that of the Governor, P. Nuyts. But, however unfavourably the
affairs may have been regarded by the Japanese Court, it was no less
ill received by the supreme Government at Batavia. When the matter
was discussed there, the Governor, General De Carpentier, had been
replaced by the Governor-General, Jan Pieterzoon Koen, who bad
arrived at Batavia with this rank a second time. In the former Herr
Nuyts lost a great and powerful protector, whilst it appeared on the
other side that the new Gevernor-General was by no means inclined to
give his approval to all the measures of his predecessor in office.

“ Some historians have made out that the dissatisfaction of the
Supreme Indian Government with Herr Nuyts went even so far that
they caused him^ to be carried back as a prisoner to Japan, in order to
be placed at the disposition of the Japanese Government, as a state
sacrifice; but this fable, which is taken from the ^ Rectiil de Voyages
ail Nordj' is positively contradicted by all genuine information and
records of that period. It is true, nevertheless, that Herr Nuyts, re-
called from Formosa to Batavia, received a not very honourable dismissal,
not only from his office of- governor, but also from his rank as Coun-
cillor of India; that he afterwards returned to Japan in 1632, not under
compulsion, hut of his own choice, because bis enemies gave out that
many things had come to light in Japan to his disadvantage, and he
said he was not afraid to go to defend his cause, which he (210) held to
be justified in that country also ; that he subsequently, upon his arrival
at Hirado, was immediately put in prison by order of the Japanese
Government, without being granted any trial or hearing ; and lastly,
that after his arrest the [successive] Superintendents, under repeated
instructions from the Supreme Government, left nothing untried to
procure his release, sparing neither representations, money or presents,
though his release was not obtained until the month of July, 1636. So
much expenditure and solicitude on the part of the Supreme Government
to effect the release of Herr Nuyts from Japan prove abundantly that
he was not sent thither as a political victim, whatever reasons for dis^
satis/iiction the Supreme Government may have had with the said
genileinan.”


2i6 —


Sir Harry Parkes said that it was very interesting to find from a
Japanese quarter information throwing light on history. He hoped that
Captain James’ example would be followed. The facts revealed ac-
counted for the recent interest taken by the Japanese in Formosa. It
would seem that at the time referred to in the story there 'were very
few Chinese in Formosa; now the Chinese population amounted to
3,000,000. The force of the Dutch governor of the island must have
been small. To the present day there was down by Chinese junks in
the Formosan channel a little horizontal tricolour flag that was^ derived
from the Dutch. In connection with the expedition to Siam, he
remarked that the Japanese, like the Swiss, had been accustomed to
enter into the service of various foreign potentates. Until recently,
very little had been known of Siam. The inhabitants of that country
had a predilection for Japanese swords.

The meeting was then adjourned.


ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA


AND

THE NECESSITY FOR ITS IMPROVEMENT:


Being the Result of a Systematic Inspection.
AND Analysis of the Wells in Yokohama.


By Dr. A. T. C. Geerts,


and

T. J. R. Onaka, Sanitary Chemist and 4- nalyist^


J. S. Umayabara, ^
M. T. Yamashina,

T. T. Ninomiya,

R. S. Matsuzaka, V

K. S. Ikuta,

J. F. Koiso,

M. Y. Ogushx, !


Assistant Chemists and
Analyists at the Im-
perial Laboratory of
BenteUy Yokohama,


CONTENTS: i. Short History op Drinking Water. — 2. Standard
AND Limits op Purity of Drinking Water. — 3.
Table ; General Review of Results Obtained in
THE Three Districts of Yokohama. — ^4. Tamagawa
Water and Its Aqueduct — 5. Model of Register
Used. — 6-7. Two Maps Showing the Quality of the
Wells in Yokohama and the Number op Deaths
from Choleraic Disease in Yokohama.


L— SHORT HISTORY OP FRESH WATER.

The principal source of all drinking , or potable water is
rain. When rain-water falls on the ground it constitutes a
comparatively pure water. It contains then only minute
traces of organic matter, ammonia, nitrate of ammonia, and


2I8 GEERTS : on the drinking water of YOKOHAMA.

atmospheric air,' which substances have been absorbed
during the passage of the rain through the air.

(212) When rain-water penetrates into the ground, it
dissolves the more or less soluble substances contained in
the latter; such as the chlorides of potassium and sodium,
the carbonates of magnesia, and lime and other salts.

After reaching the ground, rain-water may either collect
directly and form brooks, rivulets, and at last rivers, or it
may completely disappear from the surface of the earth, and
be gathered in underground reservoirs, and form what Is
generally called a well.

The water of brooks and that of rivers, in their upper
course, will be free or at least nearly free from animal
organic matter, and may therefore be safely used as drink-
ing water by the people living in its neighbourhood. But
when such running water has once passed the first inhabited
place (village or town) on its banks, it will no longer possess
its original purity. For the water which has been used by
the people will partly return to the river through gutters,
drains, canals, roads and ways in the form of sewage ; and
as this filthy water contains a great quantity of impurities
of animal origin, such as faecal matter, urine, soap, refuse-
water that has been used in washing, etc., it will, in mixing
with the river-water, deprive the latter of its orignal purity.
In its further course such running water may again be
partly freed from the organic impurities in solution, by their
being slowly oxidized into nitrous and nitric compounds,
and other products of oxidation. The more densely popula-
ted the places a; river passes in its course, the more will its
water become impure and polluted ; until at last, in its
lower course, the water will have become perfectly unfit to
be used as drinking water, and its use may even be dange-
rous to health. ^

Is is- therefore easy to see why the originally pure mount-
ain water, in flowing past densely populated places, must
necessarily become more and more poUiited and foul.

The rain-water , that has penetrated into the earth and
that has gathered in underground reservoirs, forms, ‘.as we


GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA, 2ig

have said, the water of wells. If a well is very shallow,
and if it contains chiefly what is called surface water, it will
act also as a reservoir for part of the drain-water and of the
sewage of the neighorhbood. If such a shallow well is
situated in proximity to dwellings, in densely populated
streets, or, — what is even worse, — near leaky closets, drains,
dung-heaps, cess-pools, stagnant-pools*, swamps, etc., its
water must necessarily (213) become polluted by animal
matter and other organic substances in a state of decom-
position, whilst it will also mostly contain nitrites and
nitrates as the products of oxidation of a part or of the
whole of the nitrogenous organic substances, together with
ammonia as a product of decomposition or reduction of the
same substances.

After the water of a well has once been used by man, it
will — like the river-water — form sewage, or filthy water, and
either flow into a river, through gutters, drains and canals,
or be again absorbed by the ground. It is evident that the
water of shallow wells — surface water — situated in low,
densely populated and badly drained places, must become
more and more polluted ; also shallow wells may sometimes
contain pretty pure water, when they are situated in un-
inhabited highlands and mountain places. The water of
the last kind of wells is called upland surface-water, and is
often of good quality.

With the so-called deep wells, the case is quite different,
for in these wells the surface water is as far as possible
excluded. A deep well"' is not always a well of great
depth, but it is a well in which the water appears beneath a
layer of earth which is wholly or nearly impenetrable for
water ; the shaft of the deep well must therefore penetrate
through that impermeable stratum. The water which such
a well contains is not the rain-water that falls in its im-
mediate neighbourhood, but that which falls at the place
where the impenetrable sti*atum appears at the surface of
the earth. If this place is uninhabited or mountainous, the
water of the well will in all probability be entirely free from
organic impurities, or from the products of the, decomposi-


220 GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA.

tion of organic bodies (ammonia, nitrites, nitrates). As the
water of deep wells has in most cases to flow a great dis-
tance underground before it reaches the well, and as it has to
pass on its way through an extensive filter of layers of
earth, it happens very often that, although it contained at
its origin some organic substances, it is found to contain in
the well only nitrates, without any trace of organic matter,
the latter substances having been oxidized during the pas-
sage of the water into the inoffensive nitrous compounds ^
through the different earth-layers.

We thus see that the water pf mountain lakes, streams,
or rivulets, and of deep wells constitutes the two best natural
kinds of drinking water, whilst the water of more or less
polluted rivers, and that of shallow wells, especially in
densely populated y lowly situated and badly (214) drained
places^ form the worst and most dangerous kinds of drinking
water.

A systematic investigation into the nature of the wells of
Yokohama, performed in the year 1877, has shown us that,
with the exception of some wells situated on the hills, all
the wells of this town belong to the worst sort of shallow
wellSj containing only surface-water. It has further shown
us that the water of the shallow wells, situated in the most
densely populated and badly drained parts of the town, must
be considered to be of very bad quality ; and that those
parts of Yokohama where in former times swamps were to
be found, contain wells the water of which is so bad that
even the common people, do not think of using it as a
beverage. The water of the wells situated along the sea-
shore or near the canals that intersect Yokohama in many
directions, contains a large' amount of salt which makes it
in most cases unfit to serve as drinking water.

It is certain that the water of even those shallow wells of
Yokohama which furnish at present water of tolerable qua-
lity will also become polluted whithin a few years, if none
of the following measures of precaution and improvement
be immediately taken.

These measures are ; —


GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF 'J^OICOHAMA. 221

ist. — The introduction of a better system of disposal of
sewage, better constructed open drains, care being taken to
keep the drains open and clean.

2nd. — The removal of the closets from the immediate
neighbourhood of the wells : these conveniences are in this
country generally built quite close to the well. Should it be
impossible, from want of space, to remove them^ then they
ought at least to be rendered perfectly water-tight.

3rd. — The transformation of the present shallow wells
into deep wells^'' by making the shafts of a water-tight
material, in order to prevent the surface-water from mixing
directly with the lower layers of pure water,

4th — The termination, extension ^nd amelioration of the
Tamagawa aqueduct by conducting its water, which is
wholesome and of great purity, by means of perfectly
circulating iron pipes, through the whole town. The pre-
sent system of aqueducts, which ends here and there in
dead points, must be wholly given up.^

(215) We insist on the fact that shallow wells are always
dangerous to public health. Although they may at a certain
time of the year contain tolerably good water, their con-
tinuing to do So is never to be relied upon. My experience
in Yokohama has proved that these wells are subject to
great variations in the quality of their water, A sudden
rain shower after a, long season of drought will carry
mechanically a great amount of impurities into the drain-
water ; the latter will dissolve, besides, part of the filth
which has accumulated in the pores of the ground during
the period of drought ; it will therefore pollute the water
of the well just at a time when one would think that its
water must have been improved by the great quantity of
fresh rain-water that has been added.

In shallow wells a sinall amount of impurities or organic
matter in decomposition must be considered to be of far
greater importance than it would be in a deep well, as the

^ A first necessity is that the wafer of all parts of the aqueduct is kept
contantly ift movement The system must therefore be circulatory, with-
out any dead ends. „ . ^


222 GEERTS-: ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA.

former are subject to such great alterations in the quality
of their water, whilst the water of the latter remains more
constant in its compositon.

IL-~-THE STANDARD AND THE LIMITS OF
PURITY OF DRINKING WATER.

In considering the quality of water in general, the
sanitary chemist must keep in mind ther different purposes
for which it has to serve. The water of a well, for instance,
may be good enough to supply a single house with drinking
water, whilst it may be unfit to be carried by an aqueduct
for the supply of a tov^i. The reason of this is, that the
water used in a great town has not only to serve as drinking
water, but must also be fit to be employed for a great
variety of industrial purposes for which pure water is re-
quired, and that the water carried by an aqueduct is always
apt to become less pure in passing through the conduits.

Many a water may be safely used for cleansing and
washing, whilst its use as drinking water may be danger-
ous.

It is, however, not to be forgotten that many people are
not at all aware of the consequences of the use of bad
water, and that they are apt to drink a water which ought
only to, serve for washing purposes. This is the more the
case if the acqui'sition of a better sort of water offers some
difficulties.

{216) If it can be done, it is therefore always far better to
supply a town with wat^r of good quality only, and to pre-
vent the use of bad water even for cleansing and washing.

There are as yet no fixed rules according to which the
sanitary chemist may decide as to the good or bad quality
of a water for drinking. It is easy enough to determine
the difference between a very good and a very bad water;
but there are many waters which keep just in the middle
of these, two extremes, and- jn such cases it is often a
difficult task to decide if the water is be to admitted or
rejected as potable water. One phemist will be more severe


GEERTS ; ON THE DRINKING WATER OE YOKOHAMA. 223

in his appreciation of facts, ergo in his judgment, than
another, although they may both have found the same
substances in the water. Another difficulty is to be found
in the difference of composition that the water of one and
the same source shows at different seasons and even on
different days of the year.

Before deciding upon the quality of potable water, it is
consequently necessary to fix a standard of purity and to
ascertain the average condition of the well, and to collect
the water which is to be examined at a time when it is in
its normal state.

The water of rivers is, as a rule, not to be examined im-
mediately after heavy rain. A sudden rain * shower, after a
period of drought, will in most cases contribute more, to
the pollution of the river-water than would a lasting rain
under normal conditions of the weather. Besides, the
quantity of sewage carried off in great towns is, at the
beginning of a rain-storm, extraordinarily great, and, in
mixing with the river-watery it communicates to the latter
an amount of impurities, which it would not possess under
ordinary circumstances.^

, In judging of a water, the chemist has at the same time
to indicate the means by which a water might he improved.

A water, lor instance, that contains minute particles or
clay in suspension, in consequence of which it appears
turbid, may easily be rendered clear, either by slow filtra-
tion or by allowing it to stand for a while in a vessel,' so
that the clay particles may collect at the bottom; it very
often happens that such a water turns out to be. of a very
good quality. - Even a water that contains some organic
matter in suspension is not always to be rejected, as it has
been proved that, in passing through layers of fine sand,
animal charcoal or spongy iron, it may become a very clear,
colourless,' and suitable sdrt of water.

(217) What contribute the most to make water dangerou?^
to health are the dissolved' nitrogenous organic. matter of
animal origin ahd in a state of decomposition, and the
ducts * of thia ' decomposition , viz., ammonia, nitrites, aud^


224 GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA,

nitrates. Not that the latter substances are in themselves
obnoxious to health, but they indicate a former contact of
the water with putrefied organic matter of animal origin.

The water of deep wells may in many instances be im-
proved by preventing the drain-water from penetrating into
them. This may principally be done by making the walls
of the shaft water-tight, or by using an iron cylinder, with
a pump placed at its upper end.

The shallow wells, which are so numerous in Yokohama,
may partly be improved by rendering the upper part of the
shafts impermeable to water, in order to prevent the direct
flowing of the drain-water into the well. It would further
be necessary to ram the surface of the ground around the
well for a space of eight to ten square metres and to cover
this space with a thick layer of clay, in order to prevent the
vertical penetration of the drain-water.

The condition of the wells of Yokohama may likewise be
ameliorated by altering the present system of drains. The
drains now in use are leaky in many places, they do not
allow a free passage to the sewage, and are usually not
kept clean ; they ought to be replaced by water-tight open
conduits, which allow the water to flow freely through them.

I am of opinion that the bad system of the narrow, wooden
drains is the principal reason of the bad quality of the drink-
ing water in many parts of Yokohama. All kinds of stinking
liquids and putrid gases are by these drains communicated
to the air and to the soil, and by the latter to the water of
the wells, !

In regard to public health, the system of drains Tn
Yokohama, as well as in all other towns of Japan, ought
to attract^ the particular attention of the local government
authorities, because the drains ought not only to keep
the ground and the drinking water free from pollution,
but they ought, moreover, to provide for pure air^ another
most important factor ip the public health.

The systematic inspectipn of all bad wells in Yokohama,
made by myself on the spot, has completely satisfied me
that the defective removah of the sewage, through the


OEERTS: ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA. 225

narrow and leaky wooden drains, and through the narrow
underground cylinders of pottery, is not only the (218)
reason of the bad condition of the drinking water, but
may even become the cause of the propagation of zymotic
infections and diseases, such as cholera, typhoid fever,
diarrhoea, ague and continued fever. For although the
nature of most contagia is not yet exactly known, it
appears very probable that in all infectious diseases the
specific contagious principles . are excessively minute, of
a solid nature, endowed with an independent life, able to
multiply under certain conditions at a prodigious rate,
and to be transported by the medium, of air and water.

Medical experience has proved that these diseases often
arise from swallowing water derived from wells contaminated
with sewage or the fluids from filthy drains and stagnant
pools.

As the lower situated parts of Yokohama consist nearly
exclusively of filled-up ground of a very porous nature
(pebble-conglomerate), it will necessarily become im-
pregnated with all kind of organic matter in a state of
decomposition, if care is not taken to carry the sewage
off by means of water-tight conduits. ^

The proximity of the wooden drains to the wells and
dwellings makes them still more dangerous to public
health, and I think, therefore, that I connot insist enough
on the necessity of a radical change in the very imperfect
system of draining, not only in Yokohama, but in all
Japanese towns.

It is easy to see that stagnant pools and cess-pools ought
also to be removed from the immediate neighbourhood of
wells ; or if this should be impossible, these pools ought
to be made at least perfectly water-tight.

Lastly, I desire to draw attention to the bad Japanese
practice of building the closets always near to the wells.
Few reservoirs of these conveniences are water-tight
enough to prevent the excreta from penetrating into the
surrounding porous, gronnd and from thus becorping the
cause of pollution of the water. To remove these closets


2^6 GEERfS : ON TNE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA.

from the wells is of the first necessity for the public health,
and in such few cases as the removal may be impossible,
the walls of the reservoirs must be made perfectly water-
tight by covering them with cement, so that no liquids
may by any means pass through them.

In judging of the quality of the water of the different
wells of Yokohama, they have been divided into three
classes, viz,

1ST, Good Water. — When the water is clear, and is free,
or at least nearly free from organic matter, either
in solution or in (219) suspension, and from nitric
acid ; and when it contains no, or only traces of, am-
monia. Besides, it must be without smell and colour
and of an agreeable fresh taste.

2ND, Water of Medium Quality. — When, although not
being very pure, it may still be used as drinking-
< water, and when it stands above the under-mentioned
limits of purity.

3RD, Bad Water — ^Unfit for Drinkig.— When the use
of it is dangerous to ’ health, and when it stands
below the admitted limits of purity.

The following limits of purity have been adopted by us in
judging of the quality of the water : —


I. — Colour. - ^

When poured into a tube of colourless glass of two'
decimeters’ length, and the tube, placed vertically on a wliite
sheet of paper, the water viewed through the height of the
column must not appear yellowish, brownish, or greyish.


. 2.^ — Smell.

Neither in its normal state' nor when heated in a boiling-
fiask to 30 or 35° C, and shakdn, must it evolve a bad smell
(presence of hydrosulphurtc acid or other gases of putrefac-
tion). * " ‘ ■ -


GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA. 227


3. — Clearness.

The water must he clear, and after being filtered it must
not show a yellowish or brownish colour. If a trifling,
milky turbidity is present, due only to minute clay particles
and not to floating organic matter or living organized beings,
the water may, after filtration or clarification, still serve as
drinking water if it possesses the other qualities required
for good water.


4. — Taste.

The water miist possess a good, fresh, and agreeable
taste. Water having a disagreeable, soapy, nasty, or earthy
taste is to be rejected, as well as water which has a promi-
nent saline taste.


5. — Chi-orides.

The water must not contain more than five parts of
chlorine (Cl = 35, 46) in 100,000 parts of water. (Good
water seldom contains more than two or three parts of
chlorine in 100,000 parts of water.)

6. — Hardness.

The water must not be too hard, and not show more than
20 (220) degrees of hardness (equal to 20 parts of lime,
CaO) in the 100,000 parts of water.

7. — Nitrites.

The water must not contain more than the maximum of
0.5 of nitrous acid (NO3 == 38) in 100,000 parts of water.
(Good water contains no nitrous acid at all.)

8. — Nitrates.

The water must not contain more than the maximum of
one part of mtWc acid (NO5 = 54) in the 100,000 parts of
water. (Good water contains no nitric acid.)


228 GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA.

g. — A mmonia.

The water must not contain more than the maximum of
o.o6 of ammonia (NH3 = 17) in the 100,000 parts of water,
(Good water contains no ammonia at all or only traces of
it.)

10. — Organic Matter and Living Microscopic Beings.

The water must be free from dissolved organic matter, or
at least contain only traces of it. It must not contain
suspended organic bodies in a state of putrefaction, nor such
living microscopic beings as annelids (Nals)^ Cyclops,
Macrohiotus^ bacteria, infusoria, ccclenteraia, scolecida,
turhellaria, Entomostraca, Malacostraca, Acanna^ 'L^tVd. of
insects and ova of eniozoa. When heated to near the boil-
ing point with diluted sulphuric acid and mineral chameleon,
the water must not discolour more than 0.8 parts (eight-
tenths) of mineral chameleon in 100,000 parts of water,
(Correction for nitrous acid,: see later.)

II. — Total Amount of Solid Matter,

The total amount of solid matter, contained in the water
after evaporating and drying at 120° C., must not exceed 50
parts of solid matter in 100,000 parts of water.

i2.—Nature of Sediment.

The particles kept in suspension by the water; or< the
sediment which is formed by water standing for a titne;
must not, on examination under the microscope, with a-
magnifying power of 400 to 600 diameters, show any of the
above-mentioned living microscopic beings, nor the ova of
e?itozoa or of insects. [A small amount of fresh water algce^
desmidiacecB, etc^, is harmless.]

A water, although its other qualities may be good, if it
contain living microscopic animals, is to be rejected for
drinking purposes, (22*1) not because it is proved that the
latter are all without exception obnoxious to health — which
in fact has not yet been proved— but from’ an esthetic point
of view and because some of them arc dangerous.


GEERTS : ON THE DRINEmG WATER OF YOKOHAMA. 229


GENERAL REVIEW OF THE RESULTS OF THE
SANITARY INSPECTION OF THE
WELLS IN YOKOHAMA.


DISTRICT OF THE CITY.

GOOD.

MEDIUM

QUALITY.

bad: unfit

FOR

DRINKING.

First District


14

5a

5a

45

5a

76

Second District

762

1107

Third District


Total


177


I3D

Percentage- numbers of all wells ....
Total number of wells for drinking pur-
poses anab^zed in all districts. . .

86-57o

2324

67o

8.57o


Note. In these tables, only those wells the water of which is used
as drinking water are mentioned. If the very numerous bad wells in
the swamp and in the lower filled-up parts of Yokohama (the water of
which is never drunk by the people) had been taken into account, the
percentage -numbers of bad wells would have been very much larger.

THE TAMAGAWA AQUEDUCT TO YOKOHAMA.

The Tamagawa is the chief river of the Kanagawa Ken,
and after the Sumida-gawa, the largest river of the province
of Mnsashi. It has its sources at the mountain-range
which forms the limits of the two provinces, Kai and Mu-
sashi. The river flows over a distance of about 25 W, in
the‘direction from W.N.W. to E.S.E., and discharges into
the sea at Kawasaki. Remarkable for the purity of its
water, this river has very justly been used as the prise
d' eau ” for the aqueducts both of Tokio and Yokohama.

The water destined fof the Yokohama aqueduct is, how-
ever, not taken directly from the river, but from an open
canal, artificially made, which obtains its water from the
upper Tamagawa. Near the village of Nakanoshima, in
the district of Tachibana-gori, in the province of Musashi,
a first branGh. canal commences, and a little lower, at Yado-
kawara-mura,^ another branch canal is taken from the river


230 GEERTS ; ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA.

Tamagawa. These two branches unite at Hisashi-mura,
after, which village the canal runs, nearly parallel with the
river, to the village of Kashimada. At the latter place
there is a reservoir, and it is here (222) that the wooden
tubes of the aqueduct proper commence. Kashimada is
therefore the ” for Yokohama.' The distance

from this place to Yokohama (Minato-chd, Roku-chome), thus
the whole length of the wooden aqueduct, is 8,650 hen or
15,725 meters, i.e. nearly 16 kilometers.

In 1877, before the local authorities had commenced the
repair of the existing aqueduct, I examined the water taken
from different places in Yokohama, and I then found the
water so much mixed with salt water and impurities, of both
an organic and an inorganic nature, that it was not fit for
drinking. The common people did not even think of using
it as drink, on account of its bad taste and brackish nature.
The water had become impure by reason of the tubes which
lay under the canal near the railway station being very
leaky, and permitting the sea-water from the canal to enter
in large quantities. Besides, many other parts of the
aqueduct and the vertical tubes in the town placed over
the wooden tubes were in a bad and more or less rotten
state.

The whole aqueduct had become, in fact, useless as a
supply for drinking water. In 1878, I took water from the
prise d'eau'' at Kashimada-mura and subjected it to a
careful analysis. I found that the water was at that point
of exceptionally good quality, as may be seen ftpm the fol-
lowing results. , \

ANALYSIS OF THE TAMAGAWA-WATFR AT KASHIMADA-
MURA, BEFORE IT ENTERS THE AQUEDUCT
TO YOKOHAMA.

QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATION.

Parts by weight in 100,000 water.

Total solid matter.. 4. 10,

' Chlorine 0.67.

Calcium-oxide


QUALITATIVE EXAMINATION.

Clearness clear.

Colour none.

Smell none.

Taste agreeable.

Carbonic acid , . . .medium du^nt .


GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA. 2^1


Sulphates very faint trace.

Chlorides few.


Sulphuretted hy-
drogen or other
obnoxious gases . . none


Hardness .2.3 Dutch degrees.

Nitrates very J faint"^ trace

after evapora-
tion.

Nitrites none.

Ammonia very faint trace.


Oxidizability . . . .very little.

Total solid matter. .4.10 in 100 .oo^
parts.

Nature of suspended

matter only a few Diato-

macecBy Acomi^
•vitrea and a few
clay and sand,
particles.


Sulphuric acid . . . .very faint trace*
only.

Nitric acid ,,.0.007.

Ammonia 0.005,

Albumenoid Am-
monia 4.0.011.

Suspended matter,

I as examined by

microscope only afewDm^o-

macecBf , Acomia
vitrea and a few
clay and sand
particles.


( 223 ) This result, compared with the ordinary degree of
purity of good drinking water derived from wells, shows that
the Tamagawa water is> at the village of Kashimada-mura,
of superior quality, as its previous contact with sewage is
evidently very small. , As the repairs at the Yokohama
aqueducrare not yet finished, I have had up to this time no
occasion to compare the quality of the water at different
parts of the aqueduct with that of the water at the prise
d'eau:' But Messrs. Atkinson (Transactions of the Asia-
tic Society of Japan, Vol. VI., Fart i, pages 94"95)
Martin (Mittheilungen der Deutsch. Ost. Asiat. Gesell-
schaft, Heft, ii, page xg) have already shewn the fact with
perfect certitude, that the water of the T5kio wooden aque-
duct loses relatively much of its original purity by passage
through wooden pipes, and there seems to be no reason why
this should|not be the case with the Yokohama aqueduct
when completed. It is true that the authorities at Yoko-
hama have taken a great deal of care to make tight iton
pipes at places ’Where the aqueduct has to pass under salt
water canals, but I fear that even the more or less brackish


232 GEERTS : ON THE DRINKING WATER OF YOKOHAMA,

and impure surface ground-water in other places will mix
up by diffusion or by leakage with the water - inside the
wooden tubes, unless the water should have a great velocity
of movement, which is impossible with the present arrange-
ment, on account . of the small difference of height and
consequently the slight pressure under which the water flows
through the pipes.

For these reasons 1 have been advocating the use of tight
iron pipes instead of wooden ones, the more so as the
pressure could then be easily augmented and special
arrangements for fire-cocks and for watering the streets
in summer could easily be made. But the costs of such a
more thorough construction, seem to 'have been the great
obstacle, and thus considerable care has been bestowed on
repairing the old wooden aqueduct.

(224) Porcelain or earthenware tubes, as suggested by
some people, I consider far worse than wooden ones, as a
single crack, caused either by mechanical force, difference
of temperature, or occasional fault in the baking, would
necessitate long and difficult repairs.

The wooden pipes have, since the. year 1878, been exten-
sively repaired from Kashimada-mura down to the neigh-
bourhood of Yokohama. As the last work in Yokohama
has not yet begun, I should earnestly recommend the disuse
of the system of round wooden tubs, placed upon the
aqueduct at certain distances, for the purpose of drawing
the water for daily use. The water rises naturally into
these tubs and stands there as in dead ends, whilst- only the
water below flows further. Besides, the dust of the streets,
and other impurities may occasionally enter these cylinders
and spoil the purity of the water. Instead of using the
latter, I deem it far better to fix at certain distances hand-
pumps of different si^es in the wooden pipes, in such a
manner that the under-end of the pump-tube is only 2;3
decimeters from the bottom of the wooden pipes. Thus the
water will constantly be kept running, and no outside
impurities from the streets will be able to enter the pipes.


FORM OF DRINKING WATER REaiii^tER USED.


n

Number

1.

2.

a


5 ,

a


of

No, 9 on the

No. II on the

No. 16 on the

Now 4 on the

No. 22 on the

No. 43 on the

m

Lab. Register,

well.

well.

well*


well.

well.


Street-name.

ist District.

1st District.

1st District.

TSt District.

ist District.

ist District.


Moto-hama-

Moto-hama-

Molo-Iiama-

Moto-hama-

Moto-hama-

Kitanaka dOri,


Number of

cho, San-cho-

cho, San-cho-

cho, Nichome,

cho, Nichome,
No. 10.

cho, Nichome,

Nichome,

i «

the house.

me, No. 30.

me, No. 24.

No. 16.

No. 12.

No. 8.

!

■ ft

Situation of


Water-closet


tlie well,
Noighbour-
bood of
closets, cess-

Dirty drains.
Neighbour-
hood dirty,

Hudly

constructed

drains.

Water-closet

near the well.

Water-closet

near the well.

near the well.

[ Drains and
neighbour-
hood very

Bad and dirty

drains.

jjools.


dirty.


Depth of the

Upper surfjice
of the Wilier,

3 shaku.
Bottom of well
7 shaku.

Upper, 4
shaku.

Upper, 6
siiaku.

Upper, 8
shaku.

Upper, 54
shaku.

Upper, 10.^
shaku.


well.

Bottom, 10

1 shaku.

Bottom, 12
shaku.

BoUoni, i.|
shaku.

Bottom, 9.J
shaku.

Bottom, 19
shaku.


Clearness,


m

Turbidity,

Clear.

Clear.

Clear.

Clear.

Clear.

Clear.

a

Colour.


Smell and

No smell.

No smell.

No smell.

No smell.

No smell.

No smell.

m

Ti^te.

No bad taste.

Taste good.

Taste good.

itte good.

Taste good.

Taste good.


Carbonic acid


m

and

Much,

Much.

Much.

Much.

Much.

Much.

^ m

Carbonates.


SI

Sulphates.

Few.

Few.

Few.

^ew.

Few.

Few.

m


#

a

m

Chlorides.

Few.

Few.

Few.

Pew.

Few.

Few.

u

Sulphuretted

None.

None.

None.

None.

None.

None.


Hydrogen.


■.

1 ®


Hardness. -

5,125 ptitcb

8.25 Dutch

8.25 Dutch

15. Bntdi

15. Dutch

9.6S Dutch


degmes.

degrees.

degrees.

dq|^U

degrees.

degrees.

m


:m

Nitrates.

....

*. ..

,, ,,


Very much* i

None,

m


1


i

1


jiy

Nitrates.

Very much.

Very much.

Much.

None,

Few.

None.


i


S


0,035


0.035 iti

IS

p*

Ammonia,

1.4 in 100,000.1

0,65 in


0.035 in


100,000.

IC^jOCKl.

lOC^Bife.

100,000.

100,000.

i -s


■ =t

Organic


♦ . . *

* * • ,

Lfei|,' ,

. . . ♦

' Little.

r-- W^_

Matter.


i .#


"m ”a 1

!

i

1

Total Solid ;

r"

!

i


Matter.


S 1

i

i


j

Nature of


1 ^

Sediment or
Suspended

None.

None.

None.

None*

None.

None.

1 ^

Matter.


fij' j
1 1

3*

Judgment
t Possibility' of
improvement.

Bad,

Too much
i Ammonia ;
cleaning;
better drains.

Bad.

Too mucli
Ammonia.
Better drains.

Bad.

Too much
nitrites. Re-
moval of W.C.

Bad.

T 00 much
Ammonia.
Removal of
W.C.

Bad.

Too much
nitrate*
RemoYal of
W.C.

Medinm

quality.

Better drains.

ru

1 ^?amc of


....

• , . .

* * T •

....

. • « «

....

!

1 .A .

Analyst. j

!


te


THE EPIDEMIC OHOIEBAIC DISEASE


AT


YOKOHAMA in the YEAR^ 1877,
or the 11th year MElri.


PEBSONS ATTA(3JIlJk
PEESONS DIED,


Fsmijfis.

ATIACKED.

1

I 2 >rSD.

iHHABmNTS

1

781

404

J

TjiAVEEXHBS '

1

^ 31

1 13

Totai

763.

416.


( 233 )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


(225) A General Meeting was held at the Grand Hotel, Yokohama, on
Thursday, the 31st January. Neither the President nor either of the
jVice-Presidents being present, Mr. Walsh was elected by the meeting
^as Chairman for the evening,

. In the absence of any Recording Secretary for Yokohama, Mr. Dallas
read the minutes pf the General Meeting held in TSki 5 on the 14th
January, and announced the election of the Rev. J. H. Quimby as a
member of the Society.

Dr. Geerts then read a paper on “The Drinking water of Yokohama
and the Necessity for it's Improvement.”

At the conclusion of the paper some general conversation took place
between the Chairman, Dr. Geerts, Mr. Smedley, and Mr. Hodges,
but without eliciting any information that was not contained in the
paper.

The Chairman expressed to Dr. Geerts the thanks of the Society for
his valuable paper, and the meeting then adjourned.


I


ON THE TRANSLITERATION OF THE 1
JAPANESE SYLLABARY. ^

By Ernest Satow.

{Read February iitliy 1879.]


(226) It seems a remarkable instance of acute appreciaticf
of what may be called a metaphysical fact on the part of 4
uneducated community, that the Japanese people, whj^
they first became acquainted with the Chinese ideograpl^Q
signs, should have at once called them na, or nam^,
James Mill has devoted a chapter to the subject jjf

Naming,” at the end of which he pertinently summari^g

f

the matter by saying that “spoken language is the use^
immediate marks of the ideas ; written language is the u^e
of secondary marks of the ideas.” It is evident, however^
that in the case of a deaf and dumb people, if such existed
a written language, being the only one possible tot heri^
would constitute ‘primary marks,’ and the signs of whic^
it consisted would be the names of their ideas. Iri fact,
as far as the essential purpose for which they are suited is
concerned, spoken words and written characters (whether
independent ideographs or combinations of phonetic sym-
bols) are equally ‘ names,’ perceived in one case by the
sense of hearing, and in the other by the sense of sight.
But we should be crediting the ancient Japanese with a
train of reasoning on the subject far beyond their powers,
if we supposed that they were led by philosophical con-
siderations to look upon ideographs as a sort of “ names.”
In making the acquaintance of a Chinese character for the
first time, they no doubt learnt the' number and sequence
of the strokes of which it was formed, its pronunciation,
and what it was called in their own tongue. We may be
almost certain that they began by learning those characters


SATOw: OK transliteration/ 23S

which represented what we call substantives, or rather
nouns, and to which they naturally applied the word na,
name, extending it afterwards to (227) others which denoted
qualities, actions and relations. This supposition is cor-
roborated by their earliest extant attempt to form a dic-
tionary, namely the Wa-miyau Seu (fn ig #) or ^ Transcrip-
tion of Japanese Names,’ composed by the famous Mina-
moto no Shitagafu (911-983), which is a collection of
Chinese characters, with definitions of their meaning, and
the Japanese equivalents, all of which are nouns substan-
tive. It need hardly be said that this is a book of the
greatest value for linguistic purposes, and with which no
student of the older literature can dispense.

At what period the Chinese system of Writing was intro-
duced into this country cannot be stated with certainty;
on the one hand we are told that the first teacher came
from Korea in the year 285 A.D., nearly four and a quarter
centuries before the composition of the earliest known
historical record, and in an age which can only be regarded
as semi-historical at the best. A glance at the popular
chronology shows that this event is placed during the
reign of a sovereign to whom is ascribed the age of one
hundred and eleven years, while his successor is said to
have attained the great age of one hundred and twenty-two.
It may be urged, of course, that so long as we accept as
facts the ages attributed in the Old Testament to the
Hebrew Patriarchs, it is hardly open to us to dispute the
genuineness of similar, though less extraordinary, instances
of longevity in the early annals of Japan, but this is an
argument which probably will count for little with serious
people. I think we may safely come to the conclusion
that the general character of the so-called history of the
period to which the introduction of Chinese literature is
assigned, is not such as to warrant our placing any con-
fidence in its exactness with regard to dates, although
some of the events recorded may actually have taken place
at some previous time, in an age considerably remote from
that of the records themselves. We have in the Kozhiki


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


^36

(7 1 1 A.D.) the positive statement that the Thousand
Character Composition^ (SefizhimoS was one of

the (228) first books brought to Japan by the Korean Wani,
along with the Lxinyu or Confucian Analects (8m ^), and we
know positively that the former book did not exist in its
present form before the reign of Wu-ti (# S!) of the Liang
(^) dynasty (502-550), so that it certainly could not have
reached Japan by way of Korea much before the middle of
the 6th century A.D. But if the fact that this book was
amongst the very first brought to the knowledge of the

^Motowori, in the KozhikideS, vol. 33, p. 27, quotes a note appended
to a Chinese variorum edition of the ^ which gives the following
account of the origin of the book. “Wu-Ti (265-250) of the Tsin
dynasty succeeded to the Wei dynasty, and while he was at the city
of Luchou, an official named Chung Yu made this composition and
presented it to the emperor, who was so delighted with it that he kept
it always close by him. When the (last of the) Tsin dynasty was
expelled by W^n-Ti of the Sung dynasty, he fled for safety towards
Tanyang, (228) having the Thousand Character Composition with him
in a cart. On the way be encountered a shower of rain ; the cart
leaked, and the Thousand Character Composition got wet. On reaching
Tanyang he put it away in a case. Fifteen emperors of the Tsin
dynasty had ruled the empire in succession, during a century and a
half. When Liu Yii, the Wen Huangti (424-454) of the Sung, acceded
to the throne and ruled the empire, he opened the library of the Tsin
emperors and found this Thousand Character Composition so injured
by the rain that the sequence [of the words or phrases?] was lost.
He ordered his General of the Right, Wang Hichi (jE ^ 5 ^) to arrange
the rhymes, but he was unable to do it. The Sung emperors ruled the
empire for about sixty years, and the Tsi then came to the throne, and
ruled Tanyang, but still no one could put it [the composition] in order.
Seven emperors of the Tsi ruled during thirty years, after which Wu-Ti
(502-550) of the Liang dynasty came to the throne, and he gave a
command to Chow Hing-Sze, who put the rhymes in order, and pro-
duced the Thousand Character Composition.” There is a glaring error
here in the statement that W6n-Ti of the Sung dynasty gave the
disordered document to Wang Hichi to correct, for Wang Hichi had
been dead 44 years when Win-Ti became emperor. A more probable
story is that contained in the (see Wylie’s Notes, on

Chin. Lit., p. 17), that Liang Wu-ti (d. 549) had in his possession a
thousand Chinese characters which had been written by the celebrated
caligraphist Wang Hichi, and that he gave them to Chow Hing-Sze
to put into rhyme (see Mayers’ Hdbk., Art. 68. Mr, Mayers says that
Wang Hichi wrote the 1000 characters for Liang Wu-ti, from which
it would naturally be inferred that they were contemporaries, but the
former died in 379 and the latter lived to 549, one hundred and seventy
years later.)


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


^37


Japanese, about that time or later, be true, it is not unlikely
to have been handed down with greater accuracy than the
mere date, and we need not be surprised at the name of
the book being recorded in the year 71 1, even if the precise
date of its importation were no longer known. Thus, if
the Confucian Analects and the Thousand Character Com-
position reached Japan together, as we are told they did,
and were the means of introducing Chinese literature into
Japan for the first time, that introduction cannot be older
than the (229) middle of the 6th century. Against this
theory is to be placed the statement in the Nihofigi (720
A.D.), that in the year 403, or over three centuries earlier,
historiographers were appointed for the first time to all
provinces, to record words and events,” which, if exact,
leads to the inference that at the Court such officials had
existed before that date. In a paper which I wrote a few
years ago, entitled the “Revival of Pure Sbihtd,’’ which
was reprinted in the 3rd volume of our Transactions, I
quoted this statement without qualification, as if I accepted
it as historical truth, and 1 am not at present prepared to
disprove its accuracy, although less disposed than formerly
to accept it with implicit faith. A special study of the
Nihongi and Koxhiki would be necessary to enable us to.
draw the line between the semi-historical and historical in
those records. It certainly appears most probable that
Chinese literature and the art of writing were mainly
communicated to the Japanese by Buddhist priests, although
not first introduced by them, and to this cause is to be
traced the prevalence in the early literature and in the
spoken tongue of the people of that variety of pronunciation
of Chinese words known as Go on (^^), which was then
and has continued down to the present day to be taught
and used 'hy the Buddhist priesthood, while the classical
variety or Kan on (i[®) is a later importation.

When Chinese literature was introduced into this country,
the Japanese at once set to work to learn how to read and
to translate it into their own language. The Buddhist
scriptures, though written in Chinese characters, contained


238


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


a great deal that was more transcription of Sanscrit or Pali,
and it was more important to be able to repeat them than
to understand their meaning. It became the practice to
read them with the Chinese sounds in the order in which
they are written, according to the method still observed in
Buddhist seminaries, and known as hou-yomi^ ‘ stick-reading.’
Students of the works of Confucius and his followers cared
more for the meaning than for the sound, and they fell into
a habit of translating literally, preserving the Chinese word
where there was no Japanese equivalent or none which
immediately suggested itself. In this way innumerable
Chinese idioms and phrases were introduced into the
Japanese tongue, producing a marked effect upon the genius
of the language, which it would be extremely instructive to
trace out in detail. No one has yet attempted to compare
the two languages, (230) and to distinguish those similari-
ties of modes of expression which are due to the influence
of the Chinese language upon the Japanese through the
medium of literature, from those which appear to be spon-
taneous coincidences.

Moving their fingers up and down the page, as they
turned the original into Japanese, they found it convenient
to devise marks for the particles and terminations of the
verbs, in order to assist the memory, others to show whe-
ther a character was to be translated or to be read with the
Chinese sound. In modern editions of Chinese works
intended for the use of learners, these purposes are served
by what are known as sute-gana; but before the kana had '
been invented, certain dots or small strokes were employed,
placed at different parts of the square which a Chinese
character might be imagined to occupy. Thus a dot in
the centre of a character denoted no, of ; one at the upper
right-hand corner, 200, the sign of the objective case ; ano-
ther, a little lower down on the right-hand side, koto^ thing,
one at the upper left-hand corner, the particle ni, and so on.
These dots and marks are called the wo koto from the
values of the first two in the square. , Books have been
preserved in MS. which are marked in this way, one being


SATOw: ON TRANSUTERATION.


^39


a copy of the Safidaikaku Regulations of the Three

Reigns) another the Classic of Filial Piety (#®), which
show that these marks were still in use long after the
invention of hata-hana. It may here be noted that the
earliest prose writing in ordinary kana is the Kokinshifu
about 922 A.D. The only extant hana up to that
period are those in the Kozhiki, Nihofigi, Mafiyefushifu,
Kogo-shiui and perhaps the YeSgi-shiki, in of which the
entire Chinese characters, or Manyeftt-gana, are employed
to a greater or less extent* Of course the kana in the
Kozhiki and Nihofigi are the earliest examples of the use of
Chinese characters by the Japanese as phonetic symbols,
and next to them come the poems of the Mafiyefushifu.

Various systems of wo koto ten appear to have been used
by the different schools of Chinese learning and by the
numerous sects of Buddhists in their monasteries, many of
which were, in their latest state at least, posterior to the
invention of the katakana syllabary, of which use is made
in by far the greater number known. The 495th volume of
Hanawa’s Gutishiyo ruwizhiyuu contains several

specimens, and the Waj^hi Dai KuwaS Seu (fp a

single system, and (231) from a comparison of these with
two other collections in MS. it appears that the purest ex-
amples of the contrivance are those of the Sugahara and
Kiyohara families of Chinese scholars belonging to the
Court. It seems that these families had each two sets of
marks, one employed in reading the classics, the other only
used for historical works and general purposes. So long a
period has elapsed since the use of kana superseded the wo
koto ten, and so great the secrecy which was observed with
regard to them by the rival schools, that considerable differ-
ences exist among what purport to be copies of the same
system. As a specimen of them, the wo koto ten of the two
families and a facsimile extract from the Classic of Filial
Piety (#iE), in which they are marked upon the Kiyohara
system, are here given. The katakana in the latter area
modern addition to the MS. from which the copy I have
used was printed.


240 SATOWrON TRANSLITERATION.

The idea of using Chinese oharacters to spell Japanese
words evidently originated from the study of Chinese ver-
sions of Buddhist sacred literature, in which a great number
of Sanscrit or Pali words (I believe it has not yet been
determined which language was the original of these trans-
lations) were transcribed by means of Chinese characters
employed merely as phonetic symbols. Not a few of these
words survive to the present day in the spoken language of
the Japanese, and naturally to a far greater extent in the
doctrinal literature of the Buddhist sects. No one who
thinks upon the subject can suppose that alphabets or
syllabaries have sprung in their simplest and most perfect
form from the brain of any single individual, however gifted
with inventive genius, and the researches of scholars have
proved that in one instance which concerns us all, namely
that of the Roman alphabet, the process of its development
from Egyptian picture-writing was a very gradual one, which
proceeded by steps far removed from each other in time,
and that were taken, not by one continuous race of men,
but by several in succession, occupying different parts of
the world’s surface, until it came to be what it is now, a
very imperfect means, at the best, for recording spoken
sounds. This is one of the strongest arguments (and to
my mind an argument which would require an enormous
amount of positive evidence to shake, much less refute it)
against the theory that the Japanese, previous to the intro-
duction of Chinese characters, possessed, not a syllabary —
which would be in natural accordance with the physical
structure of their language — ^but (232) an alphabet, con-
structed upon the most scientific principles, the letters
of which are composed of horizontal and perpendicular
lines, long and short, combined according to a regular
system of variation. This is the sort of alphabet which
Hirata Atsutane and others have put forth as the square
form of what they call Zhindai no mozhi, or Shindaizhi,
(characters of the age of the gods), but which is manifestly
borrowed fiom the Korean alphabet, with certain modifica-
tions. It is very evident to any one who has examined the


SATOW ; ON TRANSLITERATION,


241


Korean alphabet that it not only was devised by some
person or persons who understood the principle upon which
an alphabetic system of writing must be constructed, but
also that it was based upon the alphabet of a language, the
Sanskrit, which also influenced in an indirect manner the
formation of the Japanese syllabaries, and the most popular
order in which their signs are arranged. Had the Japanese
really possessed an alphabet of their own before the intro-
duction of Chinese literature, they would not have been
driven to invent the wo koto ten system, or rather to
develope that system out of the circles which the Chinese
use for marking the tones of characters.

It was not by a sudden discovery that the Japanese learnt
to write their own language in kajiUf that is, in Chinese
characters used merely as phonetic signs. Their first
impulse, after having made themselves acquainted with
the ordinary Chinese literature, was to attempt to write
in the same style. The NihoSgi is a specimen of what they
were able to accomplish in the way of imitation, for nearly
all the phrases used in its composition can be traced back
to a Chinese original, so that it is a mozaic of borrowed
sentences, , although the subject matter is Japanese legend
and history. Whenever they wished to preserve the native
form as well as substance, either of poetry or legend, they
put down in Chinese whatever could be translated, and fol-
lowing the example of the Chinese priests, who, in trans-
lating the Buddhist scriptures had represented those words,
for which they could think of no equivalent, by Chinese
characters used phonetically, they transcribed each syllable
with a Chinese character which had the same sound, or
which could be rendered in Japanese by a monosyllabic
word of the same sound (WfS, on kana andllH®^, kun
kana ) ; or they wrote a couple of syllables with a Chinese
character, the ordinary translation of which was some
Japanese dissyllable of quite different meaning, but com^
posed of the (233) same vowels and consonants
kari-mozhi ) ; and sometimes the sound of a Chinese cha-
racter was used to represent two syllables (z:


242 SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.

gafii^ no hana^). At first they did this only when they were
forced to do it, and some time elapsed before it became the
custom to write poetry exclusively in kana. But the disco-
very having once been made, its use could be extended
when circumstances rendered it necesskry. Thus the verses
contained in the Kozhiki and Nihohgi are written exclusively
in perhaps because it was considered of absolute im-

portance that these, compositions, attributed in many in-
stances to divine personages, should be transmitted in such
a way that there could be no doubt whatever of their exact
wording. In the Manyefushifu it is chiefly the later poems
(about the middle of the 8th century) which are so written,
while the earlier are half translated into Chinese prose, from
which they are only to be retranslated with great difficulty.
We find, too, that while one poet, Yamanohe Okura, writing
about 730, used principally kana^ most of his contemporaries
wrote with Chinese characters used as ideographs. The
poems of Kakino-moto no Hitornaro, who died before the
end of the 7th century, are almost exclusively written with
ideographs. This merely serves to show that the use of
liana in poetry did not become universal all at once, and
that the idea of employing phonetic symbols not being
familiar to the Japanese mind, was not readily adopted.

It is perhaps believed by a great many persons that the
Japanese syllabaries called kata-kana and hira-gana^ as we
now possess them, were actually the individual contrivances
of two men named respectively Kibi no Mabi (b. 695, d.
776) and Koubofu Daishi (b. 774, d. 835), for such are the
statements Which have been handed down from a remote
period among the Japanese, and have been repeated by
successive European writers on the authority of their native
teachers. It is quite possible that the last of these may
have selected the forty-seven common signs which are
known as hira-gana (whether ^ easy kana ’ or ‘ broad flat
kana ’ be the origin of the name does not matter), and
arranged them so as to Convey the same meaning as a cer-
tain succession of phrases in the Daihafiniya Kiyau

^See KozhikideS, vol. i, p. 29 verso to p. 44.


SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.


243


a Buddhist Sutra), or that the former performed the same
operation of selection upon the hata-hana (234) (or part-/?a-
na) which were in use at the period. There is no evidence
to prove the contrary, and oral tradition is in favour of the
legends. But what is beyond a doubt is that they did not
invent or discover the idea of using, or ‘ borrowing,’ as the
term ka-na implies, Chinese characters to represent mere
sounds, for this use of Chinese characters was an invention
of the men who translated the Buddhist Canon from the
original into Chinese, and it was imported into Japan in
those very Chinese versions by the missionaries of Bud-
dhism. In the earliest books extant, such as the Kozhiki,®
Nihofigi, Maiiyefushifu,^ in the Norito contained in the
Yeiigishiki, and in the series of official Annals which
succeeded the Nihofigi, an immense number of different
Chinese characters are used for each single syllable articu-
lated by Japanese mouths. It must be remembered that
these were written nearly always, if not exclusively, in run-
ning hand. To believe that these ancient historical and
literary monuments were handed down carefully transcribed
in square character, would be as great an error as to sup-
pose that the spelling of modern editions of Shakespeare is
the same with that of the first folio. In fact many of the
obscure passages in the Mafiyefushifu are owing to mis-
takes of transcribers, who blundered over the cursive
character of the MSS. from which they were copying to an
extent that would have been impossible if the text had been
written in square character. These kana written in the
cursive form gradually became more unlike the complicated
originals from which they were derived, until all trace of
resembla!nce has disappeared, unless the transformation be
gradually followed backwards through the successive varia-
tions. It would be impossible unaided to recognize S: in
: ® in ^ H in 2 ^, HI in i or H in The number was

so great that it became necessary to select the easiest to
teach to children, and this was the origin of the set called

3 For a list, see Kozhiki-Den, vol. i, p.30. “^The is

exhaustive of all the kinds of hana used in that collection.


244 SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.

tVote gam^ usually confused in thought and speech with
the hiragand*

In the same way we can hardly believe that Kibi no Mabi
was the inventor of the katakana. Besides the ordinary
set of forty-seven, there are many others which were in use
at an early period, and which are even yet to be found in
limited use amongst antiquarians. There (235) was there-
fore a larger number from which the forty-seven were chosen.
The annexed table contains those which I have hitherto
met with.®

In this table the upper of each set of three tows is the
uncommon form of the hatahana, the middle one is the
ordinary form, and the lower is the character from
which the uncommon form is supposed to have been derived.
Whether the formation of katakana preceded that of the
hiragana is unknown, and recent Japanese writers on the
subject seem to have agreed that the point is not likely ever
to be determined ; but arguing from the relative degree of
artificial contrivance which characterizes each, I cannot
help thinking it probable that the katakana are of later
origin than the other, in spite of the supposed inventor of
this syllabary having died about the time that the person
to whom the hiragana are attributed was born. In confir-
mation of this view we have the fact, so often noticed by
Europeans with surprise, that the katakana syllabary, to us
the easiest of acquirement and apparently the most simple
in principle, is by no means popular, and may be said to
have been almost unknown until lately, except to educated
people and users of native dictionaries. However this may
be, all that is of immediate importance is that at some
period or other, perhaps at two successive periods probably
not very remote from each other, men who had troubled
their heads about the matter had discovered taht all the
sounds uttered by Japanese, as it seemed to them, could be
indicated by means of forty-seven signs, to some of which
diacritical marks were sometimes added to express what

5 See the Dehabos edition of the YeSgishiki, and the ^ H l^kauko

zhitsH roku)^ p. 39.


SATOw: ON TRANSLITERATION.


24s


they held to be accidental or conditional modifications of
sound, and that it was agreed that they might be written at
option in forms called hata-hana and Mra-gana. I choose
the former for the purpose of the remarks which I now
propose to make concerning the phonetic value of these
signs.

The most scientific arrangement of the forty-seven sounds
is that which is known by the name of gozhifu ren on in no
dzu (aS + SSli®), or scheme of the fifty syllables and
finals. It is of acknowledged later date than the two
syllabaries, having appeared for the first time in a book on
music called kuwan-geTi on gi ‘meaning of the

sounds of wind and stringed instruments,’ written in 1185.
There is another arrangement given in what is called the
Abridged Wamiyau Sen, the earliest copy of (236) which is
dated 1546. When this is translated into katakana we
have only forty-seven sounds to do the work of fifty, and
consequently three of them have to perform double work in
the complete scheme. Some modern grammarians have
proposed to use certain signs of their own invention to
make good the deficiency, and thus to complete the series
of fifty, which according to theory ought at some time or
.other to have existed. I shall be able to give good reason
later on for believing that the syllabic sounds for which no
signs have been handed down, formed at one period part of
the linguistic apparatus of the Japanese, but it is quite
certain that the recognized number of sounds, at the time
when the two popular syllabaries were selected, was only
forty-seven, exclusive of the final consonant v or fi (a later
formation), and of these forty-seven, three have since disap-
peared from the spoken language, as will appear in the
sequel.

In order to arrive at a satisfactory set of equivalents for
the signs of the Japanese syllabary, three axioms must be
conceded. Fir My ^ that for each sign a distinct equivalent
be selected, so that the equivalent shall represent a single
sign, and it shall thus be possible to turn a transliterated
word back into the original kana without a mistake.


246 SATOW; ON TRANSLITERATION.

Secondly i that we use such equivalents as might reasona-
bly have been adopted by the Japanese themselves, if at the
period when the syllabaries were constructed, the material
out of which they were to be formed had been the Roman
alphabet instead of the Chinese ideographs ; and in cases
where we cannot be certain of the pronunciation of that
period, that we adopt the modern pronunciation of Yedo
and Kiyauto.

Thirdly^ that we shall not use more letters to transliterate
any one sign than are absolutely necessary.

Concerning the value to be assigned to the letters of the
Roman alphabet which we shall employ, a few words are
also necessary. If possible, it would evidently be most
convenient to take the pronunciation of some single Euro-
pean language for both vowel-letters and consonant-leters,
and say simply : transliterated Japanese is to be pronounced
exactly like the language thus chosen. But unfortunately
that is not practicable. The vowels in Spanish seem to me
to most nearly coincide with those of the Japanese language,
but all the Spanish consonants do not correspond to the
Japanese consonants. A compromise is therefore necessary.
What are often called the Continental sounds of the
vowel-letters (237) are now generally recognized as the most
simple and scientific, namely the values, with some varia-
tion, which they possess in the German, Italian and
Spanish languages. It must be noted, however, that Ja-
panese a and w, and perhaps the other three vowels also,
are shorter than in German and Italian. If in writing Ja-
panese we were to use ou as in French, or oe as in Dutch,
for »7 the effect would be un symmetrical, and besides we
should then have to write - 1 ^ with oon or ooe. The French
and Dutch values of the vowels are useless, because
insufficient, and in English the representatives of Japanese
vowel sounds are for the most patt provincial. For con-
sonants the [^English value, where it differs from that of
Continental languages,, seems best. About f, h, g, b, d, t,
k, m, n, r, s, there is no question,. There remains the soupd
represented in Italian by c before e and i and ci before other


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


247


vowels ; for which the Italian expedient may be dismissed
at once, because it is not constant. In German four letters,
tsch, have to be used for it, and in French tch^ either of
which is too much, and the English and Spanish ch is the
simplest of all. For the sound which the Italians write sci
and the Germans sch, we have in English the simpler com-
bination the only rival to which would be the French ch ;
but ch having been adopted for another purpose, is. not here
available. The letter z has the same value in Dutch,
English and French, and the only other languages which
could claim to supply a transliteration for Japanese, namely
German and Italian, are in a minority, so that if z be taken
for the sonant of 5, there is less chance of its being
mispronounced by foreigners than if it were used for ts*
Next, w properly exists only in Dutch, English and German ;
in Italian it is represented by the vowel which we require
for another purpose, and in French by ow, which is some-
what clumsy. But the English and Dutch use of w (though
not quite identical) is sufficiently close to give it the
superiority over the German pronunciation of the letter,
which in fact does not occur in Japanese at all. For the
sonant of h it is open to us. to use g as in English (except
in some words before i and e), Italian (before a, o, and
and German (when it occupies an initial position in a word or
syllable) against in French and in Italian (before i and 5),
but the adoption of the latter is clumsy, and g is better,
because simpler. There remains only the consonant which
forms the initial of the syllable i.e. of the sonant corres-
ponding to ch. In French there is no possible way of
(238) rendering this sound (except by dji^j and Italian would
give us gif which we require for another purpose, namely
for the sonant of ki. A German must write dschj which is
inadmissible for the same reason, somewhat enforced, for
which we reject tsch for the initial of ^ (j^hi^. The Dutch
language cannot pronounce it, and the English j possesses
the superiority of simplicity over the only possible com-
petitors. The consonants are thus to be taken at what,
shortly stated, is their English value. No doubt it might


248 SATQW: ON. TRANSLITERATION.

appear more scientific to use s, and with some diacritical
mark, instead of sh and zh^ an italic or g with an inverted
caret over it, instead of j, and some other special sign
instead of ch, but considering the usual resources of print-
ing-offices, the inconyenience of multiplying types, and the
neglect shown by mankind in general to accents and
diacritical marks, the comipromises here advocated are more
practical.

-The top line of the Table of Syllables and Finals is
formed as follows : —

7 *7

a ka sa ta na ha ma ya ra wa

the characters being read from right to left. Under a should
come a column composed of the remaining vowels f, <?, <?, Uj
and under each of the other signs a column composed of its
initial consonant and the same set of vowels. But this
would give fifty syllables.


7

It


if

7

/s

v*


9

7

a

ka

sa

ta

na

ha

ma

ya

ra

wa

d

4

3^

7-

zz

fc

5,

d

V

#

i

ki

shi

chi

ni

hi

mi

yi

ri

wi

*7


%

7

5 ?

7


u

kn

su

tsu

nu

fu

mu

yu

ru

wu

zc

7

±

■f


y

nl


X

e

ke

se

ta

'^ne

ha

ma

ye

ra

toe

t

zt

y

b

)


3

n

J

0

ho

so

to

no

ho

■ mo

yo

ro

wo

It will be

observed

that

in

this

table

d

»7

have to do


double work., It will be more convenient to discuss their
office afterwards, and I will proceed first wdth those columns
of signs concerning the value of which, and their expression
in Roman letters, there has never been any dispute.

Thus are by every one written ka^

ku, ka, (239) ^0 ; t , ^ na, ni, nu, ne, no ; and v ,

s, y, 7/ia, mi, mu, me, mo. Some foreigners have
supposed that in 7, V , n', v, n they recognized a sound


SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.


249


allied more closely to the ordinary European I than to r,
but if that pronunciation of the initial consonant of this
series resemble I in any part of Japan, there can be little
doubt from the united testimony, whether direct or indirect,
of foreigners who have had opportunities of hearing the lan-
guage spoken in various provinces, that something closely re-
sembling r is the most usual sound given to it, and in writing
ra, ri, n/, re, ro, we shall certainly be in conformity with the
most approved practice. The exact pronunciation of this
letter, and its difference from the r of various European
languages, are points beyond the scope of the present paper,
which is occupied with the consideration, not of pronuncia-
tion, but of the orthography of Japanese words.

The soft or sonant gutturals in Japanese are formed by
adding two dots or small circles to the hard gutturals, as
follows : —


r

In the island of Kiushiu the initial consonant of these
syllables is uniformly pronounced g, in whatever part of a
word it may occur, but at Kiyauto and that part of Japan
which lies to the east of the old capital, it is only so pro-
nounced at the beginning of words, while it is nasalized
when it occurs in the middle of a word. Exceptions to the
general rules are formed by the particle ga, which is usually
pronounced as if it formed part of the previous word, and
by gotoshi and giirai,^ that is, nasally, while in mere re-
duplications of roots beginning with g, as gata-gata, goro-
goro, it is not nasalized. But it may be doubted whether
such reduplications should not be rather considered as two
words, instead of one united by a hyphen. It might natural-
ly be supposed at first sight that this soft guttural should
be written g where it is to be so pronounced, and ng when
it is to be nasalized, but the probable effect of writing
would be to lead English-speaking people to pronounce
ngg ; as, for instance, if if were written kango, most


^Zhifu go, fifteen, which is really two words, ten five, and shi go,
four or fiye, are other cases of this irregularity.


25Q SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.

people would read it kang-go, that being the English
practice in such words as dingy (a small boat), jingo, lingo,
mango, fandango, Congo., Rangoon, shingle, jingle, dangle,
Mongolj Fingal, and others. Italians (240) and Spaniards
would also be led to pronounce ngg by this spelling. It
seems better, therefore, to write g in all cases, and to lay
down the rule beforehand, that it is to be nasalized in the
cases above mentioned, with certain exceptions. In Kiu-
shiu of course this rule may be neglected, without any
danger of one’s being misunderstood by the inhabitants.

The next column to be considered is that of the dental
sibilants Z ± '/. All writers on Japanese grammar

have agreed, so far as I am aware, to express the first sign
and the last three respectively by sa, su, se and so^ but
there is a difference of opinion with regard to the proper
equivalent of Some think that it should be for the
sake of uniformity with the rest of the series, or because
we may suppose that to have been the ancient or original
sound of the syllable. Others have merely continued to
write 52 , because the earliest writers, who were chiefly
acquainted with the Hizefi dialect, in which it is so pro-
nounced, had set the example. But this argument would
render it incumbent on us to express ± by she, in order to be
consistent, for that appears to be the HizeS pronunciation
of this latter syllable. As is certainly pronounced shl, both
at Yedo and at Kiyauto, and over the greater part of the
country, considerations of utility induce us to write it thus,
and since we do not thereby in any degree obscure the fact
of its being a sibilant, it is easy to remember that it belongs
to the same series as x -t y. The fact that is pro-
nounced she in one part of the country would lead us to the
conclusion that the initial consonant of this series was ori-
ginally somewhat indefinite, and lay between s and sh, and
that in course of time, as the habit of articulating con-
sonants with distinctness began to grow, 5 was preferred
for certain vowels in some loca.lities, while sh was prefixed
to them in others. So we get sa, shi, su, se, so, in the two
capital cities and in the greater part of the country, but sa,


SATOW': ON TRANSLITERATION. 251

si, sli, she, so in Hizefi and a few other localities in the
west ; also in Yonezawa, on the authority of Mr. Charles
H. Dallas, in Vol III. of our Transactions, p. 145. To
represent the original intermediate initial consonant would
be impossible with the Roman alphabet unassisted by dia-
critical marks, the use of which is always to be avoided if
possible, and the best course is therefore in this case to
represent the actual pronunciation of the standard of the
most cultivated part of the population.

(24T) By adding the sign of the nigori to -y*, V, X, -fc, y,
we get /. There is little difference of opinion

among students as to the way in which the first, fourth and
fifth of this series are to be represented, and I know of no
one who objects to za, ze, zo. If is to be written shi,
reasoning from analogy it would appear a matter of course
that must be equivalent to zlii, but as a matter of fact it
is so pronounced over only a proportionately small area,
and is confined, I believe, to the southern part of Kiushiu.
Most of us in this country have written it j, because the
almost universal pronunciation resembles that of j in En-
glish. In the different editions of his grammars of both
the spoken and written dialects of Japanese, Mr. Aston has
followed the usual practise, and in the second edition of his

Grammar of the Japanese written Language,” in order to
distinguish this j from the precisely identical sound which
•is given to the initial of in other words to the sonant or
soft consonant corresponding with ch (as in child, church),
he has written the latter syllable dji, apparently considering
that as ^ belongs to the dental column of s3dlables, the
introduction of d can give rise to no misunderstanding as
to the nature of the sound thus figured. It is certainly
desirable that as near an approach as possible to uniformity
should be made by students, but I should have preferred to
usez^ in this place, reserving j for the initial of I shall
recur -to this subject in discussing the dental series, which
comes next in order to the sibilant.

A difficulty presents itself with regard to the mode of
writing :?cV There is no doubt that the people of Yedo often


2^2 SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.

confound with *y in their common speech, and yet there
are certain words in which they seem to me to pronounce
X correctly, that is to say, as 2u, This habit of saying •/
where they should say X does not appear to be universal
among the inhabitants of the city, and I am inclined to
think that it is in reality confined to persons who have not
received what would be considered a liberal education, just
as we find that the error of substituting s/ii for hz in words
beginning with t and accented on that syllable, is com-
mitted chiefly by the middle and lower classes, especially
by women. This is, however, not a local variety of pro-
nunciation which is entitled to be recognized as standard,
for a great many of those who are daily guilty of the practice
are quite conscious of it, and often make amusing blunders
by trying to correct themselves where they are not in the
(242) wrong, just like uneducated English people who
misplace their k's, from a nervous desire to commit no
mistake. Even if X were universally pronounced dzzi by
all classes, both educated and ignorant, I should still
advocate writing because this spelling has the advantage
of indicating at once the corresponding Japanese sign, and
it would be easy, if necessary, to lay down a rule that it
should be pronounced dzu; but still more is ztz to be
preferred when it actually represents a better pronunciation,
which is recognized by Japanese writers on orthography to
be the correct one.

We come now to the dental column of signs 1^, y,
Tf As in the case of the sibilant series, there are
certain of these signs with regard to which no difference of
opinon has ever existed, namely p ^ ir and f, which every
one writes /a, te and to. Of the remaining two, ^ has been
written chi by all students of the language in the eastern
part of Japan, while those who studied at Nagasaki, and
the late Dr. Hoffmann, who derived his early knowledge of
the pronunciation from Europeans who had resided there,
wrote Ui. This is the way in which we should expect to
find ^ pronounced by a dialect which pronounced v si,
since in either case ^ is merely > with the first half of the


SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.


253


consonant i prefixed. Whether we try to pronounce tsi or
tshi, as they would naturally be pronounced by an English-
man, it is evident that we do not complete the t. As
Professor Max Muller observes in reply to those who
maintained that the ch in English consists of two conso-
nants, t followed by sh^ and should no-t be classed as a
simple consonant, Ch may be said to consist of half and
half 5 A; only give one consonant. There is an attempt of
the organs at pronouncing but that attempt is frustrated
or modified before it takes effect.”^ For y nearly all
scholars, whether studying in Japan or in Europe, have
written tsu up to the present, with a few exceptions. Not
that the initial consonant is ^+s, any more than ch is
but because an European in trying to pronounce, as he
thinks, tSy comes as near as possible to the required Japan-
ese sound. Professor Max Muller’s remarks as to the
nature of the consonant ch apply with equal force to ts ;
that is, it consists of half t and half 5. But a love of theo-
retical uniformity has led a few scholars, especially those
of the Istituto di Studij Stiperiori in Florence, to write ii
and tu for the two signs and (243) y ; possibly on the
ground that these signs were anciently so pronounced, chi
and tsu being, according to them, modern corruptions.
This practice has been likewise adopted by some Japanese
writers, to whom has fallen the task of presenting a few
isolated Japanese words in the European character, ap-
parently from the same desire to attain uniformity in theory
at the expense of irregular facts. Dr. Edkins, in his
Introduction to the Study of the Chinese characters, p,
181, asserts that the sign was at first ti and di^ and
afterwards changed to chi and zhi^ and he endeavours to
prove this by the fact that the Chinese character T ting
is written ^ ^ y, shiyau^ in the Japanese transliteration.
But thei'e is no reason to suppose that the Japanese trans-
literation exactly represented the Chinese sound. In the
same way a modern Japanese trying to represent in hana
the English definite pronoun ‘ the,’ will write i or X ^


7 ' LfectureS on the Science of Language, 2nd series, p. 141.


2|4* SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION,

(zui or zuwi)^ but that does not prove that the present
pronunciation of is th. The simplest explanation of
the fact is that ^ was the nearest thing to U that the
ancient Japanese possessed, but there is nothing to show
that they were ever identical. There does not exist any
evidence in support of the supposition that tsu and chi are
corruptions of tic and and the more probable conjecture
is that if this series ever possessed a single consonantal
initial common to all five syllables, is was intermediate
between the two consonants which are actually found in
the modern language, and that where t occurs it is a
purification, so to speak, of this previously existing indeter-
minate consonant for which our alphabet affords, no ade-
quate equivalent. We cannot be certain of what the ancient
pronunciation of the whole series was, nor could we re-
present it, even if certain of its original nature, and it seems
more practical to represent, as it is within our power to
do, the modern actual pronunciation of the standard dialects
of Yedo and Kiyauto.

The soft dentals are represented in Japanese by the
addition of the nigori mark, f^, */, x, F; and here again
there is conformity amongst students with respect to the
mode of expressing the first and the last two of the series,
which are universally written da, de, do. Those who
express the hard or surd syllables ^ and *7 by ti and tic,
naturally write the corresponding soft or .sonant, syllables
di and du. Most Europeans who have studied in Japan
have used dzu for *y and ji for f', with the exception of
Mr. Aston in the second edition of (244) his “ Grammar
of the Written Language,” where, as already observed, he
has employed dji to distinguish from which he writes
ji. Some mark of the kind is manifestly desirable, for
nothing could be more misleading to any student who
wishes to reconvert a transliterated word or text into the
original signs, than the practice of rendering the soft sibi-
lant and the soft dental before i in the same manner. . In
English j, as we pronounce it, denotes the soft sound, the
corresponding hard sound to^ which, is written ch^ and if


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


255


we represent ^ by chi^ it seems most consequent to use
ji for Although P of the sibilant series is also pro-
nounced ji throughout nearly the whole of the country, it
is evident that this is not its correct value, which should
be z or zhy or at least something between them, and
therefore in a system of transliteration, based as fat as
consonants are concerned upon the English use of the
Roman alphabet, j should not be used to denote the cor-
ruption of z or zh, but should be restricted to its proper
function of representing the sonant which corresponds to
the surd ch. In Professsr Max Muller’s physiological
alphabet^ and in his transcription of the Sanskrit alphabet,’
j is employed in this manner, which I venture to think
furnishes an additional reason for our adhering to the use
of ji for the syllable At the same time in coming to
a decision on this point, we must not leave out of sight
the great recommendation of Mr. Aston’s method, namely,
that while completely distinguishing bat ween the two sylla-
bles, it enables us at once to sound them both according
to the pronunciation most in vogue at the present day.

There is at bird series, the initial consonant of which
was originally too indefinite to be represented in an exact
manner by any consonant belonging to the Roman alphabet.
It is the series fc, 7, From the fact that the

sounds represented by these signs readily pass under certain
circumstances into the hard and soft labials pa^ pi, pxi, pe,
po, and ha, hi, hu, he, ho, it appears to be a matter of
course to include them also in the class of labials, and in
the west of Japan, in the province of Hixen, as well as in
Aushiu in the north, they are actually pronounced as nearly
as possible fa, fi, fu, fe, The early Christian mission-

aries in the i6th century seem to have been most familiar
with dialects which followed this practice, and the first
modern (245) European writers on the Japanese language?
who derived their knowledge chiefly from Nagasaki, natu-

3 Lect, on Sci. of Lang, 2nd Series, p. 152.

9 Ib., p. 158.

10 Mr. Dallas ; Transactions : vol. ii., p. 145.


SATOW: ON TRANSUTERATXON.


256

used / as the initial throughout the- series. Their
example was likewise imitated by European students of
the language, whp n^eyer having visited the country,, ha,d
no opportunity of hearing the pronunciation of educated
residents at either Yedp or Kiyauto. On the other hand,
those who pioneered the way in Japanese studies in the
east part of the country, especially the Rev. Dr. S. R.
Brown, and Dr. J. C. Hepburn, endeavoured to represent
the, fivs syllables by the sounds which they actually heard,
and wrote /m, /ri, /«, he, ho, as being the closest approxi-
mation attainable. It spite of the fact that the letter h
represents the spiritus^^asper or hard breathing, and comes
nearer to a guttural (German ch) then to a labial, this use
of it is in accordance with the facts, as appears from the
following passage out of Suzuki Otozhh'au’s^^ Kotoba no
Chikamichi, or Short Road to Language.’^

‘‘In all ages and in all countries t, 7, ^ and ^ have
ever been the origin from which all (other) syllables and
finals have sprung. To prove this, if the mouth be
opened and breath be emitted direct from the throat, the

sound is produced. This sound is the natural

striking and resounding of the breath against the whole of
the interior of the mouth. If now the lips be opened wide
and the. breath be emitted through the closed teeth, the

sound t, is produced. In this case the breath touches

the teeth, and resounds against the interior of the mouth.
But if, on the contrary, the breath be emitted with the lips
puckered, together and the teeth separated, it lightly sounds,
7, a sound in which the breath touches spontaneously
against the lips and resounds against them. Again, if the
tongue be pressed against the base of the lower gum and
breath be then emitted, the, sound ^ is spontaneously
produced, a sound \yhich resounds from the interior of the
mouth to the base of the lower , gum. But if, contrariwise,
the lips be contracted, the cavity of the mouth be puffed
out, and breath be emitted against the roof of the mouth,
a light sound * is spontaneously produced. In producing


Also Icnown as MinamotO mo. Slngetane.


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


^57


this sound the breath touches the roof of the mouth and
resounds against the walls of the cavity of the mouth. To
speak more distinctly, these are the gutturals b, 7,
or to speak more distinctly yet, they are semi-guttural
and semi-labial.”

(246) From this extract it clearly appears that whilst, in
the opinion of the Japanese writer, the whole series partake
of the nature of labials, the four syllables fc , and ^
are produced mainly by the resonance of the breath against
the walls of the cavity of the mouth, while 7 is due to the
impact of air upon the lips. That the initial ' consonant
of b , ^ and * is precisely the same in each case, no
one will, I think, venture to maintain. The directions for
pronouncing b seem to me exactly calculated to produce
the sound heard in the standard dialects, a sound which
differs a good deal from the initial of less so from that
of and is also unlike that of ^ , but the general character
of all four is much more like h than any other letter in out
alphabet, and therefore the letter which has been accepted
by the ears of nearly all writers on the language resident in
Japan, seems to me to be preferable to the /, which has
been used to represent the sound as given in a few pro-
vincial dialects. According to this view, then, b,
will be written Aa, hi, he, ho. But in the case of 7 the
evidence of the Japanese writer is distinct as to its labial
character, and the practice of the writers referred to is also
in favour of fu. Mr. Aston correctly points out that the
initial consonant differs from our /, as the lower lip and
upper teeth do not touch, '^the result being a kind of
strongly aspirated whJ" This description of the sounds
seems to me quite in acordance with what I believe my
own ear informs me, but at the same time I think it will be
found that the sound is very much nearer/ than h. This
may easily be tested by trying to induce a Japanese to
pronounce the English word ‘who’ or by repeating a
number of Japanese words beginning with 7 , alternately as
if it were equivalent to our fti and Jm, and noting which
the Japanese finds most like the pronunciation approved


SATOWr^ON TRAT^SLITERATION.


fey his own ear. His verdict will, I feel confident, be in
favour of fii.

When the signs of the series t, have the

iiigori^ they are written hay hi, bu, he, ho, in conformity
with the sound given to them in all parts of Japan, and this
transcription is, as far as I know, unversal amongst
foreigners. When they take the han nigori, that is, a
single dot or small circle, then they are alwaj^s represented
hj pa, pi^pUi pe, po.

There still remain three series of syllables, namely the
pure vowels, the syllables which begin with w and those
which begin with y. As in (247) every other case, the series
of five signs is complete, we naturally suppose that the
same rule prevails here, and expect to find a, i, ii, e, 0 : ya,

. yr, yii, ye, yo, and wa, wi, imi, we, wo. But as a matter of
fact there are only twelve signs to represent the fifteen the-
oretical syllables. From etymological considerations it is
evident that there was once a syllable yz. For example, the
root of the verb 4 ^to shoot,’ is identical with the radi-
cal of yii-mi, bow, and with ya, arrow ; 'f ^ , the archaic
form o£ yiane, dream, must have been before it came
to be pronounced ime ; the root of iiiiyuru, to repent, was
kuyi, and that of oyuru, to grow old, oyi. It may even be
heard at the present day, not as an initial, but in the middle
of certain compounds of Chinese origin, like knwan-in-
official, kon4n, marriage, pronounced kan-yin, kon-yin, by
many people. In the same manner it can be shown that ^ .
represents a primitive wu, as the simple vowel u. Thus
for uimtsu, actually, the Mafiyefushifu has wotsutsu (vol.
XVII, pt. 2, p. ii) ; wosagi for usagi, hare, (vol. XIV, pt.

p. 26, verso) ; woso for tiso, falsehood (vol. XIV, pt. 2,
p. 23 verso) ; wosoro instead oi uso, falsehood (vol. 4, pt. 2,
p, 3).^® The Wamiyau Seu gives woso for the otter, or,
dinarily called uso (vol. XVIII p. 17, v.). Atractylis ovata
it called wokera in the Wamiyau Seu, while in old poetry we
find the form ukera. It is not possible to say with certainty
which of these is the older form, though from the frequency

references are to the Riyakuge edition.


SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.


259


with which an archaic u becomes 0 in the more modern
form of the language, we may conjecture the same to have
happened here, by wii> being changed into wo. As an
initial could not have passed into wo^ the antecedent of
wo must have been wu.^^

Whatever may be the opinion held as to the. proper
equivalent of 3 ^, it cannot be doubted that the roots of verbs
which have their conclusive forms in yu^ like miyuru, to be
visible, ohoyurti, to have a sensation, moyuru^ to burn, i.v.
hoy urn ^ to pass over, hayuru^ to grow, i.v., tayuru^ to cease,
i.v., nay%i,ru, to bend, i.v., iyuru^ to cure, i.v., fuyuru^ to
increase, i.v., sayuru, to ring, i.v., kiynru, to vanish, hiyuru,
to be cold, must have ended in ye^ as miye-, oboye-^ moye-^
koye-, etc. At the present day, over the greater part of the
country, as an initial, is pronounced ye^ and it is only, as
far as I am at present informed, the (248) Yedo and Kiyauto
dialects that sound it e at the beginning of a word. Even
in these dialects, when preceded by an open syllable, or by
the final v (fi) it is mostly pronounced with a faint y.
Nevertheless, all the earlier writers on grammar and ety-
mology, such as Mabuchi, Motowori, Suzuki Otozhirau and
their followers, always held the view that it was part of the
simple vowel series, and ranked it accordingly with T, f ,
^,7,(ort).

Respecting this sign t it is worth while noting that it
was formerly ranged in the 7 (waj series, while ^ was
supposed to belong to the T (a) column, notably by Ma-
buchi and the author of the Wakufi Shiwori As

a matter of fact they are both, at the present day, pronoun-
ced 0 when occurring at the beginning of a word,^^ while ^
as the mark of the subjective case, and also in the centre of
a word^^ (except after 0 and sometimes after i) sounds very

iSThese examples are from Shikida Toshiharu’s 05-iS-kei-mou §
®tvol.I.,p.7.

^^That is, a single word pronounced by itself. In a sentence the final
vowel or nasal S of the preceding word affect its pronunciation.

i3The syllables a, i, ti, and 0 never occur in the centre of a word,
unless it be a compound, or by loss of a previously existing consonant,
as in mono-ushiy melancoly, ot yaiha^ blade, corruption oiyakiha, and in


26 o


SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION.


much like English ze/o, though the breathing is fainter.
There exists, however, much stronger evidence than this in
support of the view that and not t j belongs to the wa
series. As Motowori says,^® the identity of ^ and #
to be, of ^ •Y and ifr ^ ^ ) gentle woman, v t i- ^

and 7 ± d* to neigh, proves that ^ and # and 7 belong
to the same series, and as it has never been disputed that
V is. wa and ^ wi^ it follows that ^ must be wo. On the
other hand t ^ and ^ Y, meaning breath, must both be-
long to the same set, that is of the simple vowels. Besides
this, it can be shown that the original pronunciation of the
character from which t is formed, was o and that of
from which 7 is derived, was wo.^^

It has been usually held, until lately, that the kata-
kana sign is derived from the Chinese character
also that the ancient (249) pronunciation of the Japanese
equivalent word being e, this abbreviation was employed as
the phonetic sign of the syllable e. The Wamiyau Sen
says ‘ the Japanese name for is that is, the pronuncia-
tion of the corresponding Japanese word is identical with
that of the character We can hardly doubt, therefore,
that at the period when the Wamiyau Seu was compiled *JX
and as kana signs were pronounced exactly alike, and
that both ought to be transliterated in the same way. Here
the question thrusts itself in, ^ Did not the selection of forty-
seven signs of the syllabary, and consequently the loss of
either e ov ye from the language, precede the compilation of
this dictionary ?’ If it did, then this quotation settles no-
thing. In the Kojzhiki, the earliest extant written example
of the Japanese language, iC and are use to repre-

such cases hiatus is avoided in pronunciation either by inserting a semi-
vowel, which is not usually written, or by converting the two vowels
into a diphthong, or by making one long vowel of them.

# fS ^ M tSi P; 7 * pp. 35 and 37.

^ 2 From the use of fc in Chinese to mean river, it has been inferred
that the Japanese equivalent has also that signification, but this appears
to be incorrect; thc: Wamiyau Seu quotes a from the old Chin-
ese dictionary of ih-.t 'fav-g tiic jj? \vl;c:e is defined by

sea, about the :M ,:ar.i:’g of whicii cl-iaracic; ilicrc is no doubt. Hence
naturally means iniet.


SATOW: ON TRANSUTOEATJONi 26l

sent what would be written ^ in katakanay and yet of these
four the first must originally have been pronounced e and
the second ye, according to the corresponding Chinese
sounds, while of and both being kmi kana^ it does not
appear at first sight whether they were used for e or for ye.
By more modern Japanese writers than those previously
referred to,, it is mamtained that is not derived from
but from and if so, as g was evidently pronounced in
earlier times with an initial y , the syllabic sign, must
originally have been y^. Ohoiahi Chibiki in the
(Geh gefi teij or Ladder to the Origin of Words), places all
words beginning with excepting only ^ to get, under
they column, and amongst them consequently the word
so that if he be right, the sign 3:, even if derived from 'J!X, is
nevertheless properly ye. Motowori and Suzuki are the
most conspicuous advocates of the view which assigns to ^
the value a, and the latter has proposed to use fory^ X, the
lower half of which he considers to reqresent a sound
belonging to they series. .On the other hand, it is main-
tained by Ohota Kata in the Kafi Go Ofidzu by

Katayama, author of the Tetsu-zhi-heS an exceh

lent spelling-book, by Shikida Toshiharu in the Oii-ifi-
keimou and by Hori Hidenari, one of the greatr

est livibg authorities on Japanese grammar and etymology,
that the proper sound of ^ is e, and their opinion is corrobo-
rated by the K’anghi Lexicon, which gives (250) as
the spelling of on the authority of three earlier Chinese
dictionaries of finals. Katayama and Hori consequently
propose to dentoe e by means of the upper half of the
character, while Shikida, who appears to hold the opinion
that ^ rightly represents e, has taken ^fory^, as a convene
lent- abbreviation of ®§. These new signs are not, however,
to used in writing -Japanese words; they are simply
intended by their inventors to fill up the gaps in the Table
:of Fifty Syllables, and for us they have no practical value.
The discussion serves to illustrate the uncertainty which
surrounds the question, and the extreme divergence of
opinion among Japanese writers of reputation. I am inch-


262 SATOW : ‘ ON TRANSLITERATION.

ned Oli the whole to agree with those who would take y t as
the correct equivalent of 3 c:,„ahd the corresponding signs of
the hirci^ana syllabary. In the first place, although ^ is
the pronunciation common at the two capitals at the begin-
ning of a word, ye is heard throughout the west and north
as an initial, and it is a well recognized fact that provincial
dialects often retain forms and sounds long after they have
disappeared from the cultivated speech of capitals. Seeing
that the tendency in the past has been constantly to the
suppression of consonants, giving us u instead of wu in such
words as usagi, here ; uso, falsehood ; W 50 , otter (which were
orignally wtisagi and wuso), and doubtless others, that the
initial w of ^ { wi ) has been dropped universally, that ^ is
undistinguishable from and that yi at the beginning of
words has been confounded with i from the time when the
two syllabaries were formed, it is very improbable, to say ^
the least of it, that an original e should have acquired an
initial ye. In other words, if e had been the general
pronunciation at any period, it is difficult to believe that it
cciuld have been supplanted by ye throughout half the
country, and the most natural conclusion therefore is that
ye represents the sound prevalent when the person to whom
the iroha is attributed selected the forty-seven characters of
the hiragana^ which he believed were sufficient to represent
all the pure sounds of the Japanese language. Besides, it is
ackowledged by all native scholars that a hiatus between two
vowels in the middle of a word is contrary to the habits of
the Japanese language, and that ohoe^ moe, koe, and so
forth, are* impossible. The true pronunciation of these
roots must, according to this view, have been moye,

koye, haye, and so forth. Another proof is afforded by the
MAKURA-KOTOBA, Or ‘ pillow-word,’ uchiyosuru, an alterna-
tive (251) of which is uchi tC sttru. Is is evident that Si
must here be ready^, foryo is hot interchangeable with
but only with syllables beginning with y.^*^ The apparent
Cases of the occurrence of the vowels not directly preceded
by a consonant in any part of a word except the beginning
vol. 2, p.30.


SATOW i . ON TR^SL^IT'ERATION.


263


are fully explained by Shikida.*® On these grounds it
appears to me advisable to writey^ for and the correspond-
ing hiragmia signs. Consequently I propose to transcribe
as follows i


7 i

a i

4 ^

ya yu


u o

JC ‘ 3

ye yo


The remaining four sounds out of the twelve belong to
the w column. W best represents their initial consonant,
which is, however, much softer and less positive than the
same letter as usually pronounced by Englishmen. In
modern times, at least in the standard dialects of Kiyauto
and Yedo, three of them have, when occurring as initials,
lost the consonant, namely # te'i, ^ we. ond 7 wo, which
are pronounced exactly like ^ and t, or i, e and o. In
those dialects which still pronounce ye, the sign x has
likewise that sound. The fourth, 7 , still retains the initial
w in Japanese words, but in some words of Chinese origin,
as 7 prince (i), it has exactly the same value as T.
•But in spite of these facts, we cannot doubt that these
syllables had not suffered this loss at the time when the
syllabary was formed. It is clear from the cases of ^
and (which also represent the lost syllables yi, wu and e)
that the framers of the syllabary were guided by actual
contemporary practicci and were not influenced at all by
considerations of etymological theory, and they would not
have gone out of their way to adopt two sets of signs, 7
and t, ^ and i and ,^ if there had been only one set of
sounds to be represented'. The loss of the initial consonant
must have occurred very early, perhaps in the 12 th century,
and led to the constant confusion of + and 7 , i and ^ in
written compositions, but in the ancient literature the
distinction. is maintained. Although no difference is made
in pronunciation at the present day, the labours of recent
etymologists have restored the correct spelling, both of
• ^ 38.


264 SATOW:, QN TRANSL'^XERATION*.

inative Japanese words and of words borrowe(^ (252) from
the Chinese, and it seems advisable^ therefore, to write wiy
wCj and wo for x and in order to avoid ambiguity*
Wzru, to be, and iru, to shoot/ woru, to be, and oru, to
weave, are pronounced exactly alike, but it is obviously
advantageous to avoid in writing by this simple means the
ambiguity which exists jp speaking such words, for though
a question addressed to a living speaker serves to clear up
doubt, documents can give no explanations other than those
which appear on their face.

There is a difficulty in the case of ^ and ^ which at
present I see no means of surmounting. In the west and
north of Japan, the few indigenous, words which begin with
(we) are pronounced as if they were written with that
is, according to the practice of that part of Japan, as ye,
I have said that it is difficult to suppose that e could have
acquired an initial y, and yet this is what must have taken
place if we in becoming ye first dropped the w^ as it has
done in the east. Is it perhaps to be explained by saying
that w passed directly into y ? I must; confess, however,
that I know of no evidence to support such a theory. The
solitary example of eru^ to get, becoming yeru^ gives no
trouble, for we may easily suppose that a single, case of
was likely to get confounded with the numerous cases of
initial

Lastly, there is the sign > {h in hiragana), which never
occurs except at the end of a syllable or word. In the
^ H M (KcLTt zhi 0% hau ), of Motowori it is suggest
ted that the hiragana sign h is derived from a cursiv^. fdrm^
of ^ or from the hiragana and the hatakana y from
Okada Masumi, author of the IS (KarLa K^u)^ prefers
to derive h from the cursive from of 35 , while Arawi Haku-
seki looks upon both ’ A/‘ and v as identical with the
Devanagari Anundsika. Okada is inclined to agree with
Arawi as far the katahana symbol is concerned, and if mere
resemblance of form were to decide the question, we must
allow that there is considerable reason for accepting this
view, in preference to that of a single writer, who refers it


sATow : ON transliteration. 265

to In any case both signs are of much later date than
the rest of the two syllabaries. In the Maiiyefushifu we
always find a sign which can only be read mu^ wherein
the later language we should have fi ; of course v and h
which occur in modern transliterations of the Mafiyefushifu
are no indications of the pronunciation of the origihaL It
is* also evident that it was invented after the Japanese:
transliteration of Chinese (253) words had been fixed, since
if it had already existed when Chinese words began to be
written in kuna, it would have been naturally used as the
equivalent of the Chinese final consonat ng^ which it most
closely resembles in sound. The fact is, however, that the
vowel u (*>) is employed for this purpose, and such words
as changS, tang tong ® are written chiyau ^)tau
*>), tou ( ^ ^), that being the nearest approach which
the existing syllabary enabled the Japanese of that period
to make. Even in the pronunciation of modern Japanese a
slight nasal twang is sometimes given to u* The Chinese
words which .at the present day are written with a final
formerly had mu in its place.

From the fact that the ancient future ending ^ (mu) has
changed into v (s) in the later forms of the language it
might be hastily inferred that the origin of v was in all
cases, but it is easy to show that such an inference is in-
correct. It often occurs merely as a strengthening of the
following consonant^ as in nukinde, to be distinguished, for
nuki’de ; in kangame^ t 6 consider, for hagami^ in the nega-
tive conditional termination -zunba instead of ^zuha ; also
in such names as Bungo, and Bingo, properly Bugo and
Bigo. As a corruption of mi it is very common, as ason
(a title), for asomi ; kindachi, nobles, for kimi-tachi ; kan’^
zashi, hairpin, for ka^mi-sashi , and in the colloquial participle
of verbs in mi, as tanon-de for ianomite, d^^king, yonde for
yoniite, reading. Mo also becomes % as in nengoro for
nemogoro, earnestly ; ni, as in nanzo for nanizo, something ;
ikan ni, how ; ri, as kiidan (in kudan no gotoku, as above)
for kudcixi oJuinnu, finished, for ohdrinu ; tu, as anm&Ti,
seems to be ;* fn wayanhe^ hoy, for wurdhabe ; hi, in


266 SATOW : ON TRANSLITERATION;

mondOf watef-carrier, for moki 4 on ; hirando^ a keeper of
the wardrobe, for kufa~hito ; akindo merchant, for ahi~hito,
and the colloquial participle of verbs in Ibi-, as oyonde for
oyobite^ rtSLChing ] toMe iox fobitey ^iymg ; and ho^ as in
hoioitd'o^ nearly, iot hotohoto. Xh® ^ which is a corruption
of mu is, however^, far commoner than the > from other
sources.

It has been hitherto the custom of most, if not all Europe
eon and Artierican students of Japanese to transcribe the
signs >' and h, by the letter n. Perhaps there would be
little reason to object to this if the n never occurred except
at the end of a word, provided that readers would always
bear in mind that this d, when followed by ‘a vowel, or by
y, Wy (254) h or / is to be pronounced somewhat like the
French nasal n. The difficulty of inducing people ' to
remember this fact on every occasion, would be most effiec,
tually avoided by adding some mark to the letter n, which
would at any rate suggest to the reader that it differs from
an ordinary n. The most convenient method of doing this
is by using n, a form which is to be found in most ordinary
fonts of type, while any other sign we might elect to use
would have to be specially manufactured.*^

It may be said that, after all, readers will easily learn that
n at the end of a word is to be pronounced as in French,
and that consequently we do not require a special sign, but
the answer to this is that in a large number of common
words of Chinese origin the sign occurs in the middle-
followed by a syllable beginning with a vowel, and that in,
that position it is impossible, without having previous ac-
quintance with the particular word,, to know how to pro-
nounce it, if V in, the transliteration is represented by simple
n. For instance, what chance would there be of a correct
pronunciation being given at first sight if, IE friendliness,
^0, origin, 5 ^®, heavei)ly grace, 51 , delay, Jg®, mar-
riage and ^@1, tranquillity, was written koni^ geni^ tenon^

1 imagine that 71 with a dot under it, given by Prof. Max Muller in
his physiological alphabet, would best represent the sound. See Lect.
on the Science of Language, vol. ii, p.*r52,


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION. 267

yenin, konin and anon. The natural tendency would be
to divide these words as if the middle n belonged to the
suceeding vowel, and to read ko-ni^ ge-nin, te-nin^ ye-nin,
ko-nin, and anon^ and in the second of these cases, at least,
ambiguity of meaning would arise in reading, from the fact
that the same combination would be used to write T A,
genin^ a common person. This is leaving out of account
the incorrect pronunciation of n for fi, and consequent mis-
apprehension on the hearer’s part. A suggestion has been
made that the difficulty might be got over by the use of a
hyphen, and by writing kon-i^ gen-in y yen-in^ and so forth,
but the objection to this plan is that the hyphen would
convey an erroneous idea of the character of these words,
which often are not compounds in the usual sense of the
term, besides rendering the hyphen useless for purposes to
which it is more appropriate. Some modification of n is
certainly a more fitting means of representing the sound,
and we are obliged to take that which we (255) shall have
the greatest chance of finding in the printing-offices to
which we have access in the east. The facts that > before
a labial , (except h and f) is pronounced m, and n before a
dental do not affect the question. That is a rule of pro-
nunciation which will have to be learnt among the rest,
for whatever system of transliteration be adopted, whether
phonetic or in accordance with the kana, some such rules
will have to be learnt before, a sentence can be correctly
pronounced.

From the foregoing considerations it appears that the
following is a rational and convenient method of transcrib-
ing single kana signs : — ■


i

n


*

...Vi

h


V


A-

y

V


i

TO

ha

ni

ho

he

to

chi

ri

nu

ru

wo

wa

ka


y

V


-r

y

>


)


re

so

tsu,

ne

na

ra

mu

u

wi

no

0

ku


V

7

y


ni


r


4

JL

;*

"5


ya

ma

ke

fu

ko

ye

te

a

sa

ki

yu

me

mi

shi

X

t


X

V


we

hi

mo

se

su

' n


or,


258 SATOW ^OI^ TItAHSLIXRRATlONt.

; j it iff ^ r ± r -r 7 9

,a ka ga sa* za ta da na ha pa ba ma ya ra wa

< 4 ^ ^ f; ri fc fc“ e ^ O

i ki gi shi zhi chi ji ni hi pi bi mi o ti wi

^ ^ ^ X >/ % i f r > O

la kia gu su zu ts\i,. dzii nu fu pu bu mu yu ru o

0 9 ¥ ± ^ T t* ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

o ke ge se ze te de ne he pe be me ye re we

n’ y / h K ; ^ ^ ^ 3 p y

b ko go so zo to do no ho po bo mo yo ro wo

. A system of transcription for the signs having' been thus
arrived at, it would appear most natural to transcribe whole
words in accordance with the Japanese spelling, just, as we
do in writing Greek or Russian or German words with the
Roman alphabet. It is only necessary to know what the
Japanese spelling should be. In the, middle ages, when
the nation was too occupied with its civil wars to be able
to cultivate literature, orthography was neglected, and every
one who used the kana (256) in writing trusted to his ear or
any other private and particular guide, very much as the
Englishmen of the Elizabethan age did. Another cause
of the prevailing ignorance of the correct spelling or
tsukahi was the practice of writing chiefly in Chinese or in
a style derived from it, which for the most part rendered a
knowledge of the proper kana unnecessary. Nevertheless
the sources of this, knowledge still exist in the earliest
poetry and in the prose romances, and during the last two
centuries the labours of native scholars have gradually
determined the orthography of all words belonging to the
literacy style, with but few exceptions, concerning which
some doubt still exists. The result of their researches is
embodied in the^ Wakufi Shiwori by Tanigaha

Shisei, . which is the guide to be followed for the spelling'
of words of Japanese origin and a few of Chinese derivation.
For the proper kana' to be used in spelling the sounds of
Chinese characters, and consequently of words borrowed
from the Chinese, the lists in Motowori’s
(Zhi on kana-dzukahi), are the generally recognized authori-
ty. They have been reprinted by Suzuki Otozhirau in his


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION.


269


Kotoba no Chikamichi and in the IK BSE (Kagaku Shifu-
weki). Provided with these works, we have no difficulty in
transcribing all Japanese words, whether of indigenous or
Chinese origin, met with in books, and also ninety-nine
out of every hundred heard in the colloquial tongue, for the
differences between that and the written language^* conmst
chiefly in grammatical forms and significations of words,
i and in the comparative poverty of the former in words
taken from the Chinese,

This system of following the Japanese spelling, sign by
sign, is what I propose to call the * orthographic method ^
of transliteration, as distinguished from the phonetic sys-
tems hitherto in general use. Its superiority for linguistic
purposes is very great, on account of the greater clearness
with which it shows the relation of different grammatical
forms to each other, and it affords great aid in etymological
research by presenting to the eye the earliest pronunciation
of words, which otherwise would not easily be recognued
as related, because phonetic spelling, according to the
modern pronunciation, would render the relation obscure.
For instan ce, the words for * rope ’ and ‘ twist,’ if written
(257) phonetically, nawa and no, apparently possess
nothing in common but the initial n, while if they are
written, orthographically naha and nafu^ one has only to
remember that the consonant which is‘^ before a is/ before
u, in order to perceive that the one word is derived directly
from the other. So also the system enables one to see at
a glance that awo green, blue, and awi, the name of the
plant which furnishes the common indigo dye {Polygonum
tinctorium) are related. The orthographic spelling is also
that which must be adopted by students of comparative
philology who wish to trace the connection of Japanese and
other members of the Altaic family of languages, for the
separation of the races who speak these tongues took place
long before the beginning even of the historical period, and
the earliest forms attainable -will be of the greatest service

The language of poetry excepted, which does not admit of words
derived from the Chinese.


270 SAlrOW : ON TTRANSUTERA-XlONi

for purposes of comparison. Guided by phonetic, spelling,
errors may be committed such as one which appeared lately
in print. It Was , suggested that the word which

denotes a fertile, enclosed plain, might be of the same origin
with the Tartar Daria, riVer, river-plain.” Taira, spelt
orthographically, is ta-hira, the first syllable of which is a
prefix common tq many words, probably identical with ie,
hand, and hira is the essential, part of the word, which
means ^fiat.’ Now there certainly does not appear to be
much resemblance between Daria and hira,

’ The aid which the orthographic system lends to ety-
mology makes its use preferable also for the; student of
early history and mythology, the greater part of whose
researches must consist of etymological investigation.
Dictionaries to the classical Japanese literature ought .a;lso
to be constructed on this system, because the • modern
pronunciation of the words in use eight or nine centuries
^go would be of no value to a student resident in Japah,
while to a student working in Europe it would be a mere
source of perplexity. I cannot see, any reason for making
a ditference, with regard to the matter of spelling,,between
native words and words dirived from the Chinese. In the
classical prose, and in a great many modern books, words
of Chinese! origin are often written in kana, with no Chinese
characters at the side to indicate their meaning. How is
the student to know at sight that a certain combination of
kana signs denotes a, Japanese or a Chinese word ? For
instance-^ (yo may be either the Chinese word S to dwell,
or the root of the Japanese word kiyoshi, pure. But if in
the dictionary the Japanese (258) word is; to be spelt
orthographically, and the Chinese word phonetically, then
the reader has to mtake a guess as to the nationality of the
word, and aceording to. the theory of probabilities he must
on the average be wrong five times out of ten, which will
add fifty per cent, to his labour in looking up words.
Besides, how are compound words composed of a Japanese
and a Chinese element to be written? Surely no one
would propose to spell one part phonetically and the other


SATOW: ON TRANSLITERATION. 27I

orthographically. There is another advantage to be derived
from spelling the Chinese words according to the ortho-
graphic system, supposing that to have been adopted for
Japanese words, namely, that the spelling of words of
Chinese origin according to the hana, is of great assistance
in determining the standard pronunciation of the Chinese
language fourteen Or fifteen centuries ago, and in a large
number of cases it suggests the corresponding pronunciation
in the Mandarin dialect, which is the most useful to know
of all the modern dialects of Chinese. Thus, all words
which are spelt with the final au in Japanese have the final
ang or ao in Mandarin ; shiywu in Japanese is nearly always
shang in that dialect, while ou corresponds to ung* The
final wau in Japanese represents wang in Chinese; an
corresponds to an and uwan to wan.' To trace out the
constant relation of the Japanese spelling of Chinese words
to the pronunciation in the modern dialects, or even to the
Mandarin alone, would be an extensive undertaking, , hut
these few examples are sufficient to show that kana
spelling would afford valuable aid in such an investigation,
while the modern Japanese pronunciation, especially that
of the eastern metropolis, would be simply misleading.
There is no greater difficulty in remembering the proper
hana spelling of words derived from the Chinese than in
the case of native Japanese words, and few well-educated
persons would make a mistake in orthography in the
present day, while in the west , of Japan the youngest
children never fail to distinguish in their pronunciation
between and kuwan and kan^ Jmwaku and

kaku^ though in the east the two are confounded.

Another recommendation in its favour, even for every-day
purposes, is that it employs no accents over the vowels,
land the only type not used by Americans) Dutch^ English,
iPrench, Germans and Italians is the S, which is absolutely
necessary in order to prevent a confusion between n and
u sound quite different from it, while any phonetic (259)
System yet devised requires 0 with a long accent in one word
•put" of fivp besides long and short short i,- and perhaps


' 2 ,^% SATOW ON TRANSLITERATION.

long a and &, It is found in practice that few persons will
take the trouble to put in these accents, and the conse-
quence is that words are not spelt as they are pronounced,
and then, if pronounced as they are spelt, are not under-
stood. The commonest case in point is that of names of
places which begin with Oho, great, which is pronounced
as a long o, and in a phonetic system would be represented
by O,, with either a long or a circumflex accent over it.
Few fonts possess such a type, unless specially ordered,
and few persons mark the accent jn writing. Thus we find
the name of the second city in Japan written Osaka; that
of a town near Nagasaki, famous for its connection with
the early history of Christianity in Japan, as Omura; that
of a piovince in Kiushiu as Osumi, all of which are in
reality long O. Further, we make no distinction between
the names of islands and surname^) one of which has the
long, the other the short o, and write Oshima and Oyaraa
for both. If we adopt an expedient which has been suggest-
ed, and write double o for long o, there is a danger, for
"English speaking people at least, that this will be taken for
00 as in ^ good ’ or ‘brood.’ A rule of pronunciation must
here be prescribed and learnt, but if we are to be at that
trouble, we may as well learn a rule with respect to the
Japanese spelling, instead of a rule about a new invention
of our own. I suggest, therefore, that we should spell
according to the hana in these cases, and write Ohosaka,
and so forth, as was done by some of the earlier writers
upon Japan about twenty years ago. This is only one. case
out of many in which the orthographic spelling would be
preferable to phonetic spelling shorn of its accents. The
question between the two systems would probably be settled
for ever, if the Japanese, nation took to writing in the
principal European alphabet instead of in Chinese characters
and kana^ for foreigners would then have a norm to which
they would be compelled to conform ; but much as this
reform is to be desired in the interests of the Japanese
people, there are no signs of its being adopted at present.
The tendency of the time, as shown especially in the leading


73


V


t


f

11)11

OJUI

01


Tf^ H F 7t

T" 4

itL ^ ^ 'if-
1 -t-


^ A A ^

^|, -c '^i

fe -^^1^7 ^

’Ll A li I

A ^ ^ ^


-T


t?f !i t!’'1^


:s: I


11 ^ MB *

^ t -f- f *

-7\ r^ -m ^


■^> *r I


t A
^ T

t ^


5. S ^

■Pp^ w

'A


SATOW : ON TRANRLITERATION.


273


articles of newspapers, and in officials decrees, notifications
and laws, is all the other way. New combinations of
Chinese words, which are incomprehensible without the
pictorial aid of the ideograph, are sought out daily with
great diligence from the most (260) recondite sources, and
added to the huge vocabulary which threatens ere long to
become unintelligible in great part to all except the om-
niscient. What I have attempted, however, to do in the
preceding pages is to construct the most practical system
attainable; which will enable Japanese to be written in
Roman characters in such a way as not to confound
pronunciation or meaning, and so that the acquisition of
far fewer rules and exceptions than are required to be known
in order to pronounce English, French or Dutch will render
the pronunciation of Japanese a matter of ease.


List of Books

consulted

or referred to in this

paper

W •

m

m

n m

5c


^ m

a

m IE

s

li? m


m ff

m

B m


m


ti


if

m


■*


0


m

■ m

w>


ff

m

@

n


m

m


#

m

fa

m

m


!$.


m


fa


•j'


m

m


■k


m

—


( 274 )


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


(261) A General Meeting of the above Society was held at the ShShei-
kuwan, SeidQ, TokiyQ, on the nth February. The Rev. Dr. Syle,
President of the Society, occupied the chair.

The Recording Secretary announced the election of the following
gentlemen as members of the society : — Lieut. C. W. Baillie, R.N., Mr.
Ernest F. Fenollosa, and Mr. C. J. Tarring,

The Librarian reported the receipt of various periodicals.

Mr. Ernest Satow then read his paper “ On the Transliteration of the
Japanese Syllabary.”

The President, after thanking Mr. Satow for bringing before the society
so valuable a paper on so important a subject, referred to the fact that
in the transactions of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (which was the
mother of all Asiatic Societies), the very first dissertation read by the
first president, Sir Wm. Jones, was on the same topic. *A system of
alphabetic writing for the dialects of India had then been adopted, which,
with modifications, had been used ,by Pickering in the N. American
languages, and by Dr, Wells Williams for the Mandarin and Canton
pronunciations of Chinese. Professor Max. Muller had also elaborated a
scheme — a surprising one, considering the hand from which it came,
greatly embarrassed by diacritical marks, and italics and srnall-capital
letters. The Russians had resorted to the Greek letters in order to make
a perfect alphabet, neither redundant nor deficient ; but the result was
not altogether a happy one. In short, the task was an exceedingly
difficult one, as those well knew who had attempted to deal with the
several provincial dialects of China — even Shanghai and Ningpo, though
so near together, requiring a different apparatus, not to speak of Tie^chew,
Foochow, Amoy, Canton, and Chefoo. In Japan, attempts had been
made by Dr. Hepburn, Sir R. Alcock, Mr. Bramsen, Mr. Lyman, and
others ; now Mr. Satow proposes a scheme which has a marked peculiarity.
The President added that he had himself endeavoured, some months
ago, to give this subject a practical bearing, by proposing that committees
from this Society and from the German Asiatic Society should confer
with the authorities of the Mombusho, and endeavour to secure the adop-
tion of some system which might be set forth “with authority;” and
now that, in the Mombusho itself, a kind of Council of Education had
been established, he thought it a favourable opportunity for effecting
something that might prove valuable to both Japanese and foreigners.


( 275 )

Mr. Bramsen asked Mr^ Satow to what extent he advocated the adop-
tion of his .system; — whether he meant to confine it to dictionaries and
grammars of the written language, or to adopt it generally for the spoken
language as well.

(262) Mr. Satow replied that he was not prepared to recommend the
immediate introduction of the orthographic system for all purposes,
though he was aware of the inconveniences of having two systems in use
together. It had been suggested by several scholars that there should
be a phonetic system for popular use, and a second based on the Japanese
spelling, for scientific purposes. There were several objections to every
so-called phonetic system that had yet been proposed, the chief of which
was that they did not fulfil their purpose. In Japanese the terminal
vowel of a word always modifies an initial vowel in a word following it,
rules for which must be learnt, for it is impossible to represent this
modification phonetically, as it would of course involve spelling a word
differently according to the position in which it was found. But yet in
compound words it would manifestly be convenient to indicate this
change, if we could only determine what words are to be treated as
compounds. It is, however, not easy to do this. A great many words
which seem to be compounds in the later language, because the action
which the two elements, of the compound represent* are conceived as
one, in the older Japanese are certainly distinct words corresponding to
distinct actions. All these questions, however, disappear when the
orthographic system is used, because no account is taken of them by
the original kana spelling.

Mr. Bramsen thought those present hardly realized what the innova-
tions amounted to. We should have to write such a word as sho'sho, a
little, seu-seu; mid cho^ to-morrow morning, miyauteu, A common
syllable like to is in Japanese written in six different ways, according to
the word it is used in, viz.: iowo^ toho, toitj tofii, hiu^ and iafu. The
correct way of spelling can only be ascertained by looking up the charac-
ter in question in a Chinese dictionary, and thus finding its equivalent
in kana. If, as Mr. Satow asserted, foreigners have not yet learned to
indicate the long vowel in Osaka, Oyama, what prospect is there of
making them write the name of the province of Oshiu Afushht or Aushiu
(the speaker did not know which of the two it was, not having his Chinese
dictionary with him) ? The question seemed simply to be this : Is the
new system proposed by Mr. Satow to be generally used, for the spoken
as well as the written language, or is it to be used exclusively by
grammarians and etymologists ? In the first case, the system is utterly
impracticable, because, as already remarked, the reading of it demands
a thorough knowledge of all the combinations of the kanay while the
writing of it requires an extensive acquaintance with the Chinese char-
acter. If, on the other hand, the system is merely intended for etymo-
logical purposes, there seems to be nothing gained at all by transliterat-


( 276 )


ing. If a thorough knowledge of the hana and Chinese characters is
required to use the system, why not remain satisfied with the kana as it
is? It is surely easier to write down the short Japanese signs, than to
use two or three Roman letters for each. Thus it appears that if the
proposed system is intended for general adoption, it is useless", while if
specially designed for etymological purposes, it is superfluous.

Mr, T. W. Hellyer thought that if Mr. Satow’s new system of trans-
literation were ^brought into general use, it would exclude the greater
portion of the large (263) class of students of the Japanese language, who
only have time to acquire suflScient knowledge to enable them to carry
oh ordinary conversation, from making use of the different books that
ar6 published in Romanized Japanese, and from writing Japanese words
according to the recognized system. Whilst admitting that some
students of this class might take the trouble to learn how to read the
new style of transliteration, he felt sure that none could learn how to
write in it, as to do so would require an acquaintance with the use of
the Chinese dictionary.

Mr. Chamberlain remarked that the subject of transliteration was one
as to which agreement seemed hopeless, chiefly, perhaps, owing to a
cause to which sufficient attention was rarely paid, viz., that under the
single name of “Japanese” are in reality included two distinct lan-
guages, differing from one another almost as much as Latin and Italian,
viz., the Written Language and the Spoken Language. If, as Mr,
Satow had stated, and as was doubtless true, it would be highly incon-
venient -to adopt one system for transliterating the Written, and another
for transliterating the Spoken, Tongue ; and if, as seemed likely, no
single system would be equally suited to the requirements of both, the
question was : which should be sacrificed to the other ? To this question
be, for one, had no hesitation in replying that, from both the practical
and the theoretical point of view, the Written Language has the greatest
claims on our attention. It is not as a medium of everyday intercourse,
but as the vehicle of a highly interesting literature and as^an important
member of the Altaic family of tongues that Japanese is to be chiefly
valued. For facilitating the study of this literature, and for furthering
etymological researches, it is plain that that method of transliteration
which preserves the standard native spelling and, therebj;^, the original
pronunciation of words is the one that to the theoretical student must
offer the greatest advantages, on the other hand, if the constructor of a
system of transliteration looks forward to the day when the Japanese
nation will adopt the Roman alphabet, it cannot be doubted that that
plan will best meet their necessities which pays chief regared to the
Written Language, which is the only one they ever care, or are ever
likely to care, to write. As for those Europeans who wish to write
Japanese without properly learning it, their number is so small and their
claims so slight that the alleged difficulties to them ought not to be


( 277 )

allowed to stand in the way of the adoption of a scientific and consistent
system. If they find it too hard to learn, let them write by rule of thumb
as heretofore. Very likely they maybe understood. But, in reality, the
hardships imposed on these persons by the new system are not nearly
so gteat as Mr. Bramsen and Mr. Hellyer suppose. Kven our own
extremely irregular English orthography is, notwithstanding all that
may be said against it, to be learnt by a very moderate effort. The
word “ scissors,” says a high authority, might, following analogy, be
spelt in no less than 240 different ways. But would any person with
a tincture of education be likely to misspell it? The case, however,
against the native spelling of Japanese is not by a very long way so
strong as the case against the received mode of spelling English. That
with regard to pure Japanese words is this so, {264) seems to be generally
acknowledged, and the advocates of the orthographical system rest their
chief objections to it on the difficulty of discovering the proper ortho-
graphy of like-sounding but differently spelt Chinese monosyllables.
There is some difficulty, but it is not extreme ; for once remember the
correct spelling of a very small percentage of the characters, and you
will^know the spelling of almost all, both pronunciation and spelling
being, in the vast majority of cases, determined by what is called the
“ phonetic ” (in Japanese tsukuri),

Mr. Blanchet said he would be very glad to see Mr. Satow's system
in use, but he almost despaired of this being effected. He very
often had to correct his own teacher in the spelling of words in the
kana,

Mr. Soper remarked that for dictionaries and grammars the orthogra,
phic system was the more logical. Even for practical purposes the
phonetic style was defective, as a stranger could not always, according
to it, pronounce correctly.

Mr. Bramsen thought Mr. Chamberlain, being himself an Englishman-
greatly underrated the difficulties arising from the habit of writing the
same sound in so many ways. He could testify that it would be
infinitely easier to a foreigner to acquire a knowledge of English, if, for
instance, the long sound of e was always written in one way, instead of
' being written e, ee, ea, i, ei, and ie. The same feeling seemed to be
gaining ground in England itself. Thus, the speaker had seen a
** Phonetic Journal,” which is widely circulated, written in and advocat*
ing a mode of writing in which the same sound is always rendered by
the same letters. All over Europe there is a tendency to simplify
language by throwing out all superfluous letters ; and to advocate
exactly an opposite course here, namely, to discard our phonetic system
for the sake of an orthographic one like Mr. batow’s, is at least very
conservative. If, as Mr. Chamberlain says, the very few people who
make a special study of comparing different languages would not take
the trouble to learn the 48 kaiict characters, it was very unlikely that


{ 278 )


everybody else, for the sake of using the system, would undertake iirst
to learn “a few hundred” Chinese characters.

Captain James said he would like to know the object to be gained by
this system; — ^whether it was for foreigners learning Japanese, or for the
ulterior object of the Japanese themselves learning Roman characters.

Mr. Hellyer mentioned that one point had been lost sight of by Mr.
Chamberlain when comparing the difficulty of spelling Japanese correct-
ly with the difficulty that exists in spelling English words, viz., that
whereas any tolerably well educated Englishman could tell you at once
how to spell any ordinary word, it was not so with the Japanese ; for if
you asked how a certain word should be spelt in the ig people out

of 20 would have to refer to a dictionary before they would be able to
answer positively, unless the word enquired about were a simple one.
This fact would render the adoption of the new system impracticable
for general purposes.

Mr. Chamberlain stated, in reply to Mr- Hellyer, that for a few cents
(262) could be bought a book. — a very small one, — reference to which
would lead him right in the spelling of words of Chinese origin. It is
called yi-on kana Bcn-ran.

Mr. Hellyer, in answer to this, remarked that; his orthographic.system
was supposed to be learned without a knowledge of the kana,

Mr. Chamberlain replied that books for learning the transliteration
would be made.

Mr. Satow replied that, as far as reading texts transliterated ortho-
graphically went, he was inclined to think that the number of rules of
pronunciation to be learnt would be very little greater than in the case
of any system of phonetic spelling. He even believed that writing
orihographically would not be a greater tax on the memory than writing
phonetically with the aid of accents. Every one knew that in writing
b'rench it was far more difficult to remember the position of the accents
than the spelling, and nearly every one would leave them out in conse-
quence, so that the spelling of the word would not represent the sound,
and the word when pronounced as it was written would not be understood.
It was just as easy to recollect the sequence of letters in Kiyauto, as to
recollect Kioto or Kiyoto with a circumflex or a long accent over the
first 0, In fact, the system which we pursue at present in writing Jap-
anese is very much as if we were to try to teach the French language by
dictionaries and phrase-books spelt phonetically ; but the effect of such
a plan upon the pronunciation of the learner would evidently be extremely
injurious. To the observation that even for philological purposes the
orthographic, system was unnecessary, and therefore useless, because
the kana would serve the purpose just as well, he replied that if it were
possible to do without transliteration and use kana only in dictionaries
and grammars, he would prefer it, but there were practical difficulties in
the way. Firstly, an eye which was accustomed to read chiefly in the


( 279 )


Roman alphabet would never attain equal facility with any other; and
it is actually easier to read Japanese transliterated than in the native
character. Secondly, the huna are usually printed in perpendicular
columns, from right to left of the page, which makes them unsuitable
for printing along with the Roman alphabet horizontally and from left
to right. If Aa?ia are printed as our letters are, then in order to read
them with fluency, the student must unlearn his habit of reading down
tbe page and acquire a new habit of reading across it, and the advantage
of using the original /lanti would be very small indeed. So that trans-
literation would in the end be an advantage to the student. In making
a dictionary of the written language, he would neglect theii/g'or/ marks,
which are nearly always omitted in books, especially of the earlier
literature, and place /i,/', and & together, ^ and together, and so on,
as much trouble would be saved to the student by not having to hunt,
it might be, in four places for a single word.

The President expressed a hope that this subject would not fail to
appear on another occasion.

The meeting was then adjourned.


A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION, AS
ATTAINED TO BY BUDDHA.


Translated by Capt. J. M. James.


(Read March 1879^.

The following is a translation of a discourse on Ten-
gan-Hiyau Shiyahii, i.e., Infinite Vision, or the state in
which all earthly illusions are dispelled, and to which
Buddha alone attained, interspersed with arguments by
objectors amongst the congregation. The discourse was
delivered at the temple of Shin-Kai-Zhi, at Shinagaha, in
the month of August, 1878, by a priest named Sata
Kaisehi, of the Itsti-Kaii-shiu [i.e., Itsii-Kaii sect] , an
off-shoot of the Zhiyau-do-shm, and commonly termed
Mon-to shiu^ founded by Shin-ran Shiyau-nin during the
latter part of the 12th century.

Sata Kaiseki is considered a man of note amongst the
followers of the Itsu-Kat^ sect. His sermon consists of
a series of arguments intended to produce belief in the
intellectual perfection and holy state to which the mind of
the great reformer Buddha attained, surpassing therein
all other mortals, while it also illustrates the various
doctrinal paths and stages of discipline which the novice
must tread, with a fixed and unerring determination, before
he can finally reach the state of Ten-gan (Infinite Vision),
when all human cravings and desires shall have forever
lost their hold on the senses : then, and not till then, has
the inner or spiritual essence arrived at that final state of
development which enables it to be absorbed into the
Divine Essence.

The text is an follows : —


268


JAMES; A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


The subject of the discourse being announced, one of
the congregation, a sceptic, stood forth, and thus addressed
the priest : —

^‘Whereas it is invariably the custom of the Buddhist
priests, when preaching the doctrines of their creed, to in-
troduce various accounts of strange events said to have
happened during the life of Shiyaka Muni (Buddha) and
of those of his five hundred disciples, together with graphic
descriptions of ^igokii (Hell) and Shiyimisen (the name
of a fabulous mountain in India, where the gods are sup-
posed to reside), they have an easy manner of illustrating
these assertions by parable, or if that fail in convincing
their hearers, of diving at once into the abstruse metaphy-
sical reasoning of Buddhism, which very few, if any, are
able to comprehend, the priesthood included. I particularly
wish you would give us a lucid explanation of Hell and
Shiyimisen (Heaven). In the first place, you say that
Hell is buried ten thousand miles, or more, in the bowels
of the earth. What human eye, or understanding is able
to see, or really believe that such is the case? Again, that
Shiyimisen is situated so high above this earth, — several
hundreds of thousands of miles, — that no human being,
however clear his organs of sight, can even conceive the
manner of its existence. Truly, the more we consider and
reflect on these subjects, the more are we plunged into, and
lost in, the vortex of perplexed thought ! All that the priest-
hood affirms on the subject, of Heaven and Hell is a mere
fabrication, an assertion of which any plain man can easily
perceive the truth without the aid of an eyeglass. If you
explain the visible, which the eye can see and the under-
standing grasp, well and good. But as to the invisible,
who can believe ? ”

To which the priest, taking up the discussion, made
answer : — In this world there are two great forces con-
stantly at work, vix., Cause and Effect. Everything which
takes places, from the least to the greatest, is comprehended
in these two forces. To understand these, a man must
be educated, and the greater knowledge- he possesses the


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


269


more readily will all his former doubts be dispelled, and
everything* become plain to his reason. With the un-
educated man the case is the reverse ; he is always difficult
to convince on any subject, however well his opponent may
ai’gue. His reasoning faculties not being developed, he
cannot understand arguments, which, indeed, only serve to
confuse him the more.

(269) A person, before he can finally attain to Ten-gan
(550^, Infinite Vision),^ must first possess the San-Riyati-
Chi Three Talents of Knowledge), viz : — -

— Gen-Riyaii-Chi the faculty of forming cor-

rect conclusions, from things that are presented to our
organ of sight).

ftf ll^—Hi-Riyau-Chi (^5^, the faculty of basing our
conclusions on inferences). For instance, if you see smoke
rising, you naturally conclude that there must be fire to
produce the smoke. Again, if you hear men’s voices, you
feel assured that thei'e must be some men within a short
distance of 3^00, even if you cannot now perceive them.

“ None amongst you, I presume, will doubt these state-
ments.

— Hi-Riyau-Chi the faculty of compre-

hending the impossible). [Being rather difficult to explain
with clearness, the priest leaves this faculty undefined until
further on in the discussion.]

Therefore, if Infinite Vision exists, and sees freely
around and beyond endless mountains, thereto comparing
our own feeble knowledge which sinks into comparative
nothingness beside it, there can be no doubt as to the
existence of Hell and Heaven.”

Another unbeliever asks the priest for a more particular
description of the species of vision which he terms Infinite
Vision, predicating of it the power of seeing over the
above-mentioned vast distances.


^Divyatchakchus, the faculty of comprehending in one instantaneous
view or by intuition all beings in all the worlds . — EitcVs Ildbk. of Bud-
dhism* ^See Eitel’s Hdbk. art, Abhidjnd.


270


JAMES : A DISCO-URSE ON- INFINITE VISION.


The priest replied : If you wish to know and under-

stand the order of sight named Infinite Vision, which is
indeed inconceivable by ordinary human beings in their
present unenlightened state, I will try, by means of a series
of doctrinal proofs, to explain the matter thoroughly to you,
and shall thereby probably convince you. We commence
with the Go-zhiU’dzim Five Spiritual Attributes

of Infinite Permeating Power), ^ viz. : —

ffj. — Tengan-Tstiu Infinite Vision), that order

of vision which perceives the four extremes, viz., Hi (^)^
the order which includes all things to infinity ; Shiyau ([fg),
the order which distinguishes between, or subdivides, all
things to infinity ; (IfH), the order which perceives all
things, even such as are too minute for the human eye ( 270 )
or intellect to take in, even with the aid of a microscope ;
Wen order (*g)^ the order of infinite perception. This order
perceives things that no. human eye or intellect could grasp
in their present unenlightened state, even though they
should use a telescope a million times more powerful than
any yet invented.

II. — Ten-NhTstcti the all-hearing ear),^ in all

the four respects of Hi, Shiyau, Sai, and Wen.

III. ---Ta-Shin-Tsuu the knowledge of the in-

nermost thoughts of the hearts of all mankind).^

^^IV. — Shiynkti-Mei-'Tsim the infinite know-

ledge of what has transpired through all preexisting ages).^

V. — Zhin-Kiyan-Tstm the infinite knowledge

of all existing things). [It also includes the infinite powers
of Transformation and Transmutation] .

” Of these five orders of Zhin-dzmi, that which freely
perceives Heaven and Hell is Tcn-gan-Tsim (553^^, In-
finite Vision), which is infinite in all the four respects of
Hi, Shiyati, Sai, and Wen, P''or whatever hindrances may
present themselves to our sight or reasoning powers, none


sDivyas’ rOtra, the power to hear and to understand every sound,
articulate and inarticulate, produced in any universe.— Hdhk.
^Paratchitta djnana. spurvaniv^sdnu Smriti djSana.


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


271


are present to it, permeating, as it does, everywhere and
every thing. There can, therefore, be no doubt as to the
existence of Hell and Heaven.”

Again, one of the congregation addressed the priest, re-
minding him of the promise he had given not to relate any
miraculous occurrences of which he could not bring forward
proof positive, and suggesting that he had deviated consid-
erably from this promise and told them incredible stories
about innumerable kinds of eyes of which he, for one, could
make nothing. So far as he knew, there was but one kind
of eye, via., that common to all living beings possessed of
eyesight.

“ In ancient times in China,” the priest replied, “ during
the reign of the Emperor Bun, there were doubts entertained
amongst the literati of the day as to the existence of a cer-
tain plant called Kuwa-Kuwan-Pu, a herb which

was said, on being burnt, to possess the virtue of cleansing,
without consuming it, any clothing material that might be
placed on its fire; hence its name of Knwa-Kuwan-Pu,
lit ‘ cleansing by fire’). After due deliberation, it was
decided that no such plant, or substance, could possibly
exist, as such a thing was without all reason ; and, to
commemorate this decision, the Emperor caused the same
to be inscribed on a stone tablet, which was placed outside
one of the principal gates of the city, for the edification
of all who might pass by and care to read it.

“ Some years subsequently, during the reign of the
Emperor Mei, son of the former Emperor Bun, an embassy
bearing presents from the kingdom of Ko arrived at the
capital, and presented, among other things, some specimens
of the identical plant, Kuwa-Kiman-Pu. They were
brought as a special rarity, only indigenous to the envoys
country. The Emperor, on learning that a plant possessing
such wonderful virtues did really exist, felt deeply hum-
iliated at the ignorance displayed by his late father and
his father’s ministers, and forthwith issued an edict for
the stone tablet to be removed and destroyed. Surely this
is an instance of things existing in the world, whose exist-


JAMES: A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


272

ence, until actually demonstrated, seems out of all reason.
In this world there are many subjects and things within
reason, which appear to be without reason, and vice versa''
[This must be taken as the priest’s explanation of the
talent of Hi-Riyatt-chi, i.e., the comprehension of the
impossible, which was mentioned earlier in the discourse.]
Again, I will now try and explain to you the live
different kinds of vision as described in the Sutra named
Mu-Riyau^Zhiyu They are as follows — Nika-

Movi2i\ Vision)] Ten-gan ( 550 ^)^ Infinite Vi-
sion); Hofu-gan The Eye of the Law); W e-gan

(^3^)^ Enlightened Vision of a Benevolent Order) ; Bntsn-
gan Divine Vision).

^^For instance, take a man who, by continued study,
obtains a knowledge of the laws both moral and civil, and
of the different arts and sciences. His intelligence is
developed to such an extent that he understands and per-
cives things and subjects which the ignorant man cannot
even imagine : this is the species of vision termed Hoftt-gan,

“ Again, take the case of a man who is still more enlight-
ened on a still greater number of subjects, and of clear
intellectual discernment of a highly benevolent order, — one
whom we might term a philosophical (272) philan thropist
His vision (intellectual perception) would be termed We-
gan, I could give you a lengthened discourse on this last
subject alone, but time will not admit of it on the present
occaion. Btttsu-gan, likewise, if described thoroughly and
clearly, would occupy so much time that I should not be
able to proceed with the other numerous subjects connected
with this discourse. Wherefore, to economise time, I. shall
describe (Mortal Vision) only. Of this order of

vision, there are eight different kinds, all of them entirely
diherent from Infinite Vision ; but if I explain the former
thoroughly, and as clearly as I possibl}^ can, you will perhaps
be then less inclined to doubt the existence of the latter.

I. — Shiyaku-Kuwau-gan (f^y^^), vision produced by
the reflection of borrowed light, is that order to which


<iAmitabha,


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


273


human vision belongs ; for without the rays of the sun,
moon, stars, or some artificial light, it is well known that
it would be impossible for us to see at all : hence its name
as shove.

IL — Ri-Ktiwau-gan that class of vision which

has a distinct innate power, and needs no assistance from
the borrowed lights mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
The eyes of the cat, dog, rat, cow, and horse are of this
order. In confirmation of which assertion, I ma}^ remind
you of the fact, familiar' to every child, of the dexterity
exhibited by cats in catching rats in the dark.

III. — Nitsu-Kuwau-gan order of vision

which is •obtained solely through the action of the light
of the sun. The eyes of pigeons, sparrows and many
others of the bird tribe are of this class, and their powers
of sight are consequently limited to the day-time. Cases
have been known of human beings being marked by the
like characteristic. They must be supposed to possess eyes
whose structure resembles that of the above-mentioned
birds ; at least, so the fact is accounted for, and hence the
term Tori-me (J^^, bird-eye) which is applied to such
individuals.'^

lY. -Ki-hmau-gan that order of vision

which dreads or (273) shuns the overpowering rays of the
sun, such as the vision of owls, bats, and alliedspecies. The
eyes of these creatures,* at least to all outward appearance,
do not differ in any marked degree from these of other
birds, yet, during the day-time, their powers of vision are
simply overcome, and rendered powerless by the rays of the
sun.

Y.-Wen-sai-gan that order of vision which is

possessed by the eagle and other birds of that tribe, who
subsist and thrive by preying on weaker species. Thus the
eagle or hawk, when soaring high up in the air on the alert

71 have been informed, on reliable authority, that many instances have
been known in Japan of people who lost all powers of vision on the ap-
proach of night, so much so that even the light of a lamp or candle
would make very little impression for the better on their organs of sight.


274


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


for whatever prey may come first, ‘can, from a great height
or distance, distinctly see the most minute objects, and will
rarely make a mistake by pouncing on anything other than
his real prey. The eagle, if soaring up aloft, can distinctly
see the hunter as he sets the bait, thinking to entrap him,
even though the hunter should be ten miles distant. Hence
the term Wen-sai-gan distant and minute sight’). Truly,
the eyesight these birds possess is wonderful in comparison
with our feeble powers of vision.

“VI. — Mu-Suwi-gan (^^ 3 ^), — sleepless vision, — that
order of sight which is possessed by the fish tribe. The eye
of the fish never closes, nor does it require rest ; whereas
human beings, when asleep, naturally close their, eyes, thus
giving rest to those organs, repose to the mind, and nourish-
ment to the body; but the eye of the fish tribe never rests
for one moment. This order difiers entirely from those
which I have previously described ; — does it not ? In
ancient times in China, — so tradition says, — when padlocks
were first invented and came into use, the shape adopted
was that of the fish’s eye, emblematical of that which was
supposed never to I'est or sleep, but to be ever on the alert.
Locks of this shape were believed to have the virtue of keep-
ing robbers away, or at any rate to be ever on the watch
for their approach.® ^

“VII, — Sen-yeu-gan that order of vision which

is possessed by dogs and monkeys, and has the power of
seeing fairies, hobgoblins, and elves in their true form, so
that its possessor cannot in any way be bewitched, or led
astray by such supernatural beings. Human beings do not
possess this faculty of supernatural vision, and, (274) con-
sequently, are often bewitched, beguiled, and led astray by
foxes and racoon-faced dogs, who temporarily put on the
form of some object, which entrances the senses of the
individual, and causes him or her to do whatever best
pleases the beguiler. To the class of creatures thus endowed

2 At the present day, throughout most parts of China, there is scarcely
a native junk or boat of any kind which does not carry,— one on either
bow,— two cavings of the fish’s eye, as the emblem of watchfulness.


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


275

belongs the Suwiko water-tiger), commonly called

Kaha-Tarau, an animal which inhabits the beds of rivers,
and is commonly on the alert for his prey during the sum-
mer time, when children go out bathing, so that many a
child has lost its life through the attacks of this monster.
Monkeys are supposed to possess the faculty of seeing this
animal in its true form, and of being able to catch and kill
it. Cases have been reported of the Sntaiko having been
seen, by human beings ; but this is evidently an error, caused
by an overheated imagination.

^^VIIL — Zhi-hen-gan periodically changing vi-

sion), that order of vision which changes at certain specifi-
ed times, as the vision of the cat, which changes at noon
and at midnight.

“ I have now fully explained to you the eight different
orders of sight variously possessed by human beings and by
the animal tribes generally, each order differing considerably
from the others. It, therefore, should neither astonish nor
perplex you if I tell you of the existence of Infinite Vision.”

Another unbeliever now addressed the priest, and : —
can almost believe that other orders of vision than that
which human beings are possessed of, do exist. But even
allowing such to be the case, I doubt their possessors being
able to see through a paper window. How, then, do you
account for that order of sight which sees things at an
infinite distance.? There must be some limit, probably not
exceeding twenty miles. I, therefore take the liberty to
doubt the existence of the extraordinary powers of what you
call Infinite Vision, which can, you tell us, see all things
plainly at the distance of a million miles.”

The priest answered ; ‘‘That you should doubt this at
first, does not surprise me much ; for when we call to mind
the different orders of vision of which most people have any
knoweledge, there seems no evident reason why Infinite
Vision should exist. But when we reflect more deeply, and
think of all those wonderful and mysterious occurrences
which are daily taking place in nature (always allowing that
nothing happens of itself, but that there must be a cause for


276


JAMES: A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


all things)^ then (275) there should be very little room left
in your mind to doubt the existence of Infinite Vision in
each degree of Shiyatt-^ Saiy and Wen. Furthermore,
I will show that Shiyaka Muni (‘ Buddha*) alone attained
to Infinite Vision, and will prove to you the same by com-
parisons drawn from those creatuers who are known to pos-
sess a certain inferior order of Infinite Vision.**

One of the congregation hereupon enquiring who might
they be who are known to possess a certain inferior order
of Infinite Vision, —

The priest replied : It is such as have the power of

bewitching, or otherwise deceiving human beings, namely,
the fox, racoon-faced dog, ourang-outang, and ten-gii (a
hobgoblin represented in paintings and images as a monster
of human shape, with an extraordinarily long protruding
nose). These creatures are endowed with an inferior grade
of the faculty of Infinite Vision, and their sight consequently
extends for hundreds and thousands of miles in all directions,
from whatever place they may be standing in. In proof of
this, I will relate to you a remarkable case which is known
to have actually occurred : — ■

certain man, a native of Tsugaru (a province in the
northern part of Japan), whilst residing in Hiuga (a province
in the extreme south-west of the empire), one day when
walking amongst the hills chanced to meet a fox, which he
tried to kill or capture. The animal got badly wounded,
but managed to escape. Its feelings may be easily imagined.
So annoyed and disgusted was it at the treatment it had
received, that it determined, by way of retaliation, to bewitch
the man of Tsugaru. It began by completely entrancing
his senses by suddenly showing to him the exact scenery of
his own province, and the ceremony of his own marriage ;
next, it made him see the houses, the style of head-dress
there in vogue, the different crests there used and with which
the man was familiar, the manner of the entertainment, the
face of the bride, the behaviour of the middle-man, the songs
peculiar to the place, the dialect, — in fact every thing in the
way in which it would have presented itself to him had he


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


277


been in Tsugaru, even to the extent of going through the
ceremony that takes place at a wedding. Thus, for the time
being, the man was perfectly bewitched and deluded, and
believed what he saw to be a reality. If the fox had pre-
sented to his sense of sight scenery other than that of
Tsugaru, it would not have had the effect of deluding him.
(276) But its evincing this knowledge of the man’s native
place, and its being able to show him things as they really
existed in Tsugaru, proves the fox to have possessed the
faculty of seeing over, and around, in all directions, that is,
to have possessed Infinite Vision. And to judge from its
hearing the voices of the people of Tsugaru, their singing,
laughter, and so on, it must have possessed Ten-Ni-Tsim
(the all "hearing ear) ; from its knowledge of the feelings and
desires of the guests at the wedding, we must infer it to
have possessed Ta-Shin-Tsim (the knowledge of the inner-
most thoughts of others). From its knowledge of the mar-
riage ceremony as handed down from ancient times, we per-
ceive its possession of Shiytihi-Mei-Tsim (the knowledge of
things as existing in previous ages) ; whilst the fact of its
being in Hiuga, and thence clearly seeing the scenery of Tsu-
garu, which is over five hundred Japanese miles distant, pro-
ves also its possession of Zhin-Kiyau-Tsiiu (the knowledge
of all existing things, also the powers of transformation and
transmutation). And even allowing the fox, racoon -faced
dog, ourang-outang, and hobgoblin to be endowed with an
instinctive vision of a different order fron that of human
beings, it would have been altogether impossible for this fox
to have known all the circumstances I have just related,
unless it had possessed Ten-gan, Ten-nij Ta-shin^ Shiyttku-
mei and Zhhi-Kiyau-Tsuu. Foxes inhabiting countries
other than India, China, and Japan are not thus endowed,
and, consequently, have not the power of bewitching people.
Many persons doubt the possession of that faculty by the
foxes of the three above-mentioned countries. But the
diversity is to be accounted for by the different climatic
influences acting on the same species. For instance, take
the difference of instinct between the dogs of our country


278


JAMES:, A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


and those from European countries : what sagacity and what
stupidity within the limits of the same species !

“If, then, you allow that the fox and racoon-faced dog
are endowed with the visual powers I have described, surely
you can no longer doubt that Buddha possessed Infinite
Vision, and that of the purest order.”

One of the audience here interposed : “ I admit your

statement with regard to the power possessed by the fox
and racoon-faced dog of seeing through, over, and around
in all directions for hundreds and thousand of miles. But
I find it hard to believe that Shiyaka Muni (Buddha) attained
to Infinite Vision ; for he was but an ordinary mortal, — the
son of an Indian prince, — not a supernatural being. If he
(277) possessed pure Infinite Vision, it is |)ut natural to
suppose that we should have been similarly endowed ; but
as this is not the case, there is reason to doubt that he
alone was so.”

The priest replied : “ A hundred years ago, if there

had been, any man in this country who had known the* art
of photography or of electric telegraphy, and had publicly
proclaimed his knowledge to the world, no doubt but that
he would have forfeited his life for his temerity. But in
these days, when people have become enlightened, we
know that photography and electric telegraphy do really
exist, and have ample proofs of their great use to mankind ;
and, after having once learnt their origin, and the theory
on which they are based, a child even would find no great
mystery in the whole matter. It is the same with Infinite
Vision. After thoroughly investigating and understanding
the origin and reason of it in its true sense, all doubts
and suspicions are dispelled. Now, there is no reason to
doubt the superiority of the understanding and intellectual
powers generally of human beings as compared with those
of all other animals. If, therefore, we admit that the fox
and racoon-faced dog possess Infinite Vision, but deny that
faculty to human beings, then we assert the superiority of
those creatures to mankind. But knowing, as we do, that
men are superior in intellect and in reasoning powers to


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION,


279


all other animals, it follows as a natural consequence that
every human being must possess the seed of Infinite Vision,
Nevertheless, should it remain in its latent state, without
ever being developed, or be at least only partially so, then
will the mind of the individual be liable to be taken pos-
session of by doubt, arid to be carried away by erroneous
decisions. On the other hand, the more this precious
faculty becomes developed, the more easily will the film
which covers the I'etina of the spiritual eye be removed,
and all doubts and fears be dispelled from our reason. A
Buddhist work namen Gu-Shiya-Ron makes mention of four
different orders of Infinite Vision, viz., Cultivated Infinite
Vision, of which there are two species, and Instinctive
Infinite Vision, also including two different species. I
remark on them as follows : —

‘‘ I. — Natural or Instinctive Infinite Vision is that order
which is charateristic of the fox, racoon -faced dog, ourang-
outang, and hobgoblin.

II. — Cultivated Infinite Vision is that order with which
human beings are endowed, and which is developed to a
greater or less (278) extent, according to the original talent
of the individual, and to the degree of earnestness with
which he pursues its cultivation. This last order of Infinite
Vision is sub-divided into two classes, viz,, Sen-Zhiyiitsii
(fdlUj, Magic) and Zen-Zhiyan> Tranquil Abstrac-

tion). The former was peculiar to China, where it was much
practised in ancient times. During the periods of Riyau
and Zhin it was more or less discontinued, and since that
time the art has gradually been lost. For a human being
to obtain the power of magic, it is necessary that he should
cleanse his heart from all worldly lusts and desires, and
live an ascetic life in some remote mountain district, where,
removed from all human society, existing for a lengthened
time on the simplest diet and breathing the pure mountain
air, his whole material and spiritual system is finally
purified, and so changed from that of ordinary human be-
ings that he is enabled to fly through the air at will,
and to accomplish and perceive things which are beyond


28 o


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


the ken of ordinary mortals. These, in their ignorance,
would attribute such powers to the interference of demons,
or to some other supernatural ageney. But as every human
being possesses the germ of Infinite Vision, this is simply
to be regarded as its development efiected by leading a
simple and pure life.

As for Tranquil Abstraction, — the second species of
Cultivated Infinite Vision, it is gradually developed by
following various devotional and disciplinary paths. To
become proficient in it, requires unceasing effort on the part
of the devotee to overcome the Rohi-B on-N an six

principal sins and causes of suffering which beset the path
of mankind through life), viz., Don-Yoku avarice,

covetousness) ; Shin-ni anger, indignation, angry

passions); Gii-cJti (|§^, ignorance, silliness); Utagahi
doubt, suspicion) ; ilf 41 w-5/zn^ pride, arrogance, uncha-

ritableness); Aku-Gen sins of the eye, sinful lust, sen-

sual lust). These six disturbing influences are constantly
agitating the tranquillity of the heart ; and until these are
subdued, the mind cannot reach that state which is necessary
for the future attainment of Infinite Vision. The heart of or-
dinary mortals is like unto a lake whose surface, through the
winds blowing from one quarter and another, is constantly
kept in agitation. Anything which may be floating thereon
is irresistibly wafted to and fro according to the influence and
direction of the wind ; — whereas the heart of one who had be-
come proficient in Tranquil Abstraction would resemble that
(279) of a smooth and peaceful lake, whose surface was freed
from all disturbing influences, illustrative of what the heart
of mankind at large would be if freed from these six beset-
ting influences, the causes of all sorrow and misconception.
Included under Tranquil Abstraction are several branches
or disciplinary paths which must be passed through before
attaining to it in its perfect state. . Shi-K%iwan ( J[h||j
manifestation) is one of these, and includes the Go-^iyau-
Shin-Ktiwan five difterent methods by which

the light of reason is made manifest and fixed in the heart).
By way of illustrating these different methods, or paths,


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION. 281

I shall take first that of Sti-Soku-Ktiwan counting

the number of breath inspirations), in which the believer
concentrates his mind on his inspirations of breath, to the
annihilation of all other thoughts, while reclining on the
couch of Tranquil Abstraction. By perseverence in this
path, the six besetting evil influences gradually lose their
hold on the senses, and soon the light or splendour of
Tranquillized Manifestation is diffused throughout the heart,
purifying it and causing the light of reason to shine within.
The heart then resembles the surface of a lake, where, after
the winds and waves have subsided, a perfect calm reigns,
showing the water in its natural, peaceful, and uninfluenced
condition.

Another path is that of Shin-Itsti-KiyaU’Sei
fe the natural impulse of the heart to remain in one tran-
quil state). The next path is termed Kuwmi-Miyau-Zhiymc
Tranquil Beatitude). When this state is arrived
at, all the desires and lusts of the world forever lose their
hold on the senses.

The next and final path which leads to perfected Ti'an*
quil Abstraction, in which is also included Infinite Vision,
is Kuwau-Saic Reciprocal Splendour), by whose

means true enlightenment of the mind or heart becomes
apparent, thus showing that the seed of Infinite Vision,
with which all human beings are endowed in a greater or
less degree, is nearly developed. This seed, from being
constantly moistened and nourished by the vivifying in-
fluences of Tranquil Abstraction in its various phases, now
assumes the form of a matured tree by the attainment of
Infinite Vision.’'

At this point one of the congregation addressed the
priest, saying, “ I understand, then, that Infinite Vision
is only to be attained through the light of the manifestation
of tranquillized splendour ?”

(280) The priest, in reply, said : The human eye sees
objects by borrowing the light of the sun, moon, or some
artificial light. In like manner, the different paths though
which the novice must tread with unswerving devotion,


282


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


in bis pursuit of Infinite Vision, grow gradually brighter
by the rays of manifested splendour falling with ever-
increasing power on the inward spark of reason the further
he proceeds^ until it culminates in Tranquil Abstraction
in its most perfect form, as a light of the purest and most
overwhelming brilliancy, the light, namely, of Infinite
Vision.’'

Does every body then,” said an interlocuter, ‘‘possess
the inward seed of Infinite Vision ?”

“ Yes,” replied the preacher, “ every human being
possesses this seed ; but whether it with develope itself
or not, depends on its inward growth, and this inward
growth will be accelerated or retarded according to the
degree of proficiency to which the novice attains in the
different paths which lead to perfected Tranquil Abstraction.
To admit that the fox, racoon-faced dog, hobgoblin and
ourang-outang are instinctively possessed of the faculty of
Infinite Vision, while we at the same time assume that
human beings are endowed with an intellect of a much
higher order, is of itself a sufficient demonstration of the
possession by mankind of the seed of Infinite Vision, and
that of a superior order, viz., the order attained to through
the various paths leading to Tranquil Abstraction. Infinite
Vision is, therefore, of two orders, — Instinctive Infinite
Vision, the faculty characteristic of the animals before-
mentioned and which is limited to a certain extent, for
they can only see and perceive things that are within a
radius of one thousand miles, and not beyond, and Cultiva-
ted Infinite Vision, which is gradually developed by the
inward growth of the seed, through the different phases
leading to tranquil abstraction, and can see clearly for ten
thousand miles. Even in this order, however, there are
different classes, some developed to a greater degree of
perfection than others. To some, 100,000 miles, to others
1,000,000 miles or a portion of paradise may be visible, or
the San-Zen-Gai three thousand worlds, or spheres)

or the yifit-Pau-Kai all surrounding worlds, or

worlds on all sides). Truly, great are the differences of


JAMES : A DISCOURSE ON INFINITE VISION.


283


endowment. There are worlds other than our world, and
others besides these, innumerable ; but all are manifest to
Infinite Vision. The most superior order of Infinite Vision
to which ever mortal attained, was that which was reached
by Buddha — Shiyaka Muni — alone. He, from his youth up-
ward, saw that life presented no tangible realities. All was
false and illusive ; so, relinqubshing all vice and all so called
earthly pleasures, he devoted himselt with unswerving effort
to the attainment of true knowledge ; and, by steadfastly
pursuing the various paths leading to Tranquil Abstraction,
finally attained to Infinite Vision, i.e., to Omniscience.


' ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.*


A General Meeting of the above Society was held at the Shoheikuwan,
Seido, Tokiyo, on Tuesday, nth March. The Rev. Dr. Syle, President
of the Society, occupied the chair.

The minutes of the preceding general meeting were read and approved.

The Recording Secretary announced the election of Mr. E. Knipping,
Dr. Wagener, and Dr. George A. Leland, as members of the Society,
also of Mr. J. L. Hodges as Recording Secretary for Yokohama, and of
Mr. J. Bisset as a Member of Council for Yokohama.

In the absence of the Librarian, Mr. Dixon announced the receipt of
the following : — Transactions of the German Asiatic Society of Japan,
Parts 15 and 16, 1878 ; American Oriental Society, Report of Proceedings,
May, 1878 ; Bulletin de la Societe de Geographic, September 1878 :
Celestial Empire, Vol. XII., Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8, 1879; Index to Japan
Mail and Times for 1878; Transactions of the Russian Geographical
Society; Chinese Recorder, September, October, 1878; Austrian Month-
ly Sheet for the Orient, 15th January, 1879; Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society for January, 1879; Dictionary of English and
Japanese, by Messrs. Satow and Ishibashi, Second Edition, presented
to the Society by Mr. Satow ; Report on the Second Year’s Progress of
the Survey of the Oil Lands of Japan, by Mr. B. S. Lyman, Presented
by General Otori.

Professor Atkinson asked leave to present to the Society some further
analyses of the Tdkiyd drinking waters. At the reading of his former
paper on that subject, he regretted that there had been no time to
examine more thoroughly the surface waters from a greater number of
places. Since that time a number of new analyses of water taken from
a great many different points of the city had been made, and a glance
at the experimental numbers would show that they varied very much,
for while some would be seen to be unfitted for drinking purposes, others
were of very good quality. Pie also wished to present an analysis of
the water of the hot spring of Yumoto, at the foot of the Hakone pass,
made by Mr. Kuhara, Assistant in the Laboratory of the Tdkiyd Daigaku.
The remarkable point about this water was the fact that it contained
traces of boracic acid, probably in the form of borax. Dr. Martin had
previously published anaWses of the water of various points of the Riga
valley, as far down as Tonosawa, but had not mentioned the presence
of boracic acid, nor had Dr. Geerts in his recently published compilation,
“ Les produits de la Nature Japonaise et Chinoise,” given any proofs


— 285 —


of its existence in the Mineral Waters of Japan. Captain Descharmes,
in describing the waters of Kusatsu, mentioned the existence of borax,
(283) but as his information was entirely derived from Japanese ac-
counts, its existence could not be accepted as proved without further
confirmation. It would require many careful experiments before it could
be said that sufficient boracic acid existed in this water to be a source
of revenue to the country, but it would be worth while to make a careful
chemical examination of the many hot springs, solfataras and fumarol-
les, which exist in this country. The temperature of the spring was
found to be 46.1 degrees C., whereas Br. Martin found it to be only 41
degrees C.

The President expressed a hope that what Mr. Atkinson had done in
analysis would help this great city to get a supply of pure water, the
first necessity of health.

Captain J. M. James read his translation of a Buddhist sermon of the
present day, entitled “ A Discourse on Infinite Vision as attained to by
Buddha.”

The President, after thanking Captain James for presenting the
Society with his able translation on a subject so novel and interesting,
referred to the strangeness of the fact that the discourse began with the
statement of an objection, to the extreme courtesy which was displayed
throughout it, and to the strong resemblence of its theories to clairvoy-
ance, which was also found in China. The metaphysical acuteness
which it exhibited was quite remarkable. The combination in Bud-
dhism of the devotional and metaphysical elements was striking.

Mr. Satow congratulated thr Society upon the fact of the subject of
Japanese Buddhism having been taken up by one of its members. It
was well known that new Buddhist sects had been founded in Japan, and
it would be highly interesting if some one would make a comparison
between the religion as it existed in Japan and China. About certain of
the original sects, more was to be learnt in Japan than in China itself,
in consequence of their having died out in the latter country. The
whole subject of Buddhism was so vast, and the quantity of books that
must be studied so great, that a single individual could scarcely hope to
master the whole. It would be a good plan for students to divide the
sects among them, and for each to work out one or two thoroughly.
The history of Buddhism in Japan would also be of great interest, as
well as the mythical account of its introduction-

Captain James was quite of Mr. Satow’s opinion. If some of the
students of Japanese took up some subject such as Buddhism and
Shintdism, and each took a sect, much valuable information might be
brought to light.

The President asked what were the characteristic differences of this
Monto sect.

Captain James answered that their chief object of adoration was


-- 286 —


Amida Buddha, the deification of a principle, and corresponding to our
Almighty.

The Rev. Mr. Wright asked if the followers of the Nichiren sect did
not worship the image of Nichiren.

Capt, James replied that he was not aware that they worshipped the
image of Nichiren (which is generally placed above and overlooking the
altar), but that on certain occasions when it was unveiled the congrega-
tion would make their obeisance to it, and at the same time repeat
their doctrinal prayer, as an act not of worship but of reverence.

(284) In answer to further questions, Captain James stated that
Nichiren was born at Kominato, in Bushu, A.D.' 1222, and died at the
temple of Ikegami, in the province of Musashi, A.D. 1282, aged 60 years.
Also with regard to the idols worshipped by the different sects, Capt.
James enumerated the following; —

1st. — Ten-dai-shu use as their Honzon (or principal object of adora-
tion) the image of Shaka-muni, Buddha,


2nd. — Shin-gon-shu, that of Dai-nichi*Niyo-rai, the great Sun-principle
of universal light.

3rd. — Jddoshu, These three sects are termed Nembutsu shu, and
4th. — Ikko-shu, ' use the idol of Amida Butsu, or the Supreme
5th.— Jisshu, J Being.

6th. — 'The Nichi-ren Hokke*shu use no- particular idol, their chief
object of adoration being contained in their doctrinal law.


He then said, that as Buddhism was such an interesting and inex-
haustible subject for study, it would be desirable, in order to get a clear
understanding of the doctrines of the different sects in Japan, for mis-
sionaries to make a special study of the different sects of Buddhism and
their doctrines, making this one of their chief means for the study of
the Japanese language and literature. This knowledge so acquired and
the insight thereby attained into the thoughts and methods of reasoning
of the mass of the Japanese population, could not fail to increase their
usefulness in promoting the object for which they had come to this
country. Without such knowledge how could it be possible for them to
argue with and combat the deeply rooted opinions of the largest
religion in the world, numbering 500,000,000 souls, and one of the oldest
established ?


WASOBYOE,^ THE JAPANESE GULLIVER.


By B. H. Chamberlain, Esq.


(Read April loth^ 1^79^

In this reprint the orthography of Japanese names originally adopted has
been exchanged for the eavsier phonetic spelling sanctioned by the
Romaiiization Society and by Dr. Hepburn’s Dictionary.

A short time ago, while turning over some dusty volumes
in an old book-stall here in Yedo, I lighted, in one of the
dustiest of them, on a pictufe of a little man seated on
a table, and being gazed at by a company of giants, — ■
apparently some Gulliver in Brobdingnag. This easy guess
was proved by a reference to the letter-press to be correct.
Wasobyde, the hero of the book, makes, like our English
Gulliver, a number of journeys to lands unvisited by
other travellers before or since. He does not find any
Lilliput, it is true, nor any Laputa. But he goes to the
Land of Perennial Youth and Life, to the Land of Endless
Plenty, to the Land of Shams, to the Land of Followers
of the Antique, to the Land of Paradoxes, and, finally, to
the Land of the Giants, — to Brobdingnag. Though in
four volumes, the work is quite a short one, Japanese
volumes often consisting, as the members of this Society
well know, of. but a few pages, I have, nevertheless, not
found it convenient to translate the whole. Some of the
journeys, — especially that to the Land of the Antique, —
would be hard to make generally intelligible, even with
an array of notes and comments quite disproportionate

standing for Japan, and for the name of the
philosopher Chwang Tsze, while the two remaining characters form,
as it were, a termination indicating a name, the author indicates by
his title the nature of the work, — a Japanese adaptation of Chwang
Tsze’s method of teaching by parable and simile.


■ 288 chamberlain: wasobyoe, the Japanese qulliver.

to the merits of the work in question. The easiest, as
well as the most pleasing, sections are the first and the
last, — the journeys, vi^:., to the Land of Perennial Life and
to the Land of the Giants, — a translation of which, there-
fore, forms the following paper. Nothing has been omitted
but a few lines in the middle of the first (286) section ; and
the version is as literal as the divergent genius of the
English and Japanese idioms will permit. The original,
which bears date 1774, has no particular importance or
celebrity, beyond that of having suggested to the well-
known novelist Bakin his work of a somewhat similar na-
ture, styled (in imitation of the present one) ‘‘ Muso-
byde.” But both treatment and tendency are so peculiarly
Japanese, that, as a specimen of the modern didactic lite-
rature, it has seemed to me that the members of this Society
might like to ivhile away an hour in the company of this
obscure Oriental Swift, who, if not endowed with the
graphic humour of his western prototype, is at least free
from that prototype’s "disgusting coarseness.

The text is as follows :

THE LAND OF PERENNIAL LIFE.^

While the world was at peace and not a ripple stirred
within the Four Seas, there lived at Nagasaki, in the
province of Hizen, one Shikaiya Wasobyoe. From
father to son, the family had carried on a brisk trade in
foreign merchandise, and Wasobyoe’s household of ten
persons passed their days in all prosperity. Like the
rest of the Nagasaki folk, he was a fellow who had his
wits about him, could interlard his Japanese with ching,

^ ^ ‘^1' such a land appears to have been introduced

into China with Buddhism, and Japan would seem to have^ been at
one time looked upon as the land in question. Whether the name
of Fujiyama (sometimes written ^ (Ij) gave rise to the notion, or
whether the notion gave rise to the name, it would be hard to tell.
The latter part of the Take-tori Mono-gatai'i^ a celebrated Japanese
classic of the loth century, turns upon this reading of the name of the
great volcano.


CHAMBJ&RJLAIN : WAS 5 BY 0 E, THE JAX^ANESE GULLIVER. 289


chang, chong when conversing with Chinamen and Hollan-
ders, and was quite aware of his dignity as the head
of a household of more than eight souls.^ On reaching
his forty-eighth year, he handed over the business
to his only son Shiizo, and built himself a little re-
treat a couple of hundred yards from the family dwelling,
where he lived at ease, with a lad called Chomatsu^ to
cook his rice for him. Having always been addicted to
(287) angling, he would go out day after day and night
after night on to the beach and fish ; and, later on, having
learnt to manage a boat properly, he w^ould leave Cho-
matsu to take care of the house, and go out in the boat
by himself after the only sport he had any love for, holding
an oar in one hand and his rod in the other, with a face
on him like Taikbbo,^ only with a crooked hook to his
line instead of a straight one.

Well ! it was when the eighth moon was at the full, ^
that Wasobyde, bethinking himself that, as this was
the ^ night of the year he was likely to see visitors come
pouring in with their most genteel airs, determined to escape
the nuisance, and set off alone before dark in his little craft.
So, as he floated hither and thither, swiftly from beyond
the eastern billows, which she spanned like a golden bridge,
uprose the oft-sung moon, fresh-washed in the salt sea
waves. Beautiful as a picture, glowed the breakers in the
offing and the pine-trees upon the strand, while the moon-

3 Households. were anciently of three classes, — those consisting of
three, those of five, and those of eight or more members. The latter
class naturally received a greater extent of ground at the annual re-
distribution of fields- This system has long been in abeyance, but the
terms deriving from it still subsist.

;jg, the common book-name for servant lads.

5 ^ g , a celebrated tactician of the ShU (J^) dynasty in China. He
took to fishing in his old age merely as a means of avoiding contact
with the world, and used a straight piece of metal as a hook.

6 The eighth moon, when at the full, is supposed to far surpass in
beauty all the other moons of the year. It answers to our harvest-mono.
This full-moon was made the occasion of numerous elegant and literary
assemblies, where verses were composed and other refined pleasures
indulged in.


2gO CHAMBERLArN: WASOBYdE,- THE JAPANESE GUEUVER.

beams glided from twig to twig like to an hare ^ coursing
upon the waves,— a scene which (since we need not make
good our words 1) was worth a thousand, was worth two
thousand pieces of gold.^ So thought Wasubyoe, as he
hummed to himself the limes —

“ All the delights of the four seasons are summed up in the moon :

“From of old the bird sings but of the autumn,

and, as he hummed them, did out notice how far he was
drifting from the shore. He had rowed out to sea about a
league, carelessly angling and moon-gazing, when a bank
of clouds, black enough, one would imagine, (288) for a
vampire to choose for his chariot, loomed up from behind
the western mountain-ridge, while the sighing gust foretold
the coming rain. So, saying to himself, “No loitering in
this fickle autumn weather Wasobyde set to work
again with the oars to make the best of his way home. But
heavier and heavier fell the rain ; a gust ripped the sail
in two and broke the mast, and away and away, far out to
sea, sped the little craft, as if borne on fleetest wings.
Fighting for dear life, and utterly bewildered, Wasd-
byde rowed on, now to the right hand and now to the
left. But, meanwhile, the moon had withdrawn behind the
clouds. No landmark was anywhere to be seen amid the
inky darkness. East and West had become indistinguishable,
and the poor man knew not in what direction to endeavour

7 The Chinese and Japanese place a hare in the mobn instead of

our traditionl “ man.” •

8 A recollection of the lines by the Chinese poet ^ , saying :

9 Lines by the Chinese poet :j. .

^0 1 know not how to render the original nne It is said to be a
creature possessing the head of a monkey, the body of a racoon-faced
dog, the tail of a serpent, and the limbs of a tiger, while its name
is taken from its cry “ There is a celebrated story of the

destruction by Gen Sammi Yorimasa of a mie which attacked the
person of the Mikado Konoye-In. [See the No entitled and

the “ Helke Mono-gatari^ ”] ,

A Japanese proverb says : “ There ^re two fickle things ; the heart
of man, and the autumn sky.”


CHAMBERI.AIN : WASUBYOE, THE JAPAKESE GULLIVER.


291


to urge on his boat. His arms were exhausted ; his strength
had given in ; and, seeing that there was nothing more to
be done, he nerved himself to face the future with the
knowledge that, even should he escape with his life, it
would only be in order to be cast on some unknown island.
He therefore crossed his legs to await the will of Heaven,
baled out the water from time to time, and sat watching
for the break of day, leaving his future in the hands of
fate and of the winds. But louder and louder blew the
tempest, while the boat sped on towards shores unknown,
— was it for hundreds of leagues ? was it for thousands 0
leagues ? was he awake, or was he dreaming ?

Meanwhile, daylight reappeared, and a reddish tint over-
spread what seemed to be the East. But there came not
the least pause in the violence of the wind and rain. The
sea was a mass of white foaming waves like mountains
of snow. Whither he was going he could not tell, and
the sun set upon his bewilderment. In this manner
did three days and three nights pass by, after which
time the rain and wind abated, and the morning sun rose
up in ruddy splendour. But Wasobyde could see that he
was far away from the land of Japan. The appearance
(289) of the ocean and the fashion of the sky were altered,
nor was there anywhere to be discovered the trace of an
island or of a mountain. So on he drifted at the mercy
of the winds and waves, putting out his hook, from time to
time, to catch a fish, which he would devour raw after the
manner of the Abbot Shunkwan.^^

Thus he dwelt upon the ocean for about the space of
three months, but without being able toxount either the
days or the number of myriads of leagues that he had
drifted. And, as he floated on, he came to what was evi-
dently the Sea of Mud, of which he had heard tell, where
there blows no wind and rise no waves, and where no fish

See the iV'cJ entitled Shxmkwan^^ Hethe Mono-

gatarir Sbunkwan, v-ho was abbot of the monastery of HoshDji in
Kyoto, was implicated in an intrigue against the powerful house of
Taira, and banished to the islet of Kikwaigashima in the year 1177.


2g2 chamberlain: wasobyob, the Japanese gulliver.

would take his hook. In this manner, ten days passed by,
during which his strength oo^ed away, and he lay on his
back at the bottom of the boat awaiting his latter end,
when, just as the sound of his prayers to Buddha was
growing faint, and it seemed as if any moment might be
the last, lo ! as in a dream, there came wafted to his nos-
trils a perfumed Eastern bree^^e, which he no sooner felt,
than his spirits revived, and he was himself once more.
“Strange I” thought he, and, raising his head, glanced
round the horizon, where there stood forth in the far dis-
tance a mighty island, the breeze from which, every time
it touched him, gave him sensations of indescribable delight.
Full of joy, therefore, he determined to make for this island ;
his hands, as they managed the oars, recovered a degree of
strength that had not been theirs for the last twenty days ;
the nearer he drew to the land, the higher rose his spirits ;
his voice began to keep time with the oars ; and, after about
half a day’s exertion, he reached the land in safety.

His first care, on stepping on shore, was to look around
him for the means of satisfying his long pent-up craving
for a drink of water; and he soon found a spring of an un-
known kind of water, fragrant exceedingly, and red in color.
Not without hesitation did he take some of it up in the
palm of his hand. But one draught sufficed to show him
how sweet it tasted ; nor had it scarcely been quaffed down
before it interpenetrated every vital part, giving strength
and firmness to the whole frame, satisfying in a moment
the pangs of hunger that had been (ago) accumulating for
so many months, and making him feel more robust than he
had ever felt before. “What god,” thought he, “ can have
come to my rescue? Is this China, or is it Japan, or is
it India ? I must make enquiries.” So he climbed up a
great embankment, and, looking down on the scene that
opened out beneath him, saw that both the vegetation, the
fashion of the dwelling-houses, and the general aspect of
the country were altogether different to those of his native
land, — and not only different, but vastly more beautiful.
And, as he gazed around him in bewilderment, a crowd of


CHAMBERLAIN: WASOBYSE, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER.


293


men and women came pouring out of the town and soon
surrounded him, viewing him with evident surprise, and
talking to each other in an unknown tongue. No ! this
could never be Japan ! neither were the people like those of
Ye^o or of Loochoo. Surely it must be either Nanking or
Peking that was the abode of all this splendour. So, as he
had always been proud of his fluency in Chinese, he put on
his most genteel tone of voice, and began questioning the
natives in, cliing, change chong. But their faces plainly
showed that not a word did they comprehend ; and all the
while the crowd, like crows gathered round an owl,^® con-
tinued to jabber away in a language that was neither Chinese,
nor Dutch, nor anything else of which Wasobyoe could make
out one syllable. He was, therefore, in despair and at his
wit’s end. But just then live or six persons, apparently
officials, came forth, and, after holding counsel together,
seemed to send to fetch some one. Only a short time elaps-
ed before there came, pushing aside the corn was man of
about forty years of age, with his head unshaven [after the
ancient Chinese fashion] , who, making his way to where
Wasobyoe stood, thus addressed him in the Chinese tongue :

‘‘What is your worship’s country, and what fate has
driven you to these shores ? ”

To which WasdbyOe, also speaking in Chinese, made
answer: am a native of Nagasaki in Great Japan, and

have been blown hither against my will by the violence of
the wind. Pray tell me what country this may be.”

Upon this, his interlocutor cfapped his hands, and cried :
“Is it possible ? AY ell 1 you citc a waif from a distant land 1
But you are (291) fortunate as well. This country is one
of which you cannot but have heard tell : it is the Land
of Perennial Youth and Life. It is divided from the
shores of the Middl e Flowery Kingdom by a distance of

iThis refers to the method of catching birds called zuku-blki. An
owl is placed on a stand in the middle of a wood, where the surrounding
twigs have been covered with bird-lime ; by which means are secured all
the birds who come to look (and, according to the belief of the Japanese,
jeer) at the stranger.


294 CHAMRERLAIK : WASOBYOE, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER.

fifty or sixty thousand leagues, nor is it within the power
of any man to reach it unless endowed with special know-
ledge. Like yourself, I, who now stand speaking to you,
came originally from abroad. I am he who, in the world
of mortals, bore the name of Jofuku,^-^- and served Shiko-
tei,^5 king of Shin,^*^ in China. This Shikotei, who was a
violent and foolish prince, chose to institute a search for
the Elixir of Life. The task devolved upon me ; and, after
many dangers and troubles, I finally managed to reach
this place. But considering that, even were I to return
with the Elixir, a prolonged service under so unrighteous
a prince as was Shikotei could scarcely end otherwise
than in unhappiness, I at once detei'mined . to remain
where I was ; and here I have been ever since, living on
during several hundreds of yeai’s without the slightest
detei'ioration either in my physical powers or in my ap-
pearance. If you will elect to pursue the same course,
you may prolong for ever a life that is subject to no ma-
ladies, while even supposing it to be your desire to return
to the land of your birth, you will find it no easy matter to
do so across all this vast expanse of ocean. So you had
better make up your mind to remain among us.”

At the conclusion of this most courteous speech, Wa-
sobyoe, in his turn; clapped his hands, and exclaimed :
“What, my lord ! are you the far-famed Jofuku ? Happy,
indeed, am I to be driven to the shores of this Land of
Perennial Youth and Life, — a land of which I had, doubt-
less, heard men speak, but to whose actual existence
I had never given credence. Wherefore should I think of
returning to my native country in the mortal world ? ”

At the sight of Was5by5e’s joy, Jofuku grew more
and more delighted, and remarking that, as Japan was the
nearest country to his own old home, he felt all the more
particularly drawn towards the new-comer, led him to off

Chinese legend says that this worthy came over to Japan
with a train of a thousand lads and a thousand maidens to search for
the elixir of life.


chamberlain: WASOBYSE, the JAPANESE GULLIVER,


295


his ovirn house, where, as guest or dependent, Was 5 by 6 e
spent the next two or three hundred years.

(292) The chief feature of life in this country was, as Wa-
sobyoe observed, the absence both of deaths and of births.
One death might, indeed, occur once in every thousand or
couple of thousand years, and would be compensated by one
birth. But this was only a rare exception among the many
myriads of inhabitants, all of whom presented the appearan-
ce of being about forty years of age,^^ and were all, both men
and women, free from every kind of sickness. The seasons,
too, were perfect ; the succession of breezes and of rains all
that could be desired ; the crops good and plentiful — altoge-
ther a truly happy land. Every household kept its stud of
storks, just as in Japan people keep oxen and horses, using
them for agricultural purposes, and also for travelling about,
in which latter case they would deck the creature out with a
variety of trappings, and then jump on its back and fly about.
Wasdbyoe, as he became used to the country manners, na-
tui'aHy got into the habit of stork-riding, and would go
flying about on stork-back every day with a numerous troop
of friends to inspect all the sights of the neighbourhood.

Among many others, must specially be mentioned the
Peach-Tree Mountain, situated two leagues to the East of
the city, and ten times as high as the Peach Mountain at
Fushimi,^^^ covered with red and white blossoms as lovely
as they were fragrant. At its base was the gayest im-
aginable medley of houses of entertainment and of theatre
tea-houses, forming a perfect vista of roofs and towers,

17 After the completion of the fortieth year, old age is suppose to com-
mence.

28 The stork is the chief emblem of long life.

^9 The peach-tree is a favourite of the elves, and emblematical of long
life. Fushimi is a suburb of Kiyoto.

io No English word exactly corresponds to the original here translated
as ‘tower.’ The as it was called (for it has almost disappeared
during the last three or four years), was a square room perched on the
roof of a theatre, and forming the visible sign of its license as such. U
is said to have been originally used by the beaters of the drums, but in
later days it had become simply ornamental, or, rather, symbolic.


296 chamberlain: wasobyDe, the Japanese gulliver.

while the drums of the theatres and the guitars of the tea-
houses made a merrier noise than the Dotombori at
Osaka, the Yojo at Kyoto, the Kobiki-Chd^^ (293) at
Yedo, and the Miyajima^^ and Kompira^® fairs all put
together. There were conjurors doing the butterfly
trick, and striking stones and turning them into sheep;
raree-shows where a man would make a pony come out
of a pumpkin, or else blow a whiff of tobacco into the
shape of his own figure ; quack-medicine vendors with
their gabble flowing ceaseless as the stream through
the valley ; peep-shows with signboards showing garments
hung upon a willow-tree/* and bidding you enter to behold
a luckless wight, who, for having in a former state of
existence caused the death of a toad, had been born as a
toad himself in this; and, all the time, each showman, with
his handkerchief dapperly twisted round his head, and
crying out : “ Walk in to see this famous sight I walk in

to see this famous sight On the other side was a
theatre (price of entrance-ticket ten mon’^^ only), into which
you crept by a passage as narrow as the neck of a jar, and
found yourself in a spacious hall of a thousand mats, — at
least so ’twas said, — and could gaze on the most celebrated
actors, whether of male or female parts, disputing the palm
of good looks and of public favour. The crowds of sightseers,
meanwhile, were pushing and elbowing their way forward ;

DDtombori, YojO, and Kobiki-Chs are the names of streets famous
for their theatres. That in the Kobiki-Cho, however, no longer remains,
having been removed, first to Asakusa, and then to Shimabara in
Tsukiji, the present Foreign Concession.

=^^An island in the Inland Sea, famous for its beauty and for the
sanctity of its temples. A great fair is held there at the end of July.

^^A celebrated holy place in the province of Sanuki, in the island of
Shikoku.

^'‘'Souls on their way to Hell have to cross the river Sanzugawa
(H ^ 111), containing the waters of Avarice, Cruelty and Envy, where a
crone named Datsuiba despoils them of their raiment, which

she hangs upon the branches of a willow-tree.

25A small copper coin.

^^As in Europe during the Middle Ages, so in Japan down to the
present day, all parts, even the females ones, are taken by male actors.


chamberlain : WAS6BY6B, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER. 297


red-pinafored tea-house girls were running hither and thither ;
dancing-girls wore their most fascinating smiles ; grisettes
were standing at the street- corners, while the fair Aspasia,^^
beneath her stately -parasol, marched past, perfumed and
powdered like the pearly mists of spring, what time the
nightingale winged his retreating flight at the sound of the
melodious voice of the singing-girl, and the crescent moon,
at the sight of her well-arched eyebrows, retired shamefaced
behind a filmy cloud.

[The original continues in a similar strain for another page or more,
detailing (294) the delights of this rather dcmUmonde paradise. But the
allusions to ancient Phrynes, Cagliostros, etc., would require so much
elucidation to make them comprehensible, and when made comprehen-
sible would still remain so little worth comprehending, that I omit the
passage in the translation. The conclusion of it is ;

Thus may it he seen that not even a land inhabited hy
sages and wizards can escape being the scene of the conquests
of love.

The text then continues :]

Two leagues and a half to the left of the Peach Mountain
was a Camellia Mountain, whose fiowers blossomed but
once in every eight thousand years.^* Being thus, like
the Ho-ryii-jP^ festival, a rare event, it was the sight to
which, of all others, the greatest crowds would flock, all
arrayed in their finest clothes, and each as his or her fancy
might suggest; all, too, both men and women, mounted on
storks, and making the gayest possible show, now darting
along in straight files, now advancing in wedge-like shape,
so that you might have imagined yourself in Japan in
autumn when the wild geese fly across the sky.5« As for

»7For the specific name of the superior class of hetairce, termed in
Japanese taiyu there is no English equivalent.

^^The camellia tree is said to be very long-lived, and the expression
“ the camellia-tree of eight thousand years” is common in Japanese
poetry. But that it should only fowcr once every eight thousand years
is an addition by our author.

temple at Saga, in Kyoto, containing what is said to be the only gen-
uinely Indian image of the founder of Buddhism ever brought to Japan.

30 One of the commonest and prettiest of the autumn sights in Central
and Eastern japan.


298 chamberlain : WASOBYOE, the JAPANESE GULLIVER.


all the other pleasures and diversions of the country, words
fail me to describe them.

Now you must know that, as in this country there were
no such phenomena as death or disease, none of the people
knew what death or disease felt like, though they were
much given to speculating on the subject. Some few
volumes -of the Buddhist Scriptures, that had been brought
over in ancient times from India and China, described
heaven in such glowing terms that they were filled with
quite a desperate admiration for death, and a distaste for
their own never-ending existence ; — so much so that when,
as a rare exception, any of their countrymen chanced to die,
he was envied in the same manner as in Japan would be
envied one who should have obtained immortality. They
studied the ‘‘Art of Death” as it were the Art of Magic,
retiring to mountain districts and to secluded valleys, where
they subjected themselves to all manner of ascetic privations,
which, however, (295) rarely obtained for them the desired
effect. In the matter of food, all such articles as ginseng,
wild potatoes, eels, wild-duck, etc., which increase the
action of the kidneys, and strengthen the spleen and
stomach, were feared and avoided as being poisonously life-
giving, whereas what people of rank and consideration
highly prized and delighted in were such viands as were
likely to cause the eater’s death. Thus, mermaids^^ were
unusually cheap and plentiful, — plentiful as cuttle-fish on
the coast of Izumi,— and you might see slices of them
piled up on dishes, as well as whole ones hanging from the
eaves of every cook-.shop. But nobody who was anybody
would touch with the tips of his fingers a fish so apt to
poison you to life ; and it was accordingly left to the lowest
of the populace. The globe-fish^ ^ was a much -esteemed

S^Dioscorea japonica.

32This would appear to be the correct, as it is the literal, translation
of the original characters

33The globe-fish, though partaken of by the lower classes, is such dan-
gerous food that an edict has this year been issued totally prohibiting its
sale. The Japanese have a proverb of wide application saying, “I want
to eat globe-fish, but life is dear ” {Fugii. wa kuitasU, inochi wa oshishi).


CHAMBERLAIN: WASOBY0E, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER.


299


fish, commanding a high price ; and a favourite dish to set
before the most honoured guests was a broth made of this
fish and powdered over with soot. Buckwheat macaroni
served up with water-melon-juice®*^ was another, while as
similar dainties may be mentioned raw eels, spinach with
a dressing of tooth-blacking,® ^ and sea-weed jelly sprinkled
with wachusan?^ A dinner of globe-fish sprinkled with
soot, or of pickled cantharides, would not, of course, in this
Land of Perennial Youth and Life, actually kill a man.
But still the poison would have a certain slight effect,
making him feel giddy for half an hour or so, and giving
him sensations as pleasurable as those experienced by us
Japanese after drinking rice-beer. “AhT" he would ex-
claim, this is what death must feel like 1 I feel my head
turn round and he would clap his hands, and dance and
sing, and believe himself to have attained the very acme of
felicity. At New Year, also, and at the other major festi-
vals, they would stand their screens upside down, (296)
hang their shop-curtains inside out, wear light blue cere-
monial dresses over white under-garments, while, in
particularly superstitious families, the New Year’s Day
Visitors’ Book would be inscribed with the words ‘‘A
Record of Regrets.” If, in trying to say something flatter-
ing about a friend’s child, a caller were to remark on its
apparent healthiness, both father and mother would remem-
ber his words with uneasiness; whereas, if he should say:

The little thing doesn’t look as if it would live long,” he
would give the parents the greatest pleasure, and they would
reply : “Ah I if only what you say may come true 1 ”

Wasobyoe, who, during the first twenty or thirty years
of his residence in the country, had marvelled at, and
inwardly ridiculed, the opinions of the inhabitants on this
point, and had esteemed himself fortunate beyond all mea-
sure in having arriyed at a country where disease and death

3iSaid to be a particularly dangerous combination.

35The o-ha-gurp ® , used by married women to blacken their teeth.

36 Jp Ut, a mtedical powder.

37These three things are indicative of mourning.


300 e^iaAMBERLAIN : WAsSBYSE, the JAPANESE 0ULUVER*

were U'nicnown, was gradually converted to the native
notloiis durifig a sojourn of ’ two or three hundred years.
Tho' prospect of never-endin’^ Mfoj day after day and year
after year, began td pall on him, While death became all the
ihdre attractive for being so difficult of attainment. Re-
solving to put an end to his existence, he threw himself
backwards head oVer heels into a deep well. But lo ! up
he rose to the surface without the slightest hurt, and walked
oh the water so exactly as if it had been a road on dry land,
thatnot all his endeavours to sink himself would sink him.
So, seeing that this plan was of no avail, he climbed Up a
lofty mountain, and threw himself down from a peak several
myriad fathoms high. But lo ! down he came on his feet
Without even turning a somersault in the air, as if he *had
been a cat springing off a roof. Try as he might, until he
grew weary of trying, nothing would succeed in making
him die, till at last, while turning the matter over in his
mind, he suddenly struck out a new idea : No!” cried

he, “ what better fortune than this of perennial life ? I
will set out dn a tour through the Three Thousand Worlds,
and carefully study the various manners and customs of
the inhabitants.” So, urged by a new reason for thinking
life precious, and caring nothing for the ridicule Which
would be cast on such a display of bad taste, he fell to
eating, morning and evening, such life-giving substances
as raw merrriaid and ginseng salad ; after Which, leaving a
(297) letter to thank Jofuku for 'his protracted hospitality,
he purloined from the adjacent house a stork df thote fhan
average strength of wing, vaulted into the saddM, and rode
off towards the South. ■


Moral.

The mimic representations of Elysium with which we
decorate our houses at the New Year, the Adonis sibirica
which we then bring out in pots, our avoidance at that
season of the syllable shi, our predilection for the syllable
38This number of worlds is fixed by the Buddhist Scriptures, v


CHAMBERLAIN i WASOBYOE, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER^ 30if


and our desire to emulate the wrinkled crone and
her spouse who, with so much labour, rake up the leayes
beneath the pine-trees, of Takasago,— all this springs si niply
and solely froni the yearning after long life. Nor is this
a specially human folly.; The birds and beasts j and^ indeed:^
all Hying creatures abhpr death, and take deHght in livingi
Yet, if you go to the root of the matter, ajnd ask whence
this preferencejr--~why death should be thought a misfortune,,
why length of days should be esteemed a blessing, — ^yfou
will ^ind that there is, in reality, no reason. Men, during
waking hours, toil with their bodies- and toil with their
minds ; during sleep, they lay. both body andrnind to rest;
and, arguing from analogy, we may wel believe it not
unlikely that, for all our oh’s and ah’s, death, when w:e
actually reach it, is a thing so beyond all expectation
delicious, that we shall only regret that we could not have
known this sooner, and have gone to meet it.

If the moon and the flowers delight our eyes, it is because
these soon fade, and that sinks beneath the horizon. Were
the flowers to blossom on continuously from rhonth to
month, or the moon to shine nightly from dusk to dawn,
or the snow never to ceaise falling throughout the ; year,
no one Wioulfl eai^ tp look at them.— It is the same with

the Hfe of man. If we Were to live on for ever, we should
'have no pleasure in living, and should naturally become as
anxious for death as were the inhabitants of the Land of
Perennial Life:, about whom We have just been readings

It is, of course, not to be wondered at that, carried away
by the delights of the hour, we should wish that we might
never die. But many, who allow themselves to be thus
carried away too seriously, do, on the contrary, abridge

39Because one of the meanings of shi is “ death ** (JE), and one of the
meanings of ju is “long life” The decorations which are set

up and the ceremonies which are used at the New Year > are many and
complicated. They form the subject of a paper by Mrs. Chaplin . AyytOn,
B.Sc., in Vol. V, Part I, of these Transactions.

40 This sentiment constantly appears in Japanese poetry and literature
generally. The ” stanza :


GSAMBBRCAIN : WASSBVBB, TKE JAPANESE GtJLEXVER.

tteir li^m Thus^ th& Emp^wt^ of Sht,^^ Shi-

kotei^^ of! Shill, amd of Eaaj^^ for all they : wore

loiig' beards and and put orr airs: of

wisdom, Were led by theii yearning after immortality Into
the- loMs of soecessiTO impostors, and, far from obtaining
from any of their elixirs and; magic arts the slightest pro-
traction of their existence, merely succeeded in handing
down their names to posterity as signal instances of human
folly. The Honso Gomokn'^'^ gives a number of strange
pfe&mptions as specifics , against old age and death, and
as elixirs eriablihg him: who shall partake pf them to fly
about on clouds, walk te the surface of - the waves, etc.,
etGi,---all arrant lies invented by impostors and immortality-^
mongers of by-gone ages. Even at the present day, we
find many examples of rich men who get into the habit of
taking drugs, being shampooed, and having the mioxa^^
applied when nothing is the matter with them, and of
following many other practices injurious to health. ' But
whether, it be drugs, or whether it be the moxa^ or
acupuncture, or shampooing, — not one of them, however
pificacious in the cure of sickness, has any power to
lengthen out our heaven-allotted span, nor should any one
of them be used by persons of sound constitution. When
they are so used, and the system becomes impregnated
with them, they lose most of their virtue as antidotes
to disease. The proper course to pursue is always to call
in the doctor, however, , slight the complaint, so as to
get it treated: by him with drugs, or the moxa, or

,, ; Nokorinaku

Chiru 20 medctald
Sahtra-bana :

AriU yo no naha
Hai^e no ukercba

is but one example of the treAtmrfi.t of a tbeme which almost every
Japanese poet has made hts own. > ,

0 , a Ch inese: botanical wbrk.: ■ ^ .

moxa^ shampooingtah'd aGupujicture'ate'Still the three favouffte
remedies of the Japanese for the most’ various ailments.


CHAMBERI,A1N : WASOBY^E, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER#


m


aetipuncture, or shampooing, as the case may be, before it
attains to any gravity. .Many are they whp, thitiking their
(299) ailment too , trivial to necessitate the recontse to
drugs, allow it to gather strength. A grave mist^fe this#
For, when a malady has become serious^ it top often
happens that no treatment, whether by drugs or by the
moxUf will reach it. Always take an illness at its com-
mencement, in order not to pass through one day’s more
sickness thah can be avoided ; and then, if your frame be a
sound one, long life will follow as a natural result. Taking
instruction .from the views of the natives of the Land of
Perennial Life, to leave off yearniiig after immortality, to
put aside all fear of death, and simply to keep a careful
watch over the body while also preserving a peaceful mind,
may be said to be the proper medical maxims: for a man in
health.

. THE LAND OF THE GIANTS.

Wa^sobyoe, who preserved his health and spirits amid
every change of circnrnstances and of latitude, had no#,;
beginning with the Land of Perennial Youth and Life,
perambulated every country that the universe contains, hnt
without meeting with anything particularly extraordinary.
He, thereupon, thought of visiting the paradise presided
over by Mida,'^^ and which lies one million degrees to the
west of our earth ; but desisted an account of the place
having already been sufficiently described by Shaka^^
f ' Euddha ”] , The Dragon Palac©*^^ he gave up in like
manner, because the boy Urashima’s experiences have
probably left but few novelties for any later traveller to
discover. He determined, therefore, to extend his travels
beyond the limits of this universe, seeking lands of which
neither Shaka nor Confucius bad ever beard any report,
and then' to return home, and put to shame all such as
were puffed up with the notion of their bwn umversal
topographical information. So, bestriding his stork once

Generally called Aiuida ^ ^)i the Indian Ainitdbh&*

50 Cakya Mnni.


304 OHAMB^RLAII^ : WASOBY^E, THE JAPANESE ^UELIVEE.^

riipre,. he started off to pass (3oo).out of this worlds hy:t^^^
fe-tthest bpiiBdiary of the, SOHtherQ OceaB, and flew straight
oh without ever, casting; a glahoe ,edthe to the right hand
qr to the left, On they went, the stork and he, a valiant
rider and a noble bird, capable of doing their five or six
hundred, aye ! their thousand leagues a day ; and, as they
fl^Wj i^aoy a, country opened out before Wasobyoe’s
but he would look at nothing comprised within the
lihpits, qf , this universe of ours. So the days passed by till
thqy:bad been , a, good three months upon the road. By and
by, the rays of the sun and moon waxed faint; then it
seemed every clay as if the sun were on the point of vanish-
ing altogether ; and, by the fifth month of their journey,
their flight had led them into regions of absolute darkness,
where day-light was no longer to be distinguished from
the night. The stork began to utter cries of doubt and,
distress, and the courage oozed out even from Wasobyoe’s
doughty heart, as there arose within his agitated breast the
thought of tlie possibility of being swallowed up alive in the
Hades of Darkness. ^ But no!” cried he, ‘‘ if I am to pass
out of this universe, of course I must expect to reach the
limit of the space illumined by the rays of sun and moon.
Once cross this region of darkness, and I shall soon arrive
in, some other world. One effort more, good stork! one;
effort more I” And the bird, apparently understanding tffe
words addressed to it, shook itself and flapped its wings,
and, sped on like an arrow, flying and flying for four montbs'
more at least, though, to be sure, it was not possible to kq.ep
tally of the days in a region where the distinction of day
and night was ajl unknown. Theri it began to grow light
again, and they arrived within the limits of another world.

51 Chinese and Buddhist ideas' have caused the identification by the
more modern Japanese of the “ Dragon Palace with the Palace of the
Bea.-goi {Wat^uml no Kami), though there is , no - authority for this in
the ancient native . literature,. , The , original and beautiful legend of the
boy Urashima’s visit to the Sea-god’s Palace will be found in tlie ninth
volurue of , the Man-yoskit^^ whence it has been borrowed many times
to be reproduced both in poetry and :atfy, i ; '

5* One of the Buddhist hells.


chamberlain: wasCbyoe, the Japanese culliver.


S^S

Wasobyoe, feeling himself, as it were, born afresh,
determined to fly down and inspect the country at his
leisure. So, perceiving a broad road running through a large
bamboo thicket^, he sat down to rest, and closed his eyes
for a few moments to collect his thoughts, which done, he
opened them wide again, and turned to look about him.
What was not his astonishment to find, on close inspecr
tion, that what he had at first taken for a bamboo thicket
was nothing but a corn-field, where.every stalk was th6 height
of one of our largest, Japanese bamboos 1 good wheat
country!” said Wasobyoe to himself, and conhnued his
walk along the path. But he had only to go a few furlongs
(301) to discover that it was not the wheat; only, \ but
anything and everything that was of a size exceeding the
power alike of eye and mind to comprehend, Tho Hibisms
syriactts in the hedge dividing field from field had stems so
thick that one of them was as much as Wasobyoe couid
encompass. As for the pines, Cryptomerias and ChcmcRcy-
Paris ohtma^ they were beyond all powers of description,
while everi the most ordinary little trees would be, some
a hundred ahd fifty, and some , a hundred feet in circum-
ference, and the dkndelions and horsetails by the roadside
were nearly as tall as a native of Japan.

It was, indeed, -a land where the mountains j the rivers,
and the vegetation exceeded tenfoM anything to be found
even in China or : in India.®^ WasdbySe was dum-
founded^ but nevertheless walked on for two or three
leagues, till he came to what was apparently a large town,
every house in which was higher than the halls containing
the great images of Buddha,®^ and had attached to it, a
godown that looked like a castle. Even the most insigni-
ficant hills were higher than Fujiyama, the gutters beneath

0mm ignoUm pro magnijico. The common people in Japan used
to imagine that great splendour appertained to eveiything Indian and
Chinese. Even at the present day, probably, many ^ill be found who
believe India to be situated above the heavens, — ^a mistake arising
from the Japanese name for that country, ♦ Tenjiku,’ whose first syllable
te signifies ‘ heaven.’

Viz., those at Kyoto and at Nara.


3q6 -^m J[4I‘AiSfpB^.’<^P'Wy]^iR.

■ i ^

the ©aves oCth© houses , wer© deeper than the fiVer Yoclo,
while: thea^e werr dust^^^ height of Higashiyama, and

ponds that might have been taken for importantiakes Lodk
where he might, everything was strange, and everything
exceeded in size the power of Wasobyoe’s eyes to discern
.and of his imagination to comprehend. He simply stood
aghast, and the idea struck him that he might himself have
shrunk in size! But no I an attentive survey of his person
showed him still to be a man of some five foot four or five,
and only left him the more astonished.

So there he stood ; and after a while there came out of the
bouses a crowd of people, none of them, whether men or
women,- less than fifty or sixty feet high, while some of the
tallest men reached the height of seventy feet, and even the
young urchins of nine or ten, with their heads still half-
shaven, were at least twenty or thirty feet. The (302) crowd
gathered round Wasobyoe, and viewed him with wonder and
amaze. *‘What an extraordinarily tiny creature!” they
cried/ as they picked him up between their finger and thumb,
and made him stand upon their hand, and turned him up to
th.e light to look at him, first on one side and then on the
other : ‘‘ Where do you come from ? Are you a human
being or are you an elf? What has brought you here ?”

To which Wasobyoe, stretching his legs wide ’ apart,
as he stood in the palm of the hand of one of them, and
bawling out at the top of his voice, made answer ; ‘‘ You

must know that I am a native of Great Japan, and that
I haye arrived here on a journey round the miivers:©. If
you despise me for my small stature, I will sho^v . you
what feats can be performed by a fighting-man brought
up in the school of Yoshitsune,”^<* and he . laughed a
scornful laugh to make believe that he Was not afraid- ,

..55 Lit, “with cross-road hair and round over the eyebrows ” [accord-
ing tp Japanese custom],. , ,

5, <5 The 'great national hero, and brother of the ShOgun Yoritomp,
by whom he was persecuted. The reference, is here chi, eHy made to , the
celebrated encounter in \vhich Ypshit§unei,, when still a boy, tpet -the
burly Benkei, whom he vanquished and then kept as his nao^t trusty
retainer. ,t , ^ , , '


CHAMBERLAIN : WASOBYOE, THE JARANBSB QHLLIVER^ ^67


At this they all smiled, and declared* him to be the
queerest and dearest of little creatures. They had heard,-
they said, in a vague manner of the existence of countrms
called China, India and Japan, but had never yet cast eyes
on anything or anybody coming from those countries;
and every one of them i^ould fain haVe taken him home
and kept him as we keep pet birds. But one’ sixty-five-
foot man with ah unshaven head,®^ called Dr. K6chi,^^
picked him up, and, putting him in his left hand, and
covering him up carefully with his right, as a child does
who has caught a firefly, carried him off to his house.

This dwelling was evidently neither that of a merchant
nor of a peasant, but wore rather the aspect of a
retreat inhabited by a scholar retired from public life.
Judged by the standard of the country, it was small. The
owner entered a four and a half that room,®® about tho si^^e
(303) of a metropolitan temple of the Mohto sect,®® where>
over a desk some thirty^six feet by eighteen, he spread a
piece of drugget ; and then, placing Wa#by6e upon it,
took up a grain of rice about the siE^e of a Japanese
musk-tnelon, with a pair of Chopsticks about as Aick as a
palanquin-bearer's pole, and began feeding him. Was 5 -
byoe, finding this pellet thrust in , front of his hose,
nibbled at it, feeling the while as if he had been turned into
a young sparrow ; and it was thus that he took his food,
morning and evening, during the whole period of his resi-
dence in the country.

Attracted by the report of the extraordinary creature caught
by Dr. Kochi, crowds of people, both men and \yomen,
young and old, ke pt pouring in daily from the neighbourhood

57 Xhe distinctive mark of a scholar.

‘ 58 The characters with which the name iS written {% signify wide
khowl'edge.’'’ ^ ■

s 9 The size of ; a room is always cpmputpd by the number of mats:,
as the latter scarcely vary in size, at least in the towns. The Japanese
mat is five feet, nine inches long, by three feet wide. A four and a half
mat room is, therefore, not much better than a closet,

60 The IMa, being the most popular and the richest of the

Buddhist sects, is noted for the large scale of its places of worship.


308 chamberlain: WAS9BY5E, TfiB JAPANESE GtJLLlVER.

to obtdri a sight of it They would try making the little
thing stand iii the palm of their hand or on their headj a
would discuss its various peculiarities. Certainly/' they
would say, “it is wonderfully tame. What? it requires no
made-up food,— no hemp-seed? Why! it’s easier to feed
than a quail !” Wasobyoe did not relish, being made
a toy of in this manner^ But it was useless to be angry,
and there was no good to be expected from resistance in
dealing with Such giants as these people were. And so the
days aiid months slipped by.

Meanwhile, Wasobyoe was busy observing the char-
acteristics of the land and of its inhabitants. He could
see that everything was ten times bigger than even in
China or India ; that the seasons were regular and propi-
tious, the harvests abundant, the people prosperous ; that,
in short, it was a perfect land, endowed with every advan-
tage. But, at the same time, he noticed that this nation
had no philosophy, no moral code, no system of govern-
ment; that they were not only entirely ignorant of the
religious teachings of Confucianism, Buddhism and Shin-
to, but had not so much as words for the ideas of bene-
volenbe, righteousness, propriety, and wisdom, and, in
short, that they were a nation without knowledge and with-
out learning. The men simply worked in their fields and
gardens,, and , manufactured various implements, while the
Women busied themselves with weaving and spinning.
Beyond that, there was nothing; and when, from time to
time, they would meet together for purposes of recreation?
they had (304) no curious subjects of conversation, no
personal discussions, no differences or contentions, but, they
simply talked about things in general. So Wasobyoe
fell a-thinking to himself, as he turned the matter over in
his mind: “It would seem as if. this foolish country wei*e
superior to the rest in nothing but size, tenanted, as it is,
by such 'empty-headed folks. ' It is nothing more than a
great overgrown asparagus**^ of a country. Diminutive

<5^ An approximate rendering of the word ndo 'iS)> given in
Hepburn’s Dictionary as . /;


chamberlain: wasobyoe, the Japanese gullivbil


309


as I am, why should I not, with my knowledge of the
doctrines of the sages, aspire to the glory of becoming
a guide to this nation, and of instituting and conducting
a beneficent form of government, as did Koku-sei-^a^* in
Formosa?” Filled with this idea, he one day, when a
great crowd had assembled, strode up to his table, and
addressed them ail in a loud, voice as follows :

“Though bom in Japan j I have (to say nothing of visits
to China and India) spent the last thousand years in travel-
ling through the whole of the Three Thousand Worlds,
and have made niyself acquainted with the features, both
physical and moral, of every one of them. Now, from my
observations of this country, I gather that, while it
exceeds all others in the dimensions of everything it
contains, you. Its inhabitants, know nothing of the moral
and religious duties of mankind. What an inglorious
and lamentable distinction is this ! In the world from
which I corner there is nothing but is comprised within
the limits of the path of duty. Take China. Her Three
Primordial Sovereigns and Five Ancient Emperors^^
opened out the path, towards which it was successively
the end^^^^^ iftien a^s Lao Tsze, Confucius,

Chwang Tsz'e, hhd Mencius to lead all mankind:. In
India, the blessed^*'^ Shaka Muni preached the doctrines
of retribution, heaven, and hell ; and in my own native
Japan we have Their Grandeurs I^sanagi and Izanami,
the Great Goddess Amaterasu, and all the other gods
(305) and goddesses, who have condescended to teach us
in all simplicity. From our obedience to such teaching
spring the peace our land enjoys, and the prosperity and
cheerful labour of the people ; nor has a man any profit in

fS» commonly called Koku-sen-ya. He went over to China
towards the end of the Ming dynasty, on whose side he fought against
the Manchoo invaders. After the final overthrow of the Ming, he
retired to Formosa, which he is said, — with how much truth I know
not , — io have ruled with a patriarchal sway.

i»jg,

6+ The word , which I have, perhaps erroneously, rendered by * blessed,*
is nyprai >($fr itself a translation of the Sanskrit tathagata.


giSQ t WASSBYDE, T^E JA3?ANESE WLLIVER.

be|ng born into the world , as a human being, if he xeniain
igi|orant of Benevblence, Righteousne,ss, Propriety, and
\yfsdQn:^. From this fo^ard, ,I will commence ex-
plaining to each and all of you the doctrines of philosophy
and religion.”

And explain them he did, from his eminence on the table,
beginning with the model governments of Gyo and
Shun,®® Bun and Bu,®^ ^nd the Duke of Shu,®^ thence
passing to the philosophical systems of Confucius^ and Lao
Tsze, and concluding with an exposition of the doctrines of
Buddhism, standing on tiptoe and shouting the while, as
was but necessary when addressing such giants as were
his audience. Moreover, with all the vast treasures of
. experience which he had gathered, during the thousand years
of his peregrinations, and with his unequalled acquaintance
with all knowledge ancient and modern, Wasobyoe felt no
shame or hesitation in holding forth before so uncultivated
an audience, but, on the contrary, kept daily pouring forth
such masses of words and of arguments as should have
drawn an assenting nod even from a stone image. But,
for all this there was not one single individual among the
crowd who seemed to be in the least persuaded. On the
contr^y,. far from condescending to argue with him, they
'Would talk of him as people do of a pet bird, smiling and
saying to each other : What a queer little creature it ,is !

It performs better than a lap-dog,, and is more amusing
than a parrot, sayrpg such a lot of sentences without, beurg
taught them. Mind you take care, of it, and don’t kjll it
by overfeeding.” Vainly, therefore, did Wasobyoe:,,
for the space of six or seven days, expound to them the
blessed doctrines of Confucius and of Buddha.,, He might
as well have tried driving a nail into bran, or applying the
moxa to a piece of earth and, driven to . despair, could
only exclaim that their stupidity was aS gigantic as their
stature. . ,


672 ^. 69 ^^

y?This expression is proverbial.

7^Botb these expressions are proverbial; ' ^


chamberlain: WASSBYOE, the JAPANESE GULLIVER. 311

'■'f'

One day be said to Dr. Kochi: “Great travellet as
I have been, I have seen no country to excel this in size
and natural advantages. Yet (306) nowhere else does
their exist a land, however small and contemptible,, but
looks back with reverence to ancient sages and teachers,
prizes the social virtues, and possesses some systra o£
government. ' Nowhere else does there exist a nation ignor-
ant as is this nation of the very distinction of right and
wrong, -—in fact, ignorant and uninteliectual altogel^er.
Thinking that, as a happy fate had brought me to your
shores, I might teach your countrymen those doctrines, by
which alone men become reasonable creatures^ I haye
done my best to expound them. B:ut apparently you do
not understand my discourse ; for notone of you acknow-
ledges himself convinced. Whence this unaccountable
perversity?”

To this tirade the Doctor made no answer savig a slight
nod of the head. But as Wasobyoe kept reputing his
question over and over again, he smiled gently, and, stroking
WaadbyoC’s head, replied :

“ It is not generally discreet or wisefq tell little creatures
like , you ; the whble truth. Yet, as you seem likely to
ntiderstahd me, I will tell you all about it. Listen tp me
atteatively'': ‘

Wen 1; for the greater to comprehend the lesser is easy ;
for: the lesser to comprehend the greater is hard indeed.
The^ inhabitants of your world understand nothing of the
existence of ours in this place, neither may they under-
stand our intellectual grasp. But the inhabitants of pur
world, even down to the very women and children, have
no difficulty in understanding your intellectual grasp.
Moreover, when one of a lower degree of intelligence
observes the conduct of one possessed of a higher degree
of intelligence, that conduct appears to him mere foolish-
ness. You, with your diminutive stature of five feet, your
pitter-patterings through the tiny space of ninety thousand
miles square, and your gaping visits to the scanty number

72 A reference to a saying of the philosopher Chwang Tsze;


312 CHAMBE^tLAXN : WASSBYSB, THE J^ANESJE GULLIVER.

0j£ Three, Thousand Worlds,, , ar:^ naturally hindered by
your arrogant assumption that you are acquainted /with
the length and breadth of the universe and by ybm
natrow ^iews as to the p aramount reverence due to
the doctrines of your sages, from comprehending what
is truly great. Beings of wide intelligence discern
the end of a business from its commencement. Beings
able to discern the end of a business from its commence-
ment fall into no errors. Beings who fall into no errors
commit no wickedness. It is beings of narrow intelligence,
(507) unable to discern the end of a business from its com-
mencement, forgetful of the cold of winter when the heats
of summer are upon them, careless of summer heat during
the winter cold, and wanting the power of reasoning from
what is near to what is distant, who fall into the com-
mission of wickedness. In your world, the intellectual
powers of the inhabitants are as limited as the space in
which they dwell, — void of knowledge unless specially
taught, ill at ease except when licking the dregs of anti-
quity, unruly except when under direction, difficult to
persuade to virtue, easy to persuade to vice.

Wherefore, Heaven has caused a kind of busybodies
named sages to be born, who should lead the bewildered
race on to better things. But each of these busybodies
has his own special proclivities. The method of Lao
Ts2e and Ghwang Tsze was that of the simile, and their
doctrine was rooted in approval of human nature as^ it
is. Confucius spread out a great net called by the various
names of Benevolence, Righteousness, Propriety, and so
forth, forbade the indulgence of individual caprice, and
drew men towards the path of duty by a practical method
of instruction. The point which Shaka thoroughly took
in, was the existence in mankind of deep-seated evil pas-
sions ; and he brought people into the true path by laying
hold of their imaginations with all manner of tales, de-
lightful and terrific. jfn fact, what these men, one and
all, did, was to instruct and lead men by coaxing them
like children ; and thus will religious and philosophical


CHAMBERLAIN : WASOBYOE, THE JAPANESE GULLIVER.


313


teaching have its appropriate sphere in the training o£
small minds, but of small minds only. Dogma is a
box in which small minds are kept safe. Small minds
disport themselves inside this box, not knowing the out-
side, Large minds disport themselves outside the box,
knowing the inside. You yourself have been sporting
inside the box of the Three Thousand Worlds, without
knowing the outside. While you have been wagging
your tongue during these last six or seven days, the
natives of this land have let your clamour go in at
one ear and out at the other, like the whinings of a
peevish child. It is on account of the narrow intellects
of your world, and its evil practice, that it has been
furnished with all this paraphernalia of philosophy and
religion. It is on account of the broad intellect of ours
and its virtuous practice, that. Benevolence, Righteous-
ness, Propriety and Dogma being useless, we have no
such systems,

(308) ** Do you now, Wasobyoe, understand the mental
conditions of the Land of the Giants ? But if so, do
you and your countrymen, with your tiny frames and
your minute knowledge just sufficient to let you see in
front of your noses, avoid pride, mischief and foolish
ingenuity, and not fail quietly to continue in the paths
that Shaka and Confucius have traced out, spending
your lives in all tranquillity and happiness,” — and, with
these words, the giant patted him on the back.

/ Wasobyoe stood gaping in fear and abashment, and
recognized how boundless are the extremes of the very little
and the very great. Then, leaping on to the back of his
stork, he set off, and returned safely to Japan after hi^
long-continued absence.


314 ATKINSON: ANALYSES OF SURFACE WATERS IN t6ki6.


P4

H


ft

O

o .

,0:

iO

o

o


5 S £
) 0 <


isli

>• H ^

M td g ■<

S o »


J H? 5®

^ w

i“i

gss


Q 0»

X Q ^


i v6 N !

rr

• o •

. m .

* vb M •


• m •


'mm*

; H H ;


ih ' ' b" ’ '"K

p 9 Minp o o poo
2 b fo, d ,d op
^ r?'0 c\ o\ o» «’ t>HTs

W K H '


0 0 0.9 3 0 g0.op0<>^00qp
oi cd’ 6 uo lo »o w inod o’ ij^cd h dv.cd K cT wed' d

CO '<i‘'sO WCJ^HinW^OwH y^co roH cO'ci'H'JOfOWcO
H kCOH' HW


o

00 lO w

iniD CO N coroch*-'0oco
N CO moo ir> m <s moo


in r^oo «? m^o m m ■^1
M mroM ooo O ■^'if
a>cp jN w ^ cj w cp p
H* m^wvomwml


too w c3<oco H rs.o
in M (p mep o op inco w mip h i
minbiwib h mwebw h ^a\l
M M,mM hw hh-^mi


. mm

W m N VO m rs.
p> ;;«h pi mp mep p w
5* ’ mVwvbforofol


o oi o o m VO
VO O O Oi H '«!' mco O.
ThHMH'HWWO O'^


in m o '

to Ol c


H m H oi t>H o r^vo .

Isvo INVO CO VO CTl m
H t-l H <S G w O


oomHWm mj-n. m c>.oo CNmvo moo O'

r>ino wvo mmw movo m coco w m « vo oi oico co '
OOHlOOCOOOOOOC^Omm^NMOOO t>*oo


ppppvpppmpt^ppp cpwppvppi^j

b bimrf-Voi ^rbbicjvb bi i>.vO O ON K b db bi
rhvo cl lO CO H O N ■^00 O ^ mvQ Ol ’<d* Th N Ol

HHN M WHH *at“N MmN

mpmop p Hppi

mjN n 4’ioKbimmNvo ocovo inc>. mvo vo meb meb ;

CO m envo Nvovo i>.moicri'!t-o wvo moo m m m h cji cti

o> mvo m M U-) H '<*’ ■<f VO tv. i'* m M m Th m moo h


— 315 —


YUMOTO THERMAL SPRING.

GRMS. PER LITER.

SO4 .06877

Cl 16088

' Ga 03600

Mg 00041

Na .11870

K *02315

Si O2 *04450

AL O3 .00270 ,

Org. Matter 025000

B2 O3 trace.

Manganese **

Iro

Nitrates

Nitrites “

Carbonates

Sum 48011

Total residue dried at 190 X 5200

Sp. gravity 1.0016

'Temp 46,1 °C

On evaporation to small bulk the liquid became alkaline
to best paper.


Mitsuku Kuhara.


ASIATIC SOCIBTy OF JAPAN.

A General Meeting of the above Society was held at the Sh6heikwan,
Seid6, on Tuesday, Sth April. The Rev. Dr. Syle, President of the
Society, occupied the chair;

The minutes of the previous General Meeting, having been published,
were taken as read. ,

The Librarian reported the receipt of various periodicals.

Mr. B. H. Chamberlain read his paper eutitled, “ Wasobyoe, the
Japanese Gulliver.’*

The President conveyed to Mr. Chamberlain the thanks of the Society
for his exceedingly interesting and very valuable contribution. The
amount of imagination, wit, and happy expression which this tale con-
tained was very creditable as well as very remarkable. The more he
heard what Japan had done in an intellectual way, the more he was
charmed. All the world over, such panaceas as the elixir of life had
been sought after. The charm of change had beeh realized in the
happiest manner by the Japanese; it would seem as if they thought
change desirable in itself. In this tale there w^s brought out Confucius’S
fallacy of identifying knowledge with goodness.

In reply to a question of the President’s, Mr. Chamberlain stated that
Japan itself had been supposed to be the Land of Perennial Life, and
one way of wtiting the name of Mount Fuji i/p signified “ deathles-
sness.” ’Whether, however, , the belief gave rise to the name, or the
name to the belief, seems difficult to determine, The belief that Mount
Fuji was in some way connected with long life] was certainly very
ancient; indeed it formed a main factor of the plot of the “ Takctori
Mono-gatdrl,^^ the earliest Japanese romance that has come down to
us, and which dates from the middle of the loth century.

Mr. Amerman asked whether the Wasobyoe of this tale was the same
as Vi^asQbyoe.^

Mr. Chamberlain replied that, as stated in the few introductory words
prefixed to the trauslation, it was this tale of “ Wasobyoe that had
given to Bakin the idea of his ” Mtisobyae,^^ which was not composed
till several years later.

Mr. Ewing referred to the remarkable coincidence in details between
this and Swift’s Gulliver, and suggested the possibility of the Japanese
writer having heard something, of the Western tale.

Mr. Chamberlain said that there happened to be more resemblance
to our English Gulliver in the two chapters of Wasobyoe which he
had translated than in the rema,ining portion of the work, which as
a whole, contained, be thought, too few such points of likeness to
favour the idea of any borrowing on the part of the Japanese author.
Swift’s work was so infinitely richer in amusing (312) incidents that
had it been known to the writer of Wasobyoe through a Dutch


- 317 “-

translation, — in itself a not very probable supposition, -*he could hardly
have failed to borrow much more extensively.

In reply to a question fiom Mr. Wright, Mr. Chamberlain stated that
Wasohyde was composed in an ?asy, but sufficiently graceful style,
and he also e^tplained the signification of the name : 5(fp (Wa) means
“Japanese; ” ^ {so) is the first character of the name of the philosop-
her known in China as Chwang Tsze ; and ^ {byde) is a Species
of termination used to form proper names, the purport of the whole
being, therefore, “ the Japanese Chwang Tsze,” a title descriptive of
the nature of the book, in which, as in the teaching of that sage,
the method adopted was that of the fable.

Dr. Divers said he would like to hear from Mr. Chamberlain whether
it was a common thing to meet with such philosophical ideas in Japan-
ese literature as were contained in these tales. He had been much
struck with the very great difference between the philosophy of this
writer and that contained in the Buddhist sermon read to the Society
at a recent meeting. It was interesting to notice in connection with
this paper that, in one of the latest numbers from England of a scientific
serial, a distinguished chemist *and physicist had been writing a specu-
lative article on what would have been the effect upon our knowledge
of nature had we been framed in very different proportions, to our
surroundings to what we are. The writer there showed it to be highly
probable that we should have overlooked, of giant proportions, many
phenomena now familiar to us, whereas we should have long ago
recognised and appreciated much that now escapes our attention, if
we had been pigmies ; and that in general we should hold largely
different notioirs as to the nature of things from those we at present
hold. Thus it would be seen, Gulliver’s Travels had a scientific aspect
besides its humorous one.

Mr. Chamberlain; The anonymous author of this book was, as
his style and the allusions with which his book teem plainly Show,
sin educated man. Few of the common treatises on morals are so
amusing': indeed, dreary prosiness is a very frequent characteristic.

In reply to the President, Mr. Chaberlain said he feared that he
could not promise to translate the whole work. Life was short here
away from the Land of Perennial Youth, and there were so many
more important native studies to occupy one’s attention. Pie, however,
gave a short sketch of the remaining chapters of the book.


THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES OF JAPAN.


No. 2.—AME.


By R. W. Atkinson, B. Sc. (Loncl.).


[Read May 1:879.]

Although the material which forms the subject of this
note is best known to foreigners in the form of a sweetmeat
much esteemed by children, it is also used to some extent
in place of ordinary cane sugar for cooking purposes, and
still more largely in the manufacture of inirin and shoyu^
and also secretly, as a reducing agent in the common
process of dyeing with indigo. Everyone has probably
been struck with the peculiar method adopted for giving
the sweetmeat such a form that it can be readily cut up
and handled ; at various places in this city two men may
be seen industriously engaged in pulling at what, at a
distance, appears to be a white elastic rope. After having
drawn it out to a sufficient extent, so that it possesses a
uniform thickness of about threefourths of an inch, it is
cut up into small sticks, and then sold as hard ame^ either
Uncoloured, or coloured fed with safflower (beni

In this form it is only a sweetmeat ; bnt inside the shops,
coarse earthen jars containing a clear yellow substance,
having a greater or less degree of viscosity, may be seen.
This is termed midzti-aine”

In Europe, of late years, a new kind of sugar has been
shown to be product’ when malt in solution is allowed
to remain in contact with starch, and as the conditions;
which obtain in the manufacture oi ante seemed favourable


3^9


ATKINSON GN

to the production of this particular kind of sugar, itappeaared
to me to be worth examining from a chemical point of view.

(314) At first I found some difficulty in getting exact
information as to «the details of this industry ; — those whom
I first visited seemed anxious to keep the whole process as
secret as possible, but when they found that my object was
not to compete with them, they became sufficiently com-
municative^. Not that there is any secret connected with the
production of ante, but it appeared to be in this, as in some
other cases, the smaller the secret, the greater the secrecy.

I have, however, prosecuted my enquiries in Ozaka as well
as in T6ki6, and in the main points there is no essential
difference between the processes made use of in the two
places.

The starch-containing body used is either millet (Jap.
awa), or mochigo^ne, or the common kind of rice called
timchi. The finest . and most esteemed variety of miclsu-
ame ” goes by the name of awa-ame, although not in
all cases prepared from millet, but the term seems to be
applied to those kinds having a clear yellow colour, those
produced from either of the two kinds of rice beind usually
darker and leas pleasing in appearance. The late Dr. Ritter,
in a paper communicated to the German Asiatic Society
in 1874 (Part V. pp. 4-5), stated that the ame prepared
from millet is sweeter, but that that prepared from rice
is preferred on account of its greater whiteness. This-
statement is in part incorrect,, for, both from my own
observations, and from the universal testimony of ame,
makers, it is certain that that prepared from rice is much
sweeter than that prepared from millet. The latter part
of Dr. Ritter’s statement is, however, quite true when hard
am& is referred to, as vlc^-ame is said to yield a much
whiter product when drawn out than millet-aw^ does. The
latter produces a hard ame of a dull grey appearance, and
is consequently seldom used to produce that substance.

In the preparation of the commoner kinds of ame^ the
broken grains which are formed during the cleaning of
the rice to be used for the production of sake, are bought at


ATKINSON ON “ AME/


a2o

a chieap rate by the ame maker. At the brewery at Nishir
no-miya, near O^aka^ I was teld that the amount of broken
grains formed amounted to 4 per cent, of the whole rice
treated, and that it was sold at the rate of«4 yen per koku.
At Itami at the same time it was. sold at 5 yen per koku. -

The starch-containing material, whether rice or millet, is
first of all (315) soaked in cold water until it is sufficiently
soft, rice reijuiring to. be steeped a longer time than millet,
after which it is steamed in the same way as the rice which
is used in mke brewing. If the rice has been sufficiently
soaked in cold water to begin with, the steaming of 5 to
(about 20 galls.) will not require more than half an hour, or
at most, one hour. After being sufficiently heated it is
transferred , to shallow wooden tubs, like those called han-giri
in sake breweries, and covered with mats until the whole of
the rice or millet to be treated at one time is ready.

The malt used is prepared from barley, and although
the mode of preparation is the same as that followed in
England, the growth of the plumule is allowed to proceed
to a greater extent ; in those specimens of Japanese malt
which I have seen, the plumule has been about three times
as long as the grain. By permitting the growth to go
so far as this, a considerable part of the starch of the grain
is rendered useless for conversion into sugar.^

The proportion of malt used varies in different places,
and also with the nature of the starch-yielding material
which is to be converted into sugar. In some places, for
every to of rice pr millet, i sho of malt is used, . and 5
sko are then steeped in water, and added, together with
about 8 to of warm water, to 5 to of steamed rice or millet.
In another place I found 17 per cent, of malt usecLfor millet

1 The Japanese, word for malt prepared from barley is moyashi,
but while I was in Ozaka I heard the same word applied by one
or two workmen to what is properly known as koji. Foreigners are
in the habit of calling the latter substance by the name of malt, but
it does not properly bear any resemblance to malt, inasmuch as the
vegetable growth in the case of kojl is quite foreign to the grain
itself. I know of no single word by which koji might be rendered
into E$iglish.


ATKINSON ON $21

and mochigome^ and only 13 per cent, for the broken rice,
the smaller amount used in the latter case being due to
the more rapid action caused by the greate^J. surface exposed.
One workman whom I questioned about the process, said
that if a larger proportion of malt were used in the case
of the broken rice grains, the product would be sweeter, but
that its colour would be inferior. This shows, therefore,
that we may expect to find the composition of the ame
made in different places to vary, and so I have found
it. . The statement of the workman as to the (316) greater
sweetness of the product when more malt is used is quite
in accordance with the knowledge we possess concerning’
the action of malt extract upon dextrine.

The tubs containing the mixture of rice or millet, malt,
and warm water, are carefully covered up with mats to
prevent the temperature falling too rapidly below the point
at which the greatest action takes place between the starch
and the malt. Durmg the winter, at one of the places
visited, the malt was added at 7 a.m., and the whole
allowed to stand covered up until 3 p.m., by which time
the conversion of the starch into sugar was said to be
complete ; in other places only d or 6^ hours were allowed,
the shorter time being in those works where the proportion
of malt used was greater.

The liquid having been left at rest for some time, allows
the insoluble substances to fall to the bottom of th^ vessel,
and the workman removes the clear liquid from the surface
for the preparation of the best kind of ame, both liquid and
solid. The latter portions of the decanted liquid are less
pure than the first portions, and when afterwards evaporated
yield the second quality of midzu^amer That which is
Mt after the removal of the clearer portions is introduced into
coarse hempen bags, and the liquid portions are separated
from th^ solid residue by pressure. On accbunt of the
smaller scale of the operations carried on in this industry,
the Japanese lever press is never used as it is in the
separation of the liquid sahe ( moromi ) from the unconverted
grains of rice.


322


A^KINSOK rON “ AME.”


V Tke liqtiids tkas «<])btaitied are aeixt boiled dowt^ in iron
i pans resembling those used for steaming rice, iintii they
possess the required con sisten<cy^ which takes from three
to silt hours in different works for liquid ame, and about to
minutes longer when the hard white ame is desired. For
the production of the latter the stiff ame is rolled out
on boards, and handled by the workmen in such a manner
that it does not adhere to the fingers, after which it is
repeatedly drawn out and cut into lengths. By this treat-
'ment it loses its transparency and assumes the opaque
white appearance so well known to the frequenters of the
matsuri held in different districts. The workman also
notices that it becomes much more bulky, and this seems
to be correct, as the solid ame floats upon the surface of
water, while the liquid kind immediately (3 17) sinks. This
is no doubt due to a great extent to the imprisonment of
bubbles of air during the kneading process, just as in the
preparation of ordinary dough. But it may also be that
by the niechanical treatment to which it is subjected, the
sugar undergoes a species of crystal Ikation, and if expan-
sion took place as is usual, both the less density and the
opacity of the solid ame would be accounted for.

Solid ame is said to be made invariably from rice, as
when kneaded it produces a whiter paste, and I am told
that they never mix rice and millet ; but the results of my
analyses throw some doubt upon this statement.

I have made analyses of a considerable number of speci-
mens obtained from different places in Tokid, and embracing
the different qualities sold. As before said, there are three
kinds sold, Awa-ame” Mochi-ame” and Uruchi-
ameyV^jid there are also two or three qualities of the first
kind mentioned, Awa~ame, All the specimens examin-
ed were found to contain the sugar, recently isolated by
Mr. O’Sullivah, called Maltose^ mixed with an extractive
matter-^in most cases ordinary dextrine.- The presence
of maltose in ame was first proved by digesting the aine
with alcohol, filtering from the precipitated dextiine, and
examining the properties of the body dissolvedhy the adcOhok


ATKINSON ON^ “ AME,”


3«3


It was found to have a specific rotatory power of 150°, and
to reduce oxide of copper as though the solid matter in
solution contained only 65 per cent, of glucose. These, are
the essential characters of maltose, and I have further con-
firmed these experiments by separating a quantity of the
sugar in the pure state, by crystallisation, a specimen of
which is on the table. This substance agrees in, all respects
with the maltose as prepared by Mr. O’Sullivan. The
numbers given in the accompanying tables were obtained in
the following way : — About 20 grams of ame were dissolved
in water, and then diluted to 500 cub. centim. The amount
of sblid matter in solution was found by evaporating 10 cub.
cent, on a steam bath, and cooling in vacuo over oil of
vitriol. The heating was continued in an air-bath heated to
100° C. alternately with cooling in vacuo, until the weight
remained constant, which required a considerable time, and
involved a large number of weighings. I found it impos-
sible to adopt the method recommended by Mr. O’Sullivan—
viz., 4 o determine the sp. gr. and from that to calculate the
amount of solid (318) matter present, — which he asserts is
the best way, maltose and dextrine having the same sp. gr.
in solution. I found on testing, that the numbers obtained
by the two methods differed, and that the numbers obtained
by calculation from the specific gravity varied according as
more or less water was present. This I ascertained by
taking a given solution, diluting it to different extents,
finding the sp. gravity, and calculating the amount of solid
matter according to his rule. The numbers found in each
of these cases, when allowance was made for the different
degrees of dilution, did not agree, and I was therefore com-
pelled to adopt the more accurate, but certainly much more
troublesome, method first described.

The amount of sugar present was determined in the
usual way^ in most cases both volumetrically and by
weight. The number so obtained gives the equivalent
amount’ of glucose, and to ascertain the amount of maltose,
it was multiplied by 1.538. The difference between

the number thus obtained and the amount of solid matter


324


ATKiNSdN ON AMB.”


gave the amount of extract. The percentage .of water was
obtained by deducting the percentage of solid matter from
100. An observation was also made in each case of the spe-
cific rotatory power, and the number thus found by observa-
tion was compared with the number obtained by calculation
from the amounts of maltose and dextrine, previously deter-
mined. It’ was thus found that the numbers in most cases
agreed fairly well, on the supposition that the extractive mat-
ter was wholly dextrine, but in other cases, and especially
in the case of the hard ame^ the number observed was con-
siderably below the number calculated on this supposition.

In the first table I have collected the analyses made of
the better kinds of what is called Awa-ame, all of whiph
were of a pale yellow colour, like the samples on the table.
In the first three columns the numbers represent the re-
precentages of maltose, extract, and water, calculated on
the original ame; in the fourth and fifth, the percentages
of maltose and dextrine on the substance dried at ioo° C.
are given ; in the sixth column, the numbers indicate the
number of parts of maltose associated with one part of ex-
tract ; in the seventh, the observed specific rotatory power ;
in the eighth the specific rotatory power calculated from the
number in columns IV. and V. taking the specific rotatory
power of maltose =150°, and that of dextrine =2 14'^.


TABLE A.^AWA-^AME. BETTER KIND.


°/o OF ORIGINAL
ame.

7o or dry
SUBSTANCE,

Ratio of Maltose
to Dextrine,

SP. ROT.
POWER,

OBTAINED FROM.

Water.

Dextrine.

Maltose,

Dextrine.

Maltose.

Observed.

Calculated.


1 .

II.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

I. Mikawa cho

19,80

20.20

60.00

25.20

74.80

2*97

164.5

166.0

2. Shin Idzunii ch6

3. Mikawa ya (Hon

12.06

27.94

60.00

31*75

68.23

2,15

169.3

170.0

Hachio bori.)

4. Tomita ya (Hon

17.81

19.66

62.53

23.92

76.08

3.18

160.2

165.0

Hachio bori.)

16.62

23.18

60.20

27,80

72.20

2.60

168.7

167.8

5. Unknown ori^inj 14.47

20.83

64.70

24-35

75.65


6. Uriknow-n origin 14.95 J

22.05

63.00 1

3:9.1.

74.08 i

2.S5


ATKINSON' ON AME.‘


3^5


In the preceding table, which represents the composition
of the better kinds of aiva-ame, it will be observed that the
dry substance contains on an average about 26^ per cent,
of dextrine. In table B, the composition of the inferior
kinds of awa-ame is given, all the specimens of which :Were
of . a dark brown colour, and gave a turbid liquid when
dissolved in water. The percentage of dextrine is much
less in these specimens than in the former.


TABLE B,— AWA-AME, INFERIOR KIND.


7 o OF ORIGINAL ^
ame. j

7 o OF DRY
ame.

Ratio of Maltose
to Dextrine. ""

SP. ROT.

POWER.


Water.

Dextrine.

a 5

Dextrine.

Maltose.

Observed.

Calculated.


1 .

IL

HL

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

!vm.

7. Mikawa ch6

18.52

X2.38

69.10

15,20

84.80

5.60

160,0

159.6

8. Mikawa ya (Hon


Hachio tori.)

17.69

13.03

69.28

15-83

84,17

5-32

X56,2

160.0

g. Tomita ya (Hon


Hachio bori.)

19.69

i 16.73

63.58

20. $4

79.16

3.80


Table C contains the results of the analysis of two
specimens of hard ante from different places, and we have
here a case in which the observed rotatory power is very
much less than that' calculated on the assumption that the
extractive matter is dextrine, and indeed agreeing ‘ very
closely with that of the maltose alone.


TABLE C.— HARD AME.


7 o OP ORIGINAL
ame.

7 o OF DRY
ame.

Ratio of Maltose
to Dextrine.

SP. ROT.
POWER.

Water.

Dextrine,

Maltose.

Dextrine.

Maltose,

Observed.

Calculated,


' I.

IL

III.

IV.

V.

IV. 1

VII.

VIIL

10. Mikawa ch6 . .

7-50

18.97

73-53

20.50

79-50 1

3-87!

122.3

1&3

II. Unknown ....

12.00

12.12

75-88

13*77

86.23

6.26

124.0


The siini'larity hi th& c;G)h:apo&ition the &o\id ame to the
inferior kinds of what is t&rmad a wa-ame will be noticed at
oiioe, while the difference between these two and the
specimens of the better kinds is not less marked.

The analyses in Table D were made upon specimens
giv^en to me as certainly prepared from rice, from mochigonie
and uruchi respectively.


TABLE D.— AND URUCHI-AME.

r


7 o OF ORIGINAL

ame.

1

7 o OF DRY

ame.

Ratio of Maltose
to Dextrine.

SP. ROT.

POWER.

Water.

Dextrine.

'

q 3

m

2

Dextrine.

Maltose.

Observed.

Calculated.


I.

IL

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

12. Mochi-ame (Mi-


kawa ch6) . .

23*17

6.83

70.00

8.89

91.11

10.25

136.0

139.62

13. Mochi-ame (un*


known)

15*15

7.83

77.00

9-25

90-75

9.81


14. Uruchi- ame


1

(Mikawa ch6).

19-23

4.87

75.90

6.00

94.00

15.60

153.0

153.8

15. Uruchi-ame


(Mikawa cli6).

20.22

7-52

72.26

9-43

90.57

9.60

156.6

156-01


The large percentage of maltose in these specimens is
worthy of note, and would lead one to infer from the
analyses alone, that the substance from which they , were
prepared was different from that used in the preparation of
the other kinds, the analyses of which are giveti in the
preceding tables.

(321) A comparison of the amount of starch and albu-
menoids in millet and in the two kinds of rice does not
appear to help us much in explaining the course of the
reaction. Mr. Dwars communicated to the Society last
year some analyses of rice, and I give below results which
have been obtained in my own laboratory, which agree very
fairly 'with those of Mr. Dwars,


^ Calculated for maltose only.


ATKINSON ON


URUCHI.

MOCHIGOME.


From

Is6.

From

Mino.

From

Koshi-

gaya.

From

Kaj^ai,

Starch

74.69

11.96

1.46

00

72.

72. S6

T2-/|T

72.S1

12,. 60

\Vater ^ j . .

12, <^2

Asli

1-53,

1. 21

,1.61

t.30

4*30 1

6.og i

Fat 1

: 4.30

7-73

Albumenoids 1

A.7Q

Cellulose and extract !

6.10

6.65

Sum

99.90

100.00

98.57 ^

100.66


The analysis of millet given below is taken from Prof.
Church’s Manual on Food.”


CoMPOvsmoN OF Millet.


Starch 61.60

Water 13.00

Ash 1.60

Fat 5*00

Albumenoids 15 * 3 ^

Cellulose 3 * 5 ^


100.00


There is considerable difference in the amount of starch
and of albumenoid bodies in the specimens of rice and
millet, but it does not easily^ explain how it is that ,the
actual percentage of sugar contained in the ame prepared
from the former is so much greater than in that prepared
from the latter. It is certainly not due to over-boiling, for
the percental^e of water in the specimens of midzii-ame
presents comparatively small variations, and where there
is a decided difference, as in No. 3, the result is not what
might have been expected, for long heating would convert
a great part of the dextrine into maltose, whereas in this
specimen, where the percentage of water is below the
average, the percentage of dextrine is above the average.
Moreover, in the (322) specimens of hard ame in which the
percentage of water is less than in any of the remaining


328


ATKINSON ON “ AME.”


kinds of mldzu-aine^ and where we know that the length of
boiling is greater, we do not find a proportion of maltose at
all comparable to that contained in the specimens prepared
from rice. I think we must conclude that the action of
malt upon millet differs essentially from its action upon
rice, unless, indeed, the simples explanation of all be true,
that the husk which encloses the seed in the case of millet
prevents the access of the malt solution to it.^ I do not
think that this is probable, for the operations of soaking
and steaming would serve as a sufficient preparation.

A substance is now prepared in England for the use of
brewers called Dextrine-Maltose, and contains on an
average 33 per cent, of dextrine, and 66 per cent, of maltose.
It is formed by the regulated action of dilute sulphuric acid
upon starch. We have here, then, a substance which
approaches certain kinds of ame in its composition, and the
question naturally arises whether atne^ when sufficiently
diluted, might not be used for brewing purposes. At pre-
sent, no doubt, it would be found to be too expensive, but
with larger works it might be made at a sufficiently small
cost to be able to compete with imported beer. It is not
my purpose, however, to enter upon such a question ; my
only desire was to ascertain what occurred in the chemical
processes involved in this wide-spread industry.


31 have since learnt that the millet is always subjected to the same
kind of husking which rice undergoes.


H. M. S. “PHAETON” AT NAGASAKI IN i8q8.


By W. G. Aston, Esq.


[Read May i^th^ 1879.]

“ History of the outrage by Anglians at Nagasaki,” Such
was the title which caught my eye as I was one day turning
over the volumes on a book-stall in a back street of the city
of Yedo, A few tempos placed me in possession of a little
manuscript book which, on examination, proved to be a
copy of the official diary kept in the Government House at
Nagasaki during a visit made to that port by H. M. S.
Phaeton in the year 1808. Of this volume the following
narrative is a faithful resume : —

It was now late in September, and all hopes of the arrival
of the annual Dutch trading ship had been abandoned,
when one fine morning, at 7 o’clock, a “white sail” was
descried on the horizon by the coast-guards at the station
near Nagasaki. Information was at once sent to the
Governor, who took it for granted that this vessel was the
Dutch ship which had at last arrived. The usual orders
were issued for her reception. Officials were instructed to
be in readiness to go out to meet her, and exchange the pre-
concerted signal by which Dutch ships were distinguished
from others, which, in defiance of the national prohibition,
might attempt to enter the harbour ; and these were to be
followed by other officers with a supply of Japanese money,
and a letter authorizing the expected ship to approach the
city. Notice was given to the native merchants in the
foreign trade, and also to the “ Kapitan,” as the chief of the
Dutch factory was called.

The news caused a joyful excitement among ail classes at
Nagasaki, There were few of the towns-people who had


330 ASTON*. H. M. S. “ l^HAETON ” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.


not some share in the profitable monopoly of foreign trade
enjoyed by that city, and although our manuscript is silent
on the subject, we may be sure that (324) the Japanese
officials had also good reason for satisfaction at the news.
Of course, the joy was greatest in the Dutch settlement of
Desima. Afrer more than a year without news of Europe,
without letters from friends and relations, and deprived of
many a little comfort which the land of their exile could not
supply, the delight of the Dutch residents may be easily
imagined. The ship approached rapidly, and was already
visible in the distance off the entrance to the beautiful inlet
which forms the harbour of Nagasaki, when the interpreter
who had been sent to convey the news to the Dutchmen
arrived in Desima. He reported on his return that the
Kapitan had taken him aside, and after expressing the joy
which he and his countrymen felt at the arrival of their
ship, had added, ‘‘There are, however, some suspicious
circumstances. It is very improbable that she should have
delayed her departure from, Batavia until so late in the
season. If she had left at the usual time and were only
arriving now, she must have met with an accident, and lost
one or two of her masts. But the ship we see approaching
is not deeply laden. She sails well on the wind, and her
masts and rigging are in excellent order. She may be a
ship of some other country,^ and it would be disloyal of me
if I did not warn you to take every precaution.”

The boats which had previously been got in readiness
were now despatched. They were told that in consequence
of the late arrival of the “ Redhairs,” as the Dutch were
called, they were to be very careful and not to approach the
ship until the proper signals had been exchanged, If any-
thing suspicious were observed, they must lose no time in
giving notice to the guard-houses, so as to prevent her from
entering the harbour. Two clerks of the Dutqh factory
were included in the party.

^ No wonder the Phaeton did not look precisely like a Dutch mer-
chantman. She was a crack ship of the navy, and one of four frigates
known as “the Saucy Channel f^our.”


ASTON: H. M. a. “phaeton” at NAGASAKI IN l8o8.


33^


At dusk on the same day intelligence was received at the
Government House that after the first boat had, as was
thought, exchanged signals with the foreign ship, that
which contained the Dutch clerks approached her. A boat
was therefore lowered by the foreigners, who proceeded to
ti'ansfer the Dutchmen to it. One resisted, but was threat-
ened with a drawn sword, and both were then seized and
(325) carried on board the ship. No answer could be
obtained to the letters sent by the Kapitan, so it was
suspected that something was wrong, and the boats returned
to Nagasaki.

A note to the diary gives another account of this occur-
rence, said to have been afterwards obtained from one of
the Ducth clerks. Its Japanese colouring is, however,
unmistakable.

When the boat with the two Dutchmen neared the ship,
a green leather a if cm (foreign boat), thirty feet in length
and from twelve to thirteen feet in breadth, was let down
by a lowering anchor an awning was spread, and

the boat was rowed by only two men on each side with oars
like rice ladles. As soon as they came alongside the boat
with the Dutch, the planks of the deck were raised up, and
from underneath there leaped out twelve men armed with
swords and pistols, and waving in their hands lighted
matches. They drew their swords, and, uttering loud
shouts, seized the Dutchmen and forced them into their
boat. The Japanese boatmen were so frightened that they
leaped into the sea, and a confused outcry arose from the
trading and fishing craft near, as they got up their anchors
and took to flight. Some of their crews fell into the sea,
and could be seen swimming about. Before the Japanese
officers recovered from their consternation, the foreigners
drew back to their ship, receiving the wind in the awning,
and bringing their boat alongside with a bound. Here
hooks were fastened to her, and she was swiftly hoisted
on board. The ship was thirty-six fathoms in length. On
her bows there was a dreadful painted figure of a bird
with outstretched wings and eyes of precious stones. The


332 ASTON: H. M. S. “PHAETON” AT NAGASAKI IN x 8 o 8 .

cannon were fifty in number, and at night were protected by
a shield just like a plaster wall. At each gun stood a
gunner with war hat on, and a great match in hand, ready
to fire at any moment. The strictest discipline prevailed.
It was just as if a fortress had been erected on a spur of
the Inasa hill, or on the islet of Takaboko (Papenberg). On
each mast there, were three bastions (no doubt the cradles
are meant), the lower one of which was eight mats (12 ft.
by 16 ft.) in extent, and was surrounded by a screen. On
its four sides eight cannon were planted, in such a way that
they could be pointed freely in any direction. On the stern
were posted four or five guns in a similar fashion. On the
two upper bastions, look-outs were stationed, who surveyed
the surrounding (326) country and noted the position of
the batteries on shore. The Captain was a young man of
19 years of age. He sat on a chair day and night, and
moved no more than a mountain. The crew numbered
three hundred and fifty, all picked men, and as ferocious as
tigers or leopards. There were all kinds of warlike engines ;
balls made of crooked iron nails hammered together, copper
balls to be fired red-hot, etc., etc.’’

The news of the Dutchmen’s capture excited the utmost
indignation in the Governor of Nagasaki, Matsudaira
Dzusho no Kami. As the sequel proves, he was a high-
spirited and resolute man, and he determined to administer
speedy and condign punishment to the foreign ship which
had behaved in such a high-handed manner. Summoning
the chief officers of the Daimios of Hi^en and Chikuzen, to
whom the military protection of Nagasaki was entrusted,
he informed them that ‘‘a strange ship had entered the
harbour, and had seized two Dutchmen in the most out-
rageous and lawless manner. Immediate measures must
be taken to recover the Dutchmen and to burn and sink the
ship, as the Spaniard had been destroyed ninety years
before. Combustibles and fire-ships should be provided,
and a scheme of action drawn up on paper and submitted
for his consideration.”

The note of warlike preparation was soon heard on all


ASTON: H. N. S. ‘‘phaeton’’ AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.


333


sides. A small force of twenty men which acted as guard-
of-honour to the governor was put under arms, the batteries
were manned, the arsenal was emptied of its contents,
which, however, proved miserably insufficient; and all
the officials, from the Governor downwards, donned their
helmets and coats-of-mail, and hastened to their posts.
It was already night, and the writer of the diary tells us
that in the darkness the noise of the ammunition carts
and the shouting of the coolies, as they dragged the
guns to the batteries, reverberated among the hills like
thunder.”

Meanwhile the unlucky officials who had allowed the
Dutchmen to be carried off from under their vesy noses,
reluctantly entered the Government House to make their re-
port. They were admitted into the Governor’s presence by
Tokuyemon, the writer of our diary, and with deep-drawn
sighs and chattering teeth they told their story. They said
that ‘‘ all of a sudden, fifteen men with pistols and naked
swords had sprung up out of the bottom of the foreign boat,
captured the (327) Redhairs, and carried them off in the
twinkling of an eye. The crew of this boat were like so
many fierce tigers. They were so nimble in their move-
ments, and looked so terrible, that it seemed in no wise
possible to approach them. They nevertheless pursued
them, and were about to put them to the sword, when they
reflected that such a course would cause the Governor great
anxiety, and might give rise to serious trouble. They there-
fore resolved to come back and report what had happened.”
The Governor drew himself up angrily, and said : Listen

well, you fellows, to what I say. You don’t get much pay,
it is true; still it is Government pay. You have disgraced
yourselves before all the provincial militia. As I told you
this morning the Redhairs were committed to your charge.
You were enjoined to take the greatest care of them, and
not to let them go forward in advance of you. ’What do
you mean by talking of its causing trouble if you cut the
foreigners down ? When an insufferable wrong has been
done, whether is it better to cut the offender to pieces, or to


334 ASTON: H. M. S. “phaeton” at NAGASAKI IN l8o8,

come away without doing anything ? Return immediately
to the ship and bring back the Redhairs. Anxiety and hard
work are to be expected at a time like this. I can’t let you
off. You must pluck up courage, and bring back the
Redhairs at all risks.”

They had not been long dismissed when news came that
the foreigners had embarked in several small boats, and
were making the circuit of the harbour. Scarcely had
oi'ders been despatched to the guard-houses along the shore
to capture them at all hazards, when messengers in hot
haste entered to Government House by the back and front
doors simultaneously, crying out, “The foreigners have
landed at the great jetty, and are nearly before the gate!”
Tokuyemon rushed to inform the Governor, and requested
his permission to go out and take the foreigners prisoners.
“Go,” said the Governor, patting him on the back, “and
distinguish yourself.” Tokuyemon ran across the courtyard
for his war hat, and told his servant Heihachi to bring his
lance, and another servant named Banzo to look after the
house during his absence. Banz6, however, brought the
lance, and on Tokuyemon asking him angrily where he was
going, replied that he wanted to accompany his master and
kill somebody. He insisted on coming, and would not be
refused. ' As Tokuyemon was going out, he was stopped
b}^ one of his comrades, who expressed his fears that, as the
foreigners were armed (328) with pistols, it would be Use-
less to resist them without armour, and i*eminded him that
the guard of the Government House had gone aw^ay. He
caught Tokuyemon by the sleeve and pulled him back,
beseeching him not to go. “ You need not come,” said
Tokuyemon. Shaking him off, and so saying, he sallied
out, shutting the gate behind him. But in his hurry he
had forgotten his lance, so the gate had to be opened
again. Four of five others then came forward and offered
to accompany Tokuyemon, who accordingly took command
of the party. At this moment, a great noise of voices was
heard in front of them, and something red could be seen
rapidly approaching. Tokuyemon, who imagined that the


ASTON: H. M. s. “phaeton’' AT NAGASAKI l8o8..


335


foreigners were upon him, grasped his lance firmly, and
prepared to receive their onset. He was undeceived by
a voice, which he recognized as that of Nakayama, the
Interpreter, calling out him. Here are the Redhairs,
who have came to you for protection against the attack by
the foreigners.” Tokuyemon, after ordering the Dutchmen
to be shown into the office, proceeded to the jetty, when he
was told that the foreigners had not landed there, but
farther along the shore. He hastened to the spot indicated,
only to be told that the landing had taken place still farther
on; and in this way, poor Tokuyemon spent hatf'the night
in pursuit of foreigners who, as it turned out, had never
even attempted to land at all. He found time, however, to
describe in his diary the panic among the inhabitants of
Nagasaki. Suddenly,” he says, ‘‘ a great outcry arose in
the harbour. In all the Chinese junks the sailors burnt fires
and made signals to their countrymen on shore by beating
great gongs. Several boats put off to their assistance. On
board the Japanese vessels in harbour it was thought that a
fire had broken out among the Chinese junks, or that they
had been set on fire by the foreignei's. On shore, a report
was current that the Russians^ had landed, and man}" of the
towns-people prepared to fly to the hills. Men and women
rushed wildly about the streets, and the sound of voices by
sea and land was like the noise of great waves breaking
on the beach. Rumours of all kinds were afloat,- — that
a boat full of women had been captured at Inasa — that a
fishing-boat had been taken at Kitasezaki — that Hizen (329)
soldiers had been made prisoners at Fukahori — that all the
provisions had been seized — that the water-gate at Mume-
gasaki had been broken through, etc.” And yet the only
cause for all this alarm was the circumstance that some
of the Phaeton'* s boats had been sent round the harbour to
take soundings.

2 Russian ships had made piratical descents in the north of Japan.- a
few years before, burning and plundering the villages, and carrying off
some of the inhabitants. An account of these raids was given to the
Society in June, 1873. ,


336 ASTON: H* M, S. “phaeton” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.

When Tokuyemon returned to the Government House
he found it almost entirely deserted. The only person he
could find was one Baiyei, the Governor’s physician, who
said that everybody was sick : — their loins were out of joint
from cowardice, and he would like to have the chance of
prescribing for them.

Most discouraging reports now came in from all quarters.
One officer reported that he was so short of men that he
could not get his cannon placed in position, and in reply to
frequent demands, nothing but excuses could be got from
the Daimios ’ officers who were in charge of the principal
military preparations.

The Governor, however, put a bold face on it. In spite
of the remonstrances of an interpreter, who told him he
might as well try to batter down a stone wall with eggs, he
insisted on sending off a boat to demand back the Dutch-
men, gave orders to cut down the foreigners wherever they
were met if they did not promptly surrender, and com-
manded his own barges to be manned and armed. The
equipment for each barge consisted of ten lances, five bows,
and six matchlocks. The Dutch Kapitan was sent for,
and told that his mind might be at ease about his captured
countrymen, for that they would most assuredly be restored.
The Kapitan took this opportunity to offer his own ideas on
the subject. He said that although this ship acted as if
she cared for nobody, if he were in his own country and
had the necessary materials, he could stop and sink her, or
break her to pieces, as he pleased. But he was a stranger
in a foreign land, and could do nothing,” Tokuyemon
asked him what his plan was. Particulars are not given,
but it seems to have consisted in preventing the foreign
ship from leaving the harbour by a bar of iron chains
stretched across the entrance, and then attacking her with
fireships and by cannon planted on the hills. The Japa-
nese officers seem to have adopted this idea, if indeed they
had resolved on any plan at all, which may perhaps be
doubted.

Towards morning, a message was received from the


ASTON: H. M. S. “phaeton” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.


337


foreign ship to (330) the effect that the Dutchmen would be
given back in return for a supply of wood, water and provi-
sions. Amidst all the warlike talk and preparation, it is
not a little surprising to find that this demand was promptly
complied with, at least in part, although the Governor
does not seem to have been consulted in the matter. At
the suggestion of the Kapitan, the boat with the supplies
bore the flag of the Dutch Trading Company.

On the morning of the day following the arrival of the
ship, which was now discovered to be an English man-of-
war, the Governor sent ofi' a despatch reporting the occur-
rence to his Government. It was dated on the previous
day, in order to convey the impression of greater prompti-
tude, and was to the following effect.: — ^^^A foreign ship
has entered the harbour, and has seized some Redhairs.
The Redhairs will be brought back, and inqi^iry made into
the reason for this unwarranted visit, after which the ship
will be burnt, if necessary.”

But the preparations with that object went on badly.
The officers sent to inspect the troops reported that the
guard-houses were short of men, and that things looked
unsafe. Another officer, who was ordered to the batteries
on a visit of inspection, replied candidly that he had ro in-
clination to perform the duty of inspector, and that, besides,
he had no clothes suitable for such a service. His duty
had therefore, to be transferred to others. Tokuyemon
notes that for this behaviour he was afterwards condemned
to one hundred days’ imprisonment in his own house.
Nothing could be heard of the reinforcements ordered from
the neighbouring provinces, and the chief Hizen general,
on being asked how the plan for burning the ship was
progressing, replied that he personally knew nothing about
it, but would instruct his lieutenants to furnish a written
report on the matter. The diary records numerous other
circumstances which illustrate the mismanagement and
cowardice which prevailed on all sides ; but it is needless to
multiply details* The Governor himself was almost the
only exception. It is impossible to read without sympathy


338 ASTON *. H. M. S. phaeton ” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.


the account o£ the struggles of this brave man to infuse
some of his own courage and energy into the incompetent
and cowardly officials by whom he was surrounded.

At four o’clock in the afternoon the officers despatched to
the ship returned, bringing with them one of the Dutch
clerks and a letter for the Kapitan. This letter was under-
stood to contain a further (331) demand for beef, vegetables
and water, accompanied by a threat that if these articles
were not supplied, all the Japanese and Chinese vessels in
the harbour would be set fire to and destroyed. The
Governor was indignant at the tone of this communication,
and refused to send the articles asked for. No sooner had
he retired, however, than the Kapitan came and begged
urgently that the provisions should be sent. A promise had
been given, he said, under the seal of the Company, which
should under no circumstances be broken. It was, there-
fore, arranged that the articles should be got ready and sent
off to the ship in the course of the evening.

The Governor had now lost all patience with the inaction
of the military officers. He declared that, ready or not
ready, he would set out at once with such men as he could
collect, and proceed to the scene of action. Flags, spears,
drums, kettle-drums and other warlike gear were set out in
order in the principal hall, the head cook was ordered to
take charge of the commissariat, and repeated urgent mes-
sages were sent to the Daimids’ officials, from whom only
excuses and remonstrances were received in reply. One im-
portunate fellow forced himself into the Governor’s presence,
and besought him to think of the anxiety his poor old
mother would suffer if he took the field. He got a very
surly answer for his pains. But the Governor was at last
obliged to yield. As Tokuyemon says ; — Such being the
state of affairs, and being so short of men, all prospect of
burning the ship became hopeless. On the contrary, any
ill-considered project of that kind would only result in the
destruction of our own junks,” Orders were accordingly
given to abandon the attempt, and to allow the ship to take
her departitre as soon as the articles demanded had been


339


ASTON : H* M. S. “ PHAETON ” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.

*

supplied and the remaining Dutchman recovered. His re-
lease was obtained without difficulty, and the Japanese now
learnt for the first time the object of the strange ship’s visit.
The Dutch clerk told them that the Phaeton had left Eng-
land eight months before. On arriving in Bengal, informa-
tion had reached them that two Dutch ships were going to
Nagasaki this year, and they had accordingly come with the
intention of capturing them. Their reason for seizing the
Dutchmen was that the language and written character of
England being different from those of Japan, they had
detained these men as interpreters. They said they had no*
wish whatever to insult Japan, and that now they knew the
Dutch (332) ships had not arrived, they would sail at once,
but as they were badly off for provisions, fire-wood and
water, they had asked for a supply of these articles. They
were about to sail immediately, and would not return to
Japan.”

With the safe return of the two Dutchmen and the news
that England and Holland were at war, the desirability of
“severely punishing the English” again suggested itself,
but it was thought prudent first to hear what the Kapitan
might have to say on the subject. His reply was character-
istic, and evinces a shrewd appreciation of the circum-
stances, and of the character of the people he had to deal
with. It was as follows : —

“ Inasmuch as the foreign ship has committed no violence
towards Japan, and has sent back the two clerks unharmed,
it is desirable that she should be commanded to depart at
once. It is impossible to justify her unauthorized entrance
into this port, but still it will be better to treat her with
clemency. If severe measures were taken, greater feelings
of hatred [towards Holland] would be kindled in England
and Russia, who are allies. This would make trade im-
possible, to the great injury of our interests. Their hatred
to Japan would also be intensified, and on the whole it is
better that when, in future, ships approach the Japanese
coast, they should be treated with kindness.”

On the following day (the second day after the arrival of


340 ASTON: n, M. S. “phaeton” at NAGASAKI IN l8o8.

■ #

the Phaeton)^ a letter in cross (i.e. European) characters ”
was sent off to the Anglian ship, commanding her to put to
sea. Some anxiety was felt lest she might not obey this
order, as beef (one of the articles demanded) had not been
sent. But the Japanese were relieved from all further ap-
prehension about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, when, a gen-
tle breeze having sprung up, the ship swung round, and,
setting three sails, went off like an arrow. As far as Cape
Nomo three sails were set, at the Goto Islands five, then
ten, after which she was speedily lost to view,”

* Meanwhile troops had begun to pour into Nagasaki from
the neighbouring provinces, and much zeal was displayed in
keeping a strict watch on the departing ship fi'om the shore,
and from boats which were sent out to observe her motions.
The military officers now reported by letter that, in accordance
with the instructions received on the previous day, prepara-
tions had been made at Fukahori to burn the foreign ship,
(333) fire-junks had been prepared, and they were on the
point of reporting that everything was in readiness to carry
out the plan without fail, when the message came ordering
them to desist from the attempt.

At this point the official diary comes to a close. It is,
however, supplemented by notes which Tokuyemon added
at a later date from his recollection of what had taken place.
Some of these have been incorporated into the preceding
narrative, while the remainder enable us to continue the
story a little farther.

accompanied the Governor,” proceeds Tokuyemon,
^^to his balcony, where we watched the ship sailing swiftly
away. His vexation was plainly visible in his face. He
soon came down again, and I followed him into the sitting
room and tried to console him. ‘Well, well !’ said I, ‘ she
has got away safe , after all. But, as you said in your report,
you would have burnt her, if possible. It was not your
fault that the Daimibs had withdrawn so many of their
men, and that there no large junks here. You consulted
the Kapitan, you looked to the arming of the batteries and
the fighting junks, and in short neglected nothing.’ ‘You


ASTON: H. M. S. “phaeton” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8»


341


and your colleagues/ replied he, ^ have done your best ; but
when I go back to Yedo, I may feel assured of dismissal
with disgrace/ He turned away and busied himself for a
while writing letters to his family. I moved aside, and
was looking over some old archives, when the Governor
suddenly came up close to me, and laid his hand on my
knee. He began a speech of thanks for the faithful services
I had rendered him, but broke down, and burst into tears.

I was taken by surprise, and attempted to get out a few
self-depreciatory words, but a choking sensation in my
throat stopped my utterance, and we both wept together.
The regret that the foreign ship had escaped, penetrated to
our marrow, and, as it were set our whole bodies on hre.
On that night, I sat with the Governor as usual, drinking
with him from supper time until past ten o’clock. His
physician and some others of his staff had been invited,
and the Governor appeared in better spirits than usual.
We all retired after ten o’clock. That night the town of
Nagasaki was buried in profound slumber for the first time
for several days. I returned to my quarters, where, over-
powered by the heat, I fell asleep over my writing table,
and my servants spread a mosquito net over me without
my being conscious of it. I think it must have (334) heen
midnight when Tanabe came rushing in by the front en-
trance, weeping and exclaiming, ‘ Haven’t you heard that
His Excellency has committed suicide V I sprang up, not
knowing east from west, or what I was doing. I then ran
to the Governor’s apartments ; and, just beyond the sitting-
room, in front of the image of the guardian god, and close
under the hedge, I found that he had spread a carpet, seated
on which he had made a long narrow wound below his
navel, and had then thrust the dagger through his throat
up to the hilt. It was a magnificent harakiri / The spirit
had already departed. Watanabe tried to pull out the
the dagger, but it was fast clutched in the dead man’s hand.
What a pitiable sight ! Alas ! the day, on which it pleased
Heaven to allow so brave a gentleman to perish 1”

At noon on the day following, General Kuroda, who


342 ASTON : H. M, S. “ PHAETON ” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.

commanded a force of 8,000 men, furnished by the Daimid
of Chikuzen, came to the Government House and reported
that, on hearing of the departure of the foreign ship, he had
countermanded the troops which were on their way to
Nagasaki by land, but that, as the naval force was expected
very shortly, he wished to see the Governor in order to
consult with him respecting the measures to be taken.
Tokuyemon left the room for a little, and then, coming in
again, said: ^‘The Governor is much pleased with your
promptitude in bringing your men from so distant a province.
It would have given him great pleasure personally to com-
pliment you on the energy you have shown, but since last
night he has suffered greatly from spasms and is confined
to bed, so that he is obliged to reply to you through one of
his household. He has no business to transact with you,
and he therefore trusts you will not hesitate to return to
your province as soon as it may suit your convenience to
do so."

This neat specimen of official unveracity was perhaps not
intended to deceive General Kuroda, and at any I'ate it had
not that effect. He thanked Tokuyemon for his courteous
reply, but the tears rolled down his cheek. He had evidently
divined from the countenances of the Governor’s household
the sad event which had taken place. Tokuyemon was
deeply impressed by his behaviour. ‘^Ihad no acquaint-
ance with this' gentleman," he writes, “but his tears
seemed to me the tears of a brave man. His feelings filled
his breast, and overflowed into his face. Even now, I often
think of him with admiration."

And now the fleet which had been destined for the des-
truction of the English ship entered the deep inlet which
forms the harbour of Nagasaki. Tokuyemon becomes
quite poetical in describing the spectacle,

“ Swift as an arrow, the squadron of eighty ships entered
the great inlet seventeen miles long by seven miles wide.^
They approached the anchorage in line like a flight of wild
geese, gradually coiling themselves up into a circular form


sTokuyemon’s figures may be divided by two, at least.


ASTON: H. M. S. “PHAETON^’ AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.


343


like a chrysanthemum, with the admiral’s ship in the
centre. Unfolded, their array would have filled the whole
harbour like a great sea-serpent. The signal for advance
was a drum ; for halting, a gong. The waters of the bay
were stained with the reflections from their green and
crimson screens : their flags waved to the wind, and the
swords and spears glanced in the sunlight. The rows of
matchlocks in sheaths of red cloth, which were leant over
each ship’s side, reminded one of the claws of a lobster,
while the gold and silver ensigns and standards dazzled all
beholders. Every one was full of admiration.”

Here ends the story of the Anglian outrage at Naga-
saki.” In the concluding pages of his manuscript, Toku-
yemon has affectionately treasured up his recollections of
the master whom he loved so well. He enumerates the
presents he had received from him, and dwells regretfully
on the evenings which he and his colleagues had spent
with him, reading in turn from some Chinese historian, or
amusing themselves by capping verses. “ But it must be
admitted,” adds Tokuyemon, ‘‘ that we were often griev-
ously tormented by mosquitos, and after a hard day’s work
in the office, would gather have been in bed.” He also
mentions his ideas of extending Japanese trade to Anam
and other commercial centres in the east of Asia, and of
colonizing Yezo by means of the profits to be derived
therefrom.

It only remains to add that the principal military officers
who were responsible for the defence of Nagasaki paid the
penalty of their cowardice and incompetence by an enforced
Iiarakiri, and that Tokuyemon was awarded a pension in
recognition of the zeal which he had displayed.

It would be a mistake to draw any sweepiilg conclusion
as to the Japanese character from the cowardice and in-
capacity shown by so many of the Nagasaki officials on
this occasion. Not only their ancient, (336) but their most
recent, history contains ample evidence that the Japanese
are an eminently brave race. This story indicates rather
that, even at the beginning of the present century, the


344 ASTON: H, M. S. “phaeton” AT NAGASAKI IN l8o8.

Taikunate was already far advanced in the process of decay
which culminated in the Revolution of 1868, The account
of the Russian descents at Hakodate, which has been
already referred to, points the same moral. Ninety years
is a short time in the life of a nation, and Japan may well
be congratulated on the change ^which has been brought
about during the interval. The jealous exclusiveness
which formerly invited affront has disappeared ; while on
the other hand, if any real insult were offered, Japan would
now be able so maintain her dignity far more effectually
than was possible for Matsudaira Dzusho no Kami, the
Taikun’s lieutenant at Nagasaki in 1808.


ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN.


A General Meeting of the above Society was held at the ShO-
heikuwan, Seid6, Tdkio, on Tuesday, 13th May. The Rev. Dr. Syle,
President of the Society, occupied the Chair.

The minutes of the preceding general meeting, having been already
published, were taken as read.

The Recording Secretary announced the election of the following
gentlemen as members of the Society: — Dr. Nelson, R.N., Mr. J,
Kennedy, Rev. M. C. Harris, Mr. T. Alexander, Dr. Laurenson, R.N,,
and Rev. C. S. Malan.

The Librarian reported the receipt of various periodicals, etc., also
a copy of “ Yeigo Henkaku Ichiran,” presented by the author, Mr. B. H.
Chamberlain.

The following gentlemen were elected from among the members
resident in T6ky6, to serve on the Committee for drawing up a list of
proposed officers for the ensuing year : — Mr. R. W. Atkinson, Lieut.
A. Gr. S. Hawes, R. M., and Mr. F, F. Jewett.

Mr. R. W. Atkinson read his paper entitled, “ Notes on the Composi-
tion of^m^. ”

Specimens of the different kinds of ame were exhibited.

The President said that the Society owed rather an unusual sort
of thanks to Mr. Atkinson, as bringing before them a subject involving
questions of public health. Sweetmeats had much to do with children’s
happiness and health. Some doctors said that most children’s stomachs
were ruined by the time they were seven years old. Excess relaxed and
impaired digestive power, while the colouring matter so often contained
in sweetmeats acted as a poison. This subject touched a good many
important points. As an article of trade, ame had considerable interest.
Then its use for beer, with a view towards the substitution of that liquor
for sake^ demanded consideration. In its various aspects, it had a not
unimportant hearing on the national health and habits.

Dr. McCartee recognized the solid ame exhibited as identical with
a substance prepared in China, from malted barley and glutinous rice,
in precisely the same way as that described by Professor Atkinson.
In China it was hawked about th 6 streets, and exchanged for cast-off
clothing, and various other second-hand articles. There was also a
liquid, similar in appearance to some of the specimens exhibited, which
was blown into various shapes for sale to children, but the speaker
had never heard of any use being made of it in the arts in that country.


In connection with the subject of fermentation generally, he expressed
a wish that Professor Atkinson would turn his attention to the use of the
pulverized leaves of the Polygomun Alaium, in China, as a substitute for
hops, in making bread, and (338) also in the fermentation of the rice wine
or tsin of China, corresponding to the sake of the Japanese. The plant
flowers late in August or in September, but the leaves are gathered
in June, dried, powdered, and made up into cakes with wheaten flour.
These are dried and kept for bringing about fermentation.

Mr. Atkinson, in reply to a question of the President, gave a short
account of the history of the discovery of the new sugar, Maltose. Some
chemists had refused to admit the existence of such a body, but he
(the speaker) had proved, at least to his own satisfaction, that it not
only existed, but was capable of being separated in the pure, crystalline
condition, possessing then all the properties assigned to it by its
discoverer.

Mr. B. H. Chamberlain then read Mr. W. G. Aston’s paper on
M- S. Phaeton, at Nagasaki, in 1808.”

The President, in returning the thanks of the Society, said this that
paper spoke for itself. It was extremely interesting as showing a phase
of Japanese character which had its charm. He referred to that ex-
emplified in the conduct of the Governor. He asked Mr. Chamberlain
what material there was for a history of Japan.

Mr. Chamberlain answered that the greater part of the historical
writings consisted of mere annals, and were very dry reading.

The meeting was then adjourned.


A HISTORY OF JAPANESE ART.


By W. Anderson, Esq.


[Read ^une 2 ^thf 1^790

In all countries the earliest manifestations of art appear
fitfully through a hazy atmosphere of legend, now taking ‘
one form, now another ; but its remote origin is always hid
in prehistoric darkness, and the rare examples of apparently
rudimentary results that time spares to us seldom provide
food for more than empty speculation as to the period of
conception of the primitive models. The difficulties of
investigation are particularly great in Japan, a country
peopled by at least two distinct races, of which the later and
dominating must have imported into the conquered islands
many relics and traditions of a fatherland possessing a
civili-zatiQn far in advance of that Aino aborigines of their
new home. Speculations in this direction must, however,
be left to the archaeologists, who have already in recent
times brought to light many suggestive facts.

At present we have only to conjecture that art, arising
as an appendage to utility, was first applied to impress
upon the rough earthen vessels, originally constructed
without reference to aesthetics, such forms of symmetry
and grace as would not interfere with their practical aim ; a
little later, the plastic clay of the potter would be made
to imitate the contour of the simpler native objects ; and,
with a surface fitted to retain an impression, and a tool
suitable to make a mark, recognij^able outlines of familiar
things would soon appear in a form capable of preservation.
To such productions in the round and fiat the dawning taste
of the savage would add the crude pigments that nature
placed at his disposal, distributing them in harmonies and


34 ^


ANDERSON; HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


contrasts and in propriety of choice under the guidance
of the teachings drawn by his unripened powers of obser-
vation from his surroundings in the animal, vegetable and
mineral worlds. So much effected, the foundation of Art in
all its phases exists ready for development by the few more
highly gifted minds that the (340) ages may bring forth,
aided by the advantages of the improved materials that
industrial progress renders available. But this stage would
be reached by slow and hesitating steps, and would be
unlikely to present any grand epochs that could hold a place
in the tradition-monger’s stock. And thus we find in Japan
that written records give no clue to the time or manner of
inception of any section of artistic labour, but refer us back
to simple fable, as though to show the hopelessness of more
advanced research ; and even when at length, the infancy of
Art past, we meet with particulars of date, name, and
circumstance, we still must stop to winnow from the grains
of fact a dusty cloud of fiction before the results of our
enquiry can be fitted to cohere into historic form.

The following arrangement of the subject will be adopted,
but the frequent combination of one branch of art with
another renders it impossible to draw a sharp line of
demarcation between the different sections named : —

1. --Pictorial art.

2. — Plastic art. — Clay figures, pottery and porcelain.

3. — Sculpture in wood, stone, metal, ivory and other
materials.

4. — Engraving upon wood and copper for printing.

5. — Lacquer,

6. — Miscellaneous works.

It is necessary to inform the reader that the present
sketch, the first portion of a general review of Japanese
art, is limited to the chief historical facts in connexion
with the development of the different branches. The con-
sideration of characteristics and aesthetic qualities will form
the subject of a separate essay.

Architecture is referred to only in connexion with its
artistic decoration.


ANDERSON : HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAD ART. 349

PICTORIAL ART.

The History of Pictorial Art in Japan, according to the
Catalogue of Families (Shiyauzhiroku), begins as early as
the 5th century of our. era, with the arrival of a Chinese
painter of Imperial descent, named Nanriu or Shinki, in the
reign of Yuuriyaku Tenwau (A.D. 457-479.) Intercourse
with Korea is said, however, to have dated from about 147
B.C., and a circumstantial account is given of the advent in
285 A.D., of a (341) Korean savant named Wani who brought
a number of Chinese books, and was appointed tutor to the
Prince Imperial. If these stories be true, there is no doubt
that something must have been learned of Chinese or
Korean art before the 5th century, but no evidence of the
existence of any such knowledge is now to be obtained.

Nanriu, like his somewhat apocryphal literary predeces-
sor, was well received at the Court, and settled permanently
in the new land, where he and many generations of his des-
cendants found honoured employment. The fifth in succes-
sion from Nanriu attained so great a reputation as an artist
that he received from the Emperor Teiiji the title of Yama-
to Weshi (the painter of Japan), and from the Empress
Shiyoutoku, in 770, the surname Ohowoka no Imiki, The
family is said to have boasted many skilled painters, but no
account is preserved of any of their achievements.

In the sixth century flourished Shiyautoku Taishi, the
famous son of the Emperor Youmei. In addition to his
preeminence as a priest, scholar, and calligrapher, he was
noted for artistic skill, and works still extant in wood-en-
graving, wood-carving, and painting are attributed, wfith
more or less probability, to his hand. The Hohteu Guwai-
shi describes a life-size portrait of the great Buddhist, said
to have been painted by himself, which is kept at Tenwau-
zhi in Ohosaka.^

The Nihofigi (written in 720 A.D.) refers briefly to sever-
al painters, mostly Koreans, engaged at the Court in the 6th
and 7th centuries, but gives no particulars of interest.


1 The authenticity of this picture is very doubtful.


350 ANDERSON; HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.

In the early part of the ninth century, the historical mists
begin to disperse, and we find standing in moderate relief
the figure of a Korean, Yofuku, afterwards called Kudara
no Kahanari, reputed as a mighty bowman and dexterous
painter, who held a prominent position at the Court of Saga
TeaWau. About this time, also, Kuukai (canonized as
Koubofu daishi), a second Shiyautoku Taishi, an energetic
promulgator of Buddhism and secular learning, returned
from a visit to China, bearing many specimens of the art of
that country. He contributed many paintings of Buddhist
subjects from his own brush, and in his nephew, Chisbiyou
daishi, and his pupil, Shifisai, left worthy successors.
These also had the advantage of a residence in China, and
made many additions to the store of artistic models. It is
related of the latter that after the (342) death of Koubofu
daishi he commenced a portrait to perpetuate the features of
his beloved master, and when his task was near its end, the
ghostly form of the departed original appeared before the
picture, and dotting the pupils in the yet unfinished eyes,
at once consecrated and completed the work of reverential
affection.

Whatever pictorial art existed in Jupan up to this time
could not he considered really Japanese, as the few native
painters whose names have reached us were at best but
skilful amateurs. During three hundred years Art was a
cherished exotic, but had not struck root in the new soil,
and it was not until the ninth century had begun to wane
that its naturalization began. The first true Japanese artist
was Kose no Kanawoka, a court noble of ancient lineage,
whose name, handed down by history and fiction, receives
in Japan as full a meed of veneration as that accorded in
Italy to the fathers of the new art destined to replace the
giant development that once existed in Greece. He appear-
ed at a time when the cultivation of the arts of refinement
had acquired an extraordinary prominence. For two
hundred and fifty years Japan had possessed colleges, fully
organized, teaching music, astronomy, mathematics, medi-
cine, philosophy and other branches of knowledge. Poetic-


ANDERSON : HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


351


al composition on the Chinese model was the ambition of
every educated mind, and although the palmy age of the
great native poets was pavssing away, the influence of their
works had reached its zenith, Hitomaro and Nakamaro
had been dead upwards of a century. Narihira, the patri-
cian Antinous, had been crowned king of poetry fifty years
before. Wono no Komachi, as renowned for beauty as for
literary genius, had long passed the time of triumph when
her potent verse brought a famine-dispelling rain upon the
parched fields, and had ended her days in self-imposed
misery and destitution. Koubofu daishi, the apostle of let-
tei's, had been translated, like Elijah, living to the skies,
but in Sugawara no Michizane (better known by his post-
humous title of Tehzhiia Sam a) learning still owned one of
its brightest ornaments and art a warm patron and distin-
guished amateur. The third great representative of native
calligraphy, Wono no Toufuu, whose name rivals that of
Kanawoka, was yet unborn,, but stories of the superna-
tural skill of Koubofu daishi hallowed the handicraft.
Sculpture on wood and stone was largely practised
for religious purposes, and three schools of painting
had been made known by foreign intercourse, the
(343) Kara-we or Chinese and Korai-we or Korean, which
may be grouped together, and the Buisii-we or Buddhist
pictures, wholly distinct in style from the others and pro-
bably of Indian birth. The Court, removed from Nara to
Kiyauto about 80 years before, was in its heyday. The
Emperors, leaving the cares of government in the hands of
the Fujihara nobles, devoted their energies to the study of
religious lore and the culture of letters, and had already
favoured the development of art by establishing an office,
called Wedokoro, which was to be filled by the most
distinguished painter of the time. Of the people, now
separated from the military class, nothing is to be learned;
they appear to have always been too well disciplined to
thrust themselves into disrespectful prominence in the
history of their country, but it is to be feared that the
charming pursuits engrossing the minds of their rulers left


35 ^


ANDERSON: HISTORV OE JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


them at the mercy of multitudes of official birds of prey.
The day was certainly far distant when the artisan or trader
might hope that learning or talent would place his name
upon the list that fame had hitherto reserved for his
superiors.

Kanawoka is first heard of in the court of Seiwa Tenwau,
where, under the instruction of a Chinese emigre^ named
Gokiyoshi, ‘‘ by studyingthe works of a great Chinese artist
named Godaushi,” he developed the remarkable skill that has
made him one of the greatest as well as the first of the paint-
ers of Japan. Among his works, tradition speaks of many
designs in landscape, animal life and figures ; but the best
known are the portraits of the learned men of China (painted
in A.D. 888), said to have been copied from a Chinese
original upon the sliding doors of the Imperial palace,
Shishifidefi, at Kiyauto. One of his pictures, a kind of
altarpiece in the style of the Butsu-we, representing Fudou
with Seitaka Douzhi and Koiigara Douzhi, may be seen at
the Temple of Daiyouzhi in Nishinokubo, Toukiyau; this,
although conventional in treatment, compares not un-
favorably in its bold expressive outlines and rich harmonious
colouring with the productions of the old Italian masters
of three centuries later. It is greatly to be regretted that
so few monuments of his power are still remaining.

The estimation in which he was held by his countrymen
is shown less by the honours lavished upon him by the five
successive Emperors under whom he served, and by the
devoted friendship of Sugahara no Michizane and many other
of the leading spirits of the court, than by the wonderful
legends invented by some, and firmly believed by the (344)
rest, of his admirers, Every child in Japan has heard of
Kanawoka’s horse, painted on a screen in Niuwazhi temple
near Kiyauto : a strange picture, which so far exceeded the
limits of mere imitative art that in the hours of darkness
it would quit its frame and gallop wildly through the
cultivated land around, till angry peasants, recognizing in
the matchless form of the mysterious depredator the Kana-
woka steed, and finding full confirmation in the damning


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAD ART.


353


evidence of the mud that yet clung to its shapely hoofs
after its return to pictorial existence, ruthlessly blotted out
the eyes of the masterpiece ; and thenceforth the nocturnal
excursions ceased. A rival horse in the Imperial treasury,
a creation of the same brush, was wont to devour the
Lespede^a flowers, till by a happy inspiration it was firmly
tethered to its panel by a painted rope.

He left three sons, Kifitada, Ahimi, and Fukaye, all clever
painters, and the Kanawoka riu was maintained by several
descendants and pupils, who bore the name of Kose. Kose
no Asomi Hirotaka, his grandson, was in especial favour
at Court. He was noted as an earnest disciple of Buddhism
and devoted his talents chiefly to religious art. One of his
paintings, a representation of the tortures of the damned
in Hades, still exists in the temple ChiyaurakuHii near
Kiyauto. It has a curious history that recalls the closing
episode in the life of our own Hogarth. On commencing
the grewsome work, the painter became inspired by a
mysterious foreboding of approaching death, but with the
same jnournful perseverance that sustained Moj^art in the
composition of the Requiem fated t6 bewail its author’s
death, he laboured unceasingly until the sickening details
filled the great sheet before him, when with the last touches,
the strained energies gave way and the artist expired, brush
in hand, in front of his ill-omened masterpiece.

The period following the death of Kanawoka was, however,
one of art decadence, and for a time we hear of little else than
the fabulous exploits of Minamoto no Yorimitsu, Watanabe,
Kifitoki and the other heroes who performed mighty quests
to destroy ghouls and demons, to rescue imprisoned damsels
from giant robbers, and to furnish future generations with
nursery legends that rival those of Valentine and Orson
and the Seven Champions of Christendom. It is not
until the beginning of the eleventh century that anything
worthy of record in art appears. At this time arose Moto-
mitsu or Takumi no Kami, a pupil of Kose Kinmochi.
His paintings were chiefly representations of court life, and
(345) as they differed in motive and to some extent in style


354


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


from the works of previous painters, Motomitsu is spoken of
as the originator of the Yamato-wa (or Waguwa riu, the Jap-
anese school). The distinctive characters of the Yamato-we
were the great prominence, given by brilliancy of colouring,
to mere details of costume (hence the title nishiki-tae some-
times applied to the new manner), and the extreme con-
ventionality and incorrectness of the human figures, which
were ordinarily stiff and ungraceful in attitude and curiously
imbecile in feature. In the same century appeared Kaku-
yuu or Toba Souzhiyau, a high rank priest of the Tefidai
sect living at the Temple of Miwidera in Afumi province,
who was celebrated for humorous sketches and originated
the caricature pictures called Toha<ve* His style was
simple and original, and the drawing, as seen in an admirable
specimen in possession of Mr. Ninagaha of Toukiyau,
skilful and vigorous. His subjects and those of his
followers are characterijzed by much genuine wit, but un-
fortunately too often in that primitive form which derives
its chief force from the indecency of its suggestions. The
cleverness of execution that distinguished the works of
this school is rarely seen in the general productions of
the Toba-we, in which carelessness and extravagance of
design are apparently relied upon as an important element
of the joke. Toba Souzhiyau must not be confounded
with Wono no Souzhiyau, a priest of the Mitsushiu sect,
who nearly a century later adopted a new style of drawing,
to which the title Wono riu has been given.

The quiet reign of fine arts and polite learning at the
Court of Kiyauto was approaching its term. Kiyomori,
the actual ruler of the country, was himself a painter, but
was too deeply occupied by his ambitious projects to lend
any substantial encouragment to the development of art,
and the civil discords which, in the latter half of the 12th
century, raised Minamoto no Yoritomo to the Shiyaugunate
and destroyed the Tahira clan, were very unfavorable to
the progress of painting. It was not until long after the
Ashikaga branch of the Minamoto family was fixed at
Kamakura, and after the rivalry of the Northern and South-


ANDERSON; HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


355


ern Courts was terminated by the establishment of Go-
Komatsu Tenwau at Kiyauto, that the languishing art
began to revive. A few names of those who worked on
in the troubled interim are still preserved. Fujihara no
Nobuzane, whose father Takanobu was a pupil of the
(346) Yamato riu, attained high repute for paintings of
portraits and Court ceremonials in great elaborateness of
detail. His most celebrated work is a portrait, painted
in 1221, of the poet Hitomaro, who five hundred years
after his death presented himself to the artist in a dream.
The fidelity of Nobu2;ane’s representation is said to have
gained the admiration of the whole court, but whether
the critics had the same opportunities as the painter of
knowing the lineaments of the original we are not told.
The portrait is engraved in the Wakan-mei-hitsu-guwa*we,
but if the cut be a correct copy, the popularity of the work
could scarcely have been due to its artistic merits.

At the same time lived Takuma Tameyuki, a court
painter in the service of Go-Horikawa Tenwau. He is
referred to as the chief of the Takuma riu, a school which,
however, does not differ in any important respect from that
of Motomitsu. Sumiyoshi Hofugen and Ahadaguchi Ho-
fugen were celebrated painters in the style of the Yamato
riu in the 13th century.

At the beginning of the thirteenth century commenced
the great Tosa Riu, so called from the adopted name
of its founder, Fujihara no Tsunetaka, the fifth in descent
from Motomitsu. This school, which in a modified form
exists at the present day, was really a development of the
Yamato riu.

Painting revived under the Ashikaga dynasty about a
century after the- restoration of Italian Art by Cimabue,
Gaddo Gaddi and Giotto. The Shiyaugun Takauji was
an artist as well as an art patron, but the impulse given
by his example did not produce any important results
till long after his death, and then only after an infusion
of foreign blood in the person of Zhiyosetsu, a Chinese
priest who came to Japan about the beginning of the 15th


356 ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.

century, and established a kind of monastic school at the
temple of Soukokuzhi in Kiyauto.* So successful was the
instruction of the new comer that the names of three of
his pupils, Setsushiu, Shiubun and Kano Masanobu are
still venerated as those of the fathers of modern art in
Japan. His own pictures are very rare ; one of them,
rather inferior in composition and drawing, is still preserved
at Soukoku2:hi, but he is renowned rather as a teacher than
as a painter. His style was that of the great artists of
the Sung Dynasty.

(347) Teu Deiisu or Miyauteu, a Buddhist priest, shares
with Zhiyosetsu the honour of ushering in the art renais-
sance of the 15th century. As a painter of Buddhist
pictures he is unequalled, and must be considered as one of
the most original artists of Japan. Child-like in simplicity,
profoundly religious, passionately devoted to his art, he
offers, in character as in talent, a remarkable parallel to his
European contemporar}^. Fra Angelico, the Italian painter
monk, and like him worked throughout a blameless life in
priestly poverty and seclusion, despising temporal reward,
and ended his days peacefully in the holy retreat that
formed his only home.

In commemoration of his youthful talent, the HoSteu
Guwashi relates that, on one occasion during his novitiate
at Toufukuzhi, when he had just completed in stolen
moments a portrait of Fudou, he heard the footstep of his
stern superior Daidau, who had hitherto repressed his
pictorial tendencies, and fearing reprimand he tried to
conceal the picture between his knees, but the flaming
environment of the god rose up and betrayed the presence
of the sacred work. The astonished Daidau, thus convinced
of the divine inspiration of the boy, thenceforth placed
no obstacles in the path of his artistic career. On the
same authority we learn that after many years of honoured
labour, when his patron the Shiyaugufi Yoshimochi asked
what reward he would receive, he replied, “For money,

^ Some authorities claim liim as a native of Kiushiu, but there
appears to be little doubt of his Chinese origin.


ANDERSON: HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART»


357


treasures and rank I have no need ; one change of raiment
and a pot of rice suffice for my daily wants, but I humbly
ask that the cherry trees which the priests have planted in
the temple grounds may be cut down by my lord’s order,
lest in future times the sacred garden may become degraded
to a park of pleasure.” The Shiyaugufi, surprised at the
modesty and unselfishness of the request, did as the priest
desired, and to this day the wish of Teu TeBsu has been
respected by the monks of Toufukuzhi.

Some of his pictures are still in existence. An enormous
Death of Buddha,” 39 feet long by 26 feet wide, painted
in 1409, and the portraits of the Sixteen Rakaii, and of
some Chinese Setinin were preserved in Toufukuzhi ; and
other portraits of the Rakafl are in the temple of Yuutefizhi
at Meguro. Several of his paintings are engraved in the
WakaS-mei-hitsu-guwa-we.

Setsushiu was a native of Bitsuchiyuu province, and a
member of (348) the Wota family. At the age of 13 he was
entered at the temple Haufukuzhi as a novice and afterwards
became a priest. His youth was passed in gaining instruc-
tion from various artist monks, including Zhiyosetsu, and
in his early manhood, seeking to complete his education, he
undertook the voyage to China. There, in the fatherland
of the only art of which he had heard, he sought out the
greatest living painters, but disappointed in their skill he
held himself superior to their aid, and proclaimed that “as
he saw no man from whom he could learn, his masters
should be the mountains, rivers, grass and trees of China.
During his stay he was indefatigable in his work, and soon
attracted the notice of the Emperor and many powerful
patrons. His countryixxen consider it the highest honour ever
conferred upon Japanese Art that he received the Imperial
order in China to paint a picture upon a wall in the palace.

He is said to have followed no school, but invented a
style of his own, which in hence distinguished by the title
of Setsushiu ri% ; but his early teaching by Zhiyosetsu and
others had imbued him so thoroughly with the rules of
Chinese art, that notwithstanding his professed adoption of


358


ANDERSON: HISTORY OR JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


nature’s teaching, his pictures have all the artificiality of
the Kara-we. He is chiefly celebrated for landscape ; but,
like most of the artists of Japan, did not confine his brush
to any single class of subjects. His works, singularly
striking in effect, though untruthful, were boldly sketched
in ink without any attempt at elaboration ; colour was seldom
introduced, and then consisted of little more than a light,
sparingly distributed tinting of prominent objects.

Setsushiu’s skill, like that of the other great painters of
old times, was embellished by the ingenious inventions of
his admirers. The Honteu Guwashi tells us that when a
novice at Haufukuzhi he showed more devotion to art than
religion, and in consequence often got into tro-uble. One
day, as a- punishment for some act of neglect, left
in solitude lashed to a temple pillar, with his hands
fastened behind him, he passed the weary hours drawing
with his toe as a pencil, and his tears as ink, the outlines
of rats upon the boarded floor. His superior, returning
in compassion to set him free, was surprised to see a
number of long-tailed vermin scamper off from beneath
the boy’s feet. These were the supernatural results of
(349) Setsushiu’s skill, startled into life by the approach of the
monk and flying to preserve their miraculously acquired
existence. Another story, more in accordance with the
ancient Grecian legends, speaks of a painting of a sparrow
around which the living birds would flutter, their deceived
senses giving them no warning that they were wasting
their time on a thing of ink and paper.

He was in the habit of preparing for his daily task by
playing an air upon the flute, or singing a verse of poetiy,
after which, says the Guwashi, ‘\he would paint like a
dragon refreshed by contact with water.”

His powers suflered no impairment from age. Many of
his most valued pictures were executed after the age of
fourscore. He died aged 87, in 1507.

His followers were very numerous. A large number
of artist priests of subsequent periods modelled their style
upon his pictures. The most celebrated of his pupils were


ANDERSON : HISTORY OR JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


359


Setsusofi. of Hitachi, Shiugetsu of Satsuma, and Dauaii
of Yamato.

Shiubufi and Woguri Soutafi were celebrated contem-
poraries of Setsushiu. The former, also a priest, in the
style of the Sung and Yuan dynasties, following Ma Yuen,
Hia Kwei and Ngan Hwui (Bayefi, Kakei and Ganki),
three of the greatest artists of these periods, and was the
leading supporter of the parent school. He was equally
skilful in landscape, figure, flowers, and birds. Hi^ views,
chie% in ink with a light wash of colour, were not unlike
those of Setsushiu. The chief painters of his time ai^e
said to have used him “ as a ladder to enable them to
climb to the height of the Sung and Yuan dynasties.”
His most noted followers were Nouami and Sauami, both
celebrated professors of the Cha-no-yu or Tea drinking
ceremonies. Woguri Soutan also painted in the Chinese
style of the same periods. His works are now extremely
scarce.

Kano Masanobu, the ancestor of the Kano line, was a
member of the Fujihara family and a retainer of the most
princely of virtuosi, the ShiyauguS Yoshimasa. He was
a pupil of Zhiyosetsu, and afterwards of Shiubufi and
Woguri Soutan, but his powers of brush attracted no special
attention until Setsushiu, having seen one of his pictures,
recommended him to the Shiyauguii as the artist most
competent to complete an unfinished work left by Woguri
Soutafi (350) at Kihkakuzhi near Kiyauto. His style of
painting was a modification of that of the Chinese school,
but without any marked characteristics. His reputation,
considerable during his life, was afterwards eclipsed by that
of his eldest son, Motonobu, the real founder of the great
Kano-riu, He died at the age of 97.

Kano Motonobu was born in the latter part of the 15th
century. Of his early education there is no account, but we
hear that many years of his youth were spent in Bohemian
rambles through the country with empty purse and free
from all encumbrance beyond a change of clothing and a
set of painting implements, stopping to sketch whatever


360


ANDERSON: HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


pleased his eye, and paying his way with the produce of
his brush. His personal character appears to have been
simple and unambitious. The Honteu Guwashi, in which
many detail of his life are given, says that ‘‘even in the
days of his poverty he would never flatter a lord and that
once when Ota Nobunaga, a redoubtable personage in
history,* attracted by the rising reputation of the then poor
artist, went in lordly fashion uninvited into his atelier^
Motonobu administered a silent reproof by working on,
ignoring the existence of his aristocratic visitor, careless
alike of the advantages to be derived from the support of
such a patron and of the danger that might attach to his
enmity.

The fame of the painter spread widely, soon surpassing
that of any of his predecessors except Kanawoka and
Setsushiu, and his position in the artist world was confirm-
ed by his marriage with the daughter of Mitsushige, then
leader of the Tosa riu, thus uniting the two schools that
for more than three centuries afterwards almost monopoliz-
ed the recognized art teaching of Japan. His wife was
herself an artist of no mean powers, and the union resulted
in the birth of three sons, lusetsu, Shiyouyei and Sukeyori,
who all inherited their parents’ talents, and a daughter,
whose husband Yausetsu was adopted into the Kano line.

During his career he received the title of Hofugen, an
honour afterwards conferred upon many of his descendants.
He is commonly called, for the purpose of distinction, “ Ko-
Hofugen,” or the Old Hofugen.

He lived, like Setsushiu, many years beyond the
allotted time, and worked with undiminished vigour almost
to the last. He died in 1559, at the age of 84. It is worthy
of notice that he was born in the same 3^ear as Michael
Angelo, and the short but brilliant career of Raphael sped
(351) during the vigour of the age of the man to whom
Japan points as the author of its greatest school. Moto-
nobu is remarkable for the extreme simplicity of his mate-
rials and the absence of any indication of laborious work.
His chief pictures are ink sketches, plain or slightly tinted,


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


361


dashed in with extraordinary freedom and rapidity, but dis-
playing a force and suggestiveness that we look for in vain
in most of the pupils of his Academy. His early education,
probably transmitted through his father from Zhiyosetsu,
was of Chinese origin, and like Shiubun he followed the
styles of the chief artists of the Sung and Yuan dynasties,

It cannot be said that he diverged widely either in rules or
motive from his models, but his works nevertheless bear
the stamp of unquestionable originality. His landscapes,
mostly imaginary Chinese scenes, possessed a peculiar
charm of composition, and an expressiveness of manipula-
tion that makes the spectator forget the artificiality of the
elements of the scene and the defects of perspective, to
wander in imagination in the mountain passes, or follow
the winding paths leading through rice-fields to the farmer’s
cottage, in the spacious panoramas that the Old Hofugefi
has spread out before him. His sages and immortals were
those depicted by scores of his forerunners in China and
Japan, but every figure derived, like Rembrandt’s portraits,
some intellectual spark from the fire of the painter’s genius.
Even the ancient dragon, whose image traced back in end-
less repetition, becomes lost in the unfathomable perspec-
tive of the past, showed on Ko-HofugeS’s easel an indivi-
duality that separated it from the rest of its mythical tribe,
and supplied a new model for the future myriad adaptations
of its composite outlines to decorative art.

His success is usually considered greatest in landscape,
but so near to the Japanese ideal of perfection did he attain
in all other subjects, that he is likened to the great Chinese
caligrapher Waugishi,^ w^ho, not decidedly superior to cer-
tain among his rivals in any one class of letter, surpassed
all in the versatility which enabled him to execute with
equal beauty every section of the art.

The foreign critic, looking for the first time at the few
remaining works of the artist, listens in wonder to the
praise lavished upon them ; but with patient and repeated
study their influence gradually gr ows upon the sceptic, till

3Wang Hiche. A.D. 321-379* Mayers’ No. 190.


362


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


at length he becomes able to understand, if not to share,
the enthusiasm of the painter’s fellow-countrymen when
they dilate upon his preeminence.

(352) In Motonobu’s time the age of marvellous legends
was not yet ended, and as might be expected, he shared
with other leaders of his craft in the mythical renown so
freel}^ bestowed even upon men of lesser note. The story
best known has a different form from those previously
related. As told in the Guwashi it runs as follows. The
Shiyaugun dreamed that a priestly figure appeared to him
and said, “ I am the Souzhiyau of Kuraniadera. I pray
your Highness that my portrait may be painted by Kano
Motonobu, and that it may be placed in the temple in which
my life was spent.” The sleeper awoke in surprise, and on
telling the dream subsequently to Motonobu, learned that
he too had had a similar visitation. The painter was
commanded to execute the picture, but when his materials
were prepared he could remember nothing of the Souzhiyau’s
form, and as no portrait was extent, he knew not how to
begin. At that moment a spider was seen crawling upon
the untouched sheet, and as Motonobu looked, the web
woven by the insect marked the outlines of the ghostly
suppliant. Thus guided, the painter completed the portrait.
The frame on which the picture was stretched was more
than six feet square, too large to pass through the gateway
of his house, and as the building was very old, he broke the
entrance, and the painting was removed to its destination ;
but the children and girls of his time averred that as soon
as the portrait was completed, a great wind threw down
the gateway and bore away the picture to the temple Kura-
madera, where it remains at the present day.

While Masanobu and Motonobu were inaugurating the
Kano I'iu, Mitsunobu and his son Mitsushige, of the Fuji-
hara clan in Kiyauto, were developing the rival Tosa riu.
Mitsunobu was the originator of the fine-lined drawing
that characterized the latter Tosa-we, and appears to have
held the same position in the older school that Ko-Hofugen
won in the Kano line, and it is to him that the Tosa riu


ANDERSON : HRSTORY 01 ' JAPx\NESE PICTORIx\D ART.


363


ovv^ed its ability to maintain a position in the race with its
more youthful competitor.

No jealousy of opposition appears to have existed at any
time between the two schools. The subjects upon which
they exercised their skill were usually distinct, and their
spheres of action were far apart. The leaders of the Tosa
school remained at Kiyauto, and were best known by ela-
borate illustrations of court life, while the Kano were for the
most part retainers of the Shiyaugun or leading Daimiyau,
and revelled in rapid sketches of landscape, bird, flowers,
popular deities, and Chinese (353) sages and immortals. The
marriage of Ko-HofngeS with the daughter of Mitsushige,
moreover, is likely to have brought the two families into
permanently friendly relations.

During the life of Motonobu the art of ornamental work-
ing in metal, pi'eviously in a very rudimentary condition,
was greatly advanced by Yuuzhiyau, founder of the well
known Gotou family and a personal friend of the great
painter, and it is said that he and his descendants copied
their designs upon sword guards and from the drawings of
the Kano school.

In the early part of the i6th century, Ihasa Matahei, a
pupil of Mitsushige, became distinguished as the first
painter of a class of pictures representing popular customs.
They were originally produced in Ohotsu, the ancient capital
of Japan, and are hence known as Ohotsu-we» The draw-
ings of Matahei are in the manner of the Tosa-we, and are
of considerable interest to the student of the middle period
of Japan ; but the later specimens of Ohotsu-we, which may
still be obtained in considerable numbers at Kiyauto and
Ohosaka, lack the skilful execution of the founder of the
style, and are generally little more than roughly drawn
caricatures.

The early Kano riu artists were carrying on their school
during the Shiyaugunate of Iheyasu, but the great founder
of the Tokugaha dynasty, the Maecenas of letters, lacked
either leisure or inclination to bestow active patronage upon
art. On the other hand, the rough Taikafu was from first


364


ANDERSON r HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


to last the painter’s friend. Whether he was guided by
inherent artistic tastes, by a desire to emulate the dilettanti
Shiyaugun of the Ashikaga line, or by the policy of aiding
the tea ceremonials in distracting the minds of the nobles
and leading samurahi from less peaceful ideas, it is to
Taikafu’s'*' support of the Kano line that the great castles of
the country owe the enormous pictorial embellishments of
their gilded walls ; the work of Yeitoku and Sanraku, the
chief proteges of the terrible Kuwanbaku ; and to him also
Japan is indebted for the preservation of many of the most
celebrated works of the early age of native art ^ and for the
enormous impulse given to the ceramic produce of the
country in the i6th and 17th centuries.

(354) The Kano school could not enjoy the favour of
Hideyoshi without exciting some jealousy. Hasegaha
Touhaku, a soidisant descendant of Setsushiu, had obtained
a reputation for large pictures, but was dissatisfied with the
notice taken of his productions, and combined with Sen no
Rikiu, the great master of the Chiya no yu or Tea-ceremo-
nials, to decry to Hideyoshi the works of the Kano, but
without success.

Yeitoku, the grandson and pupil of Ko-Hofugen, proved
worthy of his descent. His pictures, nearly all of large
si/je, were painted in a coarse but vigorous style, and were
considered among the chief attractions of the great castles
in the decoration of which his services had been engaged.

He died at the age of 48, near the end of the i6th century
His sons Mitsunobu and Takanobu, and Kano Sanraku,
his son-in-law, were all good artists. The latter, whose

* “ Hideyoshi or the Taikafu, better known to foreigners as Taiko
Sama, was the great soldier of fortune who raised himself to the highest
dignity of the Empire, and by reducing the local chieftains to the
subjection which the feebleness of the Ashikaga ShiyauguS had allowed
them to throw off, laid the foundation of the polity which was completed
by Iheyasu.”

^ Notably a screen painted in the gth century by the Empress Fujihara
no Akiko, the mother of Seiwa Tenwau, representing white chrysan-
themums on a ground sprinkled with gold and silver. This was one of
the oldest Japanese works of art in existence at the time.


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


365


real name was Kimura Mitsuyori, was taken while a boy
into the service of Hideyoshi as a page. His master
observing him on one occasion occupied, in oblivion of his
duty and surroundings, sketching a horse in the sand, good-
humouredly commented upon his pictorial tastes and after-
wards oi'dered Yeitoku to take him in hand. It was by the
same command that he entered the Kano famil}^ by in-
termarriage with the daughter of his teache^:.

Takanobu left three sons, Morinobu, Nahonobu, and
Yasunobu, who under the instruction of Yamancto Koui
greatly excelled their father is skill.

Morinobu, more often called Taniu or Taniusai, was the
most celebrated of the Kano line after Ko-Hofugen.

He was appointed Wedokoro Adzukari, and received the
signal honour of a command to paint from life a portrait of
the reigning Emperor; the picture is still to be seen in the
temple Hanshin-win, Kiyauto. A picture of the great Chinese
sages in the South palace of Kiyauto is also from his hand.

Genuine drawings by Taiiiu are now becoming rare, but
large numbers have been handed down by engravings and
copies. They are generally distinguished rather by oripnal-
ity of design and freedom of outline than by any preeminence
in execution, and appear to be in style intermediate between
the works of Setsushiu and Ko-Hofugen, but the mode
of handling the brush varies considerable in the dif-
ferent {355) examples. He seldom made use of pigments
in his pictures, and like the rest of his family, he did not
coniine himself to any one class of subject. A valuable
series of woodcuts from his sketches has been published
in the Guwakou Sen ran (1776), representing the ten kinds
of touch practised by the noted artists of China and Japan, s
and in the Kiyauguwa Wen will be found a number of
caricatures of Buddhist saints and other grave personages
who are usually held sacred, even by^ the Toba-we bar-

houMeurs,

5 Two of the drawings have been reproduced in foreign publications
under the erroneous impression that the figures are made up of the Kata,
kana and Hiragana, to which of course they have no reference.


366


ANDERSON: HISTORV OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


Nahonobu and Yasunobu were inferior to Tafiiu, but
their works are highly esteemed by connoisseurs. The
landscapes of Yasunobu are very striking.

The three brothers were taught by a painter named
Ykmamoto Koui or Ukiyo, who received the rank of
Hotsuldyau and was allowed to adopt the name of Kano
in acknowledgment of the success of his pupils.

The chief remaining celebrities of the Kano school were
Tsunenobu the son of Nahonobu, Tanshin the son of
Tafiiu, Chikanobu the son of Tsunenobu, Toun the son-
in-law of Tatliu, and of the more modern representatives,
Isen, Seisen and Kazunobu. The latter is the painter
of the well-known pictures of the Rakan in the temple of
2?ouzhiyauji in Shiba.

The school numbered many noted names outside the
hereditary line. In addition to those of Sanraku and Koui,
Tsuruzaha Tanzan, a pupil of Tauiu, and Hanabusa
Itsutefu (of whom more will be said hereafter) deserve
special mention.

The reputation of the Tosa school was maintained during
the progress of the Kano riu, but after the time of Mitsuoki,
a grandson of Mitsuiiobu, nothing remarkable came from
its alumni. The better known of the more modern artists
were Mitsuyoshi, Wedokoro in the last century, his son
Mitsusada, and Sumiyoshi Naiki Hirosada, who died about
15 years ago, and whose pictures, still numerous, are
marked by great delicacy of touch and taste in colouring.

At the end of the 17th century an original genius appear-
ed in the person of Hanabusa Itsutefu, a pupil of Kano
Yasunobu, who departed (356) from the traditions of his
teachers so far as to draw most of his subjects from popular
sources and to take liberties with popular religion. His
sketches, mostly humourous, are in style not unlike those
of TaSiu, and have the merit of decided novelty of con-
ception and treatment. His school was named after him,
Itsutefu riu.

About the same time lived Hishigaha Moronobu, a native
of Kiyauto, who also cast off the shackles of tradition and


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART,


367


ventured to follow the example of Matahei in representing
the people and customs of his day, in place of working
the almost exhausted field of Chinese antiquities. His
paintings resemble the Tosa-we in style, and are very
careful in drawing and colouring. He had several follow-
ers, but "“none of great note ; hence the Hishigaha as
it was called, has fallen into obscurity, although its founder
is still celebrated as the author of the Ukiyo-we or popular
style, an honour which, however, should be divided with
Matahei and Itsutefu. After Moronobu and Itsutefu arises
the name of Honnami Kuwauyetsu, the most celebrated
of the Japanese lacquer painters. His pupil Kuwaurin,
chiefly distinguished in the same branch of art as Kuwau-
yetsu, founded a school of pictorial design known as
Kvwaurin which possessed at the beginning of the
present century two noted followers, Hauitsu and his pupil
Kiitsu. The pictures of Kuwaurin and Hauitsu have too
much mannerism and too little resemblance to nature to
please the European eye, but Kiitsu has left some clever
works. Kenxan, the brother of Kuwaurin, was a \yell
known ceramic artist.

The mass of the paintings executed in the eighteenth
century merely swelled the old sluggish stream of pictorial
platitudes, but at the end of the period a fresh and more
healthful spring was opened b}’' Maru3^ama Oukiyo, the first
artist who had the boldness to'^demonstrate that something
better might be learned fronn nature than from the orthodox
teachers. The result of his labours was the foundation
of the Shideu riu. The professed principle of the new
school was to paint directly from natural objects : had it
been fully acted upon the position of Japan in the art world
would now have been a very different one, but Oukiyo had
not strength to break the bonds imposed by the example of
the great painters of his country, and the new element was
seriously weakened by admixture with the did, 1 he skill of
the artist saved the school from the condemnation that the
(357) heresy of its basis appeared to deserve, and his works
became so greatly sought after that the demand soon ex-


368


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


ceeded the supply, and hundreds of barefaced forgeries were
produced to supply the deficiency, a fact which the foreign
collector will do well to bear in mind.

The originals are distinguished b}^ great delicacy and
freedom of execution, and by the absence of many of the
conventional distortions of the Chinese school. The efiects
of Oukiyo’s teaching were most prominent in landscape.
The curiously inverted laws of perspective previously ac-
cepted could not withstand the test of the mpst superficial
observation, and hence in most of the Shideu sketches and
in those of the later popular school which adopted similar
rules, fewer prominent errors strike the eye ; but even the
Shideu artist, when he introduces an object of mathematical
shape, fails to see the necessity for vanishing points, and is
satisfied with a parallel perspective. The only followers
of Oukiyo who have done much to sustain the reputation of
the school were Genki and Kikuchi Yousai. The latter, an
artist of the last generation, is the author of the Zen-ken
ko-^hitsu, a collection of historical portraits unequalled in
truth and originality by anything of the same kind produced
in Japan.

The foundation of the Shideu riu was accompanied by
the formation of two new styles, both differing but slight!}"
from the Kara-we, the Bimteti riu by Tani Bunteu and the
Ganku riu by Utanosuke Ganku. Bunyo, Bunshin and
Bunrin were noted followers of the first, Gantai of the
second.

The pure Chinese school had been kept rather in the
background after the rise of the Kano riu, and from the
time of Shiubun and his pupils its chief adherents were
found among the priesthood until the latter part of the
eighteenth century, when some doughty champions of the
parent art appeared in Zhiyakuchiu, Riu Rikiyou, Tai-
gadau, Sou Shiseki, Uchida Gentai and Yuuhi. These
were succeeded by Ohonishi Keisai, Haruki Nanko, Shiuzan,
Kanrin, Chinzan, Sorin, Kuwazan, Shiuki, and a few others.
The efforts of the revivalists succeeded in raising the Kara
riu far above the stale mannerisms into which the rival


ANDERSON .* HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


369


schools were beginning to degenerate, but not until a
stronger opponent was at hand.

The beginning of the 19th century brought into the field a
new set of artists whose designs, reproduced on lacquer,
pottery and' porcelain, in (3 58) bronze, wood and ivory,
were destined to caiTy the fame of the decorative art of the
Japanese over the whole of the civilized world. These men,
simple artisans, with Hokusai at their head, formed the
modern Ukiyo-we or popular school, and signalized them-
selves as the movers in the first assertion of the intellectual
independence of their class. They had until that time been
content to admire respectfully the works of their titled and
two-sworded superiors, who, almost monopolizing the edu-
cational culture as well as the military and civil domination
of the country, had hitherto found little difficulty in limiting
the practice of art to their own body. It is true that a kind
of popular art had been originated by Ihasa Matahei.
Hishigaha Moronobu, and to |ome extent by Hanabusa
Itsutefu ; but all three of these painters were noted pupils of
orthodox academies, and kept the new fashion within the
sarimmlii circle, while Hokusai, the soul of the Ukiyo-we,
was a man of the people, and made no attempt to emerge
from the station in which he was born. Perfectly contented
with the appreciation of those with whom he lived and for
whom he laboured, the chief aim of his ambition was the
foundation of the great and essentially popular school, to
which we owe directly or indirectly the artisan artist of the
present day and the most truly characteristic art ever prac-
tised in Japan.

The only printed records of Hokusai’s life are found in the
prefaces to his works. The following fiicts were obtained
partly from these and partly from a manuscript book of biogra-
phical sketches of recent artists and novelists, written in 1S56.

* He was born at Honzhiyo in Yedo in the year 1760, and
was the son of Nakazhima Ise, a mii*ror-maker. The first
forty-five or fifty years of his life were spent in comparative
obscurity. Plis public career did not commence until about
1810, when he was induced to take a wider range of action


370


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


by establishing himself in Yedo as an industrial artist and
teacher of drawing. Pupils quickly flocked to him, and his
original sketches being insufficient to provide them with
models, he was led to multiply them by engravings, and to
this end the publication of the Manguwa or Ten Thousand
Sketches was commenced. The novelty and beauty of
the wood“Cuts attracted immediate attention, and the
draughtsman and teacher became almost at once a celebrity
in a wide though humble sphere. His fame grew as
volume after volume of his book appeared and edition after
edition sold, and there wei'e not (359) wanting learned and
clever men to write admiring prefaces to each issue,
imitators to print rival works and a multitude of pupils
of his own class to perpetuate his name and style. There
was nothing in his pictures to shock the taste of the more
aesthetically constituted of his admirers, no lack of gravity
or dignity in his saints and sages, of might and flerceness
in his warriors, or of artless beauty in his renderings of his
gentle compatriots, but his real strength lay in the popular
sketches in which the everyday life of the people was mir-
rored with a truth that could come only from one of whose
life these things formed a part — a truth that on-lookers
from another world, like Moronobu and Itsutefu, could
never attain ; a truth, moreover, brightened by flashes of
the native humour of the artist and never defaced by
coarse, ill-tempered, or ‘misconceiving caricature. Their
ceremonials and amusements, their historical landmarks,
their folk-lore and the homely jokes that repetition could
not spoil were there in characters that the most unlearned
could read, while at every page a well known view, a
common bird or insect, a household pet, a favourite flower,
or some other of the thousand objects of daily familiarity
found a graceful record in a few suggestive touches of the
artist’s magic pencil. It is impossible to conceive a work
more calculated to influence those for whom it was intend-
ed, or to give the student of Old Japan a more complete
view of the sentiments and tastes of the easy-going peace-
ful millions of the people.


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART. 37 1

Hokusai’s invention was by no means exhausted by his
“Ten Thousand Sketches.” Book after book followed at
short intervals, each bearing the stamp of the same quick
perception and facile touch. But here only a few of his
productions can be referred to. The Wehon Suwikoden,
containing loS portraits of celebrated Chinese heroes,
appeared in 1828; the Fugaku Hiyakukei or hundred
views of Fuzhi, in some respects the masterpiece of the
artist, in 1836 ; the Wehon Saki-Gake, Musashi Abumi,
and other works in the following year, together with the
later volumes of the Manguwa. At this time he was
nearly eighty, in robust health, and his eyes, clear and
true as at the beginning of his career, were independent
of the optician’s aid.® How little impairment of his facul-
ties old>age had brought is proved by the production of
many subseqent works, among the latest and best of
(360) which were the Wehon Saishi Mitsu and the Wakan
Homare. He died in 1849, at the age of eighty-nine.

Hokusai found his only reward during life in the warm
admiration of his fellows, and never received any mark
of recognition of his labours from higher quarters.
While dozens of painters of mediocre ability but of gentle
birth, bearing the warrants of the school of Tosa or Kano,
gained rank and pension for insipid repetitions of academy
traditions, Hokusai exercised his genius for the scanty pay
of the book draughtsman, and had no title beyond that
assumed by himself in his old age, Man ran zliin “the old
man of a hundred centuries”. But now, more than twenty
years after his death, his fame is extending where the
names of Kanawoka, Ko-Hofugen, and Setsushiu, are
unknown, and Japanese art gains its brightest luster from
a man for whom compatriot connoisseurs scarce find a
place in the roll of native artists. What he might have
produced had his perceptions received all the advantages
of an intellectual training by a Ruskin it is impossible to
say ; but it is probable that all he could have gained in solid
fame would have failed to compensate for the sacrifice of


^ iSee the preface to the Musashi Abumi.


372


.ANPIiRSON ; HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


the marvellous and widely diffused influence exercised upon
millions of his fellow countrymen by his multitudinous
sketches. He has given life to a popular art which can
hardly he said to have had any previous existence except
in name, and which will always And admirers and students
when the state of things it has registered shall have been
swept away by the advancing* tide of civilization.

A criticism of the thousands of wood cuts from his
sketches would require a volume ; of the original drawings
nothing can be said, as they were sacrificed in the process
of engraving, and few, if any, of his paintings are now
in existence.

The contemporaries and successors of Hokusai in the
“ Ukiyo-we” are numerous. The best known of these are
Keisai Hiroshige, Keisai Yoshinobu, . Utagalia Tpyokuni,
Utagaha or Ichiyuusai Kuniyoshi, Hasegaha Setsutan,
the artist of the Yedo Meishiyo and his son Setsutei,
Riusen Shigenobu, and a few of the pupils of Hokusai,
among whom may be named Wisai, Hokukei, Hokujiu and
Hokumei. The best works after those of the Man rau
zhin are the Keisai Uki}^ Guwa Fu, by Keisai Hiroshige,
the Kuwateu Sansui Guwa Fu by Wisai and the Wisai
Guwa Shiki, all in the style of the Manguwa ; the Honteu
(361) Suwikoden by Ichiyuusai Kuniyoshi, a model of
native chromo-xylography, and the Toyokuni Toshida
Mafude, by Ichiyausai Toyokuni. The drawings which
approach most nearly to those of Hokusai in grace and
versatility are those of Wisai, with whose name our list,
reaching but not including the present generation, must
terminate.

It must not be supposed that the painters referred to
in this short history form even as much one-tenth of
those of whom record is preserved with veneration by
the art connoisseurs of the country, but it is impossible to
include more than the most prominent names without
swelling the sketch into an inconveniently arranged bio-
graphical dictionary. The list if complete would be seen
o include many names known to fame in other spheres of


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


373


action, among which are those of the Emperors Seiwa,
Uda, Rei^ei and Kuwa^an, Sugahara no Micimane, the
great Kuwanbaku Kiyomori, the Ashikaga Shiyaugun
Takauji, Yoshimochi and Yoshimasa, the warriors Knsuno-
ki Masashige and Takeda Shingen, the swordsman Miya-
moto Musashi, the great priests Shiyautoku Taishi,
Koubofu daishi, Chishiyou daishi, Nichiren and Itsukiu,
and court and feudal nobles without number, nearly all
coming under the denomination of hunzhht or amateurs,
as distinguished from the professional painters.

Only a few of the fairer sex contributed to the pictorial
treasures of their countr3L The Empress Fujihara no
Akiko, the Nun Chiyuuzhiyau Hime, the daughter of
Ki3'‘omori, the wife of Ko-Hofugen, the wife of Taigadau,
and some others are named in books, but their works are
seldom to be met with at the present day.

The European critic must not be astonished to find that
many of the works which he considers among the most
admirable, come from the brush of painters unappreciated
or altogether unknown b}^ their countrymen, to whom our
standard of excellence is as yet a mystery.

During the past few years the tide of foreign thought has
broken down the old barriers of isolation, and while it is
sweeping away much that might well have been spared, it
is removing the accumulated dust of tradition and prejudice
that defaced or concealed man}*^ natural beauties in pictorial
art as in most things else. The present peidod is one of
transition, the older school of painting is disappearing, and
the more inferior of the modern draughtsmen for the most
part make a wretched compromise between the native
styles and what they (362) consider the Western method,
adding to the defects of outline of the former a feeble
mimicry of the latter in a travest}^ of chiaroscuro and an
unintelligent attempt at perspective, perpetrating a tawdry
trash, that unhappily finds a too easy market in Europe
and America. The ancient skill is by no means lost ; there
are yet workers who can equal in execution and originality
of design almost anything that has been produced in former


374


ANDERSON : HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


times ; but pictorial art, as seen in the Kake^^hi and
Makimono of the past, is doomed ; the style can only
survive for a time in the decoration of porcelain and lacquer,
and then a curious and in many respects beautiful phase
of ancient art will have changed its form, Let us hope
that the European school recently founded in Toukiyau
by the Imperial Government will meet the success the ex-
periment deserves, and that the quaint, cleverly stunted
art of Japan, released from its academical clippings and
trainings, will develope into a natural and nobler growth,
worthy of the soil in which it has been planted.


The subject will be brought within more easy grasp by a
review of the relations between the art of Japan and that
brought into the countr}’- from abroad. Before entering
into this it will, however, be necessary to give a short
account of the parent art of China and Korea, in order that
the claims of Japanese art to originality may be fairty
considered. The source of multitudinous errors in the
writings of foreign authors is a want of knowledge of the
older productions of the neighbouring country with which
the history, and perhaps the very origin, of the Japanese
are so intimately associated. No materials for a complete
history of Chinese and Korean art appear to exist in Japan,
but Japanese connoisseurs have collected the names of some
thousands of the most famous painters of the two countries^
and have preserved large (363) numbers of the original
pictures imported from time to time during intercourse
with the Asiatic continent. Unfortunately the European
and i\merican residents in China who have done so much

7 In the Gen Min Sei Shiyoguwa ^hinmei Roku (catalogue of caligra-
phists and artists of the Yuen, Ming and Ts’ing dynasties), published
in 1777, three thousand names are given, with a statement of the
subjects (birds, figure, landscape, etc.) in which each painter specially
excelled ; and in the Kun-in Hoshiyau are printed several hundreds of
fac-similes of seals used by the leading artists of Korea and China. The
most honoured Chinese masters are Wa Taotsz’ (Godaushi) of the T’ang
dynasty, the Emperor Hwuitsung (Kisou Kuwautei), Ngan Hwui (Ganki),


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART»


375


to make known to the world the language, literature and
religion of the country, have left the question of art
untouched.

The origin of painting in China is lost in remote ages,
but reliable historical information is of comparatively
recent date. Little is known of the art of the T’ang
dynasty, although it was during this period that painting
and many other branches of art were introduced into Japan,
and it is not until the beginning of the Sung dynasty^
(960 A.D.) that fact can be disentangled from legend.

The Kara •we, as known in Japan, is nominallj^' .divided
into the fashions of the four dynasties Sou, Gen Min and
Sei (Sung, Yuen, Ming and Tshng); but a more practical
classification separates it into the styles of Shin, Sau and
Giyau, which have their graphic analogues, respectively^
in the formal square character, the curvilinear character or
“ running hand,” and the modification intermediate be-
tween these (examples of all of which may be seen in
almost any Japanese printed book). Thus a drawing in
the Shin fashion is characterized by the careful formation
of every touch, the Sau sketch is rapidly dashed off with
a free brush, while the style of Giyau is midway between
these. The main characteristics of the older Chinese art,
almost identical with those of early Japanese art (which
will hereafter be described in detail), may be briefly sum-
marized as follows ; — Composition, nearly^ alway^s good,
though unguided by W'ritten laws ; the grouping of figures
and accessories contributing as far as possible to tell the
story of the picture and to please the ey’’e. Drawing,
almost invariably conventional, except in the representa-
tions of monkeys, birds and certain specimens of vegetable


Hia Kwei (Kakei) and Ma Yuen (Bayen) of the Sung dynasty ; Chao
Tsz’-ang (Teusugau) and Muh K’i (Mokukei) of the Yuen dynasty;
Wan Chingming (Bunchiyaumei), a celebrated calligrapher also, Wan
Chin (Bunshin), Lii Ki (Riyoki), Cheu Chimien (Shiushiben) and Chang
Ki (Chiyauki) of the Ming dynasty; and I Fukiu, Ching Weip’ei
(Teiibai) and Ch’an Nanphng (Chinnanpin) of the Ts’ing or present
dynasty.


376 ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART,


life ; the outlines of human figures and of most mammalia
incorrect, although the action is commonly truthful and
spiidted, and the proportions true. Manipulation^ almost
(364) invariably good, constituting, in fact, the most im-
portant element in the eyes of the native connoisseur, with
whom painting was looked upon as a kind of caligraphy^
Laws of perspective, unknown, but replaced by strangely
perverted rules : thus the landscape painter finds it absolutely
necessary to reduce the size of distant objects, but sees no
inconsistency in widening the further extremity of any
cubical ^object that may find a place on the picture ; again,
although he elevates the horizontal line, he draws the
foreground from the level of the plain. He has* of course
no conception of vanishing points. Colouring, nearly
always tasteful, the Chinese being masterly in the skilful
distribution of harmonies and contrasts ; the tints are
Seldom gaudy, and gold is more sparingly used than by
the Japanese. Many of the greatest artists preferred to use
black ink without intermixture with colour: drawings in
silhouette, chiefly representing the bamboo or orchid, are
constantly met with, and the rapid ink sketches which are
ofter erroneously supposed to be of Japanese origin are of
very ancient date in China. Chiaroscuro, entirel}^ omitted,
unless a little shading of the folds of garments or beneath
the prominent markings of the face can be considered to
represent it. Projected shadows are never depicted.

It will be seen that the Chinese artist, although taking
the elements of his work more or less remotely from the
real objects, seldom or never drew the entire picture from
nature, and in most cases w^as content to accept without
question from his predecessors the interpretation of facts
that were perfectly open to his own observation. That he
had at least a theoretical estimation of natural models is,
however, shown by many well known legends ; as in that
which tells how Ch’an Hung, a celebrated painter of
horses in the Sung dynasty, when the Emperor enquired
from whom he had learned his art, replied, ‘^From the
horses in Your Majesty’s stables.” But the professed


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


377


recognition of such a principle unfortunately involved no
obligation to put it into practice.

It is impossible to define any distinctions between the
styles of the different dynasties, nor has an}" attempt to do
so been made by Japanese writers, as the changes induced
by time were very gradual and constantly interrupted by
reversions on the part of leading artists to the types of
previous ages. The tendency to laudation of the ancient
in art as in literature led to an almost blind reverence for
rules laid down by the great men of remote times, and
although many modifications and a few (365) improve-
ments are seen in later works, they are not of sufficient
importance to afford a basis for a true separation of art
periods.

The present position of pictorial art in China can be
demonstrated only by residents in parts not overrun by
foreigners. Of a few recent specimens brought from Peking
by the Hon. J. Saumarez of the British Legation, Yedo, some
bear a remai'kable resemblance- to the later Japanese Kano-
ke and Kara-we, and fully equal the average of these in
execution, while others, of a popular character, testify to
the existence in the Celestial mind of a sense of humour
which would surprise the Europeans who found their ideas
of Chinese art upon a study of the designs on tea chests
and willow-pattern plates. It is certain, however, that the
modern productions which reach Europe and America
through ordinary channels are immeasurably inferior to
those of past centuries, and are altogether unworthy of
comparison with the work of young Japan. In purely
decorative art it is probable that the Chinese have for many
years been distanced by their insular neighbours, owing to
the creation in Japan of the educated artisan-artist by the
Hokusai Ukiyo-we.'

The Chinese school, almost in its purity, still exists in
Japan. Introduced by the personal teaching of the Korean
and Chinese artists, who entered the country in the period
extending from the 5th to the 9th century, and by the pas-
sive influence of the paintings brought from China by


378


ANDERSON; HISTORV OK JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


Koubofu daishi and others of the early travellers, it had
strength to exist while the Butsu-we monopolized the best
effoits of the native painters, and to survive the formal
schools of Nobuzane and Takuma, that threatened to
replace it by a showy pageant of costume and ceremony.
Its revival commenced by Zhiyosetsu, carried on by Shiu-
bun and his followers, and with slight modifications by
Setsushiu, and hy Ko*Hofugen and the Kano riu, was
stimulated anew by the Chinese Ch’an Nanp’ing, I Fukiu
and others, who in the last century made a fresh art centre
in Nagasaki, and it has during the past three or four
generations produced many of the best specimens of Jap-,
anese pictorial skill. So far was the study of the Kara-we
carried, that in the biographical accounts of distingushed
'Japanese artists we find that the majority avowedly
modelled their styles upon the works of one or other
of the old Chinese masters, such as Ma Yuen, Mu Kh',
Hia Hwui, etc,, and native critics can find no higher
expression of praise than that implied in a comparison
with one of these.

(366) The Kaumuwe 0/ Korean style is a sort of provincial
first-cousin to the Kara-we, and, although usually a little
coarser in execution, resembles it in all essential respects.
The artist who accompanied the Korean ambassadors to
Japan, in 1877, ^ sketches, two of which, in

the possession of the writer, are indistinguishable from
works of the Chinese painters of the Ming period, and
would require a very well -trained eye to demonstrate that
they are not from the brush of a Japanese of the Kara riit.

The Bntsu-we or Bnddhist style was undoubtedly the first
with which Japan made acquaintance, and nearly all the
early paintings referred to in the native historical woi'ks
were of this class. Internal evidence shows that although
brought to Japan and taught there by Korean and Chinese
painters, its origin is distinct from that of the Kara-we and
Kaurai-we. The features given to the pictured deities are
not Mongolian in type ; the horizontal direction of the
fissure between the eyelids, the comparative prominence


379


ANDERSON ; HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.

and the deiicate moulding of the nose chin, and the sensual
but well-formed lips unprotruded by prognathous jaws, re-
mind us of the Indian prince, but bear no resemblance to
the Chinese mandarin. The colouring, too, in its richness,
in its bold contrasts, in the use of bright body pigments,
and in the overlaying of garments with scrolls and diapers
of gold, recalls the decorative art of India, but offers no
points of relationship to the coniparatively sober hues of
the best schools of Chinese painting.

The drawing of Buddhist subjects is strictly conventional,
but in the better specimens shows signs in the outline of
face, limbs and uncovered portions of the body, of a higher
sense of the beauty of natural form than is obsei'vable in
the .secular schools.

In subjects the artist had little scope. He occasionally
found an opportunity for displaying some little originality
in the portraiture of a noted bishop or martyr, or in the
writhings of the damned in the torture chambers of the
hells that priestly ingenuity had invented to terrify the
believers into piety ; but as a rule he was limited to the
repetition of Buddhas, Bbdhisattvas, Arhi,n, Asuras, and
the rest of the saintly and demoniacal army of the religion,
in attitudes, groupings and colours fixed by tradition ; and
although within the limits prescribed the painters com-
monly displayed extraordinary skill and patience, none, Teu
Densu excepted, could made any claim to great eminence
in the craft.

(367) The chief artists of the Butsu-we, like the mediaeval
illuminators of Europe, were monks who worked lovingly
and untiringly in the seclusion of the temple, bequeathing
the fruit of their life’s labour to the sacred place that had
given them shelter. The names of many have failed to
reach us, as the picture, hallowed by its motive, would
have been considered desecrated by the imprint of other
characters than those composing prayers, and hence bears
no record of the painter. The Buddhist priesthood of the
present day appears to receive little reverence in Japan,
but it was different in past ages, when books were filled


3^0


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


with the lives of holy men who, careless of temporal re-
ward, carried out in self-denial the grand principles that
underlie alike the tenets of the Buddhist and the Christian
creeds. With many of these the painter’s art was a form
of prayer, and the devotee would set himself a daily task
of industry that left his temple rich in curious works. They
appear to have been favoured extraordinary visions,
some of these old artist priests, if we may believe such
stories as those already related of Shinsai and Teu Densu ;
and others, equally wonderful, like that which tells how
the blaming god Fudou, armed with his two-edged sword
and binding rope, appeared to Chishiyou Daishi, that the
monk might give to the world a true image of the terrific
form of the deity, and how Taigeri Miyauwau for the same
purpose suddenly manifested his presence to Zhiyaugeu
Azhiyari beside the sacred well at Akishino. But the race
is nearly ended, and perhaps the last of the true Butsu-we
has already left the monastic atelier. Yet even in these
degenerate days we may sometimes see remains of, the
veneration formerly lavished upon such works in the
formality and reverence with which the priest takes from
the innermost box the treasured Amida, Fudou or Kuwanon,
and raises the precious roll to his forehead before he pro-
ceeds to display its beauties to the awed or curious visitor ;
but foreign gold has tempted the more needy or avaricious
of the brotherhood to disperse in thousands over the lands
of the heretics, the possessions once held too sacred for
the unhallowed gaze of common men.

Buddhist subjects were frequently painted by the secular
artist in the style of the school to which he belong'ed, but
these pictures are not classed with true Butsu-we, which
were alw^ays distinguished both by the character of the pain-
ting and by certain peculiarities in the mounting.

(3 68) A review of the historical facts now collated is
sufficient to show that the art of Japan can claim no higher
position than that of an offshoot of the art of China. We
find that the art laws brought from Korea and China,
thirteen or fourteen centuries ago, have been followed more


ANDERSON: HISTORY OF jAPANEvSE PICTORIAL ART. 381

or less closely even to the present generation, and that
the most venerated painters of the country were those who
imitated most successfully the models with which the
fpreign lands had provided them. Kanawoka, the earliest
of the native artists (excluding the few amateurs referred
to in ancient books), was a pupil of a Chinese immigrant,
and adhered in every important respect to the rules learned
from his teacher. Motomitsu, Nobuzane, Takuma Tame-
3mki, Sumiyoshi Hofugen, Shiba Hofugen, Ahadaguchi
Hofugen and Fujihara no Tsumetaka, who may be con-
sidered to have inaugurated a new style, the Yamato-we^
unquestionably sunk below the model, although the^^ de-
serve the credit of having applied the knowledge derived
from China to the registration of historical events, court
ceremonials and the costumes of the period. Toba Sou-
zhiyau was an original and talented caricaturist, but the
Toha-we can scarcely be considered an important or dis-
tinctive section of Japanese art. The reversion to the pure
Chinese school under Zhiyosetsu, Woguri Soutan and
Shiuban, with whom we might almost associate Setsushiu,
showed that the branch thrown out under the cultivation
of the court painters had not weakened the parent stem.
The Kano school, the influence of which was paramount
from the time of Motonobu, diverged but slightly from the
Kara-we, and certainly did not improve upon its qualities
in any respect. In the latest and perhaps best work of
this academy, the sixteen Rakan by Kano Ka^unobu, the
manner of execution was almost purely Chinese. The
Ganku and Bunteu riti are also simple modifications of
the Kara-we. In the Yamato-we and its outcome, the
Tosa rill, however, we find a difference in motive and
unmistakeable chai'acteristics of execution, but all the er-
rors of the Chinese school are carefully preserved or even
exaggerated, while much of its beaut}^ is sacrificed. The
artists of the Tosa riu sometimes painted animals, birds,
■fiowers, etc., in the Chinese manner with great success,
and some of the most spirited sketches of horses in Japan
are by old masters in this school. The Kuwauriii Tiu is


382 ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


little more than a caricature of the Tosa riu and old
Ukiyo-we.

Matahei, Hishigaha Moronobu and Itsutefu extended the
application (369) of the Tosa and Kano styles to subjects
of a more familiar kind than those which had previously
been selected, but we still look in vain for anything to
replace the old false principles until the advent of Maru-
yama Oukiyo, who at length showed a path to an entire
reconstruction of the art of his country. Unfortunately
he lacked either the courage or the talent to illustrate
his principle in all its truth, and having to work at
a time when the Kano and Tosa schools were strong
in popular estimation, and the Chinese school under
Ch’an Nanp’ing, I Fukiu and others was drawing pow-
erful adherents, the righteous cause of the Shideu riu
declined for want of active support, and the style took
only an insignificant place in the race with its older
rivals. - But at last the commencement of the nineteenth
century gave Japan, in the new Ukiyo-w& of Katsushika
Hokusai, the right to boast a truly national art, which,
although adapted from the old models, the only ones
available, and still tainted with many antiquated errors,
abounded in novelty and character, and showed unlimit-
ed capabilities of development. But the Chiya-zhin,
the men who led the educated world in matters of
literary and artistic taste, were all lawlatores tcmporis
acti, and closed their ears when the plebeian draughts-
men were - spoken of, for to the critic painting was
essentially an occupation appertaining to gentle birth
and classical culture : its practice, once almost con-
fined to royalty and nobility, never descended below the
Samurahi, and thoilgh not strictly hereditary, was so
far transmitted by family descent and adoption that more
than one half of the names known to fame belonged to
a few ancient lines. Such a system had perhaps some
advantage in favouring the development of inherited
talent, but its supporters failed to perceive how serious-
ly detrimental it had proved to the progress of art in


ANDERSON : HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART,


383


Stereotyping erroneous traditions and in preventing the culti-
vation of the germs of greatness which as might have been
learned from Chinese history, could spring up even in the
shambles. 2 But the Ukijm-we became an established fact in
spite of the contemptuous neglect of those who should have
been its patrons, and its outcome, the artisan artist^ has
given to the world at large not only the wealth of strange
ideas and manual skill so long imprisoned by the pride of
seclusion, but has (370) added to it no small portion of the
sum of originality to which it can la}^ claim. He is com-
monly nothing but a copyist, but he is a skilful one, and re-
peats with the e3^e of understanding the experiences of form
and colour that have accumulated during the preceding ages :
his models, with their absence of light and shade and of strict
accuracy of detail, are far less difficult to imitate than would
be the more advanced works of the European schools and, as
a trifle supplies him with the necessaries of life, his skill
may be exercised on the cheapest and simplest objects. But
side b}^ side with him w^e may find labouring diligently over
a netsiike^ colouring a vase or sketching a design for a wood
cut, the inventor^ gifted with talents of a very high order,
telling us in his own manner the history and legends of his
country, showing quaint touches of his own mother-wit, or
putting into form an original observation of some simple oft-
repeated motive of bird or flower. Many such men, even in
the present da^’^ of mone^^-making, have that artist love of
their handicraft which leads them to add patientljq day by
day, during months or years, little touches to the slowly groov-
ing work that haste or ill-timed devotion would spoil or rend-
er tasteless ; and when all is done, the price yields him little
more than^the daily pay of a mason or a tailor, while the
crafty middle-man or merchant may grow rich on the skill
which is so little profitable to the producer.


2The three greatest heroes in Chinese history, Chang Fei (Chiyauhi),
Kwan Yu (Kuwan-u) and Liu Pei (Gentoku), who lived in the 3rd
century, rose from the occupations, respectively, of butcher, bean-curd
seller and shoemaker. Their portraits will be found in every large
collection of Japanese and Chinese paintings.


384 ANDERSON : HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.

The estimation of pictoial art in Japan is perhaps as
high as in Europe, and the power of intelligent criticism is
not less widely diffused ; but the canons of taste in the
West and the Far East are so different that a few remarks
on the subject are necessary.

The popular appreciation of a school or of an individual
painter must not be overrated. It certainly indicates in
the works admired the possession of certain marked
qualities, but not necessarily those of a high artistic order,
which are recognizable only to the cultivated few; and
even the accepted oracles, as the history of art, like that
of literature and science, constantly shows us, are not
always among the enlightened, but too often set up an
utterly false standard of excellence. In Japan the point
upon which the judgment of a picture centered was
caligraphic manipulation. Fidelity to nature was alto-
gether secondary, and hence a sketch with scarcely a line
of truth might be highly valued, while an (371) attempt at
a faithful rendering of the aspect of an object might be
condemned as ‘‘vulgar” or “without taste.” This ma}^
enable us to realize the fact that caligraphy holds with the
Japanese, as with the Chinese, a position at the least equal
to that of painting; that Kose no Kanawoka and Wono no
Toufuu, the great artist and the great writer of the ninth
century, are honoured alike, and that a single character of
Waugishi^ will command as high a price as a masterpiece
by Godaushi. There is of course no point of comparison
between the ordinary handwritings of England and Ger-
many and the domplex minutely proportioned characters
invented by the Chinese. An ordinary Japanese or Chinese
student will in a year or two acquire a power of writing our
current hand as well or better than his teacher; but the
foreigner who, after a decade of persevering effort, fails to
produce a letter that could be mistaken by a well-educated

SWaugishi (Wang Hiche) was a celebrated Chinese caligrapher of
the fourth century, and Wu Taotsz’ (Godaushi), his countryman, one
of the great masters of painting under the T’ang Dynasty about four
hundred years later.


ANDERSON : HISTORY OP JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


385


native for the work of a skilled hand, will understand the
prominence that the accomplishment holds in the educa**
tional system of the countiy. It is noticeable that the
Japanese word kakii has, like the Greek ypa(j)Zi'u^ the double
signification of writing and painting.

Such terms as ^Mife-like ” and ^‘natural” are constantly
used in works upon Art, and most of the marvellous
anecdotes of pictorial skill centre upon the preternatural
fidelity of a painting to nature ; but the significance of both
the expressions and the stories is very limited, and is con-
stantly contradicted by the details of native criticism upon
the works of special painters.

The criticism of pictures as to age, authenticity and
merit is much cultivated in Japan, and so great is the
reliance placed upon the judgment of certain connoisseurs
that their dicta are accepted as indisputable facts by the
many who, finding satisfaction and repose in simple faith,
delight to chant the strange tongue of ^‘aestheticism” in
unison with the voice of the orthodox high priests of Art.
It is impossible to analyjs^e the unwritten rules of native
art criticism ; they are handed down from man to man by
direct demonstration, and are cultivated year after year by
minute untiring study of all the specimens that eagerly
sought opportunity can afibrd. And there is no doubt that
certain men develope (372) remarkable powers of discrimina-
tion of characteristics too slightly pronounced to be suscep-
tible of verbal definition ; but such a capacity has its
dangers, and unquestionably in many cases leads its
possessor, unaccustomed to contradiction, to presume upon
the faith c f his audience,— a failing not altogether unknown
among experts in other parts of the world.

The only written attempt to guide the unlearned that has
been brought under the notice of the author is in the Guwa-
kou sen rail, published in 1760. Some of the passages in
this have so much the ring of true metal, and others indicate
such a shrewd consciousness of the existence of counterfeit
coin, that it may be worth while to give a few specimens.

“ It is often very difficult, even for the experienced judge,


386 ANDERSON: HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.

to pronounce an opinion upon a picture, and hence, if he
feel a doubt in his heart, he should study the work again
and again. In early times there was an artist — the best
of his period — named Yen Lihpan of T'ang (China). One
day he went to Kiangling and was shown a picture drawn
by Chang Sangyiu upon the wall of a temple. He w^as
at first disappointed, and believed that the celebrity of the
painting was due rather to the renowui of the artist than to
any intrinsic beauties ; but on a second visit he perceived
in it some indications of talent, and felt that it came from
no common hand. He returned to his house reflecting
upon what he had seen, and as his recollections gave him
much pleasure, he went a third time to repeat his examina-
tion, and then he saw^ in every line and touch the evidence
of skill and judgment, and that genuine taste reigned
throughout, and he sat many days before it, forgetting to
eat and sleep. We must hence remember that the works
of great artists are not to be estimated by their attrac-
tiveness at first sight, but must be earnestly studied before
they can be correct^ appreciated.”

A little further on we meet with some notable comments
upon the false criticism dictated by interest or politeness.

It often happens that a wealthy man wishes to buy an
expensive picture, but being unable to form an opinion as
to its authenticity, consults a person reputed as a judge.
The adviser, misled by ignorance or actuated by bribery, may
say falsely that the painting is genuine. Consequently the
rich man buys at a high price and believing his possession
an original, shews it with pride to his friends, (373) who
praise it highly and talk of it to others. But when a man
having ‘ real eyes ’ sees it, he detects its falsity and smiles
inwardly. The picture is handed clown to the descendants
of the buyer, until at length one of these wishes to sell
it, and then the deception is brought to light.”

In making an examination of a picture, the mind of
the judge must be unbiassed and free from self-interest in
the decision : if his personal benefit be concerned, he may
wilfully close his eyes to the truth or falsehood of the work,


ANDERSON : HISTORY OF JAPANESE PICTORIAL ART.


3«7


perhaps pronouncing a counterfeit genuine to please a
friend or to obtain a bribe ; or, wishing to buy the painting
cheaply, he condemns it as a forgery, though believing it
authentic,”

The practical rules given are as follows : A picture

should not be examined by the light of a lamp ; or during
times of feasting and drinking ; or on a day on which
there is rain, snow, wind, smoke, clouds or mist ; or in the
twilight ; lest the intention of the painter be made invisible
or the picture be injured. Ordinary people are ignorant
of the manner in which a painting should be looked at :
they put their hands upon it or bring their faces very close.
But to study a picture properly it should be hung upon the
wall and seen first at a distance — afterwards nearer — to
observe the touch and colouring. The silk mounting need
not be regarded, since counterfeits are always adorned with
rich brocades to deceive the eyes of the on-lookers. First
distinguish whether the painting is Chinese or Japanese,
then examine the silk or paper, then the effect of the
painting, then judge of the period of its execution — ^whether
recent or old — notice the colour of the ink, and lastly find
the meaning of the artist ; but do not look at the stamp.
Roll up the picture and put it in its box, and later on —
at midday — examine it again with care, and comparing
the opinion so framed with the stamp, see if there be
an agreement between the work and the name.”

With these remarks the history of pictorial art may be
concluded. The remaining sections will be taken up in
the order named in the introduction.


NOTES ON OSAKA.


By the Rev. J. Summers.


(Read June 25, iSyg.j

(375) Three great cities in Japan have in modern times
claimed the attention of the outer worlclj as they have al-
ways held a foremost place within the Empire. Every one
moderately well acquainted with geography had since the
time of old Kampfer heard of Miyako, Yedo, and Osaka
(or as they were confoundingly spelt, Meaco, Jeddo and
Osacca). It used to be stated that the first was the resid-
ence of the Spiritual Emperor, the next the residence of the
Secular Emperor and the last the great commercial Capital
of the Empire. But little was known beyond what the
painstaking Kampfer had related as to the exact proportions
or the relative importance of the three places. The glory
fo some of the old palaces and temples had probably depart-
ed before the times of the Dutch embassies, but the earlier
notices of Marco Polo may still be verified as to the golden
roofs and decorations which delighted the imagination of
the Venetian, for there is still a temple^ in this neighbour-
hood said to have golden spouts to carry off the rain from
its roofs, and the lustre of gilt and golden ornaments in the
Nishi Honguanji and other temples in Kiyoto may help to
bear out his narration of the wonders of Zipangu.

A complete descidption of Osaka is a work of too great
extent to be included in this paper. I have therefore limited
myself to a description of some of the salient points of in-
terest, and a few of the principal places which have some
historical value. Although great care has been taken to
secure accuracy, I fear that some errors may have crept in»


^ In a Miya at Yawata in Yamashiro, about 4 ri from Kiydto.


StJMMERS: NOTES ON SsAKA*


389


Such as it is I beg to offer it for the consideration of
the learned society of which I have the honour of being a
member,

(37^) city of Osaka, once the most thriving and busy
emporium of Japan, and which still retains much of its
former mercantile activity, has had a strange, eventful his-
tory. Here the monied merchants resided who could sup-
ply the daimiybs with cash for their revenue-rice, stored in
the granaries in this place. Here the forces of rival daimi-
y6s have contended for the mastery or to obtain this key to
the capital of the empire. Its history dates from the time
of Jimmu (B.C. 660) ; but at that early period it is merely
traditional, though certain statements occur in the Nihongi
which have the appearance of veritable history. According
to that highly respected work the place received the name of
Ncuni liaya from the emperor himself in consequence of the
untoward character of the landing-place where His Majesty
came to anchor after his voyage from the province of Hiuga
in Kiushiu. There would seem to have been a heavy surf,
which dealt rudely with his ships, and from this circum-
stance he gave the place the name Nanii haya^ or The
waves are boisterous.” The name JNami hana^ later on
corrupted into Naniwa^ was derived from the appearance of
the surf or breakers, which looked like white flowers upon
the waters. There were two reasons for these appearances :
first, the breaking of the waves upon the abrupt shore or
rock sakaj for at that period the sea, according to tradition,
supported by allusions in ancient ballads, etc., washed the
base of the high land which now forms the Upper town ”
(Uye maclii) in Osaka; and second, by the meeting of the
great river, which there had the character of an estuary,
and when its waters poured down from the upper country
and met the sea-waves, much foam would naturally be
produced. The name Seitsti, by which the province has
been known, was derived from the assembling here of ship-
ping first in the time of Ojin Tenno (cir. A.D, 270), when
the Court was held in this place.

The name Osaka appears, according to old accounts, to


390


summers: notes on Osaka.


have been first used about the year 1492. At that time
the town was confind to the small locality now called
Tama^stihun, The scattered villages and places around
had been previously called Oye (the great river), and from
Oye no saka by contraction is derived Osaka. Indeed, so
says the Settsn meisho (Renjarkable Places in the Province
of Settsu).

These statements are borne out by the nature of the
country hereabout, for the land running north and south at
the eastern end of the city is very high and the surrounding
country is very flat, leaving no doubt(377) in the mind that the
lower land was at one time covered by the ocean, the higher
land being the saka or hilbside ” as above referred to.
The Oye or “ Great River,” now contracted into the Yodo,
and its collateral branches may well have been the great
stream that founds its exit at this place.

It is a curious fact worth mentioning that the heir
apparent of Nintoku Tenno (A.D. 310) received the name
from the emperor of Oye no Isao waki no Mikoto.

The castle of Osaka is built upon the site of an ancient
monastery formerly belonging to the Buddhists known as
the Honguwanji. The original temple was built by a cer-
tain priest named KenjCi or Renniyo, who had been settled
with his confraternity at Yamashino in the province of Ya-
mato. He subsequently removed with a few of his people
to Ishiyama in Osaka in 1496, and hence the name of Ishi-
yama Honguwanji, by which the aforesaid temple is usually
known. It was fortified in 1534, and became a stronghold
of the Buddhists during the time of the bloody persecutions
to which they were subjected by Ota Nobunaga. This
body of religionists was very powerful in the stormy times
of the latter half of the sixteenth century, when the country
approached a state of downright anarchy. The Emperor
was in a condition bordering on destitution, and the dai-
miyos, who had assumed the title of kings, were constantly
engaged in war with each other , — a state of things which
affords a parallel to the disorders of the feudal times in
Europe. The Honguwanji then supplied the Emperor’s


SUMMERS', NOTES ON OSAEA.


S9^


wants from their coffers and received in return certain pri-
vileg’es, /I hese Buddhists were allowed to use the Imperial
crest or cognisances {n?on\ both the Inri and the kiku (the
chrysanthemum), and they received the title of vioii-
zeki. Their power was so great that they were able to
resist the forces which Nobunaga brought against them
for eleven years,— from A.D. 1569-1580, when, on the
recommendation of the Mikado, the monks gave way and
agreed to remove entirely to another place— Sangi no mori,
in Kishiu Pi'ovince.

The present castle was built by Toyotomi Hideyoshi
(Taiko sama), a brave man who had raised himself by
his merits from being a mere zori (straw sandal) carrier in
the army, to the highest honours of the state. It is on the
model of a famous Chinese fortress called the Kan-yo-km
erected during the Han Dynasty when Chang-an
(378) (Ch6-an) (S^), was the metropolis of China.^ It
corresponds probably with this model, excepting with re-
gard to some minor points and the addition of what was
called the Sotobori or outer moat. This was in existence
in the time of Hideyori, the son of Taiko, but was destroyed
and filled up by lyeyasu when he took the castle in 1615.

The circumstances connected with the destruction of
these works are that lyeyasu having besieged the castle
for several months, the combatants were commanded by
the Mikado to make peace in the last month of the 19th
year of Keicho (A.D. 1614), and the conditions of surrender
wei'e then known by the name San-ga-jo. The history
of this celebrated document framed by lyeyasu being closely
connected with the history of the castle of Osaka, I think
it may be interesting to mention it here, together with the
first cause of the siege.

lyeyasu had, in order to weaken the power and resources
of Hideyori, commanded him to restore the temple and
statue of Daibutsu at Kiy6to, originally built by Taiko, his
father, and which had been burnt in 1602, This command

^ This story in said to be found in the Osaka jo a work which

I have been unable to procure. .


392


summers; notes on .Osaka*


went forth in i6io. It was in order to reduce the wealth of
Osaka, which was now an opulent city, and the point
whence revolution might easily arise. The Daibutsu was
finished in 1614 under the direction of Katagiri, the officer
appointed for the duty, and the great bell was cast and hung
within its precincts. Upon the bell was an inscription,
and there occurred in the said inscription the four characters
{koku hi an ho)^ the second and fourth of which
are the characters used for the name ^^lyeyasu'' At this
lyeyasu took umbrage, conceiving that they were meant
as an insult and as a spell to work against him.

When, therefore, the inauguration took place, at which
many of the Osaka people were present, and in the midst of
the rejoicing, officers arrived from Yedo to put an end to
the ceremony, and so great was the feeling against the bell
that it was never rung during the Tokugawa period, and
this explains the cause of its present position on the ground
outside of the temple. The anger of lyeyasu was only
equalled by the wrath of the people of Osaka and of Hide-
yori. An embassy was, however, immediately dispatched
to Sumpu (i^W) in Suruga, where lyeyasu was then in
(379) retirement [hikiyo)^ consisting of Katagiri and Ono, a
man of great influence in the city at that time, and also
two ladies, to treat with the Shogun on behalf of Yodo-
gimi, the mother of Hideyori. The object of the mission
seems to have been to mollify the anger of lyeyasu and
to assure him that no insult was. intended. Katagiri and
Ono preceded the court ladies. lyeyasu was exceedingly
angry, and referred them to the reigning Sh6gun, his son
Hidetada in Yedo. From the latter they met with no better
reception and had to return. The ladies were courteousl}^
received both by lyeyasu and by the Shogun, and they
returned. Katagiri overtook them on the Tokaidd at Tachi-
yama, and stated that lyeyasu had stipulated that one of the
three articles (the San-ga-jO) must be accepted by Hideyori ;
I, That the Sotobori should be destroyed ; or 2, That Hide-
yori should remove to another province ; or 3, That Hide-
jwi’s mother, Yodo-gimi, should become a hostage in Yedo.


summers: notes on osaka.


393


These were received with disapproval. Katagiri was
blamed, and he retired to escape the vengeance of the party
in Osaka.

The conditions were not agreed to, but lyeyasu im-
mediately took steps to carry out the first, and thus the
outer moat was destroyed in 1614. The siege went on for
five or six months, and in the summer of 1615 the castle fell
into the hands of the Shogun’s party. The particulars of
this last act are pretty fully related in the Nilionguwaishi,
Hideyori committed suicide, with many of his followers ;
and Yodo-gimi, too, with about twenty others who had
taken refuge in a godown, were destroyed either by their
own hands or those of their attendants, or by the enemy.

After this contest the castle passed into the power of the
Shogun, and it has remained as it was in those times until
the present, A large moat protects the walls on the
western side, and on the other side it is protected by the
river. The keep of the castle is in ruins, the lower part
only remaining. It was called 'Ten shu dcti or'^SSS)

or Ten shu kaku ‘'The Heavenly lord’s platform.”

Every year the usual offerings to the manes of lyeyasu are
.placed here. It consisted originally of a seven-storied
tower. From the platform the whole neighbourhood is
seen as on a map, and from this point the best view of
the castle and its environs can be obtained. From a^well
near the keep, know from time immemorial as the 0 -gon
gold water,” (380) from the belief that there
was gold at its bottom, the castle has been designated
Kin-jo though it is usually called the Chin-dai.

The strength of the place can hardly be exaggerated. It
is built of huge stones and in a very massive manner.
With modern appliances and powerful guns it would be
impregnable to any attack by native forces, and under good
engineei's would be able to resist for a long time any foreign
power.

The oldest temple in Osaka is that called Ikudama Jinja
Its original designation was Iku-kuni kuni-
dama Jinja and is said to have been built in the


394


SUMMERS : NOTES ON OSAKA.


first year of Jimmu Tenn6, B.C. 660, when it was dedicat-
ed to Ihcdama no Kami^ and 0knni4ama no Kami, Its
original position was near the site of the present castle, and
its early form a very simple Miya, When in 1496 the
Honguwanji was built where the castle now stands by
Kenjiu (Renniyo), the Ikudama was removed a little way
off, probably to some part of Tamatsukuri the district

to the south of the castle, which district took its name from
a manifestation of the spirit of Ikudama in that locality, and
it still retains the same name. Later on, between 1573
and the following years, when Nobunaga’s eleven years ’
war with the Honguwanji was going on, the temple was
burnt, and a small Miya only marked the place where it
stood. Afterwards, in 1596, when Hideyoshi (Taik6 sama)
rebuilt the castle of Osaka, this also was rebuilt in its pre-
sent position at his command and his expense. Its pi'esent
site is one of the most commanding in the city. From the
platform facing west we can view the whole city. It is
therefore not only a place of worship, but a place of
popular resort.

Before the recent revolution, Buddhist and Shintoist
shrines were intermingled here ; but since the first year of
Meiji (1868) the Buddhist temples have been removed and
the place has been adorned with cherry trees, etc.

The next temple of interest on account of its antiquity
is Kodzu no yashiro (i®#®), as it is commonly known,
its true name being Takatsu mo yashiro. There is no
record of its building, but tradition ascribes it to times an-
terior to Jimmu Tenn6, when it was dedicated to Shita teru
Hime no Mikoto and who was worshipped there.

Subsequently Nintoku Tenn6, after his apotheosis, was
reverenced also, and the (381) worship of the latter in
course of time so far exceeded the other that it finally
disappeared, Nintoku remaining master of the position.
The site of the temple was originally near the castle, but in
the time of Taiko sama, when the castle was rebuilt, he
had it removed to its present position. The name Takatsu
was an ancient one, and seems to have arisen from the fact


summers: notes on osaka.


395


of tl^is spot being ‘‘high,” and from its jutting out, as it
were, and it is therefore called in old ballads “os/w deru*^
To the north of it was the Yodo gawa, to the east the
Yamato gawa, and to the west the sea. It is undoubtedly
one of the highest points in the old city,

Nintoku Tenno was fond of this place, because it had
been the residence in the mythical period (as they said) of
Shita teru Hime no Mikoto, and so he chose this place to
worship in, and when he built a palace there he called it
Takatsu no Miya, the shrine of the ancient emperor being
called Hime no Yashiro Nintoku was a very bene-

volent ruler, but the manner of his coming to the throne is
rather curious. Although he was the rightful heir, being
the eldest born of his father Ojin Tenno, the latter had cho-
sen his younger brother Waka Iratsu ko to succeed

to the throne. Upon the death of Ojin, Waka objected to
reign, and for three years kept up a contest with his
brother Nintoku about the succession. Waka refused it,
because, as he said, he was stupid and his brother was
wise. Nintoku refused it, because, as he said, Waka was
the appointed heir and ought to reign. Thus for three
years Japan was without an Emperor. The end was that
Waka committed suicide and his brother was then perforce
placed on the throne, but the event no doubt shed a gloom
over his reign and perhaps tended to increase his kindly
feelings towards his Subjects. Among the many stories
related of Nintoku is one worthy of record, as it forms the
subjects, too, of one of the old ballads. When, one day,
he was looking over the villages from his lofty place at
K6dzu, he beheld no smoke arising from the houses of his
subjects in the neighbourhood. He at once surmised that
they were destitute, and forthwith proclaimed a general
exemption from land-tax for three years. About the end of
that time the Empress was complaining that he was poor,
his clothing threadbare, and that the roof of his palace let
in the rain ; but he declared that he was rich, and to show
Her Majesty what he meant (382) he pointed to the roofs
of the adjacent villages, from which the smoke was rising,


396


summers: notes on OSAKA.


and proving that his people were now welhto-do. Hence
the ballad, —

, Takaki ya ni

Nohorite mireha^

Kemiiri tafstt
Tami no kmnado mo
Nigiwai ni keri.

Which may be freely rendered : — As I look from the high
roofs I see the smoke rising, and I know that my people
are rejoicing at their pots a-boiling.”

The temple of Tennbji more properly Shiten-

n6ji, i.e. the temple of the Four Celestial Kings, is a great
place of resort for the Buddhist population of Osaka and its
vicinity. Its history goes back to the time of Suiko, the
Empress who reigned about A.D. 593. It was then
situated at the back of the castle. The history of the
introduction of Buddhism into Japan is closely connected
with this temple’s history.

In the 6th year of the reign of Bitatsu Tenn6 (cir. A.D.
578) Buddhist books were brought from the kingdom of
Kudara in Korea. Two year later teachers of the Indian
doctrines came and brought a golden image of Shaky a from
Shiragi (Shinra, ffS), another kingdom in Korea. The
image, the books and the teachers seem to have made a
strong impression upon the Court, for the Emperor, the
High officers and ministers assembled to inaugurate the
new religion. One man alone seems to have opposed the
introduction of the foreign doctrines. His name was Mono-
nobe no Moriya and he appers to have addressed

the Emperor in words of the following purport: — Our
country is God’s country. From the foundation of the
world until the present day, the divine favour has been ex-
perienced and reverenced, and consequently all the people
have had peace and plenty. Now these Buddhist images
are only barbarians, and the doctrine is crooked and untrue ;
if, then, contrary to sound doctrine, we do them reverence,
we shall, I fear, bring down upon us great calamities from
the gods. If, on the contrary, these barbarian gods have
any spirit and can send a plague upon as, I challenge them


summers: notes on Osaka.


397


to visit the whole of it on my person. Thus I respectfully
offer warning.”

The Emperor’s judgment was shaken, and while he
doubted what to do, a champion of the Buddhists arose — ■
Soga no Umako (383) by name — who attacked

Moriya with calumny and falsehood. This enraged Mori-
ya, but led the Emperor Bitatsu to establish Buddhism by
building, in 586, two temples, the first iera erected in
Japan, one called Guwangoji in Yamato, the other Kogonji.
Shortly afterwards Moriya, having created a rebellion, burnt
these, together with all the images and books, sending away
all the religious, male and female. Then nearly 300,000 of
his followers assembled in Kawachi, remaining in and about
Shibukawa, the castle of which was made the base of
operations.

In the reign of Yomei Tenno, on the 7th of the 2nd
month, it was decided by a general council of the state
officers to proceed against Moriya, This they hastened to
do, but Moriya’s forces gained further strength daily and
the Imperial party had to give way. Yomei’s first son,
Umayado, — then 16 years of age— in after times always
konwn as Shotoku Taishi was then in the army,

and he determined to vanquish by God’s power the enemy
ofBuddism. So cutting a branch of the Ntinido
the Rhus Semialata^ which has some points in common
with the Rhus Vernix or Varnish tree {UrusM)^ he carved
four rude figures of the gods and placed them on the top of
his head, covering them with his hair, and at the same time
^wore that if he conquered in the war in which he was
engaged he would build a temple to these four celestial
kings — Shi tenno. Having made this vow, he went im-
mediately to war, and the story goes that a stalwart fellow,
some eight feet high, ran by his side and with great vigour
cut do'^n the enemy on all sides. Moriya and his ad-
herents were put to the sword, and Moriya , himself died,
being then 42 years of age. In fulfilment of his vow,
Shotoku Taishi built the first temple to the Four Celestial
Kings on the shore of Tamatsukuri, at the back of the


398


SUMMERS: KbtEg ON 5SA^A,


present castle, and the property of Moriya and his relatives
was taken for its endowment. This amounted to above i86,
890 koku.

Various stories are told of the destruction of this temple
by a great wave, by flocks of red and white birds, and by
wasps and flies. These evils were said to spring from the
spirits of Moriya and his party, so Shotoku Taishi is said
to have transformed himself into a great eagle and to have
driven away the evil birds — called Tera tsutsuki (^^), and
in memory of this circumstance two great eagles have been
carved and are to be seen somewhere at the back of the
Kondo or Golden Hall in the temple grounds.

(384) Tennoji was afterward rebuilt on its present site.
It has suffered much in time of war. In or about 1334,
during the civil wars in which Kusunoki Masashige was
remarkable, Tennoji was a garrison. It was burnt on the
3rd of the 5th month of 1577, when Nobunaga was at war
with the Ishiyama Honguwanji. Afterwards Hideyoshi
ordered it to be rebuilt. Again it was burnt in 1615, during
the Tokugawa and Toyotomi Hideyori war, and was rebuilt
by order of the Shogun in 1665. Its area was then from
E. to W. 8 cho ; from N. to S. 6 cho ; and much of it was
rebuilt in the ancient style, but the names of the numerous
halls and buildings given in the Nihongi are not all found.

The principal hall is the K on-do or Golden Hall. In this
is the original figure of gold and copper said to have been
brought from Korea and presented to Japan by the King
of Kudara. The name is Niyo 4 -rin Kuwannon
one of the emanations of Amit^bha, corresponding with
Avaldkites^vara of Indian Buddhism.

The most frequented temple in Osaka is Temmangii
It is situated on the north side of the Yodo gawa,
near Temman Bashi, the wholfe district being called
Temma, The Honsha or Central Hall is devoted to Tern-
man D-ai jizai Tenjin To the east of this are

shrines ; one to Tachihara-o no Milioto^ that celestial being
who threw the {ama no iwa to) door of the cavern in which
Tensho daijin (the sun goddess) had immured herself in


SUMMERS ! NOTES ON 6SARA.


3^9


mythical times, to Togakushi san in Shinshiu ; and

the other to Hosho-ho son^i To the west are

two other shrines dedicated to Saruda Hiko Daijin
and Hiruko no Mikoto

The temple was built in the year 948 by order of the
Emperor Murakami. It was erected in honor of Sugawara,

U daijin (second minister), who had been apotheosiired
under the title of Dai jizai teftjin. He had been maligned
by the Sadaijin (first minister) Fujiwara Tokihira
and the Mikado had banished him to (i^S?) Chikushi (now
Kiushiu), where he died A.D. 904. After his death he was
much lamented, for he had been a wise and good man, and
the diviners, according to the superstitious notions of those
times, attributed the thunders and earthquakes of that
period to the divine wrath on account of the Emperor’s
treatment of Sugawara. This led to his deification and
the building of the temple of Temmangu in his honour.
Another temple was also dedicated to him at Kitano in
Kiyoto.

(385) On the 25th of each month multitudes go to wor-
ship at Temmangu, and every year there is a carnival of ten
or twelve days’ duration in honour of the various divinities
whose shrines are in this place. During that season the
show of figures of life size, and some of fantastic appear-
ance, is wonderful, and attracts ci'owds of holiday folk from
town and country. Ail the shops are closed and the people
sit amusing themselves in front of the best biabu (ornament-
al screens) they can afibrd. The shells of the bivalve shiji^
mi (^B) are strung in lines to represent the Fuji (Wistaria
Chine7isis) in blossom, which is done very effectively.

The neighbourhood of Osaka offers several objects and
places of interest to the tourist. Foremost among these are
Sumiyoshi, Sakai and Mind. Sumiyoshi (S^), which is
situated two ri (about 5 English miles) from Osaka, is noted
for being the headquarters of the Shinto worship. A fine
road runs all the way from Osaka to this place, and the
place itself is a romantic spot, with the usual accessories of
large teahouses, lofty trees, stone lanterns and street beg-


4P0


summers; notes on osaka.


gars, common to all great temples in Japan. Sakai (^) is
one ri further on the same road. This place contrasts
favourably with Japanese towns in general. It strikes the
traveller with its air of prosperity, well filled shops, broad
streets, clean withal and well paved. The shops of cutlers
are numerous, and the manufacturers of tools of various
kinds supply the neighbouring places round. A short dis-
tance from the main thoroughfare is the harbour, chiefly
used by fishermen, the shore being much frequented by
holiday people from Osaka. There is a lighthouse for the
coast hereabout at Sakai, and a gun factory, the first in
central Japan, where rifles are turned out.

Min6 or Mind zan lies to the northwest of the

town and is about five ri distant. After traversing three ri
the country becomes interesting and the road rises gradual-
ly, until one comes to Hirano mura, to the north of which
is the mountain and its ravines full of beautiful scenery,
'especially in autumn, when the maple is undergoing its
rapid transformations of colour. From the village the way
rises rapidly and then descends into a glen, where there is
a temple situated and a few houses, whence it again rises
for nearly a ri until the waterfall is reached. The hill-sides
and the ravines are covered with most magnificent foliage,
the Matsu (Pine), the Hinoki (Chamaecyparis) and the
Momiji (Acer Polymorphum), the glowing tints of which are
quite indescribable.

(386) This mountain of Mind is noted for having been the
haunt of the originator of the Yamabushi sect of Buddhists,
the shn gen shu whose name was Yen no Shdkaku

He had been banished to Idzumi Province by the
Mikado in A.D. 6g8, and he subsequently made this
mountain his retreat, and having perfected himself he fled
to the Mountain Omine in Yamato, where those who

follow his tenets believe him to be still alive.

In 1596, by command of the Emperor Go Midzu-no-wo
(^^^), the Benzaiten no Yashiro was built at Mind. It is
ranked as the first of the four chief Benten temples in Japan,
the others being at Chikubushima, on the Bivva lake, Miya-


summers: notes on Qsaka,


401


jima in Geishu, and another at Yenoshima near Kamakura.
In this temple is a figure of Ben^aiten, said to have been
carved by Yen no Shbkaku himself. Its height is about i
shakii and 5 sun (about 18 inches).

There is also a hall [dd) called Giy 6 ja-dd dedicat-

ed to Yen no Shbkaku, in which is his image, two feet high,
carved by himself. In the Kuwannon do^ or Hall dedicated
to the Goddess of Mercy, is a figure of Kuwanno}}^ which
was cut by Chi-sho (^S), a priest of the Tendai (5^1^) sect.
It is four feet and five inches high.

A curious and ancient custom is observed at this temple
every year after the annual festival on the occasion of the
new year (the ist to the 7th), when the people go to pray
for peace and plenty, It is called Tomi Kuwai (g'#'). On
the 7th of the ist month crowds from time immemorial used
to assemble, and having purchased a wooden ticket for a
small sum each person writes his name thereon. Then all
the chiptickets are put into a box or tub, before which a’
priest stands with a stick, and with this he makes a stab
into the heap and picks up a ticket which he exhibits to the
crowd for their recognition, or he hails the person whose
name is written on the ticket as the first, second, third tonii^
or lucky fellows ; and so on seriatim.

Thus the bonze, with his sleeves drawn up, proceeds to
announce in a loud voice the happy individuals who have
been favoured by Kuwannon with the ist, 2nd, and 3rd
drawing. Sometimes rich men buy the tickets for larger
sums and the proceeds are always given to the temple.
The Mind no tomi is generally known in Japan. It is one
of those old customs which are so common among uncivi-
lized nations, and may be compared with the Divination
and the Oracles of Greek antiquity.

In addition to these temple and halls there are residences
for priests and some tea-houses. One of these lodgings for
priests was known by the name of Iwamoto bd
There lived the chief priest, who was always chosen by the
Shogo-In Monzeki until the ist year of Meiji

(1868), when so many changes took place. In conse-


4-02


SUMMERS : NOTES ON 5SAKA.


quence of these changes his reverence now figures as
‘‘Mine Host” at a refreshment hall in the neighbour-
hood.

About i8 chd (say a mile and a quarter) from the Benzai-
ten temple is the beautiful waterfall for which Mino is so
much frequented. It is the second in Japan for its extent
of fall and beauty. The water falls almost perpendicularly
from a height of i6 jo (about i6o feet). Its rival is at
Kumano in Kishiu. In the spring and autumn many
holiday people pay Mino a visit, and after toiling up the
■ lovely ravine which the varied foliage of the maple and
other trees so richly adorns, they come suddenly on this
grand fall. In the same locality are three pines called San-
ko no Matsu. (SSfi), so designated because, as the story
goes, Yen no Sh6kaku, when residing in the Katsuragi
mountain in Yamato, threw his Sanko, a brazen instrument
which the Buddhist priests use, and which is doubtless the
‘ Vajra of the Indian system, the symbol of Indra, the
Thunderbolt of Jove, which fell in this spot, whence came
a great light and where in due time these trees grew up.

There are several other myths connected with this moun-
tain and with Yen no Shokaku, but we must leave the
notice of them for the present.

The story of Yen no Shbkaku is that he was born near
Katsuragi in Yamato, that he spent 30 years in that
mountain in order to perfect his walk (Shu do after he
was 33 years old ; that he lived as a hermit, being clothed
in the coarse garments made of the fnji {Wistaria) dcnd
the Katsurai and that he lived on the sprouts of young
pines ; that he had his attendant demons, and was able to
walk upon the clouds ; that he came finally to Min6, and
lived in the mountain there nobody knows how long ; but
that he departed at last through the air to Omine in Yama-
to, and that there he still lives in eternal contemplation.

The temples at Sumiyoshi claim a further notice, The
name of the great temple here devoted to Shinto 'worship is
called Suminoye no on Kami no yasliiro ('S^jjkl^jiti:). This
is in Sumiyoshi gori. It was built by command of the


summers: notes on osaka. 403

Empress Jingo K6g6. Many people go there to worship
on the day called U no hij or day of the hare (# 0 '), because
(388) Jing6 K6g6 is said to have dedicated the temple on
that day. Four deities are worshipped there : — i, Soko
dzutsu 6 no Mikoto ; 2, Naka dzutsu 5 no Mikoto ; 3, Uwa
dzutsu 6 no Mikoto ; 4, Jingd Kogo.

This empress was Chiu-ai tei’s (A.D. 191-200) consort.
Her posthumous name was Tarashi Hime no Mikoto. She
is said to have been very strong when an infant, and thus
were foreshadowed her future exploits. When the Emperor
went to Chikushi (Kiushiu) to quell a revolt, the Empress
followed, and Take-uchi, the Daijin, accompanied her.
The Emperor was unfortunate and fell a victim to his un-
belief in a story told by his spouse. She said that she had
received a divine communication from a certain god, who
told her that there was a kingdom in the west — Shiraki by
name — where many wonderful productions were to be
found, and bade her invade it. When she related the
vision to Chiu-ai, His Majesty disbelieved her and died
immediately in a fit. Jingo K6g6 then proceeded to put
down the rebellion and she set out for Korea, which she
subdued and exacted a yearly tribute. On her return she
landed near Sakai, and ordered the three temples above
mentioned to be built to the three gods who had rendered
her expedition successful.®

‘ The name Sumiyoshi (fi*) is founded on a myth that
those three gods once said to jingb Kogo: — “At Otsu
Nunakakura no nagao our spirits live and

we protect ships going out and coming in.” This place is
the ancient name of Sumiyoshi (“ Dwelling fortunate ”).
(Cf. Nihongi.)

On this account people who go down to the sea in ships
worship and make votive offerings at Sumiyoshi. Even
sailors and ship-owners from other provinces resort thither.
An earlier name for the place was Ma-Sumiyoshi— “ Truly
a good dwelling place.” Afterwards the name was changed


3 Tei 6 hen nen shu sei


4Q4


SUMMERS ; NOTES ON 6SAKA»


to, Smni noye and Makoto ni snmi ^kiyoshi (Cf.

Stimiyoslii Kanimon^

liho <nsimQ Sttmiyoshiwsis not known before A.D. goo.
[CL Settsu Meisho dzttye,)

A place of remarkable interest lies* a little to the
south-east of Osaka, at a distance of about 4-| ri, near
a village named Kbrigawa (flW!#), in the district call-
ed Takayasu According to Kaibara, a well

known writer, author of the Wajishi this place is

(389) in the province of Kawachi, at the base of the moun-
tain Ikoma ga take (SItfIK), and is known by the name
of Sen d^uka or the Thousand Barrows* I am in-
debted to Mr, Ogawa of the Osaka Semmon Gakk 5 for the
following brief notes on the subject. He visited the place
in April of this year and gave me the following approximate
measurements. There are some fifty caves in the moun-
tain side, constructed of stones and with huge slabs of stone
for the roofs. The shape of the cave dwellings, for such
they seem to have been, varies between


entrances always facing towards the south. The distance
from to a to 6 was found to be about 20 feet, and from
Z? to r from 12 to 13 feet, and they were 20 feet high
(Japanese measurement in shaku K),

There are other such caves in Yamato, in Yamanobe
Gori, and in many parts of Japan.

The people who lived in the neighborhood of these caves
were, according to the oldest traditions, called Tsuchi gtcnio
which is the name given to a kind of spider which
lives underground. The fair hypothesis is that this word
is a corruption of Tsuchi gomori, which means ‘‘ earth-
dweilers,'" as this designation would accord with the fact,
and helps to explain the uses to which these underground
houses were adapted.

The modern city of Osaka lies upon the northern and


si;mmers: hotes on osaka.


405


southern banks of the Yodo gawa, which rises in Lake
Biwa and falls into the sea at Temposan, the entrance
to the port of Osaka. The greater part of the city, perhaps
live-sixths, is on the southern side of the river, and there-
fore claims our chief attention. The shape of the city
approaches nearly to that form of parallelogram called an
oblong, having its longest sides about half as long again
as its short ones, — its greatest length being from east to
west. If this oblong be divided into three nearly equal
parts, the eastern portion will include the castle and its
environs, and be almost contei'minous with its ancient outer
lines of fortification ; the central portion comprises the
richest and the business quarter of the town ; and the
western portion the business quarter rnost nearly related
to the shipping interest.

(390) The city is intersected with numerous canals (hori),
which necessitate a great number of bridges. Two of these
canals run almost parallel to each other north and south,
being supplied from the great river ; and eight others, run-
ning east and west, and cutting the former at right angles,
have communication with the Shiri-nashi gawa and the
Kidzu gawa. The principal canals trisecting the city are
the Higashi Yoho-^hori (eastern cross-canal) and the Nishi
Yoho-hori (western cross-canal). The others, running in
the same direction as the Yodo-gawa, and debouching in
the Shiri-nashi and Kidzu rivers are (beginning on the
north side), (i) the Tosa-bori^ which is really part of the
Yodo ; (2) the Yedo-hori ; (3) the Kiy 6 maclii~hori ; (4) the
A waza-hori ; (5) the Itachi-bori ; (6) the N aga-hori, which
extends through two-thirds of the city ; (7) the Horiye-
gawa ; and (8) the Dotoin-bori.

The Eastern division of the city is called Uyemachi
or “ Upper Town.” This extends from K6rai-bashi (Korea-
bridge), which is the point from which all distances are
measured, just as they are from Nihon bashi in Tdkiyb.
This is undoubtedly the oldest part of the city ; the Central
division, which extends from K6rai-bashi westwards to
the Nishi Yoko-bori, now called Semba (^:®) (N.) and Shi-


406


aUMMERS: N0T®S OK SSAKA.


ma no uchi (6P}) (S.), this with the third division on the
south of the Yodo, being the Lower Town.

There are three great bridges across the Yodo com-
municating with great thoroughfares, the (i) Temmahashi,
which communicates on the south with Tanernachi that
leads on to the Temples of Ikudama and Tennoji ; (2) the
Tenjinbashi unites on the south with Machiyamachi and
leads to Shin Kiyomid^u and Tennbji (3) ; the Naniwahashi,
which by two divisions spans the river, where the Naka no
shima lies in the stream and divides the Yodo into two
courses, and which here take new names, the northern
being Ddjima-gawa and the southern Tosa-bori.

The greatest thoroughfare in Osaka is the Shinsai-bashi
ddri (or more properly suji, line) which leads from Kita
harndj the district lying on the southern side of the Tosa-
bori, to the iron suspension bridge, Slwisai-'bcishi ^ over
the D6tom’bori, and afterwards leads on in the direction of
Sumiyoshi and Sakai. The next most important thoro-
ughfare is Sakai suji, which leads direct to Sakai. This
runs parallel with the Shinsai-bashi suji and is between
that latter and the K6rai-bashi.

(39^) ^ g^reat deal remains to be said respecting the
public places of Osaka, but they cannot be described within
the limits of this paper. They can only be alluded to.

The Imperial Mint must not be omitted, as it forms one
of the most striking objects of interest to a visitor to the
city. It was built within the first five years of the present
reign (A.D.^ 1868-1872), It is situated in the northern
division of Osaka, in Kawasaki ch6, and covers an area of
some 50,000 tsubos, employs 600 hands, including two
foreigners and the high officials. Since its commencement,
2,692,224-33 oz. of gold and 23,504,71576 oz. of silver
have been imported, and the coins struck, up to the 3rd of
March last, are :


Gold .
Silver .
Copper

Total


Yen 52,542,629.00
‘‘ 28,590,732.41

'' 4.664,987.32


SS.798.34873


summers: notes on Qsaka.


407

Sulphuric Acid is also manufactured and sold. The
quantity sold between July 1878 and April 1879 was
The above figures may be relied upon, as
they have been specially communicated to me by the kind-
ness of the Commissioner, Mr. T. Ishimal,

■ The foreign Concession, which is situated at Kawaguchi,
contains some very well built foreign houses. The roads
are broad and well kept, and although there is not the same
bustle and activity found as in the Foreign Concession in
Tokio, the quiet little settlement of Osaka may well com-
pare with Tsukiji, for it bears an aspect of tranquillity and
an air of comfort wanting in its rival.

In close proximity is the Government House — the FucM
— built in foreign style, with a cupola on the roof. Its
internal arrangements I cannot speak of.

Quite near to Kawaguchi is the Custom House and the
quays for the numerous small steamers which ply between
Osaka and K6be, the various ports of the Inland Sea,
Shikoku, etc. A mile down the i;iver we -find Temp6san,
where is one of the modern lighthouses. A few years ago
this place was a common resort for pleasure' seekers and
pic-nics ; now the gay would patronizes Sakura no Miya,
the banks of the Yodo, opposite the Imperial Mint, where
the cherry blossoms bloom in spring.

The theatres are situated in the neighbourhood of D6tom-
bori chiefly, (392) but two or three are in different quarters
of the city. The Bunraku Ningi6 shibai — a sort of puppet-
theatre — is, I understand, only to be found in Osaka.

The markets are large and classified under Fresh Fish,
Dried Fish, Vegetables, Fruits and Rice markets. The
Zakoha or great fish market is near the Foreign Concession.
To this, fish is brought very early in the morning by ex-
press boats from the neighbouring coasts, and sold by
auction to fish brokers, and these retail it to small dealers.
Osaka is furnished with a well conducted body of police-
men, and the usual complement of courts of justice and
summary jurisdiction offices. There are numerous small
schools and many night schools. The Osaka Fu supports


summers: notes on Osaka.


40&

one school in which English is taught^ and the Educa-
tional Department of T6yiy6 supports the Osaka Semmon
Gaku or Special School for Literature and Science (Natu-
ral and Medical). The Normal School was closed last
year.

; „The only book which contains an account of Osaka in a
compact form is a recent publication, issued in the begin-
ning of last year, in the form of a catechism for the use of
schools. It is called Osaka Fu Kuwandai Chishi-riyaka
Moft do It is a compilation from

various sources, — descriptive works relating to the province,
as the Settsu Mei-sho dzti-ye in 12 vols. ; and

the histories, as the Nihongi or Niho 7 i sho ki

and the Nihon gnwai shi There are .

also a few smaller works from which help may be obtained,
as the Naniwa no Nigiwai published in 1848, ,

and the varioijs Neftdaiki or chronological tables in

which facts relating to the city are noted down.

In addition to these helps there are sorne old maps and
new ones. Especially useful was the follwing: Nankm
jddio dzu S'etsu {MMJtiSWjy compiled by Nakamura
Naomi,

This marks the changes the form of the. city has under-
gone in past times, and proves these changes by references
to old ballads, histories and traditions. The writer has
also had an opportunity of using some old manuscript
maps. Naniwa ko dzu (‘/miSrS) dated cir. 1781, in which,
however, no great difference was observable from the maps
of the Naniwa jo-ko dzu setsu^^ above mentioned.

Two or three other old maps and a new one complete the
apparatus used for this article.


ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.
(Nos. 2, 3 AND 4.)


By Ernest Satow,


{Read June 1^790


No. 2,— KASUGA MATSURI, OR SERVICE OF
THE GODS OF KASUGA.

This ritual is comparatively modern, having been com-
posed for use at a service which we are told was first cele-
brated in the year 859, A.D., and it contains, in fact, cer-
tain internal indications from which we should naturally be
led to conclude that it was not of ancient origin. The ear-
liest book which professes to give any information concern-
ing the foundation of the Temple of Kasuga and of the ser-
vices performed in honour of the gods to which it is dedi-
cated is the Kuzhi kongen written about the year

1422 by a noble named Ichideu Kaneyoshi, entirely from
memory, and perhaps we can hardly be expected to place
implicit belief in everything that it tells us. Its account of
the foundation of the temple of Kasuga at Nara, one of the
ancient capitals of Japan, is" as fallows : —

‘ In the year 767 (A.D.) Take-mika-dzuchi no mikoto,
one of the four gods to whom this temple is consecrated,
set out from Kashima in Hitachi, a province in the extreme
east of Japan, in search of a dwelling-place. He rode a
white deer, and carried in his hand a branch of willow,
which he used as a whip. In this style he arrived in the
department of Nabari in Iga, accompanied by the Nakatomi
no muraxhi Tokika^e and Hidetsura. From Nabari he
shortly afterwards crossed over to Abe yama in Yamato,
and finally arrived at Mikasa yama, close to the city of


410


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.—PART 11.


Nara (which, if the date given by Kaneyoshi be accepted as
historically correct, was then the capital of the country).
Having found a resting-place that pleased him, he an-
nounced the fact to the (394) other three gods, of whom
Ihahi-nushi came from Kadori in the province of Shimofusa,
Ama-no-koya-ne no mikoto from Hirawoka in the province
of Kahachi, and the goddess, who is named last of all, came
from the great temple of the sun-goddess in Ise. In the
autumn of the same year, in accordance with a divine com-
mand, the Mikado sent an envoy to Mikasa-yama, to plant
the foundations of the stout pillars of the temple on the
rocks which lay deep in the earth, and so manifested due
reverence towards the four gods.’

This story, which the author of the Ktizhi Kongen pro-
fesses to have derived from the account given by the priests
of the temple, explains the goddess to be an emanation
from the personality of the sun-goddess, but Motowori
argues with reason that she was in reality the wife of Ama-
no-koya-ne, or as we should put it, of the ancient chieftain
deified ’Under that title, and that her worship, like his, was
derived from the temple of Hirawoka in Kahachi. The
whole legend is of course a fiction invented by the priests of
the temple, at a date long posterior to its foundation in the
ordinary way by the heads of the Fujihara family in the
name of the Mikado, in order to produce an effect upon the
imagination of credulous worshippers, for it does not bear
traces of being a genuine myth. It moreover appears to
contain some anachronisms. Such names as Tokikaze and
Hidetsura, formed by combining two separate words, had
not come into vogue in Keiun, to which period the migra-
tion of TakemikadEuchi is referred. The real name of the
man who, in 767, founded the temple of these gods at
Kasuga was Uweguri Kuhimaro, a member of the Nakatomi
tribe, who simply established at this spot the worship of his
family gods. Tokika^e and Hidetsura were descendants of
his who lived about the middle of the 9th century, when
the Fujihara, who were extremely powerful, chiefly through
the marriage ties which bound successive Mikado to their


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II- 4II

family, took advantage of their position to introduce an in-
novation by which the Mikado was made to worship the
ancestral gods of his mother as well as his own.


I.

Take-raika-dzuchi, also called Take-ika-dzuchi, is one
of three gods who, according to the version of the
myth given in the Kozhiki^ sprang from the blood of
Kagutsuchi, the god of Summer-heat, as it dropped (395)
(395) from the hilt of Izanagi’s sword on to the stones in the
bed of the River of Heaven (as the Milky Way is called in
Japanese). According to the ShiyauzhirokiL he was

the ancestor in the 15th generation of a family called
Yamato no Kahara no Imiki, who belonged to the province
of Kahachi. It seems at first sight strange that the only
persons who claimed descent from this god should be settled
in a part of the country so remote from the original seat
of his worship, and it would have been natural to suppose
that the guardians of the temple of Kashima traced their
lineage from him, as is the case with many other families
of hereditary priests. This is not the case, however) for
according to the Kashima Meishiyo Dzuiae^ the Daiguu-
zhi, or Chief Warden, is decended from x\ma-no-koya-ne,
who here appears in a subordinate position as one of the
ahidono gods or secondary deities of the temple.

A passage in the Hitachi Fudoki (’iflSIliiiE), although
somewhat obscure, appears to afford an explanation of the
manner in which the Nakatomi tribe and the branch of it
called the Fujihara family "came to worship Take-mika-
dzuchi as one of their ancestral gods. The legend says
that ^ in the reign of the sovereign Mimaki (usually known
as Suuzhin Tanwau), a spirit clad in white garments and
armed with a white spear appeared on the top of a mountain
and pronounced the following words : “If thou wilt order
things aright before me, I will make the country which thou
rulest tranquil, Oh Kikikatsu, and will grant unto thee large
countries and small countries.” Hereupon the sovereign


4X3


SATOWI ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.-— PART 11.


summoned his followers and laid the matter before them.
Kamu Kikikatsu of the Nakatomi tribe replied This in-
formation has been given by the great god who dwells in
the Kashima country, and promises thee the Great Many-
Island country to rule over.” The heavenly sovereign on
hearing this was startled, and presented the above men-
tioned offerings at the temple of the god.’ It is inferred
from this extract, which purports to record the legend
existing among the inhabitants of Hitachi in the beginning
of the 8th century, that the temple of Kashima was founded
in the reign of Suuzhin Tenwau, Kikikatsu being appointed
the first high priest and bearer of the offerings spoken of,
which are very nearly the same as those enumarated in the
ritual. It would be natural for the peasant who repeated this
legend to the official appointed to compile the Fudokif to
make Kikikatsu seem to say that the spirit who appeared was
‘ the god of Kashima,’ (396) that being the expression which
he was himself in the habit of using, while Kikikatsu simply
said that the spirit was Take-mika-dzuchi. This sort of
confusion in the report of another person’s words easily
happens in Japanese, owing to the absence of any means of
distinguishing direct from indirect speech. For example,
in Japanese the phrases * he said that it was too late ’ and
* he said : It is too late ” ’ would be expressed in exactly

the same manner, so that it is impossible to know without
special inquiry whether the speaker is repeating the ex^ct
words of another person or is merely giving the sense of
what he said. Another difficulty in connection with this
passage is that the spirit apparently promises dominion
over the country not to the Mikado but to Kikikatsu, but
the explanation of this is that supernatural utterances are
always essentially of an enigmatical character, and resemble
rather the incoherent mutterings of a dreamer than the say-
ings of a person wide awake, and if the revelation made on
this occasion had been clear there would have been no
necessity for calling a council together to declare its mean-
ing. In the present case, Kamu Kikikatsu is the only one
who understands the oracle/ and he expounds it to mean


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.


413


that if he performs due rites in honour of the god Take-
mika-dzuchi, the god will maintain the Mikado Mimaki as
ruler over the ‘ Great Many-Island Country.’ Perhaps the
foundation in the east of Japan, as yet not completely clear-
ed of its aboriginal inhabitants, of a temple dedicated to the
conquering sword which, in the hands of the founder of the
dynasty, had subjugated the western and central parts of
the country, was emblematic of the assumption of sove-
reignty in that region by this Mikado. The people of later
times, in repeating the explanation given by Kikikatsu,
would then represent him as speaking of the ‘ god of Kashi-
ma,’ and so the idea that the foundation of the temple was
anterior to the legendary period, i.e. that it dated from the
‘ age of the gods,’ would inevitably spring up. It became
the hereditary function of the descendants of Kikikatsu, who
succeeded him as high priests ofKashima, to worship Take-
mika*dzuchi, and it is not difficult to see how they would
come to look upon rites the performance of which had come
down to them from their ancestor as a family duty. Hence,
when a member of the Nakatomi tribe founded, in 767, the
little temple of Kasuga in honour of his family gods, he
naturally included among them the god of Kashima.

(397) The Yamato no Kahara no Imiki were no doubt a
tribe of swordcutlers, settled on the banks of the Yamato-
gaha, which flows through the province of Kahachi. There
is no evidence to decide whether they regarded Take-mika-
dzuchi as a famous sword or as the warrior who wielded
it, but they no doubt found it convenient to adopt the
Action that they were descended from him.

In the Kozhiki version of the myth, Take-mika-dzuchi is
celebrated as the god who descended from heaven to subdue
the chieftain whom he found ruling in the province of
Idzumo, and thus prepared the way for the advent of the
Sun-goddess’ grandchild. According to other versions of
the story he was accompanied and assisted by a god named
Futsu-nushi, but doubt is entertained by the commentators
as to the reality of Futsu-nushi’ s existence as a separate
deity. Some think that Futsu-nushi is merely another


414


ShTOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.


title for Take-mika-dzuchi himself ; others take Futsu-nushi
to he the name of the sword which he carried. It seems
more reasonable to regard Futsu-nushi as the epithet of the
warrior and Take-mika-dzuchi as one of the names of his
sword. The Kozhiki in one passage represents Take-mika-
dzuchi to have been the son of a god named Ame no Wo-
habari no Kami, and in another place it says that Ame no
Wo-habari was the name of the sword with which Izanagi
slew the god of Summer-heat, so that Take-mika-dzuchi
must also have been a sword. Wo-habari seems to mean
broad blade ; that is, a double-edged sword, and Taka-mika-
dzuchi was probably a single-edged weapon. In the
Kawachi Moislio Dznwe, vol. 3, p. 20, there is a wood-cut
representing a pair of old swords, one of which is two-
edged, the other single-edged, both called Futsu no mitama,
and similar swords are figured on the back of two curious
discs of pottery under the name of ^ treasures of Futsu no
Kami,' and dated 730. znd year). It is clear that
in that age Futsu-nushi was looked upon as the owner of
the sword, and not as a sword himself. The name Take-
mika-dzuchi is merely a title compounded of various hon-
orific words, if we accept Motowori's interpretation. Take
is of course the root of the adjective takekij bold, and is
perhaps merely a secondary form of taka tall. The double
meaning of ‘ stout ’ in our own language is an illustration
of how a single root may signify both size and warrior-like
qualities. Mika and its alternative both mean ^ big’ ; the
first form occurs in the word which originally meant

‘ big place,’ and the second has survived to this (398) day
in some parts of the country as the adjective ikai^ big,
numerous. Motowori exploins tsu to be the archaic generic
particle, and chi to be an honorific word found in the names
of several other gods, in the word woji, an- old man, and
reduplicated in chichi, father.

A much easier explanation is that ikadzuchi is the same
as the modern word for thunderbolt, and is compounded of
ika, great, and tsiicJii, mallet or hammer, so that Take-
ika-dzuchi or Take-mika-dzuchi would simply be the god


SATOW: A^TCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.-^PART 11.


415


of thunder. And as a matter of fact the name is sometimes
written W 9 ZW (Mi-kadzuchi no^ wo, august thunder man,
in the Kozhihi) and (Mika-dzuchi no kami or Great

Hammer god, in the Nihongi, where is evidently used as
a sort of kana and the second character means ‘ mallet ’ or
‘hammer ’). Further, the names of the gods who, accord-
ing to the form of the ^myth in the Kozhiki, were produced
at the same moment as Take-mika-dzuchi, are Hi-haya-bi
and Mika-haya-bi, epithets the most obvious interpretation
of which would lead us to conclude that they were gods of
fire, the sort of brethren that the god of thunder would be
naturally supposed to have. Motovvori, and Hirata follow-
ing him, warn us against accepting any such easy common-
sense derivations, which are of course contrary to the spirit
of orthodox Shintau and opposed to the general preference
of these and other modern writers for far-fetched superna-
tural interpretations. It seems on the whole most reason-
able to suppose that this name of the Thunder god, who
sprang from the blood of the god of Summer-heat, was also
applied metaphorically to the famous ’'sword which had
subdued the foes of the Mikado’s ancestor.

The date of the foundation of the temple of Kashima is
unknown, and in fact it is usually referred back to the
‘ Age of the Gods,’ which precedes even the legendary
period of Zhinmu Tenwau and his immediate successors.
We have, however, seen reason to suppose that it took
place in the reign of Suuzhin Tenwau, and we may fairly
conclude that it is one of the most ancient temples in Japan.
In fact only five Shintau temples are supposed to have
existed before the time of that Mikado, namely, the Oho-
yashiro in IdzumO' and the four temples of Asuka, Kadzura-
ki, Unada and Ohomiwa in Yamato, mentioned in the
Ritual of the Miyadzuko of Idzumo, all of which were
dedicated to Ohonamuji and his children, who ruled Japan
before it was taken possession of by the founder of the
present dynasty.

(399) The second of the four gods of Kasuga, Ihahi-nushi
of Kadori, in the province of Shimofusa, is identical with


4i6


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.—PART 11.


Futsu-nushi, as is clear from a passage in the
But the meaning of either name is not so evident.^ In the
Kozhiki we find mention made of a sword which had once
done great service in subjugating Japan in the time of the
sun-goddess’ grandchild. When Ihare hiko (ZhinmuTen-
wau) was afterwards engaged in conquering the country for
himself, in the course of an adventure in Kii, near Kumano,
he met with a man who . presented him with this very
sword, in accordance with the command of Take-mika-
dzuchi, delivered to him in a dream, ^ This sword was
variously called SazhiTutsu no kami, Mika-futsu no kami
and Futsu no mitama, and was evidently supposed to be a
god in itself. Hirata boldly supposes the god Futsu-nushi
to be identical with this sword, but it is better to regard him
■ as its owner. Both he and Motowori before him explain
futsti. to be an onomatopoeia denoting cutting off in a tren-
chant manner, without leaving anything behind, and com-
pare it with the modern colloquial piittsiiri to kiru^^ to cut
clean off, so thoX fiitsii no mi tama would mean the Soul
of Sharpness.” Futsu-nushi is then the name of the owner
of this sword, and Ihahi-nushi is that given to him to denote
the fact of his worshipping the miraculous blade. Like
Kashima, the temple of Kadori is said to date from the
‘ Age of the Gods,’ and a family of hereditary arrow-makers
who claimed descent from Futsu-nushi is recorded * in the
Shiyauzhiroku as settled in Kahachi, like the descendants
of Takemika-dzuchi. In tho, Hitachi Fudoki p.

5, verso) occurs a curious passage with reference to this god
Futsu-nushi, to the effect that after subduing the violent
gods of the mountains and rivers, he felt a longing to return
to heaven, and so, leaving behind him his magic staff,
armour, spear, shield, sword and precious stones, he
mounted on a white cloud and ascended to the skies.

^ vol. ii. p. ig,

2 lhahi means ‘ to talk together ’ [Ihi-ahi), and therefore to rejoice in
company, to celebrate a festival, to worship ; so that Ihahi-nushi means
‘ the master who celebrates ’ or ‘ who worships.’

2 Kozhild Den, vol, xviii. p, 45. i Spelt phonetically.


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.


417


What clearer proof than this legend can we have of his
being simply a deified warrior chief? It is worthy of note
that both these gods are worshipped in the form of swords.

(400) The meaning of the name Ama-no-koya-ne or Ama-
tsu-koya-ne is even more , obscure. ^ Ama is of course the
same as Ame^ heaven, but there all certainty ends. Moto-
wori suggests that hoy a is a corruption of wohi-oya^ the
beckoning elder, which contains an allusion to the constant-
ly recalled incident of the sun-goddess ’ retirement into a
cave in consequence of Susanowo’s misconduct, on which
occasion it fell to the part of this god to invite her forth
from her seclusion by reciting the great ritual.” Ne is
considered by both Motawori and Hirata^ as a merely
honorific suffix to names of gods. Hirata takes koya to be
an inversion oiya-ko^ much heart or understanding, ho being
the radical part of hokoro, which in old Japanese is used for
mind, heart, intelligence, will and every other form or facul-
ty of the immaterial part of man. Both of these deriva-
tions are extremely far-fetched, and it is much more likely
that the god or hero from whom the Nakatomi were des-
cended took his name from a place called Koya in the
province of Tsu, in the department of Kahanobe, which
belonged to the chief branch of the tribe even down to the
time of Kamatari (b.^ 620, d. 675) in the 7th century. It
was Kamatari who took the surname of Fujihara, the other
members of the tribe retaining that of Nakatomi. His
youngest brother was the ancestor of the Kanmishi of
Kasuga. Oho-Nakatomi was adopted as a surname by
Omi-maro, a son of a first cousin^of Kamatari. The Fuji-
hara family gave up the service of the gods, and devoted
themselves entirely to politics, while the Nakatomi still
remained in the priesthood, which explains the fact that so
many of them were officials of the Zhingi Kuwan, or
Ministry of Shintau religion.


5 Motowori and Hirata call this god'hero Anie-nD'koya-ne.

6 vol. xiii. p. 2.


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.


The temple of Hirawoka, whence the worship of Ama-
no-koya-ne was brought to Kashima, is situated in the
department of Kahachi in the province of the same name.
To judge by the wood-cut at page page 23, vol. v., of
the Kahachi Meishiyo dztme, the buildings cannot be
very magnificent, but a noteworthy peculiarity of the
temple is the absence of a liaiden or oratory, and the wor-
shippers appear to prostrate themselves on the bare ground
below a raised terrace on which the chapels are ranged
(401) in line. According to the book just quoted, the other
three deities are Oho-hiru-me (the ^un-goddess), Futsu-nushi
and Mika-dzuchi. Himegami, or Lady-god, is the official
designation of the goddess in the national records, where
she is frequently mentioned, together with Ama-no-koya-ne,
as receiving some accession of rank and dignity in the
divine hierarchy, but always two or three grades below
him in rank, which is incomprehensible if we believe her
to have been the Sun-goddess ; and the explanation that
the Hime-gami is the wife of Ama-no-koya-ne is the one
which must be accepted.

A curious custom used formerly to be pi'actised at this
temple, called Mi kayu tcra, or Divination by gruel.”
On the 15th day of the ist moon, a quantity of beans
of the species called adzuki (phaseolus radiatus) having
been boiled in the presence of the gods, a roll of 54 tubes
of fine bamboo, each inscribed with the name of a kind of
seed-crop, was lowered into the semi-fluid mass, and from
the way in which the beans entered the tubes, the priests
drew inferences as to the probability of the particular crops
being successful or the reverse. The peasants then knew
what it would be best to sow during the year.

The temple of Kasuga is situated on the flank of a
hill, and is surrounded by a wooden arcade, closed on the
outside, and pierced by several gateways, the main entra-
nce being on the south. Inside of this first enclosure is
a second one, raised on a terrace, which is likewise sur-
rounded by an arcade, with a principal gate in front, to


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART IL


419


which access is given by two flights of steps. The or- .
din ary layman performs his obeisance in front of this gate-
way and only priests are allowed to enter further. There
is no oratory (haiden\ but the four chapels of the gods
are ranged in a row, beginning with that of Take-mika-
d^uchi on the right, and then in the following order to
the left, Futsu-nushi, Ama-no-koya-ne and the goddess.
The material of which the buidings are constructed is
chiefly wood, painted red, and pictorial decoration has
been applied very sparingly, as must have been unavoidable
in the case of a temple which used to he rebuilt every
twenty years.

The temple of Oharanu, near Kiyauto, was founded in
850, after the removal of the capital from Nara to its
modern site in the province of Yamashiro, and is dedicated
to the same gods as the temple of Kasuga. The court
apparently found it convenient to be able to invoke the gods
(402) without having to make a long journey of two days
to Nara and back on each occasion. The buildings are
on an insignificant scale, which shows that the temple was
a mere make-shift.

According to the Ceremonial Regulations (^iyaxigiman
gishiki) the service was performed twice in each year,
namely, on the first day of the monkey in the 2nd and
iith moons.

Before the celebration of the service, orders were given
to the Divination Office to fix a day, hour and locality for
a “ purification ” to be performed. On the day preceding
the purification a sort of tent was erected near the river
(i. e, the Kamo-gaha at Kiyauto), and at the hour appointed
the priestess who had been selected for the occasion pro-
ceeded to the place of purification in a bullock-car. The
procession was magnificent and ordered with extreme pre-
cision. It consisted of nearly one hundred and forty per-
sons, besides porters. First went two municipal men-at-
arms, with white staves, followed by two citizens and eight
officials of rank. They were succeeded by the bailiff of the
priestess’ official residence with four attendants, after whom


420


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— 'PART II.


Game ten corporals of the Guard of the Palace Gates and a
few men from the other four Imperial Guards. Next came
the car of the priestess herself, with eight attendants in
brown hempen mantles, two young boys in brown, and
four running foot-pages in white dresses with purple skirts.
A silk umbrella and a huge long-handled fan were borne
on either side of the car by four men in scarlet coats. Ten
more servants completed her immediate retinue. Then
came a chest full of sacrihcial utensils, and two carriages
containing a lady who seems to have acted as a sort of
dueha to the priestess, and the Mikado’s messenger, sur-
rounded by attendants in number suited to their rank.
Close behind them were borne two chests full of food-
offerings, and four containing gifts from the Mikado in-
tended for those members of the Fujihara family who at-
tended on the occasion. Seven carriages carried the female
servants of the priestess, each of them being a lady of rank,
and therefore accompanied by half-a-dozen followers of both
sexes. Two high officials of the provincial government of
Yamashiro awaited the procession at a convenient point,
and conducted it to the spot chosen for the ceremony of
purification. A member of the Nakatomi tribe presented
the nusa^ consisting of a white wand with hemp-fibre
hanging from its upper end, the symbol of the primitive
(403) offerings of greater value, and a Diviner^ read the
purification ritual. After the ceremony was over, refresh-
ments were served out, and the Mikado’s gifts distributed.
The priestess then returned to her official residence.

On her journey to the temple of Kasuga the priestess
was preceded by various priests, diviners, musicians, cooks
and other functionaries of inferior grade, who set out one


7 Miyazhi^ the term in the original here rendered ‘‘diviner,” is a con-
traction of miya-niishi, master of the House, the person who sacrificed
to the hearth god in the Mikado’s palace. Tozhi, the later meaning of
which is woman, was originally the person who discharged the same
function in the house of a subject. It was evidently the head of the
household who at first performed these sacrifices and the office was
afterwards delegated to another.


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II,


421


day earlier in the charge of an officer of the Minister of
Religion. At the boundary of the province of Yamato she
was received by officers of the provincial government, who
accompanied her to the temporary building erected for her
accommodation on the banks of the Saho-gaha. During
the day the rite of purification was performed on the western
side of the temple, and the offerings placed in readiness
for the final ceremony. At dawn on the following day
officials of the Ministry of Religion superintended the clean-
ing of the shrine by a young girl (monoAmi)y who had
been carefully guarded for some time previous from con-
tracting any ceremonial uncleanness, wdiile other officials
(handomo ) decorated the buildings and set out the sacred
treasures close to the shrines and by the side of the arcade
round the innermost enclosure. Everything being now in
readiness, the high officers of state who had come down
from the capital for the service entered by the gate assigned
to them, and took their seats in the outer court, followed
by members of the Fujihara family of the 6th rank and
under. The priestess now arrived in a palanquin, with a
numerous retinue of local functionaries, infantry and cavalry
soldiers, and followed by porters carrying the offerings of
the Mikado, his consort, the heir-apparent and of the
priestess herself. Next came race-horses sent by the
Mikado’s consort, by the heir-apparent and from the Six
Guards of the Palace, the rear of the procession being
brought up by a crowd of lesser officials and men-at-arms.
The palanquin of the priestess was surrounded by a large
body of guards, torch-bearers and running pages, umbrella
and screen-bearers, and women and girls on horseback.
(404) After them came the chest of sacrificial vessels, a
number of servants, three chests full of food-offerings, six
chests of clothing for the gods, with carriages containing
some of the Mikado’s female attendants, the priestess’
duefia and some young girls. On arriving at the north
gate on the west side of the temple enclosure, the men got
off their horses and the women descended from their car-
riages. The priestess then alighted from her palanquin,


422


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


and passing between curtains, held by her attendants in
such a way as to render her invisible to the crowd, entered
the waiting room prepared for her inside the court-yard,
followed by the women of the Mikado’s household. The
Mikado’s offerings were now brought forward by the Keeper
of the Privy Purse, and laid on a table outside the gate,
’while the women of the Household entered the inner en-
closure, and took their places in readiness to inspect the
offerings. In a few minutes they were joined by the
priestess, who had. changed her travelling-dress for sacri-
ficial robes. The Keeper of the Privy Purse now brought
the Mikado’s presents in through the gate, and placing
them on a table in front of the inidzit^gaki or inner fence,
saluted the chapels by clapping his hands four times, al-
ternately standing upright and bowing down to the ground.
On his retiring, the same ceremony was performed by the
persons charged with the offerings of the Mikado’s consort
and heir-apparent, after which the offerings of the Fujihara
and other noble families were deposited on lower tables,
with similar ceremonies. The Kandomo^ or subordinate
officials of the Ministry of Religion, next carried up the
Mikado’s offerings and delivered them to the rnono-imi,
who carried them into the chapel. The Kandomo then
spread matting on the ground in front of each of the
four chapels, and members of the Fujihara clan who held
a sufficiently high rank carried in and arranged the tables
desti'ned to recieve the food-offerings. Two barrels of sake
were then brought in and placed between the first and se-
cond and third and fourth chapels, in a line with the tables,
ajar oisake brewed by the priests being also placed in front
of each chapel. This over, every one quitted the enclosure,
making way for the women of the household, who un-
covered the food-offerings and poured out two cups of sake
for each deity. The liquor appears to have been of the
turbid sort called nigori-zake. All the preparation being
thus complete, the high officers of state and the messengers
sent by the court entered the enclosure and took their
(405) seats. Four saddle-horese intended as offerings to


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPAIjrESE RITUALS. — PART II.


423


the gods and eight race-^horses were now led up in front
of the temple, preceded by a major-general of the Guards
and the Master of the Horse. A superior priest, with his
brows bound with a fillet of paper-mulberry fibre (yufu^-
kadzura j, then advanced and read the ritual, bowed twice,
clapped his hands four times and retired. The congrega-
tion afterwards withdrew to the Nahorahi-den, or refectory,
where the food-offerings were consumed by the participants
in the solemn act of worship, and the sansai^ or thanks-
giving service, was conducted by the Kandomo of the
Ministry of Religion.

The sacred horses were then led eight times round the
temple by the grooms of the Mikado’s stables, who received
a draught of sanctified sake as their reward. The general
of the body-guard next directed some of his men to perform
the dance called Adzima-fnahi^ and when they had finish-
ed, a meal of rice was served to them with much cere-
mony by the Mikado’s cooks. At the command of the
Vice-Minister of Religion the harpists and flute-players
were summoned to perform a piece of music, called mi koto
fuwe aJiase, the concert of Harp and Flute ; the flutes
played a short movement alone, and were then joined by
the harps, whereupon the singers struck in. An officer
of the Ministry of Religion sang the first few bars, and
the official singers finished the piece. This was followed
by one of the dances called Yamato mahi, performed in
turn, by the principal priests of the temple, by members
of the Fujihara family and by the Vice-Minister of Religion
himself. After the sake-cup had been passed round three
times, the company clapped their hands once and separat-
ed. The priestess changed her robes for a travelling dress
and returned to her lodging in stately procession as before.
A Secretary of the Council of State then presented to the
Minister of State a list of non-official persons of rank who
had attended at the service, and the gifts of the Mikado
were distributed to them as their names were called out by a
clerk, after which everybody adjourned to the race-course
and the day was wound up with galloping-matches.


424 SATOW : ancient JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^PART IL

The procedure at the half-yearly festivals of Ohoharanu
was almost exactly the same.

(406) The Yengi Shiki gives lists, of the articles required
to be supplied at the two festivals of Kasuga, either as
offerings or in their preparation. The cost was defrayed
chiefly out of the revenues of the temples of Kashima and
Kaflori, which contributed between them 500 pieces of
tribute-cloth {tsuki-nuno 10^), 300 pieces of excise-cloth
{chikara-mino 600 pieces of commercial-cloth {aki-

nuno iSiP), 600 catties of hemp and 600 sheets of paper.
These articles were forwarded to the Ministry of Religion,
and deposited in the government store-houses as a fund
for the celebration of these services. Other offerings were
provided at the expense of the several departments of the
government, as for instance, the horses came from the
Mikado’s stables, and the matting from the Kamori no
tsukasa.

In the ritual a mirror, sword, bow and spear are enu-
merated among the presents, but as no provision is made
in the regulations for furnishing these articles, it seems
probable that the same sword, bow and spear were brought
out year after and used again, while the mirror was no
doubt permanently placed in the temple in front of the
gods. It must not be forgotten that in the beginning of
the loth century, when these regulations were drawn up,
the practice of the Shiiitau religion had become a matter of
form, and it seems likely that the mirror seen until a few
years back in every Shifitau temple had then already as-
sumed its place before the shrine. In the regulations for
the conduct of the service of the Wind-gods at Tatsuta, the
use of the same saddle on the horse-oflering year after year,
until it became too old and ragged for the purpose, is
specially ordered.

The ‘ bright cloth, glittering cloth, soft cloth and coarse
cloth ’ consisted, according to the Yengi regulations, of
7 feet of asJiiginu (coarse silk), 23 feet of tribute cloth,
36 feet of bleached cloth and 12 pieces (each about 12 yards
in length) of commercial cloth, all being fabrics of inferior


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


425


quality and representing a very small value in money. The
^ things wide of fin and things narrow of fin,’ i.e, large fish
and small fish, are represented by bonito, tahi (Serranus mar-
ginalis), haliotis and cuttle fish (sepia), six catties of each.

‘ Weeds of the offing and weeds of the shore ’ are represent-
ed by six catties of me (Halochlea. sp.). For ‘ things of the
mountains and plains — even to sweet herbs and bitter herbs,’
beans of two sorts (daidzu^ Glycine hispida and adzuki^
Phaseolus radiatus), (407) oranges and miscellaneous fruits
were offered. Of ordinary rice and mochi rice 3 to (about
i-L bushels) each, and of sake koku (about 58 gallons)
were allowed. Besides these offerings there were provided
a large number of coarse earthen -ware dishes and cups of
various kinds, the very form of which is now forgotten in
most cases, nothing but their names having been preserved.

The principal service was followed by the sansai, or
thanksgiving for the feast, at which the food-offerings were
consumed. The Yengi Shiki states the amounts of the
various articles supplied for this service, but we have no
account of the ceremonies observed. Nor are any details
given about the ceremonies of ‘ purification ’ (harahi
which preceded the brewing of sacred sake for use at the
festival (properly called mi ki)^ nor of the service of the
fire-places where the mi ki was manufactured, although
we learn incidentally that such ceremonies were performed
in connection with the principal service.


RITUAL.

[translation]

[Note. — The words in italics are supplied in order to complete the
sense of the original.]

The sovran who is called According to his great word
says in the great presence of the four pillars of sovran gods,
namely, dread Mika-dzuchi’s augustness who sits in Kashi-
ma, Ihahi-nushi’s augustness who sits in Kadori, Ama-no-
koya-ne’s augustness and the lady-deity who sit in Plira-
woka.


4^6


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — ^PART II.


He says : In accordance with the request which the
great gods have deigned to make, the builders have widely
set-up the HousE-pillars on the bottom-most rocks of Ka-
suga’s Mikasa yama, and have made-high the cross-beams
to the plain-of-high-heaven, and have humbly^ fixed it as
their Shade from the heavens and their Shade from the
sun ; — as to the divine treasures which are set-up, humbly
providing a mirror, a sword, ^ a bow, spear and a horse ;
— as to CLOTHING, taking^ bright cloth, glittering cloth, soft
cloth, coarse cloth, and ranging-in-rows the first-fruit of the
tribute^ set-up by the regions of the four quarters ; as to
things of the blue-sea-plain — things wide of fin and things
narrow of (408) fin, weeds of the offing and weeds of the
shore ; as to things of the mountains and wilds — even to
sweet herbs and bitter herbs, as to Liquor, raising-high the
beer-jars, filling and ranging-in-rows the bellies of the beer-
jars, and piling up the various things like a range of hills —
namely the great offerings which he sets-up, having fixed
upon such-and-such an officer, named so-and-so, as Kan-
nushi (priest), he humbly fulfils the praises of the sovran
great deities, by saying them it 3 .n(]n\\\y and peacefully
as peaceful and sufficient offerings.

He says I humbly fulfil your praises, saying : in con-
sequence of my having done this, humbly praise the court
of the sovran peacefully and tranquilly, and as a satisfactory
and luxuriant age, and humbly bless it unchangingly and
eternally, and deign to prosper also the princes and coun-
cillors of the vario-iis places and houses^ who share in the
administration and serve, and cause them to serve tran-
quilly in the court of the sovran like the perpetual growth
of luxuriant trees.

[Note. — The rituals of Ohobarano, Hirawoka, etcetera, are similar
to this.]

NOTES.

stmcra ga oho mikoto ni mase, with which the
ritual commences, presents considerable difficulty. Mabuchi got over
this by simply changing mase into masti^ so that the altered passage
meant ‘it is the great word of the sovran.’ But apart from the


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART XI. 427

apparent want of connection between such a sentence and that which
immediately succeeds it, the fact that this phrase oho mlkoto ni mase
occurs several times in the Scn-miyan or Royal Announcements

in the Shiyohi Nihongi and in the Ruzahhiun Kokushi

and alwa3'’s in such a context that it must be translated as
a compound noun, prevents us from accepting his emendation. In an
Announcement of Ohowi no Mikado (750-764) occurs the sentence mata
oho mikoto ni mase non-tamahnku^ again the oho mikoto ni mase deigned
to say, where the expression under examination is clearl}’’ used as a
synonym for sovereign. An Announcement of Shiyaumu Tenwau of the
year 743 opens with sumcra (ga) oho mikoto

111 mase mawoshi tamahahi, the sovereign (’s) oho mikoto ni mase deigns
to report, Le. to his mother, the ex-Mikado Genshiyau. Besides these
two undoubted cases of the use of this term to denote the Mikado, there
are four other passages which are most probably to be read in the same
manner. In the Announcement by which the Mikado Genmei Tenwau
makes known her accession to the throne on the death of her son and
predecessor Monmu, she relates first that in the previous year he had
desired to abdicate on account of ill-health, and had addressed her in
the following words : Arc mi mi tsukarashiku masu ga yuwe ni Uomet
yete mi yarnahi wosamctaniahamu to su, Kono ama tsu hitsngi no
kurawi ha oho mikoto ni mase oho niaslii mashite wosame tamafu beshi:
(409) Because my Body is fatigued I intend to take leave and order-
aright my disease. Thou shalt deign to be oho mikoto ni mase and
order-aright the seat of the successor of heaven’s sun, or more freely,

‘‘‘ Thou shall be oho mikoto ni mase and occupy the throne of the sun’s
descendant.” In all the copies of the Shiyokn Nihongi^ MS. or printed,
the Chinese characters are evidently a mistake,

and Motowori is right in reading ^ instead. The phrase occurs again,
ist in a joint Announcement of Shiyaumu Teilwau and his daughter
Kauken TeSwau in 749, on the occasion of his resigning the throne to
her, 2nd in an Announcement issued by Shiyaumu TeSwau proclaiming
his accession in 724, and 3rd in his Announcement of the year 729 by
which the chronological style was altered from 2 ihinki to Tenbiyau. In
the first of these the MSS. and printed books have to instead of 5c, which
is Motowori’s emendation ; hut as the former makes no sense at all, while
the correction does, it may fairly be accepted. There is no hana in
either second or third of these cases, but in the second
is evidently the subject of the verb noritamahaku which follows immedi-
ately, and it is therefore necessary to read sumera mikoto no oho mikoto
ni mase, by comparison with the first three examples concerning which
there is no doubt whatever. In the third case we have with-

out any kana at all. It would be possible to read oho mikoto ni masu
snmera ha, and to translate, “ I, the sovran, who am the great august-
ness,” but there is absolutely no evidence jn favour of such a reading.


428


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANJPSE RITUALS,— PART 11.


I do not know of any passage where the Mikado is called a ‘great
augustness,’ ‘ oho mikoio^’ and the term mikoto is never used except as
part of a title or as an abbreviated way of speaking of the person who
bears that title, after he has been previously mentioned in the same
passage. So that we are driven to read masc here, as in the other cases.
In the RmvlMynn Kohishi, bk. 36. p. 7, there is an undoubted case of
the use of this term sumera ga

oho mikoto ni mase Ihatsukiiri no yama no fiiisasagi ni mawoshttama-
hakUi “ the sovran oho mikoto ni masc deigns to report to the tomb on
mount Ihatsukuri,” and it is found also at the beginning of the Hirano
Ritual.

It remains to inquire what is the literal meaning of Oho mikoto ni mase*
The last word is the only one which presents any difficulty. Motowori
suggests that ^ is merely a ‘borrowed character,’ used to express quite
a different ma from that which it usually means, and that this ma is
identical with the root which we find reduplicated in the expression ma
ma ni, in accordance with, in ma ni ma ni, an old form of the same, and
also in makase, to leave to, to submit to. The whole phrase would then
signify ‘ submitting to ’ or ‘ in accordance with the great command,’ and
he supposes that it may have been so constantly used of the Mikado as
to sink finally into the condition of a mere epithet, and so have become
a title; just as some of the attributive phrases called maknra-kotoha,
abandoning their original function of epithets, came to denote the sub-
stantives to which they had originally been prefixed. This suggestion
is not wanting in plausibility, especially as we find the term joined to
the preceding word stmera (or sumera mikoto) as often by ga as by no*
Though there seems good reason to believe that (410) no was a particle
of apposition (not to say a verb) before it became a possessive particle,
ga in the early Japanese is almost always a possessive particle, and
never pecame appositive. In the passage quoted from the Rtiwizhiyuu
Kokushi, and in the two rituals where the expression under discussion
occurs, the particle ga is used, with a sense, as it were, of the original
meaning, while in only one place it is preceded by no, which might be
understood either as possessive or appositive.

iMatsnri is here rendered by ‘humbly,’ its real character being that
of an auxiliary verb, originally meaning ‘to serve.’ From being used as
a verb expressing humility on the part of the speaker, it became a mere
mark of polished speech, like safurafic and habem of the written Ian-
guage, and masn in the modern colloquial language. (See Aston:
Grammar of the Written Language, 2nd edit., p. 174.)

3 The words for sword and bow in the original are hakashi and tarashi*
The authority for reading JJ as hakashi is firstly the tradition among
the Shiutau priests that it is to be so read in this place, and secondly a
passage in the Nihongi (see editn. bk. 7, p. 12, verso) in a name
MJiW: which is followed by the explanatory note WZfUtSSKsIgSv,


SATOW ; ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II. 429

august sword is here called mikahashL Hakashi is the root of hahasUy
a form of haktc, to wear, and means, therefore, a ‘ thing worn,’ Taraski
is probably a corruption of torashi (which is adopted by Hirata as the
better reading, in spite of the voice of tradition), which in like manner is
the root of a ‘ lengthened form ’ of torn^ to take, to grasp, and in the
sense of a ‘ thing to grasp ’ might very well be used to denote a bow.
The term ‘lengthened form,’ which Japanese grammarians are very
fond of using to denote forms ending in afti or asu instead of n (only in
the case of verbs of the first conjugation), must be cautiously used.
There are examples in the modern colloquial language of the introduc-
tion of a redundant syllable ka^ as in tsnkarakasu for tstikarasu ; fnhtra-
kasii for fukurasu; chirakasii for chirasn ; fuyahasu for fuyasiu;
ikarakasu for ikarastt, which seems to* be simply due to natural
impulse towards the employment of emphasis, of which matsugu for
mas7{gu ; matsnhira (pronounced mappira) for mahira are other examples.
But the archaic forms in cisu and afiL may be explained in another way.
In a certain number of verbs this termination in afti is due to the suf-
fixing of the verb afu, to meet, used as a substitute for the adverb
‘mutually’; thus tatakafu^ to fight, is tatakUafUi to beat mutually;
katarafu, to persuade, is katari-aftt^ to tell to each other ; hakarafu^ to
manage, is hakari-afu^ to weigh together, in the metaphorical sense ;
mukaftty to be opposite, is miikl-afiiy to be mutually turned towards; .
tsiigafUy to pair, is tsiigi-afti,, to be connected together. IhafUy to cele-
brate, is probably ihi-afuy to talk of together, and perhaps rttafuy to
sing, is nchi-afUy to beat time together. Just as the root ahl-, which
originally was prefixed to verbs in the same way as afti is suffixed, i,e.
in the sense of ‘ mutually,’ frequently occurs, sometimes even in the
poems of the MaSyefu, with no meaning at all, so it seems not improb-
able that the practise of ^^dding-afu to the root of a verb and dropping the
final vowel of the root, came to be pretty general, without the speaker
having any consciousness (4x1) of its signification. To prefixes like
ahi~, uchi-y fori-y ma-y the original meaning of which is patent and say iy
the derivation of wjiich is not yet known, the term ornamental prefix
may be applied, and -afu in like manner might be called an ornamental
suffix. In some cases the ornamenral form has been accepted for ordi-
nary use in the modern language, to the exclusion of the simpler, as ne-
gafiiy to pray for, formerly negu, and tamafiiy to deign, formerly tabtiy
while in suimt> and stimafii both are used concurrently. The termination
-asu seems to have come into use in a similar manner. Just as in the
modern spoken tongue causative verbs are often inflected at the choice
of the speaker, as if they belonged to both conjugations, so in the old
language there was much confusion between verbs of the first and second
conjugations (yo dan no kataraki and 7ii dan no hafarakijy of which the
confusion between verbs in >su and -seru is only a particular case. Such
forms as


430


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


tatasu^ to stand, to start;
karasu, to reap ;
waiarasti, to cross ;
kikasu, to hear ;
tohasu^ to ask ;

■ shintibasHy to love ;


nagekasii, to lament ;
wemasuy to smile ;
omohosuy to think ;
morasiiy to guard ;
himasiiy to draw (water) ;
ohasuy to wear (a girdle) ;


were probably at first causative verbs used honorifically, and as it is the
well-known tendency of all honorific epithets and phrases to desc^'^nd in
the social scale, until they come to be used without distinction per-
sons, so it became a common practice to use this corrupted ca^‘ative
form in -su indifferently, merely for the purpose of ornament. Innu-
merable examples are to be found in the MaSyefushifu, and because
they are so common in the old poetry, it is considered a sufficient ex-
planation to say that they are poetical forms ; but it can hardly he
supposed that in any language special forms were invented for use in
poetry. The most reasonable explanation of ‘ poetical forms ’ is the
fact that variety of expresion is one of the principal means of giving
ornament to a composition, and that synonymous and alternative forms
were retained in poetic diction, after they had been discarded for the
sake of convenience in plain prose and conversation.

Ni tsukalicmahitrltCy here freely rendered ‘ taking,’ is the equivalent
of the modern conversational ‘ ni shite,' which is used in the sense of
choosing one out of many things offered or present for selection. Tsu-
kahe-maisttru is seen at once to be a compound of tsnkahcriiy to be em-
ployed, and mafstiruy to serve, used as an auxiliary verb, as in the com-
pound tatcmatsimiy to set up humbly, to offer to a superior. In the
modern form of this word the syllable he has been dropped, and it has
become tsnkamatsuru, used as a polite substitute for suruy to do.

5 The word rendered ‘tribute’ is wi'tsugi, a compound of the usual
honorific prefix iniy and fsugiy root of tsngUy to continue (t.v.), used as a
substantive, that which is continued in order to supply a constant want,
uc, anything supplied (without payment) for the support of another. In
the modern languags there is a verb mitsugu derived from mitsiigly
which means to contribute towarde (412) the support of a person whose
income is insufficient for his needs. ‘ Contribution ’ best renders the
etymological signification, but ‘ tribute ’ more fitly expresses the portion
of produce paid to the sovereign by way of income.

^ By ‘ places ’ is meant departments of the government, and by ‘ hous-
es ’ the families to which the princes and the Mikado’s councillors
belonged.


o


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART IL


431


No 3.— HIROSE OHO-IMI NO MATSURI, SERVICE
OF THE GODDESS OF FOOD.

According to the Riyaic no Gige or Exposition

of Administrative Law, there were two Oho-imi no matsuri,
the object of which was ‘ to cause the waters of the moun-
tain gorges to change into sweet waters and to fertilize the
young rice-plants, so that a full harvest might be reaped.’
One of these was at Hirose, dedicated to the goddess Waka-
uka-no-me ; the other at Tatsuta, dedicated to the Wind
Gods. No satisfactory explanation has yet been given of
the name Oho-imi. We learn from the Yengi Shiki that
both services were celebrated twice in each year, on the
4th days of the 4th and 7th moons, first when the rice-plant
was springing up, and afterward when it was ripe, but this
can only mean the early variety called wase. The Zhhi-
zhiya Keimon identifies Waka-uka-no-me with

the Food-goddess of the Gekuu temple in Ise. Other
names of this goddess are Toyo-uke-bime, child of Waku-
musubi the Vegetative Producer the growth of plants
personified), who was the offspring of Ho-musubi, god of
Summerheat, and Hani-yama-bi-me, goddess of earth^;
Oho-getsu-bi-me, under which name - she is regarded as
the child of Izanagi and Izanami^ Uka-no-mi-tama, child
of Susanowo and the daughter of the God Mountains, Oho-
yama-tsu-mi®; Oho-mi-ketsu kami in the Praying for Har-
vest, Uke-mochi no kami^; Toyuke in the ‘ History of the
Inundation of the temple of the sovran deity Toyuke,’ To-
youka no kami in the KozJiiki^ Toyo-uka-no-me no mikoto
as the goddess of sake, which is prepared from rice, Oho-
uka no kami in the Catalogue of Temples and Toyo-woka-
hime no kami in the Kagura-uta. Hirata^ and MabuchF
agree in identifying the goddess of Hirose with the Food-
goddess of Ise.

1 K. Zh. K. D. vol 5, p. 51. ^ vol. 5, p. 50.

3 Ib. vol. 9, p. 50 ; Nihongi Shifuchiynu, vol. i, p. 14 verso, p. 22 verso.

^ Ib. p- 26 verso ; p. 28. ^ Vol. 15, p. 30 verso.

C § 13. ^ Norito-kau, vol. i,,p. 28 verso.


43 ?


SATOW • ANCIENT JAPANESE RITtJALS.—PART II.


(413) The text of this Ritual is probably corrupt, at least
the latter portion of it. The phrase Sovran gods who
dwell in the entrances to the mountains of the six FarMs
of Yamato ” is nonsense, for the six Farms were not situat-
ed in the same localities as the temples of the entrances to
the mountains, as can be seen from the passages in the
‘ Praying for Harvest,’ where their worship is spoken of.
The gods of the ‘ entrances to the mountains ’ were wor-
shipped for the sake of the timber which grew under their
care, and had nothing to do with the supply of water, for
which the * gods who dwell in the partings of the waters ’
are worshipped. Nor is it consonant with the functions of
either the Farm or Forest gods that they should be be- ,
sought ^‘not to inflict bad winds and rough waters.” It
was natural enough in worshipping the goddess of food to
offer up prayers also to the gods of the farms where the rice
was to be grown under her protection, and likewise to the
gods of water, without whose aid irrigation of the growing
rice was impossible, and as the goddess of food was at the
same time the goddess of trees, we can perhaps see how the
worship of the forest gods may have come to be conjoined
by mistake with hers. Motowori thinks that the original
norito of this extremely ancient service must have been
lost, and replaced much later with one composed by ignor-
ant priests, who borrowed a piece from the Praying for
Harvest and a phrase or two from the service of the gods of
wind ii.e. about" bad winds and rough waters), and mixed
the Farms, Forests and Waters to together in one petition.

It appears from a passage in the regulations for conduct-
ing the legular services that a hciTcthi or purification was
performed in connection with this service, probably before
its celebration, in order to purify the principal persons who
were to take part in the ceremony, as we have seen was
done before the Kasuga service, where the priestess ad hoc
underwent lustration. The list of articles to be expended
for the Hirose seivice contains the item 2 kin and 5
riyait (a little over 3 lbs.) of hemp, of which 5 riyatc are for
this service and the 2 kin for the purification.” The re-


SATOW : ANCIEKT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


433


maining articles in the list were apparently intended either
for offerings, or to be used in some way or other in connec-
tion with their presentation. Worship was also celebrated
on the same day at the temple of the six imperial domains
and at the fourteen temples of the Mikado’s timber-forests,
the allowance of cloth and (414) other few articles being
extremely small, but each god received a spearhead and a
mantlet. No account of the ceremonies is to be found in
books.


RITUAL,

[translation.]

He declares the name of the sovran god whose praises
are fulfilled at Kahahff in Hirose. Declaring her name as
the Young-food-woman’s augustness (Waka-uka-no-me no
mikoto), who rules^ over the food, he fulfils praises in the
PRESENCE of this sovraii deity. He says : Hear all ye
KaRnushi and Hafuri the fulfilling of praises, by sending
the princes and councillors to lift up and bring the great
OFFERINGS of the sovran grandchild’s augustness.

He says : Deign to declare in the presence of the sovran
deity that as to great offerings which are set-up — he de-
posits in abundance and offers up, as to clothing — -bright
cloth, glittering cloth, fine cloth and coarse clo^h, the five
kinds of things,® a mantlet, spear and horse ; and as to
LIQUORS, raising-high the beer-jars, filling and ranging-in
rows the bellies of the beer-jars, in soft grain and in coarse
grain as to things which dwell in the mountains — things soft
of hair and things rough of hair; ® as to things which grow in
the great-field-plain — sweet herbs and bitter herbs, as to
things which dwell in the blue-sea-plain, things wide of fin
and things narrow of fin, down to weeds of the offing and
weeds of the shore.

He says : Declare in the presence of the sovran deity that
if the sovran deity with peaceful and tranquil heart accepts
as peaceful offerings and sufficient offerings the great


434


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.


OFFERINGS thus set-up, and if the sovran deity will deign to
perfect and bless in many-bundled ears the sovran deity’s
harvest-fields in the first place and also the late-ripening har-
vest which the children,® princes, councillors and great
PEOPLE^ of the region-under-heaven, shall make by dripping
the foam from their arms and drawing the mud together be-
tween the opposing thighs, in order that it may be taken by
the Sovran grandchild’s augustness with ruddy countenance
as his long food and distant food he will draw hither the
(415) first-fruits both in liquor and in husk, even to a thou-
sand plants and many thousand plants, and piling them up
like a range of hills, will offer them up at the autumn
service, 2

He says : Hear all ye Kannushi and Hafuri, He sets-
up the g3;eat offerings of the sovran grandchild’s august-
ness, bright cloth, glittering cloth, soft cloth and coarse
cloth, the five kinds of things, down to the mantlet and
spear, in the presence of the sovran gods also who dwell in
the entrances of mountains of the six farms^ of the pro-
vince of Yamato. As to the setting-up of offerings in this
way, if the water which the sovran gods deign to send
boiling down the ravines from the entrances of the moun-
tains which they rule be received as sweet water, and ye^^
will deign to bless the late-ripening harvest which the
great people of the region under heaven have made, and
deign not ^to inflict on it bad winds and rough waters, the
princes, councillors, functionaries, down to the male and
female servants of the six farms of the province of Yamato,
will all come forth on the [number] day of the [number]
month of this year, to set-up the first fruits in juice and in
the husk, raising-high the beer-jars, filling and ranging-in-
rows the bellies of the beer-jars, piling-up the offerings like
a range of hills, and plunging down the root of the neck
cormorant-wise in the presence of the sovran gods, will
fulfil praises as the morning sun rises in glory.

, • NOTES.

^Kahahi, the name of the village in Hirose department where the tem-
ple stands, is evidently a contraction of kaha-ahh the meeting of streams.


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


435


The Yamato-gaba runs past the back of the grove, and is met by a smaU
brook which flows along the side of the temple.

^Motamru : Motowori object to the final syllable -r//, but if the so-call-
ed lengthened forms are primarily honorific, then the regular causative
verb belonging to the 2nd conjugation must have been the original form,
and fuoictsu^ for which he contends, a corruption. See note 2 on hcikctshi
in the Kasuga Ritual. Mochif to rule over, in the sense of having a cer-
tain department committed to one’s charge; as Yama-tsu-mi no kami
rules over the mountains and Wata-tsu-mi no kami over the sea, so this
goddess has charge of the Food, i.c. the Mikado’s food.

sThe phrase rendered ‘ the five kinds of things ’ might also be Mhe
things of five colours,’ and in the list of articles to be furnished as offer-
ings we find the entry ‘thin coarse-silk of five colours, 15 feet of each,’
which seems to correspond closely to the language of the Ritual. But
it is hardly safe to draw too strict an inference from such a coincidence,
for in many cases the iiorito speaks of offerings which are not provided
for by the Ycngl Shikl, and omits to mention several of those that are
actually presented.

{416) i ‘ Soft grain ’ is the grain of rice divested of its husk and ready to
be boiled for food ; ‘ coarse grain ’ is paddy, or rice before it has been
hulled.

5 Birds and beasts, that is, game of various kinds.

c Mi-kOi august child, is the old Japanese designation of a child of the
Mikado, and is used as the equivalent of the Chinese Shin wan
Prince of the Blood,-

7 The Chinese characters here translated ‘ great people ’ are

variously read by different editors and commentators. Nobuyoshi and
Mabuchi have ohotakara^ the Deha-boS edition of the Yengi Shiki has
ohomu iakara, while Motowori and Hirata both adopt the reading oho
mi takara. The solitary passage in support of this last reading, quoted
from the Gouka no Shidai, in reality proves nothing at all. This is
part of a proclamation of amnesty for ordinary offences, which says :
“ In consequence whereof he (the Mikado) deigns to pardon. Let each
return to his own home, and not repeat his offence, but becoming oho
mi takara furnish tribute.” It is clear, however, that the

char. might be translated literally, ‘imperial treasure,’ loyal sub-

jects who pay their taxes regularly being naturally regarded as treasures
by their sovereign, hut we need not infer from this single example that
this was the usual term employed to denote the Mikado’s people. Hori
suggests oho mi tmnu great people, which is a more likely reading.

SThe original of this passage can only be construed by omitting, as
Motowori suggests, the seven char. Norito

Kan, vol. 1, p. 31, line 3; in the Norito Shiyauknn, part i, page g
verso, line 3).

9 The gods who dwell in the entrances of the mountains are gods of


436


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II,


the forests, to whom altogether fourteen temples were dedicated, named
in the Catalogue of Temples, and all situated within the province of
Yamato. See note 41 to the Praying for Harvest. They had nothing
to do with supplying the ricefields with water or protecting them fcom
wind storms. This lest section is evidently a hash of the three petitions
at the end of the Praying for Harvest, made by a priest who was igno-
rant of their real meaning and purport. This is one reason for think-
ing that the art of composing norito had been quite lost by the time
when the Yengi Shiki was compiled.

ga mikola, lit., thy augustness, must be taken as addressed to
the gods of the mountains, and therefore rendered by the plural pro-
noun. The older texts and Mabuchi read Afmiashi mikoto^ which seems
hardly so good.

In the Original is the char. ^ sore no, which is used in Japanese
just as we leave a blank to be filled up with the required number.


No. 4.--.TATSUTA KAZE NO KAMI NO
MATSURI, SERVICE OF THE GODS
OF WIND AT TATSUTA.

In the Catalogue of Temples contained in vol. ix. of the
Yengi Shiki are two entries of temples at Tatsuta, in Hegu-
ri department of the (417) province of Yamato ; firstly, one
containing two shrines to Ame no mi hashira and Kuni no
mihashira, both giU or ‘ famous gods ’ {natataru kami) and
ranking as greater shrines (see Praying for Harvest p. 105)
entitled to take part in the Tsuki-nami, or so-called month-
ly services, and in the Nihi-name or Harvest Festival;
secondly, a smaller temple containing two shrines dedicated
to Tatsuta hiko and Tatsuta hime, Youth and Maiden of
Tatsuta. The first of these is evidently the temple at
which this Ritual was used, and it exists to this day on the
same spot, at a village called Tatsuno, marked on most of
the maps of the province of Yamato. Other temples to the
gods of wind are in Naka department in the province of
Idxu, called Kuni no mi-hashira no . 2 ^hiS-zhiya, at Yamada
in Ishikaha department in the province of Kahachi, called
Shinaga no KhiHxhiya, and in the grounds of the temple of
the Sun-goddess in Ise there is also a shrine to the god of


SATOW; ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


437


wind. In the KozhikP- only a single god of wind is meii'
tioned, Shina-tsu-hiko no kami, said to have been begotten
by Izanagi and I^^anami. The Nihongi’^ on the other hand
says that after Izanagi and Izanami had begotten the
country of many islands, Izanagi said: ^^The country
which I have begotten is completely beclouded and filled up
with morning-mists.'’ The breath with which he then blew *
away the mists became a god, called Shinatobe no kami and
also Shinatsu-hiko. ‘‘This is the god of wind.” But the text
of the Ritual shows clearly that there were two wind-deities,
one male and one female, who are first called Ame-no-mi-
hashira and Kuni-no-mi-hashira, Heaven’s Pillar and
Country’s Pillar, and are afterward called the youth-deity
and maiden-deity Qiiko -garni and liime-gami). From this
it may safely be concluded that Shinatsu hiko is the name
of the male and Shinatobe that of the female god of wind,
he being the equivalent of woman (h and m being con-
stantly interchanged), to^tsu, the generic particle. To and
tsu are also interchangeable, as shown for instance in sever-
al passages in the Manyefushifu^ wh^rtmato is written with
a pine tree, usually i*ead niatstL Shina is for shi-naga,
long breath, shi being an obsolete word for breath, seen in
tama-shi-hi, squl= precious-breath-fire, shinunt, to die^s/zi
hmru^ breath departs, shinaga-dori long-breathed bird, ap-
plied to a species of duck.^ Long-breathed youth and
Long-breathed maiden, (418) as we may most euphoniously
render these names, are very appropriate epithets for gods
of wind, which is always blowing and- never seems out of
breath, but the teachers of Shifitau are not content with
such an obvious idea. They base their explanation of the
name upon the assumed verity of the myth, and say that it
was necessary for Izanagi, in blowing away the mists which
obscured the land, to continue the emission of breath for a
long time, and hence the appellation given to the gods who
were evolved from his breath. It is more difficult to explain
the names Heaven’s Pil lar and Country’s Pillar. Heaven

^K. Zh. K. D. vol. 5, p- 41* ^Nlhongi Shifuchiyuu^ vol. i, p. 15*

3The is the original authority for this explanation of shtna.


438


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II.


and Country are more often used as correlatives in the ear-
liest Japanese literature than Heaven and Earth. The an-
cient Japanese must have imagined the sky to be extremely
light arid buoyant by nature if they looked upon the wind as
the sole agent which prevented' it from falling to the ground,
yet this is the explanation given by Motowori, and adopted
by his followers. If hashira originary meant pillar, then
the epithet ‘country’s pillar’ is not easy to understand.
The wind might be supposed to support the sky, but not
the earth. The only way out of the difficulty is to conjec-
ture that the first idea was to call the wind ten chi no
hashira, as being a pillar planted on the earth and bearing
the heavens on its summit, and that this phrase when
translated into norito language became ante no mi-hashira
and kuni no mi-hashira, thus bringing the names into har-
mony with the more ancient recognition of the winds as a
pair of gods. It seems clear from the Ritual itself that
these names were given to the wind-gods by the Mikado
who founded the temple of Tatsuta, and who, there is reason
to believe, was Tefimu Teiiwau (673-686), so that there
would be nothing surprising in the epithets having in reality
originated from the Chinese expression ten-chi, heaven and
earth.

It is true that that the word hashi in the sense of ^ bridge’
and ‘ladder’ (the ordinary word hashigo for staircase or
ladder is compounded of this hashi and ko, an archaic form
o£ ki, tree or wood), and hashira seem to be closely allied,
and at first to have signified generally anything which fills
up and bridges over a gap. 'The Japanese do not seem to
have held the theory that the sky is shaped like an in-
verted bowl placed over a flat surface, but rather that it
was a flat thing generally equidistant from the earth.
Inhabitants of flat countries might naturally adopt the
former view, while it would be a fact daily making
(419) itself patent to a race of active mountaineers and
huntsmen that there was no real limit to the horizon,
whenever they climbed a hill and saw lying at their feet
localities and objects which were invisible to them before


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS* — PART 11.


439


they ascended. Thus they might have conceived of the
wind as a something that filled up the gap between earth
and heaven, and also as the means of transit from one to
the other, by observing the flight of birds for long distances
borne by the wind, and the elevation in the air of dust,
dead leaves and other objects. For this reason it appeared
quite natural to believe that the Sun-goddess, when sent
forth from the earth by her father Izanagi to assume her
sovereignty over the kingdom of heaven, should travel
thither by the Aym no mi hashira, the thing that bridged „
over the distance from heaven, in other words the wind.
The interpretation which makes out this ame no mi hashira
by which she ascended, to have been a solid pillar of earth,
which in the early days of the world united it to the sky,
but afterwards fell flat on its side and became a sand-spit in
the province of Idzumo, is a modern invention for the pur-
pose of the explaining the cosmogony of the teachers of
‘ pure Shistau.’

The institution of the worship of the wind gods is usually
attributed by the commentators to Suuzhiii Tefiwau, al-
though no such fact is recorded in either the Nihongi or
Kozhiki, They found this view upon the phrase Shiki-
sliinia ni ohoyashima-guni shiroshimeshishi surne mi nia no
mikoto in the Ritual, which they take to mean ‘ the Sovran ■
grandchild’s augustness who ruled the great-eight-island-
country at Shikishima,’ and they say that Shikishima is
the same as the ancient department or hundred of Shiki in
Yamato, where the residence of that Mikado is said to have
been situated. There was another Mikado, namely Kitimei
TeEwau (540-571), whose palace was called Shikishima no
Ohomiya, the great House of Shikishima, and it would be
more reasonable, if the question were to be decided by the
mere name, to attribute the foundation of the temple to
this sovereign. In the Mcinyefushifu we find Shikishima
u^ed as the maknra-kotoha, or recognized epithet, of Yamato
no kuni, which in those passages means the whole of Japan,
and not the province of Yamato by itself. If we give to
this expression its most natural and obvious 'meaning of


440 SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— PART II. ‘

‘ spread-out islands/ then its employment as an epithet for
the whole country is seen to be extremely apt, and its ap-
plication to Oho-ya-shima-guni, another of the (420) poetical
names of Japan, would be perfectly natural. We should of
course expect to find the particle no after Shikishima in
such a case, but there was a certain indefiniteness in the
use in early Japanese of the particles no and ni, which
appear to have been more or less interchangeable. The
phrase in the original might consequently be used to denote
any Mikado who ever sat on the throne of Japan. Mabuchi
and Motowori were led to interpret this passage as referring
to a previous Mikado by the verb sliiroshitnesJii being put
in the past tense, sliiro^ilmnesliislii, but this termination shi
is evidently an error. Even if it were necessary here to
denote past time, shi would not be correct, and under any
circumstances shiroshiiiiesu must have been the original
form used, just as we have tsnknru mono and not tsukurishi
mono just afterwards. They took the first part of the Ritu-
al to be a recital of events which had occurred long pre-
viously to its composition, but it was clearly composed for
the first celebration of the worship of the gods of Tatsuta,
and used without alteration ever afterwards. In the Ni-
hongi (Shifuchiyuu, bk. 29, p. 8 verso) we have the positive
statement that Tefimu Tenwau in the 4th year of his reign
(676) ^sent two persons from the court to worship the
Wind-gods at Tatsuno in Tatsuta, and two others to wor-
ship Oho-imi no kami (the goddess of Food) at the bend
of the river in Hirose/ the meaning of which is probably
that the temples of the Wind -gods and the goddess of Food
were then founded at those places. Some Japanese scholars
think that they recognixe in this Ritual indications of its
having been composed about the time of Teiimu TeSwau,
and certainly neither it nor the Hirano Ritual appears to
belong to the oldest of these compositions. The few ar-
chaic words which it contains are to be found in poems of
the Manyefushifii fifty or sixty years later.

It is interesting to note that we have in -this Ritual a '
legend (for it is nothing more) of the way in which the


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS PART II.


441


winds first came to be worshipped. During a succes-
sion of 3^ears violent storms, such as even now frequently
visit Japan in the autumn and do considerable damage
to the ripening rice, had desti'oyed the crops, and after
the diviners had in vain endeavoured to discover by their
usual method who were the workers of the calamity, the
gods revealed themselves to the sovereign in a dream, and
directed that temples should be raised in their honour
and certain offerings made to them. The ofierings demand-
ed are of course (421) such as would be acceptable to human
beings, it being beyond the power of insight of the first
worshippers of the unseen to suppose that the beings whom
they dreaded and desired to propitiate could wish for anything
different from the articles usually offered at the graves and
shrines of departed ancestors, namely, whatever was most
useful to mankind itself in that primitive age.

We know nothing of the ceremonies and forms observed
in the worship of the Wind-gods previous to the loth cen-
tury, when the rules contained in the Ymgi ShiH were
framed. From them we learn that the envoys sent by the
Mikado to represent him at the celebration of the service
were a prince and a minister of the 5th rank or upwards,
and two officials of the Ministry of Religion, of not above
the 6th rank, accompanied each by a diviner and two Kan-
domo. Either the governor of the province or his lieutenant
had charge of the arrangements. Each department (kohori )
in the province of Yamato had to take its turn in furnish-
ing a couple of loads of food-offerings. The cost, as well
as that of rice, sake and rice in ear, was defrayed out of the
taxes of the province, but all the other articles were supplied
by different departments of the Mikado’s household. The
list of articles in the Shizhi-sai shiki corresponds

very nearly with the offerings named in the Ritual. The
‘ bright cloth, glittering cloth,’ etc., are represented as in
the preceding Ritual, with the addition of China-grass. In
^ addition to the spear and mantlet, for which the iron and
deer-skins were needed, it appears that bows and arrows
were offered up, and a certain quantity of slender bamboo


* 44 ^


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITCALS.“~PART II.


stalks, feathers for winging them and horn for arrow-tips
was therefore supplied. Each deity received a horse and
saddle ; new saddles were not presented every year, but the
old ones were made to last as long as possible on successive
occasions. The varnishes mentioned in the directions were
intended for the ^golden thread-box, golden tatari and
golden skein-holder,’ which so far from being made of the
precious metal were merely painted wood. Lastly, the
food-offerings of the produce of mountain, plain and sea are
the same as on all other occasions.


RITUAL.

[translation.]

He says : “I declare in the presence of the sovran gods
whose praises are fulfilled at Tatsuta.

' (422) Because they had not allowed, firstly the five sorts

of grain^ which the sovran grandchild’s augustness, who
rules the spread-out islands^, the country of many islands®,
takes with ruddy countenance as his long and lasting food,
and the things produced by the great^ people, down to the
least leaf of the herbs, to ripen, and has spoilt them not for
one year, or for two years, but for continuous years, he
deigned to command : As to the heart of the god which
shall come forth in the divinings^ of the men who are
learned in things, declare what god it is.”

^‘Whereupon the men learned in things divined with
their divinings, but they declared that no heart of a god
appears.

When he had heard this, the sovran grandchild’s
augustness deigned to conjure them, saying: * I thought
to fulfil their praises as heavenly temples^, without forget-
ting and without omitting, but let the gods, whatever gods
they be, that have prevented the things produced by the
great people .of the regiod under heaven from ripening and
have spoilt them, make known their Heart.’


SATOW.: ancient JA1>x\NESE HITUALS. — I>ART II.


443


“ Hereupon they made the sovran grandchild’s augustness
to know in a great dream, and made him to know their
names, saying : ‘ Our Names, who have prevented the

things made by the great people of the region under heaven
from ripening, and have spoilt them,* by visiting them with
bad winds and rough waters, are Heaven’s Pillar’s^ august-
ness and Country’s Pillar’s augustness.’ And they made
him to know, saying: ‘If for Offerings which shall be
set-up in our presence there be furnished various sorts of
OFFERINGS, as to Clothes, bright cloth, glittering cloth,
soft cloth and coarse cloth and the five kinds of things, a
mantlet, a spear, a horse furnished with a saddle, if our
House^ be fixed at Wonu in Tachinu at Tatsuta, in a place
where the morning sun is opposite and the evening sun is
hidden, and praises be fulfilled in our presence, we will
bless and ripen the things produced by the great people of
the region under heaven, firstly the live sorts of grain, down
to the least leaf of the herbs.’

“Therefore hear, all ye Kannushi and Hafuri, my de-
claring in the presence of the sovran gods that, having fixed
the House pillars in the place which the sovran gods had
taught by words and made known, in order to fulfil praises
in the presence of the sovran gods, the sovran grandchild’s
(423) augustness has caused his great offerings to be lifted
and brought, and has fulfilled their praises, sending the
princes and councillors as his messengers.”

He says: “As to the great offerings set-up for the
youth-god^ I set-up various sorts of offerings for Cloth-
es, bright cloth, glittering cloth, soft cloth and coarse
cloth, and the five -kinds of things a mantlet, a spear, a
HORSE furnished with a saddle, for the maiden-god^“ I
set-up various sorts of offerings, providing Clothes, a
golden thread-box^^, a golden tatari^^, a golden ske^n-holdeH^
bright cloth, glittering cloth, soft cloth and coarse cloth,
and five kinds of things, .a horse furnished with a saddle ;
as to Liquor^% I raise high the beer-jars, fill and range-
in-a-rowthe bellies of the beer-jars; soft grain and coarse
grain ; as to things which dwell in the hills — ^things soft of


444


■SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART 11.


hair and things coarse of hair ; as to things which grow in
the great-field-plain — sweet herbs and bitter herbs ; as to
things which dwell in the blue-sea-plain — things broad of
fin and things narrow of fin, down to the weeds of the offing
and weeds of the shore. And if the sovran gods will take
these great offerings which I set-up, piling them up like
a range of hills, peacefully in their hearts, as peaceful
OFFERINGS and satisfactory offerings, and the sovi*an gods,
deigning not to visit the things produced by the great
people of the region under heaven with bad winds and
rough waters, will ripen and bless them, I will at the
autumn service set-up the first fruits, raising-high the beer-
jars, filling and ranging-in-rows the bellies of the beer-jars,
and drawing them hither in juice and in ear, in rnany
hundred rice-plants and a thousand rice-plants. And for
this purpose the princes and councillors and all the func-
tionaries, the servants of the six farms of the country of
Yamato, even unto the males and females of them, have all
come and assembled in the fourth month of this year, and
plunging down the root of the neck cormorant-wise in the
presence of the sovran gods, fulfil their praises as the sun
of to-day rises in glory.

^^Hear, all of ye the mandate: KaSnushi and Hafuri,
deign to receive the great offerings of the sovran grand-
child’s augustness, and set them up without omission.”

NOTES.

^ The five sorts of grain of the Japanese are rice, millet (panicum
Italicum), barley and two sorts of beans, adztiU or Phaseolus radiatus,
and daidzii- or Glycine (424) hispida. This diifers from the Chinese
enumeration, in which hemp is given instead of one of the sorts of bean.
In the Kozhiki the five kinds of grain are said to have sprung from the
dead body of the Goddess of Food, Ohogetsu-hime; rice from the eyes,
millet from the ears, adzuki from the nose, barley from the private parts
and daidztc from the fundament. Hirata in the Koshi Seibitn gives a
slightly different form of the myth. The expression ‘five sorts of grain’
is evidently an imitation of Chinese phraseology, and its occurrence
here is an indication of the comparatively late date of this norito.

Spread-out islands,’ Shihi-Skima. This is generally explained to
mean the palace of SuuzhiS Tenwau, which tradition says was in the


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART 11.


445


department of Shiki in the province of Yamato, now divided into Sliiki
no kami and Shiki no shimo. Reasons for thinking this view erroneous,
and for regarding Shikishima as a general epithet of Japan, and hence
capable of being used with respect to any Mikado, have been given in
the introduction to this ritual.

5 Oho ya shima giini, the Country of Many Islands. Ya originally
signified ‘ many,’ but was afterwards adopted as the numeral ‘eight,’
and hence in the myth of the birth of the Japanese archipelago eight
islands are always mentioned, though not the same set of eight in each
form of the myth. In the Kozhiki the gods Izanagi and Izanami beget
in succession, ist, Ahaji, or the island on the road to Aha; and, lyo, an
island with one body and four faces, i.s* the island of Shikoku, divided
into the four provinces of Aha, Tosa, lyo and Sanuki ; 3rd, the triplet of
Old, a group which lies north of the province of Idzumo ; 4th, Tsukushi,
an island with one body and four faces i.e. the island of Kiushiu, or Kiu^
koku, Originally divided into four regions, namely, Tsukushi, which now
forms the modern Chikuzen and Chikugo, Toyo, the modern Buzen and
Bungo, Hi, consisting of the modern provinces of Hizen, Higo and a
part of Hiuga, and Kumaso, the modern Satsuma, Ohosumi and south-
ern half of Hiuga; 5th, Iki ; 6th, Tsushima (which probably means ‘ port
island,’ as containing the port of call for boats going from Japan to
Korea) ; 7th, Sado, formerly famous for its mines, and 8th, last of all,
Oho-yamato-Akitsushima, the main island of Japan. It is worth
while nothing how many of these names have in the course of time come
to be extended in application. Tsukushi and lyo were parts only of the
islands which were afterwards called by their names ; Kumaso was the
modern department of So in Ohosumi, and Yamato, applied later to the
whole of Japan, originally meant only the province which still bears
that name. Yamato-kotoba is the old Japanese language (or rather the
words of which it is composed), and not, as some persons still seem to
imagine, the language spoken in that province. Six forms of the myth
are given in the Nihongi with slight variations, such as the birth of
Koshi (now divided into the five provinces of WechizeS, Kaga, Noto,
Wetsuchiu and Wechigo) separately from the main island, the inclusion
of Ohoshima, which is one of the departments of Suhau forming an
island by itself, and Kibi no Kozhima, a part of Bizen, also formerly an
island. (See ; Kozhihi Deii, vol. 5, p. i, ct infra;

vol. I, p. 5 verse, ct infra.)

(425) i ‘ Great ’ {oho) is a mere honorific, like mi (rendered by ‘ august’,)
applied to the people because they belong to the Mikado. A little fur-
ther on the same epithet is applied to the dream in which the wind gods
make themselves known to the Mikado.

5 The word uva^ which in one of its secondary uses signifies divination,
means primarily that which is behind, and hence is invisible, e.g. the
mental feelings of a person, in which sense it is equivalent to hohoro


446


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


which may be employed to denote the mental part of man and most of
its modes of operation, such as will, sentiment, intention, meaning.
The art of finding out that which is hidden was called tirawaza or lira-
and then for shortness’ sake simply ura^ Thus from this use
of ura to mean ‘ heart,’ it was transferred to the means of discovering
the intentions of another, especially the intentions of a god, i.e. divina,
tion, and the verb ura-nafUj to divine, was formed from it by adding
nafu, to spin. (See note 20 to the Praying for Harvest.) Various
modes of divination were in use among the ancient Japanese, of various
degrees of solemnity. Oue of these has already been described in the
introductory remarks to the service of the gods of Kasuga. Another, to
which allusion is made in the Manyefxishifu^ consisted in stepping out
into the road, and listening to the fragmentary talk of passers-by, from
which omens might be interpreted. This was called Tstiji-ura^ or divin-
ings in the roads ; the word has lost its primitive meaning in the present
day, and is now applied to the ‘ mottoes ’ placed inside sweetmeats, with
which we are familiar in Europe also. As this sort of divination was usu-
ally practised at night it was also called yufukc tokiy ‘ questioning the
evening passers-by,’ and ynfu ura ‘evening divination,’ under which
names it is frequently alluded to in the Manyefushifu, In its earliest
form the ceremony consisted in planting a stick upright in the ground
to represent the god of roads, who according to the ancient myth was
the ^transformation of the staff of Izanagi, which he threw from him
when returning from the lower regions, in order to prevent the demon
from pursuing him any further. Offerings were then made to this gods
and he was besought to give an answer to the question propounded. A
passage alludes the custem of carrying a stick when going out to perform
th& ytiftihc tohh


Tsuwe tsnki mo
Tsukazu mo yuhife
Yufukc tohi


I go and question the evening
oracle, (unconscious) whether I
carry a stick or not.


(vol. 3, pt. 2. f. 28, line 3), and the presentation of offerings is indicated
in the following .stanza from the same (vol. ir, pt. 2, f. 6, 1. g).


Ahanahi ni

Ynfuke wo tofu to
Niisa ni okn ni^

Wa ga horomode ha
Mata zo tsugubcki.


As I have not met her, my
sleeves which I deposited as of-
ferings in order to question the
evening oracle will have to be
used again.


The meaning of tsugu is not quite certain. One commentator thinks
that the lover has ripped up his clothes and reduced them again to the
state of mere cloth (426) to offer to the god, and that tsugubcki means
that he will sew the piecs together again after obtaining an answer.
But the other view, with which the translation above given accords,
namely, that as he is unable to meet his love, it will be necessary to


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS PART II.


447


continue the offering until he gets a favourable answer, is more plau
sible. Sometimes the answer was deceptive.


Yufuke ni mo

Ura ni mo noreru
Koyohi dani

Kimasanu kimi wo
Itsn to ka matamn.


When may I expect you,
who do not come,
even on the night which
was told by the evening
oracle and by the divination too.


The woman in this case has tried both ways of finding out when her
lover will come, the ‘ evening oracle ’ and divination by scorching either
a deer’s shoulder-blade, or a tortoise-shell, and both have promised that
sho ahall see him on a certain evening, but he disappoints her after all.
The following extracts also illustrate this practice, which seems to have
been very common in ancient times, ten or eleven centuries ago. The
poet Yakamochi in reply to a lady writes :


Tsuktiyo ni ha
Kado ni idctachi
Yttfuke tohi
A ura wo zo scshl
Yukamaku wo hori.


On a moonlight night
I stood at the house-door,
questioned the evening oracle
and performed foot-divining
because I longed to go to you.


(M. Y. S. 4 , pt. 2, f. 21 verse, 1. i.) A ura is the same as ashi ura,
which BaS Nobutomo thinks may have consisted in walking up to a
string stretched across the road, and drawing omens from the position
of the feet when the string stops further progress, but this is simply


a conjecture.

Kotodama no

Yaso no chimata ni
Yufiike tofu ;

Ura-masa ni note
Imo ni ahama yoshi.


I question the evening oracle
in the many road-forkings
of the language-spirit ;
tell me truly

how I shall meet ray love.


(Bk. II, pt, I, f. 34, 1' 6)

Ima sara ni
Kimi ka wa wo yobn,
Tarachine no
Balia no mikoto ka
Momo tarazic
Yaso no chimata ni
Yufuke ni mo,

Ura ni mo zo tofu
SMnnheki wa gayuwe,

(M. Y. S, i6, f. 19, 1- 8-)
husband is far away,
wonders whether he is near
custom is, in her last momentSj


Does he now call me

after all, or does

my august mother

who suckled me,

ask the evening oracle for me

in the many road-forkings,

or ask by divination,

for me who must die.

part of a lament by a lady whose
herself dying broken-hearted, and
the Japanese
anxious about


This is
She pictures

her pillow to call her back, as
and whether her mother,


448


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART IL


her welfare, is at this moment consulting the oracle or inquiring of the
diviner. In bk. 17, pt. 2, f. 8, i. 5 we have the following extract from
a naga^uta written in kana^


Shita gohl ni
Omohi urabtire
Kndo ni tachi
Yufukc tohitsutsu,

(See also vol. 14, pt. 2, f. 5 verso, i


Feeling melancholy with
hidden longing,

I stand at the house-door,
questioning the evening oracle.
12). Generally, however, this sort


of divination was performed by going away from the house, as in the


following naga-nia,

Ki no kuni no
Hama ni yoni tofu
Ahobidama
Hirohanm to ihifc^

Imo 110 yama

Se no yama hoy etc,
Ynkishi kimi ha
Itsn hi masamii to
7 \imaboho no
Michi ni idetacki
Yufu ura zoo
Wa ga tohishikaha^

Yzifxi ura 110
War^ ni noraku ;
VVagimoko ya
Na ga matsu kimi ha
Oki isn nami
Kiyoru shira tama
He tsu nami no
y osnru shira tama
Motoinu to zo.

Kimi ga hi masanu,
Hirofn to zo.

Kimi ha ki masanu*

Hisa naraba^

Ima iiamika bahari ;
Hayakaraba,

Ima fittsuka hakari
Aramu to zo.

Kimi ha kikosMshi,

Na kohi so waghno.

In the Ohohogaml (vol. 5, f.
tohi is related as follows: “Her


♦ When I went out
and stood in the road,
and asked the evening oracle
when he would come back
who went over the sweetheart’s
mount

and the lover’s mount,
saying that he would
pick up the ahabi shells
which come ashore
in the “ Region of woods,”
the evening oracle said to me:

“ Sweetheart !

“ he for whom you wait
“ is searching for
“the white shells which
“ come near on the waves
“ of the offing, the white shells
“ which the shore waves
“ bring near.

“ He does not come,

“ he picks them up.

“ He does not come.


“if he be long,

“ ’twill be but seven days ;

“ if he be quick,

“ ’twill be but two days.

“ He has heard you.

“ Do not yearn,

“ my sweetheart.”

(M. Y. S., bk. 13, pt. 2, f, 15.)

6 from the end) an instance of ynfnhe
mother, impelled by some unknown


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS, — PART II.


449


motive, when she (428) was yet quite young, went out into the Second
Broad-street and performed the yiifuke tohi (questioning the evening
oracle), when a woman with dreadfully white hair who was passing by
stopped, and said: ‘What are you doing? If it is questioning the
evening oracle that you are bent on, then may everything you can think
of fall out as you wish, and may your fortunes be broader and higher
even than this Broad-street;’ and so saying she departed altogether.”

The book from which this is taken dates -from the beginning of the
nth century. In the Shifu gal scu, or collection of Rubbish
preserved the following stanza used by women in addressing the god
who gave the oracle :

Fwiadosahe When we ask things

Ynfnke no kami ni of Funadosahe,

Mono toheha^ the god of the evening oracle,

Michi yuku hito yo deliver the oracle truly,

Ura masa ni se yo. ye who go along the way.

The woman used to go out in threes to the nearest cross-road, and
repeat this stanza thrice. They marked out a certain portion of the
road, and scattered rice about it as a charm against demons, Then
each turning towards a separate road drew her finger along the edge of
a box-wood comb which she carried, and they inferred good or evil
fortune from the words uttered by the first person who happened to pass
that way. The use of the box-wood comb was a sort of pun, the word
Unga meaning both ‘box-wood ’ and ‘ tell,’ and drawing the finger along
the teeth was a request to the god to speak out. Ban’s work on divina-
tion, the jE mentions several other ancient methods, such as kama
no wa no nra^ divining by the boiler-bed, home nra^ rice divination, aski-
ura and ishi-^ira, foot and stone divination, of which little more is known
than the mere names.

Shitodo dori was a method of divination in which a species of bird
played a prominent part, but whether it resembled the Chinese method
of divination by observing the direction in which certain birds fly and
their number, is not known. Another method, koto-ura, was employed
at the temple of the Sun-goddess in Ise, with the object of ascertaining
whether the priests who are to take part in a religious service and the
tables and vessels used in presenting the offerings are pure or not. At
midnight on the night preceding the service a priest (called a mi kamu
no ko no uchiudo, evidently a person of peculiar sanctity) sat with a harp
outside a certain gateway of the temple. Turning towards the shrine
he prayed that the goddess would enable him to discover by divination
whether the above persons and things possessed the requisite purity.
He then struck the harp thrice with a piece of yew wood in the form of
shiyaku (Chin. ^ hwuh), a loud “Hush!” being uttered each time,
and then uttered the following three verses, by which all the gods were
besought to descend from heaven and give answer to the question put.


450


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS.— -PART 11 ,


I.

Ahari y a

Asobi ha su to mattsanu,

(429) Asaknra ni
Ama tsH kami ktmi tsu kn\ni^

Oyimashimase.


Ah 1 ah !

we do not merely amuse ourselves ;
on to your splendid seat
gods of heaven and gods of the
country
descend.


11 .

Ahari ya

Asobi ha su to vtausanu
Asahiva ni
Naru Ikadzuchi mo
Oyimashimase


Ah! ah!

we do not merely amuse ourselves ;
on to your splendid seat
sounding Thunderbolt also
descend.


Ahari y a

Asobi ha su to mausanu
Asahira ni

Uha tsu ohoye shita tsu ohoyc
Mawiri tamahe.


III.

Ah ! ah !

we do not merely amuse ourselves ;
on to your splendid seat
upper great elder brother and
lower great elder brother (?)
deign to come.


The names of all the priests were then called over one by one, and
the question was asked, ‘'Is he clean or unclean.” The same priest
as before repeated the words, and striking the harp again, tried to
whistle by drawing in his breath. If the whistle was audible, the per-
son whose name had been called was considered to be free from im-
purity, and vice versS. The same proceeding was observed with respect
to the persons who had prepared the offerings, and the boxes, pails,
ladles, tables, pottery and food-offerings. Afterwards the priest struck
the harp again three times, with a solemn “ Hush ! ” and intoned
similar verses, in which the gods who had been called down were asked
to return to their abodes. This ceremony is first mentioned in the
Calendar of the Sun-goddess’ Temple drawn up about the end of the
8th century, but the minute details are taken from a Calendar of the
end of the 12th century, and there is nothing surprising in the use of the
Chinese shiyakn or courtier’s tablet, which had been part of ceremonial
dress for several hundred years. Everything else in the proceedings,
and certainly the verses, seem purely Japanese.

The most important mode of divination practised by the primitive
Japanese was that of scorching the shoulder-blade of a deer over a clear
fire, and finding omens in the direction of the cracks produced by the
heat. It is alluded to in the following verses from the MaUyefushifu.


Mjisashi no ni
Urahe kata yakl


On Musashi moor
I burn tthe divining shoulder-blade,


SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE lUTUALS. — PART II.


451


And distinctly too
Your name which they would not
tell me

Has appeared in the divination.

Uralie is explained to be a contraction of ura ahase^ hase being
naturally contracted into he and two a coalescing ; but it is simpler to
regard alie- as the transitive verb corresponding to the ahi- to meet.
The meaning of the (430) expression is that the seeker after divine
guidance as to the right conduct to be followed, by means of the process
called divination ascertains whether his own mind is in harmony or
unison with that of the god or gods appealed to. The verse is sup-
posed to have been the composition of a girl whose parents are about
to give her in marriage, but refuse to disclose beforehand the name of
her husband, and she has recourse therefore to divination by scorching
the shoulder-blade of a deer. Being written entirely in kana^ with the
exception of the words luusashi no and na, there is no dispute about the
reading of this verse. It is to be found in bk. 14, pt. i, folio 12 verso,
Riyakuge edition.

My love’s name

which I tell not even to the grass ^
(or, not grudgingly even)
of this tree-mountain
where grow many trees
will appear in the shoulder-blade !

(Ib. folio 12 verso.)

There is a play on the words shiba nl^ which mean ‘ to the grass ’
and ‘frequently,’ or they may perhaps be read sliiha ni^ grtidgingly.
The allusion to divination by means of the shoulder-blade of a deer is
here not very distinct, but kata cannot be satisfactorily explained in
any other way*

3*

When I had toiling come
without enjoying ease
along the awful road
of the sea-possessor,
and yet again was
about to go

after burning the shoulder-blade
for the divining for a fair wind
by the fishermen of Iki,
in order to go untroubled,
thou didst depart from me,
in the sky of my road
like a dream.

(Ib. vol. 15, f. 34*)


Watatsnmi no
Kashikoki michi wo
Yasukekn mo
Naku nayami kitCy
hnada ni mo
Mo naku ynkamu io^
Ytiki no ama no
Hotsute no urahe wo
Kata yakite
Yukamu to sunt ni^
hue no goto
Michi no soraji nl
Wakarc sum kimi.


Of It shimoto
Kono moto-yama no

Mn shiha ni mo
Nor anti inio ga na
Kata ni id emu kamo


Masade ni mo
Noranu kimi ga 71a

Ura 7 ii ide ni keri.


452 SATOW: ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS, — PART II.

' This seems to be a lament by a traveller to Korea, who on arriving
at the island of Iki lost his companion by death while they were wait-
ing for a fair wind. Hotsute is explained by ho; sail, and as used
in haya-te^ a gust ; hence the compound may mean a wind that suits
the sails, a fair wind. Here the reference to scorching a shoulder-
blade is distinct, but the animal from which it was taken is not
mentioned. It is clear, however, from the following passage from the
KoMki that the shoulder-blade of a deer was used : “ He summoned
Ame-no-koya-ne no mikoto and Futo-daina no mikoto, and caused
(431) them to pull out completely the shoulder of a stag of Anie-no kagu
yama, and taking hahahci [the name of a tree] to Ame-no-kagu yama,
to perform divination.” Nothing is here said about scorching the bone>
which part of the process is known from the verses previously quoted
and from a passage in a Chinese account of Japan which dates from the
latter part of the third century, A. D. This account is to be found in
the appendix to the JVez che hi the HBSj hwo chc, or

History of the Three States, but it is more conveniently referred to in
a collection of passages from Chinese works bearing on Japan called
shlyou Nihon den)^ in the first volume of which book it
is to be found, on the reverse side of folio 10. The Chinese author,

* in describing the custom of the Japanese, says: “They have the
custom, when entering upon an undertaking or starting on a journey,
or saying or doing anything of importance, of scorching a bone, and
by divining, to discern good and evil, They first announce what is to
be divined, and the language used is the same as in divination by the
tortoise-shall. They discern the omens by observing the cracks pro-
duced by the fire.” The last sentence but one is an allusion to the
Chinese practice of muttering over the tortoise-shell the question which
it is required to answer. It is interesting to notice that a similar
method of divination was in vogue among the Kirghiz. In Pallas'
Reise durch Verschiedene Provinzen des Russischen Reichs, vol. i, p.
393, he says ; “ There is a sort of diviners called Jauuruntschi, who
from the shoulder-blade of a sheep predict the future, and can answer
all sorts of questions. It is said that the shoulder must be simply
scraped with a knife, and not touched with the teeth, because it would
thus become unfit for the purposes of magic. When a question has
been proposed to the diviner, or he has proposed something mentally to
himself, he lays the shoulder-blade on the fire, and waits until the fiat
side gets all kinds of cracks and splits, and by means of these lines he
divines.” The Chinese history of the Mongol dynasty called Vmn
( relates that Genghis Khan used to ‘ scorch the shoulder-blade of
a sheep and compare the results thus obtained with those of the astrolo-
gical diviners, whose advice he always sought before undertaking an
expedition,’ so that the Kirghiz method was also formerly practised by
the Mongols. Another Chinese work (the which appears


satow: ancient Japanese rituals. — part n.


453


to have been reprinted in Japan about two centuries ago) says : “ The
western barbarians use divination by the sheep. * * They scorch

the shoulder-blade of a sheep on a fire of worm-wood, and observe the
cracks.” These western barbarians are explained in Dr. Williams’

Dictionary to be ‘ the wild tribes in Turfan and west of China generally.’
Lubbock (Origin of Civilization, p. 163) mentions that the Lapps have
this method of divination by a shoulder-blade, and quotes Klemm to
the effect that it also exists among the Mongols and Tunguses of Siberia
and the Bedouins. In the Okugi sett written about the middle

of the 1 2th century, a tradition is quoted to the effect that * the savages
of Mutsu practised divination by scorching the shoulder-bone of a deer
(vol. 6, § 8), and the Shintau priests of Yahiko in Wechigo (near
Nihigata) had a similar tradition concerning their own temple. The
Ichi-nO'iniya Zhiyunkei shi of Tachibana no Masayoshi (dated 1696)
(432) contains the following account of a similar practice than observed
at the temple called Hatsuniu no Zhin-zhiya, the chief Shintau temple
of Kaudzuke, not far from the town of Takasaki. The shoulder-blade
of a deer presented by the villagers of Akibata is taken out, carefully
polished, and divided into slips about five inches in length. These are
placed on a tray and touched with an awl heated in purified fire, and
omens are discerned from the extent to which the point penetrates the
bone, complete penetration being accounted a fortunate omen and vice
versd. This practice seems to be a survival from the ancient method of
divining by the cracks in the scorched bone. It is interesting to note
the existence of this sort of divination amongst so many different races
of central and eastern Asia. The substitution in Japan of the tortoise-
shell for the deer’s bone seems to have taken place as early as the 8th
century at least, for it is alluded to in a poem which was composed
about 730 (M. y. S. 16, f. 19), and in the Riymt no Gige there is a note
explaining that divination was performed by ‘ scorching a tortoise (shell)
and discerning good and evil omens from the lines across and up and
down the scorched shell.’ It is said that the tortoise-shell has been
used for this purpose by the islanders of Hachi-jiyau from the earliest
times, and it is evident that a maritime people would find the tortoise-
shell more convenient than the deer’s shoulder-blade, especially as the
“neighbouring sea abounds in turtle, and the island is inhabited by no
species of wild quadrupeds except rats.

6 What gods were in the earliest ages regarded as ‘heavenly’ and
what as ‘ country ’ gods is unknown, but the Riyciti fto Gige makes an
attempt to give a definition of the two Chinese terms TenzUn (^p) and
Jigi (iti®, which were in old Japanese translated by ama tsu yashiro
and huni tsu yashiro or kami (see Wa miyau Seu^ bk. 2, f, i). Among
the former it ranks the Sun-goddess and the other goddess worshipped
in Ise, the god of Kamo near Kiyauto in Yamashiro, those of Sumiyoshi
or Suminoye between Ohosaka and Sakahi, and the god worshipped by


454


SATOW; ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. —PART 11.


the kuni no miyafsttko of Idzumo; and as representatives of the latter it
names the gods of Oho-Miwa in Yamato, of Oho-yamato and of
Katsuragi no Kamo in Yamato, and lastly Oho-namuchi no mikoto in
Idzumo. That this division is wrong seems clear from the fact that the
god of Kamo in Yamashiro is identical with the god of Kamo in Yamato ;
Koto-shiro-nushi, who is worshipped at the latter place, being simply
the intelligent spirit ’ {ni§^i mi tama) of Aji>siiki-taka-hiko-ne, to whom
the former temple is dedicated. It is of course impossible that the
same god can have belonged *to both classes at once. Of the two
goddesses of Ise, the Sun-goddess must evidently be ranked in the first
class, but Ukemochi no kami, the personification of the earth as ‘ the
supporter,’ can only belong to the second. The gods of Sumiyoshi
were chiefly sea- gods, and therefore more earthly than heavenly in
their nature, while the god worshipped by the hereditary chieftains of
Idzumo was Susanowo, who was evidently a human being, though not
a native of Japan. Among the deities classed by the Gige as ‘ earthly,’
those of Oho-miwa, namely Oho-mono-nushi the ‘ intelligent spirit ’
of Oho-nainuchi, and of Katsuragi no kamo are deified human beings,
while the deity {433) of Oho-yamato, called Oho-kuni-mitama, is pro-
bably the earth looked upon as the abundant giver of food. It is
impossible to discover what principle ot classification wes here acted
upon by the compilers of the Gige, and it is most natural to suppose
that the original meaning of the terms Ama Uuyashiro and Kuni tsii
yashtro was no longer remembered in their time. In fact, they were
simply trying, by the aid of such lights as they possessed, to explain
the two Chinese terms tenzhin and jigi, which they seem to have
misunderstood. According to the orthodox Chinese view, these two
expressions simply signify the two spirits of Heaven and Earth, and if
Ama tsu yashiro and Kuni tsu yashiro, which the Wamiyau Sen gives
as their equivalents in Japanese, really correspond to them, then the
Japanese terms can only mean the Sun as the Celestial deity and the
, Earth as Terrestrial deity. A second interpretation is that ama is it
yashiro denotes all gods of supernatural origin, while kuni tsu yashiro
should only be applied to deified human beings. A third view is that
which looks on the latter class as the gods of the race which Zhinmu
Tenwau found in possession of the land, and Ama tsu kami (or yashiro)
as those whose worship was brought from beyond the sea by his an-
cestor, the ancient idea concerning foreigners having been that they
descended from heaven. But on the whole, the safer conclusion is that
the two expressions at first meant only Amaterasu-oho-nii-kami and
Uke-mochi no kami, the Sun and the Earth, and that when their original
signification was afterwards forgotten, various erroneous interpretations
were put upon them.

^See Introductory remarks.

zMi ya. House, has now various meanings, palace, temple, prince of


SATOW : ANCIENT JAPANESE RITUALS. — PART II.


455


the imperial family by special patent. Anciently it was also applied to
a tomb, which suggests how a chieftain who had once inhabited a
palace, passed at death into a tomb which was at the same time a
temple. In the Manyefu^ toko mi ya, eternal house, is several times
applied to tomb.

9 The youth-god, that is Shinatsu-hiko no mikoto, the ‘ long-breathed
youth,’ which is the other name of the god of wind.

The maiden-god, that is Bhinatobe no mikoto, ‘ the long-breathed
maiden.’ These are the pair of wind-gods spoken of in the preceding
part of the Ritual as Heaven’s Pillar and Country’s Pillar ; see also
introductory remarks.

^^Wo-ke ^ thread-box. Wo is ‘thread,’ but as hemp-fibre in

ancient times was the chief material used for that purpose (as it con-
tinues in modern times to be considerably employed) the character fgc,
which properly means ‘ hemp,’ was used to denote thread in general.
Wo in iama-no'wo, bead-string, and perhaps wo, tail, are identical with
it. Kc is usually a wooden vessel made by forming a thin board or a
stout shaving into a circle and applying a flat bottom, to which the
nearest European approach in form is a shallow band-box ; ke is found
in tvokc, pail (which is probably the same word), and in kushi-ge, casket
(literally, comb-box). Wogoke is the modern term in use for the ancient
woke, and the article known by this name is applied to the same purpose,
namely, that of holding hempen threat used for coarse needlework.

(434) ^^Tatari, supposed to have been formed of a flat stand 3-6 Japa-
nese inches square, with an upright piece of wood in the centre, i ft.


1*6 inches high, Japanese measure.

^^Kasehi. Kasc is ‘skein,’ and hi is commonly translated ‘ shuttle,’
but it probably had^originally the wider meaning of something to wind
a skein on. In t\\& Dahhm gim shiki amongst the treasures

of the goddess two kasehi are mentioned, one of gold, the other of
copper, ‘ 9*6 inches long, the length of the handles 5-8 inches.’ In the
Manycfu, vol. 6, p. 56 verso, line 3, we have


‘Wo tome ra ga,
Umi wo kahi tofu
Kasc no yama.


The mountain of the skein
[holder] on which the
maidens hang the twisted thread.


There is a play here on the first half of kasM and the name of a
mountain. The kasehi kept at the sun-goddess’ temple in Ise is simply
a sort of reel in the shape of a letter H, the upright strokes being curved
to hold the thread which was wound round it, and the horizontal stroke
representing the te or handle.

iJ^From this point the offerings are common to both deities.


ANNUAL MEETING.


(435) The Annual Meeting of the Society was held at the Shohei-
kuwan, Tdkiyd, on the 30th June, Dr. Syle, President, in the chair.

The elections of the Rev. G. M. Meacham, Tokiyo, as a resident
member, and M. Philippe Burty, Paris, as a non-resident member,
were announced.

The Annual Report of the Council was read and passed.

The Treasurer shewed that the revenue and expenditure of the
Society had increased by about one hundred dollars during the past
session, the increase in expenditure being partly due to the presentation
of accounts which should have been included in the balance sheet of the
previous year. The balance to the Society’s credit was found to be
slightly over seven hundred dollars, within a few cents of what it was
at the last annual meeting in June, 187S. Of this sum a certain portion
will be required to pay for the printing of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th parts of
the Transactions for the past session.

The Librarian reported that the following books, the property of the
Society, are not to be found in the Library, and he requested that
member who have them in their . possession would be so good as to
inform him.

“ History of Japan F, 0 . Adams ; 2 vols.

“Outline History of Japanese Education.”

“Enumeratio Plantarum in Japonid sponte Crescentium
Franchet Savatier ; 2 parts.

“ From Moscow Overland to China;” Ides.

“Reminiscences of Captivity in China;” Loch.

“Oriental and Linguistic Studies;” Whitney.

A vote of thanks to the outgoing Council, moved by the Rew. W. B.
Wright and seconded by Mr. C. J. Tarring, was carried unanimously,
and acknowledged by the president.

The Rev. J. Soper and Dr. Leland having been appointed to scru-
tinize the voting papers for the Council for next session, the following
result was ascertained :

President, Rev. Dr. Syle.

Vice-Presidents, Dr. Edward Divers, Mr. J. J. Keswick.

Corresponding Secretary, Mr. E, Satow,

Recording Secretaries, Mr. J. A. Ewing, Mr. G. J. L. Hodges.


457 —


(436) Treasurer, Mr. T. W. Hellyer,

Librarian, Rev. C. T. Blanchet,

Councillors : Tokiyo — Rev. J. L. Amerman, Mr. W. Anderson, Mr. R.
W. Atkinson, Mr. B. H. Chamberlain, Mr. W. S. Chaplin; Yoko-
hama — Mr. J. Bisset, Mr. C. H- Dallas, Mr. A. J. C. Geerts, Dr. J.
C. Hepburn, Mr. Thomas Walsh. Mr. Satow then read extracts
* from a paper entitled “ Ancient Japanese Rituals. — Part ii.“

o —

REPORT OF TPIE COUNCIL LAID BEFORE THE
MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY AT THE
ANNUAL MEETING, 30thJNUE, 2879.


The Council have much pleasure in congratulating the Society on
the amount of work accomplished by it during the past session. The
number of General Meetings held has been fourteen, at which twenty
papers were read. A list of these papers is given in Appendix A to
this Report.

They have also to record with satisfaction that a proposal has recen-
tly reached them from a committee of gentlemen at Osaka on the sub-
ject of forming a branch of the Society at that place. Should this
proposal be carried into effect, a considerable extension of the Society’s
usefulness may be expected,

Twenty-four new members have been elected.

In exchange for the Transactions of the Society, Journals, Transac-
tions and Proceedings have been received from learned bodies in various
parts of the world. A detailed list will be found in Appendix B.

A list of books and pamphlets added to the Library during the past
year and of books omitted from the catalogue printed in Part 3 of Vol,
VI. of the Society’s Transactions appears in Appendix C. The number
and value of the books added by purchase is less than it might other-
wise have been, had not unavoidable circumstances rendered it neces-
sary to devote a larger proportion than usual of the year’s income to
defraying the expenses of publishing the Transactions.

The Council beg to tender their thanks to the Vice-Minister of
Education for the use of a large hall at the Shdhei-kuwan for the
meetings of the Society at Tokiyo and to the Proprietors of the Grand
Hotel for the use of a room for the meetings held at Yokohama. Their
thanks are also due to the authorities of the Kobu Daigakko for permis-
sion to make use of the large hall on the occasion of Mr. Anderson’s
Lecture and Exhibition of Pictures illustrative of Japanese art.

The following balance-sheet shows the present condition of the
Society’s Finances : —


HELLYER,

In Account u-ith


— 45S —


— 459 —


APPENDIX A.

List of Papers Read During the Session 1878-9.

Journey across Europe and Asia ; by Mr. J. Milne, F. G. S.

Analysis of Takmoko ; by Mr. D. W. Dwars.

Japanese Musical Intervals; by Rev. P. V. Veeder, D. D.

Visibility of Mountains from T5kiyd ; by the same.

Discovery of Human Remains; by Mr. T. R. H. McClatchie,

Ancient Japanese Rituals. — Part I ; by Mr. E. Satow.

A Karen Inscription; by Rev. N. Brown. D. D.

The Church at Yamaguchi from 1550 to 1586 ; by Mr. E. Satow.

The Feudal Mansions ofYedo; by Mr. T. R. H. McClatchie.
Inscriptions in Shimabara and Araakusa ; by Rev. H. Stout.

Foreign Travel of Modern Japanese Adventurers; by Mr. J. M. James.
On the Drinking Water of Yokohama; by Mr. A. J. C. Geerts.
Transliteration of the Japanese Syllabary; by Mr. E. Satow.

A Discourse on Infinite Vision as Attained to by Buddha ; by Mr. J. M,
James.

WasQbyue, the Japanese Gulliver; by Mr. B. H. Chamberlain.

Analyses of Surface Waters in Tokio; by Mr. R. W. Atkinson, B. Sc.
The Chemical Industries of Japan: No. 2 — Ame; by Mr. R. W. Atkin-
son, B. Sc.

H. M. S. “Phaeton” at Nagasaki j'n 1808; by Mr. W. G. Aston.

A History of Japanese Art; by Mr. W. Anderson.

Notes on Osaka ; by the Rev. J. Summers.

Ancient Japanese Rituals. — Part II ; by Mr. E. Satow.

APPENDIX B.

Exchanges.

Agricultural and Horticultural Society of India; Journal.

American Geographical Society ; Bulletin.

American and Oriental Literary Record ; Trubner.

American and Oriental Society ; Proceedings.

American Philosophical Society; Proceedings.

Asiatic Society of Bengal ; Journal.

Asiatic Society of Bengal ; Proceedings.

Bataviaasch Genootschap; Verhandlingen.

Bolletino Italiano degli Studii Orientali.

Boston Society of Natural Philosophy ; Proceedings.

China Review.

Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal.

Cosmos ; by Guido Cara.

Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Natur-und Volkerkunde Ostasiens ; Mitthei-
lungen.

Geological Survey of India; Records.


— 4^0 —


Imperial Russian Geographical Society ; Bulletin.

Indische Taat-Landen Volkenkunden ; Tydschrift.

(439) Jahresbericht des Wissenschaftlichen Clubs.

Japan Weekly Mail.

Numismatic and Antiquarian Society, Philadelphia ; Proceedings.
Oesterreichische Monatsschaft fur den Orient.

Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ; Journal.

Royal Asiatic Society, Bombay Branch ; Journal.

Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch ; Journal.

Royal Asiatic Society, North China Branch ; Journal.

Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch ; Journal.

Royal Geographical Society ; Proceedings.

Royal Society of Tasmania ; Proceedings.

Sociedad Geografica de Madrid ; Boletin.

Societe d’AccHmatation ; Bulletin.

Soci^tl des Etudes Japonaises ; Annuaire.

Soci^t6 de Geographic ; Bulletin.

APPENDIX C,

Books Added to the Library During the Past Year.
Chinese Repository ; complete in 20 vols. bound ; purchased.

English -Japanese Dictionary ; 2nd Ed. ; by Satow and Ishibashi ;
presented.

Japan, Historical and Descriptive ; Eden ; presented.

The Times of India, Kalendar and Directory for 1866 ; presented.

Pamphlets, Leaflets, etc.

.^Egypten dargestellt in etwa 700 Bildern; von Geo. Ebers. (Speci-
men sheet.)

Annual Report of the Japanese Minister of Education for 1876.
Magic Mirror of Japan ; by Ayrton and Perry.

Map of India ; pub. by Col. ThuiHer.

Map of Japan ; pub. by N. McLeod.

Ode to the Mikado of Japan ; by Horne.

Periodical Changes of Terrestrial Magnetism ; by Schulze.

Reis und Mais ; by Dr. J. Rein.

Repertorio Sinico-Giapponese ; Severini and Puini, Parts 1-3.

Report of Japanese Postmaster General for 1876,

Das Schbne Madchen von Pao ; two copies.

The Music of Color and Visible Motion ; by Perry and Ayrton.
Tweede Vervolg-Catalogus der Bibliotheck van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap.

The following Books not mentioned in last year’s Calalogue have
been found in the Library.

Carpenter : Animal Physiology.


— 461 ^ —

Day; M. S. Report of Trigonometrical Survey of HokkaidS, Japan.
De Long: Regulations for U. S. Consular Courts in Japan.

Eitel : Hand-Book of Chinese Buddhism.

Galtier : Cours de la Langue Franfaise.

Gellert : Fabeln.

(440) Hardwicke : Science Gossip for 1866-68, 3 vols.

Imperial College of Engineering, Report for 1876.

Martin ; Statesman’s Year Book, 1872.

Parker: First Lessons in Natural Philosophy.

Penna : Report of Board of Public Charities.

Tennyson: The Princess.

Williams, M.: Sanskrit and English Dictionary.

Williams, S. W.: Chinese Commercial Guide.

Ysbrandt: Travels in China.

The following numbers of the Society’s Transactions are in the
Library : —


Vol. I

Vol. II


Vol. V. pt. 2.
Vol. VI, pt. I .

n«j

Vol. III. pt. I. .


Vol. VI. pt. 2.


Vol. HI. pt. 2. .

81

Vol. VI. pt. 3.


Vol. IV

46

Vol. VII. pt. I . ,


Vol. V. pt. I....

41


Sold 35 parts for I34; reported to the Treasurer.


LIST OF MEMBERS.


Honorary Members.

Admiral Sir C. Shadwell, R. N.

Captain Arthur, R. N.

S. Wells Williams, LL. D.

Sir Rutherford Alcock, K. C. B.

Sir Thomas F. Wade, K. C. B.

Professor Geo. E. Day, Yale College, U. S. A.
Professor W. D. Whitney, New Haven, U. S. A.
Hon. Geo. P. Marsh, Rome.

A. W. Franks, British Museum.

Professor J. J. Rein, Marburg, Germany,


Resident ‘ Members.


[The Black, Roman and Italic types indicate residence at Yokoliancia^
in Tokyo, and at the Ouiports and in the Inferior. Members
changing their address are requested to notify the Corresponding
Secretary.]


Alexander, T.

Aston, W. G.

Allen H., Junr.

Atkinson, R. W.

Amerman, Rev. Jas. L.

Barr, W.

Anderson, W.

Beadon, R.

Angas, W. M.

Begbie, J.

(441) Bellamy, A.

Gubbins, J. H.

Bingham, Hon. J. A.

Gulick, Rev. L. H,, D. D.

Bisset, J.

Hall, J. C.

Blanchet, Rev, C. T.

Hamao, A.

Bramsen, Wm.

Harris, Rev. M. C.

Brinkley, Capt. F., R, A,

Hattorif y.

Brooke, J. H.

Hawes, A. G. S.

Brown, Capt. A. R.

Hayward, Rev. 0.

Chamberlain, B. H.

Hellyer, T. W.

Chaplin, W. S.

Hepburn, J. 0., M, D., LL.D,

Cocking, S.

Hodges, G. J. L.

Conder, J.

Holtham, E, G.

Cooper, C. J.

Houghton, W.

Cox, W. D.

House, E. H.

Dallas, C, H.

Howe, H. A. Junr.

De Boinville, C. A. C.

Hunt, H. y.

De Groote, H.E., C.

Irwin, R. W.

Divers, E., M. D.

James, Lieut. T. H., R. N.

Dixon, W. G.

James^ F. S.

Dodds, J.

James, Capt. J. M.

Ddnltz, W., M. D.

Jaudon, Peyton.

Duer, Y.

Jewett, F. F.

Dyer, H.

Keil, O.

Eaton y.

Kennedy, J. G.

Eby, Ren. C. S’.

Keswick; J. J.

Eldridge, S., M, D.

Kikuchi, D.

EusdeUj R.

Kinch, E.


Ewing, J, A,

Eykman, F,

Farley, Geo., Jnnr.

Faulds, H,, M. D.
Fenollosa, E.

Fischer, Ed.


Kingdon, N, P.

Kirkwood, M,

Knipping, E.

Latham^ H., M. D.

Lawrenson, R,, O. P,, M. D.,
R.N.

Leland, G. A., M. D.


463 —


Flowers^ M. O.

Fraser, J. A.

Gay, A. O.

Geerts, J, A.

Glover, T. B,

Gould, J. E.

Gowland, W> E.

Gray, T.

Greene, Rev. D. C.

Gregory, G. E.

Grigor, J.

(442} Matsiimoio, S . ,
Maundrcll , Rev, H.
Meacham, Rev. G. M,


LiiUelU H,

Longford, J. H.

Lyman, B. S.

McBride, J. A., M. D.
McCartee, D. B., M. D.

McClatoMe, T. R. H.
McRitcMe, J.

Mackenzie^ H,

Mac lagan, R*

Manning, C, J., M. D.
Marshall, D. H.

Stone, W. H.

Struve, H.E. C. de.
Swmncrs, Rev. y.


Miller, Rev. E. H.

Syle, Rev. E. W., D. D.

Milne, A.

Tarring, C. J.

Milne, John.

Terry, H. T.

Mori, Arinori.

Thomson, A. W.

Nakamura, Masanawo.

Tomita, T.

Naumann, Dr. E.

Tripler, T. H., M. T>.

Nelson, Robert, M, D.,

R.N. Troup, y.

Olarovsky, A. G,

Tsuda, Sen.

Parkes, Sir Harry, K. C. B.

Van der Pot, J. J.

Petersen, y. V.

Wagener, G., Ph. D.

Pryer^ H.

Walsh, J. G.

Quin, y. y.

Walsh, Thos.

Quinby, Rev. J. H.

Warren, Rev, C. H.

Rickett, J. Jnnr.

Watson, E. B.

Robertson, R. B.

Wheeler, E., M. D,

Rosen, Baron R.

Whitney, W. N.

Sanjo, Kin-aya.

, Whittal, E.

Satow, E.

Wilkin, A. J.

Saiimarez, Plon. J, St. V.

Wilkinson, H. S.

Scott, M. M.

Wilson, y. A.

Shand, W. J. S.

Wilson, C. G.

Shaw, Rev. A. T.

Winstanley, A.

Sheppard, E. T.

Woolley, W. A.

Smedley; J.

Wright, A. W.

Soper, Rev. J.

Wright, Rev. W. B.


Non-Resident Members.

Amerman, Chas. H., 541 Bergen Avenue, Jersey City, New
Jersey.


Audsley, G. Ashdown, car^, of Messrs. Mollison, Fraser & Co.

Yokohama.

Baillie, C. W., R. N.

Bowes, J,, care of Messrs. Mollison, Fraser & Co., YokoHania.,
Bridgeford, Major, S. T., R.M.A.

Brown, R. M., Shanghai.

Brown, Rev. S. R., D. D.

Bryner, J., Shanghai.

Burnside, Rev. H., Church Mission House, Salisbury Sq.,
London.

Burty, Ph., ii bis Boulevard des Batignolles, Paris.

Caldwell, J., M. D., R.N.

Dickins, F. V., care of H. Bellasis, Esq., Yokohama.

(443) Dillon, E., care of W. Gowland, Esq., Osaka.

Elmore, J. F.

Hall, IL, LL.D., care of Messrs. Walsh, Hall & Co., Yokohama.
Hay, G. D., Shanghai. -i

Hayllar, T. C., Q, C., Hongkong.

Malan, Rev. C. S., Broadwindsor, Dorset.

Mounsey, A. H., British Legation, Athens.

Murray, David, LL.D., New Brunswick, Nevv^ Jersey.

Pitman, John, care of Messrs, E. Fischer Sc Co., Yokohama.
Phear, Hon, Sir J. B., Ceylon.

Pole, G. H., 31 Parliament St,, Westminster.

Robertson, John, Oriental Bank Corporation, Shanghai.

Smale, Sir John, Hongkong.

Smith, Hon. C. C., Singapore.

Sutton, F. W., R. N., care of R. Drummond, Esq., No. 10,
Canterbury road, West Croydon, Surrey.

Veeder, Rev. P. V., D, D.

Von Brandt, H.E. Max,, Peking.

Walsh, F.

Walter, J., Hongkong & Shanghai Bank, Shanghai.


J
