Manual of the Science of Religion (P.D. Chantepie de la Saussaye, 1891)
==========================================================
De la Saussaye's 1891 Manual (English) — the Amsterdam professor's phenomenology; the textbook that named the field. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

,'  7 


THE  WORKS 


AKCHBISHOP  LAUD. 


THE 


WORKS 


OF  THE 


MOST  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD, 


WILLIAM    LAUD,    D.D., 


SOMETIME  LORD  ARCHBISHOP  OP  CANTERBURY. 


VOL.  V. 
HISTORY  OF  HIS  CHANCELLORSHIP,  &c. 


OXFORD  : 
JOHN    HENRY    PARKER. 

M  DCCC  LIII. 


OXFORD: 
PRINTED  BY  I.  SHRIMPTON. 


PREFACE. 


THE  contents  of  this  volume  require  a  few  words  of  in* 
troduction. 

I.  The  Archbishop's  own  history  of  his  Chancellorship  of 
the  University  of  Oxford  is  reprinted  from  the  volume  of 
Laud's  Remains,  prepared  for  the  press  by  Henry  Wharton, 
but  published  after  his  death  by  his  father. 

The  volume,  which  contained  in  addition  the  Archbishop's 
reply  to  Lord  Say's  speech  against  the  Bishops,  and  a  re 
print  of  his  speech  against  Bastwick,  Burton,  and  Prynne, 
(which  will  appear  in  the  subsequent  volume  of  this  edition,) 
came  forth  with  the  following  title  and  preface  : 

"  The  second  volume  of  the  Remains  of  the  most  Reverend  Father  in 
God,  and  blessed  martyr,  William  Laud,  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 
Written  by  himself.  Collected  by  the  late  learned  Mr.  Henry  Wharton, 
and  published  according  to  his  request  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Edmund 
Wharton,  his  father. 

"  London,  Printed  for  Sam.  Keble  at  the  Turk's  Head  in  Fleet-street, 
Dan.  Brown  without  Temple-bar,  Will.  Hensman  in  Westminster-hall, 
Matt.  Wotton  near  the  Inner  Temple  gate,  and  R.  Knaplock  at  the  Angel 
in  St.  Paul's  Churchyard.  1700." 


"  TO  THE  READER. 

THE  late  learned  Mr.  H.  Wharton,  when  he  published  the  history  of  the 
Troubles  and  Trial  of  Archbishop  Laud,  in  the  year  1695,  finding  that  all 
the  papers  to  be  printed  with  that  work  could  not  be  brought  within  the 
compass  of  one  volume,  reserved  these  for  a  second  part.  If  God  had 
pleased  to  continue  his  life  they  had  been  published  much  sooner,  toge 
ther  with  such  an  account  of  thorn  as  he  would  have  thought  necessary  ; 
but  he  was  prevented  in  so  good  a  work  by  that  stubborn  and  incurable 


VI  PREFACE. 

distemper  of  which  he  died.  In  his  last  will  all  the  manuscript  papers 
relating  to  Archbishop  Laud  are  ordered  forthwith  to  be  delivered  to  his 
father,  (the  Reverend  Mr.  Edmund  Wharton,  now  rector  of  Saxlingham 
in  Norfolk,)  that  so  he  might  cause  them  to  be  transcribed,  and  fitted  for 
the  press.  In  compliance  therefore  with  that  his  dying  request  these 
papers  are  now  sent  into  the  world." 

Anthony  Wood  speaks  of  the  history  of  his  chancellor 
ship  under  the  title  of  Gesta  sub  Cancellariatu  meo  Oxon., 
and  adds, 

'  This  manuscript  was  communicated  to  me,  when  I  was  composing 
Hist,  et  Antiq.  Univ.  Oxon.,  by  Dr.  Pet.  Mews,  president  of  St.  John's  col 
lege,  wherein  finding  many  useful  things  for  my  purpose  (which  another 
may  do  for  his,  and  therefore  I  presume  it  escaped  Prynne's  hand)  I 
thought  it  therefore  not  unworthy  of  a  place  here,  as  I  would  of  many 
other  things  written  by  the  said  archbishop,  which  I  have  seen  reserved 
in  private  custody  as  choice  monuments.'  (Ath.  Ox.  iii.  141.) 

Every  enquiry  has  been  made,  but  in  vain,  for  the  original 
MS.  Most  however  of  the  letters  and  other  documents  have 
been  collated  with  the  copies  in  the  Register  of  the  Univer 
sity,  to  which  access  was  kindly  granted  by  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Bliss,  Keeper  of  the  Archives ;  by  which  means  many  errors 
have  been  corrected,  and  several  additions  have  been  made. 

Some  interesting  and  illustrative  notes  have  also  been 
added  from  the  MS.  Diary  of  Thomas  Crosfield,  fellow  of 
Queen's  college,  and  at  that  time  resident  in  the  university. 
This  Diary  is  now  in  the  library  of  Queen's  college.  For  the 
large  extracts  which  are  given  from  it  the  editor  is  indebted 
to  the  Librarian. 

II.  The  Archbishop's  Annual  Accounts  of  his  Province 
are  reprinted  from  the  first  volume  of  Laud's  works,  edited 
by  Henry  Wharton.     They  have  however  been  carefully  col 
lated  with  the  originals  still  preserved  in  the  Library  at 
Lambeth. 

III.  A  form  of  Penance  and  Reconciliation  of  a  Renegado 
or  Apostate,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  previous  ac 
counts  of  the  province,  is  reprinted  from  Abp.  Laud's  Regis 
ter.     It  has  already  appeared  in  Wilkins'  Concilia,  torn.  iv. 
pp.  522—524. 

IV.  A  series  of  Visitation  Articles  next  follows,  of  which, 
as  far  as  concerns  those  for  Parish  Churches,  an  explanation 


PREFACE.  Vll 

is  given  in  an  introductory  note.  The  series  contains  in 
addition  the  articles  for  the  several  Cathedrals,  Colleges,  and 
Hospitals,  which  the  Archbishop  visited  metropolitically. 
These  latter  now  appear  for  the  first  time  in  print.  The 
places  from  which  they  have  been  extracted,  whether  the 
Archbishop's  Register,  or  the  Lambeth  MSS.,  is  in  each  case 
carefully  noted. 

V.  The  Injunctions  and  Orders  founded  on  those  Articles 
of  Enquiry  come  next  in  order.    Of  these  the  Injunctions  for 
Winchester,  Gloucester,  Worcester,  Norwich,  Lichfield,  Chi- 
chester,  and  Peterborough  Cathedrals,  for  Winchester  and 
Eton  Colleges,  and  for  the  Court  of  Arches,  have  already 
appeared  in  Wilkins'  Concilia.     They  have  all,  with  the  ex 
ception  of  the  last,  (of  which  the  source  could  not  be  traced,) 
been  carefully  collated  with  the  Archbishop's  Register.  Those 
for  St.  Paul's  London,  and  Exeter  Cathedral,  and  the  second 
set  of  orders  for  Worcester,  as  well  as  those  for  the  Parish 
Churches  of  Boston  and  Rickmersworth,  are  now  printed  for 
the  first  time. 

VI.  The  Statutes  of  Canterbury  Cathedral  are  introduced 
not  only  because  mentioned  in  the  Accounts  of  the  Province, 
as  drawn  up  by  the  archbishop,  but  as  a  specimen  of  the  re 
form  which  he  wished  to  introduce  in  the  several  cathedrals. 
They  are  reprinted  from  the  MS.  in  the  Lambeth  Library. 

VII.  The  Injunctions  to  Merton  College  are  also  reprinted 
from  a  MS.  in  the  same  collection. 

VIII.  The  papers  of  the  Archbishop's  Claim  to  visit  the 
University  of  Cambridge  are  printed  from  Baker's  MSS.  pre 
served  in  the  library  of  that  university.     To  these  is  added 
a  short  notice  of  the  archbishop's  intention  to  visit  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford,  and  of  the  proceedings  consequently  taken 
by  convocation. 

IX.  The  Canons   and  Constitutions   for   the  Church   of 
Scotland,  reprinted  from  the  first  very  rare  edition  of  1636. 
The  revision  of  these  canons  was  entrusted  to  the  archbishop, 
and  the  part  he  took  in  their  revision  was  one  of  the  charges 
urged  against  him  by  the  Scotch  Commissioners.    (See  Hist, 
of  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap.  iii.  pp.  316,  seq.)    This,  together 
with  the  great  rarity  of  the  original  volume,  which  is  not  to 


Vlll  PREFACE. 

be  found  in  either  the  Bodleian  or  the  British  Museum,  is 
considered  a  sufficient  reason  for  republication  a. 

X.  The  English  Canons  and  Constitutions  put  forth  by 
the  convocation  of  1640,  the  publication  of  which  formed  a 
main  charge  against  the  archbishop,  and  in  the  preparation 
of  which  (both  from  his  office  and  his  known  temper)  he 
obviously  had  a  considerable  share. 

The  numerals  in  the  inner  margin  of  the  History  of  the 
Chancellorship  of  Oxford,  and  of  the  Accounts  of  the  Pro 
vince,  mark  the  pages  of  the  original  editions. 

The  following  lists  of  the  Heads  of  Colleges  and  Professors 
in  the  University,  and  of  the  Bishops  of  the  Province  of 
Canterbury  during  the  period  of  the  Archbishop's  official  con 
nection  with  them,  are  added  for  convenience  of  reference. 


JAMES  BLISS. 


OGBOURNE  ST.  ANDREW, 
March  11,  1853. 


a  [The  copy  from  which  the  present      editor  by  David  Laing,  Esq.,  of  Edin- 
reprint  was  made  was  kindly  lent  the      burgh.] 


HEADS  OF  COLLEGES  AND  HALLS. 


ELECTED 


UNIVERSITY 


Balliol 


Merton    »  . 

Exeter     .  . 

Oriel  .    .  . 

Queen's    .  . 
New  College 

Lincoln    .  . 
All  Souls 


Magdalen 

Brazenose 
Corpus     . 


1609  \  ^onn  Bancroft,  D.D.  ;  on  being  appointed  Bp. 

(      of  Oxford  resigned  Aug.  23,  1632. 
1632    Thomas  Walker,  B.D.,  Aug.  31. 

1616  John  Parkhurst,  D.D.,  resigned. 

1637  5  Thomas  Lawrence,  D.D.,   elected   Nov.    1  1  ; 

*     also  Margaret  Professor  of  Divinity. 

/-Nathaniel  Brent,  knt.,  D.C.L.,  Judge  of  the 
1621  <      Prerogative  Court,  (one  of  the  Parliament- 

^     ary  Commissioners.) 

1619  *  J°an  Prideaux,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Di- 

'      vinity  1615,  (Bp.  of  Worcester  1642.) 
1621     John  Tolson,  D.D. 

1626  iCnrist°Pner  Poster,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Worcester 
'    !      1635. 

1617  Robert  Pink,  D.D. 


1620  Hood>  D.D.,  (retained  his  place  during 

'     the  usurpation.) 

1618     Richard  Astley,  D.D.,  died  Feb.  23,  1636. 
1636  $Gilbert  Sheldon,  D.D.,  (Bp.  of  London  1660, 

c     Abp.  of  Canterbury  1663.) 
fir  Accepted    Frewen,   D.D.,   (Bp.  of   Lichfield 

I     1643,  Abp.  of  York  1660.) 
1614     Samuel  Radcliffe,  D.D. 
1629     John  Holt,  D.D.,  died  Jan.  10,  1631. 
1631  /Thomas  Jackson,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Peterborough, 

t     died  Sept.  21,  1640. 
1640     Robert  Newlin,  B.D. 


X  HEADS  OF  COLLEGES  AND   HALLS. 

ELECTED 

Christ  Church  .          1629  tBrian  DuPPa'  D'D"  (BP'  of  Chi'hester  I638> 
{      Salisbury  1660.) 

/Samuel  Fell,  D.D.,  (Dean  of  Lichfield  1641, 
1638  <      Winchester   1637,)  Margaret    Professor   of 

v     Divinity  1626—1637. 
Trinity     ....     1599     Ralph  Kettel,  D.D. 

{William  Juxon,  D.C.L.,  (afterwards  Dean  of 
Worcester  and  Clerk  of  the  Closet ;  Bp.  of 
London  1633,  Abp.  of  Canterbury  1660.) 
1633r  Richard  Baylie,  B.D.,  (D.D.  July  16,  1633,) 

I      Dean  of  Salisbury  1635. 
Jesus       ....     1620    Sir  Eubule  Thel wall,  died  Oct.  8,  1630. 

1630  Francis  Mansell. 

Wadham      .     .     .     1617     William  Smyth,  resigned  Sept.  5,  1635. 

1635     Daniel  Escott,  M.A.  Sept.  7, 1635,  (D.D.  1636.) 

Pembroke  1624  \  Thomas  Clayton,  M.D.,  Regius  Prof,  of  Medi- 

c      cine,  and  Tomlyn's  Reader  in  Anatomy. 

Gloucester  Hall          1626  P6*^  Wheare,  M.A.,  Camden  Professor  of 
*•     History. 

Hart  Hall    .     .     .     1621     Thomas  lies,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Ch.  Ch. 

1633     Philip  Parsons,  M.D.,  of  St.  John's  College. 

f  Richard  Zouch,  D.C.L.,  Regius  Professor  of 

St.  Alban's  Hall     .     1625*1      Law,  Judge  of  the  Admiralty  Court,  (re 
tained  his  place  during  the  usurpation.) 
St.  Edmund's  Hall     1610    John  Rawlinson,  D.D.,  died  Feb.  3,  1631. 

1631  Adam  Airay,  B.D.  Feb.  4,  (D.D.  1637.) 
St.  Mary's  Hall      .     1591     Ralph  Braddyll,  M.A. 

1632  5Jonn   launders,  M.D.   June   8,  '(Provost  of 
I     Oriel  1644.) 

New-Inn-Hall  .  1626  j  Christ°Pher  Rogers,  M.A.,  (made  Canon  of  Ch. 

Ch.  by  the  Parliamentary  Visitors,  1648.) 

/John  Wilkinson,  D.D.,  (made  President  of 
Magdalen  Hall  .  1605<!  Magdalen  College  by  the  Parliamentary 

^     Visitors,  1648.) 


PROFESSORS.  XI 


PEOFESSOES. 


ELECTED 


Divinity,  Lady  i  Samuel  Fell,  D.D.,  Canon,  afterwards  Dean  of 

Margaret's          .  6  |      Oh.  Ch. 

1638     Thomas  Lawrence,  D.D.,  Master  of  Balliol. 
Divinity,  Regius    -     1615     John  Prideaux,  D.D.,  Rector  of  Exeter. 
Hebrew    ....     1626    John  Morris,  B.D.,  All  Souls,  (D.D.  1634.) 
Gre,  1625  j  Henry  Stringer,  M.A.,  New  College,  (Proctor 

i      1630.) 

Law     .....     1620     Richard  Zouch,  Principal  of  St.  Alban  Hall. 
Medicine      .     .     .     1611     Thomas  Clayton,  Master  of  Pembroke. 
Savilian,  Geometry     1621     Henry  Briggs,  M.  A.,  Merton  (First  Professor.) 
1631  f  Peter  Turner,  M.A.,  (M.D.  1636,)  Fellow  of 
*•     Merton. 

Astronomy     1621  j  John    Cambridge,     M.D,      Merton,     (First 

<      Professor.) 

Sedley's  Reader  in     ,  g,  g  f  Edward   Lapworth,    M.D.,   St.  Alban's   Hall, 
Natural  Philos.  1      (First  Reader.) 

1636     John  Edwards,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's. 

White,  Moral  Phi-  Tnomas  Ballow,  M.A.,  Student  of  Ch.  Ch. 

losophy     .     .     . 

1634     Edward  Fulham,  M  A.,  Student  of  Ch.  Ch. 
1638     George  Gisbey,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's. 


Camden's  History       1622  /^f^  ^hear>  M^  ******  °f 
\     Hall,  (First  Professor.) 

„,      ,     ,    ,  ,,.-,,  (Thomas  Clayton.  M.D..  Master  of  Pembroke, 

Tomlyn  s  Anatomy     1624  ]  J 

(      (First  Professor.) 

FT    iv    »    TUT    •  Mzna  (Richard    Nicholson,   Mus.  Bac.,  Organist  of 

Heather  s  Music    .     1626  { 

(      Magdalen,  (First  Professor.) 

1639     Arthur  Philipps,  Mus.  Bac. 

/Edward   Pococke,   B.D.,    Fellow  of    Corpus. 

Laud's  Arabic   .     .     1636  J      (Deputy,  1637,  Thomas  Greaves,  M.A,  Fel- 
v     low  of  Corpus.) 

Public  Orator   .          1629  \  William  Strode>  M'A"  Student  °f  Ck  Ch" 
(      (Canon,  1638.) 

Keeper  of  the  Ar-     1634     Brian  Twin6j  B  D  ?  Fellow  of  Corpus 

chives  .... 
Bodley's  Librarian      1620     John  Rouse,  M.A.,  Oriel  College. 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

I.  History  of  Chancellorship    .  •       1 

II.  Accounts  of  Province  •  305 

III.  A  Form  of  Penance,  &c.       .  .372 

IV.  Visitation  Articles       .  •  3^ 
V.  Injunctions  and  Orders  •  478 

VI.  Statutes  of  Canterbury  Cathedral  .  506 

VII.  Injunctions  to  Merton  College      .  -  546 

VIII.  Papers  relating  to  the  Archbishop's  claim  to  visit  the 

University  of  Cambridge  .  .555 

IX.  Scotch  Canons  of  1636         .  .583 

X.  English  Canons  of  1640       ..  •  607 


A  N 


Hiftorical     Account 


OF      ALL 


JHaterial 

Relating  to  the 

UNIVERSITY 


O  F 


OXFORD, 


FROM 


ARCH-BISHOP    LAUD'S 

Being  ELECTED 

CHANCELLOR 

To  his  RESIGNATION  of  that 

OFFICE. 

Written  by  Hirafelf. 


ALL 


THE     PASSAGES 

FEOM  APBIL  12,  1630, 


WHICH    CONCERN    THE    UNIVERSITY   OF    OXFORD,  SINCE   THE,  FIRST  Dr.  Frewen 
NOMINATION   AND   ELECTION   OF    THE    RIGHT   REVEREND  FATHER         *~° 

IN  GOD,  WILLIAM  LAUD,  LORD  BISHOP  OF  LONDON,  TO  BE 
CHANCELLOB. 


Anno  1630.  Pars  Anni  ab  Electione  meet 

ad  Cancettariat.  Oxon. 

DIE  lunae,  viz.  12  die  Aprilis  Anno  Dom.  1630_,  habit  a  erat  The  election 
convoeatio,  in  qua  significavit  Dr.  Frewenb  vice-cancellarius,  pfaj^r  ^\ 
accepisse  se  a  nunciis  fide  dignis,  honoratissimum  academise  liam  Laud, 

cancellarium,    Gulielmum   Pembrochiae  comitem  fatis  con-  ,P"  °     ,on" 

don,  to  be 
cessissec;  ideoque  ad  electionem  novi  cancellarii  proceden-  chancellor1. 

dum  esse;  Deinde  succincta  prsefatione  venerabilem  ilium 
senatum  hortatus  est,  ut  hoc  in  negotio,  seposito  partium 
studio,  solius  academise  commodo  et  honori  studeret;  cum 
hoc  habuerit  remedium  [unicum],  quo  affectum  dari  possit, 
ut  desideratissimus  Pembrochius  minus  desideraretur. 


a  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  19.  b.]  Saturday,  April   10.     See  Clarendon, 

b  [President  of  Magd.  coll.,  after-  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion,  vol.  i.  p.  103, 

wards  bp.  of  Lich.  and  Coventry,  and  ed.  1826,  and  Wood,  ut  supra.     Easter 

archbp.  of  York.     At  the  time  of  the  term  had  begun  the  previous  Wednes- 

earl   of  Pembroke's   death   he  was  at  day.     An  account  of  his  death  is  given 

Andover  on  a  college  progress,  but  re-  in  a  letter  from  Joseph   Mede  to   Sir 

turned  to  Oxford  without  delay.     See  Martin    Stuteville,  (Birch's    Court   of 

Wood's  Annals,  p.  368.]  Charles  I.,  vol.  ii.  p.  73.)] 
c  [He   died    suddenly   in    London, 

B2 


1 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1630. 


Quibus  prcefatis,  ad  scrutinium  pro  elections  novi  Cancellarii 
Universitatis  hujus  Oxoniensis  processerunt. 

Quo  scrutinio  per  venerabiles  viros,  Doctorem  Frewen 
vice-cancellarium,  Magistrum  Rodulphum  Austen  d,  et  Ma- 
gistrum  Heiiricum  Stringer6,  procurators  universitatis,  ac- 
cepto  et  fideliter  computato,  honoratissimus  vir,  re\7erendus 
in  Christo  pater,  dominus  Guilielmus  episcopus  Londinensis, 
a  sanctioribus  consiliis  serenissimse  regis  majestatj,  numero^ 
siore  suffragiorum  calculof  electus  erat  in  cancellarium  uiii- 
versitatis  Oxon ;  et  pro  electo  per  Magistrum  Austen  procu- 
ratorem  seniorem  pronunciatus  est. 

Deinde  statuit  coiivocatio  et  decrevit,  Doctorem  Bancroft",  2 


4,53. 

e 

New 


Of  Magd.  coll.      Wood,  F.  O.  i. 

Fellow    (afterwards    warden)    of 
coll.,  and  reg.  professor  of  Greek. 


He  was  ejected  by  the  parliamentary 
commissioners.  Wood,  F.  O.  ii.  49.] 

f  [Pry nne,  Cant.  Doom,  p.  71,  says 
that  the  votes  were  miscalculated  in 
the  scrutiny,  and  Wood  asserts  "that 
that  party  for  the  earl  (of  Montgomery) 
was  held  to  he  more  numerous  than 
that  for  the  bishop,  as  divers  judicious 
and  impartial  men  that  gave  votes, 
lately  and  yet  living,  have  attested  it 
in  my  hearing."  Wood's  Annals,  pp. 
368,  369. 

The  following  contemporary  accounts 
shew  what  the  opinion  was  at  the  time, 
and  on  what  ground  unfairness  was 
alleged. 

(1.)  The  first  is  an  extract  from  a 
letter  of  Joseph  Mede  to  Abp.  Usher, 
May  4,  1630.  (MS.  Harl.  4931.  Art.  13.) 

"  Dr.  Laud  Bpp.  of  London,  after  ye 
death  of  ye  Earle  of  Pembroke,  wonne 
the  Ld.  Chancellourshipp  of  Oxford 
from  y«  Earle  of  Montgomery  by  9 
voices;  on  the  Sunday  sennett  after 
15  of  yl  University  psented  an  Ap- 
peale  wth  a  Petition  to  his  Ma^,  and  on 
Tuseday"  (this  was  the  day  before  the 
admission;  "  againe  a  2d  Petition,  that 
it  wold  please  his  Ma1?  to  inhibite  any 
further  proceeding  upon  ye  sd  Election, 
till  ye  cause  of  theire  Appeale  mighte 
be  heard,  either  by  his  Ma1'  or  some 
other  delegated  by  him:  to  wch  his 
Ma^68  answeare  was,  that  for  somuch 
as  yr  wr  so  many  Drs,  Batchelo"  of  D. 


and  Mrs  of  Arts  come  up,  to  ye  end 
they  mighte  not  loose  their  labor,  he 
wold  haue  ye  solemnity  go  on ;  but 
after  it  was  done  and  past,  he  wold  yn 
also  haue  the  cause  examined  from  ye 
original!,  and  wold  punish  ye  Delin 
quents,  and  doe  Justice.  One  of  ye 
Exceptions  agl  yc  Legality  of  ye  Elec 
tion  is,  that  ye  Vice  Chancellor  Dr. 
Frewin  had  no  Authority  to  call,  and 
sitt  President  in  the  Conuocacon,  his 
office  ceasing  in  ye  Vacancy,  and  the 
Power  belonging  to  the  Senior  Dr." 

(2.)  The  second  is  taken  from  the 
MS.  Diary  of  Thos.  Crosfield,  fel 
low  of  Queen's  college,  then  resident 
in  the  university. 

"Apr.  12.  Cancellario  nostro  mortuo, 
Dr.  Laud  Epus  Londinensis  per  amicos 
Academicos  supplicavit,  ut  ipse  succe- 
deret  in  isto  officio  honorifico  :  simili- 
ter  Comes  Montgomeriensis  frater  pri- 
oris  Cancellarii  supplex  erat,  verum 
frustra ;  nam  Dr.  Laud  locum  et  dig 
nitatem  obtinuit;  alterum  superans 
per  9m  suffragia.  Absente  nostro  prae- 
posito  (Dr.  C.  Potter)  Rectoriae  suae : 
optavit  vero  potius  custodem  magni 
sigilli  ( Williams,  bp.  of  Lincoln),  quam 
ut  Comes  Montgomer. 

Apr.  26.  Post  electionem  Cancellarii 
Epi,  priusquam  ad  ejus  Consecratio- 
nem  [...?]  quidam  academicorum  di- 
cuntur  fecisse  Appellationem  ad  Regem, 
eo  quod  non  aequa  vel  satis  prolongata 
fuit  electio  secundum  Statuta  Univer 
sitatis."] 

«  [Master  of  Univ.  coll.,  afterwards 
bp.  of  Oxford.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  5 

Doctorem  Prideauxh,  Doctorem  Smith1,  Doctorem  Duppak,  A.D.  1630. 
Doctorem  Juxon1,  Doctorem  Ayleworthm,  Doctorem  Clay 
ton"^  Magistrum  Estcot,  Coll.  Wadhami0,  Magistrum  Wil 
liam  son ?_,  Magistrum  Cooke^,  Coll.  Magd.,  Magistrum  Stroud, 
.ZEdis  Christi1",  Magistrum  Hunt,  Coll.  Novis,  Magistrum 
Johnson,  Coll.  Magd.',  Magistrum  Barker,  Coll.  Noviu,  una 
cum  vice-cancellario,  procuratoribus,  registrario  universitatis, 
tribus  bedellis  superioribus,  duobus  inferioribus,  et  statio- 
nario,  Londinum  mittendos,  vel  majorem  partem  eorum,  qui 
convocationem  Londini  haberent,  in  qua  simpliciter  roga- 
rent  honoratiss.  virum  et  reverendum  in  Christo  patrem, 
dominum  Gulielmum  episcopum  Londinensem,  [et]  a  sanc- 
tioribus  consiliis  serenissimae  regis  majestati,  ut  universitatis 
nostrae  patrocinium  et  tutelam  in  se  susciperet,  et  literas 
patentes  universitatis,  quibus  officium  cancellariatus  Oxon.  ei 
conceditur,  acceptaret;  et  ut  interesse  possint  ejus  admis- 
sioni,  juramentorum  prsestationi,  et  aliis  actis  in  hoc  negotio 
expediendis. 

Placuit  eodem  tempore  venerabili  ccetui  convocationis 
doctorum,  magistrorum  regentium  et  non-regentium,  ut 
literse  patentes,  qiiibus  omcium  sive  munus  cancellariatus 
tenetur  et  stabilitur,  communi  sigillo  universitatis  muniren- 
tur,  antequam  delegati  prasdicti  Londinum  proficiscerentur. 


h  [Rector  of  Exeter,  and  reg.  prof.  was  one   of  the  few  fellows  of  Magd. 

of  divinity,  afterwards  bp.  of  Worces-  who    submitted  to    the   parliamentary 

ter.]  visitors.] 

5  [Warden    of  Wadham,    to   which  1  [Robert  Cooke,   fellow  of  Magd. 

office  he  was  nominated  by  the  foun-  college.] 

dress.]  r    [Public     orator,     student    (after- 

k  [Dean  of  Ch.  Ch.,  afterwards  tu-  wards  canon)  of  Ch.  Ch.    He  had  been 

tor  to  Prince  Charles,  bp.  of  Chiches-  proctor  the  previous  year.  (Wood  Ath. 

ter,  Salisbury,  and  Winchester.]  Ox.  iii.  15.)] 

1  [President  of  St.  John's  coll.,  af-  s  [William    Hunt,   fellow   of   New 

terwards  bp.   of  Hereford  (elect),  and  coll.] 

London,  lord  high  treasurer,  and  abp.  l  [Sampson  Johnson,  fellow  of  Mag- 

of  Canterbury.]  dalen,  writer  of  verses  in  Coronre  Caro- 

m  [D.C.L.  of  All  Souls.]  Mnse  Quadratura,  Oxon.  1636.] 

n  [M.D.   of   Ball,    coll.,    reg.   prof.  u  [William  Barker,  fellow  of  New 

of  medicine,   last  principal  of   Broad-  college,    created    D.D.   Sept.  5,   1661, 

gates   hall,  and   first  master  of  Pern-  for  his  laudable  sermons  preached  be- 

broke  coll.]  fore   the  king   at  Oxford    during   the 

0  [Daniel  Estcot,  in    1635    warden  rebellion.      He  was   in   1661  preb.   of 

of  the  same  college.]  Cant.,  and  rector  of  Hardwicke,  Bucks., 

P  [Robert     Williamson,    fellow    of  where  he  died,  (Wood,  F.  O.  ii.  257.) 

Magd.     coll.,    proctor    in    1628,    (see  Walker   speaks   of  him  as  an   ejected 

Wood,   F.  O.  i.  438;)  now  one  of  the  fellow  of  New  coll.] 
delegacy  for  settling  the  statutes.     He 


6  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630. 

Ada  habita,  et  gesta  Londini  28  die  mensis  Aprilis  Anno 
Dom.  1630,  viz.  die  mercurii  post  meridiem  inter  horas 
secundam  et  quartam  [in  convocations  ibidem  tenta  et  ha- 
bita],  pro  admissione  honor  atissimi  viri  Guilielmi  provi- 
dentia  divina  episcopi  Londinensis,  a  sanctioribus  consiliis 
sereniss.  regis  majestati,  ad  cancellariatum  universitatis 
Oxon*. 

Convocation  QUIBUS  die  et  horis,  in  loco  celebri  civitatis  London,  vul- 
hous^foTad-  gariter  vocato  The  Doctors9  Commons,  convenerunt  venera- 
mission  of  bills  vir,  Dr.  Frewen,  in  SS.  theologia  professor  et  vice-can - 
celTor^lect  ce^arius  universitatis  Oxon.  Reverendus  in  Christo  pater  ac 
Dominus,  Dominus  Johannes  providentia  divina  episcopus 
Dunelmensis^,  insignissimi  viri,  Dominus  Guilielraus  Paddye, 
in  medicina  doctor  et  eques  auratus2,  Dominus  Henricus 
Marten,  in  legibus  doctor  et  eques  auratusa,  Dominus  Na 
than  ael  Brent,  in  legibus  doctor  et  eques  auratusb,  Dominus 
Carolus  Caesar,  in  legibus  doctor  et  eques  auratusc,  cum  longa 
et  numerosa  serie  doctorum  in  omnibus  facultatibus,  Magis- 
tro  Rodolpho  Austen,  Magistro  Henrico  Stringer,  procura- 
toribus  universitatis,  cum  multis  baccalaureis  in  SS.  theo 
logia,  et  magistrorum  regentium  et  non  regentium  magno 
comitatu.  Quo  in  loco  reverendus  in  Christo  pater  ac  do- 
minus,  Dominus  Johannes  episcopus  Dunelmensis,  habitu 
episcopali  indutus,  doctores  purpura,  magistri  ornamentis 
gradui  suo  competentibus  amicti,  justis  ordinibus  bini  atque 
bini  procedunt,  tribus  bedellis  superioribus  aureis  monilibus 
decoratis,  duobus  bedellis  inferioribus,  una  cum  stationario 
universitatis  Oxon.  erectis  columnis  praeeuntibus  ad  palatium 
reverendi  in  Christo  patris  ac  domini,  Domini  Guilielmi  epi 
scopi  Londinensis,  &c.  Ubi  ad  palatium  devenerint,  in  augus- 

*  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  20.]  Queen's,  for  his  Sermon.   See  Wood's 

y  [John  Howson,  previously  bp.  of  Annals,  p.  289.] 

Oxford.]  a  [Formerly    fellow    of    New  coll., 

z  [Of  St.  John's  coll.,    Oxford,    to  Judge  of  the  Prerogative  Court.] 

which    he    was     a     benefactor,    (see  b  [Warden  of  Merton,  vicar-general 

Laud's    letter   to    Sir    Rob.    Cotton,)  to  the  Abp.  of  Canterbury,  afterwards 

afterwards  physician  to  King  James  I.,  one  of  the  principal  witnesses  against 

whom  he  attended  at  his  death,  (Wood,  Abp.  Laud  at  his  trial.] 

F.  O.  i.  256.)  He  was  a  staunch  friend  c  [D.C.L.  of  All  Souls,  master  of 

to  Laud,  when  attacked  by  the  vice-  the  faculties.] 
chancellor,  Dr.   Airay  the  provost  of 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  7 

tarn  cameram  ascenderunt.     Ibi  vice-cancellarius  in  cathedra    A.D.  1630. 


Sin  superior!  parte  camerse  sibi  destinata  resedit,  hinc  atque 
hinc  doctores,  deinde  procurators  more  academico  coram 
vice-cancellario,  postea  magistri  reliqui  sedilibus  recto  or- 
dine  collocatis  consedere.  Ac  statim  venerabilis  vir,  Doctor 
Frewen  vice-cancellarius,  causam  illius  convocationis  signifi- 
cavit,  ut  cum  honoratissimus  Pembrochise  comes,  academise 
nostrse  Oxoniensis  nuper  cancellarius,  animam  exhalasset 
suam,  reverendusque  in  Christo  pater  ac  dominus,  Dominus 
Guilielmus  providentia  divina  episcopus  Londinensis  &c.  ad 
cancellariatum  academies  Oxon.  sit  electus,  ad  ejus  admis- 
sionem  procederetur. 

Quibus  praefatis,  ex  altiore  cubiculo  palatii  descendunt  ho 
noratissimus  comes  de  Dorsetd,  honoratiss.  comes  de  Dan- 
bye6,  honoratiss.  comes  de  Clevelandf,  vicecomes  Dorches 
ter8,  honoratiss.  vicecomes  Wentworthh,  praeses  concilii  par- 
tium  borealium,  reverendus  in  Christo  pater,  episcopus 
Winton.1,  episcopus  Bathon.  et  Wellensisk,  episcopus  Lan- 
davensis1,  qui  in  intervallo  ejusdem  camerae  tantorum  viro- 
rum  honoribus  et  reverentiis  aptissimo  consederunt. 

Omnibus  sic  compositis,  reverendus  in  Christo  pater,  Do- 
minus  Guilielmus  episcopus  Londinensis  &c.  tribus  bedellis 
superioribus,  duobus  inferioribus  et  stationario  preeeuntibus, 
honor atissimum,  reverendissimum,  et  venerabilem  coetum 
convocationis  ingressus  est,  seditque  in  cathedra  collocata 
in  suprema  parte  cameras  praedictae  coram  mensa,  pulvinari 
juxta  apposito :  cujus  reverentiam,  tanto  patre  dignam, 
auspicatissima  oratione  salutavit  venerabilis  vir  Dr.  Frewen 
vice-cancellarius,  votaque  academiae  expressit  erga  tantum 
reipublicae  literarise  patronum.  Cui  primo  literas  patentes 
ab  academia  missas  tradidit  communi  matris  nostrse  univer- 
sitatis  sigillo  signatas  [argentea  pixide  inclusas],  secundo, 

d  [Edward  Sackville,  fourth  earl  of  &  [Dudley  Carleton,   created  baron 

Dorset,    lord     chamberlain     to      the  Dorchester,  July  25,  1628.     Secretary 

Queen.     See  his  character  in  Claren-  of  State.] 

don,  Hist.  Rebellion,  vol.  i.  pp.  106,  h  [Thomas  Wentworth,  better  known 

107.]  as  the  earl  of  Straftbrd.] 

e  [Henry  Danvers,  created  earl  of  '   [Rich.    Neile,    afterwards    trans- 

Danby,    Feb.    5,    1626;    he   was    the  lated  to  York.] 

founder   of  the   Botanical   Garden    at  k  [Walter  Curie,  afterwards  trans- 
Oxford.]  lated  to  Winchester.] 

f  [Thomas  Wentworth,  baron  Went-  l  [William    Murray,    formerly    bp. 

worth,  created  earl  of  Cleveland,  Feb.  of  Kilfenora.] 
5,  1626.] 


8  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630.  cancellariatus  sui  sigillum ;  tertio,  librum ;  quarto,  claves ; 
denique,  bedellorum  columnas :  quibus  oblatis  et  porrectis, 
ad  nutum  domini  vice-cancellarii  alta  voce  lectse  fuerunt  literse 
patent es  cancellariatus  prsedicti  per  Johannem  French111,  no- 
tarium  publicum  et  registrarium  universitatis  Oxon.  Lite- 
rarum  tenor  sequitur. 

The  letters          OMNIBUS  Christ!  fidelibus,  ad  quos  prcesentes  literse  por- 
universitv    °  rec^8e    s^ve    exhibitse    fuerint,  vice-cancellarius,  magistri,   et 
scholares  universitatis  Oxon.      Salutem  in  Domino  sempi- 
ternam. 

Sciatis  nos  prsefatum  vice-cancellariura,  magistros,  et 
scholares  dedisse  ac  concessisse,  ac  per  prsesentes  dare  et 
concedere  pro  nobis  et  successoribus  nostris,  honoratissimo 
viro,  reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri  domino  Guilielmo  epi- 
scopo  Londinensi,  a  sanctioribus  conciliis  serenissimse  regis 
majestati,  officium,  munus,  praefecturam,  et  dignitatem  can 
cellariatus  universitatis  Oxon.  prsedictae,  nuper  per  ipsam 
convocationem  doctorum,  magistrorum,  regentium  et  non 
regentium,  rite  et  legitime  (facto  scrutinio)  per  procuratores 
nominato  et  electo,  habendum,  tenendum,  occupandum,  et 
gaudendum  officium  prsedictum  praefato  honoratissimo  viro, 
reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri,  Domino  Guilielmo  durante 
termino  vitae  suse  naturalis ;  cum  omnibus  libertatibus,  juri-  4 
bus,  praeeminentiis,  et  pertinentiis  quibuscunque  ad  illud 
officium  quoquo  modo  spectantibus,  vel  cum  eodem  officio 
antehac  usitatis.  Damus  insuper  et  per  prsesentes  conce- 
dimus  prsefato  honoratissimo  viro,  reverendissimo  in  Christo 
patri,  Domino  Guilielmo,  tenore  prsesentium,  potestatem  et 
auctoritatem  vice-cancellarios,  commissarios,  et  sufficientes 
deputatos  suos  de  tempore  in  tcmpus  per  literas  suas  sigillo 
suo  obsignatas  nominandi,  prseficiendi,  et  constituendi ;  nec- 
non  omnes  curias,  leetas,  dies  festos  et  juridicos  universitatis 
habendi,  utendi,  et  celebrandi  in  tarn  amplis  modo  et  forma, 
quam  aliquis  cancellarius  universitatis  prsedictse  anteactis 
temporibus  habuit,  tenuit,  usus  fuit,  vel  celebravit,  aut  ha- 
bere,  tenere,  uti,  vel  celebrare  potuit  aut  debuit.  In  cujus 
rei  testimonium  sigillum  commune  universitatis  Oxon.  prse- 

m  [Fellow  of  Merton,  unanimously      careless  man,  though  a  good  scholar.' 
elected  registrar  on  the  resignation  of      Wood,  F.  O.  i.  452.] 
Thomas  French,  Oct.   19,    1629;    'a 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  9 

apponi  fecimus.  Datum  in  Domo  Congregationis  in  A.P.  1630. 
Universitate  prsedicta  24  die  mensis  Aprilis,  anno  regni 
illustrissimi  domini  nostri,  Domini  Caroli,  Anglise,  Scotia3, 
Francise,  et  Hibernise  Regis,  Fidei  Defensoris,  &c.  sexto; 
Annoque  Domini,  secundum  computationem  Ecclesise  Angli- 
canse,  1630. 

His  prselectis,  Magister  Austen,  procurator  senior,  accura- 
tam  habuit  orationem  coram  reverendissimo  in  Christo  patre 
Domino  Guilielmo,  &c.  eidemque  de  regise  majestatis  aucto- 
ritate  agnoscenda  et  de  allegiantia  sua  juramenta  ministra- 
vit :  quse  lionoratissimus  vir  ac  reverendissimus  in  Christo 
pater,  Dominus  Guilielmus  &c.  posita  dextra  super  pectora 
in  verbo  honoris  prsestitit,  de  fideliter  prsestando  omnia  et 
singula,  quse  ad  omcium  cancellariatus  universitatis  Oxon. 
pertinent,  idem  exhibente  vice-cancellario.  Quibus  peractis, 
ad  munus  sive  omcium  cancellariatus  prsedictus  honor atis- 
simus  vir,  reverendissimus  in  Christo  pater  ac  Dominus, 
Dominus  Guilielmus,  providentia  divina  episcopus  Londi- 
nensis,  et  a  sanctioribus  consiliis  serenissimas  regis  majestati, 
admissus  est. 

Quo  munere   accepto,  honoratissimus    dominus  cancella- 
rius  gravissimam  et  elegantissimam  habuit  orationem.     In 
qua  academicis  omnibus  gratias  egit  maximas  propter  singu- 
larem  eorum  amorem  in  ipsum  collatum,  sposponditque  in 
rebus  omnibus,  tarn  qua3  communi  utilitati  matris  academise 
inservirent,  quam  qua3  bono  usui  et  utilitati  cujuscunque  pri- 
vati  accederent,  se  semper  eis  prsesto  futurum.     Deinde  no-  Dr.  Frewen 
minavit  et  deputavit  venerabilem  virum,  Doctorem  Frewen  Cj°tu£^ 
vice-cancellarium  ejus  in  reliquum  anni  subsequentis ;  retro  cellor. 
tradidit  ei  librum,   sigillum,   claves;    bedellis   omnibus  co- 
lumnas;  et  postea  epulae  lautissimse  apparatse  sunt  pro  cu- 
jus\is  ordinis  dignitate. 


Tenor  autem  orationis  reverendissimi  domini  cancellarii 
sequitur  in  haec  verba. 

NON  expectatis,  scio,  viri  literatissimi,  cultissimi  acade-  The  chancel- 
mici,  ut  longa  vos  aut  compta  oratione  excipiam.  Fateor,  *or's  sPeec"- 
amor  vester  et  merita  omnia  possunt  a  me  jure  vendicare : 


10  THE   HISTORY  OF  HTS 

A.D.  1630.  sed  hinc  desuetudo  perorandi,  illinc  stylus  parum  rotundas, 
hinc  lingua  haesitans,  illinc  memoria  febre  non  lassata  modo, 
sed  et  penitus  exusta11,  mihi  abunde  impedimento  sunt.  Lo- 
quendum  tamen  mihi  est,  et  in  hac  doctissimorum  corona, 
qua  cinctus  sum  :  loquendum ;  sed  quam  laxo  stylo,  parum 
refert,  quum  vos,  in  supplementum  oratorum,  et  gravem  et 
dulcem  attulistis. 

Mihi  non  vacat  esse  tarn  diserto,  nee  facile  invenio,  unde 
incipiam,  adeo  me  distrahit  dicendorum  copia.  Gratise,  scio, 
agendae  sunt  vobis,  et  almae  illi  academiae,  quae  corpore  quo- 
dam  abbreviato  vos  estis.  Et  gratias  ago,  non  quales  lingua 
mea  promere  didicit  (exiles  illae  !),  sed  quas  cor  vestrum  nimis 
in  me  propensum  potest  concipere.  Magnum  est,  quod  in 
me  contulistis.  Munus,  vere  magnum,  et  quo  multi  heroes 
hujus  regni  dum  fruebantur,  non  levi  se  honore  auctos  exis- 
timarunt :  nee  mirum ;  cum  in  tarn  altum  Parnassi  locum 
ascendere,  est  omnia  accipere,  quae  Musae  dare  possunt. 

Atque  hie  succurrit  mihi  illustrissimus  ille  heros,  mihi 
nunquam  sine  honoris  prsefatione  dicendus,  cujus  praesidio 
nuperrime  orbata  est  academia.  Ille  vobis  et  patronus  et 
pater  exstitit :  patronus,  vos  et  vestra  pro  posse  (quod  mag 
num  fuit)  defendendo;  pater,  se  et  suo  donando;  nee  vul- 
garia  ilia,  sed  quae  haberi  ullibi  vix  poterant,  sumptu  non 
parvo  emit,  ut  daret0.  Notius  est,  quam  ut  teste  indigeat, 
nihil  ei  magis  carum  fuisse,  quam  salutem,  honorem,  et  felici- 
tatem  istius  florentis  academiae.  Decessit  ille  sibi  suo  tem- 
pore ;  nobis  heu  nimis  cito  decessit :  quern  rex  serenissimus 
fidelissimum,  respublica  legum  observantissimum,  Ecclesia 
amicissimum,  academia  beneficentissimum  semper  experta 
est.  Ego  quum  eum  a  primo  fere  in  aulam  ingressu  Maece- 
natem  semper  habui  constantem  et  prudentissimum,  iiunc 
vestro  munere  ipsi  succenturiatus  sum.  Onus  eo  gravus  hu- 
meris  meis  impositum  sentio,  quod  viro  tarn  claro,  vobis  tarn 
caro,  successor  sim  futurus. 

"  [He  had  only  just  recovered  (as  he  °  [The  Baroccian   MSS.  purchased 

records  in  his  Diary,  March  21,  16^,)  by  the  earl  of  Pembroke  for  £700  at 

from  a  severe  illness  under  which  he  Laud's  own  request,  and  given   to  the 

had  been  suffering  ever  since  the  pre-  university.     See  Diary,  Jan.   28,  162|, 

vious  August.    From  the  prayer  written  and  a  letter  from  Laud  to  Ussher  on 

by  him  on  his  recovery,  we  may  further  the    subject,    in    the   next   vol.     Lord 

judge  how  severe  this  illness  had  been.  Pembroke's  letter  to  the  university,  on 

See  Devotions,  the  last  prayer  under  the  transmitting  the  MSS.,  is  preserved  in 

head  'Morbus.']  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  9.  b.J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  11 

Sed  quiescit  ille  in  suo  et  omnium  Domino.  Redeundum  A.D.  1630. 
est;  nam  dum  doleo  clarissimum  virum  oculis  ereptum  no- 
stris,  psene  oblitus  sum  mei.  Sed  memini  dixisse  me,  mag 
num  esse,  quod  in  me  contulistis,  munus  sine  dubio  magnum; 
seipso  tamen,  modum  rei  si  perpendamus,  majus.  Contu- 
listis  enim  cancellariatum  academies  vestree  antehac,  et  sse- 
pius ;  sed  semper  magnum  in  magnos  contulistis.  Et  honor 
iste  semper  ascendebat,  descendebat  nunquam,  usquedum 
riunc  in  me ;  nee  solum  in  me  minorem,  sed  et  immerentem, 
sed  et  prorsus  nescientem;  addo  etiam  (non  ut  beneficio 
quicquam  detraham,  sed  ut  affectus  vestros  indicem)  nolen- 
tem,  et  contra  meipsum  omni  conatu  (Deum  et  conscien- 
tias  quorundam  astantium  tester)  molientem,  descendebat. 
Amoris  vestri  impetus  hie  fait ;  cui  nunquam  par  ero,  ut  me 
in  gremium  matris  mese  vestraeque  reduceretis.  Quod  vobis 
faustum,  precor,  sit ;  sicut  mihi  non  potest  non  esse  pergra- 
tissimum,  sic,  et  tarn  fervidis  affectibus,  honor ari. 
6  Unum  tamen  placuit  vobis  errorem,  eumque  magnum, 
(sicut  solet  errare,  quum  errat,  amor)  amori  vestro  immi- 
scere;  ipsam  nempe  mei  electionem.  Nisi  enim  me  augu- 
rium  fallat,  et  sim  falsus  animi,  melius  multo  corisultum  foret 
vobis  et  academise,  fortasse  et  mihi,  si  hunc  honoris,  fateor, 
sed  et  invidiae  cmnulurn,  in  alios  et  fortiores  humeros  pla- 
cuisset  imponere.  Quippe  poterat  munere  isto  (quod  hie 
collocasse,  quid  aliud  psene  est,  quam  perdidisse  ?)  novus 
aliquis,  et  qui  plus  posset,  patronus  conciliari.  Ad  me  vero 
quod  attinet,  non  indigebam  his  stimulis,  qui,  etiam  ante 
hunc  collatum  honorem  reputabam  me  quasi  unum  e  vobis : 
nee  erat  quicquam  intra  sphseram  activitatis  mese,  ad  quod 
prsestandum  sponte  non  fuerim  paratissimus.  Adeo  ut  hoc 
tarn  ingenti  beneficio,  actione  quidem  amoris  vinculo  me  vo 
bis  devinctum  agnoscam,  promptiore  vero  ad  benefaciendum 
animo  non  sentiam. 

Videtis,  ut  amoris  vestri  sive  error  sive  sestus,  navem  aca- 
demise  gubernandam  tradidit  homini,  cui  bene  velle  quidem 
adest,  cseterum  nee  ars  suppetit,  nee  rudentes,  nee  anchora 
satis  firma.  Quae  spes  itaque  appellendi  ad  portum,  si  qua 
forte  oboriatur  tempestas  ?  certe  nulla ;  nisi  rex,  pro  innata 
sua  erga  literas  et  literatos  bonitate,  quam  a  patre  piissimae 
memoriae  et  regum,  dum  vixit,  doctissimo  hausit,  dignetur 


12  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

A.D.  1630.  ipse  Maecenas  vester  audire,  et  me  sibi  constituere  sequestrem 
in  iis,  quse  ad  vos  spectabunt ;  imo  nisi  pro  misericordia  ilia, 
quae  est  super  omnia  opera  Ejus,  plusquam  aliquid  descendat 
a  Rege  regum  et  Domino  dominantium,  Ille,  spero,  qua  est 
Pater  luminum  a  quo  omne  datum,  quod  bonum,  aperiet 
oculos  meos,  ut  videam,  diriget  gressus  meos,  ut  sequar  ea 
quae  academiae  matri  meae,  semper  honorandae,  et  vobis  con- 
fratribus  meis  utilissima,  amplissima,  honoratissima  futura 
sunt. 

Reliquum  est,  ut  vos,  viri  gravissimi,  seniores  Israelis, 
(nam  nee  Moses  solus  potuit  omnia)  humeros  vestros  una 
mecum  supponatis  oneri.  Et  nisi  ita  faciatis,  Deus  bone ! 
in  quales  quantas  angustias  me  conjecistis  ?  Sed  videtur  vel 
ipse  aspectus  hie  academicus  nescio  quid  boni  mini  polliceri ; 
eundem  nempe  amorem,  majorem,  (si  fieri  potest)  et  noil,  ut 
antea,  err  ant  em,  in  exhibendo  mini  auxilium,  quod  et  vos 
deceat,  et  me  sublevet. 

Et  certe,  [ut]  ipsa  academia  (qua  nescio  quid  mihi  carius  esse 
potest)  doctrina  simul  et  moribus,  pietate  simul  et  sobrietate, 
pace  simul  et  unitate,  sit  in  omne  aevum  florentissima,  in 
vobis  aeque  ac  in  me  situm  erit.  Academia  enim  tot  ditata 
collegiis,  quot  et  qualibus  vix  dotata  est  quaelibet  per  Euro- 
pam  alia,  non  aliunde  pejus  audit,  quam  ex  fracta  et  jacente 
quasi  disciplina.  Earn  de  postliminio  restituite,  reducite  in 
gratiam  vestram  :  et  antiquam  statim  videbitis  academiae 
pulchritudinem.  Neque  enim  anus  hsec  canitie  veneranda 
rugas  novit  contrahere,  nisi  prae  moerore  et  anxietate  ob  col- 
lapsam  disciplinam. 

Sunt,  quae  hie  plura  dicerem.  Sed  dies  serenus  est;  et 
talis,  opto,  sit  vobis  et  mihi.  Nolo  diem  hunc  querelis  ob- 
nubilare;  quae  ne  tune  quidem  sunt  gratae,  quum  forsan 
necessariae.  Opto  omnibus,  singulis  vobis,  corpori  universo, 
salutern,  serenitatem,  quam  nulla  unquam  nubila  tempes- 
tas,  quae  undique  perflare  human  a  solet,  aut  abscondat  aut 
minuat. 

Concludam  cum  Apostolo :  de  catero,  fratres,  quacunque  7 
sunt   vera,    qucecunque  pudica,    qucecunque  justa,  qu<ecunque 
sancta,    qucecunque    amabilia,    qucecunque   bona   sunt:    addo, 
qusecunque  ad  aedificationem  Ecclesiae  Christi,  quaecunque 
ad  obedientiam  erga  Christum  Domini,  quaecunque  ad  picta- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  13 

tern,  et  pacem  populi  Dei  pertinent :    si  qua  virtus,  si  qua    A.P.  1630. 
laus  discipline;    hcec  cogitate,  hsec  agite   ad  unum  oranes. 
Et  pax  Dei,  qua  exsuperat  omnem  sensum,  custodial  corda 
vestra  et  intelligentias  vestras  in  Christo  Jesu  ad  vitam  seter- 
nam.     Amen. 


So  soon  as  I  was  admitted  to  the  chancellorship,  which 
God  knows  I  little  expected,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  reform 
the  university,  which  was  extremely  sunk  from  all  discipline, 
and  fallen  into  all  licentiousness;  insomuch  that  divers  of 
the  governors  there  complained  to  me  that  if  remedy  were 
not  applied  in  time  there  would  scarce  any  face  be  left  of  a 
university.  Hereupon  I  resolved  within  myself  to  set  close 
to  a  reformation.  And  though  I  understood  most  of  the 
defects  of  the  university,  as  having  lived  there  many  years, 
and  for  divers  of  them  a  governor,  yet  the  first  thing  I  Order  taken 
thought  fit  to  do,  was  to  lay  a  command  upon  the  vice-  ^  J^6]^ 
chancellor  for  the  time  being,  that  he  should  give  me  an  the  vice- chan- 
account  by  letters  every  week  of  all  necessary  occurrences  cellor- 
which  happened  in  the  university  pertaining  to  exercise  or 
manners,  with  a  promise  that  he  should  weekly,  without  fail, 
receive  a  letter  from  me  expressing  what  I  disliked  or  ap 
proved,  and  with  directions  what  should  further  be  done  for 
the  good  of  that  place.  This  course  I  constantly  held,  and 
found  so  much  good  by  it,  that  I  resolved  as  often  as  I  made 
a  new  vice-chancellor  to  renew  the  like  charge,  and  to  pursue 
it  with  like  diligence.  Which,  when  time  served,  I  did,  and 
shall,  God  willing,  so  continue  to  do,  as  long  as  I  shall  live 
chancellor  of  the  university. 

The  statutes  of  the  university  had  lain  in  a  confused  heap  Concerning 
for  some  ages,  and  extremely  imperfect  in  all  kinds.     The  th^maij-lg 
reformation  of  the  abuses  which  grew  thereby,  and  the  re-  the  statutes. 
ducing  of  the  statutes  into  order  and  form,  with  the  addition 
of  some  new  for  the  necessity  of  the  present  times,  had  been 
often  attempted,  and  particularly  by  Cardinal  Wolseyp  and 

P  [See  Wood's  Annals,  A.D.  1518  and  A.D.  1520,  pp.  15,  18,  19.] 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630.  other  great  men  in  their  several  times q,  but  was  never  brought 
to  any  perfection,  nor  indeed  to  any  thing  at  all,  but  the 
business  left  where  it  was  first  undertaken.  I  did  ever  fore 
see  that  it  was  not  possible  to  make  a  reformation,  or  settle 
that  body,  unless  the  statutes  were  first  perfected.  And  yet 
it  was  evident  also,  what  great  difficulties  attended  that  work : 
for  it  had  been  twice  undertaken  during  my  own  time  in  the 
university ;  and  both  times  it  came  to  nothing.  At  the  last 
time  it  was  attempted,  I  was  named  in  convocation  one  of 
the  delegates  myself.  By  which  means  I  had  opportunity  to 
see  where  the  difficulties  and  impediments  lay,  but  was  not 
then  able  to  remove  them.  Afterwards  coming  to  be  bishop 
of  London,  and  finding  my  lord  the  earl  of  Pembroke  much 
troubled  at  some  unworthy  proceedings  there,  I  told  him  he 
would  never  have  remedy,  until  the  statutes  of  the  university 
were  reduced  into  a  body  and  settled ;  and  withal  acquainted  8 
his  lordship  wherein  the  difficulties  lay.  Hereupon,  at  his 
entreaty,  I  set  down  what  way  was  to  be  taken  and  followed 
for  effecting  that  work :  and  began  at  the  naming  of  the 
delegacy  below  in  convocation1".  Which  delegacy  was  no 
sooner  named,  and  my  directions  sent  unto  them,  but  my 
lord  of  Pembroke  died,  and  I  was  chosen  chancellor  after 
him,  and  took  up  this  work  where  it  was  then  left,  and  re 
solved  to  go  on  against  all  difficulties  which  were  like  to 
oppose  me  in  the  body  of  that  university :  which  being  very 
sick,  was  desirous  enough  to  be  well,  but  not  pleased  with 
the  sourness  of  the  cure.  Besides,  such  bodies  never  want 
factions ;  and  many  there,  that  were  willing  enough  to  have 
a  cure,  were  not  so  well  pleased  it  should  be  wrought  by  my 
hand.  But  this  and  many  other  difficulties  I  overcame  with 
care  and  patience,  and  went  on  with  the  work. 


i  [Cardinal    Pole,   (specified  in  the  23,  1629,  had  been  read  in  convocation 

Preface  to  the  Corpus  Statutorum  ;)  see  July  17,  and  the  delegates  nominated 

Wood,  ibid.,  A.D.  1556,  p.  132,  133  ;  immediately  after.  Reg.  Conv.  11.  foil, 

and  others.]  11  b.  12  a.     Their  names  are  given  in 

r  [The  earl  of  Pembroke's  letter  re-  Wood,  Annals,  p.  366.] 
commending  the  delegacy,  dated  June 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  15 

A.D.  1630. 

Salutem  in  Christo. 

AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.    I  am  given  to  un-  To  Dr.  Tol- 
derstand  that  on  Sunday  last*  I  was  welcomed  into  my  chan-  ^^hancel- 
cellorship  of  Oxford  with  two  very  ill  accidents,  in  either  lor's  deputy, 
sermon  one.     The  first,  I  hear,  was   committed  by  one  of  J^™*^' 
Exeter  college,  who  preached  directly  against  all  reverence  sermons. 
in  churches,  and  all  obeisance,  or  any  devout  gesture  in  or 
at  the  receiving  of  the  communion.     And  if  this  be  true, 
belike  we  shall  not  kneel  neither. 

The  other,  as  I  am  informed,  was  by  one  Mr.  Tuckeru  of 
your  own  college;  who  was  not  content  only  to  justify  the 
five  articles  commonly  called  Arminianism,  but  he  would 
needs  lay  an  aspersion  upon  the  synod  of  Dort.  In  both 
which  he  hath  directly  gone  against  his  majesty's  both  Pro 
clamation  and  Instructions x,  prohibiting  all  men  of  all  sorts 
for  a  time  to  preach  either  way  concerning  them ;  that  so 
those  unhappy  differences,  likely  to  rend  this  Church  as  well 
as  others,  might  sleep  first  and  die  after. 

I  know  not  whether  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  did  convent  these 
men  or  no.  If  he  did,  your  labour  is  past :  if  he  did  not,  then 
I  pray  do  you ;  and  take  two  or  three  doctors  to  you.  I  would 
not  be  too  sour  at  my  first  coming  in ;  and  yet  I  would  not 
have  sermons  of  such  ill  example  lead  the  way  into  my 
government  there.  I  hope  a  strict  monition,  that  they  run 
no  more  into  these  errors,  will  serve  the  turn  for  this  first 
time.  But  if  you  find  that  it  will  not,  then  I  pray  go  so 
much  further,  as  the  carriage  of  the  men  and  the  merits  of 
their  cause  shall  require. 

I  know  these  sermons  were  provided  before  I  was  chan 
cellor,  but  yet  I  know  too,  that  the  blame  will  fall  on  me 
more  than  upon  another  man,  if  such  things  as  these  pass 
without  censure.  I  pray,  as  you  shewed  your  love  to  choose 
me,  so  be  careful  to  maintain  my  honour  in  upholding  the 
peace  and  the  government  of  the  place.  For  God  knows  what 

8  [Provost  of  Oriel.]  to  in  the  King's  Instructions  to  Abp 

1  [May  2.]  Abbot,  §  3,  in  1629,  and  <A  Pro- 

u  [John  Tooker,  of  Oriel  college.  clamation  for  the  establishing  of  the 

Wood,  Annals,  p.  370.]  Peace  and  Quiet  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 

*  [See  the  Declaration  prefixed  to  land,'  dated  June  16,  1626.  (Rymer, 

the  XXXIX  Articles  in  1628,  referred  Fred.  VIII.  ii.  64.)] 


16  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630.    blustering  may  follow  upon  that  unhappy  accident  of  Mr. 
Tucker's.     Thus  not  doubting  of  your  care  herein,  I  leave  9 
you  to  the  grace  of  God.     And  shall  ever  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

London  House, 
May  7,  1630. 

Salutem  in  Christo. 

ToDr.Frewen  AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  Your  deputy,  Dr. 
vice-chan-  Tolson,  hath  done  very  well  in  some  business  in  your  absence, 
observing  for- which  I  hope  you  will  perfect.  Now  I  have  a  little  more 
malities.  business  for  you,  in  which  I  must  desire  you  to  have  a 
special  care. 

I  am  given  to  understand,  that  formalities,  which  are  in  a 
sort  the  outward  and  visible  face  of  the  university,  are  in  a 
manner  utterly  decayed,  not  only  abroad  in  the  streets,  but 
also  in  the  very  schools,  convocation  and  congregation  houses, 
and  at  Latin  sermons ;  insomuch  that  strangers  which  come 
thither,  have  scarce  any  external  mark  by  which  they  may 
know  they  are  in  a  university.  If  this  go  on,  the  university 
will  lose  ground  every  day  both  at  home  and  abroad ;  and 
especially  with  his  majesty,  who  is  a  great  lover  of  order  and 
decency  in  all  seminaries  of  good  learning.  And  he  hath 
already  given  me  strict  charge  to  look  both  to  this  and  other 
particulars  in  their  several  times. 

I  pray  therefore  call  the  heads  of  colleges  and  halls  toge 
ther,  with  the  proctors,  and  read  these  letters  to  them ;  and 
with  my  love  remembered  to  them  all,  let  them  know  I  am 
welcomed  into  my  chancellorship  with  many  complaints  from 
very  great  men.  I  hope  all  are  not  true ;  and  I  hope  such 
as  are,  you  and  they  will  all  in  your  several  houses  join 
pains  and  hearty  endeavours  to  see  them  rectified,  as  I  shall 
in  due  time  severally  propose  them. 

At  this  time  I  think  it  necessary  the  heads  should  fairly 
bespeak  their  several  companies  to  fit  themselves  with  for 
malities  fitting  their  degrees,  that  when  the  act?  comes,  (God 

y  [This  year  Act  Sunday  fell  on  pers  being  on  the  Saturday  preceding. 
July  11.  The  Act  was  then  kept  on  the  Since  the  year  1808,  it  has  been  kept 
Monday  after  the  7th  of  July,  the  Ves-  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  July.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  17 

bless  you  with  health2,  that  it  may  hold  with  honour  and    A.D.  1630. 


safety,)  the  university  may  have  credit  by  looking  like  itself : 
and  then  I  doubt  not  but  it  will  be  itself  too.  For  it  will 
not  endure  but  to  be,  as  it  seems.  And  I  desire  you  would 
bespeak  your  companies  fairly;  both  because  I  presume 
most  men  there  in  their  generous  and  liberal  education  will 
be  such  lovers  of  order,  that  they  will  run  to  the  practice ; 
and  because  I  heartily  desire,  that  as  I  am  chosen  chancellor 
with  a  great  deal  of  unexpected  love,  so  I  may  be  enabled 
ever  to  govern  with  a  like  measure  of  it.  My  heart  ever  was, 
and  I  hope  ever  shall  be,  set  to  do  that  place  all  the  good  I 
10  can.  And  I  shall  take  it  for  one  of  God's  greatest  temporal 
blessings  upon  me,  if  I  may  have  your  joint  concurrence  to 
perfect  the  good  I  wish.  And  I  will  not  doubt,  but  that  you 
do  so  love  and  honour  that  our  venerable  mother,  that  you 
will  cheerfully  afford  me  this  assistance a. 

When  you  have  made  this  entrance  for  formalities  at  the 
act,  for  which  I  now  give  time  and  warning,  then  the  better 
to  settle  them,  and  all  other  points  of  government,  I  pray 
take  care  to  go  on  with  the  delegacy  for  the  statutes,  that 
there  may  be  a  settled  and  a  known  body  of  them.  My  ever- 
honoured  predecessor  began  that  work  with  care.  I  know 
you  will  give  me  leave  to  pursue  it  to  your  good  and  his 

z  [The  plague  was  prevalent  at  this  eery, 

time.     See  below,  p.  28.  note  p.  J  ii.  Our   sister   University   that 

a  [The  way  in  which  the  chancel-  have   kept    it    constantly    in 

lor's   plans  were  carried  out  may  be  use. 

seen  by  the   following  extracts   from  iii.  Some  of  our  own  Colleges 

Crosfield's  Diary,  (1630.)  (Prayers. 

"  June  4.  Letters  sent  from  the  chan-  \  Meate. 

cellor  suasive  to  the  graduates  for  con-  iv.  Himself  that  will  begin, 

formity  in  their  habits  to  the  Statutes,  July  5.  Mr.  Provost's  approbation  or 

that  there  may  be  a  more  visible  face  gratulation  owing  many  thanks  to  all 

of  the  university,  and  better  order  than  in  their  several  degrees,  for  that  after 

formerly.  his  admonition  they  did  so  willingly 

June  24.  Duo  proponebantur  sociis  observe  to  provide  and  wear  caps.     A 

[scil.  a  praeposito]  ...  2.    de  observa-  thing  in  itself  not  so  pertinent  and  ne- 

tione  statuti  pro  pileis.  cessary,  but  therein  we  are  to  observe 

July  1.    Mr.  Provost  requested  the  the  good  end  for  which  our  wise  pre- 

scholars  decessors  did  institute  it,  for  in  itself  it 

To  provide  \  scluare  *s  ^ut  vam»  frivolous,  and  contemptible, 
(  round  caps  but  the  end  of  our  cap  and  gown  was 
both  tutors  and  scholars  against  Sun-  to  put  us  in  mind  of  piety,  civility,  so- 
day,  because  briety,  studiousness,  and  other  virtues, 

1.  Of  the  command   given   by  the  to  the  end  that  having  these  for  per- 

chancellor,  which   ought  to  be      petual  monitors  about  we  may  not  be 
observed.  forgetful  of  the  places  wherein  we  are, 

2.  Ab  exemplo,  both  of  and  the  end  for  which  we  came  hither, 

i.  The  Inns  of  Court  and  Chan-      viz.  to  grow  in  piety  and  good  letters."  ] 

LAUD.  o 


18  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

A.D.  1630.  honour.  In  the  next  long  vacation  it  were  happy,  if  that  body 
of  statutes  might  be  finished.  But  whether  it  can  or  not,  I 
heartily  pray  you  against  Michaelmas  term  look  the  register, 
and  provide  such  tables  as  were  wont  to  be  published  upon 
St.  Mary's  doors,  for  observance  of  the  known  statutes,  and 
that  then  you  proceed  to  the  execution  of  them  accordingly. 
I  know  you  and  the  governors  there  will  pardon  me  this 
care,  when  you  shall  know  what  lies  upon  me  here,  and  what 
begins  already  to  be  expected  from  me  by  a  most  gracious 
prince,  who  is  very  zealous  of  the  honour  of  that  place.  And 
this  yet  I  shall  promise  and  perform.  I  will  not  be  sudden 
upon  you,  nor  hasty  with  you  in  any  your  businesses.  Neither 
will  I  proceed  in  any  thing,  but  that  which  shall  promote 
the  honour  and  good  of  yourselves  and  that  famous  univer 
sity.  And  in  this  way  he  that  gives  me  best  assistance  shall 
be  most  welcome  to  me.  So  for  this  time  I  take  my  leave, 
commending  you  all  to  God's  gracious  protection ;  and  shall 
rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

May  28,  1630. 


Salutem  in  Christo. 

My  first  let-        AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     This  is  the  first 

ters  to  the       occasion  which  I  have  had  to  trouble  the  convocation.     And 
convocation".  .        . 

before  I  begin  with  the  business,  I  think  it  very  fit  to  give 

you  all  very  hearty  thanks  for  the  great  love  and  undeserved 
favour  which  you  would  needs  bestow  upon  me,  quite  beyond 
my  expectation,  and  cross  to  my  desires.  Yet  since  it  hath 
pleased  God  so  to  dispose  both  of  you  and  me  in  this  business, 
I  shall  endeavour  to  the  utmost  of  my  power  to  answer  your 
expectation,  and  to  discharge  the  burden  of  this  honour  to 
as  much  advantage  of  that  venerable  mother  of  myself  and 
you,  as  the  best  understanding  I  have  can  lead  me  to.  And 
whensoever  any  thing  shall  come  to  your  knowledge,  in  which 
I  may  do  that  body  service,  I  hope  you  will  not  fail  to  ac 
quaint  me  with  it,  and  in  such  time  as  the  opportunity  of 
doing  what  is  fit  may  not  be  lost;  else  I  may  be  disenabled  11 

b  [This  letter  was  read  in  convocation  July  6,  1630.   Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  24.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  19 

to  serve  you  by  your  own  default.     But  these  are  but  verbal    A.D.  1630. 
thanks ;  and  I  have  [ever]  desired  to  be  as  real  as  I  might ; 
and  therefore  [I]  shall  trouble  you  with  no  more  of  this. 

The  business  [which]  I  am  to  acquaint  you  with  is,,  to  let  A  prebend  in 
you  know,  that  his  majesty  did  very  graciously  accept  your  -j^*^  ^Je 
letter  of  thanks  for  the  prebend  bestowed  upon  the  Hebrew  HebrewRead- 
Reader :  whose  patent  I  caused  to  be  sent,  and  approved  by  ei 
you,  before  I  would  suffer  the  seal  to  passc.     And  now  it  is 
passed,  and  that  place  so  both  enriched  and  honoured,  I 
hope  you  will  take  care  that  the  reader  thereof,  as  well  as 
the  rest,  do  the  duty  of  his  place.     For  the  study  of  that 
language  is  too  much  neglected,  and  not  without  the  great 
prejudice  both  of  the  university  and  the  Church. 

Since  this,  I  have  received  from  you  the  book  of  verses  in 
honour  of  the  prince d;  which  I  have  likewise  delivered  to 
his  majesty,  with  a  full  representation  of  [all]  your  humble 
and  dutiful  respects  to  his  majesty,  and  of  your  hearty 
prayers  both  for  himself  and  his  royal  posterity :  which  he 
with  all  grace  and  favour  accepted.  I  could  heartily  have 
wished  the  book  had  been  here  any  time  of  the  last  week, 
that  it  might  have  prevented  the  christening6.  But  how 
soever,  it  is  very  welcome  now. 

It  is  not  long  since  I  writ  to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  about  The  observ- 
some  care  to  be  taken  for  formalities,  both  against  the  act,  m  °r 
and  so  after  to  continue  at  Michaelmas  term.  And  I  make 
no  doubt,  but  all  men  will  be  willing  to  continue  the  honour 
of  that  place,  and  in  that  kind.  It  is  the  hedge  and  the 
fence  of  those  things,  which  are  of  far  greater  consequence. 
In  those  letters  I  omitted  one  thing,  which  I  think  fit  now 
to  be  remembered.  It  is  a  great  abuse,  and  long  continued 
against  the  degree  of  a  Master  of  Arts.  I  know  it  is  very 
fit,  that  that  degree,  upon  which  the  orders  of  the  univer 
sity  do  so  much  rely,  both  in  convocations,  congregations, 
and  elsewhere,  should  be  had  in  more  esteem  than  it  is. 

c  [The  letter   of  thanks  had   been  of  this  year,  6  Car.  I.] 

voted  in  convocation  on  June  14.     The  d  [Charles  II.,  born  May  29.    Cros- 

register  records  the  fact  of  the  chan-  field's  Diary,  June  17,  "  Verses  made 

cellor's  having  sent  the  tenor  of  the  for  the  Prince's  birth."    The  collection 

letters     patent    to    convocation    to    be  of  verses,  entitled    Britanniae   Natalis, 

well  considered  before  they  passed  the  was  printed  in  4to.  Oxon.  1630.] 

great   seal.     Reg.    Conv.    R.   fol.    23.  e  [The  prince  was  baptized  by  Laud 

The  letters  patent  are  dated  June  19  himself  on  June  27.     See  Diary.] 


20  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

A.D.  1630.    But  this  can  no  ways  so  well  be  done,  as  by  their  due  obedi 


ence  to  governors  in  their  several  places,  and  by  their  own 
valuing  and  esteeming  themselves  above  all  inferiors.  And 
for  my  part,  I  shall  do  my  best  to  keep  up  the  price  they  set 
upon  themselves.  For  it  is  a  great  dishonour  to  that  place, 
that  in  all  public  assemblies,  yea,  and  when  they  meet  in 
open  street,  Bachelors  of  Art,  nay  boys,  will  not  know  their 
places.  I  hope  the  Delegacy  will  so  order  the  statutes 
which  they  have  in  hand,  (to  the  lasting  honour  of  my  most 
worthy  and  honourable  predecessor,)  as  that  the  degree  of  a 
Master  of  Arts  shall  hereafter  be  better  esteemed  in  that 
place ;  which  is  the  only  way  to  recover  the  ancient  credit 
of  it  abroad. 

The  not  The  last  thing  which  I  have  at  this  time  to  recommend 

spoiling  of  his  unto     Q      •     ^^     Qu  wou](i  au  be  careful,  that  the  univer- 

ITiMlGStjV  S  it  *         f  *  ' 

game.  sity  may  stand  right  in  his  majesty's  good  opinion  for  not 

spoiling  his  gamef.  There  was  very  lately  a  complaint  made 
to  me  about  it :  and  I,  fearing  the  worst,  writ  to  the  vice- 
chancellor  :  but  he  gave  me  so  discreet  and  so  sufficient  an 
answer,  that  I  not  only  did,  but  had  cause  to  think  [that] 
all  was  well.  Since  this,  I  find  that  complaint,  or  some  12 
other,  hath  gone  farther.  I  heartily  pray  you  therefore  to 
take  the  best  care  you  can,  especially  you  that  are  governors 
and  in  office,  to  look  to  the  abuses  there,  and  then  with 
God's  assistance  I  will  take  care  that  no  man's  sinister  re 
port  shall  do  you  prejudice  here.  Thus  not  doubting  of  the 
love,  and  affection,  the  care,  and  the  moderation  of  any  man 
for  the  good  and  the  honour  of  that  most  noble  body;  I 
leave  you  all  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  shall  ever  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

[Fulham  House, 
July  2,  1630.] 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford. 

f  ["  In  the  forests  of  Stow  and  Shot-  a  great  temptation  to  the  scholars,  and 

over,  near  Oxford,"  (Wood,  Annals,  p.  their  interfering  with  them  a  frequent 

371,)  where  the  king   hunted  during  subject  of  complaint;  see  Wood,  An- 

his  visits  to  Woodstock.   The  deer  were  nals,  an.  1586,  p.  229,  and  elsewhere.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  21 

A.D.  1630. 


S[alutem]  in  Christ  o^. 

AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  The  time  now  Dr.  Smith, 
draws  on  for  the  nomination  of  a  new  vice-chancellor  ac-  ^dhanfc 
cording  to  the  course  held  by  my  honourable  predecessors  in  lege,  appoint- 
that  famous  university.  In  this  little  time  in  which  by  your 
favours  I  have  had  the  honour  to  govern,  I  have  found  the  pre 
sent  vice-chancellor  Dr.  Frewen,  so  careful  and  so  discreet  in 
that  busy  place,  that  I  should,  though  it  were  to  his  great 
pains,  put  him  to  the  trouble  of  another  year,  were  it  not, 
that  I  consider,  how  full  of  able  and  sufficient  men  the  uni 
versity  is  for  the  discharge  of  that  office.  Besides,  I  have 
ever  thought  it  most  for  the  honour  and  the  profit  of  the 
university,  that  the  governors  there  should  have  the  pains 
and  the  experience  of  that  place  divided  amongst  them.  In 
which  resolution  I  shall  still  continue,  till  I  shall  receive 
better  reason  to  the  contrary  than  I  can  give  myself.  For 
this  present  year  therefore  I  have  thought  fit  to  lay  the  bur 
den  of  this  place  upon  Dr.  Smith,  the  warden  of  Wadham  Dr.  Smith, 
college :  and  do  so  choose  him  thereunto,  as  a  man  whose 
integrity  and  abilities  to  govern  I  have  known  and  observed 
for  divers  years.  These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require 
you  to  allow  of  this  my  choice ;  and  to  give  him  your  best 
advice  and  assistance  both  in  th[at  office]  and  all  other 
business,  which  shall  concern  the  good  [government]  and 
honour  of  that  famous  university.  And  so  I  bid  you  heartily 

farewell ;  and  rest, 

Your  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fulham  House, 
July  9,  1630. 

To  my  loving  friends  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors,  the 
proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  university 
of  Oxford  h. 

*  [Read  in  convocation  July  17  (the  tinentium  1°.  Salutationem,  dein  corn- 
last  day  of  term),  1630.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  mendationem  Dris.  Frewen,  quern  vo- 
fol.  24.  b.]  luisset  iterum  in  loco  continuari, 

h  Crosfield's  account  of  the  pro-  nisi  quod  maluisset  potius,  ut  alii 

ceedings  in  convocation  may  not  be  viri  digni  hoc  onus  ferrent.  Postea 

out  of  place:  Diary,  "  July  16  [17  ?]  itaque  Dr.  Fruen  officium  perorando 

Convocatio  habita  pro  lectione  lite-  deposuit:  summa  autem  orationis  erat 

rarum  a  cancellario  missarum,  con-  gratiarum  actio  academise,  quod  tam 


THE  HISTORY  OF   HIS 


A.D.  1630. 


A  letter  of 
thanks  from 
the  univer 
sity  for  my 
letters  to 
them. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE,  13 

PRUDENTISSIMA  literarum  tuarum  monita  sumrao  turn  obse- 
m  gratitudine  accepimus.  Ex  quibus  abunde  constat, 
neminem  melius  provinciam  gerere,  quam  qui  invito  suscepit  ; 
utpote  qui  onus  pensat,  non  honorem,  et  quserit  potius  invidise 
occurrere,  quam  victoria  gloriari.  Gratulamur  itaque  virtuti 
tuae,  cui  ferendum  hoc  onus  imperii  humiles  amici  ingesserunt. 
Gratulamur  modestiee,  quod  regre  hoc  feras  :  benignitati,  quod 
tamen  feras  :  curseque  deraum  paternse,  quod  adeo  studiose  per- 
ferre  decreveris.  Penitus  hoc  antea  persuasum  inerat  nobis, 
amantissimum  hunc  fore  academise  patrem,  qui  fuit  ejusdem 
films  ;  caput  concinnatissimum,  qui  fuit  membrum  ;  et  posse 
nos  itidem  accommodatius.,  uberius,  felicius  agere  sub  capite 
congenito  quam  insitivo.  En  dulce  jugum  !  Artes  jam  tem- 
perat  religio,  erudites  vir  bonus,  juvenes  expertus,  togam 
plusquam  togatus,  mitraque  presbyteros.  Nunquid  capiti 
naturali  beatius  cum  membris  convenit,  quam  tibi  nobis- 
cum?  Sentit  illud,  quicquid  partium  inferiorum  commodo 
inservit  :  seiitis  etiam  ipse.  Facultates  illud  omnes,  quibus 
imperat,  etiam  continet  :  omnes  academicas  et  ipse  contines. 
Exercet  illud  mollem,  sed  potentem  in  sequaces  artus  in- 
fluxum  :  exerces  etiam  ipse  ;  spirituque  superne  diffuse  due- 
turn  ubique  suavissimum  insinuas.  In  ipso  limine  non  minus 
literarum  incremento  consulis,  quam  literatorum  patrocinio  ; 
seque  habitus  decori  ac  togse  moribus  ;  et  honori  nostro  simul 
domi  forisque  vim  omnem  intendis.  O  caecam  academiam, 
quse  certe  audit  Britannise  oculus,  at  plane  caecam  sine  te  ! 
Ipsi  oculo  tu  prospicis  :  et  nostro  lumini  auxiliarem  hunc 
diem  immittit,  quo  si  esset  orbatum,  in  tenebris  perspicaciam 
amitteret.  Lenibus  tuis  ac  saluberrimis  hisce  mandatis, 


feliciter  per  spatium  biennii  jam  tandem 
per  multa  pericula  absque  naufragio 
navigasset,  praesertim  quod  nihil  un- 
quam  frustra  absque  successu  pro- 
posuisset. 

Postremo  Dr.  Smith  juramentum 
suprematus  suscepit,  atque  approbatio- 
netn  academiae  habuit,  instituens  de 
difficultate  loci,  quern  tune  erat  ingres- 
surus,  orationem,  de  sua  imbecillitate  et 
obscuritate,  adeo  ut  nee  applausum  ex- 
pectabat  nee  honorem,  utut  quoniam 


sic  se  res  habuit,  auxilium  a  doctoribus, 
a  procuratoribus,  et  reliquis  magistris 
praesentibus  optabat  quo  quidem  adju- 
tus  non  verebatur  munus  suum  ag- 
gredi,  ac  summam  spondere  diJigeu- 
tiam.  Publicutn  qui  nactus  est  offi- 
cium,  commune  sustentat  onus.  Vide 
hac  de  re  L.  C.  Ind. 

His  addendum  erat  computum  supe- 
rioris  anni  a  priore  vice-cane,  facien 
dum  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  Drs.  accom 
pany  him  home."] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  23 

sicut  tu  quidem,  ita  malumus  et  nos  respondere  facta,  quam    AD.  1630. 
verba.      Invenies   itaque   Parnassum   bicipitem   mitrse   tuse  ~~ 
figuram  non  immerito  exprimere,   et   Musas   episcopo   suo 
facile  se  daturas  in  quemvis  tam  venerandi  dictaminis  mo- 
dulum  effingendas.      Non   te   fore    speravimus    sine  oculis 
vigilantise  caput,  neque  nos  invenies  sine  pedibus  obsequii 
corpus. 

Honori  vestro  deditissima 

OXONIENSIS  ACADEMIA. 

E  domo  nostrts  congregationis. 
Julii  10,  1630. 

Reverendissimo  patri  in  Christo,  Guilielmo  episcopo  Londi- 
nensi,  cancellario  suo  honoratissimo. 


BEATITATEM  amplitudinis  usquequaque  censuit,  reveren- Dr.  Morris ; 
dissirae  cancellarie,  prudentior  indoles,  quod  possit,  meritum  ^a^<^rew 
cceleste,  quod  velit  opitulari.     Utrumque  vestra  beneficentia  thanks  for 
inclaruit.     Utriusque  particeps  fuit  plurimorum  necessitas ;  j£ ec^rr^nd 
praesertim  literature  Hebraicse.    Et  opportune.    Sacro-sancti  Church,  pro- 
quippe  idiomatis  gloria,  quse  apud  transmarinos^  fama  scilicet  cured  bJ  me- 
reformata  splendescentes,  eminet,  nucusque  apud  nos  eclipsin 
passa  est.  Danda  fuit  ignominia,  neque  ingeniorum,  neque  in- 
dustrise,  sed  viatici  indigentias.  Norunt  Judaicarum  rerum  pe- 
14 riti,  nobile  Hebraismi  studium  non  vili  pretio  mercandum.  Pa- 
trimonium  enim  ingens  exhauriunt  Biblica,  Talmudica,  Rab- 
binica,  Lexicographa,  Grammatica,  aliaque  volumina  linguam 
Israeliticam  supra  vulgus  Hebraeorum  imbibenti  necessaria. 
Ista  sunt,  quse  alunt  artem,  et  nobilitant  Artificem :  quae  si 
negata  fuerint,  periit  ars,  vilescit  artifex.     Ut  tandem  igitur 
apud  Anglos  florescant  uterque,  nee  diutiori  remora  suffla- 
minetur   pia   surgentis   et  Ecclesiae   et  Academiaa   ambitio, 
utrumque  sub  auspicatissima  maj estate  ditavit  et  honoravit 
vestra  manus  auxiliatrix.  Musasque  Hebrseas  beneficentissimae 
vestrae  Paternitati  seternum  obstrictas  fecit.     Eccam  spiritu 

1    [John    Morris,    B.D.,    sometime  mer,  Fred.  VIII.  ii.  64,)  succeeded  to 

chaplain  of  All  Souls  college,  was  ap-  the   canonry    1632,   D.D.    1634,    died 

pointed  Hebrew  reader  June  9,  1626,  March  21,  1648.     See  Wood's  Annals, 

(the  patent  of  appointment  is  in  Ry-  part  2.  p.  850.] 


24  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630.  facile  vaticinante  Professorum  Hebraicorum  seriem,  usque- 
dum  evanescat  inter  Oxonienses  tuos  academia,  laudes  tarn 
divini  muneris  ij;j  D^iy5?  juxta  idiotismum  sacrum,  in  SCBCU- 
lum  et  ultra  decantantem.  Non  etenim  unicum  paupercu- 
lum  me  quoad  spem  dotavit  magnifica  vestra  providentia,  sed 
revera  sobolem  infmitam.  Ita  Q»p^i  D^iy  *a»  ex  °r^  w>- 
fantium  et  lactentium  (Hiero-Psaltae  formula  est)  iy  dura- 
bile  magnificentice  testimonium,  sive,  (ut  LXX  senum  premit 
vestigia  D.  Messias,)  alvov,  laudem,  et,  quse  benignitatis  est 
drcfj,}),  vota  praecurrendo,  spem  superando,  nullius  precibus 
sive  blandis  sive  importunis  delinitus,  perfecisti.  Profes- 
sionis  idcirco  Regime  auctum  privilegium  meritis  vestris,  ut 
par  est,  acceptum  refert  ipsa  vestra  Academia,  in  obsequium 
gratitudinis  unanimiter  conspirans.  Ne  meo  denique  desim 
officio,  qui  gratia  1st  a  proximius  locupletari  sperem,  liceat 
mihi,  Prsesul  Amplissime,  personam  successorum  meorum 
induenti,  Almse  Matri  in  obsequio  famulari.  Sic  Ecclesiae 
profectum,  Academise  honorem,  literarum  augmentum  medi- 
tari  din  pergas.  Votisque  tuis  benedicat,  dignitates  augeat, 
felicitatemque  seternam  reddat  Pater  misericordiarum. 

Reverendissimse  vestrse 

Clementise  addictissimus, 
JOHANNES  MORRIS. 

Datum  Comitiis  Oxoniensium  solen- 
nibus,  [sc.  July  12]  e  Coll.  Om. 
Anim.  An,  cpochce  Christi  1630. 


Certain  ad-         AGAINST  the  beginning  of  your  term,  and  so  for  direction 

gfvenThe11^    °f  a11  tllC  V^'  J  slia11  be  b°ld  to  &VG  ?OU  these  few  adver- 
vice-chancel-  tisements  following,  till  the  statutes  may  be  perfected. 

chadnms  ^Ysij  I  ^Y^  keep  it;  in  memory  witl]L  tne  heads,  that  there 

term,  Octob.    ^e  no  gowns  made  out  of  the  ancient  fashion  of  the  univer- 

6,  1030.          sityk.     Secondly,  that  no  man  have  his  degree  till  he  hath 

done  all  his  exercise,  under  what  pretence  soever.     Thirdly, 

that  you  admit  none  to  cumulate.     Fourthly,  that  no  man 

be  suffered  to  proceed  Bachelor  of  Divinity  that  is  not  Mas- 

k  [Thus  noticed  in  Crosfield's  Diary,  habits  from  the  chancellor.'  Seethe 
Oct.  27,  '  Admonition  given  by  Mr.  Chancellor's  Letter,  Feb.  20,  1638-39, 
Provost  for  kinds  and  distinction  of  and  the  note  there.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  25 

ter  of  Arts,  unless  he  have  staid  full  fourteen  years  since  his  A.P.  1630. 
being  Bachelor  of  Arts1 :  nor  any  Bachelor  of  Law  to  be 
Bachelor  of  Divinity,  unless  he  have  spent  as  many  years  in 
the  university  as  he  should  have  done  if  he  had  gone  the 
longer  and  the  more  chargeable  way  by  the  Arts.  Last  of  all 
you  shall  do  very  well  to  make  congregations  fewer,  and  let 
15  them  draw  their  business  together,  and  not  trouble  the  whole 
university  and  yourself  so  often  for  every  boy's  business. 

I  pray  be  strict  in  these,  and  if  it  be  the  cause  you  have 
fewer  Doctors  the  next  year,  the  matter  is  not  great.  For  if 
there  be  none  for  a  year  or  two,  there  are  enough  already 
for  a  longer  time.  And  for  my  part,  I  am  as  willing  there 
should  be  none,  as  to  have  the  university  disordered  by 
them. 

THIS  day  I  received  a  complaint  from  Oxford,  concerning  An  order  De 
the  restraint  which  I  had  advised  should  be  put  upon  Dis-*^™^ 
pensations,  which  were  then  grown  too  common  in  all  kinds,  Octob.  11, 
to  the  great  disgrace  of  the  university.  But  in  the  conside- 
ration  of  this  point  there  arose  some  debate  concerning  the 
Dispensations  de  accumulandis  gradibus,  by  reason  that  some 
were  come  to  the  university  to  accumulate,  which  dwelt  in 
remoter  parts,  and  were  now  ready  to  do  their  exercise,  and 
could  not  be  sent  back  without  their  degrees,  but  it  must 
needs  tend  to  their  great  disreputation,  charge,  and  preju 
dice.  In  regard  whereof  there  was  earnest  suit  made  to  me 
by  Dr.  Prideaux,  then  the  King's  Professor  in  Divinity,  and 
by  Mr.  Bell,  Esquire-Bedell  in  Arts,  that  this  restraint  de 
accumulandis  gradibus  might  not  be  suddenly  put  upon  the 
university :  but  that  there  might  be  a  day  prefixed  and 
warning  given,  that  so  no  man  might  be  taken  upon  the 
sudden;  as  appears  by  Dr.  Prideaux  his  letter,  which  here 
after  follows.  In  the  mean  time  I  presently  settled  this 
difficulty  with  such  a  moderate  restraint  as  in  short  time 
effected  what  I  intended,  and  presently  took  off  all  further 
muttering  in  the  university. 

1  [See  p.  28,  note  q.] 


26  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630. 


RIGHT  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD, 

Dr.Prideaux's      ON  Friday  last  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  acquainted  us  amongst 

letter  deac-     o^iers  w^n  yOur  honours  advertisements,  with  your  dislike 
cumulandis  J  ,  . J 

of  accumulating  degrees,   which  heretofore  hath  been   too 

customary.  We  must  all  acknowledge  with  thankfulness 
your  fatherly  care,  and  God's  blessing  through  your  wisdom 
and  vigilance,  in  reforming  many  things  which  were  out  of 
frame.  For  my  own  part,  I  shall  hold  him  an  unworthy 
member  of  this  place,  that  with  all  readiness  conforms  not 
himself  to  such  warrantable  and  fit  proposals;  and  should 
be  loth  that  any  man  be  more  forward  than  myself  in  per 
forming  all  due  obedience  to  my  superiors.  But  I  trust 
your  honour  will  not  take  amiss,  if  I  interpose  thus  far: 
that  sufficient  notice  be  first  given  of  your  pleasure  in  this 
behalf,  before  execution  be  urged.  I  speak  it  to  this  pur 
pose.  Here  is  one  Mr.  Balye,  an  able  man  both  for  scholar 
ship  and  means,  and  his  majesty's  chaplain™,  who  upon  sup- 
posal  of  accumulating,  as  heretofore,  hath  ever  since  the  act 
been  at  great  charge  here,  and  taken  pains  to  perform  his 
exercise  for  his  degrees.  This  was  before  any  intimation 
from  your  lordship  of  stopping  accumulating :  which  if  it 
presently  take  place,  his  hopes,  travels,  and  expences  are 
frustrated,  and  his  return  must  be  to  his  great  prejudice.  16 
He  was  a  fellow  of  Exeter  college,  of  good  esteem.  There 
is  one  Mr.  Hodges,  a  fellow  of  Lincoln  college",  almost  in 
the  like  case.  Our  humble  suit  is,  that  these  men,  thus  be 
fore  engaged,  may  pass  with  your  lordship's  leave.  Others, 
as  your  wisdom  shall  think  fit,  may  for  the  present  have 
notice  given,  that  they  expect  not  the  like  easiness ;  espe 
cially  the  residents  here,  whose  negligence  hath  abused  this 
favour,  meant  rather,  as  I  take  it,  to  strangers  of  worth,  than 
to  them.  Of  this  I  held  it  my  duty  to  inform  your  honour, 
as  desirous  to  stand  in  your  favourable  opinion  with  others 

m  [John  Bayly,  late  fellow  of  Exe-  He  accumulated   this    year,     (Wood, 

ter   college,  son  of  Dr.  Lewis  Bayly,  F.  O.  i.  457,)  and  died  in  1633.] 

bp.  of  Bangor,  author  of  the  Practice  n  [John  Hodges  became  D.D.  May 

of  Piety :  he  had  formerly  been  a  pupil  26,  the  year  following.    (Wood,  F.  O.  i. 

of  Prideaux;  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  ii.499.)  461.)] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  27 

under  this  your  government :  amongst  whom  I  shall  faith-    A.D.  1630. 
fully  endeavour  in  realities  to  express  myself, 

Your  lordship' s  ready 

to  be  commanded, 

JOHN  PRIDEAUX. 

Exon.  Coll., 
October  11,  1630. 


S.  in  Christ o. 

WORTHY  SIR, 

I  RECEIVED  letters  from  you  this  week.  They  found  me  My  answer 
at  home  under  some  indisposition  of  body  by  reason  of  a 
cold  caught  in  my  court-attendance.  I  thank  you  heartily  de  accumu- 
for  your  love,  and  expression  of  readiness  to  join  in  the 
necessary  upholding  of  government  in  that  famous  univer 
sity,  whose  nourishing  shall  ever  be  the  first  and  at  the  high 
est  in  my  desires. 

For  the  particular  you  mention  de  accumulandis  gradibus, 
I  am  not  only  content,  but  thank  you  for  your  interposition: 
because  as  my  desire  is  to  propose  nothing,  but  that  which 
is  j  ust  and  honourable  for  that  place ;  so  I  am  very  willing 
to  propose  it  in  such  manner,  as  no  man  of  quality  may  have 
just  cause  to  except  against. 

In  my  indisposition  (of  which  I  am  not  yet  free)  I  must 
crave  your  pardon  to  be  brief,  and  not  write  that  over  again 
which  I  have  written  in  that  point  to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor, 
who,  I  think,  will  call  you  and  the  rest  of  the  heads  again, 
and  read  my  answer,  which  I  make  no  doubt  will  settle  this 
business.  Yet  this  I  must  tell  you,  Mr.  Balye  (howsoever 
you  write  an  honest  and  an  able  gentleman)  hath  very  far 
and  more  ways  than  one  forgotten  himself  to  Mr.  Vice- 
chancellor,  and  not  spared  me.  For  my  part  I  pity  his 
passion,  and  shall  pass  it  by,  if  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  be  satis 
fied.  And  this  I  do  for  his  father's  sake,  and  in  hope  that 
he  will  make  this  his  warning ;  else  I  would  quickly  make 
him  know,  that  my  proposals  there  are  far  from  tricks  to 
catch  him  or  any  others.  You  shall  discharge  your  love  to 
his  father,  and  your  care  of  him  very  freely,  if  you  shall 
chide  him  into  better  temper. 


28 


THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 


A.D.  1630.  The  main  of  my  answer  I  hope  you  will  expect  from  Mr.  17 
Vice-chancellor,  in  regard  of  my  present  weakness.  And  I 
shall  end  in  a  constant  belief,  that  for  the  government  of  the 
university,  and  all  necessaries  incident  thereunto,  I  shall  find 
you  very  ready  and  real,  as  you  promise.  For  which,  as  I 
now  give  you  thanks,  so  of  it  I  shall  be  ready  to  give  you 
testimony ;  and  for  it  to  shew  you  all  such  respects  as  may 
be  due,  or  fit  from  the  place  I  bear ;  and  with  as  much  favour, 
as  to  any  governor  in  that  place.  So  I  leave  you  to  the 
grace  of  God,  and  shall  rest, 

Your  loving  friend, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fvlham  House, 
October  15,  1630. 


Concerning 
Act  ques 
tions. 


I  WRITE  you  this  with  mine  own  hand0.  I  pray  hereafter 
be  very  careful  of  the  Act  questions.  The  late  question  about 
the  sickness?  (though  somewhat  qualified  from  the  first  pro 
posal)  was  very  unreasonable,  and  somewhat  else  too.  His 
majesty  took  great  distaste  at  it,  and  commanded  me  to  write 
to  you  about  it.  You  were  at  that  time  gone  into  the  west, 
and  I  forbare ;  and  do  now  only  give  you  this  private  adver 
tisement,  which  none  knows  but  yourself:  not  doubting  but 
you  will  make  good  use  of  it,  and  such  as  is  fit. 


A  clause  of  IT  seems  there  are  but  two    rubs   appearing  in  this  first 

the  vice-  meeting.     The  one   about  a  statute  for  nine  years  allowed 

chancellor  de  (it  seems)  for  men  not  Masters  of  Arts  to  be  Bachelors  in 

Syradus°bac-  Divinity^.    I  Pray  search,  whether  there  be  such  a  statute  or 


0  [This  postscript  was  printed  in 
italics  in  the  first  edition  :  it  is  to  this 
doubtless  that  he  refers  as  added  with 
his  own  hand.] 

p  [The  question  referred  to  was  the 
third  of  Mr.  Giles  Thome's  questions, 
heing  this ;  "  An  curam  habentes  ani- 
marum  insigni  urgente  necessitate  te- 
neantur  peste  laborantibus  sacramenta 
ministrare.  Aff. —  Quaestiones  JEg\dii 
Thome  Bac.  in  Theologia,  respondentis 
Inceptoribus  in  Comitiis."  Reg.  Cong. 
P.  fol.  274.  b.  The  plague  was  preva 
lent  at  the  time  of  the  Act.  Crosfield, 
Diary,  July  10,  says  ; '"  Fewer  strangers 
than  were  wont,  because,  'tis  likely, 


they  feared  the  infection."] 

i  [What  was  the  statute  alluded  to 
does  not  appear  :  but  an  instance  of  its 
being  acted  on  will  be  found  in  a  case 
which  had  occurred  in  the  same  year 
in  which  Laud  took  his  B.D.  degree, 
1604.  "On  the  2nd  day  of  March, 
1604-5,  Gabriel  Powell,  bachelor  of 
arts  of  St.  Mary's  hall,  who  had  studied 
divinity  nine  years,  supplicated  for  the 
said  degree  of  bachelor  of  divinity,  but 
whether  his  desire  was  granted  it  ap 
pears  not."  (Wood,  F.  O.  i.  303.)  That 
he  became  B.D.  appears  from  the  ad 
ditions  to  the  Athenae  ed.  Bliss,  vol.  ii. 
col.  26.  So  in  1611,  Nov.  14,  John 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  29 

no.     If  there  be  not,  I  think  it  fit  my  order  should  hold.    A.D.  1630. 
If  there  be,  I  will  not  violate  it ;    but  think  it  very  fit  it  calaur.  in  SS. 
should   be   abrogated.      For  since  seven  years  is  required  ^°jj^ 
of  a  Master  of  Arts,  and  resident  in  the  university,  where  1630. 
he  may  study ;   I  think  fourteen  years  is  little  enough  for  a 
Bachelor  of  Arts  or  undergraduate  abroad,  who  as  he  went 
away  young,  and  with  less  grounds  of  learning ;  so,  his  time 
being  taken  up  in  preaching,  must  needs  be  less  able  for 
controversy-learning.     And  this  is  all  I  shall  say  for  that. 

For  cumulation,  I  must  needs  profess  I  never  liked  it.  And  De  gradibus 
it  supposes,  of  and  in  itself,  an  unnecessary  delay  of  the  first  ^ww 
degree,  or  a  needless  haste  of  the  second.  There  are  two  things 
objected,  which  makes  me  take  it  into  second  consideration. 
The  one  is,  that  university  records  have  been  searched,  and  that 
time  out  of  mind  cumulations  have  been  admitted,  yea  and 
sometimes  by  a  statute,  provided  that  all  exercise  for  both  de 
grees  were  performed.  I  pray  therefore,  desire  in  my  name 
so  much  patience  of  the  heads,  as  to  have  these  records 
viewed  by  all  or  some  of  them  appointed  thereto  by  your 
selves.  And  if  you  find  it  so,  then  I  shall  be  contented  to 
do  as  hereafter  follows.  But  give  me  leave  to  tell  you  by 
the  way,  that  though  I  dislike  cumulations  in  themselves, 
18  yet  I  do  it  much  more  for  that  which  I  observed  when  I 
was  so  happy  as  to  live  among  you.  For  then  it  was  com 
mon  (and  some  are  yet  living  who  cumulated  so)  either  quite 

Glanvill  of  Bal.  coll.  was  admitted  who  have  not  proceeded  in  arts,  were 
B.D.  "  Whether  he  took  any  degrees  inserted  after  the  year  of  trial,  to  which 
in  arts  in  this  university  I  find  not."  the  Statutes  were  subjected. 
(Wood,  F.  O.  i.  343.)  Again,  John  "Demateriadispensabili,  in  qua  con- 
Davenport  (of  whom  more  in  theabp.'s  vocation!  dispensandi  potestas  permissa 
Accounts  of  his  Province  for  1633,)  est. 

entered  at  Merton  in  1613,  then,  after  Cum  statutorum  rigorem,  modo  pri- 
two  years,  migrated  to  Magdalen  hall,  vatis  hominum  commoditatibus,  modo 
left  the  university  without  a  degree,  re-  necessitatibus  ipsorum  attemperari 
tired  to  London,  and  became  a  noted  quandoque  expediat :  consuevit  V. 
preacher  among  the  puritans.  "In  domo  convocationis.  .  .  .ex  rationabili 
1625  he  returned  to  Magdalen  hall  fora  causa  cum  nonnullis  dispensare  .  .  .  . 
time,  performed  his  exercise  for  the  de-  siqui  olim  hujus  universitatis  alumni 
gree  of  B.D. ,  accumulated  and  took  that  perspectae  probitatis  et  eruditionis  viri, 
degree."  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.,  iii.  889.)  quique  per  15  aut  16  annorum  spatium 
The  following,  except  the  words  in  (computandum  ab  admissione  sua  ad  re- 
italics,  was  the  provision  on,  the  sub-  gendum]  Theologiae  operam  navarunt 
ject  of  accumulation  prepared  by  the  (iidemque  ultra  spatium  30  milliarium 
delegacy  in  1634,  embodying  ap-  ab  universitate  remoti)  praestitis  prius 
parently  the  old  provisions,  modified  by  omnibus  exercitiis,  gradus  accumulare, 
Laud's  suggestions  here  given.  The  sive  simul  capessere  desiderent."  Corp. 
words  in  italics,  which  preclude  those  Statut.  tit.  x.  sect.  ii.  §  4.] 


30  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

AD.  1630.  to  dispense  with  the  exercise  of  Bachelor  of  Divinity,  (which 
is  the  great  and  necessary  exercise  of  the  Gownr,)  or  turn  it 
but  into  a  sermon.  Neither  of  which  I  shall  endure. 

The  other  is,  that  if  I  intend  to  hold  the  strictness  of  this 
course,  it  might  seem  fit  that  a  time  had  been  prefixed  be 
fore  it  be  put  into  execution,  that  so  no  man  might  be  taken 
upon  the  sudden,  as  Mr.  Balye  and  Mr.  Hodges  are  reported 
to  be.  To  this  I  must  needs  confess,  that  a  long  custom, 
though  never  so  bad,  especially  if  time  out  of  mind,  should 
have  a  warning-peal  before  its  dissolution,  and  that  no  man 
should  be  struck  on  the  sudden.  My  answer  therefore  is, 
that  either  I  did  give  warning  at  the  last  Act  to  the  former 
worthy  and  careful  vice-chancellor,  or  else  very  fulness  of  it 
in  my  thoughts  thrust  it  out,  and  made  me  believe  I  had 
written  it,  if  I  have  not.  And  which  of  these  is  true  my 
bad  memory  will  not  ascertain  me.  Next  therefore  I  think 
it  very  fit  there  should  be  both  a  time  prefixed  and  notice 
given.  Both  which  I  shall  thus  far  leave  to  your  considera 
tion.  First  then,  because  the  records  are  with  you,  I  pray 
call  the  heads,  and  view  them  touching  this  point  of  cumula 
tion.  Then  if  you  find  the  wisdom  of  our  ancestors  in  for 
mer  times,  when  government  was  stricter,  and  degrees  not 
so  frequent,  to  have  allowed  them,  I  shall  then  leave  you 
fairly  to  represent  what  you  find  and  think ;  provided  that 
there  be  no  dispensation  for  any  exercise,  the  least,  but  that 
all  be  done  as  statute  requires8.  And  provided  likewise  that 
none  be  admitted  to  cumulate  upon  any  pretence,  that  are 
resident  in  the  university,  or  that  live  within  thirty  miles, 
and  may  so  come  without  great  either  trouble  or  charge. 
And  whatsoever  you  shall  upon  view  of  these  records  by 
mutual  consent  agree  unto,  I  shall  not  without  great  reason 
vary  from.  And  at  this  meeting  you  may  take  it  into  de 
liberation  what  is  fit  to  be  done  for  Mr.  Balye  and  Mr. 
Hodges.  For  I  have  no  will  to  prejudice  any  man  upon  a 
sudden.  Neither  did  any  man  give  me  the  least  notice  that 

r  [ed.  '  Town.']  granted,  but  that  old  statutes  should  be 

8  [One  effect  of  this   regulation    is  revived,  both  in  that  and  other  things, 

mentioned  in  Crosfield's  Diary,  Dec.  thereupon  for  9   or   10  days  together 

7.    "  In  the  latter  end  of  Michaelmas  there   were   Latin    sermons,   formerly 

term  because   the  chancellor  had  ap-  dispensed  withal."] 
pointed  that  no  dispensations  should  be 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  31 

Mr.  Balye  lived  at  charge  in  town  for  that  purpose.  And    A.D.  1630. 

for  notice  given,  I  know  not  what  more  can  be  done  than 

that   publication    of  it  be   in  every  college,   that    so  they 

which  are  abroad  may  know  by  their  residing  friends  what 
to  trust  to. 

GUIL.  LONDON. 


RIGHT  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD, 

I  DEFERRED   to  answer  your  lordship's  letters  until  Mr.  Dr.Prideaux's 

Vice-chancellor  had  acquainted  us  with  your  further  direc-  tlianks'  an(; 

»  _        .  an  answer  to 

tions  to  which  it  had  reference.     Nothing  so  much  takes  an  my  former 

ingenuous  mind  as  undeserved  favours ;  for  which  I  hold letter- 
myself  so  obliged  to  your  honour  that  I  trust  my  future 
expressions  shall  justify  my  thankfulness.  This  bearer,  hav 
ing  occasions  to  see  London,  I  thought  the  fittest  to  write 
19  by,  as  being  able  to  supply  by  word  of  mouth  such  circum 
stances  as  I  may  chance  to  omit,  and  your  lordship  be  will 
ing  to  be  informed  of.  We  are  all  bound  to  praise  God, 
and  to  pray  for  the  continuance  of  your  happiness,  that  so 
thoroughly  set  your  thoughts  to  reform  that  which  is  amiss 
amongst  us,  and  to  recover  that  lustre  of  the  university  which 
latter  times  had  somewhat  neglected.  For  cumulations,  I  Cumulations, 
see  not  what  could  be  more  deliberately  set  down  than  your 
last  advertisement.  The  proceeding  at  nine  years  for  bache 
lors  and  sometimes  undergraduates  (howsoever  in  use  here 
tofore  by  custom  and  the  hint  of  a  statute)  in  all  reason  at 
this  time  needs  reformation,  especially  the  case  among  di 
vines  being  now  otherwise  than  when  that  indulgence  was 
given.  Fourteen  years  might  well  be  required  (as  your 
lordship  intimates)  in  supplicants  of  that  condition.  And  if 
so  they  pass  it  may  be  held  a  favour.  Mr.  Balye  accounts 
himself  made  by  your  lordship's  goodness.  He  hath  been 
well  chid,  and  acknowledged  his  folly  to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor, 
who,  he  hopes,  is  satisfied.  That  untoward  question  the  last  The  Act 
Act  was  never  approved  by  me,  in  those  terms  it  passed,  but  (luestl011- 
I  stand  not  to  execute.  Now  I  understand  by  your  loving 
and  fatherly  advertisement,  what  will  be  expected  of  me,  I 
shall  by  God's  grace  take  a  care  hereafter  that  no  such 
occasion  of  exception  be  given.  Two  things  yet  remain 


32  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630.  concerning  my  place,  which  I  make  bold  to  tender  also  to 
your  judicious  consideration.  The  neglect  of  divinity  dis 
putations  for  term  these  five  years  last  past,  through  ter 
giversations  of  the  actors ;  and  the  proceeding  of  divers  in 
law  of  late,  to  the  prejudice  of  divinity.  Mr.  Thimble*  can 
inform  you  at  full  in  both  particulars.  I  am  fearful  to  tres 
pass  further  upon  your  weighty  employments ;  but  with  my 
hearty  prayer  unto  God  for  your  health  and  happiness, 
rest, 

Your  honour's 
Most  ready  at  command, 
JOHN  PRIDEAUX. 

Exeter  College, 
October  25,  1630. 


justness  of 
my  proceed 
ings. 


RIGHT  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD, 

Dr.Prideaux's      BY  your  last  to  me,  and  your,  direction  to  Mr.  Vice-chan- 

thanks  and     ceuOr,  which  he  lovingly  imparted  unto  me,  I  have  received 

acknowledg-  &  J 

ment  of  the    that  comfort  of  your  undeserved  respect  and  favour  which 

shall  ever  tie  me  to  a  thankful  acknowledgment.  Yesterday 
Mr.  Vice-chancellor  convented  us  concerning  term  disputa 
tions11.  It  took  so  well  with  all,  that  by  a  joint  consent  it 
was  presently  thought  fit  to  second  so  reasonable  and  season 
able  a  proposal  with  immediate  execution.  This  was  thought 
would  make  way,  that  when  the  time  cometh,  prefixed  by 
your  lordship,  there  would  be  no  failing,  and  intimate  to 
your  favourable  consideration  what  concurrence  there  is 
amongst  us  in  due  obedience,  where  directions  are  so  just, 
judicious,  and  necessary.  Concerning  the  late  proceeding  20 
of  lawyers,  we  cannot  desire  more  than  your  lordship  re 
solves  upon.  In  any  thing  that  my  assistance  may  be  use 
ful  to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  or  otherwise,  I  trust  my  faithful 


[The   esquire-bedell   of    divinity,       Schools,  which  is  to  be  three  times  every 


the  bearer  of  the  letter.] 


term,  so  that  30  persons  must  answer 


u  [Crosfield,  Diary,  Nov.  23,  says;  in  a  year  according  to  their  seniority  in 

"A   meeting  of  the  heads   of  nouses,  the  proctors  booke.     Also  further  ad- 

where    notice    was  given    that    there  monition  given  touching  caps."] 
should  be  duely  answering  in  Divinity 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  33 

endeavours  shall   make  good  how  urifeignedly  I  desire  to    A.D.  1630. 
shew  myself, 

Your  Lordship's 

Most  ready  at  command, 
JOHN  PRIDEAUX. 

Exon.  Coll., 
November  24,  1630. 


MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  LORDSHIP, 

IF  it  be  not  too  boldly  done  of  us  to  interrupt  your  lord-  The  proctors 
ship's  greater  affairs,  we  should  hope  that  you  would  be  °it  ^^1V€ 
pleased  to  accept  with  favour  these  few  lines  from  us,  which  thanks  con- 
are,  according  to  our  humble  duty  and  service,  to  congratu- 
late  your  lordship's  honourable  reformation  of  the  university 
so  well  begun.  We  cannot,  nor  can  any  man  else,  dissemble 
it.  The  corruption  was  gotten  up  high,  and  come  to  stand 
almost  in  prcecipiti.  Some  medicinal  hand  was  of  necessity, 
and  that  speedily,  to  undertake  the  cure.  Which  God  (who 
well  saw  the  weightiness  of  the  work)  would,  should  be  no 
other  than  your  lordship's,  though  your  lordship  would  not. 
There  were  others  more  powerful :  your  lordship  would  have 
been  our  friend  however.  It  would  be  envious,  you  were 
sickly,  and  the  like.  But  the  infallible  eye  saw  you,  and 
what  it  purposed  to  effect  by  you,  whilst  you  walked  thus 
under  the  fig-trees  (that  we  may  so  speak)  and  covert  of 
your  excuses.  Truly  it  was  strange  to  see  such  backward 
ness  at  the  undertaking,  and  yet  now  such  readiness  and 
skill  in  the  execution.  We  see  it,  and  must  with  all  grate 
fulness  acknowledge,  amongst  your  manifold  and  great  occa 
sions  both  for  Church  and  State,  no  pains  spared,  no  oppor 
tunity  omitted,  either  by  word  or  letter,  that  may  any  way 
advance  the  business  in  hand.  From  this  zeal  of  your  lord 
ship  to  learning  and  the  welfare  of  the  university,  there  is  no 
ingenuous v  breast  amongst  us,  but  takes  fire,  and  would  be 
glad  to  be  seen  though  amidst  the  dependence  of  so  worthy 
an  enterprize.  Ourselves,  in  an  inferior  distance,  are  even 
angry  with  ourselves,  that  we  have  not  hitherto  signified  to 
your  lordship  our  forwardness  in  our  places.  But  now  we 

v  [ed.  '  ingenious.'] 


34 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1630.  assure  your  lordship,  as  we  have  not  been  altogether  negli 
gent  for  the  time  past,  so  from  henceforward  to  be  industri 
ous  in  what  belongs  to  us,  in  taking  notice  of  formali 
ties,  in  laying  hands  upon  the  reins  and  liberty  of  dispen 
sations,  and  looking  to  the  performance  of  other  duties. 
As  for  the  point  of  dispensations,  and  proceeding  of 
bachelors,  which  now  draws  on,  somewhat  it  may  seem 
to  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  proctors.  But  it  is  so  poor  a 
thing  to  the  universal  good,  that  we  would  request  your  21 
lordship  not  to  entertain  so  much  as  a  thought  that  we 
make  the  least  account  of  it.  And  since  we  understand 
your  lordship's  desire,  we  shall  put  on  resolution  to  make 
stop  of  all  manner  of  dispensations,  (we  mean  for  defect  of 
time,  or  of  that  nature,)  and  this  without  mincing  of  the 
matter,  or  deriving  the  cause  or  envy  farther  than  ourselves. 
Truly  it  would  be  a  foul  shame  for  any,  more  for  us,  to  be 
found  either  backward  or  lukewarm  to  good  order,  when 
our  chancellor  himself  is  seen  to  press  so  nobly  for  it.  Be 
sides  the  reward  that  we  may  look  for,  that  when  in  after- 
ages  your  lordship's  honours  shall  be  recorded,  and  this 
reformation  amongst  the  rest,  Iw  and  amongst  the  chiefest, 
(oh,  it  hath  a  genius,  and  must  live  !)  we  also  may  claim  to 
have  our  names  read  for  those,  in  the  time  and  circuit  of 
whose  office  so  great  a  work  was  undertaken.  Thus  humbly 
craving  pardon  for  our  boldness,  we  rest, 

At  your  lordship's  service 

to  be  commanded, 
RALPH  AUSTEN,      )      Proctors  of 
HENRY  STRINGER,  )    the  university. 

Oxford, 
Nov.  29,  1630. 

A.D.  1631. 

Concerning  ABOUT  this  time   the  principality  of  St.  Edmund's   hall 

ofesrEd-ipal  became  void  V  the  death  of  Dr.  Rawlinson*.      And  the 

mund's  hall,  provost   of  Queen's   college   and   the    fellows   there   made 


w  [i.e.  'aye.'] 

*  [Dr.  John  Rawlinson,  D.D.,  prin- 
cipal,  died  at  Whitchurch  in  Salop,  of 
wliich  place  he  was  rector,  Feb.  3, 
1631.  The  next  day  Adam  Airay  was 
elected,  as  is  thus  mentioned  in  Cros- 
field's  Diary:  "Cum  constans  fama 
per  Andream  Corbet  Militem  et  alios 


ad  praepositum  et  socios  delata  fuit, 
statim  convocatis  sociis  et  publico  no- 
tario,  lecto  imprimis  regni  statute,  pro- 
cessimusadelectionemprincipalisaulae 
Edmundi,  et  Mr.  Airey  tune  vicarius 
de  Okeley  in  Comit.  Hampton  electus 
fuit  socius  tametsi  absens,et  Mr.  Smith 
praesens  frustra  petiit."] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  85 

choice  of  Mr.  Ayrie  to  succeed  him.  This  claim  for  the  A.P.  1631. 
freedom  of  election,  and  a  Queen's  college  man  to  be 
elected,  they  had  formerly  made  under  the  chancellorship 
of  the  lord  Archbishop  Bancroft,  who  promised  them  very 
fair  for  the  next  avoidance,  but  prevailed  with  them  to  let 
his  nomination  stand  for  Dr.  Rawlinsony.  Now  they  writ 
their  letters  to  me,  and  humbly  besought  me,  that  their 
choice  of  Mr.  Ayrie  (who  had  been  of  their  college)  might 
stand.  And  withal  they  sent  me  up  their  writings  and 
evidences  which  they  had  to  shew  that  the  right  of  election 
of  a  principal  to  the  hall  aforesaid  was  in  the  provost  and 
fellows  of  Queen's  college,  and  not  in  the  chancellor  of 
the  university,  as  the  rest  of  the  halls  are.  After  much 
debate  and  full  consideration  taken,  I  writ  to  the  vice- 
chancellor,  as  followeth. 


S.  in  Christ o. 
SIR, 

I  HAVE  now  at  last  with  much  ado  got  a  little  time  to  look  To  the  vice- 
over  the   evidences  which  the  provost  of  Queen's  college  ^*^|®r 
sent  unto  me  concerning  their  right  of  the  choosing  of  the  the  choice  of 

principal  of  St.  Edmund's  hall.       Upon  view  of  the  deed  S  p™J«pal  of 

.   St. Edmunds 
from  the  university z,  (in  which  I  find  the  chancellor  a  party)  hall. 

22  and  of  the  other  disputes  raised  concerning  this  business, 
when  the  right  honourable  the  earl  of  Dorset  was  chan 
cellor8,  all  which  concluded  for  the  right  of  the  college  to 
choose,  I  think  their  right  is  unquestionable.  And  the 

y  [Dr.  Aglionby,     principal,     died  field,  principal,  (Feb.  26,  1601,)  there 

Feb.  6,  1609-10;  on  the  following  day  was  a  dispute  about  the  title,  whether 

Barnabas   Potter,   fellow    of   Queen's  it  was  in  the  chancellor's  power,  or  in 

college,  afterwards  provost  (1616)  and  the  college,  or  the  commoners  of  the 

bp.  of  Carlisle  (1629),  was  elected  prin-  hall,  to  elect  a  principal ; . . .  but  upon  a 

cipal  by  the  provost  and  fellows,  but  he  full  and   accurate  debate,  the  college 

was  never  admitted,  and  on  his  resig-  sending  to  the  chancel  lor  the  judgment 

nation  the  provost  and  fellows  on  the  both  of  the  civil  and  common  lawyers 

first  of  May  following  elected  Dr.  Raw-  in  favour  of  them,  and  he  thereupon 

linson,  sometime  fellow  of  St.  John's.]  appointing  six  commissioners  (two  for 

z  ["  A  composition  dated   1  March  himself,  two  for  the  college,  and  two 

1  Elizab.  (A.D.  1559,)  enacted  by  the  for  the  commoners)  to  make  a  diligent 

chancellor,  masters,  and  scholars  of  the  search  into  the  public  records,  it  was 

university."    Wood's  History  of  Col-  clearly   adjudged   to    be    the    college 

leges  and  Halls,  p.  662.]  right  to  elect  a  principal  of  the  said 

*   [Thomas   lord   Buckhurst,  after-  hall."    Wood's  Hist,  of  Colleges  and 

wards    earl    of    Dorset,    1592—1608.  Halls,  p.  662.] 
"  On  the  resignation  of  Thomas  Bows- 

D  2 


36 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1631.  rather,  because  I  find  that  the  right  honourable  my  late 
predecessor,  the  lord  steward  b,  upon  view  of  these  writings 
declared  in  a  letter  of  his  the  right  to  be  in  the  college0. 
And  for  that  the  provost  and  fellows  of  Queen's  college 
have  not  only  made  this  claim  to  their  right  of  choice,  but 
have  also  from  time  to  time  made  actual  choice  of  the  several 
principals  successively,  whensoever  that  place  hath  been  void, 
and  have  at  this  time  made  their  humble  suit  unto  me  for 
confirmation  of  their  right;  I  am  very  willing  to  preserve 
this  their  right  unto  them  :  and  do  hereby  pray  and  require 
you,  as  my  deputy  there,  to  give  Mr.  Ayrie,  whom  the 
provost  and  fellows  have  lately  chosen,  admission*1  into  the 
principality  of  the  said  hall,  and  all  such  rights  as  are  there 
unto  belonging.  And  this  I  am  content  to  do  for  the  love 
of  justice,  without  reflecting  upon  the  suddenness  of  their 
late  choice,  which  might  have  been  done  with  more  respect 
to  me  and  less  hazard  to  themselves.  So  for  this  time  I 
leave  you  to  the  grace  of  God ;  and  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend, 
GUIL.  LONDON. 

London  House, 
March*,  1631. 


An  act  con-         DIE  Mercurii,  viz.  vicesimo  die  Aprilis  Anno  Dom.  1631, 

cenung  the     nabita  deliberatione  a  venerabili  viro  Dr.  Smith  vice-can- 

commission 

for  fees6.         cellario,  una  cum  aliis  collegiorum  et  aularum  prsefectis  de 

quibusdam  negotiis  ad  universitatem  spectantibus,  per  col 
legia  et  aulas  denunciandis ;  Cum  innotesceret  commissio- 
nem  regise  majestatis  auctoritate  editam  et  emissam  fuisse 
quibusdam  viris  primariis  ad  inquirendum  de  feodis  et  sala- 


b  [The  earl  of  Pembroke,  lord 
steward  1626.] 

c  [April  12,1626.  The  earl  of  Pern- 
broke,  chancellor,  wrote  a  letter  to  Dr. 
Prideaux,  his  vice-chancellor,  recog 
nising  the  right  of  the  college  to  elect, 
and  desiring  him  "whensoever  they 
have  occasion,  to  assist  their  claim  and 
to  approve  their  free  election."  This 
letter  is  entered  in  the  Register  of 
Convocation,  fol.  121.  b.  Term.  Pasch. 
1626.J 


d  [Mr.  Airey  was  accordingly  ad 
mitted  March  9  following.] 

e  [This  act  is  referred  to  in  a  mar 
ginal  note  in  the  Convocation  Regis 
ter  (fol.  33.  b),  on  the  chancellor's 
letter  about  fees,  July  4,  1631,  in  these 
words;  "See  an  order  of  the  heads  of 
houses  relating  to  the  subject  of  the 
following  letters  in  the  Hist,  of  Abp. 
Laud's  Chancellorship,  dated  20  Apr. 
1631.  p.  22."]. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFOED.  37 

riis  in  curiis  justitise  et   ratione  officiorum   debitis f ;    nee    A.D.  1631. 

constaret  quantum  hsec  commissio  ad  universitatem  pertine- 

ret :   Placuit  vice-cancellario,  cum  consilio  et  consensu  reli- 

quorum  collegiorum,  et  aularum  praefectorum  tune  prsesen- 

tium,  dom.  Doctor!  Bancroft  %  et  dom.  Doctor!  Zouchh  (de 

aliis  negotiis,  ut  videbatur,  brevi  Londinum  profecturis)  com- 

mendare,  ut  hujusmodi  commissionis  copiam  impetrarent; 

qua  obtenta,  melius  consulere  cum  honoratissimo  cancellario 

nostro  valeamus,  ne  quid  gravius  patiatur  universitas  nostra 

Oxon.   per  commissionem  prsedictam,  contra  consuetudines 

et  privilegia  antiquitus  indulta  universitati  prsedictse. 

Acta,  habita,  et  gesta  fuerunt  suprascripta,  die  et  anno 
prsedictis,  in  prsesentia  mei  JOHANNIS  FRENCH,  registrarii 
universitatis  Oxon. 


23      EA  est  beneficiorum  tuorum  amplitude,  honoratissime  can-  Thanks  from 

cellarie,  quibus  academiam  nostram  indies  cumulare  satagis  ,  *he  universit7 

for  my  care  ot 
ut  conturbare  nobis  necesse  sit,  ac  ne  verbis  qmdem  (quorum  their  liberties. 

interim  apud  nos  vilem  et  parabilem  esse  oportet  annonam) 
paria  cum  meritis  tuis  facere  liceat.  Te  tamen,  quse  est 
beneficentise  tuse  indoles,  ne  ingrati  quidem  debitores,  nedum 
tarda  vel  cassa  nomina  deterrent,  quo  minus  beneficia  tua 
beneficiis,  ne  perpluant,  porro  pertegere,  eaque  ultro  auctum 
ire  pertendas.  Veluti  quod  nuper  academiae,  nee  huic  tan- 
turn,  sed  et  sseculo  imputasti,  cum  tua  unius  opera  habitus 
est  musis  is  honos,  ut  honoratissimus  senatus  regius  le- 
gem,  quam  aliis  dare  consueverat,  a  nobis  acciperet.  Hanc- 
que  ipse  sibi  legem  in  posterum  dixerit,  ut  si  quid  in  suis 
edictis  scriptum  fuerit,  quod  per  privilegia  academica  jus 
non  sit  juberi,  ejus  iis  edictis  nihilum  jubeatur.  Circumci- 

f  [This  commission  had  been  issued  afterwards  judge  of  the  court  of  admi- 

prior  to  Oct.  12,  1627,  on  which  day  a  rally.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  510,  511). 

proclamation  was  put  forth  announcing  In   1647  he  was  employed  with  San- 

the   king's   reasons  for  appointing  it.  derson  and  others  in   drawing  up  the 

See  Rymer,  Feed.  VIII.  ii.  213.]  'Reasons  of  the  present  judgment  of 

s  [Master  of  Univ.  coll.,  afterwards  the   univ.    of  Oxford   concerning   the 

bp.  of  Oxford.]  Solemn  League  and  Covenant.'  (Wood, 

h  [Principal  of  St.  Alban's  hall  and  Annals,  par.  2.  pp.  508,  509.] 
reg.   professor  of  civil    law.     He  was 


38  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.  sum  scilicet  et  abrasum  est  hac  cautione  \eirovpyiov  quodcun- 
que,  cujus  obtentu  antehac  villani  jura  ac  privilegia  universi- 
tatis  invadere  et  involare  solebant,  honoratissimi  senatus  jussa 
capessere  simulantes,  revera  juris  sui  pomaeria,  ultra  quam 
jus  et  fas  est,  proferentes.  Et  hujus  quidem  beneficii  gratiam 
tibi,  honoratissime  cancellarie,  in  solidum  deberi  agnoscimus. 
Quo  adnitente,  factum  est,  ut  honor atissim us  senatus  jussa  sua 
in  antecessum  simul  ac  semel  interpretari,  consultius  dux- 
erit,  quam  villanis  dubiam  et  ancipitem  eorum  syntaxiii  per- 
mittere,  qui  ea  interpretari,  quam  exequi,  malunt.  Plus 
tamen  est,  quod  honoratissimis  viris  hoc  nomine  debetur, 
quam  cui  solvendo  unquam  pares  esse  possumus.  Quamvis 
igitur  in  tali  obligationum  genere  nulla  prasstatio  functionem 
recipiat,  aut  in  solutum  imputetur,  nisi  ab  ipso  reo  fiat  nu- 
meratio  :  quia  tamen  veneratio  honoratissimo  senatui  debita 
majorem  a  nobis  exigit  reverentiam,  quam  ut  scholasticis  et 
inanibus  literularum  formulis  ipsorum  tempora  morari  aude- 
amus,  de  quibus  nihil  deliberari  potest  sine  publico  dis- 
pendio.  Nostri  officii  partes  optimo  quidem  nomini,  sed 
tamen  vicar io,  tibi,  honoratissime  cancellarie,  delegamus. 
Tu  illis  pro  nobis,  nos  tibi  pro  te,  pro  illis,  gratias  agemus, 
Deus  O.  M.  te  quam  diutissime  Ecclesiae  et  Academiae  huic 
nostrae  sospitem  et  incolumem  praestet.  Sic  vovent 

Honori  tuo  addictissimi  clientes,  magistri 
et  scholares  universit.  Oxon. 

To  the  right  honourable  and  right  reverend  father  in  God, 
the  lord  bishop  of  London,  chancellor  of  the  university 
of  Oxford. 


Mr.  BRUCH  e  coll.  JSn.  Nas.h,  1  ^ 

Mr.  DOUGHTY  e  coll.  Merton1,  J  Procurat 

h  [Atherton  Bruch.]  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  Hi.  976,  977.)] 

1  [Presented  by  his  college  "to  the  J  [Admitted  April  20.     In  the  first 

rectory  of  Lapworth  in  Worcestershire.  edition  the  names  of  the  proctors  pre- 

He  suffered  during  the  civil  wars,  and  ceded,  apparently  by  mistake,  the  ad- 

at   the   Restoration   became    preb.    of  dress  of  the  letter.] 
Westminster   and    rector    of  Cheam. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD,  39 

A,D.  1631. 


24  S.  in  Christ o. 

SIR, 

THESE  are  to  pray  and  require  you  in  his  majesty's  name,  My  letters  to 
that  a  book  lately  printed  at  Oxford k,  and  made  by  Mr.  chaJceltor 
Page  of  All  Souls  college1,  be  presently  put  to  sale  and  pub-  about  the 
lished.     It  is,  as  I  am  informed,  in  defence  of  the  canon  of  j^p!^  °f 
the  Church  about  bowing  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  modestly  book  concern- 

and  well  written.     And  his  majesty  likes  not,  that  a  book  ing  bowing 

*  at  the  name 

boldly  and  ignorantly  written  by  Mr.  Prinne  against  the  of  Jesus. 

Church  should  take  place,  as  the  Church's  opinion  against 
herself,  or  as  unable  to  be  answered  by  the  Church.  If  Mr. 
Page  stick  at  your  commands,  shew  this  letter  for  your 
warrant  and  his.  So  I  leave  you  to  the  grace  of  God,  and 
shall  ever  rest, 

Your  loving  friend, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fulham, 
June  '22. 


The  occasion  of  this  letter  was,  that  Mr.  Baker,  secretary  to  The  occasion 
my  predecessor,  (who  no  doubt  was  privy  to  the  business,)  f^*1®.^** 
had  written  to  Mr.  Page  touching  the  contrary,  whose  letter, 
letter  here  follows. 

GOOD  MR.  PAGE, 

MY  lord  of  Canterbury  is  informed  that  you  are  publishing  Mr.  Baker's 
a  treatise  touching  the  question  of  bowing  at  the  name  of  ptter  *?  Mr- 
Jesus,  an  argument  wherein  Mr.  Widdowes"1  foolishly,  and  the  not  pub 
lishing  of  his 

k  [The  title  of  Page's  book  was  « A      (in  1636)  was  a  fellow  of  St.  John's,  book,  &c.  in 
treatise  of  justification  of  bowing  at  the      and  only  M.A.,  whereas  Win.  Page  of  my  predeces- 
name  of  Jesus,  by  way  of  answer  to  an      All  Souls  took  tbe  degree  of  D.D.  in  sor's  time. 
Appendix  against  it.'  Oxon.  1631.    To      1634.  See  Abp.  Laud's  Reading  Bene- 
which    is  added  « An    examination  of      factions,  pp.  15,  19.] 
such  considerable  reasons  as  are  made          m  [The  controversy  began  by  Giles 
by  Mr.  Prynne  in  a  reply  to  Mr.  Wid-      Widdowes    publishing    '  The     Schis- 
dowes    concerning    the     same     argu-      matical  Puritan,  a  Sermon  at  Witney, 
ment.']  concerning  the  lawfulness  of  Church 

1  [Page  is  stated  by  Wood  to  have  authority,  &c.  Oxon.  1630.'  To  this 
been  made  by  Abp.  Laud's  interest  Prynne  replied  in  the  Appendix  to 
master  of  the  Reading  school.  But  his  '  Anti- Arminianism,'  concerning 
Page  who  was  appointed  to  that  office  bowing  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  Lond. 


40  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.  Mr.  Prinne  scurrilously,  have  already,  to  the  scandal  and  dis 
quiet  of  the  Church,  exercised  their  pens.  His  grace  hath 
formerly  shewed  his  dislike  of  them  both,  and  hearing  that 
you  take  up  the  bucklers  in  a  theme  of  so  small  necessity, 
and  of  so  great  heat  and  distemper,  which  will  draw  on  new 
replies,  (for  Prinne  will  not  sit  down  as  an  idle  spectator,) 
and  beget  bitterness  and  intestine  contestations  at  home 
amongst  ourselves,  he  is  much  offended  that  you  do  stickle 
and  keep  on  foot  such  questions,  which  may  better  be  spoiled 
and  silenced,  than  maintained  and  drawn  into  sidings  and 
partakings.  And  therefore  I  am  wished  to  advise  you  to 
withdraw  yourself  from  these  or  the  like  domestic  broils; 
and  if  your  treatise  be  at  the  press,  to  give  it  a  stop  and 
check,  and  by  no  means  to  suffer  the  same  to  be  divulged. 
For  if  you  do,  notwithstanding  this  admonition,  proceed  in 
the  same  intention  of  publishing  it,  you  will  repent  you,  and 
perhaps  draw  more  on  yourself  of  trouble  and  discontent 
than  you  will  reap  credit  or  advantage  by  the  pursuance  of 
so  useless  an  argument.  If  you  were  out  of  your  cell,  and  saw  25 
the  world  abroad,  you  would  not  meddle  with  things  of  this 
nature,  wherein  the  governors  and  chief  pilots  of  the  Church 
discern  more  harm  and  tempest  to  the  Church,  than  you, 
that  are  unacquainted  with  ecclesiastical  estate  and  the  well 
ordering  of  it,  can  any  way  by  speculation  attain  unto ;  no 
more  than  a  scholar  that  can  read  a  lecture  of  theorical 
music,  is  able  to  play  on  a  lute  or  a  viol  by  his  bookish  rules, 
and  proportions  of  sounds,  which  are  there  taught.  I  pray 
you  to  look  hereunto,  and  say  that  a  friend  advised  you. 
And  put  not  yourself  on  a  business,  whereof  you  see  but 
the  beginning.  So  with  my  love  remembered  unto  you,  I 
rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend, 
WILL.  BAKER. 

Lambeth, 
May  31,  1631. 

1630.     Widdowes  rejoined  in  a  pam-  answer  from  Prynne,  '  Lame  Giles  his 

phlet  entitled  *  The  lawless,  kneeless,  Haultings,  together  with  an  Appendix 

schismatical   Puritan,   or  a  Confuta-  concerning   the    Popish    Original   and 

tion   of  the  Author  of  an   Appendix  Progress  of  Bowing  at  the  name    of 

concerning   bowing   at   the    name    of  Jesus.'  Lond.  1631.] 
Jesus,'  Oxon.  1631;  which  elicited  an 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  41 

A.D.  1631. 


S[alutem\  in  Christ on.  Amms  can- 

cellarii  se- 

AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  The  year  is  now  ^  «^th 
at  an  end  of  my  vice-chancellor's  government.  And  when  continued 
I  look  back  upon  it,  I  must  needs  acknowledge  he  hath 
taken  a  great  deal  of  pains,  and  shewed  himself  a  very  dis-  year, 
creet,  able,  and  worthy  governor.  And  in  all  the  passages 
of  this  year,  I  do  not  find,  but  that  he  hath  given  you  all 
great  satisfaction ;  especially  in  his  care  for  orders  and  for 
malities  ;  which,  I  hope,  you  will  so  far  like,  as  that  you  will 
make  it  a  way  to  recover  the  ancient  honour  of  that  famous 
university  in  things  of  greater  consequence.  And  though 
the  university  be  full  of  able  and  discreet  governors,  (to 
whom  we  shall,  God  willing,  hereafter  commit  this  office 
of  trust,)  yet  because  I  have  found  Dr.  Smith's  great  care  in 
his  former  year,  and  because  [that]  the  first  year  doth  but 
enable  his  experience  the  better  to  manage  the  second ;  I  am 
desirous  to  put  him  to  this  year's  pains  also ;  and  do  therefore 
make  choice  of  him  to  be  my  vice-chancellor  for  this  year 
following.  These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you  to 
allow  of  this  my  choice  of  Dr.  Smith,  and  to  give  him  your0 
best  counsel  and  assistance  in  all  businesses,  which  may  any 
way  concern  the  government  and  the  honour  of  that  famous 
university.  And  so  I  bid  you  very  heartily  farewell,  and 
rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fulham, 
July  4,  1631. 

To  my  [very]  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  univer 
sity  of  Oxford,  [these.] 

n  [Read  in  convocation  July  16,  1631.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  35.] 
°[ed.  'the.'] 


42  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631. 

S[aluterri\  in  Christo0.  26 

My  letters  AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     I  have  made  all 

sent  with  his  ^  convement  speed  I  can,  (as  you  well  know)  to  have  the 
the  university  body  of  the  statutes  of  the  university  digested  into  order, 
about  fees.  an(j  made  fit  for  present  use,  as  occasions  might  be  offered, 
and  [I]  still  heartily  pray  you  for  the  quickening  of  that 
work.  For  by  that  delay  which  hath  been  made,  a  great 
inconvenience  hath  been  like  to  arise  to  the  prejudice  of  the 
privileges  of  the  university.  For  whereas  I  thought  the 
moderation  and  ordering  of  fees  in  the  university,  if  any 
thing  be  amiss  therein,  might  have  stayed  till  that  body  of 
statutes  had  been  drawn  up,  and  then  have  been  rectified 
under  the  head  belonging  to  it;  it  seems  now  far  other 
wise.  For  1  find  that  a  friend  of  the  university's  gave  in 
timation  to  some  heads  of  colleges  of  some  things  which 
might  be  very  prejudicial  to  yourp  privileges,  if  they  did 
proceed.  I  knew  his  majesty  had  given  out  a  commission 
to  examine  fees,  and  that  the  commissioners  were  quick  and 
strict ;  but  I  had  never  seen  the  commission ;  nor  did  I  so 
much  as  dream  that  the  universities  were  included ;  or  that 
his  majesty  had  any  purpose  they  should  that  way  be  looked 
into.  And  therefore  when  Dr.  Bancroft  came  unto  me 
directed  by  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  and  divers  of  the  heads  of 
houses  upon  the  aforesaid  information,  to  make  search  after 
the  commission,  and  privately  to  acquaint  me  with  it,  and  to 
desire  my  endeavour  with  his  majesty,  that  no  foreign  com 
mission  might  come  in,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  university 
privilege;  I  was  much  troubled  at  it.  And  the  more,  be 
cause  I  found  things  had  been  so  privately  carried  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  chancellors  of  both  universities.  But  it 
fell  out  exceeding  well,  that  I  had  notice  of  this  business. 
For  within  few  days  after,  my  lord  of  Holland  %  upon  like 
information,  had  speech  with  me  about  it.  But  his  majesty's 
resolutions  for  proceeding  put  us  both  to  seek  what  course 

0  [Read    in    convocation   July    16,  of  Cambridge  in  1628,  on  the  death  of 

1631.   Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  33,  b.]  the  duke  of  Buckingham  ;  created  earl 

P  ['our.'  MS.]  of  Holland,  Sept.  24,  1624;  beheaded 

't  [Henry   Rich,   elected  chancellor  1649.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD,  43 

to  take,  till  at  last  we  resolved  to  go  both  together  to  him,     A.D.  1631. 


and  humbly  to  move  him  in  the  universities'  behalf,  that  no 
foreign  power  might  be  sent  to  the  prejudice  of  their  pri 
vileges.  And  after  much  debate  his  majesty  was  at  last 
very  graciously  pleased  to  grant  our  requests  :  provided 
that  each  university  respectively  would  meet,  and  by  them 
selves  reform  whatsoever  was  found  amiss  in  any  fees  re 
ceived  and  taken  by  any  in  the  university  of  what  office  or 
condition  soever.  And  that  this  reformation  of  fees  should 
be  made  according  to  the  letter  and  tenor  of  his  commis 
sion.  Hereupon  he  presently  called  for  Mr.  Secretary  Cookr, 
and  commanded  him  to  direct  a  letter  to  the  chancellors  of 
both  the  universities,  to  give  them  order  for  this  business. 
Which  letters  of  his  majesty  you  shall  find  here  inclosed  : 
and  the  like  are  already  gone  to  Cambridge.  And  I  must,  His  majesty's 


and  do  pray  and  require  you,  that  they  be  published  accord- 


ing  to  course,  and  registered,  and  obeyed  in  all  points  as  is 
fitting  ;  assuring  you  that  if  this  be  not  done  his  majesty's 
27  commissions  will  reform  whatsoever  you  do  not.  And  for 
my  part,  I  think  it  is  happy  we  came  so  timely  to  the 
knowledge  of  it.  For  if  the  commissioners  had  once  entered 
upon  it,  it  would  have  been  a  matter  of  far  greater  difficulty 
to  take  them  off",  than  it  was  now  to  stay  them.  And  cer 
tainly,  if  ever  it  be  my  hap  to  know  that  honourable  per 
sonage  that  gave  the  first  information  I  shall  give  him 
hearty  thanks  for  his  love  to  the  universities.  For  this 
breach  once  made  upon  your  privileges  might  have  laid  open 
a  wider  gap  in  many  other  particulars  of  like  nature. 

When  you  have  registered  these  letters  of  his  majesty,  I 
must  pray  you  to  send  the  original  back  to  me.  And  for 
the  business  itself,  because  his  majesty  looks  for  a  speedy 
reformation,  the  best  counsel  I  can  give  you  is  this  :  that 
the  delegates  which  have  the  consideration  of  the  statutes  The  delegates 


now  before  them,   may,  by  your  direction  and   command,  to 
take  the  head  about  fees  next  into  consideration,  and  settle  business  of 
that  business  presently,  that  the  other  university  may  not  fees> 
outstrip  us  in  obedience  to  his  majesty. 

r  [Sir  John  Coke,  or  Cook,  appointed  of  Sir  Albert  Morton.  See  his  charac- 
secretary  of  state  Nov.  9,  1626,  (Ry-  ter  in  Clarendon,  Hist.  Rebell.,  book  ii. 
mer,  Feed.  VIII.  ii.  25,)  on  the  death  p.  216.] 


44  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.        Thus  not  doubting  of  your  care  herein,  nor  of  the  univer- 

~  sity's  conformity ;  and  expecting  as  present  remedy  of  this 

abuse  as  may  be  made,  I  leave  you  to  the  grace  of  God,  and 

[shall  ever]  rest, 

Your  loving  friend, 

and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fulham, 
July  4,  1631. 

To  my  [very]  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  univer 
sity  of  Oxford,  [these.] 


The  tenor  of  the  king's  letters  follows. 

CHARLES  R. 

His  majesty's      RIGHT  trusty  and  right  well-beloved  cousin  and  counsellor, 

letters  to  me   an(j  ^^  reverend  father  in  God,  right  trusty  and  well-beloved  28 

about  the  fees  __     '  .__&  .  .  J      ,     , 

of  the  uni-      counsellor,  we  greet  you  well.    We  have  long  had  a  gracious 

versity.  intendment  for  the  good  of  our  subjects  to  rectify  the  pro 

ceedings  of  all  courts  and  other  places,  as  well  within  liberties 
as  without,  in  matter  of  their  fees  and  duties  which  they 
challenge.  To  this  purpose  we  have  granted  a  commission 
to  some  lords  of  our  privy  council  and  others,  to  examine 
what  they  find  amiss,  that  a  remedy  may  be  found  for  the 
abuse,  where  and  in  whomsoever  it  is,  and  the  fees  of  all 
officers  and  courts  reduced  to  that  which  they  were  found 
to  be  allowed  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Queen  Elizabeth  of 
famous  memory :  and  this  commission  we  shall  pursue  till 
we  have  settled  those  things  with  honour  and  justice  to  the 
great  ease  of  all  our  loving  subjects.  Now  whereas  you, 
taking  notice  of  this  our  intendment  to  reduce  the  fees  of 
both  our  universities,  (where  you  are  our  chancellors)  as  well 
as  other  places  to  the  same  standard,  have  made  humble  suit 
to  us,  that  this  commission  may  not  trench  upon  the  liberties 
granted  to  the  universities  by  our  royal  progenitors :  these 
are  first  to  let  you  know,  that  we  will  as  carefully  preserve 
the  rights  and  privileges  of  our  universities  as  we  or  our 
progenitors  have  given  or  confirmed  them :  and  then,  that 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  45 

our  further  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  presently  (to  prevent  A.B.  1631. 
our  commission)  you  write  expressly  to  your  deputy  govern 
ors  in  either  university,  to  will  and  require  them  in  our 
name  to  rectify  and  reduce  all  fees  given  to  officers,  readers, 
bedels,  registers,  or  others,  for  degrees  or  any  thing  else,  to 
that  quantity  which  they  bore  in  the  said  eleventh  year  of 
Queen  Elizabeth.  For  the  abuse  is  great  and  burdensome 
unto  them  which  bring  up  their  sons  in  learning :  and  we 
will  remedy  it  by  our  commission  if  you  (according  to  your 
places)  do  not  see  it  remedied  to  our  hands.  And  we 
are  the  more  careful  for  our  universities,  because  we  have 
not  forgotten  that  our  royal  father  of  ever  blessed  memory 
gave  bountiful  gifts  to  supply  divers  wants  there,  which  we 
assure  ourself  were  not  given,  but  with  an  intent,  that 
when  they  were  possessed,  the  fees  should  lessen,  at  least 
return  to  that  just  proportion  to  which  we  have  limited  them 
in  our  commission.  So  we  grant  your  suit,  not  to  break 
the  liberties  of  our  universities  by  sending  another  power 
upon  them  :  but  withal  we  require  you  both  to  send  to  our 
several  universities  respectively,  that  we  may  have  present 
redress  of  this  abuse ;  and  that  a  table  may  be  made  accord 
ing  to  the  eleventh  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  hung  up  in  the 
congregation  [house],  and  in  some  convenient  place  in  every 
college  and  hall,  that  every  man  may  know  what  fees  he  is 
to  pay,  and  no  man  presume  to  take  beyond  the  allowance 
in  that  table,  as  he  will  answer  it  at  his  peril :  and  we 
shall  look  for  an  account  of  this  from  you  both  respectively. 
29  Given  under  our  signet  at s 

To  our  right  trusty  and  right  well-beloved  cousin  and  coun 
sellor,  Henry  earl  of  Holland,  chancellor  of  our  university 
of  Cambridge :  and  to  the  right  reverend  father  in  God, 
our  right  trusty  and  well-beloved  counsellor,  William  lord 
bishop  of  London,  chancellor  of  our  university  of  Oxford4. 

8  [The  date  is  thus  omitted  in  the  1631,  it  was  decreed,  "ut  delegati  pro 

Register,  and  in  the  first  edition.]  statutis  evolvendis  et  in  utilissimarn 

4  [Immediately  after  the  reading  of  methodum  redigendis  nominati  impri- 

these  letters  in  convocation,  July  16,  mis  hanc  provinciam  expedirent."] 


46  THE  HISTOEY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

Thanks  from       GRATIAS  agimus  periculis,  quse  te  reddunt  nobis  indies 

the  university  chariorem,    et  lumen  pretiumque  adiiciunt  tarn    vigilis  pa- 

about  their  ,.<*.,  ,  . 

feest  trom  mento.     Rem  perdifficilem   eluctabimur,   si  opera  tua 

non  simus  felicissimi.  In  moderandis  academise  frsenis, 
nunquid  opus  est  oculatiori  providentia?  Tu  quidem  vix 
emicantia  periculorum  semina  e  longinquo  prsevides,  eaque 
aut  prudenter  caves  aut  fortiter  evellis.  Nunquid  opus  est 
anxietate  et  cura  ?  ubi  nusquam  occurrit  periculum,  sollicite 
circumspicis,  indagare  non  desinis,  quod  metuis  invenire,  ac 
totus  quieti  nostrse  insomnis  incubas.  At  nunquid  suavi  opus 
est  in  adducendo  militia  ?  Non  sinis  imponi  nobis  vim  ne- 
cessitatis,  vel  in  iis  etiam,  quae  ad  nostrum  spectant  emolu- 
mentum  :  sed  seque  sanandi  modo  ac  ipsi  consulens  sanitati, 
aut  ea  imperas,  quse  sponte  volumus,  aut  prius  velle  fias  ea, 
quse  imperas :  ac  turn  demum,  ubi  voti  ardor  incaluit,  eun- 
dem  obsequii  studio  ingeminatum  accendis,  non  segnius, 
quam  ventus  secundo  flamine  proni  impellit  cursum  fluenti. 
Liberalium  amici  artium  sub  feodorum  onere,  et  graduum 
venalium  caritate  jam  diu  suspirarunt,  diu  tacuerunt.  Qui- 
bus  aderat  morbi  eradicandi  et  animus  et  potestas,  defuit 
exequendi  ansa :  donee  medicus  epidemicus,  hoc  ulcus  ubi- 
que  recisurus,  utpote  in  curiis  universis  grassatum,  nos  iti- 
dem,  quamvis  a  saeculo  seclusos,  communi  tamen  peste  labo- 
rantes,  commums  convolvisset  asperitate  remedii,  et  exoticse 
potestati  tradidisset  una  corrigendos.  Utilis  fuit  medicina, 
invisa  manus ;  sanari  optabile,  sanari  vero  a  parum  benevolis 
fuit  qusedam  felicitatis  miseria :  prsesertim  cum  in  extranea 
censura  exemplum  lateret,  viamque  sterneret  usurpabili  lai- 
corum  tyrannidi.  Quid  ergo  dicemus,  regi  in  mentem  ve- 
nisse,  ut  nos  dormiscentes  solummodo  expergefaceret  ?  Certe 
ea  mole  fertur  majestas,  ut  semel  commota  segre  possit  vel 
ipsa  se  sistere.  Expergefecit  quidem,  sed  quod  nihil  tenta- 
vit  amplius,  tui  opus  patrocinii  agnoscimus.  Benignitati  au- 
gustae,  Deo  cum  proximse,  turn  simillimse,  tribuendum,  primo 
quod  nostri  causa  excanduit,  turn  postea  quod  nobis  domes- 

1  [This  letter  is  not  registered.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  47 

ticam  proprii  sinus  animadversionem  indulsit :  sed  quod  re-  A.D.  1631. 
gem  prius  pacatum  invenimus,  quam  iratum,  et  mente  subito 
compositum,  quasi  rugas  ideo  tantum  induisset,  ut  exueret, 
hoc  sagaci  tuse  providentise,  et  mature  tribuimus  intercessui. 
0  aulse  et  academiae  vinculum  !  O  qui  regem  nobis  per  leni- 
tatem,  nos  regi  per  obsequium  attemperas,  sive  plus  nostri 
affectus,  sive  gratitudinis,  sive  obedientiae  velis,  nequid  un- 
quam,  quod  velis,  desit,  cape  ad  sum  mum  omnia.  Nobis 
dulce  erit  prudentiae  tuse  animum  summisse  dedere  in  duris- 
simis :  sed  levamini  commodoque  nostro  aurem  morigeram 
30  praebere,  et  jussu  subire,  quae  ultro  expetimus,  quanta  hilari- 
tatis  ecstasi  properemus  !  Sub  tali  jugo  incurvari  lucrum  est. 
Crescit  ex  imperio  libertas ;  dominatur,  dum  paret, 

Honori  vestro  devinctissima, 

OXONIEN.  Academia. 

E  domo  nostrce  Congregations . 
July  25,  1631. 

July  26,  1631.    The  first  stone  of  my  building  at  St.  John  My  building 
Baptist's  college  was  laidu.  at  St<  John's- 


Now  that  this  intended  good  may  come  the  fuller  upon  A  passage  of 
the  university,  a  great  help  must  come  from  you  and  your  ^  ^ic^*  *° 
successors,  from  time  to  time  in  that  office.  And  first,  chancellor 

while  the  awe  of  this  is  upon  them,  you  must  call  for  the  Joncerning 

'  J  boots,  taverns, 

present  performance  of  those  things  which  his  majesty  en- and  the  king's 

joined ;    especially  the  present  drawing  up  of  the  statutes  ^eclajation, 
concerning  appeals,   and   of  the   standing   delegacy  of  the  23,  'l631. 

heads  of  colleges  and  halls,  to  meet  every  week  or  fortnight  This  letter 

,    ,  ,,    .  ,,was  here 

at  least,   as  well   in  vacation  as  term,  both  to  consider  of  placed  out  of 

the  present  businesses  of  the  university,  and  to  prepare  such  order> to  the 
things  as  are  fit  for  convocation.    Which  statutes  of  this  dele-  might  come 
gacy  and  the  appeals,  were  they  once  settled,  would  ease  half  nothing  be- 
of  the  business  of  the  university,  and  repay  all  the  pains  that  g^atbusiness 
is  or  can  be  taken  about  them.     Next,  I  pray  call  the  heads  which  follows, 
together,  and   give  them  warning  concerning  their  several 
companies,  that  no  man  of  what  degree  soever  (and  therefore 

u  [See  Diary  at  this  date.] 


48 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1631. 


Bachelors  of 
art  to  uncover 
their  heads 
when  they 
meet  their 
superiors  in 
degree  or  be 
in  presence 
with  them. 


Dr.  Prideaux 
and  Dr.  Fell 
to  read  their 
lectures  ac 
cording  to 
the  statutes. 


The  keeping 
of  his  majes 
ty's  declara 
tion  urged  : 
and  to  punish 
offenders 
against  it. 


much  less  youths)  be  suffered  to  go  in  boots  and  spurs  toge 
ther  with  their  gownsx.  And  if  any  head  of  a  house  permit  it 
in  his  own  college,  whither  my  authority  reaches  not,  I  shall 
complain  where  he  will  be  unwilling  to  answer.  And  for 
yourself  I  pray  and  require  you,  that  if  any  man  be  seen 
abroad  with  them  in  town  out  of  his  college,  you  presently 
proceed  against  him  according  to  such  statutes,  as  you  have 
De  Hab'itu  Scholastico,  fyc.  And  the  like  for  haunting  of 
inns  or  taverns,  or  other  drinking  houses,  especially  masters 
of  arts,  that  should  give  younger  youths  better  example.  And 
that  all  bachelors  of  arts,  as  well  commoners  as  others,  re 
ceive  a  strict  command  by  their  several  governors,  that  while 
upon  any  occasion  they  pass  along  the  streets  or  any  public 
place,  they  uncover  their  heads  and  do  that  reverence  which 
beseems  them,  to  any  doctor,  bachelor  of  divinity,  master  of 
arts,  or  bachelor  of  law  or  physic,  whom  they  shall  meet  or 
be  in  presence  with.  And  that  you  proceed  to  the  punish 
ment  of  all  such  as  fail  in  this  kind.  And  further  I  pray 
acquaint  Dr.  Prideaux  y  and  Dr.  Fell2,  that  I  will  look  they 
shall  read  their  several  lectures  as  the  statutes  require3.  And 
if  they  read  treatably,  that  their  younger  auditors  may  ob 
serve  by  writing  (if  they  please)  one  lecture  may  be  broken 
into  many,  to  their  own  great  ease,  and  the  greater  profit  of 
them  that  hear  them,  and  a  face  of  the  university  be  kept  in 
that  particular.  And  last  of  all,  these  are  strictly  to  require 
you,  that  since  his  majesty  hath  so  lately  and  fully  expressed 
himself  for  the  keeping  of  his  declaration  in  all  points,  that 
you  shew  yourself  very  careful  in  that  particular,  and  that 
you  proceed  impartially  against  delinquents  any  way,  that 
neither  one  nor  the  other  may  have  cause  to  say  that  you  31 
favour  a  party.  And  you  have  great  reason  to  be  watchful 


1  [This  practice  had  been  disap 
proved  of  in  1623  by  the  earl  of  Pem 
broke,  "  which  fashion,"  he  complains, 
"is  not  only  usurped  of  the  younger 
sort,  but  by  masters  of  arts,  who  pre 
posterously  assume  that  part  of  the 
doctors'  formalities,  which  admonished 
them  to  ride  ad  pratdicandum  evange- 
lium,  but  in  these  doth  imply  nothing 
else  but  animum  deserendi  studium." 
Wood,  Annals,  p.  351.] 

7  [Re£-  professor  of  divinity.] 


z  [Re-elected  the  lady  Margaret's 
professor  of  divinity,  July  31,  1630, 
the  other  candidate  for  the  office  being 
Dr.  Hannibal  Potter,  Pres.  of  Trin. 
coll.  (Crosfield's  Diary.)  He  was  after 
wards  dean  of  Lichfield,  and  Ch.  Ch.] 

a  [Crosfield,  Diary,  Oct.  19,  says: 
"  Injunction  from  the  chancellor  that 
the  doctor  of  the  chair  should  read 
three  times  a  week,  and  so  he  pro 
ceeded  in  Micah,  vindicating  the  He 
brew  text  from  corruption,"  &c.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  49 

in  this,   because  you  know  it  was  objected  against  you  at    A.D.  1631. 
Woodstock  in  Dr.  Potter's  caseb  :  which  though  it  appeared  ~ 
palpably  false,  yet  it  may  and  ought  to  be  a  summons  to  you 
to  look  warily  to  yourself.    And  some  eye  it  is  fit  you  should 
bear  towards  me  even  in  this  particular,  that  my  government 
be  not  slandered  by  it. 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

September  23,  1631. 


IN  this  year  there  arose  a  great  stir  in  the  university  by  The  trouble 
some  factious  men,  which  laboured  to  disturb  the  govern-  ^{^fin  the 
ment  both  in  their  sermons  and  in  convocation,   and   by  university 
secret  plottings.     Their  professed  aim   was  to  dissolve   the 
delegacy  appointed   for   the   ordering   and   settling  of  the 
statutes,  and  to  set  the  proctors,  in  as  cunning  a  way  as 
they  could,    against   the   chancellor,  till  they  had   almost 
brought   all   disorder   into  the  university.      How  far  they 
proceeded,  and  what  issue  their  plots  had,  will  'appear  in 
the  acts  following.     The  head  of  all  these  tumultuous  stirs 
was  by  violent  presumptions  conceived  to  be  one  whom  it 
least  became  for  his  coat's  sake :  and  I  shall  spare  his  name, 
rather  for  his  coat  than  himself0. 


RIGHT  REVEREND,  MY  HONOURABLE  GOOD  LORD, 

I  HAVE  not  hitherto  troubled  your  lordship  with  letters  of  Dr.  Duppa's 

information  concerning  any  of  our  university  affairs,  knowing  letters  t.0  me 

.       .     .  f.  concerning 

into  what  sufficient  hands  you  have  committed  the  trust  of  the  late  dis- 

them,  from  whence  I  imagine  you  receive  a  weekly  account,  orders  m 
But  such  hath  been  the  height  of  our  late  disorders  both 
without  and  within  the  pulpit,  that  should  I  not  some  way 
express  that  I  am  troubled  with  it,  I  might  be  thought  a 
very  insensible  member  of  this  body,  which  you  govern.  For 
these  late  stirs  are  not  of  an  ordinary  nature ;  but  strike  at 

b  [Dr.  Christopher   Potter,  provost  Calvinistic  school,  but  was  one  of  those 

of  Queen's,  was  attacked  in  one  of  the  who  were  now  called  Arminians.   See 

sermons,  which  was  the  subject  of  ap-  Wood's  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  180.] 

peal,  as  in  the  following  history.     See  c  [ He  refers  to  Prideaux.  See  Wood, 

Crosfield's     account,     quoted     below.  Annals,  p.  372.] 
Dr.  Potter  had  been  brought  up  in  the 


50  THE  H  [STORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.  the  very  root  of  government,  which  now  lies  bleeding.  The 
vice-chancellor's  power  is  questioned :  the  proctors,  that 
should  assist  him,  receive  the  appeals  of  delinquents  from 
him :  the  delegates  such  as  are  rather  parties  than  judges. 
And  I  could  wish  this  were  all.  But  this  gangrene  will 
spread  farther.  For  the  university  by  these  means  is  likely 
to  become  the  seed-plot  of  mutineers,  to  furnish  both  Church 
and  commonwealth  with.  But  my  comfort  is,  that  the  way 
of  their  own  choosing,  the  way  of  appeal,  (which  it  may  be  at 
first  they  did  not  think  of,)  must  at  last  [end  before  his  sacred 
majesty :  for  there  is  nothing  left  but  the  voice  of  such  a 
power  to  allay  this  storm.  The  whole  university,  though  with 
several  affections,  stands  now  at  gaze :  and  the  end  of  this 
business  must  either  prove  an  awful  peace,  or  the  letting 
loose  of  all  confusion. 

My  duty  to  my  king,  my  love  to  peace,  and  my  respect  to 
your  lordship,  hath  commanded  this  letter  from  me ;  which  if 
you  please  to  pardon,  you  will  tread  in  the  steps  of  your 
former  goodness,  and  oblige  me  to  the  continuance  of  my  32 
prayers  for  you,  whom  you  shall  ever  find 

Your  lordship's  most  humble 

and  true  servant, 

BRIAN  DUPPA. 

Ch.  Ch., 
Aug.  1,  1631. 


To  THE  KING'S  MOST  EXCELLENT  MAJESTY. 

The  humble  petition  of  William  Smith,  Dr.  of  Divinity,  and 
Vice-chancellor  of  the  University  of  Oxford. 

Dr.  Smith,          WHEREAS  of  late  the  peace  of  your  majesty's  university 

[orehtsaneCtf-"  of  Oxford  hath  been  mudl  disturbed  through  the  seditious 

tion  to  the      practices  of  some  distempered  spirits,  who  have  not  only  in 

king  against   their  sermons  presumed  to  handle  divers  points  of  doctrine 

mon.  prohibited  by  your  majesty's  straight  command;  but  also  by 

some  not  obscure  passages  have  endeavoured  to  fasten  the 

imputation  of  apostacy  and  backsliding  upon  some  persons  of 

eminent  quality  there  and  elsewhere :  and  whereas  one  Thomas 

Foord,  having  in  a  late  sermon  of  his  at  St.  Mary's  offended 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  51 

in  that  kind,  was  thereupon  by  your  humble  petitioner  A.D.  1631. 
(according  to  the  statutes  of  the  university01)  convented,  and~ 
required  to  exhibit  a  copy  of  his  sermon :  and  upon  his 
refusal  so  to  do,  was  therefore  commanded  to  prison :  he 
likewise  contrary  to  his  oath  disobeying  that  command  also : 
and  appealing  from  your  petitioner  to  the  congregation-house 
(which  by  the  statutes  of  the  university,  in  that  case  of 
breach  of  peace,  he  might  not  doe)  :  the  proctors  notwith 
standing  (which  should  have  assisted  your  petitioner)  re 
ceived  the  appeal,  and  the  major  part  of  the  delegates  enter 
tained  it  (to  the  wrong  both  of  your  humble  petitioner  and 
the  government  of  the  university)  and  quitted  the  said  Foord, 
as  not  guilty  of  the  perturbation  of  the  peace.  And  whereas 
upon  this  sentence  of  theirs,  your  humble  petitioner  finding 
himself  aggrieved,  appealed  to  the  house  of  convocation, 
through  default  of  appearance  of  a  major  part  of  delegates 
appointed  thereunto,  your  humble  petitioner's  cause  (being 
there  deserted  and  let  fall),  is  at  length  according  to  the 
statutes  of  the  university,  devolved  into  your  sacred  majesty's 
handsf.  And  whereas  one  Giles  Thome,  by  a  scandalous 
sermon  of  his  lately  preached  in  the  same  place,  hath  like  wise 
farther  disturbed  the  peace  of  the  university,  and  more  are 
like  to  follow  (especially  not  wanting  abettors  to  give  them 
encouragement)  unless  some  speedy  course  be  taken  for  pre 
vention. 

The  humble  suit  therefore  of  your  majesty's  poor  petitioner 
is,  that  out  of  your  special  clemency  always  plentifully  ex- 
41  tended  towards  the  Church,  and  her  seminaries,  your  majesty 
would  be  graciously  pleased  to  take  into  your  own  royal  con 
sideration,  the  preservation  of  the  peace  and  tranquillity  of 
your  university,  and  of  the  authority  of  her  governors  against 
the  practices  of  such,  as  under  the  colour  of  religion  or 
liberty  oppugn  both  Church  and  civil  government :  that  so 
these  troubles  of  the  university  may  have  a  present  end  by 
your  majesty's  happy  coming  so  near  it.  And  your  humble 
petitioner  shall  pray,  &c. 


d  [Embodied  in  Stat.  Univ.  Ox.,  tit.  tit.  xxi.  de  Judiciis,  §  16,  from  autho- 

xvi.  de  Concionibus,  §   9.  from   Reg.  rities  quoted  in  marg.] 
Conv.  N.  41.]  f  [See   authorities   quoted,   ibid.,  § 

e  [Embodied    in    present    statutes,  19.] 

E2 


52  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.B.  1631. 


The  vice-  IN    Dei   nomine,    Amen.      Coram  vobis  notario  publico, 

chancellor's    publicaque  et  authentica  persona,  ac  testibus  fide  dignis  hie 
appeal  to  his  ,    .,.  ,       '    ~     -,i  .11-  p 

majesty  in      praesentibus,  ego  Guilielmus  Smith  sacra?  theologise  professor, 

Ford's  case,  universitatis  Oxon.  vice-cancellarius  ac  commissarius  legitime 
constitutus,  aiiimo  appellandi,  deque  nullitate  et  nullitatibus 
omnibus  et  singulis  infra  scriptis  seque  principaliter  quere- 
landi,  omnibus  melioribus  via,  modo,  et  juris  forma,  quibus 
melius  aut  efficacius  de  jure  debeo  aut  possum,  necnon  ad 
omiiem  et  quemcunque  juris  et  facti  effectum  exinde  quo- 
vismodo  sequi  valentem,  dico,  allego,  et  in  his  scriptis  in 
jure  propono;  quod  cum  nos  praefatus  vice-cancellarius  ex 
officio  nostro  rite  et  legitime  procedentes  contra  quendam 
Thomam  Forde  de  aula  S.  Marice  Magd.  in  universitate  Oxon. 
clericum,  artium  magistrum,  occasione  cujusdam  concionis 
in  ecclesia  parochiali  B.  Mariae  virginis  Oxon.  per  dictum 
Thomam  Ford  die  dominico,  viz.  duodecimo  die  mensis  Junii 
ultimo  praeteriti,  palam  in  prsesentia  nostra  in  coetu  Aca- 
demico  habitse  et  factaB,  eundem  Thomam  Forde  personaliter 
requisitum  et  monitum  per  nos  ad  nobis  exhibendam  in  scriptis 
concionem  suam  prsedictam,  seu  veram  copiam  ejusdem,  ut 
legitimo  examine  insuper  explorari  posset,  eo  quod  (ut  ei  per 
nos  objiciebatur)  contiriebat  nonnulla,  ad  pacis  et  tranquil- 
litatis  dictse  universitatis  et  ecclesiae  perturbationem  tendentia 
contra  jura  et  statuta  regni,  et  statuta  universitatis  praedictre, 
ac  contra  proclamationes  et  declarationes  regias  majestatis 
antehac  publice  editas  et  promulgatas",  eidemque  legitimaB 
nostrse  monitioni  parere  contumaciter  renuentem  et  recu- 
santem,  sexto  die  Julii  ultimo  prseteriti  judicialiter  proce 
dentes,  ob  ejus  in  hac  parte  contemptum  et  contumaciam 
carccri  mandaverimus,  juxta  leges  ac  statuta  universitatis 
pra3dictse,  et  laudabiles  ejusdem  consuetudines  in  similibus 
usitatas :  cui  etiam  maudato  nostro  idem  Thomas  Ford 
obscqui  expresse  recusaverit,  et  praetensam  quandam  appella- 
tionem  ad  venerabilem  domum  congregationis  magistrorum 
regentium  intra  dictam  universitatem,  a  nostro  mandato  sive 
decreto  prsedicto  de  facto  utcunque  interposuerit :  cujus 
prretensse  appellationis  prsetextu,  Magister  Atherton  Bruche 

*  [See  above,  p.  15.  note  x.J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  53 

et  Magister  Johannes  Doughtye,  procurators  universitatis  AJ).  1631, 
prsedictse,  quosdam  delegates  auctoritate  ejusdem  domus 
congregationis  nominarunth,  ad  audiendum  et  determinan- 
dum,  utrum  prsedictus  Thomas  Forde  reus  fuerit  perturba- 
tionis  pacis  in  causa  habita  coram  nobis  prsedicto  sexto  die 
Julii :  quibus  delegatis  dictam  commissionem  acceptantibus, 
quidam  eorundem  delegatorum,  scilicet  venerabiles  viri,  Dr. 
Prideaux1,  Dr.  Wilkinson j,  Dr.  Hoodek,  Magister  Hill1,  Mr. 
Hyde m,  Mr.  Gerrard,  Mr.  Abbots,  Mr.  Howson,  et  Mr. 
42  Clay,  se  pro  judicibus  delegatis  prsedictis  dictse  venerabilis 
domus  congregationis  utcunque  gerentes,  perperam,  nulliter, 
inique,  et  injuste  (eorum  reverentiis  semper  salvis)  per  omnia 
procedentes,  quandam  prsetensam  sententiam,  sive  quoddam 
prsetensum  judicium  pro  parte  et  in  favor  em  prsefati  Tho. 
Forde,  de  facto,  cum  de  jure  non  potuerunt  nee  debuerunt, 
in  scriptis  (ut  asseritur)  tulerunt  et  promulgaverunt :  per 
quod  eorum  prsetensum  judicium  antedictum  Tho.  Forde  non 
fuisse  reum  perturbationis  pacis,  in  causa,  quse  coram  nobis 
habita  erat  in  camera  nostra  in  collegio  Wadhami  dicto  sexto 
die  Julii  ultimo  prceteriti,  absque  causse  cognitione,  jurisque 
ac  judiciorum  et  statutorum  universitatis  praedictse  or  dine 
minime  observato,  sed  penitus  spreto  et  prsetermisso,  utcun 
que  pronunciaverunt  et  declaraverunt.  In  omnibus  etiam  in 
juste,  perperam,  nulliter  de  facto  et  inique  (eorum  reverentiis 
semper  salvis)  tarn  ex  eorum  prsetenso  officio,  quam  ad  in- 
stantiam,  petitionem,  procurationem,  solicitationem,  et  per- 
suasionem  dicti  Thomse  Forde  subdolas,  iniquas,  et  injustas, 
in  mei  prsefati  vice-cancellarii,  dictique  officii  mei,  et  boni 
regiminis  dictas  universitatis  Oxon.  grave  damnum  prasjudi- 
ciumque  non  modicum  et  gravamen.  Uride  ego  prsefatus  vice- 
cancellarius  sentiens  me  ex  pra3missis  gravaminibus,  nulli- 

h  [The  whole  number  of  delegates  Reg.  P.  fol.  21.  a,  b.] 

nominated  by  the  proctors  were    Dr.  '  [Rector  of  Exeter,  and  reg.  prof. 

Prideaux,  Dr.  Radcliffe    (principal    of  div.j 

Brazennose),  Dr.  Wilkinson,  Dr.  Tol-  J  [Princ.   of  Magd.  hall,  appointed 

son,    Dr.  Hood,   Dr.  Zouch,    (D.C.L.,  in   1647  by  the  parliamentary  commis- 

principal  of  St.  Alban  hall),  Mr.  Rich-  sioners  president  of  Magd.  coll.] 

ardson,  sen.,  B.  N.  C.,  Turner  of  Mer-  k   [Rector  of  Line,  coll.] 

ton,  Brooks  of  Oriel,  Bodley  of  Exeter,  l    [Rich.    Hill   of    Brasenose    coll., 

Hill,  B.  N.  C.,  Hyde,  Ch.  Ch.,  Gerard  proctor  in  1624.] 

of  All  Souls,  Abbott,  Howson  of  Ch.  m  [Francis  Hyde  of  Ch.  Ch.,  proctor 

Ch.,  and  Clay  of  Magdalen,  of  whom  in  1027.] 
some  only  appear  to  have  acted.   Cong. 


54  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.  tatibus,  iniquitatibus,  injustitiis,  et  injuriis  omnibus  et  sin- 
gulis,  exactis,  factis,  et  gestis  praetensis  dictorum  venera- 
bilium  virorum  pr&etensorum  judicum  delegatorum  colligi- 
bilibus,  et  prsesertim  ex  eorum  prsetensa  declaratione  sive 
prommciatione  praefati  Thomse  Forde  non  esse  reum  per- 
turbationis  pads  in  dicta  causa  per  nos  contra  euro,  ut  prae- 
fertur,  mota  sive  habita,  indebite  praegravari,  ab  eisdem  et 
eorum  quolibet  ad  venerabilem  domum  convocationis  doc- 
torum  et  magistrorum  regentium  et  non-regentium  intra 
dictam  universitatem  Oxon.  debitis  loco  et  tempore  appel- 
lavi.  In  qua  domo,  auctoritate  ejusdem,  per  procuratores 
praedictos  nominabantur  et  dabantur  delegati  ad  audiendum 
et  determinandum  dictam  causam  sive  gravamen  meum. 
Quorum  delegatorum  major  pars  primo  die  per  statuta  dictae 
universitatis  assignati  loco  solito  convenerunt,  dictamque 
causam  sive  gravamen  meum  audierunt,  et  pro  ulteriori 
ejusdem  causae  expeditione  continuarunt  et  prorogarunt 
eorum  jurisdictionem  in  proximum  diem  extunc  sequentem. 
Quo  die  adveniente,  dicta  major  pars  delegatorum  pree- 
dictorum  eandem  causam  meam  rursus  audierunt,  et  deinde 
prorogarunt  et  continuarunt  eorum  jurisdictionem,  et  assig- 
narunt  ad  audiendum  eorum  sententiam  sive  finale  judicium 
in  dicta  causa  in  diem  proximum  extunc  sequentem,  scil.  in 
tertium  sive  ultirnum  diem  juxta  for  mam  statutorum  prse- 
dicta3  universitatis  pro  eorum  jurisdictione  indultum.  Et 
dicto  tertio  die  adveniente,  major  pars,  prout  requiritur,  dic 
torum  delegatorum  non  convenerunt,  ita  ut  dicta  causa  mea 
debitum  finem  sive  effect um  sortiri  non  potuerit.  Et  sic 
causam  meam  sive  gravamen  meum  indeterminatum  rc- 
liquerunt,  mihi  ea  ratione  justitiam  denegando;  ita  ut  pne- 
dicta  mea  appellatio  inanis  fieret  periensque  sine  fructu  ad 
instantiam,  procurationem,  sive  sollicitationem  dicti  Thorme 
Forde  subdolas,  iniquas,  et  injustas,  in  mei  grave  damnum 
praejudiciumque  non  modicum  et  gravamen.  Unde  ego  prge- 
fatus  vice-cancellarius,  sentiens  me  ex  prsemissis  gravaminibus 
mihi  per  dictos  delegates  domus  convocationis  dicto  tertio  die 
eorum  jurisdictionis,  ut  prremittitur,  non  convenientes,  et  ex 
illorum  mihi  denegatione  justitiae,  ut  praefertur,  illatis,multi- 
pliciter  laesum  et  gravatum  esse,  ab  eisdem  et  eorum  quolibet 
ad  serenissimura  in  Christo  principem  et  Dominum  nostrum, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  55 

Carolum   Dei  gratia  Angliae,  Scotia?,  Franciae,  et  Hiberniae    A.D.  1631. 


43regem,  fidei  defensorem,  &c.  (cujus  protection!  me  et  causam 
meam  humiliter  submitto)  rite  et  legitime  in  his  scriptis 
appello  et  provoco,  apostolosque n  peto  primo,  secundo,  et 
tertio,  instanter,  instantius,  et  instantissime,  mihi  fieri,  edi, 
tradi,  et  deliberari  cum  effectu.  Et  protestor,  quod  non  sunt 
decem,  seu  saltern  quindecim,  dies  adhuc  plene  elapsi,  ex  quo 
mihi  de  prsemissis  gravaminibus  per  dictos  delegates  domus 
convocations,  ut  praefertur,  illatis,  certitudiiialiter  constabat 
et  constat :  quodque  in  praesentia  dictorum  judicum  delega- 
torum  praedictae  domus  convocationis  appellarem,  si  eorum 
praesentias  commode  habere  potuissem  :  et  protestor  insuper, 
de  corrigendo  et  reformando  has  meas  appellationes  et  quc- 
relas,  et  easdem  in  meliorem  et  competentiorem  formam  re- 
digendo,  et  de  eisdem  addendo,  et  ab  eisdem  detrahendo,  et 
de  intimando  easdem  omnibus  et  singulis,  quorum  interest 
seu  iriteresse  poterit  quovismodo,  juxta  jurisperitorum  con- 
silium,  pro  loco  et  tempore  congruis  et  opportunis,  prout 
moris  est,  juris,  atque  styli.  Super  quibus  omnibus  et  singulis 
peto  a  te  notario  publico  Instrumentum  publicum  sive  in- 
strumenta  publica,  unum  sive  plura,  mihi  confici,  testesque 
hie  prsesentes  testimonium  inde  perhibere. 


Lecta  et  interposita  fuit  hsec  appellatio  octavo  die  Augusti  8.  Aug. 
anno  Domini  1631.  Annoque  regni  domini  nostri  Caroli 
Dei  gratia  Anglioe,  Scotise,  Franciae,  et  Hiberniae  regis, 
fidei  defensoris  &c.  septimo,  in  hospitio  guardiani  collegii 
Wadhami  in  universitate  Oxon.  intra  collegium  prsedictum 
notorie  situate,  per  venerabilem  Virum  Gulielmum  Smith, 
sacras  theologize  professorem,  Collegii  Wadhami  prsedicti 
guardianum,  atque  universitatis  Oxon.  Vice-cancellarium, 
qui  tune  et  ibidem  appellavit,  apostolos  petiit,  protestatus 
et  querelatus  est,  ac  caetera  fecit  et  exercuit  in  omnibus  et 
per  omnia,  prout  in  hujusmodi  protocollo  continetur,  in 
prsesentia  mei  notarii  publici  subscript!,  prassentibus  etiam 
tune  et  ibidem  testibus  subscriptis  ad  praemissa  testificanda 
specialiter  rogatis,  scil.  venerabilibus  viris  Gulielmo  Juxon 

n  [Literas  sc.  appellationis.  Vide  Du  Cangii  Gloss,  sub  voc.  '  Apostolus.'] 


56  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.  legum  doctore,  decano  ecclcsise  cathedralis  Wigorn.,  et 
Richardo  Zouch  legum  doctore,  necnon  Richardo  Mathew 
liter  at  o. 

GUIL.  JUXON°.  Ita  tester 

RICH.  ZOUCHP.  HUMFRIDUS  JONES, 

Ric.  MATTHEW.  Notarius  Publicus. 


The  great  Upon  this  petition  and  appeal,  his  majesty  coming  that 

Woodcock  year  *n  Pr°gress  to  Woodstock,  he  resolved  to  hear  the  cause 
himself,  and  put  an  end  to  those  factious  and  disorderly 
courses,  which  were  grown  too  heady  for  any  other  hancK 
And  upon  Tuesday,  Aug.  23 r,  his  majesty,  in  the  presence 
of  all  the  lords  of  his  council,  which  were  with  him  (divers 
heads  of  colleges  being  also  present)  heard  at  large  all  com 
plaints  and  grievances  on  either  side :  and  concluded,  that  44 
both  the  proctors  should  in  the  next  convocation  resign  their 
offices,  and  two  other  of  the  same  colleges  be  put  in  their 
places :  and  that  Thomas  Ford  of  Magdalen-hall,  Giles 
Thome  of  Balliol  college,  and  John  [leg.  William]  Hodges  of 
Exeter  college,  should  be  banished  the  university :  and  that 
Doctor  Prideaux,  rector  of  Exeter  college,  and  Dr.  Wilkin 
son,  principal  of  Magdalen,  should  then  and  there  receive, 
in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  the  lords,  a  public  and  sharp 
reprehension  for  their  misgovernment  and  countenancing 
the  factious  parties.  The  lord  viscount  Dorchester,  then 


0  [President  of  St.  John's  and  dean  and  he  from  them  to  the  king:  who 
of  Worcester.]  consulting   with    the   doctors    in    the 

P  [See  above,  p.  37.  note  h.]  chamber  of  presence,   and  more  pri- 

1  [The  great  importance  which  Laud  vately  afterwards  with  the  chancellor 
attached  to  this  business  may  be  ga-  and  our  provost,  who  was  abused  by 
thered  from  his  making  a  special  note  one  of  the  sermons,  in  conclusion  sen- 
of  it  in  his  Diary.]  tenced  Dr.  Prideaux  to  lose  his  place 

r  ["  At  Woodstock  his  majesty  sate  as  the  chief  encourager  of  young  fac- 

with  our  chancellor,  the  Bp.  of  Lon-  tious  men,  but   the  lord  chamberlain 

don,  for  the  space  of  six  hours,  con-  interceded  for  him,  and  so  the  punisli- 

sidering  and  consulting  about  some  se-  ment  was  not  executed  ;  but  the  proc- 

ditious  or  suspicious  sermons  preached  tors  were  sentenced  to  be  put  out  of 

in   Oxon,   which    the    vice-chancellor  their  places,  and  three  masters,  to  wit, 

demanding,  was  gainsaid,  and  not  as-  Mr.  Thome,  Hodges,  and  Forde  expell- 

sisted  by  the  proctors  as  the  statute  ed  the  university."   Crosfield's  Diary, 

required;    the   delinquents   appealing  Aug.  23.] 
from  him  to  the  house  of  convocation, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  57 

principal  secretary  of  state,  was  commanded  to  deliver  this  A.D.  1631. 
sentence  from  the  king,  which  he  did  accordingly,  and  gave 
the  reprehension  as  was  enjoined;  the  king  himself  then 
publicly  declaring,  that  Dr.  Prideaux  deserved  to  lose  his 
place  more  than  any  of  the  rest,  but  was  content  to  spare 
him,  partly  because  he  had  been  his  ancient  servant,  and 
hoped  he  would  look  better  to  himself  for  the  future,  and 
partly  because  I  entreated  favour  for  him.  As  for  Francis 
Hide,  who  had  been  proctor  the  former  year8,  and  was  as 
mutinous  as  any  of  the  rest,  he  was  out  of  the  university 
when  the  summons  came  for  their  appearance  before  the 
king,  and  so  kept  himself  till  the  hearing  was  past :  yet 
nevertheless  so  much  appeared  against  him,  as  that  after 
wards  he  was  glad  to  come  in  and  make  his  submission,  that 
he  might  escape  so.  Then  his  majesty  commanded  secretary 
Dorchester  to  write  a  letter  for  him  to  sign,  and  to  be  sent 
to  the  university,  and  in  convocation  to  require  the  perform 
ance  of  this  sentence  in  every  particular.  This  letter  was 
written  and  sent  accordingly;  and  the  tenor  of  it  follows 
in  hcsc  verba. 


At  Woodstock,  Aug.  24,  16311. 

CHARLES  E/. 
TRUSTY  and  well-beloved,  we  greet  you  well.     Having  at  His  majesty's 


full  length,  and  with  good  deliberation,  heard  the  cause  con- 
cerning  the  late  great  disorders  and  disobedience  to  govern-  after  the 
ment  in  that  our  university  of  Oxford,  and  being  moved  by  f  [e^0^ri 
the  greatness  of  the  offences  to  punish  some  persons  accord-  stock,  Aug. 
ing  to  their  several  demerits,  and  to  order  some  things  for  24>  1631- 
the  more  settled  and  constant  government  of  that  our  uni 
versity  hereafter  :  our  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  you  forthwith 
upon  the  receipt  hereof,  call  a  convocation  for  performing 
and   registering   these   our   sentences   and  decrees,   as  fol 
io  weth. 

And  first,  we  pronounce  your  appeal  to  be  just,  and  return 

*  [He  had  been  proctor  in  1627.] 

1  [Read  in  convocation  Aug.  26,  1631.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  37.  b.j 


58 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


university. 


The  proctors 
Bruche  and 
Doughty  to 
resign  their 
office. 


A.D.  1631.    Thomas  Forde  of  Magdalene  hall,  Giles  Thorne  of  Balliol 
Forde,Thorne  college,  and  William  Hodges  of  Exeter  college  (whose  causes 
'         1?    were  likewise  submitted  unto  us)  unto  your  power,  and  com 
mand  you  that  forthwith  they  be  all  three  banished  the  uni 
versity,  according  as  your  statutes  in  that  behalf  require. 

Secondly,  because  the  proctors,  which  should  have  been  45 
assistants  to  the  vice-chancellor,  and  helps  for  upholding  of 
authority  and  government,  have  most  unworthily  behaved 
themselves  in  countenancing  all  manner  of  disobedience,  in 
receiving  [of]  appeals  in  case  of  manifest  perturbation  and 
breach  of  peace,  and  by  their  cunning  practising  after  these 
appeals  received,  especially  Thorne' s,  whose  contumacy  was 
notorious,  and  his  sermon  base :  therefore  for  them,  our 
pleasure  and  command  is,  as  was  yesterday  delivered  unto 
themselves,  that  they  shall  presently  resign  their  office  in 
convocation  according  to  course,  as  if  their  year  had  been 
fully  expired,  and  the  two  colleges,  of  which  they  are,  may 
name  two  others  to  succeed  in  their  office  the  rest  of  the 
year,  to  be  chosen  and  settled  according  to  your  late  statutes 
made  in  that  behalf.  And  for  the  execution  of  this,  you  are 
(as  we  have  before  ordered)  presently  to  call  a  convocation, 
and  publish  this  our  sentence,  and  proceed  accordingly. 

Thirdly,  for  Francis  Hyde  of  Christ  Church,  and  Richard 
Hill  of  Brasenose,  we  require,  that  so  soon  as  they  return  to 
our  university,  you  warn  them  to  be  in  a  readiness,  and  give 
notice  to  your  chancellor,  when  they  are  there,  that  they 
may  be  sent  for  to  answer  such  things  as  are  laid  against 
them  :  and  when  they  are  heard,  they  shall  receive  such 
sentence,  as  the  merits  of  their  cause  deserve. 

Now  for  the  things  which  we  think  fit  to  settle  presently 
in  that  government,  they  are  these. 

Every  man  to  First,  we  command,  that  if  the  vice-chancellor  for  the  time 
give  in  a  true  being  think  fit  to  call  for  any  man's  sermon,  which  upon  his 
sermon  at  the  own  neaiing>  or  complaint  made  by  any  other,  seems  offen- 
demand  of  sive  in  any  kind,  the  party,  of  whatsoever  degree  he  be,  shall 
chancellor  deliver  a  true  and  perfect  copy  to  the  vice-chancellor  upon 
and  that  oath,  which  when  he  hath  perused,  he  'shall  convent  him,  if 
oat  '  he  find  cause,  either  by  the  statute  of  Leicester11,  (as  it  is 


[Tyde  and 
Hill  to  be 
warned  at 
their  return 
to  be  in  a 
readiness  to 
answer  to 
their  several 
charges. 


u  [This  statute  will  be  found  in  Wood, 
Annals,  ad  an.  1581.  p.  202,  partly  em 


bodied  in  the  present  statute,  tit.  xvi. 
§  9.  from  Reg.  K.  K.  3H  b.J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  59 

called,)  or  by  the  later  statute  of  the  six  doctors*,  at  the  vice-     A.D.  1631. 
chancellor's  choice,  until  at  this  new  settling  of  your  statutes 
one  entire  and  absolute  statute  be  made  of  both. 

Secondly,  that  if  the  vice-chancellor  find  cause  to  com-  Any  man 

mand  any  man  to  prison,  the  party  so  commanded  and  sent  commanded 
•  *  *  _  to  prison  by 

by  a  beadle,  shall  (for  so  the  statutes  requirey)  presently  sub-  the  vice- 

mit,  and  go  quietly  to  prison :    and  if  they  do   not,  that  chancellor, 
refusal  [alone]   shall  be  as  a  breach  of  the  peace,  and  not 
have  any  appeal. 
46      Thirdly,  we  command,  that  the  delegates,  which  at  this  The  delegates 

present  are  in  hand  with  the  statutes,  make  all  the  speed  commanded 

to  draw  up 
that  possibly  they  can,  for  the  finishing  of  that  great  and  the  first  two 

excellent  work ;  yet  so  as  that  presently  they  lay  all  other  statutes  con- 
statutes  aside,  till  they  have  drawn  up  two  perfect  and  suf-  peais  before 
ficient  statutes  for  causes  of  appeal,  the  one  in  matters  of  theJ  proceed. 
instance,  and  those  things  which  belong  to  the  chancellor's 
court  there ;  the  other  for  all  kind  of  appeals  in  other  causes 
whatsoever;    and   that  they  keep    as   near  to  the  ancient 
statutes  of  our  university  as  possibly  they  can,  so  as  they 
may  also  meet  withal  the  present  inconveniences.     And  like-  A  weekly 
wise   that   they   presently    draw   up   the   form   of   another  ^^S6^ 
statute  for  the  weekly  meeting  every  Monday  in  term  and  the  heads 
out  of  term  of  all  the  heads  of  colleges  and  halls  that  shall 
be  in  town,  to  consider  of  the  peace  and  government  of  our 
university,  as  occasion  may  arise2 :  that  so  all  things  may  be 
deliberately  put   [up]    (when  there  is  cause)  to  the  convoca 
tion  according  to  such  directions  as  we  shall  give  to  your 
chancellor,  from  whom  you  shall  receive  them.     And  these 
our  letters  shall  be  your  sufficient  warrant  on  this  behalf. 
Given  under  our  signet,  at  our  honour  of  Woodstock  the 
four  and  twentieth  day  of  August,  in  the  seventh  year  of 
our  reign,  (1631.) 

IN  convocatione  habitaa  26  die  Augusti,  1631.    promul-  Convocatio 

gata  sunt  edicta  a  serenissima  regis  maiestate  ad  venerabi-  h?rlfca  Clrca 

*  eaicta  regis. 

lem  virum,  Doctorem  Smith,  sacrae  theologize  professorem,  et 
vice-cancellarium  universitatis  Oxon.  missa,  in  quibus  sen- 

x  [Embodied  in  present  statute  z  [See  present  statutes,  tit.  xiii.] 
(ibid.)  from  Reg.  N.  41.]  a  [This  entry  comes  before  the  king's 

y  [See  authorities  in  marg.  of  Corp.  letter  in  Conv.  Reg.  11.  fol.  37.  b.] 
Stat.  tit.  de  Jud.,  §11.] 


60 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1631.  tentia  serenissimi  regis  prius  or0,  tenus  lata  de  Thoma  Forde, 
~  ^Egidio  Thorne,  et  Johanne  [leg.  Guliclmo]  Hodges  ex  aca- 
demia  exterminandis,  turn  de  Athertono  Brutche  et  Johanne 
Doughtye  procuratoribus  munere  procuratorio  privandis,  nunc 
scriptis  consignata,  ac  privato  sigillo  munita  ;  ac  insuper  edicta 
qusedam  regia  circa  concionum  censuram_,  et  appellaiidi  potes- 
tatem,  aliaque  ad  regimen  academise  spectantia,  transmissa 
sunt  ad  venerabilem  vice-cancellarium  b. 

Deinde  perlectis  hisce  regis  literis,  procuratores  regio  man- 
^ato  aiacriter  morem  gerentes  officii  sui  insignia  humillime 
deposuerunt.  Et  venerabilis  vir,  Doctor  Ratcliffe  principals 
collegii  yEnei-Nasi0,  et  Magister  Turner  collegii  Mertonensis 


The  proctors 
obey,  and  lay 

office. 


b  [The  following  is  the  notice  of 
these  proceedings  in  Crosfield's  Diary, 
Aug.  26.  "Convocatio  habita,  ubi  li- 
terae  a  rege  ad  vice-cancellarium  mis- 
sae  publice  per  registrarium  factae  sunt, 
quibus  literis  Rex  post  prasfationem  de 
sua  cura  et  consideratione  status  uni- 
versitatis,  in  quo  quidam  seditiose  et 
contumaciter  sese  gesserant  adversus 
seu  cum  conteinptu  auctoritatis,  et  in 
ipsorum  concionibus  aliquid  ejusmodi 
contentum  esset,  ideo  vice-cancellarii 
appellationem  esse  justam  et  aequam, 
necnon  mandavit,  ut  voluntatem  suam 
in  domo  convocationis  declararet  de 
Bannitione  Mri  Ford,Thorne,  et  Hodges; 
item  de  depositione  procuratorum,  &c. 
Item  de  sententia  et  examinatione  ex- 
pectanda  Mri  Hide  sedis  Christi,  et  Mr. 
Hill,  qui  adhuc  absentes  non  exami- 
nantur.  Man  datum  etiam  aliud  fuit 
de  festinatione  delegatorum  pro  collec- 
tione  statutorum. 

Item  potestas  vice-cancellarii  in  con 
cionum  dijudicatione  vel  requisition 
videbatur  aliquantisper  augmentata. 

Dispensatio  etiam  petita  et  concessa 
fuit,  ut  procuratorum  computus  non 
fieret  usque  ad  finem  anni,  propter  sta- 
tutum.  Intra  quindenam  Mr  Erics 
Merton,  et  Mr  Washington  JEn.  in 
priorum  vicem  substituti.  Dre  Smith 
vice-cancellario.  Scriptum  banniendi 
dictumThomamFordj/EgidiumThorne, 
et  Guliel.  Hodges  fuit  peremptorie  in- 
tra  spatium  quatuor  dierum,utque  nul- 
lus  eis  faveret. 

Oct.  6.  Report  that  Dr.  Zouch  is  to 
make  an  historical  narration  of  all  the 
passages  between  the  king  and  the  uni 
versity  at  Woodstock  for  the  satisfac 
tion  of  some  people  abroad  that  mur 
mur  in  the  country. 

Oct.  13.  The  23d  of  August  last  upon 


occasion  of  his  majesty's  examination 
of  university  men  that  had  offended 
against  his  declaration  they  pleaded 
ignorance  thereof:  whereof  our  chan 
cellor  hath  taken  order  that  the  articles 
with  the  same  declaration  being  new 
reprinted,  every  college  might  have 
one.  The  contents  of  the  declaration 
in  sum  are  these.  First  his  majesty 
declares  the  occasion  of  the  publishing 
his  declaration,  which  was  to  maintain 
the  Church  in  peace  by  suppressing 
unnecessary  disputations. 

2dly.  The  declaration  itself  contains 
six  particulars,  viz. 

i.  A  ratification  of  the  articles  to  be 
agreeable  to  God's  word. 

ii.  A  grant  of  power  to  the  clergy 
for  settling  and  ordering  all  dif 
ference  in  the  Church  about  ex 
ternal  polity  in  their  convoca 
tions  with  his  approbation  ob 
tained. 

iii.  The  same  grant  made  to  the 
bishops  for  deliberation. 

iv.  A  demonstration  of  his  joy  for  the 
universal  consent  of  the  clergy 
in  subscribing  to  the  articles 
notwithstanding  differences. 

v.  A  prohibition  to  print  or  preach 
anything  contrary  or  different 
to  the  full  and  plain  meaning 
of  the  articles. 

vi.  A  particular  prohibition  of  all  in 
the  universities  for  affixing  any 
new  sense  to  any  article,  or  for 
publicly  holding  any  disputa 
tion  either  way  other  than  is 
established  in  convocation."] 

c  [Samuel  lladcliffe;  he  was  ejected 
by  the  parliamentary  visitors  :  he 
founded  by  his  will  two  scholarships 
in  that  college.! 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  61 

vice-custosd,  juxta  factam  sibi  a  serenissima  regis  majestate  '  A.D.  1631. 
potestatem  alios  procurators  ex  iisdem  collegiis  substituendi, 
praesentarunt  egregios  viros  a  se  juxta  novissima  statutaregia 
nominatos :  ille  scilicet  Magistrum  Laurentium  Washington  Procuratores 
e  collegio  JEnei-Nasi ;  hie  vero  Magistrum  Johannem  Erles  cof^ert^6 
e  collegio  Merton.6,  ut  pro  eo  quod  superat  istius  anni  ad-  Mag.  Wash- 
mitterentur  ad  munus   procuratorium  obeundum.     Deinde  ^to^sC° 
prasstitis  per  praefatos  Magistrum  Erles  et  Washington  re 
spective  juramentis  de  suprema  regise  majestatis  authoritate 
agnoscenda,  de  fidelitate  sive  allegiantia,  necnon  de  officiis 
procuratorum  fideliter  praestandis,  juxta  statuta  et  decreta  in 
ea  parte  edita  et  provisa,  admissi  respective  fuerunt  ad  officia 
procuratoria,  et  statim  iisdem  dominus  vice-cancellarius  offi- 
47  ciorum  insignia  in  manus  tradidit,  viz.,  claves  et  libros.    De 
inde  hujusmodi  dispensatio  petita  erat. 

Supplicant  venerabili  convocationi  doctorum,  magistrorum 
regentium  et  non  regentium  procuratores  partis  hujus  anni, 
ut  differatur  eorum  computus  in  diem,  quando  reddendus  sit 
computus  pro  uno  anno  integro.  Conceditur  simpliciter. 

Cum  nos   Guilielmus    Smith   sacrae   theologies   professor,  Bamritio  ma- 
honoratissimi   cancellarii   universitatis   Oxon.    commissarius  p^missorum 
sive  vice-cancellarius,  contra  Thomam  Forde  clericum,  ma-  secundum 
gistrum  artium,  et   aula  St.  Marias  Magd.  in   universitate ec 
Oxon.,  J^gidium  Thorne,  clericum,  S.  Theol.  Bac.  e  collegio 
Baliol.,  et  Guilielmum  Hodges  clericum,  magistrum  artium, 
collegii  Exon.    Socium  universitatis   praedictee,  pro  quibus- 
dam   pravis  et   offensivis  assertionibus  sive  materiis  contra 
edicta  regia,  et  ad   perturbationem   pacis   et  tranquillitatis 
universitatis  Oxon.  notorie  tendentibus  in  quibusdam  eorum 
respective   concionibus    in    ecclesia   beatae   Mariae   Virginis 
Oxon.  anno  instante,  viz.  1631.  et  mensibus  ejusdem  traditis 
et  promulgatis,  juxta  statuta  universitatis  praedictae  et  edicta 
regia  processimus;  et  deinde  causis  eisdem  ad  regiam  ma- 
jest  atem  devolutis  iidem   praedicti  Thomas   Forde,  .^Egidius 
Thorne,  et  Guilielmus  Hodges  coram  serenissima  regia  ma- 

d  [Peter   Turner,    afterwards   M.D.  chancellor  of  Salisbury,  dean  of  West- 

and   Savilian   professor  of  geometry  ;  minster,  and  bishop  of  Worcester  and 

ejected  by  the  parliamentary  visitors.]  Salisbury.] 

e  [Author   of  '  Microcosmography,'  f  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  38  b.] 
afterwards  chaplain  to  Prince  Charles, 


62  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631.  jestate,  regiis  suis  consiliariis  assidentibus,  legitime  et  judi- 
cialiter  citati  et  comparentes  de  eisdem  pravis  assertionibus 
sive  materiis  in  eorum  respective  concionibus  prasdictis  aliis- 
que  enormibus  legitime  etiam  convicti  fuerint :  unde  serenis- 
sima  majestas  regia,  habito  honoratissimorum  consiliariorum 
suorum  consilio  eosdem  singulos  ab  universitate  pradicta 
banniendos  et  expelleiidos  fore  decreverit,  et  nobis  banni- 
endos  et  expellendos  mandaverit,  et  remiserit;  idcirco  nos, 
Guilielmus  Smith,  vice-cancellarius  et  commissarius  ante- 
dictus,  praefatos  Thomam  Forde,  ./Egidium  Thome,  et  Gui- 
lielmum  Hodges  juxta  mandatum  regium  et  statuta  dictae 
universitatis  erga  ejusmodi  delinquentes  pro  visa,  privilegiis 
universitatis  privandos  et  exuendos  fore,  et  a  finibus  ejus- 
dem  expellendos,  exterminandos,  et  banniendos  fore  decer- 
nimus,  prout  eosdem  Thomam,  ^Egidium,  et  Guilielmum,  et 
ipsorum  quemlibet  sic  privamus,  exuimus,  expellimus,  exter- 
minamus,  et  bannimus,  ipsorumque  quemlibet  pro  sic  pri- 
vato,  exuto,  expulso,  exterminato,  et  bannito  declaramus  et 
publicamus  :  intimantes  etiam  iisdem,  et  eorum  cuilibet,  quod 
intra  quatuor  dies  proxime  post  publicationem  praesentium  ab 
universitate  praedicta  et  finibus  ejusdem  recedant,  et  exeant, 
recedat  et  exeat :  monentes  et  intimantes  peremptorie  et  per 
prsesentes  sic  monemus,  quod  nullus  infra  praecinctum  uni 
versitatis  praedictos  Thomam,  ^Egidium,  et  Guilielmum,  aut 
eorum  aliquem  acceptet,  foveat,  aut  defendat  sub  pcena  juris. 
Dat.  sub  sigillo  officii  cancellariatus  universitatis  Oxon.  vice- 
simo  [sexto]  die  mensis  Augusti,  Anno  Dom.  1631. 

The  chapel  of      In  this  year  was  the  chapel  at   Queen's  college  wains- 
Queen's  coll.  cotecig. 
wainscoted. 


EIGHT  REVEREND,  MY  MOST  HONOURED  GOOD  LORD, 

Mr.  Hill's  How  much  I  am  bound  to  thank  my  good  God,  who  in 

howCrhe°was     ^c  m^s^  °f  trouble  hath  so  much  blessed   me  with   your 
misled  by       lordship's  grace  and  favour  to  roll  myself  upon.     In  confi- 

' 


through  these  clouds  by  your  lordship's  goodness 
ness.  and  mediation  the  royal  favour  of  my  most  gracious  and  48 

*  [Crosfield's  Diary,  Sep.  25,  1630,      tifying  by  wainscot  and  painting."] 
"  Care  was  taken  for  the  chapel's  beau- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  63 

blessed  sovereign  will  shine  upon  me.  Nemo  proficiens  eru-  A.D.  1631, 
bescit,  saith  Tertul.  No  man  is  ashamed  to  relate  the  story 
of  his  offence  when  he  is  come  to  himself,  and  begins  to 
thrive  in  the  way  of  a  better  opinion  and  judgment.  It 
hath  been  my  great  grief  and  misery,  but  to  be  thought  to 
be  possessed  with  that  damned  spirit  of  opposition,  which  in 
public  exercise  I  have  cried  down  and  conjured,  or  to  give 
fire  to  any  factious  spirit  to  rebel  against  authority  and  the 
breath  of  heaven.  Omnis  sermo  ad  forensem  famam  a  domes- 
ticis  emanat  aucloribus,  saith  the  orator11.  I  know  no  malice 
can  truly  prevent  the  credit  of  my  words.  I  thank  my  God 
I  have  been  often  an  occasion  of  peace  and  quietness  within 
my  college,  never  was  before  engaged  in  any  such  mad 
affront,  for  which  I  shall  ever  condemn  myself  upon  the 
theatre  of  my  own  conscience,  and  suspect  my  leaders.  How 
easy  a  thing  is  it  for  some  men  in  some  eminent  and  leading 
places  to  give  occasion  to  quiet  and  temperate  spirits  to  rebel 
against  their  own  conscience  and  ingenuity  !  Therefore  (saith 
S.Austin)  might  the  example  of  Cato  have  prevailed  much, 
when  he  slew  himself,  Non  quid  solus  id  fecerat,  not  because 
he  alone  had  done  so,  Sed  quia  vir  doctus  et  pro  bus  habe- 
batur'1,  but  because  he  was  esteemed  to  be  a  learned  and  an 
honest  man.  Two  glorious  titles,  which  touch  and  confine 
the  hearts  and  affections  of  all  good  men,  if  they  sometimes 
prove  not  false  fires,  to  delude  the  world  and  cheat  the 
weaker  in  their  opinions.  I  must  not  much  trespass  upon 
your  lordship's  many  serious  and  weighty  affairs.  How  gladly 
would  I  enlarge  and  unbowel  myself  in  any  style  of  true  and 
hearty  submission  !  Mihi  fama  posthac  vilius  constabit.  So 
beseeching  the  continuance  of  your  lordship's  favourable  re 
spect,  and  good  opinion  of  me,  I  shall  be  ever  bound  to  pray 
for  your  lordship's  prosperity  and  happiness. 

Your  lordship's  most  humble 

and  devoted  servant, 

RICH.  HILL. 

From  Brasenose  coll.  in  Oxon. 
Octob.  23,  16,31. 


h    [Q.    Cicero    de     Petit.    Consul.          >  [S.  Aug.  de  Civit.  Dei,  lib.  i.  cap. 
cap.  v.]  23.  Op.,  torn.  vii.  col.  32.  D.] 


64 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.B.  1631. 


Another  let 
ter  of  Mr. 
Hill's  to  me 
about  Dr. 
Prideaux, 


RIGHT  REVEREND,  AND  RIGHT  HONOURABLE, 

IT  hath  added  some  degrees  more  to  my  sorrows,  that 
I  have  not  given  your  lordship  better  satisfaction.  As  my 
tongue  hath  been  the  true  and  even  pulse  of  my  heart,  so  my 
desire  is  my  pen  should  be  the  true  and  plain  expression. 

True  it  is,  that  the  example  of  Dr.  Prideaux,  my  father 
(whom  with  reverence  I  am  to  name)  too  much  ruled  within 
my  breast.  For  I  could  not  in  any  charity  believe  that  he, 
who  had  been  so  often  vice-chancellor,  would  any  way  seem 
to  betray  or  minorate  the  authority  and  power  of  that  place. 
Besides  (that  every  man  may  rather  bear  his  own  burden)  I 
confess  that  my  own  fancy  doted  so  much  upon  that  late  49 
eighth  edict,  mistaking  it  both  in  its  end  and  latitude.  For 
it  is  impossible  that  any  one  decree  can  in  itself  be  so  round 
and  full  as  to  meet  so  closely  with  all  manner  of  offenders 
in  all  circumstances  and  several  degrees  of  offences :  much 
less  seem  any  way  to  confine  and  bind  the  hands  of  authority 
from  punishing  according  to  discretion,  even  by  virtue  also 
of  that  general  statute  of  obedience,  which  sweetly  runs 
through  all,  and  indeed  is  the  golden  chain  or  main  tie 
and  link  of  all. 

By  this,  may  it  please  your  good  lordship,  there  was  no 
malice  here,  but  error,  and  such  an  error,  that  begat  both  in 
myself  and  others  a  strange  mad  stupidity,  that  one  among 
ten  could  not  be  able,  or  so  happy  upon  the  sudden  to  look 
up  to  that  power  which  is  the  rule  and  perfection,  the  life 
and  crown  of  all.  I  beseech  your  lordship  to  set  a  period  to 
these  (amidst  many  other)  the  troubles  of 

Your  lordship's  ever  truly 

devoted  servant 

RICH.  HILL. 

From  Brasenose  Coll.  Oxon. 
Nov.  7,  1631. 


RIGHT  WORTHY  SIR, 

Mr.  Hyde's  You  cannot  but  know  (though  I  think  you  have  almost 
vlce6-chan-  °  ^org°^en)  what  high  displeasure  I  am  fallen  into  by  my 
cellor,  unfortunate  attendance  and  behaviour  in  a  delegacy.  Had 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  65 

my  intentions  been  really  as  foul  as  information  hath  de-  A.D.  1631. 
rived  them  to  be,  I  should  not  now  dare  to  entreat  your 
pardon.  I  had  not  lately  durst  so  near  to  have  approached 
unto  so  great  integrity,  as  to  wait  upon  your  most  honourable 
chancellor.  His  lordship  was  pleased  to  vouchsafe  me  access ; 
was  pleased  to  acquaint  me  with  the  charge  of  my  guilt.  To 
whom  when  my  endeavoured  excuses  (for  defence  I  thought 
not  of)  could  not  yield  satisfaction,  his  lordship  (as  inclined 
to  shew  me  favour)  commanded  me  to  signify  thus  much  to 
you,  as  also  to  intimate  that  he  did  expect  to  hear  from  you 
what  satisfaction  you  should  conceive  fit  to  be  given  by  me 
for  so  public  an  injury.  Sir,  you  best  know  my  offence,  and 
so  what  punishment  it  merits,  as  also  (which  is  my  comfort) 
what  kind  best  sorts  with  ingenuity.  In  what  condition  I 
now  stand  I  am  severely  sensible ;  how  to  better  it  I  know 
not,  unless  you  shall  vouchsafe  by  remitting  those  errors, 
which  weakness  of  judgment  (not  strength  of  faction  or  dis 
affection  to  authority)  engaged  me  in,  to  make  me  capable  of 
favour.  I  humbly  crave  your  pardon  for  so  long  interrupting 
your  more  serious  employments,  and  shall  wait  for  and  sub 
mit  unto  whatsoever  you  shall  be  pleased  to  determine  of, 

Your  humble  servant, 

FRANCIS  HYDE. 

London, 
Nov.  13,  1631. 


50      CoNvocATiok  habita  erat  die  Mercurii,  viz.  15  die  Decem-  Convocatio 
bris,  Anno  Dom.   1631,  in    qua  venerabilis   vir  Dr.  Smith  ^mb5 
S.  theologise   professor,   et    almse   universitatis   Oxon.  vice-  1631,  circa 
cancellarius,  significavit  venerabili  ccetui  doctorum,  magis-  ^^u^  ^ufE" 
trorum  regentium  et  non  regentium,  delegates  [collegisse  et]  pellat.  et  con- 

compilasse  statuta  qusedam  de  appellationibus,  necnon  sta-  7ent- 

torum. 
tutum  aliud  de  conventu  prsefectorum  collegiorum  et  aularum 

die  lunae  cujuslibet  septimanae  per  totum  annum,  tarn  in 
vacationum  quam  terminorum  temporibus,  juxta  edicta  sere- 
nissimse  regiae  majestatis  Woodstochise  edit  a,  et  habita,  et  ad 
venerabilem  domum  convocationis  transmissa.  Qua3  statuta 

k  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  41.] 

LAUD.  p 


66  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A. P.  1631.    in  eadem  convocatione  promulgabantur,  et  unanimi  assensu 
et  consensu  doctorum,  magistrorum  regentium,  et  non  regen- 
tium,  comprobabantur,  quorum  capita  hie  sequimtur. 
De  appella-          1.  Quorum  appellationes  recipiendae  non  sint1. 

2.  De  causis,  in  quibus  dubitatur,  utrum  appellatio  admit- 
tenda  sit  necnem. 

3.  De  conventu  prrefectorum  Coll.  et  Aularum". 

His  statutis  prselectis  et  approbatis  comparuit  Mr.  Hodges 
coram  venerabili  coetu  doctorum,  magistrorura  regentium,  et 
non  regentium,  per  edicta  serenissimae  regise  majestatis  ab 
academise  finibus  nuper  exterminatus  propter  sua  demerita, 
scilicet  pro  concione  in  ecclesia  B.  Maria3  Virginis  infra  uni- 
versitatem  praedictam  in  regias  injunctiones  et  academise 
tranquillitatem  seditiose  committendo  et  prsedicando.  Cui 
per  honoratissimum  nostrum  cancellarium  serenissimus  rex 
ex  summa  sua  dementia  Palinodiae,  ac  recantationis,  favorem 
indulsit,  et  in  spem  pristinse  conditionis  et  restaurationis  ad 
gremium  matris  academic  reduxit.  Flexis  itaque  genibus,  et 
animo  officiose  devoto  prsedictus  Mr.  Hodges  sequentia  lege- 
bat  in  scriptis  manu  sua  propria  consignata.  Quorum  tenor 
sequitur,  et  est  talis. 


Mr.  Hodges's       I  WILLIAM  HODGES  do  freely  and  sincerely  acknowledge 
submission      before   this   venerable   assembly  of  convocation,  that  in  a 
1631,  m  con-  sermon  by  me  preached  in  St.  Mary's  upon  the  26th  of  June 
vocation  °.       iast  past^  I  fell  upon  the  delivery  of  those  points,  which  by 
his  majesty's  royal  injunctions  were  forbidden  me  to  meddle 
withal,  and  therein  I  confess  with  hearty  sorrow  my  great 
disobedience  against   his   sacred   majesty.     Moreover  I  do 
likewise  with  hearty  sorrow  confess,  that  I  did  let  fall  some 
passages  that  might  be  taken  to  the  disparagement  of  the 
government  of  the  Church,  in  making  erroneous  and  here 
tical  opinions  the  way  to  preferment.     All  which,  with  the 
main  current  of  my  discourse,  might  sound  to  sedition  in  the 

1  [The  statute  now  passed  was  with  Stat.,  tit.  xxi.  §  17.] 

some    modifications    included    in    the  "  [Corp.  Stat.  tit.  xiii.] 

Corpus  Statutorum,  tit.  xxi.  §  16.]  °  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  42.] 

m  [This  is  the  present  statute,  Corp. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


67 


ears  of  the  present  assembly.  By  this  my  great  and  inex-  A.P.  1631. 
cusable  offence,  I  do  freely  acknowledge  that  I  have  de 
served  the  sharpest  of  censures  and  severest  of  punishments ; 
and  therefore  that  his  royal  majesty  hath  justly  rewarded  me 
for  the  same,  it  being  an  offence  of  so  high  a  nature.  And 
I  have  nothing  at  all  to  plead  but  the  royal  mercy  of  my 
gracious  sovereign  for  my  restitution  to  this  famous  univer 
sity.  This  my  confession  and  submission  I  do  most  humbly 
tender  to  the  favourable  acceptance  of  this  venerable  house, 
craving  the  pardon  of  the  university  in  general,  so  more 
51  especially  of  our  most  honourable  chancellor,  whom  with  all 
humility  I  beseech  to  present  this  my  acknowledgement  to 
his  majesty's  sacred  hand,  as  the  pledge  and  engagement 
both  in  present  and  for  the  future  of  my  readiest  obedience. 

WILLIAM  HODGESP. 


P  [Hodges  also  made  a  public  re 
cantation  sermon  at  St.  Mary's  the  first 
of  Jan.  following,  a  copy  of  which  ser 
mon  was  seized  in  Ahp.  Laud's  study, 
(Cant.  Doom,  p.  175):  "A  full  year  of 
probation"  after  his  sentence  he  pe 
titioned  the  king  for  restoration ;  this 
was  granted,  Sept.  9,  1632,  and  in  a 
convocation  held  Oct.  9  following,  the 
petition  and  grant  were  read  and  he 
was  restored.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  foil.  50, 
51. 

"  The  humble  Petition  of  William 
Hodges, 

Most  humbly  shewing  that  he  hath 
now  had  a  full  yeare  to  bewaile  his 
offence  and  learne  obedience.  How 
throughly  and  well  he  hath  done  it, 
that  famous  nurserie  of  learning  and 
religion,  wherein  by  your  royall  favor 
hee  hath  hitherto  beene  an  observant 
probationer,  shall  for  the  present  time 
give  testimony,  and  for  after  times  more 
at  large  confirme  his  every  dayes  ac 
tions  as  they  are,  so  shall  they  be  but 
a  new  commentarie  upon  that  old 
Theame. 

May  it  therefore  please  your  most 
excellent  Majestic  to  accomplish  upon 
your  obedient  petitioner  that  worke  of 
mercy  which  your  royall  favour  hath 
begun,  tbat  so  by  God's  goodness  and 
your  royall  Majesties,  he  may  have  a 
period  set  to  the  time  of  his  probation, 
and  once  more  enjoy  the  privileges  of 
his  Mother  University  with  as  much 
freedom  as  the  rest  of  her  dutifull 
sons.  It  is  a  rich  blessing  your  poore 
Levitt  beggs ;  but  at  an  humble  dis 


tance,  encouraged  by  those  former  pro 
mising  rayes  of  your  Princely  cle- 
mencie  to  hope  for  this  full  enjoyment 
of  a  brighter  sunshine  ;  and  by  them 
experienced  likewise,  that  he  hath  a 
gracious  Soveraine,  before  whose  royall 
foote  to  prostrate  his  unworthie  self 
and  suite  :  and  being  prostrate  hee  will 
not  rise  but  with  a  hearty  prayer  to  the 
King  of  Kings  for  the  en  crease  and 
perpetuitie  of  his  blessings  of  grace 
and  peace  uppon  your  royall  head,  and 
that  youre  kingly  throne  may  bee  as 
the  dayes  of  Heaven." 

This  being  received  by  his  Majesty, 
the  petitioner  was  ordered  to  carry  it  to 
the  Chancellor,  who  put  his  subscrip 
tion  to  it  as  follows  : 

"  Sept  9,  1632.  His  Majestic  hath 
considered  of  this  Petition,  arid  is  gra- 
tiously  pleased  to  put  an  end  to  the 
time  of  probation  formerly  assigned 
the  Petitioner,  and  wholy  to  discharge 
the  sentence  given  against  him  at 
Woodstock,  Aug.  the  23,  1631.  For 
which  his  release,  this  my  subscription 
to  his  petition  by  his  Majesties  com 
mand  shall  be  your  sufficient  warrant. 
GUIL.  LONDON." 

Hodges  was  then  restored  to  his  for 
mer  academical  privileges.  He  after 
wards  married  Sarah,  the  daughter  of 
Dr.  Prideaux,  (Ath.  Ox.  iii.  268,)  be 
came  one  of  the  vicars  of  Bampton 
in  Oxfordshire,  rector  of  Ripple  in 
Worcestershire,  (which  he  kept  through 
the  Rebellion,)  archdeacon  of  Worces 
ter,  and  after  the  Restoration  D.D. 
See  Wood's  F.  O.  ii.  260.] 


68  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631. 


Mr.  Hill's  I  THOMAS  HILL  do  freely  and  sincerely  acknowledge  before 

submission,  ^s  venerable  assembly  of  convocation,  that  in  a  sermon 
1631,  in  con-  lately  by  me  preached  in  St.  Mary's,  I  did  let  fall  divers 
vocations  scandalous  speeches  partly  in  opposition  to  his  majesty's  in 
junctions,  by  odious  justling  together  the  names  of  certain 
factions  in  the  Church,  and  imputing  Pelagianism  and  popery 
to  the  one  side :  partly  in  disparagement  of  the  present  go-  • 
vernment  of  state  and  Church,  by  making  foul  and  errone 
ous  opinions  the  readiest  steps  now-a-days  to  preferment r. 
As  also  in  disparaging  the  whole  order  of  bishops  in  point  of 
learning  and  religion,  making  them  favourers  of  unsound 
and  erroneous  doctrine,  and  disfavourers  of  sound  doctrine. 
As  likewise  in  imputing  to  a  great  part  of  our  clergy  only 
politic  and  lunatic  religion :  besides  private  glances  against 
particular  persons  concerning  some  speeches  delivered  in 
their  late  sermons,  in  all  which  passages  in  my  sermon, 
I  confess  to  have  given  just  offence  to  the  university,  and  to 
deserve  the  sharpest  of  censures.  Wherefore  with  all  humble 
submission  I  beseech  the  whole  university,  represented  in 
this  venerable  house,  to  pass  by  this  my  wilful  error  of 
undiscreet  and  misguided  zeal,  and  do  faithfully  promise 
henceforward  to  abstain  from  all  such  scandalous  aspersions 
and  intimations,  as  tending  only  to  the  disparagement  of  the 
Church,  and  the  distraction  and  disquiet  of  the  university. 
And  this  my  submission  I  humbly  crave  may  be  accepted, 

i  [This  submission  had  been  made  '  the  Lords  do  not  favour  it,'  1  Sam. 

July    16,   1631,  nor  is  there   any  ap-  xxix.    6.      Scripture   they   use    worse 

pearance  of  its  having  been  repealed.  than  the  Turks  do  Christians  at  Tunis, 

Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  35.  b.]  enslave  it  to  the  vassalage  of  the  foulest 

1  [Prynne  gives  the  following  pas-  errour,  and  according   to   their   most 

sages  from  Thomas  Hill's  sermon  (on  current   garbe,    employ   it    to    defend 

James  i.  16.)  from  a  copy  sent  to  Laud,  Popery,  or  as   bad   Pelagianisme,  &c. 

'  seized  among  his  papers,  and  endorsed  Popish  darts  whet  afresh  on  a  Dutch 

with  his  hand.'  grinston,  have  pierced  deep,  and  with- 

"  And  here,  were  my  time  and  learn-  out  speedy  succour  will  prove  mortal!, 

ing  parallel  to  my  zeal,  what  a  tempt-  I  am  persuaded  these  last  Transmarine 

ing  doth  present  itself,  to  shew  how  Tenets  had  not  been  so  jolly  and  briefe 

rashly   (that    1    say   not  cruelly)   our  among  us,  nor  the  opposite  truth  so 

Pelagian    votaries    have   handled    the  diametrically  condemned  by  many,  had 

Decrees  and  Statutes  of  the  King.  But  they  first  made  proof  of  these  points  in 

they  are   to  be  mischieved  into  honor  their  owne  retired  and  serious  contem- 

(but   no   matter   how),   which   tempts  plations."    Prynne's    Cant.  Doom,  p. 

them  to  disrelish  sound  doctrine  on  no  173.] 
other  ground  than  did  David,  because 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  69 

which  I  do  here  make  willingly,  and  from  my  heart,  with    A.D.  1631. 
true  sorrow  for  what  is  past. 

THOMAS  HILL, 


WHEREAS,  upon  information  given  to  his  majesty  concern-  Mr.  Hyde's 
ing  misdemeanours  of  the  delegates  in  hearing  and  deter- Si 
mining  the  cause  of  appeal,  set  on  foot  by  Mr.  Ford  against 
Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  his  majesty  was  pleased  to  give  order, 
that  as  soon  as  I  came  unto  the  university,  notice  should  be 
given  unto  the  right  honourable  and  right  reverend  father 
in  God,  the  lord  bp.  of  London,  our  chancellor,  that  upon 
examination  of  the  business  I  might  receive  such  censure,  as 
the  merits  of  the  cause  should  deserve,  and  his  lordship  upon 
my  voluntary  appearance,  acknowledgement  of  my  errors, 
and  humble  submission  to  his  lordship,  has  been  pleased  to 
remit  me  back  to  the  university,  and  hath  ordered  that  iri 
the  presence  of  Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  and  the  governors  of 
colleges  and  halls,  I  should  make  the  like  recognition  of  my 
errors  and  offensive  carriage  in  that  business;  I  with  all 
humility  and  thankfulness  acknowledge  his  lordship' s  favour, 
52  and  do  freely  and  ingenuously  confess,  that  in  the  hearing 
of  that  cause,  I  did  declare  myself  in  the  maintenance  of 
Mr.  Ford's  appeal  with  more  vehemency  than  did  become  an 
indifferent  man,  not  without  disrespect  to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor, 
and  some  other  misdemeanours.  For  which  inconsiderate  car 
riage  I  am  very  heartily  sorry,  and  do  humbly  crave  pardon 
of  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  and  the  university,  and  do  seriously 
promise,  that  from  henceforth  I  will  avoid  all  partakings 
or  factious  endeavours  against  the  quiet  and  government 
of  the  university,  and  as  much  as  shall  be  in  my  power, 
will  be  assisting  to  the  orderly  proceedings  of  those  who  are 
in  authority  and  set  over  me  in  this  place. 

FRANCIS  HYDE. 


70  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1631. 

RIGHT  HONOURABLE  AND  RIGHT  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD, 

Mr.  Hodges's       WITH  all  humility  let  me  beseech  your  lordship  amongst 
thanks*  other  faults  of  mine,  to  pardon  this  one  of  presumption. 

And  having  sealed  me  a  pardon  for  my  boldness,  I  must 
again  beseech  your  honourable  favour  to  entertain  this  the 
necessary  testimony  and  tender  of  my  heartiest  thanks  and 
most  humble  service.  Let  all  the  world  forget  me,  when  1 
forget  to  be  grateful,  having  been  blessed  with  as  great 
a  favour  from  your  fatherly  hands  as  I  could  in  reason 
or  modestly  sue  for.  The  re-enlivening  of  dying  hopes,  the 
seasonable  refreshing  of  a  withering  branch,  the  happy  re 
covery  of  a  man  as  low  in  present  being  of  his  decayed  for 
tunes  as  punishment  and  desert  could  set  him;  the  work 
your  lordship's,  mine  the  benefit ;  my  expressions  may  come 
below  the  greatness  both  of  the  benefit  I  enjoy,  and  of  the 
favour  I  have  received ;  but  my  prayers  and  continual  devo 
tions  shall  not.  I  shall  make  up  in  these  the  defects  of  the 
former,  and  in  these  I  shall  pray  God  to  bless  me  so  through 
the  course  of  my  studies  and  endeavours,  as  that  I  may  be 
able  to  approve  myself 

Your  lordship's  in  all  thankfulness 

and  faithful  service  to  be  commanded, 

WILLIAM  HODGES'. 

From  Exon.  Coll.  in  Oxon. 
Feb.  22,  163£. 

1  [As  no  notice  is  here  taken  of  the  Exeter,  and  one  of  the  commissioners 

other  delinquents,  it   may   be   stated,  for  ejecting  scandalous  ministers  in  the 

that  Forde  refused  to  make  any  apology  county  of  Devon.     He  was  ejected  in 

for  his  conduct,  and  that  on  his  en-  1662  for  non-conformity.  (Ath.  Ox.  iii. 

deavouring  to  obtain  a  Lectureship  at  1096.) 

Plymouth,  Laud  procured  a  letter  from  With  reference  to  Thome,  Wood  states 

the  king  'not  to  choose  Mr.  Ford  for  (Annals,  p.  379)  that  though  he  made 

their  lecturer  or  vicar  upon  any  terms,  his  submission,  he  was  not  restored  to  his 

under  pain  of  his  royal  displeasure,'  university  privileges  :  but  that  he  subse- 

and  another  to  the  bishop  of  Exeter,  quently  became  rector  of  St.  Cuthbert's, 

'not  to  admit  him  in  case  they  should  Bedford,  (where  he  suffered  much  from 

elect  him.'  (See  Prynne's  Cant.  Doom,  the  parliamentary  soldiers,)  archdeacon 

pp.  175,  176,  who  makes  much  of  this  of  Buckingham,  and  D.D.  in  1661.    (A 

against  the  abp.)     He  became  one  of  detailed   account  of  his    sufferings   is 

the  Assembly  of  Divines  in  1614,  and  given  in  Walker's  Sufferings,  par.  ii.  p. 

subsequently  minister  of  StLaurence's,  44.)  J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  71 

A.D.  1632. 


Procu-  (Mr.  CHAWORTHS,  ex  ^Ed.  Christ.      \  [Admitted 
ratores  \MI\MEREDITH *,  e  coll. Omni. Anim.  J  Apr.  11,1632.] 

S.  in  Christ o. 

AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     I  am  very  sorry  My  letters  to 

that  I  have  this  occasion  to  write  to  the  university,  which  t!le  c°Jlvoca- 

tion  about 
I  love  so  well,  that  it  cannot  but  trouble  me  to  hear  of  any  the  disorders 

thins:  ill  done  in  it.     I  have  divers  ways  heard,  what  dis-  ^  ^e  scllools 

.    -,      i  ,  , .       , .  the  last 

orders  and  tumults  have   accompanied  the  public  disputa-  Lentu. 

53  tions  toward  the  end  of  the  last  Lent*,  to  the  great  scandal  of 
the  university,  and  tending  to  the  breach  of  all  government 
there.  The  noise  of  these  great  disorders  was  like  enough 
of  itself  to  be  heard  far,  and  to  add  to  this  unhappiness  these 
misdemeanours  were  then  committed,  when  they  might  be 
seen  by  some  which  meant  not  to  conceal  them.  Insomuch 
that  the  report  of  them  is  come  to  his  majesty's  ears,  who  is 
highly  displeased  with  this  ill  carriage,  and  the  more,  be 
cause  he  thought  the  care  and  the  pains  which  he  lately 
took  to  settle  some  breaches  of  government  there,  would  not 
so  soon  have  been  forgotten,  as  it  seems  to  him  they  are. 
Upon  this  his  majesty  hath  directed  his  princely  letters  to 
me,  and  by  them  required  me  to  look  both  to  the  punish 
ment  of  these  distempers  and  the  preventing  of  the  like 
hereafter.  According  to  these  his  majesty's  royal  com 
mands,  I  do  pray  and  require  you,  Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  and 
the  rest  of  the  governors,  to  look  carefully  to  your  several 
charges,  both  public  and  private,  not  only  for  the  honour  of 
the  university,  (which  it  seems  by  some  is  too  much  neg 
lected)  but  also  because  I  find  his  majesty  so  resolved,  that 
he  will  have  a  severe  course  held  against  any  governors,  as 
well  as  others,  that  shall  be  proved  faulty.  And  that  this 

8     [Richard    Chaworth,    after    the  Jan.  21,  166f,  and  March  6  following 

king's  restoration  made  vicar-general  provost  of  Eton.      He  died  July  16, 

of  the   prov.   of  Cant.,    chancellor  of  1665.] 

Chichester  and  London.  (Wood,  F.  O.  u  [Read   in   convocation  April    19, 

i.  515.)]  1632.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  44.  b.] 

1  [John  Meredith,  rector  of  Stamford  x  [Alluded  to  by  Crosfield,  March 

Rivers,  June  30,  1641,  fellow  of  Eton  1,  "Utrummajores  tumultus  in  scholis 

college,  and  master  of  Wigston's  hos-  tempore  quadragesimae  cedunt  in  stu- 

pital,  Leicester.  He  was  ejected  during  diosorum    beneficiuin    vel    detrimen- 

the  Rebellion  from  these  preferments,  turn."] 
but  was  elected  warden  of  All  Souls 


72  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

A.D.  1632.  may  appear,  I  have  sent  you  here  his  majesty's  letters  to  me, 
which  are  to  be  read  in  open  convocation,  that  the  whole 
university  may  know  how  distasteful  these  courses  are  to 
his  majesty,  and  how  prejudicial  they  may  be  to  yourselves. 
And  I  do  heartily  pray  you  all,  that  hereafter,  not  only  in 
disputations,  but  upon  all  other  occurrences  whatsoever,  you 
uphold  the  honour  and  government  of  that  place,  and  spare 
no  man  that  shall  be  proved  an  offender  against  either.  And 
for  my  part,  if  nothing  else  will  serve,  I  shall  take  the  best 
course  I  can  to  see  justice  done,  and  example  made  where 
there  is  cause ;  neither  can  I  go  off  from  this  opinion,  that 
the  younger  sort  would  easily  be  reduced  into  better  order, 
if  all  the  governors  did  that  which  in  conscience  and  duty 
they  are  bound  unto.  And  I  will  hope,  that  all  whom  this 
may  any  ways  concern,  will  hereafter  be  careful  of  the  good 
of  the  university,  the  honour  of  themselves,  and  their  credit 
with  his  majesty,  which  certainly  can  neither  be  gained  nor 
held  by  such  breaches  upon  government.  So  praying  you 
to  take  care  of  these  things,  I  leave  you  to  God's  gracious 
protection,  and  shall  ever  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

London  House, 
April  13,  1632. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  univer 
sity  of  Oxford,  [these.] 


The  tenor  of  the  king's  letters  to  me  here  follows* :         54 
CHARLES  R. 

His  majesty's      RIGHT  trusty  and  well-beloved  counsellor,  and  right  reve- 

letters  to  me  -\  /.  .  •.         .      .->, 

about  the  ti*-  rend  lather  in  God,  we  greet  you  well.     We  had  reason  to 

expect  that  our  own  Princely  care  and  former  admonitions 
had  sufficiently  regulated  that  our  university  of  Oxford, 
whereof  you  as  our  chancellor  have  the  charge.  Never- 

[Read   in   the   same    convocation   after  the   chancellor's.   Reg.    Conv.    R 
fol.  45.  a.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  73 

theless  we  understand,  that  the  late  Lent  exercises  in  their  A.D.  1632. 
schools  have  been  carried  in  such  disorder,  that  if  at  the 
instance  of  the  dean  of  Christ  Church,  the  vice-chancellor 
had  not  excused  the  bachelors  of  that  house  from  answering 
in  their  turn,  there  had  followed  much  mischief,  which  dis 
cretion  of  theirs  we  well  approve z.  For  though  a  virtuous 
emulation  to  wet  the  industry  of  scholars  be  not  to  be  dis 
couraged,  yet  it  must  always  be  governed,  so  as  it  may  not 
proceed  to  animosities  and  factious  contestations  of  young 
and  hot  heads,  which  will  breed  combustion  and  public  dis 
turbance  in  the  end  if  due  prevention  be  not  used.  We 
therefore  require  you,  not  only  to  give  present  order  for  sup 
pression  of  these  or  the  like  tumults ;  but  also  to  see  that 
the  authors  be  punished  according  to  their  deserts.  And  if 
upon  due  examination  you  find  that  any  master  of  a  college, 
or  other  superior,  hath  been  actor  or  encourager  herein,  or 
hath  not  done  his  duty  in  containing  the  scholars  from  these 
distempers,  let  him  know,  that  we  shall  hold  him  unworthy 
of  that  trust,  and  will  not  spare  to  punish  him  as  we  shall 
see  cause.  Given  at  our  palace  at  Westminster  this  12th 
day  of  April,  1632,  in  the  eighth  year  of  our  reign. 

To  the  right  reverend  father  in  God,  our  right  trusty  and 
well-beloved  counsellor,  William  lord  bishop  of  London, 
chancellor  of  our  university  of  Oxford. 


55          REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

INVERECUNDIS  aliquorum  turbis  invite  hoc  bonum  debe- 
mus,  quod  ex  ansa  insuavi  accepimus  pulchrum  divinissimi 
regis  et  cordatissimi  cancellarii  monumentum,  illius  ad  te  li- 
teras,  mox  ad  nos  tuas,  utrasque  tarn  gratise  quarn  providentise 
plenas,  e  quibus  intelligimus,  quanti  sit  vobis  innocentia  nos- 
tra,  quam  ideo  et  nos  religiosius  culturi  sumus  sub  nomine 
obsequii.  Has  etiam  utrasque  duplici  registro  recondemus 
in  perpetuorum  archivorum  simul  et  cordium.  Cum  auris 
regia  per  longinquam  audiendi  seriem  pertingi  soleat  su- 
prema,  mirum  est,  quomodo  rex  ipse  res  nostras  inviseret ; 

«  [See  Wood,  Annals,  ad  an.  p.  381.] 


74  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1632.  nisi  et  summi  moderatoris  intenta  sagacitas,  et  barbari  hujus 
tumultus  clamosa  magnitude  seque  innotesceret,  nisi  princcps 
tarn  sapere  posset,  quam  populus  insipere,  nisi  et  Carolinum 
esset  in  scintilla  has  flammas  restinguere,  quas  norunt  pueri 
excitare.  Cum  vero  incolumitas  nostra  vobis  tantum  pariat 
solicitudinem  et  molestiam,  mirum  vos  ingrato  hoc  opere 
non  lassari,  nisi  pluris  esset  bencficium  serere,  quam  ex  eo 
demetere.  Cum  denique  area  haec  nostra  ventilabro  regali, 
ac  tuo,  sit  nuper  penitus  expurgata,  mirum,  unde  hse  paleas, 
mirum  nisi  indies  afflueret  temerarise  indoctseque  juventutis 
nova  successio,  quse  dum  calido  sanguine,  et  rerum  inscitia 
vexatur,  parum  valet  aut  priorum  exempla  ad  se  trahere,  aut 
cognata  pacis  violamina  comparare,  aut  eventus  futures  pros- 
picere,  sed  effera  libertatis  opinione  decepta  quicquid  non 
licet  generosum  sestimat.  Quid  ergo?  Nunc  excusamus 
crimen  patratum?  Imo  potius  patraiidi  pervicaciam  deplo- 
ramus.  Dum  in  vos  modo,  et  modo  in  nosmetipsos  divi- 
dimus  oculos,  pudore  nostri  confundimur,  vestrique  labo- 
ramus  merito.  Pudet  aliquorum  nos  omnes,  tyronum  vete- 
ranos,  subditorum  dominos ;  pudet  conturbantium  et  hos 
qui  patiuntur,  quibus  acerbius  fuit,  alii  quod  ferirent,  quam 
quod  ipsi  ferrent ;  pudet  bonos  malorum  insultantium,  sicut 
pars  ulcerosa  totius  corporis  gravamen  simulque  pudor  est. 
Puderet  minus,  si  aut  ipse  minus  solicitus,  aut  rex  minus 
esset  benignus.  Reorum  facinus  supra  modum  exaggerat 
laesse  potestatis  excellentia,  cujus  tarn  curse  oppugnatur  quam 
praecepto,  bonitati  quam  justitise.  Tu  vero,  qui  in  re  nostra 
fulmen  regale  sustines,  clientes  tuos,  quo  velis,  sub  clypeo 
tutelari  deduces.  Scrutamur  enim,  et  (quod  jubes,  et  quod 
ultro  egressi  sumus)  delinquentes  quoscunque  eos  castigamus 
inventos;  castigando  inventos  monemus  insuper  universes, 
ut  flexile  collum  prsebeant,  alios,  ut  pressius  utantur  loris  : 
idque  non  tantum  nostri  causa,  quorum  maxime  interest  in 
tuto  conquiescere,  sed  et  serenissimi  regis,  ne  frustra  tur 
bines  tarn  caute  prohibeat,  unaque  tui,  ne  frustra  tarn  pa 
ter  ne  corripias. 

Honori  vestro  devinctissima 

OXONIENS.  ACADEMIA. 

E  domo  nostra  congregationis, 
April  23,  1632. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD,  75 

A.D.  1632. 


MR.  JAMES  MASTERS  of  Alban  hall  was  banished  the  uni-  Bannitio  Mr 
versity  for  abusing  divers  heads   of  houses   openly  in  St. 
Mary's  in  his  speech,  as  being  then  terra  films  1631,  and 
was  banished  for  it  1633. 


56  [£.  in  Christ o z.] 

AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     The  time  is  now  Dr.  Duppa, 

come  for  the  choice  of  a  new  vice-chancellor,  for  I  have  been  nlano£C1lris 

'        ,  Church,  cho- 

bold  to  lay  the  pains  of  that  place  upon  Dr.  Smith  these  two  sen  vice- 
years  together.  In  the  whole  course  of  that  his  govern-  cnancenor- 
merit,  he  hath  carried  himself  with  a  great  deal  of  fidelity  to 
the  university,  and  a  great  deal  of  care  and  moderation  in 
the  managing  of  so  many  troublesome  businesses,  as  have 
fallen  in  his  time ;  yet  notwithstanding  these  and  his  other 
abilities  for  the  discharge  of  that  place,  I  am  resolved  to 
name  another  to  you ;  both  because  among  so  many  worthy 
and  able  men  as  are  with  you,  I  would  not  pass  by  all  the 
rest  continually  to  overload  any  one.  And  because  I  am 
very  desirous  to  divide  the  experience  as  well  as  the  pains  of 
that  service  among  the  heads  of  colleges,  to  the  end  there 
may  still  be  some  that  may  be  acquainted  with  the  burden 
and  weight  of  that  office,  and  able  the  better  to  assist  such 
as  must  newly  enter  upon  it.  At  this  time  upon  very  due 
consideration  I  have  thought  fit  to  name  Dr.  Duppa,  dean  of 
Christ  Church,  to  be  vice-chancellor  for  this  year  ensuing, 
whom  I  know  to  be  a  discreet,  able,  and  worthy  man  for 
that  place,  and  one  that  will  satisfy  my  expectation  and 
yours.  These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you  to  allow 
of  this  my  nomination  and  choice  of  Dr.  Duppa,  and  to  give 
him  your  best  advice  and  assistance  in  all  such  businesses,  as 
may  concern  the  good  government,  and  consequently  the 

r  [See  p.  148  in  marg.,  under  the          "  [Read    in   convocation   July    19, 
year  1638.]  1632.    Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  48.] 


76  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1632.    honour  of  the  university.     So  I  bid  you  all  heartily  farewell, 
and  rest. 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fulhnm  House, 
July  11,  1632. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  doctors,  the  proctors,  and 
the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  university  of  Oxford, 
[these.] 


An  order  con-  QUUM  serenissimse  regise  majestati  visum  fuerit  publico 
f^d^oucMn*"  ecncto  cavere,  ne  quis  in  religionis  materia  quicquam  contra 
the  king's  literalem  articulorum  sensum  pro  concione  et  publice  defi- 

dfcla-r^10^     nire  audeatb,  existant  tamen  nonnulli,  qui,  usque  quo  hoc 

about  the  five 

articles,  Feb.  edictum   extendi  debeat,  aut  pro  incomperto  habeant,   aut 

9,  163|ft.  se  ita  habere  simulent :  idcirco  nos  (quibus  obedientise  prse- 
standse  publiceeque  pacis  conservandse  et  demandatur  munus, 
et  incumbit  cura,  quorum  etiam  plerisque  serenissimae  regiae 
majestatis  turn  actis  turn  de  hac  re  consiliis  Woodstochiae 
interesse  concessum  est)  tarn  crassse  et  supinse  ignorantise  57 
aiisam  prsescindere  volentes,  sic  pronunciamus  :  quod,  ut 
dissidiorum  flammam  (circa  quinque  articulos,  quos  vocant, 
inter  remonstrantes  et  contra-remonstrantes  contraversos)  in 
exteris  regionibus  accensam,  et  vicinitate  quadam  mali  nos- 
tros  etiam  penates  jainjam  corripientem,  huic  edicto  san- 
ciendo  occasionem  prsebuisse  optime  perspectum  habemus, 
ita  tanquam  prsesentissimum  remedium  huic  incendio  re- 
stringuendo,  et  ad  controversias  prsecipue  circa  hos  articulos 
exortas,  hoc  edictum  extendendum  esse  judicamus :  quicun- 
que  igitur  in  his  controversiis  pro  sententia  sua  tuenda  pub- 
lice  de  industria  tractet,  temere  affirm  et,  aut  pertinaciter 

a  [Printed  wrongly  in  first  ed.  163J.  the  articles  in  the  Book  of  Common 

This  appears  to  be  an  order  of  the  vice-  Prayer ;  and  a  proclamation  for  esta- 

chancellor,  heads  of  houses,  and  proc-  hlishing  the  peace  and  quiet  of  the 

tors.]  Church  of  England,  dated  June  16, 

b  [See  the  declaration   prefixed    to  1626.  (Rymer's  Feed.  VIII.  ii.  64.)] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  77 

definiat ;  quicunque  etiam  publice  et  pro  concione  adversam  A.D.  1632. 
opinion!  suse  sententiam  argumentis,  et  consequentiis,  odiose 
proscindat,  aut  in  adversas  sententias  tuentium  nomina,  aut 
faraam  convitiis,  calumniis,  aut  aliis,  quovismodo  grassetur, 
eundem  ilium,  tanquam  violati  regii  edicti,  pacisque  publicse 
turbatse  reum  postulandum  censemus.  Talemque  esse  de 
liac  re  sententiam  nostram  solemni  liac  nominum  nostrorum 
subscriptione  publice  testatum  volumus ;  turn  ut  post  haec 
(quod  optandum  est)  potiore  habeatur  loco  charitas,  quse 
sedificat,  quam  scientia,  quse  inflat,  turn  etiam,  ne  quis  in 
posterum  majorem  curiositatis  SUEB,  quam  tranquillitatis 
publicae  rationem  habendam  fore,  aut  mercedis  loco  ducat 
pacata  turbare. 


SIR, 

You  have  done  very  well  in  Hobbs's c  business ;  and  the  A  passage  of 
motion  made  by  Dr.  Pink  to  prevent  pleading  of  ignorance,  ^Jhing  the 
&c.,  was  in  itself  very  good  and  seasonable ;  and  you  did  as  order  the 
fitly  lay  hold  of  it,  and  draw  up  the  order  about  it,  as  I  see  J^^f* 
by  the  inclosed ;  yet  nevertheless  there  is  somewhat  very  about  the 
considerable  before  you  publish  that  order  :  as  first,  that  five  articles. 
there  are  certain  incidents  to   some  of  those  five  articles, 
which  all  men  upon  the  hearing  presume  forbidden ;  where 
as  by  this  order  they  will  take  themselves  confined  to  the 
five  express  articles  only  :  and  secondly  it  must  be  very  well 
weighed,  what  power  you  or  I  have  to  interpret  or  make  an 
order  upon  a  declaration,  set  forth  by  the  authority  of  the 
king  with  the  consent  of  his  bishops  ;  and  I  much  doubt,  it 
will  not  be  warrantable.     In  the  meantime  it  will  be  enough 
against  the  plea  of  ignorance  to  declare  upon  all  occasions 
the  five  articles  controverted  by  the  remonstrants,  are  the 


c  ["  William  Hobbes,  B.D.  and  fel-  that  be  bad  erred  against  bis  majesty's 
low  of  Trinity  coll.,  insisting  in  his  ser-  declaration,  made  bis  submission  be- 
mon  preached  at  St.  Mary's  on  the  feast  fore  them  in  the  vice-chancellor's 
of  the  Epiphany  1632  upon  the  point  of  lodgings  25  of  the  same  month." 
falling  from  grace,  was  convented  be-  Wood,  Annals,  p.  385.  Hobbes's  Re- 
fore  the  vice-chancellor  and  certain  cantation  is  in  Reg.-Conv.  R.  fol.  54.  a. 
heads  of  houses  to  answer  for  what  he  See  also  Prynne's  Cant.  Doom,  p.  176.] 
had  delivered.  Whereupon  confessing 


78  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1632.  doctrines  for  a  time  not  to  be  meddled  with,  that  the  fac 
tions  unhappily  spread  amongst  our  neighbours  may  not 
infect  this  our  Church,  or  break  the  peace  of  it.  There  is 
somewhat  else  considerable  also,  which  I  think  not  very  fit 
to  write.  But  to  this,  if  you  have  any  exception,  you  may 
return  me  what  answer  you  please. 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Feb.  15,  163?. 


S.  in  Christo*.  58 

My  letters  to  AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  Upon  occasion  of 
tfoVaS*"  difference  between  Lichfield  and  Turner6  about  their  print- 
the  patent  ing,  there  was  cause  given  me  to  look  into  your  charters, 
)r  printing.  w^a^  power  the  university  had  for  printing,  and  how  many 
printers  were  allowed  unto  you.  Upon  search  I  cannot  find 
any  grant  at  all,  so  that  custom  is  the  best  warrant  you  have 
for  that  privilege.  Your  great  charter  of  Hen.  VIII.  hath 
no  mention  at  all  of  it :  but  Cambridge  which  had  the  like 
charter,  found  that  defect  in  it,  and  repaired  to  the  king 
again,  and  obtained  another  particular  charter  for  printing 
only,  which  is  very  large  and  of  great  honour  and  benefit  to 
that  university.  Where  by  the  way  give  me  leave  to  tell 
you,  that  they  of  Cambridge  have  been  far  more  vigilant 
both  to  get  and  keep  their  privileges  than  you  at  Oxford 
have  been,  for  they  have  gotten  this  and  other  of  their 
privileges  confirmed  by  succeeding  princes,  and  I  think 
some  of  them  by  act  of  parliament,  which  for  Oxford  hath 
not  been  done. 

Upon  consideration  of  this  I  thought  it  very  just  and 
equal,  that  the  two  universities  should  enjoy  the  same  privi 
leges,  especially  for  printing.  And  when  I  had  weighed  all 
circumstances,  I  adventured  to  move  his  majesty  on  your 
behalf,  who,  according  to  his  great  and  princely  favour  to 

d  [Read    in    convocation    April    1,      ner  had  been  joint  printers  from  1624. 
1633.   Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  55.  b.]  Turner  was  afterwards  associated  with 

e  [John  Lichfield  and  William  Tur-      Leonard  Lichfield. J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  79 

the  university  did  most  graciously  grant  it.     The  motives    A.D.  1632. 


which  I  used  were  principally  two,  the  one  that  you  might 
enjoy  this  privilege  for  learning  equally  with  Cambridge  ; 
and  the  other,  that  having  many  excellent  manuscripts  in 
your  library,  you  might  in  time  hereby  be  encouraged  to 
publish  some  of  them  in  print  to  the  great  honour  of  that 
place,  this  Church  and  kingdom.  And  now  upon  the  grant 
of  the  like  patent  I  doubt  not,  but  you  will  enter  into  some 
provident  consideration  among  yourselves,  how  you  may  set 
the  press  going,  and  do  something  worthy  of  this  his  ma 
jesty's  favour,  and  that  the  world  may  see  it  is  not  granted 
unto  you  for  nothing. 

This  patent  I  delivered  according  to  appointment  to  Mr. 
Philip  King  who  paid  the  fees,  and  took  order  for  the  safe 
carrying  of  it  downf.  But  at  that  time  there  proved  a 
happy  error  in  it  which  occasioned  the  sending  of  it  back  to 
have  it  amended.  That  slip  was  but  in  the  miswriting  of  one 
word,  which  escaped  them  whom  (for  want  of  leisure  myself) 
I  set  to  compare  it.  The  necessity  to  have  this  word  mended 
begat  a  desire  to  have  a  whole  clause  added,  containing  a 
privilege  of  sole  printing  such  MSS.  as  you  should  set  forth 
for  a  certain  number  of  years.  The  more  I  thought  of  this 
clause,  the  more  I  found  it  necessary,  and  therefore  moved 
his  majesty  again  for  this.  But  when  it  was  granted,  Mr. 
Attorneys  (to  whose  care  and  love  not  only  in  this,  but  in 
divers  other  things  the  university  is  very  much  beholden)  did 
not  think  it  fit  to  have  the  former  patent  recalled,  [but]  that 
this  might  be  added  ;  for  that  would  have  been  the  same  in 
59  charge  with  a  new  patent  being  again  to  pass  the  king's 
hand,  and  all  the  seals,  but  not  in  profit  to  you.  Therefore 
after  a  great  deal  of  debate,  I  resolved  by  advice  to  move  his 
majesty  for  a  second  patent,  which  may  recite  the  former 
and  be  in  the  nature  of  a  confirmation  of  it,  and  then  add 
all  those  many  clauses  which  concern  the  sole  printing,  not 
only  of  MSS.,  but  of  any  other  books  made,  and  printed 
there,  and  against  the  importation  of  all  such  as  shall  be 
reprinted  beyond  the  seas,  as  you  will  see  more  perfectly  by 
the  ampleness  of  the  patent  itself. 


f  [The  first  of  these  patents,  dated      VIII.  Hi.  p.  250.] 
Nov.  12,  1632,  is  in  Rymer,  Foedera,          «  [William  No 


Nov.] 


80  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1632.        This  being  now  finished,  I  here  send  you  down  both  the 

A  second        patents  together,  but  with  this  proviso,  of  which  you  must  be 

pa  en  pro      Very  careful.     The  privilege  is  given  to  you  to  name  your 

three  printers  :    but  after  they  are  named  and  settled  by 

convocation,  they  may  perchance  forget  themselves  and  you, 

and  do  some  things  prejudicial  to  the  honour  or  profit  of  the 

university,  the  right  being  then  as  in  themselves,  though 

from  you.     For  prevention  of  which  inconveniences,  and  di 

vers  others  yet  unseen,  and  that  both  for  the  present  and 

for  the  time  to  come,  I  think  it  will  be  very  requisite, 

The  printers        First,  that  you  confirm  not  either  of  the  two  printers  which 

confirm^!  in   ^ou  now  ^ave'  *n  anv  °^  tne  rights  of  these  patents  till  all 
their  places     orders  concerning  them  be  settled.  Secondly,  that  you  name 

Prmter;  but  keep  tne  Place  emPtv;  tnat  vou 


cerningthem  may  get  an  able  man,  if  it  be  possible,  for  the  printing  of 
be  settled.  Greek,  when  you  shall  be  ready  for  it.  Thirdly,  that  you 
settle  some  orders  of  agreement  beforehand  between  your 
printers,  and  your  other  stationers  there,  which  print  not. 
Fourthly,  that  though  your  patents  be  large,  yet  coming  over 
the  heads  of  the  king's  printers  and  other  stationers  here  in 
London,  I  shall  advise  you  not  to  suffer  any  of  your  printers 
as  yet  to  print  bibles,  service-books,  grammars,  primers,  &c. 
(which  caused  the  late  and  chargeable  controversy  betwixt 
Cambridge  and  them  ;)  but  let  your  privilege  settle  a  while 
and  gather  strength  quietly.  Lastly,  such  orders,  as  shall  be 
thought  fit  to  be  made  for  the  limiting  of  your  printers,  and 
keeping  them  in  due  obedience  to  the  university  upon  all 
occasions  (which  may  be  best  advised  on  by  you  that  are 
upon  the  place)  I  think,  may  now  very  fitly  be  inserted  into  a 
chapter  by  themselves  among  the  statutes11,  that  so  they  may 
have  the  more  binding  authority  over  them.  And  what  else 
you  may  fittingly  think  of  I  leave  to  yourselves. 

Mr.  Mottershed,  according  to  your  direction,  hath  paid  the 
fees  of  this  second  patent,  as  Mr.  Philip  King  did  of  the 
first  ;  but  being  a  far  larger  patent  the  charge  must  needs 
rise  higher.  Yet  I  have  gone  the  nearest  way  I  could.  As 
for  the  bill  of  charges,  Mr.  Mottershed  will  send  it  you  down. 
I  hope  I  shall  not  need  to  put  you  in  mind  of  writing  a  very 

[See  Corp.  Stat,  tit  xviii.  sect.  o.  De  typographis  Universitatis.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  81 

good  letter  of  thanks  to  his  majesty,  and  I  leave  it  to  your  A.D.  1633. 
consideration,  whether  you  will  not  think  it  fit  to  write  to 
Mr.  Attorney,  who  for  the  first  patent  would  take  no  fees, 
and  to  Mr.  Secretary  Windebank1,  who  put  them  to  the 
king's  hand,  and  ordered  them  to  the  seals,  and  would  take 
no  fee  for  either,  which  hath  not  a  little  lessened  your 
charges.  So  wishing  that  these  patents  may  turn  to  the 
60  honour  and  happiness  of  that  place,  I  leave  you  to  the  grace 
of  God,  and  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend 
and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

March  22,  163§. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford  [these.] 


REVERENDE  IN  CHRISTO  PATER,  ET  ACADEMIC  NOSTR^E 

ANTISTES  HONORATISSIMEk. 

GRATULAMUR  providentise  vestrse,  quse  tota  invigilat  Athenis  Letters  of 
suis,  quod  siquid  illustrius,  siquid  gloriosius  excogitetur,  (licet  the^ 
tanti  viri  patrocinium    in  minoribus   etiam  rebus  consequi  sity  for  get- 


pulchrum  est)  vester  tarn  perspicax  sit  oculus,  ut  illud  ex-  ^ 
quirat,  et  tarn  agilis  benevolentia,  ut  nobis  incautis,  imo  uti  printing. 
novum  aliquod  et  inexpectatum  stupentibus,  ultro  obtrudat. 
Omnia  privilegia  nostra  delectant  sane,  sed  hoc  preli  maxime, 
quod  prius  Cantabrigiae  fuerit.  Lsetamur  enim,  quod  hono- 
ribus  ejus  tandem  pares  simus,  cui  antiquitate,  (ne  dicam 
eruditione)  preeluximus.  Fatemur  ingenue,  nobis  antea  non 
defuit  prelum,  defuit  tamen  auctoritas  ;  quam  vos  pie  quidem 
impetrastis,  ut  libri  legitimi  et  innocentes  exeant,  absque 
erratis  suis.  Etenim  credidistis  lectores  parum  candidos,  si 
codices  violatse  legis  conscii  lucem  erubescerent.  Credidistis 
etiam  hoc  incitamentum  fore  Bodleiana  manuscripta  impri- 

5  [Letters  of  thanks  were  written  to      cation  Register,  R.  foil.  61.  62.] 
each  ;  they  are  recorded  in  the  Convo-          k  [Reg.  Conv.  R,  fol.  61.  b.] 


82  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1633.  mendi,  quse  diutius  neglecta  jacuerunt,  imo  excepto  uno  vel 
altero  saltern  critico,  et  illo  forsan  invido,  omnibus  sepulta. 
Invida  animalia  criticos  dicimus,  qui  e  pulvere  et  cineribus 
suis  nescio  quot  sopita  ingenia  erui  nolunt,  (quamvis  quid 
divinius  cogitare  possumus,  quam  mortuos  resuscitari  ?)  no 
lunt  tamen,  hoc  solum  magni  ~sestimantes,  quod  aliis  non 
prodest.  In  hoc  sane  te  egregium  benefactorem  agnoscimus, 
quod  Bodleianos  libros  volueris  iterum  publicos ;  parum 
curans,  quam  multi  invideant,  modo  plures  erudiantur.  Has 
tibi  pro  temporis  ratione  preecipites,  et  minus  eruditas 
mittimus  Gratias;  digniores  expectes,  quando  prelum  te 
loquetur. 

Academia  tua  Oxon.  vestrse 

Amplitudini  devinctissima. 

Dat.  in  domo  congregationis, 
Apr.  8,  1633. 


Procu-  f  Mr.  WHITE,  e  C.  C.  CJ,      ^  [admitted  May 
ratores  \  Mr.  PAGE,  e  Coll.  Exon.m,  /      2,  1633.] 


A  passage  of       THIS  ensuing  passage  of  my  letters  I  desire  may  be  read  to  61 

my  letters  to  ^he  hea(js  at  the  next  meetinsr.  the  rather  because  I  know, 
the  vice- 
chancellor       and  am   sorry  for  it,  that  divers  things  concerning  form, 

touching  for-  especially  in  the  younger  sort,  are  not  in  so  good  order  as 
malities,  &c.  n        i  u  v         *i 

some  men  would  make  me  believe  they  are;  and  though  you 

complain  not  much  yourself,  yet  I  can  hear  by  strangers 
how  the  market  goes.  For  I  am  told  by  divers,  that  though 
the  masters  come  very  duly  in  caps,  which  I  am  right  glad 
to  hear  of;  yet  the  younger  sort,  which  should  be  most  in 
awe,  are  least  in  order,  and  come  not  (divers  of  them)  to  St. 
Mary's  in  that  form,  which  they  ought  to  do.  Which  dis 
order  of  theirs  cannot  possibly  be  remedied  by  the  care  of 
the  vice-chancellor  only,  be  it  never  so  great.  But  it  must  be 
done  by  the  heads  in  their  several  colleges,  who  must  either 
punish  such  as  they  find  faulty,  or  put  up  their  names  to  the 
vice-chancellor,  that  he  may.  I  thought  fit  therefore  now 

1  [Thomas  White.]  in  [Freeman  Page.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  83 

before  my  entrance  upon  this  my  long  and  tedious  journey11,    A.P.  1633. 

to  desire  you  for  the  public,  and  every  head  of  college  and  hall 

in  their  several  houses  respectively,  to  see  that  the  youth 

conform  themselves  to  the  public  discipline  of  the  university, 

that  his  majesty,  who  is  graciously  sensible  of  all  the  defects 

of  that  place,  may  at  his  return  hear  a  good  and  true  report 

of  things  amended  there ;  which,  as  it  will  much  advantage 

the  place  itself,  so  will  it  also  much  advance  the  reputation 

of  the  several  governors  in  his  majesty's  good  opinion.     And 

particularly  I  pray  see,  that  none,  youth  or  other,  be  suffered  to 

go  in  boots  and  spurs,  or  to  wear  their  hair  undecently  long, 

or  with  a  lock  in  the  present  fashion,  or  with  slashed  doublets, 

or  in  any  light  or  garish  colours0.  And  if  noblemen  will  have  Concerning 

their  sons  court  it  too  soon,  and  be  more  in,  that  is,  out  of  l^g6^^8 

fashion  than  the  rest,  the  fault  shall  be  their  own,  not  mine,  conforming 

but  under  that  degree  I  will  have  no  dispensation  for  any  th^mselves^ 

*  to  the  disci- 
thing  in  this  kind.     And  it  were  very  well,  if  they  to  whose  pline  of  the 

trust  they  are  committed  would  fairly  and  seasonably  take  Umversit7- 
some  occasion  (especially  hereafter  at  their  first  coming)  to 
acquaint  the  lords  their  fathers  with  the  course  of  discipline 
in  the  university,  that  their  sons  may  conform  in  every  thing, 
as  others  do,  during  the  time  of  their  abode  there,  which  will 
teach  them  to  know  differences  of  places  and  orders  betimes ; 
and  when  they  grow  up  to  be  men  it  will  make  them  look 
back  upon  that  place  with  honour  to  it  and  reputation  to 
you.  And  of  this  and  all  other  particulars  of  like  nature  I 
shall  look  for  an  account  from  you,  if  God  bless  me  with  a 
safe  return.  In  the  mean  time  I  commend  my  love  heartily 
both  to  yourself  and  to  all  the  heads,  and  desire  mutual  re 
turn  of  your  prayers,  as  you  have  mine  daily. 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

May  10,  1633. 

62      IN  this  first  year  of  Dr.  Duppa's  vice-chancellorship,  the  An  order 
delegates  were  often  called  upon,  both  [by]  myself  and  him,  r)OT 
to   hasten  the  statutes.     But  that   business  went  on  very  statutes. 
slowly.     Hereupon  I  writ  very  often  down  to  quicken  them, 
and  laid  before  them  the  necessity  of  that  work.     But  little 

11  [He  left  London  May  13  to  attend          °  [See  Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  xiv.  §  1.] 
the  king  into  Scotland.  See  Diary.] 

G  2 


84 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1633.    would  be  done,  till  I  entreated  two  or  three  of  the  delegates, 
~  of  whom  Mr.  Peter  Turner  of  Merton  college  was  one,  to  set 
themselves  more  closely  to  the  work". 

In  this  year  the  wall  about  the  Physic  Garden0,  which  was 
divers  years  in  doing,  was  completely  finished. 


Physic  gar 
den. 


Queen's  col 
lege  chapel. 


In  this  year  the  upper  end  of  the  Queen's  college  chapel 
was  floored  with  marble. 


Dr.  Duppa          After  my  hearty  commendations,   &c.     I  have   put   my 

continued  vice-chancellor  to  a  great  deal  of  care  and  pains  in  this  year 

vice-chancel-  & 

lor  a  second  of  his  government,  which  is  now  drawing  to  a  happy  end. 

year*'. 


Q  more  \  consider  how  discreetly  and  worthily  he 
hath  carried  himself  both  towards  me  and  towards  the  whole 
body  of  the  university,  the  more  I  am  made  doubtful, 
whether  I  or  you  be  most  beholden  to  him.  For  my  part,  as 
I  give  him  thanks  for  his  pains  past,  and  his  vigilance  in  that 
laborious  office  :  so  at  this  time,  being  myself  absent  in  re 
moter  parts  to  do  his  majesty  such  service  as  I  am  com 
manded,  I  must  needs  think  it  very  fit  to  leave  the  govern 
ment  in  his  hands  for  the  year  ensuing,  who  hath  managed 
it  so  exceeding  well  in  the  year  that  is  past.  And  I  doubt 
not,  but  herein  I  give  both  the  heads  of  houses,  and  that 
whole  body,  very  great  satisfaction  :  because  I  assure  myself, 
the  experience  which  he  hath  had  will  make  him  the  better 
able  for  the  year  to  come.  And  upon  this  ground  I  do  make 
choice  of  him  to  be  my  vice-chancellor  for  this  year  fol 
lowing.  These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you  to 
allow  of  this  my  choice  of  Dr.  Duppa,  and  to  give  him  your 
best  counsel  and  assistance  in  all  business,  which  may  any 
way  concern  the  government  and  the  honour  of  that  famous 


11  [See  a  detailed  account  of  the 
course  pursued  in  arranging  the  Sta 
tutes,  in  Wood,  Annals,  p.  386  seq.  Out 
of  the  whole  number  of  delegates,  whose 
names  are  given  ad  an.  1629,  p.  366, 
four  sub-delegates  were  appointed,  Dr. 
Pinke,  the  warden  of  New  coll.,  Thomas 
James,  Bodley's  librarian,  Rich.  Zouch, 
principal  of  St.  Alban  hall,  and  Bryan 


Twyne  of  C.  C.  C.  The  task  mainly 
devolved  on  Zouch  and  Twyne,  '  Tur 
ner  also  associating  himself  with  them, 
as  often  as  his  occasions  would  penmt.' 
Wood,  p.  388.] 

0  [Founded  by  Henry  Danvers,  earl 
of  Dauby,  see  above,  p.  7,  note  e.] 

P  [Read  in  convocation,  July  22, 
163,3.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  66.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  85 

university.     And  so  I  bid  you  very  heartily  farewell,   (and    A.D.  1633. 

rest,) 

Your  very  loving  friend,  and  chancellor, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

July  2,  16331. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford. 


[To  the  right  worshipful  my  very  worthy  friend,  Dr.  Duppa, 
dean  of  Christ  Church  and  vice-chancellor  of  the  univer 
sity  of  Oxford,  these1. 

S.  in  Christ o. 
SIR, 

I  HAVE  received  this  letter  this  very  morning  from  the  com 
missioners  for  the  navy.  I  pray  will  you  take  it  into  your  con 
sideration,  and  seeing  the  tenor  of  the  privileges  run,  that 
the  thing  may  be  done  cum  licentia  cancellarii  aut  deputati 
illius,  or  to  that  purpose,  will  you  grant  this  leave  and  see  it 
recorded,  that  it  may  be  forthwith  done  with  all  the  con 
venient  speed  you  possibly  can.  You  shall  do  well  likewise 
to  take  a  copy  of  this  enclosed  and  record  that  too,  but  let 
me  have  the  original  kept  safe  for  me  against  my  coming  to 
Woodstock.  So  in  great  haste  I  leave  you  to  God's  grace, 
and  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

GUIL.  LONDON. 

Fulham  House, 
Aug.  16,  1633.] 

63      AFTER  our  hearty  commendations  to  your  lordship.   There  A  letter  to 
being  a  great  quantity  of  timber  to  bo  carried  out  of  his  jJJJ^^J?16 
majesty's  forests  of  Shotover  and  Stowood,  for  the  use  of  his  missioners  for 

i  ["  From  Edinburgh,  June  25,  cellor,  enclosing  that  of  the  commis- 

1633,"  is  the  date  in  the  Conv.  Reg.  sioners,  extracted  from  Conv.  Keg.  H. 

R.  fol.  66.  b.]  fol.  67.  b.] 

r  [A  copy  of  the  letter  of  the  chan- 


86  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1633.  majesty's  navy,  it  pleased  the  lords  of  his  majesty's  privy 
the  navy 8  council  to  appoint  the  counties  of  Berks,  Buckingham,  and 
about  the  Oxon.,  to  join  in  performance  of  those  carriages  for  the 
privileges  for  better  ease  of  that  service,  being  more  than  hitherto  hath 
carriages1.  been  known.  And  understanding,  that  it  will  be  a  great 
delay  and  prejudice  to  this  so  important  a  service,  if  any 
persons  shall  be  exempted,  and  yet  being  unwilling  to  press 
any  thing  that  may  be  misinterpreted,  or  trench  on  the 
privileges  of  the  university  of  Oxon.,  which  divers  (otherwise 
liable  to  this  work)  resort  unto,  to  avoid  this  his  majesty's 
service.  We  pray  your  lordship  to  take  some  course  by 
such  way  as  you  shall  think  fairest,  and  without  prejudice  to 
the  privileges  of  that  university,  that  a  business  of  so  much 
consequence,  tending  only  to  the  public  and  general  good 
and  strengthening  of  the  whole  kingdom,  may  (for  the 
encouraging  of  other  places  neighbouring)  be  cheerfully  per 
formed  by  those  who  live  within  the  parts  claiming  to  be 
exempt  from  any  such  carriages.  And  we  shall  have  a  care, 
that  they  shall  not  henceforth  be  troubled  on  any  particular 
or  less  important  occasion,  as  tendering  the  good  and  ad 
vancement  of  the  university  and  the  privileges  thereof  above 
any  particular  or  private  respects.  And  so  we  bid  your 
lordship  heartily  farewell.  From  Whitehall  this  15th  day  of 
August,  1633. 

Your  lordship's  very  loving  friends, 

PORTLAND",  LINDSEYV, 

FRAN.  COTTINGTONX,     FRAN.  WINDEBANKA 

To  the  right  reverend   father   in  God,  the  lord   bishop  of 
London. 

8  [See  the  patent  of  their  appoint-  found  below,  p.  92. 

ment,  Rymer,  Fcedera,  VIII.    iii.   p.  On  the  12tli  of  Sept.  letters  of  thanks 

250.]  were  also  voted  in  convocation  to  the 

1  [This  letter  was  read  in  convoca-  earl  of  Dorset  for  his  services  in  this 

tion   Aug.  20,  1633,  and  copied  into  matter;  in  the  margin  of  the  Reg.  is 

the  Conv.  Reg.  It.  fol.  67.  noted,  "  This  was  about  the  freedom  of 

The  convocation  agreed  to  allow  car-  the  5  miles  precinct  of  the  university 

riage  to  be  demanded  within  five  miles  from  the  common  charge  of  carriages." 

from  Oxford,  under  the  authority  of  the  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  71.] 

university,  to  carry  the  timber  for  the  u  [Rich.   Weston,   created    earl    of 

navy  as  far  as  the  Thames.  Portland    Feb.   17,   1632-3,  lord  high 

Letters  of  thanks  were  voted  at  the  treasurer.  ] 

same  time  to  the  chancellor  and  secre-  v  [Rob.    Bertie,  lord    great   cham- 

tary  Windebank.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  foil,  berlain.] 

68,  69.  *  [Chancellor  of  the  exchequer.] 

The  letter  to  the  chancellor  will  be  >'  [Secretary  of  state.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  87 

A.D.  1633. 

AT  the  vespers  upon  the  6th  of  July2,  Dr.  Heylin,  one  of  Certain  pas- 
the  proceeders,  had  these  questions  following,  out  of  the  20th  sages  uttered 

article  of  the  Church  of  England.  deaux'upon 

Dr.  Heylin's 

Ecclesia  auctoritatem  habet  in  fidei  controversiis  determi-  questions  at 

the  vespers, 
nandis.  on  July  6, 

Ecclesia  auctoritatem   habet  interpretandi   sacras  Scrip-  1633. 
turas. 

Ecclesia  potestatem  habet  decernendi  ritus  et  ceremonias. 

Upon  these  questions  Dr.  Prideaux,  then  professor,  had 
these  passages  following,  and  were  then  offered  to  be  avowed 
against  him  upon  oath,  if  need  werea;  and  it  happened 
that  the  queen's  almoner b  was  present.  The  passages  were 
these : 

64     Ecclesia  est  mera  chimsera. 

Ecclesia  nihil  docet  nee  determinat. 

Controversial  omnes  melius  ad  academiam  referri  possunt 
quam  ad  ecclesiam. 

Docti  homines  in  academiis  'possunt  determinare  omnes 
controversias,  etiam  sepositis  episcopis. 

Upon  an  occasion  of  mentioning  the  absolute  decree,  he 
brake  into  a  great  and  long  discourse,  that  his  mouth  was 
shut  by  authority,  else  he  would  maintain  that  truth  contra 
omnes  qui  sunt  in  vivis,  which  fetched  a  great  hum  from  the 
country  ministers  that  were  there,  &c. 

These  particulars,  by  the  command  of  his  majesty  I  sent  Dr.Prideaux's 
to  Dr.  Prideaux,  and  received  from  him  this  answer  follow-  thesTparticu- 
ing,  and  his  protestation  under  his  hand.  lars  received 

August  22. 

"  Ecclesia  auctoritatem  habet  in  fidei  controversiis  deter-  ex  Art.  xx. 
minandis. 

z  [The  Saturday  on  which  the  pro-  Trinity  college,  whom  he  conceived  to 

ceedings  of  the  Act  commenced.]  have  no  good  affections  to  him.  (See 

a  {Prideaux  statedat  first  that  Heylin  Heylin,   Exam.    Histor.   par.   ii.    Ap- 

had  given  this  information  against  him  ;  pend.)] 

but  Heylin,  who  gives  his  own  account  b  [James    Du    Perron,    afterwards 

of  this  whole  affair,  denies  that  he  was  bp.  of  Angouleme.    Crosfield  remarks, 

the  informant,  and  says  that  Prideaux  "  July  6.  Present  at  the  act.  .  .  The 

on  further  enquiry  imputed  it  to  one  of  French  abbot,  almoner  to  the  queen."] 


88  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

A.D.  1633.        Ecclcsia   auctoritatem  habet   interpretandi  sacras   Scrip- 
turas. 

Ecclesia  potestatem   habet  decernendi  ritus   et  cseremo- 

nias." 

These  questions  I  approved  when  they  were  brought  unto 
me,  and  wished  the  bedel  that  brought  them  to  convey 
them  to  the  congregation  to  be  allowed  according  to  custom; 
conceiving  them  to  be  specially  bent  (according  to  the  mean 
ing  of  the  article  cited)  against  papal  usurpations  and  puri 
tanical  innovations,  which  I  detest  as  much  as  any  man, 
whereby  it  appears,  what  I  positively  hold  concerning  the 
authority  of  the  Church  in  all  the  proposed  particulars, 
namely  that  which  that  20th  Article  prescribeth,  and  not 
otherwise. 

"  Certain  passages  that  came  from  Dr.  Prideaux  in  the 
discussing  of  the  questions  at  Oxford. 

Ecclesia  est  mera  chimsera. 

Ecclesia  nihil  docet  nee  determinat. 

Controversise  omnes  melius  ad  academiam  referri  possunt, 
quam  ad  ecclesiam. 

Docti  homines  in  academiis  possunt  determinare  omnes 
controversias,  etiam  sepositis  episcopis." 

The  passages,  therefore,  imperfectly  catched  at  by  the 
informer,  were  no  positions  of  mine,  (for  I  detest  them,  as 
they  are  laid,  for  impious  and  ridiculous,)  but  oppositions, 
according  to  my  place  proposed  for  the  further  clearing  of 
the  truth  to  which  the  respondent  was  to  give  satisfaction ;  65 
and  the  general  protestation,  I  hope,  takes  off  all  that  can  be 
laid  against  me  in  the  particulars. 

Notwithstanding  to  touch  on  each  of  them  as  they  are 
laid. 

To  the  first,  I  never  said  the  Church  was  mera  chim&ra  ; 
(as  it  is  or  hath  a  being,  and  ought  to  be  believed,)  but  as 
the  respondent  by  his  answer  made  it.  In  which  I  con 
ceived  him  to  swerve  from  the  Article  whence  his  questions 
were  taken. 

To  the  second,  my  argument  was  to  this  purpose  ;  omnis 
actio  est  suppositorum  vcl  sinyularium;  ergo  eccksia  in  ab- 


I 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  89 

stracto  nil  docet  aut  determinant,  sed  per  hos  aut  illos  episco-    A.D.  1633. 
pos,  pastores,  doctores :    as,  homo  non  disputat,  sed  Petrus 
et  Johannes,  fyc. 

The  third  and  fourth  may  be  well  put  together.  My  pro 
secution  was,  that  the  universities  are  eminent  parts  and 
seminaries  of  the  Church,  and  had  fitter  opportunity  to  dis 
cuss  controversies  than  divers  other  assemblies.  Not  by 
any  means  to  determine  them,  but  to  prepare  them  for  the 
determination  of  ecclesiastical  assemblies,  of  synods,  councils, 
bishops,  that  have  superior  authority,  wherein  they  might  do 
service  to  the  Church  and  those  superiors;  not  prescribing 
any  thing  unto  them.  As  the  debating  of  a  thing  by  a 
learned  counsellor  makes  the  easier  passage  for  the  bench's 
sentence.  And  this  was  urged  only  as  commodum}  not  as 
necessarium. 

"  The  queen's  almoner  present." 

I  am  told  no.  For  he  departed,  as  they  say  that  were  in 
the  seat  with  him,  being  tired,  as  it  should  seem,  by  the 
tedious  preface  of  the  respondent  before  the  disputations 
began c :  but  be  it  so  or  otherwise,  to  what  purpose  this 
is  interposed  I  know  not. 

"  Upon  an  occasion  of  mentioning  the  absolute  decree,  he 
brake  into  a  great  and  long  discourse,  that  his  mouth  was 
shut  by  authority ;  else  he  would  maintain  the  truth  contra 
omnes,  qui  sunt  in  vivis,  which  fetched  a  great  hum  from  the 
country  ministers  that  were  there/'  &c. 

This  argument  was  unexpectedly  cast  in  by  Mr.  Smith 
of  St.  John's,  but  bent,  as  I  took  it,  against  somewhat 
I  have  written  in  that  behalf;  which  the  respondent  not 
endeavouring  to  clear,  I  was  put  upon  it  to  shew  in  what 
sense  I  took  absolutum  decretum ;  which  indeed  I  said  I  was 

c  [Heylin  (ut  supra)  asserts  that  the  20th  article  from  the  Harmonia  Confes- 

queen's  almoner  left  the  schools,  be-  sionum,  in  which  the  first  clause  "  The 

cause  he  could  see  no  hope  of  a  fair  Church  hath  authority,"  &c.  was  omit- 

disputation  from  so  foul  a  beginning.  ted.   Heylin  immediately  sent  for  a  copy 

The  foul  treatment  of  which   Heylin  of  the  articles  from  a  bookseller's,  read 

complains  was   as  follows.     Prideaux  aloud  the  omitted  clause,  and  handed 

began  by  accusing  him  of  falsifying  the  the  book  to  the  auditory.   He  adds,  "  at 

public  doctrines  of  the  Church,  and  in  this   point   of  time   it    was    that    the 

order  to  establish  his  point  quoted  the  queen's  almoner  left  the  schools."] 


90  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1633.  ready  to  maintain  against  any,  as  my  predecessors  in  that 
~  place  had  done.  This  was  not  in  a  long  discourse,  as  it  is 
suggested,  but  in  as  short  a  solution  as  is  usually  brought  in 
schools  to  a  doubt  on  the  bye.  And  from  this  I  took  off 
the  opponent's  farther  proceeding  in  obedience  to  authority. 
Whereupon  if  a  hum  succeeded,  it  was  more  than  I  used  to 
take  notice  of.  It  might  be  as  well  of  dislike  as  appro- 66 
bation,  and  of  other  auditors  as  soon  as  country  ministers : 
a  hiss  I  am  sure  was  given  before,  when  the  respondent 
excluded  the  king  and  parliament  from  being  parts  of  the 
Church  d.  But  I  remember  whose  practice  it  is  to  be  Karrj- 
yopos  TWV  aBe\(f)cov.  I  had  rather  bear  and  forbear,  and 
end  with  this 

PROTESTATION. 

PrPrideaux's  THAT  as  I  believe  the  catholic  Church  in  my  creed,  so 
protestation,  j  reverence  this  Church  of  England  wherein  I  have  had  my 
baptism  and  whole  breeding,  as  a  most  eminent  member  of 
it.  To  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  this  Church  have  I 
hitherto  often  subscribed,  and  by  God's  grace  constantly 
adhered ;  and  resolve  by  the  same  assistance  according  to 
my  ability,  (under  his  majesty's  protection,)  faithfully  to 
maintain  against  papists,  puritans,  or  any  other  that  shall 
oppose  it.  The  prelacy  of  our  reverend  bishops  in  it  I  have 
ever  defended  in  my  place  to  be  jure  divino,  which  I  dare 
say  has  been  more  often,  and  with  greater  pains  taking,  than 
most  of  those  have  done  who  have  received  greater  encou 
ragement  from  their  lordships.  I  desire  nothing  but  the 
continuance  of  my  vocation  in  a  peaceable  course,  that  after 
all  my  pains  in  the  place  of  his  majesty's  professor  almost 
for  these  eighteen  years  together0,  my  sons  especially  be  not 
countenanced  in  my  declining  age  to  vilify  and  vex  me.  So 
shall  I  spend  the  remainder  of  my  time  in  hearty  prayer  for 

d  [Heylin  (ut  supra)  denies  that  any  the  power  of  decreeing  rites  and  cere- 
hiss  was  given,  and  maintains  that  he  monies,    and   the   authority  of  deter- 
did  not  exclude  the  king  and  parlia-  mining  controversies  in  faith  ....  is 
ment  from  being  part  of  the  diffusive  ascribed  by  the  articles."] 
body  of  the  Church,  "but  denied  them  e  [He  was   appointed   in   1615,  on 
to  be  members  of  Convocation,  that  is  the  promotion  of  Rob.  Abbot  to  the 
to  say  the  Church  of  England  repre-  see  of  Salisbury.] 
sented  in  a  national  council,  to  which 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  91 

his  majesty,  my  only  master  and  patron,  for  the  reverend  A.D.  1633. 
bishops,  the  state,  and  all  his  majesty' s  subjects  and  affairs, 
and  continue  my  utmost  endeavours  to  do  all  faithful  service 
to  the  Church  wherein  I  live.  To  whose  authority  I  ever 
have,  and  do  hereby  submit  myself  and  studies  to  be  accord 
ing  to  God's  word  directed  or  corrected. 

J.  PRIDEAUXf. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

INDEFESSO  prudentise  oculo,  quo  nos  gubernas,  parendi  has  The  univer- 

leges  explora.  quas  tandem  deter sas  pulvere,  simplicitate  ver-  s*ty  su"m^ 

their  statutes 
borum  rescriptas,  a   clausularum    antithesi   purgatas,  bien-  to  me  and 

nique  opere  recusas  coarctavimus  in  sanam  epitomen,  ut  "JF  ordering 
imperandi  difficile  negotium  tibi  molliamus,  obtemperandi 
methodus  patescat  nobis,  et  peccandi  venia  tollatur.  Latue- 
runt  diu  statuta  ex  vetustatis  situ  plus  satis  veneranda,  non 
memorise,  sed  scriniorum  sarcina;  in  quorum  fragmenta 
dubia,  texturam  insequalem,  toto  codice  dissita  capita,  et 
sensus  dissoni  avnvofjiiav  jurati  omnes,  tantum  ut  perjuri 
evader ent.  Temerandse  pacis  licentiam  quis  non  arripiat, 
quando  inter  se  pugnant  decreta,  quse  prohibent  ?  At  prse- 
sidem  te  nacti,  mores  integerrimo  cultu  refmgere  ardemus, 
leges  ipsas  sanare,  limam  expolire,  qua  sumus  formandi, 
omnia  denique  conari,  ut  prudentissimse  vestrse  prsefecturse 
obsequium  geramus  excultissimum.  Hortatu  molli  nos  ad- 
67  hue  duxit  dementia  vestra,  parituro  simillimus  imperasti; 
lora  jam  accipe,  quibus  impellas.  Ultro  compegimus  jugum, 
quod  pronis  cervicibus  annectas,  vestrisque  manibus  recepta 
jura  obsequendi  praestituent  aifectum,  et  libertatem  ex  onere 
ferent.  Vestrum  itaque  patrocinium  implorant  una  nobis- 
cum  statuta,  quse,  olim  congesta  intra  manus  cancellarii 
Poleg,  tantum  consenuerunt,  suisque  funeribus  jam  revire- 
scentia  prsesulatum  vestrum  prsestolari  sunt  visa,  ut  gratiam 

'  [Heylin,  through  whom  this  dis-  he  determined  in  the    negative,  con- 

turhancehadarisen,had  previously  come  trary  to   the  judgment   of  Prideaux, 

into  contact  with  Prideaux,ori  disputing  who  handled  him  roughly.     See  a  full 

for  his  I3.D.  degree  in  1627.     His  two  account  of  this  dispute  in  Heylin  (ut 

questions  on  that  occasion  were,  1.  An  supra.)] 

Ecclesia   unquam  fuerit  invisibilis.     2.  8  [See  Wood's  Annals,  ad  an.  1556, 

An  Ecclesia  possit  crrare ;  both  which  p.  132.] 


92  THE  HISTORY  OF  HTS 

A.P.  1633.  et  pondus  authenticum  a  te  accipiant,  et  vestrum  annexum 
diploma  statutis  ipsis  valentius  nos  componat.  Quibus  ad 
umbilicum  perductis,  si  manum  ultimam  adjicias  obsignan- 
do,  non  chartis  firmius  sigillum,  quam  ammo  nostro  infiges 
beneficium. 

Amplitudini  vestrse  supplex 

ACAD.  OXON. 

Dat.  in  domo  congregationis. 
\1cal 


[Honoratissimo  Domino  et  reverendissimo  in  Christo  Patri 
Guilielmo  episcopo  Londinensi,  regise  majestati  a  sanc- 
tioribus  consiliis,  academic  Oxon.  cancellario  illustris- 
simo.] 


HONORATISSIME  ANTISTES, 

Letters  of  LiTERAS  adhuc  (quod  recordari  non  parum  juvat)  rogante 

cernkigThe'ir  calamo  conscriptas  misimus  nullas  ;  adeo  praspropera,  et 
privileges.  votis  obvia  semper  fuit  human itas  vestra,  ut  academia  cli- 
entis  negotio  defuncta,  solo  beneficiorum  argumeiito  labora- 
verit.  Ex  omni  parte  teipsum  vere  magnificum  antistitem 
attestatus  es,  in  omrii  genere  vestra  erga  nos  claruit  indul- 
gcntia ;  indigenti  academise  te  benefactorem  experti  sumus, 
periclitanti  advocatum,  utpote  qui  meritissimum  vestrum 
vice-cancellarium  in  jus  et  discrimen  vocatum  non  modo 
incolumem  et  securum  praBstitisti,  sed  etiam  potiorem,  char- 
ta3que  victrici  interpretatione  illustrem  ;  cui  quidem  pro 
humanitate  sua^  candidiori  fortasse,  quam  oportebat,  charta3 
interpreti  venia  habenda  fuit  maxima.  Quid  enim  verisi- 
milius  fuit,  quam  quod  illic  delitesceret  hujusmodi  privile- 
gium  ?  Coelestium  tranquillitas  orbium  non  statim  in  ventos 
et  tempestates  dcsinit ;  qua?  adjacet  regio,  aliquomodo  coe- 
lestis  est,  pluviasque  et  tonitrua,  ruptisque  nubibus  emi- 
cantem  fulguris  stricturam  ex  intervallo  despicit ;  ita  pro- 
fecto  sequissimum  fuit,  ut  academia  nostra,  illud  coeli  em- 

f  [This  letter  is  dated  Sept.  1,  1633,  70  (in  marg.)  he  says  letters  were  sent 

in  Conv.  Reg.;  the  convocation  was  held  Sept.  12.     Letters  of  congratulation  on 

Aug.  20.   (12  cal.   Sept.  is  Aug.  21.)  his   being    made    abp.    of   Canterbury 

Below,  p.  72,  (in  marg.,)  Laud  says  the  were  sent  Sept.  12,  which  may  account 

power  was  given  in  August;  but  in  p.  for  the  latter  variation.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  93 

blema,  sua  privilegia  et  immunitates  ad  finitimos  transmit-  A.D.  1633. 
teret,  et  tarn  sacra  haberetur,  ut  otium  suum,  et  libertatem 
etiam  jumentis  impertiret.  Quod  quidem  privilegium  ut- 
cunque  antehac  in  gratiam  et  honestatem  academise  minime 
sancitum  fuit,  nihilominus  nunc  demum  summa  vestra  pru- 
dentia  et  auctoritate  confirmatum  accepimus.  Tuum  est 
mehercle,  quod  [ipsi]  Domini  commune  cum  bobus  suis 
jugum  non  subeunt,  quod  ad  obeunda  reipublicse  munia  non 
stimulis  urgentur,  et  eadem  necessitate  agitantur  aurigse  qua 
jumenta.  Itaque  non  est,  ut  fungendis  reipub.  negotiis 
ingemiscant  operarii,  quod  eorum  sarracse,  ut  Bootse  plaus- 
trum,  pigro  et  nolenti  gradu  procedant,  sed  Iseto  et  alacri. 
Quippe  quod  solet  esse  maximo  vehiculis  gravamini,,  tuo 
patrocinio  sublevatur,  convectandi  necessitas.  Adeo  hoc  in- 
signe  privilegium  consecuti  sumus,  ut  emancipato  vehiculi 
usu  principi  nostro  reique  publicse  non  morigeri  sed  benefici 
habeamur,  et  in  gloriam  cedat  parere.  Has  gratias  solenni 
formula  et  charactere  amplitudini  tuse  consecravimus ;  hoc 
exploratum  habentes,  fore;  ut  expeditius,  ita  sincerius^  tua- 
que  magnificentia  dignius  gratias?  agnoscere,  quam  repen- 
dere  benefici um. 

Amplitudini  vestrse 

devinctissima 

ACAD.  OXON. 

Dat,  in  domo  congregationis. 
12  cal.  Septemb.  1633h. 

[Honoratissimo  domino  et  reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri 
Guilielmo  episcopo  Londinensi,  regies  majestati  a  sanc- 
tioribus  consiliis;  academia3  Oxon.  cancellario  illustris- 
simo.] 


68          REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

ACCEPIMUS  membranam,  vestra  prudeiitia  cogitatam,  gratia  Thanks  from 
impetratam,  nobis  autem  vix  desideratam  quidem.     Itaque  th*°r  mort- 
rursus  agnoscimus  affectus  vestri  plus  quam  sympathiam.  Quis  main  and  the 
enim  non  suspiceret  alterius  malo  vehementius  laborantem  ?  letters  from 


?  ['  gratiarum  genus  '  ed.] 

h  [This  letter  is  also  dated  1°  Sept.  1633  in  the  Conv.  Reg.] 


94 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


about  cot 
tages  h. 


A  .P.  1633.  quis  non  miraretur  medicum  magis  afFectum  morbi  sestima- 
the  council  tione,  quam  aegrotantem  dolore  ?  Hujusmodi  tamen  experi- 
mentum  in  te,  reverendissime  prsesul,  comp[er]tura  habemus  : 
fateri  cogimur  vestram  erga  nos  solicitudinem  et  curam  nos- 
tro  sensu  acriorem  esse,  et  academise  inopiara  tibi  clarius  et 
certius  innotescere,  quam  patientibus.  Ante  chartam  a  te 
impetratam,  pecunia,  aliis  regina,  nostris  ne  ancilla?  quidem 
officia  praestitit;  aurum  abiit  in  contemptum  stercoris,  jacu- 
itque  magis  sepultum  in  academico  serario,  quam  in  fodiiia ; 
passi  sumus  prodigium  Midas  contrarium,  aurum  inter  manus 
adulterinum  evasit,  et  quod  defsecatissimum  fuit,  tactu  nos- 
tro  pulchritudinem  suam,  et  naturae  pretium  amisit.  Hoc 
nobis  quidem  in  gens  et  magnificum,  indulgentissimo  autem 
vestrse  prudentias  oculo  parum  videbatur.  Quemadmodum 


k  [The  letters  patent  from  the  king 
granting  licence  to  the  university  to 
hold  lands  to  the  amount  of  £500  per 
ann.  were  read  in  convocation,  March 
14,  1633,  and  letters  of  thanks  voted 
to  the  king,  to  the  chancellor,  as  in 
the  text,  and  to  the  attorney-general, 
Noy.  The  letter  from  the  council  about 
cottages  is  as  follows : 

To  our  loving  friend  the  vice-chan 
cellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford, 
after  our  hearty  commendations. 
Whereas  complaint  hath  been  made 
unto  us,  in  the  behalf  of  that  univer 
sity  against  the  city,  that  by  the  caus 
ing  or  suffering  of  divers  nuisances, 
especially  erecting  of  cottages,  much 
inconvenience  hath  grown  to  the  said 
university,  and  in  particular  by  cot 
tages  erected  (as  we  are  informed)  upon 
the  town  ditch,  and  the  town  wall,  the 
back  way  towards  the  castle,  and  in 
the  middle  of  the  street  by  Trinity 
college  gate,  and  near  a  place  called 
Smithgate:  As  we  cannot  but  mar 
vel  at  the  boldness  of  the  city  that 
should  venture  to  erect  such  houses, 
and  so  many  ;  and  at  the  remissness 
and  neglect  of  you  of  the  university  in 
permitting  the  same  and  not  certifying 
the  names  of  the  offenders  to  this 
board,  whose  former  directions  and 
care  by  a  very  full  letter  sent  unto 
you  is  so  well  known,  so  we  have 
thought  good  to  direct  our  like  letters 
bearing  date  with  these  to  the  mayor 
and  magistrates  of  the  said  city  to 
cause  all  such  cottages  as  have  been 
erected  either  upon  any  of  the  places 


aforesaid  or  any  other  place  whereby 
any  nuisance  is  occasioned,  to  be  forth 
with  demolished  and  taken  away,  espe 
cially  those  houses  two  or  more  near 
Smithgate ;  that  a  full  and  open  pas 
sage  for  coaches  may  be  had  through 
the  said  gate,  and  to  take  care  to  pre 
vent  all  annoyances  for  the  future,  and 
to  bind  over  refractory  persons  to  ap 
pear  and  answer  the  same  before  this 
board,  and  do  hereby  likewise  recom 
mend  it  to  your  especial  care  that  no 
other  nuisances  or  annoyances  by  cast 
ing  out  of  filth,  making  of  new  or  stop 
ping  up  of  old  sewers  or  the  like,  tend 
ing  to  corrupt  or  hinder  the  freedom 
of  the  air,  be  any  way  suffered,  and  in 
case  any  person  shall  be  obstinate  or 
refractory  therein,  that  you  bind  him 
over  to  appear  and  answer  the  same 
before  this  board,  and  so  we  bid  you 
heartily  farewell. 

Your  loving  friends, 
Will.  Cant.  Hen.  Manchester. 

Tho.  Coventry,      Carleill. 

C.  S.  Fran.  Windebanke. 

From  Whitehall  the  last 

of  February,  1633. 

(Conv.  Reg.  R.  fol.  79.  b.) 

Smithgate  was  the  gate  at  the  north 
west  end  of  New  college  lane,  leading 
out  of  Cat-street  towards  the  Parks,  the 
site  of  the  Clarendon  and  part  of  the 
street  adjoining  it  on  the  east  being 
then  occupied  by  houses. 

The  "former  directions"  refer  to 
"  an  order  from  the  council,  against  the 
suffering  of  cottages  to  be  built  and 
nourishing  of  beggars,"  date  Jan.  4, 
1625.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  52.  b.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  95 

enim  rei,  ita  et  dignitatis  nostrse  curam  egisti.  Non  satis  A..D.  1634. 
esse  academise  existimabas  pra3diis  annuisque  reditibus  foras 
ditescere,  nisi  habita  etiam  pulchritudinis,  et  honestatis  ra- 
tione  domi  floreret.  Mapalia  collegiis  admota  segre  tuleris ; 
iniquissimum  enim  videbatur,  ut  mendicantium  querelis  ad- 
deretur  societatis  fastidium,  iisque  qui  tantum  auribus  de- 
bent  nee  oculis  parcerent.  Ulterius  progrederis.  Nostrum 
adeo  studiosus  es,  ut  dignatus  sis  obicibus  quoque  et  viarum 
moris  prospexisse,  omnem  angulum  velis  vere  academicum,  et 
ipsas  plateas  scliolarum  elegantiani  induere.  Quod  solum 
restat,  candidissimo  vestro  imperio  certe  morem,  et  quas 
possumus  gratias,  prsestabimus.  Angiportus  dilatabimus, 
transeuntes  prseclusura  impedimenta  amovebimus,  viasque 
(quantum  in  nobis  est)  sternemus  decoras,  latas,  et,  quo 
niliil  majus  polliceri  audemus,  vestrse  quoque  amplitudinis 
capaces. 

Gratise  et  amplitudini 

vestrse  devinctissima 

ACADEMIA  OXON. 

Dat.  in  domo  congregationis, 
14  cal  April 

[Gratiosissimo  Domino  et  reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri 
Guliel.  arcliiep.  Cantuarensi,  totius  Anglise  primati,  regime 
majestati  a  sanetioribus  consiliis,  acad.  Oxon.  cancellario 
illustrissimo.] 


Procu-  ("Mr.  PELHAM1,  e  coll.  Magd.,  \  [admitted  April 
ratores  (.Mr.  WARREN^  e  coll.  Wadh.J       6,  1634.] 


To  all  Christian  people  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  My  procla- 


William,   by  God's   providence  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  f1^11  /or  a 
primate  of  all  England  and  metropolitan,  chancellor  of  the  in  Oxford, 
university  of  Oxon.,  sendeth  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  ever- 
lasting.     Whereas  by  the  customs,  liberties  and  privileges  of 

1  [Herbert  Pelham,  D.C.L.  in  1639,  brother  of  Henry  Pelham,  who  acted 

afterwards  an  intimate  friend  of  Ant.  for  a  short  time  as  speaker  of  the  house 

Wood.   (See  Wood's  Life,  p.  Ixix.)  He  of  commons.  (Wood,  Hist,  of  Colleges 

died  Jan.  19,  167?,  and  was  buried  in  and  Halls,  p.  348.)] 

Magd.  coll.  chapel;  he  was  younger  k  [John  Warren.] 


96  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1634.  this  university  of  Oxon.,  by  kings  and  queens  of  this  realm 
of  England  granted,  and  by  acts  of  parliament  confirmed 
unto  the  said  university,  amongst  other  noble  privileges  and 
favours,  the  clerkship  of  the  market  within  the  said  univer 
sity,  and  the  allowing,  approving,  and  correcting  of  weights 
and  measures,  and  the  well  ordering  and  governing  the  said 
market  for  the  benefit  of  the  said  university  and  the  buyers 
and  sellers  therein,  is  granted  and  confirmed  to  the  chan 
cellor,  masters,  and  scholars  of  the  said  university  of  Oxon., 
and  the  execution  thereof  to  the  chancellor,  or  his  deputy  69 
the  vice-chancellor  of  the  said  university  for  the  time  being : 
and  whereas  we  find,  that  heretofore  in  our  predecessors' 
times,  there  hath  been  a  public  officer  by  them  assigned  and 
appointed  to  look  to  the  cleansing  and  keeping  sweet  the 
market  place,  and  to  take  the  just  and  due  toll  for  the 
measuring  of  corn  and  grain,  and  to  keep  true  and  equal 
bushels,  pecks,  and  half  pecks,  that  there  be  no  fraud  com 
mitted  between  the  buyer  and  the  seller;  which  said  office 
hath  of  late  times  been  discontinued ;  by  reason  whereof,  as 
we  are  certainly  informed,  divers  citizens  of  the  city  of  Oxon., 
inhabiting  in  or  near  the  said  corn-market,  have  (of  their 
own  will  without  any  approbation  of  us  or  our  vice-chan 
cellor)  taken  upon  them  to  keep  and  set  forth  on  market 
days,  public  bushels  and  measures  for  the  measuring  of 
corn  and  grain,  and  take  toll  for  the  same  without  stint  or 
limitation,  sometimes  a  pint,  sometimes  a  pint  and  a  half, 
and  sometimes  a  quart  for  the  measuring  of  a  bushel, 
whereas  the  ancient  and  laudable  due  is  but  half  a  wine 
pint  at  the  most  for  such  measure;  and  also  that  divers 
maltsters,  bakers,  and  brewers,  do  keep  in  their  private 
houses  two  bushels,  a  bigger  wherewith  to  buy,  and  a  lesser 
to  sell,  whereby  the  country  that  bring  in  their  corn  and 
grain  to  the  said  university,  are  deterred  to  furnish  the  said 
market,  in  regard  the  measure  of  grain  will  not  hold  out 
fully  with  the  said  great  bushels.  We,  therefore,  for  the 
future  prevention  of  the  said  inconveniences,  and  for  the 
better  government  of  the  said  market,  that  there  be  no  fraud 
used,  have  given,  granted,  and  confirmed,  and  do  by  these 
presents  give,  grant,  and  confirm  unto  Christopher  Dival, 
inhabitant  within  the  said  university  of  Oxon.,  licence,  power, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  97 

and  authority  to  keep  and  set  forth  every  market  day  in  the  A.D.  1634. 
place  of  the  corn-market  so  many  lawful  bushels  and  measures 
by  us,  or  our  deputies  to  be  allowed  and  sealed,  as  shall  be 
sufficient  for  the  measuring  of  the  said  corn  or  grain,  so 
brought  to  be  sold  in  the  said  university,  and  to  take  the  due 
and  lawful  toll  for  the  same,  (viz.)  the  quantity  of  half  a 
wine  pint  at  the  most  in  every  bushel,  and  not  above :  to 
have  and  to  hold  the  said  office  of  keeping  the  said  bushels 
and  measures,  and  receiving  the  toll  as  aforesaid  to  him  the 
said  Christopher  Dival  (during  his  natural  life)  without  the 
let,  trouble,  hindrance,  or  denial  of  any  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  city  and  university  of  Oxon.  keeping  bushels  as  aforesaid, 
or  any  other  person  whatsoever.  And  we  do  also  by  these 
presents  straitly  prohibit  and  discharge  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  university  or  city  of  Oxon.  from  keeping  and  setting 
forth  any  public  bushel  or  other  measure,  and  to  receive  any 
toll  or  profit  for  the  same  :  and  also  all  maltsters,  bakers,  and 
brewers,  for  keeping  in  their  houses  any  more  than  a  lawful 
and  sealed  bushel,  by  which  they  shall  sell,  as  well  as  buy. 
Provided  always,  that  the  said  Christopher  Dival  demean 
himself  honestly,  uprightly,  and  indifferently  in  the  execution 
of  the  said  office  or  place  as  aforesaid,  and  that  he  take  a 
corporal  oath  yearly  before  us,  or  our  deputy  the  vice- 
chancellor,  to  that  effect  and  purpose,  according  to  the  law, 
and  the  use,  custom,  and  privilege  of  the  said  university : 
and  provided  also  that  the  said  Christopher  Dival,  in  con- 
7Q  sideration  of  the  premises,  do  take  diligent  care  to  view  the 
pitching,  paving,  and  cleansing  of  the  streets  within  the  said 
university,  and  to  make  known  unto  us  or  our  deputy,  by 
whose  fault  and  negligence  the  same  is  left  undone,  and  also 
that  twice  every  week  after  the  end  of  the  said  market  he 
cleanse  and  keep  sweet,  or  cause  to  be  cleansed  and  keep 
sweet,  the  said  corn  market  place,  the  inhabitants  there  paying 
to  the  scavenger  as  now  they  do  for  the  same.  In  witness 
whereof  we  have  to  these  presents  put  our  hand  and  seal. 
Dated  the  second  day  of  May,  Anno  Dom.  1634,  and  in 
the  tenth  year  of  the  reign  of  our  sovereign  lord  King 
Charles,  of  England,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland,  defender 
of  the  faith,  &c. 


98  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

A.D.  1634.  WHEREAS  John  Oxenbridge,  master  of  arts,  commoner  of 
The  sentence  Magdalen  hall  in  Oxford"1,  both  by  the  testimony  of  witnesses 
in*  dof  Mr°r"  uPon  oatn  examinec^  an^  by  his  own  confession,  hath  been 
Oxenbridge  found  "guilty  of  a  strange,  singular,  and  superstitious  way  of 
^{Ma2s7d'hall>  Dealing  witl1  n*s  scn°lars;  by  persuading  and  causing  some  of 
them  to  subscribe  as  votaries  to  several  articles  framed  by 
himself  (as  he  pretends)  for  their  better  government,  as  if  the 
statutes  of  the  place  he  lives  in,  and  the  authority  of  the 
present  governors,  were  not  sufficient.  These  are  to  signify 
that  I  Bryan  Duppa,  vice-chancellor  of  the  university  for  the 
time  being,  duly  weighing  the  quality  of  the  fact  and  the  ill 
consequences  which  might  follow  upon  the  insnaring  of  young 
and  tender  consciences  with  the  religion  of  a  vow,  do  order 
and  decree  that  the  said  John  Oxenbridge  shall  no  longer  be 
trusted  with  the  tuition  of  any  scholars,  or  suffered  to  read 
to  them  publicly  or  privately,  or  to  receive  any  stipend  or 
salary  in  that  behalf.  And  to  this  end  I  require  you  that 
are  the  principal  of  the  said  hall11,  to  dispose  of  those  scholars 
that  are  now  under  his  tuition  to  such  other  tutors,  who  by 
their  discreet  and  peaceable  carriage  shew  themselves  freest 
from  faction ;  and  not  to  suffer  the  same  or  any  other  to  live 
under  his  charge,  or  him  to  receive  any  salary  or  stipend 
from  them.  And  this  censure  you  are  presently  to  put  in 
execution,  by  taking  away  his  scholars,  and  to  take  care  that 
no  part  of  it  hereafter  be  eluded.  Of  the  performance  of 
which  you  are  to  stand  accountable  to  the  chancellor  or  his 
vice-chancellor  whensoever  you  shall  be  called. 


An  order  After  I  had  received  letters  from  the  university  of  the 

settlin^of      12th  of  Scl}t>  1633°>  wllich  Save  me  tlie  whole  P°wer  to 

statutes.         m    [J0im   Oxenbridge,   a   native  of  chapel,  which  was  written  by  Andrew 

Daventry,    (previously   of   Cambridge  Marvel,  but  defaced  at  the  Restoration, 

according  to  Cotton    Mather,  History  On  Jan.  24,  1658-9,  he  preached  the 

of  New  England,  book  iii.  p.  221,)  was  sermon  at  the  funeral  of  Francis  Rons, 

originally  of  Line,  coll.,  and  afterwards  the  intruding  provost.  After  the  Resto- 

of  Magd.  hall,  where  he  took  his  degree  ration   he    retired    to    Berwick-upon- 

of  M.A.,  June  18,  1631.     On  his  leav-  Tweed,  and  on  being  silenced  by  the 

ing  the  university  he  became  a  schis-  act  of  uniformity  in  1662,  he  went  first 

'   matical  preacher,  and  being  obliged  to  to    Surinam,   whence   he   removed   in 

leave  England,  went  to  Bermuda.     In  1C67    to    Barbadoes,  and  in   1669    to 

1641  he  returned  to  England,  and  be-  Boston  in  New  England,  where  he  suc- 

came  first  a  preacher  at  Beverley,  and  ceeded  John  Davenport,  and  died   in 

afterwards  a  fellow  of  Eton  coll.,  where  1674.  See  Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  1027.] 

he  buried  his  first  wife,  Jane  Butler,  to  n  [John  Wilkinson.] 

whom  an  inscription  was  set  up  in  the  °  [The  letters  are  dated  (see  above, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


99 


order  and  settle  the  statutes,  which  had  now  hung  long  in  A.D.  1634. 
the  hands  of  the  delegates,  though  before  they  had  put  me 
to  much  pains,  and  the  writing  of  many  letters  both  to  call 
upon  and  direct  the  delegates ;  yet  now  I  set  myself  to  it 
with  so  much  the  greater  alacrity,  because  the  university 
having  in  convocation  put  the  whole  business  into  my  hands 
I  thought  myself  sure  against  all  practice  by  faction  or  other 
wise.  To  the  end  therefore,  that  I  might  have  no  more 
jealousy  nor  crossing  in  the  business,  I  put  the  review  of  all 
that  had  been  done  formerly  by  the  delegates  into  the  hands 
of  Mr.  Peter  Turner  of  Merton  college1',  reserving  to  myself 
the  last  consideration  of  all :  by  this  means  and  God's  bless 
ing  upon  my  endeavours,  I  did  at  last,  not  without  a  great 
deal  of  pains,  get  through  this  work,  and  settled  the  statutes, 
as  will  after  appear  in  its  proper  time  and  place. 

71      In  this  year  the  west  side  of  University  college  was  new  University 
built  from  the  ground^.  colleSe' 

John  Dunn  of  C.  C.,  master  of  artsr,  for  the  supposed 
killing  of  a  boy,  called  Humphry  Dunt ;  and  John  Goffe  of 
Magd.  coIL8,  for  the  supposed  killing  of  one  Boys,  master  of 
arts ;  these  two  were  legally  tried  before  the  under-steward 
of  the  university,  Mr.  Unton  Crooke,  the  26th  of  August, 
1634,  and  acquitted. 


pp.  91,  92)  12  cal.  Sept.,  but  in  Reg. 
Conv.  1  Sept.] 

p  [Professor  of  geometry  in  Gresham 
coll.,  and  Savilian  professor  of  geo 
metry.  He  subsequently  became  M.D.; 
on  the  breaking  out  of  the  great  Re 
bellion  he  served  under  Sir  John  Byron 
as  a  volunteer,  when  he  was  taken  a 
prisoner  of  war,  and  was  afterwards  de 
prived  of  his  fellowship  by  the  par 
liamentary  visitors.  The  part  he  pre 
viously  took  in  arranging  the  statutes 
is  mentioned  above,  p.  84,  note  n.] 

i  [Partly  with  the  moneys  left  by 
Mr.  Charles  Greenwood.  (Wood,  Hist, 
of  Colleges  and  Halls,  pp.  49.  56.)  The 
first  stone  was  laid  April  14,  1634.  See 
below,  p.  123,  note  c.] 

1  [Probably  John  Donne,  son  of  Dr. 
John  Donne,  dean  of  St.  Paul's  :  '  he 
proved  no  better  all  his  life,  than  an 
atheistical  buffoon,  a  banterer,  and  a 
person  of  over  free  thoughts.'  (Wood, 
F.  O.  i.  503.)  It  appears  from  the 


evidence  at  the  coroner's  inquest  pre 
served  with  the  other  documents  of 
the  trial  in  the  archives  of  the  uni 
versity,  that  John  Dunn,  M.A.  of 
Ch.  Ch.  was  riding  with  another  mem 
ber  of  the  same  college  along  St.  Al- 
date's,  when  Humphry  Dunt,  a  boy  of 
eight  years  old,  startled  the  horse  of 
his  companion  :  on  this  Dunn  struck 
him  four  or  five  times  about  the  head. 
The  boy  afterwards  complained  of  pain 
but  went  about  for  eight  days,  after 
which  he  fell  ill,  and  died  after  a  fort 
night's  illness.  Two  surgeons  and  a 
physician  attested  that  they  could  not 
assign  the  cause  of  his  death,  as  there 
was  no  appearance  of  hurt] 

8  [It  appears  from  the  depositions, 
that  Joseph  Boys  died  on  Sunday 
March  24,  in  consequence  of  an  in 
jury  received  accidentally  from  a  kick 
in  a  scuffle  the  previous  night;  but 
whether  the  kick  was  given  by  John 
Gough  or  Williamson  was  uncertain.] 


100  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1634. 


Dr.  Pink  ap-       AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     I  have  laid  the 
pointed  vice-  •         i  n       i  •  ^ 

chancellor",    pains    of  the  vice-chancellorship    now   two   years    together 

upon  Dr.  Duppa,  who  hath  discharged  that  place  with  extra 
ordinary  care,  as  well  for  the  good  as  the  honour  of  the  uni 
versity  ;  and  God  hath  blessed  his  endeavours  with  very  great 
success  in  those  things  which  have  fallen  under  his  charge 
both  at  home  and  abroad.  And  I  dare  be  bold  to  affirm  it 
to  you  in  his  behalf  (and  yet  give  him  but  the  testimony 
which  he  deserves)  that  he  hath  merited  exceeding  much 
both  from  myself  and  from  you.  Nevertheless  I  am  not 
willing  either  to  overload  him,  or  to  pass  by  so  many  able 
and  worthy  men  as  that  university  (God  be  thanked)  now 
hath  for  the  supply  of  that  place,  and  who  I  doubt  not  will 
in  their  several  turns  follow  the  good  example  of  those  who 
have  gone  worthily  before  them.  At  this  time  I  have  thought 
fit  to  name  Dr.  Pink,  warden  of  New  Coll.,  to  be  vice-chan 
cellor  for  this  year  ensuing,  of  whose  wisdom,  judgment,  and 
integrity,  and  all  other  abilities  fit  to  fill  that  place,  I  have 
[had]  particular  knowledge  and  assurance  for  these  divers 
years,  and  am  very  desirous  to  make  him  as  well  known  to 
you  as  he  is  to  myself:  these  are  therefore  to  pray  and  re 
quire  you  to  allow  of  this  my  nomination  and  choice  of  Dr. 
Pink  to  the  vice-chancellorship,  and  to  give  him  your  best 
advice  and  assistance  in  all  such  things  as  may  any  way  con 
cern  the  honour  and  good  government  of  the  university.  So 
I  bid  you  all  heartily  farewell,  and  rest, 

Your  [very]  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
July  12,  1634. 

To  my  [very]  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford,  [these.] 

u  [Read  in  convocation  July  26,  1634.    Conv.  Reg.  R.  fol.  93.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  101 

A.D.  1634. 


AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.    The  statutes  of  the  My  letters  to 
university,  so  often  and  by  so  many  undertaken,  and  left*^^^5*" 
again,  are  now  by  God's  blessing,  and  the  great  pains  of  them  publishing 
to  whom  that  care  was  committed,  brought  to  perfection,  ^e^statutes, 
This  work  I  hope  God  will  so  bless,  as  that  it  may  much 
improve  the  honour  and  good  government  of  that  place ;  a 
thing  very  necessary  in  this  age  both  for  Church  and  com 
monwealth,  since  so  many  young  gentlemen  and  others  of  all 
ranks  and  conditions  have  their  first  breeding  for  the  public 
in  that  seminary.     To  save  the  purse  of  the  university,  and 
to  gain  time,  it  was  thought  fit  rather  to  print  than  to 
transcribe  so  many  copies  as  might  serve  for  the  present 
necessary  use  of  the  university  and  the  several  colleges  and 
halls  respectively.     And  for  my  part  I  thought  it  expedient 
that  in  every  house  they  might  have  the  rule  of  the  public 
government  by  them,  and  so  see  the  way  to  their  duty : 
which  being  as  much  for  their  particular  good  as  the  advance 
of  the  public  service,  every  man,  I  hope,  will  be  most  willing 
and  ready  to  conform  himself  to  that  which  is  required  of 
himw.     There  is  to  be  a  great  ledger  book  written  out  fair,  The  statutes 

which  is  to  be  the  authentic  copy  under  seal,  and  to  rest  in  ^^e,f^~ 

1  J  Jished  for  a 

archivis,  to  be  the  future  judge  of  all  statutes,  which  may  year's  proba- 
hereafter  be  corruptly  either  printed   or  transcribed.     But tlon< 
before  this  be  written,  I  hold  it  very  expedient  to  put  these 
statutes  (as  they  are  now  corrected  and  set  in  order)  into 
practice  and  execution  for  the  space  of  one  whole  year,  to  the 
end  it  may  better  appear,  if  any  necessary  thing  have  slipped 
the  care  of  myself,  and  those  whom  the  university  trusted 
with  me.     For  then  if  any  such  thing  be  discovered,  it  may 
easily  be  amended  in  the  margin,   or  otherwise,   of  these 
printed  books x.      And  after  this  experience  made,  the  au- 

v  [Read  in  convocation  July  22,  they  are  in  a  folio  volume  with  the 

1634.  Conv.  Reg.  R.  fol.  91.]  title  '  Corpus  Statutorum  universitatis 

w  [Accordingly  we  find  in  Cros-  Oxon.  sive  Pandectes  constitutionum 

field's  Diary,  "  1634.  Aug.  2.  The  academicarum,  e  lihris  publicis  et 

university  statutes  appointed  to  be  regestis  universitatis  consarcinatum, 

read  of  the  bachelors  and  scholars,  Oxoniae  Excudebant  Johannes  Lich- 

with  an  exhortation  to  obedience  field  and  Guilielrr.us  Turner,  academiae 

thereto."]  celeberrimae  typographi,  Ifi34.'  The 

*  [The  Statutes,  as  thus  settled  by  margins  are  wide,  and  one  or  more 

the  delegates,  were  accordingly  printed;  blank  pages  are  left  at  the  end  of  each 


102  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1634.  thentic  copy  may  be  written  fair,  without  any  interlining  or 
other  blemish,  and  so  be  a  rule  to  posterity  of  greater  credit. 
These  are  therefore  according  to  the  power  given  unto  me  by 
an  act,  with  full  consent,  in  convocation,  bearing  date  in 
August,  1633X,  to  declare  and  publish  to  the  university  and 
every  member  thereof,  that  the  statutes  now  printed  are  and 
shall  be  the  statutes  by  which  that  university  shall  be 
governed  for  this  year  ensuing,  that  is,  until  the  feast  of 
St.  Michael  the  archangel  which  shall  be  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  God  1635,  reserving  to  myself  power,  according  to  the 
decree  before  mentioned,  to  add  or  alter  that  which  shall  be 
fit,  and  take  away  from  these  statutes  or  any  of  them  that 
which  shall  be  found  by  this  intervening  practice  to  be  either 
unnecessary  or  incommodious  for  that  government.  And 
then,  God  willing,  at  or  before  that  time  I  will  discharge  the 
trust,  which  the  university  hath  commanded  to  me,  and 
absolutely  make  a  settlement  of  the  statutes  for  future  times, 
even  as  long  as  it  shall  please  God  to  bless  them  with  use 
and  continuance.  And  I  account  it  not  the  least  of  God's 
blessings  upon  myself,  that  He  hath  given  me  strength  and 
ability  to  do  this  service  for  my  ancient  mother,  the  uni 
versity,  whom  I  have  ever  so  much  honoured,  and  am  still 
ready  to  serve.  And  thus  much  comfort  I  can  already  give 
you,  that  his  majesty  being  made  acquainted  by  me,  that  the 

titulus  (or  division   of  the    Statutes),  tion  was  printed  in  1768,  except  that 

the  running  title  at  the  head  of  the  for  general  use  a  volume  containing  the 

page  only  being  printed  on  them,  as  statutes  more  necessary  to  be  known 

if  designed   for   MS.  additions.     Into  was  compiled  as  mentioned  below,  p. 

these  margins  or  blank  pages  the  al-  145,  in  marg.] 

terations  and  additions  made  by  the  x  [The  act  was  as  follows,  (20  Aug. 
chancellor,  (of  which  the  authentic  J633.)  "In  eadem  convocatione  cer- 
copy  is  in  vellum,  preserved  in  the  tiorem  insuper  facit  vice-cancellarius 
archives,)  were  transcribed  ;  (see  be-  venerabilem  ccetum  doctorum,  magis- 
low,  p.  130,  in  marg.;)  and  the  errata  trorum  regentium  et  non-regentium 
which  are  printed  at  the  bottom  of  the  statuta  academise  longo  et  fido  examine 
fourth  page,  corrected.  There  is  a  MS.  in  convcntu  prsefectorum  ventilata, 
Table  of  Contents  and  "the  Epinomis  suppletis  jam  tandem  quee  defuerunt, 
also  in  MS.  at  the  end.  A  copy  of  conciliatis  antinomy's,  obsoletis  sepo- 
the  Statutes  thus  described  is  in  the  sitis,  ultimam  cancellarii  manum  ex- 
Bodl.  Library,  and  in  college  libraries.  pectare.  Rogavit  igitur,  an  placeret,  ut 
It  is  interesting  as  shewing  readily  the  cancellarius  academic  nomine  rogare- 
additions  and  alterations  made  after  the  tur  hanc  inter  curas  suas  numerare 
year  of  trial.  The  authentic  MS.  copy  provinciam,  ut  legibus  illius  etiam  ju- 
has  prefixed  the  confirmation  of  the  dicio  '.limatis  et  firmatis  authoritas  et 
statutes  by  the  chancellor,  and  by  the  fides  '  major  adesset,  et  reverentia. 
king,  Charles  I.,  which  are  reprinted  Proponentiista  vice-cancellario  assensu 
in  the  4to.  of  1763.  In  this  form,  unanimi  annuit  convocario."  The  let- 
partly  printed,  partly  MS.,  the  Corpus  ter  addressed  to  the  chancellor  on  the 
Sta  tutor  urn  continued  till  the  4to.  edi-  occasion  is  given  above,  pp.  91,  92.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  103 

work  was  finished,  expressed  extraordinary  contentment  in  it,  A.D.  1634. 
and  commanded  me  to  let  you  know  so  much,  and  withal 
that  he  doubts  not  of  your  ready  obedience  to  them :  than 
which  nothing  can  from  thence  be  more  acceptable  to  him. 
Thus  assuring  myself  that  you  will  all  strive  to  yield  full 
obedience  to  these  your  statutes,  which  will  be  your  own 
73  honour  as  well  as  the  university's,  I  leave  you  to  God's 
blessed  protection,  and  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 
W.  CANT. 

July  18,  1C34. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford,  [these.] 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

NOSTRI    juris    corpusculum    exhibitum    pcrvolvisti,     ex-  Thanks  from 
pectatum  reddidisti,  nee  raptim  quidem,  ut  prudentiam   et  gjty^bwt" 
consilium    agnoscamus,   nee   tamen   tarde,  ut  vigil antias  et  their  statutes 
studio   gratulemur.      Quid   proposuimus,    quod   non    cffecit  ^^^nd 
industria  vestra  ?     Quid  desideravimus,  quod  non  concessit  published  in 

liberalitas?     Quid  ambivimus,  quod  non  impetravit  gratia  PP™1?? 

*•  ,  a  year  s  proba- 

Quemadmodum  prius  immunitates  comparasti,  ut  hbere,  et  tion  ?. 

ingenue,  ita  nuiic  statuta,  ut  pie  et  composite  vivamus.  In 
utroque  genere  honestati  academise  adeo  prseclare  consuluisti, 
ut  ncque  hinc  servilis  audiat,  nee  illinc  barbara.  Statuta 
quidem  dudum  habuimus,  sed  qualia  crederes  a  sphinge 
condita;  adeo  perplexa,  ambigua,  sibique  dissona,  ut  gravius 
supplicium  lueret  legis  interpres,  quam  violator.  Jam  vero 
emersit  nova  rerum  facies;  succurrunt  nobis  statuta,  alia 
dirigentia,  alia  punientia,  alia  quse  stringunt,  alia  quse 
cohibent  ensem,  eaque  omnia  adeo  perspicua,  clara,  et  (quod 
est  optimum  integritatis  argumentum)  prioribus  adeo  dis- 
similia,  ut  neque  prudenti  relinquatur  imperitias  prsetextus, 
nee  parenti  contumacia3  patrocinium.  Adeo  ut  non  dubite- 

?  [Passed  in  the  same  convocation,  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  92.  a.] 


104  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1634.  mus  plane  asserere,  nos  vestrae  atnplitudini  magis  obstrictos  ob 
hanc  epitomen,  quam  Bodleio  ob  tot  volumina;  ilia  enim 
artcs  ct  scientias  suggerunt,  haec  aliquod  divinius,  ordinem 
et  bene  institute  polities  salutcm  :  ilia  bibliothecam,  heec 
academiam  constituit.  Hactenus  cura  et  consilium,  cui 
addidisti  egregium  humanitatis  specimen ;  praesentes  canones 
tantum  anno  tenus  authenticos  voluisti,  ut  si  quid  laxius 
deprehendatur,  constringatur,  si  quid  arctius,  remittatur. 
Singularis  quidem  dementia,  et  antehac  inaudita !  Leges 
et  praescripta  ad  tempus  posuisti,  ut  nostro  demum  suffragio 
et  arbitrio  confirmentur,  et  siqua  occurrerent  errata,  non 
statuentis  auctoritate,  sed  patientis  experientia  corrigantur. 
Quod  superest,  providentiam  et  amorem,  qua  sola  possumus, 
fide  et  observantia  pensabimus,  et  obsequium,  quod  juxta 
mandati  candorem  statutis  ad  annum  tantum,  vestrae  benig- 
nitati  perpetuum  spondemus. 

Vestrae  amplitudinis  observantissima 

ACAD.  OXON. 

Dat.  in  domo  congregationis 
9  cal.  AugJ,  1634°. 

[Gratiosissimo  domino  et  reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri 
Guliel.  arcliiep.  Cantuarensi,  totius  Angliae  primati,  regiae 
majestati  a  sarictioribus  consiliis,  acad.  Oxon.  cancellario 
illustrissimo.] 


S.  in  Christo.  74 

My  letters  to  AFTER  my  very  hearty  commendations,  &c.  I  have  a  good 
Uon^em"-  ^  sinCG  delivcred  the  book  of  your  statutes,  together 
ing  the  book  Wltn  vour  letters'1,  to  his  sacred  majesty,  who  was  marvellously 

t^t^deHver-  WeU  plcased  with  both'  and  commanded  me  at  some  con 
ed  to  the  vement  leisure  to  let  you  know  how  well  he  takes  both  the 

Sir  Ke'nelm  ^   ^  ^  °ther'      And  beCaUSG  the  letter  Jou    «*lt   was 

Digby'sma-  very  wel1  written,  [and  in  an  argument  not  fit  to  be  lost;] 

nuscripts, 

&C-Z  y  [So  in  Reg.  Conv.,  i.  e.  July  24,      1634-  ] 

and  «  rnVrCf  'TJM  held  ^Uly  22'  "  [These  letters'  to  be  sent  with  a 

English  letter,  passed  at  the  printed    copy   of    the    statutes,    were 

same  convocation,  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  passed  in  a  invocation  held  Sept.  27, 

S3   bears  that  date.]  1634<  Conv<  R       R  fo}}  QQ   ^ 
[Read    in    convocation   Dec.    23, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  105 

after  his  majesty  had  read  it,  I  caused  it  to  be  fairly  written    A.D.  1634.  • 
in  the  spare  vellum  at  the  beginning  of  the  book. 

Thus  much  I  had  signified  to  yourself,  and  the  whole  body 
of  the  convocation,  about  a  month  since,  had  I  not  been 
hindered  by  two  things,  the  one  as  troublesome  to  myself  as 
the  other  will  appear  beneficial  to  you.  That  which  was 
troublesome  to  myself  was  the  great  business  of  the  term, 
which  lay  very  heavy  upon  me,  especially  towards  the  end  of 
it,  and  at  the  same  time  the  care  which  I  took  to  derive  the 
benefit  upon  you.  That  which  I  know  will  be  very  beneficial  Manuscripts 
to  you  is  a  parcel  of  manuscripts  which  I  have  obtained  for  g^Keiielm 
your  library  from  a  very  learned  and  noble  gentleman  Sir  Digby  to  the 
Kenelm  Digbyb.  These  manuscripts  (many  of  them  being  universitJ- 
very  good)  he  hath  been  at  the  charge  to  bind  up,  and  put 
his  arms  fair  upon  them,  and  I  think  there  are  very  few  but 
so  bound.  With  these  he  hath  sent  a  catalogue,  but  that 
(as  himself  tells  me)  is  somewhat  imperfect,  his  man  being 
indisposed  for  health  at  the  time  when  he  made  it;  and 
whether  the  method  of  it  will  like  you,  or  fit  the  university, 
I  know  not  ;  but  after  the  books  are  compared  with  this,  it 
will  be  very  easy  to  make  a  perfect  one  by  it.  For  myself  I 
did  not  think  it  fit  any  way  to  meddle  with  them,  but  have 
left  them  in  their  several  trunks,  as  they  were  packed  up  by 
himself,  and  so  sent  them  to  you.  Their  number  is  two 
hundred  and  thirty-five  or  thereabouts. 

Concerning  the  manuscripts   I    am   to   give   two   adver-  Two  adver 


tisements  of  the  donor's  will  and  pleasure,  which  I  must  and  g 


do  pray  you  to  settle  in  this  present  convocation  :  the  one  is,  Digby  con- 
that  he  will  not  subject  these  manuscripts  to  the  strictness  ^miscript 
of  Sir  Thomas  Bodley's  statute,  but  will  have  liberty  given  to  be  ob- 
for  any  man  of  worth,  that  will  be  at  the  pains  and  charge  to  served- 
print  any  of  these  books,  to  have  them  out  of  the  library 
upon  good  caution  given,  and  to  that  purpose  and  no  other. 
The  second  is,  that  he  will  reserve  liberty  to  himself,  during 
his  natural  life,  to  borrow  any  of  these  books  out  of  the 
library  for  his  own  private  use,  whensoever  he  shall  ask 
them.     And  both  of  us  desire  the  books  may  be  put  into  the 


b  [These  MSS.  were  the  collection  he  hequeathed  them  to  Sir  Kenelm 
of  that  very  learned  man  Thomas  Allen  Digby,  who  had  been  his  pupil.  See 
of  Trinity  college  (and  Gloucester  hall)  ;  Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  ii.  544.] 


106  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1(534.  library  with  these  two  cautions  expressly  mentioned,  as 
the  act  of  convocation  was  for  the  books  which  my  lord 
steward'1  gave. 

This  is  all  which  I  have  for  the  present  to  trouble  you 
with,  for  I  presume  I  shall  not  need  to  put  you  in  mind  of 
writing  a  letter  of  thanks  to  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  whose  love 
thus  and  divers  other  ways  expressed  deserves  it  abundantly; 
so  with  my  prayers  to  Almighty  God  to  bless  you,  to  the  75 
honour  of  His  sacred  name,  and  the  good  of  His  Church, 
I  leave  you  to  His  gracious  [and  blessed]  protection. 

Your  very  loving  friend 

and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

Dccemb.  19,  1634. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford,  [these.] 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

Thanks  from       ITERANDA  narras,  imo  iteranda.     Codex  statutorum  (ais) 

the  umvcr-     una  cum  literis  opus  absolutum  sacrantibus,  vestram  simul 

sity  for  the  . 

delivery  of     ct  regias  majestatis  frontem  serena  complacentia  cxplicuit. 

their  statutes  Curse  gaudioque  vobis,  diis  deputatis,  populi  salus,  non  ultio. 
and  for  Sir'    Abunde  est ;  exsultamus  hinc  omnes,  non  ut  legibus  adstricti, 

Kenelm  Dig-  se(j  soluti  vinculis.     Hoc,  ut  reliqua,   soli  tribuendum   est 

by's  manu-  .    .  _         .  ., 

scripts  pro-     vestn  favoris  exundantise,  et  affectui  plusquam  paterno ;  cui 

cured  by  me b.  parum  est  nos  bene  moratos  vivere,  nisi  etiam  felices,  et 
gratia  suprema  irradiates.  At  leges  compositas  composite 
observarc,  prelisque  viventibus  denuo  exprimere,  erit  hoc 
tandem  obedientia;  nostne;  nee  solum  obedientia3,  erit  gra- 
titudinis;  plus  enim  obligati  sumus  beneficiis  tuis,  quam 
legibus. 

Pro  uno,  quern  misimus,  impresso  codice,  accepimus  manu- 
scripta  decies  repetitis  numerosiora  characteribus  :  eaque  (ut 

»  [William,  earl  of  Pembroke,  Laud's  Hist,  of  Rebellion,  vol.  i.  p.  103.  ed. 
predecessor  as  chancellor;  he  had  been  1826.)   The  MSS.  alluded  to  are  men- 
lord  chamberlain  under  James  I.,  but  tioned  above,  p.  10,  note  o.] 
was  made  lord  steward  by  Charles  soon  b  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  102.  b.] 
after    his    accession,    (see    Clarendon, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFO11D.  107 

decet  munus  tarn  exquisitum)  bis  data.  Quod  prius  rogando  A.D.  1634. 
impetratum  est,  non  semel  donatur,  sed  manu  aliena  et  tua. 
Care  quidem  emit  vir  princeps,  cum  rogat ;  at  quantse  liber- 
alitatis  est  rogare,  ut  donet,  seipsum  oppignerare,  ut  donet 
aliena  ?  tu  vero  eo  conniteris,  eo  pergis  munificentise,  ut  tuis 
aliena  conjungas,  et  una  cum  beneficiis  ipsos  etiam  benefac- 
tores  cumulatissime  largiaris :  conciliato  hinc  nobis  rege, 
lucraris  illinc  subditos ;  haec  opera,  h sec  tua  vis.  O!  orbium 
nobis  influentium  utrinque  circumagens  motor!  nimio  nos 
locupletandi  studio  inopem  te  facis,  procum  humilem  ac 
similem  nobis,  ut  reddas  nos  quodammodo  amplitudini  tuse 
similes.  Sic  proprii  splendor-is  periculo  vapores  aliunde 
exhalat  sol,  ut  eosdem  instillet  arvis  :  sic  fonte  longinquo 
aquam  deducit  hortulanus,  ut  riget  seminarium :  sic  marm  or 
fodinis  eruit  tuus  lapicida,  ut  augustioribus  columnis  basi- 
licam  suffulciatc;  dum  tu  succos  gemmasque  musarum  unde- 
quaque  et  nobis  attrahis;  tu  sol  es,  tu  cultor,  exstructor 
academise.  Siste  liberalitatem  hanc  tuam,  siste,  acquies- 
camus,  te  uno  contenti;  quid  novos  tantopere  accersis  pa- 
tronos?  Pluris  est  nimio  acclinare  te  otio,  quam  nos  erigi 
quam  maximis  literarum  auxiliis.  Siste,  ne  simus  nimia 
felicitate  miseri,  et  infra  gratitudinem  positi ;  nos  enim  nil 
76  ultra  possumus,  quam  quod  volumus  dona  nobilissimi  Digbeii, 
tua  mirari,  colere,  thcsaurare  loculis,  in  registro  nominatim 
conscribere,  conditiones  impositas,  quas  etiam  convocationis 
decretum  saricivit,  catalogo  prsefigere,  grates  illi  pro  libris, 
pro  illo  tibi  conceptissimas  referre,  mandatis  tuis  religiose 
obscqui,  ex  nutu  preecurrere,  et  animitus  perstare. 

Sanctitati  vestrse 

devotissirna 

ACAD.  OXON. 

E  domo  nostrfe  congregationis 
Decemb.  24,  16M'd. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri  Guilielmo  domino  archi- 
episcopo  Cantuarensi,  regise  majestati  a  secretioribus  con- 
siliis,  et  Oxoniensis  academise  cancellario  honor atissimo.] 

c  [A    reference  to  the  repairing  of  Digby,  Reg.  Conv.  II.  fol.  103.  a,  and 

St.  Paul's  cathedral.]  the  gift  accepted  under  the  prescribed 

d  [In  the  same  convocation  letters  conditions,  fol.  102.  b.] 
of  thanks  were   voted  to    Sir  Kenelm 


108  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1635. 


A  project  to        AT  this  time  tlicre  was  a  proposition  made  for  setting  the 

of^Oxf  rd°r    Poor  on  wor^  at  Oxford,  by  making  new  stuffs  and  drapery 

work,  Dec.      ware,  much  after  the  fashion  that  the  Dutch  and  Walloons 

28,  1634.        use  at  Canterbury,  Norwich,  and  other  places.  Divers  letters 

passed  between  me  and  the  vice-chancellor  and  some  other 

interested  men  about  it :  but  in  conclusion  such  difficulties 

appeared  in  the  business,  that  the  whole  project  suddenly 

vanished   and    came   to   nothing.     And   yet  Mr.  Escott  of 

Wadham  college6,  who  very  carefully  and  certainly  with  a 

very  good  intention  laboured  in  the  business,  gave  me  this 

answer  following  to  such   doubts  as  I  had  made,  and  set 

down  some  other  things  very  considerable  in  the  business  ; 

and  yet  for  all  this  that  good  intention  fell  to  nothing. 

Mr.  Escott's        THE  doubts  that  you  have  made  to  me  I  think  in  part  be 

answer  to  cer-thd 

tain  of  mine 

concerning          To  the  first;  the  man  John  Roberts  of  Yarmouth,  and 

Oxford*  Re-  ^°rn  tnere>  is  a  man  as  I  suppose  conformable ;  for  I  have 

cep.  March     heard  him  speak  with  dislike  of  some  factious  brethren  of 

10, 1635.        tije  town  Of  yarmouth,  and  of  some  of  this  town  of  Oxford. 

And  he  commends  Mr.  Brookf  the  minister  of  Yarmouth, 

and  particularly  for  a  suit  that  he  lately  commenced  in  the 

high  commission  against  a  factious  lecturer,  for  preaching 

scandalously  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  &c.,  by  reason  of  which 

suit  I  suppose  the  said  minister  and  his  conformity  is  known 

to  my  lord's  grace  of  Canterbury. 

To  the  second;  if  this  man  die,  another  may  be  had  upon 
the  same  terms :  but  if  he  live  any  time,  he  will  make  his 
own  sons  and  others  perfect  in  the  trade,  that  may  supply 
the  place  after  him. 

To  the  third  ;  I  hope  we  shall  not  need  to  fear  the  making 
us  a  number  of  poor  by  them  that  shall  be  trained  up  in 
this  trade,  because  this  course  increaseth  not  the  number  of 

[Daniel  Escott,  elected  warden  have  been  engaged  in  both  prosecutions. 

Sept.  7,  1635.]  See  Swinden's  History  of  Yarmouth, 

[Matthew  Brooks.  Two  lecturers,  pp.837— 855,  where  the  history  is  given, 

John  Brinsley  and  George  Burdett,  and  the  documents  connected  with  these 

;_  brought  before  the  high  corn-  proceedings,  which  lasted  from  1626 

mission  court,  and  Brooks  appears  to  to  1635.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  109 

poor,  but  only  teaches  them  whom  it  finds  idle,  and  enables    A.D.  1635. 
them  to  maintain  themselves  and  their  families,  if  they  have 
any;  for  it  employs  both  men,  women,  and  children;  and 
where  there  be  no  idlers  it  is  like  there  will  not  be  many 
beggars. 

77      To  the  fourth ;  I  find  not  indeed  that  we  have  power  to 
impose  a  tax  upon  ale-houses. 

To  the  fifth ;  the  taxes  and  levies  now  made  by  the  town 
for  the  poor  are  (by  the  statute)  to  be  employed  and  dis 
posed  of  by  the  overseers  of  the  poor,  with  the  consent  of 
two  justices  of  peace  for  the  providing  of  materials  to  set 
them  to  work,  and  for  the  placing  out  of  poor  children 
to  honest  trades.  Now  if  the  overseers  of  this  work  be 
made  justices  of  peace,  I  see  not  but  they  may  have  a  hand 
in  disposing  of  those  taxes,  and  convert  as  much  of  them  as 
shall  be  fit  to  this  use.  However  the  university  may  by  its 
own  power  tax  all  privileged  men. 

There  is  a  man  of  good  place  in  the  town  (who  is  like  to 
be  a  benefactor  to  this  work)  that  thinks  the  town,  if  the 
university  go  through  with  it,  will  willingly  bind  themselves 
to  a  yearly  contribution  towards  it,  or  else  will  undertake 
to  maintain  constantly  a  certain  number  of  children,  which 
shall  work  there.  But  if  none  of  these  things  be,  I  think 
there  may  be  shewn  a  way  how  the  university  of  itself, 
without  the  assistance  of  the  town,  may  be  able  to  go  on 
with  this  charitable  work,  and  provide  for  the  maintaining 
and  teaching  sixty  poor  children  the  first  year,  and  add  to 
them  twenty  or  thirty  more  every  year  perpetually ;  and  yet 
so,  that  whatsoever  any  man  shall  contribute  towards  it, 
shall  return  to  him  within  the  compass  of  the  year  with 
advantage.  Which  way  may  be  this. 

There  must  be  raised  a  sum  of  money,  that  shall  issue  out 
yearly  for  the  maintaining  of  a  certain  number  at  work ;  sup 
pose  sixty  or  an  hundred. 

This  yearly  charge  shall  never  increase,  and  yet  the  num 
ber  to  be  maintained  shall  increase  every  year,  thus ; 

Suppose  there  be  eighty  to  be  maintained  as  apprentices 
for  seven  years,  at  £o  charge  for  every  child  per  annum. 

The  first  year  their  earnings  will  but  answer  their  spoil- 
ings. 


110  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1635.        The  second  year  this  eighty  will  earn  £120,  which  will 


take  in  twenty-four  children  more. 

The  third  year  the  first  eighty  will  earn  £200,  and  the 
twenty-four  taken  in  the  second  year  will  earn  £36,  in  all 
£236.  Out  of  which  deduct  to  maintain  the  twenty-four 
taken  in  the  second  year  .£120,  and  there  will  remain  £116, 
which  will  take  in  twenty-three  more. 

The  fourth  year  the  first  eighty  will  earn  £280,  and  the 
rest  will  earn  so  as  to  take  in  thirty  more.  The  fifth  year 
will  take  in  forty  more,  the  sixth  year  fifty,  the  seventh 
forty. 

The  eighth  year  the  first  eighty  shall  be  manumitted,  and 
yet  there  will  be  left  at  work  two  hundred  and  four,  and 
there  may  be  taken  in  thirty  more. 

The  ninth   year  will  manumit  the  twenty-four  that  were  78 
taken  in  the  second  year,  and  there  will  be  left  at  work  two 
hundred  and  ten.     And  so  always  a  certain  number  will  go 
off  yearly,  as  they  come  in,  and  others  will  be  taken  in  their 
room. 

If  there  be  taken  in  but  sixty  the  first  year,  there  will  be 
added  the  second  year  twenty,  the  third  year  sixteen,  the 
fourth  year  twenty,  the  fifth  thirty,  the  sixth^  forty,  and  so 
onward  as  it  is  shewed  before. 

If  the  town  contribute  towards  it,  there  may  be  taken  in 
the  first  year  one  hundred.  If  the  university  go  on  alone, 
they  may  (besides  the  allowance  of  the  master  and  overseers) 
take  in  sixty,  by  raising  through  the  university  by  the  poll 
Id.  a  week  upon  every  man,  except  poor  scholars;  or  by 
setting  a  certain  sum  upon  every  college,  to  be  raised  as  it 
shall  seem  meet  to  the  governors.  Now  if  any  man  think 
this  Id.  a  week  to  be  a  burden,  I  answer  him  thus : 

First,  that  upon  the  matter  he  doth  not  give  any  thing, 
but  only  lays  out  by  the  week  what  within  the  year  will  come 
in  to  him  again,  in  the  buying  of  his  gowns,  suits,  stockings, 
&c.  Neither  is  this  a  thing  only  in  imagination,  but  it  may 
easily  be  made  to  appear,  that  if  things  be  well  ordered, 
there  shall  be  saved  in  some  stuffs  4d.,  in  some  6d.,  in  some 
M.  a  yard,  in  some  more,  in  some  less,  as  it  is  of  higher  or 
lower  price,  and  in  stockings  after  the  same  proportion. 

Secondly,  I  think  I  may  say,  there  is  well-nigh  as  much 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  Ill 

as  this  given  every  week  at  buttery  hatches,  and  to  beggars    A.D.  1635. 
in  the  town,  which  by  this  means  might  be  saved ;  for  if  a 
right  course  be  taken  there  should  not  be  seen  a  beggar  or 
an  idle  person  within  the  precincts  of  the  university. 

Thirdly,  I  believe,  that  my  lord  keeper  being  petitioned 
by  the  university,  will  easily  be  induced  (in  regard  of  the 
undertaking  of  this  work)  to  keep  this  university  out  of  all 
breves,  which  now  come  very  frequently  upon  us,  and  that 
we  shall  be  burdened  with  no  collections,  save  only  some 
extraordinary  ones,  that  shall  first  pass  the  consent  and 
approbation  of  my  lord  our  chancellor. 

If  this  may  persuade  that  the  enterprise  is  feasible,  it 
were  good  that  all  the  dispatch  were  made  in  it  that  may 
be,  that  the  work  may  begin  with  the  year,  now  at  our  Lady 
day. 

If  the  overseers  were  made,  they  might  travel  in  the  per 
fecting  of  it,  and  enquire  what  were  the  causes  of  their  first 
failings  in  Cambridge,  and  how  they  do  now  go  through  with 
it,  as  likewise  what  course  they  take  at  Norwich,  where  this 
trade  hath  a  good  while  nourished,  and  so  that  it  leaves  not 
(as  I  am  informed)  a  beggar  in  the  whole  country  there 
abouts. 


[Procu-  )  Mr.  EDWARDS,  S.  John's  ColLh  \  Admitted  April 
ratores  /Mr.  CARLETON,  Queen's  Coll.1  j  8,  1635.] 


79  S.  in  Christo. 

SALUS  vestra  mihi  in  primis  votis,  et  (ut  ita  dicam)  suprcma  My  letters  to 
semper  lex  fuit;  post  salutem  hoiios.     Hinc  a  cancellariatu  g^  U^ee£in 

meo  dicam,  an  vestro  (nam  non  petenti,  imo  contra  nitenti,  I  then  gave 

them  certain 
manuscripts'5. 

h  [John    Edwards,    afterwards    nat.      lisle,  bishop  of  Bristol  and  Chichester, 
philosophy  reader,  and  M.D.]  ob.  1G85  (Wood  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  867).] 

'  [Guy  Carleton.    He  suffered  much          k  [Read   in    convocation    May    28, 
during  the  Rebellion.    At  the  Restora-      1G35.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  109,  110.] 
tion  he  was  successively  dean  of  Car- 


112 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1635.  summa  et  singular!  vestra  benevolentia  collatus  est)  omnem 
navavi  operam,  ut  vestra,  sive  statuta,  sive  privilegia,  sive  alia 
cujuscunque  generis  negotia,  quae  meam  manum  exposcerent, 
ad  optatum  finem  facile  et  plenis  velis  perducerentur.  Siquse 
restant  adhuc  non  indulta,  aut  non  satis  confirmata,  potestis 
(nil  dubito)  a  rege  serenissimo,  ecclesise  et  academiis  ad- 
dictissimo,  non  frustra  exspectare.  Vos  saltern  prudenter 
circumspicite,  quid  ulterius  in  vestram  gratiam  possim,  ante- 
quam  fato  fungi  et  ad  Deum  meum  redire  detur. 

Et  quia  annis  jam  ingravescentibus,  melius  videtur  sarci- 
nam  deponere,  quam  mole  ejus  opprimi,  exuvias  quasdam 
meas  vobis  prasmisi ;  ipse,  quum  Deus  vocaverit,  sequuturus. 
Exuere  autem  primo  placuit  libros  manuscriptos.  Quid 
enim  milii  cum  illis,  cui  uec  otium  datur  vel  inspicere  ?  Et 
si  daretur,  nee  oculi  ad  perlegendum  satis  firmi,  nee  memoria 
ad  retinendum  satis  fida  reperitur.  Nostis  enim  inter  ex- 
teriores  sensus  oculos,  et  inter  interiores  facultates  memoriam 
primo  senectutem  et  prodere  et  fallere.  Libros  igitur  hosce 
malui  vivus  dare  vobis  charissimis  filiis,  quam  testamento 
legare  mortuus,  turn  ob  alias  causas,  turn  etiam  ob  hanc,  ne 
manus  aliqua  media  furtiva  forte  selectiores  prasriperet. 

Mitto  autem  nee  tot,  nee  tales,  ut  vestris  studiis  dignos 
existimem,  sed  quales  amor  meus,  et  erga  communem 
matrem  pietas  parare  potuerunt;  mitto  tamen  (ut  per 
catalogum,  quern  una  misi,  constabit)  Hebraica  volumina 
manuscripta  quatuordecim_,  Arabica  quinquaginta  quinque, 
Persica  septendecim,  Turcica  quatuor,  Kussica  sex^  Armenica 
duo,  Chinensia  duodecim,  Gra3ca  quadraginta  quatuor,  Italica 
tria,  Gallica  totidem,  Anglicana  quadraginta  sex,  Latina 
supra  bis  centum,  prseter  alia  quadraginta  sex,  sed  recen- 
tiora,  et  e  collegio  Herbipolensi  in  Germania  tempore  belli 
Suecici  desumpta. 

Hos  libros,  amoris  mei  testes,  vestrse  fidei  committo,  in 
bibliotheca  reponendos,  hac  conditione,  ut  nunquam  inde 
extrahantur,  vel  mutuo  cuipiam  dentur  sub  quocunque  pras- 
textu,  nisi  solum,  ut  typis  mandentur,  et  sic  publici  et  juris  et 
utilitatis  fiant;  nee  tameu  ilium  in  finem,  nisi  data  prius 
cautione  a  vice-cancellario,  et  procuratoribus  approbanda,  et 
ut  statim  a  prelo  locis  suis  in  bibliotheca  prasdicta  restitu- 
antur,  ut  cautio  istsec  libros  hosce  a  furibus,  et  conditio  ista 


A  condition 
to  be  kept 
concerning 
the  manu 
scripts. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  113 

eosdem  e  blattis  tineisque  tutos  conservare  possit;    quibus    A.D.  1635. 
aliter  prseda  futuri  sunt,  dum  suo  pulvere  situque  sepulti 
jaceant.     Siqui  alii  libri  similes,  aut  meliores  ad  meas  forte 
manus  pervenerint,  eos  etiam  ad  vos  mittendos  curabo,  sub 
eadem  conditione,  et  eodem  loco  figendos. 

Nolo  alia  negotia  libris  immiscere;  sed  omnia  vobis 
prospera  corde,  quo  decet,  pio  exoptans,  academiam  illam  et 
vosmetipsos  omnes  et  singulos,  speciali  Dei  gratise  commendo. 

Cancellarius  vester  et  amicus 

W.  CANT, 

Datum  ex  cedibus  meis 

Lambethanis  Mali 
22,  [Anno  Domini]  1635. 

Viris  mihi  amicissimis  Dri.  Pinck,  vice- can cellario,  aliisque 
doctoribus,  procuratoribus,  necnon  singulis  in  domo  con- 
vocationis  intra  almam  universitatem  Oxon.  congregatis. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

DUM  verbis  te  fragilem  fateris,  et  factis  immortalem  te  Thanks  from 
comprobas,  de  felicitate  nostra  dolemus,  qui  fruituri  sumus  *jj.e  f^the 
aeterna  quidem  beneficiorum,  sed  benefactoris  temporali  prse-  manuscripts 
sentia.     Diu  nobis  intersis,  et  minus  beneficus,  dum  tamen  *  Save  them, 
diutius;  ne  unquam  in  fato  tuo  fungi  videamur,  quomodo- 
cunque  victuri,  nostro.     Cum  tibi  satis  vixeris,  vive  alteram 
ecclesise,  alteram  reipublicse,  tertiam  setatem  nobis ;  vives  et 
ultra  ssecula  in  hisce  auctoribus,  quos  in  mutuum  seternitatis 
cambium  a  tineis  vindicasti;    quorum  fidissima  exemplaria 
natalitio  atramento,  et  manu  obstetrice  consignata,  fidissi- 
mis  archivorum  simul  et  memorise  iiostrse  loculis  reposuisti. 
Sunt  illi  numero  quadringenti  quinquaginta  duo  ac  plures, 
pondere  in8estimabiles_,  linguarum  varietate  omnigeni.     Pen- 
tecosten  emisti  alteram  sub  tempore  Pentecostes,  cum  sis 
ipse  divini  Spiritus  effasissime  plenusk.     O  !  nobis  perpetuo 
memorande  tot  libris,  et  tarn  vivacibus,  tot  linguis  et  tarn 
disertis,  quot  ipse  detulisti.     Ne  queraris  amplius  lucere  tibi 

k  [This  expression  was  urged  against      Cant.  Doom,  p.  441,  and  Abp.  Laud's 
the  Abp.   at   his  trial.     See  Prynne's      History,  chap.  xxix.  p.  285.  in  marg.] 


114  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1635.  non  satis  firmos  ad  legendum  oculos,  cum  nostro  emolumento 
sic  aciem  intend  as.  Ne  queraris  minus  fidam  per  stare  ad 
retinendum  memoriam,  cum  nostri  sis  adeo  memor  inter 
densissimas  iiegotiorum  turbas.  Deficient  fortasse  et  nobis 
oculi  (si  tui  unquam  defecerint)  prse  nimio  luctus  effluvio : 
sed,  tua  languescente  (quod  absit)  memoria,  nunquam  elan- 
guescet  memoria  tui.  Hsec,  nobis  etiam  exstinctis,  quibus 
jam  tenax  insidet,  nunquam  e  tabulis  nascendse  posteritatis 
deteretur  et  excidet.  Circumspicere  nos  jubes,  si  quid 
effectum  velimus  ab  optimis,  maximisque  in  terra,  rege  ac 
te;  inter  accipiendum  carere  non  vacat.  At  quamvis  tibi 
obtemperare  sit  commodi  satis,  fruique  te  minium ;  si  tamen 
membris  quid  insit  oculi  nondum  a  capite  exercitum,  si 
munificentiae  tuse  tanta  poterit  superesse  inopia,  vel  inopia3 
nostrae  audacia,  ut  indigere  vel  petere  possimus,  circum- 
spiciemus,  egebimus,  rogabimus,  ut  in  hac  etiam  molestia  tuo 
obsequamur  imperio.  O  qui  nobis  regis  animum  concilias 
mediator  politicus,  intercede  (Sanctissime)  summo  inter- 
cessori  Christo.  Nos  itidem,  quamvis  longe  distantes,  lon- 
ginqua  pietate  devocabimus  occumulandum  in  te  gratiam.  81 
Nos  ha3C  manuscripta,  quibus  tuam  ditasti  academiam,  in- 
scribemus  registro,  recondemus  animo,  volvemus  manu, 
enunciabimus  lingua,  et  vita  recudemus.  Nos  pari  con- 
ditionum  observantia  munus  vestrum  custodiemus,  ac  pia 
gratitudinis  religione  accepimus.  Nos  codices  tuos  vel  tan- 
quam  gemmas  sinu  private  amplexabimur,  vel  tanquam 
stellas  aprico  immittemus  orbi;  omnino  consulturi  aut 
gratia3  tuae,  aut  gloriaB.  Nisi  omnibus,  certe  impertiemur 
nullis.  Qui  summa  meruisti,  nihil  invenies  in  officio  nostro 
mediocre.  Finge  animos  manuscriptos,  ac  illos  accipe.  Sic 
vovet  se,  et  pra3stabit 

Sanctitati1  vestrae 

Sacratissima 

OXON.  ACAD. 

E  domo  nostra  Convocations, 
Mail  28,  1635. 

1  [The  use  of  this  title  was  brought      at  his  trial.     See  Troubles  and  Trial, 
as  one  of  the  charges  against  the  Abp.      chap.  xxix.  p.  284.  in  marg.] 


CHANCELLOESHIP  OF  OXFORD.  115 

AD.  1635. 


The  repair  and  beautifying  of  the  chapel  of  Saint  Mary  Magdalene 
Magdalene1,  which  began  the  year  before  I  was  chancellor,  colleSe- 
was  completely  finished,   as  also  another   new  building  of 
theirs  towards  the  water-side  in  this  yearm. 

In  this  year  Smithgate  was  made  passable  for  coaches11.       Smithgate. 

In  this  year  the  Thames  was  brought  up  to  Oxford,  and  Thames 
made  navigable  for  barges0. 


Henry  Birkhead  of  Trinity  college  in  Oxford  was  seduced  Henry  Birk- 
by  a  Jesuit,  and  in  May,  1635,  carried  to  St.  Omer's,  by  one  n^c^lllge" 
who  called  himself  by  the  name  of  Kemp,  a  priest  of  that  seduced  by 
college  of  St.  Omer's  :  they  took  shipping  at  Dover,  and  there  a  Jesmt> 
they  were  not  so  much  as  asked  their  names  by  any  officer, 
nor  ever  tendered  the  oath  of  allegiance?.      But  I  found 
means  to  get  him  back  and  settled  himq. 


AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     The  time  of  the  Dr.  Pink  con- 
year  puts  me  in  mind  that  the  vice-chancellor  hath   gone  ch 

through  a  year's  pains  in  that  government,  and  the  place  another 

yearr. 

1  [Wood's   account   is    as    follows:  navigable  from  Bercot  to  Oxford."  See 

"  Great   care    being    taken   to   adorn  Wood,    Annals,   A.D.    1624,   p.    353. 

churches  and  chapels  in  most  places,  Crosfield  records  in  his  Diary,  "The 

especially  in  the  university,  this  was  lastof  August  1635  a  barge  was  brought 

then  altered  to  what  it  now  is,  that  is  up  the  Thames  to  Oxford,  which  was 

to  say,  the  floor  of  the  inner  chapel  was  the  first  ever  came ;  the  king  was  then 

pulled  up,  and  paved  with  black  and  at  Woodstock."] 

white   marble,   the   old   wainscot   and          P  [As  required  to  be  taken  by  the 

stalls  taken  away,  and  these  in  being  Act  3  Jac.  I.  cap.  iv.  sect.  18.] 
set  up  with  curious  painting  thereon.          1  [  He  was  afterwards  by  Abp.  Laud's 

Anew  organ  also  provided,  a  comely  means  elected  a  fellow  of  All  Souls.  He 

screen,  painted  windows  and  what  not,  retained  his  fellowship  during  the  Re- 

to  adorn  the  house  of  God."     Hist,  of  hellion,  but  resigned  it  at  the  Restora- 

Colleges,  p.  329.]  tion,  and  became  registrar  of  the  dio- 

m  [That  is,  "the  new  building  of  cese  of  Norwich.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv. 

freestone  at  the  east  end  of  the  com-  573,  574.)     This  case  was  brought  for- 

mon  hall,   erected  for  commoners   in  ward  by  Laud  in  his  defence  on  the 

1635,  for  the  most  part  at  the  college  first   day   of  his    trial.    See    Hist,   of 

charge."    Wood,  ibid.,  p.  322.]  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap.  xxii.  p.  226. 

n  [See  above,  p.  94,  note  h.]  in  marg.    Birkhead  was  the  founder  of 

0  [Under  the  provisions  of  an  act  the  professorship  of  poetry.] 
of  parliament,  21  Jac.  I.  cap.  32,  in-          r   [Read   in   convocation   July   22, 

titled  'An  act   to  make  the  Thames  1635.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  110.  b.] 

i  2 


116  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1635.  being  so  full  of  trouble,  a  year  may  be  thought  a  great  space 
of  time  for  any  man  to  be  exercised  in  it ;  yet  considering 
what  experience  is  requisite  for  a  governor  there,  and  in  hope 
that  the  first  year's  pains  will  make  the  labour  of  the  second 
more  easy,  and  especially  weighing  with  myself,  with  what 
great  sufficiency  both  for  integrity  and  judgment  the  present 
vice-chancellor,  Dr.  Pink,  hath  carried  himself  in  all  the 
businesses  which  concerned  the  honour  of  that  university, 
both  at  home  and  abroad;  I  have  thought  fit  to  continue 
him  another  year  in  the  vice-chancellorship ;  assuring  myself 
that  he  will  constantly  go  on  as  he  hath  begun,  which 
cannot  but  tend  to  his  own  credit  and  reputation,  as  well  as 
to  the  good  government  of  the  university,  and  all  those  other 
happy  effects  which  attend  upon  a  well-settled  government, 
which  is  so  necessary  every  where,  but  more  especially  in 
that  body.  These  are  therefore  not  only  to  let  you  know 
that  I  do  hereby  nominate  and  choose  Dr.  Pink  to  be  my  82 
vice-chancellor  for  this  year  following,  but  also  to  pray  and 
require  you  to  allow  of  this  my  choice,  and  to  give  him  all 
the  respects  due  to  his  place,  and  all  other  help  and  assistance 
which  shall  be  in  your  power  to  give,  and  may  be  necessary 
for  him  to  receive  for  his  better  ease  and  comfort  in  the 
government.  Thus  not  doubting  of  your  readiness,  and 
willing  obedience  herein,  I  leave  both  him  and  you  all  to 
the  grace  of  God,  and  rest 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

July  10,  1635. 


A  branch  of        ANOTHER  business  there  is,  which  I  think  may  be  very 

my  lord*  of  °  wel1  wortliy  jour  consideration ;   and  if  you  do  not  give  it 

Winchester1*,  remedy  (as  I  think  it  abundantly  deserves)  I  do  not  know 

New  Coll  °in  w^°  eu^ner  can  or  will.    I  have  often  wondered  why  so  many 

Oxon.  Feb.     good  scholars  came  from  Winchester  to  New  College,  and  yet 

so  few  of  them  afterwards  prove  eminent  men :  and  while  I 

lived  in  Oxford  I  thought  upon  divers  things  that  might  be 

r  [Walter  Curie.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  117 

causes  of  it,  and  I  believe  true  ones,  but  I  have  lately  heard  AJX  1635. 
of  another,  which  I  think  hath  done  and  doth  the  college  a 
great  deal  of  harm,  in  the  breeding  of  their  young  men. 
When  they  come  from  Winchester  they  are  to  be  proba 
tioners  two  years,  and  then  fellows.  A  man  would  think 
those  two  years,  and  some  years  after,  should  be  allowed  to 
logic,  philosophy,  mathematics,  and  the  like  grounds  of 
learning,  the  better  to  enable  them  to  study  divinity  with 
judgment :  but  I  am  of  late  accidentally  come  to  know,  that 
when  the  probationers  stand  for  their  fellowships,  and  are  to 
be  examined  how  they  have  profited,  one  chief  thing  in  Concerning 

which  they  are  examined  is,  how  diligently  they  have  read  ^e  P10^- 

J  .  ,  T          .      ,          tioners  of 

Calvnrs  Institutions;  and  are  more  strictly  held  to  it,  how  New  Coll., 

they  have  profited  in  that,  than  almost  in  any  kind  of  ^ir  reading 
learning  besides.  I  do  not  deny  but  that  Calvin's  Institutions  institutions 
may  profitably  be  read,  and  as  one  of  their  first  books  for  to°  soon- 
divinity,  when  they  are  well  grounded  in  other  learning ;  but 
to  begin  with  it  so  soon,  I  am  afraid  doth  not  only  hinder 
them  from  all  grounds  of  judicious  learning,  but  also  too 
much  possess  their  judgments  before  they  are  able  to  judge, 
and  makes  many  of  them  humourous  in,  if  not  against  the 
Church.  For  so  many  of  them  have  proved  in  this  latter 
age,  since  my  own  memory  in  that  university8.  Your  lordship 
is  visitor  there,  and  I  think  you  cannot  do  a  better  deed, 
than  to  advise  on  a  way,  how  to  break  this  business  with  the 
warden,  who  is  a  learned  and  discreet  man,  and  then  think 
upon  some  remedy  for  it.  For  I  am  verily  persuaded  it 
doth  that  college  a  great  deal  of  harm.  I  do  not  hold  it  fit 
that  your  lordship  should  fall  upon  this  business  too  suddenly. 
When  the  warden  comes  next  to  the  election  may  be  a  fit 
83  time ;  nor  would  I  have  you  let  it  be  known  that  you  have 
received  this  information  from  me ;  but  sure  I  am  'tis  true, 
and  needs  a  remedy. 

W.  CANT. 

February  2,  1635. 

8  [William  Twiss,  the  prolocutor  of      educated  at  New  College,  the  latter  not 
the  assembly  of  divines,  and  the  well-       on  the  foundation.] 
known  Lord  Say  and  Sele,  were  both 


118 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1636. 


S.  in  Christ o. 


My  letters  to 
the  univer 
sity  concern 
ing  their 
large  patent 
procured 
from  his 
majesty'. 


Letters  of 
thanks  to  be 
sent  to  his 
majesty  for 
their  large 
patent. 


QUOD  ad  honorem  Dei,  et  academise  utilitatem  cedat,  mitto 
vobis  a  rege  pientissimo,  et  liter  arum  patrono  munificen- 
tissimo  literas  patentes.  In  eis  facile  est  legere,  quali  gratia 
et  quanto  favore  vos,  et  studia  vestra  amplectitur  regiim 
optimus :  privilegia  enim  hse  literse  continent,  non  solum 
vetera  confirmata,  sed  etiam  ilia  ampliata,  et  ubi  obscura  vel 
dubia  fuerunt,  explicata;  ac  etiam  multa  nova,  de  quibus 
antehac  ne  cogitavit  quidem  academia. 

Ad  firmitatem  harum  libertatum  quod  attinet,  summa  (uti 
spero)  fide  et  jurisperitorum  scientia  (quorum  consilio  in  hoc 
negotio  usi  sumus)  eas  septas  et  munitas  satis  esse  confidimus. 
Nee  defuit  illis  frequentior  monitio,  ut  caute  et  circumspecte 
describerentur  omnia,  ne  oppidani,  aliive,  si  qui  privileges 
vestris  inimiciores  sint,  facile  possint  arripere  informandi 
ansam.  Majorem  a  me  cur  am  exspectare  non  potuit  academia, 
nisi  talium  legum  municipalium  peritia  imbutus  fuissem,  ut 
ipse  manu  mea  patentes  hasce  delineare,  et  delineatas  ex- 
aminare,  et  de  earum  perfectione  judicare  propria  Minerva 
potuissem. 

Sumptus  vestros  expensasque  circa  hanc  rem  majores  esse 
quam  exspectavi,  audio;  spero  tamen  non  cum  privilegiis 
hisce  comparandas.  Sed  meae  nee  potestatis,  nee  officii  est, 
vel  salaria,  seu  feoda  jurisperitorum,  vel  sigillationis  summam 
juribus  aut  consuetudine  affixam  moderari. 

Hoc  unum  adjiciam  pro  amore,  quo  vos  vestraque  amplector, 
ipse  (et  non  ficta  scribo)  sumptuum  horum  onera  in  me 
jampridem  suscepissem,  nisi  alia  vobis  ibidem  satis  nota 
tenuiores  proventus  meos  plus  satis  exhausissent.  Superest, 
ut  regi  serenissimo,  ac  de  vobis  optime  merito,  pro  patentibus 
clausas  sigillatasque  mittatis  literas,  pro  privilegiis  amplissi- 
mis  gratias  (si  possitis)  pares  rependatis.  Ante  omnia  vero 
pro  singular!  ejus  favore  obedientiam  et  fidem,  quibus  omni 
officii  genere  tenemini,  alacriter  exhibeatis.  Quae  omnia 


1  [Read  in  convocation  March   19, 
1G35.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  1 15.  a.  An  ab 


stract  of  the  charter  is  given  in  Wood's 
Annals,  ad  ann.  pp.  399—101.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  119 

nomine  vestro,  meoque  regi  clementissimo  spospondi.    Vobis    A.D.  1636. 
incumbit,  ne  falsi  reus  sit 

Cancellarius  et  amicus  vester 

W.  CANT. 

Datum  ex  cedibus  meis  Lambethanis 
10  Martii,  163$. 


1UNA  cum  literis  patentibus  mitto  vobis  decretum  domi- The  decree 

ofth    ' 
sent1 


norum,  qui  a  regis  sunt  secretioribus  sanctioribusque  consiliis,         e 


de  usu  earum  literarum,  prout  in  causa  inter  Cantabrigienses 
84  et  Londinenses  [typographos]   definitum  fuit,  ut  nee  vobis 
penitus  otiosse,  nee  aliis,  qui  prelo  hie  inserviunt,  onerosse 
nimis  esse  possunt. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

ACADEMIAM    tain  solicite   et   ex   consuetudine    curas,   ut  Thanks  from 

solo  nobiscum  agas  beneficiorum  commercio ;  nee  aliud  fere  ^e  linivi.tr". 

.      sity  for  their 

occurrat  comitns  nostris  tractandum,  quam  munincentise  large  patent 
vestrae  negotium.  Olim  sapienter  moribus  nostris  et  politic,  Pr°cured  by 
nunc  magnifice  libertati,  et  honori  consulis;  par  statutis 
donum^  chartam  accepimus  auctiorem,  et  [jam]  magnse  illius 
aemulam,  qua  et  praesentem  academiam  ditas,  et  obligas 
futuram.  In  grandi  hoc  opere  concessiones  accepimus  am- 
plissimas_,  quasdam  veteres,  sed  confirmando,  augendo,  ex- 
plicando^  penitus  novatas,  quasdam  ex  integro  novas,  sed 
eas  provide  muniendo  factas  auctoritate  vetustas.  Aliena 
dedisti  seque  ac  tua,  qui  olim  concessis  primus  [frui]  dedisti, 
fruique  absque  dissidiis.  Tua  vero  tarn  firm  a  et  plena 
largitus  es,  ut  manum  alienam  exspectare  non  possint.  Dum 
tu  sanctissimus  arbiter  oppido  rapaci  et  immodesto  justa 
statuis  pomceria,  dum  infestos  ita  circumscribis,  ac  subjicis, 
ut  locum  non  relinquas  malevolentia^  et  bello;  dum  pra3- 
cautum  habes,  ne  sit  actio  in  foro,  lis  in  lege,  sed  pace  vigeat 
dominium;  donas  ha3C  omnia  non  semel,  sed  indies,  seter- 
numque,  et  quoties  sine  tali  providentia  convelli  potuerant. 

*  [This  is  a  postscript  of  the  above      ter.] 

letter.]  x  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  116.  b.] 

u  [The  decree  is  not  in  the  Regis- 


120  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  Quamvis  vestri  beneficia  tarn  ardua  sint  ista,  ut  captum 
superent  academise,  tamque  numerosa,  ut  difficile  sit  re- 
censere,  quse  tu  largiendo  non  gravatus  es,  tamen  et  molem 
et  numerum  vincit  conferendi  modus.  Sub  tanto  rerum 
ponderc  alternatim  tu  animo  volvens  Britannise  curas  et 
academise,  eousque  descendisti,  ad  studium  artemque  nostri 
emolument!,  ut  in  recudendis  privileges  ipse  nodos  argutias- 
que  juris  perquirere,  ipse  momenta  verborum  trutinare,  et 
supra  jurisprudentum  aciem,  vel  saltern  industriam,  plurima 
perficere  tentares.  Nemo  unquam  tarn  solers  avidusque  fuit 
nocendi,  ac  tu  omnimodo  sublevandi.  At  uni  tibi  non  sufficit 
ista,  quse  nos  satiat,  liberalitas;  dicis  voluisse  te  suscipere 
etiam  feodorum  onera,  hoc  est,  escam,  quam  parasti  etiam 
nobis  in  os  ponere.  Non  sic  Deus.  Dedisti  tamen,  ut  Ille 
manum,  accipiendi  facultatem.  Statutum  sanxisti,  cujus  vi 
et  fructu  stips  annua  viritim  colligitur,  ad  sustinendas  hujus- 
modi  impensas.  Preli  exercendi  copiam  ex  decreto  domi- 
norum  hue  transmisisti,  ut  simus  Cantabrigise  pares  in 
omnibus,  sicut  ex  gratia  vestra  superiores  in  plurimis  :  totum 
illud  prelum,  si  gratitudine  contendendum  esset,  tuis  non 
sufficeret  encomiis.  Hujus  privilegii  usum  modestum  ex 
eodem  doces  decreto ;  adeo  tibi  curse  est  non  sohim  opulentia, 
sed  virtus  nostra.  Postremo  nos  mones  gratiarum,  sed  ad- 
versus  alios,  tibimetipsi  ne  gratias  quidem  vendicans.  Sic 
unico  debemus  tibi,  velut  animae  politicse  per  omnia  moventi, 
et  moderanti,  beneficia,  benefactores,  ipsam  turn  recipiendi, 
turn  gratias  agendi  rationem.  Curse  quid  nostrse  relinquet 
providentiae  vestrse  sedulitas?  Nobis  nihil  negotii  superest 
prseter  gratias,  et  obedientiam.  Deus  etiam  supra  nos  te 
amet,  qui  in  collocandis  beneficiis  Dei  es  tarn  similis.  [Gratias 
itaque  effundemus,  ut  tu  beneficia.]  Tu  nobis  ilia,  non  solum 
per  teipsum,  sed  per  maximorum  optimum,  serenissimum 
Carolum,  per  potestates,  per  juris  consultos,  per  omnes, 
quorum  aures  manusque  nobis  erant  in  auxilium  vocandse. 
Nos  itidem  gratias,  non  solum  immediate,  sed  per  plurimas 
interpositorum  umbras;  quse  tamen  [omnes]  ubi[cum]que 
disseminatse  in  te  uno  terminantur.  Comes  erit  gratitudini 
par  obedientia:  has  duse,  velut  oculi  nostri,  uno  ferentur85 
motu ;  grati  esse  non  possumus,  nisi  etiam  morigeri,  nee  diu 
morigeri,  nisi  animitus  grati.  Proinde  placito  serenissimi 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  121 

regis  vestroque  simul  obteraperare  nobis  erit  ratio,  con-  AJ).  1636. 
scientia,  religio;  non  solum  nostri  causa,  quibus  id  utile, 
tutum  ac  decorum  est,  sed  maxime  tui,  qui  accessisti  redivivaB 
academise  fundator,  morum  sponsor,  negotiorum  intercessor, 
in  consiliis  aiigelus,  in  angustiis  deputatum  Dei  brachium. 
Tot  beneficiis  conducti  sumus,  tot  affectibus  vincti,  ut  teneat 
nos  vi  seque  inevitabili  ha3c  virtus,  ac  natura  vel  fatum  ;  prius 
esse  desinet,  quam  esse  talis. 

Sanctitatis  vestrse 

colentissima  vestra 

OXON.  ACADEMIA. 

E  domo  nostrte  congregationis 
Mart.  20,  163$.z 


[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri  Guilielmo  archiepiscopo 
Cantuarensi,  regis  a  consiliis  sanctioribus,  cancellario 
nostro  honoratissimo.] 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

TAM  grandia  tamque  numerosa  profudisti  nobis  beneficia,  Thanks  for 
ut  vel  oblito,  vel  despicienti  similis,  unum  taceas,  unum  quod  ^^^fo^t 
alii  maxime  loquentur,  cum  sit  prsemium  et  hortamen  lo-  university 

quendi.     Non  satis  duxisti  academies  tuse  corpus  privilegiis  °r.ator  and 

his  succes- 
ditare,  nisi  peculiari  mumficentise  numme  auream  redderes  Sorsn. 

et  linguam.  Canonicatus  proximi  accessione  nostrum  augendo 
oratorem,  et  suggestum  rlietoricum  tlieologise  maritando, 
eifecisti,  ut  in  illo  non  minus  pro  te  quam  teipsum  oremus. 
Post  cumulum  beneficiorum,  hoc  novissimum  a  regum  optimo 
ac  munificentissimo  impetrasti,  ut  simul  prospiceres  facundse 
gratitudmi.  O  triumphans  largitor !  quid  unquam  retri- 
buemus  nisi  inopum  thesaurum,  gratias?  tu  vero  etiam 

z  [In  the  same  convocation  letters  to  the  lords  of  the  council  for  the  de- 
of  thanks  for  the  charter  were  voted  cree  respecting  the  privileges  of  print- 
to  the  king,  the  lord  keeper  Coventry,  ing,  and  to  the  king  for  the  canonry  for 
lord  treasurer  (Bp.  Juxon),  lord  privy  the  orator.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  116 — 
seal  (earl  of  Manchester),  chief  secre-  1 19.] 

tary  Windebank,  and  the  attorney  and          a  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  121.  a.] 
solicitor-general,  Banks  and  Littleton  ; 


122  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  gratiarum  auctor,  qui  sic  foves  nostrae  mentis  interpreter^ 
et  gratae  harmoiiiae  plectrum.  JSgre  sustinet  is  ipse  gra- 
tias  nostras  epistolari  brevitate  succingere :  cupit  etiam  in 
orationem  prorumpere,  nervisque  omnibus  mentem  expan- 
dere.  Scribit  unus,  quod  sentiunt,  quod  fateri  gestiunt  uni- 
versi,  te  patrem  esse  tuae  matris  academiae,  eique  nunc  lin- 
guam  fingere  novo  eloquentise  salario.  Si  lingua  publica, 
quae  pro  nobis  omnibus  vocem  ornat,  calamumque  stringit, 
nunc  demum  in  re  sua  deficeret,  essemus  nos  omnes  illius 
loco  viritim  oratores.  Sic  enim  in  causa  vehementi  singulse 
partes  corporis  facile  migrant  in  linguas,  et  signis  plusquam 
sonoris  pleiii  pectoris  exundantiam  articulant.  At  quoniam 
nee  verba,  nee  signa,  nee  vires  omnium  oratorum  in  stylo 
unius  conspirantes  enunciando  sufficiunt  unius  affectui,  tu 
sponte  intellige,  cui  mens  profundissimae  capacitatis,  quam 
simus  animitus  devoti 

Sanctitatis  vestrae  colentissima 

OXON.  ACAD. 

E  domo  nostrte  Congregationis, 
Mart.  20,  163£. 

[Revcrendissimo  in  Christo  patri  Guilielmo  archiepiscopo 
Cantuarensi,  regis  a  consiliis  sanctioribus,  cancellario 
nostro  honoratissimo.] 


HEVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

CUM  in  corpore  academic  sim  ipse  lingua,,  ct  in  oratorum 
serie  mcmbrum  illud,  quod  primum  degustaverit  vestra? 
munificentiai  fructum,  liceat  mihi  oceano  rivum,  et  im-  86 
mensurabili  gratiarum  acervo  peculiarem  sementem  vestra 
cum  venia  subministrare.  Dum  totum  se  exserit  gladiator, 
vim  ponit  in  lacerto.  Qui  totus  venerationem  exhibet,  genu 
tantum  ostendit.  Ne  succenseat  paternitas  vestra,  si  academic 
lingua  prsesertim  in  re  sua  vehementius  affici  gestiat,  ideoque 
infinite  gratiarum  ponderi  aliquid  amplius  addere,  et  plus  toto 
afferre  conetur.  Simulachri  parte  interiore  nomen  suum  in- 
scripsit  Phidias :  mihi  non  arrogantise,  ut  illi,  vertatur,  sed 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


123 


gratitudini,  si  in  maternse  epistolae  visceribus  privati  officii    A.D.  1636. 
tesseram  concludam  vestrse  memor  memorise,  curseque  tarn 
longe   infra   vestram   celsitudinem,    non    possum   non    esse 
gratus,  tametsi  gratitudine  peccavero. 


Martii  20,  163§. 


Sanctitati  vestrse  humillime  devotissimus 
Guilielm.  Strode,  academise  tuse  orator 
publicusb. 


In  this  year  the  north  side  of  University  college0  was  University 


finished. 


coll. 


Procu-  /Mr.  BROWN*  ex  JM.  Chri.,  ~\  [Admitted 
ratores  (Mr.  GOODC  e  coll.  Novo,       J  April  27.] 


UPON   a  difference  betwixt  the   university  and   town   of  The  agree- 
Oxford,  touching  felons'  goods,  court-leets,  and  taking  toll,  a 


b  [William  Strode,  student  of  Ch. 
Ch.,  chosen  public  orator  in  1629, 
being  then  proctor.  July  1,  1638,  he 
succeeded  to  the  canonry,  which  was 
annexed  to  his  office  at  the  time;  he 
died  March  10,  1644.  See  Wood's 
Athenae,  iii.  151,  and  Hist,  and  Ant. 
book  ii.  p.  905,  where  it  is  stated  that 
the  canonry  was  granted  Dec.  21, 
11  Car.  I.  (i.e.  1635.)] 

c  [That  is,  the  north  side  of  the  west 
quadrangle  (the  north  and  east  sides  of 
the  eastern  quadrangle  were  not  built 
till  1719).  The  first  stone  of  the  present 
buildings  was  laid  on  the  west  side 
April  14,  1634,  and  that  wing  was 
completed  in  about  two  years,  at  an 
expense  of  rather  more  than  £1400. 
The  north  side  fronting  the  High- 
street  was  begun  June  19,  1635,  and 
shortly  after  the  south  side,  containing 
the  hall  and  chapel ;  the  east  side  was 
not  completed  till  1674.  Ingram's 
Memorials  of  Oxford,  University  Col 
lege,  p.  11.  Wood  (Hist,  of  Colleges, 
p.  56)  says  the  north  side  was  erected 
with  the  monies  chiefly  of  Sir  Simon 
Bennet.] 

d  [Thomas  Brown.     The  following 


passage  in  Crosfield's  Diary  illustrates 
the  circumstances  of  his  election. 
"Feb.  26.  At  the  election  of  proc 
tors  in  Ch.  Ch.,  by  reason  Busby 
and  Tennant  did  not  carry  the  mat 
ters  so  fair  as  they  ought,  but  made 
more  stir  and  solicitation  than  was 
meet,  thereupon  Browne  by  letters 
from  the  dean  interposed,  and  got 
the  place  from  them  both,  which  he 
never  expected  before.  He  scandal 
ous."  Browne  was  afterwards  chap 
lain  to  Abp.  Laud,  rector  of  St.  Mary, 
Aldermanbury,  canon  of  Windsor,  and 
rector  of  Oddington.  He  was  the 
author  of  the  '  Dissertatio  de  Thera- 
peutis  Philonis  adversus  Henricum 
Valesium,'  and  he  translated  with  cor 
rections  and  additions  the  second  part 
of  Camden's  Annals  of  Queen  Eliza 
beth.] 

^.e  [John  Good,  admitted  scholar  of 
New  Coll.  July  26,  1620;  fellow  July 
26,  1622;  presented  by  the  college  to 
the  rectory  of  Tingewick,  Bucks.,  May 
3,  1645  ;  died,  still  being  fellow,  1646. 
He  was  also  vicar  of  Fareham,  pre 
sented  1639.] 


124 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1636. 

sity  and  town 
of  Oxford,  to 
stand  to  a 
final  order 
upon  the 
hearing  of 
the  difference 
about  felons' 
goods,  &c. 
Vid.  p.  199. 
[in  marg.] 


hearing  was  appointed  by  consent  of  the  most  reverend 
father  in  God  William  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury  his 
grace,  chancellor  of  the  university,  and  of  the  right  honour 
able  Thomas  earl  of  Berks,  steward  of  the  town  aforesaid ; 
as  likewise  by  the  mutual  consent  of  both  parties,  divers  of 
the  university  and  town  aforesaid  being  then  present,  who 
assumed  in  the  name  of  the  rest,  that  whatsoever  should  be 
ordered  or  directed  upon  this  hearing,  should  be  final  and 
binding,  and  that  either  party  would  for  ever  observe  here 
after,  and  stand  to  it.  In  witness  whereof  the  lords  above 
mentioned,  and  others  then  present,  have  hereunto  set  their 
hands.  Dated  at  Lambeth  this  28th  day  of  April  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  1636. 


W.  CANT. 
JOHN  OxoNf. 
BRYAN  DUPPA&. 
WILLIAM  SMITH''. 
BRYAN  TWYNE*. 


BARKSHIREk. 

JOHN  WHISTLER. 
OLIVER  SMITH. 
JOHN  SARE. 
TIMOTHY  CARTER. 


S.  in  Christo1. 


My  letters  to 
the  convoca 
tion,  when 
the  new  sta 
tutes  were 
to  be  pub 
lished™. 


NON  diu  abhinc  est,  quo  literas  patentes  libertates  avitas 
confirmantes  et  confereiites  novas  accepistis.  Munus  regium 
erat,  cura  autem  mea.  Nunc  statuta  mitto.  Ilia  vincula 
secum  ducunt,  sed  accommoda,  ne  libertates  licentiam  indue- 
rent;  sed  vobis  grata,  non  vellet  enim  academia  esse  sine  fraeno ; 
sed  in  ordinem  redacta,  ne  amplius  confusione  et  contra- 
dictionibus  subditos  oneraret ;  sed  et  antiquis  valde  consona, 
(nisi  ubi  temporum  ratio  aliud  exigit)  ne  quid  novi  videretur 
pati  celeberrima  simul  et  vetustissima  academia. 


f  [John  Bancroft.] 

*  [Dean  of  Ch.  Ch.] 

h  [Warden  of  Wadham.] 

1  [Keeper  of  the  archives.] 

k  ("Thomas  Howard.] 

1  [At  this  time  occurred  the  pro 
ceeding  about  the  Abp's.  right  of  visit 
ing  the  university  as  metropolitan.  See 
Diary,  June  21,  and  Rushworth's  Col 


lections,  vol.  ii.  pp.  324—332.] 

m  [The  convocation  for  the  publica 
tion  of  the  Statutes,  was  held  June  22, 
1636,  in  which  the  king's  commis 
sioners  appeared  as  related  in  Wood's 
Annals  ad  an.  pp.  404,  405.  Letters 
from  the  king,  and  that  which  here  fol 
lows  from  the  chancellor,  were  read. 
Reg.  Conv.  11.  foil.  125,  b.  126.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  125 

Ssepius  tentatum  hoc  opus,  et  a  viris  sreculis  suis  cele-  A.D.  1636^ 
87  berrimis  :  frustra  tamen.  Nee  enim  quidquam  in  hac  re  ad 
optatum  finem  perduxerunt.  Sed  utrum  operis  ipsius  diffi- 
cultas,  an  aliqua  alia  interveniens  remora  obstiterit,  plane 
nescio.  Quo  magis  gratulor  academise,  et  vobis,  quibus 
miseratione  divina  datum  est  opus  hoc  ad  talem  saltern 
perfectioriem  redactum  videre,  qualem  ferre  solent  leges  et 
statuta,  quae  de  quovis  particulari  cavere  nequeunt. 

Nee  academic  tantum  et  vobis,  sed  et  mihimetipsi  gratulor, 
quod  statuta  situ  et  pulvere  tantum  non  sepulta,  in  lucem 
redacta,  et  suis  numeris  titulisque  distincta  video.  Multo 
magis  tamen,  quod  placuit  academic  in  frequenti  convocatione 
(ne  uno  refragante)  rem  totam  ad  me,  curamque  meam  re- 
ferre,  ut  sub  incude  mea  statuta  hsec  limarentur,  et  a  me 
confirmationem  acciperent".  Summa  hsec  vestra  confidentia 
fuit,  et  certe  gratias  omnibus,  singulis,  ago  summas,  ob  fidem 
mihi  in  re  tanta,  ac  tali,  jam  liberaliter  prsestitam. 

Qua  in  re  certe  non  fidem,  imo  nee  spem  vestram  fefelli. 
Verum  enim  est,  et  ausim  dicere,  me  summa  cum  sequitate, 
cum  sequalitate  pari  omnia  transegisse.  Et  potestatem  a 
venerabili  domo  mihi  commissam  ita  moderatum,  ut  nihil 
prse  oculis  habuerim,  nisi  quod  plane  in  publicum  ecclesise  et 
academies  bonum  cederet.  Et  hoc  (Deum  tester)  omni 
affectione,  partialitate,  private  respectu  prsesentium  tem- 
porum,  personarum,  locorum,  officiorum  qualiumcunque 
sepositis. 

Unum  superest  non  tacendum.  Transmisi  vobis  statuta, 
quse  annum  probationis  sues  apud  vos  complevere,  jam  ex  usu 
illo  in  nonnullis  emendata,  et  pro  potestate  a  vobis  concessa, 
misi  sub  sigillis  meo  vestroque  in  debita  juris  forma  con- 
firmata.  Quum  ecce  placuit  regi  serenissimo,  musisque 
vestris  addictissimo,  suam  etiam  superadjicere  confirmati 
onem  manu  propria  et  sigillo  inagno  munitam :  quod 
academies  honorem,  moribus  disciplinam,  statutis  reve- 
rentiam  et  firmitatem  nequit  non  conferre.  Ob  quam 
regise  majestatis  gratiam  insignem,  gratias  referre  pares  nee 
ipse,  nee  vos  potestis.  Quin  et  commissionarios  misit  suos,  Commission- 
qui  ob  majorem  negotii  dignitatem,  et  statuta  hsec  ex-  ^s  sen? b^ 
hiberent,  et  collegiorum  et  aularum  prsefectos  statutis  sic  about  the ' 

exhibitis  et  confirmatis  subscribere  curarent.  publishing  of 

the  statutes. 
n  [See  above.] 


126  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  Reliquum  postea  erit,  ut  statutis  sic  confirmatis  obedientia 
preestetur,  qua  nihil  magis  poterit  augere  academise  splendo- 
rem.  Et  licet  primo  loco  auctoritas  vestra  leges  hasce  con- 
dendas  curavit,  ea  tamen  natura  legis  est,  ut  semel  condita, 
et  promulgata,  non  alios  tantum,  sed  et  condentes  liget. 
Huic  obedientise,  reliquisque  virtutibus  quibus  polletis,  vos 
semper  affines  futuros  spero,  et,  ut  tales  sitis,  supplicibus 
precibus  se  a  summo  numine  impetraturum  non  dubitat 
Amicus  vester  et  cancellarius 

W.  CANT. 

Datum  ex  tedibus  nostris  Lambethanis 
Junii  15,  1636. 

Viris  mini  amicissimis,  Doctori  Pinke  vice-cancellario,  reli 
quisque  doctoribus,  procuratoribus,  necnon  singulis  in 
domo  convocationis  intra  almam  universitatem  Oxon.  con- 
gregatis. 


A  convoca-         These  letters  were  read  in  convocation  upon  the  twenty-  88 

tion  on  the     second  of  June,  1636,  wherein  Mr.  Secretary  Cook  made  a 
22nd  of  June        .   ,  ,    „...        .,  .  -.          ,.-,        .        -,.  -,  ,  -, 

for  the  pub-    weighty  speech  nttmg  the  occasion ;  and  so  likewise  did  the 

lishing  of  the  vice- chancellor.    Mr.  Secretary's  speech  follows  in  hcec  verba. 

new  statutes. 

REVEREND  VICE-CHANCELLOR,  DOCTORS,  AND  MASTERS. 

Mr.  Secretary      You  have  heard  with  due  respect  and  attention  the  letters 

Cook's  speech  |3roUght  by  us  from  his  sacred  maiesty ;  you  have  also  heard 
m  convoca 
tion  at  the      in  conformity  thereunto  other  letters,  sent  from  your  most 

publication  reverend  chancellor,  signifying  his  majesty's  grace  and  good- 
statutes.  ness  in  recommending  unto  you  this  volume  of  statutes,  which 
we  now  deliver,  and  you  are  to  receive,  as  the  rules  by  which 
you  must  be  governed  hereafter.  You  have  also  seen  and 
heard  the  confirmation  and  establishment  of  these  statutes. 
First  by  his  majesty's  royal  signature,  and  under  the  great 
seal  of  his  kingdom :  and  respectively  under  the  hand  and 
seal  of  the  lord  archbishop,  both  as  primate  and  metro 
politan  of  England",  and  as  most  worthy  chancellor  of  this 
university ;  whereby  it  is  manifest  that  these  laws  and  ordi- 

n  [In  which  capacity  he   claimed  jurisdiction  over  both  universities.     See 
above,  p.  124,  note  1.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  127 

nances  are  so  established  and  ratified  both  by  sovereign  and  A.P.  1636. 
subalternal  authority,  temporal  and  spiritual,  that  nothing 
further  can  be  required,  but  your  ready  acceptance  and 
obedience,  whereof  I  make  no  doubt.  For  (to  do  you  right) 
you  have  already  shewed  so  effectual  conformity,  and  at  this 
present  express  such  alacrity  and  forwardness,  that  I  rather 
see  cause  to  commend  and  encourage  you,  than  to  exhort 
and  stir  you  up,  or  any  way  to  importune  you  by  any  further 
speech;  yet  because  there  is  generally  in  man's  nature  a 
secret  curiosity  and  prejudice  against  all  things  that  appear 
extraordinary  and  new,  especially  when  they  impose  any 
duty,  and  require  obedience  at  their  hands;  I  must  crave 
leave  in  discharge  of  my  own  duty  to  satisfy  those  which 
hereafter  may  be  inquisitive  into  these  proceedings,  to  insist 
a  little  upon  those  principal  respects  which  demonstrate  the 
full  authorization  and  absolute  necessity  of  submission  to 
these  laws. 

That  which  commands  in  chief,  and  which  no  reason  can 
withstand,  is  his  majesty's  sovereign  power,  by  which  these 
statutes  (as  you  see)  are  both  enacted  and  confirmed.  Him  we 
all  acknowledge  to  be  our  supreme  governor  both  of  Church 
and  commonwealth,  over  all  causes  and  persons ;  and  to  his 
supremacy  and  allegiance  we  are  all  obliged  by  oath.  This 
then  we  must  build  upon,  as  an  axiom  and  fundamental  rule 
of  government :  that  all  our  laws  and  statutes  are  the  king's 
laws,  and  that  none  can  be  enacted,  changed,  or  abrogated 
without  him ;  so  all  courts  of  law  or  equity  are  properly  the 
king's  courts ;  all  justice  therein  administered,  be  it  civil  or 
martial,  is  the  king's  justice;  and  no  pardon  or  grace  pro 
ceeds  from  any  but  from  the  king.  And  as  of  justice,  so  is 
he  the  source  of  honour ;  all  dignities,  all  degrees,  all  titles, 
arms,  and  orders,  come  originally  from  the  king,  as  branches 
from  the  root.  And  not  only  particular  men  and  families, 
but  all  corporations,  societies,  nay  counties,  provinces,  and 
89  depending  kingdoms,  have  all  their  jurisdictions  and  govern 
ments  established  by  him ;  and  by  him  (for  public  good)  to 
be  changed  or  dissolved.  So  his  power  reacheth  to  foreign 
plantations,  where  he  may  erect  principalities,  and  make 
laws  for  their  good  government,  which  no  man  may  disobey. 
And  as  in  the  temporal,  so  in  the  state  ecclesiastical,  his 


128  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  regal  power  by  ancient  right  extendeth  to  the  erection  of 
bishoprics,  deaneries,  and  cathedral  churches,  and  to  settle 
orders  for  government  in  all  churches,  by  the  advice  of  his 
own  clergy,  without  any  concurrence  of  foreign  usurping 
power. 

But  for  universities  and  colleges,  they  are  the  rights  of 
kings  in  a  most  peculiar  manner.  For  all  their  establish 
ments,  endowments,  privileges,  and  orders,  by  which  they 
subsist  and  are  maintained,  are  derived  from  regal  power. 
And  as  it  is  your  greatest  honour,  so  it  is  your  greatest 
safety,  that  now  this  body  of  your  laws,  as  well  as  your 
privileges  and  immunities,  are  established,  ratified  and  con 
firmed  by  the  king.  And  more  I  shall  not  need  to  say  in 
this  point. 

In  the  next  place  you  may  consider  for  your  encouragement 
to  receive  this  great  favour  and  benefit  from  his  majesty  with 
ready  and  thankful  minds,  that  your  chancellor' s  worthy  care 
had  a  chief  operation  in  advancing  this  great  work ;  whose 
nearness  to  his  majesty  in  a  place  of  that  eminency,  and 
sincere  conformity  to  his  orders  and  commands,  and  most 
watchful  care  over  that  part  of  the  government  which  is  com 
mitted  to  his  trust,  enableth  him  to  support,  and  may  give 
you  confidence  to  obey  that  which  his  majesty  recommendeth 
by  so  good  a  hand,  specially  in  matters  concerning  the  good 
government  of  the  Church  or  of  the  schools. 

In  the  Church  (whereof  he  is  primate  and  metropolitan) 
his  power  is  very  large,  and  his  extraordinary  endeavours  in 
it  deserve  at  least  to  be  well  understood.  In  former  times, 
when  churchmen  bore  rule,  the  greatest  prelates  gave  the 
first  way  to  alienate  Church  livings :  whereas  this  worthy 
prelate  maketh  it  his  chief  work  to  recover  to  the  Church  for 
the  furtherance  of  God's  service  what  may  be  now  restored. 
And  what  therein  he  hath  effected  under  his  majesty's 
gracious  and  powerful  order,  not  England  alone,  but  Scotland 
and  Ireland  can  abundantly  witness.  Again,  what  help  and 
relief  he  procureth  daily  for  ministers  oppressed  by  rich  en 
croaching  neighbours  or  patrons;  what  collections  and  con 
tributions  he  obtaiueth  to  re-edify,  to  repair  and  adorn 
churches;  and  what  great  structures  are  now  in  hand,  and 
much  advanced  by  his  judgment,  care,  and  zeal,  in  our  most 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  129 

famous  monuments  dedicated  to  God's  service,  we  may  behold  A.B.  1636. 
with  joy,  and  future  ages  will  commemorate  to  his  majesty's 
eternal  glory,  by  whose  power  and  order  all  is  performed, 
and  to  the  honour  of  our  country,  and  for  encouragement 
and  example  of  those  that  shall  succeed;  who  will  acknow 
ledge  with  us,  that  this  man  is  indeed,  as  he  is  by  his  just 
style,  a  most  reverend  and  beneficial  father  of  the  Church : 
90  and  for  this  university  what  better  evidence  can  be  desired 
of  his  singular  love  and  beneficence,  than  first  that  stately 
building  whereby  he  hath  made  himself  another  founder 
of  that  college,  which  bred  him  to  this  height  of  worth? 
And  secondly,  those  many  rare  and  exquisite  manuscripts 
and  authors,  wherewith  he  hath  replenished  your  renowned 
public  library?  And  if  you  add  hereunto  his  constant  care 
to  maintain  you  in  all  your  rights  and  privileges,  and  to  assist 
you  in  your  preferments ;  and  finally  in  collecting  this  great 
volume  of  ordinances  for  the  present  and  further  government 
of  this  famous  university,  you  have  monuments  sufficient 
to  eternize  among  you  and  all  men  his  memory  and  desert. 
And  this  work  is  that  which  now  remaineth  in  the  third  place 
to  be  further  stood  upon.  For  it  is  not  (as  some  may  think) 
either  a  rhapsody  of  overworn  and  unuseful  ordinances,  nor 
yet  an  imposition  of  novel  constitutions  to  serve  the  present 
times ;  but  our  royal  Justinian  by  the  labour  and  direction  of 
this  prudent  person  hath  collected  into  a  pandect  or  corpus 
juris  academici  all  the  ancient  approved  statutes,  which  in 
former  times  were  scattered  and  so  neglected.  And  though 
many  great  prelates  have  heretofore  undertaken  this  work, 
yet  it  ever  miscarried,  till  the  piercing  judgment  and  un- 
defatigable  industry  of  this  man  took  it  in  hand,  and  happily, 
as  now  you  see,  hath  put  you  into  possession  of  it,  whereof 
the  use  can  hardly  be  valued.  For  by  these  rules,  you,  that 
are  governors,  may  know  what  to  command,  and  those  that 
are  under  you  may  know  how  to  obey,  and  all  may  under 
stand  how  to  order  their  behaviour,  and  their  studies,  whereby 
they  may  become  most  profitable  members  in  the  Church  and 
commonwealth,  which  is  the  main  cause  why  his  majesty 
requireth  them  so  strictly  to  be  obeyed.  For  let  me  speak 
freely  out  of  that  true  affection  which  I  bear  to  you  all : 
deceive  not  yourselves  with  a  vain  opinion,  that  kings  and 


130  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  princes  give  great  donations,  privileges  and  honours  to  their 
""schools  and  universities  for  a  popular  applause,,  or  out  of 
mere  bounty,  or  for  honour,  or  for  opinion  of  merit,  by  which 
the  art  of  clergymen  transported  them  heretofore.  But  the 
very  truth  is,  that  all  wise  princes  respect  the  welfare  of  their 
estates,  and  consider,  that  schools  and  universities  are  (as  in 
the  body)  the  noble  and  vital  parts,  which  being  vigorous  and 
sound,  send  good  blood  and  active  spirits  into  the  veins 
and  arteries,  which  cause  health  and  strength :  or  if  feeble 
or  ill  affected,  corrupt  all  the  vital  powers ;  whereupon  grow 
diseases,  and  in  the  end  death  itself.  What  inconveniences 
have  grown  in  all  ages  by  the  ill  government  and  disorders 
of  schools,  your  books  can  inform  you.  And  to  come  home 
to  yourselves,  have  not  our  late  parliaments  complained? 
Nay  hath  not  the  land  exclaimed,  that  our  great  schools  of 
virtue  were  become  schools  of  vice?  This  I  mention  un 
willingly,  but  withal  do  most  willingly  tell  you  to  your 
eternal  praise,  that  since  it  pleased  his  majesty  to  take  to 
heart  a  reformation,  and  by  advice  of  your  never  too  often 
named  chancellor,  sent  you  down  some  temporary  orders, 
whereby  to  reduce  you  to  some  reasonable  moderation,  there 
upon  by  the  wisdom  and  resolution  of  you  the  worthy 
governors,  and  by  the  inclinable  conformity  of  all  the  students 
in  general,  it  is  now  come  to  pass,  that  scholars  are  no  more 
found  in  taverns  or  houses  of  disorder,  nor  seen  loitering  in  91 
the  streets,  or  other  places  of  idleness  or  ill  example,  but  all 
contain  themselves  within  the  walls  of  their  colleges,  and  in 
the  schools  or  public  libraries  :  wherein,  I  must  confess,  you 
have  at  length  gotten  the  start,  and  by  your  virtue  and  merit 
have  made  this  university,  which  before  had  no  paragon  in 
any  foreign  country,  now  to  go  beyond  itself,  and  give  a 
glorious  example  to  others  not  to  stay  behind. 

And  if  those  temporary  and  unperfect  orders  produced  so 
good  effect,  what  may  now  be  expected  from  this  body  of 
laws  and  statutes,  so  complete  and  so  digested,  that  no  for 
mer  age  did  ever  enjoy  the  like? 

Thus  you  have  understood  how  the  goodness  of  our  great 
king,  how  the  care  and  respect  of  your  chancellor,  and  how 
the  worth  and  substance  of  the  work  itself  may  forcibly  in 
duce  you  to  congratulate  your  own  happiness.  And  there- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  131 

fore  I  might  here  forbear  to  trouble  you  any  longer  with  a  A.D.  1636. 
harsh  interrupted  speech:  but  that  I  cannot  omit  to  put 
you  in  mind  of  one  thing,  which  I  know  you  will  hear  with 
willingness  and  attention,  because  it  tendeth  chiefly  to  the 
honour  of  our  God,  and  then  by  His  power  to  the  honour  of 
our  king ;  and  thence  to  the  comfort  of  every  true-hearted 
subject  who  will  readily  acknowledge  with  reverence  and 
thankfulness  the  great  blessings  we  now  enjoy  above  all 
other  nations ;  I  will  tell  you  but  what  I  know ;  (for  I  speak 
within  my  element;)  I  have  seen  our  neighbouring  coun 
tries  in  great  prosperity  and  renown,  their  cities  stately  built 
and  strongly  fortified,  with  walls  raised  up  to  heaven,  full  of 
people,  full  of  trade,  so  full  of  peace  and  plenty,  that  they 
surfeited  in  all  excess ;  but  from  hence  they  are  since  fallen, 
partly  by  the  boundless  ambition  of  great  princes,  partly  by 
the  factions  and  divisions  in  religion,  and  generally  by  their 
disorders,  into  such  condition,  that  men  of  great  honour  sent 
in  remote  employment,  found  whole  provinces  so  sacked  and 
depopulated,  that  in  divers  journeys  they  encountered  scarce  . 
a  man,  and  of  those  they  found  dead,  some  had  grass  in 
their  mouths  and  stomachs,  and  some  were  torn  in  pieces  by 
beasts  and  ravenous  fowls ;  and  those  that  were  alive  had 
no  other  care  or  study  than  how  to  save  themselves  from 
fire  and  sword.  In  general  there  is  such  desolation,  that 
without  a  kind  of  horror,  the  horror  thereof  cannot  be  ex 
pressed. 

Now  we  by  God's  blessing  are  in  a  better  case ;  we  sit 
here  in  God's  house  thankful  in  true  devotion  for  this  won 
derful  favour  towards  us ;  we  enjoy  peace  and  plenty ;  we  are 
like  to  those  who  resting  in  a  calm  haven  behold  the  ship 
wreck  of  others,  wherein  we  have  no  part,  save  only  in  com 
passion  to  help  them  with  our  prayers ;  which  we  all  ought 
to  do  as  interested  in  their  sufferings,  lest  the  like  may  fall 
on  us.  What  then  remaineth,  but  seriously  to  consider,  how 
all  these  great  blessings  are  conferred  upon  us,  not  for  our 
merits,  or  for  our  more  virtuous  and  holy  lives,  but  only  by 
God's  favour  to  His  true  religion:  and  under  Him  by  the 
happy  government  of  our  gracious  king ;  which  should  con- 
92  firm  us  all  to  a  constancy  in  our  obedience,  and  to  a  ready 
subjection  to  all  those  rules  and  orders  which  his  majesty 

K2 


132  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  shall  prescribe  for  the  public  good.  Wherein  this  general 
admonition  may  fruitfully  be  applied  to  the  business  now  in 
hand,  whereof  I  make  no  doubt.  So  I  crave  your  pardon 
and  your  good  acceptance  of  that  which  I  have  rudely 
spoken,  but  with  a  true  affection  to  this  whole  body,  whereof 
(though  I  had  my  education  from  another  nurse  m)  yet  I  had 
the  honour  to  be  an  adopted  son,  and  (as  I  suppose)  one  of 
the  ancientest  that  lives  amongst  you  at  this  day. 

It  remaineth,  that  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  perform  his  part; 
and  proceed  to  the  subscriptions  and  depositions  of  you  the 
heads". 

JOHN  COKE. 


A  meeting  at       DIE  Mercurii  inter  horas  secundam  et  tertiam  post  meri- 

Dr.  Pmk  s       diem,  (viz.)  vicesimo  secundo  die  Junii  anno  Dom.  1636.  una 

lodgings 

about  the       fuerunt  in  hospitio  venerabilis  viri  Doctoris  Pink,  S.  Theologise 

protestation    professoris,  et  vice-cancellarii  universitatis  Oxon.,  notorie  sito, 
vost  and  fel-  e^  situato  in  collegio  Sanctse  Marise  Winton.  in  Oxon.,  vulgo 

lows  of  vocat.  collegio  Novo,  reverendus  in  Christo  pater  dominus 

Queen's  coll..    T  ,  .  '  ,...,.... 

June  22          Johannes  episcopus  Oxon.0,  honoratissimi,  digmssimi,  et  ve- 

1636.  nerabiles  viri,  dominus  Johannes  Cook  eques  auratus  et  se- 

renissimse  regis  majestati  secretarius  principalis,  dominus 
Henricus  Martynp,  eques  auratus,  judex  admiralitatis  et 
curiae  prerogative,  Thomas  Rives  Q  legum  doctor,  et  regis 
advocatus,  commissionarii1'  domini  regis  specialiter  missi  ad 
exhibendum  librum  statutorum  universitatis  et  eorum  confir- 
mationem  sub  magno  sigillo  Anglise.  Coram  quibus  compa- 
ruerunt  venerabilis  vir  Christopherus  Potter3,  collegii  Re- 
ginse  prsepositus,  Mr.  Loughe*  et  Mr.  Stannixu,  socii  col- 

m  [He  had  been   fellow  of  Trinity  of  Univ.  coll.] 

coll.,  Cambridge,  and  rhetoric  lecturer  P  [Of  New  Coll.     See  his    Life   in 

in  the  university.     See  Lloyd's  State  Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  17.] 

Worthies,  ii.  261,  262.]  q  [Of  New  Coll.  He  did  good  service 

n  [The  Register  of  Convocation  re-  to  K.  Charles,  who  employed  him  at  the 
cords  that  at  the  close  of  this  speech  treaty  for  peace  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.] 
the  vice-chancellor  took   the   book   of  r  [Sir    Edward  Littleton,   solicitor- 
statutes,  embraced  it  in  the  name  of  general,    was    another    commissioner, 
the  university,  and  delivered  a  Latin  See  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  125.  b.] 
oration;  and  that  afterwards  the  oath  s  [Appointed  in  1635  dean  of  Wor- 
to  observe  the  statutes  was  taken  by  cester,  and  in  Jan.  1645  dean  of  Dur- 
the  vice-chancellor,  the  proctors,  and  ham,  but  died  before  his  installation.] 
heads  of  houses  present,  who  also  sub-  *  [Thomas  Lough.    He  was  tutor  to 
scribed  their  names  at  the  end  of  the  Bp.  Barlow.  Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  334.] 
book.   Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  126.]  u    [Richard     Stannix,     afterwards 

0  [John    Bancroft,  formerly  master  through   the  -recommendation   of    the 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  133 

legii  prsedicti,  qui  ante  convocationem  eodem  die  habendam    A.D.  1636. 


pro  statutorum  confirm  atione,  protestationem  suam  in  scriptis 
communi  sigillo  collegii  sui  munitam  exhibuerunt,  eamque 
in  persona  sua  legit  Mr.  Stannix  coram  commissionariis  prse- 
dictis,  et  Doctore  Pink  vice-cancellario  turn  praesente,  sub 
hac  verborum  formula. 

"  Protestatio  et  declaratio  praepositi  et  scholarium  collegii  A  protests 
Reginse  in  universitate  Oxon.  de  jure,  titulo,  et  interesse  suis  p^yost^nd 
in  electione  et  nominatione  principalis  aulae  Sancti  Edmundi  fellows  of 
in  universitate  Oxon.,  per  quam  palam  et  publice  in  quocun-  ai^^theTr 
que  celebri  dictse   universitatis  coetu,  vel  alibi,    intimari  et  right  of  the 

notum  fieri  in  perpetuam  rei  memoriam  obriixe  rogant,  se  cilplc?  of  ^e 
1-1          i    i     •  11  7  principal  of 

solos  et  in  solidum  nabuisse,  et  nabere  debere  in  nujusmodi  St.  Edmund's 

electione  et  nominatione,  quotiescunque  et  quomodocunque  tal1  v- 
officium   dicti  principalis  vacare  seu  vacuum  esse,  seu  fieri 
futuris  temporibus  contigerit,  jus,  titulum,  et  interesse  prae- 
dicta. 

"Nos  Christopherus  Potter,  sacrse  Theologise  professor,  prae- 
positus,  et  scholares  collegii  regina3  in  universitate  Oxon.  unan- 
imiter  allegamus,  aifirmamus,  et  protestamur  pro  nobis  et  suc- 
cessoribus  nostris,  nos  solum  et  in  solidum  habuisse  et  habere, 
et  successores  nostros  habere  debere  jus,  titulum,  et  interesse  in 
electione,  nominatione  principalis  aulse  Sancti  Edmundi  in  et 
93  de  universitate  praedicta,  quotiescunque  seu  quomodocunque 
ofncium  ejusdem  principalis  vacare,  seu  vacuum  fieri  conti 
gerit,  intimantes,  et  cum  ea,  qua  decet,  reverentia  per  prae- 
sentes  intimantes,  jus,  titulum,  et  interesse  nostra  in  ejus- 
modi  electione  et  nominatione  principalis  antedicti,  non 
solum  charta  publica  sub  sigillo  universitatis  praedicta3  anno 
primo  Elizabeth  hujus  regni  Anglia3  reginse  pise  memoria3 
dataw,  sed  etiam  prsescriptione  pene  centum  annorum  nobis 
acquisita,  et  obtenta  fuisse,  et  esse,  eoque  intuitu,  ut  jus, 
titulus,  et  interesse  nostra  in  preemissis  salva  et  illsesa  futuris 

provost,  made  chaplain  to  the  lord  claimed  by  the  provost  and  fellows  of 
keeper  Coventry.  He  was  preferred  Queen's  college.  See  Stat.  Aul.  sect. 
by  Sir  Rich.  Saltonstall  to  the  rectory  v.  §  1,  where  the  words  relating  to 
of  Chipping  Warden  in  Northampton-  the  election  of  the  principals  of  the 
shire,  which  he  retained  to  his  death  halls  are  "  qui  ad  nominationem  can- 
in  1656.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  427.)]  cellarii  ab  aularibus  eligantur,"  &c. 
v  [The  occasion  of  this  protest  was  A  similar  protest  was  made  on  the 
that  in  the  Statuta  Aularla  appended  to  passing  of  the  Statuta  Aularia,  after 
the  Corpus  Stalutorum,  there  was  no  being  remodelled.] 
recognition  of  the  right  of  appointment  w  [See  above,  p.  35,  note  z.] 


134  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  temporibus  maneant,  et  in  perpetuum  nobis  et  successoribus 
nostris  conserventur,  hac  protestatioiie  et  declaratione  nostra, 
quantum  de  jure  possumus,  vindicamus,  et  condicimus,  qua- 
cunque  declaratione,  decreto,  seu  statute  edito  vel  edendo  in 
contrarium  non  obstante.  Quas  nostras  protestationes,  de- 
clarationem,  allegatioriem,  et  vindicationem  penes  registra 
universitatis  Oxon.  inactitanda  ex  consensu  honoratissimi  ac 
reverendissimi  cancellarii,  ut  in  memoriam  perpetuam  custo- 
diantur,  a  vobis  venerabili  pro-cancellario  humiliter  petimus, 
et  insuper  per  vos  registrarium  notarium  publicum  hie  prae- 
sentem  iiistrumentum  publieum  fieri,  nobisque  dari,  ut,  si 
opus  fuerit  in  futurum,  proferatur  in  publicum,  instanter 
rogamus  per  procuratores  sive  syndicos  nostros  in  scripto 
procuratorio  praesentibus  annexe  nominates." 

Hac  protest atione  recitata  et  audita,  die,  horis,  et  loco 
prsedictis  dicti  domini  commissionarii  affirmabant  sibi  a  se- 
renissimo  rege  vices  solum  commissas  esse  ad  exhibendum 
librum  statutorum  universitatis  Oxon.  eorumque  confirma- 
tionem  sub  magno  sigillo  Anglise,  et  sigillo  reverendissimi  in 
Christo  patris  et  domini  domini  Guilielmi  providentia  divina 
totius  Anglise  primatis  et  metropolitani,  cancellarii  nostri 
honoratissimi,  respective  munitis,  et  sua  non  referre,  aut  ad 
se  aliquo  modo  pertinere,  aliqualem  assensum  in  istiusmodi 
negotio  prsebere  aut  determinare.  Actum  vero  protestationis 
dictorum  praepositi  et  sociorum  collegii  Reginae  intra  univer- 
sitatem  Oxon.  se  non  posse  non  agnoscere  affirmabant,  me- 
que  Johannem  French,  notarium  publicum,  et  registrarium 
universitatis  Oxon.,  praemissa,  prout  acta  fuerunt,  inactitare 
mandabant. 

Act'a  fuerunt  ha3C  omnia  et  singula,  prout  supra  scribun- 
tur  et  recitantur,  sub  anno  Domini,  die,  horis,  et  loco  supra- 
dictis,  praesentibus  Roberto  Pink,  S.  Theologiae  professore, 
et  vice-cancellario  universitatis  Oxon.,  et  Petro  Turner,  in 
artibus  magistro,  coll.  Mertonensis  socio. 

Et  ego  Johannes  French,  dioceseos  Oxon.  auctoritate  re- 
gia  notarius  publicus,  et  registrarius  universitatis  Oxon.,  prae- 
missis  omnibus  et  singulis,  dum  sic,  ut  prsemiflitur,  sub  anno 
Dom.  mense,  die,  horis  et  loco,  agebantur,  et  fiebant,  una 
cum  prsenominatis  viris  praesens  personaliter  interfui  :  eaque 
omnia  et  singula  sic  fieri  vidi,  audivi,  scivi,  et  intellexi,  et 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  135 

in  notam  protocollarem  sumpsi.    Ideo  hoc  prsesens  publicum    A.D.  1636. 
instrumentum  fideliter  conscriptum  exinde  fieri  curavi,  sub- 
scripsi,  et  publieavi,  atque  in  lianc  publicam  formam  redegi. 

Testimonium  perhibeo  veritati  JOHANNES  FRENCH, 
Notarius  publicus,  et  registrarius  universitatis  Oxon. 

94      Die  Saturni,  viz.,  nono  die  Julii  anno  Dom.  1636  Convo-  A  convoca- 
catio  eratx,  ut  literse  ab  honoratissimo  nostro  cancellario  ad  j^1  ^j^6 
academiam  missse  public  arentur,  et  inter  acta  convocationis  1636,  wherein 
redigerentur.     Quorum  tenor  sequitur.  senttcfthe 

university 
were  read. 

S.  in  Christ  o. 

SUPERIORI  anno  (quod   scio  meministis)  libros   quosdam  My  letters  to 
manuscriptos  ad  vos  transmisi  :  sub  qua  lege,  in  prioribus  *ite  ^™r~j 
libris  satis  const  at.     Illos  misi,  quia  publicis  negotiis  detento  sent  them 

ad  studia  ilia,  quse  otium   petunt.    divertere   non   dabatur.  m^  second 

.  ..  T.  .    „  ,          -,       -,    •  s  manuscripts 

Hos  vero  mitto  prioribus    similes,  ne  si  forte  (quod   absit)  and  coins. 

pestis  ingravescens  familiam  satis  amplam  una  cum  domino 
opprimeret,  aut  distraneret,  hi  tamen,  salvo  opportunitatis 
conductu  prseveniente,  in  manus  vestras  tuti  pervenirent. 

Mitto  autem  libros  non  unico  idiomate  descriptos,  quos, 
spero,  sacrabit  Deus.  Sunt  autem,  ni  fallor,  Hebraici  octo- 
decim,  Persici  quatuordecim,  Arabici  quinquaginta,  Arme- 
nicus  unus,  j^Ethiopici  duo,  Chinensis  unus,  Graeci  duodecim, 
Latini  sexaginta  quinque,  Anglicani  duodecim,  Gallici  qua- 
tuor,  Hibernici  duo.  Quos  omnes  non  sine  sumptu  intra 
anni  proxime  elapsi  spatium  congessi,  et  nunc  in  Bibliothe- 
cam  Bodleianam  reponendos  mitto.  Socios,  non  diffiteor, 
[vestra  ope]  agnoscent  suos. 

Cum  his  mitto  Astrolabium  Arabicum  sere  puriori  descrip- 
tum,  quo  me  ditavit  vir  omni  eruditionis  genere  instructissi- 
mus,  et  olim  academies  nostrae  alumnus,  nunc  decus,  Jo 
hannes  Seldenus. 

Mitto  etiam  effigiem  serenissimi  regis  Caroli,  ne  fania  ejus  The  effigies 
sere  perennior  sere  destitueretur.  Nullibi  autem  melius  locari  £n    |^      , 


potest  rex,  musarum  patronus,  quam  apud  vos  et  inter  musas  ;  to  the  uni- 
volo  autem,  ut  in  claustris  illis,  ubi  libri  mei  manuscripti  siti  verslty* 

*  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  128.] 


136  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  sunt,  collocetur  caput  hoc  nunquam  satis  venerandum,  ut  in 
memoriam  vestram  revocet,  cujus  dignatione  (sub  Deo)  fac- 
tum  est,  ut  ilia,  qualia  qualia  sunt,  quae  in  vestram  gratiam 
facta  sunt,  praestare  possem ;  et  ut  veluti  inspector  ibi  stet, 
ne  quis  libros,  quasi  sub  intuitu  regis  positos,  ullo  modo  vio- 
lare  ausit. 

Coins  sent7.  Nummi  mihi  non  sunt.  Ea  in  re  Sancto  Petro  fere 
sequalis  sum :  numismata  tamen  quaedam  diuturna  solicitu- 
dine  conquisivi.  Acervum  nolui  vobis  mittere,  sic  enim  usui 
nulli  sunt,  nisi  videre,  et  numerare  ad  studiosos  pertineat. 
Redegi  itaque  omnia,  quae  paravi,  in  seriem,  eamque  doctri- 
nalem,  ut,  per  eandem,  ordinem  saeculorum  et  temporum 
possitis  uno  quasi  intuitu  aspicere,  et  per  reversa,  ut  vocan- 
tur,  maximas  quasque  summorum  imperatorum  actiones,  et 
temporum  vices,  et  accidentia  rerum  publicarum  planius  vi 
dere,  et  per  ea  dimciliora  qusedam  historicorum  loca  melius 
intelligere,  et  quandoque  de  historiarum  veritate  etiam  in 
rebus  cognitu  necessariis  judicare  possitis. 

Numismata  haec  in  quinque  arculas  distribui ;  in  qualibet 
arcula  sunt  multae  pixides,  quae  particularium  numismatum 
cum  reversis  cellulae  quasi  et  sedes  sunt.  Has,  ubi  numis 
mata  non  occurrunt,  reperietis  vacuas,  sed  ordine  suo  ita 
signatas,  ut  statim  possitis  invenire,  et  in  iis  numismata  re- 
ponere,  si  forte  vobis  contingat  ilia  acquirere,  quae  ipse  non 
potui.  Ubi  autem  cellulae  hae  sua  habent  numismata,  locus 
tamen  adhuc  superest,  ut  alia  ejusdem  imperatoris,  sed  aliis  95 
cum  reversis,  possitis  ibidem  recondere,  si  quando  talia  vobis 
obtinere  dabitur. 

Arculas  has  quinque  ita  disposui.  In  prima  sunt  numis 
mata  Hebraica  et  Graeca,  non  omnino  seriatim,  sed  secundum 
ordinem,  quern  imperatores  et  respublicae  in  antiqua  Graecia 
liberae  ferre  possent.  In  secunda  sunt  familiae  Romanorum , 
e  quibus  summi  illi  viri,  qui  rempublicam  illam  evexerunt  in 
imperium,  prodiere.  Et  hae  ordine  alphabetico  ponuntur,  ut 
citius  omnibus  occurrant,  cum  ordo  vel  dignitatis,  vel  anti- 
quitatis,  et  difficilior  sit,  et  paucis  cognitus,  et  forte  incertior. 
In  tertia  et  quarta  sunt  numismata  imperatorum  a  Julio 

y  [Wood  states  that  these  coins  were  36.)  Or  they  may  be  the  coins  referred 
given  to  the  Ahp.  by  Dr.  John  Bar-  to  in  a  letter  written  by  Laud  to 
chain,  dean  of  Booking.  (Ath.  Ox.  iii.  Usshor,  July  5,  1630.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  137 

Csesare  ad  modernum  imperatorem,  et  seriatim  secundum    A.D.  1636. 

vices   et   successiones   suas.      Sed  tertia   continet   Romam 

ethnicam  a  Julio  Csesare   ad  Constantinum,  una   cum  in- 

terfectoribus   Julii,    et    aliis,   qui,  licet   legitime   imperato- 

res  non  fuerint,  nummos  tamen  cuderunt.      Quarta  vero 

pari  methodo  Romam  Christianam  a  Constantino  Magno, 

ad  Ferdinandum  Romano- Germanicum  imperatorem  nunc 

rerum  potitum.     In  quinta  demum  sunt  numismata  Britan- 

norum  per  omnes,  quas  subiere,  temporum  et  fortunarum 

vices,    sub    Romanis,    Saxonibus,    Danis,    Normannis,    sub 

heptarchia  et  monarchia  a  Julio  Csesare  insulam  hanc  in- 

vadente,  ad  pientissimum  et  justissimum  principem,  Carolum 

ejus  nominis  primum,  nunc  regum  pacatissime  moderantem  : 

qui  diu  floreat,  et  serus  in  ccelum  rediens  sceptra  tuta  et 

felicia  suis  relinquat. 

Quo  melius  hsec  omnia  et  vobis  innotescant,  et  posteris, 
librum  paravi,  in  quo  singula  ordiiie  describerentur,  quse  in 
quinque  prsedictis  arculis  contenta  sunt;  cum  notulis  et 
characteribus  quibusdam,  quibus  scire  potestis,  quse  numis 
mata  in  arculis  hisce  reposta  sunt,  et  quse  adhuc  desunt,  quo 
diligentius  ea  indagare  satagatis.  Librum  hunc  prse  aliis 
negotiis  adhuc  perficere  non  potui,  saltern  non  limatius 
describere,  qui  una  cum  aliis  manuscriptis  in  bibliotheca 
collocetur  (ubi  etiam  arculas  sitas  volo),  sed  quamprimum 
supremam  manum  apposuero,  eum  vobis  mittam  omni  cura 
servandum.  Et  hoc  a  vice-cancellario  obnixius  peto,  ne  ex- 
trahantur  numismata,  vel  sedibus  suis  moveantur,  donee 
librum  hunc  direct orium  acceperitis. 

Arculis  hisce  quinque  uiiica  clavis  inservit.  Duas  tamen 
misi;  harum  altera  penes  vice-cancellarium  pro  tempore 
existentem  servetur;  altera  penes  bibliothecarium,  sed  eum 
primarium  duntaxat,  (non  inferiorem  vel  deputatum)  quos 
juratos  velim  de  tuta  custodia,  de  non  tradenda  clavi  alteri 
cuicunque  sub  quocunque  prsetextu,  de  non  aperiendis  arculis 
vel  earum  aliqua,  et  de  non  extrahendis  numismatibus,  vel  ad 
usum  studentium,  vel  ad  aspectum  peregrinorum,  (si  forte 
desiderent)  nisi  prout  eorum  alter  tarn  diu  et  continue  prsesens 
fuerit,  quam  arculae  apertae  sunt.  Nee  volumus  plures  una 
arculas  simul  apertas  esse;  nee  alterutrum  praedictorum 
numismatum  extrahere,  nisi  ex  una  pixide,  vel  cellula  simul, 


138 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


Two  idols 
sent. 


A.D.  1636.  ne  occasio  detur,  aut  male  reponendi,  aut  forte  surripiendi. 
Et  quo  melius,  et  tuto,  et  in  ordine  suo  serventur  omnia, 
volumus,  ut  bis  ad  minimum  in  quolibet  anno  (tempore  a 
vice-cancellario  assignando)  comparentur  singula  numismata 
cum  libro,  et  si  jactura  aliqua  fiat,  quamprimum  resciri 
possit,  et  aut  resarciri,  aut  cautius  de  reliquis  in  posterum 
curari. 

Insuper,  etiamsi  ab  idololatria  abhorret  animus,  tamen  quo 
vobis  contemptui  sit  magis  gentium  vecordia,  duo  accipietisQG 
superstitionis  ludibria;  idola  duo,  unum  -ZEgyptiorum  vetus, 
alterum  hesternum  Indorum  occidentalium.  Eidete  caecam 
insaniam,  et  una  mecum  gratias  agite  beatissimae  Trinitati, 
prrecipue  autem  Domino  [nostro]  Jesu  Christo,  qui  seme- 
tipsum  Veritatem  nobis  revelavit.  fNon  fecit  taliter  omni 
genti/  Deus  optimus  maximus  vos  vestraque  custodiat, 
sospitetque,  ut  adventum  regium  cum  gaudio  exspectare 
possitis,  et  prsesentia  frui,  sicut  vovet 

Amicus  vester  et  cancellarius 

W.  CANT. 

Datum  ex  aidibus  meis  Lambethanis, 
Junii  16,  1636. 


Viris  mihi  amicissimis,  Doctori  Pink  vice-cancellario,  reli- 
quisque  doctoribus,  procuratoribus,  necnon  singulis  in  do- 
mo  convocationis  intra  aim  am  universitatem  Oxon.  con- 
gregatis. 


Thanks  from 
the  univer 
sity  for  per 
fecting  and 
confirming 
the  statutes 7. 


EEVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

APFECTUS  nostros  te  manu  tenere,  eosque  efficacius  regere, 
quam  vel  potest  illucens  ratio,  vel  angelus  assistens,  quid 
minim?  Immisisti  enim  conjuncta  stimulis  lora,  libertatibus 
leges,  et  utrasque  tarn  suavi  internexas  moderamine,  ut  fiant 
privilegia  pretium  obedientise,  et  statuta  licentise  frsenum. 
Gravari  nos  posse  existimas  iiecessario  hoc  vinculo,  quod 
soli  nos  alligat  felicitati?  Gravemur  itaque  irradiato  in- 
tellectu,  integritate  morunij  illabi  conscientia,  pace,  favore,  et 

2  [This  letter  of  thanks  was  passed  the  day  after  the  publication  of  the  statutes. 
Reg.  Conv.  K,  fol.  127.  b.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  139 

gratia,  his  omnibus  gravemur.  Imo  potius  confundimur  A.D.  1636. 
gloriandi  ardore,  et  studio  gratitudinis.  Gloriari  possumus 
non  opera,  sed  fautoribus  nostris;  quorum  auspiciis  id  ex 
pedite,  et  inopinato  effectum  est,  quod  ssecula  anteriora  saepe 
et  frustra  cogitarunt ;  quod  fracto  conatu  velut  insuperabile 
destituit  arduus  ille  Wolseius.  Indigesta  veterum  statutorum 
congeries,  cujus  repurgandre  cura  molimen  ridiculum  vide- 
batur  adstantibus,  in  serenam  emicuit  compagem ;  ideoque 
pari  ferit  stupore  nos  etiam  fruentes,  et  fruitionis  incredulos, 
ac  si  chaos  alterum  coram  oculis  nostris  in  mundum  har- 
monice  concinnatum  assurgeret.  Resurrectionem  quandam 
pandectse  hujus  agnoscimus,  in  ea  faeces  tarn  pure  exustas, 
additamenta  tarn  gloriose  induta,  simulque  ordinem  tarn  dis- 
tincte  lucideque  dispositum,  ut,  quamvis  sit  eadem,  multo 
tamen  sanctior,  multo  splendidior  emergat.  Quibus  itaque 
gratiarum  cumulis  compensabimus  indefessam  vestrse  boni- 
tatis  pertinaciam,  quse  nee  tuo,  nee  alieno  pepercit  sudori, 
quse  nee  pacem  regiis  auribus,  manibusque  permisit,  donee 
desperatum  hoc  opus,  ultimo  examine,  supremo  sigillo,  et 
imperiali  auctoritate  perfectum  exiret?  Tacere  non  pos 
sumus  incredibilem  vestram  in  tanta  sedulitate  prudentiam, 
quse  experiendo  aptavit  jugum,  priusquam  affixit,  et  accura- 
tissimse  recognitionis  ergo,  annum  integrum  operi  con  sum  - 
mato  indulsit,  quoniam  in  annum  Platonicum  duraturo.  Im- 
plicuisti  nunc  demum  nexu  indissolubili  regem  et  ipsius 
alumnos :  ilium,  ut  propugnet,  quse  nos  condidimus  statuta, 
quia  sua;  nos  vero,  ut  iis  lubentissime  obsequamur,  qua3 
97manus  regia  obsignavit,  quoniam  et  nostris.  Tantse  firmi- 
tudini  accedit  honor  et  reverentia,  eaque  Oxoniensi  longe 
protentior  pomoerio.  Dum  enim  constitutiones  nostras 
claudit  sanctio  regalis,  fiunt  illse  ex  academicis  plane  epi- 
demicse,  foroque  externo  [seque]  venerabiles  ac  nostro.  Si 
Carolus  regum  optimus  Justinianum  se  nobis  prsestiterit, 
certe  Triboniani  locum  subiisti  et  tu;  si  regi  augustissimo 
confirmata  debeamus  statuta,  regem  debemus  paternitati 
vestrse  ha3C  nobis  confirmantem.  Num  vice  gratitudinis 
fidem  in  obedientiama  exspectas  ?  Legibus  tarn  salutaribus 
collum  subdere,  et  earum  in  verba  jurare  (quod  sine  perjurio 
antea  vix  potuimus)  alterum  est  beneficium.  Usque  adeo 

a  ['et  obedientiam'  Reg.  Conv.] 


140  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.    mersi  sumus  beneficiorum  tuorum  abysso ;    sin  obsequi  sit 
mergi,  mergemur. 

Sanctitati  vestrrc  obscquentissime  devoti 

OXONIENSIS  ACADEMIA. 

E  domo  nostra  convocations, 
Junii  23,  1636. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri  Guilielmo  archiepiscopo 
Cantuarensi,  regis  a  consiliis  sanctioribus,  cancellario 
nostro  honoratissimo.] 


Three  fellow-      Ex  decreto  convocationis  in  assimulatione  parva a  secuiido 

ships  m  Ox-    fae  Jujji    1636  altera  pars  sive  una  pars  indenture  quadri- 

ford  given  .  ,  .  .       ,.  ,. 

by  King         partitse  dc  eligendis,  stabmendis,  et  connrmandis  tnbus  socns 

Charles  to      ex  insu]is  Jersey,  et  Guernsey,,  publice  sigillo  universitatis 
the  isles  of     munita  erat ;  et  altera  pars  indenture  sigillanda  fuit  com- 

Jersey  and      muni  sigillo  collegii  Exon.,  collegii  Jesu,  et  collegii  Pembro- 
Guernsey.          ,  .        .        .  «      •  ••  j-   L-          e      i   *.- 

chiensis;  in  quse  collegia  socii  prsedicti,  ex  fundatione  sere- 

nissimi  regis  nostri  Caroli,  eligendi  sunt  inperpetuunv,  et  ad- 
mi  ttendi  juxta  tenor  em  indenturarum  hinc  sigillatarumb. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLAEIE, 

Thanks  from       VOCITEMUS  te  licet  academise  patrem,  ductorem,  angelum, 

sityfo^my     archangelum,  ecquid  minus d  ?     Agnoscimus  te  amplissimam 

second  manu-  divinse  munificentise  cisternam^  quam  innumersc  quidem  fistula) 

anTthe^ffi1-8'  adimplent,  duse  vero  exhauriunt,  ecclesia  et  academia.    Adeo 

gies  of  King   densa  et  plusquam  quotidiana  hue  denuunt  ex  te  beneficia,  ut 

harles  m       j^s  ap^-e  memorandis  segre  sufficiat  calendarius,  tametsi  rasus, 

et  nominum  vacuus.     Quin  et  eadem  quotannis  crescunt,  et 

redeunt  solennem  in  morem  veris  ac  messis.  Anno  superiore 

libros  accepitnus  manuscriptos  numeri   multitudine,   rerum 

pondere,  linguarum  varietate^  O  quantum  immane  mirabiles  ! 

a  [Vide  Cap.  Stat.,  tit.  xii.]  Laud,  p.  336.] 

b  [These  fellowships   were   founded  c  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  129.  a.] 

from  a  portion  of  the  property  of  Sir  d  [On  these  titles  applied  to  the  Abp. 

Miles  Hubbard,  alderman  of  London,  see  History  of  his  Troubles  and  Trial, 

which,  in  default  of  an  heir,  escheated  chap.  xxix.  p.  285  in  marg.] 

to   the   crown.    See    Heylin's  Life  of 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  141 

Transmisisti  hoc  anno  centum  et  octoginta  ejusdem  opulen-    A.D.  1636. 


tise  !  Hi  pari  legum  religione  loco  contiguo  reponendi,  socios 
eo  facilius  agnoscent,  quod  compellare  possunt  nativo  idio- 
mate.     Unde  acervus  iste  literarii  thesauri  ?  unde  hie  sestus 
linguarum,  ac  donum  apostolico  proximum  ?     Num  devas- 
tata  Germanise  gaza  terrain  appulit  pacificam,  ut  ad  manus 
vestras,  hoc  est,  nostras  quam  citissime  deveniret  ?     Nun- 
quid  venti  in  mandatis  acceperunt,  omnes  mundi  cultiores 
plagas  diverrere,  ut  nitidissimas  Europse,  Asise,  Africseque, 
gem  mas  in  alterum  hunc   orbis   Britannici   oculum   presse 
contraherent  ?     Quam  gratum  hoc  erit  exteris  nationibus  in 
orbe  penitus  diviso,   domi  vivere,  suasque  dialectos,  si  non 
audire,  saltern  videre  ac  legere  !     Emirabimur  ipsi  posse  nos 
itidem  in  Bodleiano  tuoque  sacrario  solis  vestigia  prosequi, 
et  utrumque  ipsius  terminum  perlustrare.     Libris  hisce  con- 
junctam  dedisti  seream  serenissimi   regis  effigiem,  eamque 
non  minus  emblem  ate,  quam  loco  conterminam.     Is  enim 
dignior  universis  dominari  populis,  quam  nos  linguis.     JEs 
illud  exterius  interiori  figet  memorise  alteram  et  seque  per- 
ennem  regis   munificentissimi   effigiem ;    dum  Carolus  de- 
98  super  imminebit  inspector,  et   stabit   pro   ferula  sceptrum, 
difficile  erit  studiis  non  incumbere  verecunde  et  serio  :  tanti 
magistri  contemptores,  certe  graviori  nomine  desidiam  lue- 
mus;  nee  tantum  audiemus  ignavi,  sed  in  ilium  seque  re- 
belles,  ac  in  te  ingrati.     Postquam  [sic]  libris  ditasti  acade- 
miam,   invenisti   etiam,  quomodo   eruditam  faceres  divitiis. 
Quinque  misisti  areas,  easque  (es  frustra  querulus  largitor) 
non  nummis  refertas,  sed  tamen  numismatibus,  sed  plusquam 
margaritis.     Illic  ediscere  licet  historian!  ex  auro,  illic  impe- 
ratorum  gesta,  et  series  temporum  in  pecunia  speculari,  eas 
que  non  pigro  scrutinio  disquirere,  sed  uno  intuitu  percipere. 
O  nos  felices,  et  miris  modis  studiosi,  qui,  ne  tempus  in- 
utiliter  absumamus,  ssecula  tenemus,  ut  opes  avari,  arcis  in- 
clusa.     Nonne  satis  fuit  (O  beneficentige  avidissime  !)  simul 
acrum  posuisse  unius,  unius  instar  omnium  Caroli,  nisi  in 
typis  transmitters  tot  sceptrigeros,  a  monarchia  secunda  ad 
diem  usque  hodiernum  deductos.     Quid  manu  oculisque  ver- 
samus  Grsccioc  liberse  dynastas,   Kom83  crescentis  Patricios, 
adultoe  imperatores  ?     Quid  reges  denique  Britannos  a  Cse- 
sare  ad  Carolum  ?     Uno  hoc  ultimo  contenti  acquiescimus. 


142  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.  Si  de  vestra  celsitudine  habenda  sit  panegyris,  non  est,  cur 
sanus  orator  artificialis  memorise  auxilia  aliunde  appetat, 
quam  ex  vestro  numismatum  tliesauro.  Illic  in  quinque 
cistis  complures  pixides,  in  pixidum  loculis  faecundiores  lo- 
cillos,  in  iis  infinita  reperiet  signa  et  imagines,  quarum  fidei 
encomiorum  tuorum  classes  partiri  possit  ac  tuto  concedere. 

Ex  abundantia  vestra  cumulatim  accepimus  adlmc  plura, 
duo  idola,  miseranda  superstitionis  spectacula,  eademque  veri 
cultus  solamina;  e  quibus  etiam  non  ingrati  agnoscimus, 
quantum  superet  vir  bonus  ethnicorum  deos.  Astrolabium 
insuper  Arabicum  misisti,  a  Seldeno  laudatissimo,  quia  meri- 
tissimo,  acceptum;  sublimi  hoc  instrumento  capiemus  for- 
tassis  aliqui  altitudinem  stellarum,  at  vix,  aut  ne  vix  unus 
altitudinem  angeli  dona  tarn  numerosa  coelitus  deferentis. 
Vicisti  sane,  vicisti  spem  omnem  sequse  gratitudinis :  enite- 
mur  tamen  (quod  solum  possumus)  tot  regum  antiquorum 
imaginibus  unam  adjicere;  unam  optimi  prsesulis,  nempe 
tuam.  Enitemur  pro  tot  libris,  legentium  animas;  pro  tot 
exterorum  linguis,  tuorum  corda ;  pro  effigie  regali,  sequa- 
citatem  umbra?  parem;  pro  Astrolabio  Arabico,  radiationis 
vestra?  meditamen ;  pro  idolorum  ethnicorum  ludibriis  con- 
ceptissimas  ad  Deum  inconceptibilem  preces,  summa  qua 
possumus,  fide  et  constantia  rependere. 

Sanctitatis  vestra3 

devotissima  cultrix 

OXON.  ACAD. 

E  domo  nostra  convocationis, 
Julii  9,  1636. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  Patri  ac  domino  Guilielmo 
archiepiscopo  Cantuarensi,  regis  a  sanctioribus  consiliis  et 
Oxoniensis  academies  cancellario  honoratissimo.] 


St.  John's  This  year  the  buildings  which  I  began  in  St.  John  Bap 
tist's  college  anno  1631  were  fully  finished.  These  buildings 
cost  me  the  full  sum  of 

d  [The  first  stone  of  these  buildings  which  forms  part  of  the  south  side,  and 

was  laid  July  26, 1631.  (See  above,  p.47.)  were   erected  from  a  design  by  Inigo 

They  consist  of  the  whole  of  the  inner  Jones.   (Wood's  Hist,  of  Colleges  and 

quadrangle,  excepting  the  old  library,  Halls,  pp.  51-7,  548.)] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  143 

The  new  convocation-house  at  the  west  end  of  the  great    A.D.  1636. 
library,  with  an  addition  over  it   to  the  said   library,   was  The  new 
begun  to  be  built  in  May  1634%  and  all  the  stone  building  convocation- 
was  finished  in  July  1636f. 

99      In  this  year  were  the  windows  of  Queen's  college  chapel  The  windows 
glazed  with  coloured  glass,  completely  finished,  which  were     i]    ten  Si 
begun  in  the  year  1633§. 


AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  The  time  will  put  Dr.  Baylie, 
both  myself  and  you  in  mind,  that  I  have  troubled  Dr.  Pinke  j^Joh^V* 
with  the  vice-chancellorship  now  two  years  together,  and  I  chosen  vice- 
must  give  him  this  testimony,  that  his  care  and  pains,  toge-  chancellor  h. 
ther  with  his  judgment  in  managing  all  business  incident  to 
that  troublesome  office,  hath  not  only  been  very  great  in 
itself,  but  hath  equalled  the  best  and  most  careful  endeavours 
of  any  his  predecessors.  And  as  I  give  him  hearty  thanks 
for  it,  so  is  he  much  bound  to  God  (and  myself  with  him) 
for  the  great  blessing  with  which  he  hath  guided  and  sup 
ported  all  his  actions.  And  I  cannot  but  profess  unto  you, 
that  he  hath  deserved  exceeding  well,  not  of  myself  only,  but 
of  the  whole  university,  and  of  every  man  in  particular,  whose 
sons  have  been  bred  there  during  the  time  of  this  his  govern 
ment.  But  for  this  vigilancy  and  pains  of  his  I  must  not 
overload  him,  but  think  upon  some  other  worthy  and  able 
man  to  succeed,  that  may  and  will  not  take  upon  him  the 
office  only,  but  go  in  the  same  way  into  which  he  hath  led 
him.  And  after  some  deliberation  I  have  fixed  my  resolu 
tion  upon  Dr.  Baylie,  president  of  St.  John  [Baptist]  college 
and  dean  of  Sarum1,  upon  whom  I  shall  be  forced  to  lay  the 

e  [On  the  thirteenth  of  May.  Wood  sition.] 

gives   an    account  of    the    ceremony,  %  [This  glass  was  executed  hy  Abra- 

Hist.  and  Ant.,  book  ii.  pp.  939,  940.]  ham  Van  Ling.     It  is  retained  in  the 

f  [Convocations   were   held   in   the  present  chapel.] 

chancel  of  St.  Mary's  church,  till  the  h  [Read    in    convocation    July    22, 

completion    of  the   new   convocation-  1636.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  130.] 

house  in  1638.    The  part  of  the  library  '  [Dr.  Rich.  Baylie.    Heylin  records 

over   the    convocation-house   was    ap-  (Life  of  Laud,  pp.  56,  57)  that  he  was 

propriated  to  the  reception  of  the  MSS.  the  chief  opponent  of  Abp.  Laud   on 

given  by    the  earl  of  Pembroke,   Sir  his  election  to  the  presidentship  of  St. 

Kenelm  Digby,   and  Abp.  Laud,  and  John's.     Laud    afterwards    took    him 

ultimately   of  Selden's  library,   which  into  his  special  favour  and  confidence, 

latter  still  remains  in  its  original  po-  He  resigned  in  his  favour  the  living 


144 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1636.  greater  burden,  if  his  majesty  hold  his  gracious  purpose  of 
~  honouring  the  university  with  his  presence  this  present  year : 
and  he  will  therefore  need  all  the  assistance  that  either  his 
predecessors  or  the  rest  of  the  heads  can  give  him.  These 
are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you  to  allow  of  this  my 
nomination  and  choice  of  Dr.  Baylie  to  the  vice-chancellor 
ship,  and  I  will  not  doubt  but  that  you  will  all  afford  him 
your  best  advice,  counsel  and  help,  to  the  performance  of  all 
such  things,  as  may  any  ways  concern  the  honour  and  good 
government  of  the  university.  So  I  bid  you  all  heartily  fare 
well,  and  rest, 

Your  very  loving  friend 

and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
July  12J,  1636. 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford. 


S.  in  Christ o. 


100 


My  letters  to 
the  vice- 
chancellor 
about  the 
settlement  of 
the  plays  in 
Oxford 
against  his 
majesty's 
coming 


SIR, 


SINCE  I  writ  last  to  you,  the  dean  of  Christ  Church  came 
to  me,  and  acquainted  me  with  two  things,  which  are  very 
necessary  you  should  both  know  and  remedy. 

The  one  is,  that  the  university  seems  to  be  unwilling  to 
contribute  to  the  charge  of  the  plays,  which  are  to  be  at 
Christ  Church.  Now  this  charge,  as  by  reason  of  their 


of  Ibstock,  Mar.  6,  162§,  (see  Laud's 
Diary  and  note).  On  the  3rd  of  April 
following  (as  appears  by  an  entry  in 
the  register  of  Long  Whatton)  Baylie 
was  married  to  the  Abp's.neice,  Eliza 
beth,  daughter  of  Dr.  William  Robin 
son,  (preb.  of  Westm.  and  rector  of 
Long  Whatton,  who  afterwards  suc 
ceeded  his  son-in-law  as  archdeacon  of 
Nottingham).  He  was  appointed  chan 
cellor  of  St.  David's,  which  office  he 
resigned  in  Sept.  1626,  archdeacon  of 
Nottingham,  Feb.  7,  1627,  preb.  of 
Chiswick,  May  2,  1631,  president  of 
St.  John's,  Jan.  12,  1632,  vicar  of 
Northall,  April  3,  1632,  (Rymer,  VIII. 


iii.  279,)  dean  of  Sarum ,  April  1 0, 1 635, 
(Rymer,  IX.  i.  82,)  rector  of  Bradfield, 
Oct.  22,  1637,  (Rymer,  IX.  ii.  140,) 
by  means,  no  doubt,  of  Laud's  inter 
est;  and  was  nominated  by  him  his 
sole  executor,  (see  Laud's  Will.) 

It  may  be  added  that  the  first  edi 
tion  of  Abp.  Laud's  Conference  with 
Fisher  was  published  under  the  initials 
of  II.  B.  (Rich.  Baylie)  and  that  the 
money  coined  from  the  plate  given  by 
St.  John's  college  to  Charles  I.  in  1644 
was  stamped  with  his  initials,  he  being 
then  the  president  of  the  college.] 

J  [The  letter  is  dated  July  8.  in 
Reg.  Conv.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


145 


building1,  they  are  not  able  to  bear  alone;  so  I  must  needs  A.D.  1636. 
acknowledge,  there  is  no  reason  that  they  should,  whatever  " 
their  ability  be :  for  the  king  is  to  be  entertained  by  Oxford, 
not  by  Christ  Church.  And  that  he  lies  there,  is  but  for  the 
conveniency  of  the  place,  where  there  are  so  many  fair  lodg 
ings  for  the  great  men  to  be  about  him.  Indeed  if  Christ 
Church  men  will  say  they  will  have  no  actors  but  of  their 
own  house,  let  them  bear  the  charge  of  their  own  plays  in 
God's  name :  but  if  they  will  take  any  good  actors  from  any 
other  college  or  hall,  upon  trial  of  their  sufficiency  to  be  as 
good,  or  better  than  their  own,  then  I  see  no  reason  in  the 
world,  but  that  the  whole  university  should  contribute  to  the 
charge.  And  I  pray  see  it  ordered,  and  let  your  successor 
follow  you  accordingly14. 

The  other  is,  that  since  the  university  must  contribute  to  The  univer- 
this  charge  (for  so  it  was  done  when  King  James1  came,  and  8lt7  to  con" 
at  the  last  coming  of  Queen  Elizabeth"1,  both  within  my  own  piays  at 

Christ 

that  the  corporation  and  hody  of  every  Church. 
college  should  be  rated  and  assessed  by 
itself.     And  besides  every  commoner 
in  or  of  the  body  should  be  assessed 
and  rated  by  the  poll. 

5.  In  the  fifth  place  that  every  par 
ticular  college  should  be  rated  £5  for 
every  hundred  they  were  assessed,  as 


'  [In  forming  Peckwater  inn  and 
Vine  hall  into  a  quadrangle.  See 
Wood's  Hist,  of  Colleges  and  Halls,  p. 
453.] 

k  [See  Crosfield's  Diary,  1636. 
"  July  25.  Orders  set  down  and  agreed 
upon  July  25,  1636,  by  the  heads  of 
colleges  and  halls  assembled  together 
to  prepare  and  provide  for  his  majesty's 
entertainment  by  the  university  in 
August  next  following. 

1.  Imprimis,  that  the  university  shall 
pay  towards  all  gifts,  charges  and  bur 
dens  whatsoever  arising  by  this  enter 
tainment  £200  and  no  more. 

2.  In  the  second  place  the  several 
heads  of  colleges  did  acknowledge  and 
consent   unto   the    ancient   valuations 
and  assessments  of  their  several  col 
leges   there   presented   by    Dr.  Baily, 
vice-chancellor.      This  valuation  was 
made  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  time  when 
she  was  entertained  by  the  university, 
viz.:   Christ  Church  £2000;   Magdal. 
Coll.    £1200;     New     Coll.    £1000; 
Queen's  Coll.  £260,  &c.     Valued  all 
according  to  the  old  rent,  above  which 
all  now  improved. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  Jesus  college, 
Wadham  college,  and  Pembroke  college 
were  valued  and  rated  in  the  presence 
of  their  several  governors  for  this  pur 
pose  and  entertainment,  for  they  were 
not  anciently  valued. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place  it  was  ordered 

LAUD. 


heretofore. 

6.  Every  earl's  son  £1.  3*.  4d. ; 
every  baron's  son  £1.;  every  fellow 
commoner  and  upper  commoner  10s. ; 
every  ordinary  master  of  arts  5s.;  every 
ordinary  commoner  5s. ;  every  one  of 
the  lower  sort  called  batellers  or  so- 
journers  3s.  4J. ;  poor  scholars  nothing. 

6.  Also  it  was  agreed  that  a  schedule 
should  be  made  for  every  coll.,  wherein 
the  names  of  all  according  to  the  said 
rate  should  be  taxed  and  summed  up 
and  given  to  the  vice-chancellor. 

And  if  the  sum  overplus  to  what 
shall  be  expended,  then  the  same  to  be 
refunded  in  proportion.  Defective,  then 
the  same  must  be  made  up  according 
to  the  same  rate. 

Summa  pro  coll.  [Reginae]  IS11.,  pro 
scholaribus  1211.  10s."] 

1  [In  1605.  The  play  acted  was  not 
'Vertumnus,'  as  stated  by  A.  Wood, 
but '  Alba.'  See  Nichols's  Progresses, 
i.  547.] 

m  [In  1592.  Queen  Elizabeth  had 
previously  visited  the  university  in 
1566.] 


146 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1636. 

The  mate 
rials  of  the 
plays  to  be 
safely  laid  up 
and  kept. 


My  letters 
concerning 
the  business 
of  the  plays 
to  be  regis 
tered. 


Four  expe 
rienced  men 
to  be  ap 
pointed  to 
look  to  the 
materials  for 
the  plays. 


memory)  I  hold  it  very  fit,  that  all  the  materials  of  that 
stage,  which  are  now  to  be  made  new,  and  the  proscenium 
and  such  apparel  whatever  it  be  as  is  wholly  made  new,  shall 
be  laid  up  in  some  place  fit  for  it,  to  which  the  vice-chancel 
lor  for  the  time  being  shall  have  one  key,  and  the  dean  of 
Christ  Church  the  other,  that  it  may  not  be  lost,  as  things  of 
like  nature  and  use  have  formerly  been.  And  if  any  college 
or  hall  shall  at  any  time  for  any  play  or  show  that  they  are 
willing  to  set  forth,  need  the  use  of  any  or  all  of  these  things, 
it  shall  be  as  lawful  and  free  for  them  to  have  and  to  use 
them  as  for  Christ  Church ;  provided  that  after  the  use  they 
do  carefully  restore  them  to  the  place  whence  they  were 
taken.  And  to  the  end  these  things  may  be  kept  with  the 
more  safety  and  indifferency  to  the  university,  I  think  it 
very  fit  that  an  inventory  be  made  of  them,  and  that  one 
copy  thereof  remain  with  them,  at  Christ  Church,  and  the 
other  in  such  fit  and  convenient  place,  as  the  vice-chancellor 
and  the  heads  shall  agree  on.  For  my  part  I  think  it  fittest 
that  an  inventory  should  be  kept  in  the  university  registry,  101 
that  so  you  may  not  only  have  access  to  it,  so  often  as  you 
shall  have  cause,  but  also  leave  it  ready  for  direction  in  future 
times  in  like  cases  of  expense.  And  I  think  it  not  amiss, 
that  these  my  letters,  which  concern  the  ordering  of  these 
businesses,  should  be  registered  also. 

And  further,  that  the  university  may  see  how  the  money 
which  they  allow  towards  these  charges  is  expended,  I  think 
it  very  requisite  that  yourself  and  the  heads  should  name 
three  or  four  men  of  good  experience  in  those  things,  that 
may  see  at  what  rates  all  things  are  bought  and  paid  for : 
and  an  account  delivered  in  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  the 
heads,  at  such  time  as  the  vice-chancellor  shall  call  for  them. 
And  also  that  their  hands  be  set  to  both  copies  of  the  above 
named  inventories.  I  have  thought  upon  Dr.  Felln,  Dr. 
Sanders0,  and  the  warden  of  Wadhamp,  as  very  fit  men  for 
this  purpose;  and  if  you  and  the  heads  shall  think  it 
requisite  to  join  any  more  to  them,  you  may  name  whom 
you  please. 


n  [One   of    the    canons,    afterwards 
Dean,  of  Ch.  Ch.] 

0  [Principal  of  St.  Mary  hall,  after 


wards  provost  of  Oriel.] 
P  [Daniel  Escott,  D.D.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  147 

For  the  play  which  I  intend  shall  be  at  St.  John's,  I  will  A.D.  1636. 
neither  put  the  university  nor  the  college  to  any  charge,  but 
take  it  wholly  upon  myself.  And  in  regard  of  the  great 
trouble  and  inconvenience  I  shall  thereby  put  upon  that 
house,  as  also  in  regard  it  shall  set  out  one  of  the  plays  by 
itself,  I  think  there  is  great  reason  in  it,  and  do  therefore 
expect  it,  that  no  contribution  should  be  required  from  St. 
John's  towards  the  plays  at  Christ  Church.  And  I  pray  let 
me  have  an  account  from  you  of  the  settlement  of  these 
things.  So  I  leave  you  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  rest, 

Your  loving  friend, 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
July  15,  1636. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIEI, 

TENSIS  ad  ccelum  palmis,  contemplamur  attoniti  inexple-  Thanks  from 
bilem  vestrum  largiendi  ardorem.     Beneficia  omnino   sedi-  t!ie  umver- 
ficas,    et   superstruere   festinas   donis    prsemissis   facultatem  ting  up  the 

utendi.     Cum  enim  academiam  stupefeceris  Arabico  libro-  Arabic  lec- 

,  .    .   ,,.         ,.  ,  .  ture.  which  I 

rum  thesauro,  mox  eos  intelhgendi  causa  prselectorem  arcani  founded  for 

sermonis  impense  fundasti  :    per  oculos,  per  aures  immanat  mJ  °.wn  time, 
eadem  perpetua   liberalitas.     Prselectorem   istum  non    solo  means  to*0 
fundasti  hortamine,  verum  re  tua  ;  tua  quamdiu  vita  et  res  make  it  per- 
supererit  ;  hoc  est,   (si  votis  annuerit  Deus)  ultra  sseculum,  hopeTthat^y 
in  seternum.     Vim  omnem  effundis  in  te  positam,  et  alio-  charity  it 
rum  legare  pergis  voluntatem;  una  cum  beneficiis,  exempla  jj^  p™J^_ 
largiris  ;    et   velut   proprium   dedignatus,   non  ultra4,    [zelo  tuity.    I  ap- 
interminabili  posteritatem  in  partes  vocas.      Nonne]    satis  Ed^Pocock9 

felicem    reddidisses    academiam,    nisi    prorsus    Arabicam  ?  of  C.  C.  C.,  my 

reader,  and 

i  [In  a  convocation  held  Aug.   8,       of  Bray,  near  Maidenhead.]  the  stipend  I 

1636,    the  vice-chancellor   announced          8  [He  was  employed  afterwards  by  allow  is  40/. 
the  chancellor's  intention  of  instituting      Abp.  Laud  to  travel  in  the  east,  where  per  annum. 
an   Arabic    lecture,    paying    jg40.    a-      he  obtained  many    MSS.    and   coins, 
year  for  it,  and  appointing  Pococke  as      during  which  time  Thomas  Greaves  of 


the  first  lecturer  :  a  delegacy  was  ap-       C.  C.  C.  was  deputy  reader  in  Arabic. 

gulations   for  th 
lecture,    and    this    letter    of    thanks      Morris  appointed  regius   professor  of 


pointed  to   make   regulations   for  the      Pocock  was  on  the  death  of  Dr.  John 


voted.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  131.]  Hebrew.  See  his  Life  by  Twells.] 

r  [He  afterwards  made  it  perpetual,          *  [So   in   Reg.   Conv.,  and  in  first 
by  endowing  it  with  lands  in  the  parish      Edit.] 

L2 


148 


THE  HISTORY  OP  HIS 


A.D.  1636.  Utrumque  polum,  utrumque  solem,  imo  et  globum  utrum- 
~  que  revolvis  animo,  ut  sumptu  studioso  disquiras  nova  tuae 
academise  ornamenta.  "Prae  onerosa  benefaciendi  consuetudine  102 
diductus  es,  et  tantum  non  egenus,  ut  emineas  in  medi- 
ocritate  rerum,  sed  virtutum  apice  habentium  ac  non  ha- 
bentium  longe  munificentissimus.  Siste  manum,  siste,  ne 
premat  te  virtus  nimia ;  totum  enim  te  figis,  atque  insumis 
emolumento  nostro*.  Nullus  unquam  filius  sic  matrem 
sugendo  exhausit,  ac  te  patrem  filia  academia :  filiam  nunc 
dicas,  quse  fuit  mater ;  cum  earn  ex  ruinis  regenitam  lautiori 
fronte  perpoliveris,  et  ore  novo  mox  loqui  docueris.  Nos 
itaque,  licet  nondum  sermone  Arabico,  (donum  enim  hoc 
vestrum  est)  certe  gentium  omnigenarum  pectore  gratias 
conceptissimas  recumulamus;  semperque  retinebimus  sub 
linguis  omnibus  unam  animi  devotissimi  efngiem. 
Sanctitatis  vestrse 

humillima  cultrix, 

OXON.  ACAD. 

E  domo  nostree  congregationis, 
Aug,  10,  1636. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  Patri  ac  domino  Guillielmo 
archiepiscopo  Cantuarensi,  regis  a  consiliis  sanctioribus,  et 
Oxoniensis  academise  cancellario  honoratissimo.] 


Concerning  THIS  year  his  majesty  and  the  queen  invited  themselves  to 
mentnofrthen  me  to  OxfordJ  and  brought  with  them  Charles  prince  elector 
king  at  Ox-  palatine,  and  his  brother  prince  Rupert,  being  both  then  in 
ford.  England.  They  came  into  Oxford  at  the  end  of  this  sum- 

mer's  progress  on  Monday,  August  29.  The  vice-chancellor 
I  came  into  made  a  very  good  speech  unto  them,  where  myself  and  the 
make1  things  university  met  them,  which  was  a  mile  before  they  entered 
ready  for  this  the  townu.  That  speech  ended,  they  passed  along  by  St. 


1  ['  Totum  .  .  .  nostro,'  inserted  in 
Reg.  Conv.  from  the  first  Edition  of 
this  work.] 

u  [Wood  adds,  "The  speech  being 
ended  and  approved  by  many  (espe- 
cially  those  of  Ch.  Ch.)  the  chancellor 
in  the  name  of  the  university  presented 
to  the  king  a  bible  in  folio,  with  a 
velvet  cover,  richly  embroidered  with 


the  king's  arms  in  the  midst,  and  also 
a  costly  pair  of  gloves.  To  the  queen 
another  pair  of  gloves,  to  the  prince 
elector  Hooker's  hooks  of  Ecclesiastical 
Polity,  with  gloves,  and  to  his  brother 
Rupert  Caesar's  Commentaries  in  Eng- 
lish,  illustrated  by  the  learned  expla- 
nations  and  discourses  of  Sir  Clem. 
Edmonds."  Woed,  Annals,  p.  408.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


149 


John's,  where  Mr.  Tho.  Atkinsonv  made  another  speech  unto 
them  very  brief,  and  very  much  approved  of  by  his  majesty 
afterwards  to  me.  Within  Christ  Church  gate,  Mr.  William 
Strodex  the  university  orator  entertained  them  with  another 
speech,  which  was  well  approved y.  Thence  the  king  ac 
companied  his  queen  to  her  lodging,  and  instantly  returned 
and  went  with  all  the  lords  to  the  cathedral.  There  after  his 
private  devotions  ended,  at  the  west  door  Dr.  Morris2,  one  of 
the  prebendaries,  entertained  him  with  another  short  speech, 
which  was  well  liked,  and  thence  his  majesty  proceeded  into 
the  quire  and  heard  service.  After  supper  they  were  enter 
tained  with  a  play  at  Christ  Church a,  which  was  very  well 
penned,  but  yet  did  not  take  the  court  so  well.  The  next 
day  being  Tuesday,  the  king  came  to  service  soon  after  eight 
in  the  morning b;  it  was  at  Christ  Church,  and  Mr.  Thomas 


A.D.  1636. 

entertain 
ment  upon 
Thursday, 
August  25. 
I  came  in 
privately  at 
dinner  hour, 
having  sent 
most  of  my 
servants 
thither  the 
night  before, 
and  myself 
lay  that  night 
at  my  lord 
of  Oxford's. 

Aug.  30. 


v  [Ordained  deacon  by  Laud  Feb. 
12,  162|.  (See  Diary.)  Proctor  in 
1629;  afterwards  rector  of  South  Warri- 
borough,  which  he  exchanged  with 
Peter  Heylin.] 

*  [See  above,  p.  5,  note  r.] 

f  ,  The  following  extracts  from  Cros- 
field's  Diary  illustrate  the  statements 
in  the  text.  Aug.  28  (29).  The  presents 
given  to  the  king,  a  bible  of  Edin 
burgh  print,  worth  £80. ;  queen,  Cam- 
den's  .Elizabeth ;  Palsgrave,  Hooker's 
Ecclesiastical  Policy  ;  the  mayor  a 
silver  bowl,  richly  adorned. 

29.  These  were  presented  to  them,  after 
that  first  about  2  of  the  clock,  the  doc 
tors  and  citizens  had  rid  towards  Wood 
stock  to  meet  him,  (there  two  speeches, 
one  by  the  vice-chancellor,  the  other 
by  the  recorder,)  and  they  came  in 
before  the  king  in  this  manner. 

First  a  trumpeter  before  the  towns 
men,  which  were  all  either  apparelled 
in  satin  doublets  and  cloth  breeches  as 
ordinary  townsmen  of  any  degree; 
scarlet  gowns,  so  the  mayor  and  alder 
men  and  2  baylys  :  next  to  them  were 
such  as  rid  in  wide  sleeved  gowns  and 
footcloths,  namely,  Mr.  Stringer,  Greek 
professor,  Mr.  Rons,  library  keeper, 
Mr.  Principall  Airay1,  Mr.  Turner2, 
Mr.  Twine3,  the  2  proctors,  7. 

2.  The  doctors  in  scarlet  to  the  num 
ber  of  about  20. 

3.  After  the  doctors   rid  the  bps., 
thus:   1.  The  bps.  of  Winchester,  Dr. 

1  [Principal  of  St.  Edmund  hall.] 
3  [Keeper  of  the  archives.] 


Curie;  Oxford,  Dr.  Bancroft;  Nor 
wich,  Dr.  Wren.  2.  The  bp.  of  Lon 
don,  Dr.  Juxon,  lord  treasurer,  with 
2  maces  before  him.  3.  The  arch 
bishop,  the  bedells  before  him,  next 
before  the  king. 

4.  Then  the  king  and  queen,  with 
the   Palsgrave   and  his   brother   in   a 
coach. 

5.  After    them    followed    the    lord 
chamberlain,  Lord  Cottington,  and  the 
guards.     These    were  passengers ;  the 
spectators  also  were   ranked  in    their 
orders.      Without   Bocardo    all   the    4 
companies   of  the   town,   shoemakers, 
tailors,  fullers,  &c.     Within    Bocardo 
from  thence  to  Christ  Church,  1.  Un 
dergraduates.     2.   Bachelors   of   Arts. 
3.  Mrs.  of  Arts  and  Blors.  of  Law.     4. 
Bachelors  of  Divinity,  all  in  their  for 
malities. 

6.  When   the    king  and  queen  and 
Palsgrave  were   lighted   out   of  their 
coach  within  Ch.  Ch.  the  orator  made  a 
speech  and  the  vice-chancellor  deliver 
ed  the  books  ut  supra. 

7.  After  supperthe  play  'Prudentius' 
with  '  Intellectus  agens'  and  the  'Rebel 
lious  Passions'  was  acted  from  7  o'clock 
till   9   or    10   at  night,   all   this   upon 
Monday.] 

z  [John  Morris,  reg.  prof. of  Hebrew.] 
a  [The  play  was  entitled  '  Passions 

Calmed,  or  the  Settling  of  the  Floating 

Island,'  by  William  Strode.] 

h  [Crosfield  gives  the  following  ac- 

2  [Savilian  professor  of  geometry.] 


150 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1636.  Brown  being  then  proctor,  made  an  excellent  sermon,  which 
gave  great  content.  The  sermon  ended,  the  prince  elector, 
and  his  brother  prince  Rupert,  attended  by  many  of  the 
lords,  came  to  the  convocation-house,  where  the  place  was 
full  of  university  men,  all  in  their  forms  and  habits  very 
orderly.  And  the  two  princes  with  divers  lords,  were  pleased 
to  be  made  masters  of  art ;  and  the  two  princes'  names  were 
by  his  majesty's  leave  entered  in  St.  John's  college  to  do  that 
house  that  honour  for  my  sake.  In  convocation  the  vice- 
chancellor  having  first  placed  the  princes,  and  briefly  ex 
pressed  the  cause  of  that  convocation,  I  made  a  short  speech, 
which  here  follows  in  haec  verba. 


The  two 
princes' 
names  enter 
ed  in  St. 
John's  col 
lege. 


Florentes  academici,  et  hoc  tempore  florentissimi,  quibus  103 
Caroli  regis  et  pientissimi  et  prudentissimi,  simulque  Mariae 
illustrissimae  heroinse,  consortis  suae  charissimae,  praesentia 
frui  datur.  Nee  ea  solum,  sed  et  prsesentia  eximise  spei 
principum,  nepotum  M.  Jacobi  sacratissimas  memoriae  mon- 
archae,  et  de  academia  literatisque  omnibus  optime  meriti  ; 


count  of  this  day's  proceedings.  "The 
day  following  being  Tuesday,  his  ma 
jesty's  entertainment  was  thus  ordered, 

Hora  8*.  A  sermon  by  proctor 
Browne  at  Christ  Church,  his  text 
Luke  xix.  38,  "  Blessed  be  the  king 
that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
peace  in  heaven  and  glory."  The 
king's  power  proved  against  the  ana 
baptist,  puritan  and  papists.  A  hearty 
vote  to  God,  His  benedictus  upon  him. 

9a.  A  convocation  for  the  creating  of 
some  masters  and  doctors,  followers  or 
retainers  to  the  Palsgrave  ;  yea  the 
younger  brother  took  the  degree  of 
doctor?  At  this  convocation  our  lord 
chancellor  made  a  short  speech  in  ho- 
norem  academic,  by  way  of  congratu 
lation,  that  the  king  was  pleased  to 
visit  the  academy,  and  the  Palsgrave 
and  his  brother,  with  the  bishop  Curie, 
Wren,  were  present  in  the  convocation; 
another  speech  made  more  long  by  Dr. 
Baily  the  vice-chancellor,  after  that 
Sir  Nath.  Brent  had  presented  the 
doctors,  &c.  Ad  nutum  comitis  Pala- 
tini  quivis  ad  gradum  admissus.  (2 
bps.  incorporated,  27  doctors,  21  of  D., 

3°f  {ph.  37    Mast  of  A>>    2   B-    of 

A.); 

day  ; 


[i.e.,   on  this  and  the  following 
this  is   a  marginal    note   in   the 


diary.] 

10  et  11.  usque  ad  primam.  The 
king,  accompanied  with  the  archbishop, 
came  on  foot  from  Christ  Church  to 
Cat-street,  into  the  divinity  schools, 
and  then  went  up  into  the  schools, 
where  the  earl  of  Pembroke's  son,  of 
Exeter  college,  made  a  speech  upon 
his  knees,  which  was  well  accepted  by 
his  majesty.  Afterward  the  king  having 
viewed  the  new  building  westward,  re 
turned  and  sat  down  in  a  chair,  by  the 
great  window,  where  the  books  of  the 
benefactors  lie,  then  went  to  the  MSS. 
in  the  closet,  where  the  lord  chancellor 
shewed  him  some.  So  they  ascended 
into  the  gallery  to  see  the  coins,  the 
archbishop  always,  having  no  doubt 
well  preconceived  before  what  to  shew 
and  say,  related  to  his  majesty  in  pass 
ing  such  things  as  he  conceived  would 
be  most  agreeable,  and  the  king  very 
attentively  observed  all. 

2a.  post  meridiem.  Then  coming  out 
of  the  library,  the  queen  met  him  at 
the  gate,  and  so  they  went  to  dinner  at 
St.  John's,  a  comedy  after  dinner  till 
seven  o'clock,  then  returned  to  Christ 
Church  to  supper,  and  after  supper  a 
comedy,  viz.  the  Royal  Slave,  was 
acted  with  good  applause  of  king  and 
queen."  ] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  151 

principes  hi  sunt,  et  hoc  titulo,  et  suo,  omni  honoris  genere    A.P.  1636. 
dignissimi.     Vos  eos  omni,  quo  potestis,  prosequimini. 

Quid  exspectatis  ultra,  academici  ?  An  ut  ego  oratorio  in 
hoc  senatu  fungar  munere  ?  At  illud  et  memoria,  curis  simul 
et  annis  fracta,  et  lingua  per  se  inculta,  et  desuetudine  lo- 
quendi  haesitans,  et  prsesens  negotium,  quod  ad  alia  festi- 
nat,  omnino  prohibent.  Nee  principes  hi  proceresve  illud 
a  me  exspectant,  cui  aliud  satis  jam  incumbit  negotium  :  et 
qui  illis  brevitatem  in  omnibus  sum  pollicitus. 

Breviter  itaque  quod  ad  vos  attinet,  principes,  non  ortu 
magis  quam  virtutibus  illustres.  Non  exspectat  a  vobis  aca- 
demia,  ut  possitis  totam  entis  profunditatem  exhaurire,  ut 
sic  sitis  artium  magistri ;  sed  liceat  dicere,  freta  setatis  ves- 
trse  nondum  transiistis.  ^Estus  jam  urgent  juveniles.  Hos 
discite  superare  fluctus,  procellas  has  in  auras  redigere,  et 
omnium  insimul  artium  magistri  eritis;  et  quidni  fortu 
ne  ?  Atque  utinam  nostrae  potestatis  esset,  csecaa  illi  deae 
oculos  dare,  quibus  virtutes  vestras  cerneret,  et  agnosceret 
jura. 

Et  vos  etiam  proceres,  principum  horum  cultores,  convo- 
cata  hac  academia  exsultat  videre,  et  non  solum  conferre  gra- 
dus  suos  in  vos  gestit,  quos  omni  honoris  cultu  veneratur : 
sed  potius  eos  conferendo,  honorem  summum  gradibus  suis 
quserit ;  quod  placeat  principibus  hisce  vobisque  pannis  suis 
(nam  et  pannus  in  purpura  est)  inaugurari.  Floreat  sic 
ssepius  academia,  et  nativis  simul  et  adoptivis  filiis  gaudeat. 
Egregie  vice-cancellarie,  ad  creationem  et  admissionem  simul 
pro  officio  tuo  descende. 

After  this   the  vice-chancellor   proceeded,  made  another  The  two 
short  speech,  and  after  creation  and  admission  of  the  princes  othenLn'our- 
and  other  honourable  persons,  ended  the  convocation.     That  able  persons 
finished,  they  all  returned  to  Christ  Church  to  attend  upon  ™ade  masters 
the  king,  (the  princes  having  formerly  in  the  morning  seen 
some  of  the  fair  colleges.)     Then  the  queen  being  not  ready, 
the  king  with  the  princes  and  the  nobles,  myself  also  waiting 
upon  him,  went  to  the  library,  where  the  king  viewed  the 
new  buildings d  and  the  books,  and  was  entertained  with  a 

d  [See  above,  p.  143.] 


152  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.    very  neat  speech  made  by  the  son  of  the  earl  of  Pembroke 
and  Montgomery c,  then  lord  chamberlain. 

Then  word  was  brought  up,  that  the  queen  was  come. 
So  the  king  went  into  the  coach  to  her,  and  they  went 
away  to  St.  John's  to  dinner,  the  princes  and  nobles  attend 
ing  them. 

When  they  were  come  to  St.  John's,  they  first  viewed  the 
new  building,  and  that  done,  I  attended  them  up  the  library 
stairs ;  where  so  soon  as  they  began  to  ascend,  the  music 
began,  and  they  had  a  fine  short  song  fitted  for  them  104 
as  they  ascended  the  stairs.  In  the  library  they  were  wel 
comed  to  the  college  with  a  short  speech  made  by  [Abraham 
Wright f,]  one  of  the  fellows. 

The  king  And  dinner  being  ready,  they  passed  from  the  old  into 

and  (lu^n'      the  new  library,  built  by  myself,  where  the  king,  the  queen, 
and  prince      and  the  prince  elector  dined  at  one  table,  which  stood  cross 

Rupert,  with  at  the  upper  end.     And  prince  Rupert  with  all   the  lords 

other  honour-        .  ...  i-       •• 

able  persons    an(i  ladies  present,  which  were  very  many,  dined  at  a  long 

feasted  by  me  table  in  the  same  rooms.  All  other  several  tables,  to  the 
number  of  thirteen  besides  these  two,  were  disposed  in  seve 
ral  chambers  of  the  college,  and  had  several  men  appointed 
to  attend  them;  and  I  thank  God  I  had  that  happiness,  that 
all  things  were  in  very  good  order,  and  that  no  man  went 
out  at  the  gates,  courtier  or  other,  but  content ;  which  was 
a  happiness  quite  beyond  expectation. 

When  dinner  was  ended,  I  attended  the  king  and  the  queen 
together  with  the  nobles  into  several  withdrawing  chambers, 
where  they  entertained  themselves  for  the  space  of  an  hour. 
And  in  the  mean  time  I  caused  the  windows  of  the  hall  to 
be  shut,  the  candles  lighted,  and  all  things  made  ready  for 
the  play  to  begin.  When  these  things  were  fitted,  I  gave 
notice  to  the  king  and  the  queen,  and  attended  them  into 

e  [William  Herbert  of  Exeter  coll.,  account  of  his  writings,  which  were 

created  M.A.  the  day  following,  Aug.  numerous,  Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  276 

31.  (Wood,  F.  O.  i.  491)].  seq.  He  died  in  1690.] 

f  [He  was  one  of  the  principal  ac-  &  [Crosfield  remarks  on  this  enter- 
tors  in  the  play  subsequently  men-  tainment,  Diary,  Sept.  3.  "  The  baked 
tioned.  He  was  appointed  in  1645  meats  served  up  in  St.  John's  were  so 
vicar  of  Okeham,  and  was  elected,  in  contrived  by  the  cook  that  there  was 
1656,  minister  of  St.  Olave,  Silver-  first  the  forms  of  archbishops,  then 
street:  of  neither  of  which  livings  he  bishops,  doctors,  &c.  seen  in  order, 
obtained  legal  possession,  as  he  was  un-  wherein  the  king  and  courtiers  took 
willing  to  take  the  covenant.  See  a  full  much  content."] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  153 

the  hall,  whither  I  had  the  happiness  to  bring  them  by  a    A.D.  1636. 

way  prepared  from  the  president's  lodging  to  the  hall  with 

out  any  the  least  disturbance  ;    and   had  the  hall  kept   as 

fresh  and  cool,  that  there  was  not  any  one  person  when  the 

king   and  queen  came  into   it.     The   princes,  nobles,    and 

ladies  entered  the  same  way  with  the  king,  and  then  pre 

sently  another  door  was  opened  below  to  fill  the  hall  with 

the  better  sort  of  company,  which  being  done,  the  play  was 

begun  and  acted.     The  plot  was  very  good,  and  the  action  h. 

It  was  merry,  and  without  offence,  and  so  gave  a  great  deal 

of  content.     In  the  middle  of  the  play,  I  ordered  a  short 

banquet  for  the  king,  the  queen,  and  the  lords.     And  the 

college  was  at  that  time  so  well  furnished,  as  that  they  did 

not  borrow  any  one  actor  from  any  college  in  town.     The 

play  ended,  the  king  and  the  queen  went  to  Christ  Church, 

retired  and  supped  privately,  and  about  eight  o'clock  went 

into  the  hall  to  see  another  play,  which  was  upon  a  piece  of 

a  Persian  story  *.     It  was  very  well  penned  and  acted,  and  The  latter 

the  strangeness  of  the  Persian  habits  gave  great  content  ;  so  ^r^  acted 


that  all  men  came  forth  from  it  very  well  satisfied.     And  the  over  again  by 

queen  liked  it  so  well,  that  she  afterwards  sent  to  me  to  have  ™fe  <lueen/s 

players  at 
the  apparel  sent  to  Hampton  Court,  that  she  might  see  her  Hampton 

own  players  act  it  over  again,  and  see  whether  they  could  do  Court. 
it  as  well  as  it  was  done  in  the  university.     I   caused  the 
university  to  send  both  the  clothes  and  the  perspectives  of 
the  stage;    and  the  play  was    acted  at  Hampton  Court  in 
November   following1".     And   by   all   men's   confession   the 

h  [The  title  of  the  play  was  '  Love's  1605.    (See  Nichols'  Royal  Progresses 

Hospital,  or  the  Hospital  of  Lovers,'  of  King  James,  vol.  i.  p.  558.)] 
written    by    George   Wilde,   and  per-          k   [And    on   the    following  Twelfth 

formed  by  him,  John  Goad,  Humphrey  night,  as  appears  by  a  letter  of  Edw. 

Brook,    Abraham    Wright,    Edmund  Rossingham    to    Sir     T.     Puckering. 

Gayton,    John    Hyfield,  &c.     (Wood,  (Birch's   Charles   I.,    vol.  ii.  p.  266.) 

Ath.  Ox.  iv.  275.)     Wilde  was  after-  The  queen  sent  the  university  a  letter 

wards  chaplain  to  abp.  Laud,  vicar  of  of  thanks,  which  was  read  in  convo- 

St   Giles'  Reading,  rector  of  Bidden-  cation   Dec.    19,   1636;    (Reg.    Conv. 

den  in  Kent,  and  consecrated  Jan.  27,  R.  fol.  138.)     It  is  as  follows: 
1660-1,  bishop  of  Londonderry.  (Ibid.,  Henrietta  Maria, 

iii.  720.)]  Trusty   and   wellbeloved  we   greet 

1  ['  The  Royal  Slave,'    by  William  you  well.     The  clothes  together  with 

Cartwright,  student  of  Christ  Church.  the  whole  furniture  and  ornaments  be 

lt  was   published   first   in   1639,  and  longing  to  that  play  wherewith  we  were 

afterwards  in  1640.     The  scenery  and  so   much  pleased  at  our  last  being  in 

decorations   were    designed   by    Inigo  Oxford  we  have  received  ;  and  do  ac- 

Jones,   who  had  been   employed  in  a  knowledge  for  no  contemptible  testi- 

like  capacity  on  King  James's  visit  in  mony  of  your  respect  to  us  the  unfur- 


154 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1636.  players  came  short  of  the  university  actors.  Then  I  humbly 
desired  of  the  king  and  the  queen,  that  neither  the  play  nor 
clothes  nor  stage  might  come  into  the  hands  and  use  of  the 
common  players  abroad,  which  was  graciously  granted. 

But  to  return  to  Oxford.  This  play  being  ended,  all  men  121 
betook  themselves  to  their  rest,  and  upon  Wednesday  morn 
ing,  August  31,  about  eight  of  the  clock,  myself  with  the  vice- 
chancellor  and  the  doctors  attended  the  coming  forth  of  the 
king  and  queen ;  and  when  they  came,  did  our  duties  to 
them.  They  were  graciously  pleased  to  give  the  university 
a  great  deal  of  thanks ;  and  I  for  myself  and  in  the  name  of 
the  university,  gave  their  majesties  all  possible  thanks  for 
their  great  and  gracious  patience  and  acceptance  of  our  poor 
and  mean  entertainment :  so  the  king  and  the  queen  went 
away  very  well  pleased  together l. 

That  Wednesday  night  I  entertained  at  St.  John's,  in 
the  same  room  where  the  king  dined  the  day  before,  at  the 
long  table  which  was  for  the  lords,  all  the  heads  of  colleges 
and  halls  in  the  town,  and  all  the  other  doctors,  both  the 


nishing  yourselves  of  such  necessaries 
merely  for  our  accommodation  ;  a  thing 
which  we  do  not  only  take  very  kindly, 
but  are  ready  to  remember  very  really, 
whensoever  you  will  furnish  us  with 
any  occasion  wherein  our  favour  may 
be  useful  unto  you  :  in  the  mean  time 
you  may  be  confident  that  no  part  of 
these  things  that  are  come  to  our  hands 
shall  be  suffered  to  be  prostituted  upon 
any  mercenary  stage :  but  shall  be 
carefully  reserved  for  our  own  occa 
sions,  and  particular  entertainments  at 
court.  With  which  assurance,  together 
with  thanks  and  our  best  wishes  for 
the  perpetual  flourishing  of  your  uni 
versity,  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell. 
Given  under  our  hand,  at  Hampton 
Court,  this  sixth  day  of  December, 
1636. 

Letters  of  thanks  were  also  sent  from 
the  earl  of  Pembroke,  lord  chamber 
lain,  and  the  earl  of  Dorset.] 

1  [A  convocation  was  held  in  the 
afternoon  of  that  day,  when  Walter 
Curie,  bp.  of  Winchester,  and  Matth. 
Wren,  bp.  of  Norwich,  were  incorpo 
rated,  and  prince  Rupert,  James  Stuart, 
duke  of  Lennox,  William  Seymour, 
earl  of  Hertford,  Rob.  Devereux,  earl 
of  Essex,  Thomas  Howard,  earl  of 


Berkshire,  Thomas  Bruce,  earl  of  Elgin, 
and  others  whose  names  are  recorded 
in  Wood's  Fasti  (adann.)  were  created 
M.A.,  and  many  other  persons  of  note 
admitted  to  higher  degrees. 

The  following  entries  from  Cros- 
field's  Diary  may  here  be  introduced. 

"  Sept.  1.  (It  should  be  Aug.  31.) 
The  day  following,  being  Wednesday, 
the  king  and  queen  departed  about  nine 
o'clock,  and  went  to  Winchester,  the 
queen  to  Henley  that  night,  having 
first  saluted  all  the  doctors  in  Christ 
Church  quadrangle.  Then  Dr.  Jackson 
and  Mr.  Provost  being  to  wait  that 
month,  went  to  Winchester  after  the 
king. 

2.  The    comedies    were    acted    be 
fore  the  scholars  at  Christ  Church  for 
their  money. 

3.  A    convocation,     when     many 
doctors  and  bachelors  of  divinity,  law, 
and  physic,  and  masters  and  bachelors 
of  arts,  had  their  degrees  gratis,  tamen 
theologi  sub   hac  conditione,  quod   si 


on    praestent   exercitia 
intra  annum,  tenentur  solvereuniversi- 

-  {&] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  155 

proctors,  and  some  few  friends  more  which  I  had  employed  A.D.  1636. 
in  this  time  of  service ;  which  gave  the  university  a  great  deal 
of  content,  being  that  which  had  never  been  done  by  any 
chancellor  before.  I  sat  with  them  at  table,  we  were  merry, 
and  very  glad  that  all  things  had  so  passed  to  the  great 
satisfaction  of  the  king,  and  the  honour  of  that  place. 

Upon  Thursday,  September  1,  I  dined  privately  with  some 
few  of  my  friends :  and  after  dinner  went  to  Cuddesden  to 
my  ancient  friend,  my  lord  the  bishop  of  Oxford's  house; 
there  I  left  my  steward,  and  some  few  of  my  servants  with 
him  at  Oxford  to  look  to  my  plate,  linen,  and  other  things, 
and  to  pay  all  reckonings,  that  no  man  might  ask  a  penny 
after  we  had  left  the  town;  which  was  carefully  done  ac 
cordingly.  Upon  Friday,  September  2,  I  lay  at  a  house  of 
Mr.  Justice  Jones's m  of  Henley- upon -Thames,  upon  his  ear 
nest  invitation.  And  upon  Saturday,  September  3,  (God  be 
thanked,)  I  returned  safe  home  to  my  house  at  Croydon.  The 
week  after,  my  steward  and  other  servants,  which  stayed  with 
him,  came  from  Oxford  to  me;  where  the  care  of  my  ser 
vants,  with  God's  blessing  upon  it,  was  such,  as  that  having 
borrowed  all  the  king's  plate,  which  was  in  the  progress,  and 
all  my  lord  chamberlain's,  and  made  use  of  all  mine  own, 
and  hired  some  of  my  goldsmith,  I  lost  none,  but  only  two 
spoons  which  were  of  mine  own  plate,  and  but  little  of  my 
linen. 

My  retinue  (being  of  all  my  own,  when  I  went  to  this 
entertainment)  were  between  forty  and  fifty  horse ;  though  I 
came  privately  into  Oxford,  in  regard  of  the  nearness  of  the 
king  and  queen,  then  at  Woodstock.  There  was  great  store 
of  provision  in  all  kinds  sent  me  in  towards  this  entertain 
ment  ;  and  yet  (for  I  bare  all  the  charge  of  that  play  which 
was  at  St.  John's,  and  suffered  not  that  poor  college  to  be 
at  a  penny  loss  or  charge  in  any  thing)  besides  all  these 
sendings  in,  the  entertainment  cost  me" 

m  [Sir  William  Jones,  one  of  the  bedel  of  arts ;  it  is  entitled,  '  Epulae 

justices  of  the  court  of  king's  bench.  Oxonienses ;  or  a  jocular  relation  of  a 

He  died  Dec.  9,  1640,  (Wood,  Ath.  Banquet  presented  to  the  best  of  Kings 

Ox.  ii.  673.)]  by  the  best  of  Prelates,  in  the  year 

n  [Wood  mentions  a  humorous  ac-  1636,  in  the  Mathematic  Library  at  S. 

count  of  the  reception  of  the  king  at  Jo.  Bapt.  Coll.'  It  is  in  Wood's  study, 

St.  John's,  written  by  Edmund  Gay  ton,  num.423.  See  Wood,  Ath.Ox.iii.  756.] 
(mentioned  above,)  afterwards  superior 


156  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A,D.  1636. 

Satutem  in  Christo".  122 

SIR, 

Novem.  26.  THE  sickliness  of  these  times,  and  my  many  other  occa- 
the  vice-™  °  si°ns>  made  me  forget  to  write  to  you  before  the  beginning  of 
chancellor  Michaelmas  term  last,  concerning  the  sermon  and  prayers 
servicefcto  be  usualty  na^  a^  St.  Mary's  at  the  beginnings  of  terms,  which 
in  Latin  at  were  wont  to  be  not  so  orderly  as  they  should,  nor  with 
ir?n  bof  t^m  so  £00<^  example  to  other  places  at  large  in  the  kingdom,  as 
&c.  such  a  university  should  give. 

The  commu-       For,  first,  the  communion  was  celebrated  in  the  body  of  the 

nion  to  be  church,  and  not  in  the  chancel,  which  though  it  be  permitted 
celebrated  in  .  .,  ^,  i  />  T^  i  i  •  f  •*.  i 

the  chancel.    m  tne  Church  of  England  in  some  cases  of  necessity,  where 

there  is  a  multitude  of  people ;  yet  very  indecent  it  is,  and 
unfitting  in  that  place,  where  so  few  (the  more  the  pity)  use 
to  communicate  at  these  solemn  times.  But  this  abuse  I 
caused  to  be  rectified  in  Dr.  Duppa's  time,  and  I  hope  nei 
ther  you  nor  your  successors  will  suffer  it  to  return  again 
into  the  former  indecency. 

Secondly,  though  none  do  come  to  those  solemn  prayers 
and  sermons,  but  scholars,  and  those  too  of  the  best  rank, 
yet  to  no  small  dishonour  of  that  place,  the  sermon  is  in 
Latin  and  the  prayers  in  English :  as  if  Latin  prayers  were 
more  unfit  for  a  learned  congregation,  than  a  Latin  sermon. 
And  the  truth  is,  the  thing  is  very  absurd  in  itself,  and  con 
trary  to  the  directions  given  at  the  beginning  of  the  re 
formation  of  this  Church :  for  in  the  Latin  service  books, 
which  were  first  printed  in  the  beginning  of  Queen  Elizabeth 
[her  reign],  there  is  an  express  both  direction  and  charge, 
that  notwithstanding  the  altering  of  the  ordinary  form  of 
prayers  throughout  the  whole  body  of  the  kingdom  from 
Latin  into  English,  yet  in  the  universities  such  prayers, 
unto  which  none  but  they  which  were  learned  did  resort, 

0  [This  letter  was  read  in  convoca-  tulatory  for  her  entertainment;  the  earl 

tion  Dec.  19,  1636.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  of  Dorset,  gratulatory ;  the  lord  chan- 

139.  b.     Crosfield  notices  it  thus  in  his  cellor,   to   have  Latin   prayers  at  the 

Diary.  "  December.   A  convocation  for  beginning  of  term."] 
reading  letters  from  the  queen,  congra- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  157 

should  be  in  Latinp.     And  for  my  part,  I  do  much  wonder,    A.D.  1636. 


considering  how  public  that  direction  was,  that  the  university 
at  the  beginning  of  terms  should  fall  from  this  ordinance,  and 
so  divide  the  service  and  sermon  between  Latin  and  English. 

Upon  consideration  of  this  I  acquainted  his  majesty  both 
with  that  printed  direction  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  with  the 
breach  of  it  by  the  university  at  the  beginning  of  terms : 
whereupon  his  majesty  was  pleased  to  give  me  in  charge  to 
see  this  ordered,  and  to  take  a  course  for  a  remedy  in  the 
future,  and  that  hereafter  service,  sermon,  and  communion, 
should  be  at  all  beginnings  of  terms  uniformly  in  Latin, 
since  none  resort  to  either  but  such  as  well  understand  it. 

These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you  at  some  con 
venient  meeting  of  the  heads,  to  acquaint  them  with  this 
direction  of  his  majesty,  and  to  take  care,  that  both  at  the 
beginning  of  the  next  term,  and  of  all  terms  following,  the 
service  and  communion  be  in  Latin,  as  well  as  the  sermon. 
123  And  that  such  as  are  not  furnished,  may  the  better  provide 
themselves  of  service  books  in  Latin,  so  soon  as  conveniently 
they  can,  you  shall  do  well  to  make  it  so  much  the  sooner 
known  to  the  heads. 

And  this  I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you,  that  when  I  took 
this  first  into  consideration,  it  was  thought  fitting  to  put  it 
into  the  university  statutes.  But  afterwards  I  considered, 
that  since  the  statutes  were  to  remain  to  posterity,  it  would 
lay  no  small  scandal  upon  these  times,  when  they  should  see 
by  the  very  statute  itself,  what  a  stranger  the  university  was 
to  the  prayers  of  the  Church  in  a  learned  language.  And 
hereupon  (having  first  acquainted  his  majesty  with  this  also) 
I  thought  it  better  to  leave  it  out  of  the  statutes,  and  to 
reduce  it  to  this  privater  way,  which  opinion  of  mine  his 
majesty  was  pleased  graciously  to  approved 

Two  things  there  are,  which  you  and  the  heads  must  take  The  vice- 
present  care  for :  the  one  is,  that  the  vice-chancellor,  and  he  ^n 
that  helps  him  to  execute,  (whosoever  he  be)  be  in  surplices ;  officiates  with 
but  whether  the  vice-chancellor  will  put  on  his  surplice  when  ^^j^ 

to  wear  the 

P  [The  Prayer-book  was  translated      first  edition  of  1560,  permitted  its  use  surplice, 
into  Latin  by  Dr.  Walter  Haddon,  and      in  the  two  universities,  and  in  the  col- 
the  queen  by  her  letters  patent  dated      leges  of  Winchester  and  Eton.] 
April  6, 1560,  which  are  prefixed  to  the          *  [See  Corp.  Stat.  tit.  i.  §  2.J 


158  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A. P.  1636.  he  goes  to  the  communion,  or  put  it  on  at  the  first,  and  so  read 
service,  and  sit  at  the  sermon  in  it,  I  leave  to  his  own  judg 
ment  ;  but  I  like  the  latter  better,  and  the  surplice  must  be 
under  both  the  habit  and  the  hoodr. 

The  singing        The  second  is,  that  there  must  be  care  taken  with  the 
men  to  an-        ..  ,11  TT  i     -,-,-, 

swer  in  Latin.  smging  men,  that  they  may  answer  the  litany  and  all  other 

places  of  the  service,  where  they  interpose,  in  Latin,  which 
they  may  easily  practise  and  be  ready  to  perform  at  the  be 
ginning  of  the  next  term ;  but  if  they  cannot,  the  litany  must 
be  sung  or  answered  by  the  masters  (without  the  organ)  till 
they  can :  for  the  main  business  to  have  all  things  in  Latin 
must  go  on.  So  wishing  you  all  health  and  happiness,  and 
the  university  that  honour  that  belongs  unto  her  entire,  I 
leave  you  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  rest 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
Nov.  26,  1636. 

My  letters  to  I  hope  you  take  care  that  all  letters  of  mine,  which  concern 

cerr^ngTusi-'     business  of  tnis  or  the  like  nature,  be  registered8. 
ness  of  im 
portance  to 
be  registered. 

HONORATISSIME  CANCELLARIE*  ! 

Thanks  from        Qui  in  commodum  nostrum  quasi  afflatus  raperis,  honori 

the  univer-      etiam  nostro  velut  de  specula  ita  prospicis,  ut  nee  rogare 

sity  for  my  .r  . 

delivery  of      amplms,  nee  monere  ausi  simus,  ne  vel  hmc  curse,  vel  bene- 

their  letters     volentise  inde  tuse  detrahere  videamur,  a  quibus  ita  procedunt 

to  the  queen    ,          „   .  . 

about  their      benencia,  ut  ea  jam  inter  mores  tuos  reputemus,  atque  unum 

illud  restare  nobis  arbitremur,  peractis  demum  omnibus, 
gratulari.  Certe,  ut  nil  non  tibi  debeamus,  academiae  non 
oculum  tantum  te,  sed  et  manum  preebuisti.  Antehac,  fate- 
mur,  defecit  nobis  ille  donandi  decor,  qui  theses  et  axiomata  124 
observantiae  immiscuimus,  et  syllogismis  sceptrum  vexaturi, 
abacum  in  aulam  transtulimus ;  turn  certe  irruere  magis 
quam  accedere,  et  largiendi  munditias  odisse  academise  sig- 

r  [This  mode  of  wearing  the  surplice  Conv.  Reg.  in  a  later  hand  from  this 

under  the  hahit  is  the  only  suggestion  work, '  Gest.  Cane.  Laud,  p.  123.'] 

of  the  chancellor  which  is  not  complied  *  [This  letter  is  not  in  the  Register 

with.]  of  Convocation.  The  omission  is  noted 

8  [This  postscript  is  inserted  in  the  there,  fol.  138.  a.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  159 

num  erat,  sed  simul  est  opprobrium :  qujeque  nos  quasi  lite-  A.D.  1636. 
ratorum  argumenta  delectarunt,  apud  alios  in  rusticorum  in- 
dicia  transierunt.  Sed  dum  pexum  corpus  ita  aversata  est 
Lycaei  nostri  philosophia,  ut  nee  honestum  retinuerit,  et 
superflua  evitans,  etiam  necessaria  aliqua  ex  parte  prseciderit, 
ea  prorsus  incuria  (graviore  enim  verbo  uti  non  licet)  hoc 
egit,  ut  gratiose  satisfecisset  solium,  si  thura  sine  nausea  ad- 
misisset  benigne  satis,  si  ignovisset  sacerdoti.  Et  certe  in- 
tellexisset  adhuc  academia,  quam  minimum  esset  beneficii 
donare,  nisi  te  nobis  praefecisset  ccelum.  Te  dicimus  meliorem 
medicum,  qui  non  tantum  salutis,  sed  et  virium  et  coloris 
rationem  habes ;  qui  non  solum  caput  veneris  nostrse,  sed  et 
reliquas  partes  ita  perfeceris,  ut  dum  nos  in  majoribus  velis 
eminere,  id  etiam  egeris,  ut  nee  in  minoribus  deficiamus. 
Tibi  ergo  acceptum  referimus,  quod  accipiantur  nostra;  tuo 
splendori,  quod  iste  academise  nsevus  tollatur,  inscite  donare. 
Te  etenim  porrigente,  etiam  et  frustula  nostra,  maculata  magis 
quam  picta,  id  pretii  induerunt,  ut  non  tot  simulacra,  sed  tot 
sedificia,  nee  tot  vestes,  sed  tot  distentas  syntheses  obtulisse 
visi  simus :  adeo  ludicra  ilia,  tuo  honestamento  aucta  inter 
/ceijjiijXia  (fere  dixeramus  inter  avaOij/jbara)  ponuntur,  dum 
tua  protradente  dextra  muneri  nostro  non  id  solum  orna- 
menti,  sed  ea  insuper  et  auctoritas,  et  religio  accessit,  ut 
eodem  animo  receptum  sit,  quo  datum.  Certe  antehac  reges 
et  reginas  magnifica  audivimus  nomina,  jam  et  pia  sentimus. 
Ipsorum  quidem  majestatis  est,  quod  solium  augustum,  tuae 
vero  curse,  quod  et  nutricium  habeamus. 

Yestro  honori  et  paternitati  devinctissima, 

ACAD.  OXON. 

E  domo  convocations, 
Decent.  12,  1636. 


Articles  agreed  upon  and  concluded  the  16th  of  February,  Articles  of 

1636,  between  the  vice-chancellor,  proctors,  and  heads  of  f^eemeilt 

between  the 
houses  in  Oxford,  and  two  of  the  wardens,  and  some  other  university  of 

of  the  company  of  stationers  in  London.  Oxon,  and 

the  company 
of  stationers. 

FIRST,  the  said  vice-chancellor  and  heads  do  covenant  on    e  '     '     ^ 


160  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1636.    their  part,  that  the  university  shall  not  suffer  the  printers  of 
The  books       Oxford,  for   three   years  next  ensuing,  to  print  the  Latin 

are  specified    grammar  called  Lillie,  nor  the  bible,  &c.  Neither  shall  they 
in  the  order  -,,-,.  i        •  L 

from  the         authorize  or  license  any  other  under  their  power,  or  by  virtue 

council  to  the  of  their  privilege  lately  granted,  to  print  any  of  those  other- 
0      wi§e  tnan  as  the  company  of  stationers  and  the  parties  therein 
interested  shall  permit. 

Secondly,  the  said  vice-chancellor  and  heads  do  promise  125 
and  undertake,  that  an  order  to   this  purpose  reasonably 
agreed  upon  by  the  council  on  both  sides,  shall  be  ratified 
and   confirmed   by  convocation   under  the  university  seal, 
betwixt  this  present,  and  our  Lady-day  next  ensuing. 

Thirdly,  the  wardens  above  named,  and  their  brethren  of 
the  company  do  covenant,  and  grant  to,  and  with  the  said 
vice-chancellor,  &c.  That  upon  such  an  order  had,  and  ob 
tained  from  convocation  under  the  public  seal  of  the  univer 
sity,  the  company  of  stationers  shall  under  their  common 
seal,  firmly  bind  their  body  and  company  yearly  to  pay  £200 
unto  the  said  university,  during  the  time  expressed  in  the 
order,  by  even  and  equal  portions;  that  is  to  say  £100  at  our 
Lady-day,  and  an  £100  at  Michaelmas,  beginning  their  first 
payment  at  our  Lady-day  next. 

Fourthly,  the  wardens  above  named  do  undertake  to  obtain 
this  covenant  likewise  from  their  company  under  seal :  that 
in  case  the  university  of  Cambridge  and  the  said  company 
shall  agree  in  like  manner,  that  the  power  of  printing  such 
books  be  there  suspended,  and  that  the  said  company  shall 
give  a  greater  sum  yearly  unto  the  university  of  Cambridge 
in  lieu  thereof:  that  then  the  said  company  shall  add  such 
sum  or  sums  unto  the  sum  formerly  expressed  of  £200  as 
shall  make  the  portion  or  portions  of  money  equal  with  that 
which  is  paid  to  Cambridge.  And  the  said  sum  well  and 
truly  paid  unto  the  university  of  Oxon  at  such  times  by  equal 
portions,  as  are  before  specified. 

Lastly,  it  is  intended,  and  the  full  meaning  of  both  parties 
is,  that  this  course  of  suspending  their  power  by  the  univer 
sity,  and  the  yearly  payment  of  such  a  sum  by  the  company 
of  stationers,  shall  be  renewed  at  the  several  ends  of  such 
terms  of  three  years  in  manner  and  form  above  specified; 
until  it  shall  be  reasonably  agreed  on  by  both  parties  to  re- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  161 

linquish  the  same.  In  witness  whereof  the  parties  above  men-     A.D.  1637. 
tioned  have  interchangeably  set  to  their  hands. 

RICH.  BAYLIE,  vice-can.  Oxon. 
Jo.  PRIDEAUX,  Exon.  rector. 
Ro.  PINCKE,  cust.  coll.  Novi. 
PHIL.  PARSONS,  anise  Cerv.  princip.x 
THO.  WALKER,  coll.  Univers.  magist.y 
THO.  BROWN,  procur.  senior. 


126  Salutem  in  Christ o. 

SIR, 

I  HAVE  received  yonr  letters  by  the  stationers,  and  with  The  copy  of 
them  a  copy  of  the  articles  agreed  upon  between  you.  These  *  Part  °f  ™? 
articles  I  can  find  no  fault  with ;  for  certainly  it  will  be  more  vice-chancel- 
beneficial  to  the  university  for  the  advance  of  a  learned  press  lor  ^bout  ,tne 

.  -ill       stationers 

to  receive  £200  a  year,  than  to  print  grammars  and  almanacks,  agreement 

&c.     And  more  honour  too,  when  it  shall  appear  to  what  ex-  and  .tne  re- 
traordinary  good  use  you  turn  this  money.     I  have  therefore  200?.  per  ann. 
directed  them  to  my  council  to  draw  the  agreement  upon  for  the  set- 
these  articles  in  form,  and  so  to  settle  the  business  :  and  they  j^e'd  press, 
give  good  reason  why  the  fourth  article  should  be  secured  Feb.  24 ». 
apart :  but  I  like  the  conclusion  best  of  all ;   namely,  that 
this  agreement  may  determine  at  the  end  of  three  years,  if 
the  university  find  it  so  fitting  for  them. 

x  [He  was  originally  a  fellow  of  was  sealed  in  convocation,  between 

St.  John's  coll.,  took  the  degree  of  the  university  and  the  company  of 

M.D.  in  the  university  of  Padua,  and  stationers,  by  which  the  university 

June  20,  1628,  was  incorporated  at  granted  the  power  of  printing  bibles 

Oxford.  Wood,  F.  O.  i.  443.]  and  other  books  printed  by  the  king's 

y  [Canon  residentiary  and  preb.  of  printer,  and  specially  Lil lie's  grammar, 

Litton  in  the  church  of  Wells.  He  to  the  company  of  stationers  for  three 

was  related  to  Abp.  Laud,  who  be-  years,  for  £200  a-year.  It  was  after- 

queathed  him  his  ring  with  a  sapphire  wards  agreed  to  expend  this  sum  on  a 

in  it,  and  appointed  him  his  executor  press  for  printing  the  Greek,  Arabic, 

in  the  event  of  the  deaths  of  Dr.  Baylie,  and  Oriental  MSS.  given  by  the  chan- 

Mr.  John  Robinson,  and  Dr.  Edward  cellor  to  the  library ;  that  this  should 

Layfield  (his  nearest  connections),  be-  be  committed  to  the  delegates  nomi- 

sides  leaving  his  son,  John  Walker,  nated  April  1,  1633,  and  that  they 

£50  a-year  from  his  lease  of  Barton  should  keep  a  book  of  accounts  of  the 

farm,  near  Winchester.]  receipts  and  expenditure.  Conv.  Reg. 

z  [March  31,  1637.   An  indenture  R.  foil.  142.  b.— 143.  b.] 


162  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637.        For  Cambridge,  as  I  know  not  what  they  will  do  in  this 


~  business,  so  neither  will  I  be  forward  to  meddle  with  them, 
but  leave  them  to  use  their  privilege  in  such  sort  as  them 
selves  shall  think  best.  True  it  is,  that  when  Bishop 
Harsenet,  one  of  their  own,  was  so  far  from  assisting,  that 
he  oppressed  their  privilege,  and  dissuaded  me,  yet  I  stuck 
close  to  them,  and  carried  their  business  alone  :  nevertheless, 
they  shall  never  be  able  to  go  tell  my  lord  their  chancellor, 
that  I  offer  to  force  their  privilege  in  the  least.  Yet  if  any 
difference  between  them  and  the  stationers  come  in  public,  I 
shall  moderate  things  according  to  reason,  as  far  as  I  can. 

Now  in  the  mean  time  I  shall  require  this  of  you  and  your 
successors,  that  this  money,  which  you  yearly  receive,  may  be 
kept  safe,  as  a  stock  apart,  and  put  to  no  other  use,  than  the 
settling  of  a  learned  press  ;  and  I  think  it  were  not  amiss, 
that  some  handsome  register-book  were  bought,  in  which 
might  be  kept  alone  your  acts  concerning  the  settlement  of 
the  press  aforesaid,  and  in  another  part  of  the  book  all  your 
receipts,  and  all  your  disbursements  :  and  if  you  and  the 
heads  like  this  proposal  of  mine,  I  would  then  have  you  order 
it  so  by  an  act  of  convocation  :  and  1  will  presently  acquaint 
the  king,  what  great  good  use  we  are  like  to  make  of  the 
gracious  privilege  he  hath  granted,  lest  any  other  man 
should  tell  him  we  have  basely  sold  it. 

The  doctors  Now  to  your  other  letters.  And  first  I  pray,  use  any  fit 
majesty's  /ate  means  ^7  letters  or  otherwise  to  send  to  the  doctors  that 
being  at  Ox-  took  their  degree  at  his  majesty's  late  being  in  Oxford2,  that 
pay  20£  T  t0  eac^  °^  tnem  rePair  to  the  university,  and  perform  their 
man,  or  to  do  exercise  before  the  act  next  ensuing,  or  pay  their  £20  a  man, 
An^thftcT'  according  as  was  ordered  at  the  time  of  their  presentation.  I 
be  published  would  likewise  you  would  let  them  know  that  this  £20  a 
man  skaU  ke  Burned  to  no  other  use  than  to  the  setting  up 
of  the  learned  press,  that  as  many  of  them  as  mean  well  may 
be  the  forwarder  to  pay  it.  And  further,  I  think  it  were  not  127 
amiss  to  publish  this  in  convocation,  both  that  it  may  be 
known  to  what  use  I  mean  to  put  the  money,  and  withal,  that 
their  friends  may  take  notice,  and  send  them  word,  if  they 
will,  that  I  am  resolved  so  soon  as  the  act  is  over,  to  sue 
every  man  in  the  vice-chancellor's  court,  that  pays  not  his 

*  [See  their  names  in  Wood,  F.  O.  i.  493—495.]        *  [See  above,  p.  155,  note  1.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  163 

money,  if  he  have  not  done  his  exercise,  which  I  will  most    A.D.  1637. 
certainly  do,  without  respect  of  persons:  and  therefore  it, is 
fit  it  should  be  made  known  as  soon  as  may  be. 

I  pray  the  next  Monday  commend  me  to  the  heads,  and  About  scho- 
let  them  know,  that  I  expect  from  them  all,  that  their  several^1"8  tf^quent~ 
companies  frequent  the  schools  diligently,  and  behave  them-  schools  and 
selves  there  orderly  and  peaceably ;  and  I  expect  from  your-  dlsPutations. 
self  and  the  proctors,  that  tjie  schools  be  carefully  looked 
unto,  and  that  the  disputations  be  quick  and  scholar-like,  but 
not  tumultuous :  your  predecessor  kept  them  in  very  good 
order  both  his  years,  and  I  hope  you  will  not  fall  short ;  and 
I  pray  tell  Proctor  Brown,  that  whatever  his  brother  proctor 
do,  I  expect  service  from  himb. 

But  my  main  business  of  all  is  to  put  you  in  mind,  that  I  Concerning 
have  not  received  any  account  from  you  all  this  year,  how  the  *^ ^n°^ 
new  statutes  are  put  in  execution,  and  that  not  only  for  the  new  star 
matter  of  disputations,  but  for  all  things  else  :  and  the  reason  tutes* 
of  this  my  care  to  have  an  account  is  two- fold. 

First,  if  the  statutes  fall  into  a  neglect  and  a  half-per 
formance  now  at  their  beginning,  and  in  my  own  life-time, 
there  will  be  no  hope  that  ever  they  will  recover  it  after ;  and 
so  all  that  great  and  most  useful  labour  for  the  university 
will  be  lost :  and  I  have  all  the  reason  in  the  world  to  prevent 
this  inconvenience  if  I  can.  And  these  two  years  of  your 
vice-chancellorship,  the  observation,  or  the  not  observation  of 
them  therein  will  be  a  great  help  or  hindrance  to  the  statutes 
for  ever.  Therefore  I  pray,  as  ever  I  shall  intreat  any  thing 
of  you,  take  all  the  care  you  can  in  this  great  business,  and 
give  me  an  account  from  time  to  time  how  it  proceeds :  and 
you  shall  do  well  to  send  for  Doctor  Turner0,  and  desire  him 
in  my  name  to  give  you  all  the  assistance  he  can,  and  you 
may  shew  if  you  will,  how  zealously  I  have  written  to  you 
about  this  business. 

Secondly,  because  I  remember  I  have  heard,  that  the 
former  proctors  distasted  something  about  the  alteration  of 

b  [From  the  marked  way  in  which  by  him  to  Bramhall,  then  bp.  of  Derry, 

'  Proctor  Brown'  is  spoken  of,  it  woxild  Aug.    11,    1638,   it  would  appear  not 

seem  that  the  Abp.  had  some  private  improbable  that  he  was  a  relation.] 

claim  on  his  services.     And  from  the  c  [Peter  Turner  of  Merton,  created 

mention   of  Mrs.  Browne   as   a   kins-  M.D.  at   the    king's  visit  to  Oxford, 

woman  of  the  Abp.  in  a  letter  written  See  above,  p.  155,  note  1.] 

M2 


164  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637.  the  statute  for  readers'1,  and  that  since  that  time  there  hath 
*feeen  a  transmission  of  that  distemper  from  proctor  to  proctor, 
which  must  needs  do  a  great  deal  of  harm,  considering  how 
much  they  must  be  trusted  with  the  execution  of  the  statutes; 
therefore  I  pray  deal  seriously  with  both  the  proctors,  but 
especially  with  Proctor  Brown,  and  let  him  know,  that  he  can 
give  me  no  content,  if  for  the  remainder  of  his  time  he  be 
not  careful  of  the  statutes,  and  their  due  performance.  And 
at  Easter,  when  the  new  proctors  are  chosen,  I  must  desire 
you  to  look  to  them,  if  they  do  not  look  carefully  to  the 
duty  of  their  places,  and  in  this  particular  especially.  Besides 
I  hear  a  whispering  from  thence,  that  during  your  short 
abode  at  Sarum  in  this  term-time,  the  schools  were  scarce 
ever  called  so  much  as  once.  I  pray  God  it  may  be  found 
they  have  called  the  schools  at  all  since  the  publication  of  the 
new  statutes.  You  shall  do  well  to  examine  this,  and  by  the 
answer  which  the  proctors  give  you,  you  will  be  able  to  dis 
cover  something  both  of  their  diligence  and  intentions; 
besides,  it  cannot  be,  but  that  Mr.  Belle's  death  and  a  new 
and  unexperienced  successor  must  needs  give  some  hindrance 
to  the  statutes  which  pertain  to  service :  but  I  hope  this  will 
be  but  a  temporary  inconvenience,  and  soon  blown  over  by 
the  diligence  of  Mr.  Gayton6,  and  tell  him  I  expect  it. 

A  care  to  be        Besides,  you  shall  do  well  to  have  a  care  of  noctivagation, 

had  of  nocti-  an(j  o^er  disorders,   else  you  will   quickly  have   the    dis- 
vagation,  &c.  '  J  i          J 

tempers  of  the  night  break  out  in  the  day ;  and  now  the 

spring  comes  on,  if  yourself  do  not  take  some  pains  that  way, 
I  doubt  the  proctors  will  be  negligent  enough,  though  of 
their  negligence  I  can  give  no  reason,  unless  it  be  because 
by  the  new  statutes  the  university  is  made  half  sharer  in  the 
mulcts f,  which  how  small  they  are,  will  appear  by  their  ac 
counts^. 

d  [The  new  statute  for  'Readers'  year's  trial:  the  old  statute,  as  em- 
provided  that  the  unendowed  lecturers  bodied  by  the  delegates,  placed  the  ap- 
in  grammar,  rhetoric,  logic  and  meta-  pointmentin  the  hands  of  congregation, 
physics  should  be  elected  every  two  See  Corp.  Stat,  tit.  iv.  '  De  Lectoribus 
years  from  four  colleges,  those  viz.  to  Publicis,'  §  1.] 

which  the  proctors  belonged  at  the  time  e  [A  fellow  of  St.  John's,  mentioned 

of  election,  and  those  which  elected  the  above,  p.    153,   note    h,   155,  note  n; 

proctors   for  the    following  year;    on  elected    Bell's    successor   as   superior 

failure  of  election  by  the  college  the  bedel  of  arts.] 

vice-chancellor  to  nominate  from  some  f  [See  Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  xv.  §  7.] 

hall.      This   alteration   of  the  statute  *  [Ibid.,  tit.  xi.  §  3.] 
was  made  by  the  chancellor  after  the 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD,  165 

With  a  special  caution  for  the  observation  of  the  statute    A.D.  1637. 


for  speaking  Latinh.  Speaking  of 

W.  CANT.         Latin  urged. 
Lambeth, 
Feb.  24,  163f. 


SIR, 

I  HAD  almost  forgotten  a  business  to  you  of  greater  con-  TO  Dr.  Pri- 
sequence  than  this,  and  I  cannot  well  tell  whether  Mr.  Vice-  deau.x  co^- 
chancellor  hath  acquainted  you  with  it  or  no  ;  for  I  writ  not  review  of 


unto  him  very  expressly  in  the  business,  but  now  recalling  it  Mr- 

I  thought  fit  to  write  thus  much  to  yourself.     You  know  " 


swer 


that  Mr.  Chillingworth  is  answering  of  a  book,  that  much  March  3. 
concerns  the  Church  of  England  ;  and  I  am  very  sorry,  that 
the  young  man  hath  given  cause,  why  a  more  watchful  eye 
should  be  held  over  him  and  his  writings1.  But  since  it  is 
so,  I  would  willingly  desire  this  favour  from  you  in  the 
Church's  name,  that  you  would  be  at  the  pains  to  read  over 
this  tract,  and  see  that  it  be  put  home  in  all  points  against 
the  Church  of  Rome,  as  the  cause  requires.  And  I  am  con 
fident  Mr.  Chillingworth  will  not  be  against  your  altering  of 
any  thing  that  shall  be  found  reasonable.  And  to  the  end 
that  all  things  may  go  on  to  the  honour  of  the  Church  of 
England,  I  have  desired  Dr.  Potter,  (who  is  particularly  con 
cerned  in  this  business^,)  so  soon  as  ever  he  is  returned  from 

London,  to  speak  with  you  about  it.     And  when  all  these  Books  li 

censed  to  the 

h  [Ibid.,  tit.  ix.  sect.  ii.  §  1.]  1633.    (See   the    book    mentioned  in  press  to  have 

1  [Laud  doubtless  refers  to  Chilling-  Laud's  correspondence,  with  the  alter-  a  form  of  ap- 

worth's  having  gone  over  to  the  Roman  ations  he  suggested  in  it,  which  were  probation  an- 

communion.  This  occurred  about  1629;  brought  as  a  charge   against  him  by  nexedk. 

he  returned  to  Oxford  in  1631,  and  re-  Prynne,  Cant.   Doom,  pp.  251,  252.) 

considered  the  course  he  had  taken.  Knott  published  in  answer,  '  Mercy  and 

Laud  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  Truth  ;  or  Charity  maintained  by  Ca- 

that"a  watchful  eye"  was  now  more  tholics.    1634.'     It  was  to  this  volume* 

needed  in  respect  of  error  in  another  that  Chillingworth  was  now  preparing 

direction.     See  his  life  by  Des  Mai-  his  well-known  reply,  which  appeared 

seaux,  p.  55.]  in  1638,  'The  religion  of  Protestants  a 

J  [This  controversy  was  commenced  safe  way  to  salvation,  or,  An  Answer 

by  the  Jesuit  Edward  Knott  (or  rather  to  a  book  entitled,  Mercy  and  Truth, 

Matthew  Wilson,  which  was  'his  true  &c.'] 

name)   publishing  his  'Charity   mis-          k  [The   book   came  forth  with  U^e 

taken.'  At  the  king's  command  Potter  approval  of  Fell,  Bayly,  and  Prideaux, 

put  forth  a  reply  to  this  entitled  '  Want  which  gives  a  denial  to  the  unfavour- 

of  Charity  justly  charged  on  all  such  able  opinion  which  Cheynell  said  that 

Romanists,  as  dare  affirm  that  Protes-  Prideaux  entertained  of  it,  and  which 

tancy   destroyeth  Salvation.'    Oxford,  Wood  records,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  91.  J 


166 


THE  HISTORY  OF   HIS 


A.D.  163?.  trials  are  over,  I  would  be  content,  that  both  this  book,  and 
all  others  that  shall  be  hereafter  licensed  in  the  university, 
have  such  an  imprimatur  of  the  licenser  before  it,  as  we  use 
here  above,  which  I  shall  leave  to  the  wisdom  of  the  vice- 
chancellor  and  the  heads. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
March  3,  163f 


The  benefit 


printing,  and 
the  agree 
ment  with 
the  stationers 
upon  it, 
turned  to  the 
learned  press. 
April  10. 


A  PASSAGE  OUT  OF  A  LETTER  OF  THE  ViCE-CHANCELLOR's.       129 

THE  university  do  now  generally  resent,  that  your  grace 
obtained,  and  the  king  confirmed  unto  us  the  greatest  benefit 
that  ever  came  to  the  public  ;  and,  God  willing,  no  man  shall 
disturb  it,  while  I  sit  vice-chancellor. 

MY  ANSWER  TO  IT. 

JT  is  a  har(i  thing  in  this  age  to  bring  men  to  understand 
the  good  that  is  done  them;  and  therefore  I  am  the  more 
glad  that  the  university  doth  it,  that  so  great  a  benefit  given 
them  by  such  a  king  may  not  only  be  received,  but  acknow 
ledged  by  them,  and  the  memory  of  it  delivered  to  succession: 
;and  I  shall  hope  that  your  successors  after  you  will  keep  it  in 
that  way,  into  which  it  is  now  put,  unless  they  can  find  a 
better  and  more  useful  for  the  learned  press. 

W.  CANT. 

April  10,  1637. 


Procu-  ("Mr.  LAWFORDE!,  coll.  Oriel.,  \  [admitted  April 
ratorest.Mr.  GLISSON™,  coll.  Trin.,     /      19.] 


MR.  VICE-CHANCELLOR, 

Concerning  \  'THERE  was  an  English  translation  of  a  book  of  devotion, 
of  ethealla^tg  ^  witten  by  Sales  bishop  of  Geneva,  and  entitled  Praxis 
English  spiritualis  swe  introductio  ad  vitam  devotam,  licensed  by 


translation  of 


[Daniel  Lawford.] 


[John  Glieson.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  167 

Dr.  Hay  wood,  then  my  chaplain11,  about  the  latter  end  of    A.D.  1637. 
November   last ;    but   before   it  passed  his  hands,  he  first  Bishop  Sales's 
struck  out  divers  things  wherein  it  varied  from  the  doctrine  boo.k 
of  our  Church,  and  so  passed  it.     But  by  the  practice  of  one  May  5. 
Burrowes  (who  is  now  found  to  be  a  Roman  Catholic)  those 
passages  struck  out  by  Dr.  Hay  wood  were  interlined  after 
wards   (as  appears  upon  examination  before  Mr.  Attorney 
General0,  and  by  the  manuscript  copy)  and  were  printed  ac 
cording  to  Burrowes's  falsifications.     The  book  being  thus 
printed  gave  great  and  just  offence,  especially  to  myself,  who 
upon  the  first  hearing  of  it  gave  present  order  to  seize  upon 
all  the  copies,  and  to  burn  them  publicly  in   SmithfieldP. 
Eleven  or  twelve  hundred  copies  were  seized  and  burnt  ac 
cordingly;    but  it  seems  two  or  three  hundred  of  the  im 
pression  were  dispersed  before  the  seizure.     Now  my  desire 
is,  that  if  any  copies  of  this  translation  be,  or  shall  be  sent  to 
Oxford,  you  would  call  them  in,  and  take  such  order  for  the 
suppressing  of  them  there  as  is  here  already  taken.     And  so 
I  commend  you  to  God's  grace,  and  rest 

Your  loving  friend, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  4,  1637. 


11  [William  Haywcod,  fellow  of  St.  ration,  in  great  poverty.  He  died  July 
John's,  was  taken  under  Laud's  pa-  22,  1663.  Laud  mentions  (History  of 
tronage,  and  by  him  made  his  chaplain  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap,  xxxviii.) 
and  preferred  to  the  preb.  stall  of  that  he  had  retired  from  his  service  as 
Chamberlaine  Wood,  in  St.  Paul's  chaplain,  when  the  disturbance  was 
church,  Nov.  21,  1631,  and  to  the  rec-  made  about  the  licensing  of  this  book, 
tory  of  Laingdon  in  Essex,  Dec.  8  fol-  and  corrects  the  statement  he  had  in- 
lowing.  In  Jan.  1635-6  he  was  pre-  advertently  made  during  his  trial,  that 
ferred  to  St.  Giles's  in  the  Fields,  (Ry-  he  had  been  dismissed  in  consequence 
rr.er,  Fcedera  IX.  i.  81.)  and  Aug.  28,  of  the  clamour  which  had  then  been 
1638,  to  a  stall  in  Westminster  abbey.  raised.] 

(Ibid.  IX.  ii,  216.)     Articles  were  ex-  °  [Sir  Edward  Bankes.   See  Laud's 

hibited   against  him   in    1641   by   the  account  of  the  examination  in  his  His- 

parishioners   of  St.  Giles,   (an  extract  tory  of  his  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap, 

from  which  is  given  in  Dr.Bliss's  note  to  xxxviii.  p.  363  in  marg.] 

Ant.  a  Wood,  Ath.Ox.iii.635.)  in  conse-  P  [A   proclamation   was   issued   for 

quence  of  which  he  was  deprived  of  his  calling  in  and  burning  the  book.     See 

preferments,  and  lived,  till  the  Resto-  Rymer's  Fcedera,  IX.  ii.  95.] 


168  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637. 


SIR,  130 


May  5.  You  are  now  upon  a  very  good  way  toward  the  setting  up 

A  branch  of    of  a  learned  press  ;  and  I  like  your  proposal  well  to  keep  your 
my  letters  to  ,   .       , 

the  vice-         matrices  and  your  letters,  you  have  gotten,  safe,  and  in  the 

chancellor      mean  time  to  provide  all  other  necessaries,  that  so  you  may 

the  matrices   be  ^eady  for  that  work,  for  since  it  hath  pleased   God  so 

letters,  and     to  bless  me,  as  that  I  have  procured  you  both  privilege  and 

th^press.  ^  means  f°r  that  work,  I  should  be  very  glad  to  see  it  begun 

in  my  own  life-time,  if  it  might  be.     And  because  the  be 

ginning  of  such  a  work  will  be  very  difficult,  as  also  the  pro 

curing  of  a  sufficient  composer  and  corrector  for  the  eastern 

languages,  you  have  done  exceeding  well  to  think  of  him  at 

Ley  den  1,  and  to  get  him  over  upon  as  good  terms  as  you  can^ 

and  to  give  him  an  annual  pension  in  the  mean  time,  that  he 

may  not  be  tempted  from  your  service.     So  God  speed  you. 

My  book  of         I  have  sent  you  down  by  this  carrier  my  book  of  the  uni- 

statutes  sent  versity  statutes,  which  I  give  that  the  library  keepers  may 
forthelibrary         ,  f,    .  '        .       .      °r      _      _       .  T  •,      i_A 

keepers  to  see  rea(l  their  own  duties  in  itr;  tor  having  none,  1  doubt  they 

their  duties,  keep  neither  old  statutes  nor  new  so  well  as  they  should.  And 
it  may  be,  if  you  and  the  rest  of  the  Curators  would  look 
well  to  it,  you  might  find  many  things  there  out  of  order, 
and  fit  to  be  amended.  And  while  I  am  upon  this  argument 
of  placing  the  statute-book  in  the  public  library,  I  pray 

Concerning  acquaint  the  heads  at  the  next  meeting,  that  I  am  informed 
e  statute-k°°k  in  some  private  colleges  is  kept  up  too 


sa- 
tutes  too         close  from  them  whom  it  concerns  ;  which  is  a  great  hindrance 

close.  to  the  due  publication  of  the  statutes,  and  ministers  occasion 

to  many  men  to  pretend  ignorance,  instead  of  shewing  obedi 
ence.  I  pray  therefore  commend  my  love  to  the  heads,  and 
let  them  know,  that  I  expect  every  head  of  a  college  and  hall 
where  there  is  a  library,  to  take  care  that  the  book  of  statutes 
be  placed  and  chained  in  it,  that  it  may  be  of  free  access  to 
the  students  in  each  society  ;  and  that  in  such  halls  as  have 
no  library,  the  statute-book  be  placed  as  safely,  and  yet  as 

Additions  to   publicly  as  it  can  be.    And  further,  I  must  and  do  require  of 

be  inserted     every  of  the  heads,  that  all  the   additions  and  alterations 

in  the  statute         , 

book  of  every  made  upon  the  review  of  the  statutes  be  put  into  all  and 

coll.  and  hall. 

q  L^ome  one  probably  who  had  been  viver  of  oriental  literature.] 
trained  under  lirpenius,  the  professor          r  [See  the  statutes  of  the  Bodl.  libr. 

of  Arabic  at  Leyden,  and  the  great  re-  in  the  appendix  to  the  Corp.  Statut,] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  169 

every  statute-book  which  is  kept  within  their  several  govern-  A.D.  1637. 
ments8.  And  I  do  require  of  you,  Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  to 
see  it  done,  and  to  give  me  an  account  of  it.  For  it  will  be 
no  great  labour  to  you  at  some  convenient  times  to  send  for 
the  statute-book  of  every  college  and  hall,  and  see  whether  it 
be  done  or  no ;  and  if  the  additions  should  not  be  writ  into 
every  book,  it  would  cause  one  college  to  be  otherwise  in 
formed  concerning  their  particular  statutes  than  others  are, 
and  so  cause  more  frequent  recourse  to  the  ledger-book,  than 
would  otherwise  be  necessary,  and  perhaps  breed  other  dif 
ferences  also. 

I  find  that  the  proctors  of  the  last  year,  and  I  doubt  their  Concerning 
predecessors  also,  have  been  too  negligent  in  collecting  the  ^fij^f0™ 
mulcts ;  and  it  may  be  those  that  are  new  come  in  will  be  the  mulcts. 
negligent  also,  if  you  call  not  upon  them  betimes :  I  pray 
131  therefore  commend  me  to  them,  and  tell  them  that  I  will  ex 
pect  their  performance  in  this  particular,  as  well  as  their 
diligence  in  all  things  else;  and  that  I  hold  it  a  very  un 
worthy  thing,  that  out  of  a  plausible  popular  humour  to  de 
cline  the  envy  of  any  private  man,  they  should  so  far  neglect 
their  duty  to  the  statutes  and  the  public.  And  certainly  if 
the  proctors  go  on  in  this  way,  and  either  wholly  neglect  it, 
or  thrust  it  upon  the  vice-chancellor,  1  shall  not  only  take  it 
very  ill  from  them ;  but  at  the  end  of  their  year,  either  I 
shall  cause  the  delegates  not  to  pass  their  accounts,  till 
they  have  paid  it  themselves,  or  else  sue  both  them  and  the 
delinquents  in  the  vice-chancellor's  court  for  such  mulcts  as 
are  left  by  them  uncollected.  And  I  pray  let  the  heads 
know  what  I  have  written  in  this  particular  also. 

I  have  some  more  manuscripts  almost  ready  for  you,  but  I  Manuscripts. 
would  willingly  have  some  larger  place  made,  and  assigned 
for  them,  either  in  the  old  library  or  in  the  new  additions  to 
it*;  for  I  saw  the  last  summer,  that  the  place,  where  they 
now  are,  would  not  hold  all  which  I  have  sent  already.  And 
the  sooner  this  place  is  provided  the  better,  for,  to  prevent 
casualties,  I  could  be  content  they  were  out  of  my  hands. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambelh, 
May  5,  1637. 

8  [See  above,  p.  101,  note  x.]  *  [See  above,  p.  143.] 


170  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637. 

SIR, 

A  branch  of        I  WOULD  have  you  send  for  Mr.  Brevin,  and  let  him  know 

a  letter  to       no^  Qnj     ^ne  difFerence  of  a  master  of  art  at  Oxford  and 

the  vice-  » 

chancellor       Samure,  but  the  ill  consequences  also,  which  may  follow  upon 

concerning     jf   -n  case  j^  should  have  his  degree  confirmed ;  and  that  I 

Mr.  Brevms  .  ' 

degree  of        advise  him  to  go  the  other  way,  and  to  stay  half  a  year,  and 

master,  May   so  ^o  be  created  master,  and  that  in  the  mean  time  I  will 
19  u. 

speak  with  his  friends  here :  but  certainly  for  aught  appears 

to  me  yet,  or  is  like  to  appear,  I  will  never  give  way  to  the 
confirming  of  his  degree,  things  being  at  Samure  as  you 
have  reported  them. 

Concerning  I  like  your  proposal  very  well  for  Mr.  Cartwrightv,  and  am 
glad  to  hear  that  he  is  so  passing  fit  for  the  Greek,  and  every 
way  else  so  well  deserving  for  this  or  a  better  place.  I  have 
not  leisure  to  write  a  letter  to  the  heads,  which  may  lie 
ledger  against  that  time ;  but  I  am  very  heartily  willing  to 
give  my  consent,  that  when  the  voidance  shall  come,  Mr. 
Cartwright  may  be  the  successor,  and  to  that  end  I  give  you 
free  and  full  power  to  move  the  heads,  or  to  do  any  other  act 
fitting  or  conducent  to  the  good  success  of  this  business. 
And  so  much  I  pray  let  Mr.  Cartwright  know,  and  withal 
give  him  thanks  for  his  fair  and  respective  letter  to  me.  One 
thing  is  considerable,  I  take  it,  the  statute  requires  that 
somewhat  should  be  done  with  the  bedel  of  law  in  relation  to 
the  learned  press v;  but  my  memory  does  not  hold  it  perfectly 
what  it  is ;  and  therefore  you  shall  do  well  to  consider  it.  132 
And  now  upon  a  sudden  considering  Gay  ton's  sufficiency,  it 
is  come  into  my  head  to  ask  this  question.  Why  may  not  all 
three  esquire  bedels  join  in  the  learned  press,  though  perhaps 
but  one  of  them  need  be  the  chief  manager :  for  aught  I 
know,  this  may  be  very  well  worth  your  considering. 

u  [Daniel  Brevint  of  the  island  of  15,   166?,  and  created  D.D.  Feb.  27, 

Jersey,  made  the  first  fellow  on  Charles  166.}.     He  was  nominated  dean  of  Lin- 

the  First's  foundation  at  Jesus  college,  coin  Oct.  1681,  and  died  May  1695.] 
for   which    he    was    strongly   recom-          v  [It  was  provided  that  the  office  of 

mended  by  the   principal  inhabitants  superintendent  of  the  press,  Archity- 

of  the  island.  (Wilkins'  Cone.  iv.  534.)  pographus,  should  be  annexed  to  that 

He   was  not  admitted  M.A.  till  Oct.  of  superior   bedel  of  law.     See  Corp. 

12,1608.  (Wood,  F.  O.i.  503.)  During  Stat,  tit.  xviii.  sect.  v.  Cartwright  (who 

the    Rebellion   he   retired   to   France,  is  mentioned  above,  p.  153,  note  i.)  ap- 

and  on  returning  at  the  Restoration  pears  to  have  been    seeking   for   this 

was  installed  canon  of  Durham,  March  appointment.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  171 

I  am  very  desirous  to  prevent  perjury  by  all  means  pos-  A.D.  1637. 
sible,  and  therefore  if  you  can  tell  how  to  order  it,  that  so  So  much  of 
much  of  the  statute-book  may  be  printed,  as  may  direct  the  I^^J^8 
younger  sort  in  matter  of  manners  and  exercise ;  you  shall  manners  or 
do  very  well  to  take  it  into  full  consideration  with  the  heads ;  £xerc^r'  t(J  d 
and  then  put  it  in  practice  accordingly.  But  I  would  have  into  a  little 

the  collection  made  to  be  printed  in  a  little  volume  for  the  volume  and 

r  .        .  printed  for 

daily  use  of  the  students  that  may  desire  itw.     In  your  last  the  use  of 

passage  I  think  you  are  mistaken ;  for  certainly  the  great  the  younger 
ledger-book  of  the  statutes  is  to  be  placed  in  archivis  among  The  le(J  *er 
the  university  charters ;  and  not  in  any  cubb  of  the  library^  book  of*sta- 

nor  to  be  come  at  without  more  keys  than  one:  and  for  this  tutes  to  be 

J  placed  in 

(as  I  remember)  there  is  a  particular  statute  x.  But  howsoever  archivis. 

I  will  not  have  that  book  trusted  under  any  library-keeper's 
key,  and  for  the  statute-book,  which  I  sent  down,  you  did 
well  to  leave  it  in  the  cubbs,  where  it  must  remain,  unless 
you  can  find  some  other  way  to  prevent  the  endeavour  of  the 
Dutch  to  transcribe  it. 

"W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  19,  1637. 


SIR, 

I  AM  very  glad  I  put  that  to  the  question,  concerning  the  Part  of  a 
joining  of  the  other  two  bedels  with  the  law-bedel  to  assist 


at  the  learned  press,  considering  that  it  jumps  so  well  with  lor  concera- 


your  care  and  thoughts  in  the  same  kind  :  and  yet,  though  I  *ng 
think  their  assistance  may  be  very  useful  to  that  work,  it  their  assist- 

will  certainly  be  necessary,  that  the  statute  be  observed,  and  ance  a^  tlie 

J  J  '  learned  press, 

the  mam  trust  be  left  upon  the  law-bedel.     For  else  you  May  26. 

know  between  many  stools,  what's  like  to  go  to  ground.  But 

indeed  if  the  university  would  set  sadly  to  it,  and  bring  in  To  bring  in 
3  Jn  '         some  bache- 

some  bachelors  of  art  to  be  yeomen-bedels,  which  are  well  iors  Of  art  to 

grounded  and  towardly  to  serve  that  press,  as  composers,  or  be  yeomen- 
otherwise,  it  would  in  time  be  of  excellent  use.     And  they  serve  ^Q 
which  thrived  well  and  did  good  service,  might  after  be  pre-  press. 
ferred  to  be  esquire-bedels,  and  so  that  press  would  ever  train 
up  able  men  for  itself.     And  though  there  be  time  enough 

w  [See   a   further   account   of    this          x  [Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  x.  sect.  ii.  §  3.] 
matter  below,  p.  190.] 


172  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637.  to  think  of  this  business ;  yet  certainly  it  would  not  be  amiss, 
now  while  it  is  res  Integra,  to  propose  it  (in  general  at  least) 
to  the  heads,  that  every  man  may  have  his  eyes  upon,  and 
help  to  perfect  so  good  a  business,  which  yet  I  leave  to  your 
free  consideration. 

Divinity  I  am  glad  the  divinity  disputations  in  course  go  on.     1 133 

disputations.  ^Q  nQw  ^^  ig  mastere^  other  difficulties  will  be  put  the 
Speaking  of  better  over.  But  in  any  case  give  continual  charge  concern- 
ing  the  speaking  of  Latin.  For  if  that  be  not  followed, 
it  will  be  a  heavy  business  to  many  of  the  younger  sort, 
when  they  come  to  take  their  degrees  ;  and  the  time  of  four 
years  for  the  putting  of  that  statute  in  execution  will  draw 
on  apace  x. 

The  clerkship      When  I  read  your  letters,  I  was  doubtful  in  whom  the 

and  tteS'8  £ift  of  the  clerksniP  of  St-  Mary's  was,  till  after  considering 

stowing  of  it.  how  the  fees  did  rise,  I  conclude  it  must  needs  be  in  the 

university.     And  while  I  was   reading  your   letters  I  did 

think  to  leave  it  wholly  to  yourself,  for  which  of  your  men 

you  pleased ;  but  afterwards  reading  a  letter  that  came  from 

Dr.  Turner,  he  put  some  thoughts  into  my  head,  that  such  a 

man  might  be  chosen  clerk,  as  may  be  serviceable  to  the 

learned  press,  either  as  a  founder  of  letters,  or  as  a  pressman 

in  some  inferior  service.     This  is  a  very  good  consideration 

and  timely  put  in ;  I  pray  therefore   speak  with  Dr.  Turner 

about  it,  and  if  such  a  man  may  be  had  in  any  case,  let  him 

be  chosen :  but  if  otherwise  it  happen,  that  you  must  take  a 

man  at  large,  then  I  leave  you  free  to  take  which  of  your 

The  clerk  of   own  men  you  please.    Yet  whosoever  you  make  clerk,  I  hold 

to  'he^Lock10*  ^  VGY^  ^  ^at  ^  SamC  maii  t^iat  *S  c^erk>  mav  not  have  *^e 
keeper.  keeping  of  the  clock  at  St.  Mary's  to  shorten  the  hours  at 

his  pleasure,  especially  in  Lent,  to  the  great  hindrance  of 
those  disputations,  and  the  disordering  of  the  university  in 
all  exercises?.  But  I  think  very  fit  that  some  honest  man  were 
taken  into  that  service,  that  would  not  be  so  easily  found, 
nor  perhaps  so  ordinarily  corrupted,  as  the  clerks  use  to  be. 
And  for  this  service  of  his,  he  may  be  allowed  some  small 
thing  yearly  out  of  the  clerk's  wages.  I  leave  all  this  to 

x    [Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  ix.   sect.  ii.  §§       clerk  of  the  university  should  have  the 
1>  3.]  charge  of  the  clock.     Corp.  Stat.,  tit. 

y    [The    statutes    provide    that    the       xviii.  sect,  iv.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  173 

your  consideration,  but  believe  it  as  very  a  trifle  as  it  seems,    A.D.  1637. 
it  reaches  very  far  into  the  discipline  of  the  university. 

W.  CANT. 

May  26,  1637. 


SIR, 

I  AM  very  sorry  you  are  to  seek  for  men  to  answer  in  the  A  passage  to 
law  and  physic  act;  and  am  very  loth  to  give  way  to  any,  chaJcelTor 
that  want  time  to  answer,  and  have  that  exercise,  stand  for  concerning 
their  degree.     Were  it  not  better,  that  one  of  the  doctors  ^Tawlnd1 
should  answer  the  rest,  than  take  this  course  ?  truly  for  my  physic  act. 
part  I  think  it  more  honour  for  the  university  to  have  no  June  16> 
proceeders  in  either  faculty,  than  to  be  driven  to  this  exigent, 
And  it  were  fit  hereafter,  you  did  agree  with  the   doctors  faculty  to 
that  proceed,  to  provide  an  answerer,  and  not  leave  the  uni-  Provlde  hls 

ctn  s  w^rci* 

134versity  to  provide  one  for  them,  and  not  to  suffer  the  degree  himself. 
of  any  one  doctor  to  pass,  till  he  were  able  to  name  who 
should  answer  in  that  faculty.     I  pray  consider  seriously  of 
this  with  the  heads. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
June  16,  1637. 


SIR, 

FOR  Mr.  Crofts  and  his  great  horses,  he  may  carry  them  A  passage  of 
back  if  he  please,  as  he  brought  them.  For  certainly  it  can-  ^JJ^uScS? 
not  be  fit  for  the  university,  though  the  exercise  in  itself  be  lor  for  Mr. 

exceeding  commendable  :  for  the  gentlemen  there  are  most  f roits  an(* 

his  great 

part  too  young,  and  not  strong  enough  ;  besides  you  cannot  horses  to  de- 
put  that  charge  upon  their  parents,  without  their  particular  Part 
leave  and  directions ;  but  this  especially  is  considerable,  that 
where  ever  this  place  of  riding  shall  be,  where  one  scholar 
learns,  you  shall  have  twenty  or  forty  to  look  on,  and  there 
lose  their  time,  so  that  upon  the  whole  matter,  that  place 
shall  be  fuller  of  scholars,  than   either  schools   or  library. 
Therefore  I  pray  give  Mr.  Crofts  thanks  fairly  for  his   good 
intentions;    but  as  thus  advised,  I  cannot  give  way  to  his 
staying  there  to  the  purpose  he  intends ;  nor  is  it  altogether 


174  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637^  inconsiderable,  that  you  should  suffer  scholars  to  fall  into 
Hereupon       the  old  humour  of  going  up  and  down  in  boots  and  spurs  z, 

Mr.  Crofts      an(j  ^}lGn  j^ye  their  excuse  ready,  that  they  are  going  to  the 

presently  left  ,  , 

Oxford.          riding  house;  and  I  doubt  not,   bat  other   inconveniences 

may  be  thought  on,  therefore  I  pray  no  admittance  of  him. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
June  23,  1637. 

In  this  year  the  porch  at  St.  Mary's  was  finished  at  the  cost 
of  my  chaplain  Dr.  Morgan  Owen,  which  was  2 


Salutem  in  Christ o. 

Dr.  Baylie  AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.     The  time  draws 

continued       now  on  for  the  appointing  another  vice-chancellor  for  the 

vice-chancel-  ,n  ,,  «  ., 

lor  a  second    year  ensmng>  that  so  the  government  of  that  place  may  go 

year  b.  orderly  and  peaceably  on,  (as  God  be  thanked)  it  hath  hitherto 

done.  But  when  I  consider  Avith  what  temper  and  modera 
tion  Dr.  Baylie,  dean  of  Salisbury,  hath  carried  himself  in  all 
businesses  which  went  through  his  hands  in  the  year  past,  135 
and  particularly  in  the  managing  of  the  many  and  great 
businesses  which  happened  at  his  majesty's  late  being  there, 
and  what  content  he  hath  given  the  university ;  I  am  re 
solved  according  to  the  course  which  I  have  usually  held,  to 
continue  him  vice-chancellor  for  the  year  following.  And 
though  the  trouble  be  great  which  accompanies  the  due 
execution  of  that  place;  yet  I  hope  the  former  year's  ex 
perience  will  make  this  ensuing  year  seem  less  burdensome 
to  him,  and  this  my  new  choice  of  him  which  I  now  make, 
very  welcome  both  to  himself  and  you. 

2  [See  above,  p.  48,  note  x.]  lieu,  it  is  said,  of  a  Latin  sermon.     He 

a  [Morgan  Owen,  first  a  servitor  of  was  nominated  bp.  of  LlandafF,  Feb. 

Jesus  college,  and  afterwards  a  chap-  163|. 

lain  of  New  College,  was  introduced  to  The  erection  of  the  porch  of  St.Mary's 

Laud's  notice  when  bishop  of  St.  Da-  was  brought  as    one  of    the    charges 

vid's,  he  being  at  that  time   beneficed  against   the    archbishop    at   his   trial, 

in  his  native  county.     He  was  created  See  Prynne's  Cant.  Doom,  p.  71.] 

D.D.  at  the  visit  of  the  king  to  Oxford,  b  [Read    in    convocation   July   29, 

and  built  the  porch  of  St  Mary's  in  1637.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  150.  a.J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  175 

These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you  to  allow  of  A.D.  1637. 
this  my  choice  of  Dr.  Baylie,  and  to  give  him  your  best 
assistance  in  all  such  things  as  shall  concern  the  honour 
and  [the]  good  government  of  that  university,  which  not 
doubting  but  every  of  you  will  do,  I  leave  you  all  to  God's 
blessed  protection,  and  rest 

Your  very  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
June  30,  1637. 

To  my  [very]  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford. 


FOR  your  act,  non  nostrum  inter  vos  tantas  componere  lites c!  To  the  vice- 
In  plain  English,  keep  an  act  or  keep  none.     Take  it  quite  ^"^^ 
away,  or  defer  it,  do  what  you  will,  but  I  will  not  lie  open  the  act  in  the 
to  the  censure  that  may  pass  upon  it,  either  for  the  present  dangerous 
omission,  or  for  the  consequences  of  infection,  which  may  fection,  June 
follow  upon  it.    You  are  many  and  wise,  and  upon  the  place,  30- 
and  therefore  to  yourselves  I  leave  it,  with  this  caution,  that 
at  the  first  if  you  keep  not  the  act  at  the  time,  deferring  will 
seem  less  to  the  world  than  cutting  off;  but  in  the  end  it 
must  come  to  the  same  thing,  for  I  presume  you  will  not 
keep  a  winter  act :  and  for  any  thing  that  concerns  yourself 
in  particular,  that  is  not  a  matter  considerable,  for  it  is  but 
a  little  pains  lost ;  and  not  so  much,  if  you  can  tell  how  to 
lay  a  speech  in  pickle  till  the  next  year. 

W.  CANT. 

June  30,  1637d. 


c  [Virg.  Eel.  iii.  108.]  be  on  the  7th.  In  another  convocation, 

d  [In    convocation    held  July    3    it  held  Sept   9  following,  it  was    deter- 

was  determined  in  consequence  of  the  mined  to  dispense  with  it  altogether, 

pestilence  prevailing  in  London,  Leices-  and  provisions  were  made  accordingly. 

tershire,  and  Worcestershire,  to  put  off  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  150.  b.] 

the  act  till  October  9,  the  Vesperiae  to 


176  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637. 


SIR,  136 

My  letters          I  UNDERSTAND  that  Richard  Bull  one  of  the  yeomen-bedels 

to  the  vice-     js  iateiv  dead,  and  that  there  are  so  many  suitors  for  the 

chancellor  in  '  J 

the  behalf  of  place  as  somewhat  distract  the  university.    I  should  be  sorry 

William  Ball,  any  gu^  petty  occasion  should  divide  that  bodv,  and  do 

tor  a  yeoman- 

bedel's  place,  hereby  heartily  pray  you,  that  while  I  leave  all  men  to  their 

'  liberty,  you  will  take  care  to  keep  them  in  peace,  and  to  see 
that  the  election  pass  orderly.  And  yet  truly,  though  I  leave 
all  men  that  have  suffrages  free,  I  cannot  but  marvel,  that 
there  should  not  be  a  full  concurrence  of  voices  for  the  choice 
of  William  Ball,  servant  to  your  late  predecessor  Dr.  Pinke. 
For  to  my  knowledge  he  took  a  great  deal  of  very  good  pains 
in  writing  out  the  ledger-book  of  statutes  for  the  university. 
In  which  respect  I  for  my  part  cannot  but  recommend  him 
to  the  care  both  of  the  heads  and  of  the  masters,  assuring 
myself  that  he  will  be  a  very  serviceable  man  in  that  place, 
He  had  the  both  for  his  pen  and  otherwise,  and  therefore  I  do  hereby 
pray  you  to  do  him  the  best  offices  you  can,  that  he  may  be 
chosen.  So  I  leave  you  to  God's  blessed  protection,  and 
rest 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

W.  CANT. 

Cray  don, 
July  14,  1637. 


SIR, 

Mr.  Greaves  MR.  GREAVES  of  C.  C.  C.  began  to  read  the  Arabic  lecture 
b^readtr^n  UP011  Wednesday  JulJ  19>  as  deputy  to  Mr.  Pocock,  to  whom 
Mr.Pocock's  I  Saye  leave  to  travel  to  Constantinople  and  the  eastern 

absence f. 

e  [He  was  elected  July  15,   1637.  during  the  usurpation,  though  Walker 

Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  147.  b.]  states  (Sufferings,  par.  ii.  p.  112)  that 

Thomas  Greaves.     He  published  he  was  dispossessed  of  his  fellowship, 

in  1639  a  lecture  '  De  Linguae  Arabicae  At  the  Restoration  he  was  appointed 

Utilitate  et  Praestantia  oratio  Oxonii  rector  of  Northchurch,  Herts,  and  Be- 

habita   19  Jul.   1637.'     He  was  after-  nefield,  Northants,  and  installed  Oct. 

wards  rector  of  Dunsby  in  Lincolnshire  23,  1666,  prebendary  of  Peterborough, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  177 

parts  for  the  better  perfecting  himself  in  the  Arabic  and    A.D.  1637^ 
Eastern  languages,  and  I  allowed  him  the  stipend  of  the 
lecture  towards  his  travels. 

Concerning  Mr.  Brown  and  your  stationers,  there  is  little  A  passage  of 
more  to  be  said.  For  the  truth  is,  since  Mr.  Brown,  buying  J-^tood* 
at  the  first  hand,  may  sell  as  cheap  as  the  merchant,  he  will  lor  concern- 
certainly  draw  all  the  custom  of  the  whole  town  to  himself,  j^^'j^ 
And  certain  it  is,  this  would  be  a  considerable  benefit  to  the  the  station- 
particular  students  who  are  to  buy ;  but  it  must  be  the  utter  ers>  July  28> 
undoing  of  all  the  other  booksellers  about  the  town,  which 
again  on  the  other  side  is  more  considerable,  and  that  as 
well  in  regard  of  the  honour  and  justice  of  the  university,  as 
of  the  livelihood  of  the  men  themselves  and  their  families. 
The  truth  is,  for  aught  as  yet  appears  to  me,  Mr.  Brown  must 
not  be  suffered  to  sell  by  retail  for  the  reason  aforesaid.  And 
you  were  as  good  order  it  so  yourselves,  as  have  it  ordered 
above  to  your  hands ;  for  I  remember  some  two  years  since, 
there  was  a  great  complaint  brought  to  the  council- table 
that  some  men  in  London  would  be  both  merchants  of  cloth, 
and  yet  keep  a  draper's  shop,  and  sell  by  retail ;  and  it  was 
over-ruled  at  the  board  that  they  might  use  which  they  would, 
137  but  that  they  might  not  use  both.  And  I  verily  believe,  if 
your  stationers  complain  thither,  (as  fear  of  undoing  may 
make  them  do  any  thing,)  I  shall  be  commanded  to  order 
you  in  this  case  of  Mr.  Brown  after  the  same  manner. 
Besides  this,  there  is  something  considerable  in  the  thing 
itself.  For  though  it  be  true,  that  Mr.  Brown  in  this  way 
may,  and  no  doubt  will  undersell  your  other  stationers,  and 
so  undo  them,  and  enrich  himself;  yet  when  they  are  all 
undone,  may  not  he  then,  or  any  other  that  shall  succeed 
him  in  that  way,  raise  the  price  of  books,  under  some  pre 
tence  or  other,  and  sell  them  as  dear  as  the  stationers  now 
do  ?  It  is  therefore  certainly  a  business  of  great  consider 
ation  in  itself,  and  in  the  justice  of  the  university,  that  so 
many  men  and  families  be  not  ruined,  after  they  have  served 
there  for  their  freedom,  and  liberty,  for  some  saving  to  par 
ticular  men.  And  for  an  expedient  in  a  middle  way,  I  do 
not  yet  see  where  it  may  be  had ;  and  certainly  one  way  or 

besides  holding  other  preferments.   He      1676,  and   was   there   buried  (Wood, 
died  at  Weldon  in  Northants  May  22,       Ath.  Ox.  iii.  1061.)] 

LAUD. 


178  THE   HISTORY  OF   HIS 

AD.  1637.    other,  the  business  must  be  settled,  and   the   sooner  the 
better. 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 

July  28,  1637. 


MOST  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD,  MY  VERY  HONOURABLE 
GOOD  LORD. 

Dr.  Fell's  let-       I  HAD  long  since   in   my  former  letters  acquainted  your 

grace,  according  to  your  directions,  with  the  particular  rnis- 

the  too  great  chief,  that  ariseth  out  of  the  multitude  of  victualling-houses 

number  of      jn  this  place,  but  that  I  was  informed,  that  by  your  grace's 
victualling  ;/,. 

houses  in  care  an  order  was  made,  that  no  justices  should  license  ale- 
Oxford,  houses,  but  in  open  sessions,  and  that  the  number  should  not 
exceed  three  and  twenty.  But  finding  that  this  excellent 
remedy  taketh  no  good  effect,  I  am  once  more  bold  to  be 
troublesome  to  your  grace,  hoping,  that  by  your  assistance 
and  favour,  which  is  never  wanting  to  us,  we  may  in  some 
measure  amongst  ourselves  correct  this  spreading  evil.  I 
know  your  grace  is  very  apprehensive  of  the  malignity  of  this 
desperate  evil,  the  occasion  of  many's  ruin  amongst  us,  the 
number  of  victuallers  being  incredible,  and  likely  to  grow 
continually.  The  cure  (I  conceive)  is  not  by  punishing  the 
immediate  delinquents,  either  by  imprisonment,  according  to 
the  statute  quinto  Edvr.  VI.  e  or  by  whipping  by  the  statute 
primo  Reg.  Caroli^,  but  (as  I  have  learned  by  serving  two 
apprenticeships)  by  indicting  the  brewer  upon  the  statute 
quarto  Reg.  Jacobi [,  who  must  pay  6s.  8d.  for  every  barrel 
he  shall  deliver  into  any  tap-house  not  licensed.  These  men 
are  solvendi,  and  if  the  penalty  be  required,  they  will  be  soon 
weary  of  trading  this  way ;  and  by  this  means  we  stop  the 
current  at  the  very  head  and  fountain.  I  hope  the  justices  in 
the  town-sessions  will  not  hinder  this  good  work,  they  having 
much  increased  the  number  of  the  burghers  by  renewing  very  138 
lately  their  commission,  wherein  five  of  them  are  added,  one 

«  [5  and  6  Edw.VI.  cap.xxv.  sect,  iv.]       sect,  ii.] 

h  [3  (not  1)  Car.  I.  cap.  jiii.  (iv.)          !  [4  Jac.  I.  cap.  iv.  sect,  i.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  179 

being  a  brewer,  who  neither  by  law,  or  in  reason,  should  be    A.D.  1637. 
a  judge  in  this  kind,  &c. 

Your  grace's  ever  to  be  commanded  in  any 
service  for  the  good  of  Church  or  State, 

SAM.  FELL-). 

Christ  Church,  Oxford, 
August  15,  1637. 

At    this  time  Dr.  Fell    sent   me  a  list  of  ninety-four  ale-  Ale-houses 
houses,  which  were  unlicensed  within  the  city  of  Oxford. 


Salutem  in  Christo. 
SIR, 

I  RECEIVED  your  letter  concerning  the  great  number  and  August  26. 
increase"  of  ale-house  keepers  and  victuallers  unlicensed  in  to'p^FelT 
the  university,  to  the  great  dishonour  of  that  place,  and  as  letter  con- 
great  mischief  to  many  young  students  there.     I  thank  you  cerni"S  a 
heartily  for  this  care  and  pains,  and  do  hereby  assure  you,  ale-houses 
that  I  will  give  you  all  the  assistance  I  possibly  can  to  cure  unlicensed 
this  malady  :  and  if  you  find  that  neither  the  order  which  I 
caused  to  be  made,  nor  the  other  remedies,  which  yourself 
mention,  will  cure  this  business  (as  it  seems  to  do)  I  pray 
acquaint  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  with  these  my  letters,  and  let 
him  know,  I  would  have  him,  yourself,  and  the  other  justices, 
to  proceed  upon  the  Statute  quarto  Jacobi,  and  make  every 
brewer  pay  6s.  8d.  for  every  barrel  he  shall  deliver  into  any 
tap-house  not  licensed. 

It  seems  by  your  letter,  that  this  statute  well  followed  is 
a  probable  remedy,  and  indeed  I  think  it  will  go  far,  if  it  be 
well  followed.  I  perceive  you  have  but  one  doubt  against  it ; 
and  that  is,  lest  you  should  find  opposition  from  the  town- 
justices,  who  (you  say)  have  of  late  both  renewed  and  enlarged 

J    [Canon    of  Ch.    Ch.,   and    Lady  Lichfield;    and   June   24,    1638,   was 

Margaret's  professor  of  divinity,  which  appointed  dean  of  Ch.  Ch.     He  was 

latter  office  he  resigned  the  following  vice-chancellor  in  the  year  when  the 

month.     He   was   also   prebendary    of  university  was  visited  by   the  parlia- 

Wenlocksbarn  in  the  church  of  Paul's,  mentary  commissioners.] 
rector   of   Sunningwell,   and   dean   of 

N2 


180 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1637.  their  commission  by  the  addition  of  five,  one  of  them  being  a 
brewer.  Will  the  university  still  sleep,  while  the  town  slips 
these  things  upon  them  ?  I  am  sure  I  once  took  order  that 
the  number  of  town-justices  should  not  exceed  those  of  the 
university,  that  so  things  might  be  carried  with  indifferency. 
And  if  they  shall  now  oppose  in  this  business  of  the  ale-houses, 
it  will  be  a  good  occasion  for  me  to  move  my  lord  keeper 
again  to  dissolve  their  commission,  which  I  will  not  fail  to  do, 
if  they  give  me  cause ;  so  I  pray  proceed,  and  God's  blessing 
be  upon  your  endeavours,  while  I  rest 

Your  very  loving  friend 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
August  26,  1637. 


I  trouble  you  with  these  letters,  because  Mr.  Vice-chancellor 
was  newly  gone  away  from  me  with  a  whole  bundle  of  in 
structions,  just  as  your  letter  came  to  me. 

W.  CANT. 


Letters  from 
Oxford  to 
Mr.  Fish  of 
Clerkenwell 
to  convey 
two  youths 
beyond  sea. 
Mr.  Fish 
brought  me 
this  letter 
August  29, 
1637. 


SIR,  139 

THOUGH  unknown,  I  have  presumed  to  be  so  bold  as  to 
solicit  you  in  a  business,  viz.  to  know  whether  you  could  send 
over  one  or  two,  who  for  religion  sake  are  desirous  to  be 
entered  into  some  order  beyond  the  seas,  especially  that  of 
ihefratrum  minorum,  or  Jesuits.  So  expecting  your  answer 
and  unwilling  to  disclose  myself,  till  I  have  it,  I  rest 

Yours, 

August  23. 


Direct  your  answer  as  soon  as  you  can,  to  one  Richard  Pally 
in  St.  John's  college  in  Oxonk. 


k  [A  Rich.  Pulley  was  elected  to  St. 
John's   from    Merch.   Tailors'    school, 


June  14,   1036.  (See  Wilson's  Merch. 
Tailors'  School,  p.  248.) 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  181 

Superscribed  thus  :  A.D.  1637. 


To  his  very  loving  friend,  Mr.  John  Fish  in 
Clerkenwell  give  these. 

Leave  this  at  one  Mr.  Fish's  at  Doctors  Commons,  to  be 
delivered  unto  him. 

London. 


Salutem  in  Christo. 
SIR, 

I  HAVE  yet  received  no  letter  from  you  this  week,  if  I  do,  My  letters 
you  shall  have  an  answer  on  Friday,  if  I  have  so  much  leisure.  *?       ™e 
In  the  mean  time   I  send  you  this  inclosed,  which  came  (August  29, 
to  my  hands  this  present  afternoon ;  I  pray  examine  the  1^37)  ^ent 
business  with  all  the  care  and  industry  you  possibly  can,  as  away,  for  care 
well  for  the  discharge  of  your  own  duty  and  credit,  as  mine,  tjbehad  of 
•     xi  *^    i     i  A     j  -f  ru         T,  thls  business. 

in  the  government  of  that  place.  And  if  there  be  such  a  man 

as  Pully  here  mentioned,  be  sure  to  make  him  fast,  and  ex 
amine  him  throughly  touching  all  particulars,  that  you  shall 
think  material  for  the  discovery  of  these  unworthy  practices 
for  the  seducing  of  youths  in  that  university,  or  elsewhere, 
especially  concerning  the  author  of  this  letter,  and  what 
youths  have  been  dealt  withal  after  this  sort,  either  in  that 
house  or  any  other  of  the  town.  And  whether  any  Jesuits, 
or  others,  have  lain  hankering  up  and  down  thereabouts,  or 
be  there  at  this  present  to  that  purpose,  or  any  other  as  bad. 
In  all  which,  I  desire  you  to  use  the  utmost  diligence  and 
discretion  that  you  can,  and  let  me  have  an  account  with  all 
convenient  speed.  So  I  leave  you  to  God's  grace,  and  rest 
Your  very  loving  friend 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
August  29,  1637. 

This  falls  out  very  unhappily,  not  only  for  the  thing  itself, 
which  ought  by  all  means  to  be  prevented ;  but  also  for  the 
clamours  which  the  late  libellers1  have  made,  that  there  are 
great  endeavours  for  re-introducing  of  popery. 

1  [Bastwick,  Burton,  and  Prynne,  who  had  been  censured  the  previous  June.] 


182  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637. 


SIB,  140 

September!,  I  AM  glad  you  found  all  in  health,  and  all  things  else  so 
passage  of  a  we^  at  your  return  '>  an^  yet  I  cannot  but  see,  that  both 
letter  to  the  factions  would  be  busy  there.  Concerning  the  popish  faction, 


-"  l  writ  nastil7  to  y°u  to  prevent  a  danger,  which  I  thought 
ing  Mr.  was  imminent,  and  God  grant  you  may  secure  it  :  but  in  any 
Brasenosed  °f  case  name  not  Fish,  ^  vou  can  Possibly  avoid  it  ;  but  carry  it 
and  the  for-  as  if  the  letter  were  intercepted,  and  be  as  careful  as  possibly 


mer  business  yQU  can>  ^n(j  concerning  the  puritan,  I  see  plainly  that 
the  letter  sent  Brasenose  hath  some  as  bad  or  worse  than  Cook  was  about 
to  Mr.  Fish.  four  years  since1.  And  that  Greenwood01,  who  preached  on 
Sunday  last,  is  like  to  prove  a  peevish  man,  which  I  am  the 
more  sorry  for,  because  you  write  he  is  a  good  master  of  his 
pen,  and  therefore  like  to  do  the  more  harm.  But  since  he 
hath  so  cunningly  carried  it,  (for  the  fashion  is  now  to  turn 
the  libellous  part  into  a  prayer,)  I  think  the  best  way  is  to 
take  no  notice  of  it  at  all  ;  but  the  more  carefully  to  observe 
what  the  man  doth  in  the  university  :  for  I  would  have  no 
man  publicly  called  in  question,  where  a  fair  answer  may  be 
given  and  taken,  that  the  peace  both  of  the  Church  and  of 
that  place  may  be  preserved  as  much  as  may  be.  And  yet 
to  confess  my  thoughts  to  you,  I  think  Mr.  Greenwood  had 
in  this  business  a  very  factious  and  a  rancorous  meaning. 

W.  CANT. 

September  1,  1637. 

When  you  have  made  all  the  use  you  can  of  the  letter  I 
sent  you  on  Wednesday,  take  a  copy  of  it,  and  send  me  back 
the  original  safe. 


SIR, 

An  account         UPON  the  receipt  of  your  grace's  letters  on  Wednesday,  I 
chancelk?06"  instantl7  set  a  SP7  upon  Pullin  one  of  our  scholars  of  the 

1  [See  the    recantation   of  Thomas  vicars  of  Bampton,  and  archdeacon  of 

Cooke,  B.D.,  fellow  of  B.  N.  C.,  in  Salop    in    the    diocese    of    Hereford. 

Wood's  Annals,  ad  an.  1634,  p.  395,  (Wood,  ut  supra,  p.  396).] 

extracted  from  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  90.  m  [Daniel     Greenwood,     appointed 

b.     Cooke  retained  his  preferment  of  Feb.  29,  1647,  principal  of  B.  N.  C.  by 

Drayton  in  Shropshire  during  the  Re-  the  parliamentary  visitors,   and   vice- 

bellion,  having  taken  the  covenant,  and  chancellor  in  1650,  1651.] 
at  the  Restoration  became  one  of  the 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  183 

house  of  two  years  standing,  sent  to  the  carrier  for  a  view  of    A.D.  1637. 
all  the  letters  sent  to  St.  John's  ;    none  were   directed  to  business  con- 
Pullin  either  on  Thursday  or  Saturday  :  neither  did  Pullin  ^°fnftPul~ 
on  Thursday,  or  ever  since,  look  towards  the  carrier.     On  John's,  re- 
Friday  morning   I   took   him  coming  from  prayers  in  the  £e}ved  SePt- 
quadrangle,  where  I  might  see  how  he  behaved  himself  at  to  my  letters 
citation.     I  instantly  searched  his  pockets,  took  his  keys  of  on  ^e  ^ed- 
study  and  trunk  from  him,  searched  them  (he  staying  in  my  fore. 
lodging),  I  looked  over  every  book  and   paper;    I   found 
nothing  that  might  give  the  least  suspicion  that  he  is  in 
clined  towards  popery.    I  examined  his  chamber  fellows,  what 
company  resorted  to  him  ;  they  protested  they  never  saw 
any,  besides  those  of  our  own  house,  one  or  other,  to  come 
unto  him.     I  returned  to  him,  demanded  what  acquaintance 
he  had  in  town  ;  he  professed  he  knew  none  but  one  Isam  of 
141  Christ  Church,  who  went  six  weeks  hence  to  his  friends 
in  Ireland,   and  him  he  knew  at  Westminster   school.     I 
cannot  learn  that  Isam    is  inclined  that   way.      I  further 
questioned,  whether  he  ever  received  letters  for  any  other 
since  his  coming  to  us  ;  he  vowed  no,  I  shewed  him  the  letter 
directed  to  Fish,  enquired  whether  he  knew  the  man  or  the 
hand-  writing  ;  he  vowed  no.     Divers  other  interrogatories  I 
put  him,  but  could  not  gather  either  from  the  matter  or 
manner  of  his  answer  the  least  ground  of  suspicion.     I  have  I  left  him  to 
diligently  enquired  of  others,  who  might  know  him,  but  have   ,  e  vlc,<j~  , 
not  for  which  I  might  suspect  him.     Under  charge  he  is  not  disposal,  but 


to  stir  out  of  the  college,  nor  to  speak  with  any  stranger  Wlt      *°  look 


without  my  leave  upon  pain  of  expulsion,  and  thus  he  shall  and  what  let- 
rest  till  your  grace  shall  free  him.  ^rs  came  to 

September  4,  1637. 


SIR, 

SINCE  the  finishing  of  your  new  library11  will  cost  you  a  To  the  vice- 
thousand  pounds,  I  am  heartily  glad  you  have  seven  hun-  cnancell.or 
r  J   o          j  concerning 

dred  pounds  in  chest  towards  it.     I  pray  therefore  acquaint  the  addition 
the  heads,  that  I  would  have  this  work  presently  begun,  f?bttie  new 
(especially  considering  how  long  it  will  be  in  doing,)  that  so  Sept.  8. 

n  [See  above,  p.  H3.] 


184 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HfS 


A.D.  1637.    the  learned  press  may  really  and  heartily  be  set  upon  ;  which 
I  do  desire  to  see  on  foot. 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
Sept.  8,  lb'37. 


The  act  taken      THE  act,  that  was  put  off  from  the  usual  time  to  the  7th 
sonaofbtyhe6a"  of  Oct°ber,  was  on   Saturday  the  9th  of  September  quite 
sickness.         taken  away  from  this  year,  by  reason  of  the  unreasonable 
ness  of  the  time,  and  the  danger  of  the  sickness  spread  about 
the  country. 


To  the  vice- 


concernng 


lingworth' 

!?u  °k  r™121 
sheet  by 
sheet. 


SIR, 

You  cannot  carry  too  careful  an  eye,  either  over  Pullin  or 
^e  rest  ;  for  certainly  some  are  about  that  place  to  seduce 
as  many  as  they  can.  And  particularly  Dr.  Potter  writes 

-  me  word'  that  Knott  is  now  in  Oxford,  (I  would  you  could 
lay  hold  of  him,)  and  hath  the  sheets  from  the  press,  as  they 
are  done  n  >  an^  ^at  ^e  Pays  nve  shillings  for  every  sheet, 
and  '  that  you  are  acquainted  with  this  rumour.  I  pray  be 
veiy  careful  in  this  also,  for  I  know  the  Jesuits  are  very 
cunning  at  these  tricks;  but  if  you  have  no  more  hold  of 
your  printers,  than  that  the  press  must  lie  thus  open  to  their 
corruption,  I  shall  take  a  sourer  course,  than  perhaps  is  ex 
pected.  For  though  perhaps  they  go  so  cunningly  to  work,  142 
as  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  make  a  legal  proof  of  this  foul 
misdemeanour  :  yet  [if]  I  find  that  Knott  makes  a  more  speedy 
answer,  than  is  otherwise  possible,  without  such  seeing  of 
the  sheets,  I  shall  take  that  for  proof  enough,  and  proceed 
to  discommission  your  printer,  and  suppress  his  press.  And 
I  pray  fail  not  to  let  him  know  so  much  from  me. 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
Sept.  15,  1637. 


n  [Speaking  of  this  statement  Wood 
adds  '  This  doth  otherwise  appear  from 


Knott'  s  words  elsewhere.'      (Ath.  Ox. 
iii.  92).  J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  185 

A.D.  1637. 


I  HAVE  received  the  paper  of  Mr.  Chilling  worth's  reasons,,  A  passage  of 

why  he  is  so  loth  to  meddle  with  the  second  part  of  Knott's  Sy  le.fcters  to 

J  the  vice- 

book^  thinking  the  answer  to  the  first  sufficient  ;  and  truly  chancellor, 

were  all  men  that  shall  come  to  read  his  book  of  his  suffi-   fPt-  23 

_  .  _  .    .  about  Mr. 

ciency,  I  would  be  of  his  opinion,  especially  supposing  that  Chilling- 

to  be  true,  which  he  gives  for  one  of  his  reasons,  namely,  that  wort)1's  an~ 
there  is  nothing  in  the  second  of  any  worth  or  moment,  that  second  part 
is  not  a  repetition  of  somewhat  in  the  first.     Upon  all  things  of  Knott's 
laid  together,  I  am  somewhat  divided  in  my  thoughts,  what 
to  resolve  in  this  business  ;  yet  thus  far  I  dare  resolve. 

First,  I  would  not  have  the  answer  farther  delayed,  which 
Mr.  Chillingworth  says  he  must  needs  do,  and  that  for  some 
months,  if  he  answer  the  second  part.  Secondly,  if  he  an- 
Iswer  the  first  only,  I  would  have  him  print  at  the  end  of 
it  those  reasons  which  are  fit  to  be  public,  why  he  does  not 
answer  the  second  part,  and  especially  that  reason  which  he 
expresses,  namely,  that  the  second  part  contains  almost 
nothing  but  repetitions  of  the  former0.  Thirdly,  in  the 
answer  of  the  first  part,  I  would  quote  to  a  page  where  the 
same  is  repeated  in  the  second  part,  that  so  the  world  may 
take  notice,  that  both  parts  are  answered  in  one.  And  lastly, 
I  would  have  him  acquaint  Dr.  Potter  with  as  much  as  may 
any  way  be  fit,  that  so  no  discontent  may  arise  between 
them. 

W.  CANT. 

Crot/don, 
Sept.  22,  1637. 


SIR, 

DR.  FELL  is  now  with  me,  and  returns  to  Oxford  in  the  letters  to 
beginning  of  the  next  week.      At  his  return  I  would  have  I>r.  Sheldon? 
you  or  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  speak  with  him  about  his  resigna-  Fell,g  res-g_ 

tion,  which  he  hath  promised  me  to  make,  both  of  his  lecture  nation  of  the 

Marg.  lec- 

0  [Those  reasons,  four  in  number,      his  book.  ] 

are  given  by  Chillingworth,  as   Abp.  P  [Gilbert  Sheldon,  warden   of  All 

Laud  suggested,  in  the  conclusion  of      Souls,    March     1G35  ;     prebendary    of 


186  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637.    and  prebend  of  Worcester q ;  and  that  so  soon  as  their  Wor- 
ture,  and        cester  audit  is  over,  (which  I  take  is  this  November,)  he  hav- 

Dr.  Law-        j       ^^  year  an  office  in  that  church  to  be  accountable  for.  143 

rence r  sue-          &  J 

ceedmg  him,  And  when  you  have  once  spoken  with  him  about  it,  you 

Tfi??i      3'     niay  then  go  on,  and  make  the  business   as  sure   as  you 
can. 

When  all  is  done  you  must  deal  with  Dr.  Lawrence  to  be 
very  mindful  of  the  waspishness  of  these  times,  and  to  be  sure 
to  read  upon  no  argument,  that  may  make  any  the  least 
trouble  in  Church  or  university,  which  I  shall  in  part  lay 
upon  your  care  to  look  to,  for  so  much  as  concerns  Dr. 
Lawrence,  so  wishing  you  all  health,  &c. 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Nov.  3,  1637. 


SIR, 

Two  passages  I  AM  glad  to  hear  the  Guernsey  man  is  so  well  a  deserver  in 
letters  kf the  Jesus  college,  and  as  glad  that  he  wants  but  a  quarter  of  a 
vice-chancel-  year  of  full  time  to  be  master  of  art*.  I  pray  persuade  with 

concerning  *ne  youn&  man  *°  s*a^  anc^ tnen  ^ve  him  n^s  degree  with  as 
Mr.  Brevin  of  much  honour  as  you  please.  And  you  may  tell  Dr.  Mansel u 
inco^ora-  t^ie  jeal°usies  which  I  have  against  the  making  of  a  precedent 
tion.  in  the  other  way  by  incorporation,  as  the  case  stands.  And 

though  the  marginal  statute  indulge  to  the  king's  subjects  in 

Gloucester;    at  the  Restoration  dean  fol.  ISl.b.] 

of  the   chapel   royal,   bp.   of  London,  l  [Daniel  Brevint.  He  was  admitted 

and  Aug.  11,  1663,  abp.  of  Cant.]  M.A.  Oct.  12,  1638.     He  is  mentioned 

i  [The  sixth  stall  in  Worcester  cath.,  above,  p.  170.] 

annexed   to    the   Margaret    professor-  u  [He  was  originally  of  All  Souls, 

ship.]  admitted   principal    of  Jesus    college, 

r  [Now  fellow  of  All  Souls,  formerly  July  3,  1620;    this  office  he  resigned 

scholar  of  Balliol,   elected  master  of  during  the  year,  and  returned  to  his 

that  college  Nov.   11,  16o7.    Walker,  fellowship  of  All  Souls.     On  the  death 

(Sufferings  of  the  Clergy,  p.  ii.  p.  101)  of  Sir  Eubule  Thelwall,  Oct.  8,   1630, 

says  he  was  treasurer  and  prebendary  he  was  again  elected  to  the  headship 

of  Lichfield,  and  rector  of  Bemerton  of  Jesus  coll.,  from  which  he  was  ejected 

and  Fuggleston,  Wilts.]  in  1647  by  the  parliamentary  visitors, 

8  [Fell's  resignation  is  dated  March  and  to  which  he  was  restored  in  1660. 

10,   1637.     The  election  of  Lawrence  He  died  May  1,  1665.] 
took  place  March  13.    Reg.  Conv.  R. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  187 

his  own  universities  %  yet  that  is  nothing  to  Samure.     And    A.D.  1637. 
therefore  certainly  I  shall  not  like  that  which  is  desired.          Samure. 

I  know  nothing  in  the  statutes,  that  exempts  a  pro-proctor  Concerning 
from  any  exercise  which  lies  upon  him  in  the  university,  or  a  the  p].0_proc. 
master  of  the  schools  from  exercise  in  divinity.     Therefore  tors  and 
let  Mr.  Buncombe  w  do  his  exercise  in  God's  name,  for  I  will  schools*  for 
have  no  such  precedent  begun  either  against  or  without  sta-  exercise  in 
tute ;  neither  am  I  well  pleased,  that  able  men  should  be  so    ] 
willing  to  seek  all  occasions  to  shift  off  exercise  in  divinity. 

W.  CANT. 


SIR, 

I  SENT  to  the  vice-chancellor  to  speak  to  the  heads  at  the  Novemb.  10. 
Monday  meeting,  that  they  follow  the  canon  in  their  prayers  ^ncettoT' 
before  sermons,  both  in  the  university,  and  out,  and  to  re-  concerning 
quire  them  to  give  notice  of  it  to  their  several  companies. 


W.  CANT.  according  to 

canon. 


144  QUOD  omnino  semper  renitenti,  atque  difficilius  facit  aca-  The  degrada- 
demia,  manum  hodie  capulo  admovet,  gladium  stringit,  j^  f^ne  - 
aciemque  ejus  in  immorigeros,  forte  an  rebelles,  filios  in-  lecting  to  ap- 

tentat;  quorum  adversus   sive  iiicuriam,  sive  contumaciam  Pefr  at  the 
.  .  .  .....  act  should 

iras    graviores    concipit,    certioremque    infligit    vmdictam ;  have  been 

quippe  compertum  semper  habuit.  eos  maxime  contra  disci-  kept.  Re- 

....          , .     ceived  Nov. 
plinam  ejus  bonosque  mores  obvios  ivisse,  qui  in  levmsculis,  ig*. 

et  promptioris  obsequii  rebus  parere  recusaverint.  Nimirum 
ita  res  est,  sseviente  peste  Londini,  grassanteque  per  vicos 
passim  et  pagos  lue,  saluti  suorum  prospiciens  academia, 
comitia  Julio  celebranda  in  nonum  Octobris  protelat ;  sed  ne 
tune  ad  spem  et  vota  pise  matris  cessante  tabe,  decernit  vene- 
rabilis  convocatio,  prsesentis  anni  comitia  prorsus  abolenda. 
Quod  tamen  ne  candidatis  hujus  anni  in  damnum  cedat,  cavet 

v  [Corp,  Stat.,  tit.  ix.  sect.  viii.  §  1.]      one  of  the  proctors  this  year.] 
w  [Probably  John  Duncombe  of  Oriel.  x  [Reg.  Conv.  11.  fol.  151.] 

(see   below.)     This  college   appointed 


188  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1037.  itidem  venerabilis  domus,  ut  magistrorum  quilibet  ad  sextum 
aut  septimum  diem  Octobris  compareat,  ac  gratitudinis  ergo 
ob  complendum  (ipso  facto  sine  ulteriore  negotio)  gradum 
decem  solidos  in  usum  academise  ultra  feoda  omnia  persolvat. 
Non  comparens  legitime  impeditus,  ultra  feoda  omnia  viginti 
solidos  eroget,  ipsoque  facto  magister  audiat,  numeris  omni 
bus  absolutus.  Sin  quispiam  sive  socordiae  sive  contumaciaa 
litans,  ad  dictos  dies  non  compareret,  nee  secundum  tenorem 
praedictorum  nummos  erogaret,  indignata  vel  tarn  crassam 
negligentiam,  vel  apertam  contumaciam,  statuit  universitas, 
ut  a  gradu  obtento  abarceretur. 

Reportarunt  obsequii  pariter  ac  gratitudinis  praemium  pii 
ac  studiosi  filii :  cseteros,  nominatim  Guilielmum  Adams  et 
Guilielmum  Goulston  e  coll.  Lincolniensi,  Oliverum  Wallop 
e  collegio  Pembrochiensi,  Guilielmum  Holt,  e  collegio  Mag- 
dalenensi,  Eusebium  Dormer,  ex  aula  Magdalenensi,  publico 
hoc  instrumento  sistit  academia;  iisdemque  minuto-varia,  aut 
serica  de  scapulis  detrahit,  de  manibus  eorum  pilea  (ipsi  in- 
digna  capita  qui  libertatis  academicae  insignia  gerant)  excutit, 
eosdemque  nusquam  inter  magistros  numerandos  pronunciat, 
in  cujus  censurae  major  em  fidem  (sic  imperante  convocatione) 
literas  has  ad  valvas  templi  B.  Marias  Virginis  affigi  ac  pro- 
stare  curavimusy. 

Insuper  sciant  isti  tenebriones  ipsa  statuta,  ad  quas  sacra- 
menti  religione  se  obstrinxerunt,  brachium  in  eos  non  imbelle 
exseruisse,  quin  manu  fortiori  de  gradu  etiam  baccalaureatus, 
quern  ascenderant,  vigore  statuti  ipsos  deturbasse  :  cujus  tenor 
sequitur  liquetque.  tit.  ix.  sect.  vii. 

"Item,  tu  jurabis,  quod  incipies  realiter  intra  annum.  . . 
Quod  siquis  post  prsestitum  istud  juramentum  (absque  im- 
petrata  dispensatlone)  nihilominus  haud  inceperit,  privetur 
ipso  facto,  non  solum  gradu  ad  qucm  novissime  prsesentatus 
fuerat,  sed  et  aliis  omnibus,  quos  prius  susceperat." 

\_Dat  23.  Octobris.  4.D.  1637.] 

I  have  received  an  ingenious  handsome  epistle  from  him 
that  was  monk  at  Toulouse2,  and  as  I  am  most  unwilling 

y  [The  name  of  William  Holt  is  not      who  was  restored  April  4,  1638.     See 
in  the  act  of  degradation.     They  all      helow.] 
continued    degraded,    except    Wallop,  z  [Martin   Westcombe,  admitted   of 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  189 

to  break  any  letter  of  statute,,  so  do  I  not  think  that  the  A.D.  1637. 
words  which  you  have  sent  iip  have  any  purpose  to  bar 
an  Englishman,  born  especially  in  a  case  of  such  exigence 
and  extremity ;  but  is  only  a  bar  upon  such  Englishmen  as 
shall  voluntarily  forsake  their  own  universities  to  take  their 
degree  beyond  the  seasa;  and  in  this  sense  the  statute  is  de- 
145  servedly  penal  upon  them,  but  God  forbid  that  it  should  be 
extended  against  an  Englishman  in  such  a  case  of  difficulty 
and  distress  as  this  man  is.  Therefore  I  leave  him  to  you 
and  the  heads  to  shew  him  all  the  favour  which  you  shall 
think  fit  for  him. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Decent.  1,  1637. 


SIR, 

UPON  Monday  last  according  to  promise  there  was  notice  December  1 
taken  at  the  Green  Cloth  of  the  cause  of  the  privilege  for  Chancellor" 
carrying  of  billet,  &c.,  according  as  the  officers  had  promised  their  privi- 
me,  and  according  to  the  brief,  which  I  had  collected  out  °f  |S|/ofb3l 
your  letters,  and  with  my  own  hand  delivered  to  Mr.  Comp-  within  ta 
troller ;  and  as  the  officers  tell  me,  you  shall  hear  no  more  mile's  com- 

pJ-ISS  01  wX~ 

of  the  business,  which  promise  I  hope  they  will  perform.          ford. 

W.  CANT. 


SINCE  the  publishing  of  the  new  statutes  there  hath  been 
some  complaint  made,  that  the  younger  sort  cannot  have 
access  often  enough  to  the  statute-book,  which  is  reserved  in 
every  particular  college ;  thereby  to  know  all  hours  for  lec 
tures,  and  all  other  duties  required  of  them.  Hereupon  it 
was  thought  fit,  that  an  abridgment  should  be  made  of  the 
statutes,  especially  of  those  which  concern  manners  and 
exercise.  This  pains  was  undertaken,  and  the  abridgment 

Exeter   coll.,    and    incorporated    B.A.  former  religion,  and  wrote  in  defence 

Jan.  26,   1637,  proceeded  M.A.  April  of  his  so  doing.  Ath.  Ox.  ii.  675.] 
20,   1638.  (Wood,  F.  O.  i.  498,  501.)          a  [Corp.    Stat,    tit.    ix.    sect.    viii. 

Wood  states  that  he  returned   to   his  §  2.] 


190  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637.  made  by  Mr.  Thomas  Crosfield  of  Queen's  college a,  and  was 
printed  and  published  in  January  1638,  but  according  to  the 
old  style  in  England  1637.  The  title  of  the  book  is,  Statuta 
Selecta  e  Corpore  Statutorum  Universitatis  Oxoniensis,  ut  in 
promtu  et  ad  manum  sint,  quce  mayis  ad  usum  (prcecipue 
Juniorum)  facere  videntur. 


SIR 


To  the  vice-         FOR  Mr.  Chudley,  in  the  sense  which  I  write,  and  as  you 

chancellor      ^ook  it  the  example  will  be  so  full  of  danger,  and  the  breach 

concerning 

Mr.Chudley's  of  statute  so  violent  against  it,  with  a  nullo  modo  proponatur, 

dispensation    ^  ne  nuisnuam  proponat  sub  pama  bannitionis^  :  as  that  for 

for  a  term  to 

be  made         my  }>&rt,  I  shall  never  yield  to  it  for  him  or  any  other.     And 

master.  therefore  you  did  well,  before  you  proposed  any  thing  to  the 

heads,  to  acquaint  me  with  those  bars  in  statute,  and  with 
the  danger  of  the  consequence  likely  to  fall  very  often  in 
every  year  wanting  one  term,  and  no  more.  But  in  the 
end  of  your  letters  you  tell  me  that  young  Chudley  came 
to  you,  and  expressed  himself  otherwise;  namely  for  a 
present  creation.  And  this  way  (you  say)  expresses  more 
present  favour  and  respect  to  him,  and  is  of  less  danger  in 
the  precedent  for  the  future.  The  young  man  (it  seems) 
deserves  well,  and  the  prince's  tutor  hath  been  very  earnest  146 
with  me  for  him,  nevertheless  I  shall  not  in  this  way  per 
emptorily  appoint  any  thing,  but  leave  him  to  you  and  the 
heads  to  do  whatsoever  you  shall  think  fittest;  and  with 
advice  rather  to  shew  no  favour  than  to  create  a  precedent, 
which  may  endanger  the  statutes  and  the  government  after. 
Of  which  I  shall  ever  desire  you  to  be  tender  and  careful. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  9,  1631. 

a  [Thomas  Crosfield,  B.D.,  a  fellow  with  some  of  his  own  MS.  notes.    This 

of  Queen's  college,  afterwards  V.   of  selection  was  reprinted  under  the  above 

Godshill,   Isle  of  Wight,   from  which  title   for  many   years,   and   afterwards 

he  was  expelled  in  the  Rebellion  ;  he  appeared  under  the  title  of  '  Parecbolas 

obtained  another  benefice  in  the  north  sive    excerpta   e    Corpore   Statutorum 

of  Yorkshire.     A  diary  of  his  extend-  Universitatis  Oxoniensis,'  which  it  has 

ing  from  1626  to  1655  is  in  the  library  since  retained.] 

of  his  college,  (from  which  many  ex-  b  [Corp.  Stat,  tit.  x.  sect.  ii.  §  5.] 

tracts  have  been  here  given,)  as  also  a          c  [Brian  Duppa.    Wood,  Ath.   Ox. 

copy  of  this  selection  from  the  statutes  iii.  543.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  191 

A.D.  1637. 


A  STRICT  charge  given  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  proctors,  Lent  dispu- 
to  look  that  the  Lent  disputations  be  carefully  performed, tatlons- 
in  a  quick  and  learned  way,  and  without  disorder. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  12,  1(>3§. 


MR.  KILBY  of  Lincoln  college  made  a  sermon,  in  which  he  Mr.  Kilby 
broke  his  majesty's  declaration  concerning  the  five  articles  ;  j^eacJTof  the 
but   he   submitted   himself,   and   his   censure   stands   upon  five  articles, 
record.      The  sermon  was  preached  upon  Tuesday  the  30th  Feb>  12>  163*' 
of  January,  arid  he  was  censured  Feb.  12,  163J  d. 

The  students  of  Christ  Church  and  Exeter  grew  so  unruly  Out  of  a  let- 
the  last  week,  (the  masters  interposing  and  wrangling  in  the  vice-chancel- 
schools,  and  their  boys  fighting  out  of  school,)  that  I  was  lor  concern- 
forced  to  command  an  absolute  cessation  of  all  manner, 


disputations  betwixt  the  two  houses  ;  and  so  they  rest  quiet  tween  Christ 

ever  since.  £hufrch  a"d 

Exeter  coll. 

men  in  the 
schools  in  the 
second  week 
of  Lent  this 
MOST  REVEREND.  year,  163|. 

WE  are  encouraged  in  the  common  favour,  respectively  Letters  from 

vouchsafed  by  your  grace  unto  the  university  and   city  of  t!le  «niyer- 
J    J  IT  slt.Y  for  the 

Oxon,  to   present   our   common   grievances,  and  to   appeal  taking  down 

unto   your    grace   for    a    redress,   wherein   we    shall   most  of  the  conduit 
.„.     *  ,,,  at  Carfax  for 

willingly  rest  and  settle.  a  nuisance. 

d  [Wood  gives  thetextof  his  sermon,  St.  Mary's  pulpit  16  years  before,  and 

Phil.  ii.  12,  and  adds,  'For  which  being  then   it   was  well   approved   of.'      The 

convened  before  the  vice-chancellor  to  convention   at    which   Mr.  Kilby   sub- 

deliver  up  his  sermon,  did  so  according-  mitted  is  registered  immediately  after 

ly,  but  then  refusing  to  submit  or  recant  the  election  of  the  Margaret  professor, 

for  what  he  had   preached,   the  vice-  March  13.     It  is  immediately  followed 

chancellor  summoned  him  again  to  ap-  by  a  censure  and  submission  of  Jasper 

pear  before  him  and  divers  doctors  in  Mayne,  afterwards  canon  of  Ch.  Ch., 

his    lodgings.      In    obedience    he    at  for  offending  against  the  king's  decla- 

length  made  his  appearance,  and  they  ration  in  a  sermon  at  Ch.  Ch.  on  Good- 

laying  open  to  him  his  error,  recanted  Friday.   He  pleaded  ignorance  through 

about   the    13th   of  March,  at  which  his  absence  from  the  university.  Reg. 

time  he  ingenuously  confessed  that  the  Conv.  R.  fol.  152.  b.] 
self-  same  sermon  he  had  preached  in 


192  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1637.  The  jurors  consisting  of  twelve  privileged,  and  twelve  free 
men  empanelled  by  the  university  to  enquire  after  such  mis 
demeanours  as  are  impleadable  in  a  court-lect  lately  held  in 
your  grace's  name,  have  presented  with  joint  consent  unto 
your  vice-chancellor  the  conduit  raised  in  the  market-place 
at  Carfax d  as  a  nuisance. 

The  vice-chancellor  (as  opportunity  was  ministered)  gave  147 
notice  hereof  unto  the  heads  at  their  Monday  meeting,  and 
assumed  to   deliver   as  much  unto  Mr.  Mayor,  adding  his 
request,  that  it  might  duly  be  considered  what  was  best  to 
be  resolved  in  this  kind. 

We,  whose  names  are  here  underwritten,  have  deliberated 
upon  the  presentment,  do  freely  assent  to  the  body  there 
of,  and  acknowledge  the  conduit  there  placed  to  be  a  just 
grievance. 

The  remedy  is  not  so  easily  prescribed ;  neither  should  we 
happily  so  jointly  concur  in  the  amends,  if  we  undertook  to 
determine  the  same. 

Our  appeal  unto  your  grace  is  unanimous,  both  university 
and  city  submitting  our  accommodations  unto  your  grace's 
resolution,  most  humbly  beseeching  your  grace  to  take  this 
particular  into  consideration,  and  so  to  order  the  same,  and 
dispose  of  it  for  the  good  and  honour  of  the  university  and 
city,  as  you  in  your  wisdom  shall  think  fittest.  And  what 
your  grace  doth  herein  determine  and  prescribe,  we  readily 
embrace :  and  by  our  best  endeavours  (God  willing)  will 
promote  the  same;  so  taking  humblest  leave,  we  continue 
(justly  bound)  to  pray  for  your  grace's  prosperity. 

March  1,  1637. 

RICHARD  BAYLIE,  vice-can.  Oxon.  Ro.  PINCK,  custos  coll.  Nov. 

Jo.  WILKINSON,  aul.  Magd.  P.  PAUL  HOOD,  rector  Lincoln  coll.f 

Tno.     ILES,     sub-dean    of    Christ  FIIAN.  MANSEL,  coll.  Jesu  princ. 

Church6.  A.  FREWEN,  praes.  coll.  Magd. 


d  [This  conduit  was  erected  in  1610  still  stands.] 

by  Otho  Nicholson  of  Ch.  Ch.,  for  the  e  [Formerly  principal  of  Hart  hall, 

purpose  of  supplying   the   town  with  He  was  appointed  canon  of  the  first 

water  from  the  hill  above  North  Hink-  stall  in  1632,  on  the  translation  of  W. 

sey.  (See  Peshall,  pp.  17—20.)  It  was  Pearce,   bp.   of  Peterborough,    to   the 

not  removed  till  1787,  when  it  was  pre-  see  of  Bath  and  Wells.  He  was  ejected 

sented   by  the   university  and  city  to  by  the  parliamentary  visitors,  March 

the  earl  of  Harcourt,  by  whom  it  was  2,  164|.] 

re-erected  in  Nuneham  park,  where  it  f  [Walker  states   that  he   was   the 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


193 


THO.  WALKER,  coll.  Univers.  mag. 
DAN.  ESCOTT,  coll.  Wadh.  guard> 
THO.  CLAYTON,  coll.  Pemb.  mag. 
JOHN  SAUNDERS,  aul.  B.Mar.  princ.h 
JOHN  GLISSON,  procurator  jun. 
DEGORIUS  WHEAR,  aul.  Gloc.  princ.1 
CHRIST.  ROGERS,  aul.  Nov.  Hosp. 
princ.k 


A.D.  1638. 


ALEX.  FISHER,  coll.  Mert.  vice-cust.111 
RICH.  TRTMNEL,  coll.  Ball,  vice-mag. 
HEN.  TOZER,  coll.Exon.  sub-rector". 
Jo.MEREDiTH,coll.Om.An.vice-cust.° 
JOHN  REVE,  aul.  Cerv.  vice-princ. 
Jo.  DUNCOHB,  dean  of  Oriel  P. 


To  these  letters  of  the  university  I  gave  this  answer   in  My  answer  to 
the  general  in  my  letters  to  the  vice-chancellor  (March  19,  g-j®  ^^rs" 
163y  that  I  would  not  trouble  my  thoughts,  nor  proceed  concerning 
further  in  the  business  of  the  conduit  at  Carfax,  till  they  and  the  conduit- 
the  mayor  with  his  brethren  were  agreed  about  leaving  the 


only  head  of  a  house,  except  the  pro 
vost  of  Queen's,  (and  probably  of  Oriel,) 
who  was  not  dispossessed  by  the  par 
liamentary  visitors.] 

8  [Proctor  in  1624,  when  there  was 
a  severe  contest  for  the  office.  (Wood, 
F.  O.  i.  414.)  Elected  warden  Sept.  7, 
1635.  He  died  April  1644,  and  is 
buried  in  the  chapel.  (Le  Neve.)  Cre 
ated  D.D.  at  the  royal  visit,  Aug.  31, 
1636.] 

h  [M.D.,  admitted  June  8,  1632. 
Elected  provost  of  Oriel  Dec.  19, 1644. 
He  appears,  after  first  rejecting  the  au 
thority  of  the  visitors,  to  have  ulti 
mately  submitted  to  them,  as  no  suc 
cessor  was  appointed  till  his  death, 
March  20,  1652.  Wood  (Annals  ad  an. 
1648,  p.  588)  ascribes  his  retention  of 
his  place  to  the  interest  of  friends.  He 
was  buried  in  the  college  chapel.] 

1  [Originally  of  Broadgates  hall, 
elected  in  1602  a  fellow  of  Exeter 
coll.;  appointed  by  Camden  his  first 
professor  of  ancient  history,  Oct.  16, 
1622,  and  admitted  principal  of  Glou 
cester  hall  April  4,  1626.  He  died 
August  1,  1647,  and  was  buried  in 
Exeter  coll.  chapel.] 

k  [Originally  of  Lincoln  coll.,  ad 
mitted  principal  of  New  Inn  hall  July 
18,  1626.  He  was  a  great  favourer  of 
the  puritans,  and  joined  the  parliament 
in  1643,  when  his  place  was  supplied 
by  Christopher  Prior.  (Wood's  F.  O. 
ii.  54.)  He  was  restored  in  1646,  and 
May  1,  1647,  appointed  one  of  the  par 
liamentary  visitors;  in  March  164^,  a 
canon  of  Ch.  Ch.,  (Wood,  F.  O.  ii.  118,) 
and  in  1654  with  Dr.  John  Owen,  and 
others,  on  a  commission  for  ejecting 

LAUD.  *  f 


scandalous  ministers  in  the  county  of 
Oxford.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  99.)  He 
was  ejected  for  nonconformity  in  1662.  ] 

I  [B.A.  July  20,   1604,  elected  fel 
low   of  B.  N.  C.  1607,  M.A.  July  7, 
1608,  died  Dec.  31,  1642.] 

m  [Fisher  was  elected  fellow  at  the 
last  election  under  Sir  H.  Savile'swar- 
denship,  (about  1618,)  at  the  same 
time  with  Reynolds  and  Earle,  after 
wards  bishops  of  Norwich  and  Salis 
bury  ;  he  retained  his  fellowship  dur 
ing  the  Rebellion,  and  died  Oct.  23, 
1671.  Wood  speaks  of  his  timorous 
spirit,  as  contributing  to  the  election 
of  Sir  Thomas  Clayton  to"  the  warden- 
ship  in  1661,  and  terms  him  a  'snivel 
ing  presbyterian.'  It  is  stated  (Mem. 
of  Oxford)  that  the  college  chapel  was 
paved  and  wainscoted  at  his  expense 
(though  Wood  only  mentions  the  pa 
ving)  and  that  his  arms  are  in  the  east 
window.] 

II  [Henry  Tozer  was  in  1643  nomi 
nated  one  of  the  assembly  of  divines, 
but  refused  to  sit  amongst  them.     In 
1647  and  1648  he  stoutly  opposed  the 
parliamentary  visitors,  who  ejected  him 
from  his  fellowship,  when  he  retired  to 
Rotterdam.     See  a  full  account  of  the 
proceedings   against    him    in   Wood's 
Annals  ad  an.  1647,  pp.  552,  seq.] 

0  [John  Meredith,  proctor  in  1632. 
See  above,  p.  71.] 

P  [  He  was  ejected  by  the  visitors  and 
restored  in  1660:  but  was  contented 
with  the  right  of  a  fellow,  the  profits 
going  to  the  junior  of  the  society,  till 
the  next  place  should  fall.  (Walker's 
Sufferings,  par.  ii.  p.  132.)] 


194 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1638.    materials  to  my  disposal,  for  the  good  both  of  the  university 
and  that  city. 

W.  CANT. 


Dr.  Lawrence      Dr.  Lawrence,  master  of  Balliol  college,  was  chosen  the 
thelady0Mbar-  Iad7  Margaret's  reader  on  the  20th  of  March   1631,  upon 
garet's  rea-     the  resignation  of  Dr.  FelK 
der.  March 

20. 


No  masters  of  art  of  Samure  or  other  place  shall  be  in- 148 
corporated,  till  they  have  spent  so  much  time  in  Oxford,  as 
added  to  their  time    spent  at    Samure,  or   elsewhere,  shall 

corporation      make         the  time  required.  by  statute. 

of  masters  of 


To  the  vice- 
chancellor 
concerning 
the  non-in- 


Samure,  &c. 
Martii  ult. 


W.  CANT. 


Martii  ult.,  16 08. 


Procu-  f  Mr.  CORBET,  of  Merton  Coll.r      )  [admitted 
ratores  \  Mr.  NICHOLSON,  of  Magd.  Coll.3  /April  4.] 


Tho.  Masters 
and  Oliver 
Wall  up  re 
stored1. 


In  a  convocation  on  Wednesday,  April  4,  Mr.  Masters  was 
restored  to  the  university,  who  was  banished  thence  in  the 
year  1632U,  for  abusing  some  of  the  heads  the  year  before  in 
his  speech,  as  being  then  terrce  films.  Mr.  Wallup  was  like 
wise  restored  to  his  degree  of  master,  who  was  degraded 
anno  1637,  for  his  neglect  of  appearing  at  the  act  kept  on 


i  [See  above,  p.  186,  note  r.] 
r  [Edward  Corbet  married  Marga 
ret,  daughter  of  Sir  Nathaniel  Brent, 
( and  granddaughter  of  Bp.  Rob.  Abbot, ) 
became  one  of  the  assembly  of  divines, 
and  a  preacher  before  the  long  parlia 
ment.  Laud  was  repeatedly  urged  to 
give  him  the  living  of  Chartham,  and  on 
his  refusal  he  was  appointed  to  it  by 
ordinance  of  parliament,  May  17,  164-3. 
(See  History  of  Troubles  and  Trial, 
chap,  xix.)  He  was  sent  in  1646  to 
Oxford,  as  one  of  the  parliamentary 
preachers,  (which  office  he  soon  re 
linquished),  one  of  the  visitors  of  the 
university  (though  he  seldom  sat  among 
them),  canon  of  Ch.  Ch.,  and  public 


orator  (from  which  places  he  soon  re 
tired.)  He  afterwards  became  rector 
of  Great  Haseley,  where  he  resided  till 
his  death.  He  died  at  London,  Jan.  5, 
1657,  and  was  buried  at  Haseley  on 
the  14th  of  the  same  month  (Wood, 
F.  O.  ii.  117,  118),  when  the  society 
of  Merton  college  attended  his  funeral. 
(Wood's  Life,  p.  xxx.)] 

8  [John  Nicholson  ;  he  was  admitted 
to  his  degrees  in  civil  law  in  1639,  and 
became  at  the  Restoration  chancellor 
of  Gloucester.  (Wood,  F.  O.  i.  508, 
509.)] 

1  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  153.  b.] 

u  [See  above,  p.  75.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  195 

the  6th  and  7th  of  October,  by  reason  of  the  sickness  that    A.D.  1638. 
year  in  divers  places x. 

I  am  glad  you  and  the  heads  are  sensible  of  the  weakness  Two  passages 
of  the  schools  in  the  point  of  their  timber,  and  certainly  Dr.  £f  ™y  ^f1 
Hawley's  memory  will  suffer  in  it,  who  was  trusted  with  that  chancellor, 
work.     I  am  of  opinion  (for  aught  appears  to  me  yet)  that  APr^  13» 
no  other  way  but  posts  will  secure  the  business,  and  there  strengthen- 
must  be  two  posts  in  every  school,  where  there  are  more  than  ing  tl|e 
one  beam.     I  know  there  are  other  devices  which  carpenters 
may  mention :  but  they  are  to  me  as  great  eye-sores,  as  a 
post  can  be,  and  yet  will  not  secure  the  work,  for  neither 
clamping  with  iron,  nor  bracers  from  the  wall  to  the  beams, 
or  two  half  posts  close  to  each  wall,  can  secure  the  middle  of 
the  beam,  where  the  greatest  weakness  is,  and  whence  the 
danger  will  come. 

I  am  very  glad  to  hear  so  well  of  the  young  monk,  that  About  Martin 
was?;  and  I  pray  let  him  have  his  degree  to  be  master  with  to  ^master 
all  favour :  for  I  do  not  see  any  inconveniency  possible,  by  this  next  act. 
allowing  any  man  that  time  for  his  degree,  which  he  hath 
studiously  spent  in   any  other   university.     So  let  him  be 
master  this  act,  and  God  bless  him. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
April  13,  1638. 


This  week  notice  was  given  me  of  some  disorders  of  the  Notice  of 
younger  sort   against  proctor   Lawford  (at  the   end  of  his  ^^of1^" 
speech  when  he  was  to  lay  down  his  office)  in  affronting  him  youth  this 
in  the  convocation-house,  and  stamping  and  hissing  him  at  JTee 
St.  Mary's ;  and  I  returned  the  vice-chancellor  this  answer :  with  my 
that  he  should  do  well  to  vindicate  the  proctor  with  severity.  answer- 
And  if  he  could  find  the  principal  ring-leader,  to  banish  him 
the  university,  and  put  some  severe  punishment  upon  the 
149  rest.     In  which  if  he   did  fail,  we  should   have  the  youth 
break  out  oft  into  these  insolencies,  and  the  proctors  dis 
heartened  to  do  the  duties  of  their  places. 

W.  CANT. 

April  13. 

*  [See  above,  pp.  184,  188.]      y  [See  above,  p.  188,  note  y.J 

o2 


196 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.P.  1638. 


April  27, 


pin's  expul 
sion  from 
Magdalen 
hall. 


Concerning 


against  proc- 
tor  Lawford. 


SIR, 

YOUR  judgment  hath  passed  very  right  upon  the  principal 
of  Magdalen  hal1  and  Gilpin.  And  I  plainly  see,  the  business 
must  be  divided  between  them  ;  and  that  division  I  leave  you 

^Q  ma^e  .  vet  w^h  this  caution,  that  you  suffer  no  man  to 

*  J 

escape  unpunished  for  incivility  and  disrespect  to  his  gov 

ernors;  if  the  complaint  be  justly  made  to  you,  and  your 
assistance  called  for  according  to  statute2.  And  on  the  other 
side,  you  shall  do  well  to  make  the  precise  part  understand 
(as  you  have  occasion  to  deal  with  them)  that  they  are  not 
punished  for  their  conscience,  but  because  they  will  never 
reform  an  erroneous  conscience,  nor  forbear  practising  ac 
cording  to  it,  and  that  to  the  disturbance  of  government. 
So  the  whole  re-  examination  and  future  settlement  of  that 
business  I  leave  wholly  to  you. 

I  thank  you  heartily  for  your  discreet  prosecution  of  that 
^ase  r^°^ous  business,  when  the  proctor  gave  over  his  office, 
and  am  very  sorry  the  heads  are  so  ill  advised  as  to  think 
^he  whipping  of  two  or  three  boys  is  punishment  sharp 
enough  for  such  an  offence.  What  you  will  do  I  know  not  : 
but  if  I  should  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  principal 
offenders,  if  you  did  not  banish  them  the  university,  I  should 
try  how  far  my  power  would  stretch.  The  truth  is,  if  ex 
emplary  punishment  be  not  laid  upon  some  of  them,  it  will 
be  of  more  dangerous  consequence  than,  for  aught  I  see,  the 
wisest  of  your  heads  think  on. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
April  27,  1638. 


SIR, 

May  4.  My  I  DID  not  settle  the  assembling  of  the  heads  upon  Mondays 
puifchment6  to  the  end  m^  vice-chancellor  should  ask  their  leave,  or  be 
resolved  on  overruled  by  their  advice  for  the  punishing  of  a  crime  so 
for  the  tofe?8  notori°us  and  Public  as  this  tumultuous  carriage  at  the  late 
disorder.  resigning  of  the  proctor's  office  was,  and  to  deal  freely  with 


[Statut  Aular.,  Sect.  iv.  §  33.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  197 

you,  I  am  no  way  satisfied  either  with  the  heads  or  yourself    A.D.  1638. 
150  in  this  business:  not  with  the  heads,  because  if  they  would  Upon  this  the 
not  yield  to  bannition,  yet  they  should  have  ordered  it  to  [^onfeed 
public  punishment ;    the  crime  being  so  public  as  it  was.  in  his  letters 
And  the  shame  of  a  public  punishment  would  have  wrought  JJ^he  couM 
more   both  upon  the  persons,   and  for  the  example,  than  not  make  full 
greater  smart  in  a  private  way.     Besides  I  am  sure  enough,  Pr00*  against 
that  they  which  have  so  unworthily  smothered  this  punish-  would  have 
ment   will  not  be  over   severe  in  their  private  execution.  ^een  more 
Neither  am  I  satisfied  with  you  :  for  when  you  saw  in  what 
a  disproportionable  way  to  the  crime  the  heads  inclined  to 
go,  you  should  have  told  them  plainly,  and  have  performed 
it,  that  you  would  not  yield  to  any  such  ending  of  the 
business,  till  I  were  made  acquainted  with  it,  and  had  ap 
proved  it,  which  I  should  never  have  done,  but  have  brought 
the  offenders  to  some  public  shame  or  other.     And  indeed  I 
am  not  a  little  troubled  at  this  breach  upon  government; 
which  I  ever  persuaded  myself  you  would  not  have  suffered. 
And  I   have  much  ado  to   hold  myself  from   calling  this 
business  to  a  more  public  reckoning,  but  that  the  disgrace 
both  of  the  heads  and  you  must  attend  it.     And  I  pray  let 
them  know,  how  sensible  I  am  of  this  great  disservice  to 
the  university  government. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  4,  1638. 


SIR, 

FOR  the  business  concerning  Shurley,  I  have  both  thought  May  ult. 
upon  it,  and  advised  with  others,  and  am  clearly  of  opinion,  Skur 
that  the  statute a,  which  gives  leave  to  a  man's  stay  in  the  ing  in  the 
university,  that  is  under  forty  years  of  age,  doth  not  privilege  m^7??1^ 
a  man  that  hath  a  vicarage,  and  is  sworn  to  residence,  unless  two  benefices 
he  be  dispensed  withal  for  residence  according  to  law.     But  w*tn  cure> 
in  case  of  two  benefices,  and  one  of  them  a  vicarage,  and  both 
with  cure,  which  is  Shurley's  case,  I  think  the  statute  hath 
no  meaning,  that  a  man  shall  live  absent  from  both  under  any 
university  pretence  whatsoever.     And  I  believe,  should  the 

a  [21  Hen.  VIII.  cap.  xiii.  sect,  xxviii.] 


198  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1638.    words  of  the  statute  be  doubtful,  no  man  would  interpret 


He  hath         them  with  such  prejudice  against  the  Church.     You  shall 

obeyed  and    therefore  in  God'&name  send  Shurley  home,  and  not  suffer 

is  gone  to  re- 

side  upon       him  to  live  there,  either  to  be  so  great  a  scandal  to  the  Church 

one  of  his  abroad,  or  to  give  such  an  ill  example  in  the  university.  And 
this  I  assure  you,  and  so  you  shall  let  him  know  from  me, 
that  if  he  do  not  repair  to  his  residence,  being  called  thereto 
by  his  bishop,  I  will  expel  him  the  university ;  and  then  let 
him  seek  his  remedy  by  statute,,  if  he  can :  and  I  will  be  as 
good  as  my  word.  And  I  do  hereby  require  you  to  give  me 
an  account  how  this  business  proceeds  from  time  to  time. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  ult.,  1638. 


SIR,  151 

An  addita  et  I  PRAY  instantly  call  a  congregation,  and  change  the  first 
litur *&  Sco  (luestion  of  the  tliree  appointed  for  the  act.  They  which 
tianajustam  proposed  it  to  you  were  inconsiderate  bold  young  men. 

praebeant        ^nd  so  I  pass  them  over  for  busy  fools,  which  can  think 

scandah  ma-  r 

teriam  ?          there  can  be  nothing  in  the  state,  but  by  and  by  it  must  be 

made  an  act- question.  And  for  yourself,  I  do  much  wonder 
where  your  judgment  was,  when  you  could  let  pass  such  a 
question,  and  not  only  in  your  private  thoughts,  but  in  con 
gregation13,  and  that  without  consulting  me  about  it.  And 
this  I  will  tell  you,  I  know  divers  in  Oxford  are  discontented 
with  it  already,  and  they  have  reason;  and  so  there  is  just  a 
scandali  materia  in  taking  the  question.  And  every  man 
sends  his  friend  up  a  copy  to  London,  and  that  I  know  will 
make  a  noise  here ;  and  I  make  no  doubt,  but  it  will  come  to 
the  king's  ears  before  Sunday  that  I  can  come  to  him.  And 
though  you  do  change  the  question  (as  I  command  you  to 
do  presently)  yet  there  will  not  be  wanting,  which  will  say, 
that  you  would  never  have  proposed  this  without  me ;  and 
that  certainly  I  commanded  it  to  see  how  it  would  take. 
And  that  if  it  had  taken  well,  it  should  have  gone  on :  but 
that  now  I  see  it  otherwise,  I  am  content  to  disclaim  it.  In 

b  [The  act  questions  were  required       See     Corp.     Stat,    tit.     vii.     sect.    ii. 
to     be    sanctioned    by     congregation,       §  2.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  199 

short,  if  the  worst  enemy  I  have  in  the  kingdom  had  studied    A.D.  1638. 

to  do  me  a  shrewd  turn,  they  could  not  (as  the  times  are) 

have  found  out  a  way  more  cunningly  to  have  wounded  me, 

than  this,  and  I  did  not  think  it  possible,  till  now  I  see  it, 

that  you  could  have  been  so  overseen  in  this  business,  as  you 

are  in  proposing  this  question  in  the  congregation,  me  incon-  Hereupon 

sulto.     There  is  now  no  remedy,  but  to  call  a  congregation,  ent  and  ques. 

and  change  the  question,  which  I  once  more  require  you  to  tion  were 

changed  pre- 
do  presently.  sent]y  upon 

W.  CANT.  the  receipt 

of  these 

Lambeth,  letters. 

June  7,  1638. 


SIR, 

FOR  the  main  business  of  an  act  or  no  act,  it  seems  you  The  suppres- 
are  resolved  upon  the  negative ;  and  I  find  you  have  con-  "Jtfor  defer  - 
sidered  the  great  difficulty  which  attends  this  resolution,  ring  it  only, 
and  which  lies  between  the  matter  of  credit  and  safety.  choice  of Ihe 

It  is  true,  no  act,  and  you  hazard  your  reputation  very  far;  heads. 
and  so  much  the  more,  because  you  have  missed  two  years 
together  already.  And  it  is  true,  that  so  many  places  about 
you  being  infected,  and  that  Cambridge  men  may  flock 
thither,  (though  that  place  be  touched,)  you  have  great 
reason  to  think  of  your  safety ;  but  for  my  own  part  I  shall 
do  as  I  did  the  last  year,  that  is,  leave  you  to  your  own 
judgments,  and  prescribe  nothing  either  for  or  against; 
with  this,  that  I  would  have  you  remember,  that  the  last 
year  the  act  being  put  off  very  latec,  you  lost  your  reputa- 

152  tion,  and  the  town  was  as  full  of  strangers,  as  though  an  act  Tne  sick- 
111  i  i  n.-i-i  i        ness  increas- 

had  been  kept,  and  consequently  the  danger  as  great,  but  jng  -m  an 

that  it  pleased  God  to  bless  you.     And  if  it  should  happen  these  neigh- 
now  that  the  act  should  be  put  off,  and  the  company  come  th^acTwas"^ 
notwithstanding,  and  fill  the  town,  and  (which  God  forbid)  suppressed  in 
any  danger  folloAV,  you  will  then  incur  the  danger  and  lose  o^Thurs^ay 
the  credit.     I  write  this  only  to  put  you  in  mind,  how  the  the  28th  of 
case  stands,  but  will  not  command  any  alteration  of  that, 

c  [It  was  first  put  off  till  Oct.  9,  and      above,  p.  175,  note  d.] 
then  dispensed   with   altogether.     See          d  [Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  155.  a. J 


200 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1638.   which  you  and  the  heads  being  upon  the  place  shall  think 
fittest  for  yourselves  and  it. 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
June  25,  1638. 

Word  is  now  sent  me  that  the  new  convocation-house  is 
finished. 


cellor 


Dr.  Frewen  AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  The  time  puts  me 
in  mind  of  naming  unto  you  a  new  vice-chancellor.  For  the 
dean  of  Sarum,  Dr.  Baylie,  hath  now  undergone  the  pains 
and  care  of  that  place  two  years  together ;  and  I  shall  not 
hold  it  fit,  without  greater  necessity  than  I  hope  can  befal 
me  there,  to  over-burden  any  man  with  more  than  two 
years  together  in  that  careful  and  troublesome  office.  Dr. 
Baylie  for  his  time  hath  been  very  careful  to  give  both 
myself  and  you  as  much  satisfaction  and  content  as  well 
may  be  expected  in  the  execution  of  such  an  office :  and 
hath  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  uphold  the  discipline, 
and  increase  the  stock  of  the  university.  So  that  he  hath 
left  a  good  example  to  his  successor  in  both  kinds.  And  now 
I  have  made  choice  of  Dr.  Frewen,  dean  of  Gloucester6  and 
president  of  Magdalen  college,  to  succeed  him;  who,  as  he 
is  every  way  very  able  and  sufficient  for  the  discharge  of 
that  place,  so  hath  he  this  great  advantage,  that  he  hath 
been  vice-chancellor  heretoforef,  though  under  another  chan 
cellor  of  the  university,  and  by  that  means  is  well  acquainted 
with  ail  those  things  which  are  incident  to  the  office :  and 
thereby  will  be  easily  able  to  master  those  things,  which 
would  be  difficult  to  another  man's  beginnings.  And  this 
falls  out  so  much  the  better,  because  at  Michaelmas,  that 
great  and  beneficial  statute  (give  me  leave  to  call  it  so)  con 
cerning  the  examination  of  those  that  stand  for  degrees, 
must  begin  to  be  put  in  execution?.  And  though  I  do  not 


d  [Read  in  convocation  July  16, 
1638.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  156.  b.] 

e  [Appointed  Aug.  27,  (Rymer, 
Foed.VIII.iii.  221,)  installed  Sept.  13, 
1631.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  822.)] 


f  [In  1628  and  1629.  He  was  vice- 
chancellor  when  Laud  was  elected 
chancellor.  See  above,  p.  3.] 

*  i  See  Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  ix.  sect.  ii. 
§  3.]" 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  201 

hear  that  the  younger  sort  have  been  so  careful  to  provide    A.D.  1638. 
themselves  by  speaking  Latin  in  their  several  colleges,  as  I 
was  to  give  them  warning  that  they  might ;  yet  that  shall 
put  no  stop  upon  me,  but  that  I  shall  expect  and  require  the 
execution  of  the  statute. 

153  These  are  therefore  [not  only]  to  let  you  know,  that  I  do 
hereby  nominate  and  choose  Dr.  Frewen  to  be  my  vice- 
chancellor  for  the  year  ensuing,  [but  alsoh]  to  pray  and  re 
quire  you  to  allow  of  this  my  choice,  and  to  give  him  all  the 
respects  due  to  his  place,  and  all  other  aid  and  assistance  by 
your  counsel  or  otherwise,  which  shall  be  requisite,  the 
better  to  enable  him  in  the  discharge  of  the  office  which  he 
now  undertakes.  Thus  not  doubting  of  your  readiness,  and 
willing  obedience  herein,  I  leave  both  him  and  you  all  to 
the  blessing  of  God,  and  rest, 

Your  loving  friend 
and  chancellor, 
W.  CANT. 

July  11,  1638. 

To  my  very  loving  friends  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford. 


I  HAVE  now  no  business  to  you  but  only  to  pray  you,  that  Aug.  3,  1638. 
in  this  dead  time  of  vacation,  you  will  be  watchful  that  the  j^]^™6^ 
scholars  spend  not  their  time  in  taverns  and  ale-houses,  and  look  to  scho- 
so  help  themselves  to  put  on  a  habit,  which  will  not  be  fit  to  l*™^°*  &c 
be  worn  in  term,  nor  at  any  other  time.     And  you  cannot 
do  a  greater  office  in  all  the  time  of  your   vice-chancel 
lorship,  than  to  hinder  the  growth  of  this  spreading  evil,  &c. 

W.  CANT. 


Cray  don, 
August  3,  1638. 


h  ['and'  1st.  edit.] 


202 


TEIE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


AJX  1638, 


Aug.  10. 
For  care 
about  ale 
houses. 


SIR, 

I  THANK  you  heartily  for  your  care  about  the  taverns  and 
the  frequenting  of  ale-houses,  about  which  base  places  you 
cannot  be  too  careful.  For  they  are  certainly  the  bane  of  a 
great  many  young  men,  which  are  sent  to  the  university  for 
better  purposes ;  and  if  you  do  not  now  and  then  give  them 
a  night  walk,  they  will  easily  deceive  all  your  care  for  the 
day. 


To  look  to 
the  scholars 
at  his  majes 
ty's  coming 
to  Wood 
stock  by  rea 
son  of  my 
absence, 
which  was 
never  before 
since  I  was 
chancellor. 


I  CANNOT  be  at  Woodstock  this  year  when  his  majesty 
comes,  by  reason  of  business  which  the  king  himself  hath 
laid  upon  me,  and  must  be  done  at  that  time,  or  not  at  alls. 
I  am  sorry  it  so  falls  out,  but  I  have  spoken  with  his  majesty, 
that  my  absence  may  not  hinder  the  wonted  grace  which  he 
shews  to  the  university.  I  have  likewise  spoken  to  the 
officers  of  the  household  about  your  entertainment  that  day.  154 
I  have  also  sent  to  my  lord  of  Oxford11  to  attend  there  in 
my  room.  It  will  be  time  for  you  now  at  your  Monday 
meeting,  to  propose  to  the  heads  the  keeping  of  their  several 
companies  at  home,  that  they  may  not  disturb  the  king's 
game1,  nor  otherwise  offend  the  court  by  their  frequent  going 
thither ;  of  which  I  pray  be  very  careful. 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
August  10,  1638. 


Aug.  17, 1638. 
To  the  vice- 
chancellor 
about  gowns. 
The  fault 
appeared  to 
be  the  tailors' 
only,  and  so 
I  gave  order 
lor  punish 
ment. 


SIR, 

I  THANK  you  for  your  care  to  make  a  present  stop  of  the 
use  of  prohibited  gowns  among  the  younger  sortJ.  But  if 
you  punish  only  the  tailors  that  made  them,  and  not  the 
scholars  that  wear  them,  I  doubt  you  will  not  easily  remedy 


g  [He  probably  refers  to  the  second 
edition  of  the  conference  with  Fisher, 
which  he  must  have  been  at  this  time 
preparing  for  the  press,  at  the  king's 
command.  It  appeared  the  following 


year.] 

h  [John  Bancroft.] 

5  [See  above,  p.  20,  note  f.] 

J  [See  below,  p.  216.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  203 

the  abuse,   unless  it  appear  to  you  that  the  tailors  made    A.D.  1638. 
them  without  the  scholars'  appointment;   then  indeed  the 
scholars  are  blameless,  otherwise  not. 

W.  CANT. 

Cray  don, 
August  17,  1638. 


IN  this  time  of  my  absence  from  Woodstock  things  were  From  the 
carried  well  at  court  by  the  heads  ;    and  they  had  a  very      e  "°    n" 


gracious  entertainment  there,  and  gave  the  king  good  con-  27,  1638. 
tent,   and   were   dismissed   without  complaint   against   any 
scholar  for  disturbing  his  majesty's  game. 


SIR, 

FOR  the  business  concerning  the  placing  of  the  sons  of  the  To  the  vice- 
lady  Lewis  k  with  the  young  noblemen ;  I  am  sorry  that  they  gep?C2o°con 
which  are  suitors  have  so   much  as  one  precedent  for  it.  cerning  the 
But  since  it  is  so,  I  am  glad  that  was  before  my  time ;  for  $ta  jj^  a^ 
certainly  I  am  not  like  to  make  a  second.     And  I  pray  do  the  sons  of 
you  consider  what  it  may  breed  in  the  issue,  if  all  the  chil-  ter^marSed" 
dren  of  noblemen's  daughters  that  are  married  to  knights  to  knights. 
shall  challenge  the  same  privilege  in  the  university,   that 
the  sons  of  the  noblemen  do,  and  with  what  power  and  dis 
cretion  the   university  can  give  it,  considering  they   have 
not  the  privileges  with  noblemen's  sons  in  any  other  part  of 
the  kingdom  besides,  nor  can  you  at  present  see  what  con 
structions  may  be  made  of  it  above,  it  being  upon  the  matter 
the  giving  of  a  precedency.     The  truth  is,  I  would  be  very 
glad  it  were  in  my  power  to  gratify  that  honourable  lady 
without  prejudice  to  the  university,  which  I  doubt  in  this 
particular  cannot  be.      And  besides,  I  am  persuaded  this 
proceeds  from  the  forwardness  of  Dr.  Mansel1  and  her  kins- 

k  [Anne,  daughter  of  Robert  Sack-  lins's  Peerage,  ii.  149.)] 

ville,  second  earl  of  Dorset,  first  mar-  l  [Principal  of  Jesus  college.     See 

ried  to  Edward  lord  Beauchamp,  and  above,  p.  186,  note  u.] 
afterwards  to  Sir  Edward  Lewis.  (Col- 


204  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1638.    man,  ])r>  Glenliam  m,  and  not  from  herself;  though  if  it  did 

come  from  herself,  I  cannot  tell  what  other  answer  to  give ;  155 
therefore  I  pray  give  them  the  fairest  denial  you  can. 

W.  CANT. 

Croydon, 
Sept.  20,  1638. 


Passages  out  WHEREAS  there  is  an  omission  in  the  statutes  concerning 
chancellor's  the  examination  of  the  younger  sort  before  they  take  their 
letters,  with  degrees,  I  advised  the  vice-chancellor  to  consult  the  heads 
them.  f°r  a  suppty  of  this  defect  in  statute,  who  did  so,  and  sent 

1.  Concern-     me  word  that  the  heads  had  ordered,  that  all  regents  should 
tions  in  term  examine  in  their  course,  those  only  excepted  who  are  dis- 
time.  pensed  with  for  their   absence  by  the  congregation;    and 
throne  being  that  every  candidate  repulsed  as  insufficient  by  examiners, 
in  statute,       should  not  be  admitted   to    a   second   examination   in   six 
being  by         months  after.     To  this  I  gave  answer,  that  they  should  do 
statute  put     well  in  a  business  of  such  difficulty,  and  so  unpleasing  to 
hands  of  the   ^e  young   students,   and  perhaps  to   the  regents   also,  to 
proctors.         have  this  their  order  confirmed  in  convocation,  unless  they 

did  find  anything  in  statute  to  make  such  order  of  theirs 
binding. 

2.  Concern-         To  th    proctor  of  Merton  college,  Mr.  Corbet,  I  delivered 

ing  proctor 

Corbet  of        your  grace's  advice,  that  he  should  do  well  to  substitute 

Merton  col-     some  other  to  officiate  for  him  at  the  communion  at  the  be- 

lege,  about 

his  assisting    ginning  of  terms,  if  the  tenderness  of  his  conscience  would 

at  the  com-     no|-  g~  ve  ]^jni  ieave  to  conform  to  such  seemlv  gestures   as 

munion  at 

the  begin-       are  thought  fit  to  be  used  at  that  service :  his  answer  was, 

nmgofterm.  that  he  did  conform  therein  at  the  last  communion;  the 
which,  how  true,  my  predecessor  now  with  your  grace  is 
best  able  to  resolve  you,  I  found  him  (I  confess)  more 
tractable  than  I  expected;  but  since  that  time  he  is  quite 

m  [Henry  Glemham  of  Trinity  coll.,  ration  made  dean  of  Bristol,  July  28, 

D.D.  April  3,   1633  (Wood,  F.  ().  i.  1660,   and   consecrated  bishop  of  St. 

470),  son  of  Sir  Henry  Glemham,  by  Asaph  Oct.   13,    1667,  and  died  Jan. 

Anne,  eldest  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  17,   1669.    (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  836, 

Sackville,  earl  of  Dorset,  at  the  Resto-  837 .)] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  205 

relapsed  (the  fruit  of  his  friend's,  Mr.  ChannellV  sermon,  A.D.  1638. 
wherein  among  other  the  like  passages  he  told  us  that  he 
that  does  more  than  canon  requires,  is  as  great  a  puritan 
as  he  that  does  less.)  By  his  last  discourse  I  find  him 
resolved  neither  to  conform  nor  absent  himself  without  com 
mand,  which  I  have  assured  him  already  is  folly  to  expect. 
Yet  to  this  purpose  he  desired  me  to  send  you  this  inclosed 
petition  ;  a  copy  whereof  here  follows. 


To  the  right  reverend  father  in  God,  William,  by  the  divine  Proctor  Cor- 
providence,  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  his  grace,  the  bet>s  Petltlon- 
honourable  chancellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford. 

The  humble  petition  of  Edward  Corbet,  one  of  the  proc 
tors  of  the  same  university. 

WHEREAS  your  petitioner  was  wished  by  Mr.  Vice-chan 
cellor  in  your  grace's  name,  either  to  bow  towards  the  altar 
at  the  university  common  prayers,  or  to  forbear  to  officiate. 
156  He  humbly  sheweth  your  grace  that  from  his  heart  he  lov- 
eth  and  honoureth  the  Church  of  England,  and  doth  not  only 
rigidly  and  carefully  observe  her  doctrine  and  discipline,  but 
would  to  the  utmost  of  his  Aveak  power  defend  the  same 
with  his  pen  or  blood.  And  therefore  he  humbly  beseech- 
eth  your  grace,  that  if  above  and  besides  what  is  established, 
anything  be  thought  fit  to  be  practised,  your  grace  would 
vouchsafe  either  to  order  and  command  him  to  do  it,  or 
else  be  pleased  to  leave  him  to  that  liberty  which  our  reli 
gious  king  and  orthodox  Church  have  allowed  him,  so  should 
he  pray  for  your  long  life  and  happy  government  in  the 
Church0. 


11    [The  well-known  Francis  Chey-  °  [Corbet,  as  one  of  the  witnesses 

nell,  the  opponent  of  Hammond  and  against   Laud  on  his  trial,   (eleventh 

Chillingworth.    He  was  afterwards  con-  day,)  spoke  of  this  petition,  and  of  the 

nected  with  Corbet,  his  mother  being  injunction  given  to  the  fellows  of  Mer- 

Bp.  Abbot's  second  wife,  and   Corbet  ton   to   bow   towards   the   altar.     See 

having  married  the  granddaughter  of  Hist,    of    Troubles    and    Trial,   ehap. 

the  first  wife.]  xxxiii.] 


206 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1638.        And  to   all   this  I  gave  the  vice-chancellor  this  answer 
following. 

I  THANK  you  for  your  discreet  handling  of  proctor  Corbet. 

And  first  for  the  thing  itself;  I  have  received  his  petition, 

and  will  not  give  him  any  command,  either  to  do,  or  desist, 

or  to  appoint  any  substitute,  but  leave  him,  and  let  him  do 

as  it  shall  please  God  and  himself.     And  secondly,  for  the 

manner  of  this  his  refusal,  I  must  tell  you,  that  it  is  all  one 

in  substance  with  the  petition  which  Mr.  Channell  himself 

Notwith-        delivered  me  about  a  twelvemonth  since p ;    and  that  since 

standing  this  yOur   }a^e  being  with  me  I  have  received   an  answer  not 

you  shall  '     much  in  effect  differing  from  this  petition,  from  two  or  three 

give  the  proc-  refractors  in  different  parts ;  and  now  your  predecessor  tells 

tor  no  an-  .  J 

me,  that  he  being  lately  in  his  visitation  of  his  peculiars  be 
longing  to  his  deanery q,  had  the  same  answer  given  him, 
that  they  looked  for  a  command.  By  all  which  put  to 
gether,  I  see  the  faction  have  informed  themselves,  and  are 
agreed  to  make  this  answer,  to  call  for  a  command,  which 
from  me  they  shall  never  have,  till  I  may  be  warranted  my 
self  by  public  authority.  But  we  find,  that  besides  articles 
and  canons  and  rubrics,  &c.,  the  Church  of  Christ  had  ever 
certain  customs  which  prevailed  in  her  practice,  and  had  no 
canon  for  them;  and  if  all  such  may  be  kicked  out,  you 
may  bid  farewell  to  all  decency  and  order.  In  the  mean 
time  I  will  acquaint  his  majesty  with  this  distemper  grow 
ing,  that  the  blame  may  not  be  cast  upon  me. 


swer  at  all 
from  me. 


3.  Every 
lecturer  to 
have  a  dis 
tinct  bell 
tolled  to  his 
lecture. 


This  is  since 
ordered  by 
the  heads 
and  settled. 


There  is  an  abuse  hath  continued  long,  and  is,  I  think, 
very  fit  to  be  remedied.  It  is,  that  when  divers  public 
lectures  are  at  the  same  hour  in  the  university,  one  bell  (if  I 
mistake  not)  hath  been  used  to  toll  to  all  of  them,  by  which 
means  the  auditors  to  all  lectures  take  occasion  to  repair  to 
the  schools,  and  when  they  come  there,  perhaps  but  one 
lecturer  reads,  and  then  they  cannot  find  their  way  back  to 
their  several  colleges,  but  spend  their  time  as  they  should 
not.  To  prevent  this,  I  pray  communicate  with  the  heads, 
and  make  an  order,  that  a  distinct  bell  be  tolled  to  every 
lecture,  that  so  the  auditors  may  know  for  what  lecture  it  is, 

P  [On  the  visitation  of  Merton  coll.]  •»  [OfSarum.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  207 

and  apply  themselves  accordingly.     And  I  think  it  is  very    A.D.  1638. 
fit,  that  the  professor  intending  to  read  that  day  should  give  " 
warning  to  the  clerk  for  the  tolling  of  his  bell. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Oct.  5, 1638. 


167     ON  Wednesday  the  10th  of  October  the  vice-chancellor  The  new  con- 
and  the  university  entered  upon  the  use  of  their  new  con-  house^iTuse 
vocation-house,  without  any  other  solemnity  than  a  solemn  Oct.  10. 
speech  of  bene [diction]  from  the  vice-chancellor. 

On   the   same    day   the    examinations  of  candidates   for  Examination 

«         j 

degrees   began   to   be   put   in   execution  according   to   the 
statutes. 


WHEN  jthe  proctor  saw  that  your  grace  would  not  com-  Out  of  the 
mand  his  conformity  in  gesture  at  the  beginning  of  term,  he  ™f~ Chancel- 
requested  me.  to  require  it  (pretending  that  my  predecessor  Oct.  15.  ? 
had  done  so  before  me) ;  I  refusing,  he  then  proffered  to  con-  ^ne  manner 
form  of  his  own  accord,  but  he  either  did  it  not  at  all,  or  did  Corbet's  con- 
it  so  poorly,  that  it  was  scarce  observable  by  them  that  were  formity. 
present.     The  vice-chancellor  could  not  observe  it,  by  reason 
of  his  officiating  at  the  communion :  howsoever  this  is  gained 
upon  him,  that  either  he  did  conform,  and  cannot  deny  it  to 
the  faction ;  or  else  that  he  is  a  gross  dissembler  to  the  vice- 
chancellor  and  the  authority  borne  there. 


SIR, 

I  AM  informed  by  the  dean  of  Christ  Church  of  a  shameful  To  the  vice- 
non-residence  practised  by  two  Christ  Church  men,  under  ^^lor, 
the  pretence  of  university  privilege;    whereas  such  a  foul  send  away 


208 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.P.  1638. 

Mr.  Little  and 
Mr.  Vereir  to 
reside  upon 
their  several 
benefices. 


It  was  time 
to  take  this 
course,  for 
the  vice- 
chancellor 
sent  me  word, 
Oct.  22,  that 
there  is  much 
declaiming 
at  St.  Mary's 
against  non 
residents  in 
general.     Of 
which  these 
give  too  just 
cause. 


Woodruffs 
non-resi 
dence  r. 


abuse  is  no  way  to  be  endured ;  one  of  them  is  Mr.  Vereir,  he 
had  a  living  given  him  by  the  university  in  Worcestershire 
twelve  years  since.  And  he  hath  ever  since  (as  I  am  in 
formed)  lived  in  the  university,  and  spent  that  sacred  revenue 
most  profanely.  The  other  one  is  Mr.  Little,  and  he  hath 
had  two  vicarages  in  Yorkshire  these  seven  years,  and  hath 
performed  no  church  duty  upon  either  of  them,  but  only  that 
he  makes  a  merry  journey  once  a  year  into  those  parts,  and 
then  returns  again,  and  wastes  the  rest  of  his  time  in  Oxford 
under  pretence  of  suits.  But  it  is  no  way  probable,  that  both 
these  vicarages  should  be  litigious  seven  years  together.  And 
howsoever,  it  will  be  a  great  scandal  and  dishonour  to  the 
university  to  have  such  shameful  things  as  these  countenanced 
under  the  name  of  privilege.  I  have  written  to  the  dean  to 
lead  the  way  to  you,  and  expel  them  out  of  Christ  Church  if 
they  have  any  footing  there;  and  therefore  I  do  hereby 
pray  and  require  you  to  proceed  to  bannition  against  them 
in  the  university,  if  they  do  not  presently  repair  to  their 
livings,  and  reside  there;  of  which  I  shall  expect  an  ac 
count  from  you. 

And  hereupon  I  writ  to  my  lords  of  York  and  Worcester, 
to  call  these  two  men  to  reside  upon  their  several  benefices. 

The  like  course  shall  you  take  with  one  Woodruff;  I  shall 
speak  first  with  Dr.  Baylie  about  him,  for  the  monition  was 
given  him  in  his  time. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Octob.  18,  1638. 


To  the  vice- 
chancellor, 
Oct.  31.    My 
resolution 
about  non 
residents  in 
general. 


SIR, 

I  HAVE  written  to  my  lords  the  archbishop  of  York  and  168 
bishop  of  Worcester  to  call  Vereir  and  Little  to  residence; 
and  if  the  one  have  prevented  that  call,  and  the  other  mean 


r  [This  probably  was  Timothy  Wood- 
roff'e,  vicar  of  Inglesham,  Wilts,  "which 
being  about  14  or  more  miles  from 


ture,  and  himself  read  it  for  several 
years,  he  being  then  bach,  of  divinity." 
(Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  1113.)  He  was 


Oxford,  gave  him   the  opportunity   of      married  and  had  had  a  son  born  in  Ox- 


spending  much  of  his  time  in   Ball, 
college,  where  he  set  up  a  divinity  lee- 


ford  in  the  April   of  this  year.  (Ath. 
Ox.  iv.  641.)] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  209 

to  do  it,  it  is  well.  For  I  am  resolved  (and  so  you  may  signify    A.D.  1638. 

to  the  heads  at  your  next  meeting)  to  purge  the  university 

of  all  non-residents,  which  have  not  express  letter  of  statute 

to  relieve  them,  and  bind  my  hands.     And  as  for  the  statute 

of  the  realm,  which  had  a  great  deal  of  reason  upon  which  to 

ground  itself  when  it  was  made,  but  (God  be  thanked)  by 

the  learnedness  of  the  age  hath  little  now;   as  I  may  not 

violate  it,  so  neither  will  I  suffer  unworthy  pretences  to  abuse 

both  the  Church  and  it,  if  it  lie  in  my  power  to  apply  a 

remedy  to  so  gross  an  abuse.      And  I  pray  let  the  heads 

know  that  I  would  not  have  endured  so  gross  non-residence 

(as  I  find  Mr.  Vereir  and  Mr.  Little  guilty  of)  to  shelter 

itself  in  that  university,  had  I  sooner  known  of  it,  than  now 

I  came  to  do  by  a  mere  accident. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Octob.  31,  1638. 


SIR, 

IN  this  case  of  non-residence,  I  pray  require  all  the  heads  A  note  to  be 
of  colleges  and  halls  to  bring  you  in  a  note  of  all  beneficed  J^h^Une- 
men,  which  live  under  their  government :  at  what  distance  ficed  men  in 
their  benefice  is  from  the  university,  the  value  in  the  king's  ^nThall  ° 
books,  and  otherwise,  (if  they  can  learn  it,)  how  long  they  Which  was 
have  held  it,  doneaccord- 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Novemb.  2,  1638. 


CONCERNING    the    incorporation   of   the    Guernsey   man  The  Guernsey 
mentioned  page  210?,  there  hath  at  his  humble  suit  been  a 
new  consideration  taken  by  the  vice-chancellor  and  the  heads 
for  the  statutableness  thereof.     And  it  was  found  upon  this 
review,  that  the  statutes  considered  two  sorts  of  men.    The 

P  [That  is,  p.  210  of  the  original  MS.     See  above,  p.  170.] 

LAUD.  p 


210  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1638.    first  are  such  as  never  have  been  members  of  oui?  university 


or  Cambridge.  Of  these  treat  the  statutes,  the  first  de 
incorporations**,  and  seem  to  distinguish  them  into  aliens  and 
natives:  the  second  sort  are  such  as  have  been  students 
sometime  in  either  of  the  universities.  As  for  the  natives  (in 
which  number  the  Guernsey  man  is)  the  words  of  the  statutes 
are, — Quibus  incorporari  permittitur,  si  tempore  in  academia 
sua  requisite,  et  pr&stitis  prius  exercitiis,  gradus  susceperint r. 
Upon  which  words  the  question  was  whether  a  native  hav 
ing  taken  a  degree  in  a  foreign  university,  might  call  that 
academiam  suam,  which  is  resolved  by  the  use  of  the  same 
word  suos  twice  in  the  same  paragraph,  where  it  stands  in 
definitely  for  any  university,  where  either  foreigner  or  native 
hath  taken  his  degree.  As  in  this  form, —  Ut  admittatur  ad 
eundem  gradumy  fyc.  quibus  ornatus  est  apud  suos*.  Where-  169 
upon  it  was  judged  by  the  heads,  that  there  was  no  bar  in 
statute  to  exclude  the  Guernsey  man  (he  producing  first 
letters  testimonial  of  the  university,  where  he  proceeded,  that 
he  had  spent  as  much  time  in  his  studies  there,  as  is  required 
by  the  orders  of  that  university,  and  that  he  had  performed 
his  exercise)  from  the  benefit  of  incorporation. 

Mr.  Vane  Upon  the  same  ground,  way  was  given  for  the  incorpora- 

mcorporated   ^on  of  one  of  fa^  sons  of  Sir  Henry  Vane4,  comptroller  of 
his  majesty' s  household. 


To  the  most  reverend  father  in  God,  the  lord  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  chancellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford. 

A  petition  The   humble   petition   of    the   inhabitants  of    Milton, 

Haseley,  Tetsworth,  Lewknor,  &c. 


Oxford  for 

spoiling  the  Humbly  sheweth, 

theirlo  Jgreat      THAT  the  petitioners  have  bestowed  great  costs  and  charges 

carriages.        in  repairing  their  highways,  through  their  several  parishes, 

leading  from  the  university  of  Oxford  towards  London  ;  that 

the  carriers  of  Oxford  do  carry  such  unreasonable  carriages, 

i  [Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  ix.  sect,  viii.]  Saumur,  incorp.  M.A.  Dec.  6.     Wood 

r  [Corp.    Stat.,   tit.    ix.    sect.    viii.  (F.  O.  i.  504)  speaks  of  him  as  nearly 

§  1-J  related  to  Sir  Hen.  Vane.     Sir  Henry 

8  [Ibid,  paulo  infra.]  had  no  son  named  Charles.] 
1    [Charles   Vane   of   the   univ.    of 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OP  OXFORD.  211 

viz.,  sometimes  40,  50,  or  60  tun11  at  a  load,  by  which  means    AJ).  1638. 
they  do  spoil  the  highways,  that  notwithstanding  the  peti 
tioners'  great  and  extraordinary  charge  in  continual  repair 
ing  of  them,  the  ways  are  made  almost  impassable. 

The  petitioners  most  humbly  beseech  your  grace  to  give 
order  that  the  said  carriers  of  Oxford  may  be  restrained 
to  such  certain  stint  and  reasonable  weight  of  carriages, 
especially  in  the  winter  time  and  foul  weather,  as  in  your 
grace's  wisdom  shall  seem  fit,  for  the  good  of  travellers 
in  the  highway,  and  ease  of  your  petitioners.  And  they 
(as  in  duty)  &c. 

Upon  this  petition,  for  redress  of  this  abuse,  I  writ  to  the 
vice-chancellor. 

SIR, 

I  HERE  inclosed  send  you  a  petition  delivered  this  week  My  answer 
unto  me,  concerning  the  highways  towards  London,  and  be-  [j^/abuse8  °f 
yond  our  own  liberties.     I  have  been  the  only  man  that  directed  to 

have  kept  up  the  carrier  to  his  four-wheeled  carriage  for  the  ^  V1C?~ 

.     ,        ,  chancellor, 

university  s  sakev ;  but  if  this  petition  be  true,  it  will  force  me 

to  take  off  my  hand,  and  then  I  know  he  must  take  off  two 
of  his  wheels ;  and  that  done,  let  him  carry  what  weight  he 
can.  I  pray  you  and  the  heads  to  take  this  into  serious 
consideration,  and  to  think  upon  some  remedy.  That  which 
I  ever  thought  on  was  not  to  go  by  the  weight^of  his  carriage, 
for  then  he  will  be  continually  laying  on  more,  and  you  are 
not  able  to  watch  him,  but  by  the  number  of  his  horses, 
which  should  not  exceed  five  or  six  at  most ;  and  then  him- 
1 70  self  will  not  dare  to  lay  on  more  load  than  his  horses  can 
well  draw  through  those  bad  ways ;  and  if  the  carriages  be 
so  great  that  he  must  use  more  horses,  let  him  use  a 
second  cart,  and  divide  his  team.  If  you  can  think  upon  a 
better  way  than  this,  I  shall  be  glad  of  it,  but  you  must  pru 
dently  think  upon  some  way  for  remedy ;  for  if  it  come  to 

u  [There  seems  to  he  an  error  here.  riages  was  prohibited.  (Rymer,  Feed. 

It  should  probably  be  'hundred  VIII.  iii.  80.)  So  that  the  continuance 

weight.']  of  such  a  carriage  between  London  and 

v  [By  a  proclamation  dated  March  Oxford  seems  to  have  been  a  special 

9,  16§§,  the  use  of  four-wheeled  car-  favour  to  the  university.] 

p  2 


212  THE   HISTOKY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1638.  public  scanning  at  the  council  table,  or  the  assizes,  it  will  be 
ordered,  whether  you  will  or  no,  and  perhaps  in  a  sourer 
way,  and  not  so  agreeable  to  your  liberties,  as  this  way  it 
may  be  done. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Nov.  23,  1038. 


Out  of  Dr.          I  SEE  good  effects  already  of  that  statute,  which  hath  been 

Turner's  let-    most  cried  down  by  those  from  whom  I  least  expected  it,  the 

ter  to  me  (of  * 

Merton  col-     statute  de  examinandis  candidatis,  and  promise  myself  much 

lege)  of  the     m0re  hereafter.     I  was  present  at  one  examination,  and  was 
good  success  .  -IT 

of  the  new      glad  to  hear  both  the  regents  examine  so  sufficiently  and 

statute,  de       discreetly,  and  the  candidates  so  ably  and  readily.     I  cannot 

examman-      .  '  .  . 

dis  candi-       believe  that  the  ablest  proceeders  in  former  times,  if  they 

dati*,  sent      had  been  examined  upon  the  sudden,  could  have  acquitted 
time.  themselves  better  than  these  candidates  (such  as  I  stumbled 

on  by  chance)  did  upon  expectation  of  a  certain  unavoidable 
examination.  The  moderation  which  your  grace  prescribed 
to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  in  the  execution  of  this  statute,  hath 
set  it  very  well  on  foot,  which  if  it  had  been  pursued  roughly 
at  the  beginning  would  never  have  held,  or  else  would  have 
bred  great  distempers  in  the  university.  For  the  regents 
who  (at  the  beginning  of  term)  kept  out  of  the  way,  inso 
much  that  the  proctor  of  thirty  of  the  junior  regents  could 
scarce  meet  with  three  examiners,  if  they  had  been  held  up 
stiffly  at  first  to  the  rigour  of  the  statute,  and  so  enforced 
some  of  them  to  lay  open  their  own  infirmities  or  disabili 
ties,  they  would  either  have  absented  themselves  quite,  or 
else  have  made  some  desperate  violent  opposition  against  the 
The  care  and  statute,  and  the  authority  that  should  back  it.  But  by  this 

moderation     moderation  which  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  useth  towards  them 
oi  the  vice- 
chancellor       (conniving  at  some  defects  now  and  then,  where  they  come 

herein.  short  of  the  statute)  he  hath  won  the  regents  so  as  that  they 

conform  themselves  in  a  good  measure  to  the  intent  of  the 
statute.  For  they  examine  through  all  the  arts  and  sciences 
in  which  the  candidates  are  bound  to  have  been  auditors, 
asking  fundamental  questions  in  every  one,  not  propounding 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  213 

studied  subtil  ties  to  gravel  and  discourage  young  students.  A.D.  1638. 
And  when  the  statute  hath  gotten  head,  (which  many  men 
had  fore-doomed,  and  therefore  did  not  fit  themselves  for  it 
against  it  should  take  place,)  I  doubt  not  but  the  regents 
will  rise  to  a  higher  pitch,  and  the  candidates  likewise  will 
come  prepared  for  it.  But  that  which  will  set  a  special 
edge  upon  both,  is  Mr.  Vice-chancellor's  assiduous  presence 
at  their  examinations,  which  I  must  confess,  looking  to  his 
former  solitude  and  retiredness,  I  could  never  have  expected 
from  him. 

171      There  was  complaint  made  to  me  by  his  majesty,  of  the  No  more  than 
great  number  of  doctors  that  usually  resorted  to  Woodstock  g^nd  his 


at  his  being  there  ;  whereupon  to  prevent  this  abuse  for  the  majesty  at 

future,  I  writ  to  the  vice-chancellor  that  they  should  lessen  Woodstock- 

their  number,  which  was  done  accordingly;    and  in   their 

Monday  meeting,  on  the  17th  of  December,  an  order  was 

made  by  the  heads,  that  the  number  of  doctors  designed  to 

attend  his  majesty  at  Woodstock  should  not  exceed  fifteen  : 

that  they  should  all  go  in  wide-sleeved  scarlet  gowns,  (not  in 

habit  and  hood,)  save  only  the  preacher,  who  during  his 

sermon  should  wear  his  hood  also;  and  further,  that  both 

the   proctors   should   go  in  their  wide-sleeved  gowns   too. 

And  that  it  might  the  better  appear  what  doctors  should  go, 

it  was  likewise  ordered,  that  this  number  should  always,  a 

little  before  every  his  majesty  '&  resort  to  that  place,  be  chosen 

out  of  the  company  of  the  doctors  there  for  the  performance 

of  that  service. 


TRUSTY  AND  WELL-BELOVED,  &c. 

WE  are  informed  that  you  have  for  some  years  suffered  a  The  king's 

very  ill  custom  to  continue  in  that  our  collegiate  church ;  for  JSf*??/?      , 

Christ  Church 
whereas  there  are  divers  scholars  chosen  to  be  students  of  for  suppres- 

that  house,  and  divers  others  that  live  there  as  commoners,  *™g  their 

Westminster 
but  the  greatest  part  of  the  scholars  are  chosen  from  our  supper,  dated 

school  at  Westminster ;  there  is  a  supper  maintained  yearly,  about  the 
commonly  called  a  Westminster  supper,  at  which  all  and  pecember. 
only  Westminster  scholars  do  meet.  This  supper  we  hold  to 


214  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A. P.  1638.  be  a  very  ill  custom,  and  no  way  fit  to  be  continued :  for  first 
it  is  a  thing  not  allowable  in  government,  that  any  party  of 
men  should  have  a  several  meeting,  which  is  a  direct  way  to 
faction  and  combination,  and  it  teacheth  the  rest  of  the 
students  in  such  a  society  to  bandy  themselves  together 
against  the  other,  that  they  may  not  be  thought  to  be 
neglected.  Secondly,  such  a  meeting  must  needs  cause  more 
expences  than  many  students  are  able  to  bear,  especially  in 
such  chargeable  times  as  these  are.  Thirdly,  it  gives  an 
occasion  of  much  drinking  and  riot,  and  consequently  of  all 
the  bad  effects  which  follow  such  excesses ;  besides  no  small 
disorder  in  leaving  or  keeping  open  the  gates  of  the  college, 
for  ingress  and  egress,  for  resort  to  that  disorderly  meeting 
at  later  hours  than  are  fit.  And  most  usually  to  add  to  all 
this  disorder,  this  supper  must  be  kept  upon  a  Friday  night, 
against  both  the  canons  of  the  Church  and  laws  of  the  realm, 
and  to  the  great  scandal  of  all  sober  men  that  hear  of  it. 

These  are  therefore  to  will  and  require  you,  the  dean  and 
chapter,  to  suppress  that  supper  or  meeting  by  what  name 
soever  it  be  called ;  and  to  call  the  students  together,  and  to 
command  them  in  our  name,  that  they  presume  not  at  any 
time  hereafter  to  resort  together  to  any  such  meeting,  either 
in  the  college  or  out  of  it ;  and  to  register  these  our  letters 
among  the  orders  and  decrees  for  the  government  of  that 
church,  as  you  and  every  of  you  will  answer  it  at  your  utmost 
perils ;  and  these  our  letters  we  will  shall  be  binding,  not 
only  upon  yourselves,  but  upon  your  successors,  that  this  ill 
and  dangerous  custom  may  never  rise  up  into  practice  again. 
Given,  &c. 


Out  of  my          I  THANK  you  heartily  for  calling  for  arms  of  vour  pn-172 

letters  to  the     .,         -, 

vice-chancel-  V1legecl  men,  and  I  pray  be  careful  that  they  be  ordered  to 

lor  for  privi-  the  full  as  high  as  any  townsmen  of  their  rank  and  condition; 
p^vidTarms,  ailc^  so  tne^  tna^  ^ovc  neither  you  nor  your  liberties  may  not 
January  17th.  be  able  to  take  any  advantage  against  you,  cither  in  regard  of 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OP  OXFORD.  215 

the  number  or  the  sufficiency  of  the  arms.     And  I  pray  see    A.D.  1639. 
that  this  be  done  with  all  care,  and  without  any  partiality. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 

Jan.  17,  1<J3|. 


HEREUPON  the  vice-chancellor  with  other  of  the  heads  20  privileged 


charged  twenty  of  their  privileged  men  with  corslets,  and  ™  ° 


.,*„.,.  Corslets, 
thirty  with  muskets,  which  did  almost  equal  the  train-band  of  and  30  with 

the  city,  though  the  privileged  men  were  but  an  handful  in  muskets- 
respect  of  the  other. 

From  Oxford, 
January  28 th. 


SIR, 

You  had  need  be  very  careful  of  the  university,  for  while  To  the  vice- 
none  of  you  think  it,  the  Jesuits  and  their  instruments  are  ^nc^  ^ 
busy  thereabouts ;  and  at  this  present  they  have  seduced  a  watchfulness 
young  youth  of  Exeter  college,  I  have  forgotten  his  name,  against  tne 
but  it  begins  with  a  W* ;    and  the  young  organist  of  St.  *  jjjs  name 
John7sw,  who  slipt  away,  now  whilst  the  president  was  at  is  Weale. 
Sarum.      I   have   granted  an  attachment  against  them,  if 
they  can  light  upon  them  before  they  take  shipping ;  as  also 
against  Cherriton,  for  that  I  hear  is  his  name,  who  seduced 
them.     You  had  need  be  very  careful  in  these  businesses, 
for  else  we  shall  very  deservedly  hear  ill  of  it. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  7,  1638. 


[Robert  Lugge,  Mus.  Bac.,  July  5,  1638.   (Wood,  F.  O.  i.  500.)] 


216  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639. 


SIR, 


To  the  vice-        I  AM  informed  that  the  masters,  many  of  them  sit  bare  at 

"u         n 

^erninff      ^'  Mary's,  having  their  hats  there  and  not  their  caps ;  rather 
the  masters     choosing  to  sit  bare*,  than  to  keep  form,  and  then  so  soon  as 

hatfa?dtheir  they  come  out  of  the  church  tne7  are  <luite  out  of  form  a11 
lawyers'  along  the  streets.  I  am  likewise  told,  that  divers  of  the 
gowns,  and  younger  sort,  and  some  masters,  begin  again  to  leave  the 
look  to  them,  wide-sleeved  gown  apace,  and  take  up  that  which  they  call 
Feb.  20, 163f.  faG  lawyer's  gown?.  If  both  or  either  of  these  be,  you  had 
then-  sitting  need  look  to  it  in  time,  before  it  gather  head.  And  if  it  be 
bare,  so  long  true  for  the  gowns,  you  must  chide  the  tailors  that  make 
along  the  them  very  severely,  besides  what  you  do  to  the  scholars. 
streets  in  w  nANT 

their  caps,  vv  '  ^ANT- 

,  i  Lambeth, 

and  keep 

form,  which 
the  vice- 
chancellor 
assures  me 
they  do.  SIR, 

To  the  vice-        I  PRAY  take  care  of  Lent,  and  the  disputations  in  their 
F^b^ul^the  Beginnings,  and  speak  to  the  heads  of  houses  at  your  next 
forbidding  of  meeting,  that  they  warn  their  several  companies,  that  they 
betwixtS    keeP  disputations  at  the  schools  diligently,  but  very  orderly 
leges  in  Lent,  and  peaceably.     And  since  I  have  now  by  many  years'  ex 
perience  observed  that   coursing  between  one   college  and 
another  is  the  great  mother  of  all  disorder,  and  that  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  have  decent  and  orderly  disputations, 
if  that  be  permitted;    these   are  to  require  you,  that  you 
suffer  no  such  coursing  at  all  under  any  pretence.     And 
farther,  I  would  have  you  speak  with  the  principal  of  Brase- 
nosez,   that  he  would  command   their   cellar  to  be   better 
looked  to,  that  no  strong  and  unruly  argument  be  drawn 

1  ["  As  divines  preached  in  caps  .  .  .  lars. .  .  The  gown  that  a  Dr.  of  Divinity 

so  the  auditors,  if  scholars,  sat  in  them,  now  wears,  as  also  that  by  a  Master  of 

which  continued  so  till   the   late   un-  Arts  .  .  hath  .  .  only  long  sleeves  with 

happy  times;   but  when  K.  Charles  II.  a  cross  slit   to  put  the  arms  through, 

was  restored,  then  the  auditors  sat  bare,  Which  gown  is  not  ancient,  and  never 

lest  if  covered,  should   encourage  the  known  to  be  worn  by  any  before  the 

laical  party  to  put   on  their  hats,   as  time  of  John  Calvin."    (Wood,  Hist., 

they  did  all  the   time  of  Rebellion."  vol.  i.  pp.  68,  69.)  This  is  what  is  here 

Wood,  Hist,  vol.  i.  p.  71.]  called  the  lawyers'  gown.] 

["Gowns  wide  sleeved  were   an-          z  [Samuel  Radt-liffe.] 
ciently  used  by  the  generality  of  scho- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OP  OXFORD.  217 

from  that  topic  place.     And  I  pray  desire  the  heads  to  be    A.D.  1639. 
very  careful  that  the  disputations  may  be  scholar-like  and 
peaceable. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  ult.,  163|. 


AT  our  meeting  on  Monday  last  it  was  ordered,  that  from  From  the 
henceforth  all  circuiting  for  degrees a  shall  begin  from  the  ^r^?^6!" 
schools.     We  have  now  left  only  the  Friday  court  in   St.  Circuiting  for 
Mary's  church  b,  and  I  hope  that  will  not  dwell  there  long,     j^8?64!*0 

the  schools. 
March  4,  16S|. 


AN  order  for  the  Lent  disputations c,  that  no  bachelors  be  Bachelors' 
suffered  to  answer  two  in  a  school,  or  in  the  divinity  school,  i^ 
which  was  commonly  called  the  horse-fair,  &c. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
March  29,  16'39. 


LAST  week  there  arose  a  little  difference  betwixt  the  city  The  vjce. 
and  university,  but  it  is  already  composed.     They  required  chancellor 
of  all  privileged  inhabitants  a  contribution  towards  the  fit-  th^town? 
ting  out  of  their  fifteen  soldiers.     I  denied  it,  yet  in  the  requiring 
close,  that  they  might  have  no  colour  to  complain  of  our  Jjf1^  p^vi? 
coldness  in   a   business   of  such   importance,    I   gave   way  leged  persons 
for  the  taxing  of  such  privileged  persons  (and  such  only)  as  ^™^e^eur 
exercise  any  kind  of  merchandise  amongst  them.    This  (when  out  of  his 
they  saw  they  could  get  no  more)  was  accepted,  and  so  the  kfifcters>  APnl 
quarrel  ended. 

Oxford,  St.  Mary  Magdalen  Coll., 
April  15,  1 63|. 

*  [This  was  directed  by  Corp.  Stat,  Eccl.  B.  V.  M.  i.  e.  Adam  de  Brom's 

tit.  ix.  sect.  v.  §  1  ;   it  used  to  begin  chapel.     See  Corp.   Stat,  tit.  xxi.  §  1. 

from  St.  Mary's  Church.]  It  was  afterwards  held  in  the  apody- 

b  [The  vice-chancellor's  court,  ap-  terium  of  the  convocation-house.  J 
pointed  to  be  held  in  boreali  sacello          c  [Vide  Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  vi.  §  8.] 


218  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1630. 


Procu-  (Mr.  FULHAM(I,  ex  ./Ed.  Christ.  )  [Admitted 

ratores  \Mr.  HEYWOODC,  e  coll.  ^En.  Nas.     J    Apr.  24.] 

An  informa-        ABOUT  tlie  20th  of  April,  I  received  information  how  the 

tion  how  di-  statutes  at  Oxford  were  like  to  be  eluded  by  divers  non- 

vers  discon- 

tinuers  from   resident  young  men  which  resorted  to  Cambridge  for  their 

Oxford  resort  degrees,  which  information  follows,  in  hcec  verba. 
to  Cambridge 
for  their  de 
grees,  to  elude 

the  statutes  Hearing  that  the  new  statutes  at  Oxford  permit  none  but  174 
university!™  those  who  totally  reside  and  study  there  to  take  degrees,  and 
admit  no  computation  of  terms,  more  than  those  wherein 
they  were  commorant  there,  so  that  many  discontinuers  can 
not  in  so  short  time  proceed,  as  formerly  there  they  might 
have  clone,  and  here  with  us  they  may  yet,  whereby  many 
bachelors  of  arts  of  Oxford  came  this  year  for  their  degrees 
of  masters  of  arts  here,  which  this  year  they  could  not  ob 
tain  at  Oxford,  which  I  endeavoured  to  prevent,  lest  Oxford 
should  in  a  short  time  lose  half  their  proceeders,  especially 
the  non-continuers,  for  which  I  had  no  thanks  here,  be 
cause  the  vice-chancellor  and  proctors  lose  fees  thereby,  and 
the  colleges  too;  and  they  alleged  to  me,  that  it  was  no 
prejudice  to  Oxford;  for  if  it  were,  that  university  would 
have  given  public  notice,  or  written  to  Cambridge,  &c.,  and 
that  I  had  no  particular  command  from  the  chancellor  so  to 
do,  whereby  one  Walter  Crook,  late  of  Magdalen  college  in 
Oxford,  got  out  of  Caius  College  master  of  arts,  notwith 
standing  that  I  alleged  it  was  a  prejudice  to  the  university 
of  Oxford,  for  that  he  could  not  obtain  that  degree  there  this 
year;  but  the  rest  by  opposing  him  publicly,  did  not  put 
forward  so  much  as  for  incorporation,  though  in  town,  ex- 

d  [Edward  Fulham,  chaplain  to  Bp.  with  Walker's  statement,  that  he  was 

Bancroft,  soon  afterwards  preb.  of  Ip-  prebendary  in  1641,  and  that  during 

thorn  in  the  church  of  Chichester,  rec-  the  Rebellion  he  retired  to  Italy,     lie 

tor  of  Wotton,  Oxon,  and  proctor  for  the  became    canon   of  Windsor   July    12, 

diocese  of  Oxford  in  1641.  (Walker's  1G60,  D.D.  Aug.  1  the  same  year,  (F. 

Sufferings,  par.  ii.  p.  15.)  Wood  (F.  O.  O.  ii.  237,)  and  also  vicar  of  Bray  and 

ii.  237)   states  that  he  was  rector  of  rector  of  West  Ildesley.  (Wood,  Ath. 

Hampton  Poyle  during  the  usurpation,  Ox.  iii.  1035.)     He  died,  according  to 

and  that  he  became  preb.  of  Chichester  Walker,  in  1695.] 

at  the  Restoration,  which  is  at  variance  e  [Robert  Heywood.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  219 

cept  one  Thomas  Robins,  late  of  Corpus  Christ!  Oxford,  as  A.P.  1639. 
I  take  it,  a  bachelor  of  arts  and  curate,  &c.,  whom  I 
stayed,  being  accidentally  in  capite  senatus  twice  or  thrice, 
so  that  he  is  returned  to  his  cure  with  a  heavy  heart,  as  I 
hear  Crook  got  out  in  the  head,  when  Dr.  Edenf  attended 
Wiseman's  grace,  for  when  I  was  in  capite  I  stayed  Crook, 
and  gave  that  for  my  reason.  Yet  I  perceive,  that  if  his 
grace  send  not  to  the  vice-chancellor  next  term,  all  will  pass 
of  any  degree,  and  few  thereby  will  be  left  at  Oxford,  and 
the  intent  of  their  statutes  eluded  by  our  brethren,  &c. 
Hereby  I  have  procured  many  frowns,  and  some  adversaries 
in  Caius  college  for  Crook's  sake,  and  in  St.  John's  for 
Robins',  besides  the  officers,  &c.  for  all.  Thus  much  I  am 
bound  in  duty  to  signify  to  you,  that  it  may  presently  be 
known  to  his  grace,  whom  I  conceive  it  so  nearly  con- 
cerneth. 


Upon  this  information  I  writ  to  the  vice-chancellor  of 
Oxford,  as  followeth. 

SIR, 

I  HAVE  received  information  from  very  good  hands,  how  A  branch  of 
our  statutes  are  not  only  like  to  be  eluded,  but  a  great  ™y  j®*^  l°f 
many  proceeders  which  have  restraint  put  upon  them  by  the  vice- 


the  statutes,  run  to  Cambridge  to  take  their  degrees  there. 
And  this  I  conceive  will  be  a  very  great  prejudice  to  the  information. 
university,  and  to  the  officers  there.  That  you  may  the 
more  fully  understand  all  particulars,  I  send  you  part  of  the 
letter,  which  gives  you  information;  but  because  the  hand 
is  known,  I  desire  you  to  lay  it  by  you,  and  keep  it  for  your 
own  use.  That  which  I  would  have  you  do  for  prevention 
in  this  business  is,  I  would  have  you  presently  now  before 
your  journey,  write  a  letter  to  the  vice-chancellor  of  Cam 
bridge,  and  therein  tell  him  that  you  hear  of  this  slipping 
aside  of  Oxford  men  without  any  leave  of  the  university  to 
take  their  degrees  at  Cambridge,  and  thereby  to  elude  our 
statutes;  then  I  would  have  you  desire  of  him  and  the 
175  heads,  in  the  name  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  that  no  man 

f  [Thomas  Eden,  master  of  Trinity  hall.] 


220  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639. '  be  suffered  to  take  any  degree  in  Cambridge  whatsoever,  im- 
~  less  lie  bring  the  consent  of  the  university  of  Oxford  under 
seal ;  and  you  may  promise  the  like  justice  to  them ;  in  the 
end  you  may  intimate  if  you  please,  that  finding  this  in 
convenience  you  have  acquainted  me  with  it,  but  that 
you  hope  the  university  of  Cambridge  will  be  so  care 
ful,  as  that  I  shall  not  need  to  interpose  in  it,  and  I  pray 
desire  an  answer  from  him,  that  we  may  know  what  to 
trust  to. 

W.  CANT. 

April  25,  1639. 


SIR, 

The  vice-  J   PRAY   receive   this    assurance   from    me,   and  I  doubt 

ct^brid^e'f  not  but  tne  Practice  of  our  university  will  make  it  good, 
answer  to  Dr.  that  according  to  your  just  desire,  nothing  shall  pass  here 
fe^rching~  amongst  us,  either  in  this  or  any  other  way,  that  may  give 
the  business  the  least  interruption  to  the  mutual  amity  and  correspond- 
aforesaid.  ence  ^etween  the  two  universities,  &c. 

B,A.  BROWNRIGGf. 

Cambridge, 
May  7th,  1639. 


SIR, 

To  Dr.  Fell,  I  AM  informed  that  you  give  out,  that  after  the  university 
Church  ^on-*  examination  is  past,  you  will  have  them  examined  again  in 
cerning  his  the  college,  which  is  to  put  a  scorn  and  disrepute  upon  the 
regents  for  their  pains,  and  utterly  to  disparage  the  examina- 
after  the  tions,  as  if  you  in  Christ  Church  were  able  to  do  more  than 
Dr^Feil  hath  ^  wnole  university  in  that  point.  And  this,  to  deal  clearly 
assured  with  you,  I  neither  may  nor  will  endure.  If  you  will  examine 

me  that 

f  [Master  of  Cath.   hall  and  arch-      buried  in   the  Temple   church,   Lon- 
iio  cxaniina,-     ,  »„  i/^o          -IJT 

,  deacon  or  Coventry,  in  1042  appointed       don.  I 

tion  in  the,      bp  of  Exeter .  died  Dec  ^  J659>  and 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  221 

your  students'  sufficiency,  I  like  that  well  enough,  do  it  in    A..D.  1639. 
God's  name.     But  then  do  it  before  they  come  in  public  to  college  here- 
the  university  examination ;  for  after  that  is  once  past,  I  jj^j*  ^  ** 
will   endure   none  in   any  private   college  to  prejudice  it.  examinations 

And  I  pray  take  heed  what  you  do  in  this  and  the  like  kind.  of  tl!e  UQ1~ 

<i  J  versity. 

that  your  zeal  to  that  which  is  good  distemper  -us  not ;  for 

if  any  men  be  negligent,  their  fault  will  not  be  well  amended 
by  your  over-doing.  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  take  care  of 
this,  and  give  me  content. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  30,  1639. 


SIR, 

I  AM  informed  that  there  is  one  Francius  a  Polonian  or  To  the  vice- 
Transylvanian,  that  is  a  desperate  Socinian,  and  lives  either  Concerning 
in  Oxford  or   Cambridge  in  a  sly  manner  to  pervert  the  Adamus 
younger  sort  ;  I  pray  do  you  be  as  watchful  as  you  can,  and    rancms* 
make  your  examination  after  him  with  as  little  noise  as  may 
be,  but  as  much  care,  &c. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  30,  1639. 

Both  the 
vice-chancel- 
176      And  the  like  advertisement  at  this  time  I  sent  to  Cam-  lors  sent  me 

bridge  also,  concerning  this  Francius  the  Socinian.  th^y  could 

hear  of  no 
such  man  for 
the  present, 
but  that  they 
would  en 
quire  further 

I  RECEIVED  a  complaint  under  the  hand  of  Mr.  Edward  after  him- 
Fulham  of  Christ  Church,   and  proctor  of  the  university,  ^fe  between 
against  Dr.  Fell,  which  was  sent  me  by  the  vice-chancellor,  proctor  Eul- 
in  his  letters  of  June  3,  at  the  entreaty  of  the  proctor.     The 
occasion  this,   as  it  follows  in  the  proctor's  own  relation,  Christ 


Moore. 


222  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  On  the  31st  of  May,  about  8  at  night,  Mr.  Proctor 
Eulham,  with  other  senior  masters  of  that  house,  standing 
near  the  college-gate,  observed  amongst  others  coming  out 
of  the  town  into  the  college  in  their  hats,  one  Edward  Moore 
with  his  hat  on ;  the  rest,  as  soon  as  they  came  within  the 
view  of  the  proctor,  modestly  put  off  their  hats,  and  en 
deavoured  to  hide  them;  but  Moore  passed  boldly  by  the 
proctor  without  moving  his  hat,  whereupon  the  proctor 
called  him  back,  and  questioned  him  for  wearing  his  hat  in 
the  town,  telling  him,  that  since  he  was  in  a  fault,  it  would 
have  better  become  him  to  hide  it,  than  to  wear  it  on  his  head. 
Moore,  clapping  on  his  hat,  replied  that  he  was  in  the  col 
lege.  The  proctor  twice  or  thrice  admonished  him  to  put 
off  his  hat ;  but  he  refusing,  and  contesting  with  his  hat  on, 
the  proctor  (having  before  complained  on  a  scholar  of  the 
house  that  had  affronted  him  in  like  manner,  and  being  very 
much  slighted,  as  he  conceived,  with  this  answer,  that  in 
such  cases  he  was  to  be  considered  there  but  as  an  ordinary 
master  of  arts)  gave  him  a  gentle  box  on  the  ear ;  and  the 
said  Moore  continuing  in  his  contumacy,  was  charged  accord 
ing  to  statute  by  the  proctor  to  go  to  the  castle;  but  the 
said  Moore  went  not,  but  repaired  to  Mr.  Hide,  being  his 
deputy-tutor  in  the  absence  of  Mr.  Glisson,  to  be  advised. 
Mr.  Hide  brought  Moore  to  Mr.  Dean  of  Christ  Church,  and 
complained  of  the  proctor  as  if  he  had  done  the  scholar 
wrong.  Upon  this  complaint  Mr.  Dean  sends  for  the  proc 
tor  to  his  lodging,  in  the  presence  of  Moore  and  Mr.  Hide 
condemns  the  proctor,  and  justifies  Moore,  and  very  much 
rated  and  checked  the  proctor ;  telling  him  that  he  had 
done  more  than  he  could  justify,  and  that  he  should  have 
nothing  to  do  in  the  college ;  and  that  if  he  meddled  thus 
in  the  house,  he  would  meddle  with  him :  that  he  was  not 
dean  of  Christ  Church,  nor  should  be.  And  (by  way  of 
derision)  asked  him,  why  he  questioned  not  him  and  other 
doctors  that  passed  by  that  way,  for  their  hats ;  adding  that 
he  got  no  good  will  by  being  so  busy ;  and  so  warned  the 
proctor  to  appear  before  the  chapter  next  morning  at  nine 
of  the  clock,  to  answer  for  what  he  had  done ;  in  the  mean 
time  allowed  Moore  all  liberty  of  speech  to  interpose  and 
justify  his  fault.  And  Mr.  Dean  expressly  told  the  proctor, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  223 

that  Moore  should  not  go  to  the  castle,  notwithstanding  his  "  A.D.  1639. 
command ;  and  Mr.  Hide  (though  sworn  pro-proctor) ,  at  the 
same  time  abetting  the  said  Mr.  Moore,  told  the  proctor  he 
had  done  more  than  he  could  justify  in  striking  the  said 
Moore,  and  that  he  ought  not  to  go  to  the  castle  upon  his 
command;  using  many  other  words  of  contestation  and 
reproach  to  the  proctor  and  his  authority.  And  Mr.  Hide 
also  said  that  he  had  bid  his  scholar  not  go  to  the  castle, 
177  but  first  go  to  Mr.  Dean  to  complain.  Mr.  Proctor  hath 
observed  and  informed  Mr.  Dean  as  much,  that  the  gentle 
men-commoners  sit  in  the  hall  in  hats  before  him,  bring 
them  to  the  church  constantly,  walk  and  stand  under  his 
window,  some  in  boots,  and  most  in  hats;  and  as  the  proc 
tor  passeth  by,  they  stand  to  it,  upon  what  encouragement 
he  knows  not. 

EDW.  FULHAM,  Procur.  Sen. 


UPON  this  information,  I  referred  the  examination  of  the 
whole  business  to  Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  with  a  charge,  that 
in  regard  that  Moore  had  broken  the  statute  of  the  univer- 
sitys  (though  he  had  then  a  little  slipt  by  the  proctor  into 
the  college)  he  should  commit  him  to  the  castle  in  pursuance 
of  the  proctor's  command,  and  to  uphold  his  authority,  that 
it  might  not  grow  contemptible  all  the  year  after  in  the  uni 
versity.  And  that  then,  if  he  found  the  complaint  of  the 
proctor  to  be  true,  he  should  speak  with  the  heads,  and  see 
whether  any  fit  course  could  be  taken  for  removing  of  Hide 
from  the  pro-proctorship;  and  that  he  should  cause  Moore 
for  his  fault  and  his  sauciness  together  to  be  publicly  whipt  in 
the  convocation-house,  or  banished  the  university.  And  as 
for  the  dean  I  did  reserve  to  myself  what  check  I  would  put 
upon  him.  And  after  the  proctor  had  made  offer  to  justify 
all  this  complaint  upon  oath,  I  writ  to  the  dean  as  followeth, 


SIR, 

I  HAVE  received  two  letters  from  you  the  last  week  and  My  letters  to 
this,  and  both  concerning  the  accident  fallen  out  between 


[Corp.  Stcit,  tit.  xv.  §  1.]  aforesaid 

business. 


224  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  you  and  proctor  Fulham  in  the  case  of  Moore.  In  your 
last  letter  you  tell  me  there  is  a  lameness  fallen  upon  you, 
(which  I  am  sorry  for)  and  had  not  that  happened,  you  would 
have  come  and  given  me  an  account  of  the  business  at 
Lambeth;  but  had  you  come,  you  would  utterly  have  lost 
your  labour.  For  I  would  have  spent  no  time,  having  so 
little  to  run  waste,  to  hear  one  side  only,  where  two  are 
concerned. 

For  the  business  itself,  I  see  you  decline  answering  it  to 
the  vice-chancellor,  under  pretence  that  it  was  done  within 
your  gates.  But  first,  I  would  pray  you  to  remember  that 
the  fault  in  question  was  done  without  your  gates,  for  it  was 
for  wearing  a  hat  in  the  town.  And  howsoever,  be  the  cause 
what  it  will,  I  will  not  suffer  any  private  governor  to  wrong 
a  public  officer  in  any  kind  whatsoever,  but  that  he  shall 
answer  it  to  my  vice-chancellor  if  he  do.  For  I  well  know, 
the  proctor  will  have  little  credit  abroad  in  the  streets,  if  he 
shall  have  contempt  put  upon  him  at  home  in  his  college. 
Secondly,  your  declining  the  vice-chancellor  in  this  manner, 
and  your  refusing  to  answer  upon  oath,  when  the  proctor 
offers  to  justify  all  his  complaint  by  oath  in  every  particular, 
makes  me  think  the  proctor's  relation  is  true  in  every  cir 
cumstance  ;  and  if  it  be  true  both  in  circumstance  and  sub 
stance,  though  for  government  sake  (which  you  have  so 
slighted  in  the  proctor)  I  shall  be  unwilling  to  put  any 
sourness  upon  you  in  public ;  yet  must  I  tell  you  you  have 
carried  this  business  like  a  sudden,  hasty,  and  weak  man, 
and  most  unlike  a  man  that  understands  government.  And  178 
should  you  go  on  with  other  things  according  to  this,  I  shall 
have  cause  to  repent  somewhat.  And  assure  yourself,  if  I 
hear  any  more  like  this  I  shall  easily  know  what  I  have  to 
do.  This  to  yourself  under  seal ;  so  &c. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
June  22,  1 639. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  225 

A.D.  1639. 


THE  vice-chancellor  in  the  mean  time  proceeded  against 
Moore,  but  finding  the  youth  very  humble  and  submissive, 
and  but  new  come  to  the  university,  and  the  proctor  himself 
earnestly  interceding  for  him,  took  his  private  submission, 
but  enjoined  him  publicly  in  Christ  Church  hall  to  deliver 
the  proctor  an  epistle  with  an  acknowledgment  of  his  fault, 
which  was  done  accordingly.  And  for  Hide,  he  was  passed 
by,  and  was  not  pro-proctor  this  year,  but  one  Mr.  William 
Cartwright  of  Corpus  Christi^  had  that  place. 


LIBROS  MSS.  quos  antehac  misi,  florentissimi  Academici,  My  letters  to 

locates  vellem,  non  ubi  nunc  sunt,  quasi  incarcerati,  sed  ubi  ?e  C?1!1V?^", 

.   .         .  ,  tion  the  third 

simul  esse  possunt,  uno  intuitu  coiispiciendi,  et  una  quasi  time,  when  I 

vertendi  manu.     Locum,  si  forte  aptum,  dignissimo  procan- sent  tliem  my 

manuscripts 
cellario  nostro  designavi,  per  ilium  vosque  assignandum  in  and  coins, 

novis,  et  feliciter,  uti  spero,  adiectis  veteri  bibliothecae  ad  J0**1  ^e  book 
~  ,      .         ,  belonging  to 

occidentem  aedificiis.   Gazophylacmm  hoc  satis  firmum  cupio,  them,  en- 

(thesaurus   enim   est.    quern   misi,    et   iam   mitto)    et   satis  titled.  JBZwi- 
.        .  .  J_  T  ,  chus  Numis- 

amplum  :  volumma  emm  multa  sunt.     Nam  septmgenta  et 

amplius  (ni  fallor)  [jam]  a  me  accepistis,  et  nunc  misi  supra 
quingenta  septuaginta  quinque.  Quorum  sexdecim  Hebra- 
ica  sunt,  et  Syriaca,  Arabica  quinquaginta  quinque,  Persica 
quindecim,  Grseca  viginti  sex,  Latina  quadringenta  triginta 
novem,  Gallica  tria,  cum  tribus  Italicis,  Anglicana  et  Anglo  - 
Saxonica  duodecim,  Germanica  tria,  cum  uno  Chinensi,  et 
Armenico  uno.  Et  etiamsi  per  vigilantissimum  procan- 
cellarium  certior  factus  sim  locum  hunc  non  adhuc  reception! 
librorum  aptum,  istos  tamen  nolui  diutius  apud  me  retinere, 
ne  si  forte  senio  jam  et  laboribus  pene  exhaustum  mors 
celerior  invaderet,  dissiparentur  libri,  quos  summa  cura  et 
non  sine  sumptu  congessi,  vobisque  et  successoribus  destinavi. 
Ex  his  volumina  non  pauca,  sed  ilia  Latina,  mihi  dono  dedit 

*  [Query  of  Ch.  Ch.     See  above,  p.          h  [Read in  convocation  July  1,  1639. 
153,  note  i.]  Reg.  Conv.  165.  b.  and  sqq.] 

LAUD.  Q 


226  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  vir  multis  nominibus  honorandus,  comes  Arundeliush,  quae 
~una  secum  reduxit  e  Germania,  ubi  et  ego  multa  redemi 
blattis  tineisque  mancipata,  sicut  olim  memini  apud  vos 
Corpora  Juris  Canonic!  et  similia,  chirothecis  premendis  et 
deinceps  involvendis  seposita;  Jesuitis  interim,  qui  rebus 
ibi  nimium  potiuntur,  jactantque  se  collapsarum  literarum 
vindices,  hanc  jacturam  scriptorum  veterum  aut  appro- 
bantibus,  aut,  quod  certum,  aspicientibus  nee  tamen  im- 
pedientibus.  Et  hinc  est,  quod  in  quibusdam  horum  libro- 
rum,  nuiic  principium,  nunc  finis  deest.  Nolui  tamen  ne 
fragmenta  hsec  penitus  interire,  quum  bene  novi  multiplicem 
esse  posse,  et  satis  fructuosum  vel  horum  usum.  Cum  his 
MSS.  unum  mitto  typis  mandatum  Parisiis  anno  superiori; 
duobus  tomis  constat,  titulus  est,  '  Libertates  Ecclesise  Galli- 
canaeV  In  priori  tomo  sunt  Libertates  istse,  in  posteriori 
sunt  probationes  eorundem  per  certa  et  antiquissima  regni 
illius  munimenta.  Opus  in  regno  illo  revocatum  scio,  et  per 
quosdam  ibi  episcopos  in  gratiam  Romanse  sedis  coiidemna- 
tum,  connivente  interim,  aut  non  publice  renuente  cardinal! 
RichelioJ :  sed  eo  magis  curiosiusque  servandum  in  bibliothe- 
cis  Reformatarum  Ecclesiarum.  Et  hsec  causa  est,  cur  una 
cum  MSS.  hunc  lib  rum  misi,  nescio  an  unquam  iterum  typis 
mandandum.  Et  in  quo  quilibet  legere  potest,  quid  de  uni 
versal!  regimine  ecclesise  Romanse  sentiat  ecclesia  Gallica, 
etiamsi  libere  ita  loqui  aut  nolit,  aut  non  audeat.  Libros 
hosce  omnes  nunc  vestros  snb  eadem  conditione  et  eisdem 
legibus  in  bibliotheca  Bodleiana  reponendos  mitto,  quibus 
priores  meos  antea  subjeci.  Et  donee  locus  aptus  iis  parari 
possit,  vobis  et  salvse  in  dicta  bibliotheca  custodise  eos  com- 
mitto.  Quod  reliquum  est,  gratias  procancellario  vobisque 
ago,  quod  omnia  tarn  pacate,  tarn  ordinate  fiant.  Et  prse- 
cipue,  quod  examinationes  candidatorum  secundum  acade-179 

h  [Thomas  Howard,  created  in  1627  rearranged  and  published  a  third  time 

earl  of  Arundel,  the  collector  of  the  in  1651,  and  again  in  1715  and   1731, 

Arundelian  marbles,  now  deposited  at  and  lastly  by  M.  de  Maillane  in  5  vols. 

Oxford.     He  was  employed  in  1636  as  4to  in  1771.    See  Dupin,  Biblioth.  des 

ambassador   to   the  emperor   of  Ger-  Anth.Eccles.,  siecle  XVIII.  Hv.  iii.  c. 

many,  when  probably  he  obtained  these  1,  and  the  preface  of  M.  de  Maillane. 

MSS.]  A  short  account  of  the  condemnation 

1  [The  book  is  entitled  '  Traictez  des  of  the  book  is  given  in  Spondanus,  ad 
Droits  et  Libertez  de  1'  Eglise  Galli-  an.  1639.  §  1.  The  copy  mentioned  in 
cane.'  It  was  published  at  Paris  by  the  text  is  still  remaining  in  the  Bod- 
Pierre  and  Jacques  Du  Puy,  at  first  in  leian  Library,  MSS.  Laud,  303,  304.] 
1  vol.  4to  in  1609,  again  in  1  vol.  folio  J  ['  Riorleio'  in  former  edit.] 
in  1639,  with  a  second  vol.  of '  Preuves ;' 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  227 

statuta  in  maximum  eorundem  commodum,  et  summum    A.D.  1639. 


academise  ipsius  honorem  tarn  feliciter  procedant.  D.  O.  M. 
academiam  ipsam,  vosque  omnes  in  tntelam  suam  recipiat, 
vobisque  benedicat.  Et  quoties  coram  altari  Dei  et  Christi 
ejus  procidatis,  videte,  sitis  inter  orandum  memores  mei  pec- 
catorisk,  sed  et 

Amici  et  cancellarii  vestri, 

W.  CANT. 

[Viris  mihi  amicissimis  Doctori  Frewen,  vice-cancellario,  re- 
liquisque  doctoribus,  procuratoribus,  aliisque  in  domo  con- 
vocationis  intra  almam  universitatem  Oxon.  congregatis.] 

MITTO  etiam  jam  tandem,  sed  pene  e  memoria  exciderat, 
librum  meum  tamdiu  promissum,  qui  numismata  mea  ante- 
liac  missa,  ordine  quseque  suo,  continet,  et  sicut  in  arculis 
quinque  secundum  cellulas  suas  digesta  sunt.  Librum 
huiic  fidei  vestrse  committo,  petoque  a  vobis,  ut  siqua  alia 
numismata  aut  ipse  mittam,  (sicut  et  nunc  non  pauca  mitto) 
aut  aliunde  parata  sint,  velitis  ilia  etiam  [in]  vacuis  cellulis 
reponere,  et  in  libro  hoc  inscribere,  eo  ordine  quo  et  in  libro 
et  in  cellulis  [jampridem]  nominantur. 

W.  CANT. 

Dat.  ex  tedib.  nostris  Lambethanis, 
Jun.  28,  1639'. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE  ! 

ACADEMIAM  hanc  vestram  tarn  firmo  patrocinio  prsemunis,  Thanks  from 
tarn  vario  beneficiorum  supplemento  constanter   auges,  ut  gity^fo^my 
nihil  foris   occurrat  negotii,  vel  ex   cujusquam  invidia  vel  manuscripts, 
gratia,  sed  totum,  quicquid  est,  ex  tua  solius  munificentia;     c' 
quse  et  omnem  propellit  injuriam,  et  omne  optandum  sup- 
peditat.     Quin  et  largior  tibi  manus  est  effundenti,  quam 
nobis  accipientibus.     Super  at  amplitudo  vestra  non  solum 

k  [Prynne  remarks  on  this  expres-  for  him  as  oft  as  they  should  prostrate 

sion.  'This  their  ceremony  of  bowing  themselves  before    the   altar.'    (Cant, 

to,   and   prostration   before  the  altar,  Doom,  p.  72.)    See  Laud's  Defence  in 

was  so  well  pleasing  and  well  known  History  of  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap, 

to  the  archbishop  himself,  that  in  one  xxxiii.  p.  325.  in  marg.] 

of  his  letters  sent  to  the  university  of  Ox-  1  [See  Diary,  p.  56  in  marg.] 
ford,  ...  he  importunes  them  to  pray 

Q2 


228  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  indigentiae  nostrae,  sed  ambitionis  mensuram,  cumulusque 
thesauri  ingesti  Gazophylacium  angustat :  desiderantur  enim 
scrinia  codicibus,  quos  insatiabilis  vestra  liberalitas  ex  omni 
orbis  cardine  conquisivit.  Atque  ut  moles  addendorum  vo- 
luminum  ultra  loci  prioris  captum  turgescit,  ita  et  cap  turn 
nostrum  fugit  iiovitas  characterum,  itemque  linguarum  varie- 
tas,  et  inaestimabile  manuscriptorum  pretium  omiiem  linguae 
aut  calami  gratantis  copiam  transceiidit.  Quibus  demum 
officiis  haec  dona  compensabimus,  quae  nondum  intelligere,  et 
vix  quidem  possumus  numerare  ?  Integer  beneficiorum  tuo- 
rum  cubus  ipsi  onerosus  est  arithmeticae.  Nam  ut  alia  im- 
mensa  taceamus,  crevit  numerus  voluminum,  quse  modo,  ac 
Volumina,  dudum  misisti,  aut  mittenda  curasti  in  mille  quadringenta 
proprio^fuere  quadraginta  duo.  O  !  quam  multis  victurus  es  monumentis  ! 
mille  ducenta  Tua  enim  sunt  opera,  cum  tua  sint  beneficia,  quaecunque  ex 
tenebrarum  sepulchro,  vel  ex  corruptelae  morsu  vindicasti. 
Postquam  diserta  haec  supellex  occidentalem  bibliothecae 
partem  huic  usui  adaptandam  ornaverit,  theologorum  inspec- 
tantium  corona  imaginem  induct  conventus  apostolici ;  cum 
istic  linguae  omnigenae,  si  minus  audiri,  saltern  videri  potue- 
rint  ac  legi.  Interim  librorum  habitaculum  quod  extra  est 
Bodleianum  erit  inter  Laudanum.  Alius  licet  cistam,  de- 
disti  tu  gemmas_,  literarum  gemmas,  bello  rapaci  superstites, 
lacerae  Germanise  spolia,  non  solum  a  tenebris  tineisque  sed 
custodia  et  manibus  Jesuitarum  redempta ;  ut  sagittae  de  suis 
pennis  desumptse  in  ipsos  possint  aliquando  [re]torqueri. 
Quamvis  ista  nolueris  diutius  apud  te  retinere,  ne  esses  inter 
eos_,  qui  moriendo  prosunt,  quibus  vivendo  nollent ;  sic  tamen 
transmisisti,  ut  siqua  spes  immortalitatis,  et  virtutem  prose- 
quentis  glorias,  tua  sint  futura  post  mortem :  quam  tibi  tarn 
seram  precamur,  ac  nobis  luctum,  literis  caliginem,  religioni 
errorem.  Plus  satis  obaerati  sumus,  O  sancte  nutritor  hu- 
milis  nutriculae,  peculiari  vestro  promptuario :  quid  alterum 
antiquitatis  assertorem  in  partes  vocas  liberalitatis  ?  adeone 
benefaciendi  avarus  es,  ut  fieri  cupias  tarn  aliense  profluentise 
vas,  quam  tuae  fons  ?  et  alteri  debere  velis,  quo  possis  debi- 
tores  tuos  obligatiores  tenere,  ac  plusquam  captives  constrin- 
gere  ?  oculum  satis  vigilem  rebus  nostris  domi  intendis,  num 
et  orbem  circumspicis  ?  Num  ab  exteris  nationibus  Ger- 
mania  Galliaque  accersis,  quicquid  uspiam  conducat  tarn  po- 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  229 

litiae  literarum,  quam  incremento  ?    quis  modus  irrequietse    A.P.  1639. 
huic  muriificientise,    quis   finis?      Nullus,    nisi   immeiisitas, 
nullus  nisi  interminata  seternitas. 

In  libro  hoc  clandestine,  cui  titulus,  'Libertates  Ecclesias 
Gallicanse/  lucem  possidemus  non  modicam,  velut  ignem  ni- 
gro  sopitum  silice ;  hunc  itaque  accuratius  versabimus,  vestri 
180  consilii  memores ;  qui  donando  etiara  doces,  docendoque  bis 
donas.  Antiqua  insuper,  quse  misisti,  numismata,  quibus 
temporum  series  (in  solamen  amissi  temporis,  et  quodam- 
modo  revocabilis)  conclusse  latent,  ac  dispositas,  opes  erudi- 
tas  (multa  enim  in  uno  largiris,  et  uti  nos  libris  locupletas, 
sic  instruis  pecunia)  pulchra  ha3C  irritamenta  industrise,  quae 
scientise  nomine  honestam  instillent  avaritiem :  lisec  et  siqua 
sint  accessura  una  cum  libro  indice,  et  utendi  legibus,  quas 
more  divino  miscere  soles  beneficiis,  tanquam  sacrosancta,  et 
nullatenus  violanda  custodiemus.  Dona  reponemus  hsec  om- 
nia,  non  eo  solum  quo  jubes  loco,  reponemus  oculis,  animis, 
memoria,  perenni  gratitudine.  Imputare  si  velis  aliquam 
gratitudinis  particulam  rite  ordinato  obsequio  (quod  nihil 
aliud  est  nisi  sphserse  vestrae  sic  institute  lex  iiecessaria  et 
sequax  primi  motoris  rotatio)  certe  pergratissimi  sumus  fu- 
turi,  ne  simus  miserrimi.  Quinetiam  paternitatis  vestrse  pre- 
cibus  benedicti,  non  modo  latiores  progressus  conabimur,  sed 
fidentiores  procidemus  coram  summi  Patris  altari,  dum  illic 
inter  orandum  recordamur  tui,  quern  sanctum  altare  custo- 
dem  habuit  fidissimum  ac  pretiosissimum  exornatorem,  tibi 
praemium,  nobis  gratiam  multo  facilius  impetrabimus. 

Sanctitatis  vestras 

obsequentissima  ancilla 

OXONIENSIS  ACADEMIA. 

\_E  domo  nostrce  Convocationis] 
Julii  4,  1639. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  Patri  ac  domino  Gulielmo 
arcliiepiscopo  Cantuariensi,  et  Oxoniensis  Academise  can- 
cellario  honoratissimo.] 


ABOUT  this  time  Mr.  Vice-chancellor  repelled  two  igno-  July  10. 
rant  bachelors  from  their  admission,  which  was  a  very  whole-  Two  ignorant 
some  example  to  uphold  the  statute  of  examination.     But  peHed  by  the 


230 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1630. 

vice-chan 
cellor  from 
their  admis 
sion  ;  they 
were  of  Glou 
cester  hall. 


83 1/,  brought 
into  the  uni 
versity  chest 
for  this  year. 


Annuity  of 
81.  per  ann. 
brought  in. 

The  univer 
sity  stock  at 
present. 


thereupon  I  writ  to  him,  not  to  let  it  rest  there,  but  to  call 
in  question  those  masters  that  examined  them,  who  went 
directly  against  their  oath,  in  giving  testimony  to  such  igno 
rant  men,  and  desired  him  to  be  as  careful  as  he  could  in 
this  business.  And  this  repulse  was  made  in  the  view  of 
the  new  regents,  who  were  then  all  there  present  to  be  ad 
mitted. 

For  this  his  first  year  the  vice-chancellor  brought  into  the 
university  chest  in  ready  money,  831 /.  19s.  2d.  all  deduc 
tions  made;  and  repaid  likewise  to  Sir  Thomas  Bodley's 
stock  the  500/.  borrowed  thence  for  the  purchase  of  land  for 
anatomy  lecturek.  And  being  so  beforehand,  he  bought  in 
the  annuity  which  they  paid  to  one  Giles  for  ground,  on 
which  the  schools  stand ;  the  annuity  was  eight  pounds  per 
annum,  he  paid  for  it  122/.  Memorandum,  that  the  500/. 
above  mentioned  was  no  part  of  the  83 II.  which  the  vice- 
chancellor  brought  in. 

So  that  now  there  remains  in  the  university  chest  at  Corpus 
Christi1  almost  1000/.,  and  in  Sir  Thomas  Bodley's  chest  at 
the  schools  600/.,  and  the  yearly  incomes  of  the  university 
for  the  future  may  be  pitched  upon  a  medium  at  a  thousand 
marks  communibus  annis.  Other  vice-chancellors  brought 
in  very  fair  accompts,  and  some  larger  than  this,  but  they 
were  expended  upon  their  building  according  to  Sir  Thomas 
Bodley's  will,  &c.m 

W.  CANT. 


After  my  hearty  commendations,  &c. 

Dr.  Frewen  THE  vice-chancellor  which  now  is,  hath  gone  through  the 
continued  troublesome  office  of  the  vice-chancellorship  for  the  space  of 
lor  a  second  one  whole  year ;  and  this  time  of  the  year  puts  me  in  mind 
year".  thereof,  which  calls  for  a  new  nomination  and  election  accord 

ing  to  course  and  statute  to  be  made.   But  though  I  proceed  to 


k  [The  anatomy  lecture  was  founded 
in  1624  by  Rich.  Tomlyns.  Dr.  Clay 
ton,  reg.  prof,  of  medicine,  was  the  first 
professor.] 

1  [The  university  chest  was  ordered 
to  be  kept  at  Corpus.  See  Corp.  Stat, 
tit.  xx.  §  1.] 

m  [See  an  extract  from  Bodley's 
will  relating  to  this  subject.  Wood, 


Hist,  and  Ant.,  vol.  ii.  p.  790.] 

n  [Read  in  convocation  July  13, 
1639.  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  167.  a.  Dr. 
Frewen  appointed  as  his  pro-vice- 
chancellors  Dr.  Tolson,  provost  of 
Oriel,  Dr.  Potter,  provost  of  Queen's, 
Dr.  Sheldon,  warden  of  All  Souls,  Dr. 
Eastcot,  warden  of  Wadhain.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  231 

181  a  new  nomination,  yet  I  can  no  way  hold  it  fit  to  nominate  A.D.  1639. 
a  new  vice-chancellor,  but  shall  continue  that  trouble  and 
pains  to  Dr.  Frewen  for  one  year  more.  And  this  I  hold 
necessary  to  do,  not  only  for  the  great  integrity  and  suffici 
ency  with  which  he  hath  managed  that  office  for  this  year 
past ;  but  also  in  particular  for  the  great  success  with  which 
God  hath  blessed  him  in  putting  that  useful  statute  of  exami 
nation  of  candidates  into  practice,  which  must  needs  tend  to 
the  great  benefit  and  honour  of  that  university  in  all  suc 
ceeding  times.  And  I  am  very  desirous  to  continue  it  in 
the  same  hand,  and  under  the  same  care  for  another  year, 
to  the  end  it  may  the  better  settle. 

These  are  therefore  to  let  you  know,  that  I  do  nominate 
and  choose  Dr.  Frewen  to  be  my  vice-chancellor  for  this 
year  ensuing.  And  do  hereby  pray  and  require  you  to  allow 
of  this  my  choice,  and  to  give  him  all  due  respect  and  assist 
ance  in  all  things  necessary  for  that  government.  And  thus 
not  doubting  of  your  readiness  and  willing  obedience  herein, 
I  leave  both  himself  and  you  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  rest 

Your  [very]  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
July  10,  1639. 

[To  my  very  loving  friends  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford,  these.] 


(POSTSCRIPT.) 

THERE  is  an  advertisement,  which  though  I  have  given  you  Warning 
Mr.  Vice-chancellor  already  in  a  private  letter,  yet  I  thought  f^Sas^era 
it  now  fit  to  mention  it  again  in  these  public  letters,  that  the  keep  their 
whole  university  might  the  better  take  notice  of  it.    There  is  ss  whilst 


I  confess,  an  old  but  a  very  ill  custom  continued  in  the  con-  public  letters 

vocation-house  ;  namely,  that  whensoever  the  vice-chancellor  are  read>  or 

solemn 


or  either  of  the  proctors  have  an  occasion  to  read  any  public  speeches 
letters,  or  make  any  solemn  speech  to  that  body,  the  masters  made  in  . 
do  all  or  most  of  them  rise  from  their  seats  and  come  and 
stand  confusedly  before  him  that  speaks,  expressly  contrary 


232  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.    to  statute",  and  taking  off  all  decency  and  dignity  from  that 
place.     It  is  probable,  that  this  might  arise  at  first  upon  a 
desire  to  hear  some  vice-chancellor  or  proctor  who  had  a  lower 
voice ;  but  far  better  it  is,  that  any  such  should  be  imper 
fectly  heard,  than  [that]  the  whole  order,  form,  and  dignity  of 
a  convocation-house  should  be  thereby  lost.  These  are  there 
fore  to  require  every  member  of  that  house  to  keep  his  seat 
according  to  statute,  and  not  to  stir  or  draw  nearer  the  vice- 
chancellor  or  proctors  upon  any  pretence  of  hearing,  or  any 
other  whatsoever;  and  that  they  so  continue  in  their  seats 
all  the  time  of  every  several  convocation.     And  if  any  man 
shall  thus  against  statute  presume  to  leave  his  seat,  and  so 
either  break  the  order,  or  disturb  the  peace  of  the  house,  I 
do  hereby  require  that  the  vice-chancellor  command  him  to 
prison,  and  give  me  notice  of  his  name ;  and  that  he  that  is 
to  speak  proceed  not  on  with  his  speech  until  the  house 
No  man  to      shall  continue  settled  in  every  part.     And  further,  I  require 
convocation-  ^ne  vice-chancellor  and  proctors  for  the  time  being  and  their 
house  upon     successors,  to  commit  any  man  to  the  castle  that  shall  pre- 
prisonment     sume  to  come  within  the  convocation-house  door,  that  is  not 
that  is  not  a   a  member  of  that  body.     And  I  do  require  that  these  my 
thaTbody       letters  be  registered,  that  this  direction  may  be  the  better 
kept  in  memory. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
July  10,  1639. 


The  vice-  THE  vice-chancellor  hearing  of  three  poor  scholars,  (two  182 

se'ntTi^war    °f  Exeter  college  and  the  third  of  Christ  Church)  that  had 
rant  for  three  shewed  certain  small  pieces  of  battered  plate  in  a  towns- 
scholars,  who  man's  house,  sent  his  warrant  for  them.     But  two  fled,  and 
had  shewn 
college  plate  the  other  came  before  him ;  where  being  not  able  to  make 

in  *own  any  defence,  than  by  casting  all  upon  them  that  appeared 
had  battered  no^  the  vice-chancellor  expelled  him  the  university ;  whereby 
together.  it  is  hoped  the  college  plate  for  the  future  will  be  safer. 

July  22,  1639. 
n  [Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  xi.  §  3,  'nee  quisquam  de  loco  ad  locum  migret.'j 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  233 

A.D.  1639. 


THERE  was  a  great  inconveniency  found  in  the  examinations  Fixed  seats 

of  such  as  came  for  degrees ;  for  the  examiners  and  the  exa-  for.the  ex~ 

,  .         -,.  .  ainmers  and 

mined  could  hardly  be  kept  at  a  fitting  distance  in  such  a  the  candi- 

throng  of  auditors ;  and  being  upon  the  same  level,  it  was  dates- 
therefore  thought  fit,  both  for  the  ease  and  reputation  of  the 
examiners,  and  the  public  discharge  of  that  business,  that 
nothing  might  pass  by  whispering,  that  the  examiners  should 
stand  in  the  seat  appointed  for  the  natural-philosophy-reader, 
(that  school  being  by  statute  appointed  for  the  place  of  the 
examinations0,)  and  another  seat  be  set  up  opposite  for  the 
candidates,  and  a  seat  upon  one  side  for  the  vice-chancellor 
and  proctors  to  sit,  whensoever  they  should  please  to  come  to 
the  examinations.  And  this  was  done  accordingly,  that  it 
might  be  ready  against  Michaelmas  term. 

W.  CANT. 

September  11,  1639. 


SIR, 

THIS  next  passage  I  shall  desire  you  to  communicate  with  A  branch  of 
the  heads,  and  let  both  them  and  the  proctors  know,  that  I  ^  o^t^ 
have  been  informed  that  some  masters  come  to  St.  Mary's,  to  the  vice- 
and  stand  or  sit  there  bare  in  sermon  time,  not  out  of  any  about  the' ob- 
devotion,  but  only  to  hide  their  hatsp.    The  end  why  I  write  serving  of 
this  to  you  is,  because  I  doubt  if  you  look  not  well  to  it  at  formalities. 
the  beginning  of  term,  you  will  find  a  breach  upon  that  de 
cency  of  the  university  before  you  be  aware ;  and  the  reason 
why  I  desire  you  to  impart  it  to  the  heads  and  the  proctors 
is,  because  I  know  the  work  will  be  too  heavy  for  you  alone, 
if  they  shall  not  concur  to  give  you  their  best  assistance  in 
their  several  stations.     These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  re 
quire  every  of  them  to  look  strictly  to  their  several  charges, 
and  to  assist  you  in  all  things  according  to  the  statutes  in 

0  [Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  ix.  sect.  ii.  §  1.]  P  [See  above,  p.  216.] 


234  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  the  university ;  in  which  if  any  man  shall  fail,  I  shall  take  it 
so  much  the  worse  from  him,  as  there  is  greater  necessity  to 
hold  up  good  order  in  the  brokeimess  of  these  times.  And 
further,  I  think  it  not  amiss,  that  you  employ  the  yeomen 
beadles  to  look  about  the  church  in  sermon  time,  and  see 
who  they  are  that  in  any  cunning  way  offer  to  break  the 
statutes.  I  know  this  will  be  a  work  full  of  envy  to  them ; 
and  therefore  I  think  it  may  be  very  fit  that  you  think  of  a 
course  how  they  may  have  profit  by  it,  to  sweeten  their 
pains.  And  for  my  part,  if  you  and  the  heads  shall  find  it 
so  fit,  I  think  it  were  not  amiss,  if  out  of  the  mulcts  for  those 
offences  some  proportion  were  given  to  them  for  their  pains. 
But  above  all  things,  I  desire  you  and  the  proctors,  and  all 
else  whom  it  may  concern,  to  continue  your  wonted  care  of 
the  examinations,  which  will  I  hope  prove  a  great  honour, 
and  a  greater  advantage  to  the  university. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Octob.  4,  1639. 


Elzy  the  ONE  Elzy,  a  busy  attorney  of  the  King's  Bench,  pleaded  173 

his  exemption  in  point  of  debt  from  the  chancellor's  court; 
and  brought  a  writ  out  of  the  court  of  King's  Bench.  But  at 
last  found  his  error,  and  submitted,  yet  not  till  some  of  the 
judges  of  that  court  had  in  a  manner  declared  themselves  for 
the  university  jurisdiction,  as  his  case  stood. 

W.  CANT. 

Octob.  12,  1639. 


The  chandlers      THE  chandlers  (two  of  that  company  being  aldermen  of 

price  of  can-  ^e  c*ty)  took  uPon  them  to  sell  candles  at  a  price  above 

dies.  that  which  was  set  by  the  vice-chancellor? :  and  being  called 

to  an  account,  they  at  the  first,  and  again,  wilfully  refused  to 

submit.    The  vice-chancellor,  by  the  advice  of  the  heads,  was 

P  [It  was  ruled  in  '  An  order  made  'focalia,'    and   that   accordingly   their 

at    Whitehall    betwixt    the    university  price  was  to  be  regulated  by  the  vice- 

and  town  of  Cambridge,  Dec.  4.  1C29,'  chancellor.  See  Cabala,  p.  335.   Lond. 

that  candles  were  to  be  considered  as  1663.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  235 

resolved  to  make  the  two  aldermen  an  example  for  the  rest :  A.D.  1639. 
namely,  first  to  call  them,  and  demand  the  mulct  due  for 
their  offence :  and  if  they  refused  to  pay,  then  to  call  them 
into  the  chancellor's  court;  and  that  if  they  appeared  not 
there,  he  would  call  a  convocation  and  discommon  them. 
But  at  last,  when  they  had  thought  better  of  it,  they  pro 
mised  submission. 

W.  CANT. 

Octob.  4,  1639. 


YOUR  grace's  directions  touching  the  raising  of  seats  for  A  passage  out 

the  examiners  and  candidates  appear  already  to  be  very  useful,  °j- tlie  y.lce," 

*%     rm         i  chancellor  s 

and  very  much  to  advance  the  examinations.  On  Thursday  we  letters  touch- 
began,  when  though  the  school  [was]  full  from  one  end  to  the  ™%  t.lie  seats 

for  the  ex- 
other,  yet  all  stood  silent  and  attentive ;  and  well  they  might ;  animations. 

for  the  actors  on  both  sides  performed  their  parts  so  well, 
that  we  met  again  in  the  afternoon ;  and  near  three  it  was 
before  that  day's  examinations  were  ended.  Your  grace  hath 
been  sundry  ways  most  munificent  towards  this  university : 
yet  (without  flattery  be  it  spoken)  this  one  statute  is  your 
greatest  benefaction.  Pear  of  shame  and  repulse  prevailing 
more  upon  our  youth,  than  the  severest  discipline  of  any 
private  college  whatsoever  could  have  done. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Octob.  13,  1639. 


174     CONCERNING  the  hour  of  your  vespers,  I  would  have  you  A  passage  of 


to  weigh  well  one  main  thing  ;  which  is,  that  as  the  morning  gj  JM^J  t0 
service  is  every  where  to  end  by  twelve  at  farthest,  so  the  Of  Christ 
vespers  never  begin  before  three,  and  end  by  fiveq.     And  Church,  con- 
this  I  take  it  is  universal.     And  the  reason  of  it  (as  I  con-  motion  made 

i  [So  Isaac  Walton  says  of  George  the  canonical  hours  of  ten  and  four." 
Herbert's  daily  service,  "  And  for  the  Walton's  Life  of  Herbert,  in  Words- 
time  of  his  appearing,  it  was  strictly  at  worth,  Ecc.  Biogr.,  vol.  iv.  p.  38.] 


236  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.    ceive)  is,  that  the  prayers  of  the  Church,  howsoever  different 
to  him  by       in  place,  might  be  jointly  put  up  to  God  in  all  places  at  the 

the  students    same  time.     How  fit  it  will  be  upon  particular  respects  to 

there,  for  the  . 

change  of       vary  such  an  universal  tradition,  would  be  well  thought  on. 

their  hour  of  AS  for  the  hour  which  they  say  they  shall  gain  to  their 
four  to  five,  studies  by  this  change,  that  works  little  upon  me.  For  if 
men  be  so  studiously  minded,  that  hour  may  be  taken  as 
well  after  prayers  as  before.  And  prayers  coming  between 
will  rather  be  a  relaxation  to  them  than  a  hindrance.  Be 
sides,  I  cannot  foresee  what  example  this  may  produce  in 
other  cathedrals.  And  I  would  be  very  loth  they  should 
learn  an  ill  example  from  the  university.  Therefore  I  pray 
think  well  of  these  and  other  circumstances,  before  you  make 
any  change. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Octob.  18,  1639. 


Sir  H.  Savil's  I  AM  informed,  that  under  pretence  of  printing  a  Greek 
rn^urner^e  Chronologer  (one  Malala)  which  Mr.  Gregory  of  C.  C.  was 
printer's  preparing  for  the  press r,  Turner  the  printer  (I  know  not  by 

^anrnt'     j      what  commission)  got  into  his  hands  all  Sir  Henry  SaviFs 

On  Thursday,  J 

Feb.  13,  Tur-  Greek  letters,  amounting  to  a  great  number,  some  of  them 

ner  brought    scarce  worn.    It  was  in  Dr.  Pink's  time.    I  pray  speak  with 

Greek  letters,  the  Dr.  about  it,  and  call  Turner  to  an  account  before  the 

and  delivered  heads,  what  is  become  of  them.     I  doubt  Turner's  poverty 

weight  as  he  an^  knavery  together  hath  made  a  riddance  of  them.    I  pray 

received          examine  this  business  thoroughly  before  the  heads,  and  let 

were  not  any  me  nave  an  account  when  you  have  done. 

wanting.    He  "W.  CANT. 

came  very  uu-  Lambeth, 

willingly  to  Octob.  18   1639< 

it. 

r  [John  Gregory,  '  the  miracle  of  his  and  was  buried  at  Ch.  Ch.  He  assisted 
age  for  critical  and  curious  learning.'  Bp.  Lindsell  in  his  edition  of  Theo- 
He  was  at  this  time  chaplain  of  Ch.  phylact  on  the  Epistles,  (Wood,  Ath. 
Ch.,  and  was  afterwards  appointed  by  Ox.  iii.  205 — 207);  Lloyd  (Memoirs, 
Bp.  Duppa  his  domestic  chaplain,  and  p.88)adds  that  lie  was  employed  by  Abp. 
prebendary  of  Bracklesham  in  the  Laud  in  arranging  his  MSS.,  and  speaks 
church  of  Chichester,  and  of  Winter-  also  of  his  other  patrons.  Wood  states 
bourne  Earl's  in  that  of  Sarum.  (Wai-  that  his  '  Observationes  in  loca  qnae- 
ker,  Sufferings,  par.  ii.  p  14.)  He  was  dam  excerpta  ex  Joh.  Malalae  Chrono- 
deprived  of  these  preferments  in  the  Re-  logia'  were  never  published,  but  were 
bellion,  and  died  in  great  poverty  at  still  in  MS.  in  Oxford.] 
Kkllington  in  Oxfordshire  in  1646, 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  237 

A.D.  1639. 
SIR, 

I  WOULD  have  you  send  me  word  in  what  state  my  Arabic  To  Mr. 
lecture  stands  in  Oxford,  on  what  days  and  hours  of  the  days  Reaves3  of 
you  read,  and  what  ordinances  are  made  (if  any  be)  by  which  C.  C.  C.,  con- 


you  guide  yourself  in  that  business  :  and  farther,  I  would 
have  you  set  me  down  what  statutes  may  be  necessary  to  ture. 
govern  that  lecture  in  the  perpetuating  of  it,  in  case  it  should  Mr> 
please  God  to  make  me  able  to  do  it.     I  pray  do  this  with  time  deputy 

as  much  convenient  speed  as  you  can,  and  privately  without  ^ader  to  Mr. 
r    .  .  Pocock,  who 

noise  :  so  to  God  s  blessing  and  protection,  &c.  was  at  Con- 

W.  CANT.  stantinople'. 

Lambeth,  F.  omnium  Sanctorum, 
Nov.  3,  1639. 


175      THE  university  of  Oxford  in  the  time  of  king  Edward  III.  The  state  of 
had  the  sole  keeping  of  the  assize  of  bread  and  drink  in  Ox-  *j*e  ^e  °f 
fordu,  and  the  government  and  correction  of  all  manner  of  lor  and  vice- 
victuallers,  and  victualling  and  tippling-houses  there.  chancellor  of 

This  power  continued  in  the  university  for  about  two  hun-  iicensino-  and 
dred  years  without  interruption,  until  the  statute  of  5  and  6  suppressing 
Edward  YI.V,  which  gave  power  to  two  justices  of  peace  in  &<?  e 
every  shire  or  city  to  license  ale-houses ;  and  ordained  that  And  this 
none  should  keep  any  ale-house,  but  such  as  should  be  so  ^^Vnd 
licensed.  justices  of 

By  colour  of  this  statute  (in  regard  there  was  therein  no  J^g*^"' 
express  saving  of  the  privileges  of  the  university)  the  mayor  drawn  up  by 

and  aldermen  of  Oxford,  being  iustices  there,  have  licensed  S™!101!?^ of 

6  J  that  which 

ale-houses.  was  shewed 

The  chancellor  of  the  university  and  his  vice-chancellor,  th^m  ty  the 

.  _  .  ,  university. 

commissary  and  deputy  at  the  time  of  the  making  of  the 

said  statutes,  were  judges  of  peace  within  the  city.    And  the 
privileges  of  both  universities  were  afterwards  in  13  Eli z.  con- 

8  [See  above,  p.  176,  note  f.]  regni  nostri  Ang.  29.  Franc.  16.'  (i.e. 

1  [He  was  there  engaged  in  collect-  1355).    See  Wood's  Annals,  ad  ann., 

ing  oriental  MSS.    See  above,  p.  147,  p.  466.] 
note  s.]  v  [5    and    6    Edw.   VI.    cap.   xxv 

u  [This  charter  was  granted  by  the  sect,  i.] 
king  '  apud  turrim  London,  xxvii.  Jun. 


238  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  firmed  by  act  of  parliament*,  and  in  all  acts  of  parliament 
since  made  touching  ale-houses,  and  correction  and  punish 
ment  of  all  ale-house-keepers  and  tipplers  in  ale-houses  in 
the  university,  is  reserved  solely  to  the  governor  of  the  uni 
versity  y. 

The  university  of  Cambridge  in  the  fifth  year  of  king 
Richard  II. z,  had  their  privileges  by  parliament  granted  to 
them,  such  as  the  university  of  Oxford  had,  and  no  other. 
Yet  when  the  officers  of  the  town  in  the  sixth  year  of  queen 
Elizabeth  attempted  to  license  ale-houses,  they  were  re 
strained  by  the  queen's  letter,  and  that  university  hath  ever 
since  quietly  enjoyed  the  privileges  of  the  sole  licensing  of 
ale-houses. 

In  the  book  of  directions  touching  ale-houses,  set  forth 
1608,  his  late  majesty  declared  that  the  officers  of  both 
universities  should  have  the  power  of  licensing  and  ordering 
of  ale-houses,  and  not  the  officers  or  justices  of  the  town. 

And  his  majesty  in  his  charter  of  confirmation  of  the  liber 
ties  of  the  university  of  Oxford  in  the  eleventh  year  of  his 
reign,  hath  been  graciously  pleased  to  grant  that  no  license 
shall  be  made  to  any  victualler  or  ale-house-keeper,  without 
the  special  assent  of  the  chancellor a. 

There  are  now  three  hundred  ale-houses  licensed  in  Ox 
ford,  which  occasion  great  disorder  in  the  university. 

It  is  therefore  most  humbly  desired  on  the  behalf  of  the 
said  university,  that  his  majesty  would  be  pleased  by  his 
gracious  letters  to  be  directed  to  the  mayor  and  commonalty 
of  Oxford,  to  command  them  not  to  intermeddle  in  the  licens 
ing  of  any  person  to  keep  ale-house  or  tap-house  within  the 
jurisdiction  or  liberty  of  the  said  university  or  city  of  Oxford. 


x  [This  act  (13  Eliz.  cap.  xxix.)in-  sect.  iii.  §  44,  45,  and  Coke's  Instit. 

corporated  the  two  universities.]  par.  iv.  cap.  44.] 

y  [See  1  Jac.  I.  cap.  ix.  sect.  iv.  ;  a  [See  the  Caroline  charter,  §  11, 

4  Jac.  cap.  v.  sect,  x.]  apud  Wood's  Annals,  ad  an.  1635,  p. 

z  [See  Fuller's  Hist,  of  Cambridge,  400.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  239 

A.D.  1639. 


176  TRUSTY  and  well-beloved,  we  greet  you  well.  We  are  in-  His  majesty's 
formed  that  our  university  of  Oxford  had  heretofore  the  go-  iettertSv°  C°n" 
vernment  and  correction  of  all  manner  of  ale-house-keepers,  right  for  ap- 

ale-houses,   and  other  tippling-houses,    within  the  liberties  Point"ig  of 

r\  ale-houses, 

thereof:  and  we  were  graciously  pleased  lately  by  our  letters  &<•.,  in  the 

patents  to  grant  to  our  said  university,  that  no  ale-houses  chancellor 
without  the  special  consent  of  the  chancellor  or  vice-chan-  chancellor. 
cellor  should  be  licensed  there.  It  seems  strange  to  us 
(which  we  hear)  that  there  should  be  now  three  hundred 
ale-houses  in  Oxford :  and  we  believe  they  would  not  have 
risen  to  that  number  had  the  power  of  licensing  them  rested 
only  with  the  vice-chancellor  and  other  governors  of  our  said 
university,  as  it  doth  in  our  university  of  Cambridge.  We 
do  therefore  charge  and  require  you,  as  you  tender  our  plea 
sure,  and  mean  to  enjoy  the  liberties  which  you  use  under 
our  favour  and  goodness,  that  you  henceforth  meddle  not  in 
the  licensing  of  any  person  to  keep  ale-houses,  tap-houses,  or 
victualling-houses  within  the  jurisdiction  or  liberty  of  the 
said  university  and  city  of  Oxford,  but  that  you  leave  the 
same  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  other  justices  of  peace  there, 
who  are  members  of  the  said  university. 

Given  at  Westminster  the  27th  of  October,  1639. 

To  our  trusty  and  well-beloved,  the  mayor  and  bailiffs, 
and  commonalty  of  our  city  of  Oxford. 

I   sent  away  these   letters   to  the   vice-chancellor   upon 
Friday,  November  8th. 

W.  CANT. 


UPON  pretence  that  it  was  not  in  me  alone  to  absolve  the  From  the 

,  »  1 

chandlers,  on  Monday  last  I  brought  them  to  the  meeting  of  ^~  tte  sub- 
the  heads.  Where  having  in  the  first  place  pleaded  igno-  mission  of  the 
ranee  in  excuse  of  their  contumacy,  they  then  confessed 
openly,  that  it  belonged  to  the  vice-chancellor  to  regulate  sity. 


240  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  them  in  their  trade,  and  humbly  besought  me  to  raise  their 
price.  This  done  I  dismissed  them,  caused  the  register  to 
make  an  act  of  what  had  passed,  and  four  days  after  (viz.  on 
the  first  of  November)  granted  their  request;  so  that  I 
hope  the  university's  right  in  this  particular  is  now  settled 
for  ever  hereafter. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Novemb.  4,  1639. 


From  the  I  AM  informed  by  Mr.  Lenthall,  that  for  the  physic-garden 

bTconceTn6-1"  tlie  earl  of  ^anby  intends  to  put  his  heir,  the  vice-chancellor, 
ing  my  L.  of  the  dean  of  Christ  Church,  and  the  president  of  St.  Mary 
ofTn^oof  for  Magdalen  College,  in  trust  to  see  his  promised  100/.  per 
the  physic      annum  for  ever  hereafter  employed  as  he  shall  direct. 
Sarden-  A.  FREWEN. 


To  this  my  answer  was  as  followeth :  177 

My  answer  I  LIKE  the  earl  of  Danby's  business  worse  and  worse ;  and 
to  the  fore-  tjie  joining  of  his  heir  to  those  heads  you  mention  worst  of 
all.  For  if  he  may  not  ever  do,  and  have  what  he  list,  you 
shall  have  greater  imputations  of  ingratitude  thrown  upon 
you  than  the  thing  is  worth.  And  now  I  begin  to  believe 
you  will  have  nothing  settled  till  his  death6. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Novemb.  7,  1639. 


To  the  vice-  EVERY  body  speaks  well  of  the  examinations.  And  though 
somefof  the°r  -^  wou^  n°t  Pu*  anv  sucn  burden  upon  the  heads  of  houses, 
heads  to  be  yet  you  should  do  very  well  if  you  could  handsomely  in- 
aTThTeVami1-  sinuate  &  to  tnem;  wnat  an  advance  it  would  be  to  the  uni- 

c  [The  earl  of  Danby  died  Jan.  20,      conveyance  of  the  rectory  of  Kirkdale 
164|.    He  provided  by  his  will  for  the      in  Yorkshire  to  the  university.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  241 

versity  in  that  business,  if  now  and  then  at  their  leisure    A.D.  1639. 
some  one  or  other  of  them  would  come  thither,  and  sit  with 
the  vice-chancellor  and  proctors  to  hear  the  examinations. 
But  this  I  leave  free  to  you  and  them. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
November  7,  1639. 


AT  this  time  the  vice-chancellor  sent  me  word,  that  after  Charge  given 
they  had  visited  Sir  Thomas  Bodley's  great  library,  they  ^^J 
went  to  see  my  books  and  coins,  and  that  having  compared  the  vice- 
them  with  their  catalogue,  they  found  all  well  and  safe.   But 
yet  the  library-keepers  had  a  great  charge  given  them  to  to  look  well 
look  carefully  to  them,  being  they  stood  unchained,  and  scrr 
the  place  where  they  stand  almost  hourly  frequented  by  coins, 
strangers  who  come  to  see  them. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Novemb.  11,  1639. 


My  answer  to  this  was  as  followeth. 
SIR, 

I  THANK  you  heartily  for  your  care  of  my  books.     And  I  My  answer 
beseech  you  that  the  library-keeper  may  be  very  watchful  to  c^anceUore's 
look  to  them,  since  they  stand  unchained.     And  I  would  to  foresaid  pas- 
God  the  place  in  the  library  for  them  were  once  ready,  that  ^^jj0* 
they  might  be  set  up  safe,  and  chained  as  the  other  books  be  had  to  my 

are  :  and  yet  then,  if  there  be  not  care  taken,  you  may  have  manus?riPts 

J  '  PI  anc*  coins. 

some  of  the  best  and  choicest  tractates  cut  out  of  the  covers 

and  purloined,  as  hath  been  done  in  some  other  libraries'1. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Nov.  15,  1639. 


d  [Delegates  were  appointed  for  fit-      Dec.    24.     See    Reg.    Conv.    R.    fol. 
ting  up  the  new  part  of  the  library,      169.  b.] 


LAUD. 


242 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1639. 


A  gent,  un-        WHILST  I  was  at  the  examinations  on  Saturday,  Nov.  16, 178 
known  came  there  came  into  the  school  a  stranger  who  seemed  to  be  of 
examinations,  very  good  quality ;  for  he  had  three  or  four  servants  attend- 
No  v.  16, 1639.  ing  him.     There  he  sat  a  diligent  auditor  for  the  space  of 
an  hour.     Then  went  forth,  and  taking  horse  at  the  gate, 
vanished,  without  leaving  any  possibility  of  a  discovery  what 
he  was :  for  there  was  not  any  scholar  seen  in  his  company ; 
nor  can  I  find  that  he  did   so  much  as  stop  at  any  inn. 
Whatever  the  ends  of  his  coming  were,  he  cannot  but  speak 
well  of  the  exercise ;  for  it  was  at  that  very  time  singularly 
well  performed. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Out  of  his  Letters  of 
Novem.  18,  1639. 


My  judgment  upon  this  was  as  follows. 


SIR, 


My  answer 
to  the  fore- 
said  passage. 


The  vice- 
chancellor 
sent  me  word 
that  now  the 
heads  were 
of  the  same 
opinion. 


IT  is  a  pretty  accident  of  the  gentleman's  coming  to  hear 
the  examinations  upon  Saturday  last :  and  I  am  heartily 
glad  the  exercise  was  so  good,  and  worthy  his  audience. 
But  as  his  coming  was  unexpected,  and  his  departure  sud 
den,  so  we  must  be  contented  to  leave  his  person  unknown, 
unless  some  accident  discover  it.  But  what  say  you  to  this  ? 
May  it  be  some  Jesuit  attended  with  three  or  four  novices, 
that  came  to  see  what  this  new  business  is  in  the  univer 
sity  ?  For  why  any  gentleman  in  the  kingdom  should  come 
and  go  in  that  fashion,  without  so  much  as  saluting  the 
vice-chancellor,  being  present  upon  the  place,  I  for  my  part 
cannot  tell,  nor  do  I  believe  any  would  so  do. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Novem.  20,  1639. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  243 

IT  is  strongly  presumed  that  Mr.  Bowden,  a  divine  of    AJ).  1639. 
Trinity  college,  hath  drowned  himself.     His  discontent   (as  A  passage 
their  vice-president  informs  me)  arose  from  contemplation  of  0?*  of  tlie 
his  debts  to  the  college,  which  he  foresaw  he  should  not  be  lor's  letter, 

able  to  clear  at  their  audit.    On  Thursday  seven-night  in  the  Dec-.  2>  con- 
i  i  i     -XT        T»     i       cermng  Mr. 

morning  he  was  met  very  early  going  towards  New-Parks,  Bowden  of 

and  hath  not  been  seen  since  that  time.  Trinity  col- 

A.  FREWEN. 


The  like  passage  I  had  from  Dr.  Baylie  concerning 
Mr.  Bowden,  which  follows. 

ABOUT  the  beginning  of  the  last  week  one  Mr.  Bowden,  Mr.  Baylie 
fellow  of  Trinity  college   (whom  they  have    suspected   for  ^ Cg0n^ n 
crazed  heretofore)  after  the  exchange  of  some  cross  words  He  was  found 

with  the  president6  in  the  gate,  between  six  and  seven  in  ™™wne<*on 

Thurs.  Dec. 
the  morn,  went  out  of  the  college,  and  cannot  as  yet  (though  12,  1639,  at 

diligently   sought)    be   found.     It   is   feared   that   he   hath  King's  mills 
/  =      '  byHolywell. 

drowned  himself.  And  the 

Hi.  BAYLIE.  coroner's  in- 

Deeemb.  2,  1639.  <luest  found 

him  a  dis 
tracted  man ; 
and  so  indeed 
he  was. 

179     A  YOUNG  man,  lately  commoner  of  Wadham  college  and  An  informa- 
expelled  thence,  comes  last  night  to  the  sign  of  the  Grey-  vice-chancel6 
hound ;  there  he  puts  on  a  false  name,  and  under  that  dis-  lor,  touching 
guise  sends  for  two  of  the  fellows  of  that  college  (to  whom  Of^adham 
he  bore  a  grudge)  to  sup  with  him.    They  come,  he,  seconded  coll.  assaulted 
by  another,  whom  he  brought  with  him  for  that  purpose,  j!;ndj^_ded 
and  vizarded,  meets  them  under  our  grove  wall ;  there  they  moner  lately 
assaulted  the  naked  scholars  and  shrewdly  wounded  them,  expelled  that 
One  of  them  is  apprehended,  and  in  the  castle,  the  other  is 
fled,  but  known. 

A.  FREWEN. 


Oxford, 
Dec.  2,  1639. 


e  [Ralph  Kettle.] 
R2 


244  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

AD.  1639.  Whereupon  I  writ  to  the  vice-chancellor,  that  he  would  be 
careful  to  do  what  might  be  done  by  law  for  the  vindi 
cating  of  the  two  fellows,  and  the  great  wrong  done  them. 
And  that  he  that  was  known  and  fled  might  be  taken. 


To  the  vice-        FOR  your  court-leet,  if  it  be  so  expenceful  as  you  mention, 

about  setSin    and  °^  so  ^ttle  use'  since  tne  vice-chanceU°r  can  do  all  in 
judge  Jones's  his  private  chamber  without  contradiction,  which  he  can  do 


in  that  court>  I  sha11  not  advise  an^  fre(luent  keeping  of  it. 
sity  and  the    Yet  since  I  writ  last,  my  lord  of  Berkshire,  their  steward, 


city,  concern-  j^-^  been  earnest  with  me,  that  the  articles  of  agreement  f 
court-leets,  between  the  university  and  the  town  might  be  settled  accord- 
^c-  ing  to  judge  Jones  g  his  order;  and  truly  I  think  that  were 

not  amiss  to  take  the  offer  while  they  are  willing.  For  my 
now  lord  of  Berkshire  presses  me  to  move  the  judge  to  settle 
it  :  and  as  far  as  I  remember  the  stop  hath  been  in  the  town 
itself,  and  neither  in  the  university  nor  the  judge.  And 
though  their  refusing  of  setting  to  their  hands  were  espe 
cially  concerning  the  court-leet;  yet  I  do  not  think  but  that 
all  orders  may  be  agreed  to,  if  they  please,  and  that  yet  you 
need  keep  that  court  no  oftener  than  you  think  fit  your 
selves. 

According  as  you  write  next  to  me,  so  shall  I  speak  to  the 
judge  about  it. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Dec.  6,  1639. 


Dr.Lawrenceh  I  AM  sorry  to  hear  that  the  lady  Margaret's  reader h  is  so 
ret's^eade^"  su^ject  to  infirmities :  and  if  he  continue  so  weak  and  full 
to  be  dis-  of  relapses,  I  think  you  shall  do  well  to  dispense  at  least 
pensed  with  with  his  Diligence  the  next  term,  if  he  gather  not  strength 

f  [See  above,  pp.  123,  124.]  '•  [ Dr.  Lawrence.  See  above,  p.  138.] 

f  [See  above,  p.  155,  note  m.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  245 

in  the  interim.     For  I  would  be  loth,  so  able  and  careful  a    A.D.  1639. 


man  should  lose  himself  by  taking  so  much  pains  before  he  for  not  read- 
enjoy  a  confirmed  health ;  which  certainly  is  fit  for  you  and  son'o^his^ 
the  university  to  consider,  especially  since  you  write  that  he  sickness  and 
hath  been  almost  every  week  this  term  at  death's  door.  of  ten  relapses. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Decemb.  6,  1639. 


180      ON  Monday  Nov.  18,  the  vice-chancellor  sent  his  majesty's  Concerning 

[letters],  concerning  ale-houses1,  to  the  mayor  and  aldermen.  £00  ale- 

J  .  houses  in 

Upon  the  receipt  of  them  they  consulted  very  privately,  but  Oxford,  and 

yet  it  was  easily  known  to  be  about  the  contents  of  that  the  ordering 

.  n  .ox  them  ac- 

letter,  because  they  enquired  how  many  ale-houses  were  in  C0rding  to  his 

every  parish.  And  this  doubtless  they  did,  to  see  if  they  majesty's 
could  disprove  the  information  given  to  his  majesty,  con 
cerning  the  number  of  three  hundred  ale-houses  within  the 
town.  But  Dr.  Fell,  dean  of  Christ  Church,  who  by  my 
direction  looked  very  narrowly  into  the  business,  made  his 
information  good  by  the  testimony  of  the  ale-brewer's  clerk, 
servant  to  that  college.  And  though  this  number  be  ex 
tremely  too  great ;  yet  so  long  as  bakers  and  brewers  have 
the  power  of  granting  licences,  no  man  is  like  to  be  denied 
that  will  take  his  bread  of  the  one  and  his  ale  of  the  other. 

The  vice-chancellor  presently  gave  me  notice  of  all  this, 
lest  the  town  should  inform  the  earl  of  Berkshire  their 
steward,  and  perhaps  untruly,  and  so  possess  him  against 
the  university :  and  it  seems  they  did  so.  For  my  lord 
meeting  me  at  court,  spake  with  me  about  the  business,  and 
acknowledged  from  them  but  a  hundred  and  sixty  ale-houses, 
and  that  most  of  these  were  privileged  persons,  and  licensed 
by  the  university,  contrary  to  their  own  promise  and  under 
taking  at  the  open  sessions ;  but  spake  nothing  of  the  pro 
curing  of  the  letter  itself,  which  I  was  very  glad  of,  and  told 
his  lordship  that  I  verily  believed  he  was  misinformed  in  all 
particulars,  as  I  doubted  not  but  it  would  plainly  appear. 

j  [See  above,  p.  239.] 


246 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1639.        In  the  meantime  the  vice-chancellor  very  discreetly  went 


mation. 


The  order  by  °n  to  the  reformation  of  this  scandal  to  the  university ;  in 

which  the       which  he  proceeded  thus. 

vice-chancel-        ™  ..,  *         •        i  i  t      r  ,1 

lor  proceeded      First,  that  it  might  appear  he  aimed  at  the  good  of  the 

in  the  refor-  university,  in  the  licence  which  he  drew  up  for  the  future 
he  makes  it  a  forfeiture  of  his  recognizance  for  any  ale-house 
keeper  to  receive  any  scholar  into  his  house  to  drink  and 
tipple  there. 

Secondly,,  so  soon  as  he  had  his  full  proof  that  there  were 
three  hundred,  he  commanded  the  constables  of  every  parish 
to  bring  in  the  names  of  all  such  as  sell  ale  there.  This 
note  he  communicated  with  the  proctors,  and  turned  out  all 
such  as  in  their  several  night  walks  they  had  found  to  keep 
disorderly  houses. 

Thirdly,  after  this  he  sent  the  same  note  to  some  of  the 
most  substantial  and  orderly  men  in  every  parish,  and  by 
their  advice  struck  out  all  those  which  had  any  trade  or 
other  means  to  live  by,  that  being  a  far  fitter  course  for  them 
than  ale-house  keeping. 

Fourthly,  to  the  end  no  cunning  of  the  town  might  be 
able  to  elude  this,  he  delivered  to  the  ale-brewers  the  names 
of  all  such  as  are  now  licensed,  with  a  charge  not  to  serve 
ale  to  any  other  upon  penalty  of  paying  the  mulct,  which 
both  the  statutes  of  the  realm  J  and  of  the  university  inflict 
upon  offenders  in  that  particular. 

And  as  for  the  allegation  which  they  made  to  my  lord  the 
earl  of  Berkshire  in  their  excuse,  that  proves  utterly  void. 
For  1st,  the  number  of  three  hundred  at  the  least  is  fully 
2ndly,  were  it  true  that  the  most  of  these  were 


That  almost 

all  this  vast 

number  of 

ale-houses 

were  licensed 

by  the  mayor  Proved. 


and  town 
justices. 


privileged  persons,  that  would  not  help  them  neither:  for 
the  greatest  part,  even  of  the  privileged  men,  have  been 
licensed  by  themselves  for  their  own  profit.  3dly,  on  the 
university  part  no  justice  hath  given  allowance  to  any  but 
the  vice-chancellor  only :  neither  can  any  licence  continue  181 

Vid.Daltonk,  longer  than  for  one  year.  4thly,  the  vice-chancellor  that 
p.  376,  377.  now  is^  hath  been  in  that  office  a  year  and  a  hal£  and  in  all 

Bos  worth1  (as  ^s  time  hath  not  licensed  any  one  till  now,  that  his  ma- 
I  have  been  jesty's  letters  came  down  to  settle  that  power  in  me  and  the 
eTbVvIry111"  Ulliversity^  according  to  our  ancient  privileges  in  that  behalf. 

good  hands)        J  [4  Jac.  I.,  cap.  iv.  sect.  i.J         k  [Michael  Dalton's  Justice  of  the  Peace.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  247 

It  is  true,  that  some  produced  ancient  licences  subscribed  by    AD.  1639. 
some   of  the  vice-chancellor's   predecessors,   as   namely  by  licensed  100 
Dr.  Pinck  and  Dr.  Bay  lie  in  their  several  years  respectively.  ^a^ 
But  these,  as  they  were  out  of  date,  so  were  they  very  few,  all  to  take 
not  exceeding  twenty  in  the  whole  number.     By  all  which  j^eir  beer  of 
it  appears  manifestly,  that  almost  all  this  scandalous  number 
of  three  hundred  were  licensed  by  the  mayor  and  the  town 
justices,  and  not  by  the  university,  as  hath  been  suggested 
to  my  lord  their  steward. 

The  vice-chancellor  took  for  his  assistant  in  this  business  All  these  pas- 
Dr.  Pinck,  warden  of  New  college,  who  had  been  vice-chan-  sages  are  col- 
cellor,  and  best  understood  the  state  of  the  town  (though  the  vice- 
Dr.  Fell  had  means  to  be  best  acquainted  with  the  number  of  chancellor's 
the  ale-houses  :)  and  for  a  beginning  suppressed  two  hundred  Of  Nov.  20, 

of  the  three  hundred,  and  then  found  it  impossible  for  the  of  Nov-  25> 

.    !     ,,          !  ,    .  ,  and  of  Dec.  2. 

present  to  sink  them  lower,  there  being  so  many  poor  and 

indigent  people  amongst  them,  who  have  no  other  possible 
means  of  subsistence.  Among  these  appeared  a  lamentable 
spectacle :  for  the  only  son  of  Mr.  Braddel  (who  had  for 
many  years  together  in  my  memory  been  principal  of  St. 
Mary's  hall1,  and  lived  well,  but  in  too  free  a  fashion)  was 
now  found  to  be  one  of  this  number ;  yet  for  some  reasons 
the  vice-chancellor  refused  to  license  him  among  the  rest, 
unless  the  principal  of  Brasenose,  and  the  provost  of  Oriel, 
(which  were  of  his  father's  ancient  acquaintance,  and  now 
pleaded  for  him)  would  become  his  sureties;  and  so  the 
business  stands  at  present. 

W.  CANT. 

December  7,  1639. 


ARTICLES  of  agreement  betwixt  the  university  and  city,  From  the 
being  made  by  justice  Jones,  it  was  on  all  hands  thought  fit  vice-chancel- 
that  they  should  have  a  time  of  probation  before  they  were  ing  an  Oia 
signed  by  your  grace  and  their  steward.     In  this  interim  we  composition, 
found  a  composition  made  Eliz.  23,  wherein  it  was  accorded  which  gives 
that  the   amercements   of  our  leet  (which  the  judge   had  the  univer- 
awarded  wholly  to  the  town)  should  equally  be  divided  be-  amercements 

1  [Ralph  Braddyl,  originally  of  B.N.  C.,  appointed  principal  in  1591.]          of  the  court- 

leets. 


248  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  twixt  both  bodies.  This  when  the  judge  saw,  he  altered  his 
opinion  in  that  particular,  and  ordered  that  the  composition 
should  still  stand  in  force.  The  mayor,  recorder,  and  town- 
clerk  there  present  assented,  but  next  day  fell  off,  upon  pre 
tence  that  the  commonalty  would  not  yield:  and  here  we 
stick.  They  press  to  have  the  judge's  first  order  confirmed, 
which  gives  all  the  amercements  to  them.  We  plead  an 
ancient  composition  (seen  since,  and  allowed  by  the  same 
judge)  which  gives  us  half.  Their  own  recorder  is  ashamed 
of  them,  and  hath  sundry  times  complained  to  me  of  their 
peevishness  and  breach  of  promise  in  this  particular.  If  they 
be  now  in  earnest  (whereof  I  much  doubt)  we  will  give  them 
a  meeting  when  they  please,  and  once  more  try  whether  by 
a  friendly  parley  these  differences  may  be  composed. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
Decem.  9, 1639. 


Outlandish         THE  earl  of  Danby  sent  last  week  outlandish  workmen  to  182 
workmen  sent  enter  upon  the  physic  garden.     They  were  directed  to  the 
Danby  for      dean  of  Christ  Church,  Dr.  Clayton1,  and  myself.     We  have 
the  physic      perused  divers   models  which  they  brought,   and  amongst 

them  pitched  upon  one,  which  we  think  will  be  most  proper 

for  that  place. 

A.  FREWEN. 

December  9,  1639. 


Warning  I  WOULD  have  you  at  your  next  meeting  acquaint  the  heads, 

Oxfo^men6  tnat  tlie  Oxf<>r<l  men  who  come  to  preach  at  St.  Paul's,  do 

to  use  the  not  so  frequently  use  the  prayer  which  the  Canon  of  the 

the^nxm  Church  requires  before  their  sermons,  either  in  matter  or 

requires  be-  form,  as  the  Cambridge  men  do.     And  there  is  more  notice 
fore  the  ser 
mons  at  St. 

Paul's  cross.  i  j-Reg  prof-  of  medicine.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  249 

taken  of  it  than  I  could  wish  there  were.  Therefore  the  heads    A.D.  1639. 


shall  do  very  well  to  warn  their  several  companies  concerning  The  vice- 

it.     And  I  pray  be  you  careful  to  see  it  observed  there,  and  chancellor 
,,  .,,  ,       ,    ..  1-^1          i  hath  under- 

that  will  teach  them  to  do  it  abroad.  taken  this  by 


W.  CANT. 


Lambeth, 
Decemb.  13,  1639. 


THERE  came  a  letter  this  week  from  Cambridge  to  my  An  accumu- 
chaplain,  Dr.  Braym,  in  which  I  find  that  one  Mr.  Samuel  J 
Wilkinson11,  a  master  of  art,  sometimes  of  Magdalen  hall,  by  Mr.  S. 

and  now  parson  or  vicar  of  Chelsey,  came  thither  to  be  doctor,  Wilkinson, 

1  ,     ..  .  '  onceofMagd. 

and  would  accumulate.     And  this  was  certainly  to  elude  our  hall,  Oxon. 

statutes.  Dr.  Sterne0,  one  of  the  heads  there,  called  for  his  I)ec>  20- 
certificate  from  you  according  to  the  letters  which  you  lately 
sent  to  that  university  by  my  direction :  but  he  being  able 
to  shew  none,  save  only  a  ticket  from  Mr.  French,  the  re 
gister,  was  refused.  I  pray  call  French  unto  you,  and  exa 
mine  what  tickets  he  uses  to  send  in  this  kind,  and  by  what 
authority;  and  I  pray  put  him  to  it  close.  For  if  he  may 
do  this,  we  may  have  proceeders  slip  away  from  us,  I  know 
not  how.  As  now  it  might  have  been,  if  Dr.  Sterne  had  not 
been  a  very  respectful  man  to  me. 

W.  CANT. 

December  20,  1639. 


UPON  this  the  vice-chancellor  called  Mr.  French  to  an  Out~of  the 

account,  who  confessed  that  Wilkinson  writ  to  him  the  last  vice-chancel 
lor  s  letter, 
vacation,  to  know  what  year  it  was  he  proceeded  master ;  French's  an- 

and  little  suspecting  what  use  would  be  made  of  it,  (and  the  swer  concern 
ing  the  afore 
said  passage. 

m  [William  Bray,  vicar  of  St.  Mar-  Feb.  3,  1669.  (Newcourt,  i.  186,  586). 
tin's  in  the  Fields,  rector  of  St.  Ethel-  He  was  also  fourth  provost  of  Chelsea 
berga,  preb.  of  Mapesbury,  and  canon  college,  (Fuller,  Church  Hist.,  book 
of  Canterbury.  He  was  summoned  be-  x.  sect.  iii.  §  19.] 

fore  parliament  for  licensing  Pockling-  °  [Rich.  Sterne,  master  of  Jesus 
ton's  books,  and  Jan.  12,  1644,  se-  college,  Cambridge,  most  barbarously 
questered  from  the  vicarage  of  St.  treated  during  the  great  Rebellion.  He 
Martin's.]  attended  Abp.  Laud  on  the  scaffold; 

"  [Samuel  Wilkinson,  instituted  rec-      at  the  Restoration  he  became  bishop  of 
tor  of  Chelsea  Dec.  4,  1632,  preb.  of      Carlisle,  and  abp.  of  York.] 
Neasdon    Nov.    4,    1668,   died   before 


250  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  less  because  it  was  about  the  middle  of  the  great  vacation) 
he  sent  him  a  note  out  of  the  register,  which  was  it  he  pre 
sented  at  Cambridge ;  but  protests  that  since  the  vice-chan 
cellor's  coming  in  office  he  never  gave  more  than  that  one 

ticket. 

A.  FREWEN. 

December  23,  1639. 


My  Lord  IN  the  interim  hearing  that  Wilkinson  had  underhand  183 

Holland's  re-  gOtten  a  recommendation  from  my  lord  the  earl  of  Holland?, 
commenda 
tions  of  Wil-  chancellor  of  Cambridge,  and  having  occasion  one   day  to 

kmson  to        meet  with  my  lord,  I  spake  to  his  lordship  about  it ;  but  my 
Cambridge,  .  '  J 

and  his  lord-  lord  remembered  no  such  thing.      let  told  me  ne   would 

ship's  pro-  speak  to  his  secretary  about  the  business,  and  then  give  me 
Cambridge  a  farther  account.  Which  the  very  next  day  he  did ;  and 
should  keep  confessed  unto  me  that  he  had  given  him  a  recommendation, 
ment^made  but  thought  Wilkinson  had  come  attested  from  the  univer- 
with  Oxford  sity.  And  withal  his  lordship  said,  that  the  reason  which 
^e  Save  nim  wnv  ^e  werL*  to  Cambridge  for  his  degree,  was 
because  the  fees  were  greater  in  Oxford.  Upon  this  his 
lordship  promised  me  that  he  would  write  to  Cambridge, 
that  the  university  should  be  very  careful  to  keep  the  agree 
ment  made  with  Oxford  concerning  degrees q. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambelh, 
Dec.  26,  1639. 


Out  of  the  CHRISTMAS-DAY  falling  upon  a  Wednesday  this  year,  the 
vice-chancel-  mayOr  of  Oxford  stepped  in  before  the  university  clerks,  and 
the  mayor's  proclaimed  no  market.  This  he  did,  grounding  himself  (as 
thafthere18  ^  *s  conceived)  uPon  tne  strength  of  justice  Jones  his  arbi- 
should  be  no  tration.  In  the  which  (though  altogether  beside  the  ques- 

ChStmaT  tion)  he  told  the  vice-cnancellor;  that  he  thought  the  market 
day.  belonged  to  the  city,  though  the  government  of  it  to  the 

P  [Henry  Rich,  earl  of  Holland.]  «»  [See  above,  p.  220.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  251 

university.      The  vice-chancellor  doubted  not  but  that  he    AD.  1639. 
should  be  able  to  right  the  university  in  this  particular. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Dec.  23,  1639. 


THE  violence  of  the  storm  on  St.  John's  night  threw  down  The  battle- 
the  battlements  over  the  room  where  your  grace's  manuscripts  m^nts  p* the 
are  billeted,  but  did  no  more  hurt.     Fearing  that  the  leads  down  by  the 
might  be  bruised,  and  a  passage  through  them  for  the  rain  JTmd>.   From 
made  by  the  fall,  I  caused  it  to  be  thoroughly  searched,  and  chancellor, 
presently  repaired ;    so  that  now  the  books  are  out  of  all  Jan-  6- 
danger. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
Jan.  6,  1G$|. 


ONE  John  George,  deputy  register  to  old  Mr.  Jones,  peti-  The  register- 
tioned  me  for  a  reversion  of  the  registership  itself  of  the  ^v*P  chancel- 
vice-chancellor's  court  :  but  I  refused  him,  and  writ  to  the  lor's  court 


vice-chancellor  to  know  the  conditions  of  the  man  :  who  sent  phoned  for 

j       f  n  b^  John 

me  word  as  follows.  George. 

HEARTILY  glad  I  am  that  your  grace  hath  refused  this  The  vice- 
John  George,  for  having  a  reversion  of  Mr.  Jones's  office.  ^^^2™ 
For  he  is  a  saucy,  insolent  companion.     And  should  he  once  concerning 
come  to  enjoy  the  place  in  his  own  right,  it  is  likely  would  J^nt?e^rge> 
prove  insufferable.    What  yearly  rent  he  pays  for  his  deputa-  ing  of  never 

tion,  or  what  he  is  to  srive  for  the  resignation.  I  cannot  tell.  a  ta^e  °^  *"ees 

.    T  .  to  regulate 

Yet  thus  much  I  know,  through  the  greediness  of  the  regis-  that  court. 

ter  and  proctors,  the  court  begins  to  hear  ill,  nor  am  I  able  ^an-  13> 
to  redress  it  so  fully  as  I  would,  there  being  no  table  of  fees 
whereby  to  regulate  them. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 

Jan.  13,  16$. 


252 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A  J>.  1639. 


UPON  the  vice-chancellor's  mentioning  to  me  the  having  184 
no  table  of  fees  for  the  regulating  of  that  court,  I  writ  to 
him  to  draw  me  up  one,  and  send  it  me :  and  that  then  I 
would  consult  with  the  doctors  of  the  arches,  and  some  well- 
experienced  proctors,  what  fees  might  be  fittest  for  such  a 
court,  and  send  it  him  back  perfected,  to  be  confirmed  in 
convocation,  if  it  be  thought  fit. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Jan.  17,  16'$. 


Certain  pas 
sages  out  of 
the  vice- 
chancellor's 
letters  of 
Jan.  27. 
Mr.  Burton's 
legacy. 

A  dunce  of 
New-Inn. 


A  division 
in  the  town 
about  the 
ale-houses. 


ON  Saturday  Jan.  25,  died  Mr.  Robert  Burton  of  Christ 
Church1*,  who  hath  given  51.  per  annum  for  ever  to  the  uni 
versity  library,  besides  a  considerable  number  of  books,  to  be 
taken  out  of  his  study.  And  because  a  benefactor  to  the 
university,  I  was  present  at  his  funeral. 

At  our  last  examinations  we  repulsed  a  dunce  of  New-Inn, 
who  was  not  able  so  much  as  to  give  us  a  difference  betwixt 
quisquis  and  quisque,  though  a  candidate  to  be  master  of 
arts. 

To  put  an  end  to  the  town's  snarling  at  us  for  taking  from 
them  the  power  of  licensing  ale-houses,  I  last  week  cast  them 
out  a  bone,  which  hath  set  them  at  odds  amongst  them 
selves.  Understanding  that  some  sold  ale  without  my  leave, 
I  sent  out  a  warrant  to  the  officers  in  every  parish.  They 
finding  by  it  that  their  poor  should  reap  the  fruit  of  their 
pains,  readily  obey,  make  a  strict  search,  inform  and  press 
to  have  the  penalty  exacted,  which  hath  bred  a  strange  dis 
temper  amongst  them,  and  a  strange  one  it  must  be,  that 
can  disjoin  them  (as  this  hath  done)  in  their  feud  against 
the  university. 


r  [The  well-known  author  of  'the 
Anatomy  of  Melancholy.'  The  choice 
character  of  his  library  is  spoken  of 
both  by  Ant.  a  Wood  and  his  modern 


editor.  (Ath.  Ox.  ii.  653.)  There  is  a 
full  account  of  Burton  in  Nichols's 
Leicestershire.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  253 

AJX  1639. 


Here  follows  the  copy  of  the  vice-chancellor's  warrant. 

THESE  are  to  require  you  and  every  of  you,  immediately  The  vice- 
upon  receipt  hereof  to  make  diligent  enquiry  in  your  parish 
after  all  and  every  person  and  persons,  that  do  take  upon 
them  to  sell  ale  or  beer  within  your  said  parish,  besides 
them  whose  names  are  under- written.  And  that  you  do 
certify  me  who  they  are,  and  be  ready  to  prove  and  justify 
their  selling  without  licence,  that  I  may  exact  thereupon  the 
penalty  of  20s.  for  the  use  of  the  poor  of  your  parish,  from 
each  of  them  so  offending8.  Also  I  require  you  to  make 
diligent  search  (taking  with  you  a  constable)  what  quantity 
of  ale  or  beer  the  said  persons  have  in  their  several  houses, 
and  to  inform  me  what  brewer  or  brewers  have  served  the 
same  :  that  I  may  punish  them  according  to  the  law.  Hereof 
fail  you  not,  as  you  will  answer  the  contrary  at  your  perils. 
Given,  &c. 


OUR  university  coroner  being  last  week  to  sit  upon  the  A  privileged 
body  of  a  privileged  person  drowned  near  Christ  Church,  Person 
sends  his  warrant  (according  as  the  statute  directs  him)  to 
the  constable  of  St.  Olave's  to  warn  a  jury:    he  presently 
consults  the  mayor,  and  the  mayor  the  town-clerk,  the  city 
oracle,  and  both  instruct  him  to  disobey,  because  by  their  The  town  not 
charter  they  are  exempted  from  all  service  without  their  ^arnillgt^ 
liberties,  as  this  place  was,  though  yet  within  the  parish  of  command  of 
St.  Olave's ;  which  forced  us  for  the  present  to  send  into  the  the  coroner 
country  for  a  jury,  which  lost  time  and  cost  trouble.     Of  the 
legality  of  this  their  plea  we  here  are  not  able  to  judge ;  yet 
much  suspect  that  no  exemption  in  any  charter  reaches  to    , 
service  of  this  nature.     But  admit  it  to  be  legal,  yet  was  it 
withal  uncivil,  and  were  not  the  times  as  they  are,  I  should 
ere  long  make  some  of  them  smart  for  it.     And  on  Friday 
last  I  brought  one  of  their  bailiffs  almost  upon  his  knees, 
for  furnishing  an  unlicensed  tippling-house  with  beer.     And 

3  [According  to  the  provisions  of  the  act,  3  Car.  I.  cap.  iii.  sect,  ii.] 


254  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.    easy  it  will  be  for  a  vice-chancellor,  if  he  intend  to  correct 

A.  FREWEN. 


them  at  any  time  invenire  baculum. 


Oxford, 
Jan.  27,  16$. 


Warning 
given  for 
orderly  dis 
putations 
this  Lent. 


Amesius  and 
F.  Hommius, 
patrons  for 
presbyterial 
government, 
reprinted  at 
Oxford. 


AT  this  time  I  writ  to  the  vice-chancellor  to  speak  to  the  185 
heads  before  Lent  begin,  and  to  desire  them,  that  they  would 
be  very  careful  of  their  several  companies,  that  the  public 
disputations  then  may  be  quick  and  scholar-like,  and  yet 
without  tumult.  And  this  I  left  principally  upon  his  care 
to  look  to,  calling  the  proctors  to  his  assistance. 

I  received  a  letter  this  last  week  from  a  reverend  bishop 
in  this  kingdom,  in  which  he  complains  that  Amesius  and 
Festus  Hommius*  (though  I  think  before  your  time)  have 
been  reprinted  in  the  university.  They  are  professed  friends 
to  the  presbyterial  government.  And  though  they  may  speak 
and  print  what  they  please  at  Leyden  or  Amsterdam,  yet 


1  [The  following  extract  from  Crosfield's  Diary  (fol.  171.  b.)  mentions  not 
merely  these  editions  of  Hommius  and  Amesius,  but  many  other  books  pub 
lished  in  Oxford  at  this  time. 

"  The  names  of  such  books  as  were  printed  in  Oxon,  two  or  three  years  before 
this  present  year  of  our  Lord  1630,  by 


TURNER. 

1.  D.  Hackwell  of  God's  providence. 

2.  Hommius  ag.  Bellar. 

3.  Chaloner's  5  Sermons. 

4.  Amesius  ag.  Bellar. 

5.  Breerwood's  notes, 

6.  Fasciculus  Prsecept.  Log. 

7.  Tozer's  directions  to  a  godly  life. 

8.  Gusman's  Spanish  rogue. 

9.  Heilm's  Geography. 

10.  Palatine's  Catechisme. 

11.  Salvianus. 

12.  Feild  of  the  Church.  1 

13.  Vossii  Theses. 

14.  Sparke's  mystery  of  Godliness. 

15.  Burton's  Melancholy. 

16.  Richardson's  Geography. 

When  these  were  printed  Mr.  Ste- 
phenson  or  Mr.  Airey  were  correctors 
of  the  Presse  at  Turner's. 


LlCHFIELD. 

1.  Piscator's  Aphorismes. 

2.  Rainolds  ag.  Stage  playes. 

3.  Souch  [Zouch]  de  Jurisprudent. 

4.  Pemble's  5  Sermons. 

5.  Burgesse  baptismall  regeneration. 

6.  Godwine's  Antiquities. 

7.  Pemble  of  Justification. 

8.  White's  two  Sermons. 

9.  Pareus  in  Math.  &c. 

10.  Galateus  de  moribus  gentium. 

11.  Prideaux  Gram,  et  Syll. 

12.  Theophrastus  Characters. 

13.  Trueman  of  reproofe. 

14.  Pemble  de  sensibus  internis. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  255 

methinks  it  is  a  great  oversight  to  make  them  speak  by  our-    A.D.  1639. 

selves  and  our  presses,  especially  in  the  universities.    For  too 

many  men,  in  these  broken  times,  will  be  apt  enough  to  say 

that  we  allow  and  approve  of  that  doctrine,  which  we  print 

by  licence.     I  pray  speak  with  the  printers ;  and  let  them 

know  from  me,  that  I  will  not  allow  them  to  print  any  book, 

though  it  hath  been  printed  before,  without  new  leave  from 

the  vice-chancellor  for  the  time  being.     And  that  if  they  do 

print  any"  thing  without  such  leave,  I  will  utterly  suppress 

them.     And  I  pray  send  me  word  in  what  year  of  our  Lord 

these  two  books  were  printed  there. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  7,  16f§. 


ON  Sunday  morn  at  the  beginning  of  sermon  a  fire  kindled  A  fire  in 
and  brake  forth  in  Jesus  college  lane ;  it  threatened  some 
great  danger,  being  begun  among  so  many  thatched  houses ; 
but  (God  be  praised)  the  greatest  danger  was  that  of  the 
burning  and  pulling  down  two  or  three  thatched  houses,  and 
spoiling  of  poor  men's  Sunday  clothes. 

Ei.  BAYLIE. 

Oxford, 
Feb.  10,  16$|. 


THE  university  and  the  parish  of  St.  Mary's  are  agreed  for  St.  Mary's 
the  casting  of  their  broken  bell,  and  the  repair  of  their bel1  ^nd 
steeple11.     They  are  to  go  halves,  which  comes  to  40£.  charge 
136  to  the  university.     They  raise  it  not  out  of  the  university 
stock,  but  by  sixpence  from  every  one  that  contributes  to 
wards  the  maintenance  of  our  privileges. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
Feb.  17,  16$!. 

u  [It  was  found,  on  examination  of      previous  to  the  recent  repairs,  that  tLeir 
the   pinnacles   of  St.  Mary's   church,      details  were  mostly  of  this  date.] 


256  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639. 


A  scholar  of        LAST  week  a  scholar  of  Trinity  college  was  brought  home 

Trinity  col-     hither  dangerously  wounded  by  two  thieves,  who  betwixt 

and  wounded.  Wantage  and  Lambourhe   assaulted   him,   and   there  took 

from  him  his  money,  and  well-nigh  his  life.     For  wounded 

as  he  was,  they  left  him  bound  fast  unto  a  tree,  where  he 

almost  perished  before  any  passed  that  way  to  relieve  him. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Feb.  17,  16$. 


Ostendorpfe,       THERE  is  one  Ostendorpfe,  a  Dutchman,  who  lives  at  or 

LrttolH?  near  the  Batli'     He  is  a  Vei7  emPiric>  or  worse-     He  hath 
corporated      taken  his  degree  of  doctorship   at  Leyden,   and  (as  I  am 

credibly  informed)  hath  spoken  heretofore  very  slightly  of 
our  universities.  His  practice  hath  been  very  dangerous 
and  rash.  And  now  I  hear  for  his  better  countenance,  he 
hath  a  purpose  to  be  incorporated  at  Oxford.  But,  I  pray 
be  very  careful,  that  it  be  not  done  upon  any  pretence  what 
soever  ;  for  the  man  certainly  is  an  ill  deserver. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  19,  16$. 


The  exami-         I  EVER  entertained  a  very  fair  opinion  of  this  course  for 

nations  again  examinations,  as  apparently   conducible  unto  the  advance- 
approved.  , 

ment  of  learning  among  the  younger,  and  the  preserving 

the  same  in  masters.  But,  I  confess,  the  course  did  not 
make  so  deep  impression,  while  I  barely  apprehended  the 
same,  as  did  the  solemn  executions  thereof,  while  it  was  let 
in  at  mine  eyes  and  ears,  being  the  last  week  present  with 
Mr.  Vice-chancellor,  and  other  heads  at  that  exercise.  The 
eminency  of  the  places  for  the  vice-chancellor  and  proctors 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  257 

at  the  upper  end,  and  the  like  on  each  side  for  the  ex-    A.D.  1639. 


187  aminers  and  the  examined,  make  the  exercise  passing  solemn, 
and  cannot  but  beget  an  extraordinary  care  in  the  actors  on 
both  sides,  to  fit  themselves  unto  this  awful  trial.  For  my 
own  part,  upon  fuller  consideration,  I  take  it  to  be  the  most 
absolute  course  that  ever  was  devised,  for  the  honouring  of 
the  university :  this  single  course  giving  life  to  the  private 
pains  of  tutors,  and  the  public  pains  of  readers,  making  the 
auditors  diligent,  if  they  come,  which  is  for  their  advantage. 
,  And  if  not  so,  but  that  the  private  and  public  be  slack,  it 
putteth  them  upon  a  diligent  search  otherwise  to  enable 
themselves,  as  men  concerned,  either  to  give  a  good  account, 
or  to  be  left  to  public  shame  and  obloquy.  Your  grace  in 
this  one  course  hath  completed  all  that  the  founders  of  col 
leges  and  lectures  intended.  They  intended  the  means  to 
make  men  scholars;  your  grace  applieth  this  means,  and 
effecteth  it ;  I  doubt  not  but  your  grace  fully  comprehended 
this,  and  have  had  the  like  expressions  formerly  presented 
unto  you.  Yet  I  trust  the  repetition  hereof  will  not  be 
ungrateful,  inasmuch  as  this  my  late  apprehension  of  this 
singular  benefit  may  infer,  that  the  sight  and  hearing  of  this 
exercise  may  in  like  manner  work  upon  men  in  succeeding 
times,  and  cause  them  deservedly  to  bless  your  memory,  who 
have  so  completely  provided  for  this  university,  in  this  very 
particular,  as  that  it  may  for  ever  carry  the  face  and  credit 
of  an  university. 

Ri.  BAYLIE. 

Oxford, 
Feb.  17,  16$. 


THE  two  great  days  after  Ash- Wednesday  are  always  left  The  exami- 
out  of  form  for  curates,   school-masters,  and  such  like,  to  j^effecUrf 
answer  upon,  and  much  the  collectors  have  heretofore  been  them  upon 
pressed  with  their  importunities,  which  occasioned  the  horse  proceeders. 
fair  (as  we  term  it)  on  those  days  for  the  quicker  riddance  of 
them,  but  no  such  matter  this  year.     On  Friday  last  there 
answered  but  one  in  all,  such  a  strange  alteration  have  our 

LAUD.  S 


258 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1639.  examinations  wrought.  Of  the  two  hundred  bachelors  that 
proceed,  I  dare  say  that  one  hundred  and  eighty  are  resi 
dents  in  the  university.  Whereas  heretofore  we  were  wont 
to  have  a  third  part  at  the  least  out  of  the  country.  Thus  it 
is  with  us  now  at  Lent :  and  I  expect  by  so  much  a  greater 
change  at  the  act;  by  how  much  such  outliers,,  as  should 
pretend  then,  will  have  been  longer  absent  from  the  uni 
versity. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
Feb.  24,  16$}. 


Tavern 
haunting  and 
overmuch 
drinking 
again  com 
plained  of. 


Right  honourable  and  my  singular  good  Lord,  188 

IT  was  objected  unto  me  at  my  late  being  in  London,  by 
persons  of  good  quality,  that  our  universities  of  England  were 
grown  to  that  corruption,  especially  of  excessive  drinking, 
that  many  did  miscarry  by  the  liberty  and  ill  example  which 
was  given  them  there.  Insomuch  that  many  to  avoid  the 
danger,  did  send  their  sons  beyond  seas  for  their  education. 
Whereunto  I  made  answer,  that  the  humours  of  men  are 
such  in  this  age,  that  innocence  and  perfection  itself,  being 
in  authority,  could  hardly  avoid  calumny.  That  the  times 
are  much  better  than  heretofore  they  were;  and  that  the 
fault  (if  there  were  any)  did  much  proceed  from  the  parents 
themselves,  who  think  it  a  great  disparagement  to  their  sons, 
that  they  should  be  kept  within  the  limits  of  discipline. 

Notwithstanding  all  which,  and  what  else  may  justly  be 
replied,  the  serious  consideration  of  what  was  objected  hath 
caused  me  so  much  to  forget  mine  own  unworthiness,  as  by 
my  own  pen  to  intimate  unto  your  grace,  (what  I  have  long 
time  wished  that  some  other  would  have  done,)  that  the 
liberty  of  resorting  to  taverns,  and  other  drinking-houses, 
and  the  excess  committed  there,  is  such  as  may  give  some 
occasion  of  scandal,  being  dangerous  to  youth,  and  shameful 
in  others,  who  ought  to  be  examples  of  sobriety  and  virtue. 
Having  upon  this  occasion  enquired  into  times  past,  since 
the  happy  reformation  of  this  university,  I  understand  by 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  259 

credible  information,  that  Dr.  Pinck,  by  his  personal  visiting  A.D.  1639. 
of  suspected  places,  left  the  university,  in  this  respect,  in 
better  state  than  it  is  at  this  present.  For  me  to  write  how 
dangerous  the  relapse  into  so  loathsome  and  general  a  disease 
may  prove,  were  to  forget  myself,  and  my  principal  intention, 
which  was  only  to  make  known  unto  you  this  defect,  and 
thereby  to  do  service  to  this  place,  and  in  part  to  express 
my  thankfulness  to  yourself  for  the  much  favour  vouchsafed 
unto  me. 

From  Oxford, 
Feb.  24,  16fg. 


This  information  I  had  from  a  master  of  art  in  Oxford,  whom 
I  dare  trust,  but  will  not  name  :  whereupon  I  writ  to  the 
vice-chancellor  as  follows. 

I  RECEIVED  a  letter  this  week  from  Oxford,  from  an  ordi-  To  the  vice- 

nary  plain  man,  but  a  good  scholar,  and  very  honest.     And  chancellor 
J  v  J  concerning 

it  troubles  me  more  than  any  letter  I  have  received  many  a  the  abuse 


day.  It  is  true,  I  have  heard  of  late  from  some  men  of  and  . 
1  89  quality  here  above,  that  the  university  was  relapsing  into  a 
drinking  humour,  to  its  great  dishonour.  But,  I  confess,  I 
believed  it  not,  because  I  had  no  intimation  of  it  from  you. 
But  this  letter  comes  from  a  man  that  can  have  no  ends  but 
honesty,  and  the  good  of  that  place.  And  because  you  shall 
see  what  he  writes,  I  send  you  here  a  copy  of  this  letter,  and 
do  earnestly  beg  of  you,  that  you  will  forthwith  set  yourself 
to  punish  all  haunting  of  taverns  and  ale-houses  with  all  the 
strictness  that  may  be,  that  the  university,  now  advancing 
in  learning,  may  not  sink  in  manners,  which  will  shame  and 
destroy  all. 

I  am  informed  too  from  a  very  good,  but  another,  hand,  Care  to  be 
that  there  is  extreme  liberty  given  and  taken  by  young  noble-  ^®^e*^ 
men  and  gentlemen  of  the  better  sort  in  the  university  :  that  and  educat- 
tutors  in  most  colleges  do  only  bestow  a  little  pains  in  read-  mg  young 
ing  to  them,  if  they  will  come  at  them,  but  use  no  power  of 


260  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1639.  government  over  them,  or  any  restraint;  as  if  they  had 
nothing  to  do  but  only  to  read  to  them.  Besides,  almost 
all  of  them  are  suffered  to  keep  horses.  And  by  that  means, 
when  they  are  restrained  from  taverns,  and  ill  company 
within  the  university,  they  ride  forth  to  the  neighbouring 
places,  both  to  drink  and  perhaps  to  do  worse.  I  know  you 
cannot  be  blamed  for  the  neglect  of  tutors  in  private  colleges  : 
but,  I  pray,  at  your  next  meeting  with  the  heads,  let  them 
know  what  I  have  here  written,  and  desire  their  care  for 
amendment,  if  this  report  be  true.  But  true  or  false,  I  took 
it  my  duty  to  let  you  know  what  is  come  to  my  ears  from 
some,  who  are  perhaps  too  nearly  interessed  in  it. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  28,  16$. 


ToDr.Baylie,  IN  the  business  of  the  examinations,  you  write  thus:  the 
abu^eandlet  vice-cnance^or^s  successors  cannot  be  so  wanting  to  them- 
ter  aforesaid,  selves,  and  the  common  good,  as  not  to  pursue  so  fair  an 
example.  It  is  true,  it  is  a  very  fair  example :  but  can  it 
not  therefore  choose  but  be  pursued  by  the  successors  ?  I 
pray  tell  me !  Was  not  Dr.  Pinck's  care  for  suppressing 
the  scholars  haunting  of  taverns  and  ale-houses  a  very  fair 
example  ?  Were  not  you  and  Dr.  Frewen  his  successors  ? 
And  have  you  too  pursued  his  fair  example  ?  I  have  this 
reason  to  believe  you  have  not.  I  have  at  this  present  re 
ceived  a  letter  from  Oxford,  from  a  very  private,  but  a  very 
honest  hand ;  and  with  an  expression  full  of  grief,  that  the 
university  is  fallen  again  into  that  drunken  relapse,  in  which 
it  swam  before  Dr.Piiick's  vice-chancellorship.  And  I  assure 
you,  it  troubles  me  very  much,  because  this  very  week  I  have 
heard  also  that  some  persons  of  honour  and  credit  have  lately 
spoken  very  much  concerning  this  relapse  :  which  yet  I  con 
fess  I  did  not  believe  till  I  received  this  letter,  which  I  190 
cannot  distrust,  knowing  the  man  which  writ  to  be  without 
spleen  or  ends.  And  I  pray  God  send  you  governors  there 
to  take  better  care,  or  else  all  my  care  will  be  lost. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Feb.  28,  16$. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  261 

A.D.  1639. 


THE  information  given  up  to  your  grace  against  me  hath  The  vice- 
been  long  expected ;  yet  never  less  than  at  this  time.     For  JepiTcon- S 
strange  it  is  to  me,  that  an  increase  of  drunkards  should  cerning  the 
follow  upon  a  decrease  of  ale-houses.      Had  the  informer  a  use- 
(whoever  he  be)  been  with  me  in  my  dirty  night  walks  this 
winter,  and  sped  as  ill  as  I  have  done,  his  eyes  would  not 
serve  him  so  well  to  espy  faults  where  none  are;   boldly  I 
dare  say  it,  there  seldom  passes  one  night  in  a  whole  week,  in 
which  one  of  the  proctors,  or  myself,  do  not  walk  the  round. 
And  divers  times  I  have  gone  (as  my  servants  can  witness) 
from  one  end  of  the  town  to  the  other,  after  Christ  Church 
bell  hath  tolled,  and  not  found  one  scholar,  either  in  the 
streets,  or  in  any  of  the  four  taverns.     Few  hours  before  the  Oneof  Trini- 
receipt  of  your  grace's  letters,  I  committed  one  of  Trinity  committed. 
college  to  prison  for  disorder  in  the  night;  but  beside  him,  That  their 
I  have  not,  I  protest,  of  late  met  with  any.      Yet,  not  to  £  ^e^good 
justify  ourselves  too  far,  there  is,  I  confess,  too  much  good  beaten  by  the 
fellowship  amongst  us ;  but  the  informer  mislays  it :   it  is  vice-chancel- 
driven  out  of  town  (as  others  besides  myself  observe)  into  taverns  and 
our  private  colleges  and  halls.     There  they  can,  and  do  de-  ale-houses,  is 
bauch  themselves  more  securely,  being  out  of  the  reach  of  v!^  ^eges1. 
the  public  magistrate :  yea,  and  of  their  own  governors  too  in 
some  houses,  the  more  the  pity.     There        A  young  kinsman  of  mine3  Mr. 

have  indeed   (for  which  I  am  heartily     Tho.  Webbeu,  serving  the  bishop  of 

N  j.  i    ,   -i      -i  Oxon,  was  the  week  before  barbar- 

sorry)  one  or  two  disasters  lately  hap-     Ously  abused  by  this  Hull,  upon  lit- 

pened  here  (for  seldom  they  come  sin-     tie  or  no  provocation,  to  the  endan- 
gle;)   but  that  the  actors  were  in  their     ^^ditterwas  the  young 
drink  I  cannot  say,  much  less  that  they     earl  of  Downe's  quarrel  with  Dr. 
fetched  it  out  of  the  town ;  for  as  yet  I     Prideaux's  son*,  and  other  captains. 
cannot  trace  them  in  any  ale-house.     Hull  is  in  the  castle, 
(for  as  I  told  the  dean,)  I  know  him  to  be  a  very  disorderly 
man.  Others  suspected  to  have  had  a  hand  in  that  barbarous 

u  [Probably  the  son  of  Sir  William  years,   and   then    settled   him   with   a 

Webbe,   and   great  grandchild   to    Sir  gentleman  of  good  worth."    (Hist,  of 

William,  the  Abp.'s  uncle.     Laud  re-  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap.  xxii.  p.  226, 

covered  the  father  and  his  two  daugh-  in  marg. )] 

ters  from  Romanism,  as  he  observed  x  [Afterwards    Col.    William    Pri- 

in  his  defence,  adding,  "his  eldest  son  deaux,  slain  at  Marston  Moor.  (Lloyd's 

I   took  from  him,  placed  him  with  a  Memoirs,  p.  538.)] 
careful  divine,  maintained  him  divers 


262 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1639.  assault  are  upon  bail,  and  so  shall  continue  a  while ;  though 
a  messenger  from  my  lord  of  Oxon  yesterday  brought  me 
word  that  the  party  hurt  is  in  the  judgment  of  his  chirur- 
gions  now  past  danger. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
March  2,  16$. 


abuse  in 
colleges. 


SIR,  191 

What  course       HAVING  received  such  a  letter,  as  I  did  the  former  week, 
to  be  held  for  T         i  i         ,    i  i  ^M  IT  i         ,-i 

present  re-      ^  could  not  but  send  you  a  copy  of  it ;  and  I  am  heartily 

medy  of  this  glad  it  hath  produced  such  an  answer  from  you :  for  now  I 
see  clearly  that  you  are  not  in  the  fault,  and  yet  that  he 
had  cause  to  write  the  letter.  For  though  drunkenness  and 
open  good  fellowship  be  not  in  taverns  and  ale-houses ;  yet  it 
seems,  since  your  vigilancy  hath  driven  them  thence,  they 
are  crept  into  colleges  and  halls;  where,  by  your  own  ac 
knowledgment,  they  do  more  privately,  and  more  securely 
debauch  one  another.  So  the  place  is  changed,  but  not  the 
disorder.  And  the  university  will  be  undone  in  reputation, 
if  private  colleges  be  made  the  sinks  of  disorder.  In  this 
case  I  know  not  whither  to  turn  myself;  and  therefore  I 
pray  let  the  heads  know  at  your  next  meeting,  that  if  they 
do  not  look  to  this  very  strictly,  I  must  betake  myself  to 
them  for  these  home  disorders.  And  if  there  be  not  present 
remedy  by  their  care,  I  will  myself  acquaint  the  king  and 
the  state  with  these  foul  sufferances,  and  not  stay  till  great 
men  (who  of  late  begin  to  open  their  mouths  apace)  com 
plain  first  of  these  great  enormities.  For  my  own  part  I  have 
done  my  utmost :  and  I  do  very  well  understand,  what  hurt 
this  may  bring  to  the  university  in  such  times  as  these.  But 
better  some  hurt,  than  that  they  should  be  quite  undone. 
And  I  pray  let  the  heads  know  how  sensible  I  am  of  these 
foul  disorders  in  private,  and  how  the  public  comes  to  suffer 
by  them. 

I  thank  you  heartily  for  making  the  disorderly  fellow  of 
Trinity  college  an  example.     And  for  Hull^,  if  my  kinsman 

i  [A  student  of  Ch.  Ch.     He  was  expelled.     See  below,  p.  270.] 


Hull  to  be 
punished. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  263 

miscarry,  I  shall  then  expect  what  the  law  will  do  to  him ;    A.D.  1639. 


but  if  he  escape,  yet  I  hope,  the  fact  being  so  barbarous,  and 
(for  aught  I  yet  hear)  without  provocation,  you  will  take 
order,  when  he  comes  out  of  the  castle,  to  send  him  out  of 
the  university  by  bannition.  As  for  those  which,  you  say, 
are  suspected  to  have  a  hand  in  this  foul  business,  and  are 
now  under  bail,  I  leave  you  to  do  to  them  as  proof  shall  rise 
against  them.  But,  I  confess,  I  never  heard  of  more  than 
Hull  in  the  business,  till  I  read  it  in  your  letters :  and  the 
more  were  in  it,  the  worse  the  business,  for  then  (it  seems) 
the  outrage  was  plotted. 

I  perceive  that  the  complaint  which  I  received,  concern-  Care  to  be 

ing  the  young  earl  of  Downe2,  was  not  causeless:   and  how  taken  of  ^e f 

'  .  .        young  earl  of 

strangely  soever  Dr.  Fulhama  look  upon  the  business,  I  think  Downe,  and 

it  had  been  well  some  restraint  had  been  put  upon  all  the  otl?f  y°unS 

.  noblemen, 

quarrellers,  so  far  forth  as  they  had  appeared  guilty.     For 

young  noblemen,  when  they  are  in  the  university,  must  be 
kept  to  a  university  life  in  some  measure,  or  else  their  ex 
ample  will  spoil  the  rest. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
March  6, 


192     Mr.  Justice  Jones  gave  the  vice-chancellor  thanks  openly  Judge  Jones's 
on  the  bench  at  the  last  assizes,  for  his  care  and  pains  in  re-  ^ ^e  refor- 

forming  the  ale-houses.  mation  of  the 

ale-houses. 

Sir  Francis  Windebankeb  and  sir  John  Danvers c,  were  on  Burgesses  for 
Monday  March  9th  sworn  burgesses  of  the  parliament  for  the  Parlia~ 
the  university,  with  an  unanimous   consent  of  the  whole 
house. 

z  [Thomas  Pope,  grandson  of  the  intimate  friend.     See  repeated  notices 

first  earl  of  Downe,  and  his  successor  of  him  in  the  '  Diary.'] 
in  the   title  ;    matriculated   June    21,          c  [Brother  of  Henry  Danvers,  earl 

1639,  as  a  nobleman  of  Ch.Ch.     He  of  Danby;  he  was  afterwards  one  of 

suffered  much  in  the  civil  wars.  (Wood,  the  king's  judges.     See  his  character 

Ath.  Ox.  iii.  1038.)]  in  Clarendon,  Hist,  of  the  Rebellion, 

a  [If  the  same  person  as  mentioned  vol.  vi.  p.  235.     Sir  John  Danvers  was 

above,  p.  218,  note  d,  he  is  incorrectly  first  elected  burgess  for  the  Univ.  April 

termed  Doctor.]  16,  1625,  and  again  Jan.  7,  162§,  Feb. 

b  [Secretary  of  state,   Abp.  Laud's  20,  162§.] 


264 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1639.        Our  nobility  here  are  not  kept  in  such  awe  (the  more  is 
the  pity)  as  those  bred  up  at  Cambridge. 


The  mis- 
government 
of  noblemen's 
sons  in  Ox 
ford. 


And  here  is  one  Caufield,  an  Irish  lord's  sond,  who  both 
disorders  himself,  and  misleads  others :  I  think  it  would  be 

Young  Cau-    a  prOOd  office  done  to  the  university  to  have  him  removed 

field  of  Exe- 

ter  college,      nence. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
March  9,  16$. 


My  charge 
concerning 
this. 


This  message 
of  mine  was 
delivered  by 
the  vice- 
chancellor. 


I  AM  sorry  to  hear  that  the  noblemen's  sons,  which  are 
with  you,  are  not  kept  in  so  good  order  as  they  should  be. 
And  more,  that  it  should  be  confessed  by  you  that  they  are 
not  kept  in  so  good  awe  as  they  are  at  Cambridge ;  for,  I 
am  sure,  your  statutes  are  perfecter  than  theirs,  and,  I  dare 
say,  you  have  as  much  careful  assistance  from  me  in  all 
things,  as  Cambridge  hath  from  their  chancellor.  And  this 
being  undeniably  true,  the  fault  must  needs  be  among  your 
selves  :  and  I  protest  unto  you,  I  knew  nothing  of  any  of 
their  liberty  misgiven  or  misused,  till  about  a  fortnight  since, 
that  I  writ  to  you  about  the  young  earl  of  Downe,  and  that 
now  you  write  to  me  about  Caufield,  the  son  of  an  Irish 
lord.  These  are  therefore  to  pray  and  require  you,  at  your 
next  meeting  with  the  heads,  to  let  them  know,  that  I  am 
very  much  scandalized  at  the  liberty  which  is  given  to  these 
young  men :  and  to  require  of  them  in  whose  colleges  or 
halls  any  noblemen's  sons  are,  first,  that  they  be  as  carefully 
held  to  all  manner  of  exercise,  which  they  are  able  to  per 
form,  as  any  other  whatsoever ;  and,  secondly,  that  they  be 
kept  in  obedience  to  all  the  statutes  within  the  several  houses 
respectively,  as  I  hope  yourself  will  take  care  for  their  obser 
vation  of  the  statutes  of  the  university.  It  is  true,  I  would 
have  a  difference  put  between  noblemen's  sons  and  others 
of  meaner  condition ;  but  that  should  be  in  an  honourable 
usage  of  them,  not  in  giving  them  any  liberty  at  their  own 

d  [One  of  the  three  sons  of  William  earl  of  Charlemont] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  265 

hurt,  and  the  dishonour  of  the  university.     Now  whether    A.B.  1639. 
you  will  send  for  all  these  young  men  to  the  meeting  of  the  ~ 
heads,  that  they  may  know  what  charge  I  have  given  con 
cerning  them,  I  leave  to  yourself,  and  that  which  you  shall 
judge  fittest  upon  the  place.     But  I  would  have  young  Cau- 
1 93  field  called,,  and  his  tutor,  and  there  let  it  be  told  unto  them, 
and  the  head  of  the  house  in  which  he  is,  that  if  he  mend 
not  his  manners,  he  shall  not  stay  there  to  corrupt  others. 
And  I  do  hereby  require  of  you  and  them,  that  either  they  I  have  writ- 
keep  him  in  better  order,  or  presently  send  him  away  to  his  _,en  °,     ^, . 
friends  :  and  if  they  do  not  do  the  one  or  the  other,  either  day's  carrier, 
you  shall  banish  him  the  university,  or  I  will.     And  to  this 
end,  I  pray,  send  me  up  the  form  of  a  bannition  to  lie  by  me, 
and  Caufield's  Christian  name,  that  I  may  begin  with  him, 
if  there  be  cause.     And  for  the  young  earl  of  Downe,  I  have  The  young 

written  to  Dr.  Fell  to  look  better  to  him,  or  I  will  make  him  f"1  hath  left 

the  univer- 

an  example  also,  let  his  friends  take  it  as  they  please.  sity. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
March  13,  IGjfg. 


MR.  SvMPsoN6,  a  senior  fellow  of  Trinity  college,  is  by  The  degree  of 
the  statutes  of  that  house  urged  to  proceed  doctor,  or  to  doctor-ship 
resign.    Their  visitor  (as  Doctor  Potter  tells  me)  hath  herein  Mr.  Sympson 
been  consulted,  who  finds  only  this  way  to  relieve  him,  by  of  Trinity 
having  his  grace  denied  him  in  the  university,  there  being  a 
clause  in  their  statute  to  that  purpose,  which  I  have  seen. 
Hereupon  they  beg  a  repulse  of  me,  and  [I]  shall  grant  it,  if 
your  grace  think  well  of  it.     The  party  is  poor,  and  so  likely  I  gave  way  to 
to  draw  more  disrepute  on  the  degree,  than  it  can  bring  tlie  rePulse- 
honour  to  him. 

A.  FREWEN. 

March  23,  16$. 


e  [Query,   Nathaniel  Simpson,  the      Compendium.'    See  Wood,   Ath.   Ox. 
author  of  a  scarce  book,  '  Arithmetics      iii.  87.] 


266  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640. 


SIR, 

The  proctors       I  AM  informed  there  is  an  express  mulct  set  down  in  the 
coun^forthe  statute  for  each  regent  to  pay  that  hath  forfeited  his  cau- 
mulcts  due  to  tions  in  not  fulfilling  the  duties  belonging  to  his  regency, 
sU  UfYomr~     wnicn  are  creating  generals  &,  moderating  quodlibetsh,  examin- 
such  regents   ing  of  candidates1,  and  the  like ;  these  mulcts  (as  far  as  I  re- 
dutief  of their  mem^er)  are  to  ^e  gathered  by  the  proctors,  and  all  or  some 
regency.         part  of  them  to  be  accounted  for  by  them  to  yourself  and 
the  delegates  at  the  end  of  their  office k.    I  do  not  remember 
that  these  duties  have  been  so  well  accounted  for  to  the 
university  as  they  ought  to  be ;  which  as  it  is  some  loss  to 
that  body,  so  it  is  a  great  encouragement  to  the  regents  to 
be  slack  and  careless  in  the  performance  of  all  those  duties 
which  belong  unto  them.   Whereas,  were  they  strictly  called 
to  an  account  for  them,  you  should  have  a  far  greater  per 
formance  of  all  duties  than  now  there  is.     These  are  there-  194 
fore  to  pray  and  require  you  forthwith  to  acquaint  the  proc- 
The  proctors   tors  with  what  I  have  here  written ;  and  to  require  them  in 
^thifmes6    m^  namej  tnat  a^  their  accounts  they  present  unto  you  be- 
sage,  not        fore  the  delegates  a  list  subscribed  by  their  hands,  of  all  such 
ookmg  tor     ag  have  forfeited  to  the  university  any  part  of  their  cautions, 
reckoning.      in  not  fulfilling  the  duties  aforesaid  of  their  regency.     And 

?/'  Fi!eonen'    farther,  I  think  it  fit,  that  you  acquaint  the  heads  with  this 
jyietrc.ii  oU. 

business  at  your  next  meeting,  because  I  do  not  intend  to 

lay  this  as  a  burden  upon  the  present  proctors  only,  (whose 
diligence  perhaps  may  have  been  as  great  as  others  before 
them,)  but  do  require  that  notice  be  taken,  that  I  will  have  a 
strict  account  of  these  things  given  up  by  all  proctors  suc 
cessively  at  the  end  of  their  year.  And  you  shall  do  well  to 
let  the  succeeding  proctors  know  so  much  at  the  beginning 
of  theirs.  And  I  pray  fail  not  to  give  me  an  account  of  this 
business. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
March  27,  1(J40. 

«  [Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  vi.  sect.  i.  §  3,  4.]  *  [Ibid.,  tit.  ix.  sect.  ii.  §  3.] 

h  [Ibid.,  tit.  viii.  §  4.]  *  [ibid.,  tit.  xvii.  sect.  iv.  §  3,  5.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  267 

A.D.  1640. 


OUR  Lent  disputations  are  now  (God  be  thanked)  happily  Lent  dispu- 
ended,  without  any  the  least  tumult  or  disorder  at  any  time.  *J[tion?  *jass~ 
And  this  I  cannot  but  impute  principally  to  our  examinations,  The  exami- 
as  one  of  the  many  good  fruits  that  spring  from  them.     No  nations  the 
dunce  can  now  invade  the  degree ;  and  about  such  hereto 
fore  our  school  quarrels  ever  began. 

A.  FREWEN. 

March  30,  1640. 


Procu-  (Mr.  ALLIBOND],  e  Coll.  Lincoln  \  [Admitted 

ratores  \Mr.  GREAVES™,  e  Coll.  Om.  Animarum  /Apr.  15.] 


BEING  to  begin  my  journey  this  day,  last  night  I  walked  No  scholars 
round  the  town ;  when  (though  in  the  streets  the  best  part  ^?un4  stir~ 
of  the  night)   though  in  all  quarters  of  the  town,  at   all  night,  or  at 
taverns,  and  many  other  tippling-houses  besides,  yet  not  in  taverns- 
all  that  time,  nor  in  any  of  these  places  did  I  meet  with  one 
scholar,  but  returned  home  again  with  loss  of  my  labour, 
whereof  I  was  heartily  glad.     The  truth  hereof  I  protest 
upon  the  word  of  a  priest.     Nor  do  I  write  this  to  boast  of 
my  own  diligence,  but  to  furnish  your  grace  with  what  to 
answer,  if  need  require,  in  this  busy  and  inquisitive  time. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
April  20,  1640. 


195      THE  vice-chancellor  having  occasion  of  a  fortnight's  ab-  The  exami- 
sence  from  the  university,  found  at  his  coming  home  the 
examinations  at  a  dead  stand,  but  he  presently  revived  them  revived, 
again.     And  I  sent  him  word,  that  by  this  it  appeared  to  me 
that  that  great  business  would  quickly  fall  to  nothing,  if 
the  vice-chancellors  for  the  future  did  not  take  that  prudent 

1  [Peter  Allibond.    He  died  the  fol-  m    [Nicholas    Greaves,    afterwards 

lowing  Feb.]  dean  of  Dromore.] 


268 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


AJX  1640.    and  vigilant  care,  with  which  the   present  vice-chancellor 
had  settled  it. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  14,  1640. 


Concerning 
the  exami 
nations. 


I  AM  sorry  that  the  order  of  the  regents  hath  been  any 
way  disturbed  in  relation  to  the  examinations ;  and  I  pray 
set  it  as  right  again  as  you  can,  before  you  leave  your  office, 
that  your  successors,  by  your  example  and  instructions,  may 
go  on  the  next  year  with  the  more  cheerfulness  and  better 
success. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  22,  1640. 


Dr.  Jackson's      FOR  Dr.  Jackson's n  sermons,  if  they  offend  against  his 


sermons,  if 
they  offend 
against  his 
majesty's 
declaration, 
&c. 


majesty's  declaration,  you  must  contrive  the  handsomest  way 
you  can  for  some  delay,  for  certainly  this  is  no  time  to 
publish  any  thing  that  may  give  offence,  as  that  will  cer 
tainly  do,  if  it  be  so  expressly  against  his  majesty's  declara 
tion  as  you  write.  And  you  cannot  but  see  what  snatching 
there  is  at  myself,  and  that  university.  And  if  Dr.  Jackson 
be  not  satisfied  with  such  excuses  as  you  can  make,  then  you 
shall  do  well  to  tell  him,  that  I  have  lately  written  to  you, 
that  both  in  regard  of  the  duty  which  we  owe  to  his  majesty, 
and  the  peace  of  the  Church,  no  man  should  presume  to 
print  any  thing  there  which  might  break  the  rule  given  in 
his  majesty's  declaration  one  way  or  other.  And  this  I  pray 
be  very  careful  to  observe,  not  only  in  the  person  of  Dr. 
Jackson,  but  of  all  men  else. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
May  22,  1640. 

n  [Thomas  Jackson,  D.D.,  principal  the  sermons  referred  to  by  Abp.  Laud 
of  C.  C.  C.,  and  dean  of  Peterborough.  among  those  published  after  his  death  ? 
He  died  Sept.  21  in  this  vear.  Were  See  Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  ii.  668.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  269 

A.D.  1640. 

196      We  have  an  inn  in  the  High  Street  called  the  Mitre,  which  Greene,  a 
is  the  general  rendezvous  of  all  the  recusants,  not  in  this  shire  P°Plsl1  inn; 
only,  but  in  the  whole  kingdom,  that  have  any  business  to  Mitre  in 
Oxford.     Seldom  are  they  there  without  some  scholars  in  Oxford, 
their  company,  upon  pretence  either  of  alliance  or  acquaint 
ance,  which  have  ever  passed   for  warrantable   excuses   at 
seasonable  hours.     What  they  do  there  I  cannot  say;  but 
yet  the  concourse  thither  being  great,  and  the  host  a  pro 
fessed  papist,  I  somewhat  doubt  that  the  university  may  both 
hear  ill  for  it,  and  suffer  by  it  in  the  perversion  of  some  of 
our  youth,  if  there  be  not  some  course  taken  for  prevention. 
Greene,  the  host,  is  not  of  our  body,  but  a  townsman,  and 
licensed  by  them  to  keep  an  inn :  and  his  house  hath  a  back 
gate  towards  Lincoln  college,  where  most  of  the  guests  pri 
vately  enter,  and  is  near  neighboured  by  many  recusants, 
there  being,  as  I  am  informed,  more  of  them  in  that  little 
parish  of  Allhallows  (where  his  house  stands)  than  in  any 
two  besides.     I  only  give  your   grace  the  naked  relation, 
leaving  it  wholly  to  your  wisdom  to  do  what  you  shall  think 
fittest. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxon, 
June  1,  1640. 


I  DO  not  remember  that  ever  I  heard  of  Greene  your  inn-  My  answer 

keeper  by  Allhallows  church,  either  that  he  was  a  recusant,  to  *he  fore" 

said  passage. 
or  that  there  is  such  resort  of  recusants  to  his  house,  not 

only  out  of  that  shire,  but  from  other  shires  also,  that  have 
any  business  to  Oxford.  And  I  like  it  much  the  worse,  be 
cause  there  is  such  a  private  back  way  to  the  inn  as  you 
mention ;  and  were  the  town  as  careful  as  they  ought  to  be, 
they  would  not  have  licensed  such  a  man  to  be  an  inn-keeper 
there.  But  since  they  take  so  little  care,  I  will  take  the 
more.  In  my  power  it  is  not  to  discharge  him  from  his  inn, 
but  for  the  better  discharge  of  my  own  duty,  I  have  com- 


270  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640.  plained  to  the  lords  about  him.  And  I  hope  there  will  be  a 
letter  go  from  the  board  to  the  town  to  call  for  an  account 
of  the  whole  business.  You  need  not  take  any  notice  of  this, 
neither  shall  the  letters  go  as  if  you  had  given  the  informa 
tion  :  but  I  purpose  to  follow  it  close,  till  all  be  done  which 
may  be  done  by  law. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
June  8,  1640. 


Hull  ex-  THE  dean  of  Christ  Church  sent  me  word  that  Hull"  was  197 

turned  out  of  his  student's  place,  and  another  admitted  in, 
for  his  barbarous  usage  of  young  Webb. 

SAMUEL  FELL. 

June  8,  1640. 


Disputations       THE  disputations  in  quodlibets  were,  I  confess,  somewhat 

m  quodhbets.  disordered  the  last  term,  by  reason  of  that  bedel's  absence, 

to  whom  by  statute  it  solely  belongs  to  warn  the  regents  in 

their  course0.     But  now  all  goes   on   methodically  again, 

according  to  your  grace's  desire. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxon, 
June  8,  1640. 


The  Oxford        ON  Monday  last  I  con  vented  the  two  carriers  before  the 

carriers  not    heads  :  and  there  to  prevent  future  clamour  from  the  coun- 

to  travel  with  .    . 

above  six        try,  enjoined  them  not  to  travel  with  above  six  horses  in  a 

horses,  &c.      waggon?,  and  to  begin  on  this  day  seven  night. 

A.  FREWEN  q. 

n  [See  above,  p.  262.]  P  [See  above,  p.  211.] 

0  [The  superior  bedel  of  arts.    See          1  [In  former  edition  it  is  incorrectly 
Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  viii.  §  5.]  printed  W.  CANT.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  271 

A.B.  1640. 


I  LIKE  the  course  very  well  which  you  have  begun  with 
your  carriers,  to  prevent  the  clamour  of  the  country :  for  in 
deed  the  use  of  carts  with  four  wheels  cannot  make  such  a 
spoil  of  the  highway  as  is  made  usually,  if  they  do  not  over 
load  them.  And  the  extreme  overloading  of  them  is  ven 
tured  on,  because  they  may  use  as  many  horses  as  they 
please. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  so  many  soldiers  take  Oxford  in  their  Soldiers  pass- 
way  r;  but  glad  withal  that  you  keep  the  scholars  so  well  ™%  through 

J    '  J  the  town,  and 

irom  them,  that  all  disorders  may  be  prevented,  as  you  write  mutinying  in 

they  have  hitherto  been.  their  drink- 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
June  19,  1640. 


198     NOTWITHSTANDING  the  accident  which  fell  out  upon  Tues-  The  scholars 
day,  June  16,  between  the  commanders  and  the  soldiers,  J^6,^6  m 
which  was  a  very  mutinous  quarrel  in  their  drink,  and  cost 
some  blood. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 
June  22,  1640. 


ON  Friday,  June  19th,  a  bachelor  of  arts  of  Magdalen  Mr.  Davis  of 
hall  was  found  drowned  in  the  riyer  by  New  Parks.     His  ^f^ale^e 
wide-sleeved  gown,  hat,  and  band  lay  on  the  bank,  but  the  drowned  by 
rest  of  his  clothes  were  upon  him,  which  makes  us  much 
suspect  that  he  wilfully  cast  away  himself.     The  coroner's 
inquest  hath  found  him  not  mentis  compotem.     And  I  hear 
from  good  hands  that  he  was  much  troubled  in  mind,  for 
which  reason  at  the  opening  of  his  study  I  mean  to  observe 
what  books  he  used  most. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxford, 

June  22,  1640. 

r  [On  their  march  to  the  north.] 


272  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640, 


The  Arabic  ON  June  the  25th,  1640,  I  sent  by  Dr.  Bay  lie,  dean  of 
f  t"  Sarum,  an^  president  of  St.  John  Baptist's  college,  the  con 
veyances  for  the  perpetual  settling  of  the  Arabic  lecture  in 
Oxford,  and  the  statutes  which  I  made  for  the  due  reading 
of  it,  and  desired  that  those  statutes  might  by  the  vice- 
chancellor's  care  be  transcribed  into  the  original  statute- 
book1",  and  the  conveyances  also,  according  as  he  finds  done 
with  other  lectures  given  by  other  benefactors  to  the  univer 
sity.  As  also  for  the  transcribing  of  these  statutes  into  all 
other  statute-books  of  the  university  respectively,  that  those 
which  are  bound  to  be  auditors  may  know  both  their  times 
and  their  duties8.  These  directions  I  sent  by  Dr.  Bay  lie, 
but  sent  no  letter  at  this  time  to  the  university,  because  of 
the  haste  which  I  made  to  have  the  business  done,  and  to  be 
out  of  my  hands  in  these  broken  times,  which  gave  me  no 
leisure  at  all  from  more  public  affairs  to  write  unto  them. 
As  for  the  evidences  which  belong  to  this  land,  they  are  all 
in  the  custody  of  the  town  of  Reading ;  to  which  town  I  gave 
all  my  land  lying  in  Bray  in  Berkshire*,  of  which  this  to  the 
Arabic  lecture  is  not  a  full  fifth  part,  and  could  not  dismem 
ber  the  evidences ;  and  therefore  thought  it  fittest  to  leave 
them  there,  where  the  greatest  part  of  the  land  was  settled  199 
to  other  charitable  uses.  And  I  have  made  the  vice-chan 
cellor  for  the  time  being,  with  some  other  heads  of  colleges, 
perpetual  visitors  of  that  which  I  have  done  for  Reading :  a 
counterpart  whereof  remains  in  the  custody  of  the  president 
and  fellows  of  St.  John  Baptist's  college,  of  all  which  I  gave 
the  present  vice-chancellor  an  account. 

W.  CANT. 

June  25th,  1640U. 

r  [They  are  published  in  the  Ap-  Berkshire  Benefactions,  p.  21.  Lond. 

pendix  Statutorum,  pp.  46 — 48,  Oxon.  1841.] 

1768.]  u  [The  lands  for  endowing  the  lec- 

8  [See  Statut.  Lect.  Arab.  §  6,  10.]  ture  were  conveyed  July  2.  Reg.  Conv. 

1  [See  Abp.  Laud's  deed  of  gift  to  the  R.  176.  b.     See  the  Statutes,  ibid.  fol. 

corporation  of  Reading  in  Abp.  Laud's  178.  a.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  273 

A.D.  1640. 


RIGHT  HONOURABLE, 

YOUR  letters  of  the  seventh  of  this  June  with  all  humility  The  mayor  of 
we  have  received :   and  according  to  your  lordship's  com-  ^f^^et" 
mands  therein  we  have  diligently  enquired  and  informed  lords  about 

ourselves,  and  do  find  that  some  guests,  being  recusants,  do  Greene's  inn, 

with  a  com- 
resort  to  the  inn  called  the  Mitre,  and  that  Greene  named  plaint  against 

in  your  lordship's  letter  was  presented  at  the  last  sessions  t!ie  umver- 
-  . ,  .  sity for  m- 

for  a  popish  recusant ;  but  not  many  years  since  he  was  one  vading  the 
of  our  Serjeants,  and  did  then  frequent  the  church.  And  we  t°wn  Privi~ 
finding  that  he,  marrying  the  late  inn-holder's  widow  of  the 
said  inn,  became  owner  thereof  during  the  minority  of  his 
son-in-law ;  and  by  that  means,  it  being  an  ancient  inn  of 
the  inheritance  of  Lincoln  college,  he  keepeth  the  same  inn. 
And  touching  the  authority  and  licensing  the  said  Greene  so 
to  do,  his  majesty's  letters  were  lately  procured  and  sent  to 
us,  that  we  should  not  meddle  in  the  licensing  of  any  person 
to  keep  ale-houses,  or  victualling-houses,  but  that  we  should 
leave  the  same  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  the  justices  that 
were  members  of  the  university.  And  under  pretence  of 
that  letter,  when  we  in  obedience  to  his  majesty's  procla 
mation,  and  his  highness' s  writ  directed  to  us  for  the  ob 
serving  of  Lent,  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  Lent  did  by 
warrant  summon  the  victuallers  of  our  own  body  only  to  be 
come  bound  to  his  majesty  according  to  the  said  proclama 
tion,  the  vice-chancellor  sent  his  bedels  to  the  mayor,  to 
tell  him  that  the  binding  of  victuallers  did  belong  to  the 
vice-chancellor,  and  not  to  the  mayor :  and  thereupon  the 
vice-chancellor  presently  made  a  warrant  to  call  all  the  vic 
tuallers  before  him  at  another  place,  one  hour  before  the 
time  appointed  in  the  mayor's  warrant;  and  amongst  others 
did  take  a  recognizance  of  the  said  Greene,  but  never  certi 
fied  the  same  recognizance,  nor  any  other  recognizances  to 
the  sessions  according  to  the  law.  And  we  make  bold  to 
certify  your  lordships,  that  we  have  only  the  name  of  mayor 
and  magistrates,  but  the  vice-chancellor,  doctors,  and  proc 
tors  do  interpose  in  the  town  affairs :  that  all  our  liberties 
and  privileges  are  much  lessened ;  that  of  late  we  had  much 
ado  to  get  mayor  and  bailiffs  (there  being  so  many  that  paid 

LAUD. 


274  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640.  their  fines  to  refuse)  that  the  city  was  at  last  forced  to  refuse  200 
their  fines,  and  to  compel  them  to  take  upon  them  the  same 
offices.  Whereas  heretofore  when  we  enjoyed  our  liberties 
and  privileges,  the  same  places  were  much  desired.  And  so 
hoping  that,  the  premises  considered,  your  lordships  will  not 
conceive  us  so  careless  therein,  as  in  your  lordships'  letters 
is  expressed,  we  humbly  take  leave,  resting  at  your  lordships' 
service. 

JOHN  SMITH,  Mayor. 

WILLIAM  POTTER,~N 

JOHN  SARE,  / 

?•  Aldermen. 
HENRY  SOUTHAM, 


THOMAS  COOPER,    -' 


Oxon. 
15  Junii,  1610. 


MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  GOOD  LORDSHIP. 

The  mayor  of      ACCORDING  to  the  statute  of  Winchester,  in  the  thirteenth 

Oxford's  let-   vear  of  tne  reign  of  our  late  sovereign  lord  king  Edward  the 

ter  to  the         J_. 

earl  of  Berks,  First*,  and  according  to  certain  orders  and  directions  pub- 

their  steward,  lisned  by  the  body  of  his  highnesses  privy  council,  1630,  a 
the  lords  watch  was  set  by  Mr.  Mayor  and  his  brethren,  with  the  con- 
touching  sent  of  the  vice-chancellor  (these  rebellious  times  requiring 
?12  *ne  same)  Part  °f  which  watch,  by  reason  of  divers  inroads 
and  inlets  (besides  the  gates  of  the  city),  were  appointed  by 
Mr.  Mayor  to  walk  about  their  several  wards  and  liberties 
for  the  safety  thereof,  and  good  order ;  by  which  watch 
straggling  soldiers  and  others  have  been  taken,  and  we  have 
been  safe.  But  Mr.  Proctors  question  the  said  watch,  and 
exact  of  them  40s.  a  time  for  such  their  walking :  and  for 
non-payment  thereof  threaten  to  sue  them  in  the  vice- 
chancellor's  court,  and  send  for  these  watchmen  very  often 
to  their  chambers,  and  make  them  attend  them  there,  and 
have  imprisoned  some  of  the  constables,  and  have  laid  hold 
of  the  watchmen,  and  taken  some  of  them  to  the  prison 
gates  with  an  intent  to  imprison  them;  and  do  say,  that 
Mr.  Mayor  cannot  give  them  power  to  go  from  the  gates  of 

*  [13  Edw.  I.  stat.  ii.  cap.  iv.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  275 

the  said  city,  and  for  these  causes  Mr.  Mayor  is  forced  to  A.D.  1640. 
discharge  the  watch;  but  the  watch  in  St.  Thomas'  parish 
(being  the  entrance  from  Farrington,  where  the  late  re 
bellion  wasy)  he  did  not  discharge,  and  the  last  night 
proctor  Allibond  imprisoned  the  constable  for  setting  the 
same  watch.  All  this  we  will  prove  to  be  true  upon  oath, 
if  it  be  denied :  and  therefore  our  humble  suit  to  your  lord 
ship  is,  that  by  your  good  furtherance  we  may  receive 
the  opinion  of  the  honourable  lords  of  his  majesty's  privy 
council,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  premises ;  and  whether 
Mr.  Mayor  shall  be  freed  of  all  danger  for  not  setting  a 
201  watch  in  these  troublesome  times  or  not.  And  so  craving 
pardon  for  our  so  often  troubling  you,  we  remember  our 
humble  service  to  your  lordship,  and  render  many  thanks, 
always  remaining 

Your  lordship's  to  be  commanded, 

JOHN  SMITH,  Mayor. 
WILLIAM  POTTER,     WILLIAM  CHARLES, 
JOHN  NIXON,  HUMPHREY  WHISTLER, 

THOMAS  SMITH,         HENRY  SOUTHAM, 
LEO.  BOWMAN,  MARTIN  WRIGHT, 

JOHN  SARE,  ROGER  GRIFFIN. 

WALTER  CAVE,    1  Baiuffa< 

WILLIAM  POOLED 

Oxon, 
June  24,  1640. 


SIR, 

THE  mayor  of  Oxford  hath  lately  sent  these  two  letters  My  letters 
above  written,  one  to  the  lords  of  the  council,  and  the  other  chan 
to  the  earl   of  Berks,  to  shew  to  the  lords.      And  I  here  touching 
send  you  the  copies  of  them  both.     The  letter  to  the  lords  2jJJ^* 
is  most  concerning  Greene  and  his  inn ;  in  which  I  do  desire  mayor, 
you  to  make  a  clear  and  distinct  answer  to  these  particulars 


t  [This  was  a  mutiny  of  soldiers  who  A  proclamation  offered  free  pardon  for 

were  raised  in  the  county  of  Dorset  for  such  of  them  as  would  surrender  within 

the  war  against  Scotland.  They  murder-  a  limited  time.    (Rymer,  Feed.  IX.  iii. 

ed  Lieut.  Mohun  one  of  their  officers.  13.)] 

T2 


276  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


AD  1640  -     As  nrst*  whether  this  inn  be  the  inheritance  of 

~  Lincoln  college  ;  and  whether  Greene  is  possessed  of  it  by 
the  marriage  of  the  widow  in  the  right  of  his  son-in-law. 
And  this  the  rather,  because  your  first  information  said,  that 
the  town  authorized  him  to  keep  this  inn.  Secondly,  you 
may  see  by  this  how  angry  they  are  about  their  victuallers, 
where  they  directly  charge  you,  that  amongst  others  you 
took  a  recognizance  of  the  said  Greene,  but  never  certified 
the  said  recognizance,  nor  any  other  to  the  sessions  accord 
ing  to  the  law  :  to  which  also  it  will  be  fit  you  give-  answer. 
Thirdly,  they  say  they  have  only  the  name  of  mayor  and 
magistrates  ;  and  speak  in  all  the  rest  of  their  letter,  as  if  all 
the  town  privileges  were  invaded  by  the  university.  And 
here  I  would  have  you  answer  two  things.  The  one,  that 
they  offer  to  invade  the  university  privileges,  which  I  con 
ceive  is  true.  And  the  other,  whether  so  many  as  they 
mention  did  refuse  the  offices  of  mayor  and  bailiffs  this 
last  year. 

Their  second  letter  is  only  concerning  their  night-watch, 
in  which  I  think  there  is  a  manifest  invading  of  the  univer 
sity  privilege  :  and  proctor  Allibond  is  challenged  by  name. 
But  they  have  taken  a  very  cunning  rise  for  their  business  ; 
for  they  put  it  all  upon  their  care  for  a  watch,  by  reason  of 
the  seditious  tumult  at  Far  ring  ton.  There  is  great  reason 
that  Mr.  Mayor  should  be  freed  from  all  danger  about  202 
setting  of  a  watch,  save  only  such  as  is  his  duty  to  set  ;  but 
the  lords  will  not  give  me  their  opinion,  till  they  have  an 
answer  from  the  university  how  the  mayor's  watch  and  the 
university  privileges  stand  together.  I  pray  therefore  send  a 
full  answer  to  this  particular  especially.  But  I  pray  send 
your  whole  answer  in  such  fair  terms,  as  that  I  may  shew  it 
whole  and  entire  to  the  lords  ;  but  let  the  matter  be  as  full 
home  as  you  can. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
July  3,  1640. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  277 

A.D.  1640. 


MOST  REVEREND, 

IN  the  name  of  the  whole  university,  as  well  as  in  my  The  vice- 
own,   I   return   your   grace  humble  thanks  for  the  notice  ^swer1^ the 
which  by  your  last  letter  you  have  been  pleased  to  give  me  two  letters  of 
of  a  late  information  preferred  by  this  town  unto  the  lords  or  of 

of  the  council  against  us.  To  the  several  branches  whereof 
I  will  make  bold  to  return  a  brief  answer,  that  it  may  the 
more  fully  appear  unto  your  grace,  how  false  in  some,  and 
groundless  in  all  particulars,  the  complaint  is. 

It  is  true  that  Greene's  house  belongs  to  Lincoln  college, 
and  that  he  now  enjoys  it  by  the  right  of  his  wife  :  but  this 
makes  it  not  to  be  an  inn,  that  must  be  done  by  licence, 
which  he  must  either  have  from  the  town  (as  all  other  inns 
as  yet  have),  or  else  he  hath  none.  For  confident  I  am 
that  he  hath  not  any  from  the  university.  By  virtue  of  his 
majesty's  late  gracious  grant  unto  us,  we  license  ale-house 
keepers  and  victuallers.  Above  which  rank  (until  better 
informed  now  by  the  town)  we  conceived  inn-holders  to  be, 
and  therefore  meddled  not  with  them.  If  Greene  came  in 
the  throng  at  the  beginning  of  Lent  to  be  bound  by  me  from 
dressing  of  flesh  (the  which  I  remember  not),  he  came  not 
called.  For  by  my  warrant  I  then  summoned  none  but 
privileged  persons,  and  such  only  of  the  town,  as  by  the 
power  given  the  university  by  his  majesty  had  been  allowed 
by  us. 

The  recognizance  of  those  thus  licensed,  I  confess,  I  re 
turned  not  to  the  quarter  sessions,  and  that  for  this  rea 
son:  his  majesty  by  the  fore-mentioned  letter  was  pleased 
to  grant  us  the  same  authority  over  ale-houses  and  vic 
tuallers,  which  the  university  of  Cambridge  hath.  No  recog 
nizances  are  returned  there :  (whereof  I  am  certain,  for  I 
sent  thither  purposely  in  November  last  to  enquire  :)  and 
therefore  none  by  us.  The  university  there  keeps  them  in 
its  own  power,  and  so  do  we.  The  town-clerk  (who  penned 
the  letter)  does,  I  grant,  by  this  means  lose  some  petty  fees, 
which  (the  poor  men  now  save  in  their  purses)  he  formerly 
(  203  had,  whilst  the  power  of  licensing  was  in  them.  But  this  is 


278  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

AJ).  1640.  a  very  weak  plea  in  a  business  of  such  consequence.  Nor 
indeed  are  those  fees  now  considerable,  we  having  already 
reduced  those  ale-houses  to  five  score,  which  before  were 
three  hundred.  A  great  number :  and  yet  not  to  be  mar 
velled  at,  when  one  man,  this  mayor's  father-in-law,  Bos- 
worth,  a  brewer  and  justice  of  the  town,  was  (as  I  have 
credibly  been  informed)  in  a  very  short  time,  the  means  of 
licensing  an  hundred  for  his  part;  upon  conditions  (which 
tied  them  faster  than  their  recognizance  to  the  king)  that 
they  should  take  all  their  beer  of  him ;  nor  did  he  stand 
single :  others  they  have,  who  trod  after  him  in  the  very 
same  steps ;  which  makes  me  wonder  with  what  face  they 
can  complain  of  the  loss  of  a  power  which  they  so  grossly 
abused. 

And  yet  more,  I  marvel  at  their  complaint  against  us  for 
invading  their  liberties,  when  themselves  are  so  notoriously 
guilty  of  daily  attempts  upon  ours,  without  any  colour  at  all 
of  right  for  their  so  doing.  Witness  their  intrusion  into  the 
office  of  clerk  of  the  market :  their  enquiries  at  their  leets 
touching  the  cleansing  and  paving  of  the  streets:  their 
refusing  to  be  regulated  by  the  vice-chancellor  (as  here 
tofore)  touching  the  price  of  their  candles :  arresting  and 
suing  of  privileged  persons  in  their  city  court :  taking  of 
felons'  goods,  and  interrupting  our  proctors  in  their  night 
walk.  Nor  can  I  amongst  these  grievances  omit  their  pre 
sent  multiplying  of  cottages,  and  inmates  in  all  parts  of  the 
town,  in  despite  of  the  inhibition  to  the  contrary  sent  unto 
them  by  letters  from  the  lords  of  the  council z ;  whereof 
they  have  in  a  friendly  manner  been  put  in  mind  by 
the  university,  both  at  their  public  sessions,  and  at  other 
times. 

If  the  mayors  of  Oxford  have  now  (as  is  pretended)  only 
the  title,  not  the  authority  of  the  place,  they  are  the  more 
to  be  blamed  for  being  so  ambitious  of  it :  I  presume  your 
grace  hath  heard  of  the  violent  and  drunken  competition 
that  was  between  a  brewer  and  baker  at  Michaelmas  was 
twelve-month ;  how  many  days,  and  how  much  beer  was 
spent  in  the  canvass,  to  the  no  small  scandal  of  this  place, 

z  [See  above,  p.  9*,  note  h.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  279 

and  disparagement  of  the  office,  which  was  to  be  procured  A.D.  1640. 
by  such  unworthy  means.  In  the  issue  the  brewer  pre 
vailed,  and  his  beer  wrought  so  well  with  the  commoners 
the  whole  year  after,  that  by  the  strength  thereof  his 
brother  (the  present  mayor)  came  to  succeed  him  in  the 
place ;  that  none  either  then  or  since  have  fined  for  refusing 
the  office,  either  of  mayor  or  bailiffs,  though  in  their  letter 
they  seem  to  pretend  the  contrary. 

The  mayor  pretending  the  statute  of  Edward  the  First  for 
his  night-watch,  I  did  not  oppose  it ;  though  I  saw  little  use 
of  it  here,  and  knew  this  place  to  be  exempt  by  an  act  Eliz. 
13  a,  which  confirms  all  our  charters  unto  us,  notwithstand 
ing  any  acts  of  parliament  whatsoever.  That  statute  ap 
points  the  watch  to  stand  at  the  gates ;  where  had  they 
kept  themselves,  the  proctors  had  not  questioned  them.  But 
when  they  took  the  boldness  to  walk  the  streets  to  examine 
scholars  of  all  conditions,  to  enter  houses,  and  search  what 
204 company  there,  then  they  thought  it  high  time  to  appear, 
and  stand  up  in  defence  of  their  own  authority,  and  the  pri 
vilege  of  the  university.  Your  grace,  having  been  proctor 
long  since  b,  cannot  but  know  that  the  night-watch  hath  of 
old  belonged  to  the  university,  and  was  so  confirmed  unto 
us,  as  our  right  by  the  lords,  at  an  hearing  before  them 
betwixt  the  university  and  town,  1612,  Jacobi  Decimoc. 
Nor  since  then  have  the  townsmen  disturbed  it  at  any  time 
before  now,  when  our  unwillingness  to  trouble  either  your 
grace  or  the  lords  of  the  council  with  petty  complaints  in 
these  busy  times,  hath  so  heartened  them,  that  nothing  will 
now  satisfy  them,  unless  they  may  trample  our  charters 
under  their  feet,  and  give  laws  to  them  by  whom  they  live. 
For  the  particular  passage  betwixt  one  of  the  proctors  and 
the  constable  of  St.  Thomas'  parish  I  am  a  stranger,  and 
therefore  have  sent  your  grace  the  sum  of  it  under  the  proc 
tor's  own  hand. 

A  second  reason  (omitted  before  through  haste)  for  my 
not  bringing  to  the  quarter  sessions  the  recognizances  which 
I  have  taken  of  victuallers  and  ale-houses,  is  this;  because 
his  majesty  hath  by  our  charter  given  to  the  university  all 

a  [13  Eliz.  cap.  xxix.]  c  [See  Wood's  Annals,  p.  308.] 

b  [Admitted  May  4,  1603.] 


280  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

AD.  1640.  the  fines,  amercements,  and  profits  that  accrue  from  themd. 
Since  I  began  to  write,  Greene  hath  been  asked,  and  he 
makes  answer,  that  he  keeps  his  inn  by  virtue  of  a  licence 
from  the  town ;  but  an  ancient  one  it  is. 

A.  FREWEN. 

Oxon, 
July  6,  1640. 


Proctor  Alii-  WHEREAS  it  hath  been  suggested  by  Mr.  Mayor  of  Oxon 
to^hat^hlli  *°  ^ie  l°rds  °f  hig  majesty's  most  honourable  privy  council, 
concerns  him  that  I  committed  the  constable  of  St.  Thomas'  parish  for 
of  O^onT701  settinS  his  watcnJ  ii;  is  m7  humble  suit  that  the  honourable 
letter.  board  will  be  pleased  to  take  notice,  that  he  was  committed 

for  these  reasons  following : 

First,  for  taking  upon  him  (to  the  great  prejudice  of  the 
privileges  of  the  university)  the  search  of  houses.  A  thing 
not  belonging  to  the  officers  of  the  town  but  in  cases  of 
treason  and  felony. 

Secondly,  for  an  outrage  committed  by  his  watch  upon 
one  Wallis  in  his  own  lodging,  he  himself  being  at  the  same 
time  at  the  door. 

Thirdly,  for  doing  and  suffering  these  things  beyond  the 
bound  of  his  walk. 

For  these  reasons  above  specified  I  committed  him  to  the  205 
castle,  yet  so  as  a  delinquent,  not  as  a  constable,  I  not  being 
able  to  know  his  office  by  his  bare  word  without  his  mace. 

PETER  ALLIBOND, 
Proctor  of  the  university  of  Oxon. 

Oxon, 
July  6,  1640. 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

Thanks  from       INTER  ardua  et  clamosa  reipublicse  negotia,  inter  bellorum 

the  univer-  .,  ,.    „ 

sity  for  set-     strepitus  et  populi  fremitus,  etiam  nunc  tibi  vacat  animus, 

d  [See  abridgment  of  charter,  §§  10,  11.   Wood,  Annals,  p.  400.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  281 

detineri  minoribus  academiae  curis?     Siccine  acer  es  in  exe-    A.D.  1640. 


quendo  proposito,  ut  benefaciendi  horam  ne  tantillum  differas,  tling  my 

quin  earn  celeri  manu  prehensam  e  flammis  arripias  ?    Cir-  Arabic  lec- 

^  ..  ture  for  per- 

cumquaque  dum  sonant  arma,  totique  sumus  in  m  ambus,  petuity. 

quid  nobis   interim  cum  orientalium  linguis  ?    nisi   forsan 
musarum  armatura  sit  penitus  verbosa.     Stylo  quidem  uti- 
mur,   sed   mcruento;   calamum   stringimus,   sed   sine  arcu. 
Ideoque  provide  curavit  munificentia  vestra,  ne  ullo  carea- 
mus  apparatu,  qui  vim  aut  splendorem  afferat  qualicunque 
huic  belli  scholastici  discipline  et  castris  fulminantis  linguae. 
Gazophylacium   Bodleio-Laudanum   mirifice   ditasti   appor- 
tando  Arabiam  in  Oxonium :  at  postquam  ab  oriente  spo- 
liato  hue  appulit  literaria  supellex,  missa  solis  in  libris  lin 
gua  substitit  adhuc  muta,  utpote  ignotis  characteribus  impe- 
dita :  mox  ubi  accessit  salarii  clavis,  et  nimis  doctam  resera- 
turus  Barbariem  prselector,   soluta  est  lingua.      Verum  et 
nondum  facta  est  immortalis,  cum  ex  unico  vestro   (quod 
tamen  infinitum  optamus)  penderet  filo.     Huic  demum  suc- 
currit  incommodo  munincentiee  vestrse,,  quse  nunquam  deficit, 
quam  csepti  ineluctabilis  nunquam  poenitet,  manus  ultima; 
et  pensionem  annuam  consolidavit  in  glebam  hereditariam. 
Nunc   omnes  Arabum   divitias  unum   hoc  vestrum   linguse 
Arabicse  patrimonium  longe  superat.      Dominos  enim  pri 
vates  permutant  fortunse,  nunc  hunc,  nunc  ilium  accipiunt ; 
at  Lingua  publica  gaudet  firmo  inseparabilis  prsedii  susten- 
taculo.     Ut  seternam  nos  doceat  gratitudinem,  seternamque 
tibi  gloriam  refundat.     Vivacitatem  hanc  muniunt  pruden- 
tissimse,  quas  etiam  sanxisti,  leges :   nihil  enim  languidum^ 
nihil  moriturum  largiris;  sed  beneficiis  vestris  omnino  sub- 
est  anima,  quse  et  nobis  utendi  facultatem  suppeditat,  et  sibi 
vitam  conservat.  Necesse  est  itaque,  cum  a  te  facti  simus  hoc 
modo  Arabici,  vel  felices  nos  esse  vel  petrosos;  felices  qui 
dem,  si  mandatis  vestris  pie  obsequamur,   sin  minus,  mi- 
sere   petrosos   et   ingratos.      O    amabiles    angustias !      quae 
probitatem   nostram,    et  eruditionem    tarn   arete    catenant, 
ut   in   progressu    literario    neutiquam    possimus    esse   feli 
ces,    nisi    genio   vestro  morigeri.      Tales   itaque    futuri    su 
mus  (quid  enim  utilius?)    religiose  tales,  tarn  vestri  causa, 
ne   pereat   monumentum   amplissimi   conditoris,    turn   nos- 


282 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1640.    tra,  ne  pereamus  nos,  tui  altera  monumenta,   quibus  illud206 
conditur. 

Sanctitatis  vestrse  cultrix  humillima, 

ACADEM.  OXON. 

E  domo  nostrce  convocationis, 
Julii  6,  1640e. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri  ac  domino,  Gulielmo  archi- 
episcopo  Cantuarensi,  et  academise  Oxon.  cancellario  hono- 
ratissimo.] 


The  council's 
warrant  for 
the  vice- 
chancellor 
and  the 
mayor. 


Berkshire 
soldiers. 


THERE  was  a  warrant  respectively  sent  to  the  vice-chancellor 
and  the  mayor  of  Oxford,  dated  July  the  10th,  to  require  both 
of  them,  and  the  proctor  Allibond,  to  appear  before  the  lords 
of  the  council  the  22nd  of  this  present  July,  to  make  proof 
of  what  was  alleged  on  either  side  against  each  other  in  the 
former  letters. 

Berkshire  soldiers,  who  were  upon  their  marchf  as  far  as 
Brackley,  recoiled  back  upon  us  yesterday,  and  were  last 
night  our  unwelcome  guests.  Their  captains  have  been  with 
me  for  assistance  according  to  the  proclamation s,  and  are 
now  busy  in  calling  their  scattered  forces  together  again. 


Oxford, 
Wednesday  the  15th  of  July,  1640. 


A.  FREWEN. 


f  [Towards  Scotland.] 


e  [The    entry    in    the    register    is 
"  Lectae   sunt   has  literae   in   assimila- 

tione  parva  6to  Julii  1640."     The  date      hending    and    punishing    of    soldiers 
given  in  the  text  does  not  occur.     The       pressed  for  his  majesty's  service.'  Ry- 


['  A  proclamation  for  the  appre 


letter  was  voted  in  convocation  July  2. 
Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  179.  a.] 


mer,  Feed.  IX.  iii.  13.J 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD. 


283 


A.D.  1640. 


AT  WHITEHALL  THE  22ND  OF  JULY,  1640. 


PRESENT 


THE  KING'S  MAJESTY. 


LORD  ARCHBISHOP  OP  CANT. 
LORD  KEEPER, 
LORD  TREASURER, 
LORD  PRIVY  SEAL, 
LORD  DUKE  or  LENNOX, 
LORD  MARQUIS  HAMILTON, 
LORD  ADMIRAL, 


EARL  OP  BERKS, 

EARL  OF  HOLLAND, 

EARL  OF  TRAQUARE, 

LORD  GORING, 

LORD  COTTINGTON, 

MR.  TREASURER, 

MR.  SECRETARY  WINDEBANKE, 


The  order  of 
the  council 
concerning 
the  difference 
between  the 
vice-chancel 
lor  and  the 
mayor. 


SIR  THO.  HOWE. 

WHEREAS  his  majesty  (being  present  at  the  board)  did  this 
day  hear  the  complaints  of  the  mayor,  recorder,  and  others 
of  the  city  of  Oxford  expressed  in  two  letters,  the  one  of  the 
15th  of  June  to  the  board,  the  other  of  the  4th  of  June  to 
the  earl  of  Berks,  a  member  of  the  board,  concerning  their 
liberties,  in  the  presence  of  the  vice-chancellor,  and  other 
doctors  of  the  university,  and  Mr.  Allibond,  one  of  the  proc 
tors,  whom  the  said  complaint  did  concern. 

207  After  mature  debate  it  was  ordered,  that  the  university  of 
Oxford,  according  to  his  majesty's  gracious  letter,  shall  have 
the  sole  licensing  of  victualling-houses  in  that  city  and  sub 
urbs,  in  like  manner  as  the  university  of  Cambridge  hath  in 
the  town  of  Cambridge :  and  for  that  purpose  it  is  ordered 
by  his  majesty,  with  advice  of  the  board,  that  the  commission 
for  the  peace  in  Oxford  shall  be  renewed,  and  the  vice-chan 
cellor  only  made  of  the  quorum.  Secondly,  for  the  com 
plaint  of  the  building  of  cottages,  it  is  ordered,  that  the 
vice-chancellor  and  the  mayor  shall  make  several  certificates 
of  all  the  new  cottages  built  within  twenty  years,  and  shall 
distinguish  which  of  them  have  been  built  by  privileged  per 
sons  upon  college  lands,  and  which  by  townsmen,  and  which 
by  privileged  persons  upon  the  town  waste  by  their  leave : 
upon  return  of  which  certificates  their  lordships  will  give 
such  farther  order  therein  as  shall  be  fit.  Thirdly,  it  was 
ordered  that  his  majesty's  attorney  and  solicitor-general 


284 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1640.  shall  examine  how  the  orders,  set  down  by  Mr.  Justice  Jones 
for  preventing  of  disputes  and  controversies  between  the 
university  and  city  of  Oxford,  have  been  observed,  and  by 
whom  there  hath  been  any  defailer  therein  admitted.  Upon 
certificate  whereof  their  lordships  will  take  such  order  as 
shall  be  fit  for  the  due  observance  of  the  same.  Fourthly, 
it  was  ordered  that  according  to  the  statute  of  Winchester11, 
those  to  whom  it  belongeth  ought  to  set  watches  at  the  gates 
of  the  city,  according  to  the  said  statute ;  and  that  the  said 
watch  continue  there,  without  walking  of  the  streets,  or 
moving  from  their  station,  except  it  be  for  the  suppressing 
of  any  sudden  tumult,  or  other  malefactors,  whereof  there  is 
not  time  to  give  notice  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  the  proc 
tors  of  the  said  university.  Lastly,  it  is  ordered  that  the 
constable  committed  to  prison  shall  be  delivered,  but  not 
without  paying  of  fees1. 


Dr.  Potter 
chosen  my 
vice-chan 
cellor  J. 


AFTER  MY  HEARTY  COMMENDATIONS, 

DR.  FREWEN  hath  now  borne  the  troublesome  office  of  the 
vice-  chancellorship  of  that  university  for  the  space  of  two 
whole  years,  which  is  the  time  now  usually  given  [for  one 
man]  to  execute  that  office  :  and  is  certainly  weight  enough 
for  any  man  to  bear  so  long.  In  the  discharge  of  this  office 
he  hath  through  the  whole  course  of  his  time  carried  himself 
with  great  care,  moderation,  and  prudence  ;  and  that  as  well 
in  all  businesses  which  relate  to  the  town,  as  in  those  which 
look  more  immediately  upon  the  university.  And  among 
other  great  services  performed  by  him,  I  cannot  forbear  to 
single  out  one,  and  here  publicly  to  give  him  thanks  for  it, 
even  above  the  rest  :  and  that  is  the  great  pains  he  hath 
taken,  and  the  singular  dexterity  which  he  hath  used  in 
bringing  the  statutes  concerning  the  examinations  into  use 
and  settlement.  Which  statute,  I  dare  be  bold  to  say,  being 
continued  and  kept  up  in  the  same  vigour,  to  which  it  is  now 
raised  by  his  care  and  providence,  will  be  of  such  singular 


h  [13  Edw.  I.,  stat.  ii.  cap.  iv.] 
[Tin's   maintenance   of  the  privi- 


History  of  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap. 
xxx.  p.  296  in  marg.] 


leges  of  the  univ.  by   the  Abp.  was 

brought  against  him  at  his  trial.     See      1640.    lleg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  179.  b. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  285 

208  use,  as  that,  for  my  part,  I  cannot  easily  tell  whether  it  will    A.D.  1640. 
be  greater  honour  or  benefit  to  that  university ;  but  sure  I 
am,  it  will  be  the  one  by  the  other,  if  it  be  kept  up  to  the 
life,  as  I  hope  it  shall  be. 

Dr.  Fre wen's  time  being  thus  happily  spent  both  for  his 
own  honour,  and  the  university's  good,  the  care  now  lies 
upon  me  to  name  another,  to  take  up  that  burden  which  he 
lays  down,  and  to  go  in  those  steps  which  he  hath  trod  out 
before  him.  And  I  thank  God  for  it,  there  is  such  choice  of 
able  men  in  that  place  for  this  service,  that  I  cannot  be  to 
seek  whom  to  name  unto  it.  But  I  have  for  the  present 
thought  upon  Dr.  Potter,  dean  of  Worcester,  and  provost  of 
Queen's  college k,  as  a  man  whom  I  know  to  be  of  great  in 
tegrity  and  sufficiency  for  that  place,  and  of  whose  care  and 
industry  therein  I  am  very  confident.  To  him,  together  with 
the  office,  I  do  more  especially  recommend  the  care  of  the 
examinations  in  point  of  learning,  and  a  most  strict  watch 
fulness  and  observance  against  all  haunting  of  taverns  or 
any  other  meetings,  private  or  public,  which  may  any  way 
help  to  suppress  the  base  sin  of  drunkenness,  the  mother  or 
the  nurse  of  almost  all  other  distempers,  which  may  bring 
obloquy  upon  that  place.  These  are  therefore  to  let  you 
know,  that  I  do  hereby  nominate  and  choose  Dr.  Potter  to 
be  my  vice-chancellor  for  this  year  ensuing :  and  do  hereby 
pray  and  require  you  to  allow  of  this  my  choice,  and  to  give 
him  all  due  respect  and  assistance  in  all  things  necessary  for 
that  government,  and  more  especially  in  the  two  particulars 
above  named;  that  so  sobriety  and  good  manners,  as  well  as 
learning,  may  flourish  in  that  place.  And  thus  not  doubting 
of  your  readiness  and  willing  obedience  herein,  I  leave  both 
him  and  you  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  rest 

Your  loving  friend  and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
July  24,  1640. 

[To  my  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors,  the 
proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  university 
of  Oxford.] 

k  [Christopher  Potter.  He  nomi-  and  Sheldon  his  pro-vice-chancellors, 
nated  Doctors  Pinke,  Tolsoii,  Baylie,  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  179.  b.] 


286 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1640. 


Concerning 
cottages. 


AND  for  the  future,  I  pray,  let  not  the  town  so  much  as 
begin  to  lay  the  foundation  of  any  cottage  or  any  other  house 
whatsoever  in  any  place,  but  send  me  word  of  it  presently, 
that  I  may  acquaint  the  lords  with  it,  and  command  a  stay1. 

W.  CANT. 

August  3,  1640. 


Another 
breach  of  the 
town's  upon 
the  univer 
sity's  privi 
lege,  by  tax 
ing  coat  and 
conduct 
money  upon 
privileged 
persons,  yea 
and  upon 
some  doctors 
of  physic. 


UPON  a  late  warrant  from  the  deputy-lieutenants  the  209 
mayor  hath  freshly  pressed  and  set  out  ten  new  soldiers. 
Coat  and  conduct-money  for  these  in  their  several  parishes 
was  taxed  upon  all  privileged  persons,  not  only  stationers, 
apothecaries,  that  trade  and  use  merchandize,  (who  are  more 
liable,)  but  upon  doctors,  Clayton"1,  Sanders",  Bambridge0, 
and  all  physicians,  upon  Mr.  Crossep  our  beadle,  on  our 
butlers,  manciples,  cooks,  who  are  our  immediate  servants, 
and  deal  not  with  any  trade.  All  profess  themselves  very 
willing  to  advance  his  majesty's  service,  especially  in  these 
base  and  broken  times ;  yet  they  hope,  by  your  grace's 
favour,  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  that  privilege,  which,  being 
anciently  granted  to  our  university,  was  of  late  confirmed  by 
his  majesty's  charter q,  and  is  enjoyed  by  the  other  univer 
sity.  At  my  entreaty  all  of  them  in  a  manner  have  paid ; 
but  their  humble  suit  unto  your  grace  is,  that  hereafter  their 


1  [The  erection  of  cottages  without 
the  sanction  of  the  chancellor  or  vice- 
chancellor  was  prohibited  by  the  Caro 
line  charter,  §  15.  Wood,  Annals,  p. 
400.  See  a  letter  of  the  council  on  the 
subject,  above,  p.  94,  note  h.] 

m  [Thomas  Clayton,  master  of  Pem 
broke.] 

a  [John  Saunders,  principal  of  St. 
Mary  hall,  afterwards  provost  of 
Oriel.] 

0  [John  Bainbridge,  originally  of 
Emanuel  coll.  Cambr.  He  was  Jan. 
9,  1620,  appointed  by  Sir  H.  Savile  his 


first  professor  of  geometry;  incorpo 
rated  July  7  in  the  same  year  as  M.D., 
and  became  a  member  of  Merton  college. 
He  died  Nov.  3, 1643,  and  was  buried  in 
the  college  chapel.  He  printed  many 
works  on  astronomy,  and  left  several 
MS.  dissertations  on  the  same  subject 
to  Abp.  Usher,  which  are  now  in  Trinity 
coll.  Dublin.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  67, 
68.)] 

P  [Matthew  Crosse,  superior  bedel 
of  law.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv.  203.)] 

i  [See  Abridgment  of  Charter,  §  19. 
Wood,  Annals,  p.  401.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  287 

now  readiness  may  not  prejudice  them,  nor  be  drawn  into    A.D.  1640. 
consequence. 

CHR.  POTTER. 

Oxford, 
August  4,  1640. 


UPON  the  death  of  young  Divall,  whom  I  made  toll-gatherer  James  Penne 
in  Oxford  after  his  father,  I  nominated  James  Penne,  man-  tShr 
ciple  of  St.  John  Baptist  college,  to  succeed  him.    This  I  did  in  Oxford, 
by  the  advice  of  the  vice-chancellor  and  some  heads,  who     ^      ' 
thought  him  a  very  fit  person  for  that  place.     And  I  farther 
ordered,  that  out  of  the  profits  of  the  place  he  should  allow 
the  poor  widow  of  old  Divall  yearly  ten  pounds. 

W.  CANT. 

September  4,  1640. 


UPON  Sunday  last,  being  Sept.  6,  there  were  two  seditious  Two  seditious 
sermons  preached  at  St.  Mary's :  the  one  in  the  morning  by 
Mr.  Johnson  of  Magdalen  college1*,  which  was  concerning  and  Mr. 
universal  grace,  and  contrary  to  his  majesty's  declaration  in  Wilkinson, 
that  behalf.    The  other  in  the  afternoon  in  a  very  bitter  way 
against  some  ceremonies  of  the  Church,  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  of 
Magdalen  hall.     The  vice-chancellor  gave  me  notice  of  these 
by  his  letters  of  September  7th,  with  a  promise  that  he  would 
see  them  both  censured ;  and  I  writ  back  unto  him,  that  he 
should  not  fail  to  see  it  done,  according  to  either  of  their 
faults  respectively. 

W.  CANT. 

September  11,  1640. 

r  [John  Johnson.  Probably  the'same      Bible.  See  Todd's  Life  of  Bp.  Walton, 
person  of  both  those  names,  who  as-      vol.  i.  pp.  311 — 313.] 
sisted  Walton  in  editing  the  Polyglott 


A.D.  1640. 


288 


THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 


THE  vice-chancellor  sends  me  farther  word  in  his  letters  210 
of  September  14th,  that  Wilkinson's  sermon  was  very  base 
and  factious,  and  merely  intended  to  make  a  party  for  the 
Scots. 

W.  CANT. 

September  14,  1640. 


son. 


The  recanta-  THE  vice-chancellor  according  to  this  my  direction  con- 
to^IrTohn-  vented  both  tne  delinquents  before  the  heads ;  and,  with 
their  consent,  enjoined  them  to  submit,  and  make  the  re 
tractations  following,  viz. 

Whereas  I,  John  Johnson,  fellow  of  Magdalen  college, 
preaching  at  St.  Mary's  upon  Sunday  September  6th  [last] 
in  the  forenoon,  did  unadvisedly  throughout  my  sermon  in 
sist  upon  the  proof  of  universal  redemption  and  universal 
grace,  not  without  some  bitterness  against  the  contrary 
opinions,  hereby  disobeying  the  declaration  and  command 
of  his  majesty  [our  most  religious  sovereign  lord  the  king], 
to  the  disturbance  of  the  peace  of  the  Church  and  of  the 
university,  I  do  hereby  acknowledge  my  offence,  and  my 
sorrow  for  it,  humbly  desiring  that  this  my  acknowledg 
ment  may  be  accepted :  and  I  do  promise  for  the  time  to 
come  to  conform  myself  in  all  humble  obedience  to  his 
majesty's  said  declaration,  and  always  to  prefer  the  public 
quiet  and  peace  of  the  Church  before  any  doubtful  and  dis 
putable  opinion  of  mine  own. 

Whereas  I,  Henry  Wilkinson,  of  Magdalen  hall,  preaching 
at  St.  Mary's  upon  Sunday  September  6th  in  the  afternoon, 
did  in  several  passages  of  my  sermon  uncharitably  and  in 
discreetly  glance  at  my  superiors,  and  other  conformable 
members  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  at  men  lukewarm, 
and  wanting  zeal,  and  inclining  to  favour  Romish  super 
stitions  and  ancient  heresies ;  and  also  did  indirectly  accuse 
the  present  condition  of  this  Church,  as  if  it  never  fared 
worse  with  good  men,  and  as  if  goodness  were  discounte- 


Mr.  Wilkin 
son's  recan 
tation  re 
fused. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  289 

nanced,  discouraged,  and  punished,  &c.  I  do  hereby  un-  A.D.  1640. 
feignedly  confess  my  error  and  my  sorrow  for  it :  and  I  do 
also  promise  ever  hereafter,  both  in  my  sermons  and  dis 
courses  in  public  and  in  private,  to  carry  myself  with  all 
obedience  and  conformity  to  the  public  government,  being 
careful  to  give  no  just  offence  or  scandal  to  the  Church  or 
my  superiors. 

Upon  the  tender  of  these  two  submissions  Johnson  re-  Wilkinson 
canted  according  to  the  form,  and  so  was  dismissed s ;  but Sl 
Wilkinson  obstinately  refused,  and  so  was  suspended  from 
all  execution  of  this  priestly  function  within  the  university 
and  precincts  thereof,  according  to  the  statute,  (coram  prce- 
fectis]  September  14th*. 

I  am  not  willing  by  an  over-strictness  to  fasten  discourage-  A  son  of 
ment  upon  desert ;  and  yet  I  cannot  but  fear  on  the  other  ^secl  with8" 
side  what  a  loose  hand  may  work,  by  giving  an  easy  way  to  for  one  term 
dispensations  :  therefore  in  this  case  if  the  young  youth u  of  £ 
Christ  Church,  whom  you  mentioned,  be  of  such  known  de-  arts, 
sert,  and  that  he  wants  but  one  term,  I  shall  leave  him  to 
yourself  and  the  heads :  yet  with  my  earnest  and  hearty 
desire,  that  you  be  very  careful  in  all  dispensations.     And 
I  pray,  now  term  is  beginning,  be  as  careful  for  the  uphold 
ing  of  all  exercises,  and  all  discipline  there;  and  especially 
the  examinations  and  the  manners  of  the  younger  sort.    For 
if  any  thing  prove  to  be  amiss  in  these  broken  times,  both 
you  and  I  shall  be  sure  to  hear  of  it,  and  perhaps  where  we 
would  not. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
October  7,  1640. 


8  [See  Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  180.  a.]  to  attend  the  house,  Dec.  23;  Wilkin- 
*  [Henry  Wilkinson,  tutor  of  Magd.  son  was  released  from  his  suspension, 
hall,  and  divinity  reader.  He  was  sus-  and  ordered  to  print  his  sermon.  (Nal- 
pended  by  the  vice-chancellor  with  the  son's  Collections,  i.  700.)  It  is  entitled 
consent  of  Doctors  Radcliffe,  Tolson,  '  A  Sermon  against  lukewarmness  in 
Mansel,  Baylie,  Sheldon,  and  Lawrence,  Religion,'  on  Rev.  iii.  16.  Lond. 
till  he  recanted.  (Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  180.  1641.  He  hecame  a  memher  of  the 
b.)  In  the  following  November  he  ap-  assembly  of  divines,  fellow  of  Magd., 
pealed  to  the  long  parliament.  On  the  canon  of  Ch.  Ch.,  and  Margaret  pro- 
report  of  the  committee  of  religion,  to  fessor  of  divinity.  He  was  ejected  for 
whom  his  sermon  and  the  comments  of  non- conformity  at  the  Restoration, 
the  vice-chancellor  were  referred,  Dr.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iii.  1039.)] 
Potter,  the  vice-chancellor,  was  ordered  u  [This  'young  youth  of  such 
LAUD.  TT 


290  THE   HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640. 


SIR, 

Examina-  IN  the  end  of  Dr.  Frewen's  second  year  he  had  observed 

ven^collusion  ^ow  *n  tne  Srea^  an^  useful  business  of  the  examinations  of 
in  them.  A  proceeders,  there  might  be  a  collusion ;  (though  as  yet  he 
JU^rsV^h^  thought  it  was  never  practised ;)  he  sent  me  word  of  it,  and 
vice-chan-  withal  proposed  this  way  of  remedy.  The  collusion,  which 
cellor.  jie  feare(j  might  be,  was  by  plotting  before-hand  between  the 

examinants  and  the  candidates,  which  by  which  should  be 
examined,  and  consequently  each  candidate  might  easily 
know  upon  what  questions  he  should  be  examined,  and  pro 
vide  accordingly.  The  remedy  which  he  proposed  against 
this  was,  (and  he  practised  it  the  last  term  of  his  office,) 
that  the  candidates  should  be  examined  in  such  order  as  the 
proctor  should  rank  them  in  a  paper  to  be  set  up  over  the 
seat  (where  the  examinants  sit  in  the  school)  every  day  im 
mediately  before  the  exercise  begins.  By  this  means  the 
candidates  being  uncertain  where  they  should  pitch,  must 
either  tamper  with  all  three  examiners,  or  run  a  very  great 
hazard  of  missing  their  end,  if  they  should  apply  themselves 
but  to  one  only.  This  remedy  I  did  then  approve,  and  your 
predecessor  put  it  in  practice.  And  I  desire  you  heartily  to 
speak  with  him  about  it,  and  to  pursue  it  with  all  care  and 
diligence ;  and  not  to  suffer  that  exercise,  which  will  bring 
so  much  present  honour  to  the  university,  and  so  much  fu 
ture  benefit  to  the  Church,  either  to  fail  or  to  be  abused  by 
any  collusion  whatsoever. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
October  16,  1640. 


known  desert'  was  John  Fell,  after-  eleven  years  old.  (Wood,  Ath.  Ox.  iv. 

wards  dean  of  Ch.  Ch.  and  Bp.  of  Ox-  193.)     The  dispensation  spoken  of  in 

ford.     He  was  presented  by  his  father  the  text  was  granted   in   convocation 

to  a  studentship  of  Ch.  Ch.  when  only  Oct.  17.   Reg.  Conv.  R.  fol.  152.  b.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  291 

A.D.  1640. 


212      THE  last  week  I  was  present,  and  both  the  proctors,  at  The  vice- 

both  the  days  of  examinations.     The  school  was  full;   and  chancell°r's 
*  3/nswcr  to 

the  invention  will  be  of  singular  use  for  the  encouragement  this  passage 


of  studies,  the  honour  of  learning.  and  the  discountenancing  a<>u         ex> 

°'  °  animations. 

of  ignorance.      So  that   now  the  Church  is  more  like  to 

nourish  with  peace,  as  well  as  learning,  when  it  shall  be 
freed  from  those  ignorant  bold  bayerds,  which  first  break 
into  it  by  symonyv,  and  after  disorder  it  by  faction.  I  will 
therefore  have  an  especial  eye  to  the  exercise,  and  either  my 
self  or  the  proctors  be  usually  there. 

CHR.  POTTER,  Vice-chan. 

Octob.  19,  1640. 


THE  outer  room  before  the  convocation-house  is  now  The  room  be- 
handsomely  fitted  both  for  our  courts,  and  for  the  meeting  ^Jj^ °n~ 
of  the  heads,  with  a  general  approbation  and  small  charge,  house  fitted 

CHR.  POTTER.          £r  courts> 

Octob.  26,  1640  °' 


I  HAVE  already  gathered  a  pretty  purse  of  mulcts  from  Night  walks 

taverns  and  such  places  in  my  night  and  day  walks,  and  *^e  Vic1e~  , 

J  *  chancellor's 

mean  to  continue  the  course  :    though  I  doubt  not   that  care. 

some  of  our  back  friends  in  parliament  will  give  us  but  lit 
tle  thanks :  some  there,  perhaps  many,  rather  desiring  we 
should  be  guilty,  that  they  might  with  more  colour  use  us  as 
they  did  the  monasteries.  God  preserve  this  miserable  na 
tion  from  sacrilege  and  atheism  :  to  which  I  say  Amen. 

I  hanged  up  last  week  this  fair  and  short  monition  follow 
ing  at  the  door  of  the  congregation;  and  it  hath  already 

v  [Simony  appears  to  have  been  very  and  also  Abp.  Laud's  remarks  in  the 

prevalent  at  this  period.    See  frequent  Hist,  of  his  Troubles  and  Trial,  chap, 

mention  of  it  in  the  forms  of  presenta-  xxvi.  p.  266  in  marg.] 
tion  to  benefices  in  Rymer's  Fcedera, 


292 


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 


A.D.  1640.   brought  in  many  miniver-hoods,  and  will  in  short  time  pre- 
—  vail  (I  hope)  with  all,  without  any  word  or  murmur  of  con 
tradiction. 

"  Vetustissima  hujus  universitatis  consuetude  est,  ut  magis- 
tri  regentes,  toto  regentise  suse  tempore  in  omni  conventu 
academico,  prsecipue  vero  in  congregationibus  et  convoca- 
tionibus,  caputiis  ex  minuto-vario  (vulgo  miniver)  et  non 
sericis,  induti  intersint.  Atque  ideo  D.  Vicecancellarius 
monet  omnes  et  singulos  magistros  regentes,  et  insuper  col- 
legiorum  aularumque  decanos,  seu  pra3sentatores,  ut  hujus 
consuetudinis  et  juramenti  sui  memores  in  posterum  caputio 
ordini  suo  et  huic  domui  competente  hue  semper  accedant : 
sub  prena  in  statutis  prsescriptaV 

CH.  POTTER. 

Octob.  26,  1640. 


w  [The  statute  (Corp.  Stat.,  tit.  xiv. 
sect.  3,)  says,  caputiis,  sive  e  serico 
sive  e  minuto-vario,  obversis ;  from 
this  place  it  appears  that  the  miniver 
hood,  now  worn  by  the  proctors,  is  the 
regents'  hood,  the  silk,  the  non-regents'. 
The  last  instance  probably  of  the  mini 
ver  hood  being  thus  worn  is  recorded 
in  the  following  letter,  from  Mr.  Bishop 
to  Dr.  Charlett,  printed  "from  the  ori 
ginal  in  the  Bodleian  Library,"  in 
Oxoniana,  vol.  iii.  p.  161. 

May  11,  1721. 
Rev.  Sir, 

Yours  of  the  4th,  7th,  and  8th,  came 
to  me  regularly.  Your  brother  Gandy 
tells  me,  Dr.  Crowder,  when  he  was 
dean  of  the  college,  often  told  him  a 
proctor's  hood,  as  dean  of  the  coll. 
(Oriel)  was  his  proper  habit  in  congre 
gation,  &c.,  upon  which  Mr.  Gandy 
told  him,  that  if  the  Dr.,  viz.,  Dr. 
Crowder,  would  give  him  such  a  hood 
he  would  use  it  in  congregation,  &c. 
Upon  which  the  doctor  sent  him  one, 
but  so  bad  a  one  that  it  would  scarce 
hang  together ;  however,  he  wore  it 
three  or  four  times  in  the  congregation 
house,  as  dean  of  Oriel,  (Dr.  Haughton 
then  vice-chancellor,)  and  had  con 
tinued  it  during  the  remainder  of  the 
year  as  dean  of  the  coll.,  if  it  had  been 
fit  to  wear  longer;  that  Dr.  Haughton 
owned  it  was  the  proper  hood  of  a  dean, 
as  dean  of  a  college,  which  they  ought 
to  wear  upon  proposing  or  presenting 
to  degrees  ;  but  that  it  being  chargeable 
to  buy,  he  believed  was  at  first  the  rea 


son  of  its  being  dispensed  with  for  not 
being  worn,  and  at  last  of  its  being 
totally  laid  aside,  and  that  before  or 
after  him,  he,  viz.,  Mr.  Gandy,  says, 
"  he  remembers  no  one  dean  wore  such 
a  hood,  viz.,  a  proctor's  hood."  The 
next  sentence  probably  records  the  last 
instance  of  the  wide  sleeved  gown 
being  worn  by  masters  of  arts  in  Ox 
ford.  "  As  for  the  librarian,  he,  Mr. 
Gandy,  very  well  remembers  the  li 
brarian  upon  public  days  wore  a  proc 
tor's  gown,  as  his  proper  habit,  but 
what  was  his  hood  as  librarian,  he  has 
forgot,  but  as  he  thinks  will  appear  in 
Loggan's  cuts  of  the  habits  of  all  de 
grees  and  denominations."  In  Log- 
gan  (Oxonia  depicta)  the  M.A.  wears 
the  miniver  hood.  The  Dr.  Haughton 
mentioned  here  is  Dr.  Timothy  Halton, 
provost  of  Queen's  college,  vice-chan 
cellor  in  1679,  1680,  1685.  Mr.  Gandy 
is  Henry  Gandy,  who  was  ultimately  a 
bishop  of  the  rionjurors'  succession;  he 
was  fellow  of  Oriel,  and  dean.  He  and 
Dr.  (Arthur)  Charlett  (then  fellow  of 
Trinity),  afterwards  ( 1 692)  elected  mas 
ter  of  University  college,)  were  the 
proctors  in  the  year  1683.  Dr.  Crow- 
ther  is  most  probably  Joseph  Crowther, 
fellow  of  St.  John's  college,  D.D.,  1660. 
and  principal  of  St.  Mary  hall  from 
1664  to  1689.  (Wood's  Fasti  ii.  236,) 
There  is  an  interesting  account  of  Dr. 
Charlett,  from  Rawlinson's  MSS.  in 
the  Bodleian  letters,  vol.  i.  p.  30. 

The  wide-sleeved  gown  is  still  worn 
at  Winchester  college  election  by  the 
senior  poser,  who  is  always  a  M.A.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  293 

A.D.  1640. 


213      NON  datur  scribendi  otium;  hoc  tamen  quale  quale  est  ar-  My  letters  to 
ripio  lubens,  ut  pauca  ad  vos  transmittam :  adhuc  (florentes  *|j®  ^ever" 
Academic!)  tempora  adsunt  plusquam  difncillima,  nee  negotia,  fourth  time, 
quee  undique  urgent,,  faciliora  sunt.     Quin  et  quo  loco  res  ^en  *  senfc 
Ecclesise  sint,  nemo  non  videt.     Horum  malorum  fons  non  scripts1, 
unus  est :  unus  tamen  inter  alios  furor  est  eorum,  qui  sanam 
doctrinam  non  sustinentes  (quod  olim  observavit  S.  Hilarius) 
corruptam  desiderant.     Inter  eos,  qui  hoc  cestro  perciti  sunt, 
quam  difficile  sit  vivere  mihi  plus  satis  innotescit,  cui  (Deo 
gratias)  idem  est  vivere  et  officium  facere. 

Sed  mittenda  haec  sunt.  Nee  enim,  quo  fata  ducant,  datur 
scire,  nee  mitiora  redduntur  tempora,  aut  tutiora  querimo- 
niis.  Interim  velim  sciatis  me  omnia  vobis  fausta  et  felicia 
precari,  quo  tuti  sitis  felicesque,  dum  hie  inter  sphaeras  supe- 
riores  stellse  cujuslibet  magnitudinis  vix  motum  suum  tenent, 
aut  prse  nubium  crassitie  debile  lumen  emittunt. 

Dum  sic  fluctuant  omnia,  statui  apud  me  in  tuto  (id  est, 
apud  vos    spero)   manuscripta  qusedam  temporum   priorum 
monumenta  deponere.     Pauca  sunt,  sed  prioribus  similia,  si 
non  sequalia.     Et  talia,  quse,  non  obstantibus  temporum  dif- 
ficultatibus,  in  usum  vestrum  parare  non  destiti.  .  .  Sunt  vero 
inter  hsec   Hebraica  sex,   Grseca  undecim,  Arabica  triginta 
quatuor,  Latina  viginti  et  unum,  Italica  duo,  Anglicana  to- 
tidem,  Persica  quinque,  quorum  unum,  folio  digestum  am- 
pliori,  historiam  continet  ab  orbe  condito  ad  finem  imperil 
Saracenici,  et  est  proculdubio  magni  valoris.    Hsec  per  vos  in 
bibliothecam  Bodleianam  (nomen  veneror,  nee  superstitiose) 
reponenda,  et  ceeteris  olim  meis  apponenda  cupio,  et  sub  iis- 
dem  legibus,  quibus  et  priora  dedi.      Non  opus  est  multis 
donum  hoc  nostrum  nimis  exile  ornare,  nee  id  in  votis  meis 
unquam  fuit.     Hoc  obnixe  et  quotidie  a  Deo  O.  M.  summis 
votis   peto,  ut   academia   semper   floreat,  in   ea  religio,   et 
pietas,  et  quicquid  doctrinam  decorare  potest,  in  altum  cres- 
cat,  ut  tempestatibus,  quse  nunc  omnia  perflant,  sedatis,  tuto 


x  [Read   in   convocation   Nov.    10,      the  entry  in   Diary  relating  to   those 
1640.  Reg.  Conv.  II.  fol.  182.  b.     See      MSS.  Oct.  27,  16-10. J 


294  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640.    possitis  et  vobis  et  studiis,  prse  omnibus  Deo  frui :  quse  vota 
~"  semper  erunt, 

Fidelissimi  et  amantissimi 

Cancellarii  vestri, 

W.  CANT.Y 

Dat.  ex  tedibus  nostris  Lambeth. 
Nov.  6,  1640. 

[Viris  mihi  amicissimis,  Doctor!  Potter,  vice-cancellario,  re- 
liquisque  doctoribus,  procuratoribus,  necnon  singulis  in 
domo  convocationis  intra  almam  universitatem  Oxon.  con- 
gregatis.] 


REVERENDISSIME  CANCELLARIE, 

QUJENAM  hsec  lucta  indefessse  virtutis  et  prementium  an- 
gustiarum?  Dum  nutat  orbis,  nictantque  stellse,  academiam 
firmare  cogitas,  unicam  illustrare  academiam;  securus  tui, 
de  nobis  solicitus.  Prioribus  manuscriptis,  ingenti  labore  et 
pretio  comparatis,  [pro  nobis]  novam  accumulasti  messem. 
pari  linguarum  varietate,  argumentorum  pondere,  et  exem- 
plarium  raritate  spectabilem,,  numero  qnidem  octoginta  et 
unum  volumina,  quse  pari  fide  et  gratitudine  sancte  custo-214 
diemus,  caste  versabimus.  Occurrit  hos  libros  intuentibus 
vox  plurimum  diversa,  nnus  tamen  hie  sensus,  te  musis  esse 
musam,  et  almse  academise  altorem  inexhaustum.  Fuere 
hsec  temporis  anteacti  monumenta,  sed  eruiit  tui.  Thesau- 
rum  historicum  nobis  nunc  transmittendo,  meruisti  histo- 
riam.  Duplicat  enim  eximii  hujus  beneficii  charitatem  tu- 
multuosa  rerum  prsesentium  difficultas ;  quse  cum  segre  per- 
mittat  scribendi  otium  aut  legendi,  loquendi  otium  aut  ta- 
cendi  [nihilominus]  insuperabili  vestrse  benefaciendi  solertise 
locum  et  consilii  spatium  relinquit.  Quicquid  in  sinum  aca- 
demiae  congeris,  in  tuto  collocatum  existimas;  opinamur  et 
nos  extra  fortunam  id  esse  positum;  non  quia  nobis  datur, 
sed  quia  datur,  quia  merces  tantorum  operum  immortali 

y  [This  and  the  following  letter  were  and  the  university,  as  reflecting  on  the 
translated  and  published  in  1641,  in  state  of  the  times.  See  Wood,  Annals, 
order  to  bring  odium  on  the  chancellor  p.  424.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  295 

cista  reconditur.  Nos  interim,  qui  in  spem  Ecclesise  nutri-  A.D.  1640. 
mur,  ejusdem  fato  convolvimur:  seminario  non  parcet  rna- 
nus,  quae  odit  hortum,  et  minatur  hortulano.  Si  in  lubrico 
stet  ille,  venerandissimus  ille,  quo  rectior  non  stat  regula,  quo 
prior  est  corrigenda  religioz,  num  ulla  erit  nobis  sub  umbra 
tua  latentibus  fiducia  ?  Certe  sine  Ecclesia,  sine  te,  salutem 
sperare  non  possumus  :  solatium  nolumus,  non  tenet  nos  in- 
columitatis  nostrae  tarn  turpis  avaritia,  tarn  pusillanimis  com- 
placentia.  Eja  lubentiores  pereamus  omnes,  quam  vivamus 
hanc  mortem,  ex  arbitrio  pendere  furentium.  Postquam 
supervenit  infelix  ille  dies,  quando  nihil  erit  invisius  fidelis- 
simis  Dei  ministris,  nihil  periculosius  innocentia,  et  vitio  ver- 
tetur  nimia  integritas,  nimium  viximus.  Malum  istud,  quod 
piget  ominari,  longe  avertat  Deus,  et  popularem  compescat 
furorem,  qui  sedat  fluctus  marinos.  Nobis  ad  latus  tibi  clau- 
dendum  stipante  satellitio  prompta  sunt  mens  ac  membra : 
sed  mens  per  omnia  intervalla  prsesentior.  Hac  ergo  vali- 
dissima  superiorum  agmina,  densasque  votorum  phalangas 
ordinabimus,  exercebimus,  prselio  committemus;  in  co3lum 
acriter  figentes  oculum,  tendentes  manum,  de  genu  pug- 
nantes;  ut  una  cum  reliquis  dono  datis,  perfruamur  hoc 
dono  maximo,  te  datore. 

Sanctitatis  vestrse  devotissima  cultrix, 

ACADEM.  OXON. 

E  domo  nostrte  convorationis, 
Novemb.  10,  1640. 

[Reverendissimo  in  Christo  patri  ac  domino  Gulielmo  archie- 
piscopo  Gantuarensi,  et  Oxoniensis  academise  honor atissimo 
cancellario.] 


WITHIN  the  precincts  of  the  university  I  cannot  hear  of  A  search  for 
any  one  convicted  recusant:    yet  I  am  resolved  to-morrow  arm,s,1?  recu* 

ScilltS    I10USC9* 

to  desire  the  mayor  to  go  along  with  me  to  view  and  search 
all  recusants'  houses,  what  munition  or  arms  they  have. 

CH.  POTTER. 

November  23,  1640. 

z  [See  the  remarks  on  this  expres-      — 478,  and  Laud,  Hist,  of  Troubles  and 
sion  in  Prynne's  Cant.  Doom,  pp.  441      Trial,  chap.  xxix.  p.  286  in  marg.] 


296  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1640. 


I  AM  very  glad  to  hear  from  you,  that  you  know  of  no 
convicted  recusant  in  Oxford :  yet  you  shall  do  very  well  to 
make  the  search  which  you  mention.     It  will  be  a  very  good  215 
justification  both  of  yourself  and  the  place. 

W.  CANT. 

November  27,  1640. 


IN  our  visit  (Mr.  Mayor's  and  mine  on  Tuesday  last)  of 
our  recusants'  houses,  we  found  nothing  that  was  like  to 
arms,  only  in  Mr.  Napper's  of  Holy- Well,  furniture  for  one 
light  horse,  with  which  he  is  charged.  In  other  houses, 
(most  of  them  poor  mean  persons,  seven  or  eight  in  all,) 
here  a  pistol,  and  there  a  sword  rusty,  and  elsewhere  a 
birding-piece ;  so  we  are  safe  enough  from  them.  God  keep 
us  from  the  Scots.  In  that  view  I  found  two  convicted :  one 
here  below  east-gate,  a  sorry  labouring  mason.  The  other, 
one  Mr.  Hunt,  by  the  castle,  a  stranger ;  staying  here  only 
a  while  in  a  house  of  his  own,  till  he  can  find  some  brewer 
to  take  it,  being  fit  for  that  purpose,  and  standing  void. 

CH.  POTTER. 

November  ult.,  1640. 


I  THANK  you  for  your  pains  in  your  search  for  arms  among 
recusants,  and  am  glad  you  find  all  so  safe,  and  them  so  un 
furnished.  As  for  Mr.  Hunt,  if  he  be  a  stranger,  the  sooner 
the  town  is  rid  of  him  the  better. 

Confirmation       For  the  confirmation  of  your  endowments  upon  your  pro- 

turers'  en-      fessors  and  orators,  you  shall  do  well  when  the  great  busi- 

dowments  by  nesses  are  more  over  (for  till  then  it  will  not  be  intended) 

to  move  for  confirmation  in  parliament.     And  in  the  mean 

time  it  may  be  very  fit  for  you  to  prepare  a  bill  by  some  good 

council,  which  may  contain  them  all  in  one,  if  it  may  be. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  297 

It  is  true,  you  write  that  most  colleges  have  upon  Christ-    A.D.  1640. 
mas  day  a  sermon  and  a  communion  in  their  private  chapels,  Christmas- 
and  by  that  means  cannot  come  to  the  public  sermon  of  the  day's  morn- 
university  at  Christ  Church.    And  whereas  you  write  farther,  "^  ^the* 
that  some  have  wished,  that  in  regard  of  this  the  morning  afternoon. 
sermon  for  the  university  might  be  put  off  to  the  afternoon  This  was  con- 
(as  it  is  upon  Easter-day  for  the  like  occasion),  I  for  my  part  ^^al^n- 
think  the  motion  very  good,  it  being  a  day  of  solemn  obser-  sent  of  the 
vation.    Yet  I  would  have  it  proposed  to  the  heads,  and  then  i 
that  which  you  shall  do  by  public  consent  shall  very  well 
satisfy  me. 

W.  CANT. 

Lambeth, 
Dec.  4,  1 640. 


MR.  WILKINSON  complained  in  parliament  against  the  vice- 
chancellor,  for  censuring  of  his  sermon.  The  vice-chancellor, 
according  to  the  command  of  the  committee  for  religion  in 
the  house  of  commons,  sent  up  the  copy  of  Wilkinson's  ser 
mon,  and  his  exceptions  against  it  upon  Tuesday  December  The  censure 

8th,  the  time  appointed  for  the  committee.    But  the  carrier's  ??  Ml\Wll- 
.  ,        ,     ,  kmson  s  ser 

iate  coming  in  hindered  the  delivery  for  that  time ;  but  it  mon  com- 

was  delivered  the  next  morning  by  Dr.  Baylie.  plained  of  m 

J  J  T-T  parliament. 

W.  CANT. 


WHEREAS  upon  enquiry  made  by  Dr.  Frewen,  late  vice-  No  univer- 
chancellor  of  Oxford,  in  two  several  assemblies  of  the  heads  ^^fB 
of  houses  there,  none  of  them  could  inform  him  of  any  uni-  popery, 
versity  man,  whom  he  knew  or  probably  suspected  to  be  a 
papist,  or  popishly  affected :  notwithstanding  which  care  of 
the  governors,  and  clearness  of  the  university,  it  could  not 
be  avoided,  but  some  persons'  suggestions  should  be  put  up 
to  the  high  court  of  parliament,  as  if  mass  were  ordinarily 
said  in  the  university,  and  frequented  by  university  men, 
without  any  control  of  the  governors  there. 


298  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1040.  We,  therefore,  the  present  vice-chancellor  and  the  heads 
of  houses,  for  the  better  clearing  of  our  university  from  such 
foul  imputations,  have  thought  fit  under  our  hands  to  testify, 
that  we  are  so  far  from  conniving  at  the  celebration  of  mass 
here,  or  knowing  of  any  such  matter,  that  we  neither  know, 
nor  can  probably  suspect  any  member  of  our  university  to  be 
a  papist,  or  popishly  addicted. 

In  witness  whereof  we  have  subscribed, 

CHRISTO.    POTTER,    Vice  -  Chancel.  FE AN.  HANSEL,  coll.  Jesu  Princ. 

Oxon.  THO.  WALKER,  universit.  Mr. 

NAT.  BRENT,  Praefect.  coll.  Mert.  GILBERT   SHELDON,   Ward,  of  All 
Ro.  KETTLE,  President  of  Trin.  coll.          Souls  coll. 

Jo.  PRIDE AUX,  Rector  coll.  Exon.  et  DANIEL  EscoTT,Ward.  of  Wadh.  coll. 

S.  T.  P.  regius.  GULL.  STRODE,  Eccl.  Christ.  Subdec. 

Jo.  WILKINSON,  aul.  Magd.  Princ.  ADAM  AIRAY,  Princip.  of  Edraond 
SAMUEL  RADCLIF,  coll.  Mr.   Nas.         hall. 

Princ.  Ro.  NEWLIN,  Prses.  coll.  Corp.  Christ. 

Jo.  TOLSON,  coll.  Oriel.  Praspos.  RICH.  ZOUCH,  aul.  Alb.  Princip. 

PAUL  HOOD,  Rector  coll.  Lincoln.  PHILIP.  PARSONS,aul.Cervin.Princip. 

A.  FREWEN,  Pres.  coll.  Magd.  JOHN  SAUNDERS,  aul.  Mar.  Princ. 

RICHARD  BAYLIE,  Prsesid.  S.  John.  DEGORY  WHEARE,  Princ.  Glouc.hall. 

THO.  CLAYTON,  coll.  Pembr.  magr.  P.  ALLIBOND,  Proct.  sen. 

Med.  Prof.  Reg.  N.  GREAVES,  Proct.  jun. 
THO.  LAWRENCE,  Magist.  coll.  Bal. 

Dec.  4,  1640. 

The  other  heads  of  houses  were  not  in  town  when  this  was 
subscribed3. 


Resignation        MY  present  condition  is  not  unknown  to  the  whole  world,  217 
cellOTship^Tn  ^et  b^  few  Pitied  or  deplored  ;  the  righteous  God  best  knows 
a  letter  to  the  the  justice  of  my  sufferings,  on  whom  both  in  life  and  death 
university.       j  wiu  eyer  depend  .   tlie  lagt  of  ^fafa  fi^  fa  unto  me  most 


a  [Wood  states  that  this  certificate  to  have  originated  from  the  speech  of 

was  signed  hy  all  the   heads,   except  Sir  Edward  Littleton  in  the  house  of 

Rogers  of  New-  Inn-Hall,  a  notorious  commons  the  previous  April.     He  re- 

puritan.     But  the  names  of  the  dean  ferred  to  the  celebration  of  mass  at  the 

of  Ch.  Ch.,  and  of  the  warden  of  New  Mitre  inn,  which  was  kept  by  a  recu- 

Coll.  are  not  annexed  to  it.     The  re-  sant,  as  mentioned  above.  (Wood,  An- 

port  of  the  celebration  of  mass  appears  nals,  ad  an.,  p.  425.)] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  299 

welcome,  in  that  my  life  is  now  burdensome  unto  me,  my  A.D.  1641. 
mind  attended  with  variety  of  sad  and  grievous  thoughts,  my 
soul  continually  vexed  with  anxieties  and  troubles,  groaning 
under  the  burden  of  a  displeased  parliament,  my  name  as 
persed  and  grossly  abused  by  the  multiplicity  of  libellous 
pamphlets,  and  myself  debarred  from  wonted  access  to  the 
best  of  princes,  and  it  is  vox  populi  that  I  am  popishly  af 
fected.  How  earnest  I  have  been  in  my  disputations,  ex 
hortations,  and  otherwise  to  quench  such  sparks,  lest  they 
should  become  coals,  I  hope  after  my  death  you  will  all  ac 
knowledge  ;  yet  in  the  midst  of  all  my  afflictions  there  is  no 
thing  more  hath  so  nearly  touched  me  as  the  remembrance 
of  your  free  and  joyful  acceptance  of  me  to  be  your  chan 
cellor,  and  that  I  am  now  shut  up  from  being  able  to  do  you 
that  service  which  you  might  justly  expect  from  me.  When 
I  first  received  this  honour  I  intended  to  have  carried  it  with 
me  to  my  grave ;  neither  were  my  hopes  any  less,  since  the 
parliament  (called  by  his  majesty's  royal  command)  com 
mitted  me  to  this  royal  prison.  But  sith  (by  reason  of  mat 
ters  of  greater  consequence  yet  in  hand)  the  parliament  is 
pleased  to  procrastinate  my  trial,  I  do  hereby  as  thankfully 
resign  my  office  of  being  chancellor,  as  ever  I  received  that 
dignity,  entreating  you  to  elect  some  honourable  person,  who 
upon  all  occasions  may  be  ready  to  serve  you ;  and  I  beseech 
God  send  you  such  an  one  as  may  do  all  things  for  His  glory, 
and  the  furtherance  of  your  most  famous  university.  This  is 
the  continual  prayer  of, 

Your  dejected  friend  and  chancellor, 

Being  the  last  time  I  shall  write  so, 

W.  CANT. 

Tower, 
June  28,  1641b. 


b  [The  editor  has  seen  two  copies  of  sign   his   Chancellor-ship   and   withal 

this   letter  printed  at  the   time,  with  deploring  his   sad   estate  now  in   the 

slight  variations  from  the  text  printed  time  of  his  imprisonment.     Printed  in 

by  Wharton  and  from  each  other,  one  the  year  1641,"  having  the  arms  of 

bearing  the  title  :  "  The  copie  of  a  let-  the  university  with  the  letters  AC.  ox. ; 

ter  sent   from  William  Laud,   Arch-  the  other  with  a  slightly  different  title, 

bishop  of  Canterbury,  the  28  of  June,  the  likeness  of  the  Archbishop,  instead 

M.DCXLI.  unto  the   University  of  Ox-  of  the  arms,  also  printed  anno  1641.] 
ford  :  specifying  his  willingness  to  re- 


300  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1641. 

[The  following  letters  were  printed  under  this  title  :  "The  true 
copy  of  a  Letter  sent  from  the  most  Reverend  William, 
Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  to  the  University  of  Ox 
ford,  when  he  resigned  his  office  of  Chancellor.  Published 
by  occasion  of  a  base  Libel  and  Forgery,  that  runs  under 
this  Title ;  and  also  the  Answer  of  the  University  to  the 
said  Letter.  Oxford,  printed  by  Leonard  Lichfield,  Printer 
to  the  University,  Anno  Dom.  1641 c." 

To  my  very  loving  friends,  the  vice-chancellor,  the  doctors, 
the  proctors,  and  the  rest  of  the  convocation  of  the  uni 
versity  of  Oxford. 

AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  &c.  These  are  to  re 
member  my  love  to  that  whole  body ;  that  love,  than  which 
no  other  chancellor  ever  bore  greater,  or  with  more^fervent- 
ness  and  zeal  to  the  public  good  and  happiness  of  that  place. 
And  I  do  heartily  pray  all  and  every  of  you  to  believe  me ; 
for  most  true  it  is,  that  the  unfortunateness  of  my  great 
affliction  doth  not  trouble  me  for  any  one  thing  more,  than 
that  I  can  be  no  further  useful  or  beneficial  to  that  place, 
which  I  so  much  love  and  honour. 

I  was  once  resolved  not  to  resign  my  place  of  chancellor, 
till  I  saw  the  issue  of  my  troubles  one  way  or  other :  and 
this  resolution  I  took,  partly  because  I  had  no  reason  to 
desert  myself,  and  occasion  the  world  to  think  me  guilty, 
and  partly  because  I  have  found  so  much  love  from  the 
university,  that  I  could  not  make  myself  willing  to  leave  it, 
till  some  greater  cause  should  take  me  off  from  that  which 
I  so  resolved  on. 

That  cause,  if  I  be  not  much  mistaken,  doth  now  present 
itself;  for  I  see  the  university  hath  great  need  of  friends, 
great  and  daily  need.  I  see  my  trial  not  hastened,  so  that 
I  am  neither  able  to  assist  your  great  occasions  myself,  nor 
procure  friends  for  them.  I  see  that  if  you  had  another 
chancellor,  you  could  not  want  the  help  which  now  you  do. 
And  I  cannot  but  know,  that  were  your  love  never  so  great 
to  me,  it  must  needs  cool,  when  you  see  me  able  to  give  no 

e  [This  also  has  the  arms  of  the  university  in  another  form.] 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  301 

assistance,  and  fill  the  place,  which  should  afford  it  to  you;    A.D.  1641, 
and  I  should  hardly  satisfy  myself  that  I  love  you  so  well  as 
I  do,  if  I  did  not  further  your  good  happiness  by  all  the 
means  I  can,  and  even  by  this  my  resignation. 

The  serious  consideration  of  these  things,  and  the  fore 
sight  I  have,  that  I  shall  never  be  able  to  serve  you  as  I  have 
done,  have  prevailed  with  me  at  this  time,  to  send  the  resig 
nation  of  the  chancellorship  to  your  body  met  in  convoca 
tion;  and  I  do  hereby  pray  you  that  it  may  be  publicly 
read  and  accepted,  the  time  being  now  most  fit;  that  so 
your  honourable  succeeding  chancellor  may  presently  ap 
point  an  able  deputy  for  the  government,  according  to  his 
own  judgment. 

And  now  I  do  earnestly  desire  of  you  all,  either  to  remem 
ber  or  to  know  that  I  never  sought  or  thought  of  the  honour 
of  this  place  to  myself;  and  yet  that,  since  it  was  by  the 
great  favour  and  love  of  that  university  laid  upon  me,  I 
have  discharged  it,  by  God's  grace  and  goodness  to  me,  with 
great  pains  and  care;  and  God's  blessing,  I  humbly  thank 
Him,  hath  not  been  wanting.  And  I  profess  singly  and 
from  my  heart,  if  there  be  any  good  which  I  ought  to  have 
done  to  that  place,  and  have  not  done  it,  it  proceeded  from 
want  of  understanding  or  ability,  not  will  or  affection.  And 
though  I  do,  for  the  cause  aforesaid,  resign  this  place,  yet  I 
shall  serve  it  still  with  my  prayers,  so  long  as  God  continues 
my  life. 

As  I  doubt  not  but  God  will  bless  you  with  an  honourable 
chancellor,  and  one  able  to  do  more  for  that  place  than  I 
have  been,  so  I  pray  God  to  give  you  a  peaceable  and  quiet 
election,  and  to  direct  it  to  the  good  of  this  His  Church,  and 
the  honour  and  happiness  of  that  famous  university;  that 
you  may  have  no  miss,  in  the  least,  of  me,  who  after  your 
prayers  heartily  desired,  now  writes  himself  the  last  time, 

Your  very  loving  poor  friend  and  chancellor, 

W.  CANT. 

From  the  Toiver, 
June  25,  1641. 


302  THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS 

A.D.  1641. 


Amplissimo    et    Reverendissimo   Domino    Gulielmo   Archi- 
Prsesuli  Cantuarensi. 

Reverendissime  Archi-Praesul Hoc  euim  solum  tibi 

(sic  voluisti)  nomen  relictum  est 

Novissimae  literae  tuae,  amoris,  sed  et  doloris,  plenae,  fece- 
runt  ut  dehinc  nos  plane  sere  dirutos  diruptosque  profiteri 
debeamus.  Cum  effusissimo  amori  tuo,  verbis  (quod  unicum 
nobis  suppetit  peculium)  ut  paria  faceremus,  nunquam  spe- 
randum  fuit;  nedum  dolori  nostro  verba  nos  reperturos 
paria;  ne  si  passis  quidem  eloquentise  velis  vehi,  et  tota 
doloris  praerogativa  frui  liceret.  Hodie  vero,  ut  sunt  tem- 
pora,  ad  justissimum  dolorem  nostrum  non  levis  hie  accessit 
cumulus,  quod  eum  in  sinu  premere  et  quasi  strangulare 
necesse  habeamus ;  quibus  ne  illud  quidem  tuto  queri  licet, 
in  ea  nos  tempora  incidisse,  in  quibus  singular!  tuae  pru- 
dentiae  et  erga  nos  amori  consultissimum  visum  sit,  nostra- 
que  quam  maxime  interesse,  ut  res  ac  fortunas  nostras  a 
tuos  segreges  habeamus  et  sejunctas.  Quanquam  vero  su 
premo  numini  sic  visum  est,  ut  illud  nobis  beneficii  loco 
imputandum  haberes,  quod  maximum  beneficiorum  tuorum, 
teipsum  a  nobis  segregares,  et  Cancellarii  munus  abdicares ; 
affectus  tamen  tuus  erga  Academiam  nostram  propensissi- 
mus,  turn  literis  tuis  novissimis,  turn  aliis  frequentibus  argu- 
mentis  abunde  testatus,  dubitare  nos  non  sinit,  quin  deposito 
invidioso  cancellarii  titulo,  amantissimi  patroni  affectum  ad- 
huc  in  sinu  tuo  retineas.  Quamdiu  Manuscriptad  ilia  /cei,/j,tf- 
\ta  Tua,  Orientis  spolia,  et  vere  f)\tov  avaOrj^ara  Bibliothe- 
cam  nostram  illustrabunt ;  quamdiu  Lectura  Arabica,  a  Tee 
dotata,  frequentabitur ;  quamdiu  Antiquitatis  vindices  simul 
et  testes  antiquaf  Numismata  visentur ;  quamdiu  castigatior 
disciplina,  mores  emendati,  morumque  canon  statuta  vige- 

d   MSS.    Cod.  plus   quam   MCCC.  e  Salarium  Professoris  Ling.  Arab. 

De  quibus  plus  quam  CCCXXX.  Lin-  XL.  Ib.  Annuae. 

guis  Oriental,  scripti,  et  paulo  minus  f   Hebr.    Grsec-Roman.    Famil.    et 

C.  Ling.  Gr.  Imper.  Britannic. 


CHANCELLORSHIP  OF  OXFORD.  303 

bunt;  quamdiu  pro  studio  partium  bonarum  artium  studia  A.D.  1641. 
colentur;  quamdiu  literis  honos,  honori  literse  erunt,  Can- 
cellarium  adhuc  esse  Te,  sentiet  prsesens  setas ;  fuisse,  postera 
agnoscet.  Dehinc,  immortalitatis  securus,  gloriseque  tuse 
superstes,  diu  hie  posteritati  tuse  intersis;  ac  demum,  ubi 
mortalitatis  numeros  omnes  impleveris,  plenus  annis  abeas, 
plenus  honoribus,  illis  etiam  quos  abdicasti.  Ita  vovet 

Amplitudini  tuae  omni  cultus  ac 

observantise  nexu  devinctissima, 

ACADEMIA  OXON.] 

Dat.  e  domo  Convocat. 
Q  Julii,  1641. 


BOOKS 

PUBLISHED 

BY  JAMES  PARKER  AND   CO 

OXFORD,  AND  377,  STRAND,  LONDON. 


geological,  &c. 

REV.  CANON  HOLE. 
HINTS   TO   PREACHERS,  WITH   SERMONS  AND  ADDRESSES. 

By  S.  REYNOLDS  HOLE,  Canon  of  Lincoln.     Post  8vo.,  cloth.  [Just  ready. 

REV.  E.  B.  PTJSEY,  D.D. 
WHAT  IS  OF  FAITH  AS  TO  EVERLASTING  PUNISHMENT  ? 

In  Reply  to  Dr.  Farrar's  Challenge  in  his  "  Eternal  Hope,"  1879.  By  the  Rev. 
E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Canon  of  Christ  Church. 
8vo.,  cloth,  286  pp.,  3s.  6d. 

REV.  E.  F.  WILLIS,  M.A. 

THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  OLD  COVENANT  CONSIDERED 
MORE  ESPECIALLY  IN  RELATION  TO  THAT  OF  THE  NEW.  By  the 
Rev.  E.F.WiLLis,  M.A.,  Vice- Principal  of  Cuddesdon  Theological  College. 
Post  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

ARCHDEACON  DENISON. 

NOTES  OF  MY  LIFE,  1805  —  1878.  By  GEORGE  ANTHONY 
DENISON,  Vicar  of  East  Brent,  1845;  Archdeacon  of  Taunton,  1851.  Third 
Edition,  8vo.,  cloth,  price  12s. 

HERBERT  DE  LOSINGA. 

THE  FOUNDER  OF  NORWICH  CATHEDRAL.  The  LIFE, 
LETTERS,  and  SERMONS  of  BISHOP  HERBERT  DE  LOSINGA 
(b.  circ.  A.D.  1050,  d.  1119).  Edited  by  E.  M.  GOULBURN,  D.D.,  Dean  of 
Norwich,  and  H.  SYMONDS,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Tivetshall.  2  vols.  8vo.,  cloth,  30s. 

C.  C.  ROLFE. 
THE  ANCIENT  USE   OF  LITURGICAL   COLOURS.     By  C.  C. 

ROLFE.     An  attempt  to  shew  that  the  ancient  use  of  the  Church  of  England  is 
in  harmony  with  the  Levitical  use,  and  entirely  distinct  from  that  which  is  now 
sanctioned  by  the  Church  of  Rome.     Medium  8vo.,  cloth,  10s.  6d. 
"  An  elaborate  and  learned  work."— Bishop  of  Lincoln. 

THE  LATE  CANON  JENKINS,  D.D. 

PASSAGES  IN  CHURCH  HISTORY.  Selected  from  the  MSS.  of 
the  late  Rev.  JOHN  DAVID  JENKINS,  D.D.,  Vicar  of  Aberdare;  Canon  of  the 
Cathedral  of  Natal.  With  a  Brief  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  T.  J.  DYKE.  Edited 
by  F.  M.  F.  S.  2  vols.,  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  pp.  xxiv— 1,108,  15s. 

REV.  J.  WORDSWORTH,  M.A. 

UNIVERSITY  SERMONS  ON  GOSPEL  SUBJECTS.  By  the 
Rev.  JOHN  WORDSWORTH,  M.A.  Fcap.,  cloth,  4s. 

HENRY  HARRIS. 
THE  POWERS  OF  THE  WORLD   TO  COME.     Short  Sermons 

by  HENRY  HARRIS,  B.D.     Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

BISHOP  OF  BARBADOS. 
SERMONS   PREACHED  ON   SPECIAL  OCCASIONS.     By  JOHN 

MITCHINSON,  Bishop  of  Barbados.     Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 
THE  LATE  BISHOP  WILBERFORCE. 

SERMONS  PREACHED  ON  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS.  With  a 
Preface  by  the  Lord  Bishop  of  ELY.  8vo.,  cloth,  7s.  fid. 

[880.3.50.] 


2  THEOLOGICAL  WORKS,  Sfc.  (continued). 

THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER. 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  SUCCES 
SIVE  REVISIONS  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER.  By 
JAMES  PARKER,  Hon.  M.A.  Oxon.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  12s. 

THE  FIRST  PRAYER-BOOK  OF  EDWARD  VI.,  compared  with 
the  Successive  Revisions  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer;  with  a  Concordance  and 
Index  to  the  Rubrics  in  the  several  editions.  By  the  same  Author.  Cr.  Svo.,  cl.,12s. 

REV.  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D. 

DANIEL  THE  PROPHET.  Nine  Lectures  delivered  in  the  Divinity 
School  of  the  University  of  Oxford.  With  a  new  Preface.  By  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D., 
&c.  Seventh  Thousand.  8vo.,  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

THE  MINOR  PROPHETS;  with  a  Commentary  Explanatory  and 
Practical,  and  Introductions  to  the  Several  Books.  4to.,  cloth,  31s.  6d. 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  REAL  PRESENCE,  as  contained  in 

the   Fathers  from    the    death    of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  to  the   4th   General 
Council.     By  the  Rev.  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.     8vo.,  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

THE  REAL  PRESENCE,  the  Doctrine  of  the  English  Church,  with 
a  vindication  of  the  reception  by  the  wicked  and  of  the  Adoration  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  truly  present.  By  the  Rev.  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.  8vo.,  6s. 

THE  LATE  REV.  J.  KEBLE,    M.A. 
STUDIA  SACRA.     COMMENTARIES  on  the  Introductory  Verses 

of  St.  John's  Gospel,  and  on  a  Portion  of  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans  ;  with 
other  Theological  Papers  by  the  late  Rev.  JOHN  KEBLE,  M.A.    8vo.,  cl.,  10s.  6d. 

OCCASIONAL   PAPERS   AND   REVIEWS,  on  Sir  Walter  Scott, 

Poetry,  and  Sacred  Poetry,  Bishop  Warburton,  Rev.  John  Miller,  Exeter  Synod, 
Judicial   Committee  of  Privy   Council,   Parochial   Work,   the  Lord's    Supper, 
Solomon,  the  Jewish  Nation.     By  the  late  Rev.  JOHN  KEBLE,  Author  of  "  The 
Christian  Year."     Demy  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  12s. 
«'  They  are  prefaced  by  two  letters  of  deep  interest  from  Dr.  NEWMAN  and  Dr.  PUSEY. 

There  is  something  extremely  touching  in  the  reunion,  as  it  were,  of  the  three  old  friends 

and  fellow-labourers." — Guardian. 

LETTERS  OF  SPIRITUAL  COUNSEL  AND  GUIDANCE.  By 
the  late  Rev.  J.  KEBLE,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Hursley.  Edited,  with  a  New  Preface, 
by  R.  F.  WILSON,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Rownhams,  &c.  Third  Edition,  much  en 
larged,  Post  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

THE  LATE  BISHOP  OF  BRECHIN, 
AN    EXPLANATION    OF    THE    THIRTY-NINE    ARTICLES. 

With   an    Epistle   Dedicatory   to   the   Rev.   E.   B.  PUSEY,  D.D.      By   A.   P. 
FORBES,  D.C.L.,  Bishop  of  Brechin.     Second  Edition,  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  12s. 

A  SHORT  EXPLANATION  OE  THE  NICENE  CREED,  for  the 

Use  of  Persons  beginning  the  Study  of  Theology.     By  ALEXANDER  PEN  ROSE 
FORBES,  D.C.L.,  Bishop  of  Brechin.     Second  Edition.    Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

THE  LORD  BISHOP  OF  SALISBURY. 
THE   ADMINISTRATION  OE   THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN  THE 

BODY  OF  CHRIST.   The  Bampton  Lectures  for  1868.    By  GEORGE  MOBERLY, 
D.C.L.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Salisbury.    2nd  Edit.    Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

SERMONS  ON  THE  BEATITUDES,  with  others  mostly  preached 
before  the  University  of  Oxford.  By  the  same.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo., 
cloth,  7s.  6d. 

REV.  WILLIAM  BRIGHT,  D.D. 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH,  from  the  Edict  of  Milan,  A.D. 
313,  to  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  A.D.451  Second  Edition.  Post  8vo.,  10s.  6d. 


THEOLOGICAL    WORKS,  $c.  (continued}.  3 


APOLLOS  ;  or,  THE  WAY  OP  GOD.  A  Plea  for  the  Religion  of 
Scripture.  By  A.  CLEVELAND  COXE,  Bishop  of  New  York.  Crown  8vo.,  cl.,  5s. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  CONFIRMATION.  By  WILLIAM  JACKSON,  M.  A., 

Queen's  College,  Oxford;  Vicar  of  Heathfield,  Sussex.     Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  4s. 

A   COMMENTARY    ON   THE   EPISTLES   AND    GOSPELS    IN 

THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER.  Extracted  from  Writings  of  the 
Fathers  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  anterior  to  the  Division  of  the  East  and 
West.  With  an  Introductory  Notice  by  the  DEAN  OF  ST.  PAUL'S.  In  Two 
Vols.,  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  15s. 

THE   EXPLANATION  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE  by  VENERABLE 

BEDA,  Translated  by  the  Rev.  EDW.  MARSHALL,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  formerly 
Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.  180  pp.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

GODET'S  BIBLICAL  STUDIES  ON  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

Edited  by  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  W.  H.  LYTTELTON.     Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

THE    CATHOLIC    DOCTRINE    OE    THE    SACRIFICE    AND 

PARTICIPATION  OF  THE  HOLY  EUCHARIST.  By  GEORGE  TREVOR, 
D.D.,  M.A.,  Canon  of  York;  Rector  of  Beeford.  Second  Edition,  revised  and 
enlarged.  Crown  Svo.,  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

THE  LAST  TWELYE  YERSES  OF  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING 

TO  S.  MARK  Vindicated  against  Recent  Critical  Objectors  and  Established, 
by  JOHN  W.  BFKGON,  B.D.,  Dean  of  Chichester.  With  Facsimiles  of  Codex  ^ 
and  Codex  L.  8vo.,  cloth,  12s. 

DISCOURSES  ON  PROPHECY.  In  which  are  considered  its  Struc 
ture,  Use,  and  Inspiration.  By  JOHN  DAVISON,  B.D.  A  New  Edition. 
8vo.,  cloth,  9s. 

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DIYINE  SERYICE;  or,  An  Inquiry  con 
cerning  the  True  Manner  of  Understanding  and  Using  the  Order  for  Morning  and 
Evening  Prayer,  and  for  the  Administration  of  the  Holy  Communion  in  the 
English  Church.  By  the  late  Ven.  PHILIP  FREEMAN,  Archdeacon  of  Exeter. 
A.  New  Edition.  2  vols.,  8vo.,  cloth,  16s. 

CATENA  AUREA.  A  Commentary  on  the  Four  Gospels,  collected 
out  of  the  Works  of  the  Fathers  by  S.  THOMAS  AQUINAS.  Uniform  with  the 
Library  of  the  Fathers.  Re-issue.  Complete  in  6  vols.  8vo.,  cloth,  £2  2s. 

CHRISTIANITY    AS    TAUGHT    BY    S.PAUL.      The  Bampton 

Lectures  for  1870.  To  which  is  added  an  Appendix  of  the  Continuous  Sense 
of  S.  Paul's  Epistles;  with  Notes  and  Metalegomena.  By  the  Rev.  W.  J. 
IBONS,  D.D.,  &c.  Second  Edition,  with  New  Preface,  8vo.,  with  Map,  cloth,  9s. 

CHARACTERISTICS  OF  CHRISTIAN  MORALITY.  The  Ramp- 
ton  Lectures  for  1873.  By  the  Rev.  I.  GREGORY  SMITH,  M.A.  Second  Edition, 
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

BEDE'S    ECCLESIASTICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    ENGLISH 

NATION.  A  New  Translation  by  the  Rev.  L.  GiDLET,  M.A.,  Chaplain  of 
St.  Nicholas',  Salisbury.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 


ANCIENT  DOCTRINAL  TREATISES,  fc. 


THE  CONSTITUTIONS  AND  CANONS  ECCLESIASTICAL  OF 

THIS  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND,  Referred  to  their  Original  Sources,  and 
Illustrated  with  "Explanatory  Notes.  By  MACKENZIE  E.  C.  WALCOTT,  B.D., 
F.S.A.,  Prnecentor  and  Prebendary  of  Cliichester.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  4s. 

A  CRITICAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  ATHANASIAN  CREED,  by 
the  Rev.  DANIEL  WATERLAND,  D.D.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  J.  R.  KING,  M.A. 
Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

THE    PASTORAL    RULE    OF    ST.  GREGORY.     Sancti   Gregorii 

Papae  Rejjulae  Pastoralis  Liber,  ad  Johannem  Episcopum  Civitatis  Ravetmae. 
With  an  English  Translation.  By  the  Rev.  H.  R.  BRAMLEY,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

THE  DEFINITIONS  OF  THE  CATHOLIC  FAITH  and  Canons  of 

Discipline  of  the  first  four  General  Councils  of  the  Universal  Church.  In  Greek 
and  English.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

DE  FIDE  ET  SYMBOLO :  Documenta  qu^dam  nee  non  Aliquonim 
SS.  Patrum  Tractatus.  Edidit  CAROLUS  A.  HEURTLEY,  S.T.P.,  Dom.  Mar- 
garetns  Praelector,  et  ^dis  Christi  Canonicus.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

S.  AURELIUS  AUGUSTINUS,  Episcopus  Hipponensis,  de  Catechi- 
zandis  Rudibus,  de  Fide  Rerum  quae  non  videntur,  de  Utilitate  Credendi.  In 
TJsura  Juniorurn.  Edidit  C.  MAEBIOTT,  S.T.B.,  Olim  Coll.  Oriel.  Socius.  New 
Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

ANALECTA  CHRISTIANA,  In  usum  Tironum.  Excerpta,  Epi- 
stolae,  &c.,  ex  EUSEBII,  &c. ;  S.  IGNATII  Epistolae  ad  Smyrnaeos  et  ad  Poly- 
carpum;  E.  S.  CLEMENTIS  ALEXANDRI  Paedagogo  excerpta;  S.  ATHANAS'II 
Sermo  contra  Gentes.  Edidit  et  Annotationibus  illustravit  C.  MARRIOTT, 
S.T.B.  8vo.,  10s.  6d. 

S.  PATRIS  NOSTRI  S.  ATHANASII  ARCHIEPISCOPI  ALEX 
ANDRIA  DE  INCARNATIONS  VERBI,  ejusque  Corporal!  ad  nos  Ad- 
ventu.  With  an  English  Translation  by  the  Rev.  J.  RIDGWAY,  B.D.,  Hon. 
Canon  of  Christ  Church.  [_In  the  Press. 

OXPOKD    SEKIES    OP    DEVOTIONAL  WOEKS, 

Fcap.  8vo.,  printed  in  Red  and  Black,  on  toned  paper. 

Laud's  Devotions. 
THE    PRIVATE     DEVOTIONS     of 

DR.  WILLIAM  LAUD,  Archbishop  of  Canter 
bury,  and  Martyr.    Antique  cloth,  5s. 

Spinckes'  Devotions. 

TRUE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND 
MAN'S  COMPANION  IN  THE  CLOSET  ; 
or,  a  complete  Manual  of  Private  Devotions, 
collected  from  the  Writings  of  eminent  Di 
vines  of  the  Church  of  England.  Antique 
cloth,  4s. 

Ancient  Collects. 

ANCIENT  COLLECTS  AND  OTHER 
PRAYERS.  Selected  for  Devotional  use 
from  various  Rituals.  By  WM.  BRIGHT, 
D.D.  Antique  cloth,  5s. 

Devout  Communicant. 
THE     DEVOUT     COMMUNICANT, 

exemplified  in  his  Behaviour  before,  at,  and 


The  Imitation  of  Christ. 
FOUR  BOOKS.      By  Thomas  A  KEM- 
PTS.    Cloth,  4s. 

Andre wes'  Devotions. 
DEVOTIONS.      By   the    Right    Rev. 
Father    in    God,    LAUNCELOT    ANDREWEB. 
Translated  from  the  Greek  and  Latin,  and 
arranged  anew.    Antique  cloth,  5s. 

Taylor's  Holy  Living-. 
THE      RULE    AND     EXERCISES 
OF  HOLY   LIVING.    By  BISHOP  JEREMY 
TAYLOR.     Antique  cloth,  4s. 

Taylor's  Holy  Dying1. 
THE     RULE    AND     EXERCISES 
OF   HOLY   DYING.    By  BISHOP    JEREMY 
TAYLOR.     Antique  cloth,  4s. 

Taylor's  Golden  Grove. 
THE  GOLDEN  GROVE;  a  Choice 
Manual,  containing  what  is  to  be  Believed, 
Practised,  and  Desired,  or  Prayed  for.  By 
BISHOP  JKREMY  TAYLOR.  Printed  uniform 
•with  "  Holy  Living  and  Holy  Dying."  An 
tique  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Button's  Meditations. 
GODLY  MEDITATIONS  UPON 
THE  MOST  HOLY  SACRAMENT  OF  THE 
LORD'S  SUPPER.  By  CHRISTOPHER  SUT- 
TON,  D.D.,  late  Prebend  of  Westminster. 
A  new  Edition.  Antique  cloth,  5s. 


after  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper : 
Practically  suited  to  all  the  Parts  of  that 
Solemn  Ordinance.  7th  Edition,  revised. 
Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  4s. 

EIKHN  BA2IAIKH. 

THE     PORTRAITURE     OF     HIS 
SACRED  MAJESTY  KING  CHARLES  I. 

in  his  Solitudes  and  Sufferings.  New  Edition, 
with  Preface  by  C.M.PHILLIMORE  [On  the 
evidence  that  the  book  was  written  by 
Charles  I.,  and  not  by  Gauden].  Antique 
cloth,  5s. 


DEVOTIONAL. 
THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS  CHRIST  IN  GLORY :  Daily  Meditations, 

from  Easter  Day  to  the  Wednesday  after  Trinity  Sunday.  By  NOUET.  Trans 
lated  from  the  French,  and  adapted  to  the  Use  of  the  English  Church.  Third 
Thousand.  12mo.,  cloth,  6s. 

A  GUIDE  FOR  PASSING  ADVENT  HOLILY.     By  AYEILLO^. 

Translated  from  the  French,  and  adapted  to  the  use  of  the  English  Church. 
New  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

A  GUIDE  FOR  PASSING  LENT  HOLILY.  By  AYRILLON-. 
Translated  from  the  French,  and  adapted  to  the  use  of  the  English  Church. 
Fourth  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

THE  PASTOE  IN  HIS  CLOSET ;  or,  A  Help  to  the  Devotions 
of  the  Clergy.  By  JOHN  ARMSTRONG,  D.D.,  late  Lord  Bishop  of  Grahamstown. 
Third  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  2s. 

DAILY  STEPS  TOWARDS  HEAVEN;  or,  Practical  Thoughts  on 
the  Gospel  History,  for  every  day  in  the  year.  With  Titles  and  Characters  of 
Christ.  32mo.,  roan,  2s.  6d.  Large  type  edition,  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

Uniform  with  above. 

THE  HOURS;  being  Prayers  for  the  Third,  Sixth,  and  Ninth 
Hours;  with  a  Preface,  and  Heads  of  Devotion  for  the  Day.  Seventh  Edition. 
S2mo.,  in  parchment  wrapper,  Is. 

ANNUS  DOMINI.  A  Prayer  for  each  Day  of  the  Year,  founded  on 
a  Text  of  Holy  Scripture.  By  CHRISTINA  G.  ROSSETTI.  32mo.,  cloth,  3s.  fid. 

DEVOTIONS    BEFORE    AND    AFTER    HOLY    COMMUNION. 

With  Prefatory  Note  by  KEBLE.  Sixth  Edition,  in  red  and  black,  on  toned 
paper,  32mo.,  cloth,  2s. — With  the  Service,  32mo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

MEDITATIONS  FOR  THE  FORTY  DAYS  OF  LENT.  With 
a  Prefatory  Notice  by  the  ARCHBISHOP  OP  DUBLIN.  18tno.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

THE  EVERY-DAY  COMPANION.     By  the  Rev.  W.  H.  RIDLEY, 

M.A.,  Rector  of  Hambleden,  Bucks.     Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s. 

EVENING  WORDS.  Brief  Meditations  on  the  Introductory  Portion 
of  our  Lord's  Last  Discourse  with  His  Disciples.  16mo.,  cloth,  2s. 

THOUGHTS  DURING  SICKNESS.     By  ROBERT  BRETT,  Author  of 

"  The  Doctrine  of  the  Cross,"  &c.     Fcap.  8vo.,  limp  cloth,  Is.  6d. 

BREVIATES  FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE,  arranged  for  use  by  the 

Bed  of  Sickness.  By  the  Rev.  G.  ARDEN,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Winterborne-Came  ; 
Domestic  Chaplain  to  the  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Devon.  2nd  Ed.  Fcap.  8vo.,  2s. 

DEVOTIONS  FOR  A  TIME  OF  RETIREMENT  AND  PRAYER 
FOR  THE  CLERGY.  New  Edition,  revised.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  Is. 

PRAYERS  IN  USE  AT  CUDDESDON  COLLEGE.     Third  Edition, 

revised  and  enlarged.     Fcap.  8vo.,  2s. 

EARL  NELSON'S  FAMILY  PRAYERS.     With  Responsions  and 

Variations  for  the  different  Seasons,  for  General  Use.  New  and  improved 
Edition,  large  type,  cloth,  2s. 

INSTRUCTIONS  ON  THE  HOLY  EUCHARIST,  AND  DEVO 
TIONS  FOR  HOLY  COMMUNION,  being  Part  V.  of  the  Clewer  Manuals, 
by  Rev.  T.  T.  CAETEB,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Clewer.  18mo.,  cloth,  2s. 

THE    SERVICE-BOOK    OF    THE   CHURCH    OF    ENGLAND, 

arranged  according  to  the  New  Table  of  Lessons.  Crown  8vo.,  roan,  12s.  ; 
calf  antique  or  calf  limp,  16s. ;  limp  morocco  or  best  morocco,  18s. 


6  SERMONS, 

SERMONS,   &c. 

PAROCHIAL   SERMONS.     By  E.  B.  PUSET,   D.D.     Vol.  I.  From 

Advent  to  Whitsuntide.     Seventh  Edition.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s.    Vol.  II.,  8vo.,  cl.,  6s. 

. —  Vol.  III.    Reprinted   from   "Plain    Sermons    by 

Contributors  to  Tracts  for  the  Times."     Revised  Edition.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

PAROCHIAL  SERMONS  preached   and  printed  on  Yarious   Occa 
sions,  1832—1850.     13y  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

SERMONS    preached    before    the    UNIVERSITY    OF    OXFORD 
between  A.D.  1859  and  1872.     By  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.   8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

1843  to  1855,  &c.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

. 1864  to  1876,  &c.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

LENTEN  SERMONS   preached  chiefly  to  Young  Men  at  the  Uni 
versities,  between  A.D.  1868  and  1874.     By  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.    8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

ILLUSTRATIONS    OF    FAITH.      Eight  Plain   Sermons,   by   the 
late  Rev.  EDWARD  MONHO.     Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Uniform,  and  by  the  same  Author, 


PLAIN  SERMONS  ON  THE  BOOK  OP  COM 
MON  PRAYER.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

SERMONS  ON  NEW  TESTAMENT  CHARAC 
TERS.  Fcap.  8vo.,  4s. 


HISTORICAL  AND  PRACTICAL  SERMONS 
ON  THE  SUFFERINGS  AND  RESUR 
RECTION  OF  OUB  LORD.  2  vols.,  Fcap. 
8vo.,  cloth,  10s. 


CHRISTIAN  SEASONS.— Short  and  Plain  Sermons  for  every  Sunday 
and  Holy  day  throughout  the  Year.  4  vols.,  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  10s.  Second 
Series,  4  vols.,  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  10s. 

SHORT    SERMONS    FOR   FAMILY   READING,    following    the 

Order  of  the   Christian  Seasons.     By  the  Rev.  J.  W.  BURGON,  B.D.     2   vols., 
Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  8s.     Second  Series,  2  vols.,  Fcap.  Svo.,  cloth,  8s. 

PAROCHIAL  SERMONS.  By  the  late  Bp.  ARMSTRONG.  Fcap. 
8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

SERMONS  FOR  FASTS  AND  FESTIYALS.  By  the  late  Bp.  ARM 
STRONG.  A  New  Edition.  Fcap.  Svo.,  5s. 

SERMONS  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.     By  J.  KEBLE,  M.A. 


ADVENT  TO  CHRISTMAS.    8vo.,  cl.,  6s. 
CHRISTMAS    AND     EPIPHANY.      8vo., 

cloth,  6s. 

SEPTUAGESIMA  TO  LENT.    8vo.,  cl.,  6->. 
ASH  -  WEDNESDAY    TO    HOLY   WEEK. 

8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 
HOLY  WEEK.    8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 


EASTER    TO    ASCENSION   DAY.      8vo., 

cloth,  6s. 
ASCENSION  DAY  TO  TRINITY  SUNDAY 

inclusive.    8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 
TRINITY,  Part  I.    Svo  ,  cloth,  6-». 
TRINITY,  Part  II.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 
SAINTS'  DAYS.     8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 


VILLAGE  SERMONS  ON  THE  BAPTISMAL  SERVICE.  By 
the  Rev.  JOHN  KEBLE,  M.A.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

THE  AWAKING  SOUL,  as  Sketched  in  the  130th  Psalm.  Ad 
dresses  delivered  in  Lent,  1877.  By  E.  R.  WILBERFORCE,  M.A.  Crown  Svo., 
limp  cloth,  2s.  6'cl. 

"  SINGLE  HEART."  Four  Advent  Sermons,  by  EDWARD  M.  BEN 
SON,  Lord  Bishop  of  Truro.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

OXFORD  LENT  SERMONS,  1857,  8,  9,  65,  6,  7,  8,  9,  70.  8vo., 
cloth,  5s.  each. 

XX.  SHORT  ALLEGORICAL  SERMONS.     By  B.  K.  W.  PEARSE, 

M.A.,  and  W.  A.  GRAY,  M.A.     Sixth  Edition,  Fcap.  8vo.,  sewed,  Is. 

SERMONS  AND  ESSAYS  ON  THE  APOSTOLICAL  AGE.  By 
the  Very  Rev.  ARTHUR  PENRHYN  STANLEY,  D.D.  Third  Edition,  revised. 
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  7s.  tid. 


ENGLISH  DIVINES. 

of  Ik  ^tamtard 

PUBLISHED  IN  THE  LIBRARY  OF  ANGLO-CATHOLIC  THEOLOGY, 

AT    THE   FOLLOWING   PRICES   IN    CLOTH. 

ANDRE  WES'  (BP.)  COMPLETE  WORKS.     11  vols.,  8vo.,  £3  7s. 

THE  SERMONS.     (Separate.)     5  vols.,  £1 15s. 
BEYERIDGE'S  (BP.)  COMPLETE  WORKS.    12  vols.,  8vo.,  £4  4s. 

THE  ENGLISH  THEOLOGICAL  WORKS.    10  vols.,  £3  10s. 
BRAMHALL'S  (ABP.)  WORKS,  WITH  LIFE  AND  LETTERS,  &c. 

5  vols.,  8vo.,  £1  15s.     (Vol.  2  cannot  be  sold  separately.) 

BULL'S  (BP.)  HARMONY  ON  JUSTIFICATION.  2  vols.,  8vo.,  10s. 
DEFENCE  OF  THE  NICENE  CREED.  2  vols.,  10s. 

JUDGMENT  OF  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.   5s. 

COSIN'S  (BP.)  WORKS  COMPLETE.     5  vols.,  8vo.,  £1  10s. 
CRAKANTHORP'S     DEFENSIO     ECCLESLE      ANGLICANJE. 

8vo.,  7s. 

FRANK'S  SERMONS.     2  vols.,  8vo.,  10s. 

FORBES'  CONSIDERATIONS  MODESTO.     2  vols.,  8vo.,  12s. 
GUNNING'S  PASCHAL,  OR  LENT  FAST.     8vo.,  6s. 
HAMMOND'S  PRACTICAL  CATECHISM.     8vo.,  5s. 

MISCELLANEOUS  THEOLOGICAL  WORKS.    5s. 

THIRTY-ONE  SERMONS.     2  Parts.     10s. 

HICKES'S  TWO   TREATISES  ON  THE   CHRISTIAN  PRIEST 
HOOD.     3  vols.,  8vo.,  15s. 

JOHNSON'S  (JOHN)  THEOLOGICAL  WORKS.  2  vols.,  8vo.,  10s. 

ENGLISH  CANONS.     2  vols.,  12s. 

LAUD'S  (ABP.)  COMPLETE  WORKS.     7  vols.,  (9  Parts,)  8vo., 

£2  17s. 

L'ESTRANGE'S  ALLIANCE  OF  DIYINE  OFFICES.    8vo.,  6s. 
MARSHALL'S    PENITENTIAL     DISCIPLINE.      (This    volume 

cannot  be  sold  separate  from  the  complete  set.) 

NICHOLSON'S  (BP.)  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  CATECHISM.  (This 

volume  cannot  be  sold  separate  from  the  complete  set.) 

OYERALL'S  (BP.)  CONYOCATION-BOOK  OF  1606.     8vo.,  5s. 
PEARSON'S    (BP.)    YINDICI^E    EPISTOLARUM  S.  IGNATII. 

2  vols.  8vo.,  10s. 

THORNDIKE'S    (HERBERT)    THEOLOGICAL    WORKS    COM 
PLETE.     6  vols.,  (10  Parts,)  8vo.,  £2  10s. 

WILSON'S   (BP.)   WORKS    COMPLETE.     With  LIFE,  by  Rev. 

J.  KEBLE.     7  vols.,  (8  Parts,)  8vo.,  £3  3s. 

A  Complete  set,  80  Vols.  in  88  Parts,  £21. 


8 


POETRY, 


THE  AUTHORIZED  EDITIONS  OF 
THE    CHRISTIAN    YEAR, 

With  the  Author's  latest  Corrections  and  Additions. 

NOTICE. — Messrs.  PARKER  are  the  sole  Publishers  of  the  Editions  of  the 
"Christian  Year"  issued  with  the  sanction  and  under  the  direction  of  the 
Author's  representatives.  All  Editions  without  their  imprint  are  unauthorized. 

SMALL  4to.  EDITION. 

Handsomely  printed  on  toned 

paper,  with  red  border  lines 

and   initial  letters.     Cloth 

extra          .         .        .         .  10     6 

DEMY  8vo.  EDITION. 
Cloth 6    0 

FOOLSCAP  8vo.  EDITION. 

Cloth 36 

24mo.  EDITION. 
Cloth,  red  lines      .         .         .26 

The  above  Editions  (except  the  Facsimile  of  the  First  Edition)  are  Jcept  in 
a  variety  of  bindings,  ^vhich  may  be  ordered  through  the  Trade,  or  direct  from 
the  Publishers.  The  chief  bindings  are  Morocco  plain,  Morocco  Antique,  Calf 
Antique,  and  Vellum,  the  prices  varying  according  to  the  style. 

By  the  same  Author. 

LYRA  INNOCENTIUM.  Thoughts  in  Verse  on  Christian  Chil 
dren.  Thirteenth  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

24mo.,  cloth,  red  lines,  3s.  6d. 

48mo.  edition,  limp  cloth,  6d.;  cloth  boards,  Is. 

MISCELLANEOUS  POEMS  BY  THE  KEY.  JOHN  KEBLE,  M.A., 

Vicar  of  Hursley.     [With  Preface  by  G.  M.]    Third  Edition.    Fcap.,  cloth,  6s. 

THE   PSALTER,  OR  PSALMS  OF  DAVID:    In  English  Verse. 

Fourth  Edition.    Fcap.,  cloth,  6s. 

• 18mo.,  cloth,  Is. 

The  above  may  also  be  had  in  various  bindings. 


32mo.  EDITION. 
Cloth  boards,  gilt  edges 
Cloth,  limp   .... 

48mo.  EDITION. 
Cloth,  limp  .... 

1 
1 

0 
1 

6 
0 

6 
6 

FACSIMILE  OF  THE  IST  EDI 
TION,    with    a   list    of   the 
variations  from  the  Origi 
nal  Text  which  the  Author 
made     in    later    Editions. 
2  vols.,  12mo.,  boards 

7 

6 

A  CONCORDANCE    TO 

8vo.,  toned  paper,  cloth,  4s. 


THE   "  CHRISTIAN    YEAR."      Fcap. 


MUSINGS  ON  THE  "  CHRISTIAN  YEAR ;"  WITH  GLEANINGS 
FROM  THIRTY  YEARS'  INTERCOURSE  WITH  THE  LATE  Rev.  J.  KEBLE,  by  CHAR 
LOTTE  M.  YONGE;  to  which  are  added  Recollections  of  Hursley,  by 
FRANCES  M.  W1LBRAHAM.  Second  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

MEMOIR   OF   THE   REV.  J.  KEBLE,  M.A.     By  Sir  J.  T.  COLE- 

BIDGK.     Fourth  and  Cheaper  Edition.     Post  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

THE  CHILD'S  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.  Hymns  for  every  Sunday 
and  Holyday  throughout  the  Year.  Cheap  Edition,  18mo.,  cloth,  Is. 


CHURCH  POETRY,  AND  PAROCHIAL.  9 

Cfjurclj 

RE-ISSUE  OP  THE  POETICAL  WORKS  OF  THE  LATE 

REV,  ISAAC   WILLIAMS. 
THE  CATHEDRAL;    or,   The  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church  in 

England.     Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  fis.;  32mo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

THE  BAPTISTERY;  or,  The  Way  of  Eternal  Life.  With  Plates  by 
BOETIUS  A  BOLSWERT.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  7s.  6d.  ;  32mo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

HYMNS  FROM  THE  PARISIAN  BREVIARY.     32mo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
THE  CHRISTIAN  SCHOLAR.  Fcap.  8vo.,cl.,  5s.;  32mo.f  cl.,2s.  6d. 
THOUGHTS  IN  PAST  YEARS.     32mo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
THE  SEVEN  DAYS   OF   THE   OLD   AND  NEW  CREATION. 

Fcap.  8vo..  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

BISHOP  CLEVELAND  COXE. 

CHRISTIAN  BALLADS  AND  POEMS.  By  ARTHUE  CLEVELAND 
COXE,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Western  New  York.  A  New  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo., 
cloth,  3s.  Also  selected  Poems  in  a  packet,  32mo.,  Is. 

THE  BELLS  OF  BOTTEVILLE  TOWER;  A  Christmas  Story  in 
Verse:  and  other  Poems.  By  FREDERICK  G.  LEE,  Author  of  "  The  Martyrs  of 
Vienne  and  Lyons,"  "Petronilla,"  &c.  Fcap.  8vo.,  with  Illustrations,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

HYMNS  ON  THE  LITANY,  by  ADA  CAMBRIDGE.    Fcap.  8vo.,  cl.,  3s. 


THE  CONFIRMATION  CLASS-BOOK:    Notes  for  Lessons,  with 

APPENDIX,  containing  Questions  and  Summaries  for  the  Use  of  the  Candidates. 
By  E.  M.  HOLMES,  LL.B.,  Rector  of  Marsh  Gibbon,  Bucks.  Fcap.  8vo.,  limp 
cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Also,  in  wrapper,  THE  QUESTIONS  AND  SUMMARIES  separate,  4  sets  of  128  pp. 
in  packet,  Is.  each. 

THE  CATECHIST'S  MANUAL  ;  with  an  Introduction  by  the  late 
SAMUEL  WILBEEFOECE,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester.  By  the  same. 
Sixth  Thousand,  revised.  Crown  8vo.,  limp  cloth,  5s. 

A  MANUAL  OF  PASTORAL  VISITATION,  intended  for  the  Use 

of  the  Clergy  in  their  Visitation  of  the  Sick  and  Afflicted.  By  a  PARISH  PRIEST. 
Dedicated,  by  permission,  to  His  Grace  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin.  Second 
Edition,  Crown  8vo.,  limp  cloth,  3s.  6d.  ;  roan,  4s. 

THE  INNER  LIFE.  Hymns  on  the  "  Imitation  of  Christ,"  by 
THOMAS  A'KttMPis  ;  designed  especially  for  Use  at  Holy  Communion.  By  the 
Author  of  "Thoughts  from  a  Girl's  Life,"  &c.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s. 

SHORT  READINGS  FOR  SUNDAY.  By  the  Author  of  "Foot 
prints  in  the  Wilderness."  With  Twelve  Illustrations  on  Wood.  Third  Thou 
sand,  Square  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

A  SERIES  OF  WALL  PICTURES  illustrating  the  New  Testament. 

The  Set  of  16  Pictures,  size  22  inches  by  19  inches,  12s. 

COTTAGE    PICTURES    FROM    THE    OLD    TESTAMENT. 

A  Series  of  Twenty-eight  large  folio  Engravings,  brilliantly  coloured  by  hand. 
The  Set,  7s.  6d. 

COTTAGE    PICTURES    FROM    THE    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

A  Series  of  Twenty-eight  large  folio  Engravings,  brilliantly  coloured.  The 
Set,  7s.  6d. 

Upwards  of  8,000  Sets  of  these  Cottage  Pictures  have  been  sold. 
TWELVE  SACRED  PRINTS  FOR  PAROCHIAL  USE.     Printed 

in  Sepia,  with  Ornamental  Borders.    The  Set,  One  Shilling;  or  each,  One  Penny. 
Upwards  of  100,000  of  these  Prints  have  already  been  sold. 

FABER'S  STORIES  FROM  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.    With  Four 

Illustrations.     Square  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  4s. 

MUSINGS  ON  THE  PSALM  (CXIX.)  OF  DIVINE  ASPIRA 
TIONS.  32mo.,  cloth,  2s. 


10  MISCELLANEOUS. 

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  PSYCHOLOGY. 
THE   ELEMENTS   OF  PSYCHOLOGY,  ON  THE   PRINCIPLES 

OF  BENEKE,  Stated  and  Illustrated  in  a  Simple  and  Popular  Manner  by 
DR.  G.  HAUE,  Professor  in  the  Medical  College,  Philadelphia ;  Fourth  Edition, 
considerably  Altered,  Improved,  and  Enlarged,  by  JOHANN  GOTTLIEB  DBESS- 
LER,  late  Director  of  the  Normal  School  at  Bautzen.  Translated  from  the 
German.  Post  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

REV.  CANON  GEEGOEY. 

ARE  WE  BETTER  THAN  OUR  EATHERS?  or,  A  Comparative 
View  of  the  Social  Position  of  England  at  the  Revolution  of  1688,  and  at  the 
Present  Time.  FOUR  LECTURES  delivered  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  By 
ROBEET  GEEGOEY,  M.A.,  Cauon  of  St.  Paul's.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 

PEOFESSOE  GOLDWIN  SMITH. 
THE  REORGANIZATION  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OE  OXFORD. 

By  GOLDWIN  SMITH.     Post  8vo.,  limp  cloth,  2s. 
LECTURES    ON    THE    STUDY    OF    HISTORY.      Delivered    in 

Oxford,  1859 — 61.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  limp  cloth,  3s.  6'd. 

IRISH  HISTORY  AND  IRISH  CHARACTER.     Cheap  Edition, 

Fcap.  8vo.,  sewed,  Is.  6d. 

THE  EMPIRE.  A  Series  of  Letters  published  in  "The  Daily 
News,"  1862,  1863.  Post  8vo.,  cloth,  price  6s. 

MES.  ALGEENON  KINGSFOED. 

ROSAMUNDA  THE  PRINCESS:  An  Historical  Eomance  of  the 
Sixth  Century;  the  CROCUS,  WATER-REED,  ROSE  and  MARIGOLD,  PAINTER  OF 
VENICE,  NOBLE  LOVE,  ROMANCE  of  a  RING,  and  other  Tales.  By  Mrs.  ALGER 
NON  KINGSFORD.  8vo.,  cloth,  with  Twenty-four  Illustrations,  6s. 

THE  EXILE  FEOM  PAEADISE. 
THE  EXILE   FROM   PARADISE,  translated  by  the  Author  of  the 

"Life  of  S.  Teresa."     Fcap.,  cloth,  Is.  6d. 

H.  A.  MUNEO-BUTLEE-JOHNSTONE,   M.P. 
THE   FAIR   OF   NLJNI-NOVGOROD.     With  a  Map  acd  Twelve 

Illustrations.  By  H.  A.  MUNRO-BUTLER-JOHNSTONE,  M.P.  Second  Edition, 
Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

THE  TURKS  :  their  Character,  Manners,  and  Institutions,  as  bearing 
on  the  Eastern  Question.  By  H.  A.  MUNRO-BUTLER-JOHNSTONE,  M.P.  8vo., 
sewed,  Is. 

VILHELM  THOMSEN. 

THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  ANCIENT  RUSSIA  AND  SCAN 
DINAVIA,  and  the  Origin  of  the  Russian  State.  THREE  LECTURES  de 
livered  at  the  Taylor  Institution,  Oxford,  in  May,  1876,  by  Dr.  VILHELM 
THOMSEN,  Professor  at  the  University  of  Copenhagen.  Small  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

BEENAED  BOSANQUET,  M.A. 
ATHENIAN   CONSTITUTIONAL   HISTORY,    as  Represented  in 

Crete's  "  History  of  Greece,"  critically  examined  by  G.  F.  SCHOMANN  :  Trans 
lated,  with  the  Author's  permission,  by  BERNARD  BOSANQUET,  M.A.,  Fellow 
and  Tutor  of  University  College,  Oxford.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 


ARCHITECTURE  AND  ARCHEOLOGY.  11 


THE  PKAYER-BOOK  CALENDAR. 
THE   CALENDAR   OF   THE   PRAYER-BOOK  ILLUSTRATED. 

(Comprising  the  first  portion  of  the  "Calendar  of  the  Anglican  Church,"  with 
additional  Illustrations,  an  Appendix  on  Emblems,  &c.)  With  Two  Hundred 
Engravings  from  Medieval  Works  of  Art.  Sixth  Thousand.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cl.,  6s. 

SIR  G.  G.  SCOTT,  F.S.A. 

GLEANINGS  FROM:  WESTMINSTER  ABBEY.   By  SIR  GEORGE 

GILBERT  SCOTT,  R.A.,  F.S.A.  With 'Appendices  supplying  Further  Particu 
lars,  and  completing  the  History  of  the  Abbey  Buildings,  by  Several  Writers. 
Second  Edit/on,  enlarged,  containing  many  new  Illustrations  by  O.  Jewitt  and 
others.  Medium  8vo.,  10s.  6d. 

THE  LATE  CHARLES  WINSTON. 

AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  DIFFERENCE  OF  STYLE  OBSERV 
ABLE  IN  ANCIENT  GLASS  PAINTINGS,  especially  in  England,  with 
Hints  on  Glass  Painting,  by  the  late  CHARLES  WINSTON.  With  Corrections  and 
Additions  by  the  Author.  2  vols.,  Medium  8vo.,  cloth,  £1  11s.  6d. 

REV.  SAMUEL  LYSONS,  F.S.A. 
OUR    BRITISH    ANCESTORS  :      WHO    AND    WHAT    WERE 

THEY?  An  Inquiry  serving  to  elucidate  the  Traditional  History  of  the  Early 
Britons  by  means  of  recent  Excavations,  Etymology,  Remnants  of  Religious 
Worship,  Inscriptions,  Craniology,  and  Fragmentary  Collateral  History.  By  the 
Rev.  SAMUEL  LYSONS,  M.A,  F.S.A.,  Rector  of  Rodmarton,  and  Perpetual  Curate 
of  St.  Luke's,  Gloucester.  Post  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

M.  VIOLLET-LE-DUC. 
THE  MILITARY  ARCHITECTURE  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES. 

Translated  from  the  French  of  M.  VIOLLET-LE-DUC,  by  M.  MACDERMOTT,  Esq., 
Architect.  With  151  original  French  Engravings.  Second  Edition,  with  a  Pre 
face  by  J.  H.  PARKER,  C.B.  Medium  8vo.,  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

JOHN  HEWITT. 
ANCIENT  ARMOUR  AND  WEAPONS  IN  EUROPE.      By  JOHN 

HEWITT,  Member  of  the  Archaeological  Institute  of  Great  Britain.  Vols.  II.  and 
III.,  comprising  the  Period  from  the  Fourteenth  to  the  Seventeenth  Century, 
completing  the  work,  £l  12s.  Also  Vol.  I.,  from  the  Iron  Period  of  the  Northern 
Nations  to  the  end  of  the  Thirteenth  Century,  18s.  The  work  complete,  3  vols., 
8vo.,  £1  11s.  6d. 

REV.  PROFESSOR  STUBBS. 

THE  TRACT  "DE  INVENTIONE  SANCTJE  CRUCIS  NOSTR^l 
IN  MONTE  ACUTO  ET  DE  DUCTIONE  EJUSDEM  APUD  WALT- 
HAM,"  now  first  printed  from  the  Manuscript  in  the  British  Museum,  with  In 
troduction  and  Notes  by  WILLIAM  STUBBS,  M.A.  Royal  8vo.,  5s.;  Demy  8vo., 
3s.  6d. 

NORTHERN  ANTIQUITIES. 

THE  PRIMEVAL  ANTIQUITIES  of  ENGLAND  and  DENMARK 

COMPARED.  By  J.  J.  A.  WORSAAE.  Translated  and  applied  to  the  illus 
tration  of  similar  remains  in  England,  by  W.  J.  THOMS,  F.S.A.,  &c.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

OUR  ENGLISH  HOME: 

Its  Early  History  and  Progress.  With  Notes  on  the  Introduction  of 
Domestic  Inventions.  New  Edition,  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

PARISH  CHURCH  GOODS  IN  BERKSHIRE,  A.D.  1552. 

Inventories  of  Furniture  and  Ornaments  remaining  in  certain  of  the 
Parish  Churches  of  Berks  in  the  last  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Edward  the 
Sixth  :  Transcribed  from  the  Original  Records,  with  Introduction  and  Explana 
tory  Notes  by  WALTER  MONEY,  F.S.A.,  Member  of  Council  for  Berks,  Brit.  Arch. 
Assoc.,  and  Hon.  Sec.  of  the  Newbury  District  Field  Club.  Crown  8vo.,  limp 
cloth,  3s.  6d. 


12  ARCHITECTURE  AND  ARCHEOLOGY. 

JOHN  HENRY  PARKER,  C.B.,  F.S.A.,  HON.  M.A.  OXON. 
AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE   STUDY   OF   GOTHIC  ARCHI 
TECTURE.      Fifth  Edition,    Revised  and  Enlarged,  with   189  Illustrations, 
with  a  Topographical  and  Glossarial  Index.     Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

A    CONCISE   GLOSSARY    OF    TERMS  USED    IN    GRECIAN, 

ROMAN,  ITALIAN,  AND  GOTHIC  ARCHITECTURE.  A  New 
Edition,  revised.  Fcap.  8vo.,with  470  Illustrations,  in  ornamental  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

AN  ATTEMPT  TO  DISCRIMINATE  THE  STYLES  OF  AR 
CHITECTURE  IN  ENGLAND,  from  the  Conquest  to  the  Reformation; 
with  a  Sketch  of  the  Grecian  and  Roman  Orders.  By  the  late  THOMAS  RICK- 
MAN,  F.S.A.  Seventh  Edition,  with  considerable  Additions,  chiefly  Historical,  by 
JOHN  HENRY  PARKER,  C.B.,  F.S.A. ,  &c.  8vo.  [Nearly  ready. 

DOMESTIC   ARCHITECTURE   OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES,  with 

numerous  Engravings  from  Existing  Remains,  and  Historical  Illustrations  from 
Contemporary  Manuscripts.  By  the  late  T.  HUDSON  TURNER,  Esq.  From  the 
Norman  Conquest  to  the  Thirteenth  Century  ;  interspersed  with  Remarks  on 
Domestic  Manners  during  the  same  Period.  8vo.,  cloth,  £1  Is.  A  Reprint. 

FROM    EDWARD   I.  TO   RICHARD  II.  (the   Edwardian 

Period,  or  the  Decorated  Style).  By  the  Editor  of  "The  Glossary  of  Archi 
tecture."  8vo.,  cloth,  £1  Is. 

Also, 
FROM  RICHARD  II.  TO  HENRY  VIII.  (or  the  Perpen 


dicular  Style).  With  numerous  Illustrations  of  Existing  Remains,  from  Ori 
ginal  Drawings.  In  Two  Vols.,  8vo.,  £1  10s. 

THE  ARCHEOLOGY  OF  ROME.     By  JOHN  HENET  PAEKEE,  C.B. 

Parti.  THE  PRIMITIVE  FORTIFICATIONS.   Fifty-nine  Plates. 

21s. 
Part  4.  THE  TWELVE  EGYPTIAN  OBELISKS.     Eight  Plates.  5s. 

Part  5.    FORUM    ROMANUM    ET    MAGNUM.     Second  Edition, 

Revised  and  Enlarged.     Forty-one  Plates.     10s.  6d. 

Part  7.  THE  COLOSSEUM  AT  ROME.    Thirty-six  Plates.    10s.  6d. 
Part  8.  THE  AQUEDUCTS  OF  ROME.     Thirty-six  Plates.     15s. 

Parts  9  and  10.  THE  TOMBS  IN  AND  NEAR  ROME.  Twenty- 
four  Plates.  MYTHOLOGY  IN  FUNEREAL  SCULPTURE,  AND 
EARLY  CHRISTIAN  SCULPTURE.  Sixteen  Plates.  These  Two  Parts  in 
one  Volume.  15s. 

Part  11.    CHURCH   AND   ALTAR    DECORATIONS   IN   ROME, 

Twenty  Plates.       10s.  6d. 

Part  12.    THE  CATACOMBS.     Twenty -four  Plates.     15s. 

SEPULCHRAL  CROSSES. 

A  MANUAL  for  the  STUDY  of  SEPULCHRAL  SLABS  and 
CROSSES  of  the  MIDDLE  AGES.  By  the  Rev.  EDWARD  L.  CUTTS,  B.A. 
Illustrated  by  upwards  of  300  Engravings.  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 

MEDL2EVAL  BRASSES. 
A    MANUAL    OF    MONUMENTAL    BRASSES.     Comprising  an 

Introduction  to  the  Study  of  these  Memorials,  and  a  List  of  those  remaining  in 
the  British  Isles.  With  Two  Hundred  Illustrations.  By  the  late  Rev.  HERBERT 
HAINES,  M.A.,  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  2  vols.,  8vo*.,  cloth,  12s. 

ENGLISH  COUNTRY  HOUSES. 

SIXTY-ONE  VIEWS  AND  PLANS  of  recently  erected  Mansions, 
Private  Residences,  Parsonage-Houses,  Farm-Houses,  Lodges,  and  Cottages 
with  Sketches  of  Furniture  and  Fittings:  and  A  Practical  Treatise  on  House- 
Building.     By  WILLIAM  WILKINSON,  Architect,   Oxford.     Second  Edition, 
Royal  8vo.,  ornamental  cloth,  £1  5s. 


NEW  AND   STANDARD   EDUCATIONAL    WORKS.  13 

THE  ANNALS  OF  ENGLAND.  An  Epitome  of  English  History. 
From  Cotemporary  Writers,  the  Rolls  of  Parliament,  and  other  Public  Records. 
A  LIBRARY  EDITION,  revised  and  enlarged,  with  additional  Woodcuts: 
with  a  Recommendatory  Note  by  the  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History, 
Oxford.  8vo.,  half-bound,  12s. 

THE  SCHOOL  EDITION  OF  THE  ANNALS   OF  ENGLAND. 

In  Five  Half-crown  Parts.  1.  Britons,  Romans,  Saxons,  Normans.  2.  The 
Plantagenets.  3.  The  Tudors.  4.  The  Stuarts.  5.  The  Restoration,  to  the 
Death  of  Queen  Anne.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth. 

THE    NEW    SCHOOL  -  HISTORY    OF    ENGLAND,   from   Early 

Writers  and  the  National  Records.  By  the  Author  of  "  The  Annals  of  England." 
Sixth  Thousand.  Crown  8vo.,  with  Four  Maps,  limp  cloth,  5s. ;  Coloured  Maps, 
half  roan,  6's. 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  from  its  Foundation 
to  the  Reign  of  Queen  Mary.  By  M.  C.  STAPLET.  Fourth  Edition,  revised. 
Crown  8vo.,  cloth  boards,  5s. 

POETARUM   SCENICORUM  GR^ECORUM,  ^Eschyli,    Sophoclis, 

Euripidis,  et  Aristophanis,  Fabulae,  Superstites,  et  Perditarum  Fragmenta.     Ex 

recognition  GUIL.  DINDORFII.     Editio  Quinta.     Royal  8vo.,  cloth,  £1  Is. 
THUCYDIDES,   with  Notes,    chiefly  Historical    and   Geographical. 

By  the  late  T.  ARNOLD,  D.D.     With  Indices  by  the  Rev.  R.  P.  G.  TIDDEMAN. 

Eighth  Edition.     3  vols.,  8vo.,  cloth  lettered,  £1  16s. 
JELF'S  GREEK  GRAMMAR.— A  Grammar  of  the  Greek  Language, 

chiefly  from   the  text  of  Raphael   Kiihner.      By  WM.  EDW.  JELF,  B.D.,  late 

Student  and  Censor  of  Ch.  Ch.     Fourth  Edition,  with  Additions  and  Corrections. 

2  vols.  8vo.,  £l  10s. 

LAWS  OF  THE  GREEK  ACCENTS.    By  JOHN  GRIFFITHS,  D.D., 

Warden  of  Wadham  College,  Oxford.     Sixteenth  Edition.     16mo.,  price  6d. 
RUDIMENTARY  RULES,  with  Examples,  for  the  Use  of  Beginners 
in  Greek  Prose  Composition.   By  JOHN  MITCHINSON,  D.C.L.,  late  Head  Master 
of  the  King's  School,  Canterbury,  (now  Bishop  of  Barbados).     16mo.,  sewed,  Is. 

TWELVE  RUDIMENTARY  RULES  FOR  LATIN  PROSE  COM 
POSITION  :  with  Examples  and  Exercises,  for  the  use  of  Beginners.  By  the 
Rev.E.MooBE,D.D.,PrincipalofSt.Edmund  Hall,  Oxford.  SecondEdit.  16mo.,6d. 

MADVIG'S  LATIN  GRAMMAR.  A  Latin  Grammar  for  the  Use 
of  Schools.  By  Professor  MADVIG,  with  additions  by  the  Author.  Translated 
by  the  Rev.  G.  WOODS,  M.A.  New  Edition,  with  an  Index  of  Authors.  8vo., 
cloth,  12s. 

ERASMI  COLLOQUIA  SELECTA :    Arranged  for  Translation  and 

Re-translation  ;  adapted  for  the  Use  of  Boys  who  have  begun  the  Latin  Syntax. 
By  EDWARD  C.  LOWE,  D.D.,  Head  Master  of  S.John's  Middle  School,  Hurst- 
pierpoint.  Fcap.  8vo.,  strong  binding,  3s. 

PORTA  LATINA :  A  Selection  from  Latin  Authors,  for  Translation 
and  Re-Translation ;  arranged  in  a  Progressive  Course,  as  an  Introduction  to 
the  Latin  Tongue.  By  EDWARD  C.  LOWE,  D.D.,  Head  Master  of  Hurstpierpoint 
School ;  Editor  of  Erasmus'  "  Colloquies,"  &c.  Fcap.  8vo.,  strongly  bound,  3s. 

A  GRAMMATICAL  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  HEBREW  PSALTER ; 

being  an  Explanatory  Interpretation  of  Every  Word  contained  in  the  Book  of 
Psalms,  intended  chiefly  for  the  Use  of  Beginners  in  the  Study  of  Hebrew.     By 
JOANA  JULIA  GRESWELL.     Post  8vo.,  cloth,  6s. 
SUNDAY-SCHOOL    EXERCISES,   Collected    and   Revised    from 

Manuscripts  of  Burghclere  School-children,  under  the  teaching  of  the  Rev.  W. 
B.  BARTER,  late  Rector  of  Highclere  and  Burghclere ;  Edited  by  his  Son-in-law, 
the  BISHOP  OF  ST.  ANDREW'S.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  5s. 

A  FIRST    LOGIC    BOOK,  by  D.  P.  CHASE,   M.A.,   Principal   of 

St.  Mary  Hall,  Oxford.     Small  4to.,  sewed,  3s. 

NEW  AND  OLD  METHODS  OF  ETHICS,  by  P.  Y.  EDGEWORTH. 

8vo.,  sewed,  3s. 


OXFORD   POCKET   CLASSICS. 


A  SERIES  OF  GREEK  AND  LATIN  CLASSICS 

FOR  THE  USE  OF  SCHOOLS. 


GREEK    POETS. 

Cloth. 

Cloth. 

s.     d. 

s.    d. 

^Eschylus       .         .         .         .30 

Sophocles       .... 

3     0 

Aristophanes.     2  vols.    .         .60 

Homeri  I  lias 

3     6 

Euripides.     3  vols.          .         .66 

f\A    ,-      <  <•         ij 

3     0 

Tragcedioe  Sex         .     3     6 

GREEK  PROSE  WRITERS. 

Aristotelis  Ethica            .         .20 

Thucydides.     2  vols. 

5     0 

Demosthenes  de  Corona,  et  )        on 

Xenophontis  Memorahilia 

1     4 

JEschines  in  Ctesiphontem  ) 

\  »  ,  .    V«  ~C« 

2     0 

Herodotus.     2  vols.        .        .60 

LATIN    POETS. 

Horatius        .         .         .         .20     Lucretius       .... 

2     0 

Juvenalis  et  Persius       .         .16 

Phoedrus         .... 

1     4 

Lucanus         .         .        .        .26 

Virgilius                  ; 

2     6 

LATIN  PROSE  WRITERS. 

Csesaris  Commentarii,  cum  Sup-             Ciceronis  Tusc.  Disp.  Lib.  V. 

2     0 

plementisAuliHirtiiet  aliorum  2     6     Ciceronis  Orationes  Selectae    . 
—  —  Commentarii    de   Bello               Cornelius  Nepos     . 

3     6 
1     4 

Gallico        .         .         .         .16     Livius.     4  vols. 

6     0 

Cicero  De  Officiis,  de  Senectute, 

Sallustius       .... 

2     0 

et  de  Amicitia    .         .         .20 

Tacitus.     2  vols.     . 

5     0 

TEXTS  WITH  SHORT  NOTES. 

UNIFORM  WITH  THE  SERIES  OF  "OXFORD  POCKET  CLASSICS." 

GREEK  WRITERS.     TEXTS  AND  NOTES. 

SOPHOCLES. 

s.  d. 

s.    d. 

AJAX  (Text  and  Notes}        .        .10 

ANTIGONE  (Text  and  Notes) 

1     0 

ELECTRA            „                 ..10 

PHILOCTETES    ,, 

1     0 

OEDIPUS  REX     ,,         .         .         .10 

TRACHINI^E       ,,        .         . 

1     0 

(Eoipus  COLONEUS  „         .        .10 

The  Notes  only,  in  one  vol.,  cloth,  3s. 

AESCHYLUS. 

PERS;E  (Text  and  Notes)     .         .10 

CHOEPHOR/E  (Text  and  Notes)    . 

1     0 

PROMETHEUS  VINCTUS         „      .     1     0 

EUMENIDES               „ 

1     0 

SEPTEM  CONTRA  THEBAS     ,,.10 

SUFPLICES                        ,j             .             . 

1     0 

AGAMEMNON                          ,,.10 

The  Notes  only,  in  one  vol.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

ARISTOPHANES. 

THE  KNIGHTS  (Text  and  Notes)      I     0  |  ACHARNIANS  (Text  and  Nofes)       1     0 
THE  BIRDS  (Text  and  Notes)  1     0 


NEW  SERIES  OF  ENGLISH  NOTES. 


15 


HECUBA  (Text  and  Notes} 
MEDEA  „        . 

ORESTES  ,, 

HIPPOLYTUS       „ 


EURIPIDES. 

s.    d. 
1     0 

0      ALCESTIS  ,,  .10 

0       The  above,  Notes  only,  in  one  vol.,  cloth,  3s. 


PHCENISS^E  (Text  and  Notes) 


.     1     0     BACCH^E 
DEMOSTHENES. 


1     0 


DE  CORONA  (Text  and  Notes)     . 

HOMERUS. 
ILIAS,    LIB.  i. — vi.    (Text   and 

Notes) 20 

jESCHINES. 
IN    CTESIPHONTEM    (Text  and 

Notes)  .         .         .         .20 


0  j  OLYNTHIAC  ORATIONS        .        .10 

XENOPHON. 
MEMORABILIA  (Text  and  Notes)      2     6 

ARISTOTLE. 
DE    ARTE   POETICA    (Text  and 

Notes)       .         cloth,  2s. ;   sewed  1      6 
DE  RE  PUBLICA     „      3s.  2     6 


LATIN  WRITERS.     TEXTS  AND  NOTES. 
VIRGILIUS. 


BUCOLICA  (Text  and  Notes)        .     1     0 
GEORGICA  „  .20 


LIB.    I. — in.   (Text 


and  Notes) 

HORATIUS. 
2     0  |  EPISTOL^E  ET  ARS  POETICA  (Text 


CARMINA,  &c.  (Text  and  Notes) 

SATIRE  „  .10]       and  Notes) 

The  Notes  only,  in  one  vol.,  cloth,  2s. 

SALLUSTIUS. 
JUGURTHA  (Text  and  Notes)       .     1     6  \  CATILINA  (Text  and  Notes) 

M.  T.  CICERO. 


1     0 


1     0 


IN  Q.  C^ECILIUM  —  DIVINATIO 

(Text  and  Notes)  .  .  .10 
IN  VERREM  ACTIO  PRIMA  .  1  0 
PRO  LEGE  MANILIA,  et  PRO 

ARCHIA  1     0 


IN  CATILINAM 

PRO  PLANCIO  (Text  and  Notes)  . 

PRO  MILONE     . 

PRO  Roscio        . 

ORATIONES  PHILIPPICS,  I.,  II. 


The  above,  Notes  only,  in  one  vol.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 


DE  SENECTUTE  et  DE  AMICITIA    1     0 

CAESAR. 
DE  BELLO  GALLICO,  LIB.  i.— in. 

(Text  and  Notes)    .         .         .10 

LIVIUS. 
LIB.  xxi. — xxiv.  (Text  and  Notes) 

sewed 40 

Ditto  in  cloth      .         .         .         .46 


EPISTOLS  SELECTEE.     Pars  I. 

CORNELIUS    NEPOS. 

LIVES  (Text  and  Notes)      . 

PH^EDRUS. 
FABUL^E  (Text  and  Notes) 

TACITUS. 

THE  ANNALS.  Notes  only,  2vols., 
}6mo.,  cloth     .         .         .         . 


1     0 

0 

G 
0 
0 
6 

1  6 
1  6 
1  0 


7     0 


Portions  of  several  other  Authors  are  in  preparation. 


Uniform  with  the  Oxford  Pocket  Classics. 

THE  LIYES  OF  THE  MOST  EMINENT  ENGLISH  POETS; 
WITH  CRITICAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THEIR  WORKS.  By  SA 
MUEL  JOHNSON.  3  vols.,  24mo.,  cloth,  2s.  6d.  each. 

THE  LIYES  OF  MILTON  AND  POPE,  with  Critical  Observations 
on  their  Works.  By  SAMUEL  JOHNSON.  24mo.,  cloth,  Is.  6d. 

CHOICE  EXTRACTS  FROM  MODERN  FRENCH  AUTHORS, 

for  the  use  of  Schools.     18mo.,  cloth,  3s. 


16  J500KS,  $c.,  RELATING  TO  OXFORD. 

SELECTIONS  from  the  RECORDS  of  the  CITY  OF  OXFORD, 

with  Extracts  from  other  Documents  illustrating  the  Municipal  History : 
Henry  VIII.  to  Elizabeth  [1509 — 1583].  Edited,  by  authority  of  the  Cor 
poration  of  the  City  of  Oxford,  by  WILLIAM  H.  TURNER,  of  the  Bodleian 
Library;  under  the  direction  of  ROBERT  S.  HAWKINS,  Town  Clerk.  Royal 
8vo.,  cloth,  £1  Is. 

A  HANDBOOK  FOR  VISITORS  TO  OXFORD.  Illustrated  with 
numerous  Woodcuts  by  Jewitt,  and  Steel  Plates  by  Le  Keux.  A  New  Edition, 
8vo.,  cloth,  12s. 

THE  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  CALENDAR  for  1879.  Corrected 
to  the  end  of  December,  1878.  12mo.,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

THE  OXFORD  TEN- YEAR  BOOK:  A  Complete  Register  of  Uni 
versity  Honours  and  Distinctions,  made  up  to  the  end  of  the  Year  1870. 
Crown  8vo.,  roan,  7s.  6d. 

WYKEHAMICA  :  a  History  of  Winchester  CoUege  and  Commoners, 
from  the  Foundation  to  the  Present  Day.  By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  ADAMS,  M.A., 
late  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Post  8vo.,  cloth,  508  pp.,  with 
Nineteen  Illustrations,  10s.  6d. 


HISTORICAL  TALES 

Illustrating  the  Chief  Events  in  Ecclesiastical  History,  British  and  Foreign. 

29  Numbers  at  One  Shilling  each,  limp  cloth  ;  or  arranged  in 
Six  Volumes,  cloth  lettered,  3s.  6d.  each. 

ADDITIONAL  VOLUMES   TO   THE   SERIES, 

ENGLAND  :  Mediaeval  Period.  Containing  The  Orphan  of  Evesham,  or  The 
Jews  and  the  Mendicant  Orders.— Mark's  "Wedding,  or  Lollardy. — The  White 
Rose  of  Lynden,  or  The  Monks  and  the  Bible.— The  Prior's  Ward,  or  The 
Broken  Unity  of  the  Church.  By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  ADAMS,  Vicar  of  Dry  Sand- 
ford;  Author  of"  Wilton  of  Cuthbert's,"  "  Schoolboy  Honour,"  &c.  With  Four 
Illustrations  on  Wood.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

THE  ANDREDS-WEALD,  OB  THE  HOUSE  OF  MICHELHAM :  A  Tale  of 
the  Norman  Conquest.  By  the  Rev.  A.  D.  CRAKE,  B.A.,  Fellow  of  the  Royal 
Historical  Society;  Author  of  "jEmilius,"  "Alfgar  the  Dane,"  &c.  With  Four 
Illustrations  by  LOUISA  TAYLOR.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 


CHEAPER  ISSUE  OF  TALES  FOR  YOUNG  MEN 
AND  WOMEN. 

In  Six  Half-crown  Vols.,  cloth. 

Vol.  I.  contains  F.  E.  FACET'S  Mother  and  Son,  Wanted  a  Wife,  and  Hobson's 
Choice. 

Vol.  II.  F.  E.  PAGET'S  Windycote  Hall,  Squitch,  Tenants  at  Tinkers'  End. 

Vol.  III.  W.  E.  HEYGATE'S  Two  Cottages,  The  Sisters,  and  Old  Jarvis's  Will. 

Vol.  IV.  W.  E.  HEYGATE'S  James  Bright  the  Shopman,  The  Politician,  Ir 
revocable. 

Vol.  V.  R.  KING'S  The  Strike,  and  Jonas  Clint;  N.  BROWN'S  Two  to  One,  and 
False  Honour. 

Vol.  VI.  J.  M.  NEALE'S  Railway  Accident ;  E.  MONRO'S  The  Recruit,  Susan, 
Servants'  Influence,  Mary  Thomas,  or  Dissent  at  Evenly  ;  H.  HAYMAN'S  Caroline 
Elton,  or  Vanity  and  Jealousy. 

Each  Volume  w  bound  as  a  distinct  and  complete  work,  and  sold 
separately  for  PBESENTS. 


16  EOOKS,  #c.t  RELATING  TO  OXFORD. 

SELECTIONS  from  the  RECORDS  of  the  CITY  OF   OXFORD, 

with  Extracts  from  other  Documents  illustrating  the  Municipal  History : 
Henry  VIII.  to  Elizabeth  [1509—1583].  Edited,  by  authority  of  the  Cor 
poration  of  the  City  of  Oxford,  by  WILLIAM  H.  TURNER,  of  the  Bodleian 
Library;  under  the  direction  of  ROBERT  S.  HAWKINS,  Town  Clerk.  Royal 
8vo.,  cloth,  £1  Is. 

A  HANDBOOK  FOR  VISITORS  TO  OXFORD.  Illustrated  with 
numerous  Woodcuts  by  Jewitt,  and  Steel  Plates  by  Le  Keux.  A  New  Edition, 
8vo.,  cloth,  12s. 

THE  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  CALENDAR  for  1879.  Corrected 
to  the  end  of  December,  1878.  12mo.,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

THE  OXFORD  TEN- YEAR  BOOK :  A  Complete  Register  of  Uni 
versity  Honours  and  Distinctions,  made  up  to  the  end  of  the  Year  1870. 
Crown  8vo.,  roan,  7s.  6d. 

WYKEH AMIGA  :  a  History  of  Winchester  College  and  Commoners, 
from  the  Foundation  to  the  Present  Day.  By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  ADAMS,  M.A., 
late  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Post  8vo.,  cloth,  508  pp.,  with 
Nineteen  Illustrations,  10s.  6d. 


HISTORICAL  TALES 

Illustrating  the  Chief  Events  in  Ecclesiastical  History,  British  and  Foreign, 

29  Numbers  at  One  Shilling  each,  limp  cloth  ;  or  arranged  In 
Six  Volumes,  cloth  lettered,  3s.  6d.  each. 

ADDITIONAL  VOLUMES   TO   THE   SERIES, 

ENGLAND  :  Mediaeval  Period.  Containing  The  Orphan  of  Evesham,  or  The 
Jews  and  the  Mendicant  Orders. — Mark's  Wedding,  or  Lollardy. — The  White 
Rose  of  Lynden,  or  The  Monks  and  the  Bible.— The  Prior's  Ward,  or  The 
Broken  Unity  of  the  Church.  By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  ADAMS,  Vicar  of  Dry  Sand- 
ford;  Author  of"  Wilton  of  Cuthbert's,"  "  Schoolboy  Honour,"  &c.  With  Four 
Illustrations  on  Wood.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d, 

THE  ANDREDS-WEALD,  OR  THE  HOUSE  OF  MICHELHAM :  A  Tale  of 
the  Norman  Conquest.  By  the  Rev.  A.  D.  CRAKE,  B.A.,  Fellow  of  the  Royal 
Historical  Society  ;  Author  of  "  jEmilius,"  "  Alfgar  the  Dane,"  &c.  With  Four 
Illustrations  by  LOUISA  TAYLOR.  Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 


CHEAPER  ISSUE  OF  TALES  FOR  YOUNG  MEN 
AND  WOMEN. 

In  Six  Half-crown  Tols.,  cloth. 

Vol.  I.  contains  F.  E.  PAGET'S  Mother  and  Son,  Wanted  a  Wife,  and  Hohson's 
Choice. 

Vol.  II.  F.  E.  FACET'S  Windycote  Hall,  Squitch,  Tenants  at  Tinkers'  End. 

Vol.  III.  W.  E.  HEYGATE'S  Two  Cottages,  The  Sisters,  and  Old  Jarvis's  Will. 

Vol.  IV.  W.  E.  HEYGATE'S  James  Bright  the  Shopman,  The  Politician,  Ir 
revocable. 

Vol.  V.  R.  KING'S  The  Strike,  and  Jonas  Clint  j  N.  BROWN'S  Two  to  One,  and 
False  Honour. 

Vol.  VI.  J.  M.  NEALE'S  Railway  Accident ;  E.  MONRO'S  The  Recruit,  Susan, 
Servants'  Influence,  Mary  Thomas,  or  Dissent  at  Evenly  ;  H.  HAYMAN'S  Caroline 
Elton,  or  Vanity  and  Jealousy. 

Each  Volume  is  bound  as  a  distinct  and  complete  work,  and  sold 
separately  for  PBESENTS. 


LAUD,  WILLIAM  BX 

5035 
.L5 
Works  L2 

v.5 
Pt.  1
