"NOTICE OF THE EXTERNAL CHARACTERS AND HABITS OF TROGLODYTES GORILLA, A NEW SPECIES OF ORANG"
By Thomas S. Savage, M.D. — Boston Journal of Natural History, Vol. V, No. 4 (1847), pp. 417-443 (with J. Wyman's osteological appendix)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text extracts Savage's 1847 paper (with Wyman's appendix) from Vol. 5 of the Boston Journal of Natural History, as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier mobot31753002212675). The 1847 publication is in the public domain. The extraction is complete.

========================================================================

1. NOTICE OF THE EXTERNAL CHARACTERS AND HABITS OF
THE ENGE-ENA.

While on the voyage home from Cape Palmas, I was unex-
pectedly detained in the Gaboon river, latitude 15/ N., and
the month of April (1847) was spent at the house of the Rev.
J. L. Wilson, Senior Missionary of the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions to West Africa. Soon
after my arrival Mr. Wilson showed me a skull, represented
by the natives to be that of a monkey-like animal, remarkable
for its size, ferocity and habits. From the contour of the
skull, and the information derived from several intelligent
natives, I was induced to believe that it belonged toa new
species of Orang. I expressed this opinion to Mr. Wilson,
e a desire for further investigation, and if possible, to de-
by the inspection of a specimen alive or r dead.
Se with interest into the matter, and promise his
i hearty coöperation. Having been a resident at that vom for
several years, well acquainted with the chiefs and ple, pos-
sessing in an eminent degree their regard, and speaking fedy
their bango he was enabled to secure. to me advant ges ;4
signal importance to my investigations. - ‘T did not suc
however, i in obtaining the animal, but several crania of the
two sexes, and of different : ages, v other import B m x y
the skeleton were received. These p z


! We arrived at a bay called ded Southern. Fom; at the amet yhic J
island like the former, having a lake, and in. this lake another. ear filo s savage


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 421


examination, and I now proceed to give the results of my
investigations on its External Characters and Habits.

It should be borne in mind that my account is based upon
the statements of the aborigines of that region. In this con-
nection it may be proper for me also to remark, that having
been a missionary, resident for several years, studying from
habitual intercourse, the African mind and character, I felt
myself prepared to discriminate and decide upon the proba-
bility-of their statements. Besides, being familiar with the
history and habits of its interesting congener, (Troglodytes
niger, Geoff.) 1 was able to separate their accounts of the two
animals, which, having the same locality and a similarity of
habit are confounded in the minds of the mass, especially as
but few, such as traders to the interior and huntsmen, have
ever seen the animal in question. In this last fact stated we
find an explanation of the confusion, inaccuracy and exagger-
ation which characterize the occasional references that have
been made in books to both animals, the sources of such in-
formation being transient visitors and voyagers. If it be ad-
missible to base and sustain a proposition on human testimony,
then to my mind the existence of this new species of orang,
aside from the evidence of its skeleton, is established, and the
account that I now submit of its habits, authentic. It is on
Such grounds, and with such convictions I venture to place my
. Sütements on record, leaving them to the future for confirma-
tion or correction.

_ The tribe from which our knowledge of the animal is de-
: "Wed and whose territory forms its habitat, is the Mpongwe,
. "feüpying both banks of the river Gaboon from its mouth to
_ “ome fifty or sixty miles upwatd. The face of the country as
; You proceed inward is undulating and hilly, well watered with

‘Steams and rivers, and abounding with indigenous fruits.

The river is visited for purposes of trade in ivory, ebony and
.  **"WOOds by vessels from different parts of America and Eu-
en Te. In view of this fact it may seem surprising that the ani-

jm ld be unknown to science, and without its proper


492 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


place in systems of Zoology. But this is accounted for by the
fact that its immediate habitat is back some distance from the
coast, and its habits and ferocity such that it is not often en-
countered. "The natives stand greatly in fear of it, and never
attempt its capture except in self-defence.

If the word * Pongo' be of African origin it is probably a
corruption of Mpongwe, the name of the tribe on the banks
of the Gaboon, and hence, applied to tbe region they inhabit.
Their local name for the Chimpanzée is Enché-eko, as near as it
can be anglicised, from which the common term “ Jocko"
probably comes. The Mpongwe appellation for its new con-
gener is Engé-ena, prolonging the sound of the first vowel and
slightly sounding the second.

The habitat of the Engé-ena is the interior of Lower Guinea,
while that of the Enché-eko or Chimpanzée is nearer the sea-
board.

Its height is above five feet, it is disproportionally broad
across the shoulders, thickly covered with coarse black hair,
which is said to be similar in its arrangement to that of the
Enché-eko. With age it becomes gray, which fact has give?
rise to the report that both animals are seen of different colors.

Head. The prominent features of the head are, the great
width and elongation of the face, the depth of the
region, the branches of the lower jaw being very deep and
extending far backward, and the comparative smallness of the
cranial portion ; the eyes are very large, and said to be ces
of the Enché-eko, a bright hazel ; nose broad and flat, sligh T
elevated towards the root; the muzzle broad and prominent,
lips and chin with scattered gray hairs, the under lip highly
mobile, and capable of great elongation when the animal i5
enraged, then hanging over tlie chin; skin of the face
ears naked, and of a dark brown approaching black.

The most remarkable feature of the head is a high ridge pA
crest of hair in the course of the sagittal suture, which mee
posteriorly with a transverse ridge of the same, but kn es
inent; running tound from the back of one ear to the


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 493


The animal has the power of moving the scalp freely forward
and back, and when enraged, is said to contract it strongly
over the brow, thus bringing down the hairy ridge, and point-
ingthe hair forward so as to present an indescribably ferocious
aspect.

Neck short, thick and hairy; chest and shoulders very
broad, said to be fully double the size of the Enché-eko's; arms
very long, reaching some way below the knee, the forearm
much the shortest; hands very large, the thumbs much larger
than the fingers.

Abdomen very broad and prominent, the hair thinner than
on the back, legs bowed like the Chimpanzée’s, but the muscles
larger or better developed.

No tail nor callosities ; a small tuft of hair at the extremity
of the os coccygis ; the genitalia similar in both sexes to the
c parts in the Chimpanzée except their larger size in the


Their gait is shuffling, the motion of the body, which is
never upright as in man, but bent forward, is somewhat rolling,
or from side to side. The arms being longer than those of
the Chimpanzée it does not stoop as much in walking; like
that animal it makes progression by thrusting its arms forward,
testing the hands on the ground and then giving the body a

jumping, half swinging motion between them. In this
"wit is said not to flex the fingers as does the Chimpanzée,
‘esting on the knuckles, but to extend them, thus making a
fulerum of the hand. When it assumes the walking posture
to Which itis said to be much inclined, it balances its huge

Xy by flexing the arms upward. They live in bands, but
are not so numerous as the Chimpanzée’s ; the females generally
exceed the other sex in number. My informants all agree in
assertion that but one adult male is seen in a band ; that

the young males grow up, a contest takes place for mas-
tery, and the strongest, by killing and driving out the others,
establishes himself as the head of the community. The silly
Stories about their carrying off women from the native towns,


w


434 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


and vanquishing the elephants, related by voyagers and widely
copied into books, are unhesitatingly denied. They have been
averred of the Chimpanzée, but this is still more preposterous.
They probably had their origin in the marvellous accounts
given by the natives, of the Engé-ena, to credulous traders.

Their dwellings, if they may be so called, are similar to
those of the Chimpanzée, consisting simply of a few sticks and
leafy branches supported by the crotches and limbs of trees ;
they afford no shelter, and are occupied only at night.'

They are exceedingly ferocious, and always offensive in their
habits, never running from man as does the Chimpanzée. They
are objects of terror to the natives, and are never encountered
by them except on the defensive. The few that have been
captured were killed by elephant hunters and native traders as
they came suddenly upon them while passing through the
forests. :

It is said that when the male is first seen he gives a terrific
yell that resounds far and wide through the forest, something
like kh—ah! kh—ah! prolonged and shrill. His enormous
jaws are widely opened at each expiration, his under lip hangs
over the chin, and the hairy ridge and scalp is contracted upon
the brow, presenting an aspect of indescribable ferocity- The
females and young at the first ery quickly disappear ; he å
approaches the enemy in great fury, pouring out his horrid
cries in quick succession. 'The hunter awaits his approach
with his gun extended; if his aim is not sure he permits
animal to grasp the barrel, and as he carries it to his mouth
(which is his habit) he fires ; should the gun fail to go off, the
barrel (that of an ordinary musket, which. is thin) is |
between his teeth, and the encounter soon proves fatal to the

unter.

1 The natives ridicule this habit of the Engé-ena. "They call him 2 fool, to m
house without a roof, in a country where they have so much rain. They " roof,
not so much sense as a certain bird, which makes a large nest with a tight round
then it daubs the inside with mud, and unfolding its wings vun a house. M:
Nace are all E and the inside smoothly Baie SE fts habit


Ly


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 495


The killing of an Engé-ena is considered an act of great skill
and courage, and brings to the victor signal honor. A slave
toan Mpongwe man, from an interior tribe, killed the male and
female whose bones are the origin of this article. On one
occasion he had succeeded in killing an elephant, and return-
ing home met a male Engé-ena, and being a good marksman he
soon brought him to the ground. He had not proceeded far
before the female was observed, which he also killed. This
act, unheard of before, was considered almost superhuman.
the man’s freedom was immediately granted to him, and his
hame proclaimed abroad as the prince of hunters,

It is said that this animal exhibits a degree of intelligence
inferior to that of the Chimpanzée ; this might be expected
from its wider departure from the organization of the human
subject. I could not ascertain that more than one or two at
most of the young had ever been captured. One was taken
and kept for a year by a native, and then sold toa Frenchman,
but it died on the passage home. Whether the skeleton was
preserved is not known. No information respecting its
habits in a state of domestication could be had upon which
reliance might be placed.

In the wild state their habits are in general like those of the
Troglodytes niger, building their nests loosely in trees, living
9n similar fruits, and changing their places of resort from the
force of circumstances.

The Amomums, which constitute in every locality of the
Orangs a prominent article of food, I found to be of entirely

“tent species from those at Cape Palmas. At the latter
Point but one species and a small variety, with acid pulp is
known, but at the Gaboon at least three. ‘They eat only those
Species which have an acid pulp or arillus: Fruits distin-
Suished by the opposite qualities of acidity and sweetness are
"ien with equal zest. The stem of the Saccharum officina-
rum, the fruit of the Elais Guineénsis or oil palm, Carica
Papaya, Musa sapientium, and several others unknown to
Botany are prominent on the list.. Here, as at all other points


496 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


on the coast, the orangs are believed by the natives to be
human beings, members of their own race, degenerated.
Some few, who have put on a degree of civilization above the
mass, will not acknowledge their belief in this affinity ; such
profess to view them as embodied spirits, the belief in trans-
migration of souls being prevalent. They say that the
Enché-eko or Chimpanzée has the spirit of a Coastman, being
less fierce and more intelligent, and the Engé-ena that of a
Bushman. The majority however, fully believe them to be
men, and seem to be unaffected by our arguments in proof of
the contrary. This is especially true of the tribes in the im-
mediate vicinity of the locality. They believe them to be
literally ** wild men of the woods."

They are generally eaten, and their flesh, with that of the
Chimpanzée, and monkeys at large, occupies a prominent place
in their “ bill of fare.”


I. DESCRIPTION OF THE CRANIA AND SOME OF THE BONES OF
; THE ENGÉ-ENA.

The collection of crania and bones brought from Africa by
Dr. Savage, and which served as the basis of the following
descriptions, consists of four skulls, two males and two females,
one of each in a perfect condition, and all of them adult ;
a male and female pelvis, the long bones of the upper an
lower extremities, and a few vertebrae and ribs.

The crania of the males are much larger than those of the
females, and exceed in their longest diameter the skull Ji
well characterized Negro by two and a quarter inches; e y
nearly one inch the diameter across the zygomatic arches.

The sutures were entirely obliterated in one, anc
in the other, a condition similar to that of the crant i
adult Simia satyrus; and of the older crania of the Troglodyt
niger, in both of which all sutures sooner or later disap =

When viewed laterally, the- incisive alveoli in both
See Table of Admeasurements, -
'* See Boston Journal of Nat. Hist. Vol. IV. p. 370.


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 427


Orang and Chimpanzée form a strong projection below the
nasal orifice, but are most conspicuous in the former, giving the
lower part of the face that remarkable degree of prominence
which is socharacteristic. In the Engé-ena the outline of the
face is straight from below the superciliary ridges (Pl. I. and IT.)
to the edge of the incisive alveoli, and when the head is so
placed that the edge of the lower jaw is horizontal, the facial
line makes with it an angle of about 45°. The facial angle
according to the usual method of measuring it (the supercil-
lary ridges excluded) is about 30". According to Mr. Owen
that of S. satyrus is 30^, and that of Troglodytes niger 35°.’
The most remarkable peculiarity, one which strikes the ob-
Server at sight, is the great development of the interparietal
and occipital crests, as well as of the superciliary ridges,
(PI. I.) all of which give the head great angularity of outline,
causing it somewhat to resemble that of S. satyrus, and to con-
trast with that of T. niger, on which there are no crests, and
the superciliary ridges of which, though well developed, are
much more curvilinear and smooth. Both crests are quite
thin on the free edges, and are elevated about 1j inches above
the skull; the occipital extending across from one mastoid
Process to the other, and the interparietal extending forward at
Night angles to it terminates near the centre of the coronal
Fegion in two strong diverging ridges, which are directed to
the outer angles of the orbits, including between them a
*eply concave triangular space. The superciliary ridges are
much more prominent than in the Chimpanzée, especially at
their union over the nose, and the apertures of the orbits are
more nearly square. A single large supra-orbitar and a small
Ifra-orbitar foramen exists on each side. The two fol-
ng peculiarities, pointed out by Prof. Agassiz, exist in all
“© crania, and are specific characters ; one of them is drawn
m the structure of the infra-orbitar canal, which in the
panzée forms a deep groove terminating in the spheno-


! Trans. Zoolog. Soc. London, T. p. 372.


498 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


maxillary fissure, its depth remaining uniform to its termination ;
but in the Engé-ena this canal becomes gradually less deep from
before backwards, and at the fissure is scarcely obvious.’
The second character is derived from the internal walls of the
orbits, which recede from each other in descending towards the
floor, thus leaving a large pyramidal space for the lodgment of
the os ethmoides, and serving to increase the capacity of the
maxillary sinuses.

The foramen lacerum of the orbit, which serves to trans-
mit the IIT, IV, part of the V, and the VI nerves, and which
in the human cranium has an elongated form, is in the Engé-ena
very nearly round, having a diameter of only two or three
lines. The spheno-maxillary fissure is much more narrow and
contracted, forming only a linear opening between the orbit
and the zygomatic fossa. á

The ossa nasi are firmly co-ossified with each other and with
the surrounding bones, but their outline is sufficiently distinct.
They have a more triangular form than in the Chimpanzee,
the apex being much more acute, and on the median line pre
sentsa ptominent ridge. In four skulls of Chimpanzées the
nasal orifice is of a triangular form, the angles more oF less
rounded, and the apex directed upwards; in three of the
skulls of the Engé-enait is nearly square, and in the fourth ap-
proaches the triangular form, but the apex is directed down-
wards. The form of the posterior nares also in the two spe
cies is materially different; in the Chimpanzée the transverse
diameter of the orifice exceeds that of the vertical, but n the
Engé-ena the vertical is twice that of the transverse, a condition
which results from the elongation downwards of the superior
maxillary bones; the posterior edge of the palatine bones in
the new species is emarginated on the median line 9$ e
S. satyrus, while in the Chimpanzée it is either destitute '
an emargination or extended into a spine ; the lower edge of the


ae =


^
* In an adult cranium of the Chimpanzée belonging to Dr. J. C. Warren, this
canal posteriorly is completely closed over, as in t


Habits and Osieology of a New Orang. 429


vomer in the Engé-ena is thin and delicate, and articulates
imperfectly with the palatine bones, the reverse condition exist-
ing in the second.

If the length of the bony roof of the mouth compared with
its breadth is an index of inferiority, the Engé-ena certainly
occupies a lower position in the animal Fits than the Chim-
panzée ; in the latter the breadth is to the length as 1.5 inches
to 2.8 inches, and in the former as 1.5 inches to 3.9 inches.
The incisive canals, which in the Chimpanzée open into the
mouth by two distinct orifices, in the Engé-ena are but imper-
fectly separated from each other at their termination ; a single
oramen on each side exists midway between the incisive fora-
men and the edges of the alveoli laterally, which is represent-
ed in the Chimpanzée by two or more smaller foramina on
each side.

After the cranial crests and ridges there is no one character
by which the head of the new. species may be more easily dis-
tinguished from that of the Chimpanzée than by the zygomatic
arches. In the latter they are thin and slender, especially at
their posterior part, and the superior edge is very nearly hori-
zontal. In the new species the arches are much broader, more
Massive, at their posterior third suddenly arched upwa, e
the Zygomatic fossæ much deeper ; a well marked E
indicates the attachment of the strong masseter mu |
= Tespects they resemble. the emitting varii of the

satyrus.’


pr of the. male € crania only was in a condition to permit.
an examination of its cavi Supe


bees galli existed, e =e plates of the


= g ove the plane of the cribriform.
plate $ the os eim enclosed t Between: gem a de de-


430 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


pression. The mastoid cells of the temporal bone were largely
developed, and were continuous with other cells of similar size
situated in front of the auditory meatus; large cells also ex-
isted at the inner extremity of the petrous bone.

As in S. satyrus, the foramen magnum of the base of the
skull is elongated, and has an emargination on its posterior
edge, and the anterior condyloid foramen is double in one ot
the males, though in the other crania the second or venous
canal is very minute compared with that which transmits the
hypoglossal nerve. (XIth pair.) A well developed ridge on
the temporal bone, (corresponding with the “ vaginal process”
of the human anatomist) extends from the carotid foramen to
the auditory meatus, but there is no obvious surface for the
attachment of a styloid process. A stout cylindrical process a
obliquely terminated, the extremity somewhat roughened as if
for a muscular attachment, is situated just behind and beneath
(the head being in its natural position) the orifice of the
Eustachian tube.

x "The lower, jet presens a degree of massiveness and strength
ination of the great surface for the attachment of the tem-
poral muscles, and the great size of the zygomatic arches.
In its general conformation it resembles that of the Simia
satyrus, but surpasses it in size, although the projection of the
face in the last is the greatest. Its ascending portion is nearly ver-
tical, and contrary to that of the Chimpanzée and Oring;
the coronoid process is more elevated than the condy: loid.” -

The dental formula, as in the Orangs and the Caten
osi. 7 is Bene the same as that of. man,’ m
incisors 7 E = canines + i; premolars 2-2 2 , molars i; rur = diese
"The middle i incisors had been lost, i
of the Females, i in which his were much worn, ermina


e o by Prof. a Op Gs Fal dl
Mc this is not the ¢ s belong


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 431


a broad straight edge, while the lateral incisors were pointed,
very closely resembling a human canine. The interval be-
tween the lateral incisors and the canines in both sexes was
proportionally less than in the Chimpanzée, though there could
not be said to exist any great regularity in this respect in the
different crania. The canines of the males were much larger
than those of the females, but the points were too much
abraded to render it practicable to determine exactly their
original length. ‘The canine of the male, worn as it is, meas-
ures 2.2 inches, and projects about an inch below the edge of
the alveolus ; that of the female, which was not worn, pro-
jected only 0.7 inch below the edge of the alveolus. In both
Sexes these teeth were laterally compressed with a slightly
trenchant edge behind, and on the inner face impressed with
two distinct grooves. The premolars are equal in size, the

_ external cusps longer and more pointed than the internal ; the

. molars have each four cusps the two external the longest, the
_ own having a more rhomboidal form than in the Chimpanzée ;
| the third molar is the smallest of the three, and in all, the
Anterior cusp on the inside is united by an oblique ridge to the

. Posterior cusp on the outside.

. Tn the lower jaw the lateral incisors are much longer than.

E the middle, and. are separated by a small space from the ca- |
. Pines. "The first premolars have blunt stout conical crowns,
_ With the rudiment of a second cusp on the posterior and inner
E edge 5 the second premolar is the smallest, has two cusps on
E Ats anterior ge, with a third much smaller on the posterior
. Mher angle, a rudiment of a fourth cusp is seen on the outer
. "mgl. Of the molars, the third is the largest, and the first
EOS oet of the series ; all have three cusps on |


two on the inside, in which respect they resemble those of
Chimpanzée, and differ from the Orangs. “In the true
. '9n*eys (Cercopitheci) the Gibbons and the Orangs, the last
„oar of the lower jaw has a square quadri-tuberculate crown,
Ke that above." 1 i EE :


1 Owen, Op. Cit. Vol, I., p. 442.


432 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


The heads of the two females, as will be seen by reference
to the table of measurements, were both smaller than those of
the males. A small occipital crest exists in both, but the in-
ter-parietal is entirely wanting in one, and is represented by a
very slight ridge in the other, though both, as is shown by the
teeth being all protruded and more or less worn, have reached
the adult period.. The crania are much more smooth, the out-
lines less angular, and the general expression of the face far
less savage and brutal than in the males. In the younger of
the females the dentes sapientie were perfectly protruded,
and some of their points slightly worn; in this head, as well
as the others, the cranial sutures had become obliterated, but
some of those of the face were still obvious, viz. the zygo-
matic, the malar, and a portion of that between the maxillary
and intermaxillary bones, and between the ossa palati. The
inferior maxillary bone is smaller, and its ramus much more
narrow than in the male, a condition corresponding with the
less perfect development of the canine teeth. Two infra-or-


*


com amina existed in one of the females, but only one m


“Trunk. Of the vertebral column only a few bones €
served ; two adjoining cervical vertebre probably the fifth un
sixth, were remarkable for the great length of the spinous pro
cesses, the longest of which, measured from the inside of ~
spinal canal (posterior face) had a length of 2.4 inches, the
ongest process in the neck of the Chimpanzée was 9?
Elundées — e are quema

The last dorsal, and the first two lumbar vertebree iue. :


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 433


dering it almost impracticable to balance the trunk on the base
of the sacrum, or to maintain with ease an erect attitude un-
aided by the arms.

All the long bones of the upper extremity are remarkable
for their great size and strength. By reference to the table
of admeasurements it will be seen that the scapula is two
inches longer, and nearly two inches broader than that of an or-
dinary man. Instead of having the narrow and elongated form
of the Chimpanzée, the bone is more nearly equilateral, and
recedes farther from the human type in having the fossæ above
and below the spine more nearly equal ; the spine itself is not
so well developed, and after passing the middle of the bone is
Tepresented only by a slightly prominent ridge, which termi-
nates but a few lines above the middle of the posterior edge
of the dorsum. The supra-spinous portion is more nearly in

. the same plane with the inferior part than in either man or

the T. niger; the acromion process is broad and flat as in

. an, but is more straight, its curves are larger, and it is destitute

E of the prolongation inwards which characterizes the same part

E mman. The glenoid cavity prešents the form of that of the

¥ human Scapula, except that its superior extremity is deflected

_ towards the base of the acromion instead of the coracoid pro-

3 cess. A subscapular fossa exists, which is subdivided into

a three smaller fossze, and the coracoid process is much stouter

in man, its terminal portion forming a right angle with

bone.

... The humerus, seventeen inches in length, exceeds that of
the adult S. satyrus by 2.6 inches, has its bicipital groove as
tabe Chimpanzée, more on the anterior face than in man ; its

1 of


Tosities are largely developed, indicating the great strength
the rotator muscles; and the impressions formed by the at-
nent of the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi are very

sly marked on each side of the bicipital groove, having
“A a length of about three inches, indicating the great


i Of the Upper extremity, the clavicles and bones of the wrist and hand were


434 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


strength of these suspensory muscles of the body, and which
are so essential to an arboreal life. The humerus is slightly
twisted, though less so than in man, but there is not the prom-
inence of bone corresponding with the insertion of the deltoides,
its anterior face being uniformly concave, and the posterior
convex, as in the Chimpanzée. The smaller head is less
spherical, the trochlear portion less deeply emarginated, and the
internal edge of the trochlea less prominent than in the
T. niger, but as in the latter, the humerus has a perforation
of its inferior extremity.

In the proportions between the length of the humerus and
ulna, the Engé-ena recedes less from the human type than
the Orang or the Chimpanzée. In S. satyrus the ulna 1s
nearly an inch longer than the humerus, in T. niger the two
bones are (as in Mr. Owen's specimen’ ) nearly equal ; in the
Engé-ena the ulna is to the humerus as 1 to 1.2, and in man
as 1 to 1.5 very nearly. (See table.) "The radius more stout
and massive than in the Chimpanzée, has the same curved

. form necessary for that constantly pronated condition of the
hand essential to their climbing habits.

The sacrum was broken through the body of the fifth ver-
tebra; the canal was complete as far as the broken edge; and
the intervertebral spaces, except the first, had become oblitera-
ted. As in the Chimpanzée compared with that of man; the
sacrum was long and narrow, and its anterior face more nearly
straight than in either. The articulating surface {facet
articulaire) extends down on each side as far asa point m th
way between the third and fourth sacral foramina, its breadt
as in the Chimpanzée, being proportionally much less than in
man ; the broadest part is at the lowest extremity, om
very narrow above; in man the surface is much broader, LI
the breadth more nearly uniform throughout. Here agam; ia 4
have a mark of the inferiority of the higher Quadruman?; > "He


3 Op. Cit. p. 375. In a skeleton presented to the Boston Society of Nal :
. History by Dr. Savage, the ulna is 0.8 inch shorter than the humerus.


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 435


want of strength in the pelvis, resulting from diminished articu-
lating surface, and consequently a want of adaptation to sustain
the erect position.

*In the Chimpanzée the iliac bones are long, straight and
expanded outwardly above, but narrow in proportion to their
length ; the posterior face is concave for the lodgment of the
glutei muscles, the anterior surface nearly flat, and stretching
outwards almost parallel with the plane of the sacrum."' “In
the Orang, the ilia are rather more expanded than in the Chim-
panzée."* "The ilia of the Engé-ena make a much nearer ap-
proach to the human type than either of the animals above-
mentioned ; the space between the anterior spinous processes
is proportionally larger, the wings are much broader, the ante-
rior face has a deep concavity, the dorsum has a correspond-
ing convexity, but is destitute of the semicircular lines indica-
ting the origins of the glutæi muscles, and the superior spinous
processes are farther in advance of the plane of the sacrum.
The crest of the ilium is destitute of the curve like an F
which is characteristic of the human pelvis.

If, in the upper extremity, the Engé-ena approaches nearer

. io man than his congeners in the relative lengths of the ulna
and humerus, he recedes much farther in those of the humerus
and femur. In the Chimpanzée the humerus and femur are

almost exactly of the same length, but in the Engé-ena the
 ^umerus exceeds the femur by three inches, a disproportion

. “ery nearly the same as that which exists in the correspond-

ing parts of the S. satyrus. As in the Chimpanzée, the h

of the femur has an impression corresponding with the at-

tachment of the round ligament, but the greater trochanter is

Proportionally stouter, the shaft of the bone is more curved,

od the inner condyle much longer, so that when the two
condyles rest in a horizontal surface, the shaft of the bone has

“inclination outwards as in man, instead of a direction nearly

Vertical as in the Chimpanzée.


Owen,

.- WEB, Trans. Zool p. 5
Ks og. Soc. Lond. vol. i. p. 351.
Owen, Op. cit. p. 363.


436 Savage and Wyman, External Character,


The two articulating surfaces on the upper extremity of the
tibia are situated on different planes, the internal, the lowest
is concave, and the external convex. The depressed concave
surface corresponds with the longer condyle of the femur, so
that the one compensates for the other, and when the bones
are in place their axes are very nearly in the same line, The
tibia is more cylindrical than in man, and is destitute of the
ridge separating the internal and posterior faces.


HI. GENERAL REMARKS.


From the preceding descriptions there can be no reason
to doubt that the Engé-ena is specifically distinct from the
Enché-eco or Chimpanzée, the only member of the sub-genus
Troglodytes hitherto recognized by naturalists. From the
Enché-eco it is readily —

1. By its greater size ;

. 9. By the size and forth of the superciliary ridges ;

* 3 M the existence of the large occipital and interparietal
| crests e males, and by rudiments of the same in the


4 By the great strength and arched form of the zygomatic
arches ;
5. By the form of the anterior and posterior nasal orifices ;
6. By the structure of the infra-orbitar canal ; :
7. By the existence of an emargination on the posterior
edge of the hard palate ; x
8. 'The incisive alveoli do not project beyond the line of
the rest of the face as in the Chimpanzée and Orang; e
9. The distance between the nasal orifice and the edge - P.
the incisive alveoli is less than in the Chimpanzée ;


» Dr.
1 Prof. Owen estimates the height of the Chimpanzée at “ about y four cag de feet —
m Savage gives as the result of the measurement of four adults, that two were 366.) i
En ies , and two “five feet nearly.” (See Bost. Journ. Nat. Hist «Vien compared s


ments of the Engé-ena given in the subjoined table, ' be for
ahi riri ones ot the Enché-eco, will j justify the assertion that 4.
must Ed TAM.


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 437


10. The ossa nasi are more narrow and compressed su-
periorly ;

11. The scapula is more nearly equilateral ;

12. The ulna is shorter in proportion to the humerus;

13. The ossa ilia are much broader, more concave on the
anterior face, and the anterior spines project farther forward.


The Engé-ena in the strength of the zygomatic arches, in
the existence of the occipital and interparietal crests, and in
the strength and size of the lower jaw, approximates the
Orangs, but is readily distinguished from all those yet de-
scribed,

1. By its large superciliary ridges ;

2. By the straight outline of the face ;

3. By the existence of a fifth tubercle on the last molar of
the lower jaw ;

4. By the existence of a round ligament in the hip joint;

9. By the more anthropoid conformation of the pelvis;
at In having the cerebral cavity more depressed behind the

ce;

T. In having the ulna shorter than the humerus.
It should be borne in mind that the above distinctions are
Rot based upon observations made upon a single specimen,
but upon the examination of four adult crania of the Engé-ena,
. two males and two females, and upon six adult crania of the
E é-eco. In no one of these last has there béen found
any approach to an interparietal crest, nor have they in any
instance deviated materially in their dimensions from those
given i in the table. The temporal ridges are generally separa-
ted from each other by a space varying from half an inch to


* Of the adult ura of the himpanzée, t there are two in the Cabinet of the Bos-
a Society of N: tual History, one in that of Dr. J. C. Warren, two in that of the
rademy of Natural tural Sciences in Philadelphia, and one in my own collection,


438 Savage and Wyman, External Character,


one or two inches, according to age, but in none of them isto
be seen even a rudiment of the interparietal ridge.

The skull of the Engé-ena recedes much farther from the
human type than that of the Enché-eco, in its greater devel-
opment of the cranial crests and ridges, in the greater elonga-
tion of the upper jaw downwards and forwards, in the length
of the bony palate, no less than in the much more brutal and
ferocious expression of the face; in this last respect it even
surpasses the Orangs of Borneo and Sumatra.

In the conformation of the pelvis, as indicated by the broad
and concave iliac bones, the projection forwards of the ante-
rior spines, it is, on the other hand, the most anthropoid of all
the Simiade. The central portion of the ilia acquires a cer-
tain degree of transparency in both sexes, and the same has
been noticed, though to a less extent, in the pelvis of the En-
ché-eco. This observation is interesting in connection with
the results obtained by Vrolick with reference to the marks of
degradation in the Negro, an index of which he finds in the ab-
. sence of this character. Certainly, a much more satisfactory
. index of degradation is to be derived from the general shape of
the bones, and their approximation in form to those of the semi-
erect animals with which they have been compared ; and the
exact measure would be the amount of deviation from the
Caucasian type.


1 “The pelvis of the male Negro, in the strength and density of its substance, and
t bones wr hinh HON


of the p resembles the pelvis of the wild beast, while we
contrary, the,pelvis of the female of the same race combines lightness of sub h of


bone are so closely united. This transparency was found only in one er udi


in which, however, the part in question when held up to the light, yet ap! how-
f diplóe int i en the bony plates." ^ Delicate À


itis difficult to separate fro jue


aller breadth of the sacrum, the smaller extent of the haunches, &c^ Pr
wehes into the Phys. Hist. of Mankind, 4th edit. vol. i. p. 324- ;


mitthe —


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 439


l'rom an examination of the narratives of travellers, and the
works of some naturalists, it will be found that no one pecu-
liarity is more strongly insisted upon than the ability and dis-
position of the Orangs to assume and maintain the erect atti-
tude. An attentive examination however, of their organization,
as compared with that of man, gives the most conclusive evi-
dence on the other hand, that they are not constituted like him
for the erect position, a conclusion abundantly supported by
the observation of living specimens exhibited from time to time
in America and Europe. Evidence is yet to be adduced that
any Quadrumanous animal whatever, assumes or maintains the
erect attitude in its ordinary and natural movements. The
gait of an Orang walking on its legs alone, is one of great in-
stability, the animal showing by its bent position like that of
an infirm old man, by the attitude of the arms, the constant
effort to balance itself, and its disposition to get assistance from
surrounding objects, that such a mode of progression is one of
extreme difficulty.

The conditions for walking erect, as manifested in the human
skeleton, are as follows:

l. The head must be balanced, or very nearly so, on the
atlas ;

2. The curves, and the general direction of the vertebral -
Column must be such that the centre of gravity of the trunk
‘Shall be over the plane of the pelvis, passing through the heads
9f the thigh bones ; :
! 3. The lower extremities on which the pelvis rests should
5 the axes of the thigh and leg in one and the same vertical

Sblane :


H A
4. The feet should be directed at right angles to the axes of
; the sole resting on the ground.
Ue These conditions are found to co-exist in man, and in man
p alone ; they are not found in any of the anthropoid animals
hitherto described, nor is there any nearer approximation to
hem in the species now under consideration, unless it be the


existence of a pelvis a little more perfect in its conformation —


440 Savage and Wyman, External Characters,


than in the congeners. The natural attitude of the Orangs on
the ground is semi-erect, aided and supported by one or both
of their long arms ; the Chimpanzées and Orangs resting on
their callous knuckles, and the Engé-enas on the palms of tbeir
hands. If they at any time support themselves on their legs
alone, their heads droop, the trunk is bent forwards, the
thighs are flexed, and their feet inverted, all which necessarily
results from the mechanical arrangements of their skel-
eton. The foramen magnum and (consequently the occipital
condyles), instead of being situated in the middle of the base
of the skull as in man, is situated in the middle of the pos-
terior third, from which results the greater preponderance of
the head forwards.’

The vertebral column is concave throughout nearly the
whole of its anterior face, and in the lumbar region especially,
deviates from the form of that of the human body, in which
it is strongly convex. ‘This results from the anterior portions
of the bodies of the lumbar vertebra in the Orangs having
. the vertical diameter of the anterior face shorter than that of
the posterior, so that when they are piled one above another,
the superior ones incline forwards, and will necessarily cause
the whole superimposed trunk to preponderate in that direc-
tion, consequently throwing the centre of gravity forward in à
proportional degree.

The bent position of the body necessarily involves a greater
or less flexion of the legs, in order that a portion of its lower
part should be thrown behind the centre of gravity, to compen-
sate ina measure forthe upper portion including the head,
which is thrown in front of it.


jdence
1 The position of this foramen in the Orangs is correctly regarded as an e cunis
of degradati ion. Semmering has imagined that an approach to it existed in


ween an)
rm


X. aue ap inthe 3
vx Urat that of the Caucasians ; so that the difference between the Nese


*


Habits and Osteology of a New Orang. 441


Lastly, the feet are always inverted, in consequence of the
mode of their articulation with the leg. Living habitually in
trees, and the natural locomotion being that of climbing or
swinging from limb to limb by the aid of long and powerful arms,
their feet are so constructed as to enable them to apply the
soles against the sides of the trunks and branches, consequent-
ly requiring them to be in planes, either really in, or approx-
imating to a vertical direction. When on the ground, there-
fore, they are from necessity obliged to walk on the outer edge
of the foot, and this with the other peculiarities of their
Organization, gives them an unstable gait, contrasting with
that of man, who, habitually walking erect on a horizontal sur-
face, has the soles of the feet necessarily in a horizontal plane.

The organization of the anthropoid Quadrumana justifies
the naturalist in placing them at the head of the brute creation,
and placing them in a position in which they, of all the animal
Series, shall be nearest to man. Any anatomist, however,
who will take the trouble to compare the skeletons of
the Negro and Orang, cannot fail to be struck at sight with
the wide gap which separates them. The difference between
the cranium, the pelvis, and the conformation of the upper ex-
tremities in the Negro and Caucasian, sinks into comparative
insignificance when compared with the vast difference which
exists between the conformation of the same parts in the Ne-
Sro and the Orang. Yet it cannot be denied, however wide
the separation, that the Negro and Orang do afford the points
Where man and the brute, when the totality of their organ-
zation is considered, most nearly approach each other -


(442)


TABLE OF COMPARATIVE MEASUREMENTS
OF THE CRANIA AND BONES OF SIMIA SATYRUS, TROGLODYTES NIGER, TROGLO-
YTES GORILLA, AND MAN


Simia | Trog. | Trog. Gorilla, à
| Somat niger. | maie. |female. wes
From the posterior jiire of the wo to margin of

incisors 6 | 7.3 |12.0 | 9.10} 9.6
xreatest lateral diameter of cranium at post auditory
s 5.4 | 4.6 | 6.1 | 52 | 5-4
Smallest lateral diameter of cranium behind orbits 2.6 | 2.8 | 2.5 | 2.5 | 3-4
- Diameter of face across zygomata 6.0 | 4.8 | 6.5| 5.5 | 5-7
[Diameter of face outside of orbits 4.2 | 40 | 4.9 | 43 | 49
|From posterior plane of occiput to fronto- nasal suture 4.7 | 6.3 | 7.3 | 6.5 -
x |From fronto-nasal suture to marg x inc 44 |4,4 | 4.81 4.519
‘Breadth of zygomatic fossa 1.1$|-1.7 | 1-4] -a
Inter orbitar s ; Dose oe one. 5-L DIDA DAE 1
Lateral diameter of orbit . `. VS LITICE Der
Vertical | “ fa aaa ui oo oi ac aided NE
Length of bony sell : : : 3.3 | 2.10| 3.7 | 3.4 | 17
Length of lower j jaw r from ee to sy mphysis .16.215.0(1 2.0] 65 s
$ 5.6 | 3.8 z
From dis to condyl La ee 3.10| 2.5 ee
Breadth between v angles (inside) . uy . 3.9 | 1.10| 4.5 | 3.8 7
[Breadth of ram : 2 27:012] 1-00 Seen
Height o : : ; 2.4 | 4.6 | 4.3 2.
"p ER EXTREMITY. 7.0
Length of scapula al along base : -I 5l e a
S 24 6: j
; 2.0
extremity ty of. spine from upper angle 4.5.
s ppe E 13.4 |10.9 [17.0 a~
LI LI LI - . ^ LI 1234 10.0 1 im
pr fe v Tc Hos [a= 10.6
| PELVIS.
Length d ee ; e P NOS : 3.4 | 6.0
3.4 |2.6 | 3.7
Breadth of pelris between spinous processes of ilia |11.5 | 9.3 oe i ;
: 4.9 | 4.2 | 8.0 | 7-
Length » be exit n " 9.10| 9.10/14.0 |12.0 |
ntero-posterior diameter of pelvis from symphysis
f base of sacrum . $ aii 5.5 | 5.0 8.0
rse diameter of — M RM ee 4.0 | 3.5 ae
symphysis ^. | 2.0 | 1.6 | 3.0 | 2.3
diameter of obturator fura 1.9 | 1.7 | 2-1 | 2-2
outside of on Ming ischii te to ; thai ofthe other | 5.8 | 6.0 5.8
OWE; MITY. s
wea oe uer ce MES NES UN
: XE 9.0 | 8.5 {11.5
bof ERTEBRUE — 12th. DORSAL,
| Transverse diene ter mare E x
: Antero-posterior “ ^ E g 0.9 z
S Vertical diameter of anterior face . i ; P 9. of
pot * ose Es 0.9
SE hie patecior dài L *
ro- ior iameter (ug Es PRS 0
Transverse diameter . . . edes i
Vertical ie . eso s 0.
io To ee 0


Rogerio er c PE


Araneides of the United States. 443


EXPLANATION OF PLATES.


I. Head of Male, profile. In this view, are to be seen the
imn developed inter-parietal crest and superciliary ridges, the broad
and curved aH arches, and the expanded ramus of the lower jaw.


Prate I. Head of Female, profile. The attr PAR crest here
exists in a ditare condition only, and the ramu e lower jaw is
much more narrow than in the male, but the curve ot ES zygomatie arch
is quite acp


Prate III. d of Mate, front view. This represents the head so
placed dis the bea of the lower jaw is horizontal, in which position the
cranium proper almost disappears behind the superciliary ridges. The
occipital crest cannot be seen in this position. "The middle incisors of the
upperjaw were missing.

Prare IV. Fic. 1. Head of Female, front view. The teeth of
this head are irregularly arranged i in the lower jaw; the canine of the
right side is opposed to the lateral incisor of the upper jaw, and the right
middle incisor is to the left of the median line.

Fic. 2. An ideal representation of the teeth of the female.
