Po ae Ol ed Te eR a el a al ie ae


NOT TO BE ISSUED (
OUT OF THE LIBRARY. (


SS EN PN PP Ta


TOT LE
00078805


Qu il


Digitized with financial assistance from


Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 11 March, 2020


SYSTEM


MODERN ROMAN LAW,


FRIEDRICH CARL von SAVIGNY,
18805


WILLIAM HOLLOWAY, -


ONE OF THE ylUISNE INSTICES OP R- M.S HIGH COURT OF
JUDICATURE AT MADRAS,


vol. I


MADRAS:
J. HIGGINBOTHAM, PUBLISHER.
1867,


PRELIMINARY VIEW OF THE ENTIRE WORK.


FIRST BOOK.—Law-souRces.

Cap. I,—Problem of this work.
Cap, IL—Nature of the law-sources in general.
CAP, ILL. —Sources of the modern Roman law.
Car. I¥.-—Interpretation of written laws.

SECOND BOOK.-—JURAL RELATIONS.
Cap. I—Nature and kinds of jural relations.
Car. Il.—Persons as hee of jural relations.


Cap, Tll—Arising. and passing away of the
jural relations.


Cap, IV.—Infraction of the jural relations.


THIRD BOOK.—APPLICATIONS OF THE RULES OF
LAW TO THE JURAL RELATIONS.:


FOURTH BOOK.—Tatnes-Law.

FIFTH BOOK.—Os1ications’-LAW.
SIXTH BOOK.—Famity-Law.

SEVENTH BOOK.—Law oF INHERITANCE,


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME


FIRST CHAPTER.—Prosiem or tus Worx.
Section, : Page,
T. Modern Roman law........cssceescsseeenees eres |


TL Common law in Germany.....cesesncee 8
Il. Limits of the task........ wcavavess soasestens a uieodeees 4


SECOND CHAPTER,.—Narure or LAw-sOURCES


: GENERALLY.

TV, Sural velatiotia” a diedatdieiedeewne 26
V.. Institution of law......ccccssesccrrsrsreccseseeetegens — 8
VI. Notion of the law-sources....ccsccsscscspresseessses 9


Vil. Origin of law generally...occcscssssenecsoeqrscseea 1D
VITL., People .......c.secscsssrensesecsccsscnsassaccasssnesseone 2S:
IX. State, State’s-law, private law, public law... 17

%. Different opinions as to the state...sensonee, 23:
XL Peoples-law.,. Ase nee cesses pesenseceseereroeseespaneesses 26 '
KEL, Customary law.iscccscerssscsscsesersssssesssseases 27
KHL. Legislation... rsererssccsrescssssscesrsrsserenensvoes SL
XIV. Scientific ]aw.,....ssscccssccssssrssseccentescresneress 36
XV. The law-sources in their connexi0D.w..0008 40

XVI. Absolute and mediatory, normal and anoma<
lous law...u0e 45


- SECOND CHAPTER.—Sovncrs of THE MODERN
. Roman Law. ;
XVIL. A.—Written laws. ...ccccccsrsessssseesessonsesseene OF
AVI. B.—Customary law.....ccsssosessescrcssessovesvesens 62
XIX. C— Scientific law. ..cerssscsssresesssessersetrese 67
BEM, Continiation. d.casacisresseensssnina aivssvenssansevster 72
XXI. Concurrent Law-sources.....cscssecssssessssseee 80
XXII. Edie of the Romans upon the law-
sources generally...... 84
XXUOI. Expressions of the Romans on. written laws.... 97
KATV. Continuation... .c.cc0 sess ssseseseessscersesereeses LOB
XXV. Expressions of the Homans on Customary law. 116
XXVI. “5 in on Scientific law... 125


ii CONTENTS.


Section, Page.


XXVIII. Value in practice of the Roman determinations

upon the law-sources......

XXVIE. Views of the. moderns upon the law-sources...
KKIX., Continwation....csscecsssssessecse covesssseseneseess

KXX. Continuation... rcccecceseessseese voccssseeseevecseceee

XXXI. Expressions of the new Codes upon the Jaw-

SOUTCES,...+,


FOURTH CHAPTER.—InrerPrEration OF
WRITTEN LAWS.


XXXII. Idea of Interpretation. Legal and doctrinal...
XXXL. A.—Interpretation of single laws. Fundamental
: rules..,...

XXXIV. Ground of the written law.......65 ssecresessseenee
XXXV. Interpretation of defective laws......s.sess0 severe
AXRVI. Continuation... .rccercee cocseseveseeseees cseyes
XXXVIF. Continuation.........ssccsseccssesusses seosesseeeenecs
XXXVUI. Interpretation of the laws of Justinian. Critick.
KXXIX. Continuation.........cc-osccecscceccscces sosegveseeee
XL. Interpretation af the laws of Justinian. Single
Texts......

XLI. Interpretation of the laws of Justinian. Com-
pilation,.....

XLI. B.~~Interpretation of the law-sources as &
whole, Cas

KRLITT. Continuation... ......sssscorseresessessecccce ceresenetece
XLIV. Continwation.cacecacscesssscssosscens snseseccaresss
KLV. Continuation,,.....crcccccccssece cossssscescsssceseveeee
XLVI. Interpretation of the law-sources as a whole.


XLVIX. Expressions of the Roman law upon interpre-
tation...


XLVITL. Continuation... .....,sscsscsesreeesssses cneeetcensenees
XLIX. Value in practice of the Roman determinations,
L. Views of the moderns upon interpretation......

LI, Expressions of the new Codes upon interpre-
tation, cs


130
134
. 137
146 -


158


166


171
174
179
181
185
194
198


203
205


211
216


+ 220


229
234


239
246
25%
258


265


CONTENTS. © ik
SECOND BOOK.—Txus JURAL RELATIONS-


Finsr Cuaprer,—Nature and kinds of the jural
relations,

Section. ' Page.
Lil. Nature of the jural TELAtIONS.cecceesssescevsesasees 269
LUI, Kinds of jural Te]AAIONS sassersesessessesensaness wees QTL
LIV. Families’-law....secsssesscecensae sevsssessssseveesesees 281
LY. Continuation .......sserssccssressertcossearssecersevses 290
LVI. Potentiality’s-law.....csssssososssecsseesvers vesersene 209
LVIL. Continuation.....,..scsercosccessessesee evevsesetsevees 309
LVIIL. Review of the institutions of ]aw..s..esccrsree S15
LIX. Different opinions upon classification,.......00+0. 320


APPENDIX L—Jus naturale, gentium, civile..e.ssive. 86
APPENDIX II.—L, 2. C. quae sit longa consuetudo,.. ,.... 343


CORRIGENDA.


’
——


Page 10, note (2), dth line, for “ Titrelus” read “ Titulus.”


>
2
”


od


» note @), last line, for * Anatomy” read “ Autonomy.”
41, note (q),. 4th line from bottom, for “ Sanctis” read “ Sanctio,”
47, note (9), 1st line, for * ‘yoluntatum” read “ yoluntatem.”


5, 7th line from bottom, for “ or” read * sich and for “opposuite”
read * opposite.” :


59, note (2), 6th line, for “ consequenter” read “ consequenter.”
69, 8rd line from bottom, for « claim” read claims.”
76, 20th line, for “ preposition” read “ proposition.”
84, note (0), 8rd line, for “ orat” read “ orat.”
169, 3rd line from bottom, for “ the part of” read “on the part of.”


~ 269, 4th line from bottom, for “ gains” read “ gain.”
276, 6th line “from bottom, for “ being” read“ a being.”


331, 6th line from bottom, for “ which” read “with which.”


PREFACE.


WHEN a scientific province, such as ours, has been .
cultivated by the unbroken exertion of many centuries,
a rich inheritance is offered to us who belong to the
present. It is not merely the mass of truth won which
falls to our share; évery direction essayed by the
intellectual -powers, all efforts of past time, be they
fruitful or abortive, are also good for us as pattern or
warning and thus we are in some sense in the position
of working with the united power of centuries passed
away. If now we would, through indolence or con-
ceit, neglect this natural advantage of our position and
in a superficial treatment leave. to chance how much of
that rich inheritance is to influence our culture, we
should then be dispensing with the priceless benefits
inseparable from the nature of real science—the com-
munion of scientific convictions and at the same time
with the constant, living, progress without which that
communion might pass over into a dead letter. In
order that this may not happen, it is desirable that
from time to time, the researches and gains of indi-
viduals should be summarized in a unifying conscious-
ness, The holders of science, living at the same time,
are often in sharp oppositions to one another; but
those contrasts come out still more strongly when we
compare all ages. Here our business is not to choose
the one and reject the other; the task consists rather
in dissolving the perceived oppositions in a higher
unity which is the only way to a safe progress in the
science. The frame of mind suitable to such compre-


i PREFACE,

hensive work is a reverence for the GREAT which
appears in the efforts of our predecessors. That how-
ever this respect may not degenerate into a narrowing
one-sidedness and thus endanger the freedom of
thought, it is necessary to direct our eyes fixedly to
the final aim of the science, in comparison with which
even the greatest accomplishable by the individual
must appear incomplete.


If however the continuous cultivation of our science
throughout many generations offers a rich inheritance,
it is also the originator of peculiar and great dangers.
In the mass of ideas, rules and technical expressions
which we receive from our predecessors, with the
truth won, will infallibly be mingled a large addition
of error, which, with the traditional power of an
ancient state of possession, operates upon us and may
easily obtain mastery over us. To prevent this danger
we must desire that from time to time the whole mass
of that, which has been handed down to us, should be,
newly examined, brought into doubt, questioned as to
its origin. This will be done by placing ourselves
artificially in the position of having to impart the
material transmitted, to one unskilled, doubting, con-
troverting. The fitting spirit for such a testing work
is one of intellectual freedom, independence of all
authority; in order however that this sense of freedom
may not degenerate into arrogance, there must step in,
the natural fruit of an unprejudiced consideration of
the narrowness of our own powers, that wholesome
feeling of humility which can alone render that free-
dom of view fruitful of performances of our own.


From two wholly opposite stand-points, we are thus
directed to one and the same need in our science. It


PREFACE. dik


may be described as a periodically recurring examin-
ation of the work accomplished by our predecessors, for
the purpose of removing the spurious but of appro-
priating to ourselves the true as a lasting possession,
which will place us in the condition, according to the
measure of our powers in the solution of the common
problem, of coming nearer to the final aim. To institute
such an examination for the point of time, in which we
actually are, is the object of the present work.


‘At the very outset however it must not be concealed
how greatly the unprejudiced reception of this work
may be endangered by what has happened in our
science in recent times. Many will be induced by the
very name of the author to throw doubt upon the
general déstination of the work just expressed ; they
will believe that there is here less regard to the free
service of science than to the one-sided representation.
of the historical school; thus the work will bear’ the
character of a purely party publication against which ~
every one, who does not belong to that school, ought
to be on his guard. ,


All success in our science depends upon the joint
working of various intellectual activities. The expres-
sion, historical school, was formerly used both by me
and others simply to denote one of those activities and
the scientific direction especially arising from it. At
that time this side of the science was made especially
prominent, not for the purpose of denying or even of
depreciating other activities and directions, but because
that form of activity had, for a long time previously,
been more neglected than others and thus, more than
others, needed a zealous defence in order that it might
again step into its natural rights. Now to that desig-


iv PREFACE.


nation a long continued, lively opposition has attached
itself and even very recently hard words have been
spoken about it. A defence against such attacks would
be unprofitable, in some measure impossible ; for as the
ill-humour has proceeded _more from personal feelings
than from scientific oppositions, the opponents of the
historical school are accustomed to embrace and cen-
sure, under that name, everything in literary manifest-
ations which appears to them inapt and disagreeable ;
who could attempt a controversy in that state of
things ? One reproach however, by reason of its more
general nature, must be excepted from that forbearance.
It has often been asserted by opponents that the mem-
bers of the historical school, misunderstanding their
independence, would subject the present to the govern-
ment of the past and in particular would improperly
extend the dominion of the Roman law in opposition
partly to the German law, partly to the new legal
culture which, by means of science and practice, has
stepped into the place of the pure Roman law. This
reproach has a general, scientific, character and ought
not to be passed over in silence.


The historical view of legal science is completely
mistaken and disfigured when it is frequently so con-
' ceived as if the legal culture sprung from the past were
set up as a something supreme to which the immutable
government of the present and the future must be
preserved. The essence of that view rather consists in
the uniform recognition of the value and the independ-
ence of each age and it merely ascribes the greatest
weight to the recognition of the living connexion which
knits the present to the past, and without the recog-
nition of which we recognize merely the external
appearance, but do not grasp the inner nature, of the


PREFACE. Lov


legal condition of the present. The view, in its special
application to the Roman law, consists not, as is assert-
ed by many, in assigning to it an improper mastery over
us; it will rather first of all search out and establish
in the whole mass of our legal condition what in fact .
is of Roman origin, in order that we may not .be
unconsciously governed by it: further however, in
order that freer space may be gained for the develope-
ment and healthy operation of the still living parts of
that Roman element, it will, in-the circle of those
Roman elements of our legal consciousness, separate
that part of it which is in fact dead and, merely through
our misunderstanding, still drags on a perturbing show
of life. The object of the present work is so little
that of assigning an immoderate mastery to the Roman
law, that on the contrary it contests its applicability to
not a few theories of law in which it was heretofore ©
generally admitted even by such as have constantly
declared themselves opponents of the historical school.
No inconséstency in this procedure can be found in the
author since he has been publicly declaring the greater
part of these opinions for from thirty to forty years ;
thus in this appearance there rather consists a proof
that the censure mentioned, which people have been in
the habit of casting upon the historical school in gene-
ral and me in particular, is wholly without ground.
With the unprejudiced the perception of this fact will
rather serve entirely to get rid of the whole party
struggle and the party names relating to it, especially
since the reasons, which occasioned the first use of the
name historical school, have almost disappeared along
with the prevailing errors, which at that time required
to be combated. A continuous struggle of such a kind
may indeed serve for the sharper bringing out of


vi - PREFACE.


numerous contrasts, but this advantage will certainly
be greatly out-weighed by the prevention of an unpre-
judiced decision upon that accomplished by others as
well as by the dissipation, in the strife of parties, of
those powers which might be more advantageously
applied to the common ends of the science, I am far
from ignoring the general and great advantage of scien-
tific conflict which is even a condition of the life of
science ; in the kind and direction of the intellectual
powers of the individual great variety will be con-
stantly perceived. From the very conjoint operation
of elements so opposite, the true life of science is to
issue and the possessors of the diverse powers should
not cease to regard themselves as labourers at the
same great edifice. If on the contrary we allow them
to enter hostile camps and strive by the assiduous
application of party names to render the opposition
positively personal, our perception soon becomes funda-
mentally untrue and the consequences can be simply
mischievous; the individual life and workin of others
fade from our eyes, in that we approve of, or feel
. enmity to, them especially as adherents of a party and
we thus lose the benefit, which we might naturally
derive for our own culture, from the undisturbed
operation of their work upon us.


If the attempt, by means of the present work, to
procure for the Roman law an immoderate mastery
over us, has been definitely disclaimed, so on the other
hand it must be no less. definitely recognized that the
thorough knowledge of that law, even for our present
legal condition, is of the highest value, aye call it indis-
pensable ; and if this conviction were not here express-
ed in words, it would be sufficiently manifested by the


PREFACE. Vii


fact of my undertaking a work of such compass. It
only remains to come to an understanding upon the
ground and quality of the great value of ‘the know-
ledge of that law.


Nota few entertain the following idea upon this,
matter. In countries in which the Roman law still
prevails as law, no real jurist ought to neglect the assi-

.duous study of it; in countries, on the other hand, in
which new codes have been introduced such a necessity
disappears, and the condition of law itself must. be
deemed more fortunate, since the jurist may apply his


time and power to objects with more life. Were this _


the correct view, the Roman law would have at best a


very precarious value even in those countries, since ~


nothing would be easier than for legislators to bring


about the more fortunate condition mentioned, by the —


appropriation ofan already existent foreign code if
haply they could not produce a new one of their own.
Others have understood the assertion of a special value
of the Roman law as if it meant that its material pro-
duct, as exhibitable in practical rules must be consider-
ed of special excellence when compared with similar
rules appearing in the legal culture of the middle or
modern age.- That the present work proceeds upon.
no apology of this sort, its execution will show.


A few isolated cases excepted, the matter lies too -


deep to admit of being disposed of by such a
selection between contrasted practical rules, and a
work, which sought to carry out this comparative
point of view into particulars, would remind one of
the frame of mind of a child who, when the histories
of battles are related to him, is always inclined to ask
—which were the good and which the bad.


’


vili . PREFACE.


The intellectual activity of individuals may, in
reference to law be displayed in two different direc-
tions—by the reception and developement of the
consciousness of law in. general, by means of know-
ledge, teaching, exposition ; or by applying it to the
events of actual life. This two-fold element of law,
the theoretical and the practical accordingly appertains
to the nature of law generally. It is a characteristic
however of the course of developement of recent
centuries that these two directions, have occupied
positions, and been the object of callings, separated
from one another, so that, with few exceptions, jurists,
through the exclusiveness or preponderance of their
calling, belong either to theory or practice alone. As
this has not resulted from the human will, so generally
there is nothing in it to praise or blame. It is of con-
sequence however seriously to consider what is natural
and wholesome in this contrast, how on the other hand
it may result in ruinous one-sidedness. It is a con-
dition of all health that, amid these separated activities,
each should keep firmly in view the original unity, so
that, in some degree, every theorist should preserve
and develope the practical, every practitioner the
theoretic, feeling. Where this is not the case, where
the separation between theory and practice becomes an _
absolute one, there unavoidably arises the danger of -
theory being degraded to a mere sport, practice to a
mere handicraft.


When I say that every theorist should always bear
within him a practical element, I am speaking of feel-
ing and spirit, not of occupation; although in truth
some practical employment, rightly applied, is the
surest way to the promotion of the practical sense.
Certainly many, who have earnestly and vividly


PREFACE. ix


attached themselves to jurisprudence, have experienced
that a single case has given them such a lively view of’
au institution of law as they.could never have attained
by the study of books and their own meditation. ; What
is thus casually, in single cases, thus adapted to our
improvement, is conceivable as the conscious end of
our exertion and as carried through the whole of our |
science. Then he would be the complete theorist, to
whose theory life was given by the camplete thorough
contemplation: of the entire practice of law; thereby
all moral, religious, political, economical relations must
stand before his eyes. It is hardly necessary to mention
that this requirement is not set forth for the purpose
of blaming those who do not.completely fulfil it, for
every one, who-would apply such a standard to another,
must admit how far he himself fails short of it.
Nevertheless it is well to keep before one’s eyes such.
an aim for the united efforts of manifold powers—first
that we may keep in the right direction and next that
we may preserve ourselves from all paroxysms of self-
conceit, against which none is wholly safe. If now
however we compare the actual condition of our legal
theory, with what it was fifty and still more a hundred
years ago, we find excellences and defects singularly
mixed. No one indeed will misunderstand, that much
has become possible and actually accomplished, which
earlier was not to be thought of, that the, mass of
acquirements brought into operation, in comparison
with that earlier time, stands very high. If we regard’
the above demanded practical sense, by which, in the
individual theorists, their knowledge is to be vitalized,
the comparison must turn out less to the advantage of the
present. This fault of the present is however connected
with the peculiar direction at present perceptible in


x PREFACE,


theoretic efforts themselves, Nothing certainly is more
commendable than the effort to enrich science by fresh
discoveries; however even this effort has in our time
taken, a frequently one-sided and unhealthy turn.
Men have begun to set an inordinate value upon the
origination of new views, in comparison with the true,
vivid cultivation and satisfactory exposition of those
already discovered, although by these, when earnestly
conducted, the already existent constantly assumes a_
new shape and will thus lead to the practical, even if
little remarkable, progress of the science. Since now
a widely operating creative power has not been given
io most, that one-sided prizing of the new, has led
many to exercise themselves especially in isolated,
fragmentary, thoughts and opinions and to neglect
for the sake of this splintering the possession of
our science as a coherent whole. In this respect
our predecessors, among whom was found a propor-
’ tionally larger number capable of worthily representing
our science as a whole, were superior to us. He, who
will-regard the matter from a more general stand-point,
will be readily convinced that these appearances are
in no way peculiar to jurisprudence, but are rather
in complete coherence with the course of develope-
ment of our literature. —


On the other hand it was demanded above that the
practitioner should likewise bear in himself a theoretic
element. It is not meant by this again that he should .
be likewise an active author or even be constantly
going through a comprehensive study of books; both
would be wholly impossible on account of the extent
of practical labours. He ought however, in his very
practical occupation, to preserve ever living the feeling


»


"PREFACE, , xi


for the science, he ought never to forget that juris-
prudence rightly conceived is nothing else than the
summarizing of that which in individual cases, he is to
become conscious of and apply. In estimating a prac-
tical jurist nothing is more common than the attaching
of exclusive valu¢ to mere adroitness and readiness,
although these, in themselves very serviceable qualities,
are perfectly compatible with the most unconscientious
superficiality. That the right spirit does not penetrate
our juristic practice becomes quite manifest from the
result shown by it as a whole. If this spirit were
operative in it, theoretic efforts must be assisted by it
and, where they err, be led back to the right road ;
especially however it must so prepare the way for
legislation that both written law and the practice of it
must, agreeably to nature, go forward in intimate —
union. ~Do we not for the most part find the exact
reverse of all this ?


If now the main evil of our legal condition consists
in an ever-increasing separation between théory and
- practice, the remedy can be sought. only.in the restor-
ation of their natural unity. .To that very end how-
ever, the Roman law, if we will rightly employ it, is
capable of rendering the most important service. Among
the Roman jurists that natural unity appears still
undisturbed and in the liveliest activity ; it is no merit
‘of theirs, even as the opposite condition of modern
times has been produced more by the general course of
developement than by the fault of individuals. ‘To the
extent that we with earnestness and candour enter in
thought upon a procedure so different from ours, we
may also make it our own and thus ourselves get hack
into the right road.


xil : PREFACE.


‘Since however there are very different ways of seek-
ing the knowledge of the Roman law, it is necessary to
express clearly what kind of way to this knowledge is
required for the attainment of the end proposed. That
a thorough scientific process is meant, every one will
readily expect; many however might be deterred by
the erroneous idea that the whole work of antiquarian
enquiry and critical examination of the sources, is
required of every one who would obtain for himself
such a knowledge of the Roman law; now although
this branch of our study is important, still the whole-
some principle of the division of labour is in this
matter not to be ignored; thus the majority will be
quite contented with the results of the special enquiries

. conducted by individuals. On the other hand it would
be a complete error to believe that the end proposed
would be furthered in the smallest degree by a know-
ledge of the most general principles of the Roman law
—such'a knowledge for example as is laid down in a
compendium, of the Institutes orsuch as it is the custom
to impart in the French schools. Such a knowledge is
sufficient for fixing in the memory, until a better future,
the words of the Roman law; to him, who limits him-
self to this, it is hardly worth the small effort which he
applies to it. If the knowledgé of the Roman law is
to lead to the end proposed, there is one way only; we
moust independently read, and meditate for ourselves
upon, the writings of the old jurists. Then also we
shall have nothing further to fear in the enormous mass
of modern literature. Judicious guidance will point
out to us the little of it which can be really required
for our independent study; the rest of the mass we
may abandon to the jurists, whose calling is theory,
who cannot indeed decline this laborious occupation.


PREFACE. — xii


The entire special design of the present work is to
further the stated objects of a serious study of the
Roman law—especially therefore to diminish the dif-
ficulties which ordinarily hold back the jurists, whose
calling is practice, from independently studying the
sources for themselves. By reason of these difficulties
an inordinate authority is attached to the opinions laid
down in the most current modern manuals; therefore
if the design-of the author is fulfilled in this work, the
emancipation of practice from a-spurious theory will,
be worked out in it.


Doubtless these thoughts will be most immediately
applicable in those countries in which the Roman law
is still the foundation of legal practice; they are how-
ever also applicable where new codes have stepped into
the place of the Roman law; for in both places the
defects’ of the legal condition are essentially the same
and in like manner the need and the kind of the’
remedy are less different than one might suppose.
Even therefore in countries provided with indigenous
law books, by the mode of utilizing the Roman law
here proposed, theory will in part be furnished with
new life, in part protected against aberrations entirely
subjective and arbitrary, more especially however it
will be again approximated to practice which is the
matter of greatest consequence. Such a changing is
in truth more difficult here than in the countries of
the common law, but impossible it is not. This is
markedly shown by the example of the modern French
jarists who, often ina very judicious manner, illustrate
and complete their Code from the Roman law. In this
they obviously proceed according ‘to the true sense of
this Code and where they make mistakes, this occurs


‘xiv PREFACE.


less from an improper mode of using the Roman law,
than from a defective knowledge of it. In this we are
indisputably superior to them, but in the mode .of
employing it beside the indigenous laws we should do
well to learn from them. In truth in our Prussian
father-land this employment is more difficult than
with them, because in our Code the innate connexion
with the earlier law actually existent, is often conceal-
ed, partly by the peculiar mode of exposition, partly by
the great prolixity displayed. More difficult therefore
it is but not therefore impossible; and when it is
reinstated, a-remedy will be applied to an essential evil
which has resulted from the introduction of the Code.
This evil consists in the complete separation from the
scientific working up of the common law whereby our
‘practice has been hitherto deprived of one of the most
important means of culture—the living contact with
the juristic thoughts of earlier times and other lands.
It is not to be disguised that at the time, at which the
composition of the Prussian Cade was undertaken, the
. German juristic literature had become in a great mea-
sure spiritless and unserviceable and had consequently
lost almost entirely the capacity for a beneficial influ-
ence upon practice; indeed the perception of this
faulty condition of law, at that time led to the design
of remedying the evil by an indigenous code and thus
entirely changing the foundation of the practical law.
If, in the present entirely altered condition of juris-
prudence, we should succeed in partially re-establishing
‘the dissolved connection with the literature of the
common law, the result now could be nothing but the
arising of a beneficial influence upon practice, and the
mischiefs, so ‘sensibly felt at an earlier time, would
ceftainly not recur.


PREFACE. : Xv


Many perceive, in the effort to employ the Roman
law constantly as a means of culture for our own legal
condition, simply an injurious depreciation of our time
and our nation. They conceive the matter as if, in the
most favourable case, we could still only set forth an
incomplete. imitation of the condition of law brought.
forth by the Romans, and in their view it is more:
worthy to create something new by our own independ-
ent efforts. A misunderstanding lies at the root of this.
in itself commendable self-appreciation. By reason of
the great and manifold_legal material with which cen--

‘turies have supplied us, our task is incomparably more
difficult than that of the Romans; our aim.thus standg:
higher and when it. happens to us. to reach it, we shall
‘not merely have repeated in mere imitation the excel-
lence of the Roman jurists, but have accomplished.
something much greater than they did. -When we
shall have been taught to handle the matter of law
presented to us with the same freedom and mastery as.
astonishes. us in the Romans, then we may dispense
‘with them as models and hand them over to the grate- -
ful commemoration of history. Until that time how-
ever we should be restrained as little by false pride as.
by love of ease from making use of a means of culture
which it would be scarcely possible for us, by our own.
power, to restore. In this province we have thus
asserted a. relation of our age to antiquity ‘similar to
that which we in like manner perceive in other intel
lectual departments. May no one understand these
words as if they would elevate the pursuit of the
Roman law to the detriment. of the zealous Germanic
efforts which in our own time give room. for expect-
ations so joyful Nothing is more common and more
natural than for the lively zeal for the province of our


xvi - PREFACE.


own researches to display itself by the depreciation of’

a diverse but cognate province; but an error it is —
nevertheless; and this error will infallibly be productive
of harm, to him who cherishes and practises it, not to
him whose injury is intended by such depreciation.


From the plan of this work above laid down, it
follows that it will have an especially critical character.
Many will be little satisfied with that, since they above
all desire to attain merely positive truth susceptible of
immediate application, without regard to the mode of
obtaining it and the possible contradictions of it. Our
intellectual life would be easy and comfortable if we
could let nierely the clear simple truth operate exclu-
sively upon us and thus ever progress undisturbedly to
fresh knowledge ; but we are encompassed and hemmed
in on all sides, by the rubbish. of false or half-true ideas,
through which we must make a path for ourselves.
Would we struggle with fate because it has imposed so
unprofitable a burden upon us? We have only to
resign ourselves to it as to a necessary condition of our
intellectual existence, but there is no want of rich fruit
which, as the reward of our labour, grows out of this
necessity. Our intellectual power therein finds its
general education and each single truth, won through
this conflict with error, becomes in a higher sense our
property and shows itself more fruitful for us than if”
we had, passively and without effort, received . it
from others. .


The critical character of the work mentioned will be
shown especially in the following particular applica-
tions. First and almost exclusively in the not infre-
quently wholly negative results of a research under-
taken—whether this consists, in an institution of


PREFACE. xval


Roman law being pointed out as dead and consequently
foreign to our legal state, or in the exhibition of the
groundless ideas and theories erroneously inserted by
modern jurists in ow system of law. . It is precisely
such enquiries by which many will perhaps be annoyed
and repelled. He however, who removes stones from
the way or by sign posts gives warning against
deviations, essentially improves the condition of his
successors; when the advantages so obtained have
become rooted by custom, it may soon be forgotten
that there was once a time at which difficulties were
here to be overcome.


That critical character of the work will not however
be shown ‘in merely negative results but where, for the
establishment of a positive truth, the simple, absolute,
contrast of the true and false does not suffice. Thus
in many cases it becomes on that account especially
important to mark out precisely the degree of our
‘ conviction. When e. g. we enter into conflict with the
opinions of others, this may happen in diverse ways.
The feeling of complete truth is not seldom attached
to our opinion through our perceiving how the opinion
of our opponent springs from logical defects, unac-
‘quaintance with facts, or a thoroughly censurable
method ; in such a case we hold this opinion .inadmis-
sible on scientific grounds and in our contradiction is
involved decided blame of our opponent. It is not so
in other cases in which, after careful weighing of all
the reasons, we give the preference to one opinion but
without there being any claim to so decided a con-
demnation of our opponent. "Now in this probability,
with which we must then be satisfied, degrees are
distinguishable, and the accurate pointing out, the


RVI PREFACE.


coriscientious recognition, of these degrees belongs just

as much to the moral as tothe scientific value of our

work.) In other cases of conflicting opinions, it is

of consequence to determine accurately the proper
limits of the conflict, as also the value and influence,
which this difference of opinion exercises in the science.
The liveliness of the struggle as well as the self-esteem
often raised by it readily leads us to attach to it an
extravagant importance, and hence occasions our lead-
ing others into error in this ‘respect. In the last place
in the opinions of others combated by us, a relation of
them, which may be designated as relative truth,
deserves especial attention. For example we shall not.
seldom recognize in an opinion, which we must reject
as erroneous, a true element which has been converted
into error merely by inverted treatment or one-sided
exaggeration; this is true of many tases in which the
error merely consists in. the concrete being conceived
too generally or the really general too concretely. The
exhibition and recognition of such a true element in
the opinion combated by us as erroneous, may be of
preat value to the science; it is especially fitted to
bring about an understanding among unprejudiced,
truth-loving opponents and thus to bring the dispute
to the purest and most satisfactory determination by:
the resolution of the oppositions into a higher unity.


The form, in which the ends here proposed are to be
pursued, is the systematic and as. this is not conceived
by all in a like way, it is necessary to give in this


(a) Leberis Nachrichten tiber B. G. Niebuhr. B. 2.8. 208. “ Above
all things we must in the science preserve our truthfulness so pure,
that we do not write the very smallest thing, of which we are not
thoroughly convinced, as true, that, where we are driven to conjecture,
we tise every effort to render clear the degree of probability.” Much
in the excellent letter, from which this passage is taken, applies not
only to philology, to which it actually relates, but to all sciences.


PREFACE. xix


particular place a general explanation. I place the
essence of the systematic method in the knowledge
and exhibition of the innate connexion or of the
relationship, by which the single ideas and rules of
law are attached to a great unity, Such relationships
are at first often hidden and the discovery of them.
will then enrich our research. They are moreover very
manifold and our view will become more complete in’
~ proportion as we succeed, as to an institution of law,
in discovering and pursuing its relationships on various
sides. Lastly not seldom we are presented with a
deceitful shew of relationship where such does not in
fact exist, and then our business consists in the annihi-
lation of this appearance. The external arrangement
of a systematic work will naturally be determined by
that innate connexion which is to be reflected in it,
and one not uncommonly thinks of this alone when one -
speaks of systematic treatment. As to that a warning
is however needed against several misunderstandings.
In the richness of living reality, all jural relations
form a systematic whole, we are however necessitated
to break them up into their single parts in order to
receive them successively into our. consciousness and
to impart them to others.. The order, in which we.
put them, can therefore be determined only by that
relationship which we actually recognize as the’ pre-
ponderant one and every other relationship, existing in
reality, can only be brought to view beside that in a
disjointed mode of statement. In this matter a certain
tolerance, more a certain play-room must-be demanded
for the subjective course of culture of the writer which
perhaps determines him to give especial prominence to
a certain method of treatment which he will then be
in a condition to render especially fruitful.


xX PREFACE.


Many require of asystematic exposition that nothing
should be put forward which has not found a system-
atic grounding in that which has gone before and those
reasons must in no way be embraced in the contents of
the subsequent parts. To these the present work
must be a great offence as I cannot regard that require-
ment for a work such as this even as an approximation
to the rule to be followed. The basis of that require-
ment is the supposition that the matter is strange to
the reader and must now for the first time be made
known to him and it is quite correct to require it in
the arrangement of preliminary instruction. It will
scarcely however enter any one’s head to wish to take
his first lessons in jurisprudence from so copious a work
as the present. It will rather be made use of by those,
to whom the matter has become known by means of
courses of instruction and other books, for testing,
purifying, laying a deeper foundation for, enlarging,
the knowledge already acquired. It may well be
expected of such that at each point of the exposition,
that which they already know will be recalled to their
consciousness even when in this work it is first set
forth independently at a later time. - If one will avoid
this procedure, one is under the necessity either of
entirely abandoning the exposition of the most import-
ant and most fruitful relationships of the institutions
of law or of transferring them to a place in which they
must become less evident and operative. Hence if in
fact by the arrangement selected the advantage of life-
like exhibition is attained, that selection needs no other
justification. These however who might not be deter-
mined by these reasons to give up the censure mentioned
should call to mind that in copious monographs they
put up with a number of suppositions of which the


PREFACE. XXi


grounds are not given in the actual book. Why should
the author of a comprehensive -work have. smaller
rights in this matter than the author of a monograph ?


As for the obviating of a supposed reproach, attention
has been here called to monographs, which are of the
more importance that in them the most important
progress of our science in modern times is to be sought,
we must obviate at the same time a misunderstanding
which is entertained by many as to the relationship of
this sort of works to a comprehensive system of law. .
They think of each monograph as if it were a single
section of a system, accidentally worked out and put
forth separately from the system as a whole; according
te this view all that would be wanted would be a
sufficient number of good monographs in order, by their .
combination, to construct a satisfactory system. The
essential difference however consists in the stand-point
of an individual institution of law, in a monagraph,
‘being arbitrarily selected fn order from that stand-point
to perceive the relations to the whole; on this account
however the selection and arrangement are quite differ-
ent from that which would be adopted where the self- _.
same institution is to be set forth in a complete system _
of law. I have found this remark necessary to explain
and justify beforehand, the doctrine of possession being
about to assume, in the -present work, an entirely
different shape from that of the book in which I at an-
earlier time specially expounded it.


Beside the system itself are found in this work
distinctive enquiries under the name of appendixes; I |
have, on various grounds, found this arrangement
_ necessary. At times a particular question needs so
extended an examination that its conduct in the course


xXx PREFACE,


of the system ‘would far ovér-step the right measure
and so destroy the natural coherence. In other cases a
legal concept exerts its influence so equally upon wholly
different parts of the system, that only a separate
exposition can lead to an.exhaustive treatment of the
object-matter ; this. is literally the case of a copious
appendix in which the theory of error will be discuss-
ed (Beilage VIII). Lastly it is true that antiquarian
researches are entirely without the plan of the work ;
at times however these are so interwoven with institu-
tions of the most modern law, that these could not be
brought completely to view, if their appropriate place
in an appendix were not allowed to those. It is
impossible to fix a completely safe boundary between
the matter which ought to be allotted to the system
and that which should be consigned to the appendixes,
and it will perhaps be wished by some that here and
there something more or less, than is in fact, should be,
banished to the appendixes. ,As to this question also
a somewhat wide play-room may without danger be
permitted to the individual freedom.


In earlier times it was customary to adopt, in the
exposition of the single institutions of law, a wholly
uniform method of which it was an especial character-
istic that a complete statement of all possible divisions
necessarily followed the exposition of the concept.
Many more recent authors have rejected this arrange-
ment as unserviceable and useless,and have consequently
confined themselves to calling attention. to such

. divisions, where the statement of particular rules of
law leads to them. I can approve of neither the one
proceeding nor the other as a general maxim, for in
this matter I regard as censurable every mechanical
uniformity whether it consist im doing or leaving


PREFACE, ¥xili


undone. Each form is good and desirable which, in’
the application, furthers a thorough insight into a legal

institution, and one should hence do, in each particular

case, what its special nature requires. Where therefore

‘the concept of a legal institution includes in itself
‘contrasts deeply influencing its very nature, for a com-

plete dealing with that concept it may well be necessary

to append to the general statement of it the divisions

in which those contrasts find their expression.


In the present work special care will be applied to
the accurate settlement of the genuine phraseology of
the sources and it is necessary to justify this because
many believe that in recent times an excessive import-
ance is ascribed to it. The importance of it however
arises from the existence of an unmistakeable and
dangerous interchanging between ungenuine phraseo-
logy and the erroneous construction or uniting of
concepts. For while on the one hand the false use of
language is the product and indicator of the erroneous
idea, on the other this is established, extended, propa-
gated, by that.. When however this source of error
has been destroyed by the unmasking of the spurious
‘ terminology, we’ ought not to permit ourselves to be
restrained from the use of newly formed technical
expressions where the phraseology of the sources is
inadequate and in this respect perhaps many have
pushed purism too far. It will merely be always
advisable to avoid those ungenuine expressions, which
have in fact already shown themselves dangerous by
their connexion with false ideas.


A special chapter has been given to the e€planation
of the manner in which the sources have been employ-
ed in this work (S. 32—52); however some general


xxiv PREFACE.


explanations will not be out of place even here.
The jurists are often derided for being guilty of great
prodigality in seeking to prove by numerous texts
what every man would trust them upon without proof.
If indeed such citations are regarded as mere forms of
defence against doubts and contradictions wholly non-
_ existent, this blame might have some foundation ; but
as to that there is another and in some measure an
opposite view. If the assertion made above, that we
may gain from the right treatment of the old jurists a
vitalizing and enriching of our own juristic thought
obtainable in‘no other way, is well founded*and if this
right treatment is not without peculiar difficulties, a
systematic introduction to it must be welcome to us.
. The present work is to serve for such an introduction ;
from this point of view, the texts quoted from the_
sources appear not merely as proofs of the propositions
laid down in the system but these propositions will be
at the same time an introduction to, and coramentary
upon, the texts cited which, in this selection, arrange-
ment, connexion with the representation embraced in
the system, ought to be brought nearer to our mode of
thought and be rendered more accessible to us. It is
not seldom found that two enquirers equally careful,
while working upon exactly the same material, are
nevertheless led to very different results. This differ-
ence will for the most part be dependent upon, what
texts are raised to the central point of the whole
enquiry, which brought into subordinate connexion
with them ; a misconception in this separation may
give a false direction to the whole work. In this
matter little security is to be gained by the laying
down of rules; the study of excellent models will do
good service, but above all we must seek to gain by


PREFACE. XX


our own practice the tact which teaches us to find the
right way.
It is probable on the other hand that many will be


disappointed in thé demand, which they may be inclined —


to make, of a greater wealth of literary material than
they will find in the present work. I have designedly
referred merely to such jurists as with reference to the


plan of this work are likely to be serviceable, if only in ,


consequence of their referring to other writers for


wider investigation ; therefore I have not at all striven .


after a material completeness in the statement of all
writers who treat of an object-matter even “when they
are of no considerable use, if I had I should deserve
small thanks from the reader for leading him, by
referring to such writers, to waste his time upon a
fruitless acquaintance with them. Had I come to this
undertaking in my earlier years I would have attempted
an exhaustive employment of the juristic literature in
a wholly different sense. We find in it two gr reat masses
difficult of mastery, a mass howeyer from which of
course much benefit is nevertheless extractible; the
one consists of exegesis beginning from the glossators
and then especially continued throughout the French
school: the other in practical matter, the authors of
numerous consilia response, &e. likewise reckoning
from the glossators. An. exhaustive employment of
them, according to my meaning, would consist in read-
ing through these jurists with special reference to this
system that is in order to test, rectify, complete, the
system, a procedure by which doubtless very much
might be gained in particulars, less in the mass and
the whole. Now beginning as I do this work in the
evening of my life, it were folly to think of such a
plan. Any one however, who ascribes to the work an


xxvi PREFACE.

enduring value, might be of essential service to it, if
he were willing to undertake to give it the literary
completeness here - pointed -out.. There is nothing
extravagant in this proposal inasmuch as it might be
carried out gradually and in separate pieces, perhaps by
reading through the jurists or even individual works
of a limited space of time. Perhaps also people will
regret that I have-not given, at the outset of the work,
a collection of the authors useful and to be recom-
mended for the study of our system of law. . It
appears to me however more suitable for this certainly
important want to be satisfied by writers expressly.
upon bibliography, just as the historical -summarizing
of our separate law-sources, their manuscripts, and
editions, is better undertaken in works on legal history
than at the outset of a system of law, where a satis-
factory exposition of this sort is wahout foundation
and coherence.


The material for the present work has been gradually
collected and worked up in the courses of instruction |
which the author has been giving from the very
commencement of the century. In the shape in which
it now appears, it is however an entirely new work
for which those lectures could be used merely as
a preparation. Further, lectures are meant for the
uninitiated ; they are designed to bring new and strange
object-matters to the consciousness of the hearers, by
adapting the exposition to their other acquirements
and their general culture. The writer on the other
hand works for the initiated; he pre-supposes their
‘possession of the science in its present shape, he attaches
his communication to this possession and summons
them, in common with himself, to meditate anew upon
what they know, in order that they may purify, secure,


PREFACE. XXVi


enlarge, their possession. Undeniable as is this con-
trast of the.two forms of instruction, the passing over
of one into the other is not only conceivable but
unobjectionable. The jurist also may sometimes so
handle the material as imperceptibly, in common with
the reader, to go back to the. beginnings of scientific
ideas and permit them, as it were, to arise anew before
his eyes. Frequently such a proceeding may do good
service in the cleansing of the ideas and proposi-
tions after they have been arbitrarily treated and
disfigured by others; the author will have especial
inclination and readiness for that work if -he has
frequently had occasion to handle, in his courses of
instruction, the matter which he is now employing as:
writer. The plan of the work in its existing shape,
was sketched in the spring of 1835; in the autumn of -
the same year, the working out of it had been begun
and when I began to print, the four chapters of the
first book and the first three chapters of the second
had been completed.


At the moment of sending forth this work, I cannot
suppress thought upon the fate which awaits it. Good
and bad will be its portion as of every effort and work
of man. Many will tell me how faulty it is; none
however can see more completely or feel more vividly
those faults than Ido. Now that a considerable por-
tion lies ready before me, I could wish that so much.
had turned out more exhaustive, clearer, otherwise.
Should such knowledge deprive us. of the courage
required to resolve upon every extensive enterprise ?
Amid that, self-knowledge there is comfort in the con-
sideration that truth is advanced not merely by the
absolute knowledge and expression of it, but by point-
ing and smoothing the way to it, and by firmly positing


XXviii PREFACE. ~~


the questions and problems, on the solution of which
all succéss depends ; when this is done we aid others in
attaining the end which it is perchance not given to
ourselves to reach. So now I am comforted by the
self-confidence’ that the present work may contain
fruitful germs of the truth-which, peradventure will
first come to their full bloem in others, and turn out
ripe fruit. It will be a smail~matter if in that new,
richer, unfolding, the present work, which afforded .it
the germ, steps into the back-ground and is even for-
gotten. The individual work is as transitory as the
individual man in his visible appearance, but imperish-
able is the thought which, stepping forth beyond the
lives of individuals, unites us all who labour with
earnestness and life, -in a large, lasting, communion,
wherein each, the very smallest, contribution ‘of the
individual, finds its enduring life.


Written in September 1839.


FIRST BOOK,
SOURCES OF THE MODERN ROMAN LAW.


CHAPTER I.
OBJECT OF THIS WORK,


=


SECTION I.
a MODERN ROMAN LAW, ;
THE part of the science of law, of which the exposition
is undertaken in this work, has been designated as the
Modern Roman Law. This special undertaking will-~
now, in the following contrasted propositions, be more.
precisely defined than it could be in a mere title.

1. It is the Roman Law which is to be exhibited in
this work. To the actual undertaking belong merely
those legal institutions which have a Roman origin,
with the inclusion however of their later developement,
although this should be referable to another, than
Roman origin. Hence are excluded all institutions to
which a Germanic origin must be ascribed. ;


2, It is the existing Roman Law. Hence are
excluded ; first, the history as such of legal institutions ;
secondly, each special determination belonging to the
earlier law which is strange to that of Justinian,
because this newest form of the Roman Law alone has
entered into connexion with our modern state of law ;
thirdly, each institution which belonging to the law of
Justinian, has disappeared from our state of law.


2 MODERN ROMAN LAW.


3. Private law and not public law belongs to our
undertaking : consequently that part of law which the
Romans’ denote by jus civile in one of the many
acceptations of that term; in other words that which
in the time of the republic, they regarded as the
exclusive science of a juris-consultus or jurisprudence
proper.(¢) This limitation is in part to be regarded as
a consequence of the preceding, inasmuch as the private
law of the Romans only, has become in any considerable
quantity, a part of our present law.


True, it is that the Roman Criminal Law also has
not remained strange to our present law, but it has
entered into it partially and ncomparnbly less than the
private law.


4. Lastly merely the actual system of Jaw to the
exclusion of procedure or the forms destined to the
pursuit of rights: consequently merely that which is
called by many material private law. For procedure
has formed itself in so peculiar a manner by the blend-
ing of sources historically diverse that a special treat-
ment of this branch has become necessary, instead of
holding as the Roman Jurists. would have .held, the
intimate union of the theory of procedure with that of
material law not only as possible but expedient. With
respect to the limit of our work on this side, there is in
point of principle no doubt, but in practice that limit is


(a) Although Cicero carefully distinguishes between himself and the
jurists he was far from believing, that he or any other statesman, must
know less than a Jurist of the constitution, jus sacrum, &c. Ulpian te
be sure gives to jurisprudentia a much wider scope (L. 10, T. 2, D. de J.
et J.); this does not arise merely from the indefiniteness of his explan-
ation and still less from an undue exaltation of his science, but from
the entirely altered position in his time of statesmen and jurists,


COMMON LAW IN GERMANY. 3.


often misunderstood, principally because one and the
same institution may in fact belong to two departments.
For example the judicial decision, as to its form and its
conditions belongs to procedure ; on the other hand, as
‘goon as it becomes legally valid, it has two operations :
one, the action and exception arising from a res-judi-
cata, which belong to the system of law itself; the other,
execution which is a pure doctrine of procedure.


If these limitations are brought to a common point
of view, they precisely define the Roman Law in the
sense in which, it has become common law for the
greater part of Europe.


SECTION I,
COMMON LAW IN GERMANY,

To the conception of common law laid down in the
' first section, the conception of the common law prevail-
ing in Germany is nearly allied. That law is bound up
with the peculiar constitution of the German Empire of
which the single states were united under the general
authority of the empire. Thus every part of Germany
was subject to a double authority under the influence
of which a two-fold positive law was formed—territorial
law and common law. Now many writers assert that
upon the dissolution of the German Empire, the commen
law has lost its validity with its basis, the imperial
power. This opinion based upon a misunderstanding |
of the nature of positive law, has remained however
entirely without influence upon the actual state of

law.(o) . ,


(a) This opinion arises from the erroneous view that with the dis-
solution of an empire, everything must cease which was created by it or


A LIMITS OF THE TASK.


Now the common law here mentioned is no other
than the modern Roman Law in its special application
to the German Empire and with the special modifica-
tions established by that empire. These modifications
however are nearly all contained in the imperial legis- °
lation and are of trifling importance; for all the
important deviations from pure Roman Law, as for
example, the actionability of all contracts without the
stipulation, the more extended importance of bona fides,
have never been peculiar to the German Empire, but
have everywhere been uniformly recognized to the
exact extent to which the Roman Law has been applied
in modern Europe.

Hence an exposition of the modern Roman Law, to
which this work is confined, would require merely
trifling additions to be able to pass at the same time
for an exposition of the common law of Germany.


SECTION Ii...
LIMITS OF THE TASK.


By the limits established for our subject, every
province lying outside them is treated as foreign to it.
In reference to this the exposition has to avoid two
opposite faults. The one consists in an arbitrary
transgression of the limits from a predilection sometimes
for a department lying near, sometimes for a special
research actually belonging to the subject; the other
consists in a narrow observance of the limits even


under its influence. An entirely similar case is found in the destruction
of the Western Empire. In this case also many assert that the Roman
Law, must by the conquest have disappeared and did practically vanish.
This assertion at least, would not now easily find any more partisans,


LIMITS OF THE TASK. §


- where a transgression of them is unavoidable if either
the thoroughness of the particular enquiry or the clear-
ness of the exposition is not to suffer(¢) This last
consideration makes also a certain toleration on the
part of the reader desirable, for here the exact measure
is reached more by tact than by fixed rules; a certain
free-play cannot therefore be refused to the subjective
insight.
_Especially much will be admitted which belongs to
the common fundamental doctrine of every system of
positive law and consequently is clearly not peculiar to
the Roman law. In favor of this introduction, speaks _
not merely former practice. especially in the courses
of the Pandects of the German universities, not merely
the peculiar shape which the Roman law has given to '
many a part of this doctrine, and the influence which
in this direction it has exercised over other systems of
legislation: but especially the consideration, that the
Roman law, from the exigencies of its situation, has
assumed more than any other-system of positive law
a general character, which renders it especially fit for a
satisfactory treatment of that fundamental doctrine.


(a} Thus for example it will be necessary to exhibit the antiquated
portions of some laws by reason of the necessary regard to the relation
of the sources of law dependent upon these portions,


6 -  JURAL RELATION.


CHAPTER II,
GENERAL NATURE OF THE LAW-SOURCES.


SECTION IY.
JURAL RELATION. (1)


We have to seek the foundation of the modern
Roman law in the Establishment of the law-sources
belonging to it. That this may be done with success
a more general discussion of the nature of law-sources
is altogether-necessary. ,

If we regard the position of Right.as in practical life
it surrounds and penetrates us on all sides it appears
to us as the power justly appertaining to the individual
person: a territory in which his will rules and rules
with our consent. This power we call a right of this
person synonymous with privilege; some call it right in
a subjective sense. Such a right appears especially in
‘visible form when on being questionéd or resisted, its
existence and scope are recognized by a judicial decision.

Only a closer examination convinces us that this
logical form of a decision is merely called forth by the
accidental need and that it does not exhaust the
essence of the matter but itself requires a deeper
ground-work. This we find in the jural relation, of


(1.) The description given of jural relation (Rechtsverhaltnies) in this
and other places will show how inadequate the term is to the denoting
of the very complex conception. The literal meaning of the German
word is relation of right or law. That word no more than the English
by its etymology expresses the conception. It is therefore a technica
phrase of this work, and thoroughly explained as it is, will create no
difficulty. °


JURAL RELATION. ve


which each individual right shows a particular side
separated from it by abstraction, so that the very
decision upon the individual right can only be correct
and convincing in so far as it proceeds from the com-
plete perception of the jural relation. The jural relation
has moreover an organic nature and this reveals itself -
partly in the coherence of its constituent parts, balancing
and limiting one another, partly in the gradual unfold-
ing which we recognize in it, partly in the mode of its”
arising and passing away. This living production of
-the jural relation in each given case, is the intellectual
element of juristic practice and distinguishes its noble
calling, from the bare mechanism which so many
ignorant persons see in that practice. That this import-
ant point may not merely be generally understood but
be brought to view in the entire value of its import, it
may not be superfiuous to illustrate it by an example.
The famous law Frater a fratre deals with the follow-
ing case :—~T'wo brothers are under the paternal power.
One makes a loan to the other. The borrower repays
this loan after the father’s death and it is asked whether
he can recover this money paid as money paid under
mistake. Here the Judge has simply to decide upon
the question whether there is or is not ground for the
condictio indebiti ; but to know this, a complete view
of the jural relation, must be present to him. The
individual elements of this were: the paternal power
over the two brothers, a loan of one to the other, a
peculiwm which the debtor had received from the
father, the inheriting to that father, the discharge of
the loan. From these elements, the decision desired
from the Judge must proceed.


8 INSTITUTION .OF LAW.-


‘SECTION V.
INSTITUTION OF LAW.


The decision upon the individual right is only possible
by a reference of the particular matters of fact to a
general rule by which the particular rights are
governed. That rule we call simply law or law in
general: some term it law in an objective. sense. In
its visible shape, it appears especially in legislation
which, is an’ expression of the supreme power of the
state upon the rule of law. .


Even as the decision upon a litigated right, has only
a narrowed and dependent nature and first finds its
living root and convincing force in the exhibition of
the jural relation ; so in like manner is it with the rule
of law. For the rules of law and also their expression
in legislation have a deeper ground-work, in the
exhibition of the institutions of law, and the organic
nature of this, shows itself as well in the living con-
nexion of the constituent: parts as in its gradual unfold-
ing. If we do not stop at the immediate appearance
but search into the essence of the thing we recognize
the fact that each jural relation is subject to a corres-
ponding legal institution which is, as it were, its type,
and by which it is governed, in the same manner as the
single judicial decision by the rule of law. Indeed this
last is dependent upon the former by which itself is
able first to obtain truth and life. The case introduced
in the former section shall here also be employed for
illustration. The legal institutions thereto relating are:
the inheritance by the children to the father; the
ancient peculiwm and especially the deductio prevailing
in it, transmission of credits to the heirs, confusion of


CONCEPTION OF THE LAW-SOURCES. 9


eredits and debts, the condictio indebitt. In the
unfolding of the thought there exists this natural
distinction that we first perceive the institutes of law
separately and afterwards combine them by an effort of .
the will and that on the contrary the jural relation is
given to us by the events of life and immediately
appears in its concrete combination and complexity.

On further examination however we perceive that
all. the institutions of law are bound up in a system
and that they can only be completely conceived in the
entire connexion of this system in which ‘again the
same organic nature appears. Immeasurable as may
be the difference between a single, narrowed jural
relation and the system of positive law of a nation, the '
difference lies merely in the dimensions; in their
essence they do nof differ and the mental operation
which leads to a knowledge of one and the other is
essentially the same.

Hence we perceive how vainly as is often done in
the science of law, theory and practice are regarded as
entirely separated even as opposed. Their outward
vocation is different and the application of the know-
ledge acquired : but the nature and direction of thought
as well as the education which leads to them, they have
in common and both one and the other of these occupa-
tions will only be worthily filled by him, in whom
dwells a consciousness of this identity.


SECTION VI.
CONCEPTION OF THE LAW-SOURCES.


We call law-sources the grounds of origin of the
general law hence we call so both the institutions of


10 CONCEPTION OF THE LAW-SOURCES.


law, and the individual rules formed from them by
abstraction. This conception has a double affinity,
hence it becomes necessary to remove two mistakes.


Individual jural relations have their grounds of
origin(#) and the affinity of jural relations to the
institutions of law easily leads to a confusion of the
grounds of origin of jural relations with those of the
rules of law. If for example one wishes to enumerate
completely the conditions of any single jural relation
undoubtedly thereto belongs as well the existence of a
rule of law as a matter of fact corresponding to this
rule, as for example a law which recognizes a contract,
. and ‘a concluded contract itself. Nevertheless these
conditions are specifically different and it leads to a
confusion of that conception if we place on the same line
as law-sources, contract and law.(®)


Another confusion based more upon the name, is that
of the.law-sources with the historical sources of juris-
prudence. To these belong all monuments from which
we derive a knowledge of jurisprudential matters of
fact. The two conceptions are entirely independent of
one another and it is merely accidentally when they
meet at any single point,-nevertheless this meeting is
especially frequent and important. Thus for example


(a) The general theory of these grounds of origin is contained in the
third chapter of the second book.


(6) That combination, not to speak of the moderns is found in several
passages of Cicero (S. 22, note m.) As here contracts are wrongly
elevated into sources, so on the other hand by an opposite error, laws
are dragged down to the same line with the grounds of origin of jural
relations in order to save the false theory of Titrelus and modus
acquirends (Héptner Commentar, S. 293.) The ambiguous expression
anatomy has often contributed to the former error.


GENERAL ORIGIN OF LAW. 11


Justinian’s compilations belong to the sources in both
meanings of the term: the lex Voconia belongs to the
sources of the older law, but since it is lost, not to the
sources of the science of law (jurisprudence.) The
opposite case presents itself as to the passages of the
ancient historians or poets which contain notices of law.
It is however to be remarked that in most cases, in which
we have occasion to speak of law-sources, both senses
of the expression in fact coincide so that the danger of
an error in the conception, is not great. Thus for
example; the parts of the corpus juris, are as laws of-
Justinian, law-sources for Justinian’s empire, by virtue
of their reception law-sources for us, lastly as still
existing books, sources of our legal science. In like
manner, ‘the German law books of the thirteenth and.
fourteenth centuries are records of customary laws
therefore of law-sources and as preserved books, sources
of legal science, (jurisprudence.) Hence also most
writers use the expression without giving to their
readers special information of these different imports,
and they are not, on that account to be blamed.


SECTION VI.
GENERAL ORIGIN OF LAW.


What then are the grounds of origin of common law
or in what do the law-sources consist ?


If one wished to conjecture on the matter, law may
have a wholly different origin according as it is influ-
enced by accident or the human will, reflection and
wisdom. But this opinion is contradicted by the
undoubted fact that wherever a jural relation comes
into question and consciousness, a rule for it is already


12 GENERAL ORIGIN OF LAW.-


present, therefore the discovery of one is neither neces-
‘gary nor possible. In reference to this property of
common law, by which in every given case, in which
it is sought for, it proves itself to have a practical
existence, we call it positive law.


If we further ask about the subject in which aa for |
which positive law subsists, we find the people to be that
subject. In the general consciousness of a people lives
positive law and hence we have to call it peoples’ law.
It is by no means to be thought that it was the parti-
cular members of the people by whose arbitrary will, law
was brought forth ; in that case the will of individuals
might perhaps have selected the same law, perhaps
however and more probably very varied laws. Rather
is it the spirit of a people living and working in
common in all the individuals, which gives birth to
positive law, which therefore is to the consciousness of ”
each individual not accidentally but necessarily one
and the same. Since therefore we acknowledge an
invisible origin of positive law we must as to that
origin, renounce documentary proof: but this defect is
common to our and every other view of that origin,
since we discover in all peoples who have ever presented
themselves within the limits of authentic history an
already existing positive law of which the original
generation must lie beyond those limits. There are
not wanting proofs of another sort and suitable to the
special nature of the object-matter. Such a proof lies
in the universal, uniform recognition of positive law.
and in the feeling of inner necessity with which its
conception is accompanied. This feeling expresses itself
most definitely in the primeval assertion of the divine
origin of law or statutes ; a more manifest opposition to


GENERAL ORIGIN OF LAW. 13


the idea of its arising from accident or the human will
is not to be conceived. A second proof lies in the
analogy of other peculiarities of peoples which have in
like manner an origin invisible and reaching beyond
authentic history, for example, social life and above all
speech. In this is found the same independence of
accident and free individual choice, the same generation
from the activity of the spirit of the people working in
common in each individual; in speech too from its
sensible nature, all this is more evident and recogniz-
able than in law. Indeed the individual nature of a
particular people is determined and recognized solely
by those common directions and activities of which
speech as the most evident obtains the first place.


The form however in which law lives in the common
consciousness of a people ‘is not that of abstract rules
but as the living intuition of the institutions of law in
their organic connexion, so that whenever the necessity
arises for the rule to be conceived in its logical form,
this must be first formed by a scientific procedure
from that: total intuition. That form reveals itself
in the symbolical acts which display in. visible shape
the essence of the jural relation and in which the
primitive laws express themselves more intelligibly and
thoroughly than in written laws.


In this view of the origin of positive law, we have at
present kept out of sight the progress of the life of a
people in time. If we now look also at this. operation
upon law we must above all ascribe to it an establish-
ing force. The longer the convictions of law live in a.
people, the, more deeply they become rooted in it.
Moreover law will develope itself by use and what
originally was present as a mere germ will by practice

B


14 GENERAL ORIGIN OF LAW.


assume a definite shape to the consciousness. However
in this way the changing of law is also generated. For
as in the life of smgle men, no glimpse of complete
passiveness can be perceived, but a continual organic
developement, so is it with the life of peoples and with
"each single element of which that concrete life. is com- .
posed. Thus we find in speech a constant gradual
shaping and developement and in like manner in law.
. This gradual formation is subject to the same law of:
generation from inner power and necessity, independent
of accident and individual will, as its original arising
was. But the people experiences in this natural pro-
cess of developement, not merely a change in general,
but it experiences it in a settled, regular series of events
and of these each has its peculiar relation to the
expression of the spirit of the people in which the law
is generated, This appears in the clearest and strongest
manner in the youth of a people for then the connexion
is more intimate, the consciousness of it is more generally
diffused and is less obscured by the variety of individual
cultivation. Moreover in the same degree in which the
cultivation of individuals becomes heterogeneous and
predominant and in which a sharper division of employ-
menis, of acquirements, and of ranks produced by these,
enters, the generation of law which rests upon the
common consciousness becomes more difficult ; and this
mode of generation would disappear altogether if new
organs for that purpose were not formed by the influ-
ence of these self-same new circumstances ; these organs
are legislation and the science of law ‘of which the
nature will be immediately explained. ,


This new developement of law may have an entirely
different relation to the originally existing law. New


PEOPLE. im)


institutions of law may be generated by it, the existing
-law transformed or it may be entirely swept away if it
has become foreign to the thought and need of the age.


SECTION VIII.
PEOPLE, -


The generation of law has been preliminarily posited
in the people as the active, personal subject. The
nature of this subject shall now be more accurately
defined. If in the examination of the jural relation,
we remove by abstraction, all its special contents, there
remains over a8 a- common nature, the united life of a
plurality of men, regulated in a defined‘ manner. We
might naturally be led to stop short at this abstract
conception of a plurality and regard law as its discovery,
without which the external freedom of no individual
could subsist, but such an: accidental meeting of an
undefined multitude is a conception both arbitrary and,
entirely wanting in truth: and even if they found
themselves so met together, the capacity for producing
law would be entirely wanting since with a need the
power of at once supplying it, is not given. In fact
we find so far as history informs us upon the matter,
that wherever men live together, they stand in an
intelléctual communion which reveals as well as estab-
lishes and developes itself by the use of speech. In
this natural whole is the seat of the generation of law

‘and in the common intelligence of the nation penetrat-
ing individuals, is found the power of satisfying the
necessity above recognized.

The boundaries however of individual nations are
certainly undefined and wavering and this state of
doubt also shows itself in the unity or variety of the


16 PEOPLE.


law engendered in them. — Thus as'to kindred races it
may appear uncertain whether they are to be regarded


as one people or as several: in like manner we also.


frequently find in their law not an entire consonance,
probably however affinity.

Even where the unity of a people is undoubted,
within its limits are often found inner circles which are
included in a special connexion side by side with the
general union of the people, as cities and villages guilds
and corporations of every sort which altogether form
popular divisions of the whole. In these circles again


.a special generation of Jaw may have its seat as _


particular law, side by side with the general law of the
nation which by that particular law is on many sides
completed or altered.(@)

When we regard the people as a natural unity and
merely as the subject of positive law, we ought not to
think only of the individuals comprised in that people
at any particular time ; that unity rather runs through
generations constantly replacing one another, and thus
it unites the present with the past and the future. This
constant preservation of law is effected by tradition and
this is conditioned by, and based upon, the not sudden
but ever gradual change of generations. The independ-
ence of the life of individuals, here asserted. of law,
appertains first to the unchanged continuation of the
rules of law: it is secondly too the foundation of the
gradual formation of law (S. 7) and in this connexion
we must ascribe to it a special importance.

This view in which the individual people is regarded
as the generator and subject of positive or practical law


(a) Thus arose in Rome, the ancient customary law of individual
gentes. Dirksen civil abhandlungen, B. II, p. 90,


‘


STATE, STATE'S, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LAW. 17


may appear too confined to some who might be inclined .
to ascribe that generation rather to the general spirit
of humanity than to that of a particular people. On
closer examination these two views do not appear con-
flicting, What works in an individual people is merely
the general human spirit which reveals itself in that
people in a particular manner. The generation of law
is a fact and one common to the whole. This is con-
ceivable only of those, between whom a communion of
thought and action is not only possible but actual.
Since then such a communion, exists only within the
limits of an individual people so here also can practical
law alone be created, although in its production, the
expression of a generative principle common to men in
general, is perceived, consequently not at all the peculiar
arbitrary will of several individual peoples of which
perhaps no single trace would be found in other peoples.
‘Therein is found merely the distinction that this pro-
duct of the people’s mind is sometimes entirely peculiar .
to that single people, sometimes equally present i in more
peoples. How the Romans have conceived: this common
basis of peoples’ law as jus gentiwm will be shown
below.


SECTION IX,
STATE, STATE’S-LAW, PRIVATE LAW, PUBLIC LAW.


The people to which we must, as to an invisible
natural whole, ascribe undefined limits, nevertheless
does not anywhere or at any time exist in this abstract
manner, There-rather works in that people an irre-
pressible inclination to manifest the-invisible unity in
a visible and organic form. This bodily shape of the


18 STATE, STATE'S, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LAW.


intellectual communion of.a people is the state and by
it are likewise supplied definite boundaries of the unity.


If we enquire as to the origin of the state, we must
posit that origin in a higher necessity, in a formative
“power proceeding from within, as has been, above
generally asserted of law ; and this holds good not only
of the existence of a state generally but also of the
particular shape presented by the state “in each people.
Thus also the creation of the state is a species of the
generation of law and it is certainly the highest degree
of that generation. :


If we now contemplate from the stand-point obtained,
law as an.aggregate, we discern in it, two provinces
. States-law and private law. The first has for its object-
matter the state, that is the organic manifestation of
the people; the second the ‘totality of jural relations
which surround the individual man in order that in
them, he may lead his inner life and fashion it in a
defined shape.(¢) When we compare these two depart-
ments of law, there are not wanting transitions and
affinities. For the family has in its enduring member-
ship as also in the relation of government and obedience
an unmistakeable analogy to the state: and in like
manner communities which are real parts of the state,
almost step into the situation of individuals. Never-
theless between the two departments this firmly
established difference remains ; in public law the whole
appears as the end, the individual as subordinate, while
in private law on the contrary, the individual man is
(a) L, 1, de J. and J. (I.) Publicum jus est quod ad statum rei
Romane spectat ; privatum quod ad singulorum utilitatem. Sunt enim


queedam publice utilia quedam privatim. See L. 2, 8. 46, de orig jur.
Q, 2.)


STATE, STATE'S, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LAW. 19


on his own. account an end, and each jural relation —
has reference only to his existence or his special cireum- ~
“stances.


Nevertheless the state has likewise a very manifold |
influence upon private law and first. of all upon the
reality of its existence. Then in the state, the: people
first obtains real personality and of consequence the
capacity of acting. As therefore to private law apart
from the state, we are able to ascribe merely an invisible
existence in the concordant feelings thoughts and man-
ners, so that law by the establishment of judicature pre-
serves in the state its life and activity. This however
does not imply that in fact, there ever appeared, in the life
of peoples before the discovery of the state, a time in
which private law could have this incomplete nature
(state of nature.) A people rather, as soon as it appears
as such,also comes to view as a state, whatever the shape

_ which it may have taken. This assertion therefore will
hold good only of that state of a people, which remains to
us in thought, when we artificially abstract it from its
character as state. In this likewise the relation of
individuals to the general law preserves its reality and
completeness. Law has its being in the common intel-
lect of the people, (8S. 7 and 8,) therefore in their united
will which thus restricted is also the will of each
individual ; but the individual can by force of his free-
dom, in consequence of what he individually wills

"resist that which he thinks and wills as a member of

the whole body. This contradiction is wrong or the
violation of law, whith must be annihilated if law is to
subsist and rule. : If this annihilation is to be independent
of accident and maintain a regular certainty, this is only
possible in the state; for in the state alone the rule of


20. STATE, STATE'S, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LAW.


law can stand as an external and objective matter, face
to face with the individual, and in this new connexion
the individual capacity of freedom of wrong, appears
restrained by the aggregation of wills and absorbed in
them.


The state moreover has also the most evident influence
upon the generation of private law and this not merely
upon its contents which will yet be spoken of more at
length but also upon the limits of the generation, from
the consideration that the common spirit of a people
must be more intimate and more active within the limits
of the same state; in different states even of kindred
races on the other hand it must be more remote and be
hindered in many ways. Though the arising of a special
people’s-law is not excluded by the unity of the state,
it is there subject to this restriction, that by it the
essential unity of the state must not be endangered. It
would be simply erroneous in this view of the influence
of the state either to fix it too high in comparison with
that of other relations or to conceive it as the exclusive
motive influence. Thus at the fall of the western
empire, several German states consisted partly of
German and partly of Roman subjects ; in this condition
the Roman subjects of the’ one state had the same
Roman law as those of the other; the German subjects
of the different states had at a least a kindred law and
this more or less complete complete legal communion
was not destroyed by the limits of the states.


In order to protect from the reproach of incomplete-
ness the classification of the laws prevailing in a state,
here. established, the following addition is however
necessary. I do not desire to narrow the state to the
purposes of law ; indeed the theory will not presume


STATE, STATE'S, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LAW. 21


to desire to limit the freedom of individual develope-
_ ment by the assertion of exclusive aims for the activity
of the state. Nevertheless its first and most inevitable
task is to make the idea of law dominant in the visible
world. To this object leads a double activity of the
state. First it has to protect the individual who is
injured in his right against that injury ; we call the
rules to which this activity is subject, civil process.
Secondly it has to defend and re-establish the injured
right, without reference to the individual interest. This
is done by punishment, through which the human will,
in the narrower field of law, imitates the law of moral
retribution prevailing in the higher system of the
world.(¢) We call the rules to which this activity is
subject, criminal law of which criminal procedure forms
merely a part.(o) Civil procedure, criminal law and
criminal procedure are hence parts of state’s-law and.
were so regarded by the Romans. The strangeness of
this conception in more recent times arises from the
following circumstances. The administration of criminal
law is often lodged in the same jurisdiction as the pro-
tection of private right and hence the treatment of the
“two matters has assumed a like shape. In civil proce-
dure moreover the activity of the state, is so inter-


(a) Thus far one may say that the general moral ordinance of
retribution in a limited way, assumes the nature of an institution of
law and as such ought to be brought into practice by the state, See
Hegel Naturrecht, p, 102, 103, 120. fienze Lehrbuch des Strafrechts,
p- 10-17. ,

(b) It depends upon the positive law of each state, how far the state
will directly exercise this law or leave to the injured individual the
pursuit of his own right. This last arrangement is the basis of the
private penal law of the Romans,. A more complete developement of
the power of the state will lead to the abandonment therein of this


latter course. ;


22 STATE, STATE'S, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LAW. _


woven with the rights of the individual, that.a complete
separation is not practically attainable. . However the
inner nature’ of these doctrines of law here expressed
cannot on that account be changed. - In order to afford
recognition on the one hand to the essence of the thing
and on the other to its more practical bearings it seems
desirable to. employ, as is not uncommon, with the
name state’s-law the more general name of public law
under which are embraced civil procedure and criminal
law. This expression shall henceforth be employed.


The case is quite different with church-law. From a
merely worldly point of view, the church seems like
every other association, and one might ascribe to it such
a dependent and subordinate position as other corpo-
rations obtain partly in public and partly in private
law. Its importance dominating the innermost nature
of men, does not admit of this treatment. In the
various ages of the world’s history the church and
church-law have occupied a very different position
towards the state. Among the Romans the jus sacrum
was a part of public law and was subordinated to the
power of the state(4) The world-embracing nature of
Christianity excludes this purely national treatment. ,
Tn the middle ages the church sought to subordinate
the state to itself and to rule over it. We should regard
the various Christian churches as existing beside the
state, though in manifold,and intimate contact with it.
Hence Church-law is to us a self-subsisting province of
law which must be subordinated neither to public nor
to private law.


(a) L.1, 8. 2, de just et jur (1. 1.)


DISCORDANT OPINIONS CONCERNING, THE STATE. 23


SECTION X.
_ DISCORDANT OPINIONS CONCERNING THE STATE,


- The view here set forth has been far from finding a
general recognition., e*


In the first place here also it. is the indefinite concept
of a multitude in general, abstracted from ‘the unity of
the people, which. has often been thought as the subject
of the state. This assertion is contradicted by the fact
that those who have made their appearance in the
organic form of states, were peoples and that wherever .
an attempt has been made on an extensive scale, with-
out regard tothe complete difference of their origin,
arbitrarily to bring together masses of men, as in the
American slave states, the attempt has been very
unsuccessful and insurmountable obstacles have stood
in the way of the formation of a state. In contradiction
of this opinion, we must again assert that the state
arises spontaneously and naturally, in a people, through
the people, and for the people.


Moreover there is a widely prevalent opinion in
accordance with which states must have taken their
rise in the will of individuals, therefore in contract;
this opinion has in its developement led to results as
pernicious as they are false. There is the assumption
that the people who found it advantageous to found this
particular state, could just as well have remained
entirely without a state, or have united and confined
themselves to a state as they actually did so, or in a
different manner or that they might have selected a
different constitution. In this theory therefore not
merely is the natural unity preserved in, the people, as
well as the inner necessity once more overlooked but
especially also the circumstance that wherever such


94 DISCORDANT OPINIONS CONCERNING THE STATE.


deliberation is possible, there will infallibly be a state
existent as fact and law, so that there can no longer be
any question, as these people would have it, of the
arbitrary invention of a state but at the utmost a
question of destroying it. Two misconceptions have
especially contributed to this error. First the percep-
tion of the great variety in the formation of states, that
is of the historical and individual elements of states
which has been confounded with the free choice and
arbitrary will of individuals; Secondly the constant
and often unconscious interchanging of the whliolly
different concepts which are denoted by the common
name—people. This name denotes, viz. : ,

1. The natural whole in which the state actually
arises and continually carries on its existence and about
which there can be no question. of choice or arbitrary
will.

2. The aggregate of all the individuals living in a
state at the same time.

' 8. The very same individuals with the deduction of
the governing body, therefore those who obey in con-:
tradistinction to those who govern.

4. Ina republican state such as Rome, that organ-
ised aggregation of individuals, in which by thé consti-
tution, the supreme power actually resides. Those now
with whom these concepts, have in a confused manner,
run into one another,would be thereby led to transfer
the ideal right of the people as a natural whole (1) and
the historical right of the Roman people (4) to the
whole body of subjects and thus by amentire subversion
of the truth, ascribe government to those rightfully
obeying. Even when they do not take this extreme
step but allow right and power to reside in the aggre-


DISCORDANT OPINIONS CONCERNING THE STATE. 25


gate of all the individuals living at the time, therefore
with the inclusion of the-rulers ; they do not better the
matter much by that. In the first place because indi-
viduals as such and according to the number of heads
do not make the state; but merely do so as its consti-
tutionally created members: then because individuals
never can will and act in their totality but-always in a
selected number, so that in regard to a majority, (women
and minors) it only remains to have receurse to the
empty fiction of a representation: lastly because the
very totality of individuals would merely be those
existing at the present moment, while the ideal people
here spoken of, includes the entire future in itself, and
has therefore a permanent existence (S. 8.)


However an element of truth is contained in the
views here controverted. ‘Certainly accident and arbi-
trary will may exercise great influence upon the form-
ation of a state and in particular the boundaries of it
are settled by conquest and dismemberment in a manner
very different from that dictated by the natural unity
of the people. On the other hand a foreign element
may often be completely assimilated to the state; the
possibility of such assimilation has its conditions and
stages as these are furnished by some affinity of the
new element and also by the innate perfection of the
receiving state. But all such events, however often they
may appear in history, are merely anomalies. The
people does not on their account the less remain the
natural basis of the state and the forming by indwelling
power its natural cause of origin. If now into this
formative process, a heterogeneous, historical motive
principle enters, it may be subdued and assimilated. If
this consumption of it, does not take place, a condition

Cc,


26 - INTERNATIONAL LAW.


of weakness is thereby presented. In this way is
explained how and what was originally force and wrong
can gradually be so changed by the power of attraction
indwelling in the legal condition, that it passes into it
as a new, legitimate element. It is altogether objection-
able even rash to try to represent these anomalies
which disturb and put to the test the moral force as
the real ground of origin of the state and to seek in
this view, the only possible protection against the
dangerous theory which makes a state arise from the
. voluntary contract of its individual members.(4) As to
this attempt at preservation, it is difficult to say which
is more hazardous the disease or the remedy.


SECTION XI.
ENTERNATIONAL LAW.


If we go on to contemplate the relation of several
peoples and states subsisting near one another, that
relation will appear to us at first similar to the relation
of single men who are. brought together by accident
without being bound together by community of race.
If each of them, is an intelligent and educated man,
they will apply, in their accidental proximity the con-
sciousness of law, inherent in each, from his earlier .
relations, and they will thus establish themselves in a
legal condition which will infallibly be more or less an
imitated and consequently a translated one. In like
manner several independent states may voluntarily
apply that which in each resides as law so far as it is
suitable and as they find it convenient; but still no
law arises in this way. Nevertheless among different


(a) Haller restauration der Staatswissenschaft. -


CUSTOMARY LAW. ~ 27.


peoples a community of legal consciousness may arise
like that which generates positive law in a’ people.
The basis of this intellectual communion-consists partly
of a community of race, partly and principally in
common religious convictions. Thereon grounds itself
the international law which exists especially among the
Christian states of Europe and was not unknown to the
_ancient nations as for example it appears among the
Romans.as jus feciale. And we ought to regard it as
positive law although on two grounds as incompletely
formed ; First by reason of its incompleteness in any
certain contents and secondly because there is wanting
to it that real foundation which is given by the power
of the state and especially by the judicial tribunal to
the law of the single members of the same state.


Moreover the progressive moral education as based
on Christianity leads each people to apply analogically
that positive international law to entirely. foreign
peoples by whom this mode of thinking is not shared
and this practice not requited. Such an application
however has a purely ethical character and not the
nature of a positive law. .


SECTION XII.
CUSTOMARY LAW.


G. F. Puchta das Gewohnheitsrecht B. 1. 2. Erlangen
1828 and 1837.


The origination of law here set forth under the name
of peoples’ law, which proceeds in an invisible manner
and is therefore not referable to an external event and to
a defined point of time, has indeed been recognized at
all times although this recognition has remained


28 CUSTOMARY LAW.


unfruitful, for the two main reasons that people have
assigned to it a too limited office and that they have
conceived its nature wrongly. The first can only be
explained below in connexion with legislation; the
second is associated with the usual name of customary
law.


This name may easily mislead us into the following
course of thinking. When anything whatever needed
to be done in a jural relation, it was originally quite
indifferent what was done ; accident and arbitrary will
anyhow settled the decision. If the same case presented
itself a second time, it was more easy to repeat the
same decision than to deliberate upon a new one and
with each fresh repetition, this procedure of necessity
appeared more conveniént and more natural. Thus
after a while such a rule would become law as had
originally no greater claim to prevail than an opposite
rule and the cause of origin of this law was custom
alone. If one looks at the true bases of positive law,
at the actual substance of it, he will see that in that
view, cause and effect are exactly reversed. That basis
has its existence, its reality in the common -conscious-
ness of the-people. This existence is an invisible thing ;
by what means can we recognize it? We do so when
it reveals itself in external act when it steps forth in
usage, manners, custom; in the uniformity of a con-
tinuing and therefore lasting manner of action we
recognize the belief of the people as its common root
and one diametrically oppesite to bare chance. Custom
therefore is the badge and not a ground of origin of posi-
tive law. However this error which converts custom
into a ground of origin has also an ingredient of truth
which must now be reduced to its proper dimensions.


CUSTOMARY LAW. 29


Besides those bases universally recognized in the con-
sciousness of a people and undoubted, there are many
determinations as to details which have in themselves
a less certain existence; they may obtain such an
existence, by being through constant practice brought
more definitely to the consciousness of the people
itself(¢) Such cases will more frequently present
themselves in each people in proportion as the power of
forming law, belongs to that people in a less conspicuous
manner. Moreover in the nature of many determin-
ations there is a relative indifference ; in these it is only
necessary that some fixed rule should exist and be
recognized as existing, whatever that rule may be. To
this class belong the numerous cases in which the rule
of law merely determines a number and in which
within a certain limit, great latitude is left to arbitrary
will, as in the periods of prescription ; such too are the
tules which have for their object merely the external
form of'a legal matter. In all cases of this sort, we
become by our prior thought and will an authority for
ourselves in each later application, and thus custom as
such may have an influerice upon the formation of law.
Here operates the law of continuity of human thoughts,
acts and circumstances—a law which has extensive
influence upon many special institutions of law.() This
belief in a custom reacting upon law is-only degrading

(a) Puchta II, p. 8. 9. “and for the people from whose views of law
it proceeds, custom serves as a mirror in which that people ‘recognizes
itself, ,

(b) The same law shows itself in the burden of proof (as 2 condition
of changing an existing situation) in possession, usucapio, the limitation
of actions and lastly in the power of presumptions (S. 20) in each place
to be sure in a special admixture and shape. This general point of view


can only be indicated here, the exhibition of the institutions of law
named must precede its full establishment.


30 ; CUSTOMARY LAW._


to law in so far as this constant activity is regarded as
something irrefiective and determined by accidental and
external impulse; if on the contrary it is regarded as a
considered, activity proceeding from the energy of the
spirit, the dignity of law is not impaired by this origin.
Although therefore the name customary law, in the two
senses here illustrated, can be in some measure vindi-
cated, a somewhat narrower use of the word is desirable
because it brings with it so many inherited misunder-
standings, which have always been bound up with it.


In the two relations in which the use of customary
law is important, as marks of positive law and as a co-
operative ground of origin, there are two classes of acts
which show themselves especially fruitful and efficacious
—the symbolical forms of legal acts and the decisions
of the tribunals formed from the people.(4) The former
bring completely to view the meaning of legal institu-
tions ; the latter being called forth by the opposition of


(a) If I here ascribe to the nature of popular tribunals a special
weight, I do so in contradistinction to the learned tribunals which in
our more modern times are composed of permanent colleges (S. 14.)
This character shows itself quite unmistakeably in the German sheriff’s
courts ; not less so in the Roman res judicate and this not as one might
easily be led to believe, because the judges were private persons and
therefore in this sense were taken from the people (for the point of law
which is everything here, proceeded from the pretor not from the
judex) but because the prator himself being changed yearly and not
necessarily belonging to the educated order of jurists, therefore repre-
sented the general view of the people. Thus the Romans themselves
referred the res judicate as law-sources to the preetor, as their author
(Auctor ad Herenn II, 13.) All this however is only true of the ordin-
ary judges who were singly or in a small number nominated by the
Pretor. In matters before the centumviri on the contrary it was from
the deciding judges themselves that the point of law proceeded (because
there was no formula prescribed) and thus was formed for that special
purpose the querela inofficiosi.


LEGISLATION. 31


litigated claims, are compelled by their very object to
conceive and set forth the jural relation with a Higidly
defined boundaries.


When lastly it’has been here asserted that the
appearance of the exercise of peoples’ law in particular
cases, must be regarded as a means of its recognition
and therefore this may be described as a mediate know-
ledge, necessary for those who, as it were, examine this
law from the outside without themselves belonging as
members to the confederacy, in which the peoples’ law
has arisen and leads its continuous life. ‘For the mem-
bers themselves, such a deduction from the experience
of particular cases is not necessary since their know-
ledge is an immediate one resting upon intuition.


SECTION XU.
LEGISLATION.
Even when positive law had obtained the highest
* certainty and definiteness, error or a perverted will
might seek to withdraw themselves from its govern-
ment. Hence it becomes necessary to give to it an.
existence externally perceivable, by force of which each
individual opinion may be set aside and the actual con-
trol of the unrighteous will be facilitated. Positive law
thus embodied by speech and furnished with absolute
power is called written law (statute) and the laying
down of this is-one of the noblest rights of the supreme
power in the state. Legislation may be operative as
well.in public as in private law. Here however it will
be more nearly examined in its special reference to
the latter.
If we enquire first as to the contents of written law,
they are already determined by the mode of derivation


32 LEGISLATION.


of the law-giving power; the already present peoples’
law are those contents or what is the same thing,
written law is the organ of peoples’ law. If one would”
doubt about that, one must conceive the lawgiver as
standing apart from the nation; he however rather .
stands in its centre, so that he concentrates in himself
their spirit, feelings, needs, so that we have to regard
him as the true representative of the spirit of the people.
It is also entirely erroneous to regard this position”
of the legislator, as dependent upon the different
arrangement of the legislative power in this or that
constitution. Whether a prince makes the law or a
senate or a larger collection of people perhaps formed
by election or perhaps the agreement of several such
powers is furnished for legislation, the essential relation
of the legislator to the people’s law is not at all changed
and it is again owing to the error of the concep-
tion censured above, if some believe that real peoples’
law is only contained in the laws made by selected
representatives. ,


This view of the nature and contents of legislation _
has not infrequently been misunderstood as if it ascribed
to the legislator an office subordinate and not worthy
of him and even as if it tacitly declared the whole
practice of legislation not only as superfluous but as
even mischievous, This misunderstanding will be most
decisively removed by showing in what the real influ-
ence of legislation ppon the formation of law consists
and what specific importance must be ascribed to this
influence. This important influence shows itself especi-
ally in reference to two things—first as an aid to the
extension of positive law secondly as a support to its
gradual progress, - ,


LEGISLATION. ; 33


With reference to the first, what has been already
remarked concerning customary law (S. 12) must be
- borne in mind. Amid all the certainty of the founda-
tions of positive law, special parts in it may remain
undetermined and this: especially in a people whose
disposition and aim have been distinguished more on
other sides than that of law-forming. Here come in |
the numerous regulations in the nature of which a
certain latitude of will is permitted as for example all
those determinations which involve as a condition a
certain space of time. In all such cases an extension
of peoples’ law is necessary and although this, as is
above mentioned, can be imparted by custom, it is
effected more speedily, more securely , and in a better,
way by legislation.


The influence of legislation upon the progress of law
is more important than upon the original formation of
it. If through changed manners, views, needs, a change
in the existing law becomes necessary or if in the pro-
gress of time entirely new legal institutions are neces-
sary, these new elements may indeed be introduced into
the existing law by the same innate invisible power
which originally generated the law. It is however
precisely here that the influence of legislation may
become most obviously beneficial nay indispensable.
‘Since those operative principles only enter gradually,
there of necessity arises an interval of uncertain law
and this uncertainty is brought to an end by the
expression of the law. Further all the institutions of
law stand among one another in connexion and reci-
procal action, so that by this newly formed legal
proposition, without the matter being noticed a con-
tradiction of other legal propositions, themselves


| 84 LEGISLATION.


unchanged, may arise. Hence an assimilation becomes


necessary which can only be safely effected by reflexion
and considerate and therefore personal exertion of
power.(¢) These principles obtain a very obvious
importance in the cases in which the law at present
needing change, was established by previous legislation.
For since in this law there dwells the constantly visible
and resisting power of the written text, the gradually
operating, innate formation will often be entirely
hindered and often be lowered to an unsatisfactory
degree{b) Lastly into the history of every people, enter
stages of developement and conditions which are no
longer propitious to the creation of law by the general
consciousness of a people (S. 7.) In this case this
activity, in all cases indispensable, will in great measure
of itself devolve upon legislation. This change has at no
time appeared so evidently and so suddenly as under
Constantine from whose time the formation of law, was


(a) Stahl Philosophie des Rechts II, 1, P. 149.


(6) This is the real meaning of the often misused passage of Gothe :


“ Laws are a fatal heritage,—
Like a disease an heir-loom dread
“Their curse they trail from age to age,
And furtively abroad they spread,
Reason doth nonsense, good doth evil grow;
That thou’rt grandson is thy woe
- But of the law on man impress’d
By nature’s hand, there’s ne’er a thought.
° Swanwick’s Faust.


This hag frequently been taken as if 4 general blame of positive law
were expressed and a lament that merely natural law did not govern ;
that the poet has expressly followed in this passage the same connexion
of thought, that I have done, I will not assert. It is however the
privilege of the seer to produce directly by intuition that which such
as we can only produce by the long and troublesome way of deduction,


LEGISLATION. BEL


exclusively undertaken by the very active imperial ‘
legislation,


As it follows from this examination that an import-
ance subordinate in comparison’ with pure (that is not
passed over into legislation) peoples’ law, must: not. be

_ascribed, it is also necessary to forewarn against the
opposite error by which people’s law will be treated as
a necessary supplement to legislation by accident
defective but as-no longer to be thought of when legis-
lation has come into existence. This view would lead
logically to the holding as impossible a change of a
written law by fresh people’s law (abrogating custom.)
If one acknowledges in the two forms of making law a
like independent importance, it will appear evident that
the natural creative power of people’s law cannot be
taken away by the circumstance in itself accidental that
a later product of it has assumed the form of legislation.


Besides the contents of written laws of which we
‘have hitherto spoken, the form of them is now to be
specially adverted to. This is determined as well by
its proceeding from the supreme power as by the abso-
lute power with which it is to operate.


No-form can be more suitable to this origin and
mode of operation than the abstract one of a rule and
acommand, Every other that could be attached to it,
explanation, exposition, exerting an influénce upon the
conviction, is foreign to the nature of written law and
belongs to other spheres of communication.


From this springs an incongruity between the written
law and the institutes of law of which the organic
nature cannot possibly be expressed in that abstract
form. Nevertheless the legislator must have in his eye


36 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


a most complete view of the organic institutes of law
and he must from this view of the whole, by an artifi-
cial process, form the abstract precept of the law; in
like manner must he who is to apply the law by an
inverse process re-unite the organic contents of which
the law represents as it were a segment. That incon-
gruity and the necessity for this artificial process is
lessened wherever the written law is filling the office
of enlarging and aiding, for these special aims of them-
selves wear an already abstract nature and consequently
can be more easily expressed in the abstract form of the
written law.


SECTION XIV.
SCIENTIFIC LAW.


It is a natural consequence of the developement of
nations that in progressive cultivation, special activities
and acquirements should separate them and thus form
separate occupations for the different classes. Thus
also Jaw, originally the common property of the collected
people, by the more extended relations of .active life is
developed in so special a manner that it can no longer
be mastered by the knowledge uniformly spread among
the people. Then is formed a special order of persons
skilled in law who an actual part of the people,
in this order of thought represent the whole. The law
is in the particular consciousness of this order, merely
a continuation and special unfolding of the people’s law.
It leads henceforth a double life ; in outline it continues
to live in the common consciousness of the people, the
more minute cultivation and handling of it, is the
special calling of the order of jurists.


SCIENTIFIC LAW. ; 37


The external forms of the activity of this .order
present a picture of their very gradual developement. -
This class first appears merely as giving counsel in par-
- ticular cases sometimes by advice as to the decision of |
a litigated matter(@) sometimes by instruction as to
the correct performance of the solemnities in legal acts.
Next to these commonly appear as their first literary
performances, formularies, mechanical indications of the
correct execution of legal acts. By little and little the
activity becomes more intellectual and educates itself
into science. Now show themselves, as theoretical fornis
the expositions of law partly in manifold books and
partly in oral teaching, as practical forms the decisions
of the courts which differ from those of the-old popular
tribunals. partly by the scientific education of their
members and partly by the tradition of permanent
colleges. ;


Hence one may discern in the order of jurists a
two-fold action; one material, inasmuch as the law-
producing activity of the people, has in great measure
founda retreat among them and is continuously exercised
by them as représentatives of thé whole; one formal
and purely scientific inasmuch as the law, however it
may have arisen is scientifically brought to knowledge
and set forth by them. In this latter function ‘the
action of the jurists, appears at first sight a dependent
one, receiving its materials from without. However by
their giving to the materials so presented a scientific
form which strives to disclose and perfect the unity’
dwelling in them, there arises a new organic life which
shapes and reacts upon the materials themselves, so


(4) First verbal counsels of the advocati in the presence of the court
aubsequently written responsa, 2
D


38 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


that from science as such, a new sort of generation of
law incessantly proceeds. How important and beneficial
this formal reaction of science upon the law itself may
be, is clear at a glance but it is also not without its
dangers. Even in early times the Roman jurists sought
to lay down for use in many jural relations, general
formulas, which became rooted by tradition and obtained
great and lasting respect; Gaius in particular has pre-
served for us many of these; but the jurists them-
selves(®) and Justinian in their words, remark upon
‘the danger of an indiscriminate submission to those
formulas and point out that their purpose is the sum-
marizing of the law and concentrating its contents but
that they ought not to be regarded as bases of law.(¢)


In later times this reaction of the form, became much
more extended, multifarious and powerful, and herein
lies the great danger of the composition of a compre-
hensive code by which the temporary result of the
formal conception becomes fixed and is deprived of the
purification and improvement which naturally ‘result
from a progressive scientific developement.

The special relation of the order of jurists to legisla-
tion will be found when examined, to exhibit itself in


(6) L. 202 de R. J. (50. 17.) Omnis definitio in jure civili periculosa
est : parum (rarum) est enim ut non subverti possit.

(c) L. 1. de R. J. (50. 17.) Regula est que rem que est breviter endr-
rat, Non. (ut) ex regula jus sumatur, sed (ut) ex jure quod est regula
fiat .... que, simul cum in aliquo vitiata est, perdit officium suum. That
means : we must never sacrifice to the love of it (regula) any otherwise
independently established concrete determination. Here therefore is
the place for the recognition of exceptions by the side of the rule;
indeed what we here cal] exceptions, is really only the recognition of an
incomplete expression of the rule. Legislative declarations expressed
in the form of general rules, have a different nature and in these, we
must be more sparing in the permission of exceptions, :


SCIENTIFIC LAW. 39


the following modes. They Socniat upon legislation.
partly through the peoples’ law improved by them as —
well as through the spontaneous growth of it being
materials for legislation and partly through the juristical
training of the persons who in various degrees have an
influence upon legislation. They moreover work upon
legislation and are the medium of its passage into prac-
tical life. The free and manifold forms too of which
they may avail themselves, render it possible for them to
exhibit the abstract statutory rule in its living connexion
with the institutions of law ; it is true that the written
law also has been derived from a view of that connexion -
which is not however in itself immediately visible
(S.13.) Thus by scientific handling the government
of the relations of life, is rendered easier, and is secured _
to legislation.


There thus appears therefore, a manifold influence of
the order of jurists upon positive law. Against the
assertion of this influence, the reproach of unauthorized
pretension has often been raised. That reproach could
- only be well founded if the jurists wished to form an

exclusive order but since every one may become a jurist
who applies to it the necessary energy, the assertion
amounts to the simple proposition that he who makes
law the business of his life, will through his larger
acquaintance with the matter have greater influence
thaz another upon it.
I call this particular.sort of origination of law, scien-
tific law; it is otherwise called jurists’ law.
’ The intellectual culture which has been asserted as
the condition of scientific law, must not be misunder-
stood to be merely a very high order of such culture,
since often a bare commencement is sufficient for that


40 LAW-SOURCES, ‘ &C.


end, so that a very rigorous limitation, will not be
expected, Still more important is the observation that
a similar though more contracted relation may arise
from the constitution of the state, if it puts a single
order above all other orders in the situation of possess-
ing a knowledge of law.


Thus in Rome a prudentium auctoritas was acknow- —
ledged in a time, in which there existed not the smallest
trace of & scientific need and that auctoritas was con-
nected with the exclusive acquirements ‘of the pontifices
and consequently with the privileges of the patrician
order.(a)


SECTION XV.
THE LAW-SOURCES IN THEIR CONNEXION, NATURE AND
ORIGIN OF THEIR CONTENTS.

From the previous exposition it follows that origin-
ally all positive law is people’s law and that side by
side with this spontaneous generation, comes legislation
(often even in early times) enlarging and propping it
up. Then by the progressive developement of the ~
people, legal science is added ; thus in legislation and
the science of law, two organs are furnished to people’s
law, each of which simultaneously leads its independent
life. If lastly in later times, the law forming energy,
departs from the people as a whole, it continues to live
in these organs. Then since the largest and most

‘important part of the old people’s law have been incor-
porated with legislation and legal science, that law
shows itself very little in its original shape but merely
appears through their medium. Thus it may happen


(a). 2. S. 5. 6. de orig jur. (1. 2.) This is not the place for examin-
ing to what extent, this historical statement is true.


LAW-SOURCES, &C. 44


that people’s law may be almost hidden by legislation -
and legal science in which it lives on, and that the true ~
origin of existing positive law, may be easily forgotten.
and misunderstood/«) Legislation especially, in its
external influence has such a preponderance, that the
delusion easily arises that it is the sole true ground of
origin of law and that all others must be considered in
the subordinate position of a mere help or succedaneum
of it. Law however is never in a healthy condition, unless
these law-forming powers work harmoniously together;
neither of them ‘isolating itself from the others: and
since legislation and legal science are the continuous
product of individual consciousness ahd reflexion, it is
also of importance that correct views of the origin of
positive lai, and of the true connexion of the powers
co-operating in that production, should obtain and
assert the mastery.

This intrinsic connexion of legislation and the science
of law with people’s law which also ser'ves as their basis,
makes it the more necessary to examine more narrowly


(a) This concealment of the spontaneous generation of law, by later
forms into which the earlier materials have passed, is especially marked
in a constant expression of the later Roman law. In the earlier time
leges, plebiscita, senatus consulta, &., would have been stated ag law:
sources. These had now passed entirely into the works of the famous
jurists beside: which existed the constantly augmenting imperial laws.
At this later time therefore all law rested upon leges or constitutiones
(imperial laws) and upon jus or prudentia (juristic literature.) Tt is
thus stated in several passages of the commonitorium whieh prefaces
the Visigothic breviary. L. 2. C. Th, de dot. (8.13.) ,L. un. C. Th. de
resp. prud. (1. 4.) Int. Cod. Greg. II. 2. 1. Edictum Theodorici in
epilogo. Prem. Inst. S. 2. 4. Const, Deo auctore 8. 1. 2.9.11. Const,
Cordi. pr. S. 1. L. 6. C. quorum appell. (7. 65.) Justiniani Sanctis
pragmatica S. 11, ‘In like manner, the whole English law rests upon
two bases, statute law and common law, What the imperial laws were
in Rome, the acts of parliament are in England,


42 LAW-SOURCES, &C.


the quality of the contents of people’s law. In it we
find a two-fold element; an individual one specially
belonging to each people and a general one based upon
the human nature common to all. Both find their
scientific recognition and sphere, in the history and the
philosophy of law. Nota few of those, who in all times
have busied themselves with the establishment of the
nature of law, have treated the idea as absolute, without
concerning themselves with its form in actual existence
and with the influence of their thoughts, upon its
condition. Those also, who have sought to give to
their scientific task a definite relation to the actual
condition of law, have often in so doing been led to a
one-sided treatment of law because they have recogniz-
ed only one or the other of the elements of law speci-
fied—some of them because they have conceived the
contents of law as accidental and indifferent and have
satisfied themselves with the perception of the matter
of fact as such; others by the setting up of a normal
law overhanging all positive law which all nations would
do well to substitute immediately for their own positive
law. This latter one-sidedness deprives law of all life
while the former misunderstands entirely its lofty
calling. We shall avoid both errors if we recognize a
general problem which it is the historical task of each
people to solve in its own particular manner. The
lively conflict upon these opposite views has indeed
served-to render that task more clearly and definitely
understdod ; it has however often led to narrow failure
to recognize the element of truth in the efforts of
opponents. We ought not then to overlook the fact
that in a research apparently confined to particulars, a
sense of the whole, consequently of the higher import


LAW-SOURCES, & 43


of legal institutions, may show itself: in like manner

on the other hand, a research general in its aim, may.
be pervaded by a perception of the historical life of the
people. If one turns one’s eyes from the utterances of
party spirit (as worthless and transient) and directs
them simply to the scientific aims of our age, one must:
be able to entertain the joyful thoughts of a closer:
approximation of opinion and hence of a real progress.


That general aim of all law is simply referable to the
moral destination of human nature, as it exhibits itself
in the Christian view of life; then Christianity is not

“to be regarded merely as a rule of life for us but it has
also in fact changed the world so that all our thoughts,
howéver strange-and even hostile they may appear to
it, are nevertheless governed and penetrated by it. By
this recognition of a general aim, law is by’ no means
dissolved in a wider province and deprived of its
independence : it appears rather as an entirely peculiar
element in the series of conditions of that general pro-
blem ; in its own department it rules absolutely and it

-merely preserves its higher verity by that connection
with the whole. It is moreover quite satisfied with
the adoption of that single end and it is by no means
necessary to place beside it a second end altogether
different under the name of the public weal, by admit-
ting besides an ethical principle, a politico-economical
one entirely independent of it. Since political economy
strives to extend our mastery over nature, it can only
aim at increasing and ennobling the medium in which
the moral ends of human nature are to be attained ; a
new aim however is not embraced in it.


If from this stand-point we regard the positive law
of particular nations, we find in its generation the two


44 LAW-SOURCES, &c.


elements of law not as different, but as one and the
same undivided operating power. However the two not
‘seldom enter into a definite opposition to one another,
in turn oppose and limit one another, haply afterwards
to be dissolved into a higher unity. In this opposition
appears to us the special or natural element, and each
single part which is embraced as a logical consequence
of it, as for example the bare letter of the law (jus
strictum, ratio juris)(); in such a locking up in the
letter, the law itself is incomplete arid narrowed, it has
lowever the capacity, of adopting more and more
general principles cognate to it, and of extending itself
by them. The general element on the other hand,
‘ appears in its turn in different forms and more clearly
and immediately in proportion as the moral nature of
law is generally operative therein: the recognition of.
the like moral value and the freedom of men, the
encircling of that freedom with the institutions of law
and with all that follows as the practical consequences
of these institutions, what the moderns call the nature
of the thing, (equitas or naturalis ratio) are such,
immediate appearances. The general element.of law
appears mediately and of more mixed nature: I, as the
regarding of moral ends without the province of law,
and in the latest form of law the regarding of ecclesias-
tical ends; 2, as the regarding of the interest of the


(a) Roman technical expressions are used in this place-not to estab-
lish historically the ideas which the Romans entertained but to make
the present genera] statement clearér by associating it in the memory,
with well known technical expressions, The connexion of that -state-
ment with the fundamental notions prevailing among the Romans, will
follow in S, 22. The logical consequentiality is very distinctly expressed
in the following text: L, 51. S. 2, ad. L. Aquil, (9. 2.) Mula autem
jure civili, contra rationem disputandi, pro utilitate, communi recepta


esse.


ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &C. 45


state (publica utilitas, quod reipublice interest) ; 3,
as a paternal care for the welfare of individuals (ratio
utilitatis) e. g., the promotion of commerce, the protec-.
tion of a particular class such as women or minors
against particular dangers. According to this review,
_ the grounds of arising of law may . be classified in the
following manner. They rest-either simply upon the
province of law alone (jus strictum and equitas) or
upon the conjoint operation of such principles as do not ,
lie within the boundaries of the province of law,
although they have, in common with it, the same
general aim (bond mores and every_sort of utilitas.)
By this perception of the two elements of every system —
of positive law, the general and the special, a new and
‘high puxpose of legislation imniediately reveals itself.
Since the most powerful motive to the developement
of positive law, lies‘ in these two elements, it is of the.
last importance for the legislator to recognize with cer-
tainty that general end and approximate himself to it
without weakening the free power of individual life.
In this road there'is much to be levelled, many ‘an
obstacle to be surmounted, and_ here the legislative
power may render, to the invisibly working spirit: of
the people, the most salutary aid. In no task however
is so much caution necessary lest one-sided views and
arbitrary will should supplant the living prevalence
and developement of law. Here especially a sense of
real liberty is necessary to the legislator and this is
often most wanting in those who talk the most about it.


SECTION XVI.
ABSOLUTE & MEDIATE. NORMAL & ANOMALOUS LAW.
In the consideration of the constituents of objective


law we find two contrasts which, since they’ have


46 _ ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &€.


manifold influence upon the doctrines to follow, must
be set forth in this place. In respect to the relation in
which the rules of law stand to the jural relations
governed by them (8. 5.) the following difference is
found—some of those rules govern with an immutable
necessity without leaving any play-room to the indivi- .
dual will: I call these absolute or mandatory rules of
law. The grounds of this necessity may lie either in
the very nature of the organism of law as it shows
itself in positive law or in political and politico-econo-
mical views or immediately in ethical considerations
‘(S. 15.) Other rules at first leave free power to the
individual will and only take its place in order to give
the necessary definiteness to the jural relation where
that will has failed to exercise its power: these rules,
which one may regard as interpretations of the will
which has remained incomplete, I call mediate. The
contrast between the two sorts of rules is very definitely
acknowledged by the Roman jurists. They most fre-
quently term rules of the first kind jus publicum/«)
jus simply(®) jus communele) or juris forma.(¢@)
Sometimes they express specially the reference for
the sake of which the rule has this quality, for example
the interest of the state(¢) or good morals(f) The rules
.of the second sort, of which the nature mainly results


(a) L. 88. de pactis (2, 14.) L. 20. pr. de relig. (11. 7.) L. 42, de
op. lib, (88. 1.) L. 45.8. 1. de R. J. (50. 17.) &e.


(b) L, 12. 8. 1. de pactis dot. (23. 4) L. 27. de R. J. (50. 17.)
(¢) L. 7. 8. 16, de pactis (2. 14.)


(d) L, 42, de pactis (2, 14.) L, 114.8. 7. de leg. (80.1,) L. 49. 8. 2
de fidej, (46. 1.)


(e) L.27,8.4. 1. 7,9.14. de pactis (2. 14.)
* (f) Consultatio 8. 4. in several places,


ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &C. 47


from their contrast with the first, have no sttch regularly
recurting names.(9) The same order of thought is in
part the basis of the division of statutes by modern
writers into commanding, forbidding and permitting.(%)
In this mode of division, the narrowing of it to statutes
is first to be blamed, since the same contrast may occur -
in customary law. Moreover commanding and forbid-
ding statutes are distinguished merely by the logical
form of affirming and denying which, in itself an.
indifferent circumstance, cannot be the basis of the
members of a division. Lastly permission is not that
upon which the third class depends but it is rather the
supplementing of an imperfect declaration of will
Permission can in general have a meaning only in
reference to a previously conceived prohibition: whether
it be that this is removed by the permission or narrowed
by it in the way of exception. In fact one especially
applies the expression to such laws as recognize a
capacity for action in particular persons and therefore
negative the denial of that capacity. There still
remains one of the technical expressions cited which
needs fuller discussion because its ambiguity has pro-
duced great misunderstandings. I mean the expression
publicum jus. Publicwm is generally populicwm, that .
which stands in connexion with the populus. This fun- —
damental expression involves the following varieties.
{g) Res familiaris, privata, ad voluntatum spectans, L.7.58.14. L.,
27.8. 4. de pactis (2. 14.) L,-12. S. 1. de pactis dot. (28. 4.) L. 27. de


R. J. (50. 17.) “The difference between the two sorts of rules of law
will be treated in the fourth chapter.

(h) Glick 1.8.14. The cause of this division exists in L. 7, de leg.
(1. 3.) where however there is one more member “ Legis virtus est
imperare, vetare, permittere, punire,’” Here however these cases stand
merely as an unassuming view of the operation of law not as bases of a


- classification.


48 ' ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &c.


First by it may be meant the Roman people (which is the
common meaning of the term) or the-people of a single
city.) Secondly the word publiéum may refer to the
populus as a whole (as the ager publicus, the bonorum
publicatio and so on,) or to the individual members of
‘that people (as the res publice in the common use of
’ individuals.) (4) As to the special expression jus publi-
-ewm, we may denote by it, entirely different relations
of the jus to the populus. Thus publicum jus denotes
‘first public law, ¢. ¢ the rules of law of which the
people are the object matter ; further the rules of law
generally (objective law) which have their origin in the
recognition of the populus (8. 7. 8:) (4 lastly those
rules of private law, in which the - -populus has an
‘interest (publice interest, publica utilitas) and which
- for that reason are independent of the individual will,
therefore the absolute rules of law (note (@).) But the
expression publicwm jus is not applied merely ‘to the
rules of law (objective law). but also to the privileges of
_individuals (subjective law.) Hence is called publicwm
jus the common enjoyment by all, of streams and
highways(™) in like manner the rights which appertain
to individuals, as senators or as individual members of
the general assembly of the people are called publica
jura(") The neglect of these different though cognate
meanings has frequently led to remarkable errors.(o)


(i) L. 15. de V. 8, (50.16.) 1,16. eod. “L. 9. de usurp (41. 3.)


(k) Le 5. pr, de div. rer. (1.8) L, 7.8.5. Le 14.pr. 1. 30.9.1.
“L. 65. S. 1. de adq. rer dom. (44.1,.) L. 6. pre L. 72. 8.1. de contr.
emt. (18.1.) L. 45, pr. de usurp (41. 3,)


“( L, 8 de tut (26. 1.) L, 77.8. 8, de cond (85. 1.) L. 116, B. 1, de
BR. J. (50,17.) L. 814, C. de Judais (1. 9.)


: (m) L. 1,8. 16.17, 1.8.8.4. L, 4.de O. n. n, (39, ae Similar is
L, 40, ad U,. J. de adult (48, 5.)


(nm) LL 5.8.2. L, 6, de cap. min, (4. 5.)
(0) Upon this error the work-of Burchardi is mainly beised Grund-


ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &c. 49


A second contrast is referable to the difference of
origin of the rules of law according as they have arisen,
.that is, from the pure province of law (be that jus or
aequitas) or from a foreign department (8. 15.) , Since
these latter intrude as foreign elements into the law,
its pure principles are modified by them and in so far
as they are so modified go contra rationem juris(p)
for this reason call them anomalous ; the Romans call
them jus singulare and base their ground of origin on
the utilitas or necessitas different from law{a) I call
’ the law originating from the province of law the normal;


ziige des Rechts systems der Riémer aus ihrem Begriffen von offentlichem
und Privat recht entwickelt, Bonn 1822, He treats the whole law of
persons as jus publicum the law relating to things as jus privatum, and
that relating to actions as a mixture of the two, I hold the fundamental
idea to be erroneous, but the acute manner in which it is worked out
renders the book instructive nevertheless,


(p) L. 14, 15. 16, de leg (1.3.) UL. 141. pr. de R. J. (50.17,) In-
substance this is the same view which has been already taken by Thibaut,
(Versuche II, n. 13.)

(q) L. 16. de leg (1, 3.) “Jus singulare est quod contra tenorem
rationis propter aliquam utilitatem auctoritate constituentium intro-
ductum est. The name jus singulare also appears in L, 23. 8, 3. de fid.
lib, (40. 5.) L. 28.8.1. BL, 44. §. 3. de usurp (41, 3.) L. 15. de reb,
cred, (12.1,) (‘‘Singularia quedam recepta.”) Utilitas (supra S, 15.)
as their ground of origin also in L. 44, 8.1. cit L, 2,8, 16. pro. emt.
(41, 4.) Necessitas (not essentially different from utilitas) in L. 162. de
R. J. (50.17.) It is sometimes called benigne receptum L. 34, pr. man-
dati (17. 1.) Conf Brissonius x benigne and benignus. In many other
places this singular, purely positive, law is called jus constitutum and
therefore without any reference to the imperial constitutions as their.
ground of origin. -L, 25, de don. int. v et ux, (24. 1.) L, 1. rer, am,
(25. 2.) L. 20, 8, 3, de statu lib, (40.7.) 1. 94, pr. 8. 1. de cond (35.
1.) Alciati parerg. VII, 26. Otherwise jus constitutum merely denotes ~
constitutional law L.1.S, 2. que sent. (49, 8,) Uncertain as to this
view Fragm vat..S. 278, and L, 22. C, de usur, (4. 32.) The antithesis
of that singular law (jus constitutum) is jus vulgatum, L. 32,5, 24, de
don, int, vir. (24. 1.)

E


50 ABSOLUTE AND: MEDIATE, &C.


the” Romans’ pémmanly do not use any particular name
for it, but’ in the Roman law the name jus commune is
used for it.( r). “By- fax the jtiost common designation
for jus ‘ stagulare among ‘the Romans, is the expression.
privilegium. “Thus appear the privileges of soldiers as
to. testaments () those of several persons ase grounds of
excise from: guardianship (® and’ especially frequently
the term is used for the favour shown to.certain creditors
in eoncursus(4) as the ,fiscus, minors, claims of dowry
and so on, and therefore’ especially among others for
those demands, which have in later times, obtained the
still greater advantage of a tacit hypothec:() in all
these cases, privilegiwm means. exactly the same thing
as was indicated by the term jus singulare. If we seek
more fully to comprehend this jus singubare, it appears
as purely positive and generally referable to the will of
a particular legislator.~) More rarely it appears as the
product, of primitive national opinion and therefore.
without traceable origin: such is the prohibition ‘of
gifts between husband and wife which rests upon moral
views, not upon a principle of law.) Moreover anomal-
ous law appears in the logical relation to normal law
of an exception to the rule: but this relation is a
derivative one and the essence of the matter is not


(r) L. 15, de vulg, (28, 6.)

(8) Le 15. de vulg. (28.6.) L. 10. de admin, (26, 7.)

(i) L, 80,8. 2. de excus, - 1) Fr, Vatic S, 152, but the expression
ig not common,

(u) Thus throughout the whole title de reb, “sists jud, (42. 5.)
especially L, 24,8. 2,3, L, 32, here they are called privilegiaric,

(v) Our especially common phrase, privileged hypothecs is not used
by the Romans,

(w) Auctoritate constituentium (note (g.)

(x) L. 1, de don. int, vir, (24, 1.) _ -


ABSOLUTE ANB MEDIATE, &C- 51


embraced by: it. Lastly ‘anomalous. Tay. y.eCand this.
belongs to its chataeter of an exception)’ appears, cone.


stantly as confiied to ceftain classes of persofss,. ‘things
or legal acts’: this relation moreover’ is vin the first placg
indefinite, since one can at pleasure’ fotm the concept of
such classed, as for example the whol¢ lary | of sale i ig of
force only among the class of buyers and sellérs. “Te fs
moreover like the previously. ‘mentioned “exteptional
. relation, a subordinate one and* “many haxne quite
erroneously attributed to it the nature of jus singulare.
If this were the case we ought to-be able to reverse the
proposition and then every law of a special class must
always be ju& singulare which can by no means be
admitted, Similarly Justinian’s triennial usucapion
applies merely to moveables but notwithstanding, there
is not on that account any jus singulare. The privi-
lege of minors in the actio tutele ida jus singulare ;
their incapacity to act is not so. ‘The Se. Velleianwm
is a jus singulare of women; their exclusive capacity
of living in the matrimonial relation with men is not so.
_ Consequently the restriction of a law to particular
classes is not that which makes it jus singulare. In
its most usual relation to single classes of persons, the
aim is not, as in normal law (aequitas) directed to an.
indifferent dealing with all those interested but rather,
in consequence of the utilitas intruding from without
upon the law, it has for its object an advantage or dis-
advantage of this class. In the first case, which is the
most common, that law is also called beneficium.y) The
important special laws as to heretics and Jews in
the later Roman law are examples of the latter case.
According to this exposition the concept of the jus


Y) & 9, L.1, 9. 2 ad muni, (50. 1.)


¢


52 ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &c.


singulare is a general, not: an historical one. Never-
theless it may so far assume an historical character,
when a principle originally foreign to the law is
assimilated by it so that that which originally pre-
vailed as utilitas, is in process of time received as ratio
juris. This without doubt happened as to the obtain-
ing of possession, through the medium of free persons
and the singularia as to loan seem as if they must be
understood in the same way.) .


Great confusion has .entered this doctrine through
people eonfounding the jus singulare with that which
we now call privileges, for example with the special
exceptions from the application of the rules of law,
defined by the supreme power of the state. To render
this clear it is necessary carefully to separate the rela-
tion of the concept from the terminology.) Such
exceptions as to individuals are not parts of the general
law and hence are entirely distinguished from the jus
singulare. They have in common with that law, the
nature of an exception to a rule and also an origin from
a one-sided declaration of the legislative power; but
this latter resemblance is merely an accidental, not a
general one, since it may also arise by contract. With
the terminology, it is connected in the following shape.
In the ancient language these individual exceptions
were in fact called privilegia.(}) In our law-sources
on the contrary privilegium is the normal expression
for the jus singulare and as above remarked is so


(2) L.'1. ©. de adg.-poss. (7. 82.) L, 58, de adq. rer. dom. (41. 1.)
L. 15. de reb, ered. (12. 1.)

(aa) These rights will be exhibited below in the treatment of statutes

(38) Thus in many passages of Cicero (Ernesti v privilegium) Gellius
X, 20. conf. Dirksen civilistische abhandlungen B, 1. p. 246. seq.


ABSOLUTE AND MEDIATE, &c.: 53


employed in a great number of texts. The individual
exceptions however are seldom generally mentioned in
the law-sources and where they do occur, they are not
marked by any regular technical expression but are
‘sometimes simply, described,(cc) sometimes called per-
sonales constitutiones or also privata privilegia, aay


(cc) L, 8, in f. C, de leg. (1. 14.) const. summa S. 4.


(dd) L, 1.8.2 de const, prince. (1. 4) Ls 4. G, Th. de itin. mun,
(15. 3.) see S, 24, : S =e


54 s- WRITTEN LAWS.


CHAPTER III.
SOURCES OF THE MODERN ROMAN LAW. —


SECTION XVII.
” A—WRITTEN LAWS.


What has before been said of the nature of law-
sources in general, shall now be applied to the modern
Roman law, the special purpose of this work (8. 1—3.)
That application requires us to specify the particular
place, which, legislation, customary law and scientific
law occupy as sources of the modern Roman law.


The four parts of the Justinianean legislation, which
we are accustomed to include under the name Corpus
Juris, come first under consideration as written laws:
those parts are the three law books and the single
novels published after them and under the limitations
and.in the special shape, which they received in the
school of Bologna, since they were only so known,
when from the influence of that school, the Roman law
was established and recognized as a common law for
modern Europe ; and when four centuries later, new
sources were gradually added to those earlier ones,
their exclusive authority had been so long and so
generally recognized, had so completely passed over into
the practical condition of law, that it was wholly
impossible to ascribe to the new discoveries other than
a purely theoretical use. On this same ground the
ante-justinianean law is excluded from all application
and this exclusion has been recognized by all without
exception. It would be wholly illogical, to be unwilling


WRITTEN LAWS. 55


to apply the same principle to the limits of the canon
of the Justinianean sources. Hence therefore are
excluded, the Greek tests in the Digest for which the
translations received in the school of Bologna are
substituted, the comparatively unimportant restitutions
in the Digest and the much more important ones in the
Code. Of the three compilations of the novels (®) which
are extant in modern times, those only are to be recog-
nized which we term Authenticwm and these in the
abridgment which they have undergone in the school of
Bologna in which they bear the name of the’ Vulgata. ()
On the same grounds, or the oppositue direction, we
must recognize in the Code, the extension which it
received in Bologna by the admission of the awthen-
tica which proceeded from the emperors Frederick I
and Frederick II, and equally the extension by the
reception of the much more ntmerous muthentica of
Imnerius.(@) Nevertheless we ‘must not extend the


(6) Compilation of 168, Julian, and liber authenticoram, Viener
Geschichte der Novellen Justinians, Berlin 1824, 8°.


(c) Viener 8, 258, 259.—Although individual jurists (few indeed in
number) may have held different. opinions on this point (Mithlenbruch
I, 8. 18.) the matter itself ought not on that account to be regarded aa
doubtful, If the principle here laid down is abandoned, it is utterly
impossible to get rid of boundless arbitrariness. ,


(d) Savigny Geschichte des: R. R. im Mittelalter B. 8.8. 195, 196.
It ought not to be regarded as inconsistent when the authority of the
gloss is presently denied while here the authority of the authentica of
Imerius is asserted, although these were nothing more than glosses for
facilitating a comparison between the Code and the Novels. Since they
were recognized merely as portions of the historical canon, without any
strange ingredient, and as they were regarded merely as a convenience
for citation, since the text or the extract could at pleasure be employed,

~ it would be wholly contrary to the intention with which the authentica
were received, if one wished to establish from them a contradiction to
the text of the novels.


56 WRITTEN LAWS.


immediate influence of the school of Bologna beyond
this determination of the sphere of the sources and in
particular not to the doctrines wherein an exclusive
génerality was neither obtained nor even attempted (
and as little to the criticism of the text, upon which
the general efforts of the glossators are unmistakeable
but never reached to a point of completeness at which
alone there could arise any question of exclusive
authority.(f) Still more important is the limitation of
the application of the contents of that body -(circle) of
sources generally received. To this belong not merely
the important exclusion of public law, from all present
application (S. 1.) but also the exclusion of «whole
institutes appertaining to private law, as e. g., the law
relating to slaves, coloni, the stipulation. This material
limitation is not like the formal one to be ascribed to
the school of Bologna but rather to the re-action of
other Jaw-sources (customary law and scientific law)
upon the written law. The limitation, in truth has not
been always universally recognized ; the critical spirit
of later science has first succeeded in entirely removing
the erroneous application of Roman law, which in earlier
times was often attempted. The attempt made under
the emperor Frederick I to use the Roman law for the


(e) In opposition to this opinion is the assertion, that the Italian
legal practice expressed by the glossators, rather than the corpus juris
limited by them has been received by us, (Seidensticker Juristische
Fragmente Th. 2, 8. 188—194,) This opinion is to be the more
peremptorily rejected that the object of the glossators was merely to —
interpret, and not to set forth practice but to reformit. (Sav. G. d. R.
R. i. m. B. 5. Cap, 41. n. 1.) The true element existing in this
erroneous View is that the doctrines of the glossators have had no small
influence upon the practice of German law.


(f) Sav. G. 8.175.


WRITTEN LAWS. 57


firmer establishment of the imperial power, is an example
of the manner in which the glossators were induced to
misunderstand those natural limitations,


So far as the non-prevalence of the unglossed or
restored texts of the corpus juris is here asserted, the
limitations which have been stated under which the
Roman law has been received as- written law, have not
remained unimpugned. The majority of theoretical and
practical writers indeed agree in this assertion and
regard each departure from this principle as an evident
error.(9) The assertion however has not wanted oppo-
nents. Individual authors have gone so far, as to ascribe
validity as law to the novels of the emperor Leo VI, (4)
without considering that in the time of that emperor.
(about the year 900,) the authority of the Greek
emperors over Italy had long ceased so that there no
longer existed any bridge by which Leo's legislation
could have reached us, as that of Justinian did. More
specious is the opinion of others which confines the
force of law to the restored texts of the Justinianean
law, or even to a part of them, or at the least regards
the question as doubtful. They have conceived thé


(g) Lauterbach proleg, S. 5. num. 6,7, Eckhard hermeneut. S. 282.
Brunnquell hist. j. 2. 9. S. 22. Zepernick upon Beck de novellis-
Leonis Hal, 1779. P. 552. sq. Glick I. 8. 53.56. Weber gemche
itber das Civilrecht. S. 47,—49.


(h) Beck de novellis Leonis ed Zepernick Hale 1779.


(4) Beck I, c. 8. 48. Miblenbruch 1. 5, 18. Dabelow Handbuch
des Pandectenrechts Th, 1, Halle 1816, S, 50, This last lays down the
following position. According to the older use all the unglossed parts

_were invalid; in the more recent, since the glossed editions dis-
afpeared, the unglossed novels only continued invalid, the remainder
of the unglossed parts are still valid (P. 199. 200.) On the other hand
even now “the so called leges restitute have no practical application,”
so that in this particular there is no distinction between the old and


58 WRITTEN LAWS.


matter as if the restrained validity was based upon the
exclusive use of the glossed editions and since these
became disused and were superseded by more complete
editions (that of Gothofredus. ¢. g.,) the whole contents
of these are to be regarded as received. The matter
however has never had so material and accidental a
connexion; the reception was rather recognized and
settled in definite limits, long before people thought of
printed editions or still less of a difference between
them. It may indeed be said that the same capability
and privilege as to reception, as existed in earlier times,
still survived in the sixteenth century, in which, the
restitutions for the most part took place. Reception
however is a matter of fact not to be concealed and
which does not take place without solid reasons. Such
have evidently not been wanting to the actual recep-
tion; if for example the Digest had at that time
remained incomplete and perchance in the sixteenth
century the Infortiatwm had first been discovered, it
could scarcely have failed to obtain reception. As to
the texts then restored, isolated laws, a like motive for
their reception, was partly on account of their ambiguous
or wholly objectionable contents, entirely wanting and
no single general opinion has advocated their reception
as a whole. It can therefore merely be a question
whether single texts of this kind, on account of any
excellence in their contents, are to be received. This
has been asserted to be the case with the L. 4 C. de in
jus vocando (restored by Cujacius) whereby the neglect
of the is pendens is punished with the loss of the suit ;
this. text is quoted by name in a judgment of the


the unglossed from the restored parts. The two are in fact exactly as
different from one another, as the Digest and the Pandects.


WRITTEN LAWS. 59


imperial court and is made the ground of a threat of
punishment(+) If this did not happen from pure over-
sight, from which even the tribunals of the empire were
not privileged,() then it is easily understandable, that. ©
the tribunal would have welcomed a law by which it
could enhance respect to-their supreme jurisdiction ;
the principle would not on that account have passed
into the general legal procedure of Germany. The
authority of the supreme appellate tribunal of the
Polatinate is quite erroneously cited, as stating the
(restored) L. 12. C. de aedificiis privatis as the basis of
a decision, while there as the ground of the decision,
the force of law is definitely denied to that text.(™) If


(k) The imperial chamber made such an order on 23d Dec. 1650 in
the matter of Waldeck v. Paderborn et consortes concerning the earl-
dom of Piedmont, It is printed in full in Er Mauritius de judicio
aulico S. 14, (Kelon 1666 and in his Dissert. et opuse. Argent 1724. 4°
P. 337.) The text runs thus, “ We require and cite .... to see and
hear, your excellency and you, on account of your disobedience and
abovementioned acts, the declaration of the condemnation to the penalty

_which you have subjected yourselves by virtue of the provision in C.
ult. S. ult. C, de in jus. voc. Many authors understand this text as if
a multitude of such decisions had proceeded from the imperial courts.
@ g., Andler. jurisprud, qua publ. qua privata Salisbaci 1672. 4° p. 434.
Piitter de preeventione 8. 19. 90. 185.

(1) One might readily suspect such an oversight from the manner in
which Usfenbach de consilio aulico C. 12. P.155. expresses himself upon
the matter “addition interdum citatio ad videndum se incidisse in
penam L. ult. C. de in j. voc. .... et quamvis quod pauct hactenus
observarunt praedicta L. ult. non authentica sed a Cujacio restituta
consequeater apuria est et hine adeo secure cum illa neutiquam navigari
videatur, hoc tamen non obstante Du. ab Andler quotidianam praedic-
tae L. ult. praxin confirmat” &. Now the only proof furnished of this
is the mandate of 1650 contained in the preceding note. One may
now 80 far give-in to the opinion of Dabelow (note 7) that the extended.
use of more complete editions, might easily have led to this oversight,
which would, at an earlier time, have been impossible.

(m) J. W. Textor decisiones electorales Polatine Francof 1693-4.


60 WRITTEN LAWS.


now on these grounds nothing can be conceded as to
the established limits of the received law, on the other
hand the scientific use of the restored texts (which may.
also have an influence upon the formation of practical
law) is in no way to be disputed ; it is just as unques-
tionable as the scientific use of the texts as to anti-
quated law-institutes (¢ g., slavery) as also of the
pre-justinianean law-sources.’ That influence is merely
from the nature of the contents much narrower and
less evident. Gaius and -Ulpian enlighten us upon
much which would otherwise, in the Digest, have
remained obscure to us; those restored texts on the
contrary are single modifying laws, which throw no
new light upon the rest of the law and as to them the
only question which arises is whether they shall be
immediately applied or not. Thus ¢. g., as to the L. 22.
C. de fide instrum, there can merely be the question
whether a party to the suit, is entitled to require, that
a third person should communicate his documents or
not; in the same way as to Nov. 121. 138. concerning
the calculation of interest over double of the principal.
The prior law prevailing independently of these statutes,
becomes in no way clearer through them. On the
other hand the case perhaps happens, that upon a


Decisis XX. The complainant surely enough had relied upon that lex
restituta but the court distinctly asserts (p. 81. 82.) the entire invalidity
of this and every other lex restituta; where the proposition contained
in it had never been received by special customary law. This may at
the best have been the case as to the decision of the imperial chamber
in the matter W. v. P. (note &.) It is quite inconceivable how Beck de
novellis Leonis S. 48, quotes the decision of the palatinate court and
thereupon can’say of the L. 12. C. cit: excitatam tamen pariter ad
cause definitionem in suprenfo appellationis judicio Palatino docet
J.W,Textor. He must understand the words as if the court had made
the law, the basis of its decision, whereas exactly the contrary is said.


WRITTEN LAWS. 61


question of law there exist contradictory texts of the.
Digest and that upon that very question an unglossed
novel of Justinian pronounces itself; although this has
not the force of a law, nevertheless the force of a very
weighty authority is not to be denied to it, and thus
reference has rightly been made by precucat writers
_to the unglossed novels(™)


If therefore particular decisions are found in which
the restored parts of the Justinianean law may have
been directly used as laws, it is manifest that by so
rare and isolated decisions, the principle here laid down,
can neither be abrogated nor rendered doubtful, since
its truth is in general constantly recognized by the
writers theoretical and practical of all centuries,


Besides the Roman law the canon law requires here
‘to be treated as written law in so far as it has developed
and modified the institutions of Roman law ;'since also
this has found a like general European recognition with
the Roman. Howéver this recognition can only be
certainly asserted of the following compilations, the
decree of Gratian, the Decretals of Gregory IX, Sextus
and Clementine.(o)


If lastly the modern Roman law is conceived in the
particular form which it has obtained, as the common


(n) An example is the unglossed Nov. 162, The purely scientific
use of the law-sources before and after Justinian, may be illustrated by
two very suitable analogies, The same sort of use must be asserted of
‘the ancient German law-sources in the countries subject to common law

and of the Roman law in the countries furnished with new codes
(Prussia, Austria, France.) -
“ (0) Hichhorn Kirchenrecht I. 8. 349—360. The reception of the two
collections of extravagantes is disputed but these are not of importance
for the only matter here in question, the modifications of the Roman
private law, so that for our object, the dispute is unimportant.


F


62 CUSTOMARY LAW.


law of the German empire, the statutés of the empire
are of the number of the laws to be applied in so far as
the institutes of Roman private law have been modified
thereby. These modifications are, in their compass far
less important, than those based upon the canon law.


SECTION XVIII.
B.—CUSTOMARY LAW.

We have next to show the place, which the people’s
law or customary law, above generally explained (S. 7.
12.), occupies among the sources of the modern Roman
law.

When Justinian began to reign, the indigenous
people’s law of the Romans, had in that form long been
invisible. Already in the time of the republic, the
most important part of it had passed over into decrees
of the people or edicts and what remained along with
them, as purely customary law, the juristie literature
incorporated, so that it merely appeared as scientific
law. At the extinction of literature, that vigorous —
national power, which is required for the formation of
new law, almost failed, and when at times an external
need urged them to such formation, it almost always
devolved upon the imperial legislation to give to the
new institutions of law, a definite shape(¢) It would
therefore be scarcely conceivable, that a pure customary
law should have been able to continue, as common
Roman law side by side with the Justinianean law
books, since everything of consequence, which had
formerly arisen in this-way, would have infallibly
found its place in the Digest or the Code. On the other


(a) The so-called peculium adventitium and the donatio propter
nuptias may serve as illustrative examples,


CUSTOMARY LAW. 63


hand much special customary law might have existed
beside this general legislation, without our being in a
condition to define even conjecturally its compass and
importance. Under Justinian’s successors, the same
state of things must under similar conditions, have the
rather continued, that his legislation was the last great
effort of this kind and after him the power of forming
law more and more disappeared.


The case was wholly different when in renovated
Europe, the Roman law found an entrance into nations
in which it had not arisen. At that time those nations
had already arrived at a condition, in which the arising
of a common customary law, was difficult and especially
of a customary law by which the Roman law, strange
to them, could be extended and developed. , However
circumstances arose which were favorable to such a.com-
mon customary law. By the reception of the foreign
law, an artificial and complex condition of rights was
generated, which could only be regulated by the form-
ation of much new subsidiary law. This need might
have been satisfied by a considered and active legisla-
tion if such had been possible in the character of those
states. Since this failed, the only remedy was custom-
ary law, to the arising of which the fresh and youthful
power of the nations was favorable. Only the particular
mode, in which the need had arisen, necessarily gave to
this customary law itself a peculiar character. It was
not, in the degree that other people’s law was, the
common possession of the nation but it from the very
beginning assumed a scientific nature, as will presently
be more precisely unfolded (8. 19.)


_The greatest and most remarkable action of a common
customary law in this beginning of the modern age,


. 64 CUSTOMARY LAW.


was the very reception of the Roman law itself, and
especially its reception within the settled limits which
have already been stated (S. 17.) This reception
moreover had a different significance in the different
nations of modern Europé, so that the changing of the
state of law, which resulted therefrom, must have been
felt in very diverse degrees. In Italy the Justinianean
law had never disappeared: here were new, partly its
revival and partly the special and definite limits in
which it was henceforth recognized. In France too,
the Roman law had certainly not disappeared, but the:
special shape, which it had in Justinian’s legislation,
was here quite new. Far more perceptible must the
reception have been in Germany, where the Roman
law itself was an entirely new, hitherto unknown,
element of law certainly adapted to the relations of life
which had newly arisen, since on that account only, it
could have found an entrance. Here a long and lively
struggle preceded the reception, and hence this influence
of customary law was equally prepared for and estab-
lished. Our whole attention ought not to be directed, to
the mere reception of the Roman law, as a decided influ-
ence of customary law, but as much and even more to the
definite mode and limitations in which this reception
took place, since it follows from these, that the recep-
tion, was attended by a clear consciousness, and must
not be regarded, as in any way whatever, the work of
accident apart from reflection. This reception, consum-
mated in a definite way, must not be regarded as
instantaneous and immediately concluded, since it came
at first partially and gradually to a completed develope-
ment; this is especially the case as to the material
limitation, by which an important part of the contents
of the Roman law, is excluded from reception. In this


CUSTOMARY LAW. 65


lofty vision of a common customary law appearing
uniformly in many nations (although not at the same
time,) the peculiar nature of the whole modern age,
reveals itself. These nations received a whole system
_of law, which had not arisen in them but in a foreign
people, with which some among them had not even a
_ cognate origin. Thereby is shown, that the vocation of
modern nations was not, in the same degree as that of
the ancient, to an exclusive nationality but that rather
their common Christian creed had wound round them ~
- all an invisible bond without removing their national
peculiarity.(2) Herein lies the great course of develope-
ment of the modern age of which the final limit‘is still |
hidden from our eyes. ,


In the modern age a particular customary law appear-
ed side by side with the general and it had, in arising
within a narrower circle, as formerly in the Roman
empire, less difficulty to contend with. It might arise
within this narrower circle from a really common con-
sciousness of law and therefore in a purely popular
manner, without first being prepared, and mediated for,
by science. In this particular customary law, the
purely German relations of landed proprietorship (fiefs,
allodial estates, base fees,) have been preserved and
developed very extensively together with the law of
inheritance attaching to them—relations which are
destined to overreach the duration of individual lives
and which are ordinarily connected, in numerous
situations with continuing and homogeneous manners
and occupations. In a similar way we see that in cities,
the community of industrial relations among merchants
‘and artisans has especially produced peculiar customary


- (b) Savigny Geschichte des R. R, im, Mittelalter B, 8, S. 33.


66 CUSTOMARY LAW.


laws, which introduced special modifications even into
the law of succession (by community of goods in
numerous forms); however there remains here a freer
scope for the application of the Roman law. On the
other hand we find a much more limited influence of
particular customs upon the legal institutions already
existing in Roman law of which only a few new
determinations by means of custom, established them-
selves, through the daily recurring and uniform need,
e. g., the right of building in respect to neighbours, the
law of tenancy and the relation of domestic servitude.
Thus therefore particular customary law has always
remained, of great importance in the indigenous Ger-
man law, less important in the developement of the
Roman law.(¢)


This two-fold customary law, general and particular,
is. not merely to be recognized in the past, along with
written law, as a source of the modern Roman law,
but it may also appear as developing it in the future. |


In this special application, the same nature must be
ascribed to it, as was above representéd to -prevail in
customary law generally. It therefore arises from the
convictions of the community not from the wills of
individuals, whose opinions and acts must be regarded
merely as tokens of that community of convictions.
Habit and practice, that which we especially call cus-
tom is hence in substance, a medium of recognition, and
not a ground of origin, of that law. If lastly, we look
at its operation in relation to written laws, we must
ascribe to these law-sources a complete similarity.
Written laws therefore may not only be enlarged and


(c) Very good observations on the materiality of this distinction are
found in: Gétze Provinzialrecht der Altmark. Motive I, 8, 11—13,


SCIENTIFIC LAW. 67


modified by fresh customary law, but also be: put out
of power (8. 13.) and customary law may merely
enfeeble the law or put a newly generated rule in
its place(@)  .


SECTION XIX,
C.—SCIENTIFIC LAW.


Tn ancient Rome, long before there was any thought
of a science of law, people’s law had, in early communion
with legislation, brought forth a highly remarkable and
peculiar form of law. When however scientific life
generally, arose in the nation, that science naturally
applied itself also to law, wherein it found prepared for
it, an object-matter as worthy as it was truly national.
The order of jurists, which was now formed, was in
great measure the depositary (bearer) of people’s law,
of which the creative power, in its original form, pre-
sented itself to view more rarely. If therefore legal
science was merely a branch of the common scientific
life arisen in the nation, that science had an entirely
peculiar course of developement. It came more slowly
than other sciences to the maturity, destined to be
attained among the Romans and it reached the height
of its completeness at a time, at which science and art
generally were already evidently in their decline. This
divergence in the periods of formation was in fact of
‘great benefit to Roman legal science, because its more

(d) The meaning and importance of these positions here stated in a
very abstract way will be rendered clear below (S. 28 foll.) On account
of the opposed opinions of modern writers, I do not establish more
narrowly here, the conditions of true customary law, for which this
would be the natural place, if it were not desirable, on account of the

_ widely spread errors of modern theorists, to establish critically the true
conditions in connexion with those erroneous opinions and in contrast
to them.


68 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


tardy developement was at the same time more thorough
and more peculiar, and it thereby secured to itself an
enduring influence, upon foreign nations and later ages,
such as the Romans did not attain in any other depart-
ment (circle) of science. This arising of legal science
as the result of a general scientific impulse of the nation,
connected itself with the natural, and by foreign influ-
ences undisturbed, developement, by which the Romans
distinguish themselves in their legislation from other
nations. It is difficult for us to attain to a correct con-
ception of the way in which the Roman Jurists operated
upon the formation of law (not merely upon the know-
ledge of it,) since it is so natural imperceptibly to
transfer the view of our circumstances to an age entirely
~ different. Among the Romans, the jurists had a very
remarkable position in consequence of, the free and
beneficial exercise of their calling, their moderate
number, and in great measure also in consequence of
their high birth. They lived for the most part together,
in the higher places of the world, in the neighbourhood
of the Preetors and afterwards of the Emperor and
therefore with enduring influence upon them. Nothing
was more natural, than that the common opinions, of
this order, opinions which in great measure determined
the formation of law, and the opinions of each single
one of them particularly if distinguished by genius,
should have a notable share of this invisible power.
Among us is called a Jurist each one who has studied
jurisprudence in order to use it as judge, advocate,
writer, professor, consequently almost always to attach
himself thereby to a lucrative calling. These jurists
are scattered in immense number over the whole of
Germany and form a very mixed company by their
great diversity in intrinsic worth. Naturally here


SCIENTIFIC LAW. 69


the operation is much more indefinite and moderate ;
it needs a longer time before a common opinion obtains
decided recognition and it must still more be dependent
upon accident how a particular mode of culture or an
opinion attains here or there to an influence upon legis-
lation and through this upon the formation of law.


We find a state of things, quite different from that
of ancient Rome in the’ middle ages when the Roman
law was received by a great part of the European states,
This reception generated an artificial condition of law
(S. 18.) the difficulties of which could only be sur-
mounted by a higher degree of legal knowledge than is
conceivable as the common property of the nations.
From this necessity arose a juristic school and literature
without being called forth by the general state of cul-
ture of the people. Here also as in ancient Rome,
although here in an order exactly reversed, legal science
had its peculiar period of culture differmg from the
periods of culture in general; since instead of legal
science attaining its full bloom later than the other
sciences as it did in Rome, legal science in the middle
ages arose much earlier than the general scientific life
of the nations awoke. The isolation therefore in which
during a long period, legal science found itself greatly
enhanced the difficulty of its existence, and rendered a
complete cultivation of many parts of it impossible; but
the more strenuous exertion, which was hence a neces-
sity to the glossators, gave to their work an earnest and
worthy character, and the remarkable success, which
attended their work, under conditions of such difficulty,
still claim our admiration.


In these circumstances, people’s law, except so far as
it confined itself to a narrower circle, was from the


70 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


beginning identical with scientific law so that it was
not operative outside that law, and the practical need
of the people found its expression and satisfaction in
scientific law alone (S. 18.) Hence legal science itself
became of a peculiar character and it was in conformity
with this condition of it, that in the business of the
jurisprudents, theory and practice remained intimately
united and that the operation of practice has served to
protect theory from sinking entirely.(¢). In the succeed-
ing centuries legal science went through many degrees
of culture and had a very checquered existence, but its
general relation to the mere generation of law continued
the same as that already ascribed to it in the middle ages.


The products of that intellectual activity, which from
the moment of the reception of the Roman law, were
directed to it, are however in compass so vast and in
kind so various that a special enquiry is needed as to
the sense in which those intellectual products are to be
regarded as sources of law and as to the manner in
which we are to treat them. For this‘purpose we may
distribute the whole labour of the jurisprudents lying
before us into two great masses, theoretical and prac-
tical work. However these expressions, the opposition
of which is often very differently conceived, require
more careful definition.


I here call theoretic every purely scientific enquiry
whether directed, to the establishment of the text of
the sources, to their explanation, to the working of
them out to the results of a system of law or to the
internal perfecting of this system. By these operations
no new law is generated, but merely the existing law


fe) Savigny G. R. R. i. m. BR, 6. S. 20.


SCIENTIFIC LAW. 71


rendered more clearly understood and so far this work
cannot, at first sight, be numbered. among law-sources.
However as a great authority, it assumes a like nature ;
for although the freedom of judicial decision is not
narrowed, for those willing to put to the test this work
in an independent manner, how many soever the writers,
who agree upon a newly expressed opinion, still there
is always a class of judicial functionaries numerous as
respectable who are not in a condition, by the thorough-
ness of their training, to apply to the new opinion
their own independent criticism and thus attain toa
conviction of their own. It is not merely natural but
commendable and desirable, that these should follow
unconditionally that authority. This procedure isrecom- ~
mended here not merely in the interests of convenience
but of the vertainty of the law itself, since this cannot
possibly be obtained, if a judge without the possibility
of a comprehensive study seeks to form an opinion of
his own upon each particular question of law which
from the one-sidedness of its origin will be of very
accidental and doubiful success. This principle in par-
ticular can alone obviate the danger of a judge of
special activity being hurried away by the superficial
show of any new doctrine to the greatest injury of the
administration of law.(¢) If at any time a specially
learned man is found upon the bench, to him the right
will not be denied of establishing in the administration
of law, his own well grounded and examined conclusion.
The mode of recognizing such real and good authority
cannot be brought to any definite and formal external
tule. It cannot arise from the number of concordant


(a) Upon the value and the nature of authority in the administration
of law compare the excellent essay of Méser patriotische Phantasieen I.
n, 22. ;


72 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


writers and still less can be conceived to arise in a-
continuing conflict of opinion, from a numbering of
voices. It rather depends upon those jurists who have
a reputation for thoughtful and thorough examination
agreeing in such an opinion and upon a contrary
opinion evidently worthy of consideration and supported
with reasons not being continually maintained by any
one among them. This new opinion will naturally be
received only when for- a certain time it has been the
object of public examination,although no one will under-
take to settle a fixed term of years for that examination.
In this relative sense therefore a theoretic work may
itself be numbered among the law-sources, since under
the conditions stated, a really well grounded authority
must be ascribed to it. The theory as to the two
degrees of culpa may serve as an example ; that theory
has in our days been quite as generally received as that
of the three degrees, previously and for a long time had
been. It follows from the nature of the authority here
described, that it must not itself be regarded as con-
clusive and unchangeable since a future and deeper
enquiry may once more modify the opinion now received
and then it has a no less rightful claim to make than
that formerly recognized in its predecessor.


SECTION XX.
SCIENTIFIC LAW.—( Continuation.)


I here describe on the contrary as practical law every
research which is not confined to the mere contents of
the sources but also keeps in view the relation of those
contents to the living condition of law in which it is to
exercise influence, therefore the condition and need of
the modern age. What outer manifestation such an


SCIENTIFIC LAW. 73


‘enquiry has may be treated as indifferent or subordinate
—whether teaching and writing or the necessity of
deciding an existing litigation be the medium of that
resulting manifestation. In both cases therefore this
enquiry is an organ of customary law and likewise a
part of scientific law, since each decision of trained judges
and especially when formed into bodies (colleges) of
itself bears a scientific character (S. 14.) Herein there-
fore is verified the essential identity of customary law
and scientific law, which has been asserted as a charac-
teristic of more recent centuries. Under the head of
practical labours in this sense therefore, I place dogmatic
writings when they have had this, particular direction,
as collections of consilia, responsa and decisions whether
these have proceeded from individual jurists or from
colleges of them as e.g. from faculties of jurists or from
superior Courts. By here contrasting the practical:
works of writers with the theoretical it is by no means
‘meant that each individual work must belong exclu-
sively to one of these classes. The great majority
partake both of a theoretical and practical character
sometimes with one of them. predominant but often
working with equal force in the two departments,


The question which arose above as to theoretical,
arises also as to practical works—how are we to recognize
the valid and genuine and be able to distinguish it more
certainly from the invalid. and the spurious. This
question has here a still higher importance and hence
requires a more careful discussion.


When a case is submitted for the decision of one
unskilled in law, he will generally decide it according
to a confused impression of the whole and nevertheless
if of sound sense and decided character ‘ill believe

G


74 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


himself to be very sure of his point. It will however
be. very much a matter of chance whether a second of
like qualities will give the same or the opposite decision.
Science now will individualise and separate the jural
relations and the rules of decision, so as thereby to con-
vert that confusion into clearness and to remove from
decisions, the uncertainty and accidental character which
result from that confusion. In this is shown the great
mastery of the Roman jurists, which is indeed aided by
a very definite terminology and especially by the rigid
marking out of individual actions; it would however
be an error to regard this advantage as accidental since
it has rather been produced by the law-forming impulse
in-dwelling in the nation. This advantage, and likewise
the still more important one of a law completely inde-
genous which has grown up with the people, are wanting
to us: the task however and the possibility of accom-
plishing it, are equally present to us. If we now
examine without prejudice the compass of that, which
has been handed down to us from earlier times as practi-
cal law, differing from the Roman but as a remodelling
of the institutions of Roman law, we may divide it into
two heterogeneous parts. One part is of a healthy nature,
resting upon new necessities which have been naturally
produced by the change of the circumstances, among
others by the greatly changed nature of the courts,
partly also by the moral view of life changed in a great
measure by Christianity ; to this part we must, according
to the views already unfolded, ascribe the force and
reality of a customary law scientifically recognized.
~Hence it is a matter of indifference when earlier writers
have erroneously attempted to derive such propositions
from the Roman law. This error cannot lessen the
truth of the propositions themselves; only we must


SCIENTIFIC LAW. 5


not delude ourselves with the idea that the erroneous
deduction was a mere pretence. Those jurists were.
perfectly sincere and we must regard as an’ essential
portion of our task, the exploration of the real Roman
law in such cases, not for the purpose of maintaining it;
but of establishing the real extent of the alteration.
Another part of practical law on the contrary, has
proceeded from the absence of principle mentioned above,


_ therefore from scientific incompleteness; this it is our


ry


business to expose and destroy and not permit it to
defend itself by a long, undisturbed, state of possession’
—and the more so that in great measure it may be
shown to involve an innate contradiction therefore -
defective logic. All that bears this character has merely
the false appearance of a practical law : it is bad theory
and must give place to a better.) A critical separa-
tion of these two parts has not hitherto been attempted,
because people have for the most part confined them-
selves to the adduction of the testimony of particular
practical lawyers, selected at pleasure, for or against the
present validity of whatever legal proposition may be
in question. It is impossible to lay down beforehand, a
general rule for that separation : this work must rather
proceed from particulars and it may be for the time
doubtful how far this criticism of particulars will permit
of being brought to a general point of view. This
critical examination of practice in details will also there-
fore be a main object of this work—a task of which the
great difficulty will serve as an excuse for the frequent-
ly incompleté accomplishment of it. Regarded from
another point of view, this task may be thus expressed—
(a) The Summariisimum as it often appears in modern practice may


serve as an example illustrative of this case. Conf, Savigny Recht des
Besitzes S, 51-of the 6th Ed.


76 f SCIENTIFIC LAW.


to separate that which in the Roman law has perished
from that which survives and in great part will continue
to live. The main condition of the accomplishment of
this task is a pure unprejudiced desire of truth. He is
unfit who from a predilection for the Roman law
enters upon it, merely with the view of re-establishing
in its purity that law: as also is he who founds it upon
his own conceptions of the modern practice and ascribes
to it a complete independence never thought of by its
authors—the one because he treats as living, a dead
piece of history—the other because he regards his own
delusion as reality.


That part of practical law which I have designated
as sound has an entirely different importance from that
above ascribed to the theoretical work. It operates not
merely as an authority commanding respect but it in
fact embraces in itself newly formed law. However
we must not ascribe to it any exclusive, unchanging
existence. True it is that the validity of any particular
preposition of practical law cannot be impaired in con-
sequence of a theoretical examination showing that
it deviates from the law according to the sources,
because it has obtained, as real customary law, an
independent existence. Moreover it is not to be doubt-
ed that it may again lose its validity in the same way
in which it arose.


The influence of practical law, has often been explain-
ed quite differently for it has been asserted by some that
a Court was bound by several uniform decisions to
adhere unchangeably in the future to the rule followed
in them.%) On this matter the truth is that in such


(b) Thibaut S. 16. and many earlier writers. Puchta handles this
matter very well, Gewobnheitsrecht 2. 8. HI,


SCIENTIFIC LAW. QZ -


cases the Court forms an authority for itself which it
will be more commendable and beneficial to respect than
with inconsiderate inconstancy again to abandon: and
this again like each’ custom rests upom the law of
continuity already observed upon (8. 12.(¢)) If on the
other hand a renewed and careful examination furnishes
new and previously unconsidered grounds, the abandon-
ment of the rule previously followed cannot be blamed
and especially there is no ground for desiring to exclude
that abandonment by the arbitrary adoption of an
unchangeable rule which has arisen in the manner
described. The influence of the decisions of a higher
tribunal upon the courts subordinate to it, is of a wholly
different nature. In this case there operates not only
an authority entitled to respect but the power belonging
of right to the higher tribunal, of giving effect to its
convictions by immutable decisions. In submitting
itself to the view discrepant from its own, the subordin-
ate court is not yielding to any external power what-
ever, but is rather entering into the meaning and bene-
ficial intention of the establishment of courts of grades
of jurisdiction or in other words of appellate courts.


In the whole. of this enquiry special technical expres-
sions, have been designedly avoided; the very indeter-
minate and shifting use of them has in this department
led to a prevailing confusion of the concepts. It will
now be sufficient to state briefly their different meaning
in modern writers and of their relation to the genealogy
of the concepts, here set forth.


The expression PRACTICE OF THE CoURT first requires
notice. By it is sometimes understood the real custom-
ary law evidenced by decisons—sometimes the uniform
decisions of one and the same court, which nominally


78 SCIENTIFIC LAW.


have a binding force for the future. It would be con-
venient to apply this expression, as well as that of,
PRacTICE to the first idea, consequently to the real
customary law so far as it is ascertainable from decisions.
It is besides especially necessary to warn against a very
frequent and pernicious misuse of these expressions. It
is, for example, enough for many who are desirous of
basing a legal proposition upon practice if they prove
the recognition of that proposition in single decisions.
Since however judges as well as authors are subject to
error, such decisions also may have proceeded from pure
ignorance of the law. Here therefore as well as in the
case of writers, a more general agreement is wanting
and this is absolutely excluded by several decisions
running one against the other.{¢)


This is the place also for the expression OBSERVANCE
or Usage which is used ina manner even more fluctu-
ating than the foregoing. It is often confined to public
Jaw and it then denotes what in ‘private law is called
custom(¢) In private law it is often used quite
synonymously with customary law and then it is super-_
fluous and better avoided.(e) The most definite use


(c) Comp. upon the agreement of writers 8. 19. and upon the not
absolute capacity of decisions to the forming of a customary law S. 29,
Num, 4. One must hence be very suspicious of the favourite formula ;
Praxin testantar, &c.

(a) Pitter inst. jur. publ. 8. 44,

(e) Hofacker 8.127. Thibaut S. 16—so also in individual texta of
the law sources 8. 7. J. de satisd, (4, 11.) cum necesse est omnes
provincias .... regiam urbem ejusque observantiam sequi. L. 2.8. 24.
de O. J. (1. 2.) “ Vetustissima juris observantia.” Clem. 2.de appell.
(2. 12) “ antiquam et communem observantiam litigantium sequi.” In
other places the word is used for more frequent observatio : respect for or
following of a rule ; which therefore has nothing to do with this matter
and still less has the very frequent use of the word in the classical
writers: respect for the person. Cicero de invent. 2, 22, 53.


SCIENTIFIC LAW, 79


of the word is perhaps that by which it simply denotes
a customary law but merely the customary law of a
defined class of persons é. g. of a definite order or also
of the members of a corporation.(f) It is merely a
modification of this meaning when by this expression
is understood a statute of the corporation tacit and
expressed in their acts and-based upon the right of
autonomy inherent in it.(g) On the contrary, we must
call it an entire alteration of that most definite meaning
when the word is used to denote a tacit contract of the
members of the corporation.(2) In this case it would
be far better entirely to avoid the ambiguous expression
and only use the safer expression—contract. On closer
examination it will be found that when most people
employ the name observance, customary law and not
contract is the matter before them and that the cause
of the idea of contract being attached to it, lies
deeper ; for example there’are many jural relations, in
which it may in fact be doubtful whether they are
subject to a determination by customary law or by a
tacit contract of the individuals participating in it. On
account of this doubt or rather of the obscure concep-
tion of the matter, the use of this shifting expression


(f) Eichhorn Deutsches Privatrecht S, 35. Muhblenbrich 8. 40,
Personal in contrast to local pecularity is the basis of the concept so
that one may properly speak of an observance of, the nobility or a certain
class of them, a chapter, a corporation &¢. but not of that of a province
or town, ;

(9) Bichhorn Kirchenrecht B, 2, 8. 89—44, Puchta Gewohnheits-
recht 2, 8,105, who has more definitely than any other, determined
the difference between observance and cognate ideas, will allow the
word observantia to apply to the single case (application of the auto-
nomy.) In truth the confusing of these ideas would be best obviated
by fixing the use of the expression in the manner proposed by Puchta.

(4) Meurer abhandlungen. num. 6, Hofacker 8.127. Thibaut 8. 16.
See for the opposite view Hichhorn ut supra §, 11.


80 CONCURRING LAW-SOURCES.


was resorted to as the easiest way out of the difficulty.
However the evil was not removed by that but rather
rendered incurable because the recognition of this doubt
and therefore the indispensable decision upon it were
impeded. :


Lastly we have still remaining the expression com-
munis opinio to which in the early centuries an
uncommon importance used to be ascribed. By it was
implied so general an accordance of teachers of law,
that each individual teacher must be regarded as bound
by it and by reason of the importance of the result, an
attempt was made to establish by formal rules, the
idea and conditions of the generality, as at one time
Valentinian 2 had done by a law.(#) They found
themselves in that attempt in the domain of pure
arbitrariness and the frequently very singular rules
established were quite consistent with their origin.
The correct. import of a common opinion and its real
application have already been explained (S. 19.) In
modern times there is no more talk of this technical
expression._


°


SECTION XXI.
CONCURRING LAW-SOURCES.

In the previous exposition of the sources of the
modern Roman law, they have been represented as if
existing alone and self-contained. This mode of treat-
ment was necessary in order that they might be purely
and completely comprehended, but so isolated an exist-
ence they have practically never had in the nations
into which they found an entrance. A survey therefore
will now be taken of those law-sources heterogeneous


(i) Puchta Gewohnheitsrecht L 8, 163.


CONCURRING LAW-SOURCES, 81


to them which have come into contact with them and
with which in actual lifé, they have shared the
dominion over the jural relations.


First, at the very time-of their reception, they were
met by the indigenous law—in Germany therefore by
the indigenous German law and so in most other
countries especially in France. The relation of these
two heterogeneous systems in their application to life,
was at all times difficult and complex and the recon-
ciliation of this conflict was always one of the most’
important tasks of scientific law and especially in the
practical part of it (S. 20.)


Then to the received foreign law was everywhere
added a continuous national legislation, which was
urged on, partly by the just mentioned necessity of
assimilation with, the Germanic law, partly with no
reference to this conflict by the new practice which was
recognized and established in this national legislation.
In some parts of Germany, therefore, the whole terri-
torial law, which sometimes applies to a whole country,
sometimes to particular parts and of which the compass
and importance are very different in different countries,
belongs to this category. The idea of common law
given above (S. 2.) stands in contrast with this terri-
torial law in the relation of a subsidiary law, so that it
can only-be applied so far as no different determination
of territorial law exists. This relation follows naturally,
even necessarily from the fact that such new legislation,
actually arises from the necessity of continually improv-
ing the existing law and therefore has that improvement
specially in view. It would only be erroneous so to
regard this relation of subsidiary law as if in actual
life, disputed jural relations were regularly determined


82 CONCURRING LAW—-SOURCES.


by territorial law, by the side of which the common
law was only applied in exceptional cases. The prac-
tical application of common law has rather remained
greatly preponderant so long as its contents remain in
force and have not been, entirely abolished where new
codes have been introduced.

In great part of Europe the law-sources. have, in
modern times, been essentially changed by new indige-
nous codes. In Prussia and Austria reasons innate and
relating to the state of law have given the impulse ; in
France. inducements especially political have bee
added ; partly the shattering of so many jural relations
by the revolution—partly the necessity of bringing to
oblivion in matters of law also, the differences of the
provinces. The internal grounds operating upon all
these legislators were the same which had already in
many countries led to the production of a great number
of special laws, namely the desire to remove the
difficulties which had arisen partly out of the conflict
of Roman and Germanic institutions of law, partly out
of the clumsy theory and often shifting practice of the
last centuries (S. 19, 20,) These aims could only have
been attained by a preliminary purification of legal
science from these faults by a searching critical
examination ; since this was wanting and therefore the
composition of the codes was undertaken under the
influence of the same faulty condition of science which
it was desired to remedy, the improvement could only
be an external, accidental and contracted one while the
innate and essential faultiness became fixed and hence
the purification by the innate power of legal science
was prevented or at least rendered far more difficult.

The great difference between these codes and all
previous single laws consists in their comprehensive


CONCURRING LAW—SOURCES. ' 83


and excluding nature.. They comprise an exhaustive,
exclusive system of law. Although for example in the
Prussian Landrecht the object was not the changing of
the previous material law but an improved form, it lay
in the very nature of the organically forming power of
every theory of law that they -should soon be unwil-
_lingly hurried beyond the aita which they had proposed
and so arrived .at results, which lay not in their original
design and which, if at the beginning they had been
able to foresee, would have led them to hesitate about
the entire undertaking. By their excluding character
these codes gave to the positive law of their countries
. an entirely new basis—new as to form inasmuch as
within their territory there can no longer be any ques-
tion of the immediate application of the Roman law—
not new as to contents since the ideas and rules of
law rooted in the earlier law-sources, survive in the
new codes. Hence then a thorough insight into these
codes is only attainable by a retracing of their con-
tents to their origin, so that they have not rendered an
exhaustive study of the earlier sources less indispensable,
however often many may have flattered themselves
with such a lightening of the juristic work.


In this, at the same time lies the reason for the
selection of the modern Roman law as the object of the
present work (S. 1.); since from this stand-point an
immediate application is possible in the countries in
which the earlier law-sources have remained dominant,
as well as a thorough insight into the new codes
wherever these have been introduced, this stand-point
is most, fruitful in vivifying juristic science and the
practice dependent upon it.


84 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


SECTION XXIL.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS UPON THE LAW- SOURCES
IN GENERAL. (a) 2


With this exposition of the nature of our law-sources,
the expressions of the Romans upon the same object-
matter must now be compared. The meaning, which
we must attach to those expressions may be investigated
after they have been collected. There are in the canon
law and the laws of the empire, single matters belong-
ing to this subject but so few, that they may be
conveniently treated as an appendix to the expressions
of the Roman law.


The enumeration of the law-sources, as it is found in
numerous texts of the Roman jurists, is based upon no
definite idea. They rather assume the form of an
exhibition of the externals of law, without reference, to
the nature and origin of its contents, and to classification
which can only proceed from the relationship or diver-
sity of the contents. As is quite consistent with their
practical character, this enumeration assumes in them,
the nature of indicating to the judge to what he must
address himself in order to attain information upon any
question of law. The frequently used division of law
into jus scriptum and non scriptum suits very well
this external mode of conceiving it(®)—a division to be
treated as purely verbal and to which the Romans
themselves moreover, have assigned no peculiar import-


f(a) Puchta Gewohnheitsrecht Bk. 1. especially cap. 4. 5. 6.

(6) 3. 3. 9, 10. J. de jure nat. (1. 2.) L. 6.8. 1.de jet J. (1.1) L. 2
8. 5. 12. de orig, jur. (1. 2.) The passage which most definitely excludes
this artificial mode of thinking is Cicero de partit orat C. 37. “sed
propria legis et ea que scripta sunt et ea que sine litteris, aut gentium
jure aut majorum more retinentur,”


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 85


ance. Jus scriptwm therefore is the name of that law
of which the origination is bound up with a written
- yeeord.(c) Modern writers believed that they ought
not to remain satisfied with this simple explanation but
have often explained jus scriptwm as law promulgated
by a legislator and non scriptum as law not so promul-
gated, consequently applied the latter term to customary
law and both terms without regard to the use or non-
use of writing.(¢/ Others indeed allow both parties to
be right, by’ distinguishing a juristic and grammatical
use of the expression of which either may be employed
at pleasure. (¢)


Gaius thus sums up the law-sources: Lex, Plebis-
citum, Senatus consult, imperial constitutions, Edicts,


(c) Thus the praetorian edict is jus scriptum even when it is based
upon old customary law while this, by its reception into the edict has
become in such a manner, recognized, certain, perhaps too changed,
that one in reference to practice may_regard it as newly arisen. The
responsa of the jurists were equally jus scriptum, since they received
their binding power through their being composed in writing,, How-
ever a proposition of customary law did not become a part of jus
scriptum because jurists admitted it into their systems of law and
testified to its truth. This was merely the scientific imparting of the
proposition ef law without reference to its mode of origin, Conf.
Thibaut 8, 10. The explanation of Zimmern 1. 8, 44. is not 80
much erroneous as too subtle and for that reason not suitable to the

. matter,

(d) Hiibner’s corrections and supplement to Hiépfner.

(e) Glick 1. 8, 82. Where will be found an excessively prolix treat-_
ment of the matter and a reference to the earlier writers, The occasion -
but by no means the excuse for the false opinion lies in L. 35, 36, de
legibus (1. 8.) The true element of this error consists merely in the
fact that the written law is externally recognizable. in a fixed text
whereby in comparison with customary law, its existence and contents
preserve greater certainty ; but the authority of the legislator is not
wanted for that, since without being a legislator, the Praetor i in his edict
made written law,

H


86 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS,. &C.


responsa of the jurists(7) Justinian’s institutes make
the like summary except that they add unwritten law
wanting in Gaius.(9) “Pomponius first gives a chrono-
logical view of the origination of law and then sums up
its different grounds: Lex, Prudentiwm interpretatio,
legis actiones, Plebiscit, Edicts, Senatus consult, impe-
rial constitutions.(4) Papinian lastly agrees on the
whole with Gaius except that he as well as Pomponius
rather substitutes for the special responsa the more
general auctoritas prudentium.(t) The difference
between them all lies first in the arrangement of the
parts ; then in the fact that unwritten law is sometimes
wanting and sometimes included ; then in the different
apprehension of the jurists’ law ; lastly in the fact that
Pomponius only enumerates the legis actiones, This
last discrepancy is easily explicable thus; in a view of
the history of law, Pomponius might properly include
matter which would not, be spitable to a work upon
the law actually prevailing.


Other summaries of the law-sources are found in the
rhetorical writers. On this matter, as is explicable by
the nature of the work, that contained in Cicero’s
Topics, most resembles the passages quoted from the
‘ jurists(4) The rest of them are devoted to peculiar -
speculation upon the primal origination of the ideas of
law.(1) Not only is this speculation very confused and


(f) Gaius 1.8, 2—7.

(9) 8. 3-9. Jude j. nat. (1. 2.)

(A) L. 2. 8. 12, de orig. jur. (1. 2.)

(@ L, 7. de J. et J. (1. 1.)

(k) Cicero top. C. 5. “ut si quis jus civile dicat id esse quod in legi-
bus, senatus consultis, rebus judicatis, juris peritorum auctoritate,
edictis magistratuum, more aequitate consistat.”

(@ Cicero de invent 2, Cap. 22. 58 54—de partit oratoria C. 37.
Auct, ad Herennium 2, C, 13.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, SWC. - 87


; uiisitisfactory ‘but thay content themselves, like the
, jurists above mentioned, witha conception of the outer
appearance of law. although this procedure. was not
consistent with their main object: indeed they push
the confusion so far as to mingle with the Jaw-sources ’
the matter of fact grounds of origin of individual jural
_relations—a confusion from which indeed those jurists
are entirely: free.(m)


Two contrasts in the origination of law, to which a
remarkable practical interest attaches, have been'treated
more carefully by the old jurists than those general
summarizings of the law-sources—I mean the contrast
between the jus civile and honorarium. The first of
these opposites has the following signification.) The
early commerce of the Romans with neighbouring
foreign peoples made it necessary, to apply before the
Roman tribunals the law of peregrini beside the indi-
genous law, therefore also to know it by study, and not
-merely the law of some particular foreign state but also
that which was common to several of them. The more
the Roman dominion spread and. consequently the
dealing with foreign states became more manifold, by
so much must the scope of vision on this matter have
widened and in this way they came to the abstract
conception of a law common to the Romans and all


-(m) Thus for example Cicero de part or 0. 37, All law springs from
natura or lex. This last is partly written, partly unwritten, Written
arises either from acts of a public authority ; lex, senatus consultum,
foedus, or from private acts, tabulae, pactum conventum, stipulatio.
Contracts again appear in the unwritten law. On this matter, the other
passages cited are similar. ~


(n) Comp. Dirksen Eigenthiimlichkeit des jus gentium Rhen. Mus.
- B, 1.8, 1. 50. Puchta Gewohnheitarecht 1.8, 82—40, » ;


88 EXPRESSIONS OF-THE ROMANS, &C.


foreign states, therefore common to them and all men. ()
This concept was the creation of experience and was so
far incompletely verified as that the Romans could not
be deceived as to the incompleteness of their induction,
since in the first place they did not know all peoples,
and next there was not a searching inquisition as to
each proposition of the jus gentiwm, whether it also
prevailed in all known states. Hence it was natural
to refer to the ground of origin, with regard to this
relative generality and this was generally found in the
naturalis ratio t. e., in the common consciousness of
law implanted in the nature of men(») of which the
unchangeableness of this law was regarded as a neces-
sary consequence. (2) However they were contented
with generally recognizing this ground of origination
without subjecting the individual positions of the jus
gentiwm to an examination.


The very comparison between the indigenous and the
general law resulted as follows. Single institutions
with the rules of law referring to them were in fact
always general therefore equally juris genttum and
juris civilis. Under this head are most contracts in
the intercourse of daily life, as buying, letting, partner-
ship and moreover most delicts in so far as they bring

“with them the obligation to indemnification; then
tradition as a mode of acquiring property which in


(0) “ Omnes homines,” “ Omnes gentes,” “ gentes humanae,” Gaius
LS. L.% L.1.8. 4. de J. et J.


(p) Gaius 1. S. 1. 189. 2.8. 66. 69. 79. L. 9. de J. et J. (1. 1.) Li.
pr. de adq- rer. dom. (41. 1.) In the writers upon rhetoric it is com-
monly called simply natura (note 7.) The general root of this view has
already been set forth above, at the end of 8. 8.


(g) Lali.deJ et J. (1.1) S. 11. J. de. j, nat. (1, 2,)


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 89


application to res nee mancipi was also already recog-
nized in the civil law; lastly the condition of slavery.
implanted by birth. Still more institutions however
exclusively belonged to the indigenous law; thus
marriage which even in its freest form was only bind-
ing between Roman citizens and hence was subject to _
entirely positive conditions; still more the paternal
power and the agnation based upon it; the most
numerous and important grounds of origin of property,
as mancipation, usucapion and so on; moreover the
verborum and literaruin obligatio among obligations ;
delicts in as far as they involved a penalty of an
amount arbitrarily determined ; lastly the whole law of
inheritance. Though thus belonging to indigenous law,
most of these positive institutions have nevertheless a
basis (kernel) of generality and.by virtue of this essen-
tial generality therefore present themselves merely in
another form in the foreign Jaw. also. Thus it happened
through the increased commerce with foreigners that in
the very Roman courts, beside many of those positive
institutions, cognate ones of law in general, were recog-
nized in practice ; thus beside the civil, a valid, though
less efficacious, marriage according to the jus gentiwm ;
beside agnation a naturalis cognatio ; beside property
ex jure quiritium that in bonis ; beside the most bind-
ing form of the stipulation (spondes spondeo) forms
attainable also by peregrina. This happened the least
in the law of inheritance which for the most part has
a strongly positive nature and there the permitted and
“constantly extended right of inheritance of cognates to
an intestate, rests upon the developement of the same
natural law. Itis clear from this exposition that.an
opposition of national and. general law (jus civile and ~
gentium) can only be partially. admitted, since a great


90 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c.


part of the first belongs also to the second(); and even
this partial opposition must in course of time diminish,
since from the constant contact of the two systems in
the ‘courts of the same state, a real assimilation was
unavoidable. ;


From these. considerations the two appellations
which are here used as completely synonymous are
quite simply explicable : jus gentiwm the law which is
found in all known nations: jus naturale the law
which is produced by the common consciousness of law
founded in human nature.(s) However of these two
modes of expression the first must be treated as pre-
ponderant so that according to the view of the Romans
the jus gentiwm was no less than the jus civile, an
entirely positive, historically generated and developed
law. In proportion as the Roman people ruling over
many peoples, assimilating itself to them, withal lost its
own individuality in this immense and undefined mass,

‘must the jus gentiwm as more adapted to this new
condition become as prevalent as it actually appears in
the Justinianean legislation. This great alteration is
to be regarded therefore as the work of an innate
necessity, neither to be blamed as arbitrariness nor
lauded as wisdom, except so far as it deserves the
highest praise of rightly recognizing at that time the


(r) Tf one conceives the contrast from this stand-point it is related to,
but not identical with, that of jus strictum and aequitas, jus (or juris
ratio) and utilitas. Here is shown in special historical application what
has been said above (S. 15.) of these contrasts treated generally.


(8) This terminology based upon a division of two members may be
regarded as the prevalent one among the Roman jurists; sure enough
beside it appears also a division of three members into jus naturale,
gentium, civile. The first supplement to this volume treats of this
matter, :


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &G 91


gradual and silent operation of this necessity as was
never before done and thus the text of the law has
become, more satisfactorily assimilated to its greatly
altered spirit and nature than could have been reason-
ably expected in that century. The most important
practical interest which was attached to. this contrast,
consisted in the application of the two systems of law
being dependent upon the relation of the personal con-_
dition of the individual person. The special jural
‘relations of the jus civile were merely applicable to
Roman citizens, later, partially to the Latins, never at
all to the peregrini. The relations of the jus gentiwm
were applicable to all men who were not generally
regarded as rightless. A similar difference of suscepti-
bility for the application of the rules of law is also
found in landed property because the institutions and —
rules of the law of things were applicable either in
Italy only or also in the provinces and. that accordingly
as they belonged to the jus civile as Mancipation and
Usucapion or to the jus gentium as tradition. One
may now propose the question what relation does this
contrast bear to that of written and unwritten law.
Commonly this is only mentioned with respect.to the
jus civile so that it appears as a subdivision of that
law, but in the nature of things there is no obvious
ground for this limitation, and since the recognition of
the jus gentiwm rests upon the continuous collection
and assimilation of many foreign laws, therefore upon,
a procedure in which a written record is inconceivable
although the written laws of foreign peoples may have
been employed in it, the whole jus gentiwm, originally,
i, &, when it has not by accident been committed to
writing in an edict, belongs in a Roman view to the
unwritten law and forms a second division of it beside —


92 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


the indigenous customary law, or in other words beside
the mores majorum. This arrangement indeed is found
in none of the jurists but it isin Cicero.() In con-
clusion the following relation between the two sorts of
law here explained must be brought to view. Since the
jus gentiwm in.Rome had become a comprehensive
system of law of a positive nature and practical appli-
cation, the determinations of the jus civile must inevit-
ably have had the capacity of acting upon it. If
therefore anything whatever, e. g., a marriage within a
certain degree of relationship, was forbidden by the
jus civile, such a marriage had never in Rome existence
and efficacy even according to the jus gentiwi although
perhaps such a prohibition did not exist among other
nations so that among them the same marriage would
have been valid(u) In like manner it is quite evident
that not even a naturalis obligatio arises out of a con-
tract forbidden by the jus civile—e. g., gambling debts
or usury. Cicero in direct terms expresses this reaction
of the jus civile upon the jus gentium in the following
passage “atque etiam hoc imprimis ut nostros mores
legesque, tueamur quodammodo naturalt jure prae-
scriptum est. However this reaction, as is self-evident,
can only be ascribed to such rules of the jus civile as
bear in themselves the nature of an absolute law (S. 16.)


The second significant contrast was that of the-jus
civile and honorariwm(*) The practical importance of


.


(¢) Cicero de partitione oratoria C. 37. See above (note 6.)

(u) S. 12. J. de nupt. (I. 10.) comp. below S. 65. note (b). In such
eases a two-fold treatment of the jus gentium is certainly shown: a
speculative which merely regards the origin of the positions of law and
a practical which relates to the form which it must have taken in the
Roman courts. :

(x) L. 7. pr. de J.et J, (1. 1.) L. 2.8.10. de orig. jur. (1.2) §. 7.
J. de j. nat, (1. 2.) Jus civile has also in general very different signi-


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 93


this did not at all consist in the fact that the latter
was less operative and in cases of collision, for example,
inferiongfor this ought not to be entirely admitted, but
in the fact that its validity remained confined to the
district and time of the jurisdiction of its author,
instead of operating as every form belonging to the jus
ceivile did in all parts of the empire and at all times)
In this sense it must be taken when very frequently
this jus civile is also designated as Lew and quod legis
vicem obtinet(=) and when the old jurists carefully
remark of individual law-sources that this latter expres-
sion may be used of them.(y) However this purely


fications, It implies 1 Private law S.1, 2 the positive of law of any
state whatever, 8 especially that of the Romans S. 1. 2. 3. J. de j. nat.
(1.2) L.6.pr L.°9 de J. et J. (1. 1); 4 still more narrowly, the
Roman law with the exclusion of the honorarium L, .7, de. J. et J, (4.
1.); 5. still more narrowly that which bears no more special name L,
2, S. 5. 6. 8, 12. de orig, jur. (1- 2s)
(wy I do not say therefore that it operated everywhere but that it
possessed the capacity of doing so, ‘Thus ¢. g. the edictal laws of the
emperors operated as a general rule over the whole empire ; they might
however through their contents be also confined to a single province or
city. The responsa and originally the rescripts also operated only on
the special matter, therefore in a very limited way but this limited
operation of theirs had place in every part of the empire. The edict of
a magisterial authority had by its very nature validity only within the
limits of the district in which the author of the edict had jurisdiction.
(a) Gaius IV. 8. 118. “ Exceptiones .... omnes vel ex legibus, vel ex
his quae legis vicem olhart substantiam capiunt, vel ex jurisdictione
Praetoris proditae sunt.” L. 14. de condit. inst. (28. 7.) The very
same thing that Gaius here says accidentally of the excéption arpes
equally to the action.


(y) Have legis vicem 1, The senatus consults, Gaius 1.8, 4—2, The
imperial constitutions, Gaius 1, 8,5, L. 1. pr. de const, (1, 4,) and
even the imperiales contractus L, 26. C. de don, int. vir, 5. 16—8. The
customary law L. 32, 8,1. L. 38. de leg. (1. 8.) “pro lege.” LL. 38, eod.
“vim legis.” L. 8 C, que sit longa consue. (8. 58.) “legis vicem” S, 9,
J. de j. nat. (1. 2.) “legem imitantur,”


94 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, WNC.


practical difference had the following deeper ground.
By decrees of the pedple, senatus consults, imperial
constitutions, new law was in fact generateg The
Praetor on the other hand-did not express in his edict,.
that which he was not authorized to do, what should
be law for the future but what he will regard and
administer as law so that he merely announced before-
hand his own official activity. Hence the former class
of rules of law were expressed as valid ipso jure, the
latter as valid jwrisdictione Praetoris. This contrast
will stand out still more clearly by a comparison with
other contrasts already presented. That the jus hono-
rariwm belongs wholly to the written law, consequently
‘the unwritten is attached solely to the jus civile, is self-
evident. The relation of the jus honorariwm:to the
jus gentvum may appear more doubtful. It would be
entirely false to hold the two to be identical since the
edict of the Praetor urbanus in part contained much .
strict Roman law partly and not infrequently protected
the utilitas deviating from the rules of the naturalis
ratio (8. 15.)() Just as little however ought the con-
trast of the jus civile and honorarium be regarded as
a subdivision of the jus civile in opposition to the jus
gentium ; for the provincial édicts contained in fact
much jus gentium by the’ side of the purely parti-
cular law and this must have been still more preva-
lent .in the edict of the Praetor peregrinus. The
practical relationship of the two ideas can merely be
asserted to be, that much of the general element
embraced in the jus gentium, passed over into the jus
civile of the Romans and that the jus honorarium served
as the intermediate organ of this passage already


(2) Examples of such a conflict of the Edicts with the jus gentium
are collected in Diiroi Archiv. B. 6. 8, 308. 309. 393,


,


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &¢. 95


remarked above. Lastly one may propose the still
more general question whether the Praetorian law, so
far as it embraced new law and especially so far-as it -
modified the jus civile, was written or customary law.
We may now assume it as clear that it derived its
modifying power, from the customary law, not from the
special power of the Praetor (S. 25. (#)) Nevertheless
we should err if on that account we regarded the
Praetor as a-mere writer of customary law. The
material was indeed given to him by people’s law ; how-
ever the cultivation of law proceeding therefrom by
unfolding and applying it in particulars (corrigendt_
juris cwilis) was more freely resigned to him, as also
the enlarging of the civil law where it was incomplete —
(supplendi juris .civilis.)() In fact therefore the
developement of law was in great measure cared for by
the Praetor; however through the annual change of
the Praetors the mode of accomplishment of the task
again became somewhat popular although with an
aristocratic character.


‘All that has hitherto been ‘said of the general view
of the Romans upon the law-sources can only‘hold good _
if the time in which legal science still had a life of its
own. After this time therefore from that of the Chris-” -
tian emperors the view became fundamentally changed.’
Then merely leges and jus existed as law-sources, that
is to say the imperial edicts and the law worked up in

(aa) The apparent contradiction, of such texts as refer the materials
of the edicts to customary law with others which set the edict in
opposition to customary law as Gaius 3. 8. 82. neque lege 12. tab.
“neque praetoris edicto, sed eo jure quod consensu receptum est,” and
S. 8—9. J, de j. nat. (1, 2.), is removed by the observation that in texts
‘of this latter kind, that only is designated as customary law which cun-
tinued in its original form and had not been incorporated into the edict,


96 - EXPRESSIONS OF THE BOMANS, &c. -


science (S. 15. (¢)) into which form all earlier law had
already resolved itself, Valentinian III reduced this
use of the literature in the Courts to rigid rules
(S. 26.) Stilt more simple were the law-sources by
‘Justinian’s legislation. He gave the sanction of writ-
ten law to a part of the existing jurisprudential litera-
ture, invalidated the remaining and far greater part and
forbade the future origination of a new (S. 26.) Since
therefore the digest no longer prevailed as jus but as
lex, one might say that, merely with the addition ofa
particular customary law of which the scanty form
will immediately be spoken of more at length, there
existed no longer any other law-sources than the impe-
rial constitutions. The general contrasts of jus civile
and gentiwm were ‘merely to be mentioned as history
in Justinian’s legislation, as was in truth the case there,
since they had entirely lost their practical importance,
even if not all practical application. Then it was still
the rule that Roman citizens alone could contract a
perfectly valid marriage, obtain the paternal power,
make a testament, and be instituted as heirs. How-
ever in fact the peregrini, to whom this part of legal
capacity continued to be denied, were merely foreigners
therefore for the stand-point of the Romans and for the
Roman tribunals, then insignificant: and even for these
the greater part of the practical distinction was removed
in consequence of. the right of succession to an intes-_
tate, since the 118th Novel no longer depending upon
agnation. Fora long time no more jus honorarvwm
had arisen and there could hence no longer be any ques-
tion as to the geographical limits of its applicability.


” EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 97


SECTION XXII.
EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS UPON WRITTEN LAWS.
Sources: Dig. I. 3. 4.
Cod. Just. I. 14, 15. 19. 22, 28.
Cod. Theod. I. 1. 2. 3.


What is preserved to us in the law-sources upon the
old forms of legislation is of very scanty aspect. There ~
are merely common-places, instructions for the conduct
of the legislator from which there is little to learn. (@)
Doubtless instructive accounts of the position of each
kind of decrees of the people as well as of the law-giv-
ing power of the Senate were found in the old jurists;
these however bore too slender a reference to the age
of Justinian to permit us to expect that they would be
admitted into his collections.)

More important and connected are the notices and
rules as to the imperial legislation; these were still
applicable in Justinian’s empire and a partial applica-
bility to our own condition is at least conceivable.
Gaius and Ulpian agree in saying that all constitutiones
had legis vicem since each Emperor held his imperiwm
by a law); and they reckon three sorts, Edicts,

Decrees -and Rescripts to which we must still add the
Mandates.


I. Edicts. Not merely their name but also the
authority to:make them attached immediately to


(a) L. 3—6, 8, 10—12. de leg. (1. 3.)

(b) The few and mutilated expressions of Ulpian tit de leg. S, 3.
support this conjecture. Conf, Blume Zeitschrift, f. geschichtl,
Rechtsviss. 4. 367, ;

(c) Gaius I. 8. 5—L. 1,de const. prine, (1. 4.) from Ulpian copied from
there S. 6, J. de j, nat. (1.2.) The enquiry how in the Digest and
Institutes the lex regia has received a meaning other than its original
one belongs not to this place, Ordinarily constitutto denotes the whole
class, at times only the Edicts in contrast to the rescripts L, 3. C. si,
minor, (2, 48.) :


I


98 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


the States-law of.the republic. They were orders
which the emperor, by virtue of a magisterial power
appertaining to him, promulgated, just as the Praetors,
Pro-consuls, &c. before, and even for a long period dur-
ing the time of the emperors, also did. That this form
was not from the beginning applied to the most’ impor-
tant acts of the supreme power is explained at once
by the long continued effort of the emperors to rule
with the old accustomed forms and also by the fact that
so long as this form was firmly restrained within the tra-
ditional limits, it was not altogether adapted for general
legislation; because when the Emperor promulgated
an edict in his tribunicia or proconsularis potestas,
the first availed, like the tribunitial power itself, in
Rome only; the second only in the provinces and in
truth only in those which had fallen to the share of
the Emperor. Only after the idea of the Emperor as
the sovereign magistratus for the whole empire, was
developed and recognized could his edicts be regarded:
as laws of the empire and it is therefore very remark-
able that Gaius already ascribes to them legis vicem,
therefore pronounces them to be independent of any
local limits of jurisdiction instead of having as their
fundamental character a limitation to a certain district
like other edicts which are hence sharply divided from
the lex et quod legis vicem obtinet (S. 22.) Although
not a few certainly imperial edicts are found in the
first century, I however regard as certainly so, those
only introduced with this appellation in the law-sources
since an equally firm regard to technical phraseology is
not to be expected in the historical writers.(@)

(d) 1 will here givea summary of edicts proper which doubtless


may be much enlarged. Four of Augustus L, 2. pr. ad Sc. Vell.
(16.1.) L. 26. de lib. (28, 2.) L. 8 pr. de quaest (48. 18,) Auct, de j.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 99


Now. since the edicts as real statutes ought to havea
generally obligatory force, in contradistinction to other,
constitutions, it was therefore important to have cer-
tain characteristics of them. These were thus stated
tn an edict of Theodosius II and Valentinian III ;—
the name edictum or generalis constitutio; the com-
munication of it to the senate by an oratio; the publi-
cation of it by the governors of provinces ; lastly the
provision inserted in the constitution itself that it
should have a force obligatory upon all; either of these
marks ought alone and without the rest to be suffi-
cient.©) This property would not consequently be
excluded, by a single case being the occasion of it, as
this is expressed by the constitution quoted and as
little by the circumstance that the contents were not
addressed to all Romans but to a single class(/) since
these precepts ought to be recognized and respected by


fisci, 5. 8. Claudius four, L..2. pr. ad Sc. Vell. (16, 1.) I, 15. pr.ad L,
corn, de falsis (48, 10.) Li. 2. qui sine man, (40. 8.) L, un 8, 3, C. de
lat, lib. (7. 6.) Ulpian 3, 8S. 6, Vespasian two, L, 4. 8, 6. de legat,
(50. 7.) L, 2, C, de, aed. priv. 8, 10, Domitian L. 2. S, 1. de cust.
(48. 3.) Nerva. L. 4. pr. ne de statu (40.15,) Trajan four, L, 6,58. 1.

_ de extr. crim, (47,11.) Gaius 3,8, 172, 8. 4, J. de suce, lib. (3. 7.)
L, 13, pr, S. 1, de j. fisci (49,14,) Auct, de j. fisci, 8,6, Hadrian two.

Gaius, 1,8, 55,938, L. 3, C. de ed. D, Hadr. (6. 83.) Pius L. 11, de

muner. (50, 4.) Marcus three 8, 14, J. de usuc, (2. 6.) L. 24.8, 1

de reb, Auct, jud. (42.5.) L. 8. C,siadv. fiscum, (2. 87.) Severus,

L. 3. 8. 4. de sep. viol. (47. 12.) Besides proclamations to the people

in which no legal propositions are contained appear as edicts e.g. that

of Nerva in Plinius epist. X 66. _

(e) L,.8. C. de leg. (1. 14.)

(f) What our jurists call a jus singulare. Thus «. g. the edicts of
Augustus and Claudius relative to the acceptance of women as bail, an
edict of Augustus forbade the disinheritance of soldiers, L, 2. pr. ad
Sc. Vell, (16. 1.) L, 26. de lib. (28.2,) There were theréfore accord-
ing to. later phraseology generales leges. Giiyet is mistaken on this
matter. Abhandlungen §, 42. “ :


100 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c.


all; lastly not by its being addressed to a single tribunal
of which the question was perhaps the occasion of the
law.) Moreover the same Emperors explained how
for the future their edicts would be composed under
the co-operation of the senate by which they: certainly
did not mean to say that the force of law was depend-
ent upon the observance of this form. Lastly the
necessity of making known the law is recognized how-
ever without the definition of a form for doing so
' which in that matter can alone be of practical value.


II Decreta. By these is understood each exercise of
the impérial jurisdiction as well by interlocutory orders
as by final judgments.) When as to all other consti-
tutions the force of law in the individual case is
ascribed to these, this appears inconsistent, since they
ought rather to be regarded as judicial determinations,
which were always of legal force since they proceeded
from the supreme court of the empire. This mode
of- conceiving the matter is perhaps explicable by the
whole jurisdiction of the Emperor being an extraordi-
nary one to which the old idea of judicium and resju-
cata was not absolutely suitable, it was therefore wished


(g) By far the most numerous imperial Jaws namely those of Justi-
nian are addressed to some functionary e.g. Praefectus praetorio and
they may on account of this shape be also called Rescripts ; however
no one doubts that they are real edicta, génerales leges, leges edictales
and hence the expression, reseriptwm in itself applicable, was not usual,
A comparison with modern contrivances will render this clearer,
What is published in the Prussian Gazette be it called law or ordinance
has a completely similar legislative power therefore whether it is
addressed to all subjects, and funetionaries or consists in an order of
the cabinet addressed to the ministry in general or to a single minister.

() L. 9. C, de leg, (1. 14.)

(%) L, 1. 8, 1. de const, prine, (1. 4.) |“ Quodeunque igitur Imp. ....
vel cognoscens decrevit vel de plano interlocutus est .,. legem esse
constat,


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c. 1o1


to’ express quite decidedly that the decisions of the
Emperor were not less, but even more competent, than
those of a jude, to establish unalterably a disputed
jural relation. In fact there was sure enough no essen~.
tial difference from the legally valid decision of a
judge, since in this case also the operation would be
confined to the case presented for decision and the very
rule contained in the decision ought not to be applied,
as legally established, to other cases. Indeed a great
weight of authority could not be denied to the rule
applied in a decree and hence is explained why the
jurists compiled collections of such decrees() and why
single decrees gave occasion to the formation and
recognition of entirely new legal positions.(™)


As to this limited operation of the decrees, Justinian
so-far as interlocutory ones are concerned, left the mat-
ter in the same state, for in the Code there is an earlier
constitution introduced which expressly prescribes this
as to interlocutory ones) On the other hand he
ascribed to the final imperial decrees a more extended .
operation, so that the rule of law expressed in them
was also to be applied in all future cases.(0?) From the


(1) Pauli libri tres decretorum. Further the collection by Dositheus
of the decrees of Hadrian.


(tr) e g. The decretum D, Marci upon remedies by one’s own act
L. 13. quod metus (4. 2.) L, 7. ad. L. J. de vi priv, (48, 7.)

(nm), L. 8 C, de leg, (1.14,) “ .... interlocutionibus, quas in uno
negotio judicantes protulimus vel postea proferemus, non in commune
prae judicantibus” in contrast to the legal force before defined to
belong to the edicts,


(o) L. 12, pr. C. de leg, (1.14.) “Si imperialis majestas causam
cognitionaliter examinaverit, et partibus cominus constitutis sententiam
dixerit ; omnes omnino judices ... sciant hanc esse legem non solum
illi cause pro qua producta est sed e¢ omnibus similibus. A contradic-


102 - EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


very insertion of this provision it follows that up to
that time another rule prevailed on the matter and
that something new must have been introduced by it.
When therefore the Emperor appeals to the concordant
opinion of the old jurists upon the matter he thus
gives to their words an arbitrary meaning since they
certainly thought only of the legal force of decrees as
to the single case.(») In fact however much may be
said for the innovation and it was at least free from the
objections which stood in the way of a similar hand-
ling of the rescripts. Then an error of the Emperor
from a one-sided report was not possible in this case
in which both sides had been heard and the dignity
and publicity attached to the imperial court(q) in some
measure made up for the want of open publication.
BeforeJustinian therefore all decrees had legal force only
in the existing case; by his new enactment a more
extensive operation was assigned to the final decisions,
so that the rule of law contained in them should be
regarded as a general written law.


The nature of this contrast has been greatly mis-
understood by the modern jurists' They have first of
all confounded it with the limitation of the legal vali-
_ dity to the parties to the suit. The legal validity

refers only to the particular jural relation and this


tion is generally believed to exist between this passage and that in the
foregoing note : but the two sorts of decrees are expressly distinguished
here as Ulpian distinguishes them (note &,)


(p) L. 12 cit. ... * cum et veteris juris conditores, constitutiones
qua ex imperiali decreto processerunt, legis vim obtinere, aperte diluci-
deque definiant: It seems as if Gaius 1.8, 5. was here directly refer-
red to,


(g) Decrees of this kind may be compared to the decisions of our
superior courts of appeal,


" EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c: 103


should not be extended even here; therefore if the
Emperor had to decide on a matter of inheritance
between two parties, even this decision of the- Supreme
Court should neither injure nor profit a third. Secondly
they have confounded it with that of a rigid and liberal
interpretation. There is no question of that here but
much rather of the permissibility or non-permissibility
of the application of the same rule of law not extended,
to a future and precisely similar case.


SECTION XXIV.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS UPON WRITTEN
LAWS,.—( Continuation. )


III. Rescripts.¢) Rescriptwm means literally a

“re-writing, a written reply. This might, with respect

to external form, be issued in various ways: merely on

the margin of the letter received (adnotatio subscriptio),

in a separate letter (epistola), lastly in a solemn dispatch
(pragmatica sanctio)®) of which we do not accurately
know the official form. To all these rescripts the

validity of a lew is ascribed, although essentially”
different, through more contracted limit, from the

yalidity of the edicts. What now is to be understood —
by this? In order that this peculiar nature of a con-
tracted validity should belong to them, we must neces-
" sarily add something in thought, which is not embraced
in the idea determined by their form and occasion.
(a) Schulting diss. pro rescriptis Imp. Rom. Commacad. Vol. En.
8, Giiyet Abhandlungen. n, 4. _

(d) This form would only have been specially used on more impor-
tant occasions viz., merely in rescripts on matters of public law and
indeed in reference to corporations L. 7. C. de div. reser, (1. 23.) That
however this limitation was not universally observed, is very clearly


104 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


There exist therefore letters-of the Emperor which
have ‘still smaller force and do not therefore at all
operate as a lex—others, freed from those narrow limits,
which operate more forcibly; we must subtract both
and here the question can only be of the remainder
lying between the two; these only can be considered:
by us as Rescripts in a technica] sense. Thus in the
first place all letters of an unofficial character, which
besides every one would tacitly in thought remove
from the class, although their name and form do not
exclude them, have less power than réscripts proper.
However from the official letters which we may desig-,
nate as enactments, we must separate those which were
not at all intended to apply a rule but to be a mere
exercise of the will of the Emperor ase. g. exceptions
of individuals from the application of laws (6. 16.),
pecuniary aids, rebukes.(¢) These have in their opera-
tion certainly the same power as a lew as to the person
and the case giving occasion to them, and each judge
has to respect them as laws. On the- other hand they
-cannot as a positive authority supply a rule for the
treatment of other cases since they themselves rest


originally upon no rule.


On the other hand those letters, which prescribe a
rule as such to be generally obeyed and with that


shown by Const, Summa 8. 4, “ Si,. pragmaticae sanctiones ... alicui
personae impertitae sunt. Very copious material for this enquiry are
found in J, H. Bobmer exerc ad Pand. 1, ex. 12 C, 1. He however errs
in treating that legal limitation of the application of the pragm. sanct.
as the concept itself. ,

(e) They are called personales constitutiones L. 1. S. 2. de const.
(1, 4.) S. 6. J. de j, nat. (1. 2.) Modern writers call them rescripts of
grace which is too narrow and ¢. 9. wiaaed does not suit reprimand
and punishment.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &. 105


view were generally promulgated have more force than
rescripts proper. These are actual written laws of
unlimited validity as to which certainly no distinction
from other laws can be based on the form of a letter
being accidentally selected or onthe fact of their being
called forth by a question or exposition, in reply to which
they gave the Jaw. In an earlier time these from their
external form were called general letters or general
rescripts(¢) without any intention of signifying thereby
a narrowed validity. When however this form of
legislation at a later time became the prevailing one,
they. no longer applied this name to them, but embraced
them under the general name leges, edicta, edictales
constitutiones:(e) The making them generally known,
which is not apparent from the shape in which we
know them was a matter of course there and was


(d) L. 1. 8. 2, de fugit (11. 4.) “Ast etiam generalis epistola D.
Marci et Commodi que declaratur, et praesides et magistratus, et milites
stationarios dominum adjuvare debere in inquirendis fugitivis &. L,
8.8. 5. de sepulcro viol. (47.12,) “D. Hadrianus rescripto poenam
statuit quadraginta aureorum in eos qui in civitate sepeliunt, quam
fisco inferri jussit, et in magistratus eadem qui passi sunt ... guia
generalia sunt rescripta et oportet imperialia statuta suam vim obtinere
et in omni loco valere.” Perhaps the epistola D, Hadriani upon
giving security belongs to this place. In the two first named cases

the matter was fitted for this treatment by its being .of a police nature.
Such rescripts were, like what we-call circular rescripts, addressed to
several functionaries at the samie time,

(e) Thus e. g. Justinian in L, 5. pr. C. de receptis (2. 56,) calls his own
earlier enactment (L, 4. eod) a lex although it was a communication to
the Praefectus praetorio; still more decisive on this matter is the Theodo-
sian code which consists mainly of such rescripts and of which the parts
are designated by the author himself as “constitutiones edictorum
viribus aut sacra generalitate subnixae” and “edictales generalesque
constitutiones.” L, 56. C, Th. de const, (1. 1.) ed Hanel. Giiyet on this
matter errs; he allows himself to be misled by the outer form in
numbering these among the rescripts and in putting the edicts in
opposition to them whence he then derives results as to the true edicts,
comp, above S, 23. note (g,) ;


106 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c.


managed, by the functionaries to whom they were
addressed, according to general directions without any .
necessity for a special direction in each particular case;
however sometimes such an injunction is expressed in
the ordinance itself.(f) In like manner the pragmaticae
sanctiones might be real laws(9) so that to them as to
the less formal epistolae something must always be
‘added in thought if they are to fall into the province
of the rescripts proper, narrowed in their validity.


What is it then which characterizes the rescripts
proper and broadly separates them from the edicts ?. It
is their destination for merely operating upon a single
case with which is naturally connected the want of
any public promulgation. On the other hand they
have in common with other constitutions that they rest
upon a rule and express this rule-‘merely however with
a view to the concrete application of it. Moreover
the following important differences are presented in
them. °


‘1. They will sometimes be occasioned by the
demand of a single party (libellus), sometimes by
that of a court.) This last happens especially in the
important application to a procedure of a particular
shape where a judge begs the Emperor to prescribe to
him the decision to be given, (relatio consultatio.)
Here the Emperor appears not actually as a judge but
as the framer of the decision for another judge, exactly
as our faculties of jurists in cases submitted to them.
Hence such an order is numbered among the rescripts


(f) e.g.in L,un C, de grege domin. (11. 75.) Other passages are
collected by Giiyet S. 74. ,

(g) Thus e g. Justinian’s sanctio pragmatica pro petitione Vigili
upon the regulation of Italy after the completion of the conquest.

(h) L. 7. pr. C. de dive rescr.


- EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. °. 107°


not among the decrees. Justinian has forbidden these
consultations but this must not be understood abso-
-lutely as it might appear according to the words.)


2. The rule contained in them is sometimes inter-’
woven with the individual decision sometimes separately
expressed and then employed as ground of the decision,
so that it may have been brought forward in the same
shape as a law, but it was not one. Such rescripts are
called generalia rescripta in a sense other than that in
which the expression has been presented above.


3. The rule employed by them is often fully embo-
died in the previous law so that the Emperor acts in
the same way as an answering jurist; often however
the previous law is developed in the rescript by-a free
interpretation. This happens especially where political
or politico-economical considerations determine the new
rule and where no right of another person is endanger-
ed by it.


(2) On the constitutions comp. especially Hollweg Civil Prozess 1.
§. 10. The abolition of them is contained in the Nov. 125, That
this prohibition could not have prevailed absolutely will be first shown
in the theory of the interpretation of laws (S. 48.) Besides it is self-
evident that when despite the prohibition a judge asked the question
and the Emperor made up his mind upon an answer, the judge was as
much bound as before the 125 Nov. In like manner when the Emperor
of his own motion or at the request of a party addressed a rescript to
the judge. The application of rescripts to a particular case was
therefore now much limited, by no means entirely abolished,

(k) L, 89.8. 1. ad. L. Fale, (85. 2.) “generaliter rescripserunt.” L,_
1,8. 3. de leg. tut (26. 4.) “ generaliter rescripsit.” L. 9. S. 2. de her,
inst. (28. 5.) “rescripta generalia.’ L. 9. S. 5, de jur. et facti, ign, (22. 6.)
“initium constitutionis generale est.” The rescripts quoted in these
texts refer to single cases and are hence distinguished from the general
rescripts quoted in note (d.) On the other hand the expression generale
rescriptum must denote more than a mere antithesis te personalis
constitutio. :

(1) These two considerations at once explain why the doctrine of


108 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &. -° _~


The operation of the rescripts may be summed up in.
the following rules. (1) They ought to have legal force
~ for the single case by which they were occasioned. (2)
They should not have it for any other case. (3) On the
other hand they also operated upon other cases with
the force of a great authority.


‘The legal force for the single case follows from its
being generally ascribed to them in the Digest and the
Institutes (8, 23.) ; in the Code moreover it is denied as
to every case other than that by which it was occasion-
ed. so that the applicability of the force of law remains
merely for the single case. The meaning here is that
every judge before whom the rescript is produced is
bound to a strict conformity with it, and is not allowed
to give any scope to his own convictions.- This great
effect was particularly important when the rescripts had
been elicited not by a judge but by a party ; here they
appear as a right acquired by a person which could be
rendered available also to his heirs and co-parties and
available: after a longer lapse of time.(™) However in
this case the rescripts were also peculiarly dangerous
both because of their possible falsification and still more
commonly ‘because they might have been obtained
through a one-sided setting forth of the matters of fact.
Security against falsification was sought in precise
directions upon the form and distinguishing marks of
the rescripts.(”) By reason of the wrongful exposition


excuses especially was so often extended by mere rescripts,- Fragm.
Vatic S. 191. 208. 247, S. 159. 206. 211. 215, 246. Especially worthy of
remark is §. 236. in which the intention of innovating is directly express-
ed ; “ quo rescripto declaratur ante eos non habuisse immunitatem.”


(m) L, 4. 12. (otherwise 2 and 10 ¢. th, de div. reser. (1,2.) L,1. 2.
e. de div. reser, (1. 23.) ~ -
(n) L. 3. 4, 6. c. de div. reser. (1. 23.) L.-1. ¢ th, eod, (1. 2.)


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 109


of the facts it was constantly permitted to the opposite
party to take advantage of a particular procedure.
With this also was connected the provision that every
rescript which was contrary to the interest of the state or
to recognized rules (contra jus)(») should be regarded
as invalid. By this latter determination the Emperors
in no way intended to disclaim the developing of law.
by their rescripts ; here the thought was rather of that
sort of rescripts in which the Emperors might be misled
by an untrue statement of the case into violating the
existing rules of law. If one reflected upon these risks
attached to the legal force of the rescripts, one might
certainly have considered it more judicious at least on
the demand of the parties to issue no rescripts whatever
in law suits, as Trajan is reputed to'have thought ; it
was by this consideration also that Justinian was at
last moved to forbid the judges to eregard private -res-
cripts and consequently to take away from them entirely
the force of law.(g)


On the other hand the force of law was repeatedly
and in the most express terms denied to rescripts for
cases other than that for which they were issued. This
happened in special application to the rescripts occasi-
oned by the consultationes of the judges(") as to which


(0) L. 7. ¢. de div, reser. (1. 28.) L, 2. 3, 4. 5. ¢, si contra jus. (1, 22.)
To this is related the appeal permitted against rescripts that is to say
against the decisions based upon them L. 1. 8.1, de appell. (49. 1.)

(p) L, 2. (otherwise 1,) cod. th. de div. reser. (1. 2.) L. 6, ¢, si. contra
jus. (1. 22,) L. 3. 7, ¢. de precibus (1. 19.) Nov. 82. ¢. 13.

(q) Capitolini Macrinus c. 13. “ quum Trajanus nunquam libellis
responderit.” He would therefore issue rescripis merely to the Courts
not to the parties. Several rescripts of Trajan are collected by Schult-
ing diss. pro rescriptis §, 15. “Justinian has forbidden the regarding of
private rescripts in the Nov. 113. c. 1. of the year 541.

(7) LAL (otherwise 9.) c. th, de div, reser, (1.2.) L,2.c. de leg.

K


110. EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


such a wider operation might have been the least hazard-
ous; the same limitation as to private rescripts resulted so
completely of course that it did not appear necessary
specially to express it. This limitation was based first
on the fact that from the regard to the particular case
and especially to the wholly untrue representation of
the parties the very rule expressed might easily have
so one-sided a shape that its general application must
become very dangerous ;'to this was added the still
more important ground that the rescripts were wanting


(1, 14,) “ Quae ex relationibus .... vel consultatione .... statuimus....

nec generalia jura sint, sed leges faciant his duntaxat negotiis atque
personis, pro quibus fuerint promulgata.” L. 13. ce. de sentent. et
interloc. (7, 45.) “ Nemo judex vel arbiter existimet, neque consulta-
tiones, quas non rite judicatas esse putaverit, sequendum ... cum non
exemplis sed legibus judicandum sit.” This last passage is peculiarly
important in two respects first because in the words quoted he speaks
directly of the application of a rule once accepted to new cases of the
like kind—the matter of which we are speaking. Secondly because it
“puts together with the consultationes, that is to say with the rescripts
occasioned by them, the decisions of several high tribunals not however
those of the Emperor’s own. By this omission all contradiction of the
text to L. 12. ce, de leg. (1. 14,) (S, 23. note 0) is with much foresight

avoided. ‘A distinction therefore is made between the decisions of the

Emperor himself upon a case conducted before him and the decisions

of the judge of which a rescript of the Emperor was merely the foun-

dation. These latter decisions had neither like publicity nor like

certainty with the former, since ’% misunderstanding in them as to the

meaning of the rescript was always conceivable. Many would by way

of exception ascribe a general force to the rescripts when they contained
an authentic interpretation since L.12.5. 1. c, says “ interpretationem,
sive in precibus, sive in judiciis sive alio quocunque modo factum ratam
et indubitatam haberi.” Gliick 1.8. 96. n.3.; but the rescripts were
valid just as much as laws but limited to the individual case, Had
Justinian intended to ascribe to them a general validity in contradiction
with the other passages quoted he would not have expressed it by the
words sive in precibus used in passing but would have as expressly said
it, as he had actually done, immediately before, of decrees.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c. H1


in public notification. This reason is as applicable to
the interpreting rescripts as to all the others and it is °
wrong when, as is done by many, a binding force in all
eases is ascribed to them—a point which can only be
rendered quite clear hereafter (8. 47.) As to the res-
cripts, as well as the decrees (8, 23.) this limitation has
often been misunderstood in modern times. Here also
it has been confounded with the prohibition of an
extending interpretation, while there the question was
as to the application of the rescripts themselves to new
cases of a completely similar kind, arid not at all of the
application of an extended rule. As to rescripts also
the limitation has been confounded with the rule that
a decision having the force of law avails only between
the parties to it. That rule was still less in question
here than as to decrees; there could indeed be no ques-—
tion about it when e. g. the testamentary heir sub-
mitted to the Emperor a testament of doubtful validity
and the Emperor by rescript recognized the validity,
the heir by testament could make use of it against each
heir to the succession of an intestate (the next of kin),
because.it was not at all necessary for a definite opponent
to be named in the petition. However the force of law
in other cases was meant to be withdrawn from rescripts,
not the influence, which as a great authority, they might
have upon them.) It was impossible- to forbid this—


(s) Many seem to understand the legis vis which Gaius and ‘Ulpian
ascribe to the rescripts solely of this influence as authority but cer-
tainly wrongly, Those jurists knew better how to choose their
expressions than people here give them credit for. If they meant any-
thing so indefinite as influence and operation generally Gaius would not
have left out the legis vis as to the jus honorarium : in like manner in
S, 7, he would not have named merely the responsa prudentum but the
still more extensively operating auctoritas prudentium. It would how-
ever be erring on the other side so to understand the indefinite expres-


112 | EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c.


more it might not appear at all desirable to do so.
Indeed in that influence existed an especial means of
developing law, and in the Digest we have before our
eyes the extensive use which the ancient jurists have
made of this means. There was no danger of much
consequence from bad rescripts since the character of
bare authority in no way excluded individual rescripts
from criticism and rejection. However by reason of
this danger the Emperor Macrinus seems once to have
thought of abolishing all the old rescripts—a thought
which manifestly referred merely to this authority.@


From this point of view all the appearances which
we find of the rescripts are easily explained. It is

' explained that the jurists might have a very extensive
knowledge of them since they. themselves, lived in
proximity to the Emperor, often conducted the compila-
tion of the rescripts, still oftener might have free access
to the archives.(“) It is explicable also that they should


sion of Gaius (1. S. 5.) as if he would ascribe to the rescripts just .as
generally binding a power as to the edicts of the emperor, Just as he
apparently ascribes “ legis vicem” in the 8. 7, to the responsa, it appears
incidentally only from the following contrast that he must be speaking
only of the legally binding power upon the judge of the individual case.


(2) Capitolini Macrinus ¢. 13._ Fuit in jure non incallidus, a deo ut
statuisset omnia rescripta veterum principum tollere, ut jure non re-
scriptis ageretur, nefas esse dicens leges videri Commodi et Caracalli et
hominum imperitorum voluntates quum Trajanus nunquam libellis
responderet, ne ad alias causas facta praeferrentur, quae ad gratiam
composita viderentur. This intention of the emperor could only act
upon the authority of the rescripts in future, since the cases in which
the veteres principes had given the rescripts, had long been settled
and forgotten,


(4) It is not therefore necessary by reason of this very customary
acquaintance with the rescripts to suppose as is done by Giiyet (ut sup.
8, 74.) a public proclamation,


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c. 113


early have made known collections of rescripts in the
form of books.) It is also explicable however that
they should have taught the opposite of what was
found in a rescript, either because by accident they did
not know of it or because they rejected its contents as
erroneous. ~) =


From this summary view of the precepts given at
different times as to the rescripts it follows, that at the
time of Justinian’s law books they were still of the
greatest importance, that however their influence has
been almost entirely annihilated by the legislation. of
the novels.


‘ IV. Mandates. These were instructions to func-
tionaries who had to apply them in the exercise of their
offices. As arule such were addressed to the legates
who in the imperial provinces acted as representatives
of the Emperor, just as the ordinary pro-consuls might
issue mandates (where ¢. g. the mandata jurisdictio
exists.) Such mandates had the same regard in the
province as the provincial edicts. That they are men-
tioned much more rarely than other sorts of constitutions,
is fully explained by the dependent situations of the pro-
vinces in relation to the whole empire and by its being


(vp Thus e.g. Papirii Justi libri XX, constitutionum which accord-
ing to the fragments preserved were rescripts. The Gregorian and
Hermogenian code was soat least in great part. Further without
doubt the Semestria of D. Marcus, half yearly collections of a selection
of the most important rescripts often of decrees also belonged to this
class—these were called forth often by private persons often by the
‘Emperor himself in which case this might have availed as a sort of legal
publication, Comp. upon this Brissonius v. Semestria, Cujacius in
Papin L, 72, de cond. opp. IV. 489. His explanation I do not consider
correct.

(w) Passages of such a kind are collected by Giiyet ut. sup. 8. 55;
foll.


114 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


seldom possible for the developement of.the general
Roman law to have its beginning in them. _ Most of
the mandates of which we have accounts relate to cri-
minal law or police orders.) A more remarkable case,
in which they have led to a new proposition of private
law, concerns military testaments) but this is easily
explained by the nature of the object-matter for a
campaign, which is presupposed in such a testament,
could only happen in the provinces and hence also a
campaign was essential in such province to bring this
proposition of law into use. In like manner the inter-
dicting of marriage between Roman provincial func-
tionaries and the women of their province was based
upon mandates.) Gaius and Ulpian pass over the
mandates in the enumeration of the sorts of constitu-
tions: this may arise from the small importance men-
tioned; possibly from the circumstance that in the
beginning they were limited to single provinces so that
the legis vis attaching to the rest of the constitutiones
could be ascribed to them as little as to the jus hono-
rarvwm.

The result of this enquiry as to the operativeness of
” the imperial constitutions may be summed up in the
following propositions. The edicts and mandates were
laws proper equally obligatory upon the judge and the
parties ; the mandates naturally merely in the province
for which they were issued. The rescripts had the
force of law only ‘in the single case for which they were
issued ; after Justinian’s latest direction even in this
case they were much limited inasmuch as those issued


(«) Brissonius de formulis Lib, 3, ¢, 84.

(y) L. 1. pr. de test mil, 29, 1. “et exinde mandatis inseri coepit
caput tale ; cum in notitiam, &c.

(2) L. 2.8, 1, de his quae ut, ind. (31, 9.) L. 6. ¢. de nupt. (5, 4.)


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c. 115


to private persons were to remain unnoticed and as it
was as a rule forbidden to the judge to seek for
rescripts except in the case of a doubt as to, the inter-
pretation of a law. Decrees were for the individual
case like decisions of legal validity and in so far as they
embraced final decisions and not mere interlocutory
orders, the rule of law expressed in them had general
validity like a real written law. Moreover all the sorts
of constitutions, without regard to their differences and
limitations, had everywhere the natural power of a
great authority for each person who had happened to
‘obtain a knowledge of them.


Justinian’s code made a great inroad upon all these
sorts of imperial constitutions. What was received into
the code received the force of law even when as a
‘decree or rescript, it had hitherto not had any such
force of law for a future case: the unreceived were by
the very non-reception abolished as laws.(@@a) The rules
here laid down therefore could henceforth be applied
only to these constitutions which after the promul-
gation of the code, were issued by Justinian or his
successors.


The edicts or generales formae of the Praefecti Prae-
torio might be regarded as an appendix to or partial sub-
stitute for the imperial legislation. Alexander Severus
gave to them a generally binding force if they did not
contradict the written laws and so long as the Emperor

‘did not order otherwise) Justinian appeals to single


(aa) Const. Summa S,3, Hereby however the privileges conferred
by rescripts upon any corporation ora private midrviaual Were not -
meant to be abolished. Ibid, S. 4.

(56) L, 2. ¢, de off. praef. praet. or et Ill. (1, 26.) That was then to be
understood of the whole empire, since Constantine of each praefecture
in particular as previously of the provincial edicts of the pro-consuls.


116 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c,


ones among them as to written laws.(cc) Single frag.
ments of such are preserved at the end of our collection
of novels.(42) Cassiodorus ascribes to the praefects a
similar legislative power. (ee)


SECTION XXV.
EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS UPON CUSTOMARY LAW.


Sources: Dig. 1. 3.
Cod. VIII. 53.
Cod. Th. V. 12.


The following remarkable utterance upon customary
law is found in Cicero in the midst of rather confused
thoughts. “A rule of life, says he, is given by it which
.does not spring from the opinion of individuals, but from
a necessity dwelling in our moral nature. In the com-
munion of men living together, where it merely appears
as an undefined directing. influence this rule is in part
brought to a definite shape, partly widened, partly
established as unchanging usage.” Subsequently he
puts the Jez or the positive rule arbitrarily formed @) in
contradistinction to all this.. Among the old jurists
we do not find customary law recognized to the extent-


(ec) L. 16, ¢, de jud, (3. 1.) L. 27 ¢, de fidejuss, (8, 41,)


(dd) Nov, 165. 166, 167. 168, Comp, Viener Geschichte der Novellen
S, 98. 118, ”


(ee) Cassidor. Var. VI. 3, Formula Praef, Praet, “ Pene est ut leges


possit condere.”


(a) Cicero de inventione II. 53. 64. “ Natura jus est, quod non
opinio genuit, sed quaedam innata vis inseruit, ut religionem, pietatem.
Consuetudine jus est, quod aut leviter a natura tractum aluit et
majus fecit usus, ut religionem : aut si quid eorum, quae ante diximus,
ab natura profectum, majus factum propter consuetudinem videmus,
aut quod in morem vetustas vulgi approbatione perduxit.”


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 117


and as of the importance belonging to it. This is easily
explained by the consideration that in their time, the
greatest part of the old national customary law had
already long passed over into other forms of law, and
therefore appeared no longer in its indigenous shape
(S. 15. 18.) Their age was moreover little suited to.
the origination of a new general customary law in the
purely popular way (S. 7.) Hence it was for the most
part particular customary law only, which presented
itself to them in actual life and to this most of the
passages as to customary law, preserved in their
writings, refer.) However the views which they express
upon it are in the main satisfactory and if modern
writers have béen misled by them into erroneous
opinions, this has been merely through the indefinite-
ness of expression. According to the theory of the
Romans a proposition of law is to be regarded as estab-
lished when it appears in a long, of many years, con-
suetudo and the ground of its validity is the tacit con-
sent of the populus, therefore of those who employ that
proposition of law (utentiwm, and omniwm.)() This
has been misunderstood into custom comprehending the
ground of origin of law and into the formation of this
law being effected by the arbitrary resolution of indivi-
duals, consequently by the will of those persons who
make law also in the comitia. This last explanation
was particularly. important since by it, the customary
law seemed to be placed in immediate connexion with
a special political constitution, whence it had lost its
applicability to the Rome of the Caesars and to our


(b) Piichta Gewahnheitsrecht I. S. 71. fg.


(c) Gaius III. S, 82. Ulpian tit de leg. S. 4, L. 82—40, de leg. (1. 3.)
8. 9-11. J. de j. nat, (1, 2.)


118 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &¢.


monarchies. In fact however consuetudo is to the
jurists not the ground of origin of this sort of law but
merely its sensible manifestation, therefore a medium of
recognizing it, just as they are accustomed to conceive
in this way the forms of written law (S. 22.) ~ The cor-
_rectness of this view is established by the fact that in
numerous passages the ratio, that is to say the common
immediate conviction of the existence and the validity
of a rule of law, is as well as the mere custom, called a
peculiar ground of origin.@ In like manner consensus
is not a voluntary decision, which might just as well
have been conceived to be in an opposite direction, but
the opinion agreeing from an innate necessity. Then
also the populus to whom this’ consensus is ascribed is
not so much the collection of the citizens registered at
any one time in tribes and centuries, as rather the ideal
Roman people continuing throughout all generations,
which can be conceived as constantly the same in the
most various political constitutions.) The correctness
of this explanation shows itself in the first place in the


(d) L. 39. de leg. (1. 3.) “quod non ratione introductum, sed errore

’ primum deinde consuetudine obtentum est ; in aliis similibus non obtinet.”

The alia stmilia are the future cases entirely similar, L,1.c. quae sit,

.1,¢. (8, 53.) “Nam et consuetudo praecedens, et ratio quae consuetudi-
nem suasit, custodienda est.” Comp. Puchta, 8, 61. 81.


(e) L. 82. S. 1, de leg, (1. 8.) ig with much plausibility quoted against
this last assertion, in this law there is an argument from the expressus
populi consensus in the lex to the tacitus inthe consuetudo, First how-
ever by this comparison not so much the validity of actual custom as
the sort of this validity (the legis vice) is made good, (Puchta S. 84.)
Secondly also I do not at all assert that the old jurists constantly con-
ceived with precision the oppositions in the meaning of populus, There
would only be a contradiction of the view here maintained if the old
jurists had, expressly with a clear knowledge of tlfe opposition, recog-
nized the assembly of the cives and not the ideal nation, as subject of
the customary law,


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &. 119


high degree of certainty which is declared to be the
fundamental character of customary law(/) and which
is obviously more consistent with a common conviction
of the people than with a voluntary determination of
individuals in single recurring acts. Still further the
correctness of this explanation is verified by the condi-
tions and tokens which are furnished to us for custom-
ary law.


For example a customary law is to be recognized in
the common conviction of the skilled in law, the
prudentium auctoritas.9) These may very well be
the organ in which the common consciousness of the
people lives and works with especial power and definite-
ness (S. 14.) On the other hand it would be entirely
unjust to permit the whole nation to be bound by their
arbitrary decision, and still customary law is to prevail
among the whole people and not among the jurists
alone. Further the concordance of judicial recognitions
is stated to us as an especial medium of recognizing
customary law.(#) In this statement also there is a con-
firmation of our explanation, because these recognitions
may furnish an especially trustworthy proof of the
existence of a conviction of the people, while the
arbitrary decision of the judge could not possibly bind
the nation. It would be entirely erroneous to ascribe,
to the res judicatae in themselves and apart from cus-


(f) L. 36. de leg, (1. 3.) : “quod in tantum probatum est ut non
fuerit necesse scripto id comprehendere,”

(g) L. 2. S. 5. 6, 8, 12, de orig, jur. (1. 2.)

(h) L. 38, de leg, (1. 3.) L. 1. c, quae sit. 1, consu, (8, 53.) As to the
particular customary law in particular see L, 34, de leg, (1. 8,) Puchta
1.8.96. Itis remarkable that the res judicatae are quite commonly
included in the enumeration of the law-sources by the rhetoricians—
not by the old jurists (S, 22.) They were however known in all times.


120 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c.


tomary. law, such a power, since in direct contravention
of this it is expressly enacted that no judge must allow
himself to be determined by prevedent alone. This
can only mean that precedents, in themselves without
influence, are to have nevertheless the greatest influence
as testimonies to a customary law. To the extension -
of these conditions belong—the rule that a demonstrable
error excludes the existence of customary law (4) and
the other rule that the Emperor is to determine when,
the custom is too new of itself alone to place beyond
doubt the existence of a common consciousness.(/) More
than this upon the conditions of customary law is not
to be found in the Roman law. The view that custom-
ary law must be proved as a pure matter of fact by him
who invokes it, is entirely foreign to that-law.(m)


Lastly as to the operation of customary law the
Roman law sets forth the proposition that it represents
vicem legis.) That is to say according to the explan-
ation given above (S. 22.) that it operates not merely
with just as evident a power but also in the very same
way as a lex, so that it is not, like the gus honorarium,
confined by its nature to a defined district or a defined
time. The possibility however of a particular custom-
ary law is in no way in contradiction with this property,
in the same way as a written law also may be promul-
gated for a single city or province.


(i) L. 18. ¢. de sent. et interloc. (7. 45.) see above S. 24, note r,


(k) L, 89. de leg. (1. 3.) see above note d, Puchta I. 5.99. The
completely natural reason consists in the custom being then demon-
strably the result of error therefore no expression and token of a com-
mon consciousness of law which alone can lend it power,

@) BL. 11. ¢, de leg. (1. 14.)

(m) ‘Puchta 1.8, 110,

(n) See above 8, 22. note x,


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c, 121


This operation may show itself in a two-fold way.
‘First as a merely enlarging power when the expression
of the written law is indefinite or ambiguous(>) or when
upon a question of law, a determination of written law

is entirely wanting.(p) ~-This last may be especially a
necessity now in cases of municipal intercourse, in which
it is completely necessary to have some settled decision
or other while the purport of this determination may
be a matter tolerably indifferent. If such a settled
custom for such cases is wanting to a city the custom
of the city of Rome must be followed(9 a rule not based
. merely upon the importance of Rome as the first city
of the empire but still more upon the fact that it origi-
nally comprised the nation. In a time therefore in
which the nation as a whole by reason of its indefinite
extension, was less the master of a common. conscious-
ness of law, Rome might aptly as representative of the
nation have authority in the generation of a new people’s
law where this was indispensable. This prerogative
wag in the Eastern empire transferred to Constanti-
nople(*) and this was a mere result of the generally
similar position of the two cities and was by no means
justified by a like historical relation. Moreover this’
extending may appear in a different compass: some-
times as to a single hitherto unobserved side of an
institution of law already known—sometimes as the
generation of a wholly new institution, consequently as
a widening of the actual system of law. In this more
#mportant class the mores are mentioned as grounds of


(0) L. 88, de leg, (1. 3.)
(p) L, 82. pr. L. 38, de leg, (1, 8,) comp: Puchty, I. 8, 87, |
(q) L, 32. pr, de leg, (1, 3.) “ai qua in re hoc defecerit ... tune jus-
quo urbs Roma utitur servari eportet,”
(r) L. 1.8, 10.0, de vet, j.enucl. (1.17.) 8,7. J. de iatdad; (4, 11,)
L


122 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. -


origin of the cura prodigi, of the prohibition of dona-
tions between husband and wife; of the pupillary
substitution.()


Secondly the power of customary law may be exhi-
bited in opposition to the purport of a written law
whether it be by putting another in place of a text of
the written law or merely by abrogating the existing
one. This power, we have already been necessitated to
ascribe to customary law in consequence of its entire con-
formity with the expression (legis vis); it is however
expressly stated as a universal rule(¢) and what must
remove all doubt of this, is the circumstance, that cus-
tomary law has exercised this power in all ages of

‘Roman history, in the broadest way. Thus the whole
of that portion of the edict of the Praetor, by which the
jus civile and especially the law of the twelve tables is
corrected, is nothing but an abrogating customary law
of the validity of which not a single Roman has express-
ed a doubt. In like manner the operation of usus in
marriage is partially removed by customary law, just
as the second chapter of the lex Aquilia and thé inter-
rogatoriae actiones.(*) Justinian moreover has recogniz-


(s) L, 1. pr. de curat, (27. 10.) L. 1. de don. int. v. et ux, (24.1) L. 2.
pr. de vulg, et pup, subst. (28. 6.)

(t) L. 82. 8. 1. de leg. (1, 3.) ... “ quare rectissime etiam illud recep-
tum est, ut leges non solum suffragio legislatoris, sed etiam tacito con-
sensu omnium per desuetudinem abrogentur conf. Puchta ut sup.
S. 86. 90, .

(u) Cicero de invent. IT. 22, “ Consuetudinis autem jus esse putatur
id, quod voluntate omnium sine lege vetustas comprobavit. In ea
autem...sunt...eorum multo maxima pars, quae praetores edicere solent.
The misunderstandings of the earlier historians of Jaw upon this point
may now be regarded as entirely removed,

(.) Gaius 1.8.11]. L. 27.8. 4.ad L. Aquil, (9. 2.) LL. 1.8. 1.de
interrog, Act.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c. 123


ed that power of customary law in so many particular
precepts without expressing any doubt whatever to the
contrary that it is scarcely conceivable how from the
stand-point of his legislation a doubt could even have
been raised upon the matter.”) Two grounds however
have ‘often been made available in support of a different
opinion. In the first place that it was said in several
of the texts already quoted that custom prevails in
default of a written law; what so often is taken to
mean only in this default. This mode of explanation at
ail times questionable, is in the present case completely
refuted by the context.(*) In the second place a text
of the Code has more appearance of weight—custom
can never overcome a written law; but here custom
generally is not spoken of but particular customs and
these must always yield in a conflict with an absolute
written law of the country.%). All this had in Justi-
nian’s time no further significance as to propositions
of a general Roman customary law which had arisen
before his time ; since these must according to his inten-
tion either have been included in the law books or have
had no further influence atall. It was on the other
hand applicable to each subsequently arising customary
law and indeed to the already existing particular law,
so far as this could have validity according to the limi-


(w) 8,11. de j. nat, (1.2.) 8. 7. J. de injur, (4, 4.) L. 1. pr. ¢,de
ead, toll. (6.51.) L. 1.58. 10. ¢. de vet j. enucl. (1. 17.) Const, Haec
quae necess 8, 2. Nov. 89. e.15, Nov. 106.

(x) L. 82. pr. L. 38. de leg. (t. 3.) Comp. Puchta I. 8, 88. In par-
ticular such an argumentum a contrario is wholly inapplicable to the
first of these texts since the author in the words immediately following
says exactly the contrary (8. 1.)

(y) L. 2, ¢ quae sit long « cons, (8, 58,) see upon this supplement 2. of
this volume.


124 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C.


tation just mentioned. Since such a customary. law
was not included in the plan of the néw collections,
their exclusive nature could not hinder the continued
existence of that law.


Since this sort of law-sources is also mentioned in
the Canon law and the statutes of the empire, this part
of the subject is dealt with here by way of supplement.
- Tn the Canon law many texts of the Roman law are
inserted word for word; from this therefore nothing
new results.) The following propositions may be con-
sidered new and peculiar to that law :—


. 1. The custom must to be binding be rationabilis.
By this very indefinite expression although it also may
be occasioned: by texts of the Roman law, something
special seems to be here meant viz. an examination of
the materials of the contents and a, recognition of them
so far only, as they appear good and convenient and
this is the more probable as this condition is not stated
as universal but merely with reference to the case of a
conflict with the written laws. (aa)


.2.. The custom must be legitime or canonice
praescripta. (>) From this many have made out a


' @C. 4D. XI = L, 2. c. quae sit 1. consu. (8. 53.) — c. 6. D, XID.
=§. 9. J de j. nat. (1. 2.)—¢. 7. D, XIL = L. 1. ce, quae sit Lc, (8.53.)


(aa) c. 11, X. de consuet. (1. 4.) C, 1. de constit. in VI. (1, 2.) ~The
meaning of these passages is‘discussed in supplement 2.


(6b) c. 11. K, de consuet. (1,4.) ©. 3. de consuet in Vi.0.43;¢29,
de offic. ord, in VI. (1. 16.) C. 50. X. de elect. (1. 6.) In Meiirer Jurist
abbhandlungen Leipzig 1780 N. 5. who asserts that this text does speak
of a praescription but not for the establishment of a custom but for
the acquisition of a single right, will be found an enquiry on this -
matter. He however adopts the explanation given in the text at least
in regard to c. 11. X, deconsuet, Gliick 1,8, 86. Num V, has adopted


. EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &¢. 125


" practical praeseription (limitation,) the nature of which
however is not at all suitable to the establishment of a
general rule of law, and if the provision is so understood
no definite application would there be permitted, for
there exist praescriptions of very different periods of
continuance ; but here no definite time is stated. Very
probably this expression in accordance with the Roman
law must for this reason be taken.to denote merely a
long continuance generally and therefore by legitime
praescripta here is often understood longa or diuturna.


Lastly many laws of the empire make mention of
customary law but merely by ¥ way of recommendation
to the judge to conform to it without more accurate
determination of its conditions or operation.(ce)


SECTION XXVI.
EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS UPON SCIENTIFIC LAW. .


From early time, the respect for persons skilled in
law and the influence of those persons upon the
developement of law by practice, are acknowledged.()
It is visible at a glance that this influence must grow

-when the preponderance of scientific cultivation was
joined to the confidence in their practical experience.


the opinion as to the former from him. Eichhorn Kirchenrecht §, 42,
43. will have those passages understood not of a customary law proper
but of an observance 7. e, a tacit written law whence a third person would
derive rights (S, 206.) It may be that a regard to such cases has given
occasion to those expressions. It is however self-evident that all these
are used generally, thus an obscurity of ae may have been the
reason for an uncertain expression,

(cc) cc, ¢,art,-104, Cone. ord. cam, Tit, 19. provem. Tit. 71, Ree,
Imp. Nov, 8, 1065..

(a) L, 2. S. 5. de orig, jur. (1. 2.)


126 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &c.


Augustus increased and -modified this influence by
conferring upon single approved jurists the right of.
giving opinions which must be followed as written
laws (legis vice) by the judges, so long as opposing
opinions of jurists equally authorised were not brought .
forwards) By the side of these, the general undefined
authority of the juristic teachers and writers conti-_
nued—an authority which had not indeed legis vicem
but operated upon each judge merely by its innate
intellectual power, when in any case whatever either
no opinions or contradictory ones were produced.


The privileged opiniohs are mentioned by Gaius as
a still existing institution. They probably disappeared
with the scientific life of the law generally. Then as
the number of the jurists of reputation speedily dimi-
nished, these few obtained an inordinate influence upon
the practice of law, and this consideration may well
have given occasion to no privileges of this kind being
any more conferred.

However the general influence of the highly impor-


tant juristic literature was not removed with them. On
the contrary this influence of the past, living on in


(>) Gaius 1.8, 7.8. 8. J. de j, nat, (1,2.) L. 2.8. 47. de orig. jur.-
(1..2.) I distinguish therefore the Responsa, that is to say the opinions
of still living and certainly authorized jurists upon a particular case
submitted to them, from the opinions of present and earlier writers
that is to say the aggregate juristic literature, The influence of
Responsa, as a law binding the judge, wasentirely matter of positive law
and is so stated in the texts quoted. The influence of the literature
was something wholly natural and no judge was bound thereby. .
Gaius speaks of the first without intending to exclude the second.
Hugo Rgesch 8. 811 ed. 11. explains the texts quoted of the second
influence and denies or at least throws doubt upon the first. That
however seems to me wholly incompatible with the special expression
Responsa. However the settlement of this disputed question does
not belong to this place,


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 127


books, must have grown in the exact proportion that
the intellectual power of the present was lessened.
In the great. mass of this literature and the many
controverted points presented in it, the need of formal
rules for the application of it, must soon have become
felt. Isolated rules seem to have been laid down from
the time of Constantine/c} Valentinian III: however
first issued a comprehensive direction@) by means
of which the conception of a common ‘opinion of the
jurists was made practically available in a wholly other
way, than was earlier attempted by the order as to the
unanimous opinions; and this law still existed when
Justinian began to rule. However at this time the
difficulties in the application of scientific law had been
diminished but not removed by this law.(e) And this
consideration moved Justinian to a wholly new and
far more decisive measure.


Without reference to the limits drawn by the law of
Valentinian ITI, he caused te be extracted from the
‘whole range of the juristic literature what appeared
necessary for a complete view of the Jaw and particu-
larly of the practice of law. This was put together

-in a-book and promulgated as written law—all the
‘rest was abolished. Thus therefore an extract from
the jus was now elevated to a lex and what in its
original shape must have prevailed as jus no longer
existed. Moreover he entirely forbade for.the future
the arising of a new juristic literature. Only Greek
translations of the Latin text, and as mechanical aids;
short summaries of the contents of the Titles were


(c) Lf. 2, C. Th. de resp. prud. (1. 4) (newly discovered.)
(4) L. 8, (otherwise un) C. Th. de resp. prud, (1. 4.) A. D. 426.
(ec) Savigny Gesch, des R. R, im Mittelalter.


128 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &€.


permitted; if however a .special book, commenting
upon the written laws was composed this was to be
destroyed and its author rendered liable to the punish-
ment of falsificatio(f) The sole medium of the
maintenance and inculcation of legal science would
therefore be the oral instruction in the law-schools
which therefore were provided by Justinian with a
new plan of instruction.(9) Nevertheless if the prohi-
bition mentioned is taken into account, it is without
doubt what sort of instruction was meant. Certainly
not an absorption of the law books by the free intellec-
tual activity of the teachers whereby a cognate activity
would have been excited in the scholars and thus a
living science have been preserved ; for such a procedure
would have been in manifest contradiction to the aim
of the inhibition. The whole instruction must rather
have consisted in a mechanical exercise of memory, and
the services of the teacher in the matter must have
been confined, to assisting the learners in overcoming
the subjective difficulties, which ‘must have attended
their unacquaintance with a strange object-matter of
so immense a compass. A single thought was at the
foundation of all these arrangements—let the selected
and arranged intellectual product of those who went
before, be sufficient: each new production is unneces-
sary for it and can merely again destroy the work now -
established. : ,


These views may well appear to some in their literal
meaning too strange for acceptance and they hence
look for a figurative or modified meaning, as I believe
wrongly. When Justinian began to reign he probably


(A L18.12 L258. 21. L 8.8. 21. 0, de vet. j. enucl. (1. 17.)
(9) Const. Omnem. é


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMANS, &C. 129


heard voices, as loud upon the frightful confusion of -
the law and upon the urgent necessity of a thorough
reform, as Frederick II of Prussia in 1740. A fortu-
nate accident directed him to some ctear-sighted jurists
such as had not appeared for upwards of a century
and he was himself not wanting either in a knowledge
of law of his own or in activity and desire of glory.
An attempt therefore was made to remedy, what was
felt, to be the first evil, the insuperable mass of juristic
literature and the contradictions appearing init. There -
had been no “preceding experience of a similar kind,
by which the undertaking could be tested and they
might fairly therefore believe in the imperial hope of
producing in this way a condition entirely satisfactory
and in the necessity of furthering that hope by a
statutory inhibition of the recurrence of the old evil.
They had besides no reason to fear that by this inhi-
bition an actually existing intellectual life would
be suppressed, as would perhaps have happened, if
Hadrian or Marcus Aurelius had entertained a similar
purpose, for the force and culture of Justinian’s time
was sufficiently clear to every one and in it there Was
certainly nothing to be spoiled. It is true that the
threat of punishment and of the destruction of the books
is very foreign to our habits and in presence of the art
of printing and the active commerce of so many Euro-’
pean states, the mere thought of a similar procedure
would be wonderful; but if we look away from the
violent execution as. the accident of the time, the funda-
mental idea is the same self-delusion which, as deeply
grounded in the nature of men, constantly recurs in all
intellectual departments and especially in the religious,
inasmuch as we believe ourselves bound to establish, as
exclusively valid. for others, each embodiment of


130 VALUE IN PRACTICE, &c.


thought which we have brought forth by the honest -
exertion of our own force, for ever banishing error
perhaps however at the same time spiritual freedom.
Such a juristic formula of concord Justinian established
and no one was to venture to destroy the peace which
it was destined to bring. Is it for us to judge him hardly
on this matter? Our circle of vision is more widened by
the experiences of one to two thousand years and the
essentials of those thoughts of Justinian even now
dwell in those who foster expectations, so visionary.
from the composition of new codes, it is true without
the power and certainly also without the wish to bring
their designs to execution with violence so great as
Justinian sought to do.


These considerations ought not perhaps to justify
the procedure of Justinian, to which I am certainly
not inclined, but merely to place it in a milder light
especially however in such a light as to make it under-
standable, that the matters of fact, with the exhibition
of which we are at present concerned, are to be taken
literally and protected against every technical or forced
interpretation.


SECTION XXVIL


VALUE IN PRACTICE OF THE ROMAN DETERMINATIONS
UPON THE LAW-SOURCES.

Now that the expressions of the Roman law upon
the law-sources have been presented (S. 22—26.) the
question of what practical value from our stand-point
is to be ascribed to them, is to be answered. This
question relates to each state in which the reception
has once found a place and it must be conceived and
answered in the two following different applications:


VALUE IN PRACTICE, &c. 131


first—is the developement of law from the period of
‘reception to the present time to be examined and
determined according to these rules? Secondly—have
these rules binding force “as to the future cultiva-
tion of the law in such state? The first applica-
tion refers to that which we must recognize as real
contents of the now’ prevailing ‘common law—the ©
second to its possible modifications in the future. It
is however for the two applications one and the same
question to which the answer cannot turn out dif-
ferently for the two sides of it.


At the first glance nothing appears more natural
than the answering of it in the affirmative, for when
the Romaw law is of general validity why. should it
not be valid inthis important matter of the continu-
ing developement of law ? The modern writers are in
the habit, of not starting the question but of tacitly
answering it affirmatively, and on this presupposition,
of employing texts of the Roman law, under the reser-
vation, it is true, of omitting this employment wher-
ever it would be altogether too hazardous.


I will first shortly sum up the shape which the con-
sistent affirmation of this question would assume, As
for the written laws. proper (S. 28.) it would be at
least permitted to renounce the co-operation of the
senate in their composition since such a body exists, in.
the sense of the Roman empire, in no modern state;
but we must. draw from the ordinance of Theodosius 2
the exclusive distinguishing marks of a real written
law. The thing is still more important as to rescripts
of the ruler of the country in individual cases, which
must be recognized as written law by each judge, at
least in the limited manner in which they are to be


132 VALUE IN PRACTICE, &c.


received according to Justinian’s novels. Modern
writers have declared themselves to the contrary. (@)
Others hold firmly to the application of the Roman
rules, at times even without reference to the limitations
produced by the novels, while however they tacitly
ascribe to those rules a wholly different sense. For
example they pass over in silence the main thing, the
legal force in the individual case and ascribe to the
rescripts legal force merely in future like cases (®) which
never, according to the Roman rules, attached to the
rescripts but merely to the decrees (S. 23. 24.)


.As to the customary law the applicability of the
Roman law in general is not at all doubted. Only it
is sometimes found that an individual writer, when he
altogether disputes a particular application of the
customary law, which however is recognized in the
Roman law, seeks to remove that difficulty by critical
doubts as to the applicability of this law ©.


Lastly as to the scientific law (S. 26.) people are
accustomed to pass over in silence the not unimportant
law of Justinian concerning the juristic books and I
kpow not a single modern writer who asserts that
from obedience to that law, such books must even now
be destroyed. Such a want of affection for his own


(a) Miihlenbruch I. §. 35.


() Glick, 1. 8S. 96. who quotes other writers for and against his
opinion,

(c) Thus e.g. Schweitzer de desuetudine, p, 62. 538, 84. The whole
work is directed against the application of the pure desuetudo and
therefore he asserts that in this question the Roman law has no appli-
cability: a8 to all the rest of the customary law it must prevail and
actually for the nearly related question of the obrogatio by custom,


VALUE IN PRACTICE, &C: 133


work would in fact not be conceivable; and on what
ground should this law have smaller power than others
upon cognate questions ?


If we put all this together the result is that our
jurists quite arbitrarily sometimes receive and some-
times tacitly pass over the provisions contained in the
Roman law upon the law-sources. Since now an abso-
lute application of all these provisions would be wholly
impossible, there arises out of this very impossibility a
two-fold reason against any application at all—First
this proceeding is illogical and they can only protect
themselves from this reproach by supposing e. g. that
this inhibition of the juristic books has been in turn
abolished by a more recent customary law—Secondly
it is to be considered, that those precepts which are
accepted by some as still prevailing, when separated
from their connexion with those rejected, assume a
wholly different nature and must themselves become
unsuitable.


If one probes the matter more thoroughly and puts
the question why certain of these provisions, especially
such as concern written laws, ought evidently to be
regarded as inapplicable, the reason will be found in
the fact that they belong to States-law which is not
among the received parts of the foreign law (S. 1. 17.)
This reason however applies not only to legislation but
just as much to, every other mode of formation of law
in general, so that. he, who will hold firmly to this
principle, must also recognize that the Roman law is

_ not to be applied at all to the law-sources. Hence
among others, the disputed question as to the meaning
of the L. 2. C. quae sit longa consuet. is wholly unim-
portant for the practical law.

M


134 ‘VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, WC.


All that has here been said of the inapplicability of
the Roman law to the doctrine of the law-sources, is
completely true-also of the canon law.


The case would be otherwise in the German. states
with the laws of the Empire, since these had indisput-
ably the force of law for public as well as private law.
However there can be nothing to say of these in this
place since they contain absolutely nothing as to the
law-sources, except the general and indefinite recogni-
tion of a éustomary law (S. 25.) which in fact did riot
require this recognition.


_ SECTION XXVIII.
VIEWS OF THE MODERNS ON THE LAW-SOURCES.


The main points are now to be stated, on which the
views of the law-sources, which appear prevalent among
the moderns; differ from those set forth in this work.
For that purpose the bare statement of the opposition,
without reference to particular writers and without
extending into a controversy, will here be sufficient.


Legislation is very commonly put in an altogether
different relation to the law-sources. It is often consi-
dered the single true and valid ground of origin of law
beside which all the remaining ones ought to appear as
friends-in-need and had better not appear at all. Hence
likewise the science of law has a very accidental and
changing object-matter and.so dependent an existence,
that by the progress of legislation to completeness, if will
continually become less important and in an imaginable
condition of legislation must entirely disappear. In the
further developement of this fundamental view lies the
unlimited value which people in modern times have


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c. ' 135


set upon comprehensive codes and the brilliant expec-
tations which have attached to the composition of them.
It also happens that the fundamental opinion is received
by such as do not share the latter view or at least do
not bargain for such an important consequence, and
this would perhaps be found to be the opinion of the
greater part of respectable practitioners.


From legislation we will now pass to the consider-
ation of scientific law. The treatment of the early writ-
ers by the modern is often very arbitrary and unequal,
so that weight is admitted or denied to their opinions
in particular cases, without any fundamental principle
for this changeable procedure even being sought for.
In particular the opinion of the old practitioners is not
seldom regarded as if it had made an unchangeable
conclusion for all time and as if each generation could
not make good its claim to the developement of law by
innate power, as was done in each earlier time. People
then involuntarily accustom themselves to regard our
relation to those early writers, as Valentinian IIT prac-
tically established his to the times which preceded
him. This settlement however was a completely posi-
tive one which is not in itself understandable in any
age: it had there an innate ground quite peculiar in
the practical extinction of legal science as of intellectual

‘life in general, while to our age, whatever may be
thought of it in other respects, a great activity is cer-


tainly not to be denied.
As to the customary law so summary a review of the


prevalent modern opinions will not be sufficient. I
have the rather deferred until this place the definite
exposition of my own opinions upon our practical cus-
tomary law, since they can only become comprehensible
in connexion with the views prevailing elsewhere.


136 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &6¢.


According to the prevailing view customary law is
an unnatural sort of generation of law, which therefore
in order to he accepted, requires a wholly special justi-
fication. This will in republics consist in the circum-

‘stance that the same populus (S. 10,) which in a defined
way acts uniformly, is at the same time the bearer of
the law-giving power. Hence therefore each custom at
all times and of necessity carries with it the tacit
assent of the legislator to the rule put in, practice (con-
sensus tacitus specialis,) and each custom therefore. in

. consequence appears in a republic as a tacit law. Other-
wise in our monarchies in which the people which
exhibits the custom is without legislative power and
the monarch who has it, takes no part in the custom.
Even constitutional monarchy makes in this matter, no
essential difference since often no single member of the
chambers has taken any part in the custom and besides
the chambers alone without the princes can never
‘make law. In this view. therefore customary law
appears as a species of opposition of the subjects to the
ruling power, as an arrogation of a portion of the
supreme power, and so perilous an undertaking needs to
be justified with peculiar caution. This could be
sought for only in the assent of the law-giver which
however was not, as in the republic, embraced in the
custom itself but must be added to it from without.
In the countries, in which Roman law prevails; that
creates no difficulty, for the Roman law -says quite
expressly that customary law must be followed. Only
when the custom is to abolish a written law, the L. 2.
c. quae sit longa consuetudo seemed to render another
confirmation necessary and this they found in the
consensus specialis tacitus of the prince for the parti-
cular case. So there still appear two different changes


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C. 187


of view since at one time it is said—the tonsent is
already to be implied from the bare toleration of the
custom—at another however—it must be specially
shown that the law-giver has known of this custom.{«)
What has been said relates to customary law in general.
In each single case bare custom, that is to say unifor-
mity of action, is regarded as the peculiar ground of
origin of the rule of law so that, as it is supposed, this
ground of origin must always permit of resolution into
definite, individually demonstrable acts. This limited
point of view could at the best be applied to particular
customs of which alone people, for the most part, are
accustomed to think. To the numerous and important
cases in which modern customary law connects itself
with scientific law, this view is not susceptible of any
application.


These fundamental views have also had the greatest
influence upon the practical treatment of the individual,
questions which concern customary law. These relate
in part to the conditions—in part to the proof—in part
to the operation of customary law.


SECTION XXIX.
VIEWS OF THE MODERNS ON THE LAW-


SOURCES—( Continuation.)

The conditions which are ordinarily recognized for
the origination of customary law relate: entirely to the
nature of those single acts from which, it is admitted,
that that law constantly proceeds (S. 28.) These con-
ditions have consequently only an incomplete applica-


(a) Gliick 1. 8. 85. Guilleaume Rechtslehre von der Gewohnheit-
Osnabriick 1801 S. 24—27. ,


133 - VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &<


tion even to the particular customary law and evén as

to this, the single acts ought to be regarded as not

properly grounds of origin but rather as appearances or
distinguishing marks of a previously existing common
conviction of law. With these modifications however
truth may certainly be ascribed to these conditions so
that they must be separately tested and established.
In fact, as people assert, those acts must possess the
following properties in order to be adapted to the
establishment of a customary law.


1. There must be a plurality of acts. How many
was long disputed. One ought certainly not to suffice.
As a rule two also not, although exceptionally two
might avail. Lastly most have been inclined to leave all
this to the estimation of the judge, with which one may
remain satisfied. The judge will, according to the dif-
ferent quality of the acts, sometimes require more
sometimes fewer and thus be steadfast to the point of
view, that by the plurality of acts he will be guarded
against the influence of the individual and accidental
which may assume the delusive appearance of an act
proceeding from a common conviction of law.(4)

2. Uniform, uninterrupted acts; that is to say
the custom .is interrupted when among these acts
others resting upon an opposite rule have come forth.
This determination is beyond all doubt.


3. The acts must recur throughout a long period.
The length of the time was specially matter of: dispute.
Some required 100 years because once, in some place or
other, the expression longaevum has this meaning.


(a) Lanterbach I. 3. S. 36. Miiller ad Struv. I. 3. S. 20, Gliick. I. S.
86, N.1, Especially however Puchta Gewohnheitsrecht. II. 8. 79. fg.
S. 85.


‘VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C. 139°


Many more thought of the customary period of limita-
tion according to the expression of the canon law
and indeed of longum .tempus, therefore 10 years,
since of 20 years there could be no question, for the
prince or the people, against whom, as it were, this new
law was acquired, is constantly present. Only against -
the canon law, therefore against the church 40 years
were required; against sovereign princes a period
beyond memory. At a@ later time most have been
inclined to fix no definite time but to abandon all to
the discretion of the judge which is the satisfactory
method. In this matter as in that of the plurality of
acts it is of the utmost consequence to guard against
the individual, casual, transient, through the deceitful
appearance which they may assume, being falsely
regarded as indications of a common conviction of law
lying at the foundation of them.)


4. That judicial decisions may serve as such acts,
was generally recognized. On the other hand many
assert that such decisions are wholly indispensable by
a customary law; this however is rightly rejected by
most.@) For myself however, I cannot admit the
unconditional admission of decisions for this purpose.
Allowing for the difference of the cases, what has been
said above (S. 20.) of the practical works of the jurists,
is equally true as to these. If therefore the decisions
are expressly based upon a customary law, they are
weighty testimonies to its existence. - In like manner
when they merely in general recognize.a rule as true
and certain without expressing themselves definitely _


(ce) Puchta II. 8. 93. fg.


(d) Lauterbach I. 3. 8, 35. Miller ad Struv. I. 3. 8. 20. Gliick
1. 5. 86. n. v, Guilleaume ut sup. 8, 31. especially Puchta IT. 8. 31. fg.


140 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, S&C.


as to its origin. It is otherwise when they derive
a rule of law from theoretical grounds and indeed from
a false theory: in such a case the decisions have
merely a theoretical character and the existence of
' any rule in the general Consciousness, is not recogniz-
able by them.


5. Undertaking of the act in the feeling of a legal
necessity (necessitatis opinio.) If therefore many, in
the same way and for a long time, have exercised pure
liberality, no customary law can arise from that, for
the giver as well as the receiver has continually
understood that the act is voluntary and might be
left unperformed or take a different direction. This
‘condition is the most important of all and its import-
ance will be presented in connexion with the still more
definite one which immediately follows. The texts
of the Roman law in which it is expressly recognized
have already been given above (S. 25. note(@)). Judi-
cial decisions are especially adapted for the recognition
of a customary law on the ground that they can pro-
ceed merely from the conviction of the judge as to the
law and not from arbitrary will. Less adapted are
eontracts in which an element of arbitrary will always
dwells. These however may also properly serve as a
medium of recognition, of a customary law in so far as
they either set forth as true a rule of law or by their
mere sanction accept it.(@


6. The acts must not rest upon error. This con-
dition had in its support an express recognition of the
Roman law,(M however people have by it, involved
themselves in an inextricable contradiction. Since


(e) Puchta IT. 8. 33. fg.
(f) See below note (J.)


VIEWS OF. THE MODERNS, &C. 141


the rule of law must first have arisen through custom,
it was certainly not yet in existence atthe period of
the first act. However according to the foregoing rule
the first act must have been induced by the necessi-
tatis opinio ; consequently if it rests upon an error it
must not be of any account at all as to the origination
of customary law. The same is true of the second act
which now becomes the first and of the third and
every following one. The formation of a customary
law is hence, unless one of those conditions is given up,
wholly impossible. The contradiction is here so mani-
fest that in fact some have not only suffered error, but
have quite consistently regarded it as necessarily
attached to every customary law without considering
that this view is not compatible with the expression of
Celsus.9) From our stand-point no contradiction
whatever exists since the rule of law was merely mani-
fested by the custom, not generated by it; conse-
quently in the first demonstrable act the necessitatis
opimo, free of all error, might and must have been
present. Nevertheless this condition is not to be
accepted as unlimitedly true. For example when by
the side of the actually existing popular conviction,
the theoretical error has served merely as a corrobora-
tion (S. 20.,) the error does not stand in the way. It
is also exactly the same when the act has a nature so
external and in itself indifferent that an innate convic-
tion cannot properly be thought of, Thus ¢. g. it may


(g) Schweitzer de desuetudine P, 78. (Hiibner Berichtungen und
Zusitze zu Hépfner S. 164, The latter seeks to come to terms with
L. 39. de leg. by saying that it is confined to erroneous interpretation,
and denies to such the force of customary law; but in the first place
this limitation must be arbitrarily imported into the text and in the
second if every other error is no hindrance to the arising of a real
customary law, why should this be 80 ?


142 . _ VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c.


now be regarded as established that from the time of
the middle ages, a form foreign to the Roman law as
to the signatures and seals of witnesses has erroneously
crept in. This originally erroneous form has, by the
long and uniform use, in fact become a legal one.(h)


7. The acts ought to be reasonable (rationabiles.)

The texts of the canon law, from which this condition
is derived, have been already referred to above (S. 25.
note (2)). If this condition is taken in a positive sense,
as adaptation to the purpose and beneficialness of the
rule expressed in the custom, it is very hazardous to
the certainty of law to resign to the judge the decision.
upon a quality so indefinite. Hence it is more frequently
conceived in a purely negative sense so that by the
rule only customs wholly unreasonable, or contra-
-dictory of. the moral feeling would be repelled.(i) A
text of the statute for the administration of penal law
(peinlichen Gerichtsordnung),in whicha number of “bad
unreasonable” customs are abolished and disapproved
of) seems to favour this interpretation less practically
dangerous than the other. In this text however the
principle, with which alone we are concerned, that
unreasonable customs are in themselves invalid and


U


(k) Upon error in customs comp. Puchta II. 8. 62. fg.
(4) Gliick 1, S. 86, n, III, Comp. especially Puchta II, S, 49. fg.


(k) C. C. C. Art: 218 ... “As we then by our imperial power
hereby abolish, annihilate and undo and they shall not be established
for the future,” This text can the less serve for a general determina-
tion upon the enduring nature of the customary law, that the mention
of customs in itis in part merely accidental. Besides some of the
positions of law abolished by him were based not upon customs but
upon the statutory law. This text too was intended to establish in
criminal law the relation of the generat to particular laws, not the
wholly different relation of the written to unwritten law,


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c. 143


not adapted to the formation of a legal position, is not
at all stated: the Emperor rather finds it necessary to
abolish them by: his own power which presupposes
their validity up to the time of this abolition unless
one is willing to assume a very inaccurate expression
in the law.

ff these last three conditions are embraced as a
whole, there results from them the following view
based upon the nature of customary Jaw. The rule of
law arises through the common consciousness of law,
or through the immediate conviction of the truth and
independently (without external sanction) binding’
power of the rule. This conviction may manifest
itself by uniform single acts, that is to say by custom,
However these must not be attended with a conscious-
ness of the character of voluntary action as e¢. g.
liberality or also a frequently recurring delinquency in
which indeed no actor doubts as to the wrongfulness and
therefore as to the arbitrary character of his act. As
little ought they to proceed from demonstrable error
since in this case also there is absent. from them the
expression of this immediate conviction upon which
everything depends) It isa very instructive example
when a judge by oversight employs an unglossed
text of the Justinianean law, merely because in his
edition such texts are not plainly distinguished from
the others (S. 17.); even if several should follow his


(1) L, 89. de leg. (1. 8.) “ Quod non ratione introductum, sed errore
primum, deinde consuetudine obtentum est: in aliis similibus fon
obtinet.” That is to say: when the custom proceeded not from a
common conviction of law but even demonstrably from an error,
which necessarily excludes this conviction, no customary law is there-
fore to be supposed and we find therefore in those customs no reason
for deciding the future cases of like kind according to this ryle.


144 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &.


example, ‘no customary law would arise out of it. If
therefore we consider error and unreasonableness merely
as qualities of an act, by which it becomes incapable
of co-operating for the recognition of a customary law,
the condition requiring the absence of them does not
appear as different from the general condition of the
necessitatis opinio, but as a mere consequence or
developement of it. Since a correct insight into the
nature of customary law rests mainly upon this point,
it will not be superfluous, to illustrate what has here
been said, by some examples. The Roman law forbids
the taking of interest upon interest. If now in a
place this sort of usury were very common but always
artfully concealed, no customary law could in conse-
quence be accepted since from the concealment, the
absence of an honest conviction would be clear. On
the other hand it is the general usage in commerce, at
the end of a year sometimes even of a shorter period,
to close the account and carry over the balance toa
new account where it then immediately again bears
interest, although the balance itself is partly composed
of the interest of the concluded period. This is
entirely contrary to the rule of the Roman law; it is
done however openly and generally and cannot be
otherwise without destroying the simplicity of account-
ing: the aim of the Roman prohibition is nothing to
the purpose in this case. The prohibition is therefore
removed by a general custom of commerce, as to which
it is nothing to the purpose how many are able to give
an account to themselves of it in this coherent way,
since all act so with the feeling of the necessity and
legality of their procedure. If we now apprehend
these conditions according to the present exposition,


"VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c. 145


they appear applicable not merely to single acts and

particular customs but to the far more important general

customary. law of modern times. Then as to the
difference which has been above stated in the practice
of law, according to whether it arose out of a false
theory or out of the consideration of the altered
circumstances and needs (S. 20.)—this distinction is in
fact no other than the application of the principle here
unfolded. False theory is something errore non rati-
one obtentwm and hence without the capacity for
_ prevailing and operating as customary law: the prac-
tice on the contrary which has proceeded from the
necessity of our relations, has the ratio, the necessitatis
opinio, for its basis, and must consequently be valid

as real customary law, even when many an historical

error has to be intermixed with the attempt at a theo- -
retical justification of it.


- 8 Lastly many state as a special independent
condition, the publicity of the single acts. In truth
many a single act may by its publicity be specially
adapted to the laying down of a customary law and
many another by its secrecy unfit for that purpose, as
has been just shown by some examples. This is founded
on the act being, through these circumstances, more or
less adapted to be distinctive marks of an under-lying
conviction of law. These moreover, who ascribe a
peculiar importance to publicity, are led to it either by
the consensus populi or the consensus principis there-
fore by a fundamental error as to the nature of cus-
tomary law (8. 28.) According to this conception the
general requirement of publicity of acts cannot be at
all introduced into the matter(™) .


(m) Puchta IE. 8, 40. fg.
N


46 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c.


: SECTION XXX.
VIEWS OF THE MODERNS ON THE LAW-
SOURCES.—( Continuation.)

When in relation to practice we speak of the proof
of a customary law, thereby thinking of a case in
which a party avails himself of that law, the question
is, how the judge is to arrive at a conviction of it. A
satisfactory answer to this question is however only
possible by first examining the more general question,
how generally, without reference to a judge, the know-
ledge of the existence and import of a customary law
may arise.)

If we first think of the members of each society
in which customary law has arisen and continuously
lives and operates, (S. 7. 8.) the question answers itself;
their knowledge is an immediate one because the very

. essence of that law rests on the common consciousness
of law of those members. Thus far it may be said that
each customary law rests upon notoriety.(¢) Let it not
be said that this proves too much because if so there
could never be a dispute as toa customary law and
proof could never be wanted. The whole matter is as
to whom and in what scope anything is notorious,

‘Nothing is more notorious in each people than the
common language, and yet a foreigner who enters a
country often does not understand a word of that
language. So is it with the customary law as to those
who stand without the circle of that common conscious-
ness of law and whose knowledge therefore of the cus-


(a) Comp. generally Puchta Gewohnheitsrecht II. Bk. 3. cap. 3. 4.

(8) L. 36. de leg. (1. 3.) “ Immo magnae auctoritatis hoc jus habetur,
quod in tantum probatum est, ut non fuerit necesse scripto id compre-
hendere.


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &Xc. 147


tomary law can be merely a MEDIATE or artificial one.
Only we must not think as to this of foreigners only,
since it applies, certainly to all minors and as to many
legal principles also to women; therefore even within
the people we must separate the knowing or skilled in
customary law from those who take practically no part
in the common consciousness, although their jural
relations are none the less subject to the customary law. .
In truth the number of these skilled persons may
greatly differ according to the contents of the indivi-
dual rules and even according to the disposition and
degree of culture of the people; persons so. skilled in
customary law are by no means to be regarded as
jurists proper. The ancient German institution of the
village courts (Schéffengerichte) which were composed
of skilled persons, rested upon such a state of imme~-
diate recognition of the customary law.

It is now to be explained how the mediate know-
ledge of the customary law, the only one accessible to
them, may arise in those who live outside the circle of
those skilled in that law but who may be incited to
the acquisition of it sometimes through their own
interests and sometimes by a need of learning it, uncon-
nected with self-interest. They may attain to this
knowledge in the first place, through single cases of the
usage of it and the qualities, which those acts of usage
must have, to be adapted to such a purpose, have -
already been defined (S. 29.) In the. second place—
through the testimony of those who as skilled persons
have an immediate knowledge. Such testimony may
be sought and rendered for the transient need of a
single, at that time important case ; it may be deposited —
in records of which the activity is more extended and
enduring.


148 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C.


Such testimonies for a single necessity of the present
were the memorials (Weisthiimer)(¢) drawn, up by the
old courts. Such a procedure was not unknown to
the Romans. Justinian had been petitioned to make
a new law upon the foenus nautiewm, or as we call it,
_ bottomry. He ordered a functionary to examine upon

oath as witnesses the persons, who practised this busi-

ness, as to the rules abserved in it and in accordance
with their depositions, he promulgated a law by which
the customs explored were in substance established.(d)
However in our time, such an examination of the cus-
tomary law may be occasioned by the need of an
individual case, as will be presently shown when the
duty of the judge in reference to a doubtful customary
law is discussed.


To the records which prove a customary law for
wider circles and future times belong first many
Weisthiimer which were not occasioned by the require-
ments of a single case. Further among such records are
to be numbered in great part the old popular laws, the
later law-books, the German city and country laws, the
statutes of the Italian cities and the French coutumes.
In truth written law is by way of extension often
found intermixed in those heterogeneous collections ;
in especial they have in later times operated in the


- (c) Eichhorn deutsches Privatrecht S. 5.11. 26. Many might believe
such a procedure possible only in times as simple as those of the old
village courts, not in our time. England serves as an example to the
contrary where they are accustomed to examine popular matters of all
aorts, by the examination of practical persons of the most different
orders. The forms in use there might be partially employed among us
where the establishment of a customary law is in question.


(d) Nov. 106. Conf, Puchta I, S. 133.


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c. 149


same way as written laws proper; so that their original
destination, of availing as recorded customary law, has
fallen into oblivion.


It would be desirable that in the spirit of these col-
lections of earlier times, care had in our day been taken
- for the diffusion and preservation of the existing cus-

tomary law. This is the real task of the so called
provincial statute books, which are distinguished from
the general codes, especially by their not being concerned
with the whole system of law but merely with matters
with which théir authors have some direct acquaintance,
so that they have a complete thoughtful mastery over
the object-matiter. It is however perilous to treat such
a work as something to be done at a glance, to be
concluded like an ordinary business which must be
promptly dispatched ; it would be better if as some-
thing constantly progressing, independently growing, it
is brought into connexion with the superior tribunals.
In such a matter the entire success depends upon the
right selection of the workmen, in which two possible
kinds of one-sidedness may become pernicious—the
-preference for thé centralisation and the uniformity of
the law by which in truth the convenience of-the judge
and the inspection of the official machine will be much
assisted ; on the other side however an affection for the
peculiar and the ancients as such. This affection is
beautiful and good, but the precise truth is still finer
and the care for the wants of the living present, is better
still.’ If such a work is really to succeed, it must be
undertaken in the same way as the Weisthiimer were
formerly composed; in particular a careful enquiry
among persons not jurists is not to be despised, since in
’ them a defect in scientific training will be often accom-


150 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C-


panied with the clearest knowledge of the essence of
the jural relation itself.


From this general treatment of the different modes
of attaining to a knowledge, we now pass on to the
special situation of a judge who has to decide according
to such alaw. The following view is very prevalent
on this matter. Customary law is a matter of fact like
every other appertaining to the establishment of a right
e. g. the existence of a contract or a testament. The
"judge accepts no matter of fact which is not alleged and
proved by a party; hence no one can doubt that as to
the burden of proof and the conduct of the proof in
respect to the existence of a customary law the same
rules apply as in respect to other matters of fact, as
contracts and testaments. Many have in truth modified
this view in the application of it and have thereby
diminished its pernicious character ; it should however
much rather be entirely rejected.(¢)


Each jural relation has a two-fold basis, one general
and the other special. The former is the rule of law—
the latter consists in the matters of fact which are the
medium through which the rule is applied to the par-
ticular case (S. 5.) The rule of law the judge may and
is bound to know (jus novit curia); of the matters of
fact he can and must know nothing until a party has
alleged them and brought them to the proof. This
contrast remains the same, let the rule of laiv have pro-
ceeded from written laws, customary law or science.
That theory therefore rests upon an interchanging
of the two foundations of the jural relation, since what
is true only of the knowledge of the particular matters


(2) Puchta I. S. 105, II. 8. 151. fg. Comp, also Lange Begriindungs
lehre des Rechts Erlangen 1821,


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C. ISL


of fact of the individual case, is transferred to the
knowledge of the rule of law, the necessity remarked
of proof according to definite rules of procedure is true
of those matters of fact only and it is in order to denote
this important peculiarity that we only call them
' matters of fact, when we use this expression in a tech-
nical sense. This expression consequently, as happens
with every technical narrowing, is of an ambiguous
nature and this ambiguity has originated or at least
confirmed the confusion mentioned; for in a more.
general sense the arising of the customary law may of
course be called a matter of fact and that is done by
the advocates of that theory. If they would however
be consistent in this matter, they must apply the same
procedure to the written laws also ; for the written law
too rests upon the fact of the promulgation and the
judge therefore must not apply any law, of which the
existence and contents have not been stated and proved
by a party. This however has never been asserted by
any one, although written law and customary law con-
sidered from a general point of view, have on this
matter exactly the same nature. If in particular it
should be attempted to base the theory here explained,
which may also have some truth in it, upon the Roman
law, this could not be allowed since in fact the Roman
law lays down no provisions as to the proof of custom-
ary law. :


However a true element is contained in this funda-
mentally erroneous theory and we can only hope .
completely to remove the error mingled with it by
recognizing this truth and confining it within its true
limits.(9) Our legal condition has become an artificial


(g) Comp. Puchta Gewohnheitsrecht II. 8, 165, foll.


152 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c.


one; we require from the judge a scientific study of
law which must be proved by defined tests and by
which his position becomes-a wholly different one from
that of the old popular judges (Schéffen.) These in
- each case bore witness to the’ law living in the people,
of which an immediate consciousness dwelt in them as
in all othérs, perhaps with the sole difference that by
greater practice it did'so more purely and completely
in them, than in others, As on one side we require of ©
the modern judge far more than was required of the
ancient, we must on the other side depress our expect-
ations. He is to decide with the-aid of science '
not acquired without the expenditure of many powers,
hence we cannot expect that, like the old popular
judges, he will have obtained an immediate conscious-
ness of law through the experience of life(*) Hence
. it follows that our modern judge must have quite a
different relation to the part of the law which has
arisen from written law or science, from that which he
bears to that which has proceeded from customary law.
The written and scientific law, he may and must
know and he violates: his duty where he decides
wrongly from unacquaintance with them; he is not so
responsible in the case of the customary law. The
party therefore, who wishes to secure that a rule of
customary law should not to his damage be overlooked,
musk point out this rule to the judge and withal prove


(A) In truth this difference is partly grounded upon the circumstance
that we have received a foreign law, which by its nature renders a
scientific study necessary ; it would however be erroneous to seek the
main ground in this alone. The English have no foreign law but the
mass of their Acts of Parliament and precedents, is so enormous, that
the necessary study of them gives to the English judges quite a
different character from that of the popular judges, just as among us

“the study of the Roman law does.


o)


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C. 158


O


it to him; if he neglects the one or miscarries in the
other, he must ascribe the loss to himself. and in
general no reproach attaches to the judge.


In this therefore consists the unmistakeable prac-
tical resemblance between customary law and true
matters of fact proper ;-since these also must be alleged
and proved. However this similarity is very different
from an entire concordance since together with this
similarity there subsist the following very important
practical differences) Facts a judge must never supply
unless a party brings them forward; he must and will
take notice of customary law when he has merely by
accident a knowledge of it.. Matters of fact must be
brought forward at a definite period of the case and be
proved according to the prescribed rules and forms of
procedure ; customary law may in any position of the
case have an influénce upon the decision, and upon the
mode of receiving evidence of it, the judge has complete
discretion. ‘Customary law is in this respect exactly like
foreign laws upon which the decision of many a case
may be dependent. The knowledge.of them is not
required from the judge, and the party must allege and
prove them, exactly as hag been here observed of cus-

tomary law therefore, without their being put exactly’
on the same footing as matters of fact proper.


If in a case customary law is relied upon the judge
will proceed in obtaining a knowledge of it according
to an unfettered consideration of the circumstances.
He may derive his conviction from single cases of the
using of a rule of law and the necessary quality of
such cases has already been established above (S. 29.)


(¢) Puchta ‘II. S. 125. fg. S. 135. fg. He quotes other writers who
approve of this procedure. Comp. above note (¢,)


154 - VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C.


He may also examine upon its import such persons as

have an immediate skill in customary law; these must

then be regarded not so much witnesses as experts

since they are not interrogated upon an object-matter

cognizable by the senses.(4) It would not be right to
regard this proceeding as an immediate application of
the law of Justinian which speaks thereof (note (4));
since Justinian does not say what the judge is to do in
order to learn a customary law, but what he himself
has done, in order to prepare a written law correspond-
ing with the customary law in a particular case.
However in as far as the judge follows this example he
acts certainly in the spirit of our written laws, and so
far also the novel quoted may serve as a justification
of this procedure. Suppose that the same rule of
customary law, which is at present relied upon and dis-
puted in a casé, had already been made available in an
earlier case and that the same or another judge after
careful examination had recognized it as real, this
earlier decision would be a weighty authority, an
official proof as it were, by which the present new
examination would be rendered much easier or com-
pletely dispensable with ; and the more so that the con-
tradiction of the opponent in that earlier case must have
sharpened the attention of the judge who tésted. it.

Hence Ulpian rightly advises the judge to institute an
enquiry after such earlier precedents as to the cus-
tomary law at present disputed.(/)


(%) Puchta IT. 8. 125. foll. He also cites earlier jurists who approve
of this procedure—Comp. above note (c.)

(2) L. 3. 4. de leg. (1. 3.) “Cum de consuetudine civitatis vel pro-
vinciae confidere quis videtur: primum quidem illud explorandum
arbitror, an etiam contradicto aliquando judicio consuetudo firmata sit.
Comp. Puchta I. 8. 96. II. 8, 129. fg. Many have erroneously wished


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C. 155


We ought not however to forget that this somewhat
anomalous treatment of customary law in comparison
with other law-sources, is based not upon the nature of
that law itself but on the unavoidable incompletenesses
of our legal condition for which we are not responsible
but must fill up as well as we can. Hence it is necessary
to limit these anomalies, constantly regarded as succe-
danea, within as narrow bounds as possible. There can-
_ be no question of them first as to the customs belonging
to the general.law, since these have without exception
passed through the medium of scientific working
‘up and recognition and therefore bear on them no
longer the popular character which is. the ground
of the difficulty here set forth. If therefore a party
with the contradiction of his opponent asserts that a
nudum pactum is a cause of action or that the leges
restitutae in the Code as also the political principles of
the Roman law have no validity in practice, these are
really two propositions of customary law; but no —
judge will.apply a process of proof by the searching
out of single cases of the use of those propositions or ~
by the -examination of skilled witnesses upon them.
. By this it is seen that the application of those ano-
malies is confined to particular customary law, and they
would fall out of use in this too, if, by the measures

described above as desirable, precautions are taken for
" the collection and recording of the existing customary
law in general. If such collections were made in our
days, a doubt upon the rules could scarcely arise since
the very collections will for the most part receive a
statutory confirmation.


to deduce from this passage the necessity of. judicial decisions to the
establishment of a customary law. ie


156 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c.


_ Lastly as to the operations of customary law, this

law must be put on the same footing generally as writ-
ten laws sin¢é this similarity was expressly recognized
in-the Roman law which has been admitted as the
rule in this matter.. In each single case of customary
law the operation might display itself in two ways, ©
according to whether for that very question of law, a
written law was already in existence or not. In the
latter case no difficulty arose because on that point, cus-
tomary law indisputably enlarged the incomplete legis-
lation. In the former case, when the customary law
contradicted a written law, the principle of equality
directed the preference always to be given to the newer
of these two laws without distinction between written
law and customary. On this matter, it is trué, the
L. 2. C. quae sit longa consu. has raised some doubt.
However most have ‘constantly allowed to customary
law the power of modifying earlier laws and have
merely asserted an exception in certain cases by reason
of that text of the code.m) In modern times however
many have availed themselves of the following dis-
tinction between the question of the bare abolition of a
written law by non-use (deswetudo) and the supplanting
of it by a customary law which sets another rule in its
place (consuetudo obrogatoria.) The latter is admitted
without hesitation, but the first to be wholly rejected.()
This distinction however is first not even in appearance
based upon the text of the Code for, if they will take |


(m) Comp. the appendix 2,

(n) The ample defence of this view is the aim of Schweitzer de desue-
tudine Lips 1801, In favour of the same view expresses himself |
Hiibner Berichtigungen und Zusitze to Hopfiner S. 159. The right

“view is very satisfactorily explained by Puchta Gewobnheitsrecht II.
8S. 199. fg.


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c. 157


this literally, both cases are alike rejected : further the
customary law, which establishes a new rule e, g.
increases or diminishes the punishment of a -written |
law, just as much vanquishes the written law, as such
a customary law as merely removes the penal law, since
it makes the formerly punishable act not punishable.
In the nature of customary law too, there exisis no
ground for this distinction. Something is to he sure con-
‘cealing itself behind the expression deswetudo which has
nothing to do with customary law viz. the non-appli-
cation of a written law during a long period of time,
because plainly no case had occurred for the application.
In such an intermission no generation of law has
disclosed itself and consequently no customary law
can exist therein. This could rather only be admitted
if such cases had actually arisen and. nevertheless the -
application of the written law been intermitted. Then.
moreover there exists no ground in fact for admitting
a smaller power against a written law of a genuine
proper custom of not applying it, than of that custom
which sets up another positive rule instead of the
written law. Properly speaking that desuetudo may
be so comprehended as that another rule is substituted
by it. When e. g. the prohibition of compound interest
is abolished as to running commercial accounts, there
is in truth first of all a desuetudo: but this has the
immediate consequence that in such cases the more
general rule of law becomes applicable by which all
contracts as to interest, not specially pene are
considered valid.


A modification of the operation is introduced when

a particular custom isin conflict with the interest of

the state or with an absolute general written law of
- oO


~ 158 EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &c.


the land. All force must here be denied to the custom
even when it is newer than the law and this principle
follows not merely from the correct explanation of the
text of the Code quoted but also from the nature of
‘the relation of a single part of the state to the
whole.) Thus for example a new law of usury must
be generally applied, and no particular custom, let it
have arisen before or after that waitten law, must
hinder the application of it.


’ SECTION XXXI.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW .CODES UPON THE LAW-
SOURCES.

The views of modern writers here explained could
not remain without influence upon the codes which
have arisen in our time and it is now to be stated how
the law-sourves. are regarded from the stand-point of
these codes.


The Prussian Landrecht, the oldest among them,
first abolishes the whole common law hitherto prevail-
ing and puts itself alone in the place of it: and this
abolition was quite logical because all that was service-
able of the old law was to be admitted into the code.(@)
For the future the mode is first defined in which laws
are to be composed and promulgated.®) This also
was consistent because the Landrecht incorporated
many portions of states-law; only these provisions
were some time afterwards found quite insufficient and
were replaced by others. The hitherto prevailing gene-


(c) Comp, the appendix 2,
(a) Publications patent S, 1.
(6) L, R. Einleitung. (S. 7—11.}


EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, Sc. 159


ral customary law was included in the abolition of the
common law. The particular customary law was to be
collected and within two years, so far as it was useful,
put together beside the provincial statutes in the
provincial codes. What, was not admitted into them
was only to have validity so far as the Landrecht in
single passages refers to local customs or should, be
enlarged by them.(¢) As to the future arising of a new
customary law, nothing is determined ; doubtless this
was merely permissible on the two alternative pre-sup-
positions mentioned, therefore merely as particular _
customary law. Lastly on scientific law it is said “no
reference is to be made in future decisions to the opini-
ons of jurists or former expressions of judges.”@ By
the expressions of judges certainly precedents and not
decisions having the force of res judicata are meant,
although the expression might be referred to both sorts
of operation. That to these, as to the opinions of jurists,
no regard is to be paid, has certainly only the sense
that no force binding and similar to that of statutes
shall be- ascribed to them, since in truth no law can
prevent the influence of them upon the view and
conviction of the future judge, therefore the perhaps


. unconscious regard to them.


‘The French code, just as logically contains no direct


"determination upon these object-matters because it does
‘not in general extend to the public law. The abolition, of


the hitherto prevailing foreign law, of the royal ordi-
nances, as well-as of the local laws, was expressed in a
special written law.(¢) The code itself contairis merely


(c) Publikation’s patent 8.7. L. R. Einleitung S. 3. 4,
(d@) L. R. Einleitung 8. 6.. : 7
(e) Loi du 21 Mars 1804 “& compter du jour ou les lois composant


160° EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &C.


the important indirect determination that no judge
inst refuse his decision by reason of the obscurity or
incompleteness of the laws.(f) This is a direction to the
judge in- such a case to help. himself how he can;
against the misuse of this right the court of cassation
is a protection, so that in thisalso a system consistently
carried out is perceptible. The eode besides in some
few doétrines (servitudes and letting and hiring) refers
t6 local: customs and regulations.(9) Of the’ future
generation of law nothing-is said: doubtless however

it is intended that a general customary law should not
arise in future, a particular. one merely in the few cases
in which the code even now refers to local customs.


The Austrian code embraces the abolition of the
common law and of customs also by name in the patent
of introduction of 1811. In the code itself nothing is
determined as to legislation for it is entirely limited to
private law. Customs are only to avail in the matters
on which the code refers to them. Of judicial decisions
it is merely said, that they have not the force of a
written law and that they cannot be extended to other
cases or persons, (/)


Of all these determinations the least important are


le code ciyil sont exécutoires, les lois romaines, les ordonnances, Jes
coutumes générales ou locales, les statuts et reglements ont cessé d’avoir
force de loi générale ou particuliére dans les matidres qui sont l'objet
de ces lois.” Coutumes générales ou locales means not at all general
or particular customary law but provincial or state law without the
distinction of written or unwritten. Customary law is called usage.
(f) Code civil art. 4, .
(9) Code civil art, 645. 650. 663, 671. 674. 1736, 1754. 1758, 1777—


Art. 1185, 1159, 1160 only have the appearance of belonging to
this place,


(A) Austrian Code, &. 10. 12.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &c. 161


those which concern legislation, since what is important.
in this matter is dispatched elsewhere and not in the
general code; itis the same with what concerns custom-
ary law because this sort of law-forming, in so far as
it is conceived as purely popular and independent of the
scientific law, scarcely presents itself in modern. times,
Important on the contrary is the relation, in which, in
each of these states, the particular is. placed to the
general law. This however is beyond the scope of our
treatise. The most important of all is the relation of
the codes to the scientific law, that, is to say, on the one
side—the continuing influence, of literature and the
practice of the courts; on the other—the mode in
which the new law is to be reecived and worked-up
by the order of judges; and by no means how this relation
is expressly determined in the codes, since this is little
or not at all, but how it was thought of, expected and
prepared for and what it has in fact become. A
remarkable difference is shown in this matter (S. 21.)
In Prussia the whole reform had no political motive
but simply the pure benevolent aim of improving &
faulty condition and of putting something truly good
in place of it. The most perceptible evil was connected
with the condition of the juristic literature. In this
were found indeed learning and a spirit of enquiry,
therefore much good material but little coherence ; and '
in particular the practical part of legal science had
lagged behind the general culture of the time and had
ceased to be respected. It seemed advantageous, even
necessary, that the connexion with this literature should
entirely perish. It is therefore manifest that thoughts
similar to those, which Justinian once cherished, lay at
the foundation of ‘the whole undertaking (8. 26.),
merely with the difference which necessarily resulted


162 EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &.


from the freer and more intellectual condition of our
time. For that reason no attempt was made at a simi-
lar suppression of all science. A new jurisprudence
was rather to spring from the new code as a basis; to
this the great fulness and the very teaching tone of the
code were directed. ‘The negative part of this expec-
tation was immediately fulfilled since the connexion
with the earlier jurisprudence has in great part disap-
peared. A new legal science however seemed for a
period of forty years not willing to arise. A few years
ago, for the first time a remarkable activity has been
developed in this department which authorizes the
happiest expectations. To what extent the proper aim
of the new legislation, that of exclusively and com-
pletely governing practice has been attained, would only
be determinable by a comparison of the views prevail-
ing in the individual courts; for such a comparison
however literary material has been for a long time
wanting. Meanwhile an excellent beginning has now
been made in furtherance of this end.@


1


It was far otherwise in France (S. 21.) Their having’
found the state of law bad or intolerable was not the
motive to the new legislation, but it appertained to the
natural developement of the Revolution. Its effort was
especially directed to the destruction of the old his-
torical relations, and especially the difference of the
provinces, and this levelling dissolution of all local
differences in an indivisible France was now to be
effectuated also in the department of private law ; that
was the main object of the code. Now before the
Revolution the theoretical part of legal science had ©


() Simon and Strumpff Rechtsspriiche preussicher Gerichtshéfe.
Berlin 1828. fg. 8.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &C. 163


stood much lower than in Germany, the practical part
on the contrary higher. Judicial eloquence, the con-
nexion with the social culture of the great capital, the
lustre and influence of the Parliament, had all worked
together to a higher cultivation in the order and activity
of judges and advocates and by this also had preserved
for them remarkable respect. By the composition of
the code’ they did not intend to destroy the juris-
prudence which had thus arisen; they rather counted
upon its undisturbed continuance and this presup-
position may have been the very reason of their often
making such short work of the most important institu-
tions of law. The practical result: however entirely
harmonizes with the supposition. Thé new juristic
literature stands in such unbroken connexion with the
earlier that one would hardly believe that between |
them lies so important a fact as the appearance of a
code. . Indeed there is perhaps no side of public life in
France, which has been fundamentally so little shaken
and changed, as the administration of private law.


Thus in this matter also, the different spirit of the
nations with their special excellences and weaknesses
is verified. Certainly therefore those, upon whom the
supreme leadership of each of them is incumbent, will
do well to think of their special want and at the same
time to take notice of the powers to be counted upon
in them for the effecting of great things. To descend to
particulars—in Germany it would not be advisable to
leave to itself the developement of law in a way similar
to what happened in the middle ages and even later,
and to that in which modern practice arose. On the
other side it would be just as little advisable that this
matter should be looked after by the highest function-
aries (in short the ministry of justice) according to the


164 EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &¢.


_ customary official mechanism which requires that every .
current matter should be dispatched ag well as it may. .
It is rather tobe recognized that the end cannot be
attained by science alone, just as little however by
-practice alone, but only by the two being connected
and pervading each other. This might happen in each
large state by a written law commission fogmed of
scientific jurists and experienced practitioners who
should be in constant active connexion with the
superior courts and must through these collect the
experiences of the law occurring in life. By means of
such a contrivance would be done consciously, and
th@efore with greater success, what in the earlier
centuries was done unconsciously. This contrivance
would effect, with an entire difference of external form
but similarly as to inner nature, that developement
which was effected in the Roman law by the annual
_ revisionof the Praetorial edict. Howeverthis observation
is only applicable to that developement of law which is
effected by the organic power dwelling in-it, therefore
by unfolding from within (S. 7.) Much too may in this
way be conveniently and satisfactorily accomplished,
which must otherwise devolve on legislation (S. 18.)
That this position is no mere arbitrary invention but
verified by experience and in the main, (though often
without clear consciousness) recognized is proved by
‘the example of such countries as England and France
in which the right of legislation® is exercised by the
artificial co-operation of different powers ; since however
often these single powers show their jealousy of every
diminution of their share in that important right, that
tacit formation of law still exists in them, so much out
of the region of possible dispute, that those powers


_ EXPRESSIONS OF THE NEW CODES, &c. 165


~ have left it undisturbed. Only whenever a new deter-
mination. of law presents special political relations, it of -
. necessity devolves upon the rigid form of legislation ;

still more.so however where the law is changed in so


comprehensive and decisive a manner as is done in the:
code Napoleon.


166 CONCEPTION OF INTERPRETATION, . &¢.


CHAPTER IV,
INTERPRETATION OF WRITTEN LAWS,


SECTION XXXII.
CONCEPTION OF INTERPRETATION.
DIVISION INTO LEGAL AND DOCTRINAL,


Up to the present point the contents of the law-
sources have been regarded as the independent rule of
law—consequently as a something given (datum.) If
this rule is to_pass over into life it is necessary that

_something should be done on our part, that we take it
upon us in a definite manner. This reception may lead
to the most various applications—in the jurist to the
cultivation of sciegce in multifarious forms—in the
judge to decisions and their execution—in the indivi-
dual to the direction of his life-relations in a definite
shape. The peculiarity of such special developements
is foreign to our task ; as common to them all however, °
a definite way of accepting the contents of the law-
sources lies at the basis and this common foundation is
to be explained in the present section.


That which is required on our side is an intellectual
activity, therefore, however simple it may often appear,
a scientific employment, a beginning and foundation of
legal science. This was spoken of above as a principle
co-operating in the generation of law ; here however it
appears in a reversed way inasmuch as it takes up and
brings to definite consciousness the law. which has
arisen independently of it.


CONCEPTION OF INTERPRETATION, &C. 167


Such a taking up of the law is conceivable and
necessary as to all the sorts of law-sources. However
as to the customary and the scientific law, it is. a work
of a simpler nature. Upon the nature of these kinds of
origination of law very influential errors exist with
which we have dealt- above. If these are recognized
and avoided, the intellectual task does not need an
explanation going into details. It is otherwise with the
written laws in which in fact this task is often of a
very complicated character. On this ground the present
section has received the special designation of THE
INTERPRETATION OF WRITTEN LAWS.


The free intellectual activity embraced in the task
may be defined as the recognizing of the written law in
its truth, so far that is, as its truth is cognizable by the
application of a regular procedure. It is necessary to:
each written law, if it is to enter into life, and in this
its general necessity, lies likewise its justification. Its
applicability is not at all, as many suppose; conditioned
by the wholly accidental circumstance of the obscurity
of a written law (S. 50.) It may of course become, in
consequence of that obscurity, especially important and
fruitful in consequences ; but that quality of the law is
an imperfection and it is necessary to set out with the
examination of the healthy condition that we may find
safe counsel as to the faulty condition. On the other
hand however that activity is likewise not at all excluded
by a high degree of obscurity.@) We must rather assert
that, in accordance with the general nature of the judge’s
office, the obscurity of a written law ought never to
deter him from forming a definite opinion upon the


(a) The connexion of this opinion with the directions of the Justini-
anean law van only be rendered clearer below. Comp. 8. 48.


168 INTERPRETATION OF SINGLE LAWS, &C.


import of the law and from pronouncing a decision
accordingly. For’the facts of a case may also be in the
highest degree doubtful, without the judge for that
reason being allowed to refuse his decision. Between
the two elements of the decision, the rule of law and
matters of fact, there is indeed in this point of view no
essential difference. The express prescription of the
French law therefore, which forbids the judge to refuse
his decision, by reason of a defective, obscure or
insufficient law, is quite in conformity with the general
nature of the judge’s office.


In one case however that unfettered activity is
entirely excluded: when namely the meaning of one
law has itself become again the object of a new rule of
law. If therefore it is determined by a new written
law or even by a genuine customary law, how the older
law ought to be understood, that free activity is entirely
excluded, and the older law must be conceived and
applied in the sefise prescribed even by one who may
be, so far as he is concerned, convinced of the incorrect-
ness of this interpretation. The moderns call this,
according to whether. it rests upon a written or a cus-
tomary law, the AUTHENTIC and USUAL INTERPRE-
TATION both together the LEGAL, which they oppose to
the DOCTRINAL or in other words the above described
unfettered .or scientific activity. The mode of concep- -
tion, which is the basis of these technical expressions,
is so far right when one looks only at the final aim,


(6) Code civil art. 4.

(c) This interpreting customary law will always immediately take
upon itself the nature of the scientific law (S. 14—20.) For a general
consciousness of the people, which should have for its object-matter a
particular written law, is only conceivable in very rare cases.


INFERPRETATION OF SINGLE Laws, &c. 169


that namely of recognizing the contents of the written
law. Then every means to this end is called interpre-
tation and this conception moreover underlies the
division now mentioned. When one on the other hand —
looks at the essence of the process, he must necessarily
set out from the conception of interpretation above set
forth since this is presented as the general and neces-
sary one by the very destination of the written law ;
since every written law is to enter into life, which is
at first only possible through intellectual conception of
it, it can certainly not be regarded as the natural con-
dition that each written law should be succeeded by
another determining its meaning; indeed if this event
were natural, a free activity would at first, up to the
appearance of the new law, be indispensable. If one now
proceeds from the fundamental conception of interpre-
tation as a free activity, the so called legal interpretation.
does not appear ‘as a co-ordinate species of the same
genus but rather as a pure contrast, as the exclusion or
inhibition of that free activity altogether. And this
conception proves itself to be the right one, because
in it the true and undeniable relation of the rule and
the exception stands out in the- most distinct manner.
Hence from this time the so called doctrinal interpre-
tation will alone be understood by interpretation’ in
general. Modern writers have in truth in this matter
entirely reversed the relation of rule and exception.
All interpretation, it has been asserted, is according to
its nature a sort of legislation and ean only be confided.
to individual officials or even to private hands, by delega~
tion the part of the supreme power.@ This assertion
is connected with other representations of modern
writers, according to which interpretation does not


(d@) Zacharii Hermeneutik des Rechts Meissen 1805. §, 161-165.
P


170 INTERPRETATION OF SINGLE LAWS, &¢.


remain within the limits of a pure genuine compre-
hending of the written law but in fact becomes a
modifier of it; this may properly be more fully spoken
of lower down.


Interpretation is an art, and education for it is
furnished by the admirable models of ancient and
modern times of which we possess a great wealth.
More defective is that which tp to the present time has
been expounded as the theory of the matter. This
inadequacy of the theory heretofore received is acci-
dental: it is however important that one should not .
delude oneself as to the general value of any theory,
even of the best ; for this art, just as little as any other
whatever, admits of being imparted or acquired by
means of rules. We can only by the examination of
excellent models explore wherein their excellency lies ;
hence moreover we shall sharpen sensibility- to that on
which every interpretation depends and learn to direct
our efforts to the right point. This and the avoiding
of many possible wrong roads is what in this, as in
every art we must hope to obtain by the theory. :


We shall again have to enter upon the important
question whether the directions of the Roman law upon
interpretation are of binding force where this law
prevails. This question was above stated and answered
im the negative as to the developement of the law
itself. Here it concerns the bearing of the single law
to the sources and hence the two questions, although
unmistakeably related, may nevertheless receive a
different answer. However an exhaustive answer to
the question is not yet possible in this place. For this
reason the expressions of the Roman law will be quite
provisionally used in the exposition of this doctrine ; it


INTERPRETATION OF SINGLE Laws, &c. 171


will however in the nieantime remain quite undeter-
mined whether they are to have the force of binding
laws or merely of a weighty authority.

The task of this chapter has. two parts: first the
interpretation of the isolated Jaws, then that of the
circle of sources as a whole. Since this is destined
for the complete domination of law, a unity as well as
an exhaustive whole must be found init. The first
requirement makes it necessary to remove all contra-
dictions, the second to fill up all gaps.


SECTION XXXIIL
A.—INTERPRETATION OF SINGLE WRITTEN LAWS.
FUNDAMENTAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION.

Every written law is destined to the establishment
of the nature of a jural relation, therefore to the
expression of any thought whatever, be it simple or
complex, by which the existence of that jural relation
may be protected against error and arbitrariness. ~


If this end is to be reached, those who come into
‘contact with that jural relation must conceive that,
thought in its purity and completeness. This is done
by their in thought placing themselves upon the
stand-point of the legislator and artificially repeating
in themselves his activity, that is causing the law to
originate again in their thought. That is the business
of interpretation which we may therefore define as the
reconstruction of the thought@ dwelling in the law.
In this way only is it possible to obtain a sure and


(a) I use the word THouvcuT because I find it express in the most
definite manner the intellectual import of the law. Others use, not
less properly, the expression sense. On the other hand, onyzcr is to be


172 INTERPRETATION OF SINGLE LAWS, &c.


complete insight into the meaning of the law and only
by this means is the aim of the law to be arrived at.


Thus far the interpretation of written laws is not
different from the interpretation of every other thought
embodied in expression as is done in philology for
example. That, which is peculiar to it, is shown
however when we separate it into its constituent parts.
Thus we must distinguish in it four elements; a
grammatical, logical, historical and systematic. —


The grammatical element of interpretation has for
its object-matter the word which is the medium of the
transition from the thought of the legislator to ours.
It therefore consists in the explanation of the phrase-
ology used by the law-giver.


The logical element depends upon the dismemberment
of the thought, therefore upon the logical relation in
which its several parts stand to one another.


The historical element has for its object-matter the
condition of the jural relation presented, as determined
by the rules of law, at the time of the written
law in question. Into this condition. the written law
is to enter in a defined manner and that element will
bring to view the nature of this entrance—that which
by this written law has been newly inserted in -
the law.


The systematic element lastly is concerned with the
innate connexion in which all the institutions and rules
of law are bound up into a great unity (S. 5). This
connexion, as well as the historical, was likewise in the |


avoided, because it is ambiguous since it may also have reference to the
aim of the law lying outside its contents upon which the law will have
an influence. The Romans use interchangeably the expressions mens
and sententia.


INTERPRETATION OF SINGLE LAWS, &C. 173


eye of the legislator, and we can only then therefore
completely understand his thought, when we make
clear to ourselves in. what relation this written law
stands to the entire system of law and how itis practi-
cally to enter into the system, (3) ;


Through the medium of these four elements the
insight into the import of the written law is accom-
plished. They are not therefore four species of inter-
pretation, among’ which one may select according to
taste and pleasure but they are different modes of
activity which must work in unity, if the interpretation
is to be reached. In truth sometimes one and sometimes
another will be more important and stand out more
visibly so that the constant direction of the attention
to all these sides is indispensable, though in many
single cases the express mention of each one of these.
elements may be passed over as unprofitable and awk-
ward, without danger to the thoroughness of the inter-
pretation. The success of every interpretation is
dependent upon two conditions in which the four
elements may be shortly summed up: first that we
have present to us in a, life-like manner, the intellectual
activity from which the expression lying before us
has sprung. Secondly that we have in adequate
readiness the intuition of the historico-dogmiatic whole,
from which this individual can alone receive light, so
as immediately to perceive the relations of that whole,


(6) The systematic element is also an essential indispensable part of
interpretation. In the numerous existing commentaries upon the Jus-
tinianean law books, in which we might particularly expect it, by far
the smallest is to be regarded as genuine interpretation. They are for
the most part discussions of a dogmatic, at times also of a historical
kind, which merely use the text commented upon as an opportunity for
expressing their opinions upon the positions of law touched upon.


174 GROUND OF THE WRITTEN LAW.


to the text lying before us. By reflecting upon these
conditions, the strangeness of many an appearance,
_ which might easily perplex us as to the correctness of
our opinion, is lessened. We not seldom find for example
among learned and celebrated jurists interpretations of
an inconceivable perversity, while intelligent learners,
to whom we present the same text, often hit the right
one. We especially have experiences of this kind in
the numerous cases of which so large and instructive
a part of the Digest consists.

The aim of interpretation with respect to every law
is precisely the gaining from it as much practical
knowledge of law as possible.(¢) This result may be
attained in various degrees and this diversity is
dependent partly upon the skill of the interpreter,
partly however on the skill of the legislator in laying
down in the written law much of sound legal knowledge,
consequently in governing the law as much as possible
on the particular point. In this matter therefore there
exists an interchanging between apt legislation and apt
interpretation so that the success of the one is con-
ditioned and secured by the other.


SECTION XXXIV.
GROUND OF THE WRITTEN LAW.


If then the task of interpretation is to bring to
consciousness the contents of the written law, that
which is no part of these contents is, however closely


(c) The name interpretation (explicatio) is especially fitted to express
this aim of the proceeding because it results from it, that that which is
included in the word, is dragged to light and thus made public. The
name clearing up (explanation) on the other hand, means rather that
the condition (accidental) of unclearness is removed and changed into
clearness and therefore less denotes the general nature of the occupation.


-GROUND OF THE WRITTEN LAW. 178


related to them, strictly speaking, beyond the limits of
the task. Even the examination into the ground of
the written law (ratio juris) is thus excluded. The
idea of this ground has often been very differently
conceived through its having been sometimes placed in
the past, sometimes in the future. According to the
first view, the already existing more general rules of
law, of which the logical carrying through has led ta
the present written law, are to be regarded as grounds.
According to the second view, the practical effect,
which is to be produced by the written law, is to be so
regarded, so that from this stand-point. the ground is
also designated the AIM-or INTENTION of the law. It
would be erroneous to conceive these two views, in
absolute opposition. It is rather to be recognized that
the two relations of his thought have been constantly
present to the legislator, A relative difference however
in truth lies in the fact that sometimes one, sometimes
the other, of the relations may be preponderant in
particular laws. In this connexion the difference
between normal and anomalous law above explained
(S. 16.) is especially influential. In the normal law
(jus commune), the reference to the already existing
rules of law, which are here to be more fully developed,
will for the most part predominate; the aim is merely
the general one that the law may be more definitely
known and more certainly applied. In the anomalous
law (jus singulare) on the contrary, the reference to
‘what is to be attained in future is predominant; thus
e.g. the oppression of poor debtors is to be guarded
against by the usury laws, and the motive cause is
simply the general maxim of interposing with a sort of
tutelary regard, when by certain transactions the
welfare of whole classes is imperiled. aia


176 GROUND OF THE WRITTEN LAW.


‘The knowledge of the ground of the law may be
more or less certain. Thé highest certainty is secured
by-the actual expression of it in the law itself. How-
ever even in this case the ground remains distinct from
the contents of the law defining the right, and must by
no means be regarded as a part of it. Similarly on the
other hand the force of the law is not at all removed
by the entire want of a ground known to us; even
when we know definitely that the written Jaw has had
no particular ground, a case to be presently treated
more at large, the binding power of the law is not
thereby lessened. A particular sort of uncertainty
arises from the existence beside one another of several
grounds of which the mutual relation may be doubtful ;
further from the possibility of the non-expression as to
a ground in itself certain (perhaps expressed in the law),
of the middle terms between the ground and the import
of the law, by which perhaps an apparent difference
between the two may be explained and justified.(@


In like manner there are also different degrees in the
relationship of the ground to the contents of the law.
They may stand to one another in the simple, purely
logical, relation of cause to effect; then the ground of
the law appears as identical with the contents: (6)


(a) The Sc. Macedonianum was intended to obviate usurious trans-
actions, with children under the paternal power, endangering the rela-
tions of family. The prohibition was however much more generally
expressed so that many innocent cases fell under it because it would
otherwise have been impossible to reach with certainty, the cases actu-
ally meant.

(3) L. 18. &. 1. de pign. art. (18. 7.) determines the degree of the
culpa for the contract of pledge; this determination is a mere conse-
quence of the more general rule of law contained in L. 5. §. 2. commo-
dati (13. 6.) In the same way aa to several other contracts mentioned. .


GROUND OF THE WRITTEN LAW. 177.


In other cases on the contrary, they stand widely
apart from one another.) The two cases will here be
distinguished by the names SPECIAL and GENERAL
grounds. These concepts however are relative ; a sharp
limit does not exist between them and they are rather
to be thought of as very gradually transitional.


| The use of the ground of the law is in the first place
unhesitating and important where the matter at issue
is the determination of the nature of the rule of law
contained in the written law: viz., whether it is an
absolute or mediate rule, likewise whether it must be

_ regarded as jus commune or singulare (S. 16.) Much
more doubtful and permissible only under great pre-
cautions, is the use of the ground of the written law in
the interpretation of written laws ; this use is especially
dependent upon the different degrees of the certainty
and relationship of the ground in the sense in which
these differences have been already exactly explained
above. The special determinations on this matter can
only be more fully given below.


There are consequently numerous differences as to
the grounds of the law to be remarked here: in the
sort of the relation to the contents, in the certainty, in
the affinity to the contents, and in the applicability,


in the same place e. g. the depositum. A like application, to that in the
case of depositum, would have been conceivable as to tutelage since the
guardian also derives no profit from his administration. Here however
the purely logical relation is destroyed by the influence of other grounds,
so that here also the previously mentioned relation of concurrent
grounds enters, and indeed this relation of the different grounds to one
another is so circumstanced that they cut ‘across one another.


(e) The more general rule of law upon the culpa rests upon a principle
of the aequitas of which the recognition and limitation, are themselves
uncertain and the application of it to a particular case, is very remote.


178 ‘GROUND OF THE WRITTEN LAW.


However beside these differences there exists this in

common, that they have constantly a relation to the

essence of the contents of the law. or in other words an

objective ‘nature proceeding out of the thought of the

legislator. They are by this their very nature recogniz-
able by every one and we can merely regard it as
accidental when they remain ‘concealed from us. They
stand in broad contrast to those matters of fact which
have a merely subjective relation to the thought of the
legislator and into these recognizability by others enters
just as accidentally as it does naturally in the grounds of
the law and can only by accident fail. To this class
of subjective facts belong such events as have given
the impulse to a law but which might in the same
manner have led to rules wholly different ;(@) likewise
the often wholly individual and transitory actions, for
the sake of which the legislator has established a per-
manent and generally operating rule.) To such sub-
jective relations we must wholly deny the very limited
use which we have admitted to the grounds of law.
Merely the negative use may be made that the absence
of any real ground of the law is often clear from them:
thus they may serve to protect us against the erroneous
admission of such a one.(/)


(d) Thus e. g. the delinquency which gave occasion to the Sc. Mace-
donianum. L. 1. pr. de Se. Maced. (14. 6.)


(e) Thus e. g. under Claudius the law which gave liberty to marry a
prother’s wife merely that the Emperor might take Agrippina the
daughter of Germanicus in marriage.

(f) These subjective relations are commonly not sufficiently dis-
tinguished from the ground of the written law to which the vague
expressions MOTIVE-CAUSE, OCCASION, OBJECT, have not a little contri-
buted. Hufeland Geist des Rémischen Rechts Th. 1. Giessen 1813,
8. 18—19. seems at the least, inaccurate in this matter.


i,


INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE Laws, &c. 179


SECTION XXXV._.
INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS—THEIR SPECIES
AND MODE OF REMEDYING THEM.


The principles of -interpretation stated may suffice
for the healthy condition of the written law, since the
expression exhibits a thought in itself complete, and no
circumstance exists to hinder us from recognizing this
thought as the real purport of the law. The difficult
cases of defective laws are still to be exhibited and
likewise the modes of remedy to be stated by which
these difficulties may be removed. The conceivable
cases of defective laws are the following:


I. Indefinite expression which ae to no
complete thought.


‘ IL Erroneous expression in that the thought
absolutely denoted by it is different from the actual
thought of the law.

In these cases a different degree of necessity is
visible ; for the removal of the former defect is as free
from risk as it is plainly necessary; the second carries
with it much greater risk and at least makes especial —
caution necessary.

Before however these cases are particularly explained
it is necessary also to mention the means of remedy
which must be employed in the treatment of them.

The first consists in the innate connexion of the
legislation, a second in the connexion of the written
law with its ground; a third in the intrinsic value of
the import derived from the interpretation.

A,—Innate connexion of the legislation. This
can be in two ways made use of as an expedient of
interpretation in defective laws. First in so far as the


180 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &C.


defective part of the law is explained by another part
of the same law, which is the safest of all modes of
explanation(@): Secondly by the explanation of the
defective law by other laws.@) This last sort of inter-
pretation will be the more certain, the nearer the two
laws stand to one another, the most certain therefore

_ where both proceed from one and the same legislator.
However the other laws, made use of for explanation,
may be older than that explained by them, wherefore
at the base of this procedure lies the correct assumption,
that the author of the law now to be interpreted, has
had before his eyes the olderlaws and that they have been
therefore a complement of his thought. The laws so
used for the explanation may lastly be also newer: only
this case will more seldom occur in the province of
pure interpretation. ° When it does, such newer laws
will in most cases stand to the defective .one in the
relation of a modification or at least of an authentic
interpretation (S, 32.) which is no longer genuine
interpretation. Where this process presents itself as
pure interpretation, it rests. upon the assumption that
the mode of thinking of the earlier legislator, has also
been preserved in the later legislation.@


(a) L. 24. de legibus (f. 3.) “Incivile est nisi tota lege perspecta,
una aliqua particula ejus, proposita, judicare vel respondere.

(b) This sort of interpretation of the single defective law by the help
of another is not to be confounded with the reconciling of contradictions
which belongs to the treatment of the circle of sources in their
entirety. This matter will first be fully treated below (S. 42—45.)

(c) L. 26, 27, de leg. (1. 3.) “Non est novum, ut priores leges ad
posteriores trahantur.—Ideo, quia antiquiores leges ad posteriores trahi
usitatum est, et semper quasi hoe legibus inesse credi oportet, ut ad
eas quoque personas et ad eas res pertinerent, quae quandoque similes
erunt.”

(2) L. 28. de leg. (1. 3.) “Sed et posteriores leges ad priores pertinent
nisi contrariae sint.” Here merely the case of changing, as excluding the


INTERPRETATION. OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &e. 181


B—The ground of the law may likewise be an.
auxiliary for the interpretation of the defective law but -
not so unconditionally as the connexion of the legis-
lation. Its applicability is rather dependent upon the
degree of the certainty with which we know it and _
upon the degree of its relationship to the contents.
(S. 84). If one of these considerations is unfavorable,
it may still be almost always applied to the removal
of the first sort of defects, (indefiniteness) less fre-
quently however to that of the second (the erroneous
expression.)


C.—The intrinsic value of the result is lastly the
‘most questionable of all remedies because: by the
employment of it the interpreter will, as easily as
possible, overstep the limits of his occupation and
intrude upon that of the legislator. Hence this remedy
.can be merely applied to the indefiniteness of the
expression, not to the reconciliation of the expression
with the thought. . :

A gradation is therefore again perceptible in these
remedies like that in the defects themselves. The first
is to be at all events unhesitatingly applied : the second
makes greater caution necessary ; the third lastly can

-be permitted only within the narrowest limits.’


SECTION XXXVI. :
INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS.—(Continuation.)
INDEFINITE EXPRESSION.

The .indefiniteness of expression which makes it
impossible, by means of it alone, to recognize any
use for interpretation, is denoted. However it is manifest that in the
‘case of authentic interpretation, we do not accept the meaning of the


earlier legislator as explained by the later law because we hold the
explanation to be true but because the later law prescribes it.


Q


182 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE Laws, &c.


complete thought whatever may be at once conceived
in twe ways: as INCOMPLETENESS or as AMBIGUITY.


The INCOMPLETENESS of the expression of the law
is similar in nature te a sentence begun and broken off,
so that for the complete thought the indication has
remained uncompleted. This case happens e. g. when
a law requires witnesses to a transaction without
determining the number of them{«) More frequent
and more important is the case of ambiguity, which
again may appear in different shapes—as ambiguity of
the single expression or of the eonstruction.

The single expression may relate to an individual.
object-matter and a term be used which suits several
individuals—a ease which will happen oftener in legal
transactions than in laws.®) It may however also have
an abstract idea for its object-matter and here again
the ambiguity may lie in the expression chosen having
entirely different meanings (¢) or in its having a narrower
and a wider meaning.(@)


(a) Thus in Nov..107. C.1. Just so when a sum of money is to be
determined and either the number or the sort of coins is not
expressed. This case is mentioned, not as to laws but as to testaments
in L, 21. S: 1. qui test. (28. 1.)

(8) Examples~L. 21. S. 1. qui test (28. 1.) The slave Stichus is
bequeathed, Titius named as legatee while several bear these names
L. 39. 8. 6. de leg. I. (30. un.) The Cornelian farm is bequeathed when:
the testator had among his property several of this name, }


(©) Thus the expressions familia, puer, potestas have wholly different:
meanings L. 195. 204. 215. de V.S. (50. 16.) Remarkable cases of this
ambiguity arefound in L. §.C. fim veg. (3. 39.) and EL. 30. C. de j. dot.
(5. 12.)° In the first praescriptic may mean :-Exception or Precept
according to many also Limitation. Jw the second the words “ si tamen
extant” may denote #f they are net destroyed or also if they are not
alienated.


(d) Such narrower and wider meanings appear in the expressions


INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE Laws, &c. 183


The ambiguity of the construction may also make
the sense of the law doubtful and although this occurs
more often in legal transactions, it is not without
example in laws.@ Different as the forms of thie defect
here explained may be, they still have in commori with
one another, that each of them hinders us from recog+
nizing any complete thought whatever in a law with
this quality. The origination of this fault may be
founded upon a thought not clear or upon an incomplete
mastery over the expression or upon both circumstances
at once. To the interpreter the cause of origin is
indifferent since the necessity of a remedy for the defect
is always equally pressing and inevitable, because in its.
present shape the law is inapt to the establishment. of
a rule of law. The knowledge of this necessity is also
completely certain since it is attained by a proceeding.
of logic; for that very reason however its office termi-
nates with theclear insight into the nature of the existing
doubt, and does not at the same time include its solution.
This must rather be sought elsewhere and the three
classes of remedies already stated serve for that purpose
(S. 35.). They are all applicable to the purpose and
consideration as to their difference of value is confined


cognatio, pignus, hypotheca, adoptio (L. 1.8. 1.) de adopt. (1. 7.),

familia (L. 195. de V. §. 50. 16.) In like manner the contract ne

luminibus officiatur may equally well apply to the present state of

things alone and to the present and the future. (L. 23. pr. de S. P. U.

8.2.) Interpretation according to a wider or narrower signification is

commonly called lata or stricta: every interpretation for the removal
* of an ambiguity declarativa Thibaut Pandekten S. 48. 50. 53.


(e) The explanation of the difficult L, 2. de div. temp. praescr. (44. 3.)
simply depends upon whether the closing words “ mihi contra videtur”
“are to be considered in connexion with the whole text or merely with »
part of it, Examples of ambiguous construction in legal transactions
are found in Mihlenbruch 1. 8. 59. note'1.


184 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &c.


to the question, when one class is to be employed in
preference to the others.


First therefore wherever it is possible to remove the
indefiniteness by bringing the legislation into connexion
and where this means suffices, every other will be
excluded as less secure and likewise as superfluous.


Secondly the ground of the law is to be applied.to
this purpose, and wherever possible the special ground
immediately connected with the contents of the law
(S. 35.) if we are able to establish such a ground. If
this fails us a more general ground is permissible.
Thus (e. g.) when the contents of the law rest in a mere
general way upon aequitas, which must, be completely
assumed of the normal law (S. 16.) of the modern age,
then of two, in themselves possible, explanations, that
must be preferred which is justified by this aequitas.(f)


(f) In this way L. 8. C. de jud. (8. 1.) A.D. 314, is to be understood
“Placuit in omnibus rebus praecipuam esse justitiae aequitatisque
[scriptae] quam stricti juris rationem.” That is: when in ambiguous
law, the one explanation corresponds to the rigid law, the other to the
aequitas, the latter shall have the preference, (praecipuam esse rationem.)
L. 1. C0. de leg, (1. 14.) A. D. 316, is apparently in contradiction.
“Inter aequitatem jusque interpositam interpretationem nobis solia et
oportet et licet inspicere.” The hypothesis, that L. 8. cited sets out
older and L.1 cited newer law, that this therefore antiquates that, is
highly improbable, since both fall within Constantine’s reign and there
are only two years between them. In order to remove the contradiction
some have introduced into L. 8. cited the reading scriptae (an aequitas
recognized by a written law.) This reading is contained independently:
in the old editions of Chevallon (Paris 1526. 8.) and of Haloander but
isto be entirely rejected on internal grounds. Donellus (1. 13.) explains
L. 8. as a mere restriction, L. 1. as an entire abolition of the rigid
law by aequitas: there is no indication of this distinction in the text
itself. The contradiction would be at once removed if one applied L.
1. cited solely to the correction of the expression by the thought (87.)
which, by way of mere equity, was not permitted to the judge; but


INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &. 185


- Thirdly and lastly the indefiniteness may be removed
by a comparison of the intrinsic value of the contents
which, according to the one and the other in itself pos-
sible interpretation, is ascribed to the law. Thus e. g.
when the one explanation leads to an empty aimless
interpretation, the other not.(9) In the same way when
the result of the one explanation is more in conformity
with the aim in question than the other.@) Finally
when the one interpretation produces a more liberal,
beneficial result than the other.@


SECTION XXXVI.
INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS.—(Continuation.)
(ERRONEOUS EXPRESSION.)


_ The second conceivable fault of a law, consists in the
‘incorrectness of. thé expression, in ‘that it immediately


I believe that the text is not to be understood of interpretation at all,
but of developement of law; the expression interptetationem does not
stand in the way of it.


(g) L. 19. de leg. (1. 8.) “In ambigua voce legis ea potius accipienda
est significatio quae vitio caret.”

(h) L. 67. de R. J. (50. 17.) -*Quotiens idem sermo duas sententias
. exprimit ea potissimum excipiatur, quae rei gerendae optiorest. L. 3.
de constit.” (1. 4.) embodies’ an application of this rule “ Beneficium
Imperatoris quod. a divina ‘scilicet ejus indulgentia proficiscitur, quam
plenissime interpretari debemus.”


() L. 192.8. 1. de R. J. (50.17.) “In re dubia benigniorem inter-
pretationem sequi non minus justum est quam tutius.” -L. 56. 168. pr.
eud.—L. 18. de leg. (1, 3.) “ Benignius leges interpretandae sunt quo
voluntas earum conservetur.” The concluding words may mean ; since
that is the general will of the legislator. This explanation however
appears to me more correct : provided that it is not to contradict the
meaning definitely expressed in it (therefore quo for quatenus.) Single
applications of this rule : In laws expressing punishments ambiguously
.the milder prevails. (L. 42. de poenis 48. 19.) In testaments inheriting
is to be favoured, disinheriting not. (L. 19..de lib, et posth. (28, 2.)


186 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &¢,


denotes a defined and applicable thought, but such a
one as is different from the actual thought of the law.
In this internal contradiction of the elements of the
law, the question arises; to which of them are we to
give the preference? Since now the expression is a
mere means but the thought the end, it is unquestion-
able that the thought must be preferred, the expression
therefore corrected according to it.) The admission
of this rule presents no difficulty; the application of it
on the other hand may be very difficult since all depends
upon the matters of fact here presupposed being brought
to a certainty.


The cases of this sort exhibit much less variety than
those of the indefinite expression (S. 36.) Their differ-
ence is referable merely to the logical relation of the
expression to the thought owing to the possibility of
the expression embracing more or less than the thought.
Tn the first case the correction is made by an EXTEND-
ING, in the second by a NARROWING, interpretation.
The end of both is merely to bring the expression into
harmony with the actual thought. ;


This treatment of the erroneous expression is different,
in the most important respects, from’ that of the
indefinite expression. At the base of it lies the assump-
tion that we have before us a definite thought in wnion


These applications show that tle rule has another sense than that which
permits a preference to the aequitas with which it is ordinarily but ©
erroneously identified. .

(a) L. 17, de leg. (1. 3.)  “ Scire leges non est verba earum tenere,
sed vim et potestatem.” L. 6.8.1. de V.S. (50.16) 1.13.8. 2 de
excus. (27. 1.) LL, 19. ad exhib. (10. 4.)

(8) The moderns call it by unroman expressions interpretatio extensiva,
restrictiva and oppose it to the declarativa which neither extends nor
narrows, since it has no concern with a law defective in this way.


INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE Laws, &c. 187


with an imperfect expression. This relation we cannot
detect, as we can indefiniteness in a logical, but only in.
a historical way, on which aceount the recognition of it
is, of its very nature, more -unsafe and likewise admits
of different degrees of certainty. This difficulty more-
over is further aggravated by the circumstance that the
most obvious and most natural means of knowing the
thought is denied to us: for this consists in the expres-
sion and it is precisely to the expression that we here
refuse confidence. Further in respect to indefiniteness
the need of an artificial remedy was indispensable since
without it there was nothing at.all in existence which
‘we could regard and apply as law. In the present case
it is otherwise for the expression, even when uncor-
rected, exhibits an understandable and applicable
thought. Lastly in the case of indefiniteness, the
recognition of the defect was entirely distinct from the
remedy ; here the two coincide; for we recognize the
incorrectness of the expression merely by comparing it
with the real thought ; if this however is known to us,
with it the remedy for that fault is likewise found.


The three remedies above stated (8. 35.) shall now
be put severally to the test, as to their applicability to
the defect’ here stated whieh consists in the incorrect
expression.


Here again the internal connexion of the legislation
as a means of remedy, appears the most unquestionable.
An example is found in the Senatus consult which
more accurately defined the hereditatis petitio. Accord-
ing to this the honest possessor who had sold things
belonging to the inheritance was to restore the price
obtained (pretia quae pervenissent.) Under this
expression, the case of his having again lost the price


188 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &€.


was also included, for he would still once have obtained
it. However from the subsequent words of the same
Senatus consult,it was inferred that this case is excepted.
The expression used was therefore explained in the
restrained way as if it had spoken not of every one who
obtained the price but of him who had obtained it and
not afterwards lost it.© Another example is found in
penal laws.. When such a law expresses a general
punishment for a certain delinquency, while another
punishment had previously been determined for a
sirigle case of the same delinquency, the general direc-
tion is to be narrowed in the explanation by the
excepting of this particular case.@


More important also however more dangerous, is the
application of the second remedy which consists, in
recognizing the actual thought of that law from its
grounds and correcting the expression according to_
them. In this connection the distinction between the
special and general grounds is peculiarly important
(S. 34.)

A special ground may be applied to the purpose in
question. This is done in the .least questionable
manner when the literal interpretation of the expres-
sion would lead to a conflict with the known grounds.
If therefore e. g. a provision of law is introduced for the
advantage of a particular person, every single applica-
‘tion of it to his loss would be in contradiction with the
ground, and this must be guarded against by a narrow-
ing interpretation of the too general expression.
Hence when a contract occasioned by fraud is by acci-


(c) L. 20. S. 6. L. 23. de her. pet. (5. 3.)
(d) L. 41. de poenis (48, 19.) .
(2) L. 25. de leg. (1. 3) L. 6 ©. eod. (1. 14)


NTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &0. 189


dent profitable to the defrauded, it remains binding
-although the expression of.the edict declares all such
contracts invalid.(f) When the minor without a curator
conducts a case and wins it,:the proceeding remains
valid.(9) In like manner an agreement as to alimony
even without the Praetor is valid, when the position of
the person entitled is absolutely bettered by it.#) More
frequent however and likewise more difficult, are the
cases in which we correct the expression not exactly to
-obviate a contradiction with the grounds but merely in
order to find the true limits of the application conse-
quently that this may not happen either in an incom-
plete or excessive manner. We must seek the vindication
@f this mode of correction in explaining in a probable
manner the occasion of the inexact expression : perhaps
in a concrete expression being employed because a cor-.
responding abstract was wanting or on account of the
greater ease of perception which the concrete carries
with it. Thus alone can the doubt be safely removed
whether in fact the thought which proceeds from our
interpretation, is the actual thought of the legislator or
whether it is merely what that thought ought in con-
sistency to have been. In the latter case we should no
longer be correcting the expression by our interpretation
but the thought itself and that the interpreter is not
privileged to do this, will be more fully shown below
(S. 50.) The following examples will make clear what
has here been said. The edict threatened infamy in
the case of a widow marrying again during the time
of mourning, The object was merely the guarding
against all doubt as to the paternity of a subsequently’
(f) L. 7. 8. 7. de pactis (2. 14.) L. 30. C. de transact, (2. 4.) -


(g) L. 2 C. qui legit pers. (3. 6.) L. 14. C. de proc. (2. 18.)
(h) L. 8 8, 6. de transact. *(2. 15.)


190 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAws, &c.


born child. If the Praetor had directly expressed this’
and likewise desired to state the exact limits, a detailed
definition and likewise a decision of difficult questions
(as to the possible duration of pregnancy) would have
been necessary. This was avoided by the distinct
specification of the time of mourning which besides
was entirely suitable to the majority of cases and like-
wise by its wide comprehension set aside those difficult
questions. Then however cases occurred in which the
" widow had given birth toa child soon after the husband’s
death ; by this all doubt as to future children was abso-
lutely removed and in that case, by means of a narrowing
interpretation of the edict, the marriage was permitted.
Cases occurred in the other direction in which no mourn-
ing for the dead, consequently no time of mourning was
established ; nevertheless was the marriage forbidden,
and the edict was here extended by interpretation.@
The actio ad éxhibendum every one interested in the
exhibition had, and this stood evidently so in the edict.
This expression met the case of every one to whom the |
seeing of the thing would be an advantage; but the
recognized aim was directed to freeing claims of right
from the hindrance which might arise to them from the
accidental and local relations of a thing. Hence that
expression was narrowed by interpretation to every
interest which stands in connexion with a LEGAL
cam.) The twelve tables required for the usucapion
a possession of two years in the case of a fundus; of
one year in the case of all other things. To which of
them new should houses belong? Literally they were
in truth not embraced by the expression fundus ; since.


@) L.1.L. 11.8. 1. 2. 3. de his qui net. (3. 2.)
(kh) 1. 19. ad exhib. (10. 4.)


‘INTERPRETATION. OF DEFECTIVE Laws, &. 191


however usucapion embraced all things generally and.
because for this purpose all things were to be divided
inta two large masses, the meaning of the law was
without doubt to put together all immoveable things
by'reason of their complete homogeneousness ; and the
concrete expression fundus was merely used because a
corresponding abstract expression was wanting. Hence
that word was applied by extension to all immoveables,
_ therefore also to houses, and this interpretation seems
at no-time to-have been a matter of dispute In many
laws, it is true; which deal with concrete cases it is
expressly added that they are not to be regarded as a
mere expression of abstract rules: by such an injunction
this sort of extending interpretation is expressly shut.
out.) Lastly the assumption of an indirect expres-
sion, which is called the argumentum a contrario,
belongs to this species of ‘extending intérpretation, A
rule may namely be in such a way thoroughly express-
ed, even tothe limit which defines it, that in that
expression the definite thought is contained—outside
these limits, the opposite must prevail. Thus ¢ g. when
the Praetor introduced an action ‘with the customary
expression intra annum judicium dabo, there lay
likewise in that expression the meaning: post annwm
non dabo and the referring of the expression to this
meaning is unquestionably an extending . interpreta-
tion.) So the L. Julia de vi said that the Praetor


(2) Cicero, top. 8. 4.

(m) L.~ 10. €, de revoc. don, (8 56.) and Nov. 415. ©. 3. pr. are
examples.

(n) L, 22. de leg. (1.8.) “Cum lex in praeteritum quid indulget,
in futurum vetat.” Donellus (1. 14.) explains this difficult text very
probably correctly of cases of the sort here described so that the prae-
teritum and futurum is not to be referred to the period of the promuk


192 INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWS, &C.


appointed for this delinquency, could extend his juris-
diction “si profiscatur ;”
converse proposition that he otherwise could not do
it.) In the same way each exception expressed in a
written law points to the existence of a rule without
which this exception would have no meaning; it is
therefore an indirect ‘expression of this rule. When
therefore the L. Julia de adulteriis deprived the woman
condemned, of: capacity to give judicial evidence, it
necessarily followed from this that this capacity apper-
tained to other women.(?)


On the other hand the general ground of a law, e g.
the aeguitas on which it rests, cannot lead to an inter-


in this was contained the.


pretation by which the expression is to be considered ©


incorrect and undergo a correction ; because this process
at once entirely bears the character of an independent
formation of law different from interpretation, since.
we do not say what is contained in the thought of the
law, but what must have been consistently admitted
into it.if the legislator had’ made it clear. This last


assertion always has attached to it an uncertainty


remaining in the back ground, in that from the remote-
ness of the law from this its general ground, many con-


tradictory intermediate grounds may be conceived,’


through which the legislator, even with distinct insight
into the whole relation, may nevertheless have been
withheld from giving to the written law the modifica-


gation of the law, since this can have no influence upon acts already’
passed, but of the point of time lying in the future, here therefore to
the expiration of a year after the right of action had arisen. Before
this expiration the action is to be permitted (in praeteritum indulget),
therefore it is to be afterwards forbidden (in futurum vetat.)

(0) L. 1. pr. de off. ejus cui mand. (1. 21.)

(p) L. 18. de testibus. ‘


x


INTERPRETATION OF DEFECTIVE LAWws, &c. .193


tion desired by us (8. 34). When we find not seldom

‘in the Roman jurists interpretations of this sort, they
cannot serve as patterns for us in this matter fot the
Romans, as will be shown below, did not sharply
separate interpretation and law-making.@ To this
place among others belongs the rule that in each purely
prohibitive iaw the nullity of the transaction must be
added to it in thought.) If we would regard this as
a valid rule for our interpretation, it would be in con-
tradiction of the assertion just made, since great exten-
sion would here be attributed to the expression of a
bare prohibition, on the grounds of conformity to the
purpose and efficacy. That provision is in fact an
entirely positive law and conceived in connexion with
other texts of our law-books expressing a simple pro-
hibition, is an authentic interpretation of those par-
ticular texts; it is therefore not an injunction and
pattern for our own interpretation.


If it follows from all this that the special ground of
the law is, and the general is not, admissible for the
rectifying of the expression, it must likewise be kept
in mind that no sharp limit is fixed between the two
sorts of grounds (S. 34). Through the numerous gradual |
transitions of one into the other, the possibility of a
real interpretation and the distinguishing of it from
the progressive developement of the law, will often
become difficult.


On the other hand it is subject to no ‘sort of doubt
that the third of the remedies above stated, the internal


(@ I find examples of this kind in the following texts: L. 40. pr. de
her. pet. (5.3.) L. 2.8.1.3. ad Sc. Vell. (16. 1.) L. 1.8. 6. de aedil.
ed. (21. 1.) L. 18 L. 6.9.2. dej. patr. (87. 14) L. 2 pr 81. de
cust. (48. 3.) Compare below §. 47. and 8. 50. at the end, *

(7) L, 5. C. de leg (1, 14.)

R


194 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C.


value of the result (S. 35). musé in no circumstances be
employed for the recognition and improvement of the
erroneous expression; since it is manifest that in such
a process, would be comprised not an assimilation of
the expression to the thought but an attempted improve-
ment of the thought itself, This may be beneficial as
a developement of the law but is interpretation only
_ in name.


SECTION XXXVI.
INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS OF JUSTINIAN (CRITICK.)


The general principles of interpretation explained
are now to be specially applied to the Justinianean
legislation, the interpretation of which again brings
with it new difficulties and makes new rules of pro-
ceeding necessary. In this place the historical know-
ledge of this legislation will be completely presupposed
so that the question will be merely of the application
of this knowledge to the task of interpretation.(®

The wholly peculiar position of the interpreter is, in
this matter, based upon the great distance between
himself and the arising of the law to be interpreted.
Hence we are deprived of the entire advantages of —
visual perception and immediate certainty, which may
arise from communion of life with the people in which
a law arose and we must seek as far’ as possible to
supply the place of these advantages by intellectual
exertion. Hence especially interpretation embraces an


(a) Quite designedly therefore nothing will be said here of the arising
of the Justinianean law-sources, of their ‘parts, their language and the
aids which we employ upon them, of manuscripts and editions of the
text.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C. 195


aim in addition to the obtaining of a result in definite
rules of law. We must so completely make a part of
ourselves, the law-sources handed down to us, in all
their peculiarity that they may serve us instead of the
_ common life. Difficult as this task: is in itself, it is
lightened by the great literary excellence which we
detect in the most important parts of those law-sources.


The foundation of all interpretation is a text to be
interpreted and the establishment of this text is called
Critick. This therefore precedes interpretation
although this preceding must be understood of the
proceeding as a whole, not of each individual applica-
tion; for in single cases the business of Critick can
only be accomplished in common with that of inter-
pretation. Critick presents itself in two parts as
DIPLOMATIC (relating to diplomaties) or lower and as
higher critick. The businegs of the first consists in
storing up materials securely and completely, that of
the second in determining the true text from the
given material. ; :


The bu®iness of critick is just as general as that of
interpretation and in no way confined to the Roman
law. Since however it is of greater importance and
difficulty in this than in other systems of legislation, I
have preferred treating it for the first time in this place,
where it can be explained in complete coherence and
without burdensome repetitions.


In relation to critick the simplest case is first to be
considered in which the law-giver immediately delivers -
-to us the text of the law in a shape to which he himself
attaches public credit. In this case, which since the
invention of printing is not merely possible but very
common, the diplomatic critick necessarily drops; it


196 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS,. &¢.


seems moreover that the higher critick also, if it would
assert at any time an error of the press, must.be ban-
ished as a revolt against the will of the law-giver. It
has however been above shown that even the actual
expression of the law‘must by interpretation be recti-
fied by its thought (S. 37), a proceeding which rests upon
the preference of the spirit to the letter. Now the
printed text in relation to the expression actually used
is to be regarded merely as the letter of the letter,
stands on lower ground than it, and hence cannot with-
draw itself from a similar rectification. In truth how-
ever this case will very seldom occur and it has cense-
quently very small importance in the general examina~
tion of Critick.®


However the ease here described is also in no way
that*in which we find ourselves in relation to the
sources of the Justinianean law. That we have no text
officially handed down every one concedes. If the cri-
tical efforts of the glossators had come to a completion,
the reception of this vulgata would have taken the
place of an official text, though even by it, ag has just
been shown the occupation of the higher critick would


(3} A remarkable example of modern date is the following. The
royal Westphalian decree of 18th Jan, 1813. art. 3. imposed upon the
owners of the tithes of estates a tax of 1-10th of the ground-rent “‘if the
owner receives 1-10th of the NET (REINEN) PRODUCE otherwise in pro-
portion to his receipts. (Biilletin n. 3. of 1813. S. 45.) In a later part
of the legal bulletin stands “ Billetin n, 3. .... for the NET (REINEN)
PRODUCE, read GROSS (ROHEN) PRODUCE. This correction which appeared
also at the same time in the Moniteur of 8rd Feb. was however without
signature or authentication and moreover contradicted the written
authentic original. The practical result of the two readings is very
different and the question was which should be preferred. By the first
the law was logically coberent with the general system of taxation but
very difficult to apply: as to the second the case is exactly reversed,


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C. -t97


not have been excluded; but a finished vulgata in this
sense has never existed and a reception of it was there-
fore impossible (S. 17). We have consequently nothing
before us but a considerable number of manuscripts
which are very diverse in age and value.’ Even the
complete agreement of them in a reading, can only by
a species of fiction be put on an equality with the offi-
cial communication. From such an agreement in truth
there arises merely a higher degree of probability that
we have the original text before us, no certainty.
Modern writers have been afraid that all certainty of
practice would be at an end if freedom was given to
critick, and they have therefore either entirely rejected
it or shut it up within arbitrary and narrow limits.(
This anxiety is to protect a given text against the
danger of arbitrary changes. It is however vain since
the given text, which they desire to guard, never exist-
ed at all. If we look for what they conceive as such,
we discover ideas as discrepant as obscure. The
vulgata or recension of Bologna might have served for
one if it had come to that condition. The agreement of
all manuscripts preserved gives again a definite idea,
although no right to the refusal of critick ; but they do
not mean this. They do not so mean, partly because in
disputed cases up to the present time critick has scarcely
begun to know that agreement by experience, partly
because the resistance to critick principally rested upon
‘the fear that the views established in the courts would
be destroyed by a more thorough examination, and there


(c) Thibaut entirely rejected the practical use of the critick (Versuche
Bd. 1. Num. 16.) afterwards he gave up this opinion (Logische Ansle-
gung 8. 44.) Feuerbach will only allow conjectural critick to get rid of
absence of meaning or contradiction (civilistische Versuche Th. 1. Num.
8.) In like manner Glick I. S. 35. Num: 5.*


198 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &.


was danger of a comparison of manuscripts in that
point of view. If one gives up these determinations of
the given text, which is not to be touched, there is
scarcely anything left to accept for the purpose but that
text which most people use because it is that of the
most widely spread editions which perhaps the Gotho-
fredian must be considered to be(® But so shifting
and so arbitrarily conceived a notion ought certainly to
make no claim to serious regard.


SECTION XXXIX,
INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS OF JUSTINIAN (CRITICK.)


( Continuation.)


‘As the right of Critick has been made good by these
reasons, the rules for conducting it must be further
established. Diplomatic critick has to collect manu-
script materials and by means of examination marshal
them externally according to their age and value. It
has the further duty of preserving in purity the
received cation by a rejection of all foreign parts
(S. 17). which according to the arrangement of most
modern editions may easily through oversight be -
included in that canon(a) The task of the higher


¢

(d@) Most iGigonenite of Critick think thus without making it clear to
themselves or expressing it. It is definitely expressed amid many con,
fusions in Dabelow Handbuch des Pandectenrechts Th, I. S. 204. (Halle
.1816.) He however makes absolutely no use of it but allows great
freedom to Critick.

(a) Still worse than the erroneous application of the unglossed but
authentic text is the case indeed when here and there the summaries
composed since the 14th century and more recently received into
the editions, have been regarded as portions of the Roman law;
this great miscoxtception is however readily explicable. While the
glosses and the observations of the moderns constantly stand in the


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C. - 199


eritick divides itself into two parts: the employment.
(working up) of the manuscript material furnished by
the diplomatic critick and the improvement of it. It
has therefore in pursuance of the first part of this
task, first of all, by a free seleetion from the manuscript
- material, to form a text. It must of course take into
account that probability which ‘may be derived from
the number and worth of the manuscripts in favour
of one or more readings; it however remains free as
to the selection and is not’ fettered by any class of
manuscripts (¢ g. the Vulgata): in truth in many
important applications this freedom has been in general
constantly recognized, even by those who have in their
general theory expressed themselves decidedly against:
the use of critick. There are for example in the digest.
a considerable number of texts upon which the Floren-
tine text is from omissions unmeaning ; but other texts-
present a complete text of undoubted authenticity: in:
the same way there are many texts in which the
opposite appears. ® Now I know not even a single
author who has gone so far in his critical rigorism as:
to reject these two-fold emendations: and yet of all
the arbitrary limitations above set forth, the opinion,
which might perhaps ascribe exclusive predominance
to the text of Bologna, has most ‘historical appearance


margin of the editions, these summaries stand as titles in the middle
of the text and may easily be taken for text. Comp. on this matter
Savigny Beruf unfrer Zeit S. 62. and Gesch. des R. R.im Mittelalter. -
B. 6. 8. 162. .

m0) Savigny Geschichte des R. R. im Mittelalter. B. 3. §. 167. 171.
In truth it might be said that the enlargings from the Florentine, here
referred to, had already become parts of the Vulgata; but the Bolog-
nese have left to be made by us, not a few similar emendations which
were first added from the Florentine at a later time and to which
objection has nevertheless never been made. Z '


200 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C.


in its favour. In our current editions we do not
observe that two-fold necessity because into them the
emendations mentioned have been in general received,
and from this operation it becomes quite manifest that
at no time was a general opinion in the recognition of
a defined text established, as it-cannot be denied that
it was as to so many and so important propositions of
law (S. 30). Punctuation finally belongs also to this
first division of the task of the higher critick; by it
the logical membering of a text is determined and
it therefore, according to its innate nature, might be
regarded as interpretation although by its form it coin-
cides with the business of the critic. Curiously enough
many have even regarded the changing of the custom-
ary punctuation as a species of emendation(; but the
notion of a customary punctuation is, just as much as
that of a customary text in general, entirely vain and
nugatory. In fact the manuscripts for the most part
hand down to us nothing but unbroken rows of letters;
how we shall divide these into words and render the
words members of a sentence, is entirely left to our dis-
eretion. Theslender and uncertain beginnings of punc-
tuation in some manuscripts cannot be at all a matter
of interest. ;


The second part of the business of the higher eritick
still remains to be noticed ; it consists in the improving
of the text of the manuscripts, therefore in conjectural
emendation.® This conjectural critick it is in particu-


(c) Feuerbach ut. sup. P. 93.

(@) Emendation is wholly relative and has constant reference to any-
supposed text whatever, which is at the particular time to be improved.
Hence even the mere correction of errors of the press may be deemed
such ; still one commonly confines the expression to the improvements
of a acientific character 7. e. to such as have for their object-matter, the
text of certain manuscripts or that of the editions based upon them,


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &c. 201


lar which has mainly produced so great’a resistance to
the critical handling ef the text of our sources. It is.
also undeniable that since the 16th century, this critick
has, especially by the French and the Dutch been prac-
tised in an arbitrary and inconsiderate manner. It is
certainly not my intention to speak on behalf of this
. abuse, but the important nay indispensable right to
the use of it in a proper manner, we ought neither to
surrender nor permit to be narrowed by arbitrary
conditions. ©


‘The two applications of the higher critick here stated,
to the selection of manuscript texts and to their cor-
rection, have a resemblance, not to be easily mistaken,
to the two sorts-of interpretation of defective laws, in
the case of the indeterminate and the faulty expression
(S. 35—87). If in this case also we ask for the most
certain means of recognizing the genuine text which it
is our business to establish, we find the first and most
important means to be the innate necessity derived
from the connected viewing of the text itself. This
must not however be undertaken according to general
notions but according to the special literary character
of the text on which the critick is actually employed
or of the class of texts to which this particular one
belongs. Hence in this species of critick little is to be
done by rules; the matter mainly rests upon a critical
sight educated by a continuous study of the sources
and upon a circumspect, self-distrustful sense of truth,
A similar means consiste in the comparison of the
doubtful text of the written law -with other texts ; this


(e) There is such an unpermissible limitation when persons will only
permit conjectures as a last resource against meaninglessness of text or
internal contradiction in the legislation,


202 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C.


comparison however can only give certainty to the
emendation in the proportion in which a close relation-
ship between the two texts prevails. The emendation
established in this manner may obtain a more external
corroboration, when it is possible for us to explain in a
probable manner, how the text which we pronounce to
be incorrect has arisen out of the-+rue text by means
of the copyists. This can in the first place be effected
by analogy. There are for example certain faults
which recur very frequently and uniformly and of
which the supposition of itself carries with it a certain
probability. To this class belongs; the frequent inter-”
changing of certain letters with one another ; further,
the omission of a letter when the same letter went
immediately before, in which case therefore we desire
to restore the letter which has fallen out (geinination) ;
lastly the skipping or transposition of whole Jines in
the manuscript lying before the copyist—a hypothesis
indeed which is a subject for much more hesitation.
The probable explanation of the origin of an erroneous
text may in the second place be that one of several
readings is more difficult to be understood than another,
so that the copyists have rejected the true text, simply
because they did not understand it. It may he lastly.
that the law had been itself changed at the time at
which the copyists lived, so that the law once prevail-
ing was on this account corrected in the copies() On


(f) To this head belongs 8. 4. J. de nupt. (1. 10.): “ Duorum autem
fratrum vel sororum liberi, vel fratris et sororis, jungi zon possunt.”
Many manuscripts have, many others have not, the non. The rejection
of the non in itself unquestionable is strengthened by the fact that at
the time of the arising of our manuscripts, every copyist certainly
knew that the marriage of the children of brothers and sisters was for-
bidden by the Canon law. In truth such cases as thisare rare. On the
other hand it seems very obvious and very fruitful to employ in emen-


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C. 208


‘the other hand every explanation of the fault, which
rests on the hypothesis of abbreviations in the original
manuscripts which might have been wrongly written
out at length by the copyists, is to be rejected ; for,
‘since Justinian absolutely forbade the use of abbrevi-
ations in the manuscripts of his laws,() certainly a few
only of these can from oversight have erept in and
these cannot suffice as ground of any probability what-
ever in individual cases.


SECTION XL..
INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS OF JUSTINIAN (Continuation)
(SENGLE TEXTS IN THEMSELVES.)


In actual interpretation, the rules peculiar to the
Justinianean legislation have reference only to the
largest and most important parts of it, the digest and
the code. Each of these law-books forms one large
whole composed of a mixture of historically different
and distinguishable parts. How these parts are to be
treated singly for themselves and how in relation to
the whole to which they belong, is now to be stated.


For the interpretation of the single texts independ-
ently, all historical characteristics of them are to be
made available, consequently everything that we know
from the superscription and the subscription, of the date,
author, occasion, of the text, as also of the completely
different whole to which they have perhaps originally


dation the history of the pre-justinianean law; in fact however this
employment is almost entirely inadmissible as will be shown more at
length below.


(g) Const. Omnem &. 8. L, 1. 8, 18, ¢, de vet. et enucl, €1,17.) L. 2.8
22, eod, Const, Cordi, 8. 5. F


204 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C.


belonged.@) Then moreover for this interpretation the
richest material is furnished to us- by the comparison
net ealy with all other texts of the Justinianean legis-
lation but also with the collected. earlier and later law-
sources; further the scientifi¢ tse of that rich treasure
can in no way be narrowed to us by the above estab-
-lished boundaries of the received canon: 6.. 1D-


Further the great Aivetsity of those parts is’ ‘in this
connexion important; following that diversity we may
regard them as of two classes, The first and most
numerous class embraces the whole Digest and in the -
Code the rescripts. These are according to their prin-
cipal destination testimonies to the law existing in their
time; they have so far a scieritific character and the
systematic element of interpretation is predominant
with respect to them (S. 33). However warning must
here be given against a two-fold misuse which might
result from the recognition of this character. First
namely the rescripts have in no way kept strictly to
these limits; the developement of the law has been
rather effected by them to a not inconsiderable extent
(S. 24.); aye even to the scientific works of the old
jurists, although to a smaller extent than in the re-
scripts, this developement is not strange (S. 14-19.) ;
this will appear still more clearly in characterising their
method of interpretation. Secondly it would be wholly
erroneous for one to hesitate to apply the above explain-


(a) This last is mainly applicable to the Digest in which each text
must be regarded as originally part of a juristic work. Here and there
however it is so to passages of the code where several of them have
formed one constitution (coassation.) This case presents itself oftener
in the Theodosian code, still it is not strange to that of Justinian. L. 5.
ec, de act. emti (4 49.) combined with L, 3. c, in quib, causis. (2. 41.)
may serve as an example.


INTERPRETATION: OF THE LAWS, &C. 205


ed fundamental principles for the interpretation of
written laws, to the rescripts in the code and to the digest ”
as a whole, because these parts of the sources were ori-
ginally not laws; for those principles are intrinsically
as applicable to every. other sort- of shape of juristic
thoughts'as to written laws, although the unfolding of
those principles-was primarily necessary for the sake
of laws; and T have accordingly hitherto selected
examples illustrative of interpretation without regard
to whether ‘the texts to be interpreted, were or were
not, originally of the nature of laws. The second class
of the parts of the large law-books is that of laws
originally, to which only the edicts in the code belong.
As-to these the historical element of interpretation is
as predominant as the systematic was there.@) The
novels, which are mainly not portions of a larger whole
but merely laws standing alone, have an entirely simi-
lar nature.


SECTION XLI.
INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS OF JUSTINIAN (Continuation)
(SINGLE TEXTS IN RELATION TO THE COMPILATION.)


It is now further to be determined what as to the
interpretation of single texts follows from their relation
to the compilation to which they belong as to a single
whole.


Ie the first place that mode of aid to the interpreta~
tion of defective laws, which consists in an examina-


(8) Thus e. g. the main question as to the interpretation of L. un. ¢
de nude. j. quir. toll. is: What law prevailed in this matter at the
beginning of the reign of Justinian and what therefore was really altered,
by that law ?


s -


206 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &€.


tion of their internal coherence (S. 35.), obtains through
this relation an entirely new significance and import-
ance; for since now the whole digest is to be treated as
a single great-law of Justinian and the same is true of
the whole code, this means of aid obtains an uncom-
monly great and well-founded extension.@


Further a new means of interpretation arises from
the fact of a single text being inserted under a parti-
cular title; for since each title of the digest and the
code is distinguished from all other titles by the special.
legal institution. to which it refers, a well-grounded
conclusion may be drawn, as to the doubtful meaning

_of a single text embraced in such title, from its peculiar
object-matter. It must still however not be overlooked
that numerous texts have, from overgight and in conse-
quence of :an external show of relationship, been insert-
ed in a wholly unsuitable title and in this case that
rule of interpretation must not be employed.) How-
ever even in ordinary cases one would be giving to that
rule an inordinate extension if one desired to narrow
each text to the special object-matter of the title in
which it is, since that text may actually, by the side of
that object-matter, even without any oversight of the
compiler, embrace a wholly different, aye often more


(a) The comparison of two texts in the digest may be undertaken
with entirely different aims. First to remedy the indeterminate or
erroneous expression of the one by the other, with which we are concern-
ed here; secondly to remove a contradiction between the two ¢exts
which can be treated at greater length below only.


(6) Ohe calls such leges fugitioae. L. 6. de transact. (2. 15.) gives an
example; by reason of the word éransigi occurring in it, this law has
got into the title de transactionibus although it contains no rule apply-
ing to transactions as a comparjson of it with L. 1. S. 1. testam. que-
madm. aper. (29. 3.) plainly shows,


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &c. | 207


important one. One might have sought asimilar means
of interpretation in the order, in which the individual
texts of a title stand to one another, if that order had
been determined by their contents; but in the code thé
texts of each title evidently stand in chronological
order. In the digest the chronological order by no means
prevails, but as a rule too an arrangement merely exter-
nal, by which that use in interpretation is just as much
excluded. The place which a text obtains in the title
is only exceptionally determined by the contents and
then that place can also be made use of in the inter-
pretation. (¢)


Lastly the modifications,.to which numerous texts
have been subjected in their reception into the compi-
lation, are very specially important and are in fact of
three sorts. :

The first and most direct kind is composed of those
cases in which several texts, on their reception into the
compilations, have been partially changed; this proce- -
dure is ordinarily called an INTERPOLATION or Emblema
Triboniant. Many of these interpolations adynit of
being indicated with great certainty@ ; a still greater
number can only be asserted with a certain probability
or remains entirely concealed from us. The permis-
sion for such interpolations, aye a direction to make


(c) Bluhme Ordnung der Fragmente in den Pandectentiteln Zeit-
achrift. f. geschictl. Rwiss B. 4. §, 200.-366. 414.


‘@ Thus e. g. usucapion for landed property continued until Justi-
nian for two years, he put it at ten and sometimes twenty years, what
according to the usage of the old language, is called longum tempus.
Hence the expressions in the texts of the old jurists usucapto and usu-
capere were changed, although unnecessarily, into longi temporis capio,
and longo tempore capere.-Comp. L. 10. 8. 1. L. 17. L. 26. L. 33. 8. 3. de
usurp. (41. 3.) and many like texts.


208 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &c.


them, Justinian has expressly given to the author
of the compilations and the very natural aim was
that older texts, when single expressions in them were
no longer suitable to the existing law, were to be
made by their alteration fit for reception into the
law-books.@) Hence results the important rule that in
the critick of the text, comparison with the pre-justi-
nianean law-sources is permissible only in the most
limited way, namely perhaps only in cases in which it
can be shown, that a variation of the law therefore a
permission of the interpolation had certainly not
existed.


A second, less evident, sort of changings consists in
single expressions of some text, in their connexion with
the compilation, having received another meaning, than
that in which they had been written down by the
original authors. Hence the texts were suitable to the
compilation without the necessity of altering anything.
An undoubted example is found in the law of servi-
tudes. These were according to the ancient law regularly
acquired by im jure cessio whence in reference to servi-
tudes the old jurists very often speak of a cessio. ‘In
Justinian’s time the in jure cessio had entirely disap-
peared, but the expression cessio might bé used
throughout, also in the common meaning of transfer
generally, without reference to the form employed; and
so in many passages they left that expression unchanged,
in the perfectly correct expectation, that it would now
be understood by every one in this general meaning.(/)


@L18s., 7. L. 2 8. 10. C. de yet. j. enucl. (1. 17.) Const. Haec
quae necess. §. 2. Const. Summa S. 3. Const. Cordi. 8. 3.

(f) Of this sort are L. 63. de usufructu (7. 1), L. 20, S. 1. L. 89. de
8. P.U.(8.2)L.3.5.3 L.10. 1.11. L14deS. PR. (83). L. 15.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &@. | 209


Still more frequent and important is the case in which
not a single expression, but the decision of a question
of law has remained unchanged but is conceived in
the compilation in a different connexion, and must be
referred to another ground than in the old jurists: so
that both here and there the decision was equally
correct but in a different way.) The interpretation
which rests upon a presupposed changing of the second
sort is conveniently called a duplex, interpretatio.


Lastly there exists still a third sort of changings,
similar to the second, but with the difference that it
. relates not to single changed legal propositions but to
the whole internal structure of the compilations. In


L. 18. comm. praed. (8. 4.) It is possible that in several of these texts,
tn jure cessio originally stood and that the words in jure were removed,
Then these would belong in part to the first sort of changings, in part
still to this'sort because still the word cessto contained in it would have
received another meaning ; but the supposition made is not necessary; ~
Gaius and Ulpian are accustomed for the most part to add the words
in jure; they are however sometimes omitted by them. Gaius I. S
168—172. II. S. 30. 35. Ulpfan XI. S. 7.


(g) Thus e.g. L. 11. pr. de public. (6. 2.) says “Si de. usufructu agatur
tradito, Publiciana datur.” (Exactly the same afterwards of the Prae-
dial servitudes.) Ulpian undoubtedly thought thus on this matter :
when a usufructus is not formally (by the in jure cessto) established but
-still by tradition, the genuine confessoria (the vindicatio usufructus) is
not at all available but merely the Publiciana to the grounding of which
tradition is quite adequate. As to the law of Justinian, the text only
obtains a meaning by one’s adding in thought that the subject of the
usufruct is a non-proprietor for this is in fact the single case in which
there can still be a question of that-action—When my neighbour’s house ,
is about to fall andi obtain first a missio-and then a second decree, I
-8hall obtain the publiciana and the capacity for the usucapion, L, 5. pr.
L. 18. §. 15. de dammo infecto. (39. 2.) That originally meant that the
Praetor by the second decree would give the property, but not more than
the bonitarian: in Justinian’s time it must be understood of a case
in which the neighbour had no property which he could prove.


210 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS, &C.


this class I reckon the wholly new and very important
position which the numerous rescripts have obtained
by their reception into the code. The rescripts were to
have judicial force for the case by which they were
occasioned, not for other like cases (S. 24.). In the
compilation they have obtained an operation directly
reversed. For the single case, which occasioned them,
they have no longer any existence since this had already
entirely disappeared in Justinian’s time: on the con-
trary the rules of law, which they embraced, expressed
in concrete form, are now elevated to the position of
“general laws. This new importance of the rescripts
we should of necessity have derived from their mere
reception into the code, since this could have had
no other conceivable object: Justinian moreover has
ascribed it to them by express explanations.) In this
matter the task consists in discovering the general-rule
therein expressed from the decision of the individual
case, and it is accomplished by applying the right
measure in the separation of the concrete surrounding,
for in that too much or too little may easily be done.@
Sometimes complete certainty is not to be attained in
determining how much is to be reckoned, among the
circumstances of the individual case lying before us,
casual and foreign to the rule of law. This proceeding
is essentially different from the extending interpretation
of a law by a comparison of it with its grounds (8. 37.)
By this the too narrow, therefore faulty expression is
(k) Const, Haec. quae necess. §. 2. Const. Summa. §. 3. ;

(@) An example of the manner in which the Roman jurists had.
already handled the rescripts in this respect is found in L. 9.8. 5. de j.
et f. ignor. (22. 6.) They were led to the adoption of this proceeding


* by the fact that the rules contained in the rescripts already prevailed as
a great authority although not as laws (8. 24.)


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, & 0. 211


corrected: in that treatment of the rescripts there is
nothing to rectify but merely to recognize rightly the
rule expressed in the individual application As to
this interpretation of the rescripts the above explained
argumentum a contrario is more dangerous than in any
other case of interpretation, since the entire setting
aside of the doubt, whether the part of the rescript in
which one believes himself to perceive the concealed
opposition, has not merely appertained to the accidental
conditions of the individual case, is not to be easily
attained. .


SECTION XLH.


B,—INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES AS A WHOLE
CONTRADICTION,

Hitherto the discussion has been of the interpre-
tation of single laws; but the totality of the law-sources
above exhibited (S. 17—-21) forms a whole, which is
destined for the solution .of every problem arising in
the province of law. In order that it may be adapted
to this end, we must make two requisitions upon it:
Unity and CompLeTeness. In this matter however,
we must not confine ourselves to written law alone but
rather have regard to all kinds of law-sources. On the ~


(k) Warning therefore is here needed against a two-fold error by
interchanging of the extending interpretation. (1) Interchange with the
here described transformation of the concrete decision into the general
rule sometimes openly, sometimes concealedly, contained in that
decision. (2) Interchanging with the application of the rule contained
in the rescripts to like particular cases. This was (as an investing of :
them with the force of law) forbidden in the old law ; as to the rescripta
admitted into the code it is prescribed. Extending interpretation has
nothing to do with either of these kinds of proceeding.

(2), Mithlenbruch archiv fiir civil Praxis II, 8. 427.


212 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &0.


other hand here also, as in the interpretation of single
laws, the principles of the normal procedure are first to
be stated and then the remedies for defective conditions.


The normal procedure consists in the formation of a
system of law out of the totality of the sources. This
is essentially similar to the construction of the single
jural relations and institutions of law (8. 4. 5), only this
construction must here be conducted more in the gross.
In this large connexion the ground of the law, which
has been treated above as to single Jaws, (S. 34)
preserves a weightier significance and activity, and the
organically forming power of legal science (S. 14) appears
here in the greatest extension. The collected circle of
sources and in particular that part of it which we call the
corpus juris of Justinian, may from this stand-point
be regarded as a single law, so’ that the rule of inter-
pretation of a single law from itself, is to a certain
degree applicable to the interpretation of the circle.
The parallelism of the single texts is therefore in this
matter of especial importance; but the possession of
this in its completeness is rendered peculiarly difficult
by the compass as well as the manifold character of
those sources. (@) :


The faulty conditions of that whole, which may be
likened to the defects of the single laws (8. 35), have
reference to the two requisitions made above. If unrTy
is wanting we have a CONTRADICTION to remove—if
COMPLETENESS, we have a GaP to fill up. Properly
speaking both admit of being referred to one common


(a) The gloss presents a very useful and thank-worthy foundation for
the collection of parallel texts. For the commencement, the notes of
D. Gothofredus are already in use; as an extract from the gloss, they
have a sort of value.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &. 213


fundamental conception ; for it is in all cases the resto-
ration of the UNITY which we seek: negatively by the
removal of contradictions, positively by the filling up
of gaps.


‘The case of innate contradiction between ~single


" portions of the circle of sources, is cognate to that of


the indeterminate expression in single laws (8. 35. 36.)
Both defects agree in the recognition of them being
attained in a purely logical method, in remedies being
a simple necessity and in those remedies having to be
sought elsewhere than in logic—here by the historical


‘method. The most general direction is to resolve the


contradiction, wherever possible, into a pure appearance,
that is, to seek the harmonizing of the apparently
contradictory. Only where this unification is not.
attained, the following rules become applicable.


The contradiction may occur either within our
general circle of sources (S. 17—20.) or merely with
reference to the sources hypothetically entering mto it
(S. 21.).


The general circle of sources consists in Germany, of
the written laws of Justinian, the Canon law, the laws
of the Empire and of the customary law scientifically
arisen or of the practice of the courts. If in these an
insoluble contradiction is found, the rule prevails that
the newer part of the sources is preferred to the older.
The reason of this rule lies in the fact that a contra-
diction of the kind here described, appertains to the
continuous unfolding of the law, so that the practical
negation of the older, was bound up with the establish-
ment of the newer rule of law. If now we seek a rule
for the present condition of law, this can only be
obtained from that still subsisting, not from that already


214 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &C.


annulled.) A natural limitation of the rule mentioned,
is furnished by this reason for it. When namely by
the side of the older rule, an exception to itself existed,
the abolition of the rule is not necessarily to refer to
the exception; the exception rather continues to exist


beside the newer rule, if it has not been specially
abolished. ()


The application of the general rule is made’in the
following way. The genuine practice of the courts, as
the most recent working up of the law-sources existing
at an earlier time, takes precedence of all the rest.
The laws of the Empire follow next in the order of
application. Next the Canon law. Lastly the Roman
law. The ranking of the two last portions alone
requires a closer discussion.


Whether namely the canon law takes precedence, in
matters of private law, of the Roman, is much dis-


(6) Oye can only reckon this sort of contradiction among the defec-
tive conditions in so far as one looks upon the older law itself as a part
of the Jaw sources and now of necessity as a part which has perished ;
the condition of the still prevailing sources themselves is consequently
not to be called faulty. Hence in the assertion of such a contradiction
no blame of the condition of law is involved; on the contrary the
admission that single laws are faulty of necessity includes blame.


(c) L. 80. de R. J. (50. 17.) “In toto jure generi per speciem deroga-
tur, et illud potissimum habetur quod ad speciem directum est.” L.
41, de poenis (48.19.) “... nec ambigitur, in. cetero omni jyre speciem
generi derogare ...” the remainder of this text has already been made
use of above 8, 37. note (d.). Whether the abolition is to extend to the
exception also, can only be known from the contents of the newer law.
One must not apply the principle here stated as a limitation of the
general rule, to all the special determinations of the earlier law but
only to such ag bear in themselves the character of exceptions; conse-
quently not to such special determinations as were themselves merely
consequences of the earlier rule. Comp. particularly Thibaut. civilist.
abhandlungen num. 7. where that principle is satisfactorily treated.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &. 215


puted. This at least is undoubted that here also, above
all, an accordance must be sought for. The following
assertion is made as to the case in which such bringing
into accord is not attainable since perhaps an intended
modification clearly exists. The two systems, say some,
are not valid of their own proper force but through the
medium of the reception; so far as we are concerned,
‘that of both took place at the same time therefore they ©
are to us contemporaneous, neither of them has a regu-
lar preference over the other and in each particular
contradiction, the preference can only be determined by
a special practice of the courts.@) However the Canon
law has with respect to the object-matters of private
law entirely the relation of novels and especially the
decretals in which the conflict has its special seat. In
this relation the two systems were actually received in
Bologna, and when the decretals, first singly then in
our collections, appeared, the reception had already
taken place, and those decretals in fact. stepped in as
new modifying laws. In Germany in fact the reception,
and from the very beginning, of the entire and complete
canon law took place at the same time as that of the .
Roman ; but this happened i in the same sense as it took
place in Bologna just as they had also received from
there the limits of the canon of the Roman sources
(S.17.) This complete connexion of events might have
been greatly doubted in case of the canon law having
merely found an entrance as law into Italy but of
having been not at all received in Germany; but at the


(@) (Hubner) Berichtigungen und Zusitze zu Hopfner 8. 14—22.
Mihlenbruch 1.8, 70. More correct views are found in Boéhmer jus
eccl. prot. Lib. 1. Tit. 2. S. 70—78, who discusses the question very
diffusely without coming to a cleans defined result. one also Hofacker
1. 8. 53,


216 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &c.


- time of the reception the respect for the Pope and the
law proceeding from him, was fully as great in Germany
as in Italy, so that that fundamental relation of the
two systems was recognized in Germany not merely
upon the authority of Bologna but on the same ground
as in Bologna. It follows from this examination that
as to matters of private law, the canon law has,-as a
rule, preference over the Roman law. An exception to:
this rule can be only based either upon special practice
of the tribunals or, in protestant countries upon the
principles of the protestant church-law contradicting a
position of the canon law as to private law. The same
effect, as by such an exception, may also be produced
by the above asserted normal preference of the laws of
the Empire to the canon law: if for example the laws
of the Empire disallow a particular position of the
canon law and have thereby effected the re-entrance of
the opposing Roman rule.


SECTION XLII.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES AS A WHOLE
(CONTRADICTION.)— (Continuation.)


More important and more difficult to handle is the
contradiction betweén single parts of the Justinianean
legislation. This occurs to a very great extent and —
the opinions of the modern jurists are extraordinarily
different upon the matter.(@)


(e) Thus for example in the theory of interest in which at least the
general principle is recognized that the decisive inhibition of interest
by the canon law, is set aside by the laws of the Empire and conse-
quently the permissibility of interest, as in the Roman law, is established.
The more minute determinations on the matter are in truth much
disputed.

(a) Very good observations on this are found in Thibaut. civilist.
abhandlungen num. 6. and in Lohr Justinian’s compilation: Grolman


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &¢. 217


Above all is it necessary to distinguish between the
novels and the three law-books. -The novels were
destined as single laws by little and little to modify
and develope the law; they were never united by the
law-giver in one collection. Hence incase of contra-
diction, each novel must be absolutely preferred not
only to the three law-books but to every other older
novel.@) Here too the hypothesis of a-contradiction
is less matter of hesitation, therefore the seeking for
accordance less strictly necessary, since it was the
direct destination of the novels, to change the law. In
truth all the novels were received by us simultaneously
with the law-books and one might believe that for that
-reason, the natural: preference, which accrued, to them
as later laws, would be again annihilated.©) However
that reception took place then in the sense of Justinian,
as one of the legacies of laws left behind by him,
consequently completely in the way, in which their
validity had been established by him at the end of his
long reign. Now at that time the novels had already
annihilated the earlier law opposed to them and it is
therefore quite indifferent that we received the novels -
simultaneously with the earlier law.


and Lohr Magazin B,3, num. 7. A very rich collection of writers in
Haubold Inst. Jur. Rom. hist, dogm. ed. 1826. S, 300.

(6) For this purpose the chronological catalogue in Vieners Geschichte
der novellen anhang num. IV, is practically important, nay indispens-
able. Let it not be objected that the glossators have not possessed
such a table. The principle of it they also have recognized and applied
according to their insight, moreover they have not established another
erroneous chronological order. They have therefore on this side as
little blocked up the way as that of the critick of the text (17—38)

_ (c) (Hitbner) Berichtigungen und Zusitze zu Hépfner S. 8—14, makes
too much of this objection—in the end, he has recourse to the explana-
tion here given but‘merely as a friend in need which is entirely
‘erroneous,


T


218 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &c:


We have next for the three law books to establish a .


more general point of view from out of which the
special rules for the case-of contradictions may be
discovered. Justinian would unquestionably have them
regarded as one coherent whole and indeed as a law-
book proper, that is to say, as a work from which
exclusively the decision of each case was to be taken
and which moreover was fully sufficient for this end.{¢}
This end was to be attained by a selection from the
legal material which existed in a huge mass, in such a
way that the selected passages should be added to a
new whole, with their histotical.form undisturbed. In
this new edifice of law, the Digest was the main build-
ing, the: single part understandable of itself and not
inadequate, to which the two other pafts were merely
added as an epitome or as.an extension. In this position
of theirs, there exists no ground however for directly
preferring the contents of either of them to those of
the other parts. Of the Institutes many have asserted
that they must, as a work specially proceeding from
Justinian, have precedence of the rest : others that they
miust as‘a mere epitome of the Digest stand after ; both
wrongly. Their destination for a book of instruction
is not here in question. As a constituent part of the
legislation, they form a single constitution of Justi-


(d) Constit. Omnem. S. 7. Const. Summa. 8. 3. L. 2. S. ¥2. 23. «. de
vet. j. enucl. (1.17.) Hufeland Geist des R. R. 1, S. 148. 145, denies
this character of a book of laws because the law-books so often
embraced purely scientific matter; but that regards purely their mode
of origin and form: as to their destination to serve as statute books,
the texts quoted leave no doubt and with that we are alone concerned.
It may nevertheless well be that many single texts were not laws but
were merely intended for historical material and use will shortly be
made of this opinion. -


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &¢,- 219


nian(¢) and in this connexion, neither to be preferred
“nor postponed to the larger law-books. Some special
considerations as to the ease of a conflict are still to be
brought to bear. Lastly for the Code, a general prefer-
ence, on grounds similar to those on which it has been
asserted for the Novels, has been not:without a show
of reason asserted’ by many, because our present code
~ became law a-year later than the Institutes and Digest.
On this ground in a conflict of single texts, the Code
should constantly be preferred. From this assumption
the following strange result would flow. The older
code, as to its main parts entirely accordant with our
newer one, appeared in 529. As afterwards in 533
the Institutes and Digest were published, they in all
contradictory texts derogated from the Code. Lastly
in 534 appeared the new Code, which in its turn must
derogate from the Institutes and Digest and hence
immediately re-established the texts of the first Code,
which had been abrogated a year before. It is impos-
sible that Justinian could have intended so fickly to
produce an alteration of the Jaw.(/) In fact he could
have had no thought whatever of such a derogation,
since he supposed no contradictions but entire harmony
between the law-books. The single texts of the new
Code which, without being forced to the supposition of
an absurd alternation and without contradicting the
harmony supposed by Justinian, we might treat as
derogating ones, are the few which appeared between
the Digest receiving the force of law (30 Dec. 533) and
the promulgation of the code (17 Dec. 534) therefore


(e) Proen. Inst. 8.6, L. 2.8. 11, C. de vet. j, enucl. (1. 17.)


(f) This ground is correctly brought to bear by Thibaut, ut. sup.
8. 83. F


‘


220 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &C.


in the space of less than a year.’9) -That these must
be preferred to the law of the Digest is unquestionable,
but this preference flows from another more decisive
reason of which a more extended use will immediately
be made, and it is not necessary for this purpose to
bring to bear the later promulgation of the new Code™
in which those texts are contained. If we sum up once
more the general principle for dealing with the three
law-books, it is this: they are destined to prevail
as a large connected work; their promulgation not
being completely simultaneous is without influence and
we may without danger of error treat them as if they
had been simultaneously promulgated. From this gene-
ral principle special rules are now to be derived for the
treatment of single contradictions, which may present
themselves to us within the three law-books.


SECTION XLIV.
INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES AS A WHOLE
(CONTRADICTION. )—(Continuation.)

In this case the general rule of resolving wherever
possible, by reconciliation, the contradiction into a mere
appearance (S. 42.) first of all gains a wholly special
power and significance; in the first place because the
three law-books exhibit a single work, in which there-


(9) Reland (fasti P. 710) enumerates eleven such constitutions. Of
them however several, from their contents being ecclesiastical or politi-
eal, cannot: at all be in contradiction with the Digest. There remain
the six following which concern private law and are meant to introduce
new law: L. 2. ¢, de jur. propt. cal. (2. 59.) L.-29. ¢. de nupt. (5. 4.) L.
81, ¢. de test. (6. 23.) L. un. c. de cad. toll, (6. 51.) L. 15. c. de leg. Bee
(6, 58.) L. un. ec. de lat. lib, toll. (7. 6.)


(A) Lohr as above 8. 201.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &¢.- 221.


fore the unity of the’ thought is to be regarded as in
itself the natural condition ; secondly however because
Justinian expressly affirms that no contradictions ‘exist,
and that where we believe that we perceive such, should.
we scrutinize them with sufficient closeness (subtili
animo), we should find an occult ground for the-
harmonizing of them.(¢) This direction is peculiarly
important, because by it a somewhat artificial procedure
is fully justified—but certainly. not one completely
arbitrary by the importation of distinctions completely
external, for which no inducement whatever is presented,
in the contradictory texts or in other parts of the
legislation.()


Such a reconciliation is however possible in two
different ways: in the SYSTEMATICAL and in the
HISTORICAL. Both ways are in themselves allowable,
although the second is only to be resorted to, where
the first does not attain the end.


The reconciliation may be effected in the systematic
way by reason. of each of the contradictory texts
possessing special conditions for their application, conse-
quently province for their mastery, either by our
dividing the province of a rule into two halves, accord-
ing to the different conditions or by our regarding the
one text as a rule with which the other is to be
connected as a mere exception: It can however also be
effected, by the two texts being regarded as_a whole, so
that the one text is completed by the other, therefore -
so that the apparent generality of the one is more


(a) L. 2.8. 15. L. 3. 8. 15. C. de vet. j. enucl. (1. 17.)

(b) L. 2. 8. 15, cit. -“.... sed ést aliquid novum inventum vel
occulte positum, quod digsonantiae querelam dissolvit, et aliam naturam
inducit discordiae fines effugientem.”


222 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOUROES, &C.


closely determined and limited by the other(¢) The .
following applications will make this mode of proceed-
ing cléar. Many texts allege the possibility of the
‘usucapion; when a title does not in fact exist but is
“supposed by the possessor to exist ;(4) other texts allege
the impossibility of usucapion in this case.(e) They are
accommodated thus—usucapion is possible where a
probable ground for that error can be pointed out,
otherwise not.(/) In like manner several texts say that
a sale is as between husband and wife simply void, if
the price is intentionally higher or lower than the real
value amounts to;(9) other textslimit this total invalidity
__ to the case in which such a sale is simply concluded for
the effecting of a donation: if on the contrary the sale
would also have been concluded, independently of this
secondary end, then the sale is valid, and merely the
donation, lying in the settlement of the price, invalid.(*)
At the basis of this procedure therefore lies the correct
view, that a rule does not exclude limitation by means
of closer definitions or exceptions, by its being expressed
in a purely absolute way but merely by the express’


(ec) Thus L. 1. 8. 9. C, de vet. j. enu. (1. 17.) says that as a rule na
texts are admitted into the Digest for those positions which already
stood in the Code “nisi forte vel propter divisionem vel propter
repletionem vel propter. pleniorem indaginem hoc contigerit. That can
also be applied to the systematic resolution of contradictions. Justinian
himself gives an example of systematic harmonization of two texts of
the Code in Noy, 158.


(2) L, 3. L. 4. 8. 2. pro. sud. (41. 10.)

(e) L. 27. de usurp. (41. 3.) S. 11. d. de usuc. (2. 6.) .

Cf) L. 11. pro. emt. (41, 4.) L. 4: pra; leg: ¢41. 8), L. 5, 8. 1. pro,
ao, (41. 10.)

(9) L. 38, de contr. emt. (18. 1.). L. 17. pr. ad Sc. Vell. (16. 1.)

() L. 8.9. 5. L. 32. &, 26. de don. int, vir. (24. 1.) Compare below
%. 154 (notes (2) and (c)).


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &c. 223


inhibition of such a limitation. In the reconciled texts
here quoted, the old jurists have enjoined such a pro-
ceeding. On this matter special reference is to be had
to the peculiar nature of the rules and formulas framed
by the old jurists in the scientific way (S. 14.).. Where
therefore two contradictory texts exhibit the opposition
of such a formula to a concrete determination, we ought
almost always to give the preference to the latter.
Africanus proceeds entirely in this sense (note (f)); a
still more important and conspicuous application of
this principle has been made in another place (App.
VIII. Num. VIII.)

The historical harmonization is effected by means of
the supposition that one of the contradictory texts
contains the real and abiding expression of the legis-
lation, the other merely historical material. This
procedure has been brought into ill-repute through its ,
having been conceived and practised by many in a
clumsy manner. They regarded the bare position in
point of time as decisive and in all cases allowed to
the more modern text, whether of Emperor or jurist, a
preference over the older. This unquestionably simple
and convenient procedure does not admit of justification
according to the general design of the law-books:
moreover Justinian himself quite distinctly contradicts
it, since as ta the Digest he says in so many words that
each text admitted; is to be regarded as an imperial law
‘which has proceeded from himself.({) On the other hand


(@) L.1, $5.6, L. 2 S10. 20.6, de vet. j,on. (1,17) L186
cit. says: “Omnia enim merito nostra facimus ;’. the other passages are
rkimilar, Of course these expressions were meant primarily tobe in
direct opposition to the law of Valentinian IIT hitherto prevailing, so
that one should not esteem texts of Julian in the Digest leas than those
of Ulpian: but the rule is go general that it just as much excludes a


924 INTERPRETATION: OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &C.


historical accommodation admits of complete justifica-
tion, whenever an historical object. for the admission
of the older text can be rendered probable: it will
then be postponed to the newer, not because it is
older but because it was not intended to be imme-

diately applied.) Such an historical end moreover
.maay appear for a two-fold reason. First on account
of the jural relations already subsisting at the time
of the compilation, since these must still be decid-
ed according to the older laws.) The second and
more important one which admits of a far more extend-
ed application—because the new, only valid, texts were
to become more clear through the texts extracted from

the older law. In this it is assumed that the older
texts were admitted for the imparting of a portion of
the history of the law, which appeared necessary for
the elucidation of the more modern texts.


The correctness of this latter assumption is completely
established by the following circumstances. First, by
the compilation of the law-books out of historical
material which had for centuries been gradually arising,
whereby the unfolding of legal principles of necessity
became completely visible, while it might have been
completely blotted out by the newly written work.
Secondly, by the careful preservation of the historical


preference of new texts over old, based merely upon the difference

of their age. .
_ (k) This point is satisfactorily explained by Lohr ut. sup. 5. 180,

189—97.

(} It was not absolutely necessary for this purpose to receive into
the law-books, older passages which were no longer to be applied to
future cases, because the old constitutions and books had not been
destroyed. That however this was in fact done, Justinian himself
expressly says. Noy. 89. C. 7,


INTERPRETATION OF THE-LAW-SOURCES, &C, 225


“indications of each text, in cases in which no other end
can be conceived than rendering possible the explana-
tion of the prevailing by the earlier law. Thirdly, by
the existence of so many new modifying constitutions
which are scarcely understandable at all unless they
are compared with the earlier law which they were
meant to change. Lastly, by the special quality of the
Institutes. These were to contain nothing antiquated(™)
and nevertheless to exhibit the historical develope-
ment,) which with respect to many doctrines they do
with great fulness.) Hence all becomes clear: the
institutions, such as mancipation and the rigid marriage,
which had disappeared need not be mentioned; how-
ever the historical developement of institutions still
existing were not to be omitted because without this
their modern form could not be understood. - How can
we doubt about applying to the Digest and the Code
as well as to the relation of the three law-books to one
another, what as to the Institutes lies so clearly before
our eyes, besides being of itself so natural? From
this stand-point also all the objectioris, not without
plausibility, which have been attempted against our
hypothesis, vanish at once. Justinian, say some, has
explained that each text is to be regarded as if it
proceeded from himself (note (¢)); nevertheless it may
well be that any, particular one-is not destined fot
absolute application but for historical explanation.
They say further: nothing antiquated was to be


(m) Prost Inst. 8. 3. “ut.. nihil inutile, nihil perperam pam,
sed quod in ipsis rerum obtinet argumentis, accipiant.”

(n) Proem. Inst. 8. 5. In quibus breviter expositum est et quod
antea obtinedat, et quod postea desuetudine inumbratum ab Imperiali -
remedio illuminatum est.”

(0) Thus e. g. 8. 4—7. J. de fid, hered. (2, 28.)


226 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &c.


received ;(7) how that is to be understood -has been
already explained in speaking of the Institutes. Lastly:
no contradictions are to be found in ‘the law-books ;(@)
but it is not in truth a contradiction when two texts
of discrepant contents are received in order that one
may recéive historical light from the other. Unobjec-
tionable now as historical assimilation for these reasons
is, it ought however only to be applied where the
systematic is not applicable.©) This precedence of
systematic harmonizing is a natural consequence of
‘the law-books having’ been published for a practical
end, whence it must be assumed, as to each of their
constituent parts, that it is intended for practical
application, if this supposition is not rebutted by
special grounds, which takes place here on account of
the otherwise unavoidable contradiction.


However the most important and at the same time
‘the most difficult matter is the establishment of the
conditions of the historical harmonization. The rarest
case is that, of which an example has been above
exhibited from the Institutes, in which a piece of legal
history is in its connexion directly delivered to us
(note (¢/). In almost all cases that sort of harmoniza-
tion musfé be first introduced by means of an artificial
process. By what means now can we ascertain with
certainty that a case for it, is actually present to us ?


(p) Const. Haec quae necess. 8. 2. L. 1.8. 10. C. de vet, j. enucl.
(1. 17.) : .

(gq) Const. Haee quae necess. 8.2, Const. Summa. 8.1. L184
8. C. de vet. j. enucl. (1.17.) L. 2. pr. 8.15. e0d) Nov. 158.

(r) This is confirmed by Justinian himself expressly referring to
systematic harmonizing, only, plainly because he regards it as. the
normal and natural inode and that which is to be attempted before all
others, L. 2.8. 15. C. de vet. j. enuch (1.17.). Nov. 158.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &c. 227


The following rule may serve for this purpose. If we
find two contradictory texts of different age it may
happen that the diversity of contents has been quite
demonstrably produced by this difference of age, in
consequence of an actual alteration of the Jaw in the
interval between the two texts,(®) or, and this is still
more common, the alteration has been introduced by
the later text itself when this in itself bears the
character of a modifying law.~ In such cases ground —
is in fact laid for historical harmonization, since we
may definitely assert that the authors of the two texts,
if they had been written at the same time, would have
been in accord with one another. Now therefore we
ought to regard the older text as mere historical mate-
vial for the explanation of the new.(9 Hence then it


(8) This is conceivable through a new law happening in the interval ;
but also, and still oftener, through the progressive scientific develope-
ment of a rule of law. Thus e. g. in the theory of loan the rigid rule
at first prevailed that a right of action against the receiver could only
be acquired by an absolute giving away of money. When however the
theory of obtaining possession received a freer developement, this also

’ re-acted upon the permissible form of loan. At the time of Africanus,
as it seems, this developement had not yet been accomplished (L. 34. .
pr. mand. 17. 1.), at the time of Ulpian it had been (L. 15. de
R. C. 12. 1.). Here therefore the text of Africanus is purely historical
material whereby the gradual developement of this proposition of law
becomes knowable. A cognate case to this ‘appears in the appendix X.
Another case (L. 28. de don. int. vir. 24. £.) in S. 16T.

(f) A very conspicuous case is found in the Int.de vi. As to this iz
the Digest the principle of the older lgw, which limits the interdict to
immoveables, is expressly set forth (L. 1. S. 3—8 de vi) The Code -
and the Institutes treat it as applicable to things of all kinds. I
assume in facb as correct the opinion set forth in my book upon
possession S. 40. for of course this question is much disputed. Another
ease is found in the theory of the castrense peculium. Tf a jfilius
familias, who possessed such a peculium, died without disposing of it
by will, it fell to the father not as heritage, but jure pristino. This


228 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &C,


may be entirely a matter of indifference, whether the
compilers had designedly so arranged this, a ‘matter
which can never be positively proved, or whether the
‘older text has merely been introduced from oversight ;
for even in this latter case, such an historical-harmoniz-
ing takes place entirely in the sense of the compilation,
and our process is fully justified by its nature and
destination.~) In contradistinction however to the case
here described, the historical harmonization should be
entirely rejected in the following cases. First when
the two texts, so far as we know, are contemporaneous,
which must almost always be assumed if two texts of -
the Pandects proceed from the same jurist or from two
living at the same time, since-we know little of the
chronology of particular works. Secondly when. those
texts are indeed of a different time but so that this
relation as to time is not the reason of the discrepant
contents, since they might have run just as differently
if they had been composed at the same time. This is
e. g. to be assumed of such disputed questions as for
centuries existed among the Roman jurists; if such a
one has got astray in the Digest, it is altogether indif-
ferent that the one text proceeds from Julian, the other
from Modestinus since they would have differed from
one another in the same way if contemporaries. In
such cases, the older text is no evidence of the older


legal position is expressly set forth in the Digest and occurs also in the
Code (L. 1. 2.9.19. §. 3. .de castr. pec. 49. 17., L. 5. g. eod. 12, 87.)
Since however the developement of the so called adventitium, this
principle no longer suited and so the Institutes say, only incidentally
it is true, that that right of the father is only available when. the son
leaves behind neither children nor brothers and sisters. pr. J. quib. non
est permissum. 2. 12. ;


(uw) Lohr ut sup. 8, 212.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SouRCES, &c, 229


law, therefore also their reception could have no histo-
rical aim and hence historical harmonizing must be
pretermitted, since this can be based mainly not upon
the difference of age in itself but upon the historical
end, to be derived from the demonstrable develope-
ment of the law. In like manner however historical
-harmonization must also be pretermitted as to those
texts dissimilar in age, in which it is merely undecided,
which of the two relations may lie at-the base: since
that sort of harmonizing can only be justified by an
evident historical aim.


SECTION XLV.
INTEREREE ATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES AS A WHOLE
(CONTRADICTION. )-—(Conttnnation. )


If we apply these rules to the individual law-books,

_ as to the Code, a very extensive permissibility of histo-

-vical harmonization is the result. If for example the

newer text is an edict, it will be most uiidoubted that it ©
was expressly designed to introduce new law, especially
when such a text proceeds from Justinian and most
especially when it is of the small number of those which
first appeared after the Digest obtained the force of

law.(@) The same relation must be assumed with respect ~
to the majority of the later rescripts e. g. of the very
numerous edicts of Diocletian since at least very often
. they give evidence of an actual developement of law ;
but a general prefererice of the Code to thé Digest ought
” nevertheless on that account not to be: asserted, since


(a) Comp. 8. 43. note (gj. Here therefore the precedence of these
texts is rendered practically available but on other grounds than the
later promulgation of the new code, which has above been shown to be
a not decisive ground. ,


-  U


230 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &e.


many older rescripts of the code, will stand in such a
relation to the texts of the Pandects, as will not admit
of historical harmonizing according to the rules laid |
down.() As to texts of the Digest unlike as to time,
the historical harmonization can be more rarely justi-.
fied: that it may present itself, has already been shown
by an example.) When lastly the Institutes stand in.
_ contradiction with the larger law-books, the follow-
ing cases may for the most part be laid down with
sufficient certainty. Sometimes an oversight in the
composition of the Institutes has manifestly occurred,
through a text of another jurist having been unski]-
fully inserted in the Institutes of Gaius: in such a case
the Institutes are undoubtedly to be postponed.) Many


(0) Thibaut. 8. 93. and Lohr 8S. 213. assert an absolute preference of
the Code to the Digest; with this I cannot agree.


(c) S. 44. note (s).


(d) An entirely undoubted case of this sort has been pointed out in
the first appendix of this volume : but this has for its object-matter no
proposition of practical Iaw. »In like manner 8. 16. J. de L. Aquilia
(4. 8.) is compounded of Gaius III. 219. and the text of Ulpianus ad.
ed., which we possess.as L. 7. 8. 7. de dolo. (4. 3.) By the context the
appearance is created, that in such cases as this latter the a. utilis..L-
Aquiliae is not available, although in L. 27. 8. 19. 20. 21. ad L. Aquil.
(9. 2.) it is already permitted. In S. 3. J. de emt. (3. 24.) it ia said,
for the custody of a slave, the vendor is bound only through express
promise, otherwise not. That is consistent with slaves in other legah
transactions not needing to be guarded L. 5. 8. 6. 18. commod. (13. 6.)
Now however to the section of the Institutes quoted, after the mention
of slaves, is added: “Idem et in ceteris animalibus ceterisque rebus
intelligimus.” By this addition the compilers meant to say, in the
rule first propounded (which without doubt had been literally extracted
from an old. jurist) a slave was only named accidentally, whence there
fore the principle would still become practical: they im this overlooked
however that it was not accidental but that in fact the opposite rule
prevailed as to other moveables and in truth on good grounds. L. 365.
S. 4, de contr. emt. (18. 1.) 1. 3. L. 4. 81.2, de peric. (18.6.) The


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &C. 231


another passage of the Institutes,-on the ‘contrary,

directly embraces a considered explanation of the ;
legislator’s own: such a one is to be regarded as an
edict of Justinian and to be preferred to every other text
contradicting it.© For the most part however neither
the one nor the other of these cases will be able to be
admitted ; the two texts, that of the Institutes and that

of the Digest, will rather be regarded as completing’
one another: this however is a case belonging to syste- -
matic reconciliation (S. 44.), whence every other process
becomes superfluous. (/)


- What in the last place is to be done in the cases in
which both sort of reconciliation are inapplicable,
although a contradiction must at any rate be removed ?
Nothing remains but to prefer that one of the two
contradictory texts which answers best to the rest of
the undoubted principles of the legislation of Justinian.
- This rule rests upon the presumption of the organic


8. 39. J. de action. (4. 6.) permits the compensation only for that
“quod ‘invicem actorems ex cadem causa praestare oportet.” This ,
limitation is not conformable to the rest of the collected law of Justi-
nian and notably not to 8. 30. J. eod. It was already abolished in the
time of Paulus, II. 5. 8. 3. More, it could not last after Marcus Aure-
lius had applied the compensation to the always unilateral action on the
stipulation. 8. 80. J. cit. We now know that these unsuitable words
were inconsiderately copied from Gaius IV. S. 61., in whose time there-
fore the limitation was still in force.

(e) Thibaut. ut sup. S. 96. . .

(f) Under this head I reekon the following cases—-§, 25. J. de rer.
div. (2. 1.) and L. 7. 8. 7. de a. rer. dom, (41: 1.) mutually complete ons
another, The text of the Institutes is more complete on account of
the rule as to mixed property ; that of the Pandects on the contrary on
account of the closer weighing and determination of the case of threshed
grain. Both texts must therefore be blended in thought. In the same
way L. 2. 9. 6. mand. (17. 1.) is merely completed by the close of 8. 6.
J. de mand. (3. 27.)


232 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &e.


unity of the Roman legislation, which again finds its
deeper grounding in the common nature of positive
law in general (S. 5.).. A confirmation of its correct-
ness is found in the completely analogous procedure
which is applicable to ambiguous expressions of single
laws,and as to the correctness of it besides no one doubts.
As in the one case a doubt arises from two meanings
of the same expression, so in the other it arises from
two contradictory passages of the same legislation. As
there the verbal doubt is most safely removed by
‘comparison with other parts of the same law or with
other laws, so here the material doubt, by comparison
with other undoubted principles of the same legisla-
tion. The analogy is complete and undeniable. A
simple application of this rule presents itself, when we
prove a conflict between an entirely isolated expression
on the one hand and several harmonious expressions,
perhaps emanating from different periods, on the other.
We have then reason for presuming the expression of
the real sense of the legislation to exist in this conso-
nance rather than in that isolated expression.) In the
same way when one of the two contradictory texts
stands in the place to which the rule in question
immediately belongs, the other in a place at a distance.
Then of the first it may be assumed that the compilers
in its reception had an express consciousness of its
meaning and influence, while the second on the contrary,


(g) The case of L. 5. S$. 3. de praeser. verb. (19. 5.), which is in
” conflict with so many texts of different times, belongs to this head.
Further the case of L. 23. de don. int. vir. (24. 1.), which is diametri-
cally opposed to many quite clear, undoubted passages-(S. 164.) This
case belongs also to the province of S. 44; since from the contradic-
tory texts, we convince ourselves, that that text has a purely historical
meaning, which from a mere independent consideration of the text
itself would be in no way perceptible.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &, 283


on which the: contradiction is based, may have been
more easily overlooked. Hence therefore the former
expresses the sense of the legislation as a whole more
authentically than the latter.)


In truth Justinian’s definite assurance that contra-
dictions ‘did not exist, there is no way of denying
(S. 44. (@)); but of what avail is this assurance against
the evident reality and against the indispensable neces-.
sity of a removal of the contradiction where it meets
us? One might indeed be led to doubt whether this |

assurance is to be taken as so thoroughly in earnest.
It was part of the plan to obviate contradictions: but
so it was to avoid repetitions and the leaving out of
important. texts of the old law (similia and praeter-
missa.) Now it is expressly explained, that oversights
‘of these two latter sorts may have happened and for
- these the weakness of human nature was very rightly
offered as an excuse.) However this apology and the
' acknowledgment, with which it is coxmected, suit .
equally well the case of contradictions and it seems
wholly accidental that as to them it is not i a
in a similar manner.

Hitherto we have spoken of a contradiction within
our circle of the sources generally (S. 42. fg.) ; itremains
to consider the contradiction in application to the
sources which by hypothesis may be added to them .
(8. 21). -

Tn general the same rules prevail for this second case
as for the former. In particular the newer law must
take precedence of ‘the older, whence the normal


(A) On this ground the 8. 3. J. de usufr. (2. #) Toust, be pee to
the L. 66. de j. dot. (23. 3.)
@ L.2,8. 14.16. ¢ de vet. j. enucl. (1.17.) —


284 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOU


preference of the Landesrecht to the
determined. In like manner here
narrowed by reference to exceptions to
which are not necessarily touched by th
fying rule. A second special excepti
presents itself here. When. namely ©
prevails in a wider province than the o
rule the older is only abrogated when t
an absolute’ nature, otherwise the older lasts. on.
this matter we find this proverb. Will breaks State- .
law, State-law breaks Landrecht, Landrecht breaks
common law.


SECTION XLVI:
INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES AS A WHOLE
(GAPS. ANALOGY). _ ;


If we find our law-sources not sufficient for the
decision of a question of law, we have to fill up this -
gap, for the requirement of completeness has just as
absolute a claim of right as that.of unity has (S. 42).
The only question is where we are to seek this com-
pletion. Upon this question, various as the expressions
of our jurists appear, they are nevertheless essentially
referable to two opinions. According to the first a


(b) L. 8. 8. 5. de sepulchro viol. (47.12.) In a town, burying within
the walls was allowed by the lex municipalis, Hadrian at a later period
forbade it generally, there was a doubt which prevailed : however in
this ‘case the general but absolute, later precept was to have the
preference, C. 1. de const. in VI. (1.2.) “.. Romanus pontifex ... quia...
locorum specialium ... consuetudines et statuta ... potest probabiliter
ignorare: ipsis ... per constitutionem se noviter editam, nisi seprem
caveatur in ipsa,"non intelligitur in aliquo derogare,”


(@® Eichhorn deutsches Privatrecht.


_ INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &¢) 235
_ common normal law (the law of nature) is supposéd,
which is to stand as a subsidiary by the side of every
system of positive law; precisely as in Germany the
‘Roman law stands beside the individual written laws
_(Landes-rechten.) , This particular application of an
opinion already in general rejected above (S. 15.) needs
no fresh controverting here. According to the second
opinion, our positive law is completed out of itself
inasmuch as we grant the existence in it of an organi-
cally forming power. In accordance with our general
view of positive law (S. 5.), we must recognize this
opinion as the correct and necessary one, and.it is
essentially the same that has already been applied to
the production of unity by thé removal of contra-
dictions (8. 45), We call the relation of the propositions
of law discovered by this process to the positive law
in question, ANALOGY,™@ and it is by it consequently —
‘that each perceived gap is to be filled up. ~
' This discovery of law by analogy appears-in two
degrees. First when a new, hitherto unknown, jural
relation shows itself, for which consequently an institu-
tion of law as archetype is not contained in the positive
law hitherto formed. In this case such an archetypal’
institution will be newly shaped according to the law
of innate relationship with those already known.
Secondly and much oftener when in an institution of
law already known, a particular question of law newly
arises. This will have to be answered according to the
innate relationship of the principles of law belonging
_ to this institution, and for this purpose, a correct insight


- (a) The Romans took the expression in the same sense: Varro de
lingua lat. lib. 10. (in older editions 9.) C. 36. Quinctilian. I. C. 6
Gellius IL C, 25. Isidor 1. C. 27. Upon the proper naturé of analogy
Stahl. Philosophie des Rechts IJ, 1. 8, 166, expresses himself very well,


236 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &¢.


into the grounds of the particular law will be very
important (S. 34). The discovery -of law by analogy
may appear in two degrees, as impelling to the develope- .
ment of law e.g. by legislation, in which case it may -
be exercised with greater freedom. It may however also
appear, as we are here regarding it, a kind of pure
interpretation, because perhaps the new jural relation
or the new question of law is presented first for decision
to a judge. Some more precise directions for this kind
‘of application must now be given.


Each application of analogy rests upon the presup-
position of an innate consistency.in the law: only this
is not always a mere logical consistency, such as the
simple relation between reason and inference, but like-
wise an organic one, derived from a connected view of


_ the actual nature of the jural relations and of their arche-


types (S. 4. 5). Hence we must constantly proceed from
a given matter which we amplify for the solution of
the question lying before us. This datum may bea
determinate single written law, in which case the name
of a decision ex argumento legis is employed; still
oftener however the datwm may be contained in such

parts of the theory of law, as had themselves arisen in

the artificial way of abstraction. In all cases however
this process is essentially different from the above
explained extending interpretation (8. 37), with which
it is very often confounded; for this is not merely to
fill up a gap in the law, but to rectify the incorrectly
chosen expression of a law from its actual thought. In
the procedure by analogy we assume that there is a
failure of actual idea of any guiding law whatever, and
we seek fo help ourselves against this fault by the
organic unity of the law.


INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &c. 237


Interpretation by analogy is however wholly inap-'
plicable, when the datum from which we proceed is of
the nature of the exception toa rule.. In such a case
the application of analogy must be at once rejected for
' the reason that the fundamental condition of it, the
want of a rule, will not be present. When therefore
€.g.% previous law is PARTIALLY abolished by a new
law, the unabolished parts continue to subsist.) If
we would extend the abolition to them also, that would’
not be analogy, for there is no failure of a rule, but
‘rather an extending interpretation and to be sure an
arbitrary and groundless one.. The matter will stand
exactly in the same way with the analogical extension
of peculiar privileges (S. 16), with respect’ to which
there can’at no time be a want of a rule of law proper
to them. And the same case would present itself where
an anomalous law or jus singulare (S. 16.) should be

extended beyond its absolute limits, for in that case
also there already exists a rule which would be merely
destroyed by the extension. This however, the most
frequent and important case of all, still needs’ more
accurate discussion. Such an anomalous law for example,
"it might be desired to use not for enlarging the
exception contained in it but for the purpose of deciding,
in accordance with it, a similar, actually undecided,
question of law. Then the case. for analogy would
actually exist and the ground for rejecting it just
established would be no longer suitable; and even in
such a case the principle of anomalous law ought not’
-to be used for the decision of it by analogy, but a cog-
nate principle of the normal law is to be sought oud for ~
the purpose. For the whole procedure by analogy
(8) An example occurs in L. 32. 8. 6, C. de apell. 7. 62. Comp. also
Thibaut. logische Auslegung 5. 20.


238 INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW-SOURCES, &C.


rests simply upon the innate coherence of the system.
of law, but the positions of anomalous law have sprung
from heterogeneous principles, and have merely been
tacked on.to the system of law (8. 16.); wherefore the
organically forming power of the normal law cannot be
ascribed to them.


The Romans have very correct views of the comple- ©
tion of the law by analogy; only in the application ,
they do not everywhere distinguish the developement
‘of law from the pure interpretation ; the grounds of
this commingling will be more fully stated. below.
According to their theory also, in each undecided ques-
tion of law, the law already given is to be extended,
according to the rule of innate similarity and relation-
ship, to the decision’ required.) The forms under
which this organic extension of the law is effected, are ~
especially Frortons(@) and utiles actiones. By their
means withal, the innate coherence of the new with
the old is secured and thus the systematic unity of the
aggregate law preserved. An example, in which this
procedure is exhibited on a large scale, is the BoNORUM
POSSESSIO, which in its complete developement mustbe .
considered entirely a fiction of the kereditas.0 The


s


(c) L. 12. de Leg. (1. 3.) “ad similia procedere” L. 27. -eod. “quae -
guandoque similes erunt.” L. 32. pr. eod. “quod proximum et conse-
quens ei est.” L. 2. S. 18. ¢, de vet. j. enucl. (1. 17.), where Hadrian
says the gradual completion of the edict must take place “ad ejus
regulas, ejusque conjecturas et imitationes.” Justinian himself men-
tions this case, not under the praetermissum in S: 16. eod. (which are
the omitted texts of the old jurists) but under the new négotia in
8.18. How he would have it dealt with will be pointed out below,


(@) Comp. especially Gaius Iv. 8. 10. S. 33-38.


(2) Ulpion XXVIII. 8, 12. L. 2. de B. P. @7. 1) L, 117, de R. J
(50. 17.) aan


_ EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN Law, &c. 239


old jurists however express themselves in the most
determined manner against the analogical extension of
any jus singulare(f) This general rejection is also
corroborated by several remarkable applications in
particular cases. He e. g., who buys a thing of an
insane person whom he regards as sane, has by anomaly
the right to the usucapio: one would however err in
treating this sale as a valid transaction in other
respects.) He who alienates as a pledge a thing, in
the usucapion of which he is engaged, by anomaly”
. carries on the usucapion ; it would however be errone-
ous to ascribe to him, by. way of consequence, any
other possessory rights whatever, since these in their
entirety appertain rather to the creditor.@) When on
the other hand in many other applications, an exten-
sion by analogy of anomalous propositions of law
occurs, this rests upon the commingling of interpreta-
tion with the developement of law of which we shall
immediately speak more at length.


SECTION XLVII.
‘EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW UPON
INTERPRETATION.


When the Roman law recognizes the determinate
power of the authentic interpretation@ and at the


(f) L. 14. de Leg. (1. 3.). “Quod vero contra rationem juris recep-
* tum. est, non est producendum ad consequentias” (repeated in L. 141.
pr. de RJ.) L162. de R. J. (50. 17.) “Quae propter necessitate
recepta sunt, non debent in argumentum trahi.”

-(g) L. 2. S. 16. pre. emtore. (41. 4.)

(h) L. 16. de usurp. (41. 8.) L. 86, de adq. poss, (41.2). A similar
proceeding is found in L. 23.8.1. L. 44. S$ 1, de adqu. poss, (41. 2).
L. 48, §. 8, de fid. lib. (40. 5.)

(a) L. 12. S, 1. ¢. de leg. (1. 14.)


-240 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &c. _


same time that of the usual,@) no peculiar view of law
is contained’ in that recognition; it is rather a simple
consequence of statute and custom being acknowledged
as law-sources. Everything depends upon the place
which the so called doctrinal (S. 32.), which alone is
true interpretation, is to maintain, and on this point
nothing at all is decided by the bare recognition of an
authentic and usual interpretation.


Upon interpretation proper ‘the old jurists in the
Digest give rules, which have in great part’ been made
use of above in connexion with the theory of interpre-
tation explained by me, because this connexion was

- serviceable for mutual completion and illustration.
These rules, as one might expect from the authors of
them, are in themselves good but incomplete and in
particular not calculated for the peculiar case of the
Justinianean law-books which those jurists could not
anticipate. If one compares their own practice with
this theory established by them, that will be found not
quite completely in accord with this. The practice
often far oversteps the limits of genuine interpretation
and assumes the character of a real developement of
law. In particular they give explanations from the
ground of the law, which not merely rectify the
expression but have in view the improvement of the
law, which therefore ceases to be interpretation: aye
they not seldom extend by analogy even a jus singu-
tare, although this is in direct contradiction with
their own definitely expressed fundamental principle
(S. 46). These contradictions are explicable by the


(8) L. 28. 87. 88; de legibus. (1. 3.) ;

(c) Thus they extend to the bridegroom the forbidding of the aliena-
tion of the fundus dotalis, L. 4. de fundo. dot. (28. 5.) In like
manner the free form of the military testament to civilians in an


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &. Bhd


peculiar position of the Roman jurists, which in truth
placed in their hands the developement of law much
more immediately than is supposable among us (S. 19).
Tus then amnong them Interpretatio in no way means:
_ interpretation specially but generally, theory, tradition,
everything therefore which has been designated above
as scientific law (S8..14. 19. 20.) and indeed i in the freer
handling which could be allowed to.them in Rome. a)
However the old jurists may ever in their time have
recognized the shifting boundaries thereby created,
between their own vocation and the functions of the
Praetor or even of the Emperor; this is the probable
explanation of their leaving it undetermined in some
texts, whether an extension of the law is to be effect-
ed by themselves, or rather by’ the Praetor or the
Emperor.¢) Even setting aside however this greater
freedom, which, in comparison with our own, was permit-
ted to the Roman jurists, they had also a more extensive’
means of interpretation, inasmuch as they stood so close
to the origination of their law-sources, .consequently
could absolutely know how, many an expression, in itself
indeterminate, was intended and in what sense it was
immediately: applied by its authors.) In all these -


énemy’s country. L. un. de B. P. ex. test. mil. (37. 13.) Likewise the
privileged competency of the husband io the wife. L. 20. de re. jud.
(42. 1.) In these three cases it is a sus SINGULARE which is page

(d) Upon this meaning of Interpretatio comp. Ih 2. 8. 5. de O. J.
(1. 2.) Hugo Rechtsgesihichte 8. 441. 11. Aug. Puchta Gewohnheitar.
1.8. 16. foll.

(e) L. 11. de leg. (1. 3.) “aut haecteiaa aut constitutione optimi
principis” ...\L. 18. eod. “vel ad he vel certe jurisdictione
suppleri.” - Bert

(f) Thus ¢. g. the Praetor had promised an interdict for the case of
an operis novi nunciatio (L. 20. pr. de 0. N. N.) (89. 1.) That was
interpreted of an alteration of the soil and of such as supported a
building (L. 1. 8. 11. 12. eod.). In another place the edict said: “quod


v


242 “EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN Law, &c.


respects we are placed otherwise than they, especially
when we have to interpret not a law indigenous to us
but that of Justinian standing at such a distance from
us. Our situation is in that respect of more difficulty ; -


- but here as'in many other cases, the exertion required


by the difficulty has not remained fruitless. The
conception and the limits of genuine interpretation
have attained among us; to a higher degree of culture
than they ever did among the Romans, upon whom a _
similar necessity was not imposed.

Under the Emperors, especially since the middle of
the third century.of our era, completely different rela-
tions gradually stepped in. The developement of law
by edicts of the tribunals disappeared and the free
position would hardly have been any ‘longer compatible
with the completely developed imperial apthority;
there could then scarcely be any further question upon
the matter, for the scientific law still survived only in
the books of the old jurists but personal successors to
them scarcely appeared. Now at the most an interpre-
tation of the judge would be’ possible, and it can be
matter for little astonishment, when. even this’ was
subjected to wholly new and arbitrary conditions. This.
was first completed by Justinian but a beginning was
already made at a much earlier period. Thus Constan-
tine ordains :(9) “Inter aequitatem jusque interpositam


vi aut clam factum est (L. 1. pr. quod vi (43. 24.)) That also was
merely interpreted of an opus in solo but this time not merely of build-
ings but also of fields, trees and such like (L.-7. 8. 5. eod.) These
limitations and distinctions lay not in the words and they weré still less
arbitrary; they were based upon the traditional acquaintance with the
cases, and the needs, for which provision was to be made by-the one
edict and the other.

(g) L. 1. c. de leg. (1. 14.) or L. 38. c. Th. de div. reser. i) (newly
discovered.) Comp. above 8, 86. note (f).


EXPRESSIONS OF JHE ROMAN LAW, &C. 248


interpretationem nobis solis et eportet et licet inspicere.”
That is to say: “When by interpretation any principle
of aequitas is to be introduced im opposition to strict
law, that must be done by the Emperor alone.”
“Obviously. what is here spoken of, is not genuine inter-
pretation but developement and indeed a conquest —
of aequiias in the province of the hitherto prevailing
rigid law. This process, which in former times regular-
iy proceeded from the edict of the Praetor, very often
also from the jurists, is now reserved for the Emperor.
There is nothing in this which one might not have
already expected after the change in the constitution.
An ordinance of Valentinian and Martian says, the
Emperor has to remove -obscurities in laws and to
alleviate asperities. Partly however: this vocation” of
the Emperor is not here marked out as entirely exclu-
sive but procedure, by consultations which had been
_ long usual is pointed out as the safest way; one might.
partly from the connexion of the two propositions well
suppose, that only such explanations of a written law
_ were spoken of as embraced in themselves an allevia-
tion, consequently a real changing of the law.)
Lastly it is ordained that doubt upon a new law, not
yet become certain through custom, must be laid before
the Emperor.@) It is however on this matter left
undetermined whether the language is applicable to a
doubt upon legal interpretation or perhaps directly to
the existence of a completed customary law.


(h) L. 9. ce de leg. (1. 14.) ... “Si quid vero in iisdem legibus ..
obscurius fuerit, opertet id Imperiali interpretatione patefieri, duritiam-
que legum nostrae humanitati incongruam emendari.” This is perhaps
the altered beginning of Nov. Martiani 4 in which the last wuts froma
“ duritiam” do not stand.

@) L. 1L e. de leg. (1. 14.), From oe and Zeno,


244 - EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &c.


Much more obvious and decisive are the ordinances
which Justinian himself has given upon this matter. The
first was published A. D. 529, shortly after the introduc-
tion of the older code.® ‘Fhe course of his thoughts
“is briefly the following: “We find in old laws a
“doubt upon the question, whether the interpretations
of laws proceeding from the Emperor have binding
power. This subtle doubt is however altogether ridicu-
lous and is set aside by the present constitution. Every
interpretation of law proceeding from an Emperor
whether it results in a Rescript (sive in precibus) dr in
an imperial decision (sive in judiciis)m) or in any”
other way (therefore e. g. in an authentically interpret-

ing law) is to be considered binding and infallible.
Then as in thé present constitution, the Emperor alone
’ ean make laws so he alone can interpret them. Where-
fore also should questions heretofore have been put to
him by all tribunals doubting as to a law, if the
privilege of interpreting it had not belonged to him
alone ?) In other words who could remove the:


(k) L. 12. 8. 1. @ de leg. (1. 14.)


(Q In veteribus legibus invenimus dubitatum. By that texts of the
old jurists may well alone be meant: perhaps texts of the ‘earliest
period of the imperial government when the binding power of the
rescripts was not acknowledged to be undoubted —therefore certainly
older than Gaius.


* (m) The words admit of a double meaning. Precrs may denvte all
rescripts, Jupicta the decrees so that for the remaining sorts there are
the edicts and the mandates. Precrs may however be confined to the
private rescripts so that the judicia would embrace the rescripts, in the
procedure by consultations, as well as the decrees, The first explana-
tion however appears to me simpler and more natural and the rather
that the principium of the text deals with decrees therefore these have
special stress laid on them.


(a) “Si non a nobis interpretatio mera procedit ?”


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &. 245


obscurities of laws, but he who can give laws? Hence-
forth let therefore all doubts vanish, and it is the
Emperor who is to be acknowledged not.merely as sole
law-giver but also as sole interpreter. However this
direction is not to infringe in any way the right which
in this matter has been granted to the old jurists by
the Emperors.”(@) Tn this enactment two wholly different
propositions are involved: first the binding power of
the imperial interpretation in whatever form it is given ;
secondly the forbidding of every private interpretation. |
The last is for our purpose peculiarly the-new and
important one ; but the first however also needs some
illustration. In this respect Justinian evidently means
to prescribe nothing new here; but merely to enjoin
and secure against vain doubt what would properly be
otherwise of itself understandable. Hence he also
_ determines’ nothing here as to the sort of efficacy of
these imperial interpretations, but he leaves them in
this matter entirely in their former situation. Conse-
quently the interpretation in an Edict ought to_be
binding upon all, exactly like every. written law: that _
‘in a decree, if it was a final decision, likewise upon all,
therefore for other future cases also, as the principrum
of this text establishes: that in an interlocutory decree
merely for the individual case: Lastly that in a
rescript (which, had never been published) likewise
merely for the individual case in question. It is
therefore quite erroneously that many ‘think that the
interpreting rescripts were, after this ordinance, to have


the force of law for other future cases also (8. 24),
aie 2

. (0) That is to say “ the interpretations contained in the writings of

Papinian &c., are to continue to have the legal force, which the

ordinance of Valentinian prescribes.” This ordinance was for the first

time abrogated by the promulgation of the Digest four years later.


246 EXPRESSIONS OF THE. ROMAN LAW, &C.


just as the principiwm certainly prescribes of decrees
when. they are final decisions :-if one compares the
twa parts of this text with one another, one cannot be
doubtful upon the entire difference of the expression,
as also upon the grounds of treatment of the two cases..
The second ordinance of Justinian upon interpre-.
tation is contained in the patent of publication about
the Digest, A. D. 533, that is in L, 2. 8. 21. C. de vet.
jure enucl. (1. 17). It stands in connexion with the
" inhibition to write juristic works (S, 26.) and is in the
following way the complement of it: “Books properly
so called and especially commentaries upon the laws,
are forbidden, If any doubt whatever is however
discovered as to the meaning ofa law,(9) the judges.
must lay it for decision before the Emperor, for he is
at the same time the sole law-giver as also the only
authorized interpreter.” (@


SECTION XLVIII.
: EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW UPON
INTFERPRETATION.—(€ontinuation.)

These two accordant laws are so rugged in their
contents, that at the first blush one might have hesitated
about taking them quite literally. However this doubt
must vanish in presence of the frequent repetition of the
exclusive privilege of the Emperor in interpretation,
still more in presence of the constantly recurring


(p) “Si quid vero ... ambiguum fuerit visum” eto. This must by
no means be wnderabosd merely of ambiguous expressions in a law,
since from Justinian’s stand-point these could notgpossibly be regarded
aa anything. strange, but it denotes doubt and difficulties of every kind
therefore evety need of interpretation in general precisely as the
omnes ambiguitates judicum in L. 12. S. 1. cit. :

(q) “ Cui soli concessum est leges et condere et imterpretari.”


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &c. Q47 .


parallel between legislation and interpretation: for
since no one but the Emperor could make laws, so by
reason of the completely. similar position of the two
occupations, no one but he ought to interpret them. In
fact too in this there was merely a consistent carrying
out of the same fundamental principle, which led to
the prohibition of all future legal science (S. 26). It is
true, that a free interpretation permitted to the judge,
is conceivable in presence of this prohibition; that
Justinian had no such intention, is perfectly plain from
the second ordinance, which simply imposed upon the
JUDGES as a positive obligation the enquiry from the
Emperor as to every doubt upon the meaning of a law.
In what Justinian actually directed he was perfectly
consistent. To every one, jurist or judge, who came
into contact with the laws, a mechanical procedure
only was to be permitted, each free exertion of intellect
to be forbidden, All these directions were manifestly
of a piece,. In truth one might look upon it as an
inconsistency, that Justinian likewise prescribes the
seeking for a harmonization of apparent contradictions
subtili animo (S, 44.); but this must not be conceived
to be an intellectual interpretation, which certainly is
not in his thoughts, but asa searching about for a
hidden word in which the difference of the cases was
indicated, consequently again as a purely mechanical
occupation, Further it might appear inconsistent, that
so many directions as to interpretation, conceived in a
very liberal sense, are admitted into the Digest, if the
judge was not to be permitted to apply them. But
beside these diréstions do not rules as to the composition
of the laws also stand #@) And still Justinian would


(a) 1. 8, 4.5, 6 % 8 de leg. (1. 3.) L, 2, de const, prine, (1. 4.)


248 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &€.


certainly not by that, offer to his subjects a share in
the work of legislation. Both sets of rules were first,
of ‘all to declare in what way the Entperor would give
and interpret laws, and also at the same time to serve
as indications for- those functionaries, who might be
employed by him in these occupations. In this there-
fore there was no inconsistency.


Our jurists have in truth attempted the following
milder explanation of these ordinances. Genuine inter-
pretation, resting upon the rules of Hermeneutics, was
to remain completely free. With respect only to wholly
incomprehensible, incurable, laws which are past mend-
ing by all hermeneutics, the interpretation is directed,
to be reserved for the Emperor.®) But first of all I do
not believe that there exist laws in which the art of
interpretation must be entirely despaired of. Especially
however is an ordinance of this meaning wholly incon-
ceivable in the mouth of Justinian. He is so penetrated
with a consciousness of the brilliant success of his
undertaking, that he distinctly asserts. that his law-
books throughout contained no contradictions, which

nevertheless could hardly be avoided by the greatest
" diligence; and would he at the same time admit, that
in his completed law-books, wholly incomprchensible,


(6) Thibaut. logische Auslegung. 8S. 25. 47.112. Hufeland Geist des
Rémischen Rechts I. 8. 121, Miiblenbrach. 1.8. 54. Hufdjond has
however the peculiarity that he narrows this explanation to L, 2. 8, 21.
cit; on the other hand he (8. 46—51.) explains the prohibition in L. 12.
8. 1. cit as prevailing only in cases in which the Emperor has already”
actually interpreted. The text however contains no trace of this limit-
ation, indeed it is completely refuted by the ground, by which the
direction is to be put beyond doubt “to what purpose the questions if

- interpretation were not the calling of the Emperor alone?” At the time
of a question (consultatio), the Emperor had “certainly not yet inter-
preted.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &c. 249


therefore utterly bad laws would be found? Would
he moreover have regarded this case as so important
and of so frequent occurrence as to’ find it necessary to
_ promulgate, in two different years, ordinances with
respect to it? Every general consideration therefore
compels the entire rejection of this explanation ; incre-
dibly weak moreover are the special grounds which
have been adduced in justification of it. In L. 2.
de leg. stands, say they; st guid obscurius fuerit ;
that denotes an impenetrable obscurity. Setting aside
however the fact that the expression does not even
appear in Justinian’s own ordinances, of which the
meaning is the sole question here, this comparative
used absolutely has rather an attenuating meaning; it
implies: some degree of darkness, not altogether clear.
Further, say they, the older ordinance calls that which
it reserves to the Emperor: legum aenigmata solvere ;
that means: to throw light upon the obscure; but in
the idea of a riddle insolubility is so little involved,
that a riddle is ordinarily invented merely for the
‘purpose of being solved. It is also clear. from other
passages of Justinian that in his somewhat bombastic
phraseology, aenigma denotes every “difficulty, and by
no means the invincible difficulty only.) That expla-
nation of Justinian’s ordinances, appears therefore in


(c) InL. nn. C.denudo j. quir. (7. 25.) it issaid: nec jure Quiritium
nomen quod nipil ab aenigmate discrepat. We already knew the mean-
_ing of this technical expression tolerably well through Ulpian; since
Gaius we know it very much better ; in Justinian’s time when they had
so many complete Institutes, &c., the difficulty was far less still. In
like manner L. 1. S. 13. C. de vet. j. enucl. (1. 17.) forbids the siglorum
-compendiosa aenigmata, The meaning of the abbreviations people could
acquire from every copyist, there existed already in that time works in
which they were explaiged, e. g. that of Valerius Probus. In both texts
therefore aenigma does not mean anything unfathomable but something


” 250 EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN LAW, &C.


every point of view so wholly unsustainable, that its
distinguished partisans would certainly not have had
recourse to it, if they had not been urged to it by a
feeling of its extreme necessity; that necessity however
and the remedies for it will be discussed in the follow-
ing section.


Since the meaning of Justinian’s ordinances has now
“been established, we have still to add how he contrived
the procedure, by which they were to be carried out in
practice. It is clear that he was to be consulted in
every doubt upon the nfeaning of a law. These ques-
tions however were not by any means to lead to
authentic interpretations by means of Edicts, but
merely to Rescripts which had binding power as to the
existing case but no further; and this condition of the
matter appears also to have maintained itself wnchang-
ed in the time following. Then when Justinian, eight
years after the introduction of the Digest, in novel. -
118, declared private réscripts unbinding (8. 24.), he
expressly added that consultations and rescripts as to:

‘ the interpretation of laws were to continue to exist as
before. Still later (A. D. 544.) the Novel 125, forbade
consultations also (S. 24.) and in fact without that
express reservation (in Nov. 113). However the same -
reservation must be tacitly added in thought; for it is
wholly inconceivable that Justinian would now have,
indirectly and furtively as it were, again, given free
scope to private interpretation which he had, repeat-
edly and in the most solemn manner, forbidden.
Without doubt the prohibition applied only to the
peculiar consultations which yielded up the case itself


that one must learn, that which’ one cannot a have learned by


every day experience, therefore not without some effort.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE ROMAN Law, &C. 251


to the Emperor for determination, therefore for him to
compose, as our faculties might do, a decree instead of
the judge doing it himself. The consultations for the
sake of legal a ag were not to be touched by
the provision.


However this course of business, plainly prescribed
by Justinian, is not without practical difficulty. One
might suppose that he must have been so overloaded
with questions, that he would scarcely have been able
to give further thought to the other matters of govern-
ment. Let us not deceive ourselves on the matter by
our perceiving that even those among our judges not
especially learned, nevertheless find themselves tolerably
well at home with the laws of Justinian. . By their

- side stands the friendly help of some group of colleges
or of a law book, which furriishes them in the most
convenient manner with the refreshing fruit of the

“JaBour and traditions of seven hundred years. Let us
now however think of this labour of seven hundred
> wars as out of the way, and of the Corpus juris face
t. face with a judge, relegated to his own personal

strength, ignorant, as all judges must have been if

‘istinian’s prescriptions as to legal science had hitherto
hedn followed. I believe that with such a judge, if.
uuly he were conscientious, scarcely a court-day would
ass over without questions for the legislator, who

dower rer ina large state would no longer be able to
conquer the labour required of him, merely for keeping
the machine of judicial administration in daily progress.

However this consequence could not have shown itself
in Justinian’s empire; otherwise he would hardly have

’ repeated,@ eight years after the introduction of ‘the


(@) Nov. 113. C. 1. pr. A. D. 541,


252 PRACTICAL VALUE, &C.; OF INTERPRETATION,


Digest, the prescription of questions for the purpose of
interpretation, for in that time sufficient experiences.
must have been collected. This remarkable appearance
is explained by two opposing forces not seldom being
capable of leading to the same end. Intelligence and
knowledge will not have even once allowed the necessity.
of a question to occur to the judge, to whom. the
interpretation is permitted. In Justinian’s empire, the
judge to whom he had forbidden interpretation, may
have assisted himself by thoughtlessness and arbitra-
riness, without having recourse to more frequent
questions than the Emperor was in a condition to
_ dispose of. ,


SECTION XLIX.
PRACTICAL VALUE OF THE ROMAN EXPRESSIONS UPON
INTERPRETATION. -

Now that the Roman determinations as to interpre-
tation have been set forth, it: remains to examine what
value for us those determinations have, in places: in
which the Roman law. in general prevails. This ques-
tion is obviously related to, but at the same time
different frum, the question already answered as to the
law-sources (8. 27.); for there the question was as to
the generation of law which of itself belongs to public
law; here the question is as to the adoption of the

. law, therefore of the conduct of the individual in
presence of it, and why should the Roman law not be
able to furnish the rule for that matter just as well as
for every other which concerns individuals ? 2


It is necessary however at once to exclude on formal
grounds a constitution of Justinian, the L. 3. C. de vet
jure enucleando, since this belongs to the restored texts


PRACTICAL VALUE, &C., OF INTERPRETATION. 253


(8. 17). However this exclusion is altogether unim-
portant, since that text is merely the Greek of that
immediately preceding (L. 2. eod.), has therefore no
proper contents of its own, different from the latter.
‘Now one part of the texts, which are ordinarily
assigned to this place, is unquestionably decisive; I
mean those ordinances of Justinian, in which he
expresses himself upon the destination of his law-
‘books and of their several paris. When e. g. he says,
the texts of the jurists in the Digest must not be
regarded as mere instructions but as genuine laws
proceeding from himself, this is less a rule of interpreta-
tion than a part of the patent of publication; since it
does not relate properly to what we have to do, but to
the sense of that which he himself does. Something
similar in fact, only in a much more round-about way,
may be said also of the rules of interpretation proper
for they have in fact the following meaning: “all texts
of the Digest and the Code are to be understood accord-
ing to the rules of interpretation here given, since I
have admitted the passages, on a pre-supposition of
those rules. In the same manner my future laws, and
the laws of my successors, are to be understood, for we
will constantly exercise oyr legislative power on this
pre-supposition.” ‘hen the rules of interpretation
would, in reference to each particular text, already be
a sort of authentic interpretation. This view would
then lead us to the following further conclusion. The
Roman rules of interpretation might be applicable to .
and Yegally binding for Justinian’s law-books and for
the laws of the succeeding Greek Emperors, if these
had been received by us; they could not however be
applicable to the Canon Jaw, the laws of the Empire
and our written laws of the land; for Justinian could
Ww


254 PRACTICAL VALUE, &C., OF . INTERPRETATION.


not possibly have meant to determine, as by a legisla-
tive fidei-convmiss to all times, in what sense in future,

Popes, German’ Emperors, or German Princes, would
: exercise their legislative power.(@)


. Thus the matter stands according to a general,
purely formal treatment, and hence a very extensive
, Sphere of influence would be secured to the Roman
rules of interpretation, namely over Justinian’s law-
books which are precisely the most important case for
the application. If however we look at the special
contents of those rules, we rather arrive at the convic-
tion, that even in this very application, they have not
a legally binding power. The most important of all
these rules is unquestionably that which we find in
two ordinances of Justinian (S. 47. 48.); it tells us
quite distinctly how-we are to interpret, namely not at
all. Clearly on two grounds we cannot recognize as
law, this most important rule.


First because it stands in inseparable connexion with
Justinian’s forbidding the writing of juristic books
(S. 26). This connexion is clear not merely from the —
contents and aim of the two prescriptions but also
from their framing, inasmuch as they stand, immedi-
ately next to one another, in the new ordinance, and the
more 89," that the one is expressed as the consequence -
and more minute determination of the other. Since


(e) The comparison with the following case of an opposite kind, will
make this still plainer. In the Prussian Landrecht King Frederick
William II. has admitted rules upon interpretation. These were valid
for the Landrecht ‘tself, for later laws of the same king ‘and for all
laws of his successors’, then his law is also binding as to the exercise
af the regal power by his successors, until it has been abrogated. , Here
also therefore is the ever re:ppearing contrast of public and private law.


PRACTICAL VALUE, &@., OF INTERPRETATION. 255


now the inhibition of scientific books has not for us
the force of law (S. 27.), so also that with respect to
interpretation cannot have such force; if we would
permit this, torn from its context, to prevail alone, it
would in fact be no longer Justinian’s prescription, but
something which we have arbitrarily made up out of it,
and in which only a verbal appearance of his prescrip-
tion would be found. 5


Secondly. because the carrying of it out in practice
is not merely difficult but completely impossible; for
Justinian renders the interpretation of the judge
dispensable with, by imperial rescripts; such an insti-
tution however is found in no modern state. Let us
not delude ourselves with the resource of an authenti-
cally interpreting law@); no judge has the power of
bringing about such @ law, he has riot a right to delay
his decision until the appearance of such a law; above
all however this would not be what Justinian desires
but something wholly different. In like manner let
us not delude ourselves by means of a reference to a
law. commission or a ministry of justice, which, it is
true, are in some countries in the habit of imparting
such instructions); for this also is something’ quité
different, and it is sufficiently clear, from’ what wé
know of the character of Justinian, that he was


(6) Thibaut abhandlungen S$. 102. Comp. on the contrary Lohr
Magazin ITI. §. 208. who only wrongly hesitates because of the authentic
interpretation then acquiringa retroactive effect. This however it has
always had as will be shown below. Comp. in the mean time Nov.
148, pr.

(c) Such a law commission, with a binding power of intérpretation,
formerly existed in Prussia but has since been abolished. Comp. below


8. 51. note (c). There however the lands subject to the common law
are spoken of, :


256 PRACTICAL VALUE, &C., OF INTERPRETATION.


perfectly in earnest as to the personal operation of the
Emperor upon interpretation. If moreover we once
arrive at the belief in the necessity of getting over
Justinian’s actual direction by means of some substitute
or another, why then should we stop half way and
not rather take advantage of our natural freedom ?


It was a feeling of this necessity which led to the
forced explanation above stated (S. 48.), of Justinian’s
ordinances; but no justification of a procedure so
completely arbitrary is created by that necessity. It-
would be better to say without any contest, Justinian
has in fact forbidden private interpretation but a
general customary law has in turn abrogated this
probibition.@ At least in the whole of legal history,
scarcely any example occurs, in which a general custom
would be so beyond doubt, as that of private interpre-
tation from Irnerius to. our own day. From out of
‘our stand-point, we cannot indeed admit such a
derogating custom, since we no doubt ascribe no
. applicability to’ the Roman prescription in itself; and.
this very assertion is now directly corroborated in the
fullest, manner by the demonstrated impossibility of the
application. Then this impossibility is easily grounded
upon Justinian himself having placed his inhibition in
inseparable connexion with a political institution, that
of the imperial rescripts, which has now disappeared.
Hence he has made it a part of public law and accord-
ing to our general principles (S. 1. 17.), we must
consequently deny its applicability to the present time.


(d) Zacharii Hermeneutik S. 164, puts it nearly in this way, but
with the erroneous addition that the law of Justinian itself is hesita-
ting on this point since some texts permitted interpretation, others
forbade it; this vacillation has been determined by our practice iu
favour of the permissibility.


PRACTICAL VALUE, &C., OF INTERPRETATION. 257


If we compare the final consequence of the view here
expounded, with that which is derived from that
strained explanation of others, the two results are not
in fact different. They allow Justinian’s prohibition
to have the force of law, but limit it to the in fact
non-existent case of laws completely meaningless. Here
the sense of the prohibition is recognized in its fall
meaning, at the same time however its applicability
to modern times is wholly denied.


All these reasons apply merely to Justinian’s prohi-
bition of interpretation ; the rules in the Digest as to -
interpretation might, so far as they are concerned,
roaintain’ the force of law with us. Still I hold it to
be more consistent to deny this power to these rules

‘also and therefore to allow the different determinations
“of the law of Justinian upon interpretation, to stand _
or fall together. Every severance of this sort is
always a half measure: apparent maintenance amid
essential*changing ; for who can say what other rules
might have appeared good to Justinian, if private
interpretation had appeared to him generally admissible?
This question is*no longer of practical importance ;
for entirely new precepts upon interpretation, by which
our general views would be positively changed, are not
to be found in the Digest; moreover by our assertion,
neither is the regard to an authority commanding
respect withdrawn from them, nor the instruction
which we can draw out of them, from us.. They have
also been already hitherto employed by me in that way,
with the theory of interpretation here attempted.


258 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &c:


SECTION L.
VIEWS OF THE MODERNS UPON INTERPRETATION. (2)


In the course of my own exposition mention has
constantly been made of the differing views of modern
jurists. In conclusion a summary ought to be given
of those views upon certain main points, which exercise
special influence upon this theory in its entirety.


To those main points belongs first of all the very
generally prevailing conception of interpretation as an
ENLIGHTENING OF OBSCURE laws.) Inasmuch as a_
casual and indeed faulty condition of laws is made the
condition of its existence, interpretation itself possesses
the accidental nature of a mere escape from an evil,
whence it naturally follows that it must become more
dispensable with, as the laws become more’ complete.
Now no one will deny that interpretation is especially
important and necessary for obscure laws, and that
with respect to them the art of the interpreter may
often show itself with peculiar brightness: for this
reason also the greater part of the rules expounded

- are concerned with the case of defective laws (S. 35. fg.).

(a) I here appeal to the following jurists, partly as exhibiting great.
wealth of materials, partly as capable of serving as representatives of the
most current opinions; Chr. H. Eckhard hermeneutica juris ed C. W.
Walch Lips. 1802. 8. Thibaut Theorie der logischen Auslegung des R.
R. Qte. Ansgabe, Altona 1806. 8. Mithlenbruch I. S. 583-67. Espe-
cially free from prevailing conceptions (misconceptions) and rich in
thoughts of his own is here as elsewhere Donellus I. 18. 14. 15.

(6) Forster de j. interpret. I.1. Hellfeld S. 29. Hofacker I. 8. 149.
151. 152. (Hitbner) Berichtungen und gusiitze zu Hopfner S&. 178.
Hufeland Lehrbuch des Civilrechts I. 8. 28. The Romans regarded the
matter otherwise. L. 1. S, 11. de inspic. ventre.-(25. 4.) “Quamvis
sit manifestissimum Edictum Praetoris, attamen non est negligenda
interpretatio ejus. ‘ .

{e) Zacharia Hermeneutik S, 160. says this in so many words. .


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, ‘&C. “2553


Two considerations however will exhibit to us that
mode of seizing the fundamental concept as ‘too nar-
rowed and as detrimental to the whole theory. In the
first place a fundamental and exhaustive treatment
of the diseased condition is impossible, if a foundation
has not been laid by the examination of the healthy
condition to which that is to be referred. Secondly by
that mode of embracing the idea, the noblest and most
fruitful application of interpretation, which consists in
revealing the whole richness of their contents and
relations in texts not faulty therefore not obscure,
_ entirely disappears from us; a procedure which is of
‘such special importance in the Digest. When moreover
one takes this arbitrary limitation of interpretation to
obscure laws in connexion with the opinion above
quoted, according to which again very obscure laws .
‘ were withdrawn by Justinian from interpretation (S.
48.), out of the two together arises the singular conclu-
sion—that to enable laws to be fit objects for interpre-
tation, they must be neither too elear nor too obscure,
‘that they must rather find themselves in a narrow
compass of moderate obscurity. .


Secondly the division of interpretation into GRAM-
MATICAL and LOGICAL is another of those opinions.(4)
These are not at all conceived as elements of every
interpretation, which must constantly work together
throughout with the difference only that, according to
circumstances, sometimes the one, sometimes the other
element may be more productive (S. 33.), but rather as
opposed to and exclusive of one another. The gram-
matical is to proceed merely according to the meaning


(@) Eckhard S. 17. 23. Thibaut Pandekten Ste. _ Auag. 8. 45. 46. 50
—52. Thibaut logische Auslegung S. 3. 7. 17—~29. :


260 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &€¢.


of the words, the logical merely according to the inten-
tion or ground of the raw the grammatical is as a rule to
prevail, the logical only to be exceptionally permitted.
In this contrast the only thing clearly conceived and,
generally admitted, is that logical interpretation is such
as takes no small liberties, and such as must therefore
be kept under control: moreover the most heterogene-
ous matters are collected under this expression. Thus
the correction of the expression according to the actual
thought of the law (S. 35. fy.) serves for logical inter-
pretation; but also the enlarging by analogy; and
lastly yet a third process which will directly be spoken
of more at. length. If now the explanation of the
tasks presenting themselves in interpretation, which
“has been above given, is correct and exhaustive, that
division must at once be given up; the adduction and
explanation of it has certainly rather obscured than
assisted the Shjectemattey:


Thirdly and this is the most important, they have
drawn into the province of interpretation a handling of
laws, which niust in fact be regarded as an altering of

.them and nevertheless this has been. comprehended
under the name of logical interpretation. We have
spoken above of a rectification of the expression by
referring it-to the actual thought; here a rectification
of the thought itself is attempted by referring it to
those thoughts which the law ought to have contained.
One goes back, that is, to the ground of the law and
when it is found that the ground, in its logical
developement,leads to more or lessthan the Jaw embraces,
this will be improved by a new sort of EXTENDING or
NARROWING interpretation. For that purpose it. is
indifferent whether the legislator has consciously


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C. 261


committed a logical ‘mistake or whether he mercly
neglected to think of the consistent applications of the
ground by means of which they now set him right;
in the latter case therefore it is presumed that he would
infallibly have so arranged it, if his attention had only
been.called to these consequences. This at least is the
aspect of this procedure completely carried out. It is
however also made use of with the modification that
an extension according to the ground of the law is
permissible but never a narrowing of it;( however it
would be difficult to give a aa ground for this
distinction.


" Inasmuch now as by this procedure the interpreter
undertakes to improve not the mere letter, therefore
the appearance of the law, but its actual contents, he
puts himself above the legislator and consequently mis-
conceives the limits of his own calling; it is no longer
interpretation which he practises but actual develope-
ment of law.) Such a confusion of boundaries
between essentially different activities is a sufficient
ground in point of form, for wholly rejecting this sort
of interpretation, and, according to the true conception
of the office of judge, for wholly denying his liberty to
adopt it. There are however still two objections to
the process inherent in the thing itself. The first


(e) Thibaut. Pandekten 8. 51.52. He permits the extension in two
different casés according to the ground and the intention ; thé limite-
tion according to the ground alone. He means by intention (absicht)
generally what I denote as the actual thought of the law.


(f) The objection to this unauthorized procedure, has heen convert-
ed in many to the opposite one-sided view according to which all
interpretation appertains in general not to the judge but to the

- legislator, who might however, it is true, delegete it. See above S. 82.
Rote @.


f


262 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &€.


consists in the frequent uncertainty of the ground of
the law; where now upon the nature of this an error
is very possible, that procedure must degenerate into
complete arbitrariness, and all legal certainty, by which
laws may evidently- be so beneficial, be destroyed.(y)
The second cause of. hesitation lies in the possible
existence in the train of thought, of middle terms by
which the legislator might, without inconsistency, have
been determined to assign to the law a wider or nar-
‘rower province than that to which the ground.of the
law seems to lead. We must consequently be on our
guard against the deluding appearance of logical
certainty by which this procedure is customarily appli-
ed.) Only where these material causes of hesitation
could be removed by thorough enquiry, such an exten-
sion or restriction according to the ground of the law, .
must be held permissible and advisable, not as interpre-
tation but as a consistent developement of law. Even
the nature of anomalous law does not stand in the way
of such a developement although through that nature
the application of analogy must be shut out from the
judge.(S. 46).

That this procedure however is customarily accepted
by the modern jurists as genuine interpretation and
consequently (with more or less limitations) permissible
to the judge, is explained by the very usual interchang-


(9) That is the true meaning of L. 20, 21. de leg. (14.3.). “Non
emnium, quae a majoribus constituta sunt, ratio reddi potest. Et ideo
rationes eorum quae constituuntur inquiri non oportet : alioquin multa
ex his quae certa sunt, subvertuntur.” The inquiré non oportet is not
to be understood as a declaration against enquiry into the ground in
itself, but merely in so far as it is to be applied in modifying the actual
contents.

(A) Excellent remarks upon this matter are found in Stah] Rechts-
philosophie IT. S. 177.


VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &C¢. 265


ing of. this case with apparently similar cases in which
a freer procedure is in fact permitted and necessary.
Amohg those cases is first the real extending and
restrictive interpretation by which the actual contents
of the law are not (as in that process) improved, but
-merely asserted and defended against the appearance
of the letter (S. 37). A second similar case, with which
that erroneous process is confounded, is that of analogy
(S. 46), In this case however there is a complete want
of a rule of law, which therefore is to be enlarged by
an artificial extension of the existing law-sources; in
that erroneous procedure on the contrary, a rule of
law is actually existent, which is however to be exelud- ©
ed from application by artificial extension of another
law. The third case, which in the last place is accus-
tomed to give occasion to such a confusion, has not
hitherto been mentioned at all. It relates to such acts
as violate the law not indeed according to the letter of
it but according to the spirit (in fraudem legis). That
the law ought to be applied to such acts is undoubt-
_ ed.@ People are accustomed to think of this matter,
as if the law evaded, must be extended by analogy.
When e. g. usurious interest is promised under the
appearance of a contract of sale or of a conventional
penalty, they assume that the legislator has merely not
thought of these cases: if his attention had been called
to them, he would, in a supplement to the usury law, |
have forbidden these contracts also and since he has


(i) L. 29. de leg. (1. 3.). “Contra legem facit qui id facit quod lex
prohibet : in fraudem vero, qui salvis verbis legis sententiam ejus
circumvenit.” L, 5. c. de leg. (i. 14). “Non dubium est in legem
committere eum qui verba legis amplexus contra legis nititur volunta-
tem. Nec poenas insertas legibus evitabit, qui se contra juris senten-
tiam saeva praéerogativa verborum fraudulenter excusat.” L. 21. de
leg. (1. 3.). L, 64. S. 1. de condit. (85. 1.).


- 264 VIEWS OF THE MODERNS, &¢


passed over the matter, we must now come to the aid
of his thoughtlessness with an extending interpre-
tation. In fact however the matter stands quite
otherwise. We have not to interpret the law, which
is quite specific and sufficient, but the individual act.@)
Tf we apply to this the maxim as to simulation, we
must treat the apparent sale or conventional penalty .
as an actual contract for interest and we therefore in
this treatment, correct by our decisién the letter
according to the actual thought. It is essentially the
same procedure, that has in other cases becn applied to _
laws (S. 37). Only with respect to legal transactions

this procedure will often carry with it a still higher

degree of certainty; for in laws we have to do with an

unaptness in the use of the expression, in transactions

in the case supposed with a dishonest intention; this

however will often be much more certainly recognized

from the circumstances than that. Besides these
confusings however, yet another cireumstance has

induced to the favouring of the erroneous sort of inter-

pretation here set forth: the example of the Roman_
jurists who in fact apply this process and experience no

hesitation in doing so. In their proceeding however

there is no justification for us, for with the Romans it

is connected with the wholly peculiar position of the

jurists, which allowed_to them such an immediate

influence upon the .developement of law as cannot be

permitted to our own, be they writers or judges. @)


(A) It might be objected, that the Romans actually regarded the
treatment of this case as legal interpretation, by reason of L. 64,8. 1.
de cordit. (35. 1.). “Legem enim .. adjuvandam interpretatione. But
they use the expression tnterpretatio, altogether in an extended sense,
for every acientific proceeding (8. 47. note (d).

() Compare above 8. 19. and S. 37. nate (g).


EXPRESSIONS OF THE MODERN copEs, &c. 265


SECTION LI... _
EXPRESSIONS OF THE -MODERN CODES UPON
INTERPRETATION.
. The modern Codes contain still fewer determinations
upon interpretation than upon the law-sources (8. 31).
The French code says nothing at all upon the matter;
but the absolute direction given to the judge to decide
every case without regard to the obscurity of a law,
and the peculiar position of the court of cassation,
render undoubted the way in which this object-matter
is conceived in the French law. The Judge has there
complete liberty of interpretation, but at the same
time the certainty and harmony of the law-are protected .
against the danger of arbitrary interpretations by the’
supremacy over all courts of the court of cassation,
which can exercise its instructing and curbing influence
even in cases in which the rules of procedure no longer
permit an actual alteration of the particular decision,
This solution of the problem would be amply sufficient,
if the court of cassation had the right of pronouncing
a decision of its own; instead of a mere quashing
decision. It is however merely competent, after it has
quashed, to relegate the deciding to another court so
that a decision built upon erroneous legal principles,
and the quashing of it in the very same case, may be
several times repeated. This circuitous and costly
procedure was produced by the fact that in the old
constitution, the procedure by cassation did not take
place before a court at all but before a high adminis-
trative body (the conseil du rov), which was merely to
obviate the violation of law, not itself declare law.
This reason has vanished since the revolution because
now a special court of cassation exists, which forms an
express court and enjoys like independence with all
.<


266 EXPRESSIONS OF THE MODERN CODES, &C..


other courts. In recent times, they have sought to
remove the evil mentioned. The first attempt at doing
so was however not adequate.(@) The latest law, which
renders it absolutely: incumbent upon the tribunal, to
which the matter is. remitted after the second cassation,
to base its decree upon the legal principle expressed in
the decision of the court of eassation, is much more
effective.® ;


The Prussian Landrecht prescribes that the judge is
to assign to the laws that meaning which may result
from the words and their context or from the proximate
andoubted ground of the law.© More important was -
the determination, approximating to that of the law of
Justinian, that the Judge must indicate each doubt
upon interpretation to the law commission and then
follow their decision. This arrangement has however
since been abolished; the judge, who now interprets
and decides independently, has merely to indicate
his doubt to the head of the department of justice
(chef. der Justiz), whereby itmay be made useful for
legislation(¢) In case of a gap in the Jaw, the -judge
is directed to devide according to the general principles
of the Landrecht or according to the provisions for
like cases; he is likewise to point out the supposed


{a) Loi du 16, Septembre 1807. Loi du 80. Juillet 1828.


(6) Loi du 1. Avril 1837. (Bulletin des Iois TX. e. Serie T. 14 P-
223) art 2. “Si le deuxiéme arret ou jugement est cassé pour les mémes -
motifs que le prémier, la cour royale ou le tribunal auquel l’affaire est
renvoyée se conformera 4 la décision de la cour de cassation sur le point
de droit jugé par cette cour. é


(e) Allg. Landrecht Einleitung 8. 46.
(@) AL. RB. Einl 8, 47. 48, und. Anhang S. 2.


EXPRESSIONS OF THE MODERN CODES, &. 267


gap in order that it may be filled up by a new law.
In the Rhenish provinces, where the French legislation
still subsists, the French procedure has been so far
changed, that the court of cassation, when it quashes,
likewise itself pronounces the new decision. Besides
for all the rest of the country a procedure of cassa-
tion has been newly introduced under the name of
Nichtigkeitsbeschwerde (complaint of nullity) in which

‘ the judge who takes cognizance of it (the Geheime
‘Obertribunal) when. he annuls the previous decision, at
the same time himself pronounces the decision.)


The Austrian code, in the last place, refers the
judge to the peculiar meaning of the words of the law
in their connexion and to the clear intention of the
legislator.. If a law is wanting, the decision is to be
in accordance with the laws for similar cases and
according tothe grounds of cognate laws; if this is
not sufficient according to the principles of natural right
(law). The Roman inhibition of private interpretation
is here changed into the unhazardous rule, that the
legislator alone may explain laws in a manner gene-
rally binding. (9)


If we ask in the last place what is desirable for our
situation and for our needs, it seems undoubted, that
genuine interpretation should be freely allowed to the
judge, but that what is considered interpretation mere-
ly through misunderstanding, should as a rule be
denied. Sinee however in particular cases the bounda-
ries between genuine interpretation and what. is


(© ALR. Eink 8. 49. 50.


(f) Verordnung vom 14 Dee, 1833 S. 17. (Gesetz sammlung 1833
8. 306.).


_ (9) Osterreich. Gesctzbuch, Einleit. 8. 6. 7. 8. -


268 EXPRESSIONS OF THE MODERN CODES, &c.


properly developement may be very doubtful (8. 37,),
it is desirable that there should be some high authority,
in which the two privileges may be found united and
_ that its activity should ‘consequently not be hindered -
“by the doubt as to those limits. If there exists a body
of functionaries mainly designed for the developement
of law, it is undoubted that they would also have to
exercise their calling, wherever the existence of a.
doubtful interpretation of law gives occasion for it.
Even where however no such body of functionaries
exists, and even in presence of such a body, the right
to this interpretation operating without control, may
without hesitation be confided to a tribunal” which
holds a position in general similar to that of the French
court of casgation. This would then exercise a similar
influence and afford advantages to the practice of law
similar to those of the Praetor and the jurists in ancient-
Rome, so that to it would be specially confided every
sort of extending and restricting interpretation which
has been above banished, as a procedure not conform-
able to the real function of a judge, from the province
of genuine interpretation.


ESSENCE OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. | 269°


SECOND BOOK.
THE JURAL RELATIONS.


CHAPTER I,


SECTION LI.
ESSENCE OF THE JURAL BELATIONS.


_ The common nature of -the jural, relations in general
and how they form themselves into classes in the rela-
tions of public and private law, have been explained
above (8. 4.9). The nature of those of them, which
belong to private law, is now to be more fully unfolded;
these alone appertain to our undertaking and hence
they will from this time be designated, without any
addition by way of limitation, 4s JURAL RELATIONS.


Man stands in the midst of the outer world, and the
most important element; to him in this’ surrounding of
his, is the contact with those who are like him, by their
nature and destination. If now in such contact free
natures are to subsist beside one another mutually
assisting, not hindering themselves, this is possible only

‘through the recognition of an invisible boundary
within which the existence-and activity of each indi-
vidual gains a secure, free space. The rule, by which
those boundaries and that free space are determined,
is the law. Hence at the same time the relationship
and the difference between law and morality comes to


270 ESSENCE OF THE JURAL RELATIONS.


be understood. The law serves morality, not by
performing its bidding but by securing the free
developement of its power indwelling in each individual
will. The existence of law is however a self-dependent
one, and hence there is no contradiction when in
the individual case, the possibility of immoral exercise
of a right actually existing, is asserted.


The necessity and existence of the law are a
consequence of the imperfection of our condition, not
however of a casual, historical imperfection, but of
such a one as is inseparably bound up with the present
stage of our existence,


Many however, in order to discover the idea of law,
set out from the opposite stand-point, from the idea
of wrong (not right.) Wrong is with them a disturb-
ance of freedom by a freedom foreign to it, which is a
hindrance to human developement and must hence be:
banished as an evil. That which wards off this evil is ©
with them, the law. According to some it was produced |
by a conscious coming to an agreement, so that each
gives up a portion of his freedom in order the more |
securely to protect the remainder; according to others
by the institution of an external force which could
alone puta restraint upon the natural inclination of
men to their mutual destruction. By their thus placing
' the negative at the head, they treat the matter as if
they meant to set out from a condition of disease in
order to recognize the laws of life. The state appears
to them as a defence against danger which, on the
presupposition of the diffusion of righteous inclinations, ~
might disappear, instead of standing out in such a case
with more brightness and power: 8s according to our
view, it would do.


-KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. . 271


From the stand-point now gained each single jural
relation appears to us as a relation between person and
person, determined by a rule of law. This determina-
tion by a rule of law consists in the -agsignment to the
individual will of a province in which it is to rule
independently of every foreign will.


‘Hence in each jural relation two parts may be
discerned: first, a matter, that is to say, that relation
in. itself, and secondly the just determination of this

_matter. The first part we may designate as the material
element of the jural relation or as the bare matter of
fact in itself: the second as its formal element, by which:

the matter of fact relation is raised to the form of
law (jus).

However not all the relations of men to men belong
to the province of law since not all are susceptible and
in need of such a determination. In this. point of
view three cases are distinguishable. Relations of
men which entirely, others which do not at all, others
again which only partially belong to the province of
law or are governed by the rules of law. . Property _
may serve as an example of the first class, friendship
of the second, marriage of the third, for matriage
partially falls within the province of Rass pee
lies outside of it.


SECTION LIT.
KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS.

The essence of the jural relation has been defined
as a province of the independent mastery of the
individual will (S. 52). It is our first business there-
‘fore to search out the object-matters upon which the


272 KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. |


will can possibly exercise influence and thus extend its
mastery; hence a summary of the different sorts of.
possible jural relations will of .itself result.


The will my, in the first place operate upon the
willer’s own person, secondly. ‘outwards therefore upon
what, in reference to the willer, we must call the
outer world : this is the mest general of the conceivable
contrasts of that operation. The outer world however
. is composed partly of un-free nature, partly of free
beings homogeneous with that which wills, that is to
’ say, of extraneous persons. Thus in the pure logical
- treatment of the question proposed, there appear to us
three main object-matters for the mastery of the will;
hence, it would appear, that three main sorts of all
jural relations would of necessity be admitted. We
have therefore next to examine those object-matters
singly, and first the individual person as abjert of a
special jural relation.


On this matter the following view is very prevalent.
Man, say some, has a right to his own self which
necessarily arises at his birth and can never cease so
long as he lives; for this precise reason it is called an
ORIGINAL RIGHT in contradistinction to all other rights,
which come upon men first at a later period and acct-
dentally, which are also of a transitory nature and are
hence called ACQUIRED. RIGHTS. Many have gone so
far in this opinion as to ascribe to men a right of pro-
perty in their intellectual powers and to derive from
that right what is called liberty of thought;, however _
it is altogether inconceivable how one man could by
any possibility hinder another from thought or by
inversion think in him, and how he could, by either of
these ways, effect an encroachment upon this pretended


KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. 273 |


right of property. Say that they betake themselves
to a more intelligible position by confining that right
of property to the visible manifestation of the person,
the human body and its individual members, this view
has at all events meaning, as an exclusion of 'a certainly
possible violation of this right, it is however on that
account none the less unprofitable, even censurable
because among other. objections it consistently leads to
’ the recognition of a right to commit suicide. The true
element however in that erroneous hypothesis of an
original right directed to one’s own person, is the
’ following. In the first place the rightful power of
men over themselves and their own faculties is in truth .
not to be doubted; more, this power is even the basis
and preliminary of all genuine rights, for e. g. property
and obligations are only significant and. valuable to us,
as an artificial extension of our own personal faculties,
as new organs artificially added to our nature in
essence; but that power does not need recognizing and
determining by positive law and the incorrectness of
the conception here set forth consists in that natural
power needing to be placed, as superfluously as errone-
.ously, in the same line with its artificial extensions
and to be treated as homogeneous. Secondly, the precise
end of many special actual institutions of law is no
doubt to be sought in the securing of that natural
power of men over their own selves against foreign
interferences. To that head belongs a large part of
the criminal jaw, moreover in civil law the numerous
important rights which aim at the protection against
injury to the reputation, against fraud and against
force, therefore also among ‘others the possessory
_ remedies. Of all these rights the inviolability of the
person is no doubt the final ground; nevertheless they


274 KINDS CF THE JURAL RELATIONS.


are not to be regarded as mere developements of this
' gmviolability, they rather form wholly positive institu-
tions of law of -which the special contents are complete-
ly different from that inviolability itself If one is.
inclined however to represent them as rights over one’s
own person, their true nature will be merely obscured
by this mode of designation. The putting together of
those institutions of law, which have this common
point of departure, can never We regarded :as fruitful
and instructive: it is sufficient to recognize their rela-
tionship generally. :


If henceforth we entirely separate the. so-called
original rights and recognize the acquired rights ‘as the
only ones te which our further examination is to be
directed, there will remain to us only two objects
for the possible exercise of will: unfree nature.and
extraneous persons. :


(a) Denellus II. 8 S. 2. 3 admits a double nostrwm: in persona
cujusque and tx rebus externis, In the first class he reckons four parts ;
wita, incolumitas corporis, libertas, existimatio. The incolumétas animt
does not stand under the protection of law because it was not in need


of it. «


Puckta system des gem Civilrechts Miimchen 1832 puts as the first
class of all rights those to a man’s own person, and among them he
reckons the right to persenality and to possession. Under personality
he includes jural capacity and reputation: but jural capacity is-a con-
dition of all rights, of property and of obligations, not less than of
rights of the first class if one admits such a class e.g. of possession ;
it is therefore an element of all rights and can belong to no class in
particular, That, which according to the general plan one might expect
first of all, the right over one’s own members, is entirely wanting and
many another right besidesisalso wanting which must be there if between
B. 3. and B. 5. Cap. 5. N. Vi. a real connexion is to be visible. From
this the arbitrary formation of the first class becomes clear; it seems
to have been admitted almost for the sole purpose of furnishing pos-
session with a convenient place. Hegel Naturrecht S. 70. und Zusatz


KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. 275


Unfree nature cantiot be dominated by us as a whole
but merely within linfits determinate in point of place ;
a portion of it so bounded we call a THING, and hence to
this is attached the first sort of possible rights, the.
RIGHT TO A THING which, in its purest and most com-
plete shape, is called PROPERTY.


Those jural relations, of which extraneous persons.
are the objects, are not so simple, for we may stand to -
such in two wholly heterogeneous relations. The first
possible relation to an extraneous person is that in
which that person in like way with a thing, is drawn
within the province of our will, therefore is subjected
to our mastery. If this mastery were an absolute one,
the idea of liberty and personality in that other would
be entirely removed; we should not be ruling over a
person but over a thing, our right would be property in
aman justas the Roman relation of slaves in fact is. If
this is not to be, if we desire rather to conceive a jural
relation, which consists in mastery over an extraneous
- person without the destruction of his freedom, so that itis
similar to property and yet-different from it, the mastery
must relate not to the extraneous person in his entirety
but merely to an individual act of his; this act is then
conceived as withdrawn from the freedom of the actor
and subjected to our will. We call such a relation of
mastery over an individual act of the extraneous person,
OBLIGATION. This has a similar nature to property,
not merely from an extended mastery over the outer
world being embraced in both but it has still more special
relations to property: first, through the possibility of
estimating the obligation in money which is nothing


ee
za 8. 70. expresses himself against this right to the own person and


establishes by it the unavoidable admission of a right to commit
suicide.


276 KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS.


else than the transformation of it into property in
money ; secondly, through the most numerous and most
important obligations being directed to no other end
than the acquisition of property or the temporary enjoy-
ment of it. By both sorts of rights therefore, property
as well as obligations, the power of the person, possessed
of the right, is extended outwards beyond the natural
limits of its nature. The aggregate of the relations
now, which in this way widen the power of the
individual. we call his potentialities.and the aggregate
of the legal institutions relative thereto the law of
potentialities (goods, wealth.)/>)


- Inthe connexion of the person with an. extraneous
person, hitherto examined, each of them has been
eonceived as in himself a concluded whole, so that
each in his abstract personality stood in presence of
the other as a completely extraneous, though homoge-
neous, being. Wholly different in this respect is the
second possible relation to the extraneous person which
is now to be exhibited. Here we regard the individual
man not as being subsisting for himself but as a member
of the organic whole of mankind in the aggregate.
Inasmuch now as his connexion with this great whole
is continually brought about through the medium of
individuals determined, his relation to those indivi- -
duals is the foundation of a new, entirely peculiar sort


(8) The German expression for the legal concept stated is the most
appropriate which could be found for it,-since the essence of the thing
is thereby directly expressed, the power accruing to us through the
existence of those rights, that which we are in a condition to effect by
means of them or potentialities (vermégen.) The Roman expression
bona which has passed over into the modern languages of Roman origin
and which primarily denotes a cognate concept namely, the well being
produced by that power or the pleasure which it procures for a is less
suitable to the nature of the thing.


KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. 277


of jural relations. In this the individual appears to us,
not as in obligations, an independent whole but as an
incomplete being needing its complement in a large
natural coherence. This incompleteness of the indivi-
dual, like the completion referring to it, shows itself in
two different directions. In the first place in the
division of the sexes, of which each regarded by itself
alone, comprehends human nature only incompletely ;
with this the completion of the individual by marriage
is connected.(e) Secondly in the existence of single
.men limited in point of time, which limitation again
leads in. various ways to the necessity for, and the
recognition of, completing jura relations. First of all
and most immediately through the transient life of
individual men; here the completion consists in propa-
gation through the medium of which not only for the
species but, in a more limited manner, for individuals,
a constant continuance is produced. Then moreover
through the constitution of human nature according to
which the individual, at the beginning of his life, is
entirely without the power over himself and only quite
gradually. attains to it; here the completing lies in the
education. The institution of the Roman law in which
this two-fold completing finds its cominon recognition
and developement is the PATERNAL POWER; to this
attaches itself, partly in wider developement, partly in
purely natural or less juridical analogy, RELATION-
sHip.@) Now for the summary of all these completing


(ec) This view Fichte Sittenlehre expresses with some energy ag
follows. ‘It is the absolute destination of each individual of both
sexes to get married .... The unmarried person is merely half 2 man.”

(@) As wider unfolding viz. in Aanation which is merely the residuum
ef an earlier existing paternal power with continued developement ; as
‘ natural analogy, Coanation in which the jus gentium recognizes the
: Y


278 KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS.


relations—MARRIAGE, PATERNAL POWER, RELATIONSHIP
-~we call the, FAMILY, and the institutions of law
referring to it the LAW OF FAMILY.(€)


Since the family relation equally with the obligation
is a relation to individuals determined, it seems very
‘natural either to make these relations identical, that is,
to reckon those of family under obligations or to set
. the two as nearly connected, in contrast with property
which does not include in itself such a reference to
individuals. This method of treatment is accordingly
found among many, although often not in its full
extension or not accompanied by clear consciousness:
lt is however to be thoroughly rejected, and it is of
importance to the correct insight into the nature of the
family that it should be given up as erroneous. Those


association of individuals resting upon descent az the jus civile does in
AaNarion.


(e) It must as to this be expressly remarked that this terminology is
not taken’ from the Roman law: ‘Among the Romans the expression
familia has various meanings ; the most important and most technical,
is that in which it denotes the aggregate of the agnates, therefore a part
only of the relation which I comprehend within it. If however the
expression here selected is not founded upon the Roman law, still the
summary of the relations denoted by it, as well as the ground of this
summary, is completely conformable to the sense of the Roman jurists.
It isin fact precisely what they denote by jus naturale. Ulpian says
about it in L. 1. 8.3. de J. et J. “Jus naturale est quod natura omnia
animalia docuit .... Hine descendit maris atque foeminae conjnnctio
quam nos matrimonium appellamus: hine liberorum procreatio, hine
educatio (Comp. App. 1.) That the ancient jurista, as we see in Gaius,
on historical grounds allowed other points of view to come out more
clearly in their treatment of the actual institutions of law, is not at all
in contradiction with their recognition of that general natural connexion.
The expressions selected by me are certainly in accordance with modern
phraseology, just as my mede of summarizing is the only ¢ one ‘suitable
to our modern condition of law.


KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS. == 279


essential differences hence require to be stated in this
place reserving the bringing to view still more definite
ly lower down (S. 54,), of the peculiar; completely
distinctive, nature of the family. The obligation has
for its object-matter a single act, the family relation
- the person as a whole in so far as he is a member in
the erganic coherence of collective humanity.. The.
matter of obligations is of an arbitrary nature for ab
one time this, at another that, act may become the
contents of an obligation ; the matter of the family
relations is determined by the organic nature of men,
therefore bears in itself the character of necessity.
The obligation is as a rule of a transitory nature, the
family relation is destined for an enduring existence.
Hence the individual family relations, where they
appeor in their completeness, take-the shape of united
associations which are precisely expressed by the col-
lective naiae—family. In families are embraced the
germs of the state and the completely formed state ~
has families, not i individuals immediately for its consti-
tuent parts.


According to this view obligation is in fact more
nearly related to property, for the potentiality, which
embraces these two relations, forms an extension of the
individual power beyond its natural limits, while the
family relation, on the other hand, is destined to the

completion of its incomplete self. Hence family-law
lies nearer than the law of potentialities to the so-called

' eriginal rights, and as these have been above wholly
excluded from the province of positive law, so it must
be asserted of the family that it belongs only in part:
to the province of law, while the seed falls
wholly and exclusively within it,


280 KINDS OF THE JURAL RELATIONS.


If we now look back to the point of departure of
this examination of ours, we find three object-matters
over which a mastery by our will is conceivable, and
corresponding with those object-matters, three concen-
tric circles, in which our will can rule.


1. The original self, The so-called. original right
answers to it; this we do not at all treat as law proper.


: 2. The self widened into the family. The govern-

ment by our will, possible in this department, belongs
only partially to the province of law and forms in it
the law of family.


8. The outer world. The mastery by the will
which is connected with this, falls wholly within the
province.of law, and forms the law of potentialities
which again divides itself into the law of things and
the law of obligations.


. Hence there result three main classes of rights which
from out of this stand-point of the research we have
to admit : : :

1. Families’-right.

2. Things’-right.

3. Obligations’-right.()


(1) The German word is recht (jus) which means both right and law.
These three terms may therefore be also properly rendered as Families’
Jaw, Things’-law and Obligations’-law and in the following sections
Savigny, as will be seen means by the compound the body of law
belonging to the division. There is undoubtedly a dialetical advantage
in a language distinguishing between the jus implying the right resident
in a jural subject and the jus which as law gives form to the jural
relation. The distinction however imposes a difficulty upon the trans-
Jator in choosing between the terms where sometimes the one, sometimes
the other will better express the meaning of the author. I will only
add that Savigny uses the word form, with respect to the operation of
law (jus) upon the matters of fact which with it compose the jural
relation, not in the purely popular sense of opposition to substance, but
in so popular a philosophical sense as to present no difficulty,— Trang,


FAMILIES-LAW. 281


These classes of rights only subsist thus severed in
our abstraction, in practice on the contrary they appear
connected in a very manifold way, and in this constant
contact, mutual influences and modifications must infal-
libly take place. Inasmuch as we have now to consider
more narrowly the individual institutions of law of
the three classes stated, regar| must likewise be had to

these modifications, as well as to the special develope- -


ment which each institution has received in our positive
law. : ;


SECTION LIV.


FAMILIES'-LAW.

The nature of the family, which is now to be more
closely examined, has been already stated above (S. 53.); -
-its constituents were marriage, the paternal power and
relationship. The matter of each of these relations is
a natural relation which simply as such stretches beyond -
‘the limits of human nature (jus naturale). Hence in
accordance with their existence generally, a necessity
independent of positive law must be ascribed to them
although the special shape, in which they are recognized, .
is very manifold according to the positive law of differ-
ent peoples.(@) This natural relation is however to men


4a) Thus e. g., the existence of monogamy is an institution of positive
law, while we ascribe to marriage, in whatever shape it may present
itself, a universal necessity ; nevertheless it must not be said that a
choice between polygamy and monogamy happened to be determined
by accidental circumstances ; polygamy is rather to be regarded as a
lower stage in the moral developement of nations. Sure enough even
the necessity of marriage generally, not merely of monogainy, is con-
tested ¢. g. by Hugo Naturrecht $. 210—214; and in fact the essence
of it may be decomposed by the abstracting understanding, and by s
free imagination any other condition whatever be conceived in its place


282 FAMILIES ~LAW.


likewise ef necessity a moral one and since last of all
the form of law steps in, the family embraces three
indissolubly united forms, the natural, moral and
legal.©) Hence it follows that the relations of family
only partly carry in them a juridical nature (S. 53.);
indeed we must add that the juridical side of its nature
is Plainly the smaller for the most lags belongs to
@ province quite other than that of law


‘Because however a atarad sictnent as well ag iis
legal and moral element is. here ascribed to the family,
this ought not to be understood as if the natural stood '
‘in the same line with these and must attain to an
independent mastery. In the beast an impulse governs
which serves the one general purpose of nature. This
impulse and that natural purpose are found as com-
pletely in men as in beasts; in men however over
this instinct stands the higher moral law which is to


€. g. an irregular sexual love or propagation as a political institution.
The healthy living feeling however of all nations as of all times and
stages of culture would corroborate our assertion even if it had not
found its highest verification in the Christian view of life. In like
manner the artificial way in which they at times arise belongs to the
positive developement of the institutions of families, e. g. the fatherly
power by adoption. Further the inhibition of marriage between those.
very nearly related has its root in the moral feeling of all times but the
extent of this prohibition is of an entirely positive nature. J+ must at
the same time be added that the positive shape, in which these relations
enter into a particular positive law, bears in this law the absolute char
acter (S. 16), since it is determined by the moral view of life of thia
special people.


() This three-fold nature of the relations of family is in. its applica-
tion to marriage very definitely expressed by Hegel Naturrecht 8. 161.
He says very finely of marriage “that it is the legally mora] love” only
the expression still requires to be completed thus “legally moralsexual
love” which besides is undoubtedly contained in the author’s thought.


FAMILIES —LAW. 283


penetrate and dominate all parts of their nature
consequently this instinct also; by this the natural is
neither annihilated nor weakened i in men but is elevated
to the participation in the higher clement of man’s
- nature. In this matter Kant has erred in wishing to
make the purely natural constituent in marriage, the
sexual instinct, the object-matter of an obligatory jural
relation; by this the nature of marriage is necessarily
entirely misunderstood and degraded: )


If we now ask after the special contents of the jural
relations belonging to the family, they seem to lie in
the right which we have against the other person sub-
jected to our will; only this subjection’ must be
conceived not as a total but as a limited one merely
affecting the relation of family ;@ and this opinion
seems to find its support in the special determinations
of the Roman law of family which is in great part
based upon the firm mastery of the father of the family

. over the other members. However from the very
stand-point of the Roman law this opinion is to be
entirely rejected. Here the father sure enough has abso-
lute mastery. over the son, a mastery which, in the oldest

_ time,is scarcely to be distinguished from genuine proper-
ty. This mastery however does not constitute the true
contents of the jural relation. It is the natural charac-
teristic of the paternal power in which the father
asserts himself by his proper power as in the mastery
over his slaves, his house or his horse. There is
nowhere any question of a juridical obligation of the
son to obedience, as little of a complaint against the


(c) Comp. hereupon below S. 141. (d).


(d) So it is in fact conceived by Puchta, rhein. muscum B. 3.
8. 301—802.


284 FAMILIES’ —LAW.


disobedient son as against the disobédient slave. Only
when extraneous persons infringe upon the mastery of
the father of the family, actions are given against
these. . Still more manifest however is our assertion as
to the free marriage. In this there is no question at
all. of rigid ‘authority and obedience and still the
Roman law knows nothing of legal claims of one of
the married persons against the other, no actions for
the protection of such individual rights, for the case of
their denial. It is Nor therefore the partial subjecting
of one person to another which forms the jural charac-
ter of the family jelations, therefore the peculiar
contents of this class of jural relations. It is also only
when one gives up this opinion, in itself so specious,
that a sharp separation of family relations from
obligations is possible, for the partisans of this view,
how often soever they may guard themselves against .
it in words, inevitably transfer the nature of obligations
into the family.


What however now remains to us as the true contents
of jural relations appertaining to the family ? We
regarded them first as completions of the individuality
in itself incomplete (S. 58). Hence their proper nature
consists in the place which the individual obtains in
these relations, in his being not merely man in general —
but specially husband, father, son, therefore in a LIFE-
FORM firmly determined, independent of the individual
will, grounded in a large natural coherence.(e)


0) The fomily, relations therefore pelong especially to the jus, publi-
cum 4. ¢. to the absolute law" %®. 16.) Comp. above note (a). Hence
also each family relation of a man is called especially a status of that
man, that isto say, his place or his existence in relation to other men
determined. ar S. 59. and App. VI.


FAMILIES LAW. , 285


It is therefore inno way denied here that to marriage,
loyalty and self-sacrifice, as to the paternal power
obedience and reverence, belong; but these in them-
selves, most important, elements of that relation stand
under the protection of morals not of law, just as the
honorable and humane use, which the father ofa family
can make of his power over the family must also
remain left to morals alone ; it is merely by accident that
the erroneous apprehension of this last case, as if it
were a rule of law, is less possible. Hence we shall
have a very uncertain knowledge of the condition of
the family relations in a nation if we look merely at
the rule of law prevailing in them without having
regard to the morals which are its complement.
Modern writers overlooking this connexion, have not
seldom found groundless fault with the Roman law of
family as with a heartless ‘tyranny./) They have not


(f) Thus Hegel Naturrecht 8. 175, “the relation of slaves of the
Roman children is one of the most defiling institutions in this legislation
and this mortification of morality in their inner-most and tenderest life,
is one of the most important points for the understanding of the char-
acter of the Romans in the world’s history and their tendency to legal
formalism.” In him the misunderstanding is the more incomprehensible,
that in S. 16]. he recognizes very well the necessity of a conjoint
operation of the moral and legal elements in marriage, whence it natur-
ally follows that in every people the marriage Jaw presents merely an
incomplete image of marriage. - Wherefore then should not the same -
thing be true of the paternal power? Adam H. Miiller Elemente der
Staatekunst Th. 2. 8. 49—65. pushes this error still further. He speaks
of a “paternal and HUSBANDLY power as it is prescribed in our law-
books according to the Roman pattern” and therefore regrets the want
in the Roman (and our) family relations of all mutuality. According
to him one might believe that we still concluded our marriages by means
of confarreation while in very early times among the Romans the free
marriage (without the amallest trace of power) was the most frequent
and this alone has been transmitted to us with the Roman law, Further
one might believe that the Roman laws would play but'a melancholy
part “if they are not to be supplemented or supported by an invisible


286 FAMILIES LAW.


‘ considered that the house-wives were as highly respected
in no people of antiquity,.as they were at Romefs) and.
that a servile degrading treatment of the son was
ineonceivable in’ presence of a public law which allowed
to him the enjoyment of all political rights and even
the capacity for the highest Magistracies without.
prejudice to the paternal power.


This ‘general characteristic of the law (right) of
family will become more manifest through the state’
ment ‘of the real juristic contents of its single
institutions. They consist-in each of them of the
conditions of its existence and recognition, to which
belong the following separate parts: the presuppositions
for the possibility of such a jural relation, the modes
in which it arises and the grounds of its dissolution.
Thus as to marriage, the paternal power, relationship.
The jural contents become narrowed to these in so far
as- these jural relations in themselves are concerned.
Still to each is added the important influence, which
that jural relation exercises beyond its own boundaries
ever others. This is now to be specially stated as to.
each of. the three jural relations. ~


spirit of love or confidence” (8. 59.) As if any law in the world had
made this spirit dispensable with or had brought it forth. What there-
fore this writer exhibits with scorn as a weakness of the Roman law is
rather a regulation which it has pleased God to give to human nature
im general.

(g) The beautiful description in Columella de re rust. Lib, 12. praef.
S. 7. 8. of the family life of early times, comes in naturally here. “ Erat
enim summa reverentia cum concordia et diligentia mixta..” “Nihil
eonspiciebatur in domo dividuum, nihil quod aut maritus aut foemina
proprium esse juris aui diceret, sed in commune conspirabatur ab
utroque,” and forgocth inthe good old times which he pictures, the ta
manum conventio, therefore the rigid power of the husband, appearéd
more frequently than in later times in which it became eontinnely


rarer.


FAMILIES’—LAW. 287


Marriage has the following operations ‘pon other
jural relations:


1. The arising ‘of the paternal power over the
children born of the marriage. This is again an inde-
pendent jural relation in which absolutely no new
determination of the reciprocal relations of the married
persons is embraced.


2. Protection against violation of their moral
dignity by the institutions of criminal law.


3. Manifold determinations in potentialities-law
as: dos, donatio propter nuptias &c. The most numerous
and important of these institutions are not immediate
and necessary results of the marriage itself, but conse-
quences of voluntary acts, of which the possibility. is
conditioned by the existence of the marriage.


The PATERNAL POWER reveals its influence upon
potentiality in the following manner, The child is inca-
pable of acquiring a potentiality for hirgself, therefore of
possessing one; on the contrary there is a capacity of
acquiring for the father, indeed this acquisition follows
of necessity from the acts of the child. This as welt
possible as necessary representation of the father by
means of the acquiring acts of the child is denoted as
personal unity between the two. It is however narrow-
ed in numerous ways through the in sume measure
falsely called peculium. If one compares this two-fold
influence of the paternal power with the natural rela-
tions above stated as basis of the family, the regult is
as follows. The need of education (bringing up) finds
its satisfaction certainly in the paternal power, ,not
however in the properly legal side of it, but in the
power legally undetermined which, without that, the
father has over the child, even irrespectively of. his


288 FAMILIES —LAW.


age. All the rest however,.therefore the purely legal
operation upon the potentiality above remarked upon,
has no connexion whatever with education. In this
operation the view is rather brought out unmistake-
ably, according to which the son takes upon himself
the personality of the father and carries it on beyond
that father’s life in order then to transmit it to his own
children, and procure for it in them a further continu-
ance. This view is clearly shown in the representation
' of the father through the acquisitions of the child, as
well as in the peculiar manner in which the suus
obtains the paternal heritage. It is also shown in the
INCAPACITY FOR POTENTIALITIES of the child, at the
root of which doubtless lies the opinion that to the
child potentiality of his own is unnecessary since that
of his father is in fact at the same time his also.(A)
Besides it is of itself obvious from this incapacity why
it was not necessary specially to protect the potentiality
of the child subject to the paternal power during the
-years of minority; this remark is moreover necessary
here, since in it lies the point of departure from which
tutelage, as an artificial succedaneum, proceeds: -
‘Relationship lastly is the most indeterminate of
those three relations, because it appears in gradations
so different and at last is unobservedly lost. Indeed it
is not commonly avknowledged as in the proper sense
_ a family-relation, for one ordinarily places the charac-


(hk) I. say it is uv Fact his at the same time, because. the child in »
natural condition of family life participates in the benefits of the poten-
tialities. Beside it subsists indeed the very slightly limited legal power
in the father of denying to the child those advantages for the preserit
and of depriving him of them for the future. The relation therefore is
similar to that, in the dos which in law belongs to the man, in fact to
the worman ; only there was as to the dos more occasion for developing
this relation and expressing it in definite rules.


FAMILIES’ -LAW. 289


ter of such a relation in reciprocal jural claims, but
relations as such have with few exceptions no rights
against one another. This circumstance however cannot,
according to our view above explained, prevent us from
treating relationship as a family-relation proper; for
the legal conditions of its existence are with respect to
‘ it accurately determined. This influence shows itself
in the first place in marriage of which the possibility
is excluded by certain sorts of relationship. Further
in potentialities and here indeed in two ways. The
most important influence is that upon the law of
inheritance on account of which alone the most accu-
rate fixation of this relation is rendered indispensable
with. A second less important influence is shown in
the obligation to alimony which however only appears
in some sorts of relationship ; in this consists the only
‘mutual legal claim which is to be perceived among rela-
tions living at the same time. ;
According to the view here set forth each family
relation, regarded as a natural-moral one, is entirely
individual, for it consists of a reciprocal connexion
between two single persons; as jural rélation however,
it is a relation of one person to all remaining. men,
inasmuch as by its very nature, it consists merely in ©
the claim to universal récognition. Thus ¢. g. the only
right of action which a father has in the first instance
with respect to the paternal power, is a claim that the
existence of this power be acknowledged by him who
disputes it, and this claim proceeds neither more nor
less against the son than against every third person,
The jural relation once acknowledged may besides
serve as the foundation of numerous other claims (to
property, inheritance, &c.) The whole of ‘this view
finds a remarkable corroboration in the form of the
: - Z


290 FAMILIES —LAW.


Roman action. The action is here a praejudicium,
that is to say, an action which has as its result nowhere
a condémnatio but merely a, declaration as to the
existence of a relation.® The name of this sort of
complaints arises from their serving to prepare the way
for other future actions. Lastly all these actions are —
in rem, that is, they are not exclusively available, as
those founded upon obligations are, against a deter-
minate person bound by the Sey: ®


SECTION LV.


_ FAMILY-LAW.—(Continuation. )

Hitherto the family has been examined in its natu-
ral compass. Other institutions, which then display an
artificial extension of the family-law, may however be
formed after the type of these natural institutions of
family. From the natural, such artificial family-relations
are distinguished by the circumstance that unlike those,
they do not rest upon a natural-moral foundation whence
also their existence is not grounded in a universal
necessity: According therefore to Roman technical
phraseology, they do not belong to the jus naturale.


The Roman law knows the following institutions of
this artificially extended family-law.


1. Manus.—tThis rests upon an artificial blending
of the two main branches of the natural family, mar-
riage with the paternal power. The wife hence becomes
put in the legal relation of a daughter of the husband,
in which consequently an external addition to the


(2) Gaius IV. 8. 44.94. Comp. L. 1.8.16. L. 3. 4. de agnose. (25.
3.) L. 1.8.4. de lib. exhibendis (43. 30.)
(k) 8. 18. J. de act. (4. 6.)


FAMILIES—LAW. 291


marriage and, mainly in reference to potentiality, ‘a
modification of it are embraced: ' Certainly however
this view of the manus holds good only of a somewhat
late period of the Roman law, in which it was left a
voluntary matter whether this special addition should
be made to the marriage. In the oldest time it was
the only possible form of marriage in general.


2. Servitus. The relation of a slave to his
‘master had among the Romans two wholly different
jural relations, dominiwm and potestas, which were
however constantly united in practical life. According
to the first it was pute actual property; the slave
stood in this exactly like every other thing, he might
be Slienated not merely as complete property, but also
‘when a usufructus, a wsus or a right to have him in
pledge was established upon him. Lastly the same’
actions were available against every infringer of this
right as against him who injured any other property,
especially therefore the Vindication. According to the
other relation he was a constituent part of the family,
in imitation of the paternal power and strongly resemb-
_ling it. The putting of these together is justified, by
the property which originally the father had also over
“the children, by the common name potestas, and lastly
by the fact of the slaves standing in the same situation
as the children in the incapacity. for the potenti-
ality, in the possible and necessary representation of
the master through the acquiring acts of the slaves,
and in the peculiwm. If our sensibility is hurt by
this similarity of position between children and slaves,
we ought not to forget that, in the very ancient time
in which this institution was established, the slave was
the ploughman of the master, therefore the assistant
in his.labour and most probably also his companion at


292 FAMILIES —LAW.


table. In the completely changed mode of life of the
later age, when the slaves became objects of luxury
and of commercial speculation to the most exaggerated
extent, that similarity of position had in truth lost all
sense and all appropriateness. Ft is however one of
the most important sources of weakness in the condition
of the Romans, that they did not early enough and
thoroughly enough bethink themselves of modifying
the relation of the slaves and the freed-men in accord-
ance with the completely altered necessities. To this
second relation lastly belongs also manumission, that is
to say, the capacity of the master to impart freedom
and as a rule citizenship also to the slaves ; lastly also the .
liberale judicium, or the vindicatio in servitutem and
im libertatem which afforded to the potestas the same
protection as the ordinary vindicatio to the dominiwm.
‘Still somewhat different. from all this, is the case of
jural capacity being almost entirely wanting to slaves ;
for this also may be found among those over whom
dominium and potestas by accident do not exist,
among the servi sine domino. Then although the
whole jural institution of slavery had been merely
introduced and developed for the sake of the power of
the masters, still they had formed out of it the generah-
idea of the CONDITION OF SLAVES, -as an independent
condition, which should be capable of existence and
practical effect even in the cases of the slaves accident-
ally masterless.(@)


(a) To this class belong the following cases. 1. The servus poenae,
who was in no way in the property of the state. -L. 17. pr. de poenis
(48. 19.) L. 8. pr. de his 9. pro non ser. (84.8) L. 12. de j. fisci. (49.
14.) L. 25.8. 8. de adg. hered. (29. 2.) 2. The Romans who became
captives to the enemy, for the enemy was rightless, could consequently
have no potestas and no deminium. 3. The freed man over whom,


FAMILIES —LAW. ; 25938


3. Patronatus—Emancipation makes vw lave
into a free man and imparts to him according to
circumstances, now a lower now a higher position
among free men. However there exists in presence of
that freedom a personal relation between the patron.
and the freed man which itself also again partakes of
the nature of a family-relation, just as the relation of
slave, from which it sprang by means of the change,
had this nature. Patronatus had considerable influence
upon the potentiality-law, for in that law it connected
itself in many ways partly with succession partly with
obligations. To it belong institutions of criminal law
which are destined for the protection of the high
position of the patron as against the emancipated.


4, Maneipii causa.—Since the mastery of the
father over the children was in the oldest time in fact
scarcely distinguishable from property, he could also
alienate them, and the same held good of the husband
who had his wife, like a daughter, in manu ; but these
free persons when alienated were to stand to the new
masters in another and milder relation than actual


before the manumission, another bad obtained the ugufruct. Ulpian I.
§.19. (L. 1. C. comm.-de manumiss. 7.15.) 4, The slave who was a

“ derelict by his own master. L, 38. S. 1. de nox. act. (9. 4.) L.86.de .
atip. serv. (45. 3:) L. 8. pro derelicto (41. 7.) It was something wholly
special and purely positive that according to an edict of Claudius the
pruel abandonment of a sick slave was to give him the Latin right. L.
2. qui sine manum. (40. 8.) L. un S. 8. C. de lat. libert. (7.6.) The
rule remained side by side with it unaltered. The condition of the
servus poenae was harder than that of the servus fisct: hence the con-
demned became by means of favour a servus fisci and the child of the
woman sentenced to the mines had also the condition of servus jisci.
L. 24. §, 5. 6. de fideic. lib. (40. 5.) On the other hand slaves without
masters could never become libertini ; if therefore. they became free,
the condemned by pardon, the prisoner by postlimininm, they became
again tngenut. Paulus IV. 8 8, 24


294 — / BAMTLTES’-LAW.


slaves, This was the mancipii causa, a- mediate
condition between free men and slaves out of which _
further a patronatus, ‘similar to that over real slaves,
might arise through emancipation. Only in the inca-
pacity for the potentiality and in the acquisition for
the masters, this dependence is exactly similar to that
of slaves. These jural relations maintained themselves in
extensive use, as pure legal forms for the dissolution of
the paternal power, long after a sale of children in real
earnest had gone out of use, and more,. had in fact
become punishable.


5. Tutela and curatio—The germ of this insti- |
tution of law is indisputably guardianship over minors, .
and this must be regarded as a substitute for the
. paternal power where such is by accident wanting.
The only question is in what sense it is such a substi-
tute. Certainly not so far as in the paternal power lies -
a personal unity, for this certainly is not present in
guardianship. One might think rather of the relation
of education, but this also lies without the limits of
guardianship and can only -be, as a mere accident,
bound up with it. The true connexion however is this.
When the possessor of a potentiality is under age, he
eannot deal with his potentiality, that is to say, he is
incapable of acting. Now most minors are under the
patertial power and as to them that difficulty does not,
exist, since all which devolves upon them is lost in the
potentiality of the father; they themselves therefore
can have no potentiality (S. 54). In other words, their
incapacity to act becomes harmless through their jural
incapacity. It is otherwise when the minor by accident
is without father, consequently can himself have poten-
tialities, In this case an incongruity arises between


FAMILIES’ —LAW, 295.


the jural capacity present and the capacity for action
wanting which requires an artificial, positive, remedy.
Upon this alone guardianship is originally based, for in -
this case alone a general, important, frequent, natural
necessity is present. ‘The remaining cases of tutelage,
as well as the whole of curatorship, rest upon progressive
developements of a similar necessity. They have this
however in common with that principal case that they
only appear where the strictly legal relation of a
potestas or manus, does not already render them super-
fluous. ‘The jural contents of these relations are
two-fold, First they supply the incapacity for action
‘wanting to the jurally capable. Secondly they at a
later period change themselves into obligations between
him who was Tutor or Curator and the person entrust-
ed to his care,


In the time of the classical jurists, the artificial
extension of the law of family was confined to the five
institutions here explained. In Justinian’s time the

addition of a sixth CoLONATUS is necessary ; at that
time it had long been as extended as it was important.
The essence of it consisted in a hereditary, indissoluble
obligation to the cultivation of a particular farm
(copyhold) ; it. was cognate to the servitus and still
essentially different from it.©)- That this relation is
not mentioned in the first book of our institutes is not
to be éxplained on reasons inherent in the matter but
by. the small independence of intellectual activity in
the age of Justinian. They satisfied themselves by
somewhat modifying the books of the classical age
instead of independently setting forth the living law of


(6) Savigny iiber den ‘Bémischen Colonat., zeitechrift fiir aeacutaitl
Rechtsu. B. 6. Num. 4. .


296 FAMILIES —LAW.


the present; for this reason they remained with few


exceptions relegated to the circle of objects of those
books.


The artificial family relations have moreover in the
most important connexions a similar quality with the
natural (S. 54); they are like these, legal relations —
against every one who contests their recognition and
they are also protected by praejudicia.©


I have made use of the appellation, natural and
artificial family relations, in order thereby sharply to
distinguish those parts of the law of family which are
juris naturalis from those which are not so. For the
prevention of misunderstanding it is however to be
remarked that the Romans ascribed to the institutions,
indicated by me as artificial, a very diverse nature. As
to the manus and the mancipit causa it could not be
mistaken that they were entirely peculiar to the
Roman law, therefore belonged to the jus civile ; they
may have had the same opinion of. patronatus also.
On the other hand they counted guardianship, so far as
relates to minors in the jus gentium ;@ im the same
way with slavery which appeared among other nations
as much as among the Romans.) In relation to this
last the developement of the view of law, which has
entered in the train of Christianity, is very remarkable.
No philosopher of antiquity holds the existence of a
state without slaves possible. In all Christian Euro-
pean states, on the other hand, slavery is regarded aa
impossible; and in the Christian states out of Europe,


(c) 8. 18. J. de act. (4, 6.)
(d) Gaius. I. S. 189,
(e) L. 1, 8. 1 de his qui sui (1. 6.) S. 1. J. eod. (1. 8.)


FAMILIES’—LAW. 297


the struggle for the continuance or annihilation of it,
is one of the most important problems arecrved for the
future.


Two other doctrines of law however stand in close
connexion with the rélations of family just explained:
representation in; the acquisition of the potentiality
and legal capacity in different degrees.


Representation in the acquirement of a potentiality
(S. 113.) is bound up with potestas, manus, manci-
pium, therefore with three or properly four of the
family-relations above set forth. All family-relations
however have not this important influence; it is not
found namely in the marriage as such, the patronatus
and guardianghip. - The law of family therefore goes
very much beyond this doctrine and ought not to
be held as identical with it. ; :


Legal capacity (which will be explained at length in’
S. 64. fg.) rests upon a three-fold classification of men,
_with which are connected three degrees of the capitis
deminutio. The distinctions of the liberi and servi,
_ of the sui juris and alient juris, are completely based
on some of the above stated family relations; on the
other hand the third distinction (cives, latini, peregrini)
lies wholly without the limits of the law of family,
indeed of the private law in general; on the contrary
however several family relations—marriage as such,
relationship, patronatus, guardianship, have no influ-
ence at all upon jural (legal) capacity. The theory of
jural capacity also therefore is not thoroughly identi-
fiable with the law of family; the two have rather
limits entirely different.


The - historical developement of the institutions
appertaining to the family-law are still in the last place


298 ‘FAMILIES’ —LAW.


to be mentioned. The manusand the mancipit causa
had already entirely vanished in Justinian’s time. On
the transition of the Roman law into modern Europe
slavery and the patronatus have also vanished. In
like manner the Roman colonatus could not obtain
lasting recognition in modern Europe since the very
similar Germanic bondage (serfdom) had completely
taken its place. It was also entirely dislodged by ‘this
in Italy and France; in the larger part of Germany
however it had not been received with the Roman law.
Accordingly of all those institutions, the following only
have remained in the modern law: marriage, pee
power, relationship, guardianship.


On the other hand from the middle ages on the
German law as their foundation have newly arisen
several institutions of law, in which, as in the family-
relations previously existing among the Romans, a moral
element must be recognized as especially influential,
and which, if their nature is to be rightly conceived,
must be partially’ ranged in the family-law, at least
partially in the public law. Of this nature are the
whole feodal relation, the very numerous ‘relations of
‘the lord of the manor to the peasants and in particular
the already mentioned Germanic serfdom. We must
also avoid attempting to fix rigidly the limits‘of the
' family-law for all times and nations and’ must rather
recognize the possibility, for each positive law, of a frée
developement. ‘This progressive developement shows
itself in a specially remarkable way in one of the most
extended relations of our modern condition, the law of
hired servitude. From the stand-point of the Roman
law, this admits of being conceived merely as a contract
. foperae locatae) and this contracted treatment was


POTENTIALITY S—LAW. 299


sufficient for the Romans, since by reason of the exces-
sive number of the class of slaves the need of free
domestic servants was almost wholly imperceptible. It
is otherwise with us who have no slaves; whence that
relation has become of very important and extended
necessity. Now we are not satisfied with the narrow
treatment of it like any other contract for labour and
thus in the Prussian land-recht, the law of hired.
service has been perfectly correctly received not under
contracts but into the law of persons.(/)


SECTION LVI.
POTENTIALITY’S-LAW.


Two object-matters, things and acts (transactions)
have been stated above (S. 53.) for the law of potenti-
alities. Upon them are based its two main divisions
THINGS~LAW and OBLIGATIONS—Law. The first has
for its matter possession or the mastery over things in
point of fact. As law it appears simply and completely
in the shape of PROPERTY. or the unlimited and |
exclusive mastery of a person overa thing. In order
however to make clear to us the nature of property we
must set out by the following general examination.
Every man has a calling to the mastery over unfree
nature; he must however equally recognize the same
calling in every other man and from this mutual recog-
nition, in the contact of individuals in space, arises the
necessity of the equalization which appears first of all
as a something indefinite and can only be satisfied by
a more determinate limitation. This satisfaction now,
by the help of the communion in the state, is obtained.


(f) AL. RIL 5.


300 POTENTIALITY S—LAW.


through positive law. When we here ascribe to
the state a common. jurisdiction over the unfree
nature within its boundaries, individuals appear as
sharers in this comnion power and our task consists in
finding a definite rule according to which the distribu-
tion among the individuals is to be carried out. That
distribution may be made in three ways which must
not however be conceived in a relation of excluding

-one another but they may rather in a certain degree
be in simultaneous application. We may denote these
three ways in the following manner:


1. Common property and common enjoyment,—
This relation is found in the whole state’s-potentiality,
whether this consists of the revenue from taxes, regalia
or demesnes, for the public institutions maintained
by this revenue are in fact made use of and enjoyed
by each individual though often in different degrees.


. 2, _Co ommon property and pr ivate enjoyment. —
This the rarest sort of distribution. is found in the
Roman ager publicus of the most ancient time; in
like manner in modern corporations it in _which we call
them citizens’ potentialities.

3. Private property and private enjoyment depen-
dent upon the free acts or natural events recognized in
positive lww.—This everywhere prevailing form is the.
single one with which we have to do in private law.
Herein lies the idea of property, the complete recogni-
tion of which leads to the possibility of wealth and
poverty, both of them without any limitation.


A mastery of individual men over unfree nature lying
without the bounds of property is not conceivable ;
at the same time however within the limits of property


” POTENTIALITY’S-LAW. 301


a mastery, limited in manifold ways, is conceivable
from which in fact, according to the determinations of
each system of positive law, numerous individual jura
im ve may be formed. All possible rights to things—
property and jura im re--we embrace under the
common name of REAL RIGHTS.(4).


The matter of the law of obligations is the partial
mastery over the acts of others by which that, which
conceiving it in its entirety we describe as commerce,
is conditioned and formed. All acts however are not
adapted for object-matters of obligations but those
only which through their material nature may be
regarded as stepping out from the person and similar
to things.


If we sum this up, a pervading contrast to family-
law here showsitself. In the two parts of potentiality’s-
law, the matter does not, as in the family, consist in a
natural-moral relation; those parts have therefore no
mixed nature but are rather pure mere legal relations ;
they belong not to the jus naturale and the recognition.
of their existence appears less necessary, more arbitrary
and positive, than in the institutions of family-law.
On the other hand the doubt cannot here arise, in what
their real legal contents consist; for since a widening
of the individual freedom is to be embraced in them
(8. 53.), this very power, this mastery which they pro-
eure for us, is that which furnishes them, as institutions
of law; with their contents.


To the assertion here made that the potentiality’s-
law does not, like family-law, include in it a moral


(a) This terminology is only generally stated here for the prevention
of misunderstanding. The more accurate determination of it as well as
the specification of the individual jura in re is reserved for the special
law of things. *

Al


30200~— POTENTIALITY’S—LAW.


element, it might”be objected that the moral law is to
rule over every kind of human action and that there-
fore the relations of potentialities. also must have a
moral foundation. ‘Of course they have such inasmuch
as the rich man ought to regard his wealth as goods -
entrusted to his management; only this view remains
completely foreign. to the dispositions of law. The
distinction lies therefore in the family-relation being
only incompletely governed by the institutions of law
so that a large part of it is abandoned exclusively to
-moral influences. On the contrary in the potentiality’s-
relations the mastery of legal institutions is completely
accomplished and that without reference to the moral
or immoral exercise of a right. Hence the rich man
can allow the poor one to perish either through the
denial of assistance or the harsh exercise of the right
of a creditor and the remedy admitted against this, —
springs not from the ground of private, but from that
of the public law; it consists in the institutions for
the relief of the poor to which of course the rich man
_ can be compelled to contribute although perhaps his
- contribution is not immediately perceptible. It remains
therefore true, in spite of this, that no moral constitu-
‘ent is ascribable to potentiality’s-law, as an institution
of private law, and through this assertion neither the
absolute domination of the moral law is mistaken, nor
the nature of the private law placed in a doubtful
light (Comp. 8. 52). ct 4 .

At the first glance the relation to one another of the
two divisions of potentiality’s-law stated, seems so immu-
‘tably determined by their bare object-matter, that it
must everywhere be found to be the same. Of closer
examination however a very free play-room for mani-
fold determinations of the positive law of. different


POTENTIALITY’S-LAW. - 303


nations is shown in this law; and indeed we find this
variety, partly, in the determination of the boundaries
‘between things’-law and obligations, partly in the
connexion in which these two parts of the law may be
conceived to one another. So far as the settlement of
boundaries is concerned, certain extreme points doubt-
less present themselves in which the special nature of
one or the other division is wholly unmistakeable :
_ thus rigid property with unlimited vindication on the
one side, the contract of hired service and mandate on -
the other, but between these lies a natural approxi-
mating, indeed a gradual transition, in the fact that the
most numerous and important obligations aim’ at
acquiring by the acts of others a right over a thing or
at least the use and enjoyment of such.) In this
connexion now the Roman law is characterized by a
sharp standifig out of property, which shows itself,
" partly in the unlimited operation of the vindication,©
partly in the very limited possibility of an attenuation
of property by means of jura in ve) All now is
dependent upon whether the thing in itself, independ-


(0) Namely all dandi obligationes. On that is based the phraseology
of many modern jurists according to which obligations (jura personalia
are divided into jura pers. in specie and jura ad rem: Daries Inst. juris
pr. priv. 8, 31. In like manner the Prussian A. L. R. Th. 1. Bit, 2. 8,
123. 124. supposes as genus the personal right, as species the right to
the thing, :

{c) In contrast to the Prussian, the French law, as a rule, allows of
no vindication of moveables but only exceptionally in particular sorts
of loss of possession. In like manner the Prussian law gives to the
bond fide purchaser of things of every kind the right of obtaining resti-
tution of the selling price from the proprietor.

(d) The Roman law admits jura in reas possible only in individual
cases determined. The Prussian law, on the other hand, explains every
right of enjoyment of the things of another as real so soon as possession
steps in without distinction of the occasion and aim of it.


304 POTENTIALITY S—LAW.


ently. of an act of others, is the object-matter of our
right or whether our right is immediately directed to
an act of others as the object-matter subjected to our
mastery and without regard to whether this act has
for its end to invest us with the right to a thing or to
the enjoyment of it. The existence of an in rem or
im personam actio serves as a safe indicator of this
limit; the distinction between the two indeed for the
most part, by no means however universally, coincides
with the difference between an opponent undetermined
and determined.(‘)) The connexion of both divisions
of potentialities to one another may easily be dark-
ened by those vanishing boundaries. ‘The Roman law
holds them firmly apart from one another and treats
each division by itself as quite independent within its
limits. Thus property as the independent mastery
over a thing without regard to the obligation which


$ 3
(e) It ought not to be said that the limits of these two sorts of action


mainly coincide with the limits of things’-law and obligations’-law, for
very important in rem actiones exist, which do not belong to the law of
things ; but indeed all actions arising out of real rights are im rem, all
arising out of obligations in personam. The more precise determination
of this point belongs to a later section.
(f) It is often said—the essence of the in rem actio as opposed to
that in personam consists in that proceeding against every third person,
‘every possessor, and this not so proceeding ; but the actio quod metus
cause proceeds as in rem séripta against each third person and is on that
account none the less in personam. Meanwhile such cases are merely
rare exceptions and when we, conceive the object-matier as a whole, we
are fairly justified in saying—rights to things (real) are directly distin”
guished from obligations by their general operation against all, not
merely against individuals determined. A consequence of this in the
main correct distinction is then this also—that the real rights, since
they are to operate against: a person undetermined, therefore in the
greatest extension, have also a more firmly determined nature than
obligations, that is to say, they embrace more absolute law or jus
publicum (S. 16.) : :


POTENTIALITY S-LAW. 305


’


perhaps served as mediation and preparation for it: the

obligation as independent mastery over an act of
another without regard to the real right, which is per-

haps the aim of this act. A two-fold aberration is

possible from this treatment completely conformable to
the nature of those rights : inasmuch as obligations alone
may be kept in view and real rights appear merely as
consequences or developements of them :(g) or on the
other hand inasmuch as real rights may appear as the sole
object-matter of the legal determinations for then obli-
gations are merely regarded as modes of acquisition of
real rights.) Each of these modes of treatment is, from
the very fact of being constrained and one-sided, an
obstacle to an insight into the true nature of the jural
relations, to say nothing of the fact that these modes
are wholly unadaptable to many jural relations, so that
properly speaking, in the consistent carrying out of the
fundamental thought, these must be wholly omitted.(i)


(9) Thus it happens with Domat lois civiles, He divides the whole
law into engayemens (rights among the living) and successions (law of
inheritance.) The Engagemens are obligations beside which real rights
appear merely incidentally as consequences or corroborations.

(kh) So in the French civil code, which has three books. 1. Persons.
2. Things and modifications of property. 3. Modes of acquisition of
property ; these are three-fold : (a) Successions, ¢. e. heirship to an intes-
tate. (6) Donatio inter vivos-and Testament. (c) Operation of obliga-
tions. (Art. 711.) This preponderance of property is however merely
apparent, for the second book is very meagre, the third on the contrary
embraces the greatest part of the whole private law whence the pre-
dominant reference +o property figures in the title only. Thus the
Prussian Land-recht treats obligatory. contracts and testaments merely
as titles to the acquisition of property (Th. I. Tit, 11. 12. 13.)

() Thus e. g. as a consequence in Domat no place is found for oceu- .
pation and the so-called specification. The Preuss. Landrecht and the _
Code civil treat the mandate as a means for the acquisition of property,
‘although according to its general nature, it can just as wel be directed
to other objects,


396 POTENTIALITY S—LAW.


By potentiality in its application to an individual
we now understand the totality of all the relations here
described, -in so far a8 they connect themselves with
a person determined as their subject. This impor-
tant jural concept will be more fully brought out by
the following closer definitions. In the first place,
the attachment of these rights to a person determined
is casual and changeable so that that potentiality has a
determinate compass only under the presupposition of
a given point of time and that in every other point of
time it may have contents wholly different. Secondly
' we can, in the general treatment of the individual

potentiality, abstract from it the quality of the
individual rights of which it consists and by means
of this abstraction it is changed for our treatment into
a pure quantity of homogeneous contents. The abstract
handling of the potentiality makes it moreover possible
and necessary to draw into it the passive side of obli-
gations, the relation of the debtor which is not like
the potentiality, hitherto treated, the foundation of an
extended, but of a diminished freedom. When we in
this way regard the debts also as constituents of the
potentiality, we must admit that the totality of every
single potentiality may exhibit sometimes a plus,
sometimes a minus, sometimes a complete indifference
or a cipher, —


This purely quantitative treatment of the potentiality,
without which an exercise of the right would only be
possible in a very incomplete way is brought about by
means of the idea of VALUE or the equalization of
heterogeneous rights of potentiality by reduction to a
common third. This idea again is externally manifest-
ed and introduced into practical life by MONEY so that
in their legal acceptation, value and money-value are


POTENTIALITY’8-LAW. 307


synonymous and are in fact also ‘habitually interchanged |
in the employment of them.(#) The individual poten-
tial is thereby so far converted into a pure quantity that
all its constituent parts are resolved into the ownership
of a sum of money : thus it is with, the property in every
other thing—all jura im re—the bare use of a thing
naturally with -special regard to its duration—lastly
with obligations also, consequently credits and debts,
be they or be they not directed to the creation of rights
over things or their mere enjoyment (dare facere.)
Hence it becomes possible to reduce the pure faciendi
ébligatio also to genuine property, so that the indi-
vidual potentiality is now conceivable as property in a
sum of money, as a money debt which there are no
means of paying, or as a complete nullity. At the
same time however the remark made at the beginning
of this section, that all acts are’ not adapted for the
object-matters of obligations, receives a more deter-
minate meaning; those acts, namely, of which the
conversion into a sum of money would be wholly


(&) In the older Roman procedure this practical reduetion of all
rights, even the most heterogeneous, to a money value came out very
visibly. Gaius IV. S. 48. Hegel Naturrecht S. 63. defines in the main
correctly the ideas of value and money and is only one-sided in reeog-
nizing merely a property or purchase value; he therefore neither
recognizes a value in use nor the value of a thing on the hypothesis of
the property in it being inalienable; certainly still less a value of acts,
in particular of labour which he does not even mention in that passage.
However through this unnecessary limitation that idea loses the greater
part of its usefulness, .


(2) What practical consequences are attached to this bare possibility
remains for the present wholly undetermined. Whether sucha commu-
tation is always in the option of the debtor, or whether it is to operate
as merely a succedaneum where the original object-matter of the obli-
gation is no longer possible, can for thé first time be investigated_
in obligations’-law.


308 POTENTIALITY ’S—LAW.


inconceivable, are not suitable for that ‘purpose; at -
least these can be regarded only as, improperly and in
an incomplete manner, obligations.


In the idea of the individual potentiality, the unity
which we ascribe to it, is based upon the person of the
possessor. For definite purposes however this once
independently formed concept admits of being trans-
ferred to some other artificially supposed limits, whereby
the unity then becomes one arbitrarily assumed. This
happens with the peculium and the dos which are of
course for certain purposes regarded as an arbitrarily
limited potentiality.) Each case of this sort is often
denominated a UNIVERSITAS JURIS. The name wniver-
sitas is unquestionably suitable to it, for this denotes
each single whole conceived in contrast to its constitu-
ent parts”) The combination of the two does not
occur in Roman phraseology; but it is more important
and censurable that people have allowed themselves to
be misled, by this newly discovered technical expres-
sion, into ascribing to those cases a common nature
and applying to them certain arbitrarily conceived
rules of law. Each of these cases however has rather
its wholly peculiar nature and for each of them, this
nature and the rule of law prevailing for it require to
be established.)


(m) A still more important case, the inheritance, is added to these
two; the following section is the place for speaking of it,


(x) This appellation is applied without distinction whether it isa
whole of persons (e. g. 4 corporation), or of things (herd, library), or
of rights (Peculium, Dos.); moreover to the universitas of -things
without distinction of whether the parts are united in one body (house
in contradistinction to the beams and stones) or not (a herd) : without
distinction whether the union into a body is produced by nature
(animal and plant in contradistinction to the individual parts) or by .
the will of man (house). ~


(0) This matter is treated in a thorough and convincing way by
Hasse upon universitas juris and rerum Archiv. -B. 5. N. 1. . ;


POTENTIALITY ’S—LAW. 309


SECTION LVIl.-
POTENTIALITY’S-LAW,—( Continuation. )


It has been remarked above (S. 53.) that in actual
life the relations of the family and the potentiality:
come into manifold contact with one another and that
this contact generates in each of these two classes
peculiar developements. Thus in family-law slavery
readily took its rise from the reception of an ordinary.
case of property into the family fellowship: the potestas
was also a consequence of the dominium and shared
all its incidents as is shown for instance in the possi- |

_ bility of absolutely alienating slaves and transmitting
them as heritage. Patronatus and mancipium had .
again formed themselves out of slavery: guardian-
ship had its aim and its significance merely in the
potentiality. Colonatus is entirely connected with an
obligatory relation which makes up its contents and of
-which it shares the incidents ¢. g. in the transition to
the heirs of the master.


Similar reactions of the family upon the potentiality
are also found. The first and most immediate consists
in special institutions of potentiality being established
for the individual family-relations, namely real rights
and obligations which in their present shape and with ,
their present details are possible only on the pre-
‘ supposition of defined family-relations. We call the
aggregate of these APPLIED FAMILY-LAW and this is
precisely what especially gives to the family its proper
juristic character (S, 54).

The potentiality’s-law also however is susceptible


and in want, within its own boundaries, of that wider
developement which we denote by the name of the


810 POTENTIALITY S-LAW.


law (right) of inheritance. The meaning of this must
now be explained.


We originally regarded the potentiality as an extend-
ing of the power of the individual man, consequently
as an attribute of his in his exclusive personality.
Since this now is of a transitory nature, the potentiality
of each man must, with his death lose its legal signi-
ficance, that is, be reduced to. nothing ; but all right
generally first receives its reality and completeness in
the state, as positive-law of this state, and thus even
property could only attain to a practical existence by
its being referred to the state and through the medium

" of the rules developed in the positive law of the state
to the individual participators in the right in the state
as proprietors (S. 56). If we apply this mode of con-
ceiving the matter to the case mentioned, while by the -
death of its possessor a potentiality ceases to subsist as
an attribute of his so now it no longer falls back into
nothing inasmuch as its connexion with that more
remote foundation, by reason of the imperishable
nature of the state, continually lasts on. As now dif-
ferent possible ways have been above explained for the
legal developement of the mastery of men over un-free
nature, so also can such a potentiality, which has

. become masterless by death, be treated differently in
order that it may continue preserved uninterruptedly
as a constituent in the aggregated legal organism. ,


The first possible mode of treatment for this end
consists in the potentiality continuing a private one
through the deceased, by a sort of fiction, being regard- -
ed as continuing to act beyond the period of his own -
death. This again may happen in a two-fold manner;
partly through the fate of the potentiality being still


POTENTIALITY’S-LAW, - Bll


determined by the will of the possessor expressed

-during life (testaments-and contracts touching the

inheritance); partly through a continuation of the

ownership over the potentiality by those who were in.
any way whatever akin to the deceased during his life
(succession to an intestate): thus then the idea of thé
continuance of the individuality (8. 53.) established by
means of consanguinity is of peculiar influence.


According to a second possible treatment that which
was hitherto private potentiality, at the death of the
possessor becomes converted into state’s-potentiality.
This is not seldom found among the states of the East;
but in Christian Europe also this mode of treatment
presents itself, although in a far more limited way
wherever namely. succession duties are introduced of ©
which the proper nature consists in a division of the
heritage between the state and other heirs.


The first solution of the problem is the only one
with which we have to do, not only because it is recog- :
nized in the Roman law but also because it alone
belongs to private law with which we are exclusively
concerned. As to it above all things arises the impor-
tant question in what legal form that transition
of the vacated potentiality, to a new private possessor,
is to be carried out. The differences, which are

_ perceived in this respect, are in no way dependent upon
different principles between which a selection was to
be made but rather upon the more or less thorough
comprehension and solution of the problem itself. It
would be conceivable that a system of legislation
should have limited itself to determinations by which
the single parts of the potentiality, so far as they were

_ of any value, should be actually put into the possession


812  POTENTIALITY’S—LAW.


of the persons to whom the vacated potentiality is to
accrue; by this means provision would necessarily be
made for the immediate practical end. If however
one has regard to the proper nature and nted of the
jural relation here presented to us, the potentiality
must be treated as a unity of which the basis is to be
found in the common reference to the deceased holder;
this treatment moreover of necessity leads further to
the consistent carrying out of the view of the poten-
tiality as a pure quantity, the diverse qualities of its
- single constituent parts being removed by abstrac-
tion (S. 56). In technical phraseology this is thus
expressed—all succession is to be treated as a Succss-
SIO PER UNIVERSITATEM, beside which, merely in a
subordinate way and as a limiting exception, a special
succession to single parts of the potentiality may
oceur(¢) It is one of the most remarkable phenomena
in the history of the Roman law that this view was
recognized in it in a manner so clear and definite, and
that simply by means of genuine practical tact, long
before a scientific developement of this institution of
law could have been thought of.()


From this results a two-fold view of the whole law
of inheritance of which each is alike true and important.
That law,.in the first place, appears as a mode of
acquiring all the individual ‘rights belonging to the


(a) I merely use these expressions provisionally ; the more accurate
establishment of them, as of succession in general, will appear in a
subsequent paragraph.


(6) Iam far indeed from asserting that the Romans had already in
early times conceived and determined this relation in an abstract way.
There exists however a purely practical occasion for entering upon this
question whereby it must be shown whether it has been understood in
its right sense or not : the credits and debts in the inheritance are such


POTENTIALITY’S—LAW. 313


potentiality—as ADQUISITIO PER UNIVERSITATEM.()

Secondly the object-matter of succession appears as a

peculiar, independently subsisting right, as a wni-—
versitas(@) and to this is referable in particular the
special sort of pursuit of the right (action) which
appears in company with it. Both modes of conceiving
“it unite in the view according to which the heirs with
the deceased make-up a single person, therefore
continue him or represent him. According to this
view therefore the original relation is completely
inverted ; for while originally the man was of necessity
conceived as substance, the potentiality as accident
because it merely modifies the freedom of men by
widening it, so now, as the enduring and essential

appears the potentiality to which the individual

possessors stand merely in the relation of transitory
changing owners. a


In this place the potentiality has been constantly
treated as the. object-matter of the law of inheritance ;


an occasion. What the twelve tables had determined upon that matter
was so thorough and. satisfactory, that legal science at the period of
its highest developement met in those determinations, with nothing
to improve. The whole successio per universitatem was therefore at
that time already conceived with complete definiteness, Comp. L. 6. C.
fam here. (3. 66). L. 25. 8. 9.18. eod, (10. 2.) L. 7. OC. de heract -
(4. 16.) L. 26. C. de practis (2. 3.)
(c) In Gaius and thence in Justinian’s institutes also, the whole law
‘of inheritance is merely from this point of view inserted_ into the
system of the institutions of law. The one-sidedness of this mode of
conceiving it is shown among other grounds by the fact that it is
expounded as a ground of acquisition of property, while in this‘view
it belongs neither more nor less to property than to obligations.
(2) Hence the heritage is named by the moderns a universitas
juris ; to this illegitimate expression numerous not unimportant errors
concerning the matter have attached themselves. :


Bl


B40 POTENTIALITY S-LAW.


in this is. involved the aagumption that the family-
relations do ndt belong to its object-matters. Property
and obligations therefore are transmitted; marriage,
paternal power, and-relationship are not; but those
artificial institutions of the family law, which are
completely annexed to a right belonging to. the poten-
tiality, must. also share its incidents (S. 55). Thus
Slaves, like every other piece of property, are trans-
mitted : in the same way the coloni with the demesne
lands with which they are inextricably bound up.


In the establishment of the law of inheritance’ lies
the completion of the law-organism, which is thereby
extended beyond the limits of the life of the individual.
If we compare the law of inheritance with that which
we have earlier learned to know as potentiality’s-law,
that appears not subordinate to, but co-ordinate with
this. From out of the higher stand-point now gained
we must admit in the aggregate potentiality’s-law two
main divisions: the contemporaneous and the succes-
sive potentiality’s-law. The first embraces the conditions
under which each individual can for any given point of
time whatever, found for himself a potentiality (Things’-
law and Obligations’-law.) In truth into these also
a change may enter through modifications in time
but that change is accidental and foreign to the nature
of the potentiality. In the second, on the contrary,
this changing appears as of necessity produced by the
end of ‘life predestinated to each individual, indeed
this changing is the basis and forms the sa
contents of the whole jural relation.


REVIEW OF THE INSTITUTIONS or LAW. 815


SECTION LVI.
REVIEW OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF LAW: -

The arrangement of the legal institutions here
attempted is based upon their innermost nature, namely
upon their organic connexion with the actual nature of
men in ‘which they are inherent. All their other:
attributes must on the other hand appear compa-
ratively subordinate and not adapted for the foundation.
of the system of law asa whole. To these secondary
attributes the following relations belong. First the
-Opsect of the jural relations or that which,. by means
of them, is subjected to our will.@) This relation has
reality only under a pre-supposition of the mastery ag -
fundamental character of the jural relations; by this
one is certainly first of all led to ask what is to be
dominated by us. This relation is therefore adapted
for a subordinate division of the potentiality’s-law
(S. 56.), not however for a principal division of the
matter of law generally since it is not suitable to
family (S. 54). Secondly to those secondary attributes
belongs the quality of the person standing opposite to
the person entitled, namely according as our right is
directed against all men in general or merely against an
individual determined. ‘From this stand-point the
jural institutions would apparently be arranged thus:

L Against all; the real rights and the right of
inheritance.


2. Against individuals determined ; the family.
relations and obligations. :


From this arises an apparent selasionatiy of the
- family to obligations by which several have” allowed


“@ The idea of the object of law is thus Tightly determined by ;
Puchta, Rhein. Museum B. 3. 8. 298.


316 REVIEW OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF LAW.


themselves to be deceived. The unreality of that
relationship consists in that, which happens between
the two individuals in the two cases, being something
of a wholly different surt; for in obligations it is a
partial subjecting of the one to the will of the other;
in the family it is a natural-moral, at the same time legal,
relation of life which is to be continuously brought
forth by the connexion of the two, and on this account.
such a subjecting is not at all the import (contents) of
the jural relation, which is rather composed of the
claim, general and directed against all, to the recogni-
tion of the existence of this family-bond (8. 54). Itis
therefore not true homogeneousness but a purely —
external and accidental relationship by which in this
case people allow themselves to be deluded.)


The separate legal institutions have been hitherto
enumerated in the following order in which those only
ought at present to be left out which are no longer of
consequence to the modern Roman Jaw:

Marriage,
Paternal power,
Relationship,
Guardianship,
Things-law or property and jura im re,
Obligations,

Applied family-law,

Law of succession (inheritance).


Pure family-law (jus).


_ The question however arises whether it is possible
and convenient to expound them also in this order, that
is whether the natural order, in which the concepts of


(b) Only through misunderstanding could this be taken to imply,
that to the family a weaker bond between individuals is ascribed than
to obligations, Quite the reverse—the family affects the whole man in


REVIEW OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF LAW. 3817


these institutions present themselves to our view, is
likewise to be regarded as the convenient ofder for
instruction. The following objection to that course
appears ‘especially important. It is indeed in itself
possible to separate the applied family-law from the
pure, and to treat it as a special segment of the whole
potentiality’s-law ; but the life-like exhibition of the
family-relations must necessarily be a gainer, when the
influences of the family upon the potentiality are
brought into immediate connexion with the family in
itself, Now if this is to be done, it is positively .
necessary to place the whole family-law after the
potentiality’ s-law, since the influence of the family upon
the potentiality cannot be understood, unless a con-
nected exposition of the things’-law and obligations
has gone before. The law of inheritance lastly must
remain wholly incomprehensible unless a previous
accurate exposition of the family had laid the found-
ation for it, From these considerations there results the
_ following arrangement of the institutions of law, upon
which, as the simplest and most convenient, I will base
my exposition.

Things’-law,

Obligations,

Family-law (pure and applied),

Succession-law (aw of inheritance).

According to this statement of the contents of our

systemi of law, it might be expected that the exposition


his innermost nature; the obligation merely goes to something exter-
nal to the obligor, to an act conceivable as separated from him. The
bond is thus in the family certainly no weaker, though a different one:
the domination and bondage, in which the essence of the obligation
consists, are much too material for the provincein which the family has
. its true nature,


318 REVIEW OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF LAW.


of things’-law would immediately begin. - On the other
band. we find ourselves at present in the midst of a
general part of not inconsiderable extent. , Such a part
has ‘already been admitted by other saricts and has not
. 8eldom been required to serve the purpose of ‘providing
for institutions of law for which no suitable placé
seemed discoverable in the system itself; this treatment.
of the general part as a mere help in.need has again
. been frequently blamed by others. It is however to be
asked whether, for such a procedure, there cannot be
discovered a ground of inherent necessity, from which
then the right limits’ of that Eee part will imme-
- diately result.


When we attempt to exhibit the separate en
of law in the living coherence of their-parts, therefore
with completeness, we thereby of necessity meet with
many sides oftheir nature which . likewise appear in
every other institution, although perhaps with certain
modifications. 'To these belongs as a main division, the
nature of the subjects of law and in particular their
legal (jural) capacity; further the arising and passing
away of the jural relations ; lastly the protection of
_ Yights against injury and the modifications of the
rights themselves resulting from that protection. There
exists in fact no institution of law in which the clearing
up of these questions would not be necessary and
important. We might now, as to each institution, deal
with such parts again completely and anew, but a
repetition of this sort would be tolerable neither to
the writer nor the reader. We might treat them as'a
‘whole and thoroughly with respect to the institution
first presenting itself, consequently according to our
arrangement with reference to property, and in the
succeeding institutions refer to that : but this procedure


REVIEW or THE INNSITUTIONS OF LAW. 319.


also odd sesmiodinnaly show itself as arbitrary and
- disproportionate. To this is to be added the important
" consideration that the real’ generality in.such parts of
the institutions of law can at once be more thoroughly
recognized through their being put together. It thus
' appears desirable in every point of view to extract
this actually general part and put it in the front of the
system of the special institutions of law, in order that,
in each special institution, we may be able to, attach
the modifications, which are true of it, to that common
foundation. ,


Indeed the construction of such a general part may
be prejudicial to a correct insight, through the ease,
with which in this way, that is represented as general
which can in fact only be ‘applied in reference to a
concrete, Thus e. g. if the theory of interest or of
correal debis, which can both prevail as to obligations
only, is admitted into the general part. The improper
general treatment of numerous special ideas or prin-
ciples of law will present itself still more frequently
than such an incorrect placing of a whole institution
of law and that, in the proportion that it is less evident,
will lead more éasily to erroneous views. In this mat~-
‘ter therefore great care must be used, in order that the
special may not, through its false position, get a deceitful
appearance of generality, by which the right limits,
between the really general and the special, would be
overstepped. Besides as to our science, one of the
most fruitful sources of false views is to be fuund in a
baseless striving after abstractions ; this striving may be
assisted, in a very special manner, by the arbitrary and
uncritical establishment of a general part.. As however
this danger ought not to be misunderstood and the™
warning, against an inordinate extension of the general


320 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION.


part, to be neglected, so on the other-hand, truth may
be endangered through an idea or principle of law not
being conceived in the generality actually belonging to
it. And so here as everywhere, the tact, which knows
how to mete the right measure, is the only security
against opposite errors. —


Less doubt and dispute would perhaps always have
arisen on this point if the peculiarity of the various
ends and forms of the communication had been kept
in view. In a course upon the Institutes it is certainly
desirable to enter upon the special as quickly as possible,
so that the hearer may above all be put in possession
of concrete views of the institutions of law. In the
courses upon the Pandects, something more general
admits of being imparted without the risk of its
proving shapeless and insensible to the hearer. The
writer however may go still further, since he may
certainly reckon upon a considerable proportion of

readers who, in the communication, will find merely
a new arrangement and working up, or however a
critical examination and rectification, of the concrete
acquirements already existing in. them.


SECTION LIX.
DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION.

It is not my intention to go through, one by one, the
manifold forms in which others have conceived the
innate connexion of the institutions of law and in
accordance with which they have arranged their expo-
sition of them. Much, which may be of service for a
review of them, is already embraced in the expusition
of my own plan. ..A misunderstanding of a general
nature must nevertheless be mentioned here. Ifa


DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION. 321


complete insight into the jural relations, as they exert
their power in practical life, is to arise in us, it is nob
enough to know their contents and consequently the
operation, which is to be ascribed to them, in the
present time but their own mode of life, consequently
beside the stable side of their nature, the moveable
side of it. To this belong, their arising and dissolution,
their developement and their possible transition into
new shapes (metamorphoses), especially also the pursuit
of them when they are injured. These individual
periods in the organic life of the jural relations have
sometimes been conceived as proper new rights, been
placed in one line with the original jural relations, and
a search made for the place to be assigned to them in
the system of rights as a whole.(«) Such a proceeding
could only lead to the confusing of the concepts.


Although now the examination of the particular
attempts at a systematic arrangement of the jural
relations is here generally disclaimed, this must undergo
an ekception with respect to that arrangement ‘which
we find in the Institutes of Justinian; for this has
been followed, .at least in intention and name, by so
many teachers and writers for centuries, that it carries
with it the historical weight of a great authority and
that it'is necessary to justify, at least to explain, the
difference of the arrangement preferred by me.) That,


(a) This has been said, of the right of men to declare their own will,
of concluding a marriage or an obligatory contract, of acquiring
property, of bringing an action, of demanding restitution and so on.

(6) Hugo has treated this matter with especial predilection and
thoroughness in the following writings: Civ. Magazin. B. 4. Num. 1 and
9 (1812.) B, 5. Num. XV. (1825.) B. 6. Num. XV. (1832.) Ency-
clopadie 8 Ausg. 8. (60-—65.) (1835.) Besides him among modern
writers Diiroi Archiv. fiir civilist. Praxis B, 6. S. 482—440, is especially
remarkable,


322 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION. .


which up to very modern times. we knew as the
arrangement of Justinian, we vow know more accu-
rately as that of Gaius, to which Justinian has
thoroughly adhered so far as a change was not mani-—
festly of necessity brought on by the changes which
‘had occurred in the law itself. This arrangement of
Gaius we have now to examine according to two points
of view; according to its origin and diffusion and
according to its internal worth.


So far as the first point of view, the ‘ietatical is
concerned, people have not seldom admitted or tacitly
assumed the division into persona, res, actio as the
three object matters of the rules of law,() to be a
primeval and universal one among the Romans inas-
much as it has been practically followed in all or most
of the systems of the Roman jurists.@ Infact in the
Roman law such typical contrasts do present them-
selves of which the ancient and firmly established
existence becomes undoubted from the everywhere
recurring, constantly uniform phraseology. A#nong
these are, the vi, clam, precario, the three sorts of
dependence according to potestas, manus, mancipiwm,
the thiee capitis deminutiones, the three orders of
cives, latini, peregrini. That such views had a deep
root in the views of law themselves and that they


(c) This division is to be so understood for Gaius I. S. 8. says:
“Omne jus guo utimur vel ad personas pertinet, vel ad res, vel ad
actiones” exactly as he had said S. 1.: “ Populus itaque Romanus partim
suo proprio, partim communi omnium hominum jure utitur.” Persona,
res, actio are therefore to him object-matters of the rules of law not of
rights or, to use a known phraseology, it isto him a division of the
objective law not of the subjective.

(d) Hugo earlier asserted such a generality as to the works of the
Roman jurists bearing the name of Institutes. Later he explained it as
doubtful. Civ. Magazin. B. 5. 8, 403. 404. B, 6. S. 286, 287, 337,


DIVERSE OPINIONS, UPON CLASSIFICATION. 323


again ‘operated upon the treatment of the theory, is
not to be doubted. To be sure if a like ancient and
diffused existence is conceivable also of the division
according to persona, res, actio, then were its import-
ance, in connexion with the contents of the Roman
law, not to be doubted: the only-question-is whether
this: is conceivable and true. For this assumption,
however we have not the smallest historical ground,
indeed its truth appears very unlikely from the circum-
stances, that the self-same Gaius wrote.a cognate work,
(the es quotidianae) according to another’ plan, and
‘that the institutes of Florentinus, in which from the
similarity of title one might expect the same arrange- .
ment with the Institutes of Gaius, nevertheless follow
another.) We have therefore no ground for ascribing
to that division any universal diffusion whatever, it is
rather equally possible that it rested merely upon an
‘individual, casuaf view of Gaius; who at that particu-
lar time thought fit to make such an arfangement, and |
thus completely vanishes the historical importance
which some have attempted to place upon it.(/)


Ii still remains to test that division according to the
second point of view that is according to its innate


(e) Géschen in the Zeitschrift fir geschichtliche Rechtswissenschaft.
B. 1. 8. 74—76.

(f) Hugo civil Magaz. B. 5. S. 417. B, 6. S. 284. has struck out
yet another way of making good for that division a safe historical -
ground, Itis said namely not at all to have arisen in legal science but to.
rest upon a common view of life which the old jurists merely appro-
priated in accordance with what they had found in some writer not a
jurist. If this opinion were more than a bare hypothesis, it would. be

’ rather evidence against, than in favour of, the general use among the
Roman jurists; for the use of a form, of an origin so accidental and
foreign to the law, is perhaps conceivable as the fancy of a single writer
but it iy not credible that this fancy should have been able to come into
universal recognition.


324 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION.


-worth. To that end however an accurate settlement is

above all necessary of its true meaning on which the
modern writers, to a greater extent than one would
believe, have very different opinions. ©


In the first place what are the contents of the first
part, de personis. Many have at all times conceived
this division as if-it embraced the doctrine of status,
4. €, as they understood this expression, of the most
important conditions or attributes of persons as sub-
jects of law, therefore the theory of the subjects of
law generally. They now further distinguished natural
and civil conditions and under the former reckoned
age, health &e., under the latter, as main divisions, the
_ conditions of legal capacity, freedom, citizenship, inde-
pendence which were as. well particularly denoted as
stutus principales. Now that status in this sense is in
great part not. existent in the Institutes of Gaius and
Justinian eye-sight proves, hence they must comfort
themselves with the presumption that, in this matter,
they have improved Justinian’s incomplete exposition ;
whereby however the entire assumption of this point
of view for that, first book becomes very doubtful.
More consistency and a concept more sharply defined
are found in Hugo’s assertion that the first part is
nothing else than the theory of the LEGAL CAPACITY, or
of the threé attributes which answer to the three-fold
CAPITIS DEMINUTIO.(9) The actual contents of the. first


(g) Civil Magazin. B. 4. 3. 20. 21. 235—237. Others seek to mediate by
saying that the law of persons is the theory of status and of-the
family-relations. They admit therefore two-fold contents united by no
common idea, an assertion very questionable on its mere statement.
Thus Mihlenbruch I. 8. 78. Diroi Archiv. B. 6, S. 487. says that
status or conditio denotes certain important distinctions without com-
mon innate characteristics ; small credit is given to the Roman jurists


‘DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION. 825


book of Gaius and Justinian however contradict this
opinion ; for the theory of guardianship contained in the
third divisio has nothing whatever to do with legal
(jural) capacity since it refers neither to a defect in that —
capacity nor to a compensation for that defect.) On the
other hand one of the three main divisions of legal capa<
city is wanting, the distinction of Cives, latint, peregri-
wi.© Since’ now the first book of the Institutes thus
embraces essentially more and essentially less than;
according to the opinion of Hugo, it must contain, this”
opinion itself seems to me thereby completely refuted,
If we regard more closely however what is in fact found
in the first book of the Institutes, it is almost precisely.
the same that I have above pointed out as family-law.


by the assumption of:so inconsiderate an arbitrariness. He besides ~
‘asserts that there belongs to this place the distinction between cives,.
latint, peregrini, which as such does not. appear in the first book ot
Gaius and of the Institutes at all.

() Guardianship is ‘merely a compensation for the defective capacity
for action. That, Hugo himself admits Rechtageschichte 8, 120. of
the 11. Ausg. ;

, () People have ordinarily deceived themselves on this important
point by. the circumstance that Gaius sometimes, when induced by other
institutions of law mentions this division of persons: ¢. gy. a8 to the’
connubium (1. S. 56.), the causae probatio (1. 8. 66. fg.), the military
testament (2. 8, 110.), and in most detail as to the three classes of
freedmen, consequently as to Patronatus wherewith, in each of these
three classes, different rights are bound up (1. S. 12. fg).” This last may
easily be regarded as an intentional exhibition of the division mentioned,
but it isin any case only an entirely individual application of that so
general division. If they would say that at the time of Gaius this was
the most important application, it would be manifestly false for the
many millions of free-born peregrint in the provinces were then certainly
of more consequence than the dediticti and there could not fail to be
then free-born Zatini in large numbers’ since so far as we know the
latinitas, which Vespasian gave to the whole of Spain (Plinius hist. net. ”
JIL 4.) only passed away into the universal citizenship granted by
Caracalla.


- ‘ol


326 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION.


It in fact treats of marriage, paternal power, manus
slavery, patronatus, (that is of the freedmen according
to their different classes), mancipium, guardianship.@) ~
On the ‘other hand the cives, latini, peregrini, important .
as these are with respect to legal capacity, do not
appear; for these naturally belong to~ public, law;
although an influence, by means-of legal capacity, upon
the private. law, is unmistakeable. Relationship onlys
which I set forth asa branch of family-law, has no
place found for it here; but this difference is indeed
too small to be able to render doubtful, the identity in
the main of the points of view: it must also be per-.
-mitted to every rigorist to leave out relationship . from
the exposition of the Roman family-law; then by this
‘omission the concordance between the contents of the
family-law and those of the first book of the Institutes
would become complete.) That Gaius differs in the
internal arrangement of those institutions and that he,
does: not mention by name the family-law, for which —
besides he had no technical expression at his command,
no one indeed will regard as a refutation of my asser-
tion. I however find some indications of its truth in -
the expressions which here present themselves. Status .
and conditio hominwm -e. g. have not the entirely
indefinite meaning of a condition or attribute in general,
-but the expression denotes quite specially the place,
which the individual man assumes in the, various


(®) That Justinian has omitted the obsolete among these institutions ©
of law is certainly no ground of objection; he has added none.

() When moreover the modern writers, in unquestionable accordance
with the example of Gaius and Justinian, assign no place to rela-
tionship among the institutions of family, this is quite inconsisten$
‘ since they notwithstanding ascribe, in the theory of the capitis
deminutio, a wholly special importance to the agnates-family, a point
which will be more fully discussed below.


DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION. 327


family-relations, as husband, father, guardian and so
forth (S. 54 note). The expression jus personarum
~ has, as I believe, exactly the same signification since it
is employed interchangeably with those expressions,
It therefore does not denote, as jus publiicum and
privatum do, a division of the theory of law, but
’ rather the place of the individual in the jural relations
appertaining to the family ; or, according to the phrase-
ology of numerous modern writers, it ‘relates not to’
the objective but to the subjective law (comp. Appen-
dix, VI).
However there is still more dispute as to the contents
- of thé second and third divisions, de rebus and de
actionibus.m) The reason of the doubt lies in the
portion upon obligations, as an introduction to actions
since: these arise from obligations, according to some
forming the beginning of the third part, according to
others, the end of-the second part since obligations, as res
’ ¢ncorporales, are a subdivision of res(m) In favour
of the first of these opinions the evidence of Theophi-
lus, who in fact. furnishes this connexion, has been’
made use of.(0) This testimony, as that of a co-operator .


(m) The moderns for the most part denote these two divisions as jus
rerum and jus actionum after the analogy of jus personarum. Now that
those two combinations are not found in the old jurists, might be regard-
ed, as in itself, accidental and indifferent; but it is a decisive circum-
stance against that phraseology that the analogy mentioned has merely
a deluding appearance, inasmuch as the expression jus personarum
denotes not a division of the system but aspecial jural relation of
persons; there can however. be no question of a similar relation between
several res. or several actiones.

.(n) At least this form of the second opinion is certainly more con:
formable to the Roman law than the association, after the fashion of
the code civil, of obligations with property because they are often one
occasion of the acquisition of property.

(0) Hugo-ciy. Magazin. B, 4. 8. 17. ae 5. 8. 399. who in general treats ~


328 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION.


upon Justinian’s Institutes, would certainly be very
weighty if the division had arisen, for the first time, in
these Institutes: since however, as we know, it had
already been employed .by Gaius and has merely been
retained by Justinian, that testimony has little histori-
cal weight so long as people will not assume, without
the smallest evidence, that Theophilus, in addition to
the view of Gaius, had found in an ancient writer
authority for ranking obligations in the third part (de
actionibus)(e) If the testimony of Theophilus is given
up as indecisive and the decision of the question in
dispute is attempted upon purely internal grounds, the
matter stands thus. The partisans of the first opinion
are then necessitated to state the object-matters of the
three parts thus : persons, things and acts or demands.(9)
Then the proper contents of the third part would bes
the law of obligations to which the actiones would
merely have the relation of appendage or supplement:
this however suits neither the contents and the com-
pass of the large segment beginning with the actiones,
‘ nor the original plan of Gaius in which the actiones
not the obligautiones are specified as the object-matter
of the third part. Hence I regard as more probable
the second opinion according to which the second part
(de rebus) contains precisely that which I have above


the whole of this question in the passages above referred to (notg (6)
with uncommon completeness and has given very valuable literary
references.


(p) Hugo civ. Magazin. B. 5. 8. 404. B. 6.8. 337. He however adimite
that Theophilus, so far as concerns the connexion of obligations with
the third part, may perhaps have misunderstood and disfigured the old
model, and that in the compilation of the Institutes of Justinian, they
have been perhaps vacillating upon the matter.

(q) Hugo civil. Magaz. B. 4. 8S. 49. B. 5. 8. 117, Encyclopadie
8, 60—41. : ‘


DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION. 329


denoted as potentiality’s-law (things’-law and obliga
tions’-law), the third, the general theory of the pursuit
of rights. To these three parts of the system, three
books in the work of Gaius might have corresponded :
since however the seeond was nearly of the same com:
pass-as_the two other parts together, he preferred.
giving the work four books and assigning two of them
to the second part. Besides the dispute here mention-
ed, as to the true position of obligations is of less
consequence, than is commonly assumed, ag to the
_arrangement of the system of law as a whole. It is
undisputed that Gaius treats the whole potentiality’s-
Jaw with unbroken continuity, equally undisputed that
the third part embraces the pursuit of rights and much
of the law of process.. The dispute is then narrowed
to the question, whethtr the second part (de rebus)
embraces the whole potentiality’s-law so that obliga-
tions make up its last chapter or whether, as an
introductory chapter to the third part, (de actionibus),
they are placed before it.


If now we examine the innate value of the division
so determined, -we must find it, as to the main plan,
suitable to the object-matter but unsatisfactory in the
details of the execution. It gives to several of the
most important jural (legal) institutions a far too sub+
ordinaté position; thus marriage, which is presented
merely as a ground of origin of the paternal power
as if it had not,.on its own account also, the most
rightful claim to recognition: so the law (right) of
inheritance which literally is mentioned only as @
ground of acquisition of property, while it is equally
_ applicable whether property is mét with in a poten-
tiality or not. This unnatural arrangement has been
in great measure induced by an excessive use, through-


330 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION,


out the work, having been made of the logical form of
the divisiones; this one-sidedness of treatment has
likewise been the occasion of numerous other forced
transitions.(") These formal incompletenesses have how-
ever been an obstacle neither to the richness nor the
clearness of the work, of which certainly no friend of
our science will misunderstand the incomparable value.
However there exists no ground for absolutely imitating
its arrangement in point of form, even where we
recognize it to be incomplete, and we ought not to be
blamed for density and arrogance when we strive to
set forth the matter of the Roman law, historically -
“handed down to us, but in a way other than it has
been done by Gaius. Besides the two main divisions
of the system of Gaius are again found as main divisions
in our exposition also, so thaf the difference concerns
merely the more accurate membering in particulars.)


(rv) Thus ¢. g. his first part consists of three divisions of which the
third runs thus: all men are either under guardianship or not, where-
fore we will now treat of guardianship. In like manner one: might
thus have introduced the exposition of the contract of sale: all men
have either concluded a contract of sale or not, or also all legal trans-
actions are either contracts of sale or not, wherefore we will -now deal
with contracts of sale. The peculiarity of slaves appearing twice, in
the first and the second divisio, this proceediug being justified by no
difference of legal reference, is explicable in the same way. The first
mention is mere show and only serves as a transition to the different
classes of freedmen (that is therefore to the relations of patronatus), or
in other words; the divisio stands there merely as color for the sib-
divisio of the Ingenui and Libertini at whom aldne this passage is direct-
ed. It is therefore not correct when many would justify this double
mention of slaves by saying that Gaius in the first place is treating of
the potestas, in the other of the dominium in sevvos ; for this ia mani-
festly not the case; in the first mention he does not deal at all with
what concerns slaves in themselves.

(s) Hugo himself amid all his admiration of that Roman system, to
which he ascribes a greater diffusion than I can find historical ground


DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION. 331


However I must still particularly -protest against
the excessive importance which is often ascribed to -
questions concerning the form of our expositions of
_ the science. Ido not thereby mean that this is a
-mmatter of indifference but only that we must not

deceive ourselves as to what is properly matter of

substance. If a dogmatic exposition of the law is so
constituted as, to destroy the internal unity of the ~
institutions of law, to bind up together the essentially
diverse, to disfigure and reverse the real relation of
different institutions to one another in point of impor-
tance, then such errors of form are essential since they
obscure the matter itself and are hindrances to the
true insight. Where however that case does not present .
itself, we may put up with an arrangement even when
we believe that we perceive many faults init. Accord-
ing to this’ principle of a toleration being, within
certain limits, admissible it has been explained above
that the value of Gaius is in no way lessened by that -
which we have to find fault in him: and in accordance
with the same principle, in our own days, different
“systems of law may subsist peacefully beside one
another, discrepant as their arrangement may at first
sight appear. The toleration, which is here claimed,
ought not thus to be regarded as indifference to the


a


for admitting, still allows that, according to general. views of law and
in particular for the needs of our modern law, many another arrange-
ment might be more convenient than that of the Institutes and he
thereby comes in the main to the point of.view taken by me. Civ.
Mag. B. 5. 8, 397. B. 6. 8. 284-287. Speaking generally I hold the
difference of opinion, which exists between us in this matter, as much
Jess essential than at first sight appears and-I am especially glad to be
able to add that the arrangement here adopted first came to my hands
through Hugo’s Institutions. Berlin 1789 although I have since
striven to develope and establish it in my awn way.


332 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION.


imperfect in any shape whatever, but as a respectful
recognition of the free play-room for the individual
perception upon which rests the true life of all science.


There still remains to be mentioned a general view,
presenting itself in our law-sources, which might at
first sight be likewise regarded as the basis of a classi-
fication, which however I merely treat by way of
appendix because it has not in fact been applied to the
purposes of classification by modern writers. I mean
the three juris praecepta which Ulpian sets out in the
following words: Juris praecepta. sunt haec, honeste
vivere, neminem luedere, suum cuique tribuere.
Honeste vivere is the preserving of moral worth in one’s
own person, so far as this worth is externally visible.
Neminem laedere is the respecting of extraneous
personality as such, therefore the practical recognition
of the so-called original rights, Lastly, swum cuique
tribuere is the recognizing of the aggregate of the
acquired rights of other men.) Now are these, as one
might believe according to Ulpian’s expression, in fact
rules of law? The second and third praeceptwm appear
to be such rules, the first not ; in fact however in all of
them no rules of law are to be sought but rather moral
precepts in which rules of law have their foundation.
As to the third this is at once manifest ; it is the ethical


() L. 10. 8. 1. de just et jure (1. 1), 8. 3. J. eod. (1.1).


(u) Many have referred the second praeceptum ‘to the person, the
third to the potentiality; the true limits are not given here, That one
infringe not the marriage or paternal power, although it has no refer-
ence to the potentiality, belongs to the third praeceptum, the avoidance
of homicide to the second. Burchardi Grundziige des Rechtsystems
S. 42. fy. explains the three praecepta in his way ; the first as jus pub-
Jicum, the second as jus privatwm, the third as the mixed law of


actions. Comp. above 8. 16, 0.


DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION, 333 .


i precept of justice which here has like contents and
compass with the system of acquired rights.) It is
also unmistakeable as to the second, that many of the
most important rules of law originate in it; but even -
the first praeceptwm, with respect to which this con-
nexion appears at the best doubtful, is however the _
ground of origination of rules of law and can for that
reason be called, in the sense of Ulpian a juris prae- -

-ceptum. From it springs every institution of law
against injury of the bont mores, against the turpe.)
To it moreover likewise belongs the important, so much
embracing, sum of rules of law which have for their
foundation the furthering of truth and honesty, conse-
quently the very manifold influence of the DOLUS upon-
all parts of the privatelaw. Oné may say of these rules
of law that they belong equally to the first and second
praeceptum, because in each of them, independently
of the other pracceptwm, they find their justification.
The three praecepta are therefore no rules of law but
they are the basis of a classification of those rules
according to their grounds of origin; only certainly no
one will think of treating the system of rights
according to this arrangement. If it is sought to
determine the rank of the three praecepta according
to their innate nature, the first stands highest because
it is the most intrinsic (inner) and on that very account
bears in itself the germ of the others; the second has


(v) Thence it becomes clear why the justitéa exclusively is ordinarily
explained as voluntas jus suum cuique tribuendt without mention of the
first two praccepta. L. 10 pr. de J. et J. (1. 1), L. 81. S. 1. depos.
(16. 3.), Cicero de invent. II. 53., de finibus V. 23., Auct. ad Herenn.
II, 2.

(w) To it belongs the invalidity of contracts which, mediately or
immediately, promote anything immoral: as the condictio ob turpem
usam gives an example.


884 DIVERSE OPINIONS UPON CLASSIFICATION


a more external character, the third one still More. so.

On this: account these two may,. independently of the
moral inclination of the justly acting man, be completely.
observed. If one on the other hand looks at the import-
ance and fruitfulness of the three praecépta for the
law, the relation is exactly reversed. The third is the
most productive source of legal rules, the second and
first are by degrees less so; very naturally since the
law, by its nature belongs-to the province of the
external collective life. @)


(2) Essentially the same view as to the three praecepta is to be found
in Weber naturliche Verbindlichkeit S. 98,, only he does not carry it
through the single praecepta. ;


APPENDIXES.
I. Ii.


B36 “APPENDIX. ‘1.


APPENDIX I.
JUS NATURALE, GENTIUM, CIVILE
(To s. 22. Nore (s) ).


Among itie Roman jurists are found two-divisions of
the law in reference to its general origin. The one is
two-membered: law which prevails merely among the
Romans-(civile), or among all nations as well (gentiwm
or naturale). The other is three-membered : law which
prevails merely among the Romans, or among all
peoples (gentium), or among men and - beasts alike
(naturale).


' The first of these divisions I not only hold to be the
only right one, but I also maintain that it is to he
regarded as the view prevailing among the Romans
themselves, while the other can be merely considered
as an attempt, at a wider developement, which has
obtained neither general recognition nor influence upon
the special doctrines of law. —


The two-membered division is found most complete--
ly adopted in numerous passages of Gaius. “At the
commencement of his work he sets it out expressly
without’ a trace of a possible third member(® The
jus gentiwm is to him the older, as old as the human
race itself.®) . It springs from the naturalis ratio
in-dwelling in all men. Thence he- also calls it
otherwise jus naturale as he then, with arbitrary


(a) Gaius I. 8. 1. (L. 9. de J. e& J.1..1,)
(6) L. 1. pr. de adq. rer. dom. (41. 1)
(c) Gaius I. 8. 1, 189. L. 1. pr. de adq. rer. dom. (41. 1.)


‘APPENDIX, 1L 307


interchanging, sometimes refers the natural acquisitions
of property to the jus naturale,® sometimes to the
naturalis ratio.®) He bases the principle, that the
house also belongs to the owner of the soil, upon jus
civile and naturale alike.(f) The agnations and cogna-
tions he calls civiliaand naturalia jura.) Manifestly
therefore he admits only two species, and jus naturale
is to him completely synonymous with jus gentium.
In the same way Modestinus knows only two kinds "
of law, civile and naturale.4) The same is found in
Paulus who also ascribes to the naturale jus the
operation of the servilis cognatio as a hindrance to
marriage.) Naturale jus is used in like manner by
MaRCIAN, FLORENTINUS, and Lictnius RUFUS, in cases
in which it undoubtedly means the jus. gentium, is
indeed actually interchanged with this expression.


Ulpian has the three-membered division most com-
pletely; next to him Tryphonin™) and Hermogenian.@)


(d) Gaius IL. 8.65.73.

{e) Gaius IT. 8. 66. 69. 79.

(f) L. 2. de superfic. (43. 18.) .

(g) Gaius I. 8, 158,

(A) L. 4. 8. 2. de grad. (38. F0.)

@) L1ideJ.ecJ. (1. 1.) L148. 2. de ritu, nupt. (23. 2.)

(A) L. 2. 3. 4. de div. rer. (1. 8.) L. 59, de obl. et act, (44. 7.) L, 32,
de R. J. (50.17.) Cicero also everywhere puts merely natura and lex
in opposition to one another and uses natura and jus gentium ax
synonymous. Cicero de off. IIT. 15.

®1.15.2.34 L.4 L. 6. pr. de J. et J. (1. 1)

(m) L. 64. de cond. indeb. (12. 6.), upon the origin of slavery entirely:

* in accord with Ulpian. L. 81. pr. depos. (16. 3.) is lesa determinate
“ Si tantum naturale et gentium jus intuemur” where the naturale et
gentium may be understood naturale id est gentium, where in fact @
distinction between the two sorts of law would not be conformable to
the meaning.

(n) L. 5. de J. et J. (1. 1.) The text here cited names the jus
gentium only but with such evident reference to the jus naturale close


D1


338 APPENDIX. 1


It rests upon the following view. There existed a time
in which men recognized among themselves merely
those relations which ‘are common to them with beasts:
that of the sexes and that of propagation and educa-
tion (bringing up). To that succeeded a second age
which established states, introduced slavery, private
property, obligations. Finally the law, in each separate
state, developed ‘itself in a peculiar manner, partly by
discrepant determination of those general institutions,
partly by institutions newly added.


The first thing, which astonishes in this text, and by
reason of which it has often been severely blamed, is
the law and consciousness of law ascribed to beasts.()
When however the certainly ill-chosen expression is
abandoned, the view itself admits of easy defence
against that censure. Each jural relation has for its
. foundation matter of some kind, to which the form of
law is applied and which therefore can also be conceiv-
ed abstracted from this form. This material is, in most
of the jural relations, so far of an arbitrary kind that
a continuous existence of the human race can also be
conceived without it; thus in property and obligations.
Not so with the two relations above named, which are
rather universal natural relations common to men and
. beasts and without which the human race could have
no enduring existence. In fact therefore it is not the
law (right) but the material of the law (right), the


at band (what he had no doubt named immediately before), that we
may without hesitation assume a complete agreement with Ulpian. I.
have also drawn the exposition of. the whole view given in the text
from this passage.

(0) L.1. 8. 8. de J. et J. (1. 1) “ jus istud ... omnium animalium
... commune est.” Andlower down: “videmus etenim cetera quoque
danimalia, feras etiam, istius juris peritia censeri.”


APPENDIX. L 339


natural relation lying at its base, which is ascribed to
beasts.) This view now is not merely true but also
important and worthy of notice; only it is not adapted
to. a division of law viz, to the practical need of the
Romans. Without doubt it was occasioned by the -
perception that the institutions of law, even when they
were found in all other nations, must nevertheless
be regarded as natural in different degrees. Thus
e. g. they could not misunderstand that the origi-
nation of slavery is to be primarily traced back to
violence and so to accident and arbitrariness: it is,
. possible indeed that the nature of this relation has
given the impulse to the entire view; bub the whole —
division based upon this consideration is to be rejected.
First, because the’ distinction of more or less natural
is an arbitraty and shifting one, secondly, because the
division, so conceived, related merely to the general,
indeterminate, existence of the institutions of law and ~°
must on that account remain unfruitful; the far more
important carrying it out into the individual rules of
law lay wholly without its province. Not so as to the
-' two-membered division, in which the- contrast of the -
rules of law becomes evident and which, on that
account, is alone useful for application to the system
‘of law.


It remains also to point, out that the two-membered
division constantly asserted the mastery in the Roman
law. In proof of this the majority of testimonies
- already quoted on that point might be made available.
However I attach the less weight to them on the point,


(p) The defence of Ulpian in Donellus is not essentially different :
Ulpian did not ascribe the actual jural relation to beasts but merely
something similar to it. However the division as such is not justified
by that. ,


340 APPENDIX,


that the selection of texts, which we possess upon the
subject may have been made very accidentally.. On
the other hand I regard as quite decisive the great
influence of this division, which can be pointed out
through the whole system of law, while the three-
membered one, on the contrary, appears in no single
application. For example we find throughout, in the
legal institutes and in single propositions of law, a
contrast made-up of two, not of three, members; the
second member refers constantly to the jus gentium and,
swhat leaves the matter beyond doubt, is nevertheless
regularly denoted by the expression naturalis. One
might, it is true, regard this alsomerely asamultiplication
of the testimonieés in favour of a two-membered division
so that in them, merely the continuous strife of opinions,
not the real victory of the one opinion, would appear.
Ulpian himself however has in many texts this con-
ception and terminology and it is therefore clear that
he also set. forth the two-membered division merely
as a harmless speculation in the general, but that, in
all important applications throughout the whole system
of Jaw, he never attempted to make use of it. This
-two-membered division, denoted by civile and naturale,
occurs by name in the following applications:


1. The conditions of the marriage rest upon
eivilis or naturalis ratio.@


2. There exists, also according to Ulpian a double
relationship, eivilis and naturalis cognatio.@)


3. Property and obligations may be acquired
sometimes civiliter, sometimes naturaliter and accord-


(g) Pr. J. de nupt. (1. 10:)


f(r) L. 4. 8.2 de grad. (38. 10.) (Modestin), S. 1. J. de leg. agn. tut.
(1. 15.) L. 17. & 1. de adopt. (1. 7.) (CUlpian.)


APPENDIX. L 340


ing to this the permissibility of free representation i is
accommodated. (8)


4. Ulpian calls the right of the owner of the
land to the house naturale jus.©


5. The possessto is either civilis or naturalis
likewise according to Ulpian: Me:


6. Especially important i is the contrast of civilis
and naturalis obligatio which Ulpian recognizes by
this terminology.®) The meaning of the naturalis
obligatio as one established by the jus gentiwm is not
only clear in itself but is eapresly. testified to by
several texts, (w)


The conduct of the Institutes of Justinian in this
matter is wholly thoughtless. The compilers first
admit the texts of Ulpian upon the three-membered
division, and they apply it to the case of slavery.
Then they admit also the texts of Gaius, Marcian and’
Florentinus in which the two-membered division is
sometimes stated, sometimes quite definitely assumed.()
Especially worthy of remark however is a text in
‘which they admit the words of Gaius but with" an


(s) L. 58. de adg. rer. dom. (41, 1.) (Modestin.)

(f) L, 50.ad L. Aquil. (9. 2.)

(u) L. 8. S$. 15. ad exhib. (10. 4) L. 1. S. 9. 10. de vi (43. 16.), both
from Ulpian.

(v) L. 6.8. 2. L. 8 S. 3. de fidej.- -(46. 1.) L. 14. de obl. et act. (44. 7.)
L. 6. de compens, (16. 2.) L. 10. de V. S. (50. 16.) L. 1. 8. 7. de pee,
const, (18. 5.), all from Ulpian.
~ (w) L, 84.8. 1. de R. J. (50.17.) (Paulus). L, 47. de cond. indeb,
(12. 6.) (Celsus),
(@®) 3.4. Ide J. et J. 1.) pr. J. de j. nat, (1, 2.) pr. J, de Lib,
(5), .
(y) §. LIL J, de j. nat. (1. 2.) pr. 8. L 18. J. de div. rar, (2, 1.)


x


342 APPENDIX...


‘addition which says expressly, jus natwrale means the


same as jus gentiwm and it has already been s0
stated.(2)


According to this explanation it is most advisable, to
let the mode of exposition of Ulpian rest as a curiosity
and, on the other hand, to treat that of Gaius as the
one prevailing in Roman law. ;


(2) S. 1.J. de div. rer. (2.-1.) “quarundam enim rerum dominium
naneiscimur jure naturali, quod, sicut diximus, appellatur jus gentium i
quarundam jure civili,”


APPENDIX. IL 343


APPENDIX II.


L. 2, CG. QUAE SIT LONGA CONSUETUDO (8. 53.)
(To §. 25. Norz (y))

This rescript of Constantine of A. D. 319. runs thus
Consuetudinis ususque. longaevi non vilis auctoritas
est: verum non usque adeo sui valitura momento ut
aut rationem vincat aut legem. .


The amount of difficulty always created by this text
and the number of attempts made to remove that
difficulty, are incredible. The meaning, which appears
at first derivable from it, is, that customs are merely to
avail for the completion of the written laws but not
for their modification or abolition. Plainly however
this.sense is, according to numerous testimonies from
all times, so objectionable (S. 25.) that we must neces-
sarily look for another.


Now in the first place we may unhesitatingly assume
that particular customs only are here spoken of, and
that it never was the intention of the Emperor to

_weaken such customs as that ¢. g., by which the second
chapter of the L. Aquilia was rendered obsolete. This
follows, in the first place, from the circumstance that
provision must certainly be made here for such cus-
tomary laws only as should arise newly, or at least
come to light, in future. In the time of Constantine
that was hardly to be expected of any but particular
customs. In-the second place, the somewhat depre-_

_ciatory expression non vilis auctoritas would have
been wholly unsuited to a general national custom, it
might well be used of the customary law of particular


(a) L. 27. 8. 4. ad L. Aquil, (9. 2.)


344 APPENDIX. it.


localities. Further by the Zex, which is here mention-
ed, decidedly no other than a statute of the Emperor
is, in this time, to be understood; and thus therefore
the general question arises here: what relation does a
particular customary law bear to a general law of the
Emperor? This law again may itself have either an
absolute or mediatory nature (S. 16). If it is of an
absolute nature, through the general relation of the
state, a very natural limitation of the particular cus-
tomary law arises (8S. 9). Even in the absence of a law
such a customary law is impossible if a general interest
of the state is hurt thereby.) This proposition there-
fore will be none the less valid when that same interest
of the state has given rise to an absolute law. In
opposition to such law, the later custom of a city or
district cannot thrive. Just as little however can their
earlier customary law which, as a particular law not
expressly abolished by the general law, an attempt
might otherwise have been perhaps. made to preserve.
Thus e¢. g. neither earlier nor later customs can be valid
in opposition to general written usury laws.@) An
entirely similar relation is presented as to written laws
for particular. places. Thus e.g. by such laws it was
permitted, in many towns, to bury within the walls ;
when now at a later period this sort of burying was
generally forbidden on political grounds, those laws
were, even without being specially mentioned, never-


() L. 1 C. Th. de longa consu. (5, 12.): “cum nihil per causam
publicam intervenit, quae diu servata sunt permanebunt.” In like
manner in a particular case but with greater definiteness. Nov. 134. C. 1.


(c) L. 26. 8. 1. C. eod. (4. 32.) L. 1. pr. de usuris. (22. 1.) does not
speak at all of customary law but of the customary rate of interest,
which perhaps might overstep the legal measure ; whether the custom,
in this case, and under what conditions, changes the law, this text at
least says nothing. Comp. Puchta II, §. 77.


APPENDIX. IT. 345


‘theless abrogated.@). The relation is otherwise. in
respect to mhediate laws. Thus Azo appeals to the
“customs of Modena and Ravenna by which the emphy-
teuses granted by the Church were not put an end to
’ by failure, during two years to pay the quit-rent:
these customs are valid since in truth that anomaly on
this matter might have been determined, by contracts.(¢ .
However it is this contrast alone which determines the
power of the particular customary law in its relation
to a general law of the land: not the contrast of the
public and private law. “Then there exist even in the
public law, rules which ought to be generally observed
but may, without danger, admit of exceptions in indi-
_vidual cases: in such cases a particular customary law
is also admissible. Thus e g. it was the rule that
municipal magistrates had no legis actio, notably in the
case of emancipations, to particular magistrates they
were exceptionally given; in this case however Justi-
nian unhesitatingly admits an establishment of this
privilege by custom.) On the other hand in Bithynia
the Lex Pompeja had ordained that into the city-
senates only citizens of the particular city, not citizens of
other cities of Bithynia, should be admitted ; this pre-
cept had frequently been disregarded and the question
arose whether that law is abrogated by the custom of
‘particular cities. Trajan indeed, from indulgence,
allowed the already existing foreign senators to be
well appointed, but he explained with respect to the
future that the law, without regard to the custom, -
must be observed; no doubt because the law had a
political aim.) ; ;
' (@) L, 3. 8, 5. de sepulchro viol. (47. 12.)
(e) Azo Comm. in Cod, in L. 2. cit.


(f) L. 4. de adopt. (1. 7.) L. 6. C. de emane. (8, 49.)
(g) Plintus epist. X. 115; 116.


346 “ APPENDIX. Il.


Up to this point the part of the text, which says
“consuetudo non vincit legem,” has been explained.
Now it says still further however “consuetudo non
vincit. rationem,’ and the question is; which of its
numerous significations does the word ratio bear in
this particular place. In other texts as to customary
law ratio is equivalent to the common conviction of
the truth and necessity of a rule, consequently to the
proper ground of origin of this law to which the
custom itself is merely related as consequence and
badge.) It cannot mean that here, for how could
there be a question as to a conflict of the conviction
with the custom in which the latter must yield ? in
other texts however beside a ratio juris a ratio utili-.
tatis also occurs,@ and as under the lex a law of the
land, occasioned by the interest of the state, is to be
understood, so the ratio plainly denotes the interest of -
_ thé state not protected by a written law, the ratio
publicae utilitatis. By means of this explanation, the
expression receives a more definite and more practical
meaning than if one would understand by. it, the
reasonableness of the custom generally. . :


The entire import of the passage would be consequent-
ly this: local customs ought not to be valid when they
stand in contradiction with the interest of the state,
be this recognized by a general law earlier or later or
not; and by this precept something certainly not-
unimportant is determined as to local customs, but
something which is grounded upon their natural


(h) L. 39. de leg. di. 3.) L. 1. C. quae sit lc. (8. 53.) See Syst.
8, 25, note (d),

(@) L. 1. C. de adquir. et retin. poss. (7. 32.) “ ... tam ratione uétlitatis
quam juris pridem receptum est.” Savigny Bositz 8. 363. of the 6th
’ Ausg.


APPENDIX, IL. 347


connection with the bond of the state, not perhaps an
arbitrary positive limitation of their operation. The
positive, which one might perhaps seek for in it, would
be the wholly general expression lex, which one might
so understand, that the precept should hold good of all
written laws not merely of the absolute ones; but in
accordance with the connexion in which the expression
stands with ratio, still more however in consequence
of the connexion in which this text is found with
the rest of the expressions of the Justinianean law-
books, I hold it more correct to refer the expression
merely to absolute laws, to which class besides the
majority of the imperial laws belong, and especially to
the very encroaching laws of Constantine.


. The essentials of this explanation, namely the relation
of the local customary law to general laws, already
exist in Johannes and Azo although hesitatingly and
mingled with erroneous matter: more definitely and
clearly in Donellus.@). Placentin already leads to the
false, at a later time often trodden, way of distinguish-
ing between republics and monarchies: in the former
customary law is to be valid against a written law,
in the latter, not.2 The moderns have often struck
into very arbitrary ways by endeavouring to limit
the precept to some particular application of customs
or other; by this means the contradiction to other
texts is, at the best diminished in point of quantity,
not removed.) Some throw the whole stress upon


(k) Azo comm, in Cod i in h. 1. Accursius ibid. Donellus Lib. I. C. a

(2) Placentius in summa Cod, tit quae sit longa consu.

(m) Thus e. g., Schweitzer de desuetudine Lips 1801. 8. p. 47-57.
Hiibner Berichtigungen und zusiitze za Hopfner 8. 167. Schweitzer
quite arbitrarily narrows the text to the bare desuetudo in contradis-
tinction to the constantly permissible abrogatio by custom : the desue-


848 APPENDIX. II.


the sui momento: the custom in itself is no better
than a written law therefore everything depends upon
the simple question, which of the two is the newer,
“Then the practical meaning would be simply that every
eustom is beyond all doubt abolished by a later written
law and is not protected by a higher nature of its own,
Constantine certainly. never meant to express anything
so. superfluous.(”). Lastly. Hofacker propounds an
explanation according to which the consuetudo here
denotes, not a customary law but merely a custom in
point of fact, as e.g. frequent thefts; these are not to
abrogate a written law.(), Forsuch a meaning however
the expression employed, non vilis auctoritas, would
be much too good since a custom in this acceptation
cannot have even the smallest authority.


Lastly the. manner, in which the canon law has
handled these difficulties, is very note-worthy. Our


tudo was valid in the republic (L. 32. de leg. turns on that), in the
monarchy not (L. 2. C. quae sit 1. c.) Hiibner sees in the text only an
erroneous usual interpretation ; but by this the’ law would in no way
be overcome, but merely the different opinion of him who holds this
interpretation to be erroneous.


(n) Hilliger ad Donellum 1, 10, and more in detail Averanius
Interpret. Lib. 2. C. 1.


(0) Hofacker 1. S. 122:.. “consuetudinem h. 1, accipi pro consuetudine
agendi civiwm quae ... legi prohibitivae obstet.” Puchta I. 120, IL. 58.
211—215. hits upon another way by understanding the consuetudo here
mentioned of the use in point of fact. which is not to avail as means of
knowledge of the common conviction, therefore of customary law
where the existence is jurally or legally impossible. Now however
arises the larger question, by what means are we to know that numerous
cases of use are inapt to establish the ‘existence of a people’s-law ? By
the answer which he gives to this (II. S. 214.) his explanation in the
result agrees with that here given. According to both opinions there
is a want of the conditions under which the custom in point of fact :
can become a genuine customary law and ‘consequently obtain efficacy.


APPENDIX, IL 349.


text is inserted word for word in the Decretum;(»)
- but ‘the: difficulties in the explanation of it did not
remain unknown to the canonists- themselves and
Gregory IX sought to resolve them, in his own Decretals, -
by the following paraphrase.@, “The naturale jus,
that is to say the law implanted by God in men, ean
be. changed by no custom: the positive Jaw also (the
public Jaw) can it not change except when the custom
_is consistent with reason and confirmed by an adequate
duration.” This determination, discrepant from the
Roman law and in itself also questionable, evidently
proceeded from a desire of composing, by a sort of
middle cut, the strife which had been occasioned among
the jurists by our text. Here the relation of the new
eustom to the older law was” treated: similarly the
following prescription treats of the converse relation.(r)
When the Pope enacts a general law, earlier local
customs or statutes are not to be abrogated by it, always
provided that the customs be found reasonable and
that their abolition is not specially expressed in that
written law.


Equally note-worthy is the formal parody of our text
_ which is found in the feodal law of the Lombards, It


(~) « 4.D. XL

(q) C. 11. X. de consuet. (1. 4.) .. “Licet etiam longaevae consuetu-
dinis non sit vilis auctoritas: non tamen est usque adeo valitura, ut vel
juri positive debeat praejudicium generare, nist fuerit rationabilis et
legitime sit praescripta.” The end is properly merely a repetition or
_ more definite inculcation of the Zongaevae which stands at the beginning,

and this would probably have been omitted if they had not thought it
advisable to adhere, as much as possible, ta the words of the text
of the Code.’

(r) C. 1. de constitut. in VI. C1. 2.): “.. ipsis, dum tamen sint ration-
abilia, per constitutionem a se noviter editam, nisi expresse caveatur in
‘psa, non intelligitur in aliquo derogare.”


350 APPENDIX. IL


may often have happened that a Romanist cited some
text or other of the Corpus Juris by itself, which was
in contradiction with the feodal customs, and then
sought to invalidate the custom by referring to the
L, 2. C. quae sit Le. Now Obertus condemns this proce-
dure generally by means of the following proposition
which is a parody on our text: “Legum autem Roma-

-narum non est vilis auctoritas, sed non adeo vim suam
extendunt, ut usum vincant aut mores. (8)


1


(s) 2..Feud, 1,


Printed at the Asylum Press, by Wu. THomas—1867.


TO LU
00078805


Digitized with financial assistance from


Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 11 March, 2020
