BY J.  B.  SAY.


J.  M'Creery,  Tools-Court,
Chancery  Lane,  London-


LETTERS  TO  MR  MALTHUS,

ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS

OF

•POLITICAL ECONOMY,-

AND  ON  THE  CAUSE  OF  THE

STAGNATION  OF  COMMERCE.

TO WHICH IS ADDED

Catecfnsm  of  political  economy,

OR

FAMILIAR  CONVERSATIONS

ON

THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  WEALTH  IS
PRODUCED,  DISTRIBUTED,  AND  CONSUMED  IN

SOCIETY.


£ran£latet>  from  tfje  fwid)  of

J.  B.  SAY,
BY  JOHN  RICHTER.

LONDON;

PRINTED  FOR  SHERWOOD,  NEELY,  AND  JONES,
PA  TERNOSTER-RO1V.


PREFACE.


THE  science  of  Political  Economy  is  at  once  one
of  the  most  important  and  interesting  to  mankincL
It  has  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  made  great  pro-
gress, and  has  attracted  the  attention  and  become
the  study  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  enlight-
ened part  of  the  public.  Every  attempt  therefore
to  elucidate  the  subject  of  it  will  be  kindly  received,
more  particularly  as  a  general  knowledge  of  its
principles  cannot  fail  to  produce  incalculable  ad-
vantages to  the  world.

Mr.  Say  was  the  first  writer  who  attempted  to
raise  Political  Economy  to  the  rank  of  the  exact
sciences  : — how  he  has  succeeded  the  public  have
the  means  of  appreciating  5  posterity  will  decide.
Until  the-  appearance  of  the  Traite  d*  Economic
Politiquey  it  had  been  limited  to  theories  drawn
from  partial  views  of  isolated  facts  and  statistical
histories,  and  from  circumstances  which  it  was
always  uncertain  whether  they  had  been  fully  ob-
served or  contemplated.  No  attempt  was  made  to
define  the  true  nature  of  production,  and  to  consi-


Vl  PREFACE.

der  the  thing  in  itself — to  form  just  ideas  on  this
subject;  and,  following  them  to  their  remotest
consequences,  to  establish  such  a  basis  as  should
prove  a  true  guide  under  every  circumstance.
Mr.  Say  had  most  clearly  shewn  that  markets  for
commodities  are  created  by  and  depend  upon  the
production  of  commodities  which  can  only  be  pur-
chased by  producers,  or  their  representatives — not
by  unproductive  consumers.

Mr.  Malthus,  in  his  Principles  of  Political  Eco-
nomy, and  particularly  in  treating  of  the  causes  of
the  general  stagnation  of  trade,  has  controverted
this  doctrine,  together  with  some  of  the  best  esta-
blished principles  of  the  science.  In  these  letters
Mr.  Say  has  entered  the  field  of  controversy — whe-
ther he  will  have  added  to  his  high  reputation  as  a
political  economist,  or  Mr.  Malthus  will  have  dis-
appointed the  admirers  of  his  Essay  on  Population,
the  public  cannot  fail  to  be  benefitted  by  the  dis-
cussion.

When  the  great  truths  of  Political  Economy
shall  become  generally  known — when  men  shall
be  convinced  that  each  person  will  sell  with  greater
facility  the  more  others  gain;  that  they  can  only
gain  by  means  of  labour,  capital,  or  land ;  that  the
greater  the  number  of  producers  the  greater  the
number  of  consumers  ;  that  unproductive  consum-
ers are  mere  representatives  of  others,  and  can
only  consume  by  means  of  what  others  produce;
that  all  nations  are  interested  in  the  prosperity  of
each  other,  and  in  facilitating  the  means  of  com-


PREFACE.  vii

munication ;  that  capital  or  land,  and  even  labour,
can  only  be  productive  while  it  is  respected  as  pro-
perty, and  that  the  poor  but  industrious  man  is
interested  in  the  defence  of  the  property  of  the  rich,
and  in  maintaining  good  order,  because  their  sub-
version may  deprive  hirn  of  the  means  of  subsist-
ence : — when  these  truths  shall  be  generally  known,
it  will  be  almost  impossible  to  stir  up  nations  or
bodies  of  men  against  each  other.  This  science
therefore  is  eminently  social,  and  by  teaching  that
no  men  can  injure  others  without  injuring  them-
selves, and  that  the  advantages  gained  by  others
are  productive  of  advantages  to  themselves,  will  pro-
bably effect  what  a  less  interested  doctrine  has  not
yet  accomplished.

J.  R.

Cornwall  Place,
1  Jan.  1821.


ADVERTISEMENT.


THE  original  of  these  letters  came  to  my  hands
after  translations  of  part  of  them  had  appeared  in  the
New  Monthly  Magazine.  Expecting  that  they
would  afterwards  be  collected,  I  contented  myself
with  comparing  them  for  my  own  use;  but  this  not
being  intended,  and  there  appearing  to  be  errors,  and
even  contradictions,  in  several  instances  (perhaps  in-
separable from  the  fluency  of  the  translation  and  mode
of  publication)  as  well  as  a  want  of  that  accuracy
of  expression  necessary  in  scientific  works,  I  have  re-
vised and  continued  the  translation,  and  hope  to  have
done  a  service  to  the  public  by  presenting  it  in  its  pre-
sent state.  The  quotations  from  English  authors  are
given  in  the  original  words.

J.R.


ADVERTISEMENT.


Work  does  not  pretend  to  furnish  the
means  of  becoming  rich:  it  professes  only  to
point  them  out.  Wealth  cannot  be  produced
from  nothing,  but  a  clock  may  be  made  with
wheels ;  and,  as  men  may  be  taught  to  make  a
clock,  so  they  may  be  taught  to  make  what  is
called  Riches.

Many  men  have  the  materials  within  their
reach  who  do  not  suspect  it ;  and  as  for  those
who  have  them  not,  is  it  useless  even  to  them  to

a  2


iv  ADVERTISEMENT.

know  where  they  are  to  be  found,  and  how  they
may  be  employed?

Some  men  may  be  better  able  than  others  to
profit  by  the  perusal  of  this  little  Work ;  but
I  venture  to  assert,  that  there  is  no  person  who
may  not  derive  from  it  some  advantage.

It  has  been  asked,  why  I  did  not  publish  this
Catechism,  as  being  more  elementary,  before
my  "  Traite  dP Economic  Politique."  The  reason
is  evident.  If  I  had  not  previously  proved  in  a
work  of  detail,  by  numerous  examples  and  strict
reasoning,  that  Political  Economy,  in  the  present
state  of  the  science,  is  only  the  exposition  of  what
is  passing  every  day ;  and  that  all  the  facts  are
so  intimately  connected  together,  that  it  has
become  easy  to  refer  to  their  causes,  and  to
deduce  from  them  satisfactory  results,  every
thing  must  have  been  taken  upon  my  credit;
and  I  am  far  from  pretending  to  so  much
deference.


ADVERTISEMENT.  V

An  elementary  work  is  necessarily  somewhat
dogmatical.  But  when  truths  are  not  promulgated
under  the  sanction  of  an  acknowledged  authority,
it  is  not  only  necessary  to  be  in  the  right,  but  to
prove  that  one  is  so.  And  how  could  these  proofs
have  been  established  in  so  small  a  compass,  and
at  the  same  time  have  been  rendered  intelligible

to  the  uninformed  ?

f

This  task  is  however  no  longer  requisite,  as
the  proofs  of  every  thing,  which  might  appear
to  be  mere  assertion,  are  to  be  found  in  a  more
extensive  work,  which  has  been  adopted  by
foreigners  as  well  as  the  French,  and  strengthened
by  the  approbation  of  men,  the  most  versed,  in
Europe,  in  the  practice  as  well  as  the  theory
of  Values.

Those  who  possess  the  most  elevated  minds
have  generally  most  goodness  of  heart.  They
will  feel  what  a  happy  influence  the  true  prin-
ciples of  Political  Economy,  better  understood,


vi  ADVERTISEMENT.

are  capable  of  exerting-  on  the  lot  of  mankind ;
and  perhaps  they  will  judge,  that  my  efforts  to
spread  them  are  not  unworthy  of  their  sanction.

J,  B.  SAY.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  I.

Page

On  the  Composition  of  Wealth,  and  the  Use  of  Money 1

CHAPTER  II.
On  Utility  and  Value  of  Products 5

CHAPTER  III.
On  Production t  •  • 8

CHAPTER  IV.

On  the  Operations  common  to  all  Sorts  of  Industry  13

CHAPTER  V.
On  Capital  and  Land  , . . . . 16

CHAPTER  VI.
On  the  Formation  of  Capital 19

CHAPTER  VII.

On  the  Manner  in  which  the  Value  of  Products  is  es-
tablished, and  of  the  Charges  of  Production 26

CHAPTER  VIII.

On  the  Profits  of  Industry,  Capital,  and  Land ;  that
is, Income 30

CHAPTER  IX.
On  Wages,  Interest,  and  Rent 35

CHAPTER  X.
On  Incomes  founded  on  immaterial  Products ........ 41

CHAPTER  XI.
On  Consumption  in  general 46


viii  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  XII.

Page

On  Private  Consumption 54

CHAPTER  XIII.
On  Public  Consumption 58

CHAPTER  XIV.
On  Public  Property  and  Taxes 63

CHAPTER  XV.
On  Public  Loans 72

CHAPTER  XVI.
On  Property  and  the  Nature  of  Riches 78

CHAPTER  XVII.
On  Real  and  Nominal  Price 82

CHAPTER  XVIII.
On  Money 88

CHAPTER  XIX.
On  Signs  representing  Money j . . . 97

CHAPTER  XX.
On  Markets *. 102

CHAPTER  XXI.
On  Regulations  or  Restraints  of  Industry 107

CHAPTER  XXII.
On  Importations,  Prohibitions,  and  Duties 112

CHAPTER  XXIII.
On  Exportation 118

CHAPTER  XXIV.
On  Population 124

CHAPTER  XXV.
On  Colonies . ,  129


LETTERS,


LETTER  I.

SIR,

EVERY  person  who  takes  an  interest  in  the  new  and  in-
teresting science  of  political  economy,  will  certainly  read
the  work  with  which  you  have  lately  enriched  it.  You
are  not  one  of  those  authors  who  claim  the  attention  of
the  public,  without  having  any  information  to  communi-
cate ;  and  when  the  celebrity  of  the  writer  is  added  to
the  importance  of  the  subject,  when  the  question  in  debate
is  that  momentous  one  to  civilized  society,  namely,  what
are  its  means  of  existence  and  enjoyment?  the  curiosity  of
readers  will  undoubtedly  be  excited  in  an  extraordinary
degree.

I  shall  not  attempt,  Sir,  to  add  my  suffrage  to  that  of  the
public,  in  pointing  out  the  just  and  ingenious  observations
in  your  book ;  the  undertaking  would  be  too  laborious.
Nor  shall  I  here  discuss  with  you  some  points,  to  which,
I  think,  you  attach  an  importance  which  does  not  belong
to  them :  I  should  be  sorry  to  annoy  either  you  or  the
public  with  dull  and  unprofitable  disputes.  But,  J  regret
to  say,  that  I  find  in  your  doctrines  some  fundamental
principles  which,  if  admitted  under  the  imposing  sanction


of  your  authority,  would  occasion  a  retrograde  movement
in  a  science  of  which  your  extensive  information  and  great
talents  are  so  well  calculated  to  assist  the  progress.

In  the  first  place  my  attention  is  fixed  by  the  inquiry,
so  important  to  the  present  interests  of  society  :  What  is
the  cause  of  the  general  glut  of  all  the  markets  in  the
world,  to  which  merchandize  is  incessantly  carried  to  be
sold  at  a  loss  ?  What  is  the  reason  that  in  the  interior  of
every  state,  notwithstanding  a  desire  of  action  adapted  to
all  the  developements  of  industry,  there  exists  universally
a  difficulty  of  finding  lucrative  employments  ?  And  when
the  cause  of  this  chronic  disease  is  found,  by  what  means
is  it  to  be  remedied?  On  these  questions  depend  the
tranquillity  and  happiness  of  nations.  A  discussion  there-
fore which  tends  to  their  illustration,  I  have  not  thought
unworthy  of  your  attention,  or  that  of  the  enlightened
public.

Since  the  time  of  Adam  Smith,  political  economists  have
agreed  that  we  do  not  in  reality  buy  the  objects  we  con-
sume, with  the  money  or  circulating  coin  which  we  pay
for  them.  We  must  in  the  first  place  have  bought  this
money  itself  by  the  sale  of  productions  of  our  own.  To
the  proprietor  of  the  mines  whence  this  money  is  obtained,
it  is  a  production  with  which  he  purchases  such  commo-
dities as  he  may  have  occasion  for :  to  all  those  into  whose
hands  this  money  afterwards  passes,  it  is  only  the  price  of
the  productions  which  they  have  themselves  created  by
means  of  their  lands,  capital,  or  industry.  In  selling  these,
they  exchange  first  their  productions  for  money ;  and  they
afterwards  exchange  this  money  for  objects  of  consump-
tion. It  is  then  in  strict  reality  with  their  productions
that  they  make  their  purchases ;  it  is  impossible  for  them
to  buy  any  articles  whatever  to  a  greater  amount  than  that
which  they  have  produced  either  by  themselves,  or  by
means  of  their  capitals  and  lands.


TO  MR.  MALTHUS.  3

From  these  premises  I  had  drawn  a  conclusion  which
appeared  to  me  evident,  but  which  seems  to  have  startled
you.  I  had  said,  "  As  each  of  us  can  only  purchase  the
productions  of  others  with  his  own  productions — as  the
value  we  can  buy  is  equal  to  the  value  we  can  produce,
the  more  men  can  produce,  the  more  they  will  purchase."
Thence  follows  the  other  conclusion,  which  you  refuse  to
admit :  "  that  if  certain  goods  remain  unsold,  it  is  because
other  goods  are  not  produced ;  and  that  it  is  production
alone  which  opens  markets  to  produce."

I  am  aware  that  this  proposition  has  a  paradoxical  ap-
pearance, which  creates  prejudices  against  it;  I  know  that
common  prejudices  are  more  likely  to  support  the  opinions
of  those  who  maintain  that  there  is  too  much  produce,  be-
cause every  body  is  engaged  in  creating  it :  that  instead  of
constantly  producing,  we  ought  to  increase  unproductive
consumption,  and  devour  our  old  capitals  instead  of  accu-
mulating new  ones.  This  doctrine  has  indeed  appearances
on  its  side :  it  may  be  supported  by  arguments ;  and  may
interpret  facts  in  its  favour.  But,  Sir,  when  Copernicus
and  Galileo  first  taught  that  the  sun  (although  it  was  daily
seen  to  rise  in  the  east,  ascend  majestically  to  the  meri-
dian, and  decline  at  evening  in  the  west)  never  moved
from  its  station,  they  also  had  to  contend  with  universal
prejudice,  the  opinion  of  antiquity,  the  evidence  of  the
senses :  ought  they  to  have  renounced  the  demonstrations
resulting  from  sound  philosophy  ?  I  should  wrong  you,
were  I  to  doubt  of  your  answer.

To  proceed.  When  I  advance  that  produce  opens  a
vent  for  produce;  that  the  means  of  industry,  whatever
they  may  be,  when  unshackled,  always  apply  themselves
to  the  objects  most  necessary  to  nations,  and  that  these
necessary  objects  create  at  once  new  populations  and  new
enjoyments  for  those  populations,  all  appearances  are  not
against  me.  Let  us  only  look  back  two  hundred  years,


4:  LETTER  1.

and  suppose  that  a  trader  had  carried  a  rich  cargo  to  the
places  where  New  York  and  Philadelphia  now  stand ;
could  he  have  sold  it  ?  Let  us  suppose  even,  that  he
had  succeeded  in  founding  there  an  agricultural  or
manufacturing  establishment;  could  he  have  there  sold  a
single  article  of  his  produce?  No,  undoubtedly.  He
must  have  consumed  them  himself.  Why  do  we  now  see
the  contrary?  Why  is  the  merchandize  carried  to,  or
made  at  Philadelphia  or  New  York,  sure  to  be  sold  at  the
current  price  ?  It  seems  to  me  evident  that  it  is  because
the  cultivators,  the  traders,  and  now  even  the  manufac-
turers of  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  the  adjacent  pro-
vinces, create,  or  send  there,  some  productions,  by  means
of  which  they  purchase  what  is  brought  to  them  from  other
quarters.

Perhaps  it  will  be  said  that  "  what  is  true  with  respect
to  a  new  state,  may  not  be  applicable  to  an  ojd  one  :  that
there  was  in  America  room  for  new  producers  and  new
consumers;  but  in  a  country  which  already  contains  more
producers  than  sufficient,  additional  consumers  only  are
wanting."  Permit  me  to  answer,  that  the  only  true  con-
sumers are  those  who  on  their  side  produce,  because  they
alone  can  buy  the  produce  of  others ;  and  that  unproductive
consumers  can  buy  nothing,  unless  by  means  of  the  value
created  by  those  who  produce.

It  is  probable  that  so  early  as  the  time  of  Queen  Eliza-
beth, when  England  was  not  half  so  populous  as  at  present,
it  was  already  found  that  the  number  of  hands  exceeded
the  quantity  of  employment :  I  desire  no  other  proof  of  it
than  the  poor  law  of  that  period,  the  consequences  of
which  constitute  one  of  the  plagues  of  England.  The
principal  object  of  it  is  to  furnish  work  to  the  unfortunate
who  cannot  obtain  employment.  They  had  no  employ-
ment, in  a  country  which  has  since  been  able  to  employ  twice
or  thrice  the  number  of  workmen !  How  happens  it,  Sir,


TO  MR.  MALTHUS.  3

how  happens  it  that,  however  unfortunate  the  situation
of  Great  Britain  may  now  be,  much  greater  quantities  of
various  kinds  of  goods  are  now  sold  there  than  in  the
time  of  Elizabeth  ?  Whence  can  this  arise,  unless  from
the  fact  that  the  produce  of  that  country  is  now  greater?
One  man  produces  an  article  which  he  exchanges  for
another  article  produced  by  his  neighbour.  The  means  of
subsistence  having  become  greater,  the  population  has
increased,  yet  every  one  has  been  better  provided  for.  It
is  the  power  of  producing  which  makes  the  difference  be-
tween a  country  and  a  desert;  and  a  country  is  so  much
the  more  advanced,  so  much  the  more  populous,  and
so  much  the  better  provisioned,  as  it  increases  in  pro-
ductions.

You  will  probably  not  object  to  this  observation,  which
appears  so  obvious ;  but  you  deny  the  consequences  which
I  draw  from  it.  I  have  advanced  that  whenever  there  is  a
glut,  a  superabundance,  of  several  sorts  of  merchandize,  it
is  because  other  articles  are  not  produced  in  sufficient
quantities  to  be  exchanged  for  the  former ;  and  if  those
who  produce  the  latter  could  provide  IT  ore  of  them,  or  of
other  goods,  the  former  would  then  find  the  vent  which
they  required  :  in  short,  that  the  superabundance  of  goods
of  one  description  arises  from  the  deficiency  of  goods  of
another  description.  You,  on  the  contrary,  assert  that
there  may  be  a  superabundance  of  goods  of  all  sorts  at
once;  and  you  adduce  several  facts  in  favour  of  your
opinion.  M.  Sismondi  had  already  opposed  my  doctrine  ;
and  I  am  happy  to  quote  here  his  strongest  expressions,
that  I  may  not  deprive  you  of  any  of  your  advantages,  and
that  I  may  answer  you  and  M.  Sismondi  at  once.

"  Europe,"  says  that  ingenious  author,  "  has  in  every
part  arrived  at  the  point  of  possessing  industry  and  manu-
facturing power  superior  to  its  wants."  He  adds  that  the


6  LETTER  I.

glut  which  results  from  it  begins  to  affect  the  rest  of  the
world  :  That,  "  In  reading  the  commercial  reports,  the
journals  and  accounts  of  travellers,  we  see  on  every  side
proofs  of  the  superabundant  production  which  exceeds  con-
sumption; of  the  manufacturing  industry  which  is  pro-
portioned, not  to  the  demand,  but  to  the  capital  employed;
of  that  mercantile  activity  which  impels  the  merchants  in
crowds  to  every  new  market,  and  exposes  them  by  turns  to
ruinous  losses,  in  every  branch  of  commerce  from  which
they  looked  for  profit.  We  have  seen  merchandize  of
every  description,  but  above  all  that  of  England,  the  great
manufacturing  power,  abounding  in  all  the  markets  of  Italy
in  a  proportion  so  far  exceeding  the  demand,  that  the
merchants,  in  order  to  realize  even  a  part  of  their  capital,
have  been  obliged  to  dispose  of  them  at  a  loss  of  a  fourth
or  a  third,  instead  of  obtaining  any  profit.  The  torrent  of
commerce  repelled  from  Italy,  flowed  upon  Germany,
Russia,  and  Brazil,  and  soon  found  in  those  countries
similar  obstacles.

"  The  latest  journals  announce  similar  losses  in  new
countries.  In  August  1818,  they  complained  at  the  Cape
of  Good  Hope  that  all  the  warehouses  were  filled  with
European  merchandize,  which,  although  offered  at  lower
prices  than  in  Europe,  could  not  be  sold.  Similar  com-
plaints were  made  in  June  at  Calcutta.  Presently  a  strange
phenomenon  was  seen,  that  of  England  sending  her  cotton
goods,  &c.  to  India,  and  consequently  succeeding  in  work-
ing cheaper  than  the  half-naked  people  of  Hindostan,  by
reducing  her  workmen  to  a  still  more  miserable  existence  !
But  the  extraordinary  direction  thus  given  to  commerce
has  not  lasted  long:  even  now,  English  manufactures  are
cheaper  in  the  Indies  than  in  England  itself.  In  May,  it
it  was  found  necessary  to  re-export  from  New  Holland
European  merchandize  which  had  been  carried  thither  in


. TO MR.  MALTHUS.  7

excessive  quantities. Buenos  Ayres,  New  Granada,  and
Chili,  are  already  sending  back  goods  in  a  similar  way.

"  Mr.  Fearon's  journey  in  the  United  States,  concluded
only  in  the  spring  of  1818,  presents  the  same  spectacle  in
a  manner  still  more  striking.  From  one  extremity  of  that
vast  and  prosperous  continent  to  the  other,  there  is  not
even  a  village  where  the  quantity  of  merchandize  offered
for  sale  is  not  infinitely  superior  to  the  means  of  the  buyers,
although  the  merchants  labour  to  allure  them  by  very  long
credits,  and  facilities  of  every  kind  for  the  payments,  which
they  receive  by  instalments  and  in  goods  of  every  de-
scription.

"  There  are  no  facts  which  present  themselves  to  us  in
so  many  places,  and  so  many  forms,  as  the  disproportion
between  the  means  of  consumption  and  the  means  of  pro-
duction— the  inability  of  those  who  produce  to  abandon  an
employment  when  it  becomes  unprofitable, — and  the  cer-
tainty that  their  numbers  are  never  reduced  but  by  failures.
How  does  it  happen  that  philosophers  refuse  to  perceive
what  meets  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar  in  every  direction  ?

"  The  error  into  which  they  have  fallen  arises  entirely
from,  the  false  principle  that  production  is  the  same  thing
as  revenue. Mr.  Ricardo,  following  M.  Say,  thus  repeats
and  confirms  it. <  M.  Say  has  proved  in  the  most  satisfac-
tory manner,'  he  says,  c  that  there  is  no  capital,  however
considerable,  which  cannot  be  employed,  because  the  de-
mand for  production  is  limited  only  by  production. No  one
produces  any  thing  but  with  the  intention  of  consuming  or
selling  the  thing  produced ;  and  nothing  is  ever  sold  but
for  the  purpose  of  buying  some  other  product,  either  of
immediate  utility, or  calculated  to  contribute to  future
production. The  producer  therefore  becomes  the  consumer
of  his  own  produce,  or  the  purchaser  and  consumer  of  the
produce  of  some  other  person.' Upon  this  principle,"  says
M.  Sismondi,  "  it  becomes  absolutely  impossible  to  com-


8  LETTER  I.

prehend  or  explain  the  most  established  fact  in  the  history
of  commerce — the  glut  of  markets/'  *

I  must  remark  to  those  to  whom  the  facts  which  M.  Sis-
mondi  justly  regrets  appear  conclusive,  that  they  are  indeed
conclusive,  but  that  they  are  conclusive  against  himself.
The  quantity  of  English  merchandize  offered  for  sale  in
Italy  and  elsewhere  is  too  great,  because  there  is  not  suffi-
cient Italian  or  other  produce  suitable  to  the  English  mar-
ket. A  country  purchases  only  that  for  which  it  can  pay;
for,  if  it  did  not  pay,  people  would  soon  tire  of  selling  to
it.  But  with  what  articles  can  the  Italians  pay  the  English?
with  oils,  silks,  and  raisins ;  and  besides  those  and  a  few
other  articles,  if  they  would  still  acquire  English  produce,
how  are  they  to  pay  for  them?  With  money!  But  they
must  first  acquire  the  money  itself  with  which  they  are  to
pay  for  the  English  produce.  You  perceive,  Sir,  that  to
acquire  foreign  productions,  a  nation  must,  like  an  indivi-
dual, have  recourse  to  its  own  productions.

It  is  said  that  the  English  sell  at  a  loss  in  those  places
which  they  inundate  with  their  merchandize.  This  I  be-
lieve to  be  true :  they  multiply  the  goods  offered,  which
depreciates  them ;  and  they  demand  in  return,  as  far  as  it
is  practicable,  money  only,  which  therefore  becomes  more
rare  and  valuable.  Being  thus  enhanced  in  value,  money
is  given  in  smaller  quantities  in  every  exchange ;  and  this
is  the  reason  why  they  are  people  obliged  to  sell  at  a  loss.
But  suppose  for  an  instant  that  the  Italians  possessed  more
capital ;  that  they  employed  their  lands  and  their  industrious
faculties  to  greater  advantage ;  in  short  that  they  produced
more ;  and  suppose,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  English  laws,
instead  of  having  been  modelled  upon  the  absurd  principles
of  the  balance  of  trade,  had  admitted  on  moderate  terms
all  that  the  Italians  had  been  capable  of  furnishing  in  pay-

*  Nouveaux  Principes  d'Economie  Politique,  de  Sismondi,  tom.i.
p.  337.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  9

ment  for  the  English  productions ;  can  you.  doubt  that  the
English  merchandize  which  incumbers  the  ports  of  Italy,
and  great  quantities  of  other  merchandize  besides,  would
have  been  disposed  of  with  facility  ?

Brazil,  that  vast  country,  so  favoured  by  nature,  might
absorb  a  hundred  times  as  much  English  merchandize  as  is
now  vainly  sent  there  without  finding  a  market;  but  it
would  first  be  requisite  that  Brazil  should  produce  all  that
it  is  capable  of  producing;  and  how  is  that  wretched
country  to  attain  that  desirable  object  ?  All  the  efforts  of
the  citizens  are  paralyzed  by  the  government.  If  any
branch  of  industry  offers  there  the  prospect  of  gain,  it  is
instantly  seized  and  stifled  by  the  hand  of  power.  Does
any  one  find  a  precious  stone,  it  is  taken  from  him.  Fine
encouragement  this  to  exert  productive  industry  for  the
purpose  of  buying  with  its  produce  European  merchan-
dize !

The  English  government,  on  its  part,  by  custom  and
import  duties,  refuses  admission  to  the  productions  which
the  English  might  obtain  by  exchanges  with  foreigners ;
and  even  to  the  articles  of  food  of  which  their  manufacturers
stand  so  much  in  need ;  and  this  because  it  is  necessary
that  the  English  farmers  should  sell  their  corn  at  more  than
805.  the  quarter,  to  enable  them  to  pay  their  excessive
taxes.  All  these  nations  complain  of  a  state  of  suffering
into  which  they  have  been  brought  by  their  own  fault;  like
diseased  persons  who  bewail  their  maladies,  and  at  the
same  time  obstinately  refuse  to  abandon  the  excesses  which
have  caused  them.

I  know  that  it  is  not  so  easy  to  root  up  an  oak  as  to  pull
up  a  weed ;  I  know  that  old  fences,  however  rotten,  cannot
be  overthrown  when  they  are  supported  by  the  heaps  of
filth  which  have  accumulated  beneath  their  shelter ;  I  know
that  certain  governments,  corrupted  and  corrupting,  stand
in  need  of  monopolies,  and  of  custom  duties,  to  pay  for  the


10  LETTER I.

votes  of  the  honourable  majorities  which  pretend  to  repre-
sent nations  :  I  am  not  so  unreasonable  as  to  expect  them
to  govern  so  entirely  according  to  the  general  interest,  as
to  be  able  to  obtain  the  votes  without  paying  for  them  ;
but,  at  the  same  time,  why  should  I  be  astonished  that
such  vicious  systems  have  deplorable  consequences  ?

You  will,  I  presume,  readily  agree  with  me,  as  to  the
injuries  which  nations  mutually  sustain  by  their  mutual
jealousies,  by  the  sordid  interest  or  the  inexperience  of
those  who  take  upon  themselves  to  be  their  organs ;  but
you  maintain,  that  even  supposing  they  possessed  more
liberal  institutions,  the  goods  produced  might  exceed  the
wants  of  the  consumers.  Well,  Sir,  on  this  ground  I  am
willing  to  rest  my  defence.  Let  us  leave  out  of  the  ques-
tion the  war  carried  on  between  nations  by  means  of  their
revenue  officers ;  let  us  consider  each  nation  in  its  relations
with  itself;  and  let  us  inquire,  once  for  all,  whether  we
have  not  the  means  of  consuming  what  we  have  the  means
of  producing.

«  M.  Say,  Mr.  Mill,  and  Mr.  Ricardo,"  you  say,  "  the
principal  authors  of  the  new  doctrines  on  profits,  appear
to  me  to  have  fallen  into  some  fundamental  errors  on  this
subject.  In  the  first  place  they  have  considered  commo-
dities as  if  they  were  so  many  mathematical  figures,  or
arithmetical  characters,  the  relations  of  which  were  to  be
compared,  instead  of  articles  of  consumption,  which  must
of  /course  be  referred  to  the  numbers  and  wants  of  the
consumers."  *

I  know  not,  Sir,  at  least  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  upon
what  foundation  you  have  built  this  assertion.  I  have  re-
peated, in  a  great  variety  of  forms,  this  idea,  that  the  value
of  things  (the  only  quality  by  which  they  become  wealth)
is  founded  on  their  utility;  on  the  aptitude  which  they
possess  to  satisfy  our  wants.  "  The  want  which  we  have
*  Malthus's  «  Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  p.  354.


TO MR.  MALTHIT5.  11

for  any  thing,"  I  have  said,*  "  depends  on  the  physical
and  moral  nature  of  man,  on  the  climate  which  he  inhabits,
and  the  manners  and  laws  of  his  country.  He  is  subject
to  bodily  wants,  to  mental  and  spiritual  wants ;  some  things
he  wants  on  his  own  account,  others  for  his  family ;  and
others  he  requires  as  a  member  of  society.  A  bear-skin
and  a  rein-deer  are  to  a  Laplander  objects  of  the  first  ne-
cessity ;  whilst  the  very  names  of  them  are  wholly  unknown
to  a  lazzarone  of  Naples.  The  latter,  for  his  part,  can  dis-
pense with  every  other  thing,  if  he  is  plentifully  supplied
with  macaroni.  In  like  manner,  courts  of  justice,  in  Europe,
are  considered  the  strongest  bonds  of  civil  society ;  while
the  natives  of  America,  the  Arabs,  and  the  Tartars,  do  very
well  without  them  -  -  -

"  Of  these  wants,  some  are  satisfied  by  the  use  which  we
make  of  certain  things  with  which  nature  furnishes  us  gra-
tuitously ;  as  air,  water,  and  the  light  of  the  sun.  We  may
call  these  things  natural  riches,  because  the  charges  of  their
production  is  defrayed  by  nature  herself.  As  she  GIVES
them  without  distinction  to  ALL,  nobody  is  obliged  to  pur-
chase them  at  the  price  of  any  sacrifice  whatever.  They
have  therefore  no  exchangeable  value.

"  Other  wants  can  only  be  satisfied  by  the  use  which  we
make  of  certain  things  to  which  their  utility  could  not  have
been  given,  without  having  subjected  them  to  a  modifica-
tion, without  having  produced  a  change  in  their  condition;
without  having,  for  this  purpose,  surmounted  a  difficulty
of  some  kind.  Such  are  the  various  goods  which  we  can
only  obtain  by  the  processes  of  agriculture,  commerce,  or
the  arts.  These  only  have  an  exchangeable  value.  The
reason  of  this  is  evident :  they  are,  by  the  mere  fact  of  their
production,  the  result  of  an  exchange,  in  which  the  producer
has  given  his  productive  services,  in  order  to  receive  this

*  Trait^  d'Economie  Politique,  &c.  4e  Edition,  torn.  ii.  p.  5.  See  also.
Catechism  of  Political  Economy.


12  LETTER I.

product.  They  cannot  therefore  be  obtained  from  him,
except  by  virtue  of  another  exchange,  in  which  some  other
product  is  given  to  him,  which  he  may  consider  of  equal
value  with  his  own.

"  These  things  may  therefore  be  called  social  riches,  be-
cause no  exchange  can  take  place  without  a  social  relation,
and  because  it  is  only  in  a  state  of  society  that  the  right  of
possessing  exclusively  what  has  been  obtained  by  produc-
tion or  exchange,  can  be  guaranteed."

I  add,  u  Let  us  observe  at  the  same  time,  that  social
riches  are,  as  riches,  the  only  ones  which  can  become  the
object  of  scientific  study  ;  first,  because  they  are  the  only
ones  which  can  be  appreciated,  or  at  least  the  only  ones
of  which  the  appreciation  is  not  arbitrary ;  and,  secondly,
•  because  they  alone  are  formed,  distributed,  and  destroyed,
according  to  laws  which  we  are  able  to  assign."

Is  this  to  consider  productions  as  algebraic  signs,  by  ab-
stracting them  from  the  number  of  consumers  and  the  nature
of  their  wants  ?  On  the  contrary,  does  not  this  doctrine
establish  that  our  wants  alone  induce  us  to  make  the  sacri-
fices by  means  of  which  we  obtain  productions  ?  These
sacrifices  are  the  price  which  we  pay  to  procure  them  :  you,
like  Smith,  call  these  sacrifices  by  the  name  of  labour,  an
inadequate  expression,  for  they  are  partly  composed  of  the
use  derived  from  land  and  capital.  I  call  them  productive
services.  They  have  everywhere  a  current  price.  When
that  price  exceeds  the  value  of  the  thing  produced,  the  re-
sult is  a  disadvantageous  exchange,  in  which  the  value
consumed  is  greater  than  the  value  created.  When  a  pro-
duction has  been  created  equal  to  the  value  of  the  services
employed,  those  services  are  paid  by  the  production,  the
value  of  which,  distributed  among  the  producers,  forms
their  revenues.  You  see  that  the  existence  of  these  reve-
nues depends  upon  the  production  having  an  exchangeable
value,  which  it  can  only  have  in  consequence  of  the  want


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  13

which  there  is  for  such  production  in  the  actual  state  of
society.  Therefore  I  do  not  abstract  this  want,  or  give  it
an  arbitrary  appreciation ;  I  take  it  for  what  it  is,  for  what
the  consumers  make  it  to  be.  I  could  have  cited,  had  it
been  necessary,  the  whole  of  my  third  book,  which  details
the  different  modes,  motives,  and  results  of  consumption,
but  I  will  not  trifle  with  your  time  and  attention  : — let  us
proceed.

You  say,*  "  It  is  by  no  means  true,  as  a  matter  of  fact, '
that  commodities  are  always  exchanged  for  commodities.
The  great  mass  of  commodities  is  exchanged  directly  for
labour,  either  productive  or  unproductive ;  and  it  is  quite  '
obvious  that  this  mass  of  commodities,  compared  with  the
labour  with  which  it  is  to  be  exchanged,  may  fall  in  value
from  a  glut  just  as  any  one  commodity  falls  in  value,  from
an  excess  of  supply,  compared  either  with  labour  or  money."
Permit  me  to  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  I  never  said,
commodities  are  always  exchanged  for  commodities;  but
that  productions  can  only  be  purchased  by  productions.

Secondly,  that  even  those  who  admit  this  expression  of
commodities  might  answer  you,  that  when  commodities  are
given  in  exchange  for  labour,  these  commodities  are  in
reality  given  in  exchange  for  other  commodities,  that  is  to
say,  for  those  which  result  from  the  labour  which  has  been
purchased.  But  this  answer  is  insufficient  for  those  who
embrace  in  a  more  extended  and  complete  view,  the  phe-
nomenon of  the  production  of  our  riches.  Allow  me  to
place  it  before  your  eyes  in  a  striking  form.  The  public,
which  is  to  judge  between  us,  will,  1  think,  be  thus  ma-
terially assisted  in  appreciating  your  objections  and  my
answers.

To  obtain  a  better  view  of  the  operations  of  industry,
capital,  and  land,  in  the  work  of  production,  I  personify
them :  and  I  discover  that  all  these  personages  sell  their

*  Malthus's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  p,  153.


14;  LETTER 1.

services,  which  I  call  productive  services,  to  a  speculator,
who  may  be  either  a  trader,  a  manufacturer,  or  a  farmer.
This  speculator  having  purchased  the  services  of  a  landed
estate,  by  paying  a  rent  to  the  proprietor ;  the  services  of  a
capital,  by  paying  interest  to  the  capitalist ;  and  the  indus-
trious services  of  workmen,  factors,  agents  of  whatever  de-
scription, by  the  payment  of  salaries ; — consumes  all  these
productive  services,  annihilates  them ;  and  out  of  this  con-
sumption comes  a  production  which  has  a  va/:ie.

The  value  of  this  production,  provided  it  b<  equal  to  the
costs  of  production,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  sum  necessarily
advanced  for  all  the  productive  services,  suffices  to  pay
the  profits  of  all  those  who  have  concurred  directly  or  in-
directly in  this  production.  The  profit  of  the  speculator
on  whose  account  this  operation  has  been  effected,  deduct-
ing the  interest  of  the  capital  which  he  may  have  employed,
represents  the  remuneration  for  his  time  and  talents ;  that
is  to  say,  his  own  productive  services  employed  in  his  own
behalf.  If  his  abilities  be  great,  and  his  calculations  well
made,  his  profit  will  be  considerable.  If  instead  of  talent
he  evinces  inexperience  in  his  affairs,  he  may  gain  nothing ;
he  may  very  probably  be  a  loser.  All  the  risks  attach  to
the  speculator ;  but  on  the  other  hand  he  takes  the  advan-
tage of  all  the  favourable  chances.

Every  production  which  we  see,  or  which  our  imagina-
tion conceives,  is  formed  by  operations  which  resolve
themselves,  without  exception,  into  those  which  I  have  de-
scribed, but  combined  in  an  infinity  of  different  manners.
What  some  speculators  are  doing  for  one  sort  of  production,
others  perform  for  another  sort.  Now,  it  is  the  exchanging
of  these  articles  one  for  another  which  constitutes  a  market
for  each.  The  greater  or  less  want  that  exists  for  one  of
these  productions,  compared  with  the  others,  determines  the
greater  or  less  price  which  is  given  to  obtain  it;  that  is  to
say,  the  greater  or  less  quantity  of  any  other  production.
Money  is  in  these  transactions  only  a  transient  agent,


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  15

which,  when  once  the  exchange  is  completed,  is  no  farther
concerned  in  it,  and  flies  to  effect  other  exchanges.

It  is  with  the  rent,  interest,  and  wages,  which  form  the  -
profits  resulting  from  this  production,  that  the  producers
buy  the  objects  of  their  consumption.  These  producers
are  at  the  same  time  consumers ;  and  the  nature  of  their
wants,  influencing  in  different  degrees  the  demand  for
different  kinds  of  produce,  is  always  favourable,  where
liberty  exists,  to  the  most  necessary  kind  of  production ;
because  that,  being  the  most  in  demand,  affords  to  those
who  produce  it  the  greatest  profits.

I  said  that  in  order  to  see  how  industry,  capital,  and
land  respectively  act  in  productive  operations,  I  per-
sonified them,  and  observed  them  in  the  services  they  ren-
dered. But  this  is  not  a  gratuitous  fiction ;  it  is  a  fact.
Industry  is  represented  by  the  industrious  of  all  .classes ;
capital,  by  capitalists  ;  land  by  its  proprietors.  These  are
the  three  orders  of  persons  who  sell  the  productive  ser-
vices of  the  instrument  they  possess,  and  stipulate  the
remuneration  for  its  employment.  My  expressions  may
perhaps  be  objected  to ;  but  it  will  then  be  incumbent  on
those  who  find  fault  with  them,  to  propose  better,  for  it  is
impossible  to  deny  that  this  is  the  course  of  the  trans-
actions. I  have  stated  the  fact.  The  manner  of  the
painter  may  be  criticized,  but  the  facts  represented  defy
contradiction ;  there  they  are,  and  they  will  defend  them-
selves.

To  return  to  your  assertion.  You  say,  Sir,  that  many
commodities  are  purchased  with  labour;  and  I  go  farther
than  you  :  I  say,  they  are  all  purchased  with  labour,  ex-
tending that  expression  to  the  services  rendered  by  capital
and  laud.*  I  say  that  they  cannot  be  purchased  by  anj

*  The  English  authors  are  often  obscure  through  their  confoflnding,  like
Smith,  under  the  denomination  of  labour,  the  services  rendered  by  men,  by
capital,  and  by  land.


16  LETTER I.

other  means;  that  the  value  and  utility  of  things  in  all
cases  are  produced  by  such  services ;  and  that  the  alter-
native is  thus  presented  to  us:  either  to  consume  our-
selves the  utility,  and  consequently  the  value  which  we
have  produced,  or  to  employ  it  in  the  purchase  of  the
utility  and  value  produced  by  others ;  that  in  both  cases
we  purchase  commodities  with  productive  services,  and
that  the  more  productive  services  we  carry  to  market,  the
more  we  can  buy  in  return.

You  assert  that  there  are  no  immaterial  productions.*
Why,  Sir,  originally  there  were  no  other.  A  field,  for
instance,  furnishes  towards  production  only  its  service,
which  is  an  immaterial  product.  It  serves  as  a  crucible
into  which  you  put  a  mineral,  and  extract  metal  and  dross.
Is  there  any  part  of  the  crucible  in  these  products  ?  No ;
the  crucible  serves  for  a  new  productive  operation.  Is
there  any  portion  of  the  field  in  the  harvest  which  is  ob-
tained from  it  ?  I  answer  likewise,  No ;  for  if  land  were
thus  gradually  consumed,  it  would  cease  to  exist  in  a  few
years  :  the  land  only  returns  what  is  put  into  it ;  but  re-
turns it  after  an  elaboration,  which  I  call  the  productive
service  of  the  field.  Possibly  some  people  may  quibble  on
the  word.  I  do  not  apprehend  any  quibbles  that  may  be
attempted  as  to  the  thing,  because  that  is  undeniable,  and
wherever  political  economy  shall  be  studied,  will  be  ac-
knowledged as  the  fact,  whatever  name  people  may  think
proper  to  give  it.

The  service  rendered  by  capital  in  any  undertaking
whatever,  commercial,  agricultural,  or  manufactoral,  is
likewise  an  immaterial  product.  He  who  consumes  a
capital  unproductively  destroys  the  capital  itself;  he  who
consumes  it  reproductively,  consumes  the  material  capital,
and  also  the  service  of  that  capital,  which  is  an  immaterial

*  Page  49.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  17

product.  When  a  dyer  puts  indigo,  to  the  value  of  a  thou-
sand francs,  into  his  copper,  he  consumes  material  produce
worth  a  thousand  francs;  and,  besides,  he  consumes  the
hire  of  this  capital,  its  interest.  The  dye  which  he  ob-
tains, returns  to  him  the  value  of  the  material  capital
employed,  and  also  the  value  of  the  immaterial  service  of
the  same  capital.  The  service  of  the  workman  is  likewise
an  immaterial  product.  The  workman  comes  out  of  the
manufactory  at  night  with  the  ten  fingers  which  he  carried
into  it  in  the  morning.  He  has  left  nothing  material  in  the
workshop.  It  is  then  an  immaterial  service  which  he  has
furnished  towards  the  productive  operation.  This  service
is  the  daily  or  annual  produce  of  a  fund  or  estate  which
I  call  his  industrious  faculties,  and  which  compose  his
riches  :  miserable  riches  !  particularly  in  England;-  -  and  I
know  the  reason.

All  these  are  immaterial  productions,  which,  call  them  as
you  please,  will  still  be  immaterial  productions,  ^xchange-
able  mutually  one  with  another,  exchangeable  for  mate-
rial productions ;  and  which,  in  all  exchanges,  will  still  seek
their  market-price,  founded,  like  every  market-price  in
the  world,  upon  the  proportion  between  the  supply  and
demand.

These  services,  of  industry,  capital,  and  land,  which  are
products  independent  of  all  matter,  form  all  our  revenues,
much  as  we  are  -  -  -  -  What !  all  our  revenues  immate-
rial ! ! !  Yes,  Sir,  ALL  :  otherwise  the  mass  of  matter
which  composes  the  globe  would  increase  every  year ;  it
must  happen  so,  for  we  should  every  year  have  new  ma-
terial revenues.  We  neither  create  nor  destroy  a  single
atom.  All  that  we  do  is  to  change  the  combinations  of
things;  and  all  that  we  add  is  immaterial.  It  is  vALUfi;
and  it  is  this  value  which  is  immaterial  also,  that  we  daily,
annually  consume,  and  upon  which  we  live;  for  con-
sumption is  a  change  of  form  given  to  matter,  or,  if  you

c


18  LETTER  I.

prefer  the  expression,  a  derangement,  as  production  is  an
arrangement  of  form.  If  you  find  a  paradoxical  appear-
ance in  these  propositions,  examine  the  things  which  they
express,  and  I  have  no  doubt  they  will  appear  very  simple
and  reasonable.

Without  this  analysis,  I  defy  you  to  explain  the  whole
of  the  facts ;  for  instance,  how  the  same  capital  is  twice
consumed :  productively ,  by  a  speculator,  and  unproduc-
tively,  by  his  workman.  By  means  of  the  foregoing
analysis,  it  may  be  seen  how  the  workman  brings  to  market
his  labour,  the  fruits  of  his  ability ;  he  sells  it  to  the
master,  carries  home  with  him  his  wages,  which  forms  his
revenue,  and  consumes  it  unproductively.  But  the  master,
who  has  bought  the  labour  of  the  workman  with  a  part  of
his  capital  consumes  it  reproductively,  as  the  dyer  con-
sumes reproductively  the  indigo  thrown  into  his  copper.
These  values  having  been  consumed  reproductively,  re-
appear in  the  production  which  comes  out  of  the  hands  of
the  master.  It  is  not  the  capital  of  the  master  which  forms
revenue  of  the  workman,  as  M.  Sismondi  pretends.
The  capital  of  the  master  is  consumed  in  the  workshops,
and  not  in  the  maintenance  of  the  workman.  The  value
consumed  by  the  latter  has  another  source ;  it  is  the  pro-
duce of  his  industrious  faculties.  The  master  devotes  to
the  purchase  of  the  workman's  labour  a  part  of  his  capital.
Having  purchased  it,  he  consumes  it ;  and  th£  workman
consumes,  on  his  part,  the  value  which  he  has  obtained
in  exchange  for  his  labour.  Wherever  there  is  exchange,
there  are  two  values  created  and  bartered  one  for  the
other ;  and  wherever  two  values  are  created,  there  must
be,  and  there  are,  in  effect,  two  consumptions.*

*  A  domestic  produces  personal  services  which  are  wholly  consumed  un-
productively by  his  master,  as  soon  as  produced.  The  service  of  the  public
functionary  is  in  like  manner  wholly  consumed  by  the  public,  as  fast  as  it
is  produced.  That  is  the  reason  why  these  different  services  contribute


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  19

It  is  the  same  with  the  productive  service  rendered  by  ca-
pital. The  capitalist  who  lends,  sells  the  service,  the  labour
of  his  instrument;  the  daily  or  annual  hire,  which  a  spe-
culator pays  him  for  it,  is  called  interest.  The  terms  of  the
exchange  are,  on  one  side,  the  service  of  the  capital,  on  the
other,  the  interest.  The  speculator,  while  he  consumes
reproductively  the  capital,  also  consumes  reproductively
the  sercice  of  the  capital.  The  lender,  on  the  other  hand,
who  has  sold  the  service  of  the  capital,  consumes  the  in-
terest un productively,  which  is  a  material  value  given  in
exchange  for  the  immaterial  service  of  the  capital.  Ought
we  to  wonder  that  there  should  be  a  double  consumption,
that  of  Hie  speculator  to  make  his  production,  and  that  of
the  capitalist  to  satisfy  his  wants,  since  there  are  the  two
terms  of  an  exchange,  two  values  drawn  from  two  different
funds,  bartered  for  each  other,  and  both  capable  of  con-
sumption ?

nothing  to  the  augmentation  of  riches.  The  consumer  enjoys  these  services,
but  cannot  accumulate  them.  This  is  explained  in  detail  in  my  "  Traite
d'Economie  Politique,"  4e  edition,  torn.  i.  p.  124  ;  and  also  hi"  my  Catechism
of  Political  Economy.  After  that  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  M.  Malthus
could  print  (p.  35.),  "  I  am  hardly  aware  how  the  causes  of  the  increasing
riches  and  prosperity  of  Europe  since  the  feudal  times  could  be  traced,  if
we  were  to  consider  personal  services  as  equally  productive  of  wealth  with
the  labour  of  merchants  and  manufacturers."  It  is  with  these  services  as
with  the  labour  of  the  gardener,  who  has  cultivated  salads  or  strawberries.
The  wealth  of  Europe  certainly  does  not  arise  from  the  strawberries  which
have  been  produced,  because  they  must,  like  personal  services,  have  been
consumed  unproductively  as  fast  as  they  ripened,  although  less  quickly
than  personal  services.

I  have  instanced  strawberries  as  a  very  perishable  product ;  but  it  is  not
the  durability  of  a  production  which  particularly  facilitates  accumulation.
It  is  because  it  is  consumed  in  a  manner  adapted  to  reproduce  its  value  in
another  object.  For  whether  durable  or  not,  every  product  is  devoted  to
consumption,  and  answers  no  purpose  whatever  except  by  its  consumption ;
this  purpose  is  either  to  satisfy  a  want,  or  to  reproduce  a  new  value.  When
people  undertake  to  write  on  political  economy,  they  should  dismiss  from
their  minds  the  notion  that  durable  produce  accumulates  better  than
what  is  perishable.

c  2


20  LETTER I.

You  say,  Sir,  that  the  distinction  between  productive
and  unproductive  labour  is  the  corner-stone  of  Adam
Smith's  work ;  that  to  recognise  as  productive,  labours
•which  are  not  fixed  in  any  material  object  (as  I  do)  is  to
overturn  that  work  from  top  to  bottom.*  No,  Sir;  that
is  not  the  corner-stone  of  Smith's  work ;  for  when  that
stone  is  removed,  the  edifice,  although  imperfect,  remains
as  solid  as  before.  What  will  eternally  sustain  that  ex-
cellent book  is,  that  it  proclaims  in  every  page  that  the
exchangeable  value  of  things  is  the  foundation  of  all  riches.
From  the  publication  of  that  important  truth,  political
economy  became  a  positive  science ;  for  the  market-price
of  every  thing  is  a  determinate  quantity  of  which  the
elements  may  be  analysed,  the  causes  assigned,  the  rela-
tions studied,  and  the  consequences  foreseen.  Permit  me,
Sir,  to  say  that  to  separate  this  essential  character  from
the  definition  of  wealth,  is  to  plunge  the  science  again  into
the  depths  of  obscurity — to  drive  it  back.

Instead  of  weakening  the  authority  of  the  celebrated
Inquiry  into  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  I  support  it  in  the
most  essential  part ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  think  Adam
Smith  has  forgotten  some  real  exchangeable  values,  in
omitting  those  which  are  attached  to  such  productive
services  as  leave  no  trace  because  they  are  totally  consumed ;
I  think  that  he  has  likewise  misunderstood  services  un-
questionably real,  which  even  leave  their  traces  in  material
produce ;  such  are  the  services  of  capital,  consumed  in-
dependently of  the  consumption  of  the  capital  itself;  I
think  that  he  fell  into  infinite  obscurities  through  omitting
to  distinguish,  in  the  course  of  production,  the  consump-
tion of  the  industrious  services  of  a  speculator  from  the
services  of  his  capital ;  a  distinction  which  nevertheless
is  so  real,  that  there  is  scarcely  any  commercial  associa-

*  Malthus  ou  Political  Economy,  p,  37.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  2

lion  whose  regulations  do  not  contain  clauses  relative
to  it.

I  revere  Adam  Smith — he  is  my  master.  When  I  took
the  first  steps  in  political  economy,  and  when  still  tottering
I  was  pushed  by  the  advocates  of  the  balance  of  commerce
on  the  one  side,  and  the  advocates  of  net  produce  on  the
other,  I  stumbled  at  every  move — he  shewed  me  the  true
path.  Supported  by  his  Wealth  of  Nations,  which  shews
at  the  same  time  his  own  intellectual  wealth^  I  learned  to
go  alone.  Now  I  have  ceased  to  belong  to  any  school,
and  I  shall  escape  the  sort  of  ridicule  which  attached  to
the  reverend  father  Jesuits  who  translated  the  Elements
of  Newton  with  annotations.  They  were  sensible  that
physical  laws  would  not  square  very  well  with  those  of
Loyola ;  they  therefore  took  care  to  inform  the  public  by
an  advertisement,  that,  although  they  had  apparently  de-
monstrated the  motion  of  the  earth  to  complete  the  theory
of  celestial  physics,  they  nevertheless  bowed  with  submis-
sive acquiescence  to  the  decrees  of  the  Pope,  who  did  not
acknowledge  this  motion.  I  submit  only  to  the  decrees  of
eternal  reason,  and  am  not  afraid  to  declare  it :  Adam
Smith  has  not  embraced  all  the  phenomena  of  the  pro-
duction and  consumption  of  wealth ;  but  he  has  done  so
much  that  we  ought  to  feel  the  deepest  gratitude  for  his
exertions.  The  most  vague  and  obscure  of  all  the  sciences,
will,  thanks  to  his  researches,  soon  become  the  most  precise,
and  leave  fewer  facts  unexplained  than  any  of  the  others.

Let  us  then  figure  to  ourselves  the  producers  (by  which
name  I  mean  as  well  the  possessors  of  capital  and  of  land,
as  the  possessors  of  industrious  faculties)  ;  let  us  imagine
them  pressing  forwards  with  emulation  to  offer  their  pro-
ductive services,  or  the  utility  derived  from  them,  (an  im-
material quality).  This  utility  is  their  production.  Some-
times it  is  fixed  in  a  material  object,  which  passes  with


22  LETTER I.

the  immaterial  produce,  but  which  in  itself  is  of  no  importr
ance,  is  nothing  in  political  economy;  for  matter  deprived
of  value  is  not  wealth.  Sometimes  it  passes,  sold  by  one
and  bought  by  another,  without  being  fixed  in  any  sub-
stance— as  the  advice  of  the  physician,  that  of  the  lawyer,
the  service  of  the  soldier,  and  of  the  public  functionary.
All  these  exchange  the  utility  which  they  produce  for  that
which  is  produced  by  others:  and  in  as  many  of  these  ex-
changes as  are  abandoned  to  free  competition,  according
as  the  utility  offered  by  Paul  is  more  or  less  in  demand
than  the  utility  offered  by  James,  it  is  sold  more  or  less
dear,  that  is  to  say,  it  obtains  in  exchange,  more  or  less  of
the  utility  produced  by  the  latter.  It  is  in  this  sense
that  we  should  understand  the  influence  of  demand  and
supply.

This,  Sir,  is  not  a  doctrine  retrospectively  made  for  the
occasion  ;  it  is  delivered  in  several  parts  of  my  Traitc
a" Economic  Politique  /*  and  by  means  of  my  Epitome,  its
concordance  with  all  the  other  principles  of  the  science,
and  with  all  the  facts  which  form  its  basis  is  firmly  esta-
blished. It  is  already  professed  in  several  parts  of  Europe ;
but  I  ardently  wish  to  see  you  convinced  of  its  truth,  and
that  you  may  think  it  worthy  of  the  support  of  that  chair
which  you  fill  with  so  much  credit.

After  these  necessary  explanations,  you  will  not  accuse
me  of  vain  subleties,  if  I  rely  on  the  laws  which  I  have
shewn  to  be  founded  on  the  nature  of  things,  and  the  facts
which  flow  from  that  source.

Commodities,  you  say,  are  not  exchanged  for  commo-
dities only  ;  they  are  also  exchanged  for  labour.  If  this
labour  be  a  product  which  some  sell  and  others  buy  and

*  4e  edit.  L.  i.  ch.  15 ;  L.  ii.  ch.  1,  2,  3,  &  5;  and  also  the  Epitome  at
the  end,  at  the  words,  Productive  Services,  Charges  of  Production,  Income*
Utility,  Value.


TO  MR.  MALTHUS.  23

consume,  I  shall  find  little  difficulty  in  calling  it  a  com-
modify,  and  you  will  find  little  in  assimilating  other  com-
modities to  this,  for  they  are  also  productions.  If  you  will
apply  to  each  of  them  indiscriminately  the  generic  name  of
production,  you  will  probably  agree  with  me  that  produc-
tions can  only  be  purchased  with  productions.


LETTER  II.

SIB,

I  THINK  I  have  proved  in  ray  first  letter  that  productions
can  only  be  purchased  with  productions  :  I  do  not  there-
fore yet  see  any  reason  to  abandon  the  doctrine,  that  it  is
production  which  opens  a  market  to  production.  I  have
indeed  considered  as  productions  all  the  services  arising
from  our  personal  capacities,  from  our  capitals,  and  our
lands ;  which  has  obliged  me  to  sketch  anew,  and  in  other
terms,  the  doctrine  of  production,  which  Smith  evidently
did  not  comprehend,  and  has  not  completely  described.

But  on  reading  again  the  third  section  of  your  7th  chap-
ter (p.  351)  I  feel  that  there  is  still  a  point  on  which  you
will  not  agree  with  me.  You  will  probably  grant  that
productions  can  only  be  bought  with  productions  ;  but  you
will  persist  in  maintaining  that  people  may  create  a  quan-
tity of  produce  in  the  whole  exceeding  their  wants,  and
that  consequently  part  of  this  produce  can  not  be  used ;
that  there  may  be  a  superabundance  and  glut  of  all  com-
modities at  once.  In  order  to  present  your  objection  in
its  full  force,  I  shall  transform  it  into  a  sensible  image,  by
saying  :  Mr.  Malthus  will  readily  allow  that  100  sacks  of
corn  will  buy  100  pieces  of  stuff,  in  a  society  which  has
occasion  for  those  quantities  of  stuff  and  corn  for  its  raiment
and  food ;  but  if  the  same  society  should  happen  to  pro-
duce 200  sacks  of  corn  and  200  pieces  of  stuff,  although
these  two  commodities  may  still  be  exchangeable  for  each
other,  he  will  maintain  that  a  part  of  each  of  them  will  no
longer  find  purchasers.  It  is  therefore  necessary  for  me  to
prove,  first,  that  whatever  may  be  the  quantity  produced,
and  the  consequent  depression  of  price,  a  quantity  pro-
duced of  one  species  always  suffices  to  enable  those  who


LETTER II.  25

have  produced  it  to  acquire  the  quantity  produced  of
another  species ;  and  after  proving  that  the  possibility  of
acquiring  exists,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  how  the  super-
abundance of  productions  creates  a  demand  for  it,  for  the
purpose  of  consumption.

The  farmer  who  produces  corn,  after  having  purchased
the  productive  services  of  the  land  and  capital  which  he
employs,  as  well  as  those  of  his  labourers,  and  added  to
these  services  that  of  his  own  personal  labour,  has  consumed
all  those  values  to  convert  them  into  sacks  of  corn  ;  let  us
suppose  that  each  sack  stands  him  in  thirty  shillings,  in-
cluding the  value  of  his  own  labour,  that  is  to  say,  his
profit.  On  the  other  hand  the  manufacturer  who  pro*
duces  stuffs  of  linen,  woollen,  or  cotton,  after  having  con-
sumed in  like  manner  the  services  of  his  capital,  those  of
his  workmen  and  himself,  has  produced  stuffs  which  stand
him  also  in  thirty  shillings  the  piece.  If  I  may  be  per-
mitted to  jump  at  once  to  the  main  point  of  the  inquiry,
I  will  premise  that  this  manufacturer  of  stuffs  represents
in  my  mind  the  producers  of  all  manufactured  produce,
and  this  grower  of  corn  the  producers  of  all  provisions  and
raw  materials.  The  question  is,  whether  their  two  articles
of  produce,  to  whatever  quantities  they  maybe  multiplied,
and  whatever  depression  of  price  may  result  from  that  mul-
tiplication, can  be  wholly  purchased  by  the  producers,  who
are  also  at  the  same  time  the  consumers ;  and  how  wants
arise  always  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  productions.

We  must  first  inquire  into  the  course  of  things  upon  the
hypothesis  of  a  perfect  liberty,  permitting  the  indefinite
multiplication  of  all  productions ;  and  we  will  afterwards
examine  the  obstacles  which  the  nature  of  things,  or  th«
imperfection  of  society  opposes  to  this  unrestricted  freedom
of  production  ;  but  you  will  remark  that  the  hypothesis  of
unrestricted  production  is  more  favourable  to  your  cause,
because  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  dispose  of  unlimited


26  LETTER  II.

produce  than  of  that  which  is  restricted;  and  that  the  hy»
pothesis  of  production  restricted  sometimes  by  one  cause
and  sometimes  by  another,  is  more  favourable  to  mine,
which  supports  the  doctrine  that  these  restrictions  are  the
very  causes  which,  by  restraining  certain  productions,  im-
pede the  purchases  which  might  be  made  of  the  only  pro-
ductions which  can  be  indefinitely  multiplied.

Upon  the  hypothesis,  then,  of  perfect  liberty,  suppose
the  grower  brings  to  market  a  sack  of  corn,  which  includ-
ing his  profit,  comes  to  thirty  shillings,  and  the  manufac-
turer brings  a  piece  of  stuff  which  comes  to  the  same  price,
and  consequently  these  productions  will  be  exchangeable  at
par.*  Of  these  two  dealers,  if  one  have  gained  more  than
his  costs  of  production,  he  will  draw  into  his  line  of  busi-
ness a  part  of  the  persons  occupied  in  the  production  of  the
other  article,  until  in  both  parts  productive  services  shall
be  equally  well  paid  :  this  is  an  effect  generally  allowed.

Here  we  ought  to  observe,  that  upon  this  supposition,
the  producers  of  the  piece  of  stuff  have  altogether  gained
wherewith  to  repurchase  that  entire  piece,  or  to  buy  any
other  product  of  equal  value.  If,  for  instance,  it  amounts
to  thirty  shillings,  including  all  expenses,  as  well  as  the
profit  of  the  manufacturer  at  the  current  rate,  this  sum  is
distributed  amongst  all  the  persons  concerned  in  the  pro-
duction of  the  piece  of  stuff;  but  in  unequal  shares,  accord-
ing to  the  nature  and  amount  of  the  services  which  they
have  rendered  in  the  operation  of  its  production.  If  the
piece  contain  ten  yards,  he  who  has  received  six  shillings
ean  buy  two  yards  of  it;  he  who  has  received  eighteen
pence  can  only  buy  half  a  yard  :  but  all  of  them  together
can  certainly  buy  the  whole  piece.  But  if  instead  of  the

*  Does  not  the  farmer,  who  sells  a  sack  of  corn  for  thirty  shilliogs,  and
buys  a  piece  of  calico  at  thirty  shillings,  exchange  his  corn  for  the  stuff?
and  does  not  the  manufacturer,  who  buys  a  sack  of  corn  at  thirty  shillings,
being  the  price  of  his  piece  of  stuff,  exchange  that  piece  for  a  sack  of  corn  ?


TO MR.  MALTIIUS.  27

stuff,  they  wish  to  buy  the  corn,  they  are  able,  together,  to
purchase  the  whole  quantity,  since  its  value  is  the  same
with  that  of  the  stuff;  so  each  of  them  can  purchase,  ac-
cording to  their  respective  occasions,  either  a  part  of  the
piece  of  stuff,  or  an  equivalent  portion  of  the  sack  of  corn.
He  who  has  received  for  his  services  in  either  of  these  pro-
ductions six  shillings,  may  use  three  shillings  in  the  pur-
chase of  a  tenth  part  of  the  piece  of  stuff,  and  three  shillings
in  buying  a  tenth  of  the  corn ;  in  all  cases  it  is  clear  that
all  the  producers  possess  collectively  the  means  of  acquiring
the  whole  of  the  productions.

Now,  Sir,  come  your  objections.  If  commodities  in-
crease, or  wants  diminish,  you  say,  commodities  will  fall
to  a  price  too  low  to  pay  the  labour  requisite  for  their
production.*

In  proceeding  to  answer  this  o'bjection,  I  wish  to  pre-
mise, that  if  I  consent  to  employ  your  word  labour,  which,

*  That  I  may  not  incur  the  charge  of  misrepresentation,  while  I  am
merely  endeavouring  to  compress  and  render  more  perspicuous  the  meaning
of  the  worthy  professor,  I  copy  the  exact  passages.  "  If  commodities  were
only  to  be  compared  and  exchanged  with  each  other,  then,  indeed,  it  would
be  true  that,  if  they  were  all  increased  in  their  proper  proportions  to  any
extent,  they  would  continue  to  bear  among  themselves  the  same  relative
value;  but  if  we  compare  them,  as  we  certainly  ought  to  do,  with  the  num-
bers and  wants  of  the  consumers,  then  a  great  increase  of  produce  with
comparatively  stationary  numbers,  and  with  wants  diminished  by  parsi-
mony, must  necessarily  occasion  a  great  fall  of  value  estimated  in  labour,
so  that  the  same  produce,  though  it  might  have  cost  the  same  quantity  of
labour,  would  no  longer  command  the  same  quantity". . .  .p.  355.  "  It  is  as-
serted that  effectual  demand  is  nothing  more  than  the  offering  one  commo-
dity in  exchange  for  another.  But  is  this  all  that  is  necessary  to  effectual
demand  ?  Though  each  commodity  may  have  cost  the  same  quantity  of  la-
bour and  capital  in  its  production,  and  they  may  be  exactly  equivalent  to
each  other  in  exchange,  yet  why  may  not  both  be  so  plentiful  as  not  to
command  more  labour,  or  but  very  little  more  than  they  have  cost ;  and  in
this  case,  would  the  demand  for  them  be  effectual?  Would  it  be  such  as  to
encourage  their  continued  production  ?  Unquestionably  NOT."  p.  355,  356.


2»  LETTER II.

according  to  the  explanation  given  in  my  former  letter,  is
incomplete,  I  shall  comprehend  under  that  denomination,
not  only  the  productive  services  of  the  workman  and  his
master,  but  the  productive  services  rendered  by  capital
and  land ;  services  which  have  their  price,  as  well  as  per-
sonal labour,  and  a  price  so  strictly  real,  that  the  capitalist
and  the  landholder  live  upon  it.

This  point  being  understood,  I  answer  you  in  the  first
place,  that  the  depression  of  the  price  of  productions,  does
not  prevent  the  producers  from  purchasing  the  labour  which
has  created  them,  or  any  other  equivalent  labour.  In  our
hypothesis,  the  grower  of  corn  will,  by  an  improved  pro-
cess, produce  a  double  quantity  of  corn,  and  the  manu-
facturer a  double  quantity  of  stuffs;  and  the  corn  and  stuffs
will  fall  to  half  their  prices.  What  then  ?  The  producers
of  corn  will  receive  for  the  same  services  as  before,  two
sacks  worth  only  what  one  sack  was  before  worth,  and  the
producers  of  stuffs  will  have  two  pieces  together  of  the
same  value,  as  one  piece  had  formerly  been :  In  the  ex-
change called  production,  the  same  services  will  have  re-
spectively obtained  a  double  quantity  of  produce;  but  these
double  quantities  may  be  acquired  by  each  other  as  before,
and  as  easily  as  ever;  so  that  without  a  greater  expense  in
productive  services,  a  nation  in  which  this  productive  fa-
culty should  be  thus  developed,  would  have  double  the
quantity  of  commodities  for  consumption,  in  corn  or  stuffs,
or  even  in  other  articles  ;  as  we  have  agreed  to  represent
by  corn  and  stuffs,  all  things  of  which  men  stand  in  need
for  their  support  and  accommodation.  Productions  in  such
an  exchange  are  valued  against  productive  services  ;  now
as  in  every  exchange,  the  value  of  one  of  the  terms  is
greater  in  proportion  to  the  greater  quantity  of  the  other
which  it  obtains,  it  follows  that  productive  services  are  in-
creased in  value  in  proportion  as  productions  are  increased


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  29

in  quantity,  and  diminished  in  price.*  This  is  the  reason
why  the  reduction  of  the  price  of  productions,  by  in-
creasing the  value  of  the  productive  funds  of  a  nation  and
of  the  income  derived  therefrom,  augments  the  national
wealth.  I  think  this  demonstration,  which  may  be  seen  at
length  in  my  Traitg  d? Economic  Politique,  4th  edition,
book  ii.  ch.  3,  has  done  some  service  to  science,  by  eluci-
dating what  previously  had  been  felt,  but  not  explained;
that  is  to  say,  that  although  wealth  is  an  exchangeable
value,  the  general  wealth  is  increased  by  the  low  price  of
commodities  and  productions  of  all  sorts,  t

Probably  it  never  happened  that  the  productive  power
of  labour  was  suddenly  doubled;  and  for  all  productions  at
once ;  but  a  gradual  augmentation  with  respect  to  many
articles,  and  in  various  proportions,  has  undoubtedly  oc-
curred. Among  the  antients,  a  scarlet  mantle  of  equal
fineness  and  size,  solidity  of  texture  and  beauty  of  colour,
to  one  of  ours,  cost  unquestionably  more  than  double  the
price  it  would  cost  amongst  us ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that
the  corn,  paid  in  labour,  fell  in  value  at  least  half  at  the  un-
known period  of  the  invention  of  the  plough.  These
articles,  costing  less  labour,  were,  in  consequence  of  the
competition,  given  for  what  they  cost,  without  any  one
being  a  loser ;  while  all  gained  in  their  revenues  by  the
event.

But  to  return  to  the  first  part  of  your  objection :  The

*  That  is,  according  to  the  English  expression  :  when  they  (productions)
do  not  command  the  same  quantity  of  labour  as  before.

f  This  demonstration,  by  the  bye,  completely  overthrows  an  assertion
of  Mr.  Malthus,  that  cheapness  is  always  (must  be}  at  the  expense  of  projits
(p.  570),  and  consequently  all  the  reasoning  which  he  has  built  on  this
foundation.  It  is  also  fatal  to  all  that  part  of  Mr.  Ricardo's  doctrine,  in
which  he  flatters  himself  that  he  has  proved,  that  the  costs  of  production,
and  not  the  proportion  of  supply  and  demand,  regulates  the  prices  of  goods.
He  identifies  the  costs  of  production  with  the  production  itself,  whereas  they
are  completely  opposed  to  each  other,  and  the  former  are  diminished  in
proportion  to  the  Increase  of  the  latter.


LETTER II.

growers  of  corn  and  makers  of  stuffs  will  then  produce  more
corn  and  stuffs  than  they  can  consume.  Ah  !  my  good  Sir,
after  having-  proved  that  notwithstanding  a  fall  of  one  half
in  the  value  of  productions,  the  same  labour  may  purchase
the  whole  of  them,  and  thereby  procure  an  increase  of  as
much  again  in  the  necessaries  and  luxuries  of  life,  can  it
be  necessary  for  me  to  prove  to  the  justly  celebrated
author  of  the  Essay  on  Population,  that  whatever  is  pro-
duced will  find  consumers,  and  ihat  among  the  enjoyments
procured  by  the  quantity  of  productions  which  men  can
command,  they  do  not  place  in  the  inferior  ranks  the  comforts
of  a  home,  and  the  increase  and  preservation  of  their  chil-
dren? After  having  written  three  justly  admired  volumes,
to  prove  that  population  always  rises  to  the  level  of  the
means  of  subsistence,  can  you  possibly  have  admitted  the
supposition  of  a  great  augmentation  of  produce,  with  a  sta-
tionary number  of  consumers,  and  wants  diminished  by  par-
simony ?  (p.  355.)

Either  the  author  of  the  "  Essay  on  Population,19  or  the
author  of  "  Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  must  be  in
the  wrong.  But  every  thing  convinces  us  that  it  is  not  the
former  who  is  mistaken.  Experience,  as  well  as  reason-
ing, demonstrates  that  a  production,  an  article  necessary  or
agreeable  to  man,  is  only  rejected  when  people  have  not
the  means  of  paying  for  it.  These  means  of  purchasing
are  precisely  those  which  establish  the  demand  for  a  pro-
duction, and  give  it  a  price.  Not  to  want  an  useful  thing
is  not  to  be  able  to  pay  for  it.  And  what  occasions  this  in-
ability to  pay  for  it  ?  The  being  deprived  of  that  which
constitutes  wealth  :  the  being  deprived  of  industry,  land,
or  capital.

As  soon  as  men  are  provided  with  the  means  of  produ-
cing, they  appropriate  their  productions  to  their  wants;  for
production  itself  is  an  exchange,  in  which  we  offer  (or  sup-
ply) productive  means,  and  demand  in  return  the  thing  of


TO MR. MALTHUS.  31

which  we  feel  the  greatest  want.  To  create  a  thing  which
no  one  wanted,  would  be  to  create  a  thing  without  value  :
it  would  not  be  to  produce.  But  the  moment  it  has  a  va-
lue, its  producer  may  exchange  it  for  other  commodities
which  he  may  wish  to  procure.

This  faculty  of  exchange,  peculiar  to  man  alone,  among
all  the  animals,  adapts  all  productions  to  all  wants  ;  and
permits  him  to  depend,  for  his  subsistence,  not  upon  the
kind  of  his  production  (for  he  can  exchange  it  when  he
pleases,  if  it  has  value,)  but  upon  its  value.

The  difficulty,  you  will  say,  is  to  create  productions
which  shall  be  worth  the  costs  of  production.  This  I  well
know ;  and,  in  my  next  letter,  you  will  find  what  I  think
on  the  subject.  But  upon  the  hypothesis  which  we  have
already  supposed,  of  the  freedom  of  industry,  permit  me
to  point  out  that  the  only  difficulty  we  find  in  creating  pro-
ductions worth  the  costs  of  production,  arises  from  the
high  demands  of  the  vendors  of  productive  services.  Now
the  high  price  of  productive  services  denotes  that  what  is
required  exists ;  namely,  that  there  are  employments,  the
productions  of  which  suffice  to  repay  the  costs  of  produc-
tion.

You  charge  those  who  entertain  the  same  opinions  with
me,  with  "  not  taking  into  consideration  the  influence  of
so  general  and  important  a  principle  in  human  nature,  as
indolence,  or  the  love  of  ease."  (p.  358.)  You  suppose
the  case  that  men,  after  having  produced  the  means  of  sa-
tisfying their  primary  and  most  urgent  wants,  would  prefer
doing  nothing  more;  the  love  of  repose  overbalancing  in
their  minds  the  desire  of  enjoyment.  This  supposition  is
all  in  my  favour.  What  do  I  say?  That  things  are  only
sold  to  those  who  produce.  Why  are  objects  of  luxury
not  sold  to  a  farmer  who  chooses  to  lead  a  homely  life  ?  Be-
cause he  prefers  ease  to  the  trouble  of  producing  the  means
of  purchasirig  objects  of  luxury.  Whatever  be  the  cause


32  LETTER  11.

which  limits  production,  whether  the  want  of  capital  or  of
population,  of  diligence  or  liberty,  the  effect  is,  in  my  opi-
nion, the  same;  the  productions  which  are  offered  on  one
«ide  are  not  sold,  because  sufficient  commodities  are  not
produced  on  the  other.

You  consider  the  indolence  which  refuses  to  produce  as
directly  impeding  the  sale  of  productions,  and  I  entirely
agree  with  you  on  that  point.  But  then,  how  can  you  look
on  the  indolence  of  those  whom  you  call  unproductive  con-
sumers, as  favourable  to  such  sales,  (c.  vii.  sect.  9.)  "  It
is  absolutely  necessary,"  you  say,  (page  463,)  "that  a
country  with  great  powers  of  production  should  possess  a
body  of  unproductive  consumers."  How  comes  it  that  the
indolence  that  refuses  to  produce  is  prejudicial  to  the  mar-
kets in  the  former  case, and  favourable  to  them  in  the  latter?

The  fact  is,  this  indolence  is  injurious  to  them  in  both
cases.  Whom  do  you  designate  by  this  numerous  body  of
unproductive  consumers,  so  necessary,  according  to  you,  to
the  producers  ?  Is  it  the  proprietors  of  lands  and  capitals  ?
Undoubtedly  they  do  not  directly  produce,  but  their  instru-
ment (their  property)  does  it  for  them.  They  consume
the  value  to  the  creation  of  which  their  lands  and  capi-
tals have  contributed.  They  therefore  assist  in  production,
and  can  only  make  purchases  in  consequence  of  this  assis-
tance. If  they  also  contribute  their  personal  services,  and
join  to  their  profits  as  capitalists  and  landholders  other  pro-
fits as  labourers,  they  can,  by  thus  producing  more,  con-
sume more ;  but  it  is  not  in  their  non-productive  capacity
that  they  increase  the  markets  for  the  sale  of  productions.

Do  you  allude  to  public  functionaries,  the  military,  and
fundholders  ?  Still  it  is  not  on  account  of  their  non-pro-
ductive quality  that  they  increase  the  demand  for  produce.
J  am  far  from  disputing  the  legitimacy  of  the  emoluments
which  they  receive ;  but  I  cannot  believe  that  those  who
are  taxed  would  be  very  much  embarrassed  by  their  money,


TO  MR.  MALTHUS.  S3

even  if  these  receivers  of  contributions  did  not  come  to
their  assistance :  either  their  wants  would  be  more  amply
satisfied,  or  they  would  employ  this  same  money  in  a  re-
productive manner.  In  either  case  the  money  would  be
expended,  and  would  promote  the  sale  of  some  productions
of  equal  value  to  what  is  now  bought  by  those  whom  you
call  unproductive  consumers.  Confess  then,  Sir,  that  it  is
not  through  the  unproductive  consumers  that  sales  are  pro-
moted, but  by  the  productions  of  those  who  provide  the
means  for  their  expenditure  ;  and  that  even  should  all  the
unproductive  consumers  vanish,  which  heaven  forbid,  there
would  not  be  a  pennyworth  the  less  sold.

Nor  do  I  know  on  what  better  foundation  you  decide
(page  356,)  that  production  cannot  continue  if  the  value  of
the  commodities  pays  for  but  little  labour  beyond  what
they  cost.  It  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  the  continuance
of  production  that  a  commodity  should  be  worth  more  than
the  costs  of  its  production.  When  an  undertaking  is  be-
gun with  a  capital  of  a  hundred  thousand  pounds,  it  is  suf-
ficient to  enable  the  proprietors  to  re-commence  their  ope-
rations, that  the  production  which  results  from  it  should
be  worth  a  hundred  thousand  pounds.  Where  then,  say
you,  are  the  profits  of  the  producers  ?  The  whole  capital
has  served  to  pay  them ;  *  and  it  is  the  price  which  it  has
paid  to  them  which  has  formed  the  incomes  of  all  the  pro-
ducers. If  the  produce  which  has  been  obtained  be  worth

*  Some  people  imagine  that  •when  capital  is  employed  in  an  undertaking
the  portion  of  this  capital  which  is  employed  in  purchasing  raw  materials,  is
not  employed  in  purchasing  productive  services.  This  is  an  error.  Raw
material  itself  is  a  product,  which  has  no  other  value  than  that  which  has
been  imparted  to  it  by  productive  services,  which  have  made  it  a  product;
have  given  it  a  value.  When  raw  material  is  of  no  value,  it  employs  no
part  of  capital :  when  it  must  be  paid  for,  this  payment  is  only  to  reimburse
ihe  productive  services  which  have  created  its  value.

D


34  LETTER II.

only  one  hundred  thousand  pounds,  there  is  the  capital  re-
established, and  all  the  producers  are  paid.*

I  do  not  hesitate  to  strengthen  jour  objection,  by  ex-
pressing- it  thus  : — "  Though  each  commodity  may  have
eost  the  same  quantity  of  labour  and  capital  in  its  produc-
tion, and  they  may  be  exactly  equivalent  to  each  other,  yet
they  may  both  be  so  abundant,  that  they  will  not  purchase
more  labour  than  they  have  cost.  In  this  case,  can  pro-
duction go  on?  Unquestionably  NOT."

And  why  not,  I  pray  ?  Why  could  not  farmers  and  manu-
facturers, who  had  produced  together  to  the  amount  of
sixty  shillings  in  corn  and  stuffs,  and  would,  as  I  have  de-
monstrated, be  able  to  purchase  the  whole  of  those  commo-
dities, sufficient  for  their  wants — why  could  they  not  re-
commence their  operations  after  making  such  purchases,
and  consuming  the  articles  bought  ?  They  would  have  the
same  lands,  the  same  capitals,  the  same  industry  as  before ;
they  would  be  precisely  where  they  began  ;  and  they  would
have  lived  and  been  supported  by  their  incomes,  by  the
sale  of  their  productive  services.  What  more  is  requisite
for  the  preservation  of  society  ?  The  great  phenomenon  of
production  analyzed  and  viewed  in  its  proper  light,  ex-
plains all.

After  the  fear  which  you  have  testified,  Sir,  lest  the  pro-
duce of  society  should  exceed  in  quantity  what  it  can  and
will  consume,  it  is  natural  that  you  should  behold  with  ter-
ror its  capitals  increasing  by  parsimony ;  for  the  endeavour
to  employ  capital  causes  an  augmentation  of  productions,
— new  sources  of  accumulation — whence  new  productions

*  The  profits  which  are  made  by  a  person  who  carries  on  any  under-
taking, are  the  reward  of  the  labour  and  talents  which  he  exerts  in  his  busi-
ness. He  only  continues  this  business  while  it  produces  such  an  income
that  he  cannot  expect  a  better  in  any  other  employment.  He  is  one  of  the
necessary  producers,  and  his  profits  form  part  of  the  necessary  charges  of
production.


TO MR. MALTHUS.  35

arise  :  in  short,  you  seern  to  fear  that  we  should  be  suffo-
cated beneath  the  overwhelming  mass  of  our  riches.  This
fear,  I  confess,  does  not  torment  me  at  all.

Was  it  for  you,  Sir,  to  renew  the  popular  prejudices
against  those  who  do  not  expend  their  incomes  in  objects
of  luxury  ?  You  allow  (page  351,)  that  no  permanent  in-
crease of  wealth  can  take  place  without  a  previous  increase
of  capital ;  you  allow  (page  352),  that  those  who  labour
are  consumers,  as  well  as  the  unproductive  consumers  ;  and
yet  you  fear  that  if  accumulation  goes  on,  it  will  be  impos-
sible to  consume  the  still  increasing  quantity  of  commodities
produced  by  these  new  labourers  (p.  353).

We  must  remove  your  vain  terrors ;  but  first  permit  me
one  reflection  on  the  subject  of  modern  political  economy.
It  is  of  a  nature  to  guide  us  on  our  way.

What  is  it  that  distinguishes  us  from  the  economists  of
the  school  of  Quesnay?  It  is  the  scrupulous  care  with
which  we  observe  the  concatenation  of  the  facts  which  re-
late to  wealth  :  it  is  the  rigorous  exactness  which  we  im-
pose on  ourselves  in  describing  them.  Now,  in  order  to
see  and  to  describe  clearly,  one  must  to  the  utmost  of  one's
power  remain  a  passive  spectator.  Not  that  we  may  not,
ought  not,  indeed,  sometimes  to  sigh  at  those  operations,
pregnant  with  ruinous  effects,  of  which  we  are  often  the
sad  and  impotent  witnesses.  The  philanthropic  historian
is  not  prohibited  from  indulging  in  the  mournful  reflections
which  political  iniquity  frequently  draws  from  him.  But
opinions  and  advice  are  not  history ;  and,  I  insist,  are  not
political  economy.  Our  duty  to  the  public  is  to  inform  it
how  and  why  one  fact  is  the  consequence  of  another.  If  it
approves  or  fears  the  consequence,  that  is  sufficient ;  it
knows  what  it  has  to  do  :  but  let  us  avoid  exhortations.

It  appears,  therefore,  to  me,  that  I  ought  not,  after  Adam
Smith,  to  preach  up  parsimony;  and  that  you  should  not,
after  Lord  Lauderdale,  extol  dissipation.  Let  us  confine

D  2


36  LETTER II.

ourselves  to  observing  the  manner  iff  which  things  succeed,
and  are  connected  with  each  other  in  the  accumulation  of
capitals.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  greater
number  of  accumulations  are  necessarily  slow.  Every  one,
whatever  be  his  income,  has  to  live  before  he  can  save  ;
and  what  I  here  call  living,  is,  in  general,  so  much  the
more  expensive  as  the  party  is  richer.  In  most  cases  and
in  professions,  the  support  of  a  family  and  its  establish-
ment in  life  demands  the  whole  income,  and  often  the  capi-
tal besides ;  and  when  there  are  some  yearly  savings,  they
are  generally  in  a  very  small  proportion  to  the  capital
actually  employed.  A  man  of  business,  with  ten  thousand
pounds  and  a  calling,  gains,  in  ordinary  cases,  from  twelve
to  fifteen  hundred  pounds  per  annum.  Now  with  that
capital,  and  a  business  of  equal  value,  that  is  to  say,  with
a  fortune  of  twenty  thousand  pounds,  he  is  economical  if
he  only  spends  one  thousand ;  he  then  saves  annually
only  five  hundred  pounds  or  the  twentieth  part  of  his
capital.

If  this  fortune  be  divided,  as  it  often  is,  between  two
persons,  one  of  whom  supplies  the  capital,  the  other  the
industry,  the  saving  will  be  still  much  less ;  because  in
this  case  two  families  are  to  live  upon  the  united  profits  of
the  capital  and  industry,  instead  of  one.*  None  but  very
great  fortunes,  of  whatever  nature,  can  allow  great  sav-
ings; and  very  great  fortunes  are  rare  in  all  countries.
Therefore  capital  can  never  augment  with  a  rapidity  ca-
pable of  producing  sudden  revolutions  in  industrious
pursuits.

I  am  not  sensible  of  the  fears  which  caused  you to  say

*  This  happens  in  France  much  more  frequently  than  in  England,  where
the  rate  of  the  profits  of  industry  and  interest  of  capital  is  too  low  in  or-
dinary employments  for  the  former  to  suffice  for  the  support  of  a  family
who  have  no  capital;


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  37

(p.  357),  "  That  a  country  is  always  liable  to  an  increase
of  the  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  labour  'faster  than
the  increase  of  population."  Neither  am  I  afraid  of  the
enormous  surplus  of  productions  to  result  from  an  aug-
mentation of  capital  so  slow  in  its  nature.  On  the  con-
trary, I  see  these  new  capitals,  and  the  revenues  which
issue  out  of  them,  distribute  themselves  in  the  most  ad-
vantageous way,  amongst  the  producers.  First,  the  capi-
talist, by  augmenting  his  capital,  increases  his  income,
which  invites  him  to  multiply  his  enjoyments.  A  capital  in-
creased in  the  course  of  the  year,  purchases  the  follow-
ing year  a  few  more  industrious  services  than  before.
These  services  being  thus  more  in  demand,  are  a  little
better  paid ;  a  greater  number  of  the  industrious  find  en>
ployment  and  reward  for  their  faculties.  They  labour,
and  consume  unproductively  the  produce  of  their  labour ;
so  that,  if  there  is  more  produce  created  in  consequence
of  this  augmentation  of  capital,  there  are  also  more  pro-
ductions consumed.  Now  what  is  this  but  an  increase  of
prosperity  ?

You  say  (p.  352, 360),  "  That  if  savings  are  made  only
with  a  view  to  increase  capital — if  capitalists  do  not  add
to  their  enjoyments  by  augmenting  their  incomes,  they
have  no  sufficient  motive  to  save ;  for  men  do  not  save
merely  through  philanthropy,  and  to  make  industry  pros-
per." This  is  true,  but  what  conclusion  do  you  desire  to
draw  from  hence  ?  If  they  save,  I  say,  that  they  promote
industry  and  production,  and  that  this  increase  of  produc-
tion is  distributed  in  the  most  advantageous  manner  to
the  public.  If  they  do  not  save,  I  know  not  how  to  help
it:  but  you  cannot  conclude  from  this  that  producers  will
be  better  off,  for  what  the  capitalists  would  have  saved
would  nevertheless  have  been  equally  expended.  In  ex-
pending it  unproductively,  the  expenditure  has  not  been
increased  in  amount.  As  to  riches  accumulated,  without


38  LETTER II.

being  reproductively  consumed,  such  as  the  sums  amassed
in  the  miser's  coffers,  neither  Smith  nor  I,  nor  any  one,
undertakes  their  defence ;  but  they  cause  very  little  alarm;
first,  because  they  are  always  very  inconsiderable,  com-
pared with  the  productive  capital  of  a  nation ;  and  se-
condly, because  their  consumption  is  only  suspended.  All
treasures  get  spent  at  last,  productively  or  otherwise.

I  cannot  perceive  on  what  account  you  look  upon  re-
productive expenditure,  such  as  that  which  is  occasioned
by  digging  canals,  building  shipping,  erecting  manufac-
tories or  barns,  constructing  machines,  paying  artists  and
artisans,  as  less  favourable  to  producers  than  unproductive
expenditure,  or  that  which  has  for  its  object  only  the
personal  gratification  of  the  prodigal.  You  say  (p.  363),
u  While  the  farmers  were  disposed  to  consume  the  luxuries
produced  by  the  manufacturers,  and  the  manufacturers
those  produced  by  the  farmers,  all  would  go  on  smoothly ;
but  if  either  one  or  both  the  parties  were  disposed  to  save,
with  a  view  of  bettering  their  condition  and  providing  for
their  families  in  future,  the  state  of  things  would  be  very
different."  That  is  to  say,  I  presume,  that  all  would  go
wrong !  «  The  farmer,  instead  of  indulging  himself  in
ribbons,  lace,  and  velvets,  would  be  disposed  to  be  satisfied
with  more  simple  clothing;  but  by  this  economy  he  would
disable  the  manufacturer  from  purchasing  the  same  amount
of  his  produce  :  and  for  the  returns  of  so  much  labour  em-
ployed upon  the  land,  and  all  greatly  increased  in  pro-
ductive power,  there  would  evidently  be  no  market.  The
manufacturer,  in  like  manner,  instead  of  indulging  himself
in  sugar,  grapes,  and  tobacco,  might  be  disposed  to  save,
with  a  view  to  the  future,  but  would  be  totally  unable  to
do  so,  owing  to  the  parsimony  of  the  farmers  and  the  want
of  a  demand  for  manufactures."

And  a  little  farther  on  (p.  365),  "  The  population  re-
quired to  provide  simple  clothing  to  such  a  society,  with


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  39

the  assistance  of  good  machinery,  would  be  inconsiderable,
and  would  absorb  but  a  small  portion  of  the  proper  sur-
plus of  rich  and  well-cultivated  land.  There  would  evi-
dently therefore  be  a  general  want  of  demand  both  for
produce  and  population  :  and  while  it  is  quite  certain
that  an  adequate  passion  for  consumption  (unproductive)
may  fully  keep  up  the  proper  proportion  between  supply
and  demand,  whatever  may  be  the  powers  of  production,
it  appears  to  be  quite  certain  that  a  passion  for  accu-
mulation must  inevitably  lead  to  a  supply  of  commodities
beyond  what  the  structure  and  habits  of  such  a  society
will  permit  to  be  consumed."

You  go  so  far  as  to  ask  "  what  would  become  of  the
demand  for  commodities,  if  all  consumption,  except  bread
and  water,  were  suspended  for  the  next  half  year?"*  and
it  is  to  me,  by  name,  that  you  address  this  question.

In  this  passage  and  the  foregoing,  you  assume  implicitly
as  fact,  that  a  production  saved  is  abstracted  from  every
species  of  consumption ;  although  in  all  these  discussions,
in  all  the  writings  you  attack,  in  those  of  Adam  Smith,  of
Mr.  Ricardo,  in  mine,  and  even  in  your  own,t  it  is  laid
down  that  a  production  saved  is  so  much  substracted  from
unproductive  consumption  to  be  added  to  capital,  that  is
to  say,  to  the  value  that  is  consumed  reproductively.

*  lt  What  an  accumulation  of  commodities !  what  a  prodigious  market,
according  to  M.  Say  (says  Mr.  Malthus),  would  this  event  occasion!"  The
learned  professor  here  totally  mistakes  the  meaning  of  the  word  accumula-
tion: accumulation  is  not  non-consumption;  it  is  the  substitution  of  re-
productive  consumption  for  that  which  is  unproductive.  Besides,  I  never
said  that  a  product  saved  was  a  market  opened ;  I  said  that  a  product  made
was  a  market  opened  for  another  product;  and  that  is  true,  whether  the
value  of  it  be  unproductively  consumed,  or  whether  it  be  added  to  the
savings  of  its  proprietor,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  reproductive  expenditure
which  he  intends  to  make.

t  "  It  must  be  allowed  that  the  produce  annually  saved  is  as  regularly
consumed  as  that  which  is  annually  spent,  but  that  it  is  consumed  by  a  dif-
ferent set  of  people."— Malihut's  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  p,  31,


40  LETTER II.

"  What  would  become  of  commodities,  if  every  species  of
consumption,  except  that  of  bread  and  water,  were  sus~
pendedfor  six  months  ?"  Why,  Sir,  they  would  be  sold  for
a  value  every  bit  as  great ;  for,  after  all,  what  would  be
thereby  added  to  the  sum  of  capital,  would  buy  meat,  beer,
coats,  shirts,  shoes,  furniture,  for  that  class  of  producers
whose  savings  had  so  enabled  them  to  make  purchases.
But  if  they  were  to  live  on  bread  and  water  in  order  not  to
use  their  savings?  -  -  -  That  is  to  say, you  suppose  that  they
would  generally  bind  themselves  to  an  extravagant  fast
from  mere  wantonness,  and  without  any  object  whatever  !

What  would  you  reply,  Sir,  to  him  who  should  place
among  the  derangements  that  might  happen  in  society,  the
case  of  the  moon's  falling  on  the  earth  ?  -  -  -  -  The  thing
is  not  physically  impossible ;  it  would  only  be  requisite
that  the  course  of  that  planet  in  its  orbit  should  be  sus-
pended, or  even  merely  slackened  by  the  approach  of  a
comet.  Nevertheless.  I  suspect  you  would  be  apt  to  dis-
cover something  like  impertinence  in  such  a  proposition ;
and  I  must  own  J  think  you  would  be  very  excusable.

Philosophy,  indeed,  does  not  reject  the  method  of  carry-
ing principles  to  their  extreme  consequences,  in  order  to
exaggerate  and  discover  their  errors ;  but  this  exaggera-
tion itself  is  an  error  when  the  nature  of  things  itself
presents  continually  increasing  obstacles  to  the  supposed
excess,  and  thus  renders  the  supposition  inadmissible.
To  the  disciples  of  Adam  Smith,  who  think  that  saving  is
beneficial,  you  oppose  the  inconveniences  of  an  excessive
saving ;  but  here  the  excess  carries  its  remedy  along  with
it.  Wherever  capital  becomes  too  abundant,  the  interest
which  capitalists  derive  from  it  becomes  too  small  to  ba-
lance the  privations  which  they  impose  upon  themselves
by  their  economy.  It  becomes  more  and  more  difficult  to
find  good  securities  for  investing  money,  which  is  then
placed  in  foreign  securities.  The  simple  course  of  nature


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  4l

stops  many  accumulations.  A  great  part  of  those  which
occur  in  families  in  good  circumstances  are  stopped  the
moment  it  becomes  necessary  to  provide  for  the  establish-
ment of  children.  The  incomes  of  the  fathers  being  re-
duced by  this  circumstance,  they  lose  the  means  of  accu-
mulating at  the  same  time  that  they  lose  part  of  the  motives
which  induced  them  to  save.  Many  accumulations  are
also  stopped  at  the  decease  of  the  proprietor.  An  estate  is
divided  amongst  the  heirs  and  legatees,  whose  situation  is
different  from  that  of  the  deceased,  and  who  often  dissipate
part  of  the  inheritance  instead  of  increasing  it.  That  por-
tion which  the  fiscal  department  seizes,  is  very  sure  to  be
dissipated,  for  the  state  does  not  employ  it  reproductively.

The  prodigality  and  inexperience  of  many  individuals,
who  lose  part  of  their  capitals  in  ill-concerted  schemes,  re-
quire to  be  balanced  by  the  economy  of  many  others.
Every  thing  tends  to  convince  us,  that  in  what  respects
accumulation,  as  well  as  other  matters,  there  is  much  less
danger  in  leaving  things  to  take  their  natural  course,  than
in  endeavouring  to  give  them  a  forced  direction.

You  say  (p.  495),  "  That  in  some  cases  it  is  contrary  to
sound  principles  of  political  economy  to  advise  saving."  I
repeat,  Sir,  that  sound  political  economy  is  not  apt  to  ad-
vise  ;  it  shews  what  a  capital  judiciously  employed  adds  to
the  power  of  industry,  in  the  same  manner  as  sound  agri-
cultural knowledge  teaches  what  a  well-managed  irrigation
adds  to  the  power  of  the  soil;  and  after  this  it  leaves  to  the
world  the  truths  which  it  demonstrates ;  of  which  every  one
is  to  avail  himself  according  to  his  intelligence  and  capacity.

All  that  is  required,  Sir,  of  a  man  so  enlightened  as
yourself,  is,  not  to  propagate  the  popular  error,  that  pro-
digality is  more  favourable  to  producers  than  economy.*

*  "  When  there  is  more  capital  than  is  necessary  in  a  country,  to  re-
"  commend  saving  is  contrary  to  all  principles  of  political  economy.  It  is


42  LETTER  II.

Mankind  is  already  but  too  much  disposed  to  sacrifice  the
future  to  the  present.  The  principle  of  all  amelioration  is,
on  the  contrary,  the  sacrifice  of  momentary  temptations  to
future  welfare.  This  is  the  first  foundation  of  all  virtue
as  well  as  of  all  wealth.  The  man  who  loses  his  character
by  violating  a  trust ;  he  who  ruins  his  health  by  giving  way
to  his  desires;  and  he  who  spends  to-day  his  means  of  gain
for  to-morrow,  are  all  equally  deficient  in  economy  :  hence
it  has  been  said,  with  much  reason,  that  vice  is  nothing,  at
the  end  of  the  account,  but  a  bad  calculation.

"  like  recommending  marriage  to  a  people  perishing  with  famine."— Friti*
ciples  of  Political  Economy,  p,  495.  How  came  Mr.  Malthus  not  to  perceive
that  marriage  gives  birth  to  children,  and  consequently  to  new  wants ;
whilst  capitals  have  no  wants,  but,  on  the  contrary,  possess  the  means  of
satisfying  them  ?


LETTER  III.

SIB,

have  hitherto  founded  our  discussions  upon  the  sup-
position of  an  indefinite  liberty,  allowing  a  nation  to  carry
to  the  utmost  extent  production  of  every  description ;  and
it  appears  to  me  that  1  have  proved  that  if  this  hypothesis
could  be  realized,  a  nation  so  circumstanced  would  be  able
to  purchase  all  that  it  could  produce.  From  this  faculty,
and  from  the  natural  and  perpetual  desire  of  men  to  ame-
liorate their  condition,  an  infinite  multiplication  of  indivi-
duals and  of  gratifications  would  infallibly  arise.

But  the  course  of  events  is  different.  Nature  and  the
abuses  of  social  order  have  set  limits  to  this  faculty  of
production;  and  the  examination  of  those  limits,  by  lead-
ing us  back  into  the  existing  world,  will  serve  to  prove  the
truth  of  the  doctrine  established  in  my  treatise  on  political
economy,  that  the  obstacles  to  production  are  the  real  and
sole  impediments  to  the  sale  and  disposal  of  produce.

1  do  not  pretend  to  point  out  the  whole  of  the  obstacles
by  which  production  is  impeded.  Many  of  these  impedi-
ments will  manifest  themselves  during  the  progress  of  the
science  of  political  economy ;  others,  perhaps,  will  never
be  ascertained,  but  many  of  great  influence  may  already  be
observed,  both  in  the  natural  or  political  order  of  things.

In  the  natural  order,  the  production  of  alimentary  com-
modities is  more  rigidly  limited  than  that  of  furniture  and
clothing.  Although  mankind  stand  in  need  of  a  much
greater  quantity,  in  weight  and  value,  of  alimentary  goods,
than  of  all  other  sorts  of  produce  together,  yet  commodities
of  this  description  cannot  be  brought  from  any  considerable
distance,  for  they  are  difficult  to  transport,  and  the  care  of


41  LETTER  III.

them  is  expensive.  As  to  those  which  may  grow  upon  the
territory  of  a  nation,  they  are  confined  within  boundaries,
which  the  improvement  of  agriculture,  and  increase  of
capitals  engaged  therein  may  certainly  extend,*  but  which
will  always  be  sure  to  exist.  Arthur  Young  thinks  that
France  does  not  produce  more  than  half  the  alimentary
produce  which  she  is  capable  of  producing.  Suppose  he  is
right  in  this ;  suppose  even  that  with  a  more  perfect  agri-
cultural system,  France  were  to  obtain  double  her  present
quantity  of  rural  produce,  without  employing  more  agricul-
tural labourers,t  she  would  then  possess  45  millions  of  inha-
bitants at  liberty  to  devote  themselves  to  other  occupations.
Her  manufactures  would  find  better  markets  in  the  country
than  at  present,  because  the  country  would  be  more  pro-

*  The  principal  obstacles  to  agricultural  improvement  in  France  are,
first,  the  residence  of  the  rich  proprietors  and  great  capitalists  in  towns,  and
particularly  in  an  immense  capital ;  they  cannot  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the
ameliorations  in  which  their  capitals  might  be  employed ;  nor  can  they
watch  over  the  application  of  those  funds  so  as  to  obtain  a  corresponding
increase  of  income.  Secondly,  it  would  be  in  vain  for  any  particular  se-
cluded canton  to  double  its  produce ;  it  can  now  scarcely  get  rid  of  what
it  already  produces,  for  want  of  good  cross  roads,  and  industrious  neigh-
bouring  towns.  Industrious  towns  consume  rural  produce,  and  fabricate  in
exchange  articles  of  manufacture,  which  containing  greater  value  in  a  less
compass  can  be  carried  to  a  greater  distance.  This  is  the  principal  impe-
diment to  the  increase  of  French  agriculture.  The  multiplication  of  small
navigable  canals,  and  cross-roads  well  maintained,  would  greatly  augment
the  value  of  rural  produce.  But  these  objects  would  require  local  adminis-
trations chosen  by  the  inhabitants,  and  intent  only  on  the  good  of  the
country.  The  possibility  of  markets  exists,  but  nothing  is  done  to  secure
the  benefit  of  them.  Magistrates  chosen  in  the  interest  of  the  central  au-
thority, become  almost  invariably  fiscal  or  political  agents,  or  what  is  still
worse,  agents  of  police.

f  This  supposition  is  Very  admissible,  since  in  England  three  fourths  of  the
population  inhabit  towns,  and  consequently  are  not  employed  in  agricultural
pursuits.  A  country  supporting  60  millions  of  inhabitants,  might  therefore
be  well  cultivated  by  15  millions  of  agricultural  labourers ;  at  which  number
the  cultivators  of  France  are  now  actually  estimated.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  45

ductive,  and  the  surplus  would  be  sold  among  the  manu-
facturing population  itself.  People  would  not  be  worse
fed  than  at  present,  but  they  would  in  general  be  better
provided  with  articles  of  manufacture  ;  with  better  dwel-
lings, more  furniture,  finer  clothing,  and  with  objects  of
utility,  instruction,  and  entertainment,  which  are  now  re-
served for  a  very  small  number  of  people.  The  rest  of  the
population  is  still  rude  and  barbarous.

But  in  proportion  as  the  manufacturing  class  increased,
alimentary  produce  would  become  more  in  demand  and
dearer  with  relation  to  manufactures.  The  latter  would
produce  diminished  profits  and  wages,  which  would  dis-
courage those  engaged  in  such  branches  of  industry ;  hence
it  is  easy  to  conceive  how  the  restrictions  which  nature
imposes  on  agricultural  production,  limit  the  produce  of
manufacture.  But  this  effect,  like  all  which  happens  na-
turally and  results  from  the  nature  of  things,  would  be
very  gradual,  and  attended  with  fewer  inconveniences  than
any  other  possible  combination.

Admitting  the  limits  thus  set  by  nature  to  the  produc-
tion of  provisions,  and,  indirectly,  of  all  other  commo-
dities, it  may  be  asked  how  it  happens  that  very  industrious
countries,  such  as  England,  where  capital  abounds  and
communications  are  easy,  find  the  sale  of  their  goods  im-
peded long  before  their  agricultural  produce  has  attained
its  utmost  limit.  Is  there  then  some  unsoundness — some
concealed  disease,  which  preys  upon  them  ?  -  -  -  -  There
are  probably  several,  which  will  successively  show  them-
selves; but  I  already  perceive  one — immense — fatal — and
deserving  the  most  serious  attention.

Suppose  some  individual,  a  collector  of  public  revenue
for  instance,  were  to  take  up  his  residence  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  each  commercial,  manufacturing,  or  agricul-
tural establishment ;  and  that  this  man  without  increasing
the  goodness  of  the  produce,  its  utility,  or  the  quality  by


46  LETTER  HI.

which  it  becomes  an  object  of  desire  and  demand,  were
nevertheless  to  increase  the  costs  of  its  production  :  what,
I  ask,  would  be  the  consequence  ?  The  value  which  is  set
on  a  commodity,  even  where  the  means  of  obtaining  it
exist,*  depends  on  the  enjoyment  and  utility  which  it  is
expected  to  afford.  In  proportion  as  its  price  rises,  many
persons  cease  to  think  it  worth  the  expense  which  it  occa-
sions, and  thus  the  number  of  its  purchasers  is  diminished.

Besides,  taxes  do  not  augment  the  profits  of  the  producer,
although  they  increase  the  price  of  every  production  :  the
incomes  of  the  producers  become  insufficient  to  purchase
the  produce,  the  moment  its  price  is  raised  by  the  cir-
cumstance which  I  have  just  described.

Let  us  represent  this  effect  by  numbers,  in  order  to  pur-
sue it  to  its  remotest  consequences.  It  will  be  well  worth
the  trouble  of  examination,  if  it  enable  us  to  discern  one
of  the  principal  causes  of  the  evil  which  menaces  every
industrious  nation  of  the  earth.  Already  the  distresses  of
England  forewarn  other  countries  of  the  miseries  which
are  reserved  for  them.  They  will  be  more  painful  wher-
ever a  more  robust  temperament  excites  to  a  greater  de-
velopement  of  industry;  the  happiest  effects  will  result
from  this,  if  it  be  left  at  full  liberty;  if  it  be  restrained,  then
terrible  convulsions  will  be  the  consequence.

If  the  manufacturer  who  produces  a  piece  of  stuff,  after
dividing  between  his  assistants  and  himself  a  sum  of  thirty
shillings  for  the  productive  services  which  have  been  em-
ployed in  the  production  of  the  piece,  is  moreover  com-
pelled to  pay  six  shillings  to  the  receiver  of  taxes,  either

*  Th*>  means  of  acquisition  are  the  profits  which  each  individual  derives
from  bis  industry,  his  capital,  and  his  lands.  Consumers  who  have  neither
industry,  capital,  nor  land,  spend  only  what  they  are  able  to  obtain  from
tlu-  profits  of  those  who  have.  In  every  case,  thf  income  of  each  imli-  idual
has  A  limit;  slid  tli  .t!«h  the  possessors  of  very  large  incomes  ran  s::cr>fire  a
great  quantity  of  monej  ;  rery  tnfial  enjoyments,  ii  itiuni  b<-  Iluwed
that  the  dearer  any  grauticauou  is,  the  less  it  is  considered  indispensable.


TO MB.MALTHUS.  47

he  must  cease  to  make  stuffs,  or  he  must  sell  them  for  36
shillings  the  piece.*  But  when  this  piece  of  stuff  comes
thus  to  be  valued  at  36  shillings,  those  who  produced  it,
and  have  only  received  altogether  30  shillings,  will  only
be  able  to  buy  five-sixths  of  the  same  article  of  which  they
could  have  previously  purchased  the  whole ;  he  who  before
could  purchase  a  yard,  must  now  be  restricted  to  five-
sixths  of  a  yard,  and  so  on.

The  producer  of  corn  who  pays  to  another  receiver  a  tax
of  six  shillings  on  a  sack  of  corn,  of  which  the  productive
services  have  cost  SO,  must  now  obtain  36  for  his  sack  in-
stead of  30.  It  follows  that  the  producers  of  corn  and
stuffs,  when  in  want  of  either  of  those  articles,  can  only
acquire  by  their  gains  five-sixths  of  their  productions.

As  this  effect  is  seen  in  these  two  commodities  recipro-
cally, it  may  also  take  place  in  other  articles.  Without
changing  the  state  of  the  question,  it  is  easy  to  suppose
that  producers,  in  whatever  species  of  production  they  may
be  occupied,  have  occasion  for  liquors,  colonial  produce,
lodgings,  amusements,  and  objects  of  convenience  and  of
luxury.  These  commodities  they  will  find  dearer  than
they  can  afford,  with  incomes  such  as  they  now  enjoy,  ac-
cording to  the  rank  which  they  occupy  among  the  pro-
ducers. Upon  the  hypothesis  which  we  have  taken  for  our
example,  there  will  always  remain  a  sixth  part  of  the  pro-
duce unsold.

True  it  is,  that  the  six  shillings  taken  by  the  collector
jo  to  some  one,  and  that  those  whom  the  collector
represents  (public  functionaries,  military  men,  or  public
creditors)  may  employ  this  money  in  obtaining  the  remain-
ing sixth  part,  either  of  the  sack  of  corn,  or  the  piece  of
stuff,  or  of  any  other  production.  This  indeed  is  what
actually  happens.  But  let  it  be  observed  that  this  con-

*  If  he  reduce  the  quality,  it  will  be  equivalent  to  an  increase  in  the
price.


48  LETTER III.

sumption  is  entirely  at  the  expense  of  the  producers ;  and
that  if  the  collector,  or  those  by  whom  he  is  authorized,
consume  a  sixth  part  of  the  produce,  the  producers  are
thereby  compelled  to  live  upon  the  remaining  five-sixths.

This  you  will  allow;  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  shall  be
told  that  any  one  may  live  upon  five-sixths  of  what  he  pro-
duces. 1  am  willing  to  admit  that;  but  permit  me  to  ask
whether  you  think  the  producer  could  live  equally  well  if
two-sixths,  instead  of  one,  or  one-third  of  his  produce,  were
demanded  from  him  ? — No ;  but  still  he  would  live.
Ah  !  you  think  he  would  live  !  Then  would  he  still  live  in
case  two-thirds  were  wrested  from  him  ? — then  three-
fourths  ? — But  I  perceive  you  do  not  attempt  to  reply.

Now,  Sir,  I  flatter  myself  that  my  answers  to  the  most
urgent  objections  offered  by  you  and  M.  Sismondi  will  be
easily  comprehended.  "  If,  by  creating  new  productions,
(say  you,)  we  are  enabled  to  consume  them,  or  to  exchange
them  for  others  of  which  there  exists  a  superabundance,
and  thus  to  procure  markets  for  both,  why  then  are  not
such  new  productions  created  ?  Is  capital  wanting  ?  Capi-
tal abounds :  every  where  undertakings  are  sought  for  in
which  it  may  be  advantageously  employed  :  it  is  evident
(you  affirm)  that  there  are  no  longer  any  such,"  (p.  499);
"  that  all  kinds  of  commerce  are  already  overstocked  with
capital  and  labourers,  who  all  offer  their  produce  under
prime  cost,"  M.  Sismondi  assures  us.*

I  am  not  quite  prepared  to  say,  that  to  follow  the  useful
arts  is  a  fool's  trade ;  but  you  will  allow,  gentlemen,  that
if  ever  it  should  become  so,  the  consequence  would  not  be
different  from  that  which  you  are  lamenting.  To  buy  the
superabundant  produce,  it  would  be  requisite  to  create
other  produce :  but  if  the  producers  were  placed  in  too
disadvantageous  a  situation  ;  if,  after  exerting  the  produc-
tive means  sufficient  for  producing  an  ox,  they  were  to
*  Newman*  Priucipe*,  liv.  iv.  chap,  4.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.


49


produce  only  a  sheep,  and  for  this  sheep,  in  exchange  for
any  other  kind  of  produce,  were  only  to  gain  the  same
quantity  of  utility  which  exists  in  a  sheep,  who  would  go
on  producing  under  such  disadvantages?  The  persons  en-
gaged in  such  an  undertaking  would  have  made  a  bad  bu-
siness of  it :  they  would  have  expended  a  value  which  the
utility  of  their  produce  would  not  suffice  to  reimburse ;
whoever  should  be  silly  enough  to  create  another  produc-
tion sufficient  to  purchase  the  former,  would  have  to  con-
tend with  the  same  disadvantages,  and  would  involve  him-
self in  the  same  difficulties.  The  benefit  which  he  might
derive  from  his  production  would  not  indemnify  him  for  its
expenses  ;  and  whatever  he  might  buy  with  this  production
would  be  of  no  greater  value.  Then,  indeed,  the  work-
man would  no  longer  be  able  to  live  by  his  labour,  and
would  become  burthensome  to  his  parish  •*  then  the  manu-
facturer, unable  to  live  on  his  profits,  would  renounce  his
business.  He  would  buy  annuities,  or  go  abroad  in  search
of  a  better  situation,  a  more  lucrative  employment,  or,
what  is  exactly  equivalent,  a  production  at  less  expense.^

*  The  workman  can  only  labour  constantly  whilst  his  work  pays  for  his
subsistence;  and  when  his  subsistence  becomes  too  dear,  it  no  longer  suits
the  master  to  employ  him.  It  may  then  be  said,  in  the  language  of  political
economy,  that  the  workman  no  longer  offers  (or  supplies)  his  productive
services,  nlthough  in  fact  he  is  most  anxious  for  employment;  but  his  offer  is
not  acceptable  on  the  only  lasting  conditions  on  which  it  can  be  made.

t  Mr.  Ricardo  insists  that,  notwithstanding  taxes  and  other  charges,  there
is  always  as  much  industry  as  capital  employed  ;  and  that  all  capital  saved
is  always  employed,  because  the  interest  is  not  suffered  to  be  lost.  On  the
contrary,  many  savings  are  not  invested,  when  it  is  difficult  to  find  employ-
ment for  them,  and  many  which  are  employed  are  dissipated  in  ill-calcu-
lated undertakings.  Besides,  Mr.  Ricardo  is  completely  refuted,  not  only
by  what  happened  to  us  in  1813,  when  the  errors  of  Government  ruined  all
commerce,  and  when  the  interest  of  money  fell  very  low,  for  want  of  good
opportunities  of  employing  it ;  but  by  our  present  circumstances,  when  ca-
pitals are  quietly  sleeping  in  the  coffers  of  their  proprietors.  The  bank  of
France  alone  possesses  223  millions  of  specie  (about  nine  millions  of  pounds


50  LETTER HI.

If  he  were  there  to  meet  with  other  inconveniences,  he
would  again  seek  another  theatre  for  his  talents  ;  and  dif-
ferent nations  would  be  seen  pouring  forth  upon  each  other
their  capitals  and  their  labourers ;  that  is  to  say,  all  that
is  requisite  to  raise  human  society  to  the  highest  pitch  of
prosperity,  if  it  understood  its  true  interests,  and  the  means
by  which  they  may  be  promoted.

I  shall  not  attempt  to  point  out  the  parts  of  this  picture
which  apply  more  particularly  to  your  country,  Sir,  or  to
any  other  ;  but  I  leave  it  for  your  consideration,  and  that
of  all  well-meaning  men  who  exert  themselves  to  promote
the  welfare  of  the  interesting,  laborious,  and  useful  part  of
mankind.  Why  do  the  savages  of  the  new  world,  whose
precarious  subsistence  depends  on  the  flight  of  an  arrow,
neglect  to  birld  villages,  and  to  inclose  and  cultivate  lands  ?
Because  this  kind  of  life  demands  labour  too  assiduous  and
painful.  They  are  in  the  wrong;  they  calculate  ill,  for
the  privations  they  endure  are  far  less  tolerable  than  the
constraints  which  a  well-regulated  social  life  would  im-
pose upon  them.  But  if  this  social  life  were  a  galley,  in
which,  after  rowing  with  all  their  strength  for  sixteen  hours
out  of  the  twenty-four,  they  were  able  to  obtain  only  a
piece  of  bread  insufficient  to  feed  them,  they  might  indeed
be  excused  for  disliking  social  life.  Now  whatever  renders
the  condition  of  the  producer,  the  essential  party  in  every
society,  more  painful,  tends  to  destroy  the  vital  principle
of  the  social  body ;  to  reduce  a  civilized  people  to  a  sa-
vage state ;  to  introduce  a  state  of  things  in  which  less  is
produced  and  less  consumed ;  to  destroy  civilization,  which
is  extended  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  the  quantity  of
production  and  consumption.  You  observe,  in  several
places,  "  that  man  is  naturally  indolent,  and  that  it  betrays

sterling)  in  its  chests,  which  is  more  than  double  the  amount  of  its  notes  in
circulation,  and  six  times  what  prudence  would  consider  necessary  to  re-
serve for  the  ordinary  course  of  its  payments.


TO MR. MALTHUS.  51

great  ignorance  of  his  nature  to  suppose  that  he  will  always*
consum  e  all  he  can  produce'17  (p.  503).  You  are  right,  in-
deed ;  but  I  maintain  no  other  doctrine  when  I  say  that
the  utility  of  productions  is  no  longer  worth  the  produc-
tive services,  at  the  rate  at  which  we  are  compelled  to  pay
for  them.

You  appear  convinced  of  this  truth  where  you  say,  on
another  occasion  (p.  342),  "A  tax  will  entirely  put  an
end  to  the  production  of  a  commodity,  if  no  one  of  the  so-
ciety is  disposed  to  value  it  at  a  price  equal  to  the  new
conditions  of  its  supply."  And  this  inherent  vice  (of  cost-
ing in  charges  of  production  more  than  it  is  worth)  the
commodity  carries  with  it  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  It  is
every  where  too  dear  to  command  what  it  has  cost,  be-
cause it  must  be  purchased  by  productive  services  equiva-
lent to  those  employed  in  its  production.

Another  consideration,  by  no  means  unimportant  is,  that
the  costs  of  production  are  augmented  not  only  by  multi-
plied duties,  by  the  dearness  of  articles  of  every  sort,  but
by  the  habits  which  are  produced  by  a  vicious  political  sys-
tem. If  the  progress  of  luxury  and  enormous  emolu-
ments—  if  the  facility  of  obtaining  illegitimate  profits
through  favour  and  influence  in  contracts  and  financial
operations,  force  the  manufacturer,  the  merchant,  the  real
producer,  to  require  profits  disproportioned  to  the  services
which  they  render  to  the  production,  in  order  to  maintain
their  rank  in  society,  then  all  these  abuses  tend  to  raise,
from  other  causes,  the  costs  of  production,  and  consequent-
ly the  price  of  productions,  above  the  value  of  their  actual
utility.  The  consumption  of  commodities  consequently
becomes  more  limited  ;  in  order  to  acquire  them,  a  greater
quantity  of  productive  services  must  be  employed  in  the
creation  of  another  production  :  the  charges  of  production
must  be  increased.  Consider  then,  Sir,  how  extensive  are

E  2


52  LETTER III.

the  evils  produced  by  encouraging  useless  expenses,  and
multiplying  unproductive  consumers.

The  rapid  sale  of  articles  offered  at  a  cheap  rate  by
means  of  expeditious  methods  of  production,  proves  how
truly  the  cost  of  production  is  the  real  impediment  to  the
sale  of  goods. If  the  price  be  reduced  one  fourth,  it  is
found  that  a  double  quantity  is  sold. The  reason  is,  that
every  one  is  then  enabled  to  acquire  it  with  less  labour,
less  costs  of  production. When  under  the  Continental
system  it  was  necessary  to  pay  five  francs  for  a  pound  of
sugar,  whether  the  money  were  applied  to  the  production
of  the  sugar,  or  of  any  other  commodity  to  be  exchanged
for  it,  France  was  able  to  purchase  only  fourteen  millions
of  pounds.* Now  that  sugar  is  cheap,  we  consume  eighty
millions  of  pounds  per  annum,  being  abouk-  three  pounds
for  each  person. At  Cuba,  where  sugar  is  still  cheaper,
they  consume  above  thirty  pounds  for  every  free  person.f
Let  us  then  agree  upon  a  truth  which  on  every  side
presses  on  our  notice. TQ  levy  excessive duties,  with
or  without  the participation of  a  national representa-
tion, or  by  means of  a  mock  representation, no  'matter
which,  is  to  augment  the  costs  of  production  without  in-
creasing the  utility  of  the  produce,  without  adding  any
thing  to  the  satisfaction  which  the  consumer  may  derive
from  it,  and  to  impose  a  fine  on  production — ON THAT
WHICH  ENABLES SOCIETY  TO  EXIST. And  as  among
producers some  are  more  advantageously  situated  than
others  for  throwing  upon  their  competitors  all  the  burthen
of  circumstances,  they  fall  heavier  on  some  classes  than  on
others. A  capitalist  can  often  withdraw  his  capital  from
one  employment  to  place  it  in  another,  or  to  send  it  abroad.

*  See  the  Report  on  the  Situation  of  France,  made  in  1813,  by  the  then
Minister  of  the  Interior.  He  was  interested  in  concealing  this  diminution
of  commerce.

t  Humbolt,  Essai  sur  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,  torn.  iii.  p.  183.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  53

The  proprietor  of  a  concern  may  often  be  rich  enough  to
be  able  to  suspend  his  operations  for  a  time.  Besides,  as
long  as  the  capitalist  and  the  master  can  make  their  own
terms  with  the  workman,  the  latter  is  obliged  to  work
constantly,  and  at  any  price,  even  when  the  employment
does  not  procure  him  a  subsistence.  Thus  do  the  excessive
charges  of  production  reduce  several  classes  of  certain
nations  to  the  necessity  of  confining  their  consumption  to
articles  the  most  indispensable  to  their  existence,  and  the
lowest  classes  of  all  to  die  of  want.  Now,  Sir,  is  not  this,
\ipon  your  own  principle,*  the  most  shocking  and  bar-
barous of  all  the  methods  of  reducing  the  numbers  of  man-
kind ?  f

We  now  come  to  the  objection  in  which  there  is,  per-
haps, the  greatest  force,  because  it  is  supported  by  an  impos-
ing example.  In  the  United  States,  the  obstacles  tq  pro-
duction are  few,  the  taxes  are  light;  and  there,  as  in  all
other  places,  merchandize  abounds,  for  which  there  exists
no  demand.  "  These  difficulties,"  you  say,  J  "  cannot  be
attributed  to  the  cultivation  of  poor  land,  restrictions  upon
commerce,  and  excess  of  taxation.  Something  else,  there-
fore, is  necessary  to  the  continued  increase  of  wealth,  be-
sides an  increase  in  the  power  of  producing."

*  Malthns  on  Population,  book  ii.  ch.  13,  5th  ed.

t  Mr.  Malthns,  convinced  that  certain  classes  are  serviceable  to  society
on  account  of  what  they  consume  alone,  without  producing  any  thing,  would
look  upon  the  payment  of  the  whole,  or  a  great  part  of  the  English  national
debt,  as  a  misfortune.  On  the  contrary,  this  operation  would,  in  my  opi-
nion, be  very  desirable  for  England ;  for  the  consequence  would  be,  that
the  public  creditors,  being  paid  off,  would  find  means  to  derive  an  income
from  their  capitals ;  that  the  payers  of  taxes  would  themselves  spend  the
40  millions  sterling  which  they  now  pay  to  the  public  creditors ;  that  the
taxes  being  diminished  by  40  millions  sterling,  all  productions  would  be
cheaper ;  that  consumption  would  consequently  be  greatly  extended,  and
would  afford  employment  to  the  workmen  instead  of  the  sabre  blows  which
are  now  dealt  out  to  them ;  and  I  own  I  see  nothing  in  these  results  to
alarm  the  friends  of  the  public  weal.

J  P.  498.


54  LETTER III.

Well !  will  you  believe  it,  Sir  ?  it  is  the  very  power  of
production  itself,  at  least  for  the  present,  of  which  the
Americans  are  in  want,  to  enable  them  to  dispose  of  the
overflowing  productions  of  their  commerce  to  advantage.

The  favourable  situation  of  this  people,  during  a  long
war,  in  which  they  have  almost  always  enjoyed  the  advan-
tage of  neutrality,  has  turned  their  industry,  and  capitals,
far  too  exclusively  to  external  and  maritime  commerce.
The  Americans  are  enterprising ;  their  voyages  are  cheaply
performed  ;  they  have  introduced  into  navigation  long
courses,  and  various  accelerating  manoeuvres,  which  by
shortening  voyages,  reduce  their  expense,  and  correspond
with  those  improvements  in  the  arts  which  diminish  the
costs  of  production  ;  in  short,  the  Americans  have  drawn
to  themselves  all  the  maritime  commerce  which  the  English
have  not  been  able  to  engross  ;  they  have,  for  many  years,
been  the  intermediate  agents  between  all  the  Continental
powers  of  Europe  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  Their  suc-
cess has  even  exceeded  that  of  the  English  wherever  those
nations  have  been  competitors,  as  in  China.

What  has  been  the  result  ?  An  excessive  abundance  of
those  commodities  which  are  obtained  by  commercial  and
maritime  industry;  and  when  the  general  peace  at  length
opened  the  highway  of  the  ocean  to  all  nations,  the  French
and  Dutch  ships  rushed  with  a  kind  of  madness  into  the
midst  of  a  career  thus  newly  opened  to  them  ;  and  in  their
ignorance  of  the  actual  state  of  countries  beyond  sea — of
their  agriculture,  arts,  population,  and  resources  for  buying
and  consuming — these  ships,  escaped  from  a  tedious  deten-
tion, carried  in  abundance  the  produce  of  the  Continent  of
Europe  to  all  ports,  presuming  that  the  other  nations  of  the
globe  would  be  eager  to  possess  those  commodities  after
their  long  separation  from  Europe.

But  in  order  to  purchase  this  extraordinary  supply,  it
would  have  been  requisite  for  these  countries  to  create  im-


T£ MR.  MALTHUS.  55

mediately  extraordinary  quantities  of  produce  of  their  own  ;
for,  once  more  I  repeat  it,  the  difficulty  at  New  York,  at
Baltimore,  the  Havannah,  Rio- Janeiro,  or  Buenos- Ay  res,
is  not  to  consume  European  manufactures. They  would
consume  them  very  willingly  if  they  could  pay  for  tbem.
But  the  Europeans  required  payment  in  cottons,  tobaccos,
sugars,  and  rice ; but  this  demand even  enhanced  their
prices  :  and  as,  notwithstanding  the  dearness  of  these  com-
modities, and  of  money,  which  is  also  merchandize,  it  was
necessary  to  take  them  or  return  without  payment,  these
very  articles,  thus  rendered  scarce  in  their  original  country,
became  more  abundant  in  Europe,  and  at  length  so  com-
pletely overstocked  the  European  markets,  that  a  sufficient
price  could  not  be  obtained  for  them,  although  the  con-
sumption of  Europe  had  greatly  increased  since  the  peace  :
hence  the  disadvantageous  returns  which  we  have  witness-
ed But  suppose  for  an  instant  that  the  agricultural  and
manufactured  produce  of  both  North  and  South  America
had  suddenly  become  very  considerable  at  the  time  of  the
peace,  in  that  case  the  people  of  those  countries,  being
more  numerous,  and  producing  more,  would  easily  have
purchased  all  the  European  cargoes,  and  furnished  a  variety
of  returns  at  a  cheap  rate.

This  effect  will,  I  doubt  not,  take  place  with  respect  to
the  United  States,  when  they  are  enabled  to  add  to  the
objects  of  exchange  furnished  by  their  maritime  commerce,
a  greater  quantity  of  their  agricultural  produce,*  and  per-
haps some  articles  of  manufacture  also.  Their  cultivation
is  extending;  their  manufactures  multiply;  and  as  a  na-
tural consequence  their  population  increases  with  astonish-
ing rapidity.  In  a  few  years  the  whole  of  their  varied'

^  The  commercial  productions  with  which  they  furnish  France,  are  sugar
from  India,  China,  and  the  Huvannah,  coffee,  tea,  nankeens,  indigo,  ginger,
rhubarb,  cinnamon,  raw  silk,  and  pepper. — Those  of  their  soil  and  their
arts  are,  cotton,  tobacco,  potash,  rice,  bark,  whale  oil,  and  dye  woods.


56  LETTER  III.

>

industry  will  form  a  mass  of  produce,  amongst  which  will
be  found  more  articles  calculated  to  furnish  profitable  re-
turns, or  at  least  profits  of  which  the  Americans  will  em-
ploy a  part  in  the  purchase  of  European  merchandize.

Merchandize  produced  by  Europeans  at  a  less  expense
than  it  can.be  made  for  in  America  will  be  carried  to  the
United  States;  and  goods  which  the  soil  and  industry  of
America  produce  cheaper  than  they  can  be  had  elsewhere,
will  be  carried  home  in  exchange.  The  nature  of  demands
will  determine  the  nature  of  productions  ;  each  nation- will
prefer  engaging  in  that  kind  of  production  in  which  it  has
the  greatest  success,  that  is,  which  it  produces  at  the
smallest  expense  ;  and  the  result  will  be  exchanges  mutu-
ally and  permanently  advantageous.  But  these  commer-
cial ameliorations  can  only  be  brought  about  by  time.  The
talents  and  experience  which  the  arts  require  are  not  ac-
quired in  a  few  months ;  years  are  necessary.  The  Ame-
ricans will  not  discover  in  what  manufactures  they  can
succeed  until  after  several  attempts.*  Then  those  parti-
cular manufactures  will  no  longer  be  carried  to  them;  but
the  profits  which  they  will  derive  from  this  production  will
enable  them  to  purchase  other  European  produce.

On  the  other  hand,  agricultural  speculations,  however
rapid  may  be  their  extension,  can  only  by  very  slow  de-
grees, present  by  their  produce  markets  to  the  productions
of  Europe.  As  fast  as  culture  and  civilization  extend  be-
yond the  Allegany  mountains,  into  Kentucky  and  the  ter-
ritories of  Indiana  and  the  Illinois,  the  first  gains  are  em-
ployed in  the  subsistence  of  the  colonists  a's  they  arrive

*  The  manufactures  which  a  new  nation  may  execute  to  the  greatest  ad-
vantage, are,  in  general,  those  which  consist  in  preparing  raw  materials  of
their  own  growth,  or  imported  at  a  small  expense.  It  is  not  probable  that
the  United  States  will  ever  supply  Europe  with  cloth;  but  they  will  perhaps
furnish  her  with  manufactured  tobaccos,  and  refined  sugars  ;  perhaps  they
may  even  establish  cotton-manufactories  on  better  terms  than  England.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  67

from  the  states  more  anciently  peopled,  and  in  building
their  habitations.  The  profits  which  exceed  these  first
wants,  enable  them  to  clear  a  greater  quantity  of  land ;  the
next  gains  are  employed  in  manufacturing  their  own  pro-
duce for  local  consumption  :  and  only  the  savings  of  a  fourth
order  can  be  applied  to  the  manufacture  and  fabrication  of
the  produce  of  the  soil  for  distant  consumption.  It  is  not
until  this  latter  state  of  things  takes  place  that  new  states
begin  to  offer  markets  for  Europeans ;  this  cannot  be  in
their  earliest  infancy :  their  population  must  have  had
time  to  increase,  and  their  agricultural  produce  must  have
become  sufficiently  abundant  to  oblige  them  to  exchange
it  at  a  distance  for  other  value.  Afterwards,  and  by  the
natural  progress  of  tilings,  instead  of  exporting  raw  pro-
duce, they  export  produce  which  has  received  some  pre-
paration, and  which  consequently,  comprising  a  greater
value  in  a  less  bulk,  is  adapted  to  bear  the  expense  of  car-
riage. Such  produce  will  one  day  come  to  Europe  from
New  Orleans,  a  city  destined  to  become  one  of  the  greatest
marts  in  the  world.

This  point  has  not  yet  been  attained  ;  is  it  then  wonder-
ful that  the  productions  of  the  United  States  have  not  yet
afforded  markets  sufficient  for  the  commercial  efforts  which
followed  the  peace  ?  Is  it  extraordinary  that  the  com-
mercial produce  brought  by  the  Americans  themselves
into  their  ports,  at  the  conclusion  of  an  excessive  deve-
lopement  of  their  nautical  industry,  should  yet  remain
there  in  superabundance  ?

You  see,  Sir,  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  fact  but  what
is  quite  conformable  to  the  doctrine  of  your  antagonists.

Returning  to  the  painful  situation  in  which  all  kinds  of

industry  is  at  present  placed  in  Europe,  I  might  add  to  the

„ discouragement  resulting  from  the  excessive  increase  of  the

charges  of  production,  the  disorders  which  such  charges

occasion  in  the  production,  distribution,  and  consumption


58  LETTER III.

of  the  values  produced;  disorders  which  frequently  bring
into  the  market  a  supply  superior  to  the  demand,  and  at
the  same  time  drive  out  of  it  much  which  might  have  been
sold,  and  the  prices  of  which  would  have  been  employed
in  the  purchase  of  the  former.  Certain  producers  endea-
vour to  recover  by  the  quantity  of  what  they  produce
a  part  of  the  value  consumed  by  the  revenue.  Some  pro-
ductive services  are  able  to  escape  from  the  avidity  of  the
fiscal  agents,  as  often  happens  with  the  productive  services
of  capital,  which  frequently  contrives  to  obtain  the  same
interest,  while  lands,  buildings,  and  industry  are  oppressed.
Sometimes  a  workman  who  finds  it  difficult  to  maintain
his  family,  endeavours  by  excessive  toil  to  make  up  for  the
low  price  of  his  labour.  Are  not  these  causes  which  de-
range the  natural  order  of  production,  and  which  occasion
productions  of  some  kinds  to  exceed  what  would  have
taken  place,  if  the  wants  of  the  consumers  alone  had  been
considered  ?  All  objects  of  consumption  are  not  necessary
to  us  in  the  same  degree.  Before  we  reduce  our  consump-
tion of  corn  to  one  half,  we  reduce  our  consumption  of
meat  to  a  fourth,  and  our  consumption  of  sugar  to  nothing.
There  are  capitals  so  engaged  in  certain  undertakings,
particularly  in  manufactures,  that  the  proprietors  often
consent  to  lose  the  interest,  and  sacrifice  the  profits  of  their
industry,  and  continue  to  labour  merely  to  support  the
establishment  until  more  favourable  times,  and  to  preserve
their  utensils  and  connexions  :  sometimes  they  are  appre-
hensive of  losing  good  workmen,  whom  the  suspension  of
employment  would  compel  to  disperse ;  the  humanity  of
the  proprietors  is  sufficient,  in  some  instances,  to  carry  on
a  manufacture  which  is  no  longer  in  demand.  Hence  arise
disorders  in  the  progress  of  production  and  consumption,
still  more  grievous  than  those  which  originate  in  the  pro-
hibitions of  the  revenue  or  the  vicissitudes  of  the  seasons.
Hence  we  see  inconsiderate  productions — hence  recourse  is


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  59

had  to  ruinous  means — hence  commercial  establishments
are  overthrown.

At  the  same  time  I  must  remark,  that  although  the  evil
is  great,  it  probably  seems  greater  than  it  is.  The  com-
modities which  overstock  all  the  markets  in  the  world,  may
strike  the  eye  by  their  magnitude  in  a  mass,  terrify  the
commercial  world  by  their  depreciation  in  value,  and  yet
constitute  only  a  very  small  part  of  the  merchandizes  of
every  sort  made  and  consumed.  There  is  no  warehouse
but  would  speedily  be  emptied,  if  every  species  of  pro-
duction of  which  its  contents  are  made  up,  were  to  cease
simultaneously  in  every  part  of  the  world.  Besides,  it  has
been  observed,  that  the  slightest  excess  of  supply  beyond
the  demand  is  sufficient  to  produce  a  considerable  alteration
in  price.  It  is  remarked  in  the  Spectator  (No.  200),  that
when  the  harvest  exceeds  by  a  tenth  what  is  ordinarily
consumed,  the  corn  falls  to  half  its  price.  Dalrymple*
makes  an  analogous  observation.  We  must  not  then  be
surprised  if  a  slight  excess  should  be  frequently  represented
as  an  excessive  superabundance.

This  superabundance,  as  I  have  already  remarked,  is
also  occasioned  in  part  by  the  ignorance  of  producers  or
traders  on  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  demand  in  the
places  to  which  goods  are  consigned.  Of  late  years  there
have  been  many  speculations  hazarded,  because  there  have
been  many  new.  relations  between  different  nations.  Data
were  everywhere  wanting  to  serve  as  the  foundation  of  good
calculations ;  but  does  it  follow  that  because  many  affairs
have  been  unprofitable,  that  others  with  better  information
may  not  succeed  ?  I  venture  to  predict  that  as  new  re-
lations shall  grow  old,  and  reciprocal  wants  be  mo»-e  justly
appreciated,  the  markets  will  cease  to  be  glutted,  and  per-
manent connexions  of  mutual  profit  will  be  established.

*  Considerations  on  the  Policy  of  Entails,  p.  14.


60  LETTER Hi-

fi  lit  at  the  same  time  it  is  expedient  to  diminish  gra-
dually, and  as  far  as  the  circumstances  of  every  state  will
allow,  the  general  and  permanent  inconveniencies  which
spring  from  too  expensive  a  productive  system.  We
ought  to  be  firmly  convinced  that  the  more  others  gain,  the
more  easily  we  shall  sell  our  produce ;  that  there  is  only
one  way  to  gain,  namely,  to  produce,  either  by  our  own
labour,  or  by  that  of  the  capital  or  lands  we  possess ;  that
unproductive  consumers  are  only  substitutes  for  produc-
tive consumers ;  that  the  more  producers,  the  more  con-
sumers there  are ;  that,  by  the  same  rule,  every  nation  is
interested  in  the  prosperity  of  every  other  nation,  and  that
all  are  interested  in  having  the  easiest  communications
with  each  other,  for  every  difficulty  is  equivalent  to  an  in-
crease of  expense.

Such  is  the  doctrine  established  in  my  writings,  and
which,  I  acknowledge,  does  not  appear  to  me  to  have
been  shaken.  I  took  up  my  pen  to  defend  it,  not  be-
cause it  is  mine  (the  self-love  of  an  author  would  be  con-
temptible where  such  great  interests  are  concerned),  but  be-
cause it  is  eminently  social,  and  points  out  to  mankind  the
sources  of  true  wealth  and  the  danger  of  drying  them  up.
The  rest  of  this  doctrine  is  no  less  useful,  because  it
teaches  that  capital  and  land  are  only  productive  when
they  are  become  respected  property ;  that  the  poor  man  is
interested  in  defending  the  property  of  the  rich  ;  that  he  is
consequently  interested  in  the  preservation  of  good  order,
because  a  subversion,  which  could  only  yield  him  a  tempo-
rary plunder,  would  deprive  him  of  a  permanent  income.
When  we  study  political  economy  as  it  ought  to  be  stu-
died ;  v  hen  we  have  once  perceived  that  the  most  useful
truths  rest  on  the  most  certain  principles;  we  have  nothing
so  much  at  heart  as  to  place  these  principles  within  the
reach  of  every  understanding.  Let  us  not  augment  their
difficulties  by  useless  abstraction ;  let  us  not  recommence


TO  MR.  MALTHUS.  61

the  folly  of  the  economists  of  the  18th  century  by  endless
discussions  on  the  net  produce  of  lands ;  let  us  describe  the
manner  in  which  facts  occur,  and  expose  the  chain  which
connects  them  ;  it  is  then  that  our  writings  will  acquire  a
great  practical  utility,  and  the  public  will  be  truly  indebted
to  writers  who  are,  like  you,  Sir,  possessed  of  such  ample
means  of  enlightening  them.


LETTER  IV.

SIR,

1  EXPECTED  to  have  found  in  your  "  Principles  of  Po-
litical Economy,"  something  calculated  to  settle  public
opinion  on  the  subject  of  machinery,  and  all  those  inven-
tions for  facilitating  production  by  which  manual  labour  is
saved,  and  the  quantity  of  produce  is  increased  without
any  addition  to  the  costs  of  production.  I  was  in  hopes  to
meet  with  such  definite  principles,  such  exact  reasoning,  as
would  command  conviction  ;  to  which  your  Essay  on  Po-
pulation has  accustomed  the  public ;  -  -  -  -  but  the  present
is  not  the  Essay  on  Population.

It  seems  to  me,  (for  1  am  sometimes  reduced  to  the  ne-
cessity of  using  this  form  of  expression  after  having  read
your  demonstrations) — it  appears  to  me  that  you  recognize
only  one  advantage  in  the  use  of  expeditious  methods  of
production ;  namely,  that  of  multiplying  produce  to  such
a  degree,  that  even  when  its  selling  price  is  diminished,
the  total  value  of  the  quantity  produced  still  exceeds  the
value  of  the  quantity  produced  before  the  introduction  of
the  improvements.*  The  advantage  which  you  particular-

*  "  When  a  machine  is  invented,  which,  by  saving  labour,  will  bring  goods
into  the  market  at  a  much  cheaper  rate  than  before,  the  most  usual  etfort  is
such  an  extension  of  the  demand  for  the  commodity,  that  the  value  of  the
whole  mass  of  goods  made  by  the  new  machinery  greatly  exceeds  their
former  value  ;  and  notwithstanding  the  saving  of  labour,  more  hands  instead
of  fewer,  are  required  in  the  manufacture.*— P.  402.

"  But  we  must  allow  that  the  preeminent  advantages  derived  from  the
substitution  of  machinery  for  manual  labour,  depend  upon  the  extension  of
the  market  for  the  commodities  produced,  and  the  increased  stimulus  given
to  consnmption  ;  and  that,  without  this  extension  of  market,  and  increase
of  consumption,  they  must  be  in  a  great  degree  lost," — P.  412.


LETTER IV.  63

ize  is  incontestable ;  and  it  had  previously  been  observed,
that  the  total  value  of  the  cotton  manufactures,  as  well  as
the  number  of  workmen  employed  in  that  pursuit,  was
singularly  increased  since  the  introduction  of  the  improved
methods  of  manufacture.  An  analogous  observation  had
been  made  with  respect  to  the  printing-press,  the  machine
employed  in  the  multiplication  of  books,  a  branch  of  pro-
duce which  now  employs  (besides  authors)  a  much  greater
number  of  industrious  persons  than  formerly,  when  books
were  copied  by  hand,  and  produces  a  sum  far  greater  than
when  books  were  more  expensive.

But  this  very  substantial  advantage  is  only  one  amongst
many  which  nations  have  derived  from  the  use  of  machines.
It  only  refers  to  certain  articles  of  produce,  the  consump-
tion of  which  was  capable  of  sufficient  extension  to  coun-
terbalance the  diminution  of  price ;  but  there  is  in  the  in-
troduction of  machinery  an  advantage  common  to  every
economical  and  expeditive  process ;  an  advantage  which
would  be  felt,  even  where  the  consumption  of  the  article
produced  was  not  susceptible  of  any  increase ;  an  advan-
tage which  ought  to  be  fully  appreciated  in  the  principles
of  political  economy.  You  will  excuse  my  returning  to
some  elementary  notions  for  the  purpose  of  clearly  ex-
plaining myself  on  this  point.

Machines  and  tools  are  both  productions  which,  as  soon
as  they  are  produced,  become  capital,  and  are  employed  in
the  production  of  other  articles.  The  only  difference  which
exists  between  machines  and  tools  is,  that  the  former  are
complex  tools,  and  the  latter  are  simple  machines.  As
there  are  neither  tools  nor  machines  which  create  power,
they  must  be  considered  as  means  by  which  we  transmit  an
action,  a  vivid  force,  which  we  have  the  power  of  di-
recting to  an  object  intended  to  be  modified  by  that  force.
Thus  a  hand-hammer  is  a  tool  by  means  whereof  we  em-
ploy the  muscular  force  of  a  man,  in  certain  cases  to  beat


64  LETTER IV.

out  a  leaf  of  gold ;  and  the  hammers  of  a  great  forge  are
likewise  tools  by  means  whereof  we  employ  a  fall  of  water
in  flattening  iron  bars.

The  employment  of  a  power  gratuitously  furnished  by
nature,  does  not  take  away  from  a  machine  its  quality  as  a
tool.  Weight  multiplied  by  quickness,  which  constitutes
the  power  of  a  goldbeater's  hammer,  is  no  less  a  physical
power  of  nature,  than  the  weight  of  the  water  which  falls
from  a  mountain.

What  is  the  whole  of  our  industry,  but  the  employment
of  the  laws  of  nature  ?  It  is  by  obeying  nature,  says  Bacon,
that  we  learn  to  command  her.  What  difference  do  you  per-
ceive between  knitting-needles  and  a  stocking- frame,  but
that  the  latter  is  a  tool  more  complex  and  more  efficient
than  the  needles,  but,  in  fact,  applying,  to  greater  or  less
advantage,  the  properties  of  metal,  and  the  power  of  the
lever,  to  fabricate  the  vestments  with  which  we  cover  our
feet  and  legs  ?

The  question  is,  therefore,  reduced  to  this  : — Is  it  advan-
tageous for  man  to  take  into  his  hands  a  tool  more  power-
ful, capable  of  doing  a  much  greater  quantity  of  work,  or
of  doing  it  much  better,  in  preference  to  another  tool  of  a
gross  and  imperfect  construction,  with  which  he  must  work
more  slowly,  with  greater  toil,  and  less  perfection  ?

I  should  be  doing  injustice  to  your  good  sense  and  that
of  our  readers,  were  I  to  doubt  of  the  universal  answer.

The  perfection  of  our  tools  is  connected  with  the  perfec-
tion of  our  species.  It  is  this  which  constitutes  the  differ-
ence which  we  observe  between  ourselves  and  the  savages
of  the  South  Seas,  who  have  hatchets  of  flint,  and  sewing-
needles  made  of  fish-bones.  It  is  no  longer  permitted  to
a  writer  on  political  economy  to  recommend  the  prohibi-
tion of  such  means  as  chance  or  genius  may  furnish  us
with;  even  for  the  express  purpose  of  reserving  more
labour  for  our  workmen  :  he  would  soon  find  all  his  own


TO MR.  JMALTHUS.  65

reasoning  employed  to  prove  that  we  ought,  retrograding
instead  of  advancing  in  the  career  of  civilization,  to  relin-
quish, successively,  all  the  discoveries  we  have  made,  and
render  our  arts  more  imperfect  for  the  purpose  of  multiply-
ing our  toils,  and  of  lessening  our  enjoyments.

Undoubtedly  there  are  inconveniences  inseparable  from
the  transition  from  one  order  of  things  to  another,  even
from  an  imperfect  order  to  one  which  is  better.  What  wise
man  would  wish  to  abolish,  all  at  once,  the  prohibitions
which  oppress  industry,  and  the  customs  and  duties  which
impede  the  intercourse  of  nations,  prejudicial  as  they  are
to  general  prosperity?  On  these  subjects,  the  duty  of  well-
informed  persons  consists,  not  in  suggesting  motives  for
preventing  and  proscribing  every  species  of  change,  under
pretext  of  the  inconveniences  which  it  may  produce ;  but
in  appreciating  those  inconveniences ;  in  pointing  out  the
practicable  means  of  averting  or  mitigating  them,  in  order
to  facilitate  the  adoption  of  a  desirable  amelioration.

The  inconvenience,  in  this  case,  is  a  shifting  of  income,
which,  when  sudden,  is  always  more  or  less  distressing  to
that  class  whose  revenues  are  diminished.  The  introduc-
tion of  machines  diminishes  (sometimes,  but  not  always)
the  income  of  the  classes  who  derive  their  subsistence  from
their  corporeal  and  manual  faculties,  and  augments  the  re-
venues of  those  whose  resources  consist  in  their  intellectual
faculties  and  their  capitals.  In  other  terms,  machines  which
abridge  labour,  being,  in  general,  more  complex,  demand
more  considerable  capitals.  The  person  who  uses  them  is,
therefore,  obliged  to  purchase  more  of  what  we  call  the,
productive  services  of  capital,  and  requires  less  of  what  we
call  the  productive  services  of  labourers.  At  the  same  time,
as  they  require  in  their  general  and  particular  management
perhaps  more  extensive  combinations  and  more  sedulous
attention,  they  require  more  of  that  species  of  service
whence  the  profit  of  the  proprietor  is  derived.  Cotton-


66  LETTER IV.

spinning,  by  means  of  the  small  wheel  as  it  was  formerly
carried  on  by  many  families  in  Normandy,  scarcely  merits
the  name  of  a  factory;  whilst  a  cotton-mill  on  a  large  scale
is  a  factory  of  the  first  consequence.

But  the  most  important,  though  not  the  most  generally
perceived,  effect  resulting  from  the  use  of  machinery,  and,
in  general,  from  every  expediting  process,  is  the  increase
of  income  which  is  thereby  acquired  by  the  consumers  of
the  articles  produced;  an  increase  which  costs  nothing  to
anybody,  and  merits  some  more  detailed  examination.

If  people  were  now  to  grind  their  corn  as  it  was  ground
by  the  ancients,  by  manual  labour,  I  estimate  that  it  would
require  twenty  men  to  grind  as  much  meal  as  is  ground  by
a  pair  of  stones  in  our  mills.  These  twenty  men,  constant-
ly employed,  would  cost,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,
40  francs  per  day ;  and  counting  300  working-days  in  the
year  would  cost  annually ------ /r.  12,000

The  machine  and  the  grinding-stones  would  cost
originally  20,000  francs,  of  which  the  annual  in-
terest is 1,000

It  is  not  probable  that  any  person  would  undertake
such  a  business,  unless  it  would  bring  in  annu-
ally about  - 3,000

The  making  of  the  meal  by  hand,  which  may  now

be  ground  in  a  year  by  a  pair  of  millstones,

would  cost  by  this  method  about ----- 16,000

Instead  of  which  a  miller  can  now  rent  a  windmill

for  about - 2,000

He  pays  his  man  ----------- 1,000

Suppose  he  gains  for  his  trouble  and  management 3,000

The  same  quantity  of  meal  may  therefore  be  pro

ducedfor 6,000


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  G7

instead  of  16,000,  which  it  would  have  cost  if  the  process
of  the  ancients  had  been  still  in  use.

The  same  population  is  nevertheless  fed ;  for  the  mill
does  not  diminish  the  quantity  of  meal  produced  ;  the  pro-
fits gained  in  society  still  suffice  to  pay  for  the  new  pro-
duce ;  for  as  soon  as  the  6000  francs  are  paid  for  expenses
of  production,  that  moment  6000  francs  are  gained  in  pro-
fit ;  and  society  enjoys  this  essential  advantage,  that  the
individuals  of  whom  it  consists,  whatever  be  their  means
of  existence,  their  incomes — whether  they  live  by  their  la-
bour, their  capitals,  or  their  landed  possessions,  reduce  the
portion  of  their  expenses  devoted  to  paying  for  the  making
of  meal,  in  the  proportion  of  sixteen  to  six,  or  by  five-
eighths.  Where  a  man  must  formerly  have  expended  eight
francs  a  year  for  this  purpose,  he  will  now  have  to  lay  out
only  three,  which  is  exactly  equivalent  to  an  increase  of
income:  for  the  five  francs  saved  in  this  article  may  be
spent  on  any  other.  If  equal  improvements  took  place  in
every  article  of  produce  in  which  we  expend  our  incomes,
those  incomes  would  actually  have  been  increased  by  five-
eighths  ;  and  a  man  who  gets  3000  francs  a  year,  whether
by  grinding  corn,  or  in  any  other  manner,  would  really  be
as  rich  as  if  he  had  gained  8000  before  these  improvements
were  made.

These  considerations  must  have  escaped  the  attention
of  M.  Sismondi,  when  he  wrote  the  following  passage  :—
"*  Whenever  the  demand  for  consumption  exceeds  the
means  of  producing,  every  new  discovery  in  mechanics  or
the. arts  is  a  benefit  to  society,  because  it  furnishes  the
means  of  satisfying  existing  wants.  But  when  the  produc-
tion is  fully  equal  to  the  consumption,  every  such  discovery
is  a  calamity,  because  it  only  adds  to  the  enjoyments  of  the
consumers  the  opportunity  of  obtaining  them  at  a  cheaper

*  Nouveaux  Priucipes,  &c.  torn.  ii.  p.  317.


68  LETTER IV.

rate,  while  it  deprives  the  producers  even  of  life  itself.  It
would  be  odious  to  weigh  the  value  of  cheapness  against
that  of  existence."

It  is  plain  that  M.  Sismondi  does  not  adequately  appre-
ciate the  advantages  of  cheapness,  or  conceive  that  what  is
saved  in  the  expense  of  one  article,  may  be  laid  out  in
additional  purchases  of  another  commodity,  beginning  with
the  most  indispensable.

Hitherto  no  inconvenience  has  been  known  to  arise  from
the  invention  of  corn-mills ;  and  their  beneficial  operation
is  seen  in  the  diminished  price  of  produce,  which  is  equiva-
lent to  an  increase  of  income  to  all  those  who  make  use  of
the  invention.

But  it  is  said  that  this  increase  of  income  obtained  by  the
consumers,  is  taken  from  the  profits  of  the  nineteen  unfor-
tunate persons  whom  the  mill  has  deprived  of  employment.
This  T  deny.  The  nineteen  labourers  retain  the  possession
of  their  industrious  faculties,  with  the  same  strength,  the
same  capacity,  the  same  means  of  working,  as  before.  The
mill  does  not  place  them  under  the  necessity  of  remaining
without  occupation,  but  only  of  finding  another  employment.
Many  circumstances  are  attended  with  this  inconvenience,
without  producing  similar  advantages  to  compensate  for  it.
A  fashion  which  passes  away,  a  war  which  closes  a  market,
a  change  in  the  course  of  commerce,  are  a  hundred  times
more  ruinous  to  the  labouring  class  than  any  new  invention
whatever.

It  may  still  be  insisted  that,  supposing  the  nineteen  dis-
carded labourers  were  instantly  to  find  capitals  to  set  them
to  work  in  some  new  branch  of  industry,  they  would  not
be  able  to  sell  their  produce,  because  the  mass  of  the  pro-
ductions of  the  society  would  be  thereby  increased,  while
the  sum  of  its  revenues  would  remain  without  addition.
Ts  it  then  forgotten  that  the  revenues  of  the  society  are  in-
creased by  the  very  circumstance  that  there  are  nineteen


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  69

new  labourers?  The  wages  of  their  labour  form  a  revenue
which  enables  them  to  acquire  the  produce  of  their  labour,
or  to  exchange  it  for  any  other  equivalent  commodities.
This  is  sufficiently  established  by  my  preceding  letters.

Strictly  speaking,  then,  one  disadvantage  only  remains —
the  necessity  for  these  men  to  find  a  new  occupation.  Now
the  progress  which  is  made  in  a  particular  department  of
industry,  is  favourable  to  industry  in  general.  The  in-
crease of  income  which  is  derived  from  a  saving  in  the  ex-
pense of  one  article  of  consumption,  tends  to  an  expendi-
ture on  other  objects.  Nineteen  men  accustomed  to  grind
corn  have  been  deprived  of  that  employment  alone ;  a
hundred  new  occupations,  or  extensions  of  the  old  branches
of  industry,  have  been  thrown  open  to  their  exertions.  I
desire  no  better  proof  of  this  than  the  increase  which  has
taken  place  in  the  works  and  population  of  every  place  in
which  the  arts  have  attained  a  high  degree  of  cultivation.
We  are  so  much  accustomed  to  see  the  productions  of  new
arts,  that  we  scarcely  remark  them;  but  how  forcibly  would
they  strike  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Europe,  could  they
revisit  the  earth  !  Let  us  imagine  for  a  moment  some,
even  of  the  most  enlightened,  such  as  Pliny  or  Archimedes,
walking  about  one  of  our  modern  towns ;  they  would  think
themselves  surrounded  by  miracles.  The  abundance  of
our  crystals  and  glasses,  the  magnitude  and  number  of  our
mirrors,  our  clock?,  our  watches,  the  variety  of  our  stuffs,
our  iron  bridges,  our  engines  of  war,  our  ships,  would
astonish  them  beyond  expression.  And  if  they  were  to
visit  our  workshops,  what  a  multitude  of  occupations  of
which  they  could  not  have  the  least  idea !  Would  they
ever  imagine  that  thirty  thousand  men  are  constantly  em-
ployed all  night,  in  Europe,  in  printing  newspapers  which
people  read  the  next  morning  while  they  are  taking  tea,
coffee,  chocolate,  and  other  refreshments,  as  new  to  them


70  LETTER IV.

as  the  newspapers  themselves?  Doubt  not.  Sir,  that  if
the  arts,  as  I  find  pleasure  in  thinking  they  will,  continue  to
improve ;  that  is  to  say,  to  produce  more  at  less  cost,  new
millions  of  men  will,  in  a  few  ages,  produce  things  which,
could  we  rise  up  to  see  them,  would  excite  in  our  minds
no  less  surprise  than  Archimedes  and  Pliny  would  feel  if
they  were  to  revive  amongst  us.  We  who  scribble  paper
in  search  of  truth,  must  be  on  our  guard  :  if  our  writings
should  go  down  to  our  grandchildren,  the  terror  with  which
we  contemplate  improvements  which  they  will  have  greatly
excelled,  may  probably  appear  to  them  somewhat  laugh-
able. And  as  to  the  workmen  of  your  country,  at  once
so  ingenious  and  so  miserable,  our  descendants  may,  per-
haps, look  upon  them  as  persons,  who  were  forced,  in  order
to  get  their  livelihood,  to  dance  upon  a  rope  with  a  weight
fastened  to  their  feet.  They  will  read  in  history  that  some
new  plan  was  every  day  proposed  to  enable  them  to  con-
tinue dancing,  but  unluckily  the  only  one  which  could
have  been  efficacious  was  omitted — the  simple  expedient
of  taking  off  the  weight.  Then  our  descendants,  after
having  laughed  at,  may,  perhaps,  see  reason  to  pity  us.

I  have  said  that  beneficial  improvements  may  be  attended
with  transient  inconveniences.  Those  which  are  produced  by
the  invention  of  expeditious  methods,  are  fortunately  miti-
gated by  circumstances  which  have  been  already  described,
and  by  others  to  which  I  have  not  yet  alluded.  It  has  been
said  that  the  cheapness  resulting  from  an  economical  pro-
ce  s,  promotes  the  consumption  of  the  article  produced  in
such  a  manner,  that  a  greater  number  of  people  are  em-
ployed in  its  production  than  before ;  as  has  been  observed
in  the  spinning  and  weaving  of  cotton  :  and  you  yourself
consider  this  circumstance  alone  as  capable  of  more  than
compensating  for  the  injury.  I  will  add,  that  in  proportion
as  machines  and  accelerating  methods  become  more  nume-


TO MR. MALTHUS.  71

rous,  the  difficulty  of  still  discovering  new  improvements
is  increased ;  particularly  in  an  old  art  in  which  the  work-
men are  already  formed.  The  most  simple  machines  were
first  invented ;  afterwards  came  others  more  complex ;  but
as  they  grow  more  complex,  they  are  more  expensive  to
establish,  and  require  more  human  labour  in  their  forma-
tion, which,  in  some  degree,  indemnifies  the  labouring
classes  for  the  work  which  they  lose  through  the  use  of  the
new  machine.  The  complication  and  dearness  of  a  ma-
chine are  obstacles  to  its  being  too  suddenly  adopted.  The
machine  for  dressing  cloth  by  means  of  a  rotary  move-
ment, cost,  originally  from  25,000  to  30,000  francs.  Many
manufacturers  were  at  first  unable  to  lay  out  such  a  sum;
others  hesitated,  and  still  hesitate  to  adopt  it,  waiting  for
a  satisfactory  confirmation  of  its  success.  When  machines
are  thus  slowly  introduced,  almost  all  the  inconveniences
of  such  inventions  are  avoided.  In  short,  I  have  always
found,  practically,  that  new  machines  produce  more  alarm
than  injury.  As  to  the  benefit  arising  from  them,  it  is  con-
stant and  durable.

M.  de  Sismond?  raises  an  objection  founded  on  what
would  happen  supposing  a  hundred  thousand  knitters  to
make  with  their  needles  ten  million  pair  of  stockings,  and
a  thousand  workmen  with  stocking-frames  to  produce  the
same  quantity.  The  result,  according  to  him,  would  be,
that  the  consumers  of  the  stockings  would  only  save  fifty
centimes  (or  half  a  franc)  per  pair,  and  yet  that  a  manu-
facture which  formerly  maintained  a  hundred  thousand  per-
sons, would  now  support  only  twelve  hundred.  But  he
obtains  this  result  only  by  suppositions  which  are  inad-
missible.

To  prove  that  the  consumers  of  stockings  would  only
pay  fifty  centimes  less  than  before,  he  supposes  that  the
costs  of  production  would  be,  in  the  first  case,  as  fol-
lows : —


72  LETTER IV.

1 millions  for  the  purchase  of  the  materials.

40  millions  for  the  wages  of  100,000  knitters  at  400  francs

—  each.

50  millions  of  francs,  of  which  40  millions  woujd  be  dis-

—  tributed  amongst  the  working  manufacturers.
And  in  the  second  case,  he  sets  down  the  expenses  thus :
10  millions  for  the  materials.

SO  millions  for  the  interest  of  the  capital  sunk,  and  pro-
fits of  the  proprietors.

2  millions  for  the  interest  of  the  circulating  capital.
2  millions  for  repairs  and  renovation  of  machines.
1  million  for  the  pay  of  1200  workmen.

45  millions;  of  which  one  only  would  be  devoted  to  the
~— labouring  class,  instead  of  forty.
Now  I  observe  in  this  account  thirty  millions  for  the  in-
terest of  capital  sunk,  and  the  profit  of  the  proprietors  ;
which  is  to  suppose  a  capital  of  two  hundred  millions  for
an  undertaking  capable  of  supporting  twelve  hundred  men,
and  paying  fifteen  per  cent  for  capital :  a  supposition  truly
extravagant.

A  workman  cannot  use  two  frames  at  once  ;  a  thousand
workmen  would  therefore  require  a  thousand  frames.  A
good  stocking-frame  costs  six  hundred  francs;  the  thou-
sand would  consequently  cost  six  hundred  thousand  francs.
Add  to  this  capital,  a  like  capital  for  other  utensils,  work-
shops, &c.,  still  the  capital  required  will  be  only  twelve
hundred  thousand  francs.  Admit  that  the  interest  and
profits  of  the  proprietors  should  be  fifteen  per  cent  on  this
capital,  which  is  very  fair;  for  a  permanent  business,  which
should  produce  more,  would  be  reduced  by  competition  to
this  rate  of  profit.  This  being  allowed,  we  shall  find  for
interest  and  profits  of  the  proprietors  one  hundred  and
eighty  thousand  francs,  instead  of  thirty  millions.

A  like  observation  applies  to  the  two  millions  for  the


TO MR.  MALTHUS.  73

.expenses  of  repairs,  &c. ;  for  even  if  new  machines  were
to  be  bought  every  year  instead  of  repairing  the  old  ones,
still  they  would  only  cost  six  hundred  thousand  francs.
Nor  would  the  circulating  capital  cost  any  thinly  like  two
millions;  for  of  what  is  this  sum  composed,  according  to
M.  SismondiJ$  hypothesis?  Of  the  raw  materials,  which
he  estimates  at  ten  millions,  and  the  wages,  for  which  he
allows  one  million;  altogether  eleven  millions :  the  interest
whereof  at  five  per  cent  is  five  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
francs.  But  as  in  this  business  the  manufactures  may  be
completed  and  sold  in  less  than  six  months,  the  capital,
for  which  interest  is  to  be  allowed  for  the  year,  may  be  em-
ployed twice,  and  would  cost  each  time  only  two  hundred
and  seventy-five  thousand  francs,  instead  of  two  millions.

All  these  expenses  together  make  only  twelve  millions
fifty-five  thousand  francs,  instead  of  fifty  millions,  which,
according  to  M.  de  Slsmondi''s  suppositions,  would  be  the
cost  of  the  stockings  made  by  the  knitting-needles.  I  am
far  from  supposing  that  the  saving  would  be  so  enormous,
for  while  the  author  has  greatly  exaggerated  the  capital
requisite  for  the  machines,  he  has  attributed  to  them  too
great  a  degree  of  efficacy  in  supposing  they  would  enable
twelve  hundred  workmen  to  do  the  work  of  a  hundred
thousand ;  but  I  say,  that  if  the  saving  in  this  produc-
tion were  really  so  great,  the  low  price  of  the  stockings,
or  any  other  article  of  clothing  produced  under  similar  cir-
cumstances, would  operate  so  favourably  in  extending  the
consumption,  that  instead  of  the  hundred  thousand  sup-
posed workmen  being  reduced  to  twelve  hundred,  their
number  would,  in  all  probability,  be  doubled.

And  if  the  consumption  of  this  particular  article  would
not  admit  of  so  excessive  a  multiplication  of  the  same  com-
modity, the  demand  for  other  kinds  of  produce  would  be
increased  in  proportion ;  for  observe,  that  after  the  intro-
duction of  the  machines,  society  retains  the  same  revenues


74  LETTER IV.

as  before ;  that  is  to  say,  the  same  number  of  workmen,
the  same  amount  of  capital,  the  same  land.  Now,  if  in-
stead of  devoting,  out  of  this  mass  of  revenue,  fifty  millions
to  the  purchase  of  stockings,  the  introduction  of  the  frames
should  make  it  no  longer  necessary  to  lay  out  more  than
twelve  in  this  article,  the  thirty-eight  millions  remaining
would  be  applicable  to  the  purchase  of  other  articles  of
consumption,  if  not  to  the  extended  consumption  of  the
same.

These  arguments  we  learn  from  principles,  and  they  are
confirmed  by  experience.  The  distress  endured  by  the
population  of  England,  which  M.  de  Sismondi  laments
with  the  feeling  of  a  true  philanthropist,  originates  mother
causes  :  it  is  chiefly  caused  by  the  poor  laws  of  that  coun-
try ;  and,  as  I  have  before  observed,  by  a  mass  of  taxes,
which  renders  production  too  expensive;  so  that,  when
goods  are  offered  for  sale,  the  incomes  of  a  great  propor-
tion of  consumers  are  insufficient  to  enable  them  to  pay
the  prices  which  the  manufacturer  or  producer  is  absolutely
compelled  to  demand.


75


LETTER  V.

SIR,

ON  reading  your  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  the
first  object  which  excited  my  attention,  was  that  great
malady  which  at  present  afflicts  mankind,  and  which  pre-
vents their  living  upon  their  productions.  Although  in
the  order  of  things,  a  discussion  on  the  nature  of  riches
ought  to  precede  it,  to  assist  the  mind  in  comprehending
all  the  phenomena  which  relate  to  their  formation  and
distribution  ;  I  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  give  it  pre-
cedence, because  it  appeared  more  especially  to  interest
those  only  who  cultivate  political  economy  as  a  science,
and  without  any  view  to  practical  application.  However,
I  cannot  lay  down  my  pen  without  giving  you  my  opinion
on  this  point.  You  authorize  me  to  do  this  by  the  noble
frankness  with  which  you  invite  discussions  which  may
enlighten  the  public.  "It  is  extremely  ctesirable,"  you
say  (p.  4),  "  that  those  who  are  considered  by  the  public
the  most  competent  judges,  should  agree  on  the  prin-
cipal propositions."  We  cannot  therefore  make  them  too
plain.

You  object  to  the  definition  which  Lord  Lauderdale
gives  of  riches  when  he  says  that  they  are  all  that  man
desires  as  being  useful  or  agreeable  to  him,  as  too  vague ;
and  I  think  you  have  great  reason.  I  look  for  that  which  you
think  ought  to  be  substituted  for  it;  and  I  find  that  you  give
the  name  of  riches  to  all  the  material  objects  which  are
necessary,  useful,  or  agreeable  to  man  (p.  28).  The  only
difference  which  I  observe  between  these  two  definitions
consists  in  the  word  material  which  you  add  to  that  of


76  LETTER  V.

Lord  Laudcrdale ;  and  I  confess  this  word  appears  to  me
any  thing  but  the  truth.

You  must  be  aware  of  my  reasons.  The  great  disco-
very of  political  economy,  that  which  will  ever  render  it
invaluable,  is  the  having  shewn  that  every  thing  is  con-
vertible into  riches.  Man  has  learnt  from  thence  how  he
must  conduct  himself  to  possess  the  happy  means  of  sa-
tisfying his  desires.  But,  as  I  have  already  had  occasion
to  observe,  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  man,  to  add  a  single
atom  to  the  mass  of  matter  of  which  the  world  is  composed.
If  he  then  creates  riches,  riches  are  not  material :  there
is  no  middle  point.  Man  can  only,  by  means  of  his  capital
and  his  lands,  change  the  combinations  of  matter,  and
thus  make  it  useful  to  him ;  but  utility  is  an  immaterial
quality.

This  is  not  all,  Sir.  I  fear  that  your  definition  does  not
comprise  the  essential  quality  of  riches.  Permit  me  to
explain.

Adam  Smithy  as  well  as  every  body  else,  has  remarked
that  a  glass  of  water,  which  may  be  a  very  desirable  thing
when  one  is  dry,  is  not  riches.  It  is,  however,  a  material
object,  it  is  necessary,  useful,  and  agreeable  to  man.  It
possesses  all  the  conditions  of  your  definition  :  but  yet
it  is  not  riches.  It  is  not  that  however  which  is  the  sub-
ject of  our  investigation  and  the  matter  of  your  book.
What  does  it  require  to  become  so  ? — to  have  value.

There  are  then  things  which  are  natural  riches,  which
are  most  precious  to  man ;  but  are  not  such  riches  as
political  economy  can  interfere  with.  Can  they  be  in-
creased ?  Can  they  be  consumed  ?  No :  they  are  regu-
lated by  other  laws  than  those  of  political  economy.  A
glass  of  water  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  natural  philosophy  ;
the  attachment  of  our  friends  and  our  reputation  in  the
world  are  governed  by  the  moral  law ;  but  are  not  within


TO MR. MALTHUS.  77

the  compass  of  political  economy.  Which  then  are  the
riches  within  the  jurisdiction  of  that  science  ? — Those
which  are  susceptible  of  creation  and  destruction,  of  more
and  of  less  ;  and  what,  I  again  ask,  is  this  more,  this  less,
but  value  ?

You  are  yourself,  Sir,  compelled  to  admit  this  in  many
places.  You  say  (p.  340),  "  It  appears  then  that  the
wealth  of  a  country  depends  partly  upon  the  quantity  of
produce  obtained  by  its  labour  "  (it  depends  entirely  upon
it),  "  and  partly  upon  such  an  adaptation  of  it  to  the  wants
and  power  of  the  exerting  population  as  is  calculated  to
give  it  value."  And  in  the  following  page  you  are  still
more  positive.  After  having  advanced  further  into  the
discussion,  you  confess  that  "  it  is  obvious  that,  in  the

actual  state  of  things,  the  value  of  commodities may

be  said  to  be  the  sole  cause  of  the  existence  of  wealth."
How  then  has  it  happened  that  a  condition  so  essential
as  value  has  been  left  out  of  your  definition  ?

But  this  is  not  sufficient.  The  nature  of  riches  will  be
very  imperfectly  known  to  us  if  we  are  not  able  to  fix  some
precise  meaning  to  this  word  value.  In  order  to  be  pos-
sessed of  great  wealth  will  it  be  enough  that  we  estimate
at  a  high  rate  the  goods  we  possess  ?  If  I  build  a  house,
with  which  I  am  delighted,  and  which  I  choose  to  estimate
at  ten  thousand  pounds,  does  this  house  make  me  really
worth  ten  thousand  pounds  ?  We  receive  a  present  from
one  who  is  dear  to  us ;  it  is  inestimable  in  our  eyes ;  does
it  follow  that  it  has  made  us  immensely  rich  ?  You  can-
not think  so.  In  order  to  constitute  riches,  the  value  must
be  recognised^  not  by  the  possessor  merely,  but  by  other  per-
sons. But  what  more  irrefragable  proof  that  its  value  is
recognised  can  be  given  than  that  other  persons  are  ready
to  give  for  it  a  certain  quantity  of  other  things  which  are
valuable.  Notwithstanding  the  value  of  ten  thousand
pounds  which  I  set  upon  my  house,  yet  if  I  cannot  find  any


78  LETTER  V.

body  who  will  give  me  more  than  five  thousand  pounds
for  it,  I  cannot  say  that  it  is  worth  ten  thousand  pounds :
it  is  really  worth  no  more  than  five  thousand  pounds ;  it
will  produce  me  no  greater  amount  than  five  thousand
pounds,  or  whatever  value  may  be  had  for  that  sum.

Adam  Smith  also  (b.  i.  c.4)  immediately  after  having
observed  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  value,  and  having,
very  improperly  in  my  opinion,  called  one  of  them  'value
in  use,  and  the  other  value  in  exchange,  abandons  entirely
the  former,  and  is  solely  occupied  throughout  his  work
with  exchangeable  value.  This  is  what  you  have  done
yourself,  Sir ;  *  what  Mr.  Ricardo  has  done ;  what  I  have
done ;  what  all  of  us  have  done ;  for  the  plain  reason,  that
there  is  no  other  value  in  political  economy;  that  that  alone
is  subject  to  fixed  laws ;  that  that  alone  can  be  created,
distributed,  and  destroyed,  according  to  rules  which  are
invariable,  and  which  are  capable  of  becoming  an  object  of
scientific  inquiry.  It  is  a  necessary  consequence,  the  price
of  every  thing  being  its  exchangeable  value  estimated  in
money,  that  there  is  no  other  price  in  political  economy
than  market  price :  that  that  which  Smith  calls  the  natural
price,  is  no  more  natural  than  any  other;  it  is  the  cost
of  production ;  it  is  the  market  price  of  productive  ser-
vices..

I  will  not  deny,  Sir,  that  you  have,  in  Mr.  Ricardo,  a
powerful  and  respectable  ally.  He  is  against  you  in  the
subject  of  markets,  and  fights  on  your  side  in  the  question
of  value;  but  notwithstanding  my  connexion  with  him,  and
the  reciprocal  esteem  we  bear  for  each  other,  I  have  not
hesitated  to  combat  his  arguments:*)-  the  first  object  of

*  "  It  is  obviously  therefore  the  value  of  commodities,  or"  (that  IS  to
say)  "  the  saciifice  of  labour,  and  of  other  articles  which  people  are  willing  to
make  in  order  to  obtain  them  "  in  exchange,  &.c.  p.  341.

|  In  notes  which  I  have  added  to  the  French  translation  of  Mr.  Ricardo's
Principles  of  Political  Economy*


TO MR.MALTHUS.  79

both  of  us,  and  of  you  too,  Sir,  I  am  sure,  is  the  love  of
truth,  and  the  happiness  of  mankind.

These  are  Mr.  Ricardo's  words  :  (2d  edit.  c.  20)  "  Value
differs  essentially  from  riches ;  for  value  does  not  depend
on  the  abundance  (of  things  necessary  or  agreeable)  but
on  the  difficulty  or  facility  of  their  production.  The  labour
of  a  million  of  men  in  manufactories  will  always  produce
the  same  value,  but  not  the  same  riches.  By  the  inven-
tion of  machinery,  by  improvement  in  skill,  by  a  better
division  of  labour,  or  by  the  discovery  of  new  markets,
where  more  advantageous  exchanges  may  be  made,  a  mil-
lion of  men  may  produce  double  or  treble  the  amount  of
riches,  of  necessaries,  conveniences,  and  amusements,  in  one
state  of  society,  that  they  could  produce  in  another ;  but  they
will  not  on  that  account  add  any  thing  to  value."  (c.  20.
2d.  edit.)

This  argument,  founded  on  facts  which  are  not  contested,
appears  to  accord  perfectly  with  the  opinions  you  main-
tain. The  question  whether  these  facts  confirm  or  destroy
that  doctrine  of  value  which  teaches  that  riches  are  com-
posed of  the  value  of  the  things  we  possess,  applying  the
word  value  to  those  values  only  which  are  recognized  and
exchangeable.  What  is  there,  in  fact,  but  value,  but  that
quality  capable  of  appreciation,  capable  of  being  more  or
less,  which  exists  in  the  things  we  possess  ?  It  is  the  qua-
litv  which  enables  us  to  obtain,  in  exchange  for  the  things
we  have,  those  of  which  we  are  in  want.  This  value  is  so
much  the  greater,  as  the  thing  we  have  will  procure  a
greater  quantity  of  the  thing  we  want.  Thus  if  I  desire
to  exchange  a  horse  which  I  possess,  for  corn  that  I  want;
that  is  to  say,  if  I  desire  to  sell  my  horse  to  buy  corn,  if  my
horse  is  worth  sixty  pounds,  I  have  twice  as  much  value
to  convert  into  corn  as  if  my  horse  was  only  worth  thirty
pounds :  I  should  have  twice  as  many  bushels  of  corn,  and


80  LETTER V.

this  portion  of  my  property  will  be  twice  as  great.  And
as  the  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  generally  to  all  that
I  possess,  it  follows  that  our  riches  must  be  measured  by
the  value  of  the  things  we  possess.  This  is  a  consequence
that  none  can  reasonably  dispute.

You  cannot  deny,  says  Mr.  Ricardo  to  me,  that  we  are
the  more  rich,  the  more  agreeable  and  necessary  things  we
have  to  consume  .whatever  may  otherwise  be  their  value. I
do  not  deny  it :  but  have  we  not  more  things  to  consume
when  we  have  the  power  of  acquiring  them  in  greater
quantity  ? To  have  in  one's  hands  the  power  of  purchasing
a  greater  quantity  of  useful  things,  a  greater  quantity  of
utility,  extending  this  expression  to  whatever  is  necessary
and  agreeable,  is  to  possess  more  riches. But  this  propo-
sition does  not  contradict  whatever  there  is  of  truth  in  the
definition  of  riches  given  by  Mr. Ricardo  and  yourself. You
say  that  riches  consists  in  the  quantity  of  necessary  and
agreeable  things  we  possess. I  say  so  too ;  but  these  words,
quantity  of  things  necessary  and  agreeable , have  a  very
vague  and  arbitrary  meaning,  unfit  to  enter  into  a  perfect
definition  :  I  render  them  precise  and  clear  by  the  idea  of
their  exchangeable  value. The  condition  of  utility  then  is
the  being  equal  to  another  utility,  which  men  are  willing
to  give  in  exchange  for  that  which  you  possess. It  be-
comes then  an  equation. We  can  compare  one  with  another
by  means  of  a  third. A  sack  of  corn  is  equal  in  value  to  a
piece  of  stuff,  when  each  of  them  can  be  exchanged  for  the
same  number  of  shillings. This  then  serves  as  a  basis  for
all  comparisons ;  what  enables  us  to  measure  an  increase,  or
a  diminution;  in  a  word,  this  is  the  foundation  of  a  science.
Political  economy  is  nothing  without  it :  it  is  this  conside-
ration alone  which  has  taken  it  out  of  the  dominion  of
fancy ;  it  is  so  essential  that  you  have  been  compelled  to
do  homage  to  it  yourself  without  intending  it ;  and  that


TO  MR.  MALTHUS.  81

there  is  not  one  of  your  arguments  in  which  it  is  not  either
expressed  or  understood.  If  it  had  not  been  so,  you  would
have  caused  the  science  to  retrograde,  instead  of  enriching
it  with  new  truths.

While  your  definition,  and  that  of  Mr.  Ricardo,  is  want-
ing in  precision,  it  is  also  wanting  in  extent :  it  does  not
embrace  the  whole  of  what  constitutes  our  riches.  What!
are  our  riches  limited  to  objects  which  are  material,  neces-
sary, and  agreeable  ?  What  then  do  you  think  of  our  ta-
lents ?  Do  they  not  belong  to  the  productive  powers  ?
Do  we  not  draw  revenues  from  them  ?  Revenues  more  or
less  large,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  draw  a  greater  reve-
nue from  an  acre  of  good  land  than  from  an  acre  of  heath?
I  know  some  admirable  artists  who  have  no  other  income
than  what  they  derive  from  their  talents,  and  who  yet  live
in  opulence.  According  to  you,  they  ought  to  be  no  richer
than  a  dauber  of  signs.

It  is  impossible  for  you  to  deny,  that  whatever  has  an
exchangeable  value  makes  part  of  our  wealth.  It  is  com-
posed entirely  of  the  productive  powers  which  we  possess;
our  lands,  our  capitals,  and  our  personal  faculties.  Of
these,  land  is  alienable,  but  not  consumable — capital  is
both  alienable  and  consumable ;  while  talents,  though  in-
capable of  alienation,  are  consumable ;  they  perish  with
those  who  possess  them.  From  these  funds,  all  the  reve-
nues upon  which  society  subsists  are  derived ;  and  (what
may  appear  paradoxical,  although  it  is  perfectly  true)  all
these  revenues  are  immaterial /  for  they  are  derived  from
an  immaterial  quality — utility.  The  different  kinds  of
utility  are  derived  from  our  productive  powers,  and  are
comparable  with  each  other  by  their  value,  which  I  have
no  need  here  to  denominate  exchangeable,  because  I  can
not  recognize  any  value  in  political  economy  which  is  not
exchangeable.


82  LETTER V.

As  to  the  difficulty  raised  by  Mr.  Ricardo,  that  by  im-
proved processes  a  million  of  people  might  produce  twice
6r  thrice  as  much  riches,  without  producing  more  values,
it  vanishes  when  we  consider,  as  we  ought,  production  as
an  exchange  in  which  the  productive  services  of  labour,  land,
and  capital  is  given,  in  order  to  obtain  the  production.  It
is  by  means  of  these  services  that  we  obtain  all  the  pro-
ductions which  exist  in  the  world ;  and  this,  by  the  bye,
is  what  gives  value  to  productions ;  for  after  having  ac-
quired them  by  dint  of  labour  or  expense,  we  do  not  part
from  them  for  nothing.  Now,  since  our  first  riches  are  the
productive  powers  we  possess,  and  our  first  revenues  are
the  productive  services  which  emanate  from  them,  we  are
so  much  the  richer ;  our  productive  services  have  so  much
the  greater  value,  as  they  may  be  able  to  obtain  in  the
exchange  called  production,  a  greater  quantity  of  useful
things.  And  as  a  greater  quantity  of  useful  things,  and
their  greater  cheapness,  are  expressions  perfectly  synony-
mous, the  producers  are  richer  when  productions  are  more
abundant,  and  less  dear.  I  say  the  producers  generally,
because  competition  compels  them  to  give  their  produc-
tions for  what  they  have  cost ;  *  so  that  when  the  producers
of  corn  or  stuffs  have  succeeded,  with  the  same  quantity  of
productive  services,  to  produce  twice  the  quantity  of  corn
or  stuff,  all  other  producers  will  be  able  to  purchase  dou-
ble the  quantity  of  corn  or  stuff  with  the  same  quantity  of
productive  services,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  with  the
productions  which  result  from  them.

This,  Sir,  is  the  well-founded  doctrine,  without  which
I  consider  it  impossible  to  explain  the  very  great  difficul-
ties of  political  economy,  and  particularly  how  it  is  that  a

*  It  is  always  to  be  remembered  that  the  profits  of  the  manufacturer  are
considered  as  part  of  the  cost,  or  charges  of  production. — TR.


TO MR.  MALTHUS.

nation  can  become  richer  while  its  productions  diminish  in
value,  although  riches  consist  in  value.  You  see  that  I
do  not  fear  to  lay  down  ray  pretended  paradoxes  in  their
simplest  form.  I  strip  them  completely  naked,  and  submit
them  to  the  candour  of  Mr.  Ricardo  and  yourself,  and  to
the  good  sense  of  the  public.  I  shall  however  hold  my-
self at  liberty  to  explain  them  if  they  are  misunderstood,
and  to  defend  them  with  perseverance  if  they  are  unjustly
attacked.


THE END.


INDEX.


ACCUMULATION  (only  means  of  forming  capital)  is  necessarily  slow,
36 — is  not  non-consumption,  39 — is  discouraged  when  ca-
pital is  too  abundant,  40 — its  effect  destroyed  by  losses  in
other  places,  41.

Agricultural  Laborers,  more  numerous  in  France  than  neces-
sary, 44.

Agriculture,  cause  of  slow  progress  in  France  (note),  44 — her
produce  might  be  doubled  without  increase  of  laborers,  44.

Annuitants,  Public — See  Fundholders.

Appearances,  deceitful,  3.

Archimedes,  astonishment  he  would  feel  at  our  workshops  and
productions,  143.

BACON,  a  saying  of  his,  64.
Bank  of  France,  money  in  its  coffers  (note),  49.
Brazil, ill  administered,  would purchase more  if  it  produced
more,  9.

CANALS,  wanting  in  France  (note),  44.

Capital  (value  devoted  to  reproductive  consumption),  the  ser-
vice which  it  renders  is  an  immaterial  product,  16 — con-
sumption of,  distinguished  from  that  of  its  productive  ser-
vice, 18 — is  permanent,  although  composed  of  fugitive  pro-
ductions (note),  19 — is  employed  in  advancing  the  charges  of
production,  33 — is  slow  in  formation,  36 — is  advantage-
ously distributed  amongst  the  producers,  37 — fewer  induce-
ments to  accumulate  when  it  abounds,  40 — when  it  ceases
to  afford  sufficient  profits,  4S,  49 — an  estimate  of  one  ne-
cessary for  a  stocking  manufactory,  71.


INDEX.

Capitalist;  how  he  is  a  producer,  15 — consumes  the  value  de-
rived from  the  use  of  his  capital,  while  the  speculator  con-
sumes the  capital  itself,  16 — is  not  an  unproductive  consumer,
32 — the  motives  of  capitalists  of  no  importance,  37.

Civilization  -,  what,  50 — depends  on  the  perfection  of  our  tools,
64.

Consume,  to;  is  to  destroy  the  quality  which  makes  objects  fit
for  use  ;  that  is,  to  destroy  their  value,  17.

Consumers;  the  true  are  those  who  produce,  4 — an  unproductive
one  cannot  purchase  any  thing,  31 — except  with  what  others
produce,  33,  48 — income  of,  increased  by  machinery,  66 —
when  unable  to  purchase  the  objects  of  their  consumption,
74.

Consumption  (the  action  which  destroys  all  or  part  of  the  value  of
things),  17 — reproductive,  employs  producers,  as  well  as
unproductive,  38 — deranged  by  the  charges  of  production,
58.

Costs  of  Production  ;  (what  must  be  paid  in  order  to  obtain  pro-
ductive services)  are  reimbursed  by  the  value  of  the  produc-
tion, 14 — which  generally  is  sufficient  to  pay  for  them,  27 —
are  smaller  as  the  production  is  abundant,  29 — when  high,
shews  that  there  are  products  capable  of  covering  them,  31 —
may  be  more  valuable  than  the  resulting  production,  48,  49,
51 — are  increased  by  the  progress  of  luxury,  51 — and  re-
duced by  expeditive  processes,  66.

DEBT,  English  Public ;  erroneous  opinion  of  its  utility,  53.

ECONOMY,  POLITICAL  ;  is  a  new  science,  1 — and  one  which  leaves
the  fewest  facts  unexplained,  21 — ought  not  to  exhort,
but  only  describe,  34 — seldom  advises,  41 — teaches  a  doc-
trine eminently  social,  60 — proves  that  riches  can  be  created
from  all  things,  76 — when  it  became  a  science,  80.

ENGLAND  (the  British  Isles)  was  unable  under  Elizabeth  to  employ
one-third  of  the  workmen  it  does  now,  4 — why  its  produc-
tions are  not  well  sold  in  foreign  countries,  8 — refuses  even
the  provisions  by  means  of  which  they  might  be  paid  for,  9


INDEX.

— why  its  agricultural  produce  cannot  be  so  increased  as  to
pay  for  its  superabundant  manufactured  produce,  45.

Estate,  Landed,  its  productions  entirely  immaterial,  16.

Exchange  (act  of  giving  a  thing  which  is  valuable  for  another
which  is  equally  so)  can  only  take  place  in  a  state  of  society,
12 — is  only  of  utilities,  22-— is  a  faculty  peculiar  to  man,
31 — appropriates  all  productions  to  all  wants,  31.

FACTS,  deceive  if  we  draw  false  consequences  from  them,  3.

Farmer ;  how  a  producer,  14 — compared  with  a  manufacturer,
25.

Functionaries,  Public;  do  not  increase  the  markets  by  their  con-
sumptions, 33.

Fundholders  ;  idem — 32.

Funds,  Productive ;  every  thing  whatever  from  which  income  is
derived,  81.

Future;  to  sacrifice  it  to  the  present  is  equally  destructive  to
morality  and  economy,  42.

IMPROVEMENTS;  not  to  be  rejected  for  inconvenience,  64.
Industry ;  why  there  are  so  few  lucrative  employments,  48 — is

an  application  of  the  laws  of  nature,  64 — its  progress  attended

with  an  immense  number  of  new  enjoyments,  69.
Interest ;  the  price  of  the  productive  service  of  capital,  19— is

a  material  value  given  in  exchange  for  this  service,  and  is

consumed  by  the  capitalist,  19.
Italy ;  returns  English  merchandize,  6 — cannot  buy  because  it

does  not  produce  wherewithal  to  pay  for  them,  8.
Jesuits  ;  singular  advertisement  to  their  commentary  on  Newton

21.

LABOUR  ;  the  word  not  adapted  to  express  PRODUCTIVE  SERVICES,
15 — is  not  the  corner  stone  of  Adam  Smith's  work,  21 — is
only  a  production,  £3.

Landholder,  how  he  is  a  producer,  15— is  not  an  unproductive
consumer,  32.


INDEX.

Lauderdale,  Lord,  gives  a  bad  definition  of  riches,  75.
Luxury,  not  more  favorable  to  productions  than  reproductive
expenses,  38 — increases  the  charges  of  production,  51.

MACHINES,  are  only  complicated  tools,  63 — inconveniences  of,
only  a  change  of  incomes,  65 — augment  the  incomes  of  con-
sumers, without  lessening  those  of  producers,  66 — create
markets,  68 — inconveniences  temporary,  70 — cause  more
fears  than  mischiefs,  71 — example  of  stocking  machinery,
72.

Majority  of  votes,  means  of  obtaining  without  purchasing
them,  10.

Malthus,  Mr.  believes  all  merchandize  may  be  too  abundant
at  once,  5  —  accuses  Ricardo  and  Say  of  not  regarding
the  limited  wants  of  consumers,  10 — denies  the  existence  of
immaterial  productions  (though  there  are  none  other),  16 —
maintains  that  personal  services  are  not  productive,  19 —
and  that  this  is  the  corner-stone  of  Smith,  20 — believes  that
men  may  produce  more  than  they  can  consume,  24 — and
that  the  value  of  such  productions  will  not  suffice  to  pay  for
the  labour  by  which  they  were  produced,  27 — that  profits
are  reduced  by  the  cheapness  of  productions,  29 — that  in-
dolence hinders  consumption  (Yes,  because  it  hinders  pro-
duction), 31 — contradicts  himself  by  considering  unproduc-
tive consumers  necessary,  32 — believes,  erroneously,  that  it
is  necessary  to  produce  a  value  which  is  greater  than  the
costs  of  production,  34 — is  alarmed  at  increase  of  capital,  34
— is  against  saving,  36,  38, 42,  note — compares  the  increase
of  capital  to  that  of  children,  42 — is  against  paying  off  the
national  debt,  53 — attributes  no  other  advantage  to  the  in-
vention of  machines  than  increasing  the  sale  of  commo-
dities, 62 — his  definition  of  riches  examined,  75.

Manufacturer;  how  a  producer,  14 — compared  with  a  farmer,
25 — why  his  revenue  increased  by  machinery,  although  re-
duced by  competition,  66.

Market ;  want  of  attributed  to  want  of  production,  48— want  of
in  the  United  States  for  the  productions  of  commerce,  and


INDEX.

not  for  others,  54 — shut  or  diminished  inconsequence  of  the
dearness  of  productions,  58.

Matter;  nothing  in  Political  Economy,  21,22.

Materials,  the  original ;  have  no  other  value  than  that  of  the  la-
bour by  which  they  have  been  produced  (note),  34.

Money  ;  is  only  a  transitory  agent  by  means  of  which  what  we
have  to  sell  is  exchanged  for  what  we  want  to  buy,  2,  14.

Mills,  corn;  benefits  to  consumers  from  their  employment,  66.

NATIONS  ;  are  able  to  purchase  all  they  produce,  26,  27 — but  not
to  produce  every  thing  they  desire,  43 — their  convulsions
foreseen,  46 — are  richer  in  proportion  as  their  productions
are  cheaper,  82.

Nature ;  it  is  by  obeying  that  she  is  commanded,  64.

Net  produce  of  lands  ;  useless  subject  of  discussion,  61.

New  York  ;  why  sales  are  effected  there  which  could  not  have
been  so  two  hundred  years  ago,  4.

New  Orleans ;  destined  to  become  one  of  the  greatest  marts  in
the  world,  57.

POPULATION,  of  France,  supposed  capable  of  being  doubled,  44 —
it  would  then  be  less  rude,  45.

Price  (value  of  things  estimated  in  money)  may  exceed  the
value  of  the  utility  of  the  production,  48 — how  augmented
by  luxury,  51 — the  smallest  superabundance  of  commodi-
ties considerably  decreases  it,  59 — market  price  the  only
one  considered  in  the  science  of  Political  Economy,  78.

Prodigality  ;  the  sacrifice  of  the  future  to  the  present,  42.

Producer  (he  who  by  means  of  industry,  land,  or  capital,  assists
in  giving  value  to  things)  15 — is  a  dealer  in  utility,  21 —
can  buy  as  much  utility  as  he  has  produced,  26— consumes
the  value  of  which  capital  advances  the  price,  37 — gains  as
much  by  reproductive  consumers  as  by  unproductive,  38 —
may  be  disabled  from  purchasing  what  he  has  produced,  46
— may  carry  on  a  fool's  trade,  48 — is  more  or  less  enabled
to  throw  the  burden  from  his  own  shoulders,  52 — why  richer
when  productions  are  cheaper,  82.


INDEX.

Production  ;  described,  13 — why  tending  to  things  of  first  neces-
sity, 15  and  30 — is  only  a  change  of  form  given  to  matter,
17 — not  understood  by  Adam  Smith,  21 — limited  by  the
nature  of  things,  43 — and  by  taxes,  45 — cause  of  the  dis-
proportion of  it,  58.

Produce,  to;  (to  give  value  to  things,  or  to  augment  that  which
they  have,  which  is  done  by  rendering  them  useful  for  some
object)  11.

Productions  (results  of  productive  operations)  they  are  too  abun -
dant,  according  to  Sismondi,  6 — their  value  sufficient  to  pay
for  all  the  productive  services  when  it  is  equal  to  what  they
have  cost,  14,27 — are  exchanged  for  each  other,  14 — their
yalue  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  productive  services,  but  on
the  contrary,  the  inverse,  28 — the  falling  of  their  price  does
not  diminish  the  profits  of  producers,  29 — find  consumers
when  persons  are  able  to  pay  for  them,  30 — are  things  which
have  value,  and  whatever  has  value  is  an  object  of  desire,  31
— not  necessary  to  sell  for  more  than  their  cost  to  be  con-
tinually produced,  34 — taxes  render  the  price  dispropor-
tionate to  their  utility,  45 — part  only  of  the  production  is  then
the  property  of  the  producers,  48 — are  rendered  dearer  by
luxury,  51 — the  least  fall  in  price  rapidly  increases  their  sale,
52 — why  America  does  not  furnish  advantageous  returns  for,
55 — those  which  it  does  furnish,  56 — and  those  which  it  may,
56 — disorders  of,  occasioned  by  bad  laws,  58 — the  least  super-
abundance greatly  brings  down  their  price,  59 — the  glut  of
many  kinds  produced  by  ignorance  of  the  wants  of  people,
59 — new  ones  derived  from  the  progress  of  industry,  69 —
all  originally  acquired  by  productive  services,  82.

Productions  (immaterial)  value  produced  and  consumed  at  the
same  moment  j  all  services  are  immaterial  productions,
16.

English,  why  a  glut  of  in  Brazil  and  Italy,  S.

Profits  (price  of  productive  services)  of  a  speculator  are  the'price
of  his  productions,  labours,  14 — are  the  wages  of  his  labour
and  talent,  34 — provide  for  the  consumption  of  producers,
15 — are  not  lessened  by  the  low  price  of  productions,  28,  29


INDEX.

— are  not  sufficient  for  living  in  England,  36 — how  lessened

by  taxes,  47.
Property ;  established  and  consolidated  by  Political  Economy,

60.
Provisions; are  even  rejected  by  England,  9 — are  limited  by

extent  of  territory,  43 — might  be  doubled  in  France,  44,

REVENUE,  its  source,  12 — always  immaterial,  17 — change  in,  pro-
duced by  machinery,  65 — is  composed  of  every  kind  of  ex-
changeable value  derived  from  any  fund  or  faculty,  81.

Ricardo,  M.  examined  by  Sismondi,  7 — identifies  erroneously
the  costs  of  production  with  the  value  of  the  production,  29
—thinks  industry  always  proportionate  to  capital,  49 —
maintains  that  riches  are  different  from  the  value  of  what
we  possess,  79 — his  error  exposed,  79,  81.

Riches,  concealed;  their  consumption  is  merely  deferred,  38.

Riches,  natural  ;  those  which  nature  furnishes  gratuitously,  why
not  subjects  of  political  economy,  76.

Riches,  social ;  are  such  as  we  purchase  with  productive  services
and  have  exchangeable  value,  12 — are  the  only  proper  sub-
ject of  political  economy,  12 — phenomena  of  their  produc-
tion imperfectly  described  by  Adam  Smith,  21 — are  pro-
portionably  greater  as  productions  are  cheaper,  29  and  82 —
ill  defined  by  Lord  Lauderdale  and  Mr.  Malthus,  75 — may
be  created  out  of  any  thing,  76 — essential  character  is  value,
76 — measured  by  the  quantity  of  things  we  are  able  to
buy,  79 — their  true  nature,  81.

Roads,  necessary  for  sale  of  agricultural  produce,  44.

SAVAGES,  why  reject  civilization,  50.

Services,  productive  (action  of  land,  capital,  and  industry  in  pro-
ducing) the  price  we  pay  for  productions,  12— are  pur-
chased by  a  speculator,  who  consumes  them,  14 — all  give  out
immaterial  productions,  16 — are  the  source  of  our  revenues,
17 — how  productions  suffice  to  pay  for  them,  26— even
when  their  price  falls,  27 — are  best  paid  when  productions
are  cheapest,  28 — the  high  price  of,  shews  that  there  are
productions  which  are  profitable,  ^1 — raw  materials  are


INDEX.

only  valuable  from  the  value  of  the  productive  services  re-
quired to*produce  them  (note),  34.

Sismondi,  M.  laments  the  universal  glut  of  merchandize,  5 — is
wrong  in  calling  the  capital  of  a  speculator  the  revenue  of
a  workman  ;  his  revenue  is  his  labour ;  it  is  the  value  of
his  labour  that  he  consumes,  18 — thinks  every  kind  of  in-
dustry obstructed,  48 — does  not  attach  sufficient  importance
to  cheapness,  67 — his  estimate  of  a  stocking  manufactory
inadmissible,  71.

Smith,  Adam,  his  distinction  between  productive  and  unproduc-
tive labour,  not  the  foundation  of  his  work,  20 — did  not  see
all  the  phenomena  of  the  production  and  consumption  of
riches,  21 — gives  the  name  of  riches  only  to  things  which
have  exchangeable  value,  78.

Soldiers  do  not  increase  sales  by  their  consumption,  33.

Sugar  ;  consumption  of  in  France  in  1813  and  1820,  52.

TALENTS,  are  part  of  our  wealth,  81.

Taxes,  effect  of,  on  production,  45,  46 — oblige  producers  to  live
on  part  only  of  what  they  produce,  48 — why  they  weigh
heavily  on  the  labourers,  53 — are  a  fine  put  on  production,
52 — occasion  too  many  of  some  productions  and  too  few  of
others,  58.

Tax-payers,  would  consume  more  if  it  were  not  for  the  taxes,
33.

Tools  are  uncomplicated  machines,  63 — civilization  depends  on
their  perfection,  64.

Towns,  manufacturing,  present  markets  for  agricultural  pro-
duce, 44.

Trader,  how  a  producer,  14.

UNITED  STATES  overflow  with  English  merchandize,  7 — and  with
commercial  productions,  because  their  maritime  commerce
has  out-run  their  other  industry,  54 — what  they  send  to
Europe,  55 — when  they  will  find  advantageous  returns,  56.

VALUE  (that  quality  in  a  thing  from  which  it  can  be  exchanged
for  another)  depends  on  utility,  10,  13 — is  an  immaterial


INDEX.

quality,  17 — is  the  corner-stone  of  Adam  Smith's  work,  20 —
of  productions,  when  falling,  increases  the  funds  and  re-
venues of  a  nation,  29 — is  the  essential  character  of  riches,
— can  only  be  exchangeable  when  recognised,  77  — -is
subject  to  fixed  laws,  the  exposition  of  which  is  the  object
of  political  economy,  78 — is  measured  by  the  quantity  of
useful  things  which  can  be  obtained  in  exchange,  79 —
admits  of  true  scientific  equations,  80.
Vice  is  a  bad  calculation,  42.

WORKMEN  wanted  employment  even  in  the  time  of  Elizabeth,
though  only  one  third  of  their  present  number,  4 — their
labour  is  an  immaterial  production  only,  17 — it  is  the  value
of  this  production  which  furnishes  the  means  of  their  con-
sumptions, 18 — in  what  case  they  become  dependent  on
their  parishes,  49 — how  their  labour  ceases  to  be  offered
(note),  ibid. — why  they  suffer  more  than  other  producers,
53 — political  economy  proves  to  them  the  necessity  of  main-
taining property,  60 — employment  of  machinery  compels
them  to  change  their  occupations,  but  does  not  destroy  the
source  of  their  revenues,  68 — judgment  of  posterity  on  their
present  distress,  70 — mitigations  and  indemnifications  to
workmen  for  the  temporary  inconveniences  of  employing
machinery,  70.

YOUNG,  ARTHUR,  believes  France  capable  of  doubling  its  agri-
cultural productions,  44.


END OF  THE INDEX.


^y,  Tooks-Couit,
Lane,  London.


CATECHISM

OF

POLITICAL  ECONOMY;

OR,

FAMILIAR  CONVERSATIONS  ON  THE  MANNER  IN
WHICH  WEALTH  IS  PRODUCED,  DISTRIBUTED,
AND  CONSUMED.


CHAPTER  THE  FIRST.

On  the  Composition  of  Wealth  and  the  Use  of
Money.


fVHA  T  do  you  understand  by  the  word  wealth  ?

Whatever  has  a  value;  gold,  silver,  land,  mer-
chandise

Are  not  gold  and  silver  preferable  to  other  wealth  ?

That  is  preferable  in  which  the  greatest  value  is  to
be  found.  One  hundred  and  ten  guineas  in  corn  are
preferable  to  one  hundred  guineas  in  gold.

But,  where  the  value  is  equal,  is  not  the  money  better
than  the  merchandise  ?

In  fact,  it  is  preferred.


2  ON  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WEALTH

What  is  the  reason  of  it  ?

The  custom  generally  established  of  using  money  as
a  medium  in  exchanges,  renders  that  species  of  mer-
chandise more  "convenient  than  any  other  for  those  who
have  purchases  to  make ;  that  is.  for  every  body.

What  do  you  mean  by  money  being  a  medium  of
exchanges  ?

If  you  are  a  farmer  and  desire  to  exchange  a  part  of
your  corn  for  cloth,  you  begin  by  procuring  money
for  your  corn;  then  with  that  money  you  buy  cloth.

Without  doubt.

You  have  in  reality  made  a  double  exchange,  in
which  you  have  given  corn  to  one  man,  and  another
has  given  cloth  to  you.

That  is  true.

The  value  of  this  corn  was  transitorily  in  money,
afterwards  in  cloth ;  and  though  you  have  in  fact  ex-
changed your  corn  for  cloth,  money  was  the  interme-
diate form  which  that  value  assumed  in  order  to  change
itself  into  cloth.  Such  is  the  use  of  money.

Well!  But  if  all  these  values  are  equal,  why  is  that  of
money  preferred?

Because,  when  a  man  once  possesses  money,  he  need
make  only  one  exchange,  in  order  to  obtain  what  he
may  want;  while  he  who  possesses  every  other  mer-
chandise, has  two  exchanges  to  make.  He  must,  in
the  first  place,  exchange  his  merchandise  for  money,
and  afterwards  his  money  for  merchandise.


AND  THE  USE  OF  MONEY.  3

Canyon  make  use  of  any  ether  thing  for  this  purpose
instead  of  money  ?

Yes ;  there  are  countries  in  which  shells  and  other
articles  are  used ;  but  the  metals,  and  principally  gold
and  silver,  are  of  all  materials,  the  most  convenient
to  be  used  as  money:  It  is  that  which  has  caused  them
to  be  adopted  by  all  civilized  and  commercial  nations.

Then  in  those  countries  in  which  shells  are  used  as
money ,  they  are  the  objects  which,  the  value  being  equal,
are  preferred  in  exchanges  ?

They  are  so  in  effect:  but  the  precious  metals  are
more  sought  after  than  the  other  monies,  because  they
possess,  as  merchandise,  certain  advantages  which  in-
crease the  preference  they  possess  as  money.  They
contain  much  value  in  small  bulk,  which  permits  them
to  be  easily  concealed  and  carried  from  place  to  place  ;
they  do  not  spoil  by  keeping ;  they  may  be  divided  or
reunited  at  will,  almost  without  loss ;  in  fine,  they
are  valuable  all  over  the  world,  and  whatever  fre-
quented place  we  travel  to  with  this  sort  of  wealth,  we
are  sure,  on  more  or  less  favourable  conditions,  to  be
able  to  exchange  it  for  whatever  we  may  want.

I  comprehend  the  reason  why  money,  and,  above  all,
money  of  gold  and  silver,  is  more  desirable  than  any
other  merchandise;  but  how  can  we  procure  it?

As  we  procure  every  thing  else  that  we  want,  by  an
exchange  when  we  have  not  a  mine  that  produces  it;


4  ON  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WEALTH, &C.

in  the  same  way  that  we  procure  fruit  when  we  do  not
possess  the  tree  that  bears  it.

How  can  we  obtain  a  thing  in  order  to  give  it  in  ex-
change for  money  ?

Produce  it.

Produce  a  thing!  But  supposing  that  possible,  hov)
shall  I  be  certain  that  I  shall  get  money  for  that  thing?

You  may  assure  yourself  of  that  by  giving  it  a  value.

But  how  can  a  value  be  given  to  things  ?

We  shall  see  that  in  the  following  chapters.


£ 5 ]


CHAPTER  II.
On  the  Utility  and  Value  of  Products.


TV H 'AT  do  you  understand  by  the  word  Products?

1  understand  all  those  things  to  which  men  have  con-
sented to  give  a  value.

ffow  is  value  given  to  a  thing?

J3y  giving  it  utility,

How  is  the  utility  of  a  thing  the  cause  of  its  having  a
value  ?

Because  persons  are  then  to  be  found  who  are  in
want  of  this  thing ;  they  desire  to  have  it  from  those
who  produce  it.  These,  on  their  side,  will  not  part
from  it  until  they  are  paid  the  expenses  they  have  been
at  in  producing  it,  including  their  profits.  The  value
of  the  thing  is  established  by  the  result  of  this  oppo-
sition between  the  producer  and  the  consumer.

But  there  are  many  things  of  great  utility ,  and,  no
value,  as  water.  Why  have  they  no  value?

Because  nature  gives  them  gratuitously,  and  withou  t
stint,  and  we  are  not  obliged  to  produce  them,  If  a


6 ON  THE  UTILITY  AND  VALUE  OF  PRODUCTS.

person  was  able  to  create  water,  and  wished  to  sell  it,
no  one  would  buy  it,  because  it  could  be  got  at  the
river  for  nothing.  Thus  all  the  world  enjoy  these
things,  but  they  are  not  riches  to  any  body.  If  all
things  that  men  could  desire  were  in  the  same  case,  no
one  would  be  rich,  but  no  one  would  be  in  want  of
riches,  since  each  could  enjoy  all  things  at  his  plea-
sure.

But  this  is  not  the  case:  the  greater  part  of  things
which  are  necessary  and  even  indispensible  to  us,  are
not  given  to  us  gratuitously  and  unlimitedly.  Human
industry  must,  with  pains  and  labour,  collect,  fashion
and  transport  them.

They  then  become  products.  The  utility,  the  facul-
ty they  have  acquired  of  being  serviceable,  gives  them
a  value  and  this  value  is  riches.

When  once  riches  are  thus  created  they  may  be  ex-
changed for  other  riches,  other  values,  and  we  may
procure  the  products  which  we  want  in  exchange  for
those  we  can  spare.  We  have  seen  in  the  preceding
chapter  how  money  facilitates  this  exchange.

I  now  conceive  how  products  alone  are  riches ;  but
their  utility  does  not  appear  to  be  the  only  cause  which
gives  them  value  ;  for  there  are  products,  such  as  rings
and  artificial jflowers,  which  have  value  but  no  utility.

You  do  not  discover  the  utility  of  these  products
because  you  call  only  useful  that  which  is  so  to  the  eye  of
reason,  but  you  ought  to  understand  by  that  word


ON  THE  UTILITY  AJfD  VALUE  OF  PRODUCTS. 7

whatever  is  capable  of  satisfying  the  wants  and  desires
of  man  such  as  he  is.  His  vanity  and  his  passions  are
to  him  wants,  sometimes  as  imperious  as  hunger.  He
is  the  sole  judge  of  the  importance  that  things  are  of  to
him,  and  of  the  want  he  has  of  them.  We  cannot  judge
of  it  but  by  the  price  he  puts  on  them.  The  value  of
things  is  the  sole  measure  of  their  utility  to  man.  It  is
enough  for  us  to  give  them  utility  in  his  eyes  in  order  to
give  them  a  value.  Now  that  is  what  we  call  to  pro-
duce, to  create  products*

Recapitulate  what  you  have  said.

Give  to  any  thing,  to  a  material  which  has  no  value,
utility ^  and  you  give  it  a  value ;  that  is,  you  make  a
product  of  it,  you  create  wealth.

One  can  then  create  wealth  ?

Jncontestibly.

/  thought  that  man  could  not  create  any  thing.

He  cannot  create  matter :  lie  cannot  make  the  laws
which  regulate  nature ;  but  with  existing  matter  and
the  laws  of  nature  such  as  they  are,  he  can  give  a  value
to  certain  things,  and  consequently  can  create  wealth.

What  country  may  be  called  a  rich  country  ?

One  in  which  many  things  of  value,  or  more  briefly,
many  values  are  to  be  found;  in  the  same  manner  as  a
family  which  possesses  many  of  these  values  is  a  rich
family.


CHAPTER  III.


have  told  me  that  to  produce  is  to  give  utility  to
things:  how  is  utility  given?  How  are  we  to  pro^
duce?

In  an  infinity  of  ways;  but  for  our  convenience  we
may  arrange,  in  three  classes,  every  manner  of  pro-
ducing.

What  is  thejirst  manner  of  producing  ?

It  consists  in  collecting  or  gathering  together  those
things  which  nature  creates,  either  without  the  inter-
vention of  man,  such  as  fish  and  minerals ;  or,  such  as
men  have,  by  the  cultivation  of  the  earth,  and  by
means  of  seeds,  induced  and  assisted  nature  to  produce.
All  these  works  are  alike  in  their  object.  They  are
called  Agricultural  Industry.

What  utility  is  given  to  a  thing  by  him  who  jinds  it
ready  made  to  his  hands  /  as  the  fisherman  who  takes  q
)  or  the  miner  who  collects  minerals?


ON  PRODUCTION;  9

He  renders  it  fit  for  use.  The  fish,  while  it  is  in  the
sea,  is  useless.  As  soon  as  it  is  brought  to  the  market
we  can  make  use  of  it.  In  like  manner,  it  is  in  vain
that  coal  exists  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth;  while  there,
it  is  of  no  utility ;  it  neither  warms  us,  nor  heats  the
iron  in  the  forge  :  it  is  the  industry  of  the  miner  that
makes  it  fit  for  these  purposes.  He  creates,  by.  ex-
tracting it  from  the  earth,  all  the  value  that  it  has  when
extracted.

How  does  the  cultivator  create  value  f

The  materials,  of  which  a  sack  of  corn  is  composed,
are  not  drawn  from  nothing ;  they  existed  before  the
corn  was  corn :  they  were  diffused  through  the  earth,
the  water,  and  the  air,  and  had  no  value  whatever.
The  industry  of  the  cultivator,  in  taking  measures  to
bring  these  different  matters  together,  first  under  the
form  of  grain,  and  afterwards  of  a  sack  of  corn,  created
a  value  which  they  had  not  before.  It  is  the  same
with  all  the  other  products  of  agriculture.
*  What  is  the  second  manner  of  producing  ?

It  consists  in  giving  to  the  product  of  another  indus-
try a  greater  value,  by  the  new  forms  which  we  give  to
it,  by  the  changes  which  it  is  made  to  undergo.  The
miner  procures  the  metal  of  which  a  buckle  is  made ;
but  a  buckle,  when  made,  is  worth  more  than  the
metal  of  which  it  is  formed.  The  value  of  the  buckle
above  that  of  the  metal  is  a  value  produced,  and  th^


10  ON PRODUCTION.

buckle  is  the  product  of  two  kinds  of  industry  :  of  that
of  the  miner,  and  that  of  the  manufacturer.  This  last
is  called  manufacturing  industry.

What  works  are  included  in  manufacturing  indus-
try?

It  includes  the  most  ordinary  as  well  as  the  most  ex-
quisite workmanship,  the  form  given  by  a  rough  vil-
lage artisan  to  a  pair  of  wooden  shoes,  as  well  as  that
given  to  a  piece  of  jewellery.  It  includes  alike  the
work  executed  by  a  single  cobler  in  his  stall,  and  by
hundreds  of  workmen  in  a  vast  manufactory.

What  is  the  third  manner  of  producing  ?

We  produce  also  by  buying  a  product  in  one  place,
where  it  is  of  a  less  value,  and  conveying  it  to  another,
where  it  is  of  greater  value.  This  is  the  work  of
Commercial  Industry.

How  does  commercial  industry  produce  utility r,  as  it
neither  changes  the  form  nor  the  substance  of  a  product^
which  is  sold  just  as  it  is  bought  ?

It  acts  like  the  fisherman,  of  whom  we  have  just
spoken :  it  takes  a  product  from  a  place  where  it  cannot
be  used ;  from  a  place,  at  least,  where  its  uses  are  less
extensive,  less  precious,  to  a  place  where  they  are  more
so,  or  where  its  production  is  less  easy,  less  abundant,
and  dearer.  Wood  is  little  used,  and  consequently
of  very  limited  utility  in  the  mountains,  where  it  so  far
exceeds  the  wants  of  the  inhabitants,  that  it  is  some*


ON PRODUCTION.  11

times  left  to  rot ;  this  utility,*  however,  becomes  very
considerable  when  the  same  wood  is  transported  into  a
city.  Hides  are  of  little  value  in  South  America,
where  they  have  a  great  number  of  wild  animals:  the
same  skins  have  a  great  value  in  Europe,  where  their
production  is  expensive,  and  their  uses  much  more
multiplied.  Commercial  Industry,  in  bringing  them,
augments  their  value  by  all  the  difference  between
their  price  in  Brazil  and  their  price  in  Europe.

What  is  comprehended  under  the  term  Commercial
Industry  ?

Every  species  of  industry  which  takes  a  product
from  one  place  and  transports  it  to  another,  where  it  is
more  precious,  and  which  thus  brings  it  within  the
reach  of  those  who  want  it.  It  includes  also,  by  ana-
logy, the  industry  which,  by  retailing  a  product,  brings
it  within  the  reach  of  small  consumers.  Thus  the
grocer,  who  buys  merchandise  in  gross  to  resell  it  in
detail  in  the  same  town ;  and  the  butcher,  who  buys
whole  beasts  to  resell  them  piece  by  piece,  exercises
Commercial  Industry.

Is  there  not  great  similarity  between  these  different
modes  of  producing  ?


*  We  must  never  forget  that,  by  the  words  utility  of  things,
we  mean  the  faculty  they  have  of  serving  those  purposes,  to
which  man  thinks  proper  to  apply  them,


12  ON PRODUCTION.

The  greatest.  They  all  consist  in  taking  a  product
in  one  state,  and  delivering  it  in  another,  in  which  it
has  a  greater  utility  and  a  higher  value.  They  may  be
all  reduced  to  one  species.  If  we  distinguish  them
here,  it  is  to  facilitate  the  study  of  their  results,  but
notwithstanding  all  our  distinctions  it  is  often  very  dif-
ficult to  separate  one  kind  of  industry  from  another.  A
villager,  who  makes  baskets,  is  a  manufacturer ;  when
Jie  carries  them  to  market,  he  becomes  commercial.
But  no  matter  by  which  means,  the  moment  that  we
create  or  that  we  augment  the  utility  of  things,  we
augment  their  value,  we  exercise  an  industry,  we  pro-
duce wealth.

For  shortness,  Agricultural  Industry  may  be  called
Agriculture;  Manufacturing  Industry  may  be  called
Manufactures  /  and  Commercial  Industry,  Commerce*


C  13  ]


CHAPTER  IV.

On  the  Operations  \  common  to  all  the  Species  of
Industry.


L  HA  VE  just  seen  that  agriculture,  manufactures,  and
commerce  are  productive  of  wealth:  by  what  means  do
they  attain  that  end  ?

An  industrious  undertaking,  whatever  it  may  be,  is
an  enterprize  in  which  a  man  decides,  what  part  of
the  material  and  of  the  laws  of  the  physical  and  moral
world  he  is  able  to  apply  to  the  production  of  a  use-
ful thing.

What  do  you  understand  by  the  laws  of  the  physical
world  ?

I  understand  the  laws  to  which  material  beings  are
subjected;  thus,  metals  are  softened  by  heat :  this  is  a
physical  law.

Give  me  an  example  of  the  use  of  this  physical  law  in
any  industrious  enterprize  ?

A  blacksmith,  who  uses  heat  to  soften  a  piece  of
iron  of  which  he  makes  a  horse-shoe,  is  the  undertaker


14; ON  THE  OPERATIONS  COMMON  TO  ALL

of  a  manufacturing  industry,  who  avails  himself  of  that
physical  law;  in  the  same  manner,  the  merchant,  who
fits  out  a  vessel,  uses  for  the  purpose  of  sending  it  be-
yond seas,  the  power  of  the  winds,  which  are  them-
selves the  effects  of  some  other  law  of  the  physical
world.

What  do  you  understand  bit/  the  laws  of  the  moral
world?

They  are  the rules to which  we are subjected
, by  the customs, the  wants,  and  the  will  of  man-
kind.

Give  me  an  instance  in  which  the  undertaker  of  any
industry  consults  the  laws  of  the  moral  world?

He  consults  them  when  he  informs  himself  of  the
manners,  the  wants,  and  the  legislation  of  men,  which
may  either  enable  him  to  procure  the  materials  for  his
industry,  or  furnish  him  with  consumers  of  his  pro-
ducts. Some  of  these  laws  belong  to  the  nature  of
man,  others  to  the  manners  of  the  country  and  age  in
which  we  live. He  who  takes  into  his  calculation  hu-
man vanity,  runs  little  risk  of  deceiving  himself. A
hatter  who  carries  on,  in  a  proper  manner,  his  busi-
ness among  us,  has  a  lucrative  occupation. He  would
have  gained  nothing  among  the  ancients,  who  did  not
wear  hats.

Who  are  those  who  study  the  laws  of  the  physical
world?
Those  who  cultivate  the  physical  and  mathemati-


THE SPECIES OF INDUSTRY.  15

cal  sciences :  such  as  chemists,  naturalists,  geometri-
cians, &c.

fVho  are  those  who  study  the  laws  of  the  moral
world?

Those  who  inform  themselves  of  morals,  politics,
history,  geography,  travels,  &c.

I  understand:  the  learned  serve  as  guides  to  the  indus*
trious  ?

Just  so :  and  the  work  of  the  'one,  as  well  as  the
other,  is  productive,  since  they  concur  in  creating  pro-
ducts. It  is  only  in  civilized  and  enlightened  coun-
tries that  we  see  a  very  great  and  productive  industry.
It  is  there  only  that  we  find  that  great  mass  of  acquired
knowledge,  of  which  the  industrious,  the  agriculturists,
manufacturers,  and  merchants,  avail  themselves.

Are  the  learned,  and  the  undertakers  of  works  of  in-
dustry,  the  only  industrious  men  2

No. There  are  also  workmen  under  the  direction  of
the  undertakers  of  works  of  industry. When  a  work-
man carries  on  an  enterprize  on  his  own  account,  as
the  knife-grinder  in  the  streets,  he  is  both  workman
and  undertaker.


CHAPTER  V.
On  Capital  and  Land.


IS  it  sufficient  for  an  undertaker  of  industry  to  have
the  talents  and  judgment  which  constitutes  his  industry  ?

No :  his  judgment  and  his  talent  would  be  exercised
upon  nothing.  He  must  possess,  besides  those,  the
materials  on  which  he  would  employ  his  industry,  and
the  indispensible  implements  to  carry  it  into  effect.
All  these  things  have  a  value  previously  acquired,  and
this  value  is  called  capital.

I  thought  that  capital  was  a  sum  of  money,  and  not
materials  and  utensils  ?

The  value  of  a  capital  at  the  moment  in  which  it  is
borrowed  may  have  the  form  of  money  :  but  it  has  it
only  transitorily,  in  the  same  manner  that  the  corn
which  a  producer  of  corn  desires  to  exchange  for
cloth,  is  exchanged  in  the  first  place  for  money,  which
is  to  be  again  exchanged  for  cloth.*  The  ralues

*  See  Chapter  I,  on  the  Use  of  Money.


ON CAPITAL AND LAND.  17

which  we  save,  in  order  to  be  employed  as  capitals
are,  in  the  same  manner,  products  which  we  successively
exchange  for  money,  and  when  we  desire  to  use  them
as  capital,  we  exchange  them  again  for  products  ne-
cessary to  production.

You  say  that  capital  is  composed  of  products,  that  is
to  say,  of  things  or  values  produced  by  the  industry  of
man:  a  capital  is  then  always  a  value  which  is
moveable  ?

No:  the  products  of  human  industry  may  be  either
moveable  or  inimoveable.  A  house  is  a  product  of  human
industry.  In  works  of  agriculture,  besides  the  value
of  the  land,  which  may  be  considered  as  a  great  and
admirable  instrument  in  the  hands  of  man,  and  which,
on  this  account,  makes  part  of  his  capital,  the  clearings,
the  buildings,  and  the  inclosures,  which  are  improve-
ments of  this  grand  instrument,  are  products  of
industry.

Are  there  not  also  moveable  values  in  the  capital  of  an
agriculturist  ?

Yes;  the  implements  of  labour,  the  cattle,  the  seed,
as  well  as  the  provisions  for  his  family,  his  servants,
and  his  animals :  and  even  the  money  that  is  destined
for  the  outgoings  which  his  undertaking  requires.

Tell  me  of  what  the  capital  of  a  manufacturer;  a
weaver,  for  example,  consists.

It  is  composed  of  the  value  of  his  first  material,
which  may  be  either  cotton,  flax3  wool,  or  silk :  also

c


18  ON CAPITAL AND LAN1>.

of  his  looms,  shuttles,  and  other  implements  :  and,  in
fact,  of  every  value  which  he  is  obliged  to  advance  for
his  own  maintenance  as  well  as  that  of  his  workmen.

If  the  value  of  the  capital  is  employed  in  the  purchase
of  all  these  things,  how  is  it  that  it  is  not  lost  ?

Because  the  result  of  all  these  things  is  a  ribband  or
a  cloth,  the  value  of  which  reimburses  the  capital,  and
pays  besides  to  the  weaver  the  profits  of  his  industry*
In  the  same  manner,  the  capital  of  the  merchant  con-
sists principally  of  the  value  of  the  merchandise  in
which  he  trades,  and  this  merchandise,  augmenting  in
value  in  his  hands,  represents  at  all  times  his  capital
increased  by  his  profits.

How  does  a  man,  engaged  in  industry,  know  whether
the  value  of  his  capital  is  increased  or  diminished  2

By  an  inventory ;  that  is,  by  a  detailed  account  of
all  that  he  possesses,  in  which  every  thing  is  valued
according  to  its  current  price.


CHAPTER  VI.
On  the  Formation  of  Capital,


1  SEE  that  to  create  values,  that  is,  riches,  industrious
talents  and  capital  are  necessary.  I  can  conceive  that
industrious  talents  may  be  acquired  by  study  and  prac-
tice ;  but  how  is  capital  to  be  procured?

It  must  be  created,  or  borrowed  of  those  who  have
created  it.

How  can  it  be  created?

To  answer  this  question,  it  is  necessary  to  begin  by
giving  some  notions  on  consumption,  although  this  is
not  the  proper  place,  and  it  ought  to  be  developed
Jiereafter.

What  do  you  understand  by  consumption  ?

Consumption  is  the  opposite  of  production :  it  is  a
destruction  of  values  produced.  We  cannot  destroy
matter  any  more  than  we  can  create  it ;  but  we  can
destroy  the  utility  that  has  been  given  to  it  ;  and,  in


20  ON THE FORMATION OF CAPITAL.

destroying  its  utility,  we  destroy  its  value.  That  is
what  is  called  "  to  consume"

We  do  not  wantonly  destroy  things  of  'value :  what
end  is  proposed  in  doing  so  ?

Either  to  procure  an  enjoyment  or  else  to  re-
produce another  value.  The  consumption  of  food  or
clothing  is  an  enjoyment :  it  has  no  other  result.

Reproductive  consumption  is  neither  so  simple  nor  so
easy.

In  what  does  it  consist  ?

It  consists  in  the  industrious  destruction  of  one  value,
so  as  to  produce  another  in  place  of  that  which  is
destroyed,  and  which  exceeds  it  in  value  sufficiently
to  pay  for  the  industry  employed  in  the  operation.
Thus  the  agriculturist  who  sows  a  grain  of  corn  de-
stroys the  value  of  it,  but  he  does  not  destroy  it  in
the  same  manner  as  he  who  eats  it :  he  destroys  it  in
such  manner  as  that  it  shall  be  reproduced  with  profit :
and  even  if  he  employs  this, grain  or  many  grains  in
feeding  fowls,  he  still  destroys  the  value  of  this  grain ;
but  as  he  increases  the  value  of  the  fowls,  he  produces
a  value  which  usually  replaces,  with  profit,  the  value
which  was  consumed.  This  is  called  reproductive  con."
sumption.

Every  thing  that  a  man  consumes  for  his  own  use
is  then  an  unproductive  consumption  f

No,  not  all.  When  eatables,  drinkables,  or
wearing  apparel,  are  consumed  by  mea  who  are  a$


ON THE FORMATION OF CAPITAL.  21

the  same  time  employed  in  producing  a  value  equal,
or  superior,  to  what  they  consume,  it  becomes  a
reproductive  consumption.  It  is  so  much  the  more
reproductive  as  the  value  of  the  products  which  these
men  have  created  during  the  consumption  exceeds  the
value  of  those  they  have  consumed.

Give  me  examples  of  reproductive  consumption  drawn
from  manufacturing  industry  ?-

Besides  the  maintenance  of  his  workmen  and  agents,
a  manufacturer  consumes  the  materials  which  he  trans-
forms. He  consumes,  also,  although  more  slowly,
the  utensils  he  employs.  Thus  a  soap-maker  con-
sumes, reproductively,  oil,  soda,  wood,  or  coal,
cauldrons,  &c.  and  even  the  place  and  workshops  in
which  he  exercises  his  industry.

Give  me  examples  of  reproductive  consumption  in
commercial  industry  ?

A  merchant  consumes  the  value  of  the  maintenance
of  his  workmen,  that  is,  of  his  carriers,  lightermen,
sailors,  porters,  and  agents  of  every  sort :  he  consumes
also  his  instruments,  which  are  carts,  horses,  ships,
warehouses  ;  and  we  may  even  consider  as  part  of  his
consumption,  the  advances  which  he  makes  for  the
purchase  of  his  merchandise.  All  these  advances  are
restored  to  him  by  the  value  of  the  products  which  go
out  of  his  hands :  that  is,  the  merchandise  in  a  state
to  be  sold.

All  these  undertakers  of  industry  reproduce  with


%%  ON TItE FORMATION OF CAPITAL.

loss,  or  without  either  loss  or  gain,  or  with  profit^
according  as  they  reproduce  values,  which  are  either
inferior,  equal,  or  superior  to  the  values  which  they
have  consumed.

What  is  the  effect  of  these  facts,  as  it  respects  capital?

That  which  is  called  productive  capital,  or,  simply,
capital,  consists  of  all  those  values,  or,  if  you  will,  all
those  advances  employed  reproductively,  and  replaced
in  proportion  as  they  are  destroyed.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  term  capital  has  no  relation
to  the  nature  or  form  of  the  values  of  which  capital  is
composed  (their  nature  and  form  vary  perpetually) ;
but  refers  to  the  use,  to  the  reproductive  consumption
of  these  values  :  thus  a  bushel  of  corn  forms  no  part  of
my  capital  if  I  employ  it  to  make  cakes  to  treat  my
friends,  but  it  does  form  part  of  my  capital  if  I  use
it  in  maintaining  workmen  who  are  employed  on  the
production  of  that  which  will  repay  me  its  value.  In
the  same  manner  a  sum  of  money  is  no  longer  a  part
of  my  capital  if  I  exchange  it  for  products  which  I  con-
sume :  but  it  does  form  part  of  my  capital  if  1  exchange
it  for  a  value  which  is  to  remain  and  augment  in  my
hands.

How  is  capital  amassed?

Capital  is  augmented  by  all  that  is  withdrawn  from
unproductive  consumption,  and  added  to  a  consumption
which  is  reproductive.

Capitals  that  are  amassed  are  then  consumed?

Without  doubt.


ON THE FORMATION OF CAPITAL.  23

Can  capitals  be  amassed  without  being  consumed?

Yes,  capitals,  that  is,  values  may  be  amassed  under
one  form  as  well  as  another,  in  gold,  silver,  or  mer-
chandise, and  no  part  of  it  used  for  production.  These
are  idle  capitals,  which  may  become  productive  here-
after, but  which  in  the  mean  time  do  not  yield  any  of
those  profits  which  we  shall  consider  presently.  Ca-
pital thus  accumulated  may  be  transferred  from  one  to
another  by  exchange  or  by  succession,  and  may  be  lent
in  one  form  as  well  as  in  another,  either  in  the  form  of
merchandise  or  of  money :  but  in  whatever  form  it  is
transferred  or  lent,  it  consists  in  the  value  of  the  things
transferred  or  lent,  and  not  in  the  things  themselves.

Thus  when  Paul  a  clothier  sells  cloaths  on  credit  to
/

Silvan  a  woollen  draper,  he  really  lends  to  Silvan  the
value  for  which  he  gives  him  credit;  although  this
value  is  not  lent  in  money,  but  in  merchandise,  and
although  it  is  to  be  returned  not  in  merchandise  but  in
money.

Is  land  a  capital  ?

Land  is  made  use  of  in  the  way  of  capital.  It  is  an
instrument  for  which  no  other  can  be  substituted,  and
by  means  of  which  we  make  materials  for  our  use,  and
consequently  give  them  a  value.  It  may  be  transmit-
ted or  lent  (by  way  of  letting)  as  capital  may  :  but  it
differs  from  capital  as  it  is  not  a  human  production,
but  is  furnished  to  us  by  nature,  and  is  incapable  of
increase  by  accumulation  like  capital.


31  ON THE FORMATION OF CAPITAL.

/  comprehend  that  a  capital,  which  is  a  mass  of  values
accumulated  by  the  care  which  has  been  taken  to  snatch
them  successively  from  improductive,  and  to  devote  them
to  reproductive  consumption,  belongs  to  him  who  has
taken  the  pains  and  imposed  on  himself  the  privations  of
which  it  is  the  fruit :  but  why  should  land,  which  is  given
gratuitously  by  nature,  be  the  property  of  any  one?

It  is  not  the  object  of  political  economy  to  inquire
what  may  have  been  the  origin  of  the  right  to  property.
It  shews  only  that  land,  and  consequently  its  products,
is  susceptible  of  appropriation,  that  is  to  say,  of  be-
coming the  exclusive  property  of  such  or  such ;  and
that  this  appropriation  is  highly  favourable  to  pro-
duction :  for  if  land  and  the  products  to  be  derived
from  it,  did  not  belong  exclusively  to  some  one,  no  one
would  take  the  pains,  nor  make  the  advances  necessary,
to  obtain  these  products  5  much  less  to  cultivate  and
enrich  the  soil.  For  the  game  reason  it  is  useful  that
capital  and  its  products  should  be  an  exclusive  pro-
perty ;  it  is  the  only  means  of  inducing  its  accumula-
tion and  its  productive  employment.

You  have  said  that  land  differs  from  capital,  inasmuch
as  it  is  not  like  the  latter,  capable  of  extension  ;  but  the
clearing,  the  buildings  and  the  enclosures  by  increasing
the  products,  are  equivalent  to  an  actual  extension.

The  improvements  which  are  values  accumulated  by
industry  on  land  are  a  capital,  and  the  profits  which


'-


ON THE FORMATION OF CAPITAL.  25

result  from  the  whole  are  the  united  profits  of  capital
and  land.

But  how  can  we  transfer  or  lend  capital  of  this  kind?

It  can  only  be  done  by  transferring  or  lending  at  the
same  time  the  land  itself.  It  is  for  this  reason  that
capital  so  employed  is  called  an  appropriated  capital.
There  is  in  the  same  manner  much  capital  locked  up  in
many  manufactories,  in  all  the  utensils  and  in  the
buildings  which  are  generally  much  more  valuable  than
the  land  on  which  they  stand.  Thus  when  we  have
exchanged  a  moveable  capital  for  a  mill,  a  forge  or  a
house  to  live  in,  we  cannot  put  ourselves  again  into
the  possession  of  that  portion  of  our  capital,  without
selling  at  the  same  time  the  land  as  well  as  the  build-
ings upon  it.

The  other  capital  is  called  circulating  capital.  There
is  no  other  difference  between  them  than  that  the  ma-
terials of  which  these  respective  capitals  are  composed,
are  more  conveniently  and  more  easily  exchanged,  and
in  smaller  portions  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other.


CHAPTER  VII.

On  the  Manner  in  which  the  Value  of  Products  is
established,  and  of  the  Charges  of  Production*


have  seen  how  utility  is  given  to  things :  we  have
seen  that  utility  gives  them  value  /  how  is  that  value  fixed,
the  amount  of  which  constitutes  riches?

The  utility  which  the  things  have  acquired,  causes
them  to  be  sought  after,  to  be  wanted ;  a  price  is  offered
for  them ;  and  when  this  price  is  sufficient  to  defray  the
expenses  which  their  production  would  cost,  they  will
be  produced.

Of  what  are  the  expenses  of  production  composed  ?

Of  whatever  must  be  paid  to  obtain  the  co-operation
of  the  agents  of  production.  .

What  are  the  agents  of  production  ?

They  are  the  means  indispensably  necessary  for  the
creation  of  a  product:  viz.  human  industry;  the
capital  or  value  which  serves  for  that  purpose ;  the  land
and  other  natural  agents  which  contribute  to  it.

To  whom  do  you  give  the  name'  of  producers  ?


ON  THE  VALUE  OF  PRODUCTS,  &C.  §7

To  all  those  who  possess  any  of  the  agents  of  pro-
duction. A  man  who  exercises  an  industry,  and  the  pos-
sessor of  capital  or  of  land  are  producers.

Why  do  you  call  the  possessors  of  capital  or  of  land,
producers,  even  zchen  they  do  not  labour  themselves  ?

Because  the  capital  and  the  land,  concurring  in  the
formation  of  products,  those  who  furnish  these  means
of  production  contribute  to  it  effectually  themselves.

What  do  you  say  of  him  who  employs  his  own  capital
or  cultivates  his  own  land?

That  he  contributes  doubly:  first,  by  his  industry;
afterwards  as  a  capitalist  or  landholder :  but  although
these  functions  are  often  filled  by  one  person,  it  is  con-
venient to  separate  them  when  they  are  to  be  studied,
in  order  to  distinguish  properly  what  belongs  to  each
species  of  productive  service.

What  is  meant  by  the  term  productive  service  ?

It  is  the  service  rendered  by  each  of  the  agents  of
production  :  the  service  rendered  by  industry ;  the  ser-
vice rendered  by  capital,  and  the  service  rendered  by
natural  agents.

/  see  what  is  the  cause  of  the  demand  and  of  the  pay-
ment for  productive  services:  what  is  it  that  limits  this
demand?

The  property  of  the  consumers,  or  of  those  who  de-
sire to  use  the  product.  There  would  be  no  bounds
to  the  demand  for  any  useful  thing  if  it  was  not  to  be
paid  for.  There  is  no  other  effective  demand  than  that


28 ON  THE  VALUE  OF  PRODUCTS,  AND

which  is  accompanied  by  the  offer  of  a  price  :  and  it  is
this  price  which  in  paying  for  the  product  pays  at  the
same  time  for  the  services  which  were  necessary  to  its
production.

What  happens  when  the  price  of  the  product  is  not
sufficient  to  pay  the  charges  of  production  ?

Then  the  producers  will  not  exchange  their  produc-
tive services  for  the  price  of  the  product ;  and  the  pro-
duction does  not  take  place.

What  happens  when  the  price  of  the  product  is  more
than  enough  to  pay  the  charges  of  production  ?

The  producers  of  this  kind  of  product  become  more
numerous,  and  their  competition  will  cause  the  price
of  the  product  to  fall.

Can  one  let  out  or  tend  productive  services  ?

Yes,  when  a  man  lets  out  his  industry,  the  price  which
is  paid  for  it  is  called  wages.  When  he  lets  out  his
capital  it  is  called  interest.  When  he  lets  out  his  land,
the  tenant  is  called  a  farmer,  and  the  price  is  called
rent.

What  do  you  understand  by  letting  out  industry?

It  is  to  give  for  hire  time,  talent,  and  labour ;  to  co-
operate in  the  creation  of  a  product  of  industry.

Who  is  it  that  hires  the  labour  of  the  one,  the  capital
or  the  land  of  the  others  ?

It  is  an  undertaker  of  industry  who  unites  all  these
means  of  production,  and  who  finds  in  the  value  of  the
products  which  result  from  them,  the  re-establishment


THE  CHARGES  OF  PRODDCTION.  29

of  the  entire  capital  he  employs,  and  the  value  of  the
wages,  the  interest  and  the  rent  whith  he  pays,  as  well
as  the  profits  belonging  to  himself.

What  happens  when  the  value  of  the  products  he  has
created  is  not  sufficient  to  pay  for  all  that  ?

He  loses,  if  he  has  any  thing  to  lose :  or  if  he  has
nothing,  those  lose  who  have  given  him  their  confi-
dence.


[ SO ]


CHAPTER  VIII.

On  the  Profits  of  Industry,  Capital,  and  Land  $
that  is,  Income.


VfHA  T  is  the  source  of  the  profits  of  industry,  capital,
and  land?

It  is  in  the  price  of  the  products  created  by  their
co-operation.  The  consumer  in  buying  a  product,
pays  all  the  charges  of  its  production,  that  is,  the  ser-
vices of  the  producers  (the  industrious,  the  capitalists,
and  the  landholders),  who  have  contributed  to  its  pro-
duction.

How  can  these  profits,  paid  by  a  single  consumer,  be
distributed  among  the  different  producers  ?

By  the  advances  which  the  producers  make  of  them
to  one  another.

Explain  that  by  an  example.

Let  us  examine  how  the  value  of  a  cloth  coat  is  dis-
tributed among  the  producers  of  the  stuff  of  which  it
is  made.  We  see  that  a  farmer  who  has  reared  a  sheep,
.has  paid  a  rent  to  the  landholder  who  let  to  him  the


ON  THE  PROFITS  OF  INDUSTRY,  &C.  31

land  on  which  the  sheep  was  fed.  That  is  a  profit  re-
ceived for  the  productive  service  of  the  land.  If  the
farmer  has  borrowed  the  capital  necessary  for  the  cul-
tivation of  his  farm,  the  interest  which  he  pays  for  it
is  another  profit,  received  by  a  capitalist,  for  the  pro-
ductive service  of  his  capital.  When  the  farmer  has
sold  his  wool,  the  price  which  he  receives  for  it  reim-
burses to  him  the  rent  and  interest  he  has  paid,  and
also  the  profits  of  his  industry.  The  clothier,  in  his
turn,  by  means  of  his  capital,  advances  this  value  which
is  already  distributed :  if  his  capital  is  a  borrowed
one,  and  he  pays  interest  for  it,  he  pays  also  in  advance
the  profits  of  the  capitalist  who  lent  it  to  him ;  and  he
is  reimbursed  the  whole,  together  with  his  profits,  by
the  woollen  draper,  who  is  at  last  reimbursed  for  his
advances  and  his  profits  by  the  sale  which  he  makes  to
the  consumer.  Thus  at  the  time  the  sale  of  the  cloth
was  accomplished,  the  value  had  already  been  distri-
buted among  its  different  producers.

In  thus  tracing  the  progress  of  any  product  what-
ever, we  shall  find  that  its  value  is  scattered  among  a
crowd  of  producers,  many  of  whom  perhaps  are  ig-
norant of  the  existence  of  the  product :  so  that  a  man
that  wears  the  coat  is  perhaps,  without  suspecting  it,
one  of  the  capitalists,  and  consequently  one  of  the
producers,  who  have  contributed  to  its  formation.

Is  not  society  then  divided  into  producers  and  con«
sumers  ?


32  ON THE PROFITS OF INDUSTRY,

Every  body  consumes,  and  almost  every  body  pro-
duces. For,  not  to  be  a  producer,  it  is  necessary  neither
to  exercise  any  industry,  nor  any  talent,  nor  to  possess
either  the  smallest  portion  of  land  or  of  productive
capital.

What  do  the  profits,  distributed  among  society,  be-
come ?

They  compose  the  income  of  each  individual ;  and
the  incomes  of  all  the  individuals  j^hich  form  a  nation,
compose  the  total  income  of  that  nation.

What  is  called  annual  income  ?

It  is  the  sum  of  all  the  portions  of  income  received
in  the  course  of  a  year.  The  annual  income  of  a  whole
nation,  is  the  sum  of  all  the  portions  of  income  received,
in  the  course  of  a  year,  by  all  the  individuals  of  which
that  nation  is  composed.

Are  incomes  paid  at  fixed  periods  ?

Some  of  them  are  so ;  some  not.  A  landholder  who
lets  his  land,  a  capitalist  who  lends  his  capital,  and
who  thus  gives  up  to  another  the  profits  which  may
result  from  these  agents  of  production,  generally  sti-
pulate the  condition  of  receiving  the  rent  or  interest,
which  forms  their  income,  at  fixed  periods.  The  work-
man who  lets  out  his  industrious  talent  receives  the
wages  which  form  his  income  by  portions,  every  week
or  every  fortnight.  But  the  grocer,  who  sells  sugar
and  coffee,  receives  on  each  ounce  that  he  sells,  a  small


CAPITAL AND LAND.  ,  S

portion  of  his  profit,  and  all  these  united  profits  form
his  income.

Are  incomes,  or  portions  of  income,  always  paid  in
money  ?

The  manner  in  which  they  are  paid  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  subject.  The  corn,  vegetables,  milk,  and
butter,  which  a  farmer  consumes  in  his  own  family,
form  part  oMiis  income.  If  he  pays  part  of  his  rent
in  provisions,  these  provisions  form  part  of  the  income
of  the  landlord.  The  essential  thing  is  the  value  paid,
whether  this  value  is  paid  in  provisions,  or  whether
he  that  owes  it,  exchanges  these  provisions  for  money,
in  order  to  pay  the  value  in  money,  is '  of  no  import-
ance. It  is  the  value  acquired,  under  what  ever  form,
for  a  productive  service,  that  constitutes  income.

As  the  incomes  of  individuals  are  so  much  the  more
considerable  as  their  profits  are  greater,  and  as  their
profits  are  greater  when  their  productive  services  are
better  paid,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  dearer  these  pro-
ductive services  are,  the  greater  the  total  income  of  that
nation  must  be.

Yes :  but  when  the  productive  services  are  dearer
so  are  the  products  ;  and  when  the  price  of  the  pro-
ducts augments  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  incomes,
the  augmentation  of  the  income  is  only  nominal.  When
the  charges  of  production  have  doubled,  with  an  income
nominally  double,  we  can  only  purchase  the  same
quantity  of  products.  That  alone  really  increases  the


S4r  ON THE PROFITS OF INDUSTRY, &C.

ease  of  individuals  and  of  nations,  which  lowers  the
value  of  products  without  decreasing  incomes.

In  what  circumstances  is  this  advantage  experienced  ?

It  is  when,  by  a  better  employment  of  the  means  of
production,  the  products  are  multiplied  without  in-
creasing the  charges  of  production.  Then  the  products
fall  and  incomes  remain  the  same.  This  is  what  takes
place  when  a  new  and  ingenious  machine  has  been
brought  into  use,  such  as  the  stocking  frame  and  the
cotton  spinning  machines  :  when  a  new  canal  has  been
cut,  which,  without  increasing  the  charge,  permits  the
transport  of  a  hundred  times  more  merchandise,  &c.


CHAPTER  IX.
On  Wages,  Interest,  and  Rent.


you  observe  on  the  wages  of  workmen,  in*
t€rest  of  capital,  and  rent  of  land  ?

That  he  who  lets  out  his  industry,  his  capital,  or  his
land,  renounces  the  profits  he  might  have  drawn  from
their  productive  services ;  he  renounces  them  in  favour
of  an  undertaker  of  industry,  who  hires  them,  and  who
draws,  from  these  means  of  production,  a  profit  which
is  either  superior  or  equal,  or  inferior,  to  what  he  pays
for  them.

What  causes  raise  the  rate  of  wages  $

The  abundance  of  capital  and  land  compared  with
the  number  of  workmen:  for  there  must  be  land,  and,
above  all,  capital,  in  order  to  employ  workmen.

Why  is  it  that  wages  scarcely  ever  exceed  what  is
necessary  to  maintain  a  workman  and  his  family ',  ac-
cording to  the  custom  of  the  place  $

Because  wages,  by  rising  higher,  encourage  an  in-
D  2


36  ON WAGES, INTEREST,

crease  of  workmen  ;  this  occasions  such  services  to  be
more  offered  in  proportion  to  the  demand  for  them.
Works,  which  require  rare  and  distinguished  talents,
are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  because  such  talents  cannot
always  be  increased  according  to  the  demand  for  them.

What  causes  influence  the  rate  of  interest  ?

The  interest  of  capital  lent,  although  expressed  by
One  price  only,  a  certain  per  centage  on  the  capital
lent,  ought  really  to  be  distinguished  into  two  parts.

Explain  that  by  an  example.

If  you  lend  a  sum  of  money,  and  you  agree  with  the
borrower  for  an  interest  of  six  per  cent,  per  annum,
there  is  in  this  rate,  four  per  cent,  (more  or  less),  to
pay  for  the  productive  service  of  the  capital,  and  two
per  cent,  (more  or  less)  to  cover  the  risk  that  you  run
of  never  getting  your  capital  back.

On  what  do  you  found  this  presumption  2

On  this,  that  if  you  were  enabled  to  lend  the  same
capital  with  perfect  security,  on  a  very  safe  mortgage,
you  would  lend  it  at  four  per  cent,  more  or  less.  The
surplus  is  then  a  species  of  premium  of  insurance
which  is  paid  to  you  to  indemnify  you  for  the  risk  that
you  run.

Setting  aside  the  premium  of  insurance,  which  varies
according  to  the  greater  or  less  solidity  of  the  parties,
what  are  the  causes  which  vary  the  rate  of  inter  esty  pro-
perly so  called?

The  rate  of  interest  rises  when  those  who  borrow


AND RENT.  37

have  numerous,  ready,  and  lucrative  employments  for
capital,  because  then  many  undertakers  of  industry
are  desirous  of  participating  in  the  profits  which  these
employments  of  capital  offer ;  and  capitalists  are  also
more  likely  to  use  them  themselves,  which  augments
the  demand  for  capital,  and  diminishes  the  amount
which  is  offered  for  employment.  The  rate  of  interest
increases  also  when,  from  whatever  cause,  the  mass  of
disposable  capital,  that  is,  of  capitals  requiring  to  be
employed,  has  been  diminished.*  Contrary  circum-
stances lower  the  rate  of  interest;  and  one  of  these
circumstances  may  so  balance  the  other,  that  the  rate
of  interest  will  remain  at  the  same  point,  because  the
one  tends  to  heighten,  precisely  as  much  as  the  other
to  lower,  the  rate,

When  you  say  that  the  mass  of  disposable  capital
increases  or  diminishes,  do  you  mean  by  that  the  quantity
of  money  ?

By  no  means  :  I  mean  values  destined  by  their  pos-
sessors to  reproductive  consumption,  and  which  are
not  so  engaged  that  they  cannot  be  withdrawn  in  order
to  use  them  differently.

Explain  that  by  an  example  ?


*  See  some  striking  examples in  my  Treatise  on  Political
,liv .  ii.  chap,  8.


38  ON WAGES, INTEREST,

Suppose  that  you  have  lent  funds  to  a  merchant  on
condition  of  his  paying  them  back  to  you  on  giving  him
three  months  notice;  or,  which  comes  to  the  same
thing,  that  you  are  in  the  habit  of  discounting  bills  of
exchange,  can  you  not  easily  employ  these  funds  in  a
different  way  if  you  find  any  one  more  convenient  to
you?

Without  doubt.

Then  these  funds  are  a  disposable  capital.  They
are  so  too,  if  they  are  in  the  form  of  a  merchandise
easily  sold,  since  you  can  exchange  them  readily  fof
any  other  value.  They  are  still  more  disposable  if
they  are  in  specie ;  but  you  must  understand  that  the
sum  of  all  these  disposable  capitals  is  a  very  different
thing  from  the  sum  of  coined  money,  and  that  it  may
be  much  more  considerable.

I  understand  so.

Well !  it  is  the  sum  of  these  capitals  which  influences
the  rate  of  interest,  and  not  the  sums  of  money  under
which  form  these  values  temporarily  present  themselves
when  they  are  about  to  pass  from  one  hand  to  another.
A  disposable  capital  may  be  in  the  form  of  a  certain
sort  of  merchandise,  a  sack  of  guineas  for  instance  :  but
if  the  quantity  of  this  merchandise  which  is  in  circula-
tion, has  no  influence  on  the  rate  of  interest,  the
abundance  or  the  scarcity  of  the  gold  has  no  influence
on  it  either.


AND RENT.  39

It  is  not  then  really  the  hire  of  money  that  one  pays
zchen  one  pays  an  interest  ?
By  no  means.

Wlnj  is  it  called  the  interest  of  money  ?
From  very  inaccurate  ideas  which  are  formed  of  the
nature  and  use  of  capital.
What  is  legal  interest  ?

It  is  the  rate  fixed  by  the  law  in  cases  where  it  has
not  been  fixed  by  the  parties :  as  when  the  holder  of  a
capital  has  enjoyed  it  in  the  place  of  an  absentee,  or  a
minor  to  whom  he  is  bound  to  account.

Cannot  public  authority  fix  a  limit  to  the  interest  which
individuals  may  agree  upon  ?

It  cannot,  without  violating  the  freedom  of  trans-
actions.

What  causes  influence  the  rent  of  land  ?
The  demand  for  the  hire  of  farms  compared  with  th*
number  to  be  let. It  may  be  observed  on  this  subject,
that  the  demand  commonly  exceeds  the  number  to  be
let,  because  in  all  countries  the  number  of  these  is  ne-
cessarily limited ;  while  that of  farmers  and  of  ca-
pitals, which  may  be  applied  to  this  industry,  are  not
necessarily  so  :  so  that  in  those  places,  where  there  are
not  stronger  motives  to  a  contrary  effect,  rent  is  rather
above  than  below  the  real  profit  of  land.
What  ha've  you  more  to  say  on  this  subject  ?
That  rent  tends  nevertheless  to  get  down  to  the


40  ON WAGES, INTEREST, AND RENT.

profit  of  land;  for  when  it  exceeds  it,  the  farmer  is
obliged  to  pay  the  excess,  either  out  of  the  profits  of
his  industry,  or  the  interest  of  his  capital ;  and  is  no
longer  completely  indemnified  for  the  employment  of
those  means  of  production.


CHAPTER  X.
On  Incomes  founded  on  immaterial  Products,


rr HAT  is  meant  by  immaterial  products  ?

They  express  a  utility  produced,  but  which  is  nol;
attached  to  any  material.

Explain  that  by  an  example.

When  a  physician  visits  a  sicl$  person  and  prescribes
a  remedy  or  a  regimen  which  cures  him,  he  renders,
himself  useful  to  him.  The  physician  receives  a  sum
of  money  in  exchange  for  this  utility  :  but  here  the
utility  is  not  attached  to  any  merchandise  where  it
may  be  preserved  for  a  time,  and  exchanged  again.
It  is  a  product  truly  immaterial,  in  exchange  for  which
the  physician  receives  a  fee  which  constitutes  his  in-
come. The  industry  of  the  physician  is  analogous  to
that  of  every  undertaker  of  an  industry.  He  applies
to  the  wants  of  men  the  medical  knowledge  which  he
has  collected.


42  ON IMMATERIAL PRODUCTS.

What  other  professions  found  their  incomes  on  imma*
terial  products  ?

There  are  a  great  number  of  them.  They  include
the  most  elevated  as  well  as  the  most  abject  situations
in  society.  The  public  functionaries,  from  the  chiefs
of  the  government  down  to  the  lowest  officer,  the  judges
and  the  priests,  receive  in  exchange  for  their  useful-
ness to  the  public,  fees  paid  at  the  expense  of  the
public.

What  causes  influence  the  amount  of  these  fees?
As  these  fees  are  never  the  result  of  a  free  agree-
ment, but  depend  on  political  circumstances,  they  are
seldom  proportioned  with  exactness  to  the  utility  pro-
duced.

Give  me  some  other  examples  of  industry  productive  of
immaterial  products.

An  advocate,  an  actor,  a  musician,  a  soldier,  a  do-
mestic, render  services  of  which  the  value  may  be
measured  by  the  price  which  they  receive.

What  do  you  observe  respecting  immaterial  products  ?
That  they  are  necessarily  consumed  at  the  same  in-
itant  they  are  produced.  Their  value,  consequently,
cannot  be  reserved  for  consumption  at  any  other
time,  or  to  be  employed  as  capital,  because  they  are
not  attached  to  any  material  by  means  of  which  they
can  be  preserved.

What  consequence  do  you  draw  from  that?

That  in  multiplying  the  services  rendered  by  these


ON  IMMATERIAL  PRODUCTS. 43

different  classes,  the  consumption  of  them  is  multi-
plied: that  it  hinders  these  kind  of  works  from  contri-
buting to  the  increase  of  the  mass  of  wealth.  It  fol-
lows from  this,  that  in  multiplying,  for  example,  place-
men, lawyers,  soldiers,  &c.  the  wealth  of  a  country  is
not  increased,  whatever  may  otherwise  be  the  utility  of
these  different  professions.  The  services  they  ren-
der exist  no  longer  than  the  moment  they  are  per-
formed.

They  live  then  on  the  incomes  of  other  producers  ?

They  live  no  more  on  the  incomes  of  other  pro-
ducers than  a  wine  merchant  lives  on  the  income  of  a
woollen  draper,  who  buys  wine  which  he  pays  for  with
part  of  his  income,  and  afterwards  consumes.  An  actor
is  a  dealer  in  amusement;  a  spectator  buys  his  commo-
dity, pays  for  it  out  of  his  income,  and  consumes  it  the
instant  it  is  delivered  to  him.  The  products  furnished
by  the  actor  and  by  the  wine  merchant,  are  equally
lost ;  but  when  the  price  which  has  been  given  to  them
for  it  has  been  freely  paid,  it  is  an  exchange  like  all
others,  followed  by  a  consumption  of  the  same  nature
as  all  improductive  consumptions.

Are  immaterial  products  the  fruit  of  industry
alone?

Yes,  when  nothing  has  been  advanced  to  acquire
the  talent  of  which  they  are  the  fruit :  but  when  this
talent  has  required  long  and  expensive  studies  they  are


44?  ON IMMATERIAL PRODUCTS.

the  result  of  an  appropriated  capital*,  that  is  to  say,  of
advances  which  have  been  made  of  industry.  One  part
of  the  fees  then  serves  to  pay  the  life  interest  in  this
capital,  and  another  to  pay  for  the  industry  -xercised.
When  the  fees,  or  gratuities,  are  not  sufficient  to  pay
for  the  service  of  these  two  agents  of  production,  their
product  becomes  more  scarce,  and  its  price  increases
until  the  moment  when  the  quantity  of  that  product  \%
rendered  equal  to  the  demand.

Are  there  any  immaterial  products  which  are  the  result
of  capital  alone  2

Yes,  if  moveable  effects  (household  furniture)  are
considered  as  capital,  and  if  they  are  kept  up  to  their
original  value.  When  their  value  is  not  kept  up,  be-
sides the  use  of  the  capital,  a  part  of  the  capital  itself  is
consumed,

The  plate  which  is  used  in  a  family  forms  part  of
the  capital  and  riches  of  that  family.  It  is  not  impro-
ductive  since  it  renders  a  daily  service,  but  it  does  not
produce  any  value  which  can  afterwards  be  exchanged
for  any  other  thing.  This  service  is  an  immaterial
product  consumed  at  the  moment.  The  family  con-
sumes the  interest  of  this  part  of  its  capital.


*  It  must  be  remembered  that  an  appropriated  capitals  a  capi-
tal which  cannot  be  withdrawn  from  the  employment  to
it  has  been  applied,  to  be  applied  to  another  employment.


ON IMMATERIAL PRODUCTS.  45

Are  there  any  immaterial  products  which  result  froyt
land?

Yes:  the  enjoyment  received  from  a  pleasure  gar-
den, is  a  product  of  the  land  of  this  garden  and  the
capital  devoted  to  its  arrangement.  It  has  no  other
exchangeable  product.


r  46


CHAPTER  XI.
On  Consumption  in  general*


\VE  have  already  seen  what  consumption  is :  Jinish  the
development  of  its  effects.

It  must  be  remembered  that  to  consume  is  not  to
destroy  the  matter  of  a  product :  we  can  no  more  de-
stroy the  matter  than  we  can  create  it.  To  consume  is
to  destroy  its  value  by  destroying  its  utility ;  by  de-
stroying the  quality  which  had  been  given  to  it,  of  being
useful  to,  or  of  satisfying  the  wants  of  man.  Then  the
quality  for  which  it  had  been  demanded  was  destroyed.
The  demand  having  ceased,  the  value,  which  exists
always  in  proportion  to  the  demand,  ceases  also.  The
thing  thus  consumed,  that  is,  whose  value  is  destroyed,
though  the  material  is  not,  no  longer  forms  any  por-
tion of  wealth.
A  product  may  be  consumed  rapidly,  as  food,  or


ON  CONSUMPTION  IN  GENERAL.  47

slowly,  as  a  house ;  it  may  be  consumed  in  part,  as  a
coat,  which,  having  been  worn  for  some  months,  still
retains  a  certain  value.  In  whatever  manner  the  con-
sumption takes  place,  the  effect  is  the  same:  it  is  a
destruction  of  value;  and  as  value  makes  riches,  con-
sumption is  a  destruction  of  wealth.
What  u  the  object  of  consumption?
To  procure  to  the  consumer  either  an  enjoyment
or  a  new  value,  in  general  superior  to  the  value  con-
sumed, otherwise  the  consumer  would  not  obtain  any
profit.  In  the  first  case  it  is  an  improductive,  and  in
the  second  a  reproductive  consumption.

What  would  that  consumption  be  which  had  for  its  ob-
ject neither  to  procure  an  enjoyment,  nor  to  create  a  new
product  ?

That  would  be  a  sacrifice  without  compensation ;  a
folly.

What  must  be  thought  then  of  a  system^  the  tendency
of  which  is,  to  consume  for  the  sole  purpose  of  favouring
production?

That  which  must  be  thought  of  a  system  which
should  propose  to  burn  down  a  city,  for  the  purpose  of
benefiting  the  builders,  by  employing  them  to  re-
store it.

Develops  what  relates  to  reproductive  consumption.
Every  thing  which  has  been  said  on  production,  serves
for  that  purpose.


48  ON CONSUMPTION IN GENERAL.

What  have  you  to  say  on  the  subject  of  improductive
consumption  ?

Improductive  consumption,  which  we  shall  hereafter,
for  shortness,  call  simply  consumption,  divides  itself  into
two  kinds,  private  and  public.

What  do  you  understand  by  private  consumption  ?

That  which  has  for  its  object  to  satisfy  the  wants  of
individuals  and  of  families.

What  do  you  mean  by  public  consumption?

That  which  has  for  its  object  to  supply  the  wants  of
men  whose  association  forms  a  community,  a  province,
or  a  nation.

Are  these  two  sorts  of  consumption  of  the  same  na-
ture?

They  are  entirely  of  the  same  nature,  and  their  ef-
fects are  the  same.  One  set  of  persons  cause  the  con-
sumption in  one  case,  and  other  persons  in  the  other;
that  is  all  the  difference.

What  is  meant  by  these  words,  annual  consumption  of
a  nation  ?

It  is  the  sum  of  the  values  consumed  by  a  nation  in
a  year,  whether  for  the  wants  of  individuals  or  of  the
public.

Do  these  words  comprehend  reproductive  consumption
as  well  as  the  others  ?

Yes ;  for  we  may  say  that  France  consumes  annually
so  many  quintals  of  soda  or  of  indigo,  although  the  in^


ON CONSUMPTION*  49

digo  and  the  soda  can  only  be  consumed  reprod active-
ly, as  they  cannot  satisfy  directly  any  want;  and  as
they  can  be  employed  only  in  the  arts,  they  serve  ne-
cessarily for  reproduction.

Do  you  comprehend  in  the  consumption  of  a  nation,
the  merchandize  she  exports  to  other  countries?

Yes ;  and  I  comprehend  in  its  products  whatever  it
receives  in  return ;  in  the  same  manner  that  I  compre-
hend in  its  consumption  the  value  of  the  wool  it  uses
for  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  and  in  its  productions  the
value  of  the  cloth  which  results  from  it.

Does  a  nation  consume  all  that  it  produces  ?

Yes,  with  very  few  exceptions;  for  it  is  our  in-
terest not  to  create  products  unless  they  are  de-
manded, and  they  are  never  demanded  but  to  be  con-
sumed.

If  a  nation  consumes  the  total  of  the  values  which  it
produces,  how  can  it  accumulate  values,  form  capital,  and
maintain  it  ?

The  values,  which  serve  the  purposes  of  capital,
may  be  consumed  perpetually,  yet  are  never  lost,  for
in  the  same  proportion  as  they  are  consumed  they  are
reproduced  under  new  forms  by  the  action  of  industry.
This  reproduction,  once  accomplished,  if  the  value  re-
produced is  found  superior  to  the  value  consumed,
there  has  been  an  augmentation  of  capital.  In  the
contrary  case,  a  diminution  of  capital.  If  the  repro-


50  ON CONSUMPTION,

duction  has  simply  equalled  the  consumption,  the  capi-
tal has  been  merely  kept  up.*

Shew  me  the  application  of  these  truths  by  exam-
ples.

Take,  for  instance,  a  farmer,  or  a  manufacturer,  or
even  a  merchant.  Suppose  that  he  employs  in  his  en-
terprize  a  capital  of  twenty  thousand  pounds,  that
is  to  say,  suppose  that  all  the  values  that  he  has  in
his  enterprize  on  the  first  day  of  a  year,  are  equal  in
value  to  a  sum  of  twenty  thousand  pounds.  In  the
course  of  his  operations  these  values  change  their  forms
perpetually;  and  although  his  capital  does  not  exceed
twenty  thousand  pounds,  yet  we  may  suppose,  that  if
all  the  values  which  he  has  consumed  in  the  course  of
the  year  were  added  together,  they  would  amount  to
sixty  thousand  pounds,  because  a  value  destroyed  may
have  been  reproduced,  destroyed  again  a  second  and
a  third  time  before  the  year  revolves.  We  may  sup-
pose also,  that  if  all  the  values  produced  in  the  same


*  In  the  amount  of  reproductive  consumptions  the  profits  of
all  the  industries  employed,  even  that  of  the  undertaker  must
always  be  included.  When  all  the  charges  of  production,  (the
profits  included),  are  paid,  and  the  capital  is  not  completely  re-
established in  its  full  value,  the  consumption  exceeds  the  repro-
duction :  there  is  a  loss.


ON CONSUMPTION.  51

year  were  added  together  they  might  amount  to  a  sum
of  sixty-four  thousand  pounds.  If  then  this  under-
taker of  industry  has  had  consumption  for  sixty  thou-
sand pounds,  and  productions  for  sixty-four  thousand
pounds,  he  ought  to  have  at  the  end  of  the  year  values
amounting  to  four  thousand  pounds  more  than  }ie  had
at  the  beginning.

That  appears  clear  to  me.

Let  us  go  on.  If  he  has  expended  improductively
in  the  same  year,  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  his  family
four  thousand  pounds,  he  will  have  consumed  his  pro-
fits; and  if  he  takes  his  inventory  he  will  find  himself,
at  the  end  of  the  year,  with  a  capital  of  twenty  thou-
sand pounds  only,  as  he  had  at  the  beginning  of  the
year.  But  if,  instead  of  having  expended  improduc-
tively for  the  support  of  his  family  four  thousand
pounds,  he  had  only  expended  two  thousand,  unless  he
has  hid  two  thousand  pounds,  he  will  find  that  this
value  of  two  thousand  pounds,  which  has  not  been  ex-
pended improductively,  will  have  been  laid  out  pro-
ductively, and  that  it  will  appear  in  his  inventory  in
augmentation  of  capital  under  some  form  or  other,
either  under  that  of  provisions,  of  goods  in  process  of
manufacture,  or  even  of  advances  capable  of  being
recovered.
/  conceive  that.
You  perceive  then,  that  although  the  value  of  the


52  ON CONSUMPTION.

capital  has not been more  than twenty  thousand
pounds,  the  total  value  of  the  products  for  the  year
may  have  been  much  more  considerable  ?
Yes.

That  this  form  of  products,  whatever  it  may  be,
may  have  been  entirely  consumed,  and  that,  never-
theless, the  capital  of  this  individual  may  have  been
augmented.
Yes.

Well,  then,  multiply  in  your  mind  what  has  happen-
ed to  a  single  individual,  and  suppose  that  the  same
thing  has  happened  to  all  the  individuals  of  the  same
nation :  or  at  least  suppose  that  the  consequences  that
have  happened  to  some,  balanced  by  those  which  have
happened  to  others,  have  produced  a  general  result
analogous  to  the  preceding  example,  and  you  will  find,
by  a  second  example,  that  a  nation  which  had.  at
the  commencement  of  the  year  a  capital  of  a  hun-
dred millions,  may  have  consumed  in  a  year  three
hundred  millions  of  values,  producing  three  hundred
and  twenty  millions  of  values,  of  which  she  has  con-
sumed reproductively  three  hundred  millions,  and
improductively  twenty  millions;  or  rather  reproduc-
tively three  hundred  and  ten  millions,  and  improduc-
tively ten  millions.
I  grant  it.
In  this  last  supposition  this  little  nation,  which


ON CONSUMPTION.  53

will  have  consumed  all  its  productions,  will,  never-
theless, be  enriched  during  the  year  ten  millions  of
values,  which  will  be  found  distributed  under  dif-
ferent forms  among  those  individuals  who  have  con-
ducted their  affairs  with  the  greatest  intelligence  and
economy.


CHAPTER  XIL
On  Private  Consumption.


V\HA T  difference  is  there  between  the  words  Expence
and  Consumption  ?

Expence  is  the  purchase  of  a  thing  to  be  consumed,
and  as,  in  general,  one  only  buys  what  one  intends  to
consume,  the  words  expence  and  consumption  are  often
used  for  one  another.  It  is,  however,  proper  to  re-
mark, that  when  one  buys  a  product,  we  exchange  the
value  we  are  willing  to  give  up  for  one  of  which  we  are
in  want :  the  value  of  a  crown,  for  instance,  for  the
value  of  a  handkerchief.  We  are  still  as  rich  when  we
have  made  the  purchase  as  we  were  before,  only  we
possess  in  the  form  of  a  handkerchief  what  we  before
had  in  the  form  of  a  crown.  We  do  not  begin  to  lose
this  value  until  we  begin  to  use  the  handkerchief,  and
it  is  only  whon  the  consumption  is  finished  that  we  are
poorer  by  a  crown.  It  is  not  then  in  buying,  but  in
consuming,  that  we  dissipate  our  property.  That  is


ON PRIVATE CONSUMPTION.  55

the  reason  why,  in  the  middle  ranks  of  life,  the  character
and  economical  talents  of  the  woman,  who  directs  the
greater  part  of  the  consumption  of  the  family,  assists
materially  to  preserve  fortunes.

What  do  you  understand  by  economical  talents  ?

It  is  the  talent  of  deciding  judiciously  what  consump-
tion may  be  permitted,  and  what  must  be  prohibited,
in  that  state  of  fortune  in  which  we  are  placed,  and  ac-
cording to  the  income  we  have.

What  do  you  understand  by  avarice  ?

We  are  avaricious  when  we  deprive  ourselves,  or
those  dependent  upon  us,  of  those  consumptions  which
we  might  permit  according  to  our  incomes.

Is  it  avaricious  not  to  expend  the  whole  of  one's  in-
come ?

No;  for  it  is  only  by  the  savings  which  are  made
from  improductive  consumption,  that  we  can  hope  to
enjoy  repose  in  our  old  days,  and  to  procure  an  esta-
blishment for  our  families.

Do  we  do  any  wrong  to  society  by  thus  amassing  a
productive  capital,  for  the  sake  of  enjoying  ourselves^  or
suffering  those  belonging  to  us  to  enjoy ,  the  profits  it  will
produce?

On  the  contrary,  capitals,  accumulated  by  indivi-
duals, add  so  much  to  the  total  capital  of  society;  and
as  a  capital  placed,  that  is,  employed  reproductively,  is
indispensably  necessary  to  give  activity  to  industry,
every  person  who  spares  from  his  revenue  to  add  to  his


56  ON PRIVATE CONSUMPTION.

capital,  procures,  to  a  certain  number  of  persons  who
have  nothing  but  their  industry,  the  means  of  deriving
a  revenue  from  their  talents.

Are  not  some  consumptions  letter  managed  than
others  ?

Yes :  they  are  those  which  procure  greater  satisfac-
tion, in  proportion  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  values  which
they  occasion.  Such  are  the  consumptions  which  satis-
fy the  real,  rather  than  fictitious,  wants.  Wholesome
food,  decent  clothing,  convenient  lodgings,  are  con-
sumptions more  fitting  and  better  regulated  than  luxu-
rious food,  foppish  clothing,  and  stately  habitations.
More  true  satisfaction  results  from  the  first  than  the
last.

What  do  you  consider  besides  as  well  regulated  con-
sumptions ?

The  consumption  of  products  of  the  best  quality  of
every  sort,  although  they  may  cost  more.

For  what  reason  do  you  consider  them  as  well  regulated
consumptions  ?

Because  the  workmanship  employed  on  a  bad  article
will  be  more  quickly  consumed  than  that  on  a  good  one.
When  a  pair  of  shoes  is  made  with  bad  leather,  the
work  of  the  shoemaker,  which  is  used  up  in  the  same
time  as  the  shoes,  does  not  cost  les?,  and  is  consumed
in  fifteen  days  instead  of  lasting  two  or  three  months,
which  it  would  have  done  if  the  leather  had  been  good.
The  carriage  of  bad  merchandize  costs  as  much  as  that


ON PRIVATE CONSUMPTION.  57

of  good,  which  is  more  advantageous.  Poor  nations
have,  consequently?  beside  the  disadvantage  of  consum-
ing less  perfect  productions,  that  of  paving  dearer  for
them  in  proportion.

What  consumptions  do  you  consider  as  the  xorst  regu~
lated?

Those  which  procure  more  chagrin  and  mischief  than
satisfaction :  such  as  the  excess  of  intemperance,  and
expences  which  excite  contempt,  or  are  followed  by
punishment,


CHAPTER  XIII.
On  Public  Consumption,


\ V HA  T  do  you  call  public  consumptions  ?

Those  which  are  made  for  the  service  of  men,  as-
sembled in  communities,  provinces,  or  nations.  It  is
the  purchase  of  services  and  products,  consumed  for
public  utility,  which  constitute  the  public  expences.

What  are  the  principal  objects  of  public  expences?

The  payment  of  the  administrators  of  the  govern-
ment, the  judges,  soldiers,  and  professors  in  the  public
institutions;  the  providing  for  the  army  and  navy,  and
maintaining  the  public  establishments,  edifices,  roads?
canals,  ports,  hospitals,  &c.

What  do  you  observe  generally  with  respect  to  public
e.rpences  ?

That  the  public  is  never  so  cheaply  served  as  indivi-
duals.

What  are  the  reasons  ?

There  are  three.  First,  that  political  circumstances

1


ON PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.  59

fix  the  number  and  salaries  of  the  public  functionaries,
and  that  their  services  are  consequently  not  open  to  a
free  competition.  The  second,  that  those  who  direct
the  public  expences,  devoting  to  them  money  which  is
not  their  own,  are  less  sparing  of  it  than  individuals
would  be.  The  third,  that  works  executed  for  the  pub-
lic, are  easily  superintended,  and  are  never  watched  by
personal  interest.

/  am  inclined  to  believe  that  public  consumptions,  by
returning  to  society  the  money  which  has  been  drawn
from  it,  do  not  impoverish  it.

They  do  impoverish  it  the  same  as  private  consump-
tions, by  the  whole  amount  of  the  values  consumed.
How  do  you  explain  this  ?  i

The  money  is  wrested  from  the  people  without  equi-
valent. A  value  is  taken  away  from  the  community,
without  its  receiving  any  other  value  in  return.  But
when  this  money  is  returned  to  the  community,  it  is
not  gratuitously;  it  is  in  virtue  of  a  purchase  in  which
the  seller  delivers  to  government,  or  its  agents,  things
which  have  a  value.  The  community  has  twice  deli-
vered the  same  value.  It  has  delivered  the  contribu-
tion, and  also  the  merchandize,  which  the  government
has  bought  with  the  amount  of  that  contribution.  Of
these  two  values  the  one  is  returned  by  the  purchase
which  the  government  has  made ;  the  other  is  never  re-
turned at  all :  it  is  consumed,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  de-
stroyed.


60  ON PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.

Illustrate  this  by  an  example.

We  will  suppose  that  a  community  pays  in  money  a
hundred  thousand  pounds;  there  is  a  value  equal  to
one  hundred  thousand  pounds  drawn  from  the  commu-
nity. The  agents  of  the  government,  with  this  sum,
purchase  clothes  for  the  army;  this  is  another  value
equal  to  one  hundred  thousand  pounds  drawn  from  the
community.  The  government,  in  paying  the  clothier,
restores  the  one  hundred  thousand  pounds  it  had
raised  by  contribution  :  but  the  value  of  the  one  hun-
dred thousand  pounds  in  clothes  is  not  restored,  and
will  be  consumed  and  lost.  It  is  the  same  case  with
that  of  a  man  who  draws  from  the  community  his  reve-
nue in  money,  and  returns  it  back  by  means  of  his  ex-
penditure ;  but  who  does  not  return  the  provisions  he
has  purchased  with  his  revenue,  and  which  he  has  con-
sumed.

But  zchcn  a  government  constructs  buildings  ^  and  with
the  amount  of  the  contributions  .pays  the  zcorktnen,  does
it  not  then  restore  to  society  the  values  which  it  has  drawn
from  it?

Not  an  atom  more.  It  draws  from  society,  in  this
last  case,  one  value  in  contribution,  and  then  another
value  equal  to  it  in  services  which  it  consumes.  The
purchase  of  the  services  is  not  a  restitution,  but  an  ex-
change.

Is  not  this  a  mere  distinction  of  words,  and  is  not  the
purchase  of  services  equivalent  to  a  restitution?


ON PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.  61

Not  in  the  least.  When  the  government  employs
workmen,  it  receives  from  them  in  exchange  for  their

'  O

wages  a  real  value,  which  is  their  labour;  a  value
founded  on  the  products  which  are  to  result  from  this
labour;  a  value,  which  being  consumed  by  the  go-
vernment, cannot  be  consumed  in  any  other  design,
nor  with  any  other  result.

The  workmen  thus  employed  would  have  perhaps  been
without  work  ?

Why  ?  The  government  by  this  operation  lias  not
multiplied  the  values  appropriated  to  the  payment  of
workmen.  If  it  distributes  them  on  the  one  hand,  it
takes  away  from  the  contributor  on  the  other,  the
power  of  distributing  them,  either  directly,  by  employ-
ing the  workmen  himself,  or  indirectly,  by  means  of
his  consumptions.

When  a  government  consumes^  it  stands  then  in  the
same  situation  with  any  other  consumer  I

Almost  always;  the  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  too
rare  to  be  worth  noticing.

What  consequences,  do  you  draw  from  it?

That  the  consumptions,  or,  if  you  will,  the  expences
of  government,  are  always  a  sacrifice  made  by  society,
which  is  never  indemnified  for  it,  otherwise  than  by
the  product  which  results  from  it.

What  do  you  mean  by  a  product  resulting  from  public
expenditure?

When  the  government  constructs  a  bridge,  the  ser-


62  OX PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.

vice  which  the  public  derive  from  it,  repays,  and  often
with  very  great  ad  vantage,  the  sacrifice  of  values  which
the  bridge  has  cost.  But  no  benefit  results  from  the
mere  expenditure  of  the  money,  nor  the  employment
of  the  workmen  employed  on  its  construction  ;  for,  if
this  money  had  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  contribu-
tors, it  would  either  directly  or  indirectly  have  put  in
activity  an  equal  quantity  of  industry.

When  a  part  of  the  contributions  is  employed  in  the
construction  of  monuments  or  buildings  ^  which  have  no
public  utility r,  there  is  then  on  the  part  of  society  a  sacri-
jice  without  compensation  ?

Precisely :  it  is  for  that  reason  that  a  good  govern-
ment makes  no  expenditure  which  has  not  a  useful  re-
sult. The  economy  of  nations  is  exactly  the  same
with  that  of  individuals.


[ 63 ]


CHAPTER  XIV.

On  Public  Property  and  Taxes,


FROM  whence  are  the  values  derived  which  serve  for
the  public  consumptions  ?

They  are  derived  either  from  the  revenues  of  pro-
perty belonging  to  the  public,  or  from  taxes.

What  constitutes  the  revenues  of  public  property  ?

These  properties  are  either,  capital  or  freehold  pro-
perty, but  most  generally  freehold  property,  land,
houses,  &c.  which  the  government  let,  and  the  revenue
of  which  it  consumes  for  the  advantage  of  the  public.
When  it  consists  of  forests,  it  sells  the  annual  felling ;
when  capital  it  lends  it  at  interest,  but  this  last  case  is
Tery  rare.

Who  is  it  that  pays  the  taxes  ?

The  individuals  who  in  this  respect  we  call  contri-
butors.

Where  do  the  contributors  get  the  values  with  which
they  pay  the  taxes  ?

They  take  these  values  from  the  products  which


tli  ON PUBLIC PROPERTY

belong  to  them,  or  which  comes  to  the  same  thing",
from  the  money  which  they  procure  by  the  exchange
of  these  products.

Are  these  products  the  fruit  of  the  annual  productions  ?

They  are  sometimes  the  products  of  the  year,  which
form  part  of  the  income  of  individuals,  and  sometimes
former  products,  which  they  employ  as  productive
capitals.

In  what  case  do  the  contributors  take  from  their  ca-
pitals to  pay  the  taxes  ?

When  their  incomes  are  not  sufficient.  And  in  this
case  the  taxes  dry  up  one  of  the  sources  of  revenue,
and  one  of  the  means  of  the  industry  of  society.

Give  me  an  example  in  which  the  taxes  are  discharged
&ith  a  portion  of  capital.

If  a  man  whose  income  is  absorbed  by  the  ordinary
contributions,  together  with  the  maintenance  of  his
family,  comes  to  an  heritance,  and  as  an  heir  he  is
bound  to  pay  impost,  it  must  be  taken  out  of  his  in-
heritance; the  capital  in  the  hands  of  the  heir  is  there-
fore no  longer  so  considerable  as  it  was  in  the  hands
of  the  deceased.  Similar  observations  may  be  made
on  the  expenses  of  proceedings  at  law,  bonds,  secu-
rities, &c.  In  all  these  cases  the  tax  paid  by  the  con-
tributor is  withdrawn  from  the  mass  of  capital  usefully
employed,  and  is  so  much  capital  devoted  to  consump-
tion, and  actually  disappears.  This  happens  also  in
cases  where  the  profits  are  small  and  the  impost  con-


AND  TAXES.  65

siderable ;  many  contributors  cannot  in  that  case  dis-
charge the  taxes  without  breaking  in  upon  their  ca-
pitals.

The  major  part  of  the  taxes  are  however  taken  from
incomes  ?

Yes:  for  if  the  taxes  dry  up  too  completely  the
sources  of  production,  they  would  diminish  more  and
more  every  day  the  products  with  which  alone  they
could  be  paid.

If  there  are  some  of  them  which  break  into  the  capital
of  individuals,  how  happens  it  that  the  means  of  produc-
tion are  not  destroyed  in  the  long  run  ?

Because  at  the  same  time  that  some  individuals  break
into  their  capitals,  those  of  others  are  increased  by
saving.

Do  not  the  taxes  serve,  on  the  other  hand,  to  multiply
products  by  compelling  the  contributors  to  produce,  in
order  to  be  able  to  pay  them  ?

The  hope  of  enjoying  the  products  one  has  created
is  a  much  stronger  incitement  to  production  than  the
idea  of  satisfying  the  tax  gatherer.  But  if  the  impost
Should  excite  the  desire  of  producing  more  it  does  not
afford  the  means.  In  order  to  extend  production  it  is
necessary^  to  increase  capital,  which  is  the  more  im-
possible, as  the  necessity  of  paying  the  tax  prevents  the
saving,  which  alone  creates  capital.  In  short,  if  the
necessity  of  paying  the  taxes  should  excite  efforts
which  augment  production,  there  will  not  result  from

F


66  ON  PUBLIC  PBOPERTY

it  any  increase  of  the  general  riches,  since  what  is
raised  by  the  impost  is  consumed,  and  does  not  serve
to  increase  any  saving.  Thus  it  may  be  seen  that  great
taxes  are  destructive  of  public  prosperity  instead  of
being  favourable  to  it.

Which  arc  the  principal  kinds  of  taxes  levied  for  this
purpose  ?

Sometimes  they  are  exacted  from  the  contributors  at
so  much  per  head,  as  in  the  capitation  tax.  Sometimes
as  in  the  land  tax,  they  take  a  part  of  the  revenue
arising  from  the  lands ;  which  are  valued,  either  after
the  actual  rent  or  after  the  extent  and  fertility  of  the
soil.  Sometimes  the  rent  of  a  house,  the  number  of  its
doors  and  windows,  and  of  the  servants  and  horses  kept
by  the  contributor,  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  amount  of
his  contribution.  Sometimes,  his  profits  are  valued
according  to  the  industry  he  carries  on  :  from  hence
the  impost  on  licences  (patentes).  All  these  contribu-
tions bear  the  name  of  direct  taxes,  because  they  are
demanded,  directly,  of  the  contributor  in  person.

Are  not  all  taxes  demanded  directly  from  the  contri-
butor ?•

They  are  sometimes  demanded,  not  from  the  payer,
but  are  included  in  the  price  of  the  merchandize  on
which  the  impost  is  laid,  and  without  the  receiver
knowing  even  the  name  of  the  contributor.  For  this
reason  they  are  called  indirect  taxes.

When  and  in  what  manner  are  taxes  levied  on  mer-
chandize?


AND  TAXES.  67

They  are  sometimes  levied  at  the  instant  in  which
they  are  produced,  like  the  salt  in  France,  or  the  gold
and  silver  mines  in  Mexico.  A  portion  of  the  value
of  these  merchandize  is  levied  at  the  moment  of  their
extraction.  Sometimes  a  duty  is  levied  at  the  moment
of  their  transportation  from  one  place  to  another,  as
in  the  instance  of  import  duties;  and  in  the  "  Octroi/*
which  is  paid  in  France  at  the  entrance  of  towns :
sometimes  at  the  moment  of  consumption,  as  for
stamps  and  admissions  to  the  theatres.

Docs  the  amount  of  the  impost  remain  at  the  expense
vf  those  who  pay  it  ?

No:  they  endeavour  to  reimburse  themselves  at
least  in  part  from  those  who  purchase  the  products  in
the  creation  of  which  the  contributors  have  assisted.

Do  the  contributors  always  succeed  in  thus  shifting
the  burden  from  themselves  ?

They  seldom  succeed  completely,  because  they  can-
not do  so  without  raising  the  price  of  their  products ;
and  a  rise  of  price  always  diminishes  the  consumption
of  a  product  by  putting  it  out  of  the  reach  of  some  of
its  consumers.  The  demand  for  this  sort  of  product
then  diminishes,  and  its  price  falls.  The  price  not  then
affording  so  liberal  a  remuneration  for  the  productive
services  devoted  to  this  object,  the  quantity  of  it  is
lessened.  Thus  when  an  import  duty  is  laid  on  cotton,
the  manufacturers  of  cottons  and  the  tradesmen  who

F  2


68  ON  PUBLIC  PROPERTY

sell  them  cannot  raise  the  price  so  high  as  to  recover
back  the  amount  of  the  taxes ;  for  that  purpose  it  would
be  necessary  that  the  same  quantity  of  cotton  goods
should  be  demanded  and  sold,  and  that  the  society
should  devote  to  the  purchase  of  this  particular  article
more  values  than  it  had  heretofore  devoted  to  it,  which
is  not  possible.  The  cotton  goods  become  dearer;
their  producers  gain  less,  and  this  kind  of  production
declines.

What  consequence  doytu  draw  from  that  ?

That  the  impost  is  paid  partly  by  the  producers,
whose  profits,  i.  e.  whose  incomes  it  lessens ;  and  partly
by  those  consumers  who  continue  to  purchase  notwith-
standing the  dearness,  since  they,  pay  more  for  a  pro-
duct, which  in  point  of  fact  is  not  more  valuable.

What  other  consequence  do  you  draw  faom  it?

That  the  impost,  in  making  the  products  dearer,
does  not  augment  even  nominally  the  total  value  of
productions;  for  the  products  diminish  in  quantity
more  than  they  augment  in  price.

Does  this  effect  take  place  with  respect  to  any  other
merchandize  than  that  on  which  the  impost  is  levied?

It  takes  place  on  all  the  merchandise  which  the  con-
tributor sells.  Brewers  and  bakers  sell  their  products
dearer  when  a  tax  is  laid  on  the  wood  or  coals  which
they  burn.  A  tax  on  meat  and  other  eatables  at  the
gates  of  a  city  renders  all  its  manufactured  products
dearer.


AND  TAXES.  69

Can  all  producers  make  the  consumers  bear  a  portion
of  the  imposts  which  they  are  compelled  to  pay  ?

There  are  producers  who  cannot.  An  impost  laid  on
an  article  of  luxury  bears  only  on  those  who  consume
it.  If  a  tax  is  laid  on  lace,  the  wine  merchant  whose
wife  wears  lace,  cannot  sell  his  wine  dearer  on  that
account,  for  he  could  not  maintain  a  competition  with
his  neighbour  whose  wife  does  not  wear  lace.  A  land-
holder cannot  in  general  make  his  consumers  bear  any
portion  of  the  tax  he  is  compelled  to  pay.*

In  order  not  to  deceive  ourselves  as  to  the  effect  of
taxes,  how  ought  we  to  consider  them  ?

As  a  cause  of  the  destruction  of  part  of  the  products
of  society.  This  destruction  takes  place  at  the  ex-


*  So  long  as  the  tax  does  not  absorb  the  whole  of  the  net
profit,  or  rent  of  land,  it  is  worth  while  to  cultivate  it :  conse-
quently the  impost  does  not  diminish  the  quantity  of  the  terri-
torial products  which  come  to  market,  and  this  is  nev^r  a  cause
of  dearness.  When  the  impost  is  excessive,  it  surpasses  the
net  produce  of  the  worst  lands,  and  hinders  the  improvement
of  others.  Thus  territorial  products  become  more  rare :  still
this  circumstance  does  not  raise  the  price  in  a  durable  manner,
because  the  population  is  not  long  before  it  gets  down  to  the
level  of  the  territorial  products;  if  less  are  offered  less  are
wanted.  For  this  reason,  in  these  countries  which  produce  lit-
tle corn,  it  is  not  dearer  than  in  those  that  produce  much.  It
is  even  cheaper,  for  reasons  which  cannot  be  developed  here.


70  ON  PUBLIC  PROPERTY

pense  of  those  who  are  unable  to  evade  or  shift  it  from
themselves.  The  producers  and  consumers  pay  the
value  of  the  products  thus  destroyed ;  the  first,  in  not
selling  their  products  at  a  price  sufficient  to  cover  the
taxes;  the  second,  in  paying  more  for  them  than  they
are  worth,  but  in  proportions  which  vary  with  every
article  and  every  class  of  individuals.

We  may  also  consider  the  impost  as  an  augmentation
of  the  charges  of  production;  It  is  an  expense  sus-
tained by  the  producers  and  consumers;  but  which
while  it  renders  the  products  dearer,  does  not  augment
the  incomes  of  the  producers,  as  its  amount  is  not  di-
vided among  them.  Their  expenses  augment  as  con-
sumers without  their  incomes  increasing  as  producers :
they  are  not  so  rich.

What  is  to  be  understood  by  a  subject  of  taxation  ?

By  those  words,  is  often  meant,  the  merchandise
which  serves  as  a  basis  for  the  tax.  Brandy,  in  this
sense,  is  a  "  subject  of  taxation,"  by  means  of  the
duties  which  are  levied  on  this  liquor.  But  the  ex-
pression is  not  correct.  Brandy  is  only  a  basis  for  the
demand  of  a  value;  a  merchandise  which  the  govern-
ment uses  as  a  means  of  raising  money.  The  true  sub-
ject of  taxation  is,  in  this  case,  the  income  of  the
individuals  who  manufacture  and  consume  the  brandy.
Thus  the  subject  of  taxation  increases,  when  these
incomes,  whatever  be  their  source,  are  augmented.

What  do  you  conclude  from  that?


AND TAXES.  71

That  every  thing  which  tends  to  increase  the  riches
of  a  nation  extends  and  multiplies  the  subject  of  tax-
ation. It  is  from  this  cause,  that  as  a  country  prospers
the  amount  of  the  taxes  increases,  without  increasing
the  rate  of  them ;  and  diminishes  when  it  decli^  \<<.

Are  we  justified  in  considering  the  amount  of  the  taxes
as  part  of  the  income  of  a  nation  ?

Never,  for  th^y  are  values  not  created  but  trans-
ferred. They  have  formed  a  part  of  the  incomes  of
individuals  which  they  have  not  consumed,

Have  not  the  government  other  sources  of  revenue  ?

Sometimes  the  government  retains  the  exclusive  ex-
ercise of  a  certain  industry,  and  causes  it  to  be  paid
for  beyond  its  value,  as  the  carriage  of  letters.  In  this
case  the  tax  does  not  amount  to  the  whole  of  the  charge
for  postage,  but  only  to  that  part  which  exceeds  what
it  would  cost  if  this  service  was  left  open  to  free  com-
petition.

The  profits  which  government  sometimes  makes  on
lotteries  is  of  the  same  kind,  but  is  much  less  justifiable
on  many  accounts.


CHAPTER  XV.

On  Public  Loans.


what  view  do  governments  borrow  money  ?

To  provide  for  extraordinary  expences  which  the
ordinary  revenues  are  not  sufficient  to  discharge.

How  do  they  pay  the  interest  of  the  loans  they  bor-
row?

They  pay  it  either  by  laying  on  a  new  tax,  or-  by
economising,  from  the  ordinary  expences,  a  sum  suf-
ficient to  pay  the  annual  interest.

Loans)  then,  are  a  means  of  consuming  a  principal
of  which  the  interest  is  paid  by  a  portion  of  the  taxes  ?

Yes.

Who  are  the  lenders  ?

Individuals  who  have  capitals  at  their  disposal.

Since  government  represents  the  society,  and  society
is  composed  of  individuals,  it  is  then  the  society  which
lends  to  itself?


OF


I


ON PUBLIC LOANS.  73

Yes :  it  is  a  part  of  the  individuals  who  lend  to  the
whole  of  the  individuals;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  society
or  to  its  government.

What  ejfcct  is  ^produced  by  public  loans  on  the  public
riches  ?  Do  they  augment  or  dimmish  them  ?

The  loan  in  itself  neither  increases  nor  diminishes
them:  it  is  a  value  which  passes  from  the  hands  of
individuals  to  the  hands  of  the  government,  a  simple
transfer.  But  as  the  principal  of  the  loan,  or,  if  you
will,  the  capital  lent,  is  generally  consumed  in  con-
sequence of  this  transfer,  public  loans  produce  an
improductive  consumption,  a  destruction  of  capital.

Would  not  a  capital  thus  lent  have  been  equally  con-
sumed  if  it  had  remained  in  the  hands  of  individuals  ?

No :  the  individuals  who  lent  the  capital,  wished  to
lay  it  out,  not  to  consume  it.  If  it  had  not  been  lent
to  government  it  would  have  been  lent  to  those  who
would  have  made  use  of  it,  or  they  would  have  em-
ployed it  themselves;  thus  the  capital  would  have
been  consumed  reproductively  instead  of  impro-
ductively.

Is  the  total  income  of  a  nation  increased  or  diminished
by  public  loans?

It  is  diminished,  because  all  the  capital  which  is
consumed  carries  with  it  the  income  which  it  would
otherwise  have  gained.

But  in  this  case,  the  individual  who  lends  does  not,


74  ON PUBLIC  LOAXS.

lose  any  income,  since  the  government  pays  him  interest
for  Ms  capital ;  and  if  he  does  not  lose,  who  does  ?

Those  who  lose  are  the  contributors  who  pay  the
increased  taxes,  with  which  the  public  creditor  is  paid
his  interest.

But  if  the  creditor  receives  on  the  one  hand  an  income
which  the  contributor  pays  on  the  other,  it  appears  to  me
that  ihere  is  no  portion  of  income  lost,  and  that  the  state
40*  profited  "by  the  principal  of  the  loan  which  it  has
camwncd.

You  are  in  an  error ;  and  to  convince  you  of  it  we
will  examine  how  this  operation  is  effected. An  in-
dividual lends  to  the  state  a  thousand  pounds. Con-
sequently he  draws  this  value  from  an  employment  in
which  it  was  already,  or  in  which  it  would  have  been
engaged. Supposing that  this employment would
have  afforded  five  per  cent,  there  is  an  income  of  fifty
pounds  taken  from  the  society. It  is  nevertheless  paid
to  the  creditor;  but  how  is  it  paid ?  At  the  expence  of
a  contributor;  of  a  landed  proprietor,  who  would  have
used  for  his  own  purposes  these  fifty  pounds  which  the
government  takes  from  him  to  pay  the  creditor. Instead
of  two  incomes  which  there  was  in  society,  that  of  the
thousand  pounds  lent  to  government  (which  either
had  been,  or  might  have  been  placed  elsewhere)  and
the  income  of  the  funds,  which  had  produced  to  the
landholder  the  fifty  pounds  of  contribution,  which  he


ON PUBLIC LOANS-  75

has  been  compelled  to  pay  to  satisfy  the  creditor.  In
lieu  of  these  two  incomes,  there  remains  but  one,
namely,  the  last,  which  is  transferred  from  the  contri-
butor to  the  creditor.  Why  is  there  only  one  income
of  fifty  pounds  where  there  had  been  formerly  two?
Because  there  had  been,  beside  the  funds  of  the  con-
tributor, another  fund  of  one  thousand  pounds,  pro-
ducing fifty  pounds,  which  has  been  lent  and  consumed,
and  which,  consequently,  produces  nothing.  *

What  are  the  principal  forms  under  which  a  govern-
ment pays  the  interest  of  its  loans  (l

Sometimes  it  pays  a  perpetual  interest  on  the
capital  lent,  which  it  does  not  bind  itself  to  repay  :  the
lenders  have  in  this  case  no  other  means  of  recovering
their  capital  than  to  sell  their  debt  to  other  individuals
who  desire  to  place  themselves  in  the  situation  of  the
former.

Sometimes  it  borrows,  by  way  of  annuity,  and  pays
the  lender  a  life  interest.

Sometimes  it  borrows  on  condition  of  repayment,
and  it  stipulates  a  pure  and  simple  repayment,  in  a
certain  number  of  years,  by  instalments ;  or  a  reim-
bursement of  the  principal  sum  at  periods  which  are
sometimes  determined  by  lot.

*  See  in  my  Treatise  of  Political  Economy,  2d  edit.  book.  iii.
c  9.  a  synoptical  table  of  the  progress  of  these  values.


76  ON PUBLIC LOANS.

Sometimes  it  negotiates  bills  on  its  agents,  the
receivers  of  contributions.  The  loss  which  it  suffers
by  discount  represents  the  interest  on  the  advances  it
receives.

Sometimes  it  sells  public  offices,  and  thus  pays
interest  for  the  money  furnished.  The  incumbent  can
never  get  back  his  principal  without  selling  his  office.
The  price  of  offices  is  often  paid  under  the  name  of
security.

All  these  modes  of  borrowing  have  the  effect  of
withdrawing  from  productive  employment  capitals
which  are  consumed  in  the  public  service.

Have  not  the  government  the  means  of  paying  their
debts,  even  those  of  which  it  has  promised  to  pay  the
interest  perpetually  ?

Yes ;  by  means  of  what  is  called  a  sinking  fund.

What  is  a  sinking  fund  ?

When  a  tax  is  laid  upon  the  people  to  pay  the
Interest  of  a  loan,  it  is  laid  a  little  heavier  than  is
necessary  to  pay  this  interest ;  this  excess  is  confided
to  what  are  called  commissioners  for  the  management
of  *he  sinking  fund,  and  who  employ  it  every  year  to
bi*y  up  at  the  market  price  a  part  of  the  interest  or
annuities  paid  by  the  state.  As  the  same  interest
always  continues  to  be  paid,  the  sinking  fund  devotes
in  tLe  year  following,  to  the  purchase  of  these  interests,
not  only  ihe  portion  of  the  tax  which  is  deyoted  tq


OF PUBLIC LOANS.  77

this  use  in  the  first  instance,  but  also  the  interest
which  it  has  already  bought  up.  This  manner  of
extinguishing  the  public  debt  by  its  progressively
increasing  action,  would  extinguish  it  with  sufficient
rapidity  if  these  sinking  funds  were  never  diverted
from  this  object,  and  if  the  debts  were  not  kept  up  by
a  perpetual  addition  of  new  loans,  which  bring  an-
nually into  the  market  more  interest  than  the  sinking
fund  buys  up.


CHAPTER  XVI.
On  Property,  and  the  Nature  of  Riches.


CAN  riches  exist  where  there  is  no  property?

No :  for  riches  being1  composed  of  the  value  of  the
things  which  we  possess,  there  can  be  no  riches  where
no  things  are  possessed;  that  is,  no  property.

Into  how  many  classes  can  things  possessed  be  or-
tomgedf

Into  two  grand  classes  :  that  which  constitutes  stock,
and  that  which  constitutes  income.

What  do  you  observe  relative  to  the  riches  which  con-
stitute income?

That  having  been  created  without  affecting  our
stock,  they  may  be  consumed  without  encroaching
upon  it ;  and  that  if  we  do  not  consume  them  impro-
ductively,  they  will  increase  our  stock.

Do  you  not  sub  "divide  that  which  constitutes  our
stock  f


ON  PROPERTY  AND  RICHES.  7§

Yes  :  our  stock  may  consist,

1st.  Of  land  and  other  natural  agents  of  which  we
are  acknowledged  proprietors ;

2d.  Of  capital,  or  values  produced,  which  we  devote
to  reproduction :

3d.  Of  faculties,  or  talents,  natural  and  acquired^
which  we  employ  for  the  same  purpose.

What  do  you  observe  relatively  to  the  riches  which  con-
stitute our  stock?

That  we  can  alienate  the  property  of  the  first  two
kinds  of  stock  (our  lands  and  our  capitals)  but  not  that
of  the  third  kind  (our  industrious  talents).  That  we
can  let  out  to  use  all  the  three  kinds.  That  the  last  is
a  life  property,  which  perishes  with  us.

What  have  you  farther  to  observe  respecting  them?

That  not  being  applicable  to  the  satisfying  of  our
wants,  or  of  procuring  enjoyments,  because  they  are
appropiated  to  reproduction,  they  are  of  no  value,  ex-
cept for  the  faculty  which  they  have  of  contributing  to
the  production  of  some  other  consumable  values.  The
demand  which  there  exists  for  consumable  values,  that
is,  for  products,  establishes  a  demand  for  the  stock
which  is  capable  of  producing,  that  is,  for  land,  capi-
tal, and  industrious  talents;  this  demand  establishes
their  value,  an,d  this  value  makes  a  part  of  the  riches  of
those  to  whom  they  belong.

Why  have  not  a  great  number  of  natural  agents  tie-


gO  ON  PROPERTY  AND  RICHEST.

cessary  to  production,  as  the  heat  of  the  sun,  the  air  of
the  atmosphere  ;  why  have  not  these  a  value  ?

Because  there  is  no  demand  for  their  productive  fa-
culties; and  there  is  no  demand  for  them,  because
when  these  faculties  are  present  they  exceed  all  wants,
and  are  accessible  to  all  mankind:  and  when  they  are
not  present,  no  person  can  provide  them,  because  no
one  can  appropriate  them.

What  results  from  this  fact  in  relation  to  the  value  of
products  f

That  when  nature  lends,  gratuitously^  her  powers
to  the  creation  of  products,  the  charges  are  less  than
when  we  must  pay  for  assistance,  and  that  we  obtain
consequently,  products  at  a  cheaper  rate.  It  is  for
that  reason  that  the  grapes  of  the  south  do  not  cost  so
much  as  those  of  the  north,  which  are  raised  in  hot-
houses.

You  have  said  that  riches  are  proportioned  to  the  value
of  the  things  we  possess,  that  is,  that  they  are  so  much
the  greater  as  the  values  we  possess  are  greater;  have
you  any  thing  to  add  to  this  subject  ?

Riches  are  proportioned  to  the  values  we  possess,
or  rather  are  only  those  values  themselves :  but  these
values  are  great  or  small  in  comparison  with  the  price
of  the  things  which  may  be  obtained  for  them.  In
other  words,  if  with  a  certain  sum  in  land,  in  capital,
and  in  income,  1  can  obtain  the  things  I  am  in  want


ON  PROPERTY  AND  RICHES.  81

of  at  half  the  price  I  have  hitherto  obtained  them,  by
that  alone,  my  riches  are  doubled.

Thus  a  nation  which  does  not  possess  in  nominal
value  more  than  one  half  what  another  nation  possesses,
will  nevertheless  be  as  rich,  if  she  can  procure  all  the
products  of  which  she  is  in  want  at  half  the  price  the
other  nation  is  obliged  to  pay.

The  very  height  of  riches,  however  few  values  one
might  possess,  would  be  to  be  able  to  procure  for
nothing  all  the  objects  we  wished  to  consume.

We  should  be  at  the  lowest  ebb  of  poverty,  however
immense  might  be  the  values  we  possessed,  if  the  value
of  the  things  we  wanted  to  consume  exceeded  the  price
which  we  were  able  to  pay  for  them.

In  what  does  the  clearness  and  cheapness  of  things  con~
sist?

We  will  examine  that  in  the  next  chapter*


CHAPTER  XVII.
On  the  Real  and  Nominal  Price.


GIVE  me  some  just  ideas  on  the  price  of  things  ?

If  you  wish  to  form  just  ideas  on  this  subject  you
must  never  confound  the  nominal  price  with  the  real
price  of  things.

What  do  you  call  the  nominal  price  of  things?

The  price  we  pay  for  a  thing  in  money  or  in  coin.

What  do  you  call  its  real  price  ?

The  value  we  have  given  to  obtain  the  money  with
which  we  purchase  this  thing.

Give  me  an  example.

A  potter  is  in  want  of  a  loaf  of  bread,  which  sells  for
a  shilling :  he  is  obliged,  in  order  to  obtain  it,  to  sell  a
vase  which  is  worth  a  shilling.  If  the  price  of  the  loaf
should  rise  to  two  shillings;  and  if  the  potter  is  obliged
to  sell  two  vases  in  order  to  obtain  these  two  shillings,
which  he  must  pay  for  the  loaf,  the  dearness  of  the
bread  is  real.  If  the  potter  can  obtain  these  two  shil-


ON  THE  REAL AND  NOMINAL  PRICE.  83

lings  by  the  sale  of  a  single  vase,  the  dearness  of  the
bread  is  only  nominal.  He  has  in  both  cases  exchanged
only  one  vase  against  one  loaf,  whatever  may  have
been  the  denomination  of  the  intermediate  value.  It  is
the  value  of  the  money  which  is  depreciated,  that  of
the  bread  has  remained  the  same.

Is  it  not  a  real  dearness  to  a  man  whose  income  arises
from  lands  which  are  let,  or  from  a  capital  lent  at  interest,
when  the  loaf  has  risen  from  one  to  two  shillings?

No :  that  which  is  real  is  the  depreciation  which  has
taken  place  in  the  value  of  the  merchandise  in  which
his  income  is  stipulated  to  be  paid:  that  is,  in  the  fall
of  the  money.  He  who  pays  the  income,  by  acquiring
at  less  expense  this  merchandise,  gains  in  this  case  what
the  other  loses.

You  have  said  that  if,  when  I  am  obliged  to  give  two
shillings  to  buy  a  loaf,  I  am  able  to  obtain  these  two
shillings,  on  the  same  terms  that  I  before  obtained  one,
the  loaf  has  not  become  dearer;  but  if  to  obtain  two  shil-
lings, that  is,  the  price  of  one  loaf,  I  am  obliged  to  give
two  vases  instead  of  one,  then  the  bread  will  have  really
become  dearer?

No ;  not  if  the  vases  as  well  as  the  money  have  fallen
to  half  their  value.

How  can  1  tell  whether  they  have  fallen  to  half  their
value  or  not?

They  have  fallen  if  they  can  be  obtained  for  half  the
expenses  of  production :  that  is,  if  means  have  been.


84  ON  THE  REAL  AND

found  to  create,  at  the  same  charge  of  production
(which  consists  as  we  know  of  the  workmanship,  in-
terest of  capital  and  profit)  two  vases  instead  of  one.

It  is  then  the  lowering  the  charges  of  production  which
causes  the  real  fall  in  the  price  of  products  1

Just  so.  Then  whatever  may  be  the  value  with
which  a  product  is  purchased,  this  product,  which  has
fallen  one  half;  is  obtained  for  one  half  less  expense  of
production.

Explain  that  by  an  example.

If,  by  means  of  a  knitting  frame,  I  can  make  a  pair
of  stockings  for  three  shillings,  instead  of  expending  six
shillings  on  them,  he  who  grows  wheat  can  obtain  a  pair
of  stockings  for  one  half  the  quantity  of  wheat  which  he
had  before  been  accustomed  to  give  for  them.  That  is,
if  he  was  before  obliged  to  sell  thirty-six  pounds  of
wheat  in  order  to  obtain  a  pair  of  stockings,  he  would
now  sell  but  eighteen.  But  the  eighteen  pounds  have
required  on  his  part  only  one  half  the  expenses  of  pro-
duction which  the  thirty-six  pounds  would  have  re-
quired.

It  is  the  same  whatever  is  the  production  with  which
we  are  occupied.  It  may  be  said,  that  when  an  article
really  falls  in  price,  not  only  those  who  produce  it,  but
every  body  else,  obtains  it  at  the  price  of  the  reduced
charge  of  production.

You  have  said  besides  that  the  riches  of  society  is  com-
posed of  the  sum  total  of  the  values  which  it  possesses :  it


NOMINAL  PRICE.  85

appears  to  me  to  follow,  that  the  fall  of  a  product >  stock-
ings for  example,  by  diminishing  the  sum  of  the  values
belonging  to  society,  diminishes  the  mass  of  its  riches.

The  sum  pf  the  riches  of  society  does  not  fall  on  that
account.  Two  pairs  of  stockings  are  produced  instead
of  one ;  and  two  pairs  at  three  shillings  are  worth  as
much  as  one  pair  at  six  shillings.  The  income  of  society
remains  the  same,  for  the  maker  gains  as  much  on  two
pairs  at  three  shillings,  as  he  did  on  one  pair  at  six
shillings.

But,  when  the  income  remains  the  same,  and  the
products  fall,  the  society  is  really  enriched.  If  the
same  fall  takes  place  on  all  products  at  once,  which  is
not  absolutely  impossible,  society  by  obtaining  all  the
objects  of  its  consumption  at  half  price,  without  having
lost  any  part  of  its  income,  would  really  be  twice  as
rich  as  before,  and  could  buy  twice  as  many  things.

This  does  not  generally  happen,  but  it  has  happened
to  a  great  number  of  products,  which  have  fallen  from
the  price  they  were  formerly  at,  some  a  tenth,  some  a
fourth,  a  half,  three-fourths,  as  silver,  and  even  in  a
greater  proportion  as  silks,  and  probably  many  other
articles.

To  what  cause  is  that  to  be  attributed?

To  many  causes ;  but  principally  to  the  progress  of
intelligence  and  industry.  It  is  to  their  progress  that  we
owe,  both  the  discovery  of  countries  in  which  there  is  a
greater  abundance  of  products,  and  also  a  means  of


86  ON  THE  REAL  AND

transporting  them  less  hazardous  and  more  economical.
To  that  progress  also  we  are  indebted  for  processes
more  simple  and  more  expeditious^  the  use  of  machi-
nery, and  in  general  a  better  adaptation  of  the  produc-
tive faculties  of  nature.

Are  there  any  products  which  have  really  become
dearer ?

There  are  some,  but  very  few,'  and  only  those  the
demand  for  which  has  increased  in  consequence  of  the
progress  of  civilization,  without  the  means  of  produc-
tion having  increased  in  the  same  proportion.  Such  as
butchers'  meat  and  poultry,  and  almost  all  the  useful
animals  which  are  raised  at  less  expence  in  less  civilized
countries.

Are  there  not  variations  in  value  which  are  not  the  con-
sequence of  the  charges  of  production  ?

The  errors,  the  fears  or  the  passions  of  men,  or  un-
foreseen events,  cause  disorder  and  confusion  in  values
which  are  merely  relative  :  that  is,  when  any  merchan-
dise rises  or  falls  with  respect  to  others,  in  consequence
of  circumstances  foreign  to  its  production.  Late  frosts
increase  the  price  of  the  last  years  wines,  whatever  may
have  been  the  charges  of  their  production.

Does  such  a  dearness  increase  the  national  wealth?
No : for  in  exchanging  another  product  for  one
which  has  become  dearer,  one  must  give  more  to  re-
ceive less :  he  who  buys,  loses  on  his  merchandise,  pre-
cisely as  much  as  the  seller  gains  on  his  goods.


NOMINAL  PRICE.  87

When  .the  wine  doubles  its  price,  he,  who,  to  pur-
chase a  piece  of  wine  is  obliged  to  sell  six  bushels  of
wheat  instead  of  three,  which  should  have  purchased  a
piece  of  wine  is  poorer  by  all  that  the  wine  merchant  is
richer.

Thus  these  kinds  of  variation,  which  sometimes  over-
turn private  fortunes,  do  not  affect  the  general  riches*.


*  The  changes  in  Talues  which  take  from  a  man  that  property
which  he  did  not  deserve  to  lose  to  give  it  to  another  who  did  not
deserve  to  gain  it,  are  nevertheless  mischievous  to  the  gene-
ral prosperity.  They  inflict  more  evil  on  him  who  loses  than
they  confer  benefit  on  him  who  gains :  they  disappoint  the  wisest
calculations;  they  discourage  the  most  useful  speculations,  they
divert  capitals  which  were  in  full  productive  activity,  &c.  &c.


CHAPTER  XVIII.
On  Money.


IF  money  is  nothing  but  merchandise,  why  is  coined
silver  of  greater  value  than  the  same  weight  of  silver
uncoined?

For  the  same  reasons  that  a  silver  tea-pot  is  worth
more  than  the  same  weight  of  silver  in  an  ingot.

The  fashion  that  the  money er  gives  to  the  silver  is  then
of  the  same  land  as  that  given  by  the  silversmith  ?

Precisely  of  the  same  kind.

What  utility  does  the  fashion  of  the  money  er  give  to
the  silver?

The  impression  on  the  money  announces  the  weight
and  quality  of  the  coin;  that  is,  the  quantity  of  fine
metal  and  of  alloy  therein;  consequently,  it  saves
those  who  receive  it  the  expence  of  weighing  and  as-
saying it.


ON MONEY.  89

Why  do  government  reserve  to  themselves  the  exclu-
sive right  of  coining  money  ?

In  order  to  prevent  the  abuses  which  individuals
might  create  in  this  manufacture,  by  not  making  it  of
the  same  finenesss  and  weight  which  the  impression  in-
dicates ;  and  sometimes  they  reserve  that  right,  in
order  to  obtain  the  profit  of  it,  which  makes  part  of
its  revenue.

Cannot  the  government,  by  virtue  of  this  exclusive  pri-
vilege of  coining  money,  raise  the  value  of  money  much
beyond  the  expences  of  manufacturing  this  merchan-
dise ?

It  can  do  so,  by  reducing  greatly  the  quantity  of
pieces  coined,  or  the  amount  of  the  money.

What  would  happen  then  ?

The  money- merchandise  becoming  more  scarce  in
proportion  to  the  quantity  of  other  merchandise  in  cir-
culation, that  is,  which  we  are  disposed  to  sell  or  to
buy ;  this  money-merchandise  would  be  more  in  de-
mand relatively  to  all  other  merchandise.  We  should
give  less  money  in  exchange  for  more  of  other  goods ;
in  other  words,  goods  would  fall  in  price.

Should  we  not  feel  in  commerce  some  inconvenience
arising  from  the  scarcity  of  money  ?

If  that  effect  took  place,  the  inconvenience  would
not  be  lasting,  because  the  total  real  value  of  the  mo-
ney would  not  be  diminished  by  it.  There  would  be


90  ON MONEY.

fewer  pieces,  but  each  of  the  pieces  would  be  worth
more;  or,  in  other  words,  other  goods  would  nomi-
nally fall  in  price,  and  their  sum  total  would  still  bear
exactly  the  same  proportion  with  the  sum  total  of  the
money.

What  inconvenience  would  be  felt  in  this  easel
The  ingots  and  utensils  of  gold  and  silver,  being  a
different  kind  of  merchandise  from  money,  although
made  of  the  same  material,  would  fall  in  price  like  all
other  merchandise :  this  would  make  a  great  dispro-
portion between  these  metals  in  money  and  in  ingots.
There  would  be  a  considerable  gain  in  converting
them  into  money,  which  is  an  inducement  to  counter-
feit and  fabricate  false  money.

You  have  just  shewn  in  what  case  money -merchan-
dise rises  in  value  with  respect  to  other  merchandise;
in  what  case  does  it  fall  with  respect  to  such  merchan-
dises ?

When  the  quantity  of  the  money  is  augmented  rela-
tively to  all  other  merchandise,  then  more  money  is  of-
fered for  less  merchandise :  the  money  would  fall ;  in
other  words,  the  other  merchandise  would  become  no-
minally dearer.

You  say  nominally ;  but  is  it  not  really,  when  it  is  not
the  name  of  the  money  which  is  changed,  and  we  actually
give  a  greater  weight  of  metal?

The  value  of  the  metal  is,  in  this  case,  really  less;


ON MONEY.  91

hut  the  value  of  the  other  merchandise,  not  having
really  changed,  the  variation  of  their  price  is  only  no-
minal. With  the  same  quantity  of  corn,  we  purchase
the  same  quantity  of  stuff.  A  bushel  of  corn,  instead
of  being  worth  six  shillings,  is  worth  twelve;  but  a
yard  of  cotton,  instead  of  costing  two  shillings,  costs
four:  thus,  to  buy  three  yards  of  stuff,  we  are  still
obliged  to  sell  a  bushel  of  corn  as  before;  and  a  bushel
of  corn,  though  worth  double  the  quantity  of  money,
is  still  only  equal  to  the  value  of  the  same  quantity  of
stuff.

This  is  what  happened  when  the  discovery  of  the
mines  of  South  America  threw  into  circulation  an  im-
mense quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  in  comparison  to
what  there  had  been  before.  To  obtain  the  same  quan-
tity of  corn,  we  must  now  give  nearly  three  times
as  much  silver  as  before  the  discovery  of  these
mines.

America  has  then  thrown  into  circulation  three  times
as  much  silver  as  there  was  before  ?

She  has  circulated  much  more;  but  commerce,  popu-
lation, and  riches,  having  greatly  augmented  since  this
discovery,  the  necessity  for  gold  and  silver,  as  well  for
the  purposes  of  money  as  for  furniture  and  ornaments,
has  greatly  augmented  also;  and  has  prevented  the
precious  metals  from  suffering  a  depreciation  in  pro-
portion to  their  abundance.  They  have  been  produced


92  ON MONEY.

in  ten  times  the  quantity,  hut  have  been  three  times
more  in  demand.

What  happens  when,  ur-der  the  same  denomination  of
money,  a  guinea,  for  exmnph^  the  government  gives
less  metal  than  it  gave  before.

The  value  of  the  money,  which  had  fallen  really
with  respect  to  other  merchandise,  then  falls  nomi-
nally.

Explain  that  by  an  example.

When  the  piece,  called  six  livres  tournois^  does
not  contain  more  silver  than  that  which  was  before
called  three  livres  tournois,  we  do  not  obtain  for  six
livres  more  merchandise  than  we  before  obtained  for
three  livres;  that  is,  the  same  quantity  of  merchandise
costs  the  same  weight  of  silver.  The  value  of  the  in-
got of  silver  has  scarcely  varied  from  the  year  1636  to
the  present  time:  with  an  ounce  of  silver  we  can  buy
the  same  quantity  of  those  goods,  whose  value  appears
to  have  undergone  the  least  variation.  The  setier
of  corn  sold  commonly  for  twelve  livres  tournois,  and
the  same  setter  sold  in  1789  for  twenty-four  livres;
but  twenty-four  livres  in  1789  did  notconta;n  a  greater
weight  of  silver,  than  in  1636  there  was  in  twelve
livres.*


*  The  marc  of  silver,  of  the  standard  of  the  mint  (of  Paris),


ON MONEY  93

What  effect  does  this  produce  on  the  interests  of  indivi-
duals?

With  respect  to  debts  contracted  previously  by  the
government,  if  it  pays  them  in  money  which  is  really
worth  less,  it  becomes  bankrupt  by  all  that  there  is
less  in  the  value  of  the  new,  than  there  had  been  in  the
old  money

And  when  it  authorizes  individuals  to  dis-
charge their  former  debts  in  the  new  money,  it  au-
thorizes them  to  commit  a  similar  bankruptcy  to  its
own.

With  regard  to  the  bargains  made  by  individuals
after  the  change  in  the  money,  this  change  produces  no
inconvenience;  the  bargains  are  made  according  to  the
real  value  of  the  new  money.

Does  a  nation,  whose  money  is  carried  into  other  coun-
tries, lose  in  consequence  of  this  operation  ?

No,  for  the  individuals  who  send  it,  take  care  to  ob-
tain at  least  an  equal  value  in  return.

Does  the  nation  gain  by  such  an  exportation  ?


was  worth  about  twenty-five  livres  in  1636;  in  1789,  fifty
livres  tournois.  In  England,  where  no  alteration  had  been
made  in  the  weight  or  fineness  of  the  money,  scarcely  any
variation  took  place  in  the  price  of  corn  :  the  average  of  seven
years  previous  to  1636,  was  about  6s.  Ifd.  and  for  seven  years
previous  to  1790,  was  5s.  lOfd.  per  bushel. — TV.


94:  ON MONEY.

Yes,  when  she  takes  care  not  to  coin  money  gratuit-
ously, and  never  to  manufacture  this  kind  of  mer-
chandise, unless  she  is  sufficiently  indemnified  for  the
employment  of  her  capital  and  the  wages  of  her  in-
dustry.

What  relation  is  there  between  the  value  of  gold  and
silver  1

Their  relative  values  vary  continually,  and  in  differ-
ent places,  like  the  relative  values  of  any  other  mer-
chandise whatever.  The  value  of  the  gold  is  raised
in  regard  to  that  of  silver,  if  gold  is  more  demanded
or  less  offered ;  hence  the  agio  one  is  obliged  some-
times to  pay  for  the  purchase  of  gold  coin  with  silver
money.

Does  the  same  variation  exist  between  copper  and  sil-
ver monies?

Not  commonly ;  because  we  do  not  receive  copper
money  pure,  nor  that  of  copper  mixt  with  silver,  which
is  called  billon,  at  the  rate  of  its  intrinsic  value,  but
in  consequence  of  the  facility  which  it  affords  for  ob-
taining a  piece  of  silver.  If  a  hundred  sous,  which
are  paid  me  in  copper,  are  intrinsically  worth  no  more
than  four  francs,  what  does  it  signify  to  me  :  1  receive
them  for  five  francs,  because  I  am  sure  to  get  for
them,  whenever  I  please,  a  piece  of  five  francs.
But  when  copper  money  becomes  too  abundant,
and  one  can  no  longer  obtain  for  it  at  pleasure  the


ON MONEY.  95

quantity  of  silver  that  it  represents,  its  value  is  alter-
ed, and  it  can  be  no  longer  disposed  of  without
loss.

Repeat  to  me  summarily  the  essential  principles  which
relate  to  money.

The  numerous  exchangee,  and  other  transactions
which  cannot  be  dispensed  with  in  a  populous  and  ci-
vilized society,  render  absolutely  necessary  the  use  of
an  intermediate  merchandize,  which  is  money.

This  merchandise  is  commonly  of  silver,  manufac-
tured for  that  purpose.

The  value  of  this  merchandise  is  established,  like
all  other  metals,  in  direct  proportion  to  the  demand
for  it,  or  of  the  necessity  one  has  for  it ;  and  in  in-
verse proportion  to  the  quantity  offered,  or  of  the
quantity  which  is  actually  in  circulation.

The  metal  coined  into  money  is  a  merchandise,
totally  different  from  the  metal  fashioned  into  any
other  thing.  An  ounce  of  metal  in  money  may  equal
in  value  two  ounces  of  metal  in  an  ingot;  because
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  every  body  to  convert  the
ingot  into  money  :  but  an  ounce  of  metal  in  an  ingot
cannot  be  worth  much  more  than  an  ounce  of  metal
in  money,  because  any  body  cannot  convert  the  money
into  an  ingot.

Whatever  be  the  name  given  to  any  piece  of  mo-
ney, whether  it  is  called  three  lives  or  six  livres,  it


96  ON  MONEY.

is  not  really  worth,  as  it  regards  other  merchandise,
more  than  the  value  of  the  metal  and  the  fashion ;
but  this  fashion  may  be  paid  for  too  dearly,  as  it  is
exclusive,  and  as  government  keeps  to  itself  the  right
of  coining  money.*


*  It  was  not  possible,  in  an  elementary  work  like  this,  to  in-
clude any  but  the  most  important  principles,  and  which  were
essential  to  the  interest  of  the  public.  The  subject  is  treated  at
length  in  the  Treatise  on  Political  Economy.


,[ 97 j


CHAPTER  XIX.
On  Signs  representing  Money.


rrHY do  you  not  call  money  a  sign  representative  of
merchandises  ?

Because  it  is  no  more  a  sign  representative  of  mer-
chandise, than  any  one  merchandise  is  the  sign  of  an-
other. A  cloth  merchant  might  as  well  say,  that  the
cloth  in  his  warehouse  is  the  sign  which  represents
bread  and  meat,  because,  after  an  exchange  or  two,  he
might  get  bread  and  meat  for  his  cloth.

What  do  you  call  signs  representative  of  money  f

Titles,  documents,  or  vouchers,  which  have  no  in-
trinsic value,  but  which  acquire  one  by  the  right
which  they  give  to  a  certain  quantity  of  money ;  such
as  bills  of  exchange,  bonds,  bank  notes,  &c.

What  do  you  observe  respecting  bills  of  exchange  ?

1.  That  they  do  not  give  the  right  to  receive  a  sum
of  money  till  the  end  of  a  certain  term,  which  dimi-
nishes their  value  by  all  the  amount  of  the  interest

H


98  ON SIGNS REPRESENTING  MONEY.

and  of  the  risk  which  the  bearer  runs  of  not  being
paid  when  they  become  due.  On  this  account  they
cannot  be  generally  sold  for  the  full  amount  that  they
give  the  right  to  receive.  Commonly  the  discount  on
them  is  lost.

2.  That  they  are  sometimes  payable  abroad,  and
consequently  in  foreign  money.  In  order  to  sell  them,
this  foreign  money  must  be  valued  in  the  national  mo-
ney :  it  is  this  valuation  which  is  called  the  course  of
exchange.  The  exchange  is  at  par  when  the  quantity
of  fine  gold  or  silver,  paid  for  the  purchase  of  a  foreign
bill  of  exchange,  is  precisely  equal  to  the  quantity  of
these  metals,  which  the  bill  of  exchange  gives  the  right
of  receiving  abroad.

What  do  you  observe  respecting  bank  notes  2

That  they  circulate  among  the  public  for  the  entire
value  which  they  represent,  when  one  is  certain,  by
means  of  the  note,  to  receive  that  value  whenever  one
thinks  proper.

What  assurance  has  the  public  that  the  notes  of  a  bank
will  be  punctually  paid?

A  well  administered  bank  never  issues  a  note  with-
out receiving  for  it  a  value  in  exchange.  This  value
is  commonly  money,  or  ingots,  or  bills  of  exchange.
That  part  of  the  deposit,  which  is  in  money,  is  at  all
times  ready  to  discharge  them.  That  part  which  is  in
ingots  requires  only  the  time  necessary  to  sell  them.
That  part  which  is  in  bills  of  exchange  only  requires


ON STGVS  REPRESENTING  MOtfEY.  99

one  to  wait,  at  the  worst,  till  they  become  due,  before
their  value  can  be  used  to  discharge  the  notes.  So
that,  if  the  bills  of  exchange  bear  the  names  of  many
solvent  persons,  and  if  the  times  of  pavm^nt  are  not
at  too  great  a  distance,  the  bearers  of  the  notes  run  no
other  risk  than  a  trifling  delay.

But  if  these  bills  of  exchange  are  paid  when  due,  by
notes  of  the  bank  instead  of  money

Then  th  se  notes  are  in  fact  discharged.

Bank  notes  can  then  supply  the  place  of  money?

Yes,  to  a  certain  point;  but  onfy  in  places  where  an
office  is  constantly  open  to  exchange  them  for  money;
for  they  are  no  longer  worth  the  full  sum  of  money,
the  instant  they  cease  to  be  exchangeable  for  money  at
pleasure.

What  is  a  paper  money  ?

It  is  a  title  which  give  no  right  to  any  real  reim-
bursement, but  to  which  public  authority  attributes  a
certain  value:  a  title  which  is  received  at  that  value  in
the  payments  which  are  made  to  the  government,
and  which  it  authorizes  individuals  to  give  in  payment
for  the  discharge  of  engagements  which  they  have  con-
tracted with  each  other.

What  is  it  that  keeps  up  the  value  of  paper  money?

Sometimes  rigorous  measures  taken  against  those
who  refuse  to  sell  for  paper  money;  sometimes  the
uses  to  which  the  government  admits  it,  such  as  the
payment  of  taxes,  and  of  deots  previously  contracted,


100  ON SIGNS REPRESENTING  MONEY.

sometimes,  and  almost  always,  it  is  the  absence  of  all
other  money-merchandise,  so  that  the  public,  who  has
nothing  else  to  substitute  for  the  ordinary  use  of  mo-
ney, is  obliged  to  apply  to  it  from  the  absolute  neces-
sity there  is  for  this  kind  of  merchandise.  Often  it  is
all  these  things  united  which  gives  any  value  to  paper
money.  These  means  would  even  give  it  a  very  consi-
derable value,  if  the  facility  which  there  is  of  multi-
plying it  at  will,  did  not  always,  sooner  or  later,  bring
it  into  disrepute.

One  cannot  then,  by  multiplying  paper  money,  multi-
ply at  will  the  riches  of  a  country  f

No.

Explain  to  me  why.

Because  the  paper  money  can  only  replace  a  part  of
the  riches  of  a  country,  that  part  which  consists  of
coin;  and  the  money  itself,  were  it  even  gold  or  silver,
forms  but  a  small  part  of  the  riches  of  any  country
when  compared  with  the  value  of  all  the  things  in  it;
land,  houses,  furniture,  buildings  of  every  kind,  mer-
chandise, and  even  industrious  talents.

You  say^  were  it  even  gold  or  silver.  //  appears  to
me,  that  in  augmenting  the  mass  of  money  of  gold  or
silver,  the  real  riches  of  a  country  are  increased.

The  quantity  of  sales  and  purchases  in  a  country,
require  a  certain  monetary  value  devoted  to  that  circu-
lation. When  the  quantity  of  money  is  increased,
without  being  necessary  for  the  circulation  of  a  coun-


ON SIGNS REPRESENTING MONEY.  101

try,  the  real  value  of  the  money  declines,  whatever
may  be  its  nominal  value:  and  losing  in  value  as  much
as  it  increases  in  quantity,  the  total  riches  is  no  greater.
If  the  quantity  of  silver  money  were  to  be  doubled,
we  should  be  obliged  to  pay  two  ounces  of  silver  for
what  we  before  bought  for  one  ounce ;  consequently,
two  millions  of  nominal  money  in  silver  would  not  be
of  more  value  than  one  million  was  formerly.

It  is  the  same  with  paper  money.  If  the  quantity  of
this  money  had  been  increased  tenfold,  we  could  not
obtain  with  ten  notes  of  an  hundred  pounds  more
than  had  been  before  obtained  with  one  note.  What-
ever name  is  given  to  this  sum,  it  can  never  have  in
the  whole  more  than  a  certain  value ;  and  this  value,
truly  effective,  whatever  may  be  the  material  of  which
the  money  is  made,  is  always  determined  by  the  wants
of  the  circulation,  and  the  state  of  civilization,  of
riches  and  of  industry,  in  a  country.


CHAPTER  XX.
On  Markets.


^iVHAT  do  you  mean  by  markets  ?

Before  answering  this  question,  I  beg  you  to  remark,
that  those  who  engage  in  production  are  seldom  occu-
pied with  more  than  one  product,  or  at  most  a  small
number  of  products.  A  tanner  produces  nothing  but
leather ;  a  clothier,  cloth ;  one  merchant  deals  in  wine,
another  imports  foreign  goods;  one  cultivator  raises  the
vine,  another  corn,  a  third  cattle.

What  consequences  do  you  draw  from  that  ?

That  none  of  them  can  enjoy  the  greatest  part  of  the
various  articles  for  which  he  has  occasion,  except  by
means  of  exchanging  the  greater  part  of  his  own  pro-
ductions for  those  which  he  desires  to  consume :  so
that  the  greater  part  of  the  consumptions  of  society
take  place  only  in  consequence  of  an  exchange.

But  when  we  are  able  easily  to  exchange  our  own


ON MARKETS.  103

productions  for  those  which  we  want,  we  are  said  to
have  found  ready  markets  for  our  products.

On  (that  does  the  ready  sale  of  any  particular  article
depend  ?

On  the  vivacity  of  the  demand  for  it.

On  what  does  the  vivacity  of  the  demand  depend?

On  two  motives,  which  are — 1st.  The  utility  of  the
product,  that  is,  the  necessity  the  consumer  has  for
it : — 2d.  The  quantity  of  other  products  he  is  able  to
give  in  exchange.

I  conceive  thejirst  motive.  As  to  the  second,  it  ap*
pears  to  me  that  it  is  the  quantity  of  money  that  the
buyer  possesses^  which  induces  him  to  buy  or  not.

That  is  also  true  :  but  the  quantity  of  money  which
he  has,  depends  on  the  quantity  of  product  with  which
he  has  been  able  to  buy  this  money.

Could  he  not  obtain  the  money  otherwise,  than  by  hav*
ing  acquired  it  by  products?

No.

If  he  had  received  the  money  from  his  tenants  ...  .  ?

His  tenant  had  received  it  from  the  sale  of  part
of  the  products  to  which  the  earth  had  contri-
buted.

If  he  had  received  the  interest  of  a  capital  lent ?

The  undertaker  who  employed  that  capital  had  re-
ceived the  money  which  he  paid,  on  the  sale  of  a
part  of  the  products  to  which  his  capital  had  con-
curred,


104  ON MARKETS.

If  the  purchaser  had  obtained  this  money  by  gift  or
inheritance ?

The  giver,  or  he  from  whom  the  giver  had  obtained
it,  had  it  in  exchange  for  some  product.

In  every  case  the  money,  with  which  any  product  is
purchased,  must  have  been  produced  by  the  sale  of
another  product ;  and  the  purchase  may  be  considered
as  an  exchange  in  which  the  purchaser  gives  that  which
he  has  produced,  (or  that  which  another  has  pro-
duced for  him),  and  in  which  he  receives  the  thing
bought.

What  do  you  conclude  from  this  ?

That  the  more  the  purchasers  produce,  the  more
they  have  to  purchase  with,  and  that  the  productions
of  the  one  procure  purchasers  to  the  other.

It  appears  to  me,  that  if  the  buyers  only  purchased
by  means  of  their  products,  they  have  generally  more
products  than  money  to  offer  in  payment.

Every  producer  asks  for  money  in  exchange  for  his
products,  only  for  the  purpose  of  employing  that  mo-
ney again  immediately  in  the  purchase  of  another  pro^
duct;  for  we  do  not  consume  money,  and  it  is  not
sought  after  in  ordinary  cases  to  conceal  it:  thus,  when
a  producer  desires  to  exchange  his  product  for  money,
he  may  be  considered  as  already  asking  for  the  mer-
chandise which  he  proposes  to  buy  with  this  money.
Jt  is  thus  that  the  producers,  though  they  have  all  of
them  the  air  of  demanding  money  for  their  goods,  do


ON MARKETS.  105

i

in  reality  demand  merchandise for  their  merchan-
dise.

Then  the  more  merchandise  there  is  produced,  the
more  animated  is  the  demand  for  merchandise  ?

Without  doubt.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  countries,
which  are  but  little  civilized,  present  few  markets,
and  those  for  products  but  little  varied ;  while  in  popu-
lous, industrious,  and  productive  districts,  the  sales
are  repeated  and  considerable.

It  is  not  necessary  then,  in  order  that  markets  should
be  extended  and  multiplied,  to  look  for  them  in  foreign
countries  ?

No;  it  is  sufficient  that  other  products  should  be
multiplied  in  our  own  country .

What  is  it  that  multiplies  foreign  markets?

The  riches  of  neighbouring  nations,  and  the  activity
of  their  production.

What  consequence  do  you  draw  from  that  ?

That  each  of  them  is  interested  in  the  prosperity  of
his  neighbour,  and  every  nation  in  the  prosperity  of
all  others :  for  it  is  only  those  who  produce  much  that
can  readily  give  you  any  thing  in  exchange  for  your
products :  or  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  that  can
give  you  the  value  of  them  in  money.

What  other  consequence  follows  from  this  ?

That  riches  are  not  exclusive:  that,  so  far  from
that  which  another  man,  or  another  people  gains,  being
a  loss  to  you,  their  gains  are  favourable  to  you ;  that


106  ON MARKETS.

it  is  only  necessary  for  you  to  produce,  not  that  which
they  produce  easier  than  you,  but  that  which  they
cannot  fail  to  demand  from  you  by  means  of  their
products;  and  that  wars, entered  into  for  commerce,
will  appear  so  much  the  more  senseless  as  we  become
better  informed.


[ 107 ]


CHAPTER  XXI.

On  Regulations  or  Restraints  of
Industry.


WHAT  regulations  are  commonly  made  relating  to
industry  2

The  laws  and  regulations  made  by  governments  on
this  subject,  have  for  their  object  either  to  determine
on  what  products  we  may  or  maj  not  employ  ourselves;
or  to  prescribe  the  manner  in  which  the  operations  of
industry  shall  be  carried  on.

What  examples  are  there  of  the  manrt^  in  which  a
government  determines  the  nature  of  the  products  in
which  we  may  engage?

In  agriculture,  when  it  prohibits  such  or  such  or  a
culture,  as  tobacco,  or  when  it  gives  extraordinary
encouragement  to  other  crops,  such  as  corn.

In  manufactures,  when  it  favours  certain  manufac-
tures, such  as  silks,  and  prohibits  or  restrains  others,
such  as  cottons.


108  ON RESTRAINTS

In  commerce,  when  it  favours  by  treaties,  commu-
nications with  certain  countries,  and  interdicts  it  with
others;  or  when  it  gives  privileges  to  trade  in  certain
articles,  and  prohibits  it  in  others.

What  is  the  effect  of  such  regulations  ?

To  direct  the  efforts  of  industry  towards  productions
less  suitable  to  the  wants  of  the  nation,  and  less  lucra-
tive to  their  producers.

On  what  evidence  do  you  suppose  that  the  favoured
productions  are  less  suitable  to  the  wants  of  the  nation
and  less  lucrative?

By  this  alone,  that  these  productions  are  not  suffi-
ciently paid  for  to  be  able  to  support  themselves  with-
out such  encouragement.

In  what  way  do  governments  interfere  in  the  manner
in  which  products  ought  to  be  created  ?

In  manufactures,  public  authority  sometimes  pre-
scribes the  number  of  those  who  are  to  be  employed  in
them,  and  the  conditions  they  must  comply  with,  as
when  it  establishes  corporations,  freedoms,  and  com-
panies :  or  when  it  fixes  the  material  which  must  be
employed,  the  number  of  threads  which  the  warp  and
weft  of  a  stuff  must  contain,  and  subjects  them  to  par-
ticular marks.  In  commerce  it  sometimes  prescribes
the  route  by  which  the  merchandize  must  pass,  the
port  at  which  it  must  be  landed,  &c.

What  is  the  object  of  corporations  and  freedoms  £


OF  INDUSTRY.  109

It  is  to  prevent  incapable  or  inexpert  workmen  from
deceiving  the  consumers  by  delivering  to  them  an  ar-
ticle of  inferior  quality  to  that  which  it  represents.

In  what  cases  are  the  precautions  taken  by  government
to  prevent  such  abuses,  really  useful  ?

When  the  verification  is  impossible,  or  at  least  very
difficult  to  the  purchasers ;  as  in  the  case  of  apothe-
caries' drugs.  The  care  which  a  government  takes  to
ascertain  the  capacity  and  honesty  of  apothecaries,  and
ey_en  of  physicians,  is  then  incontestibly  useful.  The
same  may  be  said  of  that  control  by  which  it  puts  a
stamp  on  all  articles  of  gold  or  silver

What  is  the  inconvenience  of  corporations  and  free-
doms ?

The  establishing,  in  favor  of  producers  united  in  cor-
porations, of  a  monopoly,  that  is,  the  exclusive  trade
in  what  they  produce ;  a  monopoly  of  which  the  work-
men on  the  one  hand,  and  the  consumers  on  the  other,
are  the  victims.

Why  the  workmen  ?

Because  the  corporation,  in  limiting  the  number  of
undertakers,  and  in  subjecting  them  to  certain  forma-
lities, limits  the  free  competition  of  those  who  might
employ  the  workmen.

But  if  the  workmen  on  their  parts  agree  together  to
demand  certain  wages  ?

It  is  then  the  workmen  who  form  an  unauthorized


110  ON RESTRAINTS

corporation  just  as  prejudicial  as  those  which  are  au-
thorised.

How  do  corporations  establish  a  monopoly  against  the
consumers  ?

The  production  not  being  open  to  the  competition
of  all  producers  without  distinction,  the  products  are
not  permitted  to  fall  to  the  rate  at  which  they  might
have  been  afforded  by  the  charges  of  production  ;  in
which  are  comprised,  as  we  know,  the  profits  of  the
different  producers.

What  inconvenience  arises  from  the  profits  being  raised
beyond  what  they  would  have  been  if  left  to  free  compe-
tition? These  profit*  forming  part  of  the  income
of  the  nation,  is  not  the  income  augmented  by  this
monopoly  ?

That  which  the  producers  gain  beyond  the  rate  of
free  competition,  is  an  excess  of  price  lost  by  the  con-
sumer at  the  same  time  that  it  is  gained  by  the  pro-
ducer. It  is  not  a  value  created,  but  displaced;  it  is
a  portion  of  riches  which  goes  out  of  one  purse  into
another,  and  which  diminishes  the  general  riches  on
the  one  hand,  as  much  as  it  increases  it  on  the
other.

But  this  loss  is  trivial  to  the  consumer,  while  it  is  of
importance  to  the  productor.

It  is  little  on  each  individual  purchase ;  but  when
repeated  on  aii  the  articles  we  purchase,  it  becomes


OF INDUSTRY.  Ill

considerable  at  the  end  of  the  year ;  and  the  expenses
of  individuals  being  thus  greater  in  proportion  to  their
incomes,  it  is  the  same  as  if  their  incomes  were  less
with  respect  to  their  consumption :  they  are  poorer.


[ 112 ]


CHAPTER  XXII.
On  Importations,  Duties,  and  Prohibitions.


WHAT  does  the  word  importation  signify  ?

The  purchasing  abroad  and  introducing  into  a  coun-
try foreign  merchandise.

What  do  you  mean  by  prohibitions  ?

Forbidding  certain  merchandize  to  be  introduced
into  a  country.  Sometimes  without  prohibiting  them
entirely,  they  are  made  to  pay  duties  on  importation,
which  diminishes  the  quantity  imported.

What  results  from  an  absolute  prohibition  ?

An  absolute  prohibition  forces  the  capital  and  in-
dustry which  would  have  been  devoted  to  this  kind  of
commercial  production,  to  apply  itself  to  some  pro-
duction less  advantageous.

Why  less  advantageous  ?

Because  we  should  not  engage  in  it  but  for  the  im-
possibility of  directing  our  industry  in  the  other  mode.


ON  IMPORTATIONS,  DUTIES,  &C.  113

The  prohibition  would  be  superfluous,  if  the  prohibited
production  *  was  not  the  most  advantageous.

What  happens  when  instead  of  an  absolute  prohibition
a  duty  only  is  laid  on  the  product  imported?

The  evil  is  then  only  partial,  and  consists  in  a  dear-
ness  equal  to  the  amount  of  the  duty.  The  consumer
pays  for  the  product  more  than  it  is  worth.

What  does  it  signify  if  the  consumer  pays  dearer  for
any  thing,  since  the  producer  gains  by  it  ?

The  producer  does  not  profit  by  it ;  for  what  it  sells
for  more  goes  in  charges  of  production  which  are  lost
to  every  body ;  or  in  contributions  consumed  for  the
service  of  the  state.

Why  do  you  say  that  the  charges  of  production  are
lost  to  every  body?  It  appears  to  me  that  such  of  these
charges  as  are  composed  of  the  profits  paid  to  producers,
are  not  charges  lost,  since  the  producers  profit  by
them.

The  producers  are  people  who  sell  the  service  of
their  land,  their  capital  and  their  industrious  talents,


*  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  by  the  word  production,  we
understand  the  action  of  commercial  as  well  as  of  all  other  in-
dustry. Rice  is  to  France  or  England,  a  product  of  commercial
industry  as  much  as  wheat  is  a  product  of  its  agricultural  in*
dustry.


114  ON  IMPORTATIONS,  DUTIES,

whose  gains  are  not  the  greater  when  all  these  services
afford  a  product  less  abundant  but  dearer.

When  any  regulations  render  it  necessary,  in  order
to  create  a  pound  of  sugar,  to  employ  more  of  the  ser-
vices of  the  land,  capital,  and  industry,  the  sugar  is
dearer  without  the  producers  being  greater  gainers.
If  they  receive  more  values  in  payment,  they  have  also
furnished  more  values  in  services.

Do  not  the  prohibitions  and  the  duties,  ly  compelling
the  creation  of  a  product  in  the  interior  of  a  country,
create  the  profits  which  are  made  in  such  a  produc-
tion f

It  only  causes  the  profits  which  would  have  been
made  on  a  commercial  production,  to  be  replaced  by
other  profits,  probably  less  lucrative,  made  on  a  ma-
nufactured production.

Is  not  that  a  good  ?  Are  not  our  capitals  better  em-
ployed in  putting  into  activity  our  own  national  industry
than  that  of  foreigners  ?

Yes :  but  when  ye  make  the  consumers,  that  is,  the
nation,  pay  dearer  for  certain  products,  simply  to  sup-
port a  greater  number  of  national  producers,  it  is  just
as  if  a  part  of  the  nation  was  compelled  io  devote  a
portion  of  its  income  to  maintain  workshops  of  charity.
Perhaps  no  population  is  truly  desirable  but  that  which
industry  left  to  itself  can  naturally  support.

You  have  just  considered  the  import  duties  in  their  in-


AND PROHIBITIONS.  115

fuence  on  the  income,  on  the  riches  of  a  nation,  and  you
have  proved  that  without  augmenting  the  income  of  a
nation,  they  cause  it  to  pay  dearer  for  the  objects  it  con-
sumes ;  which  is  equivalent  to  a  real  diminution  of  its
income.  But  if  the  state  is  in  want  of  these  duties  for
the  public  expenses,  are  they  more  mischievous  than  any
other  kind  of  impost  .*

No ;  they  are  an  impost  on  commercial  production
which  procures  us  products  from  without,  as  the  land
tax  is  an  impost  on  the  products  which  come  to  us  from
the  earth;  as  the  personal  contribution  and  licences
are  imposts  on  the  interior  manufactures.  The  effect
of  all  these  imposts  is  to  increase  the  price  of  all  pro-
ducts without  augmenting  the  income  of  those  who
consume  them.  They  are  all  useful  in  providing  for
the  public  expenses  from  which  the  nation  derives  ad-
vantage; but  they  never  encourage  production,  nor
augment  the  income  of  a  country.

However  favourable  the  suppression  of  the  taxes  which
bear  on  industry  and  consumers  might  be,  would  it  not
be  attended  with  some  danger  ?

Yes,  when  the  suppression  is  sudden.  The  laws,  and
in  general  the  whole  legislation  of  a  country,  have
long  since  induced  the  particular  employment  of  cer-
tain capitals  in  the  productions  in  which  they  are  ac-
tually engaged,  and  from  which  they  cannot  be  with-
drawn without  losing  a  great  part,  and  sometimes

i  2


116  ON  IMPORTATIONS,  DUTIES,

nearly  the  whole,  of  their  value.  For  example,  if  on
the  faith  of  security  from  laws  which  had  for  a  long
time  prohibited  cotton  goods,  the  manufacturers  had
laid  out  large  sums  in  machinery  fit  for  the  manufac-
ture of  cotton  goods  only,  and  if,  by  a  new  law,  foreign
cottons  might  all  at  once  be  introduced  at  a  cheaper
rate,  this  law,  though  in  fact  favourable  to  the  income
of  a  country,  since  it  is  enabled  to  procure  the  same
products  at  less  expense,  would  be  unfavourable  to
capitals,  because  it  would  reduce  to  nothing  the  value
of  all  the  capitals  actually  engaged  in  the  productioa
of  cotton  goods.

Besides,  a  part  of  the  capital  engaged  in  any  kind  of
production  is  composed  of  the  talents  of  the  persons
employed  in  this  production ;  for  the  advances  which
apprenticeships  require  are  a  capital,  and  this  capital
is  lost  from  the  moment  that  the  apprenticeship  be-
comes useless.  A  new  apprenticeship  is  necessary;
that  is,  a  new  capital  must  be  laid  out.  The  loss  of
this  kind  of  capital  is  the  more  painful,  as  it  falls  on
the  working  class,  who,  in  general,  are  little  able  to
bear  it.

And  even  in  those  cases  in  which  a  change  in  the
legislation  does  not  cause  a  total  loss  of  capital,  it
always  produces  some  evil.  A  building,  by  its  ar-
rangement and  its  situation,  is  convenient  for  a  certain
kind  of  industry ;  it  loses  part  of  its  advantages  if  its


AND PROHIBITIONS.  117

destination  must  be  changed.  The  simple  change  of
the  habitudes,  the  dependencies,  and  the  connexions  of
producers,  exposes  them  to  serious  losses.  It  is  only
with  great  circumspection,  that  even  the  most  desirable
ameliorations  ought  to  be  introduced;  otherwise  we
are  in  danger  of  overturning  many  fortunes,  and  de-
stroying the  happiness  of  many  families.


CHAPTER  XXIIL
On  Exportation.


oes  the  word  exportation  signify '?

It  signifies  the  selling  and  sending  the  indigenous
productions  of  a  country  to  foreign  countries.

Is  it  beneficial  to  a  country  to  sell  abroad  its  indigenous
products  $

No  doubt  it  is,  for  that  multiplies  its  affairs,  and  its
lucrative  relations,  which  are  always  beneficial;  and
also  it  procures  in  return  merchandise  which  we  may
seek  for  in  vain  in  our  own  country,  or  which  would
cost  much  more.

Does  not  a  nation  gain  more  by  selling  to  strangers
than  to  its  own  people  V

No  ;  an  internal  market,  when  it  produces  the  same
profits  as  an  external  one,  is  quite  as  valuable  to  the
nation,  and  is  a  better  sign  of  increasing  prosperity
than  exportation  itself.  In  fact,  if  your  fellow  country-


ON EXPORTATION.  119

men  buy  your  goods,  it  is  a  proof  that  they  produce
something  with  which  they  can  pay  for  them.

When  a  stranger  travels  into  another  country  and
spends  his  money  there,  does  not  that  country  gain  all
the  money  he  leaves  behind  ?

The  country(  gains  in  that  case,  the  value  of  the
money  which  it  has  received  from  the  traveller  less  than
the  value  of  the  things  which  have  been  delivered  to
him  in  exchange  for  his  money  :  for  the  value  of  what
is  given  to  him  is  as  real  as  the  value  of  the  money
received.  The  expenditure  of  a  stranger  produces  an
effect  similar  to  an  exportation  of  merchandise  which
is  paid  for  in  money.

The  profits  made  on  this  production  are  gained,  and
these  profits  are  generally  advantageous,  because  a
traveller  cannot  dispute  the  prices  of 'what  is  sold  to
him  as  rigorously  as  the  foreign  merchant  who  purchases
the  merchandise  of  a  country.

Is  it  beneficial  to  expend  money  in  order  to  attract
foreigners  $

What  is  spent  with  this  view  diminishes  by  so  much
the  profit  of  the  sales  which  are  made  to  them  ;  exactly
as  the  premiums  and  rewards  which  are  given  to
encourage  exportation,  are  so  much  iaken  from  the
profits  which  result  from  it,  and  sometimes  even  exceed
them.

Why  do  most  nations  and  most  governments  (who  act
in  this  case  agreeably  to  the  desires  of  those  nations)


120  ON EXPORTATION.

endeavour  by  every  means  to  increase  the  quantity  of
merchandise  which  they  export  to  strangers,  and  to
limit  the  quantity  of  those  which  they  purchase  from
them?

It  is  because  they  are  unacquainted  with  the  true
source  of  riches.

What  is,  according  to  them,  the  source  of  riches  ?

The  mines  of  gold  and  silver ;  and,  as  these  are  not
in  our  country,  they  think  that  they  cannot  become
rich  without  selling  to  foreigners  merchandise  of  their
own  production,  and  compelling  them  to  pay  for  them
in  the  precious  metals.

On  what  do  they  found  this  opinion?

On  a  merchant  not  gaining  any  thing  on  his  mer-
chandise until  it  is  sent  out  of  his  warehouse,  at  which
time  he  exchanges  it  for  gold  or  silver  money.

Why  docs  a  nation,  in  regard  to  other  nations,  differ
from  a  merchant  in  regard  to  his  customers  ?

A  merchant,  like  a  nation,  sells  his  products  only  to
repurchase  others,  which  are  either  necessary  for  his
consumption  or  fit  for  the  continuation  of  his  commerce.
But  a  merchant  does  not  find  in  his  customer,  precisely
the  man  who  can  furnish  him  with  the  goods  or  ma-
terials which  he  wants,  and  at  the  most  advantageous
price.  It  is  only  with  the  money  of  the  buyer  that  he
can  himself  buy  what  he  wants,  and  in  the  quantities
that  are  convenient  to  him.

It  is  not  the  same  between  one  nation  and  another.


ON EXPORTATION.  121

The  merchants,  who  are  the  agents  of  this  communi-
cation, by  the  variety  and  the  facility  of  their  operations,
are  enabled  to  bring  back  in  return  for  what  they  send
out,  merchandise  which,  if  not  useful  to  the  dealer,
whose  products  they  have  exported,  will  at  least  be  so
to  some  other.  The  last,  in  paying  for  it,  will  provide
the  means  of  paying  the  first.

The  interest  of  merchants  in  all  these  operations,  is
to  obtain  in  return  such  merchandise  as  is  most  in
demand,  because  it  will  sell  the  best.

Would  it  not  still  be  better  that  a  neighbouring  nation
should  pay  us  in  money  rather  than  in  goods  1

You  do  not  desire  this  money,  but  in  order  to  use  it
in  the  purchase  of  goods  of  which  you  are  in  want.

That  is  true ;  but  when  I  have  the  money  /  am  at
liberty  to  employ  it  in  the  purchase  of  whatever  I  think
proper.

A  foreign  nation  who  pays  you  in  merchandise,  gives
you  only  such  merchandise  as  you  are  willing  to  re-
ceive, for  you  are  at  liberty  to  purchase  in  return  what-
ever you  please.

But  when  she  pays  us  in  merchandise,  this  merchandise
is  consumed,  and  ue  lose  the  value  of  it ;  a  loss  which
we  should  not  have  made  if  she  had  paid  us  in  money.

The  loss  you  make  does  not  come  from  the  importa-
tion, but  from  the  consumption,  of  the  merchandise.
If  at  the  close  of  an  external  commercial  operation
there  is  a  value  consumed  under  the  form  of  champaign)


122  ON EXPORTATION.

the  loss  is  not  greater  than  when  at  the  close  of  an
internal  commercial  operation,  the  same  value  had
been  consumed  in  cyder.

The  cyder  would  at  least  have  been  a  product  of  the
national  industry.

The  foreign  goods  are  equally  products  of  the  na-
tional industry,  since  they  are  products  of  its  com-
merce.

How  does  foreign  commerce  procure  new  values,
new  riches,  since  we  must  always  give  to  foreigners  a
merchandise  of  equal  value  to  that  which  they  give  to
us?

An  example  will  make  you  understand  this.  A  mer-
chant sends  stuffs  to  Brazil ;  he  obtains  in  that  country,
in  exchange  for  his  stuffs,  a  greater  value  than  he  gave
for  them  in  Europe,  because  they  have  gained  by  the
carriage.  This  value  which  he  has  gained,  he  there
exchanges  for  cotton  which  he  brings  back  to  Europe,
the  value  of  which  is  also  augmented  by  the  carriage.
"When  these  operations  are  finished,  although  the
merchant  has  exchanged,  in  each  place,  his  merchandise
at  the  current  price;  that  is,  value  for  value;  still  as
the  value  of  the  different  products  have  increased
•while  they  were  in  his  hands,  he  has,  without  robbing
the  stranger  of  any  value,  brought  back  to  his  own
country  a  value  superior  to  that  which  he  had  ex-
ported ;  which  is  equivalent  to  a  value  created  in  the
country.


ON EXPORTATION.  123

Every  augmentation  of  riches,  even  in  external  com-
merce,  is  then  the  fruit  of  an  internal  production  ?

Yes,  with  the  exception  of  plunder,  in  exchange  for
which  nothing  is  given.  But  besides  spoliation  being
criminal,  because  it  is  contrary  to  justice,  it  is  odious,
and  consequently  dangerous,  and  the  advantages  which
it  procures  are  uncertain,  temporary,  and  scarcely  ever
profitable.

Why  do  you  say^  scarcely  ever  profitable  ?

Because  when  we  seize  upon  goods  created  by
others,  we  rob  them  at  the  same  time  of  the  means  of
continuing  to  create  new  ones,  and  we  can  only  enjoy
them  for  once,  as  when  we  cut  down  a  tree  to  get  at
its  fruit.  The  goods  thus  obtained  are  besides  of  yery
little  profit,  because  they  are  seldom  obtained  when
wanted,  or  when  they  could  be  made  a  good  use  of,  but
must  be  taken  when  they  can  be  got.  They  may  be
carried  off;  but  the  carriage  itself  constitutes  a  great
part,  and  sometimes  the  whole  of  their  value.  They
are  consumed ;  and  generally  the  greater  part  of  them,
on  the  spot ;  they  are  wasted  rather  than  used,  and
their  consumption  often  creates  more  evil  than  good.


CHAPTER  XXIV.


On  Population.


rr  HA  T  are  the  causes  which  increase  or  diminish  the
population  of  a  country  ?

In  general  a  country  is  so  much  the  more  populous
as  it  produces  more  values  or  riches  for  the  mainte-
nance of  its  inhabitants,  and  so  much  the  less  so  as  it
produces  less  riches.

Why  do  not  you  say  more  of  the  commodities  proper
for  the  food  of  men  ?

Because  there  are  commodities  which,  without  being
alimentary,  are  necessary  to  life,  as  clothes  and  lodg-
ing, and  because  with  those  which  are  not  alimentary
we  can  procure,  by  means  of  commerce  and  exchange,
those  which  are.  it  is  sufficient  for  a  country  to  pro-
duce values  to  enable  it  to  exist ;  the  nature  of  the


ON POPULATION.  125

values  will  immediately  accommodate  itself  to  its
wants ;  for  the  commodities  of  which  it  stands  in  the
greatest  need,  are  those  for  which  it  will  pay  best,  and
the  good  price  they  will  then  obtain  will  cause  them  to
become  abundant.

But  when  war  or  bad  laws  prevent  the  arrival  of
articles  of  the  Jirst  necessity,  such  as  those  which  serve
for  subsistence,  will  not  the  population  suffer  greatly  ?

It  will  suffer  the  same  as  when  crops  fail  in  bad
years.

Without  supposing  any  scourge  on  the  part  of  men
or  of  nature,  if  the  number  of  births  exceeds  what  the
products  of  a  nation  can  nourish,  what  will  be  the  con-
sequence ?

It  will  necessarily  follow  that  part  of  those  born,  will
perish  of  want,  either  in  childhood  or  at  a  riper  age.
This  evil  exists  at  all  times,  more  or  less,  because  the
human  species,  like  all  other  organised  beings,  has  more
means  of  increase  than  it  has  of  maintenance.  Want
does  not  instantly  kill,  but  it  gradually  wastes.  Few
people  die  for  want  of  food,  but  for  want  of  food  suffi-
ciently abundant  or  sufficiently  wholesome ;  for  want
of  medicine  in  illness,  for  want  of  cleanliness,  for  want
of  rest,  for  want  of  dry  and  warm  lodging,  and  for
want  of  those  attentions  which  we  cannot  do  without
in  infirmity  and  old  age.  From  the  moment  that  any
one  of  these  objects  becomes  necessary  to  them,  and


126  ON POPULATION.

they  cannot  obtain  it,  they  languish  for  a  greater  or  a
less  period,  and  sink  at  the  first  shock.

Who  first  feel  the  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life?
The  scarcity  of  one  or  other  of  these  means  of
existence,  first  raises  the  price  of  it  ;  it  thus  gets  out
of  the  reach,  first  of  the  most  indigent ;  and  as  the
scarcity  and  dearness  increases,  the  greater  is  the
number  of  those  who  suffer  from  its  privation.

Do  not  wars,  epidemics,  and  in  general  those  plagues
which  cut  off  great  numbers  of  men,  enable  those  which
are  left  to  enjoy  a  greater  quantity  of  those  commodities
of  which  they  are  in  want  ?

These  scourges,  in  destroying  men,  destroy  at  the
same  time  the  means  of  production ;  and  we  do  not
see  that,  in  countries  thinly  populated,  the  wants  of
the  inhabitants  are  more  easily  satisfied.  It  is  the
abundance  of  productions,  and  not  the  scarcity  of  con-
sumers, which  procures  a  plentiful  supply  of  whatever
our  necessities  require  ;  and  the  most  populous  coun-
'  tries  are  in  general  the  best  supplied.

What  is  it  that  induces  men  to  assemble  together  in
villages,  towns,  or  cities  ?

The  nature  of  their  occupations.  Those  who  culti-
vate the  earth  spread  themselves  all  over  the  country,
in  order  to  be  near  their  employment,  and  to  have  a
small  distance  to  carry  their  crops  at  harvest  time.
Those  who  carry  on  manufactories  place  themselves  in


ON POPULATION.  127

towns,  where  they  find  at  hand  the  materials,  utensils,

«
and  the  artisans  of  which  they  are  frequently  *n  want.

Those  who  engage  i,» commerce place  themselves
either  in  the  sea-ports,  where  the  merchandise  arrives
more  easily,  or  on  the  roads  by  which  it  is  distributed
through  various  provinces  or  countries. Those  who
produce  by  means  of  their  lands,  but  without  cultivating
them;  or  by  means  of  their  capita!,  without  employing
them  themselves,  being  able  to  expend  their  incomes
in  any  place  whatever, live  where  they  please,  but
generally  in  cities,  where  they  find  greater  resources
and  amusements  of  every  kind. It  is  the  same  with
those  whose  profits  are  founded  on  immaterial  pro-
ducts; which,  not  being  transportable,  are  therefore
consumed  chiefly  in  places  where  a  number  of  persons
are  collected  together. It  is  for  this  reason  that  we
meet  with  so  many  physicians,  advocates,  and  public
functionaries  in  great  cities.

Are  not  great  cities  a  burden  to  a  nation,  since  they
must  be  provisioned  by  the  country  ?

By  no  means :  for  the  inhabitants  of  cities  have
incomes  equally  real  with  the  inhabitants  of  the
country.  They  do  not  live  at  the  expense  of  the
latter,  as  they  do  not  receive  from  them  any  value
without  giving  them  another  value  in  exchange.  And
the  country  cannot  have  markets  more  certain  or  more
extensive  than  the  cities,  to  which  they  present  in  their


128  ON POPULATION.

turn,  when  well  cultivated  and  they  are  able  to  pur-
chase much,  important  markets  for  the  products  of
manufacture  and  commerce.  Thus  there  is  not  a  more
certain  indication  of  the  riches  and  great  revenues  of  a
country ,  than  numerous  and  extensive  cities.


L 129 ]


CHAPTER  XXV.
On  Colonies.


\VHAT  do  you  mean  by  Colonies  ?

Establishments  which  the  inhabitants  of  one  country
form  in  another  land,  in  order  to  live  there  more  at
ease.

Are  there  different  kinds  of  colonies  ?

They  may  either  be  dependent  or  independent  of  the
metropolis.  The  metropolis  is  the  nation  from  which
the  colony  went  forth.

What  do  you  mean  by  colonies  dependent  on  the  me-
tropolis or  mother  country  2

I  understand  those  which  are  subject  to  the  same
government,  and  governed  by  laws  which  it  imposes
on  them.

What  effect  has  this  dependence  on  the  relative  riches
of  the  colonies  and  the  metropolis  ?

That  the  metropolis  can  compel  the  colony  to  pur-
chase from  her  every  thing  it  may  have  occasion  for  5


ISO  ON COLONTES.

that  this  monopoly,  or  this  exclusive  privilege,  enables
the  producers  of  the  metropolis  to  make  the  colonists
pay  more  for  the  merchandise  than  it  is  worth.

The  metropolis,  then,  gains  more  from  the  colony
than  if  she  was  independent  ?

Yes ;  but  all  that  the  tradesmen  and  merchants  of
the  metropolis  sell  too  dear,  is  paid  for  too  dear  by
the  colonial  consumers.  It  is  a  value  which  has  gone
from  the  purse,  of  one  individual  to  that  of  another,
both  citizens  or  subjects  of  the  same  country.  These
values  appear  a  great  deal  in  the  hands  of  those  who
gain  them,  because  they  are  but  few;  and  small  to
those  who  pay  them,  because  they  are  divided  amongst
many  individuals :  but  the  loss  is  not  the  less  to  the
colony,  which  is  so  much  the  poorer  by  it.

Are  not  the  colonies  indemnified  in  some  other  manner
for  the  usurious  gains  which  are  made  from  them  1

They  make  in  their  turn  an  usurious  gain  on  the
consumptions  of  the  metropolis,  which  is  not  permitted
to  purchase  from  any  other  than  them,  the  colonial
products  of  which  they  are  in  want.  On  the  one  side
and  on  the  other  it  is  a  combination,  or  conspiracy  of
the  producers  against  the  consumers.

Are  there  any  other  incon-ceniencies  attending  iiide-
pendent  colonies  ?

Their  administration  is  corrupt  and  expensive,  be-
cause it  is  superintended  from  too  great  a  distance :
and  the  metropolis  is  obliged  to  keep  up  garrisons,  and


ON COLONIES.  131

military  and  naval  forces,  either  to  enable  it  to  hold,
or  to  defend  them.  And  these  expences  increase  the
burthens,  either  of  the  people  of  the  colony,  or  of  those
of  the  metropolis,  without  taking  into  account  the
wars  which  are  always  brought  on  by  such  an  order  of
things.

Do  these  evils  take  place  when  the  colonies  are  in-
dependent  f

Never.  They  establish  a  government  for  themselves
which  costs  them  very  little ;  they  are  no  expence  to
the  metropolis  ;  and  the  one  and  the  other,  the  metro-
polis and  the  colony,  enjoy  the  advantages  which  two
civilized  nations  derive  from  their  reciprocal  com-
munications.


INDEX.


ACTORS,  42, 43.

Agents  of  production,  15,  26,  27.

,  Natural,  5,  26,  27 80.

Agriculture — See  Industry.
Anticipation,  76.
Artisan,  10.
Avarice,  55.

BANK  Notes,  97,  98,  99.
Billon, 94.
Bond  (Loan),  75.
Buildings,  Public,  60,  61,  62.

CAPITAL,  16,  17,  18,  19,22,23,24,25,26,27,3  ,35,36,37,42,
44,  49,  50,  51,  52,  53,  55,  64,  65,  73,  76 79—116.

_ ,  circulating  and  disposable,  25,  37,  38,  72.

,  Idle,  23.

,  Appropriated,  24,  25,  44,  116.

,  Formation  and  Augmentation  of,  17,  19,  22,49,  53,

55.

-  -7  Diminution  of,  37,  49,  64,  65.
Capitalist,  27,31,32,  127.  ,

Charges  of  Production,  5,  26,  30,  33,  50,70,  84,  113.

.. 9  Public — See  Taxes.

Cities,  Great,  126,  127.

Colonies,  129.

— ,  Independent,  130,  131.

Combinations,  108,  109,  129,  130.

Commerce— See  Industry.

. ,  Retail,  11,  32-

. ,  Internal,  118,122.

__ ,  External,  118,  121.

Competition,  59,69,  109,  110.

Consume,  to,  20.

Consumer,  5,  27,31,  63,  69,70,  109,  113,  126.

Consumption,  19,  20,21,22,42,  46,47,48,49,  50,  51,  54,  55,
56,57.  60,61,  66,  73,  123.

— ,  Productive,  20,  21,  37,  47,  48,  49,  50.


INDEX.

Consumption,  Unproductive,  20,  22,  42,  47,  48,  51,  59,  60,  73,
123;

}  Private,  48,  54,  55,  56,  57,  123.

* ,  Public,  48,  58,  59,  60,  61,  62,  63,  66,  72,  73.

?  Annual,  of  a  Nation,  48,  52.

Contributions,  59,  60,74,  113.
Contributors,  63,  64,  65,  66,  74.
Corporations,  108,  109.
Cultivators,  9,  126.

DEARNESS,  33,  67,  68,  82,  83,  86,  130.
Demand,  5,  26,  27,  28,  46,  67,  80,  89,  103,  105.
Discount,  76,  98,
Distribution,  30,  31,  32,  53.
Duties,  Import,  67,  112,  113,  114.

ECONOMY,  55,  56,  62.
Exchange,  2,  102.

• ,  Medium  of,  2.

,  Bills  of,  97,  98.

,  Course  of,  98.

,  Par  of,  98.

Expenses,  54— See  Charges  and  Consumption.
Expenditure,  Public,  58,59,60,  61,  62.
Exportation,  49,  105,  118.

FALL  of  Price,  85.

Farmer,  28.

Fees,  42.

Fishing,  8.

Functionary,  Public,  42,  58.

Fund,  Sinking,  78.

GOLD— See  Metals.
Gratuities— See  Fees.

HABITS  and  Customs,  14,  35.

IMMATERIAL  Products,  41,  42,  43,  44,  45.

Importation,  49,  67,  112.

Impost— See  Tax.

Income,  30,  32,  33,  41,  64,  65,  68,  70,  74,  78,  83,  85, 12G.

,  Augmentation  of,  33,  115.

,  Diminution  of,  73,  74,  75.


INDEX.

Income,  Annual,  of  a  Nation,  32,  64,  71,  73.

Industrious,  15,  27.

Industry,  6,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  20,  26,  28,  43,  66,  70,

107,  114.

. ,  Agricultural,  8,  107.

__ ,  Commercial,  10,  11,  21,66,  108,  114,  115,  120,  121,

122.

, ,  Manufacturing,  9,  14,21,31,  66,  107,  114,  115.

,  Restraints  on,  71,  89,  107,  108,  109,  110.

.  — ,  Operations  common  to  all,  13.

Interest,  28,  35,  36,  37,  38,  39.

,  Legal,  39.

on  Public  Loans,  72,  75.

Inyentory,  18,  51.
Judges,  42,  58.

LAWD,  1,16,17,23,24,26,27,30,39,45,66,  69,  7<>.
Laws,  Moral,  13,  14.

,  Physical,  13.

Learned  Men,  15.

Loans  Public,  72,  73, 74,  75,  76, 77.

MACHINES,  34,  34,86.
Manufacturer,  10, 12, 13,  15, 126.
Manufactures. See  Industry.
Markets,  102,  127.

_- ,  External,  105,  118,  121.

. ,  Internal,  118,  122,  127.

Medium,  Circulating,  2,  95,  100.
Merchandise,  1,  2,21,  23,  49,  66, 105,  120,  121.

. fall  of  Price  of,  67,  83, 84,  85,  89,  90.

rfte  of  Price  of,  33,  67,  68,  86, 1 10,  115.

. nominal  and  real  Price  of,  33,  82.

Merchant,  10,  21,  43,  120,  122, 126.

Metals,  Precious,  1,  3,90,91,94.

Metropolis,  129,  131.

Mining,  8. •

Money,  1,  2,  3,  6,  16,  33,  38,  83,  88,  89,  92,  93,  94,  100,  120,

121.

,  Alteration  of,  90,  92,  93,  101.

,  Exportation  of,  93.

,  Paper,  97,  99,  101.


INDEX.

Money,  Signs  representing,  3,  97.
OFFER. See  Demand  and  Price.

PAPER  MONEY. See  Money.
Physician,  41.
Plunder. See  Rapine.
Population,  114,  124.
Poverty,  81.
Premium,  107,  119.
Price,  offer  of,  5, 26,  28.

.  nominal,  82,  90,  92,

real,  82.

• fall  of,  67,  83,  85,  89,90.

rise  of,  33,67,86,  101,  115.

Priests. See  Actors.

Produce,  to,  4,  7,  8.

Producers,  5,  27, 28,  31,  68,  69,  70,  104, 113.

Product,  5,  6,  26,  28,  34, 41 ,  44,  45,  52, 61,  68,  79,  80,  81,  103.

Production,  8, 19,  33,  34,  50,  65,  113,  114,  115.

•  — ,  Annual,  64.

*  — ,  Annual  of  a  Nation,  52.
Profits,  5,  18,  29,  30,  32,  33,  50,  113,  122,  123.
Prohibitions,  107,108,  112,  113,  114,  115,116,117.
Property,  24,  27,78.

,  Public,  63.

Proprietor,  Landed,  27,  32,  69,  126.
Prosperity,  Taxes  destructive  of,  66,  69.
Provisions,  33,  124, 125,

RAPINE,  123.
Restraint. See  Industry.
Rent,  28,  33,  35,  39.
Revenue,  Public,  63,  71.
Riches. See  Wealth.
Riches,  height  of,  81.

,  supposed  Source  of,  120.

Risk,  36,  98.

SALE  OF  OFFICES,  76.

Savings,  17,  55,  65.

Services,  Productive,  15,  27,  33,  3f,  44,  67.


INDEX.

Shells,  3.

Signs  of  Money,  3,  97.

Silver. See  Metals  and  Money.

Soldiers,  43,  58.

Stock,  78,  79.

TALENTS,  16,  19,  55,  79.

Taxation,  Subject  of,  70.

Taxes,  63,64,  65,66,67,  68,  69,70,71,72,113,  114,115

not  the  Income  of  a  Nation,  71.

direct,  66,  69.

indirect,  66,  67,  68.

impoverish  a  Nation,  66, 69.

suppression  of,  115.

See  Duties.

Travellers,  3,  119.

UNDERTAKER,  13,  14,  15,  16,  21,  28,31,35,41,  51.

Utensils,  16,  17,  21.

Utility,  5,  6,  8,  11,  19,  20,  26,  46,  62,  88>  103.

VALUE,  1,2,  5,  11,12,  17,  37,79,  80.

variations  in,  84,  85,  86,  87.

of  Money,  83,  88,  89,  92,  93.

Yanity,  7,  14.

WAGES,  28,  32,  35.

Wants,  7,  14,  41,46,  48,  56,  79,  125.

War,  125, 106.

Wealth,  1,6,7,  12,  43,44,  47,53,71,73,78,  80,81,84,  100,105.

Workmen,  10,  15,  21,  32, 35,  60,  61,  62, 109.


THE END.


'

\ERRATUM.

Page  59,  line  7,  between  the*Vprth}  w  f-anJ  easily  insert  the  word  less.


PARNARD  AND  FARLEY,

-ttrett,  London.


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY
BERKELEY

Return  to  desk  from  which  borrowed
.  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below.


7  feb'56KO|

:T>  L
NOV  30

263ep'5BCG


I'D  21-:OOm.7,'52(A2528sl6)476


9RCO


re


KB


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  UBRARY
