The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 32: Vedic Hymns, Part 1 (F. Max Müller (trans.), 1891)
=========================================================================================
SBE Vol. 32: Hymns to the Maruts, Rudra, Vâyu and Vâta. Completes the SBE series gap. Public domain. Internet Archive.

THE 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 

TRANSLATE!) 

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS 

and EPITEH BY 

F. MAX HOLLER 

VOL. XXXII 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1891 

[ AU rights mmftd ] 

C;tfor^ 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

»Y HORACE HART. PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 

VEDIC HYMNS 

TRANSLATED BY 

F. MAX MOLLER 

HYMNS TO THE MARUTS, RUDRA, 

vAyu, and vAta 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1891 

[^// rights rtservid^ 

CONTENTS. 

PAGW 

Introduction . ix 

Preface to the First Edition . xxix 

Hymns, Translation and Notes: — 

Maw<^ala X, I2I, The Unknown God , . . . i 

I, 6, Indra and the Maruts . . .14 

„ 19, Agni and the Maruts .... 53 

„ 37, The Maruts . 63 

,, n 8i 

5? 39? n ..... 9*7 

,,64, ,, io6 

,,85, „ ..... 126 

86, „ 1:54 

,,87, „ 159 

» 88, „ 1:69 

„ 165, The Maruts and Indra . . • X79 

„ 166, The Maruts . 209 

,, i67j )j , * . , . 272 

,? 1^8, „ 279 

,, 170, Dialogue between Indra and Agastya . 286 

„ 171, The Maruts . * . . . 289 

?» 172? ?? 293 

n, 34, .. 295 

V, 52, „ 312 

..53. .. 3*9 

)i 64; )j ..... 3^6 

jj 65; ;; . . » * • 333 

>) 5^; ;» ..... 337 

;; 57; ;; 34^ 

58, „ ..... 343 

;; 59; >; ..... 347 

vni 

CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Mawa'ala V, 6o, Agni and the Maruts .... 352 

„ 61, The Maruts . 356 

.,87, „ 363 

VI, 66, „ 368 

VII, 56, „ 373 

» 57. .. 379 

,,58, „ 382 

„ 59, The Maruts and Rudra . . . 386 

VIII, 7, The Maruts . 390 

„ 20, ,, ..... 40® 

,.94. . 408 

^,11, . 412 

JJ 78, „ 416 

I, 43, Rudra . 419 

ii4j . 422 

II, 33, Rudra, the Father of the Maruts . , 426 

VI, 74, Soma and Rudr^ . . , . 434 

VII, 46, Rudra . 436 

I, 2, Vayu . 440 

3> ^34) )) 444 

X, 168, Vdta . 449 

33 451 

Appendices : — 

1. Index of Words . . . . 

IL List of the more important Passages quoted in the 

Preface and in the Notes . ^ 

III. A Bibliographical List of the more important 

Publications on the Rig-veda .... 1-40 

Corrigenda . . 

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the 

Translations of the Sacred Books of the East , . 553 

INTRODUCTION. 

I finished the Preface to the first volume of my trans¬ 
lation of ' the Hymns to the Maruts with the following 
words : 

‘ The second volume, which I am now preparing for Press, 
will contain the remaining hymns addressed to the Maruts. 
The notes will necessarily have to be reduced to smaller 
dimensions, but they must always constitute the more im¬ 
portant part in a translation or, more truly> in a deciphering 
of Vedic hymns.’ 

This was written more than twenty years ago, but though 
since, that time Vedic scholarship has advanced with giant 
steps, I still hold exactly the same opinion which I held 
then with regard to the principles that ought to be followed 
by the first translators of the Veda. I hold that they 
ought to be decipherers, and that they are bound to justify 
every word of their translation in exactly the same manner 
in which the decipherers of hieroglyphic or cuneiform 
inscriptions justify every step they take. I therefore called 
my translation the first traduction raisonnde. I took 
as an example which I tried to follow, though well aware 
of my inability to reach its excellence, the Commentaire 
sur le Yasna by my friend and teacher, Eugene Burnouf* 
Burnouf considered a commentary of 940 pages quarto 
as by no means excessive for a thorough interpretation of 
the first chapter of the Zoroastrian Veda, and only those 
unacquainted with the real difficulties of the Rig-veda 
would venture to say that its ancient words and thoughts 
required a less painstaking elucidation than those of the 
Avesta, In spite of all that has been said and written to 
the contrary, and with every wish to learn from those who 
think that the difficulties of a translation of Vedic hymns 
have been unduly exaggerated by me, I cannot in the least 

X 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

modify what I said twenty, or rather forty years ago, that 
a mere translation of the Veda, however accurate, intelligible, 
poetical, and even beautiful, is of absolutely no value for 
the advancement of Vedic scholarship, unless it is followed 
by pieces justificatives, that is, unless the translator 
gives his reasons why he has translated every word about 
which there can be any doubt, in his own way, and not 
in any other. 

It is well known that Professor von Roth, one of our most 
eminent Vedic scholars, holds the very opposite opinion. 
He declares that a metrical translation is the best com¬ 
mentary, and that if he could ever think of a translation of 
the Rig-veda, he would throw the chief weight, not on the 
notes, but on the translation of the text. ‘ A translation,’ 
he writes, ' must speak for itself. As a rule, it only re¬ 
quires a commentaiy where it is not directly convincing, 
and where the translator does not feel secure.’ 

Between opinions so diametrically opposed, no com¬ 
promise seems possible, and yet I feel convinced that when 
we come to discuss any controverted passage. Professor von 
Roth will have to adopt exactly the same principles of 
translation which I have followed. 

On one point, however, I am quite willing to agree with 
my adversaries, namely, that a metrical rendering would 
convey a truer idea of the hymns of the Vedic Rtshis than 
a prose rendering. When I had to translate Vedic hymns 
into German, I have generally, if not always, endeavoured 
to clothe them in a metrical form. In English I feel unable 
to do so, but I have no doubt that future scholars will find 
it possible to add rhythm and even rhyme, after the true 
meaning of the ancient verses has once been determined. 
But even with regard to my German metrical translations, 
I feel in honesty bound to confess that a metrical transla¬ 
tion is often an excuse only for an inaccurate translation. 
If we could. make sure of a translator like Ruckert, even 
the impossible might become possible. But as there are 
few, if any, who, like him, are great alike as scholars and 
poets, the mere scholar seems to me to be doing his duty 
better when he produces a correct translation, though in 

INTRODUCTION. 

XI 

prose, than if he has to make any concessions, however small, 
on the side of faithfulness in favour of rhythm and rhyme. 

If a metrical, an intelligible, and, generally speaking, a 
beautiful translation were all we wanted, why should so 
many scholars clamour for a new translation, when they 
have that by Grassmann? It i'ests on Bohtlingk and 
Roth’s Dictionary, or represents, as we are told, even 
a more advanced stage of Vedic scholarship. Yet after 
the well-known contributors of certain critical Journals 
had repeated ever so many times all that could possibly 
be said in praise of Grassmann^s, and in dispraise of 
Ludwig^s translation, what is the result ? Grassmann’s 
metrical translation, the merits of which, considering the 
time when it was published, I have never been loth to 
acknowledge, is hardly ever appealed to, while Ludwig’s 
pilose rendering, with all its drawbacks, is universally con¬ 
sidered as the only scholarlike translation of the Rig-veda 
now in existence. Time tries the troth in everything. 

There is another point also on which I am quite willing 
to admit that my adversaries are right. ‘No one who 
knows anything about the Veda,’ they say, ‘would think of 
attempting a translation of it at present. A translation of 
the Rig-veda is a task for the next century.’ No one feels 
this more strongly than I do ; no one has been more un¬ 
willing to make even a beginning in this arduous under¬ 
taking. Yet a beginning has to be made. We have to 
advance step by step, nay, inch by inch, if we ever hope to 
make a breach in that apparently impregnable fortress. 
If by translation we mean a complete, satisfactory, and 
final translation of the whole of the Rig-veda, I should feel 
inclined to go even further than Professor von Roth. Not 
only shall we have to wait till the next century for such 
a work, but I doubt whether we shall ever obtain it. In 
some cases the text is so corrupt that no conjectural 
criticism will restore, no power of divination interpret it. 
In other cases, verses and phrases seem to have been 
jumbled together by later writers in the most thoughtless 
manner. My principle therefore has always been, Let 
us translate what we can, and thus reduce the untranslateable 

xii 

VEDIC HYMNS, 

portion to narrower and narrower limits. But in doing this 
we ought not to be too proud to take our friends, and even our 
adversaries, into our confidence. A translation on the sic 
volo sic j ubeo principle does far more harm than good. It 
may be true that a judge, if he is wise, will deliver his 
judgment, but never propound his reasons. But a scholar 
is a pleader rather than a judge, and he is in duty bound 
to propound his reasons. 

In order to make the difference between Professor von 
Roth’s translations and my own quite clear, I readily accept 
the text which he has himself chosen. He took one of the 
hymns which I had translated with notes (the 165th hymn 
of the first and translated it himself metrically, 

in order to show us what, according to him, a really perfect 
translation ought to be Let us then compare the results. 

On many points Professor von Roth adopts the same ren¬ 
derings which I had adopted, only that he gives no reasons, 
while I do so, at least for all debatable passages. First of 
all, I had tried to prove that the two verses in the begin¬ 
ning, which the Anukrama^^i ascribes to Indra, should be 
ascribed to the poet. Professor von Roth takes the same 
view, but for the rest of the hymn adopts, like myself, that 
distribution of the verses among the singer, the Maruts, and 
Indra which the Anukrama/^t suggests. I mention this be¬ 
cause Ludwig has defended the view of the author of the Anii- 
krama^zi with very strong arguments. He quotes from the 
Taitt. Br. II, 7, ii, and from the Ttndyz Br. XXI, 14, 5, the 
old legend that Agastya made offerings to the Maruts, that, 
with or without Agastya’s consent, Indra seized them, and 
that the Maruts then tried to frighten Indra away with 
lightning. Agastya and Indra, however, pacified the Maruts 
with this very hymn. 

Verse 1, 

The first verse von Roth translates as follows ; 

‘Auf welcher Fahrt sind insgemein begriffen 
Die altersgleichen mitgebornen Marut? 

Was wollen sie.^^ woher des Wegs!^ Das Pfeifen 
Der Manner klingt : sie haben ein Begehrcn.’ 

Z. D. M. G., 1870, XXIV, p. 301. 

INTRODUCTION. 

XUl 

Von Roth here translates jubh by Fahrt, journey. But 
does jubh ever possess that meaning ? Von Roth himself 
in the Dictionary translates rubh bySchonhcit, Schmuck, 
Bereitschaft. Grassmann, otherwise a strict adherent of 
von Roth, does not venture even to give Bereitschaft, but 
only endorses G 1 a n z and Pr a c h t. Ludwig, a higher autho¬ 
rity than Grassmann, translates ^ubh by Gian z. I say then 
that to translate jubh by Fahrt, journey, may be poetical, 
but it is not scholarlike. On the meanings of jubh I have 
treated 1, 87, 3, note a. See also Gaedicke, Accusativ, p. 163. 

But there comes another consideration. That mimik.shirc 
is used in the sense of being joined with splendour, &c. 
we see from such passages as I, 87, 6, bhdnii-bhi/<; sdm 
mimikshire, i. e. ‘ they were joined with splendour,’ and this 
is said, as in our passage, of the Maruts. Pi'of. von Roth 
brings forward no passage whore mimikshire is used in the 
sense in which he uses it here, and therefore I say again, 
his rendering may be poetical, but it is not scholarlike. 

To translate arA’anti rdshmam by ‘das Pfeifen klingt,’ is, 
to say the least, very free. 3'ushma comes, no doubt, from 
rvas, to breathe, and the transition of meaning from breath 
to strength is intelligible enough. In the Psalms we read 
(xviii. ij), ‘At the blast of the breath of thy nostrils the 
channels of waters were seen, and the foundation.s of the 
earth were discovered.’ Again (Job iv. 9), ‘ By the blast of 
God they peri.sh, and by the breath of his nostrils ;ire they 
consumed ; ’ Isaiah xi. 4, ‘ And with the breath of his lips 
shall he slay the wicked.’ Wrestlers know why breath or 
wind means .strength, and even in the expression ‘ unc (euvre 
dc longue haleinc,’ tlie original intention of breath Is still 
perceived. In most i)a.s.sages therefore in the Rig-veda 
where jushnia occurs, and where it means strength, 
prowe.ss, vigour, we may, if wo like, translate it by breath, 
though it is clear that the poet himself was not always 
aware of the etymological meaning of the word. Where 
the sound of jushma Is mentioned (IX, 50, 1; X,3, 6, &c), it 
means clearly breath. But when, as in VI, 19," 8, jrushma 
has the adjectives dhanaapr/t, suddksha, we can hardly 
translate it by anything but strength, When, therefore, 

XIV 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

von Roth translates jushma by whistling, and ar/6anti 
by sounding, I must demur. Whistling is different from 
breathing, nor do I know of any passage where a-vk with 
j'ushma or with any similar word for sound means simply 
to sound a whistle. Why not translate, they sing their 
strength, i.e. the Maruts, by their breathing or howl¬ 
ing, proclaim themselves their strength? We find a similar 
idea in I, 87, 3, ‘ the Maruts have themselves glorified their 
greatness.’ Neither Grassmann nor Ludwig venture to take 
jushma in the sense of whistle, or ar>^anti in the sense of 
sounding. Bergaigne seems to take vrishanaA as a genitive, 
referring to Indra, ‘ils chantent la force k Indra,’ which 
may have been the original meaning, but seems hardly 
appropriate when the verse is placed in the mouth of Indra 
himself (Journ. Asiat. 1884, p, 199). ^ushma never occurs 
as an adjective. The passages in which von Roth admits 
mshma as an adjective are not adequate. Does mitgeboren 
in German convey the meaning of sinilkA, ‘of the same 
nest ? ’ 

Verse 2. 

The second verse contains few difficulties, and is well 
rendered by von Roth ; 

‘An wessen Spriichen freuen sich die Jungen? » 

Wer lenkt die Marut her zu seinem Opfer? 

Gleich Falken streichend durch den Raum der Lilfte — 
Wie bringt man sie mit Wunscheskraft zum Stehen?’ 

Verse 3. 

The third verse is rendered by von Roth : 

‘Wie kommt es, Indra, dass du sonst so munter, 

Heut’ ganz alleine fahrst, sag an Gebieterl 
Du pflegtest auf der Fahrt mit uns zu plaudcni ; 

Was hast du wider uns, sprich, RossclcnkcrT 

Von Roth takes kdta/^ in a causal sense, why ? I believe 
that MtaA never occurs in that sense in the Rig-veda. If 
it does, passages should be produced to prove it. 

Mlhina/^ can never be translated by ‘sonst so munter.’ 
This imparts a modern idea which is not in the original. * 

INTRODUCTION. 

XV 

Subhimi/t does not mean aufder Fahrt,and plaudern, 
adopted from Grassmann, instead of sdm prikk/iasG, intro¬ 
duces again quite a modern idea. Ludwig calls such an 
idea ‘ abgeschmackt,’ insipid, which is rather strong, but 
not far wrong. 

Verse 4. 

Von Roth : 

‘Ich liebe Spriichc, Wiinsche und die Tranke, 

Der Duft steigt auf, die Presse ist gerustet; 

Sic flehen, locken mich mit ihrem Anruf, 

Und mcine Fuchse fiihrcn mich zum Mahle.’ 

It is curious how quickly all difficulties which beset the 
first line seem to vanish in a metrical translation, but the 
scholar should face the difficulties, though the poet may 
evade them. 

To translate ji'ishma/J iyarti by ‘ der Duft steigt auf,' the 
flavour of the sacrifices rises up, is moi-e than even Grass¬ 
mann ventures on. It is simply impossible. Bcnfcy 
(Entstchung der mit r anlautenden Personalendungcn, p. 34) 
translates : ‘ My thunderbolt, when hurled by me, moves 
mightily.’ 

Again,pnibhnta/zmcddriA docs not mcandie Presse i.st 
gerustet. Where docs Indra ever .speak of the stones 
used for pressing the Soma as my stone, and where does 
prdbhrz'ta/i ever mean gerustet ? 

Verse 6. 

Von Roth : 

‘ So werden wir und mit uns unsre Freunde (Nachbarn), 

Die freien Manner, unsre Riistung nehmen, 

Und lustig unsre Schecken alsbald schirren. 

Du kommst uns eben ganz nach Wunsch, 0 Indra.’ 

The first lines arc unnecessarily free, and the last decidedly 
wrong. I low can svadhlim dnu hi na/i babhrftha mean ‘ Du 
komm.st un.s eben ganz nach Wunsch?’ Svadhd does not 
mean wish, but nature, custom, wont (see I, 6, 4, note a ; 
and Bergaigne, Joum. Asiat. 1884, p. aoy). Babhdtha 
means ‘ thou hast become,’ not ‘ thou comest’ 

XVI 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 6. 

Von Roth : 

* Da war’s auch nicht so ganz nach Wunsch, o Maruts, 
Als ihr allein mich gegen Ahi schicktet! 

Ich aber kraftig, tapfer, unerschrocken, 

Ich traf die Gegner alle mit Geschossen.’ 

The only doubtful line is the last. Von Roth’s former 
translation of nam, to bend away from, to escape from (cf. 
(j&evyco and bhu^), seems to me still the right one. He now 
translates ‘ I directed my arrow on every enemy/ when the 
genitive, as ruled by dnamam, requires confirmation. As 
to sam ddhatta I certainly think von Roth’s last interpreta¬ 
tion better than his first. In the Dictionary he explained 
samdhi in our passage by to implicate. Grassmann trans¬ 
lated it by to leave or to desert, Ludwig by to employ. I 
took it formerly in the usual sense of joining, so that yit 
m£m ^kam samddhatta should be the explanation of 
svadhd, the old custom that you should join me when I am 
alone. But the construction is against this, and I have 
therefore altered my translation, so that the sense is, Where 
was that old custom you speak of, when you made me to 
be alone, i. e. when you left me alone, in the fight with 
Ahi ? The uddtta of anamam is not irregular, because it 
is preceded by hi. 

Verse 7. 

Von Roth : 

^Gewaltiges hast du gethan im Bunde 

Mit uns, 0 Held, wir mit vereinter Starke, 
Gewaltiges vermogen wir, du machtiger 
Indra, wenn es uns Ernst ist, ihr Gesellen.’ 

By this translation, the contrast between ‘thou hast done 
great things with us,’ and ‘ Now let us do great things once 
more,’ is lost. Krzn^v^ma. expresses an exhortation, not a 
simple fact, and on this point Grassmann’s metrical transla¬ 
tion is decidedly preferable. 

Verse 8. 

Von Roth : 

^Vritrsi schlug ich mit eigner Kraft, ihr Marut, 

Uhd meine Wuth war’s, die so kiihn mich machtc, 

INTRODUCTION, 

xvii 

Ich war’s, der — in der Faust den Blitz — dem Menschen 

Den Zugang bahnte zu den blinkenden Gewassern.’ 
This is a very good translation, except that there arc 
some syllables too much in the last line. What I miss is the 
accent on the I. Perhaps this might become stronger by 
translating : 

* Ich schlug mit eigner Kraft den V^'-^tra niedcr, 

Ich, Maruts, stark durch meinen Zorn geworden ; 

Ich war’s, der blitzbewaffnet fiir den Menschen 
Dem lichten Wasser freie Bahn geschaffen/ 

Verse 9. 

Von Roth : 

‘ Gewiss, nichts ist was jc dir widerstiinde, 

Und so wie du gibts keinen zweiten Gott mchr, 
Nicht jetzt, noch kiinftig, der was du vermochte : 
Thu’ dcnn begeistert was zu thun dich lustet/ 

Here I doubt about begeistert being a true rendering 
of pravr/ddha, grown strong- As to karishySi/^t instead of 
karishy£, the reading of the MSS., Roth is inclined to adopt 
my conjecture, as supported by the analogous passage in 
IV, 30, 2^3. The form which Ludwig quotes as analogous 
to karishyam, namely, pravatsyam, I cannot find, unless it 
is meant for Apast. iTauta S. VI, a, namo vo*stu 
prdvdtsyam iti 'R^wrikth, where however prdvatsyani is 
probably meant for prAvfit.sam. 

Grassmann has understood dcvdti rightly, while Roth’s 
translation leaves it doubtful 

Verse 10, 

Von Roth ; 

* So soli dcr Starke Vorrang mir allcin sein : 

Was ich gewagt, vollfUhr’ ich mit Verstiindniss* 

Man kennt mich als den Starken wohl, ihr Marut, 

An was ich xmhre, Indra der bcmcistert’s,’ 

Von Roth has adopted the translation of the second line, 
which I suggested in a note ; Ludwig pi'efers the more 
abrupt construction which I preferred in the translation. 
It is difficult to decide, 

[3«] 

b 

XVlll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

, Verse 11. 

Von Roth : 

‘ Entzuckt hat euer Riihmen mich, ihr Marut, 

Das lobenswerthe Wort, das ihr gesprochen, 

Fiir mich — den Indra — ^fiir den freud’gen Helden, 

Als Freunde fur den Freund, fiir mich — von selbst ihr.' 

The last words fiir mich — von selbst ihr are not very 
clear, but the same may be said of the original tanvS tanubhi/^. 
I still adhere to my remark that tanu, self, must refer to 
the same person, though I see that all other translators 
take an opposite view. Non liquet. 

Verse 12. 

Von Roth : 

‘ Gefallen find ich, wie sie sind, an ihnen, 

In Raschheit und in Frische unvergleichlich. 

So oft ich euch, Marut, im Schmuck erblickte, 

Erfreut' ich mich und freue jetzt an euch mich.' 

This is again one of those verses which it is far easier to 
translate than to construe. AkkMntB. me may mean, they 
pleased me, but then what is the meaning of it/^adaydtha 
M nunam, ‘may you please me now,' instead of what we 
should expect, ‘ you do please me now.' In order to avoid 
this, I took the more frequent meaning of kAsid, to appear, 
and translated, ‘ you have appeared formerly, appear to me 
now.’ 

To translate dnedya/2 jrdvaA i ishaA didhkn^k, by ‘in 
Raschheit und in Frische unvergleichlich,' is poetical, but 
how does it benefit the scholar? I take i dh& in the 
sense of bringing or giving, as it is often used ; cf. II, 38, 
5. This is more compatible with isha/^, food, vigour. I 
am not certain that anedya/^ can mean blameless. Roth 
s. V. derives anedya from a-nedya, and nedya from nid. 
But how we get from nid to nedya, he does not say. He 
suggests anedya// or anedya^rava// as emendations. I sug¬ 
gested anedyam. But I suspect there is something else 
behind all this. Anediya/4 may have been intended for 
‘ having nothing coming nearer,' and like an-uttama, might 
express excellence. Or anedya// may have been an adverb, 
not nearly. 

INTRODUCTION. 

XIX 

These are mere guesses, and they are rather contradicted 
by anedyi/2, used in the plural, with anavadycl/^5. Still it is 
better to point out difficulties than to slur them over by 
translating ‘in Raschheit und in Frische unvergleichlich.’ 
It is possible that both Roth and S^ya^^a thought that 
anedya/^ was connected with nedtya/^ ; but what scholars 
want to know is the exact construction of a sentence. 

Von Roth : 

Verse 13. 

‘ 1st irgendwo ein Fest fur euch bereitet, 

So fahrt doch her zu unsrer Schaar, ihr Schaaren ! 
Der Andacht Regungen in uns belebend, 

Und werdet Zcugen unscrer frommcn Werke.’ 

In this verse there is no difficulty, except the exact 
meaning of apivdtdyanta/^, on which I have spoken in 
note I. 

Verse 14 

Von Roth : 

‘ Wo dankbar huldigend der Dichter lobsingt, 

Hier wo uns Mdnya’s Kunst zusammenfiihrte, 

Da kehret ein, ihr Marut, bei den Frommen, 

Euch gelten ja des Beters heirge Spriiche/ 

Prof, von Roth admits that this is a difficult verse. He 
translates it, but again he docs not help us to construe it. 
Grassmann also gives us a metrical translation, but it differs 
widely from von Roth’s : 

‘Wenn wie zur Spende euch der Dichter hcrlockt, 
Und der Gesang dcs Weisen uns herbeizog,’ &c. ; 
and so does Geldner s version, unless we are to consider 
this as an improved rendering from von Roth’s own pen ; 

‘ Wenn uns des Mdnya Kunst zur Feier herzieht, 

Wie Dichter ja zu F'esten gerne rufen/ See. 

Here Geldner conjectures duvasyd! for duvasy^t, and 
takes duvdse as an infinitive. 

Von Roth: 

Verse 15. 

^ Geweiht ist euch der Preis, Marut, die Lieder, 

Des Mdnya, des Manddrasohns, des Dichters, 

Mit Uabung kommt herbei, mir sclbst zur Starkung 
[Gebt Labung uns und wasserreiche Fluren].’ 
b 2 

XX 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

How tahve vayd'm is to mean ' mir selbst zur Starkung’ 
has not been explained by von Roth. No doubt tanve may 
mean mir selbst, and vay4m zur Starkung ; but though this 
may satisfy a poet, scholars want to know how to construe. 
It seems to me that Roth and Lanman (Noun-inflection, p. 
55^^) have made the same mistake which I made in taking 
isham for an accusative of ish, which ought to be isham, 
and in admitting the masculine gender for vrigixiz. in the 
sense of Flur. 

I still take yaslshifa for the 3 p. sing, of the precative 
Atmanepada, like ^anishish^fa and vanishish^i'a. With the 
preposition iva, yksis\sh.thkk in IV, i, 4, means to turn 
away. With the preposition £ therefore yistshifa may 
well mean to turn towards, to bring. If we took yistsh^ 
as a p. plur. in the sense of come, we could not account 
for the long t, nor for the accusative vay^m. We thus get 
the meaning, ‘ May this your hymn of praise bring vay£m,’ 
i. e. a branch, an offshoot or offspring, tanve, for ourselves, 
ish£, together with food. We then begin a new sentence : 
^May we find an invigorating autumn with quickening 
rain.’ It is true that ishi, as a name of an autumn month, 
does not occur again in the Rig-veda, but it is found in 
the ^'atapatha-br&hma^^a. Vre^dna, possibly in the sense 
of people or enemies, we have in VII, 3i^, %% 
vrigknkhi where Roth reads wrongly vrigink\ V, 

44, 1 (?); VI, 35, 5. Gtxidinu also would be an appropriate 
epithet to ishd. 

. Professor Oldenberg has sent me the following notes on 
this difficult hymn. He thinks it is what he calls an 
Akhydna-hymn, consisting of verses which originally formed 
part of a story in prose. He has treated of this class of 
hymns in the Zeitschrift der D. M. G. XXXIX, 60 seq. 
He would prefer to ascribe verses i and to Indra, who 
addresses the Maruts when he meets them as they return 
from a sacrifice. In this case, however, we should have to 
accept riramdma as a pluralis majestaticus, and I 
doubt whether Indra ever speaks of himself in the plural, 
except it may be in using the pronoun na/^. 

In verse 4 Professor Oldenberg prefers to take prd- 

INTRODUCTION'. 

XXI 

bhr^'to me ddri/z in the sense of ‘the stone for pressing 
the Soma has been brought forth,’ and he adds that me 
need not mean ‘ my stone,’ but ‘ brought forward for me.’ 
He would prefer to read Jiishmam iyarti, as in IV, 17, la; 
X, 75, 3, though he does not consider this alteration of the 
text necessary. 

Professor Oldenberg would ascribe vv. 13 and 14 to Indra. 
The 14th verse would then mean, ‘After Minya has brought 
us (the gods) hither, turn, O Maruts, towards the saga’ Of 
this interpretation I should like to adopt at all events the 
last sentence, taking varta for vart-ta, the a p. plur. 
imperat. of vrit, after the Ad class. 

The text of the Maitriyawi Sawzhitd, lately published 
by Dr. L. von Schrceder, yields a few inta^esting various 
readings: v. 5, ckam instead of etUn; v. la, jrav4 instead 
of jrava ; and v. 15, vaydwisi as a variant for vay4m, which 
looks like a conjectural emendation. 

A comparison like the one we have here instituted between 
two translations of the same hymn, will serve to show how 
useless any rendering, whether in prose or poetry, would be 
without notes to justify the meanings of every doubtful 
word and sentence. It will, no doubt, disclose at the same 
time* the unsettled state of Vedic scholarship, but the more 
fully this fact is acknowledged, the better, I believe, it will 
be for the progress of our studies. They have suffered 
more than from anything else from that baneful positivism 
which has done so much harm in hieroglyphic and cuneiform 
researches. That the same words and names should be 
interpreted differently from year to year, is perfectly in¬ 
telligible to every one who is familiar with the nature of 
these decipherments. What has seriously injured the credit 
of these studies is that the latest decipherments have always 
been represented as final and unchangeable. Vedic hymns 
may seem more easy to decipher than Babylonian and 
Egyptian inscriptions, and in one sense they are. But 
when we come to really difficult passages, the Vedic hymns 
often require a far greater effort of divination than the 
hymns addressed to Egyptian or Babylonian deities. And 
there is this additional difficulty that when we deal with 

XXll 

VEDIC HYMNS, 

inscriptions, we have at all events the text as. it was 
engraved from the first, and we are, safe against later 
modifications and interpolations, while in the case of the 
Veda, even though the text as presupposed by the Priti- 
j^khyas may be considered as authoritative for the fifth 
century B. C., how do we know what changes it may have 
undergone before that time? Nor can I help giving 
expression once more to misgivings I have so often ex¬ 
pressed, whether the date of the Prdtudkhyas is really 
beyond the reach of doubt, and whether, if it is, there 
is no other way of escaping from the conclusion that the 
whole collection of the hymns of the Rig-veda, including 
even the Vdlakhilya hymns, existed at that early time^ 
The more I study the hymns, the more I feel staggered 
at the conclusion at which all Sanskrit scholars seem to 
have arrived, touching their age. That many of them are 
old, older than anything else in Sanskrit, their grammar, if 
nothing else, proclaims in the clearest way. But that some 
of them are modern imitations is a conviction that forces 
itself even on the least sceptical minds. Here too we must 
guard against positivism, and suspend our judgment, and 
accept correction with a teachable spirit. No one would 
be more grateful "for a way out of the maze of Vedic 
chronology than I should be, if a more modern date could 
be assigned to some of the Vedic hymns than the period 
of the rise of Buddhism. But how can we account for 
Buddhism without Vedic hymns ? In the oldest Buddhist 
Suttas the hymns of three Vedas are constantly referred 
to, and warnings are uttered even against the fourth Veda, 
the Athabbana^ The Upanishads also, the latest pro¬ 
ductions of the Brihma^^a period, must have been known 
to the founders of Buddhism. From all this there seems 
to be no escape, and yet I must confess that my conscience 
quivers in assigning such compositions as the Vfilakhilya 
hymns to a period preceding the rise of Buddhism in 
India, 

* See Preface to the first edition, p. xxxii. 

^ Tuva^aJeasutta, ver. 927; Sacred Books of the East, vol x, p. 176; Intro¬ 
duction, p. xiii. 

INTRODUCTION. 

XXIll 

I have often been asked why I began my translation of 
the Rig-veda with the hymns addressed to the Maruts or 
the Storm-gods, which are certainly not the most attractive 
of Vedic hymns. I had several reasons, though, as often 
happens, I could hardly say which of them determined my 
choice. 

First of all, they are the most difficult hymns, and 
therefore they had a peculiar attraction in my eyes. 

Secondly, as even when translated they required a con¬ 
siderable effort before they could be fully understood, I 
hoped they would prove attractive to serious students only, 
and frighten away the casual reader who has don’e so much 
harm by meddling with Vedic antiquities. Our grapes, I 
am glad to say, are still sour, and ought to remain so for 
some time longer. 

Thirdly, there are few hymns which place the original 
character of the so-called deities to whom they are addressed 
in so clear a light as the hymns addressed to the Maruts 
or Storm-gods. There can be no doubt about the meaning of 
the name, whatever difference of opinion there may be about 
its etymology. Marut and maruta in ordinary Sanskrit 
mean wind, and more particularly a strong wind, differing by 
its violent character from vayu or vdta®. Nor do the hymns 
themselves leave us in any doubt as to the natural phe¬ 
nomena with which the Maruts are identified. Storms 
which root up the trees of the forest, lightning, thunder, 
and showers of rain, are the background from which the 
Maruts in their personal and dramatic character rise before 
our eyes. In one verse the Maruts are the very phenomena 
of nature as convulsed by a thunderstorm; in the next, 
with the slightest change of expression, they are young men, 
driving on chariots, hurling the thunderbolt, and crushing 
the clouds in order to win the raia Now they are the 
sons of Rudra and Przrni, the friends and brothers of Indi'a, 
now they quarrel with Indra and claim their own rightful 
share of praise and sacrifice. Nay, after a time the storm- 
gods in India, like the storm-gods in other countries. 

The VSyuB are mentioned by the side of the Marats, Rv. II, 1 1, 14. 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

xxiv 

obtain a kind of supremacy, and are invoked by them¬ 
selves, as if there were no other gods beside them. In 
most of the later native dictionaries, in the Medini, Virva, 
Hema^andra, Amara, and Anekarthadhvanimara^ri, Marut 
is given as a synonym of deva, or god in general and so is 
Maru in Pili. 

But while the hymns addressed to the Maruts enable us to 
watch the successive stages in the development of so-called 
deities'more clearly than any other hymns, there is no doubt 
one drawback, namely, the uncertainty of the etymology of 
Marut. The etymology of the name is and always must 
be the best key to the original intention of a deity. What¬ 
ever Zeus became afterwards, he was originally conceived 
as Dyaus, the bright sky. Whatever changes came over 
Ceres in later times, her first name and her first conception 
was .Sarad, harvest. With regard to Marut I have myself 
no doubt whatever that Mar-ut comes from the root M.®, 
in the sense of grinding, crushing, pounding (Sk. mnwiti, 
hiwzsaydm, part, munza, crushed, like mndita ; dmiir and 
dmiiri, destroyer). There is no objection to this etymology, 
either on the ground of phonetic rules, or on account of 
the meaning of Marut'’. Professor Kuhn’s idea that the 
name of the Maruts was derived from the root MiR, to die, 
and that the Maruts were originally conceived as the souls 
of the departed, and afterwards as ghosts, spirits, winds, 
and lastly as storms, derives no support from the Veda. 
Another etymology, proposed in Bohtlingk’s Dictionary, 
which derives Marut from a root MyR, to shine, labours 
under two disadvantages ; first, that there is no such root in 
Sanskrit “ ; secondly, that the lurid splendour of the light¬ 
ning is but a subordinate feature in the character of the 
Maruts. No better etymology having been proposed, I still 
maintain that the derivation of Marut from MM,- to pound, 
to smash, is free from any objection, and that the original 
conception of the Maruts was that of the crushing, smash¬ 
ing, striking, tearing, destroying storms. 

Anundoram Borooah, Sanskrit Grammar, vol. iii, p. 323. 

^ See Lectures on the Science of Language, vol. ii, p, 3*57 sc<^. 

® MarUi is a word of very doubtful origin. 

INTRODUCTION'. 

XXV 

It is true that we have only two words in Sanskrit formed 
by the suffix ut, mardt and ganit in ganit-mat, but 
there are other suflSxes which are equally restricted to one 
or two nouns only. This ut represents an old suffix vat, 
just as us presupposes vas, in vidus (vidusht, vidush- 
/ara) for vid-vas, nom. vid-v^n, acc. vidviwsam. 
In a similar way we find side by side par us, knot, 
pdrvan, knot, and parvata, stone, cloud, presupposing 
such forms as ^parvat and parut. If then by the side of 
*parat, we find Latin pars, partis, why should we 
object to Mars, Martis as a parallel form of Marut? 
I do not say the two words are identical, I only main¬ 
tain that the root is the same, and the two suffixes are 
mere variants. No doubt Marut might have appeared 
in Latin as Marut, like the neuter cap-ut, capitis 
(cf. prae-ceps, prae-cipis, and prae-cipitis); but 
Mars, Martis is as good a derivation from MM as Fors, 
Fortis is from GliAi\ Dr, von Bradke (Zcitschrift der 
D.M.G., voL xl, p. 349), though identifying Marut with 
Mars, proposes a new derivation of Marut, as being 
originally ’^Mavrzt, which would correspond well with 
Mavors. But *Mavrzt has no meaning in Sanskrit, and 
seems grammatically an impossible formation. 

If there could be any doubt as to the original identity 
of Marut and Mars, it is dispelled by the Umbrian name 
9erfo Martio, which, as Grassmann^^ has shown, corre¬ 
sponds exactly to the expression jrardha-s mSIruta-s, the 
host of the Maruts. Such minute coincidences can hardly 
be accidental, though, as I have myself often remarked, the 
chapter of accidents in language is certainly larger than we 
suppose. Thus, in our case, I pointed out that we can 
observe the transition of the gods of storms into the gods 
of destruction and war, not only in the Veda, but likewise 
in the mythology of the Polynesians 5 and yet the similarity 
in the Polynesian name of Mar u can only be accidental®. 

^ Biographies of Words, p. la. 

^ Kuhn’s Zcitschrift, voL xvi, p. 190 ; and note to Rv. T, 37, i, p. 70. 
« M. M., Science of Religion, p. 355. 

XXVI 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

And I may add that in Estonian also we find storm-gods 
called Marutu uled or maro, plural marud^ 

Fourthly, the hymns addressed to the Maruts seemed to 
me to possess an interest of their own, because, as it is 
difficult to doubt the identity of the two names, Marut 
and Mars, they offered an excellent opportunity for watching 
the peculiar changes which the same deity would undergo 
when transferred to India on one side and to Europe on the 
other. Whether the Greek Ares also was an offshoot of 
the same root must seem more doubtful, and I contented 
myself with giving the principal reasons for and against 
this theory^. 

Though these inducements which led me to select the 
hymns to the Maruts as the first instalment of a translation of 
the Rig-veda could hardly prevail with me now, yet I was 
obliged to place them once more in the foreground, because 
the volume containing the translation of these hymns with 
very full notes has been used for many years as a text 
book by those who were beginning the study of the Rig- 
veda, and was out of print. In order to meet the demand 
for a book which could seive as an easy introduction to 
Vedic studies, I decided to reprint the translation of the 
hymns to the Maruts, and most of the notes, though here 
and there somewhat abbreviated, and then to continue the 
same hymns, followed by others addressed to Rudra, 
Vayu^ and Vita. My task would, of course, have been 
much easier, if I had been satisfied with making a selec¬ 
tion, and translating those hymns, or those verses only, 
which afford no very great difficulties. As it is, I have 
grappled with every hymn and every verse addressed to 
the Maruts, so that my readers will find in this volume 
all that the Vedic poets had to say about the Storm- 
gods. 

In order to show, however, that Vedic hymns, though 
they begin with a description of the most striking phe¬ 
nomena of nature, are by no means confined to that 

Bertram, Ilmatar, Dorpat, 1871, p. 98. 

^ Lectures on the Science of Language, vol. ii, p. 357. 

INTRODUCTION, 

XXVll 

narrow sphei'e, but rise in the end to the most sublime 
conception of a supreme Deity, I have placed one hymn, 
that addressed to the Unknown God, at the head of 
my collection. This will clear me, I hope, of the very 
unfair suspicion that, by beginning my translation of 
the Rig-veda with hymns celebrating the wild forces of 
nature only, I had wished to represent the Vedic religion 
as nature-worship and nothing else. It will give the 
thoughtful reader a foretaste of what he may expect in 
the end, and show how vast a sphere of religious thought 
is filled by what we call by a very promiscuous name, 
the Veda. 

The MS. of this volume was ready, and the printing of 
it was actually begun in 1885. A succession of new calls 
on my time, which admitted of no refusal, have delayed the 
actual publication till now. This delay, however, has been 
compensated by one very great advantage. Beginning 
with hymn 167 of the first Ma^^^ala, Professor Oldenberg 
has, in the most generous spirit, lent me his help in the final 
revision of my translation and notes. It is chiefly due to 
him that the results of the latest attempts at the interpre¬ 
tation of the Veda, which are scattered about in learned 
articles and monographs, have been utilised for this volume. 
His suggestions, I need hardly say, have proved most 
valuable; and though he should not be held responsible 
for any mistakes that may be discovered, whether in the 
translation or in the notes, my readers may at all events 
take it for granted that, where my translation seems 
unsatisfactory, Professor Oldenberg also had nothing better 
to suggest. 

Considering my advancing years, I thought I should act 
in the true interest of Vedic scholarship, if for the future 
also I divided my work with him. While for this volume 
the chief responsibility rests with me, the second volume 
will contain the hymns to Agni, as translated and an¬ 
notated by him, and revised by me. In places where we 
really differ, we shall say so. For the rest, we are willing 
to share both blame and praise. Our chief object is to 
help forward a critical study of the Veda, and we are well 

XXVlll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

aware that much of what has been done and can be done 
m the present state of Vedic scholarships is only a kind of 
reconnaissance, if not a forlorn hope, to be followed here¬ 
after by a patient siege of the hitherto impregnable fortress 
of ancient Vedic literature. 

Oxford : 
6th Dec. 1891. 

F. MAX MULLER. 

PREFACE 

TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

When some twenty years ago I decided on undertaking 
the first edition of the two texts and the commentary of 
the Rig-veda, I little expected that it would fall to my lot 
„„ to publish also what may, without presump- 

lationofthe tion, be Called the first translation of the 
ouXTo L ancient sacred hymns of the Brahmans. - Such 
is the charm of deciphering step by step 
the dark and helpless utterances of the early poets of 
India, and discovering from time to time behind words 
that for years seemed unintelligible, the simple though 
strange expressions of primitive thought and primitive 
faith, that it required no small amount of self-denial to 
decide in favour of devoting a life to the publishing of the 
materials rather than to the drawing of the results which 
those materials supply to the student of ancient language 
and ancient religion. Even five and twenty years ago, and 
without waiting for the publication of S&ya«a’s com¬ 
mentary, much might have been achieved in the interpreta¬ 
tion of the hymns of the Rig-veda. With the MSS. then 
accessible in the principal libraries of Europe, a tolerably 
correct text of the SawhitS. might have been published, and 
these ancient relics of a primitive religion might have been 
at least partially deciphered and translated in the same way 
in which ancient inscriptions are deciphered and translated, 
viz. by a careful collection of all grammatical forms, and 
by a complete intercomparison of all passages in which the 
same words and the same phrases occur. When I resolved 
to devote my leisure to a aitical edition of the text and 
commentary of the Rig-veda rather than to an independent 
study of that text, it was chiefly from a conviction that the 
traditional interpretation of the Rig-veda, as embodied in 
the commentary of Si^ya^/a and other works of a similar 

XXX 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

character, could not be neglected with impunity, and that 
sooner or later a complete edition of these works would be 
recognised as a necessity. It was better therefore to begin 
with the beginning, though it seemed hard sometimes to 
spend forty years in the wilderness instead of rushing 
straight into the promised land. 

, It is well known to those who have followed my literary 
publications that I never entertained any exaggerated 
opinion as to the value of the traditional interpretation of 
the Veda, handed down in the theological schools of India, 
and preserved to us in the great commentary of S^yawa. 
More than twenty years ago, when it required more courage 
to speak out than now, I expressed my opinion on that sub¬ 
ject in no ambiguous language, and was blamed for it by 
some of those who now speak of Siya«a as a mere drag in 
the progress of Vedic scholarship. Even a drag, however, 
is sometimes more conducive to the safe advancement of 
learning than a whip ; and those who recollect the history 
of Vedic scholarship during the last five and twenty years, 
know best that, with all its faults and weaknesses, Sdya?ra’s 
commentary was a sine qua non for a scholarlike study 
of the Rig-veda. I do not wonder that others who have 
more recently entered on that study are inclined to speak 
disparagingly of the scholastic interpretations of Saya«a. 
They hardly know how much we all owe to his guidance in 
effecting our first entrance into this fortress of Vedic lan¬ 
guage and Vedic religion, and how much even they, without 
being aware of it, are indebted to that Indian Eustathius. 
I do not withdraw an opinion which I expressed many 
years ago, and for which I was much blamed at the time, 
that Sdyawa in many cases teaches us how the Veda ought 
not to be, rather than how it ought to be understood. 
But for all that, who does not know how much assistance 
may be derived from a first translation, even though it is 
imperfect, nay, how often the very mistakes of our pre- 
decessoi-s help us in finding the right track ? If now wc can 
walk without Sdya«a, we ought to bear in mind .that five 
and twenty years ago we could not have made even our 
first steps, we could never, at least, have gained a firm 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XXXI 

footing without his leading strings. If therefore we can now 
see further than he could, let us not forget that we are 
standing on his shoulders. 

I do not regret in the least the time which I have devoted 
to the somewhat tedious work of editing the commentary 
of S^ya;2a, and editing it according to the strictest rules of 
critical scholarship. The Veda, I feel convinced, will 
occupy scholars for centuries to come, and will take and 
maintain for ever its position as the most ancient of books 
in the library of mankind. Such a book, and the com¬ 
mentary of such a book, should be edited once for all ; and 
unless some unexpected discovery is made of more ancient 
MSS., I do not anticipate that any future Bekker or 
Dindorf will find much to glean for a new edition of Sdya^/a^ 
or that the text, as restored by me from a collation of the 
best MSS. accessible in Europe, will ever be materially 
shaken *. It has taken a long time, I know ; but those who 
find fault with me for the delay, should remember that few 

^ Since Ihe publication of the first volume of file Rig-veda, many new MSS, 
have come before me, partly copied for me, partly lent to me for a time by 
scholars in India, bxit every one of them belonged clearly to one of the three 
families which I have described in my introduction to the first volume of the 
Rig-veda. In the beginning of the first Ash/aka, and occasionally at the 
beginning of other Ashi'akas, likewise in the commentary on hymns which were 
studied by native scholars with particular interest, various readings occur in 
some MSS., which seem at first to betoken an independent source, but which 
are in reality mere marginal notes, clue to more or less learned students of 
these MSS. Thus after verse 3 of the introduction one MS. reads: sa pr/lha 
nrfpati;;/, sdya^^Hryo mamfinu,^‘a/i, sarvaw velty esha vedUn^w vydkhyl- 
tn'tvena, yu^^yatSm. The same MS., after verse 4, adds : ityukto m^dhavar- 
yewa vtrabukkamahtpati//, anvaj^t sayd^rdHrya;;# vedarthasya prakarane. 

I had for a time some hope that MSS. written in Grantha or other South* 
Indian alphabets might have preserved an independent text of Saya;m, but 
from some specimens of a Grantha MS. collated for me by Mr, Eggeling, I do 
not think that even this hope is meant to be realised. The MS. in question 
contains a few independent various readings, such as are found in all MSS., and 
owe their origin clearly to the jottings of individual students. When at the end 
of verse 6, I found the independent reading, vyutpannas t^vatli sarv^ rtko 
vydkhydtum arhati, I expected that other various readings of the same character 
might follow. But after a few additions in the beginning, and those clearly 
taken from other parts of Sdyawa’s commentary, nothing of real importance 
could be gleaned from that MS. I may mention as more important specimens of 
marginal notes that, before the first puna// ktdmam, on page 44, line 24 (ist ed.), 
this MS. read.s : athavH y%>-/3fasya devam iti sambandhai, ya^f/?asya prakfwakam 
ityarthu/^, purohitam iti pr/thagvireshawam. And again, page 44, line ad, 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

xxxii 

scholars, if any, have worked for others more than I have 
done in copying and editing Sanskrit texts, and that after 
all one cannot give up the whole of one’s life to the colla¬ 
tion of Oriental MSS. and the correction of proof-sheets. 
The two concluding volumes have long been ready for 
Press, and as soon as I can find leisure, they too shall be 
printed and published ®. 

In now venturing to publish the first volume of my trans¬ 
lation of the Rig-veda, I am fully aware that the fate which 
awaits it will be very different from that of my edition of 
the text and commentary. It is a mere contribution 
towards a better understanding of the Vedic hymns, and 
though I hope it may give in the main a right i-endering 
of the sense of the Vedic poets, I feel convinced that on 
many points my translation is liable to correction, and will 
sooner or later be replaced by a more satisfactory one. It 
is difficult to explain to those who have not themselves 
worked at the Veda, how it is that, though we may under¬ 
stand almost every word, yet we find it so difficult to lay 
hold of a whole chain of connected thought, and to discover 
expressions that will not throw a wi'ong shade on the 
original features of the ancient words of the Veda. We 
have, on the one hand, to avoid giving to our translations 
too modern a character, or paraphrasing instead of trans¬ 
lating ; while, on the other, we cannot retain expressions 
which, if literally rendered in English or any modern 
tongue, would have an air of quaintness or absurdity 
totally foreign to the intention of the ancient poets. There 
are, as all Vedic scholars know, whole verses which, as yet, 
yield no sense whatever. There are words the meaning of 

before piina/^ kMnjam, this MS. adds : atliavd ?'*/tv\i?'anx rztvigvid (vacl) ya.^'’>2a- 
nirvdhaka;/z hotaraw devdndm dhvMram ; tathE rainadhdtamam. In the saixle 
liae, after ratnandm, we read rama^^tyadhandnd^zz vd, taken from page 46, 
line 2. Various readings like these, however, occur on the first sheets only, 
soon after the MS. follows the usual and recognised text. [This opinion has 
been considerably modified after a complete collation of this MS,, made for 
me by Dr. Winternitz.] For the later Ash/akas, where all -the MSS. are very 
deficient, and where an independent authority would be of real use, no Grantha 
MS. has as yet been discovered. 

They have since been printed, but the translation has in consequence been 
delayed. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XXXlll 

which we can only guess. Here, no doubt, a continued 
study will remove some of our difficulties, and many a 
passage that is now dark, will receive light hereafter from a 
happy combination. Much has already been achieved by 
the efforts of European scholars, but much more remains to 
be done ; and our only chance of seeing any rapid progress 
made lies, I believe, in communicating freely what every 
one has found out by himself, and not minding if others 
point out to us that we have overlooked the very passage 
that would at once have solved our difficulties, that our 
conjectures were unnecessary, and our emendations wrong. 
True and honest scholars whose conscience tells them that 
they have done their best, and who care for the subject on 
which they are engaged far more than for the praise of 
benevolent or the blame of malignant critics, ought not to 
take any notice of merely frivolous censure. There are 
mistakes, no doubt^ of which we ought to be ashamed, and 
for which the only amende honorable we can make is 
to openly confess and retract them. But there are others, 
particularly in a subject like Vedic interpretation, which we 
should forgive, as we wish to be forgiven. This can be 
done without lowering the standard of true scholarship or 
vitiating the healthy tone of scientific morality. Kindness 
and gentleness are not incompatible with earnestness, — far 
from it ! — and where these elements are wanting, not only 
is the joy embittered which is the inherent reward of all 
b on & fide work, but selfishness, malignity, aye, even un¬ 
truthfulness, gain the upper hand, and the healthy growth 
of science is stunted. While in my translation of the Veda 
and in the remarks that I have to make in the course of 
my commentary, I shall frequently differ from other 
scholars, I hope I shall never say an unkind word of men 
who have done their best, and who have done what they 
have done in a truly scholarlike, that is, in a humble spirit. 
It would be unpleasant, even were it possible within the 
limits assigned, to criticise every opinion that has been put 
forward on the meaning of certain words or on the con¬ 
struction of certain verses of the Veda. I prefer, as much 
as possible, to vindicate my own translation, instead of 
[32] c 

XXXIV 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

examining the translations of other scholars, whether Indian 
or European. Styam's translation, as rendered into Eng¬ 
lish by Professor Wilson, is before the world. Let those 
who take an interest in these matters compare it with the 
translation here proposed. In order to give readers who do 
not possess that translation, an opportunity of comparing it 
with my own, I have for a few hymns printed that as well 
as the translations of Langlois and Benfey “ on the same page 
with my own. Everybody will thus be enabled to judge of 
the peculiar character of each of these translations. That 
of SkysLfzdi represents the tradition of India; that of 
Langlois is the ingenious, but thoroughly uncritical, guess¬ 
work of a man of taste ; that of Benfey is the rendering of 
a scholar, who has carefully worked out the history of some 
words, but who assigns to other words either the traditional 
meaning recorded by S4ya?2a, or a conjectural meaning 
which, however, would not always stand the test of an inter¬ 
comparison of all passages in which these words occur. I 
may say, in general, that Sdya;^2a’s translation was of great 
use to me in the beginning, though it seldom afforded help 
for the really difficult passages. Langlois* translation has 
hardly ever yielded real assistance, while I sincerely regret 
that Benfey*s rendering does not extend beyond the first 
Ms-nddddi, 

It may sound self-contradictory, if, after confessing the 
help which I derived from these translations, I venture to 
call my own the first translation of the 
traduction ^ig-^eda. The word translation, however, 
raisonnde. has many meanings. I mean by translation, 
not a mere rendering of the hymns of the 
Rig-veda into English, French, or German, but a full account 
of the reasons which justify the translator in assigning such 
a power to such a word, and such a meaning to such a 
sentence. I mean by translation a real deciphering, a work 
like that which Burnouf performed in his first attempts at 
a translation of the A vesta, — a traduction raisonn^e, if 
such an expression may be used. Without such a process, 

^ In the new edition, Langlois’ translation has been omitted, and those of 
Ludwig and Grassnaann have been inserted occasionally only. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XXXV 

without a running commentary, a mere translation of the 
ancient hymns of the Brahmans will never lead to any solid 
results. Even if the translator has discovered the right 
meaning of a word or of a whole sentence, his mere transla-^ 
tion does not help us much, unless he shows us the process 
by which he has arrived at it, unless he places before us 
the pieces justificatives of his final judgment. The 
Veda teems with words that require a justification ; not so 
much the words which occur but once or twice, though 
many of these are difficult enough, but rather the common 
words and particles, which occur again and again, which we 
understand to a certain point, and can render in a vague 
way, but which must be defined before they can be trans¬ 
lated, and before they can convey to us any real and 
tangible meaning. It was out of the question in a trans¬ 
lation of this character to attempt either an imitation of 
the original rhythm or metre, or to introduce the totally 
foreign element of rhyming. Such translations may follow 
by and by : at present a metrical translation would only 
be an excuse for an inaccurate translation. 

While engaged in collecting the evidence on which the 
meaning of every word and every sentence must be founded, 
I have derived the most important assistance from the 
Sanskrit Dictionary of Professors Bohtlingk and Roth, 
which has been in course of publication during the last 
sixteen years. The Vedic portion of that Dictionary may, 
I believe, be taken as the almost exclusive work of Professor 
Roth, and as such, for the sake of brevity, I shall treat it 
in my notes. It would be ungrateful were I not to acknow¬ 
ledge most fully the real benefit which this publication has 
conferred on every student of Sanskrit, and my only regret 
is that its publication has not proceeded more rapidly, so 
that even now years will elapse before we can hope to see 
it finished. But my sincere admiration for the work per¬ 
formed by the compilers of that Dictionary does not prevent 
me from differing, in many cases, from the explanations of 
Vedic words given by Professor Roth. If I do not always 
criticise Professor Roth’s explanations when I differ from 
him, the reason is obvious, A dictionary without a full 

XXXVl 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

translation of each passage, or without a justification of the 
meanings assigned to each word, is only a preliminary step 
to a translation. It represents a first classification of the 
meanings of the same word in different passages, but it 
gives us no means of judging how, according to the opinion 
of the compiler, the meaning of each single word should be 
made to fit the general sense of a whole sentence. I do 
not say this in disparagement, for, in a dictionary, it can 
hardly be otherwise ; I only refer to it in order to explain 
the difficulty I felt whenever I differed from Professor Roth, 
and was yet unable to tell how the meaning assigned by 
him to certain words would be justified by the author of 
the Dictionary himself. On this ground I have throughout 
preferred to explain every step by which I arrived at my 
own renderings, rather than to write a running criticism of 
Professor Roth’s Dictionary. My obligations to him I like 
to express thus once for all, by stating that whenever I 
found that I agreed with him, I felt greatly assured as 
to the soundness of my own rendering, while whenever I 
differed from him, I never did so without careful con¬ 
sideration. 

The works, however, which I have hitherto mentioned, 
though the most important, are by no means the only ones 
that have been of use to me in preparing my translation of 
the Rig-veda. The numerous articles on certain hymns, 
verses, or single words occurring in the Rig-veda, published 
by Vedic scholars in Europe and India during the last 
thirty years, were read by me at the time of their publica¬ 
tion, and have helped me to overcome difficulties, the very 
existence of which is now forgotten. If I go back still 
further, I feel that in grappling with the first and the 
greatest of difficulties in the study of the Veda, I and many 
others are more deeply indebted than it is possible to say, 
to one whose early loss has been one of the greatest mis¬ 
fortunes to Sanskrit scholarship. It was in Burnoufs 
lectures that we first learnt what the Veda was, and how 
it should form the foundation of all our studies. Not only 
did he most liberally communicate to his pupils his valuable 
MSS., and teach us how to use these tools, but the results 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XXXVll 

of his own experience were freely placed at our service, we 
were warned against researches which he knew to be useless, 
we were encouraged in undertakings which he knew to be 
full of promise. His minute analysis of long passages of 
S^yawa, his independent interpretations of the text of the 
hymns, his comparisons between the words and grammatical 
forms, the thoughts and legends of the Veda and Avesta, 
his brilliant divination checked by an inexorable sense of 
truth, and his dry logical method enlivened by sallies of 
humour and sparks of imaginative genius, though not easily 
forgotten, and always remembered with gratitude, are 
now beyond the reach of praise or blame. Were I to 
criticise what he or other scholars have said and written 
many years ago, they might justly complain of such criticism. 
It is no longer necessary to prove that NA.bhdnedish//^a 
cannot mean * new relatives,’ or that there never was a race 
of Etendhras, or that the angels of the Bible arc in no way 
connected with the Angiras of the Vedic hymns ; and it 
would, on the other hand, be a mere waste of time, were I 
to attempt to find out who first discovered that in the Veda 
deva does not always mean divine, but sometimes means 
brilliant. In fact, it could not be done. 

In a new subject 4ii:e that of the interpretation of the 
Veda, there are certain things which everybody discovers 
who has eyes to see. Their discovery requires so little 
research that it seems almost an insult to say that they 
were discovered by this or that scholar. Take, for instance, 
the peculiar pronunciation of certain words, rendered neces¬ 
sary by the requirements of Vedic metres. I believe that 
my learned friend Professor Kuhn was one of the first to 
call general attention to the fact that semivowels must fre¬ 
quently be changed into their corresponding vowels, and 
that long vowels must sometimes be pronounced as two 
syllables. It is clear, however, from Rosen's notes to the 
first Ash^aka (I, i, 8), that he^ too, was perfectly aware of 
this fact, and that he recognised the prevalence of this rule, 
not only with regard to semivowels (see his note to RV. I, 

9) and long vowels which are the result of Sandhi, but 
likewise with regard to others that occur in the body bf a 

xxxviii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

word. ‘ Animadverte,’ he writes, ‘tres syllabas postremas 
vocis adhvar^^im dipodiae iambicae munus sustinentes, 
peiiultima syllaba praeter iambi prioris arsin, thesin quoque 
sequentis pedis ferente. Satis frequentia sunt, in hac prae- 
sertim dipodiae iambicae sede, exempla syllabae natura 
longae in tres moras productae. De qua re nihil quidem 
memoratum invenio apud Pingalam aliosque qui de arte 
metrica scripserunt : sed numeros ita, ut modo dictum est, 
computandos esse, taciti agnoscere videntur, quum versus 
una syllaba mancus non eos offendat/ 

Now this is exactly the case. The ancient grammarians, 
as we shall see, teach distinctly that where two vowels have 
coalesced into one according to the rules of Sandhi, they 
may be pronounced as two syllables ; and though they do 
not teach the same with regard to semivowels and long 
vowels occurring in the body of the word, yet they tacitly 
recognise that rule, by frequently taking its effects for 
granted. Thus in Siltra 950 of the Priti.f^khya, verse IX, 
III, I, is called an Atyashri, and the first pida is said to 
consist of twelve syllables. In order to get this number, 
the author must have read, 

ay§. Yuk^ hari^yi punina^. 

Immediately after, verse IV, i, 3, is called a Dhr/ti, and the 
first pida must again have twelve syllables. Here there¬ 
fore the author takes it for granted that we should read, 

sakhe sakh^yam abhy i vavr2tsva^ 

No one, in fact, with any ear for rhythm, whether 5aunaka 
and Pingala, or Rosen and Kuhn, could have helped ob¬ 
serving these rules when reading the Veda. But it is quite 
a different case when we come to the question as to which 
words admit of such protracted pronunciation, and which 
do not. Here one scholar may differ from another according 
to the view he takes of the character of Vedic metres, and 
here one has to take careful account of the minute and 

*' See also Sdtra 937 seq. I cannot find any authority for the statement of 
Professor Kuhn (Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 1 14) that, according to the Rik-pritijdkhya, 
it is the first semivowel that must be dissolved, unless he referred to the 
remarks of the commentator to SCltra 973. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XXXIX 

ingenious observations contained in numerous articles by 
Professors Kuhn, Bollensen, Gi'assmann, and others. 

With regard to the interpretation of certain words and 
sentences too, it may happen that explanations which have 
taxed the ingenuity of some scholars to the utmost, seem 
to others so self-evident that they would hardly think of 
quoting anybody’s name in support of them, to say nothing 
of the endless and useless work it would entail, were we 
obliged always to find out who was the first to propose this 
or that interpretation. It is impossible here to lay down 
general I'ules : — each scholar must be guided by his own 
sense of justice to others and by self-respect. Let us take 
one instance. From the first time that I read the fourth 
hymn of the Rig-veda, I translated the fifth and sixth 
verses : 

utd bruvantu na^ nfda^ ni/i anydta/^ kit drata, 
dddhdnclA indre it diiva/z, 

utd nz,h su-bhdgdn zrih voki:yuh dasma knshjfdyaA, 
sydma ft fndrasya sixmzm. 

I. Whether our enemies say, ‘Move away elsewhere, you 
who offer worship to Indra only,’ — 

3. Or whether, O mighty one, all people call us blessed : 
may we always remain in the keeping of Indra. 

About the general sense of this passage I imagined there 
could be no doubt, although one word in it, viz. arf^, re¬ 
quired an explanation. Yet the variety of interpretations 
proposed by different scholars is extraordinary. First, if 
we look to Sdya^a, he translates : 

I. May our priests praise Indra 1 O enemies, go away 
from this place, and also from another place t Our priests 
(may praise Indra), they who are always performing wor¬ 
ship for Indra. 

%. 0 destroyer of enemies ! may the enemy call us pos¬ 
sessed of wealth ; how much more, friendly people I May 
we be in the happiness of Indra t 

Professor Wilson did not follow Sdya^a closely, but 
translated: 

I. Let our ministers, earnestly performing his worship, 

xl 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

exclaim : Depart, ye revilers, from hence and every other 
place (where he is adored). 

a* Destroyer of foes, let our enemies say we are pros¬ 
perous : let men (congratulate us). May we ever abide in 
the felicity (derived from the favour) of Indra. 

Langlois translated : 

I. Que (ces amis), en f^tant Indra, puissent dire: Vous, 
qui ^tes nos adversaires, retirez-vous loin d’ici. 

ii. Que nos ennemis nous appellent des hommes fortunes, 
places que nous sommes sous la protection d’ Indra. 

Stevenson translated : 

I. Let all men again join in praising Indra. Avaunt ye 
profane scoffers, remove from hence, and from every other 
place, while we perform the rites of Indra. 

ii. O foe-destroyer, (through thy favour) even our enemies 
speak peaceably to us, the possessors of wealth; what 
wonder then if other men do so. Let us ever enjoy the 
happiness which springs from Indra’s blessing. 

Professor Benfey translated : 

I. And let the scoffers say. They are rejected by every 
one else, therefore they celebrate Indra alone. .i 

0,. And may the enemy and the country proclaim us as 
happy, O destroyer, if we are only in Indra’s keeping®*. 

Professor Roth, s.v. anydtaA, took this word rightly in 
the sense of ^ to a different place,’ and must therefore have 
taken that sentence ‘move away elsewhere’ in the same 
sense in which I take it. Later, however, s.v. ar, he cor¬ 
rected himself, and proposed to translate the same words 
by ‘ you neglect something else.’ 

Professor Bollensen (Orient und Occident, vol. ii, p. 46a), 

* I add Grassmann’s and Ludwig’s renderings : 

Grassmann: Mag spot tend sagen unser Feind: 

' Kein Andrer kummert sich um sie ; 

Drum feiem Indra sie allein.’ 

Und glucklich mdgen, Machtigerl 
Die Freundesstamme nennen uns, 

Nur wenn wir sind in Indra’s Schutz. 

Ludwig : Mogen unsere tadler sagen : sogar noch anderes entgeht eucli 
(dabei), wenn ihr dienst dem Indra tut. 

Oder mdge uns gluckselige nennen der fromme, so nennen, o wundertater, 
die (funf) vdlker, in Indra’s schutze mdgen wir sein. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

xli 

adopting to a certain extent the second rendering of Professor 
Roth in preference to that of Professor Benfey-, endeavoured 
to show that the ‘ something else which is neglected,’ is not 
something indefinite, but the worship of all the other gods, 
except Indra. 

It might, no doubt, be said that every one of these trans¬ 
lations contains something that is right, though mixed up 
with a great deal that is wrong ; but to attempt for every 
verse of the Veda to quote and to criticise every previous 
translation, would be an invidious and useless task. In the 
case just quoted, it might seem right to state that Professor 
Bollensen was the first to see that arf/z should be joined 
with kr^sh/dya/^, and that he therefore proposed to alter it 
to arU, as a nom. plur. But on refei-ring to Rosen, I find 
that, to a certain extent, he had anticipated Professor Bol- 
lensen’s remark, for though, in his cautious way, he abstained 
from altering the text, yet he remai-ked: Possitne SiriM 
pluralis esse, contracta terminatione, pro arayaA? 

After these preliminary remarks I have to say a few 

Plan of the words on the general plan of my translation, 
work. j not attempt as yet a translation of the 
whole of the Rig-veda, and I therefore considered myself at 
liberty to group the hymns according to the deities to which 
they arc addressed. By this process, I believe, a great advan¬ 
tage is gained. We see at one glance all that has been 
said of a certain god, and we gain a more complete insight 
into his nature and character. Something of the same kind 
had been attempted by the original collectors of the ten 
books, for it can hardly be by accident that each of them 
begins with hymns addressed to Agni, and that these are 
followed by hymns addressed to Indra. The only excep¬ 
tion to this rule is the eighth for the ninth being 

devoted to one deity, to Soma, can hardly be accounted an 
exception. But if we take the Rig-veda as a whole^ we 
find hymns, addressed to the same deities, not only 
scattered about in different books, but not even grouped 
together when they occur in one and the same book. Here, 
as we lose nothing by giving up the old arrangement, we 

xlii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

are surely at liberty, for our own purposes, to put together 
such hymns as have a common object, and to place before 
the reader as much material as possible for an exhaustive 
study of each individual deity. 

I give for each hymn the Sanskrit original ^ in what is 
known as the Pada text, i. e. the text in which all words 
(pada) stand by themselves, as they do in Greek or Latin, 
without bemg joined together according to the rules of 
Sandhi. The text in which the words are thus joined, as 
they are in all other Sanskrit texts, is called the Sa;«hitS. 
text Whether the Pada or the Sd.7nh.it^ text be the more 
ancient, may seem difficult to settle. As far as I can judge, 
they seem to me, in their present form, the product of the 
same period of Vedic scholarship. The Pr4ti.r4khyas, it is 
true, start from the Pada text, take it, as it were, for 
granted, and devote their rules to the explanation of those 
changes which that text undergoes in being changed into 
the Sa;;2hiti text. But, on the other hand, the Pada text 
in some cases clearly presupposes the Sa;;zhitll text. It 
leaves out passages which are repeated more than once, 
while the Sa^j^hita text always repeats these passages ; it 
abstains from dividing the termination of the locative plural 
su, whenever in the Sa^^hit^ text, i. e. according to the rules 
of Sandhi, it becomes shu; hence nadtshu,a^ishu,but ap-su; 
and it gives short vowels instead of the long ones of the 
SennhitA, even in cases where the long vowels are justified 
by the rules of the Vedic language. It is certain, in fact, 
that neither the Pada nor the Sa;;2hiti text, as we now 
possess them, represents the original text of the Veda. 
Both show clear traces of scholastic influences. But if we 
try to restore the original form of the Vedic hymns, we 
shall certainly arrive at some kind of Pada text rather than 
at a Sa;^hitlt text; nay, even in their present form, the 
original metre and rhythm of the ancient hymns of thei?zshis 
are far more perceptible when the words are divided, than 
when we join them together throughout according to the 
rules of Sandhi. Lastly, for practical purposes, the Pada 
text is far superior to the Sa;^hiti text in which the final 

* This is left out in the second edition. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

xliii 

and initial letters, that is, the most important letters of 
words, are constantly disguised, and liable therefore to 
different interpretations. Although in some passages we 
may differ from the interpretation adopted by the Pada 
text, and although certain Vedic words have, no doubt, 
been wrongly analysed and divided by 5'M<alya, yet such 
cases are comparatively few, and where they occur, they 
are interesting as carrying us back to the earliest attempts 
of Vedic scholarship. In the vast majority of cases the 
divided text, with a few such rules as we have to observe 
in reading Latin, nay, even in reading Pili verses, brings 
us certainly much nearer to the original utterance of the 
ancient .^fshis than the amalgamated text. 

The critical principles by which I have been guided in 
editing for the first time the text of the Rig-veda, require 

Principles of ^ words of explanation, as they have lately 

criticism. httxi challenged on grounds which, I think, 
rest on a complete misapprehension of my previous state¬ 
ments on this subject. 

As far as we are able to judge at present, we can hardly 
speak of various readings in the Vedic hymns, in the usual 
sense of that word. Various readings to be gathered from 
a collation of different MSS., now accessible to us, there 
are none. After collating a considerable number of MSS., 
I have succeeded, I believe, in fixing on three representative 
MSS., as described in the preface to the first volume of my 
edition of the Rig-veda. Even these MSS. are not free 
from blunders, — for what MS. is ? — but these blunders have 
no claim to the title of various readings. They are lapsus 
calami, and no more ; and, what is important, they have 
not become traditional K 

^ Thus X, 101, a, one of the Pada MSS, (P a) reads distinctly ys^im pxi 
knwnta. sakh^ya^, but all the other MSS. have nayata, and there can be little 
doubt that it was the frequent repetition of the verb kn in this verse which 
led the writer to substitute knwuta for nayata. No other MS., as far as X am 
aware, repeats this blunder. In IX, 86, 3.4^ the writer of the same MS. puts 
ra^si instead of dhdvasi, because his eye was caught by ri,^ In the preceding 
line. X, 16, 5, the same MS, reads s&m instead of ga^Matdm, which 

is supported by S 1, S a, ? 1, while S 3 has a peculiar and more important 
reading, ga^^^atlt. X, 67, 6, the same MS. P a has vi ^akartha instead of 
vi Jakarta. 

A number of various readings which have been gleaned from Pandit TW- 

xliv 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

The text, as deduced from the best MSS. of the Sa^^^hiti 
text, can be controlled by four independent checks. The 
first is, of course, a collation of the best MSS. of the 
Samhiti text. 

The second check to be applied to the Sa;;zhitS. text is a 
comparison with the Pada text, of which, again, I possessed 
at least one excellent MS., and several more modern 
copies. 

The third check was a comparison of this text with 
Siya^za’s commentary, or rather with the text which is 
presupposed by that commentary. In the few cases where 
the Pada text seemed to differ from the Sa^whiti text, a 
note was added to that effect, in the various readings of my 
edition ; and the same was done, at least in all important 
cases, where Saya^^a clearly followed a text at variance 
with our own. 

The fourth check was a comparison of any doubtful 
passage with the numerous passages quoted in the PrS-ti- 
.r^khya. 

These were the principles by which I was guided in the 
critical restoration of the text of the Rig-veda, and I believe 
I may say that the text as printed by me is more correct 
than any MS. now accessible, more trustworthy than the 
text followed by Siya/^a, and in all important points identi¬ 
cally the same with that text which the authors of the 

n^tha’s Tul^ld^n^dipaddhati (see Triibner’s American and Oriental Literary 
Record, July 31, 1868) belong to the same class. They may be due either to 
the copyists of the MSS. which Pandit Tirdn^tha used while compiling his 
work, or they may by accident have crept into his own MS. Anyhow, not one 
of them is supported either by the best MSS. accessible in Europe, or by any 
passage in the Prdtijikhya. 

IX, II, a. 

read devayu 

instead of 

devayu^ 

IX, II, 4, 

areata 

11 

ar^ate \ 

IX, 14, a. 

yadt sabandhava.^ 

31 

yaddiptabandhava^ ^ 

IX, 16, 3, 

ff 

anaptam 

31 

anuptam'*. 

>< 

1-1 

3J 

suvinisa 

31 

stuvSnisa 

IX, 21, 2, 

31 

pravrmvanto 

11 

pravnwvato 

IX, 48, 2, 

11 

sa^zvrfkta 

It 

sa;«yukta \ 

IX, 49, I, 

11 

no*p^m 

33 

no y^m \ 

IX, 64, 3, 

If 

sdrya^ 

31 

siiryam 

IX, 69, 3, 

31 

sida ni 

33 

sidati K 

As printed by Pandit Tar^^ltha. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

xlv 

Prcltijikhya followed in their critical researches in the fifth 
or sixth century before our era. I believe that starting 
from that date our text of the Veda is better authenticated, 
and supported by a more perfect apparatus criticus, 
than the text of any Greek or Latin author, and I do not 
think that diplomatic criticism can ever go beyond what 
has been achieved in the constitution of the text of the 
Vedic hymns. 

Far be it from me to say that the editio princeps of 
the text thus constituted was printed without mistakes. 

But most of these mistakes are mistakes 
Romanised Re- which no attentive reader could fail to detect, 

^gVed** Cases like 11, 35, i, where ^d^ishat instead 
of ^dshishat was printed three times, so as 
to perplex even Professor Roth, or II, 13, 14, where jasa- 
mclndm occurs three times instead of j-aramclndm, are, I 
believe, of rare occurrence. Nor do I think that, unless 
some quite unexpected discoveries are made, there ever 
will be a new critical edition, or, as we call it in Germany, 
a new recension of the hymns of the Rig-veda. If by col¬ 
lating new MSS., or by a careful study of the Pr4tij^khya, 
or by conjectural emendations, a more correct text could 
have been produced, we may be certain that a critical 
scholar like Professor Aufrecht would have given us such a 
text. But after carefully collating several MSS. of Pro¬ 
fessor Wilson’s collection, and after enjoying the advantage 
of Professor Weber’s assistance in collating the MSS. of the 
Royal Library at Berlin, and after a minute study of the 
Pratij4khya, he frankly states that in the text of the Rig-veda, 
transcribed in Roman letters, which he printed at Berlin, he 
followed my edition, and that he had to correct but a small 
number of misprints. For the two Mawifalas which I had not 
yet published, I lent him the very MSS. on which my edition 
is founded ; and there will be accordingly but few passages 
in these two concluding Ma«</alas, which I have still to 
publish, where the text will materially differ from that of 
his Romanised transcript. 

No one, I should think, who is at all acquainted with the 
rules of diplomatic criticism, would easily bring himself to 

xlvi 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

touch a text resting on such authorities as the text of 
the Rig-veda. What would a Greek scholar give, if he 
could say of Homer that his text was in every word, 
in every syllable, in every vowel, in every accent, the 
same as the text used by Peisistratos in the sixth century 
B.c. ! A text thus preserved in its integrity for so many 
centuries, must remain for ever the authoritative text of the 
Veda. 

To remove, for instance, the eleven hymns 49-59 
eighth Ma;2<iala from their proper place, or count them by 

Valakhilya themselves as Valakhilya ^ hymns, seems to 
Hymns. though no doubt perfectly harmless, 

little short of a critical sacrilege. Why Saya^za does not 
explain these hymns, I confess I do not know ^ ; but what¬ 
ever the reason was, it was not because they did not exist 
at his time, or because he thought them spurious. They 
are regularly counted in Kityiyana’s Sarvdnukrama, though 
here the same accident has happened. One commentator, 
Shata^gururishya, the one most commonly used, does not 
explain them ; but another commentator, (Jagannatha, does 
explain them, exactly as they occur in the Sarvinukrama, 
only leaving out hymn 58. That these hymns had some¬ 
thing peculiar in the eyes of native scholars, is clear enough. 
They may for a time have formed a separate collection, they 

® The earliest interpretation of the name Valakhilya is found in the Taittirtya- 
Srawyaka, I, 23. We are told that Pra^pati created the world, and in the 
process of creation the following interlude occurs : 

sa tapostapyata. sa tapas taptvS, jarlram adhunuta, tasya yan m^wsam 
dstt tato*ru«ay% ketavo vatarajana ^^zshaya udatish^y^an. ye nakhd^, te vaikhE- 
nasiy^. ye hilkA, te hS,lakhilyS,y^. 

He humed with emotion. Having burnt with emotion, he shook his body. 
From what was his flesh, the .^fshis, called Aruwas, Ketus, and V^Ltarajanas, 
sprang forth. His nails became the Vaikh^nasas, his hairs the BSlakhilyas. 

The author of this allegoiy therefore took bS.la or vila in valakhilya, not in 
the sense of child, but identified it with b^la, hair. 

The commentator remarks with regard to tapas ; n^tra tapa upavfisfidirfipam, 
kiwtu srash^avyaw vastu ktdmam iti paryilo-Sanarfipam. 

^ A similar omission was pointed out by Professor Roth. Verses 21--24 of 
the 53rd hymn of the third Ma«(/ala, which contain imprecations against 
VasishMa, are left out by the writer of a Pada MS., and by a copyist of 
Sfiyawa’s commentary, probably because they both belonged to the family of 
Vasishifi^a. See my first edition of the Rig-veda, vol. ii, p. Ivi, Notes. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

xlvii 

may have been considered of more modern origin I shall 
go even further than those who remove these hymns from 
the place which they have occupied for more than two 
thousand years. I admit they disturb the regularity both 
of the Ma;^^ala and the Ash/aka divisions, and I have 
pointed out myself that they are not counted in the ancient 
Anukrama;2is ascribed to vS'aunaka ; (History of Ancient 
Sanskrit Literature, p. %%o.) But, on the other hand, verses 
taken from these hymns occur in all the other Vedas 
they are mentioned by name in the Brlthma^^as (Ait. Br. V, 
15 ; VI, »4), the Ai'a;?zyakas (Ait. Ar. V, 10, p. 445), and the 
Sutras (Ai*v. 5rauta SCitras, VIII, 3), while they are never 
included in the manuscripts of Parirish/as or Khilas or 
apocryphal hymns, nor mentioned by KSty^yana as mere 
Khilas in his Sarv^Lnukrama. Eight® of them are men¬ 
tioned in the B/'xhaddevatS-, without any allusion to their 
apocryphal character : 

Pard^^y ash/au tu stiktdny rislcAn^m tigmate^asdm, 

Aindrd;^y atra tu sha^vimja^ pragdtho bahudaivata^. 

Rig antydgner a/tety agni/i sOryam antyapado ^gau. 

Praska^zvai* ka. pr2shadhra.y ka prdddd yad vastu kimkana 

Bhdrid iti tu stiktdbhydm akhilam parikirtitam. 

Aindrdwy ubhayam ity atra sha/ dgneydt pard;^i tu. 

‘ The next eight hymns belong to iffshis of keen intel¬ 
lect ^ ; they are addressed to Indra, but the a6th Pragdtha 

* SS.ya?2a (RV. X, 88, 18) quotes these hymns as Vdlakhilya-sawhitd. In 
the Mah^bhdrata XII, 59 ; 110 seq. the Vc^lakhilyas are called the ministers of 
King Vainya, whose astrologer was Garga, and his domestic priest ^'ukra ; see 
Kern, Bnhat-saj7zhitd, transl. p. ii. 

^ This is a criterion of some importance, and it might have been mentioned, 
for instance, by Professor BoUensen in his interesting article on the Dvipadd 
Vird^ hymns ascribed to Parifara (I, 65-70) that not a single verse of them 
occurs in any of the other Vedas, 

c Sdyawa in his commentary (RV. X, 37, 15) speaks of eight, while in the 
Ait. Ar. V, 10, the first six are quoted (containing fifty-six verses, comm.), as 
being used together for certain sacrificial purposes. 

^ Lest .Saunaka be suspected of having applied this epithet, tigmatqjfas, to 
the Vdlakhilyas in order to fill the verse (pddapfirawdrtham), I may point out 
that the same epithet is applied to the Vdlakhilyas in the Maitry-upanishad a, 3. 
The nom. plur. which occurs there is tigmatq^sd/i, and the commentator 
remarks; tigmate^sas tivratqgraso » tyftr^itaprabhdvdA ; ityeva^wvidha 

eta^Mdkhdsafiketapd/^ar MdndasaA i^rvatra. See also Maitr. Up. VI, 39, 

xlviii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

(VIII, 54, 3-4, which verses form the !^6th couplet, if count¬ 
ing from VIII, 49, i) is addressed to many gods. The last 
verse (of these eight hymns), VIII, S^3 5^ beginning with 
the words a^ety agni^, is addressed to Agni, and the last 
foot celebrates Surya. Whatsoever Praska;2va and Pnsha- 
dhra gave (or, if we read prfshadhriya, whatever Praska^zva 
gave to Pr^’shadhra), all that is celebrated in the two hymns 
beginning with bhfirit. After the hymn addressed to Agni 
(VIII, 60), there follow six hymns addressed to Indra, 
beginning with ubhayam.’ 

But the most important point of all is this, that these 
hymns, which exist both in the Pada and Sa^^hit^ texts, are 
quoted by the Priti.yikhya, not only for general purposes, 
but for special passages occurring in them, and nowhere 
else. Thus in Sutra 154, hetaya^ is quoted as one of the 
few words which do not require the elision of a following 
short a. In order to appreciate what is implied by this 
special quotation, it is necessary to have a clear insight into 
the mechanism of the Pr^uakhya. Its chief object is to 
bring under general categories the changes which the sepa¬ 
rate words of the Pada text undergo when joined together 
in the Arsht Sa;«hiti, and to do this with the utmost 
brevity possible. Now the Sandhi rules, as obseiwed in the 
Sa^hita of the Rig-veda, are by no means so uniform and 
regular as they are in later Sanskrit, and hence it is some¬ 
times extremely difficult to bring all the exceptional cases 
under more or less general rules. In our passage the 
author of the Pr^tuikhya endeavours to comprehend all 
the passages where an initial a in the Veda is not elided 
after a final e or o. In ordinary Sanskrit it would be always 
elided, in the Sa^^zhita it is sometimes elided, and sometimes 
not. Thus the Pr4ti.f4khya begins in SOtra 138 by stating 
that if the short a stands at the beginning of a p^da or foot, 
it is always elided. Wh}^ it should be always elided in the 
very place where the metre most strongly requires that it 
should be pronounced, does not concern the author of the 
PrUtuakhya. He is a statistician, not a grammarian, and 
he therefore simply adds in SCltra 153 the only three excep¬ 
tional passages where the a, under these very circumstances, 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

xlix 

happens to be not elided. He then proceeds in Siatra 139 
to state that a is elided even in the middle of a pada, pro¬ 
vided it be light, followed by y or v, and these, y or v, again 
followed by a light vowel. Hence the Sa7;2hita writes te 
^vadan, so* yam, but not .?ikshanto*vratam, for here the a 
of avratam is heavy; nor mitramaho*vadyat, for here the 
a following the v is heavy 

Then follows again an extension of this rule, viz. in the 
case of words ending in ^vo. After these, a short a, even 
if followed by other consonants besides y or v, may be 
elided, but the other conditions must be fulfilled, i. e. the 
short a must be light, and the vowel of the next syllable 
must again be light. Thus the Sa7;2hit3. writes indeed g^vo 
*bhita/2, but not g^vo*gman, because here the a is heavy, 
being followed by two consonants. 

After this, a more general rule is given, or, more cor¬ 
rectly, a more comprehensive observation is made, viz. that 
under all circumstances initial a is elided, if the preceding 
word ends in aye, aya/2, ave, or ava^2. As might be 
expected, however, so large a class must have numerous 
exceptions, and these can only be collected by quoting 
every word ending in these syllables, or every passage in 
which the exceptions occur. Before these exceptions are 
enumerated, some other more or less general observations 
are made, providing for the elision of initial a. Initial a, 
according to SCitra 14a, is to be elided if the preceding 
word is va/2, and if this va/2 is preceded by a, na, pra, kva, 
>^itra/2, savitA, eva, or ka/2. There is, of course, no intel¬ 
ligible reason why, if these words precede va//, the next a 
should be elided. It is a mere statement of facts, and, 
generally speaking, these statements are minutely accurate* 
There is probably no verse in the whole of the Rig-veda 
where an initial a after va/2 is elided, unless these very 
words precede, or unless some other observation has been 
made to provide for the elision of the a. For instance, in 
V, !z5, 1, we find va/2 preceded by aZ'Ma, which is not among 
the words just mentioned, and here the SaTT^hit^l does not 
elide the a of agnim, which follows after va/2. After all 
these more or less general observations as to the elision of 
[32] d 

1 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

an initial a are thus exhausted, the author of the Prati- 
^akhya descends into particulars, and gives lists, first, of 
words the initial a of which is always elided ; secondly, of 
words which, if preceding, require under all circumstances 
the elision of the initial a of the next word, whatever may 
have been said to the contrary in the preceding Sutras. 
Afterwards, he gives a number of passages which defy all 
‘^rules, and must be given on their own merits, and as they 
stand in the Sa;;2hiti. Lastly, follow special exceptions 
to the more or less general rules given before. And here, 
among these special exceptions, we see that the author of 
the Pritudkhya finds it necessary to quote a passage from a 
V41akhilya hymn in which hetdya^ occurs, i.e. a word 
ending in aya.^, and where, in defiance of Sfitra 141, which 
required the elision of a following initial a under all circum¬ 
stances (sarvathi), the initial a of asya is not elided ; VIII, 
50, 2, Sa;;2hita, .rataniki hetayo asya. It might be objected 
that the Pr^ti.rikhya only quotes hetaya/z as an exceptional 
word, and does not refer directly to the verse in the 
Vilakhilya hymn. But fortunately hetaya// occurs but 
twice in the whole of the Rig-veda; and in the other 
passage where it occurs, I, 190, 4, neither the rule nor the 
exception as to the elision of an initial a, could apply. 
The author of the Pratu^khya therefore makes no distinc¬ 
tion between the V41akhilya and any other hymns of the 
Rig-veda, and he would have considered his phonetic 
statistics equally at fault, if it had been possible to quote 
one single passage from the hymns VIII, 49 to 59, as con¬ 
travening his observations, as if such passages had been 
alleged from the hymns of Vasish/>%a or Vuv4mitra. 

It would lead me too far, were I to enter here into similar 
cases in support of the fact that the Pr^tij-dkhya makes no 
distinction between the Valakhilya and any other hymns of 
the Rig-veda-sa^2hit4 ®'. But I doubt whether the bearing 
of this fact has ever been fully realised. Here we see that 
the absence of the elision of a short a which follows after a 
word ending in aya/2, was considered of sufficient importance 

The Pralijdkhya takes into account both the ^S’^kala and Bashkala 
as may be seen from Sutra 1057. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

li 

to be recorded in a special rule, because in most cases the 
Sawhiti elides an initial a, if preceded by a word ending in 
aya/z. What does this prove? It proves, unless all our 
views on the chronology of Vedic literature are wrong, that 
in the fifth century B.c. at least, or previously rather to the 
time when the Pr^tirikhya was composed, both the Pada 
and the Sa^hitd texts were so firmly settled that it was im¬ 
possible, for the sake of uniformity or regularity, to omit 
one single short a ; and it proves k fortiori, that the 
hymn in which that irregular short a occurs, formed at that 
time part of the Vedic canon. I confess I feel sometimes 
frightened by the stringency of this argument, and I should 
like to see a possibility by which we could explain the 
addition, not of the Vellakhilya hymns only, but of other 
much more modern sounding hymns, at a later time than 
the period of the Prdtirdkhyas. But until that possibility 
is shown, we must abide by our own conclusions ; and then 
I ask, who is the critic who would dare to tamper with a 
canon of scripture of which every iota was settled before the 
time of Cyrus, and which we possess in exactly that form 
in which it is described to us by the authors of the 
Prdtirakhyas ? I say again, that I am not free from mis¬ 
givings on the subject, and my critical conscience would be 
far better satisfied if we could ascribe the PrUtirdkhya and 
all it presupposes to a much later date. But until that is 
done, the fact remains that the two divergent tcxt.s, the 
Pada and Sawzhitd, which we now possess, existed, as we 
now possess them, previous to the time of the PrdtMkhya. 
They have not diverged nor varied since, and the vertex to 
which they point, starting from the di.stance of the two 
texts as measured by the Prdtijdkhya, carries us back far 
beyond the time of ,Saunaka, if we wish to determine the 
date of the first authorised collection of the hymns, both in 
their Pada and in their Sawhit^ form. 

^ Instances abound, if we compare the Pada and Sa?«hitd 
texts, where, if uniformity between the two texts had been 
the object of the scholar's of the ancient Parishads, the 
lengthening or shortening of a vowel would at once have 
removed the apparent discordance between the two tradi- 

d 2 

lii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

tional texts. Nor should it be supposed that such minute 
discordances between the two, as the length or shortness of 
a vowel, were always rendered necessary by the require¬ 
ments of the metre, and that for that reason the ancient 
students or the later copyists of the Veda abstained from 
altering the peculiar spelling of words, which seemed re¬ 
quired by the exigencies of the metre in the Sd.mh.itt text, 
but not in the Pada text. Though this may be true in 
some cases, it is not so in all. There are short vowels in 
the Sa?;2hiti where, according to grammar, we expect long 
vowels, and where, according to metre, there was no neces¬ 
sity for shortening them. Yet in these very places all the 
MSS. of the Samhita text give the irregular short, and all 
the MSS. of the Pada text the regular long vowel, and the 
authors of the Prdti^-^khyas bear witness that the same 
minute difference existed at their own time, nay, previous to 
their own time. In VII, 6o, lo,, the Sa;;^2hit4 text gives : 

iyAm deva purdhitir yuvabhyi?;^ ya^;2eshu mitr4varu?24v 
ak^ri. 

This primacy, 0 (two) gods, was made for you two, O 
Mitra and Varu;^a, at the sacrifices ! 

Here it is quite clear that deva is meant for a dual, and 
ought to have been dev§. or devau. The metre does not 
require a short syllable, and yet all the Sa?;zhit4 MSS. read 
deva, and all the Pada MSS. read devt ; and what is more 
important, the authors of the Pritii'^khya had to register 
this small divergence of the two texts, which existed in their 
time as it exists in our own ^ 

Nor let it be supposed, that the writers of our MSS. were 
so careful and so conscientious that they would, when 
copying MSS., regulate every consonant or vowel according 
to the rules of the Pratii*akhya. This is by no means 
the case. The writers of Vedic MSS. are on the whole 
more accurate than the writers of other MSS., but their 
learning does not seem to extend to a knowledge of the 
minute rules of the Prituikhya, and they will commit 

® See Prdtijakliya, Sutra 309 seqq., where several more instances of the same 
kind are given. I should prefer to take devapurohiti as one word, but that was 
not the intention of the authors of the Sawhit^ and Pada texts. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

liii 

occasionally the very mistakes against which they are 
warned by the PratMkhya. Thus the Pratii'akhya (S{itra 
799) warns the students against a common mistake of 
changing vaiyai’va into vayya^yvaj i. e. by changing ai to a, 
and doubling the semivowel y. But this very mistake 
occurs in S 3, and another MS. gives vaiyya^va. See 
p. Ivi. 

If these arguments are sound, and if nothing can be said 
against the critical principles by which I have been guided 

Aufrecht’s editing the text of the Rig-veda, if the 

mistakes. fourfold check, described above, fulfils every 
requirement that could be made for restoring that text 
which was known to S^ya?za, and which was known, probably 
2000 years earlier, to the authors of the Pr^tMkhyas, what 
can be the motives, it may fairly be asked, of those who 
clamour for a new and more critical edition, and who 
imagine that the editio princeps of the Rig-veda will 
share the fate of most of the editiones principes of the 
Greek and Roman classics, and be supplanted by new 
editions founded on the collation of other MSS. ? No one 
could have rejoiced more sincerely than I did at the publi¬ 
cation of the Romanised transliteration of the Rig-veda, 
carried out with so much patience and accuracy by Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht. It showed that there was a growing 
interest in this, the only true Veda ; it showed that even 
those who could not read Sanskrit in the original Devan^- 
gari, wished to have access to the original text of these 
ancient hymns ; it showed that the study of the Veda had 
a future before it like no other book of Sanskrit literature. 
My learned friend Professor Aufrecht has been most 
unfairly charged with having printed this Romanised, text 
me insciente vel invito* My edition is publici juris, 
like any edition of Homer or Plato, and anybody might, 
with proper acknowledgment, have reprinted it, either in 
Roman or DevanSgari letters. But far from keeping me 
in ignorance of his plan, Professor Aufrecht applied to me 
for the loan of the MSS. of the two Ma«<;^alas which I had 
not yet published, and I lent them to him most gladly, 
because, by seeing them printed at once, I felt far less 

liv 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

guilty in delaying the publication of the last volumes of my 
edition of the text and commentary. Nor could anything 
have been more honourable than the way in which Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht speaks of the true relation of his Romanised 
text to my edition. That there are misprints, and I, speak¬ 
ing for myself, ought to say mistakes also, in my edition of 
the Rig-veda, I know but too well ; and if Professor 
Aufrecht, after carefully transcribing every word, could 
honestly say that their number is small, I doubt whether 
other scholars will be able to prove that their number is 
large. I believe I may with the same honesty return Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht’s compliment, and considering the great 
difficulty of avoiding misprints in Romanised transcripts, 
I have always thought and I have always said that his 
reprint of the hymns of the Veda is remarkably correct and 
accurate. What, however, I must protest against, and 
what, I feel sure, Professor Aufrecht himself would equally 
protest against, is the supposition, and more than supposi¬ 
tion of certain scholars, that wherever this later Latin 
transcript differs from my own Devandgari text, Professor 
Aufrecht is right, and I am wrong ; that his various readings 
rest on the authority of new MSS., and constitute in fact a 
new recension of the Vedic hymns. Against this supposi¬ 
tion I must protest most strongly, not for my own sake, but 
for the sake of the old book, and, still more, for the sake of 
the truth. No doubt it is natural to suppose that where a 
later edition differs from a former edition, it does so inten¬ 
tionally ; and I do not complain of those wffio, without 
being able to have recourse to MSS. in order to test the 
authority of various readings, concluded that wherever the 
new text differed from the old, it was because the old text 
was at fault. In order to satisfy my own conscience on this 
point, I have collated a number of passages where Pro- 
'fessor Aufrecht’s text differs from my own, and I feel 
satisfied that in the vast majority of cases, I am right and 
he is wrong, and that his variations do not rest on the 
authority of MSS. I must not shrink from the duty of 
making good this assertion, and I therefore proceed to an 
examination of such passages as have occurred to me on 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Iv 

occasionally referring to his text, pointing out the readings 
both where he is right, and where he is wrong. The 
differences between the two texts may appear trifling, but 
I shall not avail myself of that plea. On the contrary, I 
quite agree with those scholars who hold that in truly 
critical scholarship there is nothing trifling. Besides, it is 
in the nature of the case that what may, by a stretch of the 
word, be called various readings in the Veda, must be con¬ 
fined to single letters or accents, and can but seldom extend 
to whole words, and never to whole sentences. I must 
therefore beg my readers to have patience while I endeavour 
to show that the text of the Rig-veda, as first published 
by me, though by no means faultless, was nevertheless not 
edited in so perfunctory a manner as some learned critics 
seem to suppose, and that it will not be easy to supplant 
it either by a collation of new MSS.^ such as are accessible 
at present, or by occasional references to the Prfiti.yfikhya. 

I begin with some mistakes of my own, mistakes which 
I might have avoided, if I had always consulted the 
Pr4ti.f§,khya, where single words or whole passages of 
the Veda are quoted. Some of these mistakes have been 
removed by Professor Aufrecht, others, however, appear in 
his transcript as they appear in my own edition. 

I need hardly point out passages where palpable mis¬ 
prints in my edition have been repeated in Pi'ofessor 
Aufrecht’s text. I mean by palpable misprints, cases 
where a glance at the Pada text or at the Sa^/diit^ text 
or a reference to S^iya;^a’s commentary would show at 
once what was intended. Thus, for instance, in VI, 15, 3, 
vridh6, as I had printed in the Sa?;Aitd, was clearly a 
misprint for vndhd, as may be seen from the Pada, which 
gives vridhAA, and from Sdya^/a. PI ere, though Professor 
Aufrecht repeats vrfdh6, I think it hardly necessary to 
show that the authority of the best MSS. (S a alone 
contains a correction of vndhd to vrfdh^) is in favour of 
vndhdA, whatever we may think of the relative value of 
these two readings. One must be careful, however, in 
a text like that of the Vedic hymns, where the presence 
or absence of a single letter or accent begins to» become 

Ivi 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

the object of the most learned and painstaking discussions, 
not to claim too large an indulgence for misprints. A 
misprint in the Sa?;2hiti, if repeated in the Pada, or if 
admitted even in the commentary of Saya^/a, though it 
need not be put down to the editor’s deplorable ignorance, 
becomes yet a serious matter, and I willingly take all the 
blame which is justly due for occasional accidents of this 
character. Such are, for instance, II, 1%, 14, j-asaminam 
instead of j'ai’amanam ; I, 12,4, 4, sudh.yuva.A, in the Pada, 
instead of .jundhyuvaA; and the substitution in several 
places of a short u instead of a long -Cl in such forms 
as .rii.yav4ma, when occurring in the Pada; cf. I, 166, 14; 
167, 9. 

It is clear from the Pratuakhya, Sfltra 819 and 163, 5, 
that the words Uti fndra in IV, 29, i, should not be joined 
together, but that the hiatus should remain. Hence 
utindra, as printed in my edition and repeated in Professor 
Aufrecht’s, should be corrected, and the hiatus be pre¬ 
served, as it is in the fourth verse of the same hymn, uti 
ittha. MSS. S i, S 3 are right; in S 2 the words are 
joined. 

It follows from Sutra 799 that to double the y in 
vaiya.fva is a mistake, but a mistake which had to be 
pointed out and guarded against as early as the time of 
the Prituakhya. In VIII, 26, ii, therefore, vaiyya^’vdsya, 
as printed in my edition and repeated in Professor Auf¬ 
recht’s, should be changed to vaiyaj*vdsya. MSS. S i, S 3 
are right, likewise P j, P 2; but S 2 has the double 
mistake vayya^-vdsya, as described in the Pritij-akhya ; 
another MS. of Wilson’s has vaiyy. The same applies 
to VIII, 23, 24, and VIII, 24, 23. P i admits the mistaken 
spelling vayyajva. 

Some corrections that ought to be made in the Pada- 
pk^/ia. only, as printed in my edition, are pointed out in 
a note to Sutra 738 of the Pratuikhya. Thus, according 
to Sfitra 583, 6, srCiy^A in the Pada text of II, 10, 2, 
should be changed to smy^/i, MSS. P i, P 2 have the 
short u. 

In V, 7, 8, I had printed sCiki/i shma, leaving the a of 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ivii 

shma short in accordance with the Prati^akliya, Sutra 514, 
where a string of words is given before which snia must not 
be lengthened, and where under No. it we find yasmai. 
Professor Aufrecht has altered this, and gives the ^ as 
long, w'hich is wrong. The MSS. Si, So,, S3 have the 
short a. 

Another word before which sma ought not to be length¬ 
ened is miVate. Hence, according to Sutra 14) I 

ought not to have printed in VI, 65, 4, shma mavate, but 
shma mavate. Plere Professor Aufrecht has retained the 
long which is wrong. MSS. Si, S 2, S3 have the 
short a. 

It follows from Sfitra 499 that in I, 338, 4, we should not 
lengthen the vowel of sii. Hence, instead of asyd' u shii 
?za. fipa s^tdye, as printed in my edition and repeated by 
Professor Aufrecht, we should read asyS Cl shii nB. upa 
sdtdye. S i, S 2, S 3 have short u®-. 

In VII, 31, 4, I had by mistake printed viddhf instead of 
viddhi. The same reading is adopted by Professor Auf¬ 
recht (II, p. 24), but the authority of the PrCituakhya, 
Sutra 445, can hardly be overruled. S i, S 2, S 3 have 
viddhi. 

While in cases like these, the PrCiti.rakhya is an authority 
which, as far as I can judge, ought to overrule the authority 
of every MS., however ancient, we must in other cases 
depend either on the testimony of the best MSS. or be 
guided, in fixing on the right reading, by St4ya;/a and the 
rules of grammar. I shall therefore, in cases where I 
cannot consider Professor Aufrecht s readings as autho¬ 
ritative improvements, have to give my reasons why I 
^ adhere to the readings which I had originally adopted. 

In V, 9, 4, 1 had printed by mistake puni y6 instead of 
purC[ yd. I had, however, corrected this misprint in my 
edition of the PrClthakhya, 393, 532. Professor Aufrecht 
decides in favour of purd with a short u, but against the 
authority of the MSS., S i, S 2, S 3, which have purtf. 

In the same verse, I, 138, 4, the shu in 6 shii tvS, should not be lengthened, 
for there is no nile, as far as I can see, in the Pr3,tijrS.khya that would require 
the lengthening of sd before tvil. See Prdti.r3,khya, 491. 

Iviii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

It was certainly a great mistake of mine, though it may 
seem more excusable in a Romanised transcript, that I did 
not follow the writers of the best MSS. in their use of the 
Avagraha, or, I should rather say, of that sign which, as 
far as the Veda is concerned, is very wrongly designated by 
the name of Avagraha. Avagraha, according to the Pr^ti- 
i’akhya, never occurs in the Sa^diitd text, but is the name 
given to that halt, stoppage, or pause which in the Pada 
text separates the component parts of compound words. 
That pause has the length of one short vowel, i.e. one 
mAtvL Of course, nothing is said by the Prati.ri.khya as 
to how the pause should be represented graphically, but it 
is several times alluded to as of importance in the recitation 
and accentuation of the Veda. What we have been in the 
habit of calling Avagraha is by the writers of certain MSS. 
of the Sa^^diiti text used as the sign of the Yivrztti or hiatus. 
This hiatus, however, is veiy different from the Avagraha, 
for while the Avagraha has the length of one mdtri., the 
Viv^'-ztti or hiatus has the length of J matr4, if the two 
vowels are short ; of 4 mitri, if either vowel is long ; of f 
matrd, if both vowels are long. Now I have several times 
called attention to the fact that though this hiatus is marked 
in certain MSS. by the sign I have in my edition omitted 
it, because I thought that the hiatus spoke for itself and 
did not require a sign to attract the attention of European 
readers ; while, on the contrary, I have inserted that sign 
where MSS. hardly ever use it, viz. when a short initial a 
is elided after a final e or o ; (see my remarks on pp. 36, 39, 
of my edition of the Prati.r4khya.) Although I thought, 
and still think, that this use of the sign * is more useful for 
practical purposes, yet I regret that, in this one particular, 
I should have deviated from the authority of the best MSS., 
and caused some misunderstandings on the part of those 
who have made use of my edition. If, for instance, I had 
placed the sign of the Vivrztti, the in its proper place, or 
if, at least, I had not inserted it where, as we say, the initial 
a has been elided after e or o, Professor Bollensen would 
have seen at once that the authors of the Pr4ti.fakhyas 
fully agree with him in looking on this change, not as an 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Jix 

elisioiij but as a contraction. If, as sometimes happens, 
final o or e remain unchanged before initial short a, this 
is called the Pa^^Mla and Pr^/^ya padavr^tti (Sutra 137), 
If, on the contrary, final o or e become one (ekibhavati) 
with the initial short a, this is called the Abhinihita sandhi 
(Sutra 138). While the former, the hiatus of the Pa^^Mla 
and Eastern schools, is marked by the writers of several 
MSS. by the sign * the Abhinihita sandhi, being a sandhi, 
is not marked by any sign ®'. 

I, 3, 12,. r%ati (Aufr. p. 2>) instead of ri^ati (M. M. vol. i, 
p. 75) is wrong. 

I5 7} 9- ya eka/if (Aufr. p. 5) should be yd dka/^ (M. M. 
vol. i, p. no), because the relative pronoun is never without 
an accent. The relative particle yathd may be without an 
accent, if it stands at the end of a pdda ; . and though there 
are exceptions to this rule, yet in VIII, a i, 5, where Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht gives ydthd, the MSS. are unanimous in 
favour of yathd (M. M. vol. iv, p. 480). See Phi2f-s£itra, ed. 
Kielhorn, p. 54. 

1, 10, II. d lu (Aufr. p. 7) should be d tu (M. M. vol. i, 
p. 139)5 because d is never without the accent, 

I, 10, 12,, ^fishifd/2, which Professor Aufrecht specially 
mentions as having no final Visarga in the Pada, has 
the Visarga in all the MSS., (Aufr. p. 7, M. M. vol. i, 
p. 140.) 

I, II, 4. kdvir (Aufr. p. 7) should be kavir (M. M. vol. i^ 
P- 143)- 

I, 2,2,i 8, read rddhdmsi. 

1, 40, 1 and 6. There is no excuse for the accent either on 
tveimahe or on v6i*ema, while sdMA in I, 51, ii, ought to 
have the accent on the first syllable, 

I, 49, 3. Rosen was right in not eliding the a in div6 
antebhya/^. S i, S 5^, S 3 preserve the initial a, nor does 
the Prdtudkhya anywhere provide for its suppression. 

I, 54, 8. kshdtram (Aufr. p. 46) is a mere misprint for 
kshatrdm. 

* As to the system or want of system, according to which the Abhinihita 
sandhi takes place in the Sa^/^hitl, see p. xlviii seq. 

lx 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Ij 55j 7* vandanaiTiid (Aufr. p. 47) instead of vandanamid 
(M. M. vol. i, p. 514) is wrong. 

57 » samayita instead of samai’ita had been corrected 
in my reprint of the first Ma^^^ala, published at Leipzig. 
See Bollensen, Zeitschrift der D. M. G., vol. xxii, p. 636. 

Ij 61, 7, read vishnuA ; I, 64, 2, read .rd^aya/^; I, 64, 5, 
read dhutaya^, 

I, 61, 16. Rosen had rightly printed hiriyo^and with 
a long 4 both in the Sa7;^hita and Pada texts, and I ought 
not to have given the short a instead. All the MSS., S i, 
S 2, S 3, P I, and P 2, give the long 1 Professor Auf- 
recht gives the short a in the Pada, which is wrong. 

I, 67, 2 (4). vidantim (M. M. vol. i, p. 595) is perfectly 
right, as far as the authority of the MSS. and of S^ya^^a is 
concerned, and should not have been altered to vindantim 
(Aufr. p. 57). 

I, 73, 3, read vatsdm ; I, 73, 6, readparifn ; I, 76, 3, read 
dhdkshy; I, 83, i, read yad^. 

I) 83, 3. Rosen was right in giving isamyatta/i. I gave 
■dsamyata/i on the authority of P i, but all the other MSS. 
have tt. 

I, 84, I. indra (Aufr. p. 68) cannot have the accent on the 
first syllable, because it does not stand at the beginning of 
a p4da (M. M. vol. i, p. 677). The same applies to Indra, VI, 
4ij 4> (Aufr. p. 439) instead of indra (M. M. vol. iii, p. 734) ; 
to dgne, I, 140, 13, (Aufr. p. 130) instead of agne (M. M. 
vol. ii, p. 133). In III, 36, 3, on the contraiy, indra, being 
at the head of a p4da, ought to have the accent on the first 
syllable, indra (M. M. vol. ii, p. 855), not indra (Aufr. p. 349). 
The same mistake occurs again. III, 36, 10 (Aufr. p. 350); 
IV, 33, 7. (Aufr. p. 305) ; IV, 33, 13, (Aufr. p. 305) ; VIII, 3, 
13, (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 86). In V, 61, i, nara/i should have no 
accent ; whereas in VII, 91, 3, it should have the accent on 
the first syllable. In VIII, 8, 19, vlpanyu should have no 
accent, and Professor Aufrecht gives it correctly in the 
notes, where he has likewise very properly i-emoved the 
Avagraha which I had inserted. 

I, 88, I, read yilta (M. M. vol. i, p. 708), not yiitha (Aufr. 
p. 73). 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixi 

I, 90, I, read ri^unit^; I, 94, ii> read yavas^do (M. M. 
vol. i, p. 766), not yayasldo (Aufr. p. 80). 

I, 118, 9. abhibhutim (Aufr. p. 105) instead of abhfbhutim 
(M. M. vol. i, p. 957) cannot be right, considering that in all 
other passages abhibhClti has the accent on the second 
syllable. S i, S 2, S 3 have the accent on the i. 

I, 128, 4. gh^'ftarrir (Aufr. p. 117) instead of ghi>'ftamr 
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 52) is wrong. 

I, 144, 2, read pdrivrftd/z (M. M. vol. ii, p. i55) instead 
of p&nvrztk/i (Aufr. p. 1 33). 

I, 145, 5. Professor Aufrecht (p. 134) gives upamasy^m, 
both in the Sawhita and Pada texts, as having the accent on 
the last syllable. I had placed the accent on the penulti¬ 
mate, (Pada, upa-mdsyS,m, vol. ii, p. 161,) and whatever 
may be the reading of other MSS., this is the only possible 
accentuation. S i, S 2, S 3 have the right accent. 

I, 148, 4. piii'ClMi (Aufr. p. 136) instead of purfiwi (M, M. 
vol. ii, p. 170) does not reist, as far as I know, on the autho¬ 
rity of any MSS. S i, S a, S 3 have pur&ri. 

I> i5i> 7- gayfey^/zatho (Aufr. p. 137) should be giH’/iatho 
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 181). 

I, 161, 12. All the Pada MSS. read pra abravit, sepa¬ 
rating the two words and accentuating each. Though the 
accent is in-egular, yet, considering the peculiar construc¬ 
tion of the verse, in which pi'd and pr6 are used as adverbs 
rather than as prepositions, I should not venture with 
Professor Aufrecht (p. 144) to write prd abravit. The 
MSS. likewise have d fi^agan, I, 161,4; and prd dgdA, 
VIII, 48, a, not prd agd/i, as Aufrecht gives in his second 
edition. 

I, 163, I r. dhrd^iman (Aufr. p. 147) instead of dhr^fi- 
mdn (M. M. vol. ii, p. 345) is wrong. 

I, 163, 13. gamyd (Aufr. p. 148) instead of gamyd (M. M. 
vol. ii, p. 346) is wrong. 

I, 164, 17, read pdre«a (M. M. vol. ii, p. 359) instead of 
pare«a (Aufr. p. 149). 

I, 164, 38. The first kikyAh ought to have the accent, and 
has it in all the MSS., (Aufr. p. 151, M. M. vol. ii, p. 378.) 

I, 165, 5. A mere change of accent may seem a small 

Ixii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

matter, yet it is frequently of the highest importance in the 
interpretation of the Veda. Thus in I, 165, 5, I had, in 
accordance with the MSS. S i, S a, S 3, printed dtdn 
(vol. ii, p. 293) with the accent on the first syllable. Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht alters this into et^n (p. 153), which, no 
doubt, would be the right form, if it were intended for the 
accusative plural of the pronoun, but not if it is meant, as it 
is here, for the accusative plural of dta, the speckled deer of 
the Maruts. 

Is 165, 15. ydsish/a (Aufr. p. 154) instead of ydslsh^a 
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 298) is not supported by any MS. 

I, 169, 7, instead of patayanta (Aufr. p. 158), read patd- 
yanta (M. M. vol. ii, p. 322). 

Is ^74) 7- kiiyiv^/^am (Aufr. p. i6a) should be kiiyav^^am 
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 340). 

Is i77s I* yukt4, which I had adopted from MS. S 3 
(prima manu), is not supported by other MSS., though P 2 
reads yuttkii. Professor Aufrecht, who had retained yukt^ 
in the text, has afterwai'ds corrected it to yuktv4', and in 
this he was right. In I, 177, 3, gdhi for y^hi is wrong. 

Is 188, 4. astriwan (Aufr. p. 171) instead of astrfwan 
(M. M. voL ii, p. 395) can only be a misprint. 

II, 29, 6. kdrtfld (Aufr. p. 203) instead of kartdd (M. M. 
vol. ii, p. 550) is wrong. 

IIs 40s 4- ^akra (Aufr. p. 214) instead of kakri. (M. M. 
vol. ii, p. 614) is wrong. 

III3 7) 7- (Aufr. p. 226) instead of gii^ (M. M. vol. ii, 
p. 666) is wrong ; likewise III, 30, 10, (Aufr. p. 241) 
instead of gKA (M. M. vol. ii, p. 792). 

Ills i7s i^ate (Aufr. p. 232) instead of a^yate (M. M. 
vol. ii, p. 732) is impossible. 

Ills 47s Pi'ofessor Aufrecht (p. 256) puts the nomina¬ 
tive indro instead of the vocative indra, which I had given 
(vol. ii, p. 902). I doubt whether any MSS, support that 
change (S i, S 3, S 3 have indra), but it is clear that 
Sdya«a takes indra as a vocative, and likewise the Nirukta. 

Ills 50, a. Professor Aufrecht (p. 358) gives asya, both in 
the Sa7;zhitd and Pada, without the accent on the last syl¬ 
lable. But all the MSS. that I know (S i, S 3, S 3, P i. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixiii 

P 2,) give it with the accent on the last syllable (M. M. 
vol. ii, p. and this no doubt is right. The same mis¬ 
take occurs again in III, 51, 10, (Aufr. p. 1^59); IV, 5, ii, 
(Aufr. p. IV, 36, a, (Aufr. p. 309); V, 12, 3, (Aufr. 

p. 337) ; while in VIII, 103, 9, (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 195) the 
MSS. consistently give asya as unaccented, whereas Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht, in this very passage, places the accent on 
the last syllable. On the same page (p. 259) amandan, in 
the Pada, is a misprint for drnandan. 

III, 53, 18. asi (Aufr. p. 262) instead of dsi(M. M. vol.ii, 
p. 934) is wrong, because hi requires that the accent should 
remain on asi. S i, S 2, S 3, P i, P 2 have dsi. 

IV, 4, 7. svi dyushe (Aufr. p, 279) instead of svd dyushi 
(M. M. vol. iii, p. 37) is not supported by any good MSS., 
nor required by the sense of the passage. S i, S 2, S 3, 
P I, P 2 have iyushi. 

IV, 3) 7- drupitam, in the Pada, (Aufr. p. 280) instead of 
^rupitam (M, M. vol. iii, p. 45) is right, as had been shown 
in the Pritii'^khya, Siltra 179, though by a misprint the long 
4 of the Sa;^zhita had been put in the place of the short a of 
the Pada. 

IV, 5, 9. read gaiiA (M. M. vol. iii, p. 46) instead of gdk 
(Aufr. p. 281). 

IV, 15, 2. yati, with the accent on the first syllable, is 
supported by all MSS. against y^ti (Aufr. p. 287). The 
same applies to yd'ti in IV, 29, 2, and to vdrante in IV, 
3h 9- 

IV, 18, II. amt, without any accent (Aufr. p. 293), instead 
of ami (M. M. vol. iii, p, 105) is wrong, because amfis never 
unaccented. 

IV, 2T, 9. no, without an accent (Aufr. p. 296), instead of 
116 (M. M. vol. iii, p. 120) is wrong. 

IV, 26, 3. dtithigvam (Aufr. p. 300) instead of atlthigvdm 
(M. M. vol. iii, p, 140) and VI, 47j dtithigvasya (Aufr. 
p. 437) instead of atithigvdsya (M. M. vol. iii, p. 776) are 
wrong, for atithigvd never occurs again except with the 
accent on the last syllable. The MSS. do not vary. Nor 
do they vary in the accentuation of kiitsa : hence kutsdm 
(Aufr. p. 300) should be kdtsam (M. M. vol. iii, p. 139), 

Ixiv 

VEDIC HYMKS. 

IV, 36, 6. Professor Aufrecht (p. 309) has altered the 
accent of ^ivishu^ into avishu/z, but the MSS. are unanimous 
in favour of avishu/2 (M. M. vol. iii, p. 181). 

Again in IV, 41, 9, the MSS. support the accentuation 
of agman (M. M. vol. iii, p. 200), while Professor Aufrecht 
(p. 313) has altered it to agman. 

IV, 42, 9. ad^.fat, being preceded by hi, ought to have 
the accent; (Aufrecht, p. 314, has adai“at without the 
accent.) For the same reason, V, 29, 3, avindat (M. M. 
vol. iii, p. 342) ought not to have been altered to avindat 
(Aufr. p. 344)- 

IV, 50, 4. vyoman is a misprint for vyoman. 

V, 15, 5. Professor Aufrecht (p. 338) writes dirgham 
instead of dogham (M. M. vol. iii, p. 314). This, no doubt, 
was done intentionally, and not by accident, as we see from 
the change of accent. But dogham, though it occurs but 
once, is supported in this place by all the best MSS., and 
has been accepted by Professor Roth in his Dictionary. 

V, 34, 4. prd,yato (Aufr. p. 351) instead of prdyata (M. M. 
vol. iii, p. 371) is wrong. 

V, 42, 9. visarma;^2am (Aufr. p. 358) instead of visar- 
miV^am (M. M. vol. iii, p. 402) is wrong. 

V, 44, 4. parva72(^ (Aufr. p. 360) instead of prava;/e 
(M. M. vol. iii, p. 415) is wrong. 

V, 83, 4. vdnti (Aufr. p. 389) instead of v^nti (M. M. 
vol. iii; p. 554) is supported by no MSS. 

V, 85, 6. isink3.n.Wt (Aufr. p. 391) instead of ash^Hnti/j 
(M. M. vol. iii, p. 560) is not supported either by MSS. or 
by grammar, as sink belongs to the Tud-class. On the 
same grounds ishayanta/^, VI, 16, 27 (M. M. vol. iii, p. 638), 
ought not to have been changed to ishayantaA (Aufr. 
p. 408), nor VI, 24, % avakar.rayanti (M. M. vol. iii, p. 687) 
into avakari“ayanti (Aufr. p. 418). 

VI, 46, 10, read girva^^as (M. M. vol. iii, p. 763) instead of 
gfrva^ms (Aufr. p. 435). 

VI, 60, 10. krinoti (Aufr. p. 450) instead ofkrmdti (M. M. 
vol. iii, p. 839) is wrong. 

VII, 4O; 4. aryam^ 4pa/2 (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 35), in the Pada, 
instead of aryama dpa/2 (M. M.vol. iv. p. 81) is wrong. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixv 

VII, 5I5 I. ddity^ndm (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 40) instead of 
adityfoim (M. M. vol. iv, p. 103) is wrong. 

VII, 64, i/dm (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 50) instead of i7dm (M. M. 
vol. iv, p. 146) is wrong. In the same verse gopd/^ in the 
Pada should be changed in my edition to gopd. 

VII, 66, 5. y6 (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 51) instead of y6 (M. M. 
vol. iv, p. 15 1) is indeed supported by S 3, but evidently 
untenable on account of atipfprati. 

VII, 7^^, 3. In abudhran Professor Aufrecht has pro¬ 
perly altered the wrong spelling abudhnan ; and, as far 
as the authority of the best MSS. is concerned (S i, S a, 
S 3), he is also right in putting a final h, although Pro¬ 
fessor Bollensen prefers the dental n ; (Zeitschrift der 
D. M. G., vol. xxii, p. 599.) The fact is that Vedic MSS. 
use the Anusvara dot for final nasals before all class-lettcrs, 
and leave it to us to interpret that dot according to the 
letter which follows. Before I felt quite certain on this 
point, I have in several cases retained the dot, as given by 
the MSS., instead of changing it, as I ought to have done 
according to my system of writing Devandgart, into the 
corresponding nasal, provided it represents an original n. 
In I, 71, 1, S ii, S 3 have the dot in a^ushran, but S i has 
dental n. In IX, 87, 5, asr/gran has the dot ; i. e. S i has 
the dot, and xikh, dental n joined to M; S has nkh 
without the dot before the n ; S 3 has the dot, and then 
kk. In IV, 6, the spelling of the Sa^;iihitd dvivcna;;^ tdm 
would leave it doubtful whether we ought to read dvivcnan 
tdm or dvivenam tdm ; S x and S 3 read dvivena;;^ tdj^^^, 
but S % has dvivenan tdm ; P % has dvi-venan tdm, and 
P I had the same originally, though a later hand changed 
it to dvi-vena;;^ tim. In IV, ^5, 3, on the contrary, S x 
and S 3 write dvivena?;^ ; S dvivenam ; P x and P 
dvi-venam* What is intended is clear enough, viz, dvi¬ 
venan in IV, 24, 6 ; dvi-venam in IV, 5^5, 3. [In the new 
edition dvivenam has been left in both passages.] 

VII, 73, I. asvind (Aufr. vol ii, p. 56) instead of a.s'vfnd 
(M. M. vol. iv, p. 176) is wrong. On the same page, dhfslu/yc, 
VII, 1% 3, should have the accent on the first syllable. 

VII, 77, I,, In this verse, which has been so often dis- 
[32] e 

Ixvi 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

cussed (see Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 47ri ; Bdhtlingk and 
Roth, Dictionary, vol. ii, p. 968 ; Bollensen, Orient und 
Occident, vol. ii, p. 463), all the MSS. which I know, read 
/&ar^yai, and not either ^arathai nor^rllyai. 

VIII, 2,^. kiri;^am (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 84) instead of 
karkam (M. M. vol. iv, p. 308) does not rest on the authority 
of any MSS., nor is it supported by Siyana. 

VIII, 9, 9. Professor Aufrecht has altered the very 
important form S/^u/^yuvimdhi (M. M. vol. iv, p. 389) to 
i/feu/^yavimdhi (vol. ii, p. 98). The question is whether this 
was done intentionally and on the authority of any MSS. 
My own MSS. support the form kkukyuYXmihi, and I see 
that Professor Roth accepts this form. 

VIII, 3a, 14. dydntiram (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 129) instead of 
ayant^ram (M. M. vol. iv, p. 567) is wrong. 

VIII, 47, 15. dushvapnyam (Aufr. vol.ii, p. 151) is not so 
correct as du/2shvapnyam (M. M. vol. iv, p. 660), or, better, 
dushshvapnyam (Prati.f4khya, Sutras 2^5 3^4): though 

it is perfectly true that the MSS. write dushvdpnyam. 

[I ought to state that all these errata have been corrected 
by Professor Aufrecht in his second edition.] 

In the ninth and tenth Ma^^^alas I have not to defend 
myself, and I need not therefore give a list of the passages 
where I think that Professor Aufrecht’s text is not sup¬ 
ported by the best MSS. My own edition of these Ma;^^a- 
las will soon be published, and I need hardly say that 
where it differs from Professor Aufrecht’s text, I am pre¬ 
pared to show that I had the best authorities on my side. 

Professor Aufrecht writes in the second edition of his 
Romanised text of the Rig-veda (p. iv) : ‘Um den Herren, 
My own die diese Druckfehler in majoi'em gloriam 
mistakes. suam mit so grosser Schonung hervor- 
gehoben haben, einen Gegendienst zu erweisen, bemerke 
ich einige derselben.’ Dieser Gegendienst, so gut er 
gemeint war, ist leider nicht sehr bedeutend ausgefallen, 
auch nicht immer in majorem gloriam Catonis. 

In I, 16 1, 2,, Profe.ssor Aufrecht objects to Z’aturas 
krfwotana. I felt doubtful about it, and in the commentary 
I printed kw^otana. In IV, 33, 5j ^he reading 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixvii 

kaXus kara is sanctioned by the authority of the Pratui- 
khya, Sutra a8i, 4. 

In I, 1 81, 5, Aufrecht prefers mathr4 ; S^yaj^a, Boht- 
lingk and Roth, and I prefer mathnd. 

In 11, II, 10, he has discovered that ^firvit was meant 
for^rv^t Whitney still quotes ^rvit. 

In III, 9, 4, he has discovered that apsu should be ^psu ; 
but this had been already coi'rected. 

In III, 2,^, 2^ the final a of vaha ought to be long in the 
Sa^hit^. 

In IV, 19, 4, instead of drzlAk ni read drzl/ztnL 

In VII, 33, cj, instead of avrmltk read ^vrmtt§i. 

In VII, 35, 13, the Visarga in devagop§./^ should be 
deleted. 

In VII^ 42, 2, the Anusvara in yu;;zkshv& should be 
deleted. 

In VIII, 2i 30, the anudcLttatara should be shifted from 
the ultimate to the penultimate, dadhir^, not dadhire. 

In VIII, 51, 3, avishyanta was meant for arishyantam. 

In VIII, 55, 5, for na read L The MSS. vary in both cases. 

In IX, 108, 7, in vanakraksha, the kra was printed as ri* 
Professor Aufrecht might have seen it correctly printed in 
the index. S^ya^^a read vanar^ksha. 

In X, 28, II, Professor Aufrecht thinks that the Pada 
should have godhcL^ instead of godhi. I think godh^ is 
right, in spite of Professor Aufrecht’s appeal to the silence of 
the Prdtij-dkhya. The fact is that godhd/2 never occurs, while 
godh^ occurs in the preceding verse, and again VIII, 69, 9. 

After such a flourish of trumpets, we expected more 
from Professor Aufrecht ; still we must learn to be grateful 
even for small mercies. 

Having said so much in vindication of the text of the 
Rig-veda as published by me, and in defence of my prin¬ 
ciples of criticism which seem to me so self-evident as 
hardly to deserve the name of canones critici, I feel 
bound at the same time both to acknowledge some in¬ 
accuracies that have occurred in the index at the end of 
each volume, and to defend some entries in that index 
which have been challenged without sufficient cause. 

Ixviii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

It has been supposed that in the index at the end of my 
fourth volume, the seventeenth verse of the 34th hymn in 
Sdyawa’s the Seventh Maj^^fala has been wrongly 
the^Sarvt-°°^ assigned to Ahi Budhnya, and that one half 
nukramawt. only of that verse should have been reserved 
for that deity. I do not deny that we should be justified in 
deriving that sense from the words of the Anukrama^^ika, 
but I cannot admit that my own interpretation is untenable. 
As Siya^za does not speak authoritatively on the subject, I 
followed the authority of Sha^s^gurujishya. This commen¬ 
tator of the Anukramai^ikd says; atra ka. ab^m ukthair 
ahim gm^isha ity ardhari^o^b^n^mno^ devasya stuti^ ; m4 
no*hir budhnya ity ardhar/^o^hirbudhnyanimno devasya ^ 
Another commentator says : ab^m ukthair ardhar/^o*hi>^ ; 
uttaro mi no^hir ity ahir budhnya/?:. From this we learn 
that both commentators looked upon the Dvipadas as 
ardhar/^as or half- verses, and ascribed the whole of verse 16 
to Ahir ab^a/^, the whole of verse 17 to Ahir budhnyaA 
It will be seen from an accurate examination of Siya/^a’s 
commentary on verse 17, that in the second interpretation 
of the second half of verse 1 7, he labours to show that in this 
portion, too, Ahir budhnya/2 may be considered as the deity. 

It is perfectly right to say that the words of the Anu- 
krama;2iki, ab^m ahe/^, signify that the verse beginning 
with ab^im, belongs to Ahi. But there was no misprint in 
my index. It will be seen that Sha<a!guruj*ishya goes even 
beyond me, and calls, that deity simply Ab^, leaving out 
Ahi altogether, as understood. I was anxious to show the 
distinction between Ab^i AhUi and Ahir Budhnya/?, as the 
deities of the two successive verses, and I did not expect 
that any reader could possibly misinterpret my entry 
With regard to hymns 91 and of the seventh Ma- 
ndalB., it is true, that in the index I did not mention that 
certain verses in which two deities are mentioned (91, a ; 

“ I find that Mr. Macdonell in his edition of the SarvILniikrama/^t reads 
ardhary^oshinamno. If this is right, part of my argument would fall. 

^ MS. Wilson 379 has, ardhar/i’o nSmano daivatasya, and in the margin ahi. 
Ahirbndhnya seems to have been taken as one word. 

® The editor of the Bombay edition of the text of the Rig-veda assigns 
verse 16 to Ahi, verse 17 to Ahirbndhnya. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixix 

4-7 j 9a, a), must be considered as addressed not to Viyu 
alone, but to V4yu and Indra. It will be seen from 
Sayawa’s introduction to hymn 90, that he, too, wrongly 
limits the sentence of the Anukramawikcl, aindryaj Aa y4 
dvivadukta/2, to the fifth and following verses of hymn 90, 
and that he never alludes to this proviso again in his intro¬ 
ductory remarks to hymn 91 and 9a, though, of course, he 
explains the verses, in which a dual occurs, as addressed to 
two deities, viz. Indra and Vayu. The same omission, 
whether intentional or unintentional, occurs in Sha^- 
gurujishya’s commentary. The other commentary, how¬ 
ever, assigns the verses of the three hymns rightly. The 
subject has evidently been one that excited attention in very 
early days, for in the Aitareya-br^hmawa, V, ao, we actually 
find that the word v&m which occurs in hymn 90, i, and 
which might be taken as a dual, though Siyma explains it 
as a singular, is changed into te *. 

In hymn VII, 104, rakshohawau might certainly be added 
as an epithet of Indrd-Somau, and Shaaigunmshya clearly 
takes it in that sense. The Anukramawiki says ; indrclsomtl 
paMHdhikaindrasomaw2 rikshoghna?^ jipabhw3.paprdyam. 

In hymn VIII, 67, it has been supposed that the readings 
Samada and Stmada instead of Sammada and Simmada 
were due to a misprint. This is not the case. That I was 
aware of the other spelling of this name, viz. Sammada and 
Sammada, I had shown in my History of Ancient Sanskrit 
Literature (and ed.), p. 39, where I had ti-anslated the 
passage of the ^^inkhayana-sfitras in which Matsya S4m- 
mada occurs, and had also called attention to the Aivalft- 
yana-sHtras X, 7, and the .Satapatha-br&hma«a XIII, 3, l, i, 

The interpunction of Dr. Haug’s edition (p. 128) should be after te. 
Sha/fgurujishya says: ata eva brdhmawasdtrayo// praiige vdyavyatviya pra 
virayS. j’lU'ayo daclrire^ vS.m iti dyivaz&anasthdne ta ity ekava>^anapdMa>^ knta/i, 
vim ity uktam >^ed aindratvaw /sa syid iti. Possibly the same change should 
be made in Ajvaliyana’s *S'rauta Sdtras, VIII, li, and it has been made by 
Rima Niriyawa Vidyiratna. The remark of the commentator, however, 
dadrire ta iti prayogapiif/ia^, looks as if vim might have been retained in the 
text. The MSS. I have collated are in favour of te. 

^ Mr. Macdonell (Sarvinukramawt, p. 133) inserts ta iti after dadrire. 

Ixx 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

where the same passage is found. I there spelt the name 
Sdmmada, because the majority of the MSS. were in favour 
of that spelling. In the edition of the Aj-valiyana-siitras, 
which has since been published by R4ma Ndr^ya^^a Vidyi- 
ra^ya, the name is spelt Simada. My own opinion is that 
Sammada is the right spelling, but that does not prove that 
S^ya;^a thought so ; and unless I deviated from the prin¬ 
ciples which I had adopted for a critical restoration of 
Saya^za’s text, I could not but write Simada in our passage. 
B I and B 4 omit simada, but both give samadikhyasya ; 
Ca. gives likewise samadakhyasya, and A. semadikhyasya. 
This, I believe, was meant by the writer for sammadi- 
khyasya, for in the passage from the Anukrama^zt both A. 
and Ca. give sammado. I then consulted the commentary 
of Sha^/gunmshya, and there again the same MS. gave 
twice sammada, once samada, which is explained by 
samaddkhyamahdminard^aputra^. A better MS. of Sharf- 
guru.yishya, MS. Wilson 379, gives the readings simmado, 
ScLmmada, and sammadakhyasya. The other commentary 
gives distinctly samanda. [I have adopted sammada in 
the new edition.] 

In IX, 68, Professor Aufrecht adopts what he considers 
the bold reading Vatsapri ; I prefer to be timid and allow 
Siyawa his own reading Vatsapri; see Sarvdnukrama^i, 
ed. Macdonell, pp. 34, 146. 

It will be seen from these remarks that many things 
have to be considered before one can form an independent 
judgment as to the exact view adopted by S^yazza in 
places where he differs from other authorities, or as to the 
exact words in which he clothed his meaning. Such cases 
occur again and again. Thus in IX, 86, I find that Pro¬ 
fessor Aufrecht ascribes the first ten verses to the Aknsh/as, 
whereas Sdyazza calls them Ak^zsh2?as. It is perfectly ti'ue 
that the best MSS. of the Anukrama/zikcl have Akz^zsh/a, it 
is equally true that the name of these Aknsh^fas is spelt 
with a short a in the Hariva^sa, 11,533, but an editor of 
Siya^a’s work is not to alter the occasional mistakes of that 
learned commentator, and Sdyazza certainly called these 
poets Akz^zsh/as. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxi 

Verses 1^1-30 of the same hymn are ascribed by Professor 
Aufrecht to the Trismya.k Here, again, several MSS. 
support that reading ; and in Sha^gurujishya’s commen¬ 
tary, the correction of pwniya>^: into /nmaya/^ is made 
by a later hand. But S^ya^^a clearly took iprzsndiyz.k for a 
nominative plural of prism, and in this case he certainly 
was right The Dictionary of Bohtlingk and Roth quotes 
the Mah^bhirata, VII, in support of the peculiar 

reading of przmiya/^, but the published text gives pwnaya/z. 
Professor Benfey, in his list of poets (Ind. Stud. vol. iii, p. 
1223), gives pwniyo^a as one word, not pmniyog^-, as stated 
in the Dictionary of Bohtlingk and Roth, but this is 
evidently meant for two woi'ds, viz. pmnayo*^^/^. How¬ 
ever, whether prisniysik or prwnaya/^ be the real name of 
these poets, an editor of ScLya;^a is bound to give that 
reading of the name which Sdya/^a believed to be the right 
one, i. e. prismysik ^ 

Again, in the same hymn, Professor Aufrecht ascidbes 
verses 31-40 to the Atris. We should then have to read 
tntiye * traya/^. But Siya^^a read trztiy e traya/2, and ascribes 
verses 31-40 to the three companies together of the iSzshis 
mentioned before. On this point the MSS. admit of no 
doubt, for we read : ^aturthasya ^a daj*ar/6asya dkr/sh/<i 
mashd ityadidvindmdnas trayo ga;?d drash/draA I do not 
say that the other explanation is wrong; I only say that, 
whether right or wrong, Sdya;^^a certainly read traya/^, not 
atraya/i! ; and an editor of Sdya/^a has no more right to 
correct the text, supported by the best MSS., in the first 
and second, than in the third of these passages, all taken 
from one and the same hymn. 

But though I insist so strongly on a strict observance 
of the rules of diplomatic criticism with regard to the text 

Old mistakes of the Rig-veda, nay, even of Sdya;^a, I 

in the text, insist equally strongly on the right of in¬ 
dependent criticism, which ought to begin where diplo- 

Professor Aufrecht in his new edition of the text (1877) adopts the moie 
timid reading pmnaya/^. See also Brfhat-Sawhit^, transl. by Kern, p. 2 ; 
SikatS^ pwnayogargS,vaiakhilya marUip^^ bhr^gavo^hgirasaj ^aiva stikshmlf 
i^lnye maharshaya^. 

Ixxil 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

matic criticism ends. Considering the startling antiquity 
which we can claim for every letter and accent of our MSS., 
so far as they are authenticated by the Prati^dkhya, to say 
nothing of the passages of many hymns which are quoted 
verbatim in the BrAhma^^as, the Kalpa-sQtras, the Nirukta, 
the Brfhaddevat^, and the Anukrama^is, I should deem it 
reckless to alter one single letter or one single accent in an 
edition of the hymns of the Rig-veda. As the text has been 
handed down to us^ so it should remain; and whatever 
alterations and corrections we, the critical Mltkkhd^s of the 
nineteenth century, have to propose, should be kept distinct 
from that time-hallowed inheritance. Unlikely as it may 
sound, it is true nevertheless that we, the scholars of the 
nineteenth century, are able to point out mistakes in the 
text of the Rig-veda which escaped the attention of the most 
learned among the native scholars of the sixth century B.C. 
No doubt, these scholars, even if they had perceived such 
mistakes, would hardly have ventured to correct the text of 
their sacred writings. The authors of the Prdtij-akhya had 
before their eyes or ears a text ready made, of which they 
registered every peculiarity, nay, in which they would note 
and preserve every single irregularity, even though it stood 
alone amidst hundreds of analogous cases. With us the case 
is different. Where we see a rule observed in 99 cases, we 
feel strongly tempted and sometimes justified in altering 
the looth case in accordance with what we consider to be a 
general rule. Yet even then I feel convinced we ought not 
to do more than place our conjectural readings below the 
textus receptus of the Veda,— a text so ancient and 
venerable that no scholar of any historical tact or critical 
taste would venture to foist into it a conjectural reading, 
however plausible, nay, however undeniable. 

Sthatii// ktiri- There can be no clearer case of corruption 
tham. in the traditional text of the Rig-veda than, 
for instance, in I, 70, 4, where the Pada text reads : 

vdrdh^n ydm pfirvi7^ kshapd/2 vi-rupd/2 sth4td/% kz. ratham 
^'ztd-pravitam. 

All scholars who have touched on this verse. Professors 
Benfey, Bollensen, Roth, and othei's, have pointed out that 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION* 

Ixxiii 

instead of ratham, the original poet must have said 
y&ardtham. The phrase sthdtii/2 ^aratham, what stands and 
moveSj occurs several times. It is evidently an ancient 
phrase, and hence we can account for the preservation in it 
of the old termination of the nom. sing, of neuters in ri^ 
which here, as in the Greek ixdp-rvp or fidp-rv^, masc., appeal's 
as ur or us, while in the ordinary Sanskrit we find ri only. 
This nom. sing. neut. in us, explains also the common geni¬ 
tives and ablatives, pitu/^, mitu/^, &c., which stand for pitur-s, 
matur-s. This phrase sthdtu/^ yfearatham occurs : 

Ij 583 5* sthitu/^ /^aratham bhayate patatnV2a/^. 

What stands and what moves' is afraid of Agni. 

I, 68, I. sth^Ltu^ /^aratham aktun vf fin^ot. 

He lighted up what stands and what moves during every 
night. 

I, 6. pa.run kz. sthdt:r^n /i'ardtham kz. pAhi, 

Protect the cattle, and what stands and moves I 

Here it has been proposed to read sthdtii/^ instead of 
sthatr&, and I confess that this emendation is very plaus¬ 
ible, One does not see how pa^ii, cattle, could be called 
immobilia or fixtures, unless the poet wished to make a 
distinction between cattle that are kept fastened in stables, 
and cattle that are allowed to roam about freely in the 
homestead. This distinction is alluded to, for instance, in 
the ^atapatha-brihma^^a, XI, 8, 3, saurya evaisha 
syid iti, tasmid etasminn astamite pa.favo badhyantc; 
badhnanty ek^n yathdgosh^'/ani, eka upasamfiyanti. 

I, 70, 2. gdrbha/2 kzL sth3.t£m gdrbha// /^wdthfim, (read 
sthdtr^im, and see Bollensen, Orient und Occident, vol ii, 
p. 462^.) 

He who is within all that stands and all that moves. 

The word /tardtha, if it occurs by itself, means flock, 
movable property: 

III, 31, 15. dt ft sdkhi-bhya/^ ^ardtham sdm airat* 

He brought together, for his friends, the flocks. 

VIII, 33, 8. puru-trd ytardtham dadhe. 

He bestowed flocks on many people, 

X, 92, 13. prd na^ pfishd >6ardtham — avatu. 

May Piishan protect our flock I 

Ixxiv 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Another idiomatic phrase in which sthatu^ occurs is 
sthsLtu^ ^agata-^, and here sth4tii^ is really a genitive : 

53s ^gata^ sthitiiA ubhayasya yik vail'. 

He who is lord of both, of what is movable and what is 
immovable. 

VI, 50, 7. vijvasya sthitii^ ^dgata/^ ^anitrt^. 

They who created all that stands and moves. 

VII, 60, %, vf^vasya sthitii.^ ^dgata^ y^a gopd'^. 

The guardians of all that stands and moves. Cf. X, 63, 8. 

I5 i59j 3* sthitii^ kz. satyam ^gata^ kz. dhdrmam pu- 
trdsya pitha^ paddm ddvayivina^. 

Truly while you uphold all that stands and moves, you 
protect the home of the guileless son. Cf. II, 31, 5. 

But although I have no doubt that in 1, 70, 4, the original 
poet said sth^tii^ i^aratham, I should be loath to suppress 
the evidence of the mistake and alter the Pada text from 
kz. ratham to i^aratham. The very mistake is instructive, 
as showing us the kind of misapprehension to which the 
collectors of the Vedic text were liable, and enabling us to 
judge how far the limits of conjectural criticism may safely 
be extended. 

A still more extraordinary case of misunderstanding 
on the part of the original compilers of the Vedic texts, 

, and likewise of the authors of the Pr^twi- 
Uloka, 

khyas, theNiruktas, and other Vedic treatises, 
has been pointed out by Professor Kuhn. In an article of 
his, ^ Zur altesten Geschichte der Indogermanischen Volker ’ 
(Indische Studien, voL i, p. 351), he made the following 
observation: ‘The Lithuanian laukas, Lett, lauks, Pruss. 
laukas,all meaning field, agree exactly with the Sk. lokas, 
world, Lat locus, Low Germ, (in East-Frisia and Olden¬ 
burg) louch, 16 ch, village. All these words are to be 
traced back to the Sk. uru, Gr. evpv?, broad, wide. The 
initial u is lost, as in Goth, rums, 0. H. G. rfimi, rfimin 
(Low Germ, rfime, an open uncultivated field in a forest), 
and the r changed into 1. In support of this derivation it 
should be observed that in the Veda loka is frequently 
preceded by the particle u, which probably was only sepa¬ 
rated from it by the Diaskeuastse, and that the meaning is 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxv 

that of open space.’ Although this derivation has met with 
little favour, I confess that I look upon this remark, except¬ 
ing only the Latin locus% i. e. stlocus, as one of the most 
ingenious of this eminent scholar. The fact is that this 
particle u before loka is one of the most puzzling occurrences 
in the Veda. Professor Bollensen says that loka never 
occurs without a preceding u in the first eight Mawrfalas, 
and this is perfectly true with the exception of one passage 
which he has overlooked, VIII, loo, dyaii/^ dehi lokam 
vd^r^ya vi-skdbhe, Dyu ! give room for the lightning to 
step forth ! Professor Bollensen (1. c. p. 603) reads vrztrd'ya 
instead of vd^rdy a, without authority. He objects to dyau-^ 
as a vocative, which should be dya-fi/z ; but dyau/z may be 
dy6^, a genitive belonging to vd^rdya, in which case we 
should translate, Make room for the lightning of Dyu to 
step forth 1 

But what is even more important is the fact that the 
occurrence of this unaccented u at the beginning of a pdda 
is against the very rules, or, at least, runs counter to the 
very observations which the authors of the Prdtijdkhya 
have made on the inadmissibility of an unaccented word 
in such a place, so that they had to insert a special provi¬ 
sion, Prdt 978, exempting the unaccented u from this obser¬ 
vation: anuddttam tu pddddau novar^am vidyate padam, 
‘ no unaccented word is found at the beginning of a pdda 
except u I ’ Although I have frequently insisted on the 
fact that such statements of the Prdti.ydkhya are not to be 
considered as rules, but simply as more or less general 
statistical accumulations of facts actually occurring in the 
Veda, I have also pointed out that wc are at liberty to found 
on these collected facts inductive observations which may 
assume the character of i*eal rules. Thus, in our case, we 
can well understand why there should be none, or, at least, 
very few instances, where an unaccented word begins a pdda. 
We should not begin averse with an enclitic particle in any 
other language either; and as in Sanskrit a verb at the 

* On locus, see Corssen, ICrit. Beitr, p. 463, and Aussprache, 2nd ed., p. 810. 
Corssen does not derive it from a root st^l or sth^, but identifies it v\rith Goth, 
strik-s, Engl, stroke, strecke. 

Ixxvi 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

beginning of a pida receives ipso facto the accent, and as 
the same applies to vocatives, no chance is left for an un¬ 
accented word in that place, except it be a particle. But 
the one particle that offends against this general observation 
is u, and the very word before which this u causes this 
metrical offence, is loka. Can any argument be more 
tempting in favour of admitting an old form uloka instead 
of u loka ? Lokim is preceded by u in I, 93, 6 ; II, 30, 6 ; 
(asmin bhayd-sthe krfwutam u lokdm, make room for us, 
grant an escape to us, in this danger!) IV, 17, 17; VI, 
23j 3 ; 7 (with urdm) ; 47, 8 (uriim na^ lokdm, or ulokam ?) ; 
73, 2 ; VII, 20, 2 ; 33, 5 (with uriim) ; 60, 9 (with uriim) ; 

84, 2 (with uriim) ; 99, 4 (with uriim) ; IX, 92, 5 ; X, 13, 2 ; 
1 5, 4 (sukr/tdm u lokdm) ; 30, 7; 104, 10; 180, 3 (with 
unim). Lokd is preceded by u in III, 29, 8 ; V, i, 6 ; loka- 
kWt, IX, 86, 21 ; X, 133, i. In aU remaining passages u 
lokd is found at the beginning of a pdda : loki/i, III, 37, 11 ; 
lokam. III, 2, 9 (u lokdm u dv6 (iti) lipa^imfm lyatu/^) ; V, 
4, ii; loka-krftniim, VIII, 15, 4; IX, 2, 8. The only 
passages in which loka occurs without being preceded by u, 
are lokam, VI, 47, 8 (see above) ; VIII, 100, 12 ; X, 14, 9 ; 

85, 20 (amn'tasya); IX, 113, 9; lokdn, X, 90, 14; 

lokd, IX, 113, 7^; X, 85, 24. 

It should be remembered that in the Gdthcis the u of 
words beginning with urv° does not count metrically 
(Hiibschmann, Ein Zoroastrisches Lied, p. 37), and that in 
Pdli also uru must be treated as monosyllabic, in such pas¬ 
sages as Mahdv., p. 2, line 5. The same applies to passages 
in the Rig-veda, such as I, 138, 3 ; VII, 39, 3, where the 
metre requires uru to be treated as one syllable. In 
IX, 96, 15, the original reading may have been urur iva, 
instead of uru-iva. 

Considering all this, I feel as convinced as it is possible to 
be in such matters, that in all the passages where u lokd 
occurs and where it means space, carri^re ouverte, free¬ 
dom, we ought to read ulokd ; but in spite of this I could 
never bring myself to insert this word, of which neither the 
authors of the Brdhma«as nor the writers of the Prdtijdkhyas 
or even later grammarians had any idea, into the text. On 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxvii 

the contrary, I should here, too, consider it most useful to 
leave the traditional reading, and to add the corrections in 
the margin, in order that, if these conjectural emendations 
are in time considered as beyond the reach of doubt, they 
may be used as evidence in support of conjectures which, 
without such evidence, might seem intolerable in the eyes of 
timid critics. 

There remains one difficulty about this hypothetical word 
uloka, which it is but fair to mention. If it is derived from 
uru, or, as Professor Bollensen suggests, from urva^^ or urvak, 
the change of va into o would require further support. 
Neither maghon for maghavan, nor duro;^a for dura-va;^a 
are strictly analogous cases, because in each we have an a 
preceding the va or u. Strictly speaking, uroka presupposes 
uravaka, as i‘16ka presupposes j’ravaka, or 6ka, house, avaka 
(from av, not from uk). It should also be mentioned that a 
compound such as RV. X, ii2^8, 2,^ uriilokam (scil. antdri- 
ksham) is strange, and shows how completely the origin of 
loka was forgotten at the time when the hymns of the tenth 
M^ndalsi were composed. But all this does not persuade us 
to accept Ascoli’s conjecture (Lezioni di Fonologia Compa- 
rata, p. that as uloga (but not uloka) is a regular 
Tamil form of loka, uloka in the Veda might be due to a 
reaction of the aboriginal dialects on the Vedic Sanskrit. 
We want far more evidence before admitting such a reaction 
during the Vedic period. 

The most powerful instrument that has hitherto been 
applied to the emendation of Vedic texts, is the metre. 
Metrical Metre means measure, and uniform measure, 
criticism. hence its importance for critical pur¬ 

poses, as second only to that of grammar. If our know¬ 
ledge of the metrical system of the Vedic poets rests on 
a sound basis, any deviations from the general rule are 
rightly objected to; and if by a slight alteration they 
can be removed, and the metre be restored, we naturally 
feel inclined to adopt such emendations. Two safeguards, 
however, are needed in this kind of conjectural criticism. 
We ought to be quite certain that the anomaly is impos¬ 
sible, and we ought to be able to explain to a certain extent 

Ixxviii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

how the deviation from the original correct text could have 
occurred. As this subject has of late years received con¬ 
siderable attention, and as emendations of the Vedic texts, 
supported by metrical arguments, have been carried on on 
a very large scale, it becomes absolutely necessary to re¬ 
examine the grounds on which these emendations are 
supposed to rest. There are, in fact, but few hymns in 
which some verses or some words have not been challenged 
for metrical reasons, and I feel bound, therefore, at the 
very beginning of my translation of the Rig-veda, to 
express my own opinion on this subject, and to give my 
reasons why in so many cases I allow metrical anomalies 
to remain which by some of the most learned and ingenious 
among Vedic scholars would be pronounced intolerable. 

Even if the theory of the ancient metres had not been so 
carefully worked out by the authors of the PritLrUkhyas 
and the Anukramawis, an independent study of the Veda 
would have enabled us to discover the general rules by 
which the Vedic poets were guided in the composition of 
their works. Nor would it have been difficult to show how 
constantly these general principles are violated by the 
introduction of phonetic changes which in the later Sanskrit 
are called the euphonic changes of Sandhi, and according 
to which final vowels must be joined with initial vowels, 
and final consonants adapted to initial consonants, until at 
last each sentence becomes a continuous chain of closely 
linked syllables. 

It is far easier, as I remarked before, to*discover the 
original and natural rhythm of the Vedic hymns by reading 
them in the Pada than in the Saw^hitft text, and after some 
practice our ear becomes sufficiently schooled to tell us at 
once how each line ought to be pronounced. We find, on 
the one hand, that the rules of Sandhi, instead of being 
generally binding, were treated by the Vedic poets as 
poetical licences only ; and, on the other, that a greater 
freedom of pronunciation was allowed even in the body of 
words than would be tolerated in the later Sanskrit. If a 
syllable was wanted to complete the metre, a semivowel 
might be pronounced as a vowel, many a long vowel might 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxix 

be protracted so as to count for two syllables, and short 
vowels might be inserted between certain consonants, of 
which no trace exists in the ordinary Sanskrit. If, on the 
contrary, there were too many syllables, then the rules of 
Sandhi were observed, or two short syllables contracted by 
rapid pronunciation into one ; nay, in a few cases, a final m 
or s, it seems, was omitted. It would be a mistake to 
suppose that the authors of the Pritij^khyas weremot aware 
of this freedom allowed or required in the pronunciation of 
the Vedic hymns. Though they abstained from intro¬ 
ducing into the text changes of pronunciation which even 
we ourselves would never tolerate, if inserted in the texts 
of Homer and Plautus, in the P41i verses of Buddha, or even 
in modern English poetry, the authors of the Prdti.fikhya 
were clearly aware that in many places one syllable had to 
. be pronounced as two, or two as one. They were clearly 
aware that certain vowels, generally considered as long, had 
to be pronounced as short, and that in order to satisfy the 
demands of the metre, certain changes of pronunciation 
were indispensable. They knew all this, but they did not 
change the text. And this shows that the text, as they 
describe it, enjoyed even in their time a high authority, 
that they did not make it, but that, such as it is, with all 
its incongruities, it had been made before their time- In 
many cases, no doubt, certain syllables in the hymns of the 
Veda had been actually lengthened or shortened in the 
Sa;;2hitcL text in accordance with the metre in which they 
are composed. But this was done by the poets themselves, 
or, at all events, it was not done by the authoi's of the 
Prdtij'dkhya. They simply register such changes, but they 
do not enjoin them, and in this we, too, should follow their 
example. It is, therefore, a point of some importance in 
the ci'itical restoration and proper pronunciation of Vedic 
texts, that in the rules which we have to follow in order 
to satisfy the demands of the metre, we should carefully 
distinguish between what is sanctioned by ancient autho¬ 
rity, and what is the result of our own observations. This 
I shall now proceed to do. 

First, then, the authors of the Pr4ti.yikhya distinctly admit 

Ixxx 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

that, in order to uphold the rules they have themselves laid 
down, certain syllables are to be pronounced as two syllables. 

We read in Sutra ® In a deficient p^da the 

'V'yulia. right nuniber is to be provided for by protrac¬ 
tion of semivowels (which were originally vowels), and of 
contracted vowels (which were originally two independent 
vowels).’ It is only by this process that the short syllable 
which has been lengthened in the Sa;;2hit^, viz. the sixth, 
or the eighth, or the tenth, can be shown to have occupied 
and to occupy that place where alone, according to a former 
rule, a short syllable is liable to be lengthened. Thus we 
read 

I, i6i, II. udvatsvasmi akrz>2otand trinzm. 

This would seem to be a verse of eleven syllables, in which 
the ninth syllable na has been lengthened. This, however, 
is against the system of the PrdtiVdkhya. But if we pro¬ 
tract the semivowel v in udvatsv, and change it back into u, 
which it was originally, then we gain one syllable, the whole 
verse has twelve syllables, na occupies the tenth place, and 
it now belongs to that class of cases which is included in a 
former Sfitra, 52,^. 

The same applies to X, 103, 13, where we read : 
pret^ ^yati nara^. 

This is a verse of seven syllables, in which the fifth syllable 
is lengthened, without any authority. Let us protract preti 
by bringing it back to its original component elements pra 
itd, and we get a verse of eight syllables, the sixth syllable 
now falls under the general observation, and is lengthened 
in the Saz/zhit^ accordingly. 

The same rules are repeated in a later portion of the 
Pr^tiy^khya. Here rules had been given as to the number 
of syllables of which certain metres consist, and it is added 
(Sutras ()72,, 973) that where that number is deficient, it 
should be completed by protracting contracted vowels, and 
by separating consonantal groups in which semivowels 
(originally vowels) occur, by means of their corresponding 
vowel. 

The rules in both places are given in almost identically 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxxi 

the same words, and the only difference between the two 
passages is this, that, according to the former, semivowels 
are simply changed back into their vowels, while, according 
to the latter, the semivowel remains, but is separated from 
the preceding consonant by its corresponding vowel 

These rules therefore show clearly that the authors of 
the Prituikhya, though they would have shrunk from 
altering one single letter of the authorised Sa7;ihiti, recog¬ 
nised the fact that where two vowels had been contracted 
into one, they might yet be pronounced as two ; and where 
a vowel before another vowel had been changed into a 
semivowel, it might either be pronounced as a vowel, or as 
a semivowel preceded by its corresponding vowel. More 
than these two modifications, however, the Pr^tij-akliya 
does not allow, or, at least, does not distinctly sanction. 
The commentator indeed tries to show that by the wording 
of the Sfitras in both places, a third modification is sanc¬ 
tioned, viz. the vocalisation, in the body of a word, of semi¬ 
vowels which do not owe their origin to an original vowel. 
But in both places this interpretation is purely artificial. 
Some such rule ought to have been given, but it was not 
given by the authors of the Pr4tii*ikhya. It ought to have 
been given, for it is only by obsei*ving such a rule that in 
I, 6i, I a, gor na parva vi radl tira^>i^ci, we get a verse of 
eleven syllables, and thus secure for di in radi the eighth 
place, where alone the short a could be lengthened. Yet we 
look in vain for a rule sanctioning the change of semivowels 
into vowels, except where the semivowels can rightly be called 
kshaipra-vaim (Sfitra 974), i.e. semivowels that were origin¬ 
ally vowels. The independent (sv0.bhdvika) semivowels, as 
e. g. the V in parva, are not included ; and to suppose that 
in Sfitra these semivowels were indicated by var^za is 
impossible, particularly if we compare the similar wording 
of Sfitra 974®. 

® It will be seen from my edition of the Pr^tMkhya, particularly from the 
extracts from Uva/'a, given after Sdtra 974, that the idea of making two 
syllables out of go^, never entered Uva/a’s mind* M. Regnier was right, 
Professor Kuhn (Beitrage, vol. iv, p. 187) was wrong. Uvai^a, no doubt, wishes 
to show that original (sv^bhtvika) semivowels are liable to vyilha, or at least 

[3s] f 

Ixxxii 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

We look in vain, too, in the Pritudkhya for another rule 
according to which long vowels, even if they do not owe 
their origin to the coalescence of two vowels, are "liable to 
be protracted. However, this rule, too, though never dis¬ 
tinctly sanctioned, is observed in the Pritijakhya, for unless 
its author observed it, he could not have obtained in the 
verses quoted by the Pratii’akhya the number of syllables 
which he ascribes to them. According to Siltra 937, the 
verse, RV. X, 134, i, is a Mahapahkti, and consists of six 
pidas, of eight syllables each. In order to obtain that 
number, we must read : 

samri^am >^arshamn^m. 

We may therefore say that, without allowing any actual 
change in the received text of the Sa^^^hiti, the Priti^a- 
khya distinctly allows a lengthened pronunciation of certain 
syllables, which in the Pada text form two syllables ; and 
we may add that, by implication, it allows the same even 
in cases where the Pada text also gives but one instead of 
two syllables. Having this authority in our favour, I do 
not think that we use too much liberty if we extend this 
modified pronunciation, recognised in so many cases by the 
ancient scholars of India themselves, to other cases where 
it seems to us required as well, in order to satisfy the 
metrical rules of the Veda. 

Secondly, I believe it can be proved that, if not the 
authors of the Pr^ti5‘4khya, those at least who constituted 
Shortening of the Vedic text which was current in the 
long vowels, indent schools and which we now have 
before us, were fully aware t;hat certain long vowels and 
diphthongs could be used as short. The authors of the 
Pr4ti.r4khya remark that certain changes which can take 
place before a short syllable only, take place likewise before 
the word no, although the vowel of this ‘ no ’ is by them 
supposed to be long. After having stated in Sfitra 
that the eighth syllable of hendecasyllabics and dodeca- 
syllables, if short, is lengthened, provided a short syllable 

to vyav^ya; but though this is true in fact, Uva/a does not succeed in his 
attempt to prove that the rules of the Prdtijakhya sanction it. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxxiii 

follows, they remark that for this purpose na/^ or no is 
treated as a short syllable : 

X, 59, 4. dyu-bhi/^ hita/^ ^ariml su na^ astu, (Sa^h. 
su no astu.) 

Again, in stating that the tenth syllable of hendecasyl- 
labics and dodecasyllabics, if short, is lengthened, provided 
a short syllable follows, the same exception is understood 
to be made in favour of na/^ or no, as a short syllable : 

VII, 48, 4. nu devisa/^ variva/^ kartana na/^, (Sa?;di. 
kartani no, bhuta no, See.) 

With regard to e being shortened before a short a 
where, according to rule, the a should be elided, we actu¬ 
ally find that the Sa/;2hitcl gives a instead of e in RV. 
VIII, 72, 5, v6ti stdtave ambySim, Sa7;^2h, v^ti stdtava 
ambyam. (PrcLtLy. i77j 5*) 

I do not ascribe very much weight to the authority 
which we may derive from these observations with regard 
to our own treatment of the diphthongs e and o as either 
long or short in the Veda, yet in answer to those who are 
incredulous as to the fact that the vowels c and o could 
ever be short in Sanskrit, an appeal to the authority of 
those who constituted our text, and in constituting it clearly 
treated o as a short vowel, may not be without weight. 
We may also appeal to the fact that in Pdli and Priknt 
every final o and e can be treated as cither long or short^ 
Starting from this we may certainly extend this observa- 
tion, as it has been extended by Professor Kuhn,' but wc 
must not extend it too far. It is quite clear that in the 
same verse e and o can be used both as long and short, 
I give the Sa^hitS. text : 

I, 84, 17. ka ishate | tu^yate ko bibhfiya 

ko ma^;i!sate | santam indra^Te ko anti, 
kas tok&ya | ka ibh^yota r£ye 
adhi bravat | tanve ko ^faniya. 

^ See Lassen, Inst. Linguae Pracriticse, pp. 145, 147, 151 j Cowell, Vararu/i»i, 
Introduction, p. xvii, Kcd^rabha^/a says ; PH/ainir bhagav^n prikrztalakshawam 
api vakti s^mskritid. anyat, dlrghdkshara^ kutraXnd ekdm mlLtr^m upaititi. 
Secundum d’Alwisium commentator docet sermonem esse de litteris Sanscrit icis 
£ et 0. Cf. Pischel, De Grammaticis prakritiexs, 1874. 

f 2 

Ixxxiv VEDIC HYMNS. 

But although there can be no doubt that e and o, when 
final, or at the end of the first member of a compound, may¬ 
be treated in the Veda as anceps, there is no evidence, I 
believe, to show that the same licence applies to a medial 
or initial e or o. In IV, 45, 5, we must scan 

usra^ ^arante prati vasto/^ aivin^, 
ending the verse with an epitritus tertius instead of the 
usual dij ambus ^ 

Thirdly, the fact that the initial short a, if following upon 
a word ending in o or e, is frequently not to be elided, is 
clearly recognised by the authors of the Pratii-ikhya (see 
p. xlviii). Nay, that they wished it to be pronounced even 
in passages where, in accordance with the requirements of 
the Pratii-ikhya, it had to disappear in the Sa^hit^ text, we 
may conclude from Sutra 978. It is there stated that no 
pida should ever begin with a word that has no accent. 
The exceptions to this rule are few, and they are discussed 
in Sutras 978-987. But if the initial a were not pronounced 
in I, I, 9, na/^ pitS-iva sunave agne su-upayana^ bhava, 
the second pdda would begin with a word which, after 
the elision of the initial a, would be a word without an 
accent ^ 

Fourthly, the fact that other long vowels, besides e and 
o, may under certain circumstances be used as short in the 
Veda, is not merely a modern theory, but rests on no less 
an authority than P4f?ini himself. 

* See Professor Weber’s pertinent remarks in Kuhn’s Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 394. 
I do not think that in the verses adduced by Professor Kuhn, in which final o 
is considered by him as an iambus or trochee, this scanning is inevitable. Thus 
we may scan the Sawhit^ text : 

I, 88, 2. rukmo na kitczJi svadhitfv^. 

I, 141, 8. ratho na yataA jikyabhi/i krfto. 

I, 174, 3. slwho na dame apd^/2si vasto;^. 

VI, 24, 3. aksho na k^zjoh J'fira bnbian 

X, 3, I. ino ragann aralU samiddho. 

This leaves but one of Professor Kuhn’s examples (Beitrage, vol. iv, p. 192) 
unexplained : I, 191, i. kankato na kankato, where iva for na would remove 
the difficulty. 

^ This subject, the shortness of e and o in the Veda, has been admirably 
treated by Mr. Maurice Bloomfield, ‘ Final as before Sonants,' Baltimore, 1S82. 
Reprinted from the American Journal of Philology, vol. iii, No. i. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. IxXXV 

Piwini says, VI, i, lay, that i, u, ri (see RV. Bh. IV, i, 
I a) at the end of a pada (but not in a compound “) may 
remain unchanged, if a different vowel follows, and that, if 
long, they may be shortened. He ascribes this rule, or, 
more correctly, the first portion of it only, to ^ikalya, 
Pratirflkhya 155 seq.^ Thus -^akri atra may become ^akrl 
atra or -^akry atra. MadhCi atra may become madhii atra 
or madhv atra. In VI, i, ia8, Piwini adds that a, i, u, ri 
may remain unchanged before ri, and, if long, may be 
shortened, and this again according to the teaching of 
iSfLkalya, i. e. Pritirdkhya 136®. Hence brahmfl rfshiA be¬ 
comes brahma rishi/i or brahmarshi.^ ; kum^ri risydJi be¬ 
comes kumirf risyzh or kumflry risyaJt. This rule enables 
us to explain a number of passages in which the Sa?«hita 
text either changes the final long vowel into a semivowel, 
or leaves it unchanged, when the vowel is a pragrfhya vowel. 
To the first class belong such passages as I, 163, la; IV, 
38, 10, v^^ arvcl, Sa»zh. vSjfydrva ; VI, 7, 3, agne, Saw?h. 
vi^Sgne ; VI, ao, 13, pakth? arkafj^:, Sawzh. pakthyarkaf/i ; 
IV, aa, 4, rushmf g6h, Sa»«h. rushmyli g6k. In these pas¬ 
sages t is the termination of a nom. masc. of a stem ending 
in in. Secondly, IV, a4, 8, pdtnt ikkhz., Sd^mh.. pdtnydj^Ma ; 
IV, 34, I, devi dhndm, Sawh. dcvydhndm ; V, 75, 4, v&i-^J 
d-hitd, Sa^«h. vdwi/feydhitd ; VI, 61, 4, avitr? avatu, Sa»«h. 
avitryavatu. In these passages the 1 is the termination of 
feminines. In X, 15, 4, fiti aiw^k, Sawh. CityarvSk, the final 
i of the instrumental fitt ought not to have been changed 
into a semivowel, for, though not followed by fti, it is to be 
treated as pragrfhya; (Prdtw. 163, 5.) It is, however, 

^ There are certain compounds in which, according to Professor Kuhn, two 
vowels have been contracted into one short vowel. This is certainly the 
opinion of liindu grammarians, also of the compiler of the Pada text* But 
most of them would admit of another explanation. Thus dhdnvar«asa//, which 
is divided into dhdnva-ar^zasa^, may be dhdnu-ar^iasa^ (RV. V, 45, 2), 
Dhdnar^’am, divided into dhiina-ar^am, may have been dhdna«n’>lam (RV. X, 
46, 5). 6'atdr-i’asam (RV. VII, 100, 3) may be taken as jati-n<6asam instead of 
jatd-ar^&asam. 

^ In the Pr^tir^kbya the rule which allows vowel before vowel to remain 
unchanged, is restricted to special passages, and in some of them the two 
vowels are savarwa; cf. Sdtra 163. 

« Cf.V^san, Pr^tirEkhya, IV, 48 ; Indische Studien, vol. ix, 309 ; voL x, 406. 

Ixxxvi 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

mentioned as an exception in Stitra 174, 9. The same 
applies to II, 3, 4, v^di I'ti asyim, Samh. v6dyasydm. The 
prag^'zhya i ought not to have been changed into a semi¬ 
vowel, but the fact that it had been changed irregularly, 
was again duly registered in Stitra 174, 5. These two 
pragrrliya i therefore, which have really to be pronounced 
short, were irregularly changed in the Saw2hit3. into the 
semivowel ; and as this semivowel, like all semivowels, may 
take vyav&ya, the same object was attained as if it had been 
written by a short vowel. With regard to pragrfhya 6, no 
such indication is given by the Sa^hiti text ; but in such 
passages as I, 46, 13, jambhu fti ram-bhd ^ gatam, Samh. 
rambhH £ gatam; V, 43, 4, b^thfi iti ddrim, Sawh. bShu 
adrira, the prag;'2hya u of the dual can be used as short, like 
the d of madhd atra, given as an example by the commen¬ 
tators of PS.mni. 

To Professor Kuhn, I believe, belongs the merit of having 
extended this rule to final 4. That the 4 of the dual may 
become short, was mentioned in the Pr4tir4khya, SCitra 309, 
though in none of the passages there mentioned is there any 
metrical necessity for this shortening (see p. lii). This being 
the case, it is impossible to deny thatKvhere this 4 is followed 
by a vowel, and where Sandhi between the two vowels is 
impossible, the final 4 may be treated as short. Whether it 
must be so treated, depends on the view which we take of 
the Vedic metres, and will have to be discussed hereafter. 
I agree with Professor Kuhn when he scans : 

VI, 63, I. kva ty4 valgti puru-hdt4 adya, (Sa»2h. puru- 
hdt4dya) ; and not kva tyl valgfi puruhdtidya, although we 
might quote other verses as ending with an epitritus primus. 

3) verasya pra-minata^ m4 4pe/5, (Sa»zh. 

m4pe/2,) although the dispondeus is possible. 

I, 77, I. kath4 direma agnaye k4 asmai, (Sawh. k4smai.) 

VI, 24, 5. arya/i varasya parf-eti astl. 

Even in a compound like tv4-dta, I should shorten the 
first vowel, e. g. 

X, 148, I. tmanl tan4 sanuyima tv4-dt4^, 
although the passage is not mentioned by the Pr4tu4khya 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. Ixxxvii 

among those where a short final vowel in the eighth place 
is not lengthened when a short syllable follows 

But when we come to the second p^da of a Gayatri, and 
find there a long and that long 4 not followed by a vowel, 
I cannot agree with Professor Kuhn, that the long k, even 
under such circumstances, ought to be shortened. We may 
scan : 

V, 5, 7. vltasya patman~i/lta daivyd hot4rl manusha/^. 

The same choriambic ending occurs even in the last pada 
of a Gayatri, and is perfectly free from objection at the end 
of the other pidas. 

So, again, we may admit the shortening of au to o in sino 
avye and s^no avyaye, as quoted in the Prati.f^khya, 174 
and 177, but this would not justify the shoi-tening of au to 
av in Anush/ubh verses, such as 

V, 86, 5. martiya devHu adabha, 
devl^u arvate, 

while, with regard to the Trish/ubh and (Jagati verses, our 
views on these metres must naturally depend on the difficul¬ 
ties we meet with in carrying them out systematically* 

There is no reason for shortening i in 

V, 5, 10. devin^m guhyi n^mini. 

It is the second pida of a Gayatri here; and we shall see 
that, even in the third pida, four long syllables occur again 
and again. 

For the same reason I cannot follow Dr. Kuhn in a 
number of other passages where, for the sake of the metre, 
he proposes to change a long ^ into a short one* Such 
passages are in the Pada text : 

VI, 46, II. didyava/^ tigma-mfirdhina/^, not mfirdhIna/A 

I, 15, 6, ntuni ya^&m li’^the, not culthe. 

V, 66, 2,. samyak asuryam fijr^te, not fti'Ite. 

V, 67, I. varshish2!'//am kshatram iiithe, not i.ylthe. See 
Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 12%, 

1, 46, 6. tim asme risithim isham, not rlsl!thdm isham. 

I see that Professor Kuhn, vol. iv, p. 1 86, has anticipated this observation 
in esh^au, to be read I^shifau. 

Ixxxvili 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

IV, 3!Zj 33. babhrfi yAmeshu jobhete, not i-obhete. 

IV, 45, 3. uta priyam madhune yu^^Ith^m ratham, not 
yu/l^dthlm ratham. 

V. 74, 3. kam ^kkhz. yu;2^4the ratham, not yu%athe 
ratham. 

IV, 55, I. dydvabhumi (iti) adite trisithdm na^ not trd- 
sitham na^. 

V, 41, I. riizsyk va sadasi trdsith^m na/2, not trasithdm 
na/2, 

I must enter the same protest against shortening other 
long vowels in the following verses which Professor Kuhn 
proposes to make metrically correct by this remedy : 

I, 4!Z, 6. hira^^yavdi-imat-tama, not vdj-imat-tama. 

Here the short syllable of ga;2aj’rT-bhi/2 in V, 60, 8, cannot 
be quoted as a precedent, for the i in ga;?aj’ri, walking in 
companies, was never long, and could therefore not be 
shortened. Still less can we quote ndri-bhya/^ as an 
instance of a long i being shortened, for ndri-bhyaA is 
derived from nari^, not from ndri, and occurs with a short 
i even when the metre requires a long syllable; I, 43, 6. 
n;^2-bhya/2 nSri-bhya/2 gave. The fact is, that in the Rig- 
veda the forms nddshu and ndri-bhya/2 never occur, but 
always ndrishu, ndri-bhya-^ ; while from vdd we never find 
any forms with short i, but always vddshu, v£ri-bhi/2. 

Nor is there any justification for change in I, 16. 
gdva/2 na gavyuti/2 anu, the second pada of a Gdyatri. Nor 
in V, 56, 3. rtkshdih na va/5 maruta/2 dml-vdn ama/2. In 
most of the passages mentioned by Professor Kuhn on 
p. 12(3, this peculiarity may be observed, that the eighth 
syllable is short, or, at all events, may be short, when the 
ninth is long : 

VI, 44, 21. vrishno te indu/2 vnshabha'pipdya. 

I, 73? I- syona-d/2 atithi^ na pri;2dna/2. 

VII, 13, I. bhare havi/2 na barhishi prb/dna/2. 

II, 28, 7. ena/2 kw2vantam asura bhrt^/anti. 

Before, however, we can settle the question whether in 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Ixxxix 

these and other places certain vowels should be pronounced 
as either long or short, we must settle the more general 

Metre and question, what authority we have for requir- 
Grammar. ^ long ot a short syllable in certain places 

of the Vedic metres. 

If we declare ourselves free from all authority, either 
grammatical or metrical, we may either sacrifice all 
grammar to metre, or all metre to grammar. We may 
introduce the strictest rules of metre, determining the 
length or shortness of every syllable, and then ignore 
all rules of grammar and quantity, treat short syllables as 
long, or long ones as short, and thus secure the triumph of 
metre. Or, we may allow great latitude in Vedic metres, 
particularly in certain pddas, and thus retain all the rules of 
grammar which determine the quantity of syllables. It 
may be said even that the result would really be the same 
in either case, and that the policy of ‘ thorough ’ might 
perhaps prove most useful in the end. It may be so here¬ 
after, but in the present state of Vedic scholarship it seems 
more expedient to be guided by native tradition, and to 
study the compromise which the ancient students of the 
Veda have tried to effect between grammar on one side and 
metre on the other. 

Now it has generally been supposed that the Pr4tii-4khya 
teaches that there must be a long syllable in the eighth or 
tenth place of Traish^^ibha and ffdgata, and in the sixth 
place of Anush/ubha p4das. This is not the case. The 
PrdtuMchya, no doubt, says, that a short final vowel, but 
not any short syllable, occupying the eighth or tenth place 
in a TraishAibha and C^^gata pida, or the sixth place in a 
Gayatra pdda, is lengthened, but it never says that it must 
be lengthened ; on the contrary, it gives a number of cases 
where it is not so lengthened. But, what is even more 
important, the Pr4ti.y;§.khya distinctly adds a proviso which 
shows that the ancient critics of the Veda did not consider 
the trochee as the only possible foot for the sixth and 
seventh syllables of Gayatra, or for the eighth and ninth, or 
tenth and eleventh syllables of Traish/ubha and Gdgata 
pidas. They distinctly admit that the seventh and the 

xc 

VEDIC HYMNS, 

ninth and the eleventh syllables in such pddas may be long, 
and that in that case the preceding short vowel is not 
lengthened. We thus get the iambus in the very place 
which is generally occupied by the trochee. According to 
the Pratijakhya, the general scheme for the Giyatra would 
be, not only 

6 7 

+ + + + i + -o+, 
but also . 6 7 

-!- + + +1 + '-^-+; 

and for the Traish^ubha and G^dgata, not only 

8 9 

+ + + 4'|-h - 1^^ + 

but also 8 9 

+ + + +l + 4-+v^|-+ + ( + ). 

And again, for the same p^das, not only 

10 II 

+ + + + 1+ -l- + + 1 + + 

but also ion 

4' + + +|H- + + + |+ v^“( + )- 
Before appealing, however, to the Priti^§,khya for the 
establishment of 'such a rule as that the sixth syllable 
of Anush2fubha and . the eighth or tenth syllable of Trai- 
shifubha and Gagata pddas must be lengthened, provided 
a short syllable follows, it is indispensable that we should 
have a clear appreciation of the real character of the Priti- 
i’ikhya. If we carefully follow the thread which runs 
through these books, we shall soon perceive that, even with 
the proviso that a short syllable follows, the Prdtu^khya 
never teaches that certain final vowels must be lengthened. 
The object of the Pr^tij^khya, as I pointed out on a former 
occasion, is to register all the facts which possess a phonetic 
interest. In doing this, all kinds of plans are adopted in 
order to bring as large a number of cases as possible under 
general categories. These categories are purely technical 
and external, and they never assume, with the authors of 
the Prdtij’dkhya, the character of general rules. Let us 
now, after these preliminary remarks, return to the Sfitras 
5^3 to 535, which we discussed before. The Pr4ti.f&khya 
simply says that certain syllables which are short in the 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XCl 

Pada, if occupying a certain place in a verse, are lengthened 
in the Sa;;^^hiti, provided a short syllable follows. This 
looks, no doubt, like a general rule which should be carried 
out under all circumstances. But this idea never entered 
the minds of the authors of the Pratii’akhya. They only 
give this rule as the most convenient way of registering the 
lengthening of certain syllables which have actually been 
lengthened in the text of the Sa7;2hiti, while they remain 
short in the Pada ; and after having done this, they proceed 
to give a number of verses where the same rule might be 
supposed to apply, but where in the text of the Sa?;zhit§, 
the short syllable has not been lengthened. After having 
given a long string of words which are short in the Pada 
and long in the Sa^;2hiti, and where no intelligible reason 
of their lengthening can be given, at least not by the 
authors of the Pr^tij’akhya, the Pr^ti^^khya adds in Stltra 
523, ‘The final vowel of the eighth syllable is lengthened 
in padas of eleven and twelve syllables, provided a syllable 
follows which is short in the Sa7;zhit^.* As instances the 
commentator gives (SaMiit4 text) : 

I, 32, 4. taditn4 j'dtrum nS. kda vivitsc. 

Ij 94, i, dgne sakhyd ma rishama vayam tdva. 

Then follows another rule (SCltra 525) that ‘The final 
vowel of the tenth syllable in pAdas of eleven and twelve 
syllables is lengthened, provided a syllable follows which 
is short in the Sa;;zhitfL.’ As instances the commentator 
gives : 

III, 54, 22. Ahi vlyvS sumAnI dtdihi na/z. 

II, 34, 9. ^va rudi-a ajdso liantana vddhaA. 

Lastly, a rule is given (SGtra 5a6) that ‘The final vowel 
of the sixth syllable is lengthened in a p4da of eight 
syllables, provided a syllable follows which is short : ’ 

I, 5, 10. isino yavaya vadhdm. 

If the seventh syllable is long no change takes place : 

IX, 67, 30. i pavasva deva soma. 

While we ourselves should look upon these rules as 

XCll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

founded in the very nature of the metre, which, no doubt, 
to a certain extent they are, the authors of the Pritii-akhya 
use them simply as convenient nets for catching as many 
cases as possible of lengthened syllables actually occurring 
in the text of the Sa;;2hiti. For this purpose, and in order 
to avoid giving a number of special rules, they add in this 
place an observation, very important to us as throwing 
light on the real pronunciation of the Vedic hymns at the 
time when our Sa^hiti text was finally settled, but with 
them again a mere expedient for enlarging the preceding 
rules, and thus catching more cases of lengthening at one 
haul. They say in Sfitra 5:^7, that in order to get the 
right number of syllables in such verses, we must pro¬ 
nounce sometimes one syllable as two. Thus only can the 
lengthened syllable be got into one of the places required 
by the preceding Sutra, viz. the sixth, the eighth, or the 
tenth place, and thus only can a large number of lengthened 
syllables be comprehended under the same general rule of 
the Prdtudkhya. In all this we ourselves can easily recog¬ 
nise a principle which guided the compilers of the Sa^^^^hiti 
text, or the very authors of the hymns, in lengthening 
syllables which in the Pada text are short, and which 
were liable to be lengthened because they occupied certain 
places on which the stress of the metre would naturally fall. 
We also see quite clearly that these compilers, or those 
whose pronunciation they tried to perpetuate, must have 
pronounced certain syllables as two syllables, and we 
naturally consider that we have a right to try the same 
expedient in other cases where to us, though not to them, 
the metre seems deficient, and where it could be rendered 
perfect by pronouncing one syllable as two. Such thoughts, 
however, never entered the minds of the authors of the 
Prdtii-dkhyas, who are satisfied with explaining what is, 
according to the authority of the Sz.mhitk, and who never 
attempt to say what ought to be, even against the authority 
of the SB.mh.itL While in some cases they have ears to 
hear and to appreciate the natural flow of the poetical lan¬ 
guage of the iS^shis, they seem at other times as deaf as 
the adder to the voice of the chai*mer. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XCllI 

A general rule, therefore, in our sense of the word, that 
the eighth- syllable in hendecasyllabics and dodecasyllabics, 
the tenth syllable in hendecasyllabics and dodecasyllabics, 
and the sixth syllable in octosyllabics should be lengthened, 
rests in no sense on the authority of ancient grammarians. 
Even as a mere observation, they restrict it by the con¬ 
dition that the next syllable must be short, in order to pro¬ 
voke the lengthening of the preceding syllable, thereby 
sanctioning, of course, many exceptions; and they then 
proceed to quote a number of cases where, in spite of all, 
the short syllable remains shorts In some of these quota¬ 
tions they are no doubt wrong, but in most of them their 
statement cannot be disputed. 

As to the eighth syllable being short in hendecasyllabics 
and dodecasyllabics, they quote such verses as, 

VI, 66, 4. antar (fti) santa/^ avadydni puxiknAJi. 

Thus we see that in VI, 44, 9, varshiya/^ vaya^ krmuhi 
s^kibhUz, hi remains short; while in VI, 25, 3,^ahi vrzshny^ni 
krmuM plxlksik, it is lengthened in the the only 

difference being that in the second passage the accent is 
on hi. 

As to the tenth syllable being short in a dodecasyllabic, 
they quote 

II, 27, 14. adite mitra varu^^a uta rarih. 

As to the tenth syllable being short in a hendecasyllabic, 
they quote 

II, 20, I. vayam te vaya/^ indra viddhi su nzh. 

As to the sixth syllable being short in an octosyllabic, 
they quote 

VIII, 23, 26. vis^n abhl 

A large number of similar exceptions are collected from 

“ < Wo die achtsilbigen Rexhen mit herbeigezogen sind, ist es in der Regel 
bei solchen Liedern geschehen, die im Ganzen von der regelnxassigen Form 
weniger abweiclien, und fiir solche Falle, wo auch das Prdtij&kbya die Uangting 
der sechsten Silbe in acbtsilbigen Reihen vorschreibt, namlich wo die siebente 
von Natnr knrz ist. Die achtsilbigen Reihen bedlirfen einer erneuten Durch- 
forschung, da es mehrfach schwer fallt, den Sawhittet mit der Vorschrift der 
Pr^tijS-khya in tJbereinstimmung zxx bringen.* Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 450 
and still more strongly, p. 45S. 

XCIV 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

528, 3 to 534, 94, and this does not include any cases where 
the ninth, the eleventh, or the seventh syllable is long, 
instead of being short, while it does include cases where the 
eighth syllable is long, though the ninth is not short, or, at 
least, is not short according to the views of the collectors of 
these passages. See Sutra 522, 6. 

Besides the cases mentioned by the Pratij^khya itself, 
where a short syllable, though occupying a place which 
would seem to require lengthening, remains short, there are 
many others which the Pratij-akhya does not mention, be¬ 
cause, from its point of view, there was no necessity for 
doing so. The Prdtii^khya has been blamed^ for omitting 
such cases as I, 93, 6, uru^;^ ya^/^aya i^akrathur u lokam ; 
or I, 96, I, dev4 agnim dharayan dravmodam. But though 
occupying the eighth place, and though followed by a short 
syllable, these syllables could never fall under the general 
observation of the Prdtuakhya, because that general ob¬ 
servation refers to final vowels only, but not to short 
syllables in general. Similar cases are 1, 107, i®*; 1^2^, 9; 
130,10; 152,6; 154,1; 158,5®; 163,2; 167, 10®; 171,4; 
173)6; i79»^^ 182, 8®; 186, 6, &c. 

If, therefore, we say that, happen what may, these 
metrical rules must be observed, and the text of the Veda 
altered in order to satisfy the requirements of these rules, 
we ought to know at all events that we do this on our own 
responsibility, and that we cannot shield ourselves behind 
the authority of vSaunaka or Kdtyiyana. Now it is well 
known that Professor Kuhn^ has laid down the rule that the 
Traish^ubha pS-das must end in a bacchius or amphibrachys 
and the Cagata pddas in a dij ambus or paeon 
secundus ^ With regard to Anush/ubha pddas, he 

requires the dijambus or paeon secundus — at the 
end of a whole verse only, allowing greater freedom in the 
formation of the preceding pddas. In a later article, 

“ « Dazu komint, dass der tins vorliegende Sa^zhildtext vielfaltig gar nicht 
mit .Saunaka’s allgemeiner Regel ubereinstimmt, indem die Verlangerimg 
kurzerSilben nicht unter den Bedingtingen eingetreten ist, die er vorschreibt.’ 
Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 459. 

Beitrage zur Vergleichenden Sprachforschung, vol. iii, p. n8. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. XCV 

however, the final pida, too, in AnushAibha metre is 
allowed greater freedom, and the rule, as above given, 
is strictly maintained with regard to the T raishifubha and 
(Jigata pidas only. 

This subject is so important, and affects so large a 
number of passages in the Veda, that it requires the 
The four prin- most careful examination. The Vedic metres, 
cipalPadas. though at first sight very perplexing, are 
very simple, if reduced to their primary elements. The 
authors of the Prfltijftkhyas have elaborated a most com¬ 
plicated system. Counting the syllables in the most 
mechanical manner, they have a.ssigned nearly a hundred 
names to every variety which they discovered in the hymns 
of the Rig-veda But they also observed that the con¬ 
stituent elements of all these metres were really but four, 
(Sfltras 988, 989) : 

I. The Gflyatra pflda, of eight syllables, ending in o -. 
a. The Vairfl^a pida, of ten syllables, ending in — . 

3. The TraishAibha pflda, of eleven syllables, ending 

in — . 

4. The GfLgata pida, of twelve syllables, ending in w 
Then follows an important rule, Sfitra 990 : ‘ The pen¬ 
ultimate syllable,’ he says, ‘ in a Gflyati'a and Gflgata pida 
is light (laghu), in a Vairi^a and TraishAibha pida heavy 
(guru).’ This is called their vrftta. 

This word vritta., which is generally translated by metre, 
had evidently originally a moi'e special meaning. It meant 
. the final rhythm, or if we take it literally, the 

ntta-versus. ^ derived from vrit, to 

turn. Hence vntta is the same word as the Latin versus, 
verse ; but I do not wish to decide whether the connection 
between the two words is historical, or simply etymological. 
In Latin, versus is always supposed to have meant origin¬ 
ally a furrow, then a line, then a verse. In Sanskrit the 
metaphor that led to the formation of vrftta, in the sense 
of final rhythm, has nothing to do with ploughing. If, as 
I have tried to prove (Chips from a German Workshop, 

See Appendix to my edition of the PrUtij^khya, p. cccivi. 

XCVl 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

vol. i, p. 84), the names assigned to metres and metrical 
language were derived from words originally referring to 
choregic movements, vntta must have meant the turn, i. e. 
the last step of any given movement ; and this turn, as 
determining the general character of the whole movement, 
would naturally be regulated by more severe rules, while 
greater freedom would be allowed for the rest. 

Having touched on this subject, I may add another 
fact in support of my view. The words TrishA,ibh and 
Anushifubh, names for the most common metres, are 
generally derived from a root stubh, to praise. I believe 
they should be derived from a root stubh, which is pre- 
seiwed in Greek, not only in hard, to 

strike hard, but in the root crre//^, from which <rrifji<f>v\ov, 
stamped or pressed olives or grapes, and do-r€/x<^?]9, untrodden 
(grapes), then unshaken ; and in o-r^jut/So), to shake, to ram, 
orro/Seo), to scold, &c. In Sanskrit this root is mentioned in 
the Dhitupaif>?!a X, 34, shtubhu stambhe, and it exists in 
a parallel form as stambh, lit. to stamp down, then to fix, 
to make firm, with which Bopp has compared the German 
stampfen,'to stamp ; (Glossarium, s. v. stambh.) I therefore 
look upon Trish/ubh as meaning originally tripudium, (sup¬ 
posing this word to be derived from tri and pes, according 
to the expression in Horace, pepulisse ter pede terram, Hor. 
Od. iii. 18,) and I explain its name * Three-step,* by the fact 
that the three last syllables o — w, which form the character¬ 
istic feature of that metre, and may be called its real vntta 
or turn, were audibly stamped at the end of each turn or 
strophe. I explain Anush^ubh, which consists of four equal 
pddas, each of eight syllables, as the ‘ After-step,’ because 
each line was stamped regularly after the other, possibly 
by two choruses, each side taking its turn. There is one 
passage in the Veda where Anush^ubh seems to have 
preserved this meaning : 

X, ii?4; 9- anu-stiibham anu ;^ar>^firydmd?zam indram nf 
kSky^h kavaya^ manisha. 

Poets by their wisdom discovered Indra dancing to an 
Anushifubh. 

In V, 5^ 12,, zS/zanda/z-stubha/z kubhanyava-^ litsam 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. XCVll 

ktri^aA nrituk, in measured steps (i. e. stepping the metre) 
and wildly shouting the gleemen have danced toward the 
spring. 

Other names of metres which point to a similar origin, 
i. e. to their original connection with dances, are Pada- 
pahkti, ‘Step-row;’ Nyahku-sdri;^i, ‘Roe-step;’ Abhisdri;^!, 

‘ Contre-danse,’ &c. 

If now we return to the statement of the Prdtii-ikhya in 
reference to the vrfttas, we should observe how careful its 
author is in his language. He does not say that the 
penultimate is long dr short, but he simply states, that, 
from a metrical point of view, it must be considered as 
light or heavy, which need not mean more than that it 
must be pronounced with or without stress. The fact that 
the author of the Prdtuikhya uses these terms, laghu and 
guru, instead of hrasva, short, and dirgha, long, shows in 
fact that he was aware that the penultimate in these p3,das 
is not invariably long or short, though, from a metrical 
point of view, it is always heavy or light. 

It is perfectly true that if we keep to these four p^das, 
(to which one more pclda, viz. the half Vaird^a, consisting 
of five syllables, might be added,) we can reduce neaidy all 
the hymns of the Rig-veda to their simple elements which 
the ancient poets combined together, in general in a very 
simple way, but occasionally with greater freedom. The 
most important strophes, formed out of these pddas, arc, 

1. Three Gdyatra pidas=:the Giyatrf, (1Z4 syllables.) 

a. Four Gdyatra pddas=the Anushifubh, (3Z syllables.) 

3. Four Vair^^ p4das=the Vird^, (40 syllables.) 

4. Four Traishifubha padas = the Trishmbh,(44 syllables.) 

5. Four Cdgata p4das=the G^agatt, (48 syllables.) 

Between the Gdyatri and Anush^fubh strophes, another 

strophe may be formed, by mixture of GAyatra and C^gata 
p^das, consisting of syllables, and commonly called 
Ushwih ; likewise between the AnushAibh and the Vir^fj 
a strophe may be formed, consisting of 36 syllables, and 
commonly called Brfhatt 

In a collection of hymns, however, like that of the Rig- 
veda, where poems of different ages, different places, and 
[32] g 

XCVlll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

different families have been put together, we must be 
prepared for exceptions to many rules. Thus, although 
the final turn of the hendecasyllabic Traish/ubha is, as 
a rule, the bacchius, — , yet if we take, for instance, 
the 77^^ hymn of the tenth Ma^^fala, we clearly perceive 
another hendecasyllabic pida of a totally different struc¬ 
ture, and worked up into one of the most beautiful strophes 
by an ancient poet. Each line is divided into two halves, 
the first consisting of seven syllables, being an exact 
counterpart of the first member of a Saturnian verse (fato 
Romae Metelli) ; the second a dijambus, answering boldly 
to the broken rhythm of the first members We have, in 
fact, a Trish/ubh where the turn or the three-step, , 
instead of being at the end, stands in the middle of 
the line. 

77^ ^-55 in the Pada text : 

I. abhra-prusha/^ na vdM prusha vasu, 

^ — — — v-, — __ 

havishmanta/4 na ya^«d/2 vi-^anusha/^ I &c. 

Another strophe, the nature of which has been totally 
misapprehended by native metricians, occurs in IV, lo. It 
is there called Padapankti and Mahdpadapankti ; nay, 
attempts have been made to treat it even as an Ushwih, or 
as a kind of Giyatrt. The real character of that strophe 
is so palpable that it is difficult to understand how it could 
have been mistaken. It consists of two lines, the first 
embracing three or four feet of five syllables each, having 
the ictus on the first and the fourth syllables, and resembling 
the last line of a Sapphic verse. The second line is simply 

* Professor Kuhn (vol. iii, p, 450) is inclined to admit the same metre as 
varying in certain hymns with ordinary Traishifubha pSdas, but the evidence 
he brings forward is hardly sufficient. Even if we object to the endings 

y - w - and - u V, 33, 4, may be a 6^^gata, with vyiiha of dUsa, the 

remark quoted from the Pralijdkhya being of no consequence on such 
points; and the same remedy would apply to V, 41, 5, with vyilha of eshe. 
In VI, 47, 31, vyuha of ajvaparwai/^ ; in I, 33, 9, vyiiha of indra and 
rodast ; in II, 24, 5, vyuha of mddbhi/^ would produce the same effect ; while 
8, we must either admit the Traish/ubha vmta - w - or scan 
dhuk^an. In III, 58, 6, I should admit vytiha for nard; in IV, a6, 6, for 
mandram; in I, 100, 8, for /yotih, always supposing that we consider the 
ending — — ^ — incompatible with a Trish^fubh verse. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

XCIX 

a Trish^ubh. It is what we should call an asynartete 
strophe, and the contrast of the rhythm in the first and 
second lines is very effective. I am not certain whether 
Professor Bollensen, who has touched on this metre in an 
article just published (Zeitschrift der D. M. G., vol. xxii, 
p. 57 shares this opinion. He has clearly seen that the 
division of the lines, as given in the MSS. of the Sa^hiti 
text, is wrong ; but he seems inclined to admit the same 
rhythm throughout, and to treat the strophe as consisting of 
four lines of five syllables each, and one of six syllables, 
which last line is to submit to the prevailing rhythm of the 
preceding lines. If we differ, however, as to the internal 
architecture of this strophe, we agree in condemning the 
interpretation proposed by the Pratii’llkhya ; and I should, 
in connection with this, like to call attention to two im¬ 
portant facts : first, that the Sa;;zhit4 text, in not changing, 
for instance, the final t of martat, betrays itself as clearly 
later than the elaboration of the ancient theory of metres, 
later than the invention of such a metre as the Padapahkti ; 
and secondly, that the accentuation, too, of the Szmhit^ is 
thus proved to be posterior to the establishment of these 
fanciful metrical divisions, and hence cannot throughout 
claim so irrefragable an authority as certainly belongs to it 
in many cases. I give the Sa^^zhitS, text : 

I. Agne tarn adyal^a;^ na stomaiA I kratu;^ na bhadram, 
\iridis^ris2sa ^^^dhylmi ta ohai^. 
a. AdhI hy agne \ krator bhadrasya l dakshasya sidhoA, 
rathtr r^tasya br/hato babhfltha, See. 

Now it is perfectly true that, as a general rule, the 
syllables composing the v;^ztta or turn of the different 
metres, and described by the Pritb^khya as heavy or 
light, are in reality long or short. The question, however, 
is this, have we a right, or are we obliged, in cases where 
that syllable is not either long or short, as it ought to be, 
so to alter the text, or so to change the rules of pro¬ 
nunciation, that the penultimate may again be what we wish 
it to be ? 

If we begin with the Gdyatra p4da, we have not to read 

g 2 

c 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

long before we find that it would be hopeless to try to 
crush the G^yatri verses of the Vedic i?2shis on this Pro- 
■ crustean bed. Even Professor Kuhn very 

ya ra a as. perceived that this was impossible. He 

had to admit that in the G^yatrt the two first padas, at all 
events, were free from this rule, and though he tried to 
retain it for the third or final pada, he was obliged after a 
time to give it up even there. Again, it is perfectly true, 
that in the third pida of the Giyatrt, and in the second 
and fourth pidas of the Anush/ubh strophe, greater care is 
taken by the poets to secure a short syllable for the penul¬ 
timate, but here, too, exceptions cannot be entirely removed. 
We have only to take such a single hymn as I, 27, and we 
shall see that it would be impossible to reduce it to 
the uniform standard of G§,yatrt p^das, all ending in a 
dij ambus. 

But what confirms me even more in my view that such 
strict uniformity must not be looked for in the ancient 
Conjectural hymns of the RzshiSi is the fact that in many 
emendations, cases it would be SO very easy to replace 
the irregular by a regular dipodia. Supposing that the 
original poets had restricted themselves to the dij ambus, 
who could have put in the place of that regular dijambus 
an irregular dipodia? Certainly not tlie authors of the 
Priti.y^lkhya, for their ears had clearly discovered the 
general rhythm of the ancient metres ; nor their pre¬ 
decessors, for they had in many instances preserved the 
tradition of -syllables lengthened in accordance with the 
requirements of the metre. I do not mean to insist too 
strongly on this argument, or to represent those who 
handed down the tradition of the Veda as endowed with 
anything like apaurusheyatva. Strange accidents have 
happened in the text of the Veda, but they have generally 
happened when the sense of the hymns had ceased to be 
understood ; and if anything helped to preserve the Veda 
from greater accidents, it was due, I believe, to the very 
fact that the metre continued to be understood, and that 
oral tradition, however much it might fail in other respects, 
had at all events to satisfy the ears of the hearers. I should 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

Cl 

have been much less surprised if all irregularities in the 
metre had been smoothed down by the flux and reflux of 
oral tradition, a fact which is so apparent in the text of 
Homer, where the gaps occasioned by the loss of the 
digamma, were made good by the insertion of unmeaning 
particles ; but I find it difficult to imagine by what class of 
men, who must have lived between the original poets and 
the age of the Pratii'^khyas, the simple rhythm of the Vedic 
metres should have been disregarded, and the sense of 
rhythm, which ancient people possess in a far higher degree 
than we ourselves, been violated through crude and pur¬ 
poseless alterations. I shall give a few specimens only. 
What but a regard for real antiquity could have induced 
people in VIII, 8, to preserve the defective foot of a 
Gayatri verse, samdne adhi bhdrman ? Any one acquainted 
with Sanskrit would naturally read samine adhi bhlrma?^! 
But who would have changed bhai*ma;d, if that had been 
there originally, to bhArman? I believe we must scan 
saml.ne adhi bh^rman, or samane adhi bhErman, the paeon 
tertius being a perfectly legitimate foot at the end of a 
Gayatri verse. In X, 158, 1, we can understand how an 
accident happened. The original poet may have said : 

S^ryo no divas patu p4tu vlto antarikshdt, agnir na// 
pirthivebhya/z. Here one of the two pdtu was lost. But 
if in the same hymn we find in the second verse two feet of 
nine instead of eight syllables each, I should not venture to 
alter this except in pronunciation, because no reason can be 
imagined why any one should have put these irregular lines 
in the place of regular ones. 

In V, 41, 10, grmitQ agnir etari na jfishai.^, JO/^ishkejo ni 
rinKti vani, every modern Pandit would naturally read 
vanini instead of vana, in oi'der to get the regular TrishAibh 
metre. But this being the case, how can we imagine that 
even the most ignorant member of an ancient Parishad 
should wilfully have altered vanini into van^ ? What sur¬ 
prises one is, that vand should have been spared, in spite of 
every temptation to change it into vanini : for I cannot 
doubt for one moment that vani is the right reading, only 

cu 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

that the ancient poets pronounced it vanX Wherever we 
alter the text of the Rig-veda by conjecture, we ought to 
be able, if possible, to give some explanation how the mis¬ 
take which we wish to remove came to be committed. If a 
passage is obscure, difficult to construe, if it contains words 
which occur in no other place, then we can understand how, 
during a long process of oral tradition, accidents may have 
happened. But. when everything is smooth and easy, when 
the intention of the poet is not to be mistaken, when the 
same phrase has occurred many times before, then to sup¬ 
pose that a simple and perspicuous sentence was changed 
into a complicated and obscure string of words, is more 
difficult to understand. I know there are passages where 
we cannot as yet account for the manner in which an evi¬ 
dently faulty reading found its way into both the Pada and 
Sa/;2hit^ texts, but in those very passages we cannot be too 
circumspect. If we read VIII, 40, 9, pSiwish ^a indro- 
pamltaya/^ purvir uta prai-astaya/2, nothing seems more 
tempting than to omit indra, and to read purvish ia. upami- 

o — 

taya^. Nor would it be difficult to account for the insertion 
of indra ; for though one would hardly venture to call it 
a marginal gloss that crept into the text — a case which, as 
far as I can see, has never happened in the hymns of the 
Rig-veda — it might be taken for an explanation given by 
an Akkrya to his pupils, in order to inform them that the 
ninth verse, different from the eighth, was addressed to 
Indra. But however plausible this may sound, the question 
remains whether the traditional reading could not be main¬ 
tained, by admitting synizesis of opa, and reading pSrvish 
fa indropami-taya^. For a similar synizesis of — u, see III, 
6, 10. adhvareva tasthatu/2, unless we read priiy 

adhvareva. 

Another and more difficult case of synizesis occurs in 

VII, 80, 4. ava tvanen^ namas^ tura(/2) iy4m. 

It would be easy to conjecture tvarey^m instead of tura 
iy§m, but tvarey4m, in the sense of ‘ let me hasten,* is not 
Vedic. The choriambic ending, however, of a Trish^ubh 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION, 

ciii 

can be proved to be legitimate, and if that is the case, then 

even the synizesis of tura, though hard, ought not to be 
regarded as impossible. 

In II, i8, 5, i vimsRtyE. tvimsB.tk ylhy arv§.n, 

^ kdXvkvimszXk haribhir yu^£na^, 

\ pa^M^at^ surathebhir mdra, 

_ w ^ 

d shash/yd saptatyd somapeyam, 

Professor Kuhn proposes to omit the d at the beginning of 
the second line, in order to have eleven instead of twelve 
syllables. By doing so he loses the uniformity of the four 
pddas, which all begin with d, while by admitting synizesis 
of haribhi/J all necessity for conjectural emendation dis¬ 
appears. 

If the poets of the Veda had objected to a pseon quartus 
at the end of a Gdyatri, what could have been 
easier than to change IV, 5z, i, divo adarj*i duhitd, into 
adar.ri duhitd divaA? or X, ii8, 6, addbhyai^2 grehapatim, 
into grzhapatim addbhyam ? 

If an epitritus secundus (-v^ — ) had been objectionable 
in the same place, why not say VI, 6i, lo, stomyd bhdt 
sarasvati, instead of sarasvati stomyd bhdt ? Why not VIII, 

II, revanta;;^ hi srinomi tvd, instead of revanta?;»2 hi tvd 
srinomi ? 

If an ionicus a minore (w w — ) had been excluded from 
that place, why not say I, 30, io,^rrt3>-zbhya^ sakhe vaso, 
instead of sakhe vaso ^ritrfbhya-4 ? or I, 41, 7, varuwasya 
mahi psara/z, instead of mahi psaro varuwasya ? 

If a dispondeus ( — — ) was to be avoided, then V, 68, 3, 
mahi vhn kshatraw deveshu, might easily have been re¬ 
placed by deveshu v4?« kshatram mahF, and VIII, a, 10, 
mkil tsir&m yl^ante, by jukri ySAanta Irimm. 

If no epitritus primus (o - ) was allowed, why not say 

VI, 61, II, nidas pl,tu sarasvati, instead of sarasvati nidas 
p4tu, or VIII, 79, 4, dvesho yi.vir aghasya hx., instead of 
ylvlr aghasya ^^Fd dveshaA ? 

CIV 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Even the epitritus tertius ( — ^ might easily have been 
avoided by dropping the augment of ap^m in X, 119, 1-13, 
kuvit somasy^pSm iti. It is, in fact, a variety of less frequent 
occurrence than the rest, and might possibly be eliminated 
with some chance of success. 

Lastly, the choriambus (— o «^ -) could have been removed 
in III, 5, slsihi sunumata/^, by reading sunumata/2 
slsthi na^, and in VIII, 2,^ 31, sandd amnkto dayate, by 
reading amrzkto dayate sanit. 

But I am afraid the idea that regularity is better than 
irregularity, and that in the Veda, where there is a possibility, 
the regular metre is to be restored by means of conjectural 
emendations, has been so ably advocated by some of the 
most eminent scholars, that a merely general argument 
would now be of no avail. I must therefore give as much 
evidence as I can bring together in support of the contrary 
opinion ; and though the process is a tedious one, the 
importance of the consequences with regard to Vedic 
criticism leaves me no alternative. With regard, then, to 
Seven dipodia of G^yatrt verses, I still 

Gayatra Vritta.s. hold and maintain, that, although the dij ambus 
is by far the most general metre, the following seven 
varieties have to be recognised in the poetry of the Veda “ : 

I. 2. 3. — , 4. ^ 3, - j 

6. w - 7* — 8, 

I do not pretend to give every passage in which these 
varieties occur, but I hope I shall give a sufficient number 
in support of every one of them. I have confined myself 
almost entirely to the final dipodia of Giyatri verses, as the 
Anush/ubha verses would have swelled the lists too much. 

I, 9. tasmai pivaka mr/Zaya. (Instead of mnVaya, 
it has been proposed to read mar^oTaya.) 

I, 18, 9. divo na sadmamakhasam. 

I, 43, 4 ; 46, a; 97, 1-8; III, II, 3; ay, lo; IV, 15, 7 ; 

* See some important remarks on these varieties in Mr. J. Boxwell’s article 
' On the TrishAibh Metre,’ Journal Asiat. Soc. Beng., 1885, p. 79. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CV 

32,4; 5a, I ; V,5, 9; 7,4; 7.5; 7,7; 9.4; 53. ^1,3: 

5i, ii; 64,5; 65,4; 8a, 9; VI, 16, 17; 16,18; 16, 45; 
45, 17; 61, 4; VII, 15, 14; 66, a; VIII, 6, 35; 6,4a; 
3a, 10; 44, a8 ; 45, 31 ; 7a, 6 ; 7a, 13 ; 80, i ; 83, 3 ; 93, 
a7 ; IX, 61, 5; 64, I ; X, 118, 6. 

§ 3- - ^ ■ 

I, 2%, II. a^>^/2innapatrl,/2 sa/^ant^m. 

■ 13- kshumanto yibhir madema. 

I, 41, 8 ; 90, 1 ; 90, 4 ; lao, l ; V, I9, I ; 70, 3 ; VI, 61, 
10; VIII, a, a; a, 4; 3, 5; a, II ; a, la; a, 13; a, 14; 

a, 15 ; 2, 16; 3, 17; a, 39; a, 30; a, 33; a, 33; a, 36; 

a, 37; 7, 30; 7. 33; a; II, 3; II, 4; 16, 3; 16, 4; 

^6, 5 ; ^6, 7 ; 46, a ; 7^. a ; 81, i ; 81, 3 . ^i. 4 ; ^^5 7 ; 

81, 9 ; 94, 3 ; IX, 63, 5 ; X, 30, 4 ; ao, 7. 

§ 4. w v_, - . 

I, 3, 8. usri iva svasarEwi. 

I, 37, 4. agne deveshu pra vo.^a/i. 

I, 3°, 10 ; 30, 15 ; 38, 7 ; 38, 8 ; 41, 7 ; 43, 7 ; n, 6, a ; 
III, 37, 3 ; V, 83, 7 ; VI, 16, 35 ; 16, 36 ; 61, la ; VIII, 3, 
I ; 3, 3 ; 3, 8 ; 3, 18 ; a, 19 ; 2, ax ; a, 33 ; 3, 33 ; a, 26 ; 
3, 35 ; 16, 3 ; 16, 6 ; 16, 8 ; 71,9; 79, 3 ; IX, 31, 5 ; 63, 6 ; 
66, 31 ; X, ao, 5 ; 185, i ; 185, 3 ; 185, 3. 

§5- - . 

I, 3, 7. dhiyaw ^rit^khn s^dhantS.. 

I, 3, 4. awvtbhis tanE p5tlsa.^i. 

I, a7, 3; 90, a; II, 6, 4; III, 41, 8; V, 68, 3; 68, 4; 
VIII, a, 10; 3, 34; 16, i; 16, 13; 79, a; IX, 66, 17; X, 
30, 6 ; 30, 8. 

§ 6. - . . 

I, 15, 6. ntunE ya^^am Ijlthe. 

I, 38, 3. kva VO g4vo na rawyanti (see note to I, 38, 3). 
I. 38, 9 ; 86, 9 ; III, 27, 3 ; 41, 3 ; IV, 33, 33 ; V, 68, 5 ; 
70,3; VI, 61, II ; VIII, 3,30; 3,35; 7.3a; a6, 19; 79,4; 
79. 5; 81, 6; X, 158,4. 

CVl 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

§ 7. - - V. 

Ij 10, 8. sdim gi asmabhya;i»2 dhunuhi. 

I, 1%^ 5. agne tvdim rakshasvina/2. 

I. 37. 15 ; 43. 8 ; 46, 6 ; HI. 6a, 7 ; IV, 30, ai ; V, 86, 5 ; 
VIII, 5, 3a ; 5. 35 ; X, 1 19, 1-13 ; 144, 4- 

§ 8. — KJ KJ 

I, 3, 9. daksha^;^ dadhite apasam (or § oi). 

I, 6, 10. indra;^ maho vS ra^sa>4. 

I. a7, 3°> 21; 41, 9; 9o> 5; in, 34, 5; V, 19, a; 

70, i; 70, 4; 8a, 8; VIII, a, a7; a, 31; 16, 9; 55, 4; 
67, 19; 5; 8; IX, 47, a. 

But although with regard to the G^yatra, and I may 
add, the Anush^ubha pddas, the evidence as to the variety 
Traish/ubha and of their vr^’ttas is such that it can hardly be 
G^igata padas. j-gsisted, a much more determined stand 
has been made in defence of the vrztta of the Traish- 
2?ubha and Gagata pddas. Here Professor Kuhn and 
those who follow him maintain that the rule is absolute, 
that the former must end in the latter in — 

and that the eighth syllable, immediately preceding these 
syllables, ought, if possible, to be long. Nor can I deny 
that Professor Kuhn has brought forward powerful argu¬ 
ments in support of his theory, and that his emendations 
of the Vedic text recommend themselves by their great 
ingenuity and simplicity. If his. theory could be carried 
out, I should readily admit that we should gain something. 
We should have throughout the Veda a perfectly uniform 
metre, and wherever we found any violation of it, we 
should be justified in resorting to conjectural criticism. 

The only question is at what price this strict uniformity 
can be obtained. If, for instance, in order to have the^ 
regular vrzttas at the end of Traish^ubha and C?dgata 
lines, we were obliged to repeal all rules of prosody, to 
allow almost every short vowel to be used as long, and 
eveiy long vowel to be used as short, whether long by 
nature or by position, we should have gained very little, we 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

evil 

should have robbed Peter to pay Paul, we should have 
removed no difficulty, but only ignored the causes which 
created it. Now, if we examine the process by which 
Professor Kuhn establishes the regularity of the v^^zttas or 
final syllables of Traish/ubha and Cdgata padas, we find, in 
addition to the rules laid down before, and in which he is 
supported, as we saw, to a great extent by the Pr^ti^dkhya 
and Pa;nni, viz. the anceps nature of e and o, and of a long 
final vowel before a vowel, the following exceptions or 
metrical licences, without which that metrical uniformity 
at which he aims, could not be obtained : 

Prosodial I- The vowel o in the body of a word is to 
Licences. treated as optionally short : 

< _ 11 _ _ 

II, 39, 3. prati vastor usr4 (see TrisliA § 5). 

Here the o of vasto/2 is supposed to be short, although it 
is the Gu?2a of u, and therefore very different from the final 
e of sarve or dste, or the final o of sarvo for sarvas or mano 
for manas®. It should be remarked that in Greek, too, the 
final diphthongs corresponding to the e of sarve and dste 
are treated as short, as far as the accent is concerned. 
Hence aTroifcoi, ruTTreraL^ and even yi/wjmai, nom. plur. In 
Latin, too, the old terminations of the nom. sing, o and u, 
instead of the later us, are short. (Neue, Formenlehre, 
§ 5^3 seq.) 

VI, 51, 15- gopi ami 

Here the o of gopi is treated as short, in order to get 
w - - instead of — w which is perfectly legitimate at 
the end of an Ush/nh. 

Q,, The long i and are treated as short, not only before 
vowels, which is legitimate, but also before consonants. 

VII, 62,, 4. dylvibhfimi adlte trlslthl;^^ naA (see TrishA 

§5). 

The forms Ijiya and ilsTya in VII, 3a, 18, occur at the 
end of octosyllabic or Gelyatra pidas, and are therefore 

“■ A very strong divergence of opinion is expressed on this point by Professor 
Bollensen. He says : ' O und E erst spater in die Schrifttafel aufgenommen, 
bewahren ihre Lange durch das ganze indische Schriftenthum bis ins Apa- 
bhrawfa hinab. Selbstverstiindlich kann kurz o and e im Veda erst recht nicht 
zugelassen werden.' Zeitsdhrift der D* M. G., vol. xxii, p. 5H* 

cvm 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

perfectly legitimate, yet Professor Kuhn would change 
them too, into t^iya and r^siya. In VII, 'zS, 4, even 
miyi is treated as miyi (see Trishzf. § 5) ; and in VII, 68, i, 
vitam as vitam. If, in explanation of this shortening of 
vitam, vihi is quoted, which is identified with vihi, this can 
hardly be considered as an argument, for vihi occurs where 
no short syllable is required, IV, 48, i ; II, 2,6, 2 ; and 
where, therefore, the shortening of the vowel cannot be 
attributed to metrical reasons. 

3. Final m followed by an initial consonant is allowed 
to make no position, and even in the middle of a word 
a nasal followed by a liquid is supposed to make positio 
debilis. Several of the instances, however, given in support, 
are from G^yatra pddas, where Professor Kuhn, in some of 
his later articles, has himself allowed greater latitude ; 
others admit of different scanning, as for instance, 

I, 117, 8. maha/^ ksho;^asya ai'vini kaOTaya. 

Here, even if we considered the dispondeus as illegiti¬ 
mate, we might scan ka^iya, for this scanning occurs in 
other places, while to treat the first a as short before nv 
seems tantamount to surrendering all rules of prosody. 

4. Final n before semivowels, mutes, and double n before 
vowels make no position ^ Ex. Ill, 49, i. yasmin vii-vi 
(Trishif. § 5); 1, 174, 5. yasmm Hkan ; 1, 186,4, sasmin(n) 
■udhan 

5. Final Visarga before sibilants makes no position®. 
Ex. IV, !^T, 10. satya/2 samrd^ (Trisha. § 5). Even in I, 63,4, 

" Professor Kuhn has afterwards (Beitrage, vol. iv, p, 207) modified this 
view, and instead of allowing a final nasal vowel followed by a mute to make 
positio debilis, he thinks that the nasal should in most cases be omitted 
altogether. 

^ Here a distinction should be made, I think, between an n before a con¬ 
sonant, and a final n following a short vowel, which, according to the rules of 
Sandhi, is doubled, if a vowel follows. In the latter case, the vowel before the n 
remains, no doubt, short in many cases, or, more correctly, the doubling of the 
n does not take place, e. g. I, 63, 4; 186, 4. In other places, the doubling 
seems preferable, e.g. I, 33, ii, though Professor Kuhn would remove it 
altogether. Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 125. 

c Here, too, according to later researches, Professor Kuhn would rather omit 
the final sibilant altogether, loc. cit. vol. iv, p. 207. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CIX 

ko6Xh sakh^ (probably a Gagata), and V, 83, 4. sdvi/^ sau- 
bhagam (a Gay. § 7), the long i is treated as short, and the 
short a of sakhd is lengthened, because an aspirate follows. 

6. S before mutes makes no position. Ex. VI, 66, ii. 

ugra aspWdhran (Trisha. § 3). 

7. 5 before k makes no position. Ex. vwvai-yfeandr^/?, &c. 

8. Mutes before s make no position. Ex. rakshas, accord¬ 
ing to Professor Kuhn, in the seventh Ma;/^ala only, but 

see I, I a, 5 ; kutsa, &c. 

9. Mutes before r or v make no position. .Ex. su.yrpra, 
dirghai-rut. 

* V/ 

10. Sibilants before y make no position. Ex. dasytln. 

11. R followed by mutes or sibilants makes no position. 
Ex. dyur^ivase, Mardi.^, varshish/Z^am. 

1 3. Words like smaddish/ln, &c. retain their vowel short 
before two following consonants. 

We now proceed to consider a number of prosodial rules 
which Professor Kuhn proposes to repeal in order to have 
a long syllable where the MSS. supply a short : 

I. The vowel ri is to be pronounced as long, or rather as ar. 
Ex. I, I a, 9. tasmai p^vaka mrz7aya is to be i-ead mardaya % 
V> 33j sa;/^vara«asya :^zshe/^ is to be read arshe/^. But 
why not sa7OTara;zasyar2she>5 (i. e. siarshe/^) ? 

3. The a privativum may be lengthened. Ex. 'zgzxih, 

G w/ . 

amnta/2. 

3. Short vowels before liquids may be long. Ex. nara^, 
tarutd, tarati, marutdm, hariva/^, arushi, dadhur iha, suvitd 

(p- 471)- 

_4. Short vowels before nasals may be lengthened. Ex. 
^anan, sanitar, tanii>5, upa naZ:. 

5. Short vowels before the ma of the superlative may be 
lengthened. Ex. nrftama. 

6. The short a in the roots .ram and yam, and in am (the 
termination of the accusative) may be lengthened. 

cx 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

7- The group ava is to be pronounced aua. Ex. avase 
becomes auase; saviti. becomes sault^; nava becomes naua. 

8. The group aya is to be changed into aia or ea. Ex. 
nayasi becomes naiasi. 

9. The group va is to be changed into • ua, and this ua 
to be treated as a kind of diphthong and therefore long. 

Ex. kawatama/^ becomes ka^matama^; v^xwt2.h becomes 
uaru;2^. 

10. The short vowel in the reduplicated syllable of per¬ 
fects is to be lengthened. Ex. tatana/i:, dadhire. 

11. Short vowels before all aspirates may be lengthened. 
Ex. rathi^ becomes rathi-^ ; sakhd becomes sakhd. 

Short vowels before h and all sibilants may be 
lengthened. Ex. mahini becomes mahinf; u.yi^im becomes 
; rishate becomes rishate ; dasat becomes dasat. 

13. The short vowel before t may be lengthened. Ex. 
vifavataA becomes vd^avata/^; atithi/^ becomes atithi^. 

14. The short vowel before d may be lengthened. Ex. 
udaram becomes udaram ; ud ava becomes ud ava. 

15. The short vowel before p may be lengthened. Ex. 
apim becomes apim ; tapushim becomes tapushim ; gri~ 
hapatim becomes g;"diapatim. 

16. The short vowel before g and g may be lengthened. 
Ex. sinushag asat becomes s^nushag asat ; yuna^an be¬ 
comes yuna^n. 

Let us now turn back for one moment to look at the 
slaughter which has been committed 1 Is there one 
single rule of prosody that has been spared ? Is there one 
single short syllable that must always remain short, or 
a long syllable that must always remain long ? If all re¬ 
strictions of prosody are thus removed, our metres, no 
doubt, become perfectly regular. But it should be remem¬ 
bered that these metrical rules, for which all this carnage 
has been committed, are not founded upon any a priori 
principles, but deduced by ancient or modern metricians 
from those very hymns which seem so constantly to violate 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CXI 

them. Neither ancient nor modern metricians had. as far 
as we know, any evidence to go upon besides the hymns of 
the Rig-veda ; and the philosophical speculations as to the 
origin of metres in which some of them indulge, and from 
which they would fain derive some of their unbending rules, 
are, as need hardly be said, of no consequence whatever. I 
cannot understand what definite idea even modern writers 
connect with such statements as that, for instance, the 
Trish^ubh metre sprang from the Cagati metre, that the 
eleven syllables of the former are an abbreviation of the 
twelve syllables of the latter. Surely, metres are not made 
artificially, and by addition or subtraction. Metres have a 
natural origin in the rhythmic sentiment of different people, 
and they become artificial and arithmetical in the same way 
as language with its innate principles of law and analogy 
becomes in course of time grammatical and artificial. To 
derive one metre from another is like deriving a genitive 
from a nominative, which we may do indeed for grammatical 
purposes, but which no one would venture to do who is at 
all acquainted with the natural and independent production 
of grainmatical forms. Were we to arrange the Trish/ubh 
and GB.gB.tt metres in chronological order, I should decidedly 
place the TrishAibh first, for we see, as it were before our 
eyes, how sometimes one foot, sometimes two and three feet 
in a Trish^ubh verse admit an additional syllable at the end, 
particularly in set phrases which would not submit to a 
Trishzfubh ending. The phrase sB.m no bhava dvipade SB.m 
i^atushpade is evidently a solemn phrase,, and we see it 
brought in without hesitation, even though every other 
line of the same strophe or hymn is Trish/ubh, i.e. hendeca- 
syllabic, not dodecasyllabic. See, for instance, VI, 74, 1 ; 
VII, 54, i; X, 85, 44; 165, I. However, I maintain by no 
means that this was the actual origin of iragati metres; I only 
refer to it in order to show the groundlessness of metrical 
theories which represent the component elements, a foot of 
one or two or four syllables as given first, and as afterwards 
compounded into systems of two, three or four such feet, and 
who therefore would wish us to look upon the hendecasyl- 
labic TrishAibh as originally a dodecasyllabic (?agati, only 

CXll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

deprived of its tail. If my explanation of the name of Tri- 
sh/ubh, i. e. Three-step, is right, its origin must be ascribed to 
a far more natural process than that of artificial amputation. 
It was to accompany a choros, i. e. a dance, which after 
advancing freely for eight steps in one direction, turned 
back (v;"/tta) with three steps, the second of which was 
strongly marked, and would therefore, whether in song or 
recitation, be naturally accompanied by a long syllable. It 
certainly is so in the vast majority of Trish/ubhs which 
have been handed down to us. But if among these verses 
we find a small number in which this simple and palpable 
rhythm is violated, and which nevertheless were preserved 
from the first in that imperfect form, although the tempta¬ 
tion to set them right must have been as great to the 
ancient as it has proved to be to the modern students of 
the Veda, are we to say that nearly all, if not all, the rules 
that determine the length and shortness of syllables, and 
which alone give character to every verse, are to be sus¬ 
pended ? Or, ought we not rather to consider, whether the 
ancient choregic poets may not have indulged occasionally 
in an irregular movement? We see that this was^so with 
regard to Giyatri verses. We see the greater freedom of 
the first and second p§.das occasionally extend to the third ; 
and it will be impossible, without intolerable violence, to 
remove all the varieties of the last p4da of a Gdyatrl of 
which I have given examples above, pages civ seqq. 

It is, of course, impossible to give here all the evidence 
that might be brought forward in support of similar freedom 
TraishAibha in Trish/ubh verses, and I admit that the 
Vntta. number of real varieties with them is smaller 
than with the Gdyatris. In order to make the evidence 
which I have to bring forward in support of these varieties as 
unassailable as possible, I have excluded nearly every pdda 
that occurs only in the first, second, or third line of a 
strophe, and have restricted myself, with few exceptions, 
and those chiefly referring to pddas that had been quoted 
by other scholars in support of their own theories, to the 
final pddas of Trishifubh verses. Yet even with this limited 
evidence, I think I shall be able to establish at least three 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CXlll 

varieties of Trish^fubh. Preserving the same classification 
which I adopted before for the G^yatris, so as to include 
the important eighth syllable of the TrishAjbh, which does 
not properly belong to the vntta, I maintain that class 4, 

w ^ - , class 5. - , and class 8. - w ^ - must be 

recognised as legimate endings in the hymns of the Veda, 
and that by recognising them we are relieved from nearly 
all, if not all, the more violent prosodial licences which 
Professor Kuhn felt himself obliged to admit in his theory 
of Vedic metres. 

§ 4. U W - . 

The verses which fall under § 4 are so numerous that 
after those of the first Ma;2^ala, mentioned above, they 
need not be given here in full. They are simply cases 
where the eighth syllable is not lengthened, and they 
cannot be supposed to run counter to any rule of the Prdti- 
r&khya, for the simple reason that the Pr^ltircikhya never 
gave such a rule as that the eighth syllable must be 
lengthened, if the ninth is short. Examples will be found 
in the final pdda of Trish/ubhs: II, 30, 6; III, 36, 4; 53, 
151 I IV, 1, 16 ; 2,, 9 ; 1 1 ; 4,^^ I <5, i ; ; 4 ; 7, 7 ; 

11.5; 17, 3; ^3»^; 2^8,5; 55,5; 57, a;V,i, 

2; VI, 17, 10; 21,8; 23,7; 25,5; 33.1; i; 63, 

7; VII, 21, 5; 28, 3 ; 42, 4 ; 15 5 <5o, xo; 84, 2; 92, 4; 

VIII, I, 33 ; 96, 9 ; IX, 92, 5 ; X, 61, 12 ; 13 ; 74, 3 ; 117, 7, 

In support of § 5. - , the number of cases is smaller, 

but it should be remembered that it might be considerably 
increased if I had not restricted myself to the final pAda of 
each Trish/ubh, while the first, second, and third p4das 
would have yielded a much larger harvest : 

§ 5* “ " ^ 

I, 89, 9. md no madhyd ririshatiyur ganto//. 

I, 92, 6. suprattka saumanaslyi^ga^. 

5; I; is2, 8; 186,3; II, 4, in, 

49.^; IV, 3, 9; ^6,6; V,4i, 14; VI, 25,2; 66, ii; VII, 
8, 6; a8, 4; 68, I; 71, a; 78, I ; 93, 7'»; IX, 90, 4; X, 
II, 8. 

[3*] 

h 

CXIV 

VEDIC HYMNS, 

I do not wish to deny that in several of these lines it 
would be possible to remove the long syllable from the 
ninth place by conjectural emendation. Instead of iyur 
in I, 89, 9, we might read ayu ; in I, 9:^, 6, we might di'op 
the augment of a^igar ; in II, 4, we might admit syni- 

zesis in aratir, and then read ^ira-a^rva-^, as in I, 141, I2-. 
In VI, 1^5, z, after eliding the a of ava, we might read 
dasi/2. But even if, in addition to all this, we were to 
admit the possible suppression of final m in asmabhyam, 
mahyam, and in the accusative singular, or the suppres¬ 
sion of s in the nominative singular, both of which would 
be extreme measures, we should still have a number of 
cases which could not be righted without even more vio¬ 
lent remedies. Why then should we not rather admit 
the occasional appearance of a metrical variation which 
certainly has a powerful precedent in the dispondeus of 
Giyatris ? I am not now acquainted with the last results 
of metrical criticism in Virgil, but, unless some new theories 
now prevail, I well recollect that spondaic hexameters, 
though small in numbei-, much smaller than in the Veda, 
were recognised by the best scholars, and no emendations 
attempted to remove them. If then in Virgil we read, 

' Cum patribus populoque, penatibusque et magnis dis,’ 
why not follow the authority of the best MSS, and the 
tradition of the Prdtii'^khyas and admit a dispondeus at 
the end of a Trish/ubh rather than suspend, in order to 
meet this single difficulty, some of the most fundamental 
rules of prosody ? 

I now proceed to give a more numerous list of Trai- 
sh/ubha p^das ending in a choriambus, - ^ again con¬ 
fining myself, with few exceptions, to final pidas : 

§ 8, — 

_ W _ 

I, 6Zj 3. sam usriyibhir vdvaj’anta nara^. 

I, 103, 4. yad dha slinuA j’ravase nSma dadhe, 

I, lai, 9; laa, lo^'j 173,8; 186, a; 11,4,3 5 I9, 33. 

14; IV, I, i9»»; a5, 4; 39, a; V, 30, la; 41, 45 4i, i5; 

‘ Nur eine Stelle habe icb mir angemerkt, wo das Metrum ^am verlangt.* 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CXV 

VI, 4, 7; 10,5; II.4; 13.1’’; 13.1^; ao.i’>; ao.i^; 39,4; 
33. 3; 33> 5; 44, II ; 49, 68, 5; 68, 7; VII, 19, lo; 

6a, 4; IX, 97, a6; X, 55, 8; 99, 9 ; 108, 6; 169, i. 

It is perfectly true that this sudden change in the rhythm 
of Trish^ubh verses, making their ending iambic instead of 
trochaic, grates on our ears. But, I believe, that if we admit 
a short stop after the seventh syllable, the intended rhythm 
of these verses will become intelligible. We remarked a 
similar break in the verses of hymn X, 77, where the sudden 
transition to an iambic metre was used with great effect, and 
the choriambic ending, though less effective, is by no means 
offensive. It should be remarked also, that in many, though 
not in all cases, a caesura takes place after the seventh syl¬ 
lable, and this is, no doubt, a great help towards a better 
delivery of these choriambic Trish/ubhs. 

While, however, I contend for the recognition of these 
three varieties of the normal Trish/ubh metre, I am quite 
willing to admit that other variations besides these, which 
occur from time to time in the Veda, form a legitimate 
subject of critical discussion. 

§ a, , 

Trish^ubh verses, the final pida of which ends in ^ w — , 
I should generally prefer to treat as ending in a Gagata 
pida, in which this ending is more legitimate. Thus I 
should propose to scan: 

I, IT. praj'astaye mahini. rathavate. 

Ill, i^o, 5. vasSn rudriA idity§.:i iha huve- 

V, 2^, I. pura/2 pai'yanti nihitam (tarn) aratau. 

VI, 13, 5- vayo vrzk^ySirsiye ^asuraye. 

§ I, VJ — u — * 

I should propose the same medela for some final p4da$ 
of Trishifubhs apparently ending in We might 

indeed, as has been suggested, treat these verses as single 
instances of that peculiar meti'e which we saw carried out in 
the whole of hymn X, 77, but at the end of a verse the ad- 

Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iv, p. i8o ; Bollensen, Zeitschrift der D. M. G., vol. xxii, 
P. 587. 

CXVl 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

mission of an occasional Cdgata pida is more in accordance 
with the habit of the Vedic poets. Thus I should scan : 

V, 33, 4. vWsha samatsu d^sasya nama k\t 

Vj 41, 5^ rdya eshe^vase dadhita dhik. 

After what I have said before on the real character of the 
teaching of the Prdtijdkhya, I need not show again that the 
fact of Uva^fa’s counting ta of dadhita as the tenth syllable 
is of no importance in determining the real nature of these 
hymns, though it is of importance, as Professor Kuhn re¬ 
marks (Beitrage, vol. iii, p. 451), in showing that Uva/k con¬ 
sidered himself at perfect liberty in counting or not counting, 
for his own purposes, the elided syllable of avase. 

VII, 4, 6, mdpsaya>5 pari shad^ma mdduva/ii, 

§ 6. - . 

Final pddas of TrishAjbhs ending in - are very 

scarce. In VI, i, 4, 

bhadraya;;^ te ra?2ayanta sa;;2dr2sh/au, 
it would be very easy to read bhadrdy^^w te sa^/zdnsh/au 
rawayanta ; and in X, 74, 2,, 

dyaur na varebhi/2 knwavanta svai^, 
we may either recognise a Crdgata pida, or read 

dyaur na vlrebhi^ kn^^avanta svaiA, 
which would agree with the metre of hymn X, 77. 

§ 7. - w 

P4das ending in - w - do not occur as final in any 

Traishrubha hymn, but as many G^Agata pddas occur in 
the body of Traish^ubha hymns, we have to scan them as 
dodecasyllabic ; 

I, 63, 4^ tva^;2 ha tyad indra ^odi/2 sakhd, 

IV, 2t6, 6^. parivata/2 .rakuno mandram madam. 

The adjective pdvaka which frequently occurs at the end 
of final and internal pddas of Trish/ubh hymns has always 

“ Professor Kuhn has finally adopted the same scanning, Beitrage, vol. iv, 
p. 184. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CXVll 

to be scanned pdvaka. Cf. IV, 51,2,1 VI, 5, a ; 10, 4 ; 51,3 ; 
VII, 3, I ; 9 ; 9; 5<5, 12, ; X, 46, 7^ 

I must reserve what I have to say about other metres 
of the Veda for another opportunity, but I cannot leave 
Omission of subject without referring once more to a 
final m and s. metrical licence which has been strongly 
advocated by Professor Kuhn and others, and by the 
admission of which there is no doubt that many diffi¬ 
culties might be removed, I mean the occasional omission 
of a final m and s, and the subsequent contraction of the 
final and initial vowels. The arguments that have been 
brought forward in support of this are very powerful. 
There is the general argument that final s and m are 
liable to be dropt in other Ai'yan languages, and par¬ 
ticularly for metrical purposes. There is the stronger argu¬ 
ment that in some cases final s and m in Sanskrit may or 
may not be omitted, even apart from any metrical stress. 
In Sanskrit we find that the demonstrative pronoun sas 
appears most frequently as sa (sa daditi), and if followed 
by liquid vowels, it may coalesce with them even in later 
Sanskrit. Thus we see saisha for sa esha, sendra/^ for sa 
indray^ sanctioned for metrical purposes even by 
VI, 1, 134. We might refer also to feminines which have 
s in the nominative singular after bases in fi, but drop it 
after bases in t. We find in the Sawdiitd text, V, 7, 8, 
svddhitiva, instead of svadhiti/^-iva in the Pada text, sanc¬ 
tioned by the Prdtuikhya 259 ; likewise IX, 61, 10, Sajw- 
hiti, bhfimy S. dade, instead of Pada, bh^[mi/^ & dade. But 
before we draw any general conclusions from such in¬ 
stances, we should consider whether they do not admit 
of a grammatical instead of a metrical explanation. The 
nominative singular of the demonstrative pronoun was sa 
before it was sas ; by the side of bhiimiA we have a 
secondaiy form bhumJ; and we may conclude from svd- 
dhiti-v4n, I, 88, that the Vedic poets knew of a form 
svddhiti, by the side of svddhitiA, 

As to the suppression of final m, however, we see it 
admitted by the best authorities, or we see at least alter¬ 
nate forms with or without m, in tiibhya, which occurs 

CXVlll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

frequently instead of tdbhyam^ and twice, at leasts with¬ 
out apparently any metrical reason^. We find asmaka 
instead of asmakam (I, 173, 10), yushmi'ka instead of 
yushmikam (VII, 59, 9-10), ya^dhva instead of ya^adh- 
vam (VIII, 3, 37) sanctioned both by the Sa;;2hita and Pada 
texts 

If then we have such precedents, it may well be asked 
why we should hesitate to adopt the same expedient, the 
omission of final m and s, whenever the Vedic metres 
seem to require it. Professor Bollensen's remark, that 
Vedic verses cannot be treated to all the licences of Latin 
scanning‘s, is hardly a sufficient answer; and he himself, 
though under a slightly different form, would admit as 
much, if not more, than has been admitted on this point by 
Professors Kuhn and Roth. On a priori grounds I should 
by no means feel opposed to the admission of a possible 
elision of final s or m, or even n ; and my only doubt is 
whether it is really necessary for the proper scanning of 
Vedic metres. 

My own opinion has always been, that if we admit on 
a larger scale what in single words can hardly be doubted 
by anybody, viz. the pronunciation of two 
syllables as one, we need not fall back on 
the elision of final consonants in order to arrive at a proper 
scanning of Vedic metres. On this point I shall have to 
say a few words in conclusion, because I shall frequently 
avail myself of this licence, for the purpose of righting 
apparently corrupt verses in the hymns of the Rig-veda ; 
and I feel bound to explain, once for all, why I avail my¬ 
self of it in preference to other emendations which have 
been proposed by scholars such as Professors Benfey, Kuhn, 
Roth, Bollensen, and others. 

The merit of having first pointed out some cases where 

54. 9 ; 2 ; III, 42, 8 ; V, II, 5 ; VII, 22, 7 ; VIII, 51, 9 ; 76, 8 ; 

82, 5 ; IX, 62, 27 ; 86, 30 ; X, 167, i. 

II, II, 3 ; V, 30, 6. 

® See Bollensen, Orient und Occident, vol. iii, p. 459 ; Kuhn, Beitrage, 
vol. iv, p. 199. 

^ Orient und Occident, vol. iv, p. 449. 

PREFACE TO TtlE FIRST EDITION. 

CXIX 

two syllables must be treated as one, belongs, I believe, to 
Professor Bollensen in his article, ‘ Zur Herstellung des 
Veda," published in Benfey’s Orient und Occident, vol. ii, 
p. 461. He proposed, for instance, to write hyin^ instead of 
hiyand', IX, 13, 6 ; dhyind instead of dhiyand, VIII, 49, 5 ; 
sahyase instead of sahiyase, I, 71, 4; yano instead of iydnd, 
VIII, 50, 5, &c. The actual alteration of these words seems 
to me unnecessary; nor should we think of resorting to 
such violent measures in Greek where, as far as metrical 
purposes are concerned, two vowels have not unfrequently 
to be treated as one. 

That iva counts in many passages as one syllable is 
admitted by everybody. The only point on which I differ 
is that I do not see why iva, when monosyllabic, should be 
changed to va, instead of being pronounced quickly, or, to 
adopt the terminology of Greek grammarians, by synizesis ^ 
Synizesis is well explained by Greek scholars as a quick 
pronunciation of two vowels so that neither should be lost, 
and as different thereby from synaloephe, which means the 
contraction of two vowels into one This synizesis is by 
no means restricted to iva and a few other words, but seems 
to me a very frequent expedient resorted to by the ancient 
jRfshis. 

Originally it may have arisen from the fact that language 
allows in many cases alternate forms of one or two sylla¬ 
bles. As in Greek we have double forms like akeyeivos and 
&\y€Lvd^, yakaKro(pdyo9 and ykaKro(l>dyoSj Tr^rrivos and irTTjvd^^ 
TrvKLvos and 7rvKv6$ and as in Latin we have the shortening 

“ Synizesis in Greek applies only to the quick pronunciation of two vowels, 
if in immediate contact ; and not, if separated by consonants. SamprasErawa 
might seem a more appropriate term, but though the grammatical process 
designated in Sanskrit by SamprasSrawa offers some analogies, it could only by 
a new definition be applied to the metrical process here intended. 

^ A. B, p. 835, 30. karri dk kv rets xoivots fiirpois ml if mXovfAkvrj erwe/r- 
(pdjvrjcns if ml <Tvvl^7}<Tis *'Orav (fxayrjivTm kwdWrjXos yivqraijf 

Tfpa^op&j rdre yivtrai i) avvi^TfCtiS fdav arvWcLpiiV’ Aia^kpa 6^ <xvv<x-Xoicl>7js' 
if fjikv yd.p ypanjxdrwv karri ij 5^ ^ crwaKoKp^, ws keye- 

rat^ (palveraif oiJ. Mehlhom, Griechische Grammatik, § loi. Thus in 
we have synizesis, in synaeresis. 

e Cf. Mehlhorn, Griechische Grammatik, § 57. 

cxx 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

or suppression of vowels carried out on the largest scale 
we find in Sanskrit, too, such double forms as prithvt or 
pr^thivl, adhi and dhi, api and pi, ava and va. The occur¬ 
rence of such forms which have nothing to do with metrical 
considerations, but are perfectly legitimate from a gram¬ 
matical point of view, would encourage a tendency to treat 
two syllables — and particularly two short syllables — as one, 
whenever an occasion arose. There are, besides, in the 
Vedic Sanskrit a number of forms where, as we saw, a long 
syllable has to be pronounced as two. In some of these 
cases this pronunciation is legitimate, i. e. it preserves an 
original dissyllabic form which in course of time had become 
monosyllabic. In other cases the same process takes place 
through a mistaken sense of analogy, where we cannot prove 
that an oi'iginal dissyllabic form had any existence even in 
a prehistoric state of language. The occurrence of a number 
of such alternate forms would naturally leave a general im¬ 
pression in the minds of poets that two short syllables and 
one long syllable were under certain circumstances inter¬ 
changeable. So considerable a number of words in which 
a long syllable has to be pronounced as two syllables has 
been collected by Professors Kuhn, Bollensen, and others, 
that no doubt can remain on this subject. Vedic poets, 
being allowed to change a semivowel into a vowel, were 
free to say nisatyl and nisatyl, VIII, 5, 3a; przthlvyis 
and przthlvyl/i: ; pFtroA and pitro/^, I, 31, 4* They could 
separate compound words, and pronounce ghrzt^nna/if or 
ghnta-anna-^, VII, 3, i. They could insert a kind of shewa 
or svarabhakti in words like simne or slmne, VIII, 6, 47 ; 
dh^mne or dhimne, VIII, 92, 25 ; arIv;2a/2 and 
IX, 53, 5. _They might vary between pint! and plnti> 
y^thana and yithana, I, 39, 3; nldhlto/^ and 
nidh^to.?!, I, 41, 9 ; tredha and tredM, I, 34, 8 ; dtvU and 
dlvlk (besides devdsa/i:), J, 23, 24; rodasi and rodasf, I, 33, 
9 ; 59j 4 ; 64, 9 ; and rodasyo^ I, 33, 5 ; 59, 2 ; 1 17, 10 ; 

See the important chapters on ' Kurzung cler Vokale ’ and ‘ Tilgimg der 
Vokale" in Corssen’s 'Aussprache des Lateinischen ; ’ and more especially his 
remarks on the so-called irrational vowels in Plautus, ibid. vol. ii, p. 70. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

CXXl 

VI, 24) 3) VII, 6, a; X, 74, i®. Need we wonder then 
if we find that, on the other hand, they allowed themselves 
to pronounce pr/thivt as pnthivi, 1, 191, 6 ; VII, 34, 7 ; 99, 3 ; 

dhnsh??ava as dhmh^^ava, V, $2,, 14; suvdna as suvdna? 
There is no reason why we should change the spelling of 
suv4na into svina. The metre itself tells us at once where 
suvdna is to be pronounced as two or as three syllables. 
Nor is it possible to believe that those who first handed 
down and afterwards wrote down the text of the Vedic 
hymnsj should have been ignorant of that freedom of pro¬ 
nunciation, Why, there is not one single passage in the 
whole of the ninth Ma^/rfala, where, as far as I know, su- 
vdna should not be pronounced as dissyllabic, i.e. as 

suv^na ; and to suppose that the scholars of India did 
not know how that superfluous syllable should be re¬ 
moved, is i*eally taking too low an estimate of men like 
Vy^/i or ^aunaka. 

But if we once admit that in these cases two syllables 
separated by a single consonant were pronounced as one 
and were metrically counted as one, we can hardly resist 
the evidence in favour of a similar pronunciation in a large 
number of other words, and we shall find that by the 
admission of this rapid pronunciation, or of what in Plautus 
we should call irrational vowels, many verses assume at 
once their regular form without thd necessity of admitting 
the suppression of final s, m, n, or the introduction of 
other prosodial licences. To my mind the most convinc¬ 
ing passages are those where, as in the Atyashri and 
similar hymns, a poet repeats the same phrase twice, alter¬ 
ing only one or two words, but without endeavouring to 
avoid an excess of syllables which, to our mind, unless 
we resort to synizesis, would completely destroy the uni¬ 
formity of the metre. Thus we read: 

I, 133, 6, apfirushaghno * pratlta .rfira satvabhl^, 

trisaptaiA j‘5ra satvabhnS. 

Professor Bollensen iu some of these passages proposes to read rodaslos. 
Jn I, 96, 4, no change is necessary if we read virllm. Zeitschrift der D, M. G., 
vol. xxii, p. 587, 

CXXll 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Here no ^ pra must be pronounced with one ictus only, in 
order to get a complete agreement between the two iambic 
diameters. 

I, 134,5. ugra isha?2anta bhurva?d, 
apim ishanta bhurva;2i. 

As ishanta never occurs again, I suspect that the original 
reading was isha^^anta in both lines, and that in the second 
line isha^^zanta, pronounced rapidly, was mistaken for ishanta. 
Is not bhurvam a locative, corresponding to the datives in 
vdne which are so frequently used in the sense of infinitives ? 
See note to I, 6, 8, page 47 seq. In 1, 1 38, 3, we must read : 

ahe/am4na uru.yawsa sari bhava, 
vd^e-vl^e sari bhava. 

In I, 129, II, 

adha hi tvd ^anitd ^i^nad vaso, 

rakshoha^za?^ tvd ^i^nad vaso, 
we might try to remove the difficulty by omitting vaso at 
the end of the refrain, but this would be against the general 
character of these hymns. We want the last word vaso, if 
possible, at the end of both lines. But, if so, we must admit 
two cases of synizesis, or, if this seems too clumsy, we must 
omit tvi. 

I shall now proceed to give a number of other examples 
in which the same consonantal synizesis seems necessary in 
order to make the rhythm of the verses perceptible to our 
ears as it was to the ears of the ancient i??shis- 

The preposition anu takes synizesis in 

I, I. ghntasya vibhrdshrim anu vashri .ro^ishd. Cf. 
X, 14, I. 

The preposition abhi : 

I, 91, rtyo hh^gSiPi sahasdvann abhi yudhya. 

Here Professor Kuhn changes sahasdvan into sahasva/^, 
which, no doubt, is a very simple and very plausible emen¬ 
dation. But in altering the text of the Veda many things 
have to be considered, and in our case it might be objected 
that sahasva>% never occurs again as an epithet of Soma. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. CXxiii 

As an invocation sahasva^ refers to no deity but Agni, and 
even in its other cases it is applied to Agni and Indra only. 
However, I do not by any means maintain that sahasva/^ 
could not be applied to Soma, for nearly the same argu¬ 
ments could be used against sahasavan, if conjecturally put 
in the place of sahasva// ; I only wish to point out how 
everything ought to be tried first, before we resort in the 
Veda to conjectural emendations. Therefore, if in our pas¬ 
sage there should be any objection to admitting the syni- 
zesis in abhi, I should much rather propose synizesis of 
sahasdvan, than change it into sahasva^. There is synizesis 

in maha, e.g. I, 133, 6. avar maha indra dkdrihx jrudhi na^. 
Although this verse is quoted by the Prati.r4khya, Siltra 
52:^, as one in which the lengthened syllable dhi of jrudhi 
does not occupy the tenth place, and which therefore re¬ 
quired special mention, the original poet evidently thought 
otherwise, and lengthened the syllable, being a syllable 
liable to be lengthened, because it really occupied the tenth 
place, and therefore received a peculiar stress. 

The preposition pari : 

VI, 14. vo vzk^msi pariy6akshyl!«i voy^am, 

sumneshv id vo antami madema. 

Here Professor Kuhn (Beitrage, vol. iv, p, 197) begins the 
last pa,da with voy&am, but this is impossible, unless we 
change the accent of voX^am, though even then the separa¬ 
tion of the verb from m& and the accumulation of two 
verbs in the last line would be objectionable, 

Hari is pronounced as hari: 

W M mm ^ ^ mm OwW 

VII, 3 a, 12. ya indro hariv^n na dabhanti turn ripaA. 

II, 18, 5. a iSatvImwata hanbbir jn^na.4. 

Hence I propose to scan the difficult verse I, 167, i, as 
follows : 

sahasrawz ta indra-htayo naA, 
sahasram isho harivo g5rtatami-^^ 

As to the scanning of the second line see p. cxiv. 

CXXIV 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

sahdiSYdLm rayo midayadhyai, 
sahasrma upa no yantu vigtk. 

That the final o instead of as is treated as a short 
syllable we saw before,, and in I, 133, 6, we observed that 
it was liable to synizesis. We see the same in 

I, 173, 6. maya iv§.po na trzshyate babhutha. 

V, 61, 16. i ya^^iydso vavnttana. 

The pragr2hya t of the dual is known in the Veda to be 
liable in certain cases to Sandhi. If we extend this licence 
beyond the limits recognised by the PritMkhya, we might 
scan 

VI, 5!^, 14. ubhe rodasy napd/6 manma, or we 

might shorten the 1 before the a, and admitting synizesis, 
scan : 

ubhe rodasi eLpim ksi manma. 

In III, 5, 10, we must either admit Sandhi between 
pv^kl and adhvar^va, or contract the first two syllables 
of adhvar^va. 

The o and e of vocatives before vowels, when changed 
into av or a(y), are liable to synizesis : 

IV5 48, 1. v§.yav i, kzndxtndi rathena (Anush^ubh, c.) 

IV, I, sa bhritara;;^ varu;zam agna t vavr/tsva. 

The termination ava/^ also, before vowels, seems to count 

as one syllable in V, 14, divo vd dhmh^^ava q^asE, which 
would render Professor Bollensen’s correction (Orient und 
Occident, vol. ii, p. 480), dhrzsh^^iio^asd, unnecessary. 

Like ava and iva, we find aya and iya, too, in several 
words liable to be contracted in pronunciation ; e.g. vayam, 
VI, 5 1 ayam, I, 177, 4; iyam, VII, 66, 8^; I, 186, ix 
(unless we read vo^sme) ; X, 1:^9, 6. Professor Bollensen's 
proposal to change iyam to im, and ayam to dm (Orient 
und Occident, vol. ii, p. 461), would only cause obscurity, 
without any adequate gain, while other words would by a 
similar suppression of vowels or consonants become simply 
irrecognisable. In I, 169, 6, for instance, ddha has to be 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

cxxv 

pronounced with one ictus ; in VI, a6, 7, sadhavtra is tri¬ 
syllabic. In VI^ 10, 1, we must admit synizesis in adhvar6 ; 
in I, 1 61, 8, either in udakdm or in abravitana; I, no, 9, 
in rzbhuman ; VIII, 79, 4, in diva^ ; V, 4, 6, in nrztama 
(unless we read soigne) ; I, 164, 17, in para^; VI, 15, 14, 
in pdvaka ; I, 191, 6 ; VII, 34, 7 ; 99, 3, in pr/thivi ; II, 2,0, 
8, in piira/^; VI, 10, i, in prayatf ; VI, 17, 7) bnhdt ; 
IX, 19, 6, in bhiydsam ; 1, 133, 6, in mahiA ; II, i^8, 6 ; IV, 
t, 2 ; VI, 75, 18, in varu;za ; III, 30, 2,1, in vmhabha ; VII, 
41, 6, in vd^lna^; II, 43, a, in j‘fjumatt/2; VI, $1, a, in 
sanutdr; VI, 18, irj, in sthavirasya, &c. 

These remarks will, I hope, suffice in order to justify the 
principles by which I have been guided in my treatment of 
the text and in my translation of the Rig-veda. I know 
I shall seem to some to have been too timid in retaining 
whatever can possibly be retained in the traditional text of 
these ancient hymns, while others will look upon the emen¬ 
dations which I have suggested as unpardonable temerity. 
Let everything be weighed in the just scales of argument. 
Those who argue for victory, and not for truth, can have no 
hearing in our court. There is too much serious work to 
be done to allow time for wrangling or abuse. Any dic¬ 
tionary will supply strong words to those who condescend 
to such warfare, but strong arguments require honest labour, 
sound judgment, and, above all, a genuine love of truth. 

The second volume, which I am now preparing for Press, 
will contain the remaining hymns addressed to the Maruts, 
The notes will necessarily have to be i-educed to smaller 
dimensions, but they must always constitute the more im¬ 
portant part in a translation or, more truly, in a deciphering 
of Vedic hymns. 

F. MAX MULLER. 

Parks End, Oxford: 

March, 1869. 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

MAiVPALA X, HYMN 121. 

ASH TAKA VIII, ADHYAYA 7, VARGA 3-4. 

To THE Unknown God. 

1. In the beginning there arose the Golden Child 
(Hira;eya“garbha^); as soon as born, he alone was 
the lord of all that is. He stablished the earth and 
this heaven: — Who is the God to whom we shall 
offer sacrifice ? 

2. He who gives breath, he who gives strength, 
whose ^ command all the bright gods revere, whose 
shadow® is immortality, whose shadow is death : — 
Who is the God to whom we shall offer sacrifice ? 

3. He who through his might became the sole 
king of the breathing and twinkling world, who 
governs all this, man and beast : — Who is the God 
to whom we shall offer sacrifice ? 

4. He through whose might ^ these snowy moun¬ 
tains are, and the sea, they say, with the distant 
river (the RasfL®), he of whom these regions are 
indeed the two arms : — ^Who is the God to whom 
we shall offer sacrifice? 

5. He through whom the awful heaven and the 
earth were made fast^ he through whom the ether 
was stablished, and the firmament ; he who measured 
the air in the sky® : — Who is the God to whom we 
shall offer sacrifice ? 

[3^] 

B 

2 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

6. He to whom, heaven and earthy standing firm 
by his will, look up, trembling in their mind; he 
over whom the risen sun shines forth : — Who is the 
God to whom we shall offer sacrifice ? 

7. When the great waters ^ went • everywhere, 
holding the germ (Hira«ya-garbha), and generating 
light, then there arose from them the (sole^) breath 
of the gods ; — ^Who is the God to whom we shall 
offer sacrifice ? 

8. He who by his might looked even over the 
waters which held power (the germ) and generated 
the sacrifice (light^), he who alone is God above 
all gods*: — Who is the God to whom we shall 
offer sacrifice ? 

9. May he not hurt us, he who is the begetter 
of the earth, or he, the righteous, who begat the. 
heaven; he who also begat the bright and mighty 
waters : — ^Who is the God to whom we shall offer 
sacrifice ? 

[io\ Pra^pati, no other than thou embraces all 
these created things. May that be ours \7hich we 
desire when sacrificing to thee : may we be lords 
of wealth !] 

NOTES. X, 121. 

3 

NOTES. 

This hymn is ascribed to Hira«yagarbha Pr^i^ipatya, and 
is supposed to be addressed to Ka, Who, i.e. the Unknown 
God. 

First translated in my History of Ancient Sanskrit Litera¬ 
ture, 1859, p. 569 ; see also Hibbert Lectures, i88a, p. 301 ; 
Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, IV, p. 15. 

Verse i=VS. XIII, 4; XXIII, i ; XXV, 10; TS. IV, 
I, 8, 3 ; a, 8, a ; AV. IV, a, 7. 

Verse a=VS. XXV, 13 ; TS. IV, i, 8, 4; VII, 5, 17, i ; 
AV. IV, a, 1 ; XIII, 3, a4. 

• Verse 3=VS. XXIII, 3 ; XXV, ii ; TS. IV, i, 8, 4; 
VII, 5, 16, 1 ; AV. IV, a, a. 

Verse 4=VS. XXV, la ; TS. IV, i, 8, 4 ; AV. IV, a, 5. 

Verse 5= VS. XXXII, 6 ; TS. IV, i, 8, 5 ; AV. IV, a, 4. 

Verse 6=VS. XXXII, 7; TS. IV, i, 8, 5 ; AV. IV, a, 3. 

Verse 7= VS. XXVII, a5 ; XXXII, 7 ; TS. II, a, la, 1 ; 
IV, I, 8, 5 ; TA. I, as, 8 ; AV. IV, a, 6. 

Verse 8= VS. XXVII, a6 ; XXXII. 7 ; TS. IV, i, 8, 6. 

Verse 9=VS. XII, loa; TS. IV, a, 7, i. 

Verse io=VS. X, ao ; XXIII, 65 ; TS. I, 8, 14, a ; III, 
a, 5, 6 ; TB. II, 8, 1, a ; III, 5, 7, J ; AV. VII, 79, 4 ; 80, 3. 

,, This is one of the hymns which has always been sus¬ 
pected as modern by European interpreters. The reason 
is clear. To us the conception of one God, which pervades 
the whole of this hymn, seems later thain the conception of 
many individual gods, as recognised in various aspects of 
nature, such as the gods of the sky, the sun, the storms, 
or the fire. And in a certain sense we may be right, and 
language also confirms our sentiment In our hymn there 
are several words which do not occur again in the Rig- 
veda, or which occur in places only which have likewise 
been suspected to be of more modern date. Hirawyagarbhd, 

B 2 

4 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

itself is an \^y6\x€vov. Sdm avartata is found only- 
in the last Ma;2^ala, X, 90, 14; 129, 4. Bhiitd also, in 
the sense of what is, occurs in the tenth Ma^z^aTala only. It 
is used three times (X, 55, 2 ; 5^? ; 9^? opposed to 

bhdvya, i. e. what is and what will be ; and once more in 
the sense of all that is (X, 85, 17). Atmada^, in the sense 
of giving life, is another &7ra^ Xeyofxevov. Pra^ish is re¬ 
stricted to Ma^^^alas I (I, 145, i), IX (IX, 66, 6; 86, 32), 
and our passage. Himavat, &7ra^ keyofjievov. The repeti¬ 
tion of the relative pronoun in verses 2 and 4 is unusual. 
In the tenth verse the compound ydt-kama/^ is modern, 
and the insertion of etani between tvdt and anyd/i: is at all 
events exceptional. The passage V, 31, 2 is not parallel, 
because in tvdt indra vasya/^ anyat, the ablative tvdt is 
governed by vdsya^. In VI, 2 1 , i o, nd tv^vdn anyd/^ amnta 
tvat asti, anyd-^ is separated from tvdt by a vocative only, 
as in VIII, 24, ii. 

But when we say that a certain hymn is modern, we must 
carefully consider what we mean. Our hymn, for instance, 
must have existed not only previous to the Brdhma/m 
period, for many Brdhma/^as presuppose it, but previous to 
the Mantra period also. It is true that no verse of it occurs 
in the S4ma-veda, but in the Sdma-veda-brdhmawa IX, 9, 
12, verse i at least is mentioned®. Most of its verses, 
however, occur in the Vd^asaneyi-samhitd, in the Taittirtya- 
sa.mhitt, and in the Atharva-veda-sa^/ahitd, nay, the last 
verse, to my mind the most suspicious of all, occurs most 
frequently in the other Sa;;2hitds and Brdhma^^as. 

But though most of the verses of our hymn occur in other 
Sa/;2hitds, they do not always occur in the same order. 

In the Vd^. Sa;;^h. we have the first verse in XIII, 4, but 
no other verse of our hymn follows. We have the first 
verse again in XXIII, i, but not followed by verse 2, but 
by verse 3 (XXIII, 3)^. Then we have verse 1 once more 

® The last line is here, tasmai ta indo havishd vidhema, let us 
sacrifice to him with thy oblation, 0 Soma I 
^ ’Varl |eci nimeshatdv^. 

NOTES. X, 1 2 1. 

5 

in XXV, lo, followed by verse 3 (XXV, 11), by verse 4 
(XXV, I a), and then by verse a (XXV, 13). 

We have verses 5, 6, 7, 8 in VS. XXXII, 6 and 7, and verses 
7 and 8 in VS. XXVII, a5 and ad, while verse 9 is found in 
XII, loa only®, and the last verse in X, ao*>, and XXIII, 65. 

In the Taitt. Sawihiti the verses follow more regularly, 
still never quite in the same order as in the Rig-veda. In 
TS. IV, I, 8, 3 °, we have vei'ses i to 8, but verse 3 before 
verse a, and verse 6 before verse while verse 9 follows in 
IV, a, 7, I. 

InTS. V. 3stands before v. 2,inVII,5, 16, i,and VII,5, 17, i. 

In TS. II, a, I a, the pratikas of verses i, 7, 10 are quoted 
in succession. 

Verse 7 occurs with important various readings in TA. 

^3. S, apo ha yid bnhatfr gdrbham Syan dikshaw* dddhdnd 
^ndyantt^ svayambhdm, tdta imd*dhyis?'z^anta sdrgiy^. 

Lastly in the AV. we find verses i to 7 from IV, a, i, to 
IV, a, 7, but arranged in a different order, viz. as a, 3, 6, 5, 4, 
7, I, and with important various readings. 

Verse a, y6' 3 sydje dvipddo yis ^dtushpada/i, as third 
pida ; also in XIII, 3, a4. 

Verse 3, ekd rff^d ; yisya Miyimritam yisya mrity^i/i, 
as third pflda. 

V erse 4, ydsya vfjve ; samudrd ydsya rasSm fd dhii/^ ; imSIr y^a. 

Verse 5, ydsya dyadr urvt p^fthivf mahif ydsyddd urvd- 
I ntdriksham, ydsydsad sfiro vftato mahitvd. 

Verse 6, dvata^ /Saskabhdnd bhiydsdne rddasi dhvayethdm 
(sic), ydsydsad panthd rd^aso vimdna^. 

Verse 7, dpo dgre vfjvam dvdn gdrbhaw dddhdnd am;>'/td 
ritsgU^h, ydsu devfshv ddhi devd dsit. 

Verse 10, vfjvd rdpd?zi paribhur gi^xiz, see VII, 79, 4, 
and 80, 3, 

We are justified, therefore, in looking upon the 
verses, composing this hymn, as existing before the 

® Var. lect. md md, satyddharmd vydna/, prathamd for bnliatCS. 

^ Var. lect. rftpdwi for bhdtdni. 

® Van lect., ver. 5, dridhi, dual for dnZid; ver. 6, d^tau vydti 
for ddito vibhdti ; ver. 8, agnfra for ya^f^m. , 

6 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

final arrangement of the four Sa^hitis, and if we persist 
in calling a hymn, dating from that period, a modern hymn, 
we must make it quite clear that, according to the present 
state of our knowledge, such a hymn cannot well be more 
modern than looo B. C. Besides the variations in the 
arrangement of the verses of our hymn, the very considerable 
various readings which we find in the VS., TS., and AV. 
are highly instructive, as showing the frequent employment 
of our hymn for sacrificial purposes. In several cases these 
various readings are of great importance, as we shall see. 

Verse 1. 

* Muir : Hira^^yagarbha arose in the beginning ; born, 
he was the one lord of things existing. He established 
the earth and this sky : to what god shall we offer our 
oblation ? 

Ludwig: Hira^^yagarbha hat zuerst sich gebildet, er 
ward geboren als einziger herr alles gewordenen, dise erde 
und disen himel halt er ; Ka, dem gotte, mochten wir mit 
havis aufwai'ten. 

Note 1, Hira^^yctgarbha® has been translated in different 
ways, and it would perhaps be best to keep it as a proper 
name, which it is in later times. It means literally the 
golden embryo, the golden germ or child, or born of a 
golden womb, and was no doubt an attempt at naming 
the sun. Soon, however, that name became mythological. 
The golden child was supposed to have been so called 
because it was Pra^dpati, the lord of creation, when 
dwelling as yet in the golden egg, and Hira;2yagar'bha 
became in the end a recognised name of Fra^dpati, sec 
Siy. on X, i. P All this is fully explained by Siya^^a, 
TS. IV, I, 8, 3 ; IV, a, 8, ; by Mahidhara,VS. XIII, 4, 

Verse 2. 

MuiR: He who gives breath, who gives strength, 
whose command all, [even] the gods, reverence, whose 
shadow is immortality, whose shadow is death: to what 
god shall we offer our oblation ? 

^ M. JVL, India, What can it teach us? pp. 144, 162. 

NOTES. X, I2t, 3. 

7 

Ludwig : Geber des lebendigen hauches, geber der 
kraft, zu des unterweisung alle gotter sich einfinden, 
des glanz die unsterblichkeit, dessen der tod ist, Ka, dem 
gotte, mochten wir mit havis aufwarten. 

Kote 1, In order to account for the repetition of yasya, 
Sdya?za and Mahtdhara take vi^ve for men, and devA/^ 
for gods. 

Note 2. It is difficult to say what is meant by 
shadow. I take it in the sense of what belongs to the god, 
as the shadow belongs to a man, what follows him, or is 
determined by him. In that sense Sdyas^^a also takes it, 
TS. IV, I, 8, 4, yasya pra^dpate.? svidhinam 

am^^Aam, moksharfiipam, nirziyu/i, prEt^^inclm mara?^am api, 
yasya AMyeva. svidhlna/^; and, though not quite so clearly, 
in RV. X, lai, 2. Mahtdhara on the contrary takes khkyk 
in the sense of refuge, and says, whose shadow, i.e. whose 
worship, preceded by knowledge, is amnta, immortality, 
a means of deliverance % while ignorance of him is death, 
or leads to samstxa. 

Verse 3. 

Muir : Who by his might became the sole king of the 
breathing and winking world, who is the lord of this two- 
footed and four-footed [creation] : to what god shall we 
offer out oblation ? 

Ludwig : Der des atmenden, augenbewegenden leben¬ 
digen durch seine grosze der einzige konig geworden ; der 
verfiigt liber disz zwei- und vier-fuszige, Ka, dem gotte, 
mochten wir mit havis aufwarten. 

Kote 1. It is difficult to say whether nimishata/^ 
means twinkling or sleeping. It has both meanings as 
to wink has in English. Skyana (X, is^i, 3; TS. IV, 
I, 8, 4) and Mahtdhara (VS. XXlII, 3^) explain it by 
winking. This may be right as expressing sensuous per¬ 
ception, in addition to mere breathing. In X, 190, a, 
vf.rvasya mishatd vaji means, lord of all that winks, i.e. 

muktihetu, not yuktihetu, as Weber prints. 

k Is nimeshdto in XXIII, 3, a varia lectio, or an a^uddha ? In 
XXV, 13, we read nimishato. 

8 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

lives. The later idea, that the gods do not wink, has 
nothing to do with our passage. 

Verse 4. 

Muir : Whose greatness these snowy mountains, and 
the sea with the Rasa (river), declare, — of whom these 
regions, of whom they are the arms : to what god shall we 
offer our oblation ? 

Ludwig : Lessen die schneebedeckten (berge, die Hima- 
v4n) vermoge seiner grosze, als des eigentum man ocean 
und Ras4 nennt, des dise himelsgegenden, des arme sie, 
Ka, dem gotte, mochten wir mit-havis aufwarten. 

Note 1. Muir^s translation, which suggests itself very 
naturally to a European mind, is impossible, because 
mahitvS cannot be either mahitvdm (as S^ya;^2a also and 
Mahtdhara suggest), or mahitvS!ni ; and because dhii/^ does 
not mean declare. Otherwise nothing could be better 
than his rendering: ‘Whose greatness these snowy moun¬ 
tains, and the sea with the Rasi (river), declare.’ 

MahitvII, as Skyzm also rightly perceives, TS. IV, t, 8, 
4, is a very common instrumental (see Lanman, Noun¬ 
inflection, pp. 335-6), and the same mahitv^ must be sup¬ 
plied for samudrdm. We might make the whole sentence 
dependent on khuA without much change of meaning. 
The' Atharva-veda text supplies a lectio facilior, but not 
therefore melior. 

Note 2. The Ras^ is a distant river, in some respects like 
the Greek Okeanos. Dr. Aufrecht takes it as a name of 
the milky way, Z. D. M. G. XIII, 498 : see Muir, S. T, II, 
P- 373> n- 19- 

Verse 6. 

Muir : By whom the sky is fiery, and the earth fixed, 
by whom the firmament and the heaven were established, 
who in the atmosphere is the measurer of the aerial space : 
to what god shall we offer our oblation ? 

Ludwig: Durch den gewaltig der himel und fest die 
erde, durch den gestiitzt Svar, und das gewolbe, der die 
raume im mittelgebiete ausgemeszen, Ka, dem gotte, 
mochten wir mit havis aufwarten. 

NOTES. X, 121,6. 

9 

Note 1. In this verse I decidedly prefer the reading of 
the Athai*va-veda, yena dyaur ugrd pr2thivt >^a dnV/^e. It 
seems not a lectio facilior, and we avoid the statement that 
the heaven has been made ugr4, Ugri, as applied to 
dyaus, means awful and grand, as an inherent quality 
rather, and not simply strong. See Ludwig, Notes, p. 441. 

Note 2. Rd^aso vimana/^ has been fully discussed by 
Muir, S. T. IV, p. 71, but it is difficult to find a right 
translation for it, because the cosmography of the Veda is 
so different from our own (see I, 6, 9, note i, and I, 19, 3, 
note i), I think we may translate it here by the air, or even 
by space, particularly the bright air in the sky, the sky 
(antariksha or nabhas) being between heaven (dyu) and 
earth (przthivt), while sva/^ and nika are still higher than 
the heaven (dyu), sva-^ being sometimes explained as the 
abode of the sun, the ether, or empyrean, ndka, the firmament, 
as svarga (Mahidhara) ; or sva^ as svarga, and n^ka as 
S^ditya (Sctya^^a). VimcLna is here simply the measurer, 
though vimi, from meaning to measure, is apt to take the 
meaning of to make, which is an excuse for Siyawa’s 
rendering, ‘ who makes the rain in the sky.* 

The Atharva-veda rendering is very free, and certainly 
no improvement. 

Verse 6. 

Muir : To whfltn two contending armies, sustained by 
his succour, looked up, trembling in mind ; over whom 
the risen sun shines: to what god shall we offer our 
oblation ? 

Ludwig: Auf den die beiden schlachtreihen durch (ihre) 
begifde aufgestellt in ordnung ihren blick richten, zitternd, 
im geiste, wo dariiber hin aufgegangen Stira ausstralt, Ka, 
dem gotte, mochten wir mit havis aufwarten. 

Note 1. It would be well to read rddasi for krdndasJ 
(which B. R. explain by 'two armies’), and the various 
reading in AV. IV, 2, 3 decidedly points in that direction. 
But even if krdndasi stands, it must be taken in the same 
sense as rddasi. Uditau vyeti in TS. IV, i, 8, 5 is explained 
by udayavishaye vividhaw ga^y^^ati. 

lO 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 7. 

MuiR: When the great waters pervaded the universe 
containing an embryo, and generating fire, thence arose 
the one spirit (asu) of the gods : to what god shall we 
offer our oblation ? 

Ludwig : Als die groszen waszer kamen, die alien keim 
in sich faszten, zeugend den Agni, da kam zu stande der 
gotter einziger lebensgeist ; Ka, derti gotte, mochten wir 
mit havis aufwarten. 

iTote 1. The waters here refen'ed to have to be under¬ 
stood as the waters in the beginning of the creation, where, 
as we read (RV. X, 12^9, 3), ' everything was like a sea 
without a light,’ or, as the 6'atapatha-brahma;/a (XI, i, 6, i) 
says, ' everything was water and sea/ These waters held 
the germ^ and produced the golden light, the sun^ whence 
arose the life of all the gods, viz. Pra^&pati. The Atharva- 
veda adds a verse which repeats the same idea more 
clearly: apo vatsdi?;^ ^anayanttr gdrbham dgre samairayan, 
tasyotd^4yam^nasy61ba dsid dhira/^ydya/^, Tn the beginning 
the waters, producing a young, brought forth an embryo, and 
when it was being born, it had a golden covering.’ The sun¬ 
rise serves here as elsewhere as an image of the creation. 

Note 2. Grassmann proposes to omit eka, because it is 
absent in the Maitr§,ya;«i 5akha. The metre shows the same. 

Verse 8. 

Muir : He who through his greatness beheld the waters 
which contained power, and generated sacrifice, who was 
the one god above the gods : to what god shall we offer 
our oblation ? 

Ludwig : Der in seiner grdsze sogar die waszer uber- 
schaute, wie sie die fahigkeit besitzend erzeugten das 
opfer, der der einzige gott war fiber den gottern, Ka, 
dem gotte, mochten wir mit havis aufwarten. 

Kote 1. In ddksha;^2 dddhini ^andyantir ya^/7dm, we 
have a repetition of what was said in the preceding verse, 

^ See RV. X, 82, 5-6. 

^ See RV. X, 72, 7. 

NOTES. X, I 2 1, 10. 

. V 1 1 

daksham standing for garbham, yz.gnim for agn{m,\||^ps^ 
is actually the reading of TS. The Atharva-veda does not 
contain this verse, which is used as an anyi vikalpit^ y^^g'yS. 
in TS. 

Note 2. It is curious that one of the most important 
sentences in the Rig-veda, yo deveshv adhi deva eka dstt, 
should have been changed in the Atharva-veda IV, 2, 6 into 
y^su devtshv adhi deva 4sat, ‘ over which divine waters there 
was the god.* See Ludwig, Notes, p. 441. 

Verse 9. 

Muir .* May he not injure us, he who is the generator 
of the earth, who, ruling by fixed ordinances, produced the 
heavens, who produced the great and brilliant waters : to 
what god shall we offer our oblation ? 

Ludwig: Nicht schadige uns, der der erde erzeuger, 
Oder der den himel bereitet mit warhafter satzung, der auch 
die wasser, die hellen, die machtigen erzeugt hat, Ka, dem 
gotte, mochten wir mit havis aufwarten. 

Verse 10. 

Muir : Pra^pati, no other than thou is lord over 
all these created things: may we obtain that, through 
desire of which we have invoked thee : may we become 
masters of riches. 

Ludwig : Pra^dpati, kein anderer als du hat umfasst die 
wesen alle, der wunsch, um deswillen wir dir opfern, der 
werde uns zu teil, besitzer von reichtumern mogen wir sein. 

Note 1. This verse is certainly extremely weak after 
all that preceded, still, to judge from its frequent occur¬ 
rence, we cannot well discai-d it. All we can say is that 
nowhere, except in the Rig-veda, does it form the final 
verse of our hymn, and thus spoil its whole character. 

That character consists chiefly in the burden of the 
nine verses, Kasmai dev&ya havisha vidhema, ‘To what 
god shall we offer sacrifice?’ This is clearly meant to 
express a desire of finding out the true, but unknown god, 
and to do so, even after all has been said that can be said 
of a supreme god. To finish such a hymn with a statement 

12 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

that Pra^ipati is the god who deserves our sacrificej may 
be very natural theologically, but it is entirely uncalled 
for poetically. The very phrase Kasmai dev&ya havish^ 
vidhema must have been a familiar phrase, for we find in 
a hymn addressed to the wind, X, i68, 4, after all has been 
said that can be said of him, the concluding line : ghdshi/i; 
it asya srimlx^ na rupdm tdsmai v^tiya havish^ vidhema, 
‘his sound indeed is heard, but he is not seen — to that 
Vdta let us offer sacrifice.’ 

But more than this, on the strength of hymns like our 
own in which the interrogative pronoun ka, ‘ who,’ occurs, 
the Brihmans actually invented a god of the name of 
Ka. I pointed this out many years ago in my History of 
Ancient Sanskrit Literature (i860, p. 433), where I said: 
‘In accordance with the same system, we find that the 
authors of the Brahma;2as had so completely broken with 
the past that, forgetful of the poetical character of the 
hymns, and the yearning of the poets after the unknown 
god, they exalted the interrogative pronoun into a deity, 
and acknowledged a god ‘ Ka, or Who.’ In the Taittiriya- 
sa;;2hit4 (I, 7, 6, 6), in the Kaushitaki-brihma;2a (XXIV, 
4), in the Ti;^2rfya-br4hma?2a (XV, 10), and in the ^ata- 
patha-brihma;?2a % whenever interrogative verses occur, 
the author states, that Ka is Pra^ipati, or ‘ the Lord of 
Creatures’ (Pra^4patir vai Ka/2). Nor did they stop there. 
Some of the hymns in which the interrogative pronoun 
occurred were called Kadvat, i.e. having kad or quid. 
But soon a new adjective was formed, and not only the 
hymns, but the sacrifices also, offered to the god, were 
called Kdya, or who-ish’^. This word, which is not to 
be identified with the Latin cujus, cuja, cujum, but is 
merely the artificial product of an effete mind, is found 
in the Taittiriya-sa/^^hM (I, 8, 3, i), and in the Vi^« 
sB.neyi-s^mhit^ (XXIV, 15), At the time of ‘Pinim 

8- 6'atap. Brdhm. I, i, i, 13 ; II, 5, 2, 13 ; IV, 5, 6, 4; also Aitar. 
BrShm. Ill, 21. 

b A^v. Sr. Sfitra II, 17, 14; Kdty. Siitra V, 4, 23; Vait. 
Siitra VIII, 22, ed. Garbe. 

NOTES. X, 12 1, 10. 

13 

this word had acquired such legitimacy as to call for a 
separate rule explaining its formation (Vkn. IV, 2, 25). 
The commentator there explains Ka by Brahman. After 
this we can hardly wonder that in the later Sanskrit 
literature of the Pur^i/^as, Ka appears as a recognised 
god, as the supreme god, with a genealogy of his own, 
perhaps even with a wife ; and that in the Laws of Manu, 
one of the recognised forms of marriage, generally known 
by the name of Pra^apati-marriage, occurs under the 
monstrous title of ‘ KS-ya.’ Stranger still, grammarians 
who know that ka forms the dative kasmai only if it is 
an interrogative pronoun, consider kasmai in our hymn 
as irregular, because, as a proper name, Ka ought to form 
the dative Kclya. 

14 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

MANDALA I, HYMN 6. 

ASH TAKA I, ADHYAYA 1, VARGA 11-12. 

To Indra and the Maruts (the Storm-gods). 

1 . Those who stand around ^ him while he moves 
on, harness the bright red (steed) ^ ; the lights in 
heaven shine forth K 

2. They harness to the chariot on each side his 
(Indra’s)^ two favourite bays, the brown, the bold, 
who can carry the hero. 

3. Thou who createst light where there was no 
light, and form, O men ^ ! where there was no form, 
hast been born together with the dawns 

4. Thereupon^ they (the Maruts), according to 
their wont^, assumed again the form of new-born 
babes ®, taking their sacred name. 

5. Thou, O Indra, with the swift Maruts \ who 
break even through the stronghold®, hast found 
even in their hiding-place the bright ones® (days 
or clouds). 

6. The pious singers^ (the Maruts) have, after 
their own mind ®, shouted towards the giver of 
wealth, the great, the glorious (Indra). 

7. Mayest thou^ (host of the Maruts) be verily 
seen ® coming together with Indra, the fearless ; you 
are both happy-making, and of equal splendour. 

8. With the beloved hosts of Indra, witli the 
blameless, hasting® (Maruts), the sacrificer^ cries 
aloud. 

MAJVJOALA I, HYMN 6. 

15 

9. From yonder, O traveller (Indra), come hither, 
or from the light of heaven ^ ; the singers all yearn 
for it ; — 

10. Or we ask Indra for help from here, or 
from heaven, or from above the earth, or from the 
great sky. 

i6 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

NOTES. 

This hymn is ascribed to Kawva, the son of Ghora. The 
metre is Giyatri throughout. 

Verse i = SV. II, 8i8; VS. XXIII, 5; AV. XX, 26, 4; 
47, 10 ; 69, 9 ; TS. VII, 4, ao, I ; TB. Ill, 9, 4, I- 

Verse a = SV. II, 819 ; VS. XXIII, 6 ; AV. XX, a6, 5 ; 
47, II; 69, 10; TS. VII, 4, ao, I. 

Verse 3 = SV. II, 8ao; VS. XXIX, 37 ; AV. XX, a6, 6; 
47, la; 69, ii; TS.VII, 4, «o, i; TB. Ill, 9,4, 3. 

Verse 4=SV. II, loi ; AV. XX, 40, 3 ; 69, la. 

Verse 5 = SV. II, aoa; AV. XX, 70, i. 

Verse 6=AV. XX, 70, a. 

Verse 7 = SV. II, aoo; AV. XX, 40, i; 70, 3. 

Verse 8=AV. XX, 40, a; 70, 4. 

Verse 9= AV. XX, 70, 5. 

Verse io=AV. XX, 70, 5. 

Verse 1. 

Wilson ; The circumstationed (inhabitants of the three 
worlds) associate with (Indra), the mighty (Sun), the indc- 
structive (fire), the moving (wind), and the lights that shine 
in the sky. 

Benfey : Die rothe Sonne schirr’n sie an, die wandclt 
um die stehenden, Strahlen strahlen am Himmel auf. 

Ludwig : Sie spannen an den hellen, den roten, deir 
vom feststehenden hinwegwandelnden ; heller glanz erstralt 
am Himmel. 

Note 1. The poet begins with a somewhat abrupt 
description of a sunrise. Indra is taken as the god of the 
bright day, whose steed is the sun, and whose companions 
the Maruts, or the storm-gods. Arushd, meaning originally 
red, is used as a proper name of the horse or of the rising 
sun, though it occurs more frequently as the name of the 
red horses or flames of Agni, the god of fire, and also of 
the morning light. In our passage, Arushd, a substantive, 
meaning the red of the morning, has taken bradhnd as an 

NOTES. I, 6, I. 

17 

adjective, — bradhnd meaning, as far as can be made out, 
bright in general, though, as it is especially applied to the 
Soma-juice, perhaps bright-brown or yellow. Names of 
colour are difficult to translate from one language into 
another, for their shades vary, and withdraw themselves 
from sharp definition. We shall meet with this difficulty 
again and again in the Veda ; see RV. X, <2,0, 9. 

As it has actually been doubted whether bradhnd arushd 
can be meant for the sun, and whether the Vedic poets 
ever looked upon the sun as a horse, I may quote Va^. 
Sa;;2h. XXIII, 4, where the same verse occurs and is de¬ 
clared to be addressed to the sun ; and 5atap. Br. XIII, 
2, 6, I, where we read, yu%anti bradhnam arusha^;^ i^aran- 
tam iti, asau vd 4dityo bradhno » rusho * mum ev^sm4 
iditya;^^ yunakti svargasya lokasya samash/yai. Ludwig 
remarks justly that the sun has been conceived as a chariot 
also, and that bradhnd arushd may have been thus under¬ 
stood here. Delbriick translates quite boldly: Sie schirren 
die rothe Sonne an. See also Tait. Br. Ill, 7? 7, 4; 

Br. XXIII, 3, 5 ; ^inkh. Br. II, 17, 3 ; Ludwig, Comm. ii. 
p. 173. M, Bergaigne (R^L Ved. iii. p. 324) remarks very 
truly: ‘Le soleil est tant6t une roue, tantdt un char, tantdt 
un cheval, trainant le char, tantdt un h^ros mont^ sur le 
char et dirigeant les chevaux.’ 

The following passages will illustrate the principal mean¬ 
ing of arushd, and justify the translation here adopted. 

ArushA, as an Adjectivet. 

Arushd is used as an adjective in the sense of red ; 

VII, 97, 6. tdm j‘agmasa/4 arushasa^ isvkh b^haspdtim 
saha-vd'ha/4 vahanti, — ndbha/2 nd rfipdm arushdm vdsdnM. 

Powerful red horses, drawing together draw him, Br/has- 
pati : horses clothed in red colour, like the sky. 

Ill, I, 4. 5vetdm ^a^/idndm arushdm mahi-tva, 

Agni, the white, when born ; the red, by growth. 

Ill, 15, 3- krishnisu agne arushd^ vi bhdhi. 

Shine, O Agni, red among the dark ones. 

Ill, 31, 21; VI, 27, 7, 

[32] c 

i8 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

VII, 75, 6. prdti dyutin^m zrash&szJt isvtii kltxah ^ri- 
jran ushdsam vdhantaA. 

The red horses, the beautiful, were seen bringing to us 
the bright dawn. 

V, 43. ; I, ii8, 5 ; IV, 43. 6; V, 73. 5 5 I. 3*^. 9 5 VII, 

3. 3 . ^^5 3 5 45. 7 j I. 

II, a, 8. %i.k idhini-^ ushdsa/; x^myih dnu sva/i nd didet 
arushdj^za bhaniind. 

He (Agni), lit after the lovely dawns, shone like the sky 
with his red splendour. 

III, 39, 6 ; IV, 58, 7 ; I, 114, 5 ; V, 59. 5 ; la, a; 12, 6; 
VI, 8, I. 

VI, 48, 6. jyavasu arushd/i: v^shsl. 

In the dark (nights) the red hero (Agni), Cf. Ill, % 5; 

In one passage v;"/shan ai'ushd is intended for fire in the 
shape of lightning, 

X, 89, 9. nf amitreshu vadham indra tiimram vr/shan 
vr/shd;2am arushdm juihi. 

Whet, O strong Indra, the heavy strong red weapon, 
against the enemies. 

X, 43, 9. fit ^dyatdm para^yfi/^ ^yfitishd sahd — vi roX’atdm 
arushd/^ bhdnfind sii,k\h. 

May the axe (the thunderbolt) appear with the light — 
may the red one blaze forth, bright with splendour. 

X, I, 6 ; VI, 3, 6. 

X, 2^0, 9. \irish.7iih arushd/; y^msi/i asya bradhnd/^ 

utd sdnsi/i. 

His (Agni's) path is black, white, red, bright, reddish, 
and yellow. 

Here it is extremely difficult to keep all the colours 
distinct. 

Arushd is frequently applied to Soma, particularly in the 
9th Mmdsilsi. There we read : 

IX, 8, 6, arushd/^ hixik IX, 71, 7. arushd/^ divd^ kavf/^ 
v;f^/shi. IX, 74, 1. vS.g'i arushdA. IX, 82,^ i. arushd/z vr/shd 
hdri^. IX, 89, 3. hdrim arushdm. 

IX, III, I. arushd;?: hiri/i. See also IX, 5 7 
In IX, yo,, I, arushd seems used as a substantive in the 
sense of red-horse. 

NOTES* I, 6, I. 

19 

Professor Spiegel, in his important review of my transla¬ 
tion (Heidelberger Jahrbiicher, 1870, p. 104), points out 
that aurusha in Zend means white, so that it would seem as 
if the original meaning of arusha had been bright, bright 
like fire, and thus red. 

Arusha, as an Appellative. 

Arushd is used as an appellative, and in the following 
senses : 

1. The one red-horse of the Sun, the two or more red- 
horses of Agni. 

I, 6, I. yuw^dnti bradhndm arushdm. 

They yoke the bright red-horse (the Sun). 

I, 94, 10. yit ayukthi/^ arushS rohiti rdthe. 

When thou (Agni) hadst yoked the two red-horses and 
the two ruddy horses to the chariot. I, 146, 2,. 

II, 10, 2. sruyi/i agni/i — hdvam me — sytvi ratham vaha- 
ta^ rohit^l Vcl utd arushll. 

Mayest thou, Agni, hear my call, whether the two black, 
or the two ruddy, or the two red-horses carry you. 

Here three kinds of colours are clearly distinguished^ 
and an intentional difference is made between rdhita and 
arushd. IV, 2, 3. 

IV, 5, 9. tdva tyd agne harftaA — rdhitdsa;^ — arushSsaA 
vrhhdLna./i. 

To thee (Agni) belong these bays, these ruddy, these red- 
horses, the stallions. 

Here, again, three kinds of horses are distinguished — 
Harfts, Rdhitas, and Arushds. 

VIII, 34, 17. yd rigr^h vSta-ra;^hasa^ arushdsa>% raghu- 
sydda/^. 

Here arushd maybe the subject, and the rest adjectives ; 
but it is also possible to take all the words as adjectives, 
referring them to in the next verse. The fact that rigrA 
likewise expresses a peculiar red colour, is no objection, as 
may be seen from I, 6, i ; 94, 10. 

VII, 4a, 2(, yunkshvd — ^liarfta>4 rohfta/^ ka. yd vd sddman 
arushd^. 

c 2 

20 

VEDIC HYMNS- 

Yoke (O Agni) the bays, and the ruddy horses, or the 
red-horses which are in thy stable. VII, i6, o,. 

2. The cloud, represented as one of the horses of the 
Maruts. 

I, 85, 5. uta arushdsya vf syanti dhara/2, 

(When you go to the battle, O Maruts), the streams of 
the red (horse) flow off. 

V, 56, 7. utd sya^ vSg-L arushd^. - 

This strong red-horse,— meant for one of the horses of 
the Maruts, but, at the same time, as sending rain. 

Arusha, as the Proper Name of a Solar Deity. 

Besides the passages in which arushd is used either as an 
adjective, in the sense of red, or as an appellative, meaning 
some kind of horse, there are others in which, as I pointed 
out in my Essay on Comparative Mythology®, Arushd 
occurs as a proper name, as the name of a solar deity, as 
the bright deity of the morning (M orgenroth). My inter¬ 
pretation of some of these passages has been contested, nor 
shall I deny that in some of them a different interpretation 
is possible, and that in looking for traces of Arushd, as a 
Vedic deity, representing the morning or the rising sun, and 
containing, as I endeavoured to show, the first germs of the 
Greek name of Eros, I may have seen more indications of 
the presence of that deity in the Veda than others would 
feel inclined to acknowledge. Yet in going over the same 
ground again, I think that even verses which for a time I 
felt inclined to surrender, yield a better sense, if we take the 
word arushd, which occurs in them as a substantive, as the 
name of a matutinal deity, than if we look upon it as an 
adjective or a mere appellative- It might be said that 
wherever this arushd occurs, apparently as the name of a 
deity, we ought to supply Agni or Indra orSdrya. This is 
true to a certain extent, for the sun, or the light of the 
morning, or the bright sky form no doubt the substance and 

® Chips from a German Workshop, 2nd ed., voh ii, p. 137 seq. 
Selected Essays, vol. i, p. 444* 

NOTES. I, 6, r. 

2T 

subject-matter of this deity. But the same applies to many 
other names originally intended for these conceptions, but 
which, nevertheless, in the course of time, became inde¬ 
pendent names of independent deities. In our passage 
I, 6, I, yunginti bradhnam arushdm, we may retain for 
arushd the appellative power of steed or red-steed, but if we 
could ask the poet what he mea,nt by this red-steed, or if 
we ask ourselves what we can possibly understand by it, 
the answer would be, the morning sun, or the light of the 
morning. In other passages, however, this meaning of red- 
steed is really no longer applicable, and we can only 
translate Arushd by the Red, understanding by this name 
the deity of the morning or of the morning sun, the later 
Aru^za. 

VII, 71, I, dpa svdsu^ ushdsa/2 ndk^ihtte rmikti kmh- 
m/i arushSIya pdnthdm. 

The Night retires from her sister, the Dawn ; the Dark 
one yields the path to the Red one, i, e. the red morning. 

Here ArushA shares the same half-mythological character 
as Ushas. Where we should speak of dawn and morning 
as mere periods of time, the Vedic poet speaks of them as 
living and intelligent beings, half human, half divine, as 
powers of nature capable of understanding his prayers, and 
powerful enough to reward his praises. I do not think 
therefore that we need hesitate to take Arushi in this 
passage as a proper name of the morning, or of the morning 
sun, to whom the dark goddess, the Night, yields the path 
when he rises in the East. 

VI, 49, a. divd^ sisum sdhasa^ sClmim agnim ya^/ldsya 
ketdm arushim yi^dhyai. 

To worship the child of Dyu, the son of strength, Agni, 
the light of the sacrifice, the Red one (Arushd). 

In this verse, where the name of Agni actually occurs, it 
would be easier than in the preceding verse to translate 
arushd as an adjective, referring it either to Agni, the god 
of fire, or to ya^^/Jdsya ketdm, the light of the sacrifice. 
I had myself yielded so far to these considerations that I 

a Chips from a German Workshop, vol. ii, p. 139. 

22 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

gave up my former translation, and rendered this verse by 
‘ to worship Agni, the child of the sky, the son of strength, 
the red light of the sacrifice But I return to my original 
translation, and I prefer to see in Arushd an independent 
name, intended, no doubt, for Agni, as the representative of 
the rising sun and, at the same time, of the sacrificial fire of 
the morning, but nevertheless as having in the mind of the 
poet a personality of his own. He is the child of Dyu, 
originally the offspring of heaven. He is the son of strength, 
originally generated by the strong rubbing of the ara/^is, i. c. 
the wood for kindling fire. He is the light of the sacrifice, 
whether as reminding man that the time for the morning 
sacrifice has come, or as himself lighting the sacrifice on the 
Eastern altar of the sky. He is Arushd, originally as 
clothed in bright red colour, but gradually changed into the 
representative of the morning. We see at once, if examin¬ 
ing these various expressions, how some of them, like the 
child of Dyu, are easily carried away into mythology, while 
others, such as the son of strength, or the light of the 
sacrifice, resist that unconscious metamorphosis. That 
Arushd was infected by mythology, that it had approached 
at least that point where no min a become changed into 
numina, we see by the verse immediately following ; 

VI, 49, 3. arushdsya duhitdri vfrflpe (fti vf-rfipe) str/bhiA 
anyS pipij^ sura^ anyS. 

There are two different daughters of Arushd; the one 
is clad in stars, the other belongs to the sun, or is the 
wife of Svar, 

Here Arushd is clearly a mythological being, like Agni 
or Savitar or Vauv^nara; and if Day and Night are called 
his daughters, he, too, can hardly have been conceived 
otherwise than as endowed with human attributes, as 
the child of Dyu, as the father of Day and Night, and 
not as a mere period of time, not as a mere cause or 
effect. 

IV, 15, 6, tdm Arvantam nd sanasfm arushdm nd divd/^ 
riorum marmr^^dnte divd-dive. 

* Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1867, p. ^04. 

NOTES. I, 6, I. 

23 

They trim the fire day by day, like a strong horse, like 
Arushd, the child of Dyu. 

Here, too, Arushd, the child of Dyu, has to be taken as 
a personal character, and, if the nd after arusham is right, a 
distinction is clearly made between Agni, the sacrificial fire, 
to whom the hymn is addressed, and Arusha, the child of 
heaven, the pure and bright morning, here used as a simile 
for the cleaning or trimming of the fire on the altar. 

V, 47, 3. arushdA su-pan?d/i. 

Arushd, the morning sun, with beautiful wings. 

The Feminine Arush!, as an Adjective. 

Arusht, like arushd, is used as an adjective, in the same 
sense as arushd, i. e, red : 

IIIj 55, II- -ry^vt kz. ydt drushl kz svdsdrau. 

As the dark and the red are sisters. 

I, 9 a, I and a. gava^ drushi^ and drushi^ 

The red cows of the dawn. 

I, 9a, a. rilrantam bhdndm drushlA a^irrayu^. 

The red dawns obtained bright splendour. 

Here ushdsaA, the dawns, occur in the same line, so that 
we may take drusht,^ either as an adjective, referring to the' 
dawns, or as a substantive, as a name of the dawn or of 
her cows. 

I, 30, ai. drve nd Aitre arushi. 

Thou beautiful red dawn, thou, like a mare. 

Here, too, the vocative; arushi is probably to be taken as 
an adjective, particularly if we consider the next following 
verse : 

IV, 5a, a. djvd-iva li-Axi drusht mdt^ gdvdm rftd-var! 
sdkhd abhCit arvinoA ushS,^. 

The dawn, beautiful and red, like a mare, the mother of 
the cows (days), the never-failing, she became the friend 
of the Arvins. 

X, 5, 5. saptd zvisa'th drushlA. 

The seven red sisters. 

24 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

The Feminine Arushi, as a Substantive. 

If used as a substantive, drusht seems to mean the dawn. 
It is likewise used as a name of the horses of Agni, Indra, 
and Soma ; also as a name for mare in general. 

It means dawn in X, 8, 3, though the text points here so 
clearly to the dawn, and the very name of dawn is men¬ 
tioned so immediately after, that this one passage seems 
hardly sufficient to establish the use of arushi as a recog¬ 
nised name of the dawn. Other passages, however, would 
likewise gain in perspicuity, if we took drushl by itself as 
a name of the dawn, just as we had to admit in several 
passages arushi by itself as a name of the morning. Cf. I, 
71, I. 

Arushi means the horses of Agni, in I, 14, i:^ : 

yukshvd hf drushl/i: rathe harfta/^ deva rohfta/^. 

Yoke, O god (Agni), the red-horses to the chariot, the 
bays, the ruddy, 

I, 72, 10. prd r&kXh agne arushi/^ a^nan. 

They knew the red-horses, Agni, coming down* VIII, 

69. 5- 

Soma, as we saw, was frequently spoken of as arushi/i 

hdriA. 

In IX, III, a, tridh^tubhi^ Arushibhi/i seems to refer 
to the same red-horses of Soma, though this is not quite 
clear. 

The passages where Arushi means simply a mare, without 
any reference to colour, are VIII, 68, i8, and VIII, 55, 3. 

It is curious that ArushA, which in the V eda means red, 
should, as pointed out before, in its Zend form aurusha, 
mean white. That in the Veda it means red, and not white, 
is shown, for instance, by X, ao, 9, where jvetA, the name 
for white, is mentioned by the side of arushA. Most likely 
arushA meant originally brilliant, and became .fixed with 
different shades of brilliancy in Sanskrit and Persian. 
ArushA presupposes a form ar-vas, and is derived from a 
root ar in the sense of running or rushing. See Chips 
from a German Workshop, vol. ii, pp, [35, 137. 

NOTES. I, 6, T. 

25 

Having thus explained the different meanings of arusha 
and drushi in the Rig-veda, I feel it incumbent, at least for 
once, to explain the reasons why I differ from the classifi¬ 
cation of Vedic passages as given in the Dictionary pub¬ 
lished by Boehtlingk and Roth. Here, too, the passages 
in which arushd is used as an adjective are very properly 
separated from those in which it appears as a substantive. 
To begin with the first, it is said that ‘ arushd means ruddy, 
the colour of Agni and his horses ; he (Agni) himself appears 
as a red-horse.’ In support of this, the following passages 
are quoted : 

III, I, 4. dvardhayan su-bhdgam sapta yahvi7^ .rvetdm 
^a^/?dndni arushdm mahi-tva, .rijum nd ^dtdm abhf tmk 
isvkh. Here, however, it is only said that Agni was born 
brilliant-white ^ and grew red, that the horses came to him 
as they come to a new-born foal. Agni himself is not called 
a red-horse. 

III, 7, 5. Here, again, vHshndJi arushdsya is no doubt 
meant for Agni. But vr/shan by itself does not mean 
horse, though it is added to different names of horses to 
qualify them as male horses; cf. VII, 69, i, a vdm rdtha>4 
vnshabhi/4 ydtu djvai/^, may your chariot come near 
with powerful horses, i. e. with stallions. See note to I, 
85, 1%. We are therefore not justified in translating arusha 
vr/shan by red-horse, but only by the red male, or the red 
hero. 

In III, 31, 3, agnf/^^^/ife^uhvl rd^mdnaA mahd/^ putr^n 
arushdsya pra-ydkshe, I do not venture to say who is meant 
by the mzhik putran arushdsya, whether Adityas or Maruts, 
but hardly the sons of Agni, as Agni himself is mentioned 
as only born. But, even if it were so, the father of these 
sons (putra) could hardly be intended here for a horse. 

IV, 6, 9. tdva tyd ague haritaA ghrzta-sn^A rdhitdsa^?: 
rigxi-ifikd,h sn-ifikzh, arush^sa^ vWshai^a>4 rzjfu-mushkS!/^, 
Here, so far from Agni being represented as a red-horse, 
his different horses, the Harfts or bays, the Rdhitas or 

a See V, I, 4. svtiih v^f^dyate dgre dhndm. X, i, 6. arushdA 
gSi,iih padd iiiykh. 

26 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

ruddy, and the arushfea/^ vnsha^za^, the red stallions, are 
distinctly mentioned. Here vr/shan may be translated by 
stallion, instead of simply by male, because arushi is here a 
substantive, the name of a horse. 

V, I5 5. ^anish^a hi ghiyzJi dgre dhnim hitik hit^shu 
arushd/^ vdneshu. Here arushd/^ is simply an adjective, red, 
referring to Agni, who is understood throughout the hymn 
to be the object of praise. He is said to be kind to those 
who are kind to him, and to be red in the woods, i. e. 
brilliant in the wood which he consumes ; cf. Ill, 2^9, 6, 
Nothing is said about his equine nature. 

In V, I a, 2 and 6, VI, 48, 6, we have again simply arushd 
vr/shan, which does not mean the red-horse, but the red 
male, the red hero, i. e. Agni. 

In VI, 49, diviih ^fi-um sdhasa/^ siinum agnim ya^/IAsya 
ketiim arusham ya^dhyai, there is no trace of Agni being 
conceived as a horse. He is called the child of the sky or 
of Dyu, the son of strength (who is produced by strong 
rubbing of wood), the light or the beacon of the sacrifice, 
and lastly Arushd, which, for reasons stated above, I take 
to be used hei'e as a name. 

Next follow the passages in which, according to Professor 
Roth, arushd, as an adjective, is said to be applied to the 
horses, cows, and other teams of the gods, particularly of 
the dawn, the Alvins, and Bnhaspati. 

I, 1x8, 5. pdri vdm vdpusha/2 patang^'/^ vdyaA 

vahantu arushSA abhfke. Here we find the arushSA 

of the A^ins, which it is better to ti-anslate by red birds, as 
immediately before the winged horses are mentioned. In 
fact, whenever arushd is applied to the vehicle of the A^ins, 
it is to be understood of these red birds, IV, 43, 6. 

In I, 92, 1 and 2 (not %o\ drushJ occurs three times, 
referring twice to the cows of the dawn, once to the dawn 
herself. 

In IV, 15, 6, tdm drvantam nd sdnasfm arushdm nd divdA 
jf^um marmn^dnte div6-dive, arushd does not refer to the 
horse or any other animal of Agni. The verse speaks of a 
horse by way of comparison only, and says that the sacrificers 
clean or trim Agni, the fire, as people clean a horse. We 

NOTES. I, 6, I. 

27 

cannot join arusham in the next pida with drvantam in the 
preceding p4da, for the second nd would then be without 
any construction. The construction is certainly not easy, 
but I think it is safer to translate : they trim him (Agni), 
day by day, as they clean a strong horse, as they clean 
Arushd, the child of Dyu. In fact, as far as I know, arusha 
is never used as the name of the one single horse belonging 
to Agni, but always of two or more. 

In III, 31, 21, antar (iti) krishnS.n arushai/^ dh^ma hhi/z 
gdt, dhS!ma hhUi is said to mean flames of lightning. But 
dhaman in the Rig-veda does not mean flames, and it 
seems better to translate, with thy red companies, scil. 
the Maruts. 

That arushd in one or two passages means the red cloud, 
is true. But in X, 43, 9, arushd refers to the thunderbolt 
mentioned in the same vei'se; and in I, 114, 5? eveiy thing 
refers to Rudra, and not to a red cloud, in the proper sense 
of the word. 

Further on, where the meanings attributable to drushJ in 
the Veda are collected, it is said that drusht means a red 
mare, also the teams of Agni and Ushas. Now, hei'e, 
surely, a distinction should have been made between those 
passages in which drusht means a real horse, and those 
where it expresses the imaginary steeds of Agni, The 
former, it should be observed, occur in one only, 

and in places of somewhat doubtful authority, in VIII, 55, 
3, a Vdlakhilya hymn, and in VIII, 68, 18, a ddnastuti or 
panegyric. Besides, no passage is given where drushl means 
the horses of the dawn, and I doubt whether such a passage 
exists, while the one verse where drushl is really used for 
the horses of Indra, is not mentioned at all. Lastly, two 
passages are set apart where drushi is supposed to mean 
flames. Now, it may be perfectly true that the red-horses 
of Agni are meant for flames, just as the red-horses of Indra 
may be the rays of the sun. But, in that case, the red- 
horses of Agni should always have been thus translated, or 
rather interpreted, and not in one passage only. In IX, 
III, 2, drusht is said to mean flames, but no further light is 
thrown upon that very difficult passage. 

-8 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Note 2. Piri tasthiisha>%. I take this form as a nomi¬ 
native plural like abibhyusha^, I, ii, 5> tvam dev^/i abi- 
bhyusha/? tu^amanS,sa/2 ivishu/^, ® the gods, stirred up, 
came to thee, not fearing and like dadiisha/^, I, 54j 8, ye 
te indra dadiisha^ vardhayanti mihi kshatrdm, ' who giving 
or by their gifts increase thy great power, O Indra.’ Here 
we might possibly take it as a gen. sing, referring to te, but 
dadivan is far more appropi'iate as an epithet of the sacrificer 
than of the god. (See Eenfey, Vocativ, p. 24 ; and Hermes, 
p. 16.) It is well known among Sanskrit scholars that Pi'o- 
fessor Whitney, in reviewing my translation, declared that 
the participial form tasthusha/^ had no right to be anything 
but an accusative plural or a genitive or ablative singular. 
(See Chips from a German Workshop, vol. iv, p. 5^8.) Dr. 
Kern, however, in his translation of the Er^hat-Sa^/^hit^ 
had shown long before that nom. plur. such as vidusha/^ are 
by no means rare, even in the Mah^bh^rata and kindred 
works. Dr. Lanman (Journ. Americ. Or. Soc. X, p, 513) 
has now entered abibhyusha/2 as a nom. plur., but he prefers 
to take tasthusha/^ as an acc. plural, so that we should have 
to translate ^fedrantam pdri tasthdsha/^ by ‘ walking round 
those who stand/ This may be grammatically possible ; 
but who could be meant by tasthusha/^, standing ones? 
And, secondly, is it usual in Vedic Sanskrit to say /&arati 
pdri tarn, ‘he walks round him?’ We find pari ydti, or 
tarn pari ydti, but hardly ydti pari tarn, ‘ he goes round him/ 
except when pari stands independent of the verb and means 
‘ around,’ e. g. IX, 72^, 8, pavasva pdri parthivam rd^aA It is 
more difficult to decide whether we should adopt Ludwig’s 
interpretation, who takes pari tasthusha/^ in the sense of 
‘ away from what is firm.’ This is correct grammatically, and 
tasthivat, as opposed to ^dgat, is often used in the sense of 
what is immovable. Eut is it ever used in that sense by 
itself? I doubt it, though I may add in support of it such 
a passage as I, 191, 9, fit apaptat asad surya/^ .... dditydA 
pdrvatebhya>^, a verse where the expression v\svddris)xtdh 
adrfsh/aha js* analogous to our ketiim knwvdn aketdve. I 
therefore retain pari tasthusha/2 as a nom. plural in the sense 
of standing around, circumstantes, possibly of pari^ara, 

NOTES. 1, 6, 2. 

29 

attendants. ParishMana or sth^na comes to mean an 
abode, and paritasthivantas would be bystanders, attend¬ 
ants, the people, in fact, who are supposed to harness the 
horse. 

Though I do not assign great weight to interpretations 
of hymns, as given by the Br4hma;^as, I may mention that 
in the Taitt. Br. Ill, 9, 4, i, paritasthusha/2 is explained as a 
nom. plur., ime vai Idktk paritasthusha/2, while Siya;^a in 
his commentary (Sama-veda II, 6, 3, 12, i) has parito^va- 
sthiti lokatrayavartina/2 pi’kmm.k, 

Note 3. R6/feante ro^’anS[. A similar expression occurs 
III, 61, 5, where it is said of Ushas, the dawn, that she 
lighted the lights in the sky^ prd YokQ.u& ruru/te rawi- 
sandWk. 

Verse 2. 

Wilson : They (the charioteers) harness to his car 
his two desirable coursers, placed on either hand, bay- 
coloured, high-spirited, chief-bearing. 

BenFEY : Die lieben Falben schirren sie zu beiden Seiten 
des Wagens an, braune, kiihne, held-tragende. 

Ludwig : Sie spannen seine lieblichen falben an den 
wagen mit auseinandergehenden seiten, die blutroten, 
mutigen, helden-bringenden. 

Note 1. Although no name is given, the pronotin asya 
clearly refers to Indra, for it is he to whom the two bays 
belong. The next verse, therefore, must likewise be taken 
as addressed to Indra, and not to the sun or the morning- 
red, spoken of as a horse or a chariot in the first verse. 

Vipakshasd is well explained by Siya^m, vividhe pakshast 
rathasya par.rvau yayos tau vipakshasau, rathasya dvayoA 
p^ri'vayor yo^it^v ity artha^^!. The only doubt is whether 
it refers to the two sides of the chariot, .or of the principal 
horse. That horses were sometimes yoked so that one 
should act as leader, and two should be harnessed on each 
side, we see in I, 39, 6, note. 

30 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 3, 

Wilson : Mortals, you owe your (daily) birth (to .such 
an Indra), who, with the rays of the morning, gives sense to 
the senseless, and to the formless, form. 

Benfey: Licht machend — Manner! — das Dunkele und 
kenntlich das Unkenntliche, entsprangst du mit dem Mor- 
genroth. 

Ludwig : Sichtbarkeit schaffend dem unsichtbaren, 
gestalt o schmuckreiche (Marut) dem gestaltlosen, wurdet 
ihr mit den Ushas zusammen geboren. 

Note 1. In the TB. Ill, 9, 4, several of these mantras are 
enjoined for the A^amedha. When the banner (dhva^a) 
is fastened, this verse is to be used, because ketu was 
supposed to mean a banner. The vocative marya/^, which 
I have translated by O men, had evidently become a mere 
exclamation at a very early time. Even in our passage it 
is clear that the poet does not address any men in particular, 
for he addresses Indra, nor is marya used in the general 
sense of men. It means males, or male offspring. It 
sounds more like some kind of asseveration or oath, like the 
Latin mehercle, or like the English O ye powers, and it is 
therefore quoted as a nipita or particle in the Pr4ti^. 
II, 16. It can hardly be taken here as addressed to theMaruts, 
though the Maruts are the subject of the next verse. Kluge 
in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xxv, p. 309, points out that m^ry&k 
as an interjection does not occur again in the Rig-veda. But 
the Rig-veda contains many words which occur once only, 
and the author of PritLyikhya is no mean authority. 
See also Tkndyd. Brdhm. VII, 6, 5. If Dr. Kluge proposes to 
read mirydi as a dative (like kvK(^) he knows, of course, that 
such a form does not only never occur again in the Rig-veda, 
but never in the whole of Sanskrit literature. Grassmann and 
Lanman (N. I., p. 339) both seem to imagine that the Pada 
text has marya, but it has mary4/^, and no accent. If mary44 
had the accent, we might possibly translate, ‘ the youths, i. e, 
the Maruts, made/ taking knOTan for akrzV^van, or the more 
usual akurvan ; but in that case the transition to aj^iyathd/^ 
would be very sudden. See, however, I, 6, 7. 

NOTES. I, 6, 4, 

31 

S4ya;2a explains it maryi^, manushyi/? ! idam Ir^aryam 
pa^yata. Another explanation of this verse, which evi¬ 
dently troubled the ancient commentators as much as us, 
is, ‘ O mortal, i. e. O sun (dying daily), thou hast been born 
with the dawn/ 

Note 2. Ushddbhi/2, an instrumental plural which attracted 
the attention of the author of the V^rttika to Pi7z. VII, 4, 
48. It occurs but once, but the regular form, ushobhi^, 
does not occur at all in the Rig-veda. The same grammarian 
mentions mas, month, as changing the final s of its base into 
d before bhis. This, too, is confirmed by RV. II, 2,4, 5, 
where madbhf/^ occurs. Two other words, svavas, offering 
good protection, and svatavas, of independent strength, 
mentioned together as liable to the same change, do not 
occur with hhi/i in the Rig-veda, but the forms svavadbhi/^ 
and svatavadbhi/^ probably occurred in some other Vedic 
writings. Svatavadbhya^ has been pointed out by Professor 
Aufrecht in the Vi^san. Sa;^hiti XXIV, 16, and svatavo- 
bhyaA in .Satap. Br. 11, 5, i, 14. That the nom. svav^n, which 
is always trisyllabic, is not to be divided into sva-van, 
as proposed by vS4kalya, but into su-avdn, is implied by 
Virttika to P'ln, VIII, 4, 48, and distinctly stated in the 
SiddhS,nta-Kaumudt. That the final n of the nom. su-av^n 
disappeared before semi-vowels is confirmed by the vSikala- 
pr^tu^khya, SAtra 2^87 ; see also Vi^asan. Tritis. Ill, SCttra 
135 (Weber, Ind. Stud. vol. iv, p. izod). On the proper 
division of su»avas, see Aufrecht, Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. xiii, p. 499, 

Verse 4. 

Wilson .* Thereafter, verily, those who bear names 
invoked in holy rites (the Maruts), having seen the rain 
about to be engendered, instigated him to resume his 
embryo condition (in the clouds). 

Benfey : Sodann von freien Stiicken gleich erregen 
wieder Schwangerschaft die heilgen Namen tragenden. 

Ludwig : Da haben namlich in ihrer gottlichen weise 
disc der 'Prisni leibesfrucht gebracht, opfer verdienenden 
namen erwerbend. 

32 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

'Note 1. At must here take vyCiha and be pronounced as 
an iambus. This is exceptional with it, but there are at 
least two other passages where the same pronunciation is 
necessary.. I, 148, 4, at rotate vane S> vi-bha-vi, though 
in the line immediately following it is monosyllabic- Also 
in V, 7, 10, at agne dprmata/^. 

Note 2. Svadha, literally one’s own place, afterwards, 
one’s own nature. It was a great triumph for the science 
of Comparative Philology that, long before the existence of 
such a word as svadhi in Sanskrit was known, it should 
have been postulated by Professor Benfey in his Griechisches 
Wurzellexicon, published in 1839, and in the appendix of 
1 842^. Svadha was known, it is true, in the ordinary San¬ 
skrit, but there it only occurred as an exclamation used on 
presenting an oblation to the manes. It was also explained 
to mean food offered to deceased ancestors, or to be the 
name of a personification of M^y^ or worldly illusion, or of 
a nymph. But Professor Benfey, with great ingenuity, pos¬ 
tulated for Sanskrit a noun svadha, as corresponding to the 
Greek idos and the German sitte, O. H. G. sit-u, Gothic 
sid-u. The noun svadha has since been discovered in the 
Veda, where it occurs very frequently ; and its true meaning 
in many passages where native tradition had entirely mis¬ 
understood it, has really been restored by means of its 
etymological identification with the Greek or See 
Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. ii, p. 134 ; vol. xii, p. 158. 

The expressions dnu svadhSm and svadhSm dnu are of 
frequent occurrence. They mean, according to the nature 
or character of the persons spoken of, and may be trans¬ 
lated by as usual, or according to a person’s wont. Thus in 
our passage we may translate, The Maruts are born again, 
i. e. as soon as Indra appeared with the dawn, according to 
their wont ; they are always born as soon as Indra appears, 
for such is their nature. 

^ ^5j 5* fndra svadham dnu hi na/t babhutha. 

For, Indra, according to thy wont, thou art with us* 

VIII, ao, 7. svadham dnu .yriyam nim/i — vdhante. 

According to their wont, the men (the Maruts) carry 
splendour. 

NOTES. I, 6, 4. 

33 

Thou hast grown (Indra) according to thy nature* 

IV, 33, 6. dnu svadham rihhivz/i ^agmu/^ etam. 

According to their nature, the i?/bhus went to her, scil. 
the cow ; or, according to this their nature, they came. 

IV, 52,, 6; I, 33, II ; I, 88, 6; VII, 56, 13; III, 51, n. 

In all these passages svadha may be rendered by manner, 
habit, usage, and anu svadham would seem to correspond to 
the Greek iOovs, Yet the history of these words in 
Sanskrit and Greek has not been exactly the same. First 
of all we observe in Greek a division between cdos and 
and whereas the former comes very near in meaning to the 
Sanskrit svadh^, the latter shows in Homer a much more 
primitive and material sense. It means in Homer, not a 
person’s own nature, but the own place, for instance, of 
animals, the haunts of horses, lions, fish ; in Hesiod, also of 
men. Horn. II. XV, 2,68, fierd r ijO^a /cat vofibv tirirmt loca 
consueta et pascua. SvadhSI in the Veda does not occur 
in that sense, although etymologically it might take the 
meaning of one’s own place; cf. dhd-man, fa m ilia, &c. 
Whether in Greek from meaning lair, haunt, home, 
came, like vofios and voixos, to mean habit, manner, character, 
which would be quite possible, or whether in that 

meaning represents a second start from the same point, 
which in Sanskrit was fixed in svadha, is impossible to 
determine. In Sanskrit svadha clearly shows the meaning 
of one’s own nature, power, disposition. It does not mean 
power or nature in general, but always the power of some 
one, the peculiarity, ’ the individuality of a person. This 
will appear from the following passages : 

II, 3, 8. tisrd/^ devi^ svadhdyd barhi^ & iddm ikkkidtzm 
pdntu. 

May the three goddesses protect by their power the 
sacred pile unbroken. 

IVp 13, 5. kdyd ydti svadhdyd. 

By what inherent power does he (the Sun) move on ? 

IV, a6, 4, a>&akrdyd svadhdyA. 

By a power which requires no chariot, i. e. by himself 
without a chariot. 

The same expression occurs again X, ^9* 

[32] i> . 

34 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

In some places the verb mad, to delight, joined with 
svadhdyi, seems to mean to revel in his strength, to be 
proud of his might. 

V, 4. svadhdy^ mddantam. 

Vntra who delights in his strength. 

VII, 47, 3. svadhiy^ madantU. 

The waters who delight in their strength. See X, 124, 8. 

In other passages, however, as we shall see, the same 
phrase (and this is rather unusual) requires to be taken in 
a different sense, so as to mean to rejoice in food. 

I, 164, 38; III, 17, 5. 

III, 35, 10. fndra piba svadhdyi kit sutdsya agnd/z vd 
pdbi g-ihviyt ya^atra. 

Indra drink of the libation by thyself (by thy own power), 
or with the tongue of Agni, O worshipful. 

To drink with the tongue of Agni is a bold but not 
unusual expression. V, 51, 2. agnd/z pibata ^ihvdyd. X, 
15, 3. 

I, 165, 6. kva sy^va/^ maruta-^ svadhadsit ydt mamdkam 
sam-ddhatta ahi-hdtye. 

Where was that custom of yours, O Maruts, when you 
left me alone in the killing of Ahi ? 

VII, 8, 3. kdyd naA agne vl vasa.^ su-vnktfm kdm (iti) 
svadham rinzs^Jt ^asydmdna^. 

In what character dost thou light up our work, and what 
character dost thou assume, when thou art praised ? 

IV, 58, 4; IV, 45, 6. 

I, 64, 4. sdkdm gzgmxt svadhdyd. 

They (the Maruts) were born together, according to their 
nature ; very much like dnu svadhSm, I, 6, 4. One can 
hardly render it here by 'they were born by their own 
strength," or ' by spontaneous generation.’ 

In other passages, however, svadhdyd, meaning originally 
by its own power, or nature, comes to mean, by itself, 
sponte suSi. 

VII, 78, 4, a asthdt rdtham svadhdyd yu^ydmdnam. 

She, the dawn, mounted the chariot which was harnessed 
by itself, by its own power, without requiring the assistance 
of people to put the horse3 to, 

NOTES. I, 6, 4. 

35 

X, 129, antt avitdm svadhayi tat ekam. 

That only One breathed breathlessly (or freely) by its 
own strength, i. e. by itself. 

In the same sense svadh^bhi.^ is used in several passages : 

I3 13- amr/ta ^arati svadhS!bhi^ 

The immortal Dawn moves along by her own strength, 
i.e. by herself. 

VIII, 10, 6. ydt vd svadhabhi^ adhi-t^sh^^/^atha^ ratham. 

Or whether ye mount your chariot by your own strength, 
ye Ajvins. 

I, 164, 30. giviJt mntdsya /^arati svadhabhi/^ dmartya/2 
mdrtyena sd-yoni^. 

The living moves by the powers of the dead, the immortal 
is the brother of the mortal. Ill, a6, 8 ; V, do, 4, 

There are doubtful passages, such as 1, 180, 6, in which 
the meaning of svadhd'bhii:, too, is doubtful. In VI, 8, 
svadh^ looks like an adverb, instead of svadhdyd, and would 
then refer to pdri^md. The same applies to VIII, 32, 6. 

But svadhS means also food, lit. one’s own portion, the 
sacrificial offering due to each god, and lastly, food in 
general. 

1, 108, 12. ydt indrdgnt (iti) lit-itd suryasya mddhye divd/^ 
svadhdyd mdddyethe (iti). 

Whether you, Indra and Agni, delight in your food at 
the rising of the sun or at midday. 

X, 15, 12. tvdm agne ilitkk ^ita-veda/^ dvdif havyeini 
surabhi;^i kntvi, prd add/^ pitr/-bhya/^ svadhdyd td akshan 
addhf tvdm deva prd-yatd havi!^/zshi. 13. yd kz. ihd pitdra-4 
ye kz, nd ihd yan kz. vidmd ydn (fti) kz, nd pra-vidmd, 
tvdm vettha ydti td ^dta-vedaA svadhdbhiA yegfiim sti- 
kntam ^ushasva. 14. yd agni-dagdhSA yd dnagni-dagdhd^ 
mddhye divik svadhdyd mdddyante, tdbhi^ svsL-r&t dsu- 
nitim etdm yathd-vai-dm tanvam kalpayasva. 

12. Thou, O Agni C?dtavedas, hast carried, when im^ 
plored, the offerings which thou hast rendered sweet : thou 
hast given them to the fathers, they fed on their share. 
Eat thou, 0 god, the proffered oblations. 13. Our fathers 
who are here, and those who are not here, our fathers whom 
we know and those whom we do not know, thou knowest 

36 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

how many they are^ O (JatavedaS; accept the well-made 
sacrifice with the sacrificial portions. 14. They who, whe¬ 
ther burnt by fire or not burnt by fire, rejoice in their 
offering in the midst of heaven, give to them, O king, that 
life, and thy (their) own body, according to thy will. 

Ill, 4, 7. sapta przkshasai^ svadhdya madanti. 

The seven horses delight in their food. 

X, 14, 7. ubha r%4na svadhayi mddantd. 

The two kings delighting in their food. 

IX, 1 13, 10. yatra yfea, ydtra bradhndsya 

vishzfdpam, svadh^ ka yatra tr/pti/^ ksi tdtra mam amr/tam 
kridhL 

Where wishes and desires are, where the cup of the bright 
Soma is (or, where the highest place of the sun is), where 
there is food and rejoicing, there make me immortal. 

I, 154, 4. ydsya tri pfiiv^a mddhuna pad^ni dkshiyamd?2d 
svadhdyd mddanti. 

He (Vish;^u) v/hose three places, full of sweet, imperish¬ 
able, delight or abound in food. 

V, 34. 1 ; II, 35, 7 ; I, 9 ; 1, 176, a. 

In the tenth book svadha is used very much as it occurs 
in the later Sanskrit, as the name of a peculiar sacrificial rite. 

X, 14, 3- yan >&a dtvi/i vavrMhti/^ y6 devd'n svahd 
any6 svadhdyd any^ madanti. 

Those whom the gods cherish, and those who cherish the 
gods, the one delight in S valid, the others in Svadhi ; or, in 
praise and food. 

Note 3. The expression garbha-tvdm d-irird is matched 
by that of III, 6o, 3, saudhanvand!sa/^ amnta-tvdm SI Irire, 
the Saudhanvanas (the iS^bhus) obtained immortality, or be¬ 
came immortal. I do not think that punar erire can mean, 
as Ludwig supposes, they pushed away their state of garbha. 
The idea that the Maruts assumed the form of a garbha, 
lit. of an embryo or a new-born child, is only meant to ex¬ 
press that they were born, or that the storms burst forth 
from the womb of the sky as soon as Indra arises to do 
battle against the demon of darkness. Thus we read, 

134, 4j i^r^naya/^ mariita/^ vakshd?2dbhya/i:, Thou, Vdyu, 
hast produced the Maruts from the bowels (of the sky). 

NOTES. I, 6, 5. 

37 

As assisting Indra in this battle, the Maruts, whose name 
retained for a long time its purely appellative meaning of 
storms, attained their rank as deities by the side of Indra, 
or, as the poet expresses it, they assumed their sacred 
name. This seems to be the whole meaning of the later 
legend that the Maruts, like the Ribhus, were not originally 
gods, but became deified for their works. See also Kern, 
Translation of Bnhat-sa;;2hit^, p. 117, note. 

Other explanations are : they made that which was born 
within the cloud into a garbha or embryo 5 or, they arose 
with Aditya, proceeded with Savitar, and when Savitar set, 
they became again garbhas ; see S4ma-veda II, 0,^ 7, 2, comm. 

Vahni. 

Verse 6. 

Wilson : Associated with the conveying Maruts, the 
traversers of places difficult of access, thou, Indra, hast dis¬ 
covered the cows hidden in the cave. 

BenfeY: Mit den die Festen brechenden, den Stiirm- 
enden fandst, Indra, du die Kiihe in der Grotte gar. 

Ludwig : Und mit denen, die das feste sogar anbrechen, 
selbst im versteck, o Indra, mit den priesterlichen, fandest 
du die morgenstralen auf. 

13'ote 1. S4ya?m explains vahnibhi/^ in the sense of 
Mariidbhi/^, and he tells the oft-repeated story how the 
cows were carried off by the Pa^zis from the world of the 
gods,- and thrown into darkness, and how Indra with the 
Maruts conquered them and brought them back. Every¬ 
body seems to have accepted this explanation of S&ymsi, 
and I myself do not venture to depart from it. Yet it 
should be stated that the use of vdhni as a name of the 
Maruts is by no means well established. Vdhni is in fact a 
most difficult word in the Veda, In later Sanskrit it means 
fire, and is quoted also as a name of Agni, the god of fire, 
but we do not learn why a word which etymologically 
means carrier, from vah, to carry, should have assumed the 
meaning of fire. It may be that vah, which in Sanskrit, 
Greek, and Latin means chiefly to carry, expressed origin- 

38 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

ally the idea of moving about (the German be-wegen), 
in which case vdh-nij fire, would have been formed with the 
same purpose as ag-nl, ig-nis, fire, from Sk. a^,oy-to,ag-o. 
In Alvis-mal, V, 94, we read, kalla Vanir, the Wanes 
call fire Vdg, i.e. wavy. But in Sanskrit Agni is so con¬ 
stantly represented as the carrier of the sacrificial oblation, 
that something may also be said in favour of the Indian 
scholastic interpreters who take vihni, as applied to Agni, 
in the sense of carrier. However that may be, it admits 
of no doubt that vdhni, in the Veda, is distinctly applied to 
the bright fire or light. In some passages it looks very 
much like a proper name of Agni, in his various characters 
of terrestrial and celestial light. It is used for the sacri¬ 
ficial fire : 

V, 50, 4. ydtra vahni^ abhf-hita-^. 

Where the sacrificial fire is placed. 

It is applied to Agni : 

VII, 7, 5. as^di vritih vihnUi 4-^aganv4’n SignUi brahm^. 

The chosen light came nigh, and sat down, Agni, the 

priest. 

Here Agni is, as usual, represented as a priest, chosen 
like a priest, for the performance of the sacrifice. But, for 
that very reason, vdhni may here have the meaning of 
priest, which, as we shall see, it has in many places, and 
the translation would then be more natural : He, the chosen 
minister, came near and sat. down, Agni, the priest. 

VIII, 23, 3. \ihmk vindate vAsu. 

Agni finds wealth (for those who offer sacrifices ?). • 

More frequently vAhni is applied to the celestial Agni, 
or other solar deities, where it is difficult to translate it in 
English except by an adjective ; 

III, 5, 1. Apa dvArA tAmasa/; vAhni/^ Avar (Ity Ava/2). 

Agni opened the two dooi's of darkness. 

I> 3. si/i vAhni/^ putrAA pitrd.^ pavitra-vAn punati 
dhi'ra/^ bhdvanAni mAyAyA. 

That light, the son of the two pai'ents, full of brightness, 
the wise, brightens the world by his power. 

Agni is even called vAhni-tama (IV, i, 4), which hardly 
means more than the brightest. 

NOTES* I, 6, 5. 

39 

II, 17, 4. Kt r6dast (iti)^y6tish4 vihmh a atanot. 

Then the bright (Indra) stretched out or filled heaven 
and earth with his light, 

II, 38, T, lit iXm (fti) syiih devd^ savitS — vahni/^ asthat. 

The divine Savitar, the luminous, arose. 

Besides this meaning of light or fire, however, there are 
clearly two other meanings of vdhni which must be admitted 
in the Veda, first that of a carrier, vehicle^ and, it may be, 
horse ; secondly that of minister or priest. 

VI, 57; 3. anydsya vihnaya/^ hari (iti) anydsya sdm- 
bhrztd. 

The bearers of the one (Pfishan) are goats, the bays are 
yoked for the other (Indra). 

I, 14, 6, ghntd-przsh//zd/z mana-^i-yii^/z yd tvd vdhanti 
vdhnaya/z. 

The horses with shining backs, obedient to thy will, 
which carry thee (Agni). 

VIII, 3, ydsmai anyd disa. prdti dhiiram vdhanti vdh- 
naya/z, 

A horse against whom other ten horses carry a weight ; 
i. e. it requires ten horses to carry the weight which this one 
horse carries. (See X, ii, 7, vdhamdna/z djvai/z.) 

II, 37, 3. mddyantu te vdhnaya/z ydbhi/z lyase. 

May thy horses be fat on which thou goest II, 24, 13. 

I, 44, 13. irudhf jrut-kar^za vdhni-bhi/z. 

Agni, who hast ears to hear, hear, on thy horses. Unless 
vdhni-bhi/z is joined with the words that follow, devaf/z 
saydva-bhi/z. 

III, 6, vaX’ydntdm te vdhnaya/z saptd-^ihvd/z ^ 

May thy seven-tongued horses be called. Here vdhna- 
ya/z is clearly meant for the flames of Agni, yet I doubt 
whether we should be justified in dropping the simile, 
as the plural of vdhni is nowhere used in the bald sense 
of flames. 

In one passage vdhni is supposed to be used as a feminine, 
or at all events applied to a feminine subject : 

VIII, 94; I. yuktd' vdhni^ rdthdndm. 

Cf, I, 68, 7. saptd^hvSlA. 

40 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

She is yoked as the drawer of the chariots. Probably, 
however, vdhni^ should here be changed into vahnt. 

The passages in which vahni is applied to Soma in the 
ninth and tenth Ma;2i3^alas throw little light on the subject. 
(IX, 9, 6 ; 30, 5 ; 6 ; 36, 3 ; 64, 19 ; 89, 1 ; X, loi, 10.) 

Instead of virSm vijpdtiA, lord of men (VII, 7, 4), we find 
IX, 108, 10. visSm vdhni4 ni vijpdti/2. One feels inclined 
to translate here vdhni/2 by leader, but it is more likely that 
vdhni is here again the common name of Soma, and that it 
is inserted between vijam nd vijpdti^, which is meant to 
form one phrase. 

In IX, 97, 34, tisrd^ vakuk irayati pra vdhni^, we may 
take vdhni as the common appellation of Soma. But it 
may also mean minister or priest, as in the passages which 
we have now to examine. Cf. X, it, 6. 

For besides these passages in which vdhni clearly means 
vector, carrier, drawer, horse, there is a large class of verses 
in which it can only be translated by minister, i. e. officiating 
minister, and, as it would seem, chiefly singer or reciter ^ 

The verb vah was used in Sanskrit in the sense of 
carrying out (ud-vah, ausfuhren), or performing a rite, 
particularly as applied to the reciting of hymns. Hence 
such compounds as ukthd-vdhas or st6ma-vihas, offering 
hymns of praise, and ya,f?5d-vdhas. Thus we read : 

V, 79, 4. abhi yd tvd vibhd-vari stdmai^ gnwdnti vdh- 
nayaA. 

The ministers who praise thee, splendid Dawn, with 
hymns. ^ 

I, 48, II. yd tvd grfwdnti vdhnaya^. 

The ministers who praise thee. 

75) 5’ ush^ ■akkki.'d vdhni-bhi.^ gn'wdnd’. 

The dawn lights up, praised by the ministers. 

VI, 39, I. mandrdsya kavd/2 divydsya vdhne/2. 

Of the sweet poet, of the heavenly priest .... 

VII, 83, 4. yuvd’m ft yut-sii p;Ytandsu vdhnaya/i yuvffm 
kshdmasya pra-save mitd-^>7ava/2, istnS, visv&A ubhdyasya 
kdrdva/% fndrdvaru^d su-hdvd havdmahe. 

See Taitt. Brdhm. I, i, 6, 10. vahnir vd anaifvdn, vahnir 
adhvaryuA. 

NOTES, I, 6, 5. 

41 

We, as ministers, invoke you only in fights and battles ; 
we, as suppliants, (invoke) you for the granting of treasure ; 
we, as poets, (invoke) you, the lords of twofold wealth, you, 
Indra and Varu^^a, who listen to our call. 

VI, 33, 3. sill vdlini-bhi/if r/kva-bhi/2 gdshu .yd^'vat mita- 
gnM-hhxh puru-kr/tva ^igaya. 

He (Indra) was victorious often among the cows, always 
with celebrating and suppliant ministers. 

I have placed these two passages together because 
they seem to me to illustrate each other, and to show 
that although in the second passage the celebrating and 
suppliant ministers may be intended for the Mai-uts, yet 
no argument could be drawn from this verse in favour of 
vdhni by itself meaning the Maruts. See also VIII, 6, 5^ ; 
X, 114, 

IV, 2,1, 6. hdtcl yik naA mahan sam“Vdra;>?eshu vihniA 

The Hotar who is our great priest in the sanctuaries. 

I, 1:^8, 4, v&hnlh vedM/t i^iyata. 

Because the wise priest (Agni) was born. 

The same name which in these passages is applied to 
Agni, is in others, and, as it will be seen, in the same 
sense, applied to Indra. 

II, 2, tuvi-grdye vdhnaye. 

To the strong-voiced priest or leader. 

The fact that vdhni is followed in several passages by 
ukthaf^ would seem to show that the office of the vdhni 
was chiefly that of recitation or of addressing prayers to 
the gods. 

III, I. agnfm ushdsam a.rvfncl dadhi-kram vf-ushrishu 
havate vihni/i ukthaf/^. 

The priest at the break of day calls with his hymns Agni, 
Ushas, the A^-vins, and Dadhikrd. 

I, 184, I. t^ v4m adyA tau apardm huvema ^xkkki.^lxtytm 
ushdsi vihmh ukthaf^. 

Let us invoke the two A.rvins to-day and to-morrow, the 
priest with his hymns is there when the dawn appears* 

In a similar sense, it would seem, as Yihmh ukthaf/4, the 
Vedic poets frequently use the words vdhniA ds^. This 
dsfi! is the instrumental singular of ds, mouth, and it is used 

42 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

in Other phrarses also of the mouth as the instrument of 
praise. 

VI, 32, I. va^rke .rdm-tamini vdMwsi dsS sthdvirdya 
taksham. 

I have shaped with my mouth blessed words to the 
wielder of the thunderbolt, the strong Indra. 

X, 1 15, 3. ds^ vdhnim nd jo^fshd vi-rap.yinam. 

He who sings with his flame as the poet with his mouth. 
See also I, 38, 14, mimthf j'ldkam isye, make a song in thy 
mouth. 

Thus we find vdhni/^ ds^ in the same place in the sixth 
and seventh Maf^rfalas (VI, i5, 9 ; VII, 16, 9), in the phrase 
vihniA dsd vidii/2-tara/4, applied to Agni in the sense of the 
priest wise with his mouth, or taking vihm/i dsd as it were 
one word, the wise poet. 

Ij 5* vdhni/2 dsa, vdhnii^ na/^ ikkhz.» 

Indra, as a priest by his lips, as a priest coming to¬ 
wards us. 

From the parallelism of this passage it would seem that 
Professor Roth concluded the meaning of asd**- to be near, 

a As, mouth, the Latin os, oris, has been derived from a root as, 
to breathe, preserved in the Sanskrit as-u, spirit, asu-ra, endowed 
with spirit, living, the living god. Though I agree with Curtius in 
admitting a primitive root as, to breathe, from which as-u, breath, 
must have sprung, 1 have always hesitated about the derivation of 
ds and dsya, mouth, from the same root. I do not think, however, 
that the lengthening of the vowel in ds is so great a difficulty as has 
been supposed (Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. xvii, p. 145). Several roots 
lengthen their vowel a, when used as substantives without derivative 
suffixes. In some cases this lengthening is restricted to the Anga 
base, as in ana^fvdh ; in others to the Anga and Pada base, as in 
vijvavd/, vijvava(ifbhi/^, &c. ; in others again it pervades the whole 
declension, as in turdshd/: (see Sanskrit Grammar, §§ 210, 208, 
173.) Among ordinary words vd^ offers a clear instance of a 
lengthened vowel. In the Veda we find rzTtlshdham, VI, 14, 4, and 
n'ttshdham (Sazzzhitd), I, 64, ig. In X, 71, jo the Sa7;zhitd has 
sabhdsdhdna, the Pada sabhdsah^na. We find vdh in apsu-vdh (Sdm. 
Ved.), indra-vdh, havya-vdh, Sah at the end of compounds, such as 
nrz-sah, pn’tand-sah, bhfiri-sah, satrd-sah, vibhd-sah, sadd-sah, varies 
between a long and short d : (see Regnier, Etude sur Tidiome du 

NOTES. I, 6, 5. 

43 

or coram. In the Nigha;2^u, II, 16, the right reading is 
evidently is4t, not 4sa ; see Nirukta, ed. Satyavrata S^ma- 
.yrami, vol. i, p. 264, AsS, however, is an old variant, as may 
be seen from Rig-veda-bhashya I, 12^7, 8 ; X, 115, 3. 

I, 76, 4. pra^4-vati viksist vdhni/2 a >fea huv6 nf >fea 
satsi iha devai/^. 

With words in which my people join, I, the poet, invoke^ 
and thou (Agni) sittest down with the gods. 

VI, II, 2. p^vakdyi ^uhvS vdhni/is 4sa, 

Thou, a poet with a bright tongue, O Agni ! 

Grassmann thinks that vahnir ds^ can always be translated 
by * vor das Angesicht bringend,’ but this does not appear 
to be the case in his translation. 

The question now arises in what sense vahni is used when 
applied without further definition to certain deities. Most 
deities in the Veda are represented as driving or driven, 
and many as poets or priests. When the A,fvins are called 
vdhnt, VIII, 8, 12 ; VII, 73, 4, it may mean riders. But when 
the Vuve Devis are so called, I, 3, 9, or the i?2bhus, the 
exact meaning is more doubtful. The Maruts are certainly 
riders, and whatever other scholars may say to the contrary, 
it can be proved that they were supposed to sit astride on 
horseback, and to have the bridle through the horse’s 
nostrils (V, 61, 2). But if in our verse I, 6, 53 we translate 
vahni as an epithet, rider, and not only as an epithet, but 
as a name of the Maruts, we cannot support our transla¬ 
tion by independent evidence, but must rely - partly on 
the authority of Siya;^a, partly on the general tenor of the 
text before us, where the Maruts are mentioned in the pre¬ 
ceding verse, and, if I am right, in the verse following also. 
On the other hand, if vdhni can thus be used as a name of 

Vddas, p. XII.) At all events no instance has yet been pointed 
out in Sanskrit, showing the same contraction which we should 
have to admit if, as has been proposed, we derived ds from av-as, 
or from an-as. From ‘an' we have in the Veda ^nd, mouth or face, 
I, 52, ig. From as, to breathe, the Latin omen, originally os-men, 
a whisper, might likewise be derived. See Bopp, Comp. Gr. par. 
909 ; Kuhn in Ind. Stud. I, 333. 

44 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

the Maruts, there is at least one other passage which would 
gain in clearness by the admission of that meaning, viz. 

* X, 138, I. tava ty6 indra sakhydshu vdhiiaya/2 — vf adar- 
diru/2 valdm. 

In thy friendship, Indra, these Maruts tore asunder the 
cloud. 

Note 2, I have translated vi/ii by stronghold, though it is 
only an adjective, meaning firm. Dr. Oscar Meyer, in his 
able essay Quaestiones Homericae, specimen prius, Bonnae, 
1867, has tried to show that this vi/d is the original form 
of ’'IXtos, and he has brought some further evidence to show 
that the siege and conquest of Troy, as I pointed out in my 
Lectures on the Science of Language, vol. ii, p. 470, was 
originally described in language borrowed from the siege 
and conquest of the dark night by the powers of light, or 
from the destruction of the cloud by the weapons of Indra. 
It ought to be considered, however, that vi/ii in the Veda 
has not dwindled down as yet to a mere name, and that 
therefore it may have originally retained its purely appella¬ 
tive power in Greek as well as in Sanskrit, and from meaning 
a stronghold in general, have come to mean the stronghold 
of Troy. 

Note 3. The bright cows are here the cows of the morn¬ 
ing, the dawns, or the days themselves, which are represented 
as rescued at the end of each night by the power of Indra, 
or similar solar gods. Indra’s companions in that daily 
rescue are here the Maruts, the storms, the same com¬ 
panions who act even a more prominent part in the battle 
of Indra against the dark clouds. These two battles are 
often mixed up together, so that possibly iisrlyi/is may have 
been meant for clouds. 

Verse 0. 

Wilson : The reciters of praises praise the mighty 
(troop of Maruts), who are celebrated, and conscious of the 
power of bestowing wealth in like manner as they (glorify) 
the counsellor (Indra). 

Benfey : Nach ihrer Einsicht verherrlichend besingen 
Sanger den Schatzeherrn, den beruhmten, gewaltigen. 

NOTES* I, 6, 7. 

45 

Ludwig : Als fromme heran zum liede haben die sanger 
ihn, der trefliches findet, beruhmten gesungen. 

Note 1. The reasons why I take gfra^ as a masculine in 
the sense of singer or praiser, may be seen in a note to 
I, 37, 10. 

Note 2. yatha matim, lit. according to their mind, accord¬ 
ing to their heart’s desire. Cf. II, 24, 13. 

Verse 7. 

Wilson: May you be seen, Maruts, accompanied by 
the undaunted (Indra) ; both rejoicing, and of equal 
splendour. 

Benfey : So lass mit Indra denn vereint, dem furcht- 
losen, erblicken dich, beide erfreu’nd und glanzesgleich. 

Ludwig : Mit Indra zusammen wirst du gesehn zusam- 
mengehend mit dem furchtlosen, mild ihr zwei, von gleichem 
glanze. 

Note 1. The sudden transition from the plural to the 
singular is strange, but the host of the Maruts is frequently 
spoken of in the singular, and nothing else can here be 
intended. It may be true, as Professor Benfey suggests, 
that the verses here put together stood originally in a 
different order, or that they were taken from different 
sources. Yet though the S^ma-veda would seem to sanction 
a small alteration in the order of the verses, the alteration 
of verses 7, 4, 5, as following each other, would not help us 
much. The Atharva-veda sanctions no change in the order 
of these verses. 

The transition to the dual at the end of the verse is 
likewise abrupt, not more so, however, than we are prepared 
for in the Veda. The suggestion of the Nirukta (IV, 1%) 
that these duals might be taken as instrumentals of the 
singular, is of no real value. 

Note 2. Dr/kshase, a very valuable form, well explained 
by dwyethliA, a second person singular conjunctive of the 
First Aorist Atmanepada, the termination * sase ’ corre¬ 
sponding to Greek o-j;, as the conjunctive takes the personal 
terminations of the present iu both languages. Similar 

46 

VEDIC HYMNS, 

forms, viz. p^-fkshase, X, aa, 7, mawisase, X, 37, 10 ; Ath. 
Veda VII, ao, a-6, and possibly vi'vakshase, X, ai, 1-8, 
a4, T-3, a5, i-ii, will have to be considered hereafter. 
(Nirukta, ed. Roth, p. 30, Notes.) As Ludwig has pointed 
out, the T4«^ya-br^hma«a XII, a, 6, 7, reads d^kshuse, and 
explains it by ime loki dadrwire. Siyawa, however, explains 
dmidhdto^ karmawi madhyamaikava^ane vyatyayena se- 
pratyaye d?-2‘kshusa iti rhpam. See Delbriick, Syntaktische 
Forschungen, I, p. iii. The story of Indra’s being forsaken 
by all the gods in his battle against V^'ftra, but being helped 
by the Maruts, is often mentioned ; see RV. VIII, 96, 7 ; 
SV, I, 4, 1, 4, a ; Ait, Br, III, ao. 

Verse 8. 

Wilson : This rite is performed in adoration of the 
powerful Indra, along with the irreproachable, heavenward¬ 
tending, and amiable bands (of the Maruts). 

Benfey : Durch Indra’s liebe Schaaren, die untadligen, 
himmelsturmenden, strahlet das Opfer machtiglich, 

Ludwig : Mit den tadellosen, morgens erscheinendcn 
singt der kampfer sighaft, mit des Indra zu liebenden 
scharen. 

Wote 1. AtkdAi, which I have here translated by he cries 
aloud, means literally, he celebrates. I do not know of any 
passage where ar/feati, when used, as here, without an object, 
means to shine, as Professor Benfey translates it. The real 
difHculty, however, lies in makhd, which S&ya«a explains 
by sacrifice, and which I have ventured to translate by 
priest or sacrificer. Makh^ as an adjective, means, as far 
as we can judge, strong or vigorous, and is applied to 
various deities, such as Pfishan I, 138, i, Savitn VI, 71, i, 
Soma XI, 30, 7, Indra III, 34, a, the Maruts I, 64, ii ;‘’VI, 
66, 9, By itself, makhi is never used as the name of any 
deity, and it cannot therefore, as Professor Roth proposes, 
be used in our passage as a name of Indra, or be referred to 
Indra as a significant adjective. In I, 119, 3, makhd is 
applied to men or warriors, but it does not follow that 
makhd by itself means warriors, though it maybe connected 

NOTES, I, 6, 8. 

47 

with the Greek /xa^oy in (rdufiaxps. See Curtius, Grundzuge, 
p. 293 ; Grassmann, in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xvi, p. 164. 

There are two passages where makhd refers to an enemy 
of the gods, IX, loi, 13 ; X, 171, 3. 

Among the remaining passages there is one where makhd 
is used in parallelism with vihni, X, ii, 6. vfvakti v&hmh, 
su-apasydte makhd^. Here I propose to translate, The poet 
speaks out, the priest works well. The same meaning seems 
applicable likewise to the phrase makhdsya divine, to the 
offering of the priest, though I should prefer to translate ‘to 
share in the sacrifice.’ 

I, 134, I. i yihi divine, viyo (fti), makhisya divine. 

Come, Viyu, to the offering, to the offering of the priest. 

VIII, 7, 37, i azh makhisya divine — divisa^^ ipa gan- 
tana. 

Come, gods, to the offering of our priest. 

Professor Roth proposes to render makhi in these passages 
by ‘ attestation of joy, celebration, praise,’ and he takes di¬ 
vine as a dative of divin, anomenactionis, meaning, the 
giving. There are some passages where one feels inclined to 
admit a noun divina, and to take divine as a locative sing. 

VI, 7ij devisya vayim savitfi^ sivlmani 

.rrishA^ie syima visuna/i divine. 

May we be in the favour of the god Savitar, and in the 
best award of his treasure. 

In II, II, I, and II, ii, 13, the locative would likewise 
be preferable ; but there is a decided majority of passages 
in which divine occurs and where it is to be taken as a 
dative®, nor is there any other instance in the Veda of a 
nomen actionis being formed by vana. It is better, 
therefore, in VI, 71, 3, to refer jrishi'/^e to sivlmani, and to 
make allowance in the other passages for the idiomatic use 
of such phrases as divine visfinim or riyi^S; divine, 
whether from di or from do. See De Infinitivi forma 
et usu, by E. Wilhelm, 1873, p. 17. 

/ - - - - - - 

48 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

The termination vdne explains, as has been shown by 
Professor Benfey, Greek infinitives such as dovi/ai, i. e. 
doevat or do feme = Sanskrit da-vdne. The termination mane 
in da-mane, for the purpose of giving, explains, as the same 
scholar has proved, the ancient infinitives in Greek, such 
as It may be added that the regular infinitives 

in Greek, ending in ei/at, as \e\oLTT-emLj are likewise 
matched by Vedic forms such as IX, 6i, 30. dhurv-ane, or 
VI, 61, 13. vibhv-dne, and turv-dne (Delbriick in K. Z. 
XVIII, p. 82, ; Bopp, Accent, §§ 106, 113, 117). It is hardly 
right to say that vibhvdne in VI, 61, 13, should be taken as 
an instrumental, for it does not refer to the chariot, but 
to Sarasvati. In the termination etz;, which stands for evi, 
like for eo-i, we have, on the contrary, not a dative, but a 
locative of an abstract noun in an, both cases, as we see from 
their juxta-position in VI, 71, being equally applicable to 
express the relation which we are accustomed to call infini¬ 
tive. See RV. I, 134, 5, ugrSA isha/^anta bhurvdj^i, apam 
ishanta bhurva^d. 

l^Tote 2. Abhidyu I now translate by hastening, and 
derive it from div, divyati, in its original meaning of to 
throw forth, to break forth, to shine. As from this root we 
have didyii, weapon, what is thrown, pL didyava/^, and 
possibly didyut, the weapon, particularly Indra’s weapon or 
thunderbolt, abhfdyu might mean breaking forth, rushing 
forth towards us, something like prakrl/fnaA, another name 
of the Maruts. How abhfdyu could mean conqudrant, 
mattre du jour, as M. Bergaigne maintains, I do not see. 
Abhfdyun, I, 33, ii ; 190, 4, does not differ much from dnu- 
dyiin, i.e, it is used vtpsdydm. 

Verses 9, 10. 

Wilson: Therefore circumambient (troop of Maruts), 
come hither, whether from the region of the sky, or from 
the solar sphere ; for, in this rite, (the priest) fully recites 
your praises. 

Benfey : Von hier, oder vom Himmel komm ob dem 
^ther, Umkreisender ! zu dir streben die Lieder all. 

NOTES. I, 6, 9-10, 

49 

Ludwig : Von hieher, 0 Pari^man, kom, oder von des 
himels glanzfirmamente her ; zu disem streben unsere 
lieder auf. 

Wilson: We invoke Indra, — whether he come from 
this earthly region, or from the heaven above, or from the 
vast firmament, — that he may give (us) wealth, 

Benfey : Von hier, oder vom Himmel ob der Erde be- 
gehren Spende wir, oder, Indra ! aus weiter Luft. 

Ludwig; Von hier zu empfangen verlangen wir, oder 
vom himel, oder vom irdischen raume her, oder aus dem 
grossen luftkreis den Indra. 

Wote 1. Although the names for earth, sky, and heaven 
vary in different parts of the Veda, yet the expression divi/i 
ro^andm occurs so frequently that we can hardly take it in 
this place in a sense different from its ordinary meaning. 
Professor Benfey thinks that ro^and may here mean ether, 
and he translates ‘come from heaven above the ether;’ 
and in the next verse, ‘come from heaven above the 
earth.’ At first, every reader would feel inclined to 
take the two phrases, divd>5 vd rok^n&t ddhi, and diviA 
vd parthivdt ddhi, as parallel ; yet I believe they are not 
quite so. 

The following passages will show that the two words 
ro/6andm divd^ belong together, and that they signify the 
light of heaven, or the bright place of heaven. 

VIII, 98, 3. ro^andm dWik 

Thou (Indra) wentest to the light of heaven. I, i55j 3“ 

III, 6, 8. uraii v4 y6 antdrikshe— diva^ vd y6 vokm6, 

In the wide sky, or in the light of heaven, 

VIII, Sa, 4. upamd ro^and divd^^. 

In the highest light of heaven. 

IX, 86, tHtfye pmh/y^d ddhi rofend divd^. 

On the third ridge, in the light of heaven. See also 
105, 5; VIII, 69, 3. 

The very phrase which we find in our verse, only with ^it 
instead of vd, occurs again, I, 49, x ; VIII, 8, 7 ; and the 
same sense must probably be assigned to VIII, i, 18, ddha 
ddha vd divM bnhatdA ro^and't ddhi. 

C32] E 

50 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Either from the earth, or from the light of the great 
heaven, increase, O Indra ! 

Roxana also occurs in the plural : 

I, 145, I. vij-vd diva>^ ro^an^. 

All the bright regions of heaven. 

Siyam, : ' All the bright palaces of the gods.’ See III, 
la, 9. 

The same word ro>5and, and in the same sense, is some¬ 
times joined with surya and naka. 

Thus, I, 14, 9. suryasya ro^anat v{.yvan devan — hoti iha 
vakshati. 

May the Hotar bring the Vuve Devas hither from the 
light of the sun, or from the bright realm of the sun. 

Ill, 2,2,, 3. rok3,n6 pardstit suryasya. 

The waters which are above, in the bright realm of the 
sun, and those which are below. 

I, 19, 5. ye n^kasya adhi ro>5ane, divf devasai^ ^sate. 

They who in the light of the firmament, in heaven, are 
enthroned as gods. 

Here divf, in heaven, seems to be the same as the light of 
the firmament, nSkasya roy^and. 

Thus ro^ana occurs also frequently by itself, when it 
clearly has the meaning of heaven. 

It is said of the dawn, I, 49, 4 ; of the sun, I, 50, 4 ; and 
of Indra, HI, 44, 4. 

vf^vam a bhdti ro^andm, he lights up the whole sky. 

We also read of three ro^anas, where, though it is difficult 
to say what is really meant, we must translate, the three 
skies. The cosmography of the Veda is, as I said before, 
somewhat vague and varying. There is, of course, the 
natural division of the world into heaven and earth (dyii and 
bhfimi), and the threefold division into earth, sky, and heaven, 
where sky is meant for the region intermediate between 
heaven and earth (pMhivi, antdriksha, dyd). There is also 
a fourfold division, for instance, 

VIII, 97, 5. ydt vd dsi ro>^and 6ivik 
samudrdsya ddhi vish^pi, 
ydt pdrthive sddane vrztrahan-tama, 
ydt antarikshe a gahi. 

NOTES, I, 6, 9-10. 

51 

Whether thou, O greatest killer of Vrftra, art in the light 
of heaven, or in the basin of the sea, or in the place of the 
earth, or in the sky, come hither ! 

V5 5^9 7* vavndhdnta parthivcL^^ y6 uraii antdrikshe S, 
vn^ane vd nadihdm sadhd-sthe va maha>^ divd.^. 

The Maruts who grew, being on the earth, those who are 
in the wide sky, or in the realm of the rivers, or in the 
abode of the great heaven. 

But very soon these three or more regions are each 
spoken of as threefold. Thus, 

I, 102, 8. tisrd/2 bhumU triWi ro^ana. 

The three earths, the three skies. 

IIj 2,y, 9. trx roksLiiS. divya dhdrayanta. 

The Adityas support the three heavenly skies. 

V, 59, I. tri ro^ana varu;^a trm utd dyiin trim mitra 
dhdrayatha^ ri£‘AmsL 

Mitra and Varu?2a, you support the three lights, and the 
three heavens, and the three skies. 

Here there seems some confusion, which Sdya;2a’s com¬ 
mentary makes even worse confounded. What can ro^ana 
mean as distinct from dyii and ra^s ? The fourth verse of 
the same hymn throws no light on the subject, and I should 
feel inclined to take divyS-parthivasya as one word, though 
even then the cosmic division here adopted is by no means 
clear. However, there is a still more complicated division 
alluded to in IV, 53, 5 : 

ttiA antdriksham savit^ mahi-tvana trf rd^d^si pari-bhu/2 
tri;2i ro>^and, tisrd^ diva.^ pr^'thivL^: tisrd^ invati. 

Here we have the sky thrice, three welkins, three lights, 
three heavens, three earths. 

A careful consideration of all these passages will show, I 
think, that in our passage we must take divdA vd ro^andt 
ddhi in its usual sense, and that we cannot separate the two 
words. 

In the next verse, on the contrary, it seems equally clear 
that divd^ and parthivdt must be separated. At all events 
there is no passage in the Rig-veda where parthiva is 
joined as an adjective with dyii. Pdrthiva as an adjective 
is frequently joined with rd^s, never with dyii. See I, 81, 

E 2 

54 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

NOTES. 

This hymn is ascribed to Medhitithi, of the family of 
KaOTa. Verse I = SV. I, i6. 

Verse 1. 

Wilson : Earnestly art thou invoked to this perfect rite, 
to drink the Soma juice; come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Zu diesem schonen Opfer wirst du gerufen, zum 
Trank der Milch! — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm ! 

Ludwig : Her zu diesem schonen opfer, gerufen wirst 
zum milchtrank du, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

M'ote 1. Gopitha is explained by Y4ska and Sdya^^a as 
drinking of Soma. I have kept to the literal signification 
of the word, a draught of milk. In the last verse of our 
hymn the libation offered to Agni and the Maruts is said to 
consist of Soma, but Soma was commonly mixed with 
milk. The other meaning assigned to gopithd, protection, 
would give the sense : ‘Thou art called for the sake of pro¬ 
tection.’ But pitha has clearly the sense of drinking in 
soma-pltha, RV. I, 51, 7, and may therefore be taken in the 
same sense in goplthi. 

Verse 2, 

Wilson : No god nor man has power over a rite (dedi¬ 
cated) to thee, who art mighty: come, Agni, with the 
Maruts. 

Benfey : Denn nicht ein Gott, kein Sterblicher ragt 
liber dein, des Grossen, Macht— Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni ! 
komm 1 

Ludwig : Es iiberragt kein gott, kein sterblicher die 
einsicht dein des grossen, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

Not© 1. The Sanskrit krdtu expresses power both of body 
and mind. Parsui governs the accusative. 

Verse 3. 

Wilson : Who all are divine, and devoid of malignity, 

NOTES. I, 19, 3. 

55 

and who know (how to cause the descent) of great waters : 
come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Die guten Gotter, welche all bestehen in dem 
weiten Raum — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni ! komm ! 

Ludwig : Die wissen um den grossen raum, alle gotter 
truges bar, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

Note 1. The sky or welkin (rdj^s) is the proper abode of 
the Maruts, and ‘they who know of’ means simply ‘they 
who dwell ’ in the great sky. The Vedic poets distinguish 
commonly between the three worlds, the earth, prfthivi, f., 
or parthiva, n. ; the sky, rd^s ; and the heaven, dyii : see I, 
6, 9, note I. The phrase mahdA r^fasa^ occurs I, 6, 10 ; 
1 68, 6, &c. Sdya«a takes rd^as for water or rain : see on 
this my article in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xii, p. a8. In 
some passages ra^s means ‘ darkness,’ and might be identi¬ 
fied with the Greek 'Epe^os ; Ath. Veda VIII, a, i. pdrdydmi 
tvd rd^sa lit tvd mrity6x aplparam, ‘ I bring thee out of 
darkness, out of death I brought thee.’ The identification 
of xi^s with Ipefios (Leo Meyer, in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. 
vi, p. 19) must however remain doubtful, until stronger 
evidence has been brought forward in support of a Greek ^ 
representing a Sanskrit even in the middle of a word. See 
my article in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xv, p. 315 ; Curtius, 
Grundzuge (fifth edition), p. 480. 

Note 2. The appellation VLve deval^, all gods together, 
or, more properly, host-gods, is often applied to the Maruts ; 
cf. I, 33, 8 ; 10. Benfey connects this line with the preced¬ 
ing verse, considering Ylsve dewik, it seems, inappropriate 
as an epithet of the Maruts. 

Note 3. On adrdh, without guile or deceit, without hatred, 
see Kuhn’s excellent article, Zeitschrift fur die Vergleich- 
ende Sprachforschung, vol. i, pp. 193. Adnih is applied 
to the Maruts again in VIII, 46, 4, though in connection with 
other gods. It is applied to the Visve Devas, RV. I, 3, 9 ; 
IX, 103, 5 : the Adityas, RV. VIII, 19, 34 ; 6% 13 : the 
Rudras, RV. IX, 73, 7 : to Heaven and Earth, RV. II, 41, 
31 ; III, 56, 1 ; IV, 56, 3 ; VII, 66, 18 : to Mitra and Varu^a, 
RV. V, 68, 4 : to Agni, RV. VI, 15, 7 ; VIII, 44, lo. The 
form adhnik occurs in the sixth Maw^ala only. 

56 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 4. 

Wilson : Who are fierce, and send down rain, and are 
unsurpassed in strength : come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Die schrecklich-unbesiegbaren, die machtiglich 
Licht angefacht — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni ! komm ! 

Ludwig : Die singen, die gewaltigen, ihr lied unange- 
grifFen durch (ihre) kraft, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

Note 1. Siya;^a explains arki by water. Hence Wilson : 

‘ Who are fierce and send down rain.’ But arkd has only 
received this meaning of water in the artificial system of 
interpretation first started by the authors of the Br^lhma;^as, 
who had lost all knowledge of the natural sense of the 
ancient hymns. The passages in which arkd is explained 
as water in the Br4hma;^as are quoted by Siya^^a, but they 
require no refutation. On the singing of the Maruts, see 
note to I, 38,15; also Bergaigne, Journ. As. 1884, p, 194. 
The perfect in the Veda, like the perfect in Homer, has 
frequently to be rendered in English by the present. 

Verse 6. 

Wilson : Who are brilliant, of terrific forms, who are 
possessors of great wealth, and are devourers of the malevo¬ 
lent : come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Die glanzend-grau’ngestaltigen, hochherr- 
schend feindvernichtenden — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni* 
komm ! 

Ludwig : Die glanzvollen, von schrecklicher gestalt, von 
grosser herschaft, feindverzerer, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

Verse 6. 

Wilson : Who are divinities abiding in the radiant 
heaven above the sun ; come, Agni, with the Maruts, 

Benfey : Die Gotter die im Himmel sind ob dem 
Lichtkreis des Gottersitz’s — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! 
komm! 

Ludwig : Die ob der himmelswolbung glanz, am himel 
die gotter sitzen, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

Note 1. Naka must be translated by firmament, as there 

NOTES. I, 19, 7. 

57 

is no other word in English besides heaven, and that is 
wanted to render dyii. Like the Jewish firmament, the 
Indian naka, too, is adorned with stars ; cf. I, 68, 10, 
pipei-a nakam st;^hi^. Dyfi, heaven, is supposed to be 
above the rd^as, sky or welkin. Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xii, 
p, 28. 

Siysina, : ‘ In the radiant heaven above the sun.’ See 
note I to I, 6, 9 ; p. 49. 

Verse 7. 

Wilson: Who scatter the clouds, and agitate the sea 
(with waves) : come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Welche fiber das wogende Meer hinjagen die 
Wolkenschaar — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni ! komm ! 

Ludwig : Die die berge wiegend hindurch durchs wogen- 
meer bewegen, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

'Note 1. That pdrvata (mountain) is used in the sense of 
cloud, without any further explanation, is clear from many 
passages : 

I) 57, 6. tvim tdm indra pdrvatam mah^m uriim vigrensi 
va^rin parva-jdA ^akartitha. 

Thou, Indra, hast cut this great broad cloud to pieces 
with thy lightning. Cf. I, 85, 10, 

We actually find two similes mixed up together, such 
as V, 32, 2. udha^ parvatasya, the udder of the cloud. All 
we can do is to translate pirvata by mountain, but always 
to remember that mountain means cloud. In the Edda, 
too, the rocks, said to have been fashioned out of Ymir’s 
bones, are supposed to be intended for clouds. In Old 
Norse klakkr means both cloud and rock; nay, the 
English word cloud itself has been identified with the 
Anglo-Saxon cl fid, rock. See Justi, Orient und Occident, 
voL ii, p. 62. See Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, P, 398, 
424 ; also Kuhn, Weisse Frau, p. 12. 

Note 2. Whether the surging sea is to be taken for the 
sea or for the air, depends on the view ^ich we take of 
the earliest cosmography of the Vedic i2?shis. S^lya^a 
explains : ‘ They who make the clouds to go, and stir the 

58 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

watery sea.’ Wilson remarks that the influence of the 
winds upon the sea, alluded to in this and the following verse, 
indicates more familiarity with the ocean than we should 
have expected from the traditional inland position of the 
early Hindus, and it has therefore been supposed by others 
that, even in passages like our own, samudra was meant 
for the sky, the waters above the firmament. But although 
there are passages in the Rig-veda where samudra must be 
taken to mean the welkin (RV. I, 95, 3. samudrd dkam divi 
ekam ap-sii), this word shows in by far the larger number of 
passages the clear meaning of ocean. There is one famous 
passage, VII, 95, which proves that the Vedic poets, who 
were supposed to have known the upper courses only of 
the rivers of the Penj4b, had followed the greatest and most 
sacred of their rivers, the Sarasvati, as far as the Indian 
ocean. It is well known that, as early as the composition 
of the laws of the Minavas, and possibly as early as the 
composition of the Sfltras on which these metrical laws 
are based, the river Sarasvati had changed its course, and 
that the place where that river disappeared under ground 
was called Vinaj-ana^, the loss. This Vinai’ana forms, ac¬ 
cording to the laws of the M4navas, the western frontier of 
Madhyadej*a, the eastern frontier being formed by the con¬ 
fluence of the Gang^ and Yamunsi. Madhyadei’a is a sec¬ 
tion of Ai-yivarta, the abode of the Aryas in the widest 
sense. Aryavarta shares with Madhyade.fa the same fron¬ 
tiers in the north and the south, viz. the Himalaya and 
Vindhya mountains, but it extends beyond Madhyade.fa to 
the west and east as far as the western and eastern seas. 
A section of Madhyadei'a, again, is the country described as 
that of the Brahmarshis, which comprises only Kurukshetra, 
the countries of the Matsyas, PaiUilas (K^nyakub^a, ac- 
coi'ding to Kulluka), and i'flrasenas (Mathurd, according to 
KullOka). The most sacred spot of all, however, is that 
section of the Brahmarshi country which lies between the 
rivers Dr/shadvati and Sarasvati, and which in the laws of 

0- Mentioned in Ld/y. ^Vauta Sfltras, X, 15, i ; Vz.nkmnwo, 
Brdhm. XXV, 10, i ; see Hist. A. S. L., p. 12. 

NOTES. I, 19, 7. 

59 

the Manavas is called Brahmivarta. In the Shtras which 
supplied the material to the authors of the metrical law¬ 
books, the Vinajana is mentioned for the first time in the 
Baudh4yana Shtras, I, 2,, 9, ' Aryivarta lies to the east of 
the region where (the Sarasvatt) disappears, to the west of 
the Black-forest, to the north of the P^rip^tra (mountains), 
to the south of the Himalaya.’ The name of the Sarasvati 
is not mentioned, but no other river can be understood. 
What is curious, however, is, that in the VasishMa Siitras 
where the same frontiers of Aryavarta are given (I, 8), the 
MSS. read originally pr^g ^dar^^t, i. e. east of the Adarja 
mountains, which was afterwards changed into prig adar- 
j*anit, and interpreted ‘ east of the invisibility, or of the dis¬ 
appearance of the Sarasvati.’ Vasish^/%a quotes another 
authority, a Githi of the Bhillavins, which says : ' In the west 
the boundary river,’ i. e. sindhur vidhira/^i. This sindhur vi- 
dhirai^2i is another name of the old Sarasvati, and in Baudhi- 
yana I, 12, the same verse is quoted, though the reading 
ofvidharai^i varies with v\kzxz.n\ and visara^^i. See Buhler, 
I. c. Madhyade^a is mentioned in one of the Parirish^as 
(MS. 510, Wilson) as a kind of model country, but it is 
there described as lying east of T>distxn2i% west of Kim- 
pilya'^, north of P4riyitra®, and south of the Himavat, or 
again, in a more general way, as the DuS,b of the Gang§. 
and YamunS.^. 

It is very curious that while in the later Sanskrit lite- 

a- See Wilson's Vish«u-purd;wa, ed. Hall, pp. i54) 

^ See Wilson’s Vish;?u-pur^?za, ed. Hall, p. 16 1. 
c L. c., pp. 123, 137. Instead of PIriytoa, other MSS. read 
P^riptea; see Buhler, Vasish/^a I, 8. 

d Pr^g da^dr?2dt pratyak k^mpilydd udak p^riy^tr^d, dakshiwena 
himavata/^. Gang^yamunayor antaram eke madhyadej^am ity ^>^ak- 
shate. Medh^tithi says that Madhyade^a, the middle country, was 
not called so because it was in the middle of the earth, but because 
it was neither too high nor too low. Albiruny, too, remarks that 
Madhyadeja was between the sea and the northern mountains, 
between the hot and the cold countries, equally distant from the 
eastern and western frontiers. See Reinaud, Mdmoire sur Unde, 
p, 46. 

6o 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

rature the disappearance of the Sarasvatt in the desert is 
a fact familiar to every writer, no mention of it should 
occur during the whole of the Vedic period, and it is still 
more curious that in one of the hymns of the Rig-veda we 
should have a distinct statement that the Sarasvatl fell into 
the sea : 

VII, 95, 1-2,, pri kshddasS, dhayasS- sasre eshSI sdrasvati 
dhani^^am S[yast pu^, pra-bSbadh§,n4 rathyl-iva yHti visvik 
apd^ mahina sfndhu^ any^i^. ikii a^etat sirasvatt nadmim 
sikiA yati girf-bhya^ a samudrat, rayd-^ y^etantl bhiivanasya 
bhure^ gh;^2tdm pdya^ duduhe nahushiya. 

T. 'With her fertilising stream this Sarasvatl comes forth — 
(she is to us) a stronghold, an iron gate. Moving along as 
on a chariot, this river surpasses in greatness all other 
waters. 2,. Alone among all rivers Sarasvati listened, she 
who goes pure from the mountains as far as the 
sea. She who knows of the manifold wealth of the world, 
has poured out to man her fat milk/ 

Here we see samudrd used clearly in the sense of sea, the 
Indian sea, and we have at the same time a new indication 
of the distance which separates the Vedic age from that of 
the later Sanskrit literature. Though it may not be pos¬ 
sible to determine by geological evidence the time of the 
changes which modified the southern area of the Penj&b 
and caused the Sarasvati to disappear in the desert, still 
the fact remains that the loss of the Sarasvatt is later than the 
Vedic age, and that at that time the waters of the Sarasvatt 
reached the sea. Professor Wilson had observed long ago 
in reference to the rivers of that part of India, that there 
have been, no doubt, considerable changes here, both in 
the nomenclature and in the courses of the rivers, and this 
remark has been fully confirmed by later observations, I 
believe it can be proved that in the Vedic age the Sarasvat! 
was a river as large as the Sutlej, that it was the last of the 
rivers of the Penjib, and therefore the iron gate, or the real 
frontier against the rest of India. At present the Sarasvatt 
is so small a river that the epithets applied to the Sarasvat! 
in the Veda have become quite inapplicable to it. The Vedic 
jRfshis, though acquainted with numerous rivers, including 

NOTES. I, 19, 7. 61 

the Indus and Ganges, call the Sarasvatt the mother 
of rivers (VII, 36, 6. sdrasvati saptatht sfndhu-mit^), the 
strongest of rivers (VI, 5i, 13. apdsdm apd^-tam^l), and in 
our passage, VII, 95, a, we have, as far as I can judge, 
conclusive evidence that the old Sarasvati reached in its 
course the Indian sea, either by itself, or united with the 
Indus ^ 

But this passage, though important as showing the appli¬ 
cation of samudrd, i. e. con flu vies, to the Indian sea, 
and proving the acquaintance of the Vedic iSzshis with 
the southern coast of India, is by no means the only one in 
which samudrd must be translated by sea. Thus we read, 
VII, 49,^: 

SpaA Aivyih utd Vcl srdvanti khanitrimiy^ utd v^L 
svayam-^IA, samudrd-arth^^ y&h sAkdiydih p§,vak^>^ ta^ apaA 
devi'>4 ihd m^m avantu. 

The waters which are from heaven^ or those which flow 
after being dug, or those which spring up by themselves, the 
bright, pure waters that tend to the sea, may those divine 
waters protect me here ! 

I, 71, 7. agnfm visvkh abhf p;^ksha^ sa^ante samudrdm 
nd sravita^ saptd yahvi-^. 

All kinds of food go to Agni, aS the seven rivers go to 
the sea. 

Cf. I, 190, 7. samudrdm ni sravdtaA rddha-yfeakri^. 

V, 78, 8. yith^Lvata/^J ydth^L vdnam ydthd samudrdA 

As the wind moves, as the forest moves, as the sea moves 
(or the sky). 

In hymn X, 58, the same expression occurs which we have 
in our hymn, and samudrdm ar^^avdm there as here admits 
but of one explanation, the surging sea. 

Samudrd in many passages of the Rig-veda has to be 
taken as an adjective, in the sense of watery or flowing: 

VI, 58, 3. yas te ptishan nSIvaA antdA samudrd hira^ydyii4 
antdrikshe ^dranti. 

Thy golden ships, O Pflshan, which move within the 
watery sky. 

a See ‘India, what can it teach us?' pp. 170, 17 1. 

62 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

VII, 70, a. yik vtm samudr^n sarfta^ pfpa,rfi. 

He who carries you across the watery rivers. 

I, 161, 14. at-bhf/2 yiti vArunaA samudrai>5. 

Varu;2a moves in the flowing waters. 

In both these passages samudra, as an adjective, does 
not conform to the gender of the noun. See Bollensen, 
Orient und Occident, vol. ii, p. 467. 

II, 16, 3. na samudrai^ parvatai>^ indra te rdtha^ (nd 
pari-bhve). 

Thy chariot, 0 Indra, is not to be overcome by the 
watery clouds. 

Verse 8. 

Wilson : Who spread (through the firmament), along 
with the rays (of the sun), and, with their strength, agitate 
the ocean : come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Die mit Blitzen schleuderen machtig fiber das 
Meer hinaus — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni ! komm ! 

Ludwig: Die mit stralen ihre richtung nemen mit 
gewalt durchs mer, mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

Verse 9. 

Wilson : I pour out the sweet Soma juice for thy drink¬ 
ing, (as) of old : come, Agni, with the Maruts. 

Benfey : Ich giesse zu dem ersten Trank fur dich des 
Soma Honig aus — Mit diesen Marut’g, Agni ! komm I 

Ludwig : Ich giesze dir zum ersten ti'unk madhu mit dem 
soma zu ; mit den Marut, Agni, kom. 

"Note 1. Pfirvaptti, the early draught, implies at the same 
time the priority of the god to whom it is given. 

MAiVDALA I, HYMN 37. 

63 

.MAiVZ?ALA I, HYMN 37. 

ASH^AKA I, ADHYAYA 3, VARGA ia-14. 

To THE Maruts (the Storm-gods). 

1. Sing forth, O Karevas, to the sportive host of 
your Maruts, brilliant on their chariots, and un¬ 
scathed h — 

2. They who were born together, self-luminous, 
with the spotted deer (the clouds) ', the spears, the 
daggers, the glittering ornaments 

3. I hear their^ whips, almost close by, when they 
crack them in their hands ; they gain splendour ® on 
their way 

4. Sing forth the god-given prayer to the wild^ 
host of your Maruts, endowed with terrible vigour ® 
and strength. 

5. Celebrate the bull among the cows (the storm 
among the clouds) ', for it is the sportive host of the 
Maruts ; he grew as he tasted the rain 

6. Who, O ye men, is the strongest among you 
here, ye shakers of heaven and earth, when you 
shake them like the hem of a garment ’ ? 

7. At ycrur approach the son of man holds himself 
down ; the gnarled cloud ’ fled at your fierce anger. 

8. They at whose racings * the earth, like a hoary 
king, trembles for fear on their ways, 

9. Their birth is strong indeed : there is strength 
to come forth from, their mother, nay, there is vigour 
twice enough for it h 

10. And these sons, the singers stretched out 
the fences in their racings ® ; the cows had to walk 
knee-deep. 

64- 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

11. They cause this long and broad unceasing 
rain ^ to fall on their ways. 

12. O Maruts, with such strength as yours, you 
have caused men to tremble you have caused the 
mountains to tremble. 

13. As the Maruts pass^ along, they talk together 
on the way : does any one hear them ? 

14. Come fast on your quick steeds! there are 
worshippers ^ for you among the Ka«vas : may you 
well rejoice among them. 

15. Truly there is enough for your rejoicing. We 
always are their servants, that we may live even the 
whole of life. 

NOTES. I, 37, I. 

65 

NOTES. 

This hymn is ascribed to Ka«va, the son of Ghora. 

Verse i=TS. IV, 3, 13, 6. 

Verse 3 = SV. I, 135. 

Verse 10= SV. I, aai. 

Verse 1. 

Wilson: Celebrate, Kawvas, the aggregate strength 
of the Maruts, sportive, without horses, but shining in 
their car. 

Benfey : Kawviden, aufi begriisst mit Sang, die muntre 
Heerschaar der Marut’s, die rasch’ste, wagengl^nzende. 

Ludwig : Eurer spilenden schar, der Marutschar, der un- 
angreifbaren, die auf wagen gia.nzt, der singt, o Ka«v4s, zu. 

Note 1. Wilson translates anarvSwam by without horses, 
though the commentator distinctly explains the word 
by without an enemy. A Brdhmawa passage explains : 
bhrit?'fvyo vd arvd, ity jrutyantardt. See TS. IV, 3, 13, 6, 
Wilson considers it doubtful whether drvan can ever mean 
enemy. The fact is, that in the Rig-veda an-arvdn never 
means without horses, but always without hurt or free 
from enemies; and the commentator is perfectly right, 
as far as the sense is concerned, in rendering the word by 
without an enemy, or unopposed (apraty-rfta). An-arvdn 
is not formed from drvat, horse, racer, but from drvan; 
and this is derived from the same root which yields drus, 
n. a wound, riti (see I, 64, 15, note), &c. The accusative 
of anarvat, without a horse, would be anarvantam, not 
anarvd»am. 

The root ar, in the sense of hurting, is distantly connected 
with the root mar : see Lectures on the Science of Language, 
Second Series, p. 3*3. It exists in the Greek (JXXvjut, cor¬ 
responding to Sanskrit rinomi, i. e. ar«omi, I hurt, likewise 
£3®] F 

66 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

in ovXri, wound, which cannot be derived from Skrj ; in o5Xos, 
oUkios, hurtful, and oXoos, destructive : see Curtius, Grundziige 
der Griechischen Etymologie (funfte Ausgabe), p. 37a. In 
the Veda ar has the sense of offending or injuring, par¬ 
ticularly if preceded by upa. 

3* 4-j-dsd nik-sisSi abhi-jds^ upa-drimd ^a- 
grataA yit svapinta^, agnf/2 vf^vini dpa du^^-lcntani ^fi^sh/Sni 
cLr^ asmdt dadhcltu. 

If we have offended, or whatever fault we have com¬ 
mitted, by bidding, blaming, or forbidding, while waking 
or while sleeping, may Agni remove all wicked misdeeds 
far from us. 

Hence upard, injury, VII, 86, 6. dsti ^yaydn kdniyasa^ 
upa-ard, the older man is there to injure, to offend, to mis¬ 
lead, the young : (History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 
second edition, p. 541.) Roth translates updrd by Verfeh- 
lung, missing. Ari, enemy, too, is best derived from this 
root, and not from ri, to give, with the negative particle, as 
if meaning originally, as S4ya^^a supposes, a man who does 
not give. In drarivdn, gen. drarusha^, hostile, Rosen recog¬ 
nised many years ago a participle of a really reduplicated 
perfect of ar, and he likewise traced ardru, enemy, back to 
the same root : see his note to I, 18, 3. 

From this root ar, to hurt, drvan, hurting, as well as 
drus, wound, are derived in the same manner as both 

dhdnvan and dhdnus, bow, are formed from dhan ; yd^van 
and ya^us from ya^, pdrvan and pdrus from par. See 
Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. ii, p. 

Anarvdn, then, is the same as dnarus, .Sat. P. Brdhmai^a 
h 3» 7; and from meaning originally without a wound 
or without one who can wound, it takes the more general 
sense of uninjured, invulnerable, perfect, strong, (cf. integer, 
intact, and entire.) This meaning is applicable to I, 94, a ; 
I3'5, 5 ; ii, 5 ; V, 49, 4; VII, ao, 3 ; 97. 5 ; X, 61, 13 
5. 3' a.narvdii s££ms to bo us£d as an 

adverb; in I, 51. I3, as appli£d to j'ldka, it may hav£ the 
more general meaning of irresistible, powerful. 

. There are two passages in which the nom. sing. irvAn, 
and one in which the acc. sing. drvi«am, occur, apparently 

NOTES. I, 37, I. 

67 

meaning horse. But in I, 163, 13,^ and IX, 97, irvtn 
stands in the Pada text only, the Sa/f^hiti has 4rvl ikk/idi 
and drvi iva. In X, 46, 5, the text lifri-j'maiTum ni drvdj^zam 
dhdna-ary^am is too doubtful to allow of any safe induction, 
particularly as the Sdma-veda gives a totally different 
reading. I do not think, therefore, that drvat, horse, admits 
in the nom. and acc. sing, of any forms but drvd and drvan- 
tam^ Pimni (VI, 4, i!^7) allows the forms arvdn and arvd- 
nsivn, but in anarvan only, which, as we saw, has nothing 
in common with drvat, horse. Benfey : ‘ die rascheste 
(keinen Renner habend, uneinholbar),’ the quickest (having 
no racer, hence not to be reached). M, Bergaigne (Journ. 
As. 1884, p. 188) tries to defend anarvan in the sense of 
ana^a, without considering the grammatical objections. In 
VI, 66, 7 (not I, 6, 7) zmsvi/i does not refer to ydma>4. 

The masculine . anarva;/am after the neuter sirdhas is 
curious ; j'drdhas means might, but it is here used to express 
a might or an aggregate of strong men or gods, and the 
nom. plur. yd, who, in the next verse, shows the same 
transition of thought, not only from the singular to the 
plural, but also from the neuter to the masculine, which 
must be admitted in anarv&am'^. It would be possible, if 
necessary, to explain away the irregularity of anarva^^am by 
admitting a rapid transition from the Maruts to Indra, the 
eldest among the Maruts (cf. I, £23, 8. fndra-^ycsh/AdA 
mdrut-ga^edA), and it would be easier still to alter j-di-dhas 
into .rdrdham, as an accusative singular of the masculine 
noun .rdrdha, which has the same meaning as the neuter 
^drdhas. There is one passage, V, 56, 9, which would seem 
to give ample countenance to such a conjecture : 
tdm vdiA ^drdham i^athe-^tibham—fil huve. 

I call hither this your host, brilliant on chariots. 

Again, II, 30, ii, we read : 

tdm sirdhzm mS-rutam — gir^ dpa bruve, 

I call with my voice on this your host of Maruts. 

See Bugge, K. Z. XIX, p. 403. 

^ Bollensen (Z. D. M. G. XXII, 603) calls it a vulgar Donalus ; 
see, however, Lanman, Noun-Inflection, pp. 330, 526. 

F 2 

68 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

VIIIj 93, 16. srutim vaA vntrahdn-tamam pra jdrdham 
^arsha«tnam, HI jushe. 

I pant for the glorious, victorious, host of the quick 
Maruts. 

From this jdrdha we have also the genitive ^Ardhasya, 
VII, 56,8(4): 

svihhxih vz.h ^dshma/^ knidhmt mini^^si dhdni^ mdni/^- 
iva jardhasya dhnsh;^6/^. 

Your prowess is brilliant, your minds furious ; the shout 
of the daring host is like one possessed. 

We have likewise the dative j’ArdhAya, the instrumental 
jardhena, and the acc. plur. ^Ardhin ; and in most cases, 
except in two or three where j-Ardha seems to be used as 
an adjective, meaning strong, these words are applied to the 
host of the Maruts. 

But the other word .fArdhas is equally well authenticated, 
and we find of it, not only the nominative, accusative, and 
vocative sing, jardhas, but likewise the nom. plur. sixShkmsu 

The nominative singular occurs in our very hymn : 

37j 5- kri/Am yAt jAfdha/^ marutam. 

Which is the sportive host of the Maruts. 

I, 6. sAA hf jArdha/^J nA marutam tuvi-svAni^. 

For he (Agni) is strong-voiced like the host of the Maruts. 

IV, 63 10. tuvi-svanAsa>4 marutam nA .fArdhai^. 

Thy flames (Agni) are strong- voiced like the host of the 
Maruts. 

V, 46, 5. utA tyAt na^ mHIrutam ^Ardha^ a gamat. 

May also that host of the Maruts come to us. 

II, I, 5. tvAm narHIm i-Ardha.^ asi puru-vAsuA. 

Thou (Agni), full of riches, art the host of the men. 

This host of men seems to me intended again for the 

Maruts, although it is true that in thus identifying Agni 
with different gods, the poet repeats himself in the next 
verse : 

II, I, 6. tvAm i*Ardha^ mHIrutam. 

Thou art the host of the Maruts. 

If this repetition seems offensive, the first naram jArdhas 
might be taken for some other company of gods. Thus 
we find : 

NOTES. I, 37, I. 

69 

VII, 44, 5. jrm6tu vaJt dafvyam sirdhaA agnM srmvantu 
vfjve mahish^/z dmtrkh. 

May the divine host, may Agni, hear us, may the Vijve 
hear us, the strong, the wise. 

Or III, 19, 4. sih S, vaha devd-titim yavish^^a jdrdhaA 
yit adyd divydm yd^dsi. 

Bring thou hither, O Agni, the gods, that you may 
sacrifice to-day to the divine host. 

Or I, 139, I. S. nd tdt jdrdha^ divydm vrinimaht. 

We chose for us now that divine host. 

As in these last, so in many other passages, jdrdhas is 
used as a neuter in the accusative. For instance, 

' I, 106, I; II, II, 14. mfiirutam jdrdhaA. 

II) 3) 3 ; VI, 3, 8. jdrdha>^ mariitcLm. 

The vocative occurs, 

V, 46, a. dgne indra vdruwa mftra d6vSA jdrdhaA prd 
yanta mlilruta utd vish«o (fti). 

Agni, Indra, VaruMa, Mitra, gods, host of the Maruts, 
come forth, and Vish«u 1 

We see how throughout all these passages those in which 
i'drdha and jdrdhas are applied to the Maruts, or to some 
other company of gods, preponderate most decidedly. Yet 
passages occur in the Rig-veda where both jdrdha and jdr- 
dhas are applied to other hosts or companies. Thus V, 53, 
10, jdrdha refers to chariots, while in I, 133, 3, jdrdhas is 
applied to evil spirits. 

If the passages hitherto examined were all that occur in 
the Rig-veda, we might still feel startled at the construction 
of our verse, where jdrdhas is not only followed by mascu¬ 
line adjectives in the singular, but, in the next verse, by a 
pronoun in the plural. But if we take the last irr^ularity 
first, we find the same construction, viz. jdrdhas followed by 
yd, in III, 3a, 4 : 

fndrasya sixdhsJi manita.4 yd filsan. 

The host of Indra, that was the Maruts. 

As to the change of genders, we find adjectives in the 
masculine after .fdrdhas, in 

V, 5a, 8. sitdhzh mSfrutam lit ja»m satyd-^avasam ^h- 
vasam. 

70 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Celebrate the host of the Maruts, the truly vigorous, the 
brilliant. 

Here, too, the poet afterwards continues in the plural, 
though as he uses the demonstrative, and not, as in our 
passage, the relative pronoun, we cannot quote this in 
support of the irregularity which has here to be explained. 
Anyhow the construction of our verse, though bold and 
unusual, is not so unusual as to force us to adopt conjectural 
remedies. In V, 58, 2,, we find y6 after g2iniA, On the 
Umbrian ^erfo Martio, as possibly the same as j'drdha-s 
maruta-s, see Grassman, Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xvi, p. 190. 
The Zend ^aredha, kind, species, is the same word. 

Verse 2. 

Wilson: Who, borne by spotted deer^ were born self¬ 
radiant, with weapons, war-cries, and decorations. 

Benfey : Die mit Hirschen und Speeren gleich mit 
Donnern und mit Blitzen auch — selbststrahlende — geboren 
sind. 

Ludwig : Die mit vilfarbigen speeren, mit der schwerter 
glanze, sichtbar wurden mit eignem leuchten. 

Note 1. The spotted deer (pr/shatt) are the recognised 
animals of the Maruts, and were originally, as it would 
seem, intended for the rain-clouds, S^ya^^a is perfectly 
aware of the original meaning of pr/shatt, as clouds. 
The legendary school, he says, takes them for deer with 
white spots, the etymological school for many-coloured 
lines of clouds : (RV. BH. I, 64, 8.) This passage shows 
that although pnshati, as Roth observes, may mean a 
spotted cow or a spotted horse,— the Maruts, in fact, are 
called sometimes pmhat-a.fvi^, having piebald horses, 
or, having pnshats for their horses, VII, 40, 3, — yet the 
later tradition in India had distinctly declared in favour 
of spotted deer. The Vedic poets, however, admitted both 
ideas, and they speak in the same hymn, nay, in the same 
verse, of the fallow deer and of the horses of the Maruts. 
Thus V, 58, I, the Maruts are called possessed 

of quick horses ; and in V, 58, 6, we read yit prd dy4sish/a 
p^'/shatibhi^ iyvai>^— rdthebhi>?t, where the gender of p^sha- 

NOTES. I, 37, 3. 

71 

tihhiA would hardly allow us to join it with £rvai^, but 
where we must translate : When you come with the deer, 
the horses, the chariots, or with your deer, as horses. 
Ludwig joins prisha.tihh.iA with j'^hribhi^, and again in I, 
64, 8 ; see note i to I, 87, 4. 

Note 2. The spears and daggers of the Maruts are meant 
for the thunderbolts, and the glittering ornaments for the 
lightning. Styana takes vffjt in this passage for war-cries 
on the authority of the Nirukta, where vSi^i is given among 
the names of the voice. From other passages, however, it 
becomes clear that vSri is a weapon of the Maruts ; and 
S4ya«a, too, explains it sometimes in that sense : cf. V, 53) 
4 ; 57, a. Thus I, 88, 3, the vSIjls are spoken of as being 
on the bodies of the Maruts. In V, 53, 4, the Maruts are 
said to shine in their ornaments and their vSjts. Here 
Sclyawa, too, translates v^^l rightly by weapon ; and in his 
remarks on I, 88, 3, he says that vSjt was a weapon com¬ 
monly called itSi, which is a shoemaker’s awl. See Dhamma- 
pada, ver. 401. This reminds one of framea, which at 
one time was supposed to be connected with the German 
pfrieme. See, however, Grimm (Deutsche Grammatik, 
vol. i, p. ia8) and Leo Meyer (Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. vi, 
p. 434). In VIII, ap, 3, the god Tvashj^r is said to carry 
an iron viri in his hand. Grassman (Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. 
xvi, p. 163) translates vSjI by axe. That is to be taken 
in the sense of ornament, and not in the sense of ointment, 
is shown by passages like VIII, ap, i, where a golden orna-* 
ment is mentioned, a^g'l ahkte hiraMyiyam. Sdkdm, 
together, is used with reference to the birth of the Maruts ; 
see I, 64, 4. It should not be connected with vSrtbhiA. 

■Verse 3. 

Wilson : I hear the cracking of the whips in their 
hands, wonderfully inspiring (courage) in the fight. 

BenfE'V ; Schier hier erschallt der Peitsche Knall, wenn sie 
in ihrer Hand erklingt ; leuchtend fahr’n sie im Sturm herab. 

Ludwig : Als wdre es hier, so h6rt man es, wenn die 
geisslen in ihren handen knallen ; wunderbar strecken sie 
auf ihrer fart sich nieder. 

72 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Note 1. Eshetm should be pronounced as a creticus ; also 
in verses 9, 13, 15. This is a very common vyhha. On the 
whips as lightning, see Grimm, Donner, p. 27. 

ITot© 2. I should have taken kittim as an adverb, like 
Benfey, if ni ring- were not usually construed with an accu¬ 
sative. Ring in the 3rd pers. plur. pres. Atm. is treated 
like a verb of the Ad-class. The SV. seems to read 
ydmam, and the commentator explains it by ratham. 

Note 8. The locative y^[man is frequently used of the 
path on which the gods move and approach the sacrifice ; 
hence it sometimes means, as in our passage, in the sky. 
YSmam in BR., s. v. 2irg, is wrong. 

We might also translate: ‘Here, close by, I hear what 
the whips in their hands say; they drive forth the beautiful 
(chariot) on the road.’ See SV. I, a, i, 5, i, comm. 

Verse 4. 

Wilson : Address the god-given prayer to those who 
are your strength, the destroyers of foes, the powerful, pos¬ 
sessed of brilliant reputation. 

Benfey : Singt eurer Schaar, der wuhlenden, der strahl- 
enreichen, kraftigen ein gotterfiilletes Gebet ! 

Ludwig: Eurer ktinen schar,von blendender herlichkeit, 
der kraftvollen, soil ein von den gdttem eingegebenes 
brahma gesungen werden. 

ITote 1. Benfey translates gha^shvi by burrowing, and 
refers it to the thunderbolt that uproots the earth. He 
points out that gh^shvi means also, for the same reason, 
the boar, as proved by Kuhn (Die Herabkunft des Feuers’ 
S. aoa). GhrishA is evidently a common name for boar, the 
Norse grfss, and the god of the wind, Grimnir or Grimr, is 
conceived as a boar, shaking the cornfield, in such phrases 
as ‘ Der Eber geht ins Korn ’ (Gentha, 1. c. p. 14). I prefer, 
however, in this place the general sense assigned to the 
adjective gh^shu and gh^shvi, exuberant, brisk, wild. See 
Kuhn in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xi, p. 385. Wilson, after 
Sdya«a, translates destroyers of foes. On the representation 
of the clouds as boars, see Nir. V, 4. 

Note 2. Tveshd-dyumna is difficult to render. Both 

NOTES. 1, 37, 5. 

75 

tveshd and dyumnd are derived from roots that mean to 
shine, to be bright, to glow. Derivatives from tvish express 
the idea of fieriness, fierceness, and fuiy. In IV, 17, a, 
tvish is used correlatively, with manyii, wrath. Deriva¬ 
tives from d5m convey the idea of brightness and briskness. 
Both qualities are frequently applied to the Maruts. 

Verse 6. 

Wilson : Praise the sportive and resistless might of the 
Maruts, who were born amongst kine, and whose strength 
has been nourished by (the enjoyment of) the milk. 

Benfey : Preist hoch die muntre Marutschaar die unbe- 
siegbar in den Kiih’n, im Schlund des Safts wuchs sie 
heran. 

Ludwig : Preise wie unter kiihen den stier, (so) der 
Marut spilende schar, beim verschlingen des saftes ist sie 
grosz geworden. 

Kote 1. This translation is merely conjectural. I suppose 
that the wind driving the clouds before him, is here com¬ 
pared to a bull among cows, cf. V, 5a, 3 : 

syandrlsaA nd xiksh.insJi Ati skandanti sixvztlk. 

They, the Maruts, like rushing bulls, mount on the dark 
cows. 

The last sentence states that the wind grows even stronger 
after it has tasted the rain (I, 85, a. t6 ukshitSsaA mahimS- 
nam Irata). 

Note 2. I take^mbhe in the sense of^mbhane. (On 
the root ^bh and its derivatives, see Kuhn, Zeitschrift fUr 
vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft, vol. i, p. ia3 seq.) It 
would be better to read mukhe, instead of sukhe, in the 
commentary. The Maruts were not born of milk for Prwni, 
as Wilson says in a note, but from the milk of Pmni. 
Pwni is called their mother, Rudra their father : (V, sa, id ; 
do, 5.) 

Benfey takes the cows for clouds in which the lightnings 
dwell ; and the abyss of the sap is by him supposed to be 
again the clouds. 

74 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 6. 

Wilson : Which is chief leader among you, agitators of 
heaven and earth, who shake all around, like the top (of 
a tree) ? 

Benfey : Wer, Helden ! ist der erste euch — ihr Erd- und 
Himmel-schiitterer ! — wenn ihr sie schiittelt Wipfeln gleich ? 

Ludwig : Wer ist der grosste bei euch, helden, wenn vom 
himel und der erde, schiitteler, ihr am saume gleichsam 
ruttelt ! 

Wote 1. Antam nd, literally, like an end, is explained by 
S4ya;^a as the top of a tree. Wilson, Langlois, and Benfey 
accept that interpretation. Roth proposes, like the hem of 
a garment, which I prefer ; for vastrinta, the end of a gar¬ 
ment, is a common expression in later Sanskrit, while anta 
is never applied to a tree in the sense of the top of a tree. 
Here agra would be more appropriate. 

Verse 7. 

Wilson : The householder, in dread of your fierce and 
violent approach, has planted a firm (buttress); for the 
many-ridged mountain is shattered (before you). 

Benfey : Vor eurem Gange beuget sich, vor eurem 
wilden Zorn der Mann ; der Hiigel weichet und der Berg. 

Ludwig : Vor eurem anzug, eurem gewaltigen eifer, 
niederduckte sich der mensch, wich der festgeknotete 
[wolkenjberg. 

ISTote 1. S4ya;za translates : ' Man has planted a firm 
buttress to give stability to his dwelling.’ The reading nd 
for nf, which Aufrecht adopted, is untenable, as Ludwig 
shows. It has been altered in the second edition. 
See also VIII, 7, 5, nf yemird. Nidadhrd is the perfect 
Atmanepada, and expresses the holding down of the head 
or the cowering attitude of man. I have taken ugrfya 
manydve over to ^fhita, because these words could hardly 
form an apposition to yl^mdya. As the Vedic poets speak 
of the very mountains as shaken by the storms, we might 
translate pdrvato girf^ by the gnarled or rocky mount; 

NOTES. I, 37, 9. 

75 

but there is no authority for translating ^ihita by it is 
shattered, and we should have to translate, the mountain 
yielded or bent before your anger. Cf. V, 57, 3 : 

ni va^ vdn^ ^hate ySmana/z bhiyS. 

The forests get out of your way from fear. 

V, 60, 2. vdni ^it ugr^^ ^hate ni vaA bhiyS prfthivi kit 
re^te pdrvata^ Ait. 

Even the forests, ye fearful Maruts, yield from fear of 
you ; even the earth trembles, even the mountain. 

In I, 166, 5, ydt tveshi-ydmilA nadiyanta pdrvatdn, we 
may translate ‘when they on their fiery course made the 
parvatas (clouds) to sound or thunder,’ but it is more likely 
that nddayati here means to cause to shake or vibrate, and 
that parvata stands for mountain. We ought to remember 
such poetical expressions as i Kings xix. ii, ‘and a great, 
strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the 
rocks before the Lord.' 

Verse 8. 

Wilson : At whose impetuous approach earth trembles ; 
like an enfeebled monarch, through dread (of his enemies). 

Benfey : Bei deren Lauf bei deren Sturm die Erde 
zittert voller Furcht, wic ein altergebeugter Mann. 

Ludwig : Bei deren marschen zitterte wie ein gealtet 
stammeshaupt die erd vor furcht auf ihren wegen. 

Note 1. A^ma seems to express the act of racing or 
running (like 4fi, race, battle), while yiima is the road itself 
where the racing takes place. A very similar passage 
occurs in I, 87, 3. The comparison of the earth (fem.) to 
a king (masc.) would be considered a grave offence in the 
later Sanskrit literature. In I, 87, 3, vithurit takes the place 
of vupdti. 

Verse 9. 

Wilson : Stable is their birthplace, (the sky) ; yet the 
birds (are able) to issue from (the sphere of) their parent: 
for your strength is everywhere (divided) between two 
(regions, — or, heaven and earth). 

76 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

BenfeY: Kaum geboren sind sie so stark, dass ihrer 
Mutter sie entfliehn : ist ja doch zwiefach ihre Kraft. 

Ludwig : Denn fest ist ihr geburtsort, vogel (sind sie) 
von der mutter fortzugehn, nach dem, wie von altersher 
ihre kraft. 

Oder, Denn fest ist ihre kraft geworden von der mutter sich 
zu trennen, da schon von alters her ihre kraft diss wollte. 

Note 1. A very difficult verse. The birth of the Maruts 
is frequently alluded to, as well as their surpassing strength, 
as soon as born. Hence the first sentence admits of little 
doubt. But what follows is very abrupt. Vdyas may be 
the plural of vi, bird, or it may be vdyas, the neuter, 
meaning vital strength: see Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xv, 
p. 5&17. The Maruts are frequently compared to birds (cf. I, 
87, ; 88, i), but it is usual to indicate the comparison by 

na or iva. I therefore take viyas as a nom. sing, neut., in 
the sense of vigour, life. They are called b;^2hadvayasa-4 
in a Nivid ; see Ludwig, p. 2,2,6, Nir-i is used with par¬ 
ticular reference to the birth of a child (cf. V, 78, 7 ; 9). 

Verse 10. 

Wilson : They are the generators of speech : they spread 
out the waters in their courses : they urge the lowing 
(cattle) to enter (the water), up to their knees, (to drink.) 

Benfey : In ihrem Lauf erheben dann diese Sohne Getos 
und Fluth, die bis zum Knie den Kiihen geht. 

Ludwig : Und dise sone, die sanger, denten auf ihren 
ziigen ihre banen aus, so dass briillend sie uns ganz nahe 
kamen. 

Note 1. If we could take siindva^ gfra^ in the sense of the 
sons of voice, i. e. of thunder, which would remove many 
difficulties, the accent of gfra^ would have to be changed. 
The commentator takes sdnu in the sense of utpUdaka, 
producers of sound. Gfra^, however, occurs at least once 
more, in the sense of singers or poets, IX, 63, 10, where 
gfra^ can only be a vocative, O ye singers ! In I, 6, (5, the 
translation of gfra>5 by singers, i. e. the Maruts, may be 
contested, but if we consider that gfra/5, in the sense of 

NOTES. I, 37, lO. 

77 

hymns, is feminine, and is followed by the very word which 
is here used, viz. devayanta-^, as a feminine, viz. devaydntt^, 
VII, 1 8, 3, we can hardly doubt that in I, 6, 6, gfra/^ is a 
masculine and means singers. The same applies to VI, 
63, 10. In VI, 53, 9, dpa naA sClniva/^ gira/i snmrintu avsxrl- 
tasya y6, the construction is, of course, quite different. 

Note a. The expression that the Maruts enlarged or 
extended the fences of their race-course (RV. IV, 58, 7), 
can only mean that they swept over the whole sky, and 
drove the clouds away from all the corners. KfishMfL 
may mean the wooden enclosures (carceres) or the 
wooden poles that served as turning and winning-posts 
(metae). The S4ma-veda has y^;!eshu instead of a,^eshu. 
That the translation of this verse is purely tentative, and 
far from satisfactory, was known to all Vedic scholars, but 
I doubt whether they will consider the interpretation which 
M. Bergaigne proposes with so much assurance, as less ten¬ 
tative and more satisfactory. He translates (Journ, As. 1 884, 
P- *39)) ‘ des fils ont, dans leur marche, allonge leurs chants 
comme des chemins, pour y marcher k genoux (sur les 
genoux) en mugissant (en chantant).’ I shall content my¬ 
self with shortly pointing out the misgivings which every 
Vedic scholar would feel at once in proposing such a ren¬ 
dering. First as to the conception itself. Can a poet say, 
‘The Maruts have stretched- out their songs in order to 
march on them on their knees ? ’ ‘ The roads,’ as M. Ber¬ 
gaigne shows himself, are only a simile, and no one walks 
on a simile. Secondly, the idea that these Maruts widened 
the roads on which they march, is common enough, but 
that they lengthened their songs, like paths, is never said by 
the Vedic 7?fshls, nor would they in such a case have left 
out the particle na or iva. Lastly, though many things are 
said of the Maruts, I do not remember that they ever 
appear on their knees. I do not think, therefore, that 
M. Bergaigne’s infallible method helps us much beyond 
where we were before. Conjectures are easy, but for that 
very reason, one does not like to bring them forward. One 
might propose to read s6nAva.4 divd^, a very common 
name of the Maruts. One might go a step further, identify 

78 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

giA with bhiratt, and point out that the Maruts are called 
the sons of Bharata, II, 36, iz. But all this leaves us in 
utter uncertainty, and where a scholar feels the ground so 
uncertain beneath his feet, he hesitates to speak with papal 
authority, M. Bergaigne’s strong point is that abhi^nii 
means on their knees, not up to their knees. Here again, I 
ask, does abhi in prepositional compounds ever mean on ? 
If abhig-wii is used in the same sense in which we use * on 
our knees,’ it would in Sanskrit mean only ‘ bowing up to 
the knees.’ Now in I, yz, 5, abhi^/iu seems to express a 
positive expression of reverence. With regard to the other 
passages where abhi^wu occurs, M. Bergaigne has not shown 
how they ought to be translated so as to give a clear sense. 
I do not pretend to solve the difficulties, but I think it is 
better to confess our difficulties than to hide them under 
the veil of a so-called systematic interpretation. Abhi^)2u, 
like mita^OT, may have expressed a position of the knees, 
expressive of strength, but on such points very little 
information is to be gained from Indian commentators. 

The last sentence expresses the result of this race, viz. 
the falling of so much rain that the cows had to walk up to 
their knees in water. This becomes still clearer from the 
next verse. 

SAYAiVA : These, the producers of speech, have spread 
water in their courses, they cause the cows to walk up to 
their knees in order to drink the water. 

Verse 11. 

Wilson : They drive before them, in their course, the 
long, vast, uninjurable, rain-retaining cloud. 

Benfey : Dann treiben sie im Sturm heran jenen langen 
und breiten Spross der Wolke unerschopflichen. 

Ludwig: Sogar disen langen, breiten, das kind der 
wolke, den unfeindlichen, schleudern auf ihren zugen sie 
yorwarts. 

ISTote 1. Rain is called the offspring of the cloud, mihd 
ndpit, and is then treated as a masculine ; cf. apdm 
ndpdt, &c. 

NOTES. I, 37, 14. 

79 

Verse 12. ' 

Wilson : Maruts, as you have vigour, invigorate man¬ 
kind : give animation to the clouds. 

Benfey : O Marut’s ! mit der Kraft, die ihr besitzt, 
werft ihr Geschopfe um, die Berge werft ihr um sogar. 

Ludwig : O Marut, so wie eure kraft ist, warft ihr die 
leute nieder, warft ihr die berge nieder. 

Note 1. In VIII, 72, 8, zJiwky&vM is explained by vya- 
dcLrayat, he tore open. A^u^yavJtana is the Vedic form of 
the and pers. plur. of the reduplicated aorist. 

Verse 13. 

Wilson : Wherever the Maruts pass, they fill the way 
with clamour : every one hears their (noise). 

Benfey : Wenn die Marut’s des Weges ziehn, dann 
sprechen mit einander sie und mancher mag sie hQren. 

Ludwig : Wenn die Marut wandern, sprechen auf dem 
weg sie mit einander, es horet sie ein jeder. 

Note 1, Ydnti has to be pronounced as an amphi¬ 
brachys. 

Verse 14. 

Wilson ; Come quickly, with your swift (vehicles). The 
offerings of the Ka«vas are prepared. Be pleased with 
them. 

Benfey : Auf schnellen komraet schnell herbei, bei 
Kawva’s Spross sind Feste euch : da wollt cuch schSn 
ergotzen. 

Ludwig ; Brecht rasch auf mit raschen rossen, bei den 
Ka«va’s ist euer dienst, dort eben erfreuet euch. 

Note 1. Benfey supposes that ddvaA stands in the sin¬ 
gular instead of the plural. But why should the plural 
have been used, as the singular (asti) would have created 
no kind of difficulty? It is better to take diivsuS as a 
nominative plural of a noun dfi, worshipper, derived 
from the same root which yielded ddva^, worship. We 
certainly find A-duva^, as a nom. plur., in the sense, of 
not-worshipping : 

8o 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

VII, 4, 6. ma tv4 vaydm sahas4-van avirlL^ m^il dpsava^ 
pdri sadima iduvaA. 

May we not, 0 hero, sit round thee like men without 
strength, mthout beauty (cf. VIII, 7, 7), without worship. 

Here Sdya«a explains dduvaA very well by parifera«a- 
htndA, which seems better thcin Roth’s explanation ‘zogernd, 
ohne Eifer.’ 

Verse 15. 

Wilson : The offering is prepared for your gratification : 
we are your (worshippers), that we may live all our life. 

Benfey : Geriistet ist fur euren Rausch und wir gehoren, 
traun ! euch an fiir unser ganzes Lebelang. 

Ludwig : Er ist euch zur trunkesfreude, und wir gleich- 
f2ills euer hier, dass unsere ganze dauer wir erleben. 

MAA^DALA I, HYMN 38. 

81 

MAiVZ?ALA I, HYMN 38. 

ASHJAKA I, ADHYAyA 8, VARGA 15-17. 

To THE Maruts (the Storm-gods). 

1. What then now? When^ will you take (us) as 
a dear father takes his son by both hands, O ye gods, 
for whom the sacred grass has been trimmed ^ ? 

2. Where now ? On what errand of yours are 
you going, in heaven, not on earth ^ ? Where are 
your cows sporting ? 

3. Where are your newest favours O Maruts ? 
Where the blessings ? Where all delights ? 

4. If you, sons of l^risni, were mortals, and your 
praiser an immortal — 

5. Then never^ should your praiser be unwelcome, 
like a deer in pasture grass nor should he go on the 
path of Yama ®. 

6. . Let not one sin ^ after another, difficult to be 
conquered, overcome us ; may it depart ^ together 
with greed. 

7. Truly they are terrible and powerful ; even to 
the desert the Rudriyas bring rain that is never 
dried up \ 

8. The lightning lows like a cow, it follows as a 

mother follows after her young, when the shower (of 
the Maruts) has been let loose '. ‘ 

9. Even by day the Maruts create darkness with 
the water-bearing cloud when they drench the 
earth. 

10. Then from the shouting of the Maruts over 
the whole space of the earth men reeled forward. 

1 1. Maruts on your strong-hoofed never-wearying® 

[32] G 

82 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

steeds^ go after those bright ones (the clouds), which 
are still locked up ^ 

1 2. May your fellies be strong, the chariots, and 
their horses, may your reins ^ be well-fashioned. 

13. Speak forth for ever with thy voice to praise 
the Lord of prayer \ Agni, who is like a friend the 
bright one. 

14. Fashion a hymn in thy mouth ! Expand like 
the cloud ^ ! Sing a song of praise. 

15. Worship the host of the Maruts, the terrible, 
the glorious, the musical \ May they be magnified 
here among us 

NOTES. 1, 38, I. 

8 

O 

NOTES. 

This hymn is ascribed to Ka^^va, the son of Ghora. The 
metre is Gdyatri throughout. Several verses, however, end 
in a spondee instead of the usual iambus. No attempt 
should be made to improve such verses by conjecture, for 
they are clearly meant to end in spondees. Thus in verses 

7, 8, and 9, all the thi*ee pidas alike have their final 
spondee. In verse 7, the ionicus a minore is with an evi¬ 
dent intention repeated thrice. No verse of the hymn 
occurs in SV., VS., AV. ; but verse 8 = TS. Ill, r, 11, 5 ; 
verse 9 = TS. II, 4, 8, i. 

Verse 1. 

Note 1. Kadha-priya/^ is taken in the Padap4//^a as one 
word, and SS.ya;/a explains it by delighted by or delighting 
in praise, a nominative plural. A similar compound, kadha* 
priya, occurs in I, 30, and there too the vocative sing, 
fern., kadhapriye, is explained by Sdya^^a as fond of praise. 
In order to obtain this meaning, kadha has to be identified 
with kathi, story, which is simply impossible. There is 
another compound, adha-priy^, nom. dual, which occurs 
VIII, 8, 4, and which. S4ya?^a explains cither as delighted 
here below, or as a cori'uption of kadha-priyi. 

In Boehtlingk and Roth’s Dictionary, kadha-priya and 
kadha-pri are both taken as compounds of kadha, an 
interrogative adverb, and priya or prt, to love or delight, 
and they arc explained as meaning kind or loving to whom ? 
In the same manner adha-priya is explained as kind then 
and there. 

It must be confessed, however, that a compound like 
kadha-pri, kind to whom?, is somewhat strange, and it 
seems preferable to separate the words, and to write kddha 
priyi and ddha priyd. 

It should be observed that the compounds kadha-prJ 
and kadha-priya occur always in sentences where there is 
another interrogative pronoun. The two interrogatives 
kdt — kddha, what — where, and kds — kddha, who — where, 
occurring in the same sentence, an idiom so common in 

G 2 

84 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Greek, may have puzzled the author of the Pada text, and 
the compound being once sanctioned by the authority of 
6'4kalya, would explain it as best he could. But if 

we admit the double use of the interrogative in Sanskrit, 
as in Greek, then, in our passage, priya>? would be an adjec¬ 
tive belonging to pita, and we might translate : ‘ What then 
now ? When will you take (us), as a dear father takes his 
son by both hands, O ye Maruts ? ’ In the same manner 
we ought to translate I, 30, ao : 

ka^ te usha^ kddha priye bhu^6 mdrta^ amartye. 

Who and where was there a mortal to be loved by thee, 
O beloved, immortal Dawn ? 

In VIII, 7, 31, where the same words are repeated as in 
our passage, it is likewise better to write : 

kat ha n6ndm kadha priyik yat indram ^fah^tana, 
vaA sakhi-tv6 ohate. 

What then now ? Where is there a Mend, now that you 
have forsaken Indra? Who watches for your friendship? 

Why in VIII, 8, 4, adha priyi should have been joined 
into one word is more difficult to say, yet here, too, the 
compound might easily be separated. 

Kadha does not occur again, but would be formed in 
analogy with ddhk. It occurs in Zend as kadha. 

Kuhn, Beitrage IV, p. 186, has shown that ktshtJia^ 
(RV. V, 74, i) is a similar monster, and stands for ku shtAa&. 

The words kat ha nftndm commonly introduce an inter¬ 
rogative sentence, literally, What then now? cf. X, 10, 4. 

Kote 2. Vnkta-barhis is generally a name of the priest, 
so called because he has to trim the sacrificial grass- * The 
sacred Kusa grass (Poa cynosuroides), after having had 
the roots cut off, is spread on the Vedi or altar, and upon 
it the libation of Soma-juice, or oblation of clarified butter, 
is poured out. In other places, a tuft of it in a similar 
position is supposed to form a fitting seat for the deity or 
deities invoked to the sacrifice. According to Mr. Steven¬ 
son, it is also strewn over the floor of the chamber in which 
the worship is performed.’ 

Cf. VI, II, 5. vrifigi ha yat ndmasd barhf^ agnad, dydmi 
srdk ghr/td-vatt su-vriktlk. 

NOTES, I, 38, 2. 

85 

When I reverentially trim the truss for Agni, when the 
well- trimmed ladle, full of butter, is stretched forth. 

In our passage, unless we change the accent, it must be 
taken as an epithet of the Maruts, they for whom the grass- 
altar has been prepared. They are again invoked by the 
same name, VIII, 7, ao : 

kva nftndm su-ddnava/^ midatha vnkta-barhisha>^. 

Where do ye rejoice now, you gods for whom the altar is 
trimmed ? 

Otherwise, vr^kta-barhisha/^ might, with a change of 
accent, supply an accusative to dadhidhve ; ‘ Will you take 
the worshippers in your arms?’ This, though decidedly 
better, is not absolutely necessaiy, because to take by the 
hand may be used as a neuter verb. 

Wilson : Maruts, who are fond of praise, and for whom 
the sacred grass is trimmed, when will you take us by both 
hands as a father does his son? 

Benfey : Wo weilt ihr gern ? was habt xhr jetzt— gleich- 
wie ein Vater seinen Sohn — in Handen, da das Opfer 
harrt ? 

Verse 2. 

Wote 1. The idea of the first verse; that the Maruts 
should not be detained by other pursuits, is carried on in 
the second. The poet asks, what they have to do in the 
sky, instead of coming down to the earth. The last sen*^ 
tence seems to mean ' where tarry your herds ? ’ viz. the 
clouds. Saya;2a translates : * Where do worshippers, like 
lowing cows, px-aise you?’ Wilson: ^ Where do they who 
worship you cry to you, like cattle?^ Benfey : ^ Wo jauchait 
man euch, glcich wie Stiere? (Ihrc Verehrer bfullen vor 
Freude uber ihre Gegenwart, wie Stiere.y The verb 
raj»2yati, however, when followed by an accusative, means 
to love, to accept with pleasure. The gods accept the 
offerings and the prayers : 

V, 18, I. visvkni yik dmartya/iJ havyfi mdrteshu rd^yati. 

The immortal who deigns to accept all offerings among 
mortals, 

V, 74j 3* kdsya brdhmd^i ra^^yathaA- 

86 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Whose prayers do ye accept ? 

Followed by a locative ra?2yati* means to delight in. 
Both the gods are said to delight in prayers (VIII, 12, i8 ; 
33, 16), and prayers are said to delight in the gods (VIII, 
16, 2,), I therefore take ra;?yanti in the sense of tarrying, 
disporting, and na, if it is to be retained, in the sense of 
not ; where do they not sport? meaning that they are to be 
found everywhere, except where the poet desires them to 
be. We thus get rid of the simile of singing poets and 
lowing cows, which, though not too bold for Vedic bards, 
would here come in too abruptly. It would be much 
better, however, if the negative particle could be omitted 
altogether. If we retain it, we must read : kva vik | 
givik I na rin | yanti [ . But the fact is that through the 
whole of the Rig-veda kva has always to be pronounced as 
two syllables, kuva. There is only one passage, V, 61, 2, 
where, before a vowel, we have to read kva : kuva vo 
kvabhuava-^. In other passages, even before vowels, we 
always have to read kuva, e.g, I, 161, 4. kuvet=kva it; I, 
105, 4. kuvartam=:kva ntam. In I, 35, 7, we must read 
either kuvedintm siirya>^, making starya/2 trisyllabic, or 
kuva iddnim, leaving a hiatus. In I, 168, 6, kvdvaram is 
kuvdvaram : ^^Lkalya, forgetting this, and wishing to im¬ 
prove the metre, added na, thereby, in reality, destroying 
both the metre and the sense. Kva occurs as dissyllabic in 
the Rig-veda at least forty-one times. 

Verse 3. 

Note 1. The meanings of sumnd in the first five 
are well explained by Professor Aufrecht in Kuhn’s Zeit- 
schrift, vol. iv, p. 274. As to suvita in the plural, see X, 
86, 21, and VIII, 93, 29, where Indra is said to bring all 
suvitas. It frequently occurs in the singular : 

X, 148, 1. K na^ bhara suvitdm ydsya kikin. 

Verse 4. 

Note 1. One might translate: ^f you, sons of Pmni, 
were mortals, the immortal would be your worshipper/ 
But this seems almost too deep and elaborate a compliment 
for a primitive age. Langlois translates : ‘ Quand vous ne 

NOTES. I, 38, 5. 

87 

seriez pas inomortels, (faites toutefois) que votre pan6gyriste 
jouisse d’une longue vie.’ Wilson’s translation is obscure : 

‘ That you, sons of Pwni, may become mortals, and your 
panegyrist become immortal.’ S Aya?^a translates : ‘ Though 
you, sons of Pwni, were mortal, yet your worshipper would 
be immortal.’ Ludwig has, ‘ Wenn ihr, 0 kinder der Pwni, 
sterbliche waret, der unsterbliche ware eiier sanger dann. 
Nicht werde euch unlieb der sanger, wie ein wildes tier auf der 
weide, nicht des Yama Pfad betrete er.’ I think it best to 
connect the fourth and fifth verses, and I feel justified in 
so doing by other passages where the same or a similar 
idea is expressed, viz. that if the god were the poet and the 
poet the god, then the poet would be more liberal to the 
god than the god is to him. Whether syAt should have the 
uditta, I cannot tell. Thus I translated a passage, VII, 32, 
18, in my History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 545 : 

‘ If I were lord of as much as thou, I should suppoit the 
sacred bard, thou scatterer of wealth, I should not abandon 
him to misery. I should award wealth day by day to him 
who magnifies, I should award it to whosoever it be.’ 
Another parallel passage is pointed out by Mr. J. Muir, 
(On the Interpretation of the Veda, p. 79 ; see also Sanskrit 
Texts, V, 303.) VIII, 19, 35 : ‘ If, Agni, thou wert a mortal, 
and I were an immortal, I should not abandon thee to male¬ 
diction or to wretchedness ; my worshipper should not be 
miserable or distressed.’ Still more to the point is another 
passage, VIII, 44, 33 : ‘ If I were thou, and thou wert I, then 
thy wishes should be fulfilled.’ See also VIII, I4) ^ j 3. 

As to the metre it is clear that we ought to read 
martlsi/^ syWana. 

Verse 6. 

Note 1. Min, though it seems to stand for nd, retains its 
prohibitive sense. 

Note 2. Ydvasa is explained by Sdyawa as grass, and 
Wilson’s Dictionary, too, gives to it the meaning of meadow 
or pasture grass, whereas yava is barley. The Greek (ei 
or fetd is likewise explained as barley or rye, fodder for 
horses. See I, 91, 13. gSva^ nd ydvaseshu, like cows in 
meadows. 

88 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Note 3. The path of Yama can only be the path first 
followed by Yama, or that leads to Yama, as the ruler of 
the departed, 

X, 14, 8. sam ga/^Masva pit;^/-bhi>^ s4m yam^na. 

Meet with the fathers, meet with Yama (X, 14, 10 ; 15, 8), 

X, 14, 7. yamdm pa^yisi varu^^am ka. devdm. 

Thou wilt see (there) Yama and the divine Varuj^/a. 

X, 165, 4. tdsmai yamfya ndma^ astu m;^Aydve. 

Adoration to that Yama, to Death ! 

Wilson : Never may your worshipper be indifferent to 
you, as a deer (is never indifferent) to pasture, so that he 
may not tread the path of Yama. 

Benfey : Wer .euch besingt, der sei euch nicht gleich- 
giiltig, wie das Wild im Gras, nicht wandr er auf des Yama 
Pfad. 

A^oshya is translated insatiable by Professor Goldstiicker, 
Verse 6. 

Note 1. One of the meanings of nlrriti is sin. It is 
derived from the same root which yielded rzti^ in the sense 
of right, Nfrrfti was conceived, it would seem, as going 
away from the path of right, the German V e r g e h e n, N fr - 
riti was personified as a power of evil and destruction. 

VII, 104, 9, dhaye vd tdh pra-ddddtu s6maA d vd dadhdtu 
nik-ritek upd-sthe. 

May Soma hand them over to Ahi, or place them in the 
lap of Nirnti. 

1, 1 1 7, 5. susupvdmsam nd nik-rite/z upd-sthe. 

Like one who sleeps in the lap of Nirnti. 

Here SA^yana explains Nirrzti as earth, and he attaches 
the same meaning to the word in other places which will 
have to be considered hereafter. Cf. Lectures on the 
Science of Language, Second Series, p. 56a. 

Wilson treats NirrAi as a male deity, and translates the 
last words, ‘ let him perish with our evil desires,’ 

Note 2. Padtsh^d is formed as an optative of the Atmane- 
pada, but with the additional s before the t, which, in the 
ordinary Sanskrit, is restricted to the so-called benedictive 
(Grammar, § 3855 Bopp, Kritische Grammatik, ed. 1834, 

NOTES. I, 38, 7. 

89 

§ 329, note). Pad means originally to go. Thus RV. IX, 
73, 9, dtra kartdm ava paditi aprabhu/?, may the impotent 
go down into the pit. In certain constructions it gradually 
assumed the meaning of to perish, and native commentators 
are inclined to explain it by pat, to fall. One can watch 
the transition of meaning from going into perishing in such 
phrases as VS. XI, 46, mS, pidy ^yusha/z purS,, literally, 
‘ may he not go before the time,’ but really intended for 
‘ may he not die before the time.’ In the Rig-veda padishifd, 
is generally qualified by some words to show that it is to be 
taken in malam partem. Thus in our passage, and in 
III, 53, 31 ; VII, 104, 16 ; 17. In 1, 79, 11, however, padishifd. 
si/t is by itself used in a maledictory sense, per eat, may 
he perish ! In another, VI, 30, 5, padi by itself conveys the 
idea of perishing. This may have some weight in deter¬ 
mining the origin of the Latin pestis (Corssen, Kritische 
Beitrage, p. 396), for it shows that, even without preposi¬ 
tions, such as i or vi,pad may have an ill-omened meaning. 
In the Aitareya-brdhmawa VII, 14 (History of Ancient 
Sanskrit Literature, p. 471), pad, as applied to a child’s 
teeth, means to go, to fall out. With sam, however, pad 
has always a good meaning, and this shows that originally 
its meaning was neutral. Another translation, suggested 
by Ludwig, might be : ‘ Let not one dreadful Niir/ti (sin) 
after another strike us.’ 

Verse 7. 

note 1. The only difficult word is avdt^m. Sdyawa 
explains it, ‘ without wind.’ But it is hardly possible to 
understand how the Maruts, themselves the gods of the 
storm, the sons of Rudra, could be said to bring clouds 
without wind. Langlois, it is true, translates without any 
misgivings : ‘ Ces dieux peuvent sur un sol dess^ch^ faire 
tomber la pluie sans I’accompagner de vent.’ Wilson : ‘ They 
send down rain without wind upon the desert.’ Benfey saw 
the incongruous character of the epithet, and explained it 
away by saying that the winds bring rain, and after they 
have brought it, they moderate their violence in order not to 
drive it away again ; hence rain without wind. Yet even 

90 

VEDIC HYMNS* 

this explanation, though ingenious, and, as I am told, particu¬ 
larly truthful in an eastern climate, is somewhat too artificial. 
If we changed the accent, avitdm, unchecked, unconquered, 
would be better than avat^m, windless. But avdta, uncon¬ 
quered, does not occur in the Rig-veda, except as applied 
to persons. It occurs most frequently in the phrase vanvdn 
dv^tai^, which Sdya^^a explains well by himssm ahi^sita^, 
hurting, but not hurt: (VI, i6, 2,0; 18, i; IX, 89, 7.) 
In IX, 96, 8, we read pnt-sii vanvan dvdta/^, in battles 
attacking, but not attacked, which renders the meaning of 
avdta perfectly clear. In VI, 64, 5, where it is applied to 
Ushas, it may be translated by unconquerable, intact. 

There are several passages, however, where avdta occurs 
with the accent on the last syllable, and where it is accord¬ 
ingly explained as a Bahuvrthi, meaning either windless or 
motionless, from vdta, wind, or from vata, going (I, 62, 10). 
In some of these passages we can hardly doubt that the 
accent ought to be changed, and that we ought to read 
dvdta. Thus in VI, 64, 4, avdte is clearly a vocative applied 
to Ushas, who is called dvdtci,, unconquerable, in the verse 
immediately following. In I, 52, 4, the Maruts are called 
avdtd^, which can only be dvatd^ unconquerable ; nor can 
we hesitate in VIII, 79, 7, to change avdta// into dvdta/^, as 
an epithet applied to Soma, and preceded by ddnptakratuA, 
of unimpaired strength, unconquerable. 

But even then we find no evidence that dvdta, uncon¬ 
quered, could be applied to rain or to a cloud, and I there¬ 
fore propose another explanation, though equally founded 
on the supposition that the accent of avdtdm in our passage 
should be on the first syllable. 

I take vata as a Vedic form instead of the later vdna, the 
past participle of vai, to wither. Similarly we find in the 
Veda^ita, instead of^ina, the latter form being sanctioned 
by Pdmni. Vd means to get dry, to flag, to get exhausted ; 
dvdta therefore, as applied to a cloud, would mean not dry, 
not withered, as applied to rain, not dried up, but remaining 
on the ground. It is important to remark that in one 
passage, VI, 67, 7, Sdya^m, too, explains dvdta, as applied to 
rivers, by a.yushka, not dry ; and the same meaning would 

NOTES, I, 38, 8. 

91 

be applicable to in I, 10. In this sense of not 

withered, not dry, dvatam in our passage would form a per¬ 
fectly appropriate epithet of the rain, while neither windless 
nor unconquered would yield an appropriate sense. In the 
famous passage, X, 129, anit avdtdm svadhdya tdt dkam, 
that only One breathed breathless by itself, avdtdm might be 
taken, in accordance with its accent, as windless or breath¬ 
less, and the poet may have wished to give this antithetical 
point to his verse. But dvdtam, as an adverb, would here 
be equally appropriate, and we should then have to trans¬ 
late, ‘that only One breathed freely by itself.’ Ludwig 
translates, ‘ Als treue die blendenden, die sturmenden 
Rudriya auf oder flache sogar, als brunnen die wolke 
schaffen.’ This presupposes the conjectural reading ava- 
tdm. 

Verse 8. 

I^Tote 1. The peculiar structure of the metre in the 
seventh and eighth verses should be noted. Though we 

may scan 

- - I - V - v5 - I w - — 1 

- - 6 - I - - 6 - I o - u 6 - 

by throwing the accent on the short antepenultimate, yet 
the movement of the metre becomes far more natural by 
throwing the accent on the long penultimate, thus reading 

■ \j ^ ^ u ■ 

^ - KJ — — 

SkvANA : Like a cow the lightning roars, (the lightning) 
attends (on the Maruts) as the mother cow on her calf, 
because their rain is let loose at the time of lightning and 
thunder, 

Wilson: The lightning roars like a parent cow that 
bellows for its calf, and hence the rain is set free by the 
Maruts. 

Benfey : Es blitzt — wie eine Kuh briillt es — die Mutter 
folgt dem Kalb gleichsam — wenn ihr Regen losgelassen. 
(Der Donner folgt dem Blitz, wie eine Kuh ihrem Kalbe.) 

Vlrrd as a masculine means a bull, and it is used as a 
name of the Maruts in some passages, VIII, 7) 3 > 7* •As 

92 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

a feminine it means a cow, particularly a cow with a calf, a 
milch cow. Hence also a mother, X, 119, 4. The lowing 
of the lightning must be intended for the distant thunder, 
and the idea that the lightning goes near or looks for the 
rain is not foreign to the Vedic poets. See I, 39, 9 : ' Come 
to us, Maruts, with your entire help, as lightnings (come to, 
i. e. seek for) the rain ! ’ 

Verse 9. 

Note 1. That par^anya here and in other places means 
cloud has been well illustrated by Dr. Biihler, Orient und 
Occident, vol. i, p. 321. It is interesting to watch the 
personifying process which is very palpable in this word, 
and by which Par^anya becomes at last a friend and com¬ 
panion of Indra. See now, ‘ India, what can it teach us ? ’ 
p. 183 seq. 

Verse 10. 

Kote 1. Sadma, as a neuter, means originally a seat, and 
is frequently used in the sense of altar : IV, 9, 3. sd/^ sddma 
pdri nlyate h6ta ; VII, 18, 22. h6tcl-iva sadma pdri emi 
rdbhan. It soon, however, assumed the more general meaning 
of place, as 

X, I, I. agnf^ bhaniinci xissitk visvk sddmdni aprd/^. 

Agni with brilliant light thou filledst all places. 

It is lastly used with special reference to heaven and 
earth, the two sddmant, 1, 185, 6 ; III, 55, In our passage 
sddma parthivam is the same as parthive sddane in VIII, 
97 i 5- Hei'e the earth is mentioned together with heaven, 
the sea, and the sky. Siya^^a takes sddma as ‘ dwelling,’ so 
do Wilson and Langlois. Benfey translates ‘ der Erde Sit2,’ 
and makes it the subject of the sentence, which may be 
right ; ^ F rom the roaring of the Maruts the seat of the 
earth trembles, and all men tremble,’ Sadman, with the 
accent on. the last syllable, is also used as a masculine in 
the Rig-veda, I, 173, i ; VI, 51, 12, sadmanam divydm. 

Verse 11. 

Note 1. I have translated viln-pinihhi/t^ as if it were 
vl/iipimbhiA, for this is the right accent of a Bahuvrihi 

NOTES. 1,38,11. 

93 

compound. Thus the first member retains its own accent in 
pnthii-p4;d, bhuri-pa;?2i, v;"/sha-pd;d, &c. It is possible that 
the accent may have been changed in our passage, because 
the compound is used, not as an adjective, but as a kind of 
substantive, as the name of a horse, hand, means, as 

applied to horses, hoof : 

II, 31, 2,, pnthivya/2 s&au ^hghananta p^l;2i-bhi/2. 

When they strike with their hoofs on the summit of the 
earth. 

This meaning appears still more clearly in such com¬ 
pounds as dravdt-pdm : 

VIII, 5, 35. hira:^2ydyej^2a rdthena dravdtp4wi-bhi/2 di’vaiA. 

On a golden chariot, on quick-hoofed horses. 

The horses of the Maruts, which in our verse are called 
vt/u-pft;2f, strong-hoofed, are called VIII, 7, 27. hfra;/ya‘« 
p4;2i, golden-hoofed : 

ilrvai/2 hira;^yap4;^2i-bhi^ ddv4sa/2 lipa gantana. 

On your golden-hoofed horses come hither, 0 gods. 

Those who retain the accent of the MSS. ought to trans¬ 
late, ‘ Maruts, with your strong hands go after the clouds*’ 

Note 2. RddhasvatJ is explained by S^yawa as river. It 
does not occur again in the Rig-veda. Rodhas is enclosure 
or fence, the bank of a river ; but it does not follow that 
rddhasvat, having enclosures or banks, was applicable to 
rivers only. II, 15, 8, it is said that he emptied or opened 
the artificial enclosures of Bala, these being the clouds 
conquered by Indra. Hence I take rddhasvati in the sense 
of a cloud yet unopened, which is followed or driven on by 
the Maruts. 

Kitri, bright or many-coloured, is applied to the clouds, 
V, 63, 3. ^itr<Sbhi/2 abhrAi/2. 

Note 3. Roth and Ludwig take dkhidraydman for a name 
of horse, which seems right. The word does not occur 
again in the Rig-veda. 

Wilson : Maruts, with strong hands, come along the 
beautifully-embanked rivers with unobstructed progress. 

Benfey : Mit euren starken HSnden folgt den hehren 
eingeschlossnen nach in unermiid’tem Gang, Maruts. 

94 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 12. 

Kote 1. Abhiju, rein, does not mean finger in the Rig- 
veda, though Siya^a frequently explains it so, misled by 
Yiska, who gives abhtm among the names of finger. 
Wilson : ‘ May your fingers be well skilled (to hold the 
reins).’ 

Verse 13. 

Note 1. Agni is frequently invoked together with the 
Maruts, and is even called mariit-sakhcl, the friend of the 
Maruts,VIII, 92,14. It seems better, therefore, to refer 
brdhmawas pitim to Agni, than, with Siyana., to the host 
of the Maruts (marudga^am). Brihma^zaspdti and Br/has- 
pdti are both varieties of Agni, the priest and purohita of 
gods and men, and as such he is invoked together -mth the 
Maruts in other passages, I, 40, i. Tdni is an adverb, 
meaning constantly, always, for ever. Cf. II, a, i ; VIII, 
40, 7- 

Wilson : Declare in our presence (priests), with voice 
attuned to praise Brahma^aspati, Agni, and the beautiful 
Mitra. 

Benfey : Lass schallen immerfort das Lied zu griissen 
Brahma«aspati, Agni, Mitra, den herrlichen. 

Note 2. Mitra is never, as far as I know, invoked together 
with the Maruts, and it is better to take mitrdm as friend. 
Besides nd cannot be left here untranslated. Ludwig 
translates, ‘beautiful like Mitra,’ that is, bright like the sun. 

Verse 14. 

Note 1. The second sentence is Obscure. Sdyawa trans¬ 
lates : ‘ Let the choir of priests make a hymn of praise, let 
them utter or expand it, like as a cloud sends forth rain.’ 
Wilson similarly : ‘ Utter the verse that is in your mouth, 
spread it out like a cloud spreading rain.’ Benfey: ‘ Eiq 
Preislied schaffe in dem Mund, ertone dem Pa^ganya gleich.’ 
He takes Par^nya for the god of thunder, and supf)oses the 
hymn of praise to be compared to it on account of its loud¬ 
ness. Tatana^ can only be the second person singular of 
the conjunctive of the reduplicated perfect, of which we 

NOTES. I, 38, 15. 

95 

have also tatdnat, tatinima, tatdnan, and tatinanta. Ta- 
tana^ can be addressed either to the host of the Maruts, or 
to the poet. I take it in the latter sense, for a similar verse 
occurs VIII, a 1, 18. It is said there of a patron that he alone 
is a king, that all others about the river Sarasvatt are only 
small kings, and the poet adds : ‘ May he spread like a 
cloud with the rain,’ giving hundreds and thousands (par- 
^nya/2-iva tatdnat hi vrishtyS). Ludwig takes tan in the 
sense of thundering ; thunder like Par^nya ! 

Verse 16. 

Note 1. It is difficult to find an appropriate rendering for 
arkin. It means praising, celebrating, singing, and it is in 
the last sense only that it is applicable to the Maruts. 
Wilson translates, ‘ entitled to adoration Benfey, ‘flaming.’ 
Boehtlingk and Roth admit the sense of flaming in one 
passage, but give to arkin in this place the meaning of 
praising. If it simply meant, possessed of arkd, i. e. songs 
of praise, it would be a very lame epithet after panasyii. 
But other passages, like 1, 19, 4 ; 15, show that the con¬ 

ception of the Maruts as singers was most familiar to the 
Vedic i?fshis (I, 64, 10; Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. i, p. 541, 
note) ; and arkd is the very name applied to their songs 
(1, 19, 4). In the Edda, too, ‘ storm and thunder are repre¬ 
sented as a lay, as the wondrous music of the wild hunt. 
The dwarfs and Elbs sing the so-called Alb-leich which 
carries off everything, trees and mountains.’ Sec Justi in 
Orient und Occident, vol. ii, p. 64 ; Gcnthe, Windgottheiten, 
p. 4; II. There is no doubt therefore that arkin here means 
musician, and that the arkd of the Maruts is the music of 
the winds. 

Note 2. Vnddhd, literally grown, is used in the Veda as 
an honorific epithet, with the meaning of mighty, great, or 
magnified : 

III, 34, 7. yd^ma^ ft ndmasd vn’ddhdm fndram 
bnlidntam nshvdm a^ifdram yiivdnam. 

We worship with praise the mighty Indra, the great, the 
exalted, the immortal, the vigorous. 

Here neither is vnddhd intended to express old age, 

96 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

nor yiivan young age, but both are meant as laudatory 
epithets. See Darmesteter, Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 91 seq. 

Asan is the so-called Le^ of as, to be. This Le^f is pro¬ 
perly an imperative, which gradually sinks down to a mere 
subjunctive, and is generally called so. Of as, we find the 
following Le^ forms: belonging to the present, we have 
dsasi, II, 26, % ; dsati, VI, 23, 9 ; asatha/^, VI, 63, i ; and 
dsatha, V, 61,4 : belonging to the imperfect, dsa^, VIII, 100, 
% \ dsat, I, 9, 5; asama, I, 173, 9 ; asan, I, 89, i. Asam, a 
form quoted by Roth from Rig-veda X, 27, 4, is really asam. 

We find, for instance, asa>?!, with an imperative or opta¬ 
tive meaning, in 

VIII, lob, 2. dsa^ kz. tvam dakshii^atd^ sdkhA me 
ddha vritrinl ^anghandva bhuri. 

And be thou my friend on my right hand, and we shall 
kill many enemies. 

Here we see the transition of meaning from an impera¬ 
tive to the conditional. In English, too, we may say, ' Do 
this and you shall live,* which means nearly the same as, 
^ If you do this, you will live."* Thus we may translate this 
passage : ' And if thou be my friend on my right side, then 
we shall kill many enemies.* 

X, 124, 1, imdm na^ agne lipa ya^ndm ^ ihi — 
dsaA havya-vSIif utd na/^ pura>S-gO. 

Here we have the imperative ihi and the Le^ dsaA used 
in the same sense. 

Far more frequently, however, dsa/^ is used in relative 
sentences, such as, 

VI, 36, 5. dsa^ ydthd na^ ^dvasd hzkkx\kh. 

That thou mayest be ours, delighting in strength. 

VII, 24, 1, dsa-^ ydthd na^ avitSI vridh6 ka.. 

That thou mayest be our helper and for our increase. 

See also X, 44, 4 ; 85, %6 ; 36. 

Wilson : • May they be exalted by this our worship. 

Benfey : Mogen die Hohen hier bei uns sein. 

UANDAZA I, HYMN 39. 

97 

MA;VZ?ALA I, HYMN 39. 

ASH TAKA I, ADHYAyA 3, VARGA 18-19. 

To THE Maruts (the Storm-gods). 

1. When you thus from afar cast forwards your 
measure like a blast of fire, through whose wisdom 
is it, through whose design *“? To whom do you go, 
to whom, ye shakers (of the earth) ? 

2. May your weapons be firm to attack, strong 
also to withstand. May yours be the more glorious 
power, nor that of the deceitful mortal. 

3. When you overthrow what is firm, O ye men, 
and whirl about what is heavy, you pass through 
the trees of the earth, through the clefts of the 
rocks \ 

4. No real foe of yours is known in heaven, nor 
on earth, ye devourers of foes ! May power be 
yours, together with your race ^ ! O Rudras, can it 
be defied^? 

5. They make the rocks tremble, they tear asun¬ 
der the kings of the forest h Come on, Maruts, like 
madmen, ye gods, with your whole tribe. 

6. You have harnessed the spotted deer to your 
chariots, a red one draws as leader ^ ; even the earth 
listened® at your approach, and men were frightened. 

7. O Rudras, we quickly desire your help for our 
race. Come now to us with help, as of yore ; thus 
now for the sake of the frightened Ka«va \ 

8. Whatever fiend, roused by you or roused by 
men, attacks us, deprive him of power, of strength, 
and of your favours \ 

9. For you, chasing and wise Maruts, have wholly 

C32] H 

98 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

protected^ Ka«va. Come to us, Maruts, with your 
whole favours, as lightnings ^ (go in quest of) the 
rain. 

lo. Bounteous givers, you carry whole strength, 
whole power, ye shakers (of the world). Send, O 
Maruts, against the wrathful enemy of the poets an 
enemy, like an arrow \ 

NOTES. I, 39, I. 

99 

NOTES. 

This hymn is ascribed to KaOTa, the son of Ghora. The 
metre varies between Bnliatt and Satobrzhatl, the odd 
verses being composed in the former, the even verses in 
the latter metre. Each couple of such verses is called a 
B^rhata Prag^tha. The Brzhati consists of 8 + 8 + 124-8, 
the Satobrfhati of 12 + 8 + 12+8 syllables. No verse of 
this hymn occurs in SV., VS., AV. ; verse 5=TB. II, 4, 
4, 3- 

Verse 1. 

Note 1. M&a, which I translate by measure, is explained 
by S&ysindi as meaning strength. Wilson ; ‘ When you 
direct your awful vigour downwards from afar, as light 
(descends from heaven).’ Benfey: ‘Wenn ihr aus weiter 
Feme so wie Strahlen schleudert euren Stolz (das worauf 
ihr stolz seid: euren Blitz).’ Langlois: ‘Lorsque vous 
lancez votre souffle puissant.’ I doubt whether mfoa is 
ever used in the Rig-veda in the sense of pride, which no 
doubt it has, as a masculine, in later Sanskrit : cf. FlalA- 
yudha, ed. Aufrecht, iv, 37. Mana, as a masculine, means 
frequently a poet in the Rig-veda, viz. a measurer, a thinker 
or maker; as a neuter it means a measure, or what is 
measured or made. Thus V, 85, 5? we read : 

mShena-iva tasthi-v^n antdrikshe vf yd/^'mame p?"/thivfm 
surye;2a. 

He (Varuwa) who standing in the welkin has measured 
the earth with the sun, as with a measure. 

In this passage, as well as in ours, we must take measure, 
not in the abstract sense, but as a measuring line, which is 
cast forward to measure the distance of an object, — a simile, 
peifectly applicable to the Maruts, who seem with their 
weapons to strike the trees and mountains when they them¬ 
selves are still far off. Another explanation might be given, 
if m^na could be taken in the sense of measure, i, e, shape 
or form, but this is doubtful. 

H 2 

3 00 

VEDIC HYMNS* 

Note 2. Vdrpas, which has generally been translated by 
body or form, is here explained by praise. Benfey puts 
Werk (i. e. Gesang, Gebet); Langlois, maison. Vdrpas, 
which, without much reason, has been compared to Latin 
corpus, must here be taken in a more general sense. Thus 
VI, 44, 14, asyd mdde purii vidvan, is applied to 

Indra as knowing many schemes, many thoughts, many 
things, when he is inspired by the Soma-juice ; see I, 19, 5* 

Verse 3. 

Note 1, Benfey takes vf yithana in a causative sense, 
you destroy, you cause the trees to go asunder. But even 
without assigning to yd a causative meaning, to go through, 
to pierce, would convey the idea of destruction. In some 
passages, however, vi-yd is certainly used in the simple sense 
of passing through, without involving the idea of destruction : 

VIII, 73, 13. rdtha/^ viyati rddast (fti). 

Your chariot which passes through or between heaven 
and earth. 

In other passages the mere passing across implies con¬ 
quest and destruction : 

I, ii6,i^o. vi-bhindiind _ rdthena vf pdrvatdn. . . .aydtam. 

On your dissevering chariot you went across, or, you rent, 
the mountains (the clouds). 

In other passages, however, a causative meaning seems 
equally, and even more applicable : 

VIII, 7, vf vntrdm parva-.rd^ yayu>4 vf pdrvatdn. 

They passed through Vrftra piecemeal, they passed 
through the mountains (the clouds) ; or, they destroyed 
Vrftra, cutting him to pieces, they destroyed the clouds. 

Likewise I, 85, 10. vf ydta vfjvam atrf^^am. 

Walk athwart every evil spirit, or destroy every evil 
spirit ! See before, I, 19, 7 ; 37, 7. 

We must scan vi ydthana vaninaA pnthivyd^. 

Note 2. It might seem preferable to translate djdA pdr- 
vatdndm by the spaces of the clouds, for pdrvata means 
clouds in many places. Yet here, and still more clearly in 
verse 5, where pdrvata occurs again, the object of the poet 

NOTES. I, 39, 5. 

lOI 

is to show the strength of the Maruts. In that case the 
mere shaking or bursting of the clouds would sound very 
tame by the side of the shaking and breaking of the forest 
trees. Vedic poets do not shrink from the conception that 
the Maruts shake even mountains, and Indra is even said to 
have cut off the mountain tops : IV, 19, 4. dva abhinat kakii- 
bha.^ pirvatinim. In the later literature, too, the same idea 
occurs : Mahibh. Vana-parva, ver. 10974, dyau/z svit patati 
kim bhUmir diryate paiwato nu kim, does the sky fall ? is 
the earth torn asunder, or the mountain 

Verse 4. 

Note 1. S3.yawa was evidently without an authoritative 
explanation of tdni yu^. He tries to explain it by 
‘ through the union of you may strength to resist be quickly 
extended.’ Wilson : ‘ May your collective strength be 
quickly exerted.’ Benfey takes tini as adverb and leaves 
out yu^ : ‘ Zu alien Zeiten, O Furchtbare ! — sei im Nu zu 
iiberwalt’gen euch die Macht.’ Yu^, an instrumental, if 
used together with another instrumental, becomes in the 
Veda a mere preposition ; cf. VII, 43, 5 ; 95, 4. rSt.yS. ; 
X, 83, 3. tdpasi yu^4' ; X, loa, 13. vddhri«4 yn^S. ; VII, 33, 
30. pdram-dhy4 yu^’ ; VI, 56, 3. sdkhyi yq^-fl ; VIII, 68, 
9. tvK yv^L As to the meaning of tdn, see B. R. s. v., 
where tan in our passage is explained as continuation. The 
offspring or race of the Maruts is mentioned again in the 
next verse. 

Note a. I take mi ^it 4-dh?^she as an abrupt interro¬ 
gative sentence, viz. Can it be defied ? Can it be resisted ? 
See V, 87, 3 : 

tdt vaJt maruta/i nd d-dh?'/shc s&vaJi. 

Your strength, O Maruts, is not to be defied. 

Verse 6. 

Note 1. Large trees of the forest are called the kings or 
lords of the forest. Instead of pr6 drata, the Taitt. Br. 
IIj 4j 4) reads pr6 varata, which Sdyawa explains by pro, 
prakarshe«a, avdrata dhdvata. 

102 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Verse 6. 

ITote 1. Prdshri is explained by Siya^^a as a sort of yoke 
in the middle, when three horses or other animals are 
harnessed to a car; rohita as a kind of red deer. Hence 
Wilson remarks *that the sense may be, ‘ The red deer 
yoked between them aids to drag the car/ But he adds 
that the construction of the original is obscure, and ap¬ 
parently rude and ungrammatical. Benfey translates, ‘ Sie 
fuhrt ein flammenrothes Joch,’ and remarks against Wilson 
that Siya^^a’s definition of prdshri as yoke is right, but that 
of rohita as deer, wrong. If S5.ya?^a’s authority is to be 
invoked at all, one might appeal from S^ya/^a in this place 
to S^ya^^a VIII, 7, 28, where prdshri is explained by him 
either by quick or by pramukhe yiigyam^na/^, harnessed in 
front. The verse is 

yat eshim pr/shati/^ rathe prdshri/^ vahati rdhita.^:. 

When the red leader draws or leads their spotted deer in 
the chariot. 

VI, 47, 24. prdshM is explained as tripada 4dhara/z ; tad- 
vad vahantiti prash^ayo^.yvA^. In 1, 100, 17, prdshribhi/^, as 
applied to men, means friends or supporters, or, as Siyawa 
explains, p^lrj’vasthair anyair mhibhi^. 

Ludwig (IV, ad 25, 8) adds some useful information. He 
quotes from the comm, on Taitt. S. 1, 7, 8 ; vlmadakshwzayor 
a.yvayor madhya tsh&dvayam prasirya tayor madhye sap- 
tyikhya^^tivLeshopetam yu'%■y^lt. The right horse 

is said to be the arvi, the left vi^t, the middle sapti/^. 
La^^yana II, 7, 23, calls the two side-hoi‘ses prashifi. 
According to Siya;2a (Taitt. S. I, 7, 8, p. 1024) prashri 
means originally a tripod for holding a pot (see above), and 
afterwards a chariot with three horses. In that case we 
should have to translate, the red chariot moves along. 

K'ote 2. Aufrecht derives ai^rot from i^ru, to shake, without 
necessity, however ; see Muir’s Sanskrit Texts, IV, p. 494, 

Ludwig also remarks that a.rrot might be translated by 
the earth trembled or vibrated. Similar passages occur 
RV. I, 127, 3. vi/ii kit yasya sdm-rftau j-riivat vdnd-iva ydt 
sthirdm, at whose approach even what is firm and strong 

NOTES. I, 39, lO. 

103 

will shake, like the forests. Roth translates, the earth 
yielded, got out of your way. 

Verse 7. 

Note 1. Kawva, the author of the hymn. 

Verse 8. 

Note 1. The abhva, fiend, or, as Benfey translates it very 
happily, Ungethiim, may have been sent by the Maruts 
themselves, or by some mortal. With reference to yushm6- 
shita it is said afterwards that the Maruts are to withdraw 
their help from him. I have adopted Wilson’s and Ludwig’s 
interpretation of vi yuyota, with the instrumental. 

Verse 9. 

Note 1. The verb dadd is the second pers. plur. of the 
perfect of dd, and is used here in the sense of to keep, to 
protect, as is well shown by B. and R. s. v. dd 4, base dad. 
Sdya«a did not understand the word, and took it for an 
irregular imperative ; yet he assigned to the verb the proper 
sense of to keep, instead of to give. Hence Wilson : ‘ Up¬ 
hold the sacrificer Kawva.’ Benfey, less correctly, ‘ Den 
Ka«va gabt ihr,’ as if Kawva had been the highest gift of 
the Maruts. 

Note 2. The simile, as lightnings go to the rain, is not 
very telling. It may have been suggested by the idea that 
the lightnings run about to find the rain, or the tertium 
comparationis may simply be the quickness of lightning. 
Wilson : ‘ As the lightnings bring the rain.’ Benfey : ‘ (So 
schnell) gleichwie der Blitz zum Regen kommt.’ Lightning 
precedes the rain, and may therefore be represented as 
looking about for the rain. Ludwig proposes some bold 
conjectures. He would change kd«vam to ra«vam, and 
take the words from asclmibhi/i to ganta as a parenthesis. 
He translates : ‘ For nothing imperfect, yon highly to be 
revered Maruts, no, something delightful you gave — (with 
perfect aids, Maruts, come to us)— as lightnings give rain.’ 

Verse 10. 

Note 1. Wilson : ‘ Let loose your anger.’ S4ya«a : ‘Let 
loose a murderer who hates.’ 

104 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

Pari-manyii, which occurs but once in the Rig-veda, 
corresponds as nearly cis possible to the Greek irepidvixos. 
Manyii, like dviJ.6s, means courage, spirit, anger; and in 
the compound parimanyii, as in TTepidviios, the preposition 
pari seems to strengthen the simple notion of the word. 
That pdri is used in that sense in later Sanskrit is well 
known; for instance, in parilaghu, perlevis, parikshima, 
withered away: see Pott, Etymolog^ische Forschungen, 
second edition, vol. i, p. 4^7. How pdri, originally meaning 
round about, came to mean excessive, is difficult to explain 
with certainty. It may have been, because what surrounds 
exceeds, but it may also have been because what is done all 
around a thing is done thoroughly. See Curtius, Grundziige, 
fifth edition, p. 274. Thus we find in the Veda, VIII, 
75, 9, pdri-dveshas, lit. one who hates all around, then a 
great hater : 

mS; na/i . . . pari-dveshasa/? a;KhatU, tvmih ni nfivam & 
vadhlt. 

May the grasp of the violent hater strike us not, as the 
wave strikes a ship. 

Again, pari-spr/dh means literally one who strives round 
about, then an eagei- enemy, a rival (fern.) : 

IX, 53, I. nuddsva pari-sp;^dha^. 

Drive away those who are rivals. 

Pari-krori means originally one who shouts at one from 
every side, who abuses one roundly, then an angry reviler. 
This word, though not mentioned in B. R.’s Dictionary, 
occurs in 

I, 39, 7. sArvam pari-krojim ^hi. 

Kill every reviler ! 

The same idea which- is here expressed by pari-krord, is 
in other places expressed by pari-rdp, lit. one who shouts 
round about, who defies on eveiy side, a calumniator, an 
enemy, one who ‘ be-rattles.’ 

II> 2’3) 3- ^ vi-bfidhya pari-rdpa^. 

Having struck down the enemies. 

II, 33, 14. vf pari-rdpa^ ardaya. 

Destroy the enemies. 

In the same way as the words meaning to hate, to 

which conveys the idea of round aboutj we also find words 
expressive of love strengthened by the same preposition. 
Thus from pritd//, loved, we have pdri-prita/^, lit, loved all 
round, then loved very much : I, 190, 6. pdri-prita/2 nd 
mitrd>?:; cf. X, We also find IX, i. pari-prfya/^, 

those who love fully or all around, which may mean great 
lovers, or surrounding friends. 

In all these cases the intensifying power of pdri arises 
from representing the action of the verb as taking place 
on every side, thoroughly, excessively; but in other cases, 
mentioned by Professor Pott, particularly where this pre¬ 
position is Joined to a noun which implies some definite 
limit, its magnifying power is no doubt due to the fact that 
what is around, is outside, and therefore beyond. Thus in 
Greek expresses the same idea as iiripixerpo^ (loc, 

cit. p, 488), but I doubt whether pdri ever occurs in that 
sense in Sanskrit compounds. 

106 VEDIC HYMNS. 

MANDALA I, HYMN 64. 

ASHrAKA I, ADHYAYA 5, VARGA 6-8. 

To THE Maruts (the Storm-gods). 

1. For the manly host, the joyful, the wise, for the 
Maruts bring tiiou, O Nodhas^, a pure offering ^ 
I prepare songs, like as a handy priest ®, wise in his 
mind, prepares the water, mighty at sacrifices. 

2. They are bom, the tall bulls of Dyu ^ (heaven), 
the manly youths ^ of Rudra, the divine, the blame¬ 
less, pure, and bright like suns; scattering rain¬ 
drops, full of terrible designs, like giants ®. 

3. The youthful Rudras, they who never grow 
old, the slayers of the demon have grown irre¬ 
sistible • like mountains. They throw down with 
their strength all beings, even the strongest, on 
earth and in heaven. 

4. They deck themselves with glittering orna¬ 
ments’^ for a marvellous show ; on their chests they 
fastened gold (chains) for beauty®; the spears on 
their shoulders pound to pieces ® ; they were born 
together by themselves *, the men of Dyu. 

5. They who confer power’, the roarers®, the de- 
vourers of foes, they made winds and lightnings by 
their powers. The shakers milk the heavenly udders 
(clouds), they sprinkle the earth all round with milk 
(rain). 

6. The bounteous’ Maruts pour forth® water, 
mighty at sacrifices, the fat milk (of the clouds). 
They seem to lead ® about the powerful horse, the 
cloud, to make it rain; they milk the thundering, 
unceasing spring *. 

MAiVBALA I, HYMN 64. 

107 

7. Mighty they are, powerful, of beautiful splen¬ 
dour, strong in themselves^ like mountains, (yet) 
swiftly gliding along; — you chew up forests, like 
wild elephants ^ when you have ' assumed your 
powers among the red flames 

8. Like lions they roar, the wise Maruts, they 
are handsome like gazelles^, the all-knowing. By 
night ^ with their spotted deer (rain-clouds) and with 
their spears (lightnings) they rouse the companions 
together, they whose ire through strength is like the 
ire of serpents. 

9. You who march in companies, the friends of 
man, heroes, whose ire through strength is like the 
ire of serpents salute heaven and earth ^ ! On the 
seats on your chariots, O Maruts, the lightning stands, 
visible like light ®. 

10. All-knowing, surrounded with wealth, endowed 
with powers, singers^, men of endless prowess, armed 
with strong rings they, the archers, have taken the 
arrow in their fists. 

1 1. The Maruts who with the golden tires of their 
wheels increase the rain, stir up the clouds like wan¬ 
derers on the road. They are brisk, indefatigable 
they move by themselves ; they throw down what is 
firm, the Maruts with their brilliant spears make 
(everything) to reel 

12. We invoke with prayer^ the offspring of Ru- 
dra, the brisk, the pure, the worshipful the active. 
Cling ® for happiness-sake to the strong company of 
the Maruts, the chasers of the sky^ the powerful, 
the impetuous ®. 

13. The mortal whom ye, Maruts, protected, he 
indeed surpasses people in strength through your 
protection. He carries off booty with his horses. 

I08 VEDIC HYMNS. 

treasures with his men ; he acquires honourable ^ 
wisdom, and he prospers K 

14. Give, O Miiruts, to our lords strength glorious, 
invincible in battle, brilliant, wealth-acquiring, praise¬ 
worthy, known to all men \ Let us foster our kith 
and kin during a hundred winters. 

15. WilP you then, O Maruts, grant unto us 
wealth, durable, rich in men, defying all onslaughts®? 
• — wealth a hundred and a thousand-fold, always 
increasing ? — May he who is rich in prayers ® (the 
host of the Maruts) come early and soon ! 

NOTES. I, 64, I. 

109 

NOTES. 

This hymn is asci'ibed to Nodhas, of the family of Go- 
tama. No verse of this hymn occurs in SV., VS., AV. ; 
but verse 6 = TS. Ill, i, ii, 7. 

Verse 1. 

I^ote 1. The first line is addressed by the poet to 
himself. 

Note 2. Suv?-«ktf is generally explained by a hymn of 
praise, and it cannot be denied that in ttiis place, as in most 
others, that meaning would be quite satisfactory. Etymo¬ 
logically, however, suvrfktf means the cleaning and trim¬ 
ming of the grass on which, as on a small altar, the oblation 
is offered : cf vnktabarhis, 1, 38, i, note a, page 84. Hence, 
although the same word might be metaphorically applied 
to a carefully trimmed, pure, and holy hymn of praise, 
yet wherever in the Veda the primary meaning is appli¬ 
cable, it seems safer to retain it : cf. Ill, 6r, 5 ; VI, ii, 5. 

Prof. Roth, in the Melanges Asiatiques, vii, p. 61 a, calls 
the derivation, which he himself discovered, a ‘ Columbus- 
Egg.’ Pie derives suvnlcti from suH-«Tcti, and translates it 
by excellent praise. He supports the insertion of v, by 
the analogy of su-v-ita, for su-ita. This derivation is cer¬ 
tainly very ingenious, but there are some difficulties which 
have still to be accounted for. That the substantive riktx 
does not occur by itself would not be fatal, because other 
words in the Veda occur as uttarapadas only. But there 
is the compound ndmovrfkti in X, 131, a, which shows that 
vyfkti existed as a substantive, though it is true that the 
V^^gusaneyins (X, 3a) read namaukti instead. Taitt. S. I, 8, 
ai; Taitt. Br. II, 6, I, 3 ; and Ath. V. XX, 135, 3, have all 
namovr^Tcti. There is also the compound svdvr'fkti in RV. 
X, 31, I. Are these to be separated from su-vrfkti, and 
ought we not to take into consideration also the Zend 
hvarsta, as pointed out by M. Darmesteter (Ormazd, 

no 

VEDIC HYMNS. 

p. 10, note), meaning well performed, perfect in a liturgical 
sense ? 

Note 3. Apds, with the accent on the last syllable, is the 
accusative plural of ap, water, and it is so explained by 
S4ya;2a. He translates: ‘I show forth these hymns of 
praise, like water, i. e. everywhere, as Par^nya sends down 
rain at once in every place/ Benfey explains : ‘ I make 
these hymns smooth like water, i.e. so that they run smooth 
like water/ He compares pvdixos, as derived from peco. Lud¬ 
wig translates: 'Als ein kunstfertiger das werk im geiste, 
auch geschickt mit der hand mach ich schon die in der 
opferversammlungen machtig wirkenden lieder/ I thought 
formerly that we ought either to change the accent, and 
read ipoA, or the last vowel, and read apa^^. In the former 
case the meaning would be, ‘ As one wise in mind and 
clever performs his work, so do I compose these hymns/ 
In the second case we should translate : ^ Like a workman, 
wise in mind and handy, I put together these hymns/ 

Still there is one point which has hitherto been over¬ 
looked by all translators, namely, that apd/^ vidatheshu 
ftbhiiva^, occurring in the first and sixth verses, ought to 
be taken in the same sense in both passages. Now apd/^ 
viddtheshu ibhiiva/^ seems to mean water efficacious at 
sacrifices. In the sixth verse I now translate: ^The 
bounteous Maruts pour down water, mighty or efficacious at 
sacrifices, the fat milk (of the clouds)/ Hence in the 
first verse I should now like to translate : ‘ I prepare my 
songs, like as a handy priest, wise in his mind, prepares 
the water mighty or efficacious at sacrifices/ Roth 
assigns to viddtha a too exclusively political meaning. 
Viddtha may be an assembly, a public meeting, a witena- 
gemot, or an €KK\»]crt'a, but public meetings at that time 
had always a religious character, so that viddtha must 
often be translated by sacrifice. 

Verse 2. 

Note 1. It is difficult to say in passages like this, whether 
Dyu should be taken as heaven or as a personified deity. 
When the Maruts are called Rudrdsya mdryd/;, the boys of 

NOTES. I, 64, 4. 

Ill 

Rudra (VII, 56, i), the personification is always preserved. 
Hence if the same beings are called Tiivih this too, 

I think, should be translated the boys of Dyu (III, 543 ^3 ; 
V, 59, 6), not the sons of heaven. The bulls of Dyu is a 
more primitive and more vigorous expression for what we 
should call the fertilising winds of heaven. 

Note 2. Mdrya is a male