The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta-Nipata (F. Max Müller; V. Fausböll (trans.), 1881)
==================================================================================================================
SBE Vol. 10: Buddhist scriptures — the Dhammapada and Sutta-Nipata. Completes the SBE series gap. Public domain. Internet Archive.

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

I

TRANSLATED

By VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL. X

PART I DHAMMAPADA
PART II SUTTA-NIPATA

3, *6, 27, 28, 39, 40- THE SACRED BOOKS OF CHINA : in 6 vols. :

James Legge.

4, 23, 31. THE ZEND-AVESTA : in 3 vols. : James Darmestetcr &

’ L. H. Mills.

5, i8, 24, 37, 47. PAHLAVI TEXTS : in 5 vols. : E. W. West.

6, 9. THE QUR’AN : in 2 vols. : E. H. Palmer.

7, THE INSTITUTES OF VI^IJIU ; Julius Jolly.

8, THE BHAGAVADGITA with the Sanatsujatiya and thcAnugita:

Kashinath Trimbak Tclang.

10. THE DHAMMAPADA : F, Max Mailer; SUTTA-NIPATA :

V. Fausboll.

11. BUDDHIST SUTTAS : T. W. Rhys Davids.

12, 26, 41, 43,44. THE SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA ; in 5 vols. : JuHus

Eggeling.

13, 17, 20. VINAYA TEXTS : in 3 vols. ; T. W. Rhys Davids & Hermann

Olden berg.

19. THE FO-SHO-HING-TSAN-KING : Samuel Beal.

21. THE SADDHARMA-PUNDARIKA or The Lotus ot the irue Law :

H. Kern.

22, 45. JAINA SOTRAS : in 2 vols. ; Hermann Jacobi.

25. MANU : Georg Btthler.

29, 30. THE GRIHYA-SUTRAS : in 2 vols. ; Hermann Oldenbcrg &
F. Max Mailer.

32, 46. VEDIG HYMNS : in 2 vols. ; F. Max Mailer & H. Oldenbcrg.

33, THE MINOR LAW-BOOKS ; JuHus Jolly.

34, 38. THE VEDANTA-SUTRAS : in 2 vols. : with Sahkaracarya’s

Commentary : G. Thibaut.

35, 36. THE QUESTIONS OF KING MILINDA : in 2 vols. ; T. W.

Rhys Davids.

42. HYMNS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA : M. Bloomfield.

48. THE VED ANTA-SCFTR AS with Ramanuja’s Sribhasya; G. Thibaut.

49. BUDDHIST MAHAyANA TEXTS ; E. B. Cowell, F. Max Mailer

& J. Takakusu.

50. INDEX : M. Wintemitz.

Smd

■ L’ln.ARY

^ ^ Acc No ■'.%

C5 1^ Clasf No.. .. J ^

•. B0ok.No

♦ X- ^ -...• ' *

(C) MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Indological Publishers & Booksellers
Head Office: Bungalow Road, Deihi-llOCW?
Branches : 1. Chowk, Varanasi- 1 (o.p.)

2. Ashok Rajpath, Patna-4 (mhar)

Unesco Collection of Representative Works imiim Series
The book has been accepted in the Imikm Series of the Trmskitkm
Collection of the United Nations EiiucmUmaf Scientific ami
Cultural Organization (UNESCO)

First Published by the Oxford University Press, ItlSl
Reprinted by Motilal Bmarsidass, 1965, 196S, 1973, 1977. 1980

Printed in India

By Shantilal Jain, at Shri Jaincndra Press,

A-45, Phase I, Industrial Area, Naraina, New D«Ihi-il0028
Published by Narendra Prakash Jain, for Motilal Btnarsidass,
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Napr, Dethi-1 10007,

Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New I)elhJ"4
June 10, 1962

I am very glad to know that the Sacred
Books of the East published years ago by
the Clarendon Press, Oxford, which have
been out-of-print for a number of years,
will now be available to all students of
religion and philosophy. The enterprise

of the publishers is commendable and I
hope the books will be widely read.

S. Radhakrishnan

PREFATORY NOTE TO TFIE NEW EDITION

Since 1948 the Uniteci Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), upon the recom-
mendation of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
has been concerned with facilitating the translation of the
works most representative of the culture of certain of its
Member States, and, in particular, those of Asia.

One of the major dijfficulties confronting this programme
is the lack of translators having both the qualifications and
the time to undertake translations of the many outstanding
books meriting publication. To help overcome this difficulty
in part, UNESCO’s advisers in this field (a panel of experts
convened every other year by the International Council for
Philosophy and Humanistic Studies), have recommended that
many worthwhile translations published during the 1 9th century,
and now impossiljlc to find except in a limited number of
libraries, should be brought back into print in low-priced
editions, for the use of students and of the general public. The
experts also pointed out that in certain cases, even though
there might be in existence more recent and more accurate
translations endowed with a more modern apparatus of scholar-
ship, a number of pioneer works of the greatest value and
interest to students of Eastern religions abo merited republi-
cation.

This point of view was warmly endorsed by the Indian
National Academy of Tetters (Sahitya Akadcmi), and the
Indian National Commission for UNESCO.

It is in the spirit of these recommendations that this
work from the famous scries “Sacred Books of the East” is
now once again being made available to the general public
as part of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works.

PUBLISHER’S NOTE

First, the man distinguished between eternal and perish-
able. Later he discovered within himself the germ of the
Eternal. This discovery was an epoch in the history of the
human mind and the East was the first to discover it.

To watch in the Sacred Books of the East the dawn of
this religious consciousness of man, must always remain one
of the most inspiring arid hallowing sights in the whole history
of the world. In order to have a solid foundation for a com-
parative study of the Religions of the East, we must have before
all things, complete and thoroughly faithful translation of their
Sacred Books in which some of the ancient sayings were pre-
served because they were so true and so striking that they
could not be forgotten. They contained eternal truths, ex-
pressed for the first time in human language.

With profoLindest reverence for Dr. S. Radliakrishnan,
President of India, who inspired us for the task; our deep
sense of gratitude for Dr. G. D. Deshmukh & Dr. D. S,
Kothari, for encouraging assistance; esteemed appreciation of
UNESCO for the warm endorsement of the cause; and finally
with indebtedness to Dr. H. Rau, Director, Max Mflllcr
Bhawan, New Delhi, in procuring us the texts of the Scries
for reprint, we humbly conclude.

CONTENTS.

Preface to New Edition
Introduction to the Dhammapada .

Chapter 1

If

If

ft

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
9

10

11

12

13

14

15.

16.
17,

18 .

Ji

19.

20 .

„ 21 .
22 .
„ 23.

„ 24,

„ 26.
„ 26.
Index

DHAMMAPADA.

The Twin-verses .

On Earnestness .
Thought
Flowers
The Fool .

The Wise Man (Paw/ita)
The Venerable (Arhat) .
The Thousands .

Evil ....
Punishment .

Old Age

Self .

The World
The Buddha

(the

Awake

ned)

Happiness

Pleasure

Anger ....

Impurity

The Just

The Way . . .

Miscellaneous

The Downward Course .

The Elephant

Thirst ....

The Bhikshu (Mendicant)

The BrShma«a (Arhat) .

ix-xv

xvii-lxiii

3

9

X3

i6

2Q

23

27

3 ®

34

36

41

45

47

50

54

57

59

61

65

68

71

75

78

81

86

90

97

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the
Translations of the Sacred Books of the East (see the
end of this volume)

209

PREFACE

TO NEW EDITION.

It has been a great and unexpected pleasure to me to
have to bring out a new, the third edition of my translation
of the Dhammapada. The first was published in 1870,
the second in 1881. I cannot indeed pretend to have
improved the present edition very much, for I have not
had any time left during the last few years to continue my
study of PAli. Nor has Pdli ever been more than a parergon
to me. I began it in 1845 during my stay at Paris with
Burnouf, who was then almost the only scholar who could
read P^li texts, and I still have a letter of his in which he
apologises for his imperfect knowledge of the language. At
that time Pdli scholarship had not yet become a special
and independent study, but it was a kind of annexe to
Sanskrit. Men like Bopp and Burnouf were expected
to teach not only Sanskrit and Comparative Philology,
but at the same time, Zend, the Prikrit dialects, and, as
one of them, Pili. Clough's Pili Grammar (Colombo, 1824
and 1832) and Tumour’s Mahtvanso (1837) were all that
we had to depend on. Some advance was made by Spiegel
and Westergaard, but the real impulse to an independent
and scholarlike study of Pdli literature came from my friend
Childers, the author of the first Pdli Dictionary, published
in 1875. Before that time the only names to be mentioned
in P^Ii scholarship were those of James D’Alwis, Spence
Hardy, Spiegel, E. Kuhn, MinayefF, Senart, Weber, and
last, not least, Fausbdil. After the publication of Childers’
Dictionary, the progress of Pili scholarship has been veiy
rapid, and the number of ^PiH texts and translations
has increased very considerably. As the most active

Dhammapada. It is certainly a most interesting collection
of verses, giving a trustworthy picture of Buddhist thought,
particularly in its practical and moral character. Consisting
of short sentences it seems at first an easy book to translate,
but the very fact that these versus memoriales stand by
themselves without any context to throw light on them
creates a peculiar difficulty, much the same as that with

indeed be rendered word by word, but they leave us often

which of the two we ought to choose ; while if we knew
what preceded and followed them in their original context,
we should find our choice much easier. Though many

now by a succession of translators and commentators been
elucidated, many more still remain which require renewed
Study. It may seem strange to outsiders that there should
still be so much uncertainty as to the exact meaning of
many Pili words. The meaning of the very title of our
book, the Dhammapada, is still contested. I have produced
whatever arguments I could collect in support of the mean-
ing of ‘ Path of Virtue ’ or ‘ Path of the Law.^ But I am
far from saying that the translation ‘ Collection of Texts
of the Law,* ‘ Worte der Wahrheit,’ is impossible. What
we want to settle the point is some ancient Buddhist
authority to tell us with what intention this title was
originally given. For titles are often fanciful, and mere

, scholarship is not sufficient to enable us to speak with

j magisterial assurance.

Let us take another instance. One of the commonest
words in Buddhist philosophy is sankharo. It corresponds
to Sanskrit sa7;»2skira. The meanings of the Sanskrit word
are difficult enough. It means the forming of matter, it
can mean refining, polishing, embellishing, also the preparing
of food and the moulding of clay. Purifying rites also are
called sawskdra and the impressions of the mind as well as
the result of them, the dispositions, tastes, talents or Incli-
nations, may go by the same name. In Pali, however,
the growth of the meanings of sankhdro becomes far more
complicated. It means there also preparing, but the
Buddhist, as if remembering that sa^skdra meant etymo-
logically putting together, and then what has been put
together, uses sankhdro in the sense of anything that has
been made and will therefore perish. According to Hindu
philosophy whatever has been put together or made can be
put asunder or unmade, and thus sankhdro came to be used
not only for what we should call the created or material
world, but for anything in it that is anitya or perishable.
Thus sankhdro may sometimes be rendered by matter In

that sankhdro includes what we should call attributes also.
Lastly, like sa?wskdra, sankhdro may mean the impressions
left on the mind, and the resulting states of the mind pre-
dispositions, talents or character, in which sense it is often
used • ’

that the quiet place or Nirvd^a is sankhdrupasamajw sukhaw
or happiness arising from the quieting of the sahkhdras,
we may translate either ‘ from the cessation of all existing
things,’ or ‘from the calming of all desires or affections,’
Hence Fausboll translates * naturarum sedatio ; ’ Weber, ‘wo
aufhbren die Einkleidungen;’ Gray, ‘life-ending;’ Hu, ‘ou
cessent les existences; ’ v. Schroeder/ wo alles Ding ziir Ruhe
kommt,’ whereas I prefer to take upasama in the sense of
calming, and sankhdro in the sense of all states of the mind,
more particularly the calming of all desires and affections,

Xll

PREFACE TO

If such a verse occurred in a text treating either of the
end of the world and all created things or of the subduing
of all affections or passions, we should know at once which
meaning to choose, while in our case we may, I think, allow
ourselves to be guided by the word sukha, happiness, which
seems to point to the quieting of the affections of the mind
rather than to the destruction of the world.

In looking at the literature devoted to the Dhammapada,
we may read very clearly the steady progress of PMi scholar-
ship. Fausboll’s edition of the text with a Latin translation,
and with extracts from the native commentary, which was
published in 1855, marked indeed an epoch, if we may use
such a hackneyed expression of a work of real importance
and permanent value. It was indeed a work sui generis^ and
there was no other scholar living at the time who would
have ventured on such new ground as that chosen by that
young Danish scholar. It ought never to be forgotten
that the publication of an Oriental text never published
before, and the translation of an Oriental text never
translated before, requires a kind of scholarship quite
different from that of the patient follower who is satisfied
with jurare in verba magistri* There is between a scholar
such as Fausboll and the ordinary scholars who can read
what has been read and translated before, about the same
difference as between a Stanley exploring the darkest Africa
and a tourist who now goes to Egypt personally conducted
by Messrs. Cook & Co. Naturally the pioneer is apt to lose
his way and to make mistakes. These very mistakes, however,
are sometimes most creditable, just as the bold adventures of
those who did not discover the sources of the Nile have often
required greater efforts and entailed more severe sufferings
than the successful discoveries of later comers. But be that
as it may, no truo Pili scholar will ever forget what we
owe to FausbolPs adventurous daring, no one pointing out
improvements in his text and translation would not feel
ashamed to blame or to ridicule him. In that respect PAH
scholarship may indeed be proud for having always pre-
served the temper of the true Buddhist or the gentleman,

NEW EDITION.

xiii

and it seems almost as*if the best P 4 Ii scholars had been
those who were most thoroughly imbued with the true spirit
of Buddha himself, and to whom nothing seemed so offensive
as pharusham^ which — sit venia — one might almost translate
by langage farouche ou grassier.

After the first editor and translator followed — but longo
intervallo — those who for the first time translated the text
into a new language, whether German, English or French.
To this class belong the translations of Weber (German),
myself (English), Hu (French). No one who has not him-
self tried to translate Oriental thought into any European
language can have any idea of the almost impossible task
of finding words in any of these modern languages exactly
corresponding to the ancient terms of Eastern religion or
philosophy. To find terms exactly corresponding to the
varied terminology of Buddhism is simply impossible. They
do not exist, as little as there are modern coins correspond-
ing exactly to a k^rshipa^a. Here nothing remains but
to use terms of more general meaning which at all events
are not wrong, and which, though they do not exactly
cover the Fill terms, yet include them. This is the rule
I have tried to follow throughout. It is not very satisfactory,
but it is better at all events than to use a word which is
actually wrong or covers but a small segment of the
original term.

In some cases the native commentary is of great help,
and scholars who formerly despised the help of native
interpreters, such as S^yaua or Buddhaghosa, are now
agreed that they form a siue qua non in a critical study
of ancient texts. How, for instance, should we know the
right meaning of such a verse as 353, where we read :

*I have conquered all, I know all, in all conditions of
life I am free from taint; I have left all, and through the
destruction of thirst I am free ; having learnt myself, whom
should I teach ? ’

It is true we know now, and might have known before,
that PAH uddis is not used In the sense of teaching, but
means pointing towards a person or a thing. In Sanskrit

XIV

PREFACE TO

also upadii- means teaching (anweisen), but not uddk, which

means to point to.

A very similar verse occurs in the Suttanipdta aio :

Sabbabhibhu?« sabbavidu7i»2 siimedha?;?

Sabbesii dhammesu anupalitta^w
Sabba^^ha?^ ta?«hakkhaya vimutta»2
Ta;« vdpi dhird muni:?;^ vedayanti,

which Fausboll translates: ‘The man who has overcome
everything, who knows everything, who is possessed of
a good understanding, undefiled in all things (dhamma),
abandoning all things, liberated in the destruction of desire
(nibbina), him the wise style a Muni.’

Here all traces of the event which gave rise to the utterance
of the verse have disappeared. But the commentator tells
us that it was uttered originally by Buddha when on his
way to Benares he met an Upa^ivaka who asked him who
it was that ordained him, and who was the teacher whose
doctrine he taught. It was then that Buddha declared
that he could point to no one as his teacher, but that he
was his own teacher- After this all becomes clear, and we
see that the verb uddis is the right verb to use for pointing
out. We have only to refer to the Lalita-vistara XXVI,
to see the story of the native commentator confirmed.
Here kasmin Gautama brahma^aryam u^yate corresponds
to kam uddissa pabba^ito, that is, who gave thee leave to
become a bhikshu or a pabba^ta ?

I subjoin a list of books containing translations or notes
on the Dhammapada, published after the publication of
my own translation, so far as they have become known
to me:

(1) Le Dhammapada, par Fernand Hu, Paris, 1878.

(2) The Dhammapadam or Scriptural Texts translated
from Pdli on the basis of Burmese MSS., by James Gray,
1881 ; sec. ed. Calcutta, 1887.

(3} Das Dhammapadam, Ein Vers, sammiung, aus der
EngHschen Ubersetztung von Professor M, M. : metrisch
ins Deutsch iibersetzt, Leipzig, 1885,

NEW EDITION.

XV

(4) Der Wahrheitsphad, iibersetzt von K. E. Neumann,
1893.

(5) A translation from a Chinese translation of the
Dhammapada by Samuel Beal was published in 1878, and
Is useful sometimes by the subjoined narratives.

Difficult passages have been discussed not only by
Childers in his Dictionary and in his ‘ Notes on the
Dhammapada,’ but likewise by Morris in his valuable
contributions to the Journal of the Pdli Text Society, by
Kern in his Bijdrage tot de Verklaring van eenige woorden
in Pali-geschriften voorkomende (Verhandelingen der Kon.
Akademie van Wetenschappen, Amsterdam, 1886), and by
Fausboll in his Nogle Bemaerkninger om enkelte vanskelige
Pdli-Ord i Jdtaka-Bogen, 1888.

I have also to thank Prof. Fausboll, as formerly Childers,
for help given me in my translation. What I said in my in-
troduction to my former edition, that T can claim for myself
no more than the name of a very humble gleaner in this
field of Pdli literature,’ applies with equal truth to the new
edition, I have gleaned whatever grains seemed to me
valuable in these later publications, and have consulted
several of the translators whenever there seemed to be
some points left that required to be cleared up.

F. M. M.

fifteen books is: i. 6^ataka [lo] ; a. Mah^niddesa [uj
3.^ullaniddesa[Ti]; 4. Pa/isambhidamagga [13]; S-Sutta
nip^ta [5] ; 6 . Dhammapada [3] ; 7. Udina [3] ; 8. Iti
vuttaka [4] ; 9. Viminavatthu [6] ; 10. Petavatthu [7]
II. Theragatha [8]; i 3 . TherigatM [9]; 13. A^ariy^
pi/aka [15] ; 14. Apad^na [13] ; 15. Buddha\w«sa [14]^-

There is a commentary on the Dhammapada in Pfili,
and supposed to be written by Buddhaghosa in the first
half of the fifth century A.D. In explaining the verses of the
Dhammapada, the commentator gives for every or nearly

intercourse with his disciples, or in preaching to the multi-
tudes that came to hear him.

Date of the Dhammapada.

is trying to ascertain the date of the Buddhist canon
of which it forms a part, or the date of Buddhaghosa,
who wrote a commentary on it. This, however, is by no
means easy, and the evidence on which we have to rely is
such that we must not be surprised if those who are
accustomed to test historical and chronological evidence
in Greece and Rome, decline to be convinced by it. As

* The figures within brackets refer to the other list of books in the Khud-
daka-nikfiya. See also p. xxxvi.

® M. Leon Feer in the Journal Asiatique, 1871, p. 266, mentions another com-
mentary of a more philosophical character, cqaally ascribed to Buddhaghosa,
and having the title Vivara Bra Dhammapada, i. e. L’augustc Dhammapada
devoile. Professor Forchhammcr in his ‘ List of Manuscripts,’ 1879-80, men-
tions the following works in connection with the Dhammapada : Dhammapada-
Nisgayo; Dh. P. A/// 5 akatha by Buddhagbosa; Dh. P. A#/<afcath& NIssayo,
3 vols., containing a complete translation of the commentary ; Dh. P. VmAu.
Of printed books he quotes ; Kayanupassanakyam, a work bas«d on the
Caravaggo, Mandalay, 1876 (390 pages), and Dhammapada-desanakyam,
printed in ‘British Burma News.’

INTRODUCTION.

NIX

a general rule, I quite agree that we cannot be too sceptical
in assigning a date to ancient books, particularly if we
intend to use them as documents for tracing the history
of human thought. To the initiated, I mean to those who
have themselves worked in the mines of ancient Oriental
literature, such extreme scepticism may often seem un-
scientific and uncalled for. They arc more or less aware
of hundreds of arguments, each by itself, it may be, of
small weight, but all combined proving irresistible. They
are conscious, too, of having been constantly on the look
out for danger, and, as all has gone on smoothly, they feel
sure that, in the main, they are on the right road. Still it is
always useful to be as incredulous as possible, particularly
against oneself, and to have before our eyes critics who will
not yield one inch beyond what they are forced to yield by
the strongest pressure of facts.

The age of our MSS. of the canonical books, either in
PAH or Sanskrit, is of no help to us. All Indian MSS. are
comparatively modern, and one who has probably handled
more Indian MSS. than anybody else, Mr. A. Burnell,
has lately expressed his conviction that ‘no MS. written
one thousand years ago is now existent in India, and that
it is almost impossible to find one written five hundred
years ago, for most MSS. %vhich claim to be of that date
are merely copies of old MSS. the dates of which are
repeated by the copyists k' This applies, however, to MSS.
only which are written in the ordinary DevanAgari alphabet.

Nor is the language, whether Sanskrit or PAIi, a safe
guide for fixing dates. Both languages continue to be
written to our own time, and though there are some
characteristic marks to distinguish more modern from more
ancient Buddhist Sanskrit and Pali, this branch of critical
scholarship requires to be cultivated far more extensively
and accurately before true scholars would venture to fix the
date of a Sanskrit or Pali text on the strength of linguistic
evidence alone k

^ Indian Antiquary, 1880, p. 233,

* See some important remarks on this subject in FausboU’s Introduction to
Sutta-nipSta, p. xi.

XX

DHAMMAPADA.

The Buddhists themselves have no difficulty in assigning
a date to their sacred canon. They are told in that canon
itself that it was settled at the First Council, or immediately
after the death of Buddha, and they believe that it was
afterwards handed down by means of oral tradition, or,
according to other authorities, actually written down in
books by order of Kai-yapa, the president of the First
Councils Buddhaghosa, a learned and in some respects
a critical scholar, living in the beginning of the fifth century
A.D., asserts that the canon which he had before him, was
the same as that fixed by the First Council

Several European students have adopted the same
opinion, and, so far as I know, no argument has yet been
advanced showing the impossibility of the native view,
that some collection of Buddha’s doctrines was made im-
mediately after his death at Rd^gaha, and that it was
finally settled at what is called the Second Council, or the
Council of Vesali. But what is not impossible is not there-
fore true, nor can anything be gained by appealing to later
witnesses, such as, for instance, Hiouen Thsang, who tra-
velled through India in the seventh century, and wrote
down anything that he could learn, little concerned whether
one statement tallied with the other or not ■*. He say.s that
the Tipiifaka was written down on palm leaves by Ka.ryapa
at the end of the First Council. But what can be the weight
of such a witness, living more than a thousand years after
the event, compared with that, for instance, of the Mahi-
vawsa, which dates from the fifth century of our era, and

‘ Bigandet, Life of Gaudama (Rangoon, 1866), .p. 350 ; but also p. i ao note.

® See Childers, s. v. Tipi/aka. There is a carious p&smge in Buddhaghosa's
account ot the First CotmciL ‘ Now one may ask,’ he says, ‘ Is there or » there
not in this first ParS^fika anything to be taken away or added ? ’ I reply, There
is nothing in the words of the Blessed Buddha that can be taken away, for the
Buddhas speak not even a single syllable in vain, yet in the words of disciples
and devatSs there are things which may be omitted, and these the elders who
made the recension, did omit. On the other hand, additions are everywhere
necessary, and accordingly, whenever it was necessary to add anything, they
added it. If it be asked, What are the additions referred to? I reply, Only
sentences necessary to connect the text, as ‘ at that time,’ ‘ again at that time,’
‘and so forth!*

* Piierins Bouddhistes, vol. i, p, igS.

INTRODUCTION.

XXI

tells US in the account of Mahinda’s missionary journey
to Ceylon (241/318), that the son of Asoka had to spend
three years in learning the Tipi/aka by heart from the
mouth of a. teacher^? No mention is then made of any
books or MSS., when it would have been most natural to
do so At a’ later time, during the reign of King Va//agA-
mani® (88-76 B.C.), the same chronicle, the Mah^va^/^sa, tells
us that ‘ the profoundly wise priests had theretofore orally
(mukhap^Z/itena) perpetuated the P 41 i of the PiZakattaya
and its AZZ/^akathd (commentary), but that at this period the
priests, foreseeing the perdition of the people assembled,
and in order that the religion might endure for ages, re-
corded the same in books (potthakesu likhapayuw)"*.'

No one has yet questioned the dates of the Dipavamsa,
about 400 A. D., or of the first part of the Mahdvawrsa,
between 459-477 a.d., and though no doubt there is an
inteival of nearly 600 years between the composition of
the Mah§.va??2sa and the recorded writing, down of the
Buddhist canon under Va//agdmani, yet we must remember
that the Ceylonese chronicles were confessedly founded on
an older AZZ/^akath^ preserved in the monasteries of the
island, and representing an' unbroken line of local tradition.

My own argument therefore, so long as the question was
only whether we could assign a pre-Christian date to the
Fill Buddhist canon, has always been this. We have
the commentaries on the Pdli canon translated from Sin-
halese into Pdli, or actually composed, it may be, by

* MahtvaOTsa,p.37; DIpavawisaVII, 28-31; Buddhaghosha's Parables, p.xviii.

® Bigandet, Life of Gaudaraa, p. 35 1 .

^ Dr. E. Muller (Indian Antiquary, Nov. 1880, p- 270) has discovered inscrip-
tions in Ceylon, belonging to Devanapiya MaharS^'a Gamim Tissa, whom he
identifies with Vaf/agSmani.

* The same account is given in the Dtpavawsa XX, 20, and in the SSra-
sahgraha, as quoted by Spence Hardy, Legends, p. 192. As throwing light
on the completeness of the Buddhist canon at the time of King Va//agamani,
it should be mentioned that, according to the commentary on the Mahavaw/sa
(Tumour, p. liii), the sect of the Dhammaru/6ikas established itself at the
Abhayavihira, which had been constructed by Va//agtmani, and that one of
the grounds of their secession was their refusing ta acknowledge the Parivfira
(thus I read instead of Pariwana) as part of the Vinaya-pi/aka, According to
the Dfpavawsa (VII, 42) Mahinda knew the Parivdra.

XXll

DHAMMAPADA.

Buddhagliosa. Buddhagbosa confessedly consulted various
MSS., and gives various readings, just as any modern
scholar might do. This was in the beginning of the fifth
century A.D., and there is nothing improbable, though I
would say no more, in supposing that some of the MSS.,
consulted by Buddhaghosa, dated from the first century
B.C., when Va^'/agamani ordered the sacred canon to be
reduced to writing.

There is one other event with reference to the existence
of the sacred canon in Ceylon, recorded in the Mahava?«sa,
between the time of Buddhaghosa and Va//agimani, viz.
the translation of the Suttas from Pali into the language of
Ceylon, during the reign of Buddhadisa, 339-368 a.d.
If MSS. of that ancient translation still existed, they woiiid,
no doubt, be very useful for determining the exact state
of the P^Ii originals at that time I But even without them
there seems no reason to doubt that Buddhaghosa had
before him old MSS. of the Pali canon, and that these
were in the main the same as those written down at the
time of Va/ZagAmani.

Buddhaghos'a’s Age,

The whole of this argument, however, re.stcci on the
supposition that BuddhaghosaV date in the beginning of
the fifth century A.D. was/beyond the reach of reasonable
doubt. ‘His age,* I had 1 ventured to say in the Preface
to Buddhaghosha’s Parables (1^0), ‘can be fixed with
greater accuracy than most dates in the literary history
of India.’ But soon after, one of our most celebrated Pali

scholars, the great Russian traveller, Professor foh. Minaveff.
expressed in the Melanges Asiatiques (13/25 April, 1871)
the gravest doubts as to Buddhaghosa’s age, and thus
threw the whole Buddhist chronology, so far as it had
then been accepted by all, or nearly all scholars, back into
c haos. He gave as his chief reason that Buddhaghosa was

1 A »ote IS added, stating that several portions of the other two divisions
also ot the Pi/akattoya were translated into the Sinhalese language, and that
these alone are consulted by the priests, who are unacquainted with Plli. On
the other hand, it is stated that the Sinhalese text of the AftA&k&tM exists no
IcKiger. See Spence Hardy, Legends, p. xxv, and p. 69.

not, as I supposed, the contemporary of Mahdnima, the

may be considered as a trustworthy witness with regard to
events that occurred between 410 and 432* Now the literary
activity of Buddhaghosa in Ceylon fails in that period ^ ’
These facts being admitted, it is surely not too great
a stretch of probability to suppose, as I did, that a man
\\4iose nephew was king in 459-477, niight have been
alive in 410-452:, that is to say, might have been a con-
tempo
any fi
the un

vawisa, the question whether he wrote the second halt ot
the 37th chapter of tliat work, or broke off his chronicle in
the middle of that chapter, I did not discuss, having no
new materials to bring forward beyond those on which
Tumour and those who followed him had founded their
conclusions, and which I had discussed in my History of
Sanskrit Literature (1859), p. 267. All I said was, ‘ It is
difficul
of the'

> ‘ Ungefahr 50 Jahre alter als Mah&nama ist Baddhaghosha,’ see Wester-
gaard, tlber Buddy's Todesjahr, p. 95.

XXIV

DHAMMAPADA.

the Mahava»/sa was afterwards continued by different
writers, even to the middle of the last century. But,
taking into account all the circumstances of the case, it is
most probable that Mahandma carried on the history to
his own time, to the death of Dhatusena, 477 a.d/

What I meant by ‘all the circumstances of the case’
might easily be understood by any one who had read Tur-
nour’s Preface to the Mahavawsa. Tumour himself thought
at first that Mahanama’s share in the Mahivawrsa ended
with the year 301 A.D.,and that the rest of the work, called
the Sulu Wansd, was composed by subsequent writers*.
Dharmakirti is mentioned by name as having continued
the work to the reign of Prdkrama B^hu (a.D. 1266). But
Tumour afterwards changed his mind 2. Considering that
the account of Mah^sena’s reign, the first of the Seven
Kings, terminates in the middle of a chapter, at verse 48,
while the whole chapter is called the Sattar%iko, ‘the
chapter of the Seven Kings,’ he naturally supposed that
the whole of that chapter, extending to the end of the reign
of his nephew Dhatusena, might be the work of Mahandma,
unless there were any strong proofs to the contrary. Such
proofs, beyond the tradition of writers of the MSS., have
not, as yet, been adduced^.

But even if it could be proved that Mahdndma’s own pen
did not go beyond the 48th verse of the 37th chapter, the
historical trustworthiness of the concluding portion of that
chapter, containing the account of Buddhaghosa’s literary
activity, nay, even of the 38th chapter, would be little
affected thereby. We know that both the Mahdvaw^sa
and the somewhat earlier' Dfpavawzsa were founded on the
Sinhalese A//iakathds, the commentaries and chronicles
preserved in the Mahdvihdra at Anuridhapura. We also
know that that Vihdra was demolished by Mahdsena, and
deserted by nearly all its inmates for the space of nine
years (p. 235), and again for the space of nine months

^kva«sa is mentioned with the Mahaw«*wi. both
» InuStctiL^ Professor Forchhammer in his List of Pdli MSS.

= See Rhys Davids, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1875, P-

X

(p. 257). We can well understand therefore why the older
history, the Dipavaj«sa, should end with the death of Mahd-
sena (died 302 A. D.), and why in the Mahdva?-?2sa too there
should have been a break at that date. But we must not
forget that, during Mahtndma’s life, the Mahavihdra at
Anurddhapura was restored, that some kind of chronicle,
called the Dipava?;zsa, whether it be a general name of any
‘ chronicle of the island,’ or of our Dipavawsa, or, it may be,
even of our Mah^vama, was ordered to be published or pro-
dipetum) under Dhdtusena, the nephew and protege
of Mahdnima. Therefore, even if we do not insist on the

of Anurddhapura during Dhdtusena's reign, and probably
under the personal auspices of Mahdndma, so that if we

the events, and that therefore, ' under all the circumstances

the commentator of the Mahivawsa too strong to be set
aside. He trusted chiefly to a passage in the commentary,
and if that passage had been correctly rendered, the con-
clusion which he drew from it could hardly be resisted.
We read in the Mah^va^^sa (p. 254} :

‘Certain members of the Moriyan dynasty, dreading the
power of the (usurper) Subho, the bdlattho, had settled in
various parts of the country, concealing themselves. Among
them there was a certain landed proprietor Dhdtusena, who
had established himself at Nandivdpi. His son named
Dh 4 t 4 , who lived at the village Ambiliydgo, had two sons,
Dhatusena and Silatissabodhi, of unexceptional descent.
Their mother’s brother (Mahdnama), devoted to the
cause of religion, continued to reside (at Anurd-
dhapura) in his sacerdotal character, at the edifice
built by the minister Dighasandana. The youth
Dhdtusena became a priest in his fraternity, and on a certain
day, while he was chaunting at the foot of a tree, a shower
of rain fell, and a Ndga, seeing him there, encircled him in
his folds, and covered him and his book with his hood. . . ,
Causing an image of Mahd Mahinda to be made, and con-
veying it to the edifice (Ambamdlaka) in which the thera’.s
body had been burnt, in order that he might celebrate
a great festival there, and that he might also promul-
gate the contents of the Dfpavawsa, distributing
a thousand pieces, he caused it to be read aloud k*

If we compare with this extract from the Mahdvawsa
a passage from the commentary as translated by Tumour,
we can well understand how he arrived at the conclusion
that it was written by the same person who wrote the
Mahivawzsa.

Tumour translates (p. liv) ;

‘ Upon these data by me, the th era, who had, with due

^ m Tumoar added anote in which he states that Dtpavawsa is here meant
for M^ava/w8a,bat whether brought down to this period, or only to the end of
t e reign, of MahSsena, to which alone the Jtki extends, there is no means of
ascertaining (p. 357).

INTRODUCTION.

XXVIl

soiemnity, been invested with the dignified title of Mahi-
nima, resident at the parivez/a founded by the
minister Dighasandana, endowed with the capacity
requisite to record the narrative comprised in the Maha-
va///sa, in due order, rejecting only the dialect in which
the Singhalese A///^akath4 are written, but retaining their
import and following their arrangement, the history, entitled
the Palapadoriivawsa (Padyapadanuva?wsa), is compiled.
As even in times when the despotisni of the ruler of the
land, and the horrors arising from the inclemencies of the
seasons, and when panics of epidemics and other visitations
prevailed, this work escaped all injury ; and moreover, as
it serves to perpetuate the fame of the Buddhas, their
disciples, and the Pache Buddhas of old, it is also worthy
of bearing the title of Va;«satthappaklisini.’

As the evidence of these two passages in support of the
identity of the author and the commentator of the Maha-
va?«sa seemed to me very startling, I requested Mr. Rhys
Davids to copy for me the passage of the commentary.

The passage runs as follows:

Yi. ettavata mahavawsattiianusarakusalena Dighasanda-
sendpatind kdrapita-mahaparivewavdsind Mahindmo ti ga-
rCihi gahitanfimadheyyena tiiere//a pubba-Sihala-bhisitdya
Sihala////akathdya bbasantaraw^ eva va^'jiya atthasdram
eva gahetva tantinaydnurdpena katassa imassa Fadyapadd-
nuvawsassa atthava««and mayd tarn eva sannissitena
draddha, padesissariya~diibbii///dbhaya - rogabha}''ddi - vivi-
dha-antardya-yuttakdle pi anantardyena niMdnam upagatd,
sa buddha-buddhasdvaka-pa/'iekabuddhddina?;/ pordwdnam
kiMaw pubbavawsatthappakdsanato aya^';^ Vawsatthappa-
kdsini ndmd ti diidretabbd. . . . Padyapaddnuvawsa-
va««and Va?«.satthappakdsini niitiMtL

Mr. Rhys David.s translates this :

‘The commentary on this Padyapaddnuva;«sa, which (latter
work) was made (in the same order and arrangement, and re-
taining the sense, but rejecting the dialect, of the Sinhalese
commentary formerly expressed in the Sinhalese tongue)
by the elder who bore the name of Mahdndma, which he had

XXVlll

DHAMMAPADA.

received from the venerable, who resided at the Mah^pari-
vefia built by the minister Dighasanda, and who was well
able to conform to the sense of the Mahdvawsa — (this com-
mentary) which was undertaken by me out of devotion to
that (history), and which (though thus undertaken) at a time
full of danger of various kinds — such as the danger from
disease, and the danger from drought, and the danger
from the government of the province — has been safely
brought to a conclusion — this (commentary), since it makes
known the meaning of the history of old, the mission of
the ancients, of the Buddhas, of their disciples, and of the
Pa^^eka Buddhas, should bear the name Vaz/zsatthappa-
kdsinl . . .

‘ End of the Va;«satthappakdsini, the commentary on
the Padyapadanuva?;isa.’

This shows clearly that Tumour made a mistake in trans-
lating this exceedingly involved, yet perfectly intelligible,
passage, and that so far from proving that the author of
the commentary was the same person as the author of the
text"^, it proves the very contrary. Nay, I feel bound to
add, that we might now argue that as the commentator
must have lived later than 6oi a. d., the fact that he too
breaks off at verse 48 of chapter 37, seems to show that at
his time also the Mah&vamsa did not extend as yet beyond
that verse. But even then, the fact that with the restoration
of the MahAvihdra of AnurSdhapura an interest in historical
studies revived in Ceylon, w'ould clearly show that we may
trust the date of Buddhaghosa, as fixed by the second part
of the 37th chapter of the Mahiva?«sa, at all events till
stronger evidence is brought forward against such a date.

Now I am not aware of any such evidence^. On the
contrary, making allowance for a difference of some ten or
twenty years, all the evidence which we can gain from
other quarters tends to confirm the date of Buddha-

Dr. Oldenberg informs me that the commentator quotes various readings
in the text of the Mahivawsa.

^ The passage, quoted by Professor MinayeflFfrom the Sfisanava;«sa, would
assign to Buddhaghosa the date of 930 — 543 = 387 a. d., which can easily be
reconciled with his accepted date- If he is called the contemporary of Sirip&Ia,
we ought to know who that SiripSla is.

INTRODUCTION.

xxix

ghosa^. I therefore feel no hesitation in here reprinting
that story, as we find it in the Mahiva;«sa, not free from
legendary ingredients, it is true, yet resting, I believe, on
a sound foundation of historical fact

‘A Brahman youth, bom in the neighbourhood of the
terrace of the great Bo-tree (in Magadha), accomplished in
the “ vi^4” (knowledge) and “ sippa” (art), who had achieved
the knowledge of the three Vedas, and possessed great
aptitude in attaining acquirements ; indefatigable as a
schismatic disputant, and himself a schismatic wanderer
over 6'ambudipa, established himself, in the character of
a disputant, in a certain vihdra^, and was in the habit of
rehearsing, by night and by day with clasped hands, a
discourse which he had learned, perfect in all its com-
ponent parts, and sustained throughout in the same lofty
strain. A certain Mahfithera, Revata, becoming acquainted
with him there, and (saying to himself), “ This individual is
a person of profound knowledge, it will be worthy (of me)
to convert him ; ’* enquired, “ Who is this who is braying
like an ass ? *’ The Brfihman replied to him, " Thou canst
define, then, the meaning conveyed in the bray of asses.”
On the Thera rejoining, ‘*I can define it;” he (the Brah-
man) exhibited the extent of the knowledge he possessed.
The Thera criticised each of his propositions, and pointed
out in what respect they were fallacious. He who had
been thus refuted, said, “ Well, then, descend to thy own
creed ; ” and he propounded to him a passage from the
Abhidhamma (of the Pi/akattaya). He (the Brahman)
could not divine the signification of that passage, and
enquired, “Whose manta is this?”~“ It is Buddha’s manta.”
On his exclaiming, “ Impart it to me ; ” the Thera replied,
“Enter the sacerdotal order.” He who was desirous of
acquiring the knowledge of the Pi/hkattaya, subsequently
coming to this conviction, “ This is the sole road ” (to sal-
vation), became a convert to that faith. As he was as
profound in his eloquence (ghosa) as Buddha himself, they
conferred on him the appellation of Buddhaghosa (the

‘ See Bigaadet, Life of Gaadama, pp. 36 L

* Ob this vihfim, its foandation and character, see Oldeaberg, Vinaya, vol. i,
p. liii j Hiouen*thwng, III, p. 487 seq[.

'A.

voice of Buddha) ; and throughout the world he became as
renowned as Buddha. Having there (in Cambudipa) com-
posed an original work called 79 anodaya (Rise of Know-

version to be found of the schisms (vdda) complete. The
Sinhalese A///zakath 4 are genuine. They were com-
posed in the Sinhalese language by the inspired and pro-
foundly wise Mahinda, who had previously consulted the
discourses (kathdmagga) of Buddha, authenticated at the
three convocations, and the dissertations and arguments of
Siriputta and others, and they are extant among the Sin-
halese. Preparing for this, and studying the same, translate
them according to the rules of the grammar of the Mflga-
dhas. It will be an act conducive to the welfare of the
whole world.”

‘ Having been thus advised, this eminently wise personage
rejoicing therein, departed from thence, and visited this
island in the reign of this monarch (i.e, Mahindma, 410-
433). On reaching the Mahdvihdra (at Anuriadhapura), he
entered the Mahdpadhdna hall, the most splendid of the
apartments in the vihdra, and listened to the Sinhalese
A/Z/akathd, and the Theravdda from the beginning to the
end, propounded by the Thera Sahghapaia ; and became
thoroughly convinced that they conveyed the true meaning
of the doctrines of the Lord of Dhamma. Thereupon
paying reverential respect to the priesthood, he thus peti-
tioned: “ I am desirous of translating the A///^akathi ;
give me access to all your books.” The priesthood, for the
purpose of testing his qualifications, gave only two g^thfls,
saying, “ Hence prove thy qualification ; having .satisfied
ourselves on this point, we will then let thee have all our
books.” From these (taking these gathd for his text), and

INTRODUCTION.

XXXI

consulting the Pi/akattaya, together with the Aif/y^akathd,
and condensing them into an abridged form, he composed
the work called the Visuddhimagga. Thereupon, having
assembled the priesthood, who had acquired a thorough
knowledge of the doctrines of Buddha, at the Bo-tree, he
commenced to read out the work he had composed. The
devatas, in order that they might make his (Buddhaghosa’s)
gifts of wisdom celebrated among men, rendered that book
invisible. He, however, for a second and third time re-
composed it. When he was in the act of producing his
book for the third time, for the purpose of propounding it,
the devatds restored the other two copies also. The assem-
bled priests then read out the three books simultaneously.
In those three versions there was no variation whatever
from the orthodox Theravddas in passages, in words, or in
syllables. Thereupon, the priesthood rejoicing, again and
again fervently shouted forth, saying, “ Most assuredly
this is Metteya (Buddha) himself,” and made over to him
the books in which the Pi/akattaya were recorded, together
with the A/Z^akathl.. Taking up his residence in the
secluded Ganth^kara-vihira (at Anurddhapura), he trans-
lated, according to the grammatical rules of the M%a-
dhas, which is the root of all languages, the whole of the
Sinhalese A////akathi (into PMi). This proved an achieve-
ment of the utmost consequence to all beings, whatever
their language,

^AIl the Theras and AMriyas held this compilation in
the same estimation as the text (of the Pi/akattaya). There-
after, the objects of his mission having been fulfilled, he
returned to 6'ambudipa, to worship at the Bo-tree (at Uru-
veliya, or Uruvilv^, in Magadha).*

Here* we have a simple account of Biiddhaghosa^ and

^ Mah&vawsa, p. 350, translated by Tumour.

* The Burmese entertain the highest respect for Buddhaghosa. Bishop
Bigandet, in his Life or Legend of Gaudama (Rangoon, 1866), writes: ‘ It is
perhaps as well to mention here an epoch which has been, at all times, famous
in the history of Budhism in Burma. I allude to the voyage which a Religious
of Thaton, named Budhagosa, made to Ceylon, in the year of religion 943 «= 400
A.0. The object of this voyage was to secure a copy of the scriptures. He
succeeded in his undertaking. He made use of the Burmese, or rather Taking

his literary labours written by a inatt, himself a priest,
and who may well have known Buddhaghosa during his
stay in Ceylon. It is true that the statement of his writing
the same book three times over without a single various
reading, partakes a little of the miraculous; but we find
similar legends mixed up with accounts of translations
of other sacred books, and we cannot contend that writers
who believed in such legends .are therefore altogether
unworthy to be believed as historical witnesses.

But although the date which we can assign to Buddha-
ghosa’s translation of the commentaries on the Pdli Tipi-
/aka proves the existence of that canon, not only for the

thing of his own^ requires to be more carefully examined.
The Buddhists themselves have no difficulty on that point.

They consider the A////akathds or commentaries as old as
the canon itself. To us, such a supposition seems impro-
bable, yet it has never been proved to be impossible. The
Mahivawsa tells us that Mahinda, the son of Asoka, who
had become a priest, learnt the whole of the Buddhist
canon, as it then was, in three years (p. 37)"^ i ^•nd that
at the end of the Third Council he was despatched to
Ceylon, in order to establish there the religion of Buddha
(p. 71). The king of Ceylon, Devinampiya Tissa, was
converted, and Buddhism soon became the dominant

characters, in transcribing the manuscripts, which were written with the
characters of Magatha. The Burmans lay much stress upon that voyage, and
always carefully note dpwn the year it took place. In fact, it is to Budhagosa
that the people living dn the shores of the Gulf of Martaban owe the posses-
sion of the Budhist scriptures. B'rora Thaton, the collection made by Bu.dha-
gosa was transferred to Pagan, six hundred and fifty years after it had been
imported from Ceylon.’ See ibid. p. 39a.

^ He had written the j^Snodaya, and the A//.^asilin!, a commentary on the
Dhamma-sangawi, before he went to Ceylon. CC MaMvawtsa, p. 251.

“ He learnt the five Nikiyas, and the seven sections (of the Abhidhamma) ;
the two Vibhangas of the Vinaya, the ParivSra and the Khandhaka. See
Dlpavawisa VII, 43.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXllI

f' religion of the Island. The Tipi/aka and the A///iakath^,

such as they had been collected or settled at the Third
Council in 242 B.C-, were brought to Ceylon by Mahlnda,
who promulgated them orally, the Tipi^aka in Pdll, the
A//iakathd in Sinhalese, together with an additional
A/Z/zakathi of his own. It does not follow that Mahinda
knew the whole of that enormous literature by heart, for, as
he was supported by a number of priests, they may well
have divided the different sections among them, following
the example of Ananda and Updli at the First Council.
The same applies to their disciples also. But the fact of
their transmitting the sacred literature by oral tradition’^ was
evidently quite familiar to the author of the Mahdvai'wsa.
For when he comes to describe the reign of Va/'/agdmanI
(88-76 B.C.) he simply says : ‘ The profoundly wise priests
had heretofore orally perpetuated the Pdli Pi/akattaya and
its A//>^akathd (commentaries). At this period these priests,
foreseeing the perdition of the people (from the perversions
of the true doctrines), assembled ; and in order that the reli-
gion might endure for ages, wrote the same in books.’ No
valid objection has yet been advanced to our accepting
Buddhaghosa’s A////akathds as a translation and new re-
daction of the A2'2'/^akathds which were reduced to writing
under Va/ifagdmani^, and these again as a translation of the
old A////akathds brought to Ceylon by Mahinda®. There
is prima facie evidence in favour of the truth of historical
events vouched for by such works as the Dfpavamsa and
the Mahiva^2sa so far back at least as Mahinda, because
we know that historical events were recorded in the
monasteries of Ceylon long before MahdnAma’s time.
Beyond Mahinda we move in legendary history, and must
be ready to surrender every name and every date as soon
as rebutting evidence has been produced, but not till then.

I cannot, therefore, see any reason why we should not
treat the verses of the Dhammapada, if not as the utter-
ance.s of Buddha, at least as what were believed by the

^ On the importance of oral tradition in the history of Sanskrit literature see
the writer’s Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 1859, pp. 497 ~ 3 ® 4 -
® Mahavawsa, p. 307; D!pava«sa XX, ao. ® Mahivawsa, p. 251.

[lo] C

the time of Mahinda.

Date of the Buddhist Canon.

We now return to the question of the date of the Bud-
dhist canon, which, as yet, we have only traced back to the

vamsa^, and there is another book of the Abhidhamma-

D’ Alwis in the stupendous blunder of his assertion that the
Kath^vatthu was added by Moggaliputtatissa ’ at the Third

and the passage in Mah^va/wsa upon which DAIwis rests
his assertion is as follows, Kathivatthuppakarara^ai// para-
vidappamaddanaw abhdsi Tissatthero ia tasmi?/i sahglti-
mandale, which simply means ‘ in that Convocation-assem-

* See Childers, s. v. Nik&ya.

that Moggaliputta was the author of the Kathdvatthu, and
that he recited it for the first time at the Third Council.
‘ Wise Moggaliputta/ we read ‘ the destroyer of the
schismatic doctrines, firmly established the Theravada, and
held the Third Council. Having destroyed the different
(heretical) doctrines, and subdued many shameless people,
and restored splendour to the (true) faith, he proclaimed
(pakisayi) (the treatise called) Kathdvatthu.’ And again :
‘They all were sectarians^, opposed to the Theravada ; and
in order to annihilate them and to make his own doctrine
resplendent, the Thera set forth (desesi) the treatise belong-
ing to the Abhidhamma, which is called Kathdvatthu
At present, however, we are not concerned with these
smaller questions. We treat the canon as a whole, divided
into three parts, and containing the books which still exist
in MSS., and we want to find out at what time such a
collection was made. The following is a short abstract of
the Tipiifaka, chiefly taken from Childers’ Pili Dictionary:

1 . Vinaya-pii^aka.

j. Vibhanga*.

Vol. I, beginning with Pdr^-ika, or sins involving
expulsion.

Vol. II, beginning with Pi^ittiya, or sins involving
penance.

a. Khandhaka.

Vol. I, Mahdvagga, the large section.

Vol. II, iTullavagga, the small section.

5. ParivdfapA/.^a, an appendix and later resume {%$ chap-
ters). See p. xxi, n. 4 ; p. xxxii, n. 2.

1 Dlpavjuwsa VII, 40. a Dipava«sa VII, 55.

’ Dr. Oldenberg, in his Introduction to the Vinaya-pi/aka, p. xxxii.

‘ Oldenberg, Vinaya-pi/aka I, p. xvi, treats it as an extended reading of the
Pdtimokkha,

C 2

XXXVl

DHAMMAPADA.

II. Sutta-pi/aka.

1. Digha-nikaya, collection of long suttas (54 suttas)k

2. Ma^^>?;ima-nMya, collection of middle suttas (152

suttas).

3. Sawyiitta-nikiya, collection of joined suttas.

4. Anguttara-nikiya ^5 miscellaneous suttas, in divisions

the length of which increases by one.

5. Khuddaka-nikdya the collection of short suttas, con-

sisting of —

1. Khuddakapi^'ia, the small texts \

2. Dhammapada, law verses (423)

3. UdS.na, praise (82 suttas).

4. Itivuttaka, stories referring to sayings of Buddha.

5. Suttanipita, 70 suttas ®.

6. Viminavatthu, stories of Vimdnas, celestial palaces.

7. Petavatthu, stories of Pretas, departed spirits.

8. TheragdthA, stanzas of monks.

9. Therig^thd, stanzas of nuns.

10. i^dtaka, former births (550 tales)

11. Niddesa, explanations of certain suttas by Siriputta.

* The MahlparinibbSna-sutta, ed. by Childers, Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, translated with other Suttas by Rhys Davids (S. B. E. vol. xi). Sept
Suttas Palis, par Grimblot, Paris, 1876.

® The first four are sometimes called the Four Nikiyas, the five together the
Five Nikdyas. They represent the Dharma, as settled at the First and Second
Councils, described in the ATullavagga (Oldenberg, I, p. xi).

* Sometimes Khuddaka-nikdya stands for the whole Vinaya and Abhidhamma-
piifaka, with the fifteen divisions here given of Khuddaka-nikdya. In the com-
mentary on the Brahma^^aia.sutta it is said that the Dlghaniktya professors
rehearsed the text of the CPitaka, Mahd and ATulla Niddesa, Parisambhiddmagga,
Suttanipdta, Dhammapada, Uddna, Itivuttaka, Virndna, and Petavatthu, Thera
and Thert Glthd, and called it Khuddakagantha, and made it a canonical text,
forming part of the Abhidhamma ; while the Ma^^/limanik&ya professors assert
that, with the addition of the Aariydpi/aka, Apaddna, and Buddhavawsa, the
whole of this Khuddakagantha wp included in the Suttapitaka. See Childers,
s.v. Nikdya. See also p, xviii.

* Published by Childers, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1869,

® Published by Fausboll, 1855.

® Thirty translated by Sir Coomdra Swdmy; the whole by Fausbdll, in
Sacred Books of the East, vol. x.

Published by Fausboll, translated by Rhys Davids.

INTRODUCTION. XXXVli

13 . Pa/isambhidimagga,.the road of discrimination, and
intuitive insight.

13. Apaddna\ legends.

14. Buddhava?«sa^, story of twenty-four preceding Bud-

dhas and of Gotama.

15. iTariyapi/aka^ basket of conduct, Buddhas meri-

torious actions

III. Abhidhamma-pi/aka.

I. Dhammasangawi, numeration of conditions of life

3. Vibhahga, disquisitions (18).

3. Kathavatthupakara^za, book of subjects for discussion

(1000 suttas).

4. PuggalapazHatti or pazzzzatti, declaration on puggala,

or personality.

5. Dhdtukathd, account of dhdtus or elements.

6. Yamaka, pairs (ten divisions).

7. Pa////anapakarazza, book of causes.

Taking this collection as a whole we may lay it down as
self-evident that the canon, in its collected form, cannot be
older than any of the events related therein.

There are two important facts for determining the age of
the Pali canon, which, as Dr. Oldenberg^ has been the first to
show, should take precedence of all other arguments, viz.

1. That in the Tipi/aka, as we now have it, no mention
is made of the so-called Third Council, which took place
at Pd/aliputta, under King Asoka, about 342 E. C.

2. That in the Tipi/aka, as we now have it, the First
Council of Rd^gaha (477 B.C.) and the Second Council
of Vesdli (377 B.C.) are both mentioned.

From these two facts it may safely be concluded that the
Buddhist canon, as handed down to us, was finally closed

^ Buddhaghosa does not say whether these were recited at the First Conncil.

® Partly translated by Gogerly Journal of the Asiatic Society of Ceylon, 185*.

® Cf. Gogerly, Journal of the Asiatic Society of Ceylon, 1848, p. 7.

^ See Oldenberg’s Vinaya-pi/aka, Introduction, p, xxv. The kings A^taratra
(485-453 B. c.), Ud£yin (453-437 B.C,), and Mu«</a (437-429 B.C.) are all
mentioned in the TipiZaka, See Oldenberg, Zeitschrift der D. M. G., XXXIV,
PP- 753, 753 ’

XXXVlll

DHAMMAPADA.

after the Second and before, or possibly at, the Third
Council Nay, the fact that the description of the two
Councils stands at the very end of the iTullavagga may be
taken, as Dr. Oldenberg remarks, as an indication that it
was one of the latest literary contributions which obtained
canonical authority, while the great bulk of the canon may
probably claim a date anterior to the Second Council.

This fact, namely, that the collection of the canon, as
a whole, must have preceded the Second Council rests on
an argument which does great credit to the ingenuity of
Dr. Oldenberg. The Second Council was convoked to
consider the ten deviations^ from the strict discipline of the
earliest times. That discipline had been laid down first in
the Pitimokkha rules, then in the commentary now included
in the Vibhanga, lastly in the Mahavagga and iTullavagga.
The rules as to what was allowed or forbidden to a Bhikkhu
were most minute 2, and they were so firmly established
that no one could have ventured either to take away or
to add anything to them as they stood in the sacred
code. In that code itself a distinction is made between
the offences which were from the first visited with punish-
ment (pdr^fika and pkklttiya) and those misdemeanours
and crimes which were put down as punishable at a later
time (dukka/a and thulla^^^aya). With these classes the
code was considered as closed, and if any doubt arose as to
the criminality of certain acts, it could be settled at once
by an appeal to the Vinaya-pi/aka. Now it so happens
that, with one exception, the ten deviations that had to be
considered at the Second Council, are not provided for in
the Vinaya-pi/aka ; and I quite agree with Dr. Oldenberg s
argument that, if they had been mentioned in the Vinaya-
pi/aka, the Second Council would have been objectless.
A mere appeal to chapter and verse in the existing Pii^aka
would then have silenced all dissent. On the other side, if it
had been possible to add anything to the canon, as it then
existed, the ten, or nine, deviations might have been con-

^ Oldenberg, Introduction, p, xxix.

® Oldenberg, loc. dt. p. xx.

no doubt, that Subhadda’s disloyalty was the chief cause
of the First Council, but there was no necessity to mention
that Council. On the contrary, it seems to me that the

^ Loc. cit. pp. xxvi-xxviii.

® There are several Chinese translations of Sfltras on the subject of the Maha-
pariniiTS^m. Three belong to the MahS.ydna school : i. Maiiparinirv^wa-sfitra,
translated by Dharmaraksha, about 414-433 a. d. ; afterwards revised, 424-453
(Nos. 113, 114). 2. Translation by Fa>hian and Buddhabhadra, about4i5 A.D.;
less complete (No. 1 30). 3. Translation (vaipulya) by Dharmaraksha I, i. e. .All
Fa-hn, aboitt 261-308 a.D. (No. 1 16). Three bdlong to the HinaySna school :
I. MahiparinirySwa-sfitra, translated by Po-fa-tsu, about 290-306 A.D. (No. 553).
3. Translation under the Eastern Tsin dynasty, 317-420 A.0. (No. 1 19). 3. Trans-
lation by Fa-hian, about 415 A. D. (No. 118).

We must be satisfied therefore, so far as I can see
at present, with fixing the date, and the latest date, of
a Buddhist canon at the time of the Second Council,
377 B.C. That some works were added later, we know;
that many of the treatises included in the canon existed
before that Council, can hardly be doubted. The second
chapter of the Dhammapada, for instance, is called the
AppamSda-vagga, and if the Mahava??i:sa (p. 35) tells us
that at the time when Asoka was converted by Nigrodha,
that Buddhist priest explained to him the AppamMa-
vagga, we can hardly doubt that there existed then a
collection (vagga) of verses on Appamllda, such as we
now possess in the Dhammapada and in the Saw^iyutta-
nik^ya

With regard to the Vinaya, I should even feel inclined to
admit, with Dr. Oldenberg, that it must have existed in
a more or less settled form before that time. What I doubt
is whether such terms as Pi/aka, basket, or Tipi/aka, the
three baskets, i.e. the canon, existed at that early time.
They have not been met with, as yet, in any of the canon-
ical books; and if the Dipavaw/sa (I ¥,,32) uses the word
‘ Tipi/aka,’ when describing the First Council, this is due to
its transferring new terms to older times. If Dr. Olden-
berg speaks of a Dvi-pi/aka^ as the name of the canon
before the third basket, that of the Abhidhamma, was
admitted, this seems to me an impossible name, because at

^ Feer, Revue Critique, 1870, No. 24, p- 377. =■ Introduction, pp. x, xii. t

® Dr. Oldenberg informs me that pi/aka occurs in the iTahkisuttanta in the
Ma^^^ima NikSya (Tumour’s MS., fol. the), but applied to the Veda. He
also refers to the tipifekaHryas mentioned in the Western Cave inscriptions as
compared "with the Paji(ianekS.ydka in the square Aroka character inscriptions
(Cunningham, Bharhut, pi. Ivi, No. 52). In the Sutrak«d-anga of the (?ainas,
too, the term pi 4 £tgaz« occurs (MS. Berol. fol. 77 a). He admits, however, that
pi/aka or tipi/aka, as the technical name of the Buddhist canon, has not yet been
met with in that canon itself, and defends Dvipi/aka only as a convenient term.

teaching of Buddha ; and even when it refers more par-
ticularly to the Sutta-pi/aka, we know that the Dhamma
there taught deals largely with Vinaya and Abhidhamma
doctrines. Even the fact that at the First Council, accord-
ing to the description given in the ^STullavagga, the Vinaya
and Dhamma only were rehearsed, though proving the
absence at that time of the Abhidhamma, as a separate
Pijfaka, by no means excludes the subject of the Abhi-

la. Upadei-a; some of these being decidedly metaphysical.

To my mind nothing shows so well the historical character
both of the A'ullavagga and of Buddhaghosa in the Introduc-
tion to his commentary on the Digha-nikaya, as that the
former, in its account of the First Council, should know
of the Vinaya only, as rehearsed by Updli, and the Dhamma,
as rehearsed by Ananda, while the much fater Buddhaghosa,

* See Academy, August a8, 1880, Division of Buddhist Scriptures.

® Oldenberg, Introduction, p. xii ; Tumour, Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal, vi, p. 510 seq.

DHAMMAPADA.

the time when the name of pi/aka was first used, and when
Tipi^aka was accepted as the title of the whole canon.

Whenever we see such traces of growth, we feel that we
are on historical ground, and in that sense Dr. Olden-
berg’s researches into the growth of the Vinaya, previous
to the Second Council, deserve the highest credit. He
shows, in opposition to other scholars, that the earliest
elements of Vinaya must be looked for in the short Pdti-
mokkha rules, which were afterwards supplemented by
explanations, by glosses and commentaries, and in that
form answered for some time every practical purpose.
Then followed a new generation who, not being satisfied,
as it would seem, with these brief rules and comments,
wished to know the occasion on which these rules had been
originally promulgated. What we now call the Vibhaaga,
i. e. the first and second divisions of the Vinaya-pi/aka, is
a collection of the stories, illustrating the origin of each
rule, of the rules themselves (the Pdtimokkha), and of the
glosses and comments on these rules.

The third and fourth books, the Mahavagga and /i ulla-
vagga, are looked upon as possibly of a slightly later date.
They treat, in a similar manner as the Vibhanga, on the rules

of Vesili for the repression of ten abuses
(443/377 A.D.)

7. Description of First and Second Councils in K ullavagga.
The iTuliavagga ascribes the settlement of the canon to
the First Council, and does not even claim a revision of
that canon for the Second Council. The DipavaMsa claims
a revision of the canon by the 700 Arhats for the Second
Council.

Chronology.

In order to bring the Council of Vesali in connection
with the chronology of the world, we must follow the
Buddhist historians for another century. One hundred and
eighteen years after the Council of Vesili they place the
anointment of King Asoka, during whose reign a Third
Council, under the presidency of Tissa Moggaliputta, took
place at Pi^alipiitta, the new capital adopted by that king,
instead of Ra^gaha and Vesali. This Council Is chie y
known to us through the writings of the southern Buddhists
(Dipava^sa, Mahiva;/isa, and Buddhaghosa), who belong
to the school of Moggaliputta (Therav^da or Vibha^^avada),
which ruled supreme at Pa/aliputta, while Upagiipta, the
chief authority of the northern Buddhists, is altogether
ignored in the Pdli chronicles.

Now it is well known that Asoka was the grandson
of iTandagutta, and /fandagutta the contemporary of
Alexander the Great, Here we see land, and I may
refer to my History of Sanskrit Literature, published in
1859, for the process by which the storm-tossed ship of
Indian chronplogy has been landed in the harbour of real
historical chronology. We are told by the monks of the
Mahivihira in Ceylon that Asoka was crowned, according
to their computation, 146 + 18 years before the accession
of Du2f//^agimani, 161 B.C., i. e. 325 B.C.; that between his
coronation and his father’s death four years had elapsed
(329 B,C.); that his father Bindus^ra had reigned twenty-
eight years’^ ( 357 ~ 3^9 and Bindus^ra’s father, Kz.n~

1 Mab&vawsa, p. ai.

dagutta, twenty-four years (381-357)* As we know that
iTandagutta, whom the Ceylonese place 381-357 B.C., was
king of India after Alexander’s conquest, it follows that
Ceylonese chronology is wrong by more than half a
century. For reasons stated in my History of Sanskrit
Literature, I fix the exact fault in Ceylonese chronology
as sixty-six years, assigning to iTandagutta the dates
315-391, instead of 381-357. This gives us 391-263 for
Bindusdra, 259 for Asoka’s abhisheka ; 259 +■ 118 = 377
for the Council of Vesali, and 377 + 100=477 Buddha’s
death, instead of 543 B. C.^

These dates are, of course, approximate only, and they
depend on one or two points on which people may differ.
But, with that reservation, I see no ground whatever for
modifying the chronological system which I put forward
more than twenty years ago. Professor Westergaard and
Professor Kern, who have since suggested different dates
for the death of Buddha, do not really differ from me in
principle, but only in their choice of one or the other alter-
native, which I readily admit as possible, but not as more
certain than my own. Professor Westergaard*, for instance,

laid the foundations of his own greatness, I had accepted

1 According to Bigandet, Life of Gaxidama, p. 361, the era of Buddha’s death
was introduced by A^ta^atru, at the conclusion of the First Council, and
began in the year 146 of the older Eetzana era (p. 13). See, however, Rhys
Davids, Num. Orient, vi, p. 38. In the Ktra«a?a-vydha, p. 96, a date is given as
300 after the Niiwlwa, 'tr/t!ye varsharate gate mama parinirv«tasya.' In the
Aroka-avad&na we read, mama nirvntim drabhya jatavarshagata Upagupto
nima bhikshur utpatsyati.

® liber Buddha’s Todesjahr (i860), 1862.

® The Greek name Sandrokyptus shows that the Pdli corruption Aandagotta
was not yet the recognised name of the king.

^ * Mr. Rhys Davids accepts 315 B. c. as the date when, after the murder of
king Nanda, A^ndragupta stept into the vacant throne, though he had begun
to count his reign seven or eight years before. Buddhism, p, a 30.

INTRODUCTION.

xlv

of /fandragupta’s reign. Westergaard prefers 320 as a
more likely date for Z'andragupta, and therefore places the
death of the last Nanda and the beginning of Ajokas
royal pretensions 268. Here there is a difference between
him and me of five years, which depends chiefly on the
view we take as to the time when Seleucus really laid what
Justinus calls the foundation of his future greatness.
Secondly, Westergaard actually adopts the idea, at which I
only hinted as possible, that the southern Buddhists made
two Ajokas out of one, and two Councils out of one.
Trusting in the tradition that 11.8 years elapsed between
Buddha’s death and the Council under Ajoka (at Pa/aiiputra),
and that the Council took place in the king’s tenth year
(as was the case with the imaginary KAli^oka’s Council),
he gets 268 — 10 = 258 as the date of the Council, and 368
or 370 as the date of Buddha’s death

The two points on which Westergaard ‘differs from me,
seem to me questions which should be kept before our
mind in dealing, with early Buddhist history, but which,
for the present at least, admit of no definite solution.

The same remark seems to me to apply to the calcula-
tions of another eminent Sanskrit scholar, Professor Kern^.
He lays great stress on the general untrustworthiness of
Indian chronology, and I am the last to differ from him
on that point. He then places the beginning of A'andra-
gupta’s reign in 322 B. C. Allowing twenty- four years to him
and twenty-eight to his son Bindusira, he places the begin-
ning of Ai-oka’s reign in 270. Aj-oka’s inscriptions would
fall about 258. As Ajoka reigned thirty-six or thirty-seven
years, his death would fall in 234 or 233 B.c. Like Wester-
gaard, Professor Kern too eliminates Kilti'oka, as a kind of
chronological A^oka, and the Council of VauAlf, and there-
fore places Buddha’s death, according to the northern tradi-
tion, 100 or no years before Dharm^roka, i. e. 270+100
or +110=370 or 380^1 while, according to the southern

i Westergaard, loc. cit. p. laS,

® Jaartelling der ZuldeHjke Buddhisten, 1873.

* See Professor Kem’s remark in Indian Antiquary, 1874, p. 79.

tradition, that ii8 years elapsed between Ajoka’s acces-
sion and Buddhas death, the Ceylonese monks would seem
originally to have retained 270 + 118 ^ = 388 B.C. as Buddha’s
Nirv^^za, a date which, as Professor Kem holds, happens
to coincide with the date assigned to the death of Mah^-
vira, the founder of the 6^aina religion.

Here we see again that the moot point is the beginning
of A'andragupta’s reign in accordance with the information
supplied by Greek historians. Professor Hern places it in.
322, Westergaard in 320, I myself in 3 ^ 5 - That difference
once granted, Dr. Kern’s reasoning is the same as my own.
According to the traditions which we follow, Buddha’s
death took place loo, no, 118, or 228 years before A^oka.
Hence Professor Westergaard arrives at 368 or 3-70 B.C.

Professor Kem at 370 (380) or 388 B.C, I myself at 477 B.C.
Every one of these dates is liable to certain objections, and
if I prefer my own date, 477 B.C., it is simply because it

seems 10 me naoic tu licitiici luuic iiui
than those of Professor Westergaard and .Professor Kern,
and because, so long as we always remember the grounds
of our differences, namely, the beginning of A'andragupta’s
reign, and the additional century, every one of these dates
furnishes a good hypothesis to work on, until we can arrive
at greater certainty in the ancient chronology of India.

To my mind all dates beyond /<fandragupta are as yet
purely tentative, resting far more on a chronological theory
than on actual tradition ; and though I do not doubt the
historical character of the Council of Vai.ylilt, I look upon
the date assigned to it, on the authority of the Dipava»/sa
and Mahivawsa, as. for the present, hypothetical only.

* When Professor Kern states that the Mah&vawsa (p. 22) places the Third
Council 218 years after Buddha’s death, this is not so. Aroka's abhisheka takes
place in that year. The prophecy that a calamity would befall their religion,
1 18 years after the Second Council (Mah&va«sa, p. 28), does not refer to the
Council, but to A'andljoka’s accession, 477 - 218 = 259 B. c.

INTRODUCTION.

xlvii

B.C.

557. Buddha born.

552. Bimbisara born.

537-485. Bimbisira, founder of Ra^agrfha, 5 years
younger than Buddha, was 15 when crowned, 30 or 31 when
he met Buddha in 522.

485-453. A^dtai-atru (4x8 years).

477. Buddha’s death (485 — 8=477).

477. Council at RAgagihiia, under Kai'yapa, Ananda,
and Upiii.

453-437. Uddyibliadra, founder of Pd/aliputra (2x8
years).

__ ( Anuruddhaka (8 years).

437 4 9- |Mu;2^a(at Paafaliputra).

429-405. Ndgadisaka (3 x 8 years).

405-387, 5ij‘im<iga (at Vairili).

387-359. Kdlijroka.

377. Council at Vaital!, under Yaras and Revata,
a disciple of Ananda (259 + 118 = 377).

359-337. Ten sons of Kilii’oka(22 years).

337-315. Nine Nandas (22 years); the last, Dhana-
nanda, killed by A'i?2akya,

31 5-291. A’andragupta (477 — 3 ^ ^ years)’,*

Megasthenes, anibass. of Seleucus.

291-263. Bindus^ra (Amitrochates).

263-259. A.Toka, sub-king at Ifefayini, as pretender—
his brothers killed; Daimachus, ambass. of Antiochus,
son of Seleucus ; Dionysius, ambass. of Ptolemy II.

259. Aroka anointed at Pa/aliputra, H. Ths. I, 160
(477-218 = 259).

256. Asoka converted by Nigrodha (D.V. vi, 18).

256-253. Building of Vihfiras, SthCipas, &c.

255. Conversion of TLshya (M.V, p. 34}.

253. Ordination of Mahendra (born 477 — 204=273).

251. Ti.shya and Sumitra die (D^V. VII, 32).

242. Council AT PA7aliputra”(259- '’7 = 342; 477-
236 = 241). under Tishya Maudgaliputra (477-236 = 241 ;
D.V. VII, 37).

241. Mahendra to Ceylon.

222. A^roka died (259 — 37 = 222).

193. Mahendra died (D.V. XVll, 93).

161. Du///^agimani.

88-76. Vattagdmani, canon reduced to writing.

^ We$tergaar<i, 320-296; Kewi, 322-298.

to the beginning of our era, yet I suppose I may be expected
to say here a few words on the two latest attempts to fix
the date of Buddha’s death; the one by Mr. Rhys Davids
in the Numismata Orientalia, Part VI, 1877, the other by
Dr. Buhler in the Indian Antiquary, 1877 and 1878 \ Mr.
Rhys Davids, to whom we owe so much for the elucidation
of the history of Buddha’s religion, accepts Westergaard’s
date for the beginning of isTandragupta’s reign, 520 B.C.,
instead of 322 (Kern), 315 (myself) ; and as he assigns
(p. 41) to Bindusara 25 years instead of 28 (Mahdvawsa,

1 Three New Edicts of Aroka, Bombay, 1877 ; Second Notice, Bombay, 1878.
- Mr. Rhys Davids on p. 50 assigns the 35 years of BindiisSra rightly to the
Puriwas, the 38 years to the Ceylon Chronicles.

INTRODUCTION.

xlix

essay on the Three New Edicts of Ajoka, I naturally felt
delighted at the unexpected confirmation which he fur-
nished of the date which I had assigned to Buddha’s
death, 477 B.c. And though I am quite aware of the
danger of unexpected confirmations of one’s own views,
yet, after carefully weighing the objections raised by Mr.
Rhys Davids and Professor Pischel against Dr. Buhler’s
arguments, I cannot think that they have shaken Dr.
Buhler’s position. I fully admit the difficulties in the
phraseology of these inscriptions : but I ask, Who could
have written these inscriptions, if not Ai'oka? And how,
if written by A^oka, can the date which they contain mean
anything but 356 years after Buddha’s Nirviwa? These
points, however, have been argued in so masterly a manner
by Dr. Biihler in his ' Second Notice,’ that I should be
afraid of weakening his case by adding anything of my
own, and must refer my readers to his ‘ Second Notice.’
Allowing that latitude which, owing to the doubtful read-
ings of MSS., and the constant neglect of odd months, we
must allow in the interpretation of Buddhist chronology,
Ajoka is the only king we know of who could have
spoken of a thirty-fourth year since the beginning of his
reign and since his conversion to Buddhism, And if he
calls that year, say the very last of his reign (323 E.C.), 356
after the departure of the Master, we have a right to say
that as early as Awka’s time, Buddha was believed to have
died about 477 B.C. Whether the inscriptions have been
accurately copied and rightly read is, however, a more
serious question, and the doubts raised by Dr. Oldenberg
(Mahivagga, p. xxxviii) make a new collation of the
originals absolutely indispensable, before we can definitely
accept Dr. Buhler’s interpretation.

I cannot share Dr. Buhler’s opinion^ as to the entire
worthlessness of the Gzim chronology in confirming the
date of Buddha’s death. If the 5vetimbara (Fainas place
the death of Mahdvira 470 before Vihrarndditya, i.e. 56 B.C.
4 470 =s 536 B.C., and the Digambaras 605. i.e. 7 8 A.D. deducted

[i°3

*■ Three Edicts, p. ai ; Second Notice, pp. 9, lo.

d

1 DHAMMAPADA.

from 605 = 527 b.c.5 this so far confirms Dr. Buhler’s and
Dr. Jacobi’s briliiant discovery that Mahdvlra was the same
as Wigd^nthB. Mtaputta, who died at F$.vk during Buddha’s
lifetime \ Most likely 527 is too early a date, while another
tradition fixing Mah^vira’s death 155 years before Sandra-
gupta^, 470 B.C., is too late. Yet they both show that
the distance between Aj-oka (259-322 B. C.), the grandson
of A^andragupta (315-291 B. C.), and the contemporaries of
Buddha was by the Galnas also believed to be one of two
rather than one century.

I had myself tried to support by such arguments as were
then accessible, had received so powerful a support by the
discovery of the inscriptions of Sahasr^m, Rfipn&th, and
Bairit, due to General Cunningham, who had himself
always been an advocate of the date 477 B.C., and through
their careful decipherment by Dr. Buhler, I lost no time
In testing that date once more by the D!pavaw/sa, that

Dr. Oldenberg’s edition and translation K And here I am
able to say that, before having read Dr. Biihler’s Second
Notice, I arrived, though by a somewhat difierent w^ay, at
nearly the same conclusions as those so wel worked out by
Dr. Buhler In his restoration of the Episcopal Succession
(tlierdvaii) of the Buddhists, and therefore feel convinced
that, making all such allowances as the case requires, we

^ See Jacobi, Kalpa-sfltra of Bhadrabthu, and Oldeaberg, Zeitschrift der
D. G., XXXIV, p. 749.

® Oldenberg, loc. cit, p. 750.

* The DSpavaffiaa, an ancient Buddhist historical record. London, 1879.

* Assuming twenty to be the minimum age at which a man could be ordained.

in 54L B.C., and he died 447 B.C.j i.e. thirty years A.B., at
the age of 94. This is said to have been the sixth year of
Udiyi, and so it is, 453 — 6 =447 B.c.

In the year 461 B.C. Diraka received orders from Updll.
who was then 80 years of age ; and when Dij-aka had .been
in orders forty-five years (Dipavawsa IV, 41}, he ordained
5 aunaka. This would give us 461 —45 =41 6 B.C., while the
tenth year of Ndgadisa, 439 — 10, would give us 419 A.D,
Later on the Dipavawm (V, 78) allows an interval of forty

UkUlifilfV'l

which would bring the date of 5 aunaka’s ordination to 421
B.C., instead of 419 or 416 B.C. Here there is a fault which
must be noted. Dlyaka died 461 —64=397 A.D., which is
called the eighth year of 5 'wun^ga, and so it is, 405 — 8 =
397 A.D.

When 5 'aunaka had been In orders forty years, i.e.
416—40=376, Kti^joka is said to have reigned a little
over ten years, i.e. 387 — 11=376 A.D., and in that year
5aunaka ordained Siggava. He died 416 — 66=350 a.d.,
which is called the sixth year of the Ten, while In reality
it is the ninth, 359 —6 = 353 A.D. If, however, we take 419
as the year of Saunaka’s ordination, his death would fall
419-66=353 B.C.

Siggava, when he had been in orders sixty-four years,
ordained TIshya Maudgaliputra. This date 376— 64=3i3'
B.C, -is called more than two years after .ffandragupta’s
accession, and so it very nearly is, 315 — 3=313.

Siggava died when he had been In orders seventy-six

I take 60 (80), m giveo in Dtpava^sa V, 95, 107, instead of 66 (86i|, as
given in Dipava»saV, 94.

d S

lii

DHAMMAPADA.

Buddhist

Patriarchs.

Ordination of

Patri-

Birth.

Ordination.

successor. Death.

Age.

archate.

Upali

(Generally

527

461

447

94

30

20 years

(60)

Daraka

before

ordination)

461

416’

419

1 397

84

50

45]

42 [

40)

421J

1

^aunaka

7 }

416]

376'

1 350

86

44 (47)

4 i 9 h

379

^ 353

42X j

B8iJ

(40)

Siggava

77

376J

312I 300I

96

50 (52)

(64)

Tishya

37

253

233

100

68

(60)

Mahendra 273

253

77

193

80

40

282 (284)

If we test the dates of this table by the length of time
assigned to each patriarchate, we find that UpAIi ruled
thirty years, from Buddha’s death, 477 to 447; D^jaka
fifty years. To 5 'aunaka forty-four years are assigned,
instead of forty-seven, owing to a fault pointed out before ;
and to Siggava fifty-two years, or fifty-five^ instead of fifty,
Tishya’s patriarchate is said to have lasted sixty- eight
years, which agrees with previous statements.

Lastly, the years of the death of the six patriarchs, as
fixed according to the reigns of the kings of Magadha,
agree extremely well.

Updli died in the sixth year of UdSyi, ie. 453 —6=: 447 b.C.

Dii-aka died in the eighth year of iSwundga, i.e, 405 — 8=
397 B.C.

^aunaka died in the sixth year of the Ten, i.e. 359 — 6=
353 B.C., showing again the difference of three years.

^ The combined patriarchates of .Skimaka and Siggava are given as 99 by the
Dipavawsa,

INTRODUCTION.

liii

Siggava died in the fourteenth year of Z'andragupta, i.e.

315-14=30^ B-C.

Tishya died in the twenty-sixth or twenty-seventh year
of Ajoka, i.e. 359 — 27 = 233 B.C.

This general and more than general agreement between
dates taken from the history of the kings and the history
of the patriarchs leaves on my mind a decided impression
of a tradition which, though not strictly historical, in our
sense of the word, represents at all events the result of such
enquiries as could be made into the past ages of Buddhism
at the time of Ajroka. There are difficulties in thr.t tradition
which would certainly have been avoided, if the whole
chronology had been simply made up: but there is no
doubt a certain method perceptible throughout, which
warns us that we must not mistake a smooth chronology
for solid history.

The Title of Dhammapada.

The title of Dhammapadahasbeen interpreted in various
ways. It is an ambiguous word, and has been accepted as
such by the Buddhists themselves. Dhamma has many
meanings. Under one aspect it means religion, particu-
larly the religion taught by Buddha, the law which every
Buddhist should accept and observe. Under another aspect
dhamma is virtue, or the realisation of the law.

Pada also has many meanings. In the Abhidhina-
padtpiki it is explained by place, protection, Nirviwa, cause,
word, thing, portion, foot, footstep.

Hence dhammapada may mean ‘footstep of religion,’
and thus the title was first rendered by Gogerly, only that
he used the plural instead of the singular, and called it ‘The
Footsteps of Religion/ while Spence Hardy still more freely
called it ‘ The Paths of Religion.’ It may be quite true, as
pointed out by Childers, that pada by itself never means
path. But it means footstep, and the footstep towards
a thing is much the same as what we call the path to a
thing. Thus we read, verse 21, ‘ appam^do amatapadam,’
earnestness is the step, i. e. the path that leads to immor-

tality. Again, ‘ pamddo maMuoo padam ’ can hardly mean
anything but that tlioughtlessness is the path of death, is
the path that leads to death. The commentator, too,
rightly explains it here by amatasya adhigamupaya, the
means of obtaining immortality, i.e. Nirvci«a, or simply by
u pAy o, and even by m ag go, the way. If we compare verses
92 and 93 of our text, and verses 254 and 355, we see that
pa da is used synonymously with gati, going. In the
same manner dhanimapada would mean the footstep or
the footpath of virtue, i.e. the path that leads to virtue, and
supply a very appropriate title for a collection of moral
precepts. In verses 44 and 45 ‘ path of virtue ’ seems to be
the most appropriate meaning for dhammapada^ and it is
hardly possible to assign any other meaning to it in the
following verse (/fundasutta, v. 6) :

Yo dhammapade sudesite

Magge ^ivatl sa««ato satima,

Anava^^-a-paddni sevamdno

Tatiyam bhikkhum ahii magga^rivim,

He who lives lestrained and attentive in the way that has
been well pointed out, in the path of the law, cultivating
blameless words, such a Bhikkhu they call a Maggarivi
(living in the way).’

I therefore think that ‘Path of Virtue,* or ‘Footstep of
the Law, was the idea most prominent in the mind of those

representative of the tradition of the Buddhists still pre-

verse 4a cihammapada?« sudesita/«, even if it does not
mean the path of the law, could never mean * versus iegis
bene enarratos/ but only versura iegis bene enarra-
tiim, as Dr. Fausboll himself renders eka?« dhammapadaw,
inverse J02, by unus Iegis versus. Buddhaghosa, too,
when he speaks of many law verses uses the plural, for
instance ‘ Be it known that the Gdthd consists of the
Dhammapaddnl, Therag^ltlid, Therigdthi, and those un-
mixed (detached) Gdthi not comprehended in any of the
above-named Suttdnta.’

1 Revtte Critique, 1870, p. 378.

® D'Alwis, PfiU Grammar, p. 6i.

Ivi

DHAMMAPADA.

The only way in which Dhammapada could be defended
in the sense of ‘ Collection of Verses of the Law/ would be
if we took it for an aggregate compound. But such aggre-
gate compounds, in Sanskrit at least, are possible with
numerals only; for instance, tribhuvanam, the three
worlds ; i^aturyugam, the four agesh It might therefore
be possible in Pali, too, to form such compounds as daj-a-
padam, a collection of ten padas, a work consisting of ten
padas, a decameroiie, but it would in no wise follow that
we could in that language attempt such a compound as
Dhammapadam, in order to express a collection of law
verses^. Mr. Beal® informs us that the Chinese seem to
have taken Dhammapada in the sense of ‘ stanzas of law,’
‘ law texts/ or ‘ scripture texts.’

It should be remembered, also, that the idea of repre-
senting life, and particularly the life of the faithful, as a
path of duty or virtue leading to deliverance, (in Sanskrit
dharmapatha,) is very familiar to Buddhists. The four
great truths of their religion consist in the recognition of
the following principles : i. that there is suffering ; a. that
there is a cause of that suffering ; 3. that such cause can be
removed ; 4. that there is a way of deliverance, viz. the
doctrine of Buddha. This way is the ashjf^hga-m§.rga,
the eightfold way®, taught by Buddha, and leading to Nir-
v^;^a®. The faithful advances on that road, paddt padam,

^ See M. M.’s Sanskrit Grammar, § 519.

* Mr. D'Alwis’ arguments (Buddhist Nirv&wa, pp. 63-67) in support of this
view, viz. the dhammapada may be a collective term, do not seem to me to
strengthea my own conjecture.

* Dhammapada from Chinese, p. 4,

* Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 496.

* Burnouf, Lotus, p. 520, 'Ajoutons, pour terminer ce que nous trouvons k dire
sur le mot magga,quelque commentaire qu’on en donne d’ailleurs, qnesuivant
uae definition rapportde par Tumour, le magga renferme ime sous-division que
Ton nomme paifipada, eii Sanscrit pratipad. Le magga, dit Tumour, est la
voie qui conduit au Nibbfina, la pajfipadl, littdralement “la marche pas a pas,
ou le degre,” est la vie de rectitude qu’on doit suivre, quand on marche dans la
voie du magga.’

« See Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 496. Should not ^aturvidha-dharmappda,
mentioned on p. 497, be translated by ' the fourfold path of the Law ?’ It can
hardly be the fourfold word of the Law.

INTRODUCTION.

Ivii

Step by step, and it is therefore called pa/ipadd, lit. the step
by step.

If we make allowance for these ambiguities, inherent in
the name of Dhammapada, we may well understand how
the Buddhists themselves play with the word pada (see
V. 45). Thus we read in Mr. Beal’s translation of a Chinese
version of the Pritimoksha^ :

' Let all those who desire such birth,

Who now are living in the world,

Guard and preserve these Precepts, as feet.’

Translation.

In translating the verses of the Dhammapada, I have
followed the edition of the Pdli text, published in 1855 by
Dr. Fausboll, and I have derived great advantage from his
Latin translation, his notes, and his copious extracts from
Buddhaghosa’s commentary. I have also consulted trans-
lations either of the whole of the Dhammapada, or of
portions of it, by Burnouf, Gogerly^ Upham, Weber,
and others. Though it will be seen that in many places
my translation differs from those of my predecessors,
I can only claim for myself the name of a very humble
gleaner in this field of Pdli literature. The greatest
credit is due to Dr. Fausboll; and though later critics
have been able to point out some mistakes, both in his
text and in his translation, the value of their labours p not
to be compared with that of the work accomplished single-
handed by that eminent Danish scholar.

In revising my translation, first published in 1870 , for
the Sacred Books of the East, I have been able to avail
myself of ‘Notes on Dhammapada,’ published by Childers

« chapters have been translated by Mr. Gogerl^ and have

appeared in The Friend, ^voL iv, 1840-’ (Sp^nce Hardy, Eastern Monachism,

Buddhaghosha’s Parables, translated ’^trSed

R.E. With an Introdnction, contakimg Buddhas Dhammapa ,
from PtU by F. Max MlUler. London, iSjro.

Iviii

DHAMMAPADA.

in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (May, 1871),
and of valuable hints as. to the meaning of certain words
and verses scattered about in the Pili Dictionary of that
much regretted scholar,, 1875. I have carefully weighed the
remarks of Mr. James D’Aiwis in his 'Buddhist Nirviwa,
a review of Max Muller’s Dliammapada’ (Colombo, 1871),
and accepted some of his suggestions. Some very suc-
cessful renderings of a number of verses by Mr. Rhys
Davids in his ‘Buddhism,’ and a French translation, too, of
the Dhammapada, published by Fernand Hilh have been,
consulted with advantage.

It was hoped for a time that much assistance for a more
accurate understanding of this work might be derived from
a Chinese translation of the Dhammapada of which
Mr. S. Beal published an English translation in 1878.
But this hope has not been entirely fulfilled. It was,
no doubt, a discovery of great interest, when Mr. Beal
announced that the text of the Dhammapada was not
restricted to the southern Buddhists, but that similar
collections existed in the north, and had been translated
into Chinese. It was equally important when Schiefner
proved the existence of the same work in the sacred canon
of the Tibetans. But as yet neither a Chinese nor a Tibetan
translation of the P^li Dhammapada has been rendered
accessible to us by translations of these translations into
English or German, and what we have received instead,
cannot make up for what we had hoped for.

The state of the case is this. There are, as Mr. Beal
informs us, four principal copies of what may be called
Dhammapada in Chinese, the first dating from the Wu
dynasty, about the beginning of the third century a.d.
This translation, called Fa-klieu-king, is the work of a
Shaman Wei-/^i-lan and others. Its title means ‘the SOtra
of Law verses,’ kheu being explained by githi, a verse,

* Le Dhammapada avec introduction et notes par Fernand Hfl, suivi du
Sutra en 43 articles, traduit du Tibetain, par L^on Feer. Paris, 1878.

* Texts from the Buddhist Canon, commonly known as Dhammapada, trans-
lated from the Cliinese by Samuel Beal. London, 1878.

INTRODUCTION,

fix

a word whicli we shall meet with again in the Tibetan
titles Gdthasahgfaha. In the preface the Chinese translator
states that the Shamans in .after ages copied from the
canonical scriptures various gathis, some of four lines and
some of six, and attached to each set of verses a title,
according to the subject therein explained. This work of
extracting and collecting is ascribed to Tsun-^^e-Fa-kieou,
i.e. Arya-Dharmatrita, the author of the Sa?«yuktibhi-
dharma-5-astra and other works, and the uncle ofVasumitra.
If this Vasumitra was the patriarch who took a prominent
part In the Council under Kanislika, Dharmatr&ta’s col-
lection would belong to the first century B.c. ; but this is,
as yet, very doubtful.

In the preface to the Fa-klieu-king we are told that the
original, which consisted of 500 verses, was brought from
India by Wai-Xi-lan in A. D., and that it was translated
into Chinese with the help of another Indian called 1 siang-
sin. After the translation was finished, thirteen sections
were added, making up the whole to 752 verses, 14,580

words, and 39 chapters k _ ^

If the Chinese translation is compared with the 1 mi
text, It appears that the two agree from the 9th to the
35th chapter (w'ith the exception of the
their subjects are concerned, though the Chinese^ has in
these chapters 79 verses more than the Pali. But
the Chinese translation has eight additional chapters in
the beginning (viz. On Intemperance, Inciting to Wisdom,
The 5 rtlvaka, Simple Faith, Observance of Duty, Re-
flection, Loving- kindness, Conversation), and four at the
end (viz. Nirvawa, Birth and Death, Profit of Religion,
and Good Fortune), and one between the 24th and 25th
chapter of the F&li text (viz. Advantageous Service), ail ot
which are absent in our PAH texts. This, the most ancient
Chinese translation of DharmatrAta’s work, has not been
rendered into English by Mr. Beal, but he assures us that

t Beal, Dhammapada, p. 30. The real aumber of

the Fill text, too, there are five verses f o note

M. M., Buddbaghosha's Parables, p, ix, notej Beal, loc. at, p. n.

lx

DHAMMAPADA.

it is a faithful reproduction of the original. The book which
he has chosen for translation is the Fa-kheu-pi-ii, i.e.
parables connected with the Phammapada, and transited
into Chinese by two Shamans of the western Tsin dynasty
(a.d. 265-313). These parables are meant to illustrate the
teaching of the verses, like the parables of Buddhaghosa,
but they are not the same parables, nor do they illustrate
all the verses.

A third Chinese version is called iTuh-yan-king, i.e. the
SAtra of the Dawn (avadina?), consisting of seven volumes.
Its author was Dharmatrdta, its translator JTu-fo-nien (Bud-
dhasmnti), about 410 a.d. The MS. of the work is said
to have beea brought from India by a Shaman slhght
bhadanga of Kipin (Cabul), about 345 a.d. It is a much
more extensive work in 33 chapters, the last being, as in
the Pili text, on the Brihmawa.

A fourth translation dates from the Sung dynasty (800
or 900 a.d.}, and in it, too, the authorship of the text is
ascribed to Arya-Dharmatrdta.

A Tibetan translation of a Dhamraapada was dis-
covered by Schiefner in the 28th volume of the Sutras,
in the collection called Uddnavarga, It contains 33
chapters, and more than looo verses, of which about one-
fourth only can be traced in the Pili text. The same
collection is found also in the Tan^ur, vol. 71 of the Sutras,
foil. 1-53, followed by a commentary, the Uddnavarga-
vivara«a by the A/&drya Pra^j-?dvarman. Unfortunately
Schiefner s intention of publishing a translation of it (Me-
langes Asiatiques, tom. viii, p. 560) has been frustrated by
ms death. All that he gives us in his last paper is the
Tibetan text with translation of another shorter collection
the Gdthdsahgraha by Vasubandhu, equally published in
the 72nd volume of the Shtras in the Tan^r, and accom-
panied by a commentary.

INTRODUCTION.

Ixi

Spelling of Buddhist Terms.

I had on a former occasion^ pleaded so strongly in
favour of retaining, as much as possible, the original San-
skrit forms of Pdli Buddhist terms, that I feel bound to
confess openly that I hold this opinion no longer, or, at all
events, that I see it is hopeless to expect that Fill scholars
will accept ray proposal. My arguments were these: ^Most
of the technical terms employed by Buddhist writers come
from Sanskrit ; and in the eyes of the philologist the various
forms which they have assumed in PSli, in Burmese, in
Tibetan, in Chinese, in Mongolian, are only so many corrup-
tions of the same original form. Everything, therefore,
would seem to be in favour of retaining the Sanskrit forms
throughout, and of writing, for instance, Nirviwa instead of
the PMi Nibbina, the Burmese Niban or Nepbhin, the
Siamese Niruphan, the Chinese Nipan. The only hope, in
fact, that writers on Buddhism will ever arrive at a uniform
and generally intelligible phraseology seems to He in their
agreeing to use throughout the Sanskrit terms in their
original form, instead of the various local disguises and
disfigurements which they present in Ceylon, Burmah, Siam,
Tibet, China, and Mongolia.’

I fully admitted that many Buddhist words have assumed
such a strongly marked local or national character in the
different countries and in the different languages in which
the religion of Buddha has found a new home, that to trans-
late them back into Sanskrit might seem as affected, nay,
prove in certain cases as misleading, as if, in speaking of
priests and kings, we were to speak of presbyters and
cynings. The rule by which I meant mainly to be guided
was to use the Sanskrit forms as much as possible ; in fact,
everywhere except where it seemed affected to do so.
I therefore wrote Buddhaghosha instead of the P41i Bud-
dhaghosa, because the name of that famous theologian, ‘the
Voice of Buddha,* seemed to lose its significance if turned

^ Introductioa to Buddhaghosha's Parables, 1870, p. 1 .

Into Biiddhaghosa. But I was well aware what may be
said on the other side. The name of Buddhaghosa, ‘Voice
of Buddha/ was given him after he had been converted
from Brahmanism to Buddhism, and it was given to him
by people to whom the Pdli word ghosa conveyed the
same meaning as ghosha does to us. On the other hand,
I retained the P^i Dhammapada Instead of Dharmapada,
simply because, as the title of a P^li book, it has become so
familiar that to speak of it as Dharmapada seemed like
speaking of another work. We are accustomed to speak
of Samanas instead of 6’rama;^as, for even In the- days of
Alexander’s conquest, the Sanskrit word Sramawa had
assumed the prakritized or vulgar form which we find in
Pdli, and which alone could have been rendered by the
later Greek writers (first by Alexander Poiyhistor, 80-60
B.C.) by o-apamoth As a Buddhist term, the PAli form
Samana has so entirely supplanted that of S’ramawa that,
even in the Dhammapada (v, 388), we find an etymology
of Samana as derived from sam, ‘to be quiet/ and not from
mam, ‘ to toil.’ But if we speak of Samanas, we ought also
to speak of Bdhmawas Instead of Brihmawas, for this word
had been replaced by bShmawa at so early a time, that In
the Dhammapada it is derived from a root vah, ‘ to remove,
to separate, to cleanse V

I still believe that it would be best If writers on Buddhist
literature and religion were to adopt Sanskrit throughout
as the lingua franca. For an accurate understanding of
the original meaning of most of the technical terms of
Buddhism a knowledge of their Sanskrit form is indispen-
sable ; and nothing is lost, while much would be gained, if,

Namen fiihrten, als Leute, die ihre Siinden abgespUlt batten.’ See also Lalita-
-vistara, p. 551, line i j p. 553, line 7.

is right in taking the Sap^Sm, mentioned by Megastbenes, for Brahmanic, not

INTRODUCTION.

Ixiii

speak of the town of 5rivastJ instead of Sivatthi in Pall,
Sevet in Sinhalese ; of Tripi/aka/the three baskets/ instead
of Tipt/aka in Pali, Tunpitaka in Sinhalese; of Arthakath4,
‘commentary/ instead of AMakathi in Pili, Atuwiva in
Sinhalese ; and therefore also of Dharmapada, ‘ the path of
virtue/ instead of Dhammapada.

But inclinations are stronger than arguments. Pall
scholars prefer their Pdli terms, and I cannot blame them
for it. Mr. D’ Alwis (Buddhist Nirv^wa, p. 68) says : ‘ It
will be seen how very difficult it is to follow the rule rigidly.
We are, therefore, inclined to believe that in translating Pdli
works at least, much inconvenience may not be felt by the
retention of the forms of the language in which the Buddhist
d" s were originally delivered.’ For the sake of uni-
formity, therefore, I have given up my former .plan. I use
the Pdli forms when I quote from Pdli, but I still prefer the
Sanskrit forms, not only when I quote from Sanskrh Bud*,
dhist books, but also when I have to speak of Buddhism^ m
general. I speak of Nirvtoa, dharma, and bhikshu,^ rather
than of Nibbfina, dhamma, and bhikkhu, when discussing the
meaning of these words without special reference to southern
Buddhto ; but when treating of the literature and religion
of the Theravdda school I must so far yield to the argu-
ments of Pili scholars as to admit that it is but fair to
use their language when speaking of their opinions.

DH AM MAPADA.

CHAPTER I.

THE TWIN-VERSES.

I , All that we are is the result of what we have
thought : it is founded on our thoughts, it is made
up of our thoughts. If a man speaks or acts w^th
an evil thought, pain follows him, as the wheel fol-
lows the foot of the ox that draws the carriage.

I. Dharma, though clear in its meaning, is difficult to translate.
It has different meanings in different systems of philosophy, and its
peculiar application in the phraseology of Buddhism has been fully
elucidated by Burnouf, Introduction h. I’Histoire du Buddhisme,
n. 41 seq. He writes: ‘R traduis ordinairement ce terme par
condition, d’autres fois par lois, mais aucune de ces traductions
n’est parfaitement complete; il faut entendre par dharma ce qui
fait qu'une chose est ce qu’elle est, ce qui constitue sa nature
propre, comme Pa bien montrd Lassen, 'a I'occas.on de la cdl^bre
formule, " Ye dharm^ hetuprabhava.” ’ Etymologically the Latin
for-ma expresses the same general idea which was expressed by
dhar-ma. See also Burnouf, I.otus de la bonne Loi, p. 524- baus-
bbll translates: ‘Naturae a mente principium ducunt, which
shows that he rightly understood dharma in the Buddhist sense.
Gogerly (see Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 28) translates.
‘Mind precedes action,' which, if not wrong, is
expressed ; while Professor Weber’s rendering,
dem Herz folgern,’ is not admissible. D’Alwis (Buddhist Nir-
wana, p. 70 seq.), following the commentary,
more tLhnical interpretation of this verse yiz Mmd is le^^^^
of all its faculties. Mind is the chief (of all its faculties). The ery
mind is made up of those (faculties). If one speaks or acts wi a
polluted mind, then affliction follows him as the whee
feet of the bearer (the bullock).’ To me this technical acceptation

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. 1.

2. All that we are is the result of what we have
thought : it is founded on our thoughts, it is made
up of our thoughts. If a man speaks or acts with a
pure thought, happiness follows him, like a shadow
that never leaves him.

3. ‘ He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me,
he robbed me,’ — in those who harbour such thoughts
hatred will never cease.

seems not applicable here, where we have to deal with the simplest
moral precepts, and not with psychological niceties of Buddhist
philosophy. It should be stated, however, that Childers, who first
(s.v. dhamma) approved of my translation, seems afterwards to have
changed his opinion. On p. 120 of his excellent Pfili Dictionary
he said . Three of the five khandhas, viz. vedanS, saw«a, and sah-
khara, are collectively termed dhamma (plur.), “mental faculties,"
and in the first verse of Dhammapada the commentator takes the
woid dhamma to mean those three faculties. But this interpretation
appears forced and unnatural, and I look upon Dr. Max Muller's
translation, “ All that we are is the result of what we have thought,”
as the best possible rendering of the spirit of the phrase mano pub-
bangama dhamma.' But on p. 577 the same scholar writes: ‘Of
the four mental khandhas the superiority of vi«^a»a is strongly
asserted in the first verse of Dhammapada, “ The mental faculties
(vedana, sa?7«a, and sahkhara) are dominated by Mind, they are
governed by Mind, they are made up of Mind.” That this is the
true meaning of the passage I am now convinced ; see D’AIwis, Nir-
wana, pp. 70-75.’ I do not deny that this may have been the tra-
ditional interpretation, at all events since the days of Buddhaghosa,
but the very legend quoted by Buddhaghosa in illustration of this
verse shows that its simpler and purely moral interpretation was
likewise supported by tradition, and I therefore adhere to my
original translation. Sec also v. 109.

2. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 169.

3. On akko/(’/'/ii, see Ka/’/’ayana VI, 4, r 7. D’Aiwis,Pali Grammar,
p. 38 note. ‘ When akko-(’/'/d means “ he abused,” it is derived
from kruj, not from krudh.’ See Senart, KaMiyana, I. c.

On upanayhati=upanandhati, see J. P. T. S. 1887, p, 126; it
would mean literally he who ties up such thoughts, that is he who
holds fast to them.

TWIN-VERSES.

5

4. ‘He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me,
he robbed me,’ — in those who do not harbour such
thoughts hatred will cease.

5. For hatred does not cease by hatred at any
time : hatred ceases by love, this is an old rule.

6. The world does not know that we must all
come to an end here ; — but those who know it, their
quarrels cease at once.

7. He who lives looking for pleasures only, his
senses uncontrolled, immoderate in his food, idle,
and weak, Mira (the tempter) will certainly over-
throw him, as the wind throws down a weak tree.

8. He who lives without looking for pleasures,
his senses well controlled, moderate in his food,
faithful and strong, him Mara will certainly not
overthrow, any more than the wind throws down
a rocky mountain.

9. He who wishes to put on the yellow dress

5. Sanantana, translated by Childers by ‘ perpetual, ancient,
primeval,' cf. Sk. sana, sanS, sanat, sandtana. Buddhaghosa explains
it by porawaka.

6. Pare is explained by ‘fools,’ but it has that meaning by
implication only. It is ol rroWoi, cf. Vinaya, ed, Oldenberg, vol. i,
p. 5, 1 . 4. Yamamase, a i pers. plur. imp. Atm., but really a Le/
in Pali. See Fausboll, Five 6^atakas, p. 38. Weber translates,

‘ Wir sollen uns bezahmen hier,’ which may be right, but differs from
Buddhaghosa.

7. Mdra must be taken in the Buddhist sense of ‘ tempter,’ or
‘ evil spirit.’ See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 76 : ‘ Mdra est le dt^mon
de I’amour, du pdch^ et de la mort; c’est le tentateur et I'ennemi
de Buddha.’ As to the definite meaning of viry^, see Burnouf,
Lotus, p. 548.

In the Buddhistical Sanskrit, kusida, ‘ idle,' is the exact counter-
part of the Pali kusita ; see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 548. On the change
of Sanskrit d into Pali t, see Kuhn, Beitrage zur Pali Grammatik,
p. 40; Weber, Ind. Studien, XIII, p, 135.

9. The dark yellow dress, the Kasava or Kdshaya^ is the dis-

6

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. 1.

without having cleansed himself from sin, who dis-
regards also temperance and truth, is unworthy of
the yellow dress.

10. But he who has cleansed himself from sin, is
well grounded in all virtues, and endowed also with
temperance and truth, he is indeed worthy of the
yellow dress.

11. They who imagine truth in untruth, and see
untruth in truth, never arrive at truth, but follow
vain desires.

12. They who know truth in truth, and untruth
in untruth, arrive at truth, and follow true desires.

tinctive garment of the Buddhist priests. See Vish?m-sfitra LXllI,
36. The play on the words anikkasdvo kasdvam, or in Sanskrit
anishkashaya/i kashiyam, cannot be rendered in English. Kaslidj-^a
means ‘ impurity,' nish-kashaya, ‘free from impurity,’ anish-kashaya,
‘ not free from impurity,’ while kashaya is the name of the yellowish
Buddhist garment. The pun is evidently a favourite one, for, as
Fausboli shows, it occurs also in the MahSbharata, XII, 568 :
Anishkashlye kSshfiyam fhdrtham iti viddhi tam,
Dharmadhva^na?/2 mu«<fdndOT vnUyartham iti me raatii.

‘ Know that this yellow-coloured garment on a man who is not free
from impurity, serves only for the purpose of cupidity ; my opinion
is, that it is meant to supply the means of living to those shavelings,
who carry their virtue or the dharma like a flag.’

(I read vn'ityartham, according to the Bombay edition, instead of
krftariham, the reading of the Calcutta edition.)

On the exact colour of the dress, see Bishop Bigandet, The Life
or Legend of Gaudama, the Budha of the Burmese, Rangoon, k866,
p. 504. Cf. Gataka, vol. ii, p. 198.

10. With regard to sila, ‘virtue,’ see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 547-

11, 12. Sara, which 1 have translated by ‘ truth,’ has many mean-
ings in Sanskrit. It means the sap of a thing, then essence or
reality ; in a metaphysical sense, the highest reality ; in a moral
sense, truth. It is impossible in a translation to do more than indi-
cate the meaning of such words, and in order to understand them
fully, we must know not only tlieir definition, but their history. See
Beal, Dhammapada, p. 64.

TWIN-VERSES.

7

13. As rain breaks through an ill-thatched house,
passion will break through an unreflecting mind.

14. As rain does not break through a well-thatched
house, passion will not break through a well-reflecting
mind.

15. The evil-doer mourns in this world, and he
mourns in the next ; he mourns in both. He mourns
and suffers when he sees the evil (result) of his own
work.

16. The virtuous man delights in this world, and
he delights in the next ; he delights in both. He
delights and rejoices, when he sees the purity of his
own work.

17. The evil-doer suffers in this world, and he
suffers in the next; he suffers in both. He suffers
when he thinks of the evil he has done ; he suffers
more when going on the evil path.

18. The virtuous man is happy in this world,
and he is happy in the next ; he is happy in both.
He is happy when he thinks of the good he has

13. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 65.

15, Kili//v%a is klish/a, a participle of kli^-. It means literally,
what is spoilt. The abstract noun klera, ‘ evil or sin,’ is constantly
employed in Buddhist works ; see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 443.

1 6, Like klish/a in the preceding verse, viruddhi in the present
has a technical meaning. One of Buddhaghosa’s most famous
works is called Visuddhi-magga. See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 844;
Beal, Dhammapada, p. 67.

17, 18. ‘ The evil path and the good path ' are technical expres-
sions for the descending and ascending scale of worlds through
which all beings have to travel upward or downward, according to
their deeds; see Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, p. 5, note 4, and
p. 449; Burnouf, Introduction, p. 599; Lotus, p. 865, I. 7; 1 . n.
Fausbdll translates ' heaven and hell,' which comes to the same ;
cf. vv. 126, 306.

8

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. I.

done ; he is still more happy when going on the
good path.

19. The thoughtless man, even if he can recite
a large portion (of the law), but is not a doer of
it, has no share in the priesthood, but is like a
cowherd counting the cows of others.

20. The follower of the law, even if he can recite
only a small portion (of the law), but, having for-
saken passion and hatred and foolishness, possesses
true knowledge and serenity of mind, he, caring
for nothing in this world or that to come, has in-
deed a share in the priesthood.

19. In taking sahitam in the sense of sawhitam or samhittt, I fol-
low the commentator who says, Tepi/akassa Buddhavaianass' atzm
namazw, but I cannot find another passage where the Tipi/aka, or
any portion of it, is called Sahita. Sa«ehita in vv. r 00-1 02 has
a different meaning. The fact that some followers of Buddha were
allowed to learn short portions only of the sacred writings by heart,
and to repeat them, while others had to learn a larger collection, is
shown by the story of Zakkhupfila, p. 3, of Mahakala, p. 26, &c.
See Childers, s. v. sahita.

20. SSmawwa, which I have rendered by * priesthood,’ expresses
all that belongs to, or constitutes areal Samara or ^S'rama«a,this being
the Buddhist name corresponding to the Br§hraa«a, or priest, of
the orthodox Hindus. Buddha himself is frequently called the
Good Samawa. Fausbbll takes the abstract word samai??7a as
corresponding to the Sanskrit sfimanya, ‘ community,’ but Weber
has well shown that it ought to be taken as representing rrdrnawya.
He might have quoted the SdmaMa-phala-sutta, of which Burnouf
has given such interesting details in his Lotus, p. 449 seq. Faus-
bQll also, in his notes on v. 332, rightly explains saraa?1«att by
jfrimawyatd. See Childers, s. v. sama/Ha.

Anupddiyano, which I have translated by ‘ caring for nothing,'
has a technical meaning. It is the negative of the fourth Nidana,
the so-called Updddna, which Koppen has well explained by
Anhanglichkeit, ‘clinging to the world, loving the world.’ Kdppen,
Die Religion des Buddha, p. 610. Cf. Suttanipdta, v. 470.

On huram, see J. P. T. S., 1884, P* 103 seq.

who are in earnest do not die, those who are
thoughtless are as if dead already.

22. Having understood this clearly, those who
are advanced in earnestness delight in earnestness,
and rejoice in the knowledge of the Ariyas {the
elect).

23. These wise people, meditative, steady, always
possessed of strong powers, attain to Nirv^:?^a, the
highest happiness.

^ There is nothing in the tenth section of the Dhammapada, as
translated by Beal, corresponding to the verseS of this chapter.

21. Apramtda, which Fausboll translates by ‘ vigilantia,’ Gogerly
by ‘ religion,’ Childers by ‘ diligence,’ expresses literally the absence
of that giddiness or thoughtlessness which characterizes the state of
1 mind of worldly people. It is the first entering into oneself, and

hence all virtues are said to have their root in apramada. (Ye ke/Si
kusala dhammi sabbe te appamadamfilaka.) I have translated it
by ‘ earnestness,’ sometimes by ‘ reflection.’ ‘ Immortality,’ apirz'ta,
is explained by Buddhaghosa as Nirvana. Amrz'ta is used, no
doubt, as a synonym of Nirvazza, but this very fact shows how many
dififerent conceptions entered from the very first into the NirvSzza
of the Buddhists. See Childers, s. v. nibbSna, p. 269.

This verse, as recited to Aroka, occurs in the Dipavazrasa VI,
53, and in the Mahava»zsa, p. 25. See also Sanatsu^atiya, translated
by Telang, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii, p. 138.

' 22. The Ariyas, the noble or elect, are those who have entered

on the path that leads to Nirvana ; see Koppen, p. 396. Their
knowledge and general status is fully described ; see Kbppen,
p. 436.

23. Childers, s. v. nibbdna, thinks that nibb^na here and in
many other places means Arhatship.

lO

dhammapada. chap. II.

24. If an earnest person has roused himself, if
he is not forgetful, if his deeds are pure, if he
acts with consideration, if he restrains himself, and
lives according to law, — then his glory will increase.

25. By rousing himself, by earnestness, by restraint
and control, the wise man may make for himself
an island which no flood can overwhelm.

26. Fools follow after vanity, men of evil wis-
dom. The wise man keeps earnestness as his best
jewel.

27. Follow not after vanity, nor after the enjoy-
ment of love and lust! He who is earnest and

meditative, obtains ample joy.

28. When the learned man drives away vanity
by earnestness, he, the wise, climbing the terraced
heights of wisdom, looks down upon the fools, free
from sorrow he looks upon the sorrowing crowd, as
one that stands on a mountain looks down upon
them that stand upon the plain.

29. Earnest among the thoughtless, awake among
the sleepers, the wise man advances like a racer,

leaving behind the hack.

30. By earnestness did Maghavan (Indra) rise
to the lordship of the gods. People praise earnest-
ness ; thoughtlessness is always blamed.

31. A Bhikshu (mendicant) who delights in
earnestness, who looks with fear on thoughtless-

25. Childers explains this island again as the state of an Arhal
(arahatta-phalam).

28. Cf. Childers, Dictionary, Preface, p. xiv. See Vmaya, etl

Oldenberg, vol. i, p. 6, s. f. , , . •

31. Instead of szhsim, which Dr. Fausboll translates by vin-
cens,’ Dr. Weber by ‘ conquering,’ I think we ought to read dihan,
' burning,’ which was evidently the reading adopted by Buddlia*

ghosa. Mr. R. C. Childers, whom I requested to see whether the
MS. at the India Office gives sahaza or dzhzm, writes that the
reading dahzm is as clear as possible in that MS. Prof. Fausbdll
also now writes that my conjecture is confirmed by his own
MSS. also. ,>Mr. Neumann, however, retains saha/a. The fetters
are meant for the senses. See verse 370.

32. See Childers, Notes, p. 5.

12

DHAMMAPA.DA. CHAP. III.

CHAPTER III.

THOUGHT.

33. As a fletcher makes straight his arrow, a
wise man makes straight his trembling and un-
steady thought, which is difficult to guard, difficult
to hold back,

34. As a fish taken from his watery home and
thrown on the dry ground, our thought trembles
all over in order to escape the dominion of M^ra
(the tempter).

35. It is good to tame the mind, which is difficult
to hold in and flighty, rushing wherever it listeth ;
a tamed mind brings happiness.

36. Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for
they are difficult to perceive, very artful, and they
rush wherever they list: thoughts well guarded
bring happiness.

37. Those who bridle their mind which travels
far, moves about alone, is without a body, and hides
in the chamber (of the heart), will be free from
the bonds of M^ra (the tempter).

38. If a man’s faith is unsteady, if he does not
know the true law, if his peace of mind is troubled,
his knowledge will never be perfect.

33. A'ltta, here translated by thought, may be rendered also by
mind or heart. It is, however, incorporeal, dwells in the heart, and
is opposed to the body, see Ab. 152, 338. Cf. (rStaka, vol. i,
p. 400.

34. On Mara, see verses 7 and 8.

35-39- Cf- <?ataka, vol, i, pp. 312, 400.

THOUGHT.

13

39, If a man’s thoug-hts are not dissipated, if
his mind is not perplexed, if he has ceased to think
of good or evil, then there is no fear for him while
he is watchful.

39. Fausboll traces anavassuta, ‘ dissipated,' back to the Sanskrit
root jyai, ‘to become rigid;’ but the participle of that root would
be jita, not jyuta. Professor Weber suggests that anavassuta stands
for the Sanskrit anavasruta, which he translates unbefleckt, ‘ un-
spotted.’ If avasruta were the right word, it might be taken in the
sense of ‘ not fallen off, not fallen away,' but it could not mean
‘ unspotted cf. dhairya/w no^susruvat, ‘our firmness ran away.’
I have little doubt, however, that avassuta represents the Sanskrit
avajruta, and is derived from the root jru, here used in its tech-
nical sense, peculiar to the Buddhist literature, and so well explained
by Burnouf in his Appendix XIV (Lotus, p. 820). He shows that,
according to Hema/^andra and the G'ina-alankara, aj-ravakshaya,
Pdli asavasawkhaya is counted as the sixth abhi^«d, wherever six
of these intellectual powers are mentioned, instead of five. The
Chinese translate the term in their own Chinese fashion by ‘ stilla-
tionis finis,’ but Burnouf claims for it the definite sense of destruc-
tion of faults or vices. He quotes from the Lalita-vistara (Adhyfiya
XXII, ed. Rajcndra Lai Mittra, p. 448) the words uttered by
Buddha when he arrived at his complete Buddhahood: —

6'ushka ajrava na punaA jravanti,

‘ The vices are dried up, they will not flow again ; '
and he shows that the Pali Dictionary, the AbhidhSnappadipika,
explains asava simply by kama, ‘ love, pleasure of the senses.' In
the Mahfiparinibbana-sutta, three classes of fisava are distinguished,
the kdmasava, the bhavasava, and the avi^^asavfi. See also Bur-
nouf, Lotus, p. 665 ; Childers, s. v. fisavo.

That jru means ‘ to run,’ and is in fact a merely dialectic variety
of sru, has been proved by Burnouf, while Boehtlingk thinks the
substitution of s for s is a mistake. Ajrava therefore, or asrava,
meant originally ‘ the running out towards objects of the senses '
(cf. safiga, alaya, &c.), and had nothing to do with fisrava, ‘ a run-
ning, a sore,’ Atharva-veda I, 2, 4. This conception of the ori-
ginal purport of a -j- jru or ava-jru is confirmed by a statement of
Colebrooke’s, who, when treating of the Crainas, writes (Miscella-
neous Essays, I, 382) : ‘Asrava is that which directs the embodied
spirit (asravayati purusham) towards external objects. It is the

14

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. III.

40. Knowing that this body is (fragile) like a
jar, and making his thought firm like a fortress,
one should attack Mira (the tempter) with the
weapon of knowledge, one should watch him when
conquered, and should never rest.

41. Before long, alas! this body will lie on the
earth, despised, without understanding, like a use-
less log.

occupation and employment (vr/'tti or pravr/tti) of the senses or
organs on sensible objects. Through the means of the senses it
affects the embodied spirit with the sentiment of taction, colour,
smell, and taste. Or it is the association or connection of body
with right and wrong deeds. It comprises all the karmas, for they
(^sravayanti) pervade, influence, and attend the doer, following, him
or attaching to him. It is a misdirection (mithy^-pravrz'tti) of the
organs, for it is vain, a cause of disappointment, rendering the
organs of sense and sensible objects subservient to fruition. Sawi-
vara is that which stops (saz«vn«oti) the course of the foregoing,
or closes up the door or passage to it, and consists in self-com-
mand or restraint of organs internal and external, embracing all
means of self-control and subjection of the senses, calming and
subduing them.'

For a full account of the a>rravas. see Lalita-vistara, ed. Calc.
5P- 446 Jtnd 552, where Kshl«^rrava is given as a name of Buddha.
Arrdva occurs in Apastamba's Dharma-sfltras II, 5, 9, where the
commentator explains it by objects of the senses, by which the
soul is made to run out. It is better, however, to take flrrfiva
here, too, as the act of running out, the affections, appetites,
passions.

40. Anivesana has no doubt a technical meaning, and may
signify, one who has left his house, his family and friend.s, to
become a monk. A monk shall not return to his home, but travel
about; he shall be anivesana, 'homeless,' anSg^ra, 'houseless.'
But I doubt whether this can be the meaning of anivesana here,
as the sentence, let him be an anchorite, would come in too
abruptly. I translate it therefore in a more general sense, let him
not return or turn away from the battle, let him w'atch Mara, even
after he is vanquished, let him keep up a constant fight against the
adversary, without being attached to anything or anybody.

THOUGHT.

15

42. Whatever a hater may do to a hater, or
an enemy to an enemy, a wrongly-directed mind
will do him greater mischief.

43. Not a mother, not a father will do so much,
nor any other relatives ; a well-directed mind will
do us greater service.

43. See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 73.

l6 DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. IV.

CHAPTER IV.

FLOWERS \

44. Who shall overcome this earth, and the
world of Yama (the lord of the departed), and
the world of the gods ? Who shall find out the
plainly shown path of virtue, as a clever man
finds the (right) flower ?

45. The disciple will overcome the earth, and
the world of Yama, and the world of the gods.
The disciple will find out the plainly shown path
of virtue, as a clever man finds the (right) flower.

^ See Beal, Dhammapada, p. 75.

44, 45. If I dilTer from the translation of Fausboll and Weber,
it is because the commentary takes the two verbs, vi^essati and
pa-(’essati, to mean in the end the same thin", i. e. sa/6Mi-karissati,
‘ he will perceive.’ I have not ventured to take vi^essate for vi^a-
nissati, though it should be remembered that the overcoming of the
earth and of the worlds below and above, as here alluded to, is
meant to be achieved by means of knowledge. PaA-essati, ‘ he
will gather ’ (of. vi-^ti, Indische Sprtiche, 4560), means also, like ' to
gather’ in English, ‘he will perceive or understand,’ and the dham-
mapada, or ‘path of virtue,' is distinctly explained by Buddha-
ghosa as consisting of the thirty-seven states or stations which lead
to Bodhi. (See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 430; Hardy, Manual, p. 497.)
Dhammapada might, no doubt, mean also ‘a law-verse,’ and
sudesila, ‘ well taught,’ and this double meaning may be intentional
here as elsewhere. Buddha himself is called Marga-darraka and
Mdrga-derika (cf, Lai. Vist. p. 551). There is a curious similarity
between these verses and verses 6540-41, and 9939 of the .Sanli-
parva :

Pushpfl«iva vi/^invantam anyalragatamanasam,

Anavapteshu kS.meshu mrftyur abhyeti manavam.

‘Death approaches man like one who is gathering flowers, and

FLOWERS.

17

46. He who knows that this body is like froth,
and has learnt that it is as unsubstantial as a mirage,
will break the flower-pointed arrow of Mira, and
never see the king of death.

47. Death carries off a man who is gathering
flowers, and whose mind is distracted, as a flood
carries off a sleeping village.

48. Death subdues a man who is gathering flowers,
and whose mind is distracted, before he is satiated
in his pleasures.

49. As the bee collects nectar and departs without
injuring the flower, or its colour or scent, so let a
sage dwell in his village.

whose mind is turned elsewhere, before his desires have been
fulfilled.'

Supta»z vyfighra»2 mahaugho va mrdyur fidaya ga^X 7 /ati,
Sa«-iinvanakam evaina^r kamfinfim avitnptikam.

‘As a stream (carries off) a sleeping tiger, death carries off this
man who is gathering flowers, and who is not satiated in his
pleasures.’

This last verse, particularly, seems to me clearly a translation
from Pali, and the kara of sa^/^invanakam looks as if put in metri
causd. See also verse 12063.

46. The flower-arrows of Mdra, the tempter, are borrowed from
Kama, the Plindu god of love. For a similar expression see
Lalita-vistara, ed. Calc. p. 40, 1 . 20, mdyfimari/iisadr/sd vidyutphe-
nopamdj /C’apald/^. It is on account of this parallel passage that
I prefer to translate marUi by ‘ mirage,' and not by ‘ sunbeam,' as
Fausbbll, or by ‘ solar atom,’ as Weber proposes. The expression,

‘ he will never see the king of death,’ is supposed to mean Arhatship
by Childers, s. v. nibbdna, p, 270.

47. See Thiessen, Die Legende von Kisdgotami, p. 9.

48. Antaka, ‘ death,' is given as an explanation of Mdra in ‘the
Amarakosha and Abhidhdnappadtpika (cf. FausbSll, p. 210).

49. See Beal, Catena, p. 159, where vv. 49 and go are ascribed to
Wessabhu, i.e. Vkvabhfi. See also Der Weise und der Thor, p. 134.

See Fausbdll, Nogle Bemerkninger. Buddhaghosa renders ahe-
[10] C

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. IV.

i8

50. Not the perversities of others, not their sins
of commission or omission, but his own misdeeds
and negligences should a sage take notice of.

51. Like a beautiful flower, full of colour, but
widiout scent, are the fine but fruitless words of him
who does not act accordingly.

52. But, like a beautiful flower, full of colour and
full of scent, are the fine and fruitful words of him
who acts accordingly.

53. As many kinds of wreaths can be made from
a heap of flowers, so many good things may be
achieved by a mortal when once he is born.

54. The scent of flowers does not travel against
the wind, nor (that of) sandal-wood, or (of) Tagara
and Mallikd flowers ; but the odour of good people
travels even against the wind ; a good man per-
vades every place.

55. Sandal-wood or Tagara, a lotus-flower, or a
Vassiki, among these sorts of perfumes, the perfume
of virtue is unsurpassed.

56. Mean is the scent that comes from Tagara
and .sandal-wood; — the perfume of those who pos-
sess virtue rises up to the gods as the highest.

ihzyMii by avinSvSento ; and Kern^ Verhandelingen der Koninkligke
Akademie, Amsterdam, 1888’, p. 19.

51. St. Matthew xxiii. 3, ‘For they say, and do not.’

54. Tagara, a plant from which a scented powder is made.
Mallaka or mallikS, according to Benfey, is an oil vessel. Hence
tagaramallikS was supposed to mean a bottle holding aromatic
powder, or oil made of the Tagara. Mallik^i, however, is given by
Dr. Eitel (Handbook of Chinese Buddhism) as the name of a
flower now called Casturi (musk) on account of its rich odour, and
Dr. Morris informs me that he has found mallikS, in Pali as a name
of jasmine. See also Childers, s.v.; Notes, p. 6 ; and Beal, Dhamma-
pada, p. 76.

FLOWERS.

19

57. Of the people who possess these virtues, who
live without thoughtlessness, and who are emanci-
pated through true knowledge, M^ra, the tempter,
never finds the way.

58, 59. As on a heap of rubbish cast upon the
highway the lily will grow full of sweet perfume and
delight, thus among those who are mere rubbish
the disciple of the truly enlightened Buddha
shines forth by his knowledge above the blinded
worldling.

58, 59, Cf. Beal, Dhammapada, p. 76.

20

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. V.

CHAPTER V.

THE FOOL.

60. Long is the night to him who is awake ; long
is a mile to him who is tired ; long is life to the
foolish who do not know the true law.

61. If a traveller does not meet with one who is
his better, or his equal, let him firmly keep to his
solitary journey ; there is no companionship with
a fool.

62. ‘ These sons belong to me, and this wealth
belongs to me,’ with such thoughts a fool is tor-
mented. He himself does not belong to himself ;
how much less sons and wealth ?

63. The fool who knows his foolishness, is wise at
least so far. But a fool who thinks himself wise, he
is called a fool indeed.

64. If a fool be associated with a wise man even
all his life, he will perceive the truth as little as a
spoon perceives the taste of soup.

65. If an intelligent man be associated for one
minute only with a wise man, he will soon perceive
the truth, as the tongue perceives the taste of soup.

66. Fools of poor understanding have themselves

60. ‘ Life,’ sawsdra, is the constant revolution of birth and death
which goes on for ever until the knowledge of the true law or the
true doctrine of Buddha enables a man to free himself from sarwsdra,
and to enter into Nirvd«a. See Buddhaghosha's Parables, Parable
XIX, p. 134.

61. Cf. Suttanipata, v. 46.

63. Cf. Beal, Dharnmapada, p. '77.

64. The same verses occur in the Mahdbh. Sauptikap. v. 178;
see also Sabhdp. v. 1945.

6g. Cf. Beal, Dharnmapada, p. 78.

THE FOOL.

21

for tHeir greatest enemies, for they do evil deeds
which bear bitter fruits.

67. That deed is not well done of which a man
must repent, and the reward of which he receives
crying and with a tearful face.

68 . No, that deed is well done of which a man
does not repent, and the reward of which he receives
gladly and cheerfully.

69. As long as the evil deed done does not bear
fruit, the fool thinks it is like honey ; but when it
ripens, then the fool suffers grief.

70. Let a fool month after month eat his food
(like an ascetic) with the tip of a blade of Kui’a
grass, yet is he not worth the sixteenth particle of
those who have well weighed the law.

7 1 . An evil deed, like newly-drawn milk, does not
turn (suddenly) ; smouldering, like fire covered by
ashes, it follows the fool.

67. See Beal, 1 . c, p. 78.

69. Taken from the Sa?wyutta-nikSya, where, however, we read
thdnanhi instead of niadhuvS ; see Peer, Comptes Rendus, 1871,
p. 64.

70. The commentator clearly takes sahkhdta in the sense of
sahkhySta, ‘ reckoned,’ for he explains it by ^dtadhammd, tulita-
dharomd. The eating with the tip of Kuja grass has reference
to the fastings performed by the Brahmans, but disapproved of,
except as a moderate discipline, by the followers of Buddha. This
verse seems to interrupt the continuity of the other verses which
treat of the reward of evil deeds, or of the slow but sure ripening
of every sinful act. See Childers, s. v. sahkhdto.

71. lam not at all certain of the simile, unless mu/^/ 5 ati, as applied
to milk, can be used in the sense of changing or turning sour. In
Manu IV, 172, where a similar sentence occurs, the commentators
are equally doubtful ; Nddharmar -^arito loke sadya;^ phalati gaur
iva, ‘for an evil act committed in the world does not bear fruit at
once, like a cow ; ' or ‘ like the earth (in due season) ; ’ or ‘ like
milk.’ See Childers, Notes, p. 6.

22

DFIAMMAPADA. CHAP. V.

72. And when the evil deed, after it has become
known, turns to sorrow for the fool, then it destroys
his bright lot, nay, it cleaves his head.

73. Let the fool wish for a false reputation, for
precedence among the Bhikshus, for lordship in the
convents, for worship among other people !

74. ‘May both the layman and he who has left the
world think that this is done by me ; may they be
subject to me in everything which is to be done or
is not to be done,’ thus is the mind of the fool, and
his desire and pride increase.

75. ‘ One is the road that leads to wealth, another
the road that leads to Nirv^^m;' if the Bhikshu,
the disciple of Buddha, has learnt this, he will not
yearn for honour, he will strive after separation
from the world.

72, I take watlam for ^? 7 apitam, the causative of ^/ 7 dtam, for
which in Sanskrit, too, we have the form without i, ^’-r 7 aptarn. This
^^aptam, ‘ made known, revealed,' stands in opposition to the
JlrAanna, ‘ covered, hid,’ of the preceding verse. Sukkawsa, which
Fausbdll explains by j-uklaz«sa, has probably a more technical and
special meaning, Childers traces 77attam to the Vedic ^>'/7atram,
‘knowledge.' Fausboll refers to ffataka, vol. i, p. 445, v, 1 18.

75. Viveka, which in Sanskrit means chiefly understanding, has
several meanings with the Buddhists, and among them the more
technical meaning of separation, whether separation from the world
and retirement to the solitude of the forest (k§.ya-viveka), or separa-
tion from idle thoughts (/iitta-viveka), or the highest separation and
freedom (Nirviria), As true knowledge cannot be said to be a road
to wealth, I have taken a«^a, not for but for anyS.

THE WISE iMAN.

23

CHAPTER VI.

THE WISE MAN (pANDITa).

76. If you see a man who shows you what is to
be avoided, who administers reproofs, and is intelli-
gent, follow that wise man as you would one who
tells of hidden treasures ; it will be better, not worse,
for him who follows him.

77. Let him admonish, let him teach, let him
forbid what is improper ! — he will be beloved of the
good, by the bad he will be hated.

78. Do not have evil-doers for friends, do not
have low people for friends: have virtuous people
for friends, have for friends the best of men.

79. He who drinks in the law lives happily with
a serene mind : the sage rejoices always in the law,
as preached by the elect (Ariyas).

80. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they
like) ; fletchers bend the arrow ; carpenters bend
a log of wood ; wise people fashion themselves.

78. It is hardly possible to lake mitte kaly^z/e in the technical
sense of kalyawa-milra, ‘ein geistlicher Rath,’ a spiritual guide.
Burnouf (Introd. p. 284) shows that in the technical sense kalySwa-
mitra was widely spread in the Buddhist world.

79. Ariya, ‘elect, venerable,’ is explained by the commentator
as referring to Buddha and other teachers,

80. See verses 33 and 145, the latter being a mere repetition of
our verse. The nettikas, to judge from the commentary and from
the general purport of the verse, are not simply water-carriers, but
builders of canals and aqueducts, who force the water, to go over
the fields where it would not go by itself. The Chinese translator
says, ‘ the pilot manages his ship,' See Beal, 1 . c. p. 79.

24

DHAMMAPADA, CHAP. VT.

8 1. As a solid rock is not shaken by the wind,
wise people falter not amidst blame and praise.

82. Wise people, after they have listened to the
laws, become serene, like a deep, smooth, and still

lake.

83. Good men indeed walk (warily) under all
circumstances ; good men speak not out of a desire
for sensual gratification ; whether touched by happi-
ness or sorrow wise people never appear elated or
depressed.

84. If, whetner for his own sake, or for the sake
of others, a man wishes neither for a son, nor for
wealth, nor for lordship, and if he does not wish for
his own success by unfair means, then he is good,
wise, and virtuous.

85. Few are there among men who arrive at the

83. The first Jine is very doubtful. Mr. Childer.s writes, ' I think
it will be necessary to take sabbattha in the sense of “ everywhere,”
or “under all circumstances;” paMakhandadibhedesu, sabba-
dhammesu, says Buddhaghosa. I do not think we need assume
that B. means the word vi^ahanti to be a synonym of

I would rather take the whole sentence together a.s a glo.ss upon
the word vacant! : — va^antiti arahatta?1anena apakaf/«/.^antA X 7 /an-
darS^aw! vi^ahanli; va^mnti means that, ridding themselves of lust
by the wisdom which Arhatship confers, they cast it away.’ The
line means ‘ lire righteous walk on (unmoved) in all the conditions
of life.’ Nindil, pasa?«sfi, sukha, dukkha are four of the eight
lokadhammas, or earthly conditions ; the remaining lokadhammas
are labha, alabha, yasa, ayasa. I have adopted the translation of
W. Morris, see Journal of P. 7 '. S., 1891-93, p. 41.

In V. 245, paasaia, ‘ by a man who sees,’ means ‘ by a man who
sees clearly or truly.’ In the same manner vra,^ may mean, not
simply ‘ to walk,’ but ‘ to walk properly,' or may be used synony-
mously with pravra^.

84. That the last line forms the apodosis is shown by the
demonstrative pronoun sa.

85. ‘ The other shore ’ is meant for Nirvfiwa, ‘ this shore ' for

THE WISE MAH.

25

Other shore (become Arhats) ; the other people here
run up and down the shore.

86. But those who, when the law has been well
preached to them, follow the law, will pass over
the dominion of death, however difficult to cross.

87, 88. A wise man should leave the dark state
(of ordinary life), and follow the bright state (of the
Bhikshu). After going from his home to a home-
less state, he should in his retirement look for
enjoyment where enjoyment seemed difficult. Leav-
ing all pleasures behind, and calling nothing his
own, the wise man should purge himself from all
the troubles of the mind,

89. Those whose mind is well grounded in the
(seven) elements of knowledge, who without cling-

cowwon life. On reaching Nirvana, the dominion of death is
overcome. The commentator supplies tSritv^, ‘having crossed,' in
order to explain the accusative ina-^'/i’udheyyam, but possibly pdram
essanti should here be taken as one word, in the sense of over-
coming.

87, 88. Dark and bright are meant for bad and good ; cf. Sutta-
nipata, v. 526, and Dhp, v. 167. Leaving one’s home is the same
as becoming a mendicant, without a home or family, an anagdra,
or anchorite. A man in that slate of viveka, or retirement (see
v. 75, note), sees, that where before there seemed to be no pleasure
there real pleasure is to be found, or vice versl A similar idea is
expressed in verse 99. See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 474, where he speaks
of ‘ Le plaisir cie la .satisfaction, nd de la distinction.’ On pariyo-
dapeyya, see Childers, s. v.

The five troubles or evils of the mind are passion, anger, igno-
rance, arrogance, pride; see Burnouf, Lotus, pp. 360, 443. As to
parivodapeyya, see verse 183, and Lotus, pp. 523, 528; as to
akb 7 /(’ano, see Mahdbh. XII, 6568, 1240.

89. The elements of knowledge are the seven Sambodhyahgas,
on which see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 796. D’Alwis explains them as
the thirty-seven Bodhipakkhiya-dhamma. Khmisava, which I have
iranskted by ‘ they whose frailties have been conquered,’ may also

26

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VI.

ing to anything, rejoice in freedom from attachment,
whose appetites have been conquered, and who are
full of light, they are free (even) in this world.

be taken in a more metaphysical sense, as explained in the note to
V. 39, The same applies to the other terms occurring in this verse,
such as adana, anupadaya, &c. Dr. Fausboll seems inclined to
take Ssava in this p)assage, and in the other passages where it
occurs, as the PSli representative of a^raj'a. But ajraya, in Buddhist
phraseology, means rather the five organs of sense with manas,
‘the soul,' and these are kept distinct from the asavas, ‘ the inclina-
tions, the appetites, passions, or vices.’ I'he commentary on the
Abhidharma, when speaking of the YogrIX'aras, says, ‘ En reunissant
ensemble les receptacles (turaya), les choses re9ues (a^riia) et les
supports ^alambana), qui sont chacun composi^s de six termes, on
a dix-huit termes qu’on appelle “ Dhaius ” ou contenants. La col-
lection des six receptacles, ce sont les organes tie la vue, de I’oure,
de I'odorat, du goht, du toucher, et le “ manas " (ou I’organe du
coeur), qui est le dernier. La collection des six choses revues, e’est
la connaissance produite par la vue et par les autres sens jmqu'au
“manas” inclusivement. La collection des six .siqiporis, cc sont h)i
forme et les autres attrihuts sensibles jusqu’au “Dharma” (la lot ou
I'etre) inclusivement.’ See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 449,

Parinibbuta is again a technical term, the Sanskrit parinivMa
meaning ‘ freed from all worldly fetters,’ like vimukta. See Bur-
nouf, Introduction, p. 590. See Childers, s. v. nibbana, p. 270,
and Notes on Dbamrnapada, p. 3 ; and D'Alwis, Budtlhist Nirvd«a.
P- 75 -

THE VENERABLE.

^7

CHAPTER VII.

THE VENERABLE (aRHAT).

90. There is no suffering for him who has finished
his journey, and abandoned grief, who has freed him-
self on all sides, and thrown off all fetters.

91. They exert themselves with their thoughts
well-collected, they do not tarry in their abode ; like
swans who have left their lake, they leave their
house and home.

92. Men who have no riches, who live on recog-
nised food, who have perceived void and uncon-
ditioned freedom (Nirvdwa), their path is difficult to
understand, like that of birds in the air.

91. Satimanto, Sanskrit smntimanta/^, 'possessed of memory,
but here used in the technical sense of sati, the first of the Bodhyah-
gas. See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 797. Clough translates it by
‘ intense thought,' and this is the original meaning of smar, even
in Sanskrit. See Lectures on the Science vv of Language, vol. ii,
p. 332.

Uyyu%^nti, which Buddhaghosa explains by ‘ they exert them-
selves,' may possibly signify ‘ they depart,' i. e. they leave their
family, and embrace an ascetic life. See note to verse 235. See
also Rhys Davids, MahSparinibb^na-sutta, Sacred Books of the
East, vol. xi, p. 22.

92. Snm&lo and animitlo are adjectives belonging to vimokho,
one of the many names of NirvSwa, or, according to Childers, s.v.
nibbSna, p. 270, Arhatship; see Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 442,
462, on jQnya. The Sanskrit expression jfinyatanimittapra»jhitam
occurs in L'enfant egard, g a. 1 . 4. Nimitta is cause in the most
general sense, i. e. what causes existence. The commentator ex-
plains it chiefly in a moral sense ; RdgSdinimitt^bhavena animittawi,
tehi ka, vimuttan ti animitto vimokho, i. e. owing to the absence of
passion and other causes, without causation ; because freed from

28

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VII.

93. He whose appetites are stilled, who is not
absorbed in enjoyment, who has perceived void and
unconditioned freedom (Nirvciwa), his path is diffi-
cult to understand, like that of birds in the air.

94. The gods even envy him whose senses, like
horses well broken in by the driver, have been
subdued, who is free from pride, and free from
appetites ;

95. Such a one who does his duty is tolerant like
the earth, or like a threshold ; he is like a lake with-
out mud ; no new births are in store for him.

96. His thought is cpiiet, quiet are his word and
deed, when he has obtained freedom by true know-
ledge, when he has thus become a quiet man.

these causes, therefore it is called freedom without causation. See
Childers, Pali Dictionary, p. 270, col 2, line i.

The simile is intended to comj)are the ways of those who have
obtained spiritual freedom to the flight of birds, it being difficult
to understand how the birds move on without putting their feet on
anything. This, at least, is the explanation of the commentator.
The same metaphor occurs Mahdbh. XII, 6763. Childers translates,
‘ leaving no more trace of existence than a bird in the air,’

95. Without the hints given by the commentator, we should
probably take the three similes of this verse in their natural sense,
as illustrating the imperturbable state of an Arahanta, or venerable
person. The earth is always represented as an emblem of patience ;
the bolt of Indra, if taken in its technical sense, as the bolt of a
gate, might likewise suggest the idea of firmness ; while the lake is
a constant representative of serenity and purity. 'Phe commentator,
however, suggests that what is meant is, that the earth, though
flowers are cast on it, does not feci pleasure, nor a door-step dis-
pleasure, although less savoury things are thrown upon it ; and
that in like manner a wise person is indifferent to honour and dis-
honour.

96. That this very natural threefold division, tliought, word, and
deed, the trividha-dvdra or the three doors of the Buddhists (Hardy,
Manual p. 494), was not peculiar to the Buddhists or unknown to

THE VENERABLE.

29

97. The man who is free from cfedulity, but knows
the uncreated, who has cut ail ties, removed all
temptations, renounced all desires, he is the greatest
of men.

the Brahmans, has been proved against Dr. Weber by Professor
Kbppen in his ‘ Religion desBuddha,' I, p. 445. He particularly called
attention to Manu XII, 4-8 ; and he might have added Mahabh.
XII, 4059, 6512, 6549, 6554; XIII, 5677, &c. Dr. Weber has
himself afterwards brought forward a passage from the Atharva-
veda, VI, 96, 3 (yaX' >^akshushS manasd ya/C’ / 5 a vMi upSrima),
which, however, has a different meaning. A better one was quoted
by him from the Taitt. Ar. X, i, 12 (yan me manasa, vSM, karmawi
v& dushkr/taw krftam). Similar expressions have been shown to
exist in the Zend-avesta, and among the Manichaeans (Lassen,
Indische Alterthumskunde, III, p. 414 ; see also Boehtlingk’s Dic-
tionary, s. V. kdya, and Cliilders, s. v. kSyo). There was no ground,
therefore, for supposing that this formula had found its way into
the Christian liturgy from Persia, for, as Professor Cowell remarks
(Journal of Philology, vol. iii, p, 215), Greek writers, suOh as Plato,
employ very similar expressions, e. g. Protag. p. 348, 30, trpbt &nav
tfyyov (cal X< 5 yo»» (cal fiuip 6 r]tj.a. In fact, the opposition between words
and deeds occurs in almost every writer, from Homer downwards ;
and the further distinction between thoughts and words is clearly
implied even in such expre.ssions as, ‘they say in their heart.' That
the idea of sin being committed by thought was not a new idea,
even to the Jews, may be seen from Prov. xxiv. 9, ‘ the thought of
foolishness is sin.' In the Apastamba-sfftras, lately edited by
Professor Biihler, we find the expression, atho yatkh 7 / 5 a manasS
vd/5d ^akshusha vd sahkalpayan dhydyaty dhdbhivipaxyati vS tathaiva
tad bhavatityupadijanti, ‘ they say that whatever a Brahman intend-
ing with his mind, voice, or eye, thinks, says, or looks, that will be.'
This is clearly a very different division, and it is the same which is
intended in the passage from the Atharva-veda, quoted above. In
the mischief done by the eye, we have, perhaps, the first indication
of the evil eye. (MahSbh. XII, 3417. See Dhammapada, vv. 231--
234, and Nagdr^una's Suhrfllekha.)

On the technical meaning of tadi, see Childers, s.v. D’Alwis
(p. 78) has evidently received the right interpretation, but has not
understood it. M^dwa also is used very much like tadwa, and
from it mSriso, a venerable person, in Sanskrit marsha.

30

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. VIL

98. In a hamlet or in a forest, on sea or on dry
land, wherever venerable persons (Arahanta) dwell,
that place is delightful.

99. Forests are delightful ; where the world finds
no delight, there the passionless will find delight,

for they look not for pleasures.

♦

98. See Childers, s. v. ninnaw.

^ ltbraky

^■/^Acc No

0 C!l«sg Fo.....

V Book* Fo.....,., .....

♦ .

w

THE THOUSANDS.

31

CHAPTER VIII.

THE THOUSANDS.

100. Even though a speech be a thousand (of
words), but made up of senseless words, one word
of sense is better, which if a man hears, he becomes
quiet.

1 01. Even though a G^th^ (poem) be a thousand
(of words), but made up of senseless words, one
word of a Gath^ is better, which if a man hears, he
becomes quiet.

102. Though a man recite a hundred G^th^s made
up of senseless words, one word of the law is better,
which if a man hears, he becomes quiet.

103. If one man conquer m battle a thousand
times thousand men, and if anothe'r^conquer himself,,
he is the greatest of conquerors.

104. 105. One^s own self conquered is better than
all other people ; not even a god, a Gandharva, not
M^ra with Brahman could change into defeat the

100. This Sahasravarga, or Chapter of the Thousands, is quoted
by that name in the Mahdvastu (MinayefiF, Melanges Asiatiques, VI,
p. 583) : Teshdm Bhagavii^ ^a/tlS,ndz« Dharmapadeshu sahasra-
vargam bhdshati : ‘ Sahasram api vSHn 5 m anarthapadasawhitdn^m,
ekarthavati jreyd ytm jrutvd upajS;myati. Sahasram api g^th^nSm
anarthapadasaOTbitSndm, ekArthavatl jrreyd y^m jrutv^ upajrSmyati'
(MS. R, A, S, Lond.) Here the Pili text seems decidedly more
original and perfect.

104. (rila/w, according to the commentator, stands for ^ito (lih-
gavipalldso, i. e. viparydsa) ; see also Senart in Journal Asiatique,
1880, p. 500.

The Devas (gods), Gandharvas (fairies), and other fanciful beings
of the Brahmanic religion, such as the Nagas, Sarpas, Garu</as, &c.,

32

DI-IAMMAPADA. CHAP. VIIL

victory of a man who has vanquished himself, and
always lives under restraint.

106. If a man for a hundred years sacrifice month
by month with a thousand, and if he but for one
moment pay homage to a man whose soul is grounded
(in true knowledge), better is that homage than a
sacrifice for a hundred years.

107. If a man for a hundred years worship Agni
(fire) in the forest, and if he but for one moment pay
homage to a man whose soul is grounded (in true
knowledge), better is that homage than sacrifice for
a hundred years.

108. Whatever a man sacnhce in this world as an
offering or as an oblation for a whole year in order to
gain merit, the whole of it is not worth a quarter (a
farthing); reverence shown to the righteous is better.

were allowed to continue in the traditional language of the people
who had embraced Buddhism. .See the pertinent remarks of Burnouf,
Introduction, pp. 134 seq., 184. On Mtira, the tempter, see v. 7.
Sistram Aiyar, On the (raina Religion, p. xx, says : ‘ Moreover as
it is declared in the (?aina Vedas that all the gods worshipped by
the various Hindu sects, viz. 6’iva, Brahma, Visb/m, Ga?/apati,
Subramaniyan, and others, were devoted adherents of the above-
mentioned Tfrthahkaras, the 6rainas therefore do not consider
them as unworthy of their worship; but as they are servants of
Arugan, they consider them to be deities of their system, and
accordingly perform certain p%as in honour of them, and worship
them also.’ The case is more doubtful with orthodox Buddhists.

Orthodox Buddhists,’ as Mr. D’Alwis writes (Attanagalu-vansa,
p. 55), ‘ do not consider the worship of the Devas as being sanc-
tioned by him who disclaimed for himself and all the Devas any
power over man’s soul. Yet the Buddhists are everywhere idol-
worshippers. Buddhism, however, acknowledges the existence of
some of the Hindu deities, and from the various friendly offices
which those Devas are said to have rendered to Gotama, Buddhists
evince a respect for their idols.’ See also Buddhaghosha's Parables,
p. 162.

THE THOUSANDS.

33

109. He who always greets and constantly reveres
the aged, four things will increase to him, viz. life,
beauty, happiness, power.

no. But he who lives a hundred years, vicious
and unrestrained, a life of one day is better if a man
is virtuous and reflecting.

111. And he who lives a hundred years, ignorant
and unrestrained, a life of one day is better if a man
is wise and reflecting.

1 12. And he who lives a hundred years, idle and
weak, a life of one day is better if a man has attained
firm strength.

1 13. And he who lives a hundred years, not seeing
beginning and end, a life of one day is better if a
man sees beginning and end.

1 1 4. And he who lives a hundred years, not
seeing the immortal place, a life of one day is better
if a man sees the immortal place.

1 1 5. And he who lives a hundred years, not
seeing the highest law, a life of one day is better
if a man sees the highest law.

109. Dr. Fau.sb 611 , in a most important note, called attention to
the fact that the same verse, with slight variations, occurs in Manu.
We there read, II, 12 1 :

AbhivSdanafllasya nityawz vrfddhopasevina/i,

JTatvdri sampravardhante dyur vidyd yajo balam.

Here the four things are, life, knowledge, glory, power.

In the Apastamba-shtras, I, 2, 5, 15, the reward promised for
the same virtue is svargam dyus ^a, ‘heaven and long life.' It
seems, therefore, as if the original idea of this verse came from the
Brahmans, and was afterwards adopted by the Buddhists. See
Mahdbh. V, 1398 ; Weber, Ind. Stud. XIII, p. 405, How largely
it spread is shown by Dr. Fausboll from the Asiatic Researches,
XX, p. 259, where the same verse of the Dhammapada is
mentioned as being widely in use among the Buddhists of Siam.

112. On kusfto, see note to verse 7.

[10] D

34

DHAMMAPADA. CPIAP. IX.

CHAPTER IX.

EVIL.

1 1 6. A man should hasten towards the good, and
should keep his thought away from evil ; if a man
does what is- good slothfully, his mind delights in
evil.

117. If a man commits a sin, let him not do it
again ; let him not delight in sin ; the accumulation
of evil is painful.

1 1 8. If a man does what is good, let him do it
again ; let him delight in it : the accumulation of
good is delightful.

1 19. Even an evil-doer sees happiness so long as
his evil deed does not ripen ; but when his evil deed
ripens, then does the evil-doer see evil

120. Even a good man sees evil days so long as
his good deed does not ripen; but when ‘his good
deed ripens, then does the good man see good
things.

121. Let no man think lightly of evil, saying in
his heart, It will not come nigh unto me. Even by
the falling of water-drops a water-pot is filled ; the
fool becomes full of evil, even if he gather it little
by little.

122. Let no man think lightly of good, saying in
his heart, It will not come nigh unto me. Even by
the falling of water-drops a water-pot is filled ; the
wise man becomes full of good, even if he gather it
little by little.

123. Let a man avoid evil deeds, as a merchant,
if he has few companions and carries much wealth,

EVIL.

35

avoids a dangerous road ; as a man who loves life
avoids poison.

124. He who has no wound on his hand, may
touch poison with his hand ; poison does not affect
one who has no wound; nor is there evil for one
who does not commit evil.

125. If a man offend a harmless, pure, and inno-
cent person, the evil falls back upon that fool, like
light dust thrown up against tlie wind.

126. Some people are born again; evil-doers go
to hell ; righteous people go to heaven ; those who
are free from all worldly desires attain Nirvd;za.

127. Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea,
not if we enter into the clefts of the mountains, is
there known a spot in the whole world where a
man might be freed from an evil deed.

128. Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea,
not if we enter into the clefts of the mountains, is
there known a spot in the whole world where death
could not overcome (the mortal).

125. Cf. Suttanipdta, v. 661; Indische Spriiche, 1582; Katha-
saritsdgara, 49, 222.

126. hor a description of hell and its long, yet not endless
sufferings, see Buddhaghosha’s Parables, p. 132. The pleasures of
heaven, too, are frequently described in -these Parables and else-
where. Buddha himself enjoyed these pleasures of heaven, before he
was born for the last time. It is probably when good and evil deeds
are equally balanced, that men are born again as human beings ;
this, at least, is the opinion of the (rainas. Cf. Chintdma«i, ed.
H. Bower, Introd. p. xv.

127. Cf. St. Luke xii. 2, ‘ For there is nothing covered that shall
not be revealed;’ and Psalm cxxxix. 8-12.

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. X.

36

CHAPTER X.

PUNISHMENT.

1 29. All men tremble at punishment, all men fear
death ; remember that you are like unto them, and
do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

1 30. All men tremble at punishment, all men love
life ; remember that thou art like unto them, and do
not kill, nor cause slaughter.

1 3 1. He who, seeking his own happiness, punishes
or kills beings who also long for happiness, will not
find happiness after death.

129. One feels tempted, no doubt, to take upama in the sense
of 'the nearest (der Nachste), the neighbour,’ and to translate,
‘having made oneself one's neighbour,’ i. e. loving one’s neighbour
as oneself. But as upamS,m, with a short a, is the correct accusative
of upamd, we must translate, ‘ having made oneself the likeness,
the image of others, having placed oneself in the place of others/
This is an expression which occurs frequently in Sanskrit; cf.
Hitopadera I, ii :

Pr^nfi yathStmano * bhish/a bhtitdnam api te tatha,
Atmaupamyena blifttcshu daySw kurvanti sSdhava^.

‘ As life is dear to oneself, it is dear also to other living beings :
by comparing oneself with others, good people bestow pity on all
beings.’

See also Hit. I, 12 ; Ram. V, 23, g, Utmtnam upam^iW kntvS,
sveshu ddreshu ramyadm, ‘making oneself a likeness, i.e. putting
oneself in the position of other people, it is right to love none but
one’s own wife/ Dr. Fausbbll has called attention to similar pas-
sages in the Mahfibhdrata, XIII, 5569 seq.

130. Cf. St. Luke vi. 31,

131. Dr. Fausboll points out the striking similarity between this
verse and two verses occurring in Manu and the Mahdbharata ; —

PUNISHMENT.

37

132. He who seeking his own happiness does not
punish or kill beings who also long for happiness,
will find happiness after death.

133. Do not speak harshly to anybody; those
who are spoken to will answer thee in the same
way. Angry speech is painful, blows for blows will
touch thee.

134. If, like a shattered metal plate (gong), thou
utter nothing, then thou hast reached Nirv^;??a;
anger is not known to thee.

135. As a cowherd with his staff drives his cows
into the stable, so do Age and Death drive the life
of men.

136. A fool does not know when he commits his
evil deeds : but the wicked man burns by his own
deeds, as if burnt by fire.

137. He who inflicts pain on innocent and harm-
less persons, will soon come to one of these ten
states :

Manu V, 45 :

Yo*hiOTsak{lm bhClt^ni hinasty dtmasukhe^MayS,

Sa giviims /taiva na kva-^it sukham edhate.

Mahdbhdrata XIII, 5568 ;

Ahiwsakdni bhiitdni da«<fena vinihanti ya/^,

AtmanaA sukham i^/i&Aan sa pretya naiva sukht bhavet.

If it were not for ahw/sakdni, in which Manu and the Mahdbharata
agree, I should say that the verses in both were Sanskrit modifica-
tions of the Pdli original. The verse in the Mahdbhdrata presup-
poses the verse of the Dharamapada.

133, See Mahdbhdrata XII, 4056.

134. See Childers, s.v. nibbdna, p. 270, and s.v. 'kimso ; D'Alwis,
Buddhist Nirvd«a, p. 35.

136. The metaphor of ‘burning’ for ‘suffering' is very
common in Buddhist literature. Everything burns, i. e. every-
thing suffers, was one of the first experiences of Buddha himself.
See V. 146.

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. X.

138. He will have cruel suffering, loss, injury of
the body, heavy affliction, or loss of mind,

139. Or a misfortune coming from the king, or
a fearful accusation, or loss of relations, or destruc-
tion of treasures,

140. Or lightning-fire will burn his houses; and
when his body is destroyed, the fool will go to hell.

1 41. Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not
fasting, or lying on the earth, not rubbing with dust,

138. ‘Cruel suffering’ is explained by sisaroga, ‘headache,' &c.
‘ Loss ’ is taken for loss of money. ‘ Injury of the body' is held to
be the cutting off of the arm, and other limbs. ‘ Heavy afflictions'
are, again, various kinds of diseases.

139. Upasarga means ‘accident, misfortune.’ Dr. Fausbdll
translates nigato va upassaggam by ‘ fulgentis (lunae) defectionem ; '
Dr. Weber by ‘ Bestrafung vom Konig ; ' Beal by ‘ some govern-
mental difficulty.’ Abbhakkhitnam, Sanskrit abhyakhyiinain, is a
heavy accusation for high treason, or similar offences. Beal trans-
lates, ‘ some false accusation.' I'he ‘ destruction of pleasures or
treasures ’ is explained by gold being changed to coals (see Buddha-
ghosha’s Parables, p. 98 ; Thiessen, Kisiigotami, p. 6), pearls to
cotton seed, corn to potsherds, and by men and cattle becoming
blind, lame, &c.

1 4 1. Cf. Hibbert Lectures, p. 355, Dr. Fausbdll has pointed out
that the same or a very similar verse occurs in a legend taken from
the Divyavadana, and translated by Burnouf (Introduction, p. 313
seq.) Burnouf translates the verse : ‘ Ce n'est ni la coutume de
marcher nu, ni les cheveux nattds, ni I’u.sage d'argile, ni le choix
des diverses espfeces d'aliments, ni I’habitude de coucher sur la
terre nue, ni la poussi&re, ni la malpropretd, ni Fatten tion h fuir
I'abri d'un toil, qui sont capables de dissiper le trouble dans lequel
nous jettent les ddsirs non-satisfaits ; mais qu’un homme, mattre
de ses sens, calme, recucilli, chaste, dvitant de faire du mai I, aucune
crdature, accomplisse la I.,oi, et il sera, quoique pard d’ornernents,
un Brahmane, un Cramana, un Beligieux.’ See also Suttanipata,
v. 248.

Walking naked and the other things mentioned in our verse
ate outward signs of a saintly life, and these Buddha rejects because
they do not calm the passions. Nakedness he seems to have

PUNISHMENT.

39

not sitting motionless, can purify a mortal who has
not overcome desires.

142. He who, though dressed in fine apparel,
exercises tranquillity, is quiet, subdued, restrained,
chaste, and has ceased to find fault with all other
beings, he indeed is a Brahma?^a, an ascetic (^ra-
niawa), a friar (bhikshu).

143. Is there in this world any man so restrained
by shame that he does not provoke reproof, as a
noble horse the whip ?

144. Like a noble horse when touched by the

rejected on other grounds too, if we may judge from the Suma-
gadh^-avadfina : ‘ A number of naked friars were assembled in the
house of the daughter of AnStha-ph/«5?ika. She called her daughter-
in-law, Sumdgadhd, and said, “ Go and see those highly respectable
persons.” Sumdgadhd, expecting to see some of the saints, like
3'aripulra, Maudgalyfiyana, and others, ran out full of joy. But
when she saw these friars with their hair like pigeon wings, covered
by nothing but dirt, offensive, and looking like demons, she became
sad. “Why are you sad?" said her mother-in-law. Sumdgadhd
replied, “ O mother, if these are saints, what must sinners be like?'"

Burnouf (Introduction, p. 312) supposed that the (rainas only,
and not the Buddhists, allowed nakedness. But the Grainas, too,
do not allow it universally. They are divided into two parties, the
Avetarabaras and Digambaras. The •SVetambaras, clad in white,
are the followers of Parjrvandtha, and wear clothes. The Digam-
baras, i, e. sky-clad, disrobed, are followers of Mahavira, resident
chiefly in Southern India. At present they, too, wear clothing,
but not when eating. See S^stram Aiyar, p. xxi.

The ^'•a/d, or the hair platted and gathered up in a knot, was a
sign of a .Shiva ascetic. The sitting motionless is one of the pos-
tures assumed by ascetics. Clough explains ukku/ika as ‘ the act
of sitting on the heels ; ' Wilson gives for utka/ukdsana, ‘ sitting on
the hams.' See P'ausbdil, note on verse 140.

142. This verse has to be taken in connection with the pre-
ceding verse, to show that though a man cares about his outward
appearance and is well dressed, he may be a true disciple for all
that, if only he practises virtue. As to da«(/anidhana, see MahSbh.
XII, 6559, and Suttanipdta, v, 34.

40

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. X.

whip, be ye strenuous and eager, and by faith, by
virtue, by energy, by meditation, by discernment of
the law you will overcome this great pain, perfect in
knowledge and in behaviour, and never forgetful.

145. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they
like) ; fletchers bend the arrow ; carpenters bend
a log of wood ; good people fashion themselves.

145. The same as verse 80. According to Fausboll and Subhfiti
we ought to render the verses by, ‘ What man is there found on
earth so restrained by shame that he never provokes reproof, as a
good horse the whip?' See, however, Childers, s.v, appabodhati.
Fausboll maintains his view.

OLD AGE.

41

CHAPTER XL

OLD AGE.

146. How is there laughter, how is there joy, as
this world is always burning? Do you not seek
a light, ye who are surrounded by darkness ?

147. Look at this dressed-up lump, covered with
wounds, joined together, sickly, full of many schemes,
but which has no strength, no hold !

148. This body is wasted, full of sickness, and
frail ; this heap of corruption breaks to pieces, life
indeed ends in death.

148. Dr. Fausbdll informs me that Childers proposed the emen-
dation mara/zantaw hi ^Ivitaw. The following extract from a letter,
addressed .by Childers to Dr. Fausbdll, will be read with interest: —
‘ As regards Dhp. v. 148 , 1 have no doubt whatever. I quite agree
with you that the idea (mors est vita ejus) is a profound and noble
one, but the question is, Is the idea there? I think not. Marawaw
tamhi ^ivitaw is not Pdli, I mean not a Pali construction, and
years ago even it grated on my ear as a harsh phrase. The reading
of your MSS. of the texts is nothing ; your MSS. of Dhammapada
are very bad ones, and it is merely the vicious Sinhalese spelling of
bad MSS., like kammajwta^* for kammantaw. But the comment sets
the question at rest at once, for it explains marar/antaw by marawa-
pariyosdnar;/, which is exactly the same. I see there is one serious
difficulty left, that all your- MSS. seem to have tamhi, and not
tazw hi ; but are you sure it is so ? There was a Dhammapada in
the India Office Library, and I had a great hunt for it a few days
ago, but to my deep disappointment it is missing. I do not agree
with you that the sentence “All Life is bounded by Death,” is
trivial : it is a truism, but half the noblest passages in poetry are
truisms, and unless I greatly mistake, this very passage will be found
in many other literatures'/

Dr. Fausbbll adds

*I have still the same doubt as before, because of all my

42

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XL

149. After one has looked at those grey bones,
thrown away like gourds in the autumn, what
pleasure is there (left in life) !

150. After a stronghold has been made of the
bones, it is covered with flesh and blood, and there
dwell in it old age and death, pride and deceit.

15 1. The brilliant chariots of kings are destroyed,
the body also approaches destruction, but the virtue
of good people never approaches destruction, — thus
do the good say to the good.

152. A man who has learnt little, grows old like
an ox ; his flesh grows, but his knowledge does not
grow.

153. 154. Looking for the maker of this taber-
nacle, I have run through a course of many births,

MSS. reading inara«az« tamhi. I do not know the readings
of the London MSS. The explanation of the commentary does
not settle the question, as it may as well be considered an
explanation of my reading as of the reading which Childers
proposed. — V. Fausb5ll.’

Fausbbll has now surrendered his doubts, and he produces
himself a number of passages where this phrase mara«dnta« hi
jgtvanam occurs, e. g. Mah^bh. (ed. Calcutta), XI, 48 j 20*7 ; XU,
829; RSmSy. (ed. Bombay), AyodhySk., p. 197; Divydvadfina,
p. 27 ; 100,

149. In the RudrSyaw^vaddna of the Divydvad^na this verse
appears as,

Yanim^ny apariddhdni vikshiptSni duo duai,
KapotavarwSny asthini tani dmh/vaiha kd rati/^:.

See Schiefner, M^l. Asiat. VIII, p. 589 ; CrStaka, vol i, p. 322.

150. The expression mawzsalohitalepanam is curiously like the
expression used in Manu VI, 76, mSmsajomtalepanam, and in
several passages of the MahdbhSrata, XII, 12462, 12053, pointed
out by Dr, Fausboll.

153 ) ^54’ These two verses are famous amon^ Buddhists, for
they are the words ■jvhich the founder of Buddhism is supposed
to have uttered at the moment he attained to Buddhahood. (See
Spence Hardy, Manual, p. t8o.) According to the Lalita-vistara,

OLD AGE.

43

not finding him ; and painful is birth again and
again. But now, maker of the tabernacle, thou hast
been seen ; thou shalt not make up this tabernacle
again. All thy rafters are broken, thy ridge-pole
is sundered; the mind, approaching the Eternal

however, the words uttered on that solemn occasion were those
quoted in the note to verse 39. In the commentary on the
Brahma^Sla this verse is called the first speech of Buddha, his last
speech being the words in the Mahiparinibbfi,na-sutta, ‘Life is
subject to age; strive in earnest, &c.' The words used in the Maha-
parinibbfina-sutta, Chap. IV, 2, Xatunnam dhamm^nam ananubodhfi.
appa/ivedha evam idaw dfghain addhanajyi sandh^vitaz^ saiwsarita/W
miama« k’ eva tumhakaw /I’a, answer to the anticipation expressed
in our verse.

The exact rendering of this verse has been much discussed, chiefly
by Mr. D’AIwis in the Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxviii, and again in his
Buddhist Nirvfifza, p. 78 ; also by Childers, Notes on Dhammapada,
p. 4, and in his Dictionary. Gogerly translated : ‘ Through various
transmigrations I must travel, if I do not discover the builder whom
I seek.' Spence Hardy : ‘ Through many different births I have run
(to me not having found), seeking the architect of the desire-re-
sembling house.’ Fausboll ; ‘ Multiplices generationis revolutiones
percurreram, non inveniens, domus (corporis) fabricatorem quaerens.’
And again (p. 322) : ‘Multarum generationum revolutio mihi sub-
eunda esset, nisi invenissem domus fabricatorem.’ Childers: ‘I have
run through the revolution of countless births, seeking the architect
of this dwelling and finding him not.’ D’Alwis: ‘ Through transmi-
grations of numerous births have I run, not discovering, (though)
seeking the liouse-builder.' All depends on how we take sandha-
vissam, which Fausbbll takes as a conditional, Childers, following
Trenckner, as an aorist, because the sense imperatively requires
an aorist. I had formerly translated it as a future, though
qualifying it by the participle present anibbisan, i.e. not finding,
and taking it in the sense of, if or so long as I do not find the true
cause of existence. Anibbisan I had translated by not resting
(anirviran), but the commentator seems to authorise the meaning
of not finding (avindanto, alabhanto), and in that case all the
material difficulties of the verse seem to me to disappear.

‘ The maker of the tabernacle ’ is explained as a poetical expres-
sion for the cause of new births, at least according to the views of

44

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XL

(visankh^ra, nirvi;^a), has attained to the extinction
of all desires.

155. Men who have not observed proper disci-
pline, and have not gained wealth in their youth,
perish like old herons in a lake without fish.

156. Men who have not observed proper disci-
pline, and have not gained wealth in their youth,
lie, like broken bows, sighing after the past.

Buddha’s followers, whatever his own views may have been. Bud-
dha had conquered MSra, the representative of worldly temptations,
the father of worldly desires, and as desires (tawhd) are, by means
of updd^na and bhava, the cause of ^ati, or ‘ birth,’ the destruction of
desires and the conquest of MSra are nearly the same thing, though
expressed differently in the philosophical and legendary language
of the Buddhists. Tawih-S, ‘thirst’ or ‘craving,’ is mentioned as
serving in the army of Mdra. (Lotus, p. 443.)

155. On ^-^iftyand, i.e. kshayanti, see Dr. Bollensen’s learned
remarks, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft, XVIII,
834, and Boehtlingk-Roth, s.v. kshS.

SELF.

45

CHAPTER XIL

SELF.

157. If a man hold himself dear, let him watch
himself carefully ; during one at least out of the
three watches a wise man should be watchful.

158. Let each man direct himself first to what is
proper, then let him teach others ; thus a wise man
will not suffer.

159. If a man make himself as he teaches others
to be, then, being himself well subdued, he may
subdue (odiers) ; for one’s own self is difficult to
subdue.

1 60. Self is the lord of self, who else could be
the lord ? With self well subdued, a man finds a
lord such as few can find,

1 6 1. The evil done by oneself, self-begotten, self-
bred, crushes the foolish, as a diamond breaks even
a precious stone.

162. He whose wickedness is very great brings
himself down to that state where his enemy wishes
him to be, as a creeper does with the tree which it
surrounds.

163. Bad deeds, and deeds hurtful to ourselves,
are easy to do : what is beneficial and good, that is
very difficult to do.

157. The three watches of the night are n.eant for the three
stages of Jife. Cf. St. Mark xiii. 37, ‘And what I say unto you,

I say unto all, Watch.'

158. Cf, (rataka, vol. ii, p. 441.

1 6 1. The Chinese translation renders vt^iram by ‘steel drill.'

46

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP, XII.

164. The foolish man who scorns the rule of
venerable (Arahat), of the elect (Ariya), of the vir-
tuous, and follows a false doctrine, he bears fruit to
his own destruction, like the fruits of the Ka^'/z^aka
reed.

165. By oneself the evil is done, by oneself one
suffers ; by oneself evil is left undone, b3r oneself
one is purified. The pure and the impure (stand
and fall) by themselves, no one can purify another.

166. Let no one forget his own duty for the sake
of another’s, however great ; let a man, after he has
discerned his own duty, be always attentive to his
•duty.

164. The reed either dies after it has borne fruit, or is cut down
for the sake of its fruit.

Di///n, literally 'view,' is used even by itself, like the Greek
‘ hairesis,' in the sense of heresy (see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 444). In
other places a distinction is made between mU’<('/iadi///n (vv. 167,
316) and sammMi///n (v. 319). If arahata^ ariyUnaw are used in
their technical sense, we should translate ‘ the reverend Arhats/ —
Arhat being the highest degree of the four orders of Ariyas, viz.
-S'rotatpanna, Sakaddgdmin, Andgfimin, and Arhat, See note to
verse 178.

166. Attha, lit- 'object,' must here be taken in a moral sense,
as ‘duty’ rather than as ‘-advantage.’ Childers rendered it by
‘ spiritual good.’ The story which Buddhaghosa tells of the Thera
Attadattha gives a clue to the origin of some of his parables, which
seem to have been invented to suit the text of the Dhammapada
rather than vice versS. A similar case occurs in the commentary
to verse 227.

THE WORLD.

47

CHAPTER XIII.

THE WORLD.

167. Do not follow the evil law! Do not live on
in thoughtlessness ! Do not follow false doctrine !
Be not a friend of the world.

168. Rouse thyself! do not be idle I Follow the
law of virtue! The virtuous rests in bliss in this
world and in the next.

169. Follow the law of virtue ; do not follow that
of sin. The virtuous rests in bliss in this world and
in the next.

170. Look upon the world as you would on a
bubble, look upon it as you would on a mirage : the
king of death does not see him who thus looks down
upon the world.

1 71. Come, look at this world, glittering like
a royal chariot ; the foolish are immersed in it, but
the wise do not touch it.

172. He who formerly was reckless and after-
wards became sober, brightens up this world, like
the moon when freed from clouds.

173. He whose evil deeds are covered by good
deeds, brightens up this world, like the moon when
freed from clouds.

167. Childers says, I have not the slightest notion of the meaning
of loiavaddhano. Could it mean, Do not swell the number of
worldlings ?

168, 169. See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 65.

170. See Suttanipdta, v, 1118.

48

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIIL

1 74. This world is dark, few only can see here ;
a few only go to heaven, like birds escaped from
the net.

175. The swans go on the path of the sun, they
go miraculously through the ether ,* the wise are led
out of this world, when they have conquered Mdra
and his train.

176. If a man has transgressed the one law, and
speaks lies, and scoffs at another world, there is no
evil he will not do.

177. The uncharitable do not go to the world of
the gods ; fools only do not praise liberality ; a wise
man rejoices in liberality, and through it becomes
blessed in the other world.

1 78. Better than sovereignty over the earth, better

175, Haiwsa may be meant for the bird, whether flamingo, or
swan, or ibis (see Hardy, Manual, p. 17), but it may also, I believe,
be taken in the sense of saint. As to iddhi, ‘ magical power,’
i.e. r/ddhi, see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 310; Spence Hardy, Manual,
pp. 498, 504 ; Legends, pp. 5g, 177 ; and. note to verse 254.

178. SotSpatti, the technical term for the first step in the path
that leads to Nirvana. There are four such steps, or stages, and on
entering each, a mari receives a new title r—

(1) The 6’rotaapanna, lit. he who has got into the stream.
A man may have seven more births before he reaches the other
shore, i.e. Nirvtiwa.

(2) Sakr/dagamin, lit. he who comes back once, so called be-
cause, after having entered this stage, a man is bom only once
more among men or gods. Childers shows that this involves really
two more births, one in the deva world, the other in the world of
men. Burnouf says the same, Introduction, p. 293.

(3) AndgSmin, lit. he who does not come back, so called be-
cause, after this stage, a man cannot be born again in a lower
world, but can only be born into a Brahman world, before he
reaches Nirvawa,

(4) Arhat, the venerable, the perfect, who has reached the highest
stage that can be reaclted, and from which Nirvawa is perceived

THE WORLD.

49

than going to heaven, better than lordship over all
worlds, is the reward of Sotipatti, the first step in
holiness.

(sukkhavipassan^, Lotus, p. 849). See Hardy, Eastern Monachism,
p. 280; Burnouf, Introduction, p. 209; K6ppen, p. 398; D’Alwis,
Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxiv ; Feer, Sutra en 42 articles, p. 6.

50

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIV.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE BUDDHA (tHE AWAKENED).

179. He whose conquest cannot be conquered
again, into whose conquest no one in this world
enters, by what track can you lead him, the
Awakened, the Omniscient, the trackless ?

180. He whom no desire with its snares and
poisons can lead astray, by what track can you
lead him, the Awakened, the Omniscient, the
trackless ?

1 8 1. Even the gods envy those who are awakened
and not forgetful, who are given to meditation, who
are wise, and who delight in the repose of retire-
ment (from the world).

182. Difficult (to obtain) is the conception of men,
difficult is the life of mortals, difficult is the hearing
of the True Law, difficult is the birth of the Awak-
ened (the attainment of Buddhahood).

179, 180. Buddha, the Awakened, is to be taken as an appella-
tive rather than as the proper name of the Buddha (see v. 183).
It means, anybody who has arrived at complete knowledge. Anan-
tago-i’aram I take in the sense of, possessed of unlimited knowledge.
Apadam, which Dr. Fausbbll takes as an epithet of Buddha and
translates by ‘ non investigabilis,' is translated ‘ trackless,’ in order
to show the play on the word pada; see Childers, s. v. The com-
mentator says : ‘ The man who is possessed of even a single one of
such conditions as rdga, &c., him ye may lead forward; but the
Buddha has not even one condition or basis of renewed existence,
and therefore by what track will you lead this unconditioned
Buddha?’ Cf. Dhp. vv. 92, 420 ; and 6?ataka,vol. i, pp. 79, 313.

182. Mr. Beal (Dhammapada, p. no) states that this verse occurs
also in the Sutra of the forty-two sections.

THE BUDDHA.

51

183. Not to commit any sin, to do good, and to
purify one’s mind, that is the teaching of (all) the
Awakened.

184. The Awakened call patience the highest
penance, long-suffering the highest Nirvi/^a; for he
is not an anchorite (pravra^ita) who strikes others,
he is not an ascetic (^rama^a) who insults others.

185. Not to blame, not to strike, to live restrained
under the law, to be moderate in eating, to sleep and
sit alone, and to dwell on the highest thoughts, —
this is the teaching of the Awakened.

183. This verse is again one of the most solemn verses among
the Buddhists. According to Csoma Korosi, it ought to follow
the famous AryS, stanza, ‘Ye dhamma’ (Lotus, p. 522), and serve
as its complement. But though this may be the case in Tibet, it
was not so originally. The same verse (ascribed to Kanakamuni)
occurs at the end of the Chinese translation of the Pratimoksha
(Beal, J. R. A. S. XIX, p. 473; Catena, p. 159); in the Tibetan
translation of the Githasahgraha, v. 14 (Schiefner, Mdl. Asiat.
VIII, pp. 568, 586; and Csoma Korosi, As. Res. XX, p. 79).
Burnouf has fully discussed the metre and meaning of our verse on
pp. 527, 528 of his ‘ Lotus.’ He prefers sa/?;ittaparidamanam, which
Csoma translated by ‘ the mind must be brought under entire sub-
jection’ (sva-(’ittaparidamanam), and the late Dr. Mill by ‘proprii
intellectus subjugatio.’ But his own MS. of the Mahapadhana-sutta
gave likewise sa-(’ittapariyodapanam, and this is no doubt the cor-
rect reading, (See D’Alwis, Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxix.) We
found pariyodapeyya in verse 88, in the sense of purging oneself
from the troubles of the mind. From the same verb, (pari) ava + dai,
we may derive the name Avadana, a legend, originally a pure and
virtuous act, an aptareia, 'afterwards a sacred story, and possibly a
story the hearing of which purifies the mind. See Boehtlingk-
Roth, s. V. avadana.

184. Childers, following the commentator, translates, ‘Patience,
which is long-suffering, is the best devotion, the Buddhas declare
that Nirvana is the best (of things),’

185. Patimokkhe, ‘under the law,’ i, e. according to the law, the
law which leads to Moksha, or ‘ freedom.’ Pratimoksha is the title
of the oldest collection of the moral laws of the Buddhists (Burnouf,

E 2

52

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XIV.

1 86. There is no satisfying lusts, even by a shower
of gold pieces ; he who knows that lusts have a short
taste and cause pain, he is wise ;

1 8 7. Even in heavenly pleasures he finds no satis-
faction, the disciple who is fully awakened delights
only in the destruction of all desires.

188. Men, driven by fear, go to many a refuge, to
mountains and forests, to groves and sacred trees.

189. But that is not a safe refuge, that is not the
best refuge ; a man is not delivered from all pains
after having gone to that refuge.

190. He who takes refuge with Buddha, the Law,

Introduction, p. 300 ; Bigandet, The Life of Gaudama, p. 439 ;
Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 162), and as it was common both to
the Southern and the Northern Buddhists, patimokkhe in our pas-
sage may possibly be meant, as Professor Weber suggests, as the
title of that very collection. The commentator explains it by
^e///^akastla and piltimokkhasJla. Sayandsam might stand for jaya*
najanam, see Mahdbh. XII, 6684 ; but in Buddhist literature it is
intended for jayanasanam ; See also Mahabh. XII, 9978, jayydsane.’
Fausbdll now reads pdntaw instead ofpattha;^, as in Suttanipdta, 337.

187. There is a curious similarity between this verse and verse
6303 (9919) of the -Santiparva;

Yai/’a kamasukha/// loke, yzk kz divyam mahat sukham,
Trzshwdkshayasukhasyaite ndrhata/^i shocfarfzzz kaldm.

* And whatever delight of love there is on earth, and whatever is
the great delight in heaven, they are not worth the sixteenth part
of the pleasure which springs from the destruction of all desires.'
The two verses 186, 187 are ascribed to. king Mandhatrz', shortly
before his death (Mdl, Asiat, VIII, p. 471 ; see also G'dtaka, vol. ii,
p. 113).

188-192. These verses occur in Sanskrit in the Prdtihdryasdtra,
translated by Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 162-189 5 see p. 186.
Burnouf translates rukkha/^etydni by ‘ arbres consacrds ; ' properly,
sacred shrines under or near a tree. See also (rdtaka, vol. i, p. 97.

190. Buddha, Dharrna, and Sahgha are called the Trirarazza
(cf. Burnouf, Introd. p. 630). The four holy truths are the four
statements that there is pain in this world, that the source of

THE BUDDHA.

53

and the Church ; he who, with clear understanding,
sees the four holy truths ; —

19 1. Viz. pain, the origin of pain, the destruction
of pain, and the eightfold holy way that leads to the
quieting of pain ; —

192. That is the safe refuge, that is the best
refuge ; having gone to that refuge, a man is deli-
vered from all pain.

193. A supernatural person (a Buddha) is not
easily found, he is not born everywhere. Wherever
,such a sage is born, that race prospers.

194. Happy is the arising of the awakened,
happy is the teaching of the True Law, happy is
peace in the church, happy is the devotion of those
who are at peace.

195. 196. He who pays homage to those who
deserve homage, whether the awakened (Buddha)
or their disciples, those who have overcome the
host (of evils), and crossed the flood of sorrow, he
who pays homage to such as have found deliverance
and know no fear, his merit can never be measured
by anybody.

pain is desire, that desire can be annihilated, that there is a way
(shown by Buddha) by which the annihilation of all desires can be
achieved, and freedom be obtained. That way consists of eight
parts. (See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 630.) The eightfold way
forms the subject of Chapter XVIII. (See also Feer, Journal
As. 1870, p. 418, and Chips from a German Workshop, 2nd ed.
vol. i, p. 251 seq.)

54

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XV,

CHAPTER XV.

HAPPINESS.

197. We live happily indeed, not hating those
who hate us ! among men who hate us we dwell
free from hatred!

198. We live happily indeed, free from ailments
among the ailing ! among men who are ailing let us
dwell free from ailments I

199. We live happily indeed, free from greed
among the greedy ! among men who are greedy let
us dwell free from greed I

200. We live happily indeed, though we call
nothing our own I We shall be like the bright gods,
feeding on happiness !

201. Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is
unhappy. He who has given up both victory and
defeat, he, the contented, is happy.

198. The ailment here meant is moral rather than physical.
Cf. MahSbh, XII, 9924, sawpra.yanto nirainaya/^; 9923, yo*sau
pra«antiko togas ta;;^ tr/sh«az« tya^ata/i sukham.

200. The words placed in the mouth of the king of Videha,
while his residence MithilS was in flames, are curiously like our
verse ; cf. Malutbh. XII, 9917,

Susuklia/zi vata ^Mmi yasya me ndsti kiwfiana,
Mithilaydm pradfptaySz?^ na me dahyati ki? 7 <^ana.

‘ I live happily, indeed, for I have nothing ; while Milhikt is in
flames, nothing of mine is burning.’ Cf, Muir, Religious Senti-
ments, p. io6.

The ibhassara, i, e. SbhSsvara, ‘ the bright gods,’ are frequently
mentioned. Cf. Burnouf, Introd. p. 6ii.

20 r. This verse is ascribed to Buddha, when he heard of the
defeat of A^ 4 taratru by Prasena^it, It exists in the Northern or

HAPPINESS.

55

202. There is no fire like passion; there is no
losing throw like hatred ; there is no pain like this
body ; there is no happiness higher than rest.

203. Hunger is the worst of diseases, the elements
of the body the greatest evil; if one knows this
truly, that is Nirvi^a, the highest happiness.

Sanskrit and in the Southern or PSIi texts, i.e, in the AvadSna-
jataka, in the Saz®yutta-nik^ya. See Feer, Comptes Rendus, 1871,
p. 44, and Journal As. 1880, p. 509. In the Avaddna-rataka, the
Sanskrit version is —

Gzyo vairam prasavati, dnhkh^m jete par^j^ita.^,
Upa^intaA sukhaza jete hitvi ^ayapard^ayam.

202. I take kali .in the sense of an unlucky die which makes a
player lose his game. A real simile seems wanted here, as in
verse 251, where, for the same reason, I translate graha by ‘ shark,’
not by ‘captivitas,’ as Dr. Fausboll proposes. The same scholar
translates kali in our verse by ‘ peccatum.’ If there is any ob-
jection to translating kali in P^li by ‘unlucky die,’ I should still
prefer to take it in the sense of the age of depravity, or the demon
of depravity. To judge from AbhidhS,nappadtpikd, 1106, kali was
used for parS^gaya, i. e. loss at game, a losing throw, and occurs in
that sense again in verse 252. The Chinese translation has, ‘there
is no distress (poison) worse than hate.' A similar verse occurs
MahS,bh. .Santip. 175, v. 35.

‘ Body ’ for khandha is a free translation, but it is difficult to find
any better rendering. The Chinese translation also has * body.'
According to the Buddhists each sentient being consists of five
khandhas (skandha), or aggregates, the organized body (rfipa-
kliandha) wdth its four internal capacities of sensation (vedanfi),
perception (sa%-«fi), conception (sazwskara), knowledge {vignkna.).
See Burnouf, Introd. pp. 589, 634 ; Lotus, p. 335.

203. Sawskfira is the fourth of the five khandhas, but the com-
mentator takes it here, as well as in verse 255, for the five khandhas
together, in which case we can only translate it by ‘body,’ or
‘elements of the body.’ See also verse 278. Childers proposes
‘ organic life’ (Notes on Dhammapada, p. i). There are, however,
other sawskfiras, which follow immediately upon avidyfi, ‘ ignorance,’
as second in the series of the nidSnas, or ‘ causes of existence,’ and
these too might be called the greatest pain, considering that they
are the cause of birth, which is the cause of all pain. Sometimes,

56

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XV.

204. Health is the greatest of gifts, contented-
ness the best riches; trust is the best of relation-
ships, Nirv^m the highest happiness.

205. He who has tasted the sweetness of solitude
and tranquillity, is free from fear and free from sin,
while he tastes the sweetness of drinking in the
law.

206. The sight of the elect (Arya) is good, to live
with them is always happiness ; if a man does not
see fools, he will be trul^r happy.

207. He who walks in the company of fools suf-
fers a long way; company with fools, as with an
enemy, is always painful ; company with the wise is
pleasure, like meeting with kinsfolk.

208. Therefore, one ought to follow the wise, the
intelligent, the learned, the much enduring, the du-
tiful, the elect ; one ought to follow such a good and
wise man, as the moon follows the path of the stars.

again, sawsMra seems to have a different and less technical mean-
ing, being used in the sense of conceptions, plans, desires, as, for
instance, in verse 368, where sahkhfirSnaz^i khayam is used much
like taw/hakhaya. Again, in his comment on verse 75, Buddhaghosa
says, upadhiviveko sahkhSrasahgawikaw vinodeti ; and again,
upadhiviveko kB. nirupadhtn^zw puggaldnaw visahkhSra gatdndm.

For a similar sentiment, see Stanislas Julien, Les AvadSnas, vol. i,
p. 40, ‘Le corps est la plus grande source de souffrance,' &c.
7 . should say that the khandhas in verse 202 and the sahkhfiras in
verse 203 are nearly, if not quite, synonymous. I should prefer to
read ^iga-^-^/^a-paramS as a compound. (rigaX’^>^a, or as it is written
in one MS., ^\g2,kkhi (Sk. ^ighatsd), means not only * hunger,’ but
‘ appetite, desire.’

204. Childers translates, ‘ the best kinsman is a man you can trust.'

205. Cf. Suttanipdta, v. 256.

207. I should like to read sukho k^ dhtrasawvdso.

PLEASURE.

57

CHAPTER XVL

PLEASURE.

209. He who gives himself to vanity, and does
not give himself to meditation, forgetting the real
aim (of life) and grasping at pleasure, will in time
envy him who has exerted himself in meditation.

210. Let no man ever cling to what is pleasant, or
to what is unpleasant. Not to see what is pleasant
is pain, and it is pain to see what is unpleasant.

2 1 1. Let, therefore, no man love anything; loss
of the beloved is evil. Those who love nothing,
and hate nothing, have no fetters.

212. From pleasure comes grief, from pleakire
comes fear; he who is free from pleasure knows
neither grief nor fear.

213. From affection conies grief, from affection
comes fear ; he who is free from affection knows
neither grief nor fear.

214. From lust comes grief, from lust comes
fear; he who is free from lust knows neither grief
nor fear.

215. From love comes grief, from love comes
fear ; he who is free from love knows neither grief
nor fear.

216. From greed comes grief, from greed comes
fear ; he wlup is free from greed knows neither grief
nor fear.

217. He who possesses virtue and intelligence,

214. See Beal Catena, p. 200.

58

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVI.

who is just, speaks the truth, and does what is his
own business, him the world will hold dear.

218. He in whom a desire for the Ineffable (Nir-
vtnd) has sprung up, who in his mind is satisfied,
and whose thoughts are not bewildered by love, he
is called hrdhva;^^srotas (carried upwards by the
stream).

219. Kinsmen, friends, and lovers salute a man
who has been long away, and returns safe from
afar.

220. In like manner his good works receive him
who has done good, and has gone from this world
to the other; — as kinsmen receive a friend on his
return.

218. fjFrdhvaOTsrotas or uddhamsoto i.s the technical name for
one who has reached the world of the Avrihas (Aviha), and is pro-
ceeding to that of the Akamsh/,^ias (Akani///iia). This is the last
stage before he reaches the formless world, the Arllpadhatu, (See
Buddhaghosha’s Parables, p. 123; Burnouf, Introduction, p. 599.)
Originally ftrdhvazKsrotas may have been used in a less technical
sense, meaning one who swims against the stream, and is not
carried away by the vulgar passions of the world.

ANGER.

59

CHAPTER XVII.

ANGER.

221, Let a man leave anger, let him forsake pride,
let him overcome all bondage ! No sufferings befall
the man who is not attached to name and form, and
who calls nothing his own.

22 2. He who holds back rising anger like a rolling
chariot, him I call a real driver; other people are
but holding the reins.

223. Let a man overcome anger by love, let him
overcome evil by good ; let him overcome the greedy
by liberality, the liar by truth !

224. Speak the truth, do not yield to anger ; give,
if thou art asked for little; by these three steps
thou wilt go near the gods.

225. The sages who injure nobody, and who
always control their body, they will go to the un-
changeable place (Nirv§;2a), where, if they have
gone, they will suffer no more.

226. Those who are ever watchful, who study day
and night, and who strive after Nirv4;2a, their pas-
sions will come to an end.

227. This is an old saying, O Atula, this is not
as if of to-day : ‘ They blame him who sits silent,

221. ‘Name and form’ is the translation of nSma-r6pa, the
ninth of the Buddhist Niddnas. It comprises everything- in the
phenomenal world. Cf. Burnouf, Introduction, p. got ; see also
Gogerly, Lecture on Buddhism, and Bigandet, The Life of Gaudama,
p. 454.

223. Mahdbh. XII, 3550, asddhuw sadhun^ ^ayet. Cf. Ten
Gatakas, ed. Fausboll, p. g.

227. It appears from the commentary that pord«am and a^^g-ata-

6o

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVII.

they blame him who speaks much, they also blame
him who says little ; there is no one on earth who
is not blamed.’

228. There never was, there never will be, nor is
there now, a man who is always blamed, or a man
who is always praised.

229, 230. But he whom those who discriminate
praise continually day after day, as without blemish,
wise, rich in knowledge and virtue, who would dare
to blame him, like a coin made of gold from the
6^amb{i river ? Even the gods praise him, he is
praised even by Brahman.

231. Beware of bodily anger, and control thy
body} Leave the sins of the body, and with thy
body practise virtue !

232. Beware of the anger of the tongue, and con-
trol thy tongue ! Leave the sins of the tongue, and
practise virtue with thy tongue !

233. Beware of the anger of the mind, and con-
trol thy mind! Leave the sins of the mind, and
practise virtue with thy mind !

234. The wise who control their body, who con-
trol their tongue, the wise who control their mind,
are indeed well controlled.

nam are neuters, referring to what happened formerly and what
happens to-day, and that they are not to be taken as adjectives
referring to Ssmam, &c. The commentator must have read atula
instead of atulara, and he explains it as the name of a pupil whom
Gautama addressed by that name (see note to verse 166). Others
take atula in the sense of incomparable (Mahibh. XIII, 1937), and
in that case we ought to supply, with Professor Weber, some such
word as ‘ saw ' or ‘ saying.’

230. The Brahman worlds are higher than the Deva worlds as
the Brahman is higher than a Deva; see Hardy, Manual, p. 25 ;
Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 134, 184.

IMPURITY.

6l

CHAPTER XVIII.

IMPURITY.

235. Thou art now like a sear leaf, the messen-
gers of death (Yama) have come near to thee; thou
standest at the door of thy departure, and thou hast
no provision for thy journey.

236. Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise!
When thy impurities are blown away, and thou art
free from guilt, thou wilt enter into the heavenly
world of the elect (Ariya).

237. Thy life has come to an end, thou art come
near to death (Yama), there is no resting-place for
thee on the road, and thou hast no provision for
thy journey.

238. Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise I
Wheu thy impurities are blown away, and thou art
free from guilt, thou wilt not enter again into birth
and decay.

239. Let a wise man blow off the impurities of
himself, as a smith blows off the impurities of silver,
one by one, little by little, and from time to time.

235. Uyyoga seems to mean departure, See Buddhaghosa's
commentary on verse 152, p. 319, 1 . i; Fausboll, Five (Patakas,
P- 36 -

236. ‘ An island,' for a droAvning man to save himself; (see verse
25.) It is well known that Dtpahkara is the name of one of the
former Buddhas, and it is also used as an appellative of the Buddha,
but this name is derived from dtpo, ‘ a lamp,’ and has nothing to do
with dipa, used metaphorically here and elsewhere in the sense of
resting-place, shelter, or even Nirvana ; see Childers, s. v. dipo.

239. This verse is the foundation of the thirty-fourth section of
the SQtra of the forty-two sections ; see Beal, Catena, p. 201 ; Sutta-
nipdia, V. 962.

62

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVIIL

240. As the impurity which springs from the iron,
when it springs from it, destroys it ; thus do a trans-
gressor’s own works lead him to the evil path.

241. The taint of prayers is non-repetition; the
taint of houses, non-repair ; the taint of complexion
is sloth ; the taint of a watchman, thoughtlessness.

242. Bad conduct is the taint of woman, niggardli-
ness the taint of a benefactor; tainted are all evil
ways, in this world and in the next.

243. But there is a taint worse than all taints, —
ignorance is the greatest taint. O mendicants !
throw off that taint, and become taintless !

244. Life is easy to live for a man who is without
shame, a crow hero, a mischief-maker, an insulting,
bold, and wretched fellow.

245. But life is hard to live for a modest man,
who always looks for what is pure, who is disinter-
ested, quiet, spotless, and intelligent.

246. He who destroys life, who speaks untruth,
who in the world takes what is not given him, who
goes to another man’s wife ;

247. And the man who gives himself to drinking
intoxicating liquors, he, even in this world, digs up
his own root.

248. O man, know this, that the unrestrained are

241. On atidhona/(’arin, see Morris, J. P. T. S. 1887, p. loo.

244. Pakkhandin is identified by Dr. Fausboil with praskandin,
one who jumps forward, insults, or, as Buddhaghosa explains it,
one who meddles with other people’s business, an interloper. At
all events, it is a term of reproach, and, as it would seem, of theo-
logical reproach.

246. On the five principal commandments which are recapitu-
lated in verses 246 and 247, see Buddhaghosha’s Parables, p. 153.

248. Cf. MahSbhdrata XII, 4055, yeshdw vrfttb Xu sawyativ.
‘See also verse 307.

IMPURITY.

63

in a bad state ; take care that greediness and vice
do not bring thee to grief for a long time !

249. The world gives according to their faith or
according to their pleasure : if a man frets about
the food and the drink given to others, he will find
no rest either by day or by night.

250. He in whom that feeling is destroyed, and
taken out with the very root, finds rest by day and
by night.

251. There is no fire like passion, there is no
shark like hatred, there is no snare like folly, there
is no torrent like greed.

252. The fault of others is easily perceived, but
that of oneself is difficult to perceive ; a man win-
nows his neighbour’s faults like chaff, but his own
fault he hides, as a cheat hides the bad die from the
player.

253. If a man looks after the faults of others, and is
always inclined to be offended, his own passions will
grow, and he is far from the destruction of passions.

254. There is no path through the air, a man

249. This verse has evidently regard to the feelings of the Bhik-
shus or mendicants who receive either much or little, and who are
exhorted not to be envious if others receive more than they them-
selves. Several of the Parables illustrate this feeling.

251. Dr. Fausboll translates gaho by ‘captivitas,’ Dr. Weber by
‘ fetter.' I take it in the same sense as grdha in Manu VI, 78 ; and
Buddhaghosa does the same, though he assigns to graha a more
general meaning, viz. anything that seizes, whether an evil spirit
(yakkha), a serpent (a^agara), or a crocodile (kumbhila).

Greed or thirst is represented as a river in Lalita-vistara, ed.
Calc. p. 482, trish«d-nadi tivegS praxoshitd me ^«anashryew, ‘the
wild river of thirst is dried up by the sun of my knowledge.’

252. See Childers, Notes, p. 7 ; St. Matthew vii. 3.

253. As to asava, ‘appetite, passion,’ see note to verse 39,

254. I have translated this verse very freely, and not in accord-

64

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XVIII.

is not a Samai^za outwardly. The world delights in
vanity, the Tathigatas (the Buddhas) are free from
vanity.

255. There is no path through the air, a man
is not a Sama^^a outwardly. No creatures are
eternal ; but the awakened (Buddha) are never
shaken,.

ance with Buddhaghosa’s commentary. Dr. Fausboll proposed to
translate, ‘No one who is outside the Buddhist community can
walk through the air, but only a Samawa ; ’ and the same view is
taken by Professor Weber, though he arrives at it by a different
construction. Now it is perfectly true that the idea of magical powers
(rfddhi) which enable saints to walk through the air, &c., occurs in
the Dhammapada, see v. 175, note. But the Dhammapada may
contain earlier and later verses, and in that case our verse might be
an early protest on the part of Buddha against the belief in such
miraculous powers. We know how Buddha himself protested
against his disciples being called upon to perform vulgar miracles.

‘ I command my disciples not to work miracles,' he said, ‘ but to
hide their good deeds, and to show their sins ’ (Burnouf, Introd.
p. 170). It would be in harmony with this sentiment if we trans-
lated our verse as I have done. As to bahira, I should take it in
the sense of ‘external,' as opposed to adhyStmika, or ‘ internal ; '
and the meaning w'ould be, ‘a Samawa is not a Sama«a by out-
ward acts, but by his heart.' D'Alwis translates (p. 85) : ‘ There is
no footprint in the air ; there is not a Samawa out of the pale of
the Buddhist community.'

Prapaw^a, which I have here translated by ‘vanity,’ seems to
include the whole host of human weaknesses; cf. v. 196, where it is
explained by tawhadi///^imanapapa«f’a ; in our verse by tawliadisu
papa«y^esu ; cf. Lalita-vistara, p. 564, analayawz nishprapa^T^im
anutpadara asambhavam (dharma/i’akram). As to TathSgata, a
name of Buddha, cf. Burnouf, Introd. p. 75.

255. Sahkhara for saivtskdra; cf. note to verse 203. Creature
does not, as Mr. D'Alwis (p. 69) supposes, involve the Christian
conception of creation. Buddhaghosa takes sahkhdrd as the five
skandhas.

THE JUST.

65

CHAPTER XIX.

THE JUST.

256, 257. A man is not j’ust if he carries a matter
by violence ; no, he who distinguishes both right
and wr 5 ng, who is learned and guides others, not by
violence, but by the same law, being a guardian of
the law and intelligent, he is called just.

258. A man is not learned because he talks much ;
he who is patient, free from hatred and fear, he is
called learned.

259. A man is not a supporter of the law because
he talks much ; even if a man has learnt little, but
sees the law bodily, he is a supporter of the law,
a man who never neglects the law,

260. A man is not an elder because his head is
grey; his age may be ripe, but he is called ‘Old-
in-vain.’

261. He in whom there is truth, virtue, pity,
restraint, moderation, he who is free from impurity
and is wise, he is called an elder.

262. An envious, stingy, dishonest man does not
become respectable by means of much talking only,
or by the beauty of his complexion.

263. He in whom all this is destroyed, and taken
out with the very root, he, when freed from hatred
and wise, is called respectable.

259. Buddhaghosa here takes law (dhamrua) in the sense of
the four great truths, see note to verse 190, Could dhamma?;?
kdyena passati mean, ‘ he observes the law in his acts, or sees the
law with his bodily eyes?’ Hardly, if we compare expressions like
dhammazra vipassato, v. 373.

[10]

.ei

small or large, he is called a Sama?^a (a quiet man),
because he has quieted all evil.

266. A man is not a mendicant (Bhikshu) simply
because he asks others for alms ; he who adopts
the whole law is a Bhikshu, not he who only begs.

267. He who is above good and evil, who is
chaste, who with care passes through the world,
he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

268. 269. A man is not a Muni because he ob-
serves silence (mona, i. e. maima), if he is foolish

265. This is a curious etymology, because it shows that at the
time when this verse was written, the original meaning of jramawa:
had been forgotten. .SVama«a meant originally, in tile language
of the Brahmans, a man who performed hard penances, from nram,
* to work hard,’ &c. When it became the name of the Buddhist
ascetics, the language had changed, and jrrama«a was pronounced
samawa. Now there is another Sanskrit root, ma, ‘ to quiet/ which
in Pdli becomes likewise sam, and from this root sam, ‘ to quiet,’
and not from jram, ‘ to tire,’ did the popular etymology of the day
and the writer of our verse derive the title of the Buddhist priests.
The original form jfamawa became known to the Greeks as lap-
fuhMM, that of samara as 2 afmmioi ; the former through Megasthenes,
the latter through Bardesanes, 80-60 0. C/ (See' Lassen, Indische
Alterthuraskunde, 11 , 700.) The Chinese Shamen and the Tun-
gusian Shamen do not come from the same source, though this has
sometimes been doubted. See Schott, tJber die doppelte Bedeutung
[1 des Wortes Schamane, in the Philosophical Transactions of the

j Berlin Academy, 184a, p. 463 seq.

af66-a7o. The etymologies here given of the ordinary titles of
1 the followers of Buddha are entirely fanciful, and are curious only

; as showing how the people who spoke Pfili had lost tlie etymo-

f logical consciousness of fc^ieir language. A Bhikshu is a beggar,

i. e. a Buddhist friar who has left his family and lives entirely on

THE JUST.

67

and ignorant; but the wise who, as with the balance,
chooses the good and avoids evil, he is a Muni,
and is a Muni thereby ; he who in this world
weighs both sides is called a Muni.

270. A man is not an elect (Ariya) because he
injures living creatures ; because he has pity on all
living creatures, therefore is a man called Ariya.

271, 272. Not only by discipline and vows, not
only by much learning, not by entering into a trance,
not by sleeping alone, do I earn the happiness of
release which no worldling can know. O Bhikshu,
he who has obtained the extinction of desires, has
obtained confidence.

alms. Muni is a sage, hence -S’l^kya-muni, a name of Gautama.
Muni comes from man, ‘ to think,’ and from muni comes mauna,
‘ silence.' Ariya, again, is the general name of those who embrace
a religious life.- It meant originally * respectable, noble.' In verse
270 it seems as if the writer wished to guard against deriving ariya
from ari, * enemy;’ See note to verse 22.

272. See Childers, Notes, p. 7. Nekkhamana-sukhara is explained
by the commentator as andgami-sukham, the happiness of one who
can be born again once only in the world of Brahma. The same
commentator takes Bhikkhu as a vocative. The last line is
obscure, and FausbSll with his usual modesty adds, num recte
alterum hemistichium intellexefim docti videant. The text of the
commentary is so imperfect that in its present state it cannot help
us much. Following its indications, however, Childers proposed
an emendation, Bhikkliu viss^saw md dpddi, lit. priest, enter not
into confidence. Bhikkhu may, of course, be vocative or nomina-
tive. I formerly followed Fausbdll's conjecture, but I should now
prefer to take Bhikkhu as a nominative, referring it to the person
who is speaking, i.e. I or the Bhikshu in general, has obtained con-
fidence or peace of mind, as soon as he has obtained the extinction
of passions. Apddi is here not a first, but a third person. Kuhn,
Pili Grammatik, p. 109. Appatto stands for dpatto, Sk. dpanno.
See Kuhn, Pdli Grammatik, p. 119. Athav^, in v. 270, means
or, and corresponds to vS ; it can mean nothing else here but what
it means everywhere, whether in Sanskrit or in PSli.

F 2

68

DIIAMMAPADA. CHAP. XX.

CHAPTER XX.

THE WAY.

273. The best of ways is the eightfold ; the best
of truths the four words ; the best of virtues
passionlessness ; the best of men he who has eyes
to see.

274. This is the way, there is no other that leads
to the purifying of intelligence. Go on this path !
This is the confusion of Mdra (the tempter).

275. If you go on this way, you will make an end
of pain ! The way was preached by me, when I had
understood the removal of the thorny (in the flesh).

276. You yourself must make an effort. The
Tath%atas (Buddhas) are only preachers. The
thoughtful who enter the way are freed from the
bondage of Mira.

277. ‘All created things perish,’ he who knows
and sees this becomes passive in pain ; this is the
way to purity.

273. The eightfold or eight-merabered way is the technical term
for the way by which Nirvdwa is attained. (See Burnouf, Lot«s
p. 519.) This very way constitutes the fourth of the Four Truths,
or the four words of truth, viz, Du/^kha, ' pain ; ’ Samudaya, ‘origin;'
Nirodha, ‘destruction;' Mdrga, ‘road.' (Lotus, p. 517.) See note
to verse 178. For another explanation of the Mrga, or * way,' see
Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 280.

274. Tlie last line means, ‘this following the true path is to
confound M^ra,’ i. e. the discomfiture of Mdra.

275. The ralyas, ‘ arrows or thorns,' are the rokaralya, ‘the arrows
of grief.’ Buddha himself is called mah^jalya-hartfi, ‘the great
remover of thorns.' (Lalita-vistara, p. 550 ; Mahdbh. XII, 5616.)

277. See v. 255. Nibbeda is sthfiyibhfiva.

THE WAY.

69

278. ‘All created things are grief and pain/ he
who knows and sees this becomes passive in pain ;
this is the way that leads to purity.

279. ‘All forms are unreal/ he who knows and
sees this becomes passive in pain ; this is the way
that leads to purity.

280. He who does not rouse himself when it is
time to rise, who, though young and strong, is full
of sloth, whose will and thought are weak, that lazy
and idle man never finds the way to knowledge.

* 281. Watching his speech, well restrained in mind,
let a man never commit any wrong with his body !
Let a man but keep these three roads of action clear,
and he will achieve the way which is taught by the
wise.

282. Through zeal knowledge is gotten, through
lack of zeal knowledge is lost ; let a man who knows
this double path of gain and loss thus place himself
that knowledge may grow.

283. Cut down the whole forest (of desires), not
a tree only! Danger comes out of the forest (of
desires). When you have cut down both the forest
(of desires) and its undergrowth, then, Bhikshus, you
will be rid of the forest and of desires I

278. See V. 203.

279. Dhamma stands evidently for sankhjira, and means the five
khandha, i, e. what constitutes a living body.

281. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 159.

282. Bhftri was rightly translated ‘ intelUgentia ’ by Dr, Fausboll.
Dr. Weber renders it by ‘ Gedeihen,’ but the commentator distinctly
explains it as ‘ vast knowledge,' and in the technical sense the word
occurs after vidyfi and before medha, ip the Lalita-vistara, p. 541-

283. A pun, vana meaning both ‘lust ’ and ‘ forest.' See some
mistaken remarks on this verse in D’Alwis, Nirvawa, p. 86 , and
some good remarks in Childers, Notes, p.

70

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XX.

284. So long as the desire of man towards women,
even the smallest, is not destroyed, so long is his
mind in bondage, as the calf that drinks milk is to
its mother.

285. Cut out the love of self, like an autumn lotus,
with thy hand! Cherish the road of peace, Nir-
vd/2a has been shown by Sugata (Buddha).

286. ‘ Here I shall dwell in the rain,' here in winter
and summer,’ thus the fool meditates, and does not
think of death.

287. Death comes and carries off that man,
honoured for his children and flocks, his mind dis-
tracted, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

288. Sons are no help, nor a father, nor relations ;
there is no help from kinsfolk for one whom death
has seized.

289. A wise and well-behaved man who knows
the meaning of this, should quickly clear the way
that leads to Nirvd?i5a.

285. Cf. G'ataka, vol. i, p. 183,

286. Antardya, according to the commentator, ^ivitSntarfiya,
means interitus, death, it does not mean here an obstacle only.

287. See notes to verse 47, Thiessen, Kisdgotamt, p. ii, and
Mahabh. XII, 9944, 6540, To clear is used in the sense of making
clear or easy to enter, like our own to clear the way.

MISCELLANEOUS.

71

CHAPTER XXL

MISCELLANEOUS.

290. If by leaving a small pleasure one sees a
great pleasure, let a wise man leave the small plea-
sure, and look to the great.

291. He who, by causing pain to others, wishes
to obtain pleasure for himself, he, entangled in the
bonds of hatred, will never be free from hatred.

292. What ought to be done is neglected, what
ought not to be done is done ; the desires of unruly,
thoughtless people are always increasing.

293. But they whose whole watchfulness is always
directed to their body, who do not follow what ought
not to be done, and who steadfastly do what ought
to be done, the desires of such watchful and wise
people will come to an end.

294. A true Brdhma 72 a goes scatheless, though he
have killed father and mother, and two valiant kings,
though he has destroyed a kingdom with all its
subjects.

295. A true Brdhma/2a goes scatheless, though he
have killed father and mother, and two holy kings,
and an eminent man besides.

29a. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 264.

294, 295. These two verses are either meant to show that a
truly holy man whoi by accident, commits all these crimes is guilt-
less, or they refer to some particular event in Buddha's history.
The commentator is so startled that he explains them allegorically.
Mr. D’Alwis is very indignant that I should have supposed Buddha
capable of pardoning parricide, ‘ Can it be believed,' he writes,

‘ that a Teacher, who held life, even the life of the minutest insect,

72

DMAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXL

296. The disciples of Gotama (Buddha) are always
well awake, and their thoughts day and night are
always set on Buddha.

297. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their thoughts day and night are always
set on the law.

298. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their thoughts day and night are always
set on the church.

299. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their thoughts day and night are always
set on their body.

nay, even a living tree, in such high estimation as to prevent its
wanton destruction, has declared that the murder of a BrShmawa, to
whom he accorded reverence, along with his own Sangha.was blame-
less ?’ D’Alwis, Nirvana, p. 88. Though something might be said in
reply, considering the antecedents of king A^tajatru, the patron of
Buddha, and stories such as that quoted by the commentator on the
Dhammapada (Beafl.c. p. 150), or in Der Weise und der Thor, p. 306,
still these twq verses are startling, and I am not aware that Buddha
has himself drawn the conclusion, which has been drawn by others,
viz. that those who have reached the highest Sarabodhi, and are in
fact no longer themselves, are outside the domain of good and bad,
and beyond the reach of guilt. Verses like 39 and 412 admit of a
different explanation. Still our verses being miscellaneous extracts,
might possibly have been taken from a work in which such an
opinion was advanced, and I find that Mr, Childers, no mean
admirer of Buddha, was not shocked by iny explanation. ‘ In my
judgment,’ he says, ‘ this verse is intended to express in a forcible
manner the Buddhist doctrine that the Arhat cannot commit a
serious sin,’ ‘na hanti, na /'a hanyate,’ However, we have met
befpre with far-fetched puns in these verses, and it is not impossible
that the native commentators were right after all in seeing some
puns or riddles in this verse. D’Alwis, following the commentary,
explains mother as lust, father as pride, the two valiant kings
as heretical systems, and the realm as sensual pleasure, while
veyyaggha is taken by him for a place infested with the tigers of
obstruction against final beatitude. Some confirmation of this

MISCELLANEOUS.

73

300. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their mind day and night always de-
lights in compassion,

301. The disciples of Gotama are always well
awake, and their mind day and night always de-
lights in meditation.

302. It is hard to leave the world (to become
a friar), it is hard to enjoy the world ; hard is the
monastery, painful are the houses ; painful it is to
dwell with equals (to share everything in common),
and the itinerant mendicant is beset with pain.
Therefore let no man be an itinerant mendicant,
and he will not be beset with pain.

303. A man full of faith, if endowed with virtue
and glory, is respected, whatever place he may
choose.

304. Good people shine from afar, like the snowy

interpretation is supplied by a passage in the third book of the
LahkiivatS,ra-sfitra, as quoted by Mr. Beal in his translation of the
Dhammapada, Introduction, p. 5. Here a stanza is quoted as
having been recited by Buddha, in explanation of a similar startling
utterance which he had made to Mah&mati :

‘ Lust, or carnal desire, this is the Mother,

Ignorance, this is the Father,

The highest point of knowledge, this is Buddha,

All the kleras, these are the Rahats,

The five skandhas, these are the Priests;

To commit the five unpardonable sins

Is to destroy these five

And yet not suffer the pains of hell.'

'Fhe Lahktvatdra-sfitra was translated into Chinese by Bodhiru/fi
(508-511); when it was written is doubtful. See also (?ataka,
vol. ii, p. 363.

303. This verse is difficult, and I give my translation as tentative
oniy. Childers (Notes, p. ii) has removed some, not all difficulties,
and I have been chiefly guided by the interpretation put on the
verse by the Chinese translator; see Beal, Dhammapada, p. 137.

74

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXI.

mountains; bad people are not seen, like arrows
shot by night.

305. Sitting alone, lying down alone, walking
alone without ceasing, -and alone subduing himself,
let a man be happy near the edge of a forest.

305. VanSnte, within the forest, according to a pun pointed out
before (v. 283), means both ‘at the end of a forest,’ and ‘ at the
end of desires.’

THE DOWNWARD COURSE.

75

CHAPTER XXIL

THE DOWNWARD COURSE.

306. He who says what is not, goes to hell ; he
also who-, having done a thing, says I have not done
it After death both are equal, they are men with
evil deeds in the next world.

307. Many men whose shoulders are covered with
the yellow gown are ill-conditioned and unrestrained;
such evil-doers by their evil deeds go to hell.

308. Better it would be to swallow a heated iron
ball, like flaring fire, than that a bad unrestrained
fellow should live on the charity of the land,

309. Four things does a reckless man gain who
covets his neighbours wife, — demerit, an uncom-
fortable bed, thirdly, punishment, and lastly, hell.

306. I translate niraya, ‘ the exit, the downward course, the evil
path,' by ‘ hell/ because the meaning assigned to that ancient
mythological name by Christian writers comes so near to the
Buddhist idea of niraya, that it is difficult not to believe in some
actual contact between these two streams of thought. See also
MahSbh. XII, 7176. Cf. 6^itaka, vol. ii, p. 416 ; SuttanipSta,
V. 660.

307, 308. These two verses are said to be taken from the Vinaya-
pi/aka I, 4, i ; D'Alwis, Nirvfiwa, p. 29.

308. The charity of the land, i. e. the alms given, from a sense
of religious duty, to every mendicant that asks for it.

309, 310. The four things mentioned in verse 309 seem to be
repeated in verse 310. Therefore, apuMSbha, ‘ demerit,’ is the
same in both: gatt p^pikS must be niraya ; da«</a corresponds to
ninda, and ratf thokik^l explains the anik^maseyyaw. Buddhaghosa

76

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXII.

310. There is demerit, and the evil way (to hell),
there is the short pleasure of the frightened m
the arms of the frightened, and the king imposes
heavy punishment; therefore let no man think of
his neighbour’s wife.

3 1 1. As a grass-blade, if badly grasped, cuts the
arm, badly-practised asceticism leads to hell.

312. An act carelessly performed, a broken vow,
and hesitating obedience to discipline (Brahma-
/^ariyam), all this brings no great reward.

313. If anything is to be done, let a man do it,
let him attack it vigorously ! A careless pilgrim
only scatters the dust of his passions more widely.

314. An evil deed is better left undone, for a
man repents of it afterwards ; a good deed is better
done, for having done it, one does not repent.

315. Like a well-guarded frontier fort, with de-
fences within and without, so let a man guard him-
self. Not a moment should escape, for they who
allow the right moment to pass, suffer pain when
they are in hell.

316. They who are ashamed of what they ought
not to be ashamed of, and are not ashamed of what
they ought to be ashamed of, such men, embracing
false doctrines, enter the evil path.

317. They who fear when they ought not to fear,
and fear not when they ought to fear, such men,
embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

takes the same view of the meaning *of anikimaseyya, i. e. yaiha
evazn seyyam alabhitvS, ani/tMtaw parittakam eva kdla//^
seyyaw labhati, ‘ not obtaining the rest as he wishes it, he obtains
it, as he does not wish it, for a short time only.*

313. As to ra^a meaning ‘dust’ and ‘passion,' see Buddha-
ghosha's Parables, pp. 65, 66.

THE DOWNWARD COURSE.

77

318. They who see sin where there is no sin, and
see no sin where there is sin, such men, embracing

false doctrines, enter the evil path.

319. They who see sin where there is sin, and no
sin where there is no sin, such men, embracing
the true doctrine, enter the good path.

78

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIII.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE ELEPHANT.

320. Silently I endured abuse as the elephant in
battle endures the arrow sent from the bow ; for the
world is ill-natured.

321. They lead a tamed elephant to battle, the
king mounts a tamed elephant; the tamed is the
best among men, he who silently endures abuse,

322. Mules are good, if tamed, and noble Sindhu
horses, and elephants with large tusks ; but he who
tames himself is better still.

323. For with these animals does no man reach
the untrodden country (Nirvd^a), where a tamed
man goes on a turned animal, viz. on his own well-
tamed self.

324. The elephant called Dhanapilaka, his tem-
ples running with pungent sap, and who is difficult
to hold, does not eat a morsel when bound; the
elephant longs for the elephant grove.

320. The elephant is with the Buddhists the emblem of endurance
and self-restraint. Thus Buddha himself is called N&ga, ‘ the Ele-
phant * (Lai. Vist. p. 5g3), or MahdnSga, ‘ the great Elephant ’ (Lai.
Vist, p. 553), and in one passage (Lai, Vist. p, 534) the reason of
this name is given, by stating that Buddha was sudfinta, ‘ well-
tamed,' like an elephan^t. He descended from heaven in the form
of an elephant to be born on earth. On titikkhisam, see Childers,
s.v. titikkhati.

See also Manu VI, 47, ativ&ddms titiksheta.

323. I read, as suggested by Dr. Fausbbll, yath' attani sudan-
tena danto dantena ga/^Mati (cf. verse 160). The India Office MS.
reads na hi etehi /AS-nehi ga/^Meya agatam disam, yath’ attdnara
sudantena danto dantena pJ^khoXi, As to /Mnehi instead of yfinehi,
see verse 224.

THE ELEPHANT.

79

325. If a man becomes fat and a great eater, if
he is sleepy and rolls himself about, that fool, like
a hog fed on grains, is born again and again.

326. This mind of mine went formerly wandering
about as it liked, as it listed, as it pleased ; but
I shall now hold it in thoroughly, as the rider who
holds the hook holds in the furious elephant.

327. Be not thoughtless, watch your thoughts!
Draw yourself out of the evil way, like an elephant
sunk in mud,

328. If a man find a prudent companion who walks
with him, is wise, and lives soberly, he may walk with
him, overcoming all dangers, happy, but considerate.

329. If a man find no prudent companion who
walks with him, is wise, and lives soberly, let him
walk alone, like a king who has left his conquered
country behind, — like an elephant in the forest.

330. It is better to live alone, there is no com-
panionship with a fool ; let a man walk alone, let

325. On nivSpa, see B.-R. Petersburg Diet. s. v.

326. Yoniso, i, e. yonua^ is rendered by Dr. Fausbttll ‘ sapientid,’
and this is the meaning ascribed to yoni by many Buddhist authori-
ties. But the reference to Hema. 5 andra (ed. Boehtlingk and Rieu,
p. 281) shows clearly that it meant ‘ origin,' or ‘ cause.’ Yoniso occurs
frequently as a mere adverb, meaning ‘ thoroughly, radically ’ (Dham-
mapada, p, 359), and yoniso manasikSra (Dhaniraapada, p. no)
means ‘ taking to heart ’ or ‘ minding thoroughly,’ or, what is nearly
the same, ' wisely.’ In the Lalita-vistara, p. 41, the commentator has
clearly mistaken yonuaA, changing it to ye^nijo, and explaining it
by yamaniram, whereas M. Foucaux has rightly translated it by
* depuis rorigine.’ Professor Weber suspected in yonha/?! a double
entendre, but even grammar would show that our author is
innocent of it. In Lalita-vistara, p. 544, 1 . 4, ayonija occurs in
the sense of error.

327. A ppamfidarata, not delighting in pam&da.

328. 329. Cf. Suttanipdta, vv. 44, 45.

8o

DHAMMx\PADA. CHAP. XXIIL

him commit no sin, with few wishes, like an ele-
phant in the forest.

331. If the occasion arises, friends are pleasant;
enjoyment is pleasant, whatever be the cause ; a
good work is pleasant in the hour of death ; the
giving up of all grief is pleasant.

332. Pleasant in the world is the state of a mother,
pleasant the state of a father, pleasant the state of
a Sama?/a, pleasant the state of a Br^hma?/a.

333. Pleasant is virtue lasting to old age, pleasant
is a faith firmly rooted ; pleasant is attainment of
intelligence, pleasant is avoiding of sins.

332. The commentator throughout takes these words, like mat-
teyyata, &c., to signify, not the status of a mother, or maternity,
but reverence shown to a mother.

THIRST.

8i

CHAPTER XXIV.

THIRST.

334. The thirst of a thoughtless man grows like
a creeper ; he runs from life to life, like a monkey
seeking fruit in the forest.

335. Whomsoever this fierce poisonous thirst
overcomes, in this world, his sufferings increase like
the abounding Birawa grass.

336. But from him who overcomes this fierce
thirst, difficult to be conquered in this world, suffer-
ings fall off, like water-drops from a lotus leaf.

337. This salutary word I tell you, ‘Do ye, as many
as are here assembled, dig up the root of thirst, as
he who wants the sweet-scented Uffra root must
dig up the Bira?2a grass, that Mara (the tempter)
may not crush you again and again, as the stream
crushes the reeds.'

338. As a tree, even though it has been cut down,
is firm so long as its root is safe, and grows again,
thus, unless the feeders of thirst are destroyed, this
pain (of life) will return again and again.

339. He whose thirty-six streams are strongly
flowing in the channels of pleasure, the waves will

334. This is explained by a story in the Chinese translation.
Beal, Dhammapada, p. 148.

335. Bira«a grass is the Andropogon muricatum, and the
scented root of it is called Unra (cf. verse 337).

338. On Anusaya, i. e. Anujraya (Anlage), see Wassiljew, Der
Buddhismus, p. 240 seq.

339. The thirt3'-six channels, which are divided h}' the com-
mentator into eighteen external and eighteen internal, are explained -

[ro] '' G

82

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIV.

carry away that misguided man, viz. his desires
which are set on passion.

340. The channels run everywhere, the creeper
(of passion) stands sprouting ; if you see the creeper
springing up, cut its root by means of knowledge.

341. A creature’s pleasures are extravagant and
luxurious ; given up to pleasure and deriving happi-
ness, men undergo (again and again) birth and
decay.

342. Beset with lust, men run about like a snared
hare ; held in fetters and bonds, they undergo pain
for a long time, again and again.

343. Beset with lust, men run about like a snared
hare ; let therefore the mendicant drive out thirst,
by striving after passionlessness for himself.

344. He who having got rid of the forest (of
lust) (i.e. after having reached Nirviwa) gives him-
self over to forest-life (i.e. to lust), and who, when
free from the forest (i.e. from lust), runs to the
forest (i.e. to lust), look at that man! though free,
he runs into bondage.

by Burnouf (Lotus, p. 649), from a gloss of the Crinaalahkfira :
‘ L'indication prdcise des affections dont un Buddha acte indd-
pendant, affections qui sont au nombre de dix-huit, nous est fourni
par la glose d’un livre appartenant aiix Buddhistes de Ceylan,* &c.
Gray, however, takes them as the six organs of sense, the six objects
of sense, in relation (i) to a desire for sensual pleasure, (a) to
a desire for existence, and (3) to a desire for non-existence.
Subhhli gives the right reading as manSpassavani ,• cf. Childers,
Notes, p. ra.

Vahd, which Dr. Faushdll translates by < equi, should be vaha,
'undae.' Cf. SuttanipSta, v. 1034.

344. This verse seems again full of puns, all connected with the
twofold meaning of vana, ' forest and lust.' By replacing ‘ forest ’
by ‘lust,’ we may translate; * He who, when free from lust, gives
himself up to lust, who, when removed from lust runs into lust,

THIRST.

83

345. Wise people do not c?ill that a strong fetter
which is made of ironj wood, or hemp ; passionately
strong is the care for precious stones and rings, for
sons and a wife.

346. That fetter wise people call strong which
drags down, yields, but is difficult to undo ; after
having cut this at last, people leave the world, free
from cares, and leaving the pleasures of love behind.

347. Those who are slaves to passions, ran down
the stream (of desires), as a spider runs down the
web which he has made himself; when they have
cut this, at last, wise people go onwards, free from
cares, leaving all pain behind.

348. Give up what is before, give up what is
behind, give up what is between, when thou goest
to the other shore of existence ; if thy mind is
altogether free, thou wilt not again enter into birth
and decay.

349. If a man is tossed about by doubts, full of
strong passions, and yearning only for what is de-
lightful, his thirst will grow more and more, and he
will indeed make his fetters strong.

look at that man,' &c, Nibbana, though with a short a, may be
intended to remind the hearer of Nibbdna. The right reading,
according to Childers, Notes, p. 8, is nibbanatho.

345. Apekhd, apekshd, ‘ care see Manu VI, 41, 49 ; Suttani-
pdta, V. 37 ; and Gataka, vol. ii, p. 140.

346. Paribba^, i.e. parivra^; see Manu VI, 41.

347. The commentator explains the simile of the spider as
follows : ‘As a spider, after having made its thread^-web, sits in
the middle, and after killing with a violent rush a butterfly or a fly
which has fallen in its circle, drinks its juice, returns, and sits
again in the same place, in the same manner creatures who are
given to passions, depraved by hatred, and maddened by wrath,
run along the stream of thirst which they have made themselves,
and cannot cross it,' &c.

84

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXIV.

350. If a man delights in quieting doubts, and,
always reflecting, dwells on what is not delightful
(the impurity of the body, &c,), he certainly will
remove, nay, he will cut the fetter of Mara.

351. He who has reached the consummation, who
does not tremble, who is without thirst and without
sin, he has broken all the thorns of life : this wall be
his last body.

352. He who is without thirst and without affec-
tion, who understands the words and their interpre-
tation, who knows the order of letters (those which
are before and which are after), he has received his
last body, he is called the great sage, the great
man.

353. ‘I have conquered all, I know all, in all con-
ditions of life I am free from taint ; I have left all,
and through the destruction of thirst I am free ;
having learnt myself, whom should I indicate (as
my teacher)?’

354. The gift of the law exceeds all gifts; the
sweetness of the law exceeds all sweetness ; the
delight in the law exceeds all delights; the extinc-
tion of thirst overcomes all pain.

352. As to nimtti, and its technical meaning among the Bud-
dhists, see Burnouf, Lotus, p. 841. Fausboll translates ‘niruttis
vocabulorum peritus,’ which maj' be right, if we take nirutti in the
sense of the language of the Scriptures. See note to verse 363.
Could not sannipata mean saw^hitfi or sannikarsha? SannipS.ta
occurs in the Ailkala-praLi.mkhya, but with a different meaning.

353. Cf. Suttanipaia, v. 210, Tlie commentator explains that
this verse was spoken by Buddha on liis way to Bdrdwa.st, in answer
to Upaka, who had asked him who his teacher was, when Buddha
asserted that he had no teacher. Childers accepts this explanation,
s.v. uddigati. See also Lalita-vistara XXVI, ed. Calc, p. 526 seq.,
and read tenopaka ^nno hy aham.

354. The dhammadana, or ‘ gift of the law,' is the technical

THIRST.

85

355. Riches destroy the foolish, if they look not
for the other shore ; the foolish by his thirst for
riches destroys himself, as if he were (destroying)
others.

356. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by passion : therefore a gift bestowed
on the passionless brings great reward.

357. The fields are damaged, by weeds, mankind
is damaged by hatred : therefore a gift bestowed on
those who do not hate brings great reward.

358. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by vanity : therefore a gift bestowed on
those who are free from vanity brings great reward.

359. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind
is damaged by lust : therefore a gift bestowed on
those who are free from lust brings great reward.

term for instruction iii the Buddhist religion. See Buddhaghosha's
Parables, p. 160, where the story of the Sakkadevara^a is told,
and where a free rendering of our verse is given.

358. ' Vanity and vexation of spirit,' Ecclesiastes.

86

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXV.

CHAPTER XXV.

THE BHIKSHH (mENDICANT).

360. Restraint in the eye \$ good, good is restraint
in the ear, in the nose restraint is good, good is re-
straint in the tongue.

361. In the body restraint is good, good is re-
straint in speech, in thought restraint is good, good
iS restraint in all things. A Bhikshu, restrained in
all things, is freed from all pain,

362. He who controls his hand, he who controls
his feet, he who controls his speech, he who is well
controlled, he who delights inwardly, who is collected,
who is solitary and content, him they call Bhikshu.

363. The Bhikshu who controls hi.s mouth, who
speaks wisely and calmly, who teaches the meaning
and the law, his word is sweet.

364. He who dwells in the law, delights in the
law, meditates on the law, recollects the law, that
Bhikshu will never fall away from the true law.

365. Let him not despise what he has received,
nor ever envy others : a mendicant who envies
others does not obtain peace of mind.

363. On arlha and dharma, see Stanislas Julieii, Les Avadanas,
I, 217, note: ‘Les qiiatre connaissances sont; i*’ la connaissance
du sens (artha) ; 2" la connaissance de la Loi (dharma) ,* 3” la con-
naissance des explications (niroukti) ; 4^* la connaissance do I’intel-
ligence (pratiblidna).'

364. The expression dhammdrdmo, ‘ liaving Ins garden or de-
light (Lustgarten) in the law,’ is well matched by the Brahmanic
expression ekdrdma, i. e. nirdvandva (Mahdbh. Xlll, 1930). Cf.
Suttanipata, v, 326; Bhammapada, v. 32,

THE BHIKSHU.

87

366. A Bhikshu who, though he receives little,
does not despise what he has received, even the
gods will praise him, if his life is pure, and if he is
not slothful.

367. He who never identifies himself with name
and form, and does not grieve over what is no more,
he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

368. The Bhikshu who behaves with kindness,
who is happy in the doctrine of Buddha, will reach
the quiet place (Nirvi?m), happiness arising from the
cessation of natural inclinations.

369. O Bhikshu, empty this boat! if emptied, it
will go quickly ; having cut off passion and hatred,
thou wilt go to Nirvd;/a.

370. Cut off the five (fetters), leave the five, rise
above the five. A Bhikshu, who has escaped from
the five fetters, he is called Oghati«/^a, ‘ saved from
the flood.’

371. Meditate, O Bhikshu, and be not heedless!
Do not direct thy thought to what gives pleasure.

367. NSmarupa is here used again in its technical sense of
mind and body, neither of which, however, is with the Buddhists
atman, or ‘ self.’ Asat, ‘ what is not,' may therefore mean the same
as namarhpa, or we may take it in the sense of what is no more,
as, for instance, the beauty or youth of the body, the vigour of the
mind, &g.

368. See Childers, Notes, p. ii, who translates, ‘where existence
is no more ; ' but if we take sahkhara in the plural, it may mean
states of the mind, or predispositions, inclinations, good, bad, or
indifferent. Verse 383 supports Childers’ version.

370. Morris, J. P. T. S. 1887, p. n6, takes uttaribhavaye in
the sense of to cultivate especially. Fausboll translates removeat.
The five are differently explained by the commentator. See also
Childers, s. v. sawyc^ana.

371. The swallowing of hot iron balls is considered as a punish-
ment in hell; see verse 308. Professor Weber has perceived the

DIIAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXV.

that tliou maj'est not for thy liocdlessne.sa liave to
swallow the iron ball (in hell), anti that thou mayest
not cry out when burnino-, ‘ This is pain.’

372- Without knowletige there is no meditation
without meditation there is no knowletige ; he who’
has knowledge and meditation is near unto Nirvana.

37o' 7^ bhikslui who has entert'tl his empty house
and vvhose mind is trantpiil, feds a more than human
delight when he sees the law clearly.

374- As soon as he has consitlercd the origin and
destruction of the elements (khantiha) of the body
he finds happiness anti joy which belong to those
who know the immortal (Nirvawa).

375- Ami this is the beginning here for a wise
Bhikshu : watchfulness over the senses, coiitented-
ness, restraint under the law ; keep noble friends
whose life IS pure, and who are not slothful.

376 . Let him live in charity, let him be perfect

It f Ite will
makG an end of sufiferini^,

377. As the Vassika plant shetls its withered

t'SisT" " ‘ 5-"

378. The lihikshu whose body ami longne and

the h '-r ami lias rejecteil

the baits of the world, he is called quiet

379. Rouse thyselfl.y thyself, e.xamine thyself by
thyself, thus self-protected and attentive wL thou

live happily, OBhikshu!

nether the icst of lu.s rendering is right for who wmild
swallow an iron ball by accident ? ^ '

372. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 247.

375 - Cf. Suttanipata, v. 337,

THE BHIKSHU.

89

380. For self is the lord of self, self is the refuge
of self ; therefore curb thyself as the merchant curbs
a noble horse.

381. The Bhikshu, full of delight, who is happy
in the doctrine of Buddha will reach the quiet place
(Nirva 72 a), happiness consisting in the cessation of
natural inclinations.

382. He who, even as a young Bhikshu, applies
himself to the doctrine of Buddha, brightens up this
world, like the moon when free from clouds.

381. See verse 368. D’Alwis translates, ‘dissolution of the
saukharas (elements of existence).’

90

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVI.

CHAPTER XXVI.

THE BRAHMAA^A (aRHAt).

383. Stop the Stream valiantly, drive away the
desires, O Brahmawa ! When you have understood
the destruction of all that was made, }-ou will under-
stand that which was not made.

384. If the Brahmawa has reached the other shore
in both laws (in restraint and contemplation), all
bonds vanish from him wlio has obtained knowledge.

385. He for whom there is neither the hither nor
the further shore, nor both, him, the fearless and
unshackled, I call indeed a Brdhmawa.

386. He who is thoughtful, blameless, settled,
dutiful, without passions, and who has attained the
highest end, him I call indeed a Brahma/^a.

387. The sun is bright by day, the moon shines
by night, the warrior is bright in his armour, the
Brahma/za is bright in his meditation ; Imt Buddha,
the Awakened, is bright with splendour day and
night.

388. Because a man is rid of evil, therefore he is
called Brdhmawa; because he walks quietly, there-
fore he is called Samawa ; because he has scmt away
his own impurities, therefore he is called Pravra.fita
(Pabbaflta, a pilgrim).

385. The exact meaning of the two shores is not quite clear,
and the commentator who takes them in the sense of internal and
external organs of sense, can hardly be right. See verse 86,

388. q’hese would-be etymologies are again interesting as show-
ing the decline of the etymological consciousness of the spoken

THE BRAHMA 2 VA,

91

389. No one should attack a Br^hma5^2a, but no
Brdhma?^a (if attacked) should let himself fly at his
aggressor! Woe to him who strikes a Brdhma?/a,
more woe to him who flies at his aggressor!

390. It advantages a Brahma?^a not a little if he
holds his mind back from the pleasures of life ; the
more all wish to injure has vanished, the more all
pain will cease.

391. Him I call indeed a Brahma;f2a w'ho does
not offend by body, word, or thought, and is con-
trolled on these three points.

392. He from whom he may learn the law, as
taught by the Well-awakened (Buddha), him let him
worship assiduously, as the Brdhma^xa worships the
sacrificial fire.

393. A man does not become a Br^hma^a by his
platted hair, by his family, or by birth ; in whom
there is truth and righteousness, he is blessed, he is
a Brdhma^a.

394. What is the use of platted hair, O fool 1 what
of the raiment of goat-skins ? Within thee there is
ravening, but the outside thou makest clean.

language of India at the time when such etymologies became
possible. But in ordei* to derive Brahmawa from vah, it must have
been pronounced bahma?ro; vah, ‘to remove,' occurs frequently
in the Buddhistical Sanskrit. Cf. LaL Vist. p, 551, 1 , 1 ; 553, 1 . 7.
See note to verse 265.

390. I am afraid I have taken too much liberty with this verse.
Dr, Fausboll translates, ‘ Non Brahmawae hoc paulo melius, quando
retentio fit mentis a jucundis.'

392. I have followed Childers, s. v. yo, in the translation of this
verse.

393. Fausboll proposes to read gaJcM (gityi). ‘ Both' in the first
edition of my translation was a misprint for ‘ birth.’

394. I have not copied the language of the Bible more than

92

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVL

395. The man who wears dirty raiments, who is
emaciated and covered with veins, who meditates
alone in the forest, him I call indeed a Brahmawa.

396. I do not call a man a Brdhma;^a because of
his origin or of his mother. He is indeed arrogant,
and he is wealthy: but the poor, who is free from
all attachments, him I call indeed a Brahmawa.

397. Him I call indeed a Br£ihma;/a who after
cutting all fetters never trembles, is free from bonds
and unshackled.

398. Him I call indeed a Brdhma«a who after
cutting the strap and the thong, the rope with all
that pertains to it, has destroyed all obstacles', and is
awakened.

399. Him I call indeed a Brahma?/a who, though
he has committed no offence, endures reproach,
stripes, and bonds, who has endurance for his force,
and strength for his army.

I was justified in. 'J’he words are ahlihantaran te gahanaw, bfihirawi
parima^>-^asi, ‘interna est abyssus, externum miindas.* Cf. 6'ataka,
vol. i, p. 481.

395. Tlie expression Kisan dhamanisanthatam is the San.skrit
krwaw dhamanisantatam, the frequent occurrence of wliich in the
Mahabharata has been pointed out liy Boehtlingk, s. v. dhamani.
It looks more like a Bnihmanic than like a Buddhist {fiirase;.

396. From verse 396 to the first half of ver.se 423, the text of
the Dhammapada agrees with the text of the Vasish//ra-BhaKulv%a-
sfitra. These verses are translated by D’Ahvis in Ins Nirva;/a,
pp. 113-118, and again by Fausbbll, Suttanipdta, v. 620 seq.

The text contains puns on kblX'ana, which mean,*) ‘wealth,' but
also ‘ attacliment ; ' cf. Childers, s. v.

398. D’Alwis points out a double entendre in these words.
N and hi may be either the strap that goes round a drum, or en-
mity; varatta may be either a thong or attachment; sanddna
either chain or scepticism; sahanakkamam either due order or
all its concomitants; paligha either obstacle or ignorance.

399, The exact meaning of balanfka is difficult to find. Does

THE BRAHMAiVA.

93

400. Him I call indeed a Brahma;^a who is free
from anger, dutiful, virtuous, without appetites, who
is subdued, and has received his last body.

401. Him I call indeed a Brahmai^^a who does
not cling to sensual pleasures, like water on a lotus
leaf, like a mustard seed on the point of a needle.

402. Him I call indeed a Brihma/^a who, even
here, knows the end of his own suffering, has put
down his burden, and is unshackled,

403. Him I call indeed a Brdhmas»^a whose know-
ledge is deep, who possesses wisdom, who knows
the right w^ay and the wrong, and has attained the
highest end.

404. Him I call indeed a Brahmawa who keeps
aloof both from laymen and from mendicants, who
frequents no houses, and has but few desires.

405. Him I call indeed a Br^hma^^a who without
hurting any creatures, whether feeble or strong, does
not kill nor cause slaughter.

406. Him I call indeed a BrMima//a who is tole-
rant with the intolerant, mild with the violent, and
free from greed among the greedy.

407. Him I call indeed a B^dhma7^a from whom
anger and hatred, pride and hypocrisy have dropt
like a mustard seed from the point of a needle.

408. Him I call indeed a Brahma^za who utters
true speech, instructive and free from harshness, so
that he offend no one.

409. Him I call indeed ^ Brdhma;2a who takes

it mean, possessed of a strong army, or facing a force, or leading
a force ?

405. On tasa and thdvara, see Childers, s, v., and D'Alwis, Nir-
vdwa, p. 115. On da«^/a, ‘ the rod,’ see Hibbert Lectures, p. 355,
note.

94

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVI.

nothing in the world that is not given him, be it
long or short, small or large, good or bad.

410. Him I call indeed a Brahmawa who fosters
no desires for this world or for the next, has no incli-
nations, and is unshackled.

41 1. Him I call indeed a Brahmawa who has no
interests, and when he has understood (the truth),
does not say How, how ? and who has reached the
depth of the Immortal.

412. Him I call indeed a Brahma3»fa who in this
world has risen above both ties, good and evil, who
is free from grief, from sin, and from impurity.

413. Him I call indeed a Brfihmawa who is bright
like the moon, pure, serene, undisturbed, and in
whom all gaiety is extinct.

414. Him I call indeed a Brfihma?ia who has tra-
versed this miry road, the impassable world, difficult
to pass, and its vanity, who has gone through, and
reached the other shore, is thoughtful, steadfast, free
from doubts, free from attachment, and content,

415. Him I call indeed a BrAhma«a who in this
world,, having abandoned all desires, travels about

41 r. Akathaiikathi is explained by Buddhaghosa as meaning,
‘ free from doubt or hesitation.' He also uses kathankatlifi in the
sense of ‘ doubt ' (verse 414). In the Kdvyddarja, III, 17, the com-
mentator explains akatham by kathArahitam, nirvivtidam, which
would mean, ‘without a kathS, a speech, a story without contra-
diction, unconditionally.' From our passage, however, it seems as
if kathahkathd was a noun derived from katliahkatbayali, ‘ to say
How, how ? ’ so that neither the first nor the second element had
anything to do with kath, ‘ to relate ; ' and in that case akatham,
too, ought to be taken in the sense of ‘ without a Why.*

4x2. See verse 39. The distinction between good and evil
vanishes when a man has retired from the world, and has ceased
to act, longing only for deliverance.

THE BRAHMAiVA.

95

without a home, and in whom all concupiscence is
extinct.

416. Him I call indeed a Brihma/^^a who, having
abandoned all longings, travels about without a home,
and in whom all covetousness is extinct.

417. Him I call indeed a Br^hma/za who, after
leaving all bondage to men, has risen above all
bondage to the gods, and is free from all and every
bondage.

418. Him I call indeed a Br^hma;za who has left
what gives pleasure and what gives pain, who is
cold, and free from all germs (of renewed life), the
hero who has conquered all the worlds.

419. Him I call indeed a Br^hmawa who knows
the destruction and the return of beings everywhere,
who is free from bondage, welfaring (Siigata), and
awakened (Buddha).

418. Upadhi, if not used in a technical sense, is best trans-
lated by ‘ passions or aflfeclions.’ Technically there are four upadhis
or substrata, viz. the kandhas, kdma, ‘ desire,’ kilesa, ' sin,’ and
kamma, ‘ work.’ The Brihmawa may be called nirupadhi, as being
free from desire, misery, and work and its consequences, but not
yet of the kandhas, which end through death only. The com-
mentator explains nirupadhi by nirupakkilesa, ‘ free from sin.’ See
Childers, s.v. nibbSna, p. 268 a.

419. Sugata is one of those many words in Buddhist literature
which it is almost impossible to translate, because they have been
taken in so many acceptations by the Buddhists themselves.
Sugata etymologically means ‘one who has fared well,' su gat i
means ‘happiness and blessedness.’ It is wrong to translate it
literally by ‘welcome,’ for that in Sanskrit is sv^gata; and we
can hardly accept Dr. Eitel’s statement (Handbook, p. 138) that
sugata stands incorrectly for sv^gata. Sugata is one of the
not very numerous technical terms in Buddhism for which hitherto
we know of no antecedents in earlier Brahmanism. It may have
been used in the sense of ‘ happy and blessed,' but it never became
a title, while in Buddhism it has become, not only a title, but

96

DHAMMAPADA. CHAP. XXVI.

420. Him I call indeed a Brahma?^a whose path
the gods do not know, nor spirits (Gandharvas),
nor men, whose passions are extinct, and who is
an Arhat (venerable).

421. Him I call indeed a Br^hma«a who calls
nothing his own, whether it be before, behind, or
V)etween, who is poor, and free from the love of the
world.

422. Him I call indeed a Brahma/iJa, the manly,
the noble, the hero, the great sage, the conqueror,
the indifferent, the accomplished, the aw'akened.

423. Him I call indeed a Brahmawa who knows
his former abodes, who sees heaven and hell, has
reached the end of births, is perfect in knowledge,
a sage, and whose perfections are all perfect.

almost a proiu-r name of lUulilha. 'I'lie same ajiplies to tathd-
gata, lit. ‘ thus come,' but used in Sanskrit very muclt like
tathdvidha, iu the sense of tabs, while in Buddliism it means
a Buddha. There are of course many interpretations of the word,
and many reasons are given why Buddhas should be called
Tathdgata (Burnouf, Introduction, p. 75, &c,). Boehtlingk s. v,
supposed that, because Buddha had .so many predicates, he was,
for the sake of brevity, called ‘ such a one as he really is.’ I think
we may go a step further. Another w'ord, lad/'f^a, meaning
tabs, becomes in Bali, under the form of tddi, a name of
Buddha’s disciples, and afterwards of Buddha himself. If applied
to Buddha’s disciples, it may have meant originally ‘ such as he,’ 1 . e,
his fellows; but when applied to Buddha himself, it can only mean
‘such a one,’ i. e. ‘so great a man.’ The Sanskrit miirsha is
probably the Ptili mariso, which stands for mddiso, Sk. mddrua,

‘ like me,’ used in Pali when a superior addresses others as his
ecjuals, and afterwards changed into a mere title of respect.

INDEX,

The figures of this Index refer to the numbers of the verses.

AbhSsvara, gods, aoo..

Agni, worshipped, 107, 393.
A^atajatru, defeated by Prasena^it,
201.

Akanish/-6as, 218,

Akiw^ana, 87.
hYkokihi, 1.

Amata (amr/ta), the immortal (Nir-
vSwa), 21.

Animitta, 92, 93.

Anivejana, 40.

Anuiaya, foundation, root, 338.
Apastamba, Dharma-sfiti-a, 39, 96,
109.

Appam^davagga, 21.

Arahantavagga, 90.

Arahat, and Ariya, 164.

Ariya, the elect, 22, 79.

— etymology of, 270.

Artha and dharina, 363.

Arfipadhatu, 218.

Asava, Ssrava, 253.

Asava, khwasava, 89.

Asrava, 39, See Asava.

Ajoka, 21.

Ajraya, 89.

Atharva-veda, 96.

Attavagga, 157.

Atula, 227.

AvadS.na, legend, etymology of, 183.
AvRsa, monastery, 72, 30a.

Avassuta, 39.

Avr/ha, 218.

BSllavagga, 60.

Bee, emblem of a sage, 49.
Bhikkhuvagga, 360.

Bhikshu, a mendicant, 31, 32,73,75,
366, 267.

Bhikshu, different from Sraraa«a and
Brahma»a, 142.

BhovSdi, arrogant, addressing vener-
able people by bho ! 396.

[10]

Bhfiri, knowledge, 282.

Bodhiru^i (508-51 x A.l),), 294.
Bodhyaftga. See Sambodhyahga, 89.
Brahmag'Slasuita, 153.

Brahman, above the gods, 230.
Brahman, with Mira, 105.
Brahma«a, with ^ramawa and Bhik-
shu, 142.

Brahma»a, etymology of, 388.
Erahma«avagga, 383.

Buddha’s last words, 153, 154.

— commandments, 183, 185.
Bxxddhavagga, 179.

Convent (avasa), 73, 302.

Dah, to burn, not sah, 31.
Dawi^anidhSna, 142, 405.
Da«iavagga, 129.

Death, its dominion, 86.

— king of, 170.

Dbamma, plur., forms, things, 279,
DharamS, plur., three of the five
khandhas, vedanS, sail/Tfa, and
sahkhira, i.

Dhammadina, 354.
Dhammatthavagga, 256.
Dhanapllaka, 324.

Dharma, explained, i.

Dh&tu, eighteen, 89.

Digambaras (<?ainas, followers of
MahEvira), 141.

Dfpa, island (arhatship), 25, 26.
Dipa, dvipa, island, 236, 238.
Dipahkara, 236, 258.

Dipavawsa, 21.

Disciple (sekha), 45.

DhtM, dn'shti, heresy, j 64.
Di'vyavadSna, 14 1, 149.

Drinking, 247.

Eightfold, the way, 191, 273.
Elephant, Buddha, 320.

98

DHAMMAPADA.

Fetters of life, 345, 346, 350.

Fire, worshipped by Brahmans, 107,
392 -

Flowers, with and without scent, 51,

53.

Four truths, 190, 273.

Gandharva, 104.

GathS, loi.

GathSsahgraha, 183.

Gods, 94, 200.

Gold pieces, 186, 230 (nekkha).
Good and evil bear fruit, 119-122.
Gotama, 296.

Graha, gaha, 251.

Gainas, 104, 14 1.

GambQ river, gold of it, 230.
Gar§,vagga, 146.

Gataka, 9, 33, 35-39, 73, 149, 15K,
179, 187, 285, 294, 306, 345.
Gafa, sign ot iSaiva ascetic, 141.

Hair, platted, of Brahmans, 393, 394.
Hatred, how it ceases, 3, 4.

— ceases by love, 5.

Hitopadeja, 129.

Immortal place, 1 1 4.

Immortality and death, 2 1.

Indra’s bolt, 95.

Island (dipa), 25, 26.

KSkajQra, 244.

Kali, unlucky die, 20a.

KalySwamitra, 78.

Kanakarauni, 183.

KSsiva, k^shaya, yellow dress, 9.
Kathasaritsfigara, 135.

Kavytdarja, 41 1.

Kilir^(6a, klish/a, 15.

Kisigotamt, 45.

Kodhavagga, aai.

Kuja, grass, 311.

Kuja grass, for eating with, 70,

Kittavagga, 33.

Lalita-vistara, 39, 44, 4^, i53j 251,
254, 275, 282, 330, 326, 388.
Lahkkvatara-sQtra, 294,

Lily (lotus), its purity, 58, 59
Lokavagga, 167.

Lotus leaf, water on it, 401.

Made and not made, 383.

Maggavagga, 273.

Maghavan, Indra, 30.

MahabhSrata, 9, 44, 87, 92, 96, 129,
131, 133, 142, 150, 185, 187, 198,
200, 202, 233, 227, 248, 275, 287,
306, 364, 395.

Mahtparinibblna-sutta, 39, 153.
MahS.vawsa, 21.

Mahtvastu, quotes Dharmapada, and
Sahasravarga, 100.

MahS,vira, 141.

Malavagga, 235.

Mallika, 54. .

Mandhatri, 185.

Manu, laws, 71, 96, 109, 131, 150,
251, 320, 345, 346.

Mara, the tempter, 7, 8, 34, 37, 40,46,
57, 105,175, 274, 276, 337,350.
Marsha, 96 n.

Milk, turning suddenly, 71.
Miracles, Buddha’s view of, 254.
MithilS, 200.

Muni, etymology of, 268, 369.
Mustard seed, on a needle, 401, 407.

Nagavagga, 320.

Nakedness, 141.

N^marOpa, mind and body, 221,367.
Nibbuta, nirvrita, freed, 89,

Niraya, hell, 306.

Nirayavagga, 306.

Nirukti, 363.

Nirva«a, 23, 33, 75, ia6, 134, 184,
203, 304, ai8, 225, 226, 285,
289, 333, 368, 37a, 374.
Nishkashlya, free from impurity,
play on word, 9,

Old-in-vain, 260.

Overcome evil by good, 223.

Pakiwwakavagga, 290.

Pakkhandin, praskandin, 244.
Pa«<d:tavagga, 76.

Pipavagga, 116.

Paraglmin, 85.

Pare, ol it 6 KKoi, 6.

Parivaiiatha, 141,

Path, the evil and the good, 17, 18,
316-319.

Patricide, 394.

Piyavagga, 309.

Platted hair, 141,

Prapa^ 4 -a, 354.

Prasen^it, defeated by A^gltaiatru,
aoi.

INDEX.

99

Pratibhana, 363.

Pratimoksha, 183, 185.

Pravra^, 83,

Pravra^ita, etymology of, 388.
Proverbs, 96.

Puns, 283, 294, 29s, 305,
Pupphavagga, 44.

Ra^a, dust, passion, 3 1 3
RamSyawa, 129.

Sacrifice, worthless, to6.
Sahassavagga, quoted in MahSvastu,
100.

Sahita= Tipi/aka, 19.

St. Luke, 1 30.

St. Matthew, 252.

St. Mark, 157.

Samana, etymology of, 265.
SamawTza, priesthood, 20.
Sambodhyahga, 89.

Sawsara, 60.

Sawsk&ra, conception, 202.

— the five skandhas, 202.
Sawyutta-nikaya, 69.

Sanatsugatlya, 21.

Sankhfira, creature, 255.

Sahkhata, 70.

Sawgwa, perception, 202.

Sara, truth, reality, ii.

Sati, smr/ti, intense thought, 9 1 .
Sayanasanam, jayanasanam, 185.
Self, lord of self, 160, 165.

Seven elements of knowledge, 89.
Shore, the other, 85, 384.

— the two shores, 385.

Sindhu horses, 322.

Skandha, body, 202.

Snowy mountains, 304.

Spider, 347.

Spoon, perceives no taste, 64.
Sugata, Buddha, 285, 4i9(weifaring).
Sukhavagga, 197.

Suttanipfita, 20, 6r, 87, 125, 141, 142,
170, 185, 205, 239, 3.06, 328,
339j 345, 353, 3^4, 375, 39*5-

423-

5 akala-prStuakhya, 352.

^finya, 92.

i'vetambaras (Gainas, followers of
ParivanStha), 14 x.

Tabernacle, maker of, 153.

Tagara, plant, 54.
Taittiriya-Sra«yaka, 96.
Tawhavagga, 334.

TathSgata, 254.

Tathagatas, are preachers, 276.

Ten evil states, 137.

Thirty-six passions, 339.

Thought, word, and deed, 96.
Thoughts, their influence, i.
Tirthafikara, 104.

Tonsure, 264.

Trijara«a> 190.

Trividhadvara, thought, word, and
deed, 96.

Twiti-verses, x.

Ukkutika, see Utka?ukasana, X41.
Uncreated (akata), 97.

UpSdana, 20.

Upadhi, 418.

Upadhiviveka, 203.

Upama, aupamya, 129.

Upasarga, misfortune, 139.
Ordhvawzsrotas, 2x8.

Utka/ukfisana, sitting on the hams,
141.

Viha, horse, or vaha, wave, 339.
Vana, forest and lust, 283.
V^ishriia-Bharadvfiga-sfltra, 396;
Vassikl flower, 377 .

Vassiki, flower, 55.

Vedana, sensation, 202.

Videha, king of, 200.

Vij-»§.na, knowledge, 202.

Yimoksha, freedom, 92, 93,
Vinaya-pi/aka, 28, 307.

Vishwu-sfltra, 9.

Vijvabhfl Tathagata, 49.

Viveka, separation, retirement, 75,87.

Works, good, 220.

World, the next, i 7 <>-
— of the gods, X 77 .

Yama, 44, 45> 235-
Yftma’s messengers, 235.
Yamakavagga, i.

Ye dhamxna, «&c., 183.

Yellow dress, 9, 10, 307.

Yonija>6, truly, thoroughly, 326.

H 2

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

SUTT A-N IP ATA

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

TRANSLATED

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MOLLER

VOLUME X
part II

SECOND EDITION

THE SUTTA-NIPATA

A COLLECTION OF DISCOURSES

BEING ONE OF THE CANONICAL BOOKS OF THE
BUDDHISTS

TRANSLATED FROM pALI

BY

V. FAUSBOLL

SECOND EDITION REVISED

CONTENTS.

Introduction to Sutta-Nipata
Introduction to the Second Edition

I. URAGAVAGGA . . • •

1. Uragasutta . . • •

2. Dhaniyasutta . . • •

3. Khaggavisdwasutta .

4. Kasibh^adva^asutta

5. ATundasutta . . • •

6. Par^bhavasutta

7. Vasalasutta . . • •

8. Mettasutta . . • •

9. Hemavatasutta

10. A/avakasutta . . • •

11. Vi^yasutta . . . •

12. Munisutta . . . •

II . ATtTLAVAGGA . . . •

1. Ratanasutta . . • •

2. Amagandhasutta

3. Hirisutta . . . •

4. Mah^mangalasutta .

5. Sii/?:ilomasutta . • • •

6. Dhamma-^ariyasutta or Kapilasutta

7. Brdhmanadhamniikasutta .

8. N^v^sutta . . . •

9. Kiwzstlasutta . . . •

10. U///^dnasutta . . . >

11. R^hulasutta .

12. Vangtsasutta . . . •

1,3, Sammaparibba^niyasutta

14. Dhammikasutta

VIU

CONTENTS.

III. MAHAVAGGA

1. Pabba^^asutta

2. Padhtnasutta

3. Subhasitasutta

4. Sundarikabhdradv^asutta

5. Maghasutta .

6. Sabhiyasutta .

7. Selasutta

8. Sallasutta

9. VSse//.^asutta

10. KokSIiyasutta

11. Ndlakasutta .

12. Dvayat^nupassanSsutta .

IV. A 7 OTAKAVAGGA .

1. Kdmasutta .

2. Guba/Z/iakasutta

3. Du/Ma//&kasutta .

4. Suddha/< 65 akasutta .

5. Parama/// 5 akasutta .

6. Garisutta

7. Tissametteyyasutta .

8. Pasdrasutta .

9. M%andiyasutta

10. PurSbhedasutta

11. Kalahavivadasutta .

12. A^filaviyOhasutta

13. MahSviyGhasutta .

14. Tuva^kasutta

15. Attada«<fasutta

16. Sdnputtasutta

V. PARiYANAVAGGA .

1. Vatthug^thi .

2. A^taniS«avapu/{’-^> 5 a

PAGE

66

. 66
. 68

• 71

• 73

• 79
84

• 95

■ 105

107

116

123

129

H 3

143

T44

M 5

147

148

150

151

152
154

157

>59

161

164

167

170

172

176

176

182

CONTENTS. ix

PAGE

3. TissametteyyamS«avapu-^Ma 183

4. Pu««akamS«avapUi^,^/^a 184

5. Mettagfim^«avapu/?:i^a 185

6. DhotakamamvapuMM 187

7. Upastvam^;^avapu/t/^/^S .188

8. NandamS«avapu/J/<^y 4 d 190

9. HemakamS«avapu/^-^M 191

10. Todeyyami.mvapu^^M 192

11. KappamS«avapu/^/?:^d 193

12. Gatukaxmmifiavapui/tM 194

13. Bhadrdvudham^wavapu/^yi^/id . . . • ■ 194

14. UdayamS«avapu/ 5 ^y 5 d 195

15. PosdlamS;^avapu^y 5 ^d 196

16. Moghar^am^wavapuM/i^ 197

17. PmgiyamS«avapu-^^/ 5 S 198

Index 2O3

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the

Translations of the Sacred Books of the Bast . . 209

EXPLANATION OF WORDS
the meaning of which is not always given in the translation.

A^^nvika, one belonging to a sect
of naked ascetics.

Arahat, a holy man, a saint.

Ariya, noble.

Bhagavat, worshipful, blessed, a
name of a Buddha.

Bhikkhu, a mendicant.

Brahman, the supreme god of the
Hindus.

Brihmawa, a sage.

Buddha, enlightened, a name of
certain holy men who have freed
themselves from e.xistence, parti-
cularly of Sama«a Gotama.

Dhamma, tenet, doctrine, custom,
law, religion, virtue, thing.

Gaha//y%a, Gihin, a householder.

Gotama, a name of the last Bud-
dha.

Ga/ila, an ascetic wearing clotted
hair.

Gina, a conqueror, a name of a
Buddha.

I si, a sage.

Khattiya, a warrior, a prince.

K-AftdklK, an outcast.

M dra, a name of the king of death,
the devil.

Muni, a thinker, a sage.

N4ga, an eminent man,

Namu/ii == Mdra.

Nibbina, extinction, the state of
bliss of the Buddhist.

NigawMa, a naked ascetic.

Pabba^^a, leaving the world, em-
bracing ascetic life, taking the
robe.

Pabba^ita, an ascetic, having
taken the robe.

Paribbd^a, Paribbd^^aka, a
wandering- mendicant.

S akka s= Sakya, belonging to the
Sakya tribe.

Sakyamuni, the Sakya sage a
name of Buddha. *

Sama«a, an ascetic.

Sawikhstrd, all compound things,
the material world, the elements
of existence.

Sawsdra, revolution, transmigra-
tion.

Sdvaka, a hearer, a follower, a
disciple of Buddha, including
both laity and clergy.

Sekha, a novice, student.

Sudda, a man of the servile caste.
S u ga t a, happy, a name of a Buddha.
1 hera, an elder, a senior priest.
Titthiya, an ascetic adhering to
a certain system of philosophy.

U p ad h i, the elemcnt.s of the world.
Qpdsaka, a follower, a lay de-
votee,

Upasampadd, priest’s orders.
Vessa, Vessika, a man of the
third caste.

Yakkha, a giant, a malignant
spirit.

INTRODUCTION

TO

THE SUTTA-NIPATA.

The Collection of Discourses, Sutta-Nipata, which I have
here translated^, is very remarkable, as there can be no
doubt that it contains some remnants of Primitive Bud-
dhism. I consider the greater part of the Mahavagga, and
nearly the whole of the A//>^akavagga as very old. I have
arrived at this conclusion from two reasons, first from the
language, and secondly from the contents.

I. We not only find here what we meet with in other
P^li poetry, the fuller Vedic forms of nouns and verbs in
the plural, as avitatawh^se, panditAse, dhammise, sitase,
upaif/Zdtdse, pavddiydse, &c., and >^aramase, asmase, sik-
khissimase ; the shorter Vedic plurals and the instrumental
singular of nouns, as vini/^Maya, lakkha/^a for viniy^^'Ziaydni,
lakkha/^ani, manta, pari««a, vinayd, Ubhakamya for man-
tdya, &c. ; Vedic infinitives, as vippahatave, sampayatave,
u;/«ametave; contracted (or sometimes old) forms, as santyfi,
g-aJikA, dugga>i&/^a, sammu/^M, titthyi, thiyo,panhirati for san-
tiyd, ^atiya, sammutiyi, titthiyi, itthiyo, parihariyati, by the
side of protracted forms, such as dtumina?;2 ; but also some
unusual (sometimes old) forms and words, as a.p\xkklvd£\,
sagghasi^= sakkhissasi, su.ssam = su;dssami (Sansk. .rrosh-
y^mi), pdva and pdvd = vadati, payrtkkh^ = paveseyya,
parikissati = parikilissati, vineyya, vi-^eyya, ni-^'-^//eyya, pap-
puyya, = vinayitvd, &c., da/zZ/u = disva (S. dr/sh/vi), atisi-
tvA = atikkamitvd, anuvi/^y&a = anuviditvd, paribbas^na =
vasam^lna, garuna?«, bhikkhuna;«, munina;/^, vedaguna;«
(accus.), amhana (S. aj'manA) = pisd^ena, v^/^ibhi, /^atubbhi,
rattamahibhi, ise (vocative), suvami = sami, maga = miga
tumo = so, parovara = pardvara, bhuinahu = bhhtihanaka
upaya, imagandha, dhona, vyappatha, vyappathi, v^\r\kkkA

‘ Sir M. Coomara Swdmy’s translation, of part of the book has been a great
help to me. The PSU text was published by the P^i Text Society for 1884.

® C reads pagghasi.

visenibhtita, vlsenlkatv^, pariseniyanti. We also find tmesis
as in the Vedas, for instance, v. 348, tamo v’assa nivuto sab-
baloko ; v. 1108, kiw2 su sa^zyo^ano loko. Sometimes we
meet with difficult and irregular constructions, and very
condensed expressions. All this proves, I think, that these
parts of the book are much older than the Suttas in which
the language is not only fluent, but of which some verses
are even singularly melodious.

2. In the contents of the Suttanipto we have, I think,
an important contribution to the right understanding of
Primitive Buddhism, for we see here a picture not of life
in monasteries, but of the life of hermits in its first stage.
We have before us not the systematizing of the later Bud-
dhist church, but the first germs of a system, the fundamental
ideas of which come out with sufficient clearness. From
the A///?!akavagga especially it is evident where Buddha
takes his stand in opposition to Philosophy (diit/d =
darjana).

Indian society at the time of Buddha had two large and
distinguished religious sects, Sam awas and Brihmawas.
This is apparent from several passages where they are
mentioned together ; for instance, Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg, II,
p. 295; Grimblot, Sept Suttas Pilis, p. ix, 8 &c., 118 &c.,
158 &c., 305 &c., 309 ; Dhammapada, p. 392 ; Suttanipdta,
vv. 99, 129, 189, 440, 529, 859, T078 ; Sabhiyasutta, at the
beginning ; the Inscriptions of Asoka ; MahdbhAshya, II, 4,
9 (fol. 398 a) ; Lalita Vistara, pp. 309, 1. 10, 318, 1. 18, ‘320,
1. 20 ; and lastly, Megasthenes (Schwanbeck, p. 45), SjJo yivrj
^i\o<T 6 (f)u>v, &v rolls fxh BpaxfJ^^vas KaXci, roiiif 5^ Sap/Aaiiay.

Famous teachers arose and gathered around them flocks
of disciples. As such are mentioned Phrawa-Kassapa,
Makkhali-Gosdla, A^ita-Kesakambali, Pakudha-Ka/^M-
yana, Saw^ya-Bela/Z/dputta, and Nigaw//za-Ndtaputta » ;
see Suttanip^ta, p. 85 Mah^parinibbanasutta, ed. Childers,
p. 58 ; Vinaya II, p. t 1 1 ; Grimblot, Sept Suttas Pdlis, p. 1 14,
&;c.; Milindapa^ha, ed.Trenckner, p,4. Besides these there
is B4vari (Suttanip^ta, p. 176), and his disciples A^ita, Tiss^-
metteyya, Puy/«aka, Mettagfi, Dhotaka, Up asiva, Nanda,

‘ Cf. Indian Antiquary, i88o, p. 158.

I

INTRODUCTION.

XIII

Hemaka, Todeyyaj Kappa, 6^atuka??«in, Bhadravudha,
Udaya, Posala, Moghara^aii (Pingiya, vv. 1006-1008 ; Sela,
p. 97), and i^ahkin, Tarukkha^ Pokkharasati, Canusso?/!,
YtsQtiha., and Bhiradva^a, p. 108.

We learn that there were four kinds of Samaras, viz.
Magga^inas, Maggadesakas (or Maggadesins, Magga^^/^a-
yins), Magga^ivins, and Maggadusins, vv. 83-88. Among
these Sa.ma.ms disputes arose, vv. 828, 883-884 ; a number
of philosophical systems were formed, and at the time of
Buddha there were as many as sixty- three of them, v. 538.
These systems are generally desigmated by dXttln^ vv, 54,
151, 786, 837, 851, &c. ; or by di//>^igata, vv. 834, 836, 913 ;
or by di///^asuta, v. 778 ; or by di///^a, suta, and muta,
vv. 793, 813, 914; or by di^'//^a, suta^ silavata\ and muta,
vv. 790, 797-798, 836, 887, 1080. The doctrines themselves
are called dii^/Zdnivesa, v. 785 ; or nivesana, vv. 209, 470.
801, 846 ; or vini>^ir/^aya, vv. 838, 866, 887, 894 ; and he who
entertains any of them, is called nivissavadin, vv. 910, 913.

What is said of the Samaras seems mostly to hold
good about the Brahmawas also. They too are called
disputatious, vddasila, v. 381, &c., p, 109; and three kinds
of them are mentioned, viz. 'Titthiyas, A^ivikas, and
Niga«//^as, vv. 380, 891-892. In contradistinction to
the Samaras the Brahma;zas are designated as Tevi^^as.
vv. 594, 1019; they are Padakas, Veyyakara^as, and perfect
in 6^appa, Nighawrf'u, Ketubha, Itihasa, &c., v. 595, p. 97.
They are called friends of the hymns, v. 139 ; well versed
in the hymns, v. 976 ; and their principal hymn is SWitti
vv. 368, 456. They worship and make offerings to the fire,
pp. 73, 20. In Brahmawadhammikasutta the ancient and
just Brahma7/as are described in opposition to the later

1 I am not sure whether silavata is to be imderstood as one notion or two.
It is generally written in one word, but at p. 108 Vase^fZ/^a says, when one is
virtuous and endowed with works, he is a Brahma«a, yato kho bho silava /^a
hoti vatasampanno /^a ettavata kho brahmawo hoti, Silavata, I presume, refers
chiefly to the Brflhmawas.

2 From V. 456 we see that Buddha has rightly read vare?nyam as the metre
requires, but I must not omit to mention that the Commentator understands
by Savitti the Buddhistic formula : Buddha;// saia«a/« ga/’-^y 4 ami, Dhamma///
sara//a/« ga. 4 / 5 ; 4 ami, Sa/wgha/// sara//a/// ga/( 4 ’/iami, which, like Savitti, contains
twenty-four syllables.

[TO]

I

XIV

SUTTA-NIPATA.

Brahma«as,who slayinnocent cows and have acquired wealth
through the favour of the kings, vv. 307, 308, 3 11, 302 h

All these disputants hold fast to their own prejudiced
views, V. 910. They say that purity comes from philo-
sophical views, from tradition, and from virtuous works,
and in many other ways, v. .1078, and that there is no bliss
excepting by following their opinions, vv. 889, 891, 892.

Buddha himself has, it is true, sprung from the Sama7ms:
he is called Sama77a Gotama, p. 95 ; he shines like a sun
in the midst of the Samaras, v. 550 ; and intercourse with
Sama/zas is said to be the highest blessing, v. 263. But
Buddha has oyercome all their systems, v. 538 ; there is
nothing which has not been seen, heard, or thought by him,
and nothing which has not been understood by him, v. 1121.
All the disputatious Brdhmazzas do not overcome him in
understanding, V. 380; and he asserts that no one is purified
and saved by philosophy or by virtuous, works, vv. 1079,
839. Sanctification, in fact, does not come from another,
vv. 773, 790, 813 ; it can be attained only by going into
the yoke with Buddha, v. 834 ; by believing in him and in
the Dhamma of the Saints, vv. 1 83, 1 85. 370, on the

whole, by being what Buddha is.

What then is Buddha ?

First he is a Visionary, in the good sense of the word ;
his knowledge is -intuitive, ‘ Seeing misery,’ he says, ‘ in the
philosophical views, without adopting any of them, searching
for truth, I saw inward peace,’ vv. 837, 207. And again,
‘ffe, a conqueror unconquered, saw the Dhamma visibly,
without any traditional instruction,’ vv. 934, 1052, 1065.
He teaches an instantaneous, an immediate religious life,
vv. 567, 1136. Fie is called /takkhumat, endowed wnth an
eye, clearly-seeing, vv. 160, 405, 540, 562, 596, 956, 992,
1028, 1095, 1115, 1127; samanta/^akkhu, the all-seeing,
vv. 1062, 1068; and as such he has become an eye to
the world, v. 599. He' sees the subtle meaning of things,
vv, 376, 175 ; he is, in one word, Sambuddha, the perfectly-
enlightened, vv. 177, 555, 596, 992; and by knowledge he

^ Besides the religious Brahmawas some secular Brahma7»as are mentioned,

p. II.

INTRODUCTION.

XV

is delivered, vv. iio6, 727, 733. Existence is avi^^a,
ignorance, v. 729 ; vi^^, knowledge, is the extinction of
the world, v. 730.

Secondly he is an Ascetic, a Muni ^, one that forsakes
the world and wanders from the house to the houseless
state, vv. 273, 375, 1003 ; because from house-life arises
defilement, v. 206. An ascetic has no prejudiced ideas,
V. 802 ; he has shaken ofT every philosophical view, v. 787 ;
he does not enter into disputes, v. 887 ; he is not pleased
nor displeased with anything, v. 813 ; he is indifferent to
learning, v. 91 1 ; he does not cling to good and evil,
vv. 530, 547, 790 ; he has cut off all passion and all desire,
vv. 2, 795, 113O5 91^; he is free from marks, v. 847; and
possessionless, aki/l/^ana, vv, 175, 454, 490, 620, 1058, 1062,
976, 1069, 1114. He is equable, v. 855 ; under all circum-
stances the same, v. 952 ; still as the deep water, v. 920 ;
calm, vv. 459, 86 1. He has reached peace, vv. 837, 845,
919 ; he knows that bliss consists in peace, v. 933 ; he has
gone to immortal peace, the unchangeable state of Nib-
bana, v. 203. And how is this state brought about ? By
the destruction of consciousness, vv. 734-735. And how
does consciousness cease? By the cessation of sensation,
vv. 1109-1110.

I. What then is sin according to Buddha?

Subjectively sin is desire, in all its vai'ious forms,
vv. 923, 1103; viz. desire for existence generally, vv. 776,
1059, 1067, and especially for name and form, i. e. individual
existence, vv. 354, 1099. As long as man is led by desire
he will be whirled about in existence, v. 740 ; for as long
as there is birth, there will be death, v. 742. Existence
is called' the stream of death, v. 354; the realm of Mara,
vv, 164, 1145. Those who continually go to sams^ra with
birth and death, are the ignorant, v. 729.

* Buddha is sometimes styled the great Isi, vv. rodo, 10S2 ; sometimes
a Muni, vv. 164, 700 ; sometimes a Brahmawa, v. 1064; sometimes a Bhikkhu,
vv. 41 1, 415 ; and all these appellations are used synonymously, vv. 283, 284,
1064, 1066, 843, 844, 91 1, 912, 946, 220. Ascetic life is praised throughout
the book, especially in the Uraga-, Muni-, Rahula-, Sammaparibbd^aniya-,
Dhammika-, Nalaka-, Purdbheda-, Tuvai('aka-, Attadawc/a-, and Sariputta-
suttas.

XVI

SUTTA-NIPATA.

But desire originates in the body, vv. 270, 1099 ; sin lies
objectively in embodiment or matter, and conse-
quently the human body is looked upon as a contemptible
thing. See Vi^ayasutta, p. 32.

2. And what is bliss?

Subjectively, it is emancipation from desire by
means of the peace that Buddha preaches, vv. 1065-1066,
1069, 1084, 1108, 838-839.

Objectively, it is emancipation from body and
matter. One must destroy the elements of existence,
upadhi, vv. 373, 546, 1050, 1056 ; and leave the body
behind, that one may not come to exist again, vv. J120,
1122, 761. The ignorant only create upadhi, v. 1050, and
go again and again to sa?«sara, v. 729. The wise do not
enter time, kappa, vv. 521, 535, 860; they look upon the
world as void, v. 1118; hold that there is nothing really
existing, v. 1069 ; and those whose minds are disgusted
with a future existence, the wise who have destroyed their
seeds (of existence), go out like a lamp, vv. 234, 353-354.
As a flame, blown about by the violence of the wind,
goes out, and cannot be reckoned (as existing), even so
a Muni, delivered from name and body, disappears, and
cannot be reckoned (as existing), v. 1073. For him who
has disappeared, there is no form ; that by which they say
he is,, exists for him no longer, v. 1075.

‘ Exert thyself, then, — O Dhotaka,’ so said Bhagavat, —

‘ being wise and thoughtful in this world, let one, having
listened to my utterance, learn his own extinction,’ v. 1061.
Tena h’ atappawz karohi, — Dhotaka ’ti Bhagavi, —
idh’ eva nipako sato
ito sutvana nigghosaz/z
sikkhe nibbdnam attano.

With this short sketch of the contents of the Suttanipdta
for a guide, I trust it will be easy to understand even the
more obscure parts of the book.

V. FAUSBOLL.

Copenhagen,

Sept. 13, 1880,

INTRODUCTION

TO THE SECOND EDITION OF

THE SUTTA-NIPAtA.

I am glad to acknowledge that some of the corrections
in this new translation I owe to the suggestions of Professor
Rhys Davids and to the notes of the late Doctor Richard
Morris in the Journal of the Pali Text Society. In different
difficult places I have added a few more extracts from the
commentary ‘ Paramattha^.?'otika,’ for it is and has always
been my principle to follow the commentaries, as far as
I understand them, and I think that this is the only safe
way to go at the beginning of a study like this ; later, when
we get a greater material to work from, we may perhaps in
some places rid ourselves of the commentaries, still we must
always be careful, and we must never think that we know
better than a long tradition from guru to guru.

V. FAUSBOLL.

Copenhagen.

I. URAGAVAGGA.

1. URAGASUTTA.

The Bhikkhu who discards all human passions is compared to a

snake that casts his skin. — Text and translation in Fr. Spiegel’s

Anecdota PSlica.

1. He who restrains his anger when it has

arisen, as (they) by medicines (restrain) the poison
of the snake spreading (in the body), that Bhikkhu
leaves this and the further shore, as a snake (quits
its) old worn out skin. (i)

2. He who has cut off passion entirely, as (they cut

off) the lotus-flower growing in a lake, after diving
(into the water), that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. {2)

3. He who has cut off craving entirely, the flowing,

the quickly running, after drying it up, that Bhik-
khu leaves this and the further shore, as a snake
(quits its) old worn out skin. (3)

4. He who has destroyed arrogance entirely, as the

flood (destroys) a very frail bridge of reeds, that
Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as a
snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (4)

5. He who has not found any essence in the exist-

ences, like one that looks for flowers on fig-trees,
that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as
a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (5)

2

URAGAVAGGA.

6. He in whose breast there are no feelings of

anger, who has thus overcome reiterated existence,
that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as
a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (6)

7. He whose doubts are scattered, cut ojff en-

tirely inwardl3^ that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (7)

8. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, who overcame all this (world of) de-
lusion, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (8)

9. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, having seen that all this in the world
is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (9)

10. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was

left behind, being free from covetousness, (seeing)
that all this is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and
the further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn
out skin. (10)

1 1. He who did not go too fast forward, nor

was left behind, being free from passion, (seeing)
that all this is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and
the further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn
out skin. (ii)

12. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, being free from hatred, (seeing) that all
this is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this a,nd the further
shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (12)

13. He who did not go too fast forward, nor was
left behind, being free from folly, (seeing) that all this
is false, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further
snorci as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (13)

DHANIYASUTTA.

3

14. He to whom there are no affections whatso-

ever, whose sins are extirpated from the root, that
Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore, as a snake
(quits its) old worn out skin. (14)

15. He to whom there are no (sins) wliatsoever

originating in fear, which are the causes of coming
back to this shore, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (15)

16. He to whom there are no (sins) whatsoever

originating in desire, which are the causes of binding
(men) to existence, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the
further shore, as a snake (quits its) old worn out
skin. (16)

17. He who, having left the five obstacles, is free

from suffering, has overcome doubt, and is without
pain, that Bhikkhu leaves this and the further shore,
as a snake (quits its) old worn out skin. (17)

Uragasutta is ended.

2. DHANIYASUTTA.

A dialogue between the rich herdsman Dhaniya and Buddha, the
one rejoicing in his worldly security and the other in his religious
belief. — This beautiful dialogue calls to mind the parable in the
Gospel of St. Luke xii. 16. See a translation in Rhys Davids’
Buddhism, 1896, p. 167.

T. H have boiled (my) rice, I have milked (iny
cows),’ — so said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ‘ I am
living together with my fellows near the banks of
the Mah! (river), (my) house is covered, the fire is
kindled: therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky!’ (18)
2. ‘ I am free from anger, free from stubborn-
ness ,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ I am abiding for one
night near the banks of the Mahl (river), my house

4

URAGAVAGGA.

is uncovered, the fire (of passions) is extinguished :
therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky 1 ’ {19)

3. ‘ Gad-flies are not to be found (with me),’ — so

said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ‘in meadows abound-
ing with grass the cows are roaming, and they can
endure rain when it comes : therefore, if thou like,
rain, O sky ! ’ (20)

4. ‘ (By me) is made a well-constructed raft,’ — so
said Bhagavat, — ‘ I have passed over (to Nibbina),
I have reached the further bank, having overcome
the torrent (of passions); there is no (further) use
for a raft : therefore, if thou like; rain, O sky I’ (21)

5. ‘ My wife is obedient, hot wanton,’ — so said the

herdsman Dhaniya, — ‘ for a long time she has been
living together (with me), she is winning, and I hear
nothing wicked of her : therefore, if thou like, rain,
O sky ! ’ (22)

6. ‘ My mind is obedient, delivered (from all world-

liness),’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ it has for a long time
been highly cultivated and well-subdued, there is no
longer anything wicked in me : therefore, if thou
like, rain, O sky!’ (23)

7. ‘ I support myself by my own earnings,’ — so

said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ‘and my children are
(all) about me, healthy ; I hear nothing wicked of
them ; therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky ! ’ (24)

8. ‘ I am no one’s servant,’ — so said Bhagavat, —

‘ with what I have gained I wander about in all the
world, there is no need (for me) to serve ; therefore,
if thou like, rain, O sky I ’ (25)

9. ‘I have cows, I have calves,’ — so said the

herdsman Dhaniya, — ‘ I have cows in calf and heifers,
and I have also a bull as lord over the cows : there-
fore, if thou like, rain, O sky 1 ’ (26)

DHANIYASUTTA.

5

10. ‘I have no cows, I have no calves,’ — so said

Bhagavat, — ‘ I have no cows in calf and no heifers,
and I have no bull as a lord over the cows : there-
fore, if thou like, rain, O sky!’ (27)

11. ‘ The stakes are driven in, and cannot be

shaken,’ — so said the herdsman Dhaniya, — ‘ the
ropes are made of mu^^a grass, new and well-made,
the cows will not be able to break them : therefore,
if thou like, rain, O sky ! ’ (28)

12. ‘ Having, like a bull, rent the bonds; having,

like an elephant, broken through the galu/^Mi
creeper, I shall not again enter into a womb : there-
fore, if thou like, rain, O skyl’ (29)

Then at once a shower poured down, filling both
sea and land. Hearing the sky raining, Dhaniya
spoke thus : (29 b)

13. ‘No small gain indeed (has accrued) to us
since we have seen Bhagavat; we take refuge in
thee, O (thou who art) endowed with the eye (of
wisdom) ; be thou our master, O great Muni ! ’ (30)

14. ‘ Both niy wife and myself are obedient ; (if)

we lead a holy life before Sugata, we shall conquer
birth and death, and put an end to pain.' (31)

15. ‘He who has sons has delight in sons,’ — so

said the wicked Mara, — ‘he who has cows has de-
light likewise in cows ; for upadhi (substance) is the
delight of man, but he who has no upadhi has no
delight.’ (32)

16. ‘He who has sons has care with (his) sons,’ —

so said Bhagavat, — ‘ he who has cows has likewise
care with (his) cows ; for upadhi (is the cause of)
people's cares, but he who has no upadhi has no
care.’ (33)

Dhaniyasutta is ended.

6

URAGAVAGGA.

5 . khaggavisAtv'asutta.

Family life and intercourse with others should be avoided, for

society has all vices in its train ; therefore one should leave

the corrupted state of society and lead a solitary life.

1. Having laid aside the rod against all beings,

and not hurting any of them, let no one wish for a
son, much less for a companion, let him wander
alone like a rhinoceros h (34)

2. In him’ who has intercourse (with others) af-
fections arise, (and then) the pain which follows
affection ; considering the misery that originates in
affection let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (35)

3. He who has compassion on his friends and

confidential (companions) loses (his own) advan-
tage, having a fettered mind ; seeing this danger
in friendship let one wander alone like a rhino-
ceros. (36)

4. J ust as a large bamboo tree (with its branches)

entangled (in each other, such is) the care one has
with children and wife; (but) like the shoot of a
bamboo not clinging (to ai^ything) let one wander
alone like a rhinoceros ^ (S 7 )

5. Asa beast unbound in the forest goes feeding
at pleasure, so let the wise man, considering (only
his) own will, wander alone like a rhinoceros. (38)

6. There is (a constant) calling in the midst of

company, both when sitting, standing, walking, and
going away; (but) let one, looking (only) for free-
dom from desire and for following his own will,
wander alone like a rhinoceros. (39)

7. There is sport and amusement in the midst of

^ Comp. Dhp. v. 142.

® Comp. Dhp. V. 345.

K H AGGAVISAJVASUTTA.

7

company, and for children there is great affection ;
(although) disliking separation from his dear friends,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (40)

8. He who is at home in (all) the four regions

and is not hostile (to any one), being content with
this or that, overcoming (all) dangers fearlessly, let
him wander alone like a rhinoceros. (41)

9. Discontented are some pabbafitas (ascetics),
also some gaha/Mas (householders) dwelling in
houses ; let one, caring little about other people’s
children, wander alone like a rhinoceros. (42)

10. Removing the marks of a gihin (a house-

holder) like a Kovil^ra tree whose leaves are fallen,
let one, after cutting off heroically the ties of a
gihin, wander alone like a rhinoceros. (43)

11. If one acquires a clever companion, an asso-

ciate righteous and wise, let him, overcoming all
dangers, wander about with him glad and thought-
ful k ^ (44)

12. If one does not acquire a clever companion,

an associate righteous and wise, then as a king
abandoning (his) conquered kingdom, let him wan-
der alone like a rhinoceros (45)

13. Surely we’ ought to praise the good luck of

having companions, the best (and such as are our)
equals ought to be sought for; not having ac-
quired such friends let one, enjoying (only) allowable
things, wander alone like a rhinoceros k (46)

14. Seeing bright golden (bracelets), well-wrought

by the goldsmith, striking (against each other when
there are) two on one arm, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (47)

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 328. ^ Comp. Dhp. v. 329.

’ Comp. Dhp. V, 6i.

8

uragavagga.

15. Thus (if I join myself) with another I shall

swear or scold; considering this danger in future,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (48)

1 6. The sensual pleasures indeed, which are

various, sweet, and charming, under their different
shapes agitate the mind ; seeing the misery (ori-
ginating) in sensual pleasures, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (49)

17. These (pleasures are) to me calamities, boils,

misfortunes, diseases, sharp pains, and dangers ;
seeing this danger (originating) in sensual pleasures,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (50)

18. Both cold and heat, hunger and thirst, wind

and a burning sun, and gad-flies and snakes — having
overcome all these things, let one wander alone like
a rhinoceros k (51)

19. As the elephant, the strong, the spotted, the

large, after leaving the herd walks at pleasure in
the forest, even so let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (52)

20. For him who delights in intercourse (with

others, even) that is inconvenient which tends to
temporary deliverance ; reflecting on the words of
(Buddha) the kinsman of the Adiiia family, let one
wander alone like a rhinoceros. (53)

21. The harshness of the (philosophical) views
I have overcome, I have acquired self-command, I
have attained to the way (leading to perfection),

I am in possession of knowledge, and not to be
led by others; so speaking, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (54)

22. Without covetousness, without deceit, without

^ Comp, trataka I, p. 93.

K HAGGAVISAiVASUTTA.

9

craving, without detraction, having got rid of pas-
sions and folly, h>eing free from desire in all the
world, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (55)

23. Let one avoid a wicked companion who

teaches what is useless and has gone into what is
wrong, let him not cultivate (the society of) one
who is devoted (to and) lost in sensual pleasures,
let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (56)

24. Let one cultivate (the society of) a friend

who is learned and keeps the Dhamma, who is
magnanimous and wise ; knowing the meaning (of
things and) subduing his doubts, let one wander
alone like a rhinoceros. (57)

25. Not adorning himself, not looking out for

sport, amusement, and the delight of pleasure in the
world, (on the contrary) being loath of a life of
dressing, speaking the truth, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (58)

26. Having left son and wife, father and mother,

wealth, and corn, and relatives, the different objects of
desire, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (59)

27. ‘This is a tie, in this there is little happi-

ness, little enjoyment, but more of pain, this is a
fish-hook,’ so having understood, let a thoughtful
man wander alone like a rhinoceros. (60)

28. Having torn the ties, having broken the net

as a fish in the water, being like a fire not returning
to the burnt place, let one wander alone like a rhi-
noceros. (61)

29. With downcast eyes, and not prying h with his
senses guarded, with his mind protected free from

^ Na kz ptdalolo ti ekassa duliyo dvinna-w tatiyo ti evaw
ga.mmo.ggh^.m pavisitukamatiya kawfi’Oiyam^napSdo viya abhavanto
dtgha/<&arika-anavattha/4arikavirato vS. Commentator.

10

URAGAVAGGA.

passion, not burning (with lust), let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (62)

30. Removing the characteristics of a gihin

(householder), like a Pa/iMa-tta tree whose leaves
are cut off, clothed in a yellow robe after wandering
away (from his house), let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (63)

31. Not being greedy of sweet things, not being

unsteady, not supporting others, going begging from
house to house, having a mind which is not fettered
to any household, let one wander alone like a rhi-
noceros. (64)

32. Having left the five obstacles of the mind,

having dispelled all sin, being independent, having
cut off the sin of desire, let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros. (65)

33. Having thrown behind (himself bodily) plea-
sure and pain, and previously (mental) joy and
distress, having acquired equanimity, tranquillity,
purity, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (66)

34. Strenuous for obtaining the supreme good

(i.e. Nibbana), with a mind free from attachment, not
living in idleness, being firm, endowed with bodily
and mental strength, let one wander alone like a
rhinoceros* (67)

35. Not abandoning seclusion and meditation,

always wandering in (accordance with) the Dhammash
seeing misery in the existences, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros (68)

36. Wishing for the destruction of desire (i.e. Nib-

bana), being careful, no fool, learned, strenuous, con-
siderate, restrained, energetic, let one wander alone
like a rhinoceros. (69)

^ Dhammesu mkkwt anudliamma/^ari., ® Comp. Dhp. v. 20.

kasibhAradvagasutta.

II

37. Like a lion not trembling at noises, like the
wind not caught in a net, like a lotus not stained by
water, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (70)

38. As a lion strong by his teeth, after overcom-
ing (all animals), wanders victorious as the king of the
animals, and haunts distant dwelling-places h (even
so) let one wander alone like a rhinoceros. (71)

39. Cultivating in (dufe) time kindness, equanimity,

compassion, deliverance, and rejoicing (with others),
unobstructed .. by the whole world, let one wander
alone like a rhinoceros. (72)

40. Having abandoned both passion and hatred and
folly, having rent the ties, not trembling in the loss
of life, let one wander alone like a rhinoceros (73)

41. They cultivate (the society of others) and

serve them for the sake of advantage ; friends with-
out a motive are now difficult to get, men know
their own profit and are impure ; (therefore) let one
wander alone like a rhinoceros. (74)

Khaggavis^^asutta is ended.

4 . kasibhAradvA6^asutta.

The Brahmana Kasibharadva^a reproaches Gotama with idleness,
but the latter convinces him that he (Buddha) also works, and
so the Brdhmawa is converted, and finally becomes a saint.

Compare Sp. Hardy, A Manual of Buddhism, p. 214; Gospel
of St. John V. 17.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt in Magadha at Dak-
khi//igiri in the Brilimai^a village Ekana/A. And at

’ Pantdntti dfirani sendsaniniti vasati/Mananf Commentator.

“ Comp. Dhp. V. 20.

[10] K

I

hi

12

URAGAVAGGA.

that time the Brdhma^^a Kasibhdradvi^a s five hun-
dred ploughs were tied (to the yokes) in the sowing
season. Then Bhagavat, in the morning, having put
on his raiment and taken his bowl and robes, went
to the place where the Brihma^^a Kasibhiradv^^a’s
work (was going on). At that time the Br^hma^a
Kasibharadvi^a’s distribution of food took place.
Then Bhagavat went to the place where the distri-
bution of food took place, and having gone there, he
stood apart. The Brahma:>2a Kasibharadvd^ saw
Bhagavat standing there to get alms, and having
seen him, he said this to Bhagavat ;

‘ I, O Samara, both plough and sow, and having
ploughed and sown, I eat; thou also, O Sama^^a,
shouldst plough and sow, and having ploughed and
sown, thou shouldst eat’

‘ I also, O Brdhma^^a, both plough and sow, and
having ploughed and sown, I eat/ so said Bhagavat.

‘Yet we do not see the yoke, or the plough, or
the ploughshare, or the goad, or the oxen of the
venerable Gotama.’

And then the venerable Gotama spoke in this way:

‘ I also, O Brdhma?2a, both plough and sow, and
having ploughed and sown, I eat,’ so said Bhagavat.

Then the Brdhma^^a Kasibhdradvd^a addressed
Bhagavat in a stanza :

1. ‘ Thou professest to be a ploughman, and yet

we do not see thy ploughing; asked about (thy)
ploughing, tell us (of it), that we may know thy
ploughing.’ (75)

2 . Bhagavat answered : ‘ Faith is the seed, penance

the rain, understanding my yoke and plough, mo-
desty the pole of the plough, mind the tie, thought-
fulness my ploughshare and goad. (76)

KASIBHARADVAGASUTTA.

13

3. ‘I am guarded in respect of the body, I am

guarded in respect of speech, temperate in food ;
I make truth to cut away (weeds), tenderness is my
deliverance. (77)

4. ‘ Exertion is my beast of burden ; carrying (me)
to Nibbdna he goes without turning back to the
place where having gone one does not grieve. (78)

5. ‘ So this ploughing is ploughed, it bears the

fruit of immortality ; having ploughed this ploughing
one is freed from all pain.' (79)

Then the Brahma^^a Kasibhiradva^a, having
poured rice-milk into a golden bowl, offered it to
Bhagavat, saying, ‘ Let the venerable Bhagavat eat
of the rice-milk ; the venerable is a ploughman, for
the venerable Gotama ploughs a ploughing that
bears the fruit of immortality.’

6. Bhagavat said : ‘ What is acquired by reciting

stanzas is not to be eaten by me ; this is, O Br^h-
maina., not the Dhamma of those that see rightly;
Buddha rejects what is acquired by reciting stanzas,
this is the conduct (of Buddhas) as long as the
Dhamma exists. (80)

7. ‘ One who is an accomplished great I si, whose

passions are destroyed and whose misbehaviour has
ceased, thou shouldst serve with other food and
drink, for this is the field for one who looks for
good works’.’ (81)

‘ To whom then, O Gotama, shall I give this rice-
milk ? ’ so said Kasibharadv^^a.

‘I do not see, O Br^hma?za, in the world (of men)
and gods and Miras and Brahmans, amongst beings
comprising gods and men, and Sama«:as and Brih-

’ Cf. SundarikabharadvS^a, v. 28.
K 2

URAGAVAGGA.

H

ma 72 as, any by whom this rice-milk when eaten can
be properly digested with the exception of Tathagata,
or a disciple of Tathagata. Therefore, O Brahma?2a,
thou shalt throw this rice-milk in (a place where
there is) little grass, or cast it into water with no
worms,’ so said Bhagavat.

Then the Br^hma^^a Kasibhdradv^^a threw the
rice-milk into some water with no worms. Then
the rice-milk thrown into the water splashed, hissed,
smoked in volumes ; for as a ploughshare that has
got hot during the day when thrown into the water
splashes, hisses, and smokes in. volumes, even so the
rice-milk (when) thrown into the water splashed,
hissed, and smoked in volumes.

Then the Brihma?za Kasibh^radvif^a alarmed and
terrified went up to Bhagavat, and after having
approached and fallen with his head at Bhagavat’s
feet, he said this to Bhagavat

‘ It is excellent, O venerable Gotama ! It is ex-
cellent, O venerable Gotama ! As one raises what
lias been overthrown, or reveals what has been
hidden, or tells the way to him who has gone
astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark that
those who have eyes may see the objects, even so
by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the
Dhamma (has been) illustrated. I take refuge in
the venerable Gotama and in the Dhamma and in
the Assembly of Bhikkhus ; I wish to receive the
pabbaj^^^, I wish to receive the upasampadd (the
robe and the orders) from the venerable Gotama,’
so said Kasibharadva^’a,

Then the Brahma;/a Kasibharadvi^a received the
pabba^^'a from Bhagavat, and he received also the
upasampada ; and the venerable Bharadva^ having

^rUNDASUTTA.

15

lately received the upasampadd, leading a solitary,
retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived after
having in a short time in this existence by his own
understanding ascertained and possessed himself of
that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander
away from their houses to a houseless state. ‘ Birth
had been destroyed, a religious life had been led,
what was to be done had been done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence,’ so he
perceived, and the venerable Bhdradva^a became
one of the arahats (saints).

Kasibhiradv^^asutta is ended.

5. /iTUNDASUTTA.

Buddha describes the four different kinds of Samaras to A'’unda,
the smith.

1. ‘I ask the Muni of great understanding,’ — so

said A’unda, the smith, — ‘ Buddha, the lord of the
Dhamma, who is free from craving, the best of
bipeds, the most excellent of charioteers, how many
(kinds of) Sama/^as are there in the world; pray
tell me that?’ (82)

2. ‘There are four (kinds of) Sama;^as, (there is)

not a fifth, O Afunda,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ these I
will reveal to thee, being asked in person ; (they are)
Magga^inas and Maggadesakas, Magga^ivins and
Maggadfisins.’ (83)

3. ‘ Whom do the Buddhas call a Magga^na?’ — so
said Ahinda, the smith, — ‘ How is a Magga^/^^yin

i6

URAGAVAGGA.

unequalled ? Being asked, describe to me a Mag-
ga^ivin, and reveal to me a Maggadlisin.’ (84)

4. Bhagavat said : ‘ He who has overcome doubt,

is without pain, delights in Nibbdna, is free from
greed, a leader of the world of men and gods, such
a one the Buddhas call a magga^ina (that is, vic-
torious by the way). (85)

5. ‘He who in this world having known the best

(i.e. Nibbana) as the best, expounds and explains here
the Dhamma, him, the doubt-cutting Muni, without
desire, the second Bhikkhu they call a maggadesin
(that is, teaching the way). (86)

6. ‘He who lives in the way that has so well been

taught in the Dhammapada, and is restrained, atten-
tive, cultivating blameless words, him the third
Bhikkhu they call a magga^ivin (that is, living in
the way). (87)

7. ‘He who although counterfeiting the virtuous is
forward, disgraces families, is impudent, deceitful, un-
restrained, a babbler, walking in disguise, such a one
is a maggadusin (that is, defiling the way) h (88)

8. ‘He who has penetrated these (four Sama^^as),

who is a householder, possessed of knowledge, a pupil
of the venerable ones, wise, having known that they
all are such, — having seen so, his faith is not lost;
for how could he make the undepraved equal to the
depraved and the pure equal to the impure ? ’ (89)

A'undasutta is ended.

^ Comp, G^taka II, p. 281.

PARA BHAVASUTT A.

17

6. parAbhavasutta.

A dialogue between a deity and Buddha on the things by which
a man loses and those by which he gains in this world. — Text
by Grimblot, in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (1871), p. 237 ; transla-
tion by L. Peer, in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (1871), p. 309, and
by Gogerly, reprinted in Journal Asiatique, t. xx (1872), p. 226.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Savatthi, in 6^eta-
vana, in the park of Andthapi^Ziti^ika. Then when
the night had come, a certain deity of a beautiful
appearance, having illuminated the whole (^etavana,
went up to Bhagavat, and having approached and
saluted him, he stood apart, and standing apart that
deity addressed Bhagavat in stanzas :

1. ‘We ask (thee), Gotama, about a man that
suffers loss ; having come to ask, Bhagavat, (tell us)
what is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (90)

2. Bhagavat : ‘ The winner is easily known, easily
known (is also) the loser : he who loves Dhamma is
the winner, he who hates Dhamma is the loser.’ (91)

3. Deity : ‘We know this to be so, this is the

first loser ; tell (us) the second, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (92)

4. Bhagavat : ‘ Wicked men are dear to him, he

does not do anything that is dear to the good, lip
approves of the Dhamma of the wicked, — that is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (93)

5. Deity : ‘We know this to be so, this is the

second loser ; tell us the third, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (94)

6. Bhagavat: ‘ The man who is drowsy, fond of

society and without energy, lazy, given to anger,—
that is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (95)

i8

URAGAVAGGA.

7- Deity : ' We know this to be so, this is the
third loser : tell us the fourth, O Bhagavat. what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ /q 5 \

8. Bhagavat : ' He who being rich does not support
mother or father who are old or past their youth -
that is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (07)

9 - Deity : ■ We know this to be so, this is the
fourth loser ; tell us the fifth, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (ng)

' ‘ falsehood deceives

either a Brahma/ia or a SamaKa or any other raen-

fifth' I ‘Ws to be so, this is 2

fifth loser; tell us the sixth, O Bhagavat. what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (100)

1.2. Bhagavat; ‘The man who is possessed of
much property, who has gold and food, (and still)

iofZswTh 1" "'""f is the cause

(of loss) to the losing (man).’ fioi)

six'th' ii^'" =°’ ‘lie

L the r*''’/fi“"i‘^'' seventh, O Bhagavat, what
IS the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (102)

of hts ‘ who proud of his birth,

wea , and of his family, despises his rela-

(n^an)7' “‘

15. Deity : ‘ We know this to be so. this il'°h^
seventh loser; tell us the eighth, O Bhagavat, what
IS the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (104)

to 7 ‘T*'® "’an who given to women,

eainldlitl,""^’ d’^e, wastes whatever he has

fmanV ^

(’ 05 )

parAbhavasutta.

19

1 7. Deity : ‘ We know this to be so, this is the

eighth loser ; tell us the ninth, O Bhagavat, what is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).' (io6)

18. Bhagavat: ‘He who, not satisfied with his

own wife, is seen with harlots and the wives of
others, — that is the cause (of loss) to the losing
(man).’ (to?)

19. Deity : ‘We know this to be so, this is the

ninth loser ; tell us the tenth, O Bhagavat, what
(is) the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (108)

20. Bhagavat ; ‘ The man who past his youth,

brings home a woman with breasts like the timbaru
fruit, and for jealousy of her cannot sleep, — that is
the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (109)

21. Deity: ‘We know this to be so, this is the
tenth loser ; tell us the eleventh, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (no)

22. Bhagavat : ‘ He who places in supremacy a

woman given to drink and squandering, or a man of
the same kind, — that is the cause (of loss) to the
losing (man).’ (^n)

23. Deity: ‘We know this to be so, this is the

eleventh loser; tell us the twelfth, O Bhagavat, what
is the cause (of loss) to the losing (man).’ (112)

24. Bhagavat : ‘ He who has little property, (but)

great craving, is born in a Khattiya family qnd wishes
for the kingdom in this world, — that is the cause' (of
loss) to the losing (man).’ (tis)

25. Having taken into consideration these losses

in the world, the wise, venerable man, who is en-
dowed with insight, cultivates the happy world (of
the gods). (114)

Pardbhavasutta is ended.

20

URAGAVAGGA.

7. VASALASUTTA.

The Br^hmawa Aggikabharadva^a is converted by Buddha, after
hearing his definition of an outcast, illustrated by the story of
Matanga, told in the Matanga^taka. Comp. Sp. Hardy, The
Legends and Theories of the Buddhists, p. 49. — Text and trans-
lation in Ahvis’s Buddhist NirvS/za, p. 119.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sivatthi, in 6^eta-
vana, in the park of Anithapi«<a?ika. Then Bhagavat
having put on his raiment in the morning, and having
taken his bowl and hisrobes, entered Sivatthi for alms.

Now at that time in the house of the Brdhma^^a
Aggikabhiradvi^a the fire was blazing, the offering
brought forth. Then Bhagavat going for alms from
house to house in Savatthi went to the house of the
Brahmawa AggikabhAradv%-a. The Brfihma^a Ag-
gikabhiradva^a saw Bhagavat coming at a distance,
and seeing him he said this : ‘ Stay there, O Shave-
ling;- (stay) there, O Sama^aka (i. e. wretched Samara) ;
(stay) there, O Vasalaka (i. e. outcast)!’

This having been said, Bhagavat replied to the
Brihma^a Aggikabhiradvi^a : ‘ Dost thou know,
O Brihma^a, an outcast, or the things that make
an outcast.^’

‘No, O venerable Gotama, I do not know an
outcast, or the things that make an outcast; let
the venerable Gotama teach me this so well that I
may know an outcast, or the things that make
an outcast.’

‘ Listen then, O Brahma?za, attend carefully, I will
tell (thee).’

‘ Even so, O venerable one,’ so the Brdhmawa
Aggikabharadva^a replied to Bhagavat.

VASALASUTTA.

21

Then Bhagavat said this :

1. ‘ The man who is angry and bears hatred, who

is wicked and hypocritical, who has embraced wrong
views, who is deceitful, let one know him as an
outcast. (1^5)

2. ‘ Whosoever in this world harms living beings,

whether once or twice born, and in whom there is
no compassion for living beings, let one know him
as an outcast. (iib)

3. ‘ Whosoever destroys or lays siege to villages

and towns, and is known as an enemy, let one know
him as an outcast, • (ti7)

4. ‘ Be it in the village or in the wood, whosoever
appropriates by theft what is the property of others
and what has not been given, let one know him as
an outcast.

5. ‘Whosoever, having really contracted a debt,

runs away when called upon (to pay), saying, “ There
is no debt (that I owe) thee,” let one know him as
an outcast. (119)

6. ‘ Whosoever for love of a trifle having killed a

man going along the road, takes the trifle, let one
know him as an outcast. (120)

7. ‘ The man who for his own sake or for that

of others or for the sake of wealth speaks falsely
when asked as a witness, let one know him as an
outcast, (^21)

8. ‘ Whosoever is seen with the wives of relatives

or of friends either by force or with their consent, let
one know him as an outcast. (122)

9. ‘ Whosoever being rich does not support mother

or father when old and past their youth, let one know
him as an outcast. (^23)

1 o. ‘ Whosoever strikes or by words annoys mother

22

URAGAVAGGA.

or father, brother, sister, or mother-in-iaw, let one
know him as an outcast. (124)

11. ‘ Whosoever, being asked about what is good,

teaches what is bad and advises (another, while) con-
cealing (something from him), let one know him as
an outcast (125)

12. -‘Whosoever, having committed a bad deed,

hopes (saying), “ Let no one know me ” (as having
done it, who is) a dissembler, let one know him as
an outcast (^26)

1 3. ‘ Whosoever, having gone to another’s house

and partaken of his good food, does not in return
honour him when he comes, let one know him as an
outcast (127)

14. ‘Whosoever by falsehood deceives either a

Brahma/2a or a Samawa or any other mendicant, let
one know him as an outcast (128)

15. ‘ Whosoever by words annoys either a Brah-

ma;2a or a Samawa when meal-time has come and
does not give (him anything), let one know him as
an outcast (129)

16. ‘Whosoever enveloped in ignorance in this

world predicts what is not (to take place), coveting
a trifle, let one know him as an outcast (130)

1 7. ‘Whosoever exalts himself and despises others,

being mean by his pride, let one know him as an
outcast (131)

1 8. ‘ Whosoever is a provoker and is avaricious, has

sinful desires, is envious, wicked, shameless, and fear-
less of sinning, let one know him as an outcast (132)

19. ‘ Whosoever reviles Buddha or his disciple,

be he a wandering mendicant (paribbdfa) or a
householder (gaha/Z/za), let one know him as an
outcast (X33)

VASALASUTTA.

23

20. ‘ Whosoever without being a saint (arahat)

pretends to be a saint, (and is) a thief in all the
worlds including that of Brahman, he is indeed the
lowest outcast; (all) these who have been described
by me to you are indeed called outcasts. (134)

21. ‘Not by birth does one become an outcast,

not by birth does one become a Br^hma/^a ; by
deeds one becomes an outcast, by deeds one be-
comes a Br^hmawa. (135)

22. ‘ Know ye this in the way that this example

of mine (shows) : There was a K-d.ndk\z. of the
SopM<a caste, well known as Mitahga. (136)

23. ‘ This Mitahga reached the highest fame, such

as was very difficult to obtain, and many Khattiyas
and Brahma;ms went to serve him. (137)

24. ‘ He having mounted the vehicle of the gods,
(and entered) the high road (that is) free from
dust, having abandoned sensual desires, w^ent to

the Brahma world. (13^)

25. ‘ His birth did not prevent him from being
re-born in the Brahma world ; (on the other hand)
there are Brihniawas, born in the family of pre-
ceptors, friends of the hymns (of the Vedas), (i 39 )

26. ‘But they are continually caught in sinful deeds,

and are to be blamed in this world, while in the
coming (world) hell (awaits them) , birth does not
save them from hell nor from blame. (140)

27. ‘(Therefore) not by birth does one become an
outcast, not by birth does one become a Br4hma«a,
by deeds one becomes an outcast, by deeds one
becomes a Br^hmai^a.’

This having been said, the Brihma;^a Aggikabhd-
radvli^a answered Bhagavat as follows :

‘ Excellent, O venerable Gotama ! Excellent, O

24

URAGAVAGGA.

venerable Gotama ! As one, O venerable Gotama,
raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what
has been hidden, or tells the way to him who has
gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark
that those who have eyes may see the objects, even
so by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the
Dhamma has been illustrated ; I take refuge in the
venerable Gotama and in the Dhamma and in the
Assembly of Bhikkhus. Let the venerable Gotama
accept me as an upisaka (a follower, me) who
henceforth for all my life have taken refuge (in
him).’

Vasalasutta is ended.

8. METTASUTTA.

A peaceful mind and -goodwill towards all beings are praised. — Text
by Grimblot in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (1871), p. 250, and by
Childers in Khuddaka Pa/Aa, p. 15; translation (?) by Gogerly
in the Ceylon Friend, 1839, p. 211, by Childers in Kh. Pa/>^a
and by L. Peer in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (1871), p. 328.

1. Whatever is to be done by one who is skilful

in seeking (what is) good, having attained that tran-
quil state (of Nibbina) : — Let him be able and upright
and conscientious and of soft speech, gentle, not
proud, (142)

2. And contented and easily supported and having

few cares, unburdened and with his senses calmed
and wise, not arrogant, without (showing) greediness
(when going his round) in families. ( H3)

3. And let him not do anything mean for which

others who are wise might reprove (him) ; may all
beings be happy and secure, may they be happy-

minded. ( 144)

HEMAVATASUTTA.

25

4. Whatever living beings there are, either feeble

or strong, all either long or great, middle-sized,
short, small or large, (145)

5. Either seen or which are not seen, and which

live far (or) near, either born or seeking birth, may-
all creatures be happy-minded. (146)

6. Let no one deceive another, let him not despise

(another) in any place, let him not out of anger or
resentment wish harm to another. (^47)

7. As a mother at the risk of her life watches

over her own child, her only child, so also let every
one cultivate a boundless (friendly) mind towards all
beings. (148)

8. And let him cultivate goodwill towards all the

world, a boundless (friendly) mind, above and below
and across, unobstructed, without hatred, without

enmity. (i49)

9. Standing, walking or sitting or lying, as long

as he be awake, let him devote himself to this
mind ; this (way of) living they say is the best in

this world. (^5^)

10. He who, not having embraced (philosophical)

views, is virtuous, endowed with (perfect) vision,
after subduing greediness for sensual pleasures, will
never again go to a mother’s womb. (^5^)

Mettasutta is ended.

9 . HEMAVATASUTTA.

A dialogue between, two Yakkhas on the qualities of Buddha,
They go to Buddha, and after having their questions answered
they, together with ten hundred Yakkhas, become the followers
of Buddha.

I. ‘To-day is the fifteenth, a fast day; a lovely

26

URAGAVAGGA.

night has come/ — so said the Yakkha Satagira, — ‘let
us (go and) see the renowned Master Gotama.’ (152)

2. ‘Is the mind of such a one well disposed towards

all beings ?’ — so said the Yakkha Hemavata,— ‘ are
his thoughts restrained as to things wished for or
not wished for ? ’ ( ^ 5 )

3. ‘His mind is well disposed towards all beings,

(the mind) of such a one/ — so said the Yakkha
Satdgira, — ‘and his thoughts are restrained as to
things wished for or not wished for.’ (^54)

4. ‘ Does he not take what has not been given (to

him)?’ — so said the Yakkha Hemavata, — ‘is he self-
controlled (in his behaviour) to living beings ? is
he far from (a state of) carelessness ? does he not
abandon meditation ? ’ (155)

5. ‘ He does not take what has not been given

(to him),’ — so said the Yakkha S^t^gira, — ‘and he is
self-controlled (in his behaviour) to living beings,
and he is far from (a state of) carelessness; Buddha
does not abandon meditation.’ (156)

6. ‘ Does he not speak falsely ? ’ — so said the

Yakkha Hemavata, — ‘is he not harsh - spoken ?
does he not utter slander ? does he not talk non-
sense ? ’ (157)

7. ‘ He does not speak falsely,’ — so said the Yak-

kha Satagira,— ‘ he is not harsh-spoken, he does
not utter slander, with judgment he utters what
is good sense/ (15S)

8. ‘ Is he not given to sensual pleasures ?’ — so

said the Yakkha Hemavata, — ‘is his mind undis-
turbed ? has he overcome . folly ? does he see
clearly in (all) things (dhammas)?’ (159)

9. ‘He is not given to sensual pleasures,’— so
said the Yakkha Sdt^gira, — ‘and his mind is undis-

HEMAVATASUTTA.

27

turbed; he has overcome all folly; Buddha sees
clearly in (all) things/ (160)

10. ‘ Is he endowed with knowledge?’ — so said

the Yakkha Hemavata, — ‘is his conduct pure?
have his passions been destroyed ? is there no
new birth (for him)?’ (idi)

11. ‘He is endowed with knowledge,’ — so said

the Yakkha Sdt%ira, — ‘ and his conduct is pure ; all
his passions have been destroyed ; there is no new
birth for him. (162)

12. ‘ The mind of the Muni is accomplished in

deed and word ; Gotama, who is accomplished

by his knowledge and conduct, let us (go and)
see. (163)

13. ‘Come, let us (go and) see Gotama, who has

legs like an antelope, who is thin, who is wise, living
on little food, not covetous, the Muni who is medi-
tating in the forest. (164)

14. ‘ Having gone to him who is like a lion, a lonely
wandering elephant, and who does not look for sen-
sual pleasures, let us ask about the (means of) deli-
verance from the snares of death.

15. ‘Let us ask Gotama, the preacher, the ex-
pounder, who has penetrated all things, Buddha

who has overcome hatred and fear.’ (166)

16. ‘In what has the world originated ? ’ — so said

the Yakkha Hemavata, — ‘with what is the world
intimate ? by what is the world afflicted, after
having grasped at what?’ (^*^7)

17. ‘ In six the world has originated, O Hema-
vata,’ — so said Bhagavat,— ‘ with six it is intimate,
by six the world is afflicted, after having grasped
at six.’

18. Hemavata said; ‘What is the grasping by

[lo] L

28

URAGAVAGGA.

which the world is afflicted ? Asked about salva-
tion, tell (me) how one is released from pain? ’ (169)

19. Bhagavat said : ‘ Five pleasures of sense are

said to be in the world, with (the pleasure of) the
mind as the sixth ; having divested oneself of desire
for these, one is thus released from pain. (i 70)

20. ‘ This salvation of the world has been told to

you truly, tfiis I tell you : thus one is released from
pain.’ (171)

21. Heniavata said : ‘Who in this world crosses

the stream (of existence) ? who in this world crosses
the sea ? who does not sink into the deep, where
there is no footing and no support?’ (172)

22. Bhagavat said : ‘He who is always endowed
with virtue, possessed of understanding, well com-
posed, reflecting within himself, and thoughtful,
crosses the stream that is difficult to cross. (173)

23. ‘He who is disgusted with sensual pleasures,

who has overcome all bonds and destroyed joy, such
a one does not sink into the deep.’ (^74)

24. Hemavata said : ‘ He who is endowed with a

profound understanding, seeing what is subtile, pos-
sessing nothing, not clinging to sensual pleasures,
behold him who is in every respect liberated, the
great Isi, walking in the divine path. (175)

25. ‘He who has got a great name, sees what is

subtile, imparts understanding, and does not cling to
the abode of sensual pleasures, behold him, the all-
knowing, the wise, the great Isi, walking in the noble
path. (17b)

26. ‘A good sight indeed (has met) us to-day, a
good daybreak, a beautiful rising, (for) we have seen
the perfectly enlightened (sambuddham), who has
crossed the stream, and is free from passion. (177)

AXAVAKASUTTA.

29

27. ‘These ten hundred Yakkhas, possessed of
supernatural power and of fame, they all take refuge
in thee, thou art our incomparable Master. (178)

28. ‘We will wander about from village to vil-

lage, from mountain to mountain, worshipping th«
perfectly enlightened and the perfection of the
Dhammah’ (179)

Hemavatasutta is ended.

10. Azavakasutta.

The Yakkha A/avaka first threatens Buddha, then puts some
questions to him which Buddha answers, whereupon A/avaka
is converted.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at A/avi, in the
realm of the Yakkha A/avaka. Then the Yakkha
A/avaka went to the place where Bhagavat dwelt,
and having gone there he said this to Bhagavat :

‘ Come out, O Sama??a ! ’

‘Yes, O friend ! ’ so saying Bhagavat came out.

‘ Enter, O S amanita ! ’

‘ Yes, O friend!’ so saying Bhagavat entered.

A second time the Yakkha A/avaka said this to
Bhagavat : ‘ Come out, O Sama;za 1 ’

‘ Yes, O friend I ’ so saying Bhagavat came out.

‘ Enter, O Samara I ’

‘Yes, O friend I ’ so saying Bhagavat entered.

A third time the Yakkha A/avaka said this to
Bhagavat : ‘ Come out, O Samara 1 ’

‘Yes, O friend 1 ’ so saying Bhbgavat came out.

‘ Enter, O Sama;«a ! ’

' Dhammassa ^a sudhammatam.

30

URAGAVAGGA.

‘Yes, O friend!’ so saying Bhaga vat entered.

A fourth time the Yakkha A/avaka said this to
Bhagavat : ‘ Come out, O Sama?2a 1 ’

‘ I shall not come out to thee, O friend, do what
thou pleasest.’

‘ I shall ask thee a question, O Sama^^a, if thou
canst not answer it, I will either scatter thy thoughts
or cleave thy heart, or take thee by thy feet and
throw thee over to the other shore of the Gahga.’

‘ I do not see, O friend, any one in this world nor
in the world of gods, Miras, Brahmans, amongst the
beings comprising gods, men, Samai’zas, and Brah-
ma^zas, who can either scatter my thoughts or
cleave my heart, or take me by the feet and throw
me over to the other shore of the Gahgi ; however,
O friend, ask what thou pleasest.’

Then the Yakkha A/avaka addressed Bhagavat
in stanzas :

1. ‘ What in this world is the best property for a

man. ? what, being well done, conveys happiness ?
what is indeed the sweetest of sweet things ? how
lived do they call life the best ? ’ (i8o)

2. Bhagavat said ; ‘ Faith is in this world the

best property for a man ; Dhamma, well observed,
conveys happiness ; truth indeed is the sweetest of
things ; and that life they call the best which is lived
with understanding.’ (tSi)

3. A/avaka said : ‘ How does one cross the

stream (of existence) ? how does one cross the
sea ? how does one conquer pain ? how is one
purified?’ (182)

4. Bhagavat said : ‘ By faith one crosses the

stream, by zeal the sea, by exertion one conquers
pain, by understanding one is purified.’ (^^3)

ALAVAKASUTTA.

31

5. A/avaka said ; ‘How does one obtain under-

standing ? how does one acquire wealth ? how does
one obtain fame ? how does one bind friends (to
himself) ? how does one not grieve passing away
from this world to the other?’ (i^4)

6. Bhagavat said : ‘He who believes in the
Dhamma of the venerable ones as to the acquisi-
tion of Nibbina, will obtain understanding from his
desire to hear, being zealous and discerning. (185)

7. ‘He who does what is proper, who takes the
yoke (upon him and) exerts himself, will acquire
wealth, by truth he will obtain fame, and being
charitable he will bind friends (to himself). (186)

8. ‘ He who is faithful and leads the life of a

householder, and possesses the following four
Dhammas (virtues), truth, justice (dhamma), firm-
ness, and liberality, — such a one indeed does not
grieve when passing away. (iS?)

9. ‘ Pray, ask also other Samaras and Brihma;zas
far and wide, whether there is found in this world
anything greater than truth, self-restraint, liberality,
and forbearance.’

I o. A/avaka said : ‘ Why should I now ask
Sama^^as and Br^hmaj^as far and wide ? I now
know what is my future good. (189)

11. ‘For my good Buddha came to live at A/avi ;

now I know where (i. e. on whom bestowed) a gift
will bear great fruit. (^9°)

12. ‘I will wander about from village to village,

from town to town, worshipping the perfectly en-
lightened (sambuddha) and the perfection of the

Dhamma.’ (191)

A/avakasutta is ended.

32

URAGAVAGGA.

11 . VI6^AYASUTTA.

A reflection on the worthlessness of the human body ■ a fob

ower of Buddha only sees the body as it really is, and conse-
quently goes to Nibbdna. Comp. G^itaka I, p. 146.

1. If either walking or standing, sitting or lying,

any one contracts (or) stretches (his body, then) this
is the motion of the body. ^j^2)

2. The body which is put together with bones
and sinews, plastered with membrane and flesh and
covered with skin, is not seen as it really is. (193)

3 - It IS filled with the intestines, the stomach the
lump of the liver, the abdomen, the heart, the limo-s
the kidneys, the spleen.

4 . With mucus, saliva, perspiration, lymph, blood,
the fluid that lubricates the joints, bile, and fat. (195)

5. Then in nine streams impurity flows always
rom it ; from the eye the eye-excrement, from the
ear the ear-excrement,

6. Mucus from the nose, through the mouth it
ejects at one time bile and (at other times) it ejects

phlegm, and from (all) the body come sweat and
dirt. , ,

• (^97)

7. Then its hollow head is filled with the
brain. A fool led by ignorance thinks it a fine

(198)

8. And when it lies dead, swollen and livid,
discarded in the cemetery, relatives do not care

. . (' 99 )

9. Dogs eat it and jackals, wolves and worms ;

crows and vultures eat it, and what other livino-
creatures there are.

10 . Ihe Bhikkhii possessed of understanding in
this world, having listened to Buddha’s words, he

MUNISUTTA.

33

certainly knows it (i. e. the body) thoroughly, for he
sees it as it really is. (201)

11. As this (living body is) so is that (dead one),

as this is so that (will be) ; let one put away desire
for the body, both as to its interior and as to its
exterior. (202)

1 2. Such a Bhikkhu who has turned away from de-

sire ,and attachment, and is possessed of understand-
ing in this world, has (already) gone to the immortal
peace, the unchangeable state of Nibbdna. (203)

13. This (body) with two feet is cherished (al-

though) impure, ill-smelling, filled with various kinds
of stench, and trickling here and there. (204)

14. He who with such a body thinks to exalt

himself or despises others — what else (is this) but
blindness ? (205)

Vi^ayasutta is ended.

12. MUNISUTTA.

Definition of a Muni.

1. From acquaintanceship arises fear, from house-

life arises defilement ; the houseless state, freedom
from acquaintanceship — this is indeed the view of
a Muni. (206)

2. Whosoever, after having uprooted his (sin that

has) arisen, would not replant it and would not allow
it to growup (again), him the solitarily wandering they
call a Muni ; such a great Isi has seen the state of
peace. (207)

3. Having considered the causes (of sin, and)
having discerned the seed, let him not allow any
desire (sin, &c,) for it (to arise again); such a Muni

34

URAGAVAGGA.

who sees the end of birth and destruction (i. e
Nibbdna), after leaving reasoning behind, does not
enter the number (of living beings). (208}

4. He who has penetrated all the resting-places 1

(of the mind, and) does not wish for any of them,

such a Muni indeed, free from covetousness and free
from greediness, strives no longer, for he has reached
the other shore. / \

-ru (209)

5. Ihe man who has overcome everything, who

knows everything, who is possessed of a good
understanding, undefiled in all things (dhamma),
abandoning^ everything, liberated in the destruc-
tion of desire (i.e. Nibbina), him the wise style a

‘ (210)

^ 6. The man who has the strength of understand-
ing, IS endowed with virtue and (holy) works, is
composed, delights in meditation, is thoughtful, free
from ties, free from harshness (akhila), and free from
passion, him the wise style a Muni. (21 1)

7- The Mum that wanders solitarily, the zealous
that is not shaken by blame and praise, like a lion
not trembling at noises, like the wind not caught in a
net, like a lotus not soiled by water, leading others
not led by others, him the wise style a Muni (212)

8 Whosoever becomes firm L the po;t in a
bathing-place, in whom others acknowledge pro-
priety of speech, who is free from passion, and
(endowed) with well-composed senses, such a one
the wise style a Muni. / n

^ 9- Whosoever is firm, like a straight shuttle, and
IS disgusted with evil actions, reflecting on what is
just and unjust, hi m the wise style a Muni. (214)

' Nivesanani. . Comp. Du/// 5 aka, v. 6.

“ Comp. Dhp. V. 353.

MUNISUTTA.

35

10. Whosoever is self-restrained a/id does not do

evil, is a young or middle-aged Muni, self-subdued,
one that should not be provoked (as) he does not
provoke any, him the wise style a Muni. (215)

11. Whosoever, living upon what is given by

others, receives a lump of rice from the top, from
the middle or from the rest (of the vessel, and) does
not praise (the giver) nor speak harsh words, him
the wise style a Muni. (216)

12. The Muni that wanders about abstaining from

sexual intercourse, who in his youth is not fettered
in any case, is abstaining from the insanity of pride,
liberated, him the wise style a Muni. (217)

13. The man who having penetrated the world,

sees the highest truth, such a one, after crossing the
stream and sea (of existence), who has cut off all
ties, is independent, free from passion, him indeed
the wise style a Muni. (218)

14. Two whose mode of life and occupation are

quite different, are not equal ; a householder main-
taining a wife, and an unselfish virtuous man. A
householder (is intent) upon ^ne destruction of
other living creatures, being unrestrained; but a
Muni always protects living creatures, being re-
strained. (219)

15. As the crested bird with the blue neck (the

peacock) never attains the swiftness of the swan,
even so a householder does not equal a Bhikkhu,
a secluded Muni meditating in the wood. (220)

Munisutta is ended.

Uragavagga is ended.

II. irULAVAGGA.

1, RATANASUTTA.

For all beings salvation is only to be found in Buddha, Dhamma,

and Sangha. — Text and translation in Childers' Khuddaka

PS//5a, p, 6.

1. Whatever spirits have come together here, either

belonging to the earth or living in the air, let all
spirits be happy, and then listen attentively to what
is said. (221)

2. Therefore, O spirits, do ye all pay attention,

show kindness to the human race who both day and
night bring their offerings; therefore protect them
strenuously. (222)

3. Whatever wealth there be here or in the other

world, or whatever excellent jewel in the heavens, it
is certainly not equal to Tath^gata. This excellent
jewel (is found) in Buddha, by this truth may there
be salvation. {223)

4. The destruction (of passion), the freedom from

passion, the excellent immortality which Sakyamuni
attained (being) composed, — there is nothing equal
to that Dhamma. This excellent jewel (is found) in
the Dhamma, by this truth may there be salva-
tion* (224)

5. The purity which the best of Buddhas praised,
the meditation which they call uninterrupted, there
is no meditation like this. This excellent jewel (is

RATANASUTTA.

37

found) in the Dhamma, by this truth may there be
salvation. (225)

6. The eight persons that are praised by the

righteous^, and make these four pairs, they are
worthy of offerings, (being) Sugata’s disciples ; what
is given to these will bear great fruit. This ex-
cellent jewel (is found) in the Assembly (sahgha),
by this truth may there be salvation. (226)

7. Those who have applied themselves studiously

with a firm mind and free from desire to the com-
mandments of Gotama, have obtained the highest
gain, having merged into immortality, and enjoying
happiness after getting it for nothing. This excel-
lent jewel (is found) in the Assembly, by this truth
may there be salvation. (227)

8. As a post in the front of a city gate is firm in

the earth and cannot be shaken by the four winds, like
that I declare the righteous man to be who, having
penetrated the noble truths, sees (them clearly).
This excellent jewel (is found) in the Assembly, by
this truth may there be salvation. (228)

9. Those who understand the noble truths well
taught by the profoundly wise (i. e. Buddha), though
they be greatly distracted, will not (have to) take the
eighth birth. This excellent jewel (is found) in the
Assembly, by this truth may there be salvation. (229)

10. On his (attaining the) bliss of (the right) view
three things (dhammas) are left behind (by him) :
conceit and doubt and whatever he has got of virtue
and (holy) works. He is released also from the four
hells, and he is incapable of committing the six

' The Commentator: satara pasatthi ti sappurisehi buddha-
pa/^/5ekabuddhasavakehi a?7wehi k?, devamanussehi pasatth^.

38

irt)LAVAGGA,

deadly sins. This excellent jewel (is found) in the
Assembly, by this truth may there be salvation. {2 ^o)

11. Even if he commit a sinful deed by his body,

or in word or in thought, he is incapable of conceal-
ing it, (for) to conceal is said to be impossible for
one that has seen the state (of Nibbana). This
excellent jewel (is found) in the Assembly, by this
truth may there be salvation. (231)

12. As in a clump of trees with their tops in
bloom in the first heat of the hot month, so (Buddha)
taught the excellent Dhamma leading to Nibbana to
the greatest benefit (for all). This excellent jewel (is

found) in Buddha, by this truth may there be salva-
tion. , K

(232)

13* The excellent one who knows what is excel-
lent, who gives what is excellent, and who brings
what is excellent, the incomparable one taught the
excellent Dhamma. This excellent jewel (is found) in
Buddha, by this truth may there be salvation. (233)
14. The old is destroyed, the new has not arisen,
those whose minds are disgusted with a future exist-
ence, the wise who have destroyed their seeds (of
existence, and) whose desires do not increase, go out
like this lamp. This excellent jewel (is found) in the
Assembly, by this truth may there be salvation. (234)

1 5 - W^hatever spirits have come together here,
either belonging to the earth or living in the air, let
us worship the perfect (tathdgata) Buddha, revered by
gods and men ; may there be salvation. (235)

16. Whatever spirits have come together here,
either belonging to the earth or living in the air, let
us worship the perfect (tath%ata) Dhamma, revm'ed
by gods and men ; may there be salvation, (236)

1 7 - Vi^hatever spirits have come together here,

AMAGANDHASUTTA.

39

either belonging to the earth or living in the air, let
us worship the perfect (tathagata) Sangha, revered
by gods and men ; may there be salvation. (237)

Ratanasutta is ended.

2 . Amagandhasutta.

A bad mind and wicked deeds are what defiles a man; no outward

observances can purify him. Comp. Gospel of St. Matthew

XV. 10.

1. Amagandhabrahma^ea : ‘Those who eat s^-
m^ka, iihghlaka, and /^inaka, pattaphala, mfllaphala,
and gaviphala (different sorts of grass, leaves, roots,
&c.), justly obtained of the just, do not speak false-
hood, (nor are they) desirous of sensual pleasures. (238)

2. ‘ He who eats what has been well prepared, well

dressed, what is pure and excellent, given by others,
he who enjoys food made of rice, eats, O Kassapa,
Amagandha (what defiles one). (239)

3. ‘ (The charge of) Amagandha does not apply to

me,’ so thou sayest, ‘ O Brahman (brahmabandhii,
although) enjoying food (made) of rice together
with the well-prepared flesh of birds. I ask thee,
O Kassapa, the meaning of this, of what description
(is then) thy Amagandha ? ’ (240)

4. Kassapabuddha : ‘ Destroying living beings,

killing, cutting, binding, stealing, speaking falsehood,
fraud and deception, worthless reading h intercourse
with another’s wife ; — this is Amagandha, but not
the eating of flesh. (24^)

' enaku^^an ti niratthakdnattha^anakaganthapariyapu-

«anaw2. Commentator.

40

^Olavaoga.

5. ‘ Those persons who in this world are unre-

strained in (enjoying) sensual pleasures, greedy of
sweet things, associated with what is impure, sceptics
{natthikadi;'//2i), unjust, difficult to follow;— this is
Amagandha, but not the eating of flesh. (242)

6. ‘ Those who are rough, harsh, backbiting, trea-

cherous, merciless, arrogant, and (who being) illiberal
do not give anything to any one this is Ama-
gandha, but not the eating of flesh. (243)

7. ‘Anger, intoxication, obstinacy, bigotry, deceit,

envy, grandiloquence, pride and conceit, intimacy
with the unjust; — this is Amagandha, but not the
eating of flesh. ^^ 44 )

8. ‘Those who in this world are wicked, and such as

do not pay their debts, are slanderers, false in their
dealings, counterfeiters, those who in this world
being the lowest of men commit sin ; — this is Ama-
gandha, but not the eating of flesh. (245)

9. ‘ Those persons who in this world are unre-
strained (in their behaviour) towards living creatures,
who are bent upon injuring after taking others’
(goods), wicked, cruel, harsh, disrespectful ;— this is
Amagandha, but not the eating of flesh. (246)

^ 10. ‘ Those creatures who are greedy of these
(living beings, who are) hostile, offending; always
bent upon (evil) and therefore, when dead, go to
darkness and fall with their heads downwards into
hell , this is Amagandha, but not the eating of

. (247)

II. Neither the flesh of fish, nor fasting, nor
nakedness, nor tonsure, nor matted hair, nor dirt,
nor rough skins, nor the worshipping of the fire, nor
the many immortal penances in the world, nor hymns,
nor oblations, nor sacrifice, nor observance of the

HIRISUTTA.

41

seasons, purify a mortal who has not conquered his
doubt h (248)

12. ‘The wise man wanders about with his organs
of sense guarded, and his senses conquered, standing
firm in the Dhamma, delighting in what is right and
mild; having overcome all ties and left behind all pain,
he does not cling to what is seen and heard/ (249)

13. Thus the Bhagavat (Kassapa) preached this

subject again and again, (and the Brihmawk), who
was accomplished in the hymns (of the Vedas)
understood it; the Muni who is free from defile-
ment, independent, and difficult to follow, made it
clear in various stanzas. (250)

14. Having heard the Buddha’s well-spoken

w^ords, which are free from defilement and send
away all pain, he worshipped the Tathdgata’s (feet)
in humility, and took orders at once. (251)

Amagandhasutta is ended.

3 . HIRISUTTA.

On true friendship.

1. He who transgresses and despises modesty,

who says, ‘ I am a friend,’ but does not undertake
any work that can be done, know (about) him : ‘ he
is not my (friend).’ (252)

2. Whosoever uses pleasing words to friends with-

out effect him the wise know as one that (only) talks,
but does not do anything. (253)

3. He is not a friend who always eagerly suspects

^ Comp. Dhp. V. X41.

® Ananvayan ti yzm atthazw dassSmi kariss^mfti bhasati tena
ananugataw. Commentator.

42

^tjLAVAGGA.

a breach and looks out for faults ; but he with whom
he dwells as a son at the breast (of his mother),
he is indeed a friend that cannot be severed (from
him) by others. (254)

4. He who hopes for fruit, cultivates the energy

that produces joy and the pleasure that brings praise,
(while) carrying the human yoke. (255)

5. Having tasted the sweetness of seclusion and
tranquillity one becomes free from fear and free from
sin, drinking in the sweetness of the Dhamma h (2 56)

Hirisutta is ended.

4 . mahAmangalasutta.

Buddha defines the highest blessing to a deity. — Text by Grirablot
in Journal Asiatique, t, xviii (1871), p. 229, and by Childers in
Kh. Pa//^a, p. 4 ; translation by Gogerly in the Ceylon Friend,
1839, p. 208; by Childers in Kh. p. 4; and by L. Peer

in Journal Asiatique, t. xviii (1871), p. 296.

So it was heard by me ;

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sdvatthi, in 6^eta-
vana, in the park of Andthapi^^z'ika. Then, when
the night had come near, a deity of beautiful
appearance, having illuminated the whole ( 7 etavana,
approached Bhagavat, and having approached and
saluted him, he stood apart, and standing apart that
deity addressed Bhagavat in a stanza ;

1. ‘ Many gods and men have devised blessings,

longing for happiness, tell thou (me) the highest
blessing.' (257)

2. Buddha said ; ‘ Not cultivating (the society of)
fools, but cultivating (the society of) wise men, wor-

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 2og.

MAHAMANGALASUTTA.

43

shipping those that are to be worshipped, this is the
highest blessing. (258)

3. ‘To live in a suitable country, to have done
good deeds in a former (existence), and a thorough
study of one’s self, this is the highest blessing. (259)

4. ‘ Great learning and skill, well-learnt discipline,

and well-spoken words, this is the highest bless-
ing. {260)

5. ‘ Waiting on mother and father, protecting child

and wife, and a quiet calling, this is the highest
blessing. (261)

6. ‘ Giving alms, living religiously, protecting

relatives, blameless deeds, this is the highest bless-
ing. (262)

7. ‘ Ceasing and abstaining from sin, refraining

from intoxicating drink, perseverance in the Dham-
mas, this is the highest blessing. (263)

8. ‘ Reverence and humility, contentment and gra-

titude, the hearing of the Dhamma at due seasons,
this is the highest blessing. (264)

9. ‘ Patience and pleasant speech, intercourse with

Sama/2as, religious conversation at due seasons, this
is the highest blessing. (265)

10. ‘ Penance and chastity, discernment of the

noble truths, and the realisation of Nibb^na, this is
the highest blessing. (266)

11. ‘He whose mind is not shaken (when he is)

touched by the things of the world (lokadhamma),
(but remains) free from sorrow, free from defilement,
and secure, this is the highest blessing. (267)

12. ‘Those who, having done such (things), are

undefeated in every respect, walk in safety every-
where, theirs is the highest blessing.’ (268)

Mah^mahgala is ended.

M

[ 10 ]

44

X-ULAVAGGA.

5. SC^ILOMASUTTA.

The Yakkha SMiloma threatens to harm Buddha^ if he cannot
answer his questions. Buddha answers that all passions pro-
ceed from the body..

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Gaya (seated) on
a stone seat in the realm of the Yakkha Sh/^ildma.
And at that time the Yakkha Khara and the Yakkha
SOf/^iloma passed by, not far from Bhagavat. And
then the Yakkha Khara said this to the Yakkha
Sh/§iloma : ‘Is this man a Samara ? ’

Shiiloma answered ; ‘ He is no Saniawa, he is a
Sama??aka (a wretched Sama;>«a) ;■ however I will
ascertain whether he is a Sama;^a or a Samawaka.’

Then the Yakkha Su/^iloma went up to Bhagavat,
and having gone up to him, he brushed against
Bhagavat’s body. Then Bhagavat took away his
body. Then the Yakkha Shv^iloma said this to
Bhagavat : ‘ O Samam, art thou afraid of me ? ’
Bhagavat answered : ‘No, friend, I am not afraid
of thee, but thy touching me is sinful.’

SMiloma said: ‘I will ask -thee a question, O
Samara ; if thou canst not answer it I will either
scatter thy thoughts or cleave thy heart, or take thee
by the feet and throw thee over to the other shore
of the Gahgi.’

Bhagavat answered : ‘ I do not see, O friend,
neither in this world together with the world of the
Devas, Miras, Brahmans, nor amongst the genera-
tion of Samaw-a and Brahma^as, gods and men, the
one who can either scatter my thoughts or cleave
my heart, or take me by the feet and throw me over

DHAMMAiTARIYASUTTA.

45

to the other shore of the Gahgi. However ask, O
friend, what thou pleasest.’ Then the Yakkha
Sh/^iloma addressed Bhagavat in a stanza:

1. 'What origin have passion and hatred, dis-
gust, delight, and horror ? wherefrom do they arise ?
whence arising do doubts vex the mind, as boys vex
a crow ? ’

2. Buddha said : ' Passion and hatred have their

origin from this (body), disgust, delight, and horror
arise from this body; arising from this (body) doubts
vex the mind, as boys vex a crow. (270)

3. ‘ They originate in desire, they arise in self,

like the shoots of the banyan tree ; far and wide
they are connected with sensual pleasures, like the
mdluvd creeper spread in the wood. (271)

4. ‘ Those who know whence it (sin) arises, drive

it away. Listen, O Yakkha! They cross over
this stream that is difficult to cross, and has not
been crossed before, with a view to not being born
again.’ (272)

Sd/filomasutta is ended.

6. DHAMMAA'ARIYASUTTA or KAPILA-
SUTTA.

The Bhikkhus are admonished to rid themselves of sinful persons,
and advised to lead a pure life.

1. A just life, a religious life, this they call the

best gem, if any one has gone forth from house-life
to a houseless life. (273)

2. But if he be harsh-spoken, and like a beast

delighting in injuring (others), then the life of such
a one is very wicked, and he increases his own
pollution. (274)

M 2

46

SrULAVAGGA.

3. A Bhikkhu who delights in quarrelling and is

shrouded in folly, does not understand the Dhamma
that is preached and taught by Buddha. (275)

4. Injuring his own cultivated mind, and led by

ignorance, he does not understand that sin is the
way leading to hell. (27^)

5. Having gone to calamity, from womb to womb,

from darkness to darkness, such a Bhikkhu verily,
after passing away, goes to pain (277)

6. As when there is a pit of excrement (that has be-
come) full during a number of years, — he who should
be such a one full of sin is difficult to purify. (278)

7. Whom you know to be such a one, O Bhikkhus,

(a man) dependent on a house, having sinful desires,
sinful thoughts, and being with sinful deeds and
objects, (279)

8. Him do avoid, being all in concord ; blow him
away as sweepings, put him away as rubbish. (280)

9. Then remove as chaff those that are no Sama-

?^as, (but only) think themselves, blowing away those
that have sinful desires and those with sinful deeds
and objects. (281)

10. Be pure and live together with the pure,

being thoughtful ; then agreeing (and) wise you will
put an end to pain. (282)

Dhammaiariyasutta is ended.

7 . brAhmawadhammikasutta.

Wealthy Brahmawas come to Buddha, asking about the customs of
the ancient Brahma^as. Buddha describes their mode of life
and the change wrought in them by seeing the king’s riches, and
furthermore, how they induced the king to commit the sin of

BRAHMA2VADHAMMIKASUTTA. 47

having living creatures slain at sacrifices. On hearing Buddha’s

enlightened discourse the wealthy Brahina;»zas are converted.

Compare, Sp. Hardy’s Legends, p. 46.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sdvatthi, in 6^eta-
vana, in the park of Anathapi^z^fika. Then many
wealthy Brahma^as of Kosala, decrepit, elderly, old,
advanced in age, or arrived at extreme old age, went
to Bhagavat, and having gone to him they talked
pleasantly with him, and after having had some
pleasant and remarkable talk with him, they sat
down apart. Sitting down apart these wealthy
Brihma?zas said this to Bhagravat : ‘ O venerable
Gotama, are the Brahma^as now-a-days seen (en-
gaged) in the Brahmanical customs (dhamma) of
the ancient Brahmawas ? ’

Bhagavat answered : ‘The Brahma^^as now-a-days.
O Br^hma^^as, are not seen (engaged) in the Brah-
manical customs of the ancient Brihmawas.’

The Brahma^^as said : ‘ Let the venerable Gotama
tell us the Brahmanical customs of the ancient Brah-
ma^^as, if it is not inconvenient to the venerable
Gotama.’

Bhagavat answered : ‘ Then listen, O Brahmawas,
pay great attention, I will speak.’

‘Yes,’ so saying the wealthy BrMimawas listened
to Bhagavat. Bhagavat said this :

1. The old sages (isayo) were self-restrained, peni-

tent; having abandoned the objects of the five
senses, they studied their own welfare. (283)

2. There were no cattle for the Brahma;^as, nor

gold, nor corn, (but) the riches and corn of medita-
tion were for them, and they kept watch over the
best treasure. (284)

48

A't^LAVAGGA.

3. What was prepared for them and placed as food
at the door, they thought was to be given to those that
seek for what has been prepared by -faith. (285)

4. With garments variously coloured, with beds

and abodes, prosperous people from the provinces
and the whole country worshipped those Brih-
ma«as. {286)

5. Inviolable w^ere the Brihmai^as, invincible,

protected by the Dhamma, no one opposed them
(while standing) at the doors of the houses any-
where. (287)

6. For forty-eight years they practised juvenile

chastity, the Brahma^as formerly went in search of
science and exemplary conduct. (288)

7. The Brahma^^as did not marry (a woman be-

longing to) another (caste), nor did they buy a wife ;
they chose living together in mutual love after
having come together. (289)

8. Excepting from the time about the cessation of

the menstruation else the Brdhma:^as did not indulge
in sexual intercourse. (290)

9. They praised chastity and virtue, rectitude,

mildness, penance, tenderness, compassion, and pa-
tience. (291)

10. He who was the -best of them, a strong Brih-

ma«a, did not (even) in sleep indulge in sexual
intercourse. (292)

11. Imitating his practices some wise men in this
world praised chastity, virtue, and patience. (293)

12. Having asked for rice, beds, garments, butter,

and oil, and gathered them justly, they made sacri-
fices out of them, and when the sacrifice came on,
they did not kill cows. (294)

13. Like unto a mother, a father, a brother, and

BRAHMA^-ADHAMMIKASUTTA.

49

other relatives the cows are our best friends, in
which medicines are produced. (295)

14. They give food, and they give strength, they

likewise give (a good) complexion and happiness :
knowing the real state of this, they did not kill
cows. (296)

15. They were graceful, large, handsome, re-
nowned, Brail mawas by nature, zealous for their

sever^ works ; as long as they lived in the world,
this race prospered. (297)

1 6. But there was a change in them ; after gradually
seeing the king’s prosperity and adorned women, .(298)

17. Well-made chariots drawn by noble horses,
carpets in variegated colours, palaces and houses,
divided into compartments and measured out, (299)

18. The great human wealth, attended with a
number of cows, and combined with a flock of beau-
tiful women, the Brdhma^^as became covetous. (500)

19. They then, in this matter, having composed

hymns, went to Okkaka, and said ; ‘ Thou hast much
wealth and corn, sacrifice, (for) great is thy property,
sacrifice, (for) great is thy wealth.’ (301)

20. And dien the king, the lord of chariots, in-

structed by the Brahmawas, brought about assa-
medha, purisamedha, samm^p^sa, and vdidpeyya
without any hinderance, and having offered these
sacrifices he gave the Brahmawas wealth : (302)

21. Cows, beds, garments, and adorned women,

and well-made chariots, drawn by noble horses,
carpets in variegated colours, (303)

22. Beautiful palaces, well divided into compart-
ments ; and having filled these with different (sorts of)
corn, he gave this wealth to the BrlLhma;2as. (304)

23. And they having thus received wealth wished

50

K^LAVAGGA.

for a store, and the craving of those who had given
way to (their) wishes increased still more ; they th^n,
in this matter, having composed hymns, went again
to Okkdka, and said : (305)

24. ‘ As water, earth, gold, wealth, and corn, even

so are there cows for men, for this is a requisite for
living beings ; sacrifice, (for) great is thy property,
sacrifice, (for) great is thy wealth.' (306)

25. And then the king, the lord of chariots, in-

structed by the Brdhma/^as, caused many hundred
thousand cows to be slain in offerings. (307)

26. Not with their feet, nor with their horns do

the cows hurt (any one in any way, being like goats
tender (and) yielding vessels (of milk) — (still) seizing
them by the horns the king caused them to be slain
with a weapon. (308)

27. Then the gods, the forefathers, Inda, the
Asuras, and the Rakkhasas cried out : ‘ This is injus-
tice,’ because of the weapon falling on the cows. (309)

28. There w^ere formerly three diseases : desire,

hunger, and decay, but from the slaying of cattle
there came ninety-eight. (310)

29. This injustice of (using) violence that has

come down (to us), was old ; innocent (cows) are
slain, the sacrificing (priests) have fallen off from
the Dliamma. (311)

30. So this old and mean Dhamma is blamed by

the wise; where people see such a one, they blame
the sacrificing priest. (312)

31. So Dhamma being lost, the Suddas and the

Vessikas disagreed, the Khattiyas disagreed in mani-
fold ways, the wife despised her husband. (313)

32. The Khattiyas and the Brahma«as and those
others who had been protected by their castes, after

NAVASUTTA.

51

doing away with their disputes on descent, fell into
the power of sensual pleasures. (314)

This having been said, those wealthy Br^hina 72 as
said to Bhagavat as follows :

It is excellent, O venerable Gotama ! It is excel-
lent, O venerable Gotama ! As one raises what has
been overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden,
or tells the way to him who has gone astray, or
holds out an oil lamp in the dark that those who
have eyes may see the objects, even so by the
venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma
has been illustrated ; we take refuge in the vener-
able Gotama, in the Dhamma, and in the Assembly
of Bhikkhus ; may the venerable Gotama receive us
as followers (upasaka), who from this day for life
have taken refuge (in him).’

Brahma/^adhammikasutta is ended.

8 . nAvAsutta.

On choosing a good and learned teacher,

1. A man should worship him from whom he
learns the Dhamma, as tiie gods (worship) Inda ;
the learned man being worshipped and pleased with
him, makes the (highest) Dhamma manifest. (315)

2. Having heard and considered that (Dhamma),

the wise man practising the Dhamma that is in
accordance with the (highest) Dhamma, becomes
learned, expert, and skilful, strenuously associating
with such a (learned teacher). (31b)

3. He who serves a low (teacher), a fool who has

not understood tlie meaning, and who is envious,
goes to death, not having overcome doubt, and not
having understood the Dhamma. ( 3 ^ 7 )

52

irULAVAGGA.

4. As a man, after descending into a river, a

turgid water with a rapid current, is borne along
following the current, — how will he be able to put
others across ? (318)

5. Even so how will a man, not having under-
stood the Dhamma, and not attending to the ex-
planation of the learned and not knowing it himself,
not having overcome doubt, be able to make others
understand it ?

6. As one, having gone on board a strong ship,

provided with oars and rudder, carries across in it
many others, knowing the way to do it, and being
expert and thoughtful, (320)

7 - So also he who is accomplished, of a cultivated
mind, learned, intrepid, makes others endowed with
attention and assiduity understand it, knowine' (it
himself). ^ (32 j)

8. Therefore indeed one sliould cultivate (the
society of) a good man, who is intelligent and
learned ; he who leads a regular life, having under-
stood what is good and penetrated the Dhamma,
will obtain happiness. (322)

Nivdsutta is ended.

9 . kij^sIlasutta.

How to obtain the highest good.

1. By what virtue, by what conduct, and perform-
ing what works, will a man be perfectly established
(in the commandments) and obtain the highest

. (323)

2. Let him honour old people, not be envious,

53

let him know the (right) time for seeing his teacher,
and knowing the (right) moment let him assiduously
listen to his religious discourses pronounced (and) to
his well-spoken (words). (324)

3. Let him in due time go to the presence of his

teacher, let him be humble after casting away ob-
stinacy, let him remember and practise what is good,
the Dhamma, self-restraint, and chastity. (325)

4. Let his pleasure-garden be the Dhamma, let

him delight in the Dhamma, let him stand fast in
the Dhamma, let him know how to enquire into the
Dhamma, let him not raise any dispute that pol-
lutes the Dhamma, and let him spend his time
in (speaking) well-spoken truths k (326)

5. Having abandoned ridiculous talk, lamentation,

corruption, deceit, hypocrisy, greediness and haughti-
ness, clamour and harshness, depravity and foolish-
ness, let him live free from infatuation, with a steady
mind. (327)

6. The words, the essence of which is under-

stood, are well spoken, and what is heard, if under-
stood, contains the essence of meditation ; but the
understanding and learning of the man who is hasty
and careless, does not increase. (328)

7. Those who delight in the Dhamma, proclaimed

by the venerable ones, are unsurpassed in speech,
mind and work, they are established in peace, ten-
derness and meditation, and have gone to the essence
of learning and understanding. (329)

Ki;wsilasutta is ended.

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 364.

54

JSrULAVAGGA.

10 . v tthAnasutta.

Advice not to be lukewarm and slothful. (See a free translation in
Rhys Davids’ Buddhism, 1896, p. 170.)

1. Rise, sit up, what is the use of your sleeping ; to

those who are sick, pierced by the arrow (of pain),
and suffering, what sleep is there ? (330)

2. Rise, sit up, learn steadfastly for the sake of
peace, let not the king of death, knowing you to

be indolent (pamatta), befool you and lead you into
his power.

3 - Conquer this desire which gods and men stand
wishing for and are dependent upon, let not the
(right) moment pass by you ; for those who have
et the (right) moment pass, will grieve when they
have been consigned to hell. ^^^2)

• f \ (pamada) is defilement, continued

indolence is defilement ; by earnestness (appam^da)
and knowledge let one pull out his arrow (of
Passion). ,

U///^d.nasutta is ended.

11. rAhulasutta.

Wm to turnT'""^' T f ^ admonishes

im to turn his mind away from the world and to be moderate.

1. Bhagavat said: ‘Dost thou not despise the
wise man, from living with him constantly ? Is he
who ^^holds up a torch to mankind honoured by

2. Rahula .• ‘ I do not despise the wise man, from

living with him constantly ; he who holds up a torch
to mankind is always honoured by me.’ ('>•.-)

VANGiSASUTTA.

55

Vatthugath^.

3. Bhagavat ; ‘ Having abandoned the objects of

the five senses, the beautiful, the charming, and
gone out from thy house with faith, do thou put
an end to pain. (33d)

4. ‘ Cultivate (the society of) virtuous friends and

a distant dwelling-place, secluded and quiet; be
moderate in food h (337)

5. ‘ Robes, alms (in bowl), requisites (for the

sick), a dwelling-place, — do not thirst after these
(things), that thou mayest not go back to the world
again. (338)

6. ‘ Be subdued according to the precepts, and as

to the five senses, be attentive as regards thy body,
and be full of disgust (with the world). (339)

7. ‘ Avoid signs, what is pleasant and is accom-

panied wdth passion, turn thy mind undisturbed and
well composed to what is not pleasant. (340)

8. ‘ Cherish what is signless, leave the inclina-

tions for pride ; then by sacrificing thy pride thou
shalt wander calm.’ (34 1)

So Bhagavat repeatedly admonished the venera-

ble Rdhula with these stanzas.

R^hulasutta is ended.

12. VANGtSASUTTA.

Vangisa desires to know the fate of Nlgrodhakappa, whether he
has been completely extinguished, or whether he is still with
some elements of existence left behind. He is answered by
Buddha.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at A/avi, in the

Comp. Dhp. V. 185 and v. 375.

56

ifOLAVAGGA.

temple of Aggd/ava. At that time the teacher
of the venerable Vahgisa, the Thera, by name
Nigrodhakappa, had attained bliss not long before
(aiiraparinibbuta). Then this reflection occurred
to the venerable Vangisa, while retired and medi-
tating :

Whether my teacher be blessed (parinibbuta) or
whether he be not blessed. Then the venerable
Vangisa, at the evening time, coming forth from his
retirement went to Bhagavat, and having gone to
him he sat down apart after saluting him, and sit-
ting down apart the venerable Vahgisa said this
to Bhagavat :

‘ Lord, while retired and meditating, this reflec-
tion occurred to me here: Whether my teacher be
blessed or whether he be not blessed.'

Then the venerable Vahgisa, rising from his seat,
throwing his robe over one shoulder and bending
his joined hands towards Bhagavat, addressed him
in stanzas :

I We ask the Master of excellent understand-
ing : he who in this world had cut off doubt, died

Aggh/ava, a Bhikkhu, well known, famous, and
of a calm mind. (342)

2. The name “ Nigrodhakappa ” was given to

that Brahma/^a by thee, O Bhagavat ; he wandered
about worshipping thee, having liberation in view,
strong, O thou who seest Nibbhna. (343)

3. O Sakka, thou all-seeing, we all wish to learn
(something about) this disciple ; our ears are ready
to hear, thou art our Master, thou art incom-

^ (344)

4* Lut off our doubt, tell me of him, inform us

of the blessed, O thou of great understanding; speak

VANGtSASUTTA.

57

in the midst of us, O thou all-seeing, as the thousand-
eyed Sakka (speaks in the midst) of the gods. (345)

5. ‘ Whatever ties there are in this world (con-
stituting) the way to folly, combined with ignorance,
forming the seat of doubt, they do not exist before
Tathdgata, for he is the best eye of men. (346)

6. ‘ If a man does not for ever dispel the sin as

the wind (dispels) a mass of clouds,, all the world
will be enveloped in darkness, not even illustHous
men will shine. (347)

7. ‘ Wise men are light-bringers, therefore, O wise

man, I consider thee as- such a one ; we have come
to him who beholds meditation, reveal Kappa to us
in the assembly, (348)

8. ‘ Uplift quickly, O thou beautiful one» thy
beautiful voice, like the swans drawing up (their
necks), sing softly with a rich and well-modulated
voice ; we will all listen to thee attentively. (349)

9. ‘ Having earnestly called upon him who has

completely left birth and death behind and shaken
off (sin), I will make him proclaim the Dhamma, for
ordinary people cannot do what they want, but the
Tathdgatas act with a purpose. (350)

10. ‘ This full explanation by thee, the perfectly

wise, is accepted, this last clasping of the hands is
well bent, O thou of high wisdom, knowing (Kappa s
transmigration), do not delude us. (35 0

11. ‘ Having perfectly^ comprehended the Dharn-
ma of the venerable ones, do not delude (us), O thou
of unsurpassed strength, knowing (everything) ; as
one in the hot season pained by the heat (longs for)

^ Parovaran ti lokuttaralokiyavasena sundarasundaraw d6rc|
santikaw vS, Commentator.

58

xthAVAGGA.

water, so I long for thy words ; send a shower of
learning. ^ (352)

1 2. ‘ The rich religious life which Kappiyana led,

has not that been in vain (to him), has he been
(completely) extinguished, or is he still with some
elements of existence (left behind) ? How he was
liberated, that we want to hear.' (353)

13. Bhagavat: ‘ He cut off the craving for name
and form in this world/ — so said Bhagavat,—

‘ Ka^^ha’s (i. e. Mara’s) stream, adhered to for
a long time, he crossed completely birth and death,’
so said Bhagavat, the best of the five (Brihmawas,
pa«iavaggiy 4 ). ^ (354)

14. Vahgisa ; ‘ Having heard thy word, O thou
the best of the Isis, I am pleased ; not in vain have
I asked, the Brihma^^a did not deceive me. (355)

15. ‘As he talked so he acted, he was a (true)

disciple of Buddha, he cut asunder the outspread
strong net of deceitful death. (35b)

16. ‘ Kappiya (Kappayana) saw, O Bhagavat, the

beginning of attachment, Kappiyana verily crossed
the realm of death, which is very difficult to
cross.’ _ (357)

Vahgisasutta is ended.

13 . sammAparibbA(;aniyasutta.

The right path for a BHikkhu.

I. ‘We will ask the Muni of great understanding,
who has crossed, gone to the other shore, is blessed
(parinibbuta), and of a firm mind : How does a
Bhikkhu wander rightly in the world, after having

sammAparibbaganiyasutta.

59

gone out from his house and driven away de-
sire?’ (358)

2. ‘He whose (ideas of) omens, meteors, dreams

and signs are destroyed,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ siich
a Bhikkhu who has abandoned the sinful omens,
wanders rightly in the world. (359)

3. ‘ Let the Bhikkhu subdue his passion for human

and divine pleasures, then after conquering exist-
ence and understanding the Dhamma, such a one
will wander rightly in the world. (360)

4. ‘ Let the Bhikkhu, after casting behind him

slander and anger, abandon avarice and be free
from compliance and opposition, then such a one
will wander rightly in the world. (3di)

5. ‘ He who having left behind both what is

agreeable and what is disagreeable, not seizing
upon anything, is independent in every respect and
liberated from bonds, such a one will wander rightly
in the world. (362)

6. ‘He does not see any essence in the Upadhis,

having subdued his wish and passion for attachments,
he is independent and not to be led by others, such
a one will wander rightly in the world. (363)

7. ‘ He who is not opposed (to any one) in word,
thought or deed, who, after having understood the
Dhamma perfectly, longs for the state of NibbAna,
such a one will wander rightly in the world. (364)

8. ‘ He who thinking “ he salutes me ” is not
elated, the Bhikkhu who, although abused, does not
reflect (upon it, and) having received food from
others does not get intoxicated (with pride), such
a one will wander rightly in the world., (365)

9. ‘ The Bhikkhu who, after leaving behind covet-
ousness and existence, is disgusted with cutting and

[10] N

6o

Jf{)LAVAGGA.

binding (others), he who has overcome doubt, and
is without pain, such a one will wander rightly in
the world. (366)

10. ‘And knowing what becomes him, the Bhik-

khu will not harm any one in the world, under-
standing the Dhamma thoroughly, such a one will
wander rightly in the world. (367)

11. ‘He to whom there are no affections what-

soever, whose sins are extirpated from the root, he
free from desire and not longing (for anything), such
a one will wander rightly in the world. (368)

12. ‘He whose passions have been destroyed, who

is free from pride, who has overcome all the path of
passion, is subdued, perfectly happy (parinibbuta),
and of a firm mind, such a one will wander rightly
in the world. (369)

13. ‘ The believer, possessed of knowledge, see-

ing the way (leading to Nibb^na), who is no partisan
amongst the partisans (of the sixty-two philosophical
views), wise after subduing covetousness, hatred, such
a one will wander rightly in the world. (370)

14. ‘He who is pure and victorious, who has re-

moved the veil (of the world), who is subdued in the
Dhammas, has gone to the other shore, is without
desire, and skilled in the knowledge of the cessation
of the Sawkharas, such a one will wander rightly in
the world. (37i)

15. ‘He who has overcome time (kapp^tita) in

the past and in the future, is of an exceedingly pure
understanding, liberated from all the dwelling-places
(of the mind), such a one will wander rightly in the
world. (372)

16. ^ ‘ Knowing the step (of the four truths), under-
standing the Dhamma, seeing clearly the abandon-

DHAMMIKASUTTA.

6i

ment of the passions from the destruction of all the
elements of existence (upadhi), such a one will wan-
der rightly in the world.’ (373)

1 7. ‘ Certainly, O Bhagavat, it is so : whichever
Bhikkhu lives in this way, subdued and having
overcome all bonds, such a one will wander rightly
in the world.’ (374)

Sammiparibbi^aniyasutta is ended.

14. DHAMMIKASUTTA.

Buddha shows Dhammika what the life of a Bhikkhu and what
the life of a householder ought to be.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sivatthi, in 6^eta-
vana, in the park of Anithapi?^^ika. Then the
follower (upisaka) Dhammika, together with five
hundred followers, went to Bhagavat, and having
gone to Bhagavat and saluted him, he sat down
apart ; sitting down apart the follower Dhammika
addressed Bhagavat in stanzas :

1. ‘I ask thee, O Gotama of great understanding,

How is a S^vaka (disciple) to act to be a good one ?
is it the one who goes from his house to the wilder-
ness, or the followers with a house ? (375)

2. ‘For thou knowest the doings of this world
and that of the gods, and the final end ; there is
nobody like thee seeing the subtle meaning (of
things) ; they call thee the excellent Buddha, (37b)

3. ‘Knowing all knowledge thou hast revealed
the Dhamma, having compassion on creatures ; thou
hast removed the veil (of the world), thou art all-
seeing, thou shinest spotless in all the world. (377)

N 2

62

x6lavagga.

4. ‘ The king of elephants, Erava7^a by name,

hearing that thou wert 6^ina (the Conqueror), came
to thy presence, and having conversed with thee
he went away delighted, after listening (to thee,
and saying), “Very good!” (378)

5. ‘Also king Vessava;^a Kuvera came to ask

thee about the Dhamma ; him, too, thou, O wise
man, answeredst when asked, and he also after
listening was delighted. (379)

6. ‘ All these disputatious Titthiyas and A^i-
vikas and Niga?2/^as do not any of them overcome
thee in understanding, as a man standing (does not
overcome) the one that is walking quickly. (380)

7. ‘ All these disputatious Brihma^^as, and there

are even some old Brahmay^as, all are bound by thy
opinion, and others also that are considered dis-
putants. (381)

8. This subtle and pleasant Dhamma that has

been well proclaimed by thee, O Bhagavat, and
which we all long to hear, do thou, O thou best
of Buddhas, speak to ns when asked. (382)

9. * Let all these Bhikkhus and also Updsakas

that have sat down to listen, hear the Dhamma
learnt (annbuddha) by the stainless (Buddha), as
the gods (hear) the well-spoken (words) of Vd-
sava.’ (383)

10. Bhagavat : ‘ Listen to me, O Bhikkhus, I

will teach you the Dhamma that destroys sin, do
ye keep it; all of you; let him who looks for what
is salutary, the thoughtful, cultivate the mode of
life suitable for Pabbafitas. (384)

I I. ‘ Let not the Bhikkhu walk about at a
wrong time, let him go to the village for alms at
the right time ; for ties ensnare the one that goes

DHAMMIKASUTTA.

63

at a wrong time, therefore Buddhas do not go at
a wrong time. (385)

12. ‘ Form, sound, taste, smell, and touch which

intoxicate creatures, having subdued the desire for
(all) these things (dhammas), let him in due time go
in for his breakfast. (386)

13. -^* And let the Bhikkhu, alter having obtained

his food at the right time and returned, sit down
alone and privately ; reflecting within himself let
him not turn his mind to outward things, (but be)
self-collected. (387)

14. ‘ If he speak with a Savaka or with anybody

else, or with a Bhikkhu, let him talk about the ex-
cellent Dhamma, (but let him) not (utter) slander,
nor blaming words against others. (3^8)

15. ‘For some utter language contradicting others^

those narrow-minded ones we do not j^raise. Ties
from here and there ensnare them, and they send
their mind far away in that (dispute). (389)

16. ‘ Let a Savaka of him with the excellent under-

standing (Buddha), after hearing the Dhamma taught
by Sugata, discriminately seek for food, a monastery,
a bed and a chair, and water for taking away the
dirt of his clothes. (39o)

1 7. ‘ But without clinging to these things, to food,

to bed and chair, to water for taking away the dirt
of his clothes, let a Bhikkhu be like a waterdrop on
a lotus. (39^)

18. ‘A householder’s work I will also tell you, how

a Sdvaka is to act to be a good one ; for that com-
plete Bhikkhu-dhamma cannot be carried out by one
who is taken up by (worldly) occupations. (39^)

^ Vadaz?z hi eke pa/iseniyanti=:viru^^Mnti yu^^/htukama hutva
sena3'a pa/imukha;» gayt/l’//anti viya honti. Commentator.

64

ZULAVAGGA.

19. ‘Let him not kill, nor cause to be killed any

living being, nor let him approve of others killing,
after having refrained from hurting all creatures,
both those that are strong and those that tremble
in the world. (393)

20. ‘ Then let the Savaka abstain from, (taking)

anything in any place that has not been given (to
him), knowing (it to belong to another), let him not
cause any one to take, nor approve of those that
take, let him avoid all (sort of) theft. (394)

21. ‘ Let the wise man avoid an unchaste life as a

burning heap of coals ; not being able to live a life
of chastity, let him not transgress with another
man’s wife. (395)

22. ‘ Let no one speak falsely to another in the

hall of justice or in the hall of the assembly, let him
not cause (any one) to speak (falsely), nor approve
of those that speak (falsely), let him avoid all (sort
of) untruth. (39d)

23. ‘ Let the householder who approves of this

Dhamma, not give himself to intoxicating drinks ; let
him not cause others to drink, nor approve of those
that drink, knowing it to end in madness. (397)

24. ‘For through intoxication the stupid commit

sins and make other people intoxicated ; let him
avoid this seat of sin, this madness, this folly, de-
lightful to the stupid. (398)

25. ‘ Let him not kill any living being, let him not

take what has not been given (to him), let him not
speak falsely, and let him not drink intoxicating drinks,
let him refrain from unchaste sexual intercourse, and
let him not at night eat untimely food. (399)

26. ‘Let him not wear wreaths nor use perfumes,
let him lie on a couch spread on the earth : — this they

X

DHAMMIKASUTTA.

65

call the eightfold abstinence (uposatha), proclaimed
by Buddha, who has overcome pain. (4CX))

27. ‘Then having with a believing mind kept

abstinence (uposatha) on the fourteenth, fifteenth,
and the eighth days of the half-month, and (having
kept) the complete Pd^ih^rakapakkha^ consisting of
eight parts, (401)

28. ‘And then in the morning, after having kept

abstinence, let a wise man with a believing mind, glad-
dening the assembly of Bhikkhus with food and drink,
make distributions according to his ability. (402)

29. ‘ Let him dutifully maintain his parents, and

practise an honourable trade ; the householder who
observes this strenuously goes to the gods by name

Sayampabhas.’ (403)

Dhammikasutta is ended,
jfifhlavagga is ended.

^ Compare T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 141.

III. mahavagga.

1. PABBA6^(9AsUTTA.

King Bimbisara feeling interested in Buddha tries to f k-
with wealth, but is mildly rebuked by Buddha
translation in Rhys Davids' Buddhism, 1896, p 99.)'

seeing

eeing (Buddha) led, such as he thinking (over it)
approved of as an ascetic life. , {

2. ‘ This house-life is pain the seat of im
and - an ascetic life is an open-a^ life
he embraced an ascetic life ’

bnl ^''°ided with 2

body sinful deeds, and having (also) abandnn*:.rl •
in words, he cleansed his life ^ sin

4 - Buddha went to Rd^o-pbp h ,

Giribba,^a in Magadha for w^ 7 '"^
of excellent signs. * profusion

5. BimbisSra standing in his palace saw him^tnd

seeing him endowed with these sin-nv i “O

6. ‘Attend ye to this rmn bo ' n j (4o8)
clean, he is both endowed wiih

does not look before him further
distance of a. plough). ^

7 - ‘ With downcast eves tboi. i.*r 1 . (409)

like those of low caste

off; (and askl • “ Wb ‘ ® messengers run

R Tb 1 i Bhikkhu going?” ■ feiol

«• Tire king's messengers folIowed^aftef(him!ai3

PABBAGGASUTTA.

67

said) : ‘ Where is the Bhikkhu going, where will he
reside? (41 1)

9. ‘ Going begging from house to house, watching

the door (of the senses), well restrained, he quickly-
filled his bowl, conscious, thoughtful. (412)

10. ‘Wandering about in search of alms, having
gone out of town, the Muni repaired to (the moun-
tain) Pa;^</ava ; it must be there he lives.’ (413)

11. Seeing that he had entered his dwelling, the

messengers then sat down, and one messenger having
returned announced it to the king. (4^4)

12. ‘ This Bhikkhu, O great king, is sitting on the

east side of Pa/^^ava, like a tiger, like a bull, like a
lion in a mountain cave.’ {415)

13. Having heard the messenger’s words, the

Khattiya in a fine chariot hastening went out to the
Pa;2^ava mountain. (416)

14. Having gone as far as the ground was prac-

ticable for a chariot, the Khattiya, after alighting
from the chariot, and approaching on foot, having
come up (to him), seated himself. (417)

15. Having sat down the king then exchanged the

usual ceremonious greetings with him, and after the
complimentary talk he spoke these words ; (418)

16. ‘Thou art both young and delicate, a lad in

his first youth, possessed of a fine complexion, like a
high-born Khattiya. (4^9)

17. ‘I will ornament the army-house, and at the

head of the assembly of chiefs (naga) give (thee)
wealth; enjoy it and tell me thy birth, when
asked.’ (420)

18. Buddha: ‘Just beside Himavanta, O king,

there lives a people endowed with the power of
wealth, the inhabitants of Kosala. (421)

68

mahAvagga.

r 9. ‘ They are Adiiias by family, Sakiyas by birth ;
from that family I have wandered out, not longing
for sensual pleasures. (422)

20. ‘ Seeing misery in sensual pleasures, and con-
sidering the forsaking of the world as happiness,
I will go and exert myself ; in this my mind de-
lights.’ ^ (423)

Pabba^^sutta is ended.

2. padhAnasutta.

Mara tries to tempt Buddha, but disappointed is obliged to withdraw.

Comp. Gospel of St. Matthew iv.

1. To me, whose mind was intent upon exertion

near the river Neraw^ard, having exerted myself, and
given myself to meditation for the sake of acquiring
Nibbdna (yogakkhema), (424)

2. Came Namu>^i speaking words full of compas-

sion ; ‘ Thou art lean, ill-favoured, death is in thy
neighbourhood. (42 5)

3. ‘A thousandth part of thee (is the property) of

death, (only) one part (belongs to) life ; living life, O
thou venerable one, is better; living thou wilt be
able to do good works. (426)

4. ‘ When thou livest a religious life, and feedest

the sacrificial fire, manifold good works are woven to
thee; what dost thou want with exertion ? (427)

5. ‘ Difficult is the way of exertion, difficult to

pass, difficult to enter upon; saying these verses
Mira stood near Buddha. (428)

6 . To Mira thus speaking Bhagavat said this:

‘ O thou friend of the indolent, thou wicked one, for
what purpose hast thou come here ? (429)

PADHANASUTTA.

69

7. * Even the least good work is of no use to me ;

and what good works are required, M^ra ought to
tell. ^ (430)

8. ‘ I have faith and power, and understanding is

found in me ; while thus exerting myself, why do you
ask me to live ^ ? (43 1 )

9. ‘ This (burning) wind will dry up even the cur-

rents of the rivers ; should it not by degrees dry up
my blood, while I am exerting myself? (432)

10. ‘While the blood is drying up, the bile and

the phlegm are dried up ; while the flesh is wasting
away, the mind gets more tranquil, and my atten-
tion, understanding, and meditation get more stead-
fast 2. (433)

11. ‘While I am living thus, after having felt the
extreme sensations, my mind does not look for
sensual pleasures ; behold a being’s purity. (434)

12. ‘Lust thy first army is called, discontent thy

second, thy third is called hunger and thirst, thy
fourth craving. (435)

13. ‘Thy fifth is called sloth and drowsiness, thy

sixth cowardice, thy seventh doubt, thy eighth
hypocrisy and stupor, (43^)

14. ‘Gain, fame, honour, and what celebrity has

been falsely obtained ; and he who exalts himself and
despises others. (437)

15. ‘This, O Namu/^i, is thine, the black one’s,

^ Evam mam pahitattam pi
Kim ^tvam anupu/^Masi.

® Lohite sussamanamhi
Pittawz semha« sussati,

Ma^zsesu kbtyamSnesu
Bhiyyo Mttam pasidati
Bhiyyo sati ka pa«M ka
Sam^dhi mama ti//>5ati.

70

MAHAVAGGA.

fighting army ; none but a hero conquers it, and after
conquering it obtains joyb (438)

16. ‘I myself (having conquered) wear Miw^a-
grass. Woe upon life in this world ! death in battle
is better for me than that I should live defeated. (439)

1 7. ‘ Plunged into this world some Sama^^as and

Br^hmai^^as are not seen, and they do not know the
way in which the virtuous walk. (440)

18. ‘Seeing on all sides an army arrayed, and
Mira on his elephant, I am going out to do battle,
that he may not drive me away from my place. (441)

19. ‘This army of thine, which the world of men

and gods cannot conquer, I will crush with under-
standing as (one crushes) an unbaked earthen pot

with a stone (442)

20. ‘ Having made my thought subject to me and

my attention firm, I shall wander about from kingdom
to kingdom, training disciples extensively. (443)

21. ‘They (will be) zealous and energetic, execut-

ing my orders, (the orders) of one free from lust, and
they will go (to the place) where, having gone, they
will not mourn.’ (444)

22. Mara : ‘For seven years I followed Bhagavat

step by step ; I found no fault in the perfectly en-
lightened, thoughtful (Buddha). (445)

23. ‘ The crow hovered round the rock that looked

’ SanglmSva/^arl, anivattino purisd attano anivaLtanakabhavaw
«apanaUha;>« sise vd dha^e vd avudhe va muw^atiwa?;;; bandhanti
taw ayam pi pariharati-/t/5eva maw dharehi tava send para^it’ assa.
Commentator.

^ Yaw te taw na-ppasahati
Senaw loko sadevakc
Taw te pawidya gaK’//dmi*

Amaw pattaw va amhand.

* Instead of I read bha^^mi. B“ has veAMapi, B' ve^/<ami.

SUBHASITASUTTA.

71

like (a lump of) fat : “ Do we here find something
soft, is it something sweet?” {446)

24. ‘ Having obtained nothing sweet there, the

crow went away from that spot. Thus like the crow
approaching the rock, being disgusted, we shall go
away from Gotamak’ (447)

25. While overcome with sorrow the string of his

lute slipped down ; then that evil-minded Yakkha
disappeared there. (448)

Padhinasutta is ended.

3 . subhAsitasutta.

On well-spoken language.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Sivatthl in 6^eta-
vana. Bhagavat said this : ‘ O Bhikkhus, the speech
that is provided with four requisites is well-spoken,
not ill-spoken, both faultless and blameless to the
wise.’

‘ Which four ? ’

'O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu speaks well-spoken
(language), not ill-spoken ; he speaks what is right
(dhamma), not what is unrighteous (adhamma) ; he
speaks what is pleasing, not what is unpleasing ; he
speaks what is true, not what is false. O Bhikkhus,
the speech that is provided with these four requi-
sites, is well-spoken, not ill-spoken, both faultless

* Kdko va selam dsa,^^a*

Nibbi^i4pema Gotamawt.

* C’> Ct B" asss.a'u, B' f Instead of Gotamaw I read’Gotamfi.

I

72 mahAvagga.

and blameless to the wise.’ This said BJiagavat.
When Sugata had said this, then the Master spoke
the following :

1. ‘Well-spoken language the just call the prin-
cipal (thing) ; .let one speak what is right (dhamma),
not what is unrighteous (adhamma), that is the
second ; let one speak what is pleasing, not what is
unpleasing, that is the third ; let one speak what is
true, not what is false, that is the fourth.’ (449)

Then the venerable Vahgisa, rising from his seat,
throwing his robe over one shoulder and bending
his joined hands towards Bhagavat, said this: ‘It
occurs to me, O Sugata ! ’

‘ Let it occur to thee, O Vahgisa I ’ said Bhagavat.

Then the venerable Vahgisa, standing before Bha-
gavat, praised him with appropriate stanzas :

2. ‘ Let one say such words by which he does not

pain himself, nor hurt others ; such words are truly
well-spoken. (450)

3. ‘ Let one speak pleasing words which are re-

ceived joyfully (by all), and which (saying) he, with-
out committing sins, speaks what is pleasing to
others. (451)

4. ‘Truth verily is immortal speech, this is a true

saying ; in what is true, in what is good, and in what
is right, the just stand firm, so they say. (45^)

5. ‘ The words which Buddha speaks, which are

sure to bring about extinction and put an end to
pain, such (words) are truly the best.’ (453)

SubhAsitasutta is ended.

sundarikabhAradvIgasutta.

73

4 . sundarikabhAradvA^pasutta.

Buddha shows to Sundarikabharadvd^a on whom to bestow obla-
tions, and the Br^hma«a is finally converted.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt in Kosala on the bank
of the river Sundarikfi. And during that time the
Brfihmawa Sundarikabhiradv^a made offerings to
the fire and worshipped the fire. Then the Brfihma«a
Sundarikabhfiradvfi^a, having made offerings to the
fire and worshipped the fire, and having risen from
his seat, looked about him on all sides towards the
four quarters of the globe, saying : ‘ Who is to enjoy
the rest of this oblation?’ The Brdhma;^a Sunda-
rikabh§.radvd^a saw Bhagavat sitting not far off at
the root of a tree, wrapped up head and body ; and
seeing him he, after taking the rest of the oblation
with his left hand and the waterpot with his right
hand, went up to Bhagavat. Then Bhagavat, on
hearing the footsteps of Sundarikabharadva^a, the
Brahma^^a, uncovered his head. Then the Brfih-
ma«a Sundarikabhfiradvi^a thought : ‘ This man is
shaved, this man is a shaveling,’ and he wished to
return again from there. Then this came to the
mind of Sundarikabh^radvd^a, the Brfihma?2a: ‘Some
Brdhmawas also here are shaved, I think I shall go
up and ask him about his descent’ Then the Brah-
mana Sundarikabhfiradvfi^a went up to Bhagavat,
and having gone up he said this : ‘ Of what family
art thou ? ’

Then Bhagavat answered Sundarikabhfiradv^a,
the Brfihma?2a, in stanzas :

I. ‘No Brahnia^a am I, nor a king’s son, nor any

74

mahAvagga.

Vessa ; having thoroughly observed the class of
common people, I wander about the world re-
flectlngly, possessing nothing. (454)

2. ‘Dressed in a sahghAd^ and houseless I wander

about, with my hair cut off, calm, not intermixing
with people in this world. Thou askest me an
unseasonable question about (my) family, O BrAh-
mamV (455)

3. Sundarikabhdradv^fa : ‘ Sir, BrAhma;>2as toge-
ther with Brahma?2as ask truly, Art thou a BrAh-
mana. ? ’

Bhagavat ; ‘If thou sayest, I am a Brahmawa,
and callest me no BrAhma?/a, then I ask thee about
the Savitti that consists of three padas and twenty-
four syllables (456)

4. SundarikabharadvAjra : ‘ For what (reason) did
the Isis, men, Khattiyas, BrAhmawas make offerings
to the gods abundantly in this \7orld ? ’

Bhagavat: * He who, perfect and accomplished at
the time of offering, obtains the ear of one or the
other (god), he will succeed, so I say.’ (457)

5. ‘ Surely his offering will bear fruit,' — so said

the Brihmawa, — ‘because we saw such an accom-
plished man ,* for by not seeing such as you, some-
body else will enjoy the oblation.' (458)

6. Bhagavat : ‘ Therefore, O Brihma^^a, as you

have come here to ask for something, ask ,* perhaps
thou mightest here find one that is calm, without
anger, free from pain, free from desire, one with
a good, understanding.’ (459)

7 See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 166.

* Tam Sdvitti»i
Tipadaw Muvlsatakkharaw.

(Rig-veda III, 62, 10.)

SUNDARIKABHARADVAGASUTTA.

75

7. Sundarikabharadvi^ : ‘ I delight in offering,

O Gotama, I desire to make an offering, but I do
not understand it ; do thou instruct me, tell me in
what case the offering succeeds.' (460)

8. Bhagavat : ‘ Therefore, O Brahma?2a, lend me

thy ear, I will teach thee the Dhamma. (4b i)

9. ‘Do not ask about descent, but ask about con-

duct ; from wood, it is true, fire is born ; (likewise) a
firm Muni, although belonging to a low family, may
become noble, when restrained (from sinning) by
humility. (462)

ro, ‘ He who is subdued by truth, endowed with
temperance, accomplished, leading a religious life,
on such a one in due time people should bestow
oblations ; let the Brahma^za who has good works
in view, offer. (463)

11. ‘Those who, after leaving sensual pleasures,

wander about houseless, well restrained, being like
a straight shuttle, on such in due time people should
bestow oblations ; let the Brahma^^a who has good
works in view, offer. (464)

1 2. ‘ Those whose passions are gone, whose senses

are well composed, who are liberated like the moon
out of the grasp of Rihu, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the Brdhma^a
who has good works in view^ offer. (4^5)

13. ‘Those who wander about in the world without

clinging (to anything), always thoughtful, having left
selfishness, on such in due time people should be-
stow oblations ; let the Brdhma^^a who has good

works in view, offer. (466)

14. ‘He who, after leaving sensual pleasures, wan-
ders about victorious, he who knows .the end of
birth and death, who is perfectly happy (parinib-

[10] o

76

mahAvagga.

buta), calm like a deep water, TathAgata deserves
the oblation. (467)

15. ‘Just with the just and far from the unjust ^

Tathigata is possessed of infinite understanding;
undefiled both in this world and in the other, Tathd-
gata deserves the oblation. (468)

16. ‘ He in whom there lives no deceit, no arro-

gance, he who is free from cupidity, free from selfish-
ness, free from desire, who has banished anger, who
is calm, the Brihmas^^a who has removed the taint
of grief, TathSgata deserves the oblation. _ (469)

17. ‘He who has banished (every) resting-place

of the mind, he for whom there is no grasping, he
who covets nothing either in this world or in the
other, TathAgata deserves the oblation ^ (470)

18. ‘He who is composed, who has crossed over

the stream (of existence) and knows the Dhamma
by (taking) the highest view (of it), he whose pas-
sions are destroyed, who is wearing the last body,
Tathdgata deserves the oblation. (47 1)

19. ‘He whose passion for existence and whose

harsh talk are destroyed, are perished, (and therefore)
exist not, he the accomplished and in every respect
liberated Tathagata deserves the oblation. (472)

20. ‘He who has shaken off all ties, for whom

there are no ties, who amongst arrogant beings is
free from arrogance, having penetrated pain to-
gether with its domain and subject, Tathdgata
deserves the oblation. (473)

21. ‘He who, without giving himself up to desire,
sees seclusion (i. e. Nibbdna), who has overcome the
view that is to be taught by others, to whom there

‘ Samo samehi visamehi dOre. * Comp. Dhp. V. 20,

sundakikabhAradvAgasutta.

77

are no objects of sense whatever, Tathl,gata de-
serves the oblation ^ (474)

22 . ' He to whom all Dhammas of every descrip-

tion, after he has penetrated them, are destroyed,
are perished, (and therefore) exist not, he who is
calm, liberated in the destruction of attachment (i. e.
NibbAna), Tathdgata deserves the oblation. (475)

23. ‘He who sees the destruction of bond and

birth, who has totally evaded the path of passion,
(who is) pure, faultless, spotless, undepraved, TathA-
gata deserves the oblation. (476)

24. ‘ He who does not measure himself by him-

self, who is composed, upright, firm, without desire,
free from harshness (akhila), free from doubt, TathA-
gata deserves the oblation. (477)

25. ‘He to whom there is no cause of folly, who
has a supernatural insight in all Dhammas, who
wears the last body, and who has acquired perfect
enlightenment, the highest, the blessed, (for him)
thus a Yakkha’s purification (takes place) (478)

26. SundarikabhdradvA^a : ‘ May my offering be

a true offering, because I met with such an accom-
plished one; Brahman is my witness, may Bha-
gavat accept me, may Bhagavat enjoy my obla-
tion.’ ^ (479)

27. Bhagavat: ‘What is obtained by stanzas is
not to be enjoyed by me, this is not the custom of
the clearly-seeing, O Brahma/za ; Buddhas reject
what is obtained by stanzas. While the Dhamma

^ Asa»z aiiiss^ya vivekadasst
Paravediyaw* di/Mim upativatto
Aramma/d yassa na santi ke-^i, &c.

* Comp. Kalahavivadasutta, v. 14.

* Paravediyan ti parehi «f3petabbaw. Commentator,

78

MAHAVAGGA.

exists, O Brahma^^a, this is the practice (of the
Buddhas). (480)

28. ‘With other food and drink must thou serve
one that is perfect, a great I si, whose passions are de-
stroyed, and whose misbehaviour has ceased, for this
is a held for one who looks for good works h’ (481)

29. Sundarikabhdradva^a : ‘ Good, O Bhagavat,

then I should like to know, who will enjoy a gift
from one like me, and whom I shall seek at the time
of sacrifice (as one worthy of offerings) after having
accepted thy doctrine.’ (482)

30. Bhagavat: ‘Whosoever has no quarrels, whose

mind is untroubled, and who has freed himself from
lusts, whose sloth is driven away, (483)

31. ‘Whosoever conquers his sins, knows birth

and death, the Muni who is endowed with wisdom
such a one who has attained to offering, (484)

32. ‘ Him you should w'orship and honour with

food and drink, putting away frowning ; so the gifts
will prosper/ (485)

33. Sundarikabharadvi^a : ‘Thou Buddha de-
servest the oblation, (thou art) the best field for
good works, the object of offering to all the world ;
what is given to thee will bear great fruit’ (486)

Then the Brihma;>^a Sundarikabhdradvd/a said
this to Bhagavat: ‘It is excellent, O venerable
Gotamal It is excellent, O venerable Gotama !
As one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals
what has been hidden, or tells the way to him who
has gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark
that those who have eyes may see the objects, even
so by the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the

' Comp. Kasibharadv^^asutta, v. y.

“ Moneyyasampannaffz=:pa««asampanna/». Commentator.

MAGHASUTTA.

79

Dhamma has been illustrated ; I take refuge in
the venerable Gotama, in the Dhamma, and in the
Assembly of Bhikkhus ; I wish to receive the robe
and the orders from the venerable Gotama.’

The Brahma? 2 a Sundarikabhiradva^a received the
pabba^d from Bhagavat, and he received also the
upasampadi ; and the venerable Bhiradva^a, having
lately received the upasampad^, leading a solitary,
retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived after
having in a short time in this existence by his own
understanding ascertained and possessed himself of
that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander
away from their houses to a houseless state. ‘ Birth
had been destroyed, a religious life had been led,
what was to be done had been done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence,’ so he
perceived, and the venerable Bhiradva^a became
one of the arahats.

Sundarikabharadvi^asutta is ended.

5. mAghasutta.

Buddha on being asked tells Magha of those worthy of offerings
and the blessing of offering.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Rd^agaha, in the
mountain (called) the Vulture’s Peak (Gi^/4aku/a),

Then the young man Magha went to Bhagavat,
and having gone to him he talked pleasantly with
him, and after having had some pleasant, remarkable
conversation with him he sat down apart ; sitting
down apart the young man Mdgha spoke this to
Bhagavat :

So

mahAvagga.

‘ O venerable Gotama, I am a liberal giver, boun-
tiful, suitable to beg of; justly I seek for riches, and
having sought for riches justly, I give out of the
justly obtained and justly acquired riches to one, to
two, to three, to four, to five, to six, to seven, to
eight, to nine, to ten, to twenty, to thirty, to forty,
to fifty, to a hundred, I give still more. (I should
like to know), O venerable Gotama, whether I, while
so giving, so offering, produce, much good.’

‘ Certainly, O young man, dost thou in so offering
produce much good ; he, O young man, who is a
liberal giver, bountiful, suitable to beg of, and who
justly seeks for riches, and having sought for riches
justly, gives out of his justly obtained and justly
acquired riches to one, to two, to three, to four, to
five, to six, to seven, to eight, to nine, to ten, to
twenty, to thirty, to forty, to fifty, to a hundred, and
gives still more, produces much good.’

Then the young man MAgha addressed Bhagavat
in stanzas :

1. ‘I ask the venerable Gotama, the bountiful,' —

so said the young man MAgha, — ‘wearing the yel-
low robe, wandering about houseless ; ’ ‘ He who is
a householder, suitable to beg of, a donor, who, de-
sirous of good, offers haying what is good in view,
and giving to others in this world food and drink, —
where- (i. e. on whom bestowed) will the oblation of
such an offerer prosper ? ’ (4^7)

2. ‘ He who is a householder, suitable to beg of,

a donor, O Magha,’— so said Bhagavat, — ‘who, de-
sirous of good, offers having what is good in view,
and giving to others in this world food and drink,
such a one will prosper with those worthy of
offerings.’ (488)

mAghasutta.

8r

3. ‘He who is a householder, suitable to beg of,

a donor,’ — so said the young man, — ‘who, desirous
of good, offers having what is good in view, and
giving to others in this world food and drink, — tell
me (I being such a one), O Bhagavat, of those worthy
of offerings.’ (489)

4. Bhagavat : ‘ Those indeed who wander about in
the world without clinging to anything and without
possessing anything, perfect, self-restrained, on such
in due time people should bestow oblations ; let the
BrAhmawa who has good (works) in view, offer. (490)

5. ‘ Those* who have cut through all bonds and

fetters, who are subdued, liberated, free from pain,
and free from desire, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Brahmawa who has
good (works) in view, offer. (491)

6. ‘ Those who are released from all bonds, who

are subdued, liberated, free from pain, and free
from desire, on such in due time people should
bestow oblations ; let the Brihma/^a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (492)

7. ‘ Those who, having forsaken both passion and

hatred and folly, have destroyed their desires and
lead a religious life, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the BrAhmawa who has
good (works) in view, offer h (493)

8. ‘ Those in whom there lives no deceit, no arro-

gance, who are free from cupidity, free from selfish-
ness, free from desire, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the BrAhma^^a who has
good (works) in view, offer. (494)

9. ‘ Those indeed who without being lost in craving.

* Comp. Dhp. V. 20.

82

mahAvagga.

after crossing the stream (of existence), wander
about free from selfishness, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the Brdhma?^a
who has good (works) in view, offer. (495)

10. ‘ Those in whom there is no craving for any-

thing in the world, nor for existence after existence
here or in the other world, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations ; let the BrAhmawa
who has good (works) in view, offer. (496)

11. ‘Those who, after leaving sensual pleasures,

wander about houseless, well restrained, beino- like
a straight shuttle, on such in due time people should
bestow oblations; let the Brahma^a who has good
(works) in view, offer. (407)

12. Those whose passions are gone, whose senses

are well composed, who are liberated like the moon
out of the grasp ofRahu, on such in due time people
should bestow oblations ; let the Brahma;/a who has
good (works) in view, offer. (4^3^

13. ‘ Those who are calm, whose passions are gone
who are without anger, and for whom there is no
transmigration after having left here, on such in due
time people should bestow oblations ; let the BrAh-
ma^a who has good (works) in view, offer. (499)

14. T. hose who, after leaving birth and death alto-

gether, have conquered all doubt, on such in due time
people should bestow oblations; let the BrShmawa
who has good (works) in view, offer. (500)

them',e'l'^'’°r about in the world with

eniselves for a light, not possessed of anything, in

shounT^r' « due time people

food ln'lT '^ho has

good (works) in view, offer.

16. ‘Those who in this world rightly understand

MAGHASUTTA.

83

this : “ This is the last (birth), there is no re-birth,”
on such in due time people should bestow oblations ;
let the Br^hma;^a who has good (works) in view,
offer. (502)

17. ‘He who is accomplished, and delights in me-
ditation, thoughtful, possessed of thorough enlight-
enment, a refuge for many, on such a one in due
time people should bestow oblations ; let the Brih-
ma^a who has good (works) in view, offer.’ (503)

18. ‘ Certainly my question was not in vain, Bha-

gavat has told me of those worthy of offerings ; for
thou truly knowest this in this world, as surely to
thee this Dhamma is known. (504)

19. ‘He who is a householder, suitable to beg of,

a donor,’ — so said the young man M%ha, — ‘who,
desirous of good, offers having what is good in
view, and giving to others in this world food and
drink, — tell me (I being such a one), O Bhagavat,
of the blessing of offering.’ (S^S)

20. ‘Offer, O Magha,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘and
while offering make calm thy mind in all things ;
the object of the one that offers is the oblation,
standing fast in this he leaves sin behind.

21 . ‘Such a one whose passion is gone will re-
press hatred, cultivating an unbounded friendly

mind ; continually strenuous night and day he will
spread infinite goodness through all regions.’ (507)

22. Mdgha : ‘ Who prospers ? who is liberated and

who is bound ? In which way can one by himself go
to Brahmaloka ? Tell this to me who does not know,
O Muni, when asked. Bhagavat is indeed my wit-
ness that Brahman is seen by me to-day, for thou art
to us equal to Brahman, this is the truth ; how can one
attain Brahmaloka, O thou glorious one ? ’ ( 5 ^ 8 )

84

MAHAVAGGA.

^ 23. ‘He who offers the threefold blessing of obla-
tion, O Migha,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ such a one
will^ prosper with those worthy of offerings ; so,
having offered properly, he who is suitable to beg
of attains Brahmaloka, so I say.’ (^09)

This having been said, Mdgha the young man
spoke as follows to Bhagavat; ‘Excellent, O vener-
able Gotama 1 Excellent, O venerable Gotama ! As
one raises what has been overthrown, or reveals what
has been hidden, or tells the way to him who has
gone astray, or holds out an oil lamp in the dark that
those who have eyes may .see the objects, even so by
the venerable Gotama in manifold ways the Dhamma
has been illustrated ; I take refuge in the venerable
Gotama and in the Dhamma and in the Assembly of
Bhikkhus. Let die venerable Gotama accept me as
an up^saka (a follower, me), who henceforth for all
my life have taken refuge (in him).’

Mdghasutta is ended.

6. SABHIYASUTTA.

Sabhiya, the Paribb^aka, goes to the six famous teachers of his
time to have his questions answered, but not having his doubts
so ved, he repairs to Gotama and asks him how one is to behave
to become a Br^hmawa, a Sama«a, a Nah^taka, a Khetta^c^ina, a
Kusala, a Pa«^ita, a Mum, a VedagQ, an Anuvidita, a Dhira, an
Ajaniya, a Sottiya, an Ariya, a ^ara«avat, a Paribba^aka.
Bhagavat answers his questions, and -Sabhiya finally receives the
robe and the orders from Buddha.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at RS^gaha, in
ve/uvana, in KalandakanivSpa. And at that time
questions were recited to Sabhiya, the Paribbdjaka

SABHIYASUTTA.

85

(wandering mendicant),, by a deity who had in a
former birth been a relation of his : ‘He who, O
Sabhiya, be it a Samaj^a or a Brahma^^a, explains
these questions to thee when asked, near him thou
shouldst live a religious life/

Then Sabhiya, the Paribb^aka, having learnt the
questions from that deity, went to whatever Samaj^as
and Brahmai^^as there were that had an assembly (of
Bhikkhus), a crowd (of followers), and were well-
known teachers, famous leaders, considered excel-
lent by the multitude, as Phra^^a-Kassapa, Makkhali-
Gos^la, Aj^ita-Kesakambali, Pakudha-Ka-^/^^yana,
Sa^^aya-Bela/Z/^iputta, and Niga;^22f/^a-Nitaputta.
Those he went to, and after going to them, he
asked the questions. They, being asked the ques-
tions by Sabhiya, the Paribba^aka, did not succeed
(in answering them), and not succeeding they showed
wrath and hatred and discontent, and they also in
return put questions to Sabhiya, the Paribb^^aka.

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Parib-
ba^aka: ‘Whatever Sama?2as and Brdhma^as there
are that have an assembly (of Bhikkhus), a crowd
(of followers), and are well-known teachers, famous
leaders, considered excellent by the multitude, as
P{ira?^a-Kassapa, Makkhali-Gosala, A^ita-Kesakam-
bali, Pakudha- Ka/^/^yana, Sa^^aya-Bela^'^fy^iputta,
and Niga;^22f/^a-Nataputta, they, being asked ques-
tions by me, did not succeed (in answering them),
and not succeeding they showed wrath and hatred
and discontent, and they also in return put ques-
tions to me in this matter ; surely I think I shall go
back to what I have left, and enjoy sensual pleasures.

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the
Paribb^^ka : ‘ This Samara Gotama has both an

86

mahAvagga.

assembly (of Bhikkhus) and a crowd (of followers),
and is a well-known teacher,- a famous leader, con-
sidered excellent by the multitude, surely I think I
shall go to Sama/^a Gotama and ask these ques-
tions/ Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya
the ParibbA^ka: ‘Whatever Sama?^as and BrAh-
ma;^as there are that are decayed, old, aged, ad-
vanced in years, having reached old age, expe-
nenced elders, long ordained, having assemblies (of
Bhikkhus), crowds (of followers), being teachers well
known, famous leaders, considered excellent by the
multitude, as Ptira/^a-Kassapa, Makkhali-GosAla
A^ita-Kesakambali, Pakudha-Kaiiayana, Sa;^aya-
Bela^'/^iputta, and Niga?z//2a-Ndtaputta, they, being
asked questions by me, did not succeed (in answering
them), and not succeeding they showed wrath and
hatred and discontent, and they also in return put
questions to me in this matter; (I should like to
know) whether Sama; 2 a Gotama being asked these
questions will be able to explain them to me, for

bama«a Gotama is both young by birth and new in
ascetic life.

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the

aribba^aka : ' Samara Gotama is not to be slighted

because he is young ; even if the Samatia is youne

powerful; surely I think I

tions’^°Tr these ques-

tions. Then Sabhiya. the Paribbd^aka, went on a

journey to Ra^gaha, and wandering on his journey

Vefuvana,

andakanivapa, to Bhagavat, and having come to
gavat he talked pleasantly with him,- and after
having had some pleasant and remarkable conversa-
lon with him he sat down apart ; sitting down apart

SABHIYASUTTA.

87

Sabhiya, the Paribbi^aka, spoke to Bhagavat in
stanzas :

1. ‘ Anxious and doubtful I have come/ — so said

Sabhiya, — ‘ longing to ask questions. Do thou put
an end to these (doubts when) asked these questions
by me, in regular order, and rightly explain them
to me.' (510)

2. ‘ Thou hast come from afar, O Sabhiya,’ — so

said Bhagavat, — ‘longing to ask questions; I shall
put an end to those (doubts when) asked those
questions by thee, in regular order, and rightly I
shall explain them to thee. (5^0

3. ‘ Ask me, O Sabhiya, a question ; whatsoever
thou wishest in thy mind that question I (will
explain, and) put an end to (thy doubt).’ (512)

Then this came to the mind of Sabhiya, the Parib-
bij^aka : ‘ It is marvellous, it is wonderful indeed, the
reception which I did not get from other Sama^^as
and Br4hma«as has been given me by Gotama,’
so saying he glad, rejoicing, delighted, and highly
elated asked Bhagavat a question :

4. ‘ What should a man (necessarily) have obtained
that people may call him a Bhikkhu ? ^so said
Sabhiya, — ‘ how may they call him compassionate,
and how subdued? how can he be called enlightened
(buddha) ? Asked (about this) do thou, Bhagavat,
explain it to me.’

5. ‘He who by the path he has himself made,
O Sabhiya,’— so said Bhagavat, — ‘has attained to
perfect happiness, who has conquered doubt, who Jives
after having left behind both misfortune and fortune^
who has destroyed re-birth, he is a Bhikkhu. (514)

^ Vipatti sampatti h^ni y\xddhu Commentator.

88

mahAvagga.

6. ‘ Always resigned and attentive, he will not

hurt any one in all the world, the Samam who has
crossed the stream (of existence, and is) untroubled ;
for whom there are no desires (ussada), he is com-
passionate. (515)

7. ‘He whose senses are trained internally and

externally in all the world, he who after penetrating
this and the other world longs for death, being
trained, he is subdued. (516)

8. ‘Whosoever, after having considered all times,
(kappa), the revolution (sai>;^saFa), both the vanishing
and re-appearance (of beings), is free from defilement,
free from sin, is pure, and has obtained destruction of
birth, him they call enlightened (buddha).' (517)

Then Sabhiya, the ParibbA^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad, re-
joicing, delighted, highly elated, asked Bhagavat
another question :

9. ‘ What should a man (necessarily) have obtained

that people may call him a BrAhmam ? ’ — so said
Sabhiya, — ‘ and how (may they call him) a Samaj^^a ?
and how a Nahitaka? how can he be called a
NAga ? Asked (about this) do thou, Bhagavat,
explain it to me.’ (518)

10. ‘He who, after removing all sins, O Sabhiya,’

— so said Bhagavat, — ‘is immaculate, well composed,
firm-minded, perfect after crossing the Sawsara, such
an independent one is called a Brahma ?^a. (519)

11. ‘ He who is calm, having left behind good and
evil, free from defilement, having understood this
and the other world, and conquered birth and death,
such a one is called a Sama?^a by being, so h’ (520)

^ Samawo tadi pavuy^/6ate taihattd.

SABHIYASUTTA.

89

12. ‘Whosoever, after having washed away all

sins internally and externally in all the world, does
not enter time (kappa) amongst gods and men who
are subject to time, him they call a Nahitaka
(cleansed) h (521)

13. ‘He who does not commit any crime in the

world, who, after abandoning all bonds and fetters,
clings to nothing, being liberated, such a one is called
a Ndga (sinless) by being so V (522)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribbi^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad,
rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, further asked
Bhagavat a question :

14. ‘Whom do the Buddhas call a Khetta^ina —

so said Sabhiya, — ‘how (can they call any one) a
Kusala ? and how a Pa;^^ita ? how can he be called
a Muni? Asked (about this) do thou, Bhagavat,
explain it to me.’ (523)

15. ‘He who, after examining all regions, O Sa-

bhiya,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ the divine and the
human, and Brahman’s region, is delivered from the
radical bond of all regions, such a one is called a
Khetta^ina (he who has conquered the regions) by
being so. (524)

16. ‘He who, after examining all treasures, the
divine and the human, and Brahman’s treasure, is
delivered from the radical bond of all treasures, such
a one is called a Kusala (happy) by being so. (525)

^ Devamanussesu kappiyesu
Kappan n' eti tarn ^hu nahatako.

® Agum na karoti kiw/4i loke
Sabbasa/«yoge visa^^a bandhanani
Sabbattha iia sa^^^ati vimutto
NSgo tidi pavu^^aie tathatt^.

But compare Pabba^^asutta 17, Magandiyasutta 11, &c.

90

mahAvagga.

17. ‘He who, after examining both kinds of

senses, internally and externally, is endowed with a
clear understanding and has conquered evil and good
(ka^hasukka), such a one is called a Pana^ita, (wise)
by being so. {526)

18. ‘ He who, having understood the Dhamma of

the just and the unjust, internally and externally, in
all the world, is to be worshipped by gods and men,
he, after breaking through the net of ties, is called
a Muni (sage).’ (527)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribbaj^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad,
rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, further asked
Bhagavat a question :

19. ‘ What should one (necessarily) have obtained

that people may call him Vedagh?’ — so said Sabhiya,
— ‘and how (may they call him) Anuvidita ? and
how Viriyavat ? How does one become A/Aniya ?
Asked (about this) do thou, O Bhagavat, explain it
to me.’ (528)

20. ‘He who, having conquered all sensations, O

Sabhiya,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ which are (known) to
Sama^^as and to Brdhma^^as, is free from passion for
all sensations, he is Vedagh (having passed sensa-
tion) after conquering all sensation. (529)

21. ‘ He who, having seen the delusion of name

and form h internally and externally, the root of
sickness, and is delivered from the radical bond of
all sickness, such a one is called Anuvidita (well-
informed) by being so. (53°)

22. ‘He who is disgusted in this world with all
sins, is strong after conquering the pain of hell, is

^ Anuvi^^a papa^-^andraarfipaw.

SABHIYASUTTA.

91

Strong and powerful, such a one is called Dhira ( =
viriyavat, firm) by being so. (53

23. ‘ He whose bonds are cut off internally and

externally, the root of ties who is delivered from
the radical bond of all ties, such a one is called
A^dniya (high-bred) by being so.’ (532)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribba/aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad,
rejoicing, delighted, highly elated, further asked
Bhagavat a question :

24. ‘ What should a man (necessarily) have ob-

tained that people may call him a Sottiya ? ’ — so
said Sabhiya, — ‘ how (may they call him) an Ariya ?
and how a Aara^avat ? how may he become a
Paribb^aka ? Asked (about this) do thou, O Bha-
gavat, explain it to me.’ (533)

25. ‘Whosoever, after having heard and under-
stood every Dhamma in the world. O Sabhiya,’ — so
said Bhagavat, — ‘whatsoever is wrong and what-
soever is blameless, is victorious, free from doubt,
liberated, free from pain in every respect, him they
call a Sottiya (learned in the revelation). (534)

26. ‘ Whosoever, after having cut off passions and

desires, is wise and does not (again) enter the womb,
having driven away the threefold sign, the mud (of
lust), and -vsrho does not (again) enter time (kappa),
him they call an Ariya (noble). (535)

27. ‘He who in this world, after having at-
tained the (highest) gain in the i^ara^as, is skilful,
has always understood the Dhamma, clings to nothing,
is liberated, and for whom there are no passions, he is
a ^ara^eavat (endowed with the observances). (536)

^ Yass' assu lutani bandhanani

bahiddhii H sangamftla///.

[10] P

92

MAHAVAGGA.

28. ‘ Whosoever abstains from the action that has

a painful result, above and below and across and in
the middle, who wanders with understanding, who
has put an end to deceit, arrogance, cupidity and
anger, name and form, him they call a Paribbi-
^aka (a wandering mendicant) who has attained the
(highest) gain.’ (537)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribbil^aka, having approved
of and rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat, glad, re-
joicing, delighted, highly elated, having risen from his
seat, and having put his upper robe upon one shoulder,
bending his joined hands towards Bhagavat, praised
Bhagavat face to face in appropriate stanzas :

29. ‘ Having conquered the three and sixty (philo-

sophical) views referring to the disputations of the
Samaras, thou hast crossed over the darkness of
the stream h (?) (53^)

30. ‘Thou hast passed to the end of and beyond
pain, thou art a saint, perfectly enlightened, I consider
thee one that has destroyed his passions, thou art glo-
rious, thoughtful, of great understanding, O thou who
puts an end to pain, thou hast carried me across. (539)

31. ‘Because thou sawest my longing, and car-

riedst me across my doubt, adoration be to thee, O
Muni, who hast attained the (highest) gain in the
ways of wisdom ; O thou who art a true kinsman of
the Adii^/^as, thou art compassionate. (54o)

32. ‘ The doubt I had before thou hast cleared

away for me, O thou clearly-seeing ; surely thou art
a Muni, perfectly enlightened, there is no obstacle
for thee. (540

^ Ydni ka. ti»i ySni ka.

Samawappavidasitini bhfiripa««fa
Sa««fakkhara sai^wanissitSni (?)

Osara«dni vineyya oghatam' agS.

SABHIYASUTTA.

93

33. ‘ And all thy troubles are scattered and cut
off, thou art calm, subdued, firm, truthful. (542)

34. ‘All gods and both Nirada and Pabbata re-

joice at thee, the chief of the sinless (n^ganaga), the
great hero, when thou art speaking. (543)

35. ‘Adoration be to thee, O noble man, adora-
tion be to thee, O thou best of men ; in the world of
men and gods there is no man equal to thee. (544)

36. ‘ Thou art Buddha, thou art the Master, thou

art the Muni that conquers Mara ; after having cut
off desire thou hast crossed over and hast carried
across this generation. (545)

37. ‘The elements of existence (upadhi) are over-

come by thee, the passions are destroyed by thee,
thou art a lion, free from desire, thou hast left behind
fear and terror. (54b)

38. ‘ As a beautiful lotus does not adhere to the

water, so thou dost not cling to good and evil, to
either ; stretch forth thy feet, O hero, Sabhiya wor-
ships the Master’s (feet).’ (54?)

Then Sabhiya, the Paribbi^aka, stooping with his
head to Bhagavat’s feet, said this to Bhagavat :

‘It is excellent, O venerable! It is excellent,
O venerable I As one raises what has been over-
thrown, or reveals what has been hidden, or tells the
way to him who has gone astray, or holds out an
oil lamp in the dark that those who have eyes may
see the objects, even so by the venerable Gotama
in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illus-

trated; I take refuge in the venerable Gotama, in
the Dhamma, and in the Assembly of Bhikkhus; I
wish to receive the robe and the orders from the
venerable Bhagavat.

‘He who, O Sabhiya, formerly belonging to

94

MAHAVAGGA.

another creed (a/Hatitthiyapubba), wishes to be
adopted into this religion (dhammavinaya), and
wishes to receive the robe and the orders, he serves
for four months ; after the lapse of four months
Bhikkhus who have appeased their thoughts will
give him the robe and the orders to become a
Bhikkhu, (for) I also in this matter acknowledge
a difference of persons.’

‘If, O venerable, those that formerly belonged
to another creed and wish to be adopted into this
religion and to receive the robe and the orders,
serve for four months, and after the lapse of
four months Bhikkhus who have appeased their
thoughts give them the robe and the orders that
they may become Bhikkhus, I will serve for four
years, and after the lapse of four years Bhikkhus
who have appeased their thoughts shall give (me)
the robe and the orders that I may become a
Bhikkhu.’

Sabhiya, the Paribba^aka, received the robe and the
orders from Bhagavat, and the venerable Sabhiya,
having lately received the upasampadd, leading a
solitary, retired, strenuous, ardent, energetic life, lived
after having in a short time in this existence by his
own understanding ascertained and possessed himself
of that highest perfection of a religious life for the
sake of which men of good family rightly wander
away from their houses to a houseless state. ‘ Birth
had been destroyed, a religious life had been led,
what was to be done had been done, there was
nothing else (to be done) for this existence,’ so he
perceived, and the venerable Sabhiya became one
of the saints.

Sabhiyasutta is ended.

SELASUTTA.

95

7 . SELASUTTA.

Ke«iya, the Ga/ih, invites Buddha with his assembly to take his
meals with him on the morrow. Sela, the Brahmawa, arrived at
that place with his three hundred young men; seeing the pre-
parations he asks what is going on, and is answered that Buddha
is expected the next day. On hearing the word ' Buddha,' Sela
asks where Buddha lives, goes to him, converses with him, and
is cohverted ; so are his followers.

So it was heard by me :

At one time. Bhagavat wandering about in Ahgut-
tar^pa, with a large assembly of Bhikkhus, with 1250
Bhikkhus, went to Apa;za, a town in Anguttaripa.

And Ke7dya, the ascetic, with matted hair (j’'adla)
heard the following : ‘ The Sama^^a, the venerable
Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out from the family of
the Sakyas, wandering about in Ahguttardpa with
a large assembly of Bhikkhus, with 1250 Bhikkhus,
has reached Apa^za, and the following good praising
words met the venerable Gotama : “ And so he is
Bhagavat, the venerable, the perfectly enlightened,
endowed with science and works (vi^a/^ara/^a), the
happy, knowing the world, the incomparable, the
charioteer of men that are to be subdued, the
master, the enlightened of gods and men, the glo-
rious ; he teaches this world and the world of gods,
of Mdras, of Brahmans, and beings comprising Sa-
maT^as and Brahma^zas, gods and men, having him-
self known and seen them face to face ; he teaches
the Dhamma (which is) good in the beginning, in the
middle, and in the end, is full of meaning and rich in
words, quite complete ; he teaches a perfectly pure
religious life, and good is the sight of such saints.” ’
Then Kemya., the Ga/ila, went (to the place) where

g6

mahAvagga.

Bhagavat was, and having gone there he talked
pleasantly with him, and after having had some
pleasant and remarkable conversation (with him) he
sat down apart ; and while Kemya, the was

sitting down apart, Bhagavat, by religious talk,
taught, advised, roused, and delighted him. Then
Kemya, the GatWa, having been taught, advised,
roused, and delighted by Bhagavat through religious
talk, said this to Bhagavat :

‘ Let the venerable Gotama accept my food to-
morrow, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus.’

This having been said, Bhagavat answered
Kewiya, the Gafila : ‘ Large, O Ke^dya, is the
assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two hundred
and fifty Bhikkhus, and thou art intimate with the
BrAhma? 2 as.'

A second time Kewiya, the 6^adla, said this to
Bhagavat: ‘Although, O venerable Gotama. the
assembly of Bhikkhus is large, one thousand two
hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, and I am intimate with
the BrAhma/xas, let the venerable Gotama accept
my food to-rnorrow, together with the assemblv of
Bhikkhus.’

A second time Bhagavat said this to Kemya, the
GatWa : ‘ Large, O Ke;dya, is the assembly of Bhik-
khus, one thousand two hundred and fifty Bhikkhus,
and thou art intimate with the Brahma^^as.’

A third time Kewiya, the fradla, said this to Bha-
gavat . Although, O venerable Gotama, the assembly
of Bhikkhus is large, one thousand two hundred and
fifty Bhikkhus, and I am intimate with the Br^h-
ma«as, yet let the venerable Gotama accept my food
to-morrow, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus.’
Bhagavat assented by being silent.

SELASUTTA.

97

Then Kewiya, the G^a/ila, having learnt the assent
of Bhagavat, after rising from his seat went to his
hermitage, and having gone there he addressed his
friends and servants, his relatives and kinsmen (as
follows) ; ‘ Let my venerable friends and servants,
relatives and kinsmen hear me ; — the Sama; 2 a Go-
tama has been invited by me to (take his) food (with
me) to-morrow, together with the assembly of Bhik-
khus : wherefore you must render me bodily service.’

‘ Surely, O venerable one,’ so saying the friends
and servants, relativ-es and kinsmen of Ke^iya, the
6^adla, complying with his request, some of them dug
fireplaces, some chopped firewood, some washed the
vessels, some placed waterpots, some prepared seats.
Kemya, the Gadla, on the other hand, himself pro-
vided a circular pavilion.

At that time the Brdhmam Sela lived at Apa«a,
perfect in the three Vedas, vocabulary, Ke/ubha,
etymology, Itihisa as the fifth (Veda), versed in
metre, a grammarian, one not deficient in popular
controversy and the signs of a great man, he taught
three hundred • young men the hymns h At that
time Ke«iya, the Gadla, was intimate with the
Br4hma;^^a Sela. Then the Brahma^^a Sela sur-
rounded by three hundred young men, walking on
foot, arrived at the place where the hermitage of
Kemya, the Gadla, was. And the Brahma;?a Sela
saw the (Madias in Kewiya’s hermitage, some of them
digging fireplaces, some chopping firewood, some
washing the vessels, some placing waterpots, some

^ Tena kho pana samayejia Selo brdhmawo Apawe pa/ivasati
ti««a;« vedanawz parag^i sanighaw^uke/ubhSnaw sakkharappabhe-
ddnam Uihdsapa«Zumana7« padako veyyakarawo lokayatamahdpuri-
salakkhanesu anavayo tb/i mawavakasatani mante vdi^eti.

98

MAHAVAGGA.

preparing seats, and Ke^^iya, the (9adla, on the other
hand, himself providing a circular pavilion ; seeing
Kemya, the 6^adla, he said this : ‘ Is the venerable
Kemya to celebrate the marriage of a son or the
marriage of a daughter, or is there a great sacrifice
at hand, or has Bimbisara, the king of Magadha,
who has a large body of troops, been invited for
to-morrow,- together with his army?’

‘ I am not to celebrate the marriage of a son or
the marriage of a daughter, nor has Bimbisara, the
king of Magadha, who has a large body of troops,
been invited for to-morrow, together with his army,
yet a great sacrifice of niine is at hand. The Sa-
ma? 2 a Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out from the
Sakja family, wandering about in Anguttardpa with
a large assembly of Bhikkhus, one thousand two
hundred and fifty Bhikkhus, has reached Apa^za, and
the following good praising words met the venerable
Gotama : “ And so he is Bhagavat, the venerable,
the perfectly enlightened, endowed with science and
works (vi^aiara;?a), the happy, knowing the world,
the incomparable, the charioteer of men that are to
be subdued, the master, the enlightened of gods
and men, the glorious, he has been invited by
me for to-morrow, together with the assembly of
Bhikkhus.” ’

Didst thou say that he is a Buddha, O venerable
Ke/^iya ? ’

‘ Yes, I say, O venerable Sela, that he is a Buddha.’

Didst thou say that he is a Buddha, O venerable
Ke/^iya ? ’

‘ Yes. I say, O venerable Sela, that he is a Buddha.’
Then this occurred to the Brahmam Sela : ‘ This
sound “ Buddha ’ is (indeed) rare, but in our hymns

SELASUTTA.

99

are to be found the thirty-two signs of a great man,
and for a great man endowed with these there are
two conditions and no more : if he lives in a house
he is a king, a universal (king), a just religious king,
a lord of the four-cornered (earth), a conqueror, one
who has obtained the security of his people (and) is
possessed of the seven gems. These are his seven
gems, namely, the wheel gem, the elephant gem,
the horse gem, the pearl gem, the woman gem, the
householder gem, and the chief gem as the seventh.
He has more than a thousand sons, heroes, possessing
great bodily strength and crushing foreign armies;
he having conquered this ocean-girt earth without a
rod and without a weapon, but by justice, lives (in
a house). But if, on the other hand, he goes out
from (his) house to the houseless state, he becomes
a saint, a perfectly enlightened, one who has removed
the veil in the world. And where, O venerable
Kemya, dwells now that venerable Gotama, the
saint and the perfectly enlightened ? ’

This having been said, Ke»iya, the (9adla,
stretching out his right arm, spoke as follows to the
Br^hma;^a Sela : ‘ There, where yon blue forest line
is, O venerable Sela.’

Then the Brahma^a Sela together with (his) three
hundred young men went to the place where Bhaga-
vat was. Then the Brihma/^a Sela addressed those
young men : ‘ Come ye, venerable ones, with but
little noise, w'alking step by step, for Bhagavats are
difficult of access, walking alone like lions, and when
I speak to the venerable Sama? 2 a Gotama, do ye not
utter interrupting words, but wait ye venerable ones,
for the end of my speech.’

Then the Brahmawa Sela went to the place where

lOO

MAHAVAGGA.

Bhagavat was, and having gone there he talked
pleasantly with Bhagavat, and after having had some
pleasant and remarkable conversation with him he
sat down apart, and while sitting down apart Sela,
the Brihma;za, looked for the thirty-two signs of
a great man on the body of Bhagavat. And the
Brahmawa Sela saw the thirty-two signs of a great
man on the body of Bhagavat with the exception of
two ; in respect to two of the signs of a great man
he had doubts, he hesitated, he was not satisfied, he
was not assured as to the member being enclosed in
a membrane and as to his having a large tongue.

Then this occurred to Bhagavat: ‘This Brihma:>2a
Sela sees in me the thirty-two signs of a great man
with the exception of two, in respect to two of the
signs of a great man he has doubts, he hesitates, he
is not satisfied, he is not assured as to the member
being enclosed in a membrane, and as to my having
a large tongue.’ Then Bhagavat created such a
miraculous creature that the Br&hma?^a Sela might
see Bhagavat’s member enclosed in a membrane.
Then Bhagavat having put out his tongue touched
and stroked both his ears, touched and stroked both
nostrils, and the whole circumference of his forehead
he covered with his tongue.

Then this occurred to the Br^hma;ia Sela : ‘ The
Sama?za Gotama is endowed with the thirty-two signs
of a great man, with them all, not with (only) some
of them, and yet I do not know whether he is a
Buddha or not; I have heard old and aged Br^h-
ma;2as, teachers and their previous teachers, say
that those who are saints and perfectly enlightened
manifest themselves when their praise is uttered.

I think I shall praise the Samaf^a Gotama face to

SELASUTTA.

lOI

face in suitable stanzas.’ Then the Brihma;za Sela
praised Bhagavat face to face in suitable stanzas :

1. ‘ Thou hast a perfect body, thou art resplen-

dent, well-born, of beautiful aspect, thou hast a go.lden
colour, O Bhagavat, thou hast very white teeth,
thou art strong. (54^)

2. ‘All the signs that are for a well-born man, they
are on thy body, the signs of a great man. (549)

3. ‘ Thou hast a bright eye, a handsome coun-

tenance, thou art great, straight, majestic, thou
shinest like a sun in the midst of the assembly of
the Samaj^as. (55o)

4. ‘ Thou art a Bhikkhii of a lovely appearance,

thou hast a skin like gold ; what is the use of being
a Sama^^a to thee who art possessed of the highest
beauty? (55 1)

5. ‘ Thou deservest to be a king, a king of uni-

versal kings, a ruler of the four-cornered (earth),
a conqueror, a lord of the jambu grove (i. e.
India). (552)

6. ‘ Khattiyas and wealthy kings are devoted to

thee ; rule, O Gotama, as a king of kings, a leader
of men.’ (553)

7. ‘ I am a king, O Sela,’ — so said Bhagavat, —
ah incomparable, religious king (dhammari^an),with

justice (dhammena) I turn the wheel, a wheel that is
irresistible (554)

8. ‘ Thou acknowledgest thyself (to be) perfectly

enlightened (sambuddha),’ — so said Sela, the Brah-
ma^a, — ‘ an incomparable, religious king ; “ with
justice I turn the wheel," so thou sayest, O
Gotama. ( 555 )

^ Compare Gospel of St. John xviii. 37.

102

MAHAVAGGA.

9. ‘ Who is thy general, (who is thy) disciple,

(who is) the successor of the master, who is to
turn after thee the wheel of religion turned (by
thee) ? ’ (556)

10. ‘ The wheel turned by me, O Selaf — so said

Bhagavat, — ‘ the incomparable wheel of religion,
Sariputta is to turn after (me), he taking after
Tath%ata. (557)

11. ‘What is to be known is known (by me),

what is to be cultivated is cultivated (by me), what
is to be left is left by me, therefore I am a Buddha,
O Br 4 hma;^a. ( 55 ^)

12. ‘ Subdue thy doubt about me, have faith (in

me), O Brdhma^a, difficult (to obtain) is the sight of
Buddhas repeatedly. (559)

13. ‘Of those whose manifestation is difficult for

you (to obtain) in the world repeatedly, I am, O
Br^hmajfza, a perfectly enlightened, an incomparable
physician, (sdo)

14. ‘ Most eminent, matchless, a crusher of Miras

army ; having subjected all enemies I rejoice secure
on every side.' . (561)

15. Sela : ‘O venerable ones, pay attention to

this : as the clearly-seeing (Buddha) says, (so it is) :
he is a physician, a great hero, and roars like a
lion in the forest. (562)

16. ‘ Who, having seen him, the most eminent,

the matchless, the crusher of Mira s army, is not
appeased, even if he be of black origin (ka?^hibhi-
^itika). (563)

17. ‘ He who likes me, let him follow after (me),

he who does not like me, let him go away; I shall
at once take the orders in the presence of him of
excellent understanding (i. e. Buddha).’ (564)

SELASUTTA.

103

18. The followers of Sela: ‘ If this doctrine of the
perfectly enlightened pleases thee, we also shall take
the orders in the presence of him of excellent under-
standing.’ (565)

Ip. Sela, these three hundred Brahma^as ask
with clasped hands (to be admitted into the order) :
‘ we want to cultivate a religious life, O Bhagavat,
in thy presence.’ (566)

20. ‘A religious life is well taught (by me), — O

Sela,’ so said Bhagavat, — ‘ an instantaneous, an im-
mediate (life), in which it is not in vain to become
an ascetic to one who learns in earnest \’ (567)

Then the Brahma/^a Sela together with his as-
sembly took the robe and the orders in the presence
of Bhagavat.

Then Ke/^iya, the (ra/ila, by the expiration of that
night, having provided in his hermitage nice hard
food and soft food, let Bhagavat know the time (of
the meal) : ‘It is time, O venerable Gotama, the
meal is prepared.’ Then Bhagavat in the morning,
having put on his raiment and taken his bowl and
robes, went to the < 9 arila Ke/riya’s hermitage, and
having gone there he sat down on the prepared
seat, together with the assembly of Bhikkhus. Then
Ke?2iya, the Gafila., satisfied and' served with his own
hands the assembly of Bhikkhus, with Buddha at
their head, with nice hard food and soft food. Then
Ke^^iya, the 6^arila, having gone up to Bhagavat who
had finished eating and had taken his hand out of
the bowl, took a low seat and sat down apart, and
while Ke;«iya, the 6^arila, was sitting down apart,
Bhagavat delighted him with these stanzas :

21. ‘ The principal thing in sacrifice is the sacred
fire, the principal thing amongst the hymns is the Sk-

104

mahAvagga.

vitti\ the king is the principal amongst men, and the
sea the principal amongst waters (nadina;?^®). (568)

22. ‘Amongst the stars the moon is the prin-
cipal thing, the sun is the principal thing amongst
the burning ^ (objects), amongst those that wish for
good works and make offerings the assembly (sam-
gha) indeed is the principal.’ (569)

Then Bhagavat, having delighted Kewiya, the
6^a2fila, with these stanzas, rose from (his) seat and
went away.

Then the venerable Sela together with his as-
sembly leading a solitary, retired, strenuous, ardent,
energetic life, lived after having in a short time in
this existence by his own understanding ascertained
and possessed himself of that highest perfection of a
religious life for the sake of which men of good
family rightly wander away from their houses to a
houseless state ; ‘ birth (had been) destroyed, a reli-
gious life (had been) led, what was to be done (had
been) done, there was nothing else (to be done) for
this existence,’ so he perceived, and the venerable
Sela together with his assembly became one of the
saints.

Then the venerable Sela together with his as-
sembly went to Bhagavat, and having gone (to him)
he put his upper robe on one shoulder, and bending
his joined hands towards Bhagavat he addressed
him in stanzas :

23. ‘Because we took refuge in thee on the eighth
day previous to this, O thou clearly-seeing, in seven
nights, O Bhagavat, we have been trained in thy
doctrine. (57o)

‘ SSvitd /f^andaso ^mukhaOT. * Comp. Nalakasutta, v. 42.

* Adi^^o .tapataw mukhaw.

SALLASUTTA.

TO5

24. ‘ Thou art Buddha, thou art the Master, thou
art the Muni that conquered Mira, thou hast, after
cutting off the affections, crossed over (the stream
of existence) and taken over these beings. (571)

25. ‘The elements of existence (upadhi) have been

overcome by thee, the passions have been destroyed
by thee, thou art a lion not seizing on anything, thou
hast left behind fear and danger. (572)

26. ‘ These three hundred Bhikkhus stand here

with clasped hands ; stretch out thy feet, O hero, let
the Nagas worship the Master’s feet.’ ( 573 )

Selasutta is ended.

8. SALLASUTTA.

Life is short, all mortals are subject to death, but knowing the
terms of the world the wise do not grieve, and those who have
left sorrow will be blessed. — Text in the Dasaratha-GrStaka,
P- 34-

1. Without a cause and unknown is the life of

mortals in this world, troubled and brief, and com-
bined with pain. (574)

2. For there is not any means by which those

that have been born can avoid dying ; after reaching
old age there is death, of such a nature are living
beings. (575)

3. As ripe fruits are early in danger of falling,

so mortals when born are always in danger of

death. (57^)

4. As all earthen vessels made by the potter end

in being broken, so is the life of mortals. (577)

5. Both young and grown-up men, both those who
are fools and those who are wise men, all fall into
the power of death, all are subject to death. (578)

io6

MAHAVAGGA.

6. Of those who, overcome by death, go to the

other world, a father does not save his son, nor rela-
tives their relations. (579)

7. Mark! while relatives are looking on and lament-

ing greatly, one by one of the mortals is carried off,
like an ox that is going to be killed. (S^o)

8. So the world is afflicted with death and decay,

therefore the wise do not grieve, knowing the terms
of the world. (581)

9. For him, whose way thou dost not know, either

when he is coming or when he is going, not seeing
both ends, thou grievest in vain. (5^2)

10. If he who grieves gains anything, (although

he is only) a fool hurting himself, let the wise man,
do the same. (5^3)

11. Not from weeping nor from grieving will any
one obtain peace of mind ; (on the contrary), the
greater his pain will be, and his body will suffer. (584)

12. He will be lean and pale, hurting himself by

himself, (and yet) the dead are not kept alive \
lamentation (therefore) is of no avail. (58 5)

13. He who does not leave grief behind, goes

(only) deeper into pain ; bewailing the dead he
falls into the power of grief. (5^6)

14. Look at others passing away, men that go (to

what they deserve) according to their deeds, beings
trembling already here, after falling into the power
of death. (587)

15. In whatever manner people think (it will come

to pass), different from that it becomes, so great is
the disappointment “ (in this world); see, (such are)
the terms of the world. (588)

' Na ySpenti na taw tes^w upaMrdya hoti. Commentator.

® Et&diso vinSbMvo.

VASErraASUTTA.

107

1 6. Even if a man lives a hundred years or even
more, he is at last separated from the company of
his relatives, and leaves life in this world. (589)

1 7. Therefore let one, hearing (the words of) the

saint, subdue his lamentation; seeing the one that
has passed away and is dead, (let him say) : ‘ He will
not be found by me (any more).’ (590)

1 8. As a house on fire is extinguished by water,

.so also the wise, sensible, learned, clever man rapidly
drives away sorrow that has arisen, as the wind a
tuft of cotton. (59 0

19. He who seeks his own happiness should draw

out his arrow (which is) his lamentation, and com-
plaint, and grief. (59^)

20. He who has drawn out the arrow and is not
dependent (on anything), he, having obtained peace
of mind, (and) having overcome all sorrow, will be-
come free from sorrow, and blessed (nibbuta). (593)

Sallasutta is ended.

9. VASErZiYASUTTA.

A dispute arose between two young men, Bharadv^^aand Vase///^a,
the former contending man to be a Brahmawa by birth, the latter
by deeds. They agreed to go and ask Sama«a Gotama, and he
answered that man is a Brahma«a by his work only. The two
young men are converted. — Text (from Ma^^/^imaniktya) and
translation in Alwis's Buddhist Nirvana, p. 103.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at I-^/C’/zanawkala, in
the H/C’/^inawkala forest. At that time many dis-
tinguished, wealthy Brahmawas lived, at I/§i- 4 anaw-
kala, as the Brahmawa ATawkin, the Brahmawa
[10] Q

io8

MAHAVAGGA.

Tanikkha, the Brahmaj^a Pokkharasiti, the Brih-
ma;2a 6^ariusso?2i, the Brihmaj^a Todeyya, and other
distinguished, wealthy Brihma^as.

Then this dialogue arose between the young men
V^selikdi and Bhiradvi^ while walking about :

‘ How does one become a Brdhma:^a? ’

The young man Bharadvi^a said ; ‘ When one
is noble by birth on both sides, on the mother’s and
on the father’s side, of pure conception up to the
seventh generation of ancestors, not discarded and
not reproached in point of birth, in this way one is
a Brahmawa.’

The young man Vise/if/^a said : ‘ When one is
virtuous and endowed with (holy) works, in this way
he is a Brahmawa.’

Neither could the young man Bh^radv^^ con-
vince the young man V^se/Ma, nor could the young
man Vdse///i?a convince the young man Bhdradv^^a.
Then the young man Vase^'^'/^a addressed the young
man Bharadv^'a : ‘ O BhS.radv^^, this Samaria
Gotama, the Sakya son, gone out from the Sakya
family, dwells at I/^-f’Mnawkala, in the forest of
I/^i/iana/;fkala, and the following good praising words
met the venerable Gotama : “ And so he is Bha-
gavat, the venerable, the enlightened, the glorious,
let us go, O venerable Bharadv^^a, let us go (to
the place) where the Sama;ea Gotama is, and having
gone there let us ask the Samaria Gotama about
this matter, and as the Sama^za Gotama replies so
will we understand it.” '

‘ Very well, O venerable one ; ’ so the young man
Bhdradv^^a answered the young man Vdsez'^/^a.

Then the young men Vise///za and Bhtodv^fa
went (to the place) where Bhagavat was, and having

VASErraASUTTA.

109

gone, they talked pleasantly with Bhagavat, and
after having had some pleasant and remarkable con-
versation (with him) they sat down apart. Sitting
down apart the young man V^se//^a addressed Bha-
gavat in stanzas :

1. ‘We are accepted and acknowledged masters
of the three Vedas, I am (a pupil) of Pokkharasiti,
and this young man is (the pupil) of Tdrukkha. (594)

2. ‘ We are accomplished in all the knowledge

propounded by those who are acquainted with the
three Vedas, we are padakas (versed in the metre),
veyydkara?2as (grammarians ?), and equal to our
teachers in recitation (^appa)h (595)

3. ‘ We have a controversy regarding (the distinc-

tions of) birth, O Gotama ! Bh^radvi^a says, one
is a Br^hma^^a by birth, and I say, by deeds • know
this, O thou clearly-seeing ! (59b)

4. ‘We are both unable to convince each other,

(therefore) we have come to ask thee (who art) cele-
brated as perfectly enlightened. (597)

5. ‘As people adoring the full moon worship (her)

with uplifted clasped hands, so (they worship) Gotama
in the world. (59^)

6. ‘We ask Gotama who has come as an eye to

the world: Is a man a Br^hma^za by birth, or is he so
by deeds ? Tell us who do not know, that we may
know a Brdhma?za.’ (599)

7. ‘ I will explain to you, O V&se//-^a,’ — so said
Bhagavat, — ‘in due order the exact distinction of

^ Tevi^^anaw* yad akkhata?^

Tatra kevalino 'smase,

Padak’ asma veyyakarana
d^appet ^/^ariyasadM.

■* Tevi^^&naw = tivedSnaw. Commentator j but compare v. 63.

+ d?appe « vede. Commentator.

Q 2

no

mahAvagga.

living beings according to species, for their species
are manifold. (600)

8. ‘Know ye the grass and the trees, although they
do not exhibit (it), the marks that constitute species
are for them, and (their) species are manifold. (601)

9. ‘Then (know ye) the worms, and the moths,

and the different sorts of ants, the marks that con-
stitute species are for them, and (their) species are
manifold. . (602)

10. ‘Know ye also the four-footed (animals), small

and great, the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold. (603)

11. ‘Know ye also the serpents, the long-backed

snakes, the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold. (604)

1 2. ‘ Then know ye also the fish which range in

the water, the marks that constitute species are for
them, and (their) species are manifold. (605)

13. ‘Then know ye also the birds that are borne

along on wings and move through the air, the marks
that constitute species are for them, and (their) spe-
cies are manifold. (606)

14. As in these species the marks that constitute

species are abundant, so in men the marks that con-
stitute species are not abundant. (607)

15. Not as regards their hair, head, ears, eyes,

mouth, nose, lips, or brows, (608)

16. ‘ Nor as regards their neck, shoulders,
belly, back, hip, breast, female organ, sexual inter-

(609)

17. ‘Nor as regards their hands, feet, palms,
nails, calves, thighs, colour, or voice are there marks
that constitute species as in other species. (610)

18. Difference there is in beings endowed with

VASErriyASUTTA.

Ill

bodies, but amongst men this is not the case, the
difference amongst men is nominal (only) h (6ii)

19. ‘For whoever amongst men lives by cow-

keeping,— know this, O Vase//^a, — he is a husband-
man, not a Br4hma;2a. (612)

20. ‘ And whoever amongst men lives by dif-

ferent mechanical arts, — know this, O Vase/Ma, —
he is an artisan, not a Br4hma;2a. (bis)

21. ‘And whoever amongst men lives by trade, —

know this, O Vase^/-^a, — he is a merchant, not a
Br^hma;^a. (614)

22. ‘And whoever amongst men lives by serving

others, — know this, O Vise//-^a, — -he is a servant,
not a Brihma^^ia. (615)

23. ‘And whoever amongst men lives by theft, —

know this, O VtsQ.itkdL , — he is a thief, not a Brdh-
ma^a.. (6 1 6)

24. ‘And whoever amongst men lives by archery,

— know this, O Vase//f^a, — he ils a soldier, not a
Brahmawa. (6 1 7)

25. ‘And whoever amongst men lives by per-
forming household ceremonials, — know this, O Va-
aottha , — he is a sacrificer, not a Br^hma^^a. (6 1 8)

26. ‘And whoever amongst men possesses villages

and countries, — know this, O Vase///^a, — he is a king,
not a Brdhma/^a. (di9)

27. ‘And I do not call one a Brihmawa on account
of his birth or of his origin from (a particular)
mother ; he may be called bhovadi, and he may be
wealthy, (but) the one who is possessed of nothing

^ Pa^iX’attaw sasariresu,

Manussesv-etaw na vi^^ati,

Vokaraw kz. manussesu
Samaw/aya pavu/{’/^ati.

I 12

•MAHAVAGGA.

and seizes upon nothing, him I call a Brdh-
ma.na\ (620)

28. ‘Whosoever, after cutting all bonds, does not

tremble, has shaken off (all) ties and is liberated, him
I call a Brdhma;?2a- (621)

29. ‘The man who, after cutting the strap (i. e.

enmity), the thong (1. e. attachment), and the rope
(i. e. scepticism) with all that pertains to it, has
destroyed (all) obstacles (i.e. ignorance), the enlight-
ened (buddha), him I call a Br^hma^a. (622)

30. ‘ Whosoever, being innocent, endures reproach,

blows, and bonds, the man who is strong in (his)
endurance and has for his array this strength, him
I call a Brihma^a. (623)

31. ‘The man who is free from anger, endowed

with (holy) works, virtuous, without desire, sub-

dued, and wearing the last body, him I call a Brih-
mctna. (624)

32. ‘The man who, like water on a lotus leaf, or a
mustard seed on the point of a needle, does not cling
to sensual pleasures, him I call a Brahma?ia. (625)

33. ‘ The man who knows in this world the de-

struction of his pain, who has laid aside (his) burden,
and is liberated, him I call a Brahmawa. (626)

34. ‘ The man who has a profound understanding,

who is wise, who knows the true way and the wrong
way, who has attained the highest good, him I call
a Brahmawa. (627)

35. ‘ The man who does not mi?c with householders

nor with the houseless, who wanders about without
a house, and who has few wants, him I call a Br^h-
ma?^a. (628)

36. ‘Whosoever, after refraining from hurting

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 39^, &c.

VASErrJ7ASUTTA.

II3

(living) creatures, (both) those that tremble and
those that are strong, does not kill or cause to be
killed, him I call a Br^hma^a. (629)

37. ‘The man who is not hostile amongst the
hostile, who is peaceful amongst the violent, not
seizing (upon anything) amongst those that seize
(upon everything), him I call a Brahma^^a. (630)

38. ‘ The man whose passion and hatred, arrogance
and hypocrisy have dropt like a mustard seed from
the point of a needle, him I call a Brahma^za. (631)

39. ‘The man that utters true speech, instructive
and free from harshness, by which he does not
offend any one, him I call a Brahmai^a. (632)

40. ‘ Whosoever in the world does not take what
has not been given (to him), be it long or short, small
or large, good or bad, him I call a Brahmaj’2a. (633)

41. ‘The man who has no desire for this world

or the next, who is desireless and liberated, him
1 call a Brahma?2a. (634)

42. ‘ The man who has no desire, who through his
knowledge is free from doubt, and has attained the
depth of immortality, him I call a Brahma^ea. (635)

43. ‘Whosoever in this world has overcome good
and evil, both ties, who is free from grief and defile-
ment, and is pure, him I call a Brahma;2a. (636)

44. ‘ The man that is stainless like the moon,

pure, serene, and undisturbed, who has destroyed
joy, him I call a Br4hma;2a. (^ 37 )

45. ‘ Whosoever has passed over this quagmire

difficult to pass, (who has passed over) revolution
(sa;;^sira) and folly, who has crossed over, who has
reached the other shore, who is meditative, free
from desire and doubt, calm without seizing (upon
anything), him I call a Br^hma^ia. (^3^)

114

mahavagga.

46. 'Whosoever in this world,

sensual pleasures, wanders about houseless, and
has destroyed the existence of sensual pleasures
(kdmabhava), him I call a Brahma«a. ^

47. • Whosoever in this world, after abandoning
craving, wanders about houseless, and has destroyed
the existence of desire (ta;*abhava), him I call a

48. ' Whosoever, after leaving human attachmll
(yoga), has overcome divine attachment, and is
liberated from all attachment, him I call a Brih
ma;2a.

49- The man that, after leaving pleasure ^ atid
disgust,^ IS calm and free from the elements of exist-
ence (nirupadhi), who is a hero, and has conquered
all the world, him I call a Br4hma«a. (642)

50. ‘ Whosoever knows wholly the vanishing and
reappearance of beings, does not cling to (anything)

BrahmaL him I call a

neither gods nor Gm-
habbas nor men know, and whose passions are de-
stroyed, who is a saint, him I call a Brahma«a. (644)

before nor after

TcalU BrSimtm. anything), him

is fni'in'elt " “"‘daunted like a) bull, who

54- The man who knows his former dwellhits^

Siro^'f^r; “■* s

estruction of births, him I call a Brahma«a. (647)

VASErrFASUTTA.

1^5

55. ‘For what has been designated as “name”
g^nd “ family ” in the world is only a term, what has
been designated here and there is understood by

common consent. (^4^)

56. ‘Adhered to for a long time are the views of
the ignorant, the ignorant tell us, one is a Br^hma^za

by birth. ^ (^49)

57. ‘ Not by birth is one a Brahma^a, nor is one
by birth no Brahma/ea ; by work (kammand) one is
a Brdhma^za, by work one is no Brahma^^a. (650)

58. ‘By work one is a husbandman, by work one
is an artisan, by work one is a merchant, by work
one is a servant.

59. ‘ By work one is a thief, by work one is a

soldier, by work one is a sacriflcer, by work one is
a king. ^ (^5 2)

60. ‘ So the wise, who see the cause of things and
understand the result of work, know this work as

it really is. (^53)

61. ‘ By work the world exists, by work mankind

exists, beings are bound by work as the Hnch-pin
of the rolling cart (keeps the wheel on). (^54)

62. ‘ By penance, by a religious life, by self-restraint,

and by temperance, by this one is a Brahma;^a, such
a one (they call) the best Brahma^^a. (^55)

63. ‘He who is endowed with the threefold
knowledge, is calm, and has destroyed regenera-
tion,— know this, O Vase/Z/^a,— he is to the wise
Brahman and $akka.’

This having been said, the young men Vdse/Ma
and Bhiradvafa spoke to Bhagavat as follows :

‘ It is excellent, O venerable Gotama! It is excellent,

O venerable Gotama ! As one raises what has been
overthrown, or reveals what has been hidden, or

ii6

MAHAVAGGA.

tells the way to him who has gone astray, or holds
out an oil lamp in the dark that those who have eyes
may see the objects, even so by the venerable Go-
tama in manifold ways the Dhamma has been illus-
trated ; we take refuge in the venerable Gotama, in
the Dhamma, and in the Assembly of Bhikkhiis ;
may the venerable Gotama receive us as followers
(upasaka), who from this day for life have taken
refuge (in him).’

Vase//;^asutta is ended.

10. kokAliyasutta.

KoHlija abuses Sariputta and MoggaMna to Buddha; therefore
as soon as he has left Buddha, he is struck with boils, dies and
goes to the Paduma hell, -whereupon Buddha describes to the
Bhikkhus the punishment of backbiters in hell.

So it was heard by me :

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at Savatthl, in
C^etavana, in the park of Anathapli^^rfika. Then
the Bhikkhu Kokaliya approached Bhagavat, and
after having approached and saluted Bhagavat he
sat down apart; sitting down apart the Bhikkhu
Kokiliya said this to Bhagavat ; ‘ O thou venerable
one, Sariputta and Moggalldna have evil desires;
they have fallen into the power of evil desires.'

When this had been said, Bhagavat spoke to the
Bhikkhu Kokd.liya as follows: ‘(Do) not (say) so.
Kokd.liya; (do) not (say) so, Kokiliya ; appease, O
Kokaliya, (thy) mind in regard to Siriputta and
Moggall^na: Siriputta and Moggallana are amiableh’

^ Pesalt ti piyasild. Commentator.

KOKALIYASUTTA.

I 17

A second time the Bhikkhu Kokaliya said this to
Bhagavat ; ‘ Although thou, O venerable Bhagavat,
(appearest) to me (to be) faithful and trustworthy,
yet Sariputta and Moggallana have evil desires, they
have fallen into the power of evil desires.'

A second time Bhagavat said this to the Bhikkhu
Kokdliya : ‘ (Do) not (say) so, Kokdliya ; (do) not
(say) so, Kokaliya ; appease, O Kokdliya, (thy) mind
in regard to Sdriputta and Moggalldna; Sariputta and
Moggalldna are amiable.’

A third time the Bhikkhu Kokiliya said this to
Bhagavat; ‘Although thou, O venerable Bhagavat,
(appearest) to me (to be) faithful and trustworthy,
yet Sariputta and Moggallana have evil desires,
Sariputta and Moggallana have fallen into the power
of evil desires.’

A third time Bhagavat said this to the Bhikkhu
Kokdliya : ‘(Do) not (say) so, KokMiya; (do) not
(say) so, Kokaliya; appease, O Kokiliya, (thy) mind
in regard to Sariputta and Moggallana; Sariputta
and Moggalldna are amiable.’

Then the Bhikkhu Kokaliya, after having risen
from his seat and saluted Bhagavat and walked
round him towards the right, went away; and when
he had been gone a short time, all his body was
struck with boils as large as mustard seeds ; after
being only as large as mustard seeds, they became
as large as kidney beans ; after being only as large
as kidney beans, they became as large as chick peas ;
after being only as large as chick peas, they became
as large as a KoW//d egg(?); after being only as
large as a Kola///^i egg, they became as large as the
jujube fruit; after being only as large as the jujube
fruit, they became as large as the fruit of the emblic

mahAvagga.

i[8

myrobalan ; after being only as large as the fruit of
the emblic myrobalan, they became as large as the
unripe beluva fruit ; after being only as large as the
unripe beluva fruit, they became as large as a billi
fruit (?) ; after being as large as a billi fruit, they
broke, and matter and blood flowed out. Then
the Bhikkhu KokAliya died of that disease, and when
he had died the Bhikkhu KokAliya went to the
Paduma hell, having shown a hostile mind against
Sariputta and Moggalldna. Then when the night
had passed Brahman Sahampati of a beautiful ap-
pearance, having lit up all 6^etavana, approached
Bhagavat, and having approached and saluted Bha-
gavat, he stood apart, and standing apart Brahman
Sahampati said this to Bhagavat i ‘ O thou venera-
ble one, Kokaliya, the Bhikkhu, is dead ; and after
death, O thou venerable one, the Bhikkhu Kokaliya
IS gone to the Paduma hell, having shown a hostile
mind against Sariputta and Moggalldna.’

This said Brahman Sahampati, and after savins^
this and saluting Bhagavat, and walking round him
towards the right, he disappeared there.

^ Then Bhagavat, after the expiration of that
night, addressed the Bhikkhus thus : ‘ Last night,
O Bhikkhus, when the night had (nearly) passed,
Brahman Sahampati of a beautiful appearance, having
lit up all 6^etavana, approached Bhagavat, and having
approached and saluted Bhagavat, he stood apart,
and standing apart Brahman Sahampati said this to
Bhagavat : O thou venerable one, KokAliya, the
Bhikkhu, is dead ; and after death, O thou venerable
one, the Bhikkhu Kokaliya is gone to the Paduma
hell, having shown a hostile mind against Siriputta
and Moggalldna.” This said Brahman Sahampati, O

kokAliyasutta.

II9

Bhikkhus, and having said this and saluted me, and
walked round me towards the right, he disappeared
there.’

When this had been said, a Bhikkhu asked Bha-
gavat ; ‘How long is the rate of life, O venerable
one, in the Paduma hell ? ’

‘ Long, O Bhikkhu, is the rate of life in the Pa-
duma hell, it is not easy to calculate either (by
saying) so many years or so many hundreds of years
or so many thousands of years or so many hundred
thousands of years.’

‘ But it is possible, I suppose, to make a com-
parison, O thou venerable one ? ’

‘ It is possible, O Bhikkhu;’ so saying, Bhagavat
spoke (as follows) : ‘ Even as, O Bhikkhu, (if there
w.ere) a Kosala load of sesamum seed containing
twenty khiris, and a man after the lapse of every hun-
dred years were to take from it one sesamum seed at
a time, then that Kosala load of sesamum seed, con-
taining twenty khiris, would, O Bhikkhu, sooner by
this means dwindle away and be used up than one
Abbuda hell ; and even as are twenty Abbuda hells,
O Bhikkhu, so is one Nirabbuda hell; and even as
are twenty Nirabbuda hells, G Bhikkhu, so is one
Ababa hell ; and even as are twenty Ababa hells,
O Bhikkhu, so is one Ahaha hell; and even as are
twenty Ahaha hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one A/a/a
hell ; and even as are twenty A/a/a hells, O
Bhikkhu, so is one Kumuda hell ; and even as
are twenty Kumuda hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one
Sogandhika hell ; and even as are twenty Sogan-
dhika hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Uppalaka hell;
and even as are twenty Uppalaka hells, O Bhikkhu,
so is one Pu;«^arika hell ; and even as are twenty

120

mahavagga.

Pu»^arika hells, O Bhikkhu, so is one Paduma hell ;
and to the Paduma hell, O Bhikkhu, the Bhikkhu
Kok^liya is gone, having shown a hostile mind
against S^riputta and Moggalldna.’ This said Bha-
gavat, and having said this Sugata, the Master,
furthermore spoke as follows :

1. ‘ To (every) man that is born, an axe is born in

his mouth, by which the fool cuts himself, when
speaking bad language. (657)

2 . ‘He who praises him who is to be blamed, or

blames him who is to be praised, gathers up sin
in his mouth, and through that (sin) he will not find
any joy. ^ ^ (658)

3. ‘Trifling is the sin that (consists in) losing

riches by dice ; this is a greater sin that corrupts
the mind against Sugatas. (^59)

4. ‘ Out of the one hundred thousand Nirabbudas

(he goes) to thirty-six, and to five Abbudas ; because
he blames an Ariya he goes to hell, having employed
his speech and mind badly. (660)

5. ‘He who speaks falsely goes to hell, or he

who having done something says, “ I have not
done it ; ” both these after death become equal, in
another world (they are both) men guilty of a
mean deedh (661)

6. ‘He who offends* an offenceless man, a pure

man, free from sin, such a fool the evil (deed)
reverts against, like fine dust thrown against the
wind, (662)

7. ‘ He who is given to the quality of covetous-

ness, such a one censures others in his speech,
(being himself) unbelieving, stingy, wanting in affa-
bility, niggardly, given to backbiting. (663)

^ Comp, Dhp. V. 306.

“ Comp. Dhp. V. 125.

KOKALIYASUTTA.

I2I

8. ‘ O thou foul-mouthed, false, ignoble, blasting,

wicked, evil-doing, low, sinful, base-born man, do
not be garrulous in this world, (else) thou wilt be
an inhabitant of hell (^64)

9. ‘Thou spreadest pollution to the misfortune
(of others), thou revilest the just, committing sin
(yourself), and having done many evil deeds thou
wilt go to the pool (of hell) for a long time. (665)

10. ‘For one’s deeds are not lost, they will

surely come (back to you), (their) master will meet
with them, the fool who commits sin will feel the
pain in himself in the other world (666)

11. ‘To the place where one is struck with iron

rods, to the iron stake with sharp edges he goes ;
then there is (for him) food as appropriate, resem-
bling a red-hot ball of iron. (667)

12. ‘For those who have anything to say (there)

do not say fine things, they do not approach (with
pleasing faces) ; they do not find refuge (from their
sufferings), they lie on spread embers, they enter
a blazing pyre. (668)

13. ‘ Covering (them) with a net they kill (them)

there with iron hammers; they go to dense dark-
ness ^ for that is spread out like the body of the
earth. (669)

14. ‘Then (they enter) an iron pot, they enter

a blazing pyre, for they are boiled in those (iron
pots) for a long time, jumping up and down in

the pyre. (670)

* Mukhadugga vibhiita-m-anariya
Bhfinahu* p^paka dukkatakSri.

* Comp. Revelation xiv. 1 3.

® Andhaw va Timisaw Syanti.

"■ Bhtoahu bhfitihanaka vuddhinSsaka. Commentator.

122

MAHAVAGGA.

15. 'Then he who commits sin is surely boiled

in a mixture of matter and blood ; whatever quarter
he inhabits, he becomes rotten there from coming
in contact (with matter and blood). (671)

16. ‘He who commits sin will surely be boiled

in the water, the dwelling-place of worms ; there
it is not (possible) to get to the shore, for the jars
(are) even all round. (672)

17. ‘Again they enter the sharp Asipattavana

with mangled limbs ; having seized the tongue
with a hook, the different watchmen (of hell) kill
(them). (673)

18. ‘Then they enter Vetara 72 i, that is difficult

to cross and has got streams of razors with sharp
edges ; there the fools fall in, the evil-doers after
having done evil. (^74)

19. ‘There black, mottled flocks of ravens eat

them who are weeping, and dogs, jackals, great
vultures, falcons, crows tear (them). (675)

20. ‘ Miserable indeed is the life here (in hell)

which the man sees that commits sin. Therefore
should a man in this world for the rest of his life
be strenuous, and not indolent. (676)

21. ‘Those loads of sesamum seed which are

carried in Paduma hell have been counted by the
wise, they are five nahutas of ko^is and twelve
hundred ko/is besides k (677)

22. ‘As long as hells are called painful in this

world, so long people will have to live there for
a long time ; therefore amongst those who have
pure, amiable, and good qualities one should always
guard speech and mind.’ (6 78)

Kokaliyasutta is ended.

k

* That is 512,000,000,000.

NALAKASUTTA.

123

11. nAlakasutta.

The Isi Asita, also called Kawhasiri, on seeing the gods rejoicing,
asks the cause of it, and having heard that Buddha has been
born, he descends from Tusita heaven. When the Sakyas
showed the child to him, he received it joyfully and prophesied
about it. Buddha explains to Nalaka, the sister s son of Asita,
the highest state of wisdom. — Compare Lalita-vistara, Adhyaya
VII ; Asita and Buddha, or the Indian Simeon, by J. Muir, in
the Indian Antiquary, Sept. 1878.

Vat thug atha.

1. The Isi Asita saw in (their) resting-places

during the day the joyful, delighted flocks of the
Tidasa gods, and the gods in bright clothes, always
highly praising Inda, after taking their clothes and
waving them. (679)

2. Seeing the gods with pleased minds, delighted,

and showing his respect, he said this on that occa-
sion : ‘ Why is the assembly of the gods so exceed-
ingly pleased, why do they take their clothes and
wave them ? (680)

3. ‘ When there was an encounter with the Asuras,
a victory for the gods, and the Asuras were defeated,
then there was not such a rejoicing. What wonder-
ful (thing) have the gods seen that they are so de-
lighted ?

4. ‘ They shout and sing and make music, they

throw (about their) arms and dance ; I ask you, the
inhabitants of the tops of (mount) Meru, remove
my doubt quickly, O venerable ones!’ (682)

5. ‘ The Bodhisatta, the excellent pearl, the incom-
parable, is born for the good and for a blessing in
the world of men, in the town of the Sakyas, in

[10] K

124

MAHAVAGGA.

the country of Lumbini. Therefore we are glad
and exceedingly pleased. (683)

6. ‘ He, the most excellent of all beings, the pre-

eminent man, the bull of men, the most excellent of
all creatures will turn the wheel (of the Dhamma) in
the forest called after the Isis, (he who is) like the
roaring lion, the strong lord of beasts.’ (684)

7. Having heard that noise he descended from

(the heaven of) Tusita. Then he went to Suddho-
dana’s palace, and having sat down there he said
this to the Sakyas : ‘ Where is the prince ? I wish to
see (him).’ (685)

8. Then the Sakyas showed to (the I si), called

.Asita, the child, the prince who was like shining
gold, manufactured by a very skilful (smith) in the
mouth of a forge, and beaming in glory and having
a beautiful appearance. (686)

9. Seeing the prince shining like fire, bright like

the bull of stars wandering in the sky, like the
burning sun in autumn, free from clouds, he joyfully
obtained great delight. (687)

10. The gods held in the sky a parasol with a
thousand circles and numerous branches, yaks’ tails
with golden sticks were fanned, but those who held
the yaks’ tails and the parasol were not seen. (688)

11. The Isi with the matted hair, by name Ka?^ha-
siri, on seeing the yellow blankets (shining) like
a golden coin, and the white parasol held over his
head, received him delighted and happy. (689)

12. And having received the bull of the Sakyas,

he who was wishing to receive him and knew the
signs and the hymns, with pleased thoughts raised
his voice, saying : ‘ Without superior is this, the
most excellent of men.’ (690)

NALAKASUTTA.

125

13. Then remembering his own migration he was

displeased and shed tears ; seeing this the Sakyas
asked the weeping Isi, whether there would be any
obstacle in the prince’s path. (691)

14. Seeing the Sakyas displeased the Isi said;

‘ I do not remember anything (that will be) un-
lucky for the prince, there will be no obstacles at
all for him, for this is no inferior (person). Be
without anxiety. (692)

15. ‘This prince will reach the summit of per-
fect enlightenment, he will turn the wheel of the
Dhamma, he who sees what is exceedingly pure (i. e.
Nibb^na),this (prince) feels for the welfare of the mul-
titude, and his religion’ will be widely spread. (693)

1 6. ‘ My life here will shortly be at an end, in
the middle (of his life) there will be death for me ;

I shall not hear the Dhamma of the incomparable
one ; therefore I am afflicted, unfortunate, and suf-
fering.’ (694)

17. Having afforded the Sakyas great joy he

went out from the interior of the palace to lead a
religious life; but taking pity on his sisters son,
he induced him to embrace the Dhamma of the
incomparable one. (695)

18. ‘When thou hearest from others the sound

“ Buddha,” (or) “ he who has acquired perfect en-
lightenment walks the way of the Dhamma,” then
going there and enquiring about the particulars,
lead a religious life with that Bhagavat’ (696)

19. Instructed by him, the friendly-minded, by

one who saw in the future what is exceedingly

pure (i. e. Nibbana), he, Nalaka, with a heap of

^ Brahina-^anyaffz=s^sana/?/. Commentator.
■R 2

A

126

MAHAVAGGA.

gathered-up good works, and with guarded senses
dwelt (with him), looking forward to G^ina (i. e.
Buddha). (^ 97 )

20. Hearing the noise, while the excellent (Gina

turned the w'heel (of the Dhamma), and going and
seeing the bull of the Isis, he, after being converted,
asked the eminent Muni about the best wisdom,
when the time of Asita’s order had come. (698)

The Vatthugathis are ended.

21. ‘These words of Asita are acknowledged

true (by me), therefore we ask thee, O Gotama,
who art perfect in all things (dhamma). (699)

22. ‘O Muni, to me who am houseless, and

who wish to embrace a Bhikkhifs life, explain
when asked the highest state, the state of wisdom
(moneyya).’ (700)

23. ‘I will declare to thee the state of wisdom,’

— so said Bhagavat, — ‘ difficult to carry out, and
difficult to obtain ; come, I will explain it to thee,
stand fast, be firm. (701)

24. ‘ Let a man cultivate equanimity : which is

(both) reviled and praised in the village, let him take
care -not to corrupt his mind, let him live calm,
and without pride, (702)

25. ‘Various (objects) disappear, like a flame

of fire in the wood ; women tempt the Muni, let
them not tempt him. (703)

26. ‘ Let him be disgusted with sexual inter-

course, having left behind sensual pleasures of all
kinds, being inoffensive and dispassionate towards
living creatures, towards anything that is feeble
or strong. (704)

27. ‘As I am so are these, as these are so am

nalakasutta.

127

I, identifying himself with others, let him not kill
nor cause (any one) to killk (705)

28. ‘ Having abandoned desire and covetousness

let him act as one that sees clearly where a common
man sticks, let him cross over this hell. (706)

29. ‘ Let him be with an empty stomach, taking

little food, let him have few wants and not be
covetous ; not being consumed by desire he will
without desire be happy. (707)

30. ‘ Let the Muni, after going about for alms,

repair' to the outskirts of the wood, let him go
and sit down near the root of a tree. {708)

31. ‘ Applying himself to meditation, and being

wise, let him find his pleasure in the outskirts of
the wood, let him meditate at the root of a tree
enjoying himself. (709)

32. ‘ Then when night is passing away let him

repair to the outskirts of the village, let him not
delight in being invited nor in what is brought
away from the village. (710)

33. ‘ Let not the Muni, after going to the village,

walk about to the houses in haste ; cutting off (all)
talk while seeking food, let him not utter any
coherent speech. (7^1)

34. ‘ “ What I have obtained that is good," “ I did

not get (anything that is) good,” so thinking in both
cases he returns to the tree unchanged ^ (7^2)

35. ‘Wandering about with his alms-bowl in his

hand, considered dumb without being dumb, let
him not disregard a little gift, let him not despise
the giver. (f^i)

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 129.

* Tadi=nibbikaro. Commentator.

128

MAHAVAGGA.

36. ‘ Various are the practices illustrated by the

Sama;2a, they do not go twice to the other shore,
this (is) not once thought. (?) (714)

37. ‘For whom there is no desire, for the Bhikkhu
who has cut off the stream (of existence) and aban-
doned all kinds of work, there is no pain. (715)

38. ‘ I will declare to thee the state of wisdom,’ —
so said Bhagavat, — ‘ let one be like the edge of a
rator, having struck his palate with his tongue, let
him be restrained in (regard to his) stomach. (716)

39. ‘ Let his mind be free from attachment, let

him not think much (about worldly affairs), let him
be without defilement, independent, and devoted
to a religious life. (7^7)

40. ‘ For the sake of a solitary life and for the
sake of the service that is to be carried out by
Sama;itas, let him learn, solitariness is called wis-
dom ; alone indeed he will find pleasure. (7t^)

41. ‘Then he will shine through the ten regions,

having heard the voice of the wise, of the medi-
tating, of those that have abandoned sensual plea-
sures, let my adherent then still more devote himself
to modesty and belief. (719)

42. ‘ Understand this from the waters in chasms

and cracks : noisy go the small waters, silent goes
the vast ocean. (72Q)

43. ‘ What is deficient that makes a noise, what is

full that is calm ; the fool is like a half-(filled) water-
pot, the wise is like a full pool, (721)

44. ‘ When the Sama??a speaks much that is pos-
sessed of good sense, he teaches the Dhamma while
knowing it, while knowing it he speaks much. (722)

45. ‘ But he who while knowing it is self-restrained,
and while knowing it does not speak much, such a

dvayatAnupassanAsutta.

129

Muni deserves wisdom (mona), such a Muni has
attained to wisdom (mona).’ (723)

Nalakasutta is ended.

12. dvayatAnupassanAsutta.

All pain in the world arises from upadhi, avi^^^, sawzkhard, vi««a«a,

phassa, vedand, ta«hd, upadana, arambha, ahara, iw^ita, nissaya,

riipa, mosadhamma, sukha.

So it was heard by me ;

At one time Bhagavat dwelt at SAvatthi in Pub-
bArAma, MigaramAtar’s mansion. At that time
Bhagavat on the Uposatha day\ on the fifteenth,
it being full moon, in the evening was sitting in the
open air, surrounded by the assembly of Bhikkhus.
Then Bhagavat surveying the silent assembly of
Bhikkhus addressed them (as follows) :

‘ Whichever Dhammas there are, O Bhikkhus,
good, noble, liberating, leading to perfect enlighten-
ment, — what is the use to you of listening to these
good, noble, liberating Dhammas, leading to perfect
enlightenment ? If, O Bhikkhus, there should be
people that ask so, they shall be answered thus :
Yes, for the right understanding of the two Dham-
mas.’ ‘ Which two do you mean ? ’ ‘ (I mean), “ this
is pain, this is the origin of pain,” this is one con-
sideration, “ this is the destruction of pain, this is
the way leading to the destruction of pain,” this is
the second consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the
Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly ^ is stre-

‘ See Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 140.

* . . . kd upanisd savandya ’ti iti X’e bhikkhave pu/d’(^itdro assu te

130

MAHAVAGGA.

nuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to
be expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or,
if any of the (five) attributes still remain, the state
of an Andgdmin (one that does not return).’ This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

1. ‘Those who do not understand pain and the

origin of pain, and where pain wholly and totally
is stopped, and do not know the way that leads to
the cessation of pain, (724)

2. ‘ They, deprived of the emancipation of thought

and the emancipation of knowledge, are unable to
put an end (to sa^^sira), they will verily continue to
undergo birth and decay. (725)

3. ‘ And those who understand- pain and the

origin of pain, and where pain wholly and totally is
stopped, and who know the way that leads to the
cessation of pain, (726)

4. ‘ They, endowed with the emancipation of

thought and the emancipation of knowledge, are
able to put an end (to sa 772 s§.ra), they will not
undergo birth and decay. (727)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the upadhis (elements of existence),”
this is one consideration, “but from the complete
destruction of the upadhis, through absence of pas-

evam assu va-feniya: yavad eva dvayatana?/^ dhammSnazi'z yatha-
bh<itaOT niftiyi ’li, ki/7/’a dvayataw vadetha ? ‘ idzm dukkhaw, aya»*
dukkhasamudayo ’ ti ayani ekanupassani, ‘ayam dukkhanirodho,
ayaw dukkhanirodhag^mint pa/ipada’ ti' ayam dutiydnupassanS ;
cvam sammadvayatanupassino ...

DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA. 1 3 1

sion, there is no origin of pain,” this is the second
consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu
that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous,
ardent-, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be
expected ; in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any
of the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an
Anagdmin (dne that does not return)/ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

5. ‘ Whatever pains there are in the world, of
many kinds, they arise having their cause in the
upadhis ; he who being ignorant creates upadhi, that
fool again undergoes pain ; therefore being wise do
not create upadhi, considering what is the birth and

origin of pain. (728)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus> there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is ; “ Whatever pain arises is all in conse-
quence of nvi^^d (ignorance), this is one consider"
ation, “ but from the complete destruction of avi^^a,
through absence of passion, there is no origin of pain,”
this is the second consideration , thus, O Bhikkhus,
by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad duly, that is
strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is
to be expected: in this world perfect knowledge, or,
if any of the (fiye) attributes still remain, the state
of an Andg^min (one that does not return).’ _ This
said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

6 . ‘ Those who again and again go to sa??2sara
with birth and death, to existence dn^ this way or
in that way, — that is the state of avi^^a. {729)

7. ‘ For this avi^/^ is th6 great folly by which

132

mahAvagga.

this (existence) has been traversed Jong, but those

beings who resort to knowledge do not go to re
birth. ^ ^

Should there be a perfect consideration of the
b>yad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
peop e that ask so, they shall be told, there is
and how there is ; “ Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of the sas^khdras (matter),” this is
one consideration, “ but from the complete destruc-
tmn of the sa;;.kharas, through absence of passion
there is no origin of pain.” this is the second
considerauon ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu
that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous,
ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be
expected: in this world perfect knowledge, or if
any of the ^(five) attributes still remain, the stkte
ot an AnAgimin (one that does not return).’ This
^id Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the

Master further spoke:

8 ‘Whatever pain arises is all in consequence
of the sMras. by the destruction of the sa*«-
kharas there will be no origin of pain. (73,)

9 . ‘ Looking upon this pain that springs from the
^**1 misery, from the cessation of all the

destruction of conscious-

under of pain, having

understood this exactly, (7 '^2)

accomplished having understood (all things) com-
P etely and having conquered all association with
Mara, do not go to re-birth.

^ perfect consideration of the
P pie that ask so, they shall be told, there is.

DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA .

and how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of v\nn^n 2 L (consciousness),” this is
one consideration, “but from the complete destruc-
tion of vmnkn 2 .y through absence of passion, there
is no origin of pain,” this is the second consider-
ation ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that
considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected ;
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an An^-
gamin (one that does not return).' This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

11. ‘Whatever pain arises is all in consequence

of vi«wd«a, by the destruction of there is

no origin of pain. (734)

12 . ‘ Looking upon this pain that springs from

as misery, from the cessation of vinn^n 2 i
a Bhikkhu free from desire (will be) perfectly happy
(parinibbuta). (735)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another waj^” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is ; “ Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of phassa (touch),” this is one con-
sideration, “ but from the complete destruction of
phassa, through absence of passion, there is no
origin of pain,” this is the second consideration ;
thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute,
of two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five)
attributes still remain, the state of an Anigamin
(one that does not return).’ This- said Bhagavat.

134

MAHAVAGGA.

(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke :

13. ‘ For those who are ruined by phassa,
who follow the stream of existence, who have
entered a bad way, the destruction of bonds is
far off.

14. ‘But those who, having fully understood
phassa, knowingly have taken delight in cessation,
they verily from the destruction of phassa h and
being free from desire, are perfectly happy. (737)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the vedands (sensations),” this is one
consideration, “ but from the complete destruction
of the yedands, through absence of passion, there is
no ori^n of pain, ’ this is the second consideration ;
thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute,
o two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five)
attribiites still remain, the state of an An^^min
(one that does not return).’ This said Bhagavat,

(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke :

15- ‘Pleasure or pain, together with want of
peasure and want of pain, whatever is perceived
internally and externally,

16 . ‘ Looking upon this as pain, having touched
what IS perishable and fragile, seeing the decay
(of everyth ing), the Bhikkhu is disgusted, having

Phassanirodha. Commentator.

dvayatanupassanAsutta,

135

from the perishing of the vedanis become free from
desire, and perfectly happy h (739)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhiis, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of tawhA (craving),” this is one con-
sideration, “but from the complete destruction of
tanh^, through absence of passion, there is no origin
of pain,” this is the second consideration ; thus,
O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the
Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of
two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an AnigAmin (one that
does not return).’ This said Bhagavat, (and) when
Sugata had said this, the Master further spoke :

17. ‘A man accompanied by tanha, for a long

time transmigrating into existence in this way or
that -way, does not overcome transmigration {sam-
sAra). (740)

18. ‘Looking upon this as misery, this origin of

the pain of tanhA, let the Bhikkhu free from tanhSi,
not seizing (upon anything), thoughtful, wander
about. (741)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of the upidAnas (the seizures),” this
is one consideration, “but from the complete destruc-

‘ Mosadhamman ti nassanadhammaOT palokinan ti j^'ardmara/zehi
palii^^anadhammaw. Commentator ; see my Glossary.

136

MAHAVAGGA.

tion of the upad^nas, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain,” this is the second con-
sideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that
considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an Ana-
g^min (one that does not return).’ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

19. ‘The existence is in consequence of the

upddinas ; he who has come into existence goes to
pain, he who has been born is to die, this is the
origin of pain. (742)

20. ‘ Therefore from the destruction of the

upadanas the wise with perfect knowledge, having
seen (what causes) the destruction of birth, do not
go to re-birth. (743)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is ; “ Whatever pain arises is all in
consequence of the irambhas (exertions),” this is
one consideration, “ but from the complete destruc-
tion of the drambhas, through absence of passion,
there is no origin of pain,” this is the second con-
sideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that
considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an And-
gamin (one that does not return).’ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

dvayatAnupassanAsutta.

137

21. ‘Whatever pain arises is all in consequence

of the Arambhas, by the destruction of the drambhas
there is no origin of painh (744)

22, 23. ‘ Looking upon this pain that springs

from the drambhas as misery, having abandoned
all the Arambhas, birth and transmigration have
been crossed over by the Bhikkhu who is liberated
in non-exertion, who has cut off the craving for
existence, and whose mind is calm ; there is for
him no re-birth. (745> 74^)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the aharas (food ?),” this is one consi-
deration, “ but from the complete destruction of the
^hiras, through absence of passion, there is no origin
of pain/’ this is the second consideration; thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad
duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits
one fruit is to be expected : in this world perfect
knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still
remain, the state of an AnAgamin (one that does
not return).’ This said Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata
had said this, the Master further spoke :

24. ‘ Whatever pain arises is all in consequence

of the aharas, by the destruction of the aharas there
is no origin of pain. (747)

25. ‘ Looking upon this pain that springs from the

^h^ras as misery, having seen the result of all aharas,
not resorting to all aharas, (74^)

^ Arambhapa-^/^aya ti Kammapayuttaviriyappa^’/^'aya anararnbhe
vimuttino ti anararnbhe nibbane vimultassa . . . aharappa^^ay^ ti
kammasampayuttaharupa/J/^ayS. Commentator.

138

mahAvagga.

26. ‘ Having seen that health is from the destruc-

tion of desire., he that serves discriminatingly and
stands fast in the Dhamma cannot be reckoned as
existing, being accomplished h (749)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,, and
how there is : “ Whatever pain arises is all in con-
sequence of the i/^^itas (commotions),” this is one
consideration, “but from the complete destruction of
the i^ 7 /itas, through absence of passion, there is no
origin of pain,” this is the second consideration ; thus,
O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers the Dyad
duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two fruits
one fruit is to be expected : in this world perfect
knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes still
remain, the state of an Anigimin (one that does
not return).’ This said Bhagavat, (and) when Su-
gata had said this, the Master further spoke :

27. ‘ Whatever pain arises is all in consequence of

the destruction of the i/ 7 ^itas there is

no origin of pain. ( 75 ©)

28. ‘ Looking upon this pain that springs from
the iw^itas as misery, and therefore having aban-
doned the i^/f'itas and having stopped the sawkhdras,
let the Bhikkhu free from desire and not seizing
(upon anything), thoughtful, wander about. (751)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is: “For the nissita (dependent) there
is vacillation,” this is one consideration, “the inde-

^ Sawkha/w nopeti vedagQ.

DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA.

139

pendent (man) does not vacillate/’ this is the second
consideration ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu
that considers the Dyad duly, that is strenuous,
ardent, resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be
expected : in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any
of the (five) attributes still remain, the state of an
Andgamin (one that does not return).’ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

29. ‘ The independent (man) does not vacillate, and
the dependent (man) seizing upon existence in one
way or in another, does not overcome sa^^sto. (752)

30. ‘ Looking upon this as misery (and seeing)

great danger in things you depend upon, let a
Bhikkhu wander about independent, not seizing
(upon anything), thoughtful. (753)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : “ The formless (beings), O Bhikkhus,
are calmer than the rfipas (for ruppa, i. e. form-pos-
sessing),” this is one consideration, “ cessation is
calmer than the formless,” this is another considera-
tion ; thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that con-
siders the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent,
resolute, of two fruits one fruit is to be expected :
in this world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the
(five) attributes still remain, the state of an Ani-
g^min (one that does not return)/ This said
Bhagavat, (and) when Sugata had said this, the
Master further spoke :

31. ‘Those beings who are possessed of form,
and those who dwell in the formless (world), not
knowing cessation, have to go to re-birth. (754)

[10] s

T 40

MAHAVAGGA.

32. ‘ But those who, having fully comprehended

the forms, stand fast in the formless (worlds), those
who are liberated in the cessation, such beings leave
death behind. (755)

‘ “ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is,
and how there is : “ What has been considered true
by the world of men, together with the gods, Mdra,
Brahman, and amongst the Samaj>2as, Brdhma?2as,
gods, and men, that has by the noble through their
perfect knowledge been well seen to be really false,”
this is one consideration ; “ what, O Bhikkhus, has
been considered false by the world of men, together
with the gods, Mdra, Brahman, and amongst the
Sama^zas, Brihmazzas, gods, and men, that has by
the noble through their perfect knowledge been well
seen to be really true,” this is another consideration.
Thus, O Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu that considers
the Dyad duly, that is strenuous, ardent, resolute,
of two fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this
world perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five)
attributes still remain, the state of an Andgdmin
(one that does not return).’ This said Bhagavat,
(and) when Sugata had said this, the Master further
spoke :

33. ‘Seeing the real in the unreal, the world of

men and gods dwelling in name and form b he
thinks : “ This is true.” (75^)

34. ‘ Whichever way they think (it), it becomes

otherwise, for it is perishable to him, and what is
perishable is wretched. {?) (757)

Namar{ipasmiz«, Mndividuality.'

DVAYATANUPASSANASUTTA.

141

35. ‘ What is not perishable, the Nibbana, that

the noble conceive as true, they verily from the com-
prehension of truth are free from desire (and) per-
fectly happy. (758)

‘ Should there be a perfect consideration of the
Dyad in another way,” if, O Bhikkhus, there are
people that ask so, they shall be told, there is, and
how there is : “ What, O Bhikkhus, has been con-
sidered pleasure by the world of men, gods, M^ra,
Brahman, and amongst the Samaw.as, Brahma;>2as,
gods, and men, that has by the noble by (their)
perfect knowledge been well seen to be really pain,”
this is one consideration ; “ what, O Bhikkhus, has
been considered pain by the world of men, gods,
Mdra, Brahman, and amongst the Sama^^as, Brah-
ma/2as, gods, and men, that has by the noble by
their perfect knowledge been well seen to be really
pleasure,” this is the second consideration. Thus, O
Bhikkhus, by the Bhikkhu who considers the Dyad
duly, who is strenuous, ardent, resolute, of two
fruits one fruit is to be expected : in this world
perfect knowledge, or, if any of the (five) attributes
still remain, the state of an Anagamin (one who
does not return).’ This said Bhagavat, (and) when
Sugata had said so, the Master further spoke :

36. ‘ Form, sound, taste, smell, and touch are all

wished for, pleasing and charming (things) as long
as they last, so it is said. (759)

37. ‘By you, by the world of men and gods these

(things) are deemed a pleasure, but when they cease
it is deemed pain by them. (760)

38. ‘ By the noble the cessation of the existing
body is regarded as pleasure ; this is the opposite
of (what) the wise in all the world (hold). (761)

142

MAHAVAGGA.

39. ‘ What fools say is pleasure that the noble
say is pain, what fools say is pain that the noble
know as pleasure : — see here is a thing difficult to
understand, here the ignorant are confounded. (762)

40. ' For those that are enveloped there is gloom,

for those that do not see there is darkness, and for
the good it is manifest, for those that see there
is light ; (even being) near, those that are ignorant
of the way and the Dhamma, do not discern (any-
thing). (763)

41. ‘By those that are overcome by the passions
of existence, by those that follow the stream of
existence, by those that have entered the realm of
Mdra, this Dhamma is not perfectly understood. (764)

42. ‘ Who except the noble deserve the well

understood state (of Nibbdna) ? Having perfectly
conceived this state, those free from passion are
completely extinguished.’ (765)

This spoke Bhagavat. Glad those Bhikkhus
rejoiced at the words of Bhagavat. While this
explanation was being given, the minds of sixty
Bhikkhus, not seizing (upon anything), were libe-
rated.

Dvayat^nupassanisutta is ended.

Mahdvagga, the third.

IV. A^TiVAKAVAGGA.

1 . kAmasutta.

Sensual pleasures are to be avoided.

1. If he who desires sensual pleasures is success-

ful, he certainly becomes glad-minded, having ob-
tained what a mortal wishes for. (766)

2. But if those sensual pleasures fail the person

who desires and wishes (for them), he will suffer,
pierced by the arrow (of pain). (767)

3. He who avoids sensual pleasures as (he would

avoid treading upon) the head of a snake with his
foot, such a one, being thoughtful (sato), will conquer
this desire. (7^8)

4. He who covets extensively (such) pleasures (as

these), fields, goods, or gold, cows and horses, ser-
vants, women, relations, (769)

5. Sins will overpower him, dangers will crush

him, and pain will follow him as w^ater (pours into)
a broken ship. . (77o)

6. Therefore let one always be thoughtful, and

avoid pleasures ; having abandoned them, let him
cross the stream, after baling out the ship, and go to
the other shore. (77 1)

KAmasutta is ended.

144

A7T//AKAVACGA.

2. GUHArr/MKASUTTA.

Let no one ding to existence and sensual pleasures.

1. A man that lives adhering to the cave (i.e. the

body), who is covered with much (sin), and sunk
into delusion, such a one is far from seclusion, for
the sensual pleasures in the world are not easy to
abandon. (772)

2. Those whose wishes are their motives, those
who are linked to the pleasures of the world, they
are difficult to liberate, for they cannot be liberated
by others, looking for what is after or what is

before, coveting these and former sensual plea-
sures. ; ,

(jj'i)

3- 1 hose who are greedy of, given to, and infa-

tuatec by sensual pleasures, those who are niggardly,
they, having entered upon what is wicked, wad when
they are subjected to pain, saying : ‘ What will become
ot us, when we die away from here ? ' (774)

4- T herefore let a man here ^ learn, whatever hte

knows as wicked in the world, let him not for the
sa e o that {?) practise (what is) wicked^; for short
IS tins life, say the wise. (775)

5. I see in the world this trembling race given

to desire for existences ; tliey are wretched men who
ament in the mouth of deatli, not being free from
t te craving for reiterated existences. (776)

6. Look upon those men trembling in selfishness,

‘ e fish in a sb-eam nearly dried up, with little

water, seeing this, let one wander about unselfish,
nit lout oimin g any attachment to existences. (777

Llheva=uTia.'!ini»2 yeva siisane. Comraentaior.

IN a tassa heiu visamaw 7areyya.

DUrri/ArrZTAKASUTTA.

145

7. Having subdued his wish for both ends , having
fully understood touch without being greedy, not
doing what he has himself blamed, the wise (man)
does not cling to what is seen and heard. (77^)

8, Having understood name let the Muni cross

over the stream, not defiled by any grasping ; having
pulled out the arrow (of passion), wandering about
strenuous, he does not wish for this world or the
other. (779)

Guha 7 ^/^akasutta is ended.

3. DUrr^TArTWAKASUTTA.

The Muni undergoes no censure, for he has shaken off all systems
of philosophy, and is therefore independent.

1. Verily, some wicked-minded people censure,

and also just-minded people censure, but the Muni
does not undergo the censure that has arisen ; there-
fore there is not a discontented (khila) Muni any-
where. ( 7 ^ 0 )

2. How can he who is led by his wishes and

possessed by hi.s inclinations overcome his own
(false) view ? Doing his own doings let him talk
according to his understanding. (7^0

3. The person who, without being asked, praises
his own virtue and (holy) works to others, him the
good call ignoble, one who praises himself*’’. (7^2)

’ Comp. Sallasutta, v. 9.

® Sa««aOT=nSmarftpaw. Commentator.

® Yo atumanazra sayam eva pS.va=yo evaw attana/?/ sayam eva
vadati. Commentator.

146

ArrffAKAVAGGA.

4. But the Bhikkhu who is calm and of a happy

mind, so I am/ thus not praising himself for his
virtues, him the good call noble, one for whom there
are no desires anywhere in the world k (7S7)

5. He whose Dhammas are (arbitrarily) formed

and fabricated,^ placed in front, and confused, be-
cause he sees in himself a good result, is therefore
given to (the view which is called) kuppa-padiia-
santi. (.) (784)

6. For the dogmas of philosophy are not easy

to overcome, amongst the Dhammas (now this and
now that) is adopted after consideration; there-
fore a man rejects and adopts (now this and now
tnat) iJhamma amongst the dogmas k (78 e)

7. For him who has shaken off (sin) there is
nc^here the world any prejudiced view of the
different existences ; he who has shaken off (sin)
after leaving deceit and arrogance behind, which
(way) should he go, he (is) independents (786)

8. But he who is dependent undergoes censure
amongst the Dhammas ; with what (name) and how
should one name him who is independent ? For by
_ im there is nothing grasped or rejected, he has

world shaken off every (philosophical)

Du^/^a/^,^ak'asutta is ended, ^

Yass ussada n’ atthi kuhi«/{’i loke.

Comp. Parania////akasutta, v 6

Upayo ti ta«hadi 7 //dnissito. Commentator.

SUDDHArraAKASUTTA.

147

4. SUDDHArr^AKASUTTA.

No one is purified by philosophy, those devoted to philosophy run

from one teacher to another, but the wise are not led by passion,

and do not embrace anything in the world as the highest.

1. I see a pure, most excellent, sound man, by

his views a man’s purification takes place, holding
this opinion, and having seen this view to be the
highest, he goes back to knowledge, thinking to
see what is pure. (7^8)

2. If a man’s purification takes place by (his

philosophical) views, or he by knowledge leaves
pain behind, then he is purified by another (way
than the ariyamagga, i. e. the noble way), together
with his upadhis, on account of his views he tells
him to say sob (789)

3. But the Brahmaf^a who does not cling to

what has been seen, or heard, to virtue and (holy)
works, or to what has been thought, to what is
good and to what is evil, and who leaves behind
what has been grasped, without doing anything in
this world, he does not acknowledge that purifica-
tion comes from another. (790)

4. Having left (their) former (teacher) they go

to another, following their desires they do not
break asunder their ties; they grasp, they let go
like a monkey letting go (one) branch to catch hold
of (another). (791)

5. Having himself undertaken some (holy) works
he goes to various (things) led by his senses, but
a man of great understanding, a wise man who by

^ Di/Mihi na/?^ pava tatha vadanaw?. Comp. (Jarasutta, v. 10;
Pasfirasutta, v. 7.

148

ATTBAKAYAGGA.

his 'Wisdom has understood the Dhamma, does not
go to various (occupations). (792)

6. He being secluded^ amongst all the Dhammas,

whatever has been seen, heard, or thought — ^how
should any one in this world be able to alter him,
the seeing one, who wanders openly? (793)

7. They do not form (any view), they do not

prefer (anything), they do not say, ‘ I am infinitely
pure ; ’ having cut the tied knot of attachment,
they do not long for (anything) anywhere in the
world. (794)

8. He is a BrMima:i»2a that has conquered (sin) ;

by him there is nothing embraced after knowing
and seeing it ; he is not affected by any kind of
passion ; there is nothing grasped by him as the
highest in this world. (795)

Suddha/7/^akasutta is ended.

5. PARAMArr/^^AKASUTTA.

One should not give oneself to philosophical disputations ; a BrSh-
ma«a who does not adopt any system of philosophy, is unchange-
able, has reached NibbSna,

1. What one person, abiding by the (philoso-

phical) views, saying, ‘ This is the most excellent,
considers the highest in the world, everything
different from that he says is wretched, therefore
he has not overcome dispute ^ (79d)

2. Because he sees in himself a good result, with
regard to what has been seen (or) heard, virtue

‘ Marasenaw vinasetva Mitabhavena visenibhfito. Commentator.
^ Properly, ‘ others (are) wretched.’

PARAMArriyAKASUTTA.

149

and (holy) works, or what has been thought, there-
fore, having embraced that, he looks upon every-
thing else as bad. (797)

3. The expert call just that a tie dependent

upon which one looks upon anything else as bad.
Therefore let a Bhikkhu not depend upon what is
seen, heard, or thought, or upon virtue and (holy)
works. (79S)

4. Let him not form any (philosophical) view in

this world, either by knowledge or by virtue and
(holy) works, let him not represent himself equal
(to others), nor think himself either low or dis-
tinguished. (799)

5. Having left what has been grasped, not seizing

upon anything he does not depend even on know-
ledge. He does not associate with those that are
taken up by different things, he does not return to
any (philosophical) view. (800)

6. For whom there is here no desire, for both

ends, for reiterated existence either here or in an-
other world, for him there are no resting-places (of
the mind) embraced after investigation amongst the
doctrines (dhammesu). (^01)

7. In him there is not the least prejudiced idea

with regard to what has been seen, heard, or thought;
how could any one in this world alter such a Brah-
ma?za who does not adopt any view ? (802)

8. They do not form (any view), they do not

prefer (anything), the Dhammas are not chosen by
them, a Brahmawa is not dependent upon virtue
and (holy) works ; having gone to the other shore,
such a one does not return. (803)

Parama/^'/zakasutta is ended.

150

ArraAKAVAGGA.

6. 6^ARASUTTA.

From selfishness come grief and avarice. The Bhikkhu who has
turned away from the world and wanders about houseless, is inde-
pendent, and does not wish for purification through another.

1. Short indeed is .this life, within a hundred

years one dies, and if any one lives longer, then he
dies of old age. ’

2. People grieve from selfishness, perpetual cares

kill^ them, this (world) is full of disappointment ;
seeing this, let one not live in a house h (805)

3. That even of which a man thinks ‘this is mine ’
is^ left behind by death : knowing this, let not the
wise (man) turn himself to worldliness (while being
my) follower.

4. As a man awakened does not see what he
has met with in his sleep, so also he does not see
the beloved person that has passed away and is

(807)

5. ^ Both seen and heard are the persons whose
particular name is mentioned, but only the name
remains undecayed of the person that has passed

. (808)

0, The greedy in their selfishness do not leave
son ow, lamentation, and avarice ; therefore the
Munis leaving greediness wandered about seeing
security (i. e. Nibbana)

7. For a Bhikkhu, who wanders about unattached
and cultivates the mind of a recluse, they say it
IS proper that he does not show himself (again) in

existence 2. zo v

(810)

Reading with hiwmnti iiiiH pariggaha.
“ B* has vivitta-.

TISSAMETTEYYASUTTA.

I5I

8. Under all circumstances the independent Muni

does not please nor displease (any one) ; sorrow and
avarice do not stick to him (as little) as water to
a leaf. (811)

9. As a drop of water does not stick to a lotus,

as water does not stick to a lotus, so a Muni does
not cling to anything, namely, to what is seen or
heard or thought. (8 1 2)

10. He who has shaken off (sin) does not there-

fore think (much of anything) because it has been
seen or heard or thought; he does not wish for
purification through another, for he is not pleased

nor displeased (with anything) (8 1 3)

(9arisutta is ended.

7. TISSAMETTEYYASUTTA.

Sexual intercourse should be avoided.

1. ‘Tell me, O venerable one/ — so said the

venerable Tissa Metteyya, — ‘the defeat of him who
is given to sexual intercourse ; hearing thy precepts
we will learn in seclusion.’ (^14)

2. ‘ The precepts of him who is given to sexual

intercourse, O Metteyya,’ — so said Bhagavaf- — ‘are
lost, and he employs himself wrongly, this is what is
ignoble in him. (S^S)

3. ‘He who, having formerly wandered alone,

gives himself up to sexual intercourse, him they
call in the world a low, common fellow, like a roll-
ing chariot. (816)

* Comp. Suddha//-^akasutta, v. 2.

152

ATTHAKAVAGGA.

4. ‘ What honour and renown he had before, that

is lost for him ; having seen this let him learn to
give up sexual intercourse. (^^7)

5. ‘He who overcome by his thoughts meditates

like a miser, such a one, having heard the (blaming)
voice of others, becomes discontented. (818)

6. ‘ Then he makes weapons (i. e. commits evil

deeds) urged by the doctrines of others, he is very
greedy, and sinks into falsehood. (^^>^9)

7. ‘ Designated “ wise ” he has entered upon a soli-

tary life, then having given himself up to sexual
intercourse, he (being) a fool suffers pain. (820)

8. ‘ Looking upon this as misery let the Muni from

first to last in the world firmly keep to his solitary
life, let him not give himself up to sexual inter-
course. (821)

9. ‘ Let him learn seclusion, this is the highest for

noble men, but let him not therefore think himself
the best, although he is verily near Nibbaiia. (822)

10. ‘ The Muni who wanders void (of desire), not

coveting sensual pleasures, and who has crossed the
stream, him the creatures that are tied in sensual
pleasures envy.’ (823)

Tissametteyyasutta is ended.

8. pasOrasutta.

Disputants brand each other as fools, they wish for praise, but
being repulsed they become discontented ; one is not purified by
dispute, but by keeping to Buddha, who has shaken oliF all sin.

I. Here they maintain ‘purity,’ in other doctrines
(dhamma) they do not allow purity ; what they have

pas6rasutta.

153

devoted themselves to, that they call good, and they
enter extensively upon the single truths. (^24)

2. Those wishing for dispute, having plunged into
the assembly, brand each other as fools mutually,
they go to others and pick a quarrel, wishing for
praise and calling themselves (the only) expert. (82 5)

3. Engaged in dispute in the middle of the

assembly, wishing for praise he lays about on all
sides; but when his dispute has been repulsed he
becomes discontented, at the blame he gets angry
he who sought for the faults (of others). (826)

4. Because those who have tested his questions

say that his dispute is lost and repulsed, he laments
and grieves having lost his disputes ; ‘ he has con-
quered me,’ so saying he wails. (^27)

5. These disputes have arisen amongst the Sa-

maras, in these (disputes) there is (dealt) blow (and)
stroke; having seen this, let him leave off disput-
ing, for there is no other advantage to obtain from
getting praise. (828)

61 Or he is praised there, having cleared up the
dispute in the middle of the assembly; therefore he
will laugh and be elated, having won that case as
he had a mind to. (829)

7. That which is his exaltation will also be the

field of his defeat, still he talks proudly and arro-
gantly ; seeing this, let no one dispute, for the ex-
pert do not say that purification (takes place) by
thatb (^30)

8. As a hero nourished by kingly food goes about
roaring, washing for an adversary' — where he (i. e.
the philosopher, Di/z'/^iigatika) is, go thou there, O

^ Comp. Suddha/Z/^akasutta, v. 2.

154

ArrffAKAVAGGA.

hero ; formerly there was nothing like this to fight
against. (831)

9. Those who, having embraced a (certain philo-
sophical) view, dispute and maintain ‘ this only (is)
true,’ to them say thou when a dispute has arisen,
‘ Here is no opponent^ for thee.’ (832)

I o. Those who wander about after having secluded
themselves, without opposing view to view — what
(opposition) wilt thou meet with amongst those, O
Pashra, by whom nothing in this world is grasped
as the best? (833)

II. Then thou wentest to reflection thinking in

thy mind over the (different philosophical) views ;
thou hast gone into the yoke with him who has
shaken off (all sin), but thou wilt not be able to
proceed together (with him). (834)

Pashrasutta is ended.

9 . mAgandiyasutta.

A dialogue 'between MSgandiya and Buddha. The former offers
Buddha his daughter for a wife, but Buddha refuses her. M4gan-
diya says that purity comes’ from philosophy, Buddha from ' in-
ward peace.’ The Muni is a confessor of peace, he does not
dispute, he is free from marks.

I. Buddha : ‘ Even seeing Ta?2hd, Arati, and Ragd
(the daughters of M^ra), there was not the least wish
(in me) for sexual intercourse. What is this (thy
daughter’s body but a thing) full of water and
excrement ? I do not even want to touch it with
my foot’ (835)

^ Pa/isenikatt^ ti pa/ilomakS,rako. Commentator.

MAGANDIYASUTTA.

155

2. Mdgandiya ; ‘ If thou dost not want such a

pearl, a woman desired by many kings, what view,
virtue, and (holy) works, (mode of) life, re-birth dost
thou profess ? ’ {836)

3. ‘ “ This I say,” so (I do now declare), after in-

vestigation there is nothing amongst the doctrines
which such a one (as I would) embrace, O Mdgandiya,’
— so said Bhagavat, — ‘and seeing (misery) in the
(philosophical) views, without adopting (any of them),
searching (for truth) I saw “ inward peace.” ’ (837)

4. ‘ All the (philosophical) resolutions ^ that have

been formed,’ — so said Mdgandiya, — ‘those indeed
thou explainest without adopting (any of them) ; the
notion “ inward peace ” which (thou mentionest), how
is this explained by the wise ’ (838)

5. ‘Not by (any philosophical) opinion, not by

tradition, not by knowledge, O Migandiya,’ — so said
Bhagavat, — ‘ not by virtue and (holy) works can any
one say that purity exists ; nor by absence of (philo-
sophical) opinion, by absence of tradition, by absence
of knowledge, by absence of virtue and (holy) works
either; having abandoned these without adopting
(anything else), let him, calm and independent, not
desire existence.’ (839)

6. ‘ If one cannot say by (any philosophical) opinion,

or by tradition, or by knowledge,’ — so said Magan-
diya, — ‘ or by virtue and (holy) works that purity
exists, nor by absence of (philosophical) opinion, by
absence of tradition, by absence of knowledge, by
absence of virtue and (holy) works, then I consider
the doctrine foolish, for by (philosophical) opinions
some return to purity.’ (840)

^ Vinii^/^^aja, placita?
[iQl T

ATTHAKAVAGGA.

156

7. ‘ And asking on account of (thy philosophical)

opinion, O Magandiya," — so said Bhagavat, — ‘thou
hast gone to infatuation in what thou hast embraced,
and of this (inward peace) thou hast not the least
idea, therefore thou boldest it foolish. (841)

8. ‘He who thinks himself equal (to others),

or distinguished, or low, he for that very reason
disputes ; but he who is unmoved under those three
conditions, for him (the notions) “ equal ” and “ dis-
tinguished” do not exist. (842)

9. ‘ The Brdhma/za for whom (the notions)

“ equal ” and “ unequal do not exist, would he
say, “ This is true ? " Or with whom should he dis-
pute, saying, “ This is false ? ” With whom should
he enter into dispute (843)

10. ‘Having left his house, wandering about

houseless, not making acquaintances in the village,
free from lust, not desiring (any future existence),
let the Muni not get into quarrelsome talk with
people. (844)

11. ‘Let not an eminent man (niga) dispute

after having embraced those (views) separated from
which he (formerly) wandered in the world ; as
the thorny lotus elambuifa is undefiled by water
and mud, so the Muni, the confessor of peace, free
from greed, does not cling to sensual pleasures and
the world. (845)

12. ‘An accomplished man does not by (a phi-

losophical) view, or by thinking become arrogant,
for he is not of that sort ; not by (holy) works, nor
by tradition is he to be led, he is not led into
any of the resting-places (of the mind), (846)

13. ‘For him who is free from marks there are
no ties, to him who is delivered by understanding

PURABHEDASUTTA.

157

there are no follies ; (but those) who grasped after
marks and (philosophical) views, they wander about
in the world annoying (people).’ (^47)

Magandiyasutta is ended.

10. purAbhedasutta.

Definition of a calm Muni.

1. ‘With what view and with what virtue is

one called calm, tell me that, O Gotama, (when)
asked about the best man?’ (848)

2. ‘He whose craving is departed before the

dissolution (of his body),’— so said Bhagavat,— ‘ who
does not depend upon beginning and end, nor
reckons upon the middle, by him there is nothing
preferred. (849)

3. ‘He who is free from anger, free from trem-
bling, free from boasting, free from misbehaviour,
he who speaks wisely, he who is not elated, he is
indeed a Muni who has restrained his speech. (850)

4. ‘Without desire for the future he does not
grieve for the past, he sees seclusion in the phas-
sas (touch), and he Is not led by (any philosophical)

views. (^ 5 ^)

5. ‘ He Is unattached, not deceitful, not covetous,

not envious, not impudent, not contemptuous, and
not given to slander. (85^)

6. ‘Without desire for pleasant things and not

given to conceit, and being gentle, intelligent,
not credulous, he is not displeased (with any-
thing). (^53)

7. ‘Not from love of gain does he learn, and

T 2

158

ATTHAKAVAGGA.

he does not get angry on account of loss, and
untroubled by craving he has no greed for sweet
things. (854)

8. ‘ Equable (upekhaka), always thoughtful, he

does not think himself equal (to others) ^ in the
world, nor distinguished, nor low : for him there
are no desires (ussada). (^55)

9. ‘ The man in whom there is nothing upon which

he depends, who is independent, having understood
the Dhamma, in whom there is no craving for coming
into existence or leaving existence, (S56)

10. ‘Him I call calm, nqt looking for sensual

pleasures ; for him there are no ties, he has over-
come desire. (857)

11. ‘For him there are no sons, cattle, fields,

wealth, nothing grasped or rejected is to be found
in him. (858)

1 2. ‘ That fault of which common people and

Sama?2as and Brahmawas say that he is possessed,
is not possessed by him, therefore he is not moved
by their talk. (859)

13. ‘ Free from covetousness, without avarice, the

Muni does not reckon himself amongst the distin-
guished, nor amongst the plain, nor amongst the
low, he does not enter time, being delivered from
time. (860)

14. ‘He for whom there is nothing in the world

(which he may call) his own, who does not grieve over
what is no more, and does not walk amongst the

Dhammas (after his wish), he is called calm^’ (861)

Puribhedasutta is ended.

^ Compare Tuva/akasutta, v. 4 ; Altadawifasutta, v. 20.
* Comp, infra, Attada« 4 asutta, v. 16, and Dhp. v, 367.

KALAHAVIVADASUTTA.

159

11 . kalahavivAdasutta.

The origin of contentions, disputes, &c, &c.

1. ‘Whence (do spring up) contentions and dis-
putes, lamentation and sorrow together with envy ;
and arrogance and conceit together with slander,
whence do these spring up ? pray, tell me this.’ (862)

2. ‘From dear (objects) spring up contentions

and disputes, lamentation and sorrow together with
envy ; arrogance and conceit together with slander ;
contentions and disputes are joined with envy, and
there is slander in the disputes arisen.’ (863)

3. ‘The dear (objects) in the world whence do

they originate, and (whence) the covetousness that
prevails in the world, and desire and fulfilment
whence do they originate, which are (of consequence)
for the future state of a man^ ? ’ (864)

4. ‘ From wish^ originate the dear (objects) in the

world, and the covetousness that prevails in the
world, and desire and fulfilment originate from it,
which are (of consequence) for the future state of
a man.’ (865)

5. ‘ From what has wish in the world its origin,

and resolutions -^ whence do they spring, anger and
falsehood and doubt, and the D ham mas which are
made known by the Sama;^a (Gotama) ? ’ (866)

6. ‘What they call pleasure and displeasure in

the world, by that wish springs up ; having seen
decay and origin in (all) bodies a person forms
(his) resolutions in the world. (867)

^ Ye saroparayaya narassa honti. ^ .Oanda.

® Y\nikkhz.ya., *■ Rupesu disva vibhavaz^i bhava« ^a.

i6o

ATTHAKAVAGGA.

7. ‘ Anger and falsehood and doubt, these Dham-

mas are a couple ^ ; let the doubtful learn in the way
of knowledge, knowingly the Dhammas have been
proclaimed by the Sama/^a.’ (868)

8. ‘ Pleasure and displeasure, whence have they
their origin, for want bf what do these not arise ?
This notion which (thou mentionest), viz. “ decay and
origin,” tell me from what does this arise.’ (869)

9. ‘ Pleasure and displeasure have their origin

from phassa (touch), when there is no touch they do
not arise. This notion which (thou mentionest), viz.
“ decay and origin,” this I tell thee has its origin
from this.’ (870)

TO. ‘ From what has phassa its origin in the world,
and from what does grasping spring up ? For want
of what is there no egotism, by the cessation of what
do the touches not touch ?’ (871)

11. ‘On account of name and form the touches

(exist), grasping has its origin in wish ; by the cessa-
tion of wishes there is no egotism, by the cessation
of form the touches do not touch.’ (872)

12. ‘ How is one to be constituted that (his) form

may cease to exist, and how do joy and pain cease
to exist ? Tell me this, how it ceases, that we should
like to know, such was my mind ? ’ {873)

13. ‘ Let one not be with a natural consciousness,

nor with a mad consciousness, nor without con-
sciousness, nor with (his) consciousness gone; for
him who is thus constituted form ceases to exist, for
what is called delusion has its origin in conscious-
ness.’ {?) (874)

^ 7’e pi kodhddayo dhammd satasatadvaye sante eva pahonti
uppa^^anti. Commentator.

zOl AVI Y t H ASUTTA.

i6i

1 4. ‘ What we have asked thee thou hast explained

unto us ; we will ask thee another question, answer
us that : Do not some (who are considered) wise in
this world tell us that the principal (thing) is the
purification of the yakkha, or do they say something
different from this ^ ? ’ (875)

15. ‘Thus some (who are considered) wise in this

world say that the principal (thing) is the purification
of the yakkha ; but some of them say samaya- (anni-
hilation), the expert say (that the highest purity
lies) in anupddisesa (none of the five attributes
remaining). (876)

16. ‘And having known these to be dependent,

the investigating Muni, having known the things we
depend upon, and after knowing them being libe-
rated, does not enter into dispute, the wise (man)
does not go to reiterated existence.’ (877)

Kalahavivadasutta is ended.

12. itrCLAVIYCH ASUTTA.

A description of disputing philosophers. The different schools of
philosophy contradict each other, they proclaim different truths,
but the truth is only one. As long as the disputations are going
on, so long will there be strife in the world.

I. Abiding by their own views, some (people),
having got into contest, assert themselves to be
the (only) expert (saying), "(He) who understands
this, he knows the Dhamma ; he who reviles this, he
is not perfect’ (878)

^ Comp. Sundarikabharadva^asutta, v. 25.
“ Vkk/iedmi. Commentator.

i 62

Arr^fAKAVAGGA.

2. So having got into contest they dispute : ‘ The

opponent (is) a fool, an ignorant (person),’ so they
say. Which one of these, pray, is the true doctrine
(vida) ? for all these assert themselves (to be the
only) expert. (879)

3. He who does not acknowledge an opponent’s
doctrine (dhamma), he is a fool, a beast, one of poor
understanding, all are fools with a very poor under-
standing; all these abide by their (own) views. (880)

4. They are surely purified by their own view,
they are of a pure understanding, expert, thoughtful,
amongst them there is no one of poor understanding,
their view is quite perfect !

5. I do not say, ‘ This is the reality,’ which fools

say mutually to each other ; they made their own
views the truth, therefore they hold others to be
fools. (882)

6. What some say is the truth, the reality, that

others say is void, false, so having disagreed they
dispute. Why do not the Samaras say one (and
the same thing) ? (883)

7. For the truth is one, there is not a second,

about which one intelligent man might dispute with
another intelligent man ; (but) they themselves pro-
claim different truths, therefore the Sama^^as do not
say one (and the same thing). (884)

8. Why do the disputants that assert themselves

(to be the only) expert, proclaim different truths ?
Have many different truths been heard of, or do they
(only) follow (their own) reasoning ? (885)

9. There are not many different truths in the world,

no eternal ones except consciousness ; but having
reasoned on the (philosophical) views they proclaim
a double Dhamma, truth and falsehood. (886)

zClayiyOhasutta.

163

10. In regard to what has been seen, or heard,

virtue and (holy) works, or what has been thought,
and on account of these (views) looking (upon
others) with contempt, standing in (their) resolutions
joyful, they say that the opponent is a fool and an
ignorant person. (?) (^^7)

11. Because he holds another (to be) a fool, there-

fore he calls himself expert, in his own opinion he is
one that tells what is propitious, others he blames,
so he said. (?) (888)

12. He is full of his overbearing (philosophical)
view, mad with pride, thinking himself perfect, he is
in his own opinion anointed with the spirit (of genius),
for his (philosophical) view is quite complete. (889)

13. If he according to another’s report is low, then
(he says) the other is also of a low understanding,
and if he himself is accomplished and wise, there
is not any fool amongst the Sama^^ash (890)

14. ‘Those who preach a doctrine (dhamma)

different from this, fall short of purity and are
imperfect,’ so the Titthiyas say repeatedly, for they
are inflamed by passion for their own (philosophical)
views. (^91)

15. Here they maintain purity, in other doctrines

(dhamma) they do not allow purity ; so the Titthi-
yas, entering extensively (upon details), say that in
their own way there is something firm. (892)

16. And saying that there is something firm in his

own way he holds his opponent to be a fool ; thus
he himself brings on strife, calling his opponent a
fool and impure (asuddhadhamma). (^93)

17. Standing in (his) resolution, havipg himself

^ So pi ten’ eva. Commentator, Ved. tva (?).

i64

ArriyAKAVAGGA.

measured (teachers, &c.), he still more enters into
dispute in the world ; but having left all resolutions
nobody will excite strife in the world. (S94)

i^hlaviyhhasutta is ended.

13 . mahAviyChasutta.

Philosophers cannot lead to purity, they only praise themselves and

stigmatise others. But a Brdhmana has overcome all dispute,

he is indifferent to learning, he is appeased.

1. Those who abiding in the (philosophical) views
dispute, saying, ‘This is the truth,’ they all incur
blame, and they also obtain praise in this matter, (895)

2. This is little, not enough to (bring about)

tranquillity, I say there are two fruits of dispute;
having seen this let no one dispute, understanding
Kliema (i.e. Nibbina) to be the place where there
is no dispute. (896)

3. The opinions that have arisen amongst

people, all these the wise man does not embrace;
he is independent. Should he who is not pleased
with what has been seen and heard resort to
dependency^? (?) (897)

4. Those who consider virtue the highest of all,

say that purity is associated with restraint ; having
taken upon themselves a (holy) work they serve.
Let us learn in this (view), then, his (the Master’s)
purity ; wishing for existence they assert themselves

to be the only expert (898)

5. If he falls off from virtue and (holy) works, he
trembles, having missed (his) work ; he laments, he

* Khantim, so all the MSS.

mahaviyOhasutta.

165

prays for purity in this world, as one who has lost
his caravan or wandered away from his house. (899)

6 . Having left virtue and (holy) works altogether,
and both wrong and blameless work, not praying
for purity or impurity, he wanders abstaining (from

f both purity and impurity), without having embraced

peace. (900)

7. By means of penance, or anything disliked, or
what has been seen, or heard, or thought, going
upwards they wail for what is pure, without being
free from craving for reiterated existence. (901)

8. For him who wishes (for something there
always are) desires and trembling in (the midst of
his) plans ; he for whom there is no death and no re-
birth, how can he tremble or desire anything? (902)

9. What some call the highest Dhamma, that
others again call wretched ; which one of these,
pray, is the true doctrine (vida) ? for all these
assert themselves (to be the only) expert. (903)

10. Their own Dhamma they say is perfect,

another’s Dhamma again they say is wretched ;

so having disagreed they dispute, they each say
their own opinions (are) the truth. (904)

11. If one (becomes) low by another s censure,

then there will be no one distinguished amongst
the Dhammas; for they all say another’s Dhamma
(is) low, in their own they say there is something
firm. (905)

12. The worshipping of their own Dhamma is

as great as their praise of their own ways; all
schools would be in the same case, for their purity
is individual. (9od)

13. There is nothing about a Brahmaj^a de-

^ Gappitani.

I

I

ATTHAKAYAGGA.

1 66

pendent upon others, nothing amongst the Dhammas
which he would embrace after investigation ; there-
fore he has overcome the disputes, for he does not
regard any other Dhamma as the best, (907)

14. ‘I understand, I see likewise this,’ so saying,

some by (their philosophical) views return to purity.
If he saw purity, what then (has been effected) by
another’s view ? Having conquered they say that
purity exists by another. (.^) (908)

15. A seeing man will see name and form, and

having seen he will understand those (things) ; let
him at pleasure see much or little, for the expert
do not say that purity exists by that. (909)

16. A dogmatist is no leader to purity, being

guided by prejudiced views, saying that good con-
sists in what he is given to, and saying that purity
is there, he saw the thing so. (910)

17. A Brdhma/2a does not enter time, (or) the

number (of living beings), (he is) no follower of
(philosophical) views, nor a friend of knowledge ;
and having penetrated the opinions that have arisen
amongst people, he is indifferent to learning, while
others acquire it. (91 1)

18. The Muni, having done away with ties here

in the world, is no partisan in the disputes that
have arisen ; appeased amongst the unappeased
he is indifferent, not embracing learning, while
others acquire it. (912)

19. Having abandoned his former passions, not

contracting new ones, not wandering according to
his wishes, being no dogmatist, he is delivered
from the (philosophical) views, being wise, and he
does not cling to the world, neither does he blame
himself. (9 1 3)

TUVArAKASUTTA.

167

20. Being secluded amongst all the doctrines
(dhamma), whatever has been seen, heard, or
thought, he is a Muni who has laid down his
burden and is liberated, not belonging to time (na
kappiyo), not dead, not wishing for anything. So
said Bhagavat. (914)

Mahdviytihasutta is ended.

14. TUVArAKASUTTA.

How a Bhikkhu attains bliss, what his duties are, and what he is

to avoid.

1. ‘I ask thee, who art a kinsman of the Adi/^ias

and a great Isi, about seclusion (viveka) and the
state of peace. How is a Bhikkhu, after having
seen it, extinguished, not grasping at anything in
the world.?’ (915)

2. ‘ Let him completely cut off the root of what is

called papawia^ (delusion), thinking “ I am wisdom ’
— so said Bhagavat, — ‘ all the cravings that arise in-
wardly, let him learn to subdue them, always being
thoughtful. (916)

3. ‘ Let him learn every Dhamma inwardly or out-

wardly; let him not therefore be proud, for that is
not called bliss by the good. (917)

4. ‘ Let him not therefore think himself better

(than others or) low or equal (to others) ; questioned
by different people, let him not adorn himselR (918)

5. ‘Let the Bhikkhu be appeased inwardly, let
him not seek peace from any other (quarter); for

^ Avi^^idayo kilest. Commentator.
® Ndtumdna»z vikappayan ti/Me.

i68

ATTHAKAYAGGA.

him who is inwardly appeased there is nothing
grasped or rejected. (919)

6 . ‘ As in the middle (i. e. depth) of the sea no

wave is born, (but as it) remains still b so let the
Bhikkhu be still without desire, let him not desire
anything whatever.’ (920)

7. He with open eyes expounded clearly the

Dhamma that removes (all) dangers ; tell (now)
the religious practices ; the precepts or contem-
plation. (921)

8. Bhagavat ; ‘ Let him not be greedy with his

eyes, let him keep his ears from the talk of the town,
let him not be greedy after sweet things, and let
him not desire anything in the world. (922)

9. ‘ When he is touched by the touch (of illness),

let the Bhikkhu not lament, and let him not wish
for existence anywhere, and let him not tremble at
dangers. (923)

10. ‘ Having obtained boiled rice and drink, solid

food and clothes, let him not store up (these things),
and let him not be anxious, if he does not get
them. (924)

11. ‘Let him be meditative, not prying, let him
abstain from misbehaviour‘s, let him not be indolent,
let the Bhikkhu live in his quiet dwelling. (925)

12. ‘Let him not sleep too much, let him apply

himself ardently to watching, let him abandon sloth,
deceit, laughter, sport, sexual intercourse, and adorn-
ment. (926)

1 3. ‘ Let him not apply himself to practising (the
hymns of) the Athabba«a(-veda), to (the interpreta-
tion of) sleep and signs, nor to astrology; let not

^ mto.

^ Virame kukku/4/^aw.

TUVArAKASUTTA.

169

(my) follower (mimaka) devote himself to (inter-
preting) the cry of birds, to causing impregnation,
nor to (the art of) medicine. (927)

14. ‘ Let the Bhikkhu not tremble at blame, nor

puff himself up when praised ; let him drive off
covetousness together with avarice, anger, and
slander. (928)

15. ‘ Let the Bhikkhu not be engaged in purchase

and sale, let him not blame others in anything, let
him not scold in the village, let him not from love of
gain speak to people. (929)

1 6. ‘ Let not the Bhikkhu be a boaster, and let
him not speak coherent language; let him not learn
pride, let him not speak quarrelsome language. (930)

1 7. ‘ Let him not be led into falsehood, let him

not consciously do wicked things ; and with respect
to livelihood, understanding, virtue, and (holy) works
let him not despise others. (93 1)

18. ‘ Having heard much talk from much-talking
Sama^^as let him not irritated answer them with harsh
language; for the good do not thwart^ others. (932)

19. ‘ Having understood this Dhamma, let the
investigating and always thoughtful Bhikkhu learn ;
having conceived bliss to consist in peace, let him
not be indolent in Gotama’s commandments. ( 933 )

20 ‘ For he a conqueror unconquered saw the
Dhamma visibly, without any traditional instruction®;
therefore let him learn, heedful in his, Bhagavat’s,
commandments, and always worshipping.' (934)

Tuva^akasutta is ended.

^ Payuta; comp. Nalakasutta, v. 33.

^ Pa/isenikaronti.

^ Sakkhi dhammaw anitiham adassi.

ArrHAKAVAGGA.

170

15. ATTADAA^Z?ASUTTA.

Description of an accomplished Muni.

1. From a stick seized fear arises. Look at

people killing (each other) ; I will tell of grief as
it is known to me (935)

2. Seeing people struggling like fish in (a pond

with) little water, seeing them obstructed by each
other, a fear came over me. (936)

3. The world is completely unsubstantial, all

quarters are shaken ; wishing for a house for myself
I did not see (one) uninhabited. (937)

4. But having seen (all beings) in the end ob-

structed, discontent arose in me ; then I 'saw in
this world an arrow, difficult to see, stuck in the
heart. (93^)

5. He who has been pierced by this arrow runs
through all quarters ; but having drawn out that ar-
row, he will not run, he will sit down (quietly). (939)

6. There (many) studies are gone through ; what

is tied in the world let him not apply himself to
(untie) it ; having wholly transfixed desire, let him
learn his own extinction (nibb5.na). (940)

7. Let the Muni be truthful, without arrogance,

undeceitful, free from slander, not angry, let him

overcome avarice. (940

8. Let the man who has turned his mind to Nib-

bffiia conquer sleepiness, drowsiness, and sloth;- let
him not live together with indolence, let him not in-
dulge in conceit. (942)

^ The Commentator understands the verse differently. He says,
tAm sabbaw attada«c?abhayam ^atam attano du/t/taritak^ra«d

ATTADAiVrDASUTTA.

171

9. Let him not be led into falsehood, let him

not turn his affection to form ; let him penetrate
arrogance, let him wander abstaining from vio-

lence. ^ (943)

10. Let him not delight in what is old, let him not
bear with what is new, let him not grieve for what
is lost, let him not give himself up to desire b (944)

11. (This desire) I call greed, the great stream,

I call (it) precipitation, craving, a trouble, a bog of
lust difficult to cross. ' (945)

12. The Muni who without deviating from truth

stands fast on the firm ground (of Nibbdna, being) a
Brihmam, he, having forsaken everything, is indeed
called calm. (946)

13. He indeed is wise, he is accomplished, having

understood the Dhamma independent (of every-
thing) ; wandering rightly in the world he does not
envy any one here. (947)

14. Whosoever has here overcome lust, a tie

difficult to do away with in the world, he does not
grieve, he does not covet b having cut off the
stream, and being without bonds. (948)

15. What is before (thee), lay that aside; let there
be nothing behind thee ,* if thou wilt not grasp after
what is in the middle, thou wilt wander calm b (949)

16. The man who has no desire at all for name

and form (individuality) and who does not grieve
over what is no more, he indeed does not decay in
the world b (950)

^ Akdsaz?2i na sito siyd ti nissito na bhaveyya.

Commentator.

® N^^^i^eti=ndbhi^^v^ati (read nibhi^^^/myati). Commentator.

® Comp, infra, (ratuka««in’s question, v. 4, and Dhammapada,
p. 308.

* Comp, infra, (?atuka««in’s question, v. 5.

[10] U

172

ATTHAKAYAGGA.

17. He who does not think, ‘this is mine’ and ‘for

others there is also something,’ he, not having ego-
tism, does not grieve at having nothing. (95 1)

18. Not being harsh, not greedy, being without

desire, and being the same under all circumstances
(samo^), — that I call a good result, when asked about
an undaunted man. (952)

19. For him who is free from desire, for the

discerning (man) there is no Sawkhira ; abstaining
from every sort of effort he sees happiness every-
where. ^ (953)

20. The Muni does not reckon himself amongst
the plain, nor amongst the low, nor amongst the
distinguished ; being calm and free from avarice, he
does not grasp after nor reject anything^. (954)

Attada;2^asutta is ended.

16 . sAriputtasutta.

On Sariputta asking what a BMkkhu is to devote himself to,
Buddha shows what life he is to lead.

1. ‘ Neither has before been seen by me,’ — so said

the venerable Sariputta, — ‘ nor has any one heard of
such a beautifully-speaking master, a teacher arrived
from the Tusita heaven. (955)

2. ‘As he, the clearly-seeing, appears to the world
of men and gods, after having dispelled all darkness,
so he wanders alone in the midst (of people). (956)

3. ‘To this Buddha, who is independent, un-
changed, a guileless teacher, who has arrived (in

^ sEUpekhako. Commentator.

* Comp, supra, PurSbhedasutta, vv. 1 $, 20 .

SARIPUTTASUTTA.

173

the world), I have come supplicatingly with a ques-
tion^ from many who are bound in this world. (957)

4. ‘ To a Bhikkhu who is loath (of the world)

and affects an isolated seat, the root of a tree or
a cemetery, or (who lives) in the caves of the
mountains, (958)

5. ‘How many dangers (are there not) in these

various dwelling-places at which the Bhikkhu does
not tremble in his quiet dwelling ^ | (959)

6. ‘How many dangers (are there not) in the

world for him who goes to the immortal region
(dangers) which the Bhikkhu overcomes in his
distant dwelling ! (960)

7. ‘ Which are his words, which are his objects

in this world, which are the virtue and (holy) works
of the energetic Bhikkhu } (961)

8. ‘ What study having devoted himself to, in-

tent on one object h wise and thoughtful, can he
blow off his own filth as the smith (blows off) that
of the silver® (962)

9. ‘What is pleasant for him who is disgusted

(with birth, &c.), O Sdriputta,’ — so said Bhagavat,
— ‘ if he cultivates a lonely dwelling-place, and
loves perfect enlightenment in accordance with
the Dhamma, that I will tell thee as I under-
stand it. (963)

10. ‘ Let not the wise and thoughtful Bhikkhu
wandering on the borders® be afraid of the five

^ Atthi pa«hena |gamiOT=atthiko pa«hena agato ’mhtti atthi-
kSna/?z vd pawhena atthi Sgamanaw ti. Commentator.

® U,^/'ava/’es 1 a 'ti htnapanttesu. Commentator.

* Ga/^Mato amataw disaw,

‘ Ekodi=ekagga/ 5 itto. Commentator.

® Comp. Dhp. V. 239.

U 2

® Pariyantaiart.

174

atthakavagga.

dangers : gad-flies and (all other) flies h snakes,
contact with (evil) men and quadrupeds. (964)

11. 'Let him not be afraid of adversaries k even

having seen many dangers from them ; further he
will overcome other dangers while seeking what is
good. (965)

12. ‘Touched by sickness and hunger let him

endure cold and excessive heat, let him, touched
by them in many ways, and being houseless, make
strong exertions. (966)

13. ‘ Let him not commit theft, let him not speak

falsely, let him touch friendly what is feeble or
strong, what he acknowledges to be the agitation
of the mind, let him drive that off as a partisan
of Ka«ha (i. e. Mdra). (967)

14. ‘Let him not fall into the power of anger

and arrogance ; having dug up the root of these,
let him live, and let him overcome both what is
pleasant and what is unpleasant (968)

15. ‘ Guided by wisdom, taking delight in what

is good, let him scatter those dangers, let him
overcome discontent in his distant dwelling, let him
overcome the four causes of lamentation. (969)

16. ‘What shall I eat, or where shall I eat ? — he
lay indeed uncomfortably (last night) — where shall
I lie this night ? let the Sekha who wanders about
houseless subdue these lamentable doubts. (970)

17. ‘Having had in (due) time both food and
clothes, let him know moderation in this world for

^ Dawis^iclhipdtSnan ti pingalainakkhikdnaw X’a sesamakkhi-
kSnaw sesamakkhikS, hi tato adhipatitv^ khSdanti, tasm^ adhi-
pita ti vU/^/fanti. Commentator.

* ManussaphassSnanti X’orddiphassdnaw. Commentator.

® Paradhammikana»?.

SARIPUTTASUTTA.

175

the sake of happiness ; guarded in these (things)
and wandering restrained in the village let him, even
(if he be) irritated, not speak harsh words. (971)
1 8. ‘ Let him be with down-cast eyes, and not
prying, devoted to meditation, very watchful; having
acquired equanimity let him with a composed mind
cut off the seat of doubt, and misbehaviour. (972)
19 - ‘ Urged on by words (of his teachers) let
him be thoughtful and rejoice (at this urging), let
him break stubbornness in his fellow-students, let
him utter propitious words and not unseasonable,
let him not think detractingly of others. (973)

20. ‘ And then the five impurities in the world,

the subjection of which he must learn thoughtfully,
— let him overcome passion for form, sound and
taste, smell and touch. (974)

21. ‘Let the Bhikkhu subdue his wish for these

Dhammas and be thoughtful, and with his mind
well liberated, then in time he will, reflecting upon
Dhamma, and having become intent upon one object,
destroy darkness.’ So said Bhagavat. ( 975 )

SariputtasLitta is ended.

A///^akavagga, the fourth.

V. pArAyanavagga.

To the Brahmawa Bavart, living on the banks of the Godhavari,
in A.ssaka’s territory, comes another Br^hmawa and asks for five
hundred pieces of money, but not getting them he curses Bavari,
saying, ‘ May thy head, on the seventh day hence cleave into
seven/ A deity comforts Bavari by referring him to Buddha.
Then Bavart sends his sixteen disciples to Buddha, and each of
them asks Buddha a question.

1 . vatthugAthA.

1. From the beautiful city of the Kosalas (Sd>

vatthi) a Br^hma;za, well versed in the hymns, went
to the South (Dakkhi^z^patha) wishing for nothing-
ness^. (976)

2. In Assaka’s territory, in the neighbourhood

of A/aka, he dwelt on the banks of the Godhd.vad,
(living) on gleanings and fruit. (977)

3. And close by the bank there was a large

village, with the income of which he prepared a
great sacrifice. (978)

4. Having offered the great sacrifice, he again

entered the hermitage. Upon his re-entering,
another Brahma^za arrived,, (979)

5. With swollen feet trembling, with dirty teeth,
and with dust on his head. And he going up

^ Aki«X’aw7a.

“ Uggha/Zapado ti maggakkamanena gha/Zapfidatalo pa«hi-
kaya va pawhika/^i gopphakena va gopphakaw ^a;/7/ukena g-annu-
kam agantvapi gha/Zapildo. Commentator.

vatthugAthA.

177

to him (i. e. the first BrAhma^a) demanded five
hundred (pieces of money). (980)

6. BAvari, seeing him, bade him be seated, asked

him whether he was happy and well, and spoke as
follows : (981)

7. ‘ What gifts I had are all given away by

me ; pardon me, O BrAhmai^a, I have no five
hundred.’ (982)

8. If thou wilt not give to me who asks, may thy
head on the seventh day cleave into seven.’ (983)

9. So after the usual ceremonies this impostor

made known his fearful (curse). On hearing these
his words BAvari became sorrowful. (984)

10. He wasted away taking no food, transfixed

by the arrow of grief, but yet his mind delighted in
meditation. (985)

1 1 . Seeing BAvari struck with horror and sorrow-

ful, the benevolent deity (of that place) approached
him and said as follows ; (986)

1 2. ‘ He does not know (anything about) the head;
he is a hypocrite coveting riches ; knowledge of the
head and head-splitting is not found in him.’ (987)

13. ‘If the venerable (deity) knows it, then tell

me, when asked, all about the head and head-
splitting ; let us hear thy words.’ (988)

14. ‘I do not know this ; knowledge of it is not

found in me ; as to the head and head-splitting, this
is to be seen by Buddhas (only),* (989)

15. ‘Who then, say, in the circumference of the

earth knows the head and head-splitting, tell me
that, O deity ? ’ (99o)

16. ‘Formerly went out from Kapilavattliu a ruler

of the world, an offspring of the OkkAka king, the
Sakya son, the light-giving ; (990

178

PARAYANAVAGGA.

17. ‘ He is, O Brihma^za, the perfectly Enlightened
(Sambuddha) ; perfect in all things, he has attained
the power of all knowledge, sees clearly in everything;
he has arrived at the destruction of all things, and is
liberated in the destruction of the upadhish (992)

18. ‘He is Buddha, he is Bhagavat in the world,
he, the clearly-seeing, teaches the Dhamma; go thou
to him and ask, he will explain it to thee/ (993)

19. Having heard the word ‘Sambuddha,’ Bivart

rejoiced, his grief became little, and he was filled
with great delight. (994)

20. Bavari glad, rejoicing, and eager asked the

deity : ‘In what village or in what town or in what
province dwells the chief of the world, that going
there we may adore the perfectly Enlightened, the
first of men ? ’ (995)

21. ‘In Savatthi, the town of the Kosalas, dwells

6^ina (the Victorious), of great understanding and
excellent wide knowledge, he the Sakya son, un-
yoked, free from passion, skilled in head-splitting,
the bull of men.’ (99^)

22. Then (Bdvari) addressed his disciples, Brah-

mawas, perfect in the hymns : ‘ Come, youths, I will
tell (you something), listen to my words ; (997)

23. ‘He whose appearance in the world is diffi-

cult to be met with often,' he is at the present time ®
born in the world and widely renowned as Sam-
buddha (the perfectly Enlightened) ; go quickly to
Sivatthi and behold the best of men/ (998)

24. ‘How then can we know, on seeing him, that

^ Sabbadhammakkhaya7« patto (i. e. nibbana^
Vimutto upadhisa777kha7e.

® Sv-a^^a

vatthugAthA,

179

he is Buddha, O BrAhma?za? Tell ns who do not
know him, by what may we recognise him ? (999)

25. ‘ For in the hymns are to be found the marks

of a great man, and thirty-two are disclosed alto-
gether, one by one.’ (looo)

26. ‘For him on whose limbs these marks of

a great man are to be found, there are two ways
left, a third does not exist. (looi)

27. ‘If he abides in a dwelling, he will subdue

this earth without rod (or) sword, he will rule with
justice. (1002)

28. ‘ And if he departs from his dwelling for the

wilderness, he becomes the saint, incomparable
Sambuddha, who has removed the veil (from the
world) b (1003)

29. ‘ Ask in your mind about my birth and family,

my marks, hymns, and my other disciples, the head
and head-splitting. (1004)

30. ‘If he is Buddha, the clear-sighted, then he
will answer by word of mouth the questions you
have asked in your mind.'

31. 32, 33. Having heard Bavari’s words his dis-
ciples, sixteen Brahma^as, A^ita, Tissametteyya,
Puj>e«aka, further Mettagu, Dhotaka and Upasiva,
and Nan da, further Hemaka, the two Todeyya and
Kappa, and the wise Ga.tuk2inni, Bhadravudha and
U daya, and also the BrAhma^za PosAla, and the wise
Moghara^mn, and the great I si Pihgiya, (1006-1008)

34. All of them, having each their host (of pupils),
and being themselves widely renowned throughout the
world, thinkers delighting in meditation, wise, scented
with the perfume of former (good deeds) ^ (1009)

^ Comp. Lalita-vistara (ed. Calc.), pp. 116, 118.

** Pubbavasanavasita.

pArAyanavagga.

i8o

35. Having saluted Bdvari and gone round him

towards the right, all with matted hair and bear-
ing hides, departed with their faces turned to the
north. (1010)

36. To PatiZ/Mna of A/aka first, then to Mihis-

sati, and also to U^eni, Gonaddha, VedisA, Vana-
savhaya, (ion)

37. And also to Kosambl, SAketa, and SAvattht,

the most excellent of cities, to Setavya, Kapila-
vatthu, and the city of KusinAra, (1012)

38. And to PAva, the city of wealth, to VesAl!, the

city of Magadha, to PiscLi^^aka j^Tetiya (the Rock
Temple), the lovely, the charming. (1013)

39. As he who is athirst (longs for) the cold water,

as the merchant (longs for) gain, as he who is plagued
by heat (longs for) shade, so in haste they ascended
the mountain. (1014)

40. And Bhagavat at that time attended by the
assembly of the Bhikkhus taught the Dhamma to the
Bhikkhus, and roared like a lion in the forest. (1015)

41. A^ita beheld Sambuddha as the shining-(sun)

without (burning) rays, as the moon on the fifteenth,
having reached her plenitude. (1016)

42. Then observing on his body all the marks

in their fulness, standing apart, rejoiced, he asked the
questions of his mind : — (lot 7)

43. ‘Tell me about (my master’s) birth, tell me

about his family together with the marks, tell me
about his perfection in the hymns, how many (hymns)
does the BrAhmawa recite ?' (1018)

44. Bhagavat said : ‘ One hundred and twenty

years (Is his) age, and by family he is a B^vari ;
three are his marks on the limbs, and in the three
Vedas he is perfect. (1019)

vatthugAtha.

i8i

45. ‘In the marks and in the Itihdsa together with

Nigha;2fl^u and Ke^fubha — he recites five hundred —
and in his own Dhamma he has reached perfec-
tion/ (1020)

46. A^ita thought : ‘ Explain fully the marks of

BAvari, O thou best of men, who cuts off desire;
let there be no doubt left for us/ {1021)

47. Bhagavat said : ‘He covers his face with his

tongue, he has a circle of hair between the eye-
brows, (his) privy member (is) hidden in a sheath,
know this, O young man/ (1022)

48- Not hearing him ask anything, but hearing
the questions answered, the multitude reflected over-
joyed and with joined hands : — (1023)

49. ‘Who, be he a god, or Brahman, or Inda, the

husband of Su^ A, asked in his mind those questions,
and to whom did that (speech) reply ?’ (1024)

50. A^ita said : ‘ The head and head-splitting

BAvari asked about; explain that, O Bhagavat,
remove our doubt, O Isi/ (^025)

51. Bhagavat said : ‘ Ignorance is the head, know

this ; knowledge cleaves the head, together with
belief, thoughtfulness, meditation, determination, and
strength/ (1026)

52. Then with great joy having composed him-

self the young man put his hide on one shoulder,
fell at (Bhagavat’s) feet (and saluted him) with his
head, (saying) : (1027)

53. ‘ BAvad, the BrAhma/^a, together with his dis-

ciples, O thou venerable man, delighted and glad, does
homage to thy feet, O thou clearly-seeing/ (1028)

54. Bhagavat said : ‘ Let BAvari, the BrAhma;^a,

be glad together with his disciples ! Be thou also
glad, live long, O young man! (1029)

i 82

PARAYANAVAGGA.

55. ‘For Bivari and for thee, for all there are all

(kinds of) doubt ; having got an opportunity, ask ye
whatever you wish.’ (1030)

56. After getting permission from Sambuddha,

A^ita sitting there with folded hands asked Tathi-
gata the first question, (^O 30

The Vatthugithas are ended.

2 . A(S^ITAMAA^AVAPUA"/T/^A.

1. ‘By what is the world shrouded,’ — so said

the venerable A^ita, — ‘ by wFat does it not shine ?
What callest thou its pollution, what is its great
danger^?’ (1032)

2. ‘With ignorance is the world shrouded, O

A^ita,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ by reason of avarice
it does not shine ; desire I call its pollution, pain is
its great danger.’ {1033)

3. ‘ The streams of desire flow in every direction,’

— so said the venerable A^ita ; — ‘ what dams the
streams, say what restrains the streams, by what
may the streams be shut off ^ ? ’ (1034)

4. ‘ Whatever streams there are in the world, 0

A^ita,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ thoughtfulness is their
dam, thoughtfulness I call the restraint of the streams,
by understanding they are shut off.’ (1035)

5. ‘ Both understanding and thoughtfulness,’ — so

said the venerable A^ita, — ‘ and name and shape ^
O venerable man, — asked about this by me, declare
by what is this stopped?’ (1036)

^ Cf. Mah^bh. Ill, 17366; XII, 11030, Kena svid Ivr/to loka/^
kena svin na prakSjate, &c.

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 340. 8 JS[^inar 0 pa« -I’a.

TISSAMETTEYYAMliVAVAPUZ&'FA. 1 83

6. Buddha : ‘This question which thou hast asked,

O Afita, that I will explain to thee ; (I will explain
to thee) by what name and shape ^ are totally
stopped; by the cessation of consciousness this is
stopped here.’ (1037)

7. A^ita : ‘Those who have examined (all)

Dhammas (i. e. the saints), and those who are
disciples, (and those who are) common men here,
— when thou art asked about their mode of life,
declare it unto me, thou who art wise, O venerable
man.’ (1038)

8. Buddha : ‘ Let the Bhikkhu. not crave for sensual
pleasures, let him be calm in mind, let him wander
about skilful in all Dhammas, and thoughtful.’ (1039)

A^itamdwavapu-^/^/^a is ended.

3 . TISSAMETTEYYAMAiVAVAPUAX/^A.

1. ‘Who is contented in the world,’ — so said the

venerable Tissametteyya, — ‘who is without com-
motions ? Who after knowing both ends does not
stick in the middle, as far as his understanding is
concerned ? Whom dost thou call a great man ?
Who has overcome desire in this world ? ’ (1040)

2. ‘The Bhikkhu who abstains, from sensual
pleasures, O Metteyya,’ — so said Bhagavat,— -‘ who
is free from desire, always thoughtEil, happy by
reflection, he is without commotions, he after know-
ing both ends does not stick in the middle, as far
as his understanding is concerned ; him I call a great
man ; he has overcome craving in this world.’ (1041)

Tissametteyyam 4 ^avapu/^/^i^ is ended.

^ N^ma^ ifipa« /fa.

1.84

pArAyanavagga.

4 . PU 7 \^mKAMAiVAVAPUA' 7 f/ 2 ^A.

1. ‘To him who is without desire, who has seen

the root (of sin),’ — so said the venerable Pii««aka,
— ‘ I have come supplicatingly with a question : on
account of what did the Isis and men, Khattiyas
and BrAhmawas, offer sacrifices to the gods abun-
dantly in this world ? (about this) I ask thee, O
Bhagavat, tell me this.’ (1042)

2. ‘ All these Isis and men, Khattiyas and BrAh-
ma:;'^as, O Pu^waka,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ who
offered sacrifices to the gods abundantly in this
world, offered sacrifices, O Pu5>^waka, after reaching
old age, wishing for their present condition.’ (1043)

3. ‘All these Isis and men, Khattiyas and BrAh-

ma^as,’ — so said the venerable Tunn^kR , — ‘who
offered sacrifices to the gods abundantly in this
world, did they, O Bhagavat, indefatigable in the
way of offering, cross over both birth and old age,
O venerable man ? I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell
me this.’ (1044)

4. ‘ They wished for, praised, desired, abandoned

(sensual pleasures), O Pu^maka,’ — so said Bhagavat,
— ‘ they desired sensual pleasures on account of what
they reached by them; they, devoted to offering, dyed
with the passions of existence, did not cross over
birth and old age, so I say.’ (1045)

5. ‘If they, devoted to offering,’ — so said the

venerable Pu;«?zaka, — ‘did not by offering cross
over birth and old age, O venerable man, who
then in the world of gods and men crossed over
birth and old age, O venerable man, I ask thee,
O Bhagavat, tell me this ?’ (1046)

METTAGtmkNAYATVKKHA.

185

6. ‘Having considered everything^ in the world,
O Pu^^aka/ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘he for whom
there is no commotion ^ anywhere in the world, who
is calm without the smoke of passions, free from
woe, free from craving, he crossed over birth and
old age, so I say.’ (104 7)

Pu^;^akamd;zavapuy^iid is ended.

6. METTAGCrMAiVAVAPU^^^A.

1. ‘ I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this,’ — so

said the venerable Mettagfl, — ‘ I consider thee
accomplished and of a cultivated mind, why are
these (creatures), whatsoever they are of many kinds
in the world, always subject to pain.^’ (1048)

2. ‘ Thou mayest well ask me concerning the

origin of pain, O MettagV — so said Bhagavat, —
‘ I will explain that to thee in the way I myself
know it : originating in the upadhis pains arise,
whatsoever they are, of many kinds in the
world. (1049)

3. ‘ He who being ignorant creates upadhi, that

fool again undergoes pain ; therefore let not the
wise man create upadhi, considering (that this is)
the birth and origin of pain.’ (1050)

4. Mettag^; ‘What we have asked thee thou
hast explained to us ; another (question) I ask thee,
answer that, pray: How do the wise cross the
stream, birth and old age, and sorrow and lamenta-

^ ParovarSnlti pardni /5a ordni ia parattabhavasakattabhava-
dini parini ^a orini >5a ti vuttaw hoti. Commentator.

* Read yass’ n’ atthi.

i86

PARAYANAVAGGA.

tion ? Explain that thoroughly to me, O Muni, for
this thing (dhamnia) is well known to thee.’ (1051)

5. ‘I yvill explain the Dhamma to thee, O Met-

tagu,’ — so said Bhagavat; — ‘ if a man in the visible
world, without any traditional instruction, has' under-
stood it, and wanders about thoughtful, he may over-
come desire in the world.’ (^052)

6. Mettagd : ‘ And I take a delight in that, in the
most excellent Dhamma, O great Isi, which if a
man has understood, and he wanders about thought-
ful, he may overcome desire in the world.’ (1053)

7. ‘Whatsoever thou knowest, O Mettagh,’ — so

said Bhagavat, — ‘(of what is) above, below, across,
and in the middle, taking no delight and no rest
in these things, let thy mind not dwell on
existence. (t054)

8. ‘Living so, thoughtful, strenuous, let the Bhikkhu

wandering about, after abandoning selfishness, birth,
and old age, and sorrow, and lamentation, being a
wise man, leave pain in this world.’ (t055)

9. Mettagfi : ‘ I delight in these words of the

great Isi ; well expounded, O Gotama, is (by thee)
freedom from upadhi (i. e. Nibbfina). Bhagavat

in truth has left pain, for this Dhamma is well
known to thee k (lOSfi)

10. ‘And those also will certainly leave pain

whom thou, O Muni, constantly mayest admonish ;
therefore 1 bow down to thee, having come hither,
O chief (n^ga), may Bhagavat also admonish me
constantly.’ (1057)

11. Buddha: ‘The Br^hmawa whom I may ac-

' Sukittita/w Gotama nfipadhikan ti ettha anupadhikan ti
nibbS.nam, taw sandhdya vS Bhagavantaw tlapanto iha sukitti-
taw, &c. Commentator.

DH 0 T AK AM AiVAV AP UiTiTFA .

187

knowledge as accomplished, possessing nothing,
not cleaving to the world of lust, he surely has
crossed this stream, and he has crossed over to
the other shore, free from' harshness (akhila),. (and)
free from doubt. (105 8 )

1 2. ‘ And he is a wise and accomplished man
in this world; having abandoned this cleaving to
reiterated existence he is without craving, free from
woe, free from longing, he has crossed over birth
and old age, so I say.’ (^059)

Mettagum^;/avapu/J’Ma is ended.

6 . DHOTAKAyLkNAVA?VJ^KI/A.

1. ‘ I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this,’ — so

said the venerable Dhotaka,— ‘ I long for thy word,
O great I si ; may one, having listened to thy utter-
ance, learn his own extinction h’ (1060)

2. ‘Exert thyself then, O Dhotaka, so said

Bhagavat, — ‘ being wise and thoughtful in this world,
let one, having listened to my utterance, learn his
own extinction.’ (1061)

3. Dhotaka : ‘ I see in the world of gods and
men a Br^hma/za wandering about, possessing no-
thing ; therefore I bow down to thee, O thou all-
seeing one, free me, O Sakka, from doubts.’ (1Q62)

4. Buddha : ‘ I shall not go to free any one in

the world who is doubtful, O Dhotaka ; when thou
hast learned the best Dhamma, then thou shalt cross
this stream.’ (1063)

1 Attano ragidJuawi nibbanatthdya adhistladinr sikkheyya.
Commentator.

[10]

X

pArAyanavagga.

1 88

5. Dhotaka: ‘ Teach (me), O BrAhma^^a, having

compassion (on me), the Dhamma of seclusion (i. e.
Nibbina), that I may understand (it and) that I,
without falling into many shapes like the air,
may wander calm and independent in this
worlds' (?) (1064)

6. ‘I will explain to thee peace®, O Dhotaka,’ —

so said Bhagavat ; — ‘ if a man in the visible world,
without any traditional instruction, has understood
it, and wanders about thoughtful, he may overcome
desire in the world.’ (1065)

7. Dhotaka: ‘And I take delight in that, the

highest peace®, O great Isi, which if a man has
understood, and he wanders about thoughtful, he
may overcome desire in the world.’ (1066)

8. ‘Whatsoever thou knowest, O Dhotaka,’ — so

said Bhagavat, — ‘ (of what is) above, below, across,
and in the middle, knowing this to be a tie in the
world, thou must not thirst for reiterated ex-
istence.’ (1067)

DhotakaniiA;^avapui/^M is ended.

7. UPAStVAMAiVAVAPUiTisr^A.

I. ‘ Alone, O Sakka, and without assistance I
shall not be able to cross the great stream ,’ — so
said the venerable Upaslva; — ‘tell me an object,
O thou all-seeing one, by means of which one may
cross this stream.’ (1068)

^ Mnappakdrataw anapa^^amSno. Commentator.

^ Santis/. 3 Santim uttama/w.

UPASIVAMAiVAVAPUJrZFA.

189

2. ‘ Having in view nothingness, being thought-
ful, O Upasiva,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘by the
reflection of nothing existing shalt thou cross the
stream ; having abandoned sensual pleasures, being
loath of doubts, thou shalt regard the extinction of
craving (i. e. Nibbina), both day and night’ (1069)

3. Upasiva: * He whose passion for all sensual

pleasures has departed, having resorted to nothing-
ness, after leaving everything else, and being deli-
vered in the highest deliverance by knowledge, will he
remain there without proceeding further ? ’ (1070)

4. ‘ He whose passion for all sensual pleasures
has departed, O Upasiva,’ — so said Bhagavat, —

‘ having resorted to nothingness after leaving every-
thing else, and being delivered in the highest
•deliverance by knowledge, he will remain there
without proceeding further.’ (1071)

5. Upasiva: ‘If he remains there without pro-

ceeding further for a multitude of years, O thou
all-seeing one, (and if) he becomes there tranquil
and delivered, will there be consciousness for such
a one ?’ (1072)

6. '‘As a flame blown. about by the violence of

the wind, O Upasiva,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘goes
out, cannot be reckoned (as existing), even so a
Muni, delivered from name and body, disappears,
and cannot be reckoned (as existing).' (1073)

7. Upasiva: ‘ Has he (only) disappeared, or does

he not exist (any longer), or is he for ever free
from sickness ? Explain that thoroughly to me,
O Muni, for this Dhamma is well known to

thee.’ (1074)

8. ‘For him wEo has disappeared there is no
form, O Upasiva,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘that by

X 2

'4

190

PARAYANAVAGGA.

which they say he is, exists for him no longer, when
all things (dhamma) have been cut off, all (kinds
of) dispute are also cut off.’ (1075)

Upasivamaz/avapui'/^M is ended.

8. NANDAMAiVAVAPU/v 7 v^//A.

1. ‘There are Munis in the world,’ — so said the

venerable Nanda, — ‘so people .say. How is this
(understood) by thee ? Do they call him a Muni
who is possessed of knowledge or him who is pos-
sessed of life ? ’ (1076)

2. Buddha : ‘ Not because of (any philosophical)
view, nor of tradition, nor of knowledge, O Nanda,
do the expert call (any one) a Muni ; (but) such as
wander free from w^oe, free from desire, after having
secluded themselves, those I call Munis.'’ (1077)

3. ‘All these Samai>zas and Brahma^a’s,’ — so said
the venerable Nanda, — ‘ say that j^urity comes from
(philosophical) views, and from tradition, and from
virtue and (holy) works, and in many (other) ways.
Did they, in the way in which they lived in the
world, cross over birth and old age, O venerable
man? I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this.’ (1078)

4. ‘ All these Samaras and Brahma;zas, O Nanda,'

— so said Bhagavat, — ‘say that purity comes from
(philosophical) views, and from tradition, and from
virtue and (holy) works, and in many (other) ways :
still they did not, in the way in which they lived
in the world, cross over birth and old age, so
I say.’ (1079)

5. ‘All these Sama;?as and Brahma^as,’— so said

H EMAKAMAiVAVAPUXA'HA.

I91

the venerable Nancla, — ‘ say that purity comes from
(philosophical) views, and from tradition, and from
virtue and (holy) works, and in many (other) ways ;
if thou, O Muni, sayest that such have not crossed
the stream, who then in the world of gods and men
crossed over birth and old age, O venerable man ?
I ask thee, O Bhagavat, tell me this.’ (1080)

6. ‘ I do not say that all Sama/^as and Brahma*

nz.s, O Nanda,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘are shrouded
by birth and old age; those who, after leaving in
this world what has been seen or heard or thought,
and all virtue and (holy) works, after leaving every-
thing of various kinds, after penetrating craving, are
free from passion, such indeed I call men that have
crossed the stream.’ (1081)

7. Nanda : ‘ I delight in these words of the great

Isi ; well expounded (by thee), O Gotama, is freedom
from upadhi (i. e. Nibbina); those who, after leaving
in this world what has been seen or heard or thought,
and all virtue and (holy) works, after leaving every-
thing of various kinds, after penetrating craving, are
free from passion, such I verily call men that have
crossed the stream.’ {1082)

Nanclam^;^avapu/^/fy^a is ended.

9. HEMAKAMAiVAVAPU/r/<"^A.

I. ‘Those who before,’ — so said the venerable
Hemaka, — ‘ explained to me (their doctrine), pre-
viously to Gotama’s doctrine, saying, “ So it was, so
it will be,” all that (was only) oral tradition, all

192

PARAYANAVAGGA.

that (was only) something that increased (my)
doubts h (1083)

2. ‘ I took no pleasure in that, but tell thou me the

Dhamma that destroys craving, O Muni, which if a
man has understood, and he wanders about thought-
ful, he may cross desire in the world.’ (1084)

3. Buddha : ‘ In this world (much) has been seen,

heard, and thought ; the destruction of passion and
of wish for the dear objects that have been per-
ceived, O Hemaka, is the imperishable state of
Nibbina. (1085)

4. ‘Those who, having understood this, are

thoughtful, calm, because they have seen the
Dhamma, tranquil and divine, such have crossed
desire in this world I’ (1086)

Hemakam^/favapu/^/I"//^ is ended.

10. TODEYYAMAiV^AVAPU/rA'-iTA.

1. ‘ He in whom there live no lusts,’ — so said the

venerable Todeyya, — ‘to whom there is no craving,
and who has overcome doubt, what sort of deliver-
ance is there for him ? ’ (1087)

2. ‘ He in whom there live no lusts, O Todeyya,’ —

so said Bhagavat,— ‘ to whom there is no craving, and
who has overcome doubt, for him there is no other
deliverance.’ (1088)

3. Todeyya: ‘Is he without desire or is he
longing, is he possessed of understanding or is he
forming himself an understanding ? Explain this to

^ Huraw Gotamasasand ti pubbatara/w. Commentator.
“ B reads ye satd instead of tedasS.

KAPPAMAiVAVAPUA'isrHA.

193

me, O thou all-seeing one, that I may know a Muni,
O Sakka.’ (1089)

4. Buddha ; ‘ He is without desire, he is not
longing, he is possessed of understanding, and he
is not forming himself an understanding ; know, O
Todeyya, that such is the Muni, not possessing any-
thing, not cleaving to lust and existence.’ (logo)

Todeyyamd?iavapu/6/’/^a is ended.

11 . KAPPAMA//AVAPUA"A"/fA.

1. ‘For those who stand in the middle of the

water,’ — so said the venerable Kappa, — ‘ in the for-
midable stream that has set in, for those who are
overcome by decay and death, tell me of an island,
O venerable man, and tell thou me of an island that
this (pain) may not again come on k’ (1091)

2. ‘For those who stand in the middle of the

water, O Kappa,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ in the for-
midable stream that has set in, for those overcome
by decay and death, I will tell thee of an island,
O Kappa. (1092)

3. ‘This matchless island, possessing nothing (and)

grasping after nothing, I call Nibbana, the destruc-
tion of decay and death k (1093)

4. ‘ Those who, having understood this, are

thoughtful (and) calm, because they have seen the
Dhamma, do not fall into the power of MAra, and
are not the companions of MAra.’ (t 094 )

KappamAwavapuM/^a is ended.

^ B reads disam for dtpam.

® Akiw/^ananti kM’anapa/ipakkhaw, anSdanan ti adanapa/i-
pakkhawz, kiw^an^ddnavQpasaman ti vuttaw hoti. Commentator.

194

PARAYANAVAGGA.

12 . GATUKANmUAN-AVAVU/aiTB^A,

1. ‘Having heard of a hero free from lust/— so
said the venerable 6’atuka;z;2in, — ‘ who has crossed
the streafflj I have come to ask him who is free
from lust , tell me the seat of peace, O thou with
the born eye (of wisdom), tell me this truly, O
Bhagavat.

2. For Bhagavat wanders about after having

conquered lust as the hot sun (conquers) the earth
by its heat ; tell the Dhamma to me who has (only)
little understanding, O thou of great understanding,
that I may ascertain how to leave in this world
birth and decay.’ ^

3* Subdue thy greediness for sensual pleasures,
O 6^atuka?2?2in,’ — so said Bhagavat, — ‘ having consi-
dered the forsaking, of the world as happiness, let
there not be anything either grasped after or re-
jected by thee. (1097)

4. ‘What is before thee, lay that aside; let there be

nothing behind thee; if thou wilt not grasp after what
IS in the middle, thou wilt wander calmk (1098)

5. ‘ For him whose greediness for name and form

is wholly gone, O Brahmar/a, for him there are no
passions by which he might fall into the power of
death.’ (1099)

Gdli\k 7 inn\m^n 2 iY 2 iimk/ihk is ended.

13 . BHADRAvUDHAMAWAVAPU/F/ibYA.

I. I entreat the wise (Buddha), the houseless, who
cuts off desire, so (said) the venerable Bhadrdvu-
dha,— ‘who is free from commotion, forsakes joy, has

Comp, supra, Attada;/fl’'asutta, v. 15.

UDAYAMAiVAVAPUA'A^J/A

195

crossed the stream, is liberated, and who leaves time
behind; having heard the chiefs (word), they will
go away from here. (1100)

2. ‘ Different people have come together from

the provinces, longing (to hear) thy speech, O hero;
do thou expound it thoroughly to them, for this
Dhamma is well known to thee.’ (iioi)

3. ‘Let one wholly subdue the craving of grasping

(after everything), O Bhadrdvudha,’ — so said Bha-
gavat, — ‘ above, below, across, and in the middle ;
for whatever they grasp after in the world, just by
that Mdra follows the man. (1102)

4. ‘Therefore, knowing this, let not the thoughtful

Bhikkhu grasp after anything in all the world, con-
sidering as creatures of desire this generation, stick-
ing fast in the realm of death.’ (1103)

Bhadrdvudhamd;?avapu/fMa is ended.

14. UDAYAMAiVAVAPlJA7f//A.

1. ‘To Buddha who is sitting meditating, free

from pollution, ’—“SO said the venerable Udaya, —
‘having performed liis duty, who is without passion,
accomplished in all things (dhamma), I have come
with a question ; tell me tlie deliverance by know-
ledge, the splitting up of ignorance,’ (1104)

2. ‘(It consists in) leaving lust and desire, O

Udaya,’— so said Bhagavat,—* and both (kinds of)
grief, and driving away sloth, and warding off mis-
behaviour. (1105)

3. ‘ The deliverance by knowledge which is puri-
fied by equanimity and thoughtfulness and preceded

196

PARAYANAVAGGA.

by reasoning on Dhamma I will tell thee, the splitting
up of ignorance/ (i 106)

4. Udaya: ‘What is the bond of the world, what

is its practice? By the leaving of what is Nibb^na
said to be?’ (1107)

5. Buddha : ‘ The world is bound by pleasure,

reasoning is its practice ; by the leaving of desire
Nibbina is said to be/ (1108)

6. Udaya: ‘How does consciousness cease in

him that wanders thoughtful ? Having come to ask
thee, let us hear thy words/ (1109)

7. Buddha: ‘For him who both inwardly and out-
wardly does not delight in sensation, for him who thus
wanders thoughtful, consciousness ceases/ (i no)

U dayamd:^2avapu/&/C’/^^ is ended.

15. POSALAMAT^AVAPU/sTA'-j^A.

1. ‘ He who shows the past (births, &c.),’ — so said

the venerable Posdla, — ‘who is without desire and
has cut off doubt, to him who is accomplished in
all things (dhamma), 1 have come supplicatingly
with a question. (iiii)

2. ‘ O Sakka, I ask about his knowledge who is

aware of past shapes, who casts off every corporeal
form, and who sees that there exists nothing either
internally or externally ; how can such a one be led

(by anybody) ? ’ (i 1 1 2)

3. ‘ Tath^gata, knowing all the faces of con-

sciousness, O Posila,’ — so said Bhagavat,— ‘ knows
(also) him who stands delivered, devoted to that
(object). (ill 3)

mogha'rXgamanaya-pvkkha.

197

4. ‘ Having understood that the bonds of pleasure
do not originate in nothingness {?), he sees clearly in
this (matter), this (is) the knowledge of a perfect,
accomplished Br^hmawa/ (1114)

Pos§.iami?zavapuZ’/i’/^d is ended.

16. MOGHARA6^AMAA7lVAPUiOriYA.

1. ‘Twice have I asked Sakka/ — so said the

venerable Moghar^an, — ‘ but the clearly-seeing has
not explained it to me; if the divine Isi is asked
for the third time, he will explain it, so I have
heard. (1115)

2. ‘ There is this world, the other world, Brah-

man’s world together with the world of the gods;
I do not know thy view, the famous Gotama’s
(view). (ill 6 )

3. ‘ To this man who sees what is good I have

come supplicatingly with a question : How is any
one to look upon the world that the king of death
may not see him ? ’ (i 1 1 7)

4. ‘Look upon the world as void, O Moghari^an,

being always thoughtful; having destroyed the view
of oneself (as really existing), so one may overcome
death ; the king of death will not see him who thus
regards the world k’ (1118)

Moghar^^am^mvapuiiid is ended.

^ Comp. Dhp. V. 170.

198

PARA YANA VAGGA.

17. PINGIYAMAyVAVAPU/rA77A.

1. ‘ l am old, feeble, colourless,’ — so said the vene-

rable Pirigiya — ‘ my eyes are not clear, my hearino-
is not good ; lest I should perish a fool on the wa^
tell me the Dhamma, that I may know how to leave
birth and decay in this world.’ (1119)

2. ^‘Seeing others afflicted by the body, O Pih-

giya,’— so said Bhagavat,—' (seeing) heedless people
suffer in their bodies therefore, O Pihgiya, shalt
thou be heedful, and leave the body behind^ that thou
mayest never come to exist again.’ (i j2o)

_ 3- Pihgiya : ‘ Four regions, four intermediate re-
gions, above and below, these are the ten regions ;
there is nothing which has not been seen, heard, or
thought by thee, and (is there) anything in the world
not understood (by thee) .? Tell (me) the Dhamma,

that I may know how to leave birth and decay in

this world.’ x

. (ri2i)

4- Seeing men seized with desire, O Pihgiya,’— so

said Bhagavat,— Tormented and overcome by decay,

—therefore thou, O Pihgiya, shalt be heedful, and

leave desire behind, that thou mayest never come

to exist again.’

Pihgiyamh;» 2 avapui^'/zh is ended.

This said Bhagavat, living in Magadha at Phsh-
Tzaka /iTetiya (the Rock T emple). Sought by sixteen
Brhhma.as, the followers (of Bdvari, aifd) qifestioned
by each of them in turn, he responded to the ques-
tions. If a man, having understood the meaning
and tenor of each question, lives according to the

PARAYANASUTTA.

199

Dliamma, then he will go to the further shore of
decay and death, for these Dhammas lead to the
further shore, and therefore this order of Dhamma
was called ‘ the way to the other shore.’

I, 2 . A/ita, Tissametteyya, PLm;zaka and Met-
tagh, Dhotaka and Upasiva, Nanda and Hemaka,
the tw 5 Todeyya and Kappa, and the wise 6^atu-
ka^zj^in, Bhadriviidha and Udaya, and also the Brah-
mawa Posala, and the wise Moghardfnn, and Pihgiya
the great Isi, (1123, 1124)

3. These went up to Buddha, the Isi of exemplary

conduct ; asking subtle questions they went up to
the supreme Buddha. (1125)

4. Buddha, being asked, responded to their ques-

tions truly, and in responding to the questions the
Muni delighted the Brihma?i^as. (1126)

5. They, having been delighted by the clearly-

seeing Buddha, the kinsman of the Adi/^ias, devoted
themselves to a religious life near the man of excel-
lent understanding. (1127)

6. He who lived according to what had been
taught by Buddha (in answer) to each single ques-
tion, went from this shore to the other shore. (1128)

7. From this shore he went to the other shore

entering upon the most excellent way; this way
is to lead to the other shore, therefore it is called
‘the way to the other shore.* (1^29)

8. ‘ I will proclaim accordingly the way to the
further shore,’ — so said the venerable Pihgiya ; — ‘ as
he saw it, so he told it ; the spotless, the very wise,
the passionless, the desireless lord, for what reason
should he speak falsely } (11 30)

200

pArAyanavagga.

9. ‘ Well ! I will praise the beautiful voice of
(Buddha), who is without stain and folly, and who
has left behind arrogance and hypocrisy. (1T31)

10. ‘The darkness-dispelling Buddha, the all-

seeing, who thoroughly understands the worlds
has overcome all existences, is free from passion,
has left behind all pain, is rightly called (Buddha),
he, O BrAhmawa, has come to me. 132)

11. ‘As the bird, having left the bush, takes

up his abode in the fruitful forest, even so I, having
left men of narrow views, have reached the great
sea, like the ha^^sa. (1133)

12. ‘ Those who before in another world explained
the doctrine of Gotama, sa)ing, “ So it was, so it
will be,” all that was only oral tradition, all that was
only something that increased my doubts. (i 134)

1 3. ‘ There is only one abiding dispelling darkness,

that is the high-born,, the luminous, Gotama of great
understanding, Gotama of great wisdom, (1135)

14. ‘Who taught me the Dhamma, the instanta-
neous, the immediate, the destruction of desire, free-
dom from distress, whose likeness is nowhere^.’ (i 136)

15. Bdvari : ‘ Canstthou stay away from him even

for a moment, O Pihgiya, from Gotama of great under-
standing, from Gotama of great wisdom, (i 137)

16. ‘ Who taught thee the Dhamma, the instan-

taneous, the immediate, the destruction of desire,
freedom from distress, whose likeness is no-
where?' (113S)

^ Lokantagfi.

* Yo me dhammam adesesi
Sandi/Z^ikam ak^likaw
Tawhakkhayam anitikawt
Yassa n’ atthi upam4 kvaii.

parAyanasutta.

201

1 7. Pingiya : ‘ I do not stay away from him even
for a moment, O BrAhma/^a, from Gotama of great
understanding, from Gotama of great wisdom, (1139)

18. 'Who taught me the Dhamma, the instan-

taneous, the immediate, the destruction of desire,
freedom from distress, whose likeness is no-
where. (1140)

19. ‘ I see him in my mind and with my eye,

vigilant, O BrAhma;2a, night and day ; worshipping
I spend the night, therefore I think I do not stay
away from him. (1141)

20. ‘ Belief and joy, mind and thought incline

me towards the doctrine of Gotama; whichever
way the very wise man goes, the very same I am
inclined to. (?) (1142)

21. 'Therefore, as I am worn out and feeble,

my body does not go there, but In my thoughts
I always go there, for my mind, O Brahma?2a, Is
joined to him. (^^^43)

22. ‘ Lying in the mud (of lusts) wriggling, 1

jumped from island to island ; then I saw the per-
fectly Enlightened, who has crossed the stream, and
is free from passion.’ (t^44)

23. Bhagavat^ : 'As Vakkali was delivered by
faith, (as well as) BhadrAvudha and A/avi-Gotama,

^ At the conclusion of this (i. e. the preceding) gatha, Bhagavat,
who stayed at Sdvatthi, when seeing the maturity of the minds of
Pingiya and Bdvarf shed a golden light. Pingiya, who sat pic-
turing Buddha's virtues to Bdvart, having seen the light, looked
round, saying, ‘ What is this ? ’ And when he saw Bhagavat
standing, as it were, before him, he said to the Brdhmawa Bdvart;

‘ Buddha has come.' The Brihma«a rose from his seat and stood
with folded hands. Bhagavat, shedding a light, showed himseif to
the BrShmawa, and knowing what was beneficial for botlfi, he said
this stanza while addressing Pingiya. Commentator.

202

PARAYANAVAGG'A.

SO thou shalt let faith deliver thee, and thou shalt
go, O Pihgiya, to the further shore of the realm
of death h’ (^HS)

24. Pihgiya : ‘ I am highly pleased at hearing
the Muni’s words ; Sambuddha has removed the
veil, he is free from harshness, and wise. (1146)

25. ' Having penetrated (all things) concerning

the gods, he knows everything of every descrip-
tion ; the Master will put an end to all questions
of the doubtful that (will) admit (him). H7)

26. ‘To the insuperable, the unchangeable (Nib-

bana), whose likeness is nowhere, I shall certainly
go; in this (Nibbana) there will be no doubt (left)
for me, so know (me to be) of a dispossessed
mind.’ (1148)

Phriyanavagga is ended.

Suttaniphta is ended.

Yathd Vakkalithero saddhadhimutto ahosi saddhadhuren’ eva
arahatta;;? papuwi evam eva tvam pi mu?7/(’assu saddiia?/-! tato saddhdya
adhimuK’anto sabbe sa;«khard ’ti iidind nayena vipassanaw

arabhiiva maH’udheyyassa paraw nibbanaz7z gamissasiti arahattani-
kQ/ena desanaw ni/Mapesi. Commentator.

INDEX.

The figures of this Index refer to the pages of the Translation, and
the numerals to the Introduction.

Ababa hell, 119.

Abbuda hell, 119, 120.

family, 8, 68, 9a, 199.
AggJl/ava temple, 56.
Aggika-BliSradvEiiga br^hma«a, 20.
A^-aniya, high-bred, 84, 91.
A;fita-Kesakambali titthakara, xii,

85.^

A^ita maj?ava, XU, 179, 180, 182, 199.
Ajivika brfihmana, xiii, 62.

Ahaha hell, 119.

Ah&ra, food ? I37'

AkHila, free from harshness, 34, 77,
187.

Akijil^ana, possessionless, xv.

Alwis, 20, 107.

A/aka city, 176, 180.

A/avaka yakkha, 29.

A/avl city, 29 . 31 , 55«

A/avi~Gotama, aoi,

Amagandha brShmawa, 39.
An^gSmin, who does not return, 130,
131.

Anllthapi«jfika, 17, so, 42, 47, 6 1, i r6.
AnguttarSpa country, 95, 98.
AnupSdisesa, not having the upSdis
remaining, 161,

Anuvidita, well-informed, 84, 90.
AMatitthiyapubba, 94.

Apa«a city, 95, 97, 98.

Appam^a, 54.

Arahat, saint, 15, 23, 79.

Arambha, exertion, 136.

Arati, daughter of Mftra, 154.

Ariya, noble, 84, 9T, 120.
Ariyamagga, the noble way, X47.
Ascetic, XV.

Ascetic life, xv, 66 ,

Cio]

Asipattavana hell, 122.

Asita isi, 123.

Asoka, inscriptions of, xii.

Assaka kingdom, 176.

Assamedha, horse-sacrifice, 49.
Assembly of Bhikkhus, 14, 37, 51,
^5, 79, 84, 93, 95, 96, 98, 116,
129.

Asuddhadhamma, impure, 163,
Asura demon, 50, 133.
Athabba«a-veda, 168.
AttadaWasutta, 170.

Atata hell, 119.

Avig-^l, ignorance, xv, 131,.

Bamboo tree, 6,

BSvari brahmawa, xii, 176.

Belief, religious, 3.

Bhadrlvudha mS«ava, xiii, 179, 194,
201.

BhSradv%a m3«ava, xiii, 107,
Bhikkhus, 58, x67', 168,

Bhovadi, in.

BimbisSra, king, 66 , 98,

Bodhisatta, 123.

Body, xvl.

Bracelets, 7.

Brahmabandhu, 39.

Brahmaloka, 83, 84,

Brahman, 13, 23, 30, 44, 77, 83, 95,

IIS, 140, * 8 i.

Brahman Sahampati, it 8.

BrEhmana, 13, 18, 33, 31, 44, 46,
56, 58, 63, 70, 74, 75, 8r, 84,
85, 9S, 96, 107, 108, 140, 149,
156, 164, 165, 190, 191, 198.
Brlhma«adhammikasutta, 46.
Brahma world, 23, 83, 89, 95, 197,

204

SUTTA-NIPATA.

Buddha, his relation to philosophy,
xii ; sprung from the Sama?/as,
xiv ; his titles, xv, 22, 25, 26,

29, 31, 32, 36, 41, 43, 44 » 45 ,

46, 54, 55, 58, 61, 63, 63, 65,

66, 67, 68, 72, 79, 88, 93, 95,

98, TOO, 116,123, 125, 352, 154,

176, 177.

Buddhistic formula, xiii.

Childers, 24, 36, 42,

Cows are slain, xiv.

DakkhiTjagiri, ir.

DakkhinApatha, 176.
Dasaratha-Gataka, 305.

Davids, T. W. Rhys, 3, ,54, 65, 66,
74 , 129 -

Deity, 17, 42, 85, 177.

Desire, xv.

Deva, god, 44, 50, 51,74, 93, 123,
124, 140, 181.
DhammaAariyasutta, 45.
Dhammapada,xii, 6,7, 10, ri, 16,34,
41, 42, 53, 55, 76, -8r, 112, 120,

127, 158, 171, 173, 182, 197.

Dhamnraragan, a religious king, loi.
Dhammavinaya, 94.

Dhammika upSsaka, 61.

Dhaniya herdsman, 3.

Dhira, firm, 84, 91.

Dhotaka mawava, xii, 179, 187.
Disputants, xiii, 152, 161, 162.
Dif/,6asiitamuta, xiii.

DittM, philosophy, xii, xiii,
Dii‘t*igata, philosopher, xiii.
Ditl/jigatika, philosopher, 153.
Di/jt/ 5 inivesa, xiii.

DuwAawAakasutta, 145.
Dvayatanupassanasutta, 129.

Ekana/a, a brahmana village, ii.
Ekodi, intent on one object, 173.
Elambiiga lotus, 156.

Erava»a, king of elephants, 62.
Etymology, 97.

Extinction, xvi.

Feer, Leon, 17, 24, 42.

Fire, offerings to, xiii, 73.
Forefathers, 51.

Gahau/’H, householder, 7, 33.
GsXuikfjl creeper, 5.

Gandhabba, 1x4.

Gangs, 30, 44-

Gaviphala, 39,

Gaya, 44^.

Gi^gg/jakCifa mountain, 79.

Gihin, householder, 7, 10.

Giribba^ga city, 66.

Godhavan river, 176,

Gogerly, ,i7, 24, 42.

Gonaddha city, 180.

Gospel of St.John, 11, loi ; St.

Luke, 3 ; St. Matthew, 39, 68.
Gotama, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 20, 23,
24, 26, 27, 37, 47, 51, 61, 71,.
75, 78, 79, 80, 84, 87, 93, 95,
96, 99, 101, 103, 109, 115, 126,
157, 169, 186, 191, 197, 200,
201 ; cf. Samawa Gotama.
Grammarian, 97.

Grimblot, xii, 17, 24, 42.
Guhat/Mkasutta, 144.

Ganusso?!! br^hmana, xiii, 108.
Gappa, recitation, xiii, 109.
Garasutta, 150.

Gataka, 8, 16, 32.

Gatukawfin manava, xiii, 179, 194.
Getavana, 17, 20, 42,47, 6r, 71, n6.
Gina, conqueror, 62, 126, 17k

Ha?wsa, 200.

Hardy, Spence, ir, 20, 47.

Hell, 23, 40, 54, 116, 1 18, 119, 120,
121, 122.

Hemaka mawava, xiii, 179, 191.
Hemavata yakkha, 25, 26.
Himavanta mountain, 67,

Hirisutta, 41.

Householder, 61, 80.

Hymns, xiii, 23, 41, 50, 97, 124, 168,
176, 178, 180.

HManawkala, 107.

Inda god, 50, 51, 123, 181.

I%ita, commotion, 138.

Isi, sage, 28, 33, 47, 58, 74, 114,123,
1*57, 179, 184, 186, 187, 188,
^191, 197, 199.

Itihasa, xiii, 97, 181.

Kalahavivadasutta, 159.
Kalandakanivapa, 84, 86.
Kdmabhava, 114.

Klmasutta, 143.

Ka«ha=Mara, 58, 70, 174.
Kanhabhi^gatika, of black origin, 102.
Ka«hasiri isi, 123, 124.

Kapilasutta, 45.

INDEX.

205

Kapilavatthu city, 177, 180.

Kappa, time, xvi, 88, 89, 91 .

Kappa mSwava, xiii, 193.

Kappa =Nigrodhakappa, 57, 179.
Kappatita, who has overcome time,
60.

Kappa yana or Kappiya brahma«a —
Nigrodhakappa, 58,
Kasibhiradva^a brahmawa, 1 1 .
Kassapa buddha, 39,

Ke?ziya g-ajfila, 95.

Ke/ubha, xiii, 97, i8r.

Khaggavisa«a, rhinoceros, 6.

Khara yakkha, 44.

Khari measure, 119.

Khattiya, 19, 23, 50, 67, 74, loi, 184.
Khema=Nibbana, 164.

Khetta^ina, who has conquered the
regions, 84, 89.

Kiw.silasutta, 52.

Kokaliya bhikkhu, 116.

Kohu/^i, 1 1 7.

Kosala country, 47, 67, 73, 84, 119,
176 , 178.

Kosambi city, 180.

Ko/i number, 122.

Kovilara tree, 7.

Kumuda hell, 119.

Kunda, 15,

Kuppapa/i/J^asanti, 146.

Kusala, happy, 89.

KusinSra city, 180.

Kuvera king, 62.

iTahkin brahmawa, xiii, 107.

ATaw^/ala, 23.

irara?;avat, endowed with the observ-
ances, 84, 91.

^inaka, 39.
isTihgulaka, 39,

/CfilaviyCihasutta, 16 r.
iTunda smith, 15.

Lalita-vistara, xii, 123, 179.

Lamp, go out like a, xvi.
Lokadhamma, the things of the
world, 43.

Lumbini country, 124.

Magadha country, ir, 66, 98, 180,
198.

M^gandiyasutta, 154.

Maggadesaka or Maggadesin, teach-
ing the way, xiii, 15, 16.
MaggadOsin, defiling the way, xiii,
15, 16.

Maggajf^Myin == Maggadesaka, xiii,

15-

Maggagina, victorious by the way.
xiii, 15, 16.

Maggag-ivin, living in the way, xiii,
15, 16.

Magha ma«ava, 79.

Magg/i^imanikaya, 107.

Mahfibharata, 182.
Mahamangalasutta, 42.
Mahaparinibbinasutta, xii.
Mahaviyuhasutta, 164.

IMahesi, 114 ,

Mahi river, 3.

Mahissati city, iSo.
hlakkhali-Gosahi titthakara, xii, 85.
IMamaka, follower, 169.

Mara yakkha, the king of death, the
evil spirit, xv, 5, r 3, 30, 44, 58, 68,
70, 71, 93 , 95 , 102, 105, 132,
140, 141, 142, 154, 174, rpj,
* 95 -

Mataiiga .^aa/fala, 20, 23.

Matter, xvi,

Megasthenes, xii.

Meru mountain, 123.

Metre, versed in, xiii, 97, 109.

Metta, friendliness, 24.

Mettagfi inaaava, xii, 179 , 185.
MigSramatar, 129.

Milindapa«ha, xii,

Moggallana therji, ir6.

Mogharagan mawava, xiii, 179, 197.
Mona, wisdom, 129.

Moneyya, state of wisdom, 126,

Muir, 123.

Mulaphala, 39,

Muni, ascetic, xv, xvi, 5, 15, 16, 27,
33 , 41, 58, 67, 75, 78, 84, 90,
92, 93, *05, 126, X27, 129,

* 45 , * 5 *, 156, * 57 , 158, 161,
166 , 167, 170, 171, 172, 186,
189, 190 , 191, 192, X93, 199 .
202.

]\lu%a grass, 5,

Muta, xiii.

Naga, chief; sinless (na-j-agas?), 67,

89 , 93 , *05, 156, 186,

Nahataka, cleansed, 84, 89.

Nahuta number, 122.

Nalaka, sister's son of Asita, 123.
125.

Namu^i — MSra, 68, 69.

Nanda ma«ava, xii, 179, 190.

Nirada isi, 93.

y 2

206

SUTTA-NIPATA.

Natthikadifi^i, sceptic, 40.

Navasutta, 51.

Nera;%ari river, 68.

Nibbana, xv, xvi, 4, lo, 13, 16, 24,
31, 32, 33 ) 34 ) 38, 43 , 56, 59 ,
60, 68, 76, 77, 125, 141, 142,
148, 150, 170, 171, 186, 188,
189, I9I, 192, 193, 196, 203 .

Nibbuta, happy, 107.

Nigawi*/!?.! brainna;;a, xiii, 62.

Nigar/^z&a-Nataputta tittliakara, xii,
85.

Nigha«,^u, vocabulary, xiii, 181.

Nigrodhakappa brahma?2a, 55, 56.

Nirabbuda hell, 119, 120.

Nirupadhi, free from the elements
of existence, 114.

Nissita, dependent, 138.

Nivesana, resting-place, dogma, xiii,
^ 4 *

Nivissaviidin, dogmatist, xiii, i66.

Obstacles, five, 3, 10.

Okkaka king, 49, 50, 177,

Oldenberg, xii.

Outcast, 20.

Pabbagi>-a, leaving the world, 14,66,
79 *

Pabbag'ita, ascetic, 7, 62.

Pabbata isi, 93.

Padaka, versed in metre, xiii, 97,
109.

Padhanasutta, 68.

Paduma hell, n6, 119, 120, 122.

Pakudha-KaX’iSyana tittliakara, xii,
85.

Pamada, indolence, 54.

Painatta, indolent, 54,

Pan^fava mountain, 67.

Pawiofita, wise, 84, 90.

Pa^ 7 )&avaggiya, 58.

Papa?2/^a, delusion, 167.

Parfibhavasutta, 17.

ParamaW/jakasutta, 148.

ParSyana, the w'ay to the further
shore, 176.

Paribbaga, ParibbEgaka, wandering
mendicant, 22, 84, 91.

PEri)l/6atta tree, 10.

Parinibbuta, happy, blessed, 58, 60,
75 , 133 -

Pariyanta^arin, wandering on the
borders, 173.

Pasawaka ietiya, rock temple, 180,
198.

Pasfirasutta, 152.

Pati/if-^ana city, 180.

Pattaphala, 39.

Pa/iharakapakkha, 65.

Pava city, 180.

Phassa, touch, 133, 157, 160.
Philosophers, two sorts of, xii,
154 -

Philosophy, no one saved by, xiv,
Pingiya nia«ava, xiii, 179, 198.
Pleasures of sense, 28.

Pokkharasuti brahmawa, xiii, 108.
PosEla muwava, xiii, 179, 196.
Pubbarama, 129.

Puwfarika hell, 1x9.

Pu««aka inawava, xii, 179, 184.
Purabhedasutta, 157,
Pura«a-Kassapa titthakara, xii, 85,
Purisamedha, sacrifice of a man, 49.

Raga, daughter of Mara, 154.
Ragagaha city, 66, 79, 84, 86.

Rahu, demon, 75, S2.

Rahula, Buddha’s son, 54.

Rakkhasa, demon, 50.

Ratanasutta, 36.

Revelation, 121.

Rhinoceros, 6.

Rfipa, Ruppa, form-possessing, 139.

Sabhiya paribbagaka, 84.

Saketa city, iSo.

Sakiya=Sakya, Sakka, tribe, 68 ,
187, i 93 » 196, 197.
Sakba=Inda, 57, 115.

Sakka ==: Buddha, 56, 187, 188, 193,
196, 197.

Sakya muni=Buddha, 36.

Sakya son — Buddha, 95, 108.

Sakya tribe, 95, 98, 108, 123, 124,
177.

Sallasutta, 105.

Sama, equable, .same, 172.

SEmaka grass, 39.

Sama«a, ascetic, xii, xiii, xiv, 12, 13,
15, 16, 18, 23 , 29, 30, 31, 43,
44, 46, 70, 84, 85, 88, 92, 95,
lor, 128, 140, 162, 163, 169,
190, 19X.

Sama«a Gotama, xiv, 85, 97, 98,
99, 100, 107, 108, 159.
Sama«aka, wretched Sama«a, 20,
44.

Sambuddha, perfectly enlightened,
28, 3ij loi, 178, 179, 180, 182,
202.

INDEX.

207

S amm apar ibba^g-an i y asu 1 1 a, 58.
Sammapasa sacrifice, 49.

SawkMra, matter, 60, 132, 138,
172.

Sawsara, revolution, transmigration,
existence, xv, xvi, 88, 113, 130,

139-

Sanctification, xiv-
Sangha, assembly, 36, 37, 104.
Sangluiifi, under-garment, 74.
Sa%aya - Bela«/jiputta titthakara,
xii, 85.

Sariputta thera, 102, ri6, 172,
Sat^ira yakkha, 26.

Savaka, disciple, 61, 63, 64.

Savatthi city, 17, 20, 43, 47, 6r, 71,
1X6, 129, 176, 180, 201.

Savitti hymn, xiii, 74, 103, 104.
Sayampabha gods, 65.

Schvvanbeck, xii.

Security, worldly, 3.

Seeds of existence, xvi.

Sekha, pupil, 174.

Sela br^hmawa, xiii, 95.

Setavya city, r8o.

Shaveling, 20, 73.

Signs of a great man, 97, 100, loi,
124,

Silavata, xiii.

Simeon, 123.

Sin according to Buddha, xv.

Snake, i,

Sogandhika hell, 1x9.

Sop^ka caste, 23,

Sottiya, learned in the revelation,

84, 91.

Spiegel, I.

Subhisitasutta, 71.

Sudda, man of the servile caste, 50.
Suddha/r/&akasutta, 147.
Suddhodana king, 124.

Sugata = Buddha, 5, 37, 63, 72, 114
^120, 130, 133, 136.

Su^a, 18 1.

SuX’iloma yakkha, 44.

Sundarika. river, 73.
Sundarikabharadvaiga brahmawa, 73
Suta, xiii.

Systems, philosophical, sixty-three
xiii.

Ta«ha, craving, 135, 154.
Ta«habhava, 114.

Tarukkha br&hmawa, xiii, 108,
Tathagata, perfect, Buddha, 14, 36,
38, 4D 57, 76, 77, J02,

I’eachers, famous, xii, 85.

Tevi^^a, perfect in the three Veilas.

xiii, 97, 109, rSo.

I'idasa gods, 123.

Timbaru fruit, 19.

Tissametteyya mawava, xii, 151, 179.

Titthiya brahma«a, xiii, 62, 163.
Todcyya briihma/ni, xiii, 108, 179,
192.

I'renckner, xii.

'Fusita heaven, 123, 124, 172.
Tuva/akasiitta, 167.

Udaya mawava, xiii, 179, X95.
Uggeni city, x8o.

U pildana, seizure, 135.

Upadhi, substance, elements of exist-
ence, xvi, 5, 59, 6r, 105, 130,
147, 178, 185, 186, 191.
Upasaka, follower, adherent, 24, 51,
61, 62, 84.

Upasampada, priest’s orders, 14, 79,
94.

Upasiva luawava, xii, 179, 188.
Upekhaka, equable, 158.

Uposatha, fasting, abstinence, 65,
129.

Uppalaka hell, 119.

Uraga, snake, 1.

Ussada, desire, 88, 158.

Uz/Aana, exertion, 54.

VUda, doctrine, 162, 165.

Vadasila, disputatious, xiii, 62, 108.
Vakkali, 201.

VaHpeyya sacrifice, 49.

Vanasavhaya city, 180.

Vahgisa thera, 55, 72.

Vasala, Vasalaka, outcast, 20.
yasava=Inda, 62.

V^se/x>6a ma«ava, xiii, 107.
Vatthugatha, 55, 123, 176.

Veda, 23, 41, 97, X09, 180.

Vedagfi, having passed sensation, 84,
90.

Vedana, sensation, 134.

Vedisa city, 180.

Ve/uvana, 84, 86.

Vesali city, x8o.

Vessa, 74.

Vessava«a Kuvera king, 63.

Vessika, xnan of the third caste,
50.

Vetaraai river in hell, 122.
Veyy 3 ,kara»a, grammarian, xiii, 109.

Y 3

SUTTA-MJPATA.

Views, philosophical, 8, 25, 146, 148,
* 49 > 154, 155, 157, 162, 163,
164, 166, 190, 191,

Vi^ayasutta, 32.

Vi§-^a, knowledge, xv.

Vi^^a>faraKa, science and works, 95,
98.

resolutions, placita, xiii.
viw^ana, consciousness, 133.
Viriyavat, firm, 90.

Visionary, xiv.

Viveka, seclusion, 167.

Vocabulary, 97.

Wheel of the Dhatnma, 124
Work, 1 1 5. ’

Works, virtuous, xiv.

World is void, xvi.

Yakkha, 25, 26, 29, 44, 45 71 y
161. ’

Yoga, attachment, 1 1 4.
Yogakkhema=Nibbana, 68.

Yuga, distance of a plough, 66.